SCRIBNER
1230	Avenue	of	the	Americas

New	York,	NY	10020

Copyright	©	1984,	2004	by	Harold	McGee
Illustrations	copyright	©	2004	by	Patricia

Dorfman
Illustrations	copyright	©	2004	by	Justin

Greene
Line	drawings	by	Ann	B.	McGee

All	rights	reserved,	including	the	right	of
reproduction	in	whole
or	in	part	in	any	form.

SCRIBNER	and	design	are	trademarks	of
Macmillan	Library	Reference	USA,	Inc.,

used	under	license	by	Simon	&	Schuster,	the
publisher	of	this	work.

Library	of	Congress	Control	Number:
2004058999



ISBN:	1-4165-5637-0

constitutes	a	continuation	of	the	copyright
page.

Visit	us	on	the	World	Wide	Web:
http://www.SimonSays.com



To	Soyoung	and	to	my	family



Contents

Acknowledgments
Introduction:	Cooking	and	Science,	1984
and	2004
Chapter	1 Milk	and	Dairy	Products
Chapter	2 Eggs
Chapter	3 Meat
Chapter	4 Fish	and	Shellfish

Chapter Edible	Plants:	An	Introduction	to
5 Fruits	and	Vegetables,	Herbs	and
Spices

Chapter	6 A	Survey	of	Common	Vegetables
Chapter	7 A	Survey	of	Common	Fruits
Chapter Flavorings	from	Plants:	Herbs	and

8 Spices,	Tea	and	Coffee
Chapter	9 Seeds:	Grains,	Legumes,	and	Nuts



Chapter Cereal	Doughs	and	Batters:	Bread,
10 Cakes,	Pastry,	Pasta

Chapter	11 Sauces
Chapter Sugars,	Chocolate,	and

12 Confectionery
Chapter	13 Wine,	Beer,	and	Distilled	Spirits
Chapter Cooking	Methods	and	Utensil

14 Materials
Chapter	15 The	Four	Basic	Food	Molecules
Appendix:	A	Chemistry	Primer
Selected	References
Permissions



Acknowledgments

Along	with	many	 food	writers	 today,	 I	 feel	a
great	 debt	 of	 gratitude	 to	Alan	Davidson	 for
the	way	he	brought	new	substance,	scope,	and
playfulness	 to	 our	 subject.	 On	 top	 of	 that,	 it
was	Alan	who	informed	me	that	I	would	have
to	 revise	On	Food	and	Cooking	—	before	 I’d
even	held	 the	 first	 copy	 in	my	hands!	At	our
first	meeting	in	1984,	over	lunch,	he	asked	me
what	the	book	had	to	say	about	fish.	I	told	him
that	 I	mentioned	 fish	 in	 passing	 as	 one	 form
of	 animal	 muscle	 and	 thus	 of	 meat.	And	 so
this	 great	 fish	 enthusiast	 and	 renowned
authority	 on	 the	 creatures	 of	 several	 seas
gently	suggested	that,	in	view	of	the	fact	that
fish	are	diverse	creatures	and	their	flesh	very
unlike	 meat,	 they	 really	 deserve	 special	 and
extended	 attention.	Well,	 yes,	 they	 really	 do.



There	 are	many	 reasons	 for	wishing	 that	 this
revision	hadn’t	taken	as	long	as	it	did,	and	one
of	 the	 biggest	 is	 the	 fact	 that	 I	 can’t	 show
Alan	 the	 new	 chapter	 on	 fish.	 I’ll	 always	 be
grateful	 to	 Alan	 and	 to	 Jane	 for	 their
encouragement	 and	 advice,	 and	 for	 the	 years
of	 friendship	 which	 began	 with	 that	 lunch.
This	book	and	my	life	would	have	been	much
poorer	without	them.

I	would	also	have	liked	to	give	this	book	to
Nicholas	Kurti	—	bracing	myself	for	the
discussion	to	come!	Nicholas	wrote	a
heartwarmingly	positive	review	of	the	first
edition	in	Nature,	then	followed	it	up	with	a
Sunday-afternoon	visit	and	an	extended
interrogation	based	on	the	pages	of	questions
that	he	had	accumulated	as	he	wrote	the
review.	Nicholas’s	energy,	curiosity,	and
enthusiasm	for	good	food	and	the	telling
“little	experiment”	were	infectious,	and
animated	the	early	Erice	workshops.	They	and
he	are	much	missed.



Coming	closer	to	home	and	the	present,	I
thank	my	family	for	the	affection	and	patient
optimism	that	have	kept	me	going	day	after
day:	son	John	and	daughter	Florence,	who
have	lived	with	this	book	and	experimental
dinners	for	more	than	half	their	years,	and
enlivened	both	with	their	gusto	and	strong
opinions;	my	father,	Chuck	McGee,	and
mother,	Louise	Hammersmith;	brother
Michael	and	sisters	Ann	and	Joan;	and	Chuck
Hammersmith,	Werner	Kurz,	Richard
Thomas,	and	Florence	Jean	and	Harold	Long.
Throughout	these	last	few	trying	years,	my
wife	Sharon	Long	has	been	constantly	caring
and	supportive.	I’m	deeply	grateful	to	her	for
that	gift.

Milly	Marmur,	my	onetime	publisher,
longtime	agent,	and	now	great	friend,	has
been	a	source	of	propulsive	energy	over	the
course	of	a	marathon	whose	length	neither	of
us	foresaw.	I’ve	been	lucky	to	enjoy	her
warmth,	patience,	good	sense,	and	her	skill	at



nudging	without	noodging.
I	owe	thanks	to	many	people	at	Scribner

and	Simon	&	Schuster.	Maria	Guarnaschelli
commissioned	this	revision	with	inspiring
enthusiasm,	and	Scribner	publisher	Susan
Moldow	and	S&S	president	Carolyn	Reidy
have	been	its	committed	advocates	ever	since.
Beth	Wareham	tirelessly	supervised	all
aspects	of	editing,	production,	and
publication.	Rica	Buxbaum	Allannic	made
many	improvements	in	the	manuscript	with
her	careful	editing;	Mia	Crowley-Hald	and	her
team	produced	the	book	under	tough	time
constraints	with	meticulous	care;	and	Erich
Hobbing	welcomed	my	ideas	about	layout	and
designed	pages	that	flow	well	and	read
clearly.	Jeffrey	Wilson	kept	contractual	and
other	legal	matters	smooth	and	peaceful,	and
Lucy	Kenyon	organized	some	wonderful	early
publicity.	I	appreciate	the	marvelous	team
effort	that	has	launched	this	book	into	the
world.



I	thank	Patricia	Dorfman	and	Justin	Greene
for	preparing	the	illustrations	with	patience,
skill,	and	speed,	and	Ann	Hirsch,	who
produced	the	micrograph	of	a	wheat	kernel	for
this	book.	I’m	happy	to	be	able	to	include	a
few	line	drawings	from	the	first	edition	by	my
sister	Ann,	who	has	been	prevented	by	illness
from	contributing	to	this	revision.	She	was	a
wonderful	collaborator,	and	I’ve	missed	her
sharp	eye	and	good	humor	very	much.	I’m
grateful	to	several	food	scientists	for
permission	to	share	their	photographs	of	food
structure	and	microstructure:	they	are	H.
Douglas	Goff,	R.	Carl	Hoseney,	Donald	D.
Kasarda,	William	D.	Powrie,	and	Alastair	T.
Pringle.	Alexandra	Nickerson	expertly
compiled	some	of	the	most	important	pages	in
this	book,	the	index.

Several	chefs	have	been	kind	enough	to
invite	me	into	their	kitchens	—	or	laboratories
—	to	experience	and	talk	about	cooking	at	its
most	ambitious.	My	thanks	to	Fritz	Blank,	to



Heston	Blumenthal,	and	especially	to	Thomas
Keller	and	his	colleagues	at	The	French
Laundry,	including	Eric	Ziebold,	Devin	Knell,
Ryan	Fancher,	and	Donald	Gonzalez.	I’ve
learned	a	lot	from	them,	and	look	forward	to
learning	much	more.

Particular	sections	of	this	book	have
benefited	from	the	careful	reading	and
comments	of	Anju	and	Hiten	Bhaya,	Devaki
Bhaya	and	Arthur	Grossman,	Poornima	and
Arun	Kumar,	Sharon	Long,	Mark	Pastore,
Robert	Steinberg,	and	Kathleen,	Ed,	and
Aaron	Weber.	I’m	very	grateful	for	their	help,
and	absolve	them	of	any	responsibility	for
what	I’ve	done	with	it.

I’m	glad	for	the	chance	to	thank	my
friends	and	my	colleagues	in	the	worlds	of
writing	and	food,	all	sources	of	stimulating
questions,	answers,	ideas,	and	encouragement
over	the	years:	Shirley	and	Arch	Corriher,	the
best	of	company	on	the	road,	at	the	podium,
and	on	the	phone;	Lubert	Stryer,	who	gave	me



the	chance	to	see	the	science	of	pleasure
advanced	and	immediately	applied;	and	Kurt
and	Adrienne	Alder,	Peter	Barham,	Gary
Beauchamp,	Ed	Behr,	Paul	Bertolli,	Tony
Blake,	Glynn	Christian,	Jon	Eldan,	Anya
Fernald,	Len	Fisher,	Alain	Harrus,	Randolph
Hodgson,	Philip	and	Mary	Hyman,	John	Paul
Khoury,	Kurt	Koessel,	Aglaia	Kremezi,	Anna
Tasca	Lanza,	David	Lockwood,	Jean
Matricon,	Fritz	Maytag,	Jack	McInerney,
Alice	Medrich,	Marion	Nestle,	Ugo	and
Beatrice	Palma,	Alan	Parker,	Daniel
Patterson,	Thorvald	Pedersen,	Charles	Perry,
Maricel	Presilla,	P.N.	Ravindran,	Judy
Rodgers,	Nick	Ruello,	Helen	Saberi,	Mary
Taylor	Simeti,	Melpo	Skoula,	Anna	and	Jim
Spudich,	Jeffrey	Steingarten,	Jim	Tavares,
Hervé	This,	Bob	Togasaki,	Rick	Vargas,
Despina	Vokou,	Ari	Weinzweig,	Jonathan
White,	Paula	Wolfert,	and	Richard	Zare.

Finally,	I	thank	Soyoung	Scanlan	for
sharing	her	understanding	of	cheese	and	of



traditional	forms	of	food	production,	for
reading	many	parts	of	the	manuscript	and
helping	me	clarify	both	thought	and
expression,	and	above	all	for	reminding	me,
when	I	had	forgotten,	what	writing	and	life	are
all	about.






The	everyday	alchemy	of	creating	food	for	the
body	and	the	mind.	This	17th	century	woodcut
compares	the	alchemical	(“chymick”)	work	of
the	 bee	 and	 the	 scholar,	 who	 transform
nature’s	 raw	 materials	 into	 honey	 and
knowledge.	 Whenever	 we	 cook	 we	 become
practical	 chemists,	 drawing	 on	 the
accumulated	 knowledge	 of	 generations,	 and
transforming	 what	 the	 Earth	 offers	 us	 into
more	 concentrated	 forms	 of	 pleasure	 and
nourishment.	 (The	 first	 Latin	 caption	 reads
“Thus	 we	 bees	 make	 honey,	 not	 for
ourselves”;	the	second,	“All	things	in	books,”
the	library	being	the	scholar’s	hive.	Woodcut
from	 the	 collection	 of	 the	 International	 Bee
Research	Association.)



Introduction

Cooking	and	Science,	1984	and	2004

This	 is	 the	 revised	 and	 expanded	 second
edition	 of	 a	 book	 that	 I	 first	 published	 in
1984,	 twenty	 long	years	ago.	 In	1984,	 canola
oil	 and	 the	 computer	 mouse	 and	 compact
discs	 were	 all	 novelties.	 So	 was	 the	 idea	 of
inviting	 cooks	 to	 explore	 the	 biological	 and
chemical	insides	of	foods.	It	was	a	time	when
a	book	like	this	really	needed	an	introduction!

Twenty	years	ago	the	worlds	of	science
and	cooking	were	neatly	compartmentalized.
There	were	the	basic	sciences,	physics	and
chemistry	and	biology,	delving	deep	into	the
nature	of	matter	and	life.	There	was	food
science,	an	applied	science	mainly	concerned
with	understanding	the	materials	and
processes	of	industrial	manufacturing.	And



there	was	the	world	of	small-scale	home	and
restaurant	cooking,	traditional	crafts	that	had
never	attracted	much	scientific	attention.	Nor
did	they	really	need	any.	Cooks	had	been
developing	their	own	body	of	practical
knowledge	for	thousands	of	years,	and	had
plenty	of	reliable	recipes	to	work	with.

I	had	been	fascinated	by	chemistry	and
physics	when	I	was	growing	up,	experimented
with	electroplating	and	Tesla	coils	and
telescopes,	and	went	to	Caltech	planning	to
study	astronomy.	It	wasn’t	until	after	I’d
changed	directions	and	moved	on	to	English
literature	—	and	had	begun	to	cook	—	that	I
first	heard	of	food	science.	At	dinner	one
evening	in	1976	or	1977,	a	friend	from	New
Orleans	wondered	aloud	why	dried	beans	were
such	a	problematic	food,	why	indulging	in	red
beans	and	rice	had	to	cost	a	few	hours	of
sometimes	embarrassing	discomfort.
Interesting	question!	A	few	days	later,
working	in	the	library	and	needing	a	break



from	19th	century	poetry,	I	remembered	it	and
the	answer	a	biologist	friend	had	dug	up
(indigestible	sugars),	thought	I	would	browse
in	some	food	books,	wandered	over	to	that
section,	and	found	shelf	after	shelf	of	strange
titles.	Journal	of	Food	Science.	Poultry
Science.	Cereal	Chemistry.	I	flipped	through	a
few	volumes,	and	among	the	mostly
bewildering	pages	found	hints	of	answers	to
other	questions	that	had	never	occurred	to	me.
Why	do	eggs	solidify	when	we	cook	them?
Why	do	fruits	turn	brown	when	we	cut	them?
Why	is	bread	dough	bouncily	alive,	and	why
does	bounciness	make	good	bread?	Which
kinds	of	dried	beans	are	the	worst	offenders,
and	how	can	a	cook	tame	them?	It	was	great
fun	to	make	and	share	these	little	discoveries,
and	I	began	to	think	that	many	people
interested	in	food	might	enjoy	them.
Eventually	I	found	time	to	immerse	myself	in
food	science	and	history	and	write	On	Food
and	Cooking:	The	Science	and	Lore	of	the



Kitchen.
As	I	finished,	I	realized	that	cooks	more

serious	than	my	friends	and	I	might	be
skeptical	about	the	relevance	of	cells	and
molecules	to	their	craft.	So	I	spent	much	of
the	introduction	trying	to	bolster	my	case.	I
began	by	quoting	an	unlikely	trio	of
authorities,	Plato,	Samuel	Johnson,	and	Jean
Anthelme	Brillat-Savarin,	all	of	whom
suggested	that	cooking	deserves	detailed	and
serious	study.	I	pointed	out	that	a	19th	century
German	chemist	still	influences	how	many
people	think	about	cooking	meat,	and	that
around	the	turn	of	the	20th	century,	Fannie
Farmer	began	her	cookbook	with	what	she
called	“condensed	scientific	knowledge”
about	ingredients.	I	noted	a	couple	of	errors	in
modern	cookbooks	by	Madeleine	Kamman
and	Julia	Child,	who	were	ahead	of	their	time
in	taking	chemistry	seriously.	And	I	proposed
that	science	can	make	cooking	more
interesting	by	connecting	it	with	the	basic



workings	of	the	natural	world.
A	lot	has	changed	in	twenty	years!	It

turned	out	that	On	Food	and	Cooking	was
riding	a	rising	wave	of	general	interest	in
food,	a	wave	that	grew	and	grew,	and	knocked
down	the	barriers	between	science	and
cooking,	especially	in	the	last	decade.	Science
has	found	its	way	into	the	kitchen,	and
cooking	into	laboratories	and	factories.

In	2004	food	lovers	can	find	the	science	of
cooking	just	about	everywhere.	Magazines
and	newspaper	food	sections	devote	regular
columns	to	it,	and	there	are	now	a	number	of
books	that	explore	it,	with	Shirley	Corriher’s
1997	CookWise	remaining	unmatched	in	the
way	it	integrates	explanation	and	recipes.
Today	many	writers	go	into	the	technical
details	of	their	subjects,	especially	such
intricate	things	as	pastry,	chocolate,	coffee,
beer,	and	wine.	Kitchen	science	has	been	the
subject	of	television	series	aired	in	the	United
States,	Canada,	the	United	Kingdom,	and



France.	And	a	number	of	food	molecules	and
microbes	have	become	familiar	figures	in	the
news,	both	good	and	bad.	Anyone	who	follows
the	latest	in	health	and	nutrition	knows	about
the	benefits	of	antioxidants	and
phytoestrogens,	the	hazards	of	trans	fatty
acids,	acrylamide,	E.	coli	bacteria,	and	mad
cow	disease.

Professional	cooks	have	also	come	to
appreciate	the	value	of	the	scientific	approach
to	their	craft.	In	the	first	few	years	after	On
Food	and	Cooking	appeared,	many	young
cooks	told	me	of	their	frustration	in	trying	to
find	out	why	dishes	were	prepared	a	certain
way,	or	why	ingredients	behave	as	they	do.	To
their	traditionally	trained	chefs	and	teachers,
understanding	food	was	less	important	than
mastering	the	tried	and	true	techniques	for
preparing	it.	Today	it’s	clearer	that	curiosity
and	understanding	make	their	own
contribution	to	mastery.	A	number	of	culinary
schools	now	offer	“experimental”	courses	that



investigate	the	whys	of	cooking	and
encourage	critical	thinking.	And	several
highly	regarded	chefs,	most	famously	Ferran
Adrià	in	Spain	and	Heston	Blumenthal	in
England,	experiment	with	industrial	and
laboratory	tools	—	gelling	agents	from
seaweeds	and	bacteria,	non-sweet	sugars,
aroma	extracts,	pressurized	gases,	liquid
nitrogen	—	to	bring	new	forms	of	pleasure	to
the	table.

As	science	has	gradually	percolated	into
the	world	of	cooking,	cooking	has	been	drawn
into	academic	and	industrial	science.	One
effective	and	charming	force	behind	this
movement	was	Nicholas	Kurti,	a	physicist	and
food	lover	at	the	University	of	Oxford,	who
lamented	in	1969:	“I	think	it	is	a	sad
reflection	on	our	civilization	that	while	we
can	and	do	measure	the	temperature	in	the
atmosphere	of	Venus,	we	do	not	know	what
goes	on	inside	our	soufflés.”	In	1992,	at	the
age	of	84,	Nicholas	nudged	civilization	along



by	organizing	an	International	Workshop	on
Molecular	and	Physical	Gastronomy	at	Erice,
Sicily,	where	for	the	first	time	professional
cooks,	basic	scientists	from	universities,	and
food	scientists	from	industry	worked	together
to	advance	gastronomy,	the	making	and
appreciation	of	foods	of	the	highest	quality.

The	Erice	meeting	continues,	renamed	the
“International	Workshop	on	Molecular
Gastronomy	‘N.	Kurti’	”	in	memory	of	its
founder.	And	over	the	last	decade	its	focus,
the	understanding	of	culinary	excellence,	has
taken	on	new	economic	significance.	The
modern	industrial	drive	to	maximize
efficiency	and	minimize	costs	generally
lowered	the	quality	and	distinctiveness	of
food	products:	they	taste	much	the	same,	and
not	very	good.	Improvements	in	quality	can
now	mean	a	competitive	advantage;	and	cooks
have	always	been	the	world’s	experts	in	the
applied	science	of	deliciousness.	Today,	the
French	National	Institute	of	Agricultural



Research	sponsors	a	group	in	Molecular
Gastronomy	at	the	Collège	de	France	(its
leader,	Hervé	This,	directs	the	Erice
workshop);	chemist	Thorvald	Pedersen	is	the
inaugural	Professor	of	Molecular	Gastronomy
at	Denmark’s	Royal	Veterinary	and
Agricultural	University;	and	in	the	United
States,	the	rapidly	growing	membership	of	the
Research	Chefs	Association	specializes	in
bringing	the	chef’s	skills	and	standards	to	the
food	industry.

So	 in	 2004	 there’s	 no	 longer	 any	 need	 to
explain	 the	 premise	 of	 this	 book.	 Instead,
there’s	 more	 for	 the	 book	 itself	 to	 explain!
Twenty	years	ago,	there	wasn’t	much	demand
for	information	about	extra-virgin	olive	oil	or
balsamic	vinegar,	farmed	salmon	or	grass-fed
beef,	cappuccino	or	white	tea,	Sichuan	pepper
or	 Mexican	 mole,	 sake	 or	 well-tempered
chocolate.	 Today	 there’s	 interest	 in	 all	 these
and	much	more.	And	so	this	second	edition	of



On	Food	and	Cooking	 is	 substantially	 longer
than	 the	 first.	 I’ve	 expanded	 the	 text	 by	 two
thirds	 in	 order	 to	 cover	 a	 broader	 range	 of
ingredients	 and	 preparations,	 and	 to	 explore
them	in	greater	depth.	To	make	room	for	new
information	 about	 foods,	 I’ve	 dropped	 the
separate	 chapters	 on	 human	 physiology,
nutrition,	 and	 additives.	 Of	 the	 few	 sections
that	 survive	 in	 similar	 form	 from	 the	 first
edition,	practically	all	have	been	 rewritten	 to
reflect	 fresh	 information,	 or	 my	 own	 fresh
understanding.

This	edition	gives	new	emphasis	to	two
particular	aspects	of	food.	The	first	is	the
diversity	of	ingredients	and	the	ways	in	which
they’re	prepared.	These	days	the	easy
movement	of	products	and	people	makes	it
possible	for	us	to	taste	foods	from	all	over	the
world.	And	traveling	back	in	time	through	old
cookbooks	can	turn	up	forgotten	but
intriguing	ideas.	I’ve	tried	throughout	to	give
at	least	a	brief	indication	of	the	range	of



possibilities	offered	by	foods	themselves	and
by	different	national	traditions.

The	other	new	emphasis	is	on	the	flavors
of	foods,	and	sometimes	on	the	particular
molecules	that	create	flavor.	Flavors	are
something	like	chemical	chords,	composite
sensations	built	up	from	notes	provided	by
different	molecules,	some	of	which	are	found
in	many	foods.	I	give	the	chemical	names	of
flavor	molecules	when	I	think	that	being
specific	can	help	us	notice	flavor	relationships
and	echoes.	The	names	may	seem	strange	and
intimidating	at	first,	but	they’re	just	names
and	they’ll	become	more	familiar.	Of	course
people	have	made	and	enjoyed	well	seasoned
dishes	for	thousands	of	years	with	no
knowledge	of	molecules.	But	a	dash	of	flavor
chemistry	can	help	us	make	fuller	use	of	our
senses	of	taste	and	smell,	and	experience
more	—	and	find	more	pleasure	—	in	what	we
cook	and	eat.



Now	 a	 few	 words	 about	 the	 scientific
approach	 to	 food	 and	 cooking	 and	 the
organization	of	 this	book.	Like	everything	on
earth,	 foods	 are	 mixtures	 of	 different
chemicals,	 and	 the	 qualities	 that	 we	 aim	 to
influence	 in	 the	 kitchen	 —	 taste,	 aroma,
texture,	 color,	 nutritiousness	 —	 are	 all
manifestations	of	chemical	properties.	Nearly
two	 hundred	 years	 ago,	 the	 eminent
gastronome	 Jean	 Anthelme	 Brillat-Savarin
lectured	his	cook	on	 this	point,	 tongue	partly
in	cheek,	in	The	Physiology	of	Taste:

You	are	a	little	opinionated,	and	I	have	had
some	trouble	in	making	you	understand
that	the	phenomena	which	take	place	in
your	laboratory	are	nothing	other	than	the
execution	of	the	eternal	laws	of	nature,	and
that	certain	things	which	you	do	without
thinking,	and	only	because	you	have	seen
others	do	them,	derive	nonetheless	from
the	highest	scientific	principles.



The	great	virtue	of	the	cook’s	time-tested,
thought-less	 recipes	 is	 that	 they	 free	us	 from
the	 distraction	 of	 having	 to	 guess	 or
experiment	 or	 analyze	 as	we	prepare	 a	meal.
On	the	other	hand,	the	great	virtue	of	thought
and	 analysis	 is	 that	 they	 free	 us	 from	 the
necessity	 of	 following	 recipes,	 and	 help	 us
deal	 with	 the	 unexpected,	 including	 the
inspiration	 to	 try	 something	 new.	Thoughtful
cooking	 means	 paying	 attention	 to	 what	 our
senses	tell	us	as	we	prepare	it,	connecting	that
information	with	past	experience	and	with	an
understanding	 of	 what’s	 happening	 to	 the
food’s	 inner	 substance,	 and	 adjusting	 the
preparation	accordingly.

To	understand	what’s	happening	within	a
food	as	we	cook	it,	we	need	to	be	familiar
with	the	world	of	invisibly	small	molecules
and	their	reactions	with	each	other.	That	idea
may	seem	daunting.	There	are	a	hundred-plus
chemical	elements,	many	more	combinations
of	those	elements	into	molecules,	and	several



different	forces	that	rule	their	behavior.	But
scientists	always	simplify	reality	in	order	to
understand	it,	and	we	can	do	the	same.	Foods
are	mostly	built	out	of	just	four	kinds	of
molecules	—	water,	proteins,	carbohydrates,
and	fats.	And	their	behavior	can	be	pretty	well
described	with	a	few	simple	principles.	If	you
know	that	heat	is	a	manifestation	of	the
movements	of	molecules,	and	that	sufficiently
energetic	collisions	disrupt	the	structures	of
molecules	and	eventually	break	them	apart,
then	you’re	very	close	to	understanding	why
heat	solidifies	eggs	and	makes	foods	tastier.

Most	readers	today	have	at	least	a	vague
idea	of	proteins	and	fats,	molecules	and
energy,	and	a	vague	idea	is	enough	to	follow
most	of	the	explanations	in	the	first	13
chapters,	which	cover	common	foods	and
ways	of	preparing	them.	Chapters	14	and	15
then	describe	in	some	detail	the	molecules
and	basic	chemical	processes	involved	in	all
cooking;	and	the	Appendix	gives	a	brief



refresher	course	in	the	basic	vocabulary	of
science.	You	can	refer	to	these	final	sections
occasionally,	to	clarify	the	meaning	of	pH	or
protein	coagulation	as	you’re	reading	about
cheese	or	meat	or	bread,	or	else	read	through
them	on	their	own	to	get	a	general
introduction	to	the	science	of	cooking.

Finally,	 a	 request.	 In	 this	 book	 I’ve	 sifted
through	 and	 synthesized	 a	 great	 deal	 of
information,	 and	 have	 tried	 hard	 to	 double-
check	 both	 facts	 and	 my	 interpretations	 of
them.	 I’m	 greatly	 indebted	 to	 the	 many
scientists,	 historians,	 linguists,	 culinary
professionals,	 and	 food	 lovers	 on	 whose
learning	 I’ve	 been	 able	 to	 draw.	 I	 will	 also
appreciate	 the	 help	 of	 readers	 who	 notice
errors	that	I’ve	made	and	missed,	and	who	let
me	 know	 so	 that	 I	 can	 correct	 them.	 My
thanks	in	advance.

As	I	finish	this	revision	and	think	about	the
endless	work	of	correcting	and	perfecting,	my



mind	returns	to	the	first	Erice	workshop	and	a
saying	shared	by	Jean-Pierre	Philippe,	a	chef
from	Les	Mesnuls,	near	Versailles.	The
subject	of	the	moment	was	egg	foams.	Chef
Philippe	told	us	that	he	had	thought	he	knew
everything	there	was	to	know	about
meringues,	until	one	day	a	phone	call
distracted	him	and	he	left	his	mixer	running
for	half	an	hour.	Thanks	to	the	excellent	result
and	to	other	surprises	throughout	his	career,
he	said,	Je	sais,	je	sais	que	je	sais	jamais:	“I
know,	I	know	that	I	never	know.”	Food	is	an
infinitely	rich	subject,	and	there’s	always
something	about	it	to	understand	better,
something	new	to	discover,	a	fresh	source	of
interest,	ideas,	and	delight.



A	Note	About	Units	of	Measurement,
and	About	the	Drawings	of	Molecules

Throughout	 this	 book,	 temperatures	 are
given	 in	 both	 degrees	 Fahrenheit	 (ºF),	 the
standard	 units	 in	 the	 United	 States,	 and
degrees	 Celsius	 or	 Centigrade	 (ºC),	 the
units	 used	 by	 most	 other	 countries.	 The
Fahrenheit	 temperatures	 shown	 in	 several
charts	can	be	converted	to	Celsius	by	using
the	 formula	 ºC	=	 (ºF-32)	 x	 0.56.	Volumes
and	weights	are	given	in	both	U.S.	kitchen
units	—	 teaspoons,	 quarts,	 pounds	—	 and
metric	 units	 —	 milliliters,	 liters,	 grams,
and	kilograms.	Lengths	are	generally	given
in	 millimeters	 (mm);	 1	 mm	 is	 about	 the
diameter	 of	 the	 degree	 symbol	 º.	 Very
small	 lengths	 are	 given	 in	 microns	 (µ).
One	 micron	 is	 1	 micrometer,	 or	 1
thousandth	of	a	millimeter.

Single	 molecules	 are	 so	 small,	 a	 tiny
fraction	 of	 a	 micron,	 that	 they	 can	 seem
abstract,	hard	to	imagine.	But	they	are	real



and	concrete,	and	have	particular	structures
that	 determine	 how	 they	—	and	 the	 foods
made	out	of	them	—	behave	in	the	kitchen.
The	 better	 we	 can	 visualize	 what	 they’re
like	and	what	happens	to	them,	the	easier	it
is	 to	understand	what	happens	 in	 cooking.
And	in	cooking	it’s	generally	a	molecule’s
overall	 shape	 that	matters,	 not	 the	precise
placement	 of	 each	 atom.	 In	 most	 of	 the
drawings	 of	 molecules	 in	 this	 book,	 only
the	 overall	 shapes	 are	 shown,	 and	 they’re
represented	 in	 different	 ways	 —	 as	 long
thin	lines,	long	thick	lines,	honeycomb-like
rings	with	some	atoms	indicated	by	letters
—	depending	on	what	behavior	needs	to	be
explained.	Many	 food	molecules	 are	 built
from	a	backbone	of	 interconnected	carbon
atoms,	 with	 a	 few	 other	 kinds	 of	 atoms
(mainly	 hydrogen	 and	 oxygen)	 projecting
from	the	backbone.	The	carbon	backbone	is
what	creates	the	overall	structure,	so	often
it	is	drawn	with	no	indications	of	the	atoms



themselves,	 just	 lines	 that	 show	 the	bonds
between	atoms.



Chapter	1

Milk	and
Dairy	Products

Mammals	and	Milk
The	Evolution	of	Milk
The	Rise	of	the	Ruminants
Dairy	Animals	of	the	World
The	Origins	of	Dairying
Diverse	Traditions

Milk	and	Health
Milk	Nutrients
Milk	 in	 Infancy	 and	 Childhood:	 Nutrition
and	Allergies
Milk	after	Infancy:	Dealing	with	Lactose
New	Questions	about	Milk

Milk	Biology	and	Chemistry
How	the	Cow	Makes	Milk
Milk	Sugar:	Lactose
Milk	Fat



Milk	 Proteins:	 Coagulation	 by	 Acid	 and
Enzymes
Milk	Flavor

Unfermented	Dairy	Products
Milks
Cream
Butter	and	Margarine
Ice	Cream

Fresh	Fermented	Milks	and	Creams
Lactic	Acid	Bacteria
Families	of	Fresh	Fermented	Milks
Yogurt
Soured	 Creams	 and	 Buttermilk,	 Including
Crème	Fraîche
Cooking	with	Fermented	Milks

Cheese
The	Evolution	of	Cheese
The	Ingredients	of	Cheese
Making	Cheese
The	Sources	of	Cheese	Diversity
Choosing,	Storing,	and	Serving	Cheese
Cooking	with	Cheese



Process	and	Low-fat	Cheeses
Cheese	and	Health

What	better	 subject	 for	 the	 first	 chapter	 than
the	 food	 with	 which	 we	 all	 begin	 our	 lives?
Humans	 are	 mammals,	 a	 word	 that	 means
“creatures	 of	 the	 breast,”	 and	 the	 first	 food
that	any	mammal	tastes	is	milk.	Milk	is	food
for	 the	 beginning	 eater,	 a	 gulpable	 essence
distilled	 by	 the	 mother	 from	 her	 own	 more
variable	 and	 challenging	 diet.	 When	 our
ancestors	 took	 up	 dairying,	 they	 adopted	 the
cow,	 the	 ewe,	 and	 the	 goat	 as	 surrogate
mothers.	 These	 creatures	 accomplish	 the
miracle	 of	 turning	 meadow	 and	 straw	 into
buckets	 of	 human	 nourishment.	 And	 their
milk	 turned	out	 to	be	an	elemental	 fluid	 rich
in	 possibility,	 just	 a	 step	 or	 two	 away	 from
luxurious	cream,	fragrant	golden	butter,	and	a
multitude	 of	 flavorful	 foods	 concocted	 by
friendly	microbes.

No	wonder	that	milk	captured	the



imaginations	of	many	cultures.	The	ancient
Indo-Europeans	were	cattle	herders	who
moved	out	from	the	Caucasian	steppes	to
settle	vast	areas	of	Eurasia	around	3000	BCE;
and	milk	and	butter	are	prominent	in	the
creation	myths	of	their	descendents,	from
India	to	Scandinavia.	Peoples	of	the
Mediterranean	and	Middle	East	relied	on	the
oil	of	their	olive	tree	rather	than	butter,	but
milk	and	cheese	still	figure	in	the	Old
Testament	as	symbols	of	abundance	and
creation.

The	modern	imagination	holds	a	very
different	view	of	milk!	Mass	production
turned	it	and	its	products	from	precious,
marvelous	resources	into	ordinary
commodities,	and	medical	science
stigmatized	them	for	their	fat	content.
Fortunately	a	more	balanced	view	of	dietary
fat	is	developing;	and	traditional	versions	of
dairy	foods	survive.	It’s	still	possible	to	savor
the	remarkable	foods	that	millennia	of	human



ingenuity	have	teased	from	milk.	A	sip	of
milk	itself	or	a	scoop	of	ice	cream	can	be	a
Proustian	draft	of	youth’s	innocence	and
energy	and	possibility,	while	a	morsel	of	fine
cheese	is	a	rich	meditation	on	maturity,	the
fulfillment	of	possibility,	the	way	of	all	flesh.

Mammals	and	Milk

The	Evolution	of	Milk
How	and	why	did	such	a	thing	as	milk	ever
come	to	be?	It	came	along	with	warm-
bloodedness,	hair,	and	skin	glands,	all	of
which	distinguish	mammals	from	reptiles.
Milk	may	have	begun	around	300	million
years	ago	as	a	protective	and	nourishing	skin
secretion	for	hatchlings	being	incubated	on
their	mother’s	skin,	as	is	true	for	the	platypus
today.	Once	it	evolved,	milk	contributed	to
the	success	of	the	mammalian	family.	It	gives
newborn	animals	the	advantage	of	ideally
formulated	food	from	the	mother	even	after



birth,	and	therefore	the	opportunity	to
continue	their	physical	development	outside
the	womb.	The	human	species	has	taken	full
advantage	of	this	opportunity:	we	are
completely	helpless	for	months	after	birth,
while	our	brains	finish	growing	to	a	size	that
would	be	difficult	to	accommodate	in	the
womb	and	birth	canal.	In	this	sense,	milk
helped	make	possible	the	evolution	of	our
large	brain,	and	so	helped	make	us	the	unusual
animals	we	are.

Milk	and	Butter:	Primal	Fluids
When	 the	 gods	 performed	 the	 sacrifice,
with	 the	 first	Man	 as	 the	 offering,	 spring
was	 the	 melted	 butter,	 summer	 the	 fuel,
autumn	 the	 offering.	 They	 anointed	 that
Man,	 born	 at	 the	 beginning,	 as	 a	 sacrifice
on	 the	 straw….	 From	 that	 full	 sacrifice
they	 gathered	 the	 grains	 of	 butter,	 and
made	 it	 into	 the	 creatures	 of	 the	 air,	 the
forest,	 and	 the	 village…cattle	 were	 born



from	 it,	 and	 sheep	 and	 goats	 were	 born
from	it.

—	The	Rg	Veda,	Book	10,	ca.	1200	BCE
…I	am	come	down	to	deliver	[my	people]
out	 of	 the	 hands	 of	 the	 Egyptians,	 and	 to
bring	them	up	out	of	that	land	unto	a	good
land	and	a	 large,	unto	a	 land	flowing	with
milk	and	honey….
—	God	to	Moses	on	Mount	Horeb	(Exodus

3:8)
Hast	 thou	not	poured	me	out	 as	milk,	 and
curdled	me	like	cheese?

—	Job	to	God	(Job	10:10)

The	Rise	of	the	Ruminants

All	mammals	produce	milk	for	their	young,
but	only	a	closely	related	handful	have	been
exploited	by	humans.	Cattle,	water	buffalo,
sheep,	goats,	camels,	yaks:	these	suppliers	of
plenty	were	created	by	a	scarcity	of	food.



Around	30	million	years	ago,	the	earth’s
warm,	moist	climate	became	seasonally	arid.
This	shift	favored	plants	that	could	grow
quickly	and	produce	seeds	to	survive	the	dry
period,	and	caused	a	great	expansion	of
grasslands,	which	in	the	dry	seasons	became	a
sea	of	desiccated,	fibrous	stalks	and	leaves.	So
began	the	gradual	decline	of	the	horses	and
the	expansion	of	the	deer	family,	the
ruminants,	which	evolved	the	ability	to
survive	on	dry	grass.	Cattle,	sheep,	goats,	and
their	relatives	are	all	ruminants.

The	key	to	the	rise	of	the	ruminants	is	their
highly	specialized,	multichamber	stomach,
which	accounts	for	a	fifth	of	their	body	weight
and	houses	trillions	of	fiber-digesting
microbes,	most	of	them	in	the	first	chamber,
or	rumen.	Their	unique	plumbing,	together
with	the	habit	of	regurgitating	and	rechewing
partly	digested	food,	allows	ruminants	to
extract	nourishment	from	high-fiber,	poor-
quality	plant	material.	Ruminants	produce



milk	copiously	on	feed	that	is	otherwise
useless	to	humans	and	that	can	be	stockpiled
as	straw	or	silage.	Without	them	there	would
be	no	dairying.

Dairy	Animals	of	the	World

Only	a	small	handful	of	animal	species
contributes	significantly	to	the	world’s	milk
supply.

The	 Cow,	 European	 and	 Indian	 The
immediate	 ancestor	 of	Bos	 taurus,	 the
common	dairy	cow,	was	Bos	primigenius,	 the
long-horned	 wild	 aurochs.	 This	 massive
animal,	 standing	 6	 ft/180	 cm	 at	 the	 shoulder
and	 with	 horns	 6.5	 in/17	 cm	 in	 diameter,
roamed	Asia,	Europe,	and	North	Africa	in	the
form	 of	 two	 overlapping	 races:	 a	 humpless
European-African	form,	and	a	humped	central
Asian	form,	the	zebu.	The	European	race	was
domesticated	in	the	Middle	East	around	8000



BCE,	 the	 heat-	 and	 parasite-tolerant	 zebu	 in
south-central	Asia	around	the	same	time,	and
an	African	variant	of	the	European	race	in	the
Sahara,	probably	somewhat	later.

In	its	principal	homeland,	central	and
south	India,	the	zebu	has	been	valued	as	much
for	its	muscle	power	as	its	milk,	and	remains
rangy	and	long-horned.	The	European	dairy
cow	has	been	highly	selected	for	milk
production	at	least	since	3000	BCE,	when
confinement	to	stalls	in	urban	Mesopotamia
and	poor	winter	feed	led	to	a	reduction	in
body	and	horn	size.	To	this	day,	the	prized
dairy	breeds	—	Jerseys,	Guernseys,	Brown
Swiss,	Holsteins	—	are	short-horned	cattle
that	put	their	energy	into	making	milk	rather
than	muscle	and	bone.	The	modern	zebu	is	not
as	copious	a	producer	as	the	European	breeds,
but	its	milk	is	25%	richer	in	butterfat.

The	 Buffalo	 The	 water	 buffalo	 is	 relatively
unfamiliar	in	the	West	but	the	most	important



bovine	 in	 tropical	Asia.	Bubalus	 bubalis	 was
domesticated	 as	 a	 draft	 animal	 in
Mesopotamia	 around	 3000	BCE,	 then	 taken	 to
the	 Indus	 civilizations	 of	 present-day
Pakistan,	 and	 eventually	 through	 India	 and
China.	This	tropical	animal	is	sensitive	to	heat
(it	 wallows	 in	 water	 to	 cool	 down),	 so	 it
proved	 adaptable	 to	 milder	 climates.	 The
Arabs	 brought	 buffalo	 to	 the	 Middle	 East
around	 700	CE,	 and	 in	 the	Middle	Ages	 they
were	introduced	throughout	Europe.	The	most
notable	 vestige	 of	 that	 introduction	 is	 a
population	 approaching	 100,000	 in	 the
Campagna	 region	 south	 of	 Rome,	 which
supplies	 the	milk	 for	 true	mozzarella	 cheese,
mozzarella	 di	 bufala.	 Buffalo	 milk	 is	 much
richer	 than	 cow’s	 milk,	 so	 mozzarella	 and
Indian	milk	dishes	are	very	different	when	the
traditional	buffalo	milk	is	replaced	with	cow’s
milk.

The	Yak 	The	 third	 important	dairy	bovine	 is



the	 yak,	Bos	 grunniens.	 This	 long-haired,
bushy-tailed	 cousin	 of	 the	 common	 cow	 is
beautifully	 adapted	 to	 the	 thin,	 cold,	 dry	 air
and	 sparse	 vegetation	 of	 the	 Tibetan	 plateau
and	 mountains	 of	 central	 Asia.	 It	 was
domesticated	 around	 the	 same	 time	 as
lowland	 cattle.	 Yak	 milk	 is	 substantially
richer	 in	 fat	 and	 protein	 than	 cow	 milk.
Tibetans	 in	 particular	 make	 elaborate	 use	 of
yak	butter	and	various	fermented	products.

The	Goat	 The	 goat	 and	 sheep	 belong	 to	 the
“ovicaprid”	 branch	 of	 the	 ruminant	 family,
smaller	animals	that	are	especially	at	home	in
mountainous	country.	The	goat,	Capra	hircus,
comes	 from	 a	 denizen	 of	 the	 mountains	 and
semidesert	 regions	 of	 central	 Asia,	 and	 was
probably	 the	 first	 animal	 after	 the	 dog	 to	 be
domesticated,	 between	 8000	 and	 9000	BCE	 in
present-day	Iran	and	Iraq.	It	is	the	hardiest	of
the	 Eurasian	 dairy	 animals,	 and	 will	 browse
just	 about	 any	 sort	 of	 vegetation,	 including



woody	 scrub.	 Its	 omnivorous	 nature,	 small
size,	 and	good	yield	of	 distinctively	 flavored
milk	—	the	highest	of	any	dairy	animal	for	its
body	weight	—	have	made	it	a	versatile	milk
and	 meat	 animal	 in	 marginal	 agricultural
areas.

The	 Sheep	 The	 sheep,	Ovis	 aries,	 was
domesticated	in	the	same	region	and	period	as
its	 close	 cousin	 the	 goat,	 and	 came	 to	 be
valued	and	bred	for	meat,	milk,	wool,	and	fat.
Sheep	 were	 originally	 grazers	 on	 grassy
foothills	 and	 are	 somewhat	 more	 fastidious
than	 goats,	 but	 less	 so	 than	 cattle.	 Sheep’s
milk	is	as	rich	as	the	buffalo’s	in	fat,	and	even
richer	 in	 protein;	 it	 has	 long	 been	 valued	 in
the	Eastern	Mediterranean	 for	making	yogurt
and	 feta	 cheese,	 and	 elsewhere	 in	Europe	 for
such	cheeses	as	Roquefort	and	pecorino.

The	 Camel	 The	 camel	 family	 is	 fairly	 far
removed	from	both	the	bovids	and	ovicaprids,
and	 may	 have	 developed	 the	 habit	 of



rumination	 independently	 during	 its	 early
evolution	 in	North	America.	Camels	are	well
adapted	 to	 arid	 climates,	 and	 were
domesticated	around	2500	BCE	in	central	Asia,
primarily	as	pack	animals.	Their	milk,	which
is	 roughly	 comparable	 to	 cow’s	 milk,	 is
collected	 in	many	countries,	 and	 in	northeast
Africa	is	a	staple	food.

The	Origins	of	Dairying

When	and	why	did	humans	extend	our
biological	heritage	as	milk	drinkers	to	the
cultural	practice	of	drinking	the	milk	of	other
animals?	Archaeological	evidence	suggests
that	sheep	and	goats	were	domesticated	in	the
grasslands	and	open	forest	of	present-day	Iran
and	Iraq	between	8000	and	9000	BCE,	a
thousand	years	before	the	far	larger,	fiercer
cattle.	At	first	these	animals	would	have	been
kept	for	meat	and	skins,	but	the	discovery	of
milking	was	a	significant	advance.	Dairy



animals	could	produce	the	nutritional
equivalent	of	a	slaughtered	meat	animal	or
more	each	year	for	several	years,	and	in
manageable	daily	increments.	Dairying	is	the
most	efficient	means	of	obtaining
nourishment	from	uncultivated	land,	and	may
have	been	especially	important	as	farming
communities	spread	outward	from	Southwest
Asia.

Small	ruminants	and	then	cattle	were
almost	surely	first	milked	into	containers
fashioned	from	skins	or	animal	stomachs.	The
earliest	hard	evidence	of	dairying	to	date
consists	of	clay	sieves,	which	have	been	found
in	the	settlements	of	the	earliest	northern
European	farmers,	from	around	5000	BCE.
Rock	drawings	of	milking	scenes	were	made	a
thousand	years	later	in	the	Sahara,	and	what
appear	to	be	the	remains	of	cheese	have	been
found	in	Egyptian	tombs	of	2300	BCE.

Diverse	Traditions



Early	shepherds	would	have	discovered	the
major	transformations	of	milk	in	their	first
containers.	When	milk	is	left	to	stand,	fat-
enriched	cream	naturally	forms	at	the	top,	and
if	agitated,	the	cream	becomes	butter.	The
remaining	milk	naturally	turns	acid	and
curdles	into	thick	yogurt,	which	draining
separates	into	solid	curd	and	liquid	whey.
Salting	the	fresh	curd	produces	a	simple,
long-keeping	cheese.	As	dairyers	became
more	adept	and	harvested	greater	quantities	of
milk,	they	found	new	ways	to	concentrate	and
preserve	its	nourishment,	and	developed
distinctive	dairy	products	in	the	different
climatic	regions	of	the	Old	World.

In	arid	southwest	Asia,	goat	and	sheep
milk	was	lightly	fermented	into	yogurt	that
could	be	kept	for	several	days,	sun-dried,	or
kept	under	oil;	or	curdled	into	cheese	that
could	be	eaten	fresh	or	preserved	by	drying	or
brining.	Lacking	the	settled	life	that	makes	it
possible	to	brew	beer	from	grain	or	wine	from



grapes,	the	nomadic	Tartars	even	fermented
mare’s	milk	into	lightly	alcoholic	koumiss,
which	Marco	Polo	described	as	having	“the
qualities	and	flavor	of	white	wine.”	In	the
high	country	of	Mongolia	and	Tibet,	cow,
camel,	and	yak	milk	was	churned	to	butter	for
use	as	a	high-energy	staple	food.

In	semitropical	India,	most	zebu	and
buffalo	milk	was	allowed	to	sour	overnight
into	a	yogurt,	then	churned	to	yield	buttermilk
and	butter,	which	when	clarified	into	ghee	(p.
37)	would	keep	for	months.	Some	milk	was
repeatedly	boiled	to	keep	it	sweet,	and	then
preserved	not	with	salt,	but	by	the
combination	of	sugar	and	long,	dehydrating
cooking	(see	box,	p.	26).

The	Mediterranean	world	of	Greece	and
Rome	used	economical	olive	oil	rather	than
butter,	but	esteemed	cheese.	The	Roman	Pliny
praised	cheeses	from	distant	provinces	that
are	now	parts	of	France	and	Switzerland.	And
indeed	cheese	making	reached	its	zenith	in



continental	and	northern	Europe,	thanks	to
abundant	pastureland	ideal	for	cattle,	and	a
temperate	climate	that	allowed	long,	gradual
fermentations.

The	one	major	region	of	the	Old	World	not
to	embrace	dairying	was	China,	perhaps
because	Chinese	agriculture	began	where	the
natural	vegetation	runs	to	often	toxic	relatives
of	wormwood	and	epazote	rather	than
ruminant-friendly	grasses.	Even	so,	frequent
contact	with	central	Asian	nomads	introduced
a	variety	of	dairy	products	to	China,	whose
elite	long	enjoyed	yogurt,	koumiss,	butter,
acid-set	curds,	and,	around	1300	and	thanks	to
the	Mongols,	even	milk	in	their	tea!

Dairying	was	unknown	in	the	New	World.
On	his	second	voyage	in	1493,	Columbus
brought	sheep,	goats,	and	the	first	of	the
Spanish	longhorn	cattle	that	would	proliferate
in	Mexico	and	Texas.

Milk	 in	 Europe	 and	 America:	 From



Farmhouse	to	Factory

Preindustrial	 Europe	 In	 Europe,	 dairying
took	 hold	 on	 land	 that	 supported	 abundant
pasturage	but	was	less	suited	to	the	cultivation
of	 wheat	 and	 other	 grains:	 wet	 Dutch
lowlands,	 the	 heavy	 soils	 of	 western	 France
and	 its	 high,	 rocky	 central	 massif,	 the	 cool,
moist	 British	 Isles	 and	 Scandinavia,	 alpine
valleys	in	Switzerland	and	Austria.	With	time,
livestock	 were	 selected	 for	 the	 climate	 and
needs	of	different	regions,	and	diversified	into
hundreds	 of	 distinctive	 local	 breeds	 (the
rugged	Brown	Swiss	cow	for	cheesemaking	in
the	 mountains,	 the	 diminutive	 Jersey	 and
Guernsey	 for	 making	 butter	 in	 the	 Channel
Islands).	 Summer	 milk	 was	 preserved	 in
equally	distinctive	local	cheeses.	By	medieval
times,	 fame	 had	 come	 to	 French	 Roquefort
and	 Brie,	 Swiss	 Appenzeller,	 and	 Italian
Parmesan.	 In	 the	 Renaissance,	 the	 Low
Countries	were	 renowned	 for	 their	butter	and



exported	 their	 productive	 Friesian	 cattle
throughout	Europe.

Until	industrial	times,	dairying	was	done
on	the	farm,	and	in	many	countries	mainly	by
women,	who	milked	the	animals	in	early
morning	and	after	noon	and	then	worked	for
hours	to	churn	butter	or	make	cheese.	Country
people	could	enjoy	good	fresh	milk,	but	in	the
cities,	with	confined	cattle	fed	inadequately
on	spent	brewers’	grain,	most	people	saw	only
watered-down,	adulterated,	contaminated	milk
hauled	in	open	containers	through	the	streets.
Tainted	milk	was	a	major	cause	of	child
mortality	in	early	Victorian	times.

Industrial	 and	 Scientific	 Innovations
Beginning	 around	 1830,	 industrialization
transformed	European	and	American	dairying.
The	 railroads	 made	 it	 possible	 to	 get	 fresh
country	milk	to	the	cities,	where	rising	urban
populations	 and	 incomes	 fueled	 demand,	 and
new	 laws	 regulated	 milk	 quality.	 Steam-



powered	 farm	 machinery	 meant	 that	 cattle
could	be	bred	and	 raised	 for	milk	production
alone,	not	for	a	compromise	between	milk	and
hauling,	 so	 milk	 production	 boomed,	 and
more	 than	 ever	 was	 drunk	 fresh.	 With	 the
invention	 of	 machines	 for	 milking,	 cream
separation,	 and	 churning,	 dairying	 gradually
moved	out	the	hands	of	milkmaids	and	off	the
farms,	 which	 increasingly	 supplied	 milk	 to
factories	for	mass	production	of	cream,	butter,
and	cheese.

From	the	end	of	the	19th	century,	chemical
and	biological	innovations	have	helped	make
dairy	products	at	once	more	hygienic,	more
predictable,	and	more	uniform.	The	great
French	chemist	Louis	Pasteur	inspired	two
fundamental	changes	in	dairy	practice:
pasteurization,	the	pathogen-killing	heat
treatment	that	bears	his	name;	and	the	use	of
standard,	purified	microbial	cultures	to	make
cheeses	and	other	fermented	foods.	Most
traditional	cattle	breeds	have	been	abandoned



in	favor	of	high-yielding	black-and-white
Friesian	(Holstein)	cows,	which	now	account
for	90%	of	all	American	dairy	cattle	and	85%
of	British.	The	cows	are	farmed	in	ever	larger
herds	and	fed	an	optimized	diet	that	seldom
includes	fresh	pasturage,	so	most	modern
milk	lacks	the	color,	flavor,	and	seasonal
variation	of	preindustrial	milk.

Dairy	Products	Today 	Today	dairying	is	split
into	several	big	businesses	with	nothing	of	the
dairymaid	left	about	them.	Butter	and	cheese,
once	 prized,	 delicate	 concentrates	 of	 milk’s
goodness,	 have	 become	 inexpensive,	 mass-
produced,	 uninspiring	 commodities	 piling	 up
in	 government	 warehouses.	 Manufacturers
now	 remove	 much	 of	 what	 makes	 milk,
cheese,	 ice	 cream,	 and	 butter	 distinctive	 and
pleasurable:	 they	 remove	 milk	 fat,	 which
suddenly	 became	 undesirable	 when	 medical
scientists	 found	 that	 saturated	milk	 fat	 tends
to	 raise	 blood	 cholesterol	 levels	 and	 can



contribute	 to	 heart	 disease.	 Happily	 the	 last
few	 years	 have	 brought	 a	 correction	 in	 the
view	 of	 saturated	 fat,	 a	 reaction	 to	 the
juggernaut	 of	 mass	 production,	 and	 a
resurgent	 interest	 in	 full-flavored	 dairy
products	 crafted	 on	 a	 small	 scale	 from
traditional	 breeds	 that	 graze	 seasonally	 on
green	pastures.

Milk	and	Health

Milk	has	long	been	synonymous	with
wholesome,	fundamental	nutrition,	and	for
good	reason:	unlike	most	of	our	foods,	it	is
actually	designed	to	be	a	food.	As	the	sole
sustaining	food	of	the	calf	at	the	beginning	of
its	life,	it’s	a	rich	source	of	many	essential
body-building	nutrients,	particularly	protein,
sugars	and	fat,	vitamin	A,	the	B	vitamins,	and
calcium.

Food	Words:	Milk	and	Dairy



In	 their	 roots,	 both	milk	 and	dairy	 recall
the	 physical	 effort	 it	 once	 took	 to	 obtain
milk	and	transform	it	by	hand.	Milk	comes
from	 an	 Indo-European	 root	 that	 meant
both	 “milk”	 and	 “to	 rub	 off,”	 the
connection	 perhaps	 being	 the	 stroking
necessary	to	squeeze	milk	from	the	teat.	In
medieval	 times,	dairy	 was	 originally	dey-
ery,	meaning	the	room	in	which	the	dey,	or
woman	servant,	made	milk	into	butter	and
cheese.	Dey	 in	 turn	 came	 from	 a	 root
meaning	“to	knead	bread”	(lady	shares	this
root)	 —	 perhaps	 a	 reflection	 not	 only	 of
the	servant’s	several	duties,	but	also	of	the
kneading	 required	 to	 squeeze	 buttermilk
out	 of	 butter	 (p.	 34)	 and	 sometimes	 the
whey	out	of	cheese.
Over	the	last	few	decades,	however,	the

idealized	portrait	of	milk	has	become	more
shaded.	We’ve	learned	that	the	balance	of
nutrients	in	cow’s	milk	doesn’t	meet	the
needs	of	human	infants,	that	most	adult



humans	on	the	planet	can’t	digest	the	milk
sugar	called	lactose,	that	the	best	route	to
calcium	balance	may	not	be	massive	milk
intake.	These	complications	help	remind	us
that	milk	was	designed	to	be	a	food	for	the
young	and	rapidly	growing	calf,	not	for	the
young	or	mature	human.

Milk	Nutrients

Nearly	all	milks	contain	the	same	battery	of
nutrients,	the	relative	proportions	of	which
vary	greatly	from	species	to	species.
Generally,	animals	that	grow	rapidly	are	fed
with	milk	high	in	protein	and	minerals.	A	calf
doubles	its	weight	at	birth	in	50	days,	a	human
infant	in	100;	sure	enough,	cow’s	milk
contains	more	than	double	the	protein	and
minerals	of	mother’s	milk.	Of	the	major
nutrients,	ruminant	milk	is	seriously	lacking
only	in	iron	and	in	vitamin	C.	Thanks	to	the
rumen	microbes,	which	convert	the



unsaturated	fatty	acids	of	grass	and	grain	into
saturated	fatty	acids,	the	milk	fat	of	ruminant
animals	is	the	most	highly	saturated	of	our
common	foods.	Only	coconut	oil	beats	it.
Saturated	fat	does	raise	blood	cholesterol
levels,	and	high	blood	cholesterol	is
associated	with	an	increased	risk	of	heart
disease;	but	the	other	foods	in	a	balanced	diet
can	compensate	for	this	disadvantage	(p.	253).

The	box	below	shows	the	nutrient	contents
of	both	familiar	and	unfamiliar	milks.	These
figures	are	only	a	rough	guide,	as	the
breakdown	by	breed	indicates;	there’s	also
much	variation	from	animal	to	animal,	and	in
a	given	animal’s	milk	as	its	lactation	period
progresses.

The	Compositions	of	Various	Milks
The	 figures	 in	 the	 following	 table	 are	 the
percent	of	the	milk’s	weight	accounted	for
by	its	major	components.



Milk Fat Protein Lactose
Human 4.0 1.1 6.8
Cow 3.7 3.4 4.8
Holstein/Friesian 3.6 3.4 4.9
Brown	Swiss 4.0 3.6 4.7
Jersey 5.2 3.9 4.9
Zebu 4.7 3.3 4.9
Buffalo 6.9 3.8 5.1
Yak 6.5 5.8 4.6
Goat 4.0 3.4 4.5
Sheep 7.5 6.0 4.8
Camel 2.9 3.9 5.4
Reindeer 17 11 2.8
Horse 1.2 2.0 6.3
Fin	whale 42 12 1.3
MilkMinerals Water
Human 0.2 88
Cow 0.7 87



Holstein/Friesian 0.7 87
Brown	Swiss 0.7 87
Jersey 0.7 85
Zebu 0.7 86
Buffalo 0.8 83
Yak 0.8 82
Goat 0.8 88
Sheep 1.0 80
Camel 0.8 87
Reindeer 1.5 68
Horse 0.3 90
Fin	whale 1.4 43

Milk	in	Infancy	and	Childhood:
Nutrition	and	Allergies

In	the	middle	of	the	20th	century,	when
nutrition	was	thought	to	be	a	simple	matter	of
protein,	calories,	vitamins,	and	minerals,



cow’s	milk	seemed	a	good	substitute	for
mother’s	milk:	more	than	half	of	all	six-
month-olds	in	the	United	States	drank	it.	Now
that	figure	is	down	to	less	than	10%.
Physicians	now	recommend	that	plain	cow’s
milk	not	be	fed	to	children	younger	than	one
year.	One	reason	is	that	it	provides	too	much
protein,	and	not	enough	iron	and	highly
unsaturated	fats,	for	the	human	infant’s	needs.
(Carefully	prepared	formula	milks	are	better
approximations	of	breast	milk.)	Another
disadvantage	to	the	early	use	of	cow’s	milk	is
that	it	can	trigger	an	allergy.	The	infant’s
digestive	system	is	not	fully	formed,	and	can
allow	some	food	protein	and	protein
fragments	to	pass	directly	into	the	blood.
These	foreign	molecules	then	provoke	a
defensive	response	from	the	immune	system,
and	that	response	is	strengthened	each	time
the	infant	eats.	Somewhere	between	1%	and
10%	of	American	infants	suffer	from	an
allergy	to	the	abundant	protein	in	cow’s	milk,



whose	symptoms	may	range	from	mild
discomfort	to	intestinal	damage	to	shock.
Most	children	eventually	grow	out	of	milk
allergy.

Milk	after	Infancy:
Dealing	with	Lactose

In	the	animal	world,	humans	are	exceptional
for	consuming	milk	of	any	kind	after	they
have	started	eating	solid	food.	And	people
who	drink	milk	after	infancy	are	the	exception
within	the	human	species.	The	obstacle	is	the
milk	sugar	lactose,	which	can’t	be	absorbed
and	used	by	the	body	as	is:	it	must	first	be
broken	down	into	its	component	sugars	by
digestive	enzymes	in	the	small	intestine.	The
lactose-digesting	enzyme,	lactase,	reaches	its
maximum	levels	in	the	human	intestinal
lining	shortly	after	birth,	and	then	slowly
declines,	with	a	steady	minimum	level
commencing	at	between	two	and	five	years	of



age	and	continuing	through	adulthood.
The	logic	of	this	trend	is	obvious:	it’s	a

waste	of	its	resources	for	the	body	to	produce
an	enzyme	when	it’s	no	longer	needed;	and
once	most	mammals	are	weaned,	they	never
encounter	lactose	in	their	food	again.	But	if	an
adult	without	much	lactase	activity	does
ingest	a	substantial	amount	of	milk,	then	the
lactose	passes	through	the	small	intestine	and
reaches	the	large	intestine,	where	bacteria
metabolize	it,	and	in	the	process	produce
carbon	dioxide,	hydrogen,	and	methane:	all
discomforting	gases.	Sugar	also	draws	water
from	the	intestinal	walls,	and	this	causes	a
bloated	feeling	or	diarrhea.

Low	lactase	activity	and	its	symptoms	are
called	lactose	intolerance.	It	turns	out	that
adult	lactose	intolerance	is	the	rule	rather	than
the	exception:	lactose-tolerant	adults	are	a
distinct	minority	on	the	planet.	Several
thousand	years	ago,	peoples	in	northern
Europe	and	a	few	other	regions	underwent	a



genetic	change	that	allowed	them	to	produce
lactase	throughout	life,	probably	because	milk
was	an	exceptionally	important	resource	in
colder	climates.	About	98%	of	Scandinavians
are	lactose-tolerant,	90%	of	French	and
Germans,	but	only	40%	of	southern	Europeans
and	North	Africans,	and	30%	of	African
Americans.

Coping	 with	 Lactose	 Intolerance
Fortunately,	 lactose	 intolerance	 is	 not	 the
same	as	milk	 intolerance.	Lactase-less	 adults
can	consume	about	a	cup/250	ml	of	milk	per
day	without	severe	symptoms,	and	even	more
of	other	dairy	products.	Cheese	contains	little
or	 no	 lactose	 (most	 of	 it	 is	 drawn	 off	 in	 the
whey,	 and	 what	 little	 remains	 in	 the	 curd	 is
fermented	 by	 bacteria	 and	 molds).	 The
bacteria	 in	 yogurt	 generate	 lactose-digesting
enzymes	 that	 remain	 active	 in	 the	 human
small	 intestine	 and	 work	 for	 us	 there.	 And
lactose-intolerant	milk	 fans	 can	 now	 buy	 the



lactose-digesting	enzyme	itself	in	liquid	form
(it’s	 manufactured	 from	 a	 fungus,
Aspergillus),	and	add	a	few	drops	to	any	dairy
product	just	before	they	consume	it.

New	Questions	about	Milk

Milk	has	been	especially	valued	for	two
nutritional	characteristics:	its	richness	in
calcium,	and	both	the	quantity	and	quality	of
its	protein.	Recent	research	has	raised	some
fascinating	questions	about	each	of	these.

Perplexity	about	Calcium	and	Osteoporosis
Our	 bones	 are	 constructed	 from	 two	 primary
materials:	 proteins,	 which	 form	 a	 kind	 of
scaffolding,	 and	 calcium	 phosphate,	 which
acts	 as	 a	 hard,	 mineralized,	 strengthening
filler.	 Bone	 tissue	 is	 constantly	 being
deconstructed	and	rebuilt	throughout	our	adult
lives,	 so	 healthy	 bones	 require	 adequate
protein	 and	 calcium	 supplies	 from	 our	 diet.



Many	women	 in	 industrialized	 countries	 lose
so	 much	 bone	 mass	 after	 menopause	 that
they’re	 at	 high	 risk	 for	 serious	 fractures.
Dietary	 calcium	 clearly	 helps	 prevent	 this
potentially	 dangerous	 loss,	 or	osteoporosis.
Milk	and	dairy	products	are	the	major	source
of	 calcium	 in	 dairying	 countries,	 and	 U.S.
government	 panels	 have	 recommended	 that
adults	 consume	 the	 equivalent	 of	 a	 quart
(liter)	of	milk	daily	to	prevent	osteoporosis.

This	recommendation	represents	an
extraordinary	concentration	of	a	single	food,
and	an	unnatural	one	—	remember	that	the
ability	to	drink	milk	in	adulthood,	and	the
habit	of	doing	so,	is	an	aberration	limited	to
people	of	northern	European	descent.	A	quart
of	milk	supplies	two-thirds	of	a	day’s
recommended	protein,	and	would	displace
from	the	diet	other	foods	—	vegetables,	fruits,
grains,	meats,	and	fish	—	that	provide	their
own	important	nutritional	benefits.	And	there
clearly	must	be	other	ways	of	maintaining



healthy	bones.	Other	countries,	including
China	and	Japan,	suffer	much	lower	fracture
rates	than	the	United	States	and	milk-loving
Scandinavia,	despite	the	fact	that	their	people
drink	little	or	no	milk.	So	it	seems	prudent	to
investigate	the	many	other	factors	that
influence	bone	strength,	especially	those	that
slow	the	deconstruction	process	(see	box,	p.
15).	The	best	answer	is	likely	to	be	not	a
single	large	white	bullet,	but	the	familiar
balanced	diet	and	regular	exercise.

The	Many	Influences	on	Bone	Health
Good	 bone	 health	 results	 from	 a	 proper
balance	between	the	two	ongoing	processes
of	bone	deconstruction	and	reconstruction.
These	 processes	 depend	 not	 only	 on
calcium	 levels	 in	 the	 body,	 but	 also	 on
physical	 activity	 that	 stimulates	 bone-
building;	 hormones	 and	 other	 controlling
signals;	 trace	 nutrients	 (including	 vitamin
C,	 magnesium,	 potassium,	 and	 zinc);	 and



other	as	yet	unidentified	substances.	There
appear	 to	 be	 factors	 in	 tea	 and	 in	 onions
and	parsley	 that	 slow	bone	 deconstruction
significantly.	Vitamin	D	is	essential	for	the
efficient	 absorption	 of	 calcium	 from	 our
foods,	 and	 also	 influences	 bone	 building.
It’s	 added	 to	 milk,	 and	 other	 sources
include	 eggs,	 fish	 and	 shellfish,	 and	 our
own	skin,	where	ultraviolet	 light	 from	 the
sun	activates	a	precursor	molecule.

The	 amount	 of	 calcium	 we	 have
available	 for	 bone	 building	 is	 importantly
affected	 by	 how	 much	 we	 excrete	 in	 our
urine.	The	more	we	lose,	the	more	we	have
to	take	in	from	our	foods.	Various	aspects
of	 modern	 eating	 increase	 calcium
excretion	 and	 so	 boost	 our	 calcium
requirement.	A	 high	 intake	 of	 salt	 is	 one,
and	 another	 is	 a	 high	 intake	 of	 animal
protein,	 the	 metabolism	 of	 whose	 sulfur-
containing	amino	acids	acidifies	our	urine,
and	 pulls	 neutralizing	 calcium	 salts	 from



bone.
The	best	insurance	against	osteoporosis

appears	 to	 be	 frequent	 exercise	 of	 the
bones	 that	 we	want	 to	 keep	 strong,	 and	 a
well-rounded	 diet	 that	 is	 rich	 in	 vitamins
and	 minerals,	 moderate	 in	 salt	 and	 meat,
and	 includes	 a	 variety	 of	 calcium-
containing	 foods.	 Milk	 is	 certainly	 a
valuable	one,	but	 so	are	dried	beans,	nuts,
corn	tortillas	and	tofu	(both	processed	with
calcium	salts),	and	several	greens	—	kale,
collards,	mustard	greens.

Milk	Proteins	Become	Something	More	We
used	to	think	that	one	of	the	major	proteins	in
milk,	casein	(p.	19),	was	mainly	a	nutritional
reservoir	of	amino	acids	with	which	the	infant
builds	its	own	body.	But	this	protein	now
appears	to	be	a	complex,	subtle	orchestrator
of	the	infant’s	metabolism.	When	it’s
digested,	its	long	amino	acid	chains	are	first
broken	down	into	smaller	fragments,	or
peptides.	It	turns	out	that	many	hormones	and



drugs	are	also	peptides,	and	a	number	of
casein	peptides	do	affect	the	body	in
hormone-like	ways.	One	reduces	breathing
and	heart	rates,	another	triggers	insulin
release	into	the	blood,	and	a	third	stimulates
the	scavenging	activity	of	white	blood	cells.
Do	the	peptides	from	cow’s	milk	affect	the
metabolism	of	human	children	or	adults	in
significant	ways?	We	don’t	yet	know.

Milk	Biology
and	Chemistry

How	the	Cow	Makes	Milk

Milk	is	food	for	the	newborn,	and	so	dairy
animals	must	give	birth	before	they	will
produce	significant	quantities	of	milk.	The
mammary	glands	are	activated	by	changes	in
the	balance	of	hormones	toward	the	end	of
pregnancy,	and	are	stimulated	to	continue
secreting	milk	by	regular	removal	of	milk



from	the	gland.	The	optimum	sequence	for
milk	production	is	to	breed	the	cow	again	90
days	after	it	calves,	milk	it	for	10	months,	and
let	it	go	dry	for	the	two	months	before	the
next	calving.	In	intensive	operations,	cows
aren’t	allowed	to	waste	energy	on	grazing	in
variable	pastures;	they’re	given	hay	or	silage
(whole	corn	or	other	plants,	partly	dried	and
then	preserved	by	fermentation	in	airtight
silos)	in	confined	lots,	and	are	milked	only
during	their	two	or	three	most	productive
years.	The	combination	of	breeding	and
optimal	feed	formulation	has	led	to	per-
animal	yields	of	a	hundred	pounds	or	15
gallons/58	liters	per	day,	though	the	American
average	is	about	half	that.	Dairy	breeds	of
sheep	and	goats	give	about	one	gallon	per	day.

The	first	fluid	secreted	by	the	mammary
gland	is	colostrum,	a	creamy,	yellow	solution
of	concentrated	fat,	vitamins,	and	proteins,
especially	immunoglobulins	and	antibodies.
After	a	few	days,	when	the	colostrum	flow	has



ceased	and	the	milk	is	saleable,	the	calf	is	put
on	a	diet	of	reconstituted	and	soy	milks,	and
the	cow	is	milked	two	or	three	times	daily	to
keep	the	secretory	cells	working	at	full
capacity.

The	Milk	Factory	The	mammary	gland	is	an
astonishing	 biological	 factory,	 with	 many
different	cells	and	structures	working	together
to	 create,	 store,	 and	 dispense	 milk.	 Some
components	 of	 milk	 come	 directly	 from	 the
cow’s	 blood	 and	 collect	 in	 the	 udder.	 The
principal	 nutrients,	 however	 —	 fats,	 sugar,
and	proteins	—	are	assembled	by	 the	gland’s
secretory	 cells,	 and	 then	 released	 into	 the
udder.

A	 Living	 Fluid	 Milk’s	 blank	 appearance
belies	its	tremendous	complexity	and	vitality.
It’s	 alive	 in	 the	 sense	 that,	 fresh	 from	 the
udder,	 it	 contains	 living	 white	 blood	 cells,
some	 mammary-gland	 cells,	 and	 various
bacteria;	 and	 it	 teems	 with	 active	 enzymes,



some	 floating	 free,	 some	 embedded	 in	 the
membranes	of	the	fat	globules.	Pasteurization
(p.	 22)	 greatly	 reduces	 this	 vitality;	 in	 fact
residual	enzyme	activity	is	taken	as	a	sign	that
the	 heat	 treatment	 was	 insufficient.
Pasteurized	 milk	 contains	 very	 few	 living
cells	 or	 active	 enzyme	 molecules,	 so	 it	 is
more	 predictably	 free	 of	 bacteria	 that	 could
cause	 food	 poisoning,	 and	 more	 stable;	 it
develops	 off-flavors	 more	 slowly	 than	 raw
milk.	But	the	dynamism	of	raw	milk	is	prized
in	 traditional	 cheese	 making,	 where	 it
contributes	 to	 the	 ripening	 process	 and
deepens	flavor.

The	 making	 of	 milk.	 Cells	 in	 the	 cow’s
mammary	gland	synthesize	the	components	of



milk,	 including	proteins	 and	globules	 of	milk
fat,	and	 release	 them	 into	many	 thousands	of
small	 compartments	 that	 drain	 toward	 the
teat.	The	 fat	 globules	pass	 through	 the	 cells’
outer	membranes,	 and	 carry	parts	 of	 the	 cell
membrane	on	their	surface.

Milk	owes	its	milky	opalescence	to
microscopic	fat	globules	and	protein	bundles,
which	are	just	large	enough	to	deflect	light
rays	as	they	pass	through	the	liquid.	Dissolved
salts	and	milk	sugar,	vitamins,	other	proteins,
and	traces	of	many	other	compounds	also
swim	in	the	water	that	accounts	for	the	bulk	of
the	fluid.	The	sugar,	fat,	and	proteins	are	by
far	the	most	important	components,	and	we’ll
look	at	them	in	detail	in	a	moment.

First	a	few	words	about	the	remaining
components.	Milk	is	slightly	acidic,	with	a	pH
between	6.5	and	6.7,	and	both	acidity	and	salt
concentrations	strongly	affect	the	behavior	of
the	proteins,	as	we’ll	see.	The	fat	globules
carry	colorless	vitamin	A	and	its	yellow-



orange	precursors	the	carotenes,	which	are
found	in	green	feed	and	give	milk	and	undyed
butter	whatever	color	they	have.	Breeds	differ
in	the	amount	of	carotene	they	convert	into
vitamin	A;	Guernsey	and	Jersey	cows	convert
little	and	give	especially	golden	milk,	while	at
the	other	extreme	sheep,	goats,	and	water
buffalo	process	nearly	all	of	their	carotene,	so
their	milk	and	butter	are	nutritious	but	white.
Riboflavin,	which	has	a	greenish	color,	can
sometimes	be	seen	in	skim	milk	or	in	the
watery	translucent	whey	that	drains	from	the
curdled	proteins	of	yogurt.

Milk	Sugar:	Lactose

The	only	carbohydrate	found	in	any	quantity
in	milk	is	also	peculiar	to	milk	(and	a	handful
of	plants),	and	so	was	named	lactose,	or	“milk
sugar.”	(Lac-	is	a	prefix	based	on	the	Greek
word	for	“milk”;	we’ll	encounter	it	again	in
the	names	of	milk	proteins,	acids,	and



bacteria.)	Lactose	is	a	composite	of	the	two
simple	sugars	glucose	and	galactose,	which
are	joined	together	in	the	secretory	cell	of	the
mammary	gland,	and	nowhere	else	in	the
animal	body.	It	provides	nearly	half	of	the
calories	in	human	milk,	and	40%	in	cow’s
milk,	and	gives	milk	its	sweet	taste.

The	uniqueness	of	lactose	has	two	major
practical	consequences.	First,	we	need	a
special	enzyme	to	digest	lactose;	and	many
adults	lack	that	enzyme	and	have	to	be	careful
about	what	dairy	products	they	consume	(p.
14).	Second,	most	microbes	take	some	time	to
make	their	own	lactose-digesting	enzyme
before	they	can	grow	well	in	milk,	but	one
group	has	enzymes	at	the	ready	and	can	get	a
head	start	on	all	the	others.	The	bacteria
known	as	Lactobacilli	and	Lactococci	not
only	grow	on	lactose	immediately,	they	also
convert	it	into	lactic	acid	(“milk	acid”).	They
thus	acidify	the	milk,	and	in	so	doing,	make	it
less	habitable	by	other	microbes,	including



many	that	would	make	the	milk	unpalatable	or
cause	disease.	Lactose	and	the	lactic-acid
bacteria	therefore	turn	milk	sour,	but	help
prevent	it	from	spoiling,	or	becoming
undrinkable.

Lactose	is	one-fifth	as	sweet	as	table	sugar,
and	only	one-tenth	as	soluble	in	water	(200	vs.
2,000	gm/l),	so	lactose	crystals	readily	form
in	such	products	as	condensed	milk	and	ice
cream	and	can	give	them	a	sandy	texture.

Milk	Fat

Milk	fat	accounts	for	much	of	the	body,
nutritional	value,	and	economic	value	of	milk.
The	milk-fat	globules	carry	the	fat-soluble
vitamins	(A,	D,	E,	K),	and	about	half	the
calories	of	whole	milk.	The	higher	the	fat
content	of	milk,	the	more	cream	or	butter	can
be	made	from	it,	and	so	the	higher	the	price	it
will	bring.	Most	cows	secrete	more	fat	in
winter,	due	mainly	to	concentrated	winter



feed	and	the	approaching	end	of	their	lactation
period.	Certain	breeds,	notably	Guernseys	and
Jerseys	from	the	Channel	Islands	between
Britain	and	France,	produce	especially	rich
milk	and	large	fat	globules.	Sheep	and	buffalo
milks	contain	up	to	twice	the	butterfat	of
whole	cow’s	milk	(p.	13).

The	way	the	fat	is	packaged	into	globules
accounts	for	much	of	milk’s	behavior	in	the
kitchen.	The	membrane	that	surrounds	each
fat	globule	is	made	up	of	phospholipids	(fatty
acid	emulsifiers,	p.	802)	and	proteins,	and
plays	two	major	roles.	It	separates	the
droplets	of	fat	from	each	other	and	prevents
them	from	pooling	together	into	one	large
mass;	and	it	protects	the	fat	molecules	from
fat-digesting	enzymes	in	the	milk	that	would
otherwise	attack	them	and	break	them	down
into	rancid-smelling	and	bitter	fatty	acids.

Creaming	When	milk	fresh	from	the	udder	is
allowed	 to	 stand	 and	 cool	 for	 some	 hours,



many	of	 its	 fat	 globules	 rise	 and	 form	 a	 fat-
rich	 layer	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 container.	 This
phenomenon	 is	 called	creaming,	 and	 for
millennia	 it	was	 the	 natural	 first	 step	 toward
obtaining	 fat-enriched	cream	and	butter	 from
milk.	 In	 the	 19th	 century,	 centrifuges	 were
developed	 to	 concentrate	 the	 fat	 globules
more	 rapidly	 and	 thoroughly,	 and
homogenization	 was	 invented	 to	 prevent
whole	 milk	 from	 separating	 in	 this	 way	 (p.
23).	 The	 globules	 rise	 because	 their	 fat	 is
lighter	 than	 water,	 but	 they	 rise	much	 faster
than	 their	buoyancy	alone	can	account	 for.	 It
turns	out	that	a	number	of	minor	milk	proteins
attach	 themselves	 loosely	 to	 the	 fat	 globules
and	 knit	 together	 clusters	 of	 about	 a	million
globules	 that	 have	 a	 stronger	 lift	 than	 single
globules	do.	Heat	denatures	these	proteins	and
prevents	the	globule	clustering,	so	that	the	fat
globules	 in	 unhomogenized	 but	 pasteurized
milk	 rise	 more	 slowly	 into	 a	 shallower,	 less
distinct	layer.	Because	of	their	small	globules



and	low	clustering	activity,	the	milks	of	goats,
sheep,	 and	 water	 buffalo	 are	 very	 slow	 to
separate.

Milk	 Fat	 Globules	 Tolerate	 Heat…
Interactions	 between	 fat	 globules	 and	 milk
proteins	 are	 also	 responsible	 for	 the
remarkable	 tolerance	 of	 milk	 and	 cream	 to
heat.	 Milk	 and	 cream	 can	 be	 boiled	 and
reduced	 for	 hours,	 until	 they’re	 nearly	 dry,
without	 breaching	 the	 globule	 membranes
enough	 to	 release	 their	 fat.	 The	 globule
membranes	 are	 robust	 to	 begin	 with,	 and	 it
turns	 out	 that	 heating	 unfolds	 many	 of	 the
milk	proteins	and	makes	 them	more	prone	 to
stick	 to	 the	globule	surface	and	to	each	other
—	 so	 the	 globule	 armor	 actually	 gets
progressively	 thicker	 as	 heating	 proceeds.
Without	 this	 stability	 to	 heat,	 it	 would	 be
impossible	 to	 make	 many	 cream-enriched
sauces	and	reduced-milk	sauces	and	sweets.

…But	 Are	 Sensitive	 to	 Cold	 Freezing	 is	 a



different	 story.	 It	 is	 fatal	 to	 the	 fat	 globule
membrane.	 Cold	milk	 fat	 and	 freezing	water
both	 form	 large,	 solid,	 jagged	 crystals	 that
pierce,	 crush,	 and	 rend	 the	 thin	 veil	 of
phospholipids	 and	 proteins	 around	 the
globule,	 just	 a	 few	 molecules	 thick.	 If	 you
freeze	milk	or	 cream	and	 then	 thaw	 it,	much
of	 the	 membrane	 material	 ends	 up	 floating
free	in	the	liquid,	and	many	of	the	fat	globules
get	 stuck	 to	 each	 other	 in	 grains	 of	 butter.
Make	 the	mistake	 of	 heating	 thawed	milk	 or
cream,	and	the	butter	grains	melt	into	puddles
of	oil.

Milk	Proteins:	Coagulation
by	Acid	and	Enzymes

Two	Protein	Classes:	Curd	and	Whey	There
are	dozens	of	different	proteins	floating
around	in	milk.	When	it	comes	to	cooking
behavior,	fortunately,	we	can	reduce	the
protein	population	to	two	basic	groups:	Little



Miss	Muffet’s	curds	and	whey.	The	two
groups	are	distinguished	by	their	reaction	to
acids.	The	handful	of	curd	proteins,	the
caseins,	clump	together	in	acid	conditions	and
form	a	solid	mass,	or	coagulate,	while	all	the
rest,	the	whey	proteins,	remain	suspended	in
the	liquid.	It’s	the	clumping	nature	of	the
caseins	that	makes	possible	most	thickened
milk	products,	from	yogurt	to	cheese.	The
whey	proteins	play	a	more	minor	role;	they
influence	the	texture	of	casein	curds,	and
stabilize	the	milk	foams	on	specialty	coffees.
The	caseins	usually	outweigh	the	whey
proteins,	as	they	do	in	cow’s	milk	by	4	to	1.

Both	caseins	and	whey	proteins	are
unusual	among	food	proteins	in	being	largely
tolerant	of	heat.	Where	cooking	coagulates	the
proteins	in	eggs	and	meat	into	solid	masses,	it
does	not	coagulate	the	proteins	in	milk	and
cream	—	unless	the	milk	or	cream	has
become	acidic.	Fresh	milk	and	cream	can	be
boiled	down	to	a	fraction	of	their	volume



without	curdling.

The	Caseins	The	casein	family	 includes	four
different	kinds	of	proteins	that	gather	together
into	microscopic	family	units	called	micelles.
Each	 casein	micelle	 contains	 a	 few	 thousand
individual	 protein	 molecules,	 and	 measures
about	a	ten	thousandth	of	a	millimeter	across,
about	 one-fiftieth	 the	 size	 of	 a	 fat	 globule.
Around	a	tenth	of	the	volume	of	milk	is	taken
up	by	casein	micelles.	Much	of	the	calcium	in
milk	is	in	the	micelles,	where	it	acts	as	a	kind
of	 glue	 holding	 the	 protein	 molecules
together.	 One	 portion	 of	 calcium	 binds
individual	 protein	 molecules	 together	 into
small	 clusters	 of	 15	 to	 25.	 Another	 portion
then	helps	pull	several	hundred	of	the	clusters
together	 to	 form	 the	 micelle	 (which	 is	 also
held	 together	 by	 the	 water-avoiding
hydrophobic	portions	of	 the	proteins	bonding
to	each	other).

Keeping	Micelles	Separate…	One	member	of



the	 casein	 family	 is	 especially	 influential	 in
these	gatherings.	That	 is	kappa-casein,	which
caps	 the	 micelles	 once	 they	 reach	 a	 certain
size,	prevents	 them	from	growing	 larger,	and
keeps	them	dispersed	and	separate.	One	end	of
the	capping-casein	molecule	extends	from	the
micelle	 out	 into	 the	 surrounding	 liquid,	 and
forms	 a	 “hairy	 layer”	 with	 a	 negative
electrical	charge	that	repels	other	micelles.

A	 close-up	 view	 of	 milk.	 Fat	 globules	 are
suspended	 in	 a	 fluid	 made	 up	 of	 water,
individual	molecules	of	whey	protein,	bundles
of	 casein	 protein	 molecules,	 and	 dissolved
sugars	and	minerals.
…And	Knitting	Them	Together	in	Curds	The
intricate	structure	of	casein	micelles	can	be
disturbed	in	several	ways	that	cause	the



micelles	to	flock	together	and	the	milk	to
curdle.	One	way	is	souring.	Milk’s	normal	pH
is	about	6.5,	or	just	slightly	acidic.	If	it	gets
acid	enough	to	approach	pH	5.5,	the	capping-
casein’s	negative	charge	is	neutralized,	the
micelles	no	longer	repel	each	other,	and	they
therefore	gather	in	loose	clusters.	At	the	same
acidity,	the	calcium	glue	that	holds	the
micelles	together	dissolves,	the	micelles
begin	to	fall	apart,	and	their	individual
proteins	scatter.	Beginning	around	pH	4.7,	the
scattered	casein	proteins	lose	their	negative
charge,	bond	to	each	other	again	and	form	a
continuous,	fine	network:	and	the	milk
solidifies,	or	curdles.	This	is	what	happens
when	milk	gets	old	and	sour,	or	when	it’s
intentionally	cultured	with	acid-producing
bacteria	to	make	yogurt	or	sour	cream.

Another	way	to	cause	the	caseins	to	curdle
is	the	basis	of	cheese	making.	Chymosin,	a
digestive	enzyme	from	the	stomach	of	a	milk-
fed	calf,	is	exquisitely	designed	to	give	the



casein	micelles	a	haircut	(p.	57).	It	clips	off
just	the	part	of	the	capping-casein	that	extends
into	the	surrounding	liquid	and	shields	the
micelles	from	each	other.	Shorn	of	their	hairy
layer,	the	micelles	all	clump	together	—
without	the	milk	being	noticeably	sour.

The	Whey	Proteins	Subtract	the	four	caseins
from	 the	 milk	 proteins,	 and	 the	 remainder,
numbering	 in	 the	 dozens,	 are	 the	 whey
proteins.	 Where	 the	 caseins	 are	 mainly
nutritive,	 supplying	amino	acids	 and	calcium
for	 the	 calf,	 the	 whey	 proteins	 include
defensive	proteins,	molecules	that	bind	to	and
transport	 other	 nutrients,	 and	 enzymes.	 The
most	 abundant	 one	 by	 far	 is	 lactoglobulin,
whose	biological	function	remains	a	mystery.
It’s	a	highly	structured	protein	 that	 is	readily
denatured	 by	 cooking.	 It	 unfolds	 at
172ºF/78ºC,	when	its	sulfur	atoms	are	exposed
to	 the	 surrounding	 liquid	 and	 react	 with
hydrogen	 ions	 to	 form	 hydrogen	 sulfide	 gas,



whose	 powerful	 aroma	 contributes	 to	 the
characteristic	 flavor	 of	 cooked	 milk	 (and
many	other	animal	foods).

In	boiling	milk,	unfolded	lactoglobulin
binds	not	to	itself	but	to	the	capping-casein	on
the	casein	micelles,	which	remain	separate;	so
denatured	lactoglobulin	doesn’t	coagulate.
When	denatured	in	acid	conditions	with
relatively	little	casein	around,	as	in	cheese
whey,	lactoglobulin	molecules	do	bind	to	each
other	and	coagulate	into	little	clots,	which	can
be	made	into	whey	cheeses	like	true	ricotta.
Heat-denatured	whey	proteins	are	better	than
their	native	forms	at	stabilizing	air	bubbles	in
milk	foams	and	ice	crystals	in	ice	creams;	this
is	why	milks	and	creams	are	usually	cooked
for	these	preparations	(pp.	26,	43).



A	 model	 of	 the	 milk	 protein	 casein,	 which
occurs	in	micelles,	or	small	bundles	a	fraction
of	 the	 size	 of	 a	 fat	 globule.	 A	 single	micelle
consists	of	many	individual	protein	molecules
(lines)	held	 together	 by	 particles	 of	 calcium
phosphate	(small	spheres).

Milk	Flavor

The	flavor	of	fresh	milk	is	balanced	and
subtle.	It’s	distinctly	sweet	from	the	lactose,
slightly	salty	from	its	complement	of
minerals,	and	very	slightly	acid.	Its	mild,
pleasant	aroma	is	due	in	large	measure	to
short-chain	fatty	acids	(including	butyric	and
capric	acids),	which	help	keep	highly



saturated	milk	fat	fluid	at	body	temperature,
and	which	are	small	enough	that	they	can
evaporate	into	the	air	and	reach	our	nose.
Normally,	free	fatty	acids	give	an	undesirable,
soapy	flavor	to	foods.	But	in	sparing
quantities,	the	4-	to	12-carbon	rumen	fatty
acids,	branched	versions	of	these,	and	acid-
alcohol	combinations	called	esters,	provide
milk	with	its	fundamental	blend	of	animal	and
fruity	notes.	The	distinctive	smells	of	goat
and	sheep	milks	are	due	to	two	particular
branched	8-carbon	fatty	acids	(4-ethyl-
octanoic,	4-methyl-octanoic)	that	are	absent
in	cow’s	milk.	Buffalo	milk,	from	which
traditional	mozzarella	cheese	is	made,	has	a
characteristic	blend	of	modified	fatty	acids
reminiscent	of	mushrooms	and	freshly	cut
grass,	together	with	a	barnyardy	nitrogen
compound	(indole).

The	basic	flavor	of	fresh	milk	is	affected
by	the	animals’	feed.	Dry	hay	and	silage	are
relatively	poor	in	fat	and	protein	and	produce



a	less	complicated,	mildly	cheesy	aroma,
while	lush	pasturage	provides	raw	material	for
sweet,	raspberry-like	notes	(derivatives	of
unsaturated	long-chain	fatty	acids),	as	well	as
barnyardy	indoles.

Flavors	 from	 Cooking	 Low-temperature
pasteurization	 (p.	 22)	 slightly	 modifies	 milk
flavor	 by	 driving	 off	 some	 of	 the	 more
delicate	 aromas,	 but	 stabilizes	 it	 by
inactivating	 enzymes	 and	 bacteria,	 and	 adds
slightly	 sulfury	 and	 green-leaf	 notes
(dimethyl	sulfide,	hexanal).	High-temperature
pasteurization	 or	 brief	 cooking	 —	 heating
milk	above	170ºF/76ºC	—	generates	traces	of
many	 flavorful	 substances,	 including	 those
characteristic	 of	 vanilla,	 almonds,	 and
cultured	 butter,	 as	 well	 as	 eggy	 hydrogen
sulfide.	 Prolonged	 boiling	 encourages
browning	 or	 Maillard	 reactions	 between
lactose	 and	 milk	 proteins,	 and	 generates
molecules	 that	 combine	 to	 give	 the	 flavor	 of



butterscotch.

The	Development	of	Off-Flavors	The	flavor
of	 good	 fresh	milk	 can	 deteriorate	 in	 several
different	ways.	Simple	contact	with	oxygen	or
exposure	 to	 strong	 light	 will	 cause	 the
oxidation	 of	 phospholipids	 in	 the	 globule
membrane	and	a	chain	of	reactions	that	slowly
generate	 stale	 cardboard,	 metallic,	 fishy,
paint-like	aromas.	If	milk	is	kept	long	enough
to	 sour,	 it	 also	 typically	 develops	 fruity,
vinegary,	malty,	and	more	unpleasant	notes.

Exposure	to	sunlight	or	fluorescent	lights
also	generates	a	distinctive	cabbage-like,
burnt	odor,	which	appears	to	result	from	a
reaction	between	the	vitamin	riboflavin	and
the	sulfur-containing	amino	acid	methionine.
Clear	glass	and	plastic	containers	and
supermarket	lighting	cause	this	problem;
opaque	cartons	prevent	it.

Unfermented
Dairy	Products



Fresh	milk,	cream,	and	butter	may	not	be	as
prominent	in	European	and	American	cooking
as	they	once	were,	but	they	are	still	essential
ingredients.	Milk	has	bubbled	up	to	new
prominence	atop	the	coffee	craze	of	the	1980s
and	’90s.

Milks

Milk	has	become	the	most	standardized	of	our
basic	foods.	Once	upon	a	time,	people	lucky
enough	to	live	near	a	farm	could	taste	the
pasture	and	the	seasons	in	milk	fresh	from	the
cow.	City	life,	mass	production,	and	stricter
notions	of	hygiene	have	now	put	that
experience	out	of	reach.	Today	nearly	all	of
our	milk	comes	from	cows	of	one	breed,	the
black-and-white	Holstein,	kept	in	sheds	and
fed	year-round	on	a	uniform	diet.	Large
dairies	pool	the	milk	of	hundreds,	even
thousands	of	cows,	then	pasteurize	it	to
eliminate	microbes	and	homogenize	it	to



prevent	the	fat	from	separating.	The	result	is
processed	milk	of	no	particular	animal	or
farm	or	season,	and	therefore	of	no	particular
character.	Some	small	dairies	persist	in
milking	other	breeds,	allowing	their	herds	out
to	pasture,	pasteurizing	mildly,	and	not
homogenizing.	Their	milk	can	have	a	more
distinctive	flavor,	a	rare	reminder	of	what
milk	used	to	taste	like.

Raw	Milk	 Careful	 milking	 of	 healthy	 cows
yields	 sound	 raw	 milk,	 which	 has	 its	 own
fresh	 taste	 and	 physical	 behavior.	 But	 if	 it’s
contaminated	 by	 a	 diseased	 cow	 or	 careless
handling	—	the	udder	hangs	right	next	 to	 the
tail	 —	 this	 nutritious	 fluid	 soon	 teems	 with
potentially	 dangerous	 microbes.	 The
importance	 of	 strict	 hygiene	 in	 the	 dairy	 has
been	 understood	 at	 least	 since	 the	 Middle
Ages,	 but	 life	 far	 from	 the	 farms	 made
contamination	 and	 even	 adulteration	 all	 too
common	 in	 cities	 of	 the	 18th	 and	 19th



centuries,	where	many	children	were	killed	by
tuberculosis,	undulant	 fever,	 and	simple	 food
poisoning	contracted	from	tainted	milk.	In	the
1820s,	 long	 before	 anyone	 knew	 about
microbes,	 some	 books	 on	 domestic	 economy
advocated	boiling	all	milk	before	use.	Early	in
the	 20th	 century,	 national	 and	 local
governments	 began	 to	 regulate	 the	 dairy
industry	 and	 require	 that	 it	 heat	 milk	 to	 kill
disease	microbes.

Today	very	few	U.S.	dairies	sell	raw	milk.
They	must	be	certified	by	the	state	and
inspected	frequently,	and	the	milk	carries	a
warning	label.	Raw	milk	is	also	rare	in
Europe.

Pasteurization	and	UHT	Treatments	 In	 the
1860s,	 the	 French	 chemist	 Louis	 Pasteur
studied	 the	 spoilage	 of	 wine	 and	 beer	 and
developed	 a	 moderate	 heat	 treatment	 that
preserved	 them	while	minimizing	 changes	 in
their	 flavor.	 It	 took	 several	 decades	 for



pasteurization	 to	 catch	 on	 in	 the	 dairy.
Nowadays,	 in	 industrial-scale	production,	 it’s
a	 practical	 necessity.	 Collecting	 and	 pooling
milk	from	many	different	farms	increases	the
risk	 that	 a	given	batch	will	 be	 contaminated;
and	the	plumbing	and	machinery	required	for
the	various	 stages	 of	 processing	 afford	many
more	 opportunities	 for	 contamination.
Pasteurization	 extends	 the	 shelf	 life	 of	 milk
by	 killing	 pathogenic	 and	 spoilage	 microbes
and	by	 inactivating	milk	 enzymes,	 especially
the	 fat	 splitters,	 whose	 slow	 but	 steady
activity	 can	make	 it	 unpalatable.	 Pasteurized
milk	 stored	 below	 40ºF/5ºC	 should	 remain
drinkable	for	10	to	18	days.

There	are	three	basic	methods	for
pasteurizing	milk.	The	simplest	is	batch
pasteurization,	in	which	a	fixed	volume	of
milk,	perhaps	a	few	hundred	gallons,	is	slowly
agitated	in	a	heated	vat	at	a	minimum	of
145ºF/62ºC	for	30	to	35	minutes.	Industrial-
scale	operations	use	the	high-temperature,



short-time	(HTST)	method,	in	which	milk	is
pumped	continuously	through	a	heat
exchanger	and	held	at	a	minimum	of
162ºF/72ºC	for	15	seconds.	The	batch	process
has	a	relatively	mild	effect	on	flavor,	while
the	HTST	method	is	hot	enough	to	denature
around	10%	of	the	whey	proteins	and	generate
the	strongly	aromatic	gas	hydrogen	sulfide	(p.
87).	Though	this	“cooked”	flavor	was
considered	a	defect	in	the	early	days,	U.S.
consumers	have	come	to	expect	it,	and	dairies
now	often	intensify	it	by	pasteurizing	at	well
above	the	minimum	temperature;	171ºF/77ºC
is	commonly	used.

The	third	method	of	pasteurizing	milk	is
the	ultra-high	temperature	(UHT)	method,
which	involves	heating	milk	at	265–300ºF/
130–150ºC	either	instantaneously	or	for	1	to	3
seconds,	and	produces	milk	that,	if	packaged
under	strictly	sterile	conditions,	can	be	stored
for	months	without	refrigeration.	The	longer
UHT	treatment	imparts	a	cooked	flavor	and



slightly	brown	color	to	milk;	cream	contains
less	lactose	and	protein,	so	its	color	and	flavor
are	less	affected.

Sterilized	milk	has	been	heated	at	230–
250ºF/110–121ºC	for	8	to	30	minutes;	it	is
even	darker	and	stronger	in	flavor,	and	keeps
indefinitely	at	room	temperature.

Homogenization	 Left	 to	 itself,	 fresh	 whole
milk	 naturally	 separates	 into	 two	 phases:	 fat
globules	 clump	 together	 and	 rise	 to	 form	 the
cream	 layer,	 leaving	 a	 fat-depleted	 phase
below	 (p.	 18).	 The	 treatment	 called
homogenization	 was	 developed	 in	 France
around	1900	to	prevent	creaming	and	keep	the
milk	 fat	 evenly	 —	 homogeneously	 —
dispersed.	 It	 involves	 pumping	 hot	 milk	 at
high	 pressure	 through	 very	 small	 nozzles,
where	 the	 turbulence	 tears	 the	 fat	 globules
apart	 into	 smaller	 ones;	 their	 average
diameter	falls	from	4	micrometers	to	about	1.
The	 sudden	 increase	 in	 globule	 numbers



causes	a	proportional	increase	in	their	surface
area,	 which	 the	 original	 globule	 membranes
are	 insufficient	 to	 cover.	 The	 naked	 fat
surface	 attracts	 casein	 particles,	 which	 stick
and	create	an	artificial	coat	(nearly	a	third	of
the	 milk’s	 casein	 ends	 up	 on	 the	 globules).
The	 casein	 particles	 both	 weigh	 the	 fat
globules	 down	 and	 interfere	 with	 their	 usual
clumping:	 and	 so	 the	 fat	 remains	 evenly
dispersed	 in	 the	 milk.	 Milk	 is	 always
pasteurized	just	before	or	simultaneously	with
homogenization	 to	 prevent	 its	 enzymes	 from
attacking	 the	 momentarily	 unprotected	 fat
globules	and	producing	rancid	flavors.

Homogenization	affects	milk’s	flavor	and
appearance.	Though	it	makes	milk	taste
blander	—	probably	because	flavor	molecules
get	stuck	to	the	new	fat-globule	surfaces	—	it
also	makes	it	more	resistant	to	developing
most	off-flavors.	Homogenized	milk	feels
creamier	in	the	mouth	thanks	to	its	increased
population	(around	sixty-fold)	of	fat	globules,



and	it’s	whiter,	because	the	carotenoid
pigments	in	the	fat	are	scattered	into	smaller
and	more	numerous	particles.

Nutritional	Alteration;	Low-Fat	Milks	 One
nutritional	 alteration	 of	 milk	 is	 as	 old	 as
dairying	itself:	skimming	off	 the	cream	layer
substantially	 reduces	 the	 fat	 content	 of	 the
remaining	 milk.	 Today,	 low-fat	 milks	 are
made	 more	 efficiently	 by	 centrifuging	 off
some	of	 the	globules	before	homogenization.
Whole	milk	 is	 about	 3.5%	 fat,	 low-fat	milks
usually	2%	or	1%,	and	skim	milks	can	range
between	0.1	and	0.5%.

More	recent	is	the	practice	of
supplementing	milk	with	various	substances.
Nearly	all	milks	are	fortified	with	the	fat-
soluble	vitamins	A	and	D.	Low-fat	milks	have
a	thin	body	and	appearance	and	are	usually
filled	out	with	dried	milk	proteins,	which	can
lend	them	a	slightly	stale	flavor.
“Acidophilus”	milk	contains	Lactobacillus



acidophilus,	a	bacterium	that	metabolizes
lactose	to	lactic	acid	and	that	can	take	up
residence	in	the	intestine	(p.	47).	More	helpful
to	milk	lovers	who	can’t	digest	lactose	is	milk
treated	with	the	purified	digestive	enzyme
lactase,	which	breaks	lactose	down	into
simple,	absorbable	sugars.

Powdered	Milk	in	13th	Century	Asia
[The	 Tartar	 armies]	 make	 provisions	 also
of	milk,	thickened	or	dried	to	the	state	of	a
hard	 paste,	 which	 they	 prepare	 in	 the
following	manner.	They	boil	the	milk,	and
skimming	off	the	rich	or	creamy	part	as	it
rises	to	the	top,	put	it	into	a	separate	vessel
as	butter;	for	so	long	as	that	remains	in	the
milk,	 it	will	not	become	hard.	The	milk	is
then	 exposed	 to	 the	 sun	 until	 it	 dries.
[When	 it	 is	 to	be	used]	some	 is	put	 into	a
bottle	 with	 as	 much	 water	 as	 is	 thought
necessary.	 By	 their	 motion	 in	 riding,	 the
contents	 are	 violently	 shaken,	 and	 a	 thin



porridge	 is	 produced,	 upon	 which	 they
make	their	dinner.

—	Marco	Polo,	Travels
Storage	Milk	is	a	highly	perishable	food.
Even	Grade	A	pasteurized	milk	contains
millions	of	bacteria	in	every	glassful,	and	will
spoil	quickly	unless	refrigerated.	Freezing	is	a
bad	idea	because	it	disrupts	milk	fat	globules
and	protein	particles,	which	clump	and
separate	when	thawed.

Concentrated	 Milks	 A	 number	 of	 cultures
have	traditionally	cooked	milk	down	for	long
keeping	 and	 ease	 of	 transport.	 According	 to
business	 legend,	 the	 American	 Gail	 Borden
reinvented	evaporated	milk	around	1853	after
a	 rough	 transatlantic	 crossing	 that	 sickened
the	ship’s	cows.	Borden	added	 large	amounts
of	 sugar	 to	 keep	 his	 concentrated	milk	 from
spoiling.	 The	 idea	 of	 sterilizing	 unsweetened
milk	 in	 the	 can	 came	 in	 1884	 from	 John
Meyenberg,	 whose	 Swiss	 company	 merged



with	 Nestlé	 around	 the	 turn	 of	 the	 century.
Dried	milk	didn’t	appear	until	around	the	turn
of	the	20th	century.	Today,	concentrated	milk
products	 are	 valued	 because	 they	 keep	 for
months	 and	 supply	 milk’s	 characteristic
contribution	to	the	texture	and	flavor	of	baked
goods	 and	 confectionery,	 but	 without	 milk’s
water.
Condensed	or	evaporated	milk	is	made	by

heating	raw	milk	under	reduced	pressure	(a
partial	vacuum),	so	that	it	boils	between	110
and	140ºF/43–60ºC,	until	it	has	lost	about	half
its	water.	The	resulting	creamy,	mild-flavored
liquid	is	homogenized,	then	canned	and
sterilized.	The	cooking	and	concentration	of
lactose	and	protein	cause	some	browning,	and
this	gives	evaporated	milk	its	characteristic
tan	color	and	note	of	caramel.	Browning
continues	slowly	during	storage,	and	in	old
cans	can	produce	a	dark,	acidic,	tired-tasting
fluid.

For	sweetened	condensed	milk,	the	milk	is



first	concentrated	by	evaporation,	and	then
table	sugar	is	added	to	give	a	total	sugar
concentration	of	about	55%.	Microbes	can’t
grow	at	this	osmotic	pressure,	so	sterilization
is	unnecessary.	The	high	concentration	of
sugars	causes	the	milk’s	lactose	to	crystallize,
and	this	is	controlled	by	seeding	the	milk	with
preformed	lactose	crystals	to	keep	the	crystals
small	and	inconspicuous	on	the	tongue	(large,
sandy	lactose	crystals	are	sometimes
encountered	as	a	quality	defect).	Sweetened
condensed	milk	has	a	milder,	less	“cooked”
flavor	than	evaporated	milk,	a	lighter	color,
and	the	consistency	of	a	thick	syrup.
Powdered	or	dry	milk	is	the	result	of	taking

evaporation	to	the	extreme.	Milk	is
pasteurized	at	a	high	temperature;	then	about
90%	of	its	water	is	removed	by	vacuum
evaporation,	and	the	remaining	10%	in	a	spray
drier	(the	concentrated	milk	is	misted	into	a
chamber	of	hot	air,	where	the	milk	droplets
quickly	dry	into	tiny	particles	of	milk	solids).



Some	milk	is	also	freeze-dried.	With	most	of
its	water	removed,	powdered	milk	is	safe
from	microbial	attack.	Most	powdered	milk	is
made	from	low-fat	milk	because	milk	fat
quickly	goes	rancid	when	exposed	to
concentrated	milk	salts	and	atmospheric
oxygen,	and	because	it	tends	to	coat	the
particles	of	protein	and	makes	subsequent
remixing	with	water	difficult.	Powdered	milk
will	keep	for	several	months	in	dry,	cool
conditions.

The	Composition	of	Concentrated	Milks
The	 figures	 are	 the	 percentages	 of	 each
milk’s	 weight	 accounted	 for	 by	 its	 major
components.

Kind	of	Milk Protein Fat Sugar
Evaporated	milk 7 8 10
Evaporated	skim	milk 8 0.3 11
Sweetened	condensed	milk 8 9 55



Dry	milk,	full	fat 26 27 38
Dry	milk,	nonfat 36 1 52
Fresh	milk 3.4 3.7 4.8

Kind	of	MilkMinerals Water
Evaporated	milk 1.4 73
Evaporated	skim	milk 1.5 79
Sweetened	condensed	milk 2 27
Dry	milk,	full	fat 6 2.5
Dry	milk,	nonfat 8 3
Fresh	milk 1 87

Cooking	with	Milk	Much	of	the	milk	that	we
use	in	the	kitchen	disappears	into	a	mixture	—
a	batter	or	dough,	a	custard	mix	or	a	pudding
—	 whose	 behavior	 is	 largely	 determined	 by
the	 other	 ingredients.	 The	 milk	 serves
primarily	 as	 a	 source	 of	 moisture,	 but	 also
contributes	 flavor,	 body,	 sugar	 that
encourages	browning,	and	salts	that	encourage



protein	coagulation.
When	milk	itself	is	a	prominent	ingredient

—	in	cream	soups,	sauces,	and	scalloped
potatoes,	or	added	to	hot	chocolate,	coffee,
and	tea	—	it	most	often	calls	attention	to
itself	when	its	proteins	coagulate.	The	skin
that	forms	on	the	surface	of	scalded	milk,
soups,	and	sauces	is	a	complex	of	casein,
calcium,	whey	proteins,	and	trapped	fat
globules,	and	results	from	evaporation	of
water	at	the	surface	and	the	progressive
concentration	of	proteins	there.	Skin
formation	can	be	minimized	by	covering	the
pan	or	whipping	up	some	foam,	both	of	which
minimize	evaporation.	Meanwhile,	at	the
bottom	of	the	pan,	the	high,	dehydrating
temperature	transmitted	from	the	burner
causes	a	similar	concentration	of	proteins,
which	stick	to	the	metal	and	eventually
scorch.	Wetting	the	pan	with	water	before
adding	milk	will	reduce	protein	adhesion	to
the	metal;	a	heavy,	evenly	conducting	pan	and



a	moderate	flame	help	minimize	scorching,
and	a	double	boiler	will	prevent	it	(though	it’s
more	trouble).

Between	the	pan	bottom	and	the	surface,
particles	of	other	ingredients	can	cause
curdling	by	providing	surfaces	to	which	the
milk	proteins	can	stick	and	clump	together.
And	acid	in	the	juices	of	all	fruits	and
vegetables	and	in	coffee,	and	astringent
tannins	in	potatoes,	coffee,	and	tea,	make	milk
proteins	especially	sensitive	to	coagulation
and	curdling.	Because	bacteria	slowly	sour
milk,	old	milk	may	be	acidic	enough	to	curdle
instantly	when	added	to	hot	coffee	or	tea.	The
best	insurance	against	curdling	is	fresh	milk
and	careful	control	of	the	burner.

Cooking	Sweetened	Condensed	Milk	Because
it	 contains	 concentrated	 protein	 and	 sugar,
sweetened	 condensed	milk	 will	 “caramelize”
(actually,	 undergo	 the	 Maillard	 browning
reaction,	p.	778)	at	temperatures	as	low	as	the



boiling	point	of	water.	This	has	made	cans	of
sweetened	condensed	milk	a	favorite	shortcut
to	 a	 creamy	 caramel	 sauce:	 many	 people
simply	put	the	can	in	a	pot	of	boiling	water	or
a	 warm	 oven	 and	 let	 it	 brown	 inside.	While
this	 does	 work,	 it	 is	 potentially	 dangerous,
since	 any	 trapped	 air	will	 expand	 on	 heating
and	may	cause	the	can	to	burst	open.	It’s	safer
to	empty	the	can	into	an	open	utensil	and	then
heat	 it	on	 the	stovetop,	 in	 the	oven,	or	 in	 the
microwave.

Intentionally	Curdled	Milk
For	most	 cooks	most	 of	 the	 time,	 curdled
milk	 betokens	 crisis:	 the	 dish	 has	 lost	 its
smoothness.	But	there	are	plenty	of	dishes
in	which	 the	cook	 intentionally	causes	 the
milk	 proteins	 to	 clot	 precisely	 for	 the
textural	 interest	 this	 creates.	 The	 English
syllabub	was	sometimes	made	by	squirting
warm	 milk	 directly	 from	 the	 udder	 into
acidic	 wine	 or	 juice;	 and	 in	 the	 17th



century,	 the	 French	writer	 Pierre	 de	 Lune
described	a	reduced	milk	“marbled”	by	the
addition	 of	 currant	 juice.	 More
contemporary	examples	include	roast	pork
braised	 in	 milk,	 which	 reduces	 to	 moist
brown	 nuggets;	 the	 Kashmiri	 practice	 of
cooking	 milk	 down	 to	 resemble	 browned
ground	 meat;	 and	 eastern	 European
summertime	 cold	 milk	 soups	 like	 the
Polish	chlodnik,	 thickened	by	 the	 addition
of	“sour	salt,”	or	citric	acid.

Milk	Foams	A	foam	is	a	portion	of	liquid
filled	with	air	bubbles,	a	moist,	light	mass
that	holds	its	shape.	A	meringue	is	a	foam	of
egg	whites,	and	whipped	cream	is	a	foam	of
cream.	Milk	foams	are	more	fragile	than	egg
foams	and	whipped	cream,	and	are	generally
made	immediately	before	serving,	usually	as	a
topping	for	coffee	drinks.	They	prevent	a	skin
from	forming	on	the	drink,	and	keep	it	hot	by
insulating	it	and	preventing	evaporative
cooling.



Milk	owes	its	foaming	power	to	its
proteins,	which	collect	in	a	thin	layer	around
the	pockets	of	air,	isolate	them,	and	prevent
the	water’s	strong	cohesive	forces	from
popping	the	bubbles.	Egg	foams	are	also
stabilized	by	proteins	(p.	101),	while	the	foam
formed	by	whipping	cream	is	stabilized	by	fat
(below,	p.	31).	Milk	foams	are	more	fragile
and	short-lived	than	egg	foams	because	milk’s
proteins	are	sparse	—	just	3%	of	the	milk’s
weight,	where	egg	white	is	10%	protein	—
and	two-thirds	of	the	milk	proteins	are
resistant	to	being	unfolded	and	coagulated
into	a	solid	network,	while	most	of	the	egg
proteins	readily	do	so.	However,	heat	around
160ºF/70ºC	does	unfold	the	whey	proteins
(barely	1%	of	milk’s	weight).	And	if	they
unfold	at	the	air-water	boundary	of	a	bubble
wall,	then	the	force	imbalance	does	cause	the
proteins	to	bond	to	each	other	and	briefly
stabilize	the	foam.



Milks	 and	 Their	 Foams	 Some	 milks	 are
better	suited	 to	 foaming	 than	others.	Because
the	whey	 proteins	 are	 the	 critical	 stabilizers,
milks	that	are	fortified	with	added	protein	—
usually	 reduced-fat	 and	 skim	 milks	 —	 are
most	 easily	 foamed.	 Full-fat	 foams,	 on	 the
other	 hand,	 are	 fuller	 in	 texture	 and	 flavor.
Milk	 should	 always	 be	 as	 fresh	 as	 possible,
since	milk	 that	 has	 begun	 to	 sour	 can	 curdle
when	heated.

India’s	Galaxy	of	Cooked	Milks
For	sheer	inventiveness	with	milk	itself	as
the	primary	ingredient,	no	country	on	earth
can	 match	 India.	 Its	 dozens	 of	 variations
on	 the	 theme	of	 cooked-down	milk,	many
of	them	dating	back	a	thousand	years,	stem
from	 a	 simple	 fact	 of	 life	 in	 that	 warm
country:	 the	 simplest	 way	 to	 keep	 milk
from	 souring	 is	 to	 boil	 it	 repeatedly.
Eventually	it	cooks	down	to	a	brown,	solid
paste	 with	 about	 10%	 moisture,	 25%



lactose,	 20%	 protein	 and	 20%	 butterfat.
Even	without	added	sugar,	khoa	is	almost	a
candy,	so	it	makes	sense	that	over	time,	it
and	 the	 intermediate	 concentrations	 that
precede	 it	 became	 the	 basis	 for	 the	 most
widely	 made	 Indian	 milk	 sweets.
Doughnut-like	 fried	gulabjamun	 and
fudge-l ike	burfi	 are	 rich	 in	 lactose,
calcium,	 and	 protein:	 a	 glass	 of	 milk
distilled	into	a	morsel.

A	 second,	 separate	 constellation	 of
Indian	 milk	 sweets	 is	 based	 on
concentrating	 the	 milk	 solids	 by	 curdling
them	 with	 heat	 and	 either	 lime	 juice	 or
sour	whey.	The	drained	curds	 form	a	soft,
moist	mass	known	as	chhanna,	which	then
becomes	 the	 base	 for	 a	 broad	 range	 of
sweets,	 notably	 porous,	 springy	 cakes
soaked	 in	 sweetened	 milk	 or	 syrup
(rasmalai,	rasagollah).

Espresso	Steamers:	Simultaneous	Bubbles
and	Heat	Milk	foams	are	usually	made	with



the	help	of	the	steam	nozzle	on	an	espresso
coffee	machine.	Steaming	milk	accomplishes
two	essential	things	simultaneously:	it
introduces	bubbles	into	the	milk,	and	it	heats
the	bubbles	enough	to	unfold	and	coagulate
the	whey	proteins	into	a	stabilizing	web.
Steam	itself	does	not	make	bubbles:	it	is
water	vapor,	and	simply	condenses	into	the
colder	water	of	the	milk.	Steam	makes
bubbles	by	splashing	milk	and	air	together,
and	it	does	this	most	efficiently	when	the
nozzle	is	just	below	the	milk	surface.

One	factor	that	makes	steaming	tricky	is
that	very	hot	milk	doesn’t	hold	its	foam	well.
A	foam	collapses	when	gravity	pulls	the
liquid	out	of	the	bubble	walls,	and	the	hotter
the	liquid,	the	faster	it	drains.	So	you	have	to
use	a	large	enough	volume	of	cold	milk	—	at
least	2/3	cup/150	ml	—	to	make	sure	that	the
milk	doesn’t	heat	up	too	fast	and	become	too
runny	before	the	foam	forms.

Cream



Cream

Cream	is	a	special	portion	of	milk	that	is
greatly	enriched	with	fat.	This	enrichment
occurs	naturally	thanks	to	the	force	of	gravity,
which	exerts	more	of	a	pull	on	the	milk’s
water	than	on	the	less	dense	fat	globules.
Leave	a	container	of	milk	fresh	from	the
udder	to	stand	undisturbed,	and	the	globules
slowly	rise	through	the	water	and	crowd
together	at	the	top.	The	concentrated	cream
layer	can	then	be	skimmed	off	from	the	fat-
depleted	“skim”	milk	below.	Milk	with	3.5%
fat	will	naturally	yield	cream	that	is	about
20%.

We	value	cream	above	all	for	its	feel.
Creaminess	is	a	remarkable	consistency,
perfectly	balanced	between	solidity	and
fluidity,	between	persistence	and	evanescence.
It’s	substantial,	yet	smooth	and	seamless.	It
lingers	in	the	mouth,	yet	offers	no	resistance
to	teeth	or	tongue,	nor	becomes	merely



greasy.	This	luxurious	sensation	results	from
the	crowding	of	the	fat	globules,	which	are	far
too	small	for	our	senses	to	distinguish,	into	a
small	volume	of	water,	whose	free	movement
is	thus	impeded	and	slowed.

Keys	to	Foaming	Milk
To	get	 a	 good	volume	of	milk	 foam	 from
the	 steam	 attachment	 on	 an	 espresso
machine:
Use	fresh	milk	right	out	of	the
refrigerator,	or	even	chilled	for	a	few
minutes	in	the	freezer.
Start	with	at	least	2/3	cup/150	ml	of	milk
in	a	container	that	will	hold	at	least
double	the	initial	volume.
Keep	the	nozzle	at	or	just	under	the	milk
surface	so	that	it	froths	continuously	with
a	moderate	flow	of	steam.

To	 foam	 a	 small	 volume	 of	 milk	 without



steam,	 separate	 the	 foaming	 and	 heating
steps:
Pour	cold,	fresh	milk	into	a	jar,	tighten
the	lid,	and	shake	it	vigorously	for	20
seconds	or	until	the	contents	have
doubled	in	volume.	(Or	froth	in	a
plunger-style	coffee	maker,	whose	fine
screen	produces	an	especially	thick,
creamy	foam.)
Then	stabilize	the	foam:	remove	the	lid,
place	the	jar	in	the	microwave,	and	heat
on	high	for	about	30	seconds,	or	until	the
foam	rises	to	the	top	of	the	jar.

In	addition	to	its	appealing	texture,	cream
has	distinctive	“fatty”	aroma	notes	from
molecules	also	found	in	coconut	and	peach
(lactones).	And	it	offers	the	virtue	of	being	a
robust,	forgiving	ingredient.	Milk	contains
roughly	equal	weights	of	protein	and	fat,
while	in	cream	fat	outweighs	protein	by	at
least	10	to	1.	Thanks	to	this	dilution	of	the



protein,	cream	is	less	likely	to	curdle.	And
thanks	to	its	concentration	of	fat	globules,	it
can	be	inflated	into	whipped	cream:	a	far
more	substantial	and	stable	foam	than	milk
alone	can	make.

Though	it	has	certainly	been	appreciated
since	the	beginning	of	dairying,	cream	spoils
faster	than	the	butter	that	could	be	made	from
it,	and	so	it	played	a	minor	role	in	all	but
farmhouse	kitchens	until	fairly	recently.	By
the	17th	century,	French	and	English	cooks
were	frothing	cream	into	imitation	snow;	the
English	exploited	its	layering	nature	to	pile
cream	skins	in	the	form	of	a	cabbage,	and
used	long,	gentle	heating	to	produce	solid,
nutty	“clouted”	cream.	Cream’s	heyday
arrived	in	the	18th	century,	when	it	went	into
cakes,	puddings,	and	such	savory	dishes	as
fricassees,	stews,	and	boiled	vegetables,	and
became	popular	in	frozen	form	as	ice	cream.
The	popularity	of	cream	declined	in	the	20th
century	with	the	nutritional	condemnation	of



saturated	fats,	so	much	so	that	in	many	parts
of	the	United	States	it’s	only	available	in	the
long-keeping	ultrapasteurized	form.

Making	 Cream	 The	 natural	 separation	 of
cream	from	milk	by	means	of	gravity	takes	12
to	 24	 hours,	 and	 was	 superseded	 late	 in	 the
19th	century	by	the	merry-go-round	forces	of
the	 French	 centrifugal	 separator.	 Once
separated,	 the	 cream	 is	 pasteurized.	 In	 the
United	States,	 the	minimum	temperatures	 for
pasteurizing	 cream	 are	 higher	 than	 the	 milk
minimum	(for	20%	fat	or	 less,	30	minutes	at
155ºF/68ºC;	 otherwise	 at	 165ºF/74ºC).
“Ultrapasteurized”	 cream	 is	 heated	 for	 2
seconds	 at	 280ºF/140ºC	 (like	 UHT-treated
milk,	 p.	 22;	 however	 the	 cream	 is	 not
packaged	under	strictly	sterile	conditions,	and
so	 is	 kept	 refrigerated).	 Under	 refrigeration,
ordinary	pasteurized	cream	keeps	for	about	15
days	 before	 bacterial	 activity	 turns	 it	 bitter
and	rancid;	ultrapasteurized	cream,	which	has



a	 stronger	 cooked	 flavor,	 keeps	 for	 several
weeks.	 Normally	 cream	 is	 not	 homogenized
because	 this	 makes	 it	 harder	 to	 whip,	 but
long-keeping	 ultrapasteurized	 cream	 and
relatively	 thin	 half-and-half	 are	 usually
homogenized	 to	 prevent	 continuing	 slow
separation	in	the	carton.

The	 Importance	 of	 Fat	 Content	 Cream	 is
manufactured	 with	 a	 number	 of	 different	 fat
levels	 and	 consistencies,	 each	 for	 particular
purposes.	Light	creams	are	poured	into	coffee
or	 onto	 fruit;	 heavy	 creams	 are	 whipped	 or
used	 to	 thicken	 sauces;	 clotted	 or	 “plastic”
creams	 are	 spread	 onto	 breads,	 pastries,	 or
fruit.	The	proportion	of	fat	determines	both	a
cream’s	consistency	and	its	versatility.	Heavy
cream	 can	 be	 diluted	 with	 milk	 to
approximate	light	cream,	or	whipped	to	make
a	spreadable	semisolid.	Light	cream	and	half-
and-half	 contain	 insufficient	 numbers	 of	 fat
globules	 to	 stabilize	a	whipped	 foam	 (p.	32),



or	 to	 resist	 curdling	 in	 a	 sauce.	 Whipping
cream,	at	between	30	and	40%	fat,	is	the	most
versatile	formulation.

Fat	globules	in	milk	and	cream.	Left	to	right:
Fat	globules	 in	homogenized	milk	 (3.5%	fat),
and	in	unhomogenized	light	cream	(20%	fat),
and	 in	 heavy	 cream	 (40%	 fat).	 The	 more
numerous	fat	globules	in	cream	interfere	with
the	 flow	 of	 the	 surrounding	 fluid	 and	 give
cream	its	full-bodied	consistency.
Stability	in	Cooking	How	does	a	high	fat
content	permit	the	cook	to	boil	a	mixture	of
heavy	cream	and	salty	or	acidic	ingredients
without	curdling	it,	as	when	dissolving	pan
solids	or	thickening	a	sauce?	The	key	seems
to	be	the	ability	of	the	fat	globule’s	surface
membrane	to	latch	onto	a	certain	amount	of



the	major	milk	protein,	casein,	when	milk	is
heated.	If	the	fat	globules	account	for	25%	or
more	of	the	cream’s	weight,	then	there’s	a
sufficient	area	of	globule	surface	to	take	most
of	the	casein	out	of	circulation,	and	no	casein
curds	can	form.	At	lower	fat	levels,	there’s
both	a	smaller	globule	surface	area	and	a
greater	proportion	of	the	casein-carrying
water	phase.	Now	the	globule	surfaces	can
only	absorb	a	small	fraction	of	the	casein,	and
the	rest	bonds	together	and	coagulates	when
heated.	(This	is	why	acid-curdled	mascarpone
cheese	can	be	made	from	light	cream,	but	not
from	heavy	cream.)

Kinds	of	Cream

U.S.	Term Fat	Content,	%Use
Half-and-half 12	(10.5–18) Coffee,	pouring
12– Coffee,	pouring,	enriching	sauces,
30 soups,	etc.,	whipping



18+ Coffee,	pouring
Light 20	(18– Coffee,	pouring	(seldom
cream 30) available)
25 Coffee,	pouring
Light	whipping 30– Pouring,	enriching,

cream 36 whipping
30– Pouring,	enriching,	whipping	(if	rich,
40 spreading)
Whipping
cream 35+ Pouring,	enriching,

whipping
Heavy	whipping 38 Pouring,	enriching,

cream (36+) whipping
48+ Spreading
55+ Spreading
Plastic	cream 65–85 Spreading

European	Term Fat	Content,	%Use
12	(10.5–18) Coffee,	pouring
Crème 12– Coffee,	pouring,	enriching



légère* 30 sauces,	soups,	etc.,	whipping
Single	cream 18+ Coffee,	pouring
20	(18– Coffee,	pouring	(seldom
30) available)

Coffee	cream 25 Coffee,	pouring
30– Pouring,	enriching,	whipping	(if	rich,
36 spreading)
Crème	fraîche** 30– Pouring,

(fleurette	or	épaisse)	* 40 enriching,
whipping

35+ Pouring,	enriching,	whipping
38	(36+) Pouring,	enriching,	whipping
Double	cream 48+ Spreading
Clotted	cream 55+ Spreading
65–85 Spreading
*légère:	 “light”;	fleurette:	 “liquid”;
épaisse:	“thick”	due	to	bacterial	culture
**fraîche:	 “fresh,	 cool,	 new.”	 In	 France,



crème	 fraîche	 may	 be	 either	 “sweet”	 or
cultured	 with	 lactic	 acid	 bacteria;	 in	 the
United	 States,	 the	 term	 always	 means
cultured,	tart,	thick	cream.	See	p.	49.

Problems	 with	 Cream:	 Separation	 A
common	problem	with	unhomogenized	cream
is	 that	 it	 continues	 to	 separate	 in	 the	 carton:
the	 fat	 globules	 slowly	 rise	 and	 concentrate
further	 into	 a	 semisolid	 layer	 at	 the	 top.	At
refrigerator	 temperatures,	 the	 fat	 inside	 the
globules	 forms	 solid	 crystals	 whose	 edges
break	 through	 the	 protective	 globule
membrane,	 and	 these	 slightly	 protruding	 fat
crystals	 get	 stuck	 to	 each	 other	 and	 form
microscopic	butter	grains.

Clotted	Creams	 These	 days	 cooks	 generally
consider	 the	 separation	 and	 solidification	 of
cream	a	nuisance.	In	the	past,	and	in	present-
day	 England	 and	 the	Middle	 East,	 congealed
cream	has	been	and	is	appreciated	for	its	own
sake.	 The	 cooks	 of	 17th	 century	 England



would	 patiently	 lift	 the	 skins	 from	 shallow
dishes	of	cream	and	arrange	them	in	wrinkled
mounds	 to	 imitate	 the	 appearance	 of	 a
cabbage.	 Cabbage	 cream	 is	 now	 a	 mere
curiosity.	 But	 the	 16th	 century	 English
invention	 called	clotted	 cream	 (and	 its
Turkish	 and	 Afghan	 relatives	kaymak	 and
qymaq)	remain	vital	traditions.

Old-fashioned	clotted	cream	is	made	by
heating	cream	just	short	of	the	boil	in	shallow
pans	for	several	hours,	then	letting	it	cool	and
stand	for	a	day	or	so,	and	removing	the	thick
solid	layer.	Heat	accelerates	the	rise	of	the	fat
globules,	evaporates	some	of	the	water,	melts
some	of	the	aggregated	globules	into	pockets
of	butterfat,	and	creates	a	cooked	flavor.	The
result	is	a	mix	of	thick,	granular,	fatty	areas
and	thin,	creamy	ones,	with	a	rich,	nutty
flavor	and	a	straw-colored	surface.	Clotted
cream	is	around	60%	fat,	and	is	spread	onto
scones	and	biscuits	and	eaten	with	fruit.



Whipped	Cream	The	miraculous	thing	about
whipped	 cream	 is	 that	 simple	 physical
agitation	 can	 transform	 a	 luscious	 but
unmanageable	 liquid	 into	an	equally	 luscious
but	 shapeable	 “solid.”	 Like	 foamed	 milk,
whipped	cream	is	an	intimate	intermingling	of
liquid	 and	 air,	 with	 the	 air	 divided	 into	 tiny
bubbles	 and	 the	 cream	 spread	 out	 and
immobilized	 in	 the	 microscopically	 thin
bubble	 walls.	 Common	 as	 it	 is	 today,	 this
luxurious,	velvety	foam	was	very	laborious	to
make	until	1900.	Before	then,	cooks	whipped
naturally	separated	cream	for	an	hour	or	more,
periodically	 skimming	 off	 the	 foam	 and
setting	 it	 aside	 to	 drain.	 The	 key	 to	 a	 stable
foam	 of	 the	whole	mass	 of	 cream	 is	 enough
fat	 globules	 to	 hold	 all	 the	 fluid	 and	 air
together,	 and	 naturally	 separated	 cream
seldom	 reaches	 that	 fat	 concentration,	 which
is	 about	 30%.	 It	 took	 the	 invention	 of	 the
centrifugal	 separator	 to	 produce	 easily
whipped	cream.



Food	Words:	Cream,	Crème,	Panna
The	 English	 name	 for	 the	 fat-rich	 portion
of	milk,	like	the	French	word	from	which	it
derives,	 has	 associations	 that	 are	 startling
but	 appropriate	 to	 its	 status	 as	 a	 textural
ideal.

Before	 the	 Norman	 Conquest,	 and	 to
this	 day	 in	 some	 northern	 dialects,	 the
English	word	for	cream	was	ream,	a	simple
offshoot	 of	 the	 Indo-European	 root	 that
also	 gave	 the	 modern	 German	Rahm.	 But
the	 French	 connection	 introduced	 a
remarkable	 hybrid	 term.	 In	 6th	 century
Gaul,	 fatty	 milk	 was	 called	crama,	 from
the	Latin	cremor	lactis,	or	“heat-thickened
substance	 of	 milk.”	 Then	 in	 the	 next	 few
centuries	it	somehow	became	crossed	with
a	 religious	 term:	chreme,	 or	 “consecrated
oil,”	 which	 stems	 from	 the	 Greek	 word
chriein,	 “to	 anoint,”	 that	 gave	 us	Christ,
“the	 anointed	 one.”	 So	 in	 France	crama
became	crème,	 and	 in	 England	ream	 gave



way	to	cream.
Why	 this	 confusion	 of	 ancient	 ritual

with	 rich	 food?	 Linguistic	 accident	 or
error,	 perhaps.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,
anointing	 oil	 and	 butterfat	are	 essentially
the	 same	 substance,	 so	 perhaps	 it	 was
inspiration.	 In	 the	 monastic	 or	 farm
kitchens	 of	 Normandy,	 the	 addition	 of
cream	 to	 other	 foods	 may	 have	 been
considered	 not	 just	 an	 enrichment,	 but	 a
kind	of	blessing.

The	 Italian	word	 for	 cream,	panna,	has
been	 traced	 back	 to	 the	 Latin	pannus,	 or
“cloth.”	 This	 is	 apparently	 a	 homely
allusion	 to	 the	 thin	 covering	 that	 cream
provides	for	the	milk	surface.

How	 Fat	 Stabilizes	 Foamed	 Cream	 Unlike
the	protein	foams	of	egg	white,	egg	yolk,	and
milk,	 the	 cream	 foam	 is	 stabilized	 by	 fat.
Initially,	 the	whisk	 introduces	 short-lived	 air
bubbles	 into	 the	 cream.	After	 the	 first	 half-



minute	 or	 so,	 the	 bubble	 walls	 begin	 to	 be
stabilized	 by	 the	de	 stabilization	 of	 the	 fat
globules.	 As	 the	 globules	 are	 knocked	 all
around	 and	 into	 each	 other	 by	 the	whipping,
parts	 of	 their	 protective	 membranes	 are
stripped	 away	 by	 the	 shearing	 action	 of	 the
whisk,	 and	 by	 the	 force	 imbalance	 in	 the	 air
bubble	walls.	The	patches	of	naked	fat,	which
by	their	nature	avoid	contact	with	water,	settle
in	 one	 of	 two	 regions	 in	 the	 cream:	 either
facing	 the	 air	 pocket	 in	 the	 bubble	 walls,	 or
stuck	 to	 a	 patch	 of	 naked	 fat	 on	 another
globule.	 The	 fat	 globules	 thus	 form	 walls
around	 the	 air	 bubbles,	 and	 connections
between	 neighboring	 walls:	 and	 so	 a
continuous	network	develops.	This	network	of
solid	fat	spheres	not	only	holds	the	air	bubbles
in	 place,	 but	 also	 prevents	 the	 intervening
pockets	of	fluid	from	moving	very	far.	And	so
the	 foam	 as	 a	 whole	 takes	 on	 a	 definite,
persistent	structure.

If	the	beating	continues	past	the	point	at



which	a	fat	network	has	just	barely	formed,
the	gathering	of	the	fat	globules	continues
also,	but	this	process	now	de	stabilizes	the
foam.	The	fine	globule	clusters	coalesce	with
each	other	into	ever	coarser	masses	of
butterfat,	and	the	pockets	of	air	and	fluid	that
they	hold	in	place	coarsen	as	well.	The	foam
loses	volume	and	weeps,	and	the	velvety
texture	of	the	perfectly	whipped	cream
becomes	granular.	The	butter	grains	in
overwhipped	cream	leave	a	greasy	residue	in
the	mouth.

Whipped	cream	as	seen	through	the	scanning
electron	microscope.	Left:	A	view	showing	the
large	 cavity-like	 air	 bubbles	 and	 smaller
spherical	 fat	 globules	 (the	 black	 bar



represents	0.03	mm).	Right:	Close-up	of	an	air
bubble,	showing	the	layer	of	partly	coalesced
fat	 that	 has	 stabilized	 the	 bubble	 (the	 bar
represents	0.005	mm).
The	Importance	of	Cold	Because	even	mild
warmth	softens	the	butterfat	skeleton	of	a
cream	foam,	and	liquid	fat	will	collapse	the
air	bubbles,	it’s	essential	to	keep	cream	cold
while	it’s	whipped.	It	should	start	out	at	the
low	end	of	40–50ºF/5–10ºC,	and	bowl	and
beaters	should	be	chilled	as	well,	since	both
air	and	beating	will	quickly	warm	everything.
Ideally,	the	cream	is	“aged”	in	the	refrigerator
for	12	hours	or	more	before	whipping.
Prolonged	chilling	causes	some	of	the
butterfat	to	form	crystalline	needles	that
hasten	the	membrane	stripping	and
immobilize	the	small	portion	of	fat	that’s
liquid	even	in	cold	cream.	Cream	that	has
been	left	at	room	temperature	and	chilled	just
before	use	leaks	bubble-deflating	liquid	fat
from	the	beginning	of	whipping,	never	rises



very	high,	and	more	easily	becomes	granular
and	watery.

How	 Different	 Creams	 Behave	 When
Whipped	 Cream	 for	 whipping	 must	 be
sufficiently	 rich	 in	 fat	 to	 form	 a	 continuous
skeleton	 of	 globules.	 The	 minimum	 fat
concentration	 is	 30%,	 the	 equivalent	 of
“single”	 or	 “light	whipping”	 cream.	 “Heavy”
cream,	at	38	to	40%	fat,	will	whip	faster	than
light	 cream,	 and	 forms	 a	 stiffer,	 denser,	 less
voluminous	foam.	It	also	leaks	less	fluid,	and
so	 is	 valued	 for	 use	 in	 pastries	 and	 baked
goods,	 and	 for	 piping	 into	decorative	 shapes.
For	 other	 purposes,	 heavy	 cream	 is	 usually
diluted	with	a	quarter	of	its	volume	of	milk	to
make	30%	cream	and	a	lighter,	softer	foam.

The	fat	globules	in	homogenized	cream	are
smaller	and	more	thickly	covered	with	milk
proteins.	Homogenized	cream	therefore	forms
a	finer-textured	foam,	and	takes	at	least	twice
as	long	to	whip	(it’s	also	harder	to	overwhip



to	the	granular	stage).	The	cook	can	cut	the
whipping	time	of	any	cream	by	slightly
acidifying	it	(1	teaspoon/5	ml	lemon	juice	per
cup/250	ml),	which	makes	the	proteins	in	its
globule	membranes	easier	to	strip	away.

Methods:	 Hand,	 Machine,	 Pressurized	 Gas
Cream	 can	 be	 foamed	 by	 several	 different
methods.	Whisking	 by	 hand	 takes	more	 time
and	physical	 exertion	 than	 an	 electric	 beater,
but	 incorporates	 more	 air	 and	 produces	 a
greater	 volume.	 The	 lightest,	 fluffiest
whipped	 cream	 is	 produced	 with	 the	 help	 of
pressurized	 gas,	 usually	 nitrous	 oxide	 (N2O).
The	most	 familiar	 gas-powered	 device	 is	 the
aerosol	 can,	 which	 contains	 a	 pressurized
mixture	 of	 ultrapasteurized	 cream	 and
dissolved	gas.	When	the	nozzle	is	opened	and
the	 mixture	 released,	 the	 gas	 expands
instantly	 and	 explodes	 the	 cream	 into	 a	 very
light	froth.	There	is	also	a	device	that	aerates
ordinary	 fresh	 cream	 with	 a	 replaceable



canister	of	nitrous	oxide,	which	is	released	in
the	 nozzle	 and	 causes	 great	 turbulence	 as	 it
mixes	with	the	cream.

Early	Whipped	Cream
My	Lord	of	S.	Alban’s	Cresme	Fouettee

Put	as	much	as	you	please	to	make,	of
sweet	thick	cream	into	a	dish,	and	whip	it
with	a	bundle	of	white	hard	rushes,	(of
such	as	they	make	whisks	to	brush	cloaks)
tied	together,	till	it	come	to	be	very	thick,
and	near	a	buttery	substance.	If	you	whip	it
too	long,	it	will	become	butter.	About	a
good	hour	will	serve	in	winter.	In	summer
it	will	require	an	hour	and	a	half.	Do	not
put	in	the	dish	you	will	serve	it	up	in,	till	it
be	almost	time	to	set	it	upon	the	table.
Then	strew	some	powdered	fine	sugar	into
the	bottom	of	the	dish	it	is	to	go	in,	and
with	a	broad	spatule	lay	your	cream	upon
it:	when	half	is	laid	in,	strew	some	more
fine	sugar	upon	it,	and	then	lay	in	the	rest



of	the	cream	(leaving	behind	some	whey
that	will	be	in	the	bottom)	and	strew	some
more	sugar	upon	that.
—	Sir	Kenelm	Digby,	The	Closet	Opened,

1669

Butter	and	Margarine

These	days,	if	a	cook	actually	manages	to
make	butter	in	the	kitchen,	it’s	most	likely	a
disaster:	a	cream	dish	has	been	mishandled
and	the	fat	separates	from	the	other
ingredients.	That’s	a	shame:	all	cooks	should
relax	now	and	then	and	intentionally	overwhip
some	cream!	The	coming	of	butter	is	an
everyday	miracle,	an	occasion	for	delighted
wonder	at	what	the	Irish	poet	Seamus	Heaney
called	“coagulated	sunlight”	“heaped	up	like
gilded	gravel	in	the	bowl.”	Milkfat	is	indeed	a
portion	of	the	sun’s	energy,	captured	by	the
grasses	of	the	field	and	repackaged	by	the	cow
in	scattered,	microscopic	globules.	Churning



milk	or	cream	damages	the	globules	and	frees
their	fat	to	stick	together	in	ever	larger
masses,	which	we	eventually	sieve	into	the
golden	hoard	that	imparts	a	warm,	sweet
richness	to	many	foods.

Ancient,	Once	Unfashionable	All	 it	 takes	 to
separate	 the	 fat	 from	 milk	 is	 30	 seconds	 of
sloshing,	so	butter	was	no	doubt	discovered	in
the	earliest	days	of	dairying.	It	has	long	been
important	 from	 Scandinavia	 to	 India,	 where
nearly	 half	 of	 all	 milk	 production	 goes	 to
making	 butter	 for	 both	 cooking	 and
ceremonial	 purposes.	 Its	 heyday	 came	 much
later	in	northern	Europe,	where	throughout	the
Middle	Ages	it	was	eaten	mainly	by	peasants.
Butter	slowly	infiltrated	noble	kitchens	as	the
only	 animal	 fat	 allowed	by	Rome	on	days	of
abstention	 from	 meat.	 In	 the	 early	 16th
century	it	was	also	permitted	during	Lent,	and
the	 rising	 middle	 classes	 adopted	 the	 rustic
coupling	of	bread	and	butter.	Soon	the	English



were	 notorious	 for	 serving	 meats	 and
vegetables	 swimming	 in	 melted	 butter,	 and
cooks	throughout	Europe	exploited	butter	in	a
host	of	fine	foods,	from	sauces	to	pastries.

Normandy	and	Brittany	in	northwest
France,	Holland,	and	Ireland	became
especially	renowned	for	the	quality	of	their
butter.	Most	of	it	was	made	on	small	farms
using	cream	that	was	pooled	from	several
milkings,	and	was	therefore	a	day	or	two	old
and	somewhat	soured	by	lactic	acid	bacteria.
Continental	Europe	still	prefers	the	flavor	of
this	lightly	fermented	“cultured”	butter	to	the
“sweet	cream”	butter	made	common	in	the
19th	century	by	the	use	of	ice,	the
development	of	refrigeration,	and	the
mechanical	cream	separator.

Around	1870,	a	shortage	of	butter	in
France	led	to	the	invention	of	an	imitation,
margarine,	which	could	be	made	from	a
variety	of	cheap	animal	fats	and	vegetable
oils.	More	margarine	than	butter	is	now



consumed	in	the	United	States	and	parts	of
Europe.

Making	Butter	Butter	making	is	in	essence	a
simple	but	 laborious	operation:	 you	 agitate	 a
container	 of	 cream	 until	 the	 fat	 globules	 are
damaged	 and	 their	 fat	 leaks	 out	 and	 comes
together	into	masses	large	enough	to	gather.

Preparing	 the	 Cream	 For	 butter	 making,
cream	 is	 concentrated	 to	 36–44%	 fat.	 The
cream	is	then	pasteurized,	in	the	United	States
usually	at	185ºF/85ºC,	a	high	temperature	that
develops	 a	 distinct	 cooked,	 custardy	 aroma.
After	 cooling,	 the	 cream	 for	 cultured	 butter
may	 be	 inoculated	 with	 lactic	 acid	 bacteria
(see	 p.	 35).	 The	 sweet	 or	 cultured	 cream	 is
then	 cooled	 to	 about	 40ºF/5ºC	 and	 “aged”	 at
that	 temperature	 for	 at	 least	 eight	 hours	 so
that	about	half	of	the	milk	fat	in	the	globules
forms	 solid	 crystals.	The	number	 and	 size	of
these	crystals	help	determine	the	how	quickly
and	completely	the	milk	fat	separates,	as	well



as	the	final	texture	of	the	butter.	The	properly
aged	 cream	 is	 then	 warmed	 a	 few	 degrees
Fahrenheit	and	churned.

Churning	 Churning	 is	 accomplished	 by	 a
variety	 of	 mechanical	 devices	 that	 may	 take
15	minutes	or	a	few	seconds	to	damage	the	fat
globules	and	form	the	initial	grains	of	butter.
The	 fat	 crystals	 formed	 during	 aging	 distort
and	 weaken	 the	 globule	 membranes	 so	 that
they	 rupture	 easily.	When	 damaged	 globules
collide	with	 each	 other,	 the	 liquid	 portion	 of
their	 fat	 flows	 together	 to	make	a	continuous
mass,	and	these	grow	as	churning	continues.

Working	Once	churning	generates	the	desired
size	of	butter	grains,	often	the	size	of	a	wheat
seed,	 the	water	phase	of	 the	cream	is	drained
off.	This	is	the	original	buttermilk,	rich	in	free
globule	 membrane	 material	 and	 with	 about
0.5%	fat	 (p.	50).	The	solid	butter	grains	may
be	 washed	 with	 cold	 water	 to	 remove	 the
buttermilk	 on	 their	 surfaces.	 The	 grains	 are



then	 “worked,”	 or	 kneaded	 together	 to
consolidate	 the	 semisolid	 fat	 phase	 and	 to
break	up	the	embedded	pockets	of	buttermilk
(or	 water)	 into	 droplets	 around	 10
micrometers	in	diameter,	or	about	the	size	of
a	 large	 fat	 globule.	Cows	 that	 get	 little	 fresh
pasturage	 and	 its	 orange	 carotene	 pigments
produce	 pale	 milk	 fat;	 the	 butter	 maker	 can
compensate	 for	 this	 by	 adding	 a	 dye	 such	 as
annatto	 (p.	 423)	 or	 pure	 carotene	 during	 the
working.	 If	 the	 butter	 is	 to	 be	 salted,	 either
fine	granular	salt	or	a	strong	brine	goes	 in	at
this	 stage	 as	 well.	 The	 butter	 is	 then	 stored,
blended,	 or	 immediately	 shaped	 and
packaged.

Kinds	 of	 Butter	 Butter	 is	 made	 in	 several
distinct	 styles,	 each	 with	 its	 own	 particular
qualities.	 It’s	 necessary	 to	 read	 labels
carefully	 to	 learn	whether	 a	 given	 brand	 has
been	 made	 with	 plain	 cream,	 fermented
cream,	 or	 cream	 flavored	 to	 taste	 like



fermented	cream.
Raw	cream	butter,	whether	sweet	or

cultured,	is	now	nearly	extinct	in	the	United
States	and	a	rarity	even	in	Europe.	It	is	prized
for	its	pure	cream	flavor,	without	the	cooked-
milk	note	due	to	pasteurization.	The	flavor	is
fragile;	it	deteriorates	after	about	10	days
unless	the	butter	is	frozen.
Sweet	cream	butter	is	the	most	basic,	and

the	commonest	in	Britain	and	North	America.
It’s	made	from	pasteurized	fresh	cream,	and
in	the	United	States	must	be	at	least	80%	fat
and	no	more	than	16%	water;	the	remaining
4%	is	protein,	lactose,	and	salts	contained	in
the	buttermilk	droplets.
Salted	sweet	cream	butter	contains

between	1	and	2%	added	salt	(the	equivalent
of	1–2	teaspoons	per	pound/5–10	gm	per	500
gm).	Originally	salt	was	added	as	a
preservative,	and	at	2%,	the	equivalent	of
about	12%	in	the	water	droplets,	it	still	is	an
effective	antimicrobial	agent.



The	 structure	 of	 butter,	 which	 is	 about	 80%
milk	 fat	 and	 15%	 water.	 The	 fat	 globules,
solid	 crystals,	 and	 water	 droplets	 are
embedded	 in	 a	 continuous	 mass	 of	 semisolid
“free”	 fat	 that	 coats	 them	 all.	 A	 high
proportion	of	ordered	crystals	 imparts	a	 stiff
firmness	 to	 cold	 butter,	 while	 free	 fat	 lends
spreadability	 and	 the	 tendency	 to	 leak	 liquid
fat	as	it	warms	and	softens.
Cultured	cream	butter,	the	standard	in

Europe,	is	the	modern,	controlled	version	of
the	commonest	preindustrial	butter,	whose
raw	cream	had	been	slightly	soured	by	the
action	of	lactic	acid	bacteria	while	it	slowly
separated	in	the	pan	before	churning.	Cultured



butter	tastes	different:	the	bacteria	produce
both	acids	and	aroma	compounds,	so	the
butter	is	noticeably	fuller	in	flavor.	One
particular	aroma	compound,	diacetyl,	greatly
intensifies	the	basic	butter	flavor	itself.

There	are	several	different	methods	for
manufacturing	cultured	butter	or	something
like	it.	The	most	straightforward	is	to	ferment
pasteurized	cream	with	cream-culture	bacteria
(p.	49)	for	12	to	18	hours	at	cool	room
temperature	before	churning.	In	the	more
efficient	method	developed	in	the	Netherlands
in	the	1970s	and	also	used	in	France,	sweet
cream	is	churned	into	butter,	and	then	the
bacterial	cultures	and	preformed	lactic	acid
are	added;	flavor	develops	during	cold
storage.	Finally,	the	manufacturer	can	simply
add	pure	lactic	acid	and	flavor	compounds	to
sweet	cream	butter.	This	is	an	artificially
flavored	butter,	not	a	cultured	butter.
European-style	butter,	an	American

emulation	of	French	butter,	is	a	cultured



butter	with	a	fat	content	higher	than	the
standard	80%.	France	specifies	a	minimum	fat
content	of	82%	for	its	butter,	and	some
American	producers	aim	for	85%.	These
butters	contain	10–20%	less	water,	which	can
be	an	advantage	when	making	flaky	pastries
(p.	563).
Whipped	butter	is	a	modern	form	meant	to

be	more	spreadable.	Ordinary	sweet	butter	is
softened	and	then	injected	with	about	a	third
its	volume	of	nitrogen	gas	(air	would
encourage	oxidation	and	rancidity).	Both	the
physical	stress	and	the	gas	pockets	weaken	the
butter	structure	and	make	it	easier	to	spread,
though	it	remains	brittle	at	refrigerator
temperature.
Specialty	butters	are	made	in	France	for

professional	bakers	and	pastry	chefs.	Beurre
cuisinier,	beurre	pâtissier,	and	beurre
concentré	are	almost	pure	butterfat,	and	are
made	from	ordinary	butter	by	gently	melting
it	and	centrifuging	the	fat	off	of	the	water	and



milk	solids.	It	can	then	be	recooled	as	is,	or
slowly	crystallized	and	separated	into
fractions	that	melt	at	temperatures	from
80ºF/27ºC	to	104ºF/40ºC,	depending	on	the
chef’s	needs.

Butter	 Consistency	 and	 Structure	 Well
made	 butters	 can	 have	 noticeably	 different
consistencies.	 In	 France,	 for	 example,	 butter
from	Normandy	is	relatively	soft	and	favored
for	spreading	and	making	sauces	—	Elizabeth
David	said,	“When	you	get	melted	butter	with
a	 trout	 in	Normandy	 it	 is	 difficult	 to	 believe
that	it	is	not	cream”	—	while	butter	from	the
Charentes	is	firmer,	and	preferred	for	making
pastries.	 Many	 dairies	 will	 often	 produce
softer	butter	in	the	summer	than	they	do	in	the
winter.	 The	 consistency	 of	 butter	 reflects	 its
microscopic	 structure,	 and	 this	 is	 strongly
influenced	by	two	factors:	what	the	cows	eat,
and	how	the	butter	maker	handles	 their	milk.
Feeds	 rich	 in	polyunsaturated	 fats,	 especially



fresh	 pasturage,	 produce	 softer	 butters;	 hay
and	grain	harder	ones.	The	butter	maker	also
influences	consistency	by	the	rate	and	degree
of	 cooling	 to	 which	 he	 subjects	 the	 cream
during	 the	 aging	 period,	 and	 by	 how
extensively	 he	 works	 the	 new	 butter.	 These
conditions	 control	 the	 relative	 proportions	 of
firming	crystalline	 fat	and	softening	globular
and	free	fat.

Keeping	 Butter	 Because	 its	 scant	 water	 is
dispersed	 in	 tiny	 droplets,	 properly	 made
butter	 resists	 gross	 contamination	 by
microbes,	 and	 keeps	 well	 for	 some	 days	 at
room	 temperature.	 However,	 its	 delicate
flavor	is	easily	coarsened	by	simple	exposure
to	 the	air	and	 to	bright	 light,	which	break	fat
molecules	 into	 smaller	 fragments	 that	 smell
stale	 and	 rancid.	 Butter	 also	 readily	 absorbs
strong	 odors	 from	 its	 surroundings.	 Keep
reserves	in	the	freezer,	and	daily	butter	in	the
cold	 and	 dark	 as	 much	 as	 possible.	 Rewrap



remainders	 airtight,	 preferably	 with	 the
original	 foiled	 paper	 and	 not	with	 aluminum
foil;	 direct	 contact	with	metal	 can	 hasten	 fat
oxidation,	 particularly	 in	 salted	 butter.
Translucent,	 dark	 yellow	 patches	 on	 the
surface	 of	 a	 butter	 stick	 are	 areas	 where	 the
butter	 has	 been	 exposed	 to	 the	 air	 and	 dried
out;	 they	 taste	 rancid	 and	 should	 be	 scraped
off.

Cooking	 with	 Butter	 Cooks	 use	 butter	 for
many	 different	 purposes,	 from	 greasing	 cake
pans	 and	 soufflé	 molds	 to	 flavoring
butterscotch	candies.	Here	are	notes	on	some
of	 its	 more	 prominent	 roles.	 The	 important
role	of	butter	 in	baking	 is	covered	 in	chapter
10.

Butter	as	Garnish:	Spreads,	Whipped	Butters
Good	 plain	 bread	 spread	 with	 good	 plain
butter	 is	 one	 of	 the	 simplest	 pleasures.	 We
owe	 butter’s	 buttery	 consistency	 to	 the
peculiar	melting	 behavior	 of	milk	 fat,	 which



softens	 and	 becomes	 spreadable	 around
60ºF/15ºC,	 but	 doesn’t	 begin	 to	 melt	 until
85ºF/30ºC.

This	workable	consistency	also	means	that
it’s	easy	to	incorporate	other	ingredients	into
the	butter,	which	then	carries	their	flavor	and
color	and	helps	apply	them	evenly	to	other
foods.	Composed	butters	are	masses	of	room-
temperature	butter	into	which	some	flavoring
and/or	coloring	has	been	kneaded;	these	can
include	herbs,	spices,	stock,	a	wine	reduction,
cheese,	and	pounded	seafood.	The	mixture	can
then	be	spread	on	another	food,	or
refrigerated,	sliced,	and	melted	into	a	butter
sauce	when	put	onto	a	hot	meat	or	vegetable.
And	whipped	butter	prepared	by	the	cook	is
butter	lightened	by	the	incorporation	of	some
air,	and	flavored	with	about	half	its	volume	of
stock,	a	puree,	or	some	other	liquid,	which
becomes	dispersed	into	the	butter	fat	in	small
droplets.



Butter	 as	 Sauce:	 Melted	 Butter,	 Beurre
Noisette,	and	 Beurre	 Noir	 Perhaps	 the
simplest	of	sauces	is	the	pat	of	butter	dropped
on	a	heap	of	hot	vegetables,	or	stirred	into	rice
or	noodles,	or	drawn	across	 the	surface	of	an
omelet	or	steak	to	give	a	sheen.	Melted	butter
can	 be	 enlivened	 with	 lemon	 juice,	 or
“clarified”	 to	 remove	 the	 milk	 solids	 (see
below).	Beurre	 noisette	 and	beurre	 noir,
“hazel”	 and	 “black”	butter,	 are	melted	butter
sauces	 that	 the	 French	 have	 used	 since
medieval	 times	 to	 enrich	 fish,	 brains,	 and
vegetables.	 Their	 flavor	 is	 deepened	 by
heating	 the	butter	 to	 about	 250ºF/120ºC	until
its	 water	 boils	 off	 and	 the	 molecules	 in	 the
white	 residue,	 milk	 sugar	 and	 protein,	 react
with	 each	other	 to	 form	brown	pigments	 and
new	 aromas	 (the	 browning	 reaction,	 p.	 777).
Hazel	butter	is	cooked	until	it’s	golden	brown,
black	butter	until	it’s	dark	brown	(truly	black
butter	 is	 acrid).	 They’re	 often	 balanced	 with
vinegar	or	lemon	juice,	which	should	be	added



only	 after	 the	 butter	 has	 cooled	 below	 the
boiling	 point;	 otherwise	 the	 cold	 liquid	 will
cause	 spattering	 and	 the	 lemon	 solids	 may
brown.	 On	 their	 own,	 they	 lend	 a	 rich	 nutty
flavor	to	baked	goods.

The	emulsified	butter	sauces	—	beurre
blanc,	hollandaise,	and	their	relatives	—	are
described	in	chapter	11.

Clarified	 Butter	 Clarified	 butter	 is	 butter
whose	 water	 and	 milk	 solids	 have	 been
removed,	 leaving	 essentially	 pure	 milk	 fat
that	 looks	 beautifully	 clear	when	melted	 and
that	is	better	suited	for	frying	(the	milk	solids
scorch	at	 relatively	 low	frying	 temperatures).
When	 butter	 is	 gently	 heated	 to	 the	 boiling
point	 of	 water,	 the	water	 bubbles	 to	 the	 top,
where	 the	 whey	 proteins	 form	 a	 froth.
Eventually	 all	 the	 water	 evaporates,	 the
bubbling	stops,	and	the	froth	dehydrates.	This
leaves	a	skin	of	dry	whey	protein	on	top,	and
dry	casein	particles	at	the	bottom.	Lift	off	the



whey	skin,	pour	the	liquid	fat	off	of	the	casein
residue,	and	the	purification	is	complete.

Frying	with	Butter	Butter	 is	 sometimes	used
for	 frying	 and	 sautéing.	 It	 has	 the	 advantage
that	 its	 largely	 saturated	 fats	 are	 resistant	 to
being	 broken	 down	 by	 heat,	 and	 so	 don’t
become	 gummy	 the	way	 unsaturated	 oils	 do.
It	 has	 the	 disadvantage	 that	 its	 milk	 solids
brown	 and	 then	 burn	 around	 250ºF,	 150º
below	the	smoke	point	of	many	vegetable	oils.
Adding	oil	to	butter	does	not	improve	its	heat
tolerance.	Clarifying	does;	butter	free	of	milk
solids	 can	 be	 heated	 to	 400ºF/200ºC	 before
burning.

Margarine	 and	 Other	 Dairy	 Spreads
Margarine	 has	 been	 called	 “a	 creation	 of
political	 intuition	 and	 scientific	 research.”	 It
was	 invented	 by	 a	 French	 chemist	 in	 1869,
three	 years	 after	 Napoleon	 III	 had	 offered
funds	 for	 the	 development	 of	 an	 inexpensive
food	 fat	 to	 supplement	 the	 inadequate	 butter



supply	 for	 his	 poorly	 nourished	 but	 growing
urban	 populace.	 Others	 before	 Hippolyte
Mège-Mouriès	 had	 modified	 solid	 animal
fats,	 but	 he	 had	 the	 novel	 idea	 of	 flavoring
beef	 tallow	 with	 milk	 and	 working	 the
mixture	like	butter.

Margarine	caught	on	quickly	in	the	major
European	butter	producers	and	exporters	—
Holland,	Denmark,	and	Germany	—	in	part
because	they	had	surplus	skim	milk	from
butter	making	that	could	be	used	to	flavor
margarine.	In	the	United	States	large-scale
production	was	underway	by	1880.	Here,	the
dairy	industry	and	its	allies	in	government	put
up	fierce	resistance	in	the	form	of
discriminatory	taxes	that	persisted	into	the
1970s.	Today,	basic	margarine	remains	cheap
compared	to	butter,	and	Americans	consume
more	than	twice	as	much	margarine	as	butter.
Scandinavia	and	northern	Europe	also	favor
margarine,	while	France	and	Britain	still	give
a	substantial	edge	to	butter.



The	 Rise	 of	 Vegetable	 Margarine 	 Modern
margarine	is	now	made	not	from	solid	animal
fats,	but	 from	normally	 liquid	vegetable	oils.
This	shift	was	made	possible	around	1900	by
German	 and	 French	 chemists	who	 developed
the	 process	 of	hydrogenation,	 which	 hardens
liquid	 oils	 by	 altering	 the	 structures	 of	 their
fatty	 acids	 (p.	 801).	 Hydrogenation	 allowed
manufacturers	to	make	a	butter	substitute	that
spreads	 easily	 even	 at	 refrigerator
temperature,	 where	 butter	 is	 unusably	 hard.
An	 unanticipated	 bonus	 for	 the	 shift	 to
vegetable	oils	was	the	medical	discovery	after
World	War	II	that	the	saturated	fats	typical	of
meats	 and	 dairy	 products	 raise	 blood
cholesterol	 levels	 and	 the	 risk	 of	 heart
disease.	The	 ratio	 of	 saturated	 to	 unsaturated
fat	 in	 hard	 stick	 margarine	 is	 only	 1	 to	 3,
where	in	butter	it	is	2	to	1.	Recently,	however,
scientists	 have	 found	 that	trans	 fatty	 acids
produced	 by	 hydrogenation	 actually	 raise
blood	 cholesterol	 levels	 (see	 box).	 There	 are



other	 methods	 for	 hardening	 vegetable	 oils
that	 don’t	 produce	 trans	 fatty	 acids,	 and
manufacturers	 are	 already	 producing	 “trans
free”	margarines	and	shortenings.

Indian	Clarified	Butter:	Ghee
In	 India,	 clarified	 butter	 is	 the	 most
eminent	 of	 all	 foods.	 In	 addition	 to	 being
used	as	an	ingredient	and	frying	oil,	it	is	an
emblem	 of	 purity,	 an	 ancient	 offering	 to
the	gods,	the	fuel	of	holy	lamps	and	funeral
pyres.	 Ghee	 (from	 the	 Sanskrit	 for
“bright”)	 was	 born	 of	 necessity.	 Ordinary
butter	 spoils	 in	 only	 ten	 days	 in	much	 of
the	 country,	 while	 the	 clarified	 fat	 keeps
six	to	eight	months.	Traditionally,	ghee	has
been	made	from	whole	cow	or	buffalo	milk
that	 is	 soured	 by	 lactic	 acid	 bacteria	 into
yogurt-like	dahi,	 then	 churned	 to	 obtain
butter.	 Today,	 industrial	 manufacturers
usually	 start	 with	 cream.	 The	 preliminary
souring	 improves	 both	 the	 quantity	 of



butter	 obtained	 and	 its	 flavor;	 ghee	made
from	sweet	cream	is	said	to	taste	flat.	The
butter	is	heated	to	190ºF/90ºC	to	evaporate
its	water,	 then	the	temperature	is	raised	to
250ºF/120ºC	 to	 brown	 the	 milk	 solids,
which	 flavors	 the	 ghee	 and	 generates
antioxidant	compounds	that	delay	the	onset
of	 rancidity.	 The	 brown	 residue	 is	 then
filtered	off	(and	mixed	with	sugar	to	make
sweets),	leaving	the	clear	liquid	ghee.

Making	Margarine	The	gross	composition	of
margarine	is	the	same	as	butter’s:	a	minimum
of	80%	fat,	a	maximum	of	16%	water.	The
water	phase	is	either	fresh	or	cultured	skim
milk,	or	skim	milk	reconstituted	from	powder.
Salt	is	added	for	flavor,	to	reduce	spattering
during	frying,	and	as	an	antimicrobial	agent.
In	the	United	States,	the	fat	phase	is	blended
from	soybean,	corn,	cottonseed,	sunflower,
canola,	and	other	oils.	In	Europe,	lard	and
refined	fish	oils	are	also	used.	The	emulsifier
lecithin	is	added	(0.2%)	to	stabilize	the	water



droplets	and	reduce	spattering	in	the	frying
pan;	coloring	agents,	flavor	extracts,	and
vitamins	A	and	D	are	also	incorporated.
Nitrogen	gas	may	be	pumped	in	to	make	a
whipped,	softer	spread.

Kinds	 of	 Margarine	 and	 Related	 Spreads
Stick	 and	tub	 margarines	 are	 the	 two	 most
common	 kinds.	 They	 are	 formulated	 to
approximate	 the	 spreadable	 consistency	 of
butter	at	room	temperature,	and	to	melt	in	the
mouth.	Stick	margarine	is	only	slightly	softer
than	butter	 in	 the	refrigerator,	and	like	butter
can	 be	 creamed	 with	 sugar	 to	 make	 icings.
Tub	margarine	 is	 substantially	 less	 saturated
and	 easily	 spreadable	 even	 at	 40ºF/5ºC,	 but
too	soft	to	cream	or	to	use	in	layered	pastries.
Reduced-fat	spreads	contain	less	oil	and

more	water	than	standard	margarines,	rely	on
carbohydrate	and	protein	stabilizers,	and
aren’t	suited	to	cooking.	The	stabilizers	can
scorch	in	the	frying	pan.	If	used	to	replace



butter	or	margarine	in	baking,	high-moisture
spreads	throw	liquid-solid	proportions	badly
out	of	balance.	Very-low-fat	and	no-fat
spreads	contain	so	much	starch,	gum,	and/or
protein	that	there’s	nothing	there	to	melt	when
heated:	they	dry	out	and	eventually	burn.
Specialty	margarines	are	generally

available	only	to	professional	bakers.	Like	the
original	French	oleomargarine,	they
sometimes	contain	beef	tallow.	They’re
formulated	to	have	a	firm	but	spreadable
consistency	over	a	much	broader	temperature
range	than	butter	(p.	562).

Hydrogenation	By-Products:	Trans
Fatty	Acids

Trans	 fatty	 acids	 are	 unsaturated	 fatty
acids	 that	 nevertheless	 behave	 more	 like
saturated	 fatty	 acids	 (p.	 801).	 They’re
formed	 in	 the	 hydrogenation	 process,	 and
are	 the	 reason	 that	 margarines	 can	 be	 as
solid	 as	 butter	 and	 yet	 contain	 half	 the



saturated	 fat;	 the	 trans	 unsaturated	 fats
contribute	 a	 great	 deal	 to	 margarine
firmness.	 Trans	 unsaturated	 fats	 are	 also
less	prone	to	oxidation	or	heat	damage	and
make	cooking	oils	more	stable.

Trans	 fatty	 acids	 have	 come	 under
scrutiny	 due	 to	 the	 likelihood	 that	 they
may	 contribute	 to	 human	 heart	 disease.
Research	 has	 shown	 that	 they	 not	 only
raise	undesirable	LDL	cholesterol	levels	in
the	 blood	 as	 saturated	 fats	 do,	 they	 also
lower	desirable	HDL	levels.	Manufacturers
are	 now	 modifying	 their	 processing
methods	to	lower	trans	fatty	acids	levels	in
U.S.	margarines	and	cooking	oils	from	the
present	 levels,	 which	 reach	 20–50%	 of
total	fatty	acids	in	hard	margarines	(less	in
softer	products).

Margarine	 manufacturers	 are	 not	 the
only	 producers	 of	 trans	 fatty	 acids:	 the
microbes	in	animal	rumens	are	too!	Thanks
to	their	activity,	the	fat	in	milk,	butter,	and



cheese	 averages	 5%	 trans	 fatty	 acids,	 and
the	meat	 fat	 of	 ruminant	 animals	—	 beef
and	lamb	—	ranges	from	1	to	5%.

Ice	Cream

Ice	cream	is	a	dish	that	manages	to	heighten
the	already	remarkable	qualities	of	cream.	By
freezing	it,	we	make	it	possible	to	taste	the
birth	of	creaminess,	the	tantalizing	transition
from	solidity	to	fluidity.	But	it	was	no	simple
matter	to	freeze	cream	in	a	way	that	does	it
justice.

The	 Invention	and	Evolution	of	 Ice	Cream
Plain	 frozen	 cream	 is	 hard	 as	 a	 rock.	 Sugar
makes	 it	 softer,	 but	 also	 lowers	 its	 freezing
point	(the	dissolved	sugar	molecules	get	in	the
way	as	the	water	molecules	settle	into	ordered
crystals).	 So	 sweetened	 cream	 freezes	 well
below	 the	 freezing	 point	 of	 pure	 water,	 and
can’t	 freeze	 in	 the	 slush	 that	 forms	 when	 a



warm	 object	 is	 placed	 in	 snow	 or	 ice.	What
made	 ice	 cream	possible	was	 a	 sprinkling	 of
chemical	 ingenuity.	 If	 salts	 are	 added	 to	 the
ice,	 the	 salts	 dissolve	 in	 the	 slush,	 lower	its
freezing	point,	and	allow	it	to	get	cold	enough
to	freeze	the	sugared	cream.

The	effect	of	salts	on	freezing	was	known
in	the	13th	century	Arab	world,	and	that
knowledge	eventually	made	its	way	to	Italy,
where	ices	made	from	fruit	were	described	in
the	early	17th	century.	The	English	term	“ice
cream”	first	appears	in	a	1672	document	from
the	court	of	Charles	II,	and	the	first	printed
recipes	for	frozen	waters	and	creams	appear	in
France	and	Naples	in	the	1680s	and	1690s.	By
the	time	of	the	American	Revolution,	the
French	had	discovered	that	frequent	stirring	of
the	freezing	mix	gave	a	finer,	less	crystalline
texture.	They	had	also	developed	super-rich
versions	with	20	egg	yolks	per	pint	of	cream
(glace	au	beurre,	“ice	butter”!),	and	ice
creams	flavored	with	various	nuts	and	spices,



orange	blossoms,	caramel,	chocolate,	tea,
coffee,	and	even	rye	bread.

The	First	Recipes	for	Ice	Cream
Neige	de	fleurs	d’orange	(“Snow	of	Orange

Flowers”)
You	 must	 take	 sweet	 cream,	 and	 put
thereto	 two	 handfuls	 of	 powdered	 sugar,
and	 take	 petals	 of	 orange	 flowers	 and
mince	 them	 small,	 and	 put	 them	 in	 your
cream…and	put	all	into	a	pot,	and	put	your
pot	in	a	wine	cooler;	and	you	must	take	ice,
crush	 it	 well	 and	 put	 a	 bed	 of	 it	 with	 a
handful	of	salt	at	 the	bottom	of	 the	cooler
before	putting	in	 the	pot….	And	you	must
continue	 putting	 a	 layer	 of	 ice	 and	 a
handful	of	salt,	until	 the	cooler	 is	full	and
the	pot	covered,	and	you	must	put	it	in	the
coolest	 place	 you	 can	 find,	 and	 you	must
shake	 it	 from	 time	 to	 time	 for	 fear	 it	will
freeze	into	a	solid	lump	of	ice.	It	will	take



about	two	hours.
—	Nouveau	confiturier,	1682

Fromage	à	l’angloise	(English	Cheese)
Take	a	chopine	[16	oz]	of	sweet	cream	and
the	same	of	milk,	half	a	pound	of	powdered
sugar,	stir	in	three	egg	yolks	and	boil	until
it	becomes	like	a	thin	porridge;	take	it
from	the	fire	and	pour	it	into	your	ice
mould,	and	put	it	in	the	ice	for	three	hours;
and	when	it	is	firm,	withdraw	the	mold,
and	warm	it	a	little,	in	order	more	easily	to
turn	out	your	cheese,	or	else	dip	your
mould	for	a	moment	in	hot	water,	then
serve	it	in	a	compôtier.

—	François	Massialot,	La	Nouvelle
instruction	pour	les	confitures	(1692)

In	America,	a	Food	for	the	Masses	America
transformed	this	delicacy	into	a	food	for	the
masses.	Ice	cream	making	was	an	awkward,
small-batch	procedure	until	1843,	when	a
Nancy	Johnson	of	Philadelphia	patented	a
freezer	consisting	of	a	large	bucket	for	the



brine	and	a	sealed	cylinder	containing	the	ice-
cream	mix	and	a	mixing	blade,	whose	shaft
protruded	from	the	top	and	could	be	cranked
continuously.	Five	years	later,	William	G.
Young	of	Baltimore	modified	Johnson’s
design	to	make	the	mix	container	rotate	in	the
brine	for	more	efficient	cooling.	The	Johnson-
Young	freezer	allowed	large	quantities	of
fine-textured	ice	cream	to	be	made	with	a
simple,	steady	mechanical	action.

The	second	fateful	advance	toward	mass
production	came	in	the	early	1850s,	when	a
Baltimore	milk	dealer	by	the	name	of	Jacob
Fussell	decided	to	use	his	seasonal	surplus	of
cream	to	make	ice	cream,	was	able	to	charge
half	the	going	price	in	specialty	shops,	and
enjoyed	great	success	as	the	first	large-scale
manufacturer.	His	example	caught	on,	so	that
by	1900	an	English	visitor	was	struck	by	the
“enormous	quantities”	of	ice	cream	eaten	in
America.	Today	Americans	still	eat
substantially	more	ice	cream	than	Europeans



do,	nearly	20	quarts/liters	per	person	every
year.

The	Industrialization	of	Ice	Cream	Once	 ice
cream	became	an	 industrial	product,	 industry
redefined	it.	Manufacturers	could	freeze	their
ice	cream	faster	and	colder	than	the	handmade
version,	 and	 so	 could	 produce	 very	 fine	 ice
crystals.	 Smoothness	 of	 texture	 became	 the
hallmark	 of	 industrial	 ice	 cream,	 and
manufacturers	 accentuated	 it	 by	 replacing
traditional	 ingredients	 with	 gelatin	 and
concentrated	milk	solids.	After	World	War	II,
they	dosed	ice	cream	with	greater	amounts	of
stabilizers	 to	 preserve	 its	 smoothness	 in	 the
new	 and	 unpredictable	 home	 freezers.	 And
price	competition	led	to	the	increasing	use	of
additives,	 powdered	 milk	 from	 surplus
production,	 and	 artificial	 flavors	 and	 colors.
So	 an	 ice	 cream	 hierarchy	 developed.	At	 the
top	 is	 traditional	 but	 relatively	 expensive	 ice
cream;	 at	 the	 bottom,	 a	 lower-quality	 but



more	stable	and	affordable	version.

The	 Structure	 and	 Consistency	 of	 Ice
Cream

Ice	 Crystals,	 Concentrated	 Cream,	 Air	 Ice
cream	 consists	 of	 three	 basic	 elements:	 ice
crystals	made	of	pure	water,	the	concentrated
cream	 that	 the	 crystals	 leave	 behind	 as	 they
form	from	the	prepared	mix,	and	tiny	air	cells
formed	 as	 the	 mix	 is	 churned	 during	 the
freezing.

The	ice	crystals	form	from	water
molecules	as	the	mix	freezes,	and	give
ice	cream	its	solidity;	they’re	its
backbone.	And	their	size	determines
whether	it	is	fine	and	smooth	or	coarse
and	grainy.	But	they	account	for	only	a
fraction	of	its	volume.
The	concentrated	cream	is	what	is	left	of
the	mix	when	the	ice	crystals	form.
Thanks	to	all	the	dissolved	sugar,	about	a



fifth	of	the	water	in	the	mix	remains
unfrozen	even	at	0ºF/–18ºC.	The	result	is
a	very	thick	fluid	that’s	about	equal
portions	of	liquid	water,	milk	fat,	milk
proteins,	and	sugar.	This	fluid	coats	each
of	the	many	millions	of	ice	crystals,	and
sticks	them	together	—	but	not	too
strongly.
Air	cells	are	trapped	in	the	ice	cream	mix
when	it’s	agitated	during	the	freezing.
They	interrupt	and	weaken	the	matrix	of
ice	crystals	and	cream,	making	that
matrix	lighter	and	easier	to	scoop	and
bite	into.	The	air	cells	inflate	the	volume
of	the	ice	cream	over	the	volume	of	the
original	mix.	The	increase	is	called
overrun,	and	in	a	fluffy	ice	cream	can	be
as	much	as	100%:	that	is,	the	final	ice
cream	volume	is	half	mix	and	half	air.
The	lower	the	overrun,	the	denser	the	ice
cream.



Balance	The	key	to	making	a	good	ice	cream
is	to	formulate	a	mix	that	will	freeze	into	a
balanced	structure	of	ice	crystals,
concentrated	cream,	and	air.	The	consistency
of	a	balanced,	well	made	ice	cream	is	creamy,
smooth,	firm,	almost	chewy.	The	smaller	the
proportion	of	water	in	the	mix,	the	easier	it	is
to	make	small	crystals	and	a	smooth	texture.
However,	too	much	sugar	and	milk	solids
gives	a	heavy,	soggy,	syrupy	result,	and	too
much	fat	can	end	up	churning	into	butter.
Most	good	ice	cream	recipes	produce	a	mix
with	a	water	content	around	60%,	a	sugar
content	around	15%,	and	a	milk-fat	content
between	10%	—	the	minimum	for
commercial	U.S.	ice	cream	—	and	20%.

Styles	 of	 Ice	 Cream	 Flavorings	 apart,	 there
are	two	major	styles	of	ice	cream,	and	several
minor	ones.

Standard	or	Philadelphia-style	ice	cream
is	made	from	cream	and	milk,	sugar,	and



a	few	other	minor	ingredients.	Its	appeal
is	the	richness	and	delicate	flavor	of
cream	itself,	complemented	by	vanilla	or
by	fruits	or	nuts.
French	or	custard	ice	cream	contains	an
additional	ingredient:	egg	yolks,	as	many
as	12	per	quart/liter.	The	proteins	and
emulsifiers	in	egg	yolk	can	help	keep	ice
crystals	small	and	the	texture	smooth
even	at	relatively	low	milk-fat	and	high
water	levels;	some	traditional	French	ice
cream	mixes	are	a	crème	anglaise	(p.	98)
made	with	milk,	not	cream.	A	mix	that
contains	yolks	must	be	cooked	to
disperse	the	proteins	and	emulsifiers
(and	kill	any	bacteria	in	the	raw	yolks),
and	the	resulting	thickened,	custard-like
mix	makes	an	ice	cream	with	a
characteristic	cooked,	eggy	flavor.
				A	distinct	style	of	custard	ice	cream	is
the	Italian	gelato,	which	is	typically	high
in	butterfat	as	well	as	egg	yolks,	and



frozen	with	little	overrun	into	a	very	rich,
dense	cream.	(The	name	simply	means
“frozen,”	and	in	Italy	is	applied	to	a
range	of	frozen	preparations.)
Reduced-fat,	low-fat,	and	nonfat	ice
creams	contain	progressively	less	fat
than	the	10%	minimum	specified	in	the
commercial	American	definition	of	ice
cream.	They	keep	their	ice	crystals	small
with	a	variety	of	additives,	including
corn	syrup,	powdered	milk,	and
vegetable	gums.	“Soft-serve”	ice	cream
is	a	reduced-fat	preparation	whose
softness	comes	from	being	dispensed	at	a
relatively	high	temperature	(20–22ºF/–
6ºC).
Kulfi,	the	Indian	version	of	ice	cream
that	may	go	back	to	the	16th	century,	is
made	without	stirring	from	milk	boiled
down	to	a	fraction	of	its	original	volume,
and	therefore	concentrated	in	texture-
smoothing	milk	proteins	and	sugar.	It	has



a	strong	cooked-milk,	butterscotch
flavor.

Generally,	premium-quality	ice	creams	are
made	 with	 more	 cream	 and	 egg	 yolks	 than
less	 expensive	 types.	 They	 also	 contain	 less
air.	Hefting	cartons	is	a	quick	way	to	estimate
value;	 there	can	be	as	much	cream	and	sugar
in	 an	 expensive	 pint	 as	 there	 is	 in	 a	 cheap
quart,	which	may	be	up	to	half	empty	space.

Ice	 cream,	 a	 semisolid	 foam.	 The	 process	 of
freezing	 the	 ice-cream	mix	 forms	 ice	 crystals
—	 solid	 masses	 of	 pure	 water	 —	 and
concentrates	 the	 remaining	mix	 into	 a	 liquid
rich	in	sugar	and	milk	proteins.	Churning	fills



the	mix	with	air	bubbles,	which	are	stabilized
by	layers	of	clustered	fat	globules.

The	Typical	Compositions	of	Ice	Creams
With	the	exception	of	overrun	and	calories,
the	percentages	shown	are	the	percentages	by

weight	of	the	ice	cream

Style %	Milk %	Other	Milk %
Fat Solids Sugar

Premium	standard 16–20 7–8 13–16
Name-brand	standard 12–14 8–11 13–15
Economy	standard 10 11 15
“French”	(commercial) 10–14 8–11 13–15
French	(handmade) 3–10 7–8 15–20
Gelato 18 7–8 16
Soft-serve 3–10 11–14 13–16
Low-fat 2–4 12–14 18–21
Sherbet 1–3 1–3 26–35



Kulfi 7 18 5–15

Style%	Yolk	Solids	(Stabilizers) %	Water
Premium	standard (0.3) 64–56
Name-brand	standard (0.3) 67–60
Economy	standard (0.3) 64
“French”	(commercial) 2 67–58
French	(handmade) 6–8 69–54
Gelato 4–8 55–50
Soft-serve (0.4) 73–60
Low-fat (0.8) 68–61
Sherbet (0.5) 72–59
Kulfi — 70–60

Overrun	(%
Style volume Calories	per	½

of	original	mix) c/125	ml

Premium	standard 20–40 240–360



Name-brand	standard 60–90 130–250
Economy	standard 90–100 120–150
“French”	(commercial) 60–90 130–250
French	(handmade) 0–20 150–270
Gelato 0–10 300–370
Soft-serve 30–60 175–190
Low-fat 75–90 80–135
Sherbet 25–50 95–140
Kulfi 0–20 170–230

Making	 Ice	 Cream	 There	 are	 three	 basic
steps	in	making	ice	cream:	preparing	the	mix,
freezing	it,	and	hardening	it.

Preparing	the	Mix	The	first	step	is	to	choose
the	 ingredients	 and	 combine	 them.	The	basic
ingredients	are	fresh	cream	and	milk	and	table
sugar.	 A	 mix	 made	 of	 up	 to	 17%	 milk	 fat
(equal	 volumes	 of	 whole	 milk	 and	 heavy
cream)	 and	 15%	 table	 sugar	 (¾	 cup	 per



quart/180	 gm	 per	 liter	 of	 liquid)	 will	 be
smooth	 when	 frozen	 quickly	 in	 kitchen	 ice
cream	 makers.	 A	 smooth	 but	 lower-fat	 ice
cream	can	be	made	by	making	a	custard-style
mix	with	 egg	yolks;	or	by	 replacing	 some	of
the	 cream	 with	 high	 protein	 evaporated,
condensed,	 or	 powdered	 milk;	 or	 replacing
some	of	the	sugar	with	thickening	corn	syrup.

In	commercial	practice,	most	or	all	of	the
mix	ingredients	are	combined,	then
pasteurized,	a	step	that	also	helps	dissolve	and
hydrate	the	ingredients.	If	carried	out	at	a	high
enough	temperature	(above	170ºF/76ºC),
cooking	can	improve	the	body	and
smoothness	of	the	ice	cream	by	denaturing	the
whey	proteins,	which	helps	minimize	the	size
of	the	ice	crystals.	Mixes	that	include	egg
yolks	are	always	cooked	until	they	just
thicken.	Simple	home	mixtures	of	cream	and
sugar	can	be	frozen	uncooked	and	have	their
own	fresh	flavor.



Freezing	Once	the	mix	has	been	prepared,	it’s
prechilled	 to	 speed	 the	 subsequent	 freezing.
It’s	 then	 frozen	 as	 rapidly	 as	 possible	 in	 a
container	with	coolant-chilled	walls.	The	mix
is	stirred	to	expose	it	evenly	to	the	cold	walls,
to	 incorporate	 some	 air,	 and	 above	 all	 to
produce	a	smooth	texture.	Slow	cooling	of	an
unstirred	 mix	 —	 “quiescent	 cooling”	 —
causes	 the	 formation	 of	 relatively	 few	 ice
crystals	 that	 grow	 to	 a	 large	 size,	 grow
together	 into	 clumps,	 and	 give	 a	 coarse,	 icy
texture.	Rapid	cooling	with	stirring	causes	the
quick	 production	 of	 many	 “seed”	 crystals
which,	because	they	share	the	available	water
molecules	among	themselves,	cannot	grow	as
large	 as	 a	 smaller	 population	 could;	 the
agitation	 also	 helps	 prevent	 several	 crystals
from	 growing	 into	 each	 other	 and	 forming	 a
cluster	 that	 the	 tongue	 might	 notice.	 And
many	 small	 crystals	 give	 a	 smooth,	 velvety
consistency.



Freezing	Ice	Cream
with	Flying	Fortresses	and	Liquid

Nitrogen
On	 March	 13,	 1943,	 the	New	 York	 Times
reported	 that	American	 fliers	 stationed	 in
Britain	had	discovered	an	ingenious	way	of
making	 ice	 cream	while	 on	 duty.	A	 story
titled	 “Flying	 Fortresses	 Double	 as	 Ice-
Cream	Freezers”	disclosed	that	the	airmen
“place	 prepared	 ice-cream	 mixture	 in	 a
large	can	and	anchor	it	to	the	rear	gunner’s
compartment	 of	 a	 Flying	 Fortress.	 It	 is
well	shaken	up	and	nicely	frozen	by	flying
over	enemy	territory	at	high	altitudes.”

These	days,	a	popular,	 spectacular,	 and
effective	 method	 among	 chemistry
teachers	 is	 to	 freeze	 the	 mix	 in	 an	 open
bowl	 with	 a	 gallon	 or	 two/8–10	 liters	 of
liquid	 nitrogen,	 whose	 boiling	 point	 is–
320ºF/–196ºC.	When	the	liquid	nitrogen	is
stirred	 in,	 it	 boils,	 bubbles,	 and	 chills	 the
mix	 almost	 instantly	 throughout,	 a



combination	 that	makes	a	very	 smooth	—
and	initially	very	cold!	—	ice	cream.

Hardening	Hardening	is	the	last	stage	in
making	ice	cream.	When	the	mix	becomes
thick	and	difficult	to	stir,	only	about	half	of
its	water	has	frozen	into	ice	crystals.
Agitation	is	then	stopped,	and	the	ice	cream	is
finished	with	a	period	of	quiescent	freezing,
during	which	another	40%	of	its	water
migrates	onto	existing	ice	crystals,	leaving	the
various	solid	components	less	lubricated.	If
hardening	is	slow,	some	ice	crystals	take	up
more	water	than	others	and	coarsen	the
texture.	Hardening	can	be	accelerated	by
dividing	the	newly	frozen	ice	cream	into
several	small	containers	whose	greater	surface
area	will	release	heat	faster	than	one	large
container.

Storing	and	Serving	Ice	Cream	Ice	cream	is
best	stored	as	cold	as	possible,	at	0ºF/–18ºC	or
below,	 to	 preserve	 its	 smoothness.	 The



inevitable	coarsening	during	storage	is	due	to
repeated	partial	thawings	and	freezings,	which
melt	 the	smallest	 ice	crystals	completely	and
deposit	 their	water	molecules	 on	 ever	 fewer,
ever	 larger	 crystals.	 The	 lower	 the	 storage
temperature,	 the	 slower	 this	 coarsening
process.

The	ice	cream	surface	suffers	in	two	ways
during	storage:	its	fat	absorbs	odors	from	the
rest	of	the	freezer	compartment,	and	can	be
damaged	and	go	rancid	when	dried	out	by	the
freezer	air.	These	problems	can	be	prevented
simply	by	pressing	plastic	wrap	directly	into
the	surface,	being	careful	not	to	leave	air
pockets.

Ideally,	ice	cream	should	be	allowed	to
warm	up	from	0ºF	before	being	served.	At	8–
10ºF/–13ºC,	it	doesn’t	numb	the	tongue	and
taste	buds	as	much,	and	it	contains	more
liquid	water,	which	softens	the	texture.	At
22ºF/–6ºC	—	the	typical	temperature	of	soft-
serve	ice	cream	—	half	of	the	water	is	in



liquid	form.

Fresh	Fermented	Milks
and	Creams

One	of	the	remarkable	qualities	of	milk	is	that
it	invites	its	own	preservation.	It	can
spontaneously	foster	a	particular	group	of
microbes	that	convert	its	sugar	into	acid,	and
thereby	preserve	it	for	some	time	from
spoiling	or	harboring	disease.	At	the	same
time,	the	microbes	also	change	the	milk’s
texture	and	flavor	in	desirable	ways.	This
benign	transformation,	or	fermentation,
doesn’t	happen	all	the	time,	but	it	happened
often	enough	that	milks	fermented	by	bacteria
became	important	among	all	dairying	peoples.
Yogurt	and	soured	creams	remain	widely
popular	to	this	day.

Why	this	fortunate	fermentation?	It’s	a
combination	of	milk’s	unique	chemistry,	and
a	group	of	microbes	that	were	ready	to	exploit



this	chemistry	long	before	mammals	and	milk
arrived	on	earth.	The	lactic	acid	bacteria	are
what	make	possible	the	variety	of	fermented
dairy	products.

Lactic	Acid	Bacteria

Milk	is	rich	in	nutrients,	but	its	most	readily
tapped	energy	source,	lactose,	is	a	sugar	found
almost	nowhere	else	in	nature.	This	means
that	not	many	microbes	have	the	necessary
digestive	enzymes	at	the	ready.	The	elegantly
simple	key	to	the	success	of	the	milk	bacteria
is	that	they	specialize	in	digesting	lactose,	and
they	extract	energy	from	lactose	by	breaking
it	down	to	lactic	acid.	Then	they	release	the
lactic	acid	into	the	milk,	where	it	accumulates
and	retards	the	growth	of	most	other
microbes,	including	those	that	cause	human
disease.	They	also	make	some	antibacterial
substances,	but	their	main	defense	is	a
pleasantly	puckery	tartness,	one	that	also



causes	the	casein	proteins	to	gather	together
in	semisolid	curds	(p.	20)	and	thicken	the
milk.

There	are	two	major	groups	of	lactic	acid
bacteria.	The	small	genus	Lactococcus	(a
combination	of	the	Latin	for	“milk”	and
“sphere”)	is	found	primarily	on	plants	(but
it’s	a	close	relative	of	Streptococcus,	whose
members	live	mainly	on	animals	and	cause	a
number	of	human	diseases!).	The	50-odd
members	of	the	genus	Lactobacillus	(“milk”
and	“rod”)	are	more	widespread	in	nature.
They’re	found	both	on	plants	and	in	animals,
including	the	stomach	of	milk-fed	calves	and
the	human	mouth,	digestive	tract,	and	vagina;
and	their	clean	living	generally	benefits	our
insides	(see	box,	p.	47).

The	bacteria	responsible	for	the	major
fermented	products	were	identified	around
1900,	and	pure	cultures	of	individual	strains
became	available	then.	Nowadays,	few	dairies
leave	their	fermentations	to	chance.	Where



traditional	spontaneously	fermented	products
may	involve	a	dozen	or	more	different
microbes,	the	industrial	versions	are	usually
limited	to	two	or	three.	This	biological
narrowing	may	affect	flavor,	consistency,	and
health	value.

Families	of	Fresh
Fermented	Milks

Unlike	most	cheeses	(p.	51),	which	undergo
several	stages	of	manipulation	and	continue	to
evolve	for	weeks	or	months,	fresh	fermented
milks	are	usually	finished	and	ready	for	eating
within	hours	or	days.	A	recent	encyclopedia
catalogued	several	hundred	different	kinds!
Most	of	them	originated	in	western	Asia,
eastern	Europe,	and	Scandinavia,	and	have
been	carried	across	the	globe	by	countless
emigrants,	many	of	whom	dipped	a	cloth	in
their	family’s	culture,	dried	it	gently,	and
guarded	it	until	they	could	moisten	it	in	the



milk	of	their	new	home.
The	handful	of	fresh	fermented	milks

familiar	in	the	West,	yogurt	and	soured
creams	and	buttermilk,	represent	two	major
families	that	developed	from	the	dairying
habits	of	peoples	in	two	very	different
climates.
Yogurt	and	its	relatives	are	native	to	a

broad	and	climatically	warm	area	of	central
and	southwest	Asia	and	the	Middle	East,	an
area	that	includes	the	probable	home	of
dairying,	and	where	some	peoples	still	store
milk	in	animal	stomachs	and	skins.	The
lactobacilli	and	streptococci	that	produce
yogurt	are	“thermophilic,”	or	heat-loving
species	that	may	have	come	from	the	cattle
themselves.	They’re	distinguished	by	their
ability	to	grow	rapidly	and	synergistically	at
temperatures	up	to	113ºF/45ºC,	and	to
generate	high	levels	of	preservative	lactic
acid.	They	can	set	milk	into	a	very	tart	gel	in
just	two	or	three	hours.



The	 curdling	 of	milk	 by	 lactic	 acid	 bacteria.
As	 the	 bacteria	 ferment	 lactose	 and	 produce
lactic	 acid,	 the	 increasingly	 acid	 conditions
cause	 the	 normal	 bundled	 micelles	 of	 casein
proteins	 (left)	to	 fall	 apart	 into	 separate
casein	 molecules,	 and	 then	 rebond	 to	 each
other	 (right).	This	general	rebonding	 forms	a
continuous	 meshwork	 of	 protein	 molecules
that	traps	the	liquid	and	fat	globules	in	small
pockets,	and	turns	the	fluid	milk	into	a	fragile
solid.

Traditional	Fresh	Fermented	Milks	and
Creams

Product Region
Yogurt Middle	East	to	India



Buttermilk Eurasia
Crème	fraîche Europe
Sour	cream Europe
Ropy	milks Scandinavia
Koumiss Central	Asia
Kefir Central	Asia

Product Microbes
Lactobacillus,	delbrueckii,

Yogurt Streptococcus	salivarius	(in	rural
areas,	assorted	lactococci	and

lactobacilli)

Buttermilk Lactococcus	lactis,	Leuconostoc
mesenteroides

Crème Lactococcus	lactis,	Leuconostoc
fraîche mesenteroides
Sour Lactococcus	lactis,	Leuconostoc
cream mesenteroides
Ropy Lactococcus	lactis,	Leuconostoc



milks mesenteroides	(Geotrichum	mold)
Koumiss Lactobacilli,	yeasts

Kefir Lactococci,	Lactobacilli,	Acetobacter,
yeasts

Product Fermentation	Temperature,	Time

Yogurt 106–114ºF/41–45ºC,	2–5	hrs,	or
86ºF/30ºC,	6–12	hrs

Buttermilk 72ºF/22ºC,	14–16	hrs
Crème	fraîche 68ºF/20ºC,	15–20	hrs
Sour	cream 72ºF/22ºC,	16	hrs
Ropy	milks 68ºF/20ºC,	18	hrs
Koumiss 80ºF/27ºC,	2–5	hrs	plus	cool	aging
Kefir 68ºF/20ºC,	24	hrs

Product Acidity
Yogurt 1–4%
Buttermilk 0.8–1.1%



Crème	fraîche 0.2–0.8%
Sour	cream 0.8%
Ropy	milks 0.8%
Koumiss 0.5–1%
Kefir 1%

Product Characteristics
Yogurt Tart,	semisolid,	smooth;	green	aroma

Buttermilk Tart,	thickened	liquid;	buttery
aroma

Crème Mildly	tart	and	thickened;
fraîche buttery	aroma
Sour Mildly	tart,	semisolid;	buttery
cream aroma
Ropy Mildly	tart,	semisolid,	slimy;
milks buttery	aroma

Koumiss Mildly	tart,	thickened	liquid;
effervescent,	0.7–2.5%	alcohol

Tart,	thickened	liquid;	effervescent,



Kefir 0.1%	alcohol

Sour	cream,	crème	fraîche,	and	buttermilk
are	 indigenous	 to	 relatively	cool	western	and
northern	 Europe,	 where	 milk	 spoils	 more
slowly	 and	 was	 often	 left	 overnight	 to
separate	 into	 cream	 for	 buttermaking.	 The
lactococci	 and	Leuconostoc	 species	 that
produce	 them	are	“mesophilic,”	or	moderate-
temperature	lovers	that	probably	first	got	into
milk	from	particles	of	pasturage	on	the	cows’
udders.	 They	 prefer	 temperatures	 around
85ºF/30ºC	 but	 will	 work	 well	 below	 that
range,	 and	 develop	moderate	 levels	 of	 lactic
acid	during	a	slow	fermentation	 lasting	12	 to
24	hours.

Yogurt

Yogurt	is	the	Turkish	word	for	milk	that	has
been	fermented	into	a	tart,	semisolid	mass;	it
comes	from	a	root	meaning	“thick.”



Essentially	the	same	product	has	been	made
for	millennia	from	eastern	Europe	and	North
Africa	across	central	Asia	to	India,	where	it
goes	by	a	variety	of	names	and	is	used	for	a
variety	of	purposes:	it’s	eaten	on	its	own,
diluted	into	drinks,	mixed	into	dressings,	and
used	as	an	ingredient	in	soups,	baked	goods,
and	sweets.

The	Health	Benefits	of	Fermented	Milks
The	 bacteria	 in	 dairy	 products	 may	 do
more	for	us	than	just	predigest	lactose	and
create	flavor.	Recent	research	findings	lend
some	 support	 to	 the	 ancient	 and
widespread	 belief	 that	 yogurt	 and	 other
cultured	milks	 can	 actively	 promote	 good
health.	 Early	 in	 the	 20th	 century,	 the
Russian	 Nobelist	 Ilya	 Metchnikov	 (who
discovered	 that	 white	 blood	 cells	 fight
bacterial	 infection)	 gave	 a	 scientific
rationale	 to	 this	 belief,	 when	 he	 proposed
that	 the	 lactic	 acid	 bacteria	 in	 fermented



milks	 eliminate	 toxic	 microbes	 in	 our
digestive	system	that	otherwise	shorten	our
lives.	 Hence	 Dr.	 James	 Empringham’s
charming	 title	 of	 1926:	Intestinal
Gardening	for	the	Prolongation	of	Youth.

Metchnikov	 was	 prescient.	 Research
over	 the	 last	 couple	 of	 decades	 has
established	that	certain	lactic	acid	bacteria,
the	 Bifidobacteria,	 are	 fostered	 by	 breast
milk,	 do	 colonize	 the	 infant	 intestine,	 and
help	keep	it	healthy	by	acidifying	it	and	by
producing	various	antibacterial	substances.
Once	we’re	weaned	onto	a	mixed	diet,	 the
Bifidobacterial	 majority	 in	 the	 intestine
recedes	 in	 favor	 of	 a	mixed	population	 of
Streptococcus,	Staphylococcus,	E.	coli,	and
yeasts.	 The	 standard	 industrial	 yogurt	 and
buttermilk	bacteria	are	specialized	to	grow
well	 in	 milk	 and	 can’t	 survive	 inside	 the
human	 body.	 But	 other	 bacteria	 found	 in
traditional,	spontaneously	fermented	milks
—	Lactobacillus	 fermentum,	 L.	 casei,	 and



L.	 brevis,	 for	 example	 —	 as	 well	 as	L.
plantarum	from	pickled	vegetables,	and	the
intestinal	native	L.	acidophilus,	do	take	up
residence	 in	 us.	Particular	 strains	 of	 these
bacteria	variously	adhere	to	and	shield	the
intestinal	 wall,	 secrete	 antibacterial
compounds,	 boost	 the	 body’s	 immune
response	 to	 particular	 disease	 microbes,
dismantle	 cholesterol	 and	 cholesterol-
consuming	 bile	 acids,	 and	 reduce	 the
production	of	potential	carcinogens.

These	 activities	 may	 not	 amount	 to
prolonging	our	youth,	but	they’re	certainly
desirable!	 Increasingly,	 manufacturers	 are
adding	 “probiotic”	 Lactobacilli	 and	 even
Bifidobacteria	 to	 their	 cultured	 milk
products,	 and	 note	 that	 fact	 on	 the	 label.
Such	 products,	 approximations	 of	 the
original	fermented	milks	that	contained	an
even	more	diverse	bacterial	flora,	allow	us
to	 plant	 our	 inner	 gardens	 with	 the	 most
companionable	 microbes	 we’re	 currently



aware	of.
Yogurt	remained	an	exotic	curiosity	in

Europe	until	early	in	the	20th	century,	when
the	Nobel	Prize–winning	immunologist	Ilya
Metchnikov	connected	the	longevity	of
certain	groups	in	Bulgaria,	Russia,	France,
and	the	United	States	with	their	consumption
of	fermented	milks,	which	he	theorized	would
acidify	the	digestive	tract	and	prevent
pathogenic	bacteria	from	growing	(see	box,	p.
47).	Factory-scale	production	and	milder
yogurts	flavored	with	fruit	were	developed	in
the	late	1920s,	and	broader	popularity	came	in
the	1960s	with	Swiss	improvements	in	the
inclusion	of	flavors	and	fruits	and	the	French
development	of	a	stable,	creamy	stirred
version.

The	 Yogurt	 Symbiosis 	 By	 contrast	 to	 the
complex	 and	 variable	 flora	 of	 traditional
yogurts,	 the	 industrial	 version	 is	 reduced	 to
the	 essentials.	 Standard	 yogurt	 contains	 just



two	 kinds	 of	 bacteria,	Lactobacillus
delbrueckii	 subspecies	bulgaricus,	 and
Streptococcus	 salivarius	 subspecies
thermophilus.	 Each	 bacterium	 stimulates	 the
growth	 of	 the	 other,	 and	 the	 combination
acidifies	 the	 milk	 more	 rapidly	 than	 either
partner	 on	 its	 own.	 Initially	 the	 streptococci
are	most	 active.	 Then	 as	 the	 acidity	 exceeds
0.5%,	 the	 acid-sensitive	 streptococci	 slow
down,	 and	 the	 hardier	 lactobacilli	 take	 over
and	bring	the	final	acidity	to	1%	or	more.	The
flavor	 compounds	 produced	 by	 the	 bacteria
are	 dominated	 by	 acetaldehyde,	 which
provides	 the	 characteristic	 refreshing
impression	of	green	apples.

Making	Yogurt	There	are	two	basic	stages	in
yogurt	making:	preparing	the	milk	by	heating
and	 partly	 cooling	 it;	 and	 fermenting	 the
warm	milk.

The	 Milk	 Yogurt	 is	 made	 from	 all	 sorts	 of
milk;	 sheep	and	goat	were	probably	 the	 first.



Reduced-fat	 milks	 make	 especially	 firm
yogurt	because	manufacturers	mask	their	lack
of	 fat	 by	 adding	 extra	 milk	 proteins,	 which
add	 density	 to	 the	 acid-coagulated	 protein
network.	 (Manufacturers	 may	 also	 add
gelatin,	 starch,	 and	 other	 stabilizers	 to	 help
prevent	 separation	 of	 whey	 and	 curd	 from
physical	 shocks	 during	 transportation	 and
handling.)

Heating	 the	Milk	 Traditionally	 the	 milk	 for
yogurt	 was	 given	 a	 prolonged	 boiling	 to
concentrate	 the	 proteins	 and	 give	 a	 firmer
texture.	 Today,	 manufacturers	 can	 boost
protein	 content	 by	 adding	 dry	 milk	 powder,
but	they	still	cook	the	milk,	for	30	minutes	at
185ºF/85ºC	 or	 at	 195ºF/90ºC	 for	 10	minutes.
These	 treatments	 improve	 the	 consistency	 of
the	 yogurt	 by	 denaturing	 the	 whey	 protein
lactoglobulin,	 whose	 otherwise	 unreactive
molecules	 then	 participate	 by	 clustering	 on
the	 surfaces	 of	 the	 casein	 particles	 (p.	 20).



With	 the	 helpful	 interference	 of	 the
lactoglobulins,	 the	 casein	 particles	 can	 only
bond	 to	 each	 other	 at	 a	 few	 spots,	 and	 so
gather	 not	 in	 clusters	 but	 in	 a	 fine	matrix	 of
chains	 that	 is	much	 better	 at	 retaining	 liquid
in	its	small	interstices.

The	 Fermentation	 Once	 the	 milk	 has	 been
heated,	 it’s	 cooled	 down	 to	 the	 desired
fermentation	 temperature,	 the	 bacteria	 are
added	 (often	 in	 a	 portion	 of	 the	 previous
batch),	 and	 the	milk	 kept	warm	 until	 it	 sets.
The	 fermentation	 temperature	 has	 a	 strong
influence	 on	 yogurt	 consistency.	 At	 the
maximum	 temperature	 well	 tolerated	 by	 the
bacteria,	 104–113ºF/40–45ºC,	 the	 bacteria
grow	and	produce	lactic	acid	rapidly,	and	the
milk	proteins	gel	in	just	two	or	three	hours;	at
86ºF/30ºC,	the	bacteria	work	far	more	slowly,
and	the	milk	takes	up	to	18	hours	to	set.	Rapid
gelling	 produces	 a	 relatively	 coarse	 protein
network	 whose	 few	 thick	 strands	 give	 it



firmness	 but	 also	 readily	 leak	 whey;	 slow
gelling	produces	a	 finer,	more	delicate,	more
intricately	branched	network	whose	individual
strands	 are	 weaker	 but	 whose	 smaller	 pores
are	better	at	retaining	the	whey.

Frozen	Yogurt 	Frozen	yogurt	became	popular
in	 the	1970s	and	 ’80s	as	a	 low-fat,	 “healthy”
alternative	to	ice	cream.	In	fact,	frozen	yogurt
is	 essentially	 ice	milk	whose	mix	 includes	 a
small	dose	of	yogurt;	 the	standard	proportion
is	4	to	1.	Depending	on	the	mixing	procedure,
the	 yogurt	 bacteria	 may	 survive	 in	 large
numbers	or	be	largely	eliminated.

Soured	Creams	and	Buttermilk,	Including	Crème	Fraîche

Before	the	advent	of	the	centrifugal	separator,
butter	was	made	in	western	Europe	by
allowing	raw	milk	to	stand	overnight	or
longer,	skimming	off	the	cream	that	rose	to
the	top,	and	churning	the	cream.	During	the



hours	of	gravity	separation,	bacteria	would
grow	spontaneously	in	the	milk	and	give	the
cream	and	the	butter	made	from	it	a
characteristic	aroma	and	tartness.

“Cream	cultures”	is	a	convenient
shorthand	for	products	that	are	now
intentionally	seeded	with	these	same	bacteria,
which	are	various	species	of	Lactococcus	and
Leuconostoc,	and	have	three	important
characteristics.	They	grow	best	at	moderate
temperatures,	well	below	the	typical
temperature	of	yogurt	fermentation;	they’re
only	moderate	acid-producers,	so	the	milks
and	creams	they	ferment	never	get	extremely
sour;	and	certain	strains	have	the	ability	to
convert	a	minor	milk	component,	citrate,	into
a	warmly	aromatic	compound	called	diacetyl
that	miraculously	complements	the	flavor	of
butterfat.	It’s	fascinating	that	this	single
bacterial	product	is	so	closely	associated	with
the	flavor	of	butter	that	all	by	itself,	diacetyl
makes	foods	taste	buttery:	even	chardonnay



wines	(p.	730).	To	accentuate	this	flavor	note,
manufacturers	sometimes	add	citrate	to	the
milk	or	cream	before	fermentation,	and	they
ferment	in	the	cool	conditions	that	favor
diacetyl	production.

Crème	Fraîche	 Crème	 fraîche	 is	 a	 versatile
preparation.	 Thick,	 tart,	 and	 with	 an	 aroma
that	can	be	delicately	nutty	or	buttery,	 it	 is	a
wonderful	 complement	 to	 fresh	 fruit,	 to
caviar,	 and	 to	 certain	pastries.	And	 thanks	 to
its	 high	 fat	 and	 correspondingly	 low	 protein
content,	 it	 can	 be	 cooked	 in	 a	 sauce	 or	 even
boiled	down	without	curdling.

In	France	today,	crème	fraîche	means
cream	with	30%	fat	that	has	been	pasteurized
at	moderate	temperatures,	not	UHT
pasteurized	(p.	22)	or	sterilized.	(Fraîche
means	“cool”	or	“fresh.”)	It	may,	however,	be
either	liquid	(liquide,	fleurette)	or	thick
(épaisse).	The	liquid	version	is	unfermented
and	has	an	official	refrigerated	shelf	life	of	15



days.	The	thick	version	is	fermented	with	the
typical	cream	culture	for	15	to	20	hours,	and
has	a	shelf	life	of	30	days.	As	with	all
fermented	milks,	the	thickening	is	an
indication	that	the	product	has	reached	a
certain	acidity	(0.8%,	pH	4.6)	and	so	a	distinct
tartness.	Commercial	American	crème	fraîche
is	made	essentially	as	the	French	fermented
version	is,	though	some	manufacturers	add	a
small	amount	of	rennet	for	a	thicker
consistency.	A	distinctly	buttery	flavor	is
found	in	products	made	with	Jersey	and
Guernsey	milks	(rich	in	citrate)	and	with
diacetyl-producing	strains	of	bacteria.

Making	 Crème	 Fraîche	 in	 the	 Kitchen	 A
home	 version	 of	 crème	 fraîche	 can	 be	 made
by	 adding	 some	 cultured	 buttermilk	 or	 sour
cream,	which	 contain	 cream-culture	 bacteria,
to	 heavy	 cream	 (1	 tablespoon	 per	 cup/15	ml
per	250	ml),	and	letting	it	stand	at	a	cool	room
temperature	for	12	to	18	hours	or	until	thick.



Sour	 Cream	 Sour	 cream	 is	 essentially	 a
leaner,	firmer,	less	versatile	version	of	crème
fraîche.	At	 around	 20%	milk	 fat,	 it	 contains
enough	protein	that	cooking	temperatures	will
curdle	it.	Unless	it	is	used	to	enrich	a	dish	just
before	 serving,	 then,	 it	 will	 give	 a	 slightly
grainy	appearance	and	 texture.	Sour	cream	 is
especially	 prominent	 in	 central	 and	 eastern
Europe,	where	it	has	 traditionally	been	added
to	 soups	 and	 stews	 (goulash,	 borscht).
Immigrants	brought	a	taste	for	it	to	American
cities	 in	 the	 19th	 century,	 and	 by	 the	middle
of	the	20th	it	had	become	fully	naturalized	as
a	base	for	dips	and	salad	dressings,	a	topping
for	baked	potatoes,	and	an	ingredient	in	cakes.
American	 sour	 cream	 is	 heavier-bodied	 than
the	European	original	thanks	to	the	practice	of
passing	 the	 cream	 through	 a	 homogenizer
twice	 before	 culturing	 it.	 A	 small	 dose	 of
rennet	 is	 sometimes	 added	with	 the	 bacteria;
this	 enzyme	 causes	 the	 casein	 proteins	 to
coagulate	into	a	firmer	gel.



A	nonfermented	imitation	called	“acidified
sour	cream”	is	made	by	coagulating	the	cream
with	pure	acid.	“Sour	creams”	labeled	“low-
fat”	and	“nonfat”	replace	butterfat	with	starch,
plant	gums,	and	dried	milk	protein.

Buttermilk	 Most	 “buttermilk”	 sold	 in	 the
United	 States	 is	 not	 buttermilk	 at	 all.	 True
buttermilk	 is	 the	 low-fat	 portion	 of	 milk	 or
cream	remaining	after	 it	has	been	churned	 to
make	butter.	Traditionally,	that	milk	or	cream
would	have	begun	to	ferment	before	churning,
and	afterwards	the	buttermilk	would	continue
to	thicken	and	develop	flavor.	With	the	advent
of	 centrifugal	 cream	 separators	 in	 the	 19th
century,	 buttermaking	 produced	 “sweet”
unfermented	 buttermilk,	which	 could	 be	 sold
as	 such	 or	 cultured	 with	 lactic	 bacteria	 to
develop	the	traditional	flavor	and	consistency.
In	 the	 United	 States,	 a	 shortage	 of	 true
buttermilk	 shortly	 after	World	War	 II	 led	 to
the	 success	 of	 an	 imitation,	 “cultured



buttermilk,”	 made	 from	 ordinary	 skim	 milk
and	fermented	until	acid	and	thick.

What’s	the	difference?	True	buttermilk	is
less	acid,	subtler	and	more	complex	in	flavor,
and	more	prone	to	off-flavors	and	spoilage.	Its
remnants	of	fat	globule	membranes	are	rich	in
emulsifiers	like	lecithin,	and	make	it
especially	valuable	for	preparing	smooth,
fine-textured	foods	of	all	kinds,	from	ice
cream	to	baked	goods.	(Its	excellence	for
emulsifying	led	to	the	Pennsylvania	Dutch
using	it	as	a	base	for	red	barn	paint!)	Cultured
buttermilk	is	useful	too;	it	imparts	a	rich,
tangy	flavor	and	tenderness	to	griddle	cakes
and	many	baked	goods.

U.S.	“cultured	buttermilk”	is	made	by
giving	skim	or	low-fat	milk	the	standard
yogurt	heat	treatment	to	produce	a	finer
protein	gel,	then	cooling	it	and	fermenting	it
with	cream	cultures	until	it	gels.	The	gelled
milk	is	cooled	to	stop	the	fermentation	and
gently	agitated	to	break	the	curd	into	a	thick



but	smooth	liquid.	“Bulgarian	buttermilk”	is	a
version	of	cultured	buttermilk	in	which	the
cream	cultures	are	supplemented	or	replaced
by	yogurt	cultures,	and	fermented	at	a	higher
temperature	to	a	higher	acidity.	It’s	noticeably
more	tart	and	gelatinous,	with	the	apple-like
sharpness	typical	of	yogurt.

Ropy	Scandinavian	Milks
A	 distinctive	 subfamily	 among	 the	 cream
cultures	 are	 the	 “ropy”	 milks	 of
Scandinavia,	 so-called	 because	 they’re
more	 than	 stringy:	 lift	 a	 spoonful	 of
F i n n i s h	viili,	 Swedish	långfil,	 or
Norwegian	tättemjölk,	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 the
bowl	 follows	 it	 into	 the	 air.	 Some	 ropy
milks	are	so	cohesive	that	they’re	cut	with
a	 knife.	 This	 consistency	 is	 created	 by
particular	strains	of	cream	culture	bacteria
that	 produce	 long	 strands	 of	 starch-like
carbohydrate.	 The	 stretchy	 carbohydrate
absorbs	 water	 and	 sticks	 to	 casein



particles,	 so	manufacturers	 are	 using	 ropy
strains	 of	Streptococcus	 salivarius	 as
natural	 stabilizers	 of	 yogurt	 and	 other
cultured	products.

Cooking	with
Fermented	Milks

Most	cultured	milk	products	are	especially
susceptible	to	curdling	when	made	into	sauces
or	added	to	other	hot	foods.	Fresh	milk	and
cream	are	relatively	stable,	but	the	extended
heat	treatment	and	high	acidity	characteristic
of	cultured	products	have	already	caused
some	protein	coagulation.	Anything	the	cook
does	to	push	this	coagulation	further	will
cause	the	protein	network	to	shrink	and
squeeze	out	some	of	the	whey	and	produce
distinct	white	particles	—	protein	curds	—
floating	in	the	thinned	liquid.	Heat,	salt,
additional	acid,	and	vigorous	stirring	can	all
cause	curdling.	The	key	to	maintaining	a



smooth	texture	is	gentleness.	Heat	gradually
and	moderately,	and	stir	slowly.

There	is	a	common	misconception	that
crème	fraîche	is	uniquely	immune	to	curdling.
It’s	true	that	while	yogurt,	sour	cream,	and
buttermilk	all	will	curdle	if	they	get	anywhere
near	the	boil,	crème	fraîche	can	be	boiled	with
impunity.	But	this	versatility	has	nothing	to
do	with	fermentation:	it’s	a	simple	matter	of
fat	content.	Heavy	cream,	at	38	to	40%	fat,
has	so	little	protein	that	it	doesn’t	form
noticeable	curds	(p.	29).

Cheese

Cheese	is	one	of	the	great	achievements	of
humankind.	Not	any	cheese	in	particular,	but
cheese	in	its	astonishing	multiplicity,	created
anew	every	day	in	the	dairies	of	the	world.
Cheese	began	as	a	simple	way	of
concentrating	and	preserving	the	bounty	of	the
milking	season.	Then	the	attentiveness	and



ingenuity	of	its	makers	slowly	transformed	it
into	something	more	than	mere	physical
nourishment:	into	an	intense,	concentrated
expression	of	pastures	and	animals,	of
microbes	and	time.

The	Evolution	of	Cheese

Cheese	is	a	modified	form	of	milk	that	is
more	concentrated,	more	durable,	and	more
flavorful	food	than	milk	is.	It’s	made	more
concentrated	by	curdling	milk	and	removing
much	of	its	water.	The	nutritious	curds	of
protein	and	fat	are	made	more	durable	by	the
addition	of	acid	and	salt,	which	discourage	the
growth	of	spoilage	microbes.	And	they’re
made	more	flavorful	by	the	controlled	activity
of	milk	and	microbe	enzymes,	which	break
the	protein	and	fat	molecules	apart	into	small
flavorful	fragments.

Unusual	Fermented	Milks:	Koumiss	and



Kefir
Because	 milk	 contains	 an	 appreciable
amount	 of	 the	 sugar	 lactose,	 it	 can	 be
fermented	like	grape	juice	and	other	sugary
fluids	 into	 an	 alcoholic	 liquid.	 This
fermentation	 requires	 unusual	 lactose-
fermenting	 yeasts	 (species	 of
Saccharomyces,	 Torula,	 Candida, 	 and
Kluyveromyces).	 For	 thousands	 of	 years,
the	 nomads	 of	 central	 Asia	 have	 made
koumiss	 from	 mare’s	 milk,	 which	 is
especially	 rich	 in	 lactose,	 and	 this	 tart,
effervescent	drink,	with	1–2%	alcohol	and
0.5–1%	 acid,	 remains	 very	 popular	 there
and	 in	 Russia.	 Other	 European	 and
Scandinavian	peoples	have	made	alcoholic
products	 from	 other	 milks,	 as	 well	 as
sparkling	“wine”	from	whey.

Another	 remarkable	 fermented	 milk
little	 known	 in	 the	West	 is	kefir,	which	 is
most	popular	in	the	Caucasus	and	may	well
have	 originated	 there.	 Unlike	 other



fermented	milks,	 in	which	 the	 fermenting
microbes	 are	 evenly	 dispersed,	 kefir	 is
made	by	large,	complex	particles	known	as
kefir	grains,	which	house	a	dozen	or	more
kinds	 of	 microbes,	 including	 lactobacilli,
lactococci,	 yeasts,	 and	 vinegar	 bacteria.
This	 symbiotic	 association	 grows	 at	 cool
room	 temperatures	 to	 produce	 a	 tart,
slightly	 alcoholic,	 effervescent,	 creamy
product.
The	long	evolution	of	cheese	probably

began	around	5,000	years	ago,	when	people	in
warm	central	Asia	and	the	Middle	East
learned	that	they	could	preserve	naturally
soured,	curdled	milk	by	draining	off	the
watery	whey	and	salting	the	concentrated
curds.	At	some	point	they	also	discovered	that
the	texture	of	the	curd	became	more	pliable
and	more	cohesive	if	the	curdling	took	place
in	an	animal	stomach	or	with	pieces	of
stomach	in	the	same	container.	These	first
cheeses	may	have	resembled	modern	brine-



cured	feta,	which	is	still	an	important	cheese
type	in	the	eastern	Mediterranean	and	the
Balkans.	The	earliest	good	evidence	of
cheesemaking	known	to	date,	a	residue	found
in	an	Egyptian	pot,	dates	from	around	2300
BCE.

The	 Ingredient	 Essential	 to	 Diverse
Cheeses:	 Time	 This	 basic	 technique	 of
curdling	 milk	 with	 the	 help	 of	 the	 stomach
extract	 now	 called	 rennet,	 then	 draining	 and
brining	the	curds,	was	eventually	carried	west
and	north	 into	Europe.	Here	people	gradually
discovered	that	curds	would	keep	well	enough
in	 these	 cooler	 regions	 with	 much	 milder
treatments:	a	less	puckery	souring	and	only	a
modest	 brining	 or	 salting.	 This	 was	 the
discovery	 that	 opened	 the	 door	 to	 the	 great
diversification	 of	 cheeses,	 because	 it
introduced	 a	 fifth	 ingredient	 after	milk,	milk
bacteria,	 rennet,	 and	 salt:	 time.	 In	 the
presence	of	moderate	acidity	and	salt,	cheese



became	 a	 hospitable	 medium	 for	 the
continuing	growth	and	activity	of	a	variety	of
microbes	 and	 their	 enzymes.	 In	 a	 sense,
cheese	 came	 to	 life.	 It	 became	 capable	 of
pronounced	 development	 and	 change;	 it
entered	 the	 cyclical	 world	 of	 birth,
maturation,	and	decline.

When	were	modern	cheeses	born?	We
don’t	really	know,	but	it	was	well	before
Roman	times.	In	his	Rei	rusticae	(“On	Rustic
Matters,”	about	65	CE),	Columella	describes	at
length	what	amounts	to	standard
cheesemaking	practice.	The	curdling	was	done
with	rennet	or	various	plant	fluids.	The	whey
was	pressed	out,	the	curds	sprinkled	with	salt,
and	the	fresh	cheese	put	in	a	shady	place	to
harden.	Salting	and	hardening	were	repeated,
and	the	ripe	cheese	was	then	washed,	dried,
and	packed	for	storage	and	shipping.	Pliny,
who	also	wrote	in	the	first	century,	said	that
Rome	most	esteemed	cheeses	from	its
provincial	outposts,	especially	Nîmes	in



southern	France,	and	the	French	and
Dalmatian	Alps.

The	Growth	of	Diversity	During	the	10	or	12
centuries	 after	Rome’s	 strong	 rule,	 the	 art	 of
cheesemaking	progressed	in	the	feudal	estates
and	 monasteries,	 which	 worked	 steadily	 at
settling	 in	 forested	 areas	 or	 mountain
meadows	 and	 clearing	 the	 land	 for	 grazing.
These	 widely	 dispersed	 communities
developed	 their	 cheesemaking	 techniques
independently	 to	 suit	 their	 local	 landscape,
climate,	 materials,	 and	 markets.	 Small,
perishable	 soft	 cheeses,	 often	made	 from	 the
milk	 of	 a	 few	 household	 animals,	 were
consumed	locally	and	quickly	and	could	only
be	 sent	 to	 nearby	 towns.	 Large	 hard	 cheeses
required	 the	milk	 of	many	 animals	 and	were
often	 made	 by	 cooperatives	 (the	 Gruyère
fruiteries	 began	 around	 1200);	 they	 kept
indefinitely	 and	 could	 be	 transported	 to
market	from	distant	regions.	The	result	was	a



remarkable	 diversity	 of	 traditional	 cheeses,
which	number	from	20	to	50	in	most	countries
and	several	hundred	in	France	alone,	thanks	to
its	size	and	range	of	climates.

Cheeses	as	Artifacts
Behind	every	cheese	there	is	a	pasture	of	a
different	 green	 under	 a	 different	 sky:
meadows	encrusted	with	salt	that	the	tides
of	 Normandy	 deposit	 every	 evening;
meadows	 perfumed	 with	 aromas	 in	 the
windy	 sunlight	 of	 Provence;	 there	 are
different	herds,	with	their	shelters	and	their
movements	 across	 the	 countryside;	 there
are	 secret	methods	 handed	 down	 over	 the
centuries.	 This	 shop	 is	 a	 museum:	 Mr.
Palomar,	visiting	it,	feels	as	he	does	in	the
Louvre,	 behind	 every	 displayed	 object	 the
presence	 of	 the	 civilization	 that	 gave	 it
form	and	takes	form	from	it.

—	Italo	Calvino,	Palomar,	1983



Charlemagne	Learns	to	Eat	Moldy
Cheese

During	the	Middle	Ages,	when	cheese	was
evolving	into	a	finely	crafted	food,	even	an
emperor	 of	France	had	 to	 learn	 a	 thing	or
two	 about	 how	 to	 appreciate	 it.	About	 50
years	after	Charlemagne’s	death	in	814,	an
anonymous	monk	at	the	monastery	of	Saint
Gall	 wrote	 a	 biography	 of	 him	 that
includes	this	fascinating	anecdote	(slightly
modified	 from	Early	 Lives	 of
Charlemagne,	 transl.	 A.	 J.	 Grant,	 1922).
Charlemagne	 was	 traveling,	 and	 found
himself	 at	 a	 bishop’s	 residence	 at
dinnertime.

Now	on	that	day,	being	the	sixth	day	of	the
week,	he	was	not	willing	to	eat	the	flesh	of
beast	or	bird.	The	bishop,	being	by	reason
of	the	nature	of	the	place	unable	to	procure
fish	immediately,	ordered	some	excellent
cheese,	white	with	fat,	to	be	placed	before



him.	Charles…required	nothing	else,	but
taking	up	his	knife	and	throwing	away	the
mold,	which	seemed	to	him	abominable,	he
ate	the	white	of	the	cheese.	Then	the
bishop,	who	was	standing	nearby	like	a
servant,	drew	close	and	said	“Why	do	you
do	that,	lord	Emperor?	You	are	throwing
away	the	best	part.”	On	the	persuasion	of
the	bishop,	Charles…put	a	piece	of	the
mold	in	his	mouth,	and	slowly	ate	it	and
swallowed	it	like	butter.	Then,	approving
the	bishop’s	advice,	he	said	“Very	true,	my
good	host,”	and	he	added,	“Be	sure	to	send
me	every	year	to	Aix	two	cartloads	of	such
cheeses.”
The	 word	 I’ve	 translated	 as	 “mold”	 is
aerugo	 in	 the	 Latin:	 literally,	 “the	 rust	 of
copper.”	The	cheese	isn’t	named,	and	some
writers	 have	 deduced	 that	 it	 was	 a	 Brie,
which	 then	 had	 an	 external	 coat	 of	 gray-
green	 mold,	 much	 the	 same	 color	 as
weathered	 copper.	 But	 I	 think	 it	 was



probably	 more	 like	 Roquefort,	 a	 sheep’s-
milk	 cheese	 veined	 internally	 with	 blue-
green	mold.	The	rest	of	the	anecdote	fits	a
large,	firm,	internally	ripened	cheese	better
than	 a	 thin,	 soft	 Brie.	 It	 also	 marks	 what
may	have	been	the	first	appointment	of	an
official	cheese	affineur!

The	bishop	was	alarmed	at	the
impossibility	of	the	task	and…rejoined:
“My	lord,	I	can	procure	the	cheeses,	but	I
cannot	tell	which	are	of	this	quality	and
which	of	another….”	Then	Charles…spoke
thus	to	the	bishop,	who	from	childhood	had
known	such	cheeses	and	yet	could	not	test
them.	“Cut	them	in	two,”	he	said,	“then
fasten	together	with	a	skewer	those	that
you	find	to	be	of	the	right	quality	and	keep
them	in	your	cellar	for	a	time	and	then
send	them	to	me.	The	rest	you	may	keep
for	yourself	and	your	clergy	and	family.”

Cheeses	of	Reputation	The	art	of



cheesemaking	had	progressed	enough	by	late
medieval	times	to	inspire	connoisseurship.
The	French	court	received	shipments	from
Brie,	Roquefort,	Comté,	Maroilles,	and
Geromé	(Münster).	Cheeses	made	near	Parma
in	Italy	and	near	Appenzell	in	Switzerland
were	renowned	throughout	Europe.	In	Britain,
Cheshire	cheese	was	famous	by	Elizabethan
times,	and	Cheddar	and	Stilton	by	the	18th
century.	Cheese	played	two	roles:	for	the
poor,	fresh	or	briefly	ripened	types	were
staple	food,	sometimes	called	“white	meat,”
while	the	rich	enjoyed	a	variety	of	aged
cheeses	as	one	course	of	their	multicourse
feasts.	By	the	early	19th	century,	the	French
gastronome	Brillat-Savarin	found	cheese	to	be
an	aesthetic	necessity:	he	wrote	that	“a	dessert
without	cheese	is	like	a	beautiful	woman	who
is	missing	an	eye.”	The	golden	age	of	cheese
was	probably	the	late	19th	and	early	20th
centuries,	when	the	art	was	fully	developed,
local	styles	had	developed	and	matured,	and



the	railroads	brought	country	products	to	the
city	while	they	were	still	at	their	best.

Modern	 Decline	 The	 modern	 decline	 of
cheesemaking	 has	 its	 roots	 in	 that	 same
golden	 age.	Cheese	 and	 butter	 factories	were
born	 in	 the	United	 States,	 a	 country	with	 no
cheesemaking	tradition,	just	70	years	after	the
Revolution.	 In	 1851,	 an	 upstate	 New	 York
dairy	farmer	named	Jesse	Williams	agreed	to
make	 cheese	 for	 neighboring	 farms,	 and	 by
the	end	of	the	Civil	War	there	were	hundreds
of	such	“associated”	dairies,	whose	economic
advantages	 brought	 them	 success	 throughout
the	 industrialized	 world.	 In	 the	 1860s	 and
’70s,	 pharmacies	 and	 then	 pharmaceutical
companies	 began	 mass-producing	 rennet.	 At
the	turn	of	the	century	scientists	in	Denmark,
the	 United	 States,	 and	 France	 brought	 more
standardization	in	 the	form	of	pure	microbial
cultures	 for	 curdling	 and	 ripening	 cheese,
which	 had	 once	 been	 accomplished	 by	 the



local,	 complex	 flora	 of	 each	 cheesemaker’s
dairy.

The	crowning	blow	to	cheese	diversity	and
quality	was	World	War	II.	In	continental
Europe,	agricultural	lands	became
battlefields,	and	dairying	was	devastated.
During	the	prolonged	recovery,	quality
standards	were	suspended,	factory	production
was	favored	for	its	economies	of	scale	and
ease	of	regulation,	and	consumers	were
grateful	for	any	approximation	of	the	prewar
good	life.	Inexpensive	standardized	cheese
rose	to	dominance.	Ever	since,	most	cheese	in
Europe	and	the	United	States	has	been	made
in	factories.	Even	in	France,	which	in	1973
established	a	certification	program	(“Fromage
appellation	d’origine	contrôlée”)	to	indicate
that	a	cheese	has	been	made	by	traditional
methods	and	in	the	traditional	area	of
production,	less	than	20%	of	the	total	national
production	qualifies.	In	the	United	States,	the
market	for	process	cheese,	a	mixture	of	aged



and	fresh	cheeses	blended	with	emulsifiers
and	repasteurized,	is	now	larger	than	the
market	for	“natural”	cheese,	which	itself	is
almost	exclusively	factory-made.

At	the	beginning	of	the	21st	century,	most
cheese	is	an	industrial	product,	an	expression
not	of	diverse	natural	and	human	particulars,
but	of	the	monolithic	imperatives	of
standardization	and	efficient	mass	production.
Industrial	cheese	also	requires	great
ingenuity,	has	its	economic	merits,	and	suits
its	primary	role	as	an	ingredient	in	fast-food
sandwiches,	snacks,	and	prepared	foods	(a
role	that	doubled	U.S.	per	capita	cheese
consumption	between	1975	and	2001).	But	in
its	own	way,	industrial	cheese	is	a	throwback
to	primitive	cheese,	a	simplified	food	that
could	be	and	is	made	anywhere,	and	that
tastes	of	nowhere	in	particular.

The	 Revival	 of	 Tradition	 and	 Quality
Though	 finely	crafted	cheeses	will	 always	be



a	 minor	 part	 of	 modern	 dairy	 production,
recent	 years	 have	 brought	 modest	 signs	 of
hope.	 The	 postwar	 era	 and	 its	 economic
limitations	 have	 faded.	 Some	 European
countries	 have	 seen	 a	 revival	 of	 appreciation
for	 traditional	 cheeses,	 and	 air	 travel	 has
brought	 them	 to	 the	 attention	 of	 an	 ever-
growing	number	of	 food	 lovers.	Once	 “white
meat”	for	 the	rural	poor,	 they	are	now	pricey
treats	for	the	urban	middle	class.	In	the	United
States,	 a	 few	 small	 producers	 blend	 respect
for	 tradition	with	21st	century	understanding,
and	 make	 superb	 cheeses	 of	 their	 own.	 For
enthusiasts	willing	to	seek	them	out,	the	world
still	 offers	 delightful	 expressions	 of	 this
ancient	craft.

The	Ingredients	of	Cheese

The	three	principal	ingredients	of	cheese	are
milk,	rennet	enzymes	that	curdle	the	milk,	and
microbes	that	acidify	and	flavor	the	milk.



Each	strongly	influences	the	character	and
quality	of	the	final	cheese.

Milks	 Cheese	 is	 milk	 concentrated	 five-	 to
tenfold	by	 the	removal	of	water;	so	 the	basic
character	 of	 the	 milk	 defines	 the	 basic
character	 of	 the	 cheese.	Milk	 character	 is	 in
turn	 determined	 by	 the	 kind	 of	 animal	 that
produces	 it,	 what	 the	 animal	 eats,	 the
microbes	that	inhabit	the	milk,	and	whether	it
is	raw	or	pasteurized.

Species	 The	milks	 of	 cows,	 sheep,	 and	 goats
taste	 different	 from	 each	 other	 (p.	 21),	 and
their	 cheeses	 do	 too.	 Cow’s	 milk	 is	 more
neutral	 than	 other	 milks.	 Sheep	 and	 buffalo
milk	 have	 relatively	 high	 fat	 and	 protein
contents	 and	 therefore	 make	 richer	 cheeses.
Goat’s	milk	has	a	relatively	low	proportion	of
curdle-able	 casein	 and	 usually	 produces	 a
crumbly,	less	cohesive	curd	compared	to	other
milks.



Breed	During	 the	 spread	 of	 cheesemaking	 in
the	Middle	Ages,	 hundreds	of	 different	 dairy
animal	 varieties	 were	 bred	 to	 make	 the	 best
use	 of	 local	 pasturage.	 The	 Brown	 Swiss	 is
thought	 to	 go	 back	 several	 thousand	 years.
Today,	 most	 of	 these	 locally	 adapted	 breeds
have	been	replaced	by	the	omnipresent	black-
and-white	 Holstein	 or	 Friesian,	 bred	 to
maximize	 the	 milk	 it	 yields	 on	 standardized
feed.	 Traditional	 breeds	 produce	 a	 lower
volume	of	milk,	but	a	milk	 richer	 in	protein,
fat,	and	other	desirable	cheese	constituents.

Feed:	 The	 Influence	 of	 the	 Seasons	 Today
most	 dairy	 animals	 are	 fed	 year-round	 on
silage	 and	 hay	made	 from	 just	 a	 few	 fodder
crops	 (alfalfa,	maize).	This	 standard	 regimen
produces	a	 standard,	neutral	milk	 that	can	be
made	 into	 very	 good	 cheese.	However,	 herds
let	 out	 to	 pasture	 to	 eat	 fresh	 greenery	 and
flowers	 give	 milk	 of	 greater	 aromatic
complexity	 that	 can	 make	 extraordinary



cheese.	 Thanks	 to	 newly	 sensitive	 analytical
instruments,	 dairy	 chemists	 have	 recently
verified	 what	 connoisseurs	 have	 known	 for
centuries:	an	animal’s	diet	influences	its	milk
and	the	cheese	made	from	it.	French	studies	of
alpine	 Gruyère	 found	 a	 larger	 number	 of
flavor	 compounds	 in	 cheeses	 made	 during
summer	 pasturage	 compared	 to	winter	 stable
feeding,	 and	 more	 herbaceous	 and	 floral
terpenes	 and	 other	 aromatics	 (p.	 273)	 in
mountain	cheeses	 than	cheeses	 from	the	high
plateaus,	 which	 in	 turn	 have	 more	 than
cheeses	from	the	plains	(alpine	meadows	have
more	 diverse	 vegetation	 than	 the	 grassy
lowlands).

Like	fruits,	cheeses	made	from	pasturefed
animals	are	seasonal.	The	season	depends	on
the	local	climate	—	the	summer	is	green	in
the	Alps,	the	winter	in	California	—	and	how
long	it	takes	a	particular	cheese	to	mature.
Cheeses	made	from	pasturage	are	generally
recognizable	by	their	deeper	yellow	color,	due



to	the	greater	content	of	carotenoid	pigments
in	fresh	vegetation	(p.	267).	(Bright	orange
cheeses	have	been	dyed.)

Pasteurized	and	Raw	Milks	In	modern	cheese
production,	 the	 milk	 is	 almost	 always
pasteurized	 to	 eliminate	disease	 and	 spoilage
bacteria.	This	is	really	a	practical	necessity	in
industrial	 cheesemaking,	 which	 requires	 that
milk	 be	 pooled	 and	 stored	 from	many	 farms
and	 thousands	 of	 animals.	 The	 risk	 of
contamination	 —	 which	 only	 takes	 one
diseased	 cow	 or	 dirty	 udder	—	 is	 too	 great.
Since	 the	 late	1940s,	 the	U.S.	Food	and	Drug
Administration	 has	 required	 that	 any	 cheese
made	from	unpasteurized,	“raw”	milk	must	be
aged	a	minimum	of	60	days	at	a	 temperature
above	35ºF/2ºC,	conditions	that	are	thought	to
eliminate	 whatever	 pathogens	 might	 have
been	in	the	milk;	and	since	the	early	1950s	it
has	 also	 banned	 the	 import	 of	 raw-milk
cheeses	 aged	 less	 than	 60	 days.	 This	 means



that	 soft	 cheeses	 made	 with	 raw	 milk	 are
essentially	 contraband	 in	 the	 United	 States.
The	 World	 Health	 Organization	 has
considered	 recommending	a	complete	ban	on
the	production	of	raw-milk	cheeses.

Of	course	until	barely	a	century	ago,	nearly
all	cheeses	were	made	in	small	batches	with
raw	milk,	fresh	from	the	udders	of	small	herds
whose	health	was	more	easily	monitored.	And
French,	Swiss,	and	Italian	regulations	actually
forbid	the	use	of	pasteurized	milk	for	the
traditional	production	of	a	number	of	the
world’s	greatest	cheeses,	including	Brie,
Camembert,	Comté,	Emmental,	Gruyère,	and
Parmesan.	The	reason	is	that	pasteurization
kills	useful	milk	bacteria,	and	inactivates
many	of	the	milk’s	own	enzymes.	It	thus
eliminates	two	of	the	four	or	five	sources	of
flavor	development	during	ripening,	and
prevents	traditional	cheeses	from	living	up	to
their	own	standards	of	excellence.

Pasteurization	is	no	guarantee	of	safety,



because	the	milk	or	cheese	can	be
contaminated	during	later	processing.	Nearly
all	outbreaks	of	food	poisoning	from	milk	or
cheese	in	recent	decades	have	involved
pasteurized	products.	It	will	be	genuine
progress	when	public	health	officials	help
ambitious	cheesemakers	to	ensure	the	safety
of	raw-milk	cheeses,	rather	than	making	rules
that	restrict	consumer	choice	without
significantly	reducing	risk.

The	Key	 Catalyst:	 Rennet	 The	making	 and
use	of	rennet	was	humankind’s	first	venture	in
biotechnology.	 At	 least	 2,500	 years	 ago,
shepherds	 began	 to	 use	 pieces	 of	 the	 first
stomach	 of	 a	 young	 calf,	 lamb,	 or	 goat	 to
curdle	 milk	 for	 cheese;	 and	 sometime	 later
they	 began	 to	make	 a	 brine	 extract	 from	 the
stomach.	 That	 extract	 was	 the	 world’s	 first
semipurified	 enzyme.	 Now,	 by	 means	 of
genetic	 engineering,	 modern	 biotechnology
produces	 a	 pure	 version	 of	 the	 same	 calf



enzyme,	 called	chymosin,	 in	 a	 bacterium,	 a
mold,	and	a	yeast.	Today,	most	cheese	 in	 the
United	 States	 is	 made	 with	 these	 engineered
“vegetable	 rennets,”	 and	 less	 than	 a	 quarter
with	 traditional	 rennet	 from	 calf	 stomach
(which	 is	 often	 required	 for	 traditional
European	cheeses).

The	 curdling	 of	 milk	 by	 the	 rennet	 enzyme
chymosin.	 The	 bundled	 micelles	 of	 casein	 in
milk	 are	 kept	 separate	 from	 each	 other	 by
electrically	 charged	micelle	 components	 that
repel	 each	 other	 (left).	Chymosin	 selectively
trims	away	 these	charged	kappa-caseins,	and
the	 now	 uncharged	 micelles	 bond	 to	 each
other	 to	 form	a	continuous	meshwork	 (right).
The	liquid	milk	coagulates	into	a	moist	solid.



The	Curdling	Specialist	Traditional	rennet	is
made	from	the	fourth	stomach	or	abomasum
of	a	milk-fed	calf	less	than	30	days	old,	before
chymosin	is	replaced	by	other	protein-
digesting	enzymes.	The	key	to	rennet’s
importance	in	cheesemaking	is	chymosin’s
specific	activity.	Where	other	enzymes	attack
most	proteins	at	many	points	and	break	them
into	many	pieces,	chymosin	effectively
attacks	only	one	milk	protein,	and	at	just	one
point.	Its	target	is	the	negatively	charged
kappa-casein	(p.	19)	that	repels	individual
casein	particles	from	each	other.	By	clipping
these	pieces	off,	chymosin	allows	the	casein
particles	to	bond	to	each	other	and	form	a
continuous	solid	gel,	the	curd.

Since	plain	acidity	alone	causes	milk	to
curdle,	why	do	cheesemakers	need	rennet	at
all?	There	are	two	reasons.	First,	acid
disperses	the	casein	micelle	proteins	and	their
calcium	glue	before	it	allows	the	proteins	to
come	together,	so	some	casein	and	most	of	the



calcium	are	lost	in	the	whey,	and	the
remainder	forms	a	weak,	brittle	curd.	By
contrast,	rennet	leaves	the	micelles	mostly
intact	and	causes	each	to	bond	to	several
others	into	a	firm,	elastic	curd.	Second,	the
acidity	required	to	curdle	casein	is	so	high
that	flavor-producing	enzymes	in	the	cheese
work	very	slowly	or	not	at	all.

Cheese	 Microbes	 Cheeses	 are	 decomposed
and	 recomposed	 by	 a	 colorful	 cast	 of
microbes,	 perhaps	 a	 handful	 in	most	modern
cheeses	 made	 with	 purified	 cultures,	 but
dozens	in	some	traditional	cheeses	made	with
a	portion	of	the	previous	batch’s	starter.

Starter	Bacteria	First	there	are	the	lactic	acid
bacteria	that	initially	acidify	the	milk,	persist
in	the	drained	curd,	and	generate	much	of	the
flavor	 during	 the	 ripening	 of	many	 semihard
and	 hard	 cheeses,	 including	Cheddar,	Gouda,
and	 Parmesan.	 The	 numbers	 of	 live	starter
bacteria	 in	 the	 curd	 often	 drop	 drastically



during	 cheesemaking,	 but	 their	 enzymes
survive	 and	 continue	 to	 work	 for	 months,
breaking	 down	 proteins	 into	 savory	 amino
acids	 and	 aromatic	 by-products	 (see	 box,	 p.
62).	 There	 are	 two	 broad	 groups	 of	 starters:
the	 moderate-temperature	 lactococci	 that	 are
also	 used	 to	 make	 cultured	 creams,	 and	 the
heat-loving	 lactobacilli	 and	 streptococci	 that
are	 also	 used	 to	 make	 yogurt	 (p.	 48).	 Most
cheeses	are	acidified	by	the	mesophilic	group,
while	 the	few	that	undergo	a	cooking	step	—
mozzarella,	 the	 alpine	 and	 Italian	 hard
cheeses	—	are	acidified	by	 thermophiles	 that
can	survive	and	continue	to	contribute	flavor.
Many	Swiss	and	 Italian	starters	are	still	only
semidefined	 mixtures	 of	 heat-loving	 milk
bacteria,	and	are	made	the	old-fashioned	way,
from	the	whey	of	the	previous	batch.

True	“Vegetable	Rennets”	from	Thistle
Flowers

It	 has	 been	 known	 at	 least	 since	 Roman



times	that	some	plant	materials	can	curdle
milk.	Two	have	been	used	for	centuries	 to
make	 a	 distinctive	 group	 of	 cheeses.	 In
Portugal	 and	 Spain,	 flowers	 of	 the	 wild
cardoon	 thistles	 (Cynara	 cardunculus	 and
C.	 humilis)	 have	 long	 been	 collected	 and
dried	 in	 the	 summer,	 and	 then	 soaked	 in
warm	 water	 in	 the	 winter	 to	 make	 sheep
and	goat	cheeses	(Portuguese	Serra,	Serpa,
Azeitão;	 Spanish	 Serena,	 Torta	 del	 Casar,
Pedroches).	 The	 cardoon	 rennets	 are
unsuited	 to	cow’s	milk,	which	 they	curdle
but	 also	 turn	 bitter.	 Recent	 research	 has
revealed	that	Iberian	shepherds	had	indeed
found	 a	 close	 biochemical	 relative	 of	 calf
chymosin,	which	the	thistle	flower	happens
to	concentrate	in	its	stigmas.

The	Propionibacteria	An	important	bacterium
in	Swiss	starter	cultures	is	Propionibacter
shermanii,	the	hole-maker.	The
propionibacteria	consume	the	cheese’s	lactic
acid	during	ripening,	and	convert	it	to	a



combination	of	propionic	and	acetic	acids	and
carbon	dioxide	gas.	The	acids’	aromatic
sharpness,	together	with	buttery	diacetyl,
contributes	to	the	distinctive	flavor	of
Emmental,	and	the	carbon	dioxide	forms
bubbles,	or	the	characteristic	“holes.”	The
propionibacteria	grow	slowly,	and	the
cheesemaker	must	coddle	them	along	by
ripening	the	cheese	at	an	unusually	high
temperature	—	around	75ºF/24ºC	—	for
several	weeks.	This	need	for	warmth	may
reflect	the	cheese	propionibacteria’s	original
home,	which	was	probably	animal	skin.	(At
least	three	other	species	of	propionibacteria
inhabit	moist	or	oily	areas	of	human	skin,	and
P.	acnes	takes	advantage	of	plugged	oil
glands.)

The	Smear	Bacteria	The	bacterium	that	gives
Münster,	 Epoisses,	 Limburger,	 and	 other
strong	 cheeses	 their	 pronounced	 stink,	 and
contributes	more	subtly	to	the	flavor	of	many



other	 cheeses,	 is	Brevibacterium	linens.	As	 a
group,	 the	 brevibacteria	 appear	 to	 be	 natives
of	 two	 salty	 environments:	 the	 seashore	 and
human	 skin.	 Brevibacteria	 grow	 at	 salt
concentrations	 that	 inhibit	 most	 other
microbes,	 up	 to	 15%	 (seawater	 is	 just	 3%).
Unlike	 the	 starter	 species,	 the	 brevibacteria
don’t	tolerate	acid	and	need	oxygen,	and	grow
only	 on	 the	 cheese	 surface,	 not	 inside.	 The
cheesemaker	 encourages	 them	 by	wiping	 the
cheese	periodically	with	brine,	which	causes	a
characteristic	 sticky,	 orange-red	 “smear”	 of
brevibacteria	 to	 develop.	 (The	 color	 comes
from	a	carotene-related	pigment;	exposure	 to
light	 usually	 intensifies	 the	 color.)	 They
contribute	 a	 more	 subtle	 complexity	 to
cheeses	 that	 are	 wiped	 for	 only	 part	 of	 the
ripening	 (Gruyère)	 or	 are	 ripened	 in	 humid
conditions	 (Camembert).	 Smear	 cheeses	 are
so	 reminiscent	 of	 cloistered	 human	 skin
because	 both	B.	 linens	 and	 its	 human	 cousin,
B.	 epidermidis,	 are	 very	 active	 at	 breaking



down	 protein	 into	 molecules	 with	 fishy,
sweaty,	 and	 garlicky	 aromas	 (amines,
isovaleric	 acid,	 sulfur	 compounds).	 These
small	 molecules	 can	 diffuse	 into	 the	 cheese
and	affect	both	flavor	and	texture	deep	inside.

Why	Some	People	Can’t	Stand	Cheese
The	 flavor	 of	 cheese	 can	 provoke	 ecstasy
in	 some	people	 and	disgust	 in	others.	The
17th	century	saw	the	publication	of	at	least
two	 learned	 European	 treatises	 “de
aversatione	casei,”	 or	 “on	 the	 aversion	 to
cheese.”	And	 the	 author	 of	 “Fromage”	 in
the	 18th	 century	Encyclopédie	 noted	 that
“cheese	 is	 one	 of	 those	 foods	 for	 which
certain	 people	 have	 a	 natural	 repugnance,
of	 which	 the	 cause	 is	 difficult	 to
determine.”	Today	the	cause	is	clearer.	The
fermentation	of	milk,	like	that	of	grains	or
grapes,	 is	 essentially	 a	process	of	 limited,
controlled	 spoilage.	 We	 allow	 certain
microbes	and	their	enzymes	to	decompose



the	original	food,	but	not	beyond	the	point
of	 edibility.	 In	 cheese,	 animal	 fats	 and
proteins	 are	 broken	 down	 into	 highly
odorous	 molecules.	 Many	 of	 the	 same
molecules	 are	 also	 produced	 during
uncontrolled	 spoilage,	 as	 well	 as	 by
microbial	activity	in	the	digestive	tract	and
on	moist,	warm,	 sheltered	areas	of	human
skin.

An	aversion	to	the	odor	of	decay	has	the
obvious	 biological	 value	 of	 steering	 us
away	from	possible	food	poisoning,	so	it’s
no	wonder	 that	 an	 animal	 food	 that	 gives
off	whiffs	of	shoes	and	soil	and	the	stable
takes	some	getting	used	to.	Once	acquired,
however,	 the	 taste	 for	partial	 spoilage	can
become	a	passion,	an	embrace	of	the	earthy
side	 of	 life	 that	 expresses	 itself	 best	 in
paradoxes.	 The	 French	 call	 a	 particular
plant	 fungus	 the	pourriture	 noble,	 or
“noble	 rot,”	 for	 its	 influence	 on	 the
character	 of	 certain	 wines,	 and	 the



Surrealist	poet	Leon-Paul	Fargue	is	said	to
have	 honored	Camembert	 cheese	with	 the
title	les	pieds	de	Dieu	—	the	feet	of	God.

The	Molds,	Especially	Penicillium	Molds	are
microbes	that	require	oxygen	to	grow,	can
tolerate	drier	conditions	than	bacteria,	and
produce	powerful	protein-	and	fat-	digesting
enzymes	that	improve	the	texture	and	flavor
of	certain	cheeses.	Molds	readily	develop	on
the	rind	of	almost	any	cheese	that	is	not
regularly	wiped	to	prevent	it.	The	French	St.-
Nectaire	develops	a	surface	as	variegated	as
lichen-covered	rocks	in	the	fields,	with	spots
of	bright	yellow	or	orange	standing	out	from	a
complex,	muted	background.	Some	cheeses
are	gardened	to	allow	a	diverse	flora	to
develop,	while	others	are	seeded	with	one
particular	desired	mold.	The	standard	garden
variety	molds	come	from	the	large	and
various	genus	Penicillium,	which	also	gave	us
the	antibiotic	penicillin.



Blue	 Molds	 Penicillium	 roqueforti,	 as	 its
name	 suggests,	 is	 what	 gives	 sheep’s	 milk
Roquefort	 cheese	 its	 veins	 of	 blue.	 It	 and	 its
cousin	P.	 glaucum 	 also	 color	 the	 interior	 of
Stilton	 and	 Gorgonzola	 and	 the	 surface	 of
many	 aged	 goat	 cheeses	 with	 the	 complex
pigment	produced	 in	 their	 fruiting	structures.
The	 blue	 penicillia	 are	 apparently	 unique	 in
their	 ability	 to	 grow	 in	 the	 low-oxygen	 (5%,
compared	 to	 21%	 in	 the	 air)	 conditions	 in
small	 fissures	 and	 cavities	 within	 cheese,	 a
habitat	 that	 echoes	 the	 place	 that	 gave
Roquefort	 its	 mold	 in	 the	 first	 place:	 the
fissured	 limestone	 caves	 of	 the	 Larzac.	 The
typical	 flavor	of	blue	cheese	comes	 from	 the
mold’s	 metabolism	 of	 milk	 fat,	 of	 which	P.
roqueforti	 breaks	 up	 10	 to	 25%,	 liberating
short-chain	 fatty	 acids	 that	 give	 the	 peppery
feel	 to	sheep’s	milk	and	goat	milk	blues,	and
breaking	 the	 longer	 chains	 and	 converting
them	 into	 substances	 (methyl	 ketones	 and
alcohols)	 that	 give	 the	 characteristic	 blue



aroma.

White	Molds	In	addition	to	the	blue	penicillia,
there	 are	 the	 white	 ones,	 all	 strains	 of	P.
camemberti,	 which	 make	 the	 small,	 milder
surface-ripened	 soft	 cow’s	 milk	 cheeses	 of
northern	 France,	 Camembert	 and	 Brie	 and
Neufchâtel.	 The	 white	 penicillia	 create	 their
effects	 mainly	 by	 protein	 breakdown,	 which
contributes	to	the	creamy	texture	and	provides
flavor	 notes	 of	 mushrooms,	 garlic,	 and
ammonia.

Making	Cheese

There	are	three	stages	in	the	transformation	of
milk	into	cheese.	In	the	first	stage,	lactic	acid
bacteria	convert	milk	sugar	into	lactic	acid.	In
the	second	stage,	while	the	acidifying	bacteria
are	still	at	work,	the	cheesemaker	adds	the
rennet,	curdles	the	casein	proteins,	and	drains
the	watery	whey	from	the	concentrated	curds.



In	the	last	stage,	ripening,	a	host	of	enzymes
work	together	to	create	the	unique	texture	and
flavor	of	each	cheese.	These	are	mainly
protein-	and	fat-digesting	enzymes,	and	they
come	from	the	milk,	from	bacteria	originally
present	in	the	milk,	the	acidifying	bacteria,
the	rennet,	and	any	bacteria	or	molds	enlisted
especially	for	the	ripening	process.

Cheese	is	certainly	an	expression	of	the
milk,	enzymes,	and	microbes	that	are	its
major	ingredients.	But	it	is	also	—	perhaps
above	all	—	an	expression	of	the	skill	and
care	of	the	cheesemaker,	who	chooses	the
ingredients	and	orchestrates	their	many
chemical	and	physical	transformations.	Here
is	a	brief	summary	of	the	cheesemaker’s
work.

Curdling	 With	 the	 exception	 of	 some	 fresh
cheeses,	 the	 cheesemaker	 curdles	 nearly	 all
cheeses	with	a	combination	of	starter	bacteria
acid	 and	 rennet.	 Acid	 and	 rennet	 form	 very



different	 kinds	 of	 curd	 structures	 —	 acid	 a
fine,	 fragile	 gel,	 rennet	 a	 coarse	 but	 robust,
rubbery	one	—	so	their	relative	contributions,
and	how	quickly	 they	act,	help	determine	 the
ultimate	 texture	 of	 the	 cheese.	 In	 a
predominantly	 acid	 coagulation,	 the	 curd
forms	 over	 the	 course	 of	 many	 hours,	 is
relatively	 soft	 and	 weak,	 and	 has	 to	 be
handled	 gently,	 so	 it	 retains	 much	 of	 its
moisture.	This	is	how	fresh	cheeses	and	small,
surface-ripened	 goat	 cheeses	 begin.	 In	 a
predominantly	 rennet	 coagulation,	 the	 curd
forms	 in	 less	 than	an	hour,	 is	quite	 firm,	and
can	be	cut	into	pieces	the	size	of	a	wheat	grain
to	extract	large	amounts	of	whey.	This	is	how
large	 semihard	 and	 hard	 cheeses	 begin,	 from
Cheddar	 and	 Gouda	 to	 Emmental	 and
Parmesan.	 Cheeses	 of	 moderate	 size	 and
moisture	content	are	curdled	with	a	moderate
amount	of	rennet.



How	Some	Familiar	Cheeses	Are	Made

Draining,	Shaping,	and	Salting	the	Curds
The	curds	can	be	drained	of	their	whey	in
several	ways,	depending	on	how	much
moisture	the	cheesemaker	wants	to	remove
from	the	curd.	For	some	soft	cheeses,	the
whole	curd	is	carefully	ladled	into	molds	and
allowed	to	drain	by	force	of	gravity	alone,	for
many	hours.	For	firmer	cheeses,	the	curd	is
precut	into	pieces	to	provide	more	surface
area	from	which	the	whey	can	drain	or	be
actively	pressed.	The	cut	curd	of	large	hard
cheeses	may	also	be	“cooked”	in	its	whey	to
130ºF/55ºC,	a	temperature	that	not	only	expels



whey	from	the	curd	particles,	but	also	affects
bacteria	and	enzymes,	and	encourages	flavor-
producing	chemical	reactions	among	some
milk	components.	Once	the	curd	pieces	are
placed	in	the	mold	that	gives	the	cheese	its
final	shape,	they	may	be	pressed	to	squeeze
out	yet	more	moisture.

The	cheesemaker	always	adds	salt	to	the
new	cheese,	either	by	mixing	dry	salt	with	the
curd	pieces	or	by	applying	dry	salt	or	brine	to
whole	cheese.	The	salt	provides	more	than	its
own	taste.	It	inhibits	the	growth	of	spoilage
microbes,	and	it’s	an	essential	regulator	of
cheese	structure	and	the	ripening	process.	It
draws	moisture	out	of	the	curds,	firms	the
protein	structure,	slows	the	growth	of	ripening
microbes,	and	alters	the	activity	of	ripening
enzymes.	Most	cheeses	contain	between	1.5
and	2%	salt	by	weight;	Emmental	is	the	least
salty	traditional	cheese	at	about	0.7%,	while
feta,	Roquefort,	and	pecorino	may	approach
5%.



Ripening,	 or	Affinage	 Ripening	 is	 the	 stage
during	 which	 microbes	 and	 milk	 enzymes
transform	the	salty,	rubbery,	or	crumbly	curd
into	 a	 delicious	 cheese.	 The	 French	 term	 for
ripening,	affinage,	 comes	 from	 the	 Latin
finus,	meaning	“end”	or	“ultimate	point,”	and
was	used	in	medieval	alchemy	to	describe	the
refining	of	impure	materials.	For	at	 least	200
years	it	has	also	meant	bringing	cheeses	to	the
point	 at	which	 flavor	 and	 texture	 are	 at	 their
best.	 Cheeses	 have	 lives:	 they	 begin	 young
and	 bland,	 they	 mature	 into	 fullness	 of
character,	 and	 they	 eventually	 decay	 into
harshness	and	coarseness.	The	life	of	a	moist
cheese	like	Camembert	is	meteoric,	its	prime
come	 and	 gone	 in	weeks,	while	 the	majority
of	 cheeses	 peak	 at	 a	 few	 months,	 and	 a	 dry
Comté	 or	 Parmesan	 slowly	 improves	 for	 a
year	or	more.

The	cheesemaker	initiates	and	manages
this	maturation	process	by	controlling	the
temperature	and	humidity	at	which	the	cheese



is	stored,	conditions	that	determine	the
moisture	content	of	the	cheese,	the	growth	of
microbes,	the	activity	of	enzymes,	and	the
development	of	flavor	and	texture.	Specialist
cheese	merchants	in	France	and	elsewhere	are
also	affineurs:	they	buy	cheeses	before	they
have	fully	matured,	and	carefully	finish	the
process	on	their	premises,	so	that	they	can	sell
the	cheeses	at	their	prime.

Industrial	producers	usually	ripen	their
cheeses	only	partly,	then	refrigerate	them	to
suspend	their	development	before	shipping.
This	practice	maximizes	the	cheeses’	stability
and	shelf	life	at	the	expense	of	quality.

OPPOSITE:	 Principal	 cheese	 families.	 Only
distinctive	 processing	 steps	 are	 shown;	 most
cheeses	are	also	salted,	shaped	in	molds,	and
aged	for	some	time.	Curdling	the	milk,	cutting
the	 curd,	 heating	 the	 curd	 particles,	 and
pressing	 are	 methods	 of	 removing
progressively	 more	 moisture	 from	 a	 cheese,



slowing	 its	 aging,	 and	 extending	 its	 edible
lifetime.

The	Sources
of	Cheese	Diversity

So	these	are	the	ingredients	that	have
generated	the	great	diversity	of	our	traditional
cheeses:	hundreds	of	plants,	from	scrubland
herbs	to	alpine	flowers;	dozens	of	animal
breeds	that	fed	on	those	plants	and
transformed	them	into	milk;	protein-cutting
enzymes	from	young	animals	and	thistles;
microbes	recruited	from	meadow	and	cave,
from	the	oceans,	from	animal	insides	and
skins;	and	the	careful	observation,	ingenuity,
and	good	taste	of	generations	of	cheesemakers
and	cheese	lovers.	This	remarkable	heritage
underlies	even	today’s	simplified	industrial
cheeses.
The	usual	way	of	organizing	the	diversity	of
cheeses	into	a	comprehensible	system	is	to



group	them	by	their	moisture	content	and	the
microbes	that	ripen	them.	The	more	moisture
removed	from	the	curd,	the	harder	the
cheese’s	eventual	texture,	and	the	longer	its
lifespan.	A	fresh	cheese	with	80%	water	lasts
a	few	days,	while	a	soft	cheese	(45–55%)
reaches	its	prime	in	a	few	weeks,	a	semihard
cheese	(40–45%)	in	a	few	months,	a	hard
cheese	(30–40%)	after	a	year	or	more.	And
ripening	microbes	create	distinctive	flavors.
The	box	on	p.	60	shows	how	cheesemakers
create	such	different	cheeses	from	the	same
basic	materials.

Cheese	Flavors	from	Proteins	and	Fats
The	 flavor	 of	 a	 good	 cheese	 seems	 to	 fill
the	 mouth,	 and	 that’s	 because	 enzymes
from	 the	 milk	 and	 rennet	 and	 microbes
break	 down	 the	 concentrated	 protein	 and
fat	into	a	wide	range	of	flavor	compounds.

The	long,	chain-like	casein	proteins	are
first	 broken	 into	 medium-sized	 pieces



called	 peptides,	 some	 still	 tasteless,	 some
bitter.	Usually	these	are	eventually	broken
down	 by	 microbial	 enzymes	 into	 the	 20
individual	 protein	 building	 blocks,	 the
amino	acids,	a	number	of	which	are	sweet
or	 savory.	The	amino	acids	can	 in	 turn	be
broken	into	various	amines,	some	of	which
are	 reminiscent	 of	 ocean	 fish
(trimethylamine),	 others	 of	 spoiling	 meat
(putrescine);	into	strong	sulfur	compounds
(a	 specialty	 of	 smear	 bacteria),	 or	 into
simple	ammonia,	a	powerful	aroma	that	in
overripened	 cheeses	 is	 harsh,	 like
household	 cleaner.	 Though	 few	 of	 these
sound	 appetizing,	 bare	 hints	 of	 them
together	build	the	complexity	and	richness
of	cheese	flavor.

Then	 there	 are	 the	 fats,	 which	 are
broken	 down	 into	 fatty	 acids	 by	 blue-
che e s e	Penicillium	 roqueforti	 and	 by
special	 enzymes	 added	 to	 Pecorino	 and
Provolone	 cheeses.	 Some	 fatty	 acids



(short-chain)	have	a	peppery	effect	on	 the
tongue	 and	 an	 intensified	 sheepy	 or	 goaty
aroma.	 The	 blue	 molds	 further	 transform
some	 fatty	 acids	 into	 molecules	 (methyl
ketones)	 that	 create	 the	 characteristic
aroma	 of	 blue	 cheese.	 And	 the	 copper
cauldrons	 in	which	 the	 Swiss	 cheeses	 and
Parmesan	are	made	damage	some	milk	fat
directly,	 and	 the	 fatty	 acids	 thus	 liberated
are	 further	 modified	 to	 create	 molecules
with	 the	 exotic	 aromas	 of	 pineapple	 and
coconut	(esters,	lactones).

The	 more	 diverse	 the	 cast	 of	 ripening
enzymes,	 the	 more	 complex	 the	 resulting
collection	of	protein	and	fat	fragments,	and
the	richer	the	flavor.

Choosing,	Storing,
and	Serving	Cheese

It	has	always	been	a	challenge	to	choose	a
good	cheese,	as	Charlemagne’s	instructor



admitted	(p.	53).	A	late	medieval
compendium	of	maxims	and	recipes	for	the
middle-class	household,	known	as	Le
Ménagier	de	Paris,	includes	this	formula	“To
recognize	good	cheese”:

Not	at	all	white	like	Helen,
Nor	weeping,	like	Magdalene.
Not	Argus,	but	completely	blind,
And	heavy,	like	a	buffalo.
Let	it	rebel	against	the	thumb,
And	have	an	old	moth-eaten	coat.
Without	 eyes,	 without	 tears,	 not	 at	 all
white,
Moth-eaten,	rebellious,	of	good	weight.
But	these	rules	wouldn’t	work	for	young

goat	cheeses	(white	and	coatless),	Roquefort
(with	its	pockets	of	whey),	Emmental	(eyefull
and	light),	or	Camembert	(which	should	give
when	thumbed).	As	always,	the	proof	is	in	the
tasting.

These	days,	the	most	important	thing	is	to



understand	that	bulk	supermarket	cheeses	are
only	pale	(or	dyed)	imitations	of	their	more
flavorful,	distinctive	originals.	The	way	to
find	good	cheeses	is	to	buy	from	a	specialist
who	loves	and	knows	them,	chooses	the	best
and	takes	good	care	of	them,	and	offers
samples	for	tasting.

Cut	to	Order	Whenever	possible,	buy	portions
that	 are	cut	while	you	watch.	Precut	portions
may	 be	 days	 or	 weeks	 old,	 and	 their	 large
exposed	 surfaces	 inevitably	 develop	 rancid
flavors	from	contact	with	air	and	plastic	wrap.
Exposure	 to	 light	 in	 the	 dairy	 case	 also
damages	 lipids	 and	 causes	 off-flavors	 in	 as
little	 as	 two	days;	 in	 addition	 it	 bleaches	 the
annatto	 in	 orange-dyed	 cheeses,	 turning	 it
pink.	 Pregrated	 cheese	 has	 a	 tremendous
surface	 area,	 and	 while	 it	 is	 often	 carefully
wrapped,	 it	 loses	 much	 of	 its	 aroma	 and	 its
carbon	 dioxide,	 which	 also	 contributes	 the
impression	of	staleness.



Cool,	 Not	 Cold	 If	 cheese	 must	 be	 kept	 for
more	 than	 a	 few	 days,	 it’s	 usually	 easiest	 to
refrigerate	 it.	 Unfortunately,	 the	 ideal
conditions	for	holding	cheese	—	a	humid	55–
60ºF/12–15ºC,	 simply	 a	 continuation	 of	 its
ripening	 conditions	 —	 is	 warmer	 than	 most
refrigerators,	 and	 cooler	 and	 moister	 than
most	 rooms.	 Refrigeration	 essentially	 puts
cheese	 into	 suspended	 animation,	 so	 if	 you
want	an	immature	soft	cheese	to	ripen	further,
you’ll	need	to	keep	it	warmer.

Cheeses	should	never	be	served	direct
from	the	refrigerator.	At	such	low
temperatures	the	milk	fat	is	congealed	and	as
hard	as	refrigerated	butter,	the	protein
network	unnaturally	stiff,	the	flavor
molecules	imprisoned,	and	the	cheese	will
seem	rubbery	and	flavorless.	Room
temperature	is	best,	unless	it’s	so	warm
(above	about	80ºF/26ºC)	that	the	milk	fat	will
melt	and	sweat	out	of	the	cheese.



Cheese	Crystals
Cheeses	 usually	 have	 such	 a	 smooth,
luscious	texture,	either	from	the	beginning
or	as	a	hard	cheese	melts	in	the	mouth,	that
an	 occasional	 crunch	 comes	 as	 a	 surprise.
In	 fact	 a	number	of	 cheeses	develop	hard,
salt-like	 crystals	 of	 various	 kinds.	 The
white	crystals	often	visible	against	the	blue
mold	 of	 a	 Roquefort,	 or	 detectable	 in	 the
rind	 of	 a	 Camembert,	 are	 calcium
phosphate,	 deposited	 because	 the
Penicillium	 molds	 have	 made	 the	 cheese
less	acid	and	calcium	salts	less	soluble.	In
aged	 Cheddar	 there	 are	 often	 crystals	 of
calcium	 lactate,	 formed	 when	 ripening
bacteria	 convert	 the	 usual	 form	 of	 lactic
acid	 into	 its	 less	 soluble	 mirror	 (“D”)
image.	 In	 Parmesan,	 Gruyère,	 and	 aged
Gouda,	the	crystals	may	be	calcium	lactate
or	else	tyrosine,	an	amino	acid	produced	by
protein	 breakdown	 that	 has	 limited
solubility	in	these	low-moisture	cheeses.



Loose	Wrapping	Tight	wrapping	in	plastic
film	is	inadvisable	for	three	reasons:	trapped
moisture	and	restricted	oxygen	encourages	the
growth	of	bacteria	and	molds,	not	always	the
cheese’s	own;	strong	volatiles	such	as
ammonia	that	would	otherwise	diffuse	from
the	cheese	instead	impregnate	it;	and	trace
volatile	compounds	and	plastic	chemicals
migrate	into	the	cheese.	Whole,	still-
developing	cheeses	should	be	stored
unwrapped	or	very	loosely	wrapped,	other
cheeses	loosely	wrapped	in	wax	paper.	Stand
them	on	a	wire	rack	or	turn	them	frequently	to
prevent	the	bottom	from	getting	soggy.	It	can
be	fun	to	play	the	role	of	affineur	and
encourage	surface	or	blue	mold	from	a	good
Camembert	or	Roquefort	to	grow	on	a	fresh
goat	cheese	or	in	a	piece	of	standard	Cheddar.
But	there’s	some	risk	that	other	microbes	will
join	in.	If	a	piece	of	cheese	develops	an
unusual	surface	mold	or	sliminess	or	an
unusual	odor,	the	safest	thing	is	to	discard	it.



Simply	trimming	the	surface	will	not	remove
mold	filaments,	which	can	penetrate	some
distance	and	may	carry	toxins	(p.	67).

Rinds	 Should	 cheese	 rinds	 be	 eaten?	 It
depends	on	the	cheese	and	the	eater.	The	rinds
of	 long-aged	cheeses	are	generally	 tough	and
slightly	 rancid,	 and	 are	 best	 avoided.	 With
softer	 cheeses	 it’s	 largely	 a	 matter	 of	 taste.
The	 rind	 can	 offer	 an	 interesting	 contrast	 to
the	 interior	 in	both	 flavor	 and	 texture.	But	 if
safety	 is	 a	 concern,	 then	 consider	 the	 rind	 a
protective	coating	and	trim	it	off.

Cooking	with	Cheese

When	used	as	an	ingredient	in	cooking,	cheese
can	add	both	flavor	and	texture:	either
unctuousness	or	crispness,	depending	on
circumstances.	In	most	cases,	we	want	the
cheese	to	melt	and	either	mix	evenly	with
other	ingredients	or	spread	over	a	surface.	A



certain	giving	cohesiveness	is	part	of	the
pleasure	of	melted	cheese.	Stringy	cheese	can
be	enjoyable	on	pizzas,	but	a	nuisance	in	more
formal	dishes.	To	understand	cheese	cooking,
we	need	to	understand	the	chemistry	of
melting.

Cheese	Melting	 What	 is	 going	 on	 when	 we
melt	a	piece	of	cheese?	Essentially	two	things.
First,	 at	 around	 90ºF,	 the	 milk	 fat	 melts,
which	 makes	 the	 cheese	 more	 supple,	 and
often	 brings	 little	 beads	 of	melted	 fat	 to	 the
surface.	 Then	 at	 higher	 temperatures	 —
around	 130ºF/55ºC	 for	 soft	 cheeses,
150ºF/65ºC	 for	 Cheddar	 and	 Swiss	 types,
180ºF/82ºC	 for	 Parmesan	 and	 pecorino	 —
enough	 of	 the	 bonds	 holding	 the	 casein
proteins	 together	 are	 broken	 that	 the	 protein
matrix	collapses,	and	the	piece	sags	and	flows
as	 a	 thick	 liquid.	Melting	behavior	 is	 largely
determined	 by	 water	 content.	 Low-moisture
hard	 cheeses	 require	 more	 heat	 to	 melt



because	 their	 protein	 molecules	 are	 more
concentrated	 and	 so	 more	 intimately	 bonded
to	 each	 other;	 and	 when	 melted,	 they	 flow
relatively	 little.	 Separate	 pieces	 of	 grated
moist	 mozzarella	 will	 melt	 together,	 while
flecks	 of	 Parmesan	 remain	 separate.	 With
continued	exposure	to	high	heat,	moisture	will
evaporate	 from	 the	 liquefied	 cheese,	 which
gets	 progressively	 stiffer	 and	 eventually
resolidifies.	 Most	 cheeses	 will	 leak	 some
melted	 fat,	 and	 extensive	 breakdown	 of	 the
protein	 fabric	 accentuates	 this	 in	 high-fat
cheeses.	 The	 ratio	 of	 fat	 to	 surrounding
protein	 is	 just	 0.7	 in	 part-skim	 Parmesan,
around	1	in	mozzarella	and	the	alpine	cheeses,
but	 1.3	 in	Roquefort	 and	Cheddar,	which	 are
especially	prone	to	exuding	fat	when	melted.

Nonmelting	Cheeses	 There	 are	 several	 kinds
of	 cheese	 that	 do	 not	 melt	 on	 heating:	 they
simply	 get	 drier	 and	 stiffer.	 These	 include
Indian	paneer	and	Latin	queso	blanco,	 Italian



ricotta,	 and	 most	 fresh	 goat	 cheeses;	 all	 of
them	are	 curdled	 exclusively	or	 primarily	 by
means	 of	 acid,	 not	 rennet.	 Rennet	 creates	 a
malleable	 structure	 of	 large	 casein	 micelles
held	together	by	relatively	few	calcium	atoms
and	 hydrophobic	 bonds,	 so	 this	 structure	 is
readily	weakened	by	heat.	Acid,	 on	 the	other
hand,	dissolves	the	calcium	glue	that	holds	the
casein	 proteins	 together	 in	 micelles	 (p.	 20),
and	 it	 eliminates	 each	 protein’s	 negative
electrical	 charge,	 which	 would	 otherwise
cause	 the	 proteins	 to	 repel	 each	 other.	 The
proteins	 are	 free	 to	 flock	 together	 and	 bond
extensively	into	microscopic	clumps.	So	when
an	 acid	 curd	 is	 heated,	 the	 first	 thing	 to	 be
shaken	loose	is	not	the	proteins,	but	water:	the
water	 boils	 away,	 and	 this	 simply	 dries	 out
and	concentrates	the	protein	even	further.	This
is	why	 firm	 paneer	 and	 queso	 blanco	 can	 be
simmered	or	fried	like	meat,	and	goat	cheeses
and	 ricotta	maintain	 their	 shape	 on	 pizzas	 or
in	pasta	stuffings.



Stringiness	 Melted	 cheese	 becomes	 stringy
when	 mostly	 intact	 casein	 molecules	 are
cross-linked	 together	 by	 calcium	 into	 long,
rope-like	 fibers	 that	can	stretch	but	get	 stuck
to	each	other.	 If	 the	casein	has	been	attacked
extensively	 by	 ripening	 enzymes,	 then	 the
pieces	 are	 too	 small	 to	 form	 fibers;	 so	well-
aged	 grating	 cheeses	 don’t	 get	 stringy.	 The
degree	of	cross-linking	also	matters:	a	lot	and
the	 casein	molecules	 are	 so	 tightly	 bound	 to
each	 other	 that	 they	 can’t	 give	 with	 pulling,
and	 simply	 snap	 apart;	 a	 little	 and	 they	 pull
apart	 right	 away.	 The	 cross-linking	 is
determined	by	how	the	cheese	was	made:	high
acidity	 removes	 calcium	 from	 the	 curd,	 and
high	 moisture,	 high	 fat,	 and	 high	 salt	 help
separate	casein	molecules	from	each	other.	So
the	stringiest	cheeses	are	moderate	in	acidity,
moisture,	 salt,	 and	 age.	 The	 most	 common
stringy	 cheeses	 are	 intentionally	 fibrous
mozzarella,	 elastic	 Emmental,	 and	 Cheddar.
Crumbly	cheeses	like	Cheshire	and	Leicester,



and	 moist	 ones	 like	 Caerphilly,	 Colby,	 and
Jack	 are	 preferred	 for	 making	 such	 melted
preparations	as	Welsh	rarebit,	 stewed	cheese,
and	 grilled-cheese	 sandwiches.	 Similarly,
Emmental’s	 alpine	 cousin	 Gruyère	 is
preferred	 in	 fondues	 because	 it’s	 moister,
fatter,	 and	 saltier.	 And	 the	 Italian	 grating
cheeses	 —	 Parmesan,	 grana	 Padano,	 the
pecorinos	 —	 have	 had	 their	 protein	 fabric
sufficiently	 broken	 that	 its	 pieces	 readily
disperse	 in	 sauces,	 soups,	 risottos,	 polenta,
and	pasta	dishes.

Cheeses	are	at	their	stringiest	right	around
their	melting	point	—	which	usually	means
right	about	the	point	that	a	piping	hot	dish
gets	cool	enough	to	eat	—	and	get	more	so	the
more	they	are	stirred	and	stretched.	One
French	country	dish,	aligot	from	the
Auvergne,	calls	for	unripened	Cantal	cheese
to	be	sliced,	mixed	with	just-boiled	potatoes,
and	sweepingly	stirred	until	it	forms	an	elastic
cord	that	can	stretch	for	6	to	10	feet/2–3



meters!

Cheese	 Sauces	 and	 Soups	 When	 cheese	 is
used	 to	 bring	 flavor	 and	 richness	 to	 a	 sauce
(Gruyère	 or	 Parmesan	 in	 French	sauce
Mornay,	Fontina	in	Italian	fonduta)	or	a	soup,
the	aim	is	 to	 integrate	 the	cheese	evenly	 into
the	liquid.	There	are	several	ways	to	avoid	the
stringiness,	 lumps,	 and	 fat	 separation	 that
result	when	the	cheese	proteins	are	allowed	to
coagulate.

Avoid	using	a	cheese	that	is	prone	to
stringiness	in	the	first	place.	Moist	or
well-aged	grating	cheeses	blend	better.
Grate	the	cheese	finely	so	that	you	can
disperse	it	evenly	throughout	the	dish
from	the	beginning.
Heat	the	dish	as	little	as	possible	after
the	cheese	has	been	added.	Simmer	the
other	ingredients	together	first,	let	the
pot	cool	a	bit,	and	then	add	the	cheese.
Remember	that	temperatures	above	the



cheese’s	melting	point	will	tend	to
tighten	the	protein	patches	into	hard
clumps	and	squeeze	out	their	fat.	On	the
other	hand,	don’t	let	the	dish	cool	down
too	much	before	serving.	Cheese	gets
stringier	and	tougher	as	it	cools	down
and	congeals.
Minimize	stirring,	which	can	push	the
dispersed	patches	of	cheese	protein	back
together	into	a	big	sticky	mass.
Include	starchy	ingredients	that	will	coat
the	protein	patches	and	fat	pockets	and
keep	them	apart.	These	stabilizing
ingredients	include	flour,	cornstarch,	and
arrowroot.
If	the	flavor	of	the	dish	permits,	include
some	wine	or	lemon	juice	—	a
preventive	or	emergency	measure	well
known	to	fans	of	the	ultimate	cheese
sauce,	fondue.

Cheese	Fondue	In	the	Swiss	Alps,	where	for



centuries	cheese	has	been	melted	in	a
communal	pot	at	the	table	and	kept	hot	over	a
flame	for	dipping	bread,	it’s	well	known	that
wine	can	help	keep	melted	cheese	from
getting	stringy	or	seizing	up.	The	ingredients
in	a	classic	fondue,	in	fact,	are	just	alpine
cheese	—	usually	Gruyère	—	a	tart	white
wine,	some	kirsch,	and	sometimes	(for	added
insurance)	starch.	The	combination	of	cheese
and	wine	is	delicious	but	also	savvy.	The	wine
contributes	two	essential	ingredients	for	a
smooth	sauce:	water,	which	keeps	the	casein
proteins	moist	and	dilute,	and	tartaric	acid,
which	pulls	the	cross-linking	calcium	off	of
the	casein	proteins	and	binds	tightly	to	it,
leaving	them	glueless	and	happily	separate.
(Alcohol	has	nothing	to	do	with	fondue
stability.)	The	citric	acid	in	lemon	juice	will
do	the	same	thing.	If	it’s	not	too	far	gone,	you
can	sometimes	rescue	a	tightening	cheese
sauce	with	a	squeeze	of	lemon	juice	or	a
splash	of	white	wine.



Toppings,	 Gratins 	 When	 a	 thin	 layer	 of
cheese	is	heated	in	the	oven	or	under	a	broiler
—	 on	 a	 gratin,	 a	 pizza,	 or	 bruschetta	—	 the
intense	heat	can	quickly	dehydrate	 the	casein
fabric,	toughen	it,	and	cause	its	fat	to	separate.
To	 avoid	 this,	 watch	 the	 dish	 carefully	 and
remove	it	as	soon	as	the	cheese	melts.	On	the
other	 hand,	 browned,	 crisp	 cheese	 is	 quite
delicious:	 the	religieuse	 at	 the	 bottom	of	 the
fondue	 pot	 crowns	 the	 meal.	 If	 you	 want	 a
cheese	 topping	 to	 brown,	 then	 pick	 a	 robust
cheese	that	resists	fat	loss	and	stringiness.	The
grating	 cheeses	 are	 especially	 versatile;
Parmesan	can	be	 formed	 into	a	 thin	disk	and
melted	and	lightly	browned	in	a	frying	pan	or
the	 oven,	 then	 molded	 into	 cups	 or	 other
shapes.

Process	and	Low-Fat	Cheeses

Process	cheese	is	an	industrial	version	of
cheese	that	makes	use	of	surplus,	scrap,	and



unripened	materials.	It	began	as	a	kind	of
resolidified,	long-keeping	fondue	made	from
trimmings	of	genuine	cheeses	that	were
unsaleable	due	to	partial	defects	or	damage.
The	first	industrial	attempts	to	melt	together	a
blend	of	shredded	cheeses	were	made	at	the
end	of	the	19th	century.	The	key	insight	—	the
necessity	of	“melting	salts”	analogous	to	the
tartaric	acid	and	citric	acid	in	a	fondue’s	wine
or	lemon	juice	—	came	in	Switzerland	in
1912.	Five	years	later,	the	American	company
Kraft	patented	a	combination	of	citric	acid
and	phosphates,	and	a	decade	after	that	it
brought	out	the	popular	cheddar	look-alike
Velveeta.

Today,	manufacturers	use	a	mixture	of
sodium	citrate,	sodium	phosphates,	and
sodium	polyphosphates,	and	a	blend	of	new,
partly	ripened,	and	fully	ripened	cheeses.	The
polyphosphates	(negatively	charged	chains	of
phosphorus	and	oxygen	atoms	that	attract	a
cloud	of	water	molecules)	not	only	remove



calcium	from	the	casein	matrix,	but	also	bind
to	the	casein	themselves,	bringing	moisture
with	them	and	thus	further	loosening	the
protein	matrix.	The	same	salts	that	melt	the
component	cheeses	into	a	homogeneous	mass
also	help	the	resulting	blended	cheese	melt
nicely	when	cooked.	This	characteristic,
together	with	its	low	cost,	has	made	process
cheese	a	popular	ingredient	in	fast-food
sandwiches.

Low-	and	no-fat	“cheese	products”	replace
fat	with	various	carbohydrates	or	proteins.
When	heated,	such	products	don’t	melt;	they
soften	and	then	dry	out.

Cheese	and	Health

Cheese	and	the	Heart	As	a	food	that	is
essentially	a	concentrated	version	of	milk,
cheese	shares	many	of	milk’s	nutritional
advantages	and	disadvantages.	It’s	a	rich
source	of	protein,	calcium,	and	energy.	Its



abundant	fat	is	highly	saturated	and	therefore
tends	to	raise	blood	cholesterol	levels.
However,	France	and	Greece	lead	the	world	in
per	capita	cheese	consumption,	at	better	than
2	oz/60	gm	per	day,	about	double	the	U.S.
figures,	yet	they’re	remarkable	among
Western	countries	for	their	relatively	low
rates	of	heart	disease,	probably	thanks	to	their
high	consumption	of	heart-protective
vegetables,	fruits,	and	wine	(p.	253).	Eating
cheese	as	part	of	a	balanced	diet	is	fully
compatible	with	good	health.

Food	Poisoning
Cheeses	Made	from	Raw	and	Pasteurized
Milks	Government	concerns	about	the	danger
of	the	various	pathogens	that	can	grow	in	milk
led	to	the	U.S.	requirement	(originating	in
1944,	reaffirmed	in	1949,	and	extended	to
imports	in	1951)	that	all	cheeses	aged	less
than	60	days	be	made	with	pasteurized	milk.
Since	1948	there	have	been	only	a	handful	of



outbreaks	of	food	poisoning	in	the	United
States	caused	by	cheese,	nearly	all	involving
contamination	of	the	milk	or	cheese	after
pasteurization.	In	Europe,	where	young	raw-
milk	cheeses	are	still	legal	in	some	countries,
most	outbreaks	have	also	been	caused	by
pasteurized	cheeses.	Cheeses	in	general
present	a	relatively	low	risk	of	food
poisoning.	Because	any	soft	cheese	contains
enough	moisture	to	permit	the	survival	of
various	human	pathogens,	both	pasteurized
and	unpasteurized	versions	are	probably	best
avoided	by	people	who	may	be	especially
vulnerable	to	infection	(pregnant	women,	the
elderly	and	chronically	ill).	Hard	cheeses	are
inhospitable	to	disease	microbes	and	very
seldom	cause	food	poisoning.

Storage	Molds	In	addition	to	the	usual	disease
microbes,	 the	molds	 that	can	grow	on	cheese
are	 of	 some	 concern.	When	 cheeses	 are	 held
in	 storage	 for	 some	 time,	 toxin-producing



foreign	 molds	 (Aspergillus	 versicolor,
Penicillium	 viridicatum	 and	P.	 cyclopium)
may	 occasionally	 develop	 on	 their	 rinds	 and
contaminate	 them	 to	 the	 depth	 of	 up	 to	 an
inch/2	 cm.	 This	 problem	 appears	 to	 be	 very
rare,	 but	 does	 make	 it	 advisable	 to	 discard
cheeses	overgrown	with	unusual	mold.

Amines	 There	 is	 one	 normal	 microbial
product	 that	 can	 cause	 discomfort	 to	 some
people.	 In	 a	 strongly	 ripened	 cheese,	 the
casein	 proteins	 are	 broken	 down	 to	 amino
acids,	 and	 the	 amino	 acids	 can	 be	 broken
down	 into	 amines,	 small	 molecules	 that	 can
serve	as	chemical	signals	in	the	human	body.
Histamine	 and	 tyramine	 are	 found	 in	 large
quantities	in	Cheddar,	blue,	Swiss,	and	Dutch-
style	 cheeses,	 and	 can	 cause	 a	 rise	 in	 blood
pressure,	headaches,	and	rashes	in	people	who
are	especially	sensitive	to	them.

Tooth	Decay	 Finally,	 it	 has	 been	 recognized
for	 decades	 that	 eating	 cheese	 slows	 tooth



decay,	which	is	caused	by	acid	secretion	from
relatives	 of	 a	 yogurt	 bacterium	 (especially
Streptococcus	 mutans)	 that	 adhere	 to	 the
teeth.	Just	why	is	still	not	entirely	clear,	but	it
appears	that	eaten	at	the	end	of	a	meal,	when
streptococcal	 acid	 production	 is	 on	 the	 rise,
calcium	 and	 phosphate	 from	 the	 cheese
diffuse	 into	 the	 bacterial	 colonies	 and	 blunt
the	acid	rise.



Chapter	2

Eggs

The	Chicken	and	the	Egg
The	Evolution	of	the	Egg
The	Chicken,	from	Jungle	to	Barnyard
The	Industrial	Egg

Egg	Biology	and	Chemistry
How	the	Hen	Makes	an	Egg
The	Yolk
The	White
The	Nutritional	Value	of	Eggs

Egg	Quality,	Handling,	and	Safety
Egg	Grades
Deterioration	in	Egg	Quality
Handling	and	Storing	Eggs
Egg	Safety:	The	Salmonella	Problem

The	Chemistry	of	Egg	Cooking:	How	Eggs
Get	Hard	and	Custards	Thicken

Protein	Coagulation



The	Chemistry	of	Egg	Flavor
Basic	Egg	Dishes

Eggs	Cooked	In	the	Shell
Eggs	Cooked	Out	of	the	Shell

Egg-Liquid	 Mixtures:	 Custards	 and
Creams

Definitions
Dilution	Demands	Delicacy
Custard	Theory	and	Practice
Cream	Theory	and	Practice

Egg	Foams:	Cooking	with	the	Wrist
How	the	Egg	Proteins	Stabilize	Foams
How	Proteins	Destabilize	Foams
The	Enemies	of	Egg	Foams
The	Effects	of	Other	Ingredients
Basic	Egg-Beating	Techniques
Meringues:	Sweet	Foams	on	Their	Own
Soufflés:	A	Breath	of	Hot	Air
Yolk	Foams:	Zabaglione	and	Sabayons

Pickled	and	Preserved	Eggs
Pickled	Eggs
Chinese	Preserved	Eggs



The	 egg	 is	 one	of	 the	kitchen’s	marvels,	 and
one	 of	 nature’s.	 Its	 simple,	 placid	 shape
houses	 an	 everyday	 miracle:	 the
transformation	of	a	bland	bag	of	nutrients	into
a	living,	breathing,	vigorous	creature.	The	egg
has	 loomed	 large	 as	 a	 symbol	 for	 the
enigmatic	 origins	 of	 animals,	 of	 humans,	 of
gods,	 of	 the	 earth,	 of	 the	 entire	 cosmos.	 The
Egyptian	 Book	 of	 the	 Dead,	 the	 Indian	 Rg
Veda,	 Greek	 Orphic	 mysteries,	 and	 creation
myths	 throughout	 the	 world	 have	 been
inspired	by	the	eruption	of	life	from	within	a
lifeless,	blank	shell.

Humpty	Dumpty	has	had	a	great	fall!	If
eggs	inspire	any	notable	feeling	today,	it’s
boredom	tinged	by	wariness.	The	chicken	egg
is	now	an	industrial	product,	so	familiar	that	it
would	be	almost	invisible	—	except	that	it
was	stigmatized	by	the	cholesterol	phobia	of
the	1970s	and	1980s.

Neither	familiarity	nor	fear	should	obscure
eggs’	great	versatility.	Their	contents	are



primal,	the	unstructured	stuff	of	life.	This	is
why	they	are	protean,	why	the	cook	can	use
them	to	generate	such	a	variety	of	structures,
from	a	light,	insubstantial	meringue	to	a
dense,	lingeringly	rich	custard.	Eggs	reconcile
oil	and	water	in	a	host	of	smooth	sauces;	they
refine	the	texture	of	candies	and	ice	creams;
they	give	flavor,	substance,	and	nutritiousness
to	soups,	drinks,	breads,	pastas,	and	cakes;
they	put	a	shine	on	pastries;	they	clarify	meat
stocks	and	wines.	On	their	own,	they’re
amenable	to	being	boiled,	fried,	deep-fried,
baked,	roasted,	pickled,	and	fermented.

Meanwhile	modern	science	has	only
deepened	the	egg’s	aptness	as	an	emblem	of
creation.	The	yolk	is	a	stockpile	of	fuel
obtained	by	the	hen	from	seeds	and	leaves,
which	are	in	turn	stockpiles	of	the	sun’s
radiant	energy.	The	yellow	pigments	that	gave
the	yolk	its	name	also	come	directly	from
plants,	where	they	protect	the	chemical
machinery	of	photosynthesis	from	being



overwhelmed	by	the	sun.	So	the	egg	does
embody	the	chain	of	creation,	from	the
developing	chick	back	through	the	hen	to	the
plants	that	fed	her,	and	then	to	the	ultimate
source	of	life’s	fire,	the	yellow	sphere	of	the
sky.	An	egg	is	the	sun’s	light	refracted	into
life.

Many	animals	lay	eggs,	and	humans
exploit	a	number	of	them,	from	pigeons	and
turkeys	to	wild	birds,	penguins,	turtles,	and
crocodiles.	The	chicken	egg	is	by	far	the	most
commonly	eaten	in	most	countries,	so	I’ll
concentrate	on	it,	with	occasional	asides	on
duck	eggs.

The	Chicken	and	the	Egg

Over	the	centuries	there	have	been	several
clever	answers	to	the	conundrum,	Which
came	first:	the	chicken	or	the	egg?	The
Church	Fathers	sided	with	the	chicken,
pointing	out	that	according	to	Genesis,	God



first	created	the	creatures,	not	their
reproductive	apparatus.	The	Victorian	Samuel
Butler	awarded	the	egg	overall	priority	when
he	said	that	a	chicken	is	just	an	egg’s	way	of
making	another	egg.	About	one	point,
however,	there	is	no	dispute:	eggs	existed
long	before	chickens	did.	Ultimately,	we	owe
our	soufflés	and	sunny-sides-up	to	the
invention	of	sex.

The	Evolution	of	the	Egg

Sharing	DNA	Defined	broadly,	the	egg	is	a
kind	of	cell	that	is	specialized	for	the	process
of	sexual	reproduction,	in	which	two	parents
contribute	genes	to	the	making	of	a	new
individual.	The	first	living	things	were	single
cells	and	reproduced	on	their	own,	each	cell
simply	making	a	copy	of	its	DNA	and	then
dividing	itself	into	two	cells.	The	first	sexual
organisms,	probably	single-celled	algae,
paired	up	and	exchanged	DNA	with	each	other



before	dividing	—	a	mixing	that	greatly
facilitated	genetic	change.	Specialized	egg
and	sperm	cells	became	necessary	around	a
billion	years	ago,	when	many-celled
organisms	evolved	and	this	simple	transfer	of
DNA	was	no	longer	possible.

The	World	Egg
In	the	beginning	this	world	was
nonexistent.	It	became	existent.	It
developed.	It	turned	into	an	egg.	It	lay	for
the	period	of	a	year.	It	split	apart.	One	of
the	parts	became	silver,	one	gold.

That	which	was	silver	is	this	earth.	That
which	was	gold	is	the	sky.	That	which	was
the	outer	membrane	is	the	mountains.	That
which	 was	 the	 inner	 membrane	 is	 clouds
and	 mist.	 What	 were	 the	 veins	 are	 the
rivers.	 What	 was	 the	 fluid	 within	 is	 the
ocean.

What	was	born	from	the	egg	is	the	sun.
When	 it	was	born,	 shouts	and	hurrahs	and



all	beings	and	all	desires	rose	up	toward	it.
Therefore	at	its	rise	and	at	its	every	return,
shouts	 and	 hurrahs	 and	 all	 beings	 and	 all
desires	rise	up	toward	it.

—	Chandogya	Upanishad,	ca.	800	BCE
What	makes	an	egg	an	egg?	Of	the	two

reproductive	cells,	it’s	the	larger,	less	mobile
one.	It	receives	the	sperm	cell,	accommodates
the	joining	of	the	two	gene	sets,	and	then
divides	and	differentiates	into	the	embryonic
organism.	It	also	provides	food	for	at	least	the
initial	stages	of	this	growth.	This	is	why	eggs
are	so	nutritious:	Like	milk	and	like	plant
seeds,	they	are	actually	designed	to	be	foods,
to	support	new	creatures	until	they	are	able	to
fend	for	themselves.

Improving	the	Package	The	first	animal	eggs
were	 released	 into	 the	equable	oceans,	where
their	 outer	 membrane	 could	 be	 simple	 and
their	food	supply	minimal.	Some	300	million
years	 ago,	 the	 earliest	 fully	 landdwelling



animals,	 the	 reptiles,	 developed	 a	 self-
contained	egg	with	a	leathery	skin	that	slowed
fatal	 water	 loss,	 and	 with	 enough	 food	 to
support	 prolonged	 embryonic	 development
into	a	fully	formed	animal.	The	eggs	of	birds,
animals	 that	 arose	 some	 100	 million	 years
later,	 are	 a	 refined	 version	 of	 the	 primitive
reptile	 egg.	 Their	 hard,	 mineralized	 shell	 is
impermeable	 enough	 that	 the	 embryo	 can
develop	 in	 the	 driest	 habitats;	 and	 they
contain	 an	 array	 of	 antimicrobial	 defenses.
These	developments	made	the	bird	egg	into	an
ideal	 human	 food.	 It	 contains	 a	 sizeable	 and
balanced	portion	of	animal	nutrients;	and	it’s
so	well	packaged	that	it	keeps	for	weeks	with
little	or	no	care.

The	Chicken,	from	Jungle
to	Barnyard

Eggs,	then,	are	nearly	a	billion	years	older
than	the	oldest	birds.	The	genus	Gallus,	to



which	the	chicken	belongs,	is	a	mere	8	million
years	old,	and	Gallus	gallus,	the	chicken
species,	has	been	around	only	for	the	last	3	to
4	million	years.

For	a	barnyard	commoner,	the	chicken	has
a	surprisingly	exotic	background.	Its
immediate	ancestors	were	jungle	fowl	native
to	tropical	and	subtropical	Southeast	Asia	and
India.	The	chicken	more	or	less	as	we	know	it
was	probably	domesticated	in	Southeast	Asia
before	7500	BCE,	which	is	when	larger-than-
wild	bones	date	from	in	Chinese	finds	far
north	of	the	jungle	fowl’s	current	range.	By
1500	BCE	chickens	had	found	their	way	to
Sumer	and	Egypt,	and	they	arrived	around	800
BCE	in	Greece,	where	they	became	known	as
“Persian	birds,”	and	where	quail	were	the
primary	source	of	eggs.

The	Domestic	Egg	We’ll	never	know	exactly
why	 chickens	 were	 domesticated,	 but	 they
may	 well	 have	 been	 valued	 more	 for	 their



prolific	 egg	 production	 than	 for	 their	 meat.
Some	birds	will	lay	only	a	set	number	of	eggs
at	a	time,	no	matter	what	happens	to	the	eggs.
Others,	 including	 the	 chicken,	 will	 lay	 until
they	accumulate	a	certain	number	in	the	nest.
If	an	egg	 is	 taken	by	a	predator,	 the	hen	will
lay	 another	 to	 replace	 it	 —	 and	 may	 do	 so
indefinitely.	 Over	 a	 lifetime,	 these
“indeterminate	 layers”	 will	 produce	 many
more	eggs	than	the	“determinate”	layers.	Wild
Indian	 jungle	 fowl	 lay	 clutches	 of	 about
twelve	 glossy,	 brown	 eggs	 a	 few	 times	 each
year.	 In	 industrial	 production	 —	 the
ecological	 equivalent	 of	 unlimited	 food
resources	 combined	 with	 unrelenting
predation	—	 their	 domesticated	 cousins	 will
lay	an	egg	a	day	for	a	year	or	more.

Food	Words:	Egg	and	Yolk
Egg	 comes	 from	 an	 Indo-European	 root
meaning	“bird.”

The	 brusque-sounding	yolk	 is	 rich	 in



overtones	 of	 light	 and	 life.	 It	 comes	 from
the	Old	English	for	“yellow,”	whose	Greek
cousin	meant	 “yellow-green,”	 the	 color	of
new	 plant	 growth.	 Both	 the	 Old	 English
and	 the	 Greek	 derive	 ultimately	 from	 an
Indo-European	root	meaning	“to	gleam,	to
glimmer.”	The	same	root	gave	us	glow	and
gold.

Cooked	Eggs	 Doubtless	 bird	 eggs	 have	 been
roasted	ever	since	humans	mastered	fire;	in	As
You	 Like	 It 	 Shakespeare	 has	 Touchstone	 call
Corin	“damned,	like	an	ill-roasted	egg,	all	on
one	 side.”	 Salting	 and	 pickling	 eggs	 are
ancient	treatments	that	preserved	the	spring’s
bounty	for	use	throughout	the	year.	We	know
from	 the	 recipes	 of	Apicius	 that	 the	Romans
ate	ova	frixa,	elixa,	et	hapala	—	fried,	boiled,
and	 “soft”	 eggs	 —	 and	 the	patina,	 which
could	 be	 a	 savory	 quiche	 or	 a	 sweet	 custard.
By	 medieval	 times,	 the	 French	 were
sophisticated	 omelet	makers	 and	 the	 English



were	 dressing	 poached	 eggs	 with	 the	 sauce
that	would	come	to	be	called	crème	anglaise.
Savory	 yolk-based	 sauces	 and	 egg-white
foams	developed	over	the	next	three	centuries.
By	around	1900,	Escoffier	had	a	repertoire	of
more	 than	 300	 egg	 dishes,	 and	 in	 his
Gastronomie	Pratique,	Ali	Bab	gave	a	playful
recipe	 for	 a	 “Symphony	 of	 Eggs”	—	 a	 four-
egg	 omelet	 containing	 two	 chopped	 hard-
cooked	and	six	whole	poached	eggs.

The	Industrial	Egg

Hen	Fever	The	chicken	underwent	more
evolutionary	change	between	1850	and	1900
than	it	had	in	its	entire	lifetime	as	a	species,
and	under	an	unusual	selection	pressure:	the
fascination	of	Europeans	and	Americans	with
the	exotic	East.	A	political	opening	between
England	and	China	brought	specimens	of
previously	unknown	Chinese	breeds,	the	large,
showy	Cochins,	to	the	West.	These



spectacular	birds,	so	different	from	the	run	of
the	barnyard,	touched	off	a	chicken-breeding
craze	comparable	to	the	Dutch	tulip	mania	of
the	17th	century.	During	this	“hen	fever,”	as
one	observer	of	the	American	scene	called	it,
poultry	shows	were	very	popular	and	hundreds
of	new	breeds	were	developed.

Roman	Custards,	Savory	and	Sweet
Patina	of	Soles

Beat	and	clean	the	soles	and	put	in	patina
[a	shallow	pan].	Throw	in	oil,	liquamen
[fish	sauce],	wine.	While	the	dish	cooks,
pound	and	rub	pepper,	lovage,	oregano;
pour	in	some	of	the	cooking	liquid,	add
raw	eggs,	and	make	into	one	mass.	Pour
over	the	soles	and	cook	on	a	slow	fire.
When	the	dish	has	come	together,	sprinkle
with	pepper	and	serve.

“Cheese”	Patina
Measure	out	enough	milk	for	your	pan,



mix	with	honey	as	for	other	milk	dishes,
add	five	eggs	for	[a	pint],	three	for	[a	half-
pint].	Mix	them	in	the	milk	until	they
make	one	mass,	strain	into	a	dish	from
Cuma,	and	cook	over	a	slow	fire.	When	it
is	ready,	sprinkle	with	pepper	and	serve.

—	from	Apicius,	first	few	centuries	CE
Ordinary	farm	stock	was	also	improved.

Just	a	few	decades	after	its	arrival	in	the
United	States	from	Tuscany	around	1830,
descendents	of	the	White	Leghorn	emerged	as
the	champion	layers.	Versions	of	the	Cornish,
itself	the	offshoot	of	Asiatic	fighting	breeds,
were	deemed	the	best	meat	birds;	and	the
Plymouth	Rock	and	Rhode	Island	Red,	whose
eggs	are	brown,	were	bred	as	dual-purpose
chickens.	As	interest	in	the	show	birds	faded,
the	egg	and	meat	breeds	became	ever	more
dominant.	Today,	an	egg	or	meat	chicken	is
usually	the	product	of	four	purebred
grandparents.	Nearly	all	of	the	diversity
generated	in	the	1800s	has	disappeared.



Among	industrialized	countries,	only	France
and	Australia	have	remained	independent	of
the	handful	of	multinational	corporations	that
provide	laying	stock	to	the	egg	industry.

Mass	 Production	 The	 20th	 century	 saw	 the
general	 farm	 lose	 its	 poultry	 shed	 to	 the
poultry	farm	or	ranch,	which	has	in	turn	been
split	up	into	separate	hatcheries	and	meat	and
egg	factories.	Economies	of	scale	dictate	that
production	units	be	as	large	as	possible	—	one
caretaker	can	manage	a	flock	of	100,000,	and
many	 ranches	 now	 have	 a	 million	 or	 more
laying	 hens.	 Today’s	 typical	 layer	 is	 born	 in
an	incubator,	eats	a	diet	that	originates	largely
in	 the	 laboratory,	 lives	 and	 lays	 on	wire	 and
under	 lights	 for	 about	 a	 year,	 and	 produces
between	250	and	290	eggs.	As	Page	Smith	and
Charles	 Daniel	 put	 it	 in	 their	Chicken	 Book,
the	chicken	is	no	longer	“a	lively	creature	but
merely	 an	 element	 in	 an	 industrial	 process
whose	product	[is]	the	egg.”



A	Medieval	Omelet	and	English	Cream
Arboulastre	(An	Omelet)

[First	prepare	mixed	herbs,	including	rue,
tansy,	mint,	sage,	marjoram,	fennel,
parsley,	violet	leaves,	spinach,	lettuce,
clary,	ginger.]	Then	have	seven	eggs	well
beaten	together,	yolks	and	whites,	and	mix
with	the	herbs.	Then	divide	in	two	and
make	two	allumelles,	which	are	fried	in	the
following	manner.	First	you	heat	your
frying	pan	well	with	oil,	butter,	or
whatever	fat	you	like.	When	it	is	well
heated,	especially	toward	the	handle,	mix
and	cast	your	eggs	upon	the	pan,	and	turn
frequently	with	a	paddle	over	and	under;
then	throw	some	good	grated	cheese	on
top.	Know	that	it	is	done	thus	because	if
you	mix	the	cheese	with	the	eggs	and
herbs,	when	you	fry	the	allumelle,	the
cheese	that	is	underneath	sticks	to	the
pan….	And	when	your	herbs	are	fried	in
the	pan,	shape	your	arboulastre	into	a



square	or	round	form,	and	eat	it	neither	too
hot	nor	too	cold.

—	Le	Ménagier	de	Paris,	ca.	1390
Poche	to	Potage	(Poached	Eggs	in	Crème

Anglaise)
Take	eggs	and	break	them	into	boiling
water,	and	let	them	seethe,	and	when	they
are	done	take	them	out,	and	take	milk	and
yolks	of	eggs,	and	beat	them	well	together,
and	put	them	in	a	pot;	and	add	sugar	or
honey,	and	color	it	with	saffron,	and	let	it
seethe;	and	at	the	first	boil	take	it	off,	and
cast	therein	powder	of	ginger,	and	dress	the
cooked	eggs	in	dishes,	and	pour	the	pottage
above,	and	serve	it	forth.

—	from	a	manuscript	published	in
Antiquitates	Culinariae,	1791	(ca.	1400)

Benefits	and	Costs	The	industrialization	of
the	chicken	has	brought	benefits,	and	these
shouldn’t	be	underestimated.	A	pound	of
broiler	can	now	be	produced	from	less	than
two	pounds	of	feed,	a	pound	of	eggs	from	less



than	three,	so	both	chickens	and	eggs	are
bargains	among	animal	foods.	Egg	quality	has
also	improved.	City	and	country	dwellers
alike	enjoy	fresher,	more	uniform	eggs	than
formerly,	when	small-farm	hens	ran	free	and
laid	in	odd	places,	and	when	spring	eggs	were
stored	until	winter	in	limewater	or	waterglass
(see	p.	115).	Refrigeration	alone	has	made	a
tremendous	difference.	Year-round	laying
(made	possible	by	controlled	lighting	and
temperature),	prompt	gathering	and	cooling,
and	daily	shipping	by	rapid,	refrigerated
transport	mean	that	good	eggs	deteriorate
much	less	between	hen	and	cook	than	they	did
in	the	more	relaxed,	more	humane	past.

There	are	drawbacks	to	the	industrial	egg.
While	average	quality	has	improved,	people
who	pay	close	attention	to	eggs	say	that	flavor
has	suffered:	that	the	chicken’s	natural,	varied
diet	of	grains,	leaves,	and	bugs	provides	a
richness	that	the	commercial	soy	and	fish
meals	don’t.	(This	difference	has	proven	hard



to	document	in	taste	tests;	see	p.	87.)	In
addition,	mass	husbandry	has	played	a	role	in
the	rising	incidence	of	salmonella
contamination.	“Spent”	hens	are	often
recycled	into	feed	for	the	next	generation	of
layers,	so	that	salmonella	infection	is	readily
spread	by	careless	processing.	Finally,	there	is
a	more	difficult	question:	whether	we	can
enjoy	good,	cheap	eggs	more	humanely,
without	reducing	descendents	of	the	spirited
jungle	fowl	to	biological	machines	that	never
see	the	sun,	scratch	in	the	dust,	or	have	more
than	an	inch	or	two	to	move.

Freer	 Range?	 Enough	 people	 have	 become
uncomfortable	 with	 the	 excesses	 of
industrialization,	 and	 willing	 to	 pay	 a
substantial	 premium	 for	 their	 eggs,	 that
smaller-scale,	 “free-range”	 and	 “organically
fed”	 laying	 flocks	 have	made	 a	 comeback	 in
the	United	States	and	Europe.	Swiss	 law	now
requires	that	all	hens	in	that	country	have	free



access	to	the	outdoors.	The	term	“free-range”
can	 be	misleading;	 it	 sometimes	means	 only
that	the	chickens	live	in	a	slightly	larger	cage
than	 usual,	 or	 have	 brief	 access	 to	 the
outdoors.	Still,	with	people	eating	fewer	eggs
in	the	home,	spending	so	little	on	those	eggs,
and	 paying	 more	 attention	 to	 what	 they	 eat,
the	 odds	 are	 good	 that	 this	 modest	 de-
industrialization	of	the	egg	will	continue.

Egg	Biology
and	Chemistry

How	the	Hen	Makes	an	Egg

The	egg	is	so	familiar	that	we	seldom
remember	to	marvel	at	its	making.	All
animals	work	hard	at	the	business	of
reproduction,	but	the	hen	does	more	than
most.	Her	“reproductive	effort,”	defined	as
the	fraction	of	body	weight	that	an	animal
deposits	daily	in	her	potential	offspring,	is



100	times	greater	than	a	human’s.	Each	egg	is
about	3%	of	the	hen’s	weight,	so	in	a	year	of
laying,	she	converts	about	eight	times	her
body	weight	into	eggs.	A	quarter	of	her	daily
energy	expenditure	goes	toward	egg-making;
a	duck	puts	in	half.

The	chicken	egg	begins	with	the	pinhead-
sized	white	disc	that	we	see	riding	atop	the
yellow	yolk.	This	is	the	business	end	of	the
egg,	the	living	germ	cell	that	contains	the
hen’s	chromosomes.	A	hen	is	born	with
several	thousand	microscopic	germ	cells	in
her	single	ovary.

Making	the	Yolk 	As	the	hen	grows,	her	germ
cells	 gradually	 reach	 a	 few	 millimeters	 in
diameter,	 and	 after	 two	 or	 three	 months
accumulate	 a	white,	 primordial	 form	 of	 yolk
inside	their	thin	surrounding	membrane.	(The
white	yolk	can	be	seen	in	a	hard-cooked	egg;
see	box,	p.	74.)	When	 the	hen	 reaches	 laying
age	 at	 between	 four	 and	 six	months,	 the	 egg



cells	 begin	 to	mature,	 with	 different	 cells	 at
different	 stages	 at	 any	 given	 time.	 Full
maturation	takes	about	 ten	weeks.	During	the
tenth,	 the	 germ	 cell	 rapidly	 accumulates
yellow	 yolk,	mostly	 fats	 and	 proteins,	which
is	 synthesized	 in	 the	 hen’s	 liver.	 Its	 color
depends	on	 the	pigments	 in	 the	hen’s	 feed;	a
diet	 rich	 in	 corn	 or	 alfalfa	 makes	 a	 deeper
yellow.	 If	 the	hen	 feeds	only	once	or	 twice	a
day,	her	yolk	will	show	distinct	layers	of	dark
and	light.	In	the	end,	the	yolk	comes	to	dwarf
the	 germ	 cell,	 containing	 as	 it	 must	 the
provisions	for	21	days	during	which	the	chick
will	develop	on	its	own.

Making	 the	 White	 The	 rest	 of	 the	 egg
provides	 both	 nourishment	 and	 protective
housing	 for	 the	 germ	 cell.	 Its	 construction
takes	 about	 25	 hours	 and	 begins	 when	 the
ovary	releases	the	completed	yolk.	The	yolk	is
then	gripped	by	the	funnel-shaped	opening	of
the	 oviduct,	 a	 tube	 2–3	 feet/0.6–0.9	 meter



long.	 If	 the	 hen	 has	 mated	 in	 recent	 days,
there	will	 be	 sperm	 stored	 in	 a	 “nest”	 at	 the
upper	 end	 of	 the	 oviduct,	 and	 one	 will	 fuse
with	 the	 egg	 cell.	 Fertilized	 or	 not	 —	 and
most	 eggs	 are	 not	—	 the	 yolk	 spends	 two	 to
three	 hours	 slowly	 passing	 down	 the	 upper
end	 of	 the	 oviduct.	 Protein-secreting	 cells	 in
the	oviduct	lining	add	a	thickening	layer	to	its
membrane,	and	then	coat	it	with	about	half	the
final	 volume	 of	 the	 egg	 white,	 or	albumen
(from	 the	 Latin	albus,	 meaning	 “white”).
They	 apply	 this	 portion	 of	 albumen	 in	 four
layers	 that	 are	 alternately	 thick	 and	 thin	 in
consistency.

The	first	thick	layer	of	albumen	protein	is
twisted	by	spiraling	grooves	in	the	oviduct
wall	to	form	the	chalazae	(from	the	Greek	for
“small	lump,”	“hailstone”),	two	dense,
slightly	elastic	cords	which	anchor	the	yolk	to
the	ends	of	the	shell	and	allow	it	to	rotate
while	suspending	it	in	the	middle	of	the	egg.
This	system	keeps	as	much	cushioning



albumen	as	possible	between	the	embryo	and
the	shell,	and	prevents	premature	contact
between	shell	and	embryo,	which	could	distort
the	embryo’s	development.

Membranes,	 Water,	 and	 Shell 	 Once	 the
albumen	 proteins	 have	 been	 applied	 to	 the
yolk,	 it	 spends	an	hour	 in	 the	next	 section	of
the	 oviduct	 being	 loosely	 enclosed	 in	 two
tough,	 antimicrobial	 protein	 membranes	 that
are	 attached	 to	 each	other	 everywhere	except
for	 one	 end,	 where	 the	 air	 pocket	 will	 later
develop	 to	supply	 the	hatching	chick	with	 its
first	 gulps	 of	 air.	 Then	 comes	 a	 long	 stretch
—	19	or	20	hours	—	in	the	2-inch-/5-cm-long
uterus,	or	shell	gland.	For	five	hours,	cells	 in
the	uterus	wall	pump	water	and	salts	 through
the	 membranes	 and	 into	 the	 albumen	 and
“plump”	the	egg	to	its	full	volume.	When	the
membranes	 are	 taut,	 the	 uterine	 lining
secretes	 calcium	 carbonate	 and	 protein	 to
form	 the	 shell,	 a	 process	 that	 takes	 about	 14



hours.	Since	the	embryo	needs	air,	the	shell	is
riddled	(especially	at	the	blunt	end)	with	some
10,000	pores	that	add	up	to	a	hole	about	2	mm
in	diameter.

Germ-Side	Up:	Primordial	Yolk
Have	you	ever	noticed	that	when	you	crack
open	 a	 raw	 egg,	 the	 germ	 cell	 —	 the
pinhead-sized	 white	 disc	 that	 carries	 the
hen’s	DNA	—	usually	comes	to	the	top	of
the	yolk?	It	does	so	because	the	channel	of
primordial	 white	 yolk	 below	 it	 is	 less
dense	 than	 the	 yellow	 yolk	—	 so	 the	 egg
cell’s	side	of	the	yolk	is	lighter,	and	rises.
In	 the	 intact	 egg,	 the	 chalazae	 allow	 the
germ	cell	to	return	to	the	top	whenever	the
hen	rearranges	her	eggs.

That	persistent	bit	of	uncoagulated	yolk
at	 the	 center	 of	 a	 hard-cooked	 egg	 is
primordial	 white	 yolk,	 especially	 rich	 in
iron,	 which	 the	 hen	 deposits	 in	 its	 eggs
when	 they’re	 barely	 a	 quarter-inch/6	 mm



in	diameter.
Cuticle	and	Color	The	hen’s	finishing	touch
on	her	egg	is	a	thin	proteinaceous	cuticle.	This
coating	initially	plugs	up	the	pores	to	slow
water	loss	and	block	the	entry	of	bacteria,	but
gradually	fractures	to	allow	the	chick	to	get
enough	oxygen.	Along	with	the	cuticle	comes
color,	in	the	form	of	chemical	relatives	of
hemoglobin.	Egg	color	is	determined	by	the
hen’s	genetic	background,	and	has	no	relation
to	the	egg’s	taste	or	nutritional	value.
Leghorns	lay	very	lightly	pigmented	“white”
eggs.	Brown	eggs	are	produced	by	breeds	that
were	originally	dual-purpose	egg	and	meat
birds,	including	Rhode	Island	Reds	and
Plymouth	Rocks;	New	Hampshire	and
Australorps	hens	were	bred	for	intensive
brown-egg	production.	Chinese	Cochin	hens
paint	their	eggs	with	fine	yellow	dots.	Thanks
to	a	dominant	trait	unknown	in	any	other	wild
or	domestic	chickens,	the	rare	Chilean
Araucana	lays	blue	eggs.	Crosses	between



Araucanas	and	brown-egg	breeds	make	both
blue	and	brown	pigments	and	thus	green
shells.

The	completed	egg	is	expelled	blunt	end
first	about	25	hours	after	leaving	the	ovary.
As	the	egg	cools	down	from	the	hen’s	high
body	temperature	(106ºF/41ºC),	its	contents
shrink	slightly.	This	contraction	pulls	the
inner	shell	membrane	away	from	its	outer
partner	at	the	blunt	end	and	thereby	forms	the
air	space,	whose	size	is	an	indicator	of	egg
freshness	(p.	81).

The	Yolk

The	yolk	accounts	for	just	over	a	third	of	a
shelled	egg’s	weight,	and	its	biological
purpose	is	almost	exclusively	nutritive.	It
carries	three-quarters	of	the	calories	and	most
of	the	iron,	thiamin,	and	vitamin	A	of	the	egg
as	a	whole.	The	yolk’s	yellow	color	comes	not
from	the	vitamin-A	precursor	beta-carotene,



the	orange	pigment	in	carrots	and	other	plant
foods,	but	from	plant	pigments	called
xanthophylls	(p.	267),	which	the	hen	obtains
mainly	from	alfalfa	and	corn	feeds.	Producers
may	supplement	the	feeds	with	marigold
petals	and	other	additives	to	deepen	the	color.
Duck	yolks	owe	their	deeper	orange	color
both	to	beta-carotene	and	to	the	reddish
pigment	canthaxanthin,	which	wild	ducks
obtain	from	small	water	insects	and
crustaceans,	egg-laying	ducks	from	feed
supplements.	One	minor	component	of	the
yolk	that	can	cause	a	major	culinary	disaster
is	the	starch-digesting	enzyme	amylase,	which
has	liquefied	many	a	normal-looking	pie
filling	from	within	(see	p.	98).

Spheres	 Within	 Spheres	 That’s	 a	 yolk	 by
numbers	and	nutrients.	But	there’s	a	lot	more
to	this	concentrated	pool	of	the	sun’s	rays.	Its
structure	is	intricate,	much	like	a	Chinese	set
of	nested	 spheres	 carved	 from	a	 single	block



of	 jade.	 We	 see	 the	 first	 layer	 of	 structure
whenever	 we	 cut	 into	 a	 hard-cooked	 egg.
Where	 heat	 gels	 the	 white	 into	 a	 smooth,
continuous	mass,	the	yolk	sets	into	a	crumbly
mass	 of	 separate	 particles.	 The	 intact	 yolk
turns	out	to	consist	of	spherical	compartments
about	 a	 tenth	 of	 a	 millimeter	 across,	 each
contained	within	a	flexible	membrane,	and	so
tightly	packed	that	they’re	distorted	into	flat-
sided	 shapes	 (much	 like	 the	 oil	 droplets	 that
egg	yolk	stabilizes	in	mayonnaise;	see	p.	626).
When	 a	 yolk	 is	 cooked	 intact,	 these	 spheres
harden	 into	 individual	 particles	 and	 give	 the
yolk	 its	 characteristic	 crumbly	 texture.	 But
break	 the	yolk	out	before	you	cook	 it	 so	 that
the	 spheres	 can	move	 freely,	 and	 it	 becomes
less	granular.



The	structure	of	the	hen’s	egg.	The	egg	white
provides	physical	and	chemical	protection	for
the	living	germ	cell,	and	protein	and	water	for
its	development	 into	a	chick.	The	yolk	 is	rich
in	 fats,	 proteins,	 vitamins	 and	 minerals.	 The
layering	of	color	 in	 the	yolk	 is	caused	by	 the
hen’s	 periodic	 ingestion	 of	 grain	 and	 its	 fat-
soluble	pigments.

What’s	inside	these	large	yolk	spheres?
Though	we	think	of	the	yolk	as	rich	and	fatty,
in	fact	its	chambers	are	filled	mostly	with
water.	Floating	in	that	water	are	sub-spheres
about	one	hundredth	the	size	of	the	spheres.
The	subspheres	are	too	small	to	see	with	the
naked	eye	or	to	be	broken	up	by	a	kitchen
beating.	But	they	can	be	seen	indirectly,	and
disrupted	chemically.	Yolk	is	cloudy	because
these	subspheres	are	large	enough	to	deflect
light	and	prevent	it	from	passing	through	the
yolk	directly.	Add	a	pinch	of	salt	to	a	yolk	(as
you	do	when	making	mayonnaise)	and	you’ll
see	the	yolk	become	simultaneously	clearer



and	thicker.	Salt	breaks	apart	the	light-
deflecting	sub-spheres	into	components	that
are	too	small	to	deflect	light	—	and	so	the
yolk	clears	up.

And	what	do	the	subspheres	contain?	A
mixture	similar	to	the	liquid	that	surrounds
them	in	the	spheres.	First,	water.	Dissolved	in
the	water,	proteins:	hen	blood	proteins	outside
the	subspheres;	inside,	phosphorus-rich
proteins	that	bind	up	most	of	the	egg’s	iron
supply.	And	suspended	in	the	water,	sub
subspheres	about	40	times	smaller	than	the
subspheres,	some	of	which	turn	out	to	be
familiar	from	the	human	body.	The
subsubspheres	are	aggregates	of	four	different
kinds	of	molecules:	a	core	of	fat	surrounded
by	a	protective	shell	of	protein,	cholesterol,
and	phospholipid,	a	hybrid	fat-water	mediator
which	in	the	egg	is	mainly	lecithin.	Most	of
these	subsubspheres	are	“low-density
lipoproteins,”	or	LDLs	—	essentially	the	same
particles	that	we	keep	track	of	in	our	own



blood	to	monitor	our	cholesterol	levels.
Stand	back	from	all	these	spheres	within

spheres	and	the	picture	becomes	less	dizzying.
The	yolk	is	a	bag	of	water	that	contains	free-
floating	proteins	and	protein-fat-cholesterol-
lecithin	aggregates	—	and	these	lipoprotein
aggregates	are	what	give	the	yolk	its
remarkable	capacities	for	emulsifying	and
enriching.

An	 egg	 yolk	 granule	 as	 seen	 through	 the
electron	microscope.	 It	has	 fallen	apart	after
immersion	 in	 a	 salt	 solution,	 and	 is	 an
intricate	 assembly	 of	 proteins,	 fats,
phospholipids,	and	cholesterol.

The	White



The	White

Next	to	the	yolk’s	riches,	the	white	seems
colorless	and	bland.	It	accounts	for	nearly	two
thirds	of	the	egg’s	shelled	weight,	but	nearly
90%	of	that	is	water.	The	rest	is	protein,	with
only	traces	of	minerals,	fatty	material,
vitamins	(riboflavin	gives	the	raw	white	a
slightly	yellow-green	cast)	and	glucose.	The
quarter-gram	of	glucose,	which	is	essential	for
the	embryo’s	early	growth,	isn’t	enough	to
sweeten	the	white,	though	in	such
preparations	as	long-cooked	eggs	(p.	89)	and
thousand-year	preserved	eggs	(p.	116)	it’s
sufficient	to	turn	the	white	a	dramatic	brown.
The	white’s	structural	interest	is	limited	to	the
fact	that	it	comes	in	two	consistencies,	thick
and	thin,	with	the	yolk	cords	being	a	twisted
version	of	the	thick.

Protective	Proteins	Pale	though	it	is,	the	egg
white	 has	 surprising	 depths.	 Of	 course	 it
supplies	the	developing	embryo	with	essential



water	 and	 protein.	 But	 biochemical	 studies
have	 revealed	 that	 the	 albumen	 proteins	 are
not	 mere	 baby	 food.	 At	 least	 four	 of	 the
proteins	 block	 the	 action	 of	 digestive
enzymes.	 At	 least	 three	 bind	 tightly	 to
vitamins,	 which	 prevents	 them	 from	 being
useful	 to	 other	 creatures,	 and	 one	 does	 the
same	 for	 iron,	 an	 essential	 mineral	 for
bacteria	 and	 animals	 alike.	 One	 protein
inhibits	 the	 reproduction	 of	 viruses,	 and
another	 digests	 the	 cell	 walls	 of	 bacteria.	 In
sum,	 the	 egg	white	 is	 first	 of	 all	 a	 chemical
shield	against	 infection	and	predation,	 forged
during	 millions	 of	 years	 of	 battling	 between
the	 nourishing	 egg	 and	 a	 world	 of	 hungry
microbes	and	animals.

The	Proteins	in	Egg	White

Protein Percent	of	Total
Albumen	Protein



Ovalbumin 54
Ovotransferrin 12
Ovomucoid 11
Globulins 8
Lysozyme 3.5
Ovomucin 1.5
Avidin 0.06
Others 10

Protein Natural	Functions

Ovalbumin Nourishment;	blocks	digestive
enzymes?

Ovotransferrin Binds	iron
Ovomucoid Blocks	digestive	enzymes
Globulins Plug	defects	in	membranes,	shell?

Lysozyme Enzyme	that	digests	bacterial	cell
walls

Thickens	albumen;	inhibits
Ovomucin



viruses
Avidin Binds	vitamin	(biotin)

Others Bind	vitamins	(2+);	block	digestive
enzymes	(3+)…

Protein Culinary	Properties
Ovalbumin Sets	when	heated	to	180ºF/80ºC

Ovotransferrin Sets	when	heated	to
140ºF/60ºC	or	foamed

Ovomucoid ?

Globulins Sets	when	heated	to	170ºF/75ºC;
stabilizes	foam

Lysozyme Enzyme	that	digests	bacterial	cell
walls

Ovomucin Stabilizes	foam
Avidin ?
Others ?

A	 few	 of	 the	 dozen	 or	 so	 egg-white



proteins	are	especially	important	for	the	cook
and	worth	knowing	by	name.

Ovomucin	accounts	for	less	than	2%	of
the	total	albumen	protein,	but	has	by	far
the	greatest	influence	on	the	fresh	egg’s
commercial	and	culinary	value.	It	makes
fried	and	poached	eggs	compact	and
attractive	by	making	the	thick	white
thick	—	40	times	more	so	than	the	thin
white.	Ovomucin	somehow	pulls	together
the	otherwise	soupy	protein	solution	into
an	organized	structure;	gently	tear	a
piece	of	hard-cooked	white	and	you	can
see	its	laminations	along	the	edge	of	the
tear.	This	structure	is	thought	to	help
cushion	the	yolk	and	slow	the	penetration
of	microbes	through	the	white.	It
gradually	disintegrates	with	age	in	the
raw	egg,	which	may	make	the	white	more
digestible	for	the	developing	chick,	and
certainly	makes	the	egg	less	useful	for
the	cook.



Ovalbumin,	the	most	plentiful	egg
protein,	was	the	first	protein	ever
crystallized	in	the	laboratory	(in	1890),
yet	its	natural	function	remains	unclear.
It	seems	related	to	a	family	of	proteins
that	inhibit	protein-digesting	enzymes,
and	may	be	a	mainly	nutritional	relic	of
ancient	battles	against	a	now-extinct
microbe.	It	is	the	only	egg	protein	to
have	reactive	sulfur	groups,	which	make
decisive	contributions	to	the	flavor,
texture,	and	color	of	cooked	eggs.
Interestingly	for	the	cook,	ovalbumin’s
heat	resistance	increases	for	several	days
after	laying,	so	that	very	fresh	eggs	need
less	cooking	for	a	given	consistency	than
eggs	a	few	days	old.
Ovotransferrin	holds	tightly	onto	iron
atoms	to	prevent	bacteria	from	using
them,	and	to	transport	iron	in	the
developing	chick’s	body.	It	is	the	first
protein	to	coagulate	when	an	egg	is



heated,	and	so	determines	the
temperature	at	which	eggs	set.	The
setting	temperature	is	higher	for	whole
eggs	than	for	egg	white,	because
ovotransferrin	becomes	more	stable	and
resistant	to	coagulation	when	it	binds	the
abundant	iron	in	the	yolk.	The	color	of
ovotransferrin	changes	when	it	latches
onto	metals,	which	is	why	egg	whites
whipped	in	a	copper	bowl	turn	golden;
you	can	also	make	a	pink	meringue	by
dosing	the	whites	with	a	pinch	of	ground-
up	iron	supplement.

The	Nutritional	Value	of	Eggs

An	egg	contains	everything	you	need	to	make
a	chick,	all	the	ingredients	and	chemical
machinery	and	fuel.	That	fact	is	its	strength	as
a	food.	Cooked	—	to	neutralize	the	protective
antinutritional	proteins	—	the	egg	is	one	of
the	most	nutritious	foods	we	have.	(Raw,	it



causes	laboratory	animals	to	lose	weight.)	It’s
unmatched	as	a	balanced	source	of	the	amino
acids	necessary	for	animal	life;	it	includes	a
plentiful	supply	of	linoleic	acid,	a
polyunsaturated	fatty	acid	that’s	essential	in
the	human	diet,	as	well	as	of	several	minerals,
most	vitamins,	and	two	plant	pigments,	lutein
and	zeaxanthin,	that	are	especially	valuable
antioxidants	(p.	255).	The	egg	is	a	rich
package.

Cholesterol	 in	Eggs	Too	 rich	 for	 our	 blood,
it’s	been	 thought:	a	belief	 that	contributed	 to
the	 steep	 drop	 in	 U.S.	 egg	 consumption
beginning	 around	 1950.	Among	 our	 common
foods,	 the	 egg	 is	 the	 richest	 source	 of
cholesterol.	 One	 large	 egg	 contains	 around
215	 milligrams,	 while	 an	 equivalent	 portion
of	meat	has	about	50.

Why	is	there	so	much	cholesterol	in	the
egg?	Because	it’s	an	essential	component	of
animal	cell	membranes,	of	which	the	chicken



embryo	must	construct	many	millions	before
it	hatches.	There	is	some	variability	in	the
cholesterol	contents	of	different	breeds,	and
the	hen’s	diet	has	some	effect	—	a	feed	high
in	sitosterol,	a	vegetable	relative	of
cholesterol,	brings	egg	cholesterol	down	by	a
third.	But	these	reductions	still	leave	egg	yolk
way	ahead	of	most	other	foods.

Since	high	blood	cholesterol	does	increase
the	risk	of	heart	disease,	many	medical
associations	have	long	recommended	limiting
our	yolk	consumption	to	two	or	three	per
week.	However,	recent	studies	of	moderate
eaters	have	shown	that	egg	consumption	has
little	influence	on	blood	cholesterol.	This	is
partly	because	blood	cholesterol	is	raised	far
more	powerfully	by	saturated	fats	in	the	diet
than	by	cholesterol	itself,	and	most	of	the	fat
in	egg	yolk	is	unsaturated.	It	also	appears	that
other	fatty	substances	in	the	yolk,	the
phospholipids,	interfere	with	our	absorption
of	yolk	cholesterol.	So	there	no	longer	seems



to	be	any	reason	to	bother	counting	our
weekly	yolks.	Of	course,	eggs	shouldn’t
displace	positively	heart-protective	fruits	and
vegetables	from	the	diet;	and	on	a	strict
regimen	to	deal	with	serious	heart	disease	or
obesity,	it	may	make	sense	to	avoid	egg	yolks
along	with	similarly	fatty	animal	foods.	Better
than	60%	of	the	calories	in	a	whole	egg	come
from	fat,	a	third	of	them	from	saturated	fat.

Egg	 Substitutes	 Largely	 impelled	 by	 the
public	 desire	 for	 cholesterol-free	 eggs,	 food
manufacturers	 have	 come	 up	 with
formulations	 that	 imitate	 whole	 beaten	 eggs,
and	 can	 be	 cooked	 into	 scrambled	 eggs	 or
omelets	 or	 used	 in	 baking.	 These	 products
consist	 of	 genuine	 egg	whites	mixed	with	 an
imitation	 of	 the	 yolk,	which	 is	 usually	made
from	 vegetable	 oil,	 milk	 solids,	 gums	 that
provide	 a	 thick	 consistency,	 as	 well	 as
colorings,	flavorings,	and	vitamin	and	mineral
supplements.



Fertilized	 Eggs	 Despite	 folklore	 to	 the
contrary,	 there	 is	 no	 detectable	 nutritional
difference	between	unfertilized	 and	 fertilized
eggs.	By	 the	 time	a	 fertilized	egg	 is	 laid,	 the
single	 germ	 cell	 has	 divided	 into	 tens	 of
thousands	 of	 cells,	 but	 its	 diameter	 has	 only
grown	 from	 3.5	 millimeters	 to	 4.5,	 and	 any
biochemical	 changes	 are	 negligible.
Refrigerated	 storage	 prevents	 any	 further
growth	 or	 development.	 In	 the	 U.S.	 grading
system,	 any	 significant	 development	 of	 the
egg	 —	 from	 minute	 blood	 vessels	 (which
appear	 after	 two	 to	 three	 days	 of	 incubation)
to	 a	 recognizable	 embryo	—	 is	 considered	 a
major	defect,	and	automatically	puts	 it	 in	 the
“inedible”	 category.	 Of	 course	 this	 is	 a
cultural	 judgment.	 In	 China	 and	 the
Philippines,	 for	 example,	 duck	 eggs
containing	 two-	 to	 three-week	 embryos	 are
boiled	 and	 eaten,	 in	 part	 for	 their	 supposed
contribution	 to	 virility.	 Because	 embryos
obtain	some	nourishment	from	the	shell,	these



duck	 embryos	 do	 contain	more	 calcium	 than
the	eggs	that	they	developed	from.

The	Composition	of	a	U.S.	Large	Egg
A	shelled	U.S.	Large	egg	weighs	2	ounces,
or	 55	 grams.	 In	 the	 following	 table,	 all
weights	 are	 given	 in	 grams	 (g)	 or
thousandths	 of	 a	 gram	 (mg).	 Fat	 accounts
for	 about	 60%	 of	 the	 calories	 in	 an	 egg,
saturated	fat	around	20%.

Whole	Egg Egg	White Egg	Yolk
Weight 55	g 38	g 17	g
Protein 6.6	g 3.9	g 2.7	g
Carbohydrate 0.6	g 0.3	g 0.3	g
Fat 6	g 0 6	g
Monounsaturated 2.5	g 0 2.5	g
Polyunsaturated 0.7	g 0 0.7	g
Saturated 2	g 0 2	g
Cholesterol 213	mg 0 213	mg



Sodium 71	mg 62	mg 9	mg
Calories 84 20 64
Egg	Allergies	Eggs	are	one	of	the	commonest
foods	to	which	people	develop	food	allergies.
Portions	of	the	major	egg-white	protein
ovalbumin	appear	to	be	the	usual	culprits.	The
immune	system	of	sensitive	people	interprets
these	parts	of	ovalbumin	to	be	a	threat,	and
mounts	a	massive	and	self-destructive	defense
that	can	take	the	form	of	fatal	shock.	Since	a
sensitivity	to	egg	white	often	forms	in	early
life,	pediatricians	commonly	recommend	that
children	not	eat	egg	whites	until	after	the	age
of	one.	Egg	yolks	are	far	less	allergenic	and
can	safely	be	eaten	by	nearly	all	infants.

Egg	Quality,	Handling,
and	Safety

What	is	a	good	egg?	An	intact,
uncontaminated	egg	with	a	strong	shell;	a
firm	yolk	and	yolk	membrane,	which	prevents



the	yolk	from	breaking	and	mixing	with	the
white;	and	a	high	proportion	of	cohesive,
jellylike	thick	white	compared	to	runny	thin
white.

And	what	makes	a	good	egg?	Above	all,	a
good	hen:	a	hen	of	a	select	laying	breed	that	is
healthy	and	not	approaching	the	end	of	a
laying	year,	when	shells	and	whites
deteriorate	(this	stage	is	shortened	by
restricting	the	hen’s	food,	which	induces	her
to	molt	and	reset	her	biological	clock).	A
nutritious	feed,	free	of	contaminants,	and
without	ingredients	(fish	meal,	raw	soy	meal)
that	impart	off-flavors.	And	careful	evaluation
and	handling	once	the	egg	leaves	the	hen.

In	order	to	determine	egg	quality	without
actually	breaking	them,	producers	candle	their
eggs,	or	place	them	in	front	of	a	light	bright
enough	to	pass	through	them	and	illuminate
their	contents.	(Candle	and	eye	were	the
original	equipment;	today	electric	lights	and
scanners	do	the	work	automatically.)	Candling



readily	detects	cracks	in	the	shell,	harmless
but	unappealing	blood	spots	on	the	yolk	(from
burst	capillaries	in	the	hen’s	ovary	or	yolk
sac),	and	“meat	spots”	in	the	whites	(either
brown	blood	spots	or	tiny	bits	of	tissue
sloughed	off	from	the	oviduct	wall),	and	large
air	cells,	all	characteristics	that	relegate	an
egg	to	the	lower	grades.	To	determine	the
condition	of	the	yolk	and	white,	the	egg	is
quickly	twirled.	The	yolk’s	shadow	will
remain	indistinct	if	its	membrane	is	strong
enough	and	the	white	thick	enough	to	have
kept	it	from	getting	close	to	the	shell.	If	the
yolk	is	easy	to	see,	then	it’s	too	easily
deformed	or	mobile,	and	the	egg	is	of	lower
quality.

Egg	Grades

Eggs	sold	in	stores	are	usually	(but	not
mandatorily)	classified	by	United	States
Department	of	Agriculture	(USDA)	grades.



Egg	grade	has	nothing	to	do	with	either
freshness	or	size,	and	is	not	a	guarantee	of	egg
quality	in	your	kitchen.	It’s	an	approximate
indication	of	the	quality	of	the	egg	back	at	the
ranch,	at	the	time	it	was	collected.	Because
candling	isn’t	foolproof,	USDA	definitions
allow	several	eggs	per	carton	to	be	below
grade	at	the	time	of	packing.	Once	the	eggs
have	arrived	in	stores,	the	below-grade
allowance	doubles,	because	egg	quality
naturally	declines	with	time,	and	jostling	and
vibration	during	transport	can	cause	the	white
to	thin	out.

Generally,	only	the	two	top	grades,	AA	and
A,	are	seen	in	stores.	If	you’re	going	to	use
eggs	fairly	soon	and	will	be	scrambling	them
or	making	a	custard	or	pancakes,	then	the
higher	grade	isn’t	worth	the	higher	price.	But
if	you	go	through	eggs	slowly,	or	like	your
hard-boiled	yolks	well	centered	and	your
poached	and	fried	eggs	neat	and	compact,	or
are	planning	to	make	a	meringue,	soufflé,	or



egg-leavened	cake,	then	you	may	be	better	off
with	the	premium	grade,	with	its	thicker	white
and	a	yolk	membrane	less	likely	to	leak	foam-
lowering	yolk	into	the	white.

In	any	case,	the	quality	of	a	carton	of	eggs
depends	mainly	on	how	old	they	are.	Even
Grade	AA	eggs	eventually	develop	flat	yolks
and	thin	whites.	So	be	sure	to	check	the	sell-
by	date	stamped	on	the	carton	(usually	four
weeks	from	the	packing	date;	sometimes	the
pack	date	itself	is	indicated	by	a	single
number	from	1	to	365),	and	choose	the	carton
with	the	latest	date.	Fresh	grade	A	eggs	can	be
a	better	buy	than	old	grade	AA.

Deterioration	in	Egg	Quality

Designed	as	it	was	to	protect	itself	for	the
duration	of	the	chick’s	development,	the	egg
is	unique	among	our	raw	animal	foods	in	its
ability	to	remain	edible	for	weeks,	as	long	as
it’s	kept	intact	and	cool.	Even	so,	the	moment



the	egg	leaves	the	hen,	it	begins	to	deteriorate
in	important	ways.	There	is	a	fundamental
chemical	change:	both	the	yolk	and	the	white
get	more	alkaline	(less	acidic)	with	time.	This
is	because	the	egg	contains	carbon	dioxide,
which	takes	the	form	of	carbonic	acid	when
it’s	dissolved	in	the	white	and	yolk,	but	is
slowly	lost	in	its	gaseous	form	through	the
pores	in	the	shell.	The	pH	scale	provides	a
measure	of	acidity	and	alkalinity	(p.	795).	On
the	pH	scale,	the	yolk	rises	from	a	slightly
acidic	pH	of	6.0	to	a	nearly	neutral	6.6,	while
the	albumen	goes	from	a	somewhat	alkaline
7.7	to	a	very	alkaline	9.2	and	sometimes
higher.

This	alkalinization	of	the	white	has	highly
visible	consequences.	Because	albumen
proteins	at	the	pH	of	a	fresh	egg	tend	to
cluster	in	masses	large	enough	to	deflect	light
rays,	the	white	of	a	fresh	egg	is	indeed
cloudily	white.	In	more	alkaline	conditions
these	proteins	repel	each	other	rather	than



cluster,	so	the	white	of	an	older	egg	tends	to
be	clear,	not	cloudy.	And	the	white	gets
progressively	more	runny	with	time:	the
proportion	of	thick	albumen	to	thin,	initially
about	60%	to	40%,	falls	below	50–50.

The	relatively	minor	change	in	yolk	acidity
is	less	important	than	a	simple	physical
change.	The	yolk	starts	out	with	more
dissolved	molecules	than	the	white,	and	this
osmotic	imbalance	creates	a	natural	pressure
for	water	in	the	white	to	migrate	across	the
yolk	membrane.	At	refrigerator	temperatures,
about	5	milligrams	of	water	cross	into	the
yolk	each	day.	This	influx	causes	the	yolk	to
swell,	which	stretches	and	weakens	the	yolk
membrane.	And	the	added	water	thins	the	yolk
dramatically.

A	Home	Test 	Finally,	the	egg	as	a	whole	also
loses	moisture	through	its	porous	shell,	so	the
contents	of	 the	egg	shrink,	and	 the	air	cell	at
the	wide	end	expands.	Even	an	oil-coated	egg



in	a	humid	 refrigerator	 loses	4	milligrams	of
water	 to	 evaporation	 each	 day.	The	 cook	 can
use	 this	 moisture	 loss	 to	 estimate	 the
freshness	 of	 an	 egg.	A	 new	 egg	 with	 an	 air
space	 less	 than	1/8	 inch/3	mm	deep	 is	denser
than	 water	 and	 will	 sink	 to	 the	 bottom	 of	 a
bowl	of	water.	As	an	egg	ages	and	its	air	cell
expands,	 it	gets	progressively	 less	dense,	and
the	 wide	 end	 of	 the	 egg	 rises	 higher	 and
higher	in	the	water.	An	egg	that	actually	floats
is	 very	 old	 and	 should	 be	 discarded.	Around
1750,	 the	 English	 cookbook	 author	 Hannah
Glasse	 gave	 two	 ways	 of	 determining	 the
freshness	 of	 an	 egg,	 an	 important	 talent	 at	 a
time	when	it	might	have	been	sitting	for	some
time	 in	 an	 odd	 corner	 of	 the	 yard.	One	 is	 to
feel	 how	 warm	 it	 is	 —	 probably	 less	 than
reliable	 —	 but	 the	 second	 indirectly	 assays
the	 air	 cell:	 “[Another	 way]	 to	 know	 a	 good
egg,	is	to	put	the	egg	into	a	pan	of	cold	water;
the	fresher	the	egg	the	sooner	it	will	fall	to	the
bottom;	if	rotten,	it	will	swim	at	the	top.”



Three	 different	 grades	 of	 eggs.	 The	 AA	 egg
has	 a	 high	 proportion	 of	 thick	 white	 and	 a
firm,	rounded	yolk.	The	A	egg	has	a	less	thick
albumen	 and	 a	 weaker	 yolk	 membrane,	 so	 it
spreads	more	when	cracked	into	a	pan.	The	B
egg	 spreads	 even	 further,	 and	 its	 yolk
membrane	is	easily	broken.

All	of	these	trends	are	probably	part	of	the
normal	development	of	the	egg.	The	increase
in	alkalinity	makes	the	albumen	even	less
hospitable	to	invading	bacteria	and	molds.
The	thinning	of	the	albumen	allows	the	yolk
to	rise	and	the	embryo	to	approach	the	shell,
its	early	source	of	oxygen,	and	may	make	it
easier	for	the	embryo	to	tap	the	shell’s
calcium	stores.	A	weaker	yolk	membrane
could	mean	an	easier	attachment	to	the	shell
membranes.	And	the	larger	air	cell	gives	the
chick	more	oxygen	for	its	first	few	breaths.

These	changes	may	be	good	for	the	chick,
but	they’re	mostly	bad	for	the	cook.	A	thinner



white	is	runnier	in	the	pan;	a	flabby	yolk
membrane	is	more	likely	to	break	when	the
egg	is	cracked	open;	and	a	large	air	cell	means
an	irregular	shape	for	a	whole	hard-cooked
egg.	The	only	culinary	benefit	to	an	older	egg
is	that	it’s	easier	to	peel.

Handling	and	Storing	Eggs

Producers	handle	eggs	in	ways	that	are	meant
to	slow	down	the	inevitable	deterioration	in
quality.	Eggs	are	gathered	as	shortly	after
laying	as	possible	and	immediately	cooled.	In
the	United	States,	they	are	then	washed	in
warm	water	and	detergent	to	remove	the
thousands	of	bacteria	deposited	on	the	shell
during	its	passage	through	the	hen’s	cloacal
opening.	In	the	past,	the	washed	eggs	were
given	a	fresh	coat	of	mineral	oil	to	retard	the
loss	of	both	CO2	and	moisture;	today,	with
most	eggs	getting	to	market	just	two	days
after	laying	and	refrigerated	during	shipping



as	well	as	storage,	oiling	is	limited	to	long
haul	delivery	routes.

Egg	 Storage	 at	 Home:	 Cold,	 Still,	 Sealed
Egg	 quality	 deteriorates	 as	much	 in	 a	 day	 at
room	 temperature	 as	 in	 four	 days	 under
refrigeration,	 and	 salmonella	 bacteria	 (p.	 83)
multiply	much	faster	at	room	temperature.	So
it’s	 best	 to	 buy	 your	 eggs	 cold	—	out	 of	 the
cooler,	not	off	an	open	shelf	—	and	keep	them
cold.	 Agitation	 thins	 the	 white,	 so	 an	 inner
refrigerator	shelf	is	preferable	to	the	door.	An
airtight	 container	 is	 better	 than	 the	 standard
loose	carton	at	slowing	moisture	 loss	and	the
absorption	 of	 odors	 from	 other	 foods,
although	 it	 accentuates	 the	 stale	 flavor	 that
gradually	 develops	 in	 the	 eggs	 themselves.
Bought	 fresh	 and	 treated	 with	 care,	 eggs
should	 keep	 for	 several	 weeks	 in	 the	 shell.
Once	 broken	 open,	 they’re	 far	 more
susceptible	 to	 spoilage	 and	 should	 be	 used
promptly	or	frozen.



Storage	Position
Does	it	make	a	difference	what	posture	we
store	our	eggs	in?	Studies	in	the	1950s
found	albumen	quality	to	decline	more
slowly	in	eggs	stored	blunt	end	up,	and
many	states	adopted	this	as	the	official
position	for	packing	egg	cartons.	Studies	in
the	1960s	and	’70s,	when	retailers	began	to
stack	the	cartons	on	their	side	to	display
the	top	label,	found	that	posture	doesn’t
affect	albumen	quality.	Eggs	that	are
stored	on	their	sides	give	somewhat	better-
centered	yolks	when	hard-cooked,	perhaps
because	both	yolk	cords	fight	equally
against	gravity.

Freezing	Eggs	Eggs	can	be	stored	frozen	for
several	months	in	airtight	containers.	Remove
them	from	the	shell,	which	would	shatter,	as
its	contents	expand	during	freezing.	Allow
some	room	for	expansion	in	the	containers,
and	press	plastic	wrap	onto	the	surface	to
prevent	freezer	burn	(see	p.	146)	before



covering	with	a	lid.	Whites	freeze	fairly	well;
they	lose	only	a	modest	amount	of	their
foaming	power.	Yolks	and	blended	whole
eggs,	however,	require	special	treatment.
Frozen	as	is,	they	thaw	to	a	pasty	consistency
and	can	no	longer	be	readily	combined	with
other	ingredients.	Thoroughly	mixing	the
yolks	with	either	salt,	sugar,	or	acid	will
prevent	the	yolk	proteins	from	aggregating,
and	leaves	the	thawed	mixture	fluid	enough	to
mix.	Yolks	require	1	teaspoon	salt,	1
tablespoon	sugar,	or	4	tablespoons	lemon
juice	per	pint	(respectively	5	gm,	15	gm,	or	60
ml	per	half	liter),	and	whole	eggs	half	these
amounts.	The	equivalent	of	a	U.S.	Large	egg
is	3	tablespoons	whole	egg,	or	2	tablespoons
white	and	1	tablespoon	yolk.

Egg	Safety:
The	Salmonella	Problem

Beginning	around	1985,	a	hitherto	minor



bacterium	called	Salmonella	enteritidis	was
identified	as	the	culprit	in	growing	numbers
of	food	poisonings	in	continental	Europe,
Scandinavia,	Great	Britain,	and	North
America.	Salmonella	can	cause	diarrhea	or
more	serious	chronic	infection	of	other	body
organs.	Most	of	these	outbreaks	were
associated	with	the	consumption	of	raw	or
lightly	cooked	eggs.	Further	investigation
demonstrated	that	even	intact,	clean,	Grade	A
eggs	can	harbor	large	numbers	of	salmonella.
In	the	early	1990s,	U.S.	health	authorities
estimated	that	perhaps	one	egg	in	10,000
carried	this	particularly	virulent	form	of
salmonella.	Thanks	to	a	variety	of	preventive
measures,	the	prevalence	of	contaminated
eggs	is	now	much	lower	—	but	it’s	not	zero.

Precautions	 Until	 the	 day	 of	 the	 certified
salmonella-free	 egg,	 all	 cooks	 should	 know
how	to	minimize	the	risk	to	themselves	and	to
others,	 particularly	 the	 very	 young	 and	 very



old	 and	 people	 with	 weakened	 immune
systems.	 The	 best	 way	 to	 reduce	 the	 already
small	 chance	 of	 using	 a	 badly	 contaminated
egg	 is	 to	 buy	 only	 refrigerated	 eggs	 and	 to
speed	 them	 into	 your	 own	 refrigerator.	Cook
all	egg	dishes	sufficiently	to	kill	any	bacteria
that	 might	 be	 present.	 This	 generally	 means
holding	 a	 temperature	 of	 at	 least	 140ºF/60ºC
for	 5	 minutes,	 or	 160ºF/70ºC	 for	 1	 minute.
Egg	 yolks	 will	 remain	 runny	 at	 the	 first
temperature,	 but	 will	 harden	 at	 the	 second.
For	many	 lightly	 cooked	 egg	 dishes	—	 soft-
boiled	and	poached	eggs,	for	example,	and	the
yolk-based	 sauces	—	 it’s	 possible	 to	modify
traditional	 recipes	 so	 as	 to	 eliminate	 any
salmonella	 that	might	be	present	 (see	box,	p.
91).

Pasteurized	Eggs	 Three	 safer	 alternatives	 to
fresh	 eggs	 are	 eggs	 pasteurized	 in	 the	 shell,
liquid	eggs,	and	dried	egg	whites,	all	of	which
are	 available	 in	 supermarkets.	 Intact	 eggs,



blended	 whole	 eggs,	 or	 separated	 yolks	 and
whites	 can	 all	 be	 pasteurized	 by	 careful
heating	 to	 temperatures	 between	 130	 and
140ºF/55–60ºC,	just	below	the	range	in	which
the	egg	proteins	begin	to	coagulate.	Dried	egg
whites,	 which	 are	 reconstituted	 in	 water	 to
make	 lightly	 cooked	 meringues,	 can	 be
pasteurized	 either	 before	 or	 after	 the	 drying.
For	most	uses,	 these	products	do	an	adequate
job	 of	 replacing	 fresh	 eggs,	 though	 there	 is
usually	 some	 loss	 in	 foaming	 or	 emulsifying
power	and	 in	stability	 to	 further	heating;	and
heating	 and	 drying	 do	 alter	 the	 mild	 egg
flavor.

The	Chemistry	of	Egg
Cooking:	How	Eggs	Get
Hard	and	Custards	Thicken

The	most	commonplace	procedures	involving
eggs	are	also	some	of	the	most	astonishing
kitchen	magic.	You	begin	with	a	slippery,



runny	liquid,	do	nothing	more	than	add	heat,
and	presto:	the	liquid	rapidly	stiffens	into	a
solid	that	you	can	cut	with	a	knife.	No	other
ingredient	is	as	readily	and	drastically
transformed	as	is	the	egg.	This	is	the	key	to	its
great	versatility,	both	on	its	own	and	as	a
structure	builder	in	complex	mixtures.

To	what	does	the	egg	owe	its	constructive
powers?	The	answer	is	simple:	to	its	proteins
and	their	innate	capacity	to	bond	to	each
other.

Protein	Coagulation

Pulling	Proteins	Together…	The	raw	egg
begins	as	a	liquid	because	both	yolk	and	white
are	essentially	bags	of	water	containing
dispersed	protein	molecules,	with	water
molecules	outnumbering	proteins	1,000	to	1.
As	molecules	go,	a	single	protein	is	huge.	It
consists	of	thousands	of	atoms	bonded
together	into	a	long	chain.	The	chain	is	folded



up	into	a	compact	wad	whose	shape	is
maintained	by	bonds	between	neighboring
folds	of	the	chain.	In	the	chemical
environment	of	the	egg	white,	most	of	the
protein	molecules	accumulate	a	negative
electrical	charge	and	repel	each	other,	while
in	the	yolk,	some	proteins	repel	each	other
and	some	are	bound	up	in	fat-protein
packages.	So	the	proteins	in	a	raw	egg	mostly
remain	compact	and	separate	from	one
another	as	they	float	in	the	water.
When	we	heat	the	egg,	all	its	molecules	move
faster	and	faster,	collide	with	each	other
harder	and	harder,	and	eventually	begin	to
break	the	bonds	that	hold	the	long	protein
chains	in	their	compact,	folded	shape.	The
proteins	unfold,	tangle	with	each	other,	and
bond	to	each	other	into	a	kind	of	three-
dimensional	network.	There’s	still	much	more
water	than	protein,	but	the	water	is	now
divided	up	among	countless	little	pockets	in
the	continuous	protein	network,	so	it	can’t



flow	together	any	more.	The	liquid	egg	thus
becomes	a	moist	solid.	And	because	the	large
protein	molecules	have	clustered	together
densely	enough	to	deflect	light	rays,	the
initially	transparent	egg	albumen	becomes
opaque.

How	heat	solidifies	a	liquid	egg.	Egg	proteins
begin	as	 folded	chains	of	amino	acids	 (left)	.
As	 they’re	 heated,	 their	 increased	 motion
breaks	 some	 bonds,	 and	 the	 chains	 unfold
(center).	The	 unfolded	 proteins	 then	 begin	 to
bond	 to	 each	 other.	 This	 results	 in	 a
continuous	 meshwork	 of	 long	 molecules
(right)	,	and	a	moist	but	solid	egg.

The	other	treatments	that	cause	egg	to	firm



up	—	pickling	them	in	acid	or	salt,	beating
them	into	a	foam	—	work	in	the	same	basic
way,	by	overcoming	the	proteins’	aloofness
and	encouraging	them	to	bond	to	each	other.
When	you	combine	treatments	—	adding	both
acid	and	heat,	for	example	—	you	can	achieve
a	whole	range	of	consistencies	and
appearances,	depending	on	the	degree	of
protein	unfolding	and	bonding:	from	tough	to
delicate,	dry	to	moist,	lumpy	to	jellylike,
opaque	to	clear.

…But	Not	Too	Close	In	nearly	every	egg	dish
we	make,	we	want	to	bond	a	liquid	—	the	egg
alone	 or	 a	mixture	 of	 eggs	 and	 other	 liquids
—	 into	 a	 moist,	 delicate	 solid.	 Overcooking
either	gives	the	dish	a	rubbery	texture	or	else
curdles	 it	 into	 a	 mixture	 of	 hard	 lumps	 and
watery	 liquid.	 Why?	 Because	 it	 bonds	 the
proteins	 too	 exclusively	 to	 each	 other	 and
squeezes	 out	 the	 water	 from	 the	 protein
network.	This	is	why	it	 is	that	boiled	or	fried



eggs	 lose	water	 in	 the	 form	of	steam	and	get
rubbery,	 while	 mixtures	 of	 eggs	 and	 other
liquids	 separate	 into	 two	 phases,	 the	 added
water	and	the	solid	lumps	of	protein.

The	key	to	cooking	egg	dishes,	then,	is	to
avoid	overcooking	them	and	carrying
coagulation	too	far.	Above	all,	this	means
temperature	control.	For	tender,	succulent
results,	egg	dishes	should	be	cooked	only	just
to	the	temperature	at	which	their	proteins
coagulate,	which	is	always	well	below	the
boiling	point,	212ºF/100ºC.	The	exact
temperature	depends	on	the	mixture	of
ingredients,	but	is	usually	higher	than	the
temperature	needed	to	kill	bacteria	and	make
the	dish	safe.	(Warm	but	still	liquid	yolk	is
another	story;	see	p.	91).	Generally,	plain
undiluted	eggs	coagulate	at	the	lowest
temperatures.	Egg	white	begins	to	thicken	at
145ºF/63ºC	and	becomes	a	tender	solid	when
it	reaches	150ºF/65ºC.	This	solidification	is
due	mainly	to	the	most	heat-sensitive	protein,



ovotransferrin,	even	though	it’s	only	12%	of
the	total	protein.	The	major	albumen	protein,
ovalbumin,	doesn’t	coagulate	until	about
180ºF/80ºC,	at	which	temperature	the	tender
white	gets	much	firmer.	(The	last	albumen
protein	to	coagulate	is	heat-resistant
ovomucin,	which	is	why	the	ovomucin-rich
yolk	cords	remain	liquid	in	scrambled	eggs
long	after	the	rest	has	set.)	The	yolk	proteins
begin	to	thicken	at	150ºF	and	set	at
158ºF/70ºC,	and	whole	egg	—	the	yolk	and
white	mixed	together	—	sets	around
165ºF/73ºC.

The	Effects	 of	Added	 Ingredients	 Eggs	 are
often	combined	with	other	ingredients,	from	a
sprinkling	of	salt	or	lemon	juice,	to	spoonsful
of	sugar	or	cream,	to	cups	of	milk	or	brandy.
Each	 of	 these	 additions	 affects	 egg-protein
coagulation	and	the	dish’s	consistency.



The	dilution	of	egg	proteins	in	a	custard.	Left:
An	egg	 is	 rich	 in	proteins;	when	unfolded	by
cooking,	they	are	numerous	enough	to	form	a
firm	 solid	 network.	 Center:	When	mixed	with
milk	or	cream,	whose	proteins	don’t	coagulate
with	heat,	the	egg	proteins	are	greatly	diluted.
Right:	When	a	custard	mix	is	cooked,	the	egg
proteins	 unfold	 and	 form	 a	 solid	 meshwork,
but	that	meshwork	is	open	and	fragile,	and	the
custard’s	consistency	is	delicate.

Milk,	 Cream,	 and	 Sugar	 Dilute,	 Delay,	 and
Tenderize	 When	 we	 dilute	 eggs	 with	 other
liquids,	 we	 raise	 the	 temperature	 at	 which
thickening	 begins.	 Dilution	 surrounds	 the
protein	 molecules	 with	 many	 more	 water



molecules,	and	the	proteins	must	be	hotter	and
moving	 around	more	 rapidly	 in	 order	 to	 find
and	 bond	 to	 each	 other	 at	 a	 noticeable	 rate.
Sugar	 also	 raises	 the	 thickening	 temperature,
and	 for	 the	same	reason:	 its	molecules	dilute
the	proteins.	A	tablespoon	of	sugar	surrounds
each	protein	molecule	in	a	one-egg	dish	with	a
screen	of	several	thousand	sucrose	molecules.
Combine	 the	diluting	 effects	 of	water,	 sugar,
and	milk	 fat,	 and	 a	 custard	mix	 containing	 a
cup	of	milk,	a	tablespoon	of	sugar,	and	an	egg
begins	to	thicken	not	at	160ºF/70ºC,	but	at	175
or	 180ºF/78–80ºC.	 And	 because	 the	 protein
network	 is	 stretched	 out	 into	 such	 a	 large
volume	—	 in	 a	 custard,	 the	 proteins	 from	 a
single	 egg	 have	 to	 embrace	 not	 three
tablespoons	 of	 liquid	 but	 18	 or	 20!	 —	 the
coagulum	 is	 far	 more	 delicate,	 and	 easily
disrupted	by	overheating.	At	the	extreme,	in	a
concoction	 like	 eggnog	 or	 the	 Dutch	 brandy
drink	advocaat,	the	egg	proteins	are	so	diluted
that	 they	 can’t	 possibly	 accommodate	 all	 the



liquid,	and	instead	merely	give	it	some	body.

Acids	and	Salt	Tenderize 	There’s	no	 truth	 to
the	 common	 saying	 that	 acidity	 and	 salt
“toughen”	 egg	 proteins.	 Acids	 and	 salt	 do
pretty	 much	 the	 same	 thing	 to	 egg	 proteins.
They	get	the	proteins	together	sooner,	but	they
don’t	 let	 them	 get	 as	close	 together.	 That	 is,
acids	 and	 salt	 make	 eggs	 thicken	 and
coagulate	at	a	lower	cooking	temperature,	but
actually	produce	a	more	tender	texture.

The	key	to	this	seeming	paradox	is	the
negative	electrical	charge	that	most	of	the	egg
proteins	carry,	and	that	tends	to	keep	them	at
a	distance	from	each	other.	Acids	—	cream	of
tartar,	lemon	juice,	or	the	juice	of	any	fruit	or
vegetable	—	lower	the	pH	of	the	egg,	and	thus
diminish	the	proteins’	mutually	repelling
negative	charge.	Similarly,	salt	dissolves	into
positively	and	negatively	charged	ions	that
cluster	around	the	charged	portions	of	the
proteins	and	effectively	neutralize	them.	In



both	cases,	the	proteins	no	longer	repel	each
other	as	strongly,	and	therefore	approach	each
other	and	bond	together	earlier	in	the	cooking
and	unfolding	process,	when	they’re	still
mostly	balled	up	and	can’t	intertwine	and
bond	with	each	other	as	tightly.	In	addition,
coagulation	of	the	yolk	proteins	and	of	some
albumen	proteins	depends	on	sulfur	chemistry
that	is	suppressed	in	acidic	conditions	(see	the
discussion	of	egg	foams,	p.	103).	So	eggs	end
up	more	tender	when	salted,	and	especially
when	acidified.

Cooks	have	known	this	for	a	long	time.	In
Morocco,	Paula	Wolfert	found	that	eggs	are
often	beaten	with	lemon	juice	before	long
cooking	to	prevent	them	from	becoming
leathery;	and	Claudia	Roden	gives	an	Arab
recipe	for	scrambled	eggs	made	unusually
creamy	with	vinegar	(the	eggs’	alkalinity
reduces	the	amount	of	free,	odorous	acetic
acid,	so	the	flavor	is	surprisingly	subtle).	Eggs
scrambled	with	tart	fruit	juices	were	popular



in	17th	century	France,	and	may	have	been	the
ancestors	of	lemon	curd.

Early	Acid-Tenderized	Eggs
Marmelades	or	Scrambled	Eggs	and

Verjus,	Without	Butter
Break	four	eggs,	beat	them,	adjust	with	salt
and	four	spoonsful	of	verjus	[sour	grape
juice],	put	the	mix	on	the	fire,	and	stir
gently	with	a	silver	spoon	just	until	the
eggs	thicken	enough,	and	then	take	them
off	the	fire	and	stir	them	a	bit	more	as	they
thicken.	One	can	make	scrambled	eggs	in
the	same	way	with	lemon	or	orange	juice…

—	Le	Patissier	françois,	ca.	1690

The	Chemistry	of	Egg	Flavor

Fresh	eggs	have	a	mild	flavor	that	has	proven
difficult	to	analyze.	The	white	contributes	the
main	sulfury	note,	the	yolk	a	sweet,	buttery
quality.	The	aroma	produced	by	a	given	egg	is



slightest	immediately	after	laying,	and	gets
stronger	the	longer	it’s	stored	before	cooking.
In	general,	egg	age	and	storage	conditions
have	a	greater	influence	on	flavor	than	the
hen’s	diet	and	freedom	to	range.	However,
both	diet	and	pedigree	can	have	noticeable
effects.	Brown-egg	breeds	are	unable	to
metabolize	an	odorless	component	of
rapeseed	and	soy	meals	(choline),	and	their
intestinal	microbes	then	transform	it	into	a
fishy-tasting	molecule	(triethylamine)	that
ends	up	in	the	eggs.	Fish-meal	feeds	and
certain	feed	pesticides	cause	off-flavors.	The
unpredictable	diet	of	truly	free-range	hens
will	produce	unpredictable	eggs.

Something	between	100	and	200
compounds	have	been	identified	in	the	aroma
of	cooked	eggs.	The	most	characteristic	is
hydrogen	sulfide,	H2S.	In	large	doses	—	in	a
spoiled	egg	or	industrial	pollution	—	H2S	is
very	unpleasant.	In	a	cooked	egg	it	contributes
the	distinctively	eggy	note.	It’s	formed



predominantly	in	the	white,	when	the	albumen
proteins	begin	to	unfold	and	free	their	sulfur
atoms	for	reaction	with	other	molecules,	at
temperatures	above	140ºF/60ºC.	The	longer
the	albumen	spends	at	these	temperatures,	the
stronger	the	sulfury	aroma.	Greater	quantities
of	H2S	are	produced	when	the	egg	is	older	and
the	pH	higher	(the	highly	alkaline	conditions
in	Chinese	preserving	methods,	p.	116,	also
liberate	copious	amounts	of	H2S).	Added
lemon	juice	or	vinegar	reduces	H2S
production	and	its	aroma.	Because	hydrogen
sulfide	is	volatile,	it	escapes	from	cooked
eggs	during	storage,	so	they	get	milder	with
time.	Small	quantities	of	ammonia	are	also
created	during	cooking	and	make	a	subliminal
contribution	to	egg	flavor	(but	an
overpowering	one	in	Chinese	preserved	eggs).

Basic	Egg	Dishes

Eggs	Cooked	in	the	Shell



“Boiling	an	egg”	is	often	taken	as	a	measure
of	minimal	competence	in	cooking,	since	you
leave	the	egg	safe	in	its	shell	and	have	only	to
keep	track	of	the	water	temperature	and	the
time.	Though	we	commonly	speak	of	hard-
and	soft-boiled	eggs,	boiling	is	not	a	good
way	to	cook	eggs.	Turbulent	water	knocks	the
eggs	around	and	cracks	shells,	which	allows
albumen	to	leak	out	and	overcook;	and	for
hard-cooked	eggs,	a	water	temperature	way
above	the	protein	coagulation	temperature
means	that	the	outer	layers	of	the	white	get
rubbery	while	the	yolk	cooks	through.	Soft-
cooked	eggs	aren’t	cooked	long	enough	to
suffer	in	the	same	way,	and	should	be	cooked
in	barely	bubbling	water,	just	short	of	the	boil.
Hard-cooked	eggs	should	be	cooked	at	a
bubble-less	simmer,	between	180	and
190ºF/80–85ºC.	Eggs	in	the	shell	can	also	be
steamed,	a	technique	that	requires	the	least
water	and	the	least	energy	and	time	to	heat	the
water.	Leaving	the	lid	slightly	ajar	on	a	gently



bubbling	steamer	will	reduce	the	effective
cooking	temperature	to	something	below	the
boil	and	produce	a	tenderer	white.

Telling	Cooked	Eggs	from	Raw
It’s	 easy	 to	 tell	 whether	 an	 intact	 egg	 is
raw	or	already	cooked.	Give	it	a	spin	on	its
side.	 If	 it	 spins	 fast	 and	 smoothly,	 it’s
cooked.	 If	 it	 seems	balky	and	wobbly,	 it’s
raw	—	the	liquid	insides	slip	and	slosh	and
resist	the	movement	of	the	solid	shell.

Times	and	Textures	Cooking	times	for	in-
shell	eggs	are	determined	by	the	desired
texture	(they	also	depend	on	egg	size,	starting
temperature,	and	cooking	temperature;	the
times	here	are	rough	averages).	There’s	a
continuum	of	eggs	cooked	in	the	shell	for
different	periods	of	time.	The	French	oeuf	à	la
coque	(“from	the	shell”)	is	cooked	for	only
two	or	three	minutes	and	remains	semi-liquid
throughout.	Coddled	or	“soft-boiled”	eggs,
cooked	3	to	5	minutes,	have	a	barely	solid



outer	white,	a	milky	inner	white,	and	a	warm
yolk,	and	are	spooned	from	the	shell.	The	less
familiar	mollet	eggs	(from	the	French	molle,
“soft”),	cooked	for	5	or	6	minutes,	have	a
semi-liquid	yolk	but	a	sufficiently	firm	outer
white	that	they	can	be	peeled	and	served
whole.

Hard-cooked	eggs	are	firm	throughout
after	cooking	for	10	to	15	minutes.	At	10
minutes	the	yolk	is	still	dark	yellow,	moist,
and	somewhat	pasty;	at	15,	it’s	light	yellow,
dry,	and	granular.	Hard-cooking	is	sometimes
prolonged	for	hours	to	heighten	color	and
flavor	(p.	89).	Chinese	tea	eggs,	for	example,
are	simmered	until	set,	then	gently	cracked,
and	simmered	for	another	hour	or	two	in	a
mixture	of	tea,	salt,	sugar,	and	flavorings	to
produce	a	marbled,	aromatic,	very	firm	white.

Hard-Cooked	 Eggs	 A	 properly	 prepared
hard-cooked	 egg	 is	 solid	 but	 tender,	 not
rubbery;	 its	 shell	 intact	 and	 easy	 to	 peel;	 its



yolk	 well	 centered	 and	 not	 discolored;	 its
flavor	 delicate,	 not	 sulfurous.	 Good	 texture
and	 flavor	 are	obtained	by	 taking	care	not	 to
overcook	the	eggs,	which	overcoagulates	their
proteins	 and	 generates	 too	 much	 hydrogen
sulfide.	 Any	 method	 that	 keeps	 the	 cooking
temperature	 well	 below	 the	 boil	 will	 help
avoid	 overcooking,	 as	 will	 plunging	 the
cooked	 eggs	 into	 ice	 water.	 Gentle	 cooking
also	 takes	 care	 of	 most	 shell	 and	 yolk
problems	—	but	not	all.

Easily	 Cracked	 and	 Not	 So	 Easily	 Peeled
Shells	A	shell	that	cracks	during	hard	cooking
makes	 a	mess	 and	 a	 sulfurous	 stink,	while	 a
shell	that	doesn’t	peel	away	cleanly	makes	an
ugly,	 pockmarked	 egg.	 A	 traditional
preventative	measure	 for	both	problems	 is	 to
poke	 a	 pinhole	 in	 the	 wide	 end	 of	 the	 shell,
but	studies	have	found	that	this	doesn’t	make
much	 difference.	 The	 best	 way	 to	 avoid
cracking	 is	 to	heat	 fresh	eggs	gently,	without



the	 turbulence	of	boiling	water.	On	 the	other
hand,	 the	best	guarantee	of	easy	peeling	is	 to
use	 old	 eggs!	 Difficult	 peeling	 is
characteristic	 of	 fresh	 eggs	 with	 a	 relatively
low	 albumen	 pH,	which	 somehow	 causes	 the
albumen	 to	 adhere	 to	 the	 inner	 shell
membrane	 more	 strongly	 than	 it	 coheres	 to
itself.	At	 the	pH	 typical	after	 several	days	of
refrigeration,	 around	 9.2,	 the	 shell	 peels
easily.	 If	 you	 end	 up	 with	 a	 carton	 of	 very
fresh	eggs	and	need	to	cook	them	right	away,
you	can	add	a	half	teaspoon	of	baking	soda	to
a	 quart	 of	 water	 to	 make	 the	 cooking	 water
alkaline	 (though	 this	 intensifies	 the	 sulfury
flavor).	 It	 also	 helps	 to	 cook	 fresh	 eggs
somewhat	 longer	 to	 make	 the	 white	 more
cohesive,	and	to	allow	the	white	to	firm	up	in
the	refrigerator	before	peeling.

Off-Center	Yolks	 and	Flat-Bottomed	Whites
Well-centered	 yolks	 for	 attractive	 slices	 or
stuffed	halves	are	easiest	to	obtain	from	fresh,



high-grade	 eggs	 with	 small	 air	 cells	 and
plenty	 of	 thick	 albumen.	 As	 eggs	 age,	 the
albumen	loses	water	and	becomes	more	dense,
which	 makes	 the	 yolk	 rise.	 Industry	 studies
have	 found	 that	 you	 can	 increase	 the
proportion	 of	 centered	 yolks	 somewhat	 by
storing	 eggs	 on	 their	 sides	 instead	 of	 their
ends.	 Various	 cooking	 strategies	 have	 also
been	 suggested,	 including	 rotating	 the	 eggs
around	their	long	axis	during	the	first	several
minutes	in	the	pot,	and	standing	them	on	end.
None	of	these	is	completely	reliable.

Green	 Yolks 	 The	 occasional	 green-gray
discoloration	 on	 the	 surface	 of	 hard-cooked
yolks	 is	 a	 harmless	 compound	 of	 iron	 and
sulfur,	 ferrous	 sulfide.	 It	 forms	 at	 the
interface	 of	 white	 and	 yolk	 because	 that’s
where	 reactive	 sulfur	 from	 the	 former	 comes
into	contact	with	the	iron	from	the	latter.	The
alkaline	 conditions	 in	 the	 white	 favor	 the
stripping	 of	 sulfur	 atoms	 from	 the	 albumen



proteins	 when	 heat	 unfolds	 them,	 and	 the
sulfur	 reacts	with	 iron	 in	 the	surface	 layer	of
yolk	 to	 form	 ferrous	 sulfide.	 The	 older	 the
egg,	the	more	alkaline	the	white,	and	the	more
rapidly	 this	 reaction	 occurs.	 High
temperatures	 and	 prolonged	 cooking	 produce
more	ferrous	sulfide.

Yolk	greening	can	be	minimized	by	using
fresh	eggs,	by	cooking	them	as	briefly	as
possible,	and	by	cooling	them	rapidly	after
cooking.

Long-Cooked	Eggs	An	 intriguing	 alternative
to	the	standard	hard-cooked	egg	is	the	Middle
Eastern	hamindas	 (Hebrew)	 or	beid	 hamine
(Arabic),	which	are	cooked	for	anywhere	from
6	to	18	hours.	They	derive	from	the	Sephardic
Sabbath	 mixed	 stew	 (called	hamin,	 from	 the
Hebrew	for	“hot”),	which	was	put	together	on
Friday,	 cooked	 slowly	 in	 the	 oven	 overnight,
and	 served	 as	 a	 midday	 Sabbath	 meal.	 Eggs
included	 in	 the	 stew	 shell	 and	 all,	 or



alternatively	 long-simmered	 in	 water,	 come
out	with	a	stronger	flavor	and	a	striking,	 tan-
colored	 white.	 During	 prolonged	 heating	 in
alkaline	 conditions,	 the	 quarter-gram	 of
glucose	 sugar	 in	 the	 white	 reacts	 with
albumen	 protein	 to	 generate	 flavors	 and
pigments	 typical	 of	 browned	 foods	 (see	 the
explanation	 of	 the	 Maillard	 reaction	 on	 p.
778).	 The	 white	 will	 be	 very	 tender	 and	 the
yolk	 creamy	 if	 the	 cooking	 temperature	 is
kept	in	a	very	narrow	range,	between	160	and
165ºF/71–74ºC.

Eggs	Cooked	Out	of	the	Shell

Baked,	Shirred,	en	Cocotte	There	are	several
ways	of	soft-cooking	eggs	that	are	broken	out
of	the	shell	and	into	a	container,	which	might
be	a	dish	or	a	hollowed-out	fruit	or	vegetable.
As	is	true	of	in-shell	soft-cooked	eggs,	timing
is	of	the	essence	to	avoid	overcoagulation	of
the	white	and	yolk	proteins,	and	depends	on



the	nature	and	placement	of	the	heat	source.
In	the	case	of	baked	or	shirred	eggs,	the	dish
should	be	set	on	the	middle	rack	to	avoid
overcooking	the	top	or	bottom	while	the	rest
cooks	through.	Eggs	en	cocotte	(“in	the
casserole”)	are	cooked	in	dishes	set	in	a	pan
of	simmering	water,	either	on	the	stovetop	or
in	the	oven.	Here	the	eggs	are	well	buffered
from	the	heat	source,	yet	cook	just	as	quickly
as	baked	eggs	because	water	transfers	heat
more	rapidly	than	the	oven	air.

Eggs	and	Fire
Another	Way	with	Eggs	(Roasting)

Turn	 fresh	 eggs	 carefully	 in	 warm	 ashes
near	the	fire	so	that	they	cook	on	all	sides.
When	 they	 begin	 to	 leak	 they	 are	 thought
to	 be	 freshly	 done,	 and	 so	 are	 served	 to
guests.	 These	 are	 the	 best	 and	 are	 most
agreeably	served.

Eggs	on	a	Spit



Pierce	 eggs	 lengthwise	with	 a	well-heated
spit	and	parch	them	over	the	fire	as	if	they
were	meat.	They	should	be	eaten	hot.	This
is	 a	 stupid	 invention	 and	unsuitable	 and	 a
cooks’	joke.

—	Platina,	De	honesta	voluptate	et
valetudine,	1475

Poached	Eggs	A	poached	egg	is	a
containerless,	soft-cooked	egg	that	generates
its	own	skin	of	coagulated	protein	in	the	first
moments	of	cooking.	Slid	raw	into	a	pan	of
already	simmering	water	—	or	cream,	milk,
wine,	stock,	soup,	sauce,	or	butter	—	it	cooks
for	three	to	five	minutes,	until	the	white	has
set,	but	before	the	yolk	does.

The	 Problem	 of	 Untidy	 Whites	 The	 tricky
thing	 about	 poached	 eggs	 is	 getting	 them	 to
set	into	a	smooth,	compact	shape.	Usually	the
outer	 layer	 of	 thin	 white	 spreads	 irregularly
before	 it	 solidifies.	 It’s	 helpful	 to	 use	 fresh
Grade	AA	 eggs	 shelled	 just	 before	 cooking,



which	 have	 the	 largest	 proportion	 of	 thick
white	 and	 will	 spread	 the	 least,	 and	 water
close	 to	 but	 not	 at	 the	 boil,	 which	 will
coagulate	 the	 outer	 white	 as	 quickly	 as
possible	 without	 turbulence	 that	 would	 tease
the	 thin	 albumen	 all	 over	 the	 pan.	 Other
conventional	 cookbook	 tips	 are	 not	 very
effective.	 Adding	 salt	 and	 vinegar	 to	 the
cooking	 water,	 for	 example,	 does	 speed
coagulation,	but	it	also	produces	shreds	and	an
irregular	 film	 over	 the	 egg	 surface.	 An
unconventional	 but	 effective	way	 to	 improve
the	 appearance	 of	 poached	 eggs	 is	 simply	 to
remove	 the	 runny	 white	 from	 the	 egg	before
poaching.	Crack	the	egg	into	a	dish,	then	slide
it	into	a	large	perforated	spoon	and	let	the	thin
white	 drain	 away	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 before
sliding	the	egg	into	the	pan.

Timing	Poached	Eggs	by	Levitation	There’s	a
professional	 method	 for	 poaching	 eggs	 that
also	makes	great	amateur	entertainment.	This



is	 the	 restaurant	 technique	 in	which	 eggs	 are
cracked	 into	 boiling	water	 in	 a	 tall	 stockpot,
disappear	 into	 the	 depths,	 and	 —	 as	 if	 by
magic!	 —	 bob	 up	 to	 the	 surface	 again	 just
when	 they’re	 done:	 a	 handy	 way	 indeed	 to
keep	track	of	many	eggs	being	cooked	at	once.
The	 trick	 is	 the	 use	 of	 vinegar	 and	 salt	 (at
about	 ½	 and	 1	 tablespoon	 respectively	 for
each	 quart	 of	 cooking	 water,	 8	 and	 15g	 per
liter)	 and	 keeping	 the	 water	 at	 the	 boil.	 The
vinegar	 reacts	 with	 bicarbonate	 in	 the	 thin
white	to	form	tiny	buoyant	bubbles	of	carbon
dioxide,	which	get	 trapped	at	 the	egg	surface
as	 its	 proteins	 coagulate.	 The	 salt	 increases
the	density	of	 the	cooking	 liquid	 just	 enough
that	 the	 egg	 and	 three	 minutes’	 worth	 of
bubbles	will	float.

Fried	 Eggs	 The	 containerless	 fried	 egg	 is
even	 more	 prone	 to	 spreading	 than	 the
poached	 egg	 because	 it	 is	 heated	 only	 from
below,	 so	 its	 white	 is	 slower	 to	 coagulate.



Fresh,	high-grade	eggs	give	the	most	compact
shape,	 and	 straining	 off	 the	 thin	 white	 also
helps.	 The	 ideal	 pan	 temperature	 for	 a	 pale,
tender	fried	egg	is	around	250ºF/	120ºC,	when
butter	 has	 finished	 sizzling	 but	 hasn’t	 yet
browned,	or	oil	 to	which	a	drop	of	water	has
been	added	has	 stopped	 sputtering.	At	higher
temperatures,	 you	 lose	 tenderness	 but	 gain	 a
more	 flavorsome,	browned	and	crisp	 surface.
The	 top	of	 the	 egg	 can	be	 cooked	by	 turning
the	egg	over	after	a	minute	or	so,	or	by	adding
a	teaspoon	of	water	to	the	pan	and	covering	it
to	 trap	 the	 resulting	 steam,	 or	 —	 as	 in	 the
browned	Chinese	“coin-purse”	egg	—	the	egg
can	be	folded	over	onto	itself	when	barely	set,
so	that	top	and	bottom	are	crisped	but	the	yolk
remains	protected	and	creamy.

Poached	Threads
A	kind	of	poached	egg	that	was	enjoyed	in
17th	century	France	and	England,	and	still
is	 in	 modern	 China	 and	 Portugal,	 is	 egg



yolk	trailed	in	a	thin	stream	into	hot	syrup,
then	lifted	out	as	sweet,	delicate	threads.

Scrambled	Eggs	Scrambled	eggs	and	omelets
are	made	from	yolks	and	whites	mixed
together,	and	are	therefore	a	good	fate	for
fragile,	runny	lower-quality	eggs.	These
dishes	frequently	include	other	ingredients.
Cream,	butter,	milk,	water,	or	oil	(used	in
China)	will	dilute	the	egg	proteins	and
produce	a	tenderer	mass	when	the	eggs	are
carefully	cooked;	overheating,	however,	will
cause	some	of	the	added	liquid	to	separate.
Watery	vegetables	like	mushrooms	should	be
precooked	to	prevent	them	from	weeping	into
the	eggs.	Chopped	herbs,	vegetables,	or	meats
should	be	warm	—	not	hot	or	cold	—	to	avoid
uneven	heating	of	adjacent	egg	proteins.

The	 Key	 to	 Scrambled	 Eggs:	 Slow	 Cooking
Scrambled	 eggs	 made	 in	 the	 usual	 quick,
offhand	way	are	usually	hard	and	forgettable.
The	key	 to	moist	 scrambled	eggs	 is	 low	heat



and	patience;	they	will	take	several	minutes	to
cook.	The	eggs	should	be	added	to	the	pan	just
as	 butter	 begins	 to	 bubble,	 or	 oil	 makes	 a
water	 drop	 dance	 gently.	 Texture	 is
determined	 by	 how	 and	 when	 the	 eggs	 are
disturbed.	 Large,	 irregular	 curds	 result	 if	 the
cook	 lets	 the	bottom	 layer	 set	 for	 some	 time
before	 scraping	 to	 distribute	 the	 heat.
Constant	 scraping	 and	 stirring	 prevents	 the
egg	proteins	at	the	bottom	from	setting	into	a
separate,	 firm	 layer,	 and	 produces	 a	 creamy,
even	mass	of	yolk	 and	 thin	white	punctuated
with	very	fine	curds	of	thick	white.	Scrambled
eggs	 should	 be	 removed	 from	 the	 pan	 while
still	 slightly	 underdone,	 since	 they	 will
continue	 to	 thicken	 for	 some	 time	with	 their
residual	heat.

Omelets	 If	 good	 scrambled	 eggs	 demand
patience,	 a	 good	 omelet	 takes	 panache	 —	 a
two-	or	three-egg	omelet	cooks	in	less	than	a
minute.	 Escoffier	 described	 the	 omelet	 as



scrambled	eggs	held	 together	 in	a	coagulated
envelope,	a	skin	of	egg	heated	past	the	moist,
tender	stage	to	the	dry	and	tough,	so	that	it	has
the	strength	 to	contain	and	shape	 the	rest.	 Its
formation	requires	a	hotter	pan	than	do	evenly
tender	 scrambled	 eggs.	 But	 a	 hot	 pan	means
fast	cooking	to	avoid	overcooking.

An	important	key	to	a	successful	omelet	is
contained	in	the	name	of	the	dish,	which	since
the	Middle	Ages	has	gone	through	various
forms	—	alemette,	homelaicte,	omelette	(the
standard	French)	—	and	comes	ultimately
from	the	Latin	lamella,	“thin	plate.”	The
volume	of	eggs	and	the	pan	diameter	should
be	balanced	so	that	the	mix	forms	a	relatively
thin	layer;	otherwise	the	scrambled	mass	will
take	too	long	to	cook	and	be	hard	to	hold
together.	The	usual	recommendation	is	three
eggs	in	a	medium-sized	frying	pan,	which
should	have	a	well-seasoned	or	nonstick
surface	so	that	the	skin	will	come	away	from
it	cleanly.



Safe	Poached	Eggs
The	 runny	 yolk	 in	 ordinary	 poached	 eggs
hasn’t	been	heated	enough	to	eliminate	any
salmonella	 bacteria	 that	might	 be	 present.
To	 eliminate	 bacteria	 while	 keeping	 the
yolk	 soft,	 transfer	 the	 finished	 egg	 to	 a
second	 large	 pan	 full	 of	 water	 at
150ºF/65ºC,	 cover,	 and	 let	 sit	 for	 15
minutes.	Check	the	thermometer	every	few
minutes;	 if	 the	 water	 drops	 below
145ºF/63ºC,	put	it	back	on	the	heat.	If	you
want	 to	 cook	 the	 eggs	 a	 short	 time	before
serving	 them,	 this	 hot-water	 bath	 is	 a
useful	 alternative	 to	 chilling	 and	 then
reheating.
The	skin	of	an	omelet	can	be	formed	either

just	at	the	end	of	the	cooking,	or	right	from
the	beginning.	The	fastest	technique	is	to
scramble	the	eggs	vigorously	with	a	spoon	or
fork	in	a	hot	pan	until	they	begin	to	set,	then
push	the	curds	into	a	rough	disk,	let	the
bottom	consolidate	for	a	few	seconds,	shake



the	pan	to	release	the	disk,	and	fold	it	onto
itself.	A	more	substantial	and	more	uniform-
looking	skin	results	if	the	eggs	are	left
undisturbed	for	a	while	to	allow	the	bottom
surface	to	set.	The	pan	is	then	shaken
periodically	to	free	the	skin	from	the	pan
while	the	still-liquid	portion	alone	is	stirred
until	creamy,	and	the	disk	finally	folded	and
slipped	onto	a	plate.	Yet	another	way	is	to	let
the	bottom	of	the	mix	set,	then	lift	an	edge
with	the	fork	and	tip	the	pan	to	let	more	of	the
liquid	egg	run	underneath.	This	is	repeated
until	the	top	is	no	longer	runny,	and	the	mass
then	folded	over.

An	omelet	with	an	especially	light	texture
(omelette	soufflée)	is	made	by	whipping	the
eggs	until	they’re	full	of	bubbles,	or	by
whipping	the	separated	whites	into	a	foam	and
folding	them	gently	back	into	the	mixture	of
yolks	and	flavorings.	The	mix	is	poured	into	a
heated	pan	and	cooked	in	a	moderate	oven.

Egg-Liquid	Mixtures:



Egg-Liquid	Mixtures:
Custards	and	Creams

Definitions

Eggs	are	mixed	with	other	liquids	across	a
tremendous	range	of	proportions.	One
tablespoon	of	cream	will	enrich	a	scrambled
egg,	while	one	beaten	egg	will	slightly	thicken
a	pint	of	milk	into	an	eggnog.	Just	about	in	the
middle	of	this	range	—	at	around	4	parts
liquid	to	1	part	egg,	or	1	cup/250	ml	to	1	or	2
eggs	—	are	the	custards	and	creams,	dishes	in
which	the	egg	proteins	give	substantial	body
to	otherwise	thin	liquids.	These	terms	are
often	used	interchangeably,	which	obscures	a
useful	distinction.
In	this	section	I’ll	use	custard	to	mean	a	dish
prepared	and	served	in	the	same	container,
often	baked	and	therefore	unstirred,	so	that	it
sets	into	a	solid	gel.	The	custard	family
includes	savory	quiches	and	timbales	as	well
as	sweet	flans,	crèmes	caramels,	pots	de



crème,	crèmes	brûlées,	and	cheesecakes.
Creams,	by	contrast,	are	auxiliary
preparations,	made	from	essentially	the	same
mix	as	custards	but	stirred	continuously
during	stovetop	cooking	to	produce	a
thickened	but	malleable,	even	pourable	mass.
Pastry	cooks	in	particular	use	crème	anglaise
(so-called	“custard	cream”),	pastry	cream
(crème	pâtissière),	and	their	relatives	to	coat
or	fill	or	underlie	a	great	variety	of	baked
sweets.

Classically	Smooth	Scrambled	Eggs
Oeufs	brouillés	au	jus	(Scrambled	Eggs

with	Meat	Demiglace)
Break	a	dozen	fresh	eggs	into	a	dish,	beat
them	thoroughly,	pass	them	through	a
strainer	into	a	casserole	dish,	add	six
ounces	of	Isigny	butter	cut	into	small
pieces,	season	with	salt,	white	pepper,	and
grated	nutmeg;	place	on	a	moderate	stove
and	whip	gently	with	a	little	egg-white



whip.	As	soon	as	they	begin	to	thicken
remove	the	casserole	from	the	flame	and
continue	to	whip	until	the	eggs	form	a
light,	smooth	cream.	Then	add	a	little
chicken	demiglace,	as	big	as	a	nut	of
butter,	cut	into	pieces,	return	to	the	stove
to	finish	the	cooking,	pour	into	a	silver
casserole	and	garnish	with	croutons	passed
through	nicely	colored	butter.

—	Antonin	Carême,	L’Art	de	la	cuisine
française	au	19ième	siècle,	1835

Dilution	Demands	Delicacy

Nearly	all	the	problems	that	arise	in	custard
and	cream	making	come	from	the	fact	that	the
egg	proteins	are	spread	very	thin	by	the	other
ingredients.	Take	the	nearly	identical	recipes
for	a	typical	sweet	milk	custard	or	a	crème
anglaise:	1	whole	egg,	1	cup/250	ml	milk,	2
tablespoons/30	gm	sugar.	The	milk	alone
increases	the	volume	of	the	mix	—	which	the



proteins	must	span	and	knit	together	—	by	a
factor	of	6!	And	each	tablespoon	of	sugar
surrounds	every	protein	molecule	in	the	egg
with	several	thousand	sucrose	molecules.
Because	the	egg	proteins	are	so	outnumbered
by	water	and	sugar	molecules,	the	coagulation
temperature	in	a	custard	is	between	10	and
20ºF	higher	than	in	the	undiluted	egg,	between
175	and	185ºF/79–83ºC.	And	the	protein
network	that	does	form	is	tender,	tenuous,	and
fragile.	Exceed	the	coagulation	range	by	just	5
or	10ºF	and	the	network	begins	to	collapse,
forming	water-filled	tunnels	in	the	custard,
grainy	curds	in	the	cream.

Gentle	 Heat	 Many	 cooks	 have	 known	 the
temptation	to	crank	up	the	heat	after	a	custard
has	been	in	the	oven	for	an	hour	with	no	sign
of	 setting,	 or	 a	 cream	 has	 been	 stirred	 and
stirred	with	no	sign	of	thickening.	But	there’s
good	reason	to	resist.	The	gentler	these	dishes
are	 heated,	 the	 greater	 the	 safety	 margin



between	 thickening	 and	 curdling.	 Turning	 up
the	 heat	 is	 like	 accelerating	 on	 a	 wet	 road
while	 you’re	 looking	 for	 an	 unfamiliar
driveway.	You	 get	 to	 your	 destination	 faster,
but	 you	may	 not	 be	 able	 to	 brake	 in	 time	 to
avoid	skidding	past	it.	Chemical	reactions	like
coagulation	 develop	 momentum,	 and	 don’t
stop	 the	 second	 you	 turn	 off	 the	 heat.	 If	 the
thickening	proceeds	 too	 fast,	you	may	not	be
able	to	detect	and	stop	it	before	it	overshoots
done	 and	 hits	 curdled.	A	 curdled	 cream	 can
often	be	salvaged	by	straining	out	 the	 lumps,
but	an	overcooked	custard	is	a	loss.

Always	Add	Hot	Ingredients	to	Cold	Careful
heating	 is	 also	 important	 during	 preparation
of	the	mix.	Most	custard	and	cream	mixes	are
made	 by	 scalding	 milk	 or	 cream	—	 quickly
heating	it	 just	to	the	boil	—	and	then	stirring
it	 into	 the	 combined	 eggs	 and	 sugar.	 This
technique	heats	the	eggs	gently	but	quickly	to
140	 or	 150ºF,	 just	 30	 to	 40ºF	 short	 of	 the



setting	 temperature.	 Doing	 the	 reverse	 —
adding	 cold	 eggs	 to	 the	 hot	 milk	 —	 would
immediately	 heat	 the	 first	 dribbles	 of	 egg
close	 to	 the	 boil	 and	 cause	 premature
coagulation	and	curdling.

Though	scalding	was	a	form	of	insurance
in	times	when	milk	quality	was	uncertain,	it
can	now	be	dispensed	with	in	custard	making
—	unless	you	need	to	flavor	the	milk	by
infusing	it	with	vanilla	or	coffee	beans,	citrus
peel,	or	another	solid	flavoring.	A	custard
mixed	cold	has	just	as	even	a	texture	and	sets
almost	as	quickly	as	a	pre-scalded	one.	Pre-
scalding	the	milk	remains	handy	in	making
creams	because	milk	(or	cream)	can	be	boiled
quickly	with	little	attention	from	the	cook,
while	heating	the	milk-egg	mix	from	room
temperature	requires	a	low	flame	and	constant
stirring	to	prevent	coagulation	at	the	pan
bottom.

Green	Eggs	in	the	Chafing	Dish



Scrambled	eggs	and	omelets	kept	hot	 in	a
chafing	 dish	 or	 on	 a	 steam	 table	 will
sometimes	 develop	 green	 patches.	 This
discoloration	 results	 from	 the	 same
reaction	that	turns	hard-cooked	yolks	green
(p.	89),	and	is	encouraged	by	the	persistent
high	 temperature	 and	 the	 increased
alkalinity	 of	 the	 cooked	 eggs	 (the	 rise	 is
about	 half	 a	 pH	unit).	 It	 can	be	prevented
by	including	an	acidic	ingredient	in	the	egg
mixture,	 around	 a	 half	 teaspoon/2	 gm
lemon	 juice	 or	 vinegar	 per	 egg;	 half	 that
amount	 will	 slow	 the	 discoloration	 and
affect	the	flavor	less.

Curdling	Insurance:	Starch	in	Custards
and	Creams	Flour	or	cornstarch	can	protect
against	curdling	in	custards	and	creams,	even
if	they’re	cooked	quickly	over	direct	heat	and
actually	boil.	(The	same	is	true	for	egg-based
sauces	like	hollandaise;	see	p.	628.)	The	key
is	the	gelation	of	the	solid	starch	granules	in
these	materials.	When	heated	to	175ºF/77ºC



and	above	—	right	around	the	temperature	at
which	the	egg	proteins	are	bonding	to	each
other	—	the	granules	absorb	water,	swell	up,
and	begin	to	leak	their	long	starch	molecules
into	the	liquid.	The	swelling	granules	slow
protein	binding	by	absorbing	heat	energy
themselves,	and	the	dissolved	starch
molecules	get	in	the	proteins’	way	and
prevent	them	from	bonding	to	each	other	too
intimately.	Because	they	contain	starch,	both
chocolate	and	cocoa	can	also	help	stabilize
custards	and	creams.

A	full	tablespoon/8g	of	flour	per
cup/250ml	liquid	(or	2	teaspoons/5g	pure
starch	in	the	form	of	cornstarch	or	arrowroot)
is	required	to	prevent	curdling.	The
disadvantage	is	that	this	proportion	of	starch
also	turns	a	creamily	smooth	dish	into	a
coarser,	thicker	one,	and	diminishes	its	flavor.

Custard	Theory	and	Practice



In	the	West,	custards	are	almost	always	made
with	milk	or	cream,	but	just	about	any	liquid
will	do	as	long	as	it	contains	some	dissolved
minerals.	Mix	an	egg	with	a	cup	of	plain
water	and	you	get	curdled	egg	floating	in
water;	include	a	pinch	of	salt	and	you	get	a
coherent	gel.	Without	minerals,	the	negatively
charged,	mutually	repelling	protein	molecules
avoid	each	other	as	they	unfold	in	the	heat,
and	each	forms	only	a	few	bonds	with	a	few
others.	With	minerals,	positively	charged	ions
cluster	around	the	negatively	charged	proteins
and	provide	a	neutralizing	shield,	which
makes	it	possible	for	the	proteins	to	unfold
near	each	other	and	bond	extensively	into	a
fine	network.	Meats	are	rich	in	minerals,	and
the	Japanese	make	savory	custards,	chawan-
mushi	(soft)	and	tamago	dofu	(firm),	from
both	bonito	and	chicken	broths.	Vegetable
stocks	also	work.

Proportions	The	consistency	of	a	custard	can



be	firm	or	soft,	slick	or	creamy,	depending	on
its	egg	content.	The	greater	 the	proportion	of
whole	eggs	or	whites,	 the	firmer	and	glossier
the	custard.	Extra	yolks,	or	using	yolks	alone,
will	produce	a	more	tender,	creamier	effect.	A
custard	 to	 be	 served	 in	 the	 container	 it	 was
cooked	 in	 can	be	 as	 soft	 as	 the	 cook	desires.
Those	that	are	to	be	turned	out	of	a	container
for	 serving	must	 be	 firm	 enough	 to	 stand	 on
their	own,	which	means	that	they	must	contain
either	some	egg	whites	or	at	least	3	yolks	per
cup/250	 ml	 of	 liquid	 (the	 LDL-bound	 yolk
proteins	are	less	efficient	networkers	than	the
free-floating	 albumen	 proteins,	 so	 we	 need
more	 of	 them	 to	 make	 a	 firm	 gel).	 The
replacement	 of	 some	 or	 all	 of	 the	milk	with
cream	reduces	the	proportion	of	eggs	required
for	a	given	firmness,	since	cream	contains	20
to	 40%	 less	 water	 and	 the	 egg	 proteins	 are
proportionally	 less	 diluted.	 Unmolding	 is
easiest	from	a	buttered	ramekin,	and	when	the
custards	 have	 been	 allowed	 to	 cool



thoroughly;	cooling	firms	protein	gels.

Food	Words:	Custard,	Cream,	Flan
The	 nomenclature	 for	 egg-milk	 mixtures
has	 always	 been	 loose.	 The	 English
“custard”	began	as	“croustade”	in	medieval
times,	 and	meant	 dishes	 served	 in	 a	 crust
—	 thus,	 for	 egg-milk	 combinations,
usually	 baked	 and	 unstirred,	 and	 so	 solid.
Early	English	creams	could	be	either	liquid
or	solid,	as	could	the	French	crèmes.	Those
congealed	 past	 the	 point	 of	 creaminess
became	 known	 as	crèmes	 prises,	 or	 “set
creams.”
Flan,	 a	 French	 word,	 comes	 from	 the

late	Latin	for	“flat	cake.”
Custards	that	contain	fruits	or	vegetables

can	turn	out	very	uneven,	with	pockets	of
fluid	and	curdling.	(Usually	this	is
undesirable,	though	the	Japanese	expect
chawan-mushi	to	weep	and	treat	it	as	a
combination	of	custard	and	soup.)	The



culprits	are	juices	that	leak	out	of	the	plant
tissue,	and	fibrous	particles,	which	cause	local
overcoagulation	of	egg	proteins.	The	juice
leakage	can	be	reduced	by	precooking	the
fruit	or	vegetable,	and	including	some	flour	in
the	mix	to	help	bind	excess	liquid	and
minimize	overcoagulation.	These	dishes	are
best	cooked	very	gently	and	only	until	barely
done.
Cooking	Cooks	have	known	for	thousands	of
years	that	a	low	cooking	temperature	provides
the	greatest	safety	margin	for	making
custards:	that	is,	it	gives	us	more	time	to
recognize	that	the	dish	is	properly	done	and
remove	it	from	the	heat,	before	it	toughens
and	tunnels.	Custards	are	usually	baked	in	a
moderate	oven	with	the	protection	of	a	water
bath,	which	keeps	the	effective	cooking
temperature	below	the	boiling	point.	The
actual	temperature	depends	on	the	pan
material	and	whether	and	how	the	water	bath
is	covered	(see	box).	It’s	a	mistake	to	cover



the	whole	water	bath,	since	this	forces	the
water	to	the	boil	and	makes	it	more	likely	that
the	custards	will	be	overcooked.	The	most
gentle	heating	results	when	the	individual
molds	are	set	covered	on	a	rack	in	an	open,
thin	metal	pan	of	hot	water.

Custard	doneness	can	be	judged	by
bumping	the	dish	—	the	contents	should	move
only	sluggishly	—	or	by	probing	the	interior
with	a	toothpick	or	knife,	which	should	return
without	any	mix	clinging	to	it.	When	the
proteins	have	coagulated	enough	that	the	mix
clings	mostly	to	itself,	the	dish	is	done.
Unless	the	custard	needs	to	be	firm	enough	to
unmold,	it’s	best	taken	from	the	oven	while
the	center	is	still	slightly	underdone	and
jiggly.	The	egg	proteins	continue	to	set
somewhat	with	the	residual	heat,	and	the
custard	will	in	any	case	be	firmer	once	cooled
to	serving	temperature.

“Ribboning”	Yolks	with	Sugar



Cookbooks	 often	 assert	 the	 importance	 of
beating	yolks	with	sugar	until	 they	lighten
in	color	and	thicken	sufficiently	 to	form	a
ribbon	 when	 trailed	 from	 a	 spoon.	 This
stage	does	not	mark	any	critical	change	in
the	 yolk	 components.	 It’s	 simply	 a	 sign
that	much	of	the	sugar	has	dissolved	in	the
limited	yolk	water	 (about	half	 the	volume
of	the	yolks	themselves),	which	makes	the
mix	 viscous	 enough	 to	 pour	 thickly	 and
retain	 air	 bubbles	 (the	 cause	 of	 the
whitening).	 Sugar	 grains	 are	 a	 convenient
means	 for	 mixing	 the	 yolks	 and	 albumen
remnants	 thoroughly,	 but	 the	 quality	 of	 a
cream	or	custard	will	not	suffer	if	you	mix
the	 yolks	 and	 sugar	 thoroughly	 but	 stop
short	of	the	ribbon.

Savory	Custards:	The	Quiche	The	quiche	(a
French	version	of	the	German	Kuchen,	“little
cake”)	can	be	thought	of	either	as	a	savory
custard	or	a	close	relative	of	the	omelet.	It	is	a
pie-shaped	mixture	of	eggs	and	cream	or	milk



that	contains	small	pieces	of	a	vegetable,
meat,	or	cheese.	To	make	it	firm	enough	to	be
cut	into	wedges	for	serving,	a	quiche	normally
contains	2	whole	eggs	per	cup/250	ml	of
liquid,	and	is	baked	unprotected	by	a	water
bath,	either	alone	or	in	a	precooked	crust.	The
Italian	frittata	and	Egyptian	eggah	are	similar
preparations	that	omit	any	milk	or	cream.

Crème	 Caramel	 and	 Crème	 Brûlée	 Crème
caramel	is	a	freestanding	sweet	custard	with	a
layer	 of	 moist	 caramel	 on	 top.	 It’s	 made	 by
coating	the	bottom	of	the	dish	with	a	layer	of
caramelized	 sugar	 (see	 p.	 656)	 before	 the
custard	 mix	 is	 poured	 in	 and	 cooked.	 The
caramel	does	harden	and	stick	to	the	dish,	but
moisture	from	the	custard	mix	softens	it,	and
the	 two	 layers	 become	partly	 integrated.	The
custard	 is	 turned	 out	 of	 the	 dish	 while	 still
slightly	 warm	 and	 the	 caramel	 soft.	 If	 the
custard	 must	 be	 refrigerated	 before	 serving,
leave	 it	 in	 the	 mold;	 the	 caramel	 can	 be



softened	 again	 by	 placing	 the	 dish	 in	 a
shallow	pan	of	hot	water	for	a	minute	or	 two
before	unmolding.

Crème	brûlée	(“burned	cream”)	is	also	a
custard	topped	with	caramel,	but	here	the
caramel	should	be	hard	enough	to	shatter
when	rapped	with	a	spoon.	The	trick	is	to
harden	and	brown	the	sugar	topping	without
overcooking	the	custard.	The	standard	modern
method	is	to	bake	the	custard	and	then	chill	it
for	several	hours,	so	that	the	subsequent
caramelizing	step	won’t	overcook	the	egg
proteins.	The	hard	crust	is	then	made	by
coating	the	custard	surface	with	granulated
sugar,	and	then	melting	and	browning	the
sugar,	either	with	a	propane	torch	or	by
placing	the	dish	right	under	the	broiler.	The
dishes	are	sometimes	immersed	in	an	ice-
water	bath	to	protect	the	custard	from	a
second	cooking.	From	the	time	of	its
invention	in	the	17th	century	until	early	in	the
20th,	crème	brûlée	was	a	stirred	cream,



prepared	on	the	stovetop	by	making	a	crème
anglaise,	pouring	it	into	dishes,	and
caramelizing	the	sugar	topping	with	a	red-hot
metal	plate,	or	“salamander.”

The	Surprising	Science	of	Water	Baths
Most	 cooks	 know	 that	 oven	 heat	 can	 be
moderated	 with	 a	 water	 bath.	 Though	 the
oven	 may	 be	 at	 350ºF,	 the	 liquid	 water
can’t	exceed	212ºF/100ºC,	the	temperature
at	which	it	boils	and	turns	from	liquid	into
vapor.	Less	well	known	is	the	fact	that	the
water	temperature	can	vary	over	a	range	of
40ºF	 depending	 on	 the	 pan	 containing	 the
water	 and	 whether	 it’s	 covered.	A	 pan	 of
water	 is	 heated	 by	 the	 oven,	 but	 it’s
simultaneously	 cooled	 as	water	molecules
evaporate	 from	 the	 surface.	 The	 actual
water	 temperature	 is	 determined	 by	 the
balance	between	heating	of	the	water	mass
through	the	pan,	and	evaporative	cooling	at
the	 water	 surface.	More	 heat	 accumulates



in	 a	 thick	 cast	 iron	 pan	 or	 passes	 through
infrared-transparent	 glass	 than	 is
transmitted	by	 thin	stainless	 steel.	So	 in	a
moderate	oven,	a	cast-iron	water	bath	may
reach	195ºF/87ºC,	a	glass	bath	185ºF/	83ºC,
and	a	stainless	one	180ºF/80ºC.	If	the	pans
are	 covered	 with	 foil,	 then	 evaporative
cooling	 is	 prevented,	 and	 all	 of	 them	will
come	to	a	full	boil.

Custards	 are	 tenderest	 when	 heated
gently,	 and	 so	 are	 best	 cooked	 in	 an	 open
water	bath	—	one,	however,	that	is	sure	to
reach	 at	 least	 185ºF;	 otherwise	 the	 mix
may	 never	 completely	 set.	 Many	 cooks
take	 the	 precaution	 of	 folding	 a	 kitchen
towel	 in	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 water	 bath	 so
that	 the	 custard	 cups	 or	 dish	 won’t	 be	 in
direct	contact	with	the	hot	pan,	but	this	can
backfire:	the	towel	prevents	the	water	from
circulating	 under	 the	 cups,	 so	 the	 water
trapped	there	reaches	the	boil	and	rocks	the
cups	around.	A	wire	rack	works	better.



Cheesecake	We	don’t	ordinarily	think	of
cheesecake	as	a	custard,	probably	because	the
presence	of	eggs	is	masked	by	the	richness	of
the	filling	they	bind	together,	which	is	some
combination	of	ricotta	cheese,	cream	cheese,
sour	cream,	heavy	cream,	and	butter.	The
proportions	for	cheesecake	are	similar	to
those	for	other	custards,	approaching	1	egg
per	cup/250	ml	of	filling,	though	the	greater
richness	and	tartness	of	the	filling	demand
more	sugar	for	balance,	around	4	tablespoons
per	cup	(60	gm	per	250	ml)	instead	of	2.	Flour
or	cornstarch	is	sometimes	included	to
stabilize	the	gel	and,	in	the	case	of	ricotta
cheesecakes,	to	absorb	water	that	may	be
released	from	the	fresh	cheese.

The	thick	texture	and	high	fat	content	of
cheesecake	filling	necessitate	more	delicate
treatment	than	a	standard	custard.	Instead	of	a
preliminary	cooking	on	the	stovetop,	the	sugar
is	first	mixed	into	the	cream	ingredients,	and
the	eggs	then	incorporated	along	with	other



flavorings.	The	cool	mix	is	poured	into	the
pan	(often	preceded	by	a	crumb	crust)	and
baked	at	a	gentle	325ºF/163ºC,	often	in	a
water	bath.	The	last	phase	of	cooking	may
take	place	with	the	heat	off	and	the	oven	door
ajar,	which	smooths	the	transition	between
cooking	and	cooling.

First	Recipes	for	Crème	Brûlée,	Crème
Anglaise,	and	Crème	Caramel

Massialot’s	 recipe	 for	 crème	brûlée	 is	 the
first	I	know	of.	The	identical	recipe	in	the
1731	 edition	 of	 his	 book	 is	 renamed
“Crême	a	 l’Angloise,”	which	may	well	be
the	 origin	 of	 that	 basic	 stirred	 cream.	An
English	model	 for	 “English	 cream”	hasn’t
yet	been	unearthed.

Crème	brûlée
Take	four	or	five	egg	yolks,	according	to
the	size	of	your	platter.	You	mix	them	well
in	a	casserole	with	a	good	pinch	of	flour;



and	little	by	little	you	pour	in	some	milk,
about	[3	cups/750	ml].	Add	a	little	stick
cinnamon,	and	chopped	green	citron
peel….	Put	on	the	stovetop	and	stir
continuously,	taking	care	that	your	cream
doesn’t	stick	to	the	bottom.	When	it	is	well
cooked,	place	a	platter	on	the	stove,	pour
the	cream	onto	it,	and	cook	it	again	until
you	see	it	stick	to	the	platter	rim.	Then
remove	from	the	heat	and	sugar	it	well:
take	the	fire	iron,	good	and	red,	and	burn
the	cream	so	that	it	takes	on	a	fine	gold
color.

—	F.	Massialot,	Le	Cuisinier	roial	et
bourgeois,	1692

A	 few	 decades	 later,	 Vincent	 La
Chapelle	plagiarized	Massialot’s	recipe	for
his	 own	 version	 of	 crème	 brûlée,	 which
comes	close	to	the	modern	crème	caramel.
La	 Chapelle	 copies	 Massialot	 word	 for
word	 up	 to	 the	 point	 that	 the	 cream	 is



cooked	on	the	stovetop.	Then…

When	the	cream	is	well	cooked,	put	a
silver	platter	onto	the	hot	stove	with	some
powdered	sugar	and	a	little	water	to
dissolve	it;	and	when	your	sugar	has
colored,	pour	the	cream	on	top;	turn	the
sugar	along	the	platter	rim	onto	the	top	of
your	cream,	and	serve	at	once.

—	V.	La	Chapelle,	Le	Cuisinier
moderne,	1742

The	most	common	problem	with
cheesecakes	is	the	development	of
depressions	and	cracks	in	the	surface,	which
result	when	the	mix	expands	and	rises	during
the	cooking,	then	shrinks	and	falls	as	it	cools
down.	Rising	is	essential	for	soufflés	and
sponge	cakes,	but	it	is	antithetical	to	the	dense
richness	of	cheesecake.	Four	basic	strategies
will	minimize	it.	First,	beat	the	ingredients
slowly,	gently,	and	only	long	enough	to	obtain
an	even	mix.	Vigorous	or	long	beating



incorporates	more	air	bubbles	that	will	fill
with	steam	and	expand	during	baking.	Second,
bake	the	cheesecake	slowly	in	a	low	oven.
This	will	allow	trapped	air	and	steam	to
disperse	gradually	and	evenly.	Third,	don’t
overbake.	This	will	dry	the	filling	and	cause	it
to	shrink	from	moisture	loss.	Finally,	cool	the
cheesecake	gradually	in	the	open	oven.
Cooling	causes	any	trapped	air	or	steam	to
contract,	and	the	more	gradually	this	happens,
the	more	gently	the	cheesecake	surface	is
pulled	in.

Cream	Theory	and	Practice

Creams	are	easier	to	make	than	custards	in
two	respects.	They’re	heated	on	the	stovetop,
so	the	cook	doesn’t	have	to	consider	the	fine
points	of	heat	transfer	in	the	oven.	And
because	they’re	not	served	as	is,	in	the
container	they’re	cooked	in,	some	curdling
can	be	tolerated	and	remedied	by	putting	the



cream	through	a	strainer	before	it’s	served.

Pourable	 and	 Stiff	 Creams	 There	 are	 two
broad	 classes	 of	 creams,	 and	 they	 demand
entirely	 different	 handling	 by	 the	 cook.	 The
pourable	creams,	crème	anglaise	for	example,
are	 meant	 to	 have	 the	 consistency	 of	 heavy
cream	 at	 serving	 temperature.	 They	 contain
the	 standard	 eggs,	 milk,	 and	 sugar	 (sugar	 is
omitted	 for	 a	 savory	 cream),	 and	 are	 cooked
only	until	they	just	begin	to	thicken,	far	below
the	 boil.	 The	cream	 fillings	 —	 crème
pâtissière,	 banana	 cream,	 and	 so	 on	 —	 are
meant	 to	 stay	 put	 in	 a	 dish	 and	 hold	 their
shape.	 They	 are	 therefore	 stiffened	 with	 a
substantial	 dose	 of	 flour	 or	 cornstarch;	 and
this	means	not	only	that	they	can	be	heated	to
the	 boil,	 they	must	 be	 boiled.	 Egg	 yolks
contain	 a	 starch-digesting	 enzyme,	 amylase,
that	 is	 remarkably	 resistant	 to	 heat.	Unless	 a
starch-egg	 mix	 is	 brought	 to	 a	 full	 boil,	 the
yolk	 amylase	 will	 survive,	 digest	 the	 starch,



and	turn	the	stiff	cream	into	a	pourable	one.
When	stored	for	any	time,	creams	should

be	protected	against	the	formation	of	the
leathery	skin	that	results	from	evaporation,
which	concentrates	and	toughens	the	surface
layer	of	protein	and	starch.	Butter	can	be
dotted	onto	the	warm	surface,	where	the	milk
fat	will	melt	and	spread	into	a	protective
layer;	and	sprinkled	sugar	will	form	a	layer	of
concentrated	syrup	that	resists	evaporation.
The	most	straightforward	solution	is	to	press
waxed	paper	or	buttered	parchment	directly
onto	the	cream.	Avoid	plastic	wrap;	its
plasticizing	chemicals	tend	to	migrate	into
fat-rich	foods.

A	Medieval	Cheesecake
Tart	de	bry

Take	raw	yolks	of	eggs,	and	good	fat
cheese,	and	dress	it,	and	mix	it	well
together;	and	add	powder	of	ginger,	and	of
cinnamon,	and	sugar,	and	saffron,	and	put



it	in	a	crust,	and	bake	it,	and	serve	it	forth.
—	from	a	manuscript	published	in

Antiquitates	Culinariae,	1791	(ca.	1400)
Crème	Anglaise	and	Other	Pourable
Creams	The	mix	for	a	stirred	cream	is	made
much	as	baked-custard	mixes	are.	An
especially	rich	cream	may	call	for	yolks	only,
as	many	as	4	or	5	per	cup/250	ml	milk.	The
eggs	and	sugar	are	mixed	with	scalded	milk	or
cream,	and	the	mixture	is	then	stirred
constantly	on	the	stovetop	until	it	thickens
enough	to	cling	to	the	spoon,	at	around
180ºF/80ºC.	The	gentle	heat	of	a	double	boiler
minimizes	the	possibility	of	curdling,	but	it
takes	longer	than	direct	heat.	The	thickened
cream	is	then	strained	of	any	coagulated	egg
or	other	solid	particles,	and	cooled,	with
occasional	stirring	to	prevent	the	proteins
from	setting	into	a	solid	gel.	An	ice	bath	will
cool	the	cream	quickly,	but	demands	more
frequent	stirring	to	maintain	an	even	texture.
Fruit	purees	are	generally	added	after	the



cooling,	because	their	acidity	and	fibrous
particles	can	cause	curdling	during	the
cooking.
Pastry	Cream,	Bouillie,	and	Cream-Pie
Fillings	Along	with	crème	anglaise,	pastry
cream	is	one	of	the	most	versatile	of	the
dessert	maker’s	stock	preparations.	It’s	used
mainly	to	fill	and	decorate	cakes	and	pastries,
and	is	a	common	reinforcing	base	for	sweet
soufflés;	in	Italy	and	France	it’s	even	cut	into
pieces	and	fried	on	its	own.	It	must	therefore
be	thick	enough	to	hold	its	shape	at	room
temperature,	and	so	is	stiffened	with	between
1	and	2	tablespoons	flour	(or	about	half	that
amount	of	pure	starch)	per	cup	liquid/10–20
gm	per	250	ml.

Pastry	cream	is	made	by	adding	scalded
milk	to	the	mixture	of	sugar,	eggs,	and	flour,
whose	protective	action	allows	the	mix	to	be
brought	to	a	full	boil	over	direct	heat	without
curdling.	After	a	minute	or	so	of	boiling	(and
constant	stirring)	to	thoroughly	inactivate	the



yolk	amylase	enzyme	and	to	extract	starch
from	its	granules,	and	to	improve	the	flavor,
the	thickened	cream	is	scraped	into	a	bowl
and	allowed	to	cool	with	minimal	stirring
(stirring	breaks	the	developing	starch	network
and	thins	it	out).	Once	cool,	pastry	cream	is
sometimes	enriched	with	cream	or	butter,	or
lightened	with	foamed	egg	whites,	or
simultaneously	enriched	and	lightened	with
whipped	cream.

The	First	Recipe	for	Pastry	Cream
Pastry	 cream	 has	 been	 a	 standard
professional	 preparation	 for	 more	 than
three	centuries.

The	Manner	of	Making	Cresme	de
Pâstissier

Take	for	example	a	chopine	[3	cups/750
ml]	of	good	milk….	Put	the	milk	in	a	pot
on	the	fire:	you	must	also	have	four	eggs,
and	while	the	milk	heats	up,	break	two



eggs,	and	mix	the	white	and	yolk	with
about	a	half	litron	[7	oz/185	gm]	flour,	as
if	for	making	porridge,	and	a	little	milk.
And	when	the	flour	is	well	diluted	so	that	it
has	no	more	lumps,	you	throw	in	the	other
two	eggs	to	mix	them	well	with	this
preparation.

And	when	the	milk	begins	to	boil	you
pour	in	little	by	little	this	mix	of	eggs	and
flour	and	milk,	and	boil	together	on	a	low
flame	that	is	clear	and	without	smoke;	stir
with	a	spoon	as	you	would	a	porridge.	You
must	also	add	salt	at	your	discretion	as	it
cooks,	and	a	quarteron	[a	quarter-
pound/125	gm]	good	fresh	butter.

This	cream	should	be	cooked	for	20	to
25	minutes,	then	pour	it	into	a	bowl	and	set
aside	this	preparation,	which	pastry	cooks
call	cream	and	use	in	many	baked	goods.

—	Le	Pâtis	sier	françois,	ca.	1690
A	traditional	French	variant	on	pastry

cream	is	the	bouillie	(literally	“boiled”;	the



word	means	a	plain	porridge-like	cereal
paste),	which	is	made	at	the	last	minute,	and
primarily	to	reinforce	soufflés.	For	a	bouillie,
milk,	sugar,	and	flour	are	heated	together	to
the	boil,	removed	from	the	heat,	and	the	eggs
beaten	in	as	the	mix	cools.	Because	the	egg
proteins	are	not	as	thoroughly	heated	and
coagulated	as	they	are	in	the	technique	for
pastry	cream,	the	consistency	of	a	bouillie	is
lighter	and	smoother.	Some	yolk	amylase
enzyme	survives	in	a	bouillie,	but	this	doesn’t
matter	if	the	dish	is	to	be	made	and	served
immediately;	the	enzyme	takes	hours	to	digest
a	noticeable	amount	of	starch.

However,	the	survival	of	yolk	amylase	can
spell	disaster	in	the	fillings	for	American
cream	pies,	which	are	often	made	in	the
fashion	of	a	bouillie	rather	than	a	pastry
cream,	and	are	held	for	hours	or	days	before
serving,	enough	time	for	a	perfect	cream	pie
to	disintegrate	into	a	soupy	mess.	No	matter
what	a	recipe	may	say,	always	be	sure	that	the



egg	yolks	in	a	starch-thickened	pie	filling	are
heated	all	the	way	to	the	boil.

Fruit	Curds	Fruit	curds	—	lemon	curd	is	the
most	common	—	can	be	thought	of	as	a	kind
of	 cream	 in	which	 the	place	of	milk	 is	 taken
by	 fruit	 juice,	 usually	 enriched	 with	 butter.
(They	may	have	begun	as	a	sweetened	version
of	creamy	eggs	scrambled	with	fruit	juice;	see
p.	 86.)	 Fruit	 curds	 are	 meant	 to	 have	 a
spoonable	 consistency	 that	 works	 well	 as	 a
filling	for	small	pastries	or	a	breakfast	spread,
and	 must	 be	 sweet	 enough	 to	 balance	 the
acidity	of	the	juice.	They	therefore	contain	no
flour,	more	sugar,	and	more	eggs	than	do	milk
creams,	typically	4	eggs	(or	8	yolks)	and	a	cup
or	more	of	sugar	for	a	half-cup	of	butter	and	a
half-cup	 of	 juice	 (375	 gm	 sugar	 per	 125	 ml
each	of	butter	and	juice).

Egg	Foams:	Cooking
with	the	Wrist



If	the	transformation	of	eggs	by	heat	seems
remarkable,	consider	what	beating	can	do!
Physical	agitation	normally	breaks	down	and
destroys	structure.	But	beat	eggs	and	you
create	structure.	Begin	with	a	single	dense,
sticky	egg	white,	work	it	with	a	whisk,	and	in
a	few	minutes	you	have	a	cupful	of	snowy
white	foam,	a	cohesive	structure	that	clings	to
the	bowl	when	you	turn	it	upside	down,	and
holds	its	own	when	mixed	and	cooked.	Thanks
to	egg	whites	we’re	able	to	harvest	the	air,	and
make	it	an	integral	part	of	meringues	and
mousses,	gin	fizzes	and	soufflés	and
sabayons.

The	full	foaming	power	of	egg	white
seems	to	have	burst	forth	in	the	early	17th
century.	Cooks	had	noticed	the	egg’s
readiness	to	foam	long	before	then,	and	by
Renaissance	times	were	exploiting	it	in	two
fanciful	dishes:	imitation	snow	and	the
confectioner’s	miniature	loaves	and	biscuits.
But	in	those	days	the	fork	was	still	a	novelty,



and	twigs,	shreds	of	dried	fruits,	and	sponges
could	deliver	only	a	coarse	froth	at	best	(see
box,	p.	101).	Sometime	around	1650,	cooks
began	to	use	more	efficient	whisks	of	bundled
straw,	and	meringues	and	soufflés	start	to
appear	in	cookbooks.

Like	the	head	on	a	beer	or	a	cappuccino,	an
egg	foam	is	a	liquid	—	the	white	—	filled
with	a	gas	—	air	—	in	such	a	way	that	the
mixture	of	liquid	and	gas	keeps	its	shape,	like
a	solid.	It’s	a	mass	of	bubbles,	with	air	inside
each	bubble,	and	the	white	spread	out	into	a
thin	film	to	form	the	bubble	walls.	And	the
makeup	of	those	liquid	walls	determines	how
long	a	foam	can	stand	up.	Pure	water	has	such
a	strong	surface	tension	—	such	strong
attractive	forces	among	its	molecules	—	that
it	immediately	starts	to	pull	itself	together
into	a	compact	puddle;	and	it’s	so	runny	that
it	puddles	almost	immediately.	The	many
nonwater	molecules	in	egg	white	both	reduce
the	surface	tension	of	the	water	they	float	in,



and	make	it	less	runny,	and	thus	allow	the
bubbles	to	survive	long	enough	to	accumulate
into	a	sizeable	mass.	What	gives	the	mass	of
foam	a	useful	kitchen	lifetime	is	the	white’s
team	of	proteins.

How	the	Egg	Proteins
Stabilize	Foams

Stress	Builds	Protein	Solidarity	As	is	true
for	the	setting	of	heated	eggs	and	custards,	the
key	to	the	stable	egg	foam	is	the	tendency	of
the	proteins	to	unfold	and	bond	to	each	other
when	they’re	subjected	to	physical	stress.	In	a
foam	this	creates	a	kind	of	reinforcement	for
the	bubble	walls,	the	culinary	equivalent	of
quick-setting	cement.	Whipping	exerts	two
kinds	of	physical	stress	on	the	proteins.	First,
as	we	force	the	whisk	through	the	white,	the
whisk	wires	drag	some	of	the	liquid	with
them,	and	create	a	pulling	force	that	unfolds
the	compacted	protein	molecules.	And	second,



because	water	and	air	are	very	different
physical	environments,	the	simple	mixing	of
air	into	the	whites	creates	an	imbalance	of
forces	that	also	tugs	the	proteins	out	of	their
usual	folded	shape.	All	these	unfolded
proteins	(mainly	the	globulins	and
ovotransferrin)	tend	to	gather	where	air	and
water	meet,	with	their	water-loving	portions
immersed	in	the	liquid	and	their	water-
avoiding	portions	projecting	into	the	air.	Thus
disturbed	and	concentrated,	they	readily	form
bonds	with	each	other.	So	a	continuous,	solid
network	of	proteins	pervades	the	bubble	walls,
holding	both	water	and	air	in	place.

Early	Egg-White	Foams:	“Snow”	and
Biscuits

How	to	Break	Whites	of	Eggs	Speedily
A	fig	or	two	shred	in	pieces	and	then
beaten	amongst	the	whites	of	eggs	will
bring	them	into	an	oil	speedily:	some	break
them	with	a	stubbed	rod,	and	some	by



wringing	them	often	through	a	sponge.
—	Sir	Hugh	Platt,	Delightes	for	Ladies,

1605
Eggs	in	Snow

Break	the	eggs,	separate	the	whites	from
the	yolks,	place	the	eggs	on	a	plate	with
some	butter,	season	them	with	salt,	place
on	hot	coals.	Beat	and	whip	the	whites
well,	and	just	before	serving	throw	them	on
the	yolks	with	a	drop	of	rosewater,	the	fire
iron	underneath:	sugar,	then	serve.

Another	way:	You	may	put	the	yolks	in
the	middle	 of	 the	 snow	 that	 is	made	with
your	whipped	whites,	 and	 then	 cook	 them
before	the	fire	on	a	plate.

—	François	Pierre	de	La	Varenne,	Le
Cuisinier	françois,	1651

To	Make	Italian	Biskets
Take	a	quarter	of	a	pound	of	searsed
[sieved]	Sugar,	and	beat	it	in	an	Alabaster
Mortar	with	the	white	of	an	Egg,	and	a



little	Gum	Dragon	[gum	tragacanth]	steept
in	Rose	water	to	bring	it	to	a	perfect	Paste,
then	mould	it	up	with	a	little	Anniseed	and
a	grain	of	Musk;	then	make	it	up	like
Dutch	bread,	and	bake	it	on	a	Pye-plate	in	a
warm	Oven,	till	they	rise	somewhat	high
and	white,	take	them	out,	but	handle	them
not	till	they	be	throughly	dry	and	cold.

—	Queen’s	Closet	Open’d,	1655
Permanent	Reinforcement	A	raw	egg-white
foam	will	eventually	coarsen,	settle,	and
separate.	It	must	therefore	be	reinforced	when
it	is	turned	into	a	final	dish.	This	may	be	done
by	adding	other	thickening	ingredients	—
such	things	as	flour,	cornstarch,	chocolate,	or
gelatin.	But	if	the	foam	is	to	be	used	relatively
pure,	as	in	a	meringue	or	a	flourless	soufflé,
the	egg	proteins	have	to	do	the	job
themselves.	With	the	help	of	heat,	they	do
beautifully.

Ovalbumin,	the	major	protein	in	egg	white,
is	relatively	immune	to	beating	and	doesn’t



contribute	much	to	the	raw	foam.	But	it	is
sensitive	to	heat,	which	causes	it	to	unfold	and
coagulate.	So	when	the	raw	foam	is	cooked,
ovalbumin	more	than	doubles	the	amount	of
solid	protein	reinforcement	in	the	bubble
walls.	At	the	same	time,	much	of	the	free
water	in	the	foam	evaporates.	Heat	thus
allows	the	cook	to	transform	a	transient	semi-
liquid	foam	into	a	permanent	solid	one.

How	Proteins	Destabilize	Foams

The	very	same	forces	that	make	egg	foams
also	break	egg	foams.	Often	just	as	the	foam
is	reaching	its	optimum	texture,	it	will	get
grainy,	lose	volume,	and	separate	into	a	dry
froth	and	a	runny	liquid.	As	the	proteins	bond
to	each	other	to	support	the	foam,	they
embrace	each	other	too	tightly,	and	squeeze
out	the	water	they	had	held	between	them.
There	are	several	different	kinds	of	bonds	by
which	the	long,	unfolding	egg	proteins	are



joined	to	each	other	in	a	reinforcing	network:
bonds	between	positively	and	negatively
charged	parts	of	molecules,	between	water-
like	parts,	between	fat-like	parts,	and	between
sulfur	groups.	The	protein	network	begins	to
collapse	when	too	many	of	these	bonds
accumulate	and	the	proteins	cluster	together
too	tightly.	Fortunately,	there	are	simple	ways
for	the	cook	to	limit	the	accumulation	of
bonds	and	prevent	the	collapse	of	albumen
foams.

Blocking	 Sulfur	 Bonds	 with	 Copper
Bowls…	Long	before	anyone	knew	about	egg
proteins	 or	 their	 chemical	 bonds,	 cooks	 had
come	up	with	a	way	of	controlling	them.	The
French	tradition	has	long	specified	the	use	of
copper	 utensils	 for	 making	 egg	 foams.	 One
early	 trace	 of	 this	 tradition	 is	 a	 1771
illustration	 in	 the	 French	Encyclopédie	 that
shows	a	boy	in	a	pastry	kitchen	working	with
a	straw	whisk	and	what	the	accompanying	key



identifies	 as	 “a	 copper	 bowl	 for	 beating	 egg
whites.”	It	turns	out	that	along	with	a	very	few
other	metals,	 copper	 has	 the	 useful	 tendency
to	 form	 extremely	 tight	 bonds	 with	 reactive
sulfur	 groups:	 so	 tight	 that	 the	 sulfur	 is
essentially	 prevented	 from	 reacting	 with
anything	 else.	 So	 the	 presence	 of	 copper	 in
foaming	egg	whites	essentially	eliminates	the
strongest	kind	of	protein	bond	 that	can	 form,
and	 makes	 it	 harder	 for	 the	 proteins	 to
embrace	 each	other	 too	 tightly.	Sure	 enough,
if	you	whip	egg	whites	in	a	copper	bowl	—	or
in	a	glass	bowl	to	which	you’ve	added	a	pinch
of	 a	 powdered	 copper	 supplement	 from	 a
health	food	store	—	the	foam	stays	glossy	and
never	 develops	 grains.	 A	 silver-plated	 bowl
will	do	the	same	thing.



Foamed	egg	whites.	The	folded	proteins	in	egg
white	 (left)	produce	 a	 light,	 long-lived	 foam
by	 unfolding	 at	 the	 interface	 between	 liquid
and	 air,	 the	 walls	 of	 the	 air	 bubbles.	 The
unfolded	 proteins	 then	 bond	 to	 each	 other,
and	 form	 a	 solid	 meshwork	 of	 reinforcement
around	the	bubbles	(right).
…And	Acids	There	are	disadvantages	to	the
traditional	copper	bowl:	it’s	expensive,	and	a
nuisance	to	keep	clean.	(Copper
contamination	is	negligible;	a	cup	of	foam
contains	a	tenth	of	our	normal	daily	intake.)
Fortunately	there’s	a	nonmetallic	alternative
for	controlling	reactive	sulfur	groups.	The
sulfur	bonds	form	when	the	sulfur-hydrogen
(S-H)	groups	on	two	different	protein
molecules	shed	their	hydrogens	and	form	a



sulfur-sulfur	(S-S)	connection	with	each
other.	The	addition	of	an	acid	boosts	the
number	of	free-floating	hydrogen	(H)	ions	in
the	egg	white,	which	makes	it	much	harder	for
the	S-H	groups	to	shed	their	own	H,	and	so
slows	the	sulfur	bonding	down	to	a	crawl.	A
good	dose	is	1/8	teaspoon/0.5g	cream	of	tartar
or	½	teaspoon/2ml	lemon	juice	per	egg	white,
added	at	the	beginning	of	the	beating.

The	Enemies	of	Egg	Foams

There	are	three	enemies	to	the	successful
mounting	of	a	foam	which	the	cook	should	be
careful	to	exclude	from	the	bowl:	egg	yolk,	oil
or	fat,	and	detergent.	All	are	chemical
relatives,	and	interfere	with	foaming	in	the
same	ways:	by	competing	with	the	proteins
for	a	place	at	the	air-water	interface	without
offering	any	structural	reinforcement;	and	by
interfering	with	the	bonding	of	the	protein
molecules.	Traces	of	these	troublemakers



won’t	absolutely	prevent	you	from	making	a
foam,	but	they’ll	make	you	work	harder	and
longer,	and	the	foam	won’t	be	as	light	or
stable.	Of	course	yolk	and	fat	can	safely	be
mixed	with	a	finished	foam,	as	happens	in
many	recipes	for	soufflés	and	egg-leavened
batters.

Copper	 bowls	 and	 eggs	 in	 the	 18th	 century.
This	is	a	detail	of	“Pâtissier,”	or	“The	Pastry-
cook,”	from	the	 Encyclopédie	,	 an	 engraving
first	 published	 in	 1771.	 The	 boy	 at	 right
wields	 what	 the	 accompanying	 key	 calls	 “a
copper	 bowl	 for	 beating	 egg	 whites	 and
mixing	 them	 with	 the	 dough	 from	 which
biscuits	are	made.”

The	Effects
of	Other	Ingredients



Egg	white	foams	are	almost	always	made	with
other	ingredients,	and	these	can	influence	the
beating	process	and	the	final	consistency.

Salt	 Salt	 increases	 the	 whipping	 time	 and
decreases	 the	 foam’s	 stability.	 Salt	 crystals
dissolve	 into	 positively	 charged	 sodium	 and
negatively	 charged	 chloride	 ions,	 and	 these
probably	 compete	 for	 bonding	 sites	 on	 the
unfolded	protein	molecules,	 thereby	 reducing
the	 number	 of	 protein-protein	 bonds	 and	 so
weakening	the	overall	structure.	It’s	therefore
best	 to	add	salt	 to	 the	other	components	of	a
dish	—	the	base	of	a	soufflé,	 for	example	—
rather	than	to	the	foam	itself.

Sugar	 Sugar	 both	 hinders	 and	 helps	 foam
making.	Added	early	 in	 the	process,	 it	delays
foaming,	 and	 it	 reduces	 the	 foam’s	 ultimate
volume	and	 lightness.	The	delay	comes	 from
sugar’s	 interference	 with	 the	 unfolding	 and
bonding	of	 the	proteins.	And	the	reduction	in
volume	and	lightness	is	caused	by	the	syrupy



sugar-egg	mixture	being	harder	to	spread	into
thin	 bubble	 walls.	 Slow	 foaming	 is	 a	 real
disadvantage	when	the	whites	are	whipped	by
hand	 —	 at	 standard	 soft-meringue	 levels,	 it
doubles	the	work	—	but	less	so	if	you’re	using
a	stand	mixer.

The	helpful	thing	about	sugar	is	that	it
improves	the	foam’s	stability.	By	making	the
liquid	thick	and	cohesive,	sugar	greatly	slows
drainage	from	the	bubble	walls	and
coarsening	of	texture.	In	the	oven,	the
dissolved	sugar	hangs	onto	the	water
molecules	and	so	delays	their	evaporation	in
the	high	heat	until	after	ovalbumin	has	had
time	to	coagulate	and	reinforce	the	raw	foam.
And	it	eventually	contributes	reinforcement	of
its	own	in	the	form	of	fine	but	solid,	cotton-
candy-like	strands	of	dry	sugar.

Sugar	is	usually	incorporated	into	the	egg
whites	after	the	foam	has	begun	to	form,	when
many	proteins	are	already	unfolded.	For	some
purposes,	cooks	will	mix	sugar	and	whites	at



the	outset,	in	order	to	obtain	a	very	firm,
dense	foam.

A	Silver	Bullet	for	the	Copper	Theory
Why	 do	 copper	 bowls	 make	 more	 stable
egg	 foams?	 I’ve	 wondered	 about	 this	 for
many	 years.	 In	 1984	 I	 did	 some
experiments	 with	 the	 help	 of	 Stanford
University	biologists,	and	then	published	a
theory	in	the	British	science	journal	Nature
and	 in	 the	 first	 edition	 of	 this	 book.	 The
experiments	 suggested	 that	 one	 of	 the
albumen	proteins,	 ovotransferrin,	 takes	 up
copper	 from	 the	 bowl	 surface	 and	 is
thereby	 rendered	 resistant	 to	 unfolding	—
which	 could	 make	 the	 foam	 as	 a	 whole
resistant	 to	 overcoagulating.	 That	 theory
stood	up	 for	 ten	 years,	 until	 one	 day	on	 a
whim	 I	 tried	 whipping	 egg	 whites	 in	 a
silver-plated	 bowl.	 Ovotransferrin	 doesn’t
bind	silver,	so	the	foam	should	have	turned
grainy.	 It	 didn’t.	 It	 remained	 light	 and



glossy.	I	resumed	my	frothy	investigations,
and	learned	that	both	copper	and	silver	do
block	 sulfur	 reactions	 between	 proteins.
Hence	 the	 revised	 edition	 of	 the	 copper
theory	outlined	here.

Water	Water	is	seldom	called	for,	but	in
small	amounts	it	increases	the	volume	and
lightness	of	the	foam.	Because	water	thins	the
whites,	however,	it’s	more	likely	that	some
liquid	will	drain	from	the	foam.	Albumen
diluted	by	40%	or	more	of	its	volume	in	water
cannot	produce	a	stable	foam.

Basic	Egg-Beating	Techniques

Beating	egg	whites	into	a	foam	is	one	of	those
techniques	about	which	cooks	and	cookbooks
wax	stern	and	stringent.	In	fact	it’s	not	all	that
sensitive	to	details.	Just	about	any	egg	and
bowl	and	whisk	can	give	you	a	good	foam.

Choosing	the	Eggs	An	egg	foam	begins	with



the	 eggs.	 Old	 eggs	 at	 room	 temperature	 are
often	 recommended	 on	 the	 grounds	 that	 the
whites	 are	 thinner	 and	 therefore	 foam	 more
rapidly.	 This	 is	 true,	 and	very	 fresh	 eggs	 are
said	to	be	almost	impossible	to	foam	by	hand.
But	fresh	eggs	are	less	alkaline	and	so	make	a
more	 stable	 foam;	 the	 older	 thin	 white	 also
drains	 from	 the	 foam	 more	 easily,	 and	 old
eggs	are	more	likely	to	leave	traces	of	yolk	in
the	white.	Cold	yolks	are	 less	 likely	 to	break
as	you	separate	them	from	the	whites,	and	the
whipping	 process	 quickly	 warms	 cold	 eggs
anyway.	 Fresh	 eggs	 right	 out	 of	 the
refrigerator	 will	 work	 fine,	 especially	 if
you’re	using	an	electric	mixer.	Egg	foams	can
also	be	made	with	dried	egg	whites.	Powdered
egg	whites	are	pure,	pasteurized,	freeze-dried
egg	whites.	“Meringue	powder”	contains	more
sugar	than	egg,	and	includes	gums	to	stabilize
the	foam.

Bowl	and	Whisk	The	bowl	in	which	you	beat



the	 whites	 should	 be	 large	 enough	 to
accommodate	an	eightfold	expansion	of	 their
volume.	It’s	often	recommended	that	the	cook
avoid	 making	 egg	 foams	 in	 plastic	 bowls,
because	 plastics	 are	 hydrocarbon	 relatives	 of
fats,	 and	 tend	 to	 retain	 traces	 of	 fats	 and
soaps.	 While	 this	 is	 true,	 the	 bowl	 is	 also
unlikely	 to	release	such	traces	 into	a	mass	of
egg	 white.	 Ordinary	 cleaning	 is	 adequate	 to
make	 a	 plastic	 bowl	 suitable	 for	 foaming
eggs.

If	you’re	beating	by	hand,	a	large	“balloon
whisk”	aerates	a	greater	volume	of	the	egg
whites	at	a	time	and	will	speed	your	work.	If
you	have	a	choice	of	machines,	a	stand	mixer
whose	beater	both	spins	on	its	shaft	and	traces
a	curlicue	path	from	the	center	to	the	edge	of
the	bowl	(a	“hypocycloidal”	or	planetary
motion)	beats	the	whites	more	evenly	and
leaves	less	unfoamed.	Less	efficient	beaters
produce	a	denser	texture.



Interpreting	 the	Foam’s	Appearance 	 There
are	various	ways	to	judge	when	the	foam	is	at
its	 optimum,	 from	 seeing	 whether	 the	 foam
will	support	the	weight	of	a	coin	or	an	egg,	to
seeing	 how	 it	 supports	 itself,	 in	 soft	mounds
or	sharply	defined	peaks,	to	seeing	whether	it
clings	 to	 the	 bowl	 or	 slips	 along	 its	 surface,
whether	 its	 surface	 looks	 glossy	 or	 dry.	 All
these	tests	tell	us	how	crowded	the	air	bubbles
are,	 and	 how	 much	 lubrication	 they	 have
between	 them	 in	 the	 way	 of	 liquid	 from	 the
egg	white.	And	different	dishes	will	define	an
optimum	 foam	 differently.	 The	 lightening
power	of	an	egg	foam	depends	not	just	on	the
foam’s	volume,	but	also	on	how	easily	 it	can
be	mixed	with	other	ingredients,	and	how	well
it	 can	 accommodate	 bubble	 expansion	 in	 the
oven.	 Soufflés	 and	 cakes	 require	 the
lubrication	 and	 expansion	 tolerance	 of	 a
somewhat	 underbeaten	 foam,	 while	 in
meringues	and	related	pastries	volume	is	less
important	than	shape-holding	stiffness.



Glossy	 Soft	 Peaks	 and	 Stiff	 Peaks	 At	 the
“soft	 peak”	 stage,	 when	 glossy	 foam	 edges
retain	 some	 shape	 but	 droop,	 and	 when	 the
foam	 doesn’t	 yet	 cling	 to	 the	 bowl,	 the
somewhat	 coarse	 bubbles	 are	 still	 lubricated
by	plenty	of	liquid,	which	would	quickly	drain
to	the	bottom	of	the	bowl.	At	the	“stiff	peak”
stage,	where	 the	 foam	 is	 still	glossy	but	now
retains	 a	well-defined	 edge	 and	 clings	 to	 the
bowl,	 the	 foam	 is	 approaching	 90%	 air,	 and
the	egg	liquid	has	been	spread	so	thin	that	the
protein	webs	in	adjacent	bubble	walls	begin	to
catch	on	each	other	 and	on	 the	bowl	 surface.
There’s	 just	 enough	 lubrication	 left	 for	 the
foam	 to	 be	 creamy	 and	 easily	 mixed	 with
other	 ingredients.	 This	 stage,	 or	 perhaps	 just
before	it,	is	the	optimum	for	making	mousses,
soufflés,	sponge	cakes,	and	similar	dishes	that
involve	mixing	and	further	rising	in	the	oven.
Further	beating	gains	little	additional	volume.

Dry	 Peaks	 and	 Beyond	 Just	 past	 the	 stiff-



peak	stage,	the	foam	is	even	firmer,	takes	on	a
dull,	dry	appearance	and	crumbly	consistency,
and	begins	to	leak	some	liquid,	so	that	it	slips
away	 from	 the	bowl	again.	At	 this	 “slip-and-
streak”	 stage,	 as	 pastry	 chef	 Bruce	 Healy
describes	 it,	 the	 protein	 webs	 in	 adjacent
bubble	 walls	 are	 bonding	 to	 each	 other	 and
squeezing	out	what	little	liquid	once	separated
them.	Pastry	makers	look	for	this	stage	to	give
them	 the	 firmest	 foam	 for	 a	 meringue	 or
cookie	 batter;	 they	 stop	 the	 incipient
overcoagulation	and	weeping	by	 immediately
adding	sugar,	which	separates	the	proteins	and
absorbs	the	water.	They	also	start	 the	beating
with	 about	 half	 the	 cream	 of	 tartar	 per	 egg
that	 a	 cake	or	 soufflé	maker	will,	 so	 that	 the
foam	 will	 in	 fact	 progress	 to	 this	 somewhat
overwhipped	 condition.	 Past	 the	 slip-and-
streak	 stage,	 the	 foam	begins	 to	 lose	 volume
and	get	grainy.

Egg	foams	can	be	used	on	their	own	or	as
the	aerating	ingredient	in	a	variety	of



complicated	mixtures.

Meringues:	Sweet	Foams
on	Their	Own

Though	they’re	sometimes	folded	into	cake	or
cookie	batters	or	fillings,	meringues	—
sweetened	egg	foams	—	generally	stand	by
themselves	as	a	discrete	element	in	a	dish:	as
a	frothy	topping,	for	example,	or	a	creamy
icing,	or	a	hard	edible	container,	or	melt-in-
the-mouth	decoration.	A	meringue	foam	must
therefore	be	stiff	and	stable	enough	to	hold	its
shape.	The	cook	obtains	both	stiffness	and
stability	by	the	addition	of	sugar	and/or	of
heat.	Meringues	are	often	baked	very	slowly
in	a	low	oven	(200ºF/93ºC)	to	dry	them	out
into	a	brittle,	pristinely	white	morsel	or
container.	(The	door	of	electric	ovens	should
be	left	slightly	ajar	to	allow	the	meringue’s
moisture	to	escape;	gas	ovens	are	already
vented.)	When	quickly	browned	in	a	hot	oven



or	under	the	broiler	—	atop	a	pie,	for	example
—	the	surface	gets	crisp	while	the	interior
remains	moist.	Poached	in	milk	for	the	dish
called	Floating	Islands,	they	are	firm	yet
moist	throughout.

Sugar	in	Meringues	The	addition	of	sugar	is
what	 makes	 a	 fragile	 egg-white	 foam	 into	 a
stable,	 glossy	 meringue.	 The	 more	 sugar
added,	the	more	body	the	meringue	will	have,
and	 the	 crisper	 it	 will	 be	 when	 baked.	 The
proportion	 (by	 either	 volume	 or	 weight)	 of
sugar	to	egg	white	ranges	from	about	1	to	1	to
about	 2	 to	 1,	 the	 equivalent	 of	 a	 50%	 and	 a
67%	 sugar	 solution,	 respectively.	 The	 higher
is	 typical	 of	 jams	 and	 jellies	—	and	 also	 the
room-temperature	 limit	 of	 sugar’s	 solubility
in	 water.	 Ordinary	 granulated	 sugar	 won’t
dissolve	completely	in	a	“hard”	meringue,	and
will	 leave	a	gritty	 texture	and	weeping	 syrup
drops.	 Superfine	 and	 powdered
“confectioner’s”	 sugar,	 or	 a	 premade	 syrup,



are	 better	 choices.	 (Powdered	 sugar,	 which
weighs	 half	 as	much	 as	 the	 other	 sugars	 cup
for	 cup,	 contains	 10%	 cornstarch	 to	 help
prevent	caking,	which	some	cooks	dislike	and
others	 value	 as	 moisture-absorbing
insurance.)

Meringue	 Types	 The	 traditional	 meringue
terminology	—	French,	Italian,	Swiss,	and	so
on	 —	 is	 unclear	 and	 used	 inconsistently.
These	 foams	 are	 best	 classified	 according	 to
the	 method	 of	 preparation	 and	 resulting
texture.	Meringues	 can	be	 either	uncooked	or
cooked.	 If	 the	 sugar	 is	 added	 after	 the	 egg
whites	 have	 been	 whipped	 on	 their	 own,	 the
meringue	will	be	 relatively	light;	 if	 the	sugar
is	 added	early	 in	 the	whipping,	 the	meringue
will	be	relatively	dense.

Uncooked	 Meringues	 Uncooked	 meringues
are	 the	 simplest	 and	 most	 common,	 and
provide	a	broad	range	of	textures,	from	frothy
to	 creamy	 to	 dense	 and	 stiff.	 The	 lightest



possible	 consistency	 is	 obtained	 by	 first
beating	 the	 whites	 to	 a	 firm	 foam	 and	 then
gently	folding	in	the	sugar	with	a	spatula.	The
sugar	dissolves	into	the	existing	bubble	walls
and	adds	both	bulk	and	cohesiveness	to	them.
The	added	bulk	gives	 the	bubbles	more	room
to	 slide	 past	 each	 other	 and	 creates	 a	 soft,
frothy	 consistency	 suitable	 for	 a	 spread	 pie
topping	 or	 for	 folding	 into	 a	 mousse	 or
chiffon	 mix,	 but	 too	 fragile	 to	 shape.	 A
creamier,	firmer	consistency	results	when	the
sugar	is	not	merely	folded	in,	but	beaten	in.	In
this	case,	the	sugar’s	added	bulk	is	spread	out
as	 the	beating	further	subdivides	 the	bubbles,
and	 the	 cohesiveness	 of	 the	 sugar-water
mixture	 noticeably	 tightens	 the	 foam’s
texture.	 The	 longer	 you	 beat	 the	 egg-sugar
mixture,	 the	 stiffer	 it	 will	 get	 and	 the	 more
finely	it	can	be	shaped.

These	standard	methods	take	only	a	few
minutes	but	require	the	cook’s	attention.
Some	professionals,	particularly	in	France,



make	firm	meringues	suitable	for	the	pastry
pipe	on	the	kitchen	equivalent	of	autopilot.
They	place	all	the	sugar	in	the	bowl	of	a	stand
mixer,	add	a	portion	of	the	egg	whites	with
some	lemon	juice	to	prevent	graining,	mix	for
several	minutes	—	the	timing	is	not	critical
—	then	add	more	whites,	mix	a	while,	and	so
on.	The	result	is	a	fine-textured,	stiff,	supple
meringue.	Beating	the	eggs	gradually	into	the
sugar	rather	than	the	other	way	around	does
slow	the	foaming,	but	requires	little
supervision.	Such	“automatic”	meringues	are
denser	than	usual	and	less	brittle	when	dried
down.

Food	Words:	Meringue
Thanks	 to	 the	Larousse	 Gastronomique,
it’s	widely	believed	that	the	meringue	was
invented	by	a	pastry	chef	in	the	Swiss	town
of	Mieringen	around	1720,	and	brought	 to
France	 a	 couple	 of	 decades	 later	 by	 the
Polish	 father-in-law	 of	 Louis	 XV.	 Sounds



suitably	 colorful:	 except	 that	 the	 French
writer	 Massialot	 had	 already	 published	 a
recipe	for	“Meringues”	in	1691.

The	linguist	Otto	Jänicke	has	traced	the
word	meringue	back	to	an	alteration	of	the
Latin	 word	merenda,	 meaning	 “light
evening	 meal,”	 into	meringa,	 a	 form	 that
was	 found	 in	 the	Artois	 and	Picardie	 near
what	 is	 now	Belgium.	 Jänicke	 cites	many
variations	on	merenda	that	variously	meant
“evening	 bread,”	 “shepherd’s	 loaf,”	 “food
taken	 to	 the	 field	 and	 forest,”	 “traveler’s
snack.”

What	 do	 breads	 and	 road	 food	 have	 to
do	with	whipped	 egg	whites?	Early	 baked
sugar-egg	 pastes	 were	 called	 “biscuits,”
“breads,”	 and	 “loaves”	 because	 they	were
miniature	 imitations	of	 these	baked	goods
(biscuits,	 being	 thoroughly	 dried	 and
therefore	 light	 and	 durable,	were	 standard
traveler’s	 fare).	Perhaps	 such	a	confection
was	 called	meringa	 in	 northeast	 France.



Then,	 when	 cooks	 from	 that	 region
discovered	 the	 advantage	 of	 beating	 the
eggs	 thoroughly	with	 the	new	straw	whisk
before	adding	sugar,	 the	 local	 term	spread
with	 their	 invention,	 and	 in	 the	 rest	 of
France	 served	 to	 distinguish	 this	 delicate
foam	from	its	dense	predecessors.
Between	the	two	extremes	—	adding	all

the	sugar	after	the	foam	has	been	made,	or
adding	it	all	at	the	start	of	foaming	—	are	a
host	of	methods	that	call	for	adding	certain
portions	of	the	sugar	along	the	way.	There’s
plenty	of	latitude	in	meringue	making!	Just
remember:	the	earlier	the	sugar	is	added	in	the
course	of	beating,	the	firmer	and	finer-
textured	the	meringue.	Sugar	folded	in	after
the	beating	stops	will	soften	the	texture.

Cooked	 Meringues	 Cooked	 meringues	 are
more	 trouble	 to	 make	 than	 uncooked
meringues,	 and	 are	 generally	 denser	 because
heat	 sets	 the	 albumen	 proteins	 and



prematurely	 limits	 the	 trapping	 of	 air.
However,	 they	 offer	 several	 advantages.
Because	 sugar	 is	 more	 soluble	 in	 hot	 liquid
than	in	cold,	they	more	readily	absorb	a	large
proportion	of	sugar.	Like	the	dense	automatic
meringue	 (above),	 they’re	 less	 brittle	 when
dried	 down.	 Partial	 coagulation	 of	 the	 egg
proteins	 stabilizes	 these	 foams	 enough	 to	 sit
without	separating	for	a	day	or	more.	And	for
cooks	concerned	about	the	safety	of	raw	eggs,
some	cooked	meringues	get	hot	enough	to	kill
salmonella	bacteria.

There	are	two	basic	kinds	of	cooked
meringues.	The	first	(“Italian”)	is	the	syrup-
cooked	meringue.	Sugar	is	boiled	separately
with	some	water	to	240	or	250ºF/115–120ºC
(the	“soft-ball”	stage,	around	90%	sugar,	at
which	fudge	and	fondant	are	made),	the
whites	whipped	to	stiff	peaks,	and	the	syrup
then	streamed	and	beaten	into	the	whites.	The
result	is	a	fluffy	yet	fine-textured,	stiff	foam.
It	has	enough	body	to	decorate	pastries	and	to



hold	for	a	day	or	two	before	use,	but	is	also
light	enough	to	blend	into	batters	and	creams.
Because	much	of	the	syrup’s	heat	is	lost	to	the
bowl,	whisk,	and	air,	the	foam	mass	normally
gets	no	hotter	than	130	or	135ºF/55–58ºC,
which	is	insufficient	to	kill	salmonella.

The	second	sort	of	cooked	meringue
(“Swiss”)	is	most	clearly	described	as	a
cooked	meringue	plain	and	simple	(the	French
meringue	cuite).	To	make	it,	eggs,	acid,	and
sugar	are	heated	in	a	hot-water	bath	and
beaten	until	a	stiff	foam	forms.	The	bowl	is
then	removed	from	the	heat	and	the	foam
beaten	until	it	cools.	This	preparation	can
pasteurize	the	egg	whites.	Thanks	to	the
protective	effects	of	sugar,	cream	of	tartar,
and	constant	agitation,	you	can	heat	the
meringue	mixture	to	170	or	175ºF/75–78ºC
and	still	end	up	with	a	stable	though	dense
foam.	The	cooked	meringue	can	be
refrigerated	for	several	days,	and	is	usually
piped	into	decorative	shapes.



Meringue	 Problems:	 Weeping,	 Grittiness,
Stickiness	 Meringues	 can	 go	 wrong	 in	 a
number	of	ways.	Under-	or	overbeaten	foams
may	 weep	 syrup	 into	 unsightly	 beads	 or
puddles.	 Beads	 also	 form	 when	 the	 sugar
hasn’t	 been	 completely	 dissolved;	 residual
crystals	attract	water	 from	their	surroundings
and	 make	 pockets	 of	 concentrated	 syrup.
Undissolved	 sugar	 (including	 invisibly	 small
particles	present	in	an	undercooked	syrup	that
then	 slowly	 grow	 at	 room	 temperature)	 will
give	a	gritty	 texture	 to	a	meringue.	Too	high
an	 oven	 temperature	 can	 squeeze	water	 from
the	 coagulating	 proteins	 faster	 than	 it	 can
evaporate	and	produce	syrup	beads;	it	can	also
cause	the	foam	to	rise	and	crack,	and	turn	its
surface	an	unappealing	yellow.

Royal	Icing
A	 given	 weight	 of	 egg	 whites	 can’t
dissolve	 more	 than	 about	 double	 that
weight	 in	 sugar.	 Yet	 royal	 icing,	 a



traditional	 decorative	 material	 in	 pastry
work,	is	made	by	whipping	a	4	to	1	mixture
of	powdered	sugar	and	egg	white	for	10	or
15	 minutes.	 Royal	 icing	 is	 not	 a	 simple
foam	—	it’s	a	combination	of	a	very	dense
foam	 and	 a	 paste.	 Much	 sugar	 remains
undissolved,	 but	 it’s	 so	 fine	 that	we	 can’t
feel	it	on	the	tongue.
A	common	problem	with	meringue	pie

toppings	is	that	they	weep	syrup	onto	the	base
and	don’t	adhere	properly.	This	can	be	caused
both	by	relative	undercooking	of	the	foam
bottom	when	the	pie	base	is	cold	and	the	oven
hot,	or	by	relative	overcooking	on	a	hot	pie
base	in	a	moderate	oven.	Preventive	measures
include	covering	the	pie	base	with	a	syrup-
absorbing	layer	of	crumbs	before	adding	the
meringue	topping,	and	including	starch	or
gelatin	in	the	foam	to	help	it	retain	moisture.

Humid	weather	is	bad	for	meringues.	Their
sugary	surface	absorbs	moisture	from	the	air
and	gets	soft	and	sticky.	It’s	best	to	transfer



dried	meringues	directly	from	the	oven	to	an
airtight	container,	and	serve	as	soon	as
possible	after	removing	from	the	container.

Cold	Mousses	and	Soufflés:	Reinforcement
from	 Fat	 and	 Gelatin	 In	 addition	 to	 being
served	as	is	in	the	form	of	a	sugar-	and	heat-
stabilized	meringue,	an	egg	foam	can	also	be
enrobed	in	a	mixture	of	other	ingredients,	for
which	 the	 foam	 serves	 as	 a	 hidden
scaffolding.	The	cold	mousse	and	cold	soufflé
(essentially	 a	 mousse	 molded	 to	 look	 like	 a
hot	soufflé	that	has	risen	above	its	dish)	hold
well	 for	 hours,	 even	 days,	 and	 require	 only
minimal	 cooking.	 Instead	 of	 being	 stabilized
when	 heat	coagulates	 egg	 proteins,	 these
mixtures	 are	 stabilized	 when	 cold	congeals
fats	and	gelatin	protein.

The	classic	dish	of	this	kind	is	chocolate
mousse.	In	its	purest	form,	it	is	made	by
melting	chocolate	—	a	blend	of	cocoa	butter,
starchy	cocoa	particles,	and	finely	ground



sugar	—	at	around	100ºF/38ºC,	combining	it
with	raw	egg	yolks,	and	combining	this
mixture	with	3	to	4	times	its	volume	of	stiffly
beaten	egg	whites	(see	p.	112).	The	watery
foam	walls	are	thus	augmented	with	the	thick,
yolky	chocolate,	and	much	of	the	egg
moisture	is	absorbed	by	the	cocoa	solids	and
sugar,	which	further	thickens	the	bubble
walls.	While	still	warm,	the	mousse	is
spooned	into	serving	dishes,	and	these	are
then	refrigerated	for	several	hours.	As	the
mousse	cools,	the	cocoa	butter	congeals,	and
the	bubble	walls	become	rigid	enough	to
maintain	the	foam	structure	indefinitely.	The
chocolate	thus	strengthens	the	egg	foam,	and
the	foam	spreads	the	stodgy	chocolate	mass
into	a	gossamer	structure	that	melts	on	the
tongue.

Soufflés:	A	Breath	of	Hot	Air

Soufflés	—	savory	and	sweet	mixes	lightened



with	an	egg-white	foam,	then	dramatically
inflated	above	their	dish	by	oven	heat	—	have
the	reputation	for	being	difficult	preparations.
Certainly	they	can	be	among	the	most
delicate,	as	their	name	—	French	for	“puffed,”
“breathed,”	“whispered”	—	suggests.	In	fact,
soufflés	are	reliable	and	resilient.	Many
soufflé	mixes	can	be	prepared	hours,	even
days	in	advance,	and	refrigerated	or	frozen
until	needed.	If	you	manage	to	get	any	air	into
the	mix,	an	inexorable	law	of	nature	will	raise
it	in	the	oven,	and	opening	the	door	for	a	few
seconds	won’t	do	it	any	harm.	The	inevitable
post-oven	deflation	can	be	minimized	by	your
choice	of	ingredients	and	cooking	method,
and	can	even	be	reversed.

Edible	Insulation
Egg	 foams	 are	 often	 used	 to	 cover	 and
conceal	 the	 heart	 of	 a	 dish.	 Among	 the
most	entertaining	of	 these	constructions	is
the	 hot,	 browned	 meringue	 enclosing	 a



mass	of	chilly	ice	cream:	the	baked	Alaska,
which	 derives	 from	 the	 French	omelette
surprise.	 This	 thermal	 contrast	 is	 made
possible	 by	 the	 excellent	 insulating
properties	of	cellular	structures	like	foams.
For	 the	 same	 reason,	 a	 cup	 of	 cappuccino
cools	 more	 slowly	 than	 a	 cup	 of	 regular
coffee.
The	basic	idea	of	the	soufflé	—	and	of	egg-

leavened	cakes	as	well	—	dates	back	at	least
to	the	17th	century,	when	confectioners
noticed	that	a	“biscuit”	paste	of	egg	whites
and	sugar	worked	in	a	mortar	would	rise	in	the
oven	like	a	loaf	of	bread.	Sometime	around
1700,	French	cooks	began	to	incorporate
foamed	whites	into	the	yolks	to	make	a	puffy
omelette	soufflée.	At	mid-century,	Vincent	La
Chapelle	could	offer	five	omelettes	soufflées
and	—	under	the	names	timbale	and	tourte	—
the	first	recorded	soufflés	as	we	now	know
them,	their	foams	reinforced	with	pastry
cream,	which	came	to	displace	the	omelette



soufflée	in	restaurants.	The	great	19th	century
chef	Antonin	Carême	called	the	reinforced
soufflé	“the	queen	of	hot	pastries,”	but	also
saw	its	success	as	the	triumph	of	convenience
and	stability	over	the	omelette	soufflée’s
incomparable	delicacy	of	texture	and	flavor.
Carême	wrote,	“The	omelette	soufflée	must	be
free	of	the	concoction	that	goes	into	the
soufflé,	whether	it	be	rice	flour	or	starch.	The
gourmet	must	have	the	patience	to	wait	if	he
wishes	to	eat	the	omelette	soufflée	in	all	its
perfection.”

Convenience	is	certainly	one	reason	for	the
soufflé’s	popularity	among	cooks.	It	can	be
largely	prepared	in	advance,	even	precooked
and	reheated.	Versatility	is	another.	Soufflés
can	be	made	from	practically	every	sort	of
food	—	pureed	fruits	and	vegetables	and	fish;
cheese,	chocolate,	liqueurs	—	and	in	a	broad
range	of	textures,	from	the	puddinglike	to	the
meltingly	fragile	soufflé	à	la	minute,	which	is
Carême’s	starch-free	omelette	soufflée	barely



altered.

Early	Recipes	for	the	Omelette	Soufflée
and	Soufflé

This	 18th	 century	 recipe	 for	 the	 omelette
soufflée	is	an	interesting	mix	of	savory	and
sweet	 ingredients,	 while	 the	 timbales	 are
soufflés	reinforced	with	pastry	cream.

Omelette	Soufflée	with	Veal	Kidney
Take	a	roasted	veal	kidney,	chop	with	its
fat;	put	in	a	casserole	and	cook	for	a
moment	to	break	apart.	Then	off	the	fire
add	a	large	spoonful	of	sweet	cream	and	a
dozen	egg	yolks,	whose	whites	you	will
whip;	season	the	mixture	with	salt,	minced
parsley,	minced	candied	lemon	peel.	Whip
your	egg	whites	into	snow,	mix	with	the
rest,	and	beat	well.	Then	put	a	piece	of
butter	in	a	pan,	and	when	it	has	melted
pour	in	your	mixture,	and	cook	gently.
Hold	a	red-hot	fire	iron	above	it.	Then



invert	it	onto	the	serving	platter	and	put	it
on	a	small	stove,	so	that	it	will	rise	up;
when	risen	to	a	handsome	enough	height,
powder	with	sugar	and	glaze	with	the	fire
iron	without	touching	the	omelette.	Serve
hot	as	an	entremet.

Timbales	of	Cream
You	will	have	a	good	pastry	cream,	bitter-
almond	biscuits,	candied	lemon	peel,
orange	flower;	add	to	these	egg	whites
whipped	into	snow.	You	will	have	little
timbale	dishes	greased	with	good	fresh
butter:	you	powder	them	with	bread
crumbs;	then	you	fill	them	with	your
cream,	and	cook	them	in	the	oven.	When
they	are	done,	turn	them	out	and	serve	as	a
small	hot	entremet.

—	Vincent	La	Chapelle,	Le	Cuisinier
moderne,	1742

The	Soufflé	Principle,	Up	Side:	It	Must	Rise
The	physical	law	that	animates	the	soufflé
was	discovered	a	few	decades	after	its



invention	by	—	appropriately	—	a	French
scientist	and	balloonist,	J.	A.	C.	Charles.
Charles’s	law	is	this:	all	else	equal,	the
volume	occupied	by	a	given	weight	of	gas	is
proportional	to	its	temperature.	Heat	an
inflated	balloon	and	the	air	will	take	up	more
space,	so	the	balloon	expands.	Similarly,	put	a
soufflé	in	the	oven	and	its	air	bubbles	heat	up
and	swell,	so	the	mix	expands	in	the	only
direction	it	can:	out	the	top	of	the	dish.

Charles’s	law	is	part	of	the	story,	but	not
the	whole	story	—	it	accounts	for	about	a
quarter	of	the	typical	soufflé	rise.	The	rest
comes	from	the	continuous	evaporation	of
water	from	the	bubble	walls	into	the	bubbles.
As	portions	of	the	soufflé	approach	the
boiling	point,	more	liquid	water	becomes
water	vapor	and	adds	to	the	quantity	of	gas
molecules	in	the	bubbles,	which	increases	the
pressure	on	the	bubble	walls,	which	causes	the
walls	to	stretch	and	the	bubbles	to	expand.



Down	Side:	 It	Must	Fall	Charles’s	 law	 also
means	that	what	must	go	up	in	the	oven	must
come	down	at	the	table.	A	balloon	expands	as
its	 temperature	 rises,	 but	 shrinks	 again	 if	 its
temperature	falls.	Of	course	a	soufflé	must	be
taken	out	of	 the	oven	 to	be	 served,	 and	 from
that	moment	 on	 it	 loses	 heat.	As	 the	 soufflé
bubbles	cool,	the	air	they	contain	contracts	in
volume,	and	 the	vapor	 that	 came	 from	 liquid
water	in	the	mix	condenses	back	into	liquid.

Rules	 of	 Thumb	 Several	 basic	 facts	 follow
from	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 driving	 forces	 behind
the	 soufflé.	 First,	 the	 higher	 the	 cooking
temperature,	the	higher	a	soufflé	will	rise:	the
plain	heat	expansion	will	be	greater,	and	more
mix	moisture	will	 be	vaporized.	At	 the	 same
time,	 a	 higher	 cooking	 temperature	 also
means	 a	 greater	 subsequent	 overpressure	 and
swifter	 fall.	 Then	 there’s	 the	 effect	 of
consistency.	A	thick	soufflé	mix	can’t	rise	as
easily	as	 a	 thin	mix,	but	 it	 also	won’t	 fall	 as



easily.	 A	 stiff	 foam	 can	 resist	 the
overpressure.

So	the	two	critical	factors	that	determine
the	behavior	of	a	soufflé	are	the	cooking
temperature	and	the	consistency	of	the	soufflé
base.	A	hot	oven	and	thin	mix	create	a	more
dramatic	rise	than	a	moderate	oven	(or	water
bath)	and	a	thick	mix,	but	also	a	more
dramatic	collapse	at	the	table.

The	rise	and	fall	of	a	soufflé.	Left:	The	soufflé
mix	 begins	 filled	 with	 small	 air	 bubbles.
Center:	Heat	 causes	 gases	 to	 expand	 and
water	 to	 vaporize	 into	 steam,	 so	 the	 bubbles
expand	 and	 raise	 the	 mix.	 Right:	After	 the
soufflé	 has	 been	 cooked,	 cooling	 causes	 the
bubble	 gases	 to	 contract	 and	 the	 steam	 to
condense	into	liquid	water,	so	that	the	bubbles
contract	and	the	soufflé	shrinks.



Finally,	a	fact	that	follows	from	both	the
up	and	the	down	sides	of	the	soufflé	principle:
a	fallen	soufflé	will	rise	again	if	put	back	into
the	oven.	Those	air	bubbles	are	still	in	there,
as	is	most	of	the	moisture;	and	both	air	and
moisture	will	expand	again	as	the	temperature
goes	up.	You	won’t	get	as	high	a	rise	the
second	or	third	time	around,	because	the
soufflé	mix	has	stiffened	and	there’s	less
water	available.	But	you	can	resurrect
leftovers,	or	cook	the	soufflé	once	to	set	it	and
unmold	it,	then	again	to	serve	it.

The	 Soufflé	 Base	 The	 soufflé	 base,	 the
preparation	into	which	the	foamed	egg	whites
are	 incorporated,	 serves	 two	 essential
purposes.	The	first	 is	 to	provide	the	soufflé’s
flavor	 (the	 base	 must	 be	over	 flavored	 to
compensate	 for	 its	 dilution	 by	 tasteless	 egg
white	 and	 air).	 The	 second	 purpose	 is	 to
contribute	 a	 reservoir	 of	 moisture	 for	 the
soufflé’s	rise,	and	starch	and	protein	to	make



the	 bubble	 walls	 viscous	 enough	 that	 they
won’t	 ooze	 down	 again.	 Usually	 the	 base	 is
precooked	 and	 can’t	 actually	 thicken	 during
the	soufflé’s	rise.	The	bubble	walls	are	set	by
the	egg	white	proteins,	which	can	be	effective
only	 if	 they’re	not	excessively	diluted	by	 the
base	 material.	 The	 usual	 rule	 is	 to	 allow	 at
least	one	white	or	one	cup	whipped	white	per
half-cup/125	ml	base.

The	consistency	of	the	base	has	a	strong
influence	on	soufflé	quality.	Too	liquid,	and
the	soufflé	will	rise	and	spill	over	before	the
egg	proteins	have	a	chance	to	set.	Too	stiff,
and	it	won’t	mix	evenly	with	the	foamed
whites	or	rise	much.	A	common	rule	of	thumb
is	that	the	base	should	be	cohesive	yet	soft
enough	to	fall	of	its	own	weight	from	a	spoon.

Many	Formulas	Soufflé	bases	are	made	from
a	 broad	 range	 of	 ingredients.	 Those	 that
contain	 just	 egg	 yolks,	 sugar,	 and	 flavoring
are	the	lightest	and	most	delicate	and	produce



the	 equivalent	 of	 the	omelette	 soufflée,	 often
called	soufflé	 à	 la	 minute	 because	 it	 can	 be
made	quickly	with	no	advance	preparation.	A
concentrated	sugar	syrup	will	make	the	bubble
walls	 more	 viscous	 and	 stable,	 as	 will	 the
various	 carbohydrates	 (cellulose,	 pectin,
starch)	 in	 pureed	 fruits	 and	 vegetables,	 and
the	proteins	in	a	puree	of	cooked	meat,	fish,	or
poultry.	 If	 the	 pureed	 flesh	 is	 raw,	 then	 its
proteins	 will	 coagulate	 during	 the	 cooking
along	 with	 the	 egg	 whites	 and	 provide
substantial	 reinforcement	 to	 the	 foam.	 The
starchy	 brown	 particles	 in	 cocoa	 and
chocolate	 stiffen	 the	 bubble	 walls	 by	 both
absorbing	 moisture	 and	 getting	 sticky	 and
swollen	as	they	do	so.

The	most	versatile	kind	of	soufflé	base	is
thickened	with	cooked	starch	in	the	form	of
stock	preparations	like	pastry	cream	or
béchamel	sauce,	or	a	panade	(like	pastry
cream,	but	without	sugar	and	including	butter)
or	bouillie	(p.	99).	The	standard	consistency



of	a	starchy	base	is	that	of	a	medium-thick
sauce,	and	produces	a	moist,	fairly	light
soufflé.	Double	the	flour	and	you	get	a	drier,
denser	soufflé	that	is	robust	enough	to	be
unmolded,	placed	in	a	dish	with	a	hot	sauce,
and	raised	again	in	the	oven	or	under	the
broiler	(Escoffier’s	soufflé	à	la	suissesse).
Triple	the	flour	and	you	get	a	so-called
“pudding	soufflé”	—	with	the	bready	texture
you	would	expect	from	the	name	—	that
won’t	fall	no	matter	what	you	do	to	it.
(Increase	the	flour	15-fold	and	you	have	a
sponge	cake.)

Whipping	and	Folding	the	Egg	Whites	 The
best	 consistency	 for	 egg	 whites	 in	 a	 soufflé
preparation	is	stiff	yet	moist,	glossy	peaks.	A
stiff	but	dry	foam	is	harder	to	mix	evenly	with
the	base,	while	a	softer	foam	is	still	coarse	—
so	the	soufflé	texture	will	be	the	same	—	and
may	 leave	 the	 mix	 so	 runny	 that	 it	 will
overflow	before	it	sets.



The	trick	is	to	mix	the	two	materials	as
evenly	as	possible	while	losing	as	little	air	as
possible.	Typically,	between	a	quarter	and
half	of	the	foam	volume	is	lost	at	this	stage.
The	traditional	method	of	mixing	base	and
foam	is	to	vigorously	stir	a	quarter	of	the
foam	into	the	base	to	lighten	it,	then	use	a
spatula	to	“fold”	the	two	together	by
repeatedly	scooping	some	base,	cutting
vertically	through	the	foam,	and	depositing
the	base	along	the	cut	surface.

Why	laboriously	fold	rather	than	quickly
stir?	Because	the	rough	mass	of	starch,	fats,
and	other	foreign	matter	in	the	base	pops
bubbles,	and	the	more	you	rub	the	bubbles
against	such	a	mass,	the	more	bubbles	you
lose.	Simply	stirring	continuously	grates	the
two	phases	together	and	causes	a	substantial
loss	of	air.	Folding	has	the	advantage	of
disturbing	the	foam	only	along	the	surface
where	the	base	is	being	deposited,	and	that
surface	is	only	disturbed	for	a	single	stroke.



The	result	is	minimal	grating	of	bubbles
against	mix,	and	maximal	bubble	survival.

Despite	the	usual	cookbook	direction	to
fold	the	whites	and	base	together	quickly,	it’s
best	to	fold	slowly.	The	disruptive	shear	force
felt	by	a	given	bubble	is	proportional	to	the
velocity	at	which	it’s	being	pushed	along	the
base.	The	slower	your	spatula	moves,	the	less
damage	it	will	do	to	the	foam.

The	one	exception	to	the	folding	rules	is
the	soufflé	made	with	a	fruit	puree	or	juice
cooked	with	sugar	to	a	thick	syrup.	Such	a
base	can	be	poured	onto	the	foam	as	it’s
beaten	—	a	soufflé	version	of	the	Italian
meringue	—	and	will	actually	increase	the
mix	volume.

Preparing	and	Filling	the	Soufflé	Dish	Ever
since	La	Chapelle’s	timbale	of	cream,	soufflé
dishes	 have	 been	 prepared	 in	 two	 steps:	 first
the	 interior	 is	 buttered,	 and	 then	 coated	with
sugar	for	a	sweet	soufflé,	with	breadcrumbs	or



grated	 cheese	 for	 a	 savory	 one.	 The	 butter
supposedly	helps	the	soufflé	mix	slide	up	the
side	as	it	expands,	while	the	particles	give	the
mix	 something	 to	 cling	 to	 as	 it	 climbs.
Contradictory	 claims,	 and	 not	 true!	 Soufflés
made	 in	unbuttered	or	uncrumbed	dishes	 rise
just	 as	 high.	 The	 butter	 simply	 makes	 the
soufflé	surface	easier	to	detach	from	the	dish,
and	 sugar,	 breadcrumbs,	 and	 cheese	 make	 a
nice	 crunchy,	 brown	 crust	 for	 the	 otherwise
soft	interior.

Once	put	in	its	dish,	a	reasonably	stiff
soufflé	mix	can	be	held	for	several	hours	in
the	refrigerator	before	the	foam	deteriorates.
It	will	keep	indefinitely	in	the	freezer.

Cooking	 Soufflés	 Baking	 soufflés	 is	 not	 a
perilous	 enterprise.	 Put	 a	 room-temperature
soufflé	 mix	 in	 a	 hot	 oven	 and	 it	 will	 rise.
Don’t	worry	about	opening	the	oven	door.	The
mix	can’t	fall	unless	it	actually	begins	to	cool
down,	and	even	if	that	did	happen,	it	will	rise



again	when	it	heats	up	again.
Most	soufflés	are	placed	directly	on	a	rack

or	baking	sheet	in	the	oven,	but	small
individual	soufflés	are	often	light	enough	that
they	can	be	blasted	halfway	out	of	their	dish
by	the	steam	generated	at	the	oven-hot	dish
bottom,	so	the	dish	ends	up	half	empty.	A
baking	pan	filled	with	water,	or	individual	foil
cups	of	water	on	a	baking	sheet,	will	moderate
the	bottom	temperature	and	keep	a	small
soufflé	in	its	dish.

A	soufflé’s	appearance	and	consistency	are
strongly	affected	by	the	oven	temperature.	At
temperatures	above	400ºF/200ºC,	the	mix
rises	the	fastest,	and	the	surface	can	brown
while	the	interior	is	still	moist	and	creamy.	At
325	to	350ºF/160	to	180ºC,	the	rising	is	more
modest,	and	surface	browning	coincides	with
a	firming	of	the	interior.	A	slow	oven	may
coagulate	the	surfaces	so	gradually	that	the
expanding	mix	spills	out	of	its	dish	rather
than	rising	vertically.	Doneness	can	be



determined	by	probing	the	interior	with	a
toothpick,	and	is	a	matter	of	taste;	some
people	like	a	creamy	interior	that	still	clings
to	the	toothpick,	others	prefer	a	more	fully
cooked	consistency,	which	clings	to	itself	and
leaves	the	toothpick	clean.

Yolk	Foams:
Zabaglione	and	Sabayons

Yolks	Can’t	Foam	Without	Help	Beat	an
egg	white	for	two	minutes	and	it	will	expand
eightfold	into	a	semisolid	foam.	Beat	an	egg
yolk	for	ten	minutes	and	you’ll	be	lucky	to
double	its	volume.	Yolks	are	richer	in	protein
than	whites,	and	have	the	added	advantage	of
emulsifying	phospholipids	that	do	a	fine	job
of	coating	fat	droplets:	so	why	can’t	they
stabilize	air	bubbles	and	make	a	decent	foam?

One	clue	is	what	happens	when	you	wash
out	your	yolky	bowl:	the	moment	you	pour	in
some	water,	it	foams!	It	turns	out	that	the



protein-rich,	emulsifier-rich	yolk	is	deficient
in	water.	Not	only	does	it	contain	about	half
the	water	that	the	white	does,	but	nearly	all	of
it	is	tightly	bound	to	all	the	other	materials.	In
one	tablespoon/15	ml	of	yolk,	the	volume
typical	of	a	large	egg,	there’s	about	a	third	of
a	teaspoon/2	ml	of	free,	foamable	water.	Add
two	teaspoons	to	give	it	the	same	free	water	as
a	white,	and	it	foams	enthusiastically.

Enthusiastically	but	fleetingly.	Put	your
ear	to	the	foam	and	you’ll	hear	the	bubbles
popping.	The	other	deficiency	of	the	egg	yolk
is	that	its	proteins	are	too	stable.	Neither	the
physical	abuse	of	whipping	nor	the	presence
of	air	bubbles	causes	the	yolk	proteins	to
unfold	and	bond	with	each	other	into	a
reinforcing	matrix.	Of	course	heat	will,	as	we
know	from	hard-boiled	yolks	and	custards.	So
supplement	the	yolk	with	liquid,	and	the
whipping	with	careful	cooking,	and	the
mixture	will	rise	to	four	or	more	times	its
original	volume.	Exactly	this	procedure	is	the



principle	of	zabaglione	and	sabayon	sauces.

Medieval	Precursors	of	Zabaglione	and
Sabayon

Our	modern	Italian	and	French	versions	of
foamed	egg	yolks	began	in	medieval	times
as	yolk-thickened	wine,	simply	flavored	in
France	and	Italy,	highly	spiced	in	England.

Chaudeau	flament	(“Flemish	Hot	Drink,”
for	the	Sick)

Set	a	little	water	to	boil;	then	beat	egg
yolks	without	the	whites,	mix	them	with
white	wine	and	pour	gradually	into	your
water	stirring	it	well	to	keep	it	from
setting;	add	salt	when	it	is	off	the	fire.
Some	people	add	a	very	little	verjuice.

—	Taillevent,	Le	Viandier,	ca.	1375

Cawdell	Ferry
Take	raw	yolks	of	eggs	separated	from	the
whites;	then	take	good	wine,	and	warm	it



in	a	pot	on	a	fair	fire,	and	throw	in	the
yolks,	and	stir	it	well,	but	let	it	not	boil,	till
it	be	thick;	and	throw	in	sugar,	saffron,	and
salt,	mace,	gillyflowers	and	galingale	[a
relative	of	ginger]	ground	small,	and
powdered	cinnamon;	and	when	you	serve
it,	sprinkle	with	powdered	ginger,
cinnamon,	and	nutmeg.

—	Harleian	MS	279,	ca.	1425

Zabaglone
For	four	cups	of	Zabaglone	get	twelve
fresh	egg	yolks,	three	ounces	of	sugar,	half
an	ounce	of	good	cinnamon	and	a	beaker	of
good	sweet	wine.	Cook	this	until	it	is	as
thick	as	a	broth,	then	take	it	out	and	set	it
on	a	plate	in	front	of	the	boys.	And	if	you
like	you	can	add	a	bit	of	fresh	butter.

—	Cuoco	Napoletano,	ca.	1475,	transl.
Terence	Scully

From	Zabaglione	to	Sabayon	The	recipe	trail
for	yolk	foams	is	spotty.	Zabaglione	—	from	a



root	meaning	“mixed,”	“confused”	—	was	an
Italian	yolk-thickened	spiced	wine	in	the	15th
century,	and	by	1800	was	sometimes	foamy
and	sometimes	not.	(Even	some	modern
zabaglione	recipes	are	not	whipped	but
stirred,	and	come	out	more	like	a	winey	crème
anglaise.)	The	French	discovered	zabaglione
around	1800,	and	by	1850	had	incorporated	it
into	their	system	of	sauces	as	a	dessert	cream
with	the	more	refined-sounding	name
sabayon.	In	the	20th	century	they	extended	the
principle	to	savory	cooking	broths	and	stocks,
and	to	lighten	classical	yolk-based	butter	and
oil	sauces,	including	hollandaise	and
mayonnaise.	(For	the	sauces,	see	p.	639.)

Zabaglione	Technique	 The	 standard	method
for	 making	 zabaglione	 is	 to	 mix	 equal
volumes	of	 sugar	and	yolks,	 add	 the	wine	—
usually	Marsala,	and	anywhere	from	the	same
to	 four	 times	 the	 volume	 of	 yolks	—	 set	 the
bowl	 above	 a	 pan	 of	 simmering	 water,	 and



whip	 for	 several	 minutes	 until	 the	 mix
becomes	foamy	and	thick.	During	the	mixing
and	 initial	 foaming,	 the	 elaborately	 nested
spheres	 of	 yolk	 proteins	 are	 unpacked	 for
action.	 Dilution,	 the	 wine’s	 acidity	 and
alcohol,	 and	 air	 bubbles	 all	 disrupt	 the	 yolk
granules	and	lipoprotein	complexes	into	their
component	molecules	so	that	those	molecules
can	 coat	 the	 air	 bubbles	 and	 stabilize	 them.
When	 the	 temperature	 reaches	 120ºF/50ºC,
high	 enough	 to	 unfold	 some	 of	 the	 yolk
proteins,	 the	 mix	 thickens,	 traps	 air	 more
efficiently,	 and	 begins	 to	 expand.	 As	 the
proteins	 continue	 to	 unfold	 and	 then	 bond	 to
each	other,	the	foam	rises	into	fluffy	mounds.
The	key	to	a	maximally	light	zabaglione	is	to
stop	the	heating	just	when	the	foam	teeters	on
the	 cusp	 between	 liquid	 and	 solid.	 Further
cooking	 will	 produce	 a	 stiffer,	 denser,
eventually	tough	sponge	as	the	proteins	over-
coagulate.

Zabaglione	is	traditionally	made	in	a



copper	bowl	over	a	water	bath;	the	mix
thickens	at	such	a	low	temperature	that	direct
heat	can	quickly	overcook	it.	In	professional
kitchens,	where	experience	is	long	and	time	is
short,	zabaglione	and	sabayons	are	sometimes
cooked	right	over	a	flame.	The	advantage	of	a
copper	bowl	in	making	yolk	foams	is	not
chemical,	but	physical:	its	excellent	heat
conductivity	makes	it	quickly	responsive	to
the	cook’s	adjustments.	However,	copper	does
impart	a	distinct	metallic	flavor	to	the	foam,
and	some	cooks	prefer	stainless	steel	for	this
reason.

The	ideal	zabaglione	or	sweet	sabayon	is
soft	and	meltingly	evanescent,	yet	stable
enough	that	it	can	be	refrigerated	and	served
cold.	Savory	sabayons	may	be	cooked	short	of
maximal	fluffiness	so	that	they	remain	easily
pourable,	but	the	lubricating	liquid	in	the
bubble	walls	will	eventually	drain	out	and
separate.	Fortunately,	a	separated	sabayon	can
be	rebeaten	to	its	original	consistency.



Pickled	and
Preserved	Eggs

Until	the	recent	developments	in	breeding	and
artificial	lighting,	domesticated	birds
produced	eggs	seasonally:	they	would	begin
laying	in	the	spring,	continue	through	the
summer,	and	then	cease	in	the	fall.	So,	just	as
they	did	for	milk	and	for	fruits	and
vegetables,	our	ancestors	developed	methods
for	preserving	eggs	so	that	they	could	be	eaten
year-round.	Many	of	these	methods	simply
isolated	the	eggs	from	the	air	and	left	them
largely	unchanged.	Water	saturated	with	lime,
or	calcium	hydroxide,	is	alkaline	enough	to
discourage	bacteria,	and	coats	the	egg	shell
with	a	thin	layer	of	calcium	carbonate	that
partly	seals	the	shell	pores.	Oiling	with
linseed	oil	apparently	began	on	Dutch	farms
around	1800.	The	early	20th	century	brought
the	use	of	waterglass,	or	a	solution	of	sodium
silicate,	which	again	seals	the	shell	pores	and



is	bactericidal.	These	treatments	were
rendered	obsolete	by	the	advent	of
refrigeration	and	year-round	egg	production.

Still	vital	500	years	after	their	first	known
description	are	Chinese	preservation	methods
that	maintain	the	nutritional	value	of	the	egg
but	drastically	change	its	flavor,	consistency,
and	appearance.	The	closest	Western
counterpart	to	this	ovo-alchemy	is
cheesemaking,	which	transforms	milk	into	an
entirely	different	food.	Ordinary	vinegar-
pickled	eggs	offer	only	a	hint	of	the
possibilities;	they	are	to	Chinese	preserved
eggs	as	yogurt	is	to	Stilton.

Pickled	Eggs

Common	pickled	eggs	are	made	by	first
boiling	the	eggs	and	then	immersing	them	in	a
solution	of	vinegar,	salt,	spices,	and	often	a
coloring	like	beet	juice,	for	1	to	3	weeks.	Over
that	time	the	vinegar’s	acetic	acid	dissolves



much	of	the	shell’s	calcium	carbonate,
penetrates	the	eggs,	and	lowers	their	pH
sufficiently	to	prevent	the	growth	of	spoilage
microbes.	(The	vinegar	in	Easter-egg	dyes
etches	the	shell	surface	and	helps	the	dye
penetrate.)	Pickled	eggs	will	keep	for	a	year
or	more	without	refrigeration.

Pickled	eggs	can	be	eaten	shell	—	or	its
remains	—	and	all.	In	addition	to	being	tart,
they	are	firmer	than	freshly	boiled	eggs;	the
white	is	sometimes	described	as	rubbery.	A
more	tender	consistency	can	be	obtained	by
including	ample	salt	in	the	pickling	liquid	and
having	the	liquid	at	the	boil	when	the	eggs	are
immersed.	Though	the	eggs	won’t	spoil	at
room	temperature,	they	will	suffer	less	from
swollen	yolks	and	split	whites	(which	result
when	the	egg	absorbs	the	pickling	liquid	too
rapidly)	if	stored	in	the	cold.

Chinese	Preserved	Eggs



Though	the	average	Chinese	consumes	only	a
third	as	many	eggs	as	the	average	American,
and	though	most	of	those	eggs	are	chicken
eggs,	China	is	renowned	for	its	preserved
duck	eggs,	including	the	“thousand-year-old”
eggs.	These	and	plain	salt-preserved	eggs
come	from	the	duck-rich	southern	provinces,
where	they	made	it	possible	to	transport	eggs
to	distant	markets	and	store	them	for	months
during	the	off	season.	The	proteins	and
membranes	of	chicken	eggs	are	less	suited	to
some	of	these	treatments.

Salted	 Eggs	 The	 simplest	 method	 for
preserving	 eggs	 is	 to	 treat	 them	 with	 salt,
which	 draws	 the	 water	 out	 of	 bacteria	 and
molds	and	inhibits	their	growth.	The	eggs	are
immersed	 in	 a	 35%	 salt	 solution,	 or	 coated
individually	 with	 a	 paste	 of	 salt,	 water,	 and
clay	 or	 mud.	 After	 20	 or	 30	 days,	 the	 egg
stops	 absorbing	 salt	 and	 reaches	 chemical
equilibrium.	 Strangely,	 the	 white	 remains



liquid,	 but	 the	 yolk	 at	 its	 center	 becomes
solid.	The	high	levels	of	positive	sodium	and
negative	 chloride	 ions	 actually	 shield	 the
albumen	 proteins	 from	 each	 other,	 but	 cause
the	yolk	particles	to	agglomerate	into	a	grainy
mass.	Salted	eggs,	which	are	variously	called
hulidan	and	xiandan,	are	boiled	before	they’re
eaten.

Fermented	Eggs	A	second	kind	of	preserved
egg,	 little	 seen	 in	 the	 West,	 is	 made	 by
covering	gently	cracked	eggs	 in	a	 fermenting
mass	 of	 cooked	 rice	 or	 other	 grains	 mixed
with	salt:	 in	essence	a	concentrated	and	salty
version	of	sake	or	beer.	Zaodan	mature	in	four
to	six	months	and	take	on	the	aromatic,	sweet,
alcoholic	 flavor	 of	 their	 surroundings.	 Both
white	 and	 yolk	 coagulate	 and	 fall	 out	 of	 the
softened	shell.	Such	eggs	can	be	eaten	as	is	or
cooked	first.

Pidan:	 “Thousand-Year-Old”	Alkali-Cured
Eggs	The	most	 famous	of	preserved	eggs	are



the	 so-called	 “thousand-year-old”	 duck	 eggs,
which	actually	have	only	been	made	for	about
500	years,	take	between	one	and	six	months	to
mature,	 and	keep	 for	 a	 year	 or	 so.	They	owe
their	 popular	 name	 —	 the	 Chinese	 term	 is
pidan,	or	“coated	eggs”	—	to	their	startlingly
decrepit	 appearance:	 the	 shell	 encrusted	with
mud,	the	white	a	transparent	brown	jelly,	and
the	yolk	a	semisolid,	somber	jade.	The	flavor
too	 is	 earthy	 and	 elemental,	 eggy	 in	 the
extreme,	 salty,	 stonily	 alkaline,	 with	 strong
accents	 of	 sulfur	 and	 ammonia.	Pidan	 are
toned	 down	 by	 rinsing	 the	 shelled	 egg	 and
allowing	 it	 time	 to	 “breathe”	 before	 serving.
They	are	a	delicacy	in	China,	and	are	usually
served	as	an	appetizer.

There	are	only	two	essential	ingredients
for	making	pidan,	in	addition	to	the	eggs:	salt,
and	a	strongly	alkaline	material,	which	can	be
wood	ash,	lime,	sodium	carbonate,	lye
(sodium	hydroxide),	or	some	combination	of
these.	Tea	is	often	used	for	flavor,	and	mud	to



create	a	paste	that	dries	to	a	protective	crust,
though	the	eggs	can	also	be	immersed	in	a
water	solution	of	the	curing	ingredients	(this
gives	a	faster	cure	but	also	a	coarser	alkaline
flavor).	A	mild,	soft-yolked	version	of	pidan
is	sometimes	made	by	adding	some	lead	oxide
to	the	cure.	The	lead	reacts	with	sulfur	from
the	egg	white	to	form	a	fine	black	powder	of
lead	sulfide,	which	blocks	the	shell	pores	and
slows	the	further	movement	of	salt	and
alkaline	ingredients	into	the	egg.	(Lead	is	a
potent	nerve	toxin,	so	such	eggs	should	be
avoided;	look	for	packages	clearly	labeled	“no
lead	oxide.”	A	similar	effect	can	be	obtained
by	replacing	lead	with	zinc.)

Creating	Clarity,	Color,	and	Flavor 	The	real
transforming	 agent	 in	pidan	 is	 the	 alkaline
material,	 which	 gradually	 raises	 the	 already
alkaline	 egg	 from	a	 pH	of	 around	9	 to	 12	 or
more.	This	chemical	stress	causes	what	might
be	 thought	 of	 as	 an	 inorganic	 version	 of



fermentation:	 that	 is,	 it	 denatures	 the	 egg
proteins,	 and	 breaks	 down	 some	 of	 the
complex,	 flavorless	 proteins	 and	 fats	 into
simpler,	 highly	 flavorful	 components.	 The
disruptively	high	pH	forces	the	egg	proteins	to
unfold,	and	at	the	same	time	confers	on	them
a	 strongly	 repelling	 negative	 charge.	 The
dissolved	 salt,	 with	 its	 positive	 and	 negative
ions,	moderates	the	repulsion	enough	that	the
fine	 strands	 of	 widely	 dispersed	 albumen
proteins	 are	 able	 to	 bond	 into	 a	 solid	 yet
transparent	gel.	In	the	yolk,	the	same	extreme
conditions	 destroy	 the	 organized	 structure	 of
the	 yolk	 spheres,	 and	 with	 it	 the	 usual
graininess;	 the	yolk	proteins	 coagulate	 into	 a
creamy	 mass.	 The	 extreme	 alkalinity	 also
browns	 the	 albumen	 by	 accelerating	 the
reaction	between	the	proteins	and	the	trace	of
glucose	(see	p.	89),	and	it	greens	 the	yolk	by
encouraging	 the	 formation	 of	 ferrous	 sulfide
throughout	the	yolk,	not	just	at	its	surface	(as
in	 hard-cooked	 eggs;	 see	 p.	 89).	 Finally,	 the



alkalinity	 intensifies	 the	 egg’s	 flavor	 by
breaking	 down	 both	 proteins	 and
phospholipids	 into	 hydrogen	 sulfide,
distinctly	 animal	 fatty	 acids,	 and	 pungent
ammonia	 (the	 fumes	 from	 a	 freshly	 opened
egg	will	turn	litmus	paper	blue).

Nouveaux	Pidan	 Recently,	 two	 Taiwanese
food	scientists	devised	a	method	for	making	a
striking,	 toned-down	 version	 of	pidan.	 They
minimized	 the	 chemical	 stress,	 and	 thus	 the
alteration	of	color	and	flavor,	by	limiting	the
alkaline	 treatment	 to	eight	days	 in	a	 solution
of	 5%	 salt	 and	 4.2%	 lye.	 Such	 eggs	 don’t
solidify	on	their	own.	But	when	the	unfolding
and	 bonding	 are	 supplemented	 by	 gentle
heating	 at	 160ºF/70ºC	 for	 10	 minutes,	 these
eggs	set	to	a	golden	yolk	and	a	colorless,	clear
white!

Pine-Blossom	 Eggs	 An	 especially	 prized
variant	 of	pidan	 is	 one	 in	 which	 the	 aspic-
colored	white	is	marked	throughout	with	tiny,



pale,	 snowflake	 traceries.	 Such	 eggs	 are
known	 as	songhuadan,	 or	 “pine-blossom”
eggs.	 The	 “blossoms”	 turn	 out	 to	 be	 crystals
of	 modified	 amino	 acids,	 which	 the	 high
alkalinity	 has	 broken	 off	 from	 from	 the
albumen	 proteins.	 They’re	 thus	 an	 index	 of
protein	 breakdown	 and	 flavor	 generation,	 a
delicate	 inscription	 of	 the	 mineral	 world	 on
the	blank	orb	of	the	animal,	and	an	example	of
the	 unexpected	 delight	 that	 can	 lie	 hidden	 in
the	crudest	of	preparations.



Chapter	3

Meat

Eating	Animals
The	Essence	of	the	Animal:	Mobility	from
Muscle
Humans	as	Meat	Eaters
The	History	of	Meat	Consumption
Why	Do	People	Love	Meat?

Meat	and	Health
Meat’s	Ancient	and	Immediate	Nutritional
Advantages…
…And	Modern,	Long-Term	Disadvantages
Meat	and	Food-Borne	Infections
“Mad	Cow	Disease”

Controversies	in	Modern	Meat	Production
Hormones
Antibiotics
Humane	Meat	Production

The	Structure	and	Qualities	of	Meat



Muscle	Tissues	and	Meat	Texture
Muscle	Fiber	Types:	Meat	Color
Muscle	Fibers,	Tissues,	and	Meat	Flavor
Production	Methods	and	Meat	Quality

Meat	Animals	and	Their	Characteristics
Domestic	Meat	Animals
Domestic	Meat	Birds
Game	Animals	and	Birds

The	Transformation	of	Muscle	into	Meat
Slaughter
Rigor	Mortis
Aging
Cutting	and	Packaging

Meat	Spoilage	and	Storage
Meat	Spoilage
Refrigeration
Irradiation

Cooking	Fresh	Meat:	The	Principles
Heat	and	Meat	Flavor
Heat	and	Meat	Color
Heat	and	Meat	Texture
The	Challenge	of	Cooking	Meat:	The	Right



Texture
Meat	Doneness	and	Safety

Cooking	Fresh	Meat:	The	Methods
Modifying	 Texture	 Before	 and	 After
Cooking
Flames,	Glowing	Coals,	and	Coils
Hot	Air	and	Walls:	Oven	“Roasting”
Hot	Metal:	Frying,	or	Sautéing
Hot	Oil:	Shallow	and	Deep	Frying
Hot	 Water:	 Braising,	 Stewing,	 Poaching,
Simmering
Water	Vapor:	Steaming
Microwave	Cooking
After	 the	 Cooking:	 Resting,	 Carving,	 and
Serving
Leftovers

Offal,	or	Organ	Meats
Liver
Foie	Gras
Skin,	Cartilage,	and	Bones
Fat

Meat	Mixtures



Sausages
Pâtés	and	Terrines

Preserved	Meats
Dried	Meats:	Jerky
Salted	Meats:	Hams,	Bacon,	Corned	Beef
Smoked	Meats
Fermented	Meats:	Cured	Sausages
Confits
Canned	Meats

Of	all	 the	 foods	 that	we	obtain	 from	animals
and	 plants,	 meat	 has	 always	 been	 the	 most
highly	prized.	The	sources	of	that	prestige	lie
deep	 in	human	nature.	Our	primate	 ancestors
lived	almost	exclusively	on	plant	foods	until	2
million	years	ago,	when	the	changing	African
climate	 and	 diminishing	 vegetation	 led	 them
to	 scavenge	 animal	 carcasses.	 Animal	 flesh
and	fatty	bone	marrow	are	more	concentrated
sources	 of	 food	 energy	 and	 tissue-building
protein	 than	 nearly	 any	 plant	 food.	 They
helped	 feed	 the	 physical	 enlargement	 of	 the



brain	 that	 marked	 the	 evolution	 of	 early
hominids	 into	 humans.	 Later,	 meat	 was	 the
food	 that	 made	 it	 possible	 for	 humans	 to
migrate	from	Africa	and	thrive	in	cold	regions
of	 Europe	 and	Asia,	 where	 plant	 foods	 were
seasonally	 scarce	 or	 even	 absent.	 Humans
became	 active	 hunters	 around	 100,000	 years
ago,	and	it’s	vividly	clear	from	cave	paintings
of	wild	 cattle	 and	 horses	 that	 they	 saw	 their
prey	as	embodiments	of	strength	and	vitality.
These	same	qualities	came	to	be	attributed	to
meat	 as	well,	 and	 a	 successful	 hunt	 has	 long
been	 the	 occasion	 for	 pride,	 gratitude,	 and
celebratory	 feasting.	 Though	 we	 no	 longer
depend	 on	 the	 hunt	 for	meat,	 or	 on	meat	 for
survival,	animal	flesh	remains	the	centerpiece
of	meals	throughout	much	of	the	world.

Paradoxically,	meat	is	also	the	most
widely	avoided	of	major	foods.	In	order	to	eat
meat,	we	necessarily	cause	the	death	of	other
creatures	that	feel	fear	and	pain,	and	whose
flesh	resembles	our	own.	Many	people



throughout	history	have	found	this	a	morally
unacceptable	price	for	our	own	nourishment
and	pleasure.	The	ethical	argument	against
eating	meat	suggests	that	the	same	food	that
fueled	the	biological	evolution	of	modern
humans	now	holds	us	back	from	full
humaneness.	But	the	biological	and	historical
influences	on	our	eating	habits	have	their	own
force.	However	culturally	sophisticated	we
may	be,	humans	are	still	omnivorous	animals,
and	meat	is	a	satisfying	and	nourishing	food,
an	integral	part	of	most	food	traditions.

Meat	Fit	and	Unfit	for	Men	and	Gods

Outside	Troy,	Greek	priests	sacrifice	cattle
to	Apollo:	first	they	lifted	back	the	heads
of	the	victims,	slit	their	throats,	skinned
them	and	carved	away	the	meat	from	the
thighbones	and	wrapped	them	in	fat,	a
double	fold	sliced	clean	and	topped	with
strips	of	flesh.	And	the	old	man	burned
these	over	dried	split	wood	and	over	the



quarters	poured	out	glistening	wine	while
young	men	at	his	side	held	five-pronged
forks.	Once	they	had	burned	the	bones	and
tasted	the	organs	they	cut	the	rest	into
pieces,	pierced	them	with	spits,	roasted
them	to	a	turn	and	pulled	them	off	the	fire.

—	Homer,	Iliad,	ca.	700	BCE
For	neither	is	it	proper	that	the	altars	of	the
gods	should	be	defiled	with	murder,	nor
that	food	of	this	kind	should	be	touched	by
men,	as	neither	is	it	fit	that	men	should	eat
one	another.

—	Porphyry,	On	Abstinence,	ca.	300	CE

The	 structure	 of	 muscle	 tissue	 and	 meat.	 A
piece	of	meat	is	composed	of	many	individual
muscle	cells,	or	 fibers.	The	 fibers	are	 in	 turn



filled	with	many	fibrils,	which	are	assemblies
of	 actin	 and	 myosin,	 the	 proteins	 of	 motion.
When	 a	 muscle	 contracts,	 the	 filaments	 of
actin	 and	 myosin	 slide	 past	 each	 other	 and
decrease	the	overall	length	of	the	complex.

Muscle	contraction.	The	view	through	a	 light
microscope	 of	 rabbit	 muscle	 fibers,	 relaxed
(above)	and	contracted	(below).

Less	philosophical	questions,	but	more
immediate	ones	for	the	cook,	have	been	raised
by	the	changing	quality	of	meat	over	the	last
few	decades.	Thanks	to	the	industrial	drive
toward	greater	efficiency,	and	consumer
worries	about	animal	fats,	meat	has	been



getting	younger	and	leaner,	and	therefore
more	prone	to	end	up	dry	and	flavorless.
Traditional	cooking	methods	don’t	always
serve	modern	meat	well,	and	cooks	need	to
know	how	to	adjust	them.

Our	species	eats	just	about	everything	that
moves,	from	insects	and	snails	to	horses	and
whales.	This	chapter	gives	details	for	only	the
more	common	meats	of	the	developed	world,
but	the	general	principles	apply	to	the	flesh	of
all	animals.	Though	fish	and	shellfish	are	as
much	flesh	foods	as	meat	and	poultry,	their
flesh	is	unusual	in	several	ways.	They	are	the
subject	of	chapter	4.

Eating	Animals

By	the	word	meat	we	mean	the	body	tissues	of
animals	that	can	be	eaten	as	food,	anything
from	frog	legs	to	calf	brains.	We	usually
make	a	distinction	between	meats	proper,
muscle	tissue	whose	function	is	to	move	some



part	of	the	animal,	and	organ	meats,	such
innards	as	the	liver,	kidneys,	intestine,	and	so
on.

The	Essence	of	the	Animal:	Mobility	from	Muscle

What	is	it	that	makes	a	creature	an	animal?
The	word	comes	from	an	Indo-European	root
meaning	“to	breathe,”	to	move	air	in	and	out
of	the	body.	The	definitive	characteristic	of
animals	is	the	power	to	move	the	body	and
nearby	parts	of	the	world.	Most	of	our	meats
are	muscles,	the	propulsive	machinery	that
moves	an	animal	across	a	meadow,	or	through
the	sky	or	sea.

The	job	of	any	muscle	is	to	shorten	itself,
or	contract,	when	it	receives	the	appropriate
signal	from	the	nervous	system.	A	muscle	is
made	up	of	long,	thin	cells,	the	muscle	fibers,
each	of	which	is	filled	with	two	kinds	of
specialized,	contractile	protein	filaments
intertwined	with	each	other.	This	packing	of



protein	filaments	is	what	makes	meat	such	a
rich	nutritional	source	of	protein.	An
electrical	impulse	from	the	nerve	associated
with	the	muscle	causes	the	protein	filaments
to	slide	past	each	other,	and	then	lock	together
by	means	of	cross-bridging,	or	forming	bonds
with	each	other.	The	change	in	relative
position	of	the	filaments	shortens	the	muscle
cell	as	a	whole,	and	the	cross	bridges	maintain
the	contraction	by	holding	the	filaments	in
place.

Portable	Energy:	Fat	Like	any	machine,	 the
muscle	 protein	 machine	 requires	 energy	 to
run.	Almost	 as	 important	 to	 animals	 as	 their
propulsive	 machinery	 is	 an	 energy	 supply
compact	 enough	 that	 it	 doesn’t	 weigh	 them
down	and	impede	their	movement.	It	turns	out
that	 fat	 packs	 twice	 as	 many	 calories	 into	 a
given	weight	as	carbohydrates	do.	This	is	why
mobile	 animals	 store	 up	 energy	 almost
exclusively	 in	 fat,	 and	 unlike	 stationary



plants,	are	rich	rather	than	starchy.
Because	fat	is	critical	to	animal	life,	most

animals	are	able	to	take	advantage	of
abundant	food	by	laying	down	large	stores	of
fat.	Many	species,	from	insects	to	fish	to	birds
to	mammals,	gorge	themselves	in	preparation
for	migration,	breeding,	or	surviving	seasonal
scarcity.	Some	migratory	birds	put	on	50%	of
their	lean	weight	in	fat	in	just	a	few	weeks,
then	fly	3,000	to	4,000	kilometers	from	the
northeast	United	States	to	South	America
without	refueling.	In	seasonally	cold	parts	of
the	world,	fattening	has	been	part	of	the
resonance	of	autumn,	the	time	when	wild
game	animals	are	at	their	plumpest	and	most
appealing,	and	when	humans	practice	their
cultural	version	of	fattening,	the	harvest	and
storing	of	crops	that	will	see	them	through
winter’s	scarcity.	Humans	have	long	exploited
the	fattening	ability	of	our	meat	animals	by
overfeeding	them	before	slaughter,	to	make
them	more	succulent	and	flavorful	(p.	135).



Humans	as	Meat	Eaters

Meat	became	a	predictable	part	of	the	human
diet	beginning	around	9,000	years	ago,	when
early	peoples	in	the	Middle	East	managed	to
tame	a	handful	of	wild	animals	—	first	dogs,
then	goats	and	sheep,	then	pigs	and	cattle	and
horses	—	to	live	alongside	them.	Livestock
not	only	transformed	inedible	grass	and	scraps
into	nutritious	meat,	but	constituted	a	walking
larder,	a	store	of	concentrated	nourishment
that	could	be	harvested	whenever	it	was
needed.	Because	they	were	adaptable	enough
to	submit	to	human	control,	our	meat	animals
have	flourished	and	now	number	in	the
billions,	while	many	wild	animals	are	being
squeezed	by	the	growth	of	cities	and
farmlands	into	ever	smaller	habitats,	and	their
populations	are	declining.

The	History
of	Meat	Consumption



The	Scarcity	of	Meat	in	Agricultural
Societies	Around	the	time	that	our	ancestors
domesticated	animals,	they	also	began	to
cultivate	a	number	of	grasses,	plants	that	grow
in	extensive	stands	and	produce	large	numbers
of	nutritious	seeds.	This	was	the	beginning	of
agriculture.	With	the	arrival	of	domesticated
barley	and	wheat,	rice	and	maize,	nomadic
peoples	settled	down	to	farm	the	land	and
produce	food,	populations	boomed	—	and
most	people	ate	very	little	meat.	Grain	crops
are	simply	a	far	more	efficient	form	of
nourishment	than	animals	grazing	on	the	same
land,	so	meat	became	relatively	expensive,	a
luxury	reserved	for	the	rulers.	From	the
prehistoric	invention	of	agriculture	to	the
Industrial	Revolution,	the	great	majority	of
people	on	the	planet	lived	on	cereal	gruels	and
breads.	Beginning	with	Europe	and	the
Americas	in	the	19th	century,
industrialization	has	generally	made	meat	less
expensive	and	more	widely	available	thanks



to	the	development	of	managed	pastures	and
formulated	feeds,	the	intensive	breeding	of
animals	for	efficient	meat	production,	and
improved	transportation	from	farms	to	cities.
But	in	less	developed	parts	of	the	world,	meat
is	still	a	luxury	reserved	for	the	wealthy	few.

Food	Words:	Meat
The	 English	 word	meat	 has	 not	 always
meant	 animal	 flesh,	 and	 its	 evolution
indicates	 a	 shift	 in	 the	 eating	 habits	 of
English-speaking	 people.	 In	 the	Oxford
English	Dictionary’s	first	citation	for	meat,
from	 the	 year	 900,	 the	 word	 meant	 solid
food	 in	 general,	 in	 contrast	 to	 drink.	 A
vestige	of	 this	 sense	 survives	 today	 in	 the
habit	 of	 referring	 to	 the	 meat	 of	 nuts.	 It
wasn’t	 until	 1300	 that	meat	 was	 used	 for
the	 flesh	 of	 animals,	 and	 not	 until	 even
later	 that	 this	 definition	 displaced	 the
earlier	 one	 as	 animal	 flesh	 became
preeminent	 in	 the	 English	 diet,	 in



preference	 if	 not	 in	 quantity.	 (The	 same
transformation	can	be	traced	in	the	French
word	viande.)	One	 sign	 of	 this	 preference
is	Charles	Carter’s	1732	Compleat	City	and
Country	Cook,	 which	 devotes	 50	 pages	 to
meat	dishes,	25	 to	poultry,	and	40	 to	 fish,
but	only	25	to	vegetables	and	a	handful	to
breads	and	pastries.

Abundant	Meat	in	North	America	From	the
beginning,	Americans	have	enjoyed	an
abundance	of	meat	made	possible	by	the	size
and	richness	of	the	continent.	In	the	19th
century,	as	the	country	became	urbanized	and
more	people	lived	away	from	the	farm,	meats
were	barreled	in	salt	to	preserve	them	in
transit	and	in	the	shops;	salt	pork	was	as	much
a	staple	food	as	bread	(hence	such	phrases	as
“scraping	the	bottom	of	the	barrel”	and	“pork-
barrel	politics”).	In	the	1870s	a	wider
distribution	of	fresh	meat,	especially	beef,
was	made	possible	by	several	advances,
including	the	growth	of	the	cattle	industry	in



the	West,	the	introduction	of	cattle	cars	on	the
railroads,	and	the	development	of	the
refrigerated	railroad	car	by	Gustavus	Swift
and	Philip	Armour.

Today,	with	one	fifteenth	of	the	world’s
population,	the	United	States	eats	one	third	of
the	world’s	meat.	Meat	consumption	on	this
scale	is	possible	only	in	wealthy	societies	like
our	own,	because	animal	flesh	remains	a
much	less	efficient	source	of	nourishment
than	plant	protein.	It	takes	much	less	grain	to
feed	a	person	than	it	does	to	feed	a	steer	or
chicken	in	order	to	feed	a	person.	Even	today,
with	advanced	methods	of	production,	it	takes
2	pounds	of	grain	to	get	1	pound	of	chicken
meat,	and	the	ratios	are	4	to	1	for	pork,	8	to	1
for	beef.	We	can	afford	to	depend	on	animals
as	a	major	source	of	food	only	because	we
have	a	surplus	of	seed	proteins.

Why	Do	People	Love	Meat?



If	meat	eating	helped	our	species	survive	and
then	thrive	across	the	globe,	then	it’s
understandable	why	many	peoples	fell	into	the
habit,	and	why	meat	would	have	a	significant
place	in	human	culture	and	tradition.	But	the
deepest	satisfaction	in	eating	meat	probably
comes	from	instinct	and	biology.	Before	we
became	creatures	of	culture,	nutritional
wisdom	was	built	into	our	sensory	system,	our
taste	buds,	odor	receptors,	and	brain.	Our	taste
buds	in	particular	are	designed	to	help	us
recognize	and	pursue	important	nutrients:	we
have	receptors	for	essential	salts,	for	energy-
rich	sugars,	for	amino	acids,	the	building
blocks	of	proteins,	for	energy-bearing
molecules	called	nucleotides.	Raw	meat
triggers	all	these	tastes,	because	muscle	cells
are	relatively	fragile,	and	because	they’re
biochemically	very	active.	The	cells	in	a	plant
leaf	or	seed,	by	contrast,	are	protected	by
tough	cell	walls	that	prevent	much	of	their
contents	from	being	freed	by	chewing,	and



their	protein	and	starch	are	locked	up	in	inert
storage	granules.	Meat	is	thus	mouth-filling	in
a	way	that	few	plant	foods	are.	Its	rich	aroma
when	cooked	comes	from	the	same
biochemical	complexity.

Food	Words:	Animals	and	Their	Meats
As	the	novelist	Walter	Scott	and	others
pointed	out	long	ago,	the	Norman	Conquest
of	Britain	in	1066	caused	a	split	in	the
English	vocabulary	for	common	meats.
The	Saxons	had	their	own	Germanic	names
for	the	animals	—	ox,	steer,	cow,	heifer,
and	calf;	sheep,	ram,	wether,	ewe,	and
lamb;	swine,	hog,	gilt,	sow,	and	pig	—	and
named	their	flesh	by	attaching	“meat	of”	to
the	animal	name.	When	French	became	the
language	of	the	English	nobility	in	the
centuries	following	the	Conquest,	the
animal	names	survived	in	the	countryside,
but	the	prepared	meats	were	rechristened
in	the	fashion	of	the	court	cooks:	the	first



recipe	books	in	English	call	for	beef	(from
the	French	boeuf),	veal	(veau),	mutton
(mouton),	and	pork	(porc).

Meat	and	Health

Meat’s	Ancient	and	Immediate	Nutritional	Advantages…

The	meat	of	wild	animals	was	by	far	the	most
concentrated	natural	source	of	protein	and
iron	in	the	diet	of	our	earliest	human
ancestors,	and	along	with	oily	nuts,	the	most
concentrated	source	of	energy.	(It’s	also
unsurpassed	for	several	B	vitamins.)	Thanks
to	the	combination	of	meat,	calcium-rich	leaf
foods,	and	a	vigorous	life,	the	early	hunter-
gatherers	were	robust,	with	strong	skeletons,
jaws,	and	teeth.	When	agriculture	and	settled
life	developed	in	the	Middle	East	beginning
10,000	years	ago,	human	diet	and	activity
narrowed	considerably.	Meats	and	vegetables
were	displaced	from	the	diet	of	early	farmers



by	easily	grown	starchy	grains	that	are
relatively	poor	in	calcium,	iron,	and	protein.
With	this	and	the	higher	prevalence	of
infectious	disease	caused	by	population
growth	and	crowding,	the	rise	of	agriculture
brought	about	a	general	decline	in	human
stature,	bone	strength,	and	dental	health.

A	return	to	something	like	the	robustness
of	the	hunter-gatherers	came	to	the
industrialized	world	beginning	late	in	the	19th
century.	This	broad	improvement	in	stature
and	life	expectancy	owed	a	great	deal	to
improvements	in	medicine	and	especially
public	hygiene	(water	quality,	waste
treatment),	but	the	growing	nutritional
contribution	of	meat	and	milk	also	played	an
essential	role.

…And	Modern,	Long-Term	Disadvantages

By	the	middle	of	the	20th	century,	we	had	a
pretty	good	understanding	of	the	nutritional



requirements	for	day-to-day	good	health.
Most	people	in	the	West	had	plenty	of	food,
and	life	expectancy	had	risen	to	seven	or	eight
decades.	Medical	research	then	began	to
concentrate	on	the	role	of	nutrition	in	the
diseases	that	cut	the	good	life	short,	mainly
heart	disease	and	cancer.	And	here	meat	and
its	strong	appeal	turned	out	to	have	a
significant	disadvantage:	a	diet	high	in	meat
is	associated	with	a	higher	risk	of	developing
heart	disease	and	cancer.	In	our	postindustrial
life	of	physical	inactivity	and	essentially
unlimited	ability	to	indulge	our	taste	for	meat,
meat’s	otherwise	valuable	endowment	of
energy	contributes	to	obesity,	which	increases
the	risk	of	various	diseases.	The	saturated	fats
typical	of	meats	raise	blood	cholesterol	levels
and	can	contribute	to	heart	disease.	And	to	the
extent	that	meat	displaces	from	our	diet	the
vegetables	and	fruits	that	help	fight	heart
disease	and	cancer	(p.	255),	it	increases	our
vulnerability	to	both.



It’s	prudent,	then,	to	temper	our	species’
infatuation	with	meat.	It	helped	make	us	what
we	are,	but	now	it	can	help	unmake	us.	We
should	eat	meat	in	moderation,	and
accompany	it	with	the	vegetables	and	fruits
that	complement	its	nutritional	strengths	and
limitations.

Minimizing	 Toxic	 By-Products	 in	 Cooked
Meats	We	should	also	prepare	meat	with	care.
Scientists	 have	 identified	 three	 families	 of
chemicals	 created	 during	 meat	 preparation
that	 damage	 DNA	 and	 cause	 cancers	 in
laboratory	animals,	and	that	may	increase	our
risk	 of	 developing	 cancer	 of	 the	 large
intestine.

Heterocyclic	 Amines	 HCAs	 are	 formed	 at
high	 temperatures	 by	 the	 reaction	 of	 minor
meat	 components	 (creatine	 and	 creatinine)
with	 amino	 acids.	 HCA	 production	 is
generally	 greatest	 at	 the	 meat	 surface	 where
the	temperature	is	highest	and	the	meat	juices



collect,	and	on	meats	that	are	grilled,	broiled,
or	 fried	 well	 done.	 Oven	 roasting	 leaves
relatively	 few	 HCAs	 on	 the	 meat	 but	 large
amounts	in	the	pan	drippings.	Acid	marinades
reduce	 HCA	 production,	 as	 does	 cooking
gently	 and	 aiming	 for	 a	 rare	 or	 medium
doneness.	 Vegetables,	 fruits,	 and	 acidophilus
bacteria	 (p.	 47)	 appear	 to	 bind	 HCAs	 in	 the
digestive	tract	and	prevent	them	from	causing
damage.

Polycyclic	Aromatic	Hydrocarbons	PAHs	are
created	 when	 nearly	 any	 organic	 material,
including	wood	and	fat,	is	heated	to	the	point
that	it	begins	to	burn	(p.	448).	Cooking	over	a
smoky	 wood	 fire	 therefore	 deposits	 PAHs
from	 the	 wood	 on	 meat.	 A	 charcoal	 fire	 is
largely	smokeless,	but	will	create	PAHs	from
fat	if	the	fat	is	allowed	to	fall	and	burn	on	the
coals,	or	if	the	fat	ignites	on	the	meat	surface
itself.	 Small	 quantities	 of	 PAHs	 can	 also	 be
formed	 during	 high-temperature	 frying.	 The



PAH	 hazard	 can	 be	 minimized	 by	 grilling
over	wood	 only	when	 it	 has	 been	 reduced	 to
coals,	 by	 leaving	 the	 grill	 uncovered	 so	 that
soot	and	vapors	can	dissipate,	by	avoiding	fat
flareups,	 and	 by	 eating	 smoked	 meats	 only
rarely.

Nitrosamines	Nitrosamines	 are	 formed	when
nitrogen-containing	 groups	 on	 amino	 acids
and	related	compounds	combine	with	nitrite,	a
chemical	 that	 has	 been	 used	 for	millennia	 in
salt-cured	 meats,	 and	 that	 suppresses	 the
bacterium	that	causes	botulism	(p.	174).	This
reaction	 between	 amino	 acids	 and	 nitrites
takes	 place	 both	 in	 our	 digestive	 system	 and
in	 very	 hot	 frying	 pans.	 Nitrosamines	 are
known	 to	 be	 powerful	 DNA-damaging
chemicals,	 yet	 at	 present	 there’s	 no	 clear
evidence	 that	 the	 nitrites	 in	 cured	 meats
increase	 the	 risk	 of	 developing	 cancer.	 Still,
it’s	 probably	 prudent	 to	 eat	 cured	 meats	 in
moderation	and	cook	them	gently.



Meat	and
Food-Borne	Infections

Beyond	the	possibility	that	it	may	chip	away
at	our	longevity	by	contributing	to	heart
disease	and	cancer,	meat	can	also	pose	the
much	more	immediate	hazard	of	causing
infection	by	disease	microbes.	This	problem
remains	all	too	common.

Bacterial	 Infection	 Exactly	 because	 it	 is	 a
nutritious	 material,	 meat	 is	 especially
vulnerable	 to	 colonization	 by	 microbes,
mainly	 bacteria.	 And	 because	 animal	 skins
and	 digestive	 tracts	 are	 rich	 reservoirs	 of
bacteria,	 it’s	 inevitable	 that	 initially	 clean
meat	 surfaces	 will	 be	 contaminated	 during
slaughter	 and	 the	 removal	 of	 skin,	 feathers,
and	 innards.	 The	 problem	 is	 magnified	 in
standard	 mechanized	 operations,	 where
carcasses	are	handled	less	carefully	than	they
would	 be	 by	 skilled	 butchers,	 and	 where	 a



single	 infected	 carcass	 is	 more	 likely	 to
contaminate	 others.	 Most	 bacteria	 are
harmless	 and	 simply	 spoil	 the	 meat	 by
consuming	 its	 nutrients	 and	 eventually
generating	 unpleasant	 smells	 and	 a	 slimy
surface.	A	 number,	 however,	 can	 invade	 the
cells	 of	 our	 digestive	 system,	 and	 produce
toxins	 to	 destroy	 the	 host	 cells	 and	 defenses
and	to	speed	their	getaway	from	the	body.	The
two	most	 prominent	 causes	 of	 serious	 meat-
borne	illness	are	Salmonella	and	E.	coli.
Salmonella,	a	genus	that	includes	more

than	2,000	distinct	bacterial	types,	causes
more	serious	food-borne	disease	in	Europe
and	North	America	than	any	other	microbe,
and	appears	to	be	on	the	rise.	It’s	a	resilient
group,	adaptable	to	extremes	of	temperature,
acidity,	and	moisture,	and	found	in	most	if	not
all	animals,	including	fish.	In	the	United
States	it’s	especially	prevalent	in	poultry	and
eggs,	apparently	thanks	to	the	practices	of
industrial-scale	poultry	farming:	recycling



animal	by-products	(feathers,	viscera)	as	feed
for	the	next	generation	of	animals,	and
crowding	the	animals	together	in	very	close
confinement,	both	of	which	favor	the	spread
of	the	bacteria.	Salmonella	often	have	no
obvious	effect	on	the	animal	carriers,	but	in
humans	can	cause	diarrhea	and	chronic
infection	in	other	parts	of	the	body.
Escherichia	coli	is	the	collective	name	for

many	related	strains	of	bacteria	that	are
normal	residents	of	the	intestines	of	warm-
blooded	animals,	including	humans.	But
several	strains	are	aliens,	and	if	ingested	will
invade	the	cells	of	the	digestive	tract	and
cause	illness.	The	most	notorious	E.	coli,	and
the	most	dangerous,	is	a	special	strain	called
O157:H7	that	causes	bloody	diarrhea	and
sometimes	kidney	failure,	especially	in
children.	In	the	United	States,	about	a	third	of
people	diagnosed	with	E.	coli	O157:H7	need
to	be	hospitalized,	and	about	5%	die.	E.	coli
O157:H7	is	harbored	in	cattle,	especially



calves,	and	other	animals,	but	has	little	if	any
effect	on	them.	Ground	beef	is	by	far	the	most
common	source	of	E.	coli	O157:H7	infection.
Grinding	mixes	and	spreads	what	may	be	only
a	small	contaminated	portion	throughout	the
entire	mass	of	meat.

Prevention	 Prevention	 of	 bacterial	 infection
begins	 with	 the	 well	 warranted	 assumption
that	 all	 meat	 has	 been	 contaminated	 with	 at
least	 some	 disease	 bacteria.	 It	 requires
measures	to	ensure	that	those	bacteria	are	not
spread	to	other	foods,	and	are	eliminated	from
the	 meats	 during	 cooking.	 Hands,	 knives,
cutting	 boards,	 and	 countertops	 used	 to
prepare	 meats	 should	 be	 cleaned	 with	 hot
soapy	 water	 before	 being	 used	 to	 prepare
other	 foods.	E.	 coli	 are	 killed	 at	 155ºF/68ºC,
so	ground	meats	are	safest	if	their	center	gets
at	least	this	hot.	Salmonella	and	other	bacteria
can	 multiply	 at	 significant	 rates	 between	 40
and	140ºF/5–60ºC,	so	meats	should	not	be	left



in	 this	range	for	more	 than	two	hours.	Buffet
dishes	 should	 be	 kept	 hot,	 and	 leftovers
promptly	refrigerated	and	reheated	at	 least	 to
160ºF/70ºC.

Trichinosis	Trichinosis	is	a	disease	caused	by
infection	 with	 the	 cysts	 of	 a	 small	 parasitic
worm,	Trichina	spiralis.	 In	the	United	States,
trichinosis	 was	 long	 associated	 with
undercooked	pork	 from	pigs	 fed	garbage	 that
sometimes	 included	 infected	 rodents	or	other
animals.	 Uncooked	 garbage	 was	 banned	 as
pork	 feed	 in	 1980,	 and	 since	 then	 the
incidence	 of	 trichinosis	 in	 the	 United	 States
has	declined	to	fewer	than	ten	cases	annually.
Most	 of	 these	 are	 not	 from	 pork,	 but	 from
such	game	meats	as	bear,	boar,	and	walrus.

For	many	years	it	was	recommended	that
pork	be	cooked	past	well	done	to	ensure	the
elimination	of	trichinae.	It’s	now	known	that	a
temperature	of	137ºF/58ºC,	a	medium
doneness,	is	sufficient	to	kill	the	parasite	in



meat;	aiming	for	150ºF/65ºC	gives	reasonable
safety	margin.	Trichinae	can	also	be
eliminated	by	frozen	storage	for	a	period	of	at
least	20	days	at	or	lower	than	5ºF/–15ºC.

“Mad	Cow	Disease”

“Mad	cow	disease”	is	the	common	name	for
bovine	spongiform	encephalopathy,	or	BSE,	a
disease	that	slowly	destroys	the	brains	of
cattle.	It’s	an	especially	worrisome	disease
because	the	agent	of	infection	is	a	nonliving
protein	particle	that	cannot	be	destroyed	by
cooking,	and	that	appears	to	cause	a	similar
and	fatal	disease	in	people	who	eat	infected
beef.	We	still	have	a	lot	to	learn	about	it.

BSE	originated	in	the	early	1980s	when
cattle	were	fed	by-products	from	sheep
suffering	from	a	brain	disease	called	scrapie,
whose	cause	appears	to	be	a	chemically	stable
protein	aggregate	called	a	prion.	The	sheep
prions	somehow	adapted	to	their	new	host	and



began	to	cause	brain	disease	in	the	cattle.
Humans	are	not	susceptible	to	sheep

scrapie.	But	there’s	a	mainly	hereditary
human	brain	disease	similar	to	scrapie	and
caused	by	a	similar	prion;	it	is	called
Creutzfeldt-Jakob	disease	(CJD),	typically
strikes	old	people	with	loss	of	coordination
and	then	dementia,	and	eventually	kills	them.
In	1995	and	1996,	ten	relatively	young	Britons
died	from	a	new	variant	of	CJD,	and	the	prion
agent	found	in	their	bodies	was	closely	related
to	the	BSE	prion.	This	strongly	suggests	that
humans	can	contract	a	devastating	disease	by
eating	meat	from	BSE-infected	cattle.	The
cattle	brain,	spinal	cord,	and	retina	are
thought	to	be	the	tissues	in	which	prions	are
concentrated,	but	a	2004	report	suggests	that
they	may	also	be	found	in	muscles	and	thus	in
common	cuts	of	beef.

BSE	appears	to	have	been	eliminated	in
Britain	thanks	to	the	culling	of	affected	herds,
changes	in	feeding,	and	surveillance.	But



diseased	cattle	have	turned	up	elsewhere	in
Europe,	as	well	as	in	the	United	States,
Canada,	and	Japan.	As	a	precautionary
measure,	a	number	of	countries	have
suspended	some	traditional	practices	at	least
temporarily.	These	include	eating	flavorful
meat	from	older	animals	(which	are	more
likely	to	carry	BSE),	as	well	as	beef	brains,
sweetbreads	and	spleen	(immune-system
organs),	and	intestines	(which	contain
immune-system	tissues).	Some	countries	also
forbid	the	use	of	“mechanically	recovered
meat”	—	tiny	scraps	removed	from	the
skeleton	by	machine	and	incorporated	into
ground	beef	—	from	the	head	and	spinal
column.	These	rules	will	probably	be
modified	as	rapid	tests	for	the	animal	disease
are	developed	and	implemented,	and	as	we
learn	more	about	how	it	is	transmitted	to
people.

To	date,	the	known	human	death	toll	from
BSE-infected	beef	numbers	in	the	low



hundreds,	and	the	overall	risk	of	contracting
the	prion	disease	from	beef	appears	to	be	very
small.

Controversies	in	Modern
Meat	Production

Meat	production	is	big	business.	In	the	United
States	just	a	few	decades	ago,	it	was	second
only	to	automobile	manufacturing.	Both
industry	and	government	have	long
underwritten	research	on	innovative	ways	to
control	meat	production	and	its	costs.	The
result	has	been	a	reliable	supply	of	relatively
inexpensive	meat,	but	also	a	production
system	increasingly	distant	from	its	origins	in
the	family	farmer’s	pasture,	pigsty,	and
chicken	coop,	and	troubling	in	various	ways.
Many	innovations	involve	the	use	of
chemicals	to	manipulate	animal	metabolism.
These	chemicals	act	as	drugs	in	the	animals,
and	raise	worries	that	they	may	influence



human	health	as	well.	Other	innovations
involve	the	animals’	living	conditions,	which
have	become	increasingly	artificial	and
crowded,	and	their	feed,	which	often	includes
reprocessed	waste	materials	from	various
agricultural	industries,	and	which	contributed
to	the	origin	of	mad	cow	disease	and	the
persistence	of	salmonella	in	chickens.	The
scale	and	concentration	of	modern	meat
production,	with	hundreds	of	thousands	of
animals	confined	in	a	single	facility,	have
caused	significant	water,	soil,	and	air
pollution.	Enough	consumers	and	producers
have	become	uneasy	about	these
developments	that	there	is	now	a	modest
segment	of	the	industry	devoted	to	meats
raised	more	traditionally,	on	a	smaller	scale,
and	with	more	attention	to	the	quality	of	the
animals’	life	and	meat.

Invisible	Animals
Historian	 William	 Cronon	 has	 written



eloquently	 about	 the	 disappearance	 of	 our
food	 animals	 as	 the	 system	 of	 meat
production	changed	in	the	19th	century:

Formerly,	a	person	could	not	easily	have
forgotten	that	pork	and	beef	were	the
creation	of	an	intricate,	symbiotic
partnership	between	animals	and	human
beings.	One	was	not	likely	to	forget	that
pigs	and	cattle	had	died	so	that	people
might	eat,	for	one	saw	them	grazing	in
familiar	pastures,	and	regularly	visited	the
barnyards	and	butcher	shops	where	they
gave	up	their	lives	in	the	service	of	one’s
daily	meal….	As	time	went	on,	fewer	of
those	who	ate	meat	could	say	that	they	had
ever	seen	the	living	creature	whose	flesh
they	were	chewing;	fewer	still	could	say
that	they	had	actually	killed	the	animal
themselves.	In	the	packers’	world,	it	was
easy	not	to	remember	that	eating	was	a
moral	act	inextricably	bound	to	killing….



Meat	was	a	neatly	wrapped	package	one
bought	at	the	market.	Nature	did	not	have
much	to	do	with	it.

—	William	Cronon,	Nature’s
Metropolis:	Chicago	and	the	Great	West,

1991

Hormones

The	manipulation	of	animal	hormones	is	an
ancient	technology.	Farmers	have	castrated
male	animals	for	thousands	of	years	to	make
them	more	docile.	Testicle	removal	not	only
prevents	the	production	of	sex	hormones	that
stimulate	aggressive	behavior,	but	also	turns
out	to	favor	the	production	of	fat	tissue	over
muscle.	This	is	why	steers	and	capons	have
long	been	preferred	as	meat	animals	over
bulls	and	cocks.	The	modern	preference	for
lean	meat	has	led	some	producers	to	raise
uncastrated	animals,	or	to	replace	certain
hormones	in	castrates.	Several	natural	and



synthetic	hormones,	including	estrogen	and
testosterone,	produce	leaner,	more	muscular
cattle	more	rapidly	and	on	less	feed.	There	is
ongoing	research	into	a	variety	of	growth
factors	and	other	drugs	that	would	help
producers	fine-tune	the	growth	and
proportions	of	fat	to	lean	in	cattle	and	other
meat	animals.

Currently,	beef	producers	are	allowed	to
treat	meat	cattle	with	six	hormones	in	the
United	States,	Canada,	Australia,	and	New
Zealand,	but	not	in	Europe.	Hormone
treatments	were	outlawed	in	the	European
Economic	Community	in	1989	in	response	to
well-publicized	abuses;	a	few	Italian	veal
producers	injected	their	calves	with	large
quantities	of	the	banned	steroid	DES,	which
ended	up	in	bottled	baby	food	and	caused
changes	in	the	sexual	organs	of	some	infants.
Laboratory	studies	indicate	that	meat	from
animals	treated	with	allowed	hormone	levels
contains	only	minute	hormone	residues,	and



that	these	residues	are	harmless	when	ingested
by	humans.

Antibiotics

Efficient	industrial-scale	meat	production
requires	that	large	numbers	of	animals	be
raised	in	close	confinement,	a	situation	that
favors	the	rapid	spread	of	disease.	In	order	to
control	animal	pathogens,	many	producers
routinely	add	antibiotics	to	their	feed.	This
practice	turns	out	to	have	the	additional
advantage	of	increasing	growth	rate	and	feed
efficiency.

Antibiotic	residues	in	meat	are	minute	and
apparently	insignificant.	However,	there’s
good	evidence	that	the	use	of	antibiotics	in
livestock	has	encouraged	the	evolution	of
antibiotic-resistant	campylobacter	and
salmonella	bacteria,	and	that	these	bacteria
have	caused	illness	in	U.S.	consumers.
Because	resistant	bacteria	are	more	difficult



to	control,	Europe	and	Japan	restrict	the	use	of
antibiotics	in	animals.

Humane	Meat	Production

To	many	people,	the	mass	production	of
livestock	is	itself	undesirable.	In	a	series	of
legislative	acts	and	executive	orders	dating
back	to	1978,	Switzerland	has	mandated	that
producers	accommodate	the	needs	of	their
animals	for	such	things	as	living	space,	access
to	the	outdoors,	and	natural	light,	and	limit
the	size	of	herds	and	flocks.	The	European
Union	is	also	adopting	animal	welfare
guidelines	for	meat	production,	and	producers
in	a	number	of	countries	have	grouped
together	to	establish	and	monitor	their	own
voluntary	guidelines.

Mass	production	has	certainly	made	meat	a
more	affordable	food	than	it	would	be
otherwise.	But	because	we	raise	meat	animals
in	order	to	eat	them,	it	seems	only	just	that	we



try	to	make	their	brief	lives	as	satisfying	as
possible.	It	would	certainly	be	a	challenge	to
raise	meat	animals	economically	while	taking
their	nature	and	instincts	into	account	and
allowing	them	the	opportunity	to	roam,	nest,
and	nurture	their	young.	But	it’s	a	challenge	at
least	as	worthy	as	finding	a	way	to	trim
another	1%	from	production	costs.

The	Structure
and	Qualities	of	Meat

Lean	meat	is	made	up	of	three	basic
materials:	it’s	about	75%	water,	20%	protein,
and	3%	fat.	These	materials	are	woven	into
three	kinds	of	tissue.	The	main	tissue	is	the
mass	of	muscle	cells,	the	long	fibers	that
cause	movement	when	they	contract	and
relax.	Surrounding	the	muscle	fibers	is	the
connective	tissue,	a	kind	of	living	glue	that
harnesses	the	fibers	together	and	to	the	bones
that	they	move.	And	interspersed	among	the



fibers	and	connective	tissue	are	groups	of	fat
cells,	which	store	fat	as	a	source	of	energy	for
the	muscle	fibers.	The	qualities	of	meat	—	its
texture,	color,	and	flavor	—	are	determined	to
a	large	extent	by	the	arrangement	and	relative
proportions	of	the	muscle	fibers,	connective
tissue,	and	fat	tissue.

Muscle	Tissues
and	Meat	Texture

Muscle	Fibers	When	we	look	at	a	piece	of
meat,	most	of	what	we	see	are	bundles	of
muscle	cells,	the	fibers	that	do	the	moving.	A
single	fiber	is	very	thin,	around	the	thickness
of	a	human	hair	(a	tenth	to	a	hundredth	of	a
millimeter	in	diameter),	but	it	can	be	as	long
as	the	whole	muscle.	The	muscle	fibers	are
organized	in	bundles,	the	larger	fibers	that	we
can	easily	see	and	tease	apart	in	well-cooked
meat.

The	basic	texture	of	meat,	dense	and	firm,



comes	from	the	mass	of	muscle	fibers,	which
cooking	makes	denser,	dryer,	and	tougher.
And	their	elongated	arrangement	accounts	for
the	“grain”	of	meat.	Cut	parallel	to	the
bundles	and	you	see	them	from	the	side,	lined
up	like	the	logs	of	a	cabin	wall;	cut	across	the
bundles	and	you	see	just	their	ends.	It’s	easier
to	push	fiber	bundles	apart	from	each	other
than	to	break	the	bundles	themselves,	so	it’s
easier	to	chew	along	the	direction	of	the	fibers
than	across	them.	We	usually	carve	meat
across	the	grain,	so	that	we	can	chew	with	the
grain.

Muscle	fibers	are	small	in	diameter	when
the	animal	is	young	and	its	muscles	little
used.	As	it	grows	and	exercises,	its	muscles
get	stronger	by	enlarging	—	not	by	increasing
the	number	of	fibers,	but	by	increasing	the
number	of	contractile	protein	fibrils	within
the	individual	fibers.	That	is,	the	number	of
muscle	cells	stays	the	same,	but	they	get
thicker.	The	more	protein	fibrils	there	are



packed	together	in	the	cells,	the	harder	it	is	to
cut	across	them.	So	the	meat	of	older,	well
exercised	animals	is	tougher	than	the	meat	of
young	animals.

Connective	 Tissue	 Connective	 tissue	 is	 the
physical	harness	for	all	the	other	tissues	in	the
body,	muscle	included.	It	connects	 individual
cells	and	tissues	to	each	other,	thus	organizing
and	 coordinating	 their	 actions.	 Invisibly	 thin
layers	 of	 connective	 tissue	 surround	 each
muscle	 fiber	 and	 hold	 neighboring	 fibers
together	 in	 bundles,	 then	 merge	 to	 form	 the
large,	 silver-white	 sheets	 that	 organize	 fiber
bundles	 into	 muscles,	 and	 the	 translucent
tendons	that	join	muscles	to	bones.	When	the
fibers	 contract,	 they	 pull	 this	 harness	 of
connective	 tissue	with	 them,	 and	 the	 harness
pulls	the	bones.	The	more	force	that	a	muscle
exerts,	the	more	connective	tissue	it	needs	for
reinforcement,	 and	 the	 stronger	 the	 tissue
needs	 to	 be.	 So	 as	 an	 animal’s	 growth	 and



exercise	 bulk	 up	 the	muscle	 fibers,	 they	 also
bulk	up	and	toughen	the	connective	tissue.

Connective	tissue	includes	some	living
cells,	but	consists	mainly	of	molecules	that
the	cells	secrete	into	the	large	spaces	between
them.	The	most	important	of	these	molecules
for	the	cook	are	the	protein	filaments	that	run
throughout	the	tissue	and	reinforce	it.	One,	a
protein	called	elastin	for	its	stretchiness,	is
the	main	component	of	blood	vessel	walls	and
ligaments,	and	is	especially	tough;	its	cross-
links	cannot	be	broken	by	the	heat	of	cooking.
Fortunately	there	isn’t	much	of	it	in	most
muscle	tissue.

The	major	connective-tissue	filament	is
the	protein	called	collagen,	which	makes	up
about	a	third	of	all	the	protein	in	the	animal
body,	and	is	concentrated	in	skin,	tendons,	and
bones.	The	name	comes	from	the	Greek	for
“glue	producing,”	because	when	it’s	heated	in
water,	solid,	tough	collagen	partly	dissolves
into	sticky	gelatin	(p.	597).	So	unlike	the



muscle	fibers,	which	become	tougher	with
cooking,	the	connective	tissue	becomes	softer.
An	animal	starts	out	life	with	a	large	amount
of	collagen	that’s	easily	dissolved	into
gelatin.	As	it	grows	and	its	muscles	work,	its
total	collagen	supply	declines,	but	the
filaments	that	remain	are	more	highly
crosslinked	and	less	soluble	in	hot	water.	This
is	why	cooked	veal	seems	gelatinous	and
tender,	mature	beef	less	gelatinous	and
tougher.

Fat	 Tissue	 Fat	 tissue	 is	 a	 special	 form	 of
connective	 tissue,	 one	 in	 which	 some	 of	 the
cells	 take	 on	 the	 role	 of	 storing	 energy.
Animals	 form	 fat	 tissue	 in	 three	 different
parts	of	the	body:	just	under	the	skin,	where	it
can	 provide	 insulation	 as	 well	 as	 energy;	 in
well-defined	deposits	in	the	body	cavity,	often
around	 the	 kidneys,	 intestine,	 and	 heart;	 and
in	 the	 connective	 tissue	 separating	 muscles
and	 the	 bundles	 within	 muscles.	 The	 term



“marbling”	 is	 used	 to	 describe	 the	 pattern	 of
white	splotches	in	the	red	matrix	of	muscle.

Tissues	 and	 Textures	 The	 texture	 of	 tender
meat	 is	 as	 distinctive	 and	 satisfying	 as	 its
flavor:	 a	 “meaty”	 food	 is	 something	 you	 can
sink	 your	 teeth	 into,	 dense	 and	 substantial,
initially	resistant	to	the	tooth	but	soon	giving
way	 as	 it	 liberates	 its	 flavor.	 Toughness	 is	 a
resistance	 to	 chewing	 that	 persists	 long
enough	to	become	unpleasant.	Toughness	can
come	 from	 the	muscle	 fibers,	 the	 connective
tissue	surrounding	them,	and	from	the	lack	of
marbling	fat.

Generally,	the	toughness	of	a	cut	of	meat	is
determined	by	where	it	comes	from	in	the
animal’s	body,	and	by	the	animal’s	age	and
activity.	Get	down	on	all	fours	and	“graze,”
and	you’ll	notice	that	the	neck,	shoulders,
chest,	and	front	limbs	all	work	hard,	while	the
back	is	more	relaxed.	Shoulders	and	legs	are
used	continually	in	walking	and	standing,	and



include	a	number	of	different	muscles	and
their	connective-tissue	sheaths.	They	are
therefore	relatively	tough.	The	tenderloin	is
appropriately	named	because	it	is	a	single
muscle	with	little	internal	connective	tissue
that	runs	along	the	back	and	gets	little	action;
it’s	tender.	Bird	legs	are	tougher	than	breasts
for	the	same	reasons;	the	protein	in	chicken
legs	is	5–8%	collagen	compared	to	2%	in	the
breast.	Younger	animals	—	veal,	lamb,	pork,
and	chicken	all	come	from	younger	animals
than	beef	does	—	have	tenderer	muscle	fibers
because	they	are	smaller	and	less	exercised;
and	the	collagen	in	their	connective	tissue	is
more	rapidly	and	completely	converted	to
gelatin	than	older,	more	cross-linked	collagen.



Connective	tissue.	Muscle	fibers	are	bundled,
held	 in	 place,	 and	 reinforced	 by	 sheets	 of
connective	 tissue.	The	more	connective	 tissue
in	 a	 given	 piece	 of	 meat,	 the	 tougher	 its
texture.

Fat	contributes	to	the	apparent	tenderness
of	meat	in	three	ways:	fat	cells	interrupt	and
weaken	the	sheet	of	connective	tissue	and	the
mass	of	muscle	fibers;	fat	melts	when	heated
rather	than	drying	out	and	stiffening	as	the
fibers	do;	and	it	lubricates	the	tissue,	helping
to	separate	fiber	from	fiber.	Without	much
fat,	otherwise	tender	meat	becomes
compacted,	dry,	and	tough.	Beef	shoulder
muscles	contain	more	connective	tissue	than
the	leg	muscles,	but	they	also	include	more
fat,	and	therefore	make	more	succulent	dishes.

Muscle	Fiber	Types:
Meat	Color

Why	do	chickens	have	both	white	and	dark



meat,	and	why	do	the	two	kinds	of	meat	taste
different?	Why	is	veal	pale	and	delicate,	beef
red	and	robust?	The	key	is	the	muscle	fiber.
There	are	several	different	kinds	of	muscle
fiber,	each	designed	for	a	particular	kind	of
work,	and	each	with	its	own	color	and	flavor.

White	and	Red	Fibers	Animals	move	in	two
basic	ways.	They	move	suddenly,	rapidly,	and
briefly,	 for	example	when	a	startled	pheasant
explodes	into	the	air	and	lands	a	few	hundred
yards	 away.	And	 they	move	 deliberately	 and
persistently,	 for	 example	 when	 the	 same
pheasant	 supports	 its	body	weight	on	 its	 legs
as	 it	 stands	 and	walks;	 or	 a	 steer	 stands	 and
chews	 its	 cud.	 There	 are	 two	 basic	 kinds	 of
muscle	 fibers	 that	 execute	 these	movements,
the	 white	 fibers	 of	 pheasant	 and	 chicken
breasts,	 and	 the	 red	 fibers	 of	 bird	 and	 steer
legs.	 The	 two	 types	 differ	 in	 many
biochemical	 details,	 but	 the	 most	 significant
difference	is	the	energy	supply	each	uses.



White	 Muscle	 Fibers	 White	 muscle	 fibers
specialize	 in	 exerting	 force	 rapidly	 and
briefly.	They	are	fueled	by	a	small	store	of	a
carbohydrate	 called	 glycogen,	 which	 is
already	in	the	fibers,	and	is	rapidly	converted
into	 energy	 by	 enzymes	 right	 in	 the	 cell
fluids.	 White	 cells	 use	 oxygen	 to	 burn
glycogen,	 but	 if	 necessary	 they	 can	 generate
their	energy	faster	 than	 the	blood	can	deliver
oxygen.	 When	 they	 do	 so,	 a	 waste	 product,
lactic	 acid,	 accumulates	 until	 more	 oxygen
arrives.	 This	 accumulation	 of	 lactic	 acid
limits	 the	 cells’	 endurance,	 as	 does	 their
limited	 fuel	 supply.	 This	 is	 why	 white	 cells
work	 best	 in	 short	 intermittent	 bursts	 with
long	rest	periods	in	between,	during	which	the
lactic	 acid	 can	 be	 removed	 and	 glycogen
replaced.



Steer	anatomy	and	cuts	of	beef.	The	shoulder,
arm,	 and	 leg	 do	 most	 of	 the	 work	 of
supporting	the	animal.	They	therefore	contain
a	 large	 proportion	 of	 reinforcing	 connective
tissue,	are	tough,	and	best	cooked	thoroughly
for	 an	 hour	 or	 more	 to	 dissolve	 the
connective-tissue	 collagen	 into	 gelatin.	 The
rib,	 short	 loin,	 and	 sirloin	 do	 less	 work,	 are
generally	 the	 tenderest	 cuts,	 and	 are	 tender
even	 when	 cooked	 briefly	 to	 a	 medium
doneness.
Red	Muscle	Fibers	Red	muscle	fibers	are
used	for	prolonged	efforts.	They	are	fueled
primarily	by	fat,	whose	metabolism
absolutely	requires	oxygen,	and	obtain	both



fat	(in	the	form	of	fatty	acids)	and	oxygen
from	the	blood.	Red	fibers	are	relatively	thin,
so	that	fatty	acids	and	oxygen	can	diffuse	into
them	from	the	blood	more	easily.	They	also
contain	their	own	droplets	of	fat,	and	the
biochemical	machinery	necessary	to	convert	it
into	energy.	This	machinery	includes	two
proteins	that	give	red	cells	their	color.
Myoglobin,	a	relative	of	the	oxygen-carrying
hemoglobin	that	makes	blood	red,	receives
oxygen	from	the	blood,	temporarily	stores	it,
and	then	passes	it	to	the	fat-oxidizing
proteins.	And	among	the	fat	oxidizers	are	the
cytochromes,	which	like	hemoglobin	and
myoglobin	contain	iron	and	are	dark	in	color.
The	greater	the	oxygen	needs	of	the	fiber,	and
the	more	it’s	exercised,	the	more	myoglobin
and	cytochromes	it	will	contain.	The	muscles
of	young	cattle	and	sheep	are	typically	0.3%
myoglobin	by	weight	and	relatively	pale,	but
the	muscles	of	the	constantly	moving	whale,
which	must	store	large	amounts	of	oxygen



during	its	prolonged	dives,	have	25	times
more	myoglobin	in	their	cells,	and	are	nearly
black.

Fiber	 Proportions:	 White	 Meat	 and	 Dark
Meat	Because	most	 animal	muscles	 are	 used
for	 both	 rapid	 and	 slow	 movements,	 they
contain	 both	white	 and	 red	muscle	 fibers,	 as
well	 as	 hybrid	 fibers	 that	 combine	 some
characteristics	 of	 the	 other	 two.	 The
proportions	 of	 the	 different	 fibers	 in	 a	 given
muscle	depend	on	the	inherited	genetic	design
for	 that	 muscle	 and	 the	 actual	 patterns	 of
muscle	 use.	 Frogs	 and	 rabbits,	 which	 make
quick,	 sporadic	movements	 and	use	very	 few
of	 their	 skeletal	 muscles	 continuously,	 have
very	pale	flesh	consisting	mainly	of	white	fast
fibers,	while	the	cheek	muscles	of	ruminating,
perpetually	 cud-chewing	 steers	 are
exclusively	 red	 slow	 fibers.	 Chickens	 and
turkeys	 fly	 only	 when	 startled,	 run
occasionally,	 and	 mostly	 stand	 and	 walk;	 so



their	breast	muscles	consist	predominantly	of
white	 fibers,	 while	 their	 leg	 muscles	 are	 on
average	half	white	fibers,	half	red.	The	breast
muscles	of	such	migratory	birds	as	ducks	and
pigeons	are	predominantly	 red	fibers	because
they’re	 designed	 to	 help	 the	 birds	 fly	 for
hundreds	of	miles	at	a	time.

Muscle	 Pigments	 The	 principal	 pigment	 in
meat	is	the	oxygen-storing	protein	myoglobin,
which	can	assume	several	different	forms	and
hues	depending	on	 its	chemical	environment.
Myoglobin	 consists	 of	 two	 connected
structures:	 a	 kind	 of	molecular	 cage	with	 an
iron	 atom	 at	 the	 center,	 and	 an	 attached
protein.	 When	 the	 iron	 is	 holding	 onto	 a
molecule	of	oxygen,	myoglobin	is	bright	red.
When	 the	oxygen	 is	pulled	away	by	enzymes
in	the	muscle	cell	that	need	it,	the	myoglobin
becomes	dark	purple.	 (Similarly,	hemoglobin
is	 red	 in	 our	 arteries	 because	 it’s	 fresh	 from
our	lungs,	and	blue	in	our	veins	because	it	has



unloaded	 oxygen	 into	 our	 cells.)	 And	 when
oxygen	 manages	 to	 rob	 the	 iron	 atom	 of	 an
electron	and	 then	escape,	 the	 iron	atom	 loses
its	 ability	 to	hold	oxygen	 at	 all,	 has	 to	 settle
for	 a	 water	 molecule,	 and	 the	 myoglobin
becomes	brown.

White	and	red	muscle	fibers.	Fast	muscle	cells
are	 thicker	 than	 slow	 cells,	 contain	 little
oxygen-storing	 myoglobin	 pigment	 and	 few
fat-burning	 mitochondria.	 The	 thinness	 of
slow,	red	muscle	fibers	speeds	the	diffusion	of
oxygen	 from	 the	 external	blood	 supply	 to	 the
center	of	the	fibers.

Each	of	these	myoglobins	—	the	red,	the
purple,	and	the	brown	—	is	present	in	red
meat.	Their	relative	proportions,	and	so	the
meat’s	appearance,	are	determined	by	several
factors:	the	amount	of	oxygen	available,	the



activity	of	oxygen-consuming	enzymes	in	the
muscle	tissue,	and	the	activity	of	enzymes
that	can	resupply	brown	myoglobin	with	an
electron,	which	turns	it	purple	again.	Acidity,
temperature,	and	salt	concentration	also
matter;	if	any	is	high	enough	to	destabilize	the
attached	protein,	myoglobin	is	more	likely	to
lose	an	electron	and	turn	brown.	Generally,
fresh	red	meat	with	active	enzyme	systems
will	be	red	on	the	surface,	where	oxygen	is
abundant,	and	purple	inside,	where	the	little
oxygen	that	diffuses	through	is	consumed	by
enzymes.	When	we	cut	into	raw	meat	or	into	a
rare	steak,	the	initially	purple	interior	quickly
“blooms,”	or	reddens,	thanks	to	its	direct
exposure	to	the	air.	Similarly,	vacuum-packed
meat	appears	purple	due	to	the	absence	of
oxygen,	and	reddens	only	when	removed	from
the	package.

The	pink	color	of	salt-cured	meats	comes
from	yet	another	alteration	of	the	myoglobin
molecule	(p.	148).



Muscle	Fibers,	Tissues,
and	Meat	Flavor

The	main	source	of	meat’s	great	appeal	is	its
flavor.	Meat	flavor	has	two	aspects:	what
might	be	called	generic	meatiness,	and	the
special	aromas	that	characterize	meats	from
different	animals.	Meatiness	is	largely
provided	by	the	muscle	fibers,	character
aromas	by	the	fat	tissue.

Muscle	Fibers:	The	Flavor	of	Action	Meaty
flavor	is	a	combination	of	mouth-filling	taste
sensations	 and	 a	 characteristic,	 rich	 aroma.
Both	 arise	 from	 the	 proteins	 and	 energy-
generating	machinery	of	the	muscle	fibers	—
after	 they	have	 been	broken	down	 into	 small
pieces	 by	 the	 muscle’s	 enzymes	 and	 by	 the
heat	 of	 cooking.	 Some	 of	 these	 pieces	 —
single	 amino	acids	 and	 short	 chains	of	 them,
sugars,	 fatty	 acids,	 nucleotides,	 and	 salts	—
are	 what	 stimulate	 the	 tongue	 with	 sweet,



sour,	 salty,	 and	 savory	 sensations.	And	when
they’re	 heated,	 they	 react	 with	 each	 other	 to
form	 hundreds	 of	 aromatic	 compounds.	 In
general,	 well-exercised	 muscle	 with	 a	 high
proportion	 of	 red	 fibers	 (chicken	 leg,	 beef)
makes	 more	 flavorful	 meat	 than	 less
exercised,	 predominantly	 white-fibered
muscle	 (chicken	 breast,	 veal).	 Red	 fibers
contain	more	materials	with	 the	potential	 for
generating	 flavor,	 in	 particular	 fat	 droplets
and	 fat-like	 components	 of	 the	 membranes
that	 house	 the	 cytochromes.	 They	 also	 have
more	 substances	 that	 help	 break	 these	 flavor
precursors	 down	 into	 flavorful	 pieces,
including	 the	 iron	 atoms	 in	 myoglobin	 and
cytochromes,	the	oxygen	that	those	molecules
hold,	 and	 the	 enzymes	 that	 convert	 fat	 into
energy	and	recycle	the	cell’s	proteins.



Meat	 pigments.	 Left:	The	 heme	 group,	 a
carbon-ring	 structure	 at	 the	 center	 of	 both
hemoglobin	 and	 myoglobin	 molecules	 that
holds	 oxygen	 for	 use	 by	 the	 animal	 body’s
cells.	The	protein	portion	of	 these	molecules,
the	 globin,	 is	 a	 long,	 folded	 chain	 of	 amino
acids,	 and	 is	 not	 shown	 here.	 Right:	Three
different	states	of	the	heme	group	in	uncooked
meat.	 In	 the	absence	of	oxygen,	myoglobin	 is
purple.	Myoglobin	that	has	bound	a	molecule
of	 oxygen	 gas	 is	 red.	 When	 little	 oxygen	 is
available	 for	 some	 time,	 the	 iron	atom	 in	 the
heme	 group	 is	 readily	 oxidized	—	 robbed	 of
an	 electron	 —	 and	 the	 resulting	 pigment
molecule	is	brownish	(right).

This	connection	between	exercise	and
flavor	has	been	known	for	a	very	long	time.
Nearly	200	years	ago,	Brillat-Savarin	made



fun	of	“those	gastronomes	who	pretend	to
have	discovered	the	special	flavor	of	the	leg
upon	which	a	sleeping	pheasant	rests	his
weight.”

Fat:	The	Flavor	of	the	Tribe	The	machinery
of	 the	 red	 or	white	muscle	 fiber	 is	much	 the
same	 no	 matter	 what	 the	 animal,	 because	 it
has	 the	specific	 job	of	generating	movement.
Fat	 cells,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 are	 essentially
storage	 tissue,	 and	 any	 sort	 of	 fat-soluble
material	 can	end	up	 in	 them.	So	 the	contents
of	fat	tissue	vary	from	species	to	species,	and
are	 also	 affected	 by	 the	 animal’s	 diet	 and
resident	gastrointestinal	microbes.	It’s	largely
the	 contents	 of	 the	 fat	 tissue	 that	 give	 beef,
lamb,	 pork,	 and	 chicken	 their	 distinctive
flavors,	 which	 are	 composites	 of	 many
different	 kinds	 of	 aroma	 molecules.	 The	 fat
molecules	 themselves	 can	 be	 transformed	 by
heat	 and	 oxygen	 into	 molecules	 that	 smell
fruity	 or	 floral,	 nutty	 or	 “green,”	 with	 the



relative	 proportions	 depending	 on	 the	 nature
of	 the	 fat.	 Compounds	 from	 forage	 plants
contribute	 to	 the	 “cowy”	 flavor	 of	 beef.
Lambs	 and	 sheep	 store	 a	 number	 of	 unusual
molecules,	 including	 branched-chain	 fatty
acids	 that	 their	 livers	 produce	 from	 a
compound	generated	by	the	microbes	 in	 their
rumen,	 and	 thymol,	 the	 same	 molecule	 that
gives	 thyme	its	aroma.	The	“piggy”	flavor	of
pork	 and	gamy	 flavor	 of	 duck	 are	 thought	 to
come	 from	 intestinal	microbes	 and	 their	 fat-
soluble	 products	 of	 amino-acid	 metabolism,
while	 the	 “sweetness”	 in	 pork	 aroma	 comes
from	 a	 kind	 of	 molecule	 that	 also	 gives
coconut	and	peach	their	character	(lactones).

Grass	versus	Grain	In	general,	grass	or	forage
feeding	 results	 in	 stronger-tasting	 meat	 than
grain	 or	 concentrate	 feeding,	 thanks	 to	 the
plants’	 high	 content	 of	 various	 odorous
substances,	 reactive	 polyunsaturated	 fatty
acids,	and	chlorophyll,	which	rumen	microbes



convert	 into	 chemicals	 called	 terpenes,
relatives	 of	 the	 aroma	 compounds	 in	 many
herbs	 and	 spices	 (p.	 273).	Another	 important
contributor	 to	 grass-fed	 flavor	 is	 skatole,
which	 on	 its	 own	 smells	 like	 manure!	 The
deep	“beefy”	flavor	of	beef,	however,	is	more
prominent	 in	 grain-fed	 animals.	 And	 the
flavor	 carried	 in	 fat	 gets	 stronger	 as	 animals
get	 older,	 as	 more	 of	 the	 flavor	 compounds
are	 put	 into	 storage.	 This	 is	 why	 lamb	 is
generally	 more	 popular	 than	 mutton	 from
mature	sheep.

Meat	Pigments	Are	a	Good	Source	of
Iron

One	 of	meat’s	 nutritional	 strong	 points	 is
that	 the	 body	 absorbs	 its	 iron	 more
efficiently	than	it	does	iron	from	vegetable
sources.	 The	 reason	 for	 this	 is	 not	 well
understood,	 but	 it’s	 possible	 that	 the
pigment	 proteins	 hold	 onto	 iron	 and
prevent	 it	 from	 being	 bound	 up	 with



indigestible	 plant	 compounds.	 Meat	 color
is	a	good	 indicator	of	 its	 iron	content;	 red
beef	 and	 lamb	 contain	 on	 average	 two	 to
three	 times	 as	 much	 as	 pale	 pork;
relatively	 dark	 pork	 shoulder	 contains
twice	as	much	as	the	loin.

Production	Methods
and	Meat	Quality

Full-flavored	meat	comes	from	animals	that
have	led	a	full	life.	However,	exercise	and	age
also	increase	muscle	fiber	diameter	and	the
cross-linking	of	connective	tissue:	so	a	full
life	also	means	tougher	meat.	In	centuries
past,	most	people	ate	mature,	tough,	strongly
flavored	meat,	and	developed	long-cooked
recipes	to	soften	it.	Today,	most	of	us	eat
young,	tender,	mild	meat	that	is	at	its	best
quickly	cooked;	long-cooking	often	dries	it
out.	This	shift	in	meat	quality	has	resulted
from	a	shift	in	the	way	the	animals	are	raised.



Rural	 and	Urban	 Styles	 of	Meat	 There	 are
two	 traditional,	 indeed	 ancient	 ways	 of
obtaining	 meat	 from	 animals,	 and	 they
produce	meats	of	distinctive	qualities.

One	method	is	to	raise	animals	primarily
for	their	value	as	living	companions	—	oxen
and	horses	for	their	work	in	the	fields,	laying
hens	for	their	eggs,	cows	and	sheep	and	goats
for	their	milk	and	for	wool	—	and	turn	them
into	meat	only	when	they	are	no	longer
productive.	In	this	system,	slaughtering
animals	for	meat	is	the	last	use	of	a	resource
that	is	more	valuable	when	alive.	The	meat
comes	from	mature	animals,	and	is	therefore
well	exercised	and	relatively	tough,	lean	but
flavorful.	This	method	was	by	far	the	most
common	one	from	prehistoric	times	until	the
19th	century.

The	second	way	of	obtaining	meat	from
animals	is	to	raise	the	animals	exclusively	for
that	purpose.	This	means	feeding	the	animals
well,	sparing	them	unnecessary	exercise,	and



slaughtering	them	young	to	obtain	tender,
mild,	fatty	flesh.	This	method	also	goes	back
to	prehistory,	when	it	was	applied	to	pigs	and
to	the	otherwise	useless	male	offspring	of
hens	and	dairy	animals.	With	the	rise	of	cities,
meat	animals	were	confined	and	fattened
exclusively	for	the	urban	elite	who	could
afford	such	a	luxury,	an	art	represented	in
Egyptian	murals	and	described	by	Roman
writers.

For	many	centuries,	rural	and	urban	meats
coexisted,	and	inspired	the	development	of
two	distinct	styles	of	meat	preparation:
roasting	for	the	tender,	fattened	meats	of	the
wealthy,	and	stewing	for	the	tough,	lean	meats
of	the	peasants.

The	 Rural	 Style	 Disappears	 With	 the
Industrial	 Revolution,	 draft	 animals	 were
slowly	 replaced	 by	 machines.	 City
populations	 and	 the	 middle	 class	 grew,	 and
along	with	 them	 the	demand	 for	meat,	which



encouraged	the	rise	of	 large-scale	specialized
meat	production.	In	1927	the	U.S.	Department
of	Agriculture	 enshrined	 the	 identification	of
quality	 with	 urban-style	 fattiness	 when	 it
based	 its	 beef	 grading	 system	on	 the	 amount
of	 “marbling”	 fat	 deposited	 within	 the
muscles	(see	box).	Meat	from	mature	animals
began	to	disappear	in	North	America,	and	ever
more	 efficient	 industrial	 production	 took	 the
urban	style	to	new	extremes.

Mass	Production	Favors	Immaturity	Today
nearly	 all	 meat	 comes	 from	 animals	 raised
exclusively	for	that	purpose.	Mass	production
methods	 are	 dictated	 by	 a	 simple	 economic
imperative:	 the	 meat	 should	 be	 produced	 at
minimum	cost,	which	generally	means	 in	 the
shortest	 possible	 time.	 Animals	 are	 now
confined	to	minimize	the	expenditure	of	feed
on	 unnecessary	 movement,	 and	 they’re
slaughtered	before	they	reach	adulthood,	when
the	 growth	 of	 their	 muscles	 slows	 down.



Rapid,	confined	growth	favors	the	production
of	white	muscle	 fibers,	 so	modern	meats	 are
relatively	 pale.	 They’re	 also	 tender,	 because
the	 animals	 get	 little	 exercise,	 because	 rapid
growth	 means	 that	 their	 connective-tissue
collagen	 is	 continuously	 taken	 apart	 and
rebuilt	and	develops	fewer	strong	cross-links,
and	 because	 rapid	 growth	 means	 high	 levels
of	 the	 protein-breaking	 enzymes	 that
tenderize	 meat	 during	 aging	 (p.	 143).	 But
many	 meat	 lovers	 feel	 that	 meat	 has	 gotten
less	 flavorful	 in	 recent	 decades.	 Life
intensifies	 flavor,	 and	 modern	 meat	 animals
are	living	less	and	less.

Changing	Tastes	for	Fat:	The	Modern	Style
In	 the	 early	 1960s,	 American	 consumers
began	to	abandon	well	marbled	beef	and	pork
for	 less	 fatty	cuts	and	 for	 lean	poultry.	Since
marbling	 develops	 only	 after	 the	 animals’
rapid	muscle	growth	slows,	the	meat	industry
was	happy	to	minimize	fattening	and	improve



its	 production	 efficiency.	 Consumer	 and
producer	 preferences	 for	 lean	 beef	 led	 the
USDA	to	reduce	its	marbling	requirements	for
the	top	grades	in	1965	and	1975.

The	modern	style	of	meat,	then,	combines
elements	of	the	traditional	styles:	young	like
the	city	meats,	lean	like	the	country	meats,
and	therefore	both	mild	and	easily	dried	out
during	cooking.	Cooks	now	face	the	challenge
of	adapting	hearty	country	traditions	to	these
finicky	ingredients.

Quality	 Production:	 A	 French	 Example
There	 have	 been	 small	 but	 significant
exceptions	 to	 this	 general	 trend	 toward
producing	meat	as	cheaply	as	possible.	In	the
1960s,	 the	French	poultry	industry	found	that
many	 consumers	 were	 dissatisfied	 with	 the
standard	chicken’s	bland	 flavor	and	 tendency
to	 shrink	 and	 fall	 off	 the	 bone	when	 cooked.
Some	producers	 then	 developed	 a	 production
scheme	guided	by	considerations	of	quality	as



well	as	efficiency.	The	result	was	the	popular
label	 rouge,	 or	 “red	 label,”	 which	 identifies
chickens	that	have	been	produced	according	to
specific	 standards:	 they	 are	 slow-growing
varieties,	 fed	 primarily	 on	 grain	 rather	 than
artificially	concentrated	feeds,	raised	in	flocks
of	 moderate	 size	 and	 with	 access	 to	 the
outdoors,	and	slaughtered	at	80	or	more	days
of	age	rather	than	40	to	50.	Red-label	chickens
are	 leaner	 and	 more	 muscular	 than	 their
standard	industrial	equivalent,	lose	a	third	less
of	their	moisture	during	cooking,	are	firmer	in
texture,	 and	 have	 a	 more	 pronounced	 flavor.
Similar	 quality-based	 meat	 production
schemes	exist	today	in	a	number	of	countries.

USDA	Beef	Grades:	The	Triumph	of	Fat
over	Lean

As	 economist	 V.	 James	 Rhodes	 recounts,
the	USDA	grading	system	for	beef	did	not
arise	 from	 an	 objective	 government
analysis	 of	 meat	 quality.	 Instead,	 it	 was



conceived	 and	 pushed	 during	 an
agricultural	recession	in	the	early	1920s	by
cattlemen	 in	 the	 Midwest	 and	 East,	 who
wanted	to	boost	demand	for	their	purebred,
fat,	corn-fed	animals	at	the	expense	of	lean
dairy	 and	 “scrub”	 cattle.	 The	 chief
propagandist	was	Alvin	H.	Sanders,	 editor
of	 the	Breeder’s	 Gazette,	 who	 colorfully
denigrated	the	slow	cooking	of	economical
cuts	as	“the	same	old	continental	European
story	 of	 how	 to	 make	 a	 banquet	 out	 of	 a
few	bones	and	a	dash	of	‘cat-meat.’”

Sanders	 and	 his	 colleagues	 set	 out	 to
convince	 the	 country	 that	 “the	 muscular
tissues	 of	 animals	 are	 made	 tender	 and
fully	 flavored	 only	 by	 the	 presence	 of
plenty	 of	 fat.”	 In	 the	 summer	 of	 1926,	 a
well-placed	 breeder	 and	 New	 York
financier	 named	 Oakleigh	 Thorne
personally	 tutored	 the	 Secretary	 of
Agriculture,	who	soon	offered	to	begin	free
quality	grading	—	based	on	the	amount	of



visible	 fat	 marbling	 —	 at	 all	 packing
houses	 subject	 to	 federal	 health
supervision.	U.S.	“Prime”	beef	was	born	in
1927.	 A	 few	 years	 later,	 government-
funded	 studies	 found	 that	 heavy	marbling
d o e s	not	 guarantee	 either	 tender	 or
flavorful	 beef.	But	 the	 prestige	 of	 heavily
marbled	 Prime	 beef	 persisted,	 and	 the
United	 States	 became	 one	 of	 only	 three
countries	 —	 the	 others	 being	 Japan	 and
Korea	 —	 to	 make	 fat	 content	 a	 major
criterion	for	meat	quality.
So	economic	forces	have	conspired	to

make	mild,	tender	meat	the	modern	norm,	but
small	producers	of	more	mature,	flavorful
meats,	sometimes	from	rare	“heirloom”
breeds,	are	finding	their	own	profitable
market	among	consumers	willing	to	pay	a
premium	for	quality.

Meat	Animals	and
Their	Characteristics



Each	of	the	animals	that	we	raise	for	food	has
its	own	biological	nature,	and	its	own	history
of	being	shaped	by	humans	to	meet	their
changing	needs	and	tastes.	This	section
sketches	the	distinctive	qualities	of	our	more
common	meats,	and	the	main	styles	in	which
they’re	now	produced.

Domestic	Meat	Animals

Cattle	Cattle	are	descendents	of	the	wild	ox
or	aurochs,	Bos	primigenius,	which	browsed
and	grazed	in	forests	and	plains	all	across
temperate	Eurasia.	Cattle	are	our	largest	meat
animals	and	take	the	longest	to	reach
adulthood,	about	two	years,	so	their	meat	is
relatively	dark	and	flavorful.	Breeders	began
to	develop	specialized	meat	animals	in	the
18th	century.	Britain	produced	the	compact,
fat-carcassed	English	Hereford	and	Shorthorn
and	Scots	Angus,	while	continental	meat
breeds	remained	closer	to	the	rangy,	lean	draft



type;	these	include	the	French	Charolais	and
Limousin,	and	the	Italian	Chianina,	which	is
probably	the	largest	breed	in	the	world	(4,000-
pound	bulls,	double	the	size	of	the	English
breeds).

American	Beef	The	United	States	developed	a
uniform	 national	 style	 when	 federal	 grading
standards	 for	 beef	 were	 introduced	 in	 1927
(see	 box,	 p.	 136),	 with	 the	 highest	 “Prime”
grade	 reserved	 for	 young,	 fine-textured	meat
with	abundant	marbling.	Purebred	Angus	and
Hereford	 beef	 were	 the	 model	 for	 three
decades.	The	 shift	 in	 consumer	preference	 to
lower-fat	meat	brought	revisions	of	the	USDA
grades	to	allow	leaner	meat	to	qualify	for	the
Prime	 and	 Choice	 grades	 (see	 box	 below).
Nowadays,	 U.S.	 beef	 comes	 mainly	 from
steers	 (males	 castrated	as	 calves)	 and	heifers
(females	 that	 have	 never	 calved)	 between	 15
and	 24	months	 old,	 and	 fed	 on	 grain	 for	 the
last	 four	 to	 eight	months.	 Recent	 years	 have



brought	 a	 new	 interest	 in	 beef	 from	 cattle
raised	 exclusively	 on	 grass,	 which	 is	 leaner
and	 stronger	 in	 flavor	 (p.	 134)	 than
mainstream	beef.

U.S.	Beef	Quality	and	Grades	Today
Despite	 the	 prestige	 of	 Prime	 beef,	 the
current	consensus	among	meat	scientists	is
that	fat	marbling	accounts	for	no	more	than
a	 third	 of	 the	 variation	 in	 the	 overall
tenderness,	juiciness,	and	flavor	of	cooked
beef.	 The	 other	 important	 factors	 include
breed,	 exercise	 and	 feed,	 animal	 age,
conditions	during	slaughter,	extent	of	post-
slaughter	 aging	 (p.	 143),	 and	 storage
conditions	 before	 sale.	 Most	 of	 these	 are
impossible	 for	 the	 consumer	 to	 evaluate,
though	 there	 is	 a	 movement	 toward	 store
and	 producer	 “brands”	 that	 may	 provide
greater	 information	 about	 and	 consistency
of	 production.	 Potentially	 more	 flavorful
beef	from	older	animals	can	be	recognized



by	 its	 darker	 color	 and	 coarser	 muscle
fibers.

Most	graded	supermarket	beef	 today	 is
graded	 “Choice,”	 with	 4–10%	 fat,	 or
“Select,”	with	2–4%	fat.	Prime	beef	is	now
around	 10–13%	 fat.	 Ground	 beef,	 which
may	be	all	 lean	meat	or	a	mixture	of	 lean
and	fat,	ranges	from	5	to	30%	fat	content.

European	Beef	Other	beef-loving	countries
raise	their	cattle	differently	and	have
produced	distinctive	beefs.	Italy	prefers	young
meat	from	animals	slaughtered	at	16–18
months.	Until	the	advent	of	BSE,	much
French	and	British	beef	came	from	dairy	stock
several	years	old.	According	to	a	standard
French	handbook,	Technologie	Culinaire
(1995),	the	meat	of	an	animal	less	than	two
years	old	is	“completely	insipid,”	while	meat
“at	the	summit	of	quality”	comes	from	a	steer
three	to	four	years	old.	But	because	the	risk	of
an	animal	having	BSE	rises	as	it	grows	older,
a	number	of	countries	now	require	that	meat



cattle	be	slaughtered	at	less	than	three	years
of	age.	In	2004,	most	French	and	British	beef
came	from	animals	no	older	than	30	months.

Japanese	Beef	 Japan	 prizes	 its	shimofuri,	 or
highly	marbled	beef,	of	which	the	best	known
comes	 from	 the	 Kobe	 region.	 Steers	 of	 the
native	Wagyu	 draft	 breed	 are	 slaughtered	 at
24–30	months.	High-quality	heifers	(and	some
steers)	 are	 identified	 and	 then	 fattened	 for	 a
further	 year	 or	 more	 on	 grain.	 (Currently
Japan	 tests	 all	 meat	 cattle	 for	 BSE.)	 This
process	 produces	 beef	 that	 is	 mature,
flavorful,	tender,	and	very	rich,	with	as	much
as	40%	marbling	fat.	The	best	cuts	are	usually
sliced	 very	 thin,	 in	 1.5–2	 mm	 sheets,	 and
simmered	 in	 broth	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 in	 the
one-pot	 dishes	 called	sukiyaki	 and	shabu
shabu.

Veal	Veal	is	the	meat	of	young	male	offspring
of	 dairy	 cows.	 Veal	 has	 traditionally	 been
valued	for	being	as	different	as	possible	from



beef:	pale,	delicate	in	flavor,	with	a	softer	fat,
and	 succulently	 tender	 thanks	 to	 its	 soluble
collagen,	which	 readily	dissolves	 into	gelatin
when	 cooked.	 Calf	 flesh	 becomes	 more	 like
beef	with	every	day	of	ordinary	 life,	 so	most
veal	 calves	 aren’t	 allowed	 an	 ordinary	 life:
they’re	 confined	 so	 that	 exercise	 won’t
darken,	flavor,	and	toughen	their	muscles,	and
fed	a	low-iron	diet	with	no	grass	to	minimize
the	 production	 of	 myoglobin	 pigment	 and
prevent	 rumen	 development	 (p.	 13),	 which
would	saturate	and	thus	harden	the	fat.	In	the
United	 States,	 veal	 generally	 comes	 from
confined	 animals	 fed	 a	 soy	 or	 milk	 formula
and	slaughtered	between	5	and	16	weeks	old,
when	 they	 weigh	 150	 to	 500	 lb/70–230	 kg.
“Bob”	or	“drop”	veal	comes	from	unconfined,
milk-fed	 animals	 three	 weeks	 old	 or	 less.
“Free-range”	 and	 “grain-fed”	 veal	 have
become	 increasingly	 common	 as	 more
humane	alternatives,	but	are	more	like	beef	in
the	color	and	flavor	of	their	meat.



Sheep	Along	with	goats,	sheep	were	probably
the	 first	animals	 to	be	domesticated	after	 the
dog,	thanks	to	their	small	size,	around	a	tenth
that	of	cattle,	and	their	herding	instinct.	Most
European	 breeds	 of	 sheep	 are	 specialized	 for
milk	 or	 wool;	 there	 are	 relatively	 few
specialized	meat	breeds.

Lamb	 and	Mutton	 Lamb	 and	 sheep	 meat	 is
finer	 grained	 and	more	 tender	 than	 beef,	 but
well	 endowed	 with	 red	 myoglobin	 and	 with
flavor,	including	a	characteristic	odor	(p.	134)
that	 becomes	 more	 pronounced	 with	 age.
Pasture-feeding,	 particularly	 on	 alfalfa	 and
clover,	 increases	 the	 levels	 of	 a	 compound
called	 skatole,	 which	 also	 contributes	 a
barnyardy	element	to	pork	flavor,	while	lambs
finished	on	grain	for	a	month	before	slaughter
are	 milder.	 In	 the	 United	 States,	 lambs	 are
sold	in	a	range	of	ages	and	weights,	from	1	to
12	 months	 and	 20–100	 lb/9–45	 kg,	 under	 a
variety	 of	 names,	 including	 “milk”	 and



“hothouse”	 lamb	 for	 younger	 animals,
“spring”	 and	 “Easter”	 lamb	 for	 the	 rest
(though	 production	 is	 no	 longer	 truly
seasonal).	 New	 Zealand	 lamb	 is	 pasture-fed
but	 slaughtered	at	 four	months,	younger	 than
most	 American	 lamb,	 and	 remains	 mild.	 In
France,	 older	 lambs	 (mouton)	 and	 young
female	sheep	(brebis)	are	aged	 for	a	week	or
more	 after	 slaughter,	 and	 develop	 an
especially	rich	flavor.

Pigs	Pigs	are	descendents	of	the	Eurasian	wild
boar,	Sus	 scrofa.	 If	 beef	 has	 been	 the	 most
esteemed	 of	 meats	 in	 Europe	 and	 the
Americas,	pork	has	fed	far	more	people,	both
there	and	in	the	rest	of	the	world:	in	China	the
word	 for	 “pork”	 is	 also	 the	 generic	word	 for
“meat.”	 The	 pig	 has	 the	 virtues	 of	 being	 a
relatively	 small,	 voracious	 omnivore	 that
grows	 rapidly	 and	 bears	 large	 litters.	 Its
indiscriminate	appetite	means	that	it	can	turn
otherwise	 useless	 scraps	 into	 meat,	 but	 that



meat	 can	 harbor	 and	 transmit	 parasites	 from
infected	animals	and	their	remains	(see	p.	126
on	trichinosis).	Perhaps	in	part	for	this	reason,
and	because	pigs	are	difficult	to	herd	and	will
devour	 field	 crops,	 pork	 eating	 has	 been
forbidden	 among	 various	 peoples,	 notably
Middle	Eastern	Jews	and	Muslims.

There	are	several	specialized	styles	of
pigs,	including	lard	breeds,	bacon	breeds,	and
meat	breeds,	some	large-boned	and	massive,
some	(Iberian	and	Basque	ham	pigs)
relatively	lean,	slow-growing,	small	and	dark-
fleshed,	much	like	their	wild	south-Europe
ancestors.	Today	most	of	the	specialized
breeds	have	been	displaced	by	the	fast-
growing	descendents	of	a	few	European	bacon
and	meat	breeds.

Pork	 Like	modern	 beef,	modern	 pork	 comes
from	much	 younger	 and	 leaner	 animals	 than
was	 true	 a	 century	 ago.	 Pigs	 are	 typically
slaughtered	at	 six	months	and	220	 lb/100	kg,



just	 as	 they	 reach	 sexual	 maturity,	 when	 the
connective	tissue	is	still	relatively	soluble	and
the	meat	 tender.	 Individual	 cuts	of	American
and	European	pork	generally	contain	half	to	a
fifth	of	the	fat	they	did	in	1980.	Pork	is	a	pale
meat	 because	 the	 pig	 uses	 its	 muscles	 more
intermittently	 than	 do	 cattle	 and	 sheep,	 and
therefore	has	a	lower	proportion	of	red	muscle
fibers	(around	15%).	Some	small	Chinese	and
European	breeds	have	darker	and	significantly
more	flavorful	flesh.

Domestic	Meat	Birds

Chickens	Chickens	are	descendents	of	the
aggressive,	pugnacious	red	jungle	fowl	of
northern	India	and	southern	China.	Gallus
gallus	is	a	member	of	the	pheasant	family	or
Phasianidae,	a	large,	originally	Eurasian
group	of	birds	that	tend	to	colonize	open
forest	or	the	edge	between	field	and	wood.
Chickens	seem	to	have	been	domesticated	in



the	vicinity	of	Thailand	before	7500	BCE,	and
arrived	in	the	Mediterranean	around	500	BCE.
In	the	West,	they	were	largely	unpampered
farmyard	scavengers	until	the	19th-century
importation	of	large	Chinese	birds	created	a
veritable	chicken-breeding	craze	in	Europe
and	North	America.	Mass	production	began	in
the	20th	century,	when	much	of	the	genetic
diversity	in	meat	chickens	evaporated	in	favor
of	a	fast-growing	cross	between	the	broad-
breasted	Cornish	(developed	in	Britain	from
Asian	fighting	stock)	and	the	U.S.	White
Plymouth	Rock.

Chicken	 Styles	 The	 modern	 chicken	 is	 a
product	 of	 the	 drive	 to	 breed	 fast-growing
animals	 and	 raise	 them	 as	 rapidly	 and	 on	 as
little	 feed	as	possible.	 It’s	an	 impressive	feat
of	 agricultural	 engineering	 to	 produce	 a	 4-
pound	bird	on	8	pounds	of	feed	in	six	weeks!
Because	such	a	bird	grows	very	fast	and	lives
very	little,	its	meat	is	fairly	bland,	and	that	of



the	 younger	 “game	 hen”	 or	 “poussin”	 even
more	so.

Largely	in	reaction	to	the	image	of
industrial	chicken,	so-called	“free	range”
chickens	are	now	sold	in	the	United	States,
but	the	term	only	means	that	the	birds	have
access	to	an	outdoor	pen.	“Roasting”	chickens
and	capons	(castrated	males)	are	raised	to
double	or	more	the	age	of	the	standard	broiler,
are	heavier,	and	so	have	given	their	leg
muscles	more	exercise;	the	capon	may	also	be
more	succulent	thanks	to	the	infiltration	of
marbling	fat.

Turkeys	 Turkeys	 are	 also	 members	 of	 the
sedentary	 pheasant	 family.	Meleagris
gallopavo	descended	from	ancestors	that	once
ranged	 through	North	America	and	Asia.	The
modern	 colossal	 turkey	 dates	 from	 1927–
1930,	 when	 a	 breeder	 in	 British	 Columbia
developed	 a	 40	 lb/18	 kg	 bird	 with	 oversized
flight	 and	 thigh	muscles,	 and	 breeders	 in	 the



U.S.	 northwest	 used	 his	 stock	 to	 perfect	 the
Broad-Breasted	Bronze.	The	little-used	breast
muscle	 is	 tender,	 mild,	 and	 lean;	 the	 leg
muscles	 that	 support	 the	 breast	 are	 well-
exercised,	dark,	and	flavorful.

Today,	industrial	facilities	produce	14–20
lb/6–9	kg	birds	year-round	in	12–18	weeks;
some	small	American	farms	extend	the	period
to	24	weeks,	while	the	name-controlled
French	Bresse	turkey	is	raised	for	32	weeks	or
more,	confined	and	fattened	for	the	last
several	weeks	on	corn	and	milk.

Ducks	 and	 Squab	 Ducks	 and	 squab	 are
notable	for	having	dark,	flavorful	breast	meat,
abundantly	endowed	with	myoglobin-rich	red
muscle	 fibers,	 thanks	 to	 their	 ability	 to	 fly
hundreds	of	miles	in	a	day	with	few	stops.	The
most	common	breeds	of	duck	in	China,	much
of	 Europe,	 and	 the	 United	 States	 are
descendents	of	the	wild	green-headed	mallard,
Anas	platyrhynchos,	an	aquatic	migratory	bird



that	puts	on	as	much	as	a	 third	of	 its	carcass
weight	 in	 fat	 for	 fuel	 and	 under-skin
insulation.	Ducks	are	eaten	at	two	ages:	in	the
egg	 as	 15–20-day	 embryos	 (the	 Philippine
boiled	 delicacy	balut),	 and	 at	 6	 to	 16	weeks.
The	 Muscovy	 duck	 is	 an	 entirely	 different
bi rd:	Cairina	 moschata,	 the	 greater	 wood
duck,	 which	 is	 native	 to	 the	 west	 coast	 of
Central	 and	 northern	 South	America,	 differs
in	 three	 important	 ways	 from	 mallard
varieties:	it	lays	down	about	a	third	less	body
fat,	grows	significantly	larger,	and	has	a	more
pronounced	flavor.

Squab,	dove,	and	pigeon	are	various	names
for	the	European	rock	dove,	Columba	livia,	a
species	that	includes	the	common	city	pigeon;
“squab”	means	a	bird	young	enough	that	it	has
never	flown.	Its	flying	muscles	weigh	five
times	as	much	as	its	leg	muscles.	Today,
domestic	squab	are	raised	for	four	weeks	and
slaughtered	at	about	1	lb/450	g,	just	before
they’re	mature	enough	to	fly.



Game	Animals	and	Birds

Wild	animals	—	sometimes	called	game	or
venison	—	have	always	been	especially	prized
in	the	autumn,	when	they	fatten	themselves
for	the	coming	winter.	While	the	autumn
game	season	is	still	celebrated	in	many
European	restaurants	with	wild	duck,	hare,
pheasant,	partridge,	deer,	and	boar,	in	the
United	States	wild	meats	are	banned	from
commerce	(only	inspected	meat	can	be	sold
legally,	and	hunted	meat	is	not	inspected).
Most	“game”	meats	available	to	the	U.S.
consumer	these	days	come	from	animals
raised	on	farms	and	ranches.	They’re	perhaps
better	described	as	“semi-domestic”	meats.
Some	of	these	animals	have	been	raised	in
captivity	since	Roman	times,	but	haven’t	been
as	intensively	bred	as	the	domesticated
animals,	and	so	are	still	much	like	their	wild
counterparts.



Food	Words:	Turkey
Ornithological	and	geographical	confusion
appear	 to	 be	 responsible	 for	 the	 common
names	 of	 this	 bird,	 which	 came	 late	 to
Europe.	 The	 turkey	 was	 first	 seen	 by	 the
Spanish	 in	Mexico	 around	 1518,	 and	 they
named	 it	 with	 variants	 on	 the	 word	pavo,
“pea	 fowl.”	 In	 most	 other	 European
languages	its	early	names	referred	to	India:
French	dinde,	dindon	 (d’Inde,	 “of	 India”),
Ge rm a n	Kalikutische	 Hahn	 (“hen	 of
Calicut,”	 an	 Indian	 port),	 Italian	pollo
d’India	 (“fowl	 of	 India”).	 The	 turkey	was
indeed	 in	 India	 by	 1615,	 so	 it	 could	 well
have	 been	 introduced	 to	 much	 of	 Europe
via	 Asia.	 The	 English	 connection	 with
Turkey	 goes	 back	 quite	 early,	 to	 around
1540,	and	is	more	obscure.	It	may	reflect	a
vague	 impression	 that	 the	bird	 came	 from
some	 outpost	 of	 the	 exotic	 Ottoman
Empire,	 which	 originated	 in	 and	 was
identified	with	Turkey.



Today	Americans	are	buying	more	venison
(various	species	of	deer	and	antelope),
buffalo,	and	other	game	meats	thanks	to	their
distinctive	flavors	and	leanness.	The	very	low
fat	content	of	game	meat	causes	it	to	conduct
heat	and	cook	faster	than	standard	meats,	and
to	dry	out	more	easily.	Cooks	often	shield	it
from	direct	oven	heat	by	“barding”	it	with	a
sheet	of	fat	or	fatty	bacon,	and	baste	it	during
cooking,	which	cools	the	meat	surface	by
evaporation	and	slows	the	movement	of	heat
into	the	meat	(p.	158).

Gaminess	 True	wild	 game	 has	 the	 appeal	 of
rich,	variable	flavor,	thanks	to	its	mature	age,
free	 exercise,	 and	 mixed	 diet.	 Carried	 to
excess,	 this	 interesting	 wild	 flavor	 becomes
“gamy.”	 In	 the	 time	of	Brillat-Savarin,	game
was	 typically	 allowed	 to	 hang	 for	 days	 or
weeks	until	it	began	to	rot.	This	treatment	was
called	mortification	 or	faisandage	 (after	 the
pheasant,	faisan),	 and	 had	 two	 purposes:	 it



tenderized	the	meat,	and	further	heightened	its
“wild”	 flavor.	 Gamy	 game	 is	 no	 longer	 the
style.	 Modern	 farmed	 animals	 are	 often
relatively	 sedentary,	 eat	 a	 uniform	 diet,	 and
are	 slaughtered	 before	 they	 reach	 sexual
maturity,	 so	 they’re	 usually	 milder	 in	 flavor
and	more	 tender	 than	 their	wild	counterparts.
Since	 distinctive	 meat	 flavors	 reside	 in	 the
fat,	 they	 can	 be	 minimized	 by	 careful
trimming.

Some	Characteristics	of	Meat	Birds
In	general,	older	and	larger	birds	and	those
with	 more	 red	 fibers	 have	 a	 more
pronounced	flavor.

Bird Age,	weeks
Chickens
Industrial	broiler,	fryer 6–8
Roaster 12–20
French	label	rouge 11.5



French	appellation	contrôlée 16
Game	hen 5–6
Capon <32
Stewing	fowl >40
Turkeys
Industrial 12–18
French	fermière,	U.S.	premium	brands 24
French	appellation	contrôlée 32
Duck 6–16
Goose 24–28
Quail	(wild) 6–10
Squab 4–5
Guinea	hen 10–15
Pheasant 13–24

Bird Weight,	lb/kg
Chickens

1.5–3.5/0.7–1.6



Industrial	broiler,	fryer
Roaster 3.5–5/1.6–2.3
French	label	rouge 2–3.5/1–1.6
French	appellation	contrôlée 2–3.5/1–1.6
Game	hen 1–2/0.5–1
Capon 5–8/2.3–3.6
Stewing	fowl 3.5–6/1.6–2.7
Turkeys 8–30/3.6–14
Industrial
French	fermière,	U.S.	premium	brands
French	appellation	contrôlée
Duck 3.5–7/1.6–3.2
Goose 7–20/3.2–9
Quail	(wild) 0.25–0.33/0.1–0.15
Squab 0.75–1.3/0.3–0.6
Guinea	hen 2–3.5/1–1.6
Pheasant 2–3/1–1.4



Bird Red	Fibers	in	Breast	Muscle,	%
Chickens 10
Industrial	broiler,	fryer
Roaster
French	label	rouge
French	appellation	contrôlée
Game	hen
Capon
Stewing	fowl
Turkeys 10
Industrial
French	fermière,	U.S.	premium	brands
French	appellation	contrôlée
Duck 80
Goose 85
Quail	(wild) 75
Squab 85
Guinea	hen 25



Pheasant 35

The	Transformation
of	Muscle	into	Meat

The	first	step	in	meat	production	is	to	raise	a
healthy	animal.	The	second	step	is	to
transform	the	living	animal	into	useful
portions	of	its	flesh.	The	ways	in	which	this
transformation	occurs	affect	the	quality	of	the
meat,	and	can	explain	why	the	same	cut	of
meat	from	the	same	store	can	be	moist	and
tender	one	week	and	dry	and	tough	the	next.
So	it’s	useful	to	know	what	goes	on	in	the
slaughterhouse	and	packing	plant.

Slaughter

The	Importance	of	Avoiding	Stress	By	a
fortunate	coincidence,	the	methods	of
slaughter	that	result	in	good-quality	meat	are
also	the	most	humane.	It	has	been	recognized



for	centuries	that	stress	just	before	an
animal’s	death	—	whether	physical	work,
hunger,	duress	in	transport,	fighting,	or	simple
fear	—	has	an	adverse	effect	on	meat	quality.
When	an	animal	is	killed,	its	muscle	cells
continue	to	live	for	some	time	and	consume
their	energy	supply	(glycogen,	an	animal
version	of	starch).	In	the	process	they
accumulate	lactic	acid,	which	reduces	enzyme
activity,	slows	microbial	spoilage,	and	causes
some	fluid	loss,	which	makes	the	meat	seem
moist.	Stress	depletes	the	muscles	of	their
energy	supply	before	slaughter,	so	that	after
slaughter	they	accumulate	less	lactic	acid	and
produce	readily	spoiled	“dark,	firm,	dry”	or
“dark-cutting”	meat,	a	condition	first
described	in	the	18th	century.	So	it	pays	to
treat	animals	well.	In	November	1979,	the
New	York	Times	reported	that	a	Finnish
slaughterhouse	had	evicted	a	group	of	young
musicians	from	a	nearby	building	because
their	practice	sessions	were	resulting	in	dark-



cutting	meat.

Procedures	 Meat	 animals	 are	 generally
slaughtered	 as	 untraumatically	 as	 possible.
Each	animal	is	stunned,	usually	with	a	blow	or
electrical	 discharge	 to	 the	 head,	 and	 then	 is
hung	up	by	the	legs.	One	or	two	of	the	major
blood	 vessels	 in	 the	 neck	 are	 cut,	 and	 the
animal	bleeds	to	death	while	unconscious.	As
much	 blood	 as	 possible	 (about	 half)	 is
removed	 to	 decrease	 the	 risk	 of	 spoilage.
(Rarely,	as	in	the	French	Rouen	duck,	blood	is
retained	 in	 the	 animal	 to	 deepen	 the	 meat’s
flavor	 and	 color.)	 After	 bleeding,	 cattle	 and
lamb	 heads	 are	 removed,	 the	 hides	 stripped
off,	 the	 carcasses	 cut	 open,	 and	 the	 inner
organs	 removed.	 Pig	 carcasses	 remain	 intact
until	 they	 have	 been	 scalded,	 scraped	 and
singed	 to	 remove	 bristles;	 the	 head	 and
innards	are	 then	removed,	but	 the	skin	 is	 left
in	place.

Food	Words:	Game	and	Venison



The	 word	game	 is	Germanic	 in	 origin.	 Its
original	 meaning	 in	 Old	 English	 was
“amusement,”	 “sport,”	 and	 after	 some
centuries	was	applied	to	hunted	animals	by
people	wealthy	enough	to	consider	hunting
as	 entertainment.	 (Hunt	 originally	 meant
“to	 seize.”)	 The	 term	venison	 comes	 from
the	 Latin	 verb	venari,	 “to	 hunt,”	 but
ultimately	 from	 an	 Indo-European	 root
meaning	 “to	 desire,	 to	 strive	 for,”	 which
also	gave	us	the	words	win,	wish,	venerate,
Venus,	 and	venom	 (originally	 a	 love
potion).	 It	 once	meant	 all	 hunted	animals,
but	now	refers	mainly	to	deer	and	antelope,
both	 ruminants,	 like	cattle	 and	 sheep,	 that
can	 eat	 weeds	 and	 brush	 and	 thrive	 on
poorer	 land	 than	 their	 domesticated
relatives.
Chickens,	turkeys,	and	other	fowl	must	be

plucked.	The	slaughtered	birds	are	usually
immersed	in	a	bath	of	hot	water	to	loosen	the
feathers,	plucked	by	machine,	and	cooled	in	a



cold-water	bath	or	cold-air	blast.	Prolonged
water-chilling	can	add	a	significant	amount	of
water	to	the	carcass:	U.S.	regulations	allow	5–
12%	of	chicken	weight	to	be	absorbed	water,
or	several	ounces	in	a	4-pound	bird.	By
contrast,	air-chilling,	which	is	standard	in
much	of	Europe	and	Scandinavia,	actually
removes	water,	so	that	the	flesh	becomes
more	concentrated	and	the	skin	will	brown
more	readily.

Kosher	and	halal	meats	are	processed
according	to	Jewish	and	Muslim	religious
laws	respectively,	which	among	other	things
require	a	brief	period	of	salting.	These
practices	don’t	allow	meat	birds	to	be	scalded
before	plucking,	so	their	skin	is	often	torn.
The	plucked	carcasses	are	then	salted	for	30–
60	minutes	and	briefly	rinsed	in	cold	water;
like	air-chilled	birds,	they	absorb	little	if	any
extraneous	moisture.	Salting	makes	meat	fats
more	prone	to	oxidation	and	the	development
of	off	flavors,	so	kosher	and	halal	meats	don’t



keep	as	long	as	conventionally	processed
meats.

Rigor	Mortis

The	Importance	of	Timing,	Posture,	and
Temperature	For	a	brief	period	after	the
animal’s	death	its	muscles	are	relaxed,	and	if
immediately	cut	and	cooked	will	make
especially	tender	meat.	Soon,	however,	the
muscles	clench	in	the	condition	called	rigor
mortis	(“stiffness	of	death”).	If	cooked	in	this
state,	they	make	very	tough	meat.	Rigor	sets
in	(after	about	2.5	hours	in	the	steer,	1	hour	or
less	in	lamb,	pork,	and	chicken)	when	the
muscle	fibers	run	out	of	energy,	their	control
systems	fail	and	trigger	a	contracting
movement	of	the	protein	filaments,	and	the
filaments	lock	in	place.	Carcasses	are	hung	up
in	such	a	way	that	most	of	their	muscles	are
stretched	by	gravity,	so	that	the	protein
filaments	can’t	contract	and	overlap	very



much;	otherwise	the	filaments	bunch	up	and
bond	very	tightly	and	the	meat	becomes
exceptionally	tough.	Eventually,	protein-
digesting	enzymes	within	the	muscle	fibers
begin	to	eat	away	the	framework	that	holds
the	actin	and	myosin	filaments	in	place.	The
filaments	are	still	locked	together,	and	the
muscles	cannot	be	stretched,	but	the	overall
muscle	structure	weakens,	and	the	meat
texture	softens.	This	is	the	beginning	of	the
aging	process.	It	becomes	noticeable	after
about	a	day	in	beef,	after	several	hours	in	pork
and	chicken.

The	inevitable	toughening	during	rigor
mortis	can	be	worsened	by	poor	temperature
control,	and	may	be	the	source	of	excessive
toughness	in	retail	meats.

Aging

Like	cheese	and	wine,	meat	benefits	from	a
certain	period	of	aging,	or	slow	chemical



change,	during	which	it	gets	progressively
more	flavorful.	Meat	also	becomes	more
tender.	In	the	19th	century,	beef	and	mutton
joints	would	be	kept	at	room	temperature	for
days	or	weeks,	until	the	outside	was	literally
rotten.	The	French	called	this	mortification,
and	the	great	chef	Antonin	Carême	said	that	it
should	proceed	“as	far	as	possible.”	The
modern	taste	is	for	somewhat	less	mortified
flesh!	In	fact	most	meat	in	the	United	States	is
aged	only	incidentally,	during	the	few	days	it
takes	to	be	shipped	from	packing	plant	to
market.	This	is	enough	for	chicken,	which
benefits	from	a	day	or	two	of	aging,	and	for
pork	and	lamb,	which	benefit	from	a	week.
(The	unsaturated	fats	of	pork	and	poultry	go
rancid	relatively	quickly.)	But	the	flavor	and
texture	of	beef	keeps	improving	for	up	to	a
month,	especially	when	whole,	unwrapped
sides	are	dry-aged	at	34–38ºF/1–3ºC	and	at	a
relative	humidity	of	70–80%.	The	cool
temperature	limits	the	growth	of	microbes,



while	the	moderate	humidity	causes	the	meat
to	lose	moisture	gradually,	and	thus	become
denser	and	more	concentrated.

Muscle	 Enzymes	 Generate	 Flavor…	 The
aging	 of	 meat	 is	 mainly	 the	 work	 of	 the
muscle	 enzymes.	 Once	 the	 animal	 is
slaughtered	 and	 the	 control	 systems	 in	 its
cells	 stop	 functioning,	 the	 enzymes	 begin
attacking	 other	 cell	 molecules
indiscriminately,	 turning	 large	 flavorless
molecules	 into	 smaller,	 flavorful	 fragments.
They	break	proteins	 into	savory	amino	acids;
glycogen	 into	 sweet	 glucose;	 the	 energy
currency	 ATP	 into	 savory	 IMP	 (inosine
monophosphate);	 fats	 and	 fat-like	membrane
molecules	 into	 aromatic	 fatty	 acids.	 All	 of
these	 breakdown	 products	 contribute	 to	 the
intensely	 meaty,	 nutty	 flavor	 of	 aged	 meat.
During	cooking,	 the	same	products	also	react
with	 each	 other	 to	 form	 new	 molecules	 that
enrich	the	aroma	further.



…And	 Diminish	 Toughness	 Uncontrolled
enzyme	 activity	 also	 tenderizes	 meat.
Enzymes	 called	calpains	 mainly	 weaken	 the
supporting	 proteins	 that	 hold	 the	 contracting
filaments	 in	 place.	 Others	 called	cathepsins
break	apart	a	variety	of	proteins,	including	the
contracting	 filaments	 and	 the	 supporting
molecules.	 The	 cathepsins	 also	 weaken	 the
collagen	 in	 connective	 tissue,	 by	 breaking
some	of	the	strong	cross-links	between	mature
collagen	 fibers.	 This	 has	 two	 important
effects:	 it	 causes	 more	 collagen	 to	 dissolve
into	 gelatin	 during	 cooking,	 thus	making	 the
meat	 more	 tender	 and	 succulent;	 and	 it
reduces	 the	 squeezing	 pressure	 that	 the
connective	 tissue	 exerts	 during	 heating	 (p.
150),	 which	 means	 that	 the	 meat	 loses	 less
moisture	during	cooking.

Enzyme	activity	depends	on	temperature.
The	calpains	begin	to	denature	and	lose
activity	around	105ºF/40ºC,	the	cathepsins
around	122ºF/50ºC.	But	below	this	critical



range,	the	higher	the	temperature,	the	faster
the	enzymes	work.	Some	accelerated	“aging”
can	take	place	during	cooking.	If	meat	is
quickly	seared	or	blanched	in	boiling	water	to
eliminate	microbes	on	its	surface,	and	then
heated	up	slowly	during	the	cooking	—	for
example,	by	braising	or	roasting	in	a	slow
oven	—	then	the	aging	enzymes	within	the
meat	can	be	very	active	for	several	hours
before	they	denature.	Large	50	lb/23	kg	slow-
roasted	“steamship”	rounds	of	beef	spend	10
hours	or	more	rising	to	120–130ºF/50–55ºC,
and	come	out	more	tender	than	small	portions
of	the	same	cut	cooked	quickly.

Aging	 Meat	 in	 Plastic	 and	 in	 the	 Kitchen
Despite	 the	contribution	 that	 aging	can	make
to	 meat	 quality,	 the	 modern	 meat	 industry
generally	avoids	it,	since	it	means	tying	up	its
assets	in	cold	storage	and	losing	about	20%	of
the	meat’s	original	weight	to	evaporation	and
laborious	 trimming	 of	 the	 dried,	 rancid,



sometimes	moldy	 surface.	Most	meat	 is	 now
butchered	into	retail	cuts	at	the	packing	plant
shortly	after	slaughter,	wrapped	in	plastic,	and
shipped	 to	 market	 immediately,	 with	 an
average	of	4	to	10	days	between	slaughter	and
sale.	 Such	 meat	 is	 sometimes	wet-aged,	 or
kept	 in	 its	 plastic	 wrap	 for	 some	 days	 or
weeks,	 where	 it’s	 shielded	 from	 oxygen	 and
retains	 moisture	 while	 its	 enzymes	 work.
Wet-aged	 meat	 can	 develop	 some	 of	 the
flavor	 and	 tenderness	 of	 dry-aged	 meat,	 but
not	the	same	concentration	of	flavor.

Cooks	can	age	meat	in	the	kitchen.	Simply
buying	meat	several	days	before	it’s	needed
will	mean	some	informal	aging	in	the
refrigerator,	where	it	can	be	kept	tightly
wrapped,	or	uncovered	to	allow	some
evaporation	and	concentration.	(Loose	or	no
wrapping	may	cause	dry	spots,	the	absorption
of	undesirable	odors,	and	the	necessity	of
some	trimming;	this	works	best	with	large
roasts,	not	steaks	and	chops.)	And	as	we’ve



seen,	slow	cooking	gives	the	aging	enzymes	a
chance	to	do	in	a	few	hours	what	would
otherwise	take	weeks.

Cutting	and	Packaging

In	the	traditional	butchering	practice	that
prevailed	until	the	late	20th	century	but	is
now	rare,	animal	carcasses	are	divided	at	the
slaughterhouse	into	large	pieces	—	halves	or
quarters	—	which	are	then	delivered	to	retail
butchers,	who	break	them	down	into	roasts,
steaks,	chops,	and	the	other	standard	cuts.	The
meat	might	not	be	wrapped	at	all	until	sale,
and	then	only	loosely	in	“butcher’s	paper.”
Such	meat	is	continuously	exposed	to	the	air,
so	it	tends	to	be	fully	oxygenated	and	red,	and
it	slowly	dries	out,	which	concentrates	its
flavor	at	the	same	time	that	it	leaves	some
surface	areas	discolored	and	off-flavored	and
in	need	of	trimming.

The	modern	tendency	in	butchering	is	to



break	meat	down	into	the	retail	cuts	at	the
packing	house,	vacuum-wrap	them	in	plastic
precisely	to	avoid	exposure	to	the	air,	and
deliver	these	prepackaged	cuts	to	the
supermarket.	Vacuum-packed	meat	has	the
economic	advantage	of	assembly-line
efficiency,	and	keeps	for	weeks	(as	much	as
12	for	beef,	6	to	8	for	pork	and	lamb)	without
any	weight	loss	due	to	drying	or	trimming.
Once	repackaged,	meat	has	a	display-case	life
of	a	few	days.

Carefully	handled,	well	packaged	meat
will	be	firm	to	the	touch,	moist	and	even-
colored	in	appearance,	and	mild	and	fresh	in
smell.

Meat	Spoilage	and	Storage

Fresh	meat	is	an	unstable	food.	Once	a	living
muscle	has	been	transformed	into	a	piece	of
meat	it	begins	to	change,	both	chemically	and
biologically.	The	changes	that	we	associate



with	aging	—	the	generation	of	flavor	and
tenderness	by	enzymes	throughout	the	meat
—	are	desirable.	But	the	changes	that	take
place	at	the	meat	surface	are	generally
undesirable.	Oxygen	in	the	air	and	energetic
rays	of	light	generate	off-flavors	and	dull
color.	And	meat	is	a	nourishing	food	for
microbes	as	well	as	for	humans.	Given	the
chance,	bacteria	will	feast	on	meat	surfaces
and	multiply.	The	result	is	both	unappetizing
and	unsafe,	since	some	microbial	digesters	of
dead	flesh	can	also	poison	or	invade	the
living.

Meat	Spoilage

Fat	Oxidation	and	Rancidity	The	most
important	chemical	damage	suffered	by	meats
is	the	breakdown	of	their	fats	by	both	oxygen
and	light	into	small,	odorous	fragments	that
define	the	smell	of	rancidity.	Rancid	fat	won’t
necessarily	make	us	sick,	but	it’s	unpleasant,



so	its	development	limits	how	long	we	can
age	and	store	meat.	Unsaturated	fats	are	most
susceptible	to	rancidity,	which	means	that
fish,	poultry,	and	game	birds	go	bad	most
quickly.	Beef	has	the	most	saturated	and
stable	of	all	meat	fats,	and	keeps	the	longest.

Fat	oxidation	in	meats	can’t	be	prevented,
but	it	can	be	delayed	by	careful	handling.
Wrap	raw	meat	tightly	in	oxygen-
impermeable	plastic	wrap	(saran,	or
polyvinylidene	chloride;	polyethylene	is
permeable),	overwrap	it	with	foil	or	paper	to
keep	it	in	the	dark,	store	it	in	the	coldest
corner	of	the	refrigerator	or	freezer,	and	use	it
as	soon	as	possible.	When	cooking	with
ground	meat,	grind	the	meat	fresh,	just	before
cooking,	since	dividing	the	meat	into	many
small	pieces	exposes	a	very	large	surface	area
to	the	air.	The	development	of	rancidity	in
cooked	meats	can	be	delayed	by	minimizing
the	use	of	salt,	which	encourages	fat
oxidation,	and	by	using	ingredients	with



antioxidant	activity:	for	example	the
Mediterranean	herbs,	especially	rosemary	(p.
395).	Browning	the	meat	surface	in	a	hot	pan
also	generates	antioxidant	molecules	that	can
delay	fat	oxidation.

Spoilage	 by	Bacteria	 and	Molds	 The	 intact
muscles	 of	 healthy	 livestock	 are	 generally
free	of	microbes.	The	bacteria	and	molds	that
spoil	 meat	 are	 introduced	 during	 processing,
usually	from	the	animal’s	hide	or	the	packing-
plant	 machinery.	 Poultry	 and	 fish	 are
especially	 prone	 to	 spoilage	 because	 they’re
sold	with	their	skin	intact,	and	many	bacteria
persist	 despite	 washing.	 Most	 of	 these	 are
harmless	 but	 unpleasant.	 Bacteria	 and	molds
break	 down	 cells	 at	 the	 meat	 surface	 and
digest	 proteins	 and	 amino	 acids	 into
molecules	 that	 smell	 fishy,	 skunky,	 and	 like
rotten	 eggs.	 Spoiled	 meat	 smells	 more
disgusting	 than	 other	 rotten	 foods	 exactly
because	 it	 contains	 the	proteins	 that	generate



these	stinky	compounds.

Refrigeration

In	the	developed	world,	the	most	common
domestic	method	for	preserving	meat	is
simply	to	keep	it	cool.	Refrigeration	has	two
great	advantages:	it	requires	little	or	no
preparation	time,	and	it	leaves	the	meat
relatively	unchanged	from	its	fresh	state.
Cooling	meat	extends	its	useful	life	because
both	bacteria	and	meat	enzymes	become	less
active	as	the	temperature	drops.	Even	so,
spoilage	does	continue.	Meats	keep	best	at
temperatures	approaching	or	below	the
freezing	point,	32ºF/0ºC.

Freezing	Freezing	greatly	extends	the	storage
life	 of	meat	 and	 other	 foods	 because	 it	 halts
all	 biological	 processes.	 Life	 requires	 liquid
water,	 and	 freezing	 immobilizes	 the	 food’s
liquid	 water	 in	 solid	 crystals	 of	 ice.	 Well-



frozen	 meat	 will	 keep	 for	 millennia,	 as	 has
been	 demonstrated	 by	 the	 discovery	 of
mammoth	flesh	frozen	15,000	years	ago	in	the
ice	of	northern	Siberia.	It’s	best	to	keep	meat
as	 cold	 as	 possible.	 The	 usual
recommendation	 for	 home	 freezers	 is	 0ºF/–
18ºC	(many	operate	at	10–15ºF/–12	to	–9ºC).
Freezing	will	preserve	meat	indefinitely	from
biological	decay.	However,	it’s	a	drastic
physical	treatment	that	inevitably	causes
damage	to	the	muscle	tissue,	and	therefore
diminishes	meat	quality	in	several	ways.

Cell	 Damage	 and	 Fluid	 Loss	 As	 raw	 meat
freezes,	the	growing	crystals	protrude	into	the
soft	cell	membranes	and	puncture	them.	When
the	meat	 is	 thawed,	 the	 ice	 crystals	melt	 and
unplug	 the	holes	 they’ve	made	 in	 the	muscle
cells,	and	the	tissue	as	a	whole	readily	leaks	a
fluid	 rich	 in	 salts,	 vitamins,	 proteins,	 and
pigments.	 Then	 when	 the	 meat	 is	 cooked,	 it
loses	more	fluid	than	usual	(p.	150),	and	more



readily	ends	up	dry,	dense,	and	tough.	Cooked
meat	 suffers	 less	 from	 freezing	 because	 its
tissue	has	already	been	damaged	and	lost	fluid
when	it	was	heated.

Cell	damage	and	fluid	loss	are	minimized
by	freezing	the	meat	as	rapidly	as	possible
and	keeping	it	as	cold	as	possible.	The	faster
the	meat	moisture	freezes,	the	smaller	the
crystals	that	it	forms,	and	the	less	they
protrude	into	the	cell	membranes;	and	the
colder	the	meat	is	kept,	the	less	enlargement
of	existing	crystals	will	occur.	Freezing	can
be	accelerated	by	setting	the	freezer	at	its
coldest	temperature,	dividing	the	meat	into
small	pieces,	and	leaving	it	unwrapped	until
after	it	has	solidified	(wrapping	acts	as
insulation	and	can	double	the	freezing	time).

Fat	 Oxidation	 and	 Rancidity	 In	 addition	 to
inflicting	 physical	 damage,	 freezing	 causes
chemical	changes	that	limit	the	storage	life	of
frozen	 meats.	 When	 ice	 crystals	 form	 and



remove	 liquid	 water	 from	 the	muscle	 fluids,
the	increasing	concentration	of	salts	and	trace
metals	promotes	 the	oxidation	of	unsaturated
fats,	 and	 rancid	 flavors	 accumulate.	 This
inexorable	process	means	that	quality	declines
noticeably	for	fresh	fish	and	poultry	after	only
a	 few	 months	 in	 the	 freezer,	 for	 pork	 after
about	 six	 months,	 for	 lamb	 and	 veal	 after
about	nine	months,	and	for	beef	after	about	a
year.	 The	 flavors	 of	 ground	 meats,	 cured
meats,	 and	 cooked	 meats	 deteriorate	 even
faster.

Freezer	Burn	A	last	side	effect	of	freezing	is
freezer	 burn,	 that	 familiar	 brownish-white
discoloration	 of	 the	 meat	 surface	 that
develops	 after	 some	 weeks	 or	 months	 of
storage.	This	is	caused	by	water	“sublimation”
—	 the	 equivalent	 of	 evaporation	 at	 below-
freezing	 temperatures	—	from	 ice	 crystals	 at
the	meat	surface	 into	 the	dry	freezer	air.	The
departure	 of	 the	water	 leaves	 tiny	 cavities	 in



the	 meat	 surface	 which	 scatter	 light	 and	 so
appear	 white.	 The	 meat	 surface	 is	 now	 in
effect	a	thin	layer	of	freeze-dried	meat	where
oxidation	of	fat	and	pigment	is	accelerated,	so
texture,	flavor,	and	color	all	suffer.

Freezer	burn	can	be	minimized	by
covering	the	meat	as	tightly	as	possible	with
water-impermeable	plastic	wrap.

Thawing	 Meats	 Frozen	 meats	 are	 usually
thawed	before	 cooking.	The	 simplest	method
—	leaving	the	meat	on	the	kitchen	counter	—
is	 neither	 safe	 nor	 efficient.	 The	 surface	 can
rise	 to	 microbe-friendly	 temperatures	 long
before	 the	 interior	 thaws,	 and	 air	 transfers
heat	 to	 the	 meat	 very	 slowly,	 at	 about	 one-
twentieth	 the	 rate	 that	 water	 does.	 A	 much
faster	 and	 safer	 method	 is	 to	 immerse	 the
wrapped	 meat	 in	 a	 bath	 of	 ice	 water,	 which
keeps	 the	 surface	 safely	 cold,	 but	 still
transfers	heat	 into	 the	meat	efficiently.	If	 the
piece	of	meat	is	too	large	for	a	water	bath,	or



isn’t	needed	right	away,	 then	it’s	also	safe	 to
thaw	 it	 in	 the	 refrigerator.	But	 cold	 air	 is	 an
especially	 inefficient	purveyor	of	warmth,	 so
it	can	take	days	for	a	large	roast	to	thaw.

Cooking	Unthawed	Meats	 Frozen	 meats	 can
be	 cooked	 without	 thawing	 them	 first,
particularly	with	relatively	slow	methods	such
as	oven	roasting,	which	give	 the	heat	 time	 to
penetrate	 to	 the	 center	 without	 drastically
overcooking	 the	 outer	 portions	 of	 the	 meat.
Cooking	 times	 are	 generally	 30–50%	 longer
than	for	fresh	cuts.

Irradiation

Because	ionizing	radiation	(p.	782)	damages
delicate	biological	machinery	like	DNA	and
proteins,	it	kills	spoilage	and	disease
microbes	in	food,	thus	extending	its	shelf	life
and	making	it	safer	to	eat.	Tests	have	shown
that	low	doses	of	radiation	can	kill	most



microbes	and	more	than	double	the	shelf	life
of	carefully	wrapped	refrigerated	meats.
There	is,	however,	a	characteristic	radiation
flavor,	described	as	metallic,	sulfurous,	and
goaty,	which	may	be	barely	noticeable	or
unpleasantly	strong.

Beginning	in	1985,	the	U.S.	Food	and	Drug
Administration	has	approved	irradiation	to
control	a	number	of	pathogens	in	meat:	first
trichinosis	in	pork,	then	salmonella	in
chickens,	and	E.	coli	in	beef.	A	treatment	like
irradiation	is	an	especially	valuable	form	of
insurance	for	the	mass	production	of	ground
meats,	in	which	a	single	infected	carcass	can
contaminate	thousands	of	pounds	of	meat,	and
affect	thousands	of	consumers.	But	its	use
remains	limited	due	to	consumer	wariness.
Decades	of	testing	indicate	that	irradiated
meat	is	safe	to	eat.	But	one	other	objection	is
quite	reasonable.	If	meat	has	been
contaminated	with	enough	fecal	matter	to
cause	infection	with	E.	coli,	then	irradiation



will	kill	the	bacteria	and	leave	the	meat	edible
for	three	months.	However,	it	will	still	be
adulterated	meat.	Many	consumers	set	a
higher	standard	than	the	absence	of	living
pathogens	and	months	of	shelf	life	for	the
food	from	which	they	take	daily	nourishment
and	pleasure.	People	who	care	about	food
quality	will	seek	out	meat	produced	locally,
carefully,	and	recently,	and	for	enjoyment
within	a	few	days,	when	it’s	at	its	best.

Cooking	Fresh	Meat:
The	Principles

We	cook	meat	for	four	basic	reasons:	to	make
it	safe	to	eat,	easier	to	chew	and	to	digest
(denatured	proteins	are	more	vulnerable	to	our
digestive	enzymes),	and	to	make	it	more
flavorful.	The	issue	of	safety	is	detailed
beginning	on	p.	124.	Here	I’ll	describe	the
physical	and	chemical	transformations	of
meat	during	cooking,	their	effects	on	flavor



and	texture,	and	the	challenge	of	cooking
meat	well.	These	changes	are	summarized	in
the	box	on	p.	152.

Heat	and	Meat	Flavor

Raw	meat	is	tasty	rather	than	flavorful.	It
provides	salts,	savory	amino	acids,	and	a
slight	acidity	to	the	tongue,	but	offers	little	in
the	way	of	aroma.	Cooking	intensifies	the
taste	of	meat	and	creates	its	aroma.	Simple
physical	damage	to	the	muscle	fibers	causes
them	to	release	more	of	their	fluids	and
therefore	more	stimulating	substances	for	the
tongue.	This	fluid	release	is	at	its	maximum
when	meat	is	only	lightly	cooked,	or	done
“rare.”	As	the	temperature	increases	and	the
meat	dries	out,	physical	change	gives	way	to
chemical	change,	and	to	the	development	of
aroma	as	cell	molecules	break	apart	and
recombine	with	each	other	to	form	new
molecules	that	not	only	smell	meaty,	but	also



fruity	and	floral,	nutty	and	grassy	(esters,
ketones,	aldehydes).

Surface	Browning	at	High	Temperatures	 If
fresh	meat	 never	 gets	 hotter	 than	 the	 boiling
point	 of	 water,	 then	 its	 flavor	 is	 largely
determined	 by	 the	 breakdown	 products	 of
proteins	 and	 fats.	 However,	 roasted,	 broiled,
and	 fried	meats	 develop	 a	 crust	 that	 is	much
more	 intensely	 flavored,	 because	 the	 meat
surface	 dries	 out	 and	 gets	 hot	 enough	 to
trigger	the	Maillard	or	browning	reactions	(p.
778).	Meat	aromas	generated	in	the	browning
reactions	 are	 generally	 small	 rings	 of	 carbon
atoms	with	additions	of	nitrogen,	oxygen,	and
sulfur.	Many	of	these	have	a	generic	“roasted”
character,	but	some	are	grassy,	 floral,	oniony
or	spicy,	and	earthy.	Several	hundred	aromatic
compounds	have	been	found	in	roasted	meats!

Heat	and	Meat	Color



The	appearance	of	meat	changes	in	two
different	ways	during	cooking.	Initially	it’s
somewhat	translucent	because	its	cells	are
filled	with	a	relatively	loose	meshwork	of
proteins	suspended	in	water.	When	heated	to
about	120ºF/50ºC,	it	develops	a	white	opacity
as	heat-sensitive	myosin	denatures	and
coagulates	into	clumps	large	enough	to	scatter
light.	This	change	causes	red	meat	color	to
lighten	from	red	to	pink,	long	before	the	red
pigments	themselves	are	affected.	Then,
around	140ºF/60ºC,	red	myoglobin	begins	to
denature	into	a	tan-colored	version	called
hemichrome.	As	this	change	proceeds,	meat
color	shifts	from	pink	to	brown-gray.

The	denaturation	of	myoglobin	parallels
the	denaturation	of	fiber	proteins,	and	this
makes	it	possible	to	judge	the	doneness	of
fresh	meat	by	color.	Little-cooked	meat	and
its	juices	are	red,	moderately	cooked	meat	and
its	juices	are	pink,	thoroughly	cooked	meat	is
brown-gray	and	its	juices	clear.	(Intact	red



myoglobin	can	escape	in	the	meat	juices;
denatured	brown	myoglobin	has	bonded	to
other	coagulated	proteins	in	the	cells	and
stays	there.)	However,	there	are	a	number	of
oddities	about	myoglobin	that	can	lead	to
misleading	redness	or	pinkness	even	in	well-
cooked	meat	(see	box).	And	it’s	also	possible
for	undercooked	meat	to	look	brown	and	well-
done,	if	its	myoglobin	has	already	been
denatured	by	prolonged	exposure	to	light	or	to
freezing	temperatures.	If	it’s	essential	that
meat	be	cooked	to	microbe-destroying
temperatures,	then	the	cook	should	use	an
accurate	thermometer	to	confirm	that	it	has
reached	a	minimum	of	160ºF/70ºC.	Meat
color	can	be	misleading.

The	pigments	in	cooked	and	cured	meats.	Left
to	 right:	In	 raw	 meat,	 the	 oxygen-carrying
myoglobin	 is	 red;	 in	 cooked	 meat,	 the



oxidized,	 denatured	 form	 of	 myoglobin	 is
brown;	 in	meats	 cured	with	nitrite,	 including
corned	beef	and	ham,	 the	myoglobin	assumes
a	 stable	 pink	 form	 (NO	 is	 nitric	 oxide,	 a
product	 of	 nitrite);	 and	 in	 uncured	 meats
cooked	in	a	charcoal	grill	or	gas	oven,	traces
of	 carbon	 monoxide	 (CO)	 accumulate	 and
produce	another	stable	pink	form.

Heat	and	Meat	Texture

The	texture	of	a	food	is	created	by	its	physical
structure:	the	way	it	feels	to	the	touch,	the
balance	of	solid	and	liquid	components,	and
the	ease	or	difficulty	with	which	our	teeth
break	it	down	into	manageable	pieces.	The
key	textural	components	in	meat	are	its
moisture,	around	75%	of	its	weight,	and	the
fiber	proteins	and	connective	tissue	that	either
contain	and	confine	that	moisture,	or	release
it.



Raw	 and	 Cooked	 Textures	 The	 texture	 of
raw	 meat	 is	 a	 kind	 of	 slick,	 resistant
mushiness.	The	meat	is	chewy	yet	soft,	so	that
chewing	 compresses	 it	 instead	 of	 cutting
through	it.	And	its	moisture	manifests	itself	in
slipperiness;	 chewing	 doesn’t	 manage	 to
liberate	much	juice.

Heat	changes	meat	texture	drastically.	As
it	cooks,	meat	develops	a	firmness	and
resilience	that	make	it	easier	to	chew.	It
begins	to	leak	fluid,	and	becomes	juicy.	With
longer	cooking,	the	juices	dry	up,	and
resilience	gives	way	to	a	dry	stiffness.	And
when	the	cooking	goes	on	for	hours,	the	fiber
bundles	fray	away	from	each	other,	and	even
tough	meat	begins	to	fall	apart.	All	of	these
textures	are	stages	in	the	denaturation	of	the
fiber	and	connective-tissue	proteins.

Persistent	Colors	in	Cooked	Meats
Thoroughly	cooked	meat	 is	usually	a	dull,
brownish-gray	 in	 appearance	 due	 to	 the



denaturing	 of	 its	 myoglobin	 and
cytochrome	 pigments.	 But	 two	 cooking
methods	 can	 leave	 well-done	 meat
attractively	red	or	pink.
Barbecued	meat,	stew	meat,	a	pot	roast,
or	a	confit	can	be	surprisingly	pink	or	red
inside	—	if	it	was	heated	very	gradually
and	gently.	Myoglobin	and	cytochromes
can	survive	somewhat	higher
temperatures	than	the	other	muscle
proteins.	When	meat	is	heated	quickly,
its	temperature	rises	quickly,	and	some
of	the	muscle	proteins	are	still	unfolding
and	denaturing	when	the	pigments	begin
to	do	the	same.	The	other	proteins	are
therefore	able	to	react	with	the	pigments
and	turn	them	brown.	But	when	meat	is
heated	slowly,	so	that	it	takes	an	hour	or
two	to	reach	the	denaturing	temperature
for	myoglobin	and	cytochromes,	the
other	proteins	finish	denaturing	first,	and
react	with	each	other.	By	the	time	that



the	pigments	become	vulnerable,	there
are	few	other	proteins	left	to	react	with
them,	so	they	stay	intact	and	the	meat
stays	red.	The	preliminary	salting	for
making	a	confit	(p.	177)	greatly
accentuates	this	effect	in	duck	meat.
Meats	cooked	over	wood,	charcoal,	or
gas	flames	—	barbecued	pork	or	beef,	for
example,	or	even	poultry	cooked	in	a	gas
oven	—	often	develop	“pink	ring,”	which
reaches	from	the	surface	to	a	depth	of	8–
10	mm.	This	is	caused	by	nitrogen
dioxide	(NO2)	gas,	which	is	generated	in
trace	amounts	(parts	per	million)	by	the
burning	of	these	organic	fuels.	It	appears
that	NO2	dissolves	at	the	meat	surface	to
form	nitrous	acid	(HNO2),	which	diffuses
into	the	muscle	tissue	and	is	converted	to
nitric	oxide	(NO).	NO	in	turn	reacts	with
myoglobin	to	form	a	stable	pink
molecule,	like	the	molecule	found	in
nitrite-cured	meats	(p.	174).



Early	Juiciness:	Fibers	Coagulate	One	of
the	two	major	contracting	filaments,	the
protein	myosin,	begins	to	coagulate	at	about
120ºF/50ºC;	this	lends	each	cell	some	solidity
and	the	meat	some	firmness.	As	the	myosin
molecules	bond	to	each	other,	they	squeeze
out	some	of	the	water	molecules	that	had
separated	them.	This	water	collects	around	the
solidifying	protein	core,	and	is	actively
squeezed	out	of	the	cell	by	its	thin,	elastic
sheath	of	connective	tissue.	In	intact	muscles,
juices	break	through	weak	spots	in	the	fiber
sheaths.	In	chops	and	steaks,	which	are	thin
slices	of	whole	muscles,	it	also	escapes	out
the	cut	ends	of	the	fibers.	Meat	served	at	this
stage,	the	equivalent	of	rare,	is	firm	and	juicy.

Final	 Juiciness:	 Collagen	 Shrinks	 As	 the
meat’s	temperature	rises	to	140ºF/60ºC,	more
of	 the	 proteins	 inside	 its	 cells	 coagulate	 and
the	cells	become	more	segregated	into	a	solid
core	of	 coagulated	protein	 and	 a	 surrounding



tube	of	liquid:	so	the	meat	gets	progressively
firmer	 and	 moister.	 Then	 between	 140	 and
150ºF/60–65ºC,	 the	 meat	 suddenly	 releases
lots	of	juice,	shrinks	noticeably,	and	becomes
chewier.	 These	 changes	 are	 caused	 by	 the
denaturing	 of	 collagen	 in	 the	 cells’
connective-tissue	 sheaths,	 which	 shrink	 and
exert	 new	 pressure	 on	 the	 fluid-filled	 cells
inside	 them.	 The	 fluid	 flows	 copiously,	 the
piece	 of	 meat	 loses	 a	 sixth	 or	 more	 of	 its
volume,	 and	 its	 protein	 fibers	 become	 more
densely	packed	and	 so	harder	 to	 cut	 through.
Meat	 served	 in	 this	 temperature	 range,	 the
equivalent	 of	medium-rare,	 is	 changing	 from
juicy	to	dry.

Falling-Apart	 Tenderness:	 Collagen
Becomes	 Gelatin	 If	 the	 cooking	 continues,
the	 meat	 will	 get	 progressively	 dryer,	 more
compacted,	 and	 stiff.	 Then	 around
160ºF/70ºC,	connective-tissue	collagen	begins
to	 dissolve	 into	 gelatin.	 With	 time,	 the



connective	 tissue	 softens	 to	 a	 jelly-like
consistency,	and	the	muscle	fibers	 that	 it	had
held	 tightly	 together	 are	 more	 easily	 pushed
apart.	 The	 fibers	 are	 still	 stiff	 and	 dry,	 but
they	no	longer	form	a	monolithic	mass,	so	the
meat	 seems	 more	 tender.	 And	 the	 gelatin
provides	 a	 succulence	of	 its	 own.	This	 is	 the
delightful	texture	of	slow-cooked	meats,	long
braises,	and	stews	and	barbecues.

How	 cooking	 forces	 moisture	 from	 meat.
Water	molecules	are	bound	up	 in	 the	protein
fibrils	that	fill	each	muscle	cell.	As	the	meat	is
heated,	 the	 proteins	 coagulate,	 the	 fibrils
squeeze	 out	 some	 of	 the	 water	 they	 had
contained	and	shrink.	The	thin	elastic	sheet	of
connective	 tissue	 around	 each	 muscle	 cell
then	 squeezes	 the	 unbound	water	 out	 the	 cut



ends	of	the	cells.

The	Challenge	of	Cooking
Meat:	The	Right	Texture

Generally,	we	like	meat	to	be	tender	and	juicy
rather	than	tough	and	dry.	The	ideal	method
for	cooking	meat	would	therefore	minimize
moisture	loss	and	compacting	of	the	meat
fibers,	while	maximizing	the	conversion	of
tough	connective-tissue	collagen	to	fluid
gelatin.	Unfortunately,	these	two	aims
contradict	each	other.	Minimizing	fiber
firming	and	moisture	loss	means	cooking
meat	quickly	to	no	hotter	than	130–140ºF/55–
60ºC.	But	turning	collagen	to	gelatin	requires
prolonged	cooking	at	160ºF/70ºC	and	above.
So	there	is	no	ideal	cooking	method	for	all
meats.	The	method	must	be	tailored	to	the
meat’s	toughness.	Tender	cuts	are	best	heated
rapidly	and	just	to	the	point	that	their	juices
are	in	full	flow.	Grilling,	frying,	and	roasting



are	the	usual	fast	methods.	Tough	cuts	are
best	heated	for	a	prolonged	period	at
temperatures	approaching	the	boil,	usually	by
stewing,	braising,	or	slow-roasting.

It’s	Easy	to	Overcook	Tender	Meat	Cooking
tender	 meat	 to	 perfection	 —	 so	 that	 its
internal	 temperature	 is	 just	what	we	want	—
is	 a	 real	 challenge.	 Imagine	 that	 we	 grill	 a
thick	 steak	 just	 to	medium	 rare,	 140ºF/60ºC,
at	 the	 center.	 Its	 surface	 will	 have	 dried	 out
enough	 to	 get	 hotter	 than	 the	 boiling	 point,
and	 in	 between	 the	 center	 and	 surface,	 the
meat	 temperature	 spans	 the	 range	 between
140ºF/60°C	 —	 medium	 rare	 —	 and
212ºF/100°C	—	 cooked	 dry.	 In	 fact	 the	 bulk
of	the	meat	is	overcooked.	And	it	only	takes	a
minute	or	two	to	overshoot	medium	rare	at	the
center	 and	 dry	 out	 the	 whole	 steak,	 because
meat	 is	 cooked	 but	 juicy	 in	 only	 a	 narrow
temperature	 range,	 just	 30ºF/15ºC.	When	 we
grill	 or	 fry	 an	 inch-thick	 steak	 or	 chop,	 the



rate	of	 temperature	 increase	at	 the	center	can
exceed	10ºF/5ºC	per	minute.

Solutions:	 Two-Stage	 Cooking,	 Insulation,
Anticipation	 There	 are	 several	 ways	 to	 give
the	cook	a	larger	window	of	time	for	stopping
the	 cooking,	 and	 to	 obtain	meat	 that	 is	more
evenly	done.

The	most	common	method	is	to	divide	the
cooking	into	two	stages,	an	initial	high-
temperature	surface	browning,	and	a
subsequent	cooking	through	at	a	much	lower
temperature.	The	low	cooking	temperature
means	a	smaller	temperature	difference
between	center	and	surface,	so	that	more	of
the	meat	is	within	a	few	degrees	of	the	center
temperature.	It	also	means	that	the	meat	cooks
more	slowly,	with	a	larger	window	of	time
during	which	the	interior	is	properly	done.

Another	trick	is	to	cover	the	meat	surface
with	another	food,	such	as	strips	of	fat	or
bacon,	batters	and	breadings,	pastry	and	bread



dough.	These	materials	insulate	the	meat
surface	from	direct	cooking	heat	and	slow	the
heat	penetration.

The	Nature	of	Juiciness
Food	 scientists	 who	 have	 studied	 the
subjective	sensation	of	juiciness	find	that	it
consists	 of	 two	 phases:	 the	 initial
impression	of	moisture	as	you	bite	into	the
food,	and	the	continued	release	of	moisture
as	 you	 chew.	 Juiciness	 at	 first	 bite	 comes
directly	 from	 the	 meat’s	 own	 free	 water,
while	 continued	 juiciness	 comes	 from	 the
meat’s	 fat	 and	 flavor,	 both	 of	 which
stimulate	 the	flow	of	our	own	saliva.	This
is	probably	why	well-seared	meat	 is	often
credited	with	 greater	 juiciness	 despite	 the
fact	 that	 searing	 squeezes	 more	 of	 the
meat’s	 own	 juice	 out.	 Above	 all	 else,
searing	 intensifies	 flavor	 by	means	 of	 the
browning	reactions,	and	intense	flavor	gets
our	juices	flowing.



The	Effects	of	Heat	on	Meat	Proteins,
Color,	and	Texture

Cooks	can	also	avoid	zooming	through	the
zone	of	ideal	doneness	by	removing	the	meat
from	the	oven	or	pan	before	it’s	completely
done,	and	relying	on	lingering	afterheat	to
finish	the	cooking	more	gradually,	until	the
surface	cools	enough	to	draw	the	heat	back
out	of	the	meat	interior.	The	extent	of
afterheating	depends	on	the	meat’s	weight,
shape,	and	center	temperature,	and	the
cooking	temperature,	and	can	range	from	a
negligible	few	degrees	in	a	thin	cut	to
20ºF/10ºC	in	a	large	roast.



Knowing	When	to	Stop	Cooking	The	key	to
cooking	 meat	 properly	 is	 knowing	 when	 to
stop.	 Cookbooks	 are	 full	 of	 formulas	 for
obtaining	 a	 given	 doneness	 —	 so	 many
minutes	 per	 pound	 or	 per	 inch	 thickness	 —
but	 these	 are	 at	 best	 rough	 approximations.
There	 are	 a	 number	 of	 unpredictable	 and
significant	 factors	 that	 they	 just	 can’t	 take
into	account.	Cooking	time	is	affected	by	the
meat’s	 starting	 temperature,	 the	 true
temperatures	 of	 frying	 pans	 and	 ovens,	 and
the	number	of	times	the	meat	is	flipped	or	the
oven	 door	 opened.	 The	 meat’s	 fat	 content
matters,	 because	 fat	 is	 less	 conductive	 than
the	muscle	fibers:	fatty	cuts	cook	more	slowly
than	 lean	ones.	Bones	make	a	difference	 too.
The	 ceramic-like	 minerals	 in	 bone	 give	 it
double	 the	 heat	 conductivity	 of	meat,	 but	 its
frequently	 honeycombed,	 hollow	 structure
generally	 slows	 its	 transfer	 of	 heat	 and	 turns
bone	 into	 an	 insulator.	 This	 is	 why	 meat	 is
often	 said	 to	 be	 “tender	 at	 the	 bone,”	 more



succulent	 there	 because	 less	 thoroughly
cooked.	Finally,	cooking	time	depends	on	how
the	meat’s	surface	is	treated.	Naked	or	basted
meat	 evaporates	 moisture	 from	 its	 surface,
which	cools	the	meat	and	slows	cooking,	but	a
layer	of	fat	or	a	film	of	oil	forms	a	barrier	to
such	 evaporation	 and	 can	 cut	 cooking	 times
by	a	fifth.

With	so	many	variables	affecting	cooking
time,	it’s	clear	that	no	formula	or	recipe	can
predict	it	infallibly.	It’s	up	to	the	cook	to
monitor	the	cooking	and	decide	when	it
should	stop.

Judging	 Doneness	 The	 best	 instruments	 for
monitoring	 the	 doneness	 of	 meat	 remain	 the
cook’s	 eye	 and	 finger.	 Measuring	 internal
temperature	 with	 a	 thermometer	 works	 well
for	 roasts	 but	 not	 for	 smaller	 cuts.	 (Standard
kitchen	 thermometers	 register	 temperature
along	an	 inch	span	of	 their	 thick	metal	shaft,
not	 just	 at	 the	 tip.	 Dial	 thermometers	 also



require	 frequent	 recalibration	 to	 maintain
their	accuracy.)	The	simplest	way	to	be	sure	is
to	 cut	 into	 the	meat	 and	 check	 its	 color	 (the
loss	of	fluid	is	local	and	minor).

The	 influence	 of	 cooking	 temperature	 on	 the
evenness	 of	 cooking.	 Left:	In	 meat	 cooked
through	 over	 high	 heat,	 the	 outer	 layer	 gets
overcooked	 while	 the	 center	 reaches	 the
desired	 temperature. 	 Right:	In	 meat	 cooked
through	 over	 low	 heat,	 the	 outer	 layers	 get
less	overcooked,	and	 the	meat	 is	more	evenly
done.

Most	professional	cooks	still	evaluate
meats	by	their	“feel”	and	by	the	way	their
juices	flow:

Bleu	meat,	cooked	at	the	surface	but	just
warmed	within,	remains	relatively
unchanged	—	soft	to	the	touch,	like	the
muscle	between	thumb	and	forefinger



when	it’s	completely	relaxed,	with	little
or	no	colored	juice	(some	colorless	fat
may	melt	out).
Rare	meat,	some	of	whose	protein	has
coagulated,	is	more	resilient	when	poked
with	the	finger	—	like	the	thumb-
forefinger	muscle	when	the	two	digits	are
stretched	apart	—	and	red	juice	begins	to
appear	at	the	surface.	To	some	people
this	is	meat	at	its	most	succulent;	to
others	it	is	still	raw,	“bloody”	(though
the	juices	are	not	blood),	and	potentially
hazardous.
Medium-done	meat,	whose	connective-
tissue	collagen	has	shrunk,	is	more	firm
—	like	the	thumb-forefinger	muscle
when	the	two	digits	are	squeezed
together	—	and	squeezes	droplets	of	red
juice	to	steak	and	chop	surfaces,	while
the	interior	pales	to	pink.	Most	but	not
all	microbes	are	killed	in	this	range.
Well-done	meat,	nearly	all	its	proteins



denatured,	is	frankly	stiff	to	the	touch,
little	juice	is	apparent,	and	both	juice	and
interior	are	a	dull	tan	or	gray.	Microbes
are	dead,	and	many	meat	lovers	would
say	that	the	meat	is	too.	However,
prolonged,	gentle	cooking	will	loosen	the
connective-tissue	harness	and	bring	back
a	degree	of	tenderness.

Meat	Doneness	and	Safety

As	we’ve	seen,	meats	inevitably	harbor
bacteria,	and	it	takes	temperatures	of
160ºF/70ºC	or	higher	to	guarantee	the	rapid
destruction	of	the	bacteria	that	can	cause
human	disease	—	temperatures	at	which	meat
is	well-done	and	has	lost	much	of	its
moisture.	So	is	eating	juicy,	pink-red	meat
risky?	Not	if	the	cut	is	an	intact	piece	of
healthy	muscle	tissue,	a	steak	or	chop,	and	its
surface	has	been	thoroughly	cooked:	bacteria
are	on	the	meat	surfaces,	not	inside.	Ground



meats	are	riskier,	because	the	contaminated
meat	surface	is	broken	into	small	fragments
and	spread	throughout	the	mass.	The	interior
of	a	raw	hamburger	usually	does	contain
bacteria,	and	is	safest	if	cooked	well	done.
Raw	meat	dishes	—	steak	tartare	and
carpaccio	—	should	be	prepared	only	at	the
last	minute	from	cuts	carefully	trimmed	of
their	surfaces.

Making	a	Safer	Rare	Hamburger	 One	way
to	 enjoy	 a	 less	 risky	 rare	 hamburger	 is	 to
grind	 the	 meat	 yourself	 after	 a	 quick
treatment	that	will	kill	surface	bacteria.	Bring
a	large	pot	of	water	to	a	rolling	boil,	immerse
the	 pieces	 of	 meat	 in	 the	 water	 for	 30–60
seconds,	 then	 remove,	drain	 and	pat	 dry,	 and
grind	 in	 a	 scrupulously	 clean	 meat	 grinder.
The	 blanching	 kills	 surface	 bacteria	 while
overcooking	 only	 the	 outer	 1–2	 millimeters,
which	 grinding	 then	 disperses	 invisibly
throughout	the	rest	of	the	meat.



Now	 that	 we	 understand	 the	 basic	 nature	 of
heat	and	how	it	moves	into	and	through	meat,
let’s	survey	 the	common	methods	of	cooking
meat	and	how	to	make	the	best	of	them.

Cooking	Fresh	Meat:
The	Methods

Many	traditional	meat	recipes	were	developed
at	a	time	when	meats	came	from	mature,	fatty
animals,	and	so	were	fairly	tolerant	of
overcooking.	Fat	coats	and	lubricates	meat
fibers	during	cooking,	and	stimulates	the	flow
of	saliva	and	creates	the	sensation	of	juiciness
no	matter	how	dry	the	meat	fibers	themselves
have	become.	Recipes	for	hours-long	braising
or	stewing	were	developed	for	mature	animals
with	substantially	cross-linked	collagen	that
took	a	long	time	to	dissolve	into	gelatin.
However,	today’s	industrially	produced	meats
come	from	relatively	young	animals	with
more	soluble	collagen	and	with	far	less	fat;



they	cook	quickly,	and	suffer	more	from
overcooking.	Grilled	chops	and	steaks	may	be
just	right	at	the	center	but	dry	elsewhere;
long-braised	pot	roasts	and	stews	are	often	dry
throughout.

The	cook’s	margin	of	error	in	cooking
meat	is	narrower	than	it	used	to	be.	So	it’s
more	useful	than	ever	to	understand	how	the
various	methods	for	cooking	meat	work,	and
how	best	to	apply	them	to	the	meat	of	the	21st
century.

Modifying	Texture	Before
and	After	Cooking

There	are	a	number	of	traditional	techniques
that	tenderize	tough	meat	before	cooking,	so
that	the	cooking	itself,	and	the	drying	of	the
muscle	fibers,	can	be	minimized.	The	most
straightforward	of	these	is	to	damage	the	meat
structure	physically,	to	fragment	the	muscle
fibers	and	connective-tissue	sheets	by



pounding,	cutting,	or	grinding.	Pieces	of	veal
pounded	into	sheets	(escalopes,	scallopini)
are	both	tenderized	and	made	so	thin	that	they
cook	through	in	a	moisture-sparing	minute	or
two.	Grinding	the	meat	into	small	pieces
creates	an	entirely	different	sort	of	texture:
the	gently	gathered	ground	beef	in	a	good
hamburger	has	a	delicate	quality	quite	unlike
even	a	tender	steak.

A	traditional	and	labor-intensive	French
method	for	modifying	tough	meat	is	larding,
the	insertion	of	slivers	of	pork	fat	into	the
meat	by	means	of	hollow	needles.	In	addition
to	augmenting	the	meat’s	fat	content,	larding
also	breaks	some	fibers	and	connective-tissue
sheets.

Marinades	 Marinades	 are	 acidic	 liquids,
originally	 vinegar	 and	 now	 including	 such
ingredients	 as	 wine,	 fruit	 juices,	 buttermilk,
and	yogurt,	in	which	the	cook	immerses	meat
for	 hours	 to	 days	 before	 cooking.	 They	 have



been	used	since	Renaissance	times,	when	their
primary	function	was	to	slow	spoilage	and	to
provide	 flavor.	 Today,	 meats	 are	 marinated
primarily	 to	 flavor	 them	 and	 to	 make	 them
more	 moist	 and	 tender.	 Perhaps	 the	 most
common	 marinated	 meat	 dish	 is	 a	 stew,	 for
which	 the	meat	 is	 immersed	 in	 a	mixture	 of
wine	and	herbs	and	then	cooked	in	it.

The	acid	in	marinades	does	weaken	muscle
tissue	and	increase	its	ability	to	retain
moisture.	But	marinades	penetrate	slowly,	and
can	give	the	meat	surface	an	overly	sour
flavor	while	they	do	so.	The	penetration	time
can	be	reduced	by	cutting	meat	into	thin
pieces	or	by	using	a	cooking	syringe	to	inject
the	marinade	into	larger	pieces.

Meat	 Tenderizers	 Meat	 tenderizers	 are
protein-digesting	 enzymes	 extracted	 from	 a
number	 of	 plants,	 including	 papaya,
pineapple,	 fig,	 kiwi,	 and	 ginger.	 They	 are
available	either	in	the	original	fruit	or	leaf,	or



purified	and	powdered	for	 the	shaker,	diluted
in	salt	and	sugar.	(Despite	lore	to	the	contrary,
wine	corks	do	not	contain	active	enzymes	and
don’t	tenderize	octopus	or	other	tough	meats!)
The	 enzymes	 act	 slowly	 at	 refrigerator	 or
room	temperature,	and	some	five	times	faster
between	140	and	160ºF/60–70ºC,	so	nearly	all
the	 tenderizing	 action	 takes	 place	 during
cooking.	The	problem	with	tenderizers	is	that
they	 penetrate	 into	 meat	 even	 more	 slowly
than	acids,	a	few	millimeters	per	day,	so	that
the	 meat	 surface	 tends	 to	 accumulate	 too
much	and	get	overly	mealy,	while	the	interior
remains	 unaffected.	 The	 distribution	 can	 be
improved	by	 injecting	 the	 tenderizer	 into	 the
meat.

Brining	The	tendency	of	modern	meats	to	dry
out	 led	 cooks	 to	 rediscover	 light	 brining,	 a
traditional	 method	 in	 Scandinavia	 and
elsewhere.	 The	 meats,	 typically	 poultry	 or
pork,	are	immersed	in	a	brine	containing	3	to



6%	 salt	 by	 weight	 for	 anywhere	 from	 a	 few
hours	 to	 two	 days	 (depending	 on	 thickness)
before	being	cooked	as	usual.	They	come	out
noticeably	juicier.

Brining	has	two	initial	effects.	First,	salt
disrupts	the	structure	of	the	muscle	filaments.
A	3%	salt	solution	(2	tablespoons	per	quart/30
gm	per	liter)	dissolves	parts	of	the	protein
structure	that	supports	the	contracting
filaments,	and	a	5.5%	solution	(4	tablespoons
per	quart/60	gm	per	liter)	partly	dissolves	the
filaments	themselves.	Second,	the	interactions
of	salt	and	proteins	result	in	a	greater	water-
holding	capacity	in	the	muscle	cells,	which
then	absorb	water	from	the	brine.	(The	inward
movement	of	salt	and	water	and	disruptions	of
the	muscle	filaments	into	the	meat	also
increase	its	absorption	of	aromatic	molecules
from	any	herbs	and	spices	in	the	brine.)	The
meat’s	weight	increases	by	10%	or	more.
When	cooked,	the	meat	still	loses	around	20%
of	its	weight	in	moisture,	but	this	loss	is



counter-balanced	by	the	brine	absorbed,	so	the
moisture	loss	is	effectively	cut	in	half.	In
addition,	the	dissolved	protein	filaments	can’t
coagulate	into	normally	dense	aggregates,	so
the	cooked	meat	seems	more	tender.	Because
the	brine	works	its	way	in	from	the	outside,	it
has	its	earliest	and	strongest	effects	on	the
meat	region	most	likely	to	be	overcooked,	so
even	a	brief,	incomplete	soaking	can	make	a
difference.

The	obvious	disadvantage	of	brining	is	that
it	makes	both	the	meat	and	its	drippings	quite
salty.	Some	recipes	balance	the	saltiness	by
including	sugar	or	such	ingredients	as	fruit
juice	or	buttermilk,	which	provide	both
sweetness	and	sourness.

Shredding	 Even	 if	 a	 tough	 roast	 has	 been
cooked	to	the	point	 that	 it	has	become	tender
but	 unpleasantly	 dry,	 the	 cook	 can	 restore	 a
certain	 succulence	 to	 the	 meat	 by	 pulling	 it
apart	into	small	shreds	and	pouring	over	them



the	meat’s	collected	juices,	or	a	sauce.	A	film
of	 liquid	 clings	 to	 the	 surface	 of	 each	 shred
and	thus	coats	many	fibers	with	some	of	their
lost	 moisture.	 The	 finer	 the	 shredding,	 the
greater	the	surface	that	can	take	up	liquid,	and
the	 moister	 the	 meat	 will	 seem.	 When
“pulled”	 meat	 and	 sauce	 are	 very	 hot,	 the
sauce	 is	 more	 fluid	 and	 tends	 to	 run	 off	 the
shreds;	 when	 cooler,	 the	 sauce	 becomes
thicker	 and	 clings	 more	 tenaciously	 to	 the
meat.

Flames,	Glowing	Coals,
and	Coils

Fire	and	red-hot	coals	were	probably	the	first
heat	sources	used	to	cook	meat,	and	thanks	to
temperatures	high	enough	to	generate
browning-reaction	aromas,	they	can	produce
the	most	flavorful	results.	But	this	“primitive”
method	takes	some	care	to	get	a	juicy	interior
underneath	the	delicious	crust.



Aids	to	Successful	Grilling	and	Frying:
Warm	Meat	and	Frequent	Flips

Because	 grilling	 and	 frying	 involve	 high
heat,	 they	 tend	 to	 overcook	 the	 outer
portions	 of	 meat	 while	 the	 interior	 cooks
through.	 This	 overcooking	 can	 be
minimized	 in	 two	 ways:	 prewarming	 the
meat,	and	flipping	it	frequently.
The	warmer	the	meat	starts	out,	the	less
time	it	takes	to	cook	through,	and	so	the
less	time	the	outer	layers	are	exposed	to
high	heat.	The	cooking	and	overcooking
time	can	be	reduced	by	a	third	or	more
by	wrapping	steaks	and	chops,
immersing	them	for	30–60	minutes	in
warm	water,	so	that	they	approach	body
temperature,	100ºF/40ºC,	and	then
cooking	immediately	(bacteria	grow
quickly	on	warm	meat).
How	often	should	the	cook	turn	a	steak	or
hamburger	when	grilling	or	frying?	If



perfect	grill	marks	are	necessary,	once	or
twice.	If	texture	and	moistness	are	more
important,	then	flip	every	minute.
Frequent	turns	mean	that	neither	side	has
the	time	either	to	absorb	or	to	release
large	amounts	of	heat.	The	meat	cooks
faster,	and	its	outer	layers	end	up	less
overdone.

Grilling	and	Broiling	The	term	“grilling”	is
generally	used	to	mean	cooking	meat	on	a
metal	grate	directly	over	the	heat	source,
while	“broiling”	means	cooking	meat	in	a	pan
below	the	heat	source.	The	heat	source	may	be
glowing	coals,	an	open	gas	flame,	or	ceramic
blocks	heated	by	a	gas	flame,	or	a	glowing
electrical	element.	The	primary	means	of	heat
transfer	is	infrared	radiation,	the	direct
emission	of	energy	in	the	form	of	light:	hence
the	glow	of	coals,	flames,	and	heating
elements	(p.	781).	The	meat	surface	is	only	a
few	inches	away	from	the	heat,	which	is	very



hot	indeed:	gas	burns	at	around
3,000ºF/1,650ºC,	coals	and	electrical	elements
glow	at	2,000ºF/1,100ºC.	Because	these
temperatures	can	blacken	food	surfaces	before
the	inside	is	cooked	through,	grilling	is
limited	to	such	relatively	thin	and	tender	cuts
as	chops,	steaks,	poultry	parts,	and	fish.

The	most	flexible	grill	arrangement	is	a
dense	bed	of	glowing	coals	or	high	gas	flame
under	one	area	for	surface	browning,	sparser
coals	or	a	lower	gas	flame	under	another	for
cooking	through,	and	the	distance	between
meat	and	fire	an	inch	or	two.	The	meat	is
cooked	over	high	heat	to	brown	each	side	well
but	as	briefly	as	possible,	in	two	or	three
minutes,	and	then	moved	to	the	cooler	area	to
heat	through	gently	and	evenly.

Spit-Roasting	Spit-roasting	—	impaling	meat
on	 a	 metal	 or	 wood	 spike	 and	 turning	 it
continuously	near	the	radiating	heat	source	—
is	 best	 suited	 to	 large,	 bulky	 cuts,	 including



roasts	and	whole	animals.	It	exposes	the	meat
surface	to	browning	temperatures,	but	 it	does
so	 both	 evenly	 and	 intermittently.	 Each	 area
receives	an	intense,	browning	blast	of	infrared
radiation,	but	only	 for	a	 few	seconds.	During
the	many	seconds	when	it	faces	away	from	the
heat,	the	hot	surface	gives	up	much	of	its	heat
to	 the	 air,	 so	 only	 a	 fraction	 of	 each	 blast
penetrates	 into	 the	 meat,	 and	 the	 interior
therefore	 cooks	 through	 relatively	 gently.	 In
addition,	 the	 constant	 rotation	 causes	 the
juices	 to	 cling	 to	 and	 travel	 around	 the	meat
surface,	 basting	 and	 coating	 it	 with	 proteins
and	sugars	for	the	browning	reactions.

The	full	advantages	of	spit	roasting	are
obtained	when	the	roasting	is	done	in	the	open
air,	or	in	an	oven	with	the	door	ajar.	A	closed
oven	quickly	heats	up	to	baking	temperatures,
and	the	meat	will	accordingly	heat	through
less	gently.

Barbecuing	 This	 distinctively	 American



cooking	method	took	its	modern	form	about	a
century	 ago.	 Barbecuing	 is	 the	 low-
temperature,	slow	heating	of	meat	in	a	closed
chamber	by	means	of	hot	air	from	smoldering
wood	coals.	It’s	an	outdoor	cousin	to	the	slow
oven	 roast,	 and	 produces	 smoky,	 fall-apart
tender	meat.

Modern	barbecuing	devices	allow	the	cook
to	control	the	amount	of	heat	and	smoke
produced,	and	facilitate	periodic	basting	with
a	wide	range	of	sauces,	most	of	them	spicy
and	vinegary,	to	intensify	flavor,	moisten	the
meat	surface,	and	further	slow	the	cooking.	In
the	best	devices,	the	wood	is	burned	in	one
chamber	and	the	meat	cooked	in	a	second
connected	chamber,	so	that	there’s	no	direct
radiation	from	the	coals,	and	only	the
relatively	cool	smoke	(around	200ºF/90ºC)
transfers	heat,	inefficiently	and	therefore
gently.	It	takes	several	hours	to	bring	large
cuts	of	meat	—	slabs	of	ribs,	pork	shoulders
and	legs,	beef	briskets	—	to	an	internal



temperature	of	165–70ºF/75ºC,	and	a	whole
hog	will	take	18	hours	or	more.	These	are
ideal	conditions	for	the	tenderizing	of	tough,
inexpensive	cuts.

Food	Words:	Barbecue
The	 term	barbecue	 comes	via	 the	Spanish
barbacoa	 from	 the	 West	 Indies,	 and	 a
Taino	 word	 that	 meant	 a	 framework	 of
green	sticks	suspended	on	corner	posts,	on
which	meat,	fish,	and	other	foods	were	laid
and	cooked	in	the	open	over	fire	and	coals.
Both	 the	 height	 and	 the	 fire	 were
adjustable,	so	food	could	either	be	quickly
grilled	 or	 slowly	 smoked	 and	 dried.	 In
American	colonial	times	the	barbecue	was
a	popular	and	festive	bout	of	mass	outdoor
meat	cooking.	By	the	beginning	of	the	20th
century	 it	 had	 evolved	 into	 the	 familiar
slow	cooking	of	highly	flavored	meat.
Many	barbecued	meats	end	up	with	a

“smoke	ring,”	a	permanent	pink	or	red	zone



under	the	surface	(p.	149).

Hot	Air	and	Walls:
Oven	“Roasting”

In	contrast	to	the	grill,	the	oven	is	an	indirect
and	more	uniform	means	of	cooking.	The
primary	heat	source,	whether	flame,	coil,	or
coal,	heats	the	oven,	and	the	oven	then	heats
the	food	from	all	sides,	by	means	of
convection	currents	of	hot	air	and	infrared
radiation	from	the	oven	walls	(p.	784).	Oven
heating	is	a	relatively	slow	method,	well
suited	to	large	cuts	of	meat	that	take	time	to
heat	through.	Its	efficiency	is	especially
influenced	by	the	cooking	temperature,	which
can	be	anything	from	200	up	to	500ºF/95–
260ºC	and	above.	Cooking	times	range	from
60	to	10	(or	fewer)	minutes	per	pound/500
gm.

Low	 Oven	 Temperatures	 At	 low	 oven



temperatures,	 below	 250ºF/125ºC,	 the	 moist
meat	 surface	 dries	 very	 slowly.	As	 moisture
evaporates,	 it	 actually	 cools	 the	 surface,	 so
despite	 the	 oven	 temperature,	 the	 surface
temperature	 of	 the	 meat	 may	 be	 as	 low	 as
160ºF/70ºC.	 This	 means	 relatively	 little
surface	browning	and	long	cooking	times,	but
also	 very	 gentle	 heating	 of	 the	 interior,
minimal	 moisture	 loss,	 a	 relatively	 uniform
doneness	within	the	meat,	and	a	large	window
of	time	in	which	the	meat	is	properly	done.	In
addition,	 a	 slow	 inner	 temperature	 rise	 to
140ºF/60ºC	 —	 over	 the	 course	 of	 several
hours	 in	 a	 large	 roast	 —	 allows	 the	 meat’s
own	 protein-breaking	 enzymes	 to	 do	 some
tenderizing	 (p.	 144).	 Ovens	 equipped	 with
fans	to	force	the	hot	air	over	the	meat	(“forced
convection”)	improve	surface	browning	at	low
roasting	 temperatures.	 Low-temperature
roasting	 is	 suited	 to	 both	 tender	 cuts,	 whose
moistness	 it	 preserves,	 and	 tough	 cuts	 that
benefit	 from	 long	 cooking	 to	 dissolve



collagen	into	gelatin.

High	 Oven	 Temperatures	 At	 high	 oven
temperatures,	 400ºF/200ºC	 and	 above,	 the
meat	surface	quickly	browns	and	develops	the
characteristic	 roasted	 flavor,	 and	 cooking
times	 are	 short.	On	 the	 other	 hand,	 the	meat
loses	a	 lot	of	moisture,	 its	outer	portions	end
up	much	hotter	than	the	center,	and	the	center
can	 go	 from	 done	 to	 overdone	 in	 just	 a	 few
minutes.

High-temperature	roasting	is	ideal	for
tender	and	relatively	small	cuts	of	meat	that
cook	through	quickly,	and	whose	surface
wouldn’t	have	time	to	brown	without	the
exposure	to	high	heat.

Moderate	 Oven	 Temperatures	 Moderate
temperatures,	 around	 350ºF/175ºC,	 offer	 a
compromise	 that	 produces	 acceptable	 results
with	many	cuts	of	meat.	So	does	a	 two-stage
cooking:	 for	 example,	 starting	 the	 oven	 at	 a
high	 temperature	 for	 an	 initial	 browning	 (or



browning	 the	 meat	 on	 the	 stovetop	 in	 a	 hot
pan),	and	then	turning	the	thermostat	down	to
cook	the	meat	through	more	gently.

The	 Effects	 of	 Shielding	 and	 Basting	 At
moderate	and	hot	oven	temperatures,	the	oven
walls,	ceiling,	and	floor	radiate	heat	energy	in
significant	 amounts.	 This	 means	 that	 if	 an
object	 lies	 between	 the	 food	 and	 one	 of	 the
oven	surfaces,	 the	 food	will	 receive	 less	heat
from	 that	 direction	 and	 will	 cook	 more
slowly.	 This	 shielding	 effect	 can	 be	 both	 a
nuisance	 and	 a	 useful	 tool.	 The	 pan
underneath	 a	 roast	 slows	 the	 heating	 of	 the
roast	 bottom,	 and	 the	 cook	 should	 turn	 the
roast	 periodically	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 top	 and
bottom	 receive	 equal	 amounts	 of	 heat.	 But	 a
sheet	 of	 aluminum	 foil	 deliberately	 placed
over	 the	 meat	 will	 deflect	 a	 substantial
portion	 of	 heat	 energy	 and	 thus	 slow	 the
cooking	 of	 the	 whole	 roast.	 So	 will	 basting
with	 a	 water-containing	 liquid,	 which	 cools



the	meat	surface	as	it	evaporates.

The	 Challenge	 of	 Whole	 Birds	 Chickens,
turkeys,	 and	 other	meat	 birds	 are	 difficult	 to
roast	whole,	 because	 their	 two	kinds	of	meat
are	best	cooked	differently.	The	tender	breast
meat	gets	dry	and	tough	if	heated	much	above
155ºF/68ºC.	The	leg	meat	is	full	of	connective
tissue,	 and	 is	 chewy	 if	 cooked	 to	 less	 than
165ºF/73ºC.	So	usually	the	cook	must	choose:
either	the	leg	meat	is	sufficiently	cooked	and
the	 breast	 meat	 dry,	 or	 the	 breast	 meat
succulent	and	the	leg	meat	gristly.

Cooks	try	to	overcome	this	dilemma	in
many	ways.	They	turn	the	bird	in	various
routines	to	expose	the	thigh	joint	to	more
heat.	They	cover	the	breast	with	foil,	or	with
wet	cheesecloth,	or	strips	of	pork	fat
(“barding”),	or	baste	it,	all	to	slow	its
cooking.	They	cover	the	breast	with	an	ice
pack	and	let	the	bird	sit	at	room	temperature
for	an	hour,	so	that	the	legs	start	the	cooking



warmer	than	the	breast.	They	brine	the	bird	to
juice	up	its	breast.	Perfectionists	cut	the	bird
up	and	roast	legs	and	breasts	separately.

Hot	Metal:	Frying,
or	Sautéing

Simple	frying,	or	sautéing,	cooks	by	the	direct
conduction	of	heat	energy	from	hot	metal	pan
to	meat,	usually	via	a	thin	layer	of	oil	that
prevents	the	meat	from	sticking	and	conducts
heat	evenly	across	minute	gaps	between	meat
and	pan.	Metals	are	the	best	heat	conductors
known,	and	frying	therefore	cooks	the	meat
surface	rapidly.	Its	distinctive	characteristic	is
the	ability	to	brown	and	flavor	the	meat
surface	in	a	matter	of	seconds.	This	searing
action	requires	a	combination	of	heat	source
and	pan	that	can	maintain	a	high	temperature
even	while	the	leaking	meat	juices	are	being
vaporized.	If	the	pan	gets	cool	enough	to	let
moisture	accumulate	—	for	example	because



it	was	insufficiently	preheated,	or	overloaded
with	cold	wet	meat	—	then	the	meat	stews	in
its	own	juices	until	they	boil	off,	and	its
surface	doesn’t	brown	well.	(The	same	thing
will	happen	if	the	pan	is	covered,	so	that	the
water	vapor	is	trapped	and	falls	back	into	the
pan.)	The	appetizing	sizzle	of	frying	meat	is
actually	the	sound	of	moisture	from	the	meat
being	vaporized	as	it	hits	the	hot	metal	pan,
and	cooks	use	this	sound	to	judge	the	pan
temperature.	A	continuous	strong	hiss
indicates	the	immediate	conversion	of
moisture	to	steam	by	a	hot	pan,	and	efficient
surface	browning;	weak	and	irregular
sputtering	indicates	that	the	moisture	is
collecting	in	distinct	droplets,	and	the	pan	is
barely	hot	enough	to	boil	it	off.

Predicting	Roasting	Times
A	number	of	different	guidelines	have	been
proposed	 for	 predicting	how	much	 time	 it
should	take	to	roast	a	given	piece	of	meat.



Minutes	per	inch	thickness	and	minutes	per
pound	 are	 the	 usual	 approximations.
However,	the	mathematics	of	heat	transfer
show	 that	 cooking	 times	 are	 actually
proportional	to	the	thickness	squared,	or	to
the	 weight	to	 the	2/3	 power. 	 And	 the
cooking	 time	 also	 depends	 on	many	 other
factors.	 There	 is	 no	 simple	 and	 accurate
equation	that	can	tell	us	how	long	to	cook	a
particular	 piece	 of	 meat	 in	 our	 particular
kitchen.	The	best	we	can	do	is	monitor	the
actual	 cooking,	 and	 anticipate	 when	 we
should	 stop	 by	 following	 the	 temperature
rise	at	the	center	of	the	meat.

Because	frying	is	a	rapid	cooking	method,	it’s
applied	mainly	to	the	same	thin,	tender	cuts
best	suited	for	grilling	and	broiling.	As	with
grilling,	frying	will	be	both	faster	and	gentler
if	the	meat	starts	at	room	temperature	or
above	and	is	turned	frequently	(see	box,	p.
156).	Cooks	make	frying	even	more	efficient
by	pressing	down	on	the	meat	—	with	the



spatula	or	a	heavy	pan	or	brick	—	to	improve
the	thermal	contact	between	meat	and	pan.
For	thicker	cuts	whose	insides	take	time	to
heat	through,	the	cook	slows	heat	transfer
after	the	initial	browning	to	prevent	the	outer
portions	from	being	overcooked.	This	can	be
done	simply	by	lowering	the	burner	heat,	or
by	shifting	the	pan	to	the	oven,	which
continues	the	heating	from	all	sides	and	frees
the	cook	from	the	necessity	of	turning	the
meat.	Restaurant	cooks	often	“finish”	fried
meats	by	putting	the	pan	in	the	oven	as	soon
as	the	first	side	has	been	browned	and	the
meat	turned.

Hot	Oil:	Shallow
and	Deep	Frying

Fats	and	oils	are	a	useful	cooking	medium
because	they	can	be	heated	to	temperatures
well	above	the	boiling	point	of	water,	and	can
therefore	dry,	crisp,	and	brown	the	food



surface.	In	shallow-fat	frying,	pieces	of	meat
are	cooked	in	enough	melted	fat	or	oil	to
bathe	the	bottom	and	sides	of	the	meat;	in
deep-fat	frying,	there’s	enough	oil	to	immerse
the	meat	completely.	Heat	is	transferred	from
the	pan	to	the	meat	by	way	of	convection
currents	in	the	fat	or	oil.	These	materials	are
less	efficient	than	both	metal	and	water	at
transferring	heat,	and	yet	more	than	twice	as
efficient	as	an	oven.	This	thermal	moderation,
together	with	the	ability	to	contact	the	meat
evenly	and	intimately,	makes	fat	frying	an
especially	versatile	technique.	It’s	used
primarily	for	poultry	and	fish,	everything
from	thin	fillets	and	chicken	breasts	to	whole
15	lb/7	kg	turkeys,	which	take	something	over
an	hour	to	cook	(compared	to	two	or	three
hours	in	the	oven).	The	usual	cooking
temperature	ranges	between	300	and
350ºF/150	and	175ºC.	The	oil	starts	out	near
350º,	cools	when	the	meat	is	introduced	and
its	moisture	begins	to	boil	and	bubble	away,



then	heats	up	again	as	moisture	flow	slows
and	the	burner	heat	catches	up.	The
temperature	is	high	enough	to	dehydrate,
brown,	and	crisp	the	surface,	while	the
gradual	movement	of	heat	into	the	meat	gives
the	cook	a	reasonable	window	of	time	in
which	to	stop	the	cooking	while	the	meat	is
still	moist.

The	Keys	to	Crisp	Skin
One	 of	 the	 special	 pleasures	 of	 a	 well-
cooked	bird	is	its	crisp,	rich	skin.	The	skin
of	birds	and	other	animals	is	mainly	water
(about	 50%),	 fat	 (40%),	 and	 connective-
tissue	collagen	 (3%).	 In	order	 to	crisp	 the
skin,	 the	 cook	 must	 dissolve	 the	 leathery
collagen	 into	 tender	 gelatin	 in	 the	 skin’s
water,	 and	 then	 vaporize	 the	water	 out	 of
the	 skin.	 The	 high	 heat	 of	 a	 hot	 oven	 or
frying	pan	does	this	most	effectively;	slow
cooking	 at	 a	 low	 oven	 temperature	 can
desiccate	 the	 skin	 while	 its	 collagen	 is



intact,	 and	 preserve	 its	 leatheriness.	 A
crisp	 skin	 is	 easier	 to	 obtain	 with	 a	 dry-
processed	 bird	 —	 kosher	 or	 halal,	 for
example	 —	 whose	 skin	 hasn’t	 been
plumped	with	added	water	(p.	143).	It	also
helps	 to	 let	 the	 bird	 air-dry	 uncovered	 in
the	refrigerator	for	a	day	or	two,	and	to	oil
the	 skin	before	 roasting.	 (Oiling	 improves
heat	 transfer	 from	 hot	 oven	 air	 to	 moist
meat.)	 The	 cooked	 bird	 should	 be	 served
promptly,	 since	 crisp	 skin	 quickly
reabsorbs	 moisture	 from	 the	 hot	 meat
beneath,	 and	 becomes	 flabby	 as	 it	 sits	 on
the	plate.
For	some	purposes,	meats	may	be	partly

precooked	at	a	relatively	low	oil	temperature,
and	then	cooked	through	and	browned	at	a
higher	temperature	just	before	serving.	Fast-
food	fried	chicken	is	prepared	in	special
pressure	cookers	(p.	785),	which	fry	at	the
usual	oil	temperatures,	but	raise	the	boiling
point	of	water,	so	that	less	of	the	moisture	in



the	meat	vaporizes	during	the	cooking.	The
result	is	more	rapid	cooking	(less	cooling	by
evaporation)	and	moister	meat.

The	Searing	Question
The	 best-known	 explanation	 of	 a	 cooking
method	 is	 probably	 this	 catchy	 phrase:
“Sear	 the	meat	 to	 seal	 in	 the	 juices.”	The
eminent	German	chemist	Justus	von	Liebig
came	up	with	this	idea	around	1850.	It	was
disproved	 a	 few	 decades	 later.	 Yet	 this
myth	 lives	 on,	 even	 among	 professional
cooks.

Before	 Liebig,	 most	 cooks	 in	 Europe
cooked	 roasts	 through	 at	 some	 distance
from	 the	 fire,	 or	 protected	 by	 a	 layer	 of
greased	 paper,	 and	 then	 browned	 them
quickly	at	the	end.	Juice	retention	was	not
a	 concern.	 But	 Liebig	 thought	 that	 the
water-soluble	 components	 of	 meat	 were
nutritionally	 important,	 so	 it	 was	 worth
minimizing	 their	 loss.	 In	 his	 book



Researches	 on	 the	 Chemistry	 of	 Food,	 he
said	that	this	could	be	done	by	heating	the
meat	 quickly	 enough	 that	 the	 juices	 are
immediately	 sealed	 inside.	 He	 explained
what	 happens	 when	 a	 piece	 of	 meat	 is
plunged	 into	 boiling	 water,	 and	 then	 the
temperature	reduced	to	a	simmer:

When	it	is	introduced	into	the	boiling
water,	the	albumen	immediately	coagulates
from	the	surface	inwards,	and	in	this	state
forms	a	crust	or	shell,	which	no	longer
permits	the	external	water	to	penetrate	into
the	interior	of	the	mass	of	flesh….	The
flesh	retains	its	juiciness,	and	is	quite	as
agreeable	to	the	taste	as	it	can	be	made	by
roasting;	for	the	chief	part	of	the	sapid
[flavorful]	constituents	of	the	mass	is
retained,	under	these	circumstances,	in	the
flesh.
And	if	the	crust	can	keep	water	out	during
boiling,	it	can	keep	the	juices	in	during



roasting,	so	it’s	best	to	sear	the	roast
immediately,	and	then	continue	at	a	lower
temperature	to	finish	the	insides.

Liebig’s	 ideas	 caught	 on	 very	 quickly
among	 cooks	 and	 cookbook	 writers,
including	the	eminent	French	chef	Auguste
Escoffier.	 But	 simple	 experiments	 in	 the
1930s	showed	 that	Liebig	was	wrong.	The
crust	 that	 forms	 around	 the	 surface	 of	 the
meat	 is	 not	 waterproof,	 as	 any	 cook	 has
experienced:	 the	continuing	sizzle	of	meat
in	 the	 pan	 or	 oven	 or	 on	 the	 grill	 is	 the
sound	of	moisture	continually	escaping	and
vaporizing.	 In	 fact,	 moisture	 loss	 is
proportional	 to	 meat	 temperature,	 so	 the
high	heat	 of	 searing	 actually	dries	out	 the
meat	 surface	 more	 than	 moderate	 heat
does.	 But	 searing	 does	 flavor	 the	 meat
surface	 with	 products	 of	 the	 browning
reactions	 (p.	 777),	 and	 flavor	 gets	 our
juices	 flowing.	 Liebig	 and	 his	 followers
were	 wrong	 about	 meat	 juices,	 but	 they



were	 right	 that	 searing	 makes	 delicious
meat.

Breadings	and	Batters	Nearly	all	meats	that
are	shallow-	or	deep-fried	are	coated	with	a
layer	of	dry	breading	or	flour-based	batter
before	they’re	cooked.	These	coatings	do	not
“seal	in”	moisture.	Instead,	they	provide	a
thin	but	critical	layer	of	insulation	that	buffers
the	meat	surface	from	direct	contact	with	the
oil.	The	coating,	not	the	meat,	quickly	dries
out	into	a	pleasingly	crisp	surface,	and	forms
a	poorly	conducting	matrix	of	dry	starch	with
pockets	of	steam	or	immobilized	oil.	Because
rare	meat	that	still	exudes	juice	would	quickly
make	the	crisp	crust	soggy,	oil-fried	meats	are
generally	cooked	until	bubbling	in	the	oil
ceases,	a	sign	that	their	juices	have	ceased	to
flow.

Hot	Water:	Braising,	Stewing,
Poaching,	Simmering



As	a	medium	for	cooking	meat,	water	has
several	advantages.	It	transmits	heat	rapidly
and	evenly;	its	own	temperature	is	easily
adjusted	to	the	cook’s	needs,	and	it	can	carry
and	impart	flavor	and	become	a	sauce.	Unlike
oil,	it	can’t	get	hot	enough	to	generate
browning	flavors	at	the	meat	surface;	but
meats	can	be	prebrowned	and	then	finished	in
water-based	liquids.

There	are	several	names	for	the	simple	and
versatile	method	of	heating	meat	in	these
liquids,	which	may	be	meat	or	vegetable
stock,	milk,	wine	or	beer,	pureed	fruits	or
vegetables.	The	many	variations	involve
differences	in	the	cooking	liquid	used,	the	size
of	the	meat	pieces,	the	relative	proportions	of
meat	and	liquid,	and	initial	precooking.
(Braises	and	pot	roasts	involve	larger	cuts	and
less	liquid	than	do	stews.)	In	all	of	them,
however,	the	key	variable	is	temperature,
which	should	be	kept	well	below	the	boil,
around	180ºF/80ºC,	so	that	the	outer	portions



don’t	overcook	badly.	Many	slow	braises	and
stews	are	cooked	in	a	low	oven,	but	the	usual
temperatures	specified	—	325–350ºF/165–
175ºC	—	are	high	enough	that	they’ll
eventually	raise	the	contents	of	a	covered	pot
to	the	boil.	Unless	the	pot	is	left	uncovered,
which	allows	cooling	evaporation	(and
concentrates	and	creates	flavor	at	the	liquid
surface),	the	oven	temperature	should	be	kept
below	200ºF.	(The	original	braisier	in	France
was	a	closed	pot	sitting	on	and	topped	with	a
few	live	coals.)

Meats	cooked	in	liquid	should	be	allowed
to	cool	in	that	liquid,	and	are	best	served	at
temperatures	well	below	the	cooking
temperature,	around	120ºF/50ºC.	The	capacity
of	the	meat	tissue	to	hold	water	increases	as	it
cools,	so	it	will	actually	reabsorb	some	of	the
liquid	it	lost	during	the	cooking.

Tender	Meats:	Surprisingly	Quick	Cooking
Hot	water	is	such	an	effective	heat	transmitter



that	 it	 cooks	 flat	 tender	 cuts	 of	 meat	 very
quickly.	 Chops,	 chicken	 breasts,	 fish	 steaks
and	 filets	 will	 all	 be	 done	 in	 just	 a	 few
minutes.	 If	 they’re	 browned	 first	 in	 a	 frying
pan	 to	 develop	 flavor,	 they	may	 need	 only	 a
minute	or	 two	 to	 finish	cooking	 through.	For
the	most	consistent	results	with	tender	meats,
bring	 the	 braising	 liquid	 to	 the	 boil,	 add	 the
meat	 to	 destroy	 surface	 bacteria,	 and	 after	 a
few	seconds	add	some	cold	liquid	to	cool	the
pan	 to	 180ºF/80ºC,	 so	 that	 the	 outer	 portions
of	 the	 meat	 won’t	 overheat	 and	 there	 is	 a
broader	 window	 of	 time	 during	 which	 the
center	is	properly	done.	If	the	liquid	needs	to
be	 boiled	 down	 to	 concentrate	 flavor	 or	 to
create	 a	 thicker	 consistency	 for	 a	 sauce,
remove	the	meat	first.

Food	Words:	Poach,	Simmer,	Braise,
Stew

These	 various	 terms	 for	 the	 same	 basic
process	 have	 wildly	 different	 origins.



Poach	is	a	medieval	word	from	the	French
for	the	“pouch”	of	gently	cooked	egg	white
that	 forms	 around	 the	 yolk.	 The	 original
16th-century	 form	 of	simmer	 was	simper,
an	 affected,	 conceited	 facial	 expression,
the	 connection	 possibly	 being	 the	 coy
blinking	 of	 the	 bubbles	 as	 they	 begin	 to
break	 at	 the	 surface.	Braise	 and	stew	 are
both	 18th-century	 borrowings	 from	 the
French,	 the	 first	 coming	 from	 a	 word	 for
“coal,”	 and	 referring	 to	 the	 practice	 of
putting	 coals	 under	 and	 atop	 the	 cooking
pot,	 the	 second	 from	étuve,	meaning	stove
or	heated	room	and	so	a	hot	enclosure.

Tough	and	Large	Cuts:	Slower	Means
Moister	Meats	with	a	significant	amount	of
tough	connective	tissue	must	be	cooked	to	a
minimum	of	160–180ºF/70–80ºC	to	dissolve
their	collagen	into	gelatin,	but	that
temperature	range	is	well	above	the	140–
150ºF/60–65ºC	at	which	the	muscle	fibers	lose
their	juices.	So	it’s	a	challenge	to	make	tough



meats	succulent.	The	key	is	to	cook	slowly,	at
or	just	above	the	collagen-dissolving
minimum,	to	minimize	the	drying-out	of	the
fibers.	The	meat	should	be	checked	regularly
and	taken	off	the	heat	as	soon	as	its	fibers	are
easily	pushed	apart	(“fork	tender”).	The
connective	tissue	itself	can	help,	because	once
dissolved,	its	gelatin	holds	onto	some	of	the
juice	squeezed	from	the	muscle	fibers	and
thus	imparts	a	kind	of	succulence	to	the	meat.
The	shanks,	shoulders,	and	cheeks	of	young
animals	are	rich	in	collagen	and	so	make
fairly	forgiving,	gelatin-thickened	braises.

One	useful	ingredient	in	long-cooked
braises	and	stews	can	be	a	prolonged	time	—
an	hour	or	two	—	during	which	the	cook
carefully	manages	the	meat’s	temperature	rise
up	to	the	simmer.	The	time	that	the	meat
spends	below	120ºF/50ºC	amounts	to	a	period
of	accelerated	aging	that	weakens	the
connective	tissue	and	reduces	the	time	needed
at	fiber-drying	temperatures.	One	sign	that



braised	or	stewed	meat	has	been	heated	very
gently	and	gradually	is	a	distinct	red	color
throughout	the	meat,	even	though	it’s	well
done:	the	same	slow	heating	that	allows	meat
enzymes	to	tenderize	and	flavor	the	meat	also
allows	more	of	the	myoglobin	pigment	to
remain	intact	(p.	149).

Guidelines	for	Succulent	Braises	and
Stews

A	moist,	tender	braise	or	stew	results	from
the	 cook’s	 cumulative	 attention	 to	 several
details	 of	 procedure.	 The	 most	 important
rule:	 never	 let	 the	 meat	 interior	 get
anywhere	near	the	boil.
Keep	the	meat	as	intact	as	possible	to
minimize	cut	surfaces	through	which
fluids	can	escape.
If	the	meat	must	be	cut,	cut	it	into
relatively	large	pieces,	at	least	an
inch/2.5	cm	on	a	side.



Brown	the	meat	very	quickly	in	a	hot	pan
so	that	the	inside	of	the	meat	warms	only
slightly.	This	kills	microbes	on	the	meat
surfaces,	and	creates	flavor.
Start	the	pot	with	meat	and	cooking
liquid	in	a	cold	oven,	the	pot	lid	ajar	to
allow	some	evaporation,	and	set	the
thermostat	to	200ºF/93ºC,	so	that	it	heats
the	stew	to	around	120ºF/50ºC	slowly,
over	two	hours.
Raise	the	oven	temperature	to
250ºF/120ºC	so	that	the	stew	slowly
warms	from	120ºF	to	180ºF/80ºC.
After	an	hour,	check	the	meat	every	half
hour,	and	stop	the	cooking	when	it	is
easily	penetrated	by	the	tines	of	a	fork.
Let	the	meat	cool	in	the	stew,	where	it
will	reabsorb	some	liquid.
The	liquid	will	probably	need	to	be
reduced	by	boiling	to	improve	flavor	and
consistency.	Remove	the	meat	first.

Water	Vapor:	Steaming



Water	Vapor:	Steaming

Steaming	is	by	far	the	fastest	method	for
pouring	heat	into	food,	thanks	to	the	large
amount	of	energy	that	water	vapor	releases
when	it	condenses	into	droplets	on	the	food
surface.	However,	it	works	rapidly	only	as
long	as	the	meat	surface	is	cooler	than	the
boiling	point.	Because	heat	moves	through
meat	more	slowly	than	steam	deposits	it	on
the	surface,	heat	accumulates	at	the	surface,
which	soon	reaches	the	boiling	point,	and	the
heat	transfer	rate	falls	to	a	level	just	sufficient
to	keep	the	surface	at	the	boil.	Though	it	heats
meat	by	means	of	moisture,	steaming	does	not
guarantee	moist	meat.	Muscle	fibers	heated	to
the	boiling	point	shrink	and	squeeze	out	much
of	their	moisture,	and	the	steamy	atmosphere
can’t	replace	it.

Because	steaming	brings	the	meat	surface
to	the	boil	so	quickly,	it’s	a	method	best
suited	to	thin,	tender	cuts	of	meat	that	will
cook	through	quickly	in	just	a	few	minutes,



before	their	outer	portions	become	badly
overcooked	and	dried	out.	Meats	are	often
wrapped	—	in	an	edible	lettuce	or	cabbage
leaf,	an	inedible	but	flavorsome	banana	leaf	or
corn	husk,	or	in	parchment	or	foil	—	to
protect	the	surface	from	the	harsh	steam	heat
and	cook	it	more	gradually.	The	meat	must	be
arranged	on	an	open	rack	in	a	single	layer	or
else	in	separate	tiers;	any	surface	not	exposed
directly	to	the	atmosphere	inside	the	pot	will
cook	much	more	slowly	than	the	rest.	The	pot
should	contain	enough	water	that	it	won’t
cook	dry	as	steam	escapes	around	the	lid.
Herbs	and	spices	are	often	included	in	the
water	to	aromatize	the	meat.

Low-Temperature	 Steam	 When	 steaming,
the	 cook	 usually	 takes	 care	 to	 keep	 the	 lid
tight	 on	 the	 pot	 and	 the	 heat	 high,	 to	 make
sure	that	the	pot	atmosphere	is	saturated	with
vapor.	However	steaming	can	also	be	done	at
reduced	 temperatures	 and	 therefore	 more



gently.	 Water	 at	 a	 180ºF/80ºC	 simmer	 in	 a
covered	 pot	 will	 keep	 the	 pot	 atmosphere
around	 180º	 as	 well,	 and	 leave	 the	 outer
portions	of	 the	meat	 less	overdone.	 In	China,
some	dishes	are	steamed	 in	open	pots,	where
the	 water	 vapor	 mixes	 with	 ambient	 air	 and
the	 temperature	 is	 well	 below	 the	 boil.
Commercial	convection	steamers	can	produce
saturated	 vapor	 all	 the	 way	 from	 body
temperature	to	the	boil.	They	make	it	possible
for	 restaurant	 cooks	 to	 prepare	 moist	 meats
and	 fish	 with	 very	 little	 attention	 and	 keep
them	at	serving	temperature	until	needed.

High-Pressure	 and	 Low-Pressure	 Cooking
While	 conventional	 cooking	 is	 limited	 to	 an
effective	maximum	temperature	of	the	boiling
point	 of	 water	 (p.	 784),	 the	 pressure	 cooker
allows	us	to	raise	that	maximum	from	212	to
250ºF/100	 to	 120ºC.	 It	 does	 so	 by	 tightly
sealing	the	meat	and	cooking	liquid	in	the	pan
and	allowing	the	vaporizing	water	to	build	up



the	 pressure	 to	 about	 double	 the	 normal	 air
pressure	at	 sea	 level.	This	 increased	pressure
increases	 the	boiling	point,	and	high	pressure
and	 temperature	 put	 together	 produce	 an
overall	 doubling	 or	 tripling	 of	 the	 heat
transfer	 rate	 into	 the	 meat,	 as	 well	 as	 an
extremely	 efficient	 conversion	 of	 collagen
into	 gelatin.	 Pot	 roasts	 cook	 in	 less	 than	 an
hour	 instead	 of	 two	 or	 three.	 Of	 course	 the
proteins	 get	 very	 hot	 and	 therefore	 squeeze
out	much	of	their	moisture;	meat	must	be	well
endowed	 with	 fat	 and	 collagen	 to	 end	 up
anything	but	dry.

At	the	other	end	of	the	pressure	scale	is
cooking	at	high	altitude,	where	the
atmospheric	pressure	is	significantly	lower
than	it	is	at	sea	level.	The	boiling	point	of
water	is	also	lower	(203ºF/95ºC	at	mile-high
Denver,	194ºF/90ºC	at	10,000	feet/3,000
meters),	and	meat	cooking	more	gentle	—	and
more	time-consuming.

Microwave	Cooking



Microwave	Cooking

Microwave	cooking	is	neither	dry	nor	a	moist
technique,	but	electromagnetic	(p.	786).	High-
frequency	radio	waves	generated	in	the	oven
cause	electrically	asymmetrical	water
molecules	to	vibrate,	and	these	molecules	in
turn	heat	up	the	rest	of	the	tissue.	Because
radio	waves	penetrate	organic	matter,	the
meat	is	cooked	directly	to	a	depth	of	an	inch
or	so.	Microwave	cooking	is	thus	very	fast,
but	it	also	tends	to	result	in	greater	fluid	loss
than	conventional	means.	Generally,	large
cuts	of	meats	“roasted”	in	the	microwave
oven	get	badly	overcooked	in	the	outer	inch
while	the	interior	cooks	through;	they	end	up
dryer	and	tougher	than	standard	roasts.	Since
the	air	in	the	oven	is	not	heated,	microwave
ovens	can’t	brown	meat	surfaces	unless
they’re	assisted	by	special	packaging	or	a
broiling	element.	(An	exception	to	this	rule	is
cured	meats	like	bacon,	which	get	so	dry	when
cooked	that	they	can	brown.)



More	reliable	results	can	be	obtained	in	the
microwave	oven	when	the	meat	is	immersed
in	some	liquid,	cooked	in	a	loosely	covered
container,	and	checked	carefully	for	signs	of
proper	doneness.	There’s	some	evidence	that
microwaves	are	unusually	effective	at
dissolving	collagen	into	gelatin.

After	the	Cooking:
Resting,	Carving,	and	Serving

A	meat	dish	can	be	cooked	perfectly	and	yet
disappoint	if	it’s	mishandled	on	the	way	to	the
table.	Large	oven	roasts	should	be	allowed	to
rest	on	the	countertop	for	at	least	a	half	hour
before	carving,	not	only	to	allow	the
“afterheat”	to	finish	cooking	the	center	(p.
153),	but	also	to	allow	the	meat	to	cool	down,
ideally	to	120ºF/50ºC	or	so.	(This	may	take
well	over	an	hour;	some	chefs	allow	for	a	rest
period	equal	to	the	roasting	time.)	As	the
temperature	drops,	the	meat	structure



becomes	firmer	and	more	resistant	to
deformation,	and	its	water-holding	capacity
increases.	Cooling	therefore	makes	the	meat
easier	to	carve	and	reduces	the	amount	of
fluid	lost	during	carving.

Whenever	possible,	meat	is	carved	across
the	grain	of	the	muscle	fibers	to	reduce	the
impression	of	fibrousness	in	the	mouth	and
make	the	meat	easier	to	chew.	Carving	knives
should	be	kept	sharp.	Sawing	away	with	a	dull
blade	compresses	the	tissue	and	squeezes	its
delicious	liquid	away.

Finally,	remember	that	the	saturated	fats	of
beef,	lamb,	and	pork	are	solid	at	room
temperature,	which	means	that	they	rapidly
congeal	on	the	plate.	Also,	gelatinized
collagen	begins	to	set	around	body
temperature	and	makes	the	meat	seem
noticeably	stiffer.	Preheated	platters	and
plates	prolong	the	table	appeal	of	any	hot
meat	dish.

Leftovers



Leftovers

Warmed-Over	Flavor	At	the	same	time	that
cooking	develops	the	characteristic	flavors	of
meat,	it	also	promotes	chemical	changes	that
lead	to	characteristic,	stale,	cardboard-like
“warmed-over	flavors”	when	the	meat	is
stored	and	reheated.	(Complex	or	strongly
flavored	dishes	may	actually	improve	with
time	and	reheating;	warmed-over	flavor
develops	within	the	meat	itself.)	The	principal
source	of	off-flavors	is	unsaturated	fatty
acids,	which	are	damaged	by	oxygen	and	iron
from	myoglobin.	This	damage	occurs	slowly
in	the	refrigerator	and	more	rapidly	during
reheating.	Meats	with	a	greater	proportion	of
unsaturated	fat	in	their	fat	tissue	—	poultry
and	pork	—	are	more	susceptible	to	warmed-
over	flavor	than	beef	and	lamb.	Cured	meats
suffer	less	because	their	nitrite	acts	as	an
antioxidant.

There	are	several	ways	to	minimize	the
development	of	off-flavors	in	leftovers.



Season	the	food	with	herbs	and	spices	that
contain	antioxidant	compounds	(chapter	8).
Use	low-permeability	plastic	wraps	to	cover
the	meat	(saran	or	polyvinyl	chloride;
polyethylene	is	surprisingly	permeable	to
oxygen),	and	eliminate	air	pockets	in	the
package.	Eat	the	leftovers	as	soon	as	possible,
and	with	the	minimum	degree	of	reheating
consistent	with	safety.	Leftover	roast	chicken,
for	example,	tastes	fresher	when	served	cold.

Maintaining	 Moistness	 If	 you’ve	 taken	 the
trouble	to	cook	a	meat	dish	gently,	then	apply
the	 same	 care	 to	 reheating:	 it	 only	 takes
moments	 at	 the	 boil	 to	 dry	 out	 a	 good	 stew.
Bring	 the	 liquid	 alone	 to	 the	 boil,	 return	 the
meat	 to	 it	 so	 that	 its	 surfaces	 are	 exposed	 to
the	boil	very	briefly,	and	then	reduce	the	heat
and	stir	so	that	the	liquid	quickly	comes	down
to	 150ºF/65ºC.	 Then	 let	 the	 meat	 warm
through	at	this	gentle	temperature.

Safety	As	 a	 general	 rule,	 leftover	 meats	 are



safest	when	refrigerated	or	 frozen	within	 two
hours	 of	 the	 end	 of	 cooking,	 and	 reheated
quickly	to	at	least	150ºF/65ºC	before	serving	a
second	 time.	 To	 be	 served	 cold,	 the	 meat
should	 be	 well	 cooked	 to	 begin	 with,
refrigerated	quickly,	 and	 served	within	 a	 day
or	 two,	 fresh	 out	 of	 the	 refrigerator.	 If	 in
doubt,	 it’s	 best	 to	 heat	 the	 meat	 thoroughly,
and	 compensate	 for	 the	 adverse	 effects	 on
taste	 and	 texture	 by	 shredding	 the	 meat	 and
moistening	it	with	a	flavorful	liquid.

Offal,	or	Organ	Meats

Animals	have	muscles	because	they	nourish
themselves	on	other	living	things	and	must
move	around	to	find	them.	And	they	have
innards	—	livers,	kidneys,	intestines,	and
other	organs	—	to	break	down	these	complex
foods	and	separate	the	useful	building	blocks
from	waste	materials,	to	distribute
nourishment	throughout	the	body,	and	to



coordinate	the	body’s	activities.

Composition	of	Organ	Meats
Organ	 meats	 are	 generally	 similar	 to
skeletal	 muscle	 in	 their	 chemical
composition,	 but	 often	 contain
substantially	 more	 iron	 and	 vitamins
thanks	to	their	special	tasks.	(Poultry	heart
and	liver	and	veal	liver	are	especially	rich
in	folate,	a	vitamin	that	is	associated	with	a
significantly	reduced	risk	of	heart	disease.)
Their	 higher	 cholesterol	 levels	 reflect	 the
fact	 that	 their	cells	are	much	smaller	 than
muscle	 cells	 and	 therefore	 include
proportionally	 more	 cell	 membrane,	 of
which	 cholesterol	 is	 an	 essential
component.	 The	 chart	 below	 lists	 broad
ranges	 of	 nutrient	 content	 for	 organs	 of
various	 animals.	 Cholesterol	 and	 iron
levels	 are	 given	 in	 milligrams	 per	 100
grams/3.6	oz;	folate	in	micrograms	per	100
grams.



Meat Protein,	%
Standard	cuts 24–36
Heart 24–30
Tongue 21–26
Gizzard 25–30
Tripe,	beef	(stomach) 15
Liver 21–31
Sweetbreads 12–33
Kidney 16–26
Brain 12–13

Meat Fat,	%
Standard	cuts 5–20
Heart 5–8
Tongue 10–21
Gizzard 3–4
Tripe,	beef	(stomach) 4



Liver 5–9
Sweetbreads 3–23
Kidney 3–6
Brain 10–16

Meat Cholesterol,	milligrams
Standard	cuts 70–160
Heart 180–250
Tongue 110–190
Gizzard 190–230
Tripe,	beef	(stomach) 95
Liver 360–630
Sweetbreads 220–500
Kidney 340–800
Brain 2,000–3,100

Meat Iron,	milligrams
Standard	cuts 1–4



Heart 4–9
Tongue 2–5
Gizzard 4–6
Tripe,	beef	(stomach) 2
Liver 3–18
Sweetbreads 1–2
Kidney 3–12
Brain 2–3

Meat Folate,	micrograms
Standard	cuts 5–20
Heart 3–80
Tongue 3–8
Gizzard 50–55
Tripe,	beef	(stomach) 2
Liver 70–770
Sweetbreads 3
Kidney 20–100



Brain 4–6

The	word	meat	 is	used	most	commonly	 to
mean	 the	 limb-moving	skeletal	 muscles	 of
animals.	 But	 skeletal	 muscle	 only	 accounts
for	about	half	of	the	animal	body.	The	various
other	 organs	 and	 tissues	 are	 also	 nutritious
and	offer	their	own	diverse,	often	pronounced
flavors	and	textures.	The	nonskeletal	muscles
—	 stomach,	 intestines,	 heart,	 tongue	 —
generally	 contain	 much	 more	 connective
tissue	than	ordinary	meats	—	up	to	3	times	as
much	 —	 and	 benefit	 from	 slow,	 moist
cooking	 to	 dissolve	 the	 collagen.	 The	 liver
contains	 relatively	 little	 collagen:	 it	 is	 an
agglomeration	 of	 specialized	 cells	 held
together	 by	 a	 network	 of	 connective	 tissue
that,	 because	 it	 experiences	 little	mechanical
stress,	 is	unusually	fine	and	delicate.	Liver	is
thus	tender	if	minimally	cooked,	crumbly	and
dry	if	overcooked.

Unlike	standard	meats	cut	from	discrete



and	largely	sterile	skeletal	muscles,	many
organ	meats	carry	extraneous	matter.	Before
cooking,	they’re	often	trimmed	and	cleaned,
then	“blanched,”	or	covered	with	cold	water
that	is	slowly	brought	to	a	simmer.	The	slow
heating	first	washes	proteins	and	microbes	off
the	meat,	then	coagulates	them	and	floats
them	to	the	water	surface	where	they	can	be
skimmed	off.	Blanching	also	moderates
strong	odors	on	the	meat	surface.

Liver

The	liver	is	the	biochemical	powerhouse	of
the	animal	body.	Most	of	the	nutrients	that	the
body	absorbs	from	food	go	here	first	and	are
either	stored	or	processed	for	distribution	to
other	organs.	All	this	work	takes	a	lot	of
energy,	and	this	is	why	the	liver	is	dark	red
with	fat-burning	mitochondria	and	their
cytochrome	pigments.	It	also	requires	direct
access	of	the	liver	cells	to	the	blood,	and



accordingly	there	is	very	little	connective
tissue	between	the	minute	hexagonal	columns
of	cells.	It’s	a	delicate	organ	that	is	best
briefly	cooked;	long	cooking	simply	dries	it
out.	The	characteristic	flavor	of	liver	has	been
little	investigated,	but	seems	to	depend
importantly	on	sulfur	compounds	(thiazoles
and	thiazolines),	and	gets	stronger	with
prolonged	cooking.	Generally,	both	flavor	and
texture	coarsen	with	age.	The	occasionally
milky	appearance	of	chicken	livers	is	due	to
an	unusual	but	harmless	accumulation	of	fat,
about	double	the	amount	in	a	normal	red	liver
(8%	instead	of	4%).

Foie	Gras

Of	the	various	animal	innards	that	cooks	have
put	to	good	use,	one	deserves	special	mention,
because	it	is	in	a	way	the	ultimate	meat,	the
epitome	of	animal	flesh	and	its	essential
appeal.	Foie	gras	is	the	“fat	liver”	of	force-



fed	geese	and	ducks.	It	has	been	made	and
appreciated	since	Roman	times	and	probably
long	before;	the	force-feeding	of	geese	is
clearly	represented	in	Egyptian	art	from	2500
BCE.	It’s	a	kind	of	living	pâté,	ingeniously
prepared	in	the	growing	bird	before	it’s
slaughtered.	Constant	overnourishment	causes
the	normally	small,	lean,	red	organ	to	grow	to
10	times	its	normal	size	and	reach	a	fat
content	of	50	to	65%.	The	fat	is	dispersed	in
insensibly	fine	droplets	within	the	liver	cells,
and	creates	an	incomparably	integrated,
delicate	blend	of	smoothness,	richness,	and
savoriness.

Preparing	Foie	Gras	A	good-quality	 liver	 is
recognized	 by	 its	 unblemished	 appearance,
pale	thanks	to	the	minute	fat	droplets,	and	by
its	 consistency.	The	 liver	 tissue	 itself	 is	 firm
but	pliable	(like	chicken	liver),	while	the	fat	is
only	 semisolid	 at	 cool	 room	 temperature.
When	cool	and	pressed	with	the	finger,	a	good



foie	gras	will	give,	retain	the	imprint,	and	feel
somewhat	 supple	 and	 unctuous,	 while	 an
under-fattened	liver	will	feel	elastic,	hard,	and
wet.	 An	 overfattened,	 weakened	 liver	 feels
soft	and	frankly	oily.

Foie	gras	is	at	its	best	fresh	out	of	the	bird.
Apart	from	its	use	in	pâtés,	it	is	generally
prepared	in	two	ways.	One	is	to	slice	it	fairly
thick,	briefly	saute	in	a	hot,	dry	pan	until	the
surface	is	browned	and	the	interior	just
warmed	through,	and	serve	it	immediately.
The	sensation	of	warm,	firm,	flavorful	flesh
melting	away	between	tongue	and	palate	is
unparalleled.	Liver	quality	is	especially
important	in	this	preparation,	since	high	pan
heat	will	release	a	flood	of	fat	from	an
overfattened	or	otherwise	weakened	organ,
and	the	texture	is	unpleasantly	flabby.

A	second	preparation	is	to	cook	the	liver
whole,	chill	it,	and	slice	and	serve	it	cool.
This	is	more	forgiving	of	second-quality
livers,	and	offers	its	own	kind	of	lusciousness.



To	make	a	terrine,	the	livers	are	pressed
gently	into	a	container	and	cooked	in	a	water
bath;	to	prepare	a	torchon	of	foie	gras,	they’re
wrapped	in	a	cloth	and	poached	in	stock	or	in
duck	or	goose	fat.	Fat	loss	is	minimized	by
gentle,	gradual	heating	just	to	the	desired
doneness	(from	110	to	160ºF/45–70ºC,	lower
temperatures	giving	a	creamier	texture),	the
liquid	kept	only	a	few	degrees	above	the
target	temperature.	Cooling	partly	solidifies
the	fat,	which	allows	the	terrine	or	torchon	to
be	sliced	cleanly,	and	then	contributes	a
melting	firmness	to	the	dish’s	texture	as	it’s
eaten.

Skin,	Cartilage,	and	Bones

Usually	cooks	don’t	welcome	large	amounts
of	toughening	connective	tissue	in	meat.	But
taken	on	their	own,	animal	skin,	cartilage,	and
bones	are	valuable	exactly	because	they’re
mostly	connective	tissue	and	therefore	full	of



collagen	(skin	also	provides	flavorful	fat).
Connective	tissue	has	two	uses.	First,	in	long-
cooked	stocks,	soups,	and	stews,	it	dissolves
out	of	bones	or	skin	to	provide	large
quantities	of	gelatin	and	a	substantial	body.
And	second,	it	can	be	turned	into	a	delicious
dish	itself,	with	either	a	succulent	gelatinous
texture	or	a	crisp,	crunchy	one,	depending	on
the	cut	and	the	cooking	method.	Long	moist
cooking	gives	tender	veal	ears,	cheeks,	and
muzzle	for	tête	de	veau,	or	Chinese	beef
tendon	or	fatty	pork	skin.	A	briefer	cooking
produces	crunchy	or	chewy	cartilaginous	pig’s
ears,	snouts,	and	tails;	and	rapid	frying	gives
crisp	pork	rinds.

Fat

Solid	fat	tissue	is	seldom	prepared	as	such:
instead	we	usually	extract	the	fat	from	its
storage	cells,	and	then	use	it	as	both	a	cooking
medium	and	an	ingredient.	There	are	two



major	exceptions	to	this	rule.	The	first	is	caul
fat,	a	thin	membrane	of	connective	tissue	with
a	lacework	of	small	fat	deposits	embedded	in
it.	This	membrane	is	the	omentum	or
peritoneum,	usually	from	the	pig	or	sheep,
which	covers	the	organs	of	the	abdominal
cavity.	Caul	fat	has	been	used	at	least	since
Roman	times	as	a	wrap	to	hold	foods	together
and	protect	and	moisten	their	surface	while
they	are	cooked.	During	the	cooking,	much	of
the	fat	is	rendered	from	the	membrane	and	the
membrane	itself	is	softened,	so	that	it	all	but
disappears	into	the	food.

The	second	fat	tissue	frequently	used	as	is
is	mild,	soft-textured	pork	fat,	especially	the
thick	deposits	lying	immediately	under	the
skin	of	belly	and	back.	Bacon	is	largely	fat
tissue	from	the	belly,	while	back	fat	is	the
preferred	fat	for	making	sausages	(p.	170).
Italian	lardo	is	pork	fat	cured	in	salt,
flavorings,	and	wine,	eaten	as	is	or	used	to
flavor	other	dishes.	In	classic	French	cooking,



pork	fat	is	used	to	provide	both	flavor	and
succulence	to	lean	meats,	applied	either	in	a
thin	sheet	that	protects	the	surface	during
roasting,	or	in	thin	splinters	inserted	into	the
meat	by	means	of	larding	needles.

Rendered	Fats	 Pure	 fat	 is	 rendered	 from	 fat
tissue	 by	 cutting	 the	 tissue	 into	 small	 pieces
and	 gently	 heating	 them.	 Some	 fat	melts	 out
of	 the	 tissue,	 and	 more	 is	 squeezed	 out	 by
applying	pressure.	Rendered	beef	fat	is	called
tallow,	 and	 pork	 fat	lard.	 The	 fats	 from
different	 animals	 differ	 in	 flavor	 and	 in
consistency.	 Fats	 from	 ruminant	 cattle	 and
sheep	are	more	saturated	and	therefore	harder
than	 pig	 or	 bird	 fats	 (due	 to	 their	 rumen
microbes;	seep.	13);	and	fats	stored	just	under
the	skin	are	less	saturated	and	therefore	softer
than	fats	stored	in	the	body	core,	because	their
environment	is	cooler.	Beef	suet,	from	around
the	 kidneys,	 is	 the	 hardest	 culinary	 fat,
followed	 by	 subcutaneous	 beef	 fat,	 then	 leaf



lard	from	pig	kidneys,	and	lard	from	back	and
belly	fat.	Chicken,	duck,	and	goose	fat	are	still
less	 saturated	 and	 so	 semiliquid	 at	 room
temperature.

Meat	Mixtures

The	transformation	of	a	steer	or	pig	into	the
standard	roasts,	steaks,	and	chops	generates	a
large	assortment	of	scraps	and	by-products.
These	remainders	have	always	been	put	to
use,	reassembled	into	everything	from	the
“goat	sausage	bubbling	fat	and	blood”	that	the
disguised	Odysseus	wins	in	a	warm-up	fight
before	his	battle	with	Penelope’s	suitors,	to
the	Scots	haggis	of	sheep’s	liver,	heart,	and
lung	stuffed	into	its	stomach,	to	the	modern
canned	mixture	of	ham,	pork	shoulder,	and
flavorings	called	Spam.	Chopped	or	ground
up,	mixed	with	other	ingredients,	and	pressed
together,	meat	scraps	can	provide	one	of	the
heartiest	parts	of	a	meal	—	and	even	one	of



the	most	luxurious.

Sausages

The	word	sausage	comes	from	the	Latin	for
“salt,”	and	names	a	mixture	of	chopped	meat
and	salt	stuffed	into	an	edible	tube.	Salt	plays
two	important	roles	in	the	sausage:	it	controls
the	growth	of	microbes,	and	it	dissolves	one
of	the	fiber	filament	proteins	(myosin)	out	of
the	muscle	fibers	and	onto	the	meat	surfaces,
where	it	acts	as	a	glue	to	bind	the	pieces
together.	Traditionally	the	edible	container
was	the	animal’s	stomach	or	intestine,	and	fat
accounted	for	at	least	a	third	of	the	mixture.
Today	many	sausages	are	housed	in	artificial
casings	and	contain	far	less	fat.

There	are	an	infinite	number	of	variations
on	the	sausage	theme,	but	most	of	them	fall
into	a	handful	of	families.	Sausages	may	be
sold	raw	and	eaten	freshly	cooked;	they	may
be	fermented;	they	may	be	air-dried,	cooked,



and/or	smoked	to	varying	degrees	in	order	to
keep	for	a	few	days	or	indefinitely.	The	meat
and	fat	may	be	chopped	into	discrete	pieces	of
varying	size,	or	they	may	be	disintegrated,
blended	together,	and	cooked	into	a
homogeneous	mass.	And	the	sausage	may
either	be	mostly	meat	and	fat,	or	it	may
include	a	substantial	proportion	of	other
ingredients.

Early	Sausage	Recipes
Lucanians

Pound	pepper,	cumin,	savory,	rue,	parsley,
seasoning,	 bay	 berries,	 and	liquamen
[salted	 fish	 sauce],	 and	 mix	 with	 well-
pounded	flesh,	grinding	both	together.	Mix
in	liquamen,	whole	 peppercorns,	 plenty	of
fat	 and	 pine-nuts,	 force	 into	 an	 intestine
stretched	thinly,	and	hang	in	smoke.

—	Apicius,	first	few	centuries	CE
Liver	Sausage	(Esicium	ex	Iecore)



Grind	 pork	 or	 other	 livers	 after	 they	 have
boiled	a	little.	Then	cut	up	pork	belly	to	the
amount	 of	 liver,	 and	 mix	 with	 two	 eggs,
sufficient	 aged	 cheese,	marjoram,	parsley,
raisins,	 and	 ground	 spices.	 When	 these
form	a	mass	make	balls	 the	 size	of	 a	 nut,
wrap	in	caul	fat,	and	fry	in	a	pan	with	lard.
They	require	slow	and	low	heat.

—	Platina,	De	honesta	voluptate	et
valetudine,	1475

Fermented	sausages	are	a	form	of
preserved	meat,	and	are	described	on	p.	176.

Fresh	 and	Cooked	 Sausages	 Fresh	 sausages
are	 just	 that:	 freshly	made,	 unfermented	 and
uncooked,	 and	 therefore	 highly	 perishable.
They	should	be	cooked	within	a	day	or	two	of
being	made	or	purchased.

Cooked	sausages	are	heated	as	part	of	their
production,	and	can	be	bought	and	eaten
without	further	cooking	for	several	days,	or
longer	if	they’ve	been	partly	dried	or	smoked.



But	they’re	often	cooked	again	just	before
eating.	They	can	be	made	from	the	usual
mixture	of	meat	and	fat,	or	from	a	number	of
other	materials	that	thicken	on	cooking.	The
French	white	sausage,	boudin	blanc,	is	made
from	various	white	meats	bound	together	with
milk,	eggs,	bread	crumbs,	or	flour,	while	the
black	boudin	noir	contains	no	meat	at	all:	it’s
around	one-third	pork	fat,	one-third	onions,
apples,	or	chestnuts,	and	one-third	pork	blood,
which	coagulates	during	poaching	to	help
provide	a	solid	matrix.	Liver	sausage	is	made
by	cooking	a	blend	of	finely	ground	liver	and
fat.	Manufacturers	often	use	soy	protein	and
nonfat	milk	solids	to	help	thicken	and	retain
moisture.

Emulsified	Sausages	Emulsified	sausages	are
a	special	kind	of	cooked	sausage,	best	known
in	 the	 form	of	 frankfurters	or	wieners	and	so
called	for	 their	presumed	origins	 in	Germany
(Frankfurt)	 or	 Austria	 (Wien).	 Italian



mortadella	 (“bologna”)	 is	 similar.	 These
sausages	 have	 a	 very	 fine-textured,
homogeneous,	tender	interior,	and	a	relatively
mild	flavor.	They’re	made	by	combining	pork,
beef,	 or	 poultry	 with	 fat,	 salt,	 nitrite,
flavorings,	 and	 usually	 additional	 water,	 and
shearing	 the	 ingredients	 together	 in	 a	 large
blender	 until	 they	 form	 a	 smooth	 “batter,”
which	 is	 similar	 to	 an	 emulsified	 sauce	 like
mayonnaise	 (p.	 625):	 the	 fat	 is	 evenly
dispersed	 in	 small	 droplets,	 which	 are
surrounded	and	stabilized	by	fragments	of	the
muscle	 cells	 and	 by	 salt-dissolved	 muscle
proteins.	 The	 temperature	 during	 blending	 is
critical:	 if	 it	 rises	 above	60ºF/16ºC	 in	 a	 pork
batter,	70ºF/21ºC	in	beef,	the	emulsion	will	be
unstable	 and	 leak	 fat.	 The	 batter	 is	 then
extruded	 into	 a	 casing	 and	 cooked	 to	 about
160ºF/70ºC.	Heat	coagulates	the	meat	proteins
and	 turns	 the	 batter	 into	 a	 cohesive,	 solid
mass	from	which	 the	casing	can	be	removed.
Due	 to	 their	 relatively	 high	 water	 content,



around	 50–55%,	 emulsified	 sausages	 are
perishable	and	must	be	refrigerated.

Sausage	 Ingredients:	 Fat	 and	 Casings	 The
fat	 for	 sausage	 making	 is	 generally	 pork	 fat
from	under	the	skin	of	the	animal’s	back.	Pork
fat	 has	 the	 advantage	 of	 being	 relatively
neutral	in	flavor,	and	back	fat	in	particular	has
just	the	right	consistency:	hard	enough	not	to
melt	 and	 separate	 as	 the	 meat	 is	 ground	 or
stored	 at	 warm	 room	 temperatures,	 but	 soft
enough	 that	 it’s	 not	 granular	 and	pasty	when
eaten	 cool.	 Belly	 fat	 is	 softer	 than	 ideal,
kidney	 fat	 and	 beef	 and	 lamb	 fat	 harder;
poultry	 fats	 are	 too	 soft.	 In	 standard
nonemulsified	sausages,	the	30%+	fat	content
helps	 separate	 the	 meat	 fragments	 and
provides	 tenderness	 and	 moistness.	 The
coarser	 the	 meat	 fragments,	 the	 lower	 the
surface	area	that	fat	must	lubricate,	and	so	the
less	 fat	 required	 for	 an	 appealing	 texture	 (as
little	as	15%).



Sausage	 casings	 were	 traditionally	 various
parts	 of	 the	 animal	 digestive	 tube.	 Today,
most	 “natural”	 casings	 are	 the	 thin
connective-tissue	 layers	 of	 hog	 or	 sheep
intestine,	 stripped	 of	 their	 inner	 lining	 and
outer	 muscular	 layers	 by	 heat	 and	 pressure,
partly	 dried	 and	 packed	 in	 salt	 until	 they’re
filled.	 (Beef	 casings	 include	 some	 muscle.)
There	 are	 also	 manufactured	 sausage
containers	made	 from	 animal	 collagen,	 plant
cellulose,	and	paper.

Cooking	 Fresh	 Sausages	 Since	 their
fragmented	 interior	guarantees	 a	 certain	kind
of	tenderness,	sausages	are	often	cooked	very
casually.	 But	 they	 benefit	 from	 being	 heated
as	 carefully	 as	 other	 fresh	 meats.	 Five
centuries	ago,	Platina	remarked	on	the	need	to
cook	 liver	 sausage	 gently	 (see	 box,	 p.	 169),
and	 said	 that	 another	 sausage	 was	 called
mortadella	“because	it	is	surely	more	pleasant
a	 little	 raw	than	overcooked.”	Fresh	sausages



should	be	thoroughly	cooked	to	kill	microbes,
but	 no	 hotter	 than	 well-done	 meat,	 or
160ºF/70ºC.	 Gentle	 cooking	 prevents	 the
interior	from	reaching	the	boil,	at	which	point
the	 skin	 will	 burst	 and	 leak	 moisture	 and
flavor,	 and	 which	 hardens	 the	 texture.
Intentionally	 piercing	 the	 skin	 will	 release
moisture	throughout	the	cooking,	but	provides
insurance	 against	 more	 disfiguring	 splitting
toward	the	end.

Pâtés	and	Terrines

Most	medieval	European	cookbooks	offer
several	recipes	for	meat	pies,	in	which
chopped	meat	and	fat	are	cooked	inside	a
pastry	crust	or	in	a	well-greased	earthenware
pot.	Over	the	centuries,	French	cooks	refined
this	preparation,	while	in	other	countries	it
survived	in	rustic	forms.	And	so	England	has
pasties	and	patties,	France	the	pâté	and	the
terrine.	These	last	two	terms	are	largely



synonymous,	though	today	“pâté”	usually
suggests	a	fairly	uniform	and	fine-textured
mixture	based	on	liver,	“terrine”	a	coarser,
often	patterned	one.	Pâtés	and	terrines	thus
span	a	wonderful	range,	from	coarse,	rustic
massings	of	pork	innards	and	head	in	the
French	pâté	de	campagne,	to	luxurious
layerings	of	brandy-scented	foie	gras	and
truffles.

Modern	pâtés	and	terrines	often	contain
little	fat,	but	traditional	mixes	were	based	on
a	meat	to	fat	ratio	of	around	2	to	1	to	give	a
rich,	melt-in-the-mouth	consistency.	Pork	and
veal,	an	immature	meat	with	relatively	little
tough	connective	tissue	and	an	abundant
producer	of	gelatin,	are	the	usual	main
ingredients.	They	are	ground	together	with	the
fat	—	usually	pork	for	its	ideal	consistency	—
to	mix	protein	and	fat	intimately.	Hand
chopping	is	less	likely	to	heat	the	mixture	or
damage	intact	fat	cells,	which	would	cause
more	liquid	fat	to	separate	from	the	mix



during	cooking.	The	mix	is	seasoned	more
strongly	than	many	foods	both	because	it’s
rich	in	flavor-binding	proteins	and	fats,	and
because	it’s	generally	served	cool,	which
reduces	the	aroma.	The	mix	is	placed	in	a
mold,	covered,	and	cooked	gently	in	a	water
bath	until	the	juices	run	clear	and	the	internal
temperature	reaches	160ºF/70ºC.	(Terrines	of
foie	gras	are	often	cooked	to	a	much	lower
temperature,	perhaps	120ºF/55ºC,	especially	if
intact	lobes	are	layered	together;	they	come
out	rosy	pink.)	The	proteins	have	coagulated
into	a	solid	matrix,	trapping	much	of	the	fat	in
place.	The	pâté	is	then	topped	with	a	weight	to
compact	it,	and	refrigerated	for	several	days
to	firm	and	allow	the	flavors	to	blend.	The
cooked	mixture	keeps	for	about	a	week.

Pâtés	and	Terrines:	Early	Recipes
As	 these	 medieval	 recipes	 demonstrate,
even	 early	 pâtés	 were	 made	 in	 pots	 and
dishes	 without	 the	 pastry	 that	 originally



gave	them	their	name.
Pastez	de	beuf

Take	good	young	beef,	and	remove	all	fat.
Cut	the	lean	into	pieces	and	boil,	and
afterwards	take	to	the	pastry	cook	to	be
chopped,	and	fatten	it	with	beef	marrow.

—	Le	Ménagier	de	Paris,	ca.	1390
Pastilli	di	carne

Take	as	much	lean	meat	as	you	want	and
cut	it	up	fine	with	small	knives.	Mix	veal
fat	and	spices	into	this	meat.	Wrap	in
crusts	and	bake	in	an	oven….	This	can
even	be	made	in	a	well-greased	dish
without	a	crust.

—	Maestro	Martino,	ca.	1450

Preserved	Meats

The	preservation	of	meat	from	biological



spoilage	has	been	a	major	challenge
throughout	human	history.	The	earliest
methods,	which	go	back	at	least	4,000	years,
were	physical	and	chemical	treatments	that
make	meat	inhospitable	to	microbes.	Drying
meat	in	the	sun	and	wind	or	by	the	fire
removes	enough	water	to	halt	bacterial
growth.	A	smoky	fire	deposits	cell-killing
chemicals	on	the	meat	surface.	Heavy	salting
—	with	partly	evaporated	seawater,	or	rock
salt,	or	the	ashes	of	salt-concentrating	plants
—	also	draws	vital	moisture	from	cells.
Moderate	salting	permits	the	growth	of	a	few
hardy	and	harmless	microbes	that	help
exclude	harmful	ones.	Out	of	these	crude
methods	to	stave	off	spoilage	have	come	some
of	our	most	complex	and	interesting	foods,
the	dry-cured	hams	and	fermented	sausages.

The	Industrial	Revolution	brought	a	new
approach:	preserve	meat	not	by	changing	the
meat	itself,	but	by	controlling	its
environment.	Canning	encloses	cooked	meat



in	a	sterile	container	hermetically	sealed
against	the	entry	of	microbes.	Mechanical
refrigeration	and	freezing	keep	meat	cold
enough	to	slow	microbial	growth	or	suspend	it
altogether.	And	irradiation	of	prepackaged
meat	kills	any	microbes	in	the	package	while
leaving	the	meat	itself	relatively	unchanged.

Dried	Meats:	Jerky

Microbes	need	water	to	survive	and	grow,	so
one	simple	and	ancient	preservation	technique
has	been	to	dry	meat,	originally	by	exposing	it
to	the	wind	and	sun.	Nowadays,	meat	is	dried
by	briefly	salting	it	to	inhibit	surface
microbes	and	then	heating	it	in	low-
temperature	convection	ovens	to	remove	at
least	two-thirds	of	its	weight	and	75%	of	its
moisture	(more	than	10%	moisture	may	allow
Penicillium	and	Aspergillus	molds	to	grow).
Because	its	flavor	has	been	concentrated	and
its	texture	is	interesting,	dried	meat	remains



popular.	Modern	examples	include	American
jerky,	Latin	American	carne	seca,	Norwegian
fenalår	and	southern	African	biltong,	whose
textures	can	range	from	chewy	to	brittle.	Two
refined	versions	are	Italian	bresaola	and
Swiss	Buendnerfleisch,	which	are	beef	salted
and	sometimes	flavored	with	wine	and	herbs
before	a	slow,	cool	drying	period	of	up	to
several	months.	They’re	served	in	paper-thin
slices.

Freeze-Drying	Freeze-drying	is	the	technique
originally	 used	 by	 Andean	 peoples	 to	 make
charqui;	 they	 took	 advantage	 of	 the	 thin	 dry
air	 to	 evaporate	 moisture	 from	 meat	 during
sunny	days	and	sublimate	it	from	ice	crystals
during	 freezing	 nights.	 The	 result	 was	 an
uncooked,	 honeycombed	 tissue	 that	 would
readily	reabsorb	water	during	later	cooking.	In
the	 industrial	 version,	 the	 meat	 is	 rapidly
frozen	 under	 vacuum,	 then	 mildly	 heated	 to
sublimate	 its	 water.	 Because	 this	 kind	 of



desiccation	 doesn’t	 cause	 cooking	 and
compaction	 of	 the	 tissue,	 relatively	 thick
pieces	can	be	dried	and	reconstituted.

Salted	Meats:	Hams,	Bacon,	Corned	Beef

Like	drying,	salting	preserves	meat	by
depriving	bacteria	and	molds	of	water.	The
addition	of	salt	—	sodium	chloride	—	to	meat
creates	such	a	high	concentration	of	dissolved
sodium	and	chloride	ions	outside	the	microbes
that	water	inside	their	cells	is	drawn	out,	salt
is	drawn	in,	and	their	cellular	machinery	is
disrupted.	The	microbes	either	die	or	slow
down	drastically.	The	muscle	cells	too	are
partly	dehydrated	and	absorb	salt.	Traditional
cured	meats,	made	by	dry-salting	or	brining
large	cuts	for	several	days,	are	about	60%
moisture	and	5–7%	salt	by	weight.	The
resulting	hams	(from	pig	legs),	bacon	(from
pig	sides),	corned	beef	(“corn”	coming	from
the	English	word	for	grains,	including	salt



grains),	and	similar	products	keep	uncooked
for	many	months.

Useful	 Impurities:	 Nitrates	 and	 Nitrites
Sodium	 chloride	 is	 not	 the	 only	 salt	with	 an
important	role	in	salt-curing.	The	others	were
unpredictable	mineral	 impurities	 in	 the	 rock,
sea,	 and	 vegetable	 salts	 originally	 used	 for
curing.	 One	 of	 these,	 potassium	 nitrate
(KNO3),	 was	 discovered	 during	 the	 Middle
Ages	 and	 named	saltpeter	 because	 it	 was
found	 as	 a	 salt-like	 crystalline	 outgrowth	 on
rocks.	 In	 the	 16th	 or	 17th	 century,	 it	 was
found	 to	brighten	meat	color	and	 improve	 its
flavor,	 safety,	 and	 storage	 life.	Around	1900,
German	 chemists	 discovered	 that	 during	 the
cure	certain	salt-tolerant	bacteria	 transform	a
small	portion	of	the	nitrate	into	nitrite	(NO2),
and	 that	 nitrite	 rather	 than	 nitrate	 is	 the	 true
active	 ingredient.	 Once	 this	 was	 known,
producers	 could	 eliminate	 saltpeter	 from	 the
curing	 mixture	 and	 replace	 it	 with	 much



smaller	doses	of	pure	nitrite.	This	 is	now	the
rule	 except	 in	 the	 production	 of	 traditional
dry-cured	hams	and	bacons,	where	prolonged
ripening	 benefits	 from	 the	 ongoing	 bacterial
production	of	nitrite	from	nitrate.

We	now	know	that	nitrite	does	several
important	things	for	cured	meats.	It
contributes	its	own	sharp,	piquant	flavor.	It
reacts	in	the	meat	to	form	nitric	oxide	(NO),
which	retards	the	development	of	rancid
flavors	in	the	fat	by	preemptively	binding	to
the	iron	atom	in	myoglobin,	thus	preventing
the	iron	from	causing	fat	oxidation.	The	same
iron	binding	produces	the	characteristic	bright
pink-red	color	of	cured	meat.	Finally,	nitrite
suppresses	the	growth	of	various	bacteria,
most	importantly	the	spores	of	the	oxygen-
intolerant	bacterium	that	causes	deadly
botulism.	Clostridium	botulinum	can	grow
inside	sausages	that	have	been	insufficiently
or	unevenly	salted;	German	scientists	first
named	the	poisoning	it	causes



Wurstvergiftung,	or	sausage	disease	(botulus
is	Latin	for	sausage).	Nitrite	apparently
inhibits	important	bacterial	enzymes	and
interferes	with	energy	production.

Traditional	Versions	of	Cured	Pork
Of	 curing	 hams:	 This	 is	 the	 way	 to	 cure
hams	in	jars	or	tubs….	Cover	the	bottom	of
the	 jar	 or	 tub	with	 salt	 and	 put	 in	 a	 ham,
skin	 down.	Cover	 the	whole	with	 salt	 and
put	 another	 ham	on	 top,	 and	 cover	 this	 in
the	 same	 manner.	 Be	 careful	 that	 meat
does	not	touch	meat.	So	proceed,	and	when
you	 have	 packed	 all	 the	 hams,	 cover	 the
top	with	 salt	 so	 that	no	meat	 can	be	 seen,
and	 smooth	 it	 out	 even.	 When	 the	 hams
have	 been	 in	 salt	 five	 days,	 take	 them	 all
out	with	 the	 salt	 and	 repack	 them,	putting
those	which	were	on	top	at	the	bottom….

After	the	twelfth	day	remove	the	hams,
brush	 off	 the	 salt,	 and	 hang	 them	 for	 two
days	 in	 the	 wind.	 On	 the	 third	 day	 wipe



them	off	clean	with	a	sponge	and	rub	them
with	oil.	Then	hang	them	in	smoke	for	two
days,	and	on	the	third	day	rub	them	with	a
mixture	of	vinegar	and	oil.

Then	hang	them	in	the	meat	house,	and
neither	bats	nor	worms	will	touch	them.

—	Cato,	On	Agriculture,	50	BCE
Bacon,	to	dry:	Cut	the	Leg	with	a	piece	of
the	Loin	(of	a	young	Hog)	then	with
Saltpeter,	in	fine	Pouder	and	brown	Sugar
mix’d	together,	rub	it	well	daily	for	2	or	3
days,	after	which	salt	it	well;	so	will	it	look
red:	let	it	lye	for	6	or	8	Weeks,	then	hang	it
up	(in	a	drying-place)	to	dry.

—	William	Salmon,	The	Family
Dictionary:	Or,	Household	Companion,

London,	1710
Nitrate	and	nitrite	can	react	with	other

food	components	to	form	possible	cancer-
causing	nitrosamines.	This	risk	now	appears
to	be	small	(p.	125).	Nevertheless,	residual
nitrate	and	nitrite	in	cured	meats	is	limited	to



200	parts	per	million	(0.02%)	in	the	United
States,	and	is	usually	well	below	this	limit.

Sublime	Hams	The	many	months	 that	salted
meats	 keep	 turned	out	 to	 transform	pig	 flesh
into	 some	 of	 the	 great	 foods	 of	 the	 world!
First	 among	 them	 are	 the	 dry-cured	 hams,
which	go	back	at	least	to	classical	times.	The
modern	 versions,	 which	 include	 Italian
prosciutto	 di	 Parma,	 Spanish	 serrano,	 French
Bayonne,	and	American	country	hams,	may	be
aged	 for	a	year	or	more.	Though	 they	can	be
cooked,	dry-cured	hams	are	at	their	best	when
eaten	 in	 paper-thin	 raw	 slices.	 With	 their
vivid,	 rose-colored	 translucency,	 silken
texture,	and	a	flavor	at	once	meaty	and	fruity,
they	are	to	fresh	pork	what	long-aged	cheeses
are	to	fresh	milk:	a	distillation,	an	expression
of	 the	 transforming	 powers	 of	 salt,	 enzymes,
and	time.

The	Effects	of	Salt	 In	 addition	 to	 protecting
hams	 from	 spoilage	 as	 they	 mature,	 salt



contributes	 to	 their	 appearance	 and	 texture.
High	 salt	 concentrations	 cause	 the	 normally
tightly	 bunched	 protein	 filaments	 in	 the
muscle	 cells	 to	 separate	 into	 individual
filaments,	which	are	too	small	to	scatter	light:
so	 the	 normally	 opaque	 muscle	 tissue
becomes	 translucent.	 The	 same	 unbunching
also	weakens	 the	muscle	 fibers,	 while	 at	 the
same	 time	 dehydration	 makes	 the	 tissue
denser	and	more	concentrated:	hence	the	close
but	tender	texture.

The	Enigma	of	Hams	Cured	Without
Nitrite

Though	 most	 traditional	 long-cured	 hams
are	 treated	 with	 saltpeter	 to	 provide	 a
steady	supply	of	nitrite,	a	few	are	not.	The
eminent	 prosciuttos	 of	 Parma	 and	 San
Daniele	 are	 cured	 with	 sea	 salt	 only,	 yet
somehow	 still	 develop	 the	 characteristic
rosy	 color	 of	 nitrite-stabilized	myoglobin.
Sea	 salt	 does	 contain	 nitrate	 and	 nitrite



impurities,	 but	 not	 enough	 to	 affect	 ham
color.	 Recently,	 Japanese	 scientists	 found
that	the	stable	red	pigment	of	these	hams	is
not	 nitrosomyoglobin,	 and	 its	 formation
seems	 associated	 with	 the	 presence	 of
particular	 ripening	 bacteria
(Staphylococcus	 carnosus	 and
caseolyticus).	 And	 it	 may	 be	 that	 the
absence	of	nitrite	is	one	of	the	keys	to	the
exceptional	 quality	 of	 these	 hams.	 Nitrite
protects	meat	 fats	 from	 oxidation	 and	 the
development	 of	 off-flavors.	 But	 fat
breakdown	 is	 also	 one	 of	 the	 sources	 of
desirable	 ham	 flavor,	 and	 nitrite-free
Parma	 hams	 have	 been	 found	 to	 contain
more	 fruity	 esters	 than	 nitrite-cured
Spanish	and	French	hams.

The	Alchemy	of	Dry-Cured	Flavor	Some	of
the	muscles’	biochemical	machinery	survives
intact,	in	particular	the	enzymes	that	break
flavorless	proteins	down	into	savory	peptides
and	amino	acids,	which	over	the	course	of



months	may	convert	a	third	or	more	of	the
meat	protein	to	flavor	molecules.	The
concentration	of	mouth-filling,	meaty
glutamic	acid	rises	ten-	to	twenty-fold,	and	as
in	cheese,	so	much	of	the	amino	acid	tyrosine
is	freed	that	it	may	form	small	white	crystals.
In	addition,	the	unsaturated	fats	in	pig	muscle
break	apart	and	react	to	form	hundreds	of
volatile	compounds,	some	of	them
characteristic	of	the	aroma	of	melon	(a
traditional	and	chemically	fitting
accompaniment	to	ham!),	apple,	citrus,
flowers,	freshly	cut	grass,	and	butter.	Other
compounds	react	with	the	products	of	protein
breakdown	to	give	nutty,	caramel	flavors
normally	found	only	in	cooked	meats
(concentration	compensates	for	the
subcooking	temperature).	In	sum,	the	flavor
of	dry-cured	ham	is	astonishingly	complex
and	evocative.

Modern	 Wet-Cured	 Meats	 Salted	 meats



continue	 to	 be	 popular	 even	 in	 the	 age	 of
refrigeration,	 when	 salting	 is	 no	 longer
essential.	But	because	we	now	 salt	meats	 for
taste,	 not	 to	 extend	 storage	 life,	 industrial
versions	 are	 treated	 with	 milder	 cures,	 and
generally	must	be	refrigerated	and/or	cooked.
And	they’re	made	very	quickly,	which	means
that	 their	 flavor	 is	 less	 complex	 than	 dry-
cured	 meats.	 Industrial	 bacon	 is	 made	 by
injecting	brine	(typically	about	15%	salt,	10%
sugar)	 into	 the	 pork	 side	 with	 arrays	 of	 fine
needles,	 or	 else	 cutting	 it	 into	 slices,	 then
immersing	 the	 slices	 in	 a	 brine	 for	 10	 or	 15
minutes.	 In	 either	 method	 the	 “maturing”
period	 has	 shrunk	 to	 a	 few	 hours,	 and	 the
bacon	 is	 packed	 the	 same	 day.	 Hams	 are
injected	 with	 brine,	 then	 “tumbled”	 in	 large
rotating	drums	for	a	day	to	massage	the	brine
evenly	 through	 the	 meat	 and	 make	 it	 more
supple,	 and	 finally	 pressed	 into	 shape,	 partly
or	 fully	 cooked,	 chilled,	 and	 sold	 with	 no
maturing	 period.	 For	 some	 boneless	 “hams,”



pork	pieces	are	tumbled	with	salt	to	draw	out
the	 muscle	 protein	 myosin,	 which	 forms	 a
sticky	 layer	 that	 holds	 the	 pieces	 together.
Most	 corned	 beef	 is	 now	 injected	with	 brine
as	 well;	 the	 briskets	 never	 touch	 any	 actual
salt	grains.

Modern	ham	and	bacon	contain	more
moisture	than	the	dry-cured	versions
(sometimes	more	than	the	original	raw	meat!)
and	about	half	the	salt	—	3–4%	instead	of	5–
7%.	Where	slices	of	traditional	ham	and
bacon	fry	easily	and	retain	75%	of	their
weight,	the	wetter	modern	versions	spatter,
shrink,	and	curl	as	they	give	up	their	water,
and	retain	only	a	third	of	their	initial	weight.

Smoked	Meats

Smoke	from	burning	plant	materials,	usually
wood,	has	helped	to	preserve	food	ever	since
our	ancestors	mastered	fire.	Smoke’s
usefulness	results	from	its	chemical



complexity	(p.	448).	It	contains	many
hundreds	of	compounds,	some	of	which	kill	or
inhibit	the	growth	of	microbes,	some	of	which
retard	fat	oxidation	and	the	development	of
rancid	flavors,	and	some	of	which	add	an
appealing	flavor	of	their	own.	Because	smoke
only	affects	the	surface	of	food,	it	has	long
been	used	in	conjunction	with	salting	and
drying	—	a	happy	combination	because	salted
meats	are	especially	prone	to	developing
rancidity.	American	country	hams	and	bacons
are	examples	of	smoked	salted	foods.	Because
there	are	now	other	ways	to	store	meat,	and
because	some	smoke	components	are	known
to	be	health	hazards	(p.	449),	smoke	is	now
used	less	frequently	as	a	full-strength
preservative,	and	more	often	as	a	lightly
applied	flavoring.

Hot	and	Cold	Smoking	Meat	can	be	smoked
in	 two	 different	ways.	When	hot-smoked,	 the
meat	 is	 held	 directly	 above	 or	 in	 the	 same



enclosure	 as	 the	 wood,	 and	 therefore	 cooks
while	it’s	smoked.	This	will	give	it	a	more	or
less	 firm,	 dry	 texture,	 depending	 on	 the
temperature	 (usually	 between	 130	 and
180ºF/55–80ºC)	 and	 time	 involved,	 and	 can
kill	microbes	throughout	the	meat,	not	just	on
the	 surface.	 (Barbecuing	 is	 a	 form	 of	 hot
smoking;	see	p.	157.)	When	it	is	cold-smoked,
the	 meat	 is	 held	 in	 an	 unheated	 chamber
through	 which	 smoke	 is	 passed	 from	 a
separate	firebox.	The	texture	of	the	meat,	and
any	 microbes	 within	 it,	 are	 relatively
unaffected.	 The	 cold-smoking	 chamber	 may
be	as	low	as	32ºF/0ºC	but	more	usually	ranges
between	60	and	80ºF/15–25ºC.	Smoke	vapors
are	 deposited	 onto	 the	meat	 surface	 as	much
as	 seven	 times	 faster	 in	 hot	 smoking;
however,	 cold-smoked	 meats	 tend	 to
accumulate	 higher	 concentrations	 of	 the
sweet-spicy	phenolic	components	and	so	may
have	 a	 finer	 flavor.	 (They	 also	 tend	 to
accumulate	 more	 possible	 carcinogens.)	 The



humidity	 of	 the	 air	 also	makes	 a	 difference;
smoke	 vapors	 are	 deposited	 most	 efficiently
onto	moist	 surfaces,	 so	 “wet”	 smoking	 has	 a
stronger	effect	in	a	shorter	time.

Fermented	Meats:
Cured	Sausages

Milk	is	transformed	into	long-keeping	and
flavorful	cheese	by	removing	some	of	its
moisture,	salting	it,	and	encouraging	harmless
microbes	to	grow	in	and	acidify	it:	and	meat
can	be	be	treated	in	much	the	same	way	to	the
same	effect.	There	are	many	different	kinds	of
sausage,	or	re-formed	masses	of	chopped,
salted	meat	(p.	169).	Fermented	sausages	are
the	most	flavorful	thanks	to	bacteria	that
break	down	bland	proteins	and	fats	into
smaller,	intensely	savory	and	aromatic
molecules.

Fermented	sausages	probably	developed	in
prehistoric	times	from	the	practice	of	salting



and	drying	meat	scraps	to	preserve	them.
When	salted	scraps	are	squeezed	together,
microbe-laden	surfaces	end	up	inside	the
moist	mass,	and	salt-tolerant	bacteria	that	can
grow	without	oxygen	thrive	there.	For	the
most	part,	these	bacteria	turn	out	to	be	the
same	ones	that	can	grow	in	salty,	air-poor
cheese:	namely	the	Lactobacilli	and
Leuconostocs	(and	such	relatives	as	the
Micrococci,	Pediococci,	and	Carnobacteria).
They	produce	lactic	and	acetic	acids,	which
lower	the	meat	pH	from	6	to	4.5–5	and	make
it	even	less	hospitable	to	spoilage	microbes.
Then,	as	the	sausage	slowly	dries	out	with
time,	the	salt	and	acidity	become	more
concentrated,	and	the	sausage	increasingly
resistant	to	spoilage.

Southern	 and	 Northern	 Styles	 of	 Sausage
Fermented	 sausages	 come	 in	 two	 general
styles.	 One	 is	 the	 dry,	 salty,	 well-spiced
sausage	 typical	 of	 the	 warm,	 dry



Mediterranean.	Italian	salami	and	Spanish	and
Portuguese	 chorizos	 are	 25–35%	 water,
contain	more	 than	4%	salt,	and	can	be	stored
at	 room	 temperature.	 The	 other	 style	 is	 the
moister,	 less	 salty,	 usually	 smoked	 and/or
cooked	 sausage	 typical	 of	 northern	 Europe,
whose	 cool,	 humid	 climate	 made	 drying
difficult.	 These	 “summer”	 sausages	 and
German	 cervelats	 are	 40–50%	 water,	 around
3.5%	salt,	and	must	be	refrigerated.	Both	can
be	eaten	uncooked.

Making	 Fermented	 Sausages	 These	 days,
nitrates	(Europe)	or	nitrites	(U.S.)	to	suppress
botulism	 bacteria	 are	 added	 to	 the	 mix	 of
meat,	fat,	bacterial	culture,	salt,	and	spices,	as
is	 some	 sugar,	 at	 least	 part	 of	 which	 the
bacteria	 transform	 into	 lactic	 acid.
Fermentation	 lasts	 from	 18	 hours	 to	 three
days,	 depending	 on	 temperature	 (60–
100ºF/15–38ºC,	with	 dry	 sausages	 at	 the	 low
end)	 and	 sausage	 size,	 until	 the	 acidity



reaches	 1%,	 the	 pH	 4.5–5.	 High-temperature
fermentation	 tends	 to	 produce	 volatile	 acids
(acetic,	 butanoic)	 with	 a	 sharp	 aroma,	 while
low-temperature	 fermentation	 produces	 a
more	 complex	 blend	 of	 nutty	 aldehydes	 and
fruity	 esters	 (the	 traditional	 salami	 flavor).
The	 sausage	 may	 then	 be	 cooked	 and/or
smoked,	 and	 finally	 is	 dried	 for	 two	 to	 three
weeks	to	the	desired	final	moisture	content.	A
powdery	 white	 coat	 of	 harmless	 molds	 and
yeasts	 (species	 of	Penicillium,	 Candida,
Debaromyces)	 may	 develop	 on	 the	 casing
during	 drying;	 these	 microbes	 contribute	 to
flavor	 and	 prevent	 the	 growth	 of	 spoilage
microbes.

Fermented	sausages	develop	a	dense,
chewy	texture	thanks	to	the	salt	extraction	of
the	meat	proteins,	their	denaturation	by	the
bacterial	acids,	and	to	the	general	drying	of
the	meat	mass.	Their	tangy,	aromatic	flavor
comes	from	the	bacterial	acids	and	volatile
molecules,	and	from	fragments	of	protein	and



fat	generated	by	enzymes	from	both	the
microbes	and	the	meat.

Confits

In	ancient	times,	cooks	from	central	Asia	to
western	Europe	learned	that	cooked	meat
could	be	preserved	by	burying	it	under	a	thick,
airtight	seal	of	fat.	Today	the	best	known
version	is	the	southwest	French	confit	of
goose	and	duck	legs,	which	became
fashionable	in	the	19th	century	on	the
coattails	of	foie	gras	—	which	may	in	turn
have	been	an	accidental	by-product	of
cramming	geese	to	get	the	fat	for
unfashionable	farmhouse	confits!	The	French
confit	probably	began	as	a	household	method
for	preserving	pork	in	its	own	lard	through	the
year	following	the	autumn	slaughter.	The
confit	of	goose	and	duck	seems	to	have	been
developed	by	makers	of	salted	meats	around
Bayonne	in	the	18th	century,	when	local



maize	production	made	it	economical	to
force-feed	fowl	and	generate	the	necessary
fat.	In	the	age	of	canning	and	refrigeration,
confits	are	still	made	as	a	convenient,	long-
keeping	ingredient	that	lends	its	distinctive
flavor	to	salads,	stews,	and	soups.

The	traditional	French	confit	is	made	by
salting	pieces	of	meat	for	a	day,	sometimes
along	with	herbs	and	spices,	then	drying	them,
immersing	them	in	fat,	and	heating	very
gradually	and	gently	for	several	hours.	The
meat,	often	still	pink	or	red	inside	(p.	149),	is
then	drained,	placed	in	a	sterilized	container
over	an	additional	sprinkling	of	salt,	the	fat
skimmed	from	any	spoilage-prone	meat
juices,	reheated,	and	then	poured	over	the
meat.	Sealed	and	stored	in	a	cool	place,	the
confit	keeps	for	several	months,	and	can	be
reheated	periodically	to	extend	its	useful	life.

The	small	but	real	risk	that	botulism
bacteria	could	grow	in	this	low-oxygen
environment	is	reduced	by	the	second	dose	of



salt,	by	storage	temperatures	below	40ºF/4ºC,
and	by	the	addition	of	nitrate	or	nitrite	to	the
salt.	Most	modern	versions	of	the	confit	are
either	canned	or	are	refrigerated	for	safety	and
made	to	be	eaten	within	a	few	days,	so	they’re
salted	mildly,	more	for	flavor	and	color	than
for	preservation.

The	flavor	of	a	traditional	confit	is	said	to
improve	over	the	course	of	several	months.
Though	the	cooking	presumably	kills	bacteria
and	inactivates	all	enzymes	in	the	meat,	there
will	certainly	be	biochemical	changes	in	the
meat	over	time,	and	the	fat	will	oxidize.	A
slight	rancidity	is	part	of	the	flavor	of	a
traditional	confit.

Food	Words:	Confit
These	days	 the	word	confit	 is	used	loosely
to	 describe	 just	 about	 anything	 cooked
slowly	 and	 gently	 to	 a	 rich,	 succulent
consistency:	 onions	 in	 olive	 oil,	 for
example,	 or	 shrimp	 cooked	 and	 stored



under	clarified	butter.	In	fact	the	term	is	a
fairly	 inclusive	 one.	 It	 comes	 via	 the
French	 verb	confire,	 from	 the	 Latin
conficere,	 meaning	 “to	 do,	 to	 produce,	 to
make,	 to	 prepare.”	 The	 French	 verb	 was
first	 applied	 in	 medieval	 times	 to	 fruits
cooked	 and	 preserved	 in	 sugar	 syrup	 or
honey	(hence	French	confiture	and	English
confection)	 or	 in	 alcohol.	 Later	 it	 was
applied	 to	 vegetables	 pickled	 in	 vinegar,
olives	 in	 oil,	 various	 foods	 in	 salt,	 and
meats	 under	 fat.	 The	 general	 sense	 has
been	 to	 immerse	 a	 food	 in	 and	 often
impregnate	 it	 with	 a	 substance	 that	 both
flavors	it	and	preserves	it.	In	modern	usage
of	 the	 term	confit,	 the	 connotations	 of
immersion,	 impregnation,	 flavoring,	 and
slow,	deliberate	preparation	survive,	while
the	idea	of	preservation	—	and	the	special
flavors	 that	 develop	 over	 weeks	 and
months	—	has	faded	away.

Canned	Meats



Canned	Meats

Around	1800,	a	French	brewer	and
confectioner	named	Nicolas	Appert
discovered	that	if	he	sealed	food	in	a	glass
container	and	then	heated	the	container	in
boiling	water,	the	food	would	keep
indefinitely	without	spoiling.	This	was	the
beginning	of	canning,	a	form	of	preservation
in	which	the	food	is	first	isolated	from	air	and
external	contamination	by	microbes,	and	then
heated	sufficiently	to	destroy	any	microbes
already	in	the	food.	(Pasteur	hadn’t	yet	proven
the	existence	of	microbes;	Appert	simply
observed	that	all	“ferments”	were	destroyed	in
his	process.)	When	done	properly,	canning	is
quite	effective:	canned	meat	a	century	old	has
been	eaten	without	harm,	if	also	without	much
pleasure.	The	canning	of	meats	is	almost
exclusively	an	industrial	process	today,	in	part
because	it	offers	the	cook	little	in	the	way	of
desirable	flavors	or	textures.



Chapter	4

Fish	and	Shellfish

Fisheries	and	Aquaculture
Advantages	and	Drawbacks	of	Aquaculture

Seafood	and	Health
Health	Benefits
Health	Hazards

Life	 in	 Water	 and	 the	 Special	 Nature	 of
Fish

The	Paleness	and	Tenderness	of	Fish	Flesh
The	Flavor	of	Fish	and	Shellfish
The	Healthfulness	of	Fish	Oils
The	Perishability	of	Fish	and	Shellfish
The	Sensitivity	and	Fragility	of	Fish	in	the
Pan
The	Unpredictability	of	Fish	Quality

The	Anatomy	and	Qualities	of	Fish
Fish	Anatomy
Fish	Muscle	and	Its	Delicate	Texture



Fish	Flavor
Fish	Color

The	Fish	We	Eat
The	 Herring	 Family:	 Anchovy,	 Sardine,
Sprat,	Shad
Carp	and	Catfish
Salmons,	Trouts,	and	Relatives
The	Cod	Family
Nile	Perch	and	Tilapia
Basses
Icefish
Tunas	and	Mackerel
Swordfish
Flatfish:	Soles,	Turbot,	Halibuts,	Flounders

From	the	Waters	to	the	Kitchen
The	Harvest
The	Effects	of	Rigor	Mortis	and	Time
Recognizing	Fresh	Fish
Storing	 Fresh	 Fish	 and	 Shellfish:
Refrigeration	and	Freezing
Irradiation

Unheated	 Preparations	 of	 Fish	 and



Shellfish
Sushi	and	Sashimi
Tart	Ceviche	and	Kinilaw
Salty	Poke	and	Lomi

Cooking	Fish	and	Shellfish
How	Heat	Transforms	Raw	Fish
Preparations	for	Cooking
Techniques	for	Cooking	Fish	and	Shellfish
Fish	Mixtures

Shellfish	and	Their	Special	Qualities
Crustaceans:	Shrimps,	Lobsters,	Crabs,	and
Relatives
Molluscs:	 Clams,	 Mussels,	 Oysters,
Scallops,	Squid,	and	Relatives
Other	Invertebrates:	Sea	Urchins

Preserved	Fish	and	Shellfish
Dried	Fish
Salted	Fish
Fermented	Fish
Smoked	Fish
Four-Way	 Preservation:	 Japanese
Katsuobushi



Marinated	Fish
Canned	Fish

Fish	Eggs
Salt	Transforms	Egg	Flavor	and	Texture
Caviar

Fish	 and	 shellfish	 are	 foods	 from	 the	 earth’s
other	 world,	 its	 vast	 water	 underworld.	 Dry
land	makes	up	less	than	a	third	of	the	planet’s
surface,	and	it’s	a	tissue-thin	home	compared
to	the	oceans,	whose	floor	plunges	as	much	as
7	 miles	 below	 the	 waves.	 The	 oceans	 are
voluminous	 and	 ancient,	 the	 “primordial
soup”	in	which	all	life	began,	and	in	which	the
human	imagination	has	found	rich	inspiration
for	 myths	 of	 destruction	 and	 creation,	 of
metamorphosis	and	rebirth.	The	creatures	that
live	in	this	cold,	dark,	dense,	airless	place	are
unmatched	 among	 our	 food	 animals	 in	 their
variety	and	their	strangeness.

Our	species	has	long	nourished	itself	on
fish	and	shellfish,	and	it	built	nations	on	them



as	well.	The	world’s	coastlines	are	dotted	with
massive	piles	of	oyster	and	mussel	shells	that
commemorate	feasts	going	back	300,000
years.	By	40,000	years	ago	the	hunters	of
prehistoric	Europe	were	carving	salmon
images	and	making	the	first	hooks	to	catch
river	fish;	and	not	long	afterward,	they
ventured	onto	the	ocean	in	boats.	From	the
late	Middle	Ages	on,	the	seagoing	nations	of
Europe	and	Scandinavia	exploited	the
Atlantic’s	abundant	stocks	of	cod	and	herring,
drying	and	salting	them	into	commodities	that
were	the	foundation	of	their	modern
prosperity.

Five	hundred	years	later,	at	the	beginning
of	the	21st	century,	the	oceans’	productivity	is
giving	out.	It	has	been	exhausted	by	feeding	a
tenfold	increase	in	the	human	population,	and
by	constant	advances	in	fishing	technology
and	efficiency.	With	the	help	of	faster	and
larger	ships,	sonar	to	see	into	the	depths,
miles-long	nets	and	lines,	and	the



mechanization	of	all	aspects	of	the	harvest,
we’ve	managed	to	fish	many	important	food
species	to	the	verge	of	commercial	extinction.
Formerly	common	fish	—	cod	and	herring,
Atlantic	salmon	and	swordfish	and	sole,
sturgeon	and	shark	—	are	increasingly	rare.
Others	—	orange	roughy,	Chilean	sea	bass,
monkfish	—	come	and	go	from	the	market,
temporarily	abundant	until	they	too	are
overfished.

The	decline	in	the	populations	of	wild	fish
has	encouraged	the	widespread	revival	and
modernization	of	aquaculture.	Fish	farms	are
now	our	nearly	exclusive	source	for
freshwater	fish,	for	Atlantic	salmon,	and	for
mussels.	Many	of	these	operations	effectively
spare	wild	populations,	but	others	further
deplete	them	and	cause	environmental
damage	of	their	own.	It	takes	some	effort
these	days	to	find	and	choose	fish	and
shellfish	that	have	been	produced	in
environmentally	responsible,	sustainable



ways.
Yet	it’s	a	good	time	to	be	eating	from	the

waters.	More	fish	of	excellent	quality	are
available	more	widely	than	ever	before,	and
they	come	from	all	over	the	globe,	offering
the	opportunity	to	discover	new	ingredients
and	new	pleasures.	At	the	same	time,	their
variety	and	variability	make	it	challenging	to
choose	and	prepare	them	well.	Fish	and
shellfish	are	more	fragile	and	less	predictable
than	ordinary	meats.	This	chapter	will	take	a
close	look	at	their	special	nature,	and	how
they’re	best	handled	and	prepared.

Brillat-Savarin	on	Fish
Fish	 are	 an	 endless	 source	 of	 meditation
and	 astonishment.	 The	 varied	 forms	 of
these	strange	creatures,	their	diverse	means
of	existence,	the	influence	upon	this	of	the
places	in	which	they	must	live	and	breathe
and	move	about….

—	Physiology	of	Taste,	1825



Fisheries
and	Aquaculture

Of	all	our	foods,	fish	and	shellfish	are	the
only	ones	that	we	still	harvest	in	significant
quantities	from	the	wild.	The	history	of	the
world’s	fisheries	is	the	saga	of	human
ingenuity,	bravery,	hunger,	and	wastefulness
evolving	into	a	maw	that	now	swallows	much
of	the	oceans’	tremendous	productivity.	In
1883,	the	eminent	biologist	T.	H.	Huxley
expressed	his	belief	that	“the	cod	fishery,	the
herring	fishery,	the	pilchard	fishery,	the
mackerel	fishery,	and	probably	all	the	great
sea	fisheries	are	inexhaustible;	that	is	to	say
that	nothing	we	do	seriously	affects	the
numbers	of	fish.”	Just	over	a	century	later,
cod	and	herring	stocks	on	both	sides	of	the
North	Atlantic	have	collapsed,	many	other
fish	are	in	decline,	and	the	U.N.	Food	and
Agriculture	Organization	estimates	that	we
are	harvesting	two-thirds	of	the	major



commercial	fish	in	the	world	at	or	beyond	the
level	at	which	they	can	sustain	themselves.

In	addition	to	dangerously	depleting	its
target	fish	populations,	modern	fishing	causes
collateral	damage	to	other	species,	the
“bycatch”	of	undiscriminating	nets	and	lines
that	is	simply	discarded,	and	it	can	damage
ocean-bottom	habitats.	Fishing	is	also	an
unpredictable,	dangerous	job,	subject	to	the
uncertainties	of	weather	and	the	hazards	of
working	at	sea	with	heavy	equipment.	To	this
highly	problematic	system	of	production,
there	is	an	increasingly	important	alternative:
aquaculture,	or	fish	farming,	which	in	many
parts	of	the	world	goes	back	thousands	of
years.	Today	in	the	United	States,	all	of	the
rainbow	trout	and	nearly	all	of	the	catfish	sold
are	farmed	on	land	in	various	kinds	of	ponds
and	tanks.	Norway	pioneered	the	ocean
farming	of	Atlantic	salmon	in	large	offshore
pens	in	the	1960s;	and	today	more	than	a	third
of	the	salmon	eaten	in	the	world	is	farmed	in



Europe	and	North	and	South	America.	About	a
third	of	the	world	warm-water	shrimp	harvest
is	cultured,	mainly	in	Asia.	In	all,	about	70
species	are	now	farmed	worldwide.

Advantages	and	Drawbacks	of	Aquaculture

There	are	several	distinct	advantages	to
aquaculture.	Above	all,	it	allows	the	producer
unequaled	control	over	the	condition	of	the
fish	and	the	circumstances	of	the	harvest,	both
of	which	can	result	in	better	quality	in	the
market.	Farmed	fish	can	be	carefully	selected
for	rapid	growth	and	other	desirable
characteristics,	and	raised	to	a	uniform	and
ideal	stage	for	eating.	By	adjusting	water
temperature	and	flow	rate	and	light	levels,
fish	can	be	induced	to	grow	far	more	rapidly
than	in	the	wild,	and	a	balance	can	be	struck
between	energy	consumption	and	muscle-
toning	exercise.	Farmed	fish	are	often	fattier
and	so	more	succulent.	They	can	be



slaughtered	without	suffering	the	stress	and
physical	damage	of	being	hooked,	netted,	or
dumped	en	masse	on	deck;	and	they	can	be
processed	and	chilled	immediately	and
cleanly,	thus	prolonging	their	period	of
maximum	quality.

The	Oceans’	Silver	Streams
Fish…may	 seem	 a	 mean	 and	 a	 base
commodity;	yet	who	will	but	truly	take	the
pains	and	consider	 the	sequel,	 I	 think	will
allow	it	well	worth	the	labour….	The	poor
Hollanders	 chiefly	 by	 fishing	 at	 a	 great
charge	 and	 labour	 in	 all	 weathers	 in	 the
open	 sea,…are	 made	 so	 mighty,	 strong,
and	 rich,	 as	 no	 state	 but	 Venice	 of	 twice
their	magnitude	 is	 so	well	 furnished,	with
so	 many	 fair	 cities,	 goodly	 towns,	 strong
fortresses….	 The	 sea	 [is]	 the	 source	 of
those	 silver	 streams	 of	 all	 their	 virtue,
which	 hath	 made	 them	 now	 the	 very
miracle	 of	 industry,	 the	 only	 pattern	 of



perfection	for	these	affairs…
—	Capt.	John	Smith,	The	Generall	Historie
of	Virginia,	New	England,	and	the	Summer

Isles,	London,	1624
However,	aquaculture	is	not	a	perfect

solution	to	the	problems	of	ocean	fishing,	and
has	itself	created	a	number	of	serious
problems.	Farming	in	offshore	pens
contaminates	surrounding	waters	with	wastes,
antibiotics,	and	unconsumed	food,	and	allows
genetically	uniform	fish	to	escape	and	dilute
the	diversity	of	already	endangered	wild
populations.	The	feed	for	carnivorous	and
scavenger	species	(salmon,	shrimp)	is	mainly
protein-rich	fish	meal,	so	some	aquaculture
operations	actually	consume	wild	fish	rather
than	sparing	them.	And	very	recent	studies
have	found	that	some	environmental	toxins
(PCBs,	p.	184)	become	concentrated	in	fish
meal	and	are	deposited	in	the	flesh	of	farmed
salmon.

A	less	serious	problem,	but	one	that	makes



a	difference	in	the	kitchen,	is	that	the
combination	of	limited	water	flow,	limited
exercise,	and	artificial	feeds	can	affect	the
texture	and	flavor	of	farmed	fish.	In	taste
tests,	farmed	trout,	salmon,	and	catfish	are
perceived	to	be	blander	and	softer	than	their
wild	counterparts.

Modern	aquaculture	is	still	young,	and
ongoing	research	and	regulation	will	certainly
solve	some	of	these	problems.	In	the
meantime,	the	most	environmentally	benign
products	of	aquaculture	are	freshwater	fish
and	a	few	saltwater	fish	(sturgeon,	turbot)
farmed	on	land,	and	molluscs	farmed	on
seacoasts.	Concerned	cooks	and	consumers
can	get	up-to-date	information	about	the
health	of	fisheries	and	aquacultural	practices
from	a	number	of	public	interest	groups,
including	the	Monterey	Bay	Aquarium	in
California.

Farmed	Fish	and	Shellfish



These	 are	 some	 commonly	 available	 fish
and	 shellfish	 that	 are	 being	 farmed	 on	 a
commercial	 scale	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the
21st	century.

Freshwater	Fish

1.	 Carp
2.	 Tilapia
3.	 Catfish
4.	 Trout	(rainbow)
5.	 Nile	perch
6.	 Eel
7.	 Striped	bass	(hybrid)

Saltwater	Fish

1.	 Salmon
2.	 Sea	Bass
3.	 Sturgeon
4.	 Trout	(steelhead)
5.	 Char
6.	 Turbot



7.	 Mahimahi
8.	 Milkfish
9.	 Yellowtail
10.	 Amberjack
11.	 Breams
12.	 Fugu
13.	 Tuna

Molluscs

1.	 Abalone
2.	 Mussel
3.	 Oyster
4.	 Clam
5.	 Scallop

Crustaceans

1.	 Shrimp
2.	 Crayfish

Seafood	and	Health



Fish	is	good	for	us:	this	belief	is	one
important	reason	for	the	growing	consumption
of	seafood	in	the	developed	world.	There	is
indeed	good	evidence	that	fish	oils	can
contribute	significantly	to	our	long-term
health.	On	the	other	hand,	of	all	our	foods,
fish	and	shellfish	are	the	source	of	the
broadest	range	of	immediate	health	hazards,
from	bacteria	and	viruses	to	parasites,
pollutants,	and	strange	toxins.	Cooks	and
consumers	should	be	aware	of	these	hazards,
and	of	how	to	minimize	them.	The	simplest
rule	is	to	buy	from	knowledgeable	seafood
specialists	whose	stock	turns	over	quickly,
and	to	cook	fish	and	shellfish	promptly	and
thoroughly.	Raw	and	lightly	cooked
preparations	are	delicious	but	carry	the	risk	of
several	kinds	of	food-borne	disease.	They	are
best	indulged	in	at	established	restaurants	that
have	access	to	the	best	fish	and	the	expertise
to	prepare	it.

Health	Benefits



Health	Benefits

Like	meats,	fish	and	shellfish	are	good
sources	of	protein,	the	B	vitamins,	and	various
minerals.	Iodine	and	calcium	are	special
strengths.	Many	fish	are	very	lean,	and	so
offer	these	nutrients	along	with	relatively	few
calories.	But	the	fat	of	ocean	fish	turns	out	to
be	especially	valuable	in	its	own	right.	Like
other	fats	that	are	liquid	at	room	temperature,
fish	fats	are	usually	referred	to	as	“oils.”

The	 Benefits	 of	 Fish	 Oils	 As	 we’ll	 see	 (p.
189),	 life	 in	 cold	 water	 has	 endowed	 sea
creatures	 with	 fats	 rich	 in	 unusual,	 highly
unsaturated	omega-3	 fatty	 acids.	 (The	 name
means	 that	 the	first	kink	 in	 the	 long	chain	of
carbon	atoms	is	at	the	third	link	from	the	end;
see	p.	801.)	The	human	body	can’t	make	these
fatty	 acids	 very	 efficiently	 from	 other	 fatty
acids,	 so	 our	 diet	 supplies	 most	 of	 them.	A
growing	body	of	 evidence	 indicates	 that	 they
happen	 to	 have	 a	 number	 of	 beneficial



influences	on	our	metabolism.
One	benefit	is	quite	direct,	the	others

indirect.	Omega-3	fatty	acids	are	essential	to
the	development	and	function	of	the	brain	and
the	retina,	and	it	appears	that	an	abundance	in
our	diet	helps	ensure	the	health	of	the	central
nervous	system	in	infancy	and	throughout	life.
But	the	body	also	transforms	omega-3	fatty
acids	into	a	special	set	of	calming	immune-
system	signals	(eicosanoids).	The	immune
system	responds	to	various	kinds	of	injuries
by	generating	an	inflammation,	which	kills
cells	in	the	vicinity	of	the	injury	in
preparation	for	repairing	it.	But	some
inflammations	can	become	self-perpetuating,
and	do	more	harm	than	good:	most
importantly,	they	can	damage	arteries	and
contribute	to	heart	disease,	and	they	can
contribute	to	the	development	of	some
cancers.	A	diet	rich	in	omega-3	fatty	acids
helps	limit	the	inflammatory	response,	and
thus	lowers	the	incidence	of	heart	disease	and



cancer.	By	reducing	the	body’s	readiness	to
form	blood	clots,	it	also	lowers	the	incidence
of	stroke.	And	it	lowers	the	artery-damaging
form	of	blood	cholesterol.

In	sum,	it	looks	as	though	a	moderate	and
regular	consumption	of	fatty	ocean	fish	is
good	for	us	in	several	ways.	Fish	obtain	their
omega-3	fatty	acids	directly	or	indirectly
from	tiny	oceanic	plants	called	phytoplankton.
Farmed	fish	generally	have	lower	levels	of	the
omega-3s	in	their	formulated	feed,	and	so	less
in	their	meat.	Freshwater	fish	don’t	have
access	to	the	oceanic	plankton,	and	so	provide
negligible	amounts	of	omega-3s.	However,	all
fish	contain	low	amounts	of	cholesterol-
raising	saturated	fats,	so	to	the	extent	that
they	replace	meat	in	the	diet,	they	lower
artery-damaging	blood	cholesterol	and	reduce
the	risk	of	heart	disease.

Health	Hazards



There	are	three	general	kinds	of	hazardous
materials	that	contaminate	fish	and	shellfish:
industrial	toxins,	biological	toxins,	and
disease-causing	microbes	and	parasites.

Toxic	 Metals	 and	 Pollutants	 Because	 rain
washes	chemical	pollution	from	the	air	to	the
ground,	 and	 rain	 and	 irrigation	wash	 it	 from
the	 ground,	 almost	 every	 kind	 of	 chemical
produced	 on	 the	 planet	 ends	 up	 in	 the	 rivers
and	oceans,	where	they	can	be	accumulated	by
fish	 and	 shellfish.	 Of	 the	 potentially
hazardous	 substances	 found	 in	 fish,	 the	most
significant	 are	 heavy	 metals	 and	 organic
(carbon-containing)	 pollutants,	 preeminently
dioxins	 and	 polychlorinated	 biphenyls,	 or
PCBs.	 The	 heavy	metals,	 including	mercury,
lead,	 cadmium,	 and	 copper,	 interfere	 with
oxygen	 absorption	 and	 the	 transmission	 of
signals	 in	 the	nervous	system;	 they’re	known
to	 cause	 brain	 damage	 in	 humans.	 Organic
pollutants	 cause	 liver	 damage,	 cancer,	 and



hormonal	 disturbances	 in	 laboratory	 animals,
and	 they	 accumulate	 in	 body	 fat.	 Fatty	 coho
salmon	 and	 trout	 in	 the	 Great	 Lakes	 carry
such	 high	 levels	 of	 these	 pollutants	 that
government	 agencies	 advise	 against	 eating
them.

Cooking	doesn’t	eliminate	chemical
toxins,	and	there’s	no	direct	way	for
consumers	to	know	whether	fish	contain
unhealthy	levels	of	them.	In	general,	they
concentrate	in	filter-feeding	shellfish	like
oysters,	which	strain	suspended	particles	from
large	volumes	of	water,	and	in	large	predatory
fish	at	the	top	of	the	food	chain,	which	are
long-lived	and	eat	other	creatures	that
accumulate	toxins.	In	recent	years,	common
ocean	fish	have	been	found	to	contain	so
much	mercury	that	the	U.S.	Food	and	Drug
Administration	advises	children	and	pregnant
women	not	to	eat	any	swordfish,	shark,
tilefish,	and	king	mackerel,	and	to	limit	their
overall	fish	consumption	to	12	ounces/335



grams	per	week.	Even	tuna,	currently	the	most
popular	seafood	in	the	United	States	after
shrimp,	may	join	the	list	of	fish	that	are	best
eaten	only	occasionally.	The	fish	least	likely
to	accumulate	mercury	and	other	toxins	are
smaller,	short-lived	fish	from	the	open	ocean
and	from	farms	with	a	controlled	water
supply.	They	include	Pacific	salmon	and
soles,	common	mackerel,	sardines,	and
farmed	trout,	striped	bass,	catfish,	and	tilapia.
Sport	fishing	in	freshwater	or	near	large
coastal	cities	is	more	likely	to	land	an
unwholesome	catch	contaminated	by	runoff	or
industrial	discharge.

Fat	Contents	of	Common	Fish

Low-Fat Moderately High-Fat
Fish	(0.5– Fatty	Fish	(3– Fish	(8–

3%) 7%) 20%)
Cod Anchovy Arctic	char
Flounder Bluefish Carp



Halibut Catfish Chilean	sea	bass	(Patagonian
toothfish)

Monkfish Salmon:	pink,	coho
Rockfish Shark Eel
Skate Smelt Herring
Snapper Sole:	Dover Mackerel
Tuna:	bigeye,	yellowfin, Striped

skipjack bass Pompano

Sturgeon Sablefish

Turbot Swordfish Salmon:	Atlantic,	king,
sockeye

Tilapia
Escolar* Trout Shad
Orange	roughy* Tuna:	bluefin,	albacore
Ruvettus/walu* Whitefish
*These	 fish	contain	oil-like	wax	esters	 (p.
187)	that	the	human	body	can’t	digest;	they
therefore	 seem	 rich	 but	 are	 really	 low-fat
fish.



Infectious	and	Toxin-Producing	Microbes
Seafoods	carry	about	the	same	risk	of
bacterial	infections	and	poisonings	as	other
meats	(p.	125).	The	riskiest	seafoods	are	raw
or	undercooked	shellfish,	particularly
bivalves,	which	trap	bacteria	and	viruses	as
they	filter	the	water	for	food,	and	which	we
eat	digestive	tract	and	all,	sometimes	raw.	As
early	as	the	19th	century,	public	health
officials	connected	outbreaks	of	cholera	and
typhoid	fever	with	shellfish	from	polluted
waters.	Government	monitoring	of	water
quality	and	regulation	of	shellfish	harvest	and
sales	have	greatly	reduced	these	problems	in
many	countries.	And	scrupulous	restaurant
owners	make	sure	to	buy	shellfish	for	the
summer	raw	bar	from	monitored	sources,	or
from	less	risky	cold-water	sources.	But	lovers
of	raw	or	lightly	cooked	seafood	should	be
aware	of	the	possibility	of	infection.

As	a	general	rule,	infections	by	bacteria
and	parasites	can	be	prevented	by	cooking



seafood	to	a	minimum	of	140ºF/60ºC.
Temperatures	above	185ºF/82ºC	are	required
to	eliminate	some	viruses.	Some	chemical
toxins	produced	by	microbes	survive	cooking,
and	can	cause	food	poisoning	even	though	the
microbes	themselves	are	destroyed.

Among	the	most	important	microbes	in
fish	and	shellfish	are	the	following:

Vibrio	bacteria,	natural	inhabitants	of
estuary	waters	that	thrive	in	warm
summer	months.	One	species	causes
cholera,	another	a	milder	diarrheal
disease,	and	a	third	(V.	vulnificus),
usually	contracted	from	raw	oysters	and
the	deadliest	of	the	seafood-related
diseases,	causes	high	fever,	a	drop	in
blood	pressure,	and	damage	to	skin	and
flesh,	and	kills	more	than	half	of	its
victims.
Botulism	bacteria,	which	grow	in	the
digestive	system	of	unchilled	fish	and
produce	a	deadly	nerve	toxin.	Most	cases



of	fish-borne	botulism	are	caused	by
improperly	cold-smoked,	salt-cured,	or
fermented	products.
Intestinal	viruses,	the	“Norwalk”	viruses,
which	attack	the	lining	of	the	small
intestine	and	cause	vomiting	and
diarrhea.
Hepatitis	viruses	A	and	E,	which	can
cause	long-lasting	liver	damage.

Scombroid	Poisoning	Scombroid	poisoning	is
unusual	 in	 that	 it	 is	 caused	 by	 a	 number	 of
otherwise	harmless	microbes	when	they	grow
on	 insufficiently	 chilled	 mackerels	 of	 the
genus	Scomber	 and	 other	 similarly	 active
swimmers,	 including	 tuna,	 mahimahi,
bluefish,	 herring,	 sardine,	 and	 anchovy.
Within	 half	 an	 hour	 of	 eating	 one	 of	 these
contaminated	 fish,	 even	 fully	 cooked,	 the
victim	suffers	from	temporary	headache,	rash,
itching,	 nausea,	 and	 diarrhea.	 The	 symptoms
are	 apparently	 caused	 by	 a	 number	 of	 toxins



including	histamine,	a	substance	that	our	cells
use	 to	 signal	 each	 other	 in	 response	 to
damage;	antihistamine	drugs	give	some	relief.

Shellfish	and	Ciguatera	Poisonings	Fish	and
shellfish	 share	 the	 waters	 with	 many
thousands	 of	 animal	 and	 plant	 species,	 some
of	 which	 engage	 in	 nasty	 chemical	 warfare
with	 each	 other.	At	 least	 60	 species	 of	 one-
celled	 algae	 called	 dinoflagellates	 produce
defensive	 toxins	 that	 also	 poison	 the	 human
digestive	 and	 nervous	 systems.	 Several	 of
these	toxins	can	kill.

We	don’t	consume	dinoflagellates	directly,
but	we	do	eat	animals	that	eat	them.	Bivalve
filter	feeders	—	mussels,	clams,	scallops,
oysters	—	concentrate	algal	toxins	in	their
gills	and/or	digestive	organs,	and	then
transmit	the	poisons	to	other	shellfish	—
usually	crabs	and	whelks	—	or	to	humans.
Accordingly,	most	dinoflagellate	poisonings
are	called	“shellfish	poisonings.”	Many



countries	now	routinely	monitor	waters	for
the	algae	and	shellfish	for	the	toxins,	so	the
greatest	risk	is	from	shellfish	gathered
privately.

There	are	several	distinct	types	of	shellfish
poisoning,	each	caused	by	a	different	toxin
and	each	with	somewhat	different	symptoms
(see	box	below),	though	all	but	one	are
marked	by	tingling,	numbness,	and	weakness
within	minutes	to	hours	after	eating.
Dinoflagellate	toxins	are	not	destroyed	by
ordinary	cooking,	and	some	actually	become
more	toxic	when	heated.	Suspect	shellfish
should	therefore	be	avoided	altogether.

Finfish	generally	don’t	accumulate	toxins
from	algae.	The	exceptions	are	a	group	of
tropical	reef	fish	—	barracuda,	groupers,
jacks,	king	mackerel,	mahimahi,	mullets,
porgies,	snappers,	wahoo	—	that	prey	on	an
algae-eating	snail	(cigua)	and	can	cause
ciguatera	poisoning.



Parasites	Parasites	are	not	bacteria	or	viruses:
they’re	 animals,	 from	 single-celled	 protozoa
to	 large	worms,	 that	 take	up	residence	in	one
or	more	animal	“hosts”	and	use	them	for	both
shelter	 and	nourishment	 during	parts	 of	 their
life	cycle.	There	are	more	than	50	that	can	be
transmitted	 to	 people	 who	 eat	 fish	 raw	 or
undercooked,	a	handful	of	which	are	relatively
common,	and	may	require	surgery	to	remove.
Thanks	 to	 their	 more	 complex	 biological
organization,	 parasites	 are	 sensitive	 to
freezing	(bacteria	generally	aren’t).	So	there’s
a	simple	rule	for	eliminating	parasites	in	fish
and	 shellfish:	 either	 cook	 the	 food	 to	 a
minimum	of	140ºF/60ºC,	or	prefreeze	 it.	The
U.S.	 FDA	 recommends	 freezing	 at	 –31ºF/–
35ºC	 for	 15	 hours,	 or	 –10ºF/–23ºC	 for	 seven
days,	treatments	that	are	not	feasible	in	home
freezers,	which	seldom	dip	below	0ºF.

Poisonings	Caused	by	Toxic	Algae



Type	of	Poisoning Usual	Regions
Diarrhetic	shellfish Japan,	Europe,

poisoning Canada
Amnesic	shellfish U.S.	Pacific	coast,	New

poisoning England
Neurotoxic	shellfish Gulf	of	Mexico,

poisoning Florida
Paralytic	shellfish U.S.	Pacific	coast,	New

poisoning England
Ciguatera Caribbean,	Hawaii,	South
poisoning Pacific

Type	of	Poisoning Usual	Sources
Diarrhetic	shellfish Mussels,

poisoning scallops
Amnesic	shellfish Mussels,	clams,

poisoning Dungeness	crab
Neurotoxic	shellfish Clams,

poisoning oysters
Paralytic	shellfish Clams,	mussels,	oysters,



poisoning scallops,	cockles
Ciguatera Barracuda,	grouper,	snapper,
poisoning other	reef	fish

Type	of	Poisoning Toxins
Diarrhetic	shellfish	poisoning Okadaic	acid
Amnesic	shellfish	poisoning Domoic	acid
Neurotoxic	shellfish	poisoning Brevetoxins
Paralytic	shellfish	poisoning Saxitoxins
Ciguatera	poisoning Ciguatoxins
Anisakid	and	Cod	Worms	These	species	of
Anisakis	and	Pseudoterranova	can	be	an
inch/2.5	centimeters	or	more	long,	with	a
diameter	of	a	few	human	hairs.	Both	often
cause	only	a	harmless	tingling	in	the	throat,
but	they	sometimes	invade	the	lining	of	the
stomach	or	small	intestine	and	cause	pain,
nausea,	and	diarrhea.	They’re	commonly
found	in	herring,	mackerel,	cod,	halibut,
salmon,	rockfish,	and	squid,	and	can	be



contracted	from	sushi	or	lightly	marinated,
salted,	or	cold-smoked	preparations.	Farmed
salmon	are	much	less	likely	to	be	infected
than	wild	salmon.

Tapeworms	 and	 Flukes 	 Larvae	 of	 the
tapeworm	Diphyllobothrium	latum,	which	can
grow	 in	 the	human	 intestine	 to	 as	 long	as	27
feet/9	meters,	are	 found	 in	 freshwater	 fish	of
temperate	 regions	worldwide.	Notable	among
these	 is	 the	 whitefish,	 which	 caused	 many
infections	 when	 home	 cooks	 made	 the
traditional	 Jewish	dish	gefilte	 fish	 and	 tasted
the	raw	mix	to	correct	the	seasoning.

More	serious	hazards	are	a	number	of
flukes,	or	flatworms,	which	are	carried	by
fresh-	and	brackish-water	crayfish,	crabs,	and
fish.	They	damage	the	human	liver	and	lungs
after	being	consumed	in	such	live	Asian
delicacies	as	“jumping	salad”	and	“drunken
crabs.”

Potential	Carcinogens	Formed	During	Fish



Preparation	 Certain	 cooking	 processes
transform	 the	 proteins	 and	 related	molecules
in	meat	and	fish	into	highly	reactive	products
that	damage	DNA	and	may	thereby	initiate	the
development	 of	 cancers	 (p.	 124).	 So	 the	 rule
for	cooking	meat	also	holds	for	cooking	fish:
to	 minimize	 the	 creation	 of	 potential
carcinogens,	 steam,	 braise,	 and	 poach	 fish
rather	 than	 grilling,	 broiling,	 or	 frying	 it.	 If
you	 do	 use	 high,	 dry	 heat,	 then	 consider
applying	a	marinade,	whose	moisture,	acidity,
and	 other	 chemical	 qualities	 reduce
carcinogen	production.

Life	in	Water	and
the	Special	Nature	of	Fish

As	a	home	for	living	things,	the	earth’s	waters
are	a	world	apart.	The	house	rules	are	very
different	than	they	are	for	our	cattle	and	pigs
and	chickens.	The	adaptations	of	fish	and
shellfish	to	life	in	water	are	the	source	of	their



distinctive	qualities	as	foods.

The	Paleness	and	Tenderness	of	Fish	Flesh

Fish	owe	their	small,	light	bones,	delicate
connective	tissue,	and	large,	pale	muscle
masses	to	the	fact	that	water	is	much	denser
than	air.	Fish	can	attain	a	neutral	buoyancy	—
can	be	almost	weightless	—	simply	by	storing
some	lighter-than-water	oils	or	gas	in	their
bodies.	This	means	that	they	don’t	need	the
heavy	skeletons	or	the	tough	connective
tissues	that	land	animals	have	developed	in
order	to	support	themselves	against	the	force
of	gravity.

A	Health	Inconvenience:	Waxy	Fish
There’s	 an	 unusual	 digestive	 consequence
to	 eating	 the	 fish	 called	 escolar	 and	walu
(Lepidocybium	 flavobrunneum	 and
Ruvettus	 pretiotus).	 They,	 and	 to	 a	 lesser
extent	 the	 orange	 roughy,	 accumulate



substances	 called	 “wax	 esters,”	 which	 are
an	 oil-like	 combination	 of	 a	 long-chain
fatty	 acid	 and	 a	 long-chain	 alcohol.
Humans	 lack	 the	 digestive	 enzymes
necessary	 to	 break	 these	 molecules	 into
their	 smaller,	 absorbable	 parts.	 The	 wax
esters	 therefore	 pass	 intact	 and	 oily	 from
the	small	 intestine	 into	 the	colon,	where	a
sufficient	 quantity	 will	 cause	 diarrhea.
Restaurants	 are	 the	 best	 place	 to
experience	these	luscious	fish	—	the	flesh
is	 as	 much	 as	 20%	 calorie-free	 “oil”	 —
because	they	usually	limit	the	serving	size
to	a	tolerable	amount.
The	paleness	of	fish	flesh	results	from

water’s	buoyancy	and	its	resistance	to
movement.	Continuous	cruising	requires	long-
term	stamina	and	is	therefore	performed	by
slow-twitch	red	fibers,	well	supplied	with	the
oxygen-storing	pigment	myoglobin	and	fat	for
fuel	(p.	132).	Since	cruising	in	buoyant	water
is	relatively	effortless,	fish	devote	between	a



tenth	and	a	third	of	their	muscle	to	that	task,
usually	a	thin	dark	layer	just	under	the	skin.
But	water’s	resistance	to	movement	increases
exponentially	with	the	fish’s	speed.	This
means	that	fish	must	develop	very	high	power
very	quickly	when	accelerating.	And	so	they
devote	most	of	their	muscle	mass	to	an
emergency	powerpack	of	fast-twitch	white
cells	that	are	used	only	for	occasional	bursts
of	rapid	movement.

In	addition	to	red	and	white	muscle	fibers,
fish	in	the	tuna	family	and	some	others	have
intermediate	“pink”	fibers,	which	are	white
fibers	modified	for	more	continuous	work
with	oxygen-storing	pigments.

The	Flavor	of	Fish
and	Shellfish

The	flavors	of	ocean	and	freshwater	creatures
are	very	different.	Because	ocean	fish	breathe
and	swallow	salty	water,	they	had	to	develop	a



way	of	maintaining	their	body	fluids	at	the
right	concentration	of	dissolved	substances.
Water	in	the	open	ocean	is	about	3%	salt	by
weight,	while	the	optimum	level	of	dissolved
minerals	inside	animal	cells,	sodium	chloride
included,	is	less	than	1%.	Most	ocean
creatures	balance	the	saltiness	of	seawater	by
filling	their	cells	with	amino	acids	and	their
relatives	the	amines.	The	amino	acid	glycine
is	sweet;	glutamic	acid	in	the	form	of
monosodium	glutamate	is	savory	and
mouthfilling.	Shellfish	are	especially	rich	in
these	and	other	tasty	amino	acids.	Finfish
contain	some,	but	also	rely	on	a	largely
tasteless	amine	called	TMAO	(trimethylamine
oxide).	And	sharks,	skates,	and	rays	use	a
different	substance:	slightly	salty	and	bitter
urea,	which	is	what	animals	generally	turn
protein	waste	into	in	order	to	excrete	it.	The
problem	with	TMAO	and	urea	is	that	once	the
fish	are	killed,	bacteria	and	fish	enzymes
convert	the	former	into	stinky	TMA



(trimethylamine)	and	the	latter	into	kitchen-
cleanser	ammonia.	They’re	thus	responsible
for	the	powerfully	bad	smell	of	old	fish.

Fish	 muscle	 tissues,	 shown	 in	 cross-section.
Below	 left:	Most	 fish	 swim	 intermittently,	 so
their	 muscle	 mass	 consists	 mainly	 of	 fast
white	fibers,	with	isolated	regions	of	slow	red
fibers.	 Center:	Tuna	 swim	more	 continuously
and	 contain	 larger	 masses	 of	 dark	 fibers,
while	 even	 their	 white	 fibers	 contain	 some
myoglobin.	 Right:	Soles,	 halibuts,	 and	 other
bottom-hugging	flatfish	swim	on	their	side.

Freshwater	fish	are	a	different	story.	Their
environment	is	actually	less	salty	than	their
cells,	so	they	have	no	need	to	accumulate
amino	acids,	amines,	or	urea.	Their	flesh	is
therefore	relatively	mild,	both	when	it’s	fresh



and	when	it’s	old.

The	Healthfulness
of	Fish	Oils

Why	should	fish	and	not	Angus	steers	provide
the	highly	unsaturated	fats	that	turn	out	to	be
good	for	us?	Because	oceanic	waters	are
colder	than	pastures	and	barns,	and	most	fish
are	cold-blooded.	Throw	a	beefsteak	in	the
ocean	and	it	congeals;	its	cells	are	designed	to
operate	at	the	animal’s	usual	body
temperature,	around	100ºF/40ºC.	The	cell
membranes	and	energy	stores	of	ocean	fish
and	the	plankton	they	eat	must	remain	fluid
and	workable	at	temperatures	that	approach
32ºF/0ºC.	Their	fatty	acids	are	therefore	very
long	and	irregular	in	structure	(p.	801),	and
don’t	solidify	into	orderly	crystals	until	the
temperature	gets	very	low	indeed.

The	Perishability	of	Fish
and	Shellfish



The	cold	aquatic	environment	is	also
responsible	for	the	notorious	tendency	of	fish
and	shellfish	to	spoil	faster	than	other	meats.
The	cold	has	two	different	effects.	First,	it
requires	fish	to	rely	on	the	highly	unsaturated
fatty	acids	that	remain	fluid	at	low
temperatures:	and	these	molecules	are	highly
susceptible	to	being	broken	by	oxygen	into
stale-smelling,	cardboardy	fragments.	More
importantly,	cold	water	requires	fish	to	have
enzymes	that	work	well	in	the	cold,	and	the
bacteria	that	live	in	and	on	the	fish	also	thrive
at	low	temperatures.	The	enzymes	and
bacteria	typical	of	our	warm-blooded	meat
animals	normally	work	at	100ºF/40ºC,	and	are
slowed	to	a	crawl	in	a	refrigerator	at	40ºF/5ºC.
But	the	same	refrigerator	feels	perfectly
balmy	to	deep-water	fish	enzymes	and
spoilage	bacteria.	And	among	fishes,	cold-
water	species,	especially	fatty	ones,	spoil
faster	than	tropical	ones.	Where	refrigerated
beef	will	keep	and	even	improve	for	weeks,



mackerel	and	herring	remain	in	good
condition	on	ice	for	only	five	days,	cod	and
salmon	for	eight,	trout	for	15,	carp	and	tilapia
(a	freshwater	African	native)	for	20	days.

The	Sensitivity	and	Fragility
of	Fish	in	the	Pan

Most	fish	pose	a	double	challenge	in	the
kitchen.	They	are	more	easily	overcooked	to	a
dry	fibrousness	than	ordinary	meats.	And	even
when	they’re	perfectly	done,	their	flesh	is
very	fragile	and	tends	to	fall	apart	when
moved	from	pan	or	grill	to	plate.	The
sensitivity	of	fish	to	heat	is	related	to	their
perishability:	muscle	fibers	that	are
specialized	to	work	well	in	the	cold	not	only
spoil	at	lower	temperatures,	they	become
cooked	at	lower	temperatures.	The	muscle
proteins	of	ocean	fish	begin	to	unfold	and
coagulate	at	room	temperature!

Though	overcooked	fish	gets	dry,	it	never



gets	tough.	The	fragility	of	cooked	fish	results
from	its	relatively	small	amounts	connective-
tissue	collagen,	and	from	the	low	temperature
at	which	that	collagen	is	dissolved	into
gelatin.

The	Unpredictability
of	Fish	Quality

The	quality	of	many	fish	and	shellfish	can
vary	drastically	from	season	to	season.	This	is
because	they	live	out	life	cycles	that	typically
include	one	phase	during	which	they	grow	and
mature,	accumulating	energy	reserves	and
reaching	their	peak	of	culinary	quality,	and	a
subsequent	phase	during	which	they	expend
those	reserves	to	migrate	and	create	masses	of
eggs	or	sperm	for	the	next	generation.	And
most	fish	don’t	store	their	reserves	in	layers
of	fat,	as	land	animals	do.	Instead	they	use	the
proteins	of	their	muscle	mass	as	their	energy
pack.	During	migrations	and	spawning,	they



accumulate	protein-digesting	enzymes	in	their
muscle	and	literally	transform	their	own	flesh
into	the	next	generation.	Then	and	afterward,
their	muscle	is	meager	and	spent,	and	makes	a
spongy,	mushy	dish.

Because	different	fish	have	different
cycles,	and	can	be	in	different	phases
depending	on	the	part	of	the	world	in	which
they’ve	been	caught,	it’s	often	hard	to	know
whether	a	given	wild	fish	in	the	market	is	at
its	prime.

The	Anatomy
and	Qualities	of	Fish

Fish	and	shellfish	have	many	things	in
common,	but	anatomy	is	not	one	of	them.	Fish
are	vertebrates,	animals	with	backbones;
shellfish	are	boneless	invertebrates.	Their
muscles	and	organs	are	organized	differently,
and	as	a	result	they	can	have	very	different
textures.	The	anatomy	and	special	qualities	of



shellfish	are	described	separately,	beginning
on	p.	218.

Fish	Anatomy

For	about	400	million	years,	beginning	well
before	reptiles	or	birds	or	mammals	had	even
made	an	appearance,	fish	have	had	the	same
basic	body	plan:	a	streamlined	bullet	shape
that	minimizes	the	water’s	resistance	to	their
movement.	There	are	exceptions,	but	most
fish	can	be	thought	of	as	sheets	of	muscle
tissue	anchored	with	connective	tissue	and	the
backbone	to	a	propulsive	tail.	The	animals
push	water	behind	them,	developing	thrust	by
undulations	of	the	whole	body	and	flexing	of
the	tail.

Skin	 and	 Scales	 Fish	 skin	 consists	 of	 two
layers,	 a	 thin	 outer	 epidermis	 and	 a	 thicker
underlying	dermis.	A	variety	of	gland	cells	in
the	 epidermis	 secrete	 protective	 chemicals,



the	 most	 evident	 of	 which	 is	 mucus,	 a
proteinaceous	substance	much	like	egg	white.
The	 skin	 is	 often	 richer	 than	 the	 flesh,
averaging	 5–10%	 fat.	 The	 thick	 dermis	 layer
of	 the	 skin	 is	 especially	 rich	 inconnective
tissue.	It’s	generally	about	one-third	collagen
by	weight,	and	therefore	can	contribute	much
more	 thickening	 gelatin	 to	 stocks	 and	 stews
than	 the	 fish’s	 flesh	 (0.3–3%	 collagen)	 or
bones.	Moist	heating	will	 turn	the	skin	into	a
slick	gelatinous	sheet,	while	frying	or	grilling
enough	to	desiccate	it	will	make	it	crisp.

Scales	are	another	evident	form	of
protection	for	the	fish	skin.	They	are	made	up
of	the	same	hard,	tough	calcareous	minerals
as	teeth,	and	are	removed	by	scraping	against
their	grain	with	a	knife	blade.

Bones	 The	 main	 skeleton	 of	 a	 small	 or
moderate-size	fish,	consisting	of	the	backbone
and	attached	 rib	cage,	 can	often	be	 separated
from	 the	 meat	 in	 one	 piece.	 However,	 there



are	usually	also	bones	projecting	into	the	fins,
and	 fish	 in	 the	 herring,	 salmon,	 and	 other
families	have	small	“floating”	or	“pin”	bones
unattached	 to	 the	 main	 skeleton,	 which	 help
stiffen	 some	 of	 the	 connective-tissue	 sheets
and	 direct	 the	 muscular	 forces	 along	 them.
Because	 fish	 bones	 are	 smaller,	 lighter,	 and
less	 mineralized	 with	 calcium	 than	 land-
animal	 bones,	 and	 because	 their	 collagen	 is
less	 tough,	 they	 can	 be	 softened	 and	 even
dissolved	by	a	relatively	short	period	near	the
boil	 (hence	 the	 high	 calcium	 content	 of
canned	salmon).	Fish	skeletons	are	even	eaten
on	 their	 own:	 in	 Catalonia,	 Japan,	 and	 India
they’re	deep-fried	until	crunchy.

Fish	Innards	The	innards	of	fish	and	shellfish
offer	 their	 own	 special	 pleasures.	 Fish	 eggs
are	described	below	(p.	239).	Many	fish	livers
are	 prized,	 including	 those	 of	 the	 goatfish
(“red	mullet”),	 monkfish,	mackerel,	 ray,	 and
cod,	 as	 is	 the	 comparable	 organ	 in



crustaceans,	 the	hepatopancreas	 (p.	219).	The
“tongues”	of	cod	and	carp	are	actually	 throat
muscles	and	associated	connective	tissue	that
softens	with	 long	cooking.	Fish	heads	can	be
20%	fatty	material	 and	are	 stuffed	and	 slow-
cooked	until	the	bones	soften.	And	then	there
are	 “sounds,”	 or	 swim	 bladders,	 balloons	 of
connective	 tissue	 that	 such	 fish	 as	 cod,	 carp,
catfish,	 and	 sturgeon	 fill	 with	 air	 to	 adjust
their	buoyancy.	In	Asia,	fish	sounds	are	dried,
fried	until	they	puff	up,	and	slowly	cooked	in
a	savory	sauce.

Fish	Muscle	and	its	Delicate	Texture

Fish	have	a	more	delicate	texture	than	the
flesh	of	our	land	animals.	The	reasons	for	this
are	the	layered	structure	of	fish	muscle,	and
the	sparseness	and	weakness	of	fish
connective	tissue.

Muscle	Structure	In	land	animals,	individual



muscles	and	muscle	 fibers	can	be	quite	 long,
on	 the	 order	 of	 several	 inches,	 and	 the
muscles	 taper	 down	 at	 the	 ends	 into	 a	 tough
tendon	that	connects	them	to	bone.	In	fish,	by
contrast,	muscle	 fibers	are	arranged	 in	sheets
a	fraction	of	an	inch	thick	(“myotomes”),	and
each	 short	 fiber	merges	 into	 very	 thin	 layers
of	 connective	 tissue	 (“myosepta”),	which	 are
a	loose	mesh	of	collagen	fibers	that	run	from
the	 backbone	 to	 the	 skin.	 The	muscle	 sheets
are	 folded	 and	 nested	 in	 complex	 W-like
shapes	 that	 apparently	 orient	 the	 fibers	 for
greatest	 efficiency	 of	 force	 transmission	 to
the	 backbone.	 There	 are	 about	 50	 muscle
sheets	or	“flakes”	along	the	length	of	a	cod.

Connective	Tissue	 Fish	 connective	 tissue	 is
weak	 because	 its	 collagen	 contains	 less
structure-reinforcing	 amino	 acids	 than	 beef
collagen	does,	 and	because	 the	muscle	 tissue
also	 serves	 as	 an	 energy	 store	 that’s
repeatedly	built	up	and	broken	down,	whereas



in	 land	animals	 it	 is	progressively	 reinforced
with	age.	Meat	collagen	is	tough	and	must	be
cooked	 for	 some	 time	 near	 the	 boil	 to	 be
dissolved	 into	 gelatin,	 but	 in	 most	 fish	 it
dissolves	 at	 120	 or	 130ºF/50–55ºC,	 at	 which
point	 the	muscle	 layers	 separate	 into	distinct
flakes.

Succulence	 from	 Gelatin	 and	 Fat	 Both
gelatin	and	fat	can	contribute	an	impression	of
moistness	 to	 fish	 texture.	 Fish	 with	 little
collagen	 —	 trout,	 bass	 —	 seem	 drier	 when
cooked	 than	 those	 with	 more	 —	 halibut,
shark.	 Because	 the	 motion	 for	 steady
swimming	comes	mostly	from	the	back	end	of
the	 fish,	 the	 tail	 region	 contains	 more
connective	 tissue	 than	 the	 head	 end,	 and
seems	more	succulent.	Red	muscle	 fibers	are
thinner	 than	 white	 fibers	 and	 require	 more
connective	tissue	to	join	them	with	each	other,
so	 dark	 meat	 has	 a	 noticeably	 finer,	 more
gelatinous	texture.



The	fat	content	of	fish	muscle	runs	a
tremendous	range,	from	0.5%	in	cod	and	other
white	fish	to	20%	in	well-fed	herring	and	their
relatives	(p.	184).	Fat	storage	cells	are	found
primarily	in	a	distinct	layer	under	the	skin,
and	then	in	the	visible	sheets	of	connective
tissue	that	separate	the	myotomes.	Within	a
given	fish,	the	belly	region	is	usually	the
fattiest,	while	muscle	segments	get
progressively	leaner	toward	the	back	and	tail.
A	center-cut	salmon	steak	may	have	twice	the
fat	content	of	a	slice	from	the	tail.

Fish	 anatomy.	 Unlike	 the	 muscles	 of	 land
animals	(p.	120),	fish	muscles	are	arranged	in
layers	 of	 short	 fibers,	 and	 organized	 and
separated	 by	 sheets	 of	 connective	 tissue	 that



are	thin	and	delicate.
Softness	Certain	conditions	can	lead	to	fish
flesh	becoming	unpleasantly	soft.	When	fish
flesh	is	depleted	by	migration	or	by	spawning,
their	sparse	muscle	proteins	bond	to	each
other	only	very	loosely,	and	the	overall
texture	is	soft	and	flabby.	In	extreme	cases,
such	as	“sloppy”	cod	or	“jellied”	sole,	the
muscle	proteins	are	so	tenuously	bonded	that
the	muscle	seems	almost	liquefied.	Some	fish
come	out	mushy	when	thawed	after	frozen
storage,	because	freezing	disrupts	the	cells’
compartments	and	liberates	enzymes	that	then
attack	the	muscle	fibers.	And	enzyme	activity
during	cooking	can	turn	firm	fish	mushy	in
the	pan;	see	p.	211.

Fish	Flavor

The	flavor	of	fish	may	well	be	the	most
variable	and	changeable	among	our	basic
foods.	It	depends	on	the	kind	of	fish,	the



salinity	of	its	home	waters,	the	food	it	eats,
and	the	way	it	is	harvested	and	handled.

Fish	Taste	 In	 general,	 seafood	 is	 more	 full-
tasting	than	meats	or	freshwater	fish,	because
ocean	 creatures	 accumulate	 amino	 acids	 to
counterbalance	 the	 salinity	 of	 seawater	 (p.
188).	 The	 flesh	 of	 ocean	 fish	 generally
contains	 about	 the	 same	 amount	 of	 salty
sodium	as	beef	or	trout,	but	three	to	ten	times
more	free	amino	acids,	notably	sweet	glycine
and	 savory	 glutamate.	 Shellfish,	 sharks	 and
rays,	 and	 members	 of	 the	 herring	 and
mackerel	 family	 are	 especially	 rich	 in	 these
amino	 acids.	 Because	 the	 salt	 content	 of
seawater	 varies	 substantially	 —	 it’s	 high	 in
the	 open	 ocean,	 lower	 near	 river	 mouths	—
the	 amino-acid	 content	 and	 therefore	 taste
intensity	of	fish	varies	according	to	the	waters
they’re	caught	in.

An	additional	element	of	fish	taste	is
contributed	indirectly	by	the	energy-carrying



compound	ATP	(adenosine	triphosphate).
When	a	cell	extracts	energy	from	ATP,	it	is
transformed	into	a	series	of	smaller
molecules,	one	of	which,	IMP	(inosine
monophosphate),	has	a	savory	taste	similar	to
that	of	glutamate.	However,	IMP	is	a	transient
substance.	So	the	savoriness	of	fish	increases
for	some	time	after	its	death	as	IMP	levels
rise,	then	declines	again	as	IMP	disappears.

Fish	Aroma

Fresh	and	Plant-like	Few	of	us	get	the	chance
to	 enjoy	 the	 experience,	 but	 very	 fresh	 fish
smell	 surprisingly	 like	 crushed	 plant	 leaves!
The	fatty	materials	of	both	plants	and	fish	are
highly	 unsaturated,	 and	 both	 leaves	 and	 fish
skin	have	enzymes	(lipoxygenases)	that	break
these	large	smellless	molecules	down	into	the
same	 small,	 aromatic	 fragments.	 Nearly	 all
fish	 emit	 fragments	 (8	 carbon	 atoms	 long)
that	 have	 a	 heavy	 green,	 geranium-leaf,
slightly	 metallic	 smell.	 Freshwater	 fish	 also



produce	 fragments	 that	 are	 typical	 of	 freshly
cut	 grass	 (6	 carbons),	 and	 earthy	 fragments
also	 found	 in	 mushrooms	 (8	 carbons).	 Some
freshwater	 and	 migratory	 species,	 especially
the	 smelts,	 produce	 fragments	 characteristic
of	melons	and	cucumbers	(9	carbons).

Smell	of	 the	Seacoast	Ocean	 fish	 often	 have
an	 additional,	 characteristic	 aroma	 of	 the
seacoast.	 This	 ocean	 aroma	 appears	 to	 be
provided	by	compounds	called	bromophenols,
which	 are	 synthesized	 by	 algae	 and	 some
primitive	animals	from	bromine,	an	abundant
element	 in	 seawater.	 Bromophenols	 are
propelled	into	the	seacoast	air	by	wave	action,
where	 we	 smell	 them	 directly.	 Fish	 also
accumulate	them,	either	by	eating	algae	or	by
eating	 algae	 eaters,	 and	 the	 fish	 can	 thus
remind	us	of	the	sea	air.	Farmed	saltwater	fish
lack	 the	 oceanic	 aroma	 unless	 their	 artificial
feed	is	supplemented	with	bromophenols.

Muddiness	 Freshwater	 fish	 sometimes	 carry



an	 unpleasant	 muddy	 aroma.	 It’s	 most	 often
encountered	in	bottom-feeding	fish,	especially
catfish	 and	 carp	 that	 are	 raised	 in	 ponds	 dug
directly	in	the	earth.	The	chemical	culprits	are
two	 compounds	 that	 are	 produced	 by	 blue-
green	 algae,	 especially	 in	 warm	 weather
(geosmin	 and	 methylisoborneol).	 These
chemicals	 appear	 to	 concentrate	 in	 the	 skin
and	 the	dark	muscle	 tissue,	which	can	be	cut
away	 to	 make	 the	 fish	 more	 palatable.
Geosmin	 breaks	 down	 in	 acid	 conditions,	 so
there	is	a	good	chemical	reason	for	traditional
recipes	 that	 include	 vinegar	 and	 other	 acidic
ingredients.

Fishiness	 The	 moment	 fish	 are	 caught	 and
killed,	 other	 aromas	 begin	 to	 develop.	 The
strong	 smell	 that	 we	 readily	 identify	 as
“fishy”	 is	 largely	 due	 to	 the	 saltwater-
balancing	 compound	 TMAO	 (p.	 188),	 which
bacteria	 on	 the	 fish	 surfaces	 slowly	 break
down	 to	 smelly	 TMA.	 Freshwater	 fish



generally	 don’t	 accumulate	 TMAO,	 and
crustaceans	 accumulate	 relatively	 little,	 so
they	 don’t	 get	 as	 fishy	 as	 ocean	 fish.	 In
addition,	 the	 unsaturated	 fats	 and	 fresh-
smelling	 fragments	 (aldehydes)	 produced
from	 them	 slowly	 react	 to	 produce	 other
molecules	with	stale,	cheesy	characters,	some
of	 which	 accentuate	 the	 fishiness	 of	 TMA.
And	 during	 frozen	 storage,	 the	 fish’s	 own
enzymes	 also	 convert	 some	 TMA	 to	 DMA
(dimethylamine),	 which	 smells	 weakly	 of
ammonia.

Fortunately,	the	fishiness	of	fish	past	its
prime	can	be	greatly	reduced	a	couple	of
simple	treatments.	TMA	on	the	surface	can	be
rinsed	off	with	tap	water.	And	acidic
ingredients	—	lemon	juice,	vinegar,	tomatoes
—	help	in	two	ways.	They	encourage	the	stale
fragments	to	react	with	water	and	become	less
volatile;	and	they	contribute	a	hydrogen	ion	to
TMA	and	DMA,	which	thereby	take	on	a
positive	electrical	charge,	bond	with	water



and	other	nearby	molecules,	and	never	escape
the	fish	surface	to	enter	our	nose.

The	aromas	of	cooked	fish	are	discussed
on	p.	208.

Flavor	Compounds	in	Raw	Fish	and
Shellfish

The	basic	flavors	of	fish	and	shellfish	arise
from	 their	 different	 combinations	 of	 taste
and	aroma	molecules.

Source Amino	acids: Salts: IMP:
sweet,	savory salty savory

Terrestrial	meats + + +
Freshwater	fish + + +
Saltwater	fish +++ + +++
Sharks	and	rays +++ ++ ++
Molluscs +++ +++ +
Crustaceans ++++ +++ +



Source TMA:	fishy Bromophenol:	sea-air
Terrestrial	meats – –
Freshwater	fish – –
Saltwater	fish +++ +
Sharks	and	rays +++ +
Molluscs ++ +
Crustaceans + +

Source Ammonia	(from Geosmin,	borneol:
urea) muddy

Terrestrial	meats – –
Freshwater	fish – +
Saltwater	fish – –
Sharks	and	rays +++ –
Molluscs – –
Crustaceans – –

Fish	Color



Pale	Translucence	Most	of	the	muscle	in
most	raw	fish	is	white	or	off-white	and
delicately	translucent	compared	to	raw	beef	or
pork,	whose	cells	are	surrounded	by	more
light-scattering	connective	tissue	and	fat	cells.
Especially	fatty	portions	of	fish,	such	as
salmon	and	tuna	bellies,	look	distinctly	milky
compared	to	flesh	from	just	a	few	inches
away.	The	translucence	of	fish	muscle	is
turned	into	opacity	by	cooking	treatments	that
cause	the	muscle	proteins	to	unfold	and	bond
to	each	other	into	large,	light-scattering
masses.	Both	heat	and	marination	in	acid
unfold	proteins	and	turn	fish	flesh	opaque.

Red	Tunas	 The	meaty	 color	 of	 certain	 tunas
is	 caused	 by	 the	 oxygen-storing	 pigment
myoglobin	(p.	132),	which	these	fish	need	for
their	nonstop,	high-velocity	life	(p.	201).	Fish
myoglobin	 is	 especially	 prone	 to	 being
oxidized	 to	 brownish	 metmyoglobin,
especially	 at	 freezer	 temperatures	 down	 to	 –



22ºF/–30ºC;	 tuna	 must	 be	 frozen	 well	 below
this	 to	 keep	 its	 color.	 During	 cooking,	 fish
myoglobins	 denature	 and	 turn	 gray-brown	 at
around	 the	 same	 temperature	 as	 beef
myoglobin,	 between	 140	 and	 160ºF/60	 and
70ºC.	Because	they	are	often	present	in	small
quantities,	 their	 color	 change	 can	 be	masked
by	 the	general	milkiness	caused	when	all	 the
other	 cell	 proteins	 unfold	 and	 bond	 to	 each
other.	 This	 is	 why	 fish	 with	 distinctly	 pink
raw	flesh	(albacore	tuna,	mahimahi)	will	turn
as	white	as	any	white	fish	when	cooked.

Orange-Pink	 Salmons	 and	 Trouts	 The
characteristic	color	of	the	salmons	is	due	to	a
chemical	relative	of	the	carotene	pigment	that
colors	 carrots.	 This	 compound,	 astaxanthin,
comes	 from	 the	 salmons’	 small	 crustacean
prey,	 which	 create	 it	 from	 the	 beta-carotene
they	 obtain	 from	 algae.	 Many	 fish	 store
astaxanthin	in	their	skin	and	ovaries,	but	only
the	salmon	family	stores	it	in	muscle.	Because



farmed	salmon	and	trout	don’t	have	access	to
the	 wild	 crustaceans,	 they	 have	 paler	 flesh
unless	 their	 feed	 is	 supplemented	 (usually
with	 crustacean	 shell	 by-products	 or	 an
industrially	 produced	 carotenoid	 called
canthaxanthin).

The	Fish	We	Eat

The	number	of	different	kinds	of	fish	in	the
world	is	staggering.	Of	all	the	animals	that
have	backbones,	fish	account	for	more	than
half,	something	approaching	29,000	species.
Our	species	regularly	eats	hundreds	of	these.
Perhaps	two	dozen	are	at	least	occasionally
available	in	U.S.	supermarkets,	and	another
several	dozen	in	upscale	and	ethnic
restaurants,	often	under	a	variety	of	names.
The	box	beginning	on	p.	195	surveys	the
family	relations	of	some	commonly	eaten
fish,	and	the	paragraphs	that	follow	provide	a
few	details	about	the	more	important	families.



Shellfish	are	also	a	diverse	group	of
animals.	They	lack	backbones	and	differ	from
finfish	in	important	ways,	so	they’re
described	separately,	p.	218.

The	Herring	Family:
Anchovy,	Sardine,
Sprat,	Shad

The	herring	family	is	an	ancient,	successful,
and	highly	productive	one,	and	for	centuries
was	the	animal	food	on	which	much	of
northern	Europe	subsisted.	Its	various	species
school	throughout	the	world’s	oceans	in	large,
easily	netted	numbers	and	are	relatively
small,	often	just	a	few	inches	long	but
sometimes	reaching	16	in/40	cm	and	1.5
lb/0.75	kg.

Members	of	the	herring	family	feed	by
constantly	swimming	and	straining	tiny
zooplankton	from	the	seawater.	They	thus
have	very	active	muscle	and	digestive



enzymes	that	can	soften	their	flesh	and
generate	strong	flavors	soon	after	they’re
harvested.	Their	high	fat	content,	upwards	of
20%	as	they	approach	spawning,	also	makes
them	vulnerable	to	the	off-flavors	of	easily
oxidized	polyunsaturated	fats.	Thanks	to	this
fragility	most	of	these	fish	are	preserved	by
smoking,	salting,	or	canning.

Names	and	Family	Relations	of
Commonly	Eaten	Fishes

Closely	related	families	are	grouped
together,	and	neighboring	groups	in	the
chart	are	more	closely	related	than	widely
separated	groups.	Saltwater	families	are
listed	without	special	indication;	“f”	means
a	freshwater	family	and	“f&s”	a	family
that	includes	both	freshwater	and	saltwater
species.

Family Number	of	Species Examples
Blue	(Prionace),	thresher



(Alopias),	hammerhead
Shark
(several) 350

(Sphyrna),	black-tipped
(Carcharinchus),	dogfish
(Squalus),	porbeagle	(Lamna),
smooth	hound	(Mustelus)

Skate 200 Skates	(Raja)
Ray 50 Rays	(Dasyatis,	Myliobatis)

Beluga,	kaluga	(Huso);	osetra,
Sturgeon 24 sevruga,	Atlantic,	lake,	green,

white	(all	Acipenser)
Paddlefish
(f) 2 American,	Chinese	paddlefish(Polyodon,	Psephurus)
Gar 7 Gar	(Lepisosteus)
Tarpon 2 Tarpon	(Tarpon)
Bonefish 2 Bonefish	(Albula)
Eel,
Common 15 European,	North	American,
(f&s) Japanese	eel	(allAnguilla)

Eel,	Moray 200Moray	eel	(Muraena)
Eel, Conger	eel	(Conger),	pike



Conger 150 conger	eel	(Muraenesox)

Anchovy 140 Anchovy	(Engraulis,	Anchoa,Anchovia,	Stolephorus)
Herring	(Clupea),	sardine,

Herring 180 pilchard	(Sardina	pilchardus);sprat	(Sprattus),	shad	(Alosa),
hilsa	(Hilsa)

Milkfish 1Milkfish	(Chanos)
Carp	(Cyprinus,	Carassius,

Carp
(f) 2,000Hypophthalmichthys,	etc.),minnow	(Notropis,	Barbus),

tench	(Tinca)
Catfish
(f) 50 North	American	catfish(Ictalurus),	bullhead	(Ameirus)
Sheatfish
(f) 70Wels	(Silurus),	Eastern

European
Catfish,	Sea 120 Sea	catfish	(Arius,	Ariopsis)
Pike	(f) 5 Pike,	pickerel	(Esox)

Smelt	(Osmerus,	Thaleichthys),
Smelt 13 capelin	(Mallotus),	ayu



(Plecoglossus)
Salmons	(Salmo,	Oncorhynchus),
trouts	(Salmo,	Oncorhynchus,

Salmon
(s&f) 65 Salvelinus),	char	(Salvelinus),whitefish	&	cisco	(Coregonus),

grayling	(Thymallus),	huchen
(Hucho)

Lizardfish 55 Lizardfish	(Synodus),	Bombayduck	(Harpadon)
Moonfish 2Moonfish,	opah	(Lampris)

Cod	(Gadus),	haddock
(Melanogrammus),	saithe	and	pollock

Cod 60 (Pollachius),	pollack	(Pollachius,Theragra),	ling	(Molva),	whiting
(Merlangus,	Merluccius),	burbot
(Lota)	(f)

Hake 20 Hake	(Merluccius,	Urophycis)
Southern	Hake 7 Hoki	(Macruronus)

Grenadier 300 Grenadier	(Coelorhynchus,Coryphaenoides)



Goosefish 25Monkfish	(Lophius)
Mullet 80 Grey	mullet	(Mugil)

Silversides 160 Silversides,	grunion(Leuresthes)
Needlefish 30 Needlefish,	belone	(Belone)
Saury 4 Saury	(Scomberesox)
Flying
Fish 50 Flying	fish	(Cypselurus,Hirundichthys,	Exocoetus)
Roughies 30 Orange	roughy	(Hoplostethus)
Alfonsino 10 Alfonsino	(Beryx,	Centroberyx)
Dory 10 John	Dory,	St.	Pierre	(Zeus)
Oreo 10 Oreos	(Allocyttus,	Neocyttus)

Rockfish,	“ocean	perch,”	U.S.
Rockfish 300 coastal	“snappers”	(Sebastes);

scorpionfish	(Scorpaena)
Searobin 90 Gurnard	(Trigla)
Sablefish 2 “Black	cod”	(Anoplopoma)

Greenling 10 Greenling	(Hexagrammos),“ling	cod”	(Ophiodon)



Sculpin	(Cottus,
Sculpin 300Myoxocephalus),	cabezon

(Scorpaenichthys)
Lumpfish 30 Lumpfish	(Cyclopterus)
Snook
(f&s) 40 Nile	perch,	Australian	barramundi(Lates);	snook	(Centropomus)

Bass, European	sea	bass
Temperate 6 (Dicentrarchus),	American
(f&s) striped,	white,	yellow	bass	(all

Morone)

Bass, Black	sea	bass	(Centropristis),
Sea 450 groupers	(Epinephelus,

Mycteroperca)
Sunfish,	bluegill	(Lepomis);

Sunfish
(f) 30 small-	&	large-mouth	bass(Micropterus),	crappies

(Pomoxis)
Perch
(f) 160 Perches	(Perca),	walleye(Stizostedion)
Tilefish 35 Tilefish	(Lopholatilus)



Bluefish 3 Bluefish	(Pomatomus)
Dolphin
Fish 2 Dolphin	fish,	mahimahi(Coryphaena)

Jack	(Caranx),	amberjack	&
Jack 150 yellowtail	(Seriola),	horse	mackerel(Trachurus),	scad	(Decapterus),

pompanos	(Trachinotus)

Butterfish 20 Pomfrets	(Pampus,	Peprilus,Stromateus)
Snappers	(Lutjanus,	Ocyurus,

Snapper 200 Rhomboplites),	Hawaiian	onaga(Etelis),	uku	(Aprion),
opakapaka	(Pristipomoides)

Porgies	(Calamus,	Stenotomus,
Porgy 100 Pagrus),	tai	(Pagrosomus),	seabreams	(Sparus),	dentex	(Dentex),

sheepshead	(Archosargus)
Redfish	(Sciaenops),

Drum/Croaker 200 Atlantic	croaker
(Micropogonias)



Goatfish 60 Red	mullets,	rouget	(Mullus)
Cichlid
(f) 700 Tilapia	(Oreochromis	=Tilapia)
Cod
Icefish 50 “Chilean	sea	bass”(Dissostichus)
Barracuda 20 Barracudas	(Sphyraena)
Snake
Mackerel 25 Escolar	(Lepidocybium),	waloo,ruvettus	(Ruvettus)
Cutlassfish 20 Cutlassfish	(Trichiurus)

Tunas	(Thunnus,	Euthynnus,
Katsuwonus,	Auxis),	Atlantic,

Tuna	and chub	mackerels	(Scomber);
Mackerel 50 Spanish,	sierra,	cero	mackerel(Scomberomorus);	wahoo/ono

(Acanthocybium),	bonitos
(Sarda)

Sailfish	(Istiophorus),	spearfish
Billfish 10 (Tetrapturus),	marlin	(Makaira),

swordfish	(Xiphias)
Flounder, Turbot	(Psetta),	brill



Lefteye 115 (Scophthalmus)
Halibuts	(Hippoglossus,

Flounder, Reinhardtius),	plaice
Righteye 90 (Pleuronectes),	flounders

(Platichthys,
Pseudopleuronectes)

Sole 120 True	soles	(Solea,	Pegusa)

Puffer 120 Pufferfish,	fugu	(Fugu);	blowfish(Sphoeroides,	Tetraodon)
Sunfish 3Mola	(Mola)
Adapted	 from	 J.	 S.	 Nelson,	Fishes	 of	 the
World,	3d	ed.	(New	York:	Wiley,	1994).

Carp	and	Catfish

The	freshwater	carp	family	arose	in	east
Europe	and	west	Asia,	and	is	now	the	largest
family	of	fish	on	the	planet.	Some	of	the	same
characteristics	that	have	made	them	so
successful	—	the	ability	to	tolerate	stagnant



water,	low	oxygen	levels,	and	temperatures
from	just	above	freezing	to	100ºF/38°C	—
have	also	made	them	ideal	candidates	for
aquaculture,	which	China	pioneered	three
millennia	ago.	Carp	themselves	can	reach	60
lb/30	kg	or	more,	but	are	generally	harvested
between	one	and	three	years	when	they	weigh
a	few	pounds.	They’re	relatively	bony	fish,
with	a	coarse	texture	and	a	low	to	moderate
fat	content.

The	mostly	freshwater	catfish	family	is
also	well	adapted	to	an	omnivorous	life	in
stagnant	waters,	and	therefore	to	the	fish
farm.	Its	most	familiar	member	is	the	North
American	channel	catfish	(Ictalurus),	which	is
harvested	when	about	1	ft/30	cm	long	and	1
lb/450	gm,	but	can	reach	4	ft/1.2	m	in	the
wild.	Catfish	have	the	advantage	over	the
carps	of	a	simpler	skeleton	that	makes	it	easy
to	produce	boneless	fillets;	they	keep	well,	as
much	as	three	weeks	when	vacuum-packed	on
ice.	Both	carp	and	catfish	can	suffer	from	a



muddy	flavor	(p.	193),	particularly	in	the	heat
of	late	summer	and	fall.

Salmons,	Trouts,	and	Relatives

The	salmons	and	trouts	are	among	the	most
familiar	of	our	food	fishes	—	and	among	the
most	remarkable.	The	family	is	one	of	the
oldest	among	the	fishes,	going	back	more	than
100	million	years.	The	salmons	are	carnivores
that	are	born	in	freshwater,	go	to	the	sea	to
mature,	and	return	to	their	home	streams	to
spawn.	The	freshwater	trouts	evolved	from
several	landlocked	groups	of	Atlantic	and
Pacific	salmon.

Salmons	 Salmon	 develop	 their	 muscle	 mass
and	 fat	 stores	 in	 order	 to	 fuel	 their	 egg
production	 and	 nonstop	 upstream	 migration,
processes	 that	 consume	 nearly	 half	 of	 their
weight	 and	 leave	 their	 flesh	mushy	and	pale.
Salmon	quality	 is	 thus	at	 its	peak	as	 the	 fish



approach	the	mouth	of	their	home	river,	which
is	 where	 commercial	 fishermen	 take	 them.
The	 stocks	 of	 Atlantic	 salmon	 have	 been
depleted	 by	 centuries	 of	 overfishing	 and
damage	 to	 their	 home	 rivers,	 so	 nowadays
most	 market	 fish	 come	 from	 farms	 in
Scandinavia	 and	 North	 and	 South	 America.
The	 wild	 Alaska	 fishery	 is	 still	 healthy.
Opinions	vary	on	the	relative	qualities	of	wild
and	farmed	salmon.	Some	professional	cooks
prefer	 the	 fattiness	 and	 more	 consistent
quality	 of	 farm	 fish,	 while	 others	 prefer	 the
stronger	flavor	and	firmer	texture	of	wild	fish
at	their	best.

Salmons	and	Their	Characteristics

Fat	Content,	%
Atlantic
Atlantic:	Salmo	salar 14
Pacific



King,	Chinook:	Oncorhynchus 12
tshawytscha
Sockeye,	Red:	O.	nerka 10
Coho,	Silver:	O.	kisutch 7
Chum,	Dog:	O.	keta 4
Pink:	O.	gorbuscha 4
Cherry,	Amago	(Japan	and	Korea):	O.
masou 7

size,	lb/kg
Atlantic
Atlantic:	Salmo 100/45;	6–12/3–5
salar farmed
Pacific
King,	Chinook:	Oncorhynchus
tshawytscha 30+/14

Sockeye,	Red:	O.	nerka 8/4
Coho,	Silver:	O.	kisutch 30/14
Chum,	Dog:	O.	keta 10–12/4–5



Pink:	O.	gorbuscha 5–10/2–4
Cherry,	Amago	(Japan	and	Korea):	O. 4–6/2–
masou 3
Major	Uses
Atlantic
Atlantic:	Salmo	salar Fresh,	smoked
Pacific
King,	Chinook:	Oncorhynchus Fresh,
tshawytscha smoked
Sockeye,	Red:	O.	nerka Fresh,	canned
Coho,	Silver:	O.	kisutch Fresh,	canned
Chum,	Dog:	O.	keta Roe,	pet	food
Pink:	O.	gorbuscha Canned
Cherry,	Amago	(Japan	and	Korea):	O.
masou Fresh

The	Atlantic	and	the	Pacific	king	salmons
are	well	supplied	with	moistening	fat,	and	yet
don’t	develop	the	strong	flavor	that	similarly
fatty	herring	and	mackerel	do.	The	distinctive



salmon	aroma	may	be	due	in	part	to	the	stores
of	pink	astaxanthin	pigment,	which	the	fish
accumulate	from	ocean	crustaceans	(p.	194),
and	which	when	heated	gives	rise	to	volatile
molecules	found	in	and	reminiscent	of	fruits
and	flowers.

Trouts	 and	 Chars	 These	 mainly	 freshwater
offshoots	 of	 the	 salmons	 are	 excellent	 sport
fish	and	so	have	been	transplanted	from	their
home	waters	to	lakes	and	streams	all	over	the
world.	Their	flesh	lacks	the	salmon	coloration
because	 their	 diet	 doesn’t	 include	 the
pigmented	ocean	crustaceans.	Today,	the	trout
found	 in	 U.S.	 markets	 and	 restaurants	 are
almost	all	farmed	rainbows.	On	a	diet	of	fish
and	animal	meal	 and	vitamins,	 rainbow	 trout
take	 just	 a	 year	 from	 egg	 to	 mild,	 single-
portion	 (0.5–1	 lb/225–450	 gm)	 fish.	 The
Norwegians	 and	 Japanese	 raise	 exactly	 the
same	species	in	saltwater	to	produce	a	farmed
version	of	the	steelhead	trout,	which	can	reach



50	 lb/23	 kg,	 and	 has	 the	 pink-red	 flesh	 and
flavor	of	a	small	Atlantic	salmon.	Arctic	char,
which	 can	 grow	 to	 30	 lb/14	 kg	 as	migratory
fish,	 are	 farmed	 in	 Iceland,	 Canada,	 and
elsewhere	 to	 about	 4	 lb/2	 kg,	 and	 can	 be	 as
fatty	as	salmon.

The	Cod	Family

Along	with	the	herring	and	tuna	families,	the
cod	family	has	been	one	of	the	most	important
fisheries	in	history.	Cod,	haddock,	hake,
whiting,	pollack,	and	pollock	are	medium-
sized	predators	that	stay	close	to	the	ocean
bottom	along	the	continental	shelves,	where
they	swim	relatively	little	—	and	thus	have
relatively	inactive	enzyme	systems	and	stable
flavor	and	texture.	Cod	set	the	European
standard	for	white	fish,	with	its	mild	flavor
and	bright,	firm,	large-flaked	flesh,	nearly
free	of	both	red	muscle	and	fat.



Trouts,	Chars,	&	Relatives
Trout	 family	 relations	 are	 complicated.
Here’s	a	 list	of	 the	more	common	species
and	the	part	of	the	world	they	came	from.

Common Scientific Original
Name Name Home
Brown,	salmon	trout Salmo	trutta Europe
Rainbow	trout; 	North
Steelhead Oncorhynchus W.

(seagoing) mykiss America,
Asia

Brook Salvelinus E.	North
trout fontinalis America
Lake Salvelinus N.	North
trout namaycush America
Arctic Salvelinus N.	Europe	and	Asia,	N.
char alpinus North	America

Whitefish Coregonus N.	Europe,	North
species America



Members	of	 the	cod	family	mature	 in	 two
to	 six	years,	 and	once	provided	about	 a	 third
the	tonnage	of	the	herring-family	catch.	Many
populations	have	been	exhausted	by	intensive
fishing;	 but	 the	 northern	 Pacific	 pollock
fishery	 is	 still	 highly	 productive	 (it’s	 used
mostly	 in	 such	 prepared	 foods	 as	 surimi	 and
breaded	or	battered	frozen	fish).	Some	cod	are
farmed	in	Norway	in	offshore	pens.

Nile	Perch	and	Tilapia

The	mainly	freshwater	family	of	true	perches
are	fairly	minor	foodfish	in	both	Europe	and
North	America.	More	prominent	today	are
several	farmed	relatives	that	provide
alternatives	to	scarce	cod	and	flatfish	fillets.
The	Nile	or	Lake	Victoria	perch	can	grow	to
300	lb/135	kg	on	a	diet	of	other	fish,	and	is
farmed	in	many	regions	of	the	world.	The
herbivorous	tilapia	is	also	a	widely	farmed
native	of	Africa;	it’s	hardy	and	grows	well	at



60–90ºF/20–35ºC	in	both	fresh	and	brackish
water.	A	number	of	different	species	and
hybrids	are	sold	under	the	name	tilapia,	and
have	different	qualities.	Oreochromis	nilotica
is	said	to	have	been	cultured	the	longest	and
to	have	the	best	flesh.	The	Nile	perch	and
tilapia	are	among	the	few	freshwater	fish	to
produce	TMAO,	which	breaks	down	into
fishy-smelling	TMA	(p.	193).

Basses

The	freshwater	basses	and	sunfish	of	North
America	are	mostly	sport	fish,	but	one	has
become	an	important	product	of	aquaculture:
the	hybrid	striped	bass,	a	cross	between	the
freshwater	white	bass	of	the	eastern	United
States	and	the	seagoing	striped	bass.	The
hybrid	grows	faster	than	either	parent,	is	more
robust,	and	yields	more	meat,	which	can
remain	edible	for	up	to	two	weeks.	Compared
to	the	wild	striped	bass,	the	hybrid	has	a	more



fragile	texture	and	bland	flavor.	Occasionally
muddy	aroma	can	be	reduced	by	removing	the
skin.

The	ocean	basses	—	the	American	striped
bass	and	European	sea	bass	(French	loup	de
mer,	Italian	branzino)	are	prized	for	their
firm,	fine-flavored	flesh	and	simple	skeletons;
the	sea	bass	is	now	farmed	in	the
Mediterranean	and	Scandinavia.

Bass	Family	Relations

Sea	Bass
European	sea	bass Dicentrarchus	labrax
Black	sea	bass Centropristis	striatus
Striped	bass Morone	saxtalis

North	American	Freshwater	Bass
White	bass Morone	chrysops
Yellow	bass Morone	mississippiensis



White	perch Morone	americana
Hybrid	striped Morone	saxtalis	x	Morone
bass chrysops

Icefish

The	“cod	icefish”	family	is	a	group	of	large,
sedentary	plankton-eaters	that	live	in	the	cold
deep	waters	off	Antarctica.	The	best	known	of
them	is	the	fatty	“Chilean	sea	bass,”	an
inaccurate	but	more	palatable	commercial
name	for	the	Patagonian	toothfish
(Dissostichus	eleginoides),	which	can	reach
150	lb/70	kg.	Its	fat	is	located	in	a	layer	under
the	skin,	in	the	chambered	bones,	and
dispersed	among	the	muscle	fibers:	toothfish
flesh	can	be	nearly	15%	fat.	It	wasn’t	until	the
mid-1980s	that	cooks	came	to	know	and
appreciate	this	lusciously	rich,	large-flaked
fish,	which	is	unusually	tolerant	of
overcooking.	Like	the	orange	roughy	and
other	deepwater	creatures,	the	toothfish	is



slow	to	reproduce,	and	there	are	already	signs
that	its	numbers	have	been	dangerously
depleted	by	overfishing.

Tunas	and	Mackerel

Who	would	know	from	looking	at	a	cheap	can
of	tuna	that	it	was	made	from	one	of	the	most
remarkable	fish	on	earth?	The	tunas	are	large
predators	of	the	open	ocean,	reaching	1,500
lb/680	kg	and	swimming	constantly	at	speeds
up	to	40	miles/70	km	per	hour.	Even	their
fast-twitch	muscle	fibers,	which	are	normally
white	and	bland,	contribute	to	the	nonstop
cruising,	and	have	a	high	capacity	for	using
oxygen,	a	high	content	of	oxygen-storing
myoglobin	pigment,	and	active	enzymes	for
generating	energy	from	both	fat	and	protein.
This	is	why	tuna	flesh	can	look	as	dark	red	as
beef,	and	has	a	similarly	rich,	savory	flavor.
The	meaty	aroma	of	cooked	and	canned	tuna
comes	in	part	from	a	reaction	between	the



sugar	ribose	and	the	sulfur-containing	amino
acid	cysteine,	probably	from	the	myoglobin
pigment,	which	produces	an	aroma	compound
that’s	also	typical	of	cooked	beef.

Tuna	has	been	the	subject	of
connoisseurship	at	least	since	classical	times.
Pliny	tells	us	that	the	Romans	prized	the	fatty
belly	(the	modern	Italian	ventresca)	and	neck
the	most,	as	do	the	Japanese	today.	Tuna
belly,	or	toro,	can	have	ten	times	the	fat
content	of	the	back	muscle	on	the	same	fish,
and	commands	a	large	premium	for	its
velvety	texture.	Because	the	bluefin	and
bigeye	tunas	live	longest,	grow	largest,	and
prefer	deep,	cold	waters,	they	accumulate
more	fat	for	fuel	and	insulation	than	other
species,	and	their	meat	can	fetch	hundreds	of
dollars	per	pound.

The	Tuna	Family
These	 major	 oceangoing	 tuna	 species	 are
found	worldwide.



Common Scientific
Name Name Abundance

Bluefin Thunnus	thynnus	(northern);	T. verymaccoyii	(southern) rare
Bigeye,	ahi T.	obesus rare
Yellowfin,	ahi T.	albacares abundant
Albacore T.	alalunga abundant
SkipjackKatsuwonus	pelamis abundant
Common	Name Size Fat	Content,	%
Bluefin to	1500	lb/675	kg 15
Bigeye,	ahi 20–200	lb/9–90	kg 8
Yellowfin,	ahi 3–200	lb/1–90	kg 2
Albacore 20–45	lb/9–20	kg 7
Skipjack 4–40	lb/2–20	kg 2.5

These	days,	most	tuna	are	harvested	in	the
Pacific	 and	 Indian	 oceans.	By	 far	 the	 largest
catches	 are	 of	 skipjack	 and	 yellowfin	 tuna,



small	 and	 medium-sized	 lean	 fish	 that
reproduce	rapidly	and	can	be	netted	in	schools
near	 the	 surface.	 They	 also	 provide	 most	 of
the	 world’s	 canned	 tuna,	 with	 the	 solitary
light-fleshed	 albacore	 (Hawaiian	 tombo)
giving	 “white”	 tuna.	 (Italian	 canned	 tuna	 is
often	made	 from	 the	 darker,	 stronger	 bluefin
and	from	the	dark	portions	of	skipjack.)

Mackerels	The	mackerels	are	small	 relatives
of	 the	 tunas.	The	mackerel	proper	 is	a	native
of	 the	 North	 Atlantic	 and	 Mediterranean,
typically	18	inches/45cm	long	and	1–2	lb/0.5–
1	kg.	Like	the	tuna,	it’s	an	energetic	predator,
with	a	 large	complement	of	red	fibers,	active
enzymes,	and	an	assertive	flavor.	It	is	usually
netted	 in	 large	 numbers	 and	 sold	whole,	 and
deteriorates	 rapidly	 unless	 immediately	 and
thoroughly	iced.

Swordfish



The	billfish	are	a	family	of	large	(to	13	ft/	4	m
and	2,000	lb/900	kg),	active	predators	of	the
open	oceans,	with	a	spear-like	projection	from
their	upper	jaw	and	dense,	meaty,	nearly
boneless	flesh	that	has	been	sought	after	for
thousands	of	years.	The	preeminent	billfish	is
the	swordfish,	whose	Atlantic	stock	is	thought
to	be	down	to	less	than	a	tenth	of	its	original
size	and	in	need	of	protection.	Swordfish	have
a	dense,	meaty	texture	and	keep	unusually
well	on	ice,	as	long	as	three	weeks.

Flatfish:	Soles,	Turbot,
Halibuts,	Flounders

Flatfish	are	bottom-dwelling	fish	whose
bodies	have	been	compressed	from	the	sides
into	a	bottom-hugging	shape.	Most	flatfish	are
relatively	sedentary,	and	therefore	are	only
modestly	endowed	with	the	enzyme	systems
that	generate	energy	for	the	fish	and	flavor	for
us.	Their	mild	flesh	generally	keeps	well	for



several	days	after	harvest.
The	most	prized	flatfish	is	Dover	or

English	sole,	the	principal	member	of	a
family	found	mainly	in	European	waters
(lesser	U.S.	flatfish	are	often	misleadingly
called	sole).	It	has	a	fine-textured,	succulent
flesh	said	to	be	best	two	or	three	days	after
harvest,	a	trait	that	makes	it	an	ideal	fish	for
air-shipping	to	distant	markets.	The	other
eminent	flatfish,	the	turbot,	is	a	more	active
hunter.	It	can	be	double	the	size	of	the	sole,
with	a	firmer	flesh	that	is	said	to	be	sweetest
in	a	freshly	killed	fish.	Thanks	to	their	ability
to	absorb	some	oxygen	through	the	skin,	small
turbot	are	farmed	in	Europe	and	shipped	live
in	cold,	moist	containers	to	restaurants
worldwide.

The	halibut	is	the	largest	of	the	flatfish	and
a	voracious	hunter.	The	Atlantic	and	Pacific
halibuts	(both	species	of	Hippoglossus)	can
reach	10	ft/3	m	and	650	lb/300	kg,	and	their
firm,	lean	flesh	is	said	to	retain	good	quality



for	a	week	or	more.	The	distantly	related
“Greenland	halibut”	is	softer	and	fattier,	and
the	small	“California	halibut”	is	actually	a
flounder.

From	the	Waters
to	the	Kitchen

The	quality	of	the	fish	we	cook	is	largely
determined	by	how	it	is	harvested	and	handled
by	fishermen,	wholesalers,	and	retail	markets.

The	Harvest

As	we’ve	seen,	fish	and	shellfish	are	a	more
delicate	and	sensitive	material	than	meat.
They’re	the	animal	equivalent	of	ripe	fruit,
and	ideally	they	would	be	handled	with
corresponding	care.	The	reality	is	otherwise.
In	a	slaughterhouse	it’s	possible	to	kill	each
animal	in	a	controlled	way,	minimize	the
physical	stress	and	fear	that	adversely	affect



meat	quality,	and	process	the	carcass
immediately,	before	it	begins	to	deteriorate.
The	fisherman	has	no	such	mastery	over	the
circumstances	of	the	catch,	though	the	fish
farmer	has	some.

Harvest	 from	 the	 Ocean	 There	 are	 several
common	 ways	 of	 harvesting	 fish	 from	 the
wild,	 none	 of	 them	 ideal.	 In	 the	 most
controlled	 and	 least	 efficient	 method,	 a	 few
fisherman	 catch	 a	 few	 fish,	 ice	 them
immediately,	and	deliver	them	to	shore	within
hours.	 This	 method	 can	 produce	 very	 fresh
and	 high-quality	 fish	 —	if	 they	 are	 caught
quickly	with	minimal	struggle,	expertly	killed
and	cleaned,	quickly	and	thoroughly	iced,	and
promptly	delivered	 to	market.	But	 if	 the	 fish
are	exhausted,	processing	is	less	than	ideal,	or
cold	storage	is	interrupted,	quality	will	suffer.
Far	 more	 common	 are	 fish	 caught	 and
processed	 by	 the	 thousands	 and	 delivered	 to
port	 every	 few	 days	 or	 weeks.	 Their	 quality



often	suffers	from	physical	damage	caused	by
the	 sheer	 mass	 of	 the	 catch,	 delays	 in
processing,	 and	 storage	 in	 less	 than	 ideal
conditions.	 Factory-scale	 trawlers	 and
longliners	also	harvest	huge	numbers	of	 fish,
but	 they	 do	 their	 own	 processing	 on	 board,
and	 often	 clean,	 vacuum-pack,	 and	 freeze
their	 catch	 within	 hours.	 Such	 fish	 can	 be
superior	 in	 quality	 to	 unfrozen	 fish	 caught
locally	and	recently	but	handled	carelessly.

Harvest	 in	Aquaculture	 By	 contrast	 to	 the
logistical	challenge	posed	by	fishing,	consider
the	 care	with	which	 salmon	 are	 harvested	 in
the	best	aquaculture	operations.	First,	the	fish
are	starved	for	seven	to	ten	days	to	reduce	the
levels	 of	 bacteria	 and	 digestive	 enzymes	 in
the	 gut	 that	 may	 otherwise	 accelerate
spoilage.	The	 fish	 are	 anesthetized	 in	 chilled
water	 saturated	 with	 carbon	 dioxide,	 then
killed	 either	 with	 a	 blow	 to	 the	 head	 or	 by
bleeding	with	a	cut	through	the	blood	vessels



of	the	gill	and	tail.	Because	the	blood	contains
both	 enzymes	 and	 reactive	 hemoglobin	 iron,
bleeding	 improves	 the	 fish’s	 flavor,	 texture,
color,	and	market	life.	Workers	then	clean	the
fish	while	 it’s	 still	 cold,	 and	may	wrap	 it	 in
plastic	 to	 protect	 it	 from	 direct	 contact	 with
ice	or	air.

Flatfish	Family	Relations
There	 are	 many	 flatfish,	 and	 even	 more
names	for	them;	this	list	includes	only	the
more	 common.	 The	 names	 are	 often
misleading:	American	waters	don’t	harbor
true	soles;	some	halibuts	aren’t	halibuts	or
turbots	turbots.

True	European	soles
Dover,	English	sole Solea	solea
French	sole Pegusa	lascaris

Other	European	flatfish



Turbot Psetta	maxima
Atlantic	halibut Hippoglossus	hippoglossus
Plaice Pleuronectes	platessa
Flounder Platichthys	flesus

West	Atlantic	flatfish
Halibut Hippoglossus	hippoglossus
Winter,	common Pseudopleuronectes
flounder,	lemon	sole americanus
Summer	flounder Paralichthys	dentatus
Greenland	halibut	or Reinhardtius
turbot hippoglossoides

East	Pacific	flatfish
Petrale	sole Eopsetta	jordani
Rex	sole Glyptocephalus	zachirus
Pacific	sand	dab Citharichthys	sordidus
Pacific	halibut Hippoglossus	stenolepsis



California	halibut Paralichthys	californicus

The	Effects	of	Rigor	Mortis	and	Time

We	sometimes	eat	fish	and	shellfish	very
fresh	indeed,	just	minutes	or	hours	after	their
death,	and	before	they	pass	through	the
chemical	and	physical	changes	of	rigor	mortis
(p.	143).	This	stiffening	of	the	muscles	may
begin	immediately	after	death	in	a	fish
already	depleted	by	struggling,	or	many	hours
later	in	a	fat-farmed	salmon.	It	“resolves”
after	a	few	hours	or	days	when	the	muscle
fibers	begin	to	separate	from	each	other	and
from	the	connective-tissue	sheets.	Fish	and
shellfish	cooked	and	eaten	before	rigor	has	set
in	are	therefore	somewhat	chewier	than	those
that	have	passed	through	rigor.	Some	Japanese
enjoy	slices	of	raw	fish	that	are	so	fresh	that
they’re	still	twitching	(ikizukuri);	Norwegians
prize	cod	held	in	tanks	at	the	market	and
killed	to	order	just	before	cooking	(blodfersk,



or	“blood-fresh”);	Chinese	restaurants	often
have	tanks	of	live	fish	at	the	ready;	the	French
prepare	freshly	killed	“blue”	trout;	and	many
shellfish	are	cooked	alive.

In	general,	delaying	and	extending	the
period	of	rigor	will	slow	the	eventual
deterioration	of	texture	and	flavor.	This	can
be	done	by	icing	most	fish	immediately	after
harvest,	before	rigor	sets	in.	However,	early
icing	can	actually	toughen	some	fish	—
sardine,	mackerel,	and	warm-water	fish	such
as	tilapia	—	by	disrupting	their	contraction
control	system.	Fish	are	generally	at	their
prime	just	when	rigor	has	passed,	perhaps	8	to
24	hours	after	death,	and	begin	to	deteriorate
soon	after	that.

Recognizing	Fresh	Fish

Nowadays,	consumers	often	have	no	idea
where	a	given	piece	of	fish	in	the	market	has
come	from,	when	and	how	it	was	harvested,



how	long	it	has	been	in	transit,	or	how	it	has
been	handled.	So	it’s	important	to	be	able	to
recognize	good-quality	fish	when	we	see	it.
But	looks	and	smell	can	be	deceiving.	Even
perfectly	fresh	fish	may	not	be	of	the	best
quality	if	it	has	been	caught	in	a	depleted	state
after	spawning.	So	the	ideal	solution	is	to	find
a	knowledgeable	and	reliable	fish	merchant
who	knows	the	seasonality	of	fish	quality,	and
buys	accordingly.	Such	a	merchant	is	also
more	likely	to	be	selective	about	his	suppliers,
and	less	likely	to	sell	seafood	that’s	past	its
prime.

It’s	preferable	to	have	fillets	and	steaks	cut
to	order	from	a	whole	fish,	because	cutting
immediately	exposes	new	surfaces	to
microbes	and	the	air.	Old	cut	surfaces	will	be
stale	and	smelly.

Handling	Freshly	Killed	Fish
Sport	 fishermen	 may	 not	 get	 around	 to
cooking	 their	 catch	 until	 it	 has	 already



begun	 to	 stiffen.	Fortunately,	 fish	 in	 rigor
aren’t	 as	 tough	 as	 beef	 or	 pork	would	 be.
It’s	a	mistake,	however,	to	cut	up	a	freshly
killed,	 pre-rigor	 fish	 into	 steaks	 or	 fillets,
and	 not	 either	 cook	 or	 freeze	 the	 pieces
immediately.	 If	 rigor	 develops	 in	 the
pieces,	 the	 severed	muscle	 fibers	 are	 free
to	 contract,	 and	 they	 will	 shorten	 by	 as
much	 as	 half	 into	 a	 corrugated,	 rubbery
mass.	 If	 instead	 the	 pieces	 are	 quickly
frozen,	and	then	allowed	to	thaw	gradually
so	that	the	muscle	energy	stores	slowly	run
down	 while	 the	 piece	 shapes	 are
maintained	 by	 some	 ice	 crystals,	 this
contraction	can	be	mostly	avoided.
In	the	case	of	a	whole	fish:
The	skin	should	be	glossy	and	taut.	On
less	fresh	fish	it	will	be	dull	and
wrinkled.	Color	is	not	a	helpful	guide
because	many	skin	colors	fade	quickly
after	the	fish	dies.
If	present,	the	natural	proteinaceous



mucus	covering	the	skin	should	be
transparent	and	glossy.	With	time	it	dries
out	and	dulls,	the	proteins	coagulate	to
give	a	milky	appearance,	and	the	color
goes	from	off-white	to	yellow	to	brown.
The	mucus	is	often	washed	off	when	the
fish	is	cleaned.
The	eyes	should	be	bright,	black,	and
convex.	With	time	the	transparent
surface	becomes	opaque	and	gray	and	the
orb	flattens	out.
The	belly	of	an	intact	fish	should	not	be
swollen	or	soft	or	broken,	all	signs	that
digestive	enzymes	and	bacteria	have
eaten	through	the	gut	into	the	abdominal
cavity	and	muscle.	In	a	dressed	fish,	all
traces	of	the	viscera	should	have	been
removed,	including	the	long	red	kidney
that	runs	along	the	backbone.

If	the	fish	has	already	been	cut	up,	then:
The	steaks	and	fillets	should	have	a	full,



glossy	appearance.	With	time,	the
surfaces	dry	out	and	the	proteins
coagulate	into	a	dull	film.	There	should
be	no	brown	edges,	which	are	a	sign	of
drying,	oxidation	of	oils,	and	off-flavors.
Whether	the	fish	is	precut	or	whole,	its
odor	should	resemble	fresh	sea	air	or
crushed	green	leaves,	and	be	only
slightly	fishy.	Strong	fishiness	comes
from	prolonged	bacterial	activity.	More
advanced	age	and	spoilage	are	indicated
by	musty,	stale,	fruity,	sulfurous,	or
rotten	odors.

Storing	Fresh	Fish	and	Shellfish:	Refrigeration	and
Freezing

Once	we’ve	obtained	good	fish,	the	challenge
is	to	keep	it	in	good	condition	until	we	use	it.
The	initial	stages	of	inevitable	deterioration
are	caused	by	fish	enzymes	and	oxygen,	which
conspire	to	dull	colors,	turn	flavor	stale	and



flat,	and	soften	the	texture.	They	don’t	really
make	the	fish	inedible.	That	change	is	caused
by	microbes,	especially	bacteria,	with	which
fish	slime	and	gills	come	well	stocked	—
particularly	Pseudomonas	and	its	cold-
tolerant	ilk.	They	make	fish	inedible	in	a
fraction	of	the	time	they	take	to	spoil	beef	or
pork,	by	consuming	the	savory	free	amino
acids	and	then	proteins	and	turning	them	into
obnoxious	nitrogen-containing	substances
(ammonia,	trimethylamine,	indole,	skatole,
putrescine,	cadaverine)	and	sulfur	compounds
(hydrogen	sulfide,	skunky	methanethiol).

The	first	defense	against	incipient	spoilage
is	rinsing.	Bacteria	live	and	do	their	damage
on	the	fish	surface,	and	thorough	washing	can
remove	most	of	them	and	their	smelly	by-
products.	Once	the	fish	is	washed	and	blotted
dry,	a	close	wrapping	in	wax	paper	or	plastic
film	will	limit	exposure	to	oxygen.

Shellfish	That	Glow	in	the	Dark



Some	 ocean	 bacteria	 (species	 of
Photobacterium	 and	Vibrio)	 produce	 light
by	 way	 of	 a	 particular	 chemical	 reaction
that	releases	photons,	and	can	cause	shrimp
and	crab	to	glow	in	the	dark!	So	far,	these
luminescent	bacteria	appear	to	be	harmless
to	humans,	though	some	can	cause	disease
in	 the	 crustaceans.	 Their	 glow	 indicates
that	the	crustaceans	are	laden	with	bacteria
and	thus	not	pristinely	fresh.
But	by	far	the	most	important	defense

against	spoilage	is	temperature	control.	The
colder	the	fish,	the	slower	enzymes	and
bacteria	do	their	damage.

Refrigeration:	 The	 Importance	 of	 Ice	 For
most	of	 the	foods	 that	we	want	 to	store	fresh
for	 a	 few	 days,	 the	 ordinary	 refrigerator	 is
quite	 adequate.	 The	 exception	 to	 the	 rule	 is
fresh	 fish,	 whose	 enzymes	 and	 microbes	 are
accustomed	 to	 cold	waters	 (p.	 189).	 The	 key
to	maintaining	the	quality	of	fresh	fish	is	ice.



Fish	 lasts	 nearly	 twice	 as	 long	 in	 a	 32ºF/0ºC
slush	 as	 it	 does	 at	 typical	 refrigerator
temperatures	of	40–45ºF/5–7ºC.	It’s	desirable
to	 keep	 fish	 on	 ice	 as	 continuously	 as
possible:	 in	 the	 market	 display	 case,	 the
shopping	cart,	the	car,	and	in	the	refrigerator.
Fine	 flake	 or	 chopped	 ice	 will	 make	 more
even	 contact	 than	 larger	 cubes	 or	 slabs.
Wrapping	 will	 prevent	 direct	 contact	 with
water	that	leaches	away	flavor.

In	general,	well	iced	fatty	saltwater	fish	—
salmon,	herring,	mackerel,	sardine	—	will
remain	edible	for	about	a	week,	lean	cold-
water	fish	—	cod,	sole,	tuna,	trout	—	about
two	weeks,	and	lean	warm-water	fish	—
snappers,	catfish,	carp,	tilapia,	mullets	—
about	three	weeks.	A	large	portion	of	these
ice-lives	may	already	have	elapsed	before	the
fish	appear	in	the	market.

Freezing	To	keep	fish	in	edible	condition	for
more	than	a	few	days,	it’s	necessary	to	lower



its	temperature	below	the	freezing	point.	This
effectively	 stops	 spoilage	 by	 bacteria,	 but	 it
doesn’t	 stop	 chemical	 changes	 in	 the	 fish
tissues	 that	 produce	 stale	 flavors.	 And	 the
proteins	in	fish	muscle	(especially	cod	and	its
relatives)	turn	out	to	be	unusually	susceptible
to	“freeze	denaturation,”	 in	which	 the	 loss	of
their	 normal	 environment	 of	 liquid	 water
breaks	some	of	the	bonds	holding	the	proteins
in	 their	 intricately	 folded	 structure.	 The
unfolded	proteins	are	then	free	to	bond	to	each
other.	The	result	is	tough,	spongy	network	that
can’t	hold	onto	its	moisture	when	it’s	cooked,
and	in	the	mouth	becomes	a	dry,	fibrous	wad
of	protein.

So	once	you’ve	brought	frozen	fish	home,
it’s	best	to	use	it	as	soon	as	possible.	In
general,	the	storage	life	of	fish	in	ordinary
freezers,	wrapped	tightly	and/or	glazed	with
water	to	prevent	freezer	burn	(freeze	the	fish,
then	dip	in	water,	refreeze,	and	repeat	to	build
up	a	protective	ice	layer)	is	about	four	months



for	fatty	fish	such	as	salmon,	six	months	for
most	lean	white	fish	and	shrimp.	Like	frozen
meats,	frozen	fish	should	be	thawed	in	the
refrigerator	or	in	a	bath	of	ice	water	(p.	147).

Irradiation

Irradiation	preserves	food	by	way	of	high-
energy	particles	that	damage	the	DNA	and
proteins	of	spoilage	microbes	(p.	782).	Pilot
studies	have	found	that	irradiation	can	extend
the	refrigerated	shelf	life	of	fresh	fish	by	as
much	as	two	weeks.	However,	the	initial
deterioration	of	fish	quality	is	caused	by	the
action	of	fish	enzymes	and	oxygen,	and	this
action	proceeds	despite	irradiation.	Also,
irradiation	can	produce	off-flavors	of	its	own.
It’s	unclear	whether	irradiation	will	become
an	important	means	of	preservation	for	fish.

Unheated	Preparations
of	Fish	and	Shellfish



People	in	many	parts	of	the	world	enjoy
eating	ocean	fish	and	shellfish	raw.	Unlike
meats,	fish	have	the	advantage	of	relatively
tender	muscle	and	a	naturally	savory	taste,
and	are	easier	and	more	interesting	to	eat	raw.
They	offer	the	experience	of	a	kind	of	primal
freshness.	The	cook	may	simply	provide	a	few
accompanying	ingredients	with
complementary	flavors	and	textures,	or	firm
the	fish’s	texture	by	means	of	light
acidification	(ceviche),	salting	(poke),	or	both
(anchovies	briefly	cured	in	salt	and	lemon
juice).	And	raw	preparations	don’t	require	the
use	of	fuel,	which	is	often	scarce	on	islands
and	coastlines.

All	uncooked	fresh	fish	pose	the	risk	of
carrying	a	number	of	microbes	and	parasites
that	can	cause	food	poisoning	or	infection	(p.
185).	Only	very	fresh	fish	of	the	highest
quality	should	be	prepared	for	consumption
raw,	and	they	should	be	handled	very
carefully	in	the	kitchen	to	avoid



contamination	by	other	foods.	Because
parasitic	worms	are	often	found	in	otherwise
high-quality	fish,	the	U.S.	Food	Code
specifies	that	fish	sold	for	raw	consumption
should	be	frozen	throughout	for	a	minimum	of
15	hours	at	–31ºF/–35ºC,	or	for	seven	days	at
–4ºF/–20ºC.	The	exceptions	to	this	rule	are	the
tuna	species	commonly	served	in	Japanese
sushi	and	sashimi	(bluefin,	yellowfin,	bigeye,
albacore),	which	are	rarely	infected	with
parasites.	Despite	this	exception,	most	tuna
are	blast-frozen	at	sea	so	that	the	boats	can
stay	out	for	several	days	at	a	time.	Sushi
connoisseurs	say	that	the	texture	of	properly
frozen	tuna	is	acceptable,	but	that	the	flavor
suffers.

Sushi	and	Sashimi

Probably	the	commonest	form	of	raw	fish	is
sushi,	whose	popularity	spread	remarkably	in
the	late	20th	century	from	its	home	in	Japan.



The	original	sushi	seems	to	have	been	the
fermented	preparation	narezushi	(p.	235);
sushi	means	“salted”	and	now	applies	more	to
the	flavored	rice,	not	the	fish.	The	familiar
bite-sized	morsels	of	raw	fish	and	lightly
salted	and	acidified	rice	are	nigiri	sushi,
meaning	“grasped”	or	“squeezed,”	since	the
rice	portion	is	usually	molded	by	hand.	The
mass-produced	version	of	sushi	found	in
supermarkets	is	formed	by	industrial	robots.

Sushi	chefs	take	great	care	to	avoid
contamination	of	the	fish.	They	use	a	solution
of	cold	water	and	chlorine	bleach	to	clean
surfaces	between	preparations,	and	they
change	cleaning	solutions	and	cloths
frequently	during	service.

Tart	Ceviche	and	Kinilaw

Ceviche	is	an	ancient	dish	from	the	northern
coast	of	South	America,	in	which	small	cubes
or	thin	slices	of	raw	fish	are	“cooked”	by



immersing	them	in	citrus	juice	or	another
acidic	liquid,	usually	with	onion,	chilli
peppers,	and	other	seasonings.	This	period	of
marination	changes	both	the	appearance	and
texture	of	the	fish:	in	a	thin	surface	layer	if	it
lasts	15–45	minutes,	throughout	if	it	lasts	a
few	hours.	The	high	acidity	denatures	and
coagulates	the	proteins	in	the	muscle	tissue,
so	that	the	gel-like	translucent	tissue	becomes
opaque	and	firm:	but	more	delicately	than	it
does	when	heated,	and	with	none	of	the	flavor
changes	caused	by	high	temperatures.
Kinilaw	is	the	indigenous	Philippine

version	of	acid	marination.	Morsels	of	fish	or
shellfish	are	dipped	for	only	a	few	seconds
into	an	acidic	liquid,	often	vinegar	made	from
the	coconut,	nipa	palm,	or	sugarcane,	to	which
condiments	have	been	added.	In	the	case	of
“jumping	salad,”	tiny	shrimp	or	crabs	are
sprinkled	with	salt,	doused	with	lime	juice,
and	eaten	alive	and	moving.

Salty	Poke	and	Lomi



Salty	Poke	and	Lomi

To	the	world’s	repertoire	of	raw	fish	dishes,
the	Hawaiian	islands	have	contributed	poke
(“slice,”	“cut”)	and	lomi	(“rub,”	“press,”
“squeeze”).	These	are	small	pieces	of	tuna,
marlin,	and	other	fish,	coated	with	salt	for
varying	periods	(until	the	fish	stiffens,	if	it’s
to	be	kept	for	some	time),	and	mixed	with
other	flavorful	ingredients,	traditionally
seaweed	and	roasted	candlenuts.	Lomi	is
unusual	in	that	the	piece	of	fish	is	first	worked
between	the	thumb	and	fingers	before	salting,
to	break	some	of	the	muscle	sheets	and	fibers
apart	from	each	other	and	soften	the	texture.

Cooking	Fish	and	Shellfish

The	muscle	tissues	of	fish	and	shellfish	react
to	heat	much	as	beef	and	pork	do,	becoming
opaque,	firm,	and	more	flavorful.	However,
fish	and	shellfish	are	distinctive	in	a	few



important	ways,	above	all	in	the	delicacy	and
activity	of	their	proteins.	They	therefore	pose
some	special	challenges	to	the	cook	who
wants	to	obtain	a	tender,	succulent	texture.
Shellfish	in	turn	have	some	special	qualities
of	their	own;	they’re	described	beginning	on
p.	218.

If	it’s	more	important	to	produce	the	safest
possible	dish	than	the	most	delicious	one,	then
the	task	is	simpler:	cook	all	fish	and	shellfish
to	an	internal	temperature	between
185ºF/83ºC	and	the	boil.	This	will	kill	both
bacteria	and	viruses.

How	Heat	Transforms
Raw	Fish

Heat	and	Fish	Flavor	The	mild	flavor	of	raw
fish	gets	stronger	and	more	complex	as	its
temperature	rises	during	cooking.	At	first,
moderate	heat	speeds	the	activity	of	muscle
enzymes,	which	generate	more	amino	acids



and	reinforce	the	sweet-savory	taste,	and	the
volatile	aroma	compounds	already	present
become	more	volatile	and	more	noticeable.	As
the	fish	cooks	through,	its	taste	becomes
somewhat	muted	as	amino	acids	and	IMP
combine	with	other	molecules,	while	the
aroma	grows	yet	stronger	and	more	complex
as	fatty-acid	fragments,	oxygen,	amino	acids,
and	other	substances	react	with	each	other	to
produce	a	host	of	new	volatile	molecules.	If
the	surface	temperature	exceeds	the	boiling
point,	as	it	does	during	grilling	and	frying,	the
Maillard	reactions	produce	typical	roasted,
browned	aromas	(p.	778).

Shellfish	have	their	own	distinctive	cooked
flavors	(pp.	221,	225).	Cooked	fish	fall	into
four	broad	flavor	families.

Saltwater	white	fish	are	the	mildest.
Freshwater	white	fish	have	a	stronger
aroma	thanks	to	their	larger	repertoire	of
fatty-acid	fragments	and	traces	of
earthiness	from	ponds	and	tanks.



Freshwater	trout	have	characteristic
sweet	and	mushroomy	aromas.
Salmon	and	sea-run	trout,	thanks	to	the
carotenoid	pigments	that	they
accumulate	from	ocean	crustaceans,
develop	fruity,	flowery	aromas	and	a
distinctive	family	note	(from	an	oxygen-
containing	carbon	ring).
Tuna,	mackerel,	and	their	relatives	have
a	meaty,	beefy	aroma.

Fishiness	 and	 How	 to	 Fight	 It	 The	 house-
permeating	 “fishy”	 aroma	 of	 cooked	 fish
appears	 to	 involve	 a	 group	 of	 volatile
molecules	 formed	 by	 fatty-acid	 fragments
reacting	 with	 TMAO	 (p.	 193).	 Japanese
scientists	 have	 found	 that	 certain	 ingredients
help	 reduce	 the	 odor,	 apparently	 by	 limiting
fatty-acid	 oxidation	 or	 preemptively	 reacting
with	TMAO:	these	include	green	tea	and	such
aromatics	 as	 onion,	 bay,	 sage,	 clove,	 ginger,
and	cinnamon,	which	may	also	mask	the	fishy



smell	with	their	own.	Acidity	—	whether	in	a
poaching	liquid,	or	in	a	buttermilk	dip	before
frying	 —	 also	 mutes	 the	 volatility	 of	 fishy
amines	 and	 aldehydes,	 and	helps	 break	down
muddy-smelling	 geosmin	 that	 farmed
freshwater	 fish	 (catfish,	 carp)	 sometimes
accumulate	from	blue-green	algae.

Preparing	Fish	in	Ancient	Rome
In	summer	in	their	lower	rooms	they	often
had	clear	fresh	water	run	in	open	channels
underneath,	 in	 which	 there	 were	 a	 lot	 of
live	fish,	which	the	guests	would	select	and
catch	 in	 their	 hands	 to	 be	 prepared	 to	 the
taste	 of	 each.	 Fish	 has	 always	 had	 this
privilege,	 as	 it	 still	 does,	 that	 the	 great
have	 pretensions	 of	 knowing	 how	 to
prepare	 it.	 Indeed	 its	 taste	 is	 much	 more
exquisite	than	that	of	flesh,	at	least	to	me.

—	Michel	de	Montaigne,	“Of	Ancient
Customs,”	ca.	1580

Simple	physical	treatments	can	also



minimize	fishy	odors.	Start	with	very	fresh
fish	and	wash	it	well	to	remove	oxidized	fats
and	bacteria-generated	amines	from	the
surface.	Enclose	the	fish	in	a	covered	pan,	or
pastry	crust,	or	parchment	or	foil	envelope,	or
poaching	liquid,	to	reduce	the	exposure	of	its
surface	to	the	air;	frying,	broiling,	and	baking
all	propel	fishy	vapors	into	the	kitchen.	And
let	the	fish	cool	down	to	some	extent	before
removing	it	from	its	enclosure;	this	will
reduce	the	volatility	of	the	vapors	that	do
escape.

Heat	and	Fish	Texture	The	real	challenge	in
cooking	 both	 fish	 and	 meat	 is	 to	 get	 the
texture	 right.	 And	 the	 key	 to	 fish	 and	 meat
texture	 is	 the	 transformation	 of	 muscle
proteins	 (p.	 149).	 The	 cook’s	 challenge	 is	 to
control	 the	 process	 of	 coagulation	 so	 that	 it
doesn’t	 proceed	 too	 far,	 to	 the	 point	 that	 the
muscle	fibers	become	hard	and	the	juice	flow
dries	up	completely.



Target	 Temperatures 	 In	 meat	 cooking,	 the
critical	 temperature	 is	 140ºF/60ºC,	 when	 the
connective-tissue	collagen	sheath	around	each
muscle	 cell	 collapses,	 shrinks,	 and	 puts	 the
squeeze	 on	 the	 fluid-filled	 insides,	 forcing
juice	 out	 of	 the	 meat.	 But	 fish	 collagen
doesn’t	play	the	same	critical	role,	because	its
squeezing	 power	 is	 relatively	 weak	 and	 it
collapses	 before	 coagulation	 and	 fluid	 flow
are	 well	 underway.	 Instead,	 it’s	 mainly	 the
fiber	 protein	myosin	 and	 its	 coagulation	 that
determine	 fish	 texture.	 Fish	 myosin	 and	 its
fellow	 fiber	 proteins	 are	 more	 sensitive	 to
heat	 than	 their	 land-animal	 counterparts.
Where	meats	begin	to	shrink	from	coagulation
and	major	fluid	loss	at	140ºF/60ºC	and	are	dry
by	160ºF/70ºC,	most	fish	shrink	at	120ºF/50ºC
and	 begin	 to	 become	dry	 around	 140ºF/60ºC.
(Compare	 the	 behaviors	 of	 meat	 and	 fish
proteins	in	the	boxes	on	pp.	152	and	210).

In	general,	fish	and	shellfish	are	firm	but
still	moist	when	cooked	to	130–140ºF/55–



60ºC.	Some	dense-fleshed	fish,	including	tuna
and	salmon,	are	especially	succulent	at	120ºF,
when	still	slightly	translucent	and	jelly-like.
Creatures	with	a	large	proportion	of
connective-tissue	collagen	—	notably	the
cartilagenous	sharks	and	skates	—	benefit
from	higher	temperatures	and	longer	cooking
to	turn	it	into	gelatin,	and	can	be	chewy	unless
cooked	to	140ºF/60ºC	or	higher.	Some
molluscs	are	also	rich	in	collagen	and	benefit
from	long	cooking	(p.	225).

Why	Some	Fish	Seem	to	Dry	Out	Faster
Than	Others

One	puzzling	aspect	of	fish	cooking	is	 the
fact	 that	 different	 fish	 can	 have
surprisingly	 different	 tolerances	 for
overcooking,	 despite	 similar	 protein	 and
fat	 contents.	 Rockfish,	 snappers,	 and
mahimahi,	 for	 example,	 seem	more	moist
and	 forgiving	 than	 tuna	 or	 swordfish,
which	 tend	 to	 become	 firm	 and	 dry	 very



quickly.	 Japanese	 researchers	 have	 peered
through	 the	microscope	 and	 identified	 the
likely	 culprits:	 the	 enzymes	 and	 other
proteins	in	muscle	cells	that	are	not	locked
in	 the	 contracting	 fibrils,	 but	 float	 free	 in
the	 cell	 to	 perform	other	 functions.	These
proteins	 generally	 coagulate	 at	 a	 higher
temperature	 than	 the	 main	 contractile
protein	 myosin.	 So	 when	 myosin
coagulates	 and	 squeezes	 cell	 fluids	 out,
these	other	proteins	flow	out	with	the	fluid.
Some	of	them	then	coagulate	in	the	spaces
between	 the	muscle	cells,	where	 they	glue
the	 cells	 together	 and	 prevent	 them	 from
sliding	easily	apart	when	we	chew.	Highly
active	 swimmers	 like	 tunas	 and	 billfish
require	 more	 enzymes	 than	 sedentary
bottom	fish	like	snappers	and	cod,	so	their
fibers	get	glued	more	firmly	to	each	other
if	 they	 are	 cooked	 to	 130ºF/55ºC	 and
above.



The	Effects	of	Heat	on	Fish	Proteins	and
Texture

Gentle	Heat	and	Close	Attention	In	practice,
it’s	all	too	easy	to	overshoot	the	ideal
temperature	range	for	fish.	It	takes	only	a
matter	of	seconds	to	overcook	a	thin	fillet.
Two	characteristics	of	fish	add	to	the
trickiness	of	cooking	them	well.	First,	whole
fish	and	fillets	are	thick	at	the	center	and	taper
down	to	nothing	at	the	edges:	so	thin	areas
overcook	while	the	thick	areas	cook	through.
And	second,	fish	vary	widely	in	their
chemical	and	physical	condition,	and
therefore	in	their	response	to	heat.	The	fillets



of	cod,	bluefish,	and	other	species	often	suffer
from	some	degree	of	gaping,	separations	of
muscle	layers	through	which	heat	penetrates
more	rapidly.	Such	fish	as	tuna,	swordfish,
and	shark	have	very	dense	flesh,	crammed	full
of	protein	(around	25%),	which	absorbs	a	lot
of	heat	before	its	temperature	rises;	less
active	members	of	the	cod	family	get	by	with
less	protein	(15–16%)	in	their	muscle,	and
cook	more	rapidly.	Fat	transfers	heat	more
slowly	than	protein,	so	fatty	fish	take	longer
to	cook	than	lean	fish	of	the	same	size.	And
the	very	same	species	of	fish	can	be	protein-
or	fat-rich	one	month,	depleted	and	quickly
heated	the	next.

There	are	several	ways	to	work	around
these	inherent	obstacles	and	uncertainties:

Cook	the	fish	through	with	the	gentlest
possible	heat,	so	that	the	outer	portions
aren’t	badly	overcooked.	Oven	baking
and	poaching	well	below	the	boil	are	two
good	ways	to	do	this,	after	an	initial	and



brief	high-temperature	treatment	to
brown	and/or	sterilize	the	surfaces.
Compensate	for	uneven	thickness	by
cutting	slashes	in	the	thick	areas	every	1–
2	cm.	This	effectively	divides	the	thick
areas	into	smaller	portions	and	allows
heat	to	penetrate	more	rapidly.	Another
strategy	for	relatively	large	portions	is	to
cover	thin	areas	loosely	with	aluminum
foil,	which	blocks	radiant	heat	and	slows
their	cooking.
Check	the	fish	early	and	often	for
doneness.	Simple	formulas	—	10
minutes	to	the	inch	is	a	popular	one	—
and	past	experience	can	get	you	in	the
vicinity	of	the	correct	time,	but	there’s
no	substitute	for	checking	the	particular
piece.	This	can	be	done	by	measuring	the
internal	temperature	with	a	reliable
thermometer,	peering	into	a	small
incision	to	see	whether	the	interior	is	still
translucent	or	already	opaque,	pulling	on



a	small	bone	to	see	whether	the
connective	tissue	has	dissolved	enough	to
release	it,	or	pushing	a	small	skewer	or
toothpick	into	the	flesh	to	see	whether	it
encounters	resistance	from	coagulated
muscle	fibers.

Why	 Careful	 Cooking	 Sometimes	 Makes
Fish	Mushy	 Slow	 and	 gentle	 heating	 has	 an
important	 place	 in	 meat	 cooking,	 and	 some
fish	—	Atlantic	 salmon,	 for	 example	—	 can
develop	 an	 almost	 custard-like	 texture	 if
heated	gently	to	120ºF	/50ºC.	In	fish	cooking,
however,	 slow	 cooking	 can	 sometimes
produce	an	unpleasant,	mushy	texture.	This	is
caused	 by	 protein-digesting	 enzymes	 in	 the
muscle	 cells	 of	 active	 fish	 and	 shellfish	 that
help	 convert	 muscle	 mass	 into	 energy	 (p.
189).	 Some	 of	 these	 enzymes	 become
increasingly	 active	 as	 the	 temperature	 rises
during	 cooking,	 until	 they’re	 inactivated	 at
130–140ºF/55–60ºC.	 Mush-prone	 fish	 (see



box,	p.	212)	are	best	either	cooked	quickly	to
an	 enzyme-killing	 but	 somewhat	 drying
160ºF/70ºC,	 or	 else	 cooked	 to	 a	 lower
temperature	and	served	immediately.

Preparations	for	Cooking

Cleaning	and	Cutting	Most	fish	in	U.S.
markets	are	sold	precleaned	and	precut.	This
is	certainly	convenient,	but	it	also	means	that
the	scaled	and	cut	surfaces	have	been	exposed
to	the	air	and	bacteria	for	hours	or	days,
drying	out	and	developing	off-flavors.
Preparing	fish	at	the	last	minute	can	give
fresher	results.	Both	whole	fish	and	pieces
should	be	rinsed	thoroughly	in	cold	water	to
remove	fragments	of	inner	organs,	the
accumulation	of	odorous	TMA,	other	bacterial
by-products,	and	bacteria	themselves.

Presalting	 Japanese	 cooks	 briefly	 presalt
most	 fish	 and	 shrimp	 to	 remove	 surface



moisture	 and	 odor	 and	 firm	 the	 outer	 layers.
This	 is	 especially	useful	 for	getting	 fish	 skin
to	 crisp	 and	brown	quickly	when	 fried.	As	 is
true	for	meats,	presoaking	fish	and	shellfish	in
a	 3–5%	 salt	 brine	 will	 cause	 the	 flesh	 to
absorb	both	water	and	salt,	with	moisturizing
and	tenderizing	results	(p.	155).

Techniques	for	Cooking	Fish	and	Shellfish

The	many	methods	for	heating	meats	and	fish
are	described	in	detail	in	the	previous	chapter,
pp.	156–65.	Briefly,	“dry”	heating	methods	—
grilling,	frying,	baking	—	produce	surface
temperatures	high	enough	to	produce	the
colors	and	flavors	of	the	browning	reactions,
while	“moist”	techniques	—	steaming,
poaching	—	fail	to	trigger	browning,	but	heat
foods	more	rapidly	and	can	supply	flavors
from	other	ingredients.	(Chinese	cooks	often
get	the	best	of	both	methods	by	first	frying	a
fish	and	then	finishing	it	with	a	brief	braise	in



a	flavorful	sauce.)	Fish	don’t	require	long
cooking	to	dissolve	their	connective	tissue
and	become	tender.	The	purpose	of	any	given
technique	is	to	get	the	center	of	the	fish
promptly	to	the	proper	temperature	without
overcooking	the	outer	portions.

Handling	 Delicate	 Flesh	 Its	 delicate	 and
sparse	 connective	 tissue	 means	 that	 most
cooked	 fish	 is	 troublesomely	 fragile	 to	work
with.	 It’s	 best	 to	manipulate	 fish	 as	 little	 as
possible	 during	 and	 after	 cooking,	 and	 to
support	 the	 whole	 piece	 when	 moving	 it,
small	ones	with	a	spatula,	large	ones	on	a	rack
or	 a	 stretcher	 of	 foil	 or	 cheesecloth.	 Neat
individual	 portions	 should	 be	 cut	 before
cooking,	 when	 the	 tissue	 is	 still	 cohesive;
after	cooking,	even	a	sharp	knife	pulls	 flakes
and	shreds	from	the	weakened	matrix.

Grilling	 and	 Broiling	 Grilling	 and	 broiling
are	 high-temperature	 techniques	 that	 cook
mainly	by	radiant	heat,	and	are	well	suited	to



relatively	 thin	whole	 fish,	 fillets,	 and	 steaks.
For	 successful	 results,	 the	 thickness	 of	 the
fish	 and	 the	 distance	 from	 the	 heat	 must	 be
balanced	 so	 that	 the	 fish	 can	 be	 cooked
through	 at	 the	 center	 without	 the	 outer
portions	becoming	badly	overcooked	and	dry.
The	 fish	must	 either	 be	 firm	 enough	 to	 hold
together	when	 turned	with	 a	 spatula	—	 tuna,
swordfish,	 and	 halibut	 do	 well	 —	 or	 be
supported	 in	 a	 closed	 wire	 rack	 that	 can	 be
turned	without	disturbing	the	fish.	Thin	fillets
of	sole	and	other	flatfish	are	sometimes	put	on
a	 preheated	 buttered	 plate	 or	 aromatic	 cedar
board	and	broiled	without	turning.

Mush-Prone	Fish	and	Shellfish
Japanese	 studies	 have	 found	 that	 the
following	fish	and	shellfish	have	especially
active	 protein-digesting	 enzymes	 in	 their
muscle,	 and	 tend	 to	 become	mushy	 when
cooked	 slowly	 or	 held	 at	 temperatures
around	130–140ºF/55–60ºC.



1.	 Sardine
2.	 Herring
3.	 Mackerel
4.	 Tunas
5.	 Chum	salmon
6.	 Whiting
7.	 Pollack
8.	 Tilapia
9.	 Shrimp
10.	 Lobster

Baking	Oven	baking	is	a	versatile	method	for
cooking	 fish.	Because	 it	 transfers	 heat	 to	 the
fish	mainly	by	hot	air,	which	is	an	inefficient
method	 (p.	 784),	 it’s	 relatively	 slow	 and
gentle,	 and	 makes	 it	 easier	 to	 avoid
overcooking.	 This	 is	 true	 as	 long	 as	 the
container	 remains	open	 to	 the	oven	air,	when
the	 fish	 moisture	 evaporates	 and	 cools	 the
surface	 to	 well	 below	 the	 thermostat
temperature.	 If	 the	 container	 is	 closed,	water
vapor	 builds	 up	 inside	 and	 the	 fish	 quickly



steams	rather	 than	bakes.	The	dry	oven	air	 is
also	 useful	 for	 concentrating	 the	 fish	 juices
and	 any	moist	 flavoring	 ingredients	—	wine,
or	 a	bed	of	 aromatic	vegetables,	 for	 example
—	 and	 it	 can	 also	 trigger	 aroma-producing
browning	reactions.

Low-Temperature	 Baking 	 In	 one	 extreme
version	 of	 baking,	 the	 oven	 is	 set	 for
temperatures	 as	 low	 as	 200	 or	 225ºF/	 95–
110ºC,	 and	 the	 cooking	 is	 gentle	 indeed.
Because	 the	 fish	 surface	 is	 simultaneously
warmed	 by	 the	 oven	 air	 and	 cooled	 by
evaporation	 of	 its	 moisture,	 the	 actual
maximum	 temperature	 of	 the	 fish	 surface	 in
such	 an	 oven	 may	 be	 just	 120–130ºF,	 the
internal	 temperature	 even	 lower,	 and	 the	 fish
ends	up	with	a	barely	cooked,	almost	custard-
like	 texture.	 The	 appearance	 of	 fish	 cooked
this	 way	 is	 often	 marred	 by	 the	 off-white
globs	of	solidified	cell	fluid,	which	is	able	to
leak	out	of	the	tissue	before	it	gets	hot	enough



for	 its	 dissolved	 proteins	 to	 coagulate
(normally	 these	 proteins,	which	 constitute	 as
much	as	25%	of	the	total,	coagulate	within	the
muscle).

High-Temperature	 Baking 	 At	 the	 other
extreme,	 a	 very	 hot	 oven	 is	 often	 used	 in
restaurant	kitchens	to	finish	cooking	through	a
portion	 of	 fish	 whose	 skin	 side	 has	 been
browned	 in	 a	 hot	 frying	 pan;	 pan	 and	 fish
together	 are	 then	 slipped	 into	 the	 oven,	 and
the	 fish	cooks	 through	 in	a	 few	minutes	with
heat	from	all	directions,	without	the	necessity
of	turning	it.	A	500ºF/260ºC	oven	can	also	be
used	 to	 “oven	 fry”	 pieces	 of	 fish	 that	 have
been	 breaded,	 spread	 out	 on	 a	 baking	 sheet,
and	moistened	with	oil.

Cooking	 Under	Wraps:	 Crusts,	 Envelopes,
and	Others	An	ancient	way	of	cooking	fish	is
to	 enclose	 it	 in	 a	 layer	 of	 some	material	—
clay,	 coarse	 salt,	 leaves	—	 to	 shield	 it	 from
direct	heat,	and	 then	cook	 the	whole	package



(see	box	below).	The	fish	inside	will	be	more
evenly	 and	 gently	 cooked,	 though	 checking
the	 temperature	 is	 still	 essential	 to	 avoid
overcooking.	 Showy	 preparations	 with	 an
edible	 crust	 of	 pastry	 or	 brioche	 (French	en
croûte)	 are	 baked	 in	 the	 oven.	 A	 more
versatile	 technique	 is	 the	 use	 of	 a	 thin
envelope	 of	 parchment	 (en	 papillote),	 or
aluminum	 foil,	 or	 a	 leaf,	 either	 neutral
(lettuce)	 or	 flavorful	 (cabbage,	 fig,	 banana,
lotus,	hoja	 santa),	 which	 can	 be	 used	 with
almost	any	heat	source,	from	grill	to	steamer.
But	 once	 the	 contents	 get	 hot	 enough,	 nearly
all	the	heating	is	done	by	the	juices	of	the	fish
and	 vegetables	 themselves,	 which	 surround
the	 food	 and	 steam	 it.	 The	 envelope	 can	 be
served	 intact	 and	 opened	 by	 the	 diner,
releasing	 aromas	 that	 would	 otherwise	 have
been	left	behind	in	the	kitchen.

Roman	Fish	in	Parchment
Stuffed	Bonito



Bone	 the	 bonito.	 Pound	 together
pennyroyal,	cumin,	pepper,	mint,	nuts,	and
honey.	Stuff	the	fish	with	this	mixture	and
sew	it	up.	Wrap	the	fish	in	paper	and	place
it	in	a	covered	pan	over	steam.	Season	with
oil,	 reduced	 wine,	 and	 fermented	 fish
paste.

—	Apicius,	first	few	centuries	CE
Frying	Fish	is	fried	in	hot	metal	pans	in	two
different	ways:	with	just	enough	oil	to
lubricate	the	fish	surface	in	contact	with	the
pan,	or	with	enough	oil	to	surround	and	cover
most	or	all	of	the	fish.	Either	way,	the	fish	is
exposed	to	temperatures	sufficient	to	dry	out
and	brown	its	surfaces,	and	therefore	develops
a	contrastingly	crisp	outside	and
characteristic,	rich	aroma.	Because	high	heat
also	makes	the	lean	flesh	fibrous	and	chewy,
fish	to	be	fried	is	often	given	a	protective
coating	of	starchy	and/or	proteinaceous
material,	so	that	the	coating	can	crisp	while
the	fish	remains	moist.	Common	coatings



include	flour	and	flour-based	batters;
cornmeal	or	breadcrumbs;	ground	spices	or
nuts	or	shredded	coconut;	thin	shreds,	strings,
or	sheets	of	potato	or	another	starchy	root
(sometimes	cut	and	arranged	to	look	like	fish
scales);	and	rice	paper.	The	adhesion	of
coating	to	fish	can	be	improved	by	first
lightly	salting	the	fish,	which	draws	some
protein-rich,	sticky	fluid	to	the	surface.

Frying	is	also	an	excellent	way	to	crisp	the
skin	on	a	whole	fish	or	fillet.	The	skin	will	dry
out	more	rapidly	and	thoroughly	if	it’s	first
salted	to	remove	moisture.

Fried	surfaces	stay	crispest	when	they’re
exposed	to	the	air;	confined	between	the	moist
fish	and	plate,	a	crisp	skin	or	coating	soon
reabsorbs	moisture	and	softens.	Serve
crunchy-skinned	fillets	skin-side	up,	or	at
least	give	the	skin	room	to	breathe.

Sautéing	When	 frying	 in	 a	 small	 amount	 of
oil,	it’s	best	to	heat	the	pan	before	adding	the



oil	 (this	 reduces	 oil	 breakdown	 into	 sticky
polymers),	 or	 lightly	 oil	 the	 fish	 surfaces
instead.	 If	an	especially	crisp	skin	or	crust	 is
desired,	the	fish	should	be	started	on	that	side,
pressed	 gently	 to	 maximize	 contact	 between
hot	pan	and	skin,	and	left	long	enough	on	high
heat	 to	 develop	 the	 desired	 texture,	 then
turned	 once	 and	 allowed	 to	 finish	 cooking
through	on	lower	heat.	Thin	fillets	cook	in	just
a	 few	minutes	 per	 side,	 and	 require	 a	 hotter
pan	in	order	to	brown	quickly.

Deep	Frying	In	deep	frying,	the	fish	is	usually
protected	with	a	batter	or	breading,	and	more
or	less	immersed	in	oil,	a	relatively	inefficient
conductor	 of	 heat,	 at	 a	 temperature	 around
350ºF/175ºC,	well	 above	 the	 boiling	 point	 of
water.	 The	 surface	 dries	 out	 and	 gets	 hot
enough	 to	 brown	 and	 to	 develop	 a
characteristic	rich	aroma	and	a	crisp	crust	that
acts	 as	 a	 layer	 of	 insulation	 and	 slows
subsequent	 heating.	 The	 fish	 is	 therefore



heated	 evenly	 from	 all	 directions,	 but	 fairly
gently,	 giving	 the	 cook	 some	 leeway	 in
removing	it	while	it’s	still	moist	inside.

Japanese	 Tempura 	 The	 classic	 Japanese
version	 of	 fried	 fish	 is	 fish	tempura,	 a
preparation	 and	 term	 that	 were	 borrowed	 in
the	 late	 16th	 century	 from	 Portuguese	 and
Spanish	missionaries	who	cooked	 fish	during
fasting	 seasons	 (tempora	 means	 “period	 of
time”).	 Tempura	 —	 which	 now	 means	 a
batter-fried	 food	 of	 any	 sort	 —	 is
characterized	 by	 relatively	 small	 pieces	 that
cook	in	just	a	few	minutes,	and	a	fresh,	barely
mixed	 batter	 made	 from	 an	 egg	 yolk,	 1
cup/120	gm	flour,	and	1	cup/250	ml	ice	water
stirred	together	with	chopsticks	just	before	the
frying.	As	in	all	batters,	cold	water	makes	the
mixture	more	viscous	and	thus	better	retained
on	the	fish	surface.	The	freshness	of	the	batter
means	that	the	flour	particles	have	little	time
to	 soak	 up	 water,	 so	 the	 moisture	 is	 rapidly



removed	 from	 their	 surfaces	during	 frying	 to
produce	 a	 crisp	 crust.	 And	 the	 minimal
mixing	 means	 an	 uneven	 batter	 consistency
and	 therefore	 an	 uneven,	 lacy	 coating	 on	 the
fish,	rather	than	a	monolithic	sheet.

Simmering,	 Poaching,	 Stewing	 Immersing
fish	in	hot	liquid	is	a	simple,	flexible	method
that	 offers	 the	 cook	 unmatched	 control	 over
the	 heating.	 The	 liquid	 can	 be	 very	 hot	 for
cooking	 thin	 pieces	 in	 a	 matter	 of	 seconds,
moderately	hot	for	thicker	pieces,	or	start	out
cold	for	gently	cooking	a	whole	fish	through;
it	can	be	flavored	in	many	different	ways;	and
it	can	be	 turned	 into	a	 sauce.	When	a	 fish	or
shellfish	is	served	in	a	generous	quantity	of	its
cooking	 liquid,	 however	 supplemented	 with
other	ingredients,	the	French	fittingly	call	it	a
preparation	à	la	nage,	or	“aswim.”

The	 Cooking	 Liquids	 Because	 fish	 don’t
require	prolonged	cooking,	 there’s	 little	 time
for	 fish	 and	 cooking	 liquid	 to	 exchange



flavors	and	mellow	together.	Cooking	 liquids
for	fish	are	therefore	either	fairly	neutral	and
discarded	 —	 salted	 water,	 or	 a	 mixture	 of
water	 and	 milk	—	 or	 are	 prepared	 ahead	 of
time	 to	 develop	 their	 flavor.	 In	 the	 French
tradition,	 there	 are	 two	 classic	 liquids	 for
poaching	 fish:	 a	 tart,	 light	 infusion	 of
vegetables	and	herbs,	and	a	richer	stock	made
from	fish	and	vegetables.
Court	bouillon,	or	“briefly	boiled	liquid,”

is	a	mixture	of	water,	salt,	wine	or	vinegar,
and	vegetable	aromatics,	cooked	together	for
30–60	minutes	into	a	medium	that	will	lightly
flavor	the	fish.	The	vegetables	soften	and
release	flavor	more	rapidly	if	the	acid
ingredient	is	added	toward	the	end;	black	or
white	pepper	is	also	added	in	the	last	10
minutes	to	avoid	overextraction	of	its	bitter
components.	A	whole	fish	poached	in	court
bouillon	will	contribute	both	flavor	and
gelatin	to	the	liquid,	which	can	then	be	boiled
down	to	a	succulent	sauce,	or	else	kept	as	a



fish	stock	and	used	later.
Fish	stocks,	or	fumets	(from	the	French	for

“aroma”),	are	also	generally	prepared	in	an
hour	or	less,	since	longer	simmering	of	fragile
fish	bones	can	dissolve	calcium	salts	that	then
cloud	the	liquid	and	give	it	a	chalky	taste.
Stocks	are	made	with	fish	bones,	skins,
trimmings,	and	heads,	which	are	an	especially
rich	source	of	gelatin	and	flavor.	(Gills	are
omitted	because	their	flavor	deteriorates
quickly.)	The	higher	the	proportion	of	fish,
the	more	flavorful	the	stock;	equal	weights	of
water	and	fish	work	well	(e.g.	2	lb/1	kg	per
quart/liter).	The	pot	is	left	uncovered	to
prevent	accidental	boiling	and	clouding,	and
to	allow	slow	evaporation	and	concentration.
To	make	a	clear	consommé,	the	resulting
strained	stock	can	be	clarified	with	a	whipped
mixture	of	egg	whites	and	pureed	raw	fish,
whose	massed	proteins	trap	the	tiny	protein
particles	that	cloud	the	liquid	(p.	601)	into	a
solid,	easily	removed	mass.



Fish	are	also	poached	in	a	variety	of	other
liquids,	including	oil,	butter,	and	such
emulsions	as	beurre	blanc	and	beurre	monté
(p.	632).	These	offer	the	advantage	of	slower,
more	gentle	heat	conduction	and	a	more	stable
temperature	thanks	to	reduced	evaporative
cooling.

Fish	Aspics
Ordinary	 fish	 consommés	 are	 seldom
concentrated	 enough	 in	 gelatin	 to	 set	 into
the	firm,	stable	gel	of	an	aspic	(p.	607).	For
giving	a	glossy,	aspic-like	coating	to	a	cold
fish	 preparation,	 cooks	 may	 supplement
their	 simple	 consommé	 with	 a	 small
amount	 of	 commercial	 gelatin,	 or	 cook	 a
second	batch	of	fish	in	the	consommé.	Fish
gelatin	 melts	 at	 a	 lower	 temperature	 than
pig	 and	beef	 gelatin	—	around	77ºF/25ºC,
instead	of	86ºF/30ºC	—	so	a	true	fish	aspic
melts	 more	 readily	 in	 the	 mouth,	 seems
more	 delicate,	 and	 releases	 its	 flavor



faster.
Poaching	Temperatures	The	great	advantage
of	poaching	fish	is	the	ease	of	controlling	the
heat	to	obtain	a	moist,	succulent	result.
Moderate-sized	fillets	and	steaks	should	be
started	in	liquid	just	below	the	boil	and	so	hot
enough	to	kill	surface	microbes	instantly.	The
pot	should	then	be	taken	off	the	heat,	cool
liquid	added	to	bring	its	temperature	down
more	quickly	to	around	150–160ºF/65–70ºC,
and	the	fish	cooked	through	gently.	Allowing
the	cooked	fish	to	cool	while	immersed	in	its
liquid	will	leave	it	moister,	since	a	hot	piece
of	fish	exposed	to	the	air	evaporates	its
surface	moisture	away.

Poaching	at	the	Table 	Fish	and	shellfish	cook
so	quickly	in	hot	liquid	that	some	cooks	make
poaching	part	of	the	presentation	at	the	table.
Pour	 steaming	 consommé	 into	 a	 bowl
containing	raw	scallops	or	small	cubes	of	fish,
and	 the	 diner	 can	 witness	 their	 instant



opacification	and	savor	 the	evolution	of	 their
texture.

Soups	 and	 Stews;	 Bouillabaisse	 Fish	 stews
and	soups	are	dishes	in	which	small	pieces	of
fish,	 sometimes	 several	 different	 fish,	 are
served	 in	 their	 cooking	 liquid,	 often	 with
vegetables.	 The	 basic	 rules	 for	 simmering
apply.	 The	 soup	 or	 stew	 base	 is	 prepared
ahead	of	time,	and	the	fish	pieces	added	at	the
end	 and	 cooked	 just	 long	 enough	 to	 heat
through:	thick	and	dense	pieces	first,	thin	and
delicate	 last.	 Combinations	 of	 fish	 and
shellfish	 are	 a	 nice	 acknowledgment	 of	 the
sea’s	bounteous	variety.

A	gentle	simmer	is	usually	preferred	to	a
rolling	boil	so	as	to	avoid	breaking	up	delicate
morsels.	A	partial	exception	to	this	rule	is	the
bouillabaisse	of	southern	France,	whose	name
includes	the	idea	of	boiling,	and	whose	unique
character	depends	on	the	vigorous	agitation
that	boiling	provides.	A	bouillabaisse	starts



with	a	stock	made	from	scraps	and	small	bony
fish	to	provide	gelatin	and	flavor,	tomatoes
and	aromatics	for	flavor	and	color,	and	a	large
dollop	of	olive	oil	—	perhaps	a	third	of	a
cup/75	ml	per	quart/liter	of	liquid	—	which	a
fierce	10-minute	boil	emulsifies	into	fine
droplets	throughout	the	soup.	The	dissolved
fish	gelatin	and	suspended	proteins	coat	the
oil	droplets	and	slow	their	coalescence	(p.
628).	The	other	pieces	of	fish	are	added	last
and	simmered	to	cook	through,	and	the	soup	is
served	immediately,	before	the	oil	has	a
chance	to	separate.

Steaming	 Steaming	 is	 a	 rapid	 way	 to	 cook
fish	 and	 is	 especially	 appropriate	 for	 thin
fillets,	which	can	cook	through	quickly	(thick
pieces	 would	 overcook	 on	 the	 surface	 while
their	 interior	 cooks	 through).	 Subtle	 aromas
are	 contributed	 by	 herbs	 and	 spices,
vegetables,	 and	 even	 seaweed,	 if	 they’re
included	 in	 the	 steaming	 water	 or	 provide	 a



bed	on	which	the	fish	sits.
Even	cooking	requires	that	the	fish	pieces

be	the	same	thickness,	and	that	the	steam	have
equal	access	to	all	surfaces.	If	fillets	taper
down	to	a	very	thin	end,	fold	the	thin	layers
over	or	interleave	them	with	each	other.	More
than	one	layer’s	worth	of	fish	should	be
cooked	in	batches	or	divided	among	separate
levels	(as	in	stackable	Chinese	bamboo
steamers).	Relatively	thick	steaks	or	whole
fish	are	best	steamed	below	the	boil,	at	an
effective	temperature	of	180ºF/80ºC,	to
minimize	overcooking	of	the	surface.	This	can
be	achieved	by	lowering	the	heat	on	the	pot
and/or	leaving	the	pot	lid	ajar.	An	even
gentler	effect	is	achieved	by	the	Chinese
method	of	steaming	fish	without	a	lid,	in
which	steam	and	room	air	combine	to	give	an
effective	cooking	temperature	of	150–
160ºF/65–70ºC.

Microwaving	 Microwave	 versions	 of



simmered	 or	 steamed	 fish	 can	 be	 quite
successful	 thanks	 to	 the	 relatively	 thin
dimensions	 of	 fillets	 and	 steaks,	 which	 the
electromagnetic	waves	can	penetrate	fully	and
cook	 quickly.	 To	 prevent	 especially	 thin
portions	 from	 overcooking,	 cover	 them	 with
radiation-blocking	pieces	of	aluminum	foil	(p.
787),	 or	 overlap	 them	 with	 each	 other	 to	 a
consistent	 thickness.	 As	 in	 most	 microwave
cooking,	 the	 food	 should	 be	 enclosed	 so	 that
the	surface	doesn’t	dry	out	and	toughen:	wrap
the	 fish	 pieces	 in	 parchment	 or	 the	 cooking
dish	 with	 plastic	 wrap,	 or	 simply	 place	 the
fish	between	two	inverted	plates.	Waiting	for
the	fish	to	cool	down	some	before	uncovering
the	dish	will	mean	 less	 likelihood	of	a	steam
burn,	a	smaller	billow	of	fishy	aromas	into	the
air,	 and	 less	 moisture	 loss	 from	 the	 fish
surface.

Stovetop	 Smoking	 Smoking	 whole	 fish	 is	 a
time-consuming	 and	 elaborate	 process,	 and



cold-smoking	 requires	 an	 appliance	 with
separate	 chambers	 for	 the	 smoke	 source	 and
the	 fish	 (p.	 236).	But	 it’s	 a	 simple	matter	 to
flavor	 a	 few	 portions	 with	 smoke	 on	 the
backyard	 grill,	 or	 even	 indoors.	 Line	 the
interior	 of	 an	 ordinary	 saucepan	 and	 its	 lid
with	 aluminum	 foil,	 scatter	 smokeable
materials	—	small	dry	wood	chips	or	sawdust,
sugar,	 tea	 leaves,	 spices	 —	 on	 the	 bottom,
place	presalted	fish	pieces	on	a	rack,	turn	the
heat	on	high	until	smoke	appears,	then	reduce
the	heat	to	medium,	cover	the	pot	tightly,	and
allow	 the	 fish	 to	 “bake”	 in	 this	 400–500ºF/
200–250ºC	stovetop	oven	until	barely	cooked
through.

Fish	Mixtures

Like	meats,	fish	can	be	chopped	or	pounded	or
ground	up	and	mixed	with	other	ingredients	to
make	balls,	cakes,	sausages,	pâtés,	terrines,
and	so	on.	This	is	an	excellent	way	to	use



small	scraps	or	cooked	leftovers,	or	fish	that
are	bony	or	otherwise	unsuited	to	serving	in
large	pieces.	While	meat	mixtures	are	often
tenderized	and	enriched	by	chunks	of	fat,	and
firmed	by	conversion	of	the	meat’s	connective
tissue	into	gelatin,	fish	contain	little
connective	tissue	and	no	fat	that	is	solid	at
room	temperature.	Instead,	many	fish
mixtures	aim	for	a	distinctive	lightness,	and
have	for	many	centuries,	as	is	clear	from
Anthimus’s	early	version	of	the	classic	French
dish	quenelles	de	brochet	(see	box	below).

Mousselines,	 Quenelles	 The	 basic
preparation	for	many	refined	fish	mixtures	 is
t he	mousseline,	 from	 the	 French	mousse,	 or
“foam,”	 a	 term	 that	 describes	 the	 airy,
delicate	 consistency	 aimed	 for.	 Chilled	 raw
fish	 is	 very	 finely	 chopped	 or	 pureed	 (with
care	 to	 avoid	 overheating	 in	 high-speed
processors),	then	whisked	with	one	or	more	of
several	binding	and	enriching	ingredients.	The



whisking	also	incorporates	air,	which	lightens
the	mixture.	 If	 the	 fish	 is	 very	 fresh,	 then	 it
can	 be	 enriched	 and	 tenderized	 with	 cream
and	 bound	 simply	 with	 salt,	 which	 extracts
some	myosin	 protein	 from	 the	muscle	 fibers
to	help	them	stick	together.	With	less	pristine
fish	 —	 weeks	 in	 the	 freezer	 can	 cause
premature	 protein	 aggregation	 and	 a	 wet,
crumbly	 puree	 —	 egg	 whites	 help	 hold	 the
particles	 of	 fish	 muscle	 together,	 as	 do
various	 starchy	 materials,	 including	 bread
crumbs,	 flour-based	 béchamel	 and	 velouté
sauces,	 pastry	 doughs,	 and	 mashed	 rice	 or
potatoes.	The	mousseline	mixture	is	firmed	by
refrigeration,	 then	 shaped	 into	 dumpling-like
quenelles,	 or	 wrapped	 inside	 thin	 fish	 fillets
(paupiettes),	and	gently	poached;	or	it’s	put	in
ramekins	or	a	pan	and	cooked	in	a	water	bath
to	 make	 pâtés	 and	 terrines.	 The	 target
temperature	 at	 the	 center	 is	 140–150ºF/60–
65ºC;	 higher	 temperatures	 give	 a	 harder,
heavier	result.



Ancient	Quenelles
Pike	 is	 good	 too.	 Egg	 white	 should	 be
mixed	into	the	dish	called	spumeum	which
is	made	with	pike,	so	that	this	dish	may	be
quite	soft	rather	than	hard,	and	wholesome
when	mixed	together.
—	Anthimus,	On	the	Observance	of	Foods,

ca.	600	CE
Fish	Balls	and	Cakes	Quenelles	are
essentially	refined	fish	balls,	a	genre	of	which
there	are	many	regional	variations.	Chinese
fish	balls	are	bound	with	egg	and	cornstarch,
lightened	with	water;	Norwegian	fish	balls	are
enriched	with	butter	and	cream,	bound	with
potato	flour;	Jewish	gefilte	fish	(thought	to
derive	via	eastern	Europe	from	French
quenelles),	bound	with	eggs	and	matzoh	meal,
and	aerated	by	chopping.	Less	delicate	and
tricky	fish	mixtures	include	coarse	cakes	and
croquettes	bound	with	eggs	and	starchy
particles	like	bread	crumbs,	and	mousses
made	from	cooked	fish	and	held	together	with



starchy	sauces	or	gelatin.

Fingers	 and	 Burgers,	 Surimi	 Commercial
“minced”	 fish	 products	 are	 made	 from	 a
variety	 of	 white	 ocean	 fish	 that	 would
otherwise	 be	 discarded	 as	 too	 small	 or	 bony.
They	 run	 the	 range	 from	coarse-textured	 fish
sticks	 and	 fishburgers	 to	 finer	 patties	 and
paste-like	 spreads.	 Imitation	 fish	 fillets	 and
shellfish	meats	are	made	by	extruding	highly
processed	 mixtures	 of	 fish	 paste	 and	 other
structure-reinforcing	 ingredients,	 including
seaweed-derived	 alginate	 gums	 and	 textured
vegetable	proteins.

The	most	widely	consumed	form	of
processed	fish	is	surimi,	the	Japanese	term	for
“minced	fish,”	which	is	nearly	1,000	years	old
and	is	now	made	into	many	imitation	shellfish
products.	Surimi	is	made	by	finely	mincing
fish	scraps	(today,	usually	pollack),	washing
them,	pressing	them	to	remove	the	wash
water,	salting	and	seasoning	the	mince,



shaping	it,	and	boiling	it	until	it	solidifies.
Washing	the	mince	removes	nearly	everything
from	the	muscle	except	the	muscle	fiber
membranes	and	contracting	proteins.	Salting
then	dissolves	the	protein	myosin	out	of	the
muscle	fibers,	so	that	when	it’s	heated,	the
myosin	will	coagulate	into	a	continuous,
solid,	elastic	gel	in	which	the	other	fiber
materials	are	embedded.	The	result	is	a
flavorless,	colorless,	homogeneous	matrix
that	can	be	flavored,	colored,	and	formed	to
imitate	nearly	any	seafood.

Shellfish	and	Their
Special	Qualities

Though	shellfish	have	much	in	common	with
finfish	and	are	cooked	in	many	of	the	same
ways,	they’re	also	distinctive.	Most	of	the
shellfish	we	eat	are	creatures	from	one	of	two
groups,	the	crustaceans	and	the	molluscs.
Unlike	true	fish,	these	creatures	are



invertebrates:	they	don’t	have	a	backbone	or
internal	skeleton;	and	most	of	them	don’t
swim	much.	Their	body	tissues	are	therefore
organized	differently,	undergo	different	kinds
of	seasonal	changes,	and	require	special
treatment	from	the	cook.

Crustaceans:	Shrimps,	Lobsters,	Crabs,	and	Relatives

Crustaceans	are	the	shellfish	that	have	legs
and	sometimes	claws:	shrimps	and	prawns,
lobsters	and	crayfish,	and	crabs.	Like	the
molluscs,	the	crustaceans	are	an	ancient	and
successful	group	of	animals.	There	were
primitive	shrimps	200	million	years	ago;
today	there	are	some	38,000	crustacean
species,	the	largest	with	a	claw	span	of	12
feet/4	meters!	The	crustaceans	are	members
of	the	large	animal	group	known	as
arthropods,	and	are	relatives	of	the	insects.
Like	the	insects,	they	have	a	body	made	up	of
several	segments,	a	hard	outer	cuticle,	or



exoskeleton,	that	protects	and	supports	the
muscles	and	organs	within,	and	many	rigid
appendages	that	are	adapted	to	a	variety	of
purposes,	including	swimming,	crawling,	and
attacking	prey.	Most	edible	crustaceans	are
“decapods,”	meaning	they	have	five	pairs	of
legs,	one	of	which	is	sometimes	greatly
enlarged	into	claws.	The	meat	of	crustaceans
is	mainly	skeletal	muscle	like	that	of	fish	and
our	land	livestock.	(Notable	exceptions	are	the
immobile	barnacles,	prized	in	Spain	and
South	America.)

Because	they’re	mobile,	carnivorous,	and
often	cannibalistic,	crustaceans	aren’t	as	easy
to	farm	as	molluscs.	The	greatest	success	has
come	with	the	shrimps,	thanks	to	their	ability
to	grow	rapidly	on	both	plant	feeds	and	very
small	animals.

Crustacean	Anatomy	 All	 crustaceans	 share
the	 same	 basic	 body	 plan,	 which	 can	 be
divided	 roughly	 into	 two	 parts.	 The	 forward



portion,	 or	cephalothorax,	 often	 called	 the
“head”	 in	 shrimp,	 is	 the	 equivalent	 of	 our
head	 and	 trunk	 put	 together.	 It	 includes	 the
mouth,	 sensing	 antennae	 and	 eyes,	 five	 pairs
of	manipulating	and	crawling	appendages,	and
the	main	organs	of	 the	digestive,	 circulatory,
respiratory,	 and	 reproductive	 systems.	 The
rear	 portion,	 or	abdomen,	 usually	 called	 the
“tail,”	 is	 mostly	 a	 large,	 meaty	 block	 of
swimming	 muscle	 that	 moves	 the	 fin-like
plates	at	the	back	end.	The	major	exception	to
this	 body	 plan	 is	 the	 crab,	 which	 seldom
swims;	 its	 abdomen	 is	 a	 thin	plate	 folded	up
underneath	a	greatly	enlarged	cephalothorax.

The	most	important	organ	in	the
crustacean	is	what	biologists	call	the	midgut
gland	or	hepatopancreas,	and	what	the	rest	of
us	usually	call	the	“liver.”	This	is	the	source
of	enzymes	that	flow	into	the	digestive	tube
and	break	down	ingested	foods;	it’s	also	the
organ	in	which	fatty	materials	are	absorbed
and	stored	to	provide	energy	during	molting



(below).	It’s	thus	one	of	the	richest,	most
flavorful	parts	of	the	body,	and	is	especially
prized	in	lobsters	and	crabs.	But	it’s	also	what
makes	crustaceans	spoil	so	readily.	The	gland
is	made	up	of	tiny	fragile	tubes;	and	when	the
animal	is	killed,	the	tubules	are	readily
attacked	and	damaged	by	their	own	enzymes,
which	then	spread	into	the	muscle	tissue	and
break	it	down	into	mush.	There	are	several
ways	to	avoid	this	spoilage.	Lobsters	and
crabs	are	sold	either	live,	their	digestive
system	intact,	or	fully	cooked,	their	enzymes
inactivated	by	the	cooking.	Because	the
shrimp	liver	is	relatively	small,	processors
often	remove	the	“head”	that	contains	it,	and
sell	only	the	tail	meat.	Raw	shrimp	that	are
sold	“head-on”	must	be	handled	with	greater
care	(iced	immediately	and	continuously)	and
don’t	keep	as	long.

The	 Crustacean	 Cuticle,	 Molting,	 and
Seasonal	 Quality	 Another	 defining



characteristic	of	the	crustaceans	is	a	“shell”	or
cuticle	 made	 up	 of	chitin,	 a	 network	 of
molecules	 that	 are	 something	 of	 a	 hybrid
between	 carbohydrates	 and	 proteins.	 In
shrimp,	 the	cuticle	 is	 thin	and	 transparent;	 in
larger	animals	it’s	thick	and	opaque,	hardened
to	 a	 rock-like	 mass	 with	 calcium	 minerals
filling	the	space	between	chitin	fibers.

Crustacean	anatomy.	The	 forward	part	of	 the
crustacean	 body,	 the	 cephalothorax	 or
“head,”	 contains	 the	 digestive	 and
reproductive	 organs.	 The	 rear	 part,	 the
abdomen	 or	 “tail,”	 is	 mainly	 fast	 muscle
tissue	 that	 moves	 the	 rear	 fins	 and	 propels
shrimp	 (top)	and	 lobsters	 (center)	in	 brief
swimming	maneuvers.	 The	 crab	 (bottom)	has
only	 a	 vestigial	 abdomen	 tucked	 under	 its



massive	cephalothorax.
As	a	crustacean	grows,	it	must	periodically

cast	off	the	old	cuticle	and	create	a	larger	new
one.	This	process	is	called	molting.	The
animal	constructs	a	new,	flexible	cuticle
under	the	old	one	from	its	body’s	protein	and
energy	reserves.	It	squeezes	its	shrunken	body
through	weakened	joints	in	the	old	shell,	then
pumps	up	itself	with	water	—	from	50	to
100%	of	its	original	weight	—	to	stretch	the
new	cuticle	to	its	maximum	volume.	It	then
hardens	the	new	cuticle	by	cross-linking	and
mineralizing	it,	and	gradually	replaces	its
body	water	with	muscle	and	other	tissues.

Molting	means	that	the	quality	of
crustacean	flesh	is	highly	variable,	and	this	is
why	wild	harvests	are	seasonal,	with	the
seasons	depending	on	the	particular	animal
and	location.	An	actively	growing	animal	has
dense,	abundant	muscle,	while	an	animal
preparing	to	molt	loses	muscle	and	liver	mass,
and	a	newly	molted	animal	may	be	as	much



water	as	muscle.

Crustacean	Color	Crustacean	shells	and	eggs
provide	some	of	the	table’s	most	vivid	colors.
They	 are	 generally	 a	 dark	 green-blue-red-
brown	 that	 helps	 them	 blend	 in	with	 the	 sea
bottom,	 but	 turn	 a	 bright	 orange-red	 when
cooked.	 The	 animals	 create	 their	 protective
coloration	 by	 attaching	 bright	 carotenoid
pigments	 derived	 from	 their	 planktonic	 diet
(astaxanthin,	canthaxanthin,	beta-carotene	and
others)	to	protein	molecules,	thus	muting	and
altering	 their	 color.	 Cooking	 denatures	 the
proteins	 and	 frees	 the	 carotenoids	 to	 reveal
their	own	true	colors.

The	shells	of	lobsters,	crayfish,	and	some
crabs	are	often	cooked	to	extract	both	flavor
and	color	for	sauces	(the	French	sauce
Nantua),	soups,	and	aspics.	Because
carotenoid	pigments	are	much	more	soluble	in
fat	than	in	water,	more	color	will	be	extracted
if	the	cooking	liquid	is	mainly	fat	or	oil	—



butter,	for	example	—	or	contains	some.

Crustacean	 Texture	 Like	 fish	 flesh,	 most
crustacean	flesh	consists	of	white,	fast	muscle
fibers	 (p.	131).	 Its	connective-tissue	collagen
is	both	more	abundant	 than	fish	collagen	and
less	 easily	 dissolved	 by	 heat,	 so	 crustacean
meat	is	less	delicate	and	easily	dried	out	than
fish.	But	 the	protein-breaking	enzymes	in	 the
muscle	are	very	active,	and	can	turn	the	meat
mushy	if	they	aren’t	rapidly	inactivated	by	the
heat	 of	 cooking.	These	 enzymes	work	 fastest
when	 the	 temperature	 hits	 130–140ºF/55–
60ºC,	so	the	cook	should	either	heat	the	flesh
well	 above	 this	 range	 as	 quickly	 as	 possible,
or	 get	 it	 just	 into	 this	 range	 (for	 maximum
moistness)	 and	 then	 serve	 it	 immediately.
Boiling	 and	 steaming	 are	 the	 most	 rapid
heating	methods,	and	the	usual	treatments	for
shrimp,	lobster,	and	crab.

Food	Words:	Shrimp,	Prawn,	Crab,
Crayfish,	Lobster,	Crustacean



Most	of	our	words	for	crustaceans	go	back
to	 prehistoric	 times.	Shrimp	 comes	 from
the	Indo-European	root	skerbh,	meaning	to
turn,	bend,	or	shrink,	perhaps	reflecting	the
curled	 shape	 of	 these	 creatures.	The	 near-
synonym	prawn	 first	 appears	 in	 medieval
times,	 and	 its	 origins	 are	 unknown.	Crab
and	crayfish	 both	 derive	 from	 the	 Indo-
European	gerbh,	 meaning	 to	 scratch	 or
carve,	 something	 that	 crustacean	 claws
readily	 do	 to	 human	 skin.	 Finally,	lobster
shares	 with	locust	 the	 Indo-European	 root
lek,	 meaning	 to	 leap	 or	 fly:	 a	 remarkably
early	 recognition	 of	 the	 family
resemblance	of	crustaceans	and	insects.
Crustacean	 itself	 comes	 from	 an	 Indo-

European	root	meaning	to	freeze,	to	form	a
crust,	and	describes	the	hard	outer	skeleton
of	 these	 creatures.	 It	 shares	 this	 root	with
crystal.
Crustacean	texture	is	also	more	tolerant	of

freezing	than	most	fish;	frozen	shrimp	in



particular	can	be	quite	good.	However,
domestic	freezers	are	warmer	than
commercial	freezers	and	allow	undesirable
chemical	changes	and	general	toughening	to
occur	(p.	206),	so	frozen	crustacean	meats
should	be	used	as	quickly	as	possible.

Crustacean	 Flavor	 The	 aromas	 of	 boiled
shrimp,	 lobster,	 crayfish,	 and	 crab	 are
remarkable	 for	 their	 nutty,	 popcorn-like
qualities,	quite	distinct	from	either	mollusc	or
fish	 aromas.	Even	meats	 don’t	 develop	 these
notes	 unless	 they’re	 actually	 roasted	 rather
than	 boiled.	 They’re	 due	 to	 an	 abundance	 of
molecules	 (pyrazines,	 thiazoles)	 that	 are
normally	 produced	 when	 amino	 acids	 and
sugars	 react	 at	 high	 temperatures	 (the
Maillard	 reactions,	 p.	 778).	 These	 reactions
evidently	 take	place	at	 lower	 temperatures	 in
crustaceans,	 perhaps	 thanks	 to	 the	 unusual
concentration	of	 free	 amino	 acids	 and	 sugars
in	their	muscle	tissue.	Among	the	amino	acids



that	sea	creatures	accumulate	in	their	cells	to
balance	the	salt	in	the	water,	crustaceans	favor
glycine,	 which	 has	 a	 sweet	 taste	 and	 lends
sweetness	to	their	meat.

The	distinctive	iodine-like	flavor	found
frequently	in	gulf	brown	shrimps	and
occasionally	in	other	crustaceans	originates	in
bromine	compounds	that	the	animals
accumulate	from	algae	and	other	foods,	and
then	convert	to	unusual	and	more	odorous
compounds	(bromophenols)	in	their	gut.

It’s	often	observed	that	crustaceans	are
more	flavorful	when	cooked	in	their	shells.
The	cuticle	reduces	the	leaching	of	flavor
compounds	from	the	flesh,	and	is	itself	a
concentrated	mass	of	proteins,	sugars,	and
pigment	molecules	that	can	flavor	the	outer
layer	of	flesh.

Choosing	 and	 Handling	 Crustaceans
Because	 their	 flesh	 is	 so	 easily	 damaged	 by
their	 own	 enzymes	 once	 they’re	 dead,



crustaceans	 are	 generally	 sold	 to	 consumers
either	 frozen,	 cooked,	 or	 alive.	Most	 “fresh”
raw	 shrimp	 have	 been	 obtained	 frozen	 and
thawed	 by	 the	 store.	Ask	 for	 a	 sniff	 of	 one,
and	don’t	buy	if	you	smell	ammonia	or	other
off-odors.	Cook	them	the	same	day.

The	larger	crustaceans,	lobsters	and	crabs,
are	generally	sold	either	precooked	or	alive.
Live	crustaceans	should	come	from	a	clean-
looking	tank,	and	should	be	active.	They	can
be	kept	alive	in	a	moist	wrapping	in	the
refrigerator	for	a	day	or	two.	Relatively	small
lobsters	and	crabs	will	have	finer	muscle
fibers	and	so	a	finer	texture.

Traditional	recipes	often	treat	lobsters,
crayfish,	and	crabs	as	if	they	were	insensible
to	pain,	calling	for	the	cook	either	to	cut	them
up	or	drop	them	in	boiling	water	while	they’re
still	alive.	These	creatures	don’t	really	have	a
central	nervous	system.	The	“brain”	in	the
head	region	receives	input	only	from	the
antennae	and	eyes,	and	each	body	segment	has



its	own	nerve	cluster,	so	it’s	hard	to	know
whether	or	how	pain	can	be	minimized.	The
most	sensible-sounding	advice	comes	from
marine	biologists:	anaesthetize	the	animal	in
iced	salt	water	for	30	minutes	just	before
cutting	up	or	boiling.

Shrimps	and	Prawns	Shrimp	and	prawns	are
the	most	commonly	available	shellfish	 in	 the
world.	 Their	 predominance	 stems	 from	 their
delicious	 flavor,	 conveniently	 small	 size,
rapid	 reproduction	 in	 the	 wild	 and	 in
aquaculture,	and	the	tolerance	of	their	flesh	to
freezing.	The	two	terms	are	often	used	for	the
very	 same	 animals;	 in	 the	 United	 States,
“prawn”	 usually	 means	 a	 larger	 variety	 of
shrimp.	There	are	some	300	species	of	shrimp
and	 close	 relatives	 exploited	 for	 food	 around
the	world,	but	the	most	common	belong	to	one
semitropical	 and	 tropical	 genus,	Penaeus.
Species	 of	Penaeus	 can	 mature	 in	 a	 year	 or
less	 and	 grow	 as	 long	 as	 9	 in/24	 cm.



Temperate-water	 shrimp	 belong	 to	 a	 slower-
growing	 group	 and	 are	 usually	 smaller	 (a
maximum	of	6	in/15	cm).	Today	about	a	third
of	 world	 production	 is	 cultivated,	 mainly	 in
Asia.

Shrimp	Quality	Shrimp	flavor	declines	in	just
a	 few	 days	 on	 ice	 due	 to	 the	 slow	 loss	 of
amino	acids	and	other	 tasty	 small	molecules.
But	 thanks	 to	 their	protective	cuticle,	 shrimp
can	 remain	 edible	 for	 as	 much	 as	 14	 days.
Shrimpers	 often	 treat	 them	 with	 a	 bleaching
solution	 of	 bisulfite	 to	 prevent	 discoloration,
and	 like	 scallops,	 with	 a	 sodium
polyphosphate	 solution	 to	 keep	 them	 moist;
these	practices	can	cause	off-flavors.

The	mainly	muscular	“tail”	of	the	shrimp
amounts	to	about	two-thirds	of	its	body
weight,	so	producers	often	separate	it	from	the
flavorful	“head”	and	its	midgut	enzymes,
which	can	accelerate	spoilage.	The	dark
“vein”	along	the	outside	curve	of	the	abdomen



is	the	end	of	the	digestive	tube,	and	can	be
gritty	with	the	sand	from	which	the	animals
glean	bacteria	and	debris;	it’s	easily	pulled
away	from	the	surrounding	muscle.	Though
peeled,	cooked	shrimp	are	widely	available
and	convenient,	serious	shrimp	lovers	seek
out	fresh	whole	shrimp	and	cook	them	in	the
shell,	rapidly	and	briefly.

Lobsters	 and	 Crayfish	 Saltwater	 lobsters
(species	 of	Homarus	 and	Nephrops)	 and
freshwater	 crayfish	 (Astacus,	 Procambarus,
and	 others)	 are	 generally	 the	 largest
crustaceans	 in	 their	 neighborhood.	 The
American	lobster	once	weighed	as	much	as	40
lb/19	 kg,	 while	 today	 it’s	 typically	 1–3
lb/450–1,350	gm.	And	more	than	500	species
of	crayfish	have	evolved	in	the	fresh	waters	of
isolated	 rivers	 and	 streams,	 especially	 in
North	 America	 and	 Australia.	 Most	 are
relatively	 small,	 but	 the	 Australian	 marrons
and	 “Murray	 lobsters”	 can	 exceed	 10	 lb/4.5



kg.	 Crayfish	 are	 the	 most	 easily	 cultured	 of
the	 crustaceans,	 and	 have	 been	 raised	 in
natural	 ponds	 in	 the	 Atchafalaya	 Basin	 of
Louisiana	 for	 better	 than	 two	 centuries.
They’re	also	prized	in	Sweden.

The	main	attraction	of	all	these	creatures	is
their	white	“tail”	meat.	Three	European	and
American	lobster	species	and	their	crayfish
cousins	have	large	claws,	which	in	the
American	lobster	can	amount	to	half	the	total
body	weight.	A	larger	group	of	more	distant
relatives,	the	spiny	and	rock	lobsters
(Palinurus,	Panuliris,	Jasus	and	others),	are
less	impressively	endowed,	and	are	called
“clawless”;	they	supply	much	frozen	lobster
tail,	because	their	meat	freezes	better	than
clawed	lobster	meat.	The	claw	meat	is
noticeably	different	from	the	main	body	and
tail	meats.	Because	they	require	more
stamina,	claw	muscles	include	a	substantial
proportion	of	slow	red	fibers	(p.	132),	and
have	a	distinctive,	richer	flavor.



Lobsters	and	crayfish	are	often	sold	live	to
consumers.	The	prime	season	for	Louisiana
crayfish	is	generally	local	winter	through
spring,	when	the	animals	are	heaviest	and
firm-fleshed.	The	lobster	body	contains	the
flavorful	digestive	gland	known	as	the	liver	or
tomalley,	a	pale	mass	that	turns	green	when
cooked.	Females	may	also	contain	an	ovary,	a
mass	containing	thousands	of	1–2	mm	eggs,
which	turns	red-pink	when	cooked;	hence	its
name	“coral.”	Lobster	liver	and	coral	are
sometimes	removed	before	cooking,	and	then
crushed	to	a	paste	and	added	to	hot	sauces	at
the	last	minute	to	contribute	their	color	and
flavor.

Crustacean	 innards.	 The	 cephalothorax	 of
crustaceans	 contains	 a	 large,	 flavorful
digestive	 gland,	 the	 hepatopancreas,	 whose



enzymes	 can	 also	 damage	 the	 surrounding
muscle.	 The	 dark,	 sometimes	 gritty	 “vein”
along	the	tail	muscle	is	actually	the	end	of	the
digestive	tube.
Crabs	Crabs	are	tailless.	Instead	they	have	a
massive	cephalothorax,	whose	musculature
enables	these	creatures	to	live	in	the	deepest
sea,	burrow	on	land,	and	climb	trees.	Most
crabs	have	one	or	two	powerful	claws	for
holding,	cutting,	and	crushing	their	prey.	Crab
claw	meat	is	flavorful	but	coarser	and	harder
to	get	at	than	the	body	meat,	and	generally	not
as	prized.	Exceptions	are	the	massive	and
flavorsome	single	claws	of	the	Florida	stone
crab	and	European	fiddler	crab.	The	legs	of
the	north	Pacific	king	crabs,	which	can	span
4–6	ft/1.2–1.8	m,	provide	large	cylinders	of
meat	that	are	often	sold	frozen.

Most	commercial	crabs	(species	of
Callinectes,	Carcinus,	Cancer,	and	others)	are
still	caught	alive	in	baited	traps	or	dredges.
They	may	be	sold	live,	or	cooked	and	whole,



or	cooked	and	processed	into	shell-less	meat.
This	meat	is	then	sold	fresh,	or	pasteurized,	or
frozen	for	longer	keeping.	In	addition	to	the
muscle	tissue,	the	crab’s	large	digestive
gland,	its	“mustard”	or	“butter,”	is	prized	for
a	rich,	intense	flavor	and	creamy	texture,
which	it	lends	to	sauces	or	to	crab	pastes.
Crab	liver	can	accumulate	the	toxins	from
algae	that	cause	shellfish	poisoning	(p.	186),
so	state	regulators	monitor	toxin	levels	and
restrict	crabbing	when	they	become
significant.

Soft-shell	 crabs	 Because	 freshly	 molted
crustaceans	 have	 just	 spent	 much	 of	 their
protein	 and	 fat	 reserves	 and	 are	 absorbing
water	 to	 fill	 out	 their	 new	 shell,	 eaters
generally	disdain	them.	The	major	exceptions
to	 this	 rule	 are	 the	 soft-shell	 shore	 crab	 of
Venice,	 and	 the	 soft-shell	 blue	 crab	 of	 the
U.S.	Atlantic	 coast,	 which	 is	 fried	 and	 eaten
whole.	 Animals	 that	 are	 about	 to	 molt	 are



watched	 carefully	 and	 removed	 from	 salt
water	 as	 soon	 as	 they	 shed	 their	 old	 shell,
since	 their	 new	 cuticle	 would	 otherwise
become	 leathery	 within	 hours	 and	 calcified
hard	in	two	or	three	days.

Molluscs:	Clams,	Mussels,
Oysters,	Scallops,	Squid,
and	Relatives

Molluscs	are	the	strangest	creatures	we	eat.
Take	a	close	look	sometime	at	an	intact
abalone	or	oyster	or	squid!	But	strange	or	not,
molluscs	are	plentiful	and	delicious.	Judging
by	the	massive	prehistoric	piles	of	oyster,
clam,	and	mussel	shells	that	dot	the	planet’s
seacoasts,	humans	have	feasted	on	these
conveniently	sluggish	creatures	from	the
earliest	days.	This	highly	successful	and
diverse	branch	of	the	animal	kingdom	got	its
start	half	a	billion	years	ago	and	currently
includes	100,000	species,	double	the	number



of	fish	and	animal	species	with	backbones,
from	snails	just	a	millimeter	across	to	giant
clams	and	squids.

The	secret	to	the	molluscs’	success	—	and
their	strangeness	—	is	their	adaptable	body
plan.	It	includes	three	major	parts:	a	muscular
“foot”	for	moving;	an	intricate	assembly	that
includes	the	circulatory,	digestive,	and	sexual
organs;	and	enveloping	this	assembly,	a
versatile	sheet-like	“mantle”	that	takes	on
such	jobs	as	secreting	materials	for	a	shell,
supporting	eyes	and	small	tentacles	that	detect
food	or	danger,	and	contracting	and	relaxing
to	control	water	flow	into	the	interior.	The
molluscan	shellfish	that	we	eat	have
combined	these	parts	in	very	different	ways.

Abalones,	the	most	primitive,	have	one
cup-like	shell	for	protection,	and	a
massive,	tough	muscular	foot	for	moving
along	and	clinging	to	the	seaweed	on
which	their	rasping	mouths	feed.
Clams	are	enclosed	in	two	shells,	and



burrow	into	the	sand	with	their	foot.
Modifications	of	the	mantle	have
provided	them	with	two	pegs	of	muscle
for	closing	the	shells,	and	with	the
muscular	tube	—	the	siphon	or	“neck”	—
that	they	extend	to	the	sand	surface	and
use	to	draw	in	passing	food	particles.	All
the	bivalves	—	clams,	mussels,	oysters
—	have	comb-like	gills	for	filtering	food
particles	from	the	water	that	the	mantle
draws	in	and	expels.
Mussels	are	also	two-shelled	filter
feeders,	but	they	attach	their	foot
permanently	to	intertidal	and	subtidal
rocks.	They	have	no	need	for	a	siphon,
and	one	of	their	tough	shell-closing
muscles	is	much	reduced.
Oysters	cement	themselves	to	inter-	and
sub-tidal	rocks.	Their	two	heavy	shells
are	closed	by	a	single	large	muscle	at
their	center,	around	which	the	mantle	and
other	organs	are	organized.	The	bulk	of



their	body	is	the	tender	mantle	and	food-
trapping	gills.
Scallops	neither	attach	nor	bury
themselves.	They	lie	free	on	the	ocean
floor,	and	escape	predators	by
swimming.	Their	massive	central	muscle
claps	their	shells	shut	and	forces	water
out	one	end,	thus	propelling	them	in	the
other	direction.
Squids	and	octopuses	are	molluscs	turned
inside	out	and	transformed	into	highly
mobile,	streamlined	carnivores	with
large	eyes	and	arms.	The	remnants	of	a
shell	provide	an	internal	support,	and	the
mantle	is	now	a	specialized	muscular
sheet	that	expands	and	contracts	to
provide	jet	propulsion	through	a	small
funnel	derived	from	the	foot	muscle.

The	 immobile	 molluscs	 do	 very	 well	 in
aquaculture.	 They	 can	 be	 raised	 in	 large
numbers	 in	 the	 water’s	 three	 dimensions,



suspended	 in	 nets	 or	 on	 ropes,	 and	 grow
rapidly	 thanks	 to	 the	 good	 circulation	 of
oxygen	and	nutrients.

Bivalve	Adductor	 Muscles	 The	 two-shelled
or	“bivalve”	molluscs	must	spread	their	shells
apart	to	allow	water	and	food	particles	in,	and
pull	 their	 shells	 together	 to	 protect	 their	 soft
innards	against	predators	or	—	in	 the	case	of
intertidal	 mussels	 and	 oysters	 —	 the	 drying
air.	 To	 do	 this	 work	 they	 have	 evolved	 a
special	 muscle	 system,	 one	 that	 poses	 some
challenges	 to	 the	 cook	 but	 is	mostly	 a	 boon,
since	 these	 prepackaged	 animals	 can	 survive
for	many	days	in	the	refrigerator	covered	only
with	a	moist	towel.

Bivalve	shells	are	normally	held	open
mechanically,	by	means	of	a	spring-like
ligament	that	connects	and	pulls	them
together	at	the	hinge	end,	and	thus	pulls	the
opposite	wide	ends	apart.	To	close	the	shells,
the	animal	must	power	a	muscle,	called	an



“adductor”	(from	the	Latin	adducere,	“to
bring	together”),	which	extends	between	the
broad	ends	of	the	shell	and	contracts	to
overcome	the	spring	force	of	the	ligament.

Tender	 Quick,	 Tough	 Catch 	 The	 adductor
muscle	 has	 to	 perform	 two	 very	 different
kinds	 of	 work.	 One	 is	 to	 close	 the	 shell
quickly	 to	 expel	 sediment,	 accumulated
wastes,	 or	 eggs,	 or	 to	 slam	 the	 door	 on
predators.	 The	 other	 is	 to	 keep	 the	 shell
tightly	closed	for	hours,	sometimes	even	days,
until	 the	 danger	 passes.	 These	 two	 jobs	 are
performed	 by	 adjoining	 parts	 of	 the	 muscle.
The	 fast-contracting	 “quick”	 portion	 is	 quite
similar	 to	 the	 fast	 muscles	 of	 fish	 and
crustaceans;	 it’s	 white,	 translucent,	 and
relatively	 tender.	 But	 the	 slow,	 tension-
maintaining	 “catch”	 portion	 is	 among	 the
strongest	muscles	known,	and	can	maintain	its
contraction	 with	 very	 little	 expenditure	 of
energy,	thanks	to	biochemical	tricks	that	lock



the	 muscle	 fibers	 in	 place	 once	 they’ve
shortened,	 and	 reinforcement	 with	 large
amounts	 of	 connective-tissue	 collagen.	Catch
muscles	have	an	opalescent	appearance,	much
like	the	tough	tendons	in	a	chicken	leg	or	leg
of	 lamb,	 and	 they	 are	 tough	 to	 eat	 as	 well
unless	cooked	for	a	long	time.	In	the	scallop,
the	small	catch	portion	would	detract	from	the
large	 quick	 portion’s	 tenderness,	 and	 so	 is
usually	cut	away.

Mollusc	 Texture	 The	 adductor	 muscles
largely	 determine	 the	 texture	 of	 several
bivalves	 —	 especially	 the	 scallop,	 whose
large	and	tender	“swimming”	muscle	is	often
the	 only	 portion	 served.	 The	 other	 bivalve
bodies	 are	 eaten	 whole,	 and	 include	 one	 or
two	 adductors	 together	 with	 miscellaneous
innards;	small	tubes	and	thin	sheets	of	muscle
and	 connective	 tissue;	 soft	 masses	 of	 eggs,
sperm,	 and	 food	 particles;	 and	 a	 general
proteinaceous	mucus	that	lubricates	and	binds



food	 particles.	 Clams,	 mussels,	 and	 oysters
are	 thus	 slick	 and	 both	 crunchy	 and	 tender
when	 raw,	 chewy	 when	 cooked.	 The	 greater
the	 proportion	 of	 muscle	 tissue,	 the	 chewier
the	mollusc.

Mollusc	texture	is	also	strongly	affected
by	the	animals’	reproductive	stage.	And	as
they	approach	spawning	and	their	bodies	fill
with	eggs	and/or	sperm,	the	bivalves	develop
a	soft	creaminess	that	cooking	sets	to	a
custard-like	texture.	Immediately	after
spawning,	the	depleted	tissues	are	thin	and
flabby.

Abalone,	octopus,	and	squid	meats	are
mainly	muscle	tissue	with	a	lot	of	connective-
tissue	collagen	and	a	complex	fiber
arrangement.	They’re	chewy	when	lightly
cooked,	tough	when	cooked	to	the
denaturation	temperature	of	their	collagen,
around	120–130ºF/50–55ºC,	and	become
tender	with	long	cooking.



Mollusc	Flavor	 Oysters,	 clams,	 and	mussels
are	 prized	 for	 their	 rich,	 mouth-filling	 taste,
especially	 when	 eaten	 raw.	 We	 owe	 this
savoriness	 to	 their	 accumulation	 of	 internal
taste-active	 substances	 as	 an	 energy	 reserve
and	 to	 balance	 the	 external	 salinity	 of	 their
home	 waters.	 For	 osmotic	 balance,	 marine
fish	 (and	 squid	 and	 octopus)	 use	 tasteless
TMAO	and	relatively	small	amounts	of	amino
acids,	 while	 most	 molluscs	 rely	 almost
entirely	 on	 amino	 acids:	 in	 the	 bivalves,
especially	 brothy	 glutamic	 acid.	And	 instead
of	storing	energy	in	the	form	of	fat,	molluscs
accumulate	 other	 amino	 acids	 —	 proline,
arginine,	 alanine,	 and	 some	 combined	 forms
—	as	well	as	glycogen,	the	animal	version	of
starch,	 which	 is	 itself	 tasteless,	 though	 it
probably	 provides	 a	 sense	 of	 viscosity	 and
substance,	and	is	slowly	transformed	to	sweet
molecules	(sugar	phosphates).

Because	shellfish	use	amino	acids	to
counteract	salt	concentration,	the	saltier	the



water,	the	more	savory	the	shellfish.	This	fact
accounts	for	at	least	some	of	the	flavor
differences	among	shellfish	from	different
waters,	and	it	is	part	of	the	rationale	for
“finishing”	oysters	for	a	few	weeks	or	months
in	particular	locations.	Because	shellfish	use
up	their	energy	stores	as	they	prepare	for
spawning,	they	become	noticeably	less	tasty
as	spawning	approaches.

When	molluscs	are	cooked,	their
savoriness	is	somewhat	diminished	because
heat	traps	some	of	the	amino	acids	in	the	web
of	coagulated	protein	and	so	withholds	them
from	the	tongue.	However,	heating	alters	and
intensifies	the	aroma,	which	is	generally
dominated	by	dimethyl	sulfide,	a	compound
formed	from	an	odd	sulfur-containing
substance	(dimethyl- -propiothetin)	that
molluscs	accumulate	from	the	algae	on	which
they	feed.	DMS	is	also	a	prominent	aroma	in
canned	corn	and	in	heated	milk:	one	reason
that	oysters	and	clams	go	so	well	with	these



ingredients	in	seafood	soups	and	stews.

Choosing	 and	 Handling	 Molluscs	 Unless
they’ve	 already	 been	 removed	 from	 their
shell,	 fresh	 bivalves	 should	 be	 alive	 and
healthy:	 otherwise	 they	 are	 likely	 to	 have
begun	 spoiling.	 A	 healthy	 bivalve	 has	 an
intact	shell,	and	its	adductor	muscle	 is	active
and	 holds	 the	 shells	 tightly	 together,
especially	 when	 sharply	 tapped.	 Molluscs
keep	 best	 on	 ice	 covered	with	 a	 damp	 cloth,
and	should	not	be	allowed	to	sit	in	a	puddle	of
meltwater,	 which	 is	 saltless	 and	 therefore
fatal	 to	 sea	 creatures.	 Clams	 and	 relatives
often	 benefit	 from	 several	 hours’	 immersion
in	a	bucket	of	cold	salt	water	(1/3	cup	salt	per
gallon,	 or	 20	 gm/l)	 to	 clean	 themselves	 of
residual	sand	and	grit.

When	the	cook	wants	to	“shuck”	an	oyster
or	clam,	or	open	the	shell	and	remove	the	raw
meat,	it’s	the	hinge	ligament	and	adductor
muscles	that	must	be	dealt	with.	The	usual



technique	is	to	wedge	the	blade	of	a	small,
strong	knife	between	the	shells	near	the	hinge,
then	cut	through	the	elastic	ligament.	Then
run	the	knife	along	the	inner	surface	of	one
shell	to	sever	the	adductor	muscle(s)	(clams
and	mussels	have	two,	oysters	and	scallops
one).	Remove	the	loose	shell,	and	cut	the
other	end	of	the	adductor(s)	to	free	the	body
from	the	remaining	shell.

Heat	causes	the	adductor	muscle	to	relax,
which	is	why	mollusc	shells	open	during
cooking.	Shells	that	don’t	open	may	not
contain	a	live	animal	and	should	be	discarded.

Abalone	 There	 are	 about	 100	 species	 in	 the
abalone	 genus	Haliotis;	 they	 have	 a	 single
low-slung	 shell,	 and	 the	 largest	 grow	 to	 12
in/30	cm	and	8	 lb/4	kg.	 In	 the	United	States,
the	 red	 abalone,	Haliotis	 rufescens,	 is	 now
farmed	 in	 offshore	 cages	 and	 onshore	 tanks,
reaching	3.5	in/9	cm	across	and	yielding	0.25
lb/100g	 meat	 in	 about	 three	 years.	 Abalone



meat	can	be	quite	tough,	in	part	because	they
apparently	 accumulate	 connective-tissue
collagen	 as	 an	 energy	 reserve!	 Either	 very
gentle	 or	 prolonged	 heating	 is	 essential;	 the
meat	 toughens	 badly	 when	 it	 exceeds
120ºF/50ºC,	 and	 the	 collagen	 shrinks	 and
compacts	 the	 tissue.	 Once	 this	 happens,
continued	simmering	will	eventually	dissolve
the	 collagen	 into	 gelatin	 and	 make	 the	 meat
densely	 silken.	 Japanese	 cooks	 simmer
abalone	 for	 several	 hours	 to	 obtain	 a	 more
savory	 flavor	 (free	 amino	 acids	 apparently
react	to	form	taste-active	peptides).

Clams	 Clams	 are	 the	 burrowing	 bivalves.
They	 dig	 themselves	 into	 ocean	 or	 river
sediments	 by	 extending	 a	 foot	 muscle
downward,	 expanding	 its	 end	 into	 an	 anchor,
and	 then	 contracting	 the	 foot	while	 squirting
water	and	rocking	the	shell.	In	order	to	reach
the	 water	 from	 their	 burrow	 to	 breathe	 and
feed,	 they	 have	 a	 pair	 of	 muscular	 tubes	 or



“siphons,”	 one	 for	 inhaling	 and	 the	 other	 for
exhaling,	 which	 may	 be	 separate	 or	 else
joined	together	into	a	single	“neck.”

The	U.S.	term	“hard	shell”	is	applied	to
sturdy	clams	that	close	completely	(little-
neck,	quahog),	while	“soft	shell”	clams	have
siphons	much	longer	than	the	shell,	which	is
thin	and	always	gapes	(steamer,	longneck).
The	Japanese	or	Manila	hard-shell	clam
(Ruditapes	philippinarum)	is	the	only	one	to
be	cultivated	on	a	large	scale	worldwide,
thanks	to	its	robustness	and	preference	for
shallow	burial.	The	other	dozen	or	so	common
clam	species	are	mainly	regional	products.
Some	species	of	the	large	surf	clam
(Mactromeris	species)	absorb	plankton
pigments	and	have	a	striking	red	layer	on
several	muscles.	The	largest	and	most
grotesque	of	the	temperate	commercial	clams
is	the	deep-burrowing	geoduck	of	the	Pacific
Northwest	subtidal	mudflats	(Panope
generosa),	whose	neck	looks	like	a	small



elephant’s	trunk.	Though	most	are	3	lb/1.5	kg,
geoducks	can	reach	15	lb/8	kg	with	a	neck	3
ft/1	m	long!

Food	Words:	Mollusc,	Abalone,	Clam,
Oyster,	Scallop,	Squid

The	 general	 term	 for	 these	 hard-shelled
creatures,	mollusc,	 comes	 from	 the	 Indo-
European	 root	mel,	meaning	 “soft,”	which
the	 inner	 body	 parts	 indeed	 are.	Abalone
entered	 English	 via	 Spanish	 from	 the
Monterey	Indian	word	for	this	streamlined
snai l ,	aulun.	 Clam	 began	 in	 the	 Indo-
European	gel,	 a	 compact	 mass:	cloud,
cling,	and	clamp	are	its	linguistic	relatives.
Mussel	 derives	 from	 the	 Indo-European
mus,	meaning	both	“mouse”	and	“muscle,”
which	 moves	 quickly	 like	 a	 mouse	 under
the	skin.	Since	mussels	hardly	move	at	all,
their	 dark,	 oblong	 shapes	 must	 have
suggested	the	comparison.	Oyster,	from	the
Indo-European	ost,	 “bone,”	 names	 the



mollusc	 with	 the	 heavy	 and	 bone-colored
s h e l l .	Scallop,	 with	 its	 unusually
symmetrical	 and	 patterned	 valves,	 comes
via	 the	 Middle	 French	escalope,	 from	 a
Germanic	word	for	“shell.”	And	squid?	To
date,	the	linguists	are	stumped.	It	appeared
out	of	nowhere	in	the	17th	century.
Their	burrowing	and	siphoning

musculature	makes	clams	fairly	chewy
creatures.	The	tenderer	portions	of	large
clams	(mantle,	quick	muscle)	may	be	cut	out
and	prepared	separately.	The	large	geoduck
neck	is	usually	scalded	and	the	tough
protective	skin	removed	before	the	meat	is
sliced	and/or	pounded	very	thin	for	eating	raw
or	either	gentle	or	prolonged	cooking.

Mussels	 The	 handful	 of	 mussel	 species	 we
usually	 eat	 have	 become	 cosmopolitan:	 they
have	 hitched	 rides	 or	 been	 intentionally
introduced	 to	 various	 parts	 of	 the	 world,
where	 they	 both	 grow	 naturally	 and	 are



farmed	 and	 marketed	 at	 2.5	 in/6	 cm	 in	 less
than	 two	 years.	 The	 Mediterranean	 and
Atlantic	 species	 of	Mytilus	 have
complementary	 habits;	 the	 Atlantic	 is	 in	 its
prime	 in	 the	 spring	 and	 spawns	 in	 the
summer;	the	Mediterranean	is	best	in	summer
and	spawns	in	winter.

Mussels	anchor	themselves	in	the
intertidal	zone	by	means	of	a	thatch	of	tough
proteinaceous	fibers	called	the	byssus,	or
“beard.”	Where	the	clams	have	two	similar
adductor	muscles	to	close	and	hold	the	shells
tightly	shut,	the	mussel	has	one	large	adductor
at	the	wide	end	and	a	small	one	at	the	narrow
end.	The	rest	of	the	mussel	body	comprises
the	respiratory	and	digestive	systems	and	the
mantle.	Sexual	tissues	develop	throughout
these	systems.	Coloration	depends	on	sex,
diet,	and	species;	orange	pigments	from	algae
and	crustaceans	accumulate	more	in	female
and	Atlantic	mussels.

Mussels	are	the	easiest	molluscs	to



prepare;	they	tolerate	some	overcooking	and
readily	come	off	the	shell.	Both
characteristics	reflect	the	relatively	small
amount	of	muscle	tissue.	Because	the	beard	is
attached	to	the	body	inside,	tugging	on	it	can
injure	the	animal.	Beard	removal	should	be
put	off	until	just	before	cooking.	To	avoid
toughening	mussels,	it’s	best	to	cook	them	in
a	broad,	shallow	pan	in	essentially	a	single
layer:	this	allows	the	cook	to	remove	the	early
openers	so	that	they	don’t	overcook	while	the
others	finish.

Oysters	 Oysters	 are	 the	 most	 prized	 of	 the
bivalves.	They	are	the	sea’s	tenderest	morsels,
the	 marine	 equivalent	 of	 penned	 veal	 or	 the
fattened	chicken,	which	just	sit	and	eat.	Their
shell-closing	adductor	amounts	to	just	a	tenth
of	the	body	weight,	the	thin,	delicate	sheets	of
all-enclosing	 mantle	 and	 gills	 account	 for
more	 than	 half,	 and	 the	 visceral	 mass	 for	 a
third.	 The	 oyster	 is	 a	 special	 delicacy	 when



cut	 from	 the	 shell	 and	 eaten	 raw.	 It’s	 big
enough	to	make	a	generous	morsel,	has	a	full,
complex	 flavor	 and	 suggestively	 slippery
moistness;	 and	 its	 delicacy	 is	 a	 striking
contrast	to	the	encrusted,	rocky	shell.

Clam	 and	 mussel	 anatomy.	 The	 bulk	 of	 the
clam	 body	 (left)	is	 the	 muscular	 foot,	 while
the	 mussel	 body	 (right)	is	 mainly	 a
nonmuscular	 mantle	 and	 the	 digestive	 and
reproductive	 organs	 it	 encloses.	 The	 shell-
closing	adductor	muscles	are	relatively	minor
parts.	 The	 mussel’s	 “beard”	 is	 a	 thatch	 of
tough	protein	fibers	that	anchor	it	to	a	rock	or
other	support.
Oyster	Types	Oysters	became	scarce	as	early
as	the	17th	century,	and	are	now	largely
farmed.	A	handful	of	the	two	dozen	oyster



species	are	commercially	important;	they
have	different	shapes	and	subtly	different
flavors.	European	flat	oysters	(Ostrea	edulis)
are	relatively	mild	with	a	metallic	taste;	Asian
cupped	oysters	(Crassostrea	gigas)	have
melon	and	cucumber	aromas;	and	Virginia
cupped	oysters	(Crassostrea	virginica)	smell
like	green	leaves.	Though	there	are
exceptions,	most	oysters	produced	in	Europe
are	the	native	flat,	“Portuguese,”	and	Asian;
on	the	east	and	Gulf	coasts	of	North	America,
the	Virginia;	and	on	the	west	coast,	the	Asian
and	the	Pacific	(Ostrea	lurida).	The
“Portuguese”	oyster	is	almost	certainly	a	race
of	the	Asian	oyster	that	hitched	a	ride	from
China	or	Taiwan	to	the	Iberian	peninsula	in
the	ships	of	early	explorers,	four	or	five
centuries	ago.

Oyster	 Waters 	 The	 flavor	 of	 an	 oyster	 also
depends	 on	 its	 home	waters,	which	 is	why	 it
makes	sense	to	give	geographical	designations



to	 oysters.	 The	 greater	 the	 salinity	 of	 the
water,	 the	more	 taste-active	 amino	 acids	 the
oyster’s	 cells	 must	 contain	 to	 balance	 the
dissolved	salt	outside,	and	so	the	more	savory
its	 flavor.	 The	 local	 plankton	 and	 dissolved
minerals	 will	 leave	 distinctive	 traces	 in	 the
animal;	and	predators,	currents,	and	exposure
in	 the	 tidal	zone	will	exercise	and	enlarge	 its
adductor	 muscle.	 Water	 temperature
determines	how	rapidly	the	oyster	grows,	and
even	 its	 sex:	 warmth	 and	 plentiful	 food
usually	 mean	 fast	 growth	 and	 development
into	a	plump	female	creamy	with	millions	of
tiny	 eggs;	 cold	water	means	 slow	growth,	 an
indefinitely	postponed	sexual	maturity,	 and	a
leaner,	crisper	texture.

Handling	and	Preparing	Oysters	Live	oysters
can	 survive	 for	 a	 week	 or	more	 under	moist
wraps	 in	 the	 refrigerator,	 cupped	 shell	 down.
Up	to	a	point,	this	holding	period	can	heighten
their	flavor,	since	metabolism	without	oxygen



causes	 savory	 succinic	 acid	 to	 accumulate	 in
their	 tissues.	 Preshucked	 oysters	 are	 rinsed
with	cold	fresh	water	and	then	bottled	in	their
subsequent	 secretions,	 which	 should	 be
mostly	clear;	pronounced	cloudiness	indicates
that	 the	 oyster	 tissues	 are	 breaking.	 Bottled
oysters	 are	 often	 subpasteurized	 (heated	 to
around	 120ºF/50ºC)	 to	 delay	 spoilage	 while
mostly	retaining	the	fresh	texture	and	flavor.

Scallop	 and	 oyster	 anatomy.	 The	 prized
portion	of	the	scallop	 (left)	is	 the	 large	main
adductor	 muscle,	 a	 tender	 bundle	 of	 fast
muscle	fibers	that	claps	the	shells	together	to
propel	 the	 scallop	 away	 from	 danger.	 The
crescent	of	“catch”	muscle	alongside	it	holds
the	shell	closed.	It	is	rich	in	connective	tissue
and	 tough,	 and	 is	 usually	 cut	 away	 from	 the
adductor.	 The	 pink	 and	 tan	 reproductive



tissues	 are	 prized	 in	 Europe	 but	 not	 in	 the
United	 States.	 The	 oyster	 body	 (right)	is
mainly	 digestive	 and	 reproductive	 organs
enclosed	in	a	fleshy	mantle;	it’s	usually	eaten
whole,	 the	 adductor	 and	 catch	 muscles
providing	a	crunchy	chewiness.
Scallops	The	scallop	family	includes	about
400	species	that	range	from	a	few	millimeters
to	a	yard	across.	Most	food	scallops	are	still
harvested	from	the	ocean	floor.	Large	“sea
scallops”	(species	of	Pecten	and	Placopecten)
are	dredged	from	deep,	cold	waters	year-
round	on	trips	that	may	last	weeks,	while
smaller	“bay”	and	“calico”	scallops
(Argopecten)	are	either	dredged	or	hand-
gathered	by	divers	closer	to	shore	during	a
defined	season.

Unlike	all	the	other	molluscs,	the	scallop	is
mostly	delectably	tender,	sweet	muscle!	This
is	because	it’s	the	only	bivalve	that	swims.	It
defends	itself	from	predators	by	clapping	its
shells	together	and	forcing	water	out	the	hinge



end,	using	a	central	striated	muscle	that	can
be	an	inch/2	cm	or	more	across	and	long.	This
adductor	muscle	makes	up	such	a	large
portion	of	the	scallop’s	body	that	it	also
serves	as	protein	and	energy	storage.	Its	sweet
taste	comes	from	large	amounts	of	the	amino
acid	glycine	and	of	glycogen,	a	portion	of
which	is	gradually	converted	by	enzymes	into
glucose	and	a	related	molecule	(glucose	6
phosphate)	when	the	animal	is	killed.

Because	their	shells	don’t	close	tightly,
scallops	are	usually	shucked	soon	after
harvest,	with	only	the	adductor	muscle	kept
for	the	U.S.	market,	the	adductor	and	yellow
and	pink	reproductive	organs	for	Europe.	This
means	that	meat	quality	usually	begins	to
deteriorate	long	before	it	gets	to	market.	On
boats	that	go	out	for	more	than	a	day,	the
catch	may	therefore	be	frozen	and/or	dipped
in	a	solution	of	polyphosphates,	which	the
adductors	absorb	and	retain,	becoming	plump
and	glossy	white.	However,	such	scallops



have	less	flavor	and	lose	large	amounts	of
liquid	when	heated.	Untreated	scallops	have	a
duller,	off-white	appearance	with	pink	or
orange	tones.

In	the	kitchen,	the	cook	sometimes	needs
to	separate	the	large,	tender	swimming	muscle
from	the	adjoining,	smaller,	tough	catch
muscle	that	holds	the	two	shells	shut.	When
sautéed,	scallops	quickly	develop	a	rich	brown
crust	thanks	to	their	combination	of	free
amino	acids	and	sugars,	which	undergo
Maillard	reactions.

Squid,	 Cuttlefish,	 Octopus	 The	cephalopod
group	are	the	most	advanced	of	the	molluscs,
with	their	mantle	turned	into	a	muscular	body
wall	 and	 the	 remnants	 of	 their	 shell	 within
(the	term	means	“head-foot”:	the	foot	muscle
is	 near	 the	 head).	 The	 octopus,	 species	 of
Octopus	 and	Cistopus,	 has	 eight	 arms
clustered	 around	 its	 mouth	 with	 which	 it
clambers	 along	 the	 bottom	 and	 seizes	 prey;



the	 coastal-bottom	 cuttlefish	 (species	 of
Sepia)	 and	 open-ocean	 squid	 (species	 of
Loligo,	Todarodes,	 Ilex )	 have	 short	 arms	 and
two	long	tentacles.

The	 anatomy	 of	 the	 squid	 mantle.	 This	 main
portion	 of	 the	 squid	 body	 consists	 of	 an
envelope	of	muscle	that	propels	the	animal	by
contracting	 and	 squeezing	 water	 through	 a
small	 opening.	The	mantle	muscle	 is	 built	 up
from	 tough	 connective	 tissue	 and	 alternating
rings	 of	 muscle	 fibers,	 some	 oriented	 across
the	mantle	wall	and	some	along	it.
Cephalopod	Texture	The	muscle	fibers	of
squid	and	octopus	are	extremely	thin	—	less
than	a	tenth	the	diameter	of	a	typical	fiber	in	a
fish	or	steer	(0.004	mm,	vs.	0.05–0.1	mm)	—
which	makes	the	flesh	dense	and	fine-



textured.	They’re	arrayed	in	multiple	layers,
and	greatly	reinforced	with	strengthening	and
toughening	connective-tissue	collagen,	some
three	to	five	times	more	than	fish	muscle	has.
Unlike	the	fragile	collagen	of	fish,	squid	and
octopus	collagen	is	extensively	cross-linked
and	behaves	more	like	the	collagen	of	meat
animals.

Like	the	abalone	and	clam,	squid	and
octopus	must	be	cooked	either	barely	and
briefly	to	prevent	the	muscle	fibers	from
toughening,	or	for	a	long	time	to	break	down
the	collagen.	Cooked	quickly	to	130–
135ºF/55–57ºC,	their	flesh	is	moist	and	almost
crisp.	At	140ºF/60ºC	it	curls	and	shrinks	as	the
collagen	layers	contract	and	squeeze	moisture
from	the	muscle	fibers.	Continued	gentle
simmering	for	an	hour	or	more	will	dissolve
the	tough,	contracted	collagen	into	gelatin	and
give	the	flesh	a	silken	succulence.	Pounding
can	also	help	disorganize	and	thus	tenderize
mantles	and	arms.



Cephalopod	 Flavor	 and	 Ink	 Like	 finfish,
squid	 and	 octopus	 maintain	 their	 osmotic
balance	 largely	 with	 the	 tasteless	 TMAO	 (p.
188)	 rather	 than	with	free	amino	acids.	Their
flesh	 is	 therefore	 less	 sweet	 and	 savory	 than
that	of	 the	other	molluscs,	and	can	turn	fishy
when	bacteria	convert	TMAO	to	TMA.

Cephalopod	ink	is	a	bag	of	pigment	that
the	animal	can	squirt	into	the	water	when
endangered.	It’s	a	heat-stable	mix	of	phenolic
compounds	(animal	cousins	of	the	phenolic
complexes	that	discolor	cut	fruits	and
vegetables;	p.	269),	and	cooks	use	it	to	color
stews	and	pastas	a	dark	brown.

Other	Invertebrates:
Sea	Urchins

Spiny	sea	urchins	are	members	of	the	animal
group	called	echinoderms	(Greek	for	“prickly
skin”),	which	may	account	for	90%	of	the
biomass	on	deep-sea	floors.	There	are	about	a



half	dozen	commercial	species	of	sea	urchins
with	average	diameters	of	2.5–5	in/6–12	cm.
They’re	almost	entirely	enclosed	in	a	sphere
of	mineralized	plates	covered	with	protective
spines,	and	are	collected	mainly	for	their
golden,	creamy,	richly	flavored	reproductive
tissues,	which	can	account	for	up	to	two-thirds
of	the	internal	tissues.	Both	testes	and	ovaries
are	prized,	and	are	hard	to	tell	apart.	Sea-
urchin	gonads	average	15–25%	fat	and	2–3%
savory	amino	acids,	peptides,	and	IMP.	In
Japan,	sea	urchins	are	eaten	raw	in	sushi	or
salted	and	fermented	into	a	savory	paste;	in
France	they’re	added	to	scrambled	eggs,
soufflés,	fish	soups	and	sauces,	and
sometimes	poached	whole.

Preserved	Fish
and	Shellfish

Few	foods	go	bad	faster	than	fish.	And	until
recently,	few	people	in	the	world	had	the



chance	to	eat	fresh	fish.	Before	refrigeration
and	motorized	transportation	became
common,	fish	were	harvested	in	such	numbers
and	spoiled	so	rapidly	that	most	had	to	be
preserved	by	drying,	salting,	smoking,
fermenting,	or	some	combination	of	these
antimicrobial	treatments.	Preserved	forms	of
fish	are	still	important	and	appreciated	in
most	parts	of	the	world,	especially	in	Europe
and	Asia.	It’s	true	that	their	flavor	is	much
more	assertive	than	the	mild	fresh	fish	that
are	now	the	U.S.	standard.	But	preserved	fish
aren’t	just	an	inferior	relic	of	preindustrial
necessity.	They	can	be	a	delicious	alternative,
and	they	offer	a	taste	of	history.

Dried	Fish

Drying	foods	in	the	sun	and	wind	is	an	ancient
method	of	preservation.	Fresh	fish	is	about
80%	water;	below	25%,	bacteria	have	trouble
growing,	and	below	15%	molds	do	too.



Happily,	dehydration	also	intensifies	and
alters	flavor	by	disrupting	cellular	structure
and	so	promoting	enzyme	action,	and	by
concentrating	flavorsome	molecules	to	the
point	that	they	begin	to	react	with	each	other
to	form	additional	layers	of	flavor.	Very	lean
fish	and	shellfish	are	the	usual	choice,	since
air-drying	will	inevitably	cause	fat	oxidation
and	some	development	of	rancid	flavors.	Fatty
fish	are	usually	smoked,	or	salt-cured	in
closed	containers	to	minimize	rancidity.	Often
drying	is	preceded	by	salting	and/or	cooking,
which	draw	moisture	from	the	fish	and	make
their	surfaces	less	hospitable	to	spoilage
microbes	during	the	drying	proper.

China	and	Southeast	Asia	are	the	largest
producers	and	consumers	of	dried	fish	and
shellfish.	Cooks	there	use	dried	shrimp	as	is,
either	whole	or	ground,	to	season	various
dishes;	they	steam	and	shred	dried	scallops
before	adding	them	to	soups;	they	reconstitute
tough	abalone,	octopus,	squid,	jellyfish,	and



sea	cucumber	by	soaking	in	water,	then
simmer	them	until	tender.	They	do	the	same
with	shark	fins,	which	give	a	gelatinous
thickness	to	soups.

Stockfish	 Perhaps	 the	 best	 known	 dried	 fish
in	 the	 West	 is	 the	 Scandinavian	 stockfish,
which	traditionally	has	been	cod,	ling,	or	their
relatives,	 freeze-dried	 for	 several	 weeks	 on
rocky	beaches	along	the	cold,	windy	coasts	of
Norway,	Iceland,	and	Sweden.	The	result	 is	a
hard,	 light	 slab	 that’s	 nearly	 all	 protein	 and
has	 a	 pronounced,	 almost	 gamy	 flavor	 when
cooked.	Today,	stockfish	is	mechanically	air-
dried	 for	 two	 to	 three	months	 at	 40–50ºF/5–
10ºC.	 Stockfish	 fanciers	 in	 Scandinavia	 and
the	 Mediterranean	 region	 reconstitute	 the
woody	mass	 in	water	 for	 from	one	 to	several
days,	 with	 frequent	 changes	 to	 prevent
bacterial	 growth.	 The	 skin	 is	 then	 removed
and	 the	 fish	 gently	 simmered,	 then	 served	 in
pieces,	 in	 boneless	 flakes,	 or	 else	 pounded



into	a	paste,	and	with	a	variety	of	enrichments
and	 flavorings:	 in	 the	 north,	 often	 butter	 and
mustard;	 in	 the	Mediterranean,	 olive	 oil	 and
garlic.

Salted	Fish

Preservation	by	natural	drying	works	well	in
cold	and	hot	climates.	Temperate	Europe,
where	fish	generally	spoil	before	they	can	dry
sufficiently,	developed	the	habit	of	salting
fish	first,	or	instead.	A	day’s	salting	would
preserve	many	fish	for	several	days	more,
long	enough	to	be	carried	inland,	while
saturating	the	fish	with	around	25%	salt	keeps
it	stable	for	a	year.	Lean	cod	and	relatives
were	salted	and	then	air-dried,	while	fatty
herring	and	their	ilk	were	guarded	from	air-
induced	rancidity	by	immersing	them	in
barrels	of	brine,	or	by	subsequent	smoking.
The	best	of	these	are	the	piscatory	equivalent
of	salt-cured	hams.	In	both,	salt	buys	time	for



transformation:	it	preserves	them	long	and
gently	enough	for	enzymes	of	both	fish	and
harmless	salt-tolerant	bacteria	to	break	down
flavorless	proteins	and	fats	into	savory
fragments,	which	then	react	further	to	create
flavors	of	great	complexity.

Alkaline	Fish:	Lutefisk
Distinctly	alkaline	foods	are	rare	and	have
a	slippery,	soapy	quality	that	takes	getting
used	 to.	 (Alkalinity	 is	 the	 chemical
opposite	of	acidity.)	Egg	white	is	one	such
food,	 and	 another	 is	lutefisk,	 a	 peculiar
Norwegian	 and	 Swedish	way	 of	 preparing
stockfish	 that	 probably	 began	 in	 late
medieval	 times,	 and	 that	 gives	 it	 a	 jiggly,
jelly-like	 consistency.	Lutefisk	 is	made	by
soaking	the	partly	reconstituted	dry	cod	for
a	 day	 or	 more	 in	 a	 water	 solution	 that	 is
strongly	 alkaline,	 originally	 from	 the
addition	 of	 potash	 (the	 carbonate-	 and
mineral-rich	 ashes	 from	 a	 wood	 fire),



sometimes	 lime	 (calcium	 carbonate),	 and
later	 lye	 (pure	 sodium	 hydroxide,	 at	 the
rate	 of	 about	 5	 grams	 per	 liter	 water).
These	strong	alkaline	substances	cause	the
proteins	in	the	muscle	fibers	to	accumulate
a	positive	electrical	charge	and	 repel	each
other.	When	 the	 fish	 is	 then	 simmered	 in
the	usual	way	(after	several	days	of	rinsing
to	 remove	 excess	 lye),	 the	 fiber	 proteins
bind	to	each	other	only	weakly.
It’s	hard	to	draw	a	clear	distinction

between	salted	and	fermented	fish.	Bacteria
play	some	role	even	in	hard-cured	cod;	and
most	fish	fermentations	start	with	a	salting	to
control	the	bacterial	population	and	activity.
Most	salted	cod,	herring,	and	anchovy
products	are	not	generally	thought	of	as
fermented,	so	I’ll	describe	them	in	this
section.

Salt	Cod	Bountiful	cod	was	one	resource	that
attracted	Europeans	to	the	New	World,	where



the	standard	treatment	was	to	split	and	salt	the
fish,	and	lay	them	out	on	rocks	or	racks	to	dry
for	 several	 weeks.	 Nowadays	 cod	 may	 be
hard-cured	 for	 15	 days	 to	 saturate	 the	 flesh
with	salt	 (25%),	 then	held	without	drying	for
months.	 During	 that	 time,	Micrococcus
bacteria	 generate	 flavor	 by	 producing	 free
amino	acids	and	TMA;	and	oxygen	breaks	up
to	 half	 the	 very	 small	 amount	 of	 fatty
substances	into	free	fatty	acids	and	then	into	a
range	 of	 smaller	 molecules	 that	 also
contribute	to	aroma.	The	final	artificial	drying
takes	less	than	three	days.

Salt	cod	remains	a	popular	food	around	the
Mediterranean	as	well	as	in	the	Caribbean	and
Africa,	where	it	was	introduced	during	the
slave	trade.	Scandinavia	and	Canada	are	still
the	largest	producers.	White	pieces	are
preferred	to	yellowish	or	reddish	ones,	the
colors	being	indicators	of	oxidized	or
microbial	off-flavors.	Cooks	first	reconstitute
and	desalt	it	by	soaking	it	for	hours	to	days	in



several	changes	of	water.	Perhaps	the	best-
known	preparation	is	the	Provençal	brandade,
a	paste	made	by	pounding	the	shredded
poached	fish	along	with	olive	oil,	milk,	garlic,
and	sometimes	potato.

Salt	Herring	Herring	and	their	relatives	may
be	up	to	20%	fat	by	weight,	and	are	therefore
susceptible	to	becoming	rancid	when	exposed
to	 the	 air.	 Medieval	 fishermen	 solved	 this
problem	by	barreling	 the	fish	 in	brine,	where
they	would	keep	for	as	much	as	a	year.	Then
sometime	 around	 1300,	 the	 Dutch	 and
northern	 Germans	 developed	 a	 quick	 gutting
technique	 that	 left	 in	 place	 a	 portion	 of	 the
intestine	 rich	 in	 digestive	 enzymes	 (the
pyloric	 caecum).	 During	 one	 to	 four	 months
of	 curing	 in	 a	moderate	brine	 (16–20%	salt),
these	 enzymes	 circulate	 and	 supplement	 the
activity	 of	 both	 muscle	 and	 skin	 enzymes,
breaking	 down	 proteins	 to	 create	 a	 tender,
luscious	 texture	 and	 a	 wonderfully	 complex



flavor,	at	once	fishy,	meaty,	and	cheesy.	Such
herring	 are	 eaten	 as	 is,	 without	 desalting	 or
cooking.

Two	particularly	prized	types	of	cured
herring	are	the	lightly	salted	Dutch	groen	and
maatjes,	or	“green”	and	“maiden”	herring,
which	traditionally	broke	the	winter-long	diet
of	hard-cured	beef	and	fish.	Because	all
lightly	cured	fish	must	now	be	prefrozen	to
rid	them	of	parasites	(p.	186),	these	formerly
seasonal	delicacies	are	now	made	and	enjoyed
year-round.

Cured	 Anchovies	 Anchovies,	 smaller	 and
more	 southerly	 relatives	 of	 the	 herring,	 are
cured	 in	 and	 around	 the	 Mediterranean	 to
make	 that	 region’s	 version	 of	 flavor-
enhancing	 fish	 sauce	 (see	 box,	 p.	 235).	 The
fish	are	headed	and	gutted,	 then	 layered	with
enough	salt	to	saturate	their	tissue.	This	mass
is	then	weighted	down	and	held	for	six	to	ten
months	 at	 a	 relatively	 high	 temperature,



between	 60	 and	 86ºF/15–30ºC.	 The	 fish	 can
then	 be	 sold	 as	 is,	 or	 the	 fillets	 repacked	 in
cans	or	bottles,	or	ground	and	mixed	with	oil
or	 butter	 into	 a	 paste.	 Enzymes	 from	 the
muscle,	 skin,	 blood	 cells,	 and	 bacteria
generate	 many	 flavor	 components;	 and	 their
concentration,	 together	with	 the	warm	curing
temperature,	 encourages	 early	 stages	 of	 the
browning	 reactions,	 which	 generate	 another
range	 of	 aromatic	molecules.	 The	 result	 is	 a
remarkably	 full	 flavor	 that	 includes	 fruity,
fatty,	fried,	cucumbery,	floral,	sweet,	buttery,
meaty,	 popcorn,	mushroom,	 and	malty	notes.
This	 concentrated	 complexity,	 together	 with
the	 way	 that	 the	 cured	 flesh	 readily
disintegrates	in	a	dish,	has	led	cooks	from	the
16th	century	on	to	use	anchovies	as	a	general
flavor	enhancer	in	sauces	and	other	dishes.

Gravlax	 and	 Lox	 Gravlax	 originated	 in
medieval	 Scandinavia	 as	 a	 lightly	 salted,
pressed	form	of	salmon	that	was	preserved	by



fermentation	(p.	235)	and	had	a	strong	smell.
By	 the	 18th	 century,	 it	 had	 evolved	 into	 a
lightly	 salted	 and	 pressed	 but	 unfermented
dish.	This	 new	gravlax	had	 a	 subtle	 flavor,	 a
dense,	silken	texture	that	makes	it	possible	to
cut	 very	 thin	 slices,	 and	 a	 glistening,
translucent	 appearance.	 This	 refined	 version
of	 gravlax	 has	 become	 popular	 in	 many
countries.

Modern	recipes	for	gravlax	call	for	widely
varying	amounts	of	salt,	sugar,	and	time.
Fresh	dill	is	now	the	standard	flavoring,
probably	a	domestic	replacement	for	the
original	pine	needles,	which	are	a	delightful
alternative.	The	salt,	sugar,	and	flavoring	are
sprinkled	evenly	over	all	surfaces	of	salmon
fillets,	the	fillets	are	weighted	down,	and	the
container	refrigerated	for	one	to	four	days.
The	weighting	provides	intimate	contact
between	flesh	and	flavorings,	presses	excess
fluid	from	the	fish,	and	compacts	the	flesh.
Salt	dissolves	the	major	contracting	protein



myosin	in	the	muscle	fibers,	and	thus	gives
the	flesh	its	compact	tenderness.

Lox,	most	familiar	as	a	delicatessen
accompaniment	to	the	bagel,	is	a	heavily
brined	form	of	salmon.	It’s	usually	soaked	to
remove	some	salt	before	being	sliced	for	sale.

Fermented	Fish

Many	cultures	from	the	Arctic	to	the	tropics
have	recruited	microbes	to	grow	on	fish	and
transform	their	texture	and	flavor.	But	the
world	center	of	fish	fermentation	is	eastern
Asia,	where	it	has	served	two	important
purposes:	to	preserve	and	put	to	use	the	large
numbers	of	small	fish	that	inhabit	the	coastal
and	inland	waters;	and	to	provide	a
concentrated	source	of	appetite-stimulating
flavors	—	above	all	the	savory	monosodium
glutamate	and	other	amino	acids	—	for	a	diet
dominated	by	bland	rice.

Fish	fermentation	apparently	arose	several



thousand	years	ago	in	the	freshwaters	of
southwest	China	and	the	Mekong	River
region.	It	then	spread	to	the	coastal	deltas	and
was	applied	to	ocean	fish.	Two	broadly
different	techniques	evolved:	simply	salting	a
mass	of	small	fish	or	fish	parts	and	allowing	it
to	ferment;	and	salting	larger	fish	lightly,	then
embedding	them	in	a	fermenting	mass	of	rice
or	other	grains,	vegetables,	or	fruits.	In	the
simple	fermentation,	the	proportion	of	salt	is
usually	enough	by	itself	to	preserve	the	fish
from	spoilage,	and	bacteria	are	important
mainly	as	flavor	modifiers.	But	in	the	mixed
fermentation,	a	smaller	dose	of	salt	preserves
the	fish	for	just	a	few	weeks	while	the	plant-
based	ingredients	feed	the	same	microbes	that
sour	milk	or	turn	grape	juice	into	wine.	The
fish	is	then	preserved	by	the	microbes’	acids
or	alcohol,	and	flavored	by	the	many	by-
products	of	their	growth.

From	these	simple	principles,	Asian
peoples	have	developed	dozens	of	distinctive



fermented	fish	products,	and	Europeans	a
handful.	These	include	the	original	sushi,
which	was	not	a	pristinely	fresh	piece	of	fish
on	mildly	vinegared	rice!	Here	I’ll	describe
some	of	the	more	common	ones.

Asian	 Fish	 Pastes	 and	 Sauces	 Asian
fermented	 fish	 pastes	 and	 sauces	 are	 vital
manifestations	 of	 a	 preparation	 that	 has
mostly	 disappeared	 in	 Europe	 but	 was	 once
well	 known	 as	garum	 or	liquamen,	 the	 fish
sauce	 of	 Rome	 (see	 box,	 p.	 235).	 (Modern
ketchup,	 a	 sweet-sour	 tomato	 condiment,
owes	 its	 name	 to	kecap,	 an	 Indonesian	 salty
fish	 condiment.)	 Fish	 sauces	 play	 the	 same
role	 that	 soy	 sauces	 do	 in	 regions	where	 soy
doesn’t	 grow	 well,	 and	 were	 probably	 the
original	model	for	soy	sauce.

Fish	pastes	and	sauces	are	two	phases	of
the	same	simple	preparation.	A	mass	of	fish
or	shellfish	is	mixed	with	salt	to	give	an
overall	salt	concentration	between	10%	and



30%,	and	sealed	in	a	closed	container	for	from
one	month	(for	pastes)	to	24	months	(for
sauces).	Fish	pastes	tend	to	have	relatively
strong	fish	and	cheese	notes,	while	the	more
thoroughly	transformed	fish	sauces	are	more
meaty	and	savory.	The	most	prized	fish	sauces
come	from	the	first	tapping	of	the	mass;	after
boiling,	flavoring,	and/or	aging,	they	play	the
lead	role	in	dipping	sauces.	Second-quality
sauces	from	re-extraction	of	the	mass	may	be
supplemented	with	caramel,	molasses,	or
roasted	rice,	and	are	used	in	cooking	to	add
depth	to	the	flavor	of	a	complex	dish.

Sour	Fish:	The	Original	Sushi	and	Gravlax
There	 are	 remarkable	 parallel	 traditions	 in
Asia	and	Scandinavia	in	which	fish	are	stored
with	 carbohydrate-rich	 foods	 that	 bacteria
ferment	 to	 produce	 acids	 that	 preserve	 the
fish.	These	traditions	have	given	birth	to	more
widely	popular	but	unfermented	preparations:
sushi	and	gravlax.



Some	Asian	Fermented	Fish	Products
This	chart	gives	an	idea	of	the	great	variety
of	fermented	fish	condiments	made	in
Asia.

Country Fish	Pieces	or	Paste Fish	Sauce
Thailand Kapi	(usually	shrimp) Nam-plaa
VietnamMam Nuoc	mam
Korea Jeot-kal Jeot-kuk
Japan Shiokara	(squid,	fish	viscera) Shottsuru
Ika-shoyu	(squid	viscera)
Philippines Bagoong Patis
Indonesia Pedah
Trassi	(shrimp)
Malaysia Belacan	(shrimp) Budu	(anchovy)
Kecap	ikan	(other	fish)

Country Sour-Fermented	(carbohydrate
source)



Thailand Plaa-som	(cooked	rice)
Plaa-raa	(roasted	rice)
Plaa-chao	(fermented	rice)
Plaa-mum	(papaya,	galangal)
Khem-bak-nad	(pineapple)
Vietnam
Korea Sikhae	(millet,	malt,	chilli,	garlic)
Japan Narezushi	(cooked	rice)
Kasuzuke	(cooked	rice,	sake	wine
sediments)
Philippines Burong	isda	(cooked	rice)
Indonesia Bekasam	(roasted	rice)
Makassar	(rice	fermented	with	red-
pigmented	yeast)
Malaysia Pekasam	(roasted	rice,	tamarind)
Cincaluk	(shrimp,	cooked	rice)
Asian	Mixtures	of	Rice	and	Fish	Of	the	many
Asian	fermentations	that	mix	fish	and	grains,
one	of	the	most	influential	has	been	the



Japanese	narezushi,	the	original	form	of
modern	sushi	(p.	207).	The	best-known
version	is	funa-zushi,	made	with	rice	and
goldfish	carp	(Carassius	auratus)	from	Lake
Biwa,	north	of	Kyoto.	Various	bacteria
consume	the	rice	carbohydrates	and	produce	a
range	of	organic	acids	that	protect	against
spoilage,	soften	the	head	and	backbone,	and
contribute	to	the	characteristic	tart	and	rich
flavor,	which	has	vinegary,	buttery,	and
cheesy	notes.	In	modern	sushi,	made	with
pristinely	fresh	raw	fish,	the	tartness	of
narezushi	survives	through	the	addition	of
vinegar	to	the	rice.

Scandinavian	 Buried	 Fish:	 Gravlax
According	 to	 food	 ethnologist	 Astri
Riddervold,	Scandinavian	fermented	fishes	—
the	 original	gravlax,	 Swedish	surlax	 and
sursild,	 Norwegian	rakefisk	 and	rakørret	 —
were	probably	the	result	of	a	simple	dilemma
facing	 medieval	 fisherman	 at	 remote	 rivers,



lakes,	 and	 coastlines,	 who	 landed	 many	 fish
but	 had	 little	 salt	 and	 few	 barrels.	 The
solution	 was	 to	 salt	 the	 cleaned	 fish	 lightly
and	bury	them	where	they	had	been	caught,	in
a	hole	in	the	ground,	perhaps	wrapped	in	birch
bark:	gravlax	 means	 “buried	 salmon.”	 The
low	 summer	 temperature	 of	 the	 far	 northern
earth,	the	airlessness,	minimal	salt,	and	added
carbohydrates	 (from	 the	 bark,	 or	 from	whey,
malted	 barley,	 or	 flour),	 all	 conspired	 to
encourage	a	lactic	fermentation	that	acidified
the	 fish	 surface.	And	 enzymes	 from	 the	 fish
muscle	and	the	bacteria	broke	protein	and	fish
oil	 down	 to	 produce	 a	 buttery	 texture	 and
powerful,	 sharp,	 cheesy	 smell:	 the	sur	 in
sursild	and	surlax	means	“sour.”

Modern,	unfermented	gravlax	is	made	by
dry-salting	salmon	fillets	for	a	few	days	at
refrigerator	temperatures	(p.	233).

Smoked	Fish



The	smoking	of	fish	may	have	begun	with
fishermen	drying	their	catch	over	a	fire	when
sun,	wind,	and	salt	were	inadequate.	Certainly
many	familiar	smoked	fishes	come	from	cool
northern	nations:	smoked	herring	from
Germany,	Holland,	and	Britain,	cod	and
haddock	from	Britain,	sturgeon	from	Russia,
salmon	from	Norway,	Scotland,	and	Nova
Scotia	(the	origin	of	the	“Nova”	salmon	found
in	delicatessens),	and	smoked	skipjack	from
Japan.	It	turned	out	that	smoke	imparts	a
flavor	that	can	mask	stale	fishiness,	and	it
helps	preserve	both	the	fish	and	its	own
flavor;	the	many	chemicals	generated	by
burning	wood	have	both	antimicrobial	and
antioxidant	properties	(p.	449).	Traditional
smoking	treatments	were	extreme;	the
medieval	Yarmouth	red	herring	was	left
ungutted,	saturated	with	salt	and	then	smoked
for	several	weeks,	leaving	it	capable	of	lasting
as	long	as	a	year,	but	also	odiferous	enough	to
become	a	byword	for	establishing	—	or



covering	up	—	a	scent	trail.	When	rail
transport	reduced	the	time	from	production	to
market	in	the	19th	century,	both	salt	and
smoke	cures	became	much	milder.	Today	salt
contents	are	kept	around	or	under	3%,	the
salinity	of	seawater,	and	smoking	is	limited	to
a	few	hours,	contributing	flavor	and	extending
the	shelf	life	of	refrigerated	fish	for	a	matter
of	days	or	weeks.	Much	modern	smoked	fish
and	shellfish	is	preserved	in	cans!

Garum:	The	Original	Anchovy	Paste
One	of	 the	 defining	 flavors	 of	 the	 ancient
world	was	a	fermented	fish	sauce	variously
calledgaros	(Greece),	garum,	and	liquamen
(Rome).	 According	 to	 the	 Roman	 natural
historian	Pliny,	“garum	consists	of	the	guts
of	fish	and	other	parts	that	would	otherwise
be	 considered	 refuse,	 so	 that	 garum	 is
really	 the	 liquor	 from	 putrefaction.”
Despite	 its	 origins	 and	 no	 doubt	 powerful
aroma,	Pliny	noted	that	“scarcely	any	other



liquid	 except	 perfume	 has	 become	 more
highly	 valued”;	 the	 best,	 from	 mackerel
only,	came	from	Roman	outposts	in	Spain.
Garum	 was	 made	 by	 salting	 the	 fish
innards,	 letting	 the	mixture	 ferment	 in	 the
sun	 for	 several	months	until	 the	 flesh	had
mostly	 fallen	apart,	 and	 then	 straining	 the
brown	 liquid.	 It	was	used	as	an	 ingredient
in	 cooked	 dishes	 and	 as	 a	 sauce	 at	 the
table,	 sometimes	 mixed	 with	 wine	 or
vinegar	 (oenogarum,	 oxygarum).	 Some
form	of	garum	is	called	for	in	nearly	every
savory	 recipe	 in	 the	 late	 Roman	 recipe
collection	attributed	to	Apicius.

Preparations	like	garum	persisted	in	the
Mediterranean	 through	 the	 16th	 century,
then	 died	 out	 as	 the	 modern-day,	 solid
version	of	garum	rose	to	prominence:	salt-
cured	but	innard-free	anchovies.

Preliminary	Salting	and	Drying	Nowadays,
fish	destined	for	the	smoker	are	generally
soaked	in	a	strong	brine	for	a	few	hours	to



days,	long	enough	to	pick	up	a	little	salt	(a
few	percent,	not	enough	to	inhibit	microbial
spoilage).	This	also	draws	to	the	surface	some
of	the	proteins	in	the	muscle	fiber,	notably
myosin.	When	the	fish	is	hung	and	allowed	to
drip	dry,	the	sticky	layer	of	dissolved	myosin
on	the	surface	forms	a	shiny	gel	or	pellicle
that	will	give	the	smoked	fish	an	attractive
golden	sheen.	(The	gold	color	is	created	by
browning	reactions	between	aldehydes	in	the
smoke	and	amino	acids	in	the	pellicle,	as	well
as	condensation	of	dark	resins	from	the	smoke
vapor.)

Cold	 and	Hot	Smoking	 The	 initial	 smoking
(often	using	sawdust,	which	can	produce	more
smoke	 at	 a	 lower	 temperature	 than	 intact
wood)	 takes	 place	 at	 a	 relatively	 cool
temperature	 around	 85ºF/30ºC,	 which	 avoids
hardening	the	surface	and	forming	a	barrier	to
moisture	 movement	 from	 the	 interior.	 This
also	 allows	 the	 fish	 flesh	 to	 lose	 some



moisture	 and	 become	 denser	 without	 being
cooked,	 which	 would	 denature	 connective-
tissue	collagen	and	cause	the	fish	to	fall	apart.
Finally,	the	fish	is	smoked	for	several	hours	in
one	 of	 two	 temperature	 ranges.	 In	 cold
smoking,	 the	 temperature	 remains	 below
90ºF/32ºC,	and	the	fish	retains	its	delicate	raw
texture.	In	hot	smoking,	the	fish	is	essentially
cooked	 in	 air	 at	 temperatures	 that	 gradually
rise	and	approach	the	boiling	point;	it	reaches
an	internal	temperature	of	150–170ºF/65–75ºC
fairly	 quickly,	 and	 has	 a	 cohesive	 yet	 dry,
flaky	 texture.	Fish	smoked	cold	and	 long	can
keep	for	as	long	as	a	couple	of	months	in	the
refrigerator,	 while	 a	 light	 smoking,	 hot	 or
cold,	will	only	keep	the	fish	for	a	few	days	or
weeks.

Lightly	Salted,	Strong-Smelling	Fish:
Surstrømming

Fish	 pastes	 and	 sauces	 are	 cured	 with
enough	salt	to	limit	the	growth	and	activity



of	 microbes.	 There	 are	 also	 fish
fermentations	 that	 involve	 far	 less	 salt,	 so
that	 bacteria	 thrive	 and	 have	 a	 far	 more
powerful	 influence	 on	 flavor.	 One
notorious	 example	 is	 Swedish
Surstrømming.	 Herring	 are	 fermented	 in
barrels	for	one	to	 two	months,	 then	sealed
in	 cans	 and	 allowed	 to	 continue	 for	 as
much	 as	 another	 year.	 The	 cans	 swell,
which	 is	 normally	 a	 warning	 sign	 for	 the
growth	 of	 botulism	 bacteria,	 but	 for
surstrømming	 a	 sign	 of	 promising	 flavor
development.	 The	 unusual	 bacteria
responsible	 for	 ripening	 in	 the	 can	 are
species	of	Haloanaerobium,	which	produce
hydrogen	 and	 carbon	 dioxide	 gases,
hydrogen	 sulfide,	 and	 butyric,	 propionic,
and	acetic	acids:	in	effect	a	combination	of
rotten	 eggs,	 rancid	 Swiss	 cheese,	 and
vinegar,	overlaid	onto	the	basic	fish	flavor!
Fine	smoked	salmon	may	be	treated	with

salt	and	sometimes	sugar	for	a	few	hours	to	a



few	days,	then	rinsed,	air-dried,	and	cold-
smoked	for	anywhere	from	five	to	36	hours,
with	the	temperature	rising	from	85º	to
100ºF/30º	to	40ºC	toward	the	end	to	bring
some	glossy	oil	to	the	surface.

Four-Way	Preservation:	Japanese	Katsuobushi

The	most	remarkable	preserved	fish	is
katsuobushi,	a	cornerstone	of	Japanese
cooking,	which	dates	from	around	1700	and	is
made	most	often	from	one	fish,	the	skip-jack
tuna	Katsuwonus	pelamis.	The	fish’s
musculature	is	cut	away	from	the	body	in
several	pieces,	which	are	gently	boiled	in	salt
water	for	about	an	hour,	and	their	skin
removed.	Next,	they	undergo	a	routine	of
daily	hot-smoking	above	a	hardwood	fire	until
they	have	fully	hardened.	This	stage	lasts	10
to	20	days.	Then	the	pieces	are	inoculated
with	one	or	more	of	several	different	molds
(species	of	Aspergillus,	Eurotium,



Penicillium),	sealed	in	a	box,	and	allowed	to
ferment	on	their	surface	for	about	two	weeks.
After	a	day	or	two	of	sun-drying,	the	mold	is
scraped	off;	this	molding	process	is	repeated
three	or	four	times.	At	the	end,	after	a	total	of
three	to	five	months,	the	meat	has	turned	light
brown	and	dense;	when	struck,	it’s	said	to
sound	like	a	resonant	piece	of	wood.

Why	go	to	all	this	trouble?	Because	it
accumulates	a	spectrum	of	flavor	molecules
whose	breadth	is	approached	only	in	the	finest
cured	meats	and	cheeses.	From	the	fish
muscle	itself	and	its	enzymes	come	lactic	acid
and	savory	amino	acids,	peptides,	and
nucleotides;	from	the	smoking	come	pungent
phenolic	compounds;	from	the	boiling,
smoking,	and	sun-drying	come	the	roasted,
meaty	aromas	of	nitrogen-	and	sulfur-
containing	carbon	rings;	and	from	the	mold’s
attack	on	fish	fat	come	many	flowery,	fruity,
green	notes.

Katsuobushi	is	to	the	Japanese	tradition



what	a	concentrated	veal	stock	is	to	the
French:	a	convenient	flavor	base	for	many
soups	and	sauces.	It	contributes	its	months	of
flavor-making	in	a	matter	of	moments	in	the
form	of	fine	shavings.	For	the	basic	broth
called	dashi,	cold	water	is	brought	just	to	the
boil	with	a	piece	of	kombu	seaweed,	which	is
then	removed.	The	katsuobushi	shavings	are
added,	the	liquid	brought	again	to	the	boil,
and	poured	off	the	shavings	the	moment	they
absorb	enough	water	to	fall	to	the	bottom.	The
broth’s	delicate	flavor	is	spoiled	by	prolonged
steeping	or	pressing	the	shavings.

Smoked	Fish	Terminology

Kippered Herring,	gutted	and	split,	cold-
herring smoked
Bloater, Herring,	whole,	cold-
bokking smoked
Buckling Herring,	whole,	hot-smoked



Sild Herring,	immature,	whole,	hot-smoked
Red Herring,	gutted,	unsplit,	cold-
herring smoked
Brisling Sprat,	immature,	whole,	hot-smoked
Finnan Haddock,	gutted,	split,	cold-
haddie smoked	(peat)
Norwegian/Scotch	smoked Salmon	fillets,
salmon;	“Nova” cold-smoked

Marinated	Fish

In	chemical	terms,	an	acid	is	a	substance	that
readily	releases	free	protons,	the	small
reactive	nuclei	of	hydrogen	atoms.	Water	is	a
weak	acid,	and	living	cells	are	designed	to
operate	while	bathed	in	it.	But	strong	acids
flood	living	cells	with	more	protons	than	they
can	handle,	and	cripple	their	chemical
machinery.	This	is	why	acids	are	good	at
preserving	foods:	they	cripple	microbes.	In
the	case	of	acidifying	fish,	a	happy	side



benefit	is	that	it	leaves	the	fish	with	a
distinctive,	almost	fresh	aroma.	Acid
conditions	cause	heavy-smelling	aldehydes,
which	accentuate	the	fishiness	of	TMA,	to
react	with	water	molecules	and	become
nonvolatile,	so	that	lighter	alcohols	dominate
the	aroma.	Pickled	herring	and	other	fish	can
be	surprisingly	delicate.

As	the	recipe	from	Apicius	shows	(see	box
below),	inhabitants	of	the	Mediterranean
region	have	been	marinating	fish	for
thousands	of	years.	The	common	modern
term,	escabeche	and	variants	on	it,	derives
from	the	Arabic	sikbaj,	which	in	the	13th
century	named	meat	and	fish	dishes	with
vinegar	(acetic	acid,	p.	772)	added	toward	the
end	of	the	preparation.	Other	acidic	liquids
were	also	used,	including	wine	and	verjuice,
the	juice	of	unripe	grapes.

Fish	and	shellfish	can	be	marinated	in	acid
either	raw	or	after	an	initial	salting	or
cooking.	In	northern	Europe,	for	example,	raw



herring	are	immersed	in	marinade	(3	parts
fish	to	2	parts	of	a	10%	salt,	6%	acetic	acid
mixture)	for	up	to	a	week,	at	a	temperature
around	50ºF/10ºC;	while	for	marinated
Japanese	mackerel	(shimesaba)	the	fillets	are
first	dry-salted	for	a	day,	then	immersed	in
vinegar	for	a	day.	In	the	case	of	precooked
fish,	the	initial	heat	treatment	kills	bacteria
and	firms	texture,	so	the	subsequent
marination	is	a	milder	one,	and	there	is	less
development	of	texture	and	flavor.

Canned	Fish

Because	canned	fish	keep	indefinitely	without
refrigeration	and	in	a	handy	package,	this	is
the	preserved	fish	that	most	of	us	eat	most
often.	In	the	United	States,	it	is	the	most
popular	of	all	fish	products:	we	consume	more
than	a	billion	cans	of	tuna	every	year.	Fish
and	shellfish	were	first	heated	in	a
hermetically	sealed	container	around	1810	by



Nicholas	Appert,	principal	inventor	of	the
process.	Fellow	Frenchman	Joseph	Colin
started	canning	sardines	a	little	over	a	decade
later;	American	fishermen	canned	oysters	in
Delaware	around	1840	and	Pacific	salmon
around	1865,	and	Italian	immigrants	founded
the	canned	tuna	industry	around	San	Diego	in
1903.	Today,	salmon,	tuna,	and	sardines	are
the	most	popular	canned	seafoods	worldwide.

Most	canned	fish	are	heated	twice:	once
before	the	cans	are	sealed,	to	cause	the
inevitable	cooking	losses	and	allow	the
moisture	(as	well	as	flavor	and	healthful	oils)
to	be	drained	away,	so	that	the	can	contents
won’t	be	watery;	and	once	after	the	cans	are
sealed	to	sterilize	the	contents,	usually	under
pressurized	steam	at	about	240ºF/115ºC.	This
second	treatment	is	sufficient	to	soften	fish
bones,	so	fish	canned	with	its	bones	is	an
excellent	source	of	calcium	(fresh	fish
contains	about	5	milligrams	of	calcium	per	4
oz/100	g;	canned	salmon	contains	200	to	250).



A	number	of	additives	are	permitted	in	canned
fish,	particularly	tuna,	to	improve	flavor	and
appearance.	These	include	monosodium
glutamate	and	various	forms	of	hydrolyzed
protein,	which	are	proteins	broken	down	into
savory	amino	acids	(including	glutamate).
Premium	canned	fish	is	cooked	only	once,	in
the	container,	retaining	its	juices,	and	needs
no	improvement	by	additives.

Ancient	Escabeche
To	 make	 fried	 fish	 keep	 longer.	 The
moment	that	they	are	fried	and	lifted	from
the	pan,	pour	hot	vinegar	over	them.

—	Apicius,	first	few	centuries	CE

Fish	Eggs

Of	all	foods	from	the	waters,	the	most
expensive	and	luxurious	are	fish	eggs.	Caviar,
the	salted	roe	of	the	sturgeon,	is	the	animal
kingdom’s	truffle:	a	remarkable	food	that	has



become	increasingly	rare	as	civilization	has
encroached	on	its	wild	source.	Happily,
sturgeon	farms	are	now	producing	good
caviar,	and	a	variety	of	other	fish	eggs	are
available	as	affordable	and	interesting
alternatives.

The	ovaries	or	“roes”	of	fish	accumulate
vast	numbers	of	eggs	in	preparation	for
spawning:	as	many	as	20,000	in	a	single
salmon,	and	several	million	in	a	sturgeon,
carp,	or	shad.	Because	fish	eggs	contain	all
the	nutrients	that	one	cell	will	need	to	grow
into	a	hatchling,	they’re	often	a	more
concentrated	form	of	nourishment	than	the
fish	itself,	with	more	fat	(between	10	and	20%
in	sturgeon	and	salmon	caviars)	and	large
quantities	of	savory	building-block	amino
acids	and	nucleic	acids.	They	often	contain
attractive	pigments,	sometimes	bright	pink	or
yellow	carotenoids,	sometimes	camouflaging
brown-black	melanins.

The	best	roes	for	both	cooking	and	salting



are	neither	very	immature	nor	fully	ripe:
immature	eggs	are	small	and	hard	and	have
little	flavor;	eggs	ready	for	spawning	are	soft,
easily	crushed,	and	quick	to	develop	off-
flavors.	Roes	consist	of	separate	eggs	barely
held	together	in	a	dilute	protein	solution	and
enclosed	in	a	thin,	fragile	membrane.	They
can	be	easier	to	handle	in	the	kitchen	if
they’re	first	briefly	poached	to	coagulate	the
protein	solution	and	give	them	a	firmer
consistency.

Male	fish	accumulate	sperm	to	release	into
the	water	when	the	females	release	their	eggs.
The	sperm	mass	is	called	white	roe,	milt,	or
laitance,	and	is	creamy	rather	than	granular
(the	sperm	cells	suspended	in	the
proteinaceous	fluid	are	microscopic).	Sea
bream	and	cod	milts	are	prized	in	Japan,
where	they’re	cooked	gently	to	a	delicate
custard-like	consistency.



A	salmon	egg.	Like	the	chicken	egg,	the	inner
yolk	is	surrounded	by	a	protein-rich	fluid,	and
contains	fatty	materials,	including	fat-soluble
carotenoid	pigments,	and	the	living	egg	cell.

Salt	Transforms	Egg	Flavor
and	Texture

Heavy	Salting:	Bottarga	Fish	eggs	are	more
frequently	consumed	salted	than	they	are
fresh.	Originally,	salting	was	simply	a	means
of	preserving	the	eggs.	For	millennia	in	the
Mediterranean,	whole	mullet	and	tuna	ovaries
have	been	dry-salted,	pressed,	and	dried	to
make	what’s	now	best	known	as	bottarga
(there	are	almost	identical	Asian	versions).
The	salting	and	drying	cause	a	concentration
of	amino	acids,	fatty	materials,	and	sugars,



which	react	with	each	other	in	the	complex
browning	reactions	to	darken	the	color	to	a
deep	red-brown	and	generate	rich,	fascinating
flavors	reminiscent	of	parmesan	cheese	and
even	tropical	fruits!	Bottarga	is	now	a
delicacy,	sliced	paper-thin	and	served	as	an
antipasto,	or	grated	onto	plain	hot	pasta.

Light	 Salting:	 Caviar	 It	 turned	 out	 that
salting	 has	 even	more	 to	 offer	 when	 applied
sparingly	 to	 loose,	 moist	 fish	 eggs.	A	 small
dose	 of	 salt	 triggers	 the	 action	 of	 protein-
digesting	enzymes	in	the	egg,	which	boost	the
levels	of	taste-stimulating	free	amino	acids.	It
also	 triggers	 another	 enzyme
(transglutaminase)	that	cross-links	proteins	in
the	outer	egg	membrane	and	helps	toughen	it,
thus	 giving	 the	 egg	 more	 texture.	 By
generating	 a	 brine	 that	 gets	 drawn	 into	 the
space	between	the	outer	and	yolk	membranes,
salt	 plumps	 the	 egg,	 making	 it	 rounder	 and
firmer.	 And	 by	 changing	 the	 distribution	 of



electrical	 charges	 on	 the	 proteins	 within,	 it
causes	 the	proteins	 to	bond	to	each	other	and
thicken	 the	watery	egg	 fluids	 to	a	honey-like
luxuriousness.

In	sum,	a	light	salting	transforms	fish	eggs
from	a	mere	pleasant	mouthful	into	the
remarkable	food	known	as	caviar:	a	fleeting
taste	of	the	primordial	brine	and	the	savory
molecules	from	which	all	life	springs.

Caviar

Caviar	appears	to	have	arisen	in	Russia
sometime	around	1200	CE	as	a	more	palatable
alternative	to	the	traditional	preserved
sturgeon	ovaries.	Though	the	term	caviar	is
now	widely	used	to	describe	any	sort	of
lightly	salted	loose	fish	eggs,	for	many
centuries	it	referred	only	to	loose	sturgeon
eggs.	The	most	sought-after	caviar	still	comes
from	a	handful	of	sturgeon	species	mainly
harvested	by	Russian	and	Iranian	fishermen	as



the	fish	enter	the	rivers	that	drain	into	the
Caspian	Sea.

Just	150	years	ago,	sturgeon	were	common
in	many	large	rivers	the	northern	hemisphere,
and	caviar	was	plentiful	enough	in	Russia	that
Elena	Molokhovets	suggested	using	it	to
clarify	bouillons	and	to	decorate	sauerkraut
“so	that	it	appears	as	if	it	were	strewn	with
poppy	seeds”!	But	overfishing,	dams	and
hydroelectric	plants,	and	industrial	pollution
have	since	put	many	sturgeon	species	in
danger	of	extinction.	Around	1900,	sturgeon
roe	became	rare,	expensive,	and	therefore	a
sought-after	luxury	—	and	so	even	more
expensive.	The	trend	has	continued,	with
Caspian	sturgeon	populations	plummeting	and
U.N.	organizations	considering	an	export	ban
on	caviar	from	the	region.	In	recent	decades,
caviar	production	has	been	growing	further
east,	along	the	Amur	River	in	both	Russia	and
China,	and	on	sturgeon	farms	in	the	United
States	and	elsewhere.



Making	Caviar	 In	 traditional	caviar-making,
sturgeon	 are	 captured	 alive	 in	 nets,	 stunned,
and	 their	 roe	 sacs	 removed	 before	 they	 are
killed	and	butchered.	The	caviar	maker	passes
the	roe	through	screens	to	loosen	the	eggs	and
separate	them	from	the	ovary	membrane,	sorts
and	 grades	 the	 eggs,	 and	 then	 dry-salts	 and
mixes	them	by	hand	for	two	to	four	minutes	to
obtain	a	final	salt	concentration	between	3	and
10%.	 (Small	 amounts	 of	 alkaline	 borax
[sodium	 borate]	 have	 been	 used	 since	 the
1870s	 to	 replace	 part	 of	 the	 salt,	making	 the
caviar	 taste	 sweeter	 and	 improving	 its	 shelf
life,	 but	 the	 United	 States	 and	 some	 other
countries	 forbid	 borax	 in	 their	 imports.)	 The
eggs	are	allowed	to	drain	for	5	to	15	minutes,
filled	into	large	cans,	and	chilled	to	26ºF/–3ºC
(the	 salt	 prevents	 freezing	 at	 this
temperature).

The	most	highly	prized	caviar	is	the	most
perishable.	It	goes	by	the	Russian	term
malossol,	which	means	“little	salt,”	and



ranges	from	2.5–3.5%	salt.	The
classicCaspian	caviars	have	distinctive	sizes,
colors,	and	flavors.	Beluga	is	the	rarest,
largest,	and	most	expensive.	Osetra,	the	most
common	wild	caviar,	comes	mainly	from	the
Black	and	Azov	seas,	is	tinged	with	brown,
and	has	a	flavor	reminiscent	of	oysters.
Sevruga	caviar	is	dark	and	has	a	less
complicated	flavor.	“Pressed	caviar”	is	a
relatively	inexpensive,	saltier	(to	7%),	strong-
tasting	paste	made	from	overmature	eggs,	and
can	be	frozen.

Salmon	and	Other	Caviars	Russia	pioneered
the	 development	 of	 salmon	 caviar	 in	 the
1830s,	 and	 it’s	 a	 delicious	 and	 affordable
alternative,	 with	 its	 striking	 red-pink
translucence	 and	 large	 grains.	 The	 separated
eggs	of	chum	and	pink	salmons	are	soaked	in
saturated	brine	for	2	to	20	minutes	to	achieve
a	final	salt	 level	of	3.5–4%,	then	drained	and
dried	 for	 up	 to	 12	 hours.	 Lumpfish	 caviar



dates	from	the	1930s,	when	the	sevruga-sized
eggs	 of	 this	 otherwise	 little-used	 fish	 were
salted	 and	 dyed	 to	 imitate	 the	 real	 thing.
Whitefish	 eggs	 are	 similar	 in	 size	 and	 left
undyed	 to	 retain	 their	golden	color.	 In	 recent
years,	 the	 roe	 of	 herring,	 anchovy,	 and	 even
lobster	 have	 been	 used	 to	 make	 caviars.
Caviars	 may	 be	 pasteurized	 (120–160ºF/50–
70ºC	for	1–2	hours)	to	prolong	their	shelf	life,
but	this	can	produce	a	rubbery	off-aroma	and
chewy	texture.

Commonly	Eaten	Fish	Eggs

Source Qualities,	Names

Carp 1Very	small,	light	pink;	sometimes
salted	Greece:	tarama

Cod, Very	small,	pink,	sometimes	salted,
pollack pressed,	dried,	smoked	Japan:

ajitsuki,	tarako,	momijiko
Flying Small,	yellow,	often	dyed	orange	or



fish black,	crunchy	Japan:	tobiko

Grey Small;	often	salted;	pressed	and	dried
mullet for	bottarga	Italy:	bottarga,	Greece:

tarama;	Japan:	karasumi
Medium,	yellow-gold,	sometimes

Herring salt-cured;	prized	in	Japan	when
attached	to	kelp	Japan:	kazunoko
Small,	fish	common	in	North

Lumpfish Atlantic	and	Baltic;	greenish	eggs
often	dyed	red	or	black,	heavily
salted,	pasteurized,	bottled

Large	(4–5	mm)	red-orange	eggs
mainly	from	chum	salmon

Salmon (Oncorhynchus	keta),	usually	lightly
brined	and	sold	fresh	Japan:	whole
ovary	sujiko,	separated	eggs	ikura

Shad Small,	from	herring	relative

Sturgeon Medium-sized;	lightly	salted	to
make	caviar

Large	yellow	eggs	from	Great	Lakes



Trout trout

Tuna Small;	often	salted;	pressed	and	dried
for	bottarga	Italy:	bottarga
Small,	golden,	crunchy,	from

Whitefish freshwater	cousins	of	salmon	in
Northern	Hemisphere;	often

flavored	or	smoked



Chapter	5

Edible	Plants
An	Introduction	to	Fruits

and	Vegetables,	Herbs	and	Spices

Plants	as	Food
The	Nature	of	Plants
Definitions
Plant	Foods	Through	History

Plant	Foods	and	Health
Essential	 Nutrients	 in	 Fruits	 and
Vegetables:	Vitamins
Phytochemicals
Fiber
Toxins	in	Some	Fruits	and	Vegetables
Fresh	Produce	and	Food	Poisoning

The	 Composition	 and	 Qualities	 of	 Fruits
and	Vegetables

Plant	Structure:	Cells,	Tissues,	and	Organs



Texture
Color
Flavor

Handling	 and	 Storing	 Fruits	 and
Vegetables

Post-Harvest	Deterioration
Handling	Fresh	Produce
The	Storage	Atmosphere
Temperature	Control:	Refrigeration
Temperature	Control:	Freezing

Cooking	Fresh	Fruits	and	Vegetables
How	 Heat	Affects	 the	 Qualities	 of	 Fruits
and	Vegetables
Hot	 Water:	 Boiling,	 Steaming,	 Pressure-
Cooking
Hot	 Air,	 Oil,	 and	 Radiation:	 Baking,
Frying,	and	Grilling
Microwave	Cooking
Pulverizing	and	Extracting

Preserving	Fruits	and	Vegetables
Drying	and	Freeze-Drying
Fermentation	and	Pickling:	Sauerkraut	and



Kimchi,	Cucumber	Pickles,	Olives
Sugar	Preserves
Canning

We	turn	now	from	milk,	eggs,	meats,	and	fish,
all	 expressions	 of	 animating	 protein	 and
energizing	 fat,	 and	 enter	 the	 very	 different
world	 that	 sustains	 them	 and	 us	 alike.	 The
plant	 world	 encompasses	 earthy	 roots,	 bitter
and	 pungent	 and	 refreshing	 leaves,	 perfumed
flowers,	 mouth-filling	 fruits,	 nutty	 seeds,
sweetness	 and	 tartness	 and	 astringency	 and
pleasing	pain,	and	aromas	by	the	thousands!	It
turns	 out	 that	 this	 exuberantly	 diverse	 world
was	 born	 of	 simple,	 harsh	 necessity.	 Plants
can’t	move	as	animals	do.	In	order	to	survive
their	 immobile,	 exposed	 condition,	 they
became	 virtuosic	 chemists.	 They	 construct
themselves	from	the	simplest	materials	of	the
earth	 itself,	water	and	 rock	and	air	 and	 light,
and	 thus	 transform	 the	 earth	 into	 food	 on
which	 all	 animal	 life	 depends.	 Plants	 deter



enemies	and	attract	friends	with	colors,	tastes,
and	 scents,	 all	 chemical	 inventions	 that	 have
shaped	our	ideas	of	beauty	and	deliciousness.
And	 they	 protect	 themselves	 from	 the
common	 chemical	 stresses	 of	 living	 with
substances	that	protect	us	as	well.	So	when	we
eat	 vegetables	 and	 fruits	 and	 grains	 and
spices,	we	eat	the	foods	that	made	us	possible,
and	 that	 opened	 our	 life	 to	 a	 kaleidoscopic
world	of	sensation	and	delight.

Human	beings	have	always	been	plant
eaters.	For	a	million	years	and	more,	our
omnivorous	ancestors	foraged	and	lived	on	a
wide	range	of	wild	fruits,	leaves,	and	seeds.
Beginning	around	10,000	years	ago	they
domesticated	a	few	grains,	seed	legumes,	and
tubers,	which	are	among	the	richest	sources	of
energy	and	protein	in	the	plant	world,	and	can
be	grown	and	stored	in	large	quantities.	This
control	over	the	food	supply	made	it	possible
for	many	people	to	be	fed	reliably	from	a
small	patch	of	land:	so	cultivation	of	the



fields	led	to	settlement,	the	first	cities,	and
cultivation	of	the	human	mind.	On	the	other
hand,	agriculture	drastically	reduced	the
variety	of	plant	foods	in	the	human	diet.
Millennia	later,	industrialization	reduced	it
even	further.	Fruits	and	vegetables	became
accessory,	even	marginal	foods	in	the	modern
Western	diet.	Only	recently	have	we	begun	to
understand	how	the	human	body	still	depends
for	its	long-term	health	on	a	various	diet	rich
in	fruits	and	vegetables,	herbs	and	spices.
Happily,	modern	technologies	now	give	us
unprecedented	access	to	the	world’s
cornucopia	of	edible	plants.	The	time	is	ripe
to	explore	this	fascinating	—	and	still
evolving	—	legacy	of	natural	and	human
inventiveness.

This	chapter	is	a	general	introduction	to
the	foods	that	we	obtain	from	plants.	Because
there	are	so	many	of	them,	particular	fruits
and	vegetables,	herbs	and	spices	are	described
in	subsequent	chapters.	Foods	derived	from



seeds	—	grains,	legumes,	nuts	—	have	special
properties,	and	are	described	separately	in
chapter	9.

The	Original	Food
The	 idea	 that	 plants	 are	 our	 original	 and
therefore	 only	 proper	 food	 has	 deep
cultural	roots.	In	the	Golden	Age	described
by	Greek	and	Roman	mythology,	the	earth
gave	 of	 itself	 freely,	 without	 cultivation,
and	humans	ate	only	nuts	and	fruit.	And	in
Genesis,	Adam	 and	 Eve	 spend	 their	 brief
innocence	as	gardeners:

And	the	Lord	God	planted	a	garden
eastward	in	Eden;	and	there	he	put	the	man
whom	he	had	formed.	And	out	of	the
ground	made	the	Lord	God	to	grow	every
tree	that	is	pleasant	to	the	sight,	and	good
for	food…And	the	Lord	God	took	the	man,
and	put	him	into	the	Garden	of	Eden	to
dress	it	and	to	keep	it.



The	 Bible	 doesn’t	 mention	 meat	 as	 food
until	after	it	records	the	first	killing,	Cain’s
murder	 of	 his	 brother	 Abel.	 Many
individuals	and	groups	from	Pythagoras	to
the	 present	 have	 chosen	 to	 eat	 only	 plant
foods	 to	 avoid	 taking	 the	 life	 of	 another
creature	capable	of	feeling	pain.	And	most
people	 throughout	 history	 have	 had	 no
choice,	because	meat	 is	far	more	costly	 to
produce	than	grains	and	tubers.

Plants	as	Food

The	Nature	of	Plants

Plants	and	animals	are	very	different	kinds	of
living	things,	and	this	is	because	they	have
evolved	different	solutions	to	a	single	basic
challenge:	how	to	obtain	the	energy	and
substance	necessary	to	grow	and	reproduce.
Plants	essentially	nourish	themselves.	They
build	their	tissues	out	of	water,	minerals,	and



air,	and	run	them	on	the	energy	in	sunlight.
Animals,	on	the	other	hand,	can’t	extract
energy	and	construct	complex	molecules	from
such	primitive	materials.	They	must	obtain
them	premade,	and	they	do	so	by	consuming
other	living	things.	Plants	are	independent
autotrophs,	while	animals	are	parasitic
heterotrophs.	(Parasitism	may	not	sound
especially	admirable,	but	without	it	there
would	be	no	need	to	eat	and	so	none	of	the
pleasures	of	eating	and	cooking!)

There	are	various	ways	of	being	an
autotroph.	Some	archaic	bacteria,	which	are
microbes	consisting	of	a	single	cell,
manipulate	sulfur,	nitrogen,	and	iron
compounds	to	produce	energy.	The	most
important	development	for	the	future	of
eating	came	more	than	3	billion	years	ago
with	the	evolution	of	a	bacterium	that	could
tap	the	energy	in	sunlight	and	store	it	in
carbohydrate	molecules	(molecules	built	from
carbon,	hydrogen,	and	oxygen).	Chlorophyll,



the	green	pigment	we	see	in	vegetation	all
around	us,	is	a	molecule	that	captures	sunlight
and	initiates	this	process	of	photosynthesis,
which	culminates	in	the	creation	of	the	simple
sugar	glucose.

6CO2	+	6H2O	+	light	energy	 	C6H12O6	+
6O2

carbon	dioxide	+	water	+	light	energy	
glucose	+	oxygen

The	 bacteria	 that	 managed	 to	 “invent”
chlorophyll	 gave	 rise	 to	 algae	 and	 all	 green
land	plants	—	and	 indirectly	 to	 land	 animals
as	 well.	 Before	 photosynthesis,	 the	 earth’s
atmosphere	 contained	 little	 oxygen,	 and	 the
sun’s	killing	ultraviolet	rays	penetrated	all	the
way	 to	 the	 ground	 and	 several	 feet	 into	 the
oceans.	 Living	 organisms	 could	 therefore
survive	 only	 in	 deeper	 waters.	 When
photosynthetic	 bacteria	 and	 early	 algae



burgeoned,	 they	 liberated	 vast	 quantities	 of
oxygen	 (O2),	 which	 radiation	 in	 the	 upper
atmosphere	converted	to	ozone	(O3),	which	in
turn	 absorbed	 ultraviolet	 light	 and	 prevented
much	of	 it	 from	reaching	 the	earth’s	 surface.
Land	life	was	now	possible.

The	 challenging	 life	 of	 the	 plant.	 Plants	 are
rooted	 to	 one	 spot	 in	 the	 earth,	 where	 they
absorb	 water	 and	 minerals	 from	 the	 soil,
carbon	dioxide	 and	oxygen	 from	 the	 air,	 and
light	energy	from	the	sun,	and	transform	these
inorganic	materials	 into	 plant	 tissues	—	and
into	 nourishment	 for	 insects	 and	 other
animals.	 Plants	 defend	 themselves	 against
predators	with	a	variety	of	chemical	weapons,



some	 of	 which	 also	 make	 them	 flavorful,
healthful,	 or	 both.	 In	 order	 to	 spread	 their
offspring	 far	and	wide,	 some	plants	 surround
their	 seeds	 with	 tasty	 and	 nourishing	 fruits
that	 animals	 carry	 away	 and	 eat,	 often
spilling	some	seeds	in	the	process.

So	we	owe	our	very	existence	as	oxygen-
breathing,	land-dwelling	animals	to	the
greenery	we	walk	through	and	cultivate	and
consume	every	day	of	our	lives.

Why	 Plants	 Aren’t	 Meaty	 Land-dwelling
plants	 that	 can	 nourish	 themselves	 still	 need
access	 to	 the	 soil	 for	 minerals	 and	 trapped
water,	 to	 the	 atmosphere	 for	 carbon	 dioxide
and	oxygen,	and	to	the	sun	for	energy.	All	of
these	 sources	 are	 pretty	 reliable,	 and	 plants
have	 developed	 an	 economical	 structure	 that
takes	 advantage	 of	 this	 reliability.	 Roots
penetrate	 the	 soil	 to	 reach	 stable	 supplies	 of
water	 and	 minerals;	 leaves	 maximize	 their
surface	area	to	capture	sunlight	and	exchange



gases	 with	 the	 air;	 and	 stalks	 support	 leaves
and	 connect	 them	 with	 roots.	 Plants	 are
essentially	 stationary	 chemical	 factories,
made	 up	 of	 chambers	 for	 carbohydrate
synthesis	and	carbohydrate	storage,	and	tubes
to	 transfer	 chemicals	 from	 one	 part	 of	 the
factory	 to	 another,	 with	 structural
reinforcement	 —	 also	 mainly	 carbohydrates
—	 to	 provide	 mechanical	 rigidity	 and
strength.	 Parasitic	 animals,	 by	 contrast,	must
find	and	feed	on	other	organisms,	so	they	are
constructed	 mainly	 of	 muscle	 proteins	 that
transform	 chemical	 energy	 into	 physical
motion	(p.	121).

Why	 Plants	 Have	 Strong	 Flavors	 and
Effects	Animals	can	also	use	their	mobility	to
avoid	 becoming	 another	 creature’s	 meal,	 by
fleeing	 or	 fighting.	 But	 stationary	 plants?
They	compensate	 for	 their	 immobility	with	a
remarkable	 ability	 for	 chemical	 synthesis.
These	master	alchemists	produce	thousands	of



strong-tasting,	 sometimes	 poisonous	 warning
signals	 that	 discourage	 bacteria,	 fungi,
insects,	and	us	from	attacking	them.	A	partial
list	 of	 their	 chemical	 warfare	 agents	 would
include	irritating	compounds	like	mustard	oil,
hot-chilli	 capsaicin,	 and	 the	 tear-inducing
factor	in	onions;	bitter	and	toxic	alkaloids	like
caffeine	 in	 coffee	 and	 solanine	 in	 potatoes;
the	 cyanide	 compounds	 found	 in	 lima	 beans
and	 many	 fruit	 seeds;	 and	 substances	 that
interfere	with	the	digestive	process,	including
astringent	 tannins	 and	 inhibitors	 of	 digestive
enzymes.

If	plants	are	so	well	endowed	with	their
own	natural	pesticides,	then	why	isn’t	the
world	littered	with	the	corpses	of	their
victims?	Because	animals	have	learned	to
recognize	and	avoid	potentially	harmful
plants	with	the	help	of	their	senses	of	smell
and	taste,	which	can	detect	chemical
compounds	in	very	small	concentrations.
Animals	have	developed	appropriate	innate



responses	to	significant	tastes	—	aversion	to
the	bitterness	typical	of	alkaloids	and	cyanide,
attraction	to	the	sweetness	of	nutritionally
important	sugars.	And	some	animals	have
developed	specific	detoxifying	enzymes	that
enable	them	to	exploit	an	otherwise	toxic
plant.	The	koala	bear	can	eat	eucalyptus
leaves,	and	monarch	butterfly	caterpillars
milkweed.	Humans	invented	their	own
ingenious	detoxifying	methods,	including
plant	selection	and	breeding	and	cooking.
Cultivated	varieties	of	such	vegetables	as
cabbage,	lima	beans,	potatoes,	and	lettuce	are
less	toxic	than	their	wild	ancestors.	And	many
toxins	can	be	destroyed	by	heat	or	leached
away	in	boiling	water.

A	fascinating	wrinkle	in	this	story	is	that
humans	actually	prize	and	seek	out	certain
plant	toxins!	We’ve	managed	to	learn	which
irritating	warning	signals	are	relatively
harmless,	and	have	come	to	enjoy	sensations
whose	actual	purpose	is	to	repel	us.	Hence	our



seemingly	perverse	love	of	mustard	and
pepper	and	onions.	This	is	the	essential	appeal
of	herbs	and	spices,	as	we’ll	see	in	chapter	8.

Why	 Ripe	 Fruits	 Are	 Especially	 Delicious
The	 higher	 plants	 and	 animals	 reproduce	 by
fusing	genetic	material	from	male	and	female
sex	organs,	usually	from	different	individuals.
Animals	have	the	advantage	of	being	mobile:
male	 and	 female	 can	 sense	 each	 other’s
presence	and	move	 toward	each	other.	Plants
can’t	 move,	 and	 instead	 have	 to	 depend	 on
mobile	go-betweens.	The	male	pollen	of	most
land	 plants	 is	 carried	 to	 the	 female	 ovule	 by
the	wind	or	by	animals.	To	encourage	animals
to	 help	 out,	 advanced	 plants	 evolved	 the
flower,	an	organ	whose	shape,	color,	and	scent
are	 designed	 to	 attract	 a	 particular	 assistant,
usually	 an	 insect.	 As	 it	 flies	 around	 and
collects	 nutritious	 nectar	 or	 pollen	 for	 food,
the	insect	spreads	the	pollen	from	one	plant	to
another.



Once	male	and	female	cells	have	come
together	and	developed	into	offspring,	they
must	be	given	a	good	start.	The	animal	mother
can	search	out	a	promising	location	and
deposit	her	young	there.	But	plants	need	help.
If	the	seeds	simply	dropped	from	the	plant	to
the	ground,	they	would	have	to	compete	with
each	other	and	with	their	overshadowing
parent	for	sunlight	and	soil	minerals.	So
successful	plant	families	have	developed
mechanisms	for	dispersing	their	seeds	far	and
wide.	These	mechanisms	include	seed
containers	that	pop	open	and	propel	their
contents	in	all	directions,	seed	appendages
that	catch	the	wind	or	the	fur	of	a	passing
animal	—	and	structures	that	hitch	a	ride
inside	passersby.	Fruits	are	plant	organs	that
actually	invite	animals	to	eat	them,	so	that	the
animals	will	carry	their	seeds	away,	and	often
pass	them	through	their	digestive	system	and
deposit	them	in	a	nourishing	pile	of	manure.
(The	seeds	escape	destruction	in	various	ways,



among	them	by	being	large	and	armored,	or
tiny	and	easily	spilled,	or	poisonous.)

So,	unlike	the	rest	of	the	plant,	fruit	is
meant	to	be	eaten.	This	is	why	its	taste,	odor,
and	texture	are	so	appealing	to	our	animal
senses.	But	the	invitation	to	eat	must	be
delayed	until	the	seeds	are	mature	and	viable.
This	is	the	purpose	of	the	changes	in	color,
texture,	and	flavor	that	we	call	ripening.
Leaves,	roots,	stalks	can	be	eaten	at	any	time,
generally	the	earlier	the	tenderer.	But	we	must
wait	for	fruit	to	signal	that	it	is	ready	to	be
eaten.	The	details	of	ripening	are	described	in
chapter	7	(p.	350).

Our	Evolutionary	Partners	Like	us,	most	of
our	food	plants	are	relative	newcomers	to	the
earth.	Life	arose	about	4	billion	years	ago,	but
flowering	 plants	 have	 been	 around	 for	 only
about	200	million	years,	and	dominant	for	the
last	 50	 million.	 An	 even	 more	 recent
development	is	the	“herbaceous”	habit	of	life.



Most	food	plants	are	not	long-lived	trees,	but
relatively	 small,	 delicate	 plants	 that	 produce
their	 seeds	 and	 die	 in	 one	 growing	 season.
This	 herbaceous	 habit	 gives	 plants	 greater
flexibility	in	adapting	to	changing	conditions,
and	it	has	worked	to	our	advantage	as	well.	It
allows	us	 to	grow	crops	 to	maturity	 in	 a	 few
months,	 change	 plantings	 from	 year	 to	 year,
rapidly	 breed	 new	 varieties,	 and	 eat	 plant
parts	 that	 would	 be	 inedible	 were	 they
toughened	 to	 endure	 for	 years.	 Herbaceous
plants	became	widespread	only	in	the	last	few
million	 years,	 just	 as	 the	 human	 species	was
emerging.	 They	 made	 possible	 our	 rapid
cultural	 development,	 and	 we	 in	 turn	 have
used	 selection	 and	 breeding	 to	 direct	 their
biological	 development.	 We	 and	 our	 food
plants	 have	 been	 partners	 in	 each	 other’s
evolution.

Definitions



We	group	the	foods	we	obtain	from	plants
into	several	loose	categories.

Fruit	 and	 Vegetable	 Apart	 from	 such	 plant
seeds	 as	wheat	 and	 rice,	which	 are	 described
in	 chapter	 9,	 the	most	 prominent	 plant	 foods
in	our	diet	are	fruits	and	vegetables.	Vegetable
took	on	 its	 current	 sense	 just	 a	 few	centuries
ago,	 and	 essentially	 means	 a	 plant	 material
that	 is	 neither	 fruit	 nor	 seed.	 So	 what	 is	 a
fruit?	 The	 word	 has	 both	 a	 technical	 and	 a
common	 meaning.	 Beginning	 in	 the	 17th
century,	botanists	defined	it	as	 the	organ	that
develops	 from	 the	 flower’s	 ovary	 and
surrounds	 the	 plant’s	 seeds.	 But	 in	 common
usage,	 seed-surrounding	 green	 beans,
eggplants,	 cucumbers,	 and	 corn	 kernels	 are
called	vegetables,	not	 fruits.	Even	 the	United
States	Supreme	Court	has	preferred	the	cook’s
definition	over	 the	botanist’s.	 In	 the	1890s,	a
New	 York	 food	 importer	 claimed	 duty-free
status	for	a	shipment	of	tomatoes,	arguing	that



tomatoes	 were	 fruits,	 and	 so	 under	 the
regulations	of	 the	 time,	not	subject	 to	 import
fees.	 The	 customs	 agent	 ruled	 that	 tomatoes
were	 vegetables	 and	 imposed	 a	 duty.	 A
majority	 of	 the	 Supreme	 Court	 decided	 that
tomatoes	were	“usually	served	at	a	dinner	 in,
with,	 or	 after	 the	 soup,	 fish,	 or	 meat,	 which
constitute	the	principal	part	of	the	repast,	and
not,	 like	 fruits,	 generally	 as	 dessert.”	 Ergo
tomatoes	 were	 vegetables,	 and	 the	 importer
had	to	pay.

The	 Key	 Distinction:	 Flavor	 Why	 do	 we
customarily	prepare	vegetables	as	side	dishes
to	 the	 main	 course,	 and	 make	 fruits	 the
centerpiece	 of	 the	 meal’s	 climax?	 Culinary
fruits	 are	 distinguished	 from	 vegetables	 by
one	 important	 characteristic:	 they’re	 among
the	few	things	we	eat	that	we’re	meant	to	eat.
Many	 plants	 have	 engineered	 their	 fruits	 to
appeal	 to	 the	 animal	 senses,	 so	 that	 animals
will	 eat	 them	 and	 disperse	 the	 seeds	 within.



These	fruits	are	the	natural	world’s	soft	drinks
and	 candies,	 flashily	 packaged	 in	 bright
colors,	and	 test-marketed	 through	millions	of
years	of	natural	selection.	They	tend	to	have	a
high	sugar	content,	to	satisfy	the	innate	liking
for	 sweetness	 shared	 by	 all	 animals.	 They
have	a	pronounced	and	complex	aroma,	which
may	 involve	 several	 hundred	 different
chemicals,	 far	 more	 than	 any	 other	 natural
ingredient.	And	 they	 soften	 themselves	 to	 an
appealingly	 tender,	 moist	 consistency.	 By
contrast,	 the	 plant	 foods	 that	 we	 treat	 as
vegetables	 remain	 firm,	 have	 either	 a	 very
mild	flavor	—	green	beans	and	potatoes	—	or
else	an	excessively	 strong	one	—	onions	and
cabbage	—	and	 therefore	 require	 the	 craft	 of
the	cook	to	make	them	palatable.

The	very	words	fruit	and	vegetable	reflect
these	differences.	Vegetable	comes	from	the
Latin	verb	vegere,	meaning	to	invigorate	or
enliven.	Fruit,	on	the	other	hand,	comes	from
Latin	fructus,	whose	cluster	of	related



meanings	includes	gratification,	pleasure,
satisfaction,	enjoyment.	It’s	the	nature	of	fruit
to	taste	good,	to	appeal	to	our	basic	biological
interests,	while	vegetables	stimulate	us	to	find
and	create	more	subtle	and	diverse	pleasures
than	fruits	have	to	offer.

Herb	and	Spice	The	terms	herb	and	spice	are
more	 straightforward.	 Both	 are	 categories	 of
plant	 materials	 used	 primarily	 as	 flavorings,
and	 in	 relatively	 small	 amounts.	Herbs	 come
from	green	parts	 of	 plants,	 usually	 leaves	—
parsley,	 thyme,	 basil	 —	 while	 spices	 are
generally	 seeds,	 bark,	 underground	 stems	—
black	 pepper,	 cinnamon,	 ginger	—	 and	 other
robust	 materials	 that	 were	 well	 suited	 to
international	 trade	 in	 early	 times.	 The	 word
spice	 came	 from	 the	 medieval	 Latin	species,
which	meant	“kind	of	merchandise.”



Despite	 the	 fact	 that	 we	 consider	 them
vegetables,	 capsicum	 “peppers,”	 pea	 pods,
cucumbers,	and	even	corn	kernels	are	actually
fruits:	 plant	 parts	 that	 originate	 in	 the
flower’s	 ovary	 and	 surround	 one	 or	 more
seeds.

Plant	Foods	Through	History

How	long	has	the	Western	world	been	eating
the	plant	foods	we	eat	today,	and	in	the	way
that	we	eat	them?	Only	a	very	few	common
vegetables	have	not	been	eaten	since	before
recorded	history	(the	relative	newcomers
include	broccoli,	cauliflower,	brussels
sprouts,	celery).	But	it	was	only	with	the	age
of	exploration	in	the	16th	century	that	the
variety	of	foods	we	now	know	became



available	to	any	single	culture.	In	the	Western
world,	fruit	has	been	eaten	as	dessert	at	least
since	the	Greeks;	recognizable	salads	go	back
to	the	Middle	Ages,	and	boiled	vegetables	in
delicate	sauces	to	17th-century	France.

Prehistory	 and	 Early	 Civilizations	 Many
plants	 came	 under	 human	 cultivation	 by	 the
unsophisticated	but	slowly	effective	means	of
gathering	 useful	 plants	 and	 leaving	 a	 few
seeds	 in	 fertile	 refuse	 heaps.	 Judging	 from
archaeological	 evidence,	 early	 Europeans
seem	 to	 have	 relied	 on	 wheat,	 fava	 beans,
peas,	 turnips,	 onions,	 radishes,	 and	 cabbage.
In	 Central	 America,	 corn,	 beans,	 hard
squashes,	 tomatoes,	 and	 avocados	 were
staples	 around	 3500	BCE,	 while	 Peruvian
settlements	 relied	 heavily	 on	 the	 potato.
Northern	 Asia	 started	 with	 millets,	 cabbage
relatives,	soybeans,	and	tree	fruits	in	the	apple
and	 peach	 families;	 southern	 Asia	 had	 rice,
bananas,	 coconuts,	 yams,	 cabbage	 relatives,



and	 citrus	 fruits.	 Indigenous	 African	 crops
included	related	but	distinct	millets,	sorghum,
rice,	 and	 bananas,	 as	 well	 as	 yams	 and
cowpeas.	 Mustard	 seed	 flavored	 foods	 in
Europe	 and	 in	 Asia,	 where	 ginger	 may	 also
have	been	used.	Chilli	“pepper”	was	probably
the	chief	spice	in	the	Americas.

By	the	time	of	the	earliest	civilizations	in
Sumer	and	Egypt	about	5,000	years	ago,	most
of	the	plants	native	to	that	area	and	eaten
today	were	already	in	use	(see	box,	p.	250).
Trade	between	the	Middle	East	and	Asia	is
also	ancient.	Egyptian	records	of	around	1200
BCE	document	huge	offerings	of	cinnamon,	a
product	of	Sri	Lanka.

Greece,	 Rome,	 and	 the	 Middle	Ages	 With
the	 Greeks	 and	 Romans	 we	 begin	 to	 see	 the
outlines	 of	 modern	 Western	 cuisine.	 The
Greeks	 were	 fond	 of	 lettuce,	 and	 habitually
ate	fruit	at	the	end	of	meals.	Pepper	from	the
Far	 East	 was	 in	 use	 around	 500	BCE	 and



quickly	became	the	most	popular	spice	of	the
ancient	world.	In	Rome,	lettuce	was	served	at
both	the	beginning	and	end	of	meals,	and	fruit
as	 dessert.	 Thanks	 to	 the	 art	 of	 grafting
growing	 shoots	 from	 desirable	 trees	 onto
other	 trees,	 there	were	about	25	named	apple
varieties	 and	 35	 pears.	 Fruits	were	 preserved
whole	 by	 immersing	 them,	 stems	 and	 all,	 in
honey,	 and	 the	 gastronome	 Apicius	 gave	 a
recipe	 for	 pickled	 peaches.	 From	 the	 Roman
recipes	 that	 survive,	 it	 would	 seem	 that	 few
foods	were	 served	without	 the	 application	 of
several	strong	flavors.

When	the	Romans	conquered	Europe	they
brought	along	tree	fruits,	the	vine,	and
cultivated	cabbage,	as	well	as	their	heavy
spice	habit.	Sauce	recipes	from	the	14th
century	resemble	those	of	Apicius,	and	the
English	lettuce-free	salad	would	also	have
been	quite	pungent	(see	box,	p.	251).
Medieval	recipe	collections	include	relatively
few	vegetable	dishes.



New	 World,	 New	 Foods	 Plants	 —	 and
especially	 the	 spice	 plants	 —	 helped	 shape
world	 history	 in	 the	 last	 five	 centuries.	 The
ancient	European	hunger	for	Asian	spices	was
an	important	driving	force	in	the	development
of	 Italy,	 Portugal,	 Spain,	 Holland,	 and
England	 into	 major	 sea	 powers	 during	 the
Renaissance.	Columbus,	Vasco	da	Gama,	John
Cabot,	 and	Magellan	were	 looking	 for	 a	 new
route	 to	 the	 Indies	 in	 order	 to	 break	 the
monopoly	 of	 Venice	 and	 southern	Arabia	 on
the	ancient	trade	in	cinnamon,	cloves,	nutmeg,
and	 black	 pepper.	 They	 failed	 in	 that	 quest,
but	succeeded	in	opening	the	“West	Indies”	to
European	 exploitation.	 The	 New	 World	 was
initially	 disappointing	 in	 its	 yield	 of	 sought-
for	 spices.	 But	 vanilla	 and	 chillis	 quickly
became	 popular;	 and	 its	 wealth	 of	 new
vegetables	was	 largely	 adaptable	 to	Europe’s
climate:	so	the	common	bean,	corn,	squashes,
tomatoes,	 potatoes,	 and	 sweet	 chillis
eventually	 became	 staple	 ingredients	 in	 the



new	cuisines	of	the	Old	World.

Vegetables,	Fruits,	and	Spices	Used	in
the	West

Mediterranean	Area	Natives,	Used	BCE

Vegetables
1.	 Mushroom
2.	 Beet
3.	 Radish
4.	 Turnip
5.	 Carrot
6.	 Parsnip
7.	 Asparagus
8.	 Leek
9.	 Onion
10.	 Cabbage
11.	 Lettuce
12.	 Artichoke
13.	 Cucumber
14.	 Broad	bean
15.	 Pea



16.	 Olive

Fruits
1.	 Apple
2.	 Pear
3.	 Cherry
4.	 Grape
5.	 Fig
6.	 Date
7.	 Strawberry

Herbs	and	Spices
1.	 Basil
2.	 Marjoram
3.	 Fennel
4.	 Mint
5.	 Rosemary
6.	 Sage
7.	 Savory
8.	 Thyme
9.	 Anise



10.	 Caraway
11.	 Coriander
12.	 Cumin
13.	 Dill
14.	 Parsley
15.	 Oregano
16.	 Bay
17.	 Caper
18.	 Fenugreek
19.	 Garlic
20.	 Mustard
21.	 Poppy
22.	 Sesame
23.	 Saffron

Later	Additions

Vegetables
1.	 Spinach
2.	 Celery
3.	 Rhubarb
4.	 Cauliflower



5.	 Broccoli
6.	 Brussels	sprouts

Asian	Natives,	Brought	to	the	West	BCE

Fruits
1.	 Citron
2.	 Apricot
3.	 Peach

Herbs	and	Spices
1.	 Cardamom
2.	 Ginger
3.	 Cinnamon
4.	 Turmeric
5.	 Black	pepper

Imported	Later

Vegetables
1.	 Yam
2.	 Water



3.	 Bamboo
4.	 Eggplant

Fruits
1.	 Lemon
2.	 Lime
3.	 Orange
4.	 Melon

Herbs	and	Spices
1.	 Tarragon
2.	 Mace
3.	 Clove
4.	 Nutmeg

New	World	Natives,	Imported	15th–16th
Centuries

Vegetables
1.	 Potato
2.	 Sweet	potato



3.	 Pumpkin
4.	 Squashes
5.	 Tomato
6.	 Kidney	bean
7.	 Lima	bean
8.	 Capsicum	pepper
9.	 Avocado

Fruits
1.	 Pineapple

Herbs	and	Spices
1.	 Allspice
2.	 Chillis
3.	 Vanilla

The	17th	and	18th	centuries	were	a	time	of
assimilating	the	new	foods	and	advancing	the
art	of	cooking	them.	Cultivation	and	breeding
received	new	attention;	Louis	XIV’s	orchards
and	 plantings	 at	 Versailles	 were	 legendary.
And	 cooks	 took	 a	 greater	 interest	 in



vegetables,	 and	 handled	 them	 with	 greater
refinement,	 in	part	 to	make	 the	meatless	diet
of	 Lent	 and	 other	 Catholic	 fasts	 more
interesting.	 France’s	 first	 great	 culinary
writer,	Pierre	François	de	La	Varenne,	chef	to
Henri	 IV,	 included	meatless	 recipes	 for	peas,
turnips,	 lettuce,	 spinach,	 cucumbers,	 cabbage
(five	ways),	chicory,	celery,	carrots,	cardoons,
and	 beets,	 as	 well	 as	 ordinary	 dishes	 of
artichokes,	 asparagus,	 mushrooms,	 and
cauliflower.	 And	 the	 recipes	 leave	 a	 major
role	 for	 the	 vegetables’	 own	 flavors.
Similarly,	 the	Englishman	John	Evelyn	wrote
a	 book-length	 disquisition	 on	 salads,	 once
again	 firmly	 based	 on	 the	 lettuces,	 and
emphasized	the	importance	of	balance.

Plant	Ingredients	in	Rome	and	Medieval
Europe

A	Roman	Sauce	for	Shellfish

Cumin	Sauce,	for	Shellfish:	Pepper,	lovage,



parsley,	 mint,	 aromatic	 leaf	 [e.g.,	 bay],
malabathrum	 [a	 Middle	 Eastern	 leaf],
plenty	of	cumin,	honey,	vinegar,	 liquamen
[a	 fermented	 fish	 paste	 similar	 to	 our
anchovy	paste].

—	from	Apicius,	first	few	centuries	CE
Medieval	Sauces,	French	(Taillevent,	ca.
1375)	and	English	(The	Forme	of	Cury	,

ca.	1390)

Sauce	Cameline,	for	Meats:
France:	 Ginger,	 mace,	 cinnamon,	 cloves,
grain	 of	 paradise,	 pepper,	 vinegar,	 bread
[to	thicken].
England:	 Ginger,	 cloves,	 cinnamon,
currants,	nuts,	vinegar,	bread	crusts.

Verde	Sauce:
France:	Parsley,	ginger,	vinegar,	bread.
England:	 Parsley,	 ginger,	 vinegar,	 bread,
mint,	 garlic,	 thyme,	 sage,	 cinnamon,
pepper,	saffron,	salt,	wine.



Salad	and	a	Vegetable	Compote	(The
Forme	of	Cury	,	ca.	1390)

Salat:	Take	parsley,	sage,	garlic,	scallions,
onions,	 leeks,	 borage,	mints,	 young	 leeks,
fennel,	 cress,	 new	 rosemary,	 purslane;
wash	 them	 clean;	 pick	 them	 and	 pluck
them	small	with	your	hands,	and	mix	them
well	with	raw	oil.	Lay	on	vinegar	and	salt,
and	serve	it	forth.
Compost:	Take	root	of	parsley	and	parsnip,
scrape	 them	 and	 wash	 them	 clean.	 Take
turnips	 and	 cabbages	 pared	 and	 cut.	 Take
an	earthen	pan	with	clean	water,	and	set	it
on	 the	 fire.	Cast	all	 these	 things	 in.	When
they	are	boiled,	add	pears	and	parboil	them
well.	 Take	 these	 things	 out	 and	 let	 them
cool	on	a	fair	cloth.	Put	in	a	vessel	and	add
salt	 when	 it	 is	 cold.	 Take	 vinegar	 and
powder	 and	 saffron	 and	 add.	 And	 let	 all
these	things	lie	there	all	night	or	day.	Take
Greek	 wine	 and	 honey	 clarified	 together,



Lombardy	 mustard,	 and	 raisins,	 whole
currants,	 and	 grind	 sweet	 powder	 and
whole	 anise,	 and	 fennel	 seed.	 Take	 all
these	things	and	cast	them	together	in	a	pot
of	earth,	and	take	some	when	you	wish,	and
serve	it	forth.
With	the	19th	century,	English	vegetable

cooking	became	ever	simpler	until	it	almost
always	meant	boiled	and	buttered,	a	quick	and
simple	method	for	homes	and	restaurants
alike,	while	in	France	the	elaborate
professional	style	reached	its	apogee.	The
influential	chef	Antonin	Carême	declared	in
his	Art	of	French	Cooking	in	the	19th	Century
(1835)	that	“it	is	in	the	confection	of	the
Lenten	cuisine	that	the	chef’s	science	must
shine	with	new	luster.”	Carême’s	enlarged
repertoire	included	broccoli,	truffles,
eggplant,	sweet	potatoes,	and	potatoes,	these
last	fixed	à	l’anglaise,	dites,	Mache-Potetesse
(“in	the	English	style,	that	is,	mashed”).	Of
course,	such	luster	tends	to	undermine	the



whole	point	of	Lent.	In	his	366	Menus	(1872),
Baron	Brisse	asked:	“Are	the	meatless	meals
of	our	Lenten	enthusiasts	really	meals	of
abstinence?”

The	 Influence	 of	 Modern	 Technology	 The
age	 of	 exploration	 and	 the	 advancement	 of
fine	 cooking	 brought	 a	 new	 prominence	 to
fruits	 and	 vegetables	 in	 Europe.	 Then	 the
social	 and	 technical	 innovations	 of	 the
industrial	 age	 conspired	 to	 make	 them	 both
less	 available	 and	 less	 desirable.	 Beginning
early	 in	 the	19th	century,	 as	 industrialization
drew	people	from	the	agricultural	countryside
to	 the	 cities,	 fruits	 and	 vegetables	 became
progressively	rarer	in	the	diets	of	Europe	and
North	 America.	 Urban	 supplies	 did	 improve
with	the	development	of	rail	transportation	in
the	 1820s,	 then	 canning	 at	 mid-century,	 and
refrigeration	 a	 few	decades	 later.	Around	 the
turn	 of	 the	 20th	 century,	 vitamins	 and	 their
nutritional	 significance	 were	 discovered,	 and



fruits	 and	 vegetables	 were	 soon	 officially
canonized	as	one	of	the	four	food	groups	that
should	 be	 eaten	 at	 every	 meal.	 Still,	 the
consumption	 of	 fresh	 produce	 continued	 to
decline	 through	much	of	 the	 20th	 century,	 at
least	 in	 part	 because	 its	 quality	 and	 variety
were	also	declining.	In	 the	modern	system	of
food	production,	with	crops	being	handled	 in
massive	 quantities	 and	 shipped	 thousands	 of
miles,	the	most	important	crop	characteristics
became	 productivity,	 uniformity,	 and
durability.	 Rather	 than	 being	 bred	 for	 flavor
and	 harvested	 at	 flavor’s	 peak,	 fruits	 and
vegetables	 were	 bred	 to	 withstand	 the	 rigors
of	 mechanical	 harvesting,	 transport,	 and
storage,	 and	 were	 harvested	 while	 still	 hard,
often	weeks	 or	months	 before	 they	would	 be
sold	and	eaten.	A	few	mediocre	varieties	came
to	 dominate	 the	 market,	 while	 thousands	 of
others,	 the	 legacy	 of	 centuries	 of	 breeding,
disappeared	 or	 survived	 only	 in	 backyard
gardens.



Refinements	of	17th-Century	Vegetable
Cooking

Choose	 the	 largest	asparagus,	 scrape	 them
at	 the	 bottom,	 and	 wash.	 Cook	 them	 in
some	water,	salt	 them	well,	and	do	not	 let
them	overcook.	When	done,	let	them	drain,
and	 make	 a	 sauce	 with	 some	 good	 fresh
butter,	 a	 little	 vinegar,	 salt,	 and	 nutmeg,
and	an	egg	yolk	to	bind	the	sauce;	take	care
that	 it	 doesn’t	 curdle.	Serve	 the	asparagus
well	garnished	with	whatever	you	like.
—	La	Varenne,	Le	Cuisinier	françois,	1655
…by	reason	of	its	soporifous	quality,
lettuce	ever	was,	and	still	continues	the
principal	foundation	of	the	universal	tribe
of	Sallets,	which	is	to	cool	and	refresh,
besides	its	other	properties	[which
included	beneficial	influences	on	“morals,
temperance,	and	chastity”].	We	have	said
how	necessary	it	is	that	in	the	composure
of	a	sallet,	every	plant	should	come	in	to
bear	its	part,	without	being	overpower’d	by



some	herb	of	a	stronger	taste,	so	as	to
endanger	the	native	sapor	and	virtue	of	the
rest;	but	fall	into	their	places,	like	the
notes	in	music,	in	which	there	should	be
nothing	harsh	or	grating:	And	though
admitting	some	discords	(to	distinguish
and	illustrate	the	rest)	striking	in	all	the
more	sprightly,	and	sometimes	gentler
notes,	reconcile	all	dissonancies,	and	melt
them	into	an	agreeable	composition.
—	John	Evelyn,	Acetaria:	A	Discourse	of

Sallets,	1699
At	the	end	of	the	20th	century,	several

developments	in	the	industrialized	world
brought	renewed	attention	to	plant	foods,	to
their	diversity	and	quality.	One	was	a	new
appreciation	of	their	importance	for	human
health,	thanks	to	the	discovery	of	trace
“phytochemicals”	that	appear	to	help	fight
cancer	and	heart	disease	(p.	255).	Another	was
the	growing	interest	in	exotic	and	unfamiliar
cuisines	and	ingredients,	and	their	increasing



availability	in	ethnic	markets.	Yet	another,	at
the	opposite	extreme,	was	the	rediscovery	of
the	traditional	system	of	food	production	and
its	pleasures:	eating	locally	grown	foods,
often	forgotten	“heirloom”	or	other	unusual
varieties,	that	were	harvested	a	matter	of
hours	beforehand,	then	sold	at	farmers’
markets	by	the	people	who	grew	them.	Allied
to	this	trend	was	the	growing	interest	in
“organic”	foods,	produced	without	relying	on
the	modern	array	of	chemicals	for	controlling
pests	and	disease.	Organic	practices	mean
different	things	to	different	people,	and	don’t
guarantee	either	safer	or	more	nutritious	foods
—	agriculture	is	more	complicated	than	that.
But	they	represent	an	essential,	prominent
alternative	to	industrial	farming,	one	that
encourages	attention	to	the	quality	of
agricultural	produce	and	the	sustainability	of
agricultural	practices.

These	are	good	times	for	curious	and
adventurous	eaters.	There	are	many	forgotten



varieties	of	familiar	fruits	and	vegetables	to
revive,	and	many	new	foods	to	taste.	It’s
estimated	that	there	are	300,000	edible	plant
species	on	earth,	and	perhaps	2,000	that	are
cultivated	to	some	extent.	We	have	plenty	of
exploring	to	do!

Plant	Foods
and	Health

Plant	foods	can	provide	us	all	the	nourishment
we	need	in	order	to	live	and	thrive.	Our
primate	ancestors	started	out	eating	little	else,
and	many	cultures	still	do.	But	meat	and	other
animal	foods	became	important	to	our	species
at	its	birth,	when	their	concentrated	energy
and	protein	probably	helped	accelerate	our
evolution	(p.	119).	Meat	continued	to	have	a
deep	biological	appeal	for	us,	and	in	societies
that	could	afford	to	feed	livestock	on	staple
grains	and	roots,	it	became	the	most	prized	of
foods.	In	the	industrialized	world,	meat’s



prestige	and	availability	pushed	grains,
vegetables,	and	fruits	to	the	side	of	the	plate
and	the	end	of	the	meal.	And	for	decades,
nutritional	science	affirmed	their	accessory
status.	Fruits	and	vegetables	in	particular	were
considered	to	be	the	source	of	a	few	nutrients
that	we	need	only	in	small	amounts,	and	of
mechanically	useful	roughage.	In	recent	years,
though,	we’ve	begun	to	realize	just	how	many
valuable	substances	plant	foods	have	always
held	for	us.	And	we’re	still	learning.

Essential	Nutrients	in	Fruits
and	Vegetables:	Vitamins

Most	fruits	and	vegetables	contribute	only
modestly	to	our	intake	of	proteins	and
calories,	but	they’re	our	major	source	for
several	vitamins.	They	provide	nearly	all	of
our	vitamin	C,	much	of	our	folic	acid,	and
half	of	our	vitamin	A.	Each	of	these	plays	a
number	of	roles	in	the	metabolism	of	our



cells.	For	example,	vitamin	C	refreshes	the
chemical	state	of	metal	components	in	many
enzymes,	and	helps	with	the	synthesis	of
connective-tissue	collagen.	Vitamin	A,	which
our	bodies	make	from	a	precursor	molecule	in
plants	called	beta-carotene	(p.	267),	helps
regulate	the	growth	of	several	different	kinds
of	cells,	and	helps	our	eyes	detect	light.	Folic
acid,	named	from	the	Latin	word	for	“leaf,”
converts	a	by-product	of	our	cells’
metabolism,	homocysteine,	into	the	amino
acid	methionine.	This	prevents	homocysteine
levels	from	rising,	causing	damage	to	blood
vessels,	and	possibly	contributing	to	heart
disease	and	stroke.

Genetic	Engineering	and	Food
The	 most	 far-reaching	 development	 in
20th-century	 agriculture	 was	 the
introduction	 in	 the	 1980s	 of	 genetic
engineering,	 the	 technology	 that	 makes	 it
possible	 to	 alter	 our	 food	 plants	 and



animals	by	surgically	precise	manipulation
of	the	DNA	that	makes	up	their	genes.	This
manipulation	bypasses	 the	natural	barriers
between	 species,	 so	 theoretically	 a	 gene
from	 any	 living	 thing,	 plant	 or	 animal	 or
microbe,	can	be	introduced	into	any	other.

Genetic	 engineering	 is	 still	 in	 its
infancy,	 and	 to	 date	 has	 had	 a	 limited
impact	on	 the	 foods	we	eat.	 In	 the	United
States,	 an	 estimated	 75%	of	 all	 processed
foods	 now	 contain	 genetically	 modified
ingredients.	 But	 this	 remarkable	 figure	 is
due	 to	 just	 three	 agricultural	 commodities
—	soybean,	canola,	and	corn	—	all	of	them
modified	for	improved	resistance	to	insect
pests	or	herbicides.	As	I	write	in	2004,	the
only	other	significant	engineered	U.S.	crop
is	Hawaiian	papaya,	which	is	now	resistant
to	 a	 formerly	devastating	virus	 disease.	A
few	 other	 foods	 are	 processed	 with
enzymes	made	 in	 engineered	microbes	—
for	 example,	 much	 cheese	 is	 coagulated



with	 rennet	made	 by	microbes	 into	which
the	 cattle	 gene	 for	 the	 enzyme	 has	 been
inserted.	 But	 in	 general,	 our	 raw
ingredients	remain	relatively	untouched	by
genetic	engineering.

This	 will	 certainly	 change	 in	 coming
years,	and	not	just	in	the	West:	China	also
has	 a	 very	 active	 program	 in	 agricultural
biotechnology.	 Genetic	 engineering	 is	 the
modern	 fruit	 of	 agriculture	 itself,	 an
outgrowth	of	the	ancient	human	realization
that	 living	 things	can	be	 shaped	 to	human
desires.	That	shaping	began	when	 the	first
farmers	 selectively	 cultivated	 plants	 and
animals	that	grew	larger	or	tasted	better	or
looked	 more	 interesting.	 In	 its	 own	 way,
this	 simple	 process	 of	 observation	 and
selection	 became	 a	 powerful	 biological
technology.	 It	 gradually	 revealed	 the
hidden	 potential	 for	 diversity	 within
individual	species,	and	made	that	potential
real	 in	 the	 form	 of	 hundreds	 of	 distinct



varieties	 of	 wheat	 and	 cattle,	 citrus	 fruits
and	 chillis,	 many	 of	 which	 had	 never
before	 existed	 in	 nature.	 Today,	 genetic
engineers	 are	 exploring	 the	 hidden
potential	for	 improving	a	given	food	plant
or	 animal	not	 just	within	 that	 species,	 but
among	 all	 species,	 in	 the	 entire	 living
world’s	 cornucopia	 of	 DNA	 and	 its
possible	modifications.

Genetic	 engineering	 holds	 the	 promise
of	 bringing	 great	 improvements	 to	 the
production	 and	 quality	 of	 our	 foods.
However,	 like	 any	 powerful	 new
technology,	 it	 also	 has	 the	 potential	 to
cause	 unintended	 and	 far-reaching
consequences.	 And	 as	 the	 instrument	 of
industrial	 agriculture,	 it’s	 likely	 to
contribute	 to	 the	 ongoing	 erosion	 of
traditional,	decentralized,	small-scale	food
production	 and	 its	 ancient	 heritage	 of
biological	 and	 cultural	 diversity.	 It’s
important	that	these	environmental,	social,



and	 economic	 issues	 be	 considered	 by	 all
concerned	 —	 by	 the	 biotechnology	 and
agriculture	 industries,	 the	 governments
that	 regulate	 them,	 the	 farmers	who	 plant
and	 raise	 their	 products,	 the	 cooks	 and
manufacturers	 who	 turn	 the	 products	 into
something	 edible,	 and	 the	 consumers	who
support	 the	 whole	 system	 by	 buying	 and
eating	 food	—	so	 that	 in	 the	 long	 run	 this
new	agricultural	revolution	will	benefit	the
common	good	as	much	as	possible.
Vitamins	A,	C,	and	E	are	also	antioxidants

(see	below).

Phytochemicals

The	first	edition	of	this	book	reflected	the
prevailing	nutritional	wisdom	circa	1980:	we
should	eat	enough	fruits	and	vegetables	to
avoid	vitamin	and	mineral	deficiencies,	and	to
keep	our	digestive	system	moving.	Period.

What	a	difference	20	years	makes!



Nutritional	science	has	undergone	a
profound	revolution	in	that	time.	For	most	of
the	20th	century	it	aimed	to	define	an
adequate	diet.	It	determined	our	body’s
minimal	requirements	for	chemical	building
blocks	(protein,	minerals,	fatty	acids),	for
essential	cogs	in	its	machinery	(vitamins),	and
for	the	energy	it	needs	to	run	and	maintain
itself	from	day	to	day.	Toward	the	end	of	the
century,	it	became	clear	from	laboratory
studies	and	comparisons	of	health	statistics	in
different	countries	that	the	major	diseases	of
the	adequately	nourished	developed	world	—
cancer	and	heart	disease	—	are	influenced	by
what	we	eat.	Nutritional	science	then	began	to
focus	on	defining	the	elements	of	an	optimal
diet.	So	we	discovered	that	minor,
nonessential	food	components	can	have	a
cumulative	effect	on	our	long-term	health.
And	plants,	the	planet’s	biochemical
virtuosos,	turn	out	to	be	teeming	with	trace
phytochemicals	—	from	the	Greek	phyton,



meaning	“leaf”	—	that	modulate	our
metabolism.

Antioxidants

Oxidative	Damage:	The	Price	of	Living	 One
major	theme	in	modern	nutrition	is	the	body’s
need	to	cope	with	the	chemical	wear	and	tear
of	 life	 itself.	Breathing	 is	 essential	 to	human
life	because	our	cells	use	oxygen	to	react	with
sugars	 and	 fats	 and	 generate	 the	 chemical
energy	 that	 keeps	 the	 cellular	 machinery
functioning.	 Unfortunately,	 it	 turns	 out	 that
energy	 generation	 and	 other	 essential
processes	involving	oxygen	generate	chemical
by-products	 called	 “free	 radicals,”	 very
unstable	chemicals	that	react	with	and	damage
our	 own	 complex	 and	 delicate	 chemical
machinery.	 This	 damage	 is	 called	oxidative
because	 it	 usually	 originates	 in	 reactions
involving	oxygen.	It	can	affect	different	parts
of	 the	 cell,	 and	 different	 organs	 in	 the	 body.
For	 example,	 oxidative	 damage	 to	 a	 cell’s



DNA	 can	 cause	 that	 cell	 to	 multiply
uncontrollably	 and	 grow	 into	 a	 tumor.
Oxidative	damage	 to	 the	 cholesterol-carrying
particles	in	our	blood	can	irritate	the	lining	of
our	arteries,	and	initiate	damage	that	leads	to
a	 heart	 attack	 or	 stroke.	 The	 high-energy
ultraviolet	rays	in	sunlight	create	free	radicals
in	the	eye	that	damage	proteins	in	the	lens	and
retina,	 and	 cause	 cataracts,	 macular
degeneration,	and	blindness.

Our	bodies	stave	off	such	drastic
consequences	by	means	of	antioxidant
molecules,	which	react	harmlessly	with	free
radicals	before	they	have	a	chance	to	do	any
damage	to	the	cells’	chemical	machinery.	We
need	a	continuous	and	abundant	supply	of
antioxidants	to	maintain	our	good	health.	The
body	does	make	a	few	important	antioxidant
molecules	of	its	own,	including	some
powerful	enzymes.	But	the	more	help	it	gets,
the	better	it’s	able	to	defend	itself	from	the
constant	onslaught	of	free	radicals.	And	plants



turn	out	to	be	a	goldmine	of	antioxidants.

Some	Beneficial	Effects	of	Chemicals	in
Fruits	and	Vegetables,	Herbs	and	Spices
This	 is	 a	 very	 broad	 survey	 of	 a	 rich	 and
complex	 subject.	 It’s	 meant	 to	 give	 a
general	 idea	 of	 how	 a	 variety	 of	 plant
chemicals	can	affect	various	aspects	of	our
health	 by	 a	 variety	 of	 means.	 Certain
phenolic	 compounds,	 for	 example,	 appear
capable	 of	 helping	 us	 fight	 cancer	 by
preventing	 oxidative	 damage	 to	 DNA	 in
healthy	cells,	by	preventing	the	body	from
forming	 its	 own	 DNA-damaging
chemicals,	and	by	inhibiting	the	growth	of
already	cancerous	cells.
Prevent	 oxidative	 damage	 to	 important
molecules	in	body:	antioxidants

Eye:	slow	cataracts	and	macular
degeneration

Kale,	many	dark	green	vegetables



(carotenoids:	lutein)
Citrus	fruits,	corn	(carotenoids:

zeaxanthin)
Blood	lipids:	slow	development	of	heart
disease

Grapes,	other	berries	(phenolics:
anthocyanidins)

Tea	(phenolics)
General:	reduce	DNA	damage,
development	of	cancer

Tomatoes	(carotenoids:	lycopene)
Carrots,	other	orange	and	green

vegetables	(carotenoids)
Tea	(phenolics)
Green	vegetables	(chlorophyll)
Broccoli,	daikon,	cabbage	family

(glucosinolates,	thiocyanates)

Moderate	 the	 body’s	 inflammatory
response

General:	slow	development	of	heart
disease,	cancer



Raisins,	dates,	chillis,	tomatoes
(salicylates)
Reduce	 the	 body’s	 own	 production	 of
DNA-damaging	chemicals

Many	fruits,	vegetables	(phenolics:
flavonoids)

Broccoli,	daikon,	cabbage	family
(glucosinolates,	thiocyanates)

Citrus	fruits	(terpenes)
Inhibit	 the	 growth	 of	 cancer	 cells	 and
tumors

Many	fruits,	vegetables	(phenolics:
flavonoids)

Soybeans	(phenolics:	isoflavones)
Grapes,	berries	(phenolics:	ellagic	acid)
Rye,	flaxseed	(phenolics:	lignans)
Citrus	fruits	(terpenes)
Mushrooms	(carbohydrates)

Slow	the	body’s	removal	of	calcium	from



bones

Onions,	parsley	(responsible	agents	not
yet	identified)
Encourage	 the	 growth	 of	 beneficial
bacteria	in	the	intestine

Onion	family,	sunchokes	(inulin)
Prevent	 the	 adhesion	 of	 infectious
bacteria	to	walls	of	urinary	tract

Cranberries,	grapes	(phenolics:
proanthocyanidins)

Antioxidants	 in	 Plants	 Nowhere	 in	 living
things	 is	 oxidative	 stress	 greater	 than	 in	 the
photosynthesizing	leaf	of	a	green	plant,	which
harvests	 energetic	 particles	 of	 sunlight,	 and
uses	 them	 to	split	water	molecules	apart	 into
hydrogen	and	oxygen	atoms	in	order	to	make
sugars.	 Leaves	 and	 other	 exposed	 plant	 parts
are	 accordingly	 chock-full	 of	 antioxidant



molecules	 that	 keep	 these	 high-energy
reactions	 from	 damaging	 essential	 DNA	 and
proteins.	Among	 these	 plant	 antioxidants	 are
the	 carotenoid	 pigments,	 including	 orange
beta-carotene,	 yellow	 lutein	 and	 zeaxanthin,
and	the	red	lycopene	that	colors	tomato	fruits.
Green	 chlorophyll	 itself	 is	 an	 antioxidant,	 as
are	 vitamins	 C	 and	 E.	 Then	 there	 are
thousands	of	different	“phenolic”	compounds
built	from	rings	of	6	carbon	atoms,	which	play
several	 roles	 in	plant	 life,	 from	pigmentation
to	 antimicrobial	 duty	 to	 attracting	 and
repelling	 animals.	All	 fruits,	 vegetables,	 and
grains	probably	contain	at	least	a	few	kinds	of
phenolic	compounds;	and	the	more	pigmented
and	 astringent	 they	 are,	 the	 more	 they’re
likely	to	be	rich	in	phenolic	antioxidants.

Each	plant	part,	each	fruit	and	vegetable,
has	its	own	characteristic	cluster	of
antioxidants.	And	each	kind	of	antioxidant
generally	protects	against	a	certain	kind	of
molecular	damage,	or	helps	regenerate	certain



other	protective	molecules.	No	single
molecule	can	protect	against	all	kinds	of
damage.	Unusually	high	concentrations	of
single	types	can	actually	tip	the	balance	the
wrong	way	and	cause	damage.	So	the	best	way
to	reap	the	full	benefits	of	the	antioxidant
powers	of	plants	is	not	to	take	manufactured
supplements	of	a	few	prominent	chemicals:	it
is	to	eat	lots	of	different	vegetables	and	fruits.

Other	 Beneficial	 Phytochemicals
Antioxidants	 may	 be	 the	 most	 important
group	 of	 ingredients	 for	 maintaining	 long-
term	 health,	 but	 they’re	 not	 the	 only	 one.
Trace	chemicals	in	plants,	including	herbs	and
spices,	are	turning	out	to	have	helpful	effects
on	 many	 other	 processes	 that	 affect	 the
balance	 between	 health	 and	 disease.	 For
example,	 some	 act	 like	 aspirin	 (originally
found	 in	 plants)	 to	 prevent	 the	 body	 from
overreacting	 to	 minor	 damage	 with	 an
inflammation	that	can	lead	to	heart	disease	or



cancer;	 some	 prevent	 the	 body	 from	 turning
mildly	 toxic	 chemicals	 into	 more	 powerful
toxins	 that	 damage	 DNA	 and	 cause	 cancer;
some	 inhibit	 the	 growth	 of	 cells	 that	 are
already	 cancerous.	 Others	 slow	 the	 loss	 of
calcium	from	our	bones,	encourage	the	growth
of	 beneficial	 bacteria	 in	 our	 system,	 and
discourage	the	growth	of	disease	bacteria.

The	box	on	p.	256	lists	some	of	these
effects,	and	the	chemicals	and	plants	that
cause	them.	Our	knowledge	of	this	aspect	of
nutrition	is	still	in	its	infancy,	but	we	know
enough	right	now	for	at	least	one	conclusion
to	be	evident:	no	single	fruit	or	vegetable
offers	the	many	kinds	of	protections	that	a
varied	diet	can	provide.

So	today’s	provisional	nutritional	wisdom
goes	like	this:	fruits	and	vegetables,	herbs	and
spices	supply	us	with	many	different
beneficial	substances.	Within	an	otherwise
adequate	diet,	we	should	eat	as	much	of	them
as	we	can,	and	as	great	a	variety	as	we	can.



Estimating	Healthfulness	 by	Eye	 There’s	 a
useful	 guideline	 for	 estimating	 the	 relative
healthfulness	 of	 vegetables	 and	 fruits:	 the
deeper	its	color,	the	more	healthful	the	food	is
likely	 to	 be.	 The	 more	 light	 a	 leaf	 gets,	 the
more	 pigments	 and	 antioxidants	 it	 needs	 to
handle	the	energy	input,	and	so	the	darker	the
coloration	of	the	leaf.	For	example,	the	light-
colored	 inner	 leaves	 of	 lettuce	 and	 cabbage
varieties	 that	 form	 tight	 heads	 contain	 a
fraction	 of	 the	 carotene	 found	 in	 the	 darker
outer	 leaves	 and	 in	 the	 leaves	 of	 more	 open
varieties.	 Similarly,	 the	 dark	 leaves	 of	 open
romaine	 lettuce	 contain	 nearly	 10	 times	 the
eye-protecting	 lutein	 and	 zeaxanthin	 of	 the
pale,	 tight	 heads	 of	 iceberg	 lettuce.	 Other
deeply	 colored	 fruits	 and	 vegetables	 also
contain	 more	 beneficial	 carotenoids	 and
phenolic	 compounds	 than	 their	 pale
counterparts.	 Their	 skins	 are	 especially	 rich
sources.	 Among	 the	 fruits	 highest	 in
antioxidant	 content	 are	 cherries,	 red	 grapes,



blueberries,	 and	 strawberries;	 among
vegetables,	 garlic,	 red	 and	 yellow	 onions,
asparagus,	green	beans,	and	beets.

Fiber

Fiber	is	defined	as	the	material	in	our	plant
foods	that	our	digestive	enzymes	can’t	break
down	into	absorbable	nutrients.	These
substances	therefore	aren’t	absorbed	in	the
small	intestine,	and	pass	intact	into	the	large
intestine,	where	some	are	broken	down	by
intestinal	bacteria,	and	the	rest	are	excreted.
The	four	main	components	of	fiber	come	from
plant	cell	walls	(p.	265).	Cellulose	and	lignin
form	solid	fibers	that	don’t	dissolve	in	our
watery	digestive	fluids,	while	pectins	and
hemicelluloses	do	dissolve	into	their
individual	molecules.	Minor	components	of
fiber	include	uncooked	starch	and	various
gums,	mucilages,	and	other	unusual
carbohydrates	(e.g.,	mushroom	chitin,



seaweed	agar	and	carrageenan,	inulin	in
onions,	artichokes,	and	sunchokes).	Particular
foods	offer	particular	kinds	of	fiber.	Wheat
bran	—	the	dry	outer	coat	of	the	grain	—	is	a
rich	source	of	insoluble	cellulose,	while	oat
bran	is	a	rich	source	of	soluble	glucan	(a
carbohydrate),	and	juicy	ripe	fruits	are	a
relatively	dilute	source	of	soluble	pectins.

The	different	fiber	components	contribute
to	health	in	different	ways.	Insoluble	cellulose
and	lignin	mainly	provide	bulk	to	the
intestinal	contents,	and	thus	increase	the	rate
and	ease	with	which	they	pass	through	the
large	intestine.	It’s	thought	that	rapid
excretion	may	help	minimize	our	exposure	to
DNA-damaging	chemicals	and	other	toxins	in
our	foods,	and	the	fiber	materials	may	bind
some	of	these	toxins	and	prevent	them	from
being	absorbed	by	our	cells.	Soluble	fiber
components	make	the	intestinal	contents
thicker,	so	that	there	is	slower	mixing	and
movement	of	both	nutrients	and	toxins.	They,



too,	probably	bind	certain	chemicals	and
prevent	their	absorption.	Soluble	fiber	has
been	shown	to	lower	blood	cholesterol	and
slow	the	rise	of	blood	sugar	after	a	meal.
Inulin	in	particular	encourages	the	growth	of
beneficial	intestinal	bacteria,	while	reducing
the	numbers	of	potential	troublemakers.	The
details	are	complex,	but	overall	it	appears	that
soluble	fiber	helps	protect	against	heart
disease	and	diabetes.

In	sum,	the	indigestible	portion	of	fruits
and	vegetables	does	us	good.	It’s	a	mistake	to
think	that	a	juiced	orange	or	carrot	is	as
valuable	as	the	whole	fruit	or	vegetable.

Toxins	in	Some	Fruits
and	Vegetables

Many	plants,	perhaps	all	plants,	contain
chemicals	meant	to	discourage	animals	from
eating	them.	The	fruits	and	vegetables	that	we
eat	are	no	exception.	While	domestication	and



breeding	have	reduced	their	toxin	contents	to
the	point	that	they’re	not	generally	hazardous,
unusual	preparations	or	serving	sizes	can
cause	problems.	The	following	plant	toxins
are	worth	being	aware	of.

Alkaloids	 Alkaloids	 are	 bitter-tasting	 toxins
that	 appeared	 in	 plants	 about	 the	 time	 that
mammals	 evolved,	 and	 seem	 especially
effective	at	deterring	our	branch	of	the	animal
family	by	both	 taste	 and	aftereffects.	Almost
all	 known	 alkaloids	 are	 poisonous	 at	 high
doses,	 and	 most	 alter	 animal	 metabolism	 at
lower	doses:	hence	the	attractions	of	caffeine
and	nicotine.	Among	familiar	 foods,	only	 the
potato	 accumulates	 potentially	 troublesome
alkaloid	 levels,	which	make	greened	potatoes
and	potato	sprouts	bitter	and	toxic	(p.	302).

Cyanogens	 Cyanogens	 are	 molecules	 that
warn	and	poison	animals	with	bitter	hydrogen
cyanide,	a	deadly	poison	of	 the	enzymes	 that
animals	 use	 to	 generate	 energy.	 When	 the



plant’s	 tissue	 is	 damaged	 by	 chewing,	 the
cyanogens	 are	 mixed	 with	 the	 plant	 enzyme
that	breaks	 them	apart	and	 releases	hydrogen
cyanide	 (HCN).	 Cyanogen-rich	 foods,
including	 manioc,	 bamboo	 shoots,	 and
tropical	varieties	of	lima	beans,	are	made	safe
for	consumption	by	open	boiling,	 leaching	 in
water,	 and	 fermentation.	 The	 seeds	 of	 citrus,
stone,	 and	 pome	 fruits	 generate	 cyanide,	 and
stone-fruit	 seeds	 are	 prized	 because	 their
cyanogens	 also	 produce	 benzaldehyde,	 the
characteristic	odor	of	almond	extract	(p.	506).

Hydrazines	 Hydrazines	 are	 nitrogen-
containing	 substances	 that	 are	 found	 in
relatively	 large	 amounts	 (500	 parts	 per
million)	in	the	common	white	mushroom	and
other	 mushroom	 varieties,	 and	 that	 persist
after	 cooking.	 Mushroom	 hydrazines	 cause
liver	 damage	 and	 cancer	 when	 fed	 to
laboratory	mice,	but	have	no	effect	in	rats.	It’s
not	 yet	 clear	whether	 they	 pose	 a	 significant



hazard	to	humans.	Until	we	know,	it’s	best	to
eat	mushrooms	in	moderation.

Protease	 Inhibitors	 and	 Lectins	 These	 are
proteins	 that	 interfere	 with	 digestion:
inhibitors	 block	 the	 action	 of	 protein-
digesting	 enzymes,	 and	 lectins	 bind	 to
intestinal	 cells	 and	 prevent	 them	 from
absorbing	nutrients.	Lectins	can	also	enter	the
blood-stream	and	bind	red	blood	cells	to	each
other.	 They’re	 found	 mainly	 in	 soy,	 kidney,
and	lima	beans.	Both	inhibitors	and	lectins	are
inactivated	by	prolonged	boiling.	But	they	can
survive	 in	 beans	 that	 are	 eaten	 raw	 or
undercooked,	 and	 cause	 symptoms	 similar	 to
food	poisoning.

Flavor	 Chemicals	 Flavor	 chemicals	 are
generally	consumed	in	only	tiny	amounts,	but
a	few	may	cause	problems	when	overindulged
in.	 Safrole,	 the	 main	 aromatic	 in	 oil	 of
sassafras	 and	 therefore	 of	 traditional	 root
beer,	causes	DNA	damage	and	was	banned	as



an	 additive	 in	 1960	 (root	 beer	 is	 now	 made
with	safe	sarsaparilla	or	artificial	flavorings).
Myristicin,	 the	 major	 flavor	 contributor	 in
nutmeg,	 seems	 largely	 responsible	 for
intoxication	 and	 hallucinations	 that	 result
from	 ingesting	 large	 amounts.	 Glycyrrhizin,
an	 intensely	 sweet-tasting	 substance	 in	 true
licorice	 root,	 induces	 high	 blood	 pressure.
Coumarin,	which	gives	sweet	clover	its	sweet
aroma	 and	 is	 also	 found	 in	 lavender	 and
vanilla-like	 tonka	 beans	 (Dipteryx	 odorata),
interferes	with	blood	clotting.

Toxic	 Amino	 Acids 	 Toxic	 amino	 acids	 are
unusual	 versions	 of	 the	 building	 blocks	 for
our	proteins	that	interfere	with	proper	protein
functioning.	 Canavanine	 interferes	 with
several	cell	functions	and	has	been	associated
with	 the	 development	 of	 lupus;	 it’s	 found	 in
large	quantities	in	alfalfa	sprouts	and	the	jack
bean.	 Vicine	 and	 convicine	 in	 the	 fava	 bean
cause	a	blood-cell-destroying	anemia,	favism,



in	susceptible	people	(p.	490).

Oxalates	Oxalates	are	various	salts	of	oxalic
acid,	 a	 waste	 product	 of	 plant	 metabolism
found	 in	a	number	of	 foods,	notably	spinach,
chard,	 beets,	 amaranth,	 and	 rhubarb.	 The
sodium	and	potassium	salts	are	soluble,	while
the	 calcium	 salts	 are	 insoluble	 and	 form
crystals	 that	 irritate	 the	mouth	 and	 digestive
system.	 Soluble	 oxalates	 can	 combine	 with
calcium	in	 the	human	kidney	 to	 form	painful
kidney	 stones.	 In	 very	 large	 doses	—	 a	 few
grams	—	oxalic	 acid	 is	 corrosive	 and	can	be
fatal.

Bracken-Fern	 Toxins	 Bracken-fern	 toxins
cause	 several	 blood	 disorders	 and	 cancer	 in
animals	 that	 graze	 on	 this	 common	 fern
(Pteridium),	which	 is	 sometimes	 collected	 in
the	 young	 “fiddlehead”	 stage	 for	 human
consumption.	 Ostrich	 ferns,	Matteuccia
species,	 are	 thought	 to	 be	 a	 safer	 source	 of
fiddleheads,	 but	 there’s	 little	 solid



information	 about	 the	 safety	 of	 eating	 ferns.
It’s	prudent	 to	eat	fiddleheads	in	moderation,
and	to	avoid	bracken	ferns	by	checking	labels
and	asking	produce	sellers.

Psoralens	 Psoralens	 are	 chemicals	 that
damage	 DNA	 and	 cause	 blistering	 skin
inflammations.	They’re	found	occasionally	in
badly	handled	celery	and	celery	root,	parsley,
and	parsnips,	when	these	vegetables	have	been
stressed	 by	 near-freezing	 temperatures,
intense	 light,	or	 infection	by	mold.	Psoralens
are	absorbed	through	the	skin	during	handling,
or	by	being	ingested	with	the	vegetable,	either
raw	or	cooked.	They	lie	dormant	in	skin	cells
until	 they’re	 struck	 by	 ultraviolet	 rays	 in
sunlight,	 which	 causes	 them	 to	 bind	 to	 and
damage	DNA	and	important	cell	proteins.	The
psoralen-generating	 vegetables	 should	 be
bought	as	fresh	as	possible	and	used	quickly.

In	 addition	 to	 their	 own	 chemical	 defenses,
fruits	 and	 vegetables	 can	 carry	 other	 toxins



that	come	from	contaminating	molds	(patulin
in	 apple	 juice,	 from	 a	Penicillium	 mold
growing	 on	 damaged	 fruit),	 agricultural
chemicals	(pesticides,	herbicides,	fungicides),
and	soil	and	air	pollutants	(dioxins,	polycyclic
aromatic	 hydrocarbons).	 In	 general,	 it’s
thought	 that	 the	 usual	 levels	 of	 these
contaminants	 do	 not	 constitute	 an	 immediate
health	 hazard.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 they	 are
toxins,	and	 therefore	undesirable	additions	 to
our	diet.	We	can	reduce	our	intake	of	them	by
washing	 produce,	 by	 peeling	 off	 surface
layers,	 and	 by	 buying	 certified	 organic
produce,	 which	 is	 grown	 in	 relatively	 clean
soil	 without	 the	 use	 of	 most	 agricultural
chemicals.

Fresh	Produce	and	Food	Poisoning

Though	we	generally	associate	outbreaks	of
food	poisoning	with	foods	derived	from
animals,	fruits	and	vegetables	are	also	a



significant	source.	They	have	caused
outbreaks	of	nearly	every	major	food
pathogen	known	(see	box	below).	There	are
several	reasons	for	this.	Fruits	and	vegetables
are	grown	in	the	soil,	a	vast	reservoir	of
microbes.	Field	facilities	for	the	harvesting
crew	(toilets,	wash	water)	and	for	processing
and	packing	may	not	be	hygienic,	so	the
produce	is	easily	contaminated	by	people,
containers,	and	machinery.	And	produce	is
often	eaten	raw.	Salad	bars	in	restaurants	and
cafeterias	can	collect	and	grow	bacteria	for
hours,	and	have	been	associated	with	many
outbreaks	of	food	poisoning.	Fruit	juices,
often	made	by	crushing	whole	fruits,	are
readily	contaminated	by	a	small	number	of
infected	pieces;	so	fresh	cider	has	become
hard	to	find.	Nearly	all	juice	production	in	the
United	States	is	now	pasteurized.

Disease	Outbreaks	Caused	by	Raw
Fruits	and	Vegetables



This	 selected	 list	 demonstrates	 that	 raw
produce	is	capable	of	causing	a	wide	range
of	 food-borne	 illnesses.	 These	 disease
outbreaks	 are	 not	 common	 or	 a	 cause	 for
great	 concern,	 but	 they	 do	 mean	 that
produce	 should	 be	 prepared	 carefully,	 and
ideally	 should	 be	 cooked	 for	 people	 with
weak	 immune	 systems	—	 the	 very	 young
and	 very	 old	 and	 people	 suffering	 from
other	illnesses.

Microbe Food
Clostridium	botulinum Garlic	in	oil
E. Salad	bars,	alfalfa	and	radish	sprouts,
coli melons,	apple	juice
Listeria Cabbage	(long	cold	storage)

Salmonella Salad	bars,	alfalfa	sprouts,
orange	juice,	melons,	tomatoes

Shigella Parsley,	lettuce
Staphylococcus Prepared	salads



Vibrio Fruits	and	vegetables
cholerae contaminated	by	water
Yersinia Sprouts	contaminated	by	water
Cyclospora	(protozoa) Berries,	lettuce
Hepatitis	viruses Strawberries,	scallions

The	prudent	consumer	will	thoroughly
wash	all	produce,	including	fruits	whose	skins
will	be	discarded	(knives	and	fingers	can
introduce	surface	bacteria	to	the	flesh).	Soapy
water	and	commercial	produce	washes	are
more	effective	than	water	alone.	Washing	can
reduce	microbial	populations	a	hundredfold,
but	it’s	impossible	to	eliminate	all	microbes
from	uncooked	lettuce	and	other	produce	—
they	can	evade	even	heavily	chlorinated	water
by	hiding	in	microscopic	pores	and	cracks	in
the	plant	tissue.	Raw	salads	are	therefore	not
advised	for	people	who	are	especially
vulnerable	to	infections.	Once	fruits	and
vegetables	have	been	cut	up,	they	should	be
kept	refrigerated	and	used	as	soon	as	possible.



The	Composition
and	Qualities	of	Fruits
and	Vegetables

What	makes	a	vegetable	tender	or	tough?
Why	do	leafy	greens	shrink	so	much	when
cooked?	Why	do	apples	and	avocados	turn
brown	when	cut	open?	Why	are	green	potatoes
dangerous?	Why	do	some	fruits	get	sweet	in
the	bowl,	and	others	just	older?	The	key	to
understanding	these	and	other	characteristics
is	a	familiarity	with	the	structural	and
chemical	makeup	of	plant	tissues.

Plant	Structure:
Cells,	Tissues,	and	Organs

The	Plant	Cell	Like	animals,	plants	are	built
up	out	of	innumerable	microscopic	chambers
called	cells.	Each	cell	is	surrounded	and
contained	by	a	thin,	balloon-like	cell
membrane	constructed	from	certain	fat-like
molecules	and	proteins,	and	permeable	to



water	and	other	small	molecules.	Immediately
inside	the	membrane	is	a	fluid	called	the
cytoplasm,	which	is	filled	with	much	of	the
complex	chemical	machinery	necessary	to	the
cell’s	growth	and	function.	Then	within	the
cytoplasm	float	a	variety	of	other	membrane-
contained	bags,	each	with	its	own	chemical
nature.	Nearly	all	plant	cells	contain	a	large
watery	vacuole,	which	may	be	filled	with
enzymes,	sugars,	acids,	proteins,	water-
soluble	pigments,	and	waste	or	defensive
compounds.	Often	one	large	vacuole	will	fill
90%	of	the	cell	volume	and	squeeze	the
cytoplasm	and	nucleus	(the	body	that	contains
most	of	the	cell’s	DNA)	up	against	the	cell
membrane.	Leaf	cells	contain	dozens	to
hundreds	of	chloroplasts,	bags	filled	with
green	chlorophyll	and	other	molecules	that	do
the	work	of	photosynthesis.	The	cells	of	fruits
often	contain	chromoplasts,	which	concentrate
yellow,	orange,	and	red	pigments	that	are
soluble	in	fat.	And	storage	cells	are	often



filled	with	amyloplasts,	which	hold	many
granules	of	the	long	sugar	chains	called
starch.

Cross-section	through	a	typical	plant	cell.
The	Cell	Wall	One	last	and	very	important
component	of	the	plant	cell	is	its	cell	wall,
something	that	animal	cells	lack	entirely.	The
plant	cell	wall	surrounds	the	membrane	and	is
strong	and	rigid.	Its	purpose	is	to	lend
structural	support	to	the	cell	and	the	tissue	of
which	it	is	a	part.	Neighboring	cells	are	held
together	by	the	outer,	glue-like	layers	of	their
cell	walls.	Some	specialized	strengthening
cells	become	mostly	cell	wall	and	do	their	job
even	after	their	death.	The	gritty	grains	in
pear	flesh,	the	fibers	in	celery	stalks,	the	stone
that	surrounds	a	peach	seed,	and	the	seed



coats	of	beans	and	peas	are	all	mainly	the
cell-wall	material	of	strengthening	cells.

Broadly	speaking,	the	texture	of	plant	foods	is
determined	 by	 the	 fullness	 of	 the	 storage
vacuole,	the	strength	of	the	cell	walls,	and	the
absence	or	presence	of	starch	granules.	Color
is	 determined	 by	 the	 chloroplasts	 and
chromoplasts,	 and	 sometimes	 by	 water-
soluble	 pigments	 in	 vacuoles.	 Flavor	 comes
from	the	contents	of	the	storage	vacuoles.

Plant	 Tissues	 Tissues	 are	 groups	 of	 cells
organized	 to	 perform	 a	 common	 function.
Plants	have	four	basic	tissues.
Ground	tissue	is	the	primary	mass	of	cells.

Its	purpose	depends	on	its	location	in	the
plant.	In	leaves	the	ground	tissue	performs
photosynthesis;	elsewhere	it	stores	nutrients
and	water.	Cells	in	the	ground	tissue	usually
have	thin	cell	walls,	so	the	tissue	is	generally
tender.	Most	of	our	fruits	and	vegetables	are
mainly	ground	tissue.



Vascular	tissue	runs	through	the	ground
tissue,	and	resembles	our	veins	and	arteries.	It
is	the	system	of	microscopic	tubes	that
transport	nutrients	throughout	the	plant.	The
work	is	divided	between	two	subsystems:
xylem,	which	takes	water	and	minerals	from
the	roots	to	the	rest	of	the	plant,	and	phloem,
which	conducts	sugars	down	from	the	leaves.
Vascular	tissue	usually	provides	mechanical
support	as	well,	and	is	often	tough	and	fibrous
compared	to	the	surrounding	tissue.
Dermal	tissue	forms	the	outer	surface	of

the	plant,	the	layer	that	protects	it	and	helps	it
retain	its	moisture.	It	may	take	the	form	of
either	epidermis	or	periderm.	The	epidermis	is
usually	a	single	layer	of	cells	that	secretes
several	surface	coatings,	including	a	fatty
material	called	cutin,	and	wax	(long
molecules	made	by	joining	fatty	acids	with
alcohols),	which	is	what	makes	many	fruits
naturally	take	a	shine.	Periderm	is	found
instead	of	epidermis	on	underground	organs



and	older	tissues,	and	has	a	dull,	corky
appearance.	Our	culinary	experience	of
periderm	is	usually	limited	to	the	skins	of
potatoes,	beets,	and	so	on.
Secretory	tissue	usually	occurs	as	isolated

cells	on	the	surface	or	within	the	plant.	These
cells	correspond	to	the	oil	and	sweat	glands	in
our	skin,	and	produce	and	store	various	aroma
compounds,	often	to	attract	or	repel	animals.
The	large	mint	family,	which	includes	other
common	herbs	like	thyme	and	basil,	is
characterized	by	glandular	hairs	on	stems	and
leaves	that	contain	aromatic	oils.	Vegetables
in	the	carrot	family	concentrate	their	aromatic
substances	in	inner	secretory	cells.

The	 three	 kinds	 of	 plant	 tissue	 in	 a	 stem.



Fibrous	 vascular	 tissue	 and	 thick	 dermal
layers	 are	 common	 causes	 of	 toughness	 in
vegetables.
Plant	Organs	There	are	six	major	plant
organs:	the	root,	the	stem,	the	leaf,	the	flower,
the	fruit,	and	the	seed.	We’ll	take	a	closer
look	at	seeds	in	chapter	9.

Roots	 Roots	 anchor	 the	 plant	 in	 the	 ground,
and	absorb	and	conduct	moisture	and	nutrients
to	the	rest	of	 the	plant.	Most	roots	are	tough,
fibrous,	and	barely	edible.	The	exceptions	are
roots	 that	 swell	 up	 with	 nonfibrous	 storage
cells;	 they	allow	plants	 to	survive	 temperate-
zone	 winter	 to	 flower	 in	 their	 second	 year
(carrots,	 parsnips,	 radishes)	 or	 seasonal
dryness	 in	 the	 tropics	 (sweet	 potatoes,
manioc).	Root	vegetables	develop	this	storage
area	 in	 different	ways,	 and	 so	 have	 different
anatomies.	 In	 the	carrot,	 storage	 tissue	forms
around	the	central	vascular	core,	which	is	less
flavorful.	The	beet	produces	concentric	layers



of	 storage	 and	 vascular	 tissue,	 and	 in	 some
varieties	these	accumulate	different	pigments,
so	their	slices	appear	striped.

Stems,	 Stalks,	 Tubers,	 and	 Rhizomes	 Stems
and	 stalks	 have	 the	 main	 function	 of
conducting	 nutrients	 between	 the	 root	 and
leaves,	 and	 providing	 support	 for	 the
aboveground	 organs.	 They	 therefore	 tend	 to
become	 fibrous,	which	 is	why	 asparagus	 and
broccoli	stems	often	need	to	be	peeled	before
cooking,	 celery	 and	 cardoon	 stalks	 deveined.
The	junction	between	stem	and	root,	which	is
called	 the	hypocotl,	 can	 swell	 into	 a	 storage
organ;	 turnips,	 celery	 “root,”	 and	 beets	 are
actually	part	stem,	part	root.	And	some	plants,
including	 the	 potato,	 yam,	 sunchoke,	 and
ginger,	 have	 developed	 special	 underground
stem	 structures	 for	 nonsexual	 reproduction:
they	“clone”	themselves	by	forming	a	storage
organ	that	can	produce	its	own	roots	and	stem
and	become	an	independent	—	but	genetically



identical	 —	 plant.	 The	 common	 potato	 and
true	yam	are	 such	 swollen	underground	 stem
tips	 called	tubers,	 while	 the	 sunchoke	 and
ginger	 “root”	 are	 horizontal	 underground
stems	called	rhizomes.

Leaves	Leaves	specialize	in	the	production	of
high-energy	 sugar	 molecules	 via
photosynthesis,	 a	 process	 that	 requires
exposure	 to	 sunlight	 and	 a	 good	 supply	 of
carbon	 dioxide.	 They	 therefore	 contain	 very
little	 storage	 or	 strengthening	 tissue	 that
would	interfere	with	access	to	light	or	air,	and
are	 the	 most	 fragile	 and	 short-lived	 parts	 of
the	plant.	To	maximize	light	capture,	the	leaf
is	 flattened	out	 into	a	 thin	 sheet	with	 a	 large
surface	area,	 and	 the	photosynthetic	 cells	 are
heavily	 populated	 with	 chloroplasts.	 To
promote	 gas	 exchange,	 the	 leaf	 interior	 is
filled	 with	 thousands	 of	 tiny	 air	 pockets,
which	 further	 increase	 the	 area	 of	 cells
exposed	 to	 the	 air.	 Some	 leaves	 are	 as	much



as	 70%	 air	 by	 volume.	 This	 structure	 helps
explain	why	 leafy	vegetables	 shrink	 so	much
when	 cooked:	 heat	 collapses	 the	 spongy
interior.	 (It	 also	wilts	 the	 leaves	 so	 that	 they
pack	together	more	compactly.)

Cross	 section	 of	 a	 leaf.	 Because
photosynthesis	 requires	 a	 continuous	 supply
of	 carbon	 dioxide,	 leaf	 tissue	 often	 has	 a
spongy	 structure	 that	 directly	 exposes	 many
inner	cells	to	the	air.

An	exception	to	the	rule	against	storage
tissue	in	leaves	is	the	onion	family	(tulips	and
other	bulb	ornamentals	are	exceptions	as
well).	The	many	layers	of	the	onion	(and	the
single	layer	of	a	garlic	clove)	surrounding	the
small	inner	stem	are	the	swollen	bases	of
leaves	whose	tops	die	and	fall	off.	The	leaf



bases	store	water	and	carbohydrates	during
the	plant’s	first	year	of	growth	so	that	they
can	be	used	during	the	second,	when	it	will
flower	and	produce	seed.

Flowers	 Flowers	 are	 the	 plant’s	 reproductive
organs.	 Here	 the	 male	 pollen	 and	 female
ovules	are	 formed;	here	 too	 they	unite	 in	 the
chamber	 that	 contains	 the	 ovules,	 the	 ovary,
and	develop	into	embryos	and	seeds.	Flowers
are	 often	 brilliantly	 colored	 and	 aromatic	 to
attract	 pollinating	 insects,	 and	 can	 be	 a
striking	 ingredient.	 However,	 some	 familiar
plants	 protect	 their	 flowers	 from	 animal
predators	with	toxins,	so	their	edibility	should
be	checked	before	use	(p.	326).	We	also	eat	a
few	flowers	or	their	supporting	tissues	before
they	 mature;	 broccoli,	 cauliflower,	 and
artichokes	are	examples.

Fruits	The	fruit	is	the	organ	derived	from	the
flower’s	 ovary	 (or	 adjacent	 stem	 tissue).	 It
contains	 the	 seeds,	 and	 promotes	 their



dispersal	 away	 from	 the	mother	 plant.	 Some
fruits	are	inedible	—	they’re	designed	to	catch
the	wind,	or	the	fur	of	a	passing	animal	—	but
the	fruits	 that	we	eat	were	made	by	 the	plant
to	 be	 eaten,	 so	 that	 an	 animal	 would
intentionally	 take	 it	 and	 the	 seeds	 away.	The
fruit	 has	 no	 support,	 nutrition,	 or	 transport
responsibilities	 to	 the	 other	 organs.	 It
therefore	 consists	 almost	 entirely	 of	 storage
tissue	 filled	 with	 appealing	 and	 useful
substances	for	animals.	When	ready	and	ripe,
it’s	 usually	 the	 most	 flavorful	 and	 tenderest
part	of	the	plant.

Texture

The	texture	of	raw	fruits	and	vegetables	can
be	crisp	and	juicy,	soft	and	melting,	mealy
and	dry,	or	flabby	and	chewy.	These	qualities
are	a	reflection	of	the	way	the	plant	tissues
break	apart	as	we	chew.	And	their	breaking
behavior	depends	on	two	main	factors:	the



construction	of	their	cell	walls,	and	the
amount	of	water	held	in	by	those	walls.

The	cell	walls	of	our	fruits	and	vegetables
have	two	structural	materials:	tough	fibers	of
cellulose	that	act	as	a	kind	of	framework,	and
a	semisolid,	flexible	mixture	of	water,
carbohydrates,	minerals,	and	proteins	that
cross-link	the	fibers	and	fill	the	space	between
them.	We	can	think	of	the	semisolid	mixture
as	a	kind	of	cement	whose	stiffness	varies
according	to	the	proportions	of	its	ingredients.
The	cellulose	fibers	act	as	reinforcing	bars	in
that	cement.	Neighboring	cells	are	held
together	by	the	cement	where	their	walls
meet.

Crisp	 Tenderness:	 The	 Roles	 of	 Water
Pressure	 and	 Temperature	 Cell	 walls	 are
thus	 firm	 but	 flexible	 containers.	 The	 cells
that	 they	 contain	 are	 mostly	 water.	 When
water	 is	 abundant	 and	 a	 cell	 approaches	 its
maximum	storage	capacity,	the	vacuole	swells



and	 presses	 the	 surrounding	 cytoplasm	 (p.
261)	against	the	cell	membrane,	which	in	turn
presses	against	the	cell	wall.	The	flexible	wall
bulges	 to	accommodate	 the	swollen	cell.	The
pressure	 exerted	 against	 each	 other	 by	many
bulging	cells	—	which	can	reach	50	times	the
pressure	of	the	surrounding	air	—	results	in	a
full,	firm,	turgid	fruit	or	vegetable.	But	if	the
cells	 are	 low	 on	 water,	 the	 mutually
supporting	 pressure	 disappears,	 the	 flexible
cell	 walls	 sag,	 and	 the	 tissue	 becomes	 limp
and	flaccid.

Water	 and	 walls	 determine	 texture.	 A
vegetable	 that	 is	 fully	 moist	 and	 firm	 will
seem	 both	 crisp	 and	 more	 tender	 than	 the
same	 vegetable	 limp	 from	 water	 loss.	When
we	 bite	 down	 on	 a	 vegetable	 turgid	 with
water,	 the	 already-stressed	 cell	 walls	 readily
break	 and	 the	 cells	 burst	 open;	 in	 a	 limp
vegetable,	 chewing	 compresses	 the	 walls
together,	 and	 we	 have	 to	 exert	 much	 more



pressure	 to	 break	 through	 them.	 The	 moist
vegetable	 is	 crisp	 and	 juicy,	 the	 limp	 one
chewy	and	 less	 juicy.	Fortunately,	water	 loss
is	largely	reversible:	soak	a	limp	vegetable	in
water	for	a	few	hours	and	its	cells	will	absorb
water	 and	 reinflate.	 Crispness	 can	 also	 be
enhanced	by	making	sure	that	the	vegetable	is
icy	 cold.	 This	 makes	 the	 cell-wall	 cement
stiff,	so	that	when	it	breaks	under	pressure,	it
seems	brittle.

Mealiness	 and	 Meltingness:	 The	 Role	 of
Cell	 Walls	 Fruits	 and	 vegetables	 can
sometimes	have	a	mealy,	grainy,	dry	 texture.
This	 results	 when	 the	 cement	 between
neighboring	 cells	 is	 weak,	 so	 that	 chewing
breaks	 the	 cells	 apart	 from	 each	 other	 rather
than	breaking	them	open,	and	we	end	up	with
lots	of	tiny	separate	cells	 in	our	mouth.	Then
there’s	 the	 soft,	 melting	 texture	 of	 a	 ripe
peach	or	melon.	This	too	is	a	manifestation	of
weakened	 cell	walls,	 but	 here	 the	weakening



is	 so	 extreme	 that	 the	walls	 have	 practically
disintegrated,	 and	 the	 watery	 cell	 interior
oozes	 out	 under	 the	 least	 pressure.	 The
contents	of	the	cells	also	have	an	effect:	a	ripe
fruit’s	vacuole	full	of	sugar	solution	will	give
a	 melting,	 succulent	 impression,	 while	 a
potato’s	 solid	 starch	 grains	 will	 contribute	 a
firm	chalkiness.	Because	starch	absorbs	water
when	 heated,	 cooked	 starchy	 tissue	 becomes
moist	but	mealy	or	pasty,	never	juicy.

The	changes	in	texture	that	occur	during
ripening	and	cooking	result	from	changes	in
the	cell-wall	materials,	in	particular	the
cement	carbohydrates.	One	group	is	the
hemicelluloses,	which	form	strengthening
cross-links	between	celluloses.	They	are	built
up	from	glucose	and	xylose	sugars,	and	can	be
partly	dissolved	and	removed	from	cell	walls
during	cooking	(p.	282).	The	other	important
component	is	the	pectic	substances,	large
branched	chains	of	a	sugar-like	molecule
called	galacturonic	acid,	which	bond	together



into	a	gel	that	fills	the	spaces	between
cellulose	fibers.	Pectins	can	be	either
dissolved	or	consolidated	by	cooking,	and
their	gel-like	consistency	is	exploited	in	the
making	of	fruit	jellies	and	jams	(p.	296).
When	fruits	soften	during	ripening,	their
enzymes	weaken	the	cell	walls	by	modifying
the	pectins.

Wilting	in	vegetables.	Plant	tissue	that	is	well
supplied	 with	 water	 is	 filled	 with	 fluids	 and
mechanically	 rigid	 (left)	.	 Loss	 of	 water
causes	 cell	 vacuoles	 to	 shrink.	 The	 cells
become	 partly	 empty,	 the	 cell	 walls	 sag,	 and
the	tissue	weakens	(right).
Tough	Cellulose	and	Lignin	Cellulose,	the
other	major	cell-wall	component,	is	very
resistant	to	change,	and	this	is	one	reason	that



it’s	the	most	abundant	plant	product	on	earth.
Like	starch,	cellulose	consists	of	a	chain	of
glucose	sugar	molecules.	But	a	difference	in
the	way	they’re	linked	to	each	other	allows
neighboring	chains	to	bond	tightly	together
into	fibers	that	are	invulnerable	to	human
digestive	enzymes	and	all	but	extreme	heat	or
chemical	treatment.	Cellulose	becomes	most
visible	to	us	in	the	winter	as	hay,	a	stubble
field,	or	the	fine	skeletons	of	weeds.	This
remarkable	stability	makes	cellulose	valuable
to	long-lived	trees	and	to	the	human	species
as	well.	Wood	is	one-third	cellulose,	and
cotton	and	linen	fibers	are	almost	pure
cellulose.	However,	cellulose	is	a	problem	for
the	cook:	it	simply	can’t	be	softened	by
normal	kitchen	techniques.	Sometimes,	as	in
the	gritty	“stone	cells”	of	pears,	quince,	and
guava,	this	is	a	relatively	minor	distraction.
But	when	it’s	concentrated	to	provide
structural	support	in	stems	and	stalks	—	in
celery	and	cardoons,	for	example	—	cellulose



makes	vegetables	permanently	stringy,	and
the	only	remedy	is	to	pull	the	fibers	from	the
tissue.

One	last	cell	wall	component	is	seldom
significant	in	food.	Lignin	is	also	a
strengthening	agent	and	very	resistant	to
breakdown;	it’s	the	defining	ingredient	of
wood.	Most	vegetables	are	harvested	well	in
advance	of	appreciable	lignin	formation,	but
occasionally	we	do	deal	with	woody	asparagus
and	broccoli	stems.	The	only	remedy	for	this
kind	of	toughness	is	to	peel	away	the	lignified
areas.

Color

Plant	pigments	are	one	of	life’s	glories!	The
various	greens	of	forest	and	field,	the	purples
and	yellows	and	reds	of	fruits	and	flowers	—
these	colors	speak	to	us	of	vitality,	renewal,
and	the	sheer	pleasure	of	sensation.	Some
pigments	are	designed	to	catch	our	eye,	some



actually	become	part	of	our	eye,	and	some
made	possible	the	very	existence	of	us	and	our
eyes	(see	box,	p.	271).	Many	turn	out	to	have
beneficial	effects	on	our	health.	The	cook’s
challenge	is	to	preserve	the	vividness	and
appeal	of	these	remarkable	molecules.

There	are	four	families	of	plant	pigments,
each	with	different	functions	in	the	plant’s
life	and	different	behaviors	in	the	kitchen.	All
of	them	are	large	molecules	that	appear	to	be
a	certain	color	because	they	absorb	certain
wavelengths	of	light,	and	thus	leave	only	parts
of	the	spectrum	for	our	eyes	to	detect.
Chlorophylls	are	green,	for	example,	because
they	absorb	red	and	blue	wavelengths.

The	 softening	 of	 plant	 cell	 walls.	 The	 walls



are	made	up	of	a	framework	of	cellulose	fibers
embedded	 in	a	mass	of	amorphous	materials,
including	 the	 pectins	 (left).	When	 cooked	 in
boiling	 water,	 the	 cellulose	 fibers	 remain
intact,	but	the	amorphous	materials	are	partly
extracted	 into	 fluids	 from	 within	 the	 cells,
thus	 weakening	 the	 walls	 (right)	and
tenderizing	the	vegetable	or	fruit.
Green	Chlorophylls	The	earth	is	painted
green	with	chlorophylls,	the	molecules	that
harvest	solar	energy	and	funnel	it	into	the
photosynthetic	system	that	converts	it	into
sugar	molecules.	Chlorophyll	a	is	bright	blue-
green,	chlorophyll	b	a	more	muted	olive	color.
The	a	form	dominates	the	b	by	3	to	1	in	most
leaves,	but	the	balance	is	evener	in	plants	that
grow	in	the	shade,	and	in	aging	tissues,	where
the	a	form	is	degraded	faster.	The
chlorophylls	are	concentrated	in	cell	bodies
called	chloroplasts,	where	they’re	embedded
in	the	many	folds	of	a	membrane	along	with
the	other	molecules	of	the	photosynthetic



system.	Each	chlorophyll	molecule	is	made	up
of	two	parts.	One	is	a	ring	of	carbon	and
nitrogen	atoms	with	a	magnesium	atom	at	the
center,	quite	similar	to	the	heme	ring	in	the
meat	myoglobin	pigment	(p.	133).	This	ring
portion	is	soluble	in	water,	and	does	the	work
of	absorbing	light.	The	second	part	is	a	fat-
soluble	tail	of	16	carbon	atoms,	which	anchors
the	whole	molecule	in	the	chloroplast
membrane.	This	part	is	colorless.

These	complex	molecules	are	readily
altered	when	their	membrane	home	is
disrupted	during	cooking.	This	is	why	the
bright	green	of	fresh	vegetables	is	fragile.
Ironically,	prolonged	exposure	to	intense	light
also	damages	chlorophylls.	Attention	to
cooking	times,	temperatures,	and	acidities	are
thus	essential	to	serving	bright	green
vegetables	(p.	280).

Yellow,	 Orange,	 Red	 Carotenoids
Carotenoids	 are	 so	 named	 because	 the	 first



member	of	this	large	family	to	be	chemically
isolated	 came	 from	 carrots.	 These	 pigments
absorb	 blue	 and	 green	 wavelengths	 and	 are
responsible	for	most	of	the	yellow	and	orange
colors	in	fruits	and	vegetables	(beta-carotene,
xanthophylls,	 zeaxanthin),	 as	 well	 as	 the	 red
of	 tomatoes,	 watermelons,	 and	 chillis
(lycopene,	 capsanthin,	 and	 capsorubin;	 most
red	 colors	 in	 plants	 are	 caused	 by
anthocyanins).	 Carotenoids	 are	 zigzag	 chains
of	around	40	carbon	atoms	and	thus	resemble
fat	 molecules	 (p.	 797).	 They’re	 generally
soluble	 in	 fats	 and	 oils	 and	 are	 relatively
stable,	so	they	tend	to	stay	bright	and	stay	put
when	 a	 food	 is	 cooked	 in	water.	Carotenoids
are	 found	 in	 two	 different	 places	 in	 plant
cells.	 One	 is	 in	 special	 pigment	 bodies,	 or
chromoplasts,	 which	 signal	 animals	 that	 a
flower	 is	 open	 for	business	or	 a	 fruit	 is	 ripe.
Their	 other	 home	 is	 the	 photosynthetic
membranes	of	chloroplasts,	where	there	is	one
carotenoid	 molecule	 for	 every	 five	 or	 so



chlorophylls.	 Their	 main	 role	 there	 is	 to
protect	 chlorophyll	 and	 other	 parts	 of	 the
photosynthetic	 system.	 They	 absorb
potentially	damaging	wavelengths	in	the	light
spectrum,	 and	 act	 as	 antioxidants	 by	 soaking
up	 the	 many	 high-energy	 chemical	 by-
products	 generated	 in	 photosynthesis.	 They
can	 do	 the	 same	 in	 the	 human	 body,
particularly	 in	 the	 eye	 (p.	 256).	 Chloroplast
carotenoids	 are	 usually	 invisible,	 their
presence	 masked	 by	 green	 chlorophyll,	 but
it’s	a	good	rule	of	thumb	that	the	darker	green
the	 vegetable,	 the	 more	 chloroplasts	 and
chlorophyll	 it	 contains,	 and	 the	 more
carotenoids	as	well.

About	ten	carotenoids	have	a	nutritional	as
well	as	aesthetic	significance:	they	are
converted	to	vitamin	A	in	the	human
intestinal	wall.	Of	these	the	most	common	and
active	is	beta-carotene.	Strictly	speaking,	only
animals	and	animal-derived	foods	contain
vitamin	A	itself;	fruits	and	vegetables	contain



only	its	precursors.	But	without	these	pigment
precursors	there	would	be	no	vitamin	A	in
animals	either.	In	the	eye,	vitamin	A	becomes
part	of	the	receptor	molecule	that	detects	light
and	allows	us	to	see.	Elsewhere	in	the	body	it
has	a	number	of	other	important	roles.

Red	and	Purple	Anthocyanins,	Pale	Yellow
Anthoxanthins	 Anthocyanins	 (from	 the
Greek	 for	 “blue	 flower”)	 are	 responsible	 for
most	 of	 the	 red,	 purple,	 and	 blue	 colors	 in
plants,	 including	 many	 berries,	 apples,
cabbage,	 radishes,	 and	 potatoes.	 A	 related
group,	 the	 anthoxanthins	 (“yellow	 flower”)
are	pale	yellow	compounds	found	in	potatoes,
onions,	and	cauliflower.	This	third	major	class
of	 plant	 pigments	 is	 a	 subgroup	 of	 the	 huge
phenolic	family,	which	is	based	on	rings	of	6
carbon	 atoms	 with	 two-thirds	 of	 a	 water
molecule	 (OH)	 attached	 to	 some	 of	 them,
which	makes	phenolics	 soluble	 in	water.	The
anthocyanins	 have	 3	 rings.	 There	 are	 about



300	known	anthocyanins,	and	a	given	fruit	or
vegetable	will	usually	contain	a	mixture	of	 a
dozen	 or	 more.	 Like	 many	 other	 phenolic
compounds,	they	are	valuable	antioxidants	(p.
255).

Anthocyanins	and	anthoxanthins	reside	in
the	storage	vacuole	of	plant	cells,	and	readily
bleed	into	surrounding	tissues	and	ingredients
when	cell	structures	are	damaged	by	cooking.
This	is	why	the	lovely	color	of	purple-tinted
asparagus,	beans,	and	other	vegetables	often
disappears	with	cooking:	the	pigment	is	stored
in	just	the	outer	layers	of	cells,	and	gets
diluted	to	invisibility	when	the	cooked	cells
break	open.	The	main	function	of	the
anthocyanins	is	to	provide	signaling	colors	in
flowers	and	fruits,	though	they	may	have
begun	their	career	as	light-absorbing
protection	for	the	photosynthetic	systems	in
young	leaves	(see	box,	p.	271).	Anthocyanins
are	very	sensitive	to	the	acid-alkaline	balance
of	foods	—	alkalinity	shifts	their	color	to	the



blue	—	and	they’re	altered	by	traces	of
metals,	so	they	are	often	the	source	of	strange
off-colors	in	cooked	foods	(p.	281).

Red	 and	Yellow	 Betains 	 A	 fourth	 group	 of
plant	pigments	 is	 the	betains,	which	are	only
found	in	a	handful	of	distantly	related	species.
However,	 these	 include	 three	 popular	 and
vividly	 colored	 vegetables:	 beets	 and	 chard
(both	varieties	of	the	same	species),	amaranth,
and	the	prickly	pear,	the	fruit	of	a	cactus.	The
betains	 (sometimes	 called	 betalains)	 are
complex	 nitrogen-containing	 molecules	 that
are	 otherwise	 similar	 to	 anthocyanins:	 they
are	water-soluble,	 sensitive	 to	heat	 and	 light,
and	 tend	 toward	 the	 blue	 in	 alkaline
conditions.	There	are	about	50	red	betains	and
20	 yellow	 betaxanthins,	 combinations	 of
which	produce	the	almost	fluorescent-looking
stem	 and	 vein	 colors	 of	 novelty	 chards.	 The
human	 body	 has	 a	 limited	 ability	 to
metabolize	these	molecules,	so	a	large	dose	of



red	beets	or	prickly	pears	can	give	a	startling
but	 harmless	 tinge	 to	 the	 urine.	 The	 red
betains	contain	a	phenolic	group	and	are	good
antioxidants;	 yellow	 betaxanthins	 don’t	 and
aren’t.

The	 three	major	kinds	of	plant	pigments.	For
the	 sake	 of	 clarity,	most	 hydrogen	 atoms	 are
left	 unlabeled;	 dots	 indicate	 carbon	 atoms.
T o p :	Beta-carotene,	 the	 most	 common
carotenoid	 pigment,	 and	 the	 source	 of	 the
orange	 color	 of	 carrots.	 The	 long	 fat-like
carbon	 chain	 makes	 these	 pigments	 much
more	 soluble	 in	 fats	 and	 oils	 than	 in	 water.
Bottom	left:	Chlorophyll	a,	the	main	source	of
the	 green	 in	 vegetables	 and	 fruits,	 with	 a
heme-like	 region	 (p.	 133)	 and	 a	 long	 carbon
tail	 that	 makes	 chlorophyll	 more	 soluble	 in



fats	 and	 oils	 than	 in	 water. 	 Bottom	 right:
Cyanidin,	 a	 blue	 pigment	 in	 the	 anthocyanin
family.	Thanks	to	their	several	hydroxyl	(OH)
groups,	 anthocyanins	 are	 water-soluble,	 and
readily	leak	out	of	boiled	vegetables.
Discoloration:	Enzymatic	Browning	Many
fruits	and	vegetables	—	for	example	apples,
bananas,	mushrooms,	potatoes	—	quickly
develop	a	brown,	red,	or	gray	discoloration
when	cut	or	bruised.	This	discoloration	is
caused	by	three	chemical	ingredients:	1-	and
2-ring	phenolic	compounds,	certain	plant
enzymes,	and	oxygen.	In	the	intact	fruit	or
vegetable,	the	phenolic	compounds	are	kept	in
the	storage	vacuole,	the	enzymes	in	the
surrounding	cytoplasm.	When	the	cell
structure	is	damaged	and	phenolics	are	mixed
with	enzymes	and	oxygen,	the	enzymes
oxidize	the	phenolics,	forming	molecules	that
eventually	react	with	each	other	and	bond
together	into	light-absorbing	clusters.	This
system	is	one	of	the	plant’s	chemical



defenses:	when	insects	or	microbes	damage
its	cells,	the	plant	releases	reactive	phenolics
that	attack	the	invaders’	own	enzymes	and
membranes.	The	brown	pigments	that	we	see
are	essentially	masses	of	spent	weapons.	(A
similar	kind	of	enzyme	acting	on	a	similar
compound	is	responsible	for	the	“browning”
of	humans	in	the	sun;	here	the	pigment	itself
is	the	protective	agent.)

Minimizing	Brown	Discoloration	 Enzymatic
browning	 can	 be	 discouraged	 by	 several
means.	 The	 single	 handiest	 method	 for	 the
cook	is	to	coat	cut	surfaces	with	lemon	juice:
the	 browning	 enzymes	 work	 very	 slowly	 in
acidic	 conditions.	 Chilling	 the	 food	 below
about	 40ºF/4ºC	 will	 also	 slow	 the	 enzymes
down	 somewhat,	 as	 will	 immersing	 the	 cut
pieces	 in	 cold	 water,	 which	 limits	 the
availability	 of	 oxygen.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 precut
lettuce	 for	 salads,	 enzyme	 activity	 and
browning	 can	 be	 reduced	 by	 immersing	 the



freshly	 cut	 leaves	 in	 a	 pot	 of	 water	 at
115ºF/47ºC	 for	 three	 minutes	 before	 chilling
and	 bagging	 them.	Boiling	 temperatures	will
destroy	the	enzyme,	so	cooking	will	eliminate
the	problem.	However,	high	temperatures	can
encourage	 phenolic	 oxidation	 in	 the	 absence
of	 enzymes:	 this	 is	 why	 the	 water	 in	 which
vegetables	have	been	cooked	sometimes	turns
brown	on	standing.	Various	sulfur	compounds
will	combine	with	the	phenolic	substances	and
block	 their	 reaction	 with	 the	 enzyme,	 and
these	are	often	applied	commercially	to	dried
fruits.	 Sulfured	 apples	 and	 apricots	 retain
their	 natural	 color	 and	 flavor,	 while
unsulfured	 dried	 fruits	 turn	 brown	 and
develop	a	more	cooked	flavor.



Brown	discoloration	caused	by	plant	enzymes.
When	the	cells	in	certain	fruits	and	vegetables
are	 damaged	 by	 cutting,	 bruising,	 or	 biting,
browning	enzymes	in	the	cell	cytoplasm	come
into	 contact	 with	 small,	 colorless	 phenolic
molecules	 from	the	storage	vacuole.	With	 the
help	of	oxygen	from	the	air,	the	enzymes	bind
the	 phenolic	 molecules	 together	 into	 large,
colored	 assemblies	 that	 turn	 the	 damaged
area	brown.

Another	acid	that	inhibits	browning	by
virtue	of	its	antioxidant	properties	is	ascorbic
acid,	or	vitamin	C.	It	was	first	identified
around	1925	when	the	Hungarian	biochemist
Albert	Szent-Györgyi	found	that	the	juice	of
some	nonbrowning	plants,	including	the
chillis	grown	for	paprika,	could	delay	the
discoloration	of	plants	that	do	brown,	and	he
isolated	the	responsible	substance.

Flavor



The	overall	flavor	of	a	fruit	or	vegetable	is	a
composite	of	several	distinct	sensations.	From
the	taste	buds	on	our	tongues,	we	register
salts,	sweet	sugars,	sour	acids,	savory	amino
acids,	and	bitter	alkaloids.	From	the	cells	in
our	mouth	sensitive	to	touch,	we	notice	the
presence	of	astringent,	puckery	tannins.	A
variety	of	cells	in	and	near	the	mouth	are
irritated	by	the	pungent	compounds	in
peppers,	mustard,	and	members	of	the	onion
family.	Finally,	the	olfactory	receptors	in	our
nasal	passages	can	detect	many	hundreds	of
volatile	molecules	that	are	small	and
chemically	repelled	by	water,	and	therefore
fly	out	of	the	food	and	into	the	air	in	our
mouth.	The	sensations	from	our	mouth	give	us
an	idea	of	a	food’s	basic	composition	and
qualities,	while	our	sense	of	smell	allows	us
to	make	much	finer	discriminations.

Taste:	Salty,	Sweet,	Sour,	Savory,	Bitter 	Of
the	five	generally	recognized	tastes,	three	are



especially	prominent	in	fruits	and	vegetables.
Sugar	 is	 the	main	 product	 of	 photosynthesis,
and	 its	 sweetness	 is	 the	 main	 attraction
provided	 by	 fruits	 for	 their	 animal	 seed
dispersers.	The	 average	 sugar	 content	 of	 ripe
fruit	is	10	to	15%	by	weight.	Often	the	unripe
fruit	stores	its	sugar	as	tasteless	starch,	which
is	 then	 converted	 back	 into	 sugar	 during
ripening	to	make	the	fruit	more	appealing.	At
the	same	time,	the	fruit’s	acid	content	usually
drops,	 a	 development	 that	 makes	 the	 fruit
seem	even	sweeter.	There	are	several	organic
acids	—	citric,	malic,	 tartaric,	 oxalic	—	 that
plants	 can	 accumulate	 in	 their	 vacuoles	 and
variously	 use	 as	 alternative	 energy	 stores,
chemical	 defenses,	 or	 metabolic	 wastes,	 and
that	account	for	the	acidity	of	most	fruits	and
vegetables	 (all	are	acid	 to	some	degree).	The
sweet-sour	balance	 is	 especially	 important	 in
fruits.

Most	vegetables	contain	only	moderate
amounts	of	sugar	and	acid,	and	these	are



quickly	used	up	by	the	plant	cells	after
harvest.	This	is	why	vegetables	picked	just
before	cooking	are	more	full-flavored	than
store-bought	produce,	which	is	usually	days	to
weeks	from	the	field.

Browning	Enzymes,	Breath	Fresheners,
and	the	Order	of	the	Meal

The	browning	enzymes	are	normally
considered	a	nuisance,	because	they
discolor	foods	as	we	prepare	them.
Recently	a	group	of	Japanese	scientists
found	a	constructive	use	for	their	oxidizing
activities:	they	can	help	clear	our	breath	of
persistent	garlic,	onion,	and	other	sulfurous
odors!	The	reactive	phenolic	chemicals
produced	by	the	enzymes	combine	with
sulfhydryl	groups	to	form	new	and
odorless	molecules.	(Phenolic	catechins	in
green	tea	do	the	same.)	Many	raw	fruits
and	vegetables	are	effective	at	this,	notably
pome	and	stone	fruits,	grapes,	blueberries,



mushrooms,	lettuces,	burdock,	basil,	and
peppermint.	This	may	be	one	of	the
benefits	of	ending	a	meal	with	fruit,	and
one	of	the	reasons	that	some	cultures	serve
a	salad	after	the	main	course,	not	before.
Bitter	tastes	are	generally	encountered

only	among	vegetables	and	seeds	(for
example,	coffee	and	cocoa	beans),	which
contain	alkaloids	and	other	chemical	defenses
meant	to	discourage	animals	from	eating
them.	Farmers	and	plant	breeders	have
worked	for	thousands	of	years	to	reduce	the
bitterness	of	such	crops	as	lettuce,	cucumbers,
eggplants,	and	cabbage,	but	chicory	and
radicchio,	various	cabbage	relatives,	and	the
Asian	bitter	gourd	are	actually	prized	for	their
bitterness.	In	many	cultures,	bitterness	is
thought	to	be	a	manifestation	of	medicinal
value	and	therefore	of	healthfulness,	and	there
may	be	some	truth	to	this	association	(p.	334).

Though	savory,	mouth-filling	amino	acids
are	more	characteristic	of	protein-rich	animal



foods,	some	fruits	and	vegetables	do	contain
significant	quantities	of	glutamic	acid,	the
active	portion	of	MSG.	Notable	among	them
are	tomatoes,	oranges,	and	many	seaweeds.
The	glutamic	acid	in	tomatoes,	together	with
its	balanced	sweetness	and	acidity,	may	help
explain	why	this	fruit	is	so	successfully	used
as	a	vegetable,	both	with	meats	and	without.

Touch:	Astringency 	Astringency	 is	neither	a
taste	nor	an	aroma,	but	a	tactile	sensation:	that
dry,	puckery,	rough	feeling	that	follows	a	sip
of	 strong	 tea	 or	 red	 wine,	 or	 a	 bite	 into	 an
unripe	 banana	 or	 peach.	 It	 is	 caused	 by	 a
group	of	phenolic	compounds	consisting	of	3
to	5	carbon	rings,	which	are	just	the	right	size
to	span	two	or	more	normally	separate	protein
molecules,	 bond	 to	 them,	 and	 hold	 them
together.	 These	 phenolics	 are	 called	tannins
because	 they	have	been	used	since	prehistory
to	 tan	 animal	 hides	 into	 tough	 leather	 by
bonding	with	the	skin	proteins.	The	sensation



of	astringency	is	caused	when	tannins	bond	to
proteins	in	our	saliva,	which	normally	provide
lubrication	 and	 help	 food	 particles	 slide
smoothly	 along	 the	 mouth	 surfaces.	 Tannins
cause	the	proteins	to	clump	together	and	stick
to	 particles	 and	 surfaces,	 increasing	 the
friction	between	them.	Tannins	are	another	of
the	plant	kingdom’s	chemical	defenses.	They
counteract	 bacteria	 and	 fungi	 by	 interfering
with	 their	 surface	 proteins,	 and	 deter	 plant-
eating	 animals	 by	 their	 astringency	 and	 by
interfering	 with	 digestive	 enzymes.	 Tannins
are	 most	 often	 found	 in	 immature	 fruit	 (to
prevent	 their	 consumption	 before	 the	 seeds
are	viable),	 in	 the	 skins	of	 nuts,	 and	 in	plant
parts	 strongly	 pigmented	 with	 anthocyanins,
phenolic	 molecules	 that	 turn	 out	 to	 be	 the
right	 size	 to	 cross-link	 proteins.	 Red-leaf
lettuces,	 for	 example,	 are	 noticeably	 more
astringent	than	green.

Leaves	and	Fruits	Shaped	Our	Vision



We	can	distinguish	and	enjoy	the	many
hues	of	anthocyanin-	and	carotenoid-rich
plants	—	as	well	as	the	same	hues	in
paintings	and	clothing,	makeup	and
warning	signs	—	because	our	eyes	are
designed	to	see	well	in	this	color	range	of
yellow	to	orange	to	red.	It	now	looks	as
though	we	owe	this	ability	to	leaves	and
fruits!	It	turns	out	that	we	are	among	a
small	handful	of	animal	species	with	eyes
that	can	distinguish	red	from	green.	The
other	species	are	tropical	forest–dwelling
primates	like	our	probable	ancestors,	and
they	have	in	common	a	need	to	detect	their
foods	against	the	green	of	the	forest
canopy.	The	young	leaves	of	many	tropical
plants	are	red	with	anthocyanins,	which
apparently	absorb	excess	solar	energy
during	the	momentary	shafts	of	direct
sunlight	in	an	otherwise	shaded	life;	and
young	leaves	are	more	tender	than	the
older,	green,	fibrous	leaves,	more	easily



digested	and	nutritious,	and	more	sought
after	by	monkeys.	Without	good	red	vision,
it	would	be	hard	to	find	them	—	or
carotenoid-colored	fruits	—	among	the
green	leaves.	So	leaves	and	fruits	shaped
our	vision.	The	pleasure	we	take	today	in
their	colors	was	made	possible	by	our
ancestors’	hunger,	and	the	sustenance	they
found	in	red-tinged	leaves	and	yellow-
orange	fruits.
Though	a	degree	of	astringency	can	be

desirable	in	a	dish	or	drink	—	it	contributes	a
feeling	of	substantialness	—	it	often	becomes
tiresome.	The	problem	is	that	the	sensation
becomes	stronger	with	each	dose	of	tannins
(whereas	most	flavors	become	less
prominent),	and	it	lingers,	with	the	duration
also	increasing	with	each	exposure.	So	it’s
worth	knowing	how	to	control	astringency	(p.
284).

Irritation:	 Pungency	 The	 sensations	 caused



by	 “hot”	 spices	 and	 vegetables	 —	 chillis,
black	 pepper,	 ginger,	 mustard,	 horse-radish,
onions,	 and	 garlic	 —	 are	 most	 accurately
described	 as	 irritation	 and	 pain	 (for	 why	 we
can	 enjoy	 such	 sensations,	 seep.	 394).	 The
active	ingredients	in	all	of	these	are	chemical
defenses	 that	 are	 meant	 to	 annoy	 and	 repel
animal	 attackers.	 Very	 reactive	 sulfur
compounds	in	the	mustard	and	onion	families
apparently	do	mild	damage	to	the	unprotected
cell	 membranes	 in	 our	 mouth	 and	 nasal
passages,	 and	 thus	 cause	 pain.	 The	 pungent
principles	of	the	peppers	and	ginger,	and	some
of	 the	mustard	 compounds,	work	 differently;
they	 bind	 to	 a	 specific	 receptor	 on	 the	 cell
membranes,	 and	 the	 receptor	 then	 triggers
reactions	 in	 the	 cell	 that	 cause	 it	 to	 send	 a
pain	 signal	 to	 the	 brain.	 The	 mustard	 and
onion	 defenses	 are	 created	 only	 when	 tissue
damage	 mixes	 together	 normally	 separate
enzymes	 and	 their	 targets.	 Because	 enzymes
are	 inactivated	 by	 cooking	 temperatures,



cooking	will	moderate	 the	pungency	of	 these
foods.	 By	 contrast,	 the	 peppers	 and	 ginger
stockpile	 their	 defenses	 ahead	 of	 time,	 and
cooking	doesn’t	reduce	their	pungency.

The	nature	and	use	of	pungent	ingredients
are	described	in	greater	detail	in	the	next
several	chapters,	in	entries	on	particular
vegetables	and	spices.

Aroma:	Variety	and	Complexity	The	subject
of	 aroma	 is	 both	 daunting	 and	 endlessly
fascinating!	 Daunting	 because	 it	 involves
many	 hundreds	 of	 different	 chemicals	 and
sensations	 for	 which	 we	 don’t	 have	 a	 good
everyday	 vocabulary;	 fascinating	 because	 it
helps	 us	 perceive	 more,	 and	 find	 more	 to
enjoy,	 in	 the	 most	 familiar	 foods.	 There	 are
two	basic	facts	to	keep	in	mind	when	thinking
about	 the	 aroma	 of	 any	 food.	 First,	 the
distinctive	 aromas	 of	 particular	 foods	 are
created	by	specific	volatile	chemicals	that	are
characteristic	 of	 those	 foods.	 And	 second,



nearly	 all	 food	 aromas	 are	 composites	 of
many	different	volatile	molecules.	In	the	case
of	 vegetables,	 herbs,	 and	 spices,	 the	 number
may	be	a	dozen	or	 two,	while	fruits	 typically
emit	 several	 hundred	 volatile	 molecules.
Usually	 just	 a	 handful	 create	 the	 dominant
element	of	an	aroma,	while	 the	others	supply
background,	supporting,	enriching	notes.	This
combination	 of	 specificity	 and	 complexity
helps	explain	why	we	find	echoes	of	one	food
in	 another,	 or	 find	 that	 two	 foods	 go	 well
together.	 Some	 affinities	 result	 when	 the
foods	 happen	 to	 share	 some	 of	 the	 same
aroma	molecules.

One	way	to	approach	the	richness	of	plant
flavors	is	to	taste	actively	and	with	other
people.	Rather	than	simply	recognizing	a
familiar	flavor	as	what	you	expect,	try	to
dissect	that	flavor	into	some	of	its	component
sensations,	just	as	a	musical	chord	can	be
broken	down	into	its	component	notes.	Run
through	a	checklist	of	the	possibilities,	and



ask:	Is	there	a	green-grass	note	in	this	aroma?
A	fruity	note?	A	spicy	or	nutty	or	earthy	note?
If	so,	which	kind	of	fruit	or	spice	or	nut?
Chapters	6–8	give	interesting	facts	about	the
aromas	of	particular	fruits,	vegetables,	herbs,
and	spices.

Aroma	 Families	 The	 box	 on	 pp.	 274–275
identifies	some	of	the	more	prominent	aromas
to	 be	 found	 in	 plant	 foods.	 Though	 I’ve
divided	them	by	type	of	food,	this	division	is
arbitrary.	Fruits	may	have	green-leaf	aromas;
vegetables	 may	 contain	 chemicals	 more
characteristic	 of	 fruits	 or	 spices;	 spices	 and
herbs	share	many	aromatics	with	fruits.	Some
examples:	 cherries	 and	 bananas	 contain	 the
dominant	 element	 of	 cloves;	 coriander
contains	 aromatics	 that	 are	 prominent	 in
citrus	 flowers	 and	 fruits;	 carrots	 share	 piney
aromatics	with	Mediterranean	herbs.	While	a
given	 plant	 does	 usually	 specialize	 in	 the
production	 of	 a	 certain	 kind	 of	 aromatic,



plants	 in	 general	 are	 biochemical	 virtuosos,
and	 may	 operate	 a	 number	 of	 different
aromatic	 production	 lines	 at	 once.	 Some	 of
the	most	important	production	lines	are	these:

“Green,”	cucumber/melon,	and
mushroom	aromas,	produced	from
unsaturated	fatty	acids	in	cell	membranes
when	tissue	damage	mixes	an	oxidizing
enzyme	(lipoxygenase)	with	unsaturated
fatty	acids	in	cell	membranes.	This
enzyme	breaks	the	long	fatty	acid	chains
into	small,	volatile	pieces,	and	other
enzymes	then	modify	the	pieces.
“Fruity”	aromas,	produced	when
enzymes	in	the	intact	fruit	combine	an
acid	molecule	with	an	alcohol	molecule
to	produce	an	ester.
“Terpene”	aromas,	produced	by	a	long
series	of	enzymes	from	small	building
blocks	that	also	get	turned	into
carotenoid	pigments	and	other	important
molecules.	They	range	from	flowery	to



citrusy,	minty,	herbaceous,	and	piney	(p.
391).
“Phenolic”	aromas,	produced	by	a	series
of	enzymes	from	an	amino	acid	with	a	6-
carbon	ring.	These	are	offshoots	of	the
biochemical	pathway	that	makes	woody
lignin	(p.	266),	and	include	many	spicy,
warming,	and	pungent	molecules	(p.
391).
“Sulfur”	aromatics,	usually	produced
when	tissue	damage	mixes	enzymes	with
nonaromatic	aroma	precursors.	Most
sulfur	aromatics	are	pungent	chemical
defenses,	though	some	give	a	more	subtle
depth	to	a	number	of	fruits	and
vegetables.

Fascinating	 and	 useful	 as	 it	 is	 to	 analyze
the	 flavors	 of	 the	 plant	 world,	 the	 greatest
pleasure	 still	 comes	 from	 savoring	 them
whole.	This	is	one	of	the	great	gifts	of	life	in
the	 natural	 world,	 as	 Henry	 David	 Thoreau



reminded	us:

Some	gnarly	apple	which	I	pick	up	in	the
road	reminds	by	its	fragrance	of	all	the
wealth	of	Pomona.	There	is	thus	about	all
natural	products	a	certain	volatile	and
ethereal	quality	which	represents	their
highest	value….	For	nectar	and	ambrosia
are	only	those	fine	flavors	of	every	earthly
fruit	which	our	coarse	palates	fail	to
perceive,—	just	as	we	occupy	the	heaven
of	the	gods	without	knowing	it.

Handling	and	Storing
Fruits	and	Vegetables

Post-Harvest	Deterioration

There’s	no	match	for	the	flavor	of	a	vegetable
picked	one	minute	and	cooked	the	next.	Once
a	vegetable	is	harvested	it	begins	to	change,
and	that	change	is	almost	always	for	the



worse.	(Exceptions	include	plant	parts
designed	to	hibernate,	for	example	onions	and
potatoes.)	Plant	cells	are	hardier	than	animal
cells,	and	may	survive	for	weeks	or	even
months.	But	cut	off	from	their	source	of
renovating	nutrients,	they	consume
themselves	and	accumulate	waste	products,
and	their	flavor	and	texture	suffer.	Many
varieties	of	corn	and	peas	lose	half	their	sugar
in	a	few	hours	at	room	temperature,	either	by
converting	it	to	starch	or	using	it	for	energy	to
stay	alive.	Bean	pods,	asparagus,	and	broccoli
begin	to	use	their	sugar	to	make	tough
lignified	fibers.	As	crisp,	crunchy	lettuce	and
celery	use	up	their	water,	their	cells	lose
turgor	pressure	and	they	become	limp	and
chewy	(p.	265).

Some	of	the	Aromas	in	Foods	from
Plants

This	table	provides	a	quick	overview	of	the
kinds	of	aromas	found	in	plant	foods,



where	they	come	from,	and	how	they
behave	when	the	food	is	cooked.

Vegetables

Aroma Examples Chemicals	responsible
“Green Most	green
leaf”:	fresh- vegetables;	also Alcohols,
cut	leaves, tomatoes,	apples, aldehydes
grass other	fruits (6-carbon)

Cucumber Cucumbers, Alcohols,	aldehydes
melons (9-carbon)

“Green Bell	peppers,	fresh
vegetable” peas Pyrazines

Earthy Potatoes,	beets Pyrazines,	geosmin

Fresh Alcohols,
Mushroom Mushrooms aldehydes	(8-

carbon)
Cabbage- Cabbage Sulfur
like family compounds



Onion-like, Onion Sulfur
mustard-like family compounds
Floral Edible Alcohols,	terpenes,

flowers esters

Aroma Origin Characteristics
“Green Cutting	or Delicate,
leaf”: crushing;	enzyme reduced	by
fresh-cut action	on cooking	(stops
leaves, unsaturated	cell enzymes,	alters
grass membrane	lipids chemicals)

Cutting	or Delicate,
crushing; reduced	by

Cucumber enzyme	action cooking	(stops
on	unsaturated enzymes,	alters
cell	membranes chemicals)

“Green
vegetable” Preformed Strong,

persistent
Earthy Preformed Strong,	persistent

Cutting	or Delicate,
reduced	by



Fresh crushing; cooking	(stops
Mushroom enzyme	action	on enzymes,

unsaturated	cell alters
membrane	lipids chemicals)
Cutting	or Strong,

Cabbage- crushing;	enzyme persistent,
like action	on	sulfur- altered	and

containing strengthened
precursors by	cooking

Onion- Cutting	or Strong,
like, crushing;	enzyme persistent,
mustard- action	on	sulfur- altered	and
like containing strengthened

precursors by	cooking

Floral Preformed Delicate,	altered	by
cooking

Fruits
Apple,	pear,	banana, Esters	(acid

“Fruity” pineapple,	strawberry +	alcohol)
Citrus Citrus	family Terpenes



“Fatty,”	“creamy” Peach,	coconut Lactones
Caramel, Strawberry,
nutty pineapple Furanones

Tropical Grapefruit,	passion
fruit, fruit,	mango, Sulfur
“exotic,” pineapple,	melon; compounds,
musky tomato complex

“Fruity” Preformed Delicate,	altered	by
cooking

Citrus Preformed Persistent
“Fatty,”	“creamy” Preformed Persistent
Caramel,	nutty Preformed Persistent
Tropical	fruit,	“exotic,”
musky Preformed Persistent

Herbs	&	Spices
Pine-like,	mint- Sage,	thyme,
like,	herbaceous rosemary,	mint, Terpenes

nutmeg
Spicy, Cinnamon,	clove, Phenolic



warming anise,	basil,	vanilla compounds
Pine-like,	mint-like,
herbaceous Preformed Strong,

persistent
Spicy,	warming Preformed Strong,	persistent

Fruits	 are	 a	 different	 story.	 Some	 fruits
may	 actually	 get	 better	 after	 harvest	 because
they	continue	to	ripen.	But	ripening	soon	runs
its	 course,	 and	 then	 fruits	 also	 deteriorate.
Eventually	 fruit	and	vegetable	cells	alike	 run
out	 of	 energy	 and	 die,	 their	 complex
biochemical	 organization	 and	 machinery
break	down,	their	enzymes	act	at	random,	and
the	tissue	eats	itself	away.

The	spoilage	of	fruits	and	vegetables	is
hastened	by	microbes,	which	are	always
present	on	their	surfaces	and	in	the	air.
Bacteria,	molds,	and	yeasts	all	attack
weakened	or	damaged	plant	tissue,	break
down	its	cell	walls,	consume	the	cell	contents,
and	leave	behind	their	distinctive	and	often
unpleasant	waste	products.	Vegetables	are



mainly	attacked	by	bacteria,	which	grow
faster	than	other	microbes.	Species	of	Erwinia
and	Pseudomonas	cause	familiar	“soft	rot.”
Fruits	are	more	acidic	than	vegetables,	so
they’re	resistant	to	many	bacteria	but	more
readily	attacked	by	yeasts	and	molds
(Penicillium,	Botrytis).

Precut	fruits	and	vegetables	are	convenient
but	especially	susceptible	to	deterioration	and
spoilage.	Cutting	has	two	important	effects.
The	tissue	damage	induces	nearby	cells	to
boost	their	defensive	activity,	which	depletes
their	remaining	nutrients	and	may	cause	such
changes	as	toughening,	browning,	and	the
development	of	bitter	and	astringent	flavors.
And	it	exposes	the	normally	protected
nutrient-rich	interior	to	infection	by	microbes.
So	precut	produce	requires	special	care.

Handling	Fresh	Produce

The	aim	in	storing	fruits	and	vegetables	is	to



slow	their	inevitable	deterioration.	This
begins	with	choosing	and	handling	the
produce.	Mushrooms	as	well	as	some	ripe
fruits	—	berries,	apricots,	figs,	avocados,
papayas	—	have	a	naturally	high	metabolism
and	deteriorate	faster	than	lethargic	apples,
pears,	kiwi	fruits,	cabbages,	carrots,	and	other
good	keepers.	“One	rotten	apple	spoils	the
barrel”:	moldy	fruit	or	vegetables	should	be
discarded	and	refrigerator	drawers	and	fruit
bowls	should	be	cleaned	regularly	to	reduce
the	microbial	population.	Produce	shouldn’t
be	subjected	to	physical	stress,	whether
dropping	apples	on	the	floor	or	packing
tomatoes	tightly	into	a	confined	space.	Even
rinsing	in	water	can	make	delicate	berries
more	susceptible	to	infection	by	abrading
their	protective	epidermal	layer	with	clinging
dirt	particles.	On	the	other	hand,	soil	harbors
large	numbers	of	microbes,	and	should	be
removed	from	the	surfaces	of	sturdier	fruits
and	vegetables	before	storing	them.



The	Storage	Atmosphere

The	storage	life	of	fresh	produce	is	strongly
affected	by	the	atmosphere	that	surrounds	it.
All	plant	tissues	are	mostly	water,	and	require
a	humid	atmosphere	to	avoid	drying	out,
losing	turgidity,	and	damaging	their	internal
systems.	Practically,	this	means	it’s	best	to
keep	plant	foods	in	restricted	spaces	—	plastic
bags,	or	drawers	within	a	refrigerator	—	to
slow	down	moisture	loss	to	the	compartment
as	a	whole	and	to	the	outside.	At	the	same
time,	living	produce	exhales	carbon	dioxide
and	water,	so	moisture	can	accumulate	and
condense	on	the	food	surfaces,	which
encourages	microbial	attack.	Lining	the
container	with	an	absorbent	material	—	a
paper	towel	or	bag	—	will	delay	condensation.

The	metabolic	activity	of	the	cells	can	also
be	slowed	by	limiting	their	access	to	oxygen.
Commercial	packers	fill	their	bags	of	produce
with	a	well-defined	mixture	of	nitrogen,



carbon	dioxide,	and	just	enough	oxygen	(8%
or	less)	to	keep	the	plant	cells	functioning
normally;	and	they	use	bags	whose	gas
permeability	matches	the	respiration	rate	of
the	produce.	(Too	little	oxygen	and	fruits	and
vegetables	switch	to	anaerobic	metabolism,
which	generates	alcohol	and	other	odorous
molecules	characteristic	of	fermentation,	and
causes	internal	tissue	damage	and	browning.)

Home	and	restaurant	cooks	can
approximate	such	a	controlled	atmosphere	by
packing	their	produce	in	closed	plastic	bags
with	most	of	the	air	squeezed	out	of	them.	The
plant	cells	consume	oxygen	and	create	carbon
dioxide,	so	the	oxygen	levels	in	the	bags
slowly	decline.	However,	a	major
disadvantage	of	a	closed	plastic	bag	is	that	it
traps	the	gas	ethylene,	a	plant	hormone	that
advances	ripening	in	fruits	and	induces
defensive	activity	and	accelerated	aging	in
other	tissues.	This	means	that	bagged	fruits
may	pass	from	ripe	to	overripe	too	quickly,



and	one	damaged	lettuce	leaf	can	speed	the
decline	of	a	whole	head.	Recently,
manufacturers	have	introduced	produce
containers	with	inserts	that	destroy	ethylene
and	extend	storage	life	(the	inserts	contain
permanganate).

A	very	common	commercial	treatment	that
slows	both	water	loss	and	oxygen	uptake	in
whole	fruits	and	fruit-vegetables	—	apples,
oranges,	cucumbers,	tomatoes	—	is	to	coat
them	at	the	packing	facility	with	a	layer	of
edible	wax	or	oil.	A	number	of	different
materials	are	used,	including	natural	beeswax
and	carnauba,	candellila,	and	rice-bran	waxes
and	vegetable	oils,	and	such	petrochemical
by-products	as	paraffin,	polyethylene	waxes,
and	mineral	oil.	These	treatments	are
harmless,	but	they	can	make	produce	surfaces
unpleasantly	waxy	or	hard.

Temperature	Control:
Refrigeration



The	most	effective	way	to	prolong	the	storage
life	of	fresh	produce	is	to	control	its
temperature.	Cooling	slows	chemical
reactions	in	general,	so	it	slows	the	metabolic
activity	of	the	plant	cells	themselves,	and	the
growth	of	the	microbes	that	attack	them.	A
reduction	of	just	10ºF/5ºC	can	nearly	double
storage	life.	However,	the	ideal	storage
temperature	is	different	for	different	fruits
and	vegetables.	Those	native	to	temperate
climates	are	best	kept	at	or	near	the	freezing
point,	and	apples	may	keep	for	nearly	a	year	if
the	storage	atmosphere	is	also	controlled.	But
fruits	and	vegetables	native	to	warmer	regions
are	actually	injured	by	temperatures	that	low.
Their	cells	begin	to	malfunction,	and
uncontrolled	enzyme	action	causes	damage	to
cell	walls,	the	development	of	off-flavors,	and
discoloration.	Chilling	injury	may	become
apparent	during	storage,	or	only	after	the
produce	is	brought	back	to	room	temperature.
Banana	skins	turn	black	in	the	refrigerator;



avocados	darken	and	fail	to	soften	further;
citrus	fruits	develop	spotted	skins.	Foods	of
tropical	and	subtropical	origin	keep	best	at	the
relatively	high	temperature	of	50ºF/10ºC,	and
are	often	better	off	at	room	temperature	than
in	the	refrigerator.	Among	them	are	melons,
eggplants,	squash,	tomatoes,	cucumbers,
peppers,	and	beans.

Temperature	Control:
Freezing

The	most	drastic	form	of	temperature	control
is	freezing,	which	stops	cold	the	overall
metabolism	of	fruits,	vegetables,	and	spoilage
microbes.	It	causes	most	of	the	water	in	the
cells	to	crystallize,	thus	immobilizing	other
molecules	and	suspending	most	chemical
activity.	The	microbes	are	hardy,	and	most	of
them	revive	on	warming.	But	freezing	kills
plant	tissues,	which	suffer	two	kinds	of
damage.	One	is	chemical:	as	the	water



crystallizes,	enzymes	and	other	reactive
molecules	become	unusually	concentrated	and
react	abnormally.	The	other	damage	is
physical	disruption	caused	by	the	water
crystals,	whose	edges	puncture	cell	walls	and
membranes.	When	the	food	is	thawed,	the	cell
fluids	leak	out	of	the	cells,	and	the	food	loses
crispness	and	becomes	limp	and	wet.
Producers	of	frozen	foods	minimize	the	size
of	the	ice	crystals,	and	so	the	amount	of
damage	done,	by	freezing	the	food	as	quickly
as	possible	to	as	low	a	temperature	as
possible,	often	–40ºF/–40ºC.	Under	these
conditions,	many	small	ice	crystals	form;	at
higher	temperatures	fewer	and	larger	crystals
form,	and	do	more	damage.	Home	and
restaurant	freezers	are	warmer	than
commercial	freezers	and	their	temperatures
fluctuate,	so	during	storage	some	water	melts
and	refreezes	into	larger	crystals,	and	the
food’s	texture	suffers.

Although	freezing	temperatures	generally



reduce	enzymatic	and	other	chemical	activity,
some	reactions	are	actually	enhanced	by	the
concentrating	effects	of	ice	formation,
including	enzymatic	breakdown	of	vitamins
and	pigments.	The	solution	to	this	problem	is
blanching.	In	this	process	the	food	is
immersed	in	rapidly	boiling	water	for	a
minute	or	two,	just	enough	time	to	inactivate
the	enzymes,	and	then	just	as	rapidly
immersed	in	cold	water	to	stop	further
cooking	and	softening	of	the	cell	walls.	If
vegetables	are	to	be	frozen	for	more	than	a
few	days,	they	should	be	blanched	first.	Fruits
are	less	commonly	blanched	because	their
cooked	flavor	and	texture	are	less	appealing.
Enzymatic	browning	in	frozen	fruit	can	be
prevented	by	packing	it	in	a	sugar	syrup
supplemented	with	ascorbic	acid	(between	¼
and	¾	teaspoon	per	quart,	750–2,250	mg	per
liter,	depending	on	the	fruit’s	susceptibility	to
browning).	Sugar	syrup	(usually	around	40%,
or	1.5	lb	sugar	per	quart	water,	680	gm	per



liter)	can	also	improve	the	texture	of	frozen
fruit	by	being	absorbed	into	the	cell-wall
cement,	which	becomes	stiffer.	Frozen
produce	should	be	wrapped	as	air-	and
watertight	as	possible.	Surfaces	left	exposed
to	the	relatively	dry	atmosphere	of	the	freezer
will	develop	freezer	burn,	the	slow,	patchy
drying	out	caused	by	the	evaporation	of	frozen
water	molecules	directly	into	vapor	(this	is
called	“sublimation”).	Freezer-burned	patches
develop	a	tough	texture	and	stale	flavor.

Cooking	Fresh	Fruits
and	Vegetables

Compared	to	meats,	eggs,	and	dairy	products,
vegetables	and	fruits	are	easy	to	cook.	Animal
tissues	and	secretions	are	mainly	protein,	and
proteins	are	sensitive	molecules;	moderate
heat	(140ºF/60ºC)	causes	them	to	cling	tightly
to	each	other	and	expel	water,	and	they
quickly	become	hard	and	dry.	Vegetables	and



fruits	are	mainly	carbohydrates,	and
carbohydrates	are	robust	molecules;	even
boiling	temperatures	simply	disperse	them
more	evenly	in	the	tissue	moisture,	so	the
texture	becomes	soft	and	succulent.	However,
the	cooking	of	vegetables	and	fruits	does	have
its	fine	points.	Plant	pigments,	flavor
compounds,	and	nutrients	are	sensitive	to	heat
and	to	the	chemical	environment.	And	even
carbohydrates	sometimes	behave	curiously!
The	challenge	of	cooking	vegetables	and
fruits	is	to	create	an	appealing	texture	without
compromising	color,	flavor,	and	nutrition.

How	Heat	Affects	the	Qualities
of	Fruits	and	Vegetables

Color	Many	plant	pigments	are	altered	by
cooking,	which	is	why	we	can	often	judge	by
their	color	how	carefully	vegetables	have	been
prepared.	The	one	partial	exception	to	this
rule	is	the	yellow-orange-red	carotenoid



group,	which	is	more	soluble	in	fat	than	in
water,	so	the	colors	don’t	readily	leak	out	of
the	tissue,	and	are	fairly	stable.	However,
even	carotenoids	are	changed	by	cooking.
When	we	heat	carrots,	their	beta-carotene
shifts	structure	and	hue,	from	red-orange
toward	the	yellow.	Apricots	and	tomato	paste
dried	in	the	sun	lose	much	of	their	intact
carotenoids	unless	they’re	treated	with
antioxidant	sulfur	dioxide	(p.	291).	But
compared	to	the	green	chlorophylls	and
multihued	anthocyanins,	the	carotenoids	are
the	model	of	steadfastness.

Aromas	from	Altered	Carotenoid
Pigments

Both	drying	and	cooking	break	some	of	the
pigment	 molecules	 in	 carotenoid-rich
fruits	 and	 vegetables	 into	 small,	 volatile
fragments	 that	 contribute	 to	 their
characteristic	 aromas.	 These	 fragments
provide	 notes	 reminiscent	 of	 black	 tea,



hay,	honey,	and	violets.
Green	Chlorophyll	One	change	in	the	color	of
green	vegetables	as	they	are	cooked	has
nothing	to	do	with	the	pigment	itself.	That
wonderfully	intense,	bright	green	that
develops	within	a	few	seconds	of	throwing
vegetables	into	boiling	water	is	a	result	of	the
sudden	expansion	and	escape	of	gases	trapped
in	the	spaces	between	cells.	Ordinarily,	these
microscopic	air	pockets	cloud	the	color	of	the
chloroplasts.	When	they	collapse,	we	can	see
the	pigments	much	more	directly.

The	Enemy	of	Green:	Acids	Green	chlorophyll
is	susceptible	to	two	chemical	changes	during
cooking.	 One	 is	 the	 loss	 of	 its	 long	 carbon-
hydrogen	 tail,	 which	 leaves	 the	 pigment
water-soluble	—	 so	 that	 it	 leaks	 out	 into	 the
cooking	 liquid	 —	 and	 more	 susceptible	 to
further	 change.	 This	 loss	 is	 encouraged	 by
both	 acid	 and	 alkaline	 conditions	 and	 by	 an
enzyme	 called	 chlorophyllase,	which	 is	most



active	 between	 150–170ºF/66–77ºC	 and	 only
destroyed	 near	 the	 boiling	 point.	 The	 second
and	more	noticeable	change	 in	chlorophyll	 is
the	dulling	of	its	color,	which	is	caused	when
either	 heat	 or	 an	 enzyme	 nudge	 the
magnesium	 atom	 from	 the	 center	 of	 the
molecule.	The	 replacement	of	magnesium	by
hydrogen	is	by	far	the	most	common	cause	of
color	 change	 in	 cooked	 vegetables.	 In	 even
slightly	 acidic	 water,	 the	 plentiful	 hydrogen
ions	 displace	 the	 magnesium,	 a	 change	 that
turns	 chlorophyll	a	 into	 grayish-green
pheophytin	a,	 chlorophyll	b	 into	 yellowish
pheophytin	b.	 Cooking	 vegetables	 without
water	—	stir-frying,	for	example	—	will	also
cause	 a	 color	 change,	 because	 when	 the
temperature	 of	 the	 plant	 tissue	 rises	 above
140ºF/60ºC,	the	organizing	membranes	in	and
around	 the	 chloroplast	 are	 damaged,	 and
chlorophyll	 is	 exposed	 to	 the	 plant’s	 own
natural	acids.	Freezing,	pickling,	dehydration,
and	 simple	 aging	 also	 damage	 chloroplasts



and	chlorophyll.	This	is	why	dull,	olive-green
vegetables	are	so	common.

Changes	 in	chlorophyll	during	cooking.	 Left:
The	 normal	 chlorophyll	 molecule	 is	 bright
green	 and	 has	 a	 fat-like	 tail	 that	 makes	 it
soluble	 in	 fats	 and	 oils.	 Center:	Enzymes	 in
the	 plant	 cells	 can	 remove	 the	 fat-like	 tail,
producing	a	tailless	form	that	is	water-soluble
and	readily	 leaks	into	cooking	liquids.	Right:
In	 acid	 conditions,	 the	 central	 magnesium
atom	 is	 replaced	 by	 hydrogens,	 and	 the
resulting	chlorophyll	molecule	 is	a	dull	olive
green.
Traditional	Aids:	Soda	and	Metals	There	are
two	chemical	tricks	that	can	help	keep	green
vegetables	bright,	and	cooks	have	known
about	them	for	hundreds	and	even	thousands



of	years.	One	is	to	cook	them	in	alkaline
water,	which	has	very	few	hydrogen	ions	that
are	free	to	displace	the	magnesium	in
chlorophyll.	The	great	19th-century	French
chef	Antonin	Carême	de-acidified	his	cooking
water	with	wood	ash;	today	baking	soda
(sodium	bicarbonate)	is	the	easiest.	The	other
chemical	trick	is	to	add	to	the	cooking	water
other	metals	—	copper	and	zinc	—	that	can
replace	magnesium	in	the	chlorophyll
molecule,	and	resist	displacement	by
hydrogen.	However,	both	tricks	have
disadvantages.	Copper	and	zinc	are	essential
trace	nutrients,	but	in	doses	of	more	than	a
few	milligrams	they	can	be	toxic.	And	while
there’s	nothing	toxic	about	sodium
bicarbonate,	excessively	alkaline	conditions
can	turn	vegetable	texture	to	mush	(p.	282),
speed	the	destruction	of	vitamins,	and	leave	a
soapy	off-taste.

Watch	the	Water,	Time,	and	Sauce 	Dulling	of



the	 greens	 can	 be	 minimized	 by	 keeping
cooking	 times	 short,	 between	 five	 and	 seven
minutes,	and	protecting	chlorophyll	from	acid
conditions.	 Stir-frying	 and	 microwaving	 can
be	 very	 quick,	 but	 they	 expose	 chlorophyll
fully	to	the	cells’	own	acids.	Ordinary	boiling
in	copious	water	has	the	advantage	of	diluting
the	 cells’	 acids.	 Most	 city	 tap	 water	 is	 kept
slightly	 alkaline	 to	minimize	 pipe	 corrosion,
and	 slightly	 alkaline	 water	 is	 ideal	 for
preserving	chlorophyll’s	 color.	Check	 the	pH
of	your	water:	if	it’s	acid,	its	pH	below	7,	then
experiment	 with	 adding	 small	 amounts	 of
baking	 soda	 (start	 with	 a	 small	 pinch	 per
gallon/4	 liters)	 to	 adjust	 it	 to	 neutral	 or
slightly	 alkaline.	 Once	 the	 vegetables	 are
cooked,	 either	 serve	 them	 immediately	 or
plunge	 them	briefly	 in	 ice	water	 so	 that	 they
don’t	 continue	 to	 cook	 and	 get	 dull.	 Don’t
dress	 the	 vegetables	 with	 acidic	 ingredients
like	 lemon	 juice	 until	 the	 last	 minute,	 and
consider	 protecting	 them	 first	 with	 a	 thin



layer	of	oil	(as	in	a	vinaigrette)	or	butter.

Old	Tricks	for	Green	Vegetables
Cooks	 had	 worked	 out	 the	 practical
chemistry	of	chlorophyll	long	before	it	had
a	 name.	 The	 Roman	 recipe	 collection	 of
Apicius	advises,	“omne	holus	smaragdinum
fit,	 si	 cum	 nitro	 coquatur. ”	 “All	 green
vegetables	 will	 be	made	 emerald	 colored,
if	 they	 are	 cooked	 with	 nitrum.”	 Nitrum
was	 a	 natural	 soda,	 and	 alkaline	 like	 our
baking	 soda.	 In	 her	 English	 cookbook	 of
1751,	 Hannah	 Glasse	 directed	 readers	 to
“Boil	 all	 your	Greens	 in	 a	 Copper	 Sauce-
pan	by	themselves,	with	a	great	Quantity	of
Water.	Use	no	iron	pans,	etc.,	 for	 they	are
not	proper;	but	 let	 them	be	Copper,	Brass,
or	 Silver.”	 Cookbooks	 of	 the	 early	 19th
century	 suggest	 cooking	 vegetables	 and
making	 cucumber	 pickles	 with	 a	 copper
ha’penny	 coin	 thrown	 in	 to	 improve	 the
color.	 All	 of	 these	 practices	 survived	 in



some	form	until	 the	beginning	of	 the	20th
century,	 though	 Sweden	 outlawed	 the	 use
of	 copper	 cooking	 pots	 in	 its	 armed
services	 in	 the	 18th	 century	 due	 to	 the
toxicity	 of	 copper	 in	 large,	 cumulative
doses.	And	“Tabitha	Tickletooth”	wrote	in
The	Dinner	Question	(1860):	“Never,	under
any	 circumstances,	 unless	 you	 wish
entirely	 to	 destroy	 all	 flavor,	 and	 reduce
your	 peas	 to	 pulp,	 boil	 them	 with	 soda.
This	 favorite	 atrocity	 of	 the	 English
kitchen	 cannot	 be	 too	 strongly
condemned.”

Red-Purple	Anthocyanins	and	Pale
Anthoxanthins	The	usually	reddish
anthocyanins	and	their	pale	yellow	cousins,
the	anthoxanthins,	are	chlorophyll’s
opposites.	They’re	naturally	water-soluble,	so
they	always	bleed	into	the	cooking	water.
They	too	are	sensitive	to	pH	and	to	the
presence	of	metal	ions,	but	acidity	is	good	for
them,	metals	bad.	And	where	chlorophyll	just



gets	duller	or	brighter	according	to	these
conditions,	the	anthocyanins	change	color
completely!	This	is	why	we	occasionally	see
red	cabbage	turn	blue	when	braised,
blueberries	turn	green	in	pancakes	and
muffins,	and	garlic	turn	green	or	blue	when
pickled.	(The	betacyanins	and	betaxanthins	in
beets	and	chard	are	different	compounds	and
somewhat	more	stable.)

The	Enemies:	Dilution,	Alkalinity,	and	Metals
Anthocyanins	 and	 anthoxanthins	 are
concentrated	 in	cell	vacuoles,	 and	sometimes
(as	 in	 purple	 beans	 and	 asparagus)	 just	 in	 a
superficial	layer	of	cells.	So	when	the	food	is
cooked	 and	 the	 vacuoles	 damaged,	 the
pigments	 escape	 and	 can	 become	 so	 diluted
that	 their	 color	 fades	 or	 disappears	 —
especially	if	they’re	cooked	in	a	pot	of	water.
The	pigments	 that	 remain	are	affected	by	 the
new	 chemical	 environment	 of	 the	 cooked
plant	 tissue.	 The	 vacuoles	 in	 which



anthocyanins	 are	 stored	 are	 generally	 acid,
while	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 cell	 fluids	 are	 less	 so.
Cooking	 water	 is	 often	 somewhat	 alkaline,
and	 quick	 breads	 include	 distinctly	 alkaline
baking	soda.	In	acid	conditions,	anthocyanins
tend	 toward	 the	 red;	 around	 neutral	 pH,
they’re	 colorless	 or	 light	 violet;	 and	 in
alkaline	 conditions,	 bluish.	 And	 pale
anthoxanthins	become	more	deeply	yellow	as
alkalinity	 rises.	 So	 red	 fruits	 and	 vegetables
can	 fade	 and	 even	 turn	 blue	 when	 cooked,
while	pale	yellow	ones	darken.	And	 traces	of
metals	in	the	cooking	liquid	can	generate	very
peculiar	 colors:	 some	 anthocyanins	 and
anthoxanthins	 form	 grayish,	 green,	 blue,	 red,
or	brown	complexes	with	iron,	aluminum,	and
tin.

The	Aid:	Acids	The	key	to	maintaining	natural
anthocyanin	 coloration	 is	 to	 keep	 fruits	 and
vegetables	 sufficiently	 acidic,	 and	 avoid
supplying	 trace	 metals.	 Lemon	 juice	 in	 the



cooking	 water	 or	 sprinkled	 on	 the	 food	 can
help	 with	 both	 aims:	 its	 citric	 acid	 binds	 up
metal	 ions.	 Cooking	 red	 cabbage	with	 acidic
apples	 or	 vinegar	 keeps	 it	 from	 turning
purple;	 dispersing	 baking	 soda	 evenly	 in
batters,	and	using	as	little	as	possible	to	keep
the	batter	slightly	acidic,	will	keep	blueberries
from	turning	green.

Creating	 Color	 from	 Tannins 	 On	 rare	 and
wonderful	 occasions,	 cooking	 can	 actually
create	 anthocyanins:	 in	 fact,	 it	 transforms
touch	 into	 color!	 Colorless	 quince	 slices
cooked	in	a	sugar	syrup	lose	their	astringency
and	 develop	 a	 ruby-like	 color	 and
translucency.	Quinces	and	certain	varieties	of
pear	are	especially	rich	in	phenolic	chemicals,
including	 aggregates	 (proanthocyanidins)	 of
from	 2	 to	 20	 anthocyanin-like	 subunits.	 The
aggregates	are	the	right	size	to	cross-link	and
coagulate	 proteins,	 so	 they	 feel	 astringent	 in
our	mouth.	When	these	fruits	are	cooked	for	a



long	time,	the	combination	of	heat	and	acidity
causes	 the	 subunits	 to	 break	 off	 one	 by	 one;
and	 then	oxygen	 from	 the	 air	 reacts	with	 the
subunits	 to	 form	 true	 anthocyanins:	 so	 the
tannic,	pale	fruits	become	more	gentle-tasting
and	 anything	 from	 pale	 pink	 to	 deep	 red.
(Interestingly,	 the	 similar	 development	 of
pinkness	 in	 canned	 pears	 is	 considered
discoloration.	 It’s	 accentuated	 by	 tin	 in
unenameled	cans.)

Turning	Red	Wine	into	White
The	sensitivity	of	anthocyanin	pigments	to
pH	 is	 the	basis	 for	 a	 remarkable	 recipe	 in
the	 late	 Roman	 collection	 attributed	 to
Apicius:

To	make	white	wine	out	of	red	wine.	Put
bean-meal	or	three	egg	whites	into	the
flask	and	stir	for	a	very	long	time.	The	next
day	the	wine	will	be	white.	The	ashes	of
white	grape	vines	have	the	same	effect.



Both	vine	ashes	and	egg	whites	are	alkaline
substances	 and	 do	 transform	 the	 wine’s
color	—	 though	when	 I’ve	 tried	 this	with
eggs,	the	result	is	not	so	much	a	white	wine
as	a	gray	one.

Texture	We’ve	seen	that	the	texture	of
vegetables	and	fruits	is	determined	by	two
factors:	the	inner	water	pressure	of	the
tissue’s	cells,	and	the	structure	of	the	cell
walls	(p.	265).	Cooking	softens	plant	tissues
by	releasing	the	water	pressure	and
dismantling	the	cell	walls.	When	the	tissue
reaches	140ºF/60ºC,	the	cell	membranes	are
damaged,	the	cells	lose	water	and	deflate,	and
the	tissue	as	a	whole	goes	from	firm	and	crisp
to	limp	and	flabby.	(Even	vegetables
surrounded	by	boiling	water	lose	water	during
cooking,	as	weighings	before	and	after	will
prove.)	At	this	stage,	vegetables	often	squeak
against	the	teeth:	they’ve	lost	the	crunch	of
turgid	tissue,	but	the	cell	walls	are	still	strong
and	resist	chewing.	Then	as	the	tissue



temperature	approaches	the	boiling	point,	the
cell	walls	begin	to	weaken.	The	cellulose
framework	remains	mostly	unchanged,	but	the
pectin	and	hemicellulose	“cement”	softens,
gradually	breaks	down	into	shorter	chains,	and
dissolves.	Teeth	now	easily	push	adjacent
cells	apart	from	each	other,	and	the	texture
becomes	tender.	Prolonged	boiling	will
remove	nearly	all	of	the	cell-wall	cement	and
cause	the	tissue	to	disintegrate,	thus
transforming	it	into	a	puree.

Acid	 and	 Hard	 Water	 Maintain	 Firmness;
Salt	 and	 Alkalinity	 Speed	 Softening	 The
wall-dissolving,	tenderizing	phase	of	fruit	and
vegetable	 cooking	 is	 strongly	 influenced	 by
the	 cooking	 environment.	Hemicelluloses	 are
not	 very	 soluble	 in	 acid	 conditions,	 and
readily	 soluble	 in	 alkaline	 conditions.	 This
means	that	fruits	and	vegetables	cooked	in	an
acid	liquid	—	a	tomato	sauce	for	example,	or
other	 fruit	 juices	 and	 purees	—	may	 remain



firm	during	hours	of	cooking,	while	in	neutral
boiling	 water,	 neither	 acid	 nor	 alkaline,	 the
same	vegetables	soften	in	10	or	15	minutes.	In
distinctly	alkaline	water,	fruits	and	vegetables
quickly	 become	mushy.	 Table	 salt	 in	 neutral
cooking	 water	 speeds	 vegetable	 softening,
apparently	 because	 its	 sodium	 ions	 displace
the	 calcium	 ions	 that	 cross-link	 and	 anchor
the	 cement	 molecules	 in	 the	 fruit	 and
vegetable	 cell	walls,	 thus	breaking	 the	cross-
links	 and	 helping	 to	 dissolve	 the
hemicelluloses.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 the
dissolved	 calcium	 in	 hard	 tap	 water	 slows
softening	 by	 reinforcing	 the	 cement	 cross-
links.	 When	 vegetables	 are	 cooked	 without
immersion	 in	water	—	when	 they’re	steamed
or	fried	or	baked	—	the	cell	walls	are	exposed
only	to	the	more	or	less	acid	cell	fluids	(steam
itself	 is	 also	a	 somewhat	 acidic	pH	6),	 and	a
given	 cooking	 time	 often	 produces	 a	 firmer
result	than	boiling.



Cooking	 starchy	 vegetables.	 Left:	Before
cooking,	 the	plant	cells	are	 intact,	 the	starch
granules	 compact	 and	 hard.	 Right:	Cooking
causes	 the	 starch	 granules	 to	 absorb	 water
from	the	cell	fluids,	swell,	and	soften.

The	cook	can	make	use	of	these	influences
to	diagnose	the	cause	of	excessively	rapid	or
slow	softening	and	adjust	the	preparation	—
for	example,	precooking	vegetables	in	plain
water	before	adding	them	to	a	tomato	sauce,
or	compensating	for	hard	water	with	a
softening	pinch	of	alkaline	baking	soda.	In	the
case	of	green	vegetables,	shortening	the
softening	time	with	the	help	of	salt	and	a
discreet	dose	of	baking	soda	helps	preserve
the	bright	green	of	the	chlorophyll	(p.	280).

Starchy	Vegetables 	 Potatoes,	 sweet	 potatoes,



winter	squashes,	and	other	starchy	vegetables
owe	 their	 distinctive	 cooked	 texture	 to	 their
starch	granules.	 In	 the	 raw	vegetables,	 starch
granules	 are	 hard,	 closely	 packed,
microscopic	 agglomerations	 of	 starch
molecules,	 and	 give	 a	 chalky	 feeling	 when
chewed	out	of	 the	cells.	They	begin	 to	soften
at	 about	 the	 same	 temperature	 at	 which	 the
membrane	 proteins	 denature,	 the	 “gelation
range,”	 which	 in	 the	 potato	 is	 from	 137–
150ºF/58–66ºC	(it	varies	from	plant	to	plant).
In	 this	 range	 the	 starch	 granules	 begin	 to
absorb	 water	 molecules,	 which	 disrupt	 their
compact	 structure,	 and	 the	 granules	 swell	 up
to	 many	 times	 their	 original	 size,	 forming	 a
soft	gel,	or	sponge-like	network	of	long	chains
holding	water	 in	 the	pockets	 between	 chains.
The	 overall	 result	 is	 a	 tender	 but	 somewhat
dry	 texture,	 because	 the	 tissue	 moisture	 has
been	soaked	up	 into	 the	starch.	 (Think	of	 the
textural	 difference	 between	 cooked	 high-
starch	 potatoes	 and	 low-starch	 carrots.)	 In



starchy	 vegetables	 with	 relatively	 weak	 cell
walls,	 the	 gel-filled	 cells	 may	 be	 cohesive
enough	 to	 pull	 away	 from	 each	 other	 as
separate	 little	 particles,	 giving	 a	 mealy
impression.	 This	 water	 absorption	 and	 the
large	 surface	 area	 of	 separate	 cells	 are	 the
reasons	 that	 mashed	 potatoes	 and	 other
cooked	 starchy	 purees	 benefit	 from	 and
accommodate	 large	 amounts	 of	 lubricating
fat.

Precooking	Can	Give	 a	 Persistent	 Firmness
to	 Some	 Vegetables	 and	 Fruits 	 It	 turns	 out
that	 in	 certain	 vegetables	 and	 fruits	 —
including	 potatoes,	 sweet	 potatoes,	 beets,
carrots,	beans,	cauliflower,	tomatoes,	cherries,
apples	—	 the	usual	 softening	during	 cooking
can	 be	 reduced	 by	 a	 low-temperature
precooking	 step.	 If	 preheated	 to	 130–
140ºF/55–60ºC	for	20–30	minutes,	these	foods
develop	 a	 persistent	 firmness	 that	 survives
prolonged	final	cooking.	This	can	be	valuable



for	vegetables	meant	 to	hold	 their	 shape	 in	a
long-cooked	meat	dish,	or	potatoes	in	a	potato
salad,	or	for	foods	to	be	preserved	by	canning.
It’s	 also	 valuable	 for	 boiled	 whole	 potatoes
and	beets,	whose	outer	 regions	are	 inevitably
over-softened	 and	 may	 begin	 to	 disintegrate
while	 the	 centers	 cook	 through.	 These	 and
other	long-cooked	root	vegetables	are	usually
started	in	cold	water,	so	that	the	outer	regions
will	firm	up	during	the	slow	temperature	rise.
Firm-able	 vegetables	 and	 fruits	 have	 an
enzyme	 in	 their	 cell	 walls	 that	 becomes
activated	 at	 around	 120ºF/50ºC	 (and
inactivated	 above	 160ºF/70ºC),	 and	 alters	 the
cell-wall	 pectins	 so	 that	 they’re	 more	 easily
cross-linked	 by	 calcium	 ions.	 At	 the	 same
time,	 calcium	 ions	 are	 being	 released	 as	 the
cell	 contents	 leak	 through	 damaged
membranes,	and	 they	cross-link	 the	pectin	so
that	it	will	be	much	more	resistant	to	removal
or	breakdown	at	boiling	temperatures.



Persistently	 Crisp	 Vegetables 	 A	 few
underground	 stem	 vegetables	 are	 notable	 for
retaining	 some	 crunchiness	 after	 prolonged
cooking	 and	 even	 canning.	These	 include	 the
Chinese	 water	 chestnut,	 lotus	 root,	 bamboo
shoots,	 and	 beets.	 Their	 textural	 robustness
comes	from	particular	phenolic	compounds	in
their	cell	walls	(ferulic	acids)	that	form	bonds
with	 the	 cell-wall	 carbohydrates	 and	 prevent
them	 from	 being	 dissolved	 away	 during
cooking.

Flavor	 The	 relatively	 mild	 flavor	 of	 most
vegetables	 and	 fruits	 is	 intensified	 by
cooking.	 Heating	 makes	 taste	 molecules	 —
sweet	 sugars,	 sour	 acids	—	 more	 prominent
by	 breaking	 down	 cell	 walls	 and	 making	 it
easier	for	the	cell	contents	to	escape	and	reach
our	taste	buds.	Carrots,	for	example,	 taste	far
sweeter	 when	 cooked.	 Heat	 also	 makes	 the
food’s	 aromatic	molecules	more	 volatile	 and
so	 more	 noticeable,	 and	 it	 creates	 new



molecules	 by	 causing	 increased	 enzyme
activity,	mixing	of	 cell	 contents,	 and	general
chemical	 reactivity.	 The	 more	 prolonged	 or
intense	 the	 heating,	 the	 more	 the	 food’s
original	 aroma	 molecules	 are	 modified	 and
supplemented,	 and	 so	 the	more	 complex	 and
“cooked”	 the	 flavor.	 If	 the	 cooking
temperature	 exceeds	 the	 boiling	 point	 —	 in
frying	and	baking,	 for	example	—	then	 these
carbohydrate-rich	 materials	 will	 begin	 to
undergo	 browning	 reactions,	 which	 produce
characteristic	roasted	and	caramelized	flavors.
Cooks	can	create	several	layers	of	flavor	in	a
dish	 by	 combining	 well-cooked,	 lightly
cooked,	 and	 even	 raw	 batches	 of	 the	 same
vegetables	or	herbs.

One	sensory	quality	unique	to	plants	is
astringency	(p.	271),	and	it	can	make	such
foods	as	artichokes,	unripe	fruits,	and	nuts
less	than	entirely	pleasant	to	eat.	There	are
ways	to	control	the	influence	of	tannins	in
these	foods.	Acids	and	salt	increase	the



perception	of	astringency,	while	sugar	reduces
it.	Adding	milk,	gelatin,	or	other	proteins	to	a
dish	will	reduce	its	astringency	by	inducing
the	tannins	to	bind	to	food	proteins	before
they	can	affect	salivary	proteins.	Ingredients
rich	in	pectin	or	gums	will	also	take	some
tannins	out	of	circulation,	and	fats	and	oils
will	slow	the	initial	binding	of	tannins	and
proteins.

Nutritional	Value	Cooking	destroys	some	of
the	 nutrients	 in	 food,	 but	 makes	 many
nutrients	 more	 easily	 absorbed.	 It’s	 a	 good
idea	to	include	both	raw	and	cooked	fruits	and
vegetables	in	our	daily	diet.

Some	Diminishment	 of	 Nutritional	 Value…
Cooking	 generally	 reduces	 the	 nutritional
content	 of	 fruits	 and	 vegetables.	 There	 are
some	important	exceptions	to	this	rule,	but	the
levels	 of	 most	 vitamins,	 antioxidants,	 and
other	beneficial	substances	are	diminished	by
the	 combination	 of	 high	 temperatures,



uncontrolled	enzyme	activity,	and	exposure	to
oxygen	 and	 to	 light.	 They	 and	 minerals	 can
also	be	drawn	out	of	plant	tissues	by	cooking
water.	These	losses	can	be	minimized	by	rapid
and	 brief	 cooking.	 Baked	 potatoes,	 for
example,	 heat	 up	 relatively	 slowly	 and	 lose
much	more	vitamin	C	 to	 enzyme	action	 than
do	boiled	potatoes.	However,	some	techniques
that	speed	cooking	—	cutting	vegetables	 into
small	pieces,	and	boiling	in	a	large	volume	of
water,	which	maintains	its	temperature	—	can
result	 in	 increased	 leaching	 of	 water-soluble
nutrients,	including	minerals	and	the	B	and	C
vitamins.	 To	 maximize	 the	 retention	 of
vitamins	and	minerals,	cook	small	batches	of
vegetables	 and	 fruits	 in	 the	microwave	oven,
in	a	minimal	amount	of	added	water.

…And	 Some	 Enhancement	 Cooking	 has
several	 general	 nutritional	 benefits.	 It
eliminates	 potentially	 harmful	 microbes.	 By
softening	 and	 concentrating	 foods,	 it	 also



makes	 them	 easier	 to	 eat	 in	 significant
quantities.	 And	 it	 actually	 improves	 the
availability	 of	 some	 nutrients.	 Two	 of	 the
most	 important	 are	 starch	 and	 the	 carotenoid
pigments.	 Starch	 consists	 of	 long	 chains	 of
sugar	molecules	 crammed	 into	masses	 called
granules.	 Our	 digestive	 enzymes	 can’t
penetrate	 past	 the	 outer	 layer	 of	 raw	 starch
granules,	 but	 cooking	 unpacks	 the	 starch
chains	and	lets	our	enzymes	break	them	down.
Then	there	are	beta-carotene,	the	precursor	to
vitamin	A,	 its	 chemical	 relative	 lycopene,	 an
important	 antioxidant,	 and	 other	 valuable
carotenoid	pigments.	Because	they’re	not	very
soluble	 in	 water,	 we	 simply	 don’t	 extract
these	 chemicals	 very	 efficiently	 by	 just
chewing	and	swallowing.	Cooking	disrupts	the
plant	tissues	more	thoroughly	and	allows	us	to
extract	 much	more	 of	 them.	 (Added	 fat	 also
significantly	 improves	 our	 absorption	 of	 fat-
soluble	nutrients.)



There	 are	 many	 different	 ways	 of	 cooking
vegetables	and	fruits.	What	follows	is	a	brief
outline	 of	 the	 most	 common	 methods	 and
their	general	effects.	They	can	be	divided	into
three	groups:	moist	methods	that	transfer	heat
by	means	of	water;	dry	methods	 that	 transfer
heat	by	means	of	air,	oil,	or	infrared	radiation;
and	a	more	miscellaneous	group	that	includes
ways	of	 restructuring	 the	 food,	either	 turning
it	 into	 a	 fluid	 version	 of	 itself,	 or	 extracting
the	essence	of	its	flavor	or	color.

Hot	Water:	Boiling,	Steaming,
Pressure-Cooking

Boiling	and	steaming	are	the	simplest
methods	for	cooking	vegetables,	because	they
require	no	judgment	of	cooking	temperature:
whether	water	is	boiling	on	a	high	flame	or
low,	its	temperature	is	212ºF/100ºC	(near	sea
level,	with	predictably	lower	temperatures	at
higher	elevations).	And	because	hot	water	and



steam	are	excellent	carriers	of	heat,	these	are
efficient	methods	as	well,	ideal	for	the	rapid
cooking	of	green	vegetables	that	minimizes
their	loss	of	color	(p.	280).	One	important
difference	is	that	hot	water	dissolves	and
extracts	some	pectin	and	calcium	from	cell
walls,	while	steaming	leaves	them	in	place:	so
boiling	will	soften	vegetables	faster	and	more
thoroughly.

Boiling	 In	 the	 case	 of	 boiling	 green
vegetables,	 it’s	 good	 to	 know	 the	 pH	 and
dissolved	 mineral	 content	 of	 your	 cooking
water.	 Ideally	 it	 should	 be	 neutral	 or	 just
slightly	 alkaline	 (pH	 7–8),	 and	 not	 too	 hard,
because	acidity	dulls	chlorophyll,	and	acidity
and	 calcium	 both	 slow	 softening	 and	 so
prolong	 the	 cooking.	 A	 large	 volume	 of
rapidly	boiling	water	will	maintain	a	boil	even
after	 the	 cold	 vegetables	 are	 added,	 cut	 into
pieces	small	enough	to	cook	through	in	about
five	 minutes.	 Salt	 in	 the	 cooking	 water	 at



about	the	concentration	of	seawater	(3%,	or	2
tablespoons/30	 gm	per	 quart/liter)	will	 speed
softening	(p.	282)	and	also	minimize	the	loss
of	 cell	 contents	 to	 the	 water	 (cooking	 water
without	 its	own	dissolved	salt	will	draw	salts
and	 sugars	 from	 the	 plant	 cells).	 When	 just
tender	 enough,	 the	 vegetables	 should	 be
removed	 and	 either	 served	 immediately	 or
scooped	 briefly	 into	 ice	 water	 to	 stop	 the
cooking	 and	 prevent	 further	 dulling	 of	 the
color.

Starchy	vegetables,	especially	potatoes
cooked	whole	or	in	large	pieces,	benefit	from
a	different	treatment.	Their	vulnerability	is	a
tendency	for	the	outer	portions	to	soften
excessively	and	fall	apart	while	the	interiors
cook	through.	Hard	and	slightly	acid	water
can	help	them	maintain	their	surface	firmness,
as	will	starting	them	in	cold	water	and	raising
the	temperature	only	gradually	to	reinforce
their	cell	walls	(p.	283).	Salt	is	best	omitted
from	the	water,	since	it	encourages	early



softening	of	the	vulnerable	exterior.	Nor	is	it
necessarily	best	to	cook	them	at	the	boiling
point:	180–190ºF/80–85ºC	is	sufficient	to
soften	starch	and	cell	walls	and	won’t
overcook	the	exterior	as	badly,	though	the
cooking	through	will	take	longer.

When	vegetables	are	included	in	a	meat
braise	or	stew	and	are	expected	to	have	a
tender	integrity,	their	cooking	needs	as	much
attention	as	the	meat’s.	A	very	low	cooking
temperature	that	keeps	the	meat	tender	may
leave	the	vegetables	hard,	while	repeated
bouts	of	simmering	to	dissolve	a	tough	cut’s
connective	tissue	may	turn	them	to	mush.	The
vegetables	can	be	precooked	separately,	either
to	soften	them	for	a	low-temperature	braise	or
firm	them	for	long	simmering;	or	they	can	be
removed	from	a	long-simmered	dish	when
they	reach	the	desired	texture	and	added	back
when	the	meat	is	done.

Steaming	 Steaming	 is	 a	 good	 method	 for



cooking	 vegetables	 at	 the	 boiling	 point,	 but
without	 the	 necessity	 of	 heating	 a	whole	 pot
of	 water,	 exposing	 the	 food	 directly	 to
turbulent	 water,	 and	 leaching	 out	 flavor	 or
color	or	nutrients.	It	doesn’t	allow	the	cook	to
control	 saltiness,	 calcium	 cross-linking,	 or
acidity	 (steam	 itself	 is	 a	 slightly	 acid	 pH	 6,
and	 plant	 cells	 and	 vacuoles	 are	 also	 more
acid	 than	 is	 ideal	 for	 chlorophyll);	 and
evenness	 of	 cooking	 requires	 that	 the	 pieces
be	arranged	 in	a	 single	 layer,	or	 that	 the	pile
be	very	loose	to	allow	the	steam	access	to	all
food	 surfaces.	 Steaming	 leaves	 the	 food
tasting	 exclusively	of	 its	 cooked	 self,	 though
the	 steam	 can	 also	 be	 aromatized	 by	 the
inclusion	of	herbs	and	spices.

Pressure	 Cooking	 Pressure	 cooking	 is
sometimes	applied	to	vegetables,	especially	in
the	canning	of	low-acid	foods.	It	is	essentially
cooking	 by	 a	 combination	 of	 boiling	 water
and	 steam,	 except	 that	 both	 are	 at	 about



250ºF/120ºC	 rather	 than	 212ºF/100ºC.
(Enclosing	 the	 water	 in	 an	 airtight	 container
traps	the	water	vapor,	which	in	turn	raises	the
boiling	 point	 of	 the	water.)	 Pressure	 cooking
heats	 foods	 very	 rapidly,	 which	 means	 that
it’s	 also	 very	 easy	 to	 overcook	 fresh
vegetables.	 It’s	 best	 to	 follow	 specialized
recipes	closely.

Hot	Air,	Oil,	and	Radiation:
Baking,	Frying,	and	Grilling

These	“dry”	cooking	methods	remove
moisture	from	the	food	surface,	thus
concentrating	and	intensifying	flavor,	and	can
heat	it	above	the	boiling	point,	to
temperatures	that	generate	the	typical	flavors
and	colors	of	the	browning	reactions	(p.	777).

Baking	 The	 hot	 air	 in	 an	 oven	 cooks
vegetables	 and	 fruits	 relatively	 slowly,	 for
several	 reasons.	 First,	 air	 is	 not	 as	 dense	 a



medium	 as	 water	 or	 oil,	 so	 air	 molecules
collide	 with	 the	 food	 less	 often,	 and	 take
longer	 to	 impart	 energy	 to	 it.	 Second,	 a	 cool
object	 in	 a	 hot	 oven	 develops	 a	 stagnant
“boundary	 layer”	 of	 air	molecules	 and	water
vapor	 that	 slows	 the	 collision	 rate	 even
further.	 (A	convection	 fan	speeds	cooking	by
circulating	the	air	more	rapidly	and	disrupting
the	 boundary	 layer.)	 Third,	 in	 a	 dry
atmosphere	 the	 food’s	 moisture	 evaporates
from	the	surface,	and	this	evaporation	absorbs
most	of	 the	 incoming	energy,	only	a	 fraction
of	which	gets	to	the	center.	So	baking	is	much
less	efficient	than	boiling	or	frying.

Of	course,	the	oven’s	thin	medium	is	why
the	oven	is	a	good	means	for	drying	foods,
either	partly	—	for	example,	to	concentrate
the	flavor	of	watery	tomatoes	—	or	almost
fully,	to	preserve	and	create	a	chewy	or	crisp
texture.	And	once	the	surface	has	dried	and	its
temperature	rises	close	to	the	oven’s,	then
carbohydrates	and	proteins	can	undergo	the



browning	reactions,	which	generate	hundreds
of	new	taste	and	aroma	molecules	and	so	a
greater	depth	of	flavor.

Often	vegetables	are	coated	with	oil	before
baking,	and	this	simple	pretreatment	has	two
important	consequences.	The	thin	surface
layer	of	oil	doesn’t	evaporate	the	way	the	food
moisture	does,	so	all	the	heat	the	oil	absorbs
from	the	oven	air	goes	to	raising	its	and	the
food’s	temperature.	The	surface	therefore	gets
hotter	than	it	would	without	the	oil,	and	the
food	is	significantly	quicker	both	to	brown
and	to	cook	through.	Second,	some	of	the	oil
molecules	participate	in	the	surface	browning
reactions	and	change	the	balance	of	reaction
products	that	are	formed;	they	create	a
distinctly	richer	flavor.

Frying	and	Sautéing	Baking	oiled	vegetables
is	sometimes	called	“oven	frying,”	and	indeed
true	 frying	 in	 oil	 also	 desiccates	 the	 food
surface,	 browns	 it,	 and	 enriches	 the	 flavor



with	 the	 characteristic	 notes	 contributed	 by
the	 oil	 itself.	A	 food	 may	 be	 fried	 partly	 or
fully	 immersed	 in	oil,	 or	 just	well	 lubricated
with	it	(sautéing);	and	typical	oil	temperatures
range	 from	 325–375ºF/160–190ºC.	 True
frying	is	faster	than	oven	frying	because	oil	is
much	 denser	 than	 air,	 so	 energetic	 oil
molecules	 collide	 with	 the	 food	 much	 more
frequently.	 The	 key	 to	 successful	 frying	 is
getting	 the	piece	 size	 and	 frying	 temperature
right,	 so	 that	 the	 pieces	 cook	 through	 in	 the
time	 that	 the	 surfaces	 require	 to	 be	 properly
browned.	 Starchy	 vegetables	 are	 the	 most
commonly	 fried	 plant	 foods,	 and	 I	 describe
the	important	example	of	potatoes	in	detail	in
chapter	 6	 (p.	 303).	 Many	 more	 delicate
vegetables	 and	 even	 fruits	 are	 fried	 with	 a
protective	surface	coating	of	batter	(p.	553)	or
breading,	which	 browns	 and	 crisps	while	 the
food	 inside	 is	 insulated	 from	 direct	 contact
with	the	high	heat.



Stir-Frying	 and	 Sweating	 Two	 important
variations	 on	 frying	 exploit	 opposite	 ends	 of
the	 temperature	 scale.	 One	 is	 high-
temperature	stir-frying.	The	vegetables	are	cut
into	 pieces	 sufficiently	 small	 that	 they	 heat
through	in	about	a	minute,	and	they’re	cooked
on	 a	 smoking-hot	 metal	 surface	 with	 just
enough	 oil	 to	 lubricate	 them,	 and	 with
constant	 stirring	 to	 ensure	 even	 heating	 and
prevent	 burning.	 In	 stir-frying	 it’s	 important
to	preheat	the	pan	alone	and	add	the	oil	just	a
few	 seconds	before	 the	vegetables;	 otherwise
the	high	heat	will	damage	the	oil	and	make	it
unpalatable,	viscous,	and	sticky.	The	 rapidity
of	 stir-frying	 makes	 it	 a	 good	 method	 for
retaining	pigments	and	nutrients.	At	the	other
extreme	 is	 a	 technique	 sometimes	 called
“sweating”	 (Italian	soffrito	 or	 Catalan
soffregit,	 both	 meaning	 “underfrying”):	 the
very	 slow	 cooking	 over	 low	 heat	 of	 finely
chopped	 vegetables	 coated	 with	 oil,	 to
develop	 a	 flavor	 base	 for	 a	 dish	 featuring



other	 ingredients.	 Often	 the	 cook	 wants	 to
avoid	 browning,	 or	 to	 minimize	 it;	 here	 the
low	 heat	 and	 oil	 function	 to	 soften	 the
vegetables,	 develop	 and	 concentrate	 their
flavors,	 and	 blend	 those	 flavors	 together.
Vegetables	 cooked	 in	 a	 version	 of	 the	confit
(p.	 177)	 are	 immersed	 in	 oil	 and	 slowly
cooked	 to	 soften	 them	 and	 infuse	 them	with
the	oil’s	flavor	and	richness.

Grilling	Grilling	and	broiling	cook	by	means
of	the	intense	infrared	radiation	emitted	from
burning	 coals,	 flames,	 and	 glowing	 electrical
elements.	This	radiation	can	desiccate,	brown,
and	burn	in	rapid	succession,	so	it’s	important
to	adjust	the	distance	between	heat	source	and
food	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 the	 food	 can	 heat
through	 before	 the	 surface	 chars.	 As	 in
baking,	 a	 coating	 of	 oil	 speeds	 the	 cooking
and	 improves	 flavor.	Enclosing	 the	 food	 in	 a
wrapper	—	fresh	corn	in	its	husk,	plantains	in
their	 skin,	 potatoes	 in	 aluminum	 foil	—	 can



give	 some	 protection	 to	 the	 surface	 and
essentially	steam	the	food	in	its	own	moisture,
while	 allowing	 in	 some	 of	 the	 smoky	 aroma
from	the	heat	source	and	smoldering	wrapper.
And	 some	 foods	 actually	 benefit	 from
charring.	 Large	 sweet	 and	 hot	 chillis	 have	 a
thick,	tough	cuticle	or	“skin”	that	is	tedious	to
peel	 away.	 Because	 it’s	 relatively	 dry
compared	 to	 the	 underlying	 flesh,	 and	 made
up	 in	 part	 of	 flammable	 waxes,	 it	 can	 be
burned	 to	 a	 crisp	 before	 the	 flesh	 gets	 soft.
Once	burned,	the	skin	can	be	scraped	or	rinsed
off	with	ease.	Similarly,	the	flesh	of	eggplants
is	smokily	perfumed	and	easily	scraped	from
the	 skin	when	 the	whole	 vegetable	 is	 grilled
until	 the	 flesh	 softens	 and	 the	 skin	 dries	 and
toughens.

Microwave	Cooking

Microwave	radiation	selectively	energizes	the
water	molecules	in	fruits	and	vegetables,	and



the	water	molecules	then	heat	up	the	cell	wall,
starch,	and	other	plant	molecules	(p.	786).
Because	radiation	penetrates	into	food	an
inch/2	cm	or	so,	it	can	be	a	fairly	rapid
method,	and	is	an	excellent	one	for	retaining
vitamins	and	minerals.	However,	it	has
several	quirks	that	the	cook	must	anticipate
and	compensate	for.	Because	the	microwaves
penetrate	a	limited	distance	into	the	food,	they
will	cook	evenly	only	if	the	food	is	cut	into
similar-sized	thin	pieces,	and	the	pieces
arranged	in	a	single	layer	or	very	loose	pile.
Energetic	water	molecules	turn	into	water
vapor	and	escape	from	the	food:	so
microwaves	tend	to	dry	foods	out.	Vegetables
should	be	enclosed	in	an	almost	steam-tight
container,	and	often	benefit	from	starting	out
with	a	small	amount	of	added	water	so	that
their	surfaces	don’t	lose	too	much	moisture
and	shrivel.	And	because	the	foods	must	be
enclosed,	they	retain	some	volatile	chemicals
that	would	otherwise	escape	—	so	their	flavor



can	seem	strong	and	odd.	The	inclusion	of
other	aromatics	can	help	mask	this	effect.

Cooks	can	exploit	the	drying	quality	of
microwave	radiation	to	crisp	thin	slices	of
fruits	and	vegetables.	This	is	best	done	at	a
low	power	setting	so	that	the	heating	is	gentle
and	even,	and	doesn’t	rapidly	progress	to
browning	or	burning.	When	there’s	little
water	left	in	a	patch	of	tissue,	it	takes	more
energy	to	break	it	free,	so	the	local	boiling
point	rises	to	a	temperature	high	enough	to
break	apart	carbohydrates	and	proteins,	and
this	causes	browning	and	then	blackening.

Pulverizing	and	Extracting

In	addition	to	preparing	fruits	and	vegetables
more	or	less	as	is,	with	their	tissue	structure
intact,	cooks	often	deconstruct	them
completely.	In	some	preparations,	we	blend
the	contents	of	the	plant	cells	with	the	walls
that	normally	separate	and	contain	them.	In



others,	we	separate	the	food’s	flavor	or	color
from	its	flavorless,	colorless	cell-wall	fibers
or	abundant	water,	and	produce	a	concentrated
extract	of	that	food’s	essence.

Purees	The	simplest	deconstructed	version	of
fruits	 and	 vegetables	 is	 the	 puree,	 which
includes	 such	 preparations	 as	 tomato	 and
apple	 sauces,	 mashed	 potatoes,	 carrot	 soup,
and	guacamole.	We	make	purees	by	applying
enough	 physical	 force	 to	 crush	 the	 tissue,
break	apart	and	break	open	 its	cells,	and	mix
cell	innards	with	fragments	of	the	cells’	walls.
Thanks	to	the	high	water	content	of	the	cells,
most	purees	are	fluid	versions	of	 the	original
tissue.	And	thanks	to	the	thickening	powers	of
the	 cell-wall	 carbohydrates,	 which	 bind	 up
water	molecules	 and	get	 entangled	with	 each
other,	 they	 also	 have	 a	 considerable,	 velvety
body	—	or	can	develop	such	a	body	when	we
boil	 off	 excess	 water	 and	 concentrate	 the
carbohydrates.	 (Potatoes	 and	 other	 starchy



vegetables	 are	 a	 major	 exception:	 starch
granules	 in	 the	 cells	 absorb	 all	 the	 free
moisture	in	the	tissue,	and	are	best	left	intact
in	 unbroken	 cells	 so	 the	 solid	 puree	 doesn’t
become	 gluey.	 See	 the	 discussion	 of	mashed
potatoes	 on	 p.	 303.)	 Purees	 are	 made	 into
sauces	 and	 soups,	 frozen	 into	 ices,	 and	 dried
into	 “leathers.”	 For	 purees	 as	 sauces,	 see	 p.
620.

Many	ripe	fruits	have	sufficiently
weakened	cell	walls	that	they	are	easily
pureed	raw,	while	most	vegetables	are	first
cooked	to	soften	the	cell	walls.	Precooking
has	the	additional	advantage	of	inactivating
cell	enzymes	which,	when	cellular
organization	is	disrupted,	would	otherwise
destroy	vitamins	and	pigments,	alter	flavor,
and	cause	unsightly	browning	(p.	269).	The
size	of	solid	particles	in	the	puree,	and	so	its
textural	fineness,	is	determined	by	how
thoroughly	ripening	or	cooking	have
dismantled	the	cell	walls,	and	by	the	method



used	to	crush	the	tissue.	Mashing	by	hand
leaves	large	cell	aggregates	intact;	the	screens
in	food	mills	and	strainers	produce	smaller
pieces;	machine-powered	food	processor
blades	chop	very	finely,	and	blender	blades,
working	in	a	more	confined	space,	chop	and
shear	more	finely	still.	Persistent	cellulose-
rich	fibers	can	be	removed	only	by	passing	the
puree	through	a	strainer.

Juices	 Juices	 are	 refined	 versions	 of	 the
puree:	 they	 are	 mainly	 the	 fluid	 contents	 of
fruit	 and	 vegetable	 cells,	 made	 by	 crushing
the	 raw	 food	 and	 separating	 off	 most	 of	 the
solid	 cell-wall	 materials.	 Some	 of	 these
materials	inevitably	end	up	in	the	juice	—	for
example,	 the	pulp	 in	orange	 juice	—	and	can
cause	both	desirable	and	undesirable	haziness
and	body.	Because	juicing	mixes	together	the
contents	 of	 living	 cells,	 including	 active
enzymes	 and	 various	 reactive	 and	 oxygen-
sensitive	substances,	fresh	juices	are	unstable



and	change	rapidly.	Apple	and	pear	juices	turn
brown,	 for	 example,	 thanks	 to	 the	 action	 of
browning	enzymes	and	oxygen	(p.	269).	If	not
used	immediately,	they’re	best	kept	chilled	or
frozen,	 perhaps	 after	 a	 heat	 treatment	 just
short	of	the	boil	to	inactivate	enzymes	and	kill
microbes.	Modern	juicing	machines	can	apply
very	 strong	 forces,	 and	 make	 it	 possible	 to
extract	 juice	 from	any	 fruit	 or	 vegetable,	 not
just	the	traditional	ones.

Foams	 and	 Emulsions	 The	 cell-wall
carbohydrates	in	purees	and	juices	can	be	used
to	 stabilize	 two	 otherwise	 fleeting	 physical
structures,	 a	 foam	 of	 air	 bubbles	 and	 an
emulsion	of	oil	droplets	(pp.	638,	625),	which
are	 especially	 easy	 to	 prepare	 with	 modern
electrical	 blenders	 and	 mixers.	 If	 a	 puree	 or
juice	is	whipped	to	fill	it	with	air	bubbles,	the
cell-wall	carbohydrates	slow	the	flow	of	water
out	 of	 the	 bubble	 walls,	 so	 the	 bubbles	 take
longer	 to	 collapse.	 This	 allows	 the	 cook	 to



make	a	foam	or	mousse	that	lasts	long	enough
to	be	savored;	foams	from	juice	are	especially
ethereal.	Similarly,	when	oil	is	whisked	into	a
puree	 or	 juice,	 the	 plant	 carbohydrates
insulate	 the	oil	droplets	 from	each	other,	and
the	oil	and	water	phases	separate	more	slowly.
The	cook	can	 therefore	 incorporate	oil	 into	a
puree	or	 juice	 to	form	a	 temporary	emulsion,
with	 richer	 dimensions	 of	 flavor	 and	 texture
than	 the	 puree	 alone.	 The	 thicker	 the	 puree,
the	more	stable	and	 less	delicate	 the	foam	or
emulsion.	 The	 consistency	 of	 a	 thick
preparation	can	be	lightened	by	adding	liquid
(water,	juice,	stock).

Frozen	 Purees	 and	 Juices:	 Ices,	 Sorbets,
Sherbets	When	purees	 and	 juices	 are	 frozen,
they	 form	 a	 refreshing	 semisolid	mass	 that’s
known	 by	 a	 variety	 of	 names,	 including	 ice,
sorbet,	 granita,	 and	 sherbet.	 This	 kind	 of
preparation	 was	 first	 refined	 in	 17th-century
Italy,	 which	 gave	 us	 the	 term	sorbet	 (via



sorbetto	 from	the	Arabic	sharab,	or	“syrup”).
Its	 flavor	 is	 essentially	 that	 of	 the	 fruit
(sometimes	 an	 herb,	 spice,	 flower,	 coffee,	 or
tea),	usually	heightened	with	added	sugar	and
acid	 (to	25–35%	and	0.5%	 respectively),	 and
with	an	overall	sugar-acid	ratio	similar	to	that
of	the	melons	(30–60:1;	see	p.	382).	The	puree
or	 juice	 is	 often	 diluted	 with	 some	 water	 as
well,	 sometimes	 to	 reduce	 the	acidity	 (lemon
and	 lime	 juices),	 sometimes	 to	 stretch	 an
ingredient	 in	 short	 supply,	 and	 sometimes	 to
improve	 the	 flavor,	 which	 is	 interestingly
affected	by	the	very	cold	serving	temperature:
for	 example,	 undiluted	 melon	 can	 taste	 too
much	like	its	close	relative	the	cucumber,	and
thinned	pear	puree	tastes	less	like	frozen	fruit,
more	 delicate	 and	 perfumed.	 In	 the	 United
States,	 “sherbet”	 is	 the	 term	 applied	 to	 fruit
ices	with	milk	 solids	 included	 (3–5%)	 to	 fill
out	the	flavor	and	help	soften	the	texture.

Though	traditional	ices	are	made	with
fruits,	vegetable	ices	can	be	refreshing	too,	as



a	cool	mouthful	and	as	a	surprise.

The	Texture	of	Frozen	Purees	and	Juices 	Ice
texture	 can	 vary	 from	 rocky	 to	 coarse	 to
creamy,	 depending	 on	 the	 proportions	 of
ingredients,	 how	 the	 ice	 is	 made,	 and	 the
temperature	 at	 which	 it’s	 served.	 During	 the
freezing	 process,	 water	 in	 the	 mix	 solidifies
into	 millions	 of	 tiny	 ice	 crystals,	 which	 are
surrounded	by	 all	 the	other	 substances	 in	 the
mix:	mainly	leftover	liquid	water	that	forms	a
syrup	 with	 dissolved	 sugars,	 both	 from	 the
fruit	 and	 added	 by	 the	 cook,	 as	 well	 as
contents	of	the	plant	cells	and	cell	walls.	The
more	 syrup	 and	 plant	 debris	 there	 are,	 the
more	 the	 solid	 crystals	 are	 lubricated,	 the
more	 easily	 they	 slide	 past	 each	 other	 when
we	press	with	spoon	or	tongue,	and	the	softer
the	 ice’s	 texture.	 Most	 ices	 are	 made	 with
about	 double	 the	 sugar	 of	 ice	 cream	 (whose
substantial	 fat	 and	 protein	 content	 helps
soften	the	texture,	p.	40),	between	25	and	35%



by	 weight.	 Sweet	 fruits	 require	 less	 added
sugar	to	reach	this	proportion,	and	purees	rich
in	 pectins	 and	 other	 plant	 debris	 (pineapple,
raspberry)	 require	 less	 total	 sugar	 for
softening.	Many	 cooks	 replace	 a	 quarter	 to	 a
third	 of	 the	 added	 table	 sugar	 (sucrose)	with
corn	 syrup	 or	 glucose,	 which	 helps	 soften
without	 adding	 as	 much	 perceptible
sweetness.	The	size	of	the	ice	crystals,	and	so
the	 ice’s	 coarseness	 or	 creaminess,	 is
determined	by	 the	content	of	 sugar	and	plant
solids,	and	by	agitation	during	freezing.	Sugar
and	 solids	 encourage	 the	 formation	 of	 many
small	 crystals	 rather	 than	 a	 few	 large	 ones,
and	 so	 do	 stirring	 and	 churning	 (p.	 44).	 Ices
served	 right	 from	 the	 freezer	 are	 relatively
hard	 and	 crystalline;	 allowing	 them	 to	warm
and	 thus	 partly	 melt	 produces	 a	 softer,
smoother	consistency.

Vegetable	Stocks	A	vegetable	stock	is	a	water
extract	 of	 several	 vegetables	 and	 herbs	 that



can	serve	as	a	flavorful	base	for	soups,	sauces,
and	 other	 preparations.	 By	 simmering	 the
vegetables	 until	 soft,	 the	 cook	 breaks	 down
their	 cell	walls	 and	 releases	 the	cell	 contents
into	 the	 water.	 These	 contents	 include	 salts,
sugars,	acids,	and	savory	amino	acids,	as	well
as	 aromatic	 molecules.	 Carrots,	 celery,	 and
onions	 are	 almost	 always	 included	 for	 their
aromatics,	 and	mushrooms	 and	 tomatoes	 are
the	richest	source	of	savory	amino	acids.	The
vegetables	 are	 finely	 chopped	 to	 maximize
their	 surface	 area	 for	 extraction.	 Precooking
some	 or	 all	 of	 the	 vegetables	 in	 a	 small
amount	 of	 fat	 or	 oil	 has	 two	 advantages:	 it
adds	new	flavors,	and	the	fat	it	contributes	is	a
better	 solvent	 than	 water	 for	 many	 aromatic
molecules.	 It’s	 important	 not	 to	 dilute	 the
extracted	 flavors	 in	 too	 much	 water;	 good
proportions	by	weight	(volume	varies	by	piece
size)	 are	 1	 part	 vegetables	 to	 1.5	 or	 2	 parts
water.	The	vegetables	and	water	are	simmered
uncovered	 (to	 allow	 evaporation	 and



concentration)	for	no	more	than	an	hour,	after
which	 it’s	 generally	 agreed	 that	 the	 stock
flavor	 ceases	 to	 improve	 and	 even
deteriorates.	Once	 the	vegetables	are	strained
out,	 the	 stock	can	be	concentrated	by	boiling
it	down.

Flavored	 Oils,	 Vinegars,	 Syrups,	 Alcohols
Cooks	 extract	 the	 characteristic	 aroma
chemicals	of	 fruits	and	vegetables,	herbs	and
spices,	into	a	variety	of	liquids	that	then	serve
as	 convenient	 ready-made	 flavorings	 for
sauces,	 dressings,	 and	 other	 preparations.	 In
general,	 the	 freshest-tasting	 extracts	 come
from	slowly	steeping	intact	raw	fruits	or	herbs
at	 room	 or	 refrigerator	 temperature	 for	 days
or	 weeks.	 The	 flavors	 of	 dried	 herbs	 and
spices	 are	 less	 altered	 by	 heat,	 and	 can	 be
extracted	more	rapidly	in	hot	liquids.

The	growth	of	microbes	that	cause
spoilage	or	illness	is	inhibited	by	the	acidity
of	vinegar,	the	concentrated	sugar	in	syrups,



and	the	alcohol	in	vodka	(whose	own	neutral
flavor	makes	it	a	good	medium	for	flavor
extraction),	so	flavored	vinegars,	syrups,	and
alcohols	are	relatively	trouble-free
preparations.	However,	flavored	oils	require
special	care.	The	air-free	environment	within
the	oil	can	encourage	the	growth	of	botulism
bacteria,	which	live	in	the	soil,	are	found	on
most	field-grown	foods,	and	have	spores	that
survive	ordinary	cooking	temperatures.	Cold
temperatures	inhibit	their	growth.	Uncooked
oils	flavored	with	garlic	or	herbs	are	safest
when	made	in	the	refrigerator,	and	both
uncooked	and	cooked	flavored	oils	should	be
stored	in	the	refrigerator.

“Chlorophyll”	 A	 somewhat	 arcane	 but
fascinating	 vegetable	 extract	 is	 culinary
chlorophyll,	an	intensely	green	coloring	agent
that	 is	 not	 identical	 to	 biochemical
chlorophyll,	 but	 is	 certainly	 a	 concentrated
source	of	 it.	Culinary	chlorophyll	 is	made	by



finely	 grinding	 dark	 green	 leaf	 vegetables	 to
isolate	and	break	open	cells;	soaking	them	in
water	 to	 dilute	 pigment-damaging	 enzymes
and	 acids,	 and	 separate	 off	 solid	 fibers	 and
cell-wall	 debris;	 gently	 simmering	 the	 water
to	inactivate	enzymes	and	cause	the	cells	and
free	 chloroplasts	 to	 rise	 to	 the	 surface;	 and
straining	 off	 and	 draining	 the	 green	 mass.
Though	 the	 chemical	 chlorophyll	 in	 culinary
chlorophyll	will	still	turn	drab	when	heated	in
an	acid	food,	it	can	be	added	at	the	last	minute
to	 acid	 and	 other	 sauces	 and	 maintain	 its
vibrant	green	through	the	meal.

Preserving	Fruits
and	Vegetables

Fruits	and	vegetables	can	be	preserved
indefinitely	by	killing	the	living	tissue	and
thus	inactivating	its	enzymes,	and	then
making	it	either	inhospitable	or	unavailable	to
microbes.	Some	of	these	techniques	are



ancient,	some	a	product	of	the	industrial	age.

Drying	and
Freeze-Drying

Drying	Drying	preserves	foods	by	reducing
the	tissue’s	water	content	from	around	90%	to
between	5	and	35%,	a	range	in	which	very
little	can	grow	on	it.	This	is	one	of	the	oldest
preservative	techniques;	the	sun,	fire,	and
mounds	of	hot	sand	have	been	used	to	dry
foods	since	prehistory.	Fruits	and	vegetables
usually	benefit	from	treatments	to	inactivate
the	enzymes	that	cause	vitamin	and	color
damage.	Commercially	dried	vegetables	are
usually	blanched;	and	fruits	are	dipped	or
sprayed	with	a	number	of	sulfur	compounds
that	prevent	oxidation	and	thereby	enzymatic
browning	and	the	loss	of	antioxidant	phenolic
compounds,	vitamins,	and	flavor.	While	sun-
drying	used	to	be	the	most	common	treatment
for	prunes,	raisins,	apricots,	and	figs,	forced



hot	air-drying	is	now	widely	used	because	it	is
more	predictable.	Home	and	restaurant	cooks
can	use	the	oven	or	small	electric	driers
whose	temperature	is	easier	to	control.	Fruits
and	vegetables	are	dried	at	relatively	low
temperatures,	130–160ºF/55–70ºC,	to
minimize	the	loss	of	flavor	and	color	and
prevent	the	surface	from	drying	too	fast	and
impeding	moisture	loss	from	within.	Pureed
fruits	are	spread	out	into	thin	sheets	to	make
“fruit	leather.”	Relatively	moist	dried	fruits
and	vegetables	are	nicely	soft,	but	they’re	also
vulnerable	to	some	hardy	yeasts	and	molds,
and	therefore	are	best	stored	in	the
refrigerator.

Freeze-Drying	 Freeze-drying	 is	 a	 controlled
version	 of	 freezer	 burn:	 it	 removes	moisture
not	 by	 evaporation	 but	 by	 sublimation,	 the
transformation	 of	 ice	 directly	 into	 water
vapor.	Although	we	 think	of	 freeze-drying	as
a	 recent	 industrial	 innovation,	 the	 natives	 of



Peru	 have	 been	 freeze-drying	 potatoes	 in	 the
Andes	 for	 millennia.	 To	 make	chuño,	 which
can	 be	 stored	 indefinitely,	 they	 trample
potatoes	 to	 break	 down	 their	 structure	 and
expose	 them	 constantly	 to	 the	 dry,	 cold
mountain	air,	so	 that	 they	freeze	at	night	and
lose	some	moisture	by	sublimation,	then	thaw
during	 the	 day	 and	 lose	 more	 water	 by
evaporation.	Chuño	 develops	 a	 strong	 flavor
from	 the	 disruption	 of	 the	 potato	 tissues	 and
long	 exposure	 to	 the	 air	 and	 sun,	 and	 is
reconstituted	in	water	to	make	stews.

In	modern	industrial	freeze-drying,	foods
are	quickly	chilled	to	as	low	as	–70ºF/–57ºC,
then	slightly	warmed	and	subjected	to	a
vacuum,	which	pulls	their	water	molecules
out	and	dries	them.	Because	the	foods	aren’t
heated	or	exposed	to	oxygen,	their	flavor	and
color	remain	relatively	fresh.	Many	fruits	and
vegetables	are	freeze-dried	today	and	used	as
is	for	snack	foods,	or	reconstituted	with	water
in	instant	soup	mixes,	emergency	rations,	and



camping	foods.

Fermentation	and	Pickling:
Sauerkraut	and	Kimchi,
Cucumber	Pickles,	Olives

Fermentation	is	one	of	the	oldest	and	simplest
means	of	preserving	foods.	It	requires	no
particular	kind	of	climate,	no	cooking,	and	so
no	expenditure	of	fuel:	just	a	container,	which
can	be	a	mere	hole	in	the	ground,	and	perhaps
some	salt	or	seawater.	Olives	and	sauerkraut
—	fermented	cabbage	—	are	familiar
examples	of	fermented	fruits	and	vegetables.
An	overlapping	category	is	the	pickle,	a	food
preserved	by	immersion	in	brine	or	a	strong
acid	such	as	vinegar.	Brines	often	encourage
fermentation,	and	fermentation	generates
preservative	acids,	so	the	term	“pickle”	is
applied	to	both	fermented	and	unfermented
preparations	of	cucumbers	and	other	foods.
Less	familiar	but	intriguing	relatives	of



sauerkraut	and	olives	include	North	African
preserved	lemons,	the	pickled	plums,
radishes,	and	other	vegetables	of	Japan,	and
the	highly	spiced,	multifarious	pickled	fruits
and	vegetables	of	India.

The	 Nature	 of	 Fermentation	 Preserving
fruits	and	vegetables	by	fermentation	is	based
on	the	fact	that	plants	are	the	natural	home	of
certain	 benign	 microbes	 which	 in	 the	 right
conditions	—	primarily	 the	absence	of	air	—
will	flourish	and	suppress	the	growth	of	other
microbes	 that	 cause	 spoilage	 and	 disease.
They	 accomplish	 this	 suppression	 by	 being
the	 first	 to	 consume	 the	 plant	 material’s
readily	metabolized	sugars,	and	by	producing
a	 variety	 of	 antimicrobial	 substances,
including	 lactic	 and	 other	 acids,	 carbon
dioxide,	 and	 alcohol.	At	 the	 same	 time,	 they
leave	 most	 of	 the	 plant	 material	 intact,
including	 its	 vitamin	 C	 (protected	 from
oxidation	 by	 the	 carbon	 dioxide	 they



generate);	 they	often	add	significant	amounts
of	B	vitamins;	and	they	generate	new	volatile
substances	 that	 enrich	 the	 food’s	 aroma.
These	benign	“lactic	acid	bacteria”	apparently
evolved	 eons	 ago	 in	 oxygen-poor	 piles	 of
decaying	 vegetation,	 and	 now	 transform	 our
carefully	 gathered	 harvests	 into	 dozens	 of
different	 foods	 across	 the	 globe	 (see	 box,	 p.
308),	as	well	as	 turning	milk	 into	yogurt	and
cheese	and	chopped	meat	into	tangy	sausages
(pp.	44	and	176).

Fermentation	Conditions	and	Results	While
some	 fruits	 and	 vegetables	 are	 fermented
alone	in	tightly	covered	pits	or	jars,	most	are
either	dry-salted	or	brined	to	help	draw	water,
sugars,	 and	 other	 nutrients	 out	 of	 the	 plant
tissues,	 and	 to	 provide	 a	 liquid	 to	 cover	 the
food	 and	 limit	 its	 exposure	 to	 oxygen.	 The
characteristics	of	the	pickle	depend	on	the	salt
concentration	 and	 the	 fermentation
temperature,	which	determine	which	microbes



dominate	 and	 the	 substances	 they	 produce.
Low	 salt	 concentrations	 and	 temperatures
f a v o r	Leuconostoc	 mesenteroides,	 which
generates	 a	 mild	 but	 complex	 mixture	 of
acids,	alcohol,	 and	aroma	compounds;	higher
temperatures	 favor	Lactobacillus	 plantarum,
which	produces	lactic	acid	almost	exclusively.
Many	pickles	undergo	a	microbial	succession,
with	Leuconostoc	 dominating	 early	 and	 then
giving	 way	 to	Lactobacillus	 as	 the	 acidity
rises.	 Some	 Asian	 pickles	 are	 made	 not	 by
spontaneous	 lactic	 fermentations,	 but	 by	 the
addition	 of	 another	 fermented	 “starter”
material,	 the	 by-products	 of	 producing	 wine
or	 miso	 or	 soy	 sauce.	 Japanese	nukazuke	 are
unique	 in	 employing	 rice	 bran,	 whose
abundant	 B	 vitamins	 end	 up	 enriching	 the
pickled	daikon	and	other	vegetables.

Problems	 Problems	 in	 vegetable
fermentations	 are	 generally	 caused	 by
inadequate	or	excessive	salt	concentrations	or



temperatures,	 or	 exposure	 to	 the	 air,	 all
conditions	 that	 favor	 the	 growth	 of
undesirable	 microbes.	 In	 particular,	 if	 the
vegetables	 are	 not	 weighted	 down	 to	 keep
them	below	 the	 brine	 surface,	 or	 if	 the	 brine
surface	is	 itself	not	tightly	covered,	a	film	of
yeasts,	molds,	 and	 air-requiring	 bacteria	will
form,	lower	the	brine	acidity	by	consuming	its
lactic	 acid,	 and	 encourage	 the	 growth	 of
spoilage	 microbes.	 The	 results	 may	 include
discoloration,	 softening,	 and	 rotten	 smells
from	the	breakdown	of	fats	and	proteins.	Even
the	 helpful	Lactobacillus	 plantarum	 can
generate	 an	 undesirably	 harsh	 acidity	 if	 the
fermentation	is	too	vigorous	or	prolonged.

Unfermented,	 Directly	 Acidified	 Pickles
There	 are	 also	 a	 host	 of	 fruit	 and	 vegetable
products	that	are	pickled	not	by	fermentation,
but	by	 the	direct	addition	of	acid	 in	 the	form
of	wine	or	vinegar,	which	inhibits	the	growth
of	 spoilage	microbes.	 This	 ancient	 technique



is	 much	 faster	 than	 fermentation	 and	 allows
greater	 control	 over	 texture	 and	 salt	 content,
but	 it	 produces	 a	 simpler	 flavor.	 Today,	 the
usual	method	is	 to	add	enough	hot	vinegar	to
produce	 a	 final	 acetic	 acid	 concentration	 of
around	2.5%	(half	that	of	standard	vinegar)	in
such	 materials	 as	 beans,	 carrots,	 okra,
pumpkin,	mushrooms,	watermelon	rind,	pears,
and	 peaches.	 Nonfermented	 pickles	 are
usually	 heat-treated	 (185ºF/85ºC	 for	 30
minutes)	 to	 prevent	 spoilage.	 The	 simple
flavor	 of	 directly	 acidified	 pickles	 is	 often
augmented	 by	 the	 addition	 of	 spices	 and/or
sugar.

Pickle	 Texture	 Most	 pickled	 fruits	 and
vegetables	are	eaten	raw	as	a	condiment,	and
are	 preferred	 crisp.	 The	 use	 of	 unrefined	 sea
salt	 improves	 crispness	 thanks	 to	 its	 calcium
and	magnesium	impurities,	which	help	cross-
link	 and	 reinforce	 cell-wall	 pectins.
Especially	 crisp	 cucumber	 and	 watermelon-



rind	 pickles	 are	 made	 by	 adding	 alum
(aluminum	hydroxide),	whose	aluminum	ions
cross-link	 cell-wall	 pectins,	 or	by	presoaking
the	 raw	 materials	 in	 a	 solution	 of	 “pickling
lime,”	 or	 calcium	 hydroxide,	 whose	 calcium
ions	 do	 the	 same.	 (Lime	 is	 strongly	 alkaline
and	 its	 excess	 must	 be	 washed	 from	 the
ingredients	 before	 pickling	 to	 avoid
neutralizing	 the	 pickles’	 acidity.)	 When
subsequently	 cooked,	 pickles	may	 not	 soften
because	 their	 acidity	 stabilizes	 cell	 walls	 (p.
282).	 Tender	 pickles	 are	 produced	 by
precooking	the	vegetable	until	soft.

Some	Fermented	Vegetables	and	Fruits



Adapted	 from	 G.	 Campbell	 Platt,	Fermented
Foods	 of	 the	 World 	 —	A	 Dictionary	 and
Guide	(London:	Butterworth,	1987).

Fermented	 Cabbage:	 Sauerkraut	 and
Kimchi	 Two	 popular	 styles	 of	 cabbage
pickles	 illustrate	 the	 kind	 of	 distinctiveness
that	can	be	achieved	with	slight	variations	 in
the	fermentation	process.	European	sauerkraut
is	 a	 refreshing	 side	 dish	 for	 rich	 meats,	 and
Korean	kimchi	 is	 a	 strong	accompaniment	 to
bland	rice.	Sauerkraut	—	the	word	is	German
for	“sour	cabbage”	—	is	made	by	fermenting
finely	 shredded	 head	 cabbage	 with	 a	 small



amount	 of	 salt	 at	 a	 cool	 room	 temperature;
it’s	allowed	to	become	quite	tart	and	develops
a	remarkable,	almost	flowery	aroma	thanks	to
some	 yeast	 growth.	 Kimchi	 is	 made	 by
fermenting	intact	stems	and	leaves	of	Chinese
cabbage	together	with	hot	peppers	and	garlic,
and	sometimes	other	vegetables,	fruits	(apple,
pear,	 melon),	 and	 fish	 sauce.	 More	 salt	 is
used,	 and	 the	 fermentation	 temperature	 is
significantly	lower,	a	reflection	of	its	original
production	 in	 pots	 partly	 buried	 in	 the	 cold
earth	of	late	autumn	and	winter.	The	result	is
a	 crunchy,	 pungent	 pickle	 that	 is	 noticeably
less	acid	but	saltier	 than	sauerkraut,	and	may
even	 be	 fizzy	 due	 to	 the	 dominance	 of	 gas-
producing	bacteria	below	about	58ºF/14ºC.

Cucumber	 Pickles	 Today	 there	 are	 three
different	 styles	 of	 cucumber	 pickle	 in	 the
United	States,	and	 the	 two	most	common	are
really	 flavored	 cucumbers;	 they	 don’t	 keep
unless	 refrigerated.	 True	 fermented



cucumbers	 have	 become	 relatively	 hard	 to
find.

All	cucumber	pickles	start	with	thin-
skinned	varieties	that	are	harvested	while
immature	so	that	the	seed	region	hasn’t	yet
begun	to	liquefy,	and	cleaned	of	flower
remnants	that	harbor	microbes	with	enzymes
that	cause	softening.	Fermented	cucumbers
are	cured	in	a	5–8%	brine	at	64–68ºF/18–20ºC
for	two	to	three	weeks,	and	accumulate	2–3%
salt	and	1–1.5%	lactic	acid:	so	they’re
relatively	strong.	Such	pickles	are	sometimes
moderated	before	bottling	by	soaking	out
some	salt	and	lactic	acid,	and	adding	acetic
acid.	The	most	common	style	of	cucumber
pickle,	crisper	and	more	gentle	in	flavor,	is
made	by	soaking	the	cucumbers	briefly	in
vinegar	and	salt	until	they	reach	0.5%	acetic
acid	and	0–3%	salt,	and	then	pasteurizing
them	before	bottling.	Such	pickles	need	to	be
refrigerated	after	opening.	Finally,	there	are
the	freshest-tasting	but	very	perishable



pickles,	which	are	soaked	in	vinegar	and	salt
but	not	pasteurized.	They	are	kept	refrigerated
from	the	moment	they’re	packaged.

Fermented	Cabbage	Two	Ways
The	German	and	Korean	versions	of
fermented	cabbage	are	made	differently
and	develop	distinctive	qualities.

Sauerkraut Kimchi
Piece 1	mm Small	leaves	and
size shreds stems

Ingredients	other	than Chillis,
cabbage	and	salt None garlic,	fish

sauce
Fermentation 64–76ºF/18– 41–57ºF/5–
temperature 24ºC 14ºC
Fermentation	time 1–6	weeks 1–3	weeks
Final	salt	content 1–2% 3%
Final	acidity 1–1.5% 0.4–0.8%



Qualities Tart, Strong	flavor,	crunchy,
aromatic tingly

Common	 problems	 in	 home-pickled
cucumbers	 include	 cheesy	 and	 rancid	 off-
flavors,	 which	 come	 from	 the	 growth	 of
undesirable	bacteria	when	 there’s	not	enough
salt	 or	 acidity	 to	 inhibit	 them,	 and	 hollow
“bloaters,”	 which	 are	 pickles	 swollen	 with
carbon	 dioxide	 produced	 by	 yeasts	 (or
sometimes	 by	Lactobacillus	 brevis	 or
mesentericus)	when	the	salt	level	is	too	high.

Olives	 Fresh	 olives	 are	 practically	 inedible
thanks	 to	 their	 ample	 endowment	 of	 a	 bitter
phenolic	 substance,	oleuropein,	 and	 its
relatives.	The	olive	tree	was	first	cultivated	in
the	eastern	Mediterranean	around	5,000	years
ago,	 probably	 as	 a	 source	 of	 oil.	 Olive
fermentation	may	have	been	discovered	when
early	peoples	learned	to	remove	the	bitterness
by	 soaking	 the	 fruit	 in	 changes	 of	water.	 By



Roman	 times,	 the	 soaking	 water	 was	 often
supplemented	 with	 alkaline	 wood	 ashes,
which	 cut	 the	 debittering	 period	 from	weeks
to	hours.	 (The	modern	 industrial	 treatment	 is
a	1–3%	solution	of	sodium	hydroxide,	or	lye.)
Alkaline	 conditions	 actually	 break	 bitter
oleuropein	 down,	 and	 also	 breach	 the	 waxy
outer	cuticle	and	dissolve	cell-wall	materials.
These	effects	make	the	fruit	as	a	whole	more
permeable	to	the	salt	brine	that	follows	(after
a	 wash	 and	 acid	 treatment	 to	 neutralize	 the
alkalinity),	and	help	the	fermentation	proceed
faster.	 Lactic	 acid	 bacteria	 are	 the	 main
fermenters,	though	some	yeasts	also	grow	and
contribute	 to	 the	 aroma.	 Olives	 may	 be
debittered	 and	 fermented	 while	 still	 green
(“Spanish”	style,	 the	major	commercial	 type)
or	 once	 their	 skin	 has	 turned	 dark	 with
purplish	 anthocyanins,	 when	 they	 are	 less
bitter.

Olives	are	also	fermented	without	any
preliminary	leaching	or	alkaline	treatment,



but	this	results	in	a	different	kind	of
fermentation.	Nutrients	for	the	microbes	in
the	brine	diffuse	very	slowly	from	the	flesh
through	the	waxy	cuticle,	and	the	intact
phenolic	materials	inhibit	microbial	growth.
So	the	temperature	is	kept	low	(55–64ºF/13–
18ºC),	and	yeasts	rather	than	lactic	acid
bacteria	dominate	in	a	slow	alcoholic
fermentation	that	takes	as	long	as	a	year.	This
method	is	usually	applied	to	black	ripe	olives
(Greek,	Italian	Gaeta,	French	Niçoise).	They
turn	out	more	bitter	and	less	tart	than	the
pretreated	kinds	(an	acidity	of	0.3–0.5%
rather	than	1%),	and	have	a	distinctively
winey,	fruity	aroma.

Unfermented	“ripe	black	olives”	are	an
invention	of	the	California	canning	industry.
They’re	made	from	unripe	green	olives,	which
may	undergo	an	incidental	and	partial
fermentation	while	being	stored	in	brine
before	processing.	But	their	unique	character
is	determined	by	repeated	brief	lye	treatments



to	leach	out	and	break	down	oleuropein,	and
the	addition	of	an	iron	solution	and	dissolved
oxygen	to	react	with	phenolic	compounds	and
turn	the	skin	black.	Olives	so	treated	are	then
packed	in	a	light	3%	brine,	canned,	and
sterilized.	They	have	a	bland,	cooked	flavor
and	often	some	residual	alkalinity,	which
gives	them	a	slippery	quality.

Unusual	 Fermentations:	 Poi,	 Citron,
Preserved	 Lemons	 Poi	 is	 a	 Hawaiian
preparation	of	 taro	 root	 (p.	306).	The	starchy
taro	 is	 cooked,	 mashed,	 thinned	 with	 water,
and	 then	 allowed	 to	 stand	 for	 one	 to	 three
days.	Lactic	acid	bacteria	sour	it,	and	produce
some	 volatile	 acids	 as	 well	 (vinegary	 acetic,
cheesy	 propionic).	 In	 longer	 fermentations,
yeasts	 and	Geotrichum	 molds	 also	 grow	 and
contribute	fruity	and	mushroomy	notes.

Citron	peel,	candied	from	a	relative	of	the
lemon,	owes	its	traditionally	complex	flavor
to	fermentation.	Originally	the	citron	fruits



were	preserved	for	some	weeks	in	seawater	or
a	5	to	10%	brine	while	they	were	shipped
from	Asia	and	the	Middle	East	to	Europe;	now
they’re	brined	to	develop	flavor.	Yeasts	grow
on	the	peel	and	produce	alcohol,	which	then
supports	acetic	acid	bacteria.	The	result	is	the
production	of	volatile	esters	that	deepen	the
aroma	of	the	peel.	The	preserved	lemons	of
Morocco	and	other	north	African	countries
have	a	similar	character;	they’re	made	by
packing	cut	lemons	with	salt	and	fermenting
for	days	to	weeks.

Sugar	Preserves

Another	venerable	technique	for	preserving
fruits	is	to	boost	their	sugar	content.	Like	salt,
sugar	makes	the	fruit	inhospitable	to
microbes:	it	dissolves,	binds	up	water
molecules,	and	draws	moisture	out	of	living
cells,	thus	crippling	them.	Sugar	molecules
are	quite	heavy	compared	to	the	sodium	and



chloride	ions	in	salt,	so	it	takes	a	larger	mass
of	sugar	to	do	the	same	job	of	preserving.	The
usual	proportion	by	weight	of	added	sugar	to
fruit	is	about	55	to	45,	with	sugar	accounting
for	nearly	two-thirds	of	the	final	cooked
mixture.	Of	course	sugar	preserves	are	very
sweet,	and	this	is	a	large	part	of	their	appeal.
But	they	also	develop	an	intriguing
consistency	otherwise	found	only	in	meat
jellies	—	a	firm	yet	moist	solidity	that	can
range	from	stiff	and	chewy	to	quiveringly
tender.	And	they	can	delight	the	eye	with	a
crystalline	clarity:	in	the	16th	century,
Nostradamus	described	a	quince	jelly	whose
color	“is	so	diaphanous	that	it	resembles	an
oriental	ruby.”	These	remarkable	qualities
arise	from	the	nature	of	pectin,	one	of	the
components	of	the	plant	cell	wall,	and	its
fortuitous	interaction	with	the	fruit’s	acids
and	the	cook’s	added	sugar.

The	 Evolution	 of	 Sugar	 Preserves	 The



earliest	 sugar	 preserves	 were	 probably	 fruit
pieces	 immersed	 in	 syrupy	 honey	 (the	Greek
term	for	quinces	packed	in	honey,	melimelon,
gave	us	the	word	marmalade)	or	in	the	boiled-
down	 juice	 of	 wine	 grapes.	 The	 first	 step
toward	jams	and	jellies	was	the	discovery	that
when	 they	 were	 cooked	 together,	 sugar	 and
fruit	 developed	 a	 texture	 that	 neither	 could
achieve	 on	 its	 own.	 In	 the	 4th	 century	CE,
Palladius	 gave	 directions	 for	 cooking	 down
shredded	quince	in	honey	until	its	volume	was
reduced	 by	 half,	 which	 would	 have	 made	 a
stiff,	 opaque	 paste	 similar	 to	 today’s	 “fruit
cheese”	 (spreadable	 “fruit	 butter”	 is	 less
reduced).	 By	 the	 7th	 century	 there	 were
recipes	 for	 what	 were	 probably	 clear	 and
delicate	 jellies	 made	 by	 boiling	 the	 juice	 of
quince	 with	 honey.	 A	 second	 important
innovation	was	 the	 introduction	from	Asia	of
cane	sugar,	which	unlike	honey	is	nearly	pure
sugar,	with	no	moisture	that	needs	boiling	off,
and	 no	 strong	 flavor	 that	 competes	 with	 the



flavor	of	the	fruit.	The	Arab	world	was	using
cane	sugar	by	the	Middle	Ages,	and	brought	it
to	 Europe	 in	 the	 13th	 century,	where	 it	 soon
became	 the	 preferred	 sweetener	 for	 fruit
preserves.	 However,	 jams	 and	 jellies	 didn’t
become	 common	 fare	 until	 the	 19th	 century,
when	sugar	had	become	cheap	enough	 to	use
in	large	quantities.

Pectin	 Gels	 Fruit	 preserves	 are	 a	 kind	 of
physical	 structure	 called	 a	gel:	 a	 mixture	 of
water	 and	 other	 molecules	 that	 is	 solid
because	 the	 other	 molecules	 bond	 together
into	 a	 continuous,	 sponge-like	 network	 that
traps	the	water	in	many	separate	little	pockets.
The	key	to	creating	a	fruit	gel	 is	pectin,	 long
chains	of	several	hundred	sugar-like	subunits,
which	 seems	 to	 have	 been	 designed	 to	 help
form	 a	 highly	 concentrated,	 organized	 gel	 in
plant	cell	walls	(p.	265).	When	fruit	is	cut	up
and	heated	near	the	boil,	the	pectin	chains	are
shaken	loose	from	the	cell	walls	and	dissolve



into	 the	 released	 cell	 fluids	 and	 any	 added
water.	They	can’t	simply	re-form	their	gel	for
a	couple	of	reasons.	Pectin	molecules	in	water
accumulate	 a	 negative	 electrical	 charge,	 so
they	repel	each	other	rather	than	bond	to	each
other;	 and	 they’re	 now	 so	 diluted	 by	 water
molecules	 that	 even	 if	 they	 did	 bond,	 they
couldn’t	 form	 a	 continuous	 network.	 They
need	help	to	find	each	other	again.

The	cook	does	three	things	to	cooked	fruit
to	bring	pectin	molecules	back	together	into	a
continuous	gel.	First,	he	adds	a	large	dose	of
sugar,	whose	molecules	attract	water
molecules	to	themselves,	thus	pulling	the
water	away	from	the	pectin	chains	and	leaving
them	more	exposed	to	each	other.	Second,	he
boils	the	mixture	of	fruit	and	sugar	to
evaporate	some	of	the	water	away	and	bring
the	pectin	chains	even	closer	together.	Finally,
he	increases	the	acidity,	which	neutralizes	the
electrical	charge	and	allows	the	aloof	pectin
chains	to	bond	to	each	other	into	a	gel.	Food



scientists	have	found	that	the	optimal
conditions	for	pectin	gelation	are	a	pH
between	2.8	and	3.5	—	about	the	acidity	of
orange	juice,	and	0.5%	acid	by	weight	—	a
pectin	concentration	of	0.5	to	1.0%,	and	a
sugar	concentration	of	60	to	65%.

Preparing	Preserves	Preserve	making	begins
with	 cooking	 the	 fruit	 to	 extract	 its	 pectin.
Quince,	apples,	and	citrus	fruits	are	especially
rich	 in	 pectin	 and	 often	 included	 to
supplement	other	pectin-poor	fruits,	including
most	 berries.	 The	 combination	 of	 heat	 and
acid	will	 eventually	 break	 pectin	 chains	 into
pieces	 too	 small	 to	 form	 a	 network,	 so	 this
preliminary	 cooking	 should	 be	 as	 brief	 and
gentle	 as	possible.	 (If	 a	 sparkling,	 clear	 jelly
is	 desired,	 then	 the	 cooked	 fruit	 is	 gently
strained	 to	 remove	 all	 solid	 particles	 of	 cell
debris.)	 Then	 sugar	 is	 added,	 supplemental
pectin	 if	 necessary,	 and	 the	 mixture	 rapidly
brought	 to	 the	 boil	 to	 remove	 water	 and



concentrate	the	other	ingredients.	The	boiling
is	continued	until	 the	 temperature	of	 the	mix
reaches	 217–221ºF/103–105ºC	 (at	 sea	 level;
2ºF/1ºC	 lower	 for	 every	 500	 ft/165	 m
elevation),	 which	 indicates	 that	 the	 sugar
concentration	 has	 reached	 65%	 (for	 the
relationship	 between	 sugar	 content	 and
boiling	 point,	 see	 p.	 680).	 A	 fresher	 flavor
results	when	 this	 cooking	 is	 done	 at	 a	 gentle
simmer	in	a	wide	pot	with	a	large	surface	area
for	 evaporation.	 (Industrial	 manufacturers
cook	 the	water	 out	 under	 a	 vacuum	 at	much
lower	 temperatures,	 100–140ºF/38–60ºC,	 to
maintain	 as	 much	 fresh	 flavor	 and	 color	 as
possible.)	 Now	 supplemental	 acid	 is	 added
(late	 in	 the	 process,	 to	 avoid	 breaking	 down
the	 pectin	 chains),	 and	 the	 readiness	 of	 the
mix	 is	 tested	 by	 placing	 a	 drop	 on	 a	 cold
spoon	or	saucer	to	see	whether	it	gels.	Finally,
the	mix	is	poured	into	sterilized	jars.	The	mix
sets	 as	 it	 cools	 below	 about	 180ºF/80ºC,	 but
firms	most	rapidly	at	86ºF/30ºC	and	continues



to	get	firmer	for	some	days	or	weeks.

Two	 kinds	 of	 pectin	 gels.	 Left:	In	 ordinary
fruit	 preserves,	 the	 cook	 causes	 pectin
molecules	 to	bond	directly	 to	 each	other	and
form	 a	 continuous	 meshwork	 by	 carefully
adjusting	acidity	and	sugar	content.	 Right:	A
modified	form	of	pectin	(low	methoxy)	can	be
bonded	into	a	continuous	meshwork	by	means
of	 added	 calcium	 ions	 (the	 black	 dots),	 no
matter	 what	 the	 sugar	 content.	 This	 is	 how
low-sugar	preserves	are	made.

The	usual	problem	with	preserve	making	is
failure	of	the	mix	to	set	even	at	the	proper
boiling	temperature	and	sugar	concentration.
This	can	be	caused	by	three	different	factors:
inadequate	amounts	of	either	acid	or	good-
quality	pectin,	or	prolonged	cooking	that



damages	the	pectin.	Failures	can	sometimes
be	rescued	by	the	addition	of	a	commercial
liquid	pectin	preparation	and/or	cream	of
tartar	or	lemon	juice,	and	a	brief	reboiling.
Too	much	acid	can	cause	weeping	of	fluid
from	an	overfirm	gel.

Uncooked	 and	 Unsweetened	 “Preserves”
Modern	 preserve	 making	 has	 been
transformed	 by	 the	 availability	 of
concentrated	 pectin,	 extracted	 and	 purified
from	 citrus	 and	 apple	 wastes,	 which	 can	 be
added	 to	 any	 crushed	 fruit,	 cooked	or	 not,	 to
guarantee	a	firm	gel.	“Freezer	jams”	are	made
by	 loading	 up	 crushed	 fresh	 fruit	 with
supplemental	 pectin	 and	 sugar,	 letting	 them
sit	for	a	day	while	the	pectin	molecules	slowly
form	their	network	and	form	the	gel,	and	then
“preserving”	 them	 in	 the	 refrigerator	 or
freezer	 (the	 uncooked	 fruit	 would	 otherwise
soon	 be	 spoiled	 by	 sugar-tolerant	 molds	 and
yeasts).	Pectin	is	also	used	to	make	clear	jelly



candies	and	other	confections.
Food	chemists	have	developed	several

different	versions	of	pectin	for	special
commercial	applications.	The	most	notable	of
these	is	a	pectin	that	sets	without	the	need	for
any	added	sugar	to	pull	water	molecules	away
from	the	long	pectin	chains;	instead,	the
chains	bond	to	each	other	strongly	by	means
of	cross-linking	calcium,	which	is	added	after
the	fruit	and	pectin	mixture	has	been	cooked.
This	pectin	is	what	makes	it	possible	to
produce	low-calorie	“preserves”	with
artificial	sweeteners.

Candied	 Fruits	 Candied	 fruits	 are	 small
whole	 fruits	 or	 pieces	 that	 are	 impregnated
with	 a	 saturated	 sugar	 syrup,	 then	 drained,
dried,	 and	 stored	 at	 room	 temperature	 as
separate	pieces.	Fruit	cooked	in	a	sugar	syrup
remains	 relatively	 firm	 and	 maintains	 its
shape	 thanks	 to	 the	 interaction	 of	 sugar
molecules	 with	 the	 cell-wall	 hemicelluloses



and	 pectins.	 Candying	 can	 be	 a	 tedious
process	 because	 it	 takes	 time	 for	 sugar	 to
diffuse	 from	 the	 syrup	 evenly	 into	 the	 fruit.
Typically	 the	 fruit	 is	gently	cooked	 to	 soften
it	 and	make	 its	 tissues	more	permeable,	 then
soaked	 for	 several	 days	 at	 room	 temperature
in	a	syrup	that	starts	out	at	15–20%	sugar,	and
is	 made	 more	 concentrated	 each	 day	 until	 it
reaches	70–74%.

Canning

Canning	was	a	cause	for	wonder	when	it	was
invented	by	Nicolas	Appert	around	1810:
contemporaries	said	that	it	preserved	fruits
and	vegetables	almost	as	if	fresh!	True,	it
preserves	them	without	the	desiccated	texture
of	drying,	the	salt	and	sourness	of
fermentation,	or	the	sweetness	of	sugar
preserves;	but	there’s	no	mistaking	that
canned	foods	have	been	cooked.	Canning	is
essentially	the	heating	of	food	that	has	been



isolated	in	hermetically	sealed	containers.	The
heat	deactivates	plant	enzymes	and	destroys
harmful	microbes,	and	the	tight	seal	prevents
recontamination	by	microbes	in	the
environment.	The	food	can	then	be	stored	at
room	temperature	without	spoiling.

The	arch	villain	of	the	canning	process	is
the	bacterium	Clostridium	botulinum,	which
thrives	in	low-acid,	airless	conditions	—
oxygen	is	toxic	to	it	—	and	produces	a	deadly
nerve	toxin.	The	botulism	toxin	is	easily
destroyed	by	boiling,	but	the	dormant
bacterial	spores	are	very	hardy	and	can
survive	prolonged	boiling.	Unless	they	are
killed	by	the	extreme	condition	of	higher-
than-boiling	temperatures	(which	require	a
pressure	cooker),	the	spores	will	proliferate
into	active	bacteria	when	the	can	cools	down,
and	the	toxin	will	accumulate.	One
precautionary	measure	is	to	boil	any	canned
produce	after	opening	to	destroy	any	toxin
that	may	be	there.	But	all	suspect	cans,



especially	those	bulging	from	the	pressure	of
gases	produced	by	bacterial	growth,	should	be
discarded.

The	low	pH	(high	acidity)	of	tomatoes	and
many	common	fruits	inhibits	the	growth	of
botulism	bacteria,	so	these	foods	require	the
least	severe	canning	treatment,	usually	about
30	minutes	in	a	bath	of	boiling	water	to	heat
the	contents	to	185–195ºF/85–90ºC.	Most
vegetables,	however,	are	only	slightly	acid,
with	a	pH	of	5	or	6,	and	are	much	more
vulnerable	to	bacteria	and	molds.	They’re
typically	heated	in	a	pressure	cooker	at
240ºF/116ºC	for	30	to	90	minutes.



Chapter	6

A	Survey	of
Common	Vegetables

Roots	and	Tubers
Potatoes
Sweet	Potatoes
Tropical	Roots	and	Tubers
The	Carrot	 Family:	Carrots,	 Parsnips,	 and
Others
The	 Lettuce	 Family:	 Sunchoke,	 Salsify,
Scorzonera,	Burdock
Other	Common	Roots	and	Tubers

Lower	 Stems	 and	 Bulbs:	 Beet,	 Turnip,
Radish,	Onion,	and	Others

Beets
Celery	Root
The	Cabbage	Family:	Turnip,	Radish
The	Onion	Family:	Onions,	Garlic,	Leeks

Stems	 and	 Stalks:	Asparagus,	 Celery,	 and



Others
Asparagus
The	Carrot	Family:	Celery	and	Fennel
The	 Cabbage	 Family:	 Kohlrabi	 and
Rutabaga
Tropical	 Stems:	 Bamboo	 Shoots	 and
Hearts	of	Palm
Other	Stem	and	Stalk	Vegetables

Leaves:	Lettuces,	Cabbages,	and	Others
The	 Lettuce	 Family:	 Lettuces,	 Chicories,
Dandelion	Greens
The	 Cabbage	 Family:	 Cabbage,	 Kale,
Brussels	Sprouts,	and	Others
Spinach	and	Chard
Miscellaneous	Leafy	Greens

Flowers:	Artichokes,	Broccoli,	Cauliflower,
and	Others

Flowers	as	Foods
Artichokes
The	 Cabbage	 Family:	 Broccoli,
Cauliflower,	Romanesco

Fruits	Used	as	Vegetables



The	 Nightshade	 Family:	 Tomato,
Capsicums,	Eggplant,	and	Others
The	Squash	and	Cucumber	Family
The	Bean	Family:	Fresh	Beans	and	Peas
Other	Fruits	Used	as	Vegetables

Seaweeds
Green,	Red,	and	Brown	Algae
Seaweed	Flavors

Mushrooms,	Truffles,	and	Relatives
Creatures	of	Symbiosis	and	Decay
The	Structure	and	Qualities	of	Mushrooms
The	Distinctive	Flavors	of	Mushrooms
Storing	and	Handling	Mushrooms
Cooking	Mushrooms
Truffles
Huitlacoche,	or	Corn	Smut
Mycoprotein,	or	Quorn

Chapter	 5	 described	 the	 general	 nature	 of
plant	 foods	and	 their	behavior	 in	 the	kitchen.
This	 chapter	 and	 the	 next	 two	 survey	 some
familiar	 vegetables,	 fruits,	 and	 flavorings.



Because	we	 eat	 hundreds	 of	 different	 plants,
and	countless	varieties	of	them,	these	surveys
can	 only	 be	 selective	 and	 sketchy.	 They’re
meant	 to	highlight	 the	distinctive	qualities	of
these	foods,	 to	help	 the	food	lover	appreciate
those	 qualities	more	 fully	 and	make	 the	 best
use	of	them.

These	chapters	give	special	attention	to
two	features	of	our	plant	foods.	One	is	family
relationships,	which	tell	us	which	plants	are
related	to	each	other,	and	conversely	how
varied	a	given	species	can	be.	Such
information	helps	us	make	sense	of
similarities	and	differences	among	particular
foods,	and	may	suggest	ideas	for	interesting
combinations	and	themes.

The	second	feature	emphasized	in	the
following	pages	is	flavor	chemistry.	Fruits	and
vegetables,	herbs	and	spices	are	the	most
complex	foods	we	eat.	If	we	know	even	a	little
bit	about	which	substances	create	their	flavor,
then	we	become	more	attuned	to	how	the



flavor	is	built,	and	better	able	to	perceive
echoes	and	harmonies	among	different
ingredients.	Such	perceptions	enrich	the
experience	of	eating,	and	can	help	us	become
better	cooks.	All	aromas	come	from	particular
volatile	chemicals,	and	I	sometimes	name
those	chemicals	to	be	as	specific	as	possible
about	the	qualities	of	a	given	food.	The	names
may	look	foreign	and	incomprehensible,	but
they’re	simply	names	—	and	sometimes	make
more	sense	than	the	names	of	the	foods
they’re	in!

This	survey	of	vegetables	begins
underground,	with	the	plant	parts	that	sustain
much	of	the	earth’s	population.	It	then	moves
up	the	plant,	from	stem	to	leaf	to	flower	and
fruit,	and	finishes	with	water	plants	and	those
delicious	nonplants,	the	mushrooms.

Roots	and	Tubers

Potatoes,	sweet	potatoes,	yams,	cassava	—



these	roots	and	tubers	are	staple	foods	for
billions	of	people.	They	are	subterranean
organs	in	which	plants	store	starch,	large
molecular	aggregates	of	the	sugars	they	create
during	photosynthesis.	They	are	therefore	a
concentrated	and	long-lived	package	of
nourishment	for	us	as	well.	Some
anthropologists	theorize	that	roots	and	tubers
may	have	helped	fuel	human	evolution,	when
the	climate	of	the	African	savanna	cooled
about	2	million	years	ago	and	fruits	became
scarce.	Because	tubers	were	plentiful	and	far
more	nutritious	when	cooked	—	raw	starch
granules	resist	our	digestive	enzymes,	while
gelated	starch	does	not	—	they	may	have
offered	a	significant	advantage	to	early
humans	who	learned	to	dig	for	them	and	roast
them	in	the	embers	of	a	fire.

Though	some	underground	vegetables	are	a
third	or	more	starch	by	weight,	many	others
—	carrots,	turnips,	beets	—	contain	little	or
no	starch.	Because	starch	granules	absorb



moisture	from	their	cells	as	they	cook,	starchy
vegetables	tend	to	have	a	dry,	mealy	texture,
while	nonstarchy	vegetables	remain	moist	and
cohesive.

Food	Words:	Root,	Radish,	Tuber,
Truffle

Our	word	root	comes	from	an	Indo-
European	word	that	meant	both	“root”	and
“branch.”	Radish	and	licorice	share	that
same	ancestor.	Tuber	comes	from	an	Indo-
European	(linguistic)	root	meaning	“to
swell,”	as	many	plant	storage	organs	do.
The	same	root	gave	us	truffle,	the	swollen
underground	fungus,	as	well	as	thigh,
thumb,	tumor,	and	thousand.

Potatoes

There	are	more	than	200	species	of	potato,
relatives	of	the	tomato,	chilli,	and	tobacco
that	are	indigenous	to	moist,	cool	regions	of



Central	and	South	America.	Some	were
cultivated	8,000	years	ago.	Spanish	explorers
brought	one	species,	Solanum	tuberosum,
from	Peru	or	Colombia	to	Europe	around
1570.	Because	it	was	hardy	and	easy	to	grow,
the	potato	was	inexpensive	and	the	poor	were
its	principal	consumers.	(An	Irish	peasant	ate
5–10	pounds	per	day	at	the	time	of	the	1845
blight.)	It	now	leads	all	other	vegetables	in
worldwide	production.	More	potatoes	are
consumed	in	the	United	States	than	any	other
vegetable,	around	a	third	of	a	pound/150	gm
per	person	per	day.

The	potato	is	a	tuber,	the	tip	of	an
underground	stem	that	swells	with	stored
starch	and	water	and	bears	primordial	buds,
the	“eyes,”	that	generate	the	stem	and	roots	of
a	new	plant.	It	is	sometimes	a	little	sweet,
with	a	slight	but	characteristic	bitterness,	and
has	a	mild	earthy	flavor	from	a	compound	(a
pyrazine)	produced	by	soil	microbes,	but	also
apparently	within	the	tuber	itself.



Harvest	and	Storage	True	“new”	potatoes	are
immature	 tubers,	 harvested	 from	 green	 vines
during	 the	 late	 spring	 and	 throughout	 the
summer.	They	are	moist	and	sweet,	relatively
low	in	starch,	and	perishable.	Mature	potatoes
are	harvested	 in	 the	fall.	The	vines	are	killed
by	cutting	or	drying,	and	the	tubers	are	left	in
the	 soil	 for	 several	 weeks	 to	 “cure”	 and
toughen	 their	 skin.	 Potatoes	 can	 be	 stored	 in
the	dark	for	months,	during	which	their	flavor
intensifies;	 slow	 enzyme	 action	 generates
fatty,	 fruity,	 and	 flowery	 notes	 from	 cell-
membrane	 lipids.	 The	 ideal	 storage
temperature	 is	 45–50ºF/7–10ºC.	 At	 warmer
temperatures	they	may	sprout	or	decay,	and	at
colder	temperatures	their	metabolism	shifts	in
a	 complicated	 way	 that	 results	 in	 the
breakdown	 of	 some	 starch	 to	 sugars.	Makers
of	potato	chips	must	“recondition”	cold-stored
potatoes	 at	 room	 temperature	 for	 several
weeks	 to	 reduce	 their	 levels	 of	 glucose	 and
fructose,	 which	 otherwise	 cause	 the	 chips	 to



brown	 too	 rapidly	 and	 develop	 a	 bitter	 taste.
Internal	black	spots	in	potatoes	are	essentially
bruises,	 formed	 when	 an	 impact	 during
handling	 damages	 cells	 and	 causes	 the
browning	 enzymes	 to	 create	 dark	 complexes
of	the	amino	acid	tyrosine	(alkaloid	formation
and	therefore	bitterness	often	rise	also).

Nutritional	 Qualities	 Potatoes	 are	 a	 good
source	 of	 energy	 and	 vitamin	 C.	 Yellow-
fleshed	varieties	owe	their	color	to	fat-soluble
carotenoids	 (lutein,	 zeaxanthin),	 purple	 and
blue	 ones	 to	 water-soluble	 and	 antioxidant
anthocyanins.	 Potatoes	 are	 notable	 for
containing	 significant	 levels	 of	 the	 toxic
alkaloids	 solanine	 and	 chaconine,	 a	 hint	 of
whose	 bitterness	 is	 part	 of	 their	 true	 flavor.
Most	 commercial	 varieties	 contain	 2	 to	 15
milligrams	 of	 solanine	 and	 chaconine	 per
quarter-pound	 (100	 grams)	 of	 potato.
Progressively	 higher	 levels	 result	 in	 a
distinctly	 bitter	 taste,	 a	 burning	 sensation	 in



the	 throat,	 digestive	 and	 neurological
problems,	 and	 even	 death.	 Stressful	 growing
conditions	and	exposure	to	light	can	double	or
triple	 the	 normal	 levels.	 Because	 light	 also
induces	chlorophyll	formation,	a	green	cast	to
the	 surface	 is	 a	 sign	 of	 abnormally	 high
alkaloid	 levels.	 Greened	 potatoes	 should
either	 be	 peeled	 deeply	 or	 discarded,	 and
strongly	bitter	potatoes	should	not	be	eaten.

Cooking	Types	and	Behavior	There	are	 two
general	 cooking	 categories	 of	 potato,	 called
the	“mealy”	and	the	“waxy”	for	their	textures
when	 cooked.	Mealy	 types	 (russets,	 blue	 and
purple	 varieties,	 Russian	 and	 banana
fingerlings)	 concentrate	 more	 dry	 starch	 in
their	cells,	so	they’re	denser	than	waxy	types.
When	 cooked,	 the	 cells	 tend	 to	 swell	 and
separate	 from	 each	 other,	 producing	 a	 fine,
dry,	 fluffy	 texture	 that	 works	 well	 in	 fried
potatoes	 and	 in	 baked	 and	 mashed	 potatoes,
which	are	moistened	with	butter	or	cream.	In



waxy	 types	 (true	 new	 potatoes	 and	 common
U.S.	 red-and	 white-skinned	 varieties),
neighboring	 cells	 cohere	 even	 when	 cooked,
which	 gives	 them	 a	 solid,	 dense,	 moist
texture,	 and	 holds	 them	 together	 in	 intact
pieces	 for	 gratins,	 potato	 cakes,	 and	 salads.
Both	 types	 can	 be	 made	 firmer	 and	 more
coherent,	 less	 prone	 to	 the	 “sloughing”	 of
outer	 layers	when	boiled,	by	 treating	 them	to
the	 low-temperature	 precooking	 that
strengthens	cell	walls	(p.	283).

Cooked	potatoes	sometimes	develop	a
large	internal	region	of	bluish-gray
discoloration.	This	“after-cooking	darkening”
is	caused	by	the	combination	of	iron	ions,	a
phenolic	substance	(chlorogenic	acid),	and
oxygen,	which	react	to	form	a	pigmented
complex.	This	problem	can	be	minimized	in
boiled	potatoes	by	making	the	pH	of	the	water
distinctly	acidic	with	cream	of	tartar	or	lemon
juice	after	the	potatoes	are	half-cooked.

The	flavor	of	boiled	potatoes	is	dominated



by	the	intensified	earthy	and	fatty,	fruity,	and
flowery	notes	of	the	raw	tuber.	Baked	potatoes
develop	another	layer	of	flavor	from	the
browning	reactions	(p.777),	including	malty
and	“sweet”	aromas	(methylbutanal,
methional).	Leftover	potatoes	often	suffer
from	a	stale,	cardboard-like	flavor	that
develops	over	several	days	in	the	refrigerator,
but	within	a	few	hours	if	the	potatoes	are	kept
hot	for	prolonged	service.	It	turns	out	that	the
aromatic	fragments	of	membrane	lipids	are
temporarily	stabilized	by	the	tuber’s
antioxidant	vitamin	C;	but	with	time	the
vitamin	C	is	used	up	and	the	fragments
become	oxidized	to	a	series	of	less	pleasant
aldehydes.

Potatoes	are	prepared	in	many	ways,	and
used	as	an	ingredient	in	many	dishes.	Here	are
brief	notes	on	a	few	starring	roles.

Mashed	 and	 Pureed	 Potatoes	 There	 are
many	different	styles	of	mashed	potatoes,	but



all	 of	 them	 involve	 cooking	 the	 potatoes
whole	or	in	pieces,	crushing	them	to	a	more	or
less	 fine	 particle	 size,	 and	 lubricating	 and
enriching	 the	particles	with	a	combination	of
water	 and	 fat,	 usually	 in	 the	 form	 of	 butter
and	milk	 or	 cream.	 Some	 luxurious	 versions
may	 be	 almost	 as	 much	 butter	 as	 potato,	 or
include	 eggs	 or	 egg	 yolks.	 Mealy	 types	 fall
apart	 into	 individual	 cells	 and	 small
aggregates,	 so	 they	offer	 a	 large	 surface	area
for	 coating	 by	 the	 added	 ingredients,	 and
readily	 produce	 a	 fine,	 creamy	 consistency.
Waxy	 potatoes	 require	 more	 mashing	 to
obtain	 a	 smooth	 texture,	 exude	more	 gelated
starch,	and	don’t	absorb	enrichment	as	easily.
The	 classic	 French	pommes	 purées,	 pureed
potatoes,	are	made	from	waxy	potatoes,	pieces
of	 which	 are	 pushed	 through	 a	 fine	 sieve	 or
food	mill	and	then	worked	hard	—	to	the	point
of	 having	what	 an	 eminent	 French	 cookbook
writer,	Mme	Ste-Ange,	called	a	“dead	arm”	—
first	alone	and	then	with	butter,	to	incorporate



air	and	obtain	the	lightness	of	whipped	cream.
American	 recipes	 take	 a	 more	 gentle
approach,	 sieving	 mealy	 varieties	 and
carefully	 stirring	 in	 liquid	 and	 fat	 to	 avoid
excessive	 cell	 damage,	 starch	 release,	 and
glueyness.

Fried	Potatoes	Fried	potatoes	are	some	of	the
world’s	 favorite	 foods.	 Deep-fried	 potato
sticks	and	slices	and	the	technique	of	double-
frying	were	 all	well	 known	 in	Europe	 by	 the
middle	 of	 the	 19th	 century,	 and	 in	 England
were	 attributed	 mainly	 to	 the	 French:	 hence
the	 term	 “French	 fry”	 for	 what	 the	 French
simply	 call	 fried	 potatoes	 (pommes	 frites).
These	 products	 happily	 turned	 out	 to	 be
among	 the	 few	 foods	whose	quality	need	not
be	 compromised	 by	 mass	 production.	 Of
course	 they’re	 rich:	 the	 frying	 oil	 in	 which
they’re	 immersed	 coats	 their	 surface	 and	 is
drawn	 into	 the	 tiny	 pores	 created	 when	 the
surfac	 dries	 out.	 The	 proportion	 of	 oil	 to



potato	 depends	 on	 the	 surface	 area.	 Chips,
which	 are	 almost	 all	 surface,	 average	 about
35%	 oil,	 while	 thick	 fries	 are	more	 like	 10–
15%.

French	 Fries	 “French	 fries”	 may	 first	 have
been	 made	 in	 significant	 quantities	 by
Parisian	 street	 vendors	 early	 in	 the	 19th
century.	 They	 are	 potato	 sticks	 cut	 with	 a
square	 cross	 section,	 5–10	 mm	 on	 a	 side,
deep-fried	 in	 oil,	 with	 a	 crisp	 gold	 exterior
and	 a	 moist	 interior	 that’s	 fluffy	 if	 the
potatoes	 are	 high-starch	 russets,	 creamy
otherwise.	 Simple	 quick	 frying	 doesn’t	 work
very	well;	it	gives	a	thin,	delicate	crust	that’s
quickly	softened	by	the	interior’s	moisture.	A
crisp	crust	requires	an	initial	period	of	gentle
frying,	 so	 that	 starch	 in	 the	 surface	 cells	 has
time	 to	 dissolve	 from	 the	 granules	 and
reinforce	 and	 glue	 together	 the	 outer	 cell
walls	 into	a	 thicker,	more	 robust	 layer.	Good
fries	can	be	made	by	starting	the	potato	strips



in	 relatively	 cool	 oil,	 250–325ºF/120–163ºC,
cooking	for	8–10	minutes,	then	raising	the	oil
temperature	 to	 350–375ºF/175–190ºC	 and
cooking	 for	 3–4	minutes	 to	 brown	 and	 crisp
the	 outside.	 The	 most	 efficient	 production
method	is	to	pre-fry	all	the	potato	strips	at	the
lower	 temperature	 ahead	 of	 time,	 set	 them
aside	 at	 room	 temperature,	 and	 then	 do	 the
brief	 high-temperature	 frying	 at	 the	 last
minute.

Potato	 Chips	 Potato	 chips	 are	 essentially
french	 fries	 that	 are	all	 crust	 and	no	 interior.
The	 potatoes	 are	 cut	 into	 thin	 cross	 sections
around	 1.5	 mm	 thick,	 the	 equivalent	 of	 just
10–12	 potato	 cells,	 then	 deep-fried	 until	 dry
and	crisp.	There	are	two	basic	ways	of	frying
chips,	and	they	produce	two	different	textures.
Cooking	 at	 a	 fairly	 constant	 and	 high	 oil
temperature,	 around	 350ºF/175ºC,	 heats	 the
slices	 so	 rapidly	 that	 the	 starch	 granules	 and
cell	 walls	 have	 little	 chance	 to	 absorb	 any



moisture	 before	 they’re	 desiccated	 and	 done,
in	 3–4	 minutes.	 The	 texture	 is	 therefore
delicately	 crisp	 and	 fine-grained.	 Most
packaged	 chips	 have	 this	 texture	 because
they’re	made	in	a	continuous	processor	whose
oil	temperature	stays	high.	On	the	other	hand,
cooking	 at	 an	 initially	 low	 and	 slowly
increasing	 temperature,	 beginning	 around
250ºF/120ºC	 and	 reaching	 350ºF/175ºC	 in	 8–
10	minutes,	gives	 the	starch	granules	 time	 to
absorb	water,	 exude	dissolved	 starch	 into	 the
potato	cell	walls,	and	reinforce	and	glue	them
together.	 The	 result	 is	 a	 much	 harder,
crunchier	 chip.	This	 is	 the	 texture	created	by
“kettle	 frying,”	 or	 cooking	 the	 slices	 by	 the
batch	 in	 a	 vessel	 like	 an	 ordinary	 pot.	 The
temperature	 of	 the	 preheated	 kettle	 drops
immediately	when	a	batch	of	cold	potatoes	is
dumped	in,	so	the	potatoes	cook	in	oil	whose
temperature	starts	low	and	rises	slowly	as	the
potatoes’	 moisture	 is	 cooked	 out	 and	 the
heater	catches	up.



Soufflée	Potatoes	Soufflée	potatoes	are	a	kind
of	hybrid	French	fry-chip	in	which	the	potato
slices	 puff	 up	 into	 delicate	 brown	 balloons.
They	are	made	by	cutting	potato	slices	around
3	mm	(1/8	in)	thick,	and	deep-frying	them	at	a
moderate	 temperature,	 350ºF/175ºC,	 until
their	surfaces	become	leathery	and	just	begin
to	 brown.	 The	 slices	 are	 cooled,	 then	 fried	 a
second	 time	 at	 a	 high	 temperature,	 around
380ºF/195ºC.	Now	when	the	interior	moisture
is	 heated	 to	 the	 boil	 and	 vaporized,	 the
stiffened	 surfaces	 resist	 the	pressure,	 and	 the
vapor	pushes	the	two	surfaces	apart,	leaving	a
hollow	center.

Sweet	Potatoes

The	sweet	potato	is	the	true	storage	root	of
Ipomoea	batatas,	a	member	of	the	morning
glory	family.	It	is	native	to	northern	South
America,	and	may	have	reached	Polynesia	in
prehistoric	times.	Columbus	brought	the



sweet	potato	to	Europe,	and	by	the	end	of	the
15th	century	it	was	established	in	China	and
the	Philippines.	China	now	produces	and
consumes	far	more	sweet	potatoes	than	the
Americas,	enough	to	make	it	the	second	most
important	vegetable	worldwide.	There	are
many	different	varieties,	ranging	from	dry	and
starchy	varieties	common	in	tropical	regions,
some	pale	and	others	red	or	purple	with
anthocyanins,	to	the	moist,	sweet	version,
dark	orange	with	beta-carotene,	that	is	popular
in	the	United	States	and	was	confusingly
named	a	“yam”	in	1930s	marketing
campaigns	(for	true	yams,	see	p.	306).	The
bulk	of	the	U.S.	crop	is	grown	in	the	Southeast
and	cured	for	several	days	at	86ºF/30ºC	to
heal	damaged	skin	and	encourage	sugar
development.	True	to	their	subtropical
heritage,	sweet	potatoes	store	best	at	55–60ºF/
13–16ºC.	Chilling	injury	can	contribute	to
“hardcore,”	a	condition	in	which	the	root
center	remains	hard	even	when	cooked.



Most	sweet	potato	varieties	sweeten	during
cooking	thanks	to	the	action	of	an	enzyme	that
attacks	starch	and	breaks	it	down	to	maltose,	a
sugar	made	up	of	two	glucose	molecules
that’s	about	a	third	as	sweet	as	table	sugar.
Moist	or	“soggy”	varieties	convert	as	much	as
75%	of	their	starch	to	maltose,	so	they	seem
permeated	with	syrup!	The	enzyme	starts	to
make	maltose	when	the	tightly	packed	starch
granules	absorb	moisture	and	expand,
beginning	around	135ºF/57ºC,	and	it	stops
when	the	rising	heat	denatures	it,	at	around
170ºF/75ºC.	Slow	baking	therefore	gives	the
enzyme	a	longer	time	to	work	than	does	rapid
cooking	in	steam,	boiling	water,	or	a
microwave,	and	produces	a	sweeter	result.
Freshly	harvested	“green”	roots	available	in
the	autumn	have	less	enzyme	activity	and	so
don’t	become	as	sweet	or	moist.

Pale	and	red-purple	sweet	potatoes	have	a
delicate,	nutty	aroma,	while	orange	types	have
the	heavier,	pumpkin-like	quality	created	by



fragments	of	the	carotenoid	pigments.	Some
varieties	(e.g.,	red-skinned	Garnet)	suffer
from	after-cooking	darkening	(p.	303)	due	to
their	abundant	phenolic	compounds.

Tropical	Roots	and	Tubers

Root	and	tuber	vegetables	that	come	from	the
tropics	generally	contain	less	water	than
common	potatoes,	and	as	much	as	double	the
starch	(potatoes	are	18%	carbohydrate	by
weight,	cassavas	36%).	They	therefore
become	very	floury	when	baked,	dense	and
waxy	when	boiled	or	steamed,	and	help
thicken	soups	and	stews	in	which	they’re
included.	They	have	a	relatively	short	storage
life	and	suffer	chilling	damage	if	refrigerated,
but	can	be	frozen	after	preliminary	peeling
and	cutting.

Cassava,	 Manioc,	 and	 Yuca 	 These	 are	 all
names	 for	 the	 elongated	 root	 of	 a	 tropical



plant	in	the	spurge	family,	Manihot	esculenta,
which	 has	 the	 very	 useful	 habit	 of	 lasting	 in
the	ground	for	as	much	as	three	years.	It	was
domesticated	 in	northern	South	America,	and
has	 spread	 through	 the	 lowland	 tropics	 of
Africa	and	Asia	 in	 the	 last	century	or	so.	 It’s
often	 made	 into	 flatbreads	 or	 fermented	 as
well	 as	 cooked	 on	 its	 own.	 There	 are	 two
general	 groups	 of	 cassava	 varieties:
potentially	 toxic	 “bitter”	 varieties	 that	 are
used	 in	 the	 producing	 countries,	 and	 safer
“sweet”	varieties	 that	are	exported	and	found
in	our	 ethnic	markets.	Bitter	 varieties,	which
are	 highly	 productive	 crop	 plants,	 have
defensive	 cells	 that	 generate	 bitter	 cyanide
throughout	 the	 root,	 and	must	 be	 thoroughly
treated	 —	 for	 example,	 by	 shredding,
pressing,	and	washing	—	to	become	safe	and
palatable.	 They’re	 mainly	 processed	 in	 the
producing	 countries	 into	 flour	 and	 tapioca,
small	 balls	 of	 dried	 cassava	 starch	 that
become	 pleasantly	 jelly-like	 when



remoistened	 in	 desserts	 and	 drinks.	 Sweet
cassava	 varieties	 are	 less	 productive	 crop
plants,	 but	 have	 cyanide	 defenses	 only	 near
their	surface,	and	are	safe	to	eat	after	peeling
and	 normal	 cooking.	 The	 root	 flesh	 is	 snow-
white	 and	 dense,	with	 a	 bark-like	 skin	 and	 a
fibrous	core	usually	removed	before	cooking.
Cassava	 benefits	 from	 cooking	 in	 water	 to
moisten	 the	 starch	 before	 being	 fried	 or
baked.

Food	Words:	Potato,	Yam
Potato	came	into	English	via	the	Spanish
patata,	a	version	of	the	word	used	by	the
Taino	peoples	of	the	Caribbean	for	the
sweet	potato,	batata.	The	Peruvian
Quechua	word	for	the	true	potato	of	the
Andes	was	papa.	Yam	comes	via
Portuguese	from	a	West	African	word
meaning	“to	eat.”

Taro	and	Dasheen	Taro	and	dasheen	are	two
of	 many	 names	 for	 tubers	 of	 a	 water-loving



plant	 native	 to	 eastern	 Asia	 and	 the	 Pacific
islands,	Colocasia	 esculenta,	 which	 is	 in	 the
arum	 family	 (as	 are	 calla	 lilies	 and
philodendrons).	 Like	 other	 arums,	 taro
contains	 protective	 crystalline	 needles	 of
calcium	oxalate	(40–160	mg	per	100	gm),	and
deposits	them	near	stores	of	protein-digesting
enzymes.	 The	 result	 is	 an	 arsenal	 of
something	 resembling	 poison-tipped	 darts:
when	 the	 tuber	 is	 eaten	 raw,	 the	 crystals
puncture	 the	 skin	 and	 then	 the	 enzymes	 eat
away	 at	 the	 wound,	 producing	 considerable
irritation.	 Cooking	 overcomes	 this	 defensive
system	 by	 denaturing	 the	 enzymes	 and
dissolving	the	crystals.

Taro	is	commonly	found	in	two	sizes,	one
the	main	tuberous	growth	which	may	be
several	pounds,	the	other	smaller	side-
growths,	each	a	few	ounces,	and	with	a
moister	texture.	The	flesh	is	mottled	by
vessels	purplish	with	phenolic	compounds;
during	cooking	the	phenolics	and	color	diffuse



into	and	tinge	the	cream-colored	flesh.	Taro
retains	its	shape	when	simmered,	and	it
becomes	waxy	on	cooling.	It	has	a	pronounced
aroma	that	reminds	some	of	chestnuts,	others
of	egg	yolk.	In	Hawaii	taro	is	boiled,	mashed,
and	fermented	into	poi,	one	element	in	the
luau	(p.	295).

Taro	is	sometimes	confused	with	malanga,
yautia,	and	cocoyam,	tubers	of	a	number	of
New	World	tropical	species	in	the	genus
Xanthosoma,	which	are	also	arums	protected
by	oxalate	crystals.	Malanga	grows	in	drier
soils	than	taro,	is	more	elongated,	has	an
earthier	flavor,	and	more	readily	falls	apart
when	simmered	in	soups	and	stews.

Yam	True	yams	are	starchy	tubers	of	tropical
plants	that	are	related	to	the	grasses	and	lilies,
a	dozen	or	so	cultivated	species	of	Dioscorea
from	Africa,	 South	America,	 and	 the	 Pacific
with	 varying	 sizes,	 textures,	 colors,	 and
flavors.	They	are	 seldom	seen	 in	mainstream



American	 markets,	 where	 “yam”	 means	 a
sugary	 orange	 sweet	 potato	 (p.	 304).	 True
yams	can	grow	to	100	lb/50	kg	and	more,	and
in	the	Pacific	islands	have	been	honored	with
their	 own	 little	 houses.	 They	 appear	 to	 have
been	 cultivated	 as	 early	 as	 8000	BCE	 in	Asia.
Many	yams	contain	oxalate	crystals	just	under
the	skin,	as	well	as	soap-like	saponins,	which
give	a	 slippery,	 frothy	quality	 to	 their	 juices.
Some	varieties	contain	a	toxic	alkaloid	called
dioscorine	 that	 must	 be	 removed	 by	 grating
and	 leaching	 in	water.	Yam	 tubers	 help	 their
plants	survive	drought,	and	they	have	a	longer
pantry	life	than	cassava	or	taro.

The	Carrot	Family:	Carrots,	Parsnips,	and	Others

Root	vegetables	in	the	carrot	family	share	the
family	habit	of	containing	distinctive
aromatic	molecules,	so	they’re	often	used	to
lend	complexity	to	stocks,	stews,	soups,	and
other	preparations.	Carrots	and	parsnips



contain	less	starch	than	potatoes	and	are
notably	sweet;	they	may	be	5%	sugars,	a
mixture	of	sucrose,	glucose,	and	fructose.
Carrots	have	found	their	way	into	cakes	and
sugar	preserves	in	the	West,	are	shredded	and
sweetened	for	rice	dishes	in	Iran,	and	in	India
are	cooked	down	in	milk	to	make	a	vegetable
kind	of	fudge	(halwa).

Carrot	Cultivated	carrots	are	swollen	taproots
of	 the	 species	Daucus	carota,	which	 arose	 in
the	Mediterranean	region.	There	are	two	main
groups	 of	 cultivated	 carrots.	 The	 eastern
anthocyanin	carrot	developed	 in	central	Asia,
and	 has	 reddish-purple	 to	 purple-black	 outer
layers	 and	 a	 yellow	 core	 of	 conducting
vessels.	 It’s	eaten	in	 its	home	region	and	can
also	be	found	in	Spain.	The	Western	carotene
carrot	 appears	 to	 be	 a	 hybrid	 among	 three
different	 groups	 of	 ancestors:	 yellow	 carrots
cultivated	 in	 Europe	 and	 the	 Mediterranean
since	medieval	 times;	 white	 carrots	 that	 had



been	 cultivated	 since	 classical	 times;	 and
some	 wild	 carrot	 populations.	 The	 familiar
orange	carrot,	 the	 richest	vegetable	 source	of
the	 vitamin	 A	 precursor	 beta-carotene,
appears	to	have	been	developed	in	Holland	in
the	17th	 century.	There	 are	 also	Asian	 carrot
varieties	 whose	 roots	 are	 red	 with	 lycopene,
the	 tomato	 carotenoid.	Carotene	 carrots	 have
the	practical	 advantage	of	 retaining	 their	oil-
soluble	pigments	in	water-based	dishes,	while
anthocyanin	 carrots	 bleed	 their	water-soluble
colors	into	soups	and	stews.

The	distinctive	aroma	of	carrots	is	due
largely	to	terpenes	(p.	273),	and	is	a
composite	of	pine,	wood,	oil,	citrus,	and
turpentine	notes;	cooking	adds	a	violet-like
note	from	fragmented	carotene.	White
varieties	tend	to	be	the	most	strongly
aromatic.	Exposure	to	sunlight,	high
temperatures,	or	physical	damage	can	cause
the	roots	to	generate	alcohol,	which	adds	to
the	solvent-like	aroma,	as	well	as	a	bitter



defensive	chemical.	Peeling	the	thin	outer
layer	removes	most	of	the	bitterness	as	well
as	phenolic	compounds	that	cause	brown
discoloration.	The	sweetness	is	most
noticeable	when	the	roots	are	cooked,	which
weakens	the	strong	cell	walls	and	frees	the
sugars	to	be	tasted.	The	carrot	core	carries
water	from	the	root	to	the	leaves	and	has	less
flavor	than	the	outer	storage	layers.

Pre-peeled	“baby”	carrots,	actually	cut
from	mature	ones,	often	have	a	harmless
white	fuzz	on	their	surface	due	to	damaged
outer	cell	layers	that	dehydrate	within	hours
of	processing.

Parsnip	 Pastinaca	 sativa,	 along	 with	 its
aromatic	 taproot,	 is	 native	 to	 Eurasia,	 was
known	to	the	Greeks	and	Romans,	and	like	the
turnip	was	an	important	staple	food	before	the
introduction	of	the	potato.	The	version	known
to	us	today	was	developed	in	the	Middle	Ages.
The	parsnip	accumulates	more	starch	than	the



carrot,	but	converts	it	to	sugars	when	exposed
to	 cold	 temperatures;	 so	 winter	 roots	 are
sweeter	 than	 autumn	 roots,	 and	 before	 sugar
became	 cheap	 were	 used	 to	 make	 cakes	 and
jams	in	Britain.	Its	pale,	somewhat	dry	tissue
softens	 faster	 during	 cooking	 than	 either	 the
potato’s	or	carrot’s.

Parsley	Root	Parsley	 root	 is	 the	 taproot	of	 a
particular	 variety	 of	 parsley,	Petroselinum
crispum	 var.	tuberosum,	 is	also	flavored	by	a
mixture	 of	 terpenoids,	 and	 is	 more	 complex
and	pungent	 than	parsley	 leaves.	Parsley	 is	 a
Eurasian	native	(p.	408).

Arracacha	Arracacha	 is	 the	 root	 of	 a	 South
American	 member	 of	 the	 carrot	 family,
Arracacia	xanthorhiza.	It	has	smooth	roots	of
various	 colors,	 and	 a	 rich	 flavor	 that	 the
eminent	plant	explorer	David	Fairchild	called
much	superior	to	carrots.

The	Lettuce	Family:	Sunchoke,	Salsify,	Scorzonera,



Burdock

Roots	and	tubers	from	northerly	members	of
the	lettuce	family	share	three	characteristics:
an	abundance	of	fructose-based
carbohydrates,	little	starch,	and	a	mild	flavor
reminiscent	of	the	true	artichoke	(also	a
lettuce	relative).	The	fructose	carbohydrates
(small-chain	fructosans	and	starch-like	inulin)
provide	both	an	energy	store	and	an	antifreeze
mechanism	for	the	overwintering	plants.
Humans	don’t	have	the	enzymes	necessary	to
digest	fructose	chains,	so	beneficial	bacteria
in	our	intestines	feed	on	them	instead,	in	the
process	generating	carbon	dioxide	and	other
gases	that	can	cause	abdominal	discomfort	if
we’ve	eaten	a	large	portion	of	these
vegetables.

The	sunchoke	is	the	nonfibrous,	plump
tuber	of	a	North	American	sunflower
(Helianthus	tuberosus),	whose	traditional	and
obscure	name	is	“Jerusalem	artichoke.”	It’s



pleasantly	moist,	crunchy,	and	sweet	when
raw,	and	becomes	soft	and	sweet	after	brief
cooking.	When	cooked	for	12–24	hours	at	a
low	temperature,	around	200ºF/93ºC,
sunchoke	carbohydrates	are	largely	converted
to	digestible	fructose,	and	the	flesh	becomes
sweet	and	translucently	brown,	like	a
vegetable	aspic.

Salsify	(Tragopogon	porrifolius),
sometimes	called	“oyster	plant”	for	the
supposed	flavor	resemblance,	and	black
salsify	or	scorzonera	(Scorzonera	hispanica)
are	Mediterranean	natives.	Their	Eurasian
relative	burdock	(Arctium	lappa)	is	most
appreciated	in	Japan	as	gobo.	All	three	of
these	elongated	taproots	become	undesirably
fibrous	with	size	and	age,	are	rich	in	phenolic
compounds	(those	in	gobo	are	potent
antioxidants),	and	therefore	readily	turn
grayish-brown	—	at	the	surface	when	cut	and
peeled,	throughout	when	cooked.

Other	Common	Roots	and	Tubers



Other	Common	Roots	and	Tubers

Chinese	Water	Chestnut	and	Tiger	Nut	The
Chinese	water	chestnut	and	the	tiger	nut,	or
chufa,	are	both	members	of	the	sedge	family,
a	group	of	water	grasses	that	includes
papyrus.	The	water	chestnut	is	a	swollen
underwater	stem	tip	of	Eleocharis	dulcis,	a
native	of	the	Far	East	cultivated	primarily	in
China	and	Japan.	(Horned	water	chestnuts	or
caltrops	are	the	seeds	of	species	of	Trapa,
water	plants	native	to	Africa,	central	Europe,
and	Asia.)	Tiger	nuts	are	small	tubers	of
Cyperus	esculentus,	a	native	of	northern
Africa	and	the	Mediterranean	that	was
cultivated	in	ancient	Egypt.	Both	taste	slightly
sweet	and	nutty,	and	both	are	remarkable	for
retaining	their	crispness	when	cooked	and
even	when	canned,	thanks	to	phenolic
compounds	in	their	cell	walls	that	cross-link
and	strengthen	them.	The	Spanish	make	the
sweet	drink	horchata	de	chufa	from	dried
tiger	nuts	by	soaking	them	in	water,	grinding



and	resoaking,	straining,	and	adding	sugar.
In	Asia,	where	Chinese	and	horned	water

chestnuts	are	sometimes	cultivated	in
contaminated	water,	these	foods	have	been
known	to	transmit	cysts	of	a	parasitic
intestinal	fluke	to	people	who	shell	them	with
their	teeth.	Fresh	versions	should	be	washed
and	scrubbed	thoroughly	before	trimming
away	their	tough	outer	layer,	then	washed
again.	A	brief	immersion	in	boiling	water	will
guarantee	their	safety.

Crosnes,	or	Chinese	Artichokes	Crosnes	are
small	 tubers	of	several	species	of	Stachys,	an
Asian	member	of	 the	mint	 family;	 they	were
brought	from	China	to	France	in	the	late	19th
century.	Crosnes	are	crisp	and	taste	nutty	and
sweet,	 something	 like	 a	 sunchoke.	 They’re
notable	 for	 containing	 an	 unusual
carbohydrate,	stachyose,	a	combination	of	two
galactoses	 and	 one	 sucrose.	 We	 can’t	 digest
stachyose,	 so	 a	 large	 serving	 of	 crosnes	 can



cause	gassy	discomfort.	Crosnes	contain	little
starch,	 and	 turn	 mushy	 when	 even	 slightly
overcooked.

Jicama	 Jicama	 is	 the	swollen	storage	root	of
Pachyrhizus	 erosus, 	 a	 South	 American
member	of	the	bean	family.	Its	main	virtue	is
its	 sturdy	 crispness:	 it	 keeps	well,	 is	 slow	 to
discolor,	 and	 retains	 some	 crunch	 when
cooked.	Jicama	is	often	eaten	raw,	in	salads	or
dipped	into	a	sauce,	and	is	sometimes	used	as
a	 fresh	 replacement	 for	 Chinese	 water
chestnuts,	 though	 it	 doesn’t	 have	 the	 same
sweet	and	nutty	character.

Lotus	 Root	 Lotus	 root	 is	 the	 muddwelling
rhizome	 of	Nelumbo	 nucifera,	 a	 water	 lily
native	 to	Asia	 that	 has	 North	American	 and
Egyptian	 relatives.	 The	 lily	 is	 an	 important
image	 in	 Buddhism	 and	 other	 systems	 of
thought	—	a	stalk	rising	from	the	mire	to	bear
a	 beautiful	 flower	 over	 its	 floating	 leaves	—
so	 lotus	 root	 can	 carry	 extraculinary



connotations.	The	rhizome	contains	large	void
spaces,	 so	 cross-sectional	 slices	 have	 a
characteristic	 lacy	 pattern.	 It	 is	 crisp	 and
remains	so	after	cooking,	for	the	same	reason
that	water	 chestnuts	 do.	 It	 has	 a	mild	 aroma
and	 slight	 astringency,	 and	 discolors	 rapidly
when	 cut	 due	 to	 phenolic	 compounds.	 Lotus
root	 is	 cooked	 in	many	 different	 ways,	 after
an	initial	peeling	(and	blanching	in	the	case	of
salads),	from	rapid	stir-frying	to	braising	and
candying.	 Its	 modest	 store	 of	 starch	 is	 also
extracted.

Oca	 Oca	 is	 the	 small	 tuber	 of	 a	 South
American	 relative	 of	 wood	 sorrel,	Oxalis
tuberosa.	It	is	variably	starchy	or	juicy,	comes
in	a	number	of	anthocyanin-based	skin	colors,
from	yellow	to	red	to	purple,	and	is	unusual	in
being	distinctly	tart,	thanks	to	the	oxalic	acid
typical	of	the	family.	In	Peru	and	Bolivia	it’s
usually	cooked	in	stews	and	soups.

Lower	Stems	and	Bulbs:



Beet,	Turnip,	Radish,	Onion,
and	Others

The	members	of	this	mixed	category	of
vegetables	sit	at	or	just	below	ground	level,
and	have	one	characteristic	in	common:	they
store	little	starch	compared	to	most	roots	and
tubers.	They’re	therefore	usually	less	dense,
cook	more	rapidly,	and	retain	a	moist	texture.

Beets

Beet	“roots”	are	mainly	the	lower	stem	of
Beta	vulgaris,	a	native	of	the	Mediterranean
and	Western	Europe.	People	have	eaten	this
plant	since	prehistory,	initially	its	leaves
(chard,	p.	325),	then	the	underground	part	of
specialized	varieties	(subspecies	vulgaris).	In
Greek	times	beet	roots	were	long,	either	white
or	red,	and	sweet;	Theophrastus	reported
around	300	BCE	that	they	were	pleasant
enough	to	eat	raw.	The	fat	red	type	is	first



depicted	in	the	16th	century.	Table	beets	are
about	3%	sugar	and	some	large	animal-feed
varieties	are	8%;	in	the	18th	century,	selection
for	sugar	production	led	to	sugar	beets	with
20%	sucrose.

Colored	beets	owe	their	red,	orange,	and
yellow	hues	to	betain	pigments	(p.	268),
which	are	water-soluble	and	stain	other
ingredients.	There	are	variegated	varieties
with	alternating	red	layers	of	phloem	tissue
and	unpigmented	layers	of	xylem	(p.	262);
they	look	their	best	in	raw	slices	because
cooking	causes	cell	damage	and	pigment
leakage.	When	we	eat	beets,	the	red	pigment
is	usually	decolorized	by	high	stomach	acidity
and	reaction	with	iron	in	the	large	intestine,
but	people	sometimes	excrete	the	intact
pigment,	a	startling	but	harmless	event.	The
persistent	firmness	of	cooked	beets	is	caused
by	phenolic	reinforcement	of	the	cell	walls,	as
in	bamboo	shoots	and	water	chestnuts	(p.
283).



Beet	aroma	comes	largely	from	an	earthy-
smelling	molecule	called	geosmin,	which	was
long	thought	to	originate	with	soil	microbes,
but	now	appears	also	to	be	produced	by	the
beet	root	itself.	The	sugariness	of	beets	is
sometimes	put	to	use	in	chocolate	cakes,
syrups,	and	other	sweets.

Celery	Root

Celery	root	or	celeriac	is	the	swollen	lower
portion	of	the	main	stem	of	a	special	variety
of	celery,	Apium	graveolens	var.	rapaceum.
Roots	project	from	a	knobbly	surface	that
requires	deep	peeling.	Celeriac	tastes	much
like	celery	thanks	to	the	same	oxygen-ring
aromatics,	and	contains	a	moderate	amount	of
starch	(5–6%	by	weight).	It’s	usually	cooked
like	other	root	vegetables,	but	also	finely
shredded	to	make	a	crunchy	raw	salad.

The	Cabbage	Family:
Turnip,	Radish



The	turnip,	Brassica	rapa,	has	been	under
cultivation	for	about	4,000	years	in	Eurasia	as
a	staple,	fast-growing	food.	It	consists	of	both
lower	stem	and	taproot,	can	have	a	number	of
different	shapes	and	colors,	and	has	the
sulfury	aroma	typical	of	the	family	(p.	321).
Small,	mild	varieties	may	be	eaten	raw	and
crunchy	like	radishes,	larger	ones	cooked	until
soft:	but	not	too	long,	or	the	overcooked
cabbage	flavor	dominates	and	the	texture
becomes	mushy.	Turnips	are	also	pickled.
The	crisp,	sometimes	pungent	radish	is	a
different	species,	Raphanus	sativus,	a	native
of	western	Asia,	and	had	reached	the
Mediterranean	by	the	time	of	the	ancient
Egyptians	and	Greeks.	Like	the	turnip	it’s
mainly	a	swollen	lower	stem,	and	has	been
shaped	by	human	selection	into	many
distinctive	forms	and	striking	colors	(for
example,	green	at	the	surface	and	red	inside).
Most	familiar	in	the	United	States	are	small,



early-maturing	spring	varieties,	usually	with	a
bright	red	skin,	which	take	only	a	few	weeks
to	grow,	and	become	harsh	and	woody	in
summer	heat.	These	are	usually	eaten	raw	in
salads.	But	there	are	also	large	Spanish	and
German	varieties,	some	with	black	skins	and
some	white,	that	reach	several	inches	in
diameter	and	mature	over	several	months	for
harvest	in	the	autumn.	These	types	are	firm
and	dry,	and	take	well	to	braising	and
roasting.	And	there	are	the	large,	long	white
Asian	radishes,	best	known	by	the	Japanese
term	daikon,	which	can	be	more	than	a	foot/25
cm	long	and	weigh	6	lb/3	kg.	They	are
relatively	mild	and	used	both	raw	and	cooked,
sometimes	almost	as	a	crisp	pear	might	be.
Radish	pungency	is	created	by	an	enzyme
reaction	that	forms	a	volatile	mustard	oil	(p.
321).	Much	of	that	enzyme	is	found	in	the
skin,	so	peeling	will	moderate	the
pepperiness.	Though	most	often	eaten	raw	or
pickled,	radishes	can	be	cooked	like	turnips,	a



treatment	that	minimizes	their	pungency	(the
enzyme	is	inactivated)	and	brings	out	their
sweetness.

An	unusual	radish	species,	R.	caudatus,	is
known	as	the	“rat-tailed	radish”	because	it
bears	long	edible	seedpods.

The	Onion	Family:	Onions,	Garlic,	Leeks

There	are	around	500	species	in	the	genus
Allium,	a	group	of	plants	in	the	lily	family
that	are	native	to	northern	temperate	regions.
About	20	are	important	human	foods,	and	a
handful	have	been	prized	for	thousands	of
years,	as	is	attested	by	the	well-known	lament
of	the	exiled	Israelites	in	the	Old	Testament:
“We	remember	the	fish,	which	we	did	eat	in
Egypt	freely;	the	cucumbers,	and	the	melons,
and	the	leeks,	and	the	onions,	and	the	garlic.”
Onions,	garlic,	and	most	of	their	relatives	are
grown	primarily	for	their	underground	bulbs,
which	are	made	up	of	swollen	leaf	bases	or



“scales”	that	store	energy	for	the	beginning	of
the	next	growing	season,	and	which	naturally
keep	well	for	months.	Like	the	sunchoke	and
its	relatives,	the	onion	family	accumulates
energy	stores	not	in	starch,	but	in	chains	of
fructose	sugars	(p.	805),	which	long,	slow
cooking	breaks	down	to	produce	a	marked
sweetness.	Of	course	the	fresh	green	leaves	of
bulb-forming	alliums	are	also	eaten,	and
nonbulbing	kinds,	including	leeks,	chives,	and
some	onions,	give	only	their	leaves.

The	key	to	the	onion	family’s	appeal	is	a
strong,	often	pungent,	sulfury	flavor	whose
original	purpose	was	to	deter	animals	from
eating	the	plants.	Cooking	transforms	this
chemical	defense	into	a	deliciously	savory,
almost	meaty	quality	that	adds	depth	to	many
dishes	in	many	cultures.

The	Flavors	and	Sting	of	Raw	Alliums
The	distinctive	flavors	of	the	onion	family
come	from	its	defensive	use	of	the	element



sulfur.	The	growing	plants	take	up	sulfur	from
the	soil	and	incorporate	it	into	four	different
kinds	of	chemical	ammunition,	which	float	in
the	cell	fluids	while	their	enzyme	trigger	is
held	separately	in	a	storage	vacuole	(p.	261).
When	the	cell	is	damaged	by	chopping	or
chewing,	the	enzyme	escapes	and	breaks	the
ammunition	molecules	in	half	to	produce
irritating,	strong-smelling	sulfurous
molecules.	Some	of	these	are	very	reactive
and	unstable,	so	they	continue	to	evolve	into
other	compounds.	The	mixture	of	molecules
produced	creates	the	food’s	raw	flavor,	and
depends	on	the	initial	ammunition,	how
thoroughly	the	tissue	is	damaged,	how	much
oxygen	gets	into	the	reactions,	and	how	long
the	reactions	go	on.	Onion	flavor	typically
includes	apple-like,	burning,	rubbery,	and
bitter	notes;	leek	flavor	has	cabbage-like,
creamy,	and	meaty	aspects,	while	garlic
seems	especially	potent	because	it	produces	a
hundredfold	higher	concentration	of	initial



reaction	products	than	do	other	alliums.
Chopping,	pounding	in	a	mortar,	and	pureeing
in	a	food	processor	all	give	distinctive	results.
Chopped	alliums	to	be	eaten	raw	—	as	a
garnish	or	in	an	uncooked	sauce	—	are	best
rinsed	to	remove	all	the	sulfur	compounds
from	the	damaged	surfaces,	since	these	tend
to	become	harsher	with	time	and	exposure	to
the	air.

Onion	and	garlic	bulbs.	The	bulbs	in	the	onion
family	 consist	 of	 a	 central	 stem	 bud	 and
surrounding	 leaf	 bases,	 which	 swell	 with
stored	 nutrients	 during	 one	 growing	 season
and	then	supply	them	to	the	bud	in	the	next.

One	sulfur	product	is	produced	in
significant	quantities	only	in	the	onion,
shallot,	leek,	chive,	and	rakkyo:	the
“lacrimator,”	which	causes	our	eyes	to	water.
This	volatile	chemical	escapes	from	the



damaged	onion	into	the	air,	and	lands	in	the
onion	cutter’s	eyes	and	nose,	where	it
apparently	attacks	nerve	endings	directly,	then
breaks	down	into	hydrogen	sulfide,	sulfur
dioxide,	and	sulfuric	acid.	A	very	effective
molecular	bomb!	Its	effects	can	be	minimized
by	prechilling	the	onions	for	30–60	minutes	in
ice	water.	This	treatment	slows	the
ammunition-breaking	enzyme	down	to	a
crawl,	and	gives	all	the	volatile	molecules	less
energy	to	launch	themselves	into	the	air.	It
also	hydrates	the	papery	onion	skin,	which
makes	it	tougher	and	less	brittle,	and	so	easier
to	peel	off.

The	 Flavors	 of	 Cooked	 Alliums	 When
onions	 and	 their	 relatives	 are	 heated,	 the
various	 sulfur	 compounds	 react	 with	 each
other	 and	with	 other	 substances	 to	 produce	 a
range	 of	 characteristic	 flavor	molecules.	 The
cooking	 method,	 temperature,	 and	 medium
strongly	 affect	 the	 flavor	 balance.	 Baking,



drying,	 and	 microwaving	 tend	 to	 generate
trisulfides,	 the	 characteristic	 notes	 of
overcooked	 cabbage.	 Cooking	 at	 high
temperatures	 in	 fat	 produces	 more	 volatiles
and	a	stronger	flavor	than	do	other	techniques.
Relatively	 mild	 garlic	 compounds	 persist	 in
butter	 but	 are	 changed	 to	 rubbery,	 pungent
notes	 in	more	 reactive	 unsaturated	 vegetable
oils.	 Blanching	 whole	 garlic	 apparently
inactivates	 the	 flavor-generating	 enzyme	 and
limits	its	action,	so	the	flavor	of	garlic	cooked
whole	 is	 only	 slightly	 pungent,	 and	 sweet,
nutty	 notes	 come	 to	 the	 fore.	 Similarly,
pickled	garlic	and	onions	are	relatively	mild.

The	sugar	and	sugar-chain	content	of
onions	and	garlic	is	largely	responsible	for
their	readiness	to	brown	when	fried,	and
contributes	a	caramel	note	to	the	cooked
flavor.

Food	Words:	Onion,	Garlic,	Shallot,
Scallion



Vegetable	names	in	the	onion	family	come
from	diverse	sources.	Onion	itself	comes
from	the	Latin	for	“one,”	“oneness,”
“unity,”	and	was	the	name	given	by	Roman
farmers	to	a	variety	of	onion	(cepa)	that
grew	singly,	without	forming	multiple
bulbs	as	garlic	and	shallots	do.	Garlic	is	an
Anglo-Saxon	word	that	meant	“spear-
leek”:	a	leek	with	a	slim,	pointed	leaf	blade
rather	than	a	broad,	open	one.	And	both
shallot	and	scallion	come	via	Latin	from
Ashqelon,	the	Hebrew	name	for	a	city	in
what	in	classical	times	was	southwest
Palestine.

Onions	and	Shallots	Onions	are	plants	of	the
species	Allium	 cepa,	 which	 originated	 in
central	Asia	but	has	spread	across	the	globe	in
hundreds	of	different	varieties.	There	are	two
major	 categories	 of	 market	 onions	 in	 the
United	 States,	 defined	 not	 by	 variety	 but	 by
season	 and	 harvesting	 practice.	 Spring	 or



short-day	 onions	 are	 planted	 as	 seedlings	 in
the	late	fall,	and	harvested	before	they’re	fully
mature	 in	 the	 next	 spring	 and	 early	 summer.
They’re	 relatively	 mild	 and	 moist	 and
perishable,	and	best	kept	in	the	refrigerator.	A
special	category	of	spring	onion	is	the	“sweet”
onion	—	“mild”	is	more	accurate	—	which	is
usually	a	standard	yellow	spring	onion	grown
in	 sulfur-poor	 soils,	 and	 therefore	 endowed
with	 half	 or	 less	 of	 the	 usual	 amounts	 of
sulfur-containing	 defensive	 chemicals.	 The
second	 major	 kind	 of	 market	 onion	 is	 the
storage	onion,	grown	through	the	summer	and
harvested	 when	 mature	 in	 the	 fall,	 rich	 in
sulfur	 compounds,	 drier,	 and	 easily	 stored	 in
cool	conditions	for	several	months.

White	onion	varieties	are	somewhat
moister	and	don’t	keep	quite	as	well	as	yellow
onions,	which	owe	their	color	to	phenolic
flavonoid	compounds.	Red	onions	are
pigmented	by	water-soluble	anthocyanins,	but
only	in	the	surface	layers	of	each	leaf	scale,	so



cooking	dilutes	and	dulls	their	color.
Green	onions,	or	scallions,	can	be	either

bulb-forming	onion	varieties	harvested	quite
young,	or	special	varieties	that	never	do	form
bulbs.	Shallots	are	a	distinctive,	clustering
variety	of	onion	whose	bulbs	are	smaller,
finer-textured,	and	somewhat	milder	and
sweeter,	often	with	a	purple	coloration.
They’re	especially	valued	in	France	and
southeast	Asia.

Garlic	 Garlic	 is	 the	 central	 Asian	 native
Allium	 sativum,	 which	 produces	 a	 tight	 head
of	 a	 dozen	 or	 more	 bulbs,	 or	 “cloves.”
“Elephant	garlic”	is	actually	a	bulbing	variety
of	leek,	with	a	milder	flavor,	and	“wild	garlic”
yet	 another	 species,	A.	 ursinum.	 Unlike
multilayered	 onion	 bulbs,	 garlic	 cloves
consist	 of	 a	 single	 swollen	 storage	 leaf
surrounding	 the	 young	 shoot.	 That	 leaf
contains	much	less	water	than	onion	scales	do
—	under	60%	of	its	weight,	compared	to	90%



for	onions	—	and	a	much	higher	concentration
of	 fructose	 and	 fructose	 chains,	 so	 during
frying	 or	 roasting	 it	 dries	 out	 and	 browns
much	quicker	than	onions	do.

Important	Members	of	the	Onion	Family
Onions,	scallions Allium	cepa
Shallots Allium	cepa	var.	ascalonicum
Garlic Allium	sativum
Leeks,	wild Allium	ampeloprasum
Leeks, Allium	ampeloprasum	var.
cultivated porrum
Great-headed Allium	ampeloprasum
(elephant)	garlic var.	gigante
Leeks,	Egyptian Allium	kurrat
Ramps,	ramson	(broad-leaf Allium
leek) tricoccum
Chives Allium	schoenoprasum
Chives,	“garlic”	or Allium
“Chinese” tuberosum



Japanese	long	onion Allium	ramosum
Japanese	bunching	onion Allium	fistulosum
Rakkyo Allium	chinense

There	 are	 many	 different	 garlic	 varieties,
with	 different	 proportions	 of	 sulfur
compounds	 and	 so	 different	 flavors	 and
pungencies.	 The	 main	 commercial	 varieties
are	grown	for	their	yield	and	storage	life,	not
their	flavor.	Cold	growing	conditions	produce
a	 more	 intense	 garlic	 flavor.	 Garlic	 is	 at	 its
moistest	soon	after	harvest,	from	late	summer
to	late	fall,	and	becomes	more	concentrated	as
it	 slowly	 dries	 out	 during	 storage.
Refrigerated	 storage	 causes	 a	 decline	 in
distinctively	 garlicky	 flavor,	 and	 an	 increase
in	more	generic	onion	flavors.

Because	the	peeling	and	chopping	of	the
small	cloves	is	tedious	work,	garlic	is
sometimes	prepared	in	quantity	and	then
stored	under	oil	for	later	use.	This	procedure
turns	out	to	encourage	the	growth	of	deadly



botulism	bacteria,	which	thrive	in	the	absence
of	air.	Bacterial	growth	can	be	prevented	by
soaking	the	garlic	in	acidic	vinegar	or	lemon
juice	for	several	hours	before	putting	it	under
oil,	and	by	storing	the	container	in	the
refrigerator.	Occasionally,	acid-pickled	garlic
turns	a	strange	shade	of	bluish-green,	a
reaction	that	apparently	involves	one	of	the
sulfurous	flavor	precursors.	This	discoloration
can	be	minimized	by	blanching	the	garlic
before	pickling.

Leeks	 Unlike	 onions	 and	 garlic,	 leeks	 don’t
form	 useful	 storage	 bulbs,	 and	 are	 grown
instead	 for	 their	 scallion-like	 mass	 of	 fresh
leaves.	(There’s	one	exception	to	this	rule:	the
leek	 variety	 confusingly	 named	 “elephant
garlic”	because	 it	 produces	a	garlic-like	bulb
cluster	that	can	reach	1	lb/450	gm.)	Leeks	are
very	tolerant	of	cold	and	in	many	regions	can
be	 harvested	 throughout	 the	 winter.	 They
grow	to	a	large	size,	and	the	prized	white	base



portion	of	their	leaves	is	often	increased	(to	as
much	as	1	ft/3	m	long	and	3	in/7.5	cm	thick)
by	hilling	soil	up	around	the	growing	plant	to
shield	more	of	 it	 from	 the	 sun.	This	 practice
also	fills	the	spaces	between	leaves	with	grit,
and	 necessitates	 careful	 washing.	 The	 inner
leaves	 (and	 seldom-used	 roots)	 have	 the
strongest	 flavor.	 The	 upper	 green	 portion	 of
each	 leek	 leaf	 is	 edible,	 but	 tends	 to	 be
tougher	 and	 to	 have	 a	 less	 oniony,	 more
cabbage-like	 flavor	 than	 the	 lower	 white
portion.	 It’s	 also	 rich	 in	 long-chain
carbohydrates	 that	 give	 the	 cooked	 vegetable
a	 slippery	 texture,	will	 gel	when	chilled,	 and
can	lend	body	to	soups	and	stews.

Stems	and	Stalks:
Asparagus,	Celery,
and	Others

Vegetables	derived	from	plant	stems	and
stalks	often	present	a	particular	challenge	to



the	cook.	Stems	and	stalks	support	other	plant
parts	and	conduct	essential	nutrients	to	and
from	them,	so	they	consist	in	large	part	of
fibrous	vascular	tissue	and	special	stiffening
fibers	—	for	example,	the	ridges	along	the
outer	edge	of	celery	and	cardoons	—	that	are
from	2	to	10	times	tougher	than	the	vascular
fibers	themselves.	These	fibrous	materials
become	increasingly	reinforced	with	insoluble
cellulose	as	the	stem	or	stalk	matures.
Sometimes	there’s	nothing	to	do	except	to
strip	away	the	fibers,	or	cut	the	vegetable	into
thin	pieces	to	minimize	their	fibrousness,	or
puree	them	and	strain	off	the	fibers.	The	keys
to	tender	celery,	cardoons,	and	rhubarb	are	on
the	farm	rather	than	in	the	kitchen:	choosing
the	right	variety,	providing	plenty	of	water	so
that	the	stalks	can	support	themselves	with
turgor	pressure	(p.	264),	and	providing
mechanical	support	by	hilling	with	soil	or
tying	the	stalks	together,	so	that	mechanical
stress	doesn’t	induce	fiber	growth.



Garlic	on	the	Breath
Does	 the	 chemistry	 of	 garlic	 flavor	 offer
any	 help	 when	 it	 comes	 to	 dealing	 with
garlic	 breath?	 One	 major	 component	 of
garlic	 breath	 appears	 to	 be	 various
chemical	 relatives	 of	 skunk	 spray	 (e.g.,
methanethiol)	 that	 persist	 in	 the	 mouth.
Another	 component	 (methyl	 allyl	 sulfide)
is	 apparently	 generated	 from	 garlic	 as	 it
passes	 through	 the	 digestive	 system,	 and
peaks	in	the	breath	between	6	and	18	hours
after	the	meal.	Residual	thiols	in	the	mouth
can	be	transformed	into	odorless	molecules
by	 the	 browning	 enzymes	 in	 many	 raw
fruits	 and	 vegetables	 (p.	 269),	 so	 eating	 a
salad	 or	 an	 apple	will	 help.	Mouthwashes
that	 contain	 strong	 oxidizing	 agents	 (e.g.,
chloramine)	 are	 also	 effective.	 Sulfides
from	 the	 digestive	 system	 are	 probably
beyond	our	reach!
One	group	of	stem	vegetables	is	inherently

tender:	the	tips	of	such	crop	plants	as	peas,



melons	and	squashes,	grapevines,	and	hops,
which	grow	rapidly	in	the	spring,	and	have
long	been	enjoyed	as	among	the	first	fresh
vegetables	of	the	new	season.

Asparagus

Asparagus	is	the	main	stalk	of	a	plant	in	the
lily	family,	Asparagus	officinalis,	a	native	of
Eurasia	that	was	a	delicacy	in	Greek	and
Roman	times.	The	stalk	doesn’t	support
ordinary	leaves;	the	small	projections	from
the	stem	are	leaf-like	bracts	that	shield
immature	clusters	of	feathery	photosynthetic
branches.	The	stalks	grow	up	from	long-lived
underground	rhizomes,	and	have	been	widely
prized	as	a	tender	manifestation	of	spring.
Many	other	vegetables	have	been	called	“poor
man’s	asparagus,”	including	young	leeks,
blackberry	shoots,	and	hop	shoots.	It	remains
expensive	today	because	the	shoots	grow	at
different	rates	and	must	be	harvested	by	hand.



In	Europe,	the	even	more	labor-intensive
white	version,	blanched	by	being	covered	with
soil	and	cut	from	underground,	has	been
popular	since	the	18th	century.	It	has	a	more
delicate	aroma	than	green	asparagus	(which	is
rich	in	dimethyl	sulfide	and	other	sulfur
volatiles),	and	some	bitterness	toward	the
stem	end.	Exposed	to	light	after	harvest,	white
asparagus	will	turn	yellow	or	red.	Purple
asparagus	varieties	are	colored	with
anthocyanins,	whose	color	generally	fades
during	cooking,	leaving	the	green	of	the
chlorophyll.

Harvested	early	and	fresh	from	the	soil,
asparagus	is	very	juicy	and	noticeably	sweet
(perhaps	4%	sugar).	As	the	season	progresses,
the	rhizomes	become	depleted	of	stored
energy,	and	sugar	levels	in	the	shoots	decline.
Once	harvested,	the	actively	growing	shoot
continues	to	consume	its	sugars,	and	does	so
more	rapidly	than	any	other	common
vegetable.	Its	flavor	flattens	out;	it	loses	its



juiciness,	and	it	becomes	increasingly	fibrous
from	the	base	up.	These	changes	are
especially	rapid	in	the	first	24	hours	after
harvest,	and	are	accelerated	by	warmth	and
light.	Moisture	and	sugar	losses	can	be	partly
remedied	by	soaking	the	spears	in	dilute	sugar
water	(5–10%,	or	5–10	gm	per	100	ml/1–2
teaspoons	per	half-cup)	before	cooking.	White
asparagus	is	always	more	fibrous	than	green
and	toughens	faster	in	storage.	It	and	some
green	asparagus	may	be	peeled	to	remove
some	unsoftenable	tissue,	but	woody	lignin
formation	also	takes	place	deeper	in	the	stem.
Cooks	have	dealt	with	this	internal	toughening
in	the	same	way	for	500	years:	they	bend	the
stalk,	and	allow	mechanical	stress	to	find	the
border	between	tough	and	tender	and	break
the	two	apart.

Asparagus	 and	 its	 peculiar	 branches,	 the
phylloclades,	which	are	clustered	near	the	tip



of	the	immature	stem.
Asparagus	has	long	been	notorious	for	an

unusual	side	effect	on	those	who	eat	it:	it
gives	a	strong	odor	to	their	urine.	Apparently
the	body	metabolizes	a	sulfur-containing
substance,	asparagusic	acid,	a	close	chemical
relative	of	the	essence	of	skunk	spray	called
methanethiol.	In	part	because	some	people
claim	to	be	immune	to	this	effect,	biochemists
have	studied	this	phenomenon	in	some	detail.
It	now	appears	that	thanks	to	genetic
differences,	most	but	not	all	people	do
produce	methanethiol	after	eating	asparagus,
and	most	but	not	all	are	able	to	smell	it.

The	Carrot	Family:
Celery	and	Fennel

The	carrot	family	has	provided	two	aromatic
stalk	vegetables.

Celery	Celery,	Apium	graveolens,	is	the	mild,



enlarged	 version	 of	 a	 bitter,	 thin-stalked
Eurasian	herb	called	smallage.	Chinese	celery
(var.	secalinum)	is	closer	in	form	and	favor	to
smallage,	while	Asian	water	celery	 is	a	more
distant	 relative	 (Oenanthe	 javanica)	 with	 a
distinctive	 flavor.	 Our	 familiar	 celery	 was
apparently	 bred	 in	 15thcentury	 Italy,	 and
remained	 a	 delicacy	 well	 into	 the	 19th.	 It
consists	 of	 greatly	 enlarged,	 pleasantly
crunchy	 leaf	 stalks,	 or	 petioles,	 and	 has	 a
distinctive	 but	 subtle	 aroma	 due	 to	 unusual
compounds	 called	 phthalides	 that	 it	 shares
with	walnuts	(hence	their	successful	pairing	in
Waldorf	 salads),	 and	 terpenes	 that	 provide
light	 pine	 and	 citrus	 notes.	 Celery	 is	 often
combined	 with	 carrots	 and	 onions	 in	 gently
fried	 aromatic	 base	 preparations	 for	 other
dishes	 (French	mirepoix,	 Italian	soffrito,
Spanish	sofregit;	 in	 the	 Louisiana	 Cajun
“trinity”	of	aromatics	the	carrots	are	replaced
by	 green	 capsicums).	 In	 parts	 of	 Europe,
celery	has	been	preferred	in	a	more	delicately



favored	 blanched	 form,	 originally	 produced
by	covering	the	growing	stalks	with	soil,	then
by	 growing	 pale	 green	 “self-blanching”
varieties.	 Celery	 is	 often	 served	 raw,	 and	 its
crispness	is	maximized	by	presoaking	in	cold
water	 (p.	 265).	 Both	 celery	 and	 celery	 root
contain	 defensive	 chemicals	 that	 can	 cause
skin	and	other	reactions	in	sensitive	people	(p.
259).

Fennel	Bulb	or	Florence	or	finocchio	fennel	is
a	 vegetable	 variety	 (var.	 azoricum)	 of
Foeniculum	 vulgare,	 the	 plant	 that	 produces
fennel	 seeds	 (p.	 415).	 Its	 enlarged	 leaf-stalk
bases	form	a	tight,	bulb-like	cluster.	(The	rest
of	the	leaf	stalk,	the	equivalent	of	celery	stalk,
remains	 tough	 and	 fibrous.)	 Fennel	 has	 a
strong	 anise	 aroma	 thanks	 to	 the	 same
chemical	 (anethole)	 that	 flavors	 anise	 seeds
and	 star	 anise,	 and	 this	makes	 fennel	 a	more
dominating,	 less	 versatile	 ingredient	 than
celery	and	carrots.	It	also	has	a	distinct	citrus



note	 (from	 the	 terpene	 limonene)	 that’s
especially	 prominent	 in	 the	 sparse	 foliage.
Fennel	 is	 eaten	 both	 raw,	 thinly	 sliced	 and
crunchy,	 and	 cooked,	 often	 braised	 or	 in	 a
gratin.

Asparagus	Aromatics
Not	 only	 can	people	 differ	 in	 their	 ability
to	 detect	 the	 product	 of	 asparagus
metabolism,	 those	who	can	detect	 it	differ
in	their	assessment.
[Asparagus]	cause	a	filthy	and	disagreeable
smell	in	the	urine,	as	everybody	knows.
—	 Louis	 Lemery,	Treatise	 of	 All	 Sorts	 of
Foods,	1702

…all	night	long	after	a	dinner	at	which
I	had	partaken	of	 [asparagus],	 they	played
(lyrical	 and	 coarse	 in	 their	 jesting	 as	 the
fairies	 in	 Shakespeare’s	Dream)	 at
transforming	my	 chamber	 pot	 into	 a	 vase
of	aromatic	perfume.



—	Marcel	Proust,	In	Search	of	Lost	Time,
1913

The	Cabbage	Family:
Kohlrabi	and	Rutabaga

Kohlrabi	Kohlrabi	is	a	version	of	the	basic
cabbage	plant	(Brassica	oleracea	var.
gongylodes)	in	which	the	main	stem	swells	to
several	inches	in	diameter.	It	has	the	moist
texture	and	mild	flavor	of	broccoli	stalk.	The
name	comes	from	the	German	for	“cabbage
turnip,”	and	indeed	kohlrabi	resembles	a
turnip	in	its	rounded	appearance.	Young
kohlrabi	are	tender	enough	to	eat	raw	for	their
crisp	moistness	or	cook	briefly;	overmature
stems	are	woody.

Rutabaga	 The	 rutabaga,	 or	 swede,	 is	 the
result	 of	 a	 cross	 between	 the	 turnip	 and
cabbage	 species,	 and	 is	 thought	 to	have	been
born	sometime	before	1600	in	Eastern	Europe,



perhaps	 in	 gardens	 where	 kale	 and	 turnips
were	growing	side	by	side.	Like	kohlrabi,	it’s
a	 swollen	 portion	 of	 the	main	 stem;	 like	 the
turnip,	it	may	be	white	or	yellow.	It	is	sweeter
and	 starchier	 than	 the	 turnip	 or	 kohlrabi,
though	 still	 with	 only	 half	 the	 carbohydrate
content	 of	 a	 potato;	 it’s	 often	 boiled	 and
mashed.

Tropical	Stems:	Bamboo	Shoots
and	Hearts	of	Palm

Bamboo	Shoots	Bamboo	shoots	are	the	very
young	stems	of	several	tropical	Asian
bamboos	(species	of	Phyllostachys	and
others),	which	are	woody	members	of	the
grass	family.	As	the	new	shoots	begin	to	break
the	soil	surface,	additional	soil	is	heaped	on	to
minimize	their	exposure	to	light	and	thereby
their	production	of	bitter	cyanide-generating
compounds	(p.	258).	Cooks	and	food
manufacturers	then	eliminate	all	cyanide



compounds	from	the	fresh	shoots	by	boiling
them	in	water	until	they’re	no	longer	bitter.
Along	with	Chinese	water	chestnuts	and	lotus
root,	bamboo	shoots	are	valued	for	the	ability
to	retain	their	firm,	crisp,	meaty	texture
during	and	after	cooking,	and	even	after	the
extreme	heat	treatment	of	canning	(p.	283).
Their	flavor	has	an	unusual	medicinal	or
barnyard	note	thanks	to	cresol,	as	well	as
more	common	bready	and	brothy	aromas	from
simple	sulfur	compounds	(methional,
dimethyl	sulfide).

Hearts	 of	 Palm	 Hearts	 of	 palm	 are	 the
growing	 stem	 tips	 of	 various	 palm	 trees,
especially	 the	 South	 American	 peach	 palm
Bactris	gasipaes,	which	readily	resprouts	after
its	 tip	 is	 cut.	 The	 tissue	 is	 fine-grained	 and
crisp,	 with	 a	 sweet	 and	 slightly	 nutty	 taste,
and	 is	 eaten	 both	 raw	 and	 cooked.	 Hearts	 of
other	 palms	 may	 have	 a	 bitter	 edge	 and	 a
tendency	 to	 brown	 discoloration;	 and	 their



harvest	 often	 results	 in	 the	wasteful	 death	 of
the	entire	tree.

Other	Stem	and	Stalk
vegetables

Cactus	Pads	or	Nopales	Cactus	pads,
nopales,	and	nopalitos	are	all	names	for	the
flattened	stem	segments	of	the	prickly-pear
cactus	Opuntia	ficus-indica	(p.	369),	a	native
of	the	arid	regions	of	Mexico	and	the	U.S.
Southwest.	They’re	eaten	raw	in	salads	or
salsas,	baked,	fried,	pickled,	and	added	to
stews.	Nopalitos	are	remarkable	for	two
things:	a	mucilage	that	probably	helps	them
retain	water,	and	that	can	give	them	a
somewhat	slimy	consistency	(dry	cooking
methods	minimize	this),	and	a	startling
tartness	thanks	to	their	malic	acid	content.
Cactuses,	purslane,	and	other	plants	that	live
in	hot,	dry	environments	have	developed	a
special	form	of	photosynthesis	in	which	they



keep	their	pores	closed	during	the	day	to
conserve	water,	then	open	them	at	night	to
take	in	carbon	dioxide,	which	they	then	store
in	the	form	of	malic	acid.	During	the	day,	they
use	the	energy	from	sunlight	to	convert	the
malic	acid	to	glucose.	Pads	harvested	in	the
early	morning	therefore	contain	as	much	as	10
times	more	malic	acid	than	pads	harvested	in
the	afternoon.	The	acid	levels	in	the	pads
slowly	drop	after	harvest,	so	the	difference	is
less	apparent	after	a	few	days.

Cardoons	 Cardoons	 are	 the	 leaf	 stalks	 of
Cynara	cardunculus,	 the	Mediterranean	plant
from	 which	 the	 artichoke	 (C.	 scolymus)
apparently	 descends;	 the	 stalks	 are	 often
covered	 for	 several	 weeks	 before	 harvest	 to
protect	 them	 from	 sunlight,	 or	 blanch	 them.
Cardoons	 have	 a	 flavor	 quite	 similar	 to	 the
artichoke’s,	and	are	abundantly	endowed	with
astringent,	 bitter	 phenolic	 compounds	 that
quickly	 form	 brown	 complexes	 when	 the



tissue	 is	 cut	 or	 damaged.	 They’re	 often
cooked	in	milk,	whose	proteins	bind	phenolic
compounds	and	can	reduce	astringency	(as	 in
tea,	 p.	 440).	 Phenolics	 can	 also	 cause	 a
toughening	 of	 cell	 walls,	 and	 cardoon	 fibers
are	 often	 remarkably	 resistant	 to	 softening.
Bringing	 them	 to	 a	 gradual	 boil	 in	 several
changes	of	water	can	help	leach	out	phenolics
and	soften	them,	though	flavor	is	leached	out
as	well.	Sometimes	 it’s	necessary	 to	peel	 the
reinforcing	 fibers	 from	 the	 cardoon	 stalk,	 or
cut	 it	 into	 thin	 cross	 sections	 to	 keep	 the
fibers	relatively	short	and	inconspicuous.

Fiddleheads	 Fiddleheads	 are	 the	 immature
leaf	 stalk	 and	 fronds	 of	 ferns,	 named	 for	 the
resemblance	 of	 their	 furled	 tips	 to	 the	 scroll
of	 a	 violin.	 Long	 a	 traditional	 springtime
delicacy,	harvested	as	the	fern	fronds	begin	to
elongate	 and	 unroll	 but	 before	 they	 toughen,
fiddleheads	are	now	cause	for	some	caution.	A
common	 species	 especially	 enjoyed	 in	 Japan



and	 Korea,	 the	 bracken	 fern	Pteridium
aequilinum,	has	been	found	to	contain	a	potent
DNA-damaging	 chemical	 (p.	 259).	 It	 should
be	avoided.	Stalks	of	the	ostrich	fern,	various
species	of	Matteuccia,	are	thought	to	be	safer
to	eat.

Rhubarb	 Rhubarb,	 the	 leaf	 stalks	 of	 a	 large
perennial	 herb,	 is	 unusual	 for	 containing	 a
high	concentration	of	oxalic	acid.	Its	main	use
in	the	West	is	as	a	tart	stand-in	for	fruit,	so	I
describe	it	in	the	next	chapter	(p.	367).

Sea	 Beans	 Sea	 beans	 are	 the	 small,	 fleshy
stems	 and	 branches	 of	 salt-tolerant	 and	 salty
seacoast	plants	in	the	genus	Salicornia,	which
is	 in	 the	 beet	 family.	 They	 are	 known	 under
many	 other	 names,	 including	 samphire	 (a
name	 they	 share	with	 a	 seacoast	 plant	 in	 the
carrot	 family),	 glasswort,	 pick-leweed,	 and
poussepierre.	 Young	 plants	 are	 crisp	 and
tender	 and	 can	 be	 eaten	 raw	 or	 briefly
blanched	 for	 their	 fresh,	 briny	 flavor;	 older



ones	 can	 be	 cooked	 or	 steamed	with	 seafood
to	intensify	the	sea	aroma.

Sprouts	Sprouts	are	seedlings,	newborn	plants
just	an	 inch	or	so	 long,	and	are	mainly	stem,
which	elongates	to	push	the	first	set	of	leaves
aboveground	into	the	sunlight.	Of	course	these
infantile	 stems	 are	 tender	 and	 not	 at	 all
fibrous;	 they’re	 usually	 eaten	 raw	 or	 very
briefly	 cooked.	 Many	 different	 plants	 are
germinated	 to	make	 edible	 sprouts,	 but	most
of	them	come	from	a	handful	of	families:	the
beans	 (mung	 and	 soy,	 alfalfa),	 the	 grains
(wheat,	 corn),	 the	 cabbage	 family	 (cress,
broccoli,	 mustard,	 radish),	 the	 onion	 family
(onions,	 chives).	 Because	 seedlings	 are	 so
vulnerable,	 they’re	 sometimes	protected	with
strong	 chemical	 defenses.	 In	 alfalfa	 sprouts,
the	 defenses	 include	 the	 toxic	 amino	 acid
canavanine	 (p.	 259);	 in	 broccoli	 sprouts,	 the
defenses	 are	 sulforaphanes,	 a	 kind	 of
isothiocyanate	 (p.	 321)	 that	 appears	 to	 help



prevent	 the	 development	 of	 cancer.	 Because
the	wet,	warm	conditions	of	sprout	production
also	favor	the	growth	of	microbes,	raw	sprouts
are	frequently	a	cause	of	food	poisoning.	They
should	be	bought	as	fresh	as	possible	and	kept
refrigerated,	 and	 are	 safest	 when	 cooked
thoroughly.

Leaves:	Lettuces,
Cabbages,	and	Others

Leaves	are	the	quintessential	vegetable.
They’re	usually	the	most	prominent	and
abundant	parts	of	a	plant,	and	they’re
nutritious	enough	that	many	of	our	primate
relatives	eat	little	else.	The	salad	of	raw
greens	is	a	truly	primeval	dish!	People	also
cook	and	eat	the	leaves	of	many	different
plants,	from	weeds	to	root	and	fruit	crops.	In
temperate	regions,	nearly	all	the	tender	leaves
of	spring	are	edible,	and	were	traditionally	a
welcome	harbinger	of	the	new	crops	to	come



after	winter’s	scarcity;	in	northeast	Italy,	for
example,	pistic	is	a	springtime	collection	of
more	than	50	different	wild	greens	boiled	and
then	sauteed	together.

Because	they’re	thin	and	broad,	leaves
both	edible	(lettuce,	cabbage,	grape)	and
inedible	(banana,	fig,	bamboo)	are	used	as
wrappers	to	contain,	protect,	and	aromatize
fillings	of	meat,	fish,	grains,	and	other	foods.
They’re	often	blanched	first	to	make	the
leaves	flaccid	and	pliable.

Though	many	leaf	vegetables	have
distinctive	flavors,	most	of	them	share	a
common,	fresh	aroma	note	referred	to	as
“green”	or	“grassy.”	This	comes	from
particular	molecules	that	are	6	carbon	atoms
long	—	“leaf	alcohol”	(hexanol)	and	“leaf
aldehyde”	(hexanal)	—	and	that	are	produced
when	leaves	are	cut	or	crushed.	The	cell
damage	frees	enzymes	that	break	up	the	long
fatty-acid	carbon	chains	in	the	membranes	of
the	chloroplasts	(p.	261).	Cooking	inactivates



the	enzymes	and	causes	their	products	to	react
with	other	molecules,	so	the	fresh	green	note
fades	and	other	aromas	become	more
prominent.

The	Lettuce	Family:	Lettuces,
Chicories,	Dandelion	Greens

The	lettuce	family,	or	the	Compositae,	is	the
second	largest	family	of	flowering	plants,	and
yet	it	contributes	only	a	few	food	plants.	The
most	prominent	are	lettuce	and	its	relatives,
the	primary	components	of	our	raw	salads.

Preparing	Salads
Even	 though	 salads	 of	 raw	 greens	 don’t
require	cooking,	they	do	require	care	in	the
preparation.	 Start	 with	 good	 ingredients:
fresh	young	leaves	are	the	least	fibrous	and
have	 the	 most	 delicate	 flavor,	 while	 old
overgrown	 lettuces	 can	 taste	 almost
rubbery.	 If	 the	 leaves	 need	 to	 be	 divided



into	 smaller	 pieces,	 this	 should	 be	 done
with	 the	 least	 possible	 physical	 pressure,
which	 can	 crush	 cells	 and	 initiate	 the
development	 of	 off-flavors	 and	 darkened
patches.	 Cutting	 with	 a	 sharp	 knife	 is
generally	 the	 most	 effective	 method;
tearing	by	hand	 requires	 squeezing,	which
may	 damage	 tender	 leaves.	 The	 greens
should	be	well	rinsed	in	several	changes	of
water	 to	 remove	 grit,	 soil,	 and	 other
surface	contamination.	Soaking	them	for	a
while	 in	 ice	water	will	 fill	 their	cells	with
any	water	they’ve	lost,	making	them	turgid
and	crisp.	Dry	the	greens	as	 thoroughly	as
possible,	so	 that	 the	dressing	will	coat	 the
leaves	 without	 being	 diluted.	 Thick,
viscous	dressings	are	slower	to	run	off	the
leaf	 surface	 than	 thin,	 runny	 ones.	 A
simple	vinaigrette	dressing	(p.	637)	can	be
made	 more	 viscous	 by	 chilling	 it	 in	 the
freezer.

Oil-based	 dressings	 like	 vinaigrettes



should	 be	 added	 only	 at	 the	 last	 minute,
because	 oil	 readily	 wets	 the	 waxy	 leaf
cuticle,	 percolates	 through	 the	 empty
spaces	 within,	 and	 soon	 makes	 the	 leaf
dark	 and	 sodden.	 Water-based	 cream
dressings	are	better	for	greens	that	need	to
be	dressed	well	in	advance	of	eating.

Lettuces:	 Nonbitter	 Greens	 Today’s	 mild,
widely	 popular	 lettuces,	 varieties	 of	 the
spec i es	Lactuca	 sativa,	 derive	 from	 an
inedibly	 bitter	 weedy	 ancestor,	L.	 serriola,
that	 grew	 in	Asia	 and	 the	Mediterranean	 and
has	 been	 under	 cultivation	 and	 improvement
for	 5,000	 years.	 Lettuce	 seems	 to	 be
represented	in	some	ancient	Egyptian	art,	and
was	 certainly	 enjoyed	 by	 the	 Greeks	 and	 by
the	Romans,	who	had	several	varieties	and	ate
them	 cooked	 as	 well	 as	 raw	 in	 salads	 at	 the
beginning	 or	 end	 of	 the	 meal.	 The	 first
syllable	of	its	Latin	name,	lac,	means	“milk,”
and	 refers	 to	 the	 defensive	 white	 latex	 that



oozes	 from	 the	 freshly	 cut	 base.	 Though
lettuce	 is	now	mostly	 eaten	 raw	 in	 the	West,
in	Asia	 it’s	 often	 shredded	 and	 cooked.	 This
can	be	a	good	use	for	the	older,	tougher	leaves
sometimes	found	on	supermarket	lettuces.

There	are	several	broad	groups	of	lettuce
varieties,	each	with	a	characteristic	growth
form	and	texture	(see	box	below).	Most
lettuces	have	a	similar	taste,	though	some	red-
leaf	lettuces	are	noticeably	astringent	thanks
to	their	anthocyanin	pigments.	Generally,
varieties	whose	leaves	are	shielded	from
sunlight	by	the	formation	of	a	head	offer
much	lower	levels	of	vitamins	and
antioxidants.	The	pale,	watery	crisphead
variety	known	as	iceberg	triumphed	in	the
United	States	due	to	a	combination	of	its
durability	in	shipping	and	storage	—	it
brought	lettuce	to	the	American	table	year-
round	in	the	1920s	—	and	its	refreshing,
crunchy-wet	texture.	Head	lettuces	respire
more	slowly	and	so	keep	better	than	leaf



lettuces;	both	keep	significantly	longer	at
32ºF/0ºC	than	at	40ºF/4ºC.	There’s	also	a	type
known	as	stem	lettuce,	or	celtuce;	it’s
especially	popular	in	Asia	for	its	prominent
and	crisp	stalk,	which	is	stripped	of	its	small
leaves,	peeled,	sliced,	and	cooked.	Stem
lettuce	and	the	solid	core	of	leaf	lettuces	are
sometimes	even	candied.

Chicories	 and	 Endives:	 Bitterness	 Under
Control	 The	 original	 intense	 bitterness	 of
lettuce,	which	came	from	a	terpene	compound
called	lactucin	and	its	relatives,	has	been	bred
out	 of	 the	 cultivated	 forms.	But	 a	 number	 of
close	 lettuce	 relatives	 are	 cultivated	 and
included	 in	 salads	 or	 cooked	 on	 their	 own
especially	 to	 provide	 a	 civilized	 dose	 of
bitterness.	 These	 are	 plants	 in	 the	 genus
Cichorium,	 which	 include	 endive,	 escarole,
chicory,	and	radicchio.	Growers	go	to	a	lot	of
trouble	 to	 control	 their	 bitterness.	 Open
rosettes	of	escaroles	and	endives	are	often	tied



into	an	artificial	head	to	keep	the	inner	leaves
in	 the	 dark	 and	 relatively	mild.	And	 popular
“Belgian	 endive,”	 also	 known	 as	witloof
(“white-head”),	 is	 a	 double-grown,	 slightly
bitter	 version	 of	 an	 otherwise	 very	 bitter
chicory.	The	plant	 is	grown	 from	seed	 in	 the
spring,	defoliated	 and	dug	up	 in	 the	 fall,	 and
the	 taproot	 with	 its	 nutrient	 reserves	 kept	 in
cold	storage.	The	root	is	then	either	replanted
indoors	and	kept	covered	with	soil	and	sand	as
it	 leafs	out,	or	else	it’s	grown	hydroponically
in	 the	 dark.	The	 root	 takes	 about	 a	month	 to
develop	 a	 fist-sized	 head	 of	 white	 to	 pale
green	 leaves,	 with	 a	 delicate	 flavor	 and
crunchy	 yet	 tender	 texture.	 This	 delicacy	 is
easily	lost.	Exposing	the	heads	to	light	in	the
market	will	 induce	greening	and	bitterness	 in
the	 outer	 leaves,	 and	 the	 flavor	 becomes
harsh.

Greens	from	the	Lettuce	Family
Lactuca	sativa:	nonbitter	lettuces



Loose-leaf	varieties:	open	cluster	of	leaves
Butter	 varieties:	 open	 cluster	 of	 soft,

tender	leaves,	small	midribs
Batavian	varieties:	semi-open	cluster	of

crisp,	dense	leaves
Cos,	 Romaine	 varieties:	 loose	 head	 of

elongated	large	leaves,	prominent	midribs
Crisphead	 varieties:	 large,	 tightly

wrapped	heads	of	brittle,	crunchy	leaves
Cichorium	intybus:	bitter	chicories

Chicory:	 open	 cluster	 of	 prominent
stems	and	leaves

Belgian	 “endive,”	 witloof:	 tight
elongated	head	of	blanched	crisp	leaves

Radicchio:	 tight	 round	 to	 elongated
head	of	red	leaves

Puntarelle:	 open	 cluster	 of	 prominent
narrow	stems	and	leaves
Cichorium	endivia:	bitter	endives

Curly	 endive:	 open	 cluster	 of	 curly
leaves

Frisée:	open	cluster	of	finely	cut,	frizzy



leaves
Escarole:	 open	 cluster	 of	 moderately

broad	leaves

The	Cabbage	Family:	Relationships	and
Pungencies

Botanical	 nomenclature	 is	 constantly
evolving,	especially	in	complicated	groups
like	the	cabbage	family.	Though	particular
names	may	change,	the	broad	relationships
shown	here	seem	secure.

Mediterranean	origins
Brassica	oleracea

Cabbage	(var.	capitata)
Portuguese	cabbage	(var.	tronchuda)
Kale,	collards	(var.	acephala)
Broccoli	(var.	italica)
Cauliflower	(var.	botrytis)
Brussels	sprouts	(var.	gemmifera)
Kohlrabi	(var.	gongylodes)



Mustard,	black:	Brassica	nigra
Mustard,	white:	Sinapis	alba
Rocket;	arugula:	Eruca	sativa,	Diplotaxis
species
Watercress:	Nasturtium	species
Garden	cress:	Lepidium	species
Upland,	winter	cress:	Barbarea	species
Nasturtium:	Tropaeolum	species
Garlic	mustard:	Alliaria	species

Central	Asian	origins
Brassica	rapa

Turnip	(var.	rapifera)
Broccoli	 rabe,	 broccoletti	 di	 rape	 (var.

rapifera)
Chinese	 cabbage,	 bok	 choy	 (var.

chinensis)
Chinese	cabbage,	napa	(var.	pekinensis)
Tatsoi	(var.	narinosa)
Mizuna,	mibuna	(var.	nipposinica)

Chinese	 kale/broccoli,	 gai	 lan:	Brassica
oleracea	var.	alboglabra	Radish:	Raphanus



sativus
Horseradish:	Armoracia	rusticana

Recent	Hybrids
Accidental

Rutabaga,	canola:	Brassica	napus	(rapa
x	oleracea)

Brown	 mustard,	 mustard	 greens:
Brassica	juncea	(rapa	x	nigra)

Ethiopian	 mustard:	Brassica	 carinata
(oleracea	x	nigra)
Intentional

Brocco l i n i :	Brassica	 oleracea	 x
alboglabra

Relative	Amounts	of	Sulfur	Pungency
Precursors

Brussels	sprouts 35
Green	cabbage 26



Broccoli 17
White	cabbage 15
Horseradish 11
Red	cabbage 10
Radish 7
Chinese	cabbage 3
Cauliflower 2

Salads	 of	 bitter	 greens	 are	 often
accompanied	 by	 a	 salty	 dressing	 or	 other
ingredients;	 salt	 not	 only	 balances	 the
bitterness,	 but	 actually	 suppresses	 our
perception	of	bitterness.

Dandelion	Greens	The	dandelion	(Taraxicum
officinale)	seems	to	be	found	naturally	on	all
continents,	although	most	cultivated	varieties
are	native	to	Eurasia.	It’s	occasionally	grown
on	a	small	scale,	and	has	been	gathered	from
the	 wild	 (or	 the	 back-yard)	 since	 prehistory.
The	plant	is	a	perennial,	so	if	its	taproot	is	left



intact,	 it	 will	 give	 a	 rosette	 of	 leaves
repeatedly.	 The	 bitter	 leaves	 are	 often
blanched	 before	 eating	 to	 make	 them	 more
palatable.

The	Cabbage	Family:	Cabbage,	Kale,	Brussels	Sprouts,
and	Others

Like	the	onion	family,	the	cabbage	family	is	a
group	of	formidable	chemical	warriors	with
strong	flavors.	It’s	also	a	uniquely	protean
family.	From	two	weedy	natives	of	the
Mediterranean	and	central	Asia,	we	have
managed	to	develop	more	than	a	dozen	major
crops	of	very	different	kinds:	some	leaves,
some	flowers,	some	stems,	some	seeds.	Then
there	are	a	dozen	or	more	relatives,	notably
the	radishes	and	mustards	(see	chapter	8	for
the	spicy	ones),	and	crosses	between	species:
altogether	a	rich	and	ongoing	collaboration
between	nature’s	inventiveness	and	our	own!
Beyond	the	cabbage	family	itself,	some	of	its



distant	botanical	relatives	share	elements	of
its	biochemistry	and	therefore	its	flavor;	these
include	capers	and	papayas	(pp.	409,	381).

The	 Flavor	 Chemistry	 of	 the	 Cabbage
Family	 Like	 onions,	 cabbages	 and	 their
relatives	 stockpile	 two	 kinds	 of	 defensive
chemicals	 in	 their	 tissues:	 flavor	 precursors,
and	 enzymes	 that	 act	 on	 the	 precursors	 to
liberate	the	reactive	flavors.	When	the	plant’s
cells	 are	 damaged,	 the	 two	 stockpiles	 are
mixed,	 and	 the	 enzymes	 start	 a	 chain	 of
reactions	 that	 generates	 bitter,	 pungent,	 and
strong-smelling	 compounds.	 The	 special
cabbage-family	system	is	effective	enough	to
have	 inspired	 a	 notorious	man-made	 version,
the	 mustard	 gas	 of	 World	 War	 I.	 And	 the
cabbage	family	 turns	out	 to	have	parts	of	 the
onion	defensive	system	(p.	310)	as	well;	these
contribute	 some	 sulfur	 aromatics	 to	 the
overall	family	flavor.

The	stockpiled	defensive	precursors	in	the



cabbage	family	are	called	glucosinolates.
They	differ	from	the	onion	precursors	in
containing	not	only	sulfur,	but	also	nitrogen,
so	they	and	their	immediate	flavor	products,
mainly	the	isothiocyanates,	have	distinctive
qualities.	Some	of	the	flavor	precursors	and
products	are	very	bitter,	and	some	have
significant	effects	on	our	metabolism.
Particular	isothiocyanates	interfere	with	the
proper	function	of	the	thyroid	gland	and	can
cause	it	to	enlarge	if	the	diet	is	poor	in	iodine.
But	others	help	protect	against	the
development	of	cancer	by	fine-tuning	our
system	for	disposing	of	foreign	chemicals.
This	is	the	case	for	substances	in	broccoli	and
broccoli	sprouts.

A	given	vegetable	will	contain	a	number	of
different	precursor	glucosinolates,	and	the
combinations	are	characteristic.	This	is	why
cabbage,	brussels	sprouts,	broccoli,	and
mustard	greens	have	similar	but	distinctive
flavors.	The	chemical	defensive	system	is



most	active	—	and	the	flavor	strongest	—	in
young,	actively	growing	tissues:	the	center	of
brussels	sprouts,	for	example,	and	portions	of
the	cabbage	core,	which	are	twice	as	active	as
the	outer	leaves.	Growing	conditions	have	a
strong	influence	on	the	amounts	of	flavor
precursors	the	plant	stockpiles.	Summer
temperatures	and	drought	stress	increase
them,	while	the	cold,	wetness,	and	dim
sunlight	of	autumn	and	winter	reduce	them.
Autumn	and	winter	vegetables	are	usually
milder.

The	 Effects	 of	 Chopping	 Different
preparation	 and	 cooking	 methods	 give
different	flavor	balances	in	cabbage	relatives.
It’s	 been	 found,	 for	 example,	 that	 simply
chopping	cabbage	—	for	making	coleslaw,	for
example	—	 increases	 not	 only	 the	 liberation
of	flavor	compounds	from	precursors,	but	also
increases	 the	 production	 of	 the	 precursors!
And	 if	 the	 chopped	 cabbage	 is	 then	 dressed



with	 an	 acidic	 sauce,	 some	 pungent	 products
increase	 sixfold.	 (Soaking	 the	 chopped
cabbage	 in	 cold	water	will	 leach	out	most	of
the	flavor	compounds	formed	by	chopping,	at
the	 same	 time	 that	 it	hydrates	 the	 leaves	and
makes	 them	 crisper.)	 When	 cabbages	 and
their	 relatives	 are	 fermented	 to	 make
sauerkraut	and	other	pickles,	nearly	all	of	the
flavor	 precursors	 and	 their	 products	 are
transformed	 into	 less	 bitter,	 less	 pungent
substances.

The	 Effects	 of	 Heat	 Heating	 cabbages	 and
their	friends	has	two	different	effects.	Initially
the	 temperature	 rise	within	 the	 tissue	 speeds
the	 enzyme	 activity	 and	 flavor	 generation,
with	maximum	activity	at	around	140ºF/60ºC.
The	 enzymes	 stop	 working	 altogether
somewhere	 short	 of	 the	 boiling	 point.	 If	 the
enzymes	 are	 quickly	 inactivated	 by	 plunging
the	 vegetables	 into	 abundant	 boiling	 water,
then	many	 of	 the	 flavor	 precursor	molecules



will	be	left	intact.	This	isn’t	always	desirable:
cooking	 some	 mustard	 greens	 quickly,	 for
example,	 minimizes	 their	 hot	 pungency	 but
preserves	 the	 intense	 bitterness	 of	 their
pungency	precursors.	Boiling	in	a	large	excess
of	water	leaches	flavor	molecules	out	into	the
water,	and	produces	a	milder	flavor	than	does
stir-frying	or	 steaming.	 If	 the	cooking	period
is	prolonged,	then	the	constant	heat	gradually
transforms	 the	 flavor	 molecules.	 Eventually
the	 sulfur	 compounds	 end	 up	 forming
trisulfides,	which	 accumulate	 and	 are	mainly
responsible	for	the	strong	and	lingering	smell
of	 overcooked	 cabbage.	 Prolonged	 cooking
makes	 members	 of	 the	 onion	 family	 more
sweet	 and	 mellow,	 but	 the	 cabbage	 family
gets	more	overbearing	and	unpleasant.

Food	Words:	Cabbage,	Kale,	Collards,
Cauliflower

Several	 vegetables	 in	 the	 cabbage	 family,
kale,	collards,	and	cauliflower,	have	names



that	 derive	 from	 the	 Latin	 word	caulis,
meaning	“stem”	or	“stalk,”	 the	part	of	 the
plant	 from	 which	 the	 edible	 portions
emerge.	Cabbage	 itself	 comes	 from	 the
Latin	caput,	meaning	 “head”:	 it’s	 the	 one
form	 in	 which	 the	 stem	 is	 reduced	 to	 a
short	 stub,	 and	 the	 leaves	 form	 a	 head
around	it.
Thanks	to	the	fact	that	they	share	some

enzyme	systems,	mixtures	of	the	onion	and
cabbage	families	can	produce	surprising
effects.	Add	bits	of	raw	scallion	to	some
cooked	and	therefore	nonpungent	mustard
greens,	and	the	scallion	enzymes	will
transform	heat-stable	mustard	precursors	into
pungent	products:	so	the	bits	of	scallion	taste
more	mustardy	than	the	greens	themselves!

Cabbage,	 Kale,	 Collards,	 Brussels	 Sprouts
The	 original	 wild	 cabbage	 is	 native	 to	 the
Mediterranean	seaboard,	and	this	salty,	sunny
habitat	accounts	for	the	thick,	succulent,	waxy



leaves	and	 stalks	 that	help	make	 these	plants
so	 hardy.	 It	 was	 domesticated	 around	 2,500
years	ago,	and	 thanks	 to	 its	 tolerance	of	cold
climates,	 it	 became	 an	 important	 staple
vegetable	 in	 Eastern	 Europe.	 The	 practice	 of
pickling	 it	 appears	 to	 have	 originated	 in
China.

Collards,	kale,	and	Portuguese	tronchuda
cabbage	resemble	wild	cabbage	in	bearing
separate	leaves	along	a	fairly	short	main	stalk;
tronchuda	has	especially	massive	midribs.
Cultivated	cabbage	forms	a	large	head	of
closely	nested	leaves	around	the	tip	of	the
main	stalk.	There	are	many	varieties,	some
dark	green,	some	nearly	white,	some	red	with
anthocyanin	pigments,	some	deeply	ridged,
and	some	smooth.	In	general,	open-leaved
plants	accumulate	more	vitamins	C	and	A	and
antioxidant	carotenoids	than	heading	varieties
whose	inner	leaves	never	see	the	light	of	day.
Heading	cabbages	often	contain	more	sugar,
and	store	well	for	months	after	harvest.



Brussels	sprouts	come	from	a	cabbage
variant	that	develops	small,	numerous	heads
along	a	greatly	elongated	central	stalk.	It	may
have	been	developed	in	northern	Europe	in	the
15th	century,	but	clear	evidence	for	its
existence	only	dates	from	the	18th.	For	many
people	who	are	sensitive	to	bitter	tastes,
brussels	sprouts	are	simply	too	bitter	to	eat.
They	contain	very	high	levels	of
glucosinolates.	One	of	the	major	types
(sinigrin,	also	the	major	mustard	precursor)
tastes	bitter	itself	but	produces	a	nonbitter
thiocyanate,	while	the	other	(progoitrin)	is
nonbitter	but	produces	a	bitter	thiocyanate.	So
whether	we	cook	sprouts	rapidly	to	minimize
the	production	of	thiocyanates,	or	slowly	to
transform	all	of	the	glucosinolates,	the	result
is	still	bitter.	Since	these	flavor	components
are	concentrated	in	the	center	of	the	sprout,	it
helps	to	halve	the	sprouts	and	cook	them	in	a
large	pot	of	boiling	water,	which	will	leach
out	both	precursors	and	products.



Some	 vegetables	 in	 the	 remarkably	 various
cabbage	 family.	 Center	:	 Kale	 leaf.	 To	 its
right	 and	 clockwise:	The	 swollen	 stem	 of
kohlrabi,	 the	 terminal	 bud	 of	 head	 cabbage,
the	 lateral	 buds	 of	 brussels	 sprouts,	 the
flowering	stalk	of	broccoli,	and	cauliflower,	a
mass	of	undeveloped	flower	stalks.

Rocket,	 Cress,	Mustard	 Greens,	 Ethiopian
Mustard	 Rocket	 (or	 Italian	 arugula,	 both
from	 the	 Latin	 root	roc	 meaning	 “harsh,
rough”)	is	the	name	given	to	several	different
plants	 and	 their	 leaves,	 all	 small,	 weedy
cabbage	 relatives	 from	 the	 Mediterranean
region	that	are	especially	pungent,	with	a	full,
almost	 meaty	 flavor	 built	 from	 various



aldehydes,	 including	 almond-essence
benzaldehyde.	 They’re	 frequently	 used	 to
enliven	a	 salad	of	mixed	greens,	but	are	also
pureed	 into	 a	 brilliant	 green	 sauce	 or	 put	 on
pizzas.	 Even	 the	 briefest	 cooking	 will
inactivate	 their	 protection-generating
enzymes	 and	 turn	 them	 into	 tame	 greens.
Some	 large-leaved	 varieties	 are	 quite	 mild.
Like	 rocket,	 the	 different	 forms	 of	 cress	 —
water,	garden,	winter	—	are	small-leaved	and
pungent,	 usually	 used	 as	 a	 garnish	 or	 as	 a
refreshing	 counterpoint	 to	 a	 rich	meat.	 Their
close	 relative,	 the	 window	 box	 nasturtium
plant,	 sometimes	 lends	 its	 slightly	 pungent
flower	for	a	garnish;	the	more	peppery	flower
buds	are	also	used.

Mustard	greens	are	leaves	from	varieties
of	brown	mustard	(B.	juncea)	that	have	been
selected	for	their	foliage	rather	than	their
seeds.	Their	texture	is	more	delicate	than	that
of	cabbage.	They’re	often	quite	pungent	in	the
fashion	of	seed	mustard,	but	are	usually



cooked,	which	may	leave	them	mild	and
cabbage-like	or	intensely	bitter,	depending	on
the	variety.	Ethiopian	mustard,	a	natural
hybrid	between	the	cabbage	and	mustard
groups,	probably	arose	in	northeastern	Africa,
where	the	fast-growing	young	leaves	are	eaten
both	raw	and	lightly	cooked.	An	improved
variety	developed	in	the	United	States	is
called	texsel	greens.

Asian	 Cabbages	 and	 Relatives	 The	 several
very	 different	 forms	 of	 Chinese	 cabbage,
including	bok	choy,	napa,	and	tatsoi,	all	stem
from	 the	 same	 species	 of	Brassica	 that	 gave
us	 the	 turnip.	B.	 rapa	 is	 one	 of	 the	 oldest
cultivated	 plants,	 possibly	 bred	 first	 for	 its
seeds,	 and	 now	 among	 the	 most	 important
vegetables	 in	Asia.	The	 larger	modern	 forms
are	mainly	elongated	heads	weighing	up	to	10
lb/4.5	 kg,	 and	 are	 distinguished	 from
European	 cabbages	 by	 their	 prominent	 white
midribs,	 less	 prominent	 light	 green	 leaves,



and	mildness.	Their	 smaller	 relatives	mizuna
and	 mibuna	 form	 low,	 spreading	 clumps	 of
long,	 narrow	 leaves,	 those	 of	 mizuna	 being
finely	 divided	 and	 feathery.	 Tatsoi	 makes	 a
rosette	of	rounded	leaves.	These	small	 leaves
do	well	 as	 additions	 to	Western	 salads;	 they
tolerate	 storage	 and	 dressings	 better	 than
more	delicate	lettuces.

Spinach	and	Chard

Spinach	Spinach	(Spinacia	oleracea)	is	a
member	of	the	beet	family	that	was
domesticated	in	central	Asia,	and	is	most
productive	in	the	cool	seasons	(heat	and	long
days	cause	it	to	go	to	seed	while	it	has
relatively	few	leaves).	In	the	late	Middle	Ages
the	Arabs	brought	it	to	Europe,	where	it	soon
displaced	its	smaller-leaved	relatives	orache
and	lamb’s-quarters,	as	well	as	amaranth	and
sorrel.	In	the	classic	cuisine	of	France,
spinach	was	likened	to	cire-vierge,	or	virgin



beeswax,	capable	of	receiving	any	impression
or	effect,	while	most	other	vegetables
imposed	their	taste	upon	the	dish.	Today	it’s
the	most	important	leaf	vegetable	apart	from
lettuce,	valued	for	its	rapid	growth,	mild
flavor,	and	tender	texture	when	briefly
cooked.	(Some	varieties	are	tender	when	raw,
while	thick-leaved	varieties	are	chewy	and
less	suitable	for	salads.)	When	cooked,	its
volume	is	reduced	by	about	three-quarters.
Spinach	has	a	high	content	of	potentially
troublesome	oxalates	(p.	259),	but	it	remains
an	excellent	source	of	vitamin	A	as	well	as	of
phenolic	antioxidants	and	compounds	that
reduce	potential	cancer-causing	damage	to	our
DNA.	Folic	acid	was	first	purified	from
spinach,	which	is	our	richest	source	of	this
important	vitamin	(p.	255).

A	number	of	unrelated	but	tender-leafed
plants	are	called	spinach.	Malabar	spinach	is
an	Asian	climber,	Basella	alba,	notable	for	its
heat	tolerance	and	the	mucilaginous	texture	of



its	leaves,	which	may	be	green	or	red.	New
Zealand	spinach	is	a	relative	of	the	succulent
ice	plant	(also	eaten!),	Tetragonia
tetragonioides,	productive	in	hot	weather	but
thick-leaved	and	best	when	cooked.	Water
spinach	is	an	Asian	relative	of	the	sweet
potato,	Ipomoea	aquatica,	with	elongated
leaves	and	crunchy,	hollow	stems	that	are
good	at	taking	up	sauce.

Chard	Chard	is	the	name	given	to	varieties	of
the	 beet,	Beta	 vulgaris,	 that	 have	 been
selected	 for	 thick,	 meaty	 leaf	 stalks
(subspecies	cicla)	rather	 than	their	roots.	The
beet	 is	 a	 distant	 relative	 of	 spinach,	 and	 its
leaves	—	 including	 ordinary,	 thin-midribbed
beet	 greens	 —	 also	 contain	 oxalates.	 Chard
stalks	 and	 leaf	 veins	 can	 be	 colored	 brilliant
yellow,	 orange,	 and	 crimson	 by	 the	 same
betain	pigments	that	color	the	roots,	which	are
water-soluble	 and	 stain	 cooking	 liquids	 and
sauces.	Some	of	 the	 recently	 revived	 colored



varieties	 are	 heirlooms	 that	 go	 back	 to	 the
16th	century.

Miscellaneous	Leafy	Greens

Here	are	notes	on	a	select	handful	of	the	many
other	greens	that	find	their	way	to	the	table.

Amaranth	 Amaranth	 (species	 of
Amaranthus),	 sometimes	 called	 Chinese
spinach	 and	 other	 names,	 has	 been	 enjoyed
since	 ancient	 times	 in	both	Europe	 and	Asia.
Its	 tender,	 earthy-flavored	 leaves	 are	 rich	 in
vitamin	A,	 but	 also	 in	 oxalates:	 two	 to	 three
times	more	than	spinach,	for	example.	Boiling
in	copious	water	will	remove	some	of	them.

Grape	Leaves	Grape	leaves	are	best	known	in
pickled	 form	 as	 the	 wrappers	 for	 Greek
dolmades.	 They	 are	 more	 delicate	 and
delicious	 when	 blanched	 fresh.	 Grape	 leaves
are	 distinctly	 tart	 from	 their	 large	 store	 of



malic	and	tartaric	acids.

Mâche	Mâche,	 also	 known	 as	 lamb’s	 lettuce
or	 corn	 salad	 (Valerianella	 locusta 	 and	V.
eriocarpa),	 has	 small,	 tender,	 slightly
mucilaginous	 leaves	 and	 a	 distinctive,
complex,	 fruity-flowery	 aroma	 (from	various
esters,	 linalool,	 mushroomy	 octenol,	 and
lemony	 citronellol),	which	make	 it	 a	 popular
addition	 or	 alternative	 to	 a	 lettuce	 salad	 in
Europe.

Nettles	Nettles	(Urtica	dioica)	are	a	common
Eurasian	weed	that	has	now	spread	throughout
the	 Northern	 Hemisphere.	 They’re	 notorious
for	 their	 stinging	 hairs,	 which	 have	 a	 brittle
silicate	tip	and	a	gland	that	supplies	a	cocktail
of	irritant	chemicals,	including	histamine,	for
injection	 when	 skin	 meets	 needle.	 The	 hairs
can	be	disarmed	by	a	quick	blanch	in	boiling
water,	 which	 releases	 and	 dilutes	 the
chemicals.	 But	 the	 harvest	 and	 washing
require	 protective	 gloves.	 Nettles	 are	 made



into	 soup,	 stewed,	 and	mixed	with	 cheese	 to
stuff	pasta.

Purslane	 Purslane	 (Portulaca	 oleracea)	 is	 a
low-lying	weed	with	fat	stems	and	small	thick
leaves,	 which	 thrives	 in	 midsummer	 heat	 on
neglected	ground.	 It’s	 a	European	native	 that
has	 spread	 throughout	 the	 world.	 One
nickname	 for	 purslane	 is	 pig-weed,	 and	 the
19th	 century	 Englishman	 William	 Cobbett
said	 it	 was	 suitable	 only	 for	 pigs	 and	 the
French.	 But	 people	 in	 many	 countries	 enjoy
its	 combination	 of	 tartness	 and	 soothing,
mucilaginous	 smoothness,	 both	 raw	 in	 salads
and	added	to	meat	and	vegetable	dishes	during
the	 last	 few	 minutes	 of	 cooking.	 There	 are
now	 cultivated	 varieties	 with	 larger	 leaves
shaded	 yellow	 and	 pink.	 Its	 qualities	 are
similar	to	those	of	the	cactus	pad	because	both
have	 adapted	 in	 similar	 ways	 to	 hot,	 dry
habitats	 (p.	 316).	 Purslane	 is	 notable	 for	 its
content	 of	 calcium,	 several	 vitamins,	 and	 an



omega-3	fatty	acid,	linolenic	acid	(p.	801).

Flowers:	Artichokes,
Broccoli,	Cauliflower,
and	Others

Flowers	As	Foods

Flowers	are	plant	organs	that	attract
pollinating	animals	with	a	strong	scent,	bright
colors,	or	both;	so	they	can	add	both	aromatic
and	visual	appeal	to	our	foods.	But	the	most
important	edible	flowers	in	the	West	are
neither	colorful	nor	flowery!	Broccoli	and
cauliflower	are	immature	or	developmentally
arrested	flower	structures,	and	artichokes	are
eaten	before	they	have	a	chance	to	open.
Aromatic	flowers	have	played	a	more
prominent	role	in	the	Middle	East	and	Asia.	In
the	Middle	East,	the	distilled	essence	of
indigenous	roses,	and	later	of	bitter	orange
flowers	from	China,	has	long	been	used	to



embellish	the	flavors	of	many	dishes,
rosewater	in	baklava	and	“Turkish	delight,”
for	example,	and	orange-flower	water	in
Moroccan	salads	and	stews	and	in	Turkish
coffee.	Food	historian	Charles	Perry	has
called	these	extracts	“the	vanilla	of	the
Middle	East.”	They	were	commonly	used	in
the	West	as	well	until	vanilla	displaced	them
in	the	middle	of	the	19th	century.

Many	flowers	can	be	and	are	used	as	edible
garnishes,	or	cooked	into	aromatic	fritters,	or
infused	to	make	a	tea	or	sorbet.	The	petals	are
the	main	source	of	volatile	chemicals,	which
are	held	in	surface	cells	or	specialized	oil
glands.	Both	the	petals	and	their	flavors	are
delicate,	so	they	should	be	cooked	very	briefly
or	added	at	the	last	minute.	Flower	petals	are
candied	by	brief	cooking	in	a	strong	sugar
syrup,	or	by	brushing	them	gently	with	egg
white	or	a	solution	of	gum	arabic,	dusting
them	with	sugar,	and	allowing	them	to	dry.	In
the	second	technique,	the	egg	white	provides



both	antimicrobial	proteins	(p.	77)	and	a
sticky	liquid	for	the	sugar	to	dissolve	into,	and
the	concentrated	sugar	pulls	water	out	of	any
surviving	microbes.	When	working	with
flowers,	the	cook	should	observe	two
cautions:	avoid	flowers	that	are	known	to
contain	defensive	plant	toxins,	or	that	may
have	been	treated	with	pesticides	or
fungicides	in	the	greenhouse	or	garden.

Some	Edible	and	Inedible	Flowers

Edible	Flowers
Herbs	(chive,	rosemary,	lavender)

Rose
Violet,	pansy

Daylily
Begonia
Jasmine

Geranium	(many	herb	and	fruit	scents)
Lilac
Orchids

Chrysanthemum,	marigold



Lotus
Nasturtium
Elderflower

Citrus
Apple,	pear

Tulip
Gardenia
Peony

Linden	(tilleul)
Redbud

Inedible	Flowers
Lily	of	the	valley

Hydrangea
Narcissus,	daffodil

Oleander
Poinsettia

Rhododendron
Sweet	pea
Wisteria

Banana	Flowers	Banana	flowers	are	the	large
male	 portion	 of	 the	 tropical	 banana	 tree’s



flower	 and	 its	 protective	 layers.	 They’re
somewhat	 astringent	 from	 the	 presence	 of
tannins,	and	are	cooked	as	a	vegetable.

Daylily	 Buds	 Daylily	 buds,	 mostly	 from
species	 of	Hemerocallis,	 are	 eaten	both	 fresh
and	 dried	 in	 Asia	 —	 the	 dried	 form	 is
sometimes	 called	 “golden	 needles”	 —	 and
provide	 a	 valuable	 supplement	 of	 carotenoid
and	phenolic	antioxidants.

Roselle,	Hibiscus,	and	Jamaica	These	are	all
names	for	the	bright	red,	tart,	aromatic	fleshy
flower	 covering	 (the	calyx,	 more	 familiar	 as
the	leaf-like	stubs	at	the	base	of	a	strawberry)
of	a	kind	of	hibiscus.	Hibiscus	sabdariffa	is	a
native	 of	 Africa	 and	 a	 relative	 of	 okra.	 It’s
much	 used	 in	 Mexico	 and	 the	 Caribbean,
sometimes	fresh,	sometimes	dried	and	infused
to	 make	 drinks,	 sometimes	 rehydrated	 and
cooked	 with	 other	 ingredients.	 In	 the	 United
States	 it’s	 most	 familiar	 as	 an	 ingredient	 in
Hawaiian	punch	and	many	red	herbal	teas	(the



pigments	 are	 anthocyanins).	 Jamaica	 (“ha-
MY-ka”)	 is	 remarkable	 for	 being	 a
concentrated	 source	 of	 vitamin	 C,	 phenolic
antioxidants,	and	gel-forming	pectin.

Squash	 Blossoms	 The	 large	 flowers	 of
zucchini	 and	 its	 relatives	 (p.	 332)	 are
sometimes	 stuffed,	 and	 variously	 deep-fried
or	chopped	and	added	to	soups	or	egg	dishes.
Their	 aroma	 is	 musky	 and	 complex,	 with
green,	 almond,	 spicy,	 violet,	 and	 barnyard
notes.

Artichokes

The	artichoke	is	the	large	flower	bud	of	a	kind
of	thistle,	Cynara	scolymus,	native	to	the
Mediterranean	region.	It	was	probably
developed	from	the	cardoon,	C.	cardunculus,
which	has	small	and	meager	buds	whose	base
and	stem	were	eaten	in	ancient	Greece.
Artichokes	were	a	delicacy	in	Rome,	a	fact	of



which	Pliny	professed	to	be	ashamed:	“thus
we	turn	into	a	corrupt	feast	the	earth’s
monstrosities,	those	which	even	the	animals
instinctively	avoid”	(Book19).	The	name	is	a
corruption,	via	Italian,	of	the	Arabic	al’
qarshuf,	meaning	“little	cardoon”;	food
historian	Charles	Perry	suggests	that	the	large
buds	we	know	today,	several	inches	in
diameter,	were	developed	in	the	late	Middle
Ages	in	Moorish	Spain.

The	artichoke.	The	“heart”	is	the	flower	base
and	 corresponds	 to	 the	 fleshy	 portion	 of	 the
strawberry	and	fig.

Thistles	are	members	of	the	lettuce	family
and	so	relatives	of	salsify	and	sun-chokes,	all
of	which	share	a	similar	flavor.	The	edible
parts	of	the	artichoke	are	the	fleshy	bases	of



the	bracts,	or	protective	leaves,	and	the	heart,
which	is	actually	the	base	of	the	flower
structure,	the	upper	part	of	the	stalk.	The
“choke”	is	made	up	of	the	actual	flowerets,
which	if	allowed	to	bloom	turn	a	deep	violet-
blue.	The	small	artichokes	sometimes	seen	in
markets	or	in	jars	come	from	flowering	stalks
low	on	the	plant	rather	than	the	main	stalk.
They	grow	very	slowly,	and	so	are	picked	at
an	immature	stage	when	there’s	little	or	no
choke	inside.

The	qualities	of	the	artichoke	are	largely
determined	by	its	copious	content	of	phenolic
substances,	which	manifest	themselves
immediately	when	the	flesh	is	cut	or	tasted
raw.	Cut	surfaces	turn	brown	very	quickly	as
the	phenolics	react	with	oxygen	to	form
colored	complexes,	and	raw	slices	are
noticeably	astringent	thanks	to	the	reaction	of
phenolics	with	our	salivary	proteins.	Cooking
minimizes	both	effects.	By	disrupting	the
cells,	it	causes	the	phenolics	to	bind	to	a	host



of	different	molecules	including	each	other;
this	gives	the	flesh	an	evenly	dark	tone,	and
leaves	few	phenolics	free	to	cause
astringency.	Some	artichoke	phenolics	have
antioxidant	and	cholesterol-lowering	effects,
and	one	in	particular,	a	compound	dubbed
cynarin,	has	the	unusual	effect	of	making
foods	eaten	after	a	bite	of	artichoke	taste
sweet.	Cynarin	apparently	inhibits	the	sweet
receptors	on	our	taste	buds,	so	when	it’s	swept
off	the	tongue	by	the	next	bite,	the	receptors
start	up	again,	and	we	notice	the	contrast.
Because	they	therefore	distort	the	flavor	of
other	foods,	artichokes	are	thought	to	be	an
inappropriate	accompaniment	to	fine	wines.

The	Cabbage	Family:
Broccoli,	Cauliflower,
Romanesco

These	vegetables	are	all	varieties	of	cabbage
in	which	the	normal	development	of	flower



stalks	and	flowers	is	arrested,	so	that	the
immature	flowering	tissues	proliferate	and
accumulate	into	large	masses.	Based	on	recent
genetic	and	geographic	analysis,	it	appears
that	broccoli	arose	in	Italy	and	in	turn	gave
rise	to	cauliflower,	which	was	known	in
Europe	by	the	16th	century.

In	the	case	of	broccoli,	extra	flower-stalk
tissue	develops,	fuses	into	thick	“spears,”	and
then	goes	on	to	produce	clusters	of	small
green	flower	buds.	In	cauliflower	and	its
interestingly	angular,	green	variant,
romanesco,	the	stalk-production	stage	is
extended	indefinitely	and	forms	a	dense	mass
or	“curd”	of	immature	flowerstalk	branches.
Because	the	curd	is	developmentally
immature,	it	remains	relatively	unfibrous	and
rich	in	cell-wall	pectins	and	hemicelluloses
(p.	265),	and	so	can	be	pureed	to	a	very	fine,
creamy	consistency	(and	if	overcooked	whole,
it	readily	turns	to	mush).	To	get	as	white	a
cauliflower	curd	as	possible,	growers	usually



tie	the	leaves	over	it	to	protect	it	from
sunlight,	which	induces	the	production	of
yellowish	pigments.

Broccoli	rabe,	slender	stalks	topped	with	a
small	cluster	of	flower	buds,	is	unrelated	to
true	broccoli.	The	name	is	a	corruption	of
“broccoletti	di	rape,”	or	“little	sprouts	of
turnip,”	and	refers	to	a	variety	of	turnip	that
bears	somewhat	thickened	flower	stalks	along
its	main	stalk.	Broccoli	rabe	is	notably	more
bitter	than	true	broccoli.	Broccolini,	similar	to
broccoli	rabe	but	less	bitter,	is	a	recent	hybrid
between	European	and	Asian	brassicas.

Fruits	Used	as	Vegetables

The	botanical	fruits	that	cooks	treat	as
vegetables	generally	require	cooking	to	make
them	interesting	or	soft	enough	to	eat.	The
two	familiar	exceptions	to	this	rule	are
tomatoes	and	cucumbers,	frequently	served
raw	in	salads.



The	Nightshade	Family:	Tomato,	Capsicums,	Eggplant,
and	Others

This	remarkable	plant	family	includes	several
of	the	world’s	most	popular	vegetables	as	well
as	tobacco	and	deadly	nightshade;	in	fact	it
was	the	tomato’s	resemblance	to	nightshade
that	slowed	its	acceptance	in	Europe.
Members	of	the	nightshade	family	share	the
habit	of	stock-piling	chemical	defenses,
usually	bitter	alkaloids.	Many	generations	of
selection	and	breeding	have	reduced	these
defenses	in	most	edible	nightshade	fruits,
though	their	leaves	are	often	still	toxic.
There’s	one	nightshade	defense	that	humans
have	fallen	in	love	with:	the	pungent
capsaicins	of	the	chilli	“peppers.”	Chillis	are
the	most	popular	spice	in	the	world;	their
pungency	is	discussed	in	chapter	8.	In	this
section	I’ll	describe	the	milder	capsicums	that
are	eaten	as	vegetables.



Tomatoes	 Tomatoes	 started	 out	 as	 small,
bitter	 berries	 growing	 on	 bushes	 in	 the	 west
coast	 deserts	 of	 South	America.	 Today,	 after
their	 domestication	 in	 Mexico	 (their	 name
comes	from	the	Aztec	term	for	“plump	fruit,”
tomatl),	 and	 a	 period	 of	 European	 suspicion
that	lasted	into	the	19th	century,	they’re	eaten
all	over	 the	world	 in	a	great	variety	of	 sizes,
shapes,	 and	 carotenoid-painted	 colors.	 In	 the
United	 States	 they’re	 second	 in	 vegetable
popularity	only	to	the	potato,	a	starchy	staple.

What	accounts	for	their	great	appeal?	And
why	are	these	sweet-tart	fruits	treated	as	a
vegetable?	I	think	that	the	answers	lie	in	their
unique	flavor.	In	addition	to	a	relatively	low
sugar	content	for	a	fruit	(3%),	similar	to	that
of	cabbage	and	brussels	sprouts,	ripe	tomatoes
have	an	unusually	large	amount	of	savory
glutamic	acid	(as	much	as	0.3%	of	their
weight),	as	well	as	aromatic	sulfur
compounds.	Glutamic	acid	and	sulfur	aromas
are	more	common	in	meats	than	fruits,	and	so



predispose	them	to	complement	the	flavor	of
meats,	even	to	replace	that	flavor,	and
certainly	to	add	depth	and	complexity	to
sauces	and	other	mixed	preparations.	(This
may	also	be	why	although	many	rotten	fruits
smell	pleasantly	fermented,	rotten	tomatoes
are	absolutely	foul!)	In	any	case,	tomatoes	are
a	good	thing	to	like.	They’re	rich	in	vitamin
C,	and	the	standard	red	varieties	give	us	an
excellent	dose	of	the	antioxidant	carotenoid
lycopene,	which	is	especially	concentrated	in
tomato	paste	and	ketchup.

Vegetables	in	the	Nightshade	Family

Potato Solanum	tuberosum

Eggplant Solanum	melongena;	S.aethiopicum,	macrocarpon
Tomato Lycopersicon	esculentum
Capsicums,	chillis Capsicum	species
Bell,	pimiento,	paprika,	jalapeño, C.



serrano,	poblano… annuum
Tabasco C.	frutescens
Scotch	bonnet,	habanero C.	chinense
Aji C.	baccatum
Manzano C.	pubescens

Tomatillo Physalis	ixocarpa,	P.philadelphica
Tree	tomato Cyphomandra	betacea

Tomato	Anatomy	and	Flavor 	Aside	from	the
relatively	 dry	 paste	 varieties,	 most	 tomatoes
have	 four	 different	 kinds	 of	 tissue:	 a	 thin,
tough	 cuticle,	 or	 skin,	 which	 is	 sometimes
removed;	the	outer	fruit	wall;	the	central	pith;
and	 a	 semiliquid	 jelly	 and	 juice	 surrounding
the	seeds.	The	wall	tissue	contains	most	of	the
sugars	 and	 amino	 acids,	 while	 the
concentration	of	acid	 in	 the	 jelly	and	 juice	 is
double	 that	 of	 the	 wall.	 And	 most	 of	 the
aroma	compounds	are	found	in	the	cuticle	and
wall.	 The	 flavor	 of	 a	 tomato	 slice	 thus



depends	 on	 the	 relative	 proportions	 of	 these
tissues.	 Many	 cooks	 prepare	 tomatoes	 for
cooking	 by	 first	 removing	 the	 skin,	 seedy
jelly,	 and	 juice.	 This	 practice	 makes	 the
tomato	flesh	more	refined	and	less	watery,	but
it	 changes	 the	 flavor	 balance	 in	 favor	 of
sweetness,	and	sacrifices	aroma.	The	tomato’s
citric	and	malic	acids	aren’t	volatile	and	don’t
cook	away,	so	acidity	and	some	aroma	can	be
restored	by	cooking	the	skins,	jelly,	and	juice
together	 until	 much	 of	 the	 liquid	 has
evaporated,	 then	 straining	 the	 remainder	 into
the	cooking	tomato	flesh.	As	cooks	have	long
known	and	 flavor	chemists	have	verified,	 the
overall	 flavor	 of	 tomatoes	 can	 be	 intensified
by	the	addition	of	both	sugar	and	acidity.

Tomatoes	that	are	allowed	to	ripen	fully	on
the	vine	accumulate	more	sugar,	acid,	and
aroma	compounds,	and	have	the	fullest	flavor.
An	important	element	of	ripe-tomato	flavor	is
provided	by	the	aroma	compound	furaneol,
which	resembles	sweet-savory	caramel	(it



also	contributes	to	the	flavors	of	ripe
strawberries	and	pineapples).	Most
supermarket	tomatoes	are	picked	and	shipped
while	still	green	and	artificially	stimulated	to
redden	by	treatment	with	ethylene	gas	(p.
351),	so	they	have	little	ripe-fruit	flavor,	and
in	fact	have	become	a	byword	for	flavorless
produce.	However,	parts	of	Europe	and	Latin
America	prefer	to	make	salads	with	less
fruity,	more	vegetable-like	mature	green
tomatoes,	and	people	in	many	regions	cook
(or	pickle)	and	enjoy	green	tomatoes	for	their
own	kind	of	savoriness.	And	in	rural	Peru,	the
prized	varieties	of	both	tomato	and	tomatillo
are	frankly	bitter.

Cooked	 Tomatoes 	 When	 fresh	 tomatoes	 are
cooked	down	to	make	a	thick	sauce,	they	gain
some	 flavors	—	 notably	 rose-and	 violet-like
fragments	 of	 the	 carotenoid	 pigments	—	 but
they	lose	the	fresh	“green”	notes	provided	by
unstable	 fragments	 of	 fatty	 acids	 and	 by	 a



particular	 sulfur	 compound	 (a	 thiazole).
Because	 tomato	 leaves	 have	 a	 pronounced
fresh-tomato	 aroma	 thanks	 to	 their	 leaf
enzymes	(p.	273)	and	prominent	aromatic	oil
glands,	 some	 cooks	 add	 a	 few	 leaves	 to	 a
tomato	 sauce	 toward	 the	 end	 of	 the	 cooking,
to	restore	its	fresh	notes.	Tomato	leaves	have
long	 been	 considered	 potentially	 toxic
because	 they	 contain	 a	 defensive	 alkaloid,
tomatine,	 but	 recent	 research	 has	 found	 that
tomatine	 binds	 tightly	 to	 cholesterol
molecules	in	our	digestive	system,	so	that	the
body	 absorbs	 neither	 the	 alkaloid	 nor	 its
bound	 partner.	 It	 thus	 reduces	 our	 net	 intake
of	 cholesterol!	 (Green	 tomatoes	 also	 contain
tomatine	and	have	 the	same	effect.)	 It’s	 fine,
then,	 to	 freshen	 the	 flavor	 of	 tomato	 sauces
with	the	leaves.



Tomato	 anatomy.	 The	 fruit	wall	 is	 especially
rich	 in	 sugars,	 amino	 acids,	 and	 aroma
molecules,	the	jelly	in	sugarbalancing	acids.

Fresh	 tomatoes	 readily	 cook	 down	 to	 a
smooth	 puree,	 but	 many	 canned	 tomatoes
don’t.	Canners	frequently	add	calcium	salts	to
firm	the	cell	walls	and	keep	the	pieces	intact,
and	this	can	interfere	with	their	disintegration
during	 cooking.	 If	 you	want	 to	make	 a	 fine-
textured	dish	from	canned	tomatoes,	check	the
labels	 and	 buy	 a	 brand	 that	 doesn’t	 list
calcium	among	its	ingredients.

Storage	 Tomatoes	 came	 originally	 from	 a
warm	 climate,	 and	 should	 be	 stored	 at	 room
temperature.	Their	fresh	flavor	readily	suffers
from	 refrigeration.	 Tomatoes	 at	 the	 mature-
green	stage	are	especially	sensitive	to	chilling
at	 temperatures	 below	 about	 55ºF/13ºC,	 and
suffer	damage	to	their	membranes	that	results
in	 minimal	 flavor	 development,	 blotchy
coloration,	 and	 a	 soft,	 mealy	 texture	 when



they’re	 brought	 back	 to	 room	 temperature.
Fully	ripe	tomatoes	are	less	sensitive,	but	lose
flavor	 due	 to	 the	 loss	 of	 flavor-producing
enzyme	 activity.	 Some	 of	 this	 activity	 can
come	back,	so	refrigerated	tomatoes	should	be
allowed	 to	 recover	at	 room	temperature	 for	a
day	or	two	before	eating.

The	“tree	tomato”	is	the	vaguely	tomato-
like	fruit	of	a	woody	plant	in	the	nightshade
family.	It	comes	in	red	and	yellow	types	and
has	a	tough	peel	and	bland	flavor.

Tomatillos	 Tomatillos	 are	 the	 fruits	 of
Physalis	 ixocarpa,	 a	 tomato	 relative	 that	 in
fact	 was	 cultivated	 before	 the	 tomato	 in
Mexico	 and	 Guatemala,	 to	 whose	 cool
highlands	 it	 is	 better	 adapted.	 The	 tomatillo
fruit	 is	 smaller	 than	 a	 standard	 tomato	 but
similar	in	structure,	and	is	borne	on	the	plant
enclosed	in	a	papery	husk.	Its	skin	is	thick	and
tough,	 sticky	 with	 a	 water-soluble	 secretion
(the	 plant’s	 species	 name,	ixocarpa,	 means



“sticky	 fruit”),	 that	 helps	 it	 keep	 well	 for
several	 weeks.	 The	 tomatillo	 remains	 green
when	 ripe	 and	 has	 a	 tart	 but	 otherwise	mild,
green	flavor,	a	relatively	firm	and	dry	texture.
It’s	usually	cooked	and/or	pureed	into	sauces,
with	 other	 ingredients	 adding	 depth	 or
strength	 of	 flavor.	 A	 related	 species,	P.
philadelphica,	 provides	 an	 esteemed	 purple
version	called	miltomate.

Capsicums	 or	 Sweet	 Peppers	 Capsicums,
like	 tomatoes,	 are	 fruits	 of	 the	 New	 World
that	 conquered	 the	 Old.	 They	 were
domesticated	in	South	America,	and	are	now	a
defining	 element	 of	 the	 cuisines	 of	 Mexico,
Spain,	 Hungary,	 and	 many	 countries	 in	Asia
(the	 countries	 with	 the	 highest	 per	 capita
consumption	 are	 Mexico	 and	 Korea).	 This
triumph	 is	 due	 largely	 to	 the	 defensive
chemical	 capsaicin,	which	 activates	 pain	 and
heat	receptors	in	our	mouths,	and	which	many
human	cultures	have	perversely	come	to	love.



This	 spicy	 aspect	 of	 the	 chillis	 is	 what
inspired	 Columbus	 to	 call	 them	 peppers,
though	they’re	not	at	all	 related	to	 true	black
pepper.	 (Chilli	 was	 the	 Aztec	 term.)	 For
chillis	as	spices,	see	chapter	8.

Capsicums	are	essentially	hollow	berries,
with	a	relatively	thin,	crisp	wall	of	storage
cells	(spice	types	have	been	selected	for	very
thin,	easily	dried	fruits;	vegetable	types	such
as	the	pimiento	have	been	bred	for	meatier
walls).	There	are	five	domesticated	species	in
the	chilli	genus	Capsicum,	with	most
vegetable	types	coming	from	C.	annuum.
Many	varieties	have	been	developed	that	are
mild	enough	to	be	eaten	as	vegetables	rather
than	condiments,	and	with	a	range	of	colors,
shapes,	sweetnesses,	and	aromas.	Capsicums
ripen	to	shades	of	yellow,	brown,	purple,	or
red,	depending	on	the	mix	of	pigments	(purple
comes	from	anthocyanins,	brown	from	the
combination	of	red	carotenoids	and	green
chlorophyll),	but	all	can	be	picked	and	eaten



green.	The	familiar	green	bell	pepper	has	a
strong,	distinctive	aroma	thanks	to	a
particular	compound	(isobutyl
methoxypyrazine)	carried	in	oil	droplets
within	its	cells;	the	very	same	compound
occasionally	pops	up	in	cabernet	sauvignon
and	sauvignon	blanc	wines	and	gives	them	a
usually	unwelcome	green-vegetable	note.
Green	fruits	and	mature	yellow	varieties	are
also	rich	in	the	carotenoid	lutein,	which	helps
prevent	oxidative	damage	in	the	eye	(p.	256).
In	red	varieties,	both	lutein	and	the	green
aroma	disappear	during	ripening	along	with
chlorophyll,	and	other	carotenoid	pigments
accumulate,	the	main	ones	being	capsanthin,
capsorubin,	as	well	as	beta-carotene,	the
precursor	of	vitamin	A.	Mature	red	capsicums
are	among	the	richest	carotenoid	sources	we
have;	paprika	powder	may	be	more	than	1%
pigment	by	weight.	They’re	also	rich	in
vitamin	C.	And	thanks	to	their	content	of	cell-
wall	pectins,	both	fresh	and	rehydrated	dried



capsicums	develop	a	thick,	smooth
consistency	when	cooked	and	pureed	for	a
soup	or	sauce.

Eggplants,	 or	Aubergines	 Eggplants	 are	 the
only	major	vegetable	in	the	nightshade	family
that	 came	 from	 the	 Old	 World.	 An	 early
ancestor	 may	 have	 floated	 from	 Africa	 to
India	 or	 Southeast	 Asia,	 where	 it	 was
domesticated,	 and	 where	 small,	 bitter
varieties	are	still	appreciated	as	a	condiment.
Arab	 traders	 brought	 it	 to	 Spain	 and	 north
Africa	in	the	Middle	Ages,	and	it	was	eaten	in
Italy	 in	 the	 15th	 century,	 in	 France	 by	 the
18th.	 (The	 etymology	 of	aubergine	 mirrors
this	history;	 it	comes	via	Spanish	and	Arabic
from	 the	 Sanskrit	 name.)	 Thanks	 to	 its
tropical	 origins,	 the	 eggplant	 doesn’t	 keep
well	 in	 the	 refrigerator;	 internal	 chilling
damage	leads	to	browning	and	off-flavors	in	a
few	days.
There	are	many	varieties	of	eggplant,	white-



and	orange-and	purple-skinned,	pea-and
cucumber-and	melon-sized,	very	mild	and
intensely	bitter.	Most	market	types	are
colored	with	purple	anthocyanins,	while	a
different	species	(S.	aethiopicum)	provides	the
orange	carotenoid	types.	All	eggplants	have	a
spongy	interior,	with	many	tiny	air	pockets
between	cells.	When	cooked,	the	air	pockets
collapse	and	the	flesh	consolidates	into	a	fine-
textured	mass,	sometimes	creamy	(most
Asian	varieties)	and	sometimes	meaty	(most
European	varieties)	depending	on	the	variety,
maturity,	and	preparation.	In	baked	casseroles
—	the	Greek	moussaka	and	Italian	eggplant
parmigiana	—	eggplant	slices	retain	some
structure;	in	the	Middle	Eastern	dip	baba
ghanoush,	grilled	pureed	eggplant	provides
the	smooth,	melting	body	that	carries	the
flavors	of	sesame	paste,	lemon	juice,	and
garlic.

Eggplant’s	spongy	structure	has	two
notable	consequences	for	the	cook.	One	is	that



eggplants	shrink	down	to	a	relatively	small
volume	when	cooked.	The	other	is	that	when
fried,	raw	eggplant	pieces	soak	up	oil,	leaving
little	on	the	pan	for	lubrication	and	making
the	vegetable	very	rich.	In	some	preparations
—	such	as	the	famous	Arab	dish	Imam
bayaldi,	“the	priest	fainted,”	in	which	halved
eggplants	are	stuffed	and	baked	in	copious
olive	oil	—	this	richness	is	desired	and
maximized.	Otherwise,	the	absorptiveness	of
eggplant	can	be	reduced	by	collapsing	its
spongy	structure	before	frying.	This	is
accomplished	by	precooking	it	—
microwaving	works	well	—	or	by	salting
slices	to	draw	out	moisture	from	the	cells	and
into	the	air	pockets.	Salting	is	often
recommended	as	a	way	to	remove	the
bitterness	sometimes	found	in	older	eggplants
grown	in	dry	conditions,	but	it	probably	just
reduces	our	perception	of	the	alkaloids	(p.
640);	the	bulk	of	the	cell	fluids	remains	in	the
cells.



The	Squash	and	Cucumber	Family

The	squash	or	cucurbit	family,	the
Cucurbitaceae,	has	made	three	broad
contributions	to	human	pleasure	and	nutrition.
These	are	the	sweet,	moist	melons	described
in	the	next	chapter,	the	sweet,	starchy,
nutritious	“winter”	squashes,	which	are
harvested	fully	mature	and	hard	and	keep	for
months,	and	the	not-so-sweet,	moist	cucumber
and	“summer”	squashes,	which	are	harvested
while	immature	and	tender,	and	keep	for	a	few
weeks.	(“Squash”	comes	from	a	Narragansett
Indian	word	meaning	“a	green	thing	eaten
raw.”)	When	cooked,	winter	squashes	develop
a	consistency	and	flavor	something	like	those
of	a	sweet	potato,	while	the	summer	squashes
and	immature	Asian	gourds	develop	a	mild
but	distinctive	aroma	and	a	translucent,	slick,
almost	gelatinous	texture.	Fruits	of	Cucurbita
maxima,	the	Hubbard	and	other	winter
squashes,	can	reach	300	lb/135	kg,	and	are	the



largest	fruits	of	any	plant.	Most	cucurbits
produce	a	particular	form	of	berry	called	a
pepo,	with	a	protective	rind	and	a	mass	of
storage	tissue	containing	many	seeds.	All	of
them	are	native	to	warm	climates,	so	they
suffer	from	chill	injury	if	stored	at	standard
refrigerator	temperatures.	In	addition	to	the
flesh	of	their	fruits,	cucurbits	also	offer	edible
vines,	flowers,	and	seeds.

Winter	 Squashes	 Winter	 squashes	 were
domesticated	 in	 the	 Americas	 beginning
around	 5000	BCE.	They	are	both	nutritious	—
many	 are	 rich	 in	 beta-carotene	 and	 other
carotenoids	as	well	as	starch	—	and	versatile.
The	flesh	of	most	varieties	 is	 firm	enough	 to
sauté	 or	 stew	 in	 chunks	 (fibrous	 spaghetti
squash	 is	 an	 exception),	 but	 once	 cooked	 it
also	can	be	pureed	to	a	very	fine	consistency;
and	 its	moderate	 sweetness	makes	 it	 suitable
for	both	 savory	and	 sweet	preparations,	 from
soups	 or	 side	 dishes	 to	 pies	 and	 custards.



Their	 tough,	 dry	 skin	 and	 hollow	 structure
encourage	their	use	as	edible	containers;	they
can	 be	 filled	 with	 sweet	 or	 savory	 liquids,
then	 baked,	 and	 eaten	 along	 with	 their
contents.	 Winter	 squashes	 can	 be	 stored	 for
months	 and	 many	 are	 available	 year-round,
but	they’re	at	their	prime	shortly	after	harvest
in	 late	 fall.	 They	 keep	 best	 at	 a	 temperature
around	 55ºF/15ºC	 and	 in	 relatively	 dry
conditions	(50–70%	relative	humidity).

The	Squash	Family
Asian	and	African	Species

Cucumber Cucumis	sativus
Gherkin Cucumis	anguria
Melons:	cantaloupe,	honeydew, Cucumis
etc. melo
Watermelon Citrullus	lanatus
Winter/fuzzy	melon,	wax Benincasa
gourd hispida



Luffa,	ridged	gourd Luffa	acutangula
Bottle	gourd,	cucuzza, Lagenaria
calabash siceraria
Bitter	gourd,	bitter Momordica
melon charantia

South	and	North	American	Species

Summer	and	acorn	squash,
zucchini,	pumpkin,	spaghetti Cucurbita
squash pepo

Winter	squash:	butternut, Cucurbita
cheese,	kabocha moschata
Winter	squash:	Hubbard,	turban, Cucurbita
banana,	kabocha maxima
Cushaw Cucurbita	mixta
Chayote,	mirliton Sechium	edule

Summer	 Squashes	 Summer	 squashes	 have
been	bred	 into	a	delightful	variety	of	 shapes.



There	 are	 scallops	 or	 pattypans,	 flat	 and
scalloped	 around	 the	 edges;	 crooknecks	 and
straight	 necks,	 with	 constricted	 stem	 ends;
elongated	 vegetable	 marrows,	 or	 zucchinis;
acorn	 squash;	 and	 distinctive	Middle	Eastern
and	 Asian	 types	 as	 well.	 Some	 are	 green-
skinned,	 some	 vibrantly	 yellow	 with
carotenoid	pigments,	some	variegated,	and	all
have	 a	 pale,	 delicately	 spongy	 flesh	 that
softens	 quickly	 when	 cooked.	 They’re
sweetest	 when	 picked	 young,	 and	 keep	 for	 a
few	weeks	at	45–50ºF/7–10ºC.

Cucumbers	The	 cucumber	was	domesticated
in	 India	 around	 1500	BCE,	 arrived	 in	 the
Mediterranean	 region	 about	 a	 thousand	 years
later,	 and	 is	 now	 the	 second	most	 important
cucurbit	worldwide	after	the	watermelon.	Like
the	 watermelon,	 cucumbers	 are	 notable	 for
their	 crisp,	moist,	mild,	 refreshing	 character.
They’re	mainly	consumed	raw	or	pickled,	and
sometimes	 juiced	 to	 make	 a	 delicately



flavored	 liquid	 for	 use	 in	 salad	 dressings,
poaching	 fish,	 and	 other	 procedures.	 The
distinctive	 yet	 melon-like	 aroma	 of
cucumbers	 develops	when	 the	 flesh	 is	 cut	 or
chewed,	 and	 comes	 from	 the	 action	 of
enzymes	that	break	long	membrane	fatty-acid
molecules	 into	 smaller	 chains	 that	 are	 9
carbon	 atoms	 long;	 the	 characteristic	 melon
fragments	 are	 alcohols,	 the	 cucumber
fragments	 aldehydes.	 The	 larger	 a	 cucumber
grows,	the	lower	its	acidity	and	the	higher	its
modest	sugar	content	(1–2%).

Cucumber	Types	There	are	five	broad	groups
of	 cucumber	 varieties.	 Middle	 Eastern	 and
Asian	 types	 are	 relatively	 small	 and	 thin.
American	pickling	varieties	are	either	smaller
or	 slower-growing	 than	 “slicing”	 varieties,
and	have	a	thin	skin	to	ease	the	penetration	of
brine.	 The	 standard	 American	 slicing
cucumbers	 have	 been	 bred	 for	 the	 rigors	 of
field	 production	 and	 long-distance



distribution.	They	 tend	 to	be	 short	 and	 thick,
with	 a	 relatively	 tough	 skin,	 dry	 flesh,
prominent	 seeds,	 a	 strong	 cucumber	 flavor,
and	 some	bitterness	 at	 the	 stem	 end	 and	 just
under	 the	 skin,	 thanks	 to	 the	 presence	 of
defensive	 chemicals	 called	 cucurbitacins	 that
discourage	 pests.	 European	 varieties,	 which
are	 mainly	 grown	 in	 the	 controlled
environment	 of	 greenhouses,	 are	 typically
long	 and	 slender,	 with	 a	 thin	 tender	 skin,
moist	flesh,	unformed	seeds	due	to	an	absence
of	 pollinating	 insects,	 a	 milder	 cucumber
flavor,	 and	 no	 bitterness	 (breeders	 have
eliminated	 the	 cucurbitacins).	 American
cucumbers	 are	 often	waxed	 to	 slow	moisture
loss,	 and	 so	 are	 almost	 always	 peeled	 before
use,	while	European	varieties	 are	wrapped	 in
plastic	 to	 accomplish	 the	 same	 purpose
without	 compromising	 the	 edibility	 of	 their
skin.

So-called	“Armenian	cucumbers”	are
actually	an	elongated	African	melon.	True



gherkins	are	the	abundant	prickly	fruits,	round
and	about	1	in/2	cm	long,	of	yet	another
African	relative.

Bitter	Gourds	 Bitter	 gourds	 have	 long	 been
prized	 in	Asia	 for	 a	 trait	 that’s	 considered	 a
defect	 in	 cucumbers,	 the	 presence	 of	 bitter
cucurbitacins.	 There	may	 be	 good	 reasons	 to
cultivate	 a	 taste	 for	 cucurbitacins,	 because
recent	 studies	have	 found	 that	 they	may	help
slow	 the	 development	 of	 cancers.	 Bitter
gourds	are	pale	green,	with	an	irregular,	warty
surface.	 They’re	 usually	 eaten	 while
immature,	 sometimes	 after	 an	 initial
blanching	 to	 remove	 some	 of	 the	 water-
soluble	cucurbitacins,	and	are	either	stuffed	or
combined	 with	 other	 ingredients,	 which
moderate	the	bitterness.	Mature	fruits	contain
a	 red,	 sticky,	 sweet	 material	 that	 covers	 the
seeds	and	is	sometimes	eaten.

Bottle	 Gourds	 Bottle	 gourds	 or	 calabashes
are	 most	 often	 allowed	 to	 mature	 and	 then



dried	 to	 make	 containers	 and	 ornaments.
Italians	 call	 the	 immature	 fruits	cucuzze,	 and
peel	 and	 cook	 them	 to	 produce	 a	 relatively
bland	version	of	a	summer	squash.

Luffa	 or	 Angled	 Gourds	 Luffa	 gourds,
sometimes	called	Chinese	okra,	are	elongated
fruits	with	prominent	ridges,	and	a	mild	taste
and	delicate	texture	when	eaten	immature.	(A
different	species	is	used	to	make	fibrous	luffa
“sponges”;	true	sponges	are	sea	creatures.)

Winter	 or	 Wax	 or	 Fuzzy	 Melons	 Winter
melons	accumulate	enough	protective	wax	on
their	rinds	that	it	can	be	scraped	off	and	made
into	 candles.	 On	 young	 fruits	 the	 wax-
producing	glands	are	more	prominent	than	the
wax	itself,	so	they	are	known	as	hairy	or	fuzzy
gourds	 or	 melons.	 These	 are	 cooked	 like
summer	 squash,	 and	 their	 flesh	 becomes
almost	 translucent.	Winter	melons	keep	well,
and	 in	Chinese	cooking	are	used	as	an	edible
container	for	a	festive	soup.



Chayote	 or	 Mirliton	 Chayote	 is	 the	 squash
that	seems	least	like	a	squash.	It’s	the	fruit	of
a	Central	American	vine,	and	looks	something
like	a	large	pear	some	5–8	in/12–20	cm	long,
with	a	single	large	seed	at	the	center.	Its	flesh
is	 finer-textured	 than	 the	 flesh	 of	 summer
squashes,	 takes	 longer	 to	 cook,	 but	 is
otherwise	similar	in	its	mild	aroma	and	moist
texture.	The	seed	cavity	is	sometimes	stuffed,
and	the	seed	sometimes	eaten.

The	Bean	Family:
Fresh	Beans	and	Peas

Unlike	most	edible	fruits,	the	fruits	of	the
bean	family	were	not	designed	to	appeal	to
seed-dispersing	animals.	This	group	of	plants
is	often	called	the	legumes,	“legume”	being
the	name	for	their	particular	kind	of	fruit,	a
thin-walled	pod,	dry	and	brittle	when	mature,
that	encloses	several	seeds	and	disperses	them
by	popping	open	when	they’re	disturbed.	It’s



in	their	dry	form	that	we	harvest	most	legume
crops,	since	they	can	be	stored	indefinitely
and	are	a	concentrated	source	of	nourishment
(see	chapter	9).	Green	beans	and	peas	are
immature	pods	and/or	seeds,	harvested	before
they	begin	to	dry	out,	and	are	both	very
ancient	and	very	recent	foods.	Early	humans
likely	first	ate	the	green	pods	and	seeds,	since
dried	seeds	required	cooking.	However,	the
dried	forms	were	so	much	more	useful	that
varieties	with	pods	specialized	for	eating
green	—	with	no	tough	inner	“parchment”
layer	and	reduced	fiber	throughout	—	have
only	been	bred	for	a	few	hundred	years.

Green	legume	seeds	are	tasty	and
nourishing	because	they’re	collecting	sugars,
amino	acids,	and	other	nutrients	from	the	rest
of	the	plant,	but	haven’t	yet	packed	them	all
into	compact	and	tasteless	starch	and	proteins.
The	green	pods	are	tasty	and	nourishing
because	they	serve	as	a	temporary	storage
depot	for	the	seeds’	supplies.	The	pods	also



generate	their	own	sugars	by	photosynthesis,
making	use	of	carbon	dioxide	that	its	enclosed
seeds	give	off	as	they	grow.	After	they’re
harvested,	the	green	pods	continue	to	send
sugars	to	the	seeds,	so	they	lose	their
sweetness.	We	eat	the	green	seeds	of	many
legumes,	notably	lima	beans,	fava	beans,	and
soybeans	(chapter9),	but	the	pods	of	only	a
few:	the	common	bean,	long	bean,	and	pea.

Green	 Beans	 Green	 beans	 come	 from	 a
climbing	plant	native	to	Central	America	and
the	Andes	 region	of	northern	South	America.
Though	 the	 peoples	 who	 domesticated	 them
have	 probably	 always	 eaten	 some	 immature
pods,	 the	 breeding	 of	 specialized	 vegetable
bean	varieties	is	less	than	200	years	old.	There
are	 now	 chlorophyll-free,	 yellowish	 “wax”
varieties,	 and	 purple,	 chlorophyll-masking
anthocyanin	 varieties	 that	 turn	 green	 when
cooked	 (p.	 281).	 The	 fibrous	 “strings”	 that
normally	join	the	two	walls	of	the	pod	and	are



stripped	 away	 with	 the	 stem	 during
preparation	—	hence	the	name	“string	beans”
—	were	eliminated	by	a	New	York	breeder	in
the	 late	 19th	 century;	 these	 days	 only
heirloom	varieties	tend	to	have	strings.	There
are	two	general	forms	of	green	bean,	one	with
round	 and	 thin	 pods,	 the	 other	 with	 flat	 and
broad	pods.	Flat	varieties	have	been	found	 to
have	 a	 more	 intense	 flavor.	 The	 flavor	 of
cooked	green	beans	 is	 interestingly	 complex;
it	 includes	 a	 number	 of	 sulfur	 and	 “green”
compounds,	 but	 also	 the	 essence	 of	 fresh
mushroom	 (octenol)	 and	 a	 flowery	 terpene
(linalool).

Good-quality	green	beans	can	be	hard	to
find,	because	they’re	one	of	the	most	fragile
vegetables.	Their	tissue	is	very	active,	so	they
quickly	consume	their	sugars	and	lose
sweetness	even	in	cold	storage.	And	thanks	to
their	subtropical	origins,	they	don’t	keep	well
at	refrigerator	temperatures;	their	cells
become	damaged	and	lose	chlorophyll.	Once



they’re	picked,	tender	low-fiber	varieties
quickly	become	wrinkled	and	limp	as	they
lose	moisture	and	sugars.	Commercial
varieties	have	been	bred	with	more	fiber	to
help	them	survive	shipping	and	marketing
with	a	better	shape.

Long	 or	 Yard-Long	 Beans 	 Long	 beans,
sometimes	 called	 asparagus	 beans,	 do
sometimes	 reach	 a	 yard/meter	 in	 length.
They’re	 the	 thin,	 small-seeded	 pods	 of	 a
subspecies	 of	 black-eyed	 pea,	 a	 native	 of
Africa	that	was	taken	to	Asia	more	than	2,000
years	 ago.	 Asian	 cultures	 already	 had	 a
number	 of	 excellent	 seed	 legumes	 but	 no
warm-climate	 vegetable	 legume,	 and	 it	 was
India	 or	 China	 that	 developed	 the	 yard-long
version	 of	 the	 black-eyed	 pea.	 These	 beans
have	 a	 higher	 fiber	 content	 than	 common
green	 beans	 and	 therefore	 a	 drier,	 firmer
texture	when	cooked.	They’re	also	sensitive	to
chilling	 (they	 keep	 best	 in	 the	 cold	 but



deteriorate	 quickly	 if	 then	 left	 at	 room
temperature).

Peas	Peas	come	from	a	climbing	plant	native
to	 the	 Mediterranean	 area,	 and	 are	 eaten
immature	 both	 in	 the	 pods	 and	 as	 shelled
green	 seeds	 (their	 tender	 shoots,	 stems,	 and
leaves	 are	 also	 popular	 vegetables	 in	 Asia).
Vegetable	 varieties	 of	 pea	 were	 first
developed	 in	 the	 17th	 century,	 beginning	 in
Holland	 and	 then	 in	 England,	 and	 for	 a	 long
time	 they	 remained	 luxury	 foods.	 There	 are
several	different	 types	of	pod	peas,	 including
the	traditional	English	or	European,	round	and
thin-walled,	the	very	recent	“sugar	snap”	pea,
round	and	thick-walled	and	quite	crunchy,	and
“snow”	 or	 Asian	 peas,	 flat	 and	 broad,	 thin-
walled,	 with	 small	 seeds.	 Peas	 and	 green
capsicum	 “bell	 peppers”	 contain	 similar	 and
very	 potent	 “green”	 aroma	 compounds
(isobutyl	methoxypyrazines).



Some	Vegetable	Beans	and	Their	Origins

Green Phaseolus Central
bean vulgaris America
Lima	bean Phaseolus	lunatus South	America
Green	peas,	sugar	peas, Pisum Western
snow	peas,	pea	shoots sativum Asia
Fava	bean Vicia	faba Western	Asia
Long	bean Vigna	unguiculata Africa
Soybean Glycine	max East	Asia
Winged, Tetragonolobus
asparagus	bean purpureus Africa

Other	Fruits	Used	as	Vegetables

Avocado	The	avocado	tree	Persea	americana
is	a	native	of	Central	America	and	a	member
of	the	laurel	family,	a	relative	of	the	bay
laurel,	California	bay,	and	sassafras.	Like	its
relatives,	it	has	aromatic	leaves	that	are	used



as	flavorings	(p.	408).	Avocado	fruits	are
remarkable	for	containing	little	or	no	sugar	or
starch,	and	for	being	as	much	as	30%	oil,	the
equivalent	of	well-marbled	meat	(but	marbled
with	olive	oil;	avocado	oil	is	largely
monounsaturated).	They	apparently	evolved	to
appeal	to	large	animals	with	a	high	calorie
requirement.	The	name	comes	from	the
Nahuatl	word	ahuacatl,	which	was	apparently
inspired	by	the	fruit’s	pear-like	shape	and
irregular	surface;	it	means	“testicle.”

There	are	three	geographical	groups	of
avocado.	The	Mexican	group	evolved	in
relatively	cool	subtropical	highlands,	so	the
trees	are	the	most	cold-tolerant;	they	produce
small	and	smooth-fleshed	fruit	that	are	high	in
oil	and	can	take	relatively	low	storage
temperatures,	around	40ºF/4ºC.	The	lowland
group	evolved	on	the	semitropical	west	coast
of	Guatemala	and	are	the	least	cold-tolerant;
their	fruits	tend	to	be	large	and	coarse-fleshed
and	suffer	chilling	injury	below	about



54ºF/12ºC.	And	the	Guatemalan	group,	from
the	semitropical	highlands,	is	intermediate	in
most	respects;	the	flesh	of	its	fruits	is	least
fibrous	and	the	proportion	of	seed	the	lowest.
In	the	United	States,	where	most	avocados	are
grown	in	southern	California,	commercial
varieties	are	of	mixed	background.	The	most
common	variety,	and	one	of	the	best,	is	the
black,	pebbly-skinned	Hass,	which	is	mainly
Guatemalan.	The	smooth,	green-skinned
Fuerte,	Pinkerton,	and	Reed	are	also	relatively
rich,	while	green	Bacon	and	Zutano,	and
Florida’s	Booth	and	Lula,	have	more	lowland
ancestry,	tend	to	remain	firm,	and	have	half	or
less	the	fat	content	of	the	Hass	avocado.

Avocados	don’t	begin	to	ripen	until	after
they’ve	been	picked,	so	they’re	stored	on	the
tree.	All	types	ripen	from	the	broad	end
toward	the	stem	within	about	a	week	of
harvest,	and	develop	the	best	quality	at
temperatures	between	60–75ºF/15–24ºC.
Ripening	can	be	accelerated	by	enclosing	the



fruit	in	a	paper	bag	with	an	ethylene-emitting
banana.	If	these	warm-climate	fruits	are
refrigerated	while	unripe,	their	cellular
machinery	is	damaged	and	they	will	never
ripen;	once	ripe,	however,	they	can	be
refrigerated	for	several	days	and	retain	their
quality.	The	aroma	of	avocado	comes	mainly
from	a	group	of	mildly	spicy	terpenes
including	woody	caryophyllene,	as	well	as
unusual	10-and	7-carbon	fragments	of	fatty
acids.

The	flesh	of	rich	avocado	varieties	readily
turns	into	an	unctuous	puree	without	the
necessity	of	any	cooking,	while	leaner
varieties	retain	some	crispness	and	hold	up
well	in	sliced	form	for	salads.	Avocado	flesh
is	well	known	for	browning	rapidly	once	cut
or	mashed	(p.	269),	a	problem	that	can	be
remedied	by	adding	an	acidic	ingredient
(often	lime	juice)	or	by	airtight	wrapping	with
a	plastic	film	that	blocks	oxygen	effectively
(polyvinylidene	chloride,	alias	saran,	is	far



more	effective	than	polyethylene	or	PVC).	In
the	case	of	mashed	avocado,	this	means
pressing	the	wrap	directly	into	the	surface.
Though	not	usually	cooked	—	heat	generates
a	bitter	compound	and	brings	out	an	odd,	eggy
quality	—	avocados	are	sometimes	added	at
the	last	minute	to	thicken	and	flavor	soups,
sauces,	and	stews.

Sweet	 Corn	 The	 corn	 that	 we	 eat	 as	 a
vegetable	is	a	fresh	version	of	the	same	grain
that	 gives	 us	 dry,	 starchy	 popcorn	 and
cornmeal	 (chapter	 9).	 Each	 individual	 grain
on	 an	 ear	 of	 corn	 is	 a	 miniature	 fruit	 that’s
mainly	 seed,	 a	 combination	 of	 a	 small
embryonic	 plant	 and	 its	 relatively	 large	 food
supply	of	storage	proteins	and	starch.	We	eat
fresh	corn	about	three	weeks	after	pollination,
while	 the	 fruits	 are	 immature,	 their	 storage
tissues	 still	 sweet	 and	 juicy.	 Corn	 owes	 its
typical	 yellow	 color	 to	 carotenoid	 pigments,
including	zeaxanthin	(which	derives	 its	name



from	 corn,	Zea	mays,	 and	 is	 one	 of	 the	 two
main	 eye-protecting	 antioxidants).	 There	 are
also	 white	 varieties	 with	 low	 carotenoid
levels,	as	well	as	anthocyanin-colored	red	and
blue	varieties,	and	green	ones	too.

Fresh	 Corn	 Carbohydrates	 and	 Qualities
Fresh	 corn	 contains	 three	 different	 forms	 of
carbohydrate	 that	 contribute	 different
qualities,	 and	 that	 are	 present	 in	 different
proportions	 depending	 on	 the	 variety.	 The
corn	plant	produces	sugars	and	sends	them	to
the	seed,	where	they	are	temporarily	held	as	is
and	 impart	 sweetness	 until	 the	 cells	 string
them	 together	 into	 large	 storage	 molecules.
Very	large	sugar	chains	get	packed	into	starch
granules,	 which	 have	 no	 taste	 and	 lend	 a
chalky	 texture	 to	 uncooked	 corn.	 Then	 there
are	medium-sized,	 tasteless	 sugar	 aggregates
called	“water-soluble	polysaccharides,”	which
have	many	short	branches	of	sugar	molecules.
These	 bushy	 structures	 are	 small	 enough	 to



float	 in	 dissolved	 form	 in	 the	 cell	 fluids,	 yet
large	enough	 that	 they	bind	up	a	 lot	of	water
molecules	 and	 get	 in	 each	 other’s	 way,	 and
thus	 thicken	 the	 fluid	 to	 a	 creamy,	 smooth
consistency.

Traditional	sweet	corns	derived	from	a
genetic	trait	that	arose	in	the	cultivated	fields
of	pre-Columbian	South	America,	and	that
reduced	starch	levels	in	the	maturing	fruits
while	raising	both	sugar	and	soluble
polysaccharide	levels.	The	fresh	kernels	were
thus	sweeter	and	creamier	than	standard
corns.	In	the	early	1960s,	breeders	in	the
United	States	released	new	“super-sweet”
varieties,	with	very	high	sugar	levels,	little
starch,	but	also	fewer	soluble	polysaccharides:
so	their	kernel	fluids	are	less	creamy	and
more	watery	(see	box).	Super-sweet	varieties
have	the	advantage	of	losing	less	sweetness
during	shipping	and	storage	—	in	three	days,
traditional	sweet	corn	converts	half	of	its
sweet	sugar	into	tasteless	chains	—	but	some



corn	lovers	consider	them	too	sweet,	their
flavor	one-dimensional.

Preparing	Corn	While	we	usually	prepare	and
consume	the	kernels	whole,	most	of	the	flavor
comes	 from	 the	 inner	 tissues,	 so	 some	cooks
grate,	 blend,	 or	 juice	 the	 raw	 kernels	 and
separate	the	fluids	from	the	seed	coats,	which
get	 increasingly	 thick	 and	 tough	 with	 age.
Because	 the	 fluids	 contain	 some	 starch,	 they
will	thicken	like	a	sauce	if	heated	above	about
150ºF/65ºC.	 Heating	 also	 intensifies	 the
characteristic	aroma	of	corn,	which	is	largely
due	 to	 dimethyl	 and	 hydrogen	 sulfides	 and
other	 sulfur	 volatiles	 (methane-and
ethanethiols).	 Dimethyl	 sulfide	 is	 also
prominent	 in	 the	 aroma	 of	 cooked	 milk	 and
molluscs,	which	is	one	reason	why	corn	works
so	well	in	chowders.	Sweet	corn	is	also	dried,
which	 gives	 it	 a	 toasted,	 light	 caramel	 note.
The	hard,	inedible	support	structure	called	the
cob	 can	 lend	 flavor	 to	 vegetable	 stocks;	 that



flavor	is	nuttier	 if	 the	cob	is	first	browned	in
the	oven.

Carbohydrates	and	the	Qualities	of
Fresh	Corn

This	table	gives	the	proportions	in
different	corns	of	the	carbohydrates	that
make	cooked	fresh	corn	taste	sweet	and
feel	creamy	or	dry	in	the	mouth.	The
figures	are	percentages	of	the	corn’s	fresh
weight,	when	harvested	18–21	days	after
pollination.

Sugars Water-soluble
(sweetness) polysaccharides Starch

(creaminess) (dryness)

Standard	corn 6 3 66
Sweet	corn 16 23 28
Supersweet	corn 40 5 20
Source:	 A.	 R.	 Hallauer,	 ed.,	Specialty
Corns.	2nd	ed.	(2001).



Baby	Corn	Miniature	or	“baby”	corn	consists
of	immature,	unpollinated	ears	from	full-sized
corn	 varieties,	 picked	 two	 to	 four	 days	 after
the	silks	emerge	from	the	ear,	when	the	cob	is
still	edible,	crisp,	and	sweet.	 (The	 rest	of	 the
plant	 becomes	 animal	 feed.)	The	 ear	may	 be
2–4	 in/5–10	 cm	 long	 and	 contains	 2–3%
sugar.	 Miniature	 corn	 production	 was
developed	 in	 Taiwan	 and	 advanced	 in
Thailand;	 Central	 America	 has	 recently
become	a	major	source.

Okra	 Okra	 comes	 from	 the	 annual	 plant
Hibiscus	(Abelmoschus)	esculentus,	a	member
of	 the	 hibiscus	 family,	 and	 a	 relative	 of
roselle	 (p.	 327)	 and	 cotton.	 It	 originated	 in
either	 southwest	Asia	 or	 eastern	Africa,	 and
came	 to	 the	 southern	 United	 States	 with	 the
slave	 trade.	 The	 portion	 that	 we	 eat	 is	 the
immature	 seedpod	 or	 capsule,	 with	 its
distinctive	 five-cornered	 shape,	 starlike	 in
cross	 section,	 and	 its	 notoriously	 slimy



mucilage.	 Plant	 mucilage	 is	 a	 complex
mixture	 of	 long,	 entangled	 carbohydrate
molecules	 and	 proteins	 that	 helps	 plants	 and
their	seeds	retain	water.	(Cactus	and	purslane
are	 similarly	 slimy;	 the	 seeds	 of	 basil,
fenugreek,	 and	 flax	 exude	 water-trapping
mucilage	when	soaked,	and	are	therefore	used
as	thickeners	or	to	add	texture	to	drinks.)	Okra
mucilage	 can	 be	 exploited	 as	 a	 thickener	 in
soups	and	stews	(as	it	is	in	Louisiana	gumbo,
either	 to	 replace	 or	 augment	 powdered
sassafras	 leaf),	 or	 its	 qualities	 can	 be
minimized	 by	 using	 dry	 cooking	 methods
(frying,	 baking).	 In	Africa,	 slices	 of	 the	 pod
are	sun-dried.	Okra	has	a	mild	flavor	(though
a	 relative,	A.	 moschatus,	 produces	 aromatic
seeds	 from	 which	 perfumers	 extract	 the
musky	ingredient	ambrette).

Okra	fruits	can	be	hairy	and	sometimes
even	spiny,	and	their	inner	layers	bear	bundles
of	fibers	that	thicken	and	toughen	as	they
mature.	Small	young	fruits	three	to	five	days



old	are	the	most	tender.	These	subtropical
natives	are	damaged	by	storage	temperatures
below	about	45ºF/7ºC.

Olives	 Olives	 are	 the	 small	 fruits	 of	Olea
europaea,	 a	 remarkably	 hardy,	 drought-
tolerant	 tree	 that’s	 native	 to	 the	 eastern
Mediterranean	 region,	 and	 that	 can	 live	 and
bear	 for	 a	 thousand	 years.	 In	 addition	 to
sustenance,	the	olive	has	given	us	an	everyday
word:	 its	 ancient	 Greek	 name	elaia	 is	 the
source	 of	 the	 English	oil	 (and	 Italian	olio,
French	huile).	The	pulp	layer	surrounding	the
large	central	seed	can	be	as	much	as	30%	oil,
which	 prehistoric	 peoples	 could	 extract	 by
simple	 grinding	 and	 draining,	 and	 used	 in
cooking	 and	 lamps,	 and	 for	 cosmetic
purposes.	Olives	 are	 also	 unusual	 among	 our
commonly	 eaten	 fruits	 for	 being	 extremely
unpalatable!	 They	 are	 richly	 endowed	 with
bitter	phenolic	compounds,	which	offer	some
protection	from	both	microbes	and	mammals.



(Wild	 olives	 are	 eaten	 and	 their	 seeds
dispersed	 mainly	 by	 birds,	 which	 swallow
them	 whole;	 mammals	 chew	 and	 damage
seeds.)	 Their	 bitterness	 has	 long	 been
moderated	 or	 removed	 by	 various	 curing
techniques	 (p.	 295).	 The	 dark	 color	 of	 ripe
olives	 comes	 from	 purplish	 anthocyanin
pigments	in	the	outer	layer	of	the	fruit.

Olive	Oil
Among	food	oils,	olive	oil	is	unique	for
being	extracted	not	from	a	dry	grain	or	nut,
but	from	a	fleshy	fruit,	and	for	carrying	the
prominent	flavors	of	that	fruit.	The	most
prized	olive	oils	are	sold	unrefined	and
shortly	after	harvest,	as	fresh	as	possible,
and	are	used	more	as	a	delicious,	delicate
flavoring	in	their	own	right,	not	as	a
medium	in	which	to	cook	other
ingredients.	Italy,	France,	and	other
Mediterranean	countries	are	the	largest
producers	and	consumers.



Today,	about	90%	of	the	large	worldwide
crop	goes	to	making	olive	oil.

Making	Olive	Oil	Olive	oil	 is	made	from	the
olive	fruits	when	they	are	six	to	eight	months
old,	mature	 and	 approaching	 their	maximum
oil	 content,	 and	 just	 beginning	 to	 turn	 color
from	green	to	purple;	fully	ripe	fruits	develop
less	of	the	valued	green	aroma.	The	olives	are
cleaned,	 coarsely	 crushed,	 pit	 and	 all
(sometimes	along	with	 some	 leaves	 from	 the
tree),	 and	 finely	ground	 into	a	paste	 to	break
the	 fruit	 cells	 open	 and	 free	 their	 oil.	 The
paste	 is	mixed	 for	20–40	minutes	 to	give	 the
oil	 droplets	 a	 chance	 to	 separate	 from	 the
watery	mass	of	olive	 flesh	and	coalesce	with
each	 other	 (this	 step	 is	 called	 “malaxation”).
Then	 the	paste	 is	pressed	 to	 squeeze	both	oil
and	 watery	 liquid	 from	 the	 solids.	More	 oil,
but	of	 lesser	quality,	 is	extracted	by	pressing
repeatedly	 and	 by	 heating	 the	 paste;	 oil
extracted	 in	 the	 “first	 cold	 pressing”	 is	 the



most	 delicate	 and	 stable,	 and	 most	 likely	 to
yield	 “extra	 virgin”	 oil	 (below).	 Finally,	 the
oil	 is	 separated	 from	 the	 liquid	by	centrifuge
or	other	means,	and	filtered.

The	Color	and	Flavor	of	Olive	Oil	The	result
is	 an	 oil	 that’s	 green-gold	 from	 the	 presence
of	chlorophyll	and	carotenoid	pigments	(beta-
carotene	 and	 lutein),	 more	 or	 less	 pungent
from	 a	 variety	 of	 phenolic	 compounds	 and
certain	 products	 of	 fat	 breakdown	 (hexanol),
and	 aromatic	 from	 dozens	 of	 volatile
molecules.	These	 include	flowery	and	citrusy
terpenes,	 fruity	 esters,	 nutty	 and	 earthy	 and
almondy	 and	 hay-like	 molecules;	 but	 above
all	 there	 are	 the	 grassy,	 “green”-smelling
fragments	 of	 fatty	 acids	 that	 are	 also
characteristic	 of	 leaf	 and	 other	 green
vegetables	 (artichokes),	 herbs,	 and	 apples.
Most	of	these	molecules	are	generated	during
the	 grinding	 and	 malaxation,	 when	 active
enzymes	 from	 the	 damaged	 fruit	 cells	 come



into	 contact	 with	 vulnerable	 polyunsaturated
fatty	 acids	 in	 the	green	 chloroplasts.	 (Leaves
are	 sometimes	 included	 in	 the	 grinding	 to
supply	 more	 chloroplasts.)	 The	 oil	 itself	 is
predominantly	 monounsaturated	 (oleic	 acid)
and	less	vulnerable	to	oxidation.

The	Quality	 of	Olive	Oil	Olive	oil	 quality	 is
judged	by	its	overall	flavor	and	by	its	content
of	 “free	 fatty	 acids,”	 or	 fatty	 carbon	 chains
that	 should	 be	 bound	 up	 in	 intact	 oil
molecules	 but	 instead	 are	 floating	 free,	 and
that	are	evidence	 that	 the	oil	 is	damaged	and
unstable.	 Under	 the	 regulations	 of	 the
European	 Economic	 Community,	 “extra
virgin”	 olive	 oil	 must	 contain	 less	 than0.8%
free	fatty	acids,	“virgin”	oil	less	than	2%.	(To
date,	 quality	 labeling	 of	 U.S.	 oils	 is	 not
regulated.)	 Oils	 with	 higher	 free	 fatty	 acid
levels	are	usually	processed	to	remove	nearly
all	 impurities	 from	 the	 remaining	 intact	 oil
molecules	 —	 including	 desirable	 flavor



molecules.	 Producers	 usually	 blend	 such
refined	 or	 “pure”	 oil	with	 some	 virgin	 oil	 to
give	it	flavor.

Storing	 Olive	 Oil	 The	 fact	 that	 virgin	 olive
oils	 are	 unrefined	 has	 both	 desirable	 and
undesirable	 consequences.	 Of	 course	 the
beautiful	color	and	rich	flavor	are	great	assets.
The	oils	also	contain	significant	quantities	of
antioxidant	 substances	 —	 phenolic
compounds,	 carotenoids,	 and	 tocopherols
(vitamin	E	and	relatives)	—	which	make	them
more	 resistant	 than	 other	 oils	 to	 damage	 by
oxygen	 in	 the	 air.	 However,	 the	 same
chlorophyll	that	colors	them	also	makes	them
especially	 vulnerable	 to	 damage	 by	 light,
whose	 energy	 the	 chlorophyll	 is	 designed	 to
collect.	 To	 prevent	 “photooxidation”	 and	 the
development	of	 stale,	harsh	aromas,	olive	oil
is	 best	 stored	 in	 the	 dark	—	 in	 opaque	 cans,
for	example	—	and	in	cool	conditions,	which
slow	all	chemical	reactions.



Plantains	 Plantains	 are	 varieties	 of	 banana
that	 retain	 much	 of	 their	 starchiness	 even
when	 ripe,	 and	 are	 treated	 like	 other	 starchy
vegetables.	They’re	described	along	with	their
sweeter	cousins	on	p.	378.

Seaweeds

Seaweed	is	a	very	general	term	for	large
plants	that	inhabit	the	oceans.	Nearly	all
ocean	plants	are	algae,	a	biological	group	that
has	dominated	the	waters	for	close	to	a	billion
years,	and	that	gave	rise	to	all	land	plants,
including	those	that	feed	us.	There	are	more
than	20,000	species	of	algae,	and	humans	have
enjoyed	many	hundreds	of	them.	They’ve
been	especially	important	foods	throughout
coastal	Asia,	in	the	British	Isles,	and	in	places
as	different	as	Iceland	and	Hawaii,	where
they’re	among	very	few	native	edibles.	The
Japanese	use	seaweeds	as	wrappers	and	to
make	salads	and	soups;	in	China	they	serve	as



a	vegetable;	in	Ireland	they’re	mashed	up	in
porridge	and	thicken	desserts.	Most	seaweeds
have	a	richly	savory	taste	and	a	fresh	aroma
reminiscent	of	the	seacoast,	which	in	fact	they
help	to	perfume.	Many	are	good	sources	of
vitamins	A,	B,	C,	and	E,	of	iodine	and	other
minerals,	and	when	dried	may	be	a	third
protein.	Seaweeds	are	abundant,	renew
themselves	rapidly	over	a	life	span	of	one	or
two	years,	and	are	easily	preserved	by	drying.
In	Japan,	where	they’ve	been	cultivated	since
the	17th	century,	the	farmed	production	of	the
seaweed	used	to	wrap	sushi	is	more	valuable
than	the	harvest	of	any	other	aquacultural
product,	including	fish	and	shellfish.

Some	Prominent	Edible	Seaweeds

Scientific	Name Uses
Green	Algae
Sea	lettuce Ulva	lactuca Raw	salads,	soups



Sea Caulerpa Peppery;	eaten	fresh	or
grapes racemosa sugarcoated	(Indonesia)

Enteromorpha, Powdered
Awonori Monostrema condiment

species (Japan)
Red	Algae

Nori, Porphyra Oatmeal	mush	(Ireland);
laver species sushi	wrappers	or	fried

sheets	(Japan)
Branching	stems;	raw,

Agar, Gracilaria salted,	pickled,	gelling
tengusa species agent	for	molded	sweets

(agar-agar,	Japanese
kanten)

Irish	moss, Chondrus Thickening	agent	for
carrageen crispus desserts	(carrageenan)
Dulse,
sea Palmaria With	potatoes,	milk,
parsley palmata soup,	breads	(Ireland)

Brown	Algae



Kelp, Laminaria Soup	base	(dashi),
kombu species salads,	fried	(Japan)
Wakame Undaria Miso	soup,	salads

species (Japan)

Hiziki Hizikia Vegetable,	soups,	“tea”
fusiformis (Japan,	China)

Seaweed	and	the	Original	MSG
It	 was	 a	 seaweed	 that	 provoked	 a
breakthrough	 in	 the	 understanding	 of
human	taste	—	and	also	brought	the	world
the	 controversial	 food	 additive	 known	 as
MSG.	For	better	than	a	thousand	years,	the
Japanese	 have	 been	 using	 the	 brown	 alga
kombu	as	the	base	for	soup	stocks.	In	1908
a	 Japanese	 chemist,	Kikunae	 Ikeda,	 found
that	kombu	 is	an	especially	 rich	source	of
monosodium	glutamate	—	in	fact	it	forms
crystals	on	the	surface	of	dried	kombu.	He
also	 found	 that	 MSG	 provides	 a	 unique,
savory	 taste	 sensation,	 different	 from	 the
standard	 sweet,	 sour,	 salty,	 and	 bitter.	 He



named	 this	 sensation	umami	 (a	 rough
translation	is	“delicious”),	and	pointed	out
that	 other	 foods,	 including	 meats	 and
cheese,	 also	 provide	 it.	 For	 decades,
Western	 scientists	 were	 skeptical	 that
umami	was	a	genuine	taste	sensation	of	its
own,	and	not	just	a	general	taste	enhancer.
Finally,	in	2001,	biologist	Charles	Zuker	at
the	 University	 of	 California,	 San	 Diego,
and	 colleagues	 demonstrated	 conclusively
that	 humans	 and	 other	 animals	 do	 have	 a
specific	taste	receptor	for	MSG.

A	few	years	after	 Ikeda’s	observations,
a	 colleague	 of	 his	 discovered	 a	 different
umami	substance	(inosine	monophosphate,
or	 IMP)	 in	 cured	 skipjack	 tuna,	 another
soup-base	 ingredient	 (p.	 237).	 Then	 in
1960,	Akira	 Kuninaka	 reported	 an	 umami
substance	 in	 shiitake	 mushrooms
(guanosine	 monophosphate,	 or	 GMP).
Kuninaka	 also	 discovered	 that	 these
different	 substances	were	 synergistic	with



each	 other	 and	 with	 MSG:	 a	 very	 small
amount	 of	 each	 strengthens	 the	 other’s
taste.	Sensory	scientists	are	still	working	to
understand	the	nature	of	these	effects.

A	 year	 after	 Ikeda’s	 discovery,	 the
Japanese	 company	 Ajinomoto	 began
selling	 pure	 MSG	 as	 a	 seasoning,
extracting	it	from	the	wheat	gluten	proteins
that	 are	 a	 rich	 source	 of	 glutamate	 and	 in
fact	gave	it	its	name.	It	caught	on	quickly,
first	 with	 cooks	 in	 Japan	 and	 China	 and
then	 with	 food	 manufacturers	 throughout
the	 world.	 Ajinomoto	 is	 now	 a	 large
multinational	 corporation;	 it	 and	 other
companies	produce	MSG	by	 the	 ton	using
bacteria	 that	synthesize	large	amounts	and
excrete	it	into	the	liquid	they	grow	in.

Beginning	 in	 the	 late	 1960s,	MSG	was
blamed	 for	 the	 “Chinese	 restaurant
syndrome,”	in	which	distressing	sensations
of	 burning,	 pressure,	 and	 chest	 pain
suddenly	 strike	 susceptible	 people	 who



begin	 a	 Chinese	 meal	 with	 MSG-laden
soup.	 Many	 studies	 later,	 toxicologists
have	 concluded	 that	 MSG	 is	 a	 harmless
ingredient	 for	 most	 people,	 even	 in	 large
amounts.	 The	 most	 unfortunate	 aspect	 of
the	MSG	saga	is	how	it	has	been	exploited
to	 provide	 a	 cheap,	 one-dimensional
substitute	 for	 real	 and	 remarkable	 foods.
As	 Fuchsia	 Dunlop	writes	 in	 her	 book	 on
Sichuan	cooking,	Land	of	Plenty,
It	is	a	bitter	irony	that	in	China	of	all
places,	where	chefs	have	spent	centuries
developing	the	most	sophisticated	culinary
techniques,	this	mass-produced	white
powder	should	have	been	given	the	name
wei	jing,	“the	essence	of	flavor.”
The	watery	home	of	the	seaweeds	has

shaped	their	nature	in	several	ways	that	matter
to	the	cook:

Their	buoyancy	in	water	has	allowed
free-floating	algae	to	minimize	tough
structural	supports	and	maximize



photosynthetic	tissue.	Some	algae	(e.g.,
nori,	sea	lettuce)	are	essentially	all	leaf,
just	one	or	two	cells	thick,	very	tender
and	delicate.
Their	immersion	in	salt	waters	of	varying
concentration	has	led	algae	to
accumulate	various	molecules	to	keep
their	cells	in	osmotic	balance.	Some	of
these	molecules	contribute	to	their
characteristic	flavor.	Mannitol,	a	sugar
alcohol,	is	sweet	(and,	since	our	bodies
can’t	metabolize	it,	low-calorie;	see	p.
662);	glutamic	acid	is	savory;	and	certain
complex	sulfur	compounds	give	rise	to
aromatic,	oceany	dimethyl	sulfide.
Because	water	selectively	absorbs	red
wavelengths	from	sunlight,	some	algae
supplement	their	chlorophyll	with	special
pigments	for	capturing	the	remaining
wavelengths.	Many	seaweeds	are	either
brown	or	reddish-purple,	and	change
color	when	cooked.



The	many	physical	stresses	of	ocean	life
have	encouraged	some	seaweeds	to	fill
their	cell	walls	with	large	quantities	of
jelly-like	material	that	gives	their	tissues
strength	and	flexibility,	can	be	sloughed
from	their	surface,	and	can	help	keep
coastal	species	moist	when	they’re
exposed	to	the	air	at	low	tide.	These
special	carbohydrates	turn	out	to	be
useful	for	making	jellies	(agar)	and	for
thickening	various	foods	(algin,
carrageenan).	(More	on	thickeners	in
chapter	11.)

Green,	Red,	and	Brown	Algae

Nearly	all	edible	seaweeds	belong	to	one	of
three	broad	groups:	the	green	algae,	the	red
algae,	and	the	brown	algae.

Green	algae	—	sea	lettuce,	awonori	—
are	the	most	like	the	land	plants	to	which



they	gave	rise.	Their	primary
photosynthetic	pigments	are
chlorophylls,	with	smaller	amounts	of
carotenoids,	and	they	store	energy	in	the
form	of	starch.
Red	algae	—	nori,	dulse	—	are	most
common	in	tropical	and	subtropical
waters.	They	owe	their	color	to	special
pigment-protein	complexes	that	are
soluble	in	water	and	sensitive	to	heat:	so
during	cooking	their	color	can	change
quite	strikingly	from	red	to	green.	Red
algae	store	their	energy	in	a	distinctive
form	of	starch,	and	also	produce	large
quantities	of	the	sugar	galactose	and
chains	made	up	from	it,	which	give	us
the	gelling	agents	agar-agar	and
carrageenan.
Brown	algae	—	kelp,	wakame	—
dominate	temperate	waters	and
supplement	their	chlorophyll	with	a
group	of	carotenoid	pigments,	notably



brownish	fucoxanthin.	They	store	some
of	their	energy	in	the	sweet	sugar	alcohol
mannitol,	which	can	amount	to	a	quarter
of	the	dry	weight	of	fall-harvested	kelp,
and	their	typical	mucilaginous	material
is	algin.

Some	 freshwater	 algae	 are	 also	 collected
from	rivers	and	ponds:	for	example,	species	of
Cladophora,	 which	 in	 Southeast	 Asia	 are
pressed	 into	 nori-like	 sheets	 and	 used
similarly	 (Laotian	 kaipen).	 Two	 alga-like
creatures	that	are	actually	blue-green	bacteria
sometimes	 figure	 in	 the	 kitchen:	 the
nutritional	 supplement	 spirulina	 and	 the
Chinese	 “hair	 vegetable”	 or	 “hair	 moss,”
species	 of	Nostoc,	 which	 grows	 in	 mountain
springs	in	the	Mongolian	desert.

Seaweed	Flavors

When	it	comes	to	flavor,	the	three	seaweed



families	share	a	basic	salty-savory	taste	from
concentrated	minerals	and	amino	acids,
especially	glutamic	acid,	which	is	one	of	the
molecules	used	to	transport	energy	from	one
part	of	the	seaweed	to	another.	Seaweeds	also
share	the	aroma	of	dimethyl	sulfide,	which	is
found	in	cooked	milk,	corn,	and	shellfish	as
well	as	in	seacoast	air.	There	are	also
fragments	of	highly	unsaturated	fatty	acids
(mainly	aldehydes)	that	contribute	green-tea-
like	and	fishy	overtones.	Against	this	common
background,	the	three	families	do	have
distinctive	characters.	Dried,	the	red	seaweeds
tend	to	develop	a	deeper	sulfury	aroma	from
hydrogen	sulfide	and	methanethiol,	as	well	as
flowery,	black-tea-like	notes	from	breakdown
of	their	carotene	pigments.	When	fried,	dulse
develops	a	distinct	aroma	of	bacon.	Some	red
algae,	including	the	limu	kohu	of	Hawaii
(Asparagopsis),	accumulate	compounds	of
bromine	and	iodine,	and	can	have	a	strong
iodine	flavor.	The	generally	mild	brown



seaweeds	have	a	characteristic	iodine	note
(iodooctane)	as	well	as	a	hay-like	one	(from
the	terpene	cubenol).	A	few,	notably	species
of	Dictyopteris	used	as	flavorings	in	Hawaii,
have	spicy	aroma	compounds	that	are
apparently	reproductive	signals.	Some	browns
are	noticeably	astringent	thanks	to	the
presence	of	tannin-like	phenolic	compounds,
which	in	the	dried	seaweed	form	brown-black
complexes	(phycophaeins).

Prolonged	cooking	in	liquid	tends	to
accentuate	fishy	aromas,	so	often	seaweeds
are	cooked	only	briefly.	The	first	step	in
making	the	Japanese	soup	base	dashi,	for
example,	is	to	start	dried	brown	kelp	kombu
in	cold	water,	bring	it	just	to	the	boil,	then
remove	the	kombu,	leaving	behind	mainly	its
savory	soluble	minerals	and	amino	acids.
Because	flavorsome	minerals	and	amino	acids
crystallize	on	and	in	dried	seaweeds,	they
contribute	more	when	they’re	left	unwashed,
and	if	thick,	when	scored	with	a	knife	to



release	substances	from	within.

Mushrooms,	Truffles,
and	Relatives

Mushrooms	and	their	relatives	are	not	true
plants.	They	belong	to	a	separate	biological
kingdom,	the	Fungi	(the	plural	form	of
fungus),	which	they	share	with	molds	and
yeasts.

Creatures	of	Symbiosis
and	Decay

Unlike	plants,	the	fungi	have	no	chlorophyll
and	cannot	harvest	energy	from	sunlight.	They
therefore	live	off	the	substance	of	other	living
things,	including	plants	and	plant	remains.
Different	mushrooms	do	this	in	different
ways.	Some	mushrooms,	including	boletes
and	truffles,	form	a	symbiosis	with	living
trees,	a	relationship	in	which	both	partners



benefit:	the	mushrooms	gather	soil	minerals
and	share	them	with	the	tree	roots,	which	in
turn	share	the	tree’s	sugars	with	the
mushrooms.	Some	fungi	are	parasites	on
living	plants	and	cause	disease;	we	eat	the
plant	parasite	that	infects	corncobs	(corn
smut,	or	huitlacoche).	And	some,	including
the	world’s	most	popular	mushrooms,	live	off
the	decaying	remains	of	dead	plants.	White
and	brown	mushrooms	apparently	evolved
along	with	plant-eating	mammals	to	take
advantage	of	the	animals’	partly	digested	but
nutrient-rich	dung!	They	now	thrive	in
artificial	piles	of	compost	and	manure.

Mushrooms	that	live	on	decaying	plants
have	been	relatively	easy	to	cultivate.	The
Chinese	were	raising	shiitake	mushrooms	on
oak	logs	in	the	13th	century.	The	cultivation
of	the	common	white	mushroom	began	in
17th-century	France	and	boomed	during	the
Napoleonic	era	in	quarry	tunnels	near	Paris.
Today,	Agaricus	bisporus	(or	A.	brunnescens)



is	grown	on	a	mixture	of	manure,	straw,	and
soil	in	dark	buildings	with	carefully
controlled	humidity	and	temperature.	The
tropical	zone’s	version	of	the	button
mushroom	is	the	(paddy-)	straw	mushroom,
which	grows	on	composted	rice	straw.	On	the
other	hand,	cultivation	of	symbiotic	species	is
difficult,	because	the	mushrooms	need	living
trees,	and	intensive	production	requires	a
forest.	This	is	why	boletes,	chanterelles,	and
truffles	are	relatively	rare	and	expensive:
they’re	still	largely	gathered	from	the	wild.	Of
an	estimated	1,000	edible	mushroom	species,
only	a	few	dozen	have	been	successfully
cultivated.

The	Structure	and	Qualities	of	Mushrooms

Mushrooms	differ	from	plants	in	several
important	ways.	The	part	we	eat	is	only	one
small	portion	of	the	organism,	most	of	which
lives	invisibly	underground	as	a	fine,	cottony



network	of	fibers,	or	hyphae,	which	ramify
through	the	soil	to	gather	nutrients.	A	single
cubic	centimeter	of	soil	—	a	small	fraction	of
a	cubic	inch	—	can	contain	as	much	as	2,000
meters/yards	of	hyphae!	When	the
underground	mass	of	fibers	has	accumulated
enough	material	and	energy,	it	organizes	a
new,	dense	growth	of	interwoven	hyphae	into
a	fruiting	body,	which	it	pumps	up	with	water
to	break	above	the	soil	surface	and	release	its
offspring	spores	into	the	air.	The	mushrooms
that	we	eat	are	these	fruiting	bodies.	(Morels
form	unusual	hollow	fruiting	bodies	with	a
distinctive	honeycombed	cap;	the	depressions
bear	the	spores.)

Because	the	fruiting	body	is	critical	to	the
mushroom’s	reproduction	and	survival,	it’s
often	protected	from	animal	attack	by
defensive	poisons.	Some	mushroom	poisons
are	deadly.	This	is	why	wild	mushrooms
should	be	gathered	only	by	experts	in
mushroom	identification.	One	mushroom



traditionally	gathered	and	eaten	in	Europe	is
now	thought	to	present	an	unpredictable	but
real	risk	of	potentially	fatal	hydrazine
poisoning;	this	is	the	gyromitre	or	false	morel
(species	of	Gyromitra).

Inflated	by	water	as	they	are,	mushrooms
are	80–90%	water,	with	a	thin	outer	cuticle
that	allows	rapid	moisture	loss	and	gain.	Their
cell	walls	are	reinforced	not	by	plant
cellulose,	but	by	chitin,	the	carbohydrate-
amine	complex	that	also	makes	up	the	outer
skeleton	of	insects	and	crustaceans.
Mushrooms	are	notable	for	containing	much
more	protein	and	vitamin	B12than	other	fresh
produce.	A	number	of	mushrooms	have	been
used	in	traditional	medicines,	and	there	is
scientific	evidence	that	some	of	the	unusual
cell-wall	carbohydrates	in	shiitakes,
matsutakes,	and	the	interestingly	crunchy-
gelatinous	ear	mushrooms	contain	substances
that	inhibit	tumor	growth.	Another	factor	in
shiitakes	may	limit	the	production	of



mutagenic	nitrosamines	in	our	digestive
systems.

The	anatomy	of	a	mushroom.	The	hyphae	are
nutrient-gathering	 threads	 that	 grow	 through
the	soil.	The	main	body	of	 the	mushroom	is	a
fruiting	body	that	the	hyphae	push	up	through
the	 soil	 surface,	which	disperses	 spores	 from
its	gills.

The	Distinctive	Flavors
of	Mushrooms

We	prize	fungi	for	their	rich,	almost	meaty
flavor	and	their	ability	to	intensify	the	flavor
of	many	dishes.	These	qualities	are	largely
due	to	a	high	content	of	free	amino	acids,
including	glutamic	acid,	which	makes
mushrooms	—	like	seaweeds	—	a



concentrated	natural	source	of	monosodium
glutamate.	Another	taste	enhancer	that’s
synergistic	with	glutamate,	GMP	(guanosine
monophosphate),	was	first	discovered	in
shiitake	mushrooms,	and	contributes	to	the
rich	taste.

The	characteristic	aroma	of	fresh	common
mushrooms	is	mainly	due	to	octenol	(an	8-
carbon	alcohol),	which	is	produced	by
enzymes	from	polyunsaturated	fats	when	the
tissue	is	damaged,	and	which	helps	deter
attack	by	some	snails	and	insects.	More
octenol	is	generated	from	the	gill	tissues	than
from	other	parts,	and	this	is	one	reason	that
common	mushrooms	with	immature,
unopened	caps	are	less	flavorful	than	the
mature	version	with	prominent	gills.	Brown
and	field	mushrooms	have	more	flavor	than
the	white	mushroom,	and	the	“portobello,”	a
brown	mushroom	allowed	to	mature	for	an
additional	five	or	six	days	until	it’s	about	6
in/15	cm	across,	is	especially	intense.



Other	mushrooms	offer	a	wide	range	of
aromas.	A	close	relative	of	the	common
mushroom	produces	the	essence	of	almond
extract,	while	more	exotic	species	are	valued
for	such	flavor	notes	as	cinnamon,	pepper,
garlic,	pine	needles,	butterscotch,	and
shellfish.	Shiitake	mushrooms	owe	their
distinctive	aroma	to	an	unusual	molecule
called	lenthionine,	a	ring	of	carbon	and	sulfur
atoms,	which	is	created	by	enzymes	when	the
tissue	is	damaged.	Lenthionine	production	is
maximized	by	the	common	practice	of	drying
and	then	rehydrating	shiitakes	in	warm	water
(it’s	minimized	by	rapid	cooking	of	the	fresh
or	dried	mushroom,	which	destroys	enzymes
before	they	have	a	chance	to	act).	With	a	few
exceptions	(chanterelles,	oysters,	matsutakes),
drying	intensifies	mushroom	flavor	by	a
combination	of	heightened	enzyme	activities
and	browning	reactions	between	amino	acids
and	sugars.	Shiitakes	and	boletes,	or	porcini,
are	familiar	examples,	and	especially



flavorful	because	they’re	endowed	with	sulfur
compounds	that	generate	meaty	aromas.	Even
home-dried	button	mushrooms	are	far	more
flavorful	than	the	fresh	originals,	though	they
lose	their	fresh-mushroom	octenol.

Storing	and	Handling
Mushrooms

Mushrooms	remain	very	active	after	harvest
compared	to	most	produce,	and	may	even
continue	to	grow.	During	four	days’	storage	at
room	temperature,	they	lose	about	half	of
their	energy	reserves	to	the	formation	of	cell-
wall	chitin.	At	the	same	time,	they	lose	some
of	the	enzyme	activities	that	generate	their
fresh	flavor,	while	protein-digesting	enzymes
become	active	in	the	stalk	and	turn	the	stalk
proteins	into	amino	acids	for	the	cap	and	gills;
so	these	parts	become	slightly	more	savory.
Refrigeration	at	40–45ºF/4–6ºC	will	slow
mushroom	metabolism,	but	they	should	be



loosely	wrapped	in	moisture-absorbing
packaging	to	avoid	having	the	moisture	they
exhale	wet	their	surfaces	and	encourage
spoilage.	Mushrooms	should	be	used	as
quickly	as	possible	after	purchase.

Cookbooks	often	advise	against	washing
mushrooms	so	as	not	to	make	them	soggy	or
dilute	their	flavor.	However,	they’re	already
mostly	water,	and	lose	little	if	any	flavor	from
a	brief	rinse.	They	should	be	cooked
immediately,	however,	since	washing	can
damage	the	surface	cells	and	cause	general
discoloration.

Cooking	Mushrooms

Mushrooms	can	be	cooked	in	many	different
ways.	Their	flavor	is	generally	most
developed	and	intense	when	they	are	cooked
slowly	with	dry	heat	to	allow	enzymes	some
time	to	work	before	being	inactivated,	and	to
cook	out	some	of	their	abundant	water	and



concentrate	the	amino	acids,	sugars,	and
aromas.	Heat	also	collapses	air	pockets	and
consolidates	the	texture.	(The	combination	of
water	and	air	loss	means	that	mushrooms
shrink	considerably	when	cooked.)	Like
cellulose,	chitin	and	some	other	cell-wall
materials	are	not	soluble	in	water,	so
mushrooms	don’t	get	mushy	with	prolonged
cooking.	The	jelly	and	ear	fungi,	which	are
popular	in	Asian	cuisines,	contain	an	unusual
amount	of	soluble	carbohydrates,	and	this	is
why	they	develop	a	gelatinous	texture.

Many	mushrooms,	and	especially	their
gills,	are	rich	in	browning	enzymes	and
blacken	rapidly	when	cut	or	crushed.	The	dark
pigments	are	water-soluble	and	can	stain	other
ingredients	in	a	dish,	which	may	or	may	not
be	desirable.

Truffles

Truffles	are	the	fruiting	bodies	of	species	in



the	genus	Tuber,	of	which	there	are	a	handful
of	commercially	important	ones.	They’re
typically	a	dense,	knobby	mass,	ranging	from
walnut-to	fist-sized	or	larger.	Unlike
mushrooms,	truffles	remain	hidden
underground.	They	spread	their	spores	by
emitting	a	scent	to	attract	animals	—
including	beetles,	squirrels,	rabbits,	and	deer
—	which	find	and	eat	them	and	spread	the
spores	in	their	dung.	This	is	why	truffles	have
a	musky,	persistent	aroma	—	to	attract	their
spore	spreaders	—	and	why	they’re	still
gathered	with	the	help	of	trained	dogs	or	pigs
or	by	spotting	truffle	“flies,”	insects	that
hover	over	truffled	ground	and	lay	their	eggs
there	so	that	the	larvae	can	burrow	down	and
feed	on	the	fungus.

Truffles	grow	only	in	symbiosis	with	trees,
usually	oaks,	hazels,	or	lindens,	so	cultivation
means	finding	or	planting	a	forest,	with
significant	harvests	coming	only	after	a
decade	or	more.	The	Périgord	region	in	France



remains	renowned	for	its	black	winter	truffles,
Tuber	melanosporum,	and	northern	and
central	Italy	for	its	white	truffle,	Tuber
magnatum	Pico.	Both	are	in	great	demand,	in
limited	supply,	and	so	quite	expensive.	Their
flavor	can	be	bought	more	reasonably	in	the
form	of	cooked	whole	truffles	or	truffle	paste,
or	truffle-infused	oils,	butter,	and	flours,
though	some	of	these	may	be	flavored
artificially.	There	are	a	number	of	other
truffle	species	harvested	in	Europe,	Asia,	and
North	America,	but	they’re	not	as	flavorful.
Unripe	truffles	of	any	species	will	have	little
flavor.

The	flavors	of	black	and	white	truffles	are
quite	distinct.	Black	truffles	are	relatively
subtle	and	earthy,	with	a	mix	of	a	dozen	or	so
alcohols	and	aldehydes,	and	some	dimethyl
sulfide.	(They	also	contain	small	amounts	of
androstenone,	a	steroid	compound	also	found
in	men’s	underarm	sweat	and	secreted	in	the
saliva	of	the	male	pig,	where	it	prompts



mating	behavior	in	the	sow.	Some	people	are
unable	to	smell	androstenone,	while	others
can	and	may	find	it	unappetizing.)	White
truffles	have	a	stronger,	pungent,	somewhat
garlicky	aroma	thanks	to	a	number	of	unusual
sulfur	compounds.	The	flavor	of	black	truffles
is	generally	thought	to	be	enhanced	by	gentle
cooking,	while	the	flavor	of	white	truffles,
though	strong,	is	fragile,	and	best	enjoyed	by
shaving	paper-thin	slices	onto	a	dish	just
before	serving.	Such	cross	sections	of	truffle
reveal	its	inner	structure:	a	network	of	fine
veins	running	between	masses	of	spore-
bearing	cells.

Truffle	 anatomy.	 Like	 mushrooms,	 the	 truffle
is	 the	 fruiting	 body	 of	 a	 fungus;	 unlike
mushrooms,	 it	 remains	 underground.	 The



spores	 are	 contained	 in	 the	 thick	 masses	 of
tissue	between	the	vein-like	folds.

Mushroom	Types	and	Qualities
Mushrooms	 are	 grouped	 by	 broad	 family
relationships.	Most	edible	mushrooms	bear
their	spores	on	gills.

Mushrooms	with	Gills

Agaricus
Common species	A.
mushrooms Cultivated bisporus	var.
White,	button leaf	and alba	A.
Brown, dung bisporus	var.
cremini, decomposers avellanea
portobello Almond Agaricus
Champignon, flavor campestris
field	Almond Agaricus

subrufescens
Oyster,	tree Cultivated	wood Pleurotus

decomposers species



oyster
Shiitake Cultivated	oak Lentinus

decomposers edodes
Wild	red	pine

Matsutake decomposers;	pine, Tricholoma
cinnamon	flavors species

Honey Wild	wood Armillariella
decomposers species

Mousseron, Wild	leaf Marasmius
fairy	ring decomposers species

Winter, Cultivated	wood
enokitake decomposers;grows Flammulina

at	32ºF/0ºC velutipes

Wild	leaf
Blewit decomposers;purple,	blue Clitocybe

colors nuda

Straw Rice	straw Volvariella
mushroom decomposers volvacea

Parasol Wild,	cultivated	leaf Lepiota
decomposers species



Ink Wild	compost Coprinus
cNaapmeko, decoCmupltoisveartsed	wood species
cinnamon decomposers; Pholiota
cap gelatinous	cap species

Bolete,	porcini, Wild	tree Boletus
cèpe symbionts species
Candy Wild	wood Lactarius
cap decomposers rubidus

Mushrooms	without	Gills

Hen	of	the Wild	oak Grifola
woods,	maitake decomposers frondosa
Chicken	of	the
woods,	sulfur Wild	tree Laetiporus
shelf decomposers sulphureus

Hedgehog, Wild	tree Hydnum
lion’s	mane symbionts species

Wild	tree Sparassis
Cauliflower parasites crispa



Wild	tree
Chanterelle symbionts;	gold, Cantharellus

white,	red species

Black	chanterelle, Wild	tree Craterellus
horn	of	plenty symbionts species
Ears:
wood
ear, Cultivated	wood
tree decomposers;gelatinous; Auricularia
ear, protease species
cloud
ear
Snow, Cultivated	wood
silver	ears, decomposers; Tremella
white	jelly gelatinous;	desserts! fuciformis

Puffballs Wild	compost Calvatia,
decomposers Lycoperdon	sp.

Morels Wild	tree Morchella
decomposers species

Truffles Wild	tree	symbionts Tuber	species



Lobster Wild	mushroom Hypomyces
decomposers lactifluorum

Fresh	truffles	are	very	perishable	and	emit
their	aroma	in	storage.	They’re	best	kept
refrigerated	in	a	closed	container	with	some
material	—	often	rice	—	to	absorb	moisture
and	keep	their	surface	from	getting	wet	and
spoiled	by	microbes.

Huitlacoche,	or	Corn	Smut

Huitlacoche	is	a	parasitic	fungus,	Ustilago
maydis,	that	attacks	corn	plants,	and	that	has
been	eaten	in	Mexico	and	Central	America
since	Aztec	times.	It	infects	various	plant
parts,	including	the	kernels	in	the	growing	ear,
and	develops	into	irregular	spongy	masses	or
“galls”	that	are	a	combination	of	greatly
enlarged	plant	cells,	nutrient-absorbing	fungal
threads,	and	blue-black	spores.	Fully	mature
galls	are	dry,	black	spore	bags.	The	optimum
stage	for	harvest	is	two	to	three	weeks	after



infection,	when	the	galls	on	a	single	ear	can
weigh	as	much	as	a	pound/500	gm	and	are
about	three-quarters	black	inside.	When
cooked,	these	immature	galls	develop	a	sweet,
savory,	woody	flavor	thanks	to	glucose,
sotolon,	and	vanillin.	In	the	United	States,
corn	smut	was	simply	a	disease	until	the
1990s,	when	growing	interest	in	Mexican	food
led	some	farmers	to	cultivate	it	intentionally.

A	related	smut,	U.	esculenta,	is	eaten	in
China	and	Japan.	An	Asian	wild	rice,	Zizania
latifolia,	develops	the	infection	in	its	upper
stem,	which	swells	with	hyphae.	The	stems
are	cooked	and	eaten	as	a	vegetable	(Chinese
kah-peh-sung,	Japanese	makomotake)	whose
flavor	is	said	to	resemble	bamboo	shoots.

Mycoprotein,	or	Quorn

Mycoprotein	is	a	20th-century	invention,	an
edible	form	of	the	normally	useless
underground	hyphae	of	a	common	fungus,



Fusarium	venenatum.	A	strain	of	the	fungus
originally	taken	from	a	field	in	Buck-
inghamshire,	England,	is	grown	in	a	liquid
medium	in	a	factory-scale	fermenter.	The
resulting	mass	of	hyphae	is	harvested,
washed,	and	rapidly	heated.	This	produces
microscopic	fibers	that	are	rich	in	protein	and
about	0.5	mm	long	and	0.003–0.005	mm	in
diameter,	or	about	the	dimensions	of	muscle
fibers	in	meat.	This	essentially	tasteless
mycoprotein	(from	myco-,	“related	to	fungi”)
can	then	be	manufactured	into	meat
substitutes	and	a	variety	of	other	food
products.



Chapter	7

A	Survey	of
Common	Fruits

The	Making	of	Fruit:	Ripening
Before	Ripening:	Growth	and	Expansion
The	Work	of	Ethylene	and	Enzymes
Two	 Styles	 of	 Ripening,	 Two	 Ways	 of
Handling

Common	 Fruits	 of	 Temperate	 Climates:
Apple	and	Pear,	Stone	Fruits,	Berries

Pome	Fruits:	Apple,	Pear,	and	Relatives
Stone	 Fruits:	Apricot,	 Cherry,	 Peach,	 and
Plum
Berries,	Including	Grapes	and	Kiwi	Fruit
Other	Temperate	Fruits

Fruits	 from	 Warm	 Climates:	 Melons,
Citrus	Fruits,	Tropical	Fruits,	and	Others

Melons
Fruits	 from	Arid	Climates:	 Fig,	Date,	 and



Others
The	 Citrus	 Family:	 Orange,	 Lemon,
Grapefruit,	and	Relatives
Some	Common	Tropical	Fruits

The	 vegetables	 described	 in	 chapter	 6	 are
mainly	plant	parts	with	either	mild,	accidental
flavors	 (roots,	 leaves,	 stalks)	 or	 strong
defensive	 ones	 (the	 onion	 and	 cabbage
families).	 We	 usually	 cook	 them,	 because
cooking	 improves	 their	 flavor	 and	 makes
them	 softer	 and	 easier	 to	 eat.	 The	 fruits
described	 in	 this	 chapter	 are	 parts	 that	 the
plant	creates	in	order	to	attract	animals	to	eat
them	 and	 disperse	 the	 seeds	within	 them.	 So
the	 plant	 fills	 these	 fruits	 with	 a
mouthwatering	 mixture	 of	 sugars	 and	 acids,
endows	 them	 with	 pleasant	 aromas	 and	 eye-
catching	 colors,	 and	 softens	 them	 for	 us:
they’re	 delicious	 and	 beautiful	 even	 when
raw.	The	box	on	pp.	382–383	summarizes	the
essential	 flavor	 elements	 of	 some	 common



fruits,	 especially	 the	 balance	 between	 sweet
and	sour	that	provides	their	taste	foundation.

The	Making	of	Fruit:
Ripening

Among	all	our	foods,	fruits	are	unique	in	the
way	that	they	progress	from	inedibility	to
deliciousness.	Immature	vegetables	and	young
meat	animals	are	at	their	tenderest	and	most
delicate,	but	immature	fruits	are	usually	at
their	least	appealing.	We	may	still	eat	and
enjoy	them	—	green	tomatoes,	green	papayas,
green	mangoes	—	but	we	treat	them	as
vegetables,	cut	them	small	for	a	salad	or	cook
or	pickle	them.	In	order	to	graduate	from
vegetablehood,	fruits	must	undergo	the
process	called	ripening,	which	creates	their
distinctive	character.

Before	Ripening:
Growth	And	Expansion



A	fruit	is	a	distinct	organ	that	develops	from
the	flower,	and	in	particular	from	the	flower’s
female	tissue,	the	ovary,	which	encloses	the
plant’s	maturing	seeds.	Most	fruits	are	simply
the	thickened	ovary	wall,	or	else	they
incorporate	nearby	tissues	as	well.	Apples	and
pears,	for	example,	are	made	up	mainly	of	the
stem	tip	in	which	the	flower	parts	are
embedded.	The	fruit	usually	develops	into
three	distinct	layers:	a	thin	outer	protective
skin,	a	thin	inner	protective	coat	around	the
central	mass	of	seeds,	and	a	thick,	succulent,
flavorful	layer	in	between.

Fruit	goes	through	four	distinct	stages	of
development.	The	first	is	usually	fertilization
of	the	female	ovule	by	male	pollen,	which
initiates	the	production	of	growth-promoting
hormones	and	so	leads	to	the	expansion	of	the
flower’s	ovary	wall.	Some	conveniently
seedless	fruits,	including	bananas,	navel
oranges,	and	some	grapes,	manage	to	develop
without	fertilization.	The	second,	relatively



brief	stage	of	fruit	development	is	the
multiplication	of	cells	in	the	ovary	wall,
which	in	the	tomato	is	virtually	complete	at
the	moment	of	fertilization	(you	can	see	the
fully	formed	but	tiny	fruit	at	the	base	of	the
flower	as	soon	as	it	opens).

Most	of	the	noticeable	growth	during	fruit
development	takes	place	during	the	third
stage,	the	expansion	of	the	storage	cells.	This
growth	can	be	remarkable.	Melons	at	their
most	active	put	on	better	than	5	cubic
inches/80	cc	a	day.	Most	of	this	expansion	is
due	to	the	accumulation	of	water-based	sap	in
the	cell	vacuoles.	Mature	fruit	storage	cells
are	among	the	largest	in	the	plant	kingdom,	in
watermelons	approaching	a	millimeter	in
diameter.	During	this	growth	stage,	sugar	is
stored	in	the	cell	vacuole	as	is	or	in	more
compact	granules	of	starch.	Defensive
compounds,	among	them	poisonous	alkaloids
and	astringent	tannins,	accumulate	in	the	cell
vacuoles	to	deter	infection	or	predation,	and



various	enzyme	systems	are	readied	for
action.	When	the	seeds	become	capable	of
growing	on	their	own	and	the	fruit	is	ready	to
attract	animals	to	disperse	them,	the	fruit	is
said	to	be	mature.

The	Work	of	Ethylene
and	Enzymes

The	final	stage	of	fruit	development	is
ripening,	a	drastic	change	in	the	life	of	the
fruit	that	leads	to	its	death.	It	consists	of
several	simultaneous	events.	Starch	and	acid
levels	decrease,	and	sugars	increase.	The
texture	softens;	defensive	compounds
disappear.	A	characteristic	aroma	develops.
Skin	color	changes,	usually	from	green	to	a
shade	of	yellow	or	red.	The	fruit	thus	becomes
sweeter,	softer,	and	tastier,	and	it	advertises
these	improvements	visually.	Because
ripening	soon	gives	way	to	rot-ting,	ripening
was	long	considered	to	be	an	early	stage	in	the



fruit’s	general	disintegration.	But	it’s	now
clear	that	ripening	is	a	last,	intense	phase	of
life.	As	it	ripens,	the	fruit	actively	prepares
for	its	end,	organizing	itself	into	a	feast	for
our	eye	and	palate.

Food	Words:	Ripe,	Climacteric
Our	 word	ripe	 began	 as	 an	 Old	 English
word	meaning	“ready	for	reaping,”	and	like
reap	 comes	 ultimately	 from	 an	 Indo-
European	 root	 meaning	 “to	 cut.”	River,
rope,	 row, 	 and	rigatoni	 are	 all	 relatives.
Climacteric	 can	 be	 traced	 back	 to	 a	 root
meaning	“to	lean,”	which	led	to	the	Greek
climax,	 “ladder,”	 then	 offshoots	 meaning
“rung”	 and	 therefore	 “a	 dangerous	 place,”
and	 finally	climacteric	 itself,	 meaning	 a
critical	stage	in	life	—	whether	a	human’s
or	a	fruit’s.

Fruits:	Their	Potential	for	Improvement	after
Harvest,	and	Optimal	Storage	Temperatures



Most	of	the	changes	in	ripening	are	caused
by	a	host	of	enzymes,	which	break	down
complex	molecules	into	simpler	ones,	and
also	generate	new	molecules	just	for	this
moment	in	the	fruit’s	life.	There	is	a	single
trigger	that	sets	the	ripening	enzymes	into
action.	The	first	clues	to	its	identity	came
around	1910.	From	the	Caribbean	islands
came	a	report	that	bananas	stored	near	some
oranges	had	ripened	earlier	than	the	other
bunches.	Then	California	citrus	growers
noticed	that	green	fruit	kept	near	a	kerosene
stove	changed	color	faster	than	the	rest.	What
secret	ripening	agent	did	stove	and	fruit	have



in	common?	The	answer	came	two	decades
later:	ethylene,	a	simple	hydrocarbon	gas
produced	by	both	plants	and	kerosene
combustion,	which	triggers	ripening	in	mature
but	unripe	fruit.	Much	later,	scientists	found
that	fruits	themselves	produce	ethylene	well
in	advance	of	ripening.	It	is	thus	a	hormone
that	initiates	this	process	in	an	organized	way.

Two	Styles	of	Ripening,
Two	Ways	of	Handling

There	are	two	different	styles	of	ripening
among	fruits.	One	is	dramatic.	When
triggered	by	ethylene,	the	fruit	stimulates
itself	by	producing	more	ethylene,	and	begins
to	respire	—	to	use	up	oxygen	and	produce
carbon	dioxide	—	from	two	to	five	times
faster	than	before.	Its	flavor,	texture,	and
color	change	rapidly,	and	afterwards	they
often	decline	rapidly	as	well.	Such
“climacteric”	fruits	can	be	harvested	while



mature	but	still	green,	and	will	ripen	well	on
their	own,	especially	if	nudged	by	an	artificial
dose	of	ethylene.	They	often	store	their	sugars
in	the	form	of	starch,	which	enzymes	convert
back	into	sweetness	during	the	post-harvest
ripening.

The	other	style	of	ripening	is	undramatic.
“Nonclimacteric”	fruits	don’t	respond	to
ethylene	with	their	own	escalating	ethylene
production.	They	ripen	gradually,	usually
don’t	store	sugars	as	starch,	and	so	depend	on
their	connection	to	the	parent	plant	for
continued	sweetening.	Once	harvested,	they
get	no	sweeter,	though	other	enzyme	actions
may	continue	to	soften	cell	walls	and	generate
aroma	molecules.

These	basic	styles	of	ripening	determine
how	fruits	are	handled	in	commerce	and	in	the
kitchen.	Climacteric	fruits	like	bananas	and
avocados,	pears	and	tomatoes	can	be	picked
mature	but	still	hard	to	minimize	physical
damage,	packed	and	shipped	to	their



destinations,	then	gassed	with	ethylene	to
ripen	them	for	the	produce	bin.	Consumers
can	hasten	the	process	by	enclosing	the	fruits
in	a	paper	bag	with	a	ripe	fruit	(plastic	traps
too	much	moisture)	to	expose	them	to	an
active	ethylene	emitter	and	concentrate	the
ethylene	gas	in	the	air	around	them.
Nonclimacteric	fruits	like	pineapples,	citrus
fruits,	most	berries,	and	melons	don’t	store
starch	or	improve	markedly	after	harvest,	so
their	quality	depends	mainly	on	how	far	they
had	ripened	on	the	plant.	They’re	best	when
picked	and	shipped	as	ripe	as	possible,	and
there’s	nothing	consumers	can	do	to	influence
their	quality:	we	simply	have	to	choose	good
ones	in	the	first	place.

With	just	a	few	exceptions	(pears,
avocados,	kiwis,	bananas),	even	climacteric
fruits	will	be	much	better	if	they’re	allowed	to
ripen	on	the	plant,	from	which	they	can
continue	to	accumulate	the	raw	materials	of
flavor	until	the	harvest.



Common	Fruits	of	Temperate
Climates:	Apple	and	Pear,
Stone	Fruits,	Berries

Pome	Fruits:	Apple,	Pear,
and	Relatives

Apples,	pears,	and	quinces	are	closely	related
members	of	the	rose	family,	natives	of
Eurasia	that	were	domesticated	in	prehistoric
times.	They	are	a	kind	of	fruit	known	as	a
pome	(from	the	Latin	for	“fruit”).	The	fleshy
portion	of	a	pome	fruit	is	the	greatly	enlarged
tip	of	the	flower	stem.	The	remains	of	the
flower	project	from	the	bottom	of	the	fruit,
and	the	few	small	seeds	are	protected	in	a
tough-walled	core.	Apples	and	their	relatives
are	climacteric	fruit,	and	contain	starch	stores
that	can	be	turned	into	sugar	after	harvest.
They	generally	keep	well	in	cold	storage,
though	late-harvested	fruit	tend	to	develop
brown	cores.	Apples	are	generally	sold	ripe



and	keep	best	if	immediately	wrapped	and
refrigerated;	pears	are	sold	unripe	and	are	best
ripened	at	relatively	cool	room	temperatures,
then	refrigerated	without	close	wrapping.

The	reddish	colors	of	pome	fruits	(usually
in	the	skin	but	sometimes	in	the	flesh)	are	due
mainly	to	water-soluble	anthocyanin
pigments,	their	yellow	and	cream	colors	to
fat-soluble	carotenoids,	including	beta-
carotene	and	lutein	(pp.	257,	267).	These
fruits	are	good	sources	of	phenolic	antioxidant
compounds	(p.	267),	particularly	simple	ones
(chlorogenic	acid,	also	found	in	coffee),
which	are	especially	concentrated	in	the	skin.
Some	apples	have	an	antioxidant	activity
equivalent	to	the	vitamin	C	in	30	equal
portions	of	orange!

Apples	and	pears	owe	their	primary	flavors
to	characteristic	esters	(see	box,	p.	355).	The
flavors	of	pome	fruits	differ	among	varieties,
among	fruits	on	different	parts	of	a	single
tree,	and	even	within	a	single	fruit,	from	top



to	bottom	and	from	the	core	outwards.	Pears
are	often	noticeably	more	flavorful	at	the
flower	end	than	at	the	stem	end.	Both	apples
and	pears	contain	an	indigestible,	slightly
sweet	sugar	alcohol,	sorbitol	(0.5%),	so	a
large	helping	of	cider	can	cause	the	same
discomfort	as	do	inulin-rich	foods	(p.	307).

Apples	Apple	 trees	 are	 especially	 hardy	 and
are	probably	the	most	widely	distributed	fruit
trees	on	the	planet.	There	are	35	species	in	the
genus	Malus.	 The	 species	 that	 gives	 us	most
of	 our	 eating	 apples,	Malus	 x	domestica,
seems	 to	have	originated	 in	 the	mountains	of
Kazakhstan	 from	 crossings	 of	 an	 Asian
species	(Malus	sieversii)	with	several	cousins.
The	 domesticated	 apple	 spread	 very	 early
through	the	Middle	East.	It	was	known	in	the
Mediterranean	region	by	the	time	of	the	Greek
epics,	and	the	Romans	introduced	it	to	the	rest
of	Europe.	These	days	apple	production	 is	an
international	 enterprise,	 with	 southern



hemisphere	countries	supplementing	northern
stored	 apples	 during	 the	 off-season,	 and
common	varieties	as	likely	to	have	come	from
Asia	(e.g.,	Fuji,	from	Japan)	as	from	the	West.
There	 are	 several	 thousand	 named	 apple
varieties,	 which	 can	 be	 divided	 into	 four
general	groups.

Pome	 fruits	 and	 the	 flower	 from	 which	 they
arise.	The	edible	portion	of	apples	and	pears
derives	 from	 the	 flower	 base,	 or	 receptacle.
Because	 the	 ovary	 is	 set	 below	 most	 of	 the
flower	parts,	the	flower	remains	a	scar	at	the
bottom	of	the	fruit.

Cider	apples	(mainly	the	European
native	Malus	sylvestris)	are	high-acid
fruits	rich	in	astringent	tannins,	qualities



that	help	control	the	alcoholic
fermentation	and	clarify	the	liquid
(tannins	cross-link	protein	and	cell-wall
particles	and	cause	them	to	precipitate).
They’re	used	only	in	cider	making.
Dessert	or	eating	apples	are	crisp	and
juicy,	and	have	a	pleasing	balance
between	sour	and	sweet	when	eaten	raw
(pH	3.4,	15%	sugar),	but	become
relatively	bland	when	cooked.	Most	of
the	apples	in	supermarkets	and	produce
markets	are	dessert	apples.
Cooking	apples	are	distinctly	tart	when
raw	(a	pH	around	3	and	sugar	content
around	12%),	well-balanced	when
cooked,	and	have	a	firm	flesh	that	tends
to	maintain	its	structure	when	heated	in
pies	or	tarts,	rather	than	falling
immediately	into	a	puree	or	—	as	in
some	early	“codling”	varieties	—	into	a
fluffy	froth.	Many	countries	have
traditionally	had	their	standard	cooking



apples	(France	its	Calville	blanc	d’hiver,
England	its	Bramley’s	Seedling,
Germany	its	Glockenapfel	for	strudel).
But	these	are	being	replaced	by	dual-
purpose	varieties.
Dual-purpose	apples	are	adequate	either
raw	or	cooked	(e.g.,	Golden	Delicious,
Granny	Smith).	These	are	usually	at	their
best	for	cooking	when	young	and	tart,
best	for	eating	when	older	and	more
mellow.

An	 apple’s	 potential	 for	 cooking	 can	 be
tested	by	wrapping	a	 few	slices	 in	aluminum
foil	and	baking	in	a	hot	oven	for	15	minutes,
or	 microwaving	 a	 few	 slices	 wrapped	 in
plastic	 film	 until	 the	 film	 balloons	 with
steam.

Apple	 Flavor	 Apple	 varieties	 can	 have	 very
distinctive	flavors,	and	these	evolve	even	after
the	fruit	are	picked	from	the	tree.	The	English



were	 great	 connoisseurs	 a	 century	 ago,	 and
Edward	Bunyard	wrote	 that	by	storing	apples
properly	 in	 a	 cool	 place	 and	 tasting	 them
periodically,	 the	apple	 lover	could	“catch	 the
volatile	 ethers	 at	 their	 maximum
development,	and	the	acids	and	sugars	at	their
most	 grateful	 balance.”	 Apples	 do	 become
more	mellow	with	time	because	they	consume
some	of	their	malic	acid	for	energy.	Much	of
their	 aroma	 comes	 from	 the	 skin,	 where
volatile-creating	 enzymes	 are	 concentrated.
The	 distinctive	 aroma	 of	 cooked	 apple	 pulp
comes	 largely	 from	 a	 floral-smelling
fragment	 of	 the	 carotenoid	 pigments
(damascenone).

Fruit	Aroma	Compounds:	Esters
Many	fruits	owe	their	characteristic	aroma
to	 chemicals	 called	esters.	 An	 ester
molecule	 is	 a	 combination	 of	 two	 other
molecules,	 an	 acid	 and	 an	 alcohol.	 A
typical	 plant	 cell	 contains	 many	 different



kinds	of	 acids,	 and	 several	different	kinds
of	 alcohol.	 The	 acids	 may	 be	 either	 tart
substances	 in	 the	cell	 fluids	or	vacuole	—
acetic	acid,	cinnamic	acid	—	or	 fatty-acid
portions	 of	 oil	 molecules	 and	 the
molecules	 that	 make	 up	 cell	 membranes:
hexanoic	 acid,	 butyric	 acid.	 The	 alcohols
are	usually	by-products	of	cell	metabolism.
Fruits	 have	 enzymes	 that	 join	 these	 basic
cell	 materials	 into	 aromatic	 esters.	 A
single	fruit	will	emit	many	esters,	but	one
or	 two	 account	 for	 most	 of	 its
characteristic	aroma.	Some	examples:
ethyl	alcohol	+	acetic	acid	=	ethyl	acetate,
a	characteristic	note	in	apples
hexyl	alcohol	+	acetic	acid	=	hexyl	acetate
in	pears
ethyl	alcohol	+	butyric	acid	=	ethyl
butyrate	in	pineapple
isoamyl	alcohol	+	acetic	acid	=	isoamyl
acetate	in	bananas



Apple	 Air	 and	 Texture 	 Apples	 differ	 from
pears	 in	having	as	much	as	a	quarter	of	 their
volume	occupied	by	air,	thanks	to	open	spaces
between	cells	in	the	fruit.	(Pears	are	less	than
5%	 air.)	 The	 air	 spaces	 contribute	 to	 the
typical	mealiness	of	an	overripe	apple:	as	the
cell	walls	soften	and	the	cell	interiors	dry	out,
biting	into	the	apple	simply	pushes	the	largely
separated	 cells	 apart	 from	 each	 other	 rather
than	breaking	 the	 cells	 and	 releasing	pent-up
juices.	 Air	 cells	 become	 a	 factor	 in	 baking
whole	apples;	they	fill	with	steam	and	expand
as	 the	 apple	 cooks,	 and	 the	 skin	 will	 split
unless	 a	 strip	 is	 removed	 from	 the	 top	 to
release	the	pressure.

Both	apples	and	crabapples	are	good
sources	of	cell-wall	pectins	(p.	265)	and	make
excellent	jellies.	For	the	same	reason,	a
simple	puree	of	apples	has	a	thick,	satisfying
consistency	when	briefly	cooked	into	apple-
sauce,	or	slowly	reduced	to	“apple	butter.”



Apple	 Juice	 and	 Cider	 Apple	 juice	 can	 be
either	 opalescent	 or	 clear	 depending	 on
whether	its	pectins	and	proteins	are	left	intact
to	 deflect	 light	 rays.	Made	 fresh,	 it	will	 stay
pale	 and	 retain	 its	 fresh	 flavor	 for	 about	 an
hour,	 after	 which	 the	 darkening	 and	 aroma-
modifying	influences	of	enzymes	and	oxygen
become	evident.	Browning	can	be	minimized
by	 heating	 the	 juice	 rapidly	 to	 the	 boil	 to
inactivate	 the	 browning	 enzymes,	 but	 of
course	this	lends	a	cooked	flavor	to	the	juice.
Pasteurized	 apple	 juice	 was	 first
manufactured	 around	 1900	 in	 Switzerland,
and	 is	 now	 one	 of	 the	 most	 important
commercial	 fruit	 products	 in	 the	 United
States.	 Cider	 is	 still	 an	 important	 product	 in
northwest	 Spain,	 western	 France,	 and
England,	where	the	traditional	method	was	to
let	 the	 fruit	 pulp	 ferment	 slowly	 through	 the
cold	 winter,	 reaching	 an	 alcohol	 content
around	4%.



Pears	Pears	are	fruit	of	the	genus	Pyrus,	more
temperamental	to	grow	than	the	apple	and	less
common,	 but	 called	 by	 some	 “the	 queen	 of
fruit”	 for	 their	 refinement	 of	 flavor,	 texture,
and	shape.	Pears	are	less	tart	than	apples,	and
denser.	 The	 familiar	 elongated	 European
pears,	with	mostly	smooth	flesh,	are	varieties
of	 the	 west	 Asian	Pyrus	 communis.	 “Asian
pears”	 are	 varieties	 of	 two	 species	 native	 to
China	 but	 intensively	 improved	 in	 Japan,	P.
pyrifolia	and	P.	ussuriensis.	They	have	a	juicy
but	 crisp	 flesh,	 more	 or	 less	 gritty	 with
cellulose-rich	 “stone	 cells,”	 and	 may	 be
elongated	or	 apple-shaped.	The	 characteristic
aroma	 of	 pears	 comes	 from	 several	 esters,
including	 the	 “pear	 ester”	 (ethyl
decadienoate).

Some	Distinctive	Apple	Flavors	and	Varieties

Flavor Varieties
Simple, Gravenstein,	Granny



refreshing Smith
Strawberry, Northern	Spy,
raspberry Spitzenburg
Winey McIntosh	(well	matured)
Aromatic	and Cox’s	Orange	and	Ribston
flowery Pippins

Honey Golden	Delicious	(well	matured),
Fuji,	Gala

Anise	or Ellison’s	Orange,
tarragon Fenouillet
Pineapple Newtown	Pippin,	Ananas	Reinette
Banana Dodds
Nutty Blenheim	Orange
Nutmeg D’Arcy	Spice

In	general,	pears	have	a	higher	respiratory
rate	 than	 apples	 and	 don’t	 store	 as	 well.
They’re	 unique	 among	 temperate	 fruits	 in
being	 of	 the	 highest	 quality	 when	 picked
mature	but	still	hard	and	ripened	off	the	tree;



picked	 after	 ripening	 begins,	 their	 texture
becomes	mushy	 and	 their	 core	 breaks	 down.
They	 will	 also	 develop	 a	 mealy	 core	 if
excessively	 warmed	 after	 cold	 storage.
They’re	best	ripened	slowly	over	several	days
at	 between	 65–68ºF/18–20ºC.	 Pears	 are
sensitive	to	carbon	dioxide,	so	they	shouldn’t
be	enclosed	in	plastic	bags	at	any	stage.	Asian
pears	are	especially	prone	to	bruising	and	are
often	marketed	in	protective	sleeves.

Pear	 Varieties 	 Originally,	 all	 pears	 were
gritty	 “sand	 pears”	 and	 hard-fleshed.
Centuries	 of	 breeding	 greatly	 reduced	 the
prominence	 of	 gritty	 stone	 cells	 (but	 not	 in
varieties	for	making	perry,	the	pear	version	of
cider,	 where	 they’re	 valued	 for	 helping	 to
grind	the	flesh	before	fermentation).	The	soft
“butter”	 texture	 characteristic	 of	 many
European	 pears	 was	 developed	 in	 the	 18th
century	 by	 Belgian	 and	 French	 breeders.
European	pears	 are	 classified	 in	 three	groups



according	to	when	they’re	harvested	and	their
traditional	 storage	 life	 (now	 extended	 by
controlled	 atmospheres	 and	 temperatures).
Summer	 pears	 like	 the	 Bartlett	 (also	 called
Williams	 or	 Bon	 chretien)	 are	 harvested	 in
July	 and	 August	 and	 keep	 for	 one	 to	 three
months;	 autumn	 pears	 like	 the	 Bosc	 and
Comice	 are	 harvested	 in	 September	 and
October	 and	 keep	 two	 to	 four	 months;	 and
winter	pears	like	the	Anjou	and	Winter	Nellis
are	 harvested	 in	 October	 and	 November	 and
keep	six	to	seven	months.

Quince	 Quinces,	 fruit	 of	 the	 central	 Asian
tree	Cydonia	oblonga,	give	us	a	 taste	of	what
apples	and	pears	might	have	been	like	in	their
primitive	 form.	 They	 are	 gritty	 with	 stone
cells,	astringent,	and	hard	even	when	ripe.	But
they	have	a	distinctive,	flowery	aroma	(thanks
to	lactones	and	violet-like	ionones,	all	derived
from	 carotenoid	 molecules)	 that’s	 especially
concentrated	 in	 the	 fuzzy	 yellow	 skin.	 And



cooking	domesticates	them:	heat	breaks	down
and	 softens	 their	 pectin-rich	 cell	 walls,	 and
the	astringent	tannins	become	bound	up	in	the
debris,	 so	 the	 taste	 softens	 as	 well.	 Quince
paste	 firm	 enough	 to	 slice	 is	 a	 traditional
product	 of	 Spain	 (membrillo)	 and	 Italy
(cotognata),	and	in	Portugal	a	quince	preserve
was	the	original	marmalade	(marmalada).	The
16th-century	 alchemist	 and	 confectioner
Nostradamus	 gave	 several	 recipes	 for	 quince
preserves	 and	observed	 that	 cooks	 “who	peel
them	 [before	 cooking]	 don’t	 know	 why	 they
do	this,	for	the	skin	augments	the	odor.”	(The
same	is	true	for	apples.)

Quinces	have	another	enchanting	quality:
when	slices	are	slowly	cooked	in	sugar	over
several	hours,	they	turn	from	a	pale	off-white
to	pink	to	a	translucent,	deep	ruby	red.	The
key	to	this	transformation	is	the	fruit’s	store
of	colorless	phenolic	compounds,	some	of
which	cooking	turns	into	anthocyanin
pigments	(p.	281).	Pears	contain	the	same



compounds,	but	in	smaller	quantities
(common	Bartletts	about	a	twenty-fifth,
Packhams	a	tenth	to	a	half),	and	so	usually	get
pink	at	best.

Medlar	Medlars	 are	 small	 fruits	 of	 an	 apple
relative	 (Mespilus	 germanica)	 native	 to
central	 Asia,	 now	 rare	 but	 once	 commonly
grown	 in	 Europe	 as	 a	 winter	 fruit.	 Like	 the
quince,	 the	 medlar	 remains	 hard	 and
astringent	even	when	ripe,	so	it	keeps	well	and
even	improves	if	left	on	the	tree	through	early
frosts.	 It	 was	made	 into	 preserves,	 but	 more
often	it	was	“bletted”	(a	19th-century	coinage
from	 the	 French	blessé,	“bruised”),	or	picked
from	the	tree	and	kept	in	a	cool,	dry	place	for
several	 weeks	 until	 the	 enzymes	 in	 its	 own
cells	digest	it	from	within,	and	its	flesh	turns
soft	 and	 brown.	 The	 astringency	 disappears,
the	 malic	 acid	 is	 used	 up,	 and	 the	 aroma
develops	 strong	 overtones	 of	 spice,	 baked
apples,	 wine,	 and	 gentle	 decay,	 what	 D.	 H.



Lawrence	described	as	an	“exquisite	odour	of
leave-taking.”

Loquat	 Loquats	 bear	 little	 resemblance	 to
their	cousin	pomes.	They	are	small,	elongated
fruits	 of	 a	Chinese	 tree,	Eriobotrya	 japonica,
which	was	 greatly	 improved	 by	 the	 Japanese
and	 taken	 to	many	 subtropical	 regions	 in	 the
19th	 century,	 notably	 Sicily,	 where	 they	 are
cal l ed	nespole.	 They	 usually	 ripen	 early,
before	 cherries.	 They	 have	 a	 mild,	 delicate
flavor	 and	 a	 wall	 of	 carotenoid-containing
flesh	 that	 runs	 from	 white	 to	 orange,
surrounding	several	large	seeds.	U.S.	varieties
are	 mainly	 ornamental	 and	 produce	 small
fruit,	 while	 European	 and	 Asian	 fruits	 may
approach	a	half	pound/250	gm.	They’re	eaten
fresh,	made	into	jellies	and	jams,	and	cooked
in	 a	 spicy	 syrup	 in	 the	 manner	 of	 “pickled”
peaches.	 Loquats	 are	 neither	 climacteric	 nor
chill-sensitive,	and	so	keep	well.

Stone	Fruits:	Apricot,	Cherry,



Peach,	and	Plum

Stone	fruits	are	all	species	of	the	genus
Prunus,	members	of	the	large	rose	family	and
relatives	of	the	pome	fruits.	They	owe	their
name	to	the	stone-hard	“shell”	that	surrounds
a	single	large	seed	at	their	center.	Though	the
15	species	of	Prunus	are	found	throughout	the
northern	hemisphere,	the	important	stone
fruits	mostly	come	from	Asia.	They	do	not
store	starch	and	so	get	no	sweeter	after
harvest,	though	they	do	soften	and	develop
aroma.	Their	internal	tissues	tend	to	become
mealy	or	break	down	in	prolonged	cold
storage,	so	fresh	stone	fruits	are	more
seasonal	than	hardier	apples	and	pears.	Like
some	of	the	pome	fruits,	stone	fruits
accumulate	the	indigestible	sugar	alcohol
sorbitol	(a	frequent	ingredient	in	sugar-free
gums	and	candies,	p.	662);	they’re	also	rich	in
antioxidant	phenolic	compounds.	The	seeds	of
stone	fruits	are	protected	by	a	cyanide-



generating	enzyme	that	also	produces	the
characteristic	aroma	of	almond	extract
(almonds	are	seeds	of
Prunus	amygdalus).	They	thus	lend	an	almond
character	when	included	in	sugar	and	alcohol
preserves,	and	can	replace	“bitter	almonds”	in
European	pastries	and	sweets	(p.	506).

Apricot	The	apricots	that	are	most	familiar	in
the	 West	 are	 fruits	 of	Prunus	 armeniaca,	 a
native	 of	 China	 that	 was	 taken	 to	 the
Mediterranean	during	Roman	times.	There	are
now	 thousands	 of	 different	 varieties,	 white
and	 red	 (from	 lycopene)	 as	 well	 as	 orange,
and	 most	 of	 them	 adapted	 to	 specific
climates;	 apricots	 flower	 and	 fruit	 early	 (the
name	 comes	 from	 the	 Latin	praecox,
“precocious”),	and	therefore	bear	best	in	areas
with	mild,	 predictable	 winters.	 Several	 other
species	are	grown	in	Asia,	including	P.	mume,
whose	fruits	the	Japanese	salt-pickle	and	color
red	 to	 make	 the	 condiment	umeboshi.	 The



distinctive	 aroma	 of	 fresh	 apricots	 comes
from	 a	 rich	mixture	 of	 terpenes	 that	 provide
citrus,	 herbal,	 and	 floral	 notes,	 and	 from
peach-like	 compounds	 (lactones).	 They	 are
rich	 in	 pectin,	 which	 gives	 them	 a	 luscious
texture	when	fully	ripe,	a	meaty	texture	when
dried.

Stone	 fruits	 and	 the	 flower	 from	 which	 they
arise.	 Peaches	 and	 cherries	 derive	 from	 an
ovary	 that	 sits	 above	 the	 base	 of	 the	 flower
parts,	 so	 the	 fruits	 show	 no	 remnants	 of	 the
flower.

Apricots	are	delicate	fruits	that	don’t
travel	well,	so	most	are	processed.	They’re
especially	suited	to	drying,	which
concentrates	their	sweet-tart	flavor	well	even
when	they’re	overripe.	Most	dried	apricots	in
the	United	States	come	either	from	a	few



western	states	or	from	Turkey,	which	exports
a	relatively	pale,	bland	variety	with	half	the
carotenoid	pigments	and	acidity	of	the
Blenheim	and	Patterson	varieties	of
California.	The	fruits	are	dried	in	the	sun	in
early	summer	for	one	or	two	weeks,	until	they
reach	a	moisture	content	of	15–20%.	Usually
they’re	treated	with	sulfur	dioxide	to	preserve
the	abundant	beta-carotene	and	other
carotenoids,	vitamin	C,	and	fresh	flavor.
Unsulfured	apricots	are	brown	and	have	a
flatter,	cooked	taste.

Cherry	 Cherries	 come	 in	 two	 basic	 types
from	two	different	species,	both	of	which	are
native	 to	western	Asia	 and	 southeast	Europe.
Sweet	cherries	are	the	fruits	of	Prunus	avium,
which	 is	 probably	 one	 of	 the	 parents	 of	 the
sour	 cherry,	Prunus	 cerasus.	 Sweet	 and	 sour
cherries	differ	mainly	in	their	maximum	sugar
content,	 with	 sweet	 cherries	 accumulating
significantly	 more.	 Cherries	 don’t	 improve



once	 they’re	 harvested,	 so	 they	 must	 be
picked	 ripe	 and	 fragile.	 Most	 sweet	 cherries
grown	in	the	United	States	are	sold	fresh,	but
far	more	sour	cherries	are	grown,	and	most	of
these	 are	 processed.	 Cherries	 are	 prized	 not
only	for	their	flavor,	but	for	their	color,	which
may	 range	 from	 very	 deep	 red	 (rich	 in
anthocyanins)	 to	 a	 pale	 yellow.	 The	 red
varieties	 are	 an	 excellent	 source	 of	 phenolic
antioxidants.

Cherry	flavor	comes	mainly	from	almondy
benzaldehyde,	a	flowery	terpene	(linalool),
and	essence	of	clove	(eugenol).	Heating
increases	both	the	almond	and	flowery	notes,
especially	if	the	pits	are	left	in	the	fruit.	This
is	why	the	classic	French	cherry	clafoutis,	a
custardy	tart,	is	intensely	flavored	but
requires	care	in	eating!

The	familiar	“maraschino”	cherry
originated	several	centuries	ago	in
northeastern	Italy	and	the	neighboring
Balkans,	where	the	local	marasca	cherry	was



preserved	in	its	own	liqueur	for	winter	eating.
In	the	modern	industrial	version,	light-fleshed
varieties	are	bleached	with	sulfur	dioxide	and
stored	in	brine	until	needed,	then	infused	with
sugar	syrup,	dyed	cherry	red,	flavored	with
almond	extract,	and	pasteurized.	After	all	that,
what’s	left	of	the	original	cherry	is	mainly	its
skeleton,	the	cell	walls	and	skin.

Peach	and	Nectarine	Peaches	and	nectarines
are	both	 fruits	 of	 the	 species	Prunus	 persica.
Nectarines	 are	 varieties	 with	 a	 smooth	 skin
that	are	usually	also	smaller,	firmer,	and	more
aromatic	than	their	fuzzy	siblings.	The	words
“peach”	and	“persica”	come	from	“Persia,”	by
way	 of	 which	 the	 fruit	 reached	 the
Mediterranean	world	from	China	by	about	300
BCE.

Modern	peach	and	nectarine	varieties	fall
into	a	handful	of	categories.	Their	flesh	may
be	white	or	yellow,	and	either	firm	or	melting,
strongly	attached	to	the	large	central	stone



(clingstone)	or	easily	detached	(freestone).
The	genetically	dominant	characteristics	are
white,	melting,	freestone	flesh.	Yellow
varieties	were	developed	mainly	after	1850,
and	firm	clingstone	varieties	have	been	bred
mainly	for	drying,	canning,	and	improved
tolerance	of	shipping	and	handling.	The
yellow	coloration	comes	from	a	handful	of
carotenoid	pigments,	beta-carotene	among
them;	rarer	red	varieties	contain	anthocyanins
(as	the	skin	often	does).	Peaches	begin	to
ripen	at	the	stem	end	and	along	the	groove,	or
“suture,”	and	are	said	to	continue	their	flavor
development	even	after	harvest.	The
distinctively	aromatic	flavor	of	peaches	and
nectarines	comes	largely	from	compounds
called	lactones,	which	are	also	responsible	for
the	aroma	of	coconut;	some	varieties	also
contain	clove-like	eugenol.

The	most	frequent	problem	with	peaches	is
mealy	flesh,	apparently	due	to	impaired	pectin
breakdown	when	the	fruit	has	been



temporarily	stored	in	the	cold,	at	temperatures
below	about	45ºF/8ºC.	This	is	especially
common	in	supermarket	fruits.

Plum	and	Plum	Hybrids	Most	plums	are	the
fruits	 of	 two	 species	 of	Prunus.	 A	 Eurasian
species,	P.	 domestica, 	 gave	 rise	 to	 the
European	 plums,	 which	 include	 French	 and
Italian	prune	plums,	 the	greengage	and	Reine
Claude,	 the	 yellow-egg	 and	 imperatrice.	 The
most	 common	 of	 these	 are	 the	 prune	 types,
purplish-blue	 ovals	 with	 a	 meaty,
semimelting,	semifreestone	flesh.	The	second,
Asian	 species,	P.	 salicina, 	 originated	 in
China,	 was	 improved	 in	 Japan,	 and	 further
bred	 by	 Luther	 Burbank	 and	 others	 in	 the
United	 States	 after	 1875.	 Varieties	 of	 the
Asian	species	(Santa	Rosa,	elephant	heart,	and
many	others)	tend	to	be	larger,	rounder,	from
yellow	to	red	 to	purple,	clingstone,	and	often
melting.	European	plums	are	usually	dried	or
made	into	preserves,	Asian	plums	eaten	fresh.



Plums	 are	 climacteric	 fruit,	 so	 they	 can	 be
harvested	 before	 ripening,	 stored	 at	 32ºF/0ºC
for	up	to	10	days,	and	then	allowed	to	mature
slowly	at	55ºF/13ºC.	Their	aroma	varies	from
kind	 to	 kind,	 but	 generally	 includes	 almondy
benzaldehyde,	 flowery	 linalool,	 peachy
lactones,	and	spicy	methyl	cinnamate.

Plum-apricot	hybrids,	known	as	pluots
(more	plum	parentage)	or	plumcots	(equal
parentage),	are	generally	sweeter	than	plums
and	more	complex	in	aroma.	There	are	also	a
number	of	minor	plums,	among	them	the
English	damson	and	sloe	(P.	insititia	and
spinosa),	the	latter	small,	astringent	fruits	that
are	steeped	to	make	sloe	gin.

Prunes	 The	 firm-fleshed	 prune	 plums	 dry
well	 in	 the	 sun	 or	 during	 18–24	 hours	 in	 a
dehydrator	 at	 around	 175ºF/79ºC.	 They
develop	 a	 rich	 flavor	 thanks	 to	 the
concentration	 of	 sugars	 and	 acids	 —	 nearly
50%	 and	 5%	 of	 their	 weight	 respectively	—



and	 to	 browning	 reactions	 that	 generate
caramel	 and	 roasted	 notes	 as	 well	 as	 their
color,	 a	 brown-black	 deep	 enough	 to	 be
attractive	rather	than	drab.	This	richness	is	the
reason	 that	prunes	work	well	 in	many	savory
meat	 dishes.	 Prunes	 are	 such	 a	 concentrated
source	of	antioxidant	phenolic	compounds	(up
to	 150	 mg	 per	 100	 gm)	 that	 they	 make	 an
excellent	 natural	 flavor	 stabilizer:	 they
prevent	 the	 development	 of	 warmed-over
flavor	 in	 ground	meats	when	 included	 at	 the
rate	 of	 just	 a	 few	 percent	 (1	 tablespoon	 per
pound).	 They’re	 also	 rich	 in	 moisture-
retaining	fiber	and	sorbitol	and	so	are	used	to
replace	 fat	 in	 hamburgers	 and	 a	 variety	 of
baked	 foods.	 (Dried	 cherries	 have	 many
similar	 properties	 and	 uses.)	 Their	 well-
known	laxative	action	on	the	human	digestive
tract	 is	 not	 entirely	 understood	 but	 probably
involves	 the	 sugar	 alcohol	 sorbitol	 (p.	 662),
which	accounts	for	up	to	15%	of	the	weight	of
both	prune	and	juice.	We	can’t	digest	sorbitol,



so	 it	 passes	 into	 our	 intestines	where	 it	may
have	a	number	of	stimulating	effects.

Common	 berries.	 Blueberries	 (left)	are	 true
berries,	 or	 single	 fruits	 derived	 from	 the
plant’s	ovaries.	Caneberries	and	strawberries
are	 not	 true	 berries,	 but	 multiple	 fruits	 that
develop	 from	 many	 ovaries	 set	 in	 the	 same
flower	 receptacle.	 Each	 little	 segment	 of	 a
raspberry	or	blackberry	(center)	is	a	complete
stone	 fruit.	The	strawberry	 (right)	is	a	“false
fruit”:	the	small	“seeds”	borne	on	the	surface
of	 the	 swollen	 flower	base	are	dry	but	 entire
fruits	 that	 correspond	 to	 the	 caneberry
segments.

Berries,	Including	Grapes
and	Kiwi	Fruit



Though	the	term	berry	has	a	precise	botanical
definition,	in	common	usage	it	generally
refers	to	small	fruits	borne	on	bushes	and	low
plants,	not	trees.	Most	of	our	familiar	berries
are	natives	of	northern	woodlands.

Caneberries:	 Blackberries,	 Raspberries,
and	 Relatives	 Caneberries	 are	 fruits	 of	 the
genus	Rubus,	 which	 grows	 naturally	 across
most	of	the	temperate	northern	hemisphere	in
the	form	of	long	thin,	thorny	stalks,	or	canes.
There	 are	 hundreds	 of	 species	 of	 blackberry
native	 to	 both	 Europe	 and	 the	Americas,	 but
just	 a	 few	 species	 of	 raspberry.	 Serious
caneberry	 cultivation	 probably	 began	 around
1500,	 and	 a	 number	 of	 blackberry-raspberry
hybrids	 have	 been	 created,	 including
boysenberry,	 loganberry,	 youngberry,	 and
tayberry	 from	American	species,	 the	Bedford
giant	 from	 European	 species.	 Less	 familiar
caneberries	 include	 cloudberries,	 a	 yellow-
orange	 Scandinavian	 fruit,	 and	 dark	 red,



intensely	aromatic	Arctic	bramble	fruits.
Caneberries	are	composite	fruits:	a	single

flower	has	from	50	to	150	ovaries,	and	each
ovary	makes	a	separate	small	fruitlet,	like	a
miniature	plum	with	a	stony	seed.	The
fruitlets	are	nourished	through	contact	with
the	flower	base	and	held	together	by	the
entanglement	of	small	hairs	borne	on	their
surface	(the	original	inspiration	for	Velcro).
When	they	ripen,	blackberries	separate	from
the	cane	at	the	bottom	of	the	flower	base,	so
the	base	comes	with	the	fruit;	raspberries
instead	separate	from	the	base	itself,	and	so
have	an	inner	cavity.	Caneberries	are
climacteric	fruit,	and	have	one	of	the	highest
respiration	rates	of	any	fruit;	thanks	to	this
and	their	thin	skin,	they’re	extremely	fragile
and	perishable.

Some	Caneberry	Relationships
All	caneberries	are	members	of	the	prolific
genus	Rubus,	a	member	of	the	rose	family.



Raspberry,	European Rubus	idaeus	vulgatus
Raspberry,	American R.	idaeus	strigosus
Raspberry,	black	(American) R.	occidentalis
Blackberry,	European R.	fruticosus
Blackberry, R.	ursinus,	laciniatus,
American vitifolius,	etc.
Dewberry,	European R.	caesius
Dewberry,	American R.	flagellaris,	trivialis

Boysenberry,	loganberry, Various
marionberry,	olallieberry, blackberry-
youngberry raspberry

crosses
Cloudberry R.	chamaemorus
Salmonberry R.	spectabilis
Arctic	bramble R.	arcticus

Raspberries	have	a	distinctive	flavor	due	to
a	compound	dubbed	the	raspberry	ketone,	and



also	 have	 a	 violet-like	 note	 (from	 carotenoid
fragments	called	ionones).	The	flavor	of	wild
berries	 has	 been	 found	 to	 be	 by	 far	 the	most
intense.	Blackberries	vary	 in	 their	 flavor,	 the
European	 varieties	 relatively	 mild,	 the
American	 more	 intense,	 with	 spicy	 aroma
notes	 (from	 terpenes).	Most	 caneberry	 colors
are	provided	by	anthocyanin	pigments,	whose
sensitivity	 to	 pH	 can	 cause	 dark	 purple
blackberries	to	turn	red	when	frozen	(p.	281).
These	 fruits	 are	 a	 good	 source	 of	 phenolic
antioxidants,	 at	 least	 one	 of	 which	 (ellagic
acid)	 actually	 increases	 during	 jam	 making.
When	 made	 into	 preserves,	 the	 numerous
caneberry	seeds	(several	thousand	per	quarter
pound/100	 gm)	 can	 sometimes	 absorb	 syrup,
become	 translucent,	 and	 give	 the	 normally
deep-colored	jam	a	milky	dullness.

Blueberry,	Cranberry,	 and	Relatives 	 These
berries	 are	borne	by	 several	different	 species
in	 the	 genus	Vaccinium,	 which	 ranges	 across



northern	Europe	and	North	America.

Blueberry	Blueberries	are	the	small	fruits	of	a
bushy	 North	 American	 species	 of	 the	 genus
Vaccinium,	 which	 ranges	 from	 the	 tropics	 to
the	 arctic.	V.	 angustifolium 	 and	corymbosum
are	weedy	pioneers	in	burned	fields,	and	their
fruits	 were	 gathered	 from	 the	 wild	 until	 the
1920s,	 when	 the	 first	 selected	 “highbush”
(corymbosum)	 plants	were	 developed	 in	New
Jersey.	 The	 bilberry,	V.	 myrtillus, 	 is	 a
European	 relative,	 and	 the	 rabbit-eye
blueberry,	V.	ashei,	a	similar	but	less	flavorful
native	 of	 the	 southern	 United	 States.	 The
huckleberry,	 various	 species	 of	Vaccinium,
has	a	 few	 large	hard	 seeds,	while	blueberries
have	many	small	ones.

Blueberries	have	a	distinctive,	spicy	aroma
apparently	due	to	several	terpenes,	and	are
rich	in	phenolic	antioxidants	and	in
anthocyanin	pigments,	especially	in	the	skin.
These	small	berries	freeze	well,	and	retain



their	shape	and	substance	when	baked.	The
pigments	can	turn	odd	shades	of	green	if
cooked	with	alkaline	ingredients	(for
example,	baking	soda	in	muffins).

Cranberry	 and	 Relatives	 Cranberries	 are
fruits	 of	 the	 North	American	 perennial	 vine
Vaccinium	 macrocarpon, 	 which	 is	 native	 to
low,	 swampy	 areas	 of	 northern	 states	 from
New	England	to	the	Midwest.	Cultivation	and
efforts	 at	 improvement	 began	 in	 the	 19th
century,	 and	 the	 familiar	 jelly-like	 cranberry
sauce	was	born	early	in	the	20th	century	when
a	 large	 producer	 decided	 to	 process	 his
damaged	berries	into	a	canned	puree.

Cranberries	can	be	harvested	dry,	with	a
comb-like	machine,	or	wet,	by	flooding	the
bog.	Dry-harvested	berries	keep	better,	for
several	months.	Cranberries	store	well	for	a
couple	of	reasons.	One	is	their	high	acidity,
exceeded	only	by	lemons	and	limes,	and	the
main	obstacle	to	eating	them	straight.	The



other	is	their	very	high	content	of	phenolic
compounds	(up	to	200	milligrams	per	100
grams),	some	of	which	are	antimicrobial	and
probably	protect	the	fruit	in	its	damp	habitat.
Many	of	these	phenolic	materials	are	also
useful	to	us,	some	as	antioxidants	and	others
as	antimicrobials.	One	example	is	benzoic
acid,	now	a	common	preservative	in	prepared
foods.	A	particular	pigment	precursor	in
cranberries	(also	found	in	blueberries)
prevents	bacteria	from	adhering	to	various
tissues	in	the	human	body,	and	so	helps
prevent	urinary	tract	infections.

The	spicy	aroma	of	cranberries	is	created
by	a	combination	of	terpenes	and	spicy
phenolic	derivatives	(cinnamates,	benzoates,
vanillin,	almondy	benzaldehyde).	Some	of	its
phenolic	compounds	contribute	a	notable
astringency.	Cranberries	are	rich	in	pectin,
which	is	why	a	barely	cooked	puree	thickens
immediately	into	a	sauce;	it’s	also	why
cranberries	macerated	in	alcohol	may	cause



the	alcohol	to	gel.
Lingonberries	or	cowberries	are	the	fruit	of

a	European	relative	of	the	cranberry,	V.	vitis-
idaea;	they	have	a	distinctive,	complex	flavor.
The	European	cranberry,	V.	oxycoccus,	has	a
stronger	and	more	grassy,	herbaceous	flavor
than	the	American	species.

Currants	 and	 Gooseberries	 Currants	 and
gooseberries	 are	 all	 species	 of	 the	 genus
Ribes,	which	is	found	in	northern	Europe	and
North	 America.	 These	 small	 berries	 don’t
appear	 to	 have	 been	 cultivated	 until	 around
1500.	 (Their	 cultivation	 in	 the	 United	 States
has	 been	 retarded	 by	 federal	 and	 state
restrictions	because	they	can	harbor	a	disease
that	attacks	white	pines.)	There	are	white	and
red	 currants,	R.	 sativum	 and	R.	 rubrum,	 and
hybrids	between	the	two.	The	black	currant	R.
nigrum,	 is	higher	 in	acid	 than	 the	others,	and
has	a	distinctively	 intense	aroma	made	up	of
many	 spicy	 terpenes,	 fruity	 esters,	 and	 a



musky,	 “catty”	 sulfur	 compound	 that	 is	 also
found	 in	 sauvignon	 blanc	 wines.	 Black
currants	are	also	notably	rich	in	vitamin	C	and
in	 antioxidant	 phenolic	 compounds	 —	 as
much	as	1%	of	their	weight	—	about	a	third	of
which	are	anthocyanin	pigments.	Currants	are
mainly	 made	 into	 preserves,	 and	 the	 French
make	 black	 currants	 into	 a	 liqueur,	crème	 de
cassis.

The	gooseberry,	R.	grossularia,	is	larger
than	the	currant,	and	is	often	picked	unripe	for
cooking	in	tarts	and	sauces.	The	jostaberry	is
a	black	currant–gooseberry	cross.

Grapes	Grapes	are	the	berries	of	woody	vines
in	 the	 genus	Vitis.	 V.	 vinifera, 	 the	 major
source	 of	wine	 and	 table	 grapes,	 is	 native	 to
Eurasia	 (p.	 772).	 There	 are	 also	 about	 10
grape	species	native	to	temperate	Asia,	and	25
to	 North	 America,	 including	 the	V.	 labrusca
that	 gives	 us	 Concord	 and	 Catawba	 grapes.
About	 two-thirds	 of	 the	 world’s	 grape



production	 goes	 to	 make	 wine;	 of	 the	 rest,
about	 two-thirds	 are	 eaten	 fresh	 and	 a	 third
are	 made	 into	 raisins.	 There	 are	 many
thousands	 of	 grape	 varieties.	 Most	 wine
varieties	originated	in	Europe,	while	varieties
for	 eating	 fresh	 or	 making	 into	 raisins	 can
often	be	traced	back	to	western	Asian	parents.
Wine	grapes	come	in	relatively	small	clusters
and	are	acidic	enough	to	help	control	the	yeast
fermentation;	 table	 grapes	 come	 in	 large
clusters	and	are	less	tart;	raisin	varieties	have
a	 thin	 skin,	 high	 sugar	 content,	 and	 loose
cluster	 structure	 to	 facilitate	 drying.	 The
commonest	 table	 and	 raisin	 grape	 in	 the
United	 States,	 the	 Thompson	 seedless	 or
sultana,	 is	 a	 variant	 of	 an	 ancient	 Middle
Eastern	 all-purpose	 variety,	 the	 Kishmish.
Table	 grapes	 are	 quite	 diverse.	 They	may	 be
seedy	 or	 seedless,	 deep	 purple	 with
anthocyanins	 or	 pale	 yellow;	 their	 sugar
content	 may	 range	 from	 14	 to	 25%,	 their
acidity	 from	 0.4	 to	 1.2%.	 They	 may	 have	 a



fairly	 neutral,	 green	 aroma	 (Thompson
seedless),	 or	 be	 flowery	 and	 citrusy	 from
terpenes	(muscat),	or	musky	with	anthranilate
and	other	esters	(Concord	and	other	American
varieties).	 Most	 commercial	 varieties	 today
have	been	bred	to	be	seedless,	crisp,	tart,	and
sweet,	 with	 a	 long	 storage	 life.	 Thompson
seedless	 grapes	 picked	 in	 the	 cool	 of	 the
morning	and	treated	with	antimicrobial	sulfur
dioxide	can	be	held	for	as	long	as	two	months
at	32ºF/0ºC.

Raisins	 Grapes	 are	 easily	 preserved	 by
sundrying	 to	 make	 raisins.	 In	 the	 United
States	 this	 is	 usually	 done	 by	 laying	 the
grapes	on	paper	between	rows	in	the	vineyard
for	 about	 three	 weeks.	 Raisins	 are	 naturally
brown	and	have	caramel	flavor	notes	due	to	a
combination	 of	 browning-enzyme	 oxidation
of	 phenolic	 compounds	 and	 direct	 browning
reactions	between	sugars	and	amino	acids	(pp.
269,	 778).	 Both	 of	 these	 processes	 are



accelerated	by	high	temperatures,	so	a	lighter
color	can	be	obtained	by	drying	the	grapes	in
the	shade.	Golden	raisins	are	made	by	treating
the	grapes	with	antioxidant	sulfur	dioxide	and
drying	 them	 mechanically	 at	 controlled
temperatures	 and	 humidities;	 the	 result	 is	 a
much	fruitier,	lighter	flavor.	Zante	“currants”
are	made	from	the	small	black	Corinth	grape,
and	 are	 tarter	 than	 ordinary	 raisins	 thanks	 to
their	higher	proportion	of	skin	to	pulp.

Verjus	 and	 Saba 	 Two	 ancient	 grape
preparations	make	versatile	ingredients	in	the
kitchen.	 Fruits	 thinned	 six	 to	 eight	 weeks
before	 the	 main	 harvest	 are	 crushed	 and
filtered	to	produce	verjus,	a	tart	alternative	to
vinegar	or	lemon	juice,	slightly	sweet,	with	a
delicate	 green	 aroma.	 And	 ripe	 grapes	 are
cooked	 down	 to	 a	 thick,	 sweet-tart,	 aromatic
syrup	 (Roman	sapa,	 Italian	saba	 or	mosto
cotto,	Turkish	pekmez,	Arab	dibs).	Like	syrups
from	 other	 fruit	 (pomegranates),	 grape	 syrup



was	 an	 important	 sweetener	 in	 the	 times
before	cheap	table	sugar,	but	provides	tartness
and	 aroma	 as	well	 as	 sweetness.	 It’s	 thought
that	balsamic	vinegar	may	have	evolved	from
grape	 syrup	 that	 was	 kept	 long	 enough	 to
ferment	(p.	775).

Kiwi	 “Kiwi”	 fruit	 is	 the	 name	 that	 New
Zealand	 producers	 came	 up	 with	 for	 the
striking,	 tart	 berry	 of	 a	 Chinese	 vine,
Actinidia	 deliciosa,	 when	 they	 pioneered	 its
international	marketing	 in	 the	1970s.	Several
other	 species	 of	Actinidia	 are	 now	 also
cultivated,	 including	 the	 yellow-to-red-
fleshed	A.	chinensis.	Kiwi	fruit	are	unusual	in
appearance	and	ripening	behavior.	Their	 thin,
hairy	 skin	 doesn’t	 change	 color	 during
ripening,	 and	 the	 translucent	 inner	 flesh	 is
green	with	chlorophyll,	with	as	many	as	1,500
small	 black	 seeds	 embedded	 in	 a	 ring	 and
connected	 to	 the	 core	 by	 white	 rays	 of
vascular	 tissue.	 (There	 are	 also	 chlorophyll-



free	 varieties	 with	 yellow,	 red,	 and	 purple
flesh.)	Cross-sectional	 slices	of	kiwi	are	 thus
very	 attractive.	 When	 harvested,	 kiwi	 fruits
contain	 a	 large	 amount	 of	 starch.	 During
months	 of	 storage	 at	 32ºF/0ºC,	 the	 starch	 is
slowly	 converted	 to	 sweet	 sugars.	 Then	 at
room	 temperature	 they	undergo	a	climacteric
ripening	 that	 takes	 about	 10	 days.	 The	 flesh
softens	 and	 the	 aroma	 becomes	 more
pronounced,	 with	 strongly	 fruity	 esters
(benzoates,	 butanoates)	 coming	 to	 dominate
more	delicate,	grassy	alcohols	and	aldehydes.
Some	kiwi	varieties	are	rich	in	vitamin	C	and
in	carotenoids.

Kiwi	fruits	present	a	couple	of	challenges
to	the	cook.	They	contain	a	strong	protein-
digesting	enzyme,	actinidin,	which	can
damage	other	ingredients	in	a	mixture	and
irritate	sensitive	skin.	Heat	inactivates
enzymes,	but	it	also	muddies	the	fruit’s
delicate	color	and	translucency.	Kiwi	fruits
also	contain	crystals	of	calcium	oxalate	(p.



259),	which	pureeing,	juicing,	and	drying	can
make	more	apparent	and	irritating	in	the
mouth	and	throat.

Mulberry	 Mulberries	 are	 the	 surprisingly
small,	fragile,	composite	fruits	of	trees	of	the
genus	Morus.	 They	 resemble	 the	 blackberry,
but	 each	 small	 fruitlet	 actually	 arises	 from	a
separate	flower	on	a	short	flowering	stalk.	The
white	 mulberry,	M.	 alba,	 is	 native	 to	 China,
where	 its	 leaves	have	 long	been	used	 to	 feed
silkworms.	 Its	 color	 ranges	 from	 white	 to
purple,	 and	 it	 is	 relatively	 bland;	 often	 it’s
dried,	 which	 helps	 intensify	 its	 flavor.	 The
Persian	 or	 black	 species,	M.	 nigra,	 comes
from	west	Asia;	it’s	always	a	dark	purple	and
is	 more	 flavorful.	 The	 North	 American	 red
mulberry,	M.	rubra,	is	mainly	tart.	Mulberries
are	 used	 to	 make	 preserves,	 syrups,	 and
sorbets.

Strawberry	 Strawberries	 come	 from	 small
perennial	plants	of	the	genus	Fragaria,	whose



20	 species	 range	 across	 the	 northern
hemisphere.	The	plants	 are	 easy	 to	 grow	 and
therefore	 are	 grown	 widely,	 from	 sub-arctic
Finland	to	tropical	Ecuador.	The	strawberry	is
unusual	 in	 bearing	 its	 “seeds”	 on	 the	 surface
of	 the	 fleshy	portion,	not	 inside.	The	“seeds”
are	 actually	 miniature	 dry	 fruits	 (achenes),
similar	 to	 buckwheat	 and	 sunflower	 “seeds,”
and	the	fleshy	portion	is	the	flower’s	swollen
base,	not	 its	ovary.	During	ripening,	 the	cells
of	 the	 strawberry	 interior	 enlarge	 and	 pull
apart	 from	each	other.	The	berry	 is	 therefore
filled	 with	 tiny	 air	 pockets,	 and	 its	 shape	 is
maintained	by	the	pressure	of	the	cell	contents
pushing	 each	 cell	 onto	 its	 neighbors.	 When
this	 pressure	 is	 released,	 by	 water	 loss	 from
drying	out	or	from	freezing	that	punctures	the
cell	walls,	the	structure	weakens	and	the	fruit
becomes	 soft	 and	 mushy.	 Strawberries	 don’t
improve	once	picked,	so	 they	must	be	picked
ripe.	 Thanks	 to	 their	 thin	 skin	 and	 fragile
structure,	 they	 only	 last	 a	 few	 days,	 even	 in



cold	storage.
The	pineapple	note	in	standard

strawberries	comes	from	the	presence	of	ethyl
esters.	Some	sulfur	compounds	and	a	complex
caramel-like	oxygen-containing	ring,	furaneol
(also	characteristic	of	pineapple),	round	out
strawberry	aroma.	The	smaller	European
woodland	strawberries	have	a	flavor	of
Concord	grapes	thanks	to	anthranilates,	and	a
clove-like	spicy	note	(from	the	phenolic
eugenol).	Strawberries	are	rich	in	ascorbic
acid	and	in	phenolic	antioxidants,	including
its	red	anthocyanin	pigments.	They	are	poor	in
pectic	materials,	so	strawberry	preserves	are
often	supplemented	with	prepared	pectin	or
pectin-rich	fruits.

The	Domestication	of	the	Strawberry	Most	of
the	strawberries	grown	today	derive	from	two
American	 species	 which	 were	 brought
together	 and	 hybridized	 less	 than	 300	 years
ago	—	and	in	Europe,	not	in	the	Americas!



Europe	had	its	own	native	strawberry	(F.
vesca	and	F.	moschata),	which	is	now	called
the	“wild”	strawberry	or	fraise	de
bois(“woodland	strawberry”),	even	though	it’s
cultivated.	This	strawberry	was	mentioned	in
Roman	literature,	subsequently	cultivated,	and
by	the	15th	century	had	a	wonderful	fragrance
but	was	still	small,	pithy	and	unproductive.
Early	European	visitors	to	North	America
were	impressed	by	the	size	and	vigor	of	an
American	species,	F.	virginiana,	and	brought
it	back	to	Europe.	Then	a	Frenchman	by	the
stunningly	appropriate	name	of	Frézier	found
the	walnutsized	fruits	of	another	New	World
species,	F.	chiloensis,	growing	in	Chile,	and
took	that	species	to	France	in	1712.	Around
1750,	in	the	strawberry-producing	area	around
Plougastel	in	Britanny,	an	accidental	hybrid
between	the	two	American	species	arose.
Then	across	the	Channel	in	England,	a	natural
mutant	of	the	Chilean	species	arose,	large	and
pink,	with	a	shape	and	aroma	reminiscent	of



pineapple.	Modern	strawberry	varieties,	large
and	red	and	flavorful,	derive	from	these	two
all-American	ancestors.	They	have	been	given
the	scientific	name	F.	x	ananassa	to	indicate
their	hybrid	origins	(x)	and	distinctive
pineapple	aroma	(ananassa).

Elderberry	 and	 Barberry	 Elderberries	 and
barberries	 are	 minor	 fruits	 worth
rediscovering.	 Elderberries	 are	 pleasantly
aromatic	 fruits	 borne	 by	 trees	 of	 the	 genus
Sambucus,	 which	 are	 found	 across	 the
northern	hemisphere.	They’re	 usually	 cooked
or	made	into	wine	because	they	are	too	tart	to
be	 enjoyed	 raw,	 and	 contain	 antinutritional
lectins	 (p.	 259)	 that	 require	 heating	 to	 be
inactivated.	 Elderberries	 are	 rich	 in
anthocyanin	 pigments	 and	 antioxidant
phenolic	compounds.	So	is	the	barberry,	from
shrubby	 species	 of	 the	 northern-hemisphere
Berberis,	which	is	something	like	a	miniature
cranberry	and	dries	well.	Barberries	are	much



used	 in	 Persian	 cooking,	 where	 they	 provide
the	tart	rubies	in	a	dish	called	jeweled	rice.

Food	Words:	Berry,	Strawberry
Berry	 comes	 from	 an	 Indo-European	 root
meaning	“to	shine,”	perhaps	for	 the	bright
colors	 of	 many	 small	 fruits.	 The	straw	 in
strawberry	 comes	 from	 a	 root	 for	 “to
spread,	to	strew.”	Straw	is	the	dried	stalks
strewn	 about	 the	 field	 after	 the	 grain
harvest;	 perhaps	 strawberries	 were	 named
for	the	plant’s	habit	of	spreading	by	means
of	 runners.	 A	 related	 cooking	 term	 is
streusel,	 an	 informally	 scattered	 topping
on	baked	goods.

Other	Temperate	Fruits

Ground	Cherry	This	is	one	name	for	a
couple	of	related	fruits	from	low-lying	plants
in	the	nightshade	family,	close	relatives	of	the
tomatillo	(p.	331).	The	Peruvian	or	Cape



ground	cherry	or	gooseberry,	Physalis
peruviana,	came	from	South	America,	while
the	ordinary	ground	cherry,	P.	pubescens,	is
native	to	both	North	and	South	America.	Both
fruits	resemble	miniature,	thick-skinned
yellowish	tomatoes,	are	enclosed	in	papery
husks	(thus	another	name,	husk	tomato),	and
keep	well	at	room	temperature.	The	Peruvian
ground	cherry	has	floral	and	caramel	aroma
notes	in	addition	to	generically	fruity	esters.
These	fruits	are	made	into	preserves	and	pies.

Persimmon	Persimmons	are	fruits	of	trees	in
the	 genus	Diospyros,	which	 is	 native	 to	 both
Asia	 and	 North	 America.	 There’s	 a	 plum-
sized	 native	 American	 persimmon,	D.
virginiana,	 and	 a	Mexican	 species	 known	 as
the	 black	 sapote	 (D.	 digyna),	 but	 the	 most
important	persimmon	species	worldwide	is	D.
kaki,	 a	 tree	 with	 applesized	 fruits	 native	 to
China	 and	 adopted	 by	 Japan;	 it’s	 sometimes
said	that	persimmons	are	to	the	Japanese	what



apples	 are	 to	 Americans.	 Japanese
persimmons	 are	 sweet,	 low-acid,	mild	 fruits,
with	 a	 few	 brown	 seeds	 surrounded	 by	 flesh
that’s	 bright	 orange	 from	 various	 carotenoid
pigments,	 including	 beta-carotene	 and
lycopene.	 They	 have	 a	 very	 mild	 aroma
reminiscent	 of	 winter	 squash	 that	 probably
derives	 from	 breakdown	 products	 of
carotenoids.

Japanese	persimmons	come	in	two	general
kinds,	astringent	and	nonastringent.
Astringent	varieties,	including	the	tapered
Hachiya,	have	such	high	levels	of	tannins	that
they’re	edible	only	when	completely	ripe,
with	translucent	and	almost	liquid	flesh.
Nonastringent	types,	including	the	flat-
bottomed	Fuyu	or	Jiro,	are	not	tannic,	and	can
be	eaten	while	underripe	and	crisp	(they	also
don’t	get	as	soft	as	the	astringent	types).
Centuries	ago,	the	Chinese	figured	out	a	way
to	remove	the	astringency	from	unripe
persimmons	before	they	ripen.	This	method



may	be	the	first	example	of	controlled-
atmosphere	storage!	They	simply	buried	the
fruit	in	mud	for	several	days.	It	turns	out	that
when	the	fruits	are	deprived	of	oxygen,	they
shift	their	metabolism	in	a	way	that	results	in
the	accumulation	of	an	alcohol	derivative
called	acetaldehyde,	and	this	substance	binds
with	tannins	in	the	cells,	thus	preempting
them	from	binding	to	our	tongues.	Modern
cooks	can	accomplish	the	same	thing	by
wrapping	persimmons	snugly	in	a	truly
airtight	plastic	film,	polyvinylidene	chloride
(saran).

Persimmons	are	commonly	eaten	raw,
frozen	whole	into	a	natural	sorbet,	and	made
into	pudding.	Traditional	American
persimmon	pudding	owes	its	distinctive
black-brown	color	to	the	combination	of	the
fruit’s	glucose	and	fructose,	flour	and	egg
proteins,	alkaline	baking	soda,	and	hours	of
cooking,	which	encourage	extensive	browning
reactions	(p.	778;	replace	the	baking	soda	with



neutral	baking	powder	or	shorten	the	cooking
time	and	you	get	a	light	orange	pudding).
Persimmon	flesh	can	be	whipped	into	a	long-
lived	foam	thanks	to	its	tannins,	which	help
bind	fragments	of	cell	walls	together	to
stabilize	the	air	pockets.	In	Japan,	most
Hachiya	persimmons	are	dried,	massaged
every	few	days	to	even	out	the	moisture	and
break	down	some	of	the	fibrousness	to	a	soft,
doughy	consistency.

Food	Words:	Rhubarb
Rhubarb	 is	 a	 medieval	 Latin	 coinage,	 a
combination	 of	 Greek	rha	 and	barbarum:
“rhubarb”	 and	 “foreign.”	Rha	 also	 meant
the	 Volga	 River,	 so	 the	 plant	 may	 have
been	named	after	 it:	 it	 came	 from	 foreign
lands	to	the	east	of	the	Volga.

Rhubarb	 Rhubarb	 is	 a	 vegetable	 that	 often
masquerades	 as	 a	 fruit.	 It	 is	 the	 startlingly
sour	 leaf	 stalks	 of	 a	 large	 herb,	Rheum



rhabarbarum,	 that	 is	 native	 to	 temperate
Eurasia	 and	 became	 popular	 in	 early	 19th-
century	England	 as	 one	 of	 the	 first	 fruit-like
produce	 items	 to	 appear	 in	 the	 early	 spring.
The	 rhubarb	 root	 had	 long	 been	 used	 as	 a
cathartic	 in	 Chinese	 medicine,	 and	 traded
widely	 as	 a	 medicinal.	 The	 stalks	 were	 also
used	 as	 a	 vegetable	 in	 Iran	 and	Afghanistan
(in	 stews,	 with	 spinach)	 and	 in	 Poland	 (with
potatoes).	 By	 the	 18th	 century	 the	 English
were	using	them	to	make	sweet	pies	and	tarts.
The	19th	century	brought	better	varieties	and
techniques	 for	 digging	 up	 mature	 roots	 and
forcing	 rapid	 stalk	 growth	 in	 warm	 dark
sheds,	 which	 produced	 sweeter,	 tenderer
stalks.	 These	 improvements,	 cheaper	 sugar,
and	 a	 growing	 supply	 resulted	 in	 a	 rhubarb
boom,	which	peaked	between	the	world	wars.

Rhubarb	stalks	may	be	red	with
anthocyanin	pigments,	green,	or	an
intermediate	shade,	depending	on	the	variety
and	production	techniques.	Their	acidity	is



due	to	a	number	of	organic	acids,	notably
oxalic	acid,	which	contributes	about	a	tenth	of
the	total	acidity	of	2–2.5%.	(This	is	double	or
triple	the	oxalate	content	of	spinach	and
beets.)	Rhubarb	leaves	are	said	to	be	toxic	in
part	due	to	their	high	oxalate	content,	as	much
as	1%	of	the	leaf	weight,	but	other	chemicals
are	probably	also	responsible.	Today	rhubarb
is	available	much	of	the	year	thanks	to
greenhouse	production,	though	some	cooks
prefer	the	more	intense	flavor	and	color	of	the
field-grown	crop	of	late	spring.	The	color	of
red	stalks	is	best	preserved	by	minimizing
both	the	cooking	time	and	the	quantity	of
added	liquid,	which	dilutes	the	pigments.

Fruits	From	Warm
Climates:	Melons,	Citrus
Fruits,	Tropical	Fruits,
and	Others

Melons



Except	for	the	watermelon,	melons	are	fruits
of	Cucumis	melo,	a	close	relative	of	the
cucumber	(C.	sativus)	and	a	native	of	the
semiarid	subtropics	of	Asia.	The	melon	plant
was	domesticated	in	central	Asia	or	India	and
arrived	in	the	Mediterranean	at	the	beginning
of	the	1st	century	CE,	where	their	large	size
and	rapid	growth	made	them	a	common
symbol	of	fertility,	abundance,	and	luxury.
There	are	many	melon	varieties	with
distinctive	rinds,	flesh	colors	(orange	types
are	an	excellent	source	of	beta-carotene),
textures,	aromas,	sizes,	and	keeping	qualities.

Melons	are	generally	used	fresh,	either
sliced	or	pureed.	They	contain	a	protein-
digesting	enzyme,	cucumisin,	and	thus	will
prevent	gelatin	gels	from	setting	unless	the
enzyme	is	denatured	by	cooking	or	an	excess
of	gelatin	is	used.	The	melon	surface	can
become	contaminated	with	microbes	in	the
field	and	cause	food	poisoning	when	the
microbes	are	introduced	into	the	flesh	during



cutting;	it’s	now	recommended	that	melons	be
thoroughly	washed	in	hot	soapy	water	before
preparing	them.

Food	Words:	Melon
In	 Greek,	melon	 meant	 “apple,”	 but	 also
other	 fruits	 containing	 seeds.	 The	 Greeks
called	 our	 melon	melopepon,	 or	 “apple-
gourd,”	 and	 this	 became	 shortened	 to
melon.

Melon	 Families	 and	 Qualities	 The	 most
common	 Western	 melons	 fall	 into	 two
families:

Summer	melons	are	highly	aromatic	and
perishable,	and	usually	have	rough	rinds.
They	include	true	cantaloupes	and
muskmelons.
Winter	melons	are	less	aromatic	and	less
perishable,	and	usually	have	smooth	or
wrinkled	rinds.	They	include	honeydews,
casabas,	and	canaries.



The	 differences	 between	 the	 two	 melon
families	 are	 caused	 by	 differences	 in	 their
physiology.	The	aromatic	summer	melons	are
generally	 climacteric	 fruits	 that	 (with	 the
exception	of	cantaloupes)	separate	 from	their
stems	 when	 ripe;	 and	 they	 contain	 active
enzymes	that	generate	more	than	200	different
esters	 from	 amino	 acid	 precursors,	 and	 thus
help	create	their	characteristically	rich	aroma.
The	 winter	 melons	 are	 generally
nonclimacteric	 fruit	 like	 their	 relatives	 the
cucumbers	and	squashes,	and	have	 low	ester-
enzyme	 activities	 and	 therefore	 a	 milder
flavor.

Vine-ripening	is	important	for	all	melons
because	they	don’t	store	starch	and	so	get	no
sweeter	after	harvest.	A	remnant	of	the	stem
on	an	aromatic	melon	indicates	that	it	was
harvested	before	becoming	fully	ripe,	while
all	winter	melons	(and	true	cantaloupes),	even
ripe	ones,	carry	a	piece	of	stem.	The	aroma	of
melons	may	continue	to	develop	off	the	vine,



but	will	not	be	the	same	as	the	aroma	of	vine-
ripenedfruit.	In	addition	to	fruity	esters,
melons	contain	some	of	the	same	green,
grassy	compounds	that	give	cucumbers	their
distinctive	flavor,	as	well	as	sulfur
compounds	that	provide	a	deeper,	more
savory	dimension.

Some	Melon	Varieties
Summer	Melons:	very	aromatic,	keep	one
to	two	weeks

Cantaloupe:	 smooth	 or	 lightly	 netted,
orange	 flesh,	 rich	 flavor	 (Charentais,
Cavaillon)

Muskmelon:	 deeply	 netted	 (most	 U.S.
varieties,	 sometimes	 misnamed
“cantaloupe”)

Galia,	 Ha	 Ogen,	 Rocky	 Ford:	 green
flesh,	sweet	and	aromatic

Ambrosia,	Sierra	Gold:	orange	flesh
Persian:	large,	orange,	mild
Sharlyn/Ananas:	translucent	pale	flesh



Pancha	 (charentais	 x	 muskmelon):
netted	and	ribbed,	orange,	very	aromatic
Winter	Melons:	less	aromatic,	keep	weeks
to	months

Honeydew:	 smooth	 rind,	 green	 or
orange	 flesh,	 sweet,	 mild	 aroma	 (many
varieties)

Casaba,	 Santa	 Claus:	 wrinkled	 or
smooth	 rind,	 white	 flesh,	 less	 sweet	 or
aromatic	than	honeydew

Canary:	 slightly	 wrinkled	 rind,	 white
flesh,	crisp,	aromatic
Hybrids

Crenshaw	 (Persian	 x	 casaba):	 green-
yellow	 wrinkled	 rind,	 orange	 flesh,	 juicy,
aromatic

Minor	 Melons	 In	 addition	 to	 the	 Western
melons,	 there	 are	 several	 groups	 of	 Asian
melons,	 including	 Japanese	 pickling	 or	 tea
melons,	many	 of	 them	 crisp-fleshed,	 and	 the



flexuosus	group,	long	and	twisted	like	a	snake,
which	 includes	 the	 “Armenian	 cucumber.”
There	 is	 also	 the	dudaim	 group	 of	 small,
especially	 musky	 melons	 used	 in	 the	 U.S.
South	and	elsewhere	for	preserves	and	simply
to	 scent	 the	 air	 (pocket	 melon,	 pomegranate
melon,	 smell	 melon);	dudaim	 is	 Hebrew	 for
“love-plants.”	 The	 horned	melon,	 also	 called
jelly	 melon	 and	 kiwano,	 is	 the	 fruit	 of
Cucumis	metuliferus,	a	native	of	Africa	with	a
spiky	 yellow	 skin	 and	 a	 relatively	 scant
amount	 of	 emerald-green,	 translucent	 gel
surrounding	 its	 seeds.	 The	 gel	 has	 a	 sweet
cucumbery	flavor	and	is	used	in	drinks,	fresh
sauces,	 and	 sorbets.	 The	 hollowed-out	 skin
makes	a	decorative	container.

Watermelon	 The	 watermelon	 is	 a	 distant
relative	 of	 the	 other	 melons,	 the	 fruit	 of	 an
African	 vine,	Citrullus	 lanatus,	 whose	 wild
relatives	 are	 very	 bitter.	 The	 Egyptians	were
eating	it	5,000	years	ago,	and	the	Greeks	knew



it	by	the	4th	century	BCE.	World	production	of
watermelons	 is	now	double	 the	production	of
all	 other	melons	 combined.	Watermelons	 are
notable	 for	 the	 large	 size	 both	 of	 their	 cells,
which	are	easily	seen	with	the	naked	eye,	and
their	 fruits,	which	 can	 reach	60	 lb/30	kg	 and
more.	 Unlike	 other	 melons,	 the	 watermelon
consists	 of	 seed-bearing	 placental	 tissue
rather	than	seed-surrounding	—	thus	seed-free
—	 ovary	 wall.	 “Seedless	 melons,”	 which
actually	 contain	 small	 undeveloped	 seeds,
were	 first	 bred	 in	 Japan	 in	 the	 1930s.	 The
classic	 watermelon	 is	 dark	 red	 with	 the
carotenoid	pigment	 lycopene,	and	 in	 fact	 is	a
much	 richer	 source	 of	 this	 antioxidant	 than
tomatoes!	Recent	years	have	brought	yellow-
orange	 varieties.	 A	 good	 watermelon	 has	 a
crunchy,	 crisp,	 yet	 tender	 consistency,	 a
moderately	sweet	taste,	and	a	delicate,	almost
green	 aroma.	 External	 signs	 of	 quality	 are	 a
substantial	 heaviness	 for	 the	 melon’s	 size,
yellow	 skin	 under-tones	 indicative	 of



chlorophyll	loss	and	thus	ripeness,	and	a	solid
resonance	when	thumped.

In	addition	to	being	eaten	fresh,
watermelon	flesh	is	pickled	and	candied
(often	after	a	preliminary	drying),	and	cooked
down	into	a	syrup	or	thick	puree.	The	dense
rind	is	often	made	into	sour	or	sweet
preserves.	There	is	a	subgroup	of
watermelons,	C.	lanatus	citroides,	known	as
citron	or	preserving	melons,	with	inedible
flesh	but	abundant	rind	for	these	preparations.
Both	melon	and	watermelon	seeds	are	used	in
several	regions,	roasted	or	ground	and	infused
to	make	beverages.

Fruits	From	Arid	Climates:
Fig,	Date,	and	Others

Cactus	Pear	“Cactus	pear”	is	the	modern
marketing	term	for	“prickly	pear”	(Spanish
tuna),	the	fruit	of	the	American	cactus
Opuntia	ficus-indica.	The	species	name	comes



from	the	early	European	idea	that	the	dried
fruit	was	an	“Indian	fig.”	The	cactus	arrived
in	the	Old	World	in	the	16th	century	and
spread	like	a	weed	in	the	southern
Mediterranean	and	Middle	East.	While	both
stem	pads	and	fruits	are	eaten	in	the
Americas,	Europeans	concentrated	on	the
fruits,	which	ripen	in	the	summer	and	fall	and
have	a	thick	skin,	green	to	red	or	purple,	and
many	hard	seeds	embedded	in	a	reddish,
sometimes	magenta	flesh.	The	main	pigment
is	not	an	anthocyanin	but	a	beet-like	betain	(p.
268).	The	aroma	is	mild,	reminiscent	of
melons	thanks	to	similar	alcohols	and
aldehydes.	Like	the	pineapple	and	kiwi,	cactus
pears	contain	a	protein-digesting	enzyme	that
can	affect	gelatin	gels	unless	it’s	inactivated
by	cooking.	The	pulp	is	removed	and
generally	eaten	fresh	as	juice	or	in	salsas,	or
boiled	down	to	a	syrup	or	further	to	a	pasty
consistency.	The	paste	is	made	into	candies
and	cakes	with	flour	and	nuts.



Dates	Dates	are	 the	sweet,	easily	dried	 fruits
of	a	desert	palm,	Phoenix	dactylifera,	that	can
tolerate	some	cold	and	thrives	as	long	as	it	has
a	 source	 of	 water.	 Their	 original	 home	 was
Middle	Eastern	and	African	oases,	where	they
were	being	cultivated	with	artificial	irrigation
and	 pollination	 more	 than	 5,000	 years	 ago;
they’re	 now	 also	 grown	 in	 Asia	 and
California.	Though	we	usually	see	only	two	or
three	 dried	 versions,	 there	 are	 thousands	 of
different	 date	 varieties	 that	 differ	 in	 size,
shape,	color,	flavor,	and	ripening	schedule.

Growers	and	aficionados	distinguish	four
stages	in	date	development:	green	and
immature;	mature	but	unripe,	when	they’re
yellow	or	red	and	hard,	crunchy,	and
astringent;	ripe	(Arabic	rhutab),	when	they’re
soft,	golden	brown,	and	delicate;	and	finally
dried,	when	they’re	brown	and	wrinkled	and
powerfully	sweet.	Drying	is	usually	done	on
the	tree.	Dates	are	moist	and	succulent	when
fresh,	from	50	to	90%	water,	and	chewy	and



concentrated	when	dry,	with	less	than	20%
moisture.	Dry	dates	are	60	to	80%	sugar,
together	with	some	texture-providing	pectins
and	other	cell-wall	materials,	and	a	few
percent	fatty	materials,	including	the	surface
wax.	They’re	ground	into	a	coarse	powder	to
make	“date	sugar.”

The	drying	process	causes	dates	to	develop
a	brown	color	and	browned	flavor	thanks	both
to	the	action	of	browning	enzymes	on
phenolic	materials,	and	to	the	browning
reactions	between	concentrated	sugars	and
amino	acids.	Some	varieties	rich	in	phenolic
materials,	notably	the	Deglet	Noor,	can
develop	an	increased	astringency	and	red
coloration	when	heated.	Phenolic	and	other
compounds	give	dates	notable	antioxidant	and
antimutagenic	activities.

Fig	Figs	 are	 the	 fruits	 of	Ficus	carica,	a	 tree
native	to	 the	Mediterranean	and	Middle	East,
and	 a	 relative	 of	 the	 mulberry.	 Because	 like



the	date	they	readily	dry	in	the	sun	to	a	long-
keeping,	 concentrated	 source	of	nourishment,
they	have	 been	 an	 important	 human	 food	 for
many	 thousands	of	years.	The	 fig	 is	 the	 fruit
mentioned	 most	 often	 in	 the	 Bible,	 and	 was
said	 to	 grow	 in	 the	Garden	 of	Eden.	 Spanish
explorers	 brought	 it	 to	 the	 Americas	 via
Mexico,	 and	 it	 now	 grows	 in	 many	 dry
subtropical	regions.	There	are	many	varieties,
some	 green-skinned	 and	 some	 purple,	 some
with	 bright	 red	 interiors.	 Ripe	 fresh	 figs	 are
80%	 water,	 very	 fragile	 and	 perishable.	 The
vast	 bulk	 of	 the	 world	 crop	 is	 preserved	 by
drying,	a	process	 that	normally	begins	on	the
tree	 and	 then	 concludes	 on	 the	 orchard	 floor
or	in	mechanical	dryers.

The	fig	is	unusual	in	being	more	flower
than	fruit.	The	main	body	is	a	fleshy	flower
base	folded	in	on	itself,	with	an	open	pore
opposite	the	stem,	and	inner	female	florets
that	develop	into	small,	individual	dry	fruits
that	crunch	like	“seeds.”	The	florets	are



pollinated	by	tiny	wasps	that	enter	through	the
pore.	Many	fig	varieties	will	set	fruit	without
pollination	and	produce	“seeds”	with	no
embryo	inside,	but	fig	experts	say	that
fertilization	and	seed	development	seem	to
generate	different	flavors.	(Wasps	carry
microbes	into	the	fig	interior,	so	fertilized
fruits	also	suffer	greater	spoilage.)	Smyrna
figs	and	their	descendants	(“Calimyrna”	is	the
California	version)	will	not	set	fruit	unless
fertilized.	They	must	be	grown	alongside	a
separate	and	inedible	crop	of	“caprifigs,”
from	which	the	wasps	obtain	fig	pollen	and
lay	their	eggs.

Food	Words:	Date,	Pomegranate
Date	 comes	 from	 the	 Greek	 word	 for
“finger,”	daktulos,	 which	 the	 elongated
fruits	 resemble.	Pomegranate	 comes	 from
medieval	 French,	 and	 is	 a	 combination	 of
Latin	 roots	meaning	 “apple”	 and	 “grainy”
or	“seedy.”



The	walls	of	the	fig	fruit	contain	latex
vessels	that	carry	a	protein-digesting	enzyme,
ficin,	and	tannin	cells	that	contribute
astringency.	Figs	are	remarkable	for
containing	very	large	amounts	of	phenolic
compounds,	some	of	them	antioxidants,	and
large	amounts	of	calcium	for	a	fruit.	When
ripe,	figs	have	a	unique	aroma	that	comes
mainly	from	spicy	phenolic	compounds	and	a
flowery	terpene	(linalool).

Jujube	Jujubes,	also	known	as	Chinese	dates,
are	 the	fruits	of	Ziziphus	jujuba,	a	tree	native
to	 central	 Asia.	 They	 do	 bear	 some
resemblance	to	dates,	as	do	the	version	known
in	India	as	the	ber	(Z.	mauritania).	Both	trees
tolerate	heat	 and	drought	 and	 are	now	grown
in	arid	 regions	 throughout	 the	world.	 Jujubes
are	 small,	 somewhat	 dry	 and	 spongy,	 more
sweet	than	tart.	They’re	an	excellent	source	of
vitamin	 C,	 containing	 more	 than	 double	 the
amount	in	an	equal	weight	of	oranges.	They’re



eaten	 fresh,	 dried,	 pickled,	 in	 rice-based
cakes,	and	fermented	into	alcoholic	drinks.

Pomegranate	 Pomegranates	 are	 fruits	 of	 the
shrubby	 tree	Punica	granatum,	a	native	of	the
arid	 and	 semiarid	 regions	 of	 the
Mediterranean	 and	 western	 Asia;	 the	 finest
varieties	 are	 said	 to	 grow	 in	 Iran.	With	 their
dull,	 dry	 rind	 surrounding	 two	 layered
chambers	 of	 translucent,	 ruby-like	 fruitlets
(there	are	also	pale	and	yellow	varieties),	they
figured	 very	 early	 in	 mythology	 and	 art.
Pomegranate-shaped	goblets	have	been	found
in	prehistoric	Troy,	and	in	Greek	myth	it	was
a	 pomegranate	 that	 tempted	 Persephone	 and
kept	her	in	the	underworld.	Pomegranates	are
very	 sweet,	 fairly	 tart,	 and	 often	 astringent
thanks	to	their	strongly	pigmented	juice	well-
stuffed	 with	 anthocyanins	 and	 related
phenolic	 antioxidants.	 Juice	manufactured	by
crushing	 whole	 fruits	 is	 much	 more	 tannic
than	 the	 fruitlets	 themselves;	 the	 rind	 is	 so



rich	 in	 tannins	 that	 it	 was	 once	 used	 for
tanning	leather!	Because	each	fruitlet	contains
a	 prominent	 seed,	 pomegranates	 are	 usually
processed	 into	 juice,	which	 then	 can	 be	 used
as	 is	 or	 cooked	 down	 to	 make	 a	 syrup	 or
“molasses,”	 or	 fermented	 into	 a	 wine.	 True
grenadine	 is	pomegranate	 juice	mixed	with	 a
hot	 sugar	 syrup.	 Today	 most	 commercial
grenadines	 are	 synthetic.	 In	 northern	 India,
pomegranate	fruitlets	are	dried	and	ground	for
use	as	an	acidifying	powder.

The	Citrus	Family:	Orange,
Lemon,	Grapefruit,	and	Relatives

Citrus	fruits	are	among	the	most	important	of
all	tree	fruits.	From	their	birthplace
insouthern	China,	northern	India,	and
Southeast	Asia	they	spread	throughout	the
subtropics	and	mild	temperate	zones	of	the
world.	Ancient	trade	took	the	citron	to
western	Asia	and	the	Middle	East	before	500



BCE,	and	medieval	crusaders	brought	sour
oranges	back	with	them	to	Europe;	Genoese
and	Portuguese	traders	introduced	sweet
oranges	around	1500,	and	Spanish	explorers
carried	them	to	the	Americas.	Today,	Brazil
and	the	United	States	produce	most	of	the
world’s	oranges.	Barely	a	century	ago,
oranges	were	special	holiday	treats;	now
much	of	the	Western	world	starts	its	day	with
orange	juice.

The	 fig.	 It	 contains	 small	 flowers	 within	 the
fleshy	 “fruit,”	 which	 is	 actually	 the	 swollen
flower	base.	The	 fig	 is	an	 inverted	version	of
the	 strawberry:	 it	 surrounds	 rather	 than
underlies	the	true	tiny	fruits,	or	achenes.

Why	are	citrus	fruits	so	popular?	They
offer	an	unusual	set	of	virtues.	Above	all,
their	peels	have	distinctive	and	strong	aromas,



and	these	may	have	been	their	original
attraction,	well	before	human	selection
developed	varieties	with	sweet	juices.	The
improved	varieties	do	have	a	refreshing,	tart
to	sweet-tart	juice	that	can	be	extracted	with
little	pulp.	The	peel	is	rich	in	gel-making
pectins.	And	citrus	fruits	are	also	fairly
robust.	They’re	nonclimacteric,	so	they	retain
their	quality	for	some	time	after	harvest,	and
the	meaty	peel	offers	good	protection	against
physical	damage	and	attack	by	spoilage
microbes.

Citrus	 Anatomy	 Each	 segment	 of	 a	 citrus
fruit	 is	 a	 compartment	 of	 the	 ovary,	 and	 is
stuffed	 with	 small,	 elongated	 bags	 called
vesicles,	 each	 of	 which	 contains	 many
individual	 microscopic	 juice	 cells	 that	 fill
with	 water	 and	 dissolved	 substances	 as	 the
fruit	develops.	Surrounding	the	segments	 is	a
thick,	 white,	 spongy	 layer	 called	 the	albedo,
usually	 rich	 in	 both	 bitter	 substances	 and	 in



pectin.	And	riding	atop	the	albedo	is	the	skin,
a	 thin,	 pigmented	 layer	 with	 tiny	 spherical
glands	 that	 create	 and	 store	 volatile	 oils.
Flexing	a	piece	of	citrus	peel	will	burst	the	oil
glands	 and	 send	 a	 visible,	 aromatic	 —	 and
flammable!	—	spray	into	the	air.

Citrus	 Color	 and	 Flavor	 Citrus	 fruits	 owe
their	yellow	and	orange	colors	(orange	comes
ultimately	 from	 the	 Sanskrit	 word	 for	 the
fruit)	 to	 a	 complex	 mixture	 of	 carotenoids,
only	 a	 small	 portion	of	which	has	 vitamin	A
activity.	The	fruit	peels	start	out	green,	and	in
the	tropics	often	stay	that	way	even	when	the
fruit	 ripens.	 In	 other	 regions,	 cold
temperatures	 trigger	 destruction	 of
chlorophyll	 in	 the	 peel,	 and	 the	 carotenoids
become	visible.	Fruits	of	commerce	are	often
picked	 green	 and	 treated	 with	 ethylene	 to
improve	their	color,	and	coated	with	an	edible
wax	 to	 slow	 moisture	 loss.	 Pink	 and	 red
grapefruit	 are	 colored	 by	 lycopene,	 and	 red



sweet	 oranges	 by	 a	mixture	 of	 lycopene	 and
beta-carotene	 and	 by	 cryptoxanthin.	 The
purple-red	 of	 blood	 oranges	 comes	 from
anthocyanins.

Citrus	 anatomy.	 The	 protective	 outer	 rind
includes	 aromatic	 oil	 glands	 embedded	 in	 a
bitter	white	pith,	the	albedo.	Each	segment,	or
carpel,	of	 a	 citrus	 fruit	 consists	 of	 many
delicate	 juice	 sacs	 contained	within	 a	 strong
membrane.

The	taste	of	citrus	fruits	is	created	by	a
handful	of	substances,	including	citric	acid
(so	named	because	it	is	typical	of	the	family),
sugars,	and	certain	bitter	phenolic	compounds,
which	are	usually	concentrated	in	the	albedo
and	peel.	Citrus	fruits	are	surprisingly	rich	in
the	savory	amino	acid	glutamate,	sometimes



rivaling	the	tomato	(oranges	reach	70
milligrams	per	100	grams,	grapefruits	250).
They	contain	little	starch	and	therefore	don’t
sweeten	much	after	picking.	Usually	the
blossom	end	of	the	fruit	contains	both	more
acid	and	more	sugars,	and	so	has	a	more
intense	taste	than	the	stem	end.	Neighboring
segments	can	also	vary	significantly	in	taste.

Citrus	aroma	is	produced	both	by	the	oil
glands	in	the	skin	and	oil	droplets	in	the	juice
vesicles	—	and	these	two	sources	are	usually
quite	distinct.	Generally	the	vesicle	oils
contain	more	fruity	esters,	and	peel	oil	more
green	aldehydes	and	citrusy/spicy	terpenes	(p.
274).	A	few	aroma	compounds	are	shared	by
most	citrus	fruit,	including	generically	citrusy
limonene	and	small	amounts	of	eggy
hydrogen	sulfide.	In	freshly	made	juice,	the
sac	oil	droplets	gradually	aggregate	with	the
pulpy	materials,	and	this	aggregation	reduces
the	aroma	available	to	the	taster,	especially	if
some	of	the	pulp	is	strained	off.



Citrus	Peel	The	intensely	flavored	citrus	peel
has	 long	 been	 used	 to	 flavor	 dishes	 (for
example,	 dried	 orange	 peel	 in	 Sichuan
cooking),	and	as	a	preparation	in	 itself	 in	 the
form	 of	 candied	 rind.	 The	 outer	 epidermis
contains	 the	 aromatic	 oil	 glands,	 while	 the
underlying	 white,	 spongy,	 pectinrich	 albedo
usually	 contains	 protective	 bitter	 phenolic
substances.	Both	the	oil	with	 its	 terpenes	and
the	 antioxidant	 phenolics	 are	 valuable
phytochemicals	(pp.	256,	257).	The	bitters	are
water-soluble,	 while	 the	 oils	 are	 not.	 Cooks
can	 therefore	 leach	 the	 peel	 repeatedly	 with
hot	(rapid)	or	cold	(slow)	water	to	remove	the
bitter	compounds,	then	gently	cook	the	peel	if
still	necessary	to	soften	the	albedo,	and	finally
infuse	 it	 with	 a	 concentrated	 sugar	 syrup.
Through	 all	 this	 processing	 the	 water-
insoluble	 oils	 stay	 largely	 in	 the	 rind.
Marmalade,	 a	 sugar	 preserve	 that	 includes
citrus	 peel,	 was	 originally	 a	 Portuguese	 fruit
paste	 made	 with	 quince,	 but	 by	 the	 18th



century	 the	 high-pectin,	 readily	 gelled	 sour
orange	 had	 begun	 to	 replace	 the	 quince.
Marmalade	made	with	 sweet	oranges	doesn’t
gel	 as	 readily	 and	 lacks	 the	 characteristic
flavor,	 including	 a	 bitterness	 that	 helps
balance	the	sugar.

As	is	true	for	most	fruits,	the	skin	of	citrus
fruits	is	more	easily	removed	from	the
underlying	tissue	by	briefly	immersing	the
fruit	in	simmering	water.	Thick	citrus	rinds
require	an	immersion	of	several	minutes.	Heat
softens	the	cell-wall	cement	that	attaches	rind
to	fruit,	and	may	also	encourage	some
enzymes	to	begin	to	dissolve	the	cement.

Kinds	 of	 Citrus	 Fruits	 Trees	 in	 the	 genus
Citrus	 are	wonderfully	 variable	 and	 prone	 to
form	hybrids	with	each	other,	which	makes	it
a	 challenge	 for	 scientists	 to	work	 out	 family
relationships.	 Currently	 it’s	 thought	 that	 the
common	domesticated	 citrus	 fruits	 all	 derive
from	 just	 three	 parents:	 the	 citron	Citrus



medica,	 the	 mandarin	 orange	Citrus
reticulata,	 and	 the	 pummelo	Citrus	 grandis.
At	least	one	offspring	is	relatively	young:	the
grapefruit	 apparently	 originated	 in	 the	 West
Indies	 in	 the	18th	century	as	a	cross	between
the	pummelo	and	the	sweet	orange.

Citron	 Perhaps	 the	 first	 citrus	 fruit	 to	 reach
the	 Middle	 East	 around	 700	BCE	 and	 the
Mediterranean	 around	 300	BCE,	 citrons	 are
native	 to	 the	Himalayan	 foothills.	 They	 gave
their	name	to	the	genus,	and	their	name	came
in	turn	from	their	resemblance	to	the	cone	of	a
Mediterranean	 evergreen	 cedar	 (Greek
kedros).	The	several	varieties	have	little	juice,
but	 an	 intensely	 aromatic	 rind	 that	 can
perfume	 a	 room	—	 citrons	 are	 used	 in	 both
Asian	and	Jewish	religious	ceremonies	—	and
that	has	long	been	candied	(p.	295).	In	China’s
Sichuan	province,	 the	rind	is	made	into	a	hot
pickle.

Flavor	Notes	in	Some	Citrus	Fruits



The	 chemicals	 listed	 in	 the	 first	 five	 flavor
headings	 are	 terpenes,	 which	 are	 especially
characteristic	 of	 citrus	 fruits	 and	 some	 herbs
and	spices	(p.	390).

Mandarin,	or	Tangerine	Mandarin	oranges
were	cultivated	in	ancient	India	and	China	at
least	3,000	years	ago.	The	well-known
Japanese	type,	the	satsuma,	appeared	by	the
16th	century,	and	Mediterranean	types
(“tangerines,”	from	the	Moroccan	city	of
Tangier)	in	the	19th	century.	Mandarins	tend
to	be	relatively	small	and	flat,	with	a	reddish,
easily	peeled	rind	and	a	distinctive,	rich
aroma	that	has	notes	of	thyme	and	Concord
grape	(thymol,	methyl	anthranilate).	They’re
the	most	cold-hardy	of	citrus	trees,	yet	the
fruits	are	fairly	fragile.	Satsumas	are	seedless



and	commonly	processed	into	canned
segments.

Pummelo	 Pummelos	 require	 the	 warmest
growing	 conditions	 of	 the	 common	 citrus
fruits	and	have	been	slow	to	spread	from	their
home	 in	 tropical	 Asia,	 where	 they	 were
cultivated	 in	ancient	 times.	They’re	 large,	10
in/25	 cm	 or	 more	 in	 diameter,	 with	 a
relatively	 thick	 albedo	 layer;	 large,	 easily
separated	 juice	 vesicles	 that	 burst	 in	 the
mouth;	 thick	 and	 tough	 segment	membranes;
and	 an	 absence	 of	 the	 bitterness	 that	 flavors
its	 offspring	 the	 grapefruit.	 Some	 varieties
have	pink-red	vesicles.

Orange	Nearly	three-fourths	of	all	citrus	fruit
produced	 in	 the	 world	 are	 oranges,	 whose
juiciness	 and	 moderate	 size,	 sweetness,	 and
acidity	 make	 them	 especially	 versatile.
They’re	 probably	 an	 ancient	 hybrid	 between
the	mandarin	 and	 the	 pummelo,	 and	 have	 in
turn	 been	 developed	 into	 several	 very



different	kinds	of	fruit.
Navel	oranges	probably	originated	in

China,	but	became	a	major	commodity
worldwide	when	a	Brazilian	variety	arrived	in
the	United	States	in	1870.	The	navel-like
appearance	of	their	blossom	end	is	caused	by
the	development	of	a	small	secondary	set	of
segments.	Navels	are	the	ideal	orange	for
eating	fresh	because	they’re	seedless	and
easily	peeled.	However,	the	trees	are	finicky
to	grow,	and	their	juice	contains	fewer	fruity
esters	than	the	best	juice	varieties.	And	juice
made	from	navel	oranges	will	become
noticeably	bitter	after	about	30	minutes.	This
happens	because	when	the	juice	cells	are
broken	and	their	contents	mixed,	acids	and
enzymes	convert	a	tasteless	precursor
molecule	into	an	intensely	bitter	terpene
compound	called	limonin.

Citrus	Family	Relationships



The	Parent	Species
Citron Citrus	medica
Mandarin,	tangerine Citrus	reticulata
Pummelo Citrus	grandis

Their	Offspring
Sour	orange Citrus	aurantium
Sweet Citrus	sinensis,	pummelo	x
orange mandarin(?)

Grapefruit Citrus	paradisi,	pummelo	xsweet	orange
Sour	lime Citrus	aurantifolia
Persian/Tahiti Citrus	latifolia,	sour	lime	x
lime citron(?)

Lemon Citrus	limon,	citron	x	sour	lime	xpummelo(?)
Meyer Citrus	limon,	lemon	x	mandarin	or
lemon sweet	orange?



Modern	Hybrids

Tangelo Citrus	x	tangelo,	tangerine	xgrapefruit

Tangor Citrus	x	nobilis,	tangerine	x	sweetorange

Common	 or	juice	 oranges	 have	 a	 smooth
blossom	 end,	 generally	 contain	 seeds,	 and
have	a	more	adherent	skin	than	navel	oranges.
Commercial	 orange	 juice	 is	made	 from	 juice
varieties	 with	 little	 tendency	 to	 develop
limonin	 bitterness.	 The	 mild	 flavor	 of	 the
juice	 is	usually	augmented	by	the	addition	of
peel	oils.
Blood	oranges	have	been	grown	in	the

southern	Mediterranean	at	least	since	the	18th
century,	and	may	have	originated	there	or	in
China.	They’re	now	the	major	type	of	orange
grown	in	Italy.	Blood	oranges	owe	the	deep
maroon	color	of	their	juice	to	anthocyanin
pigments,	which	develop	only	when	night
temperatures	are	low,	in	the	Mediterranean



autumn	and	winter.	The	pigments	tend	to
accumulate	at	the	blossom	end	and	in	vesicles
immediately	next	to	the	segment	walls,	and
continue	to	accumulate	after	harvest	when	the
fruits	are	held	in	cold	storage.	The	pigments
and	their	phenolic	precursors	give	blood
oranges	a	higher	antioxidant	value	than	other
oranges.	The	unique	flavor	of	blood	oranges
combines	citrus	notes	with	a	distinct
raspberry-like	aroma.
Acidless	oranges	are	grown	in	small

numbers	in	north	Africa,	Europe,	and	South
America,	and	have	about	a	tenth	the	acidity	—
and	less	orange	aroma	—	of	common	and
navel	oranges.
Sour	oranges	come	from	a	different

species	than	the	kinds	described	above,	and
are	both	sour	and	bitter	(thanks	not	to	limonin
but	a	related	compound,	neohesperidin),	with
an	intense	and	distinctive	peel	aroma.	They
arrived	in	Spain	and	Portugal	in	the	12th
century,	and	soon	displaced	quince	as	the



main	ingredient	in	marmalade.	Sour-orange
flowers	are	used	to	make	orange	flower	water.

Grapefruit	 The	 grapefruit	 originated	 as	 a
hybrid	 of	 the	 sweet	 orange	 and	 pummelo	 in
the	Caribbean	in	the	18th	century,	and	is	still
mainly	grown	in	the	Americas.	The	red	types
owe	their	color	to	lycopene,	and	first	appeared
as	 chance	mutations	 in	 Florida	 and	 in	 Texas
early	in	the	20th	century	(the	more	recent	and
popular	Star	Ruby	and	Rio	Red	varieties	were
created	 by	 intentionally	 inducing	 mutations
with	 radiation).	 Unlike	 the	 anthocyanin
coloration	 of	 blood	 oranges,	 grapefruit
lycopene	 requires	 consistent	 high	 growing
temperatures	 to	develop	well,	 appears	 evenly
through	all	the	juice	vesicles,	and	is	stable	to
heat.	The	characteristic	moderate	bitterness	is
caused	 by	 a	 phenolic	 substance	 called
naringin,	whose	concentration	declines	as	 the
fruit	 ripens.	 Like	 navel	 oranges,	 grapefruits
also	 contain	 a	 precursor	 of	 limonin,	 and	 its



juice	 becomes	 bitter	 on	 standing.	 Some
grapefruit	 phenolic	 compounds	 turn	 out	 to
interfere	 with	 our	 metabolism	 of	 certain
drugs,	cause	the	drugs	to	persist	longer	in	the
body,	 and	 thus	 cause	 the	 equivalent	 of	 an
overdose,	so	medicine	labels	sometimes	warn
against	 consuming	 grapefruit	 or	 its	 juice
along	 with	 the	 medicine.	 (These	 same
phenolics	 are	 now	 being	 developed	 into
activity-boosting	 drug	 ingredients.)
Grapefruits	 have	 an	 especially	 complex
aroma,	 which	 includes	 meaty	 and	 musky
sulfur	compounds.

Lime	Limes	are	 the	most	acidic	of	 the	citrus
fruits,	as	much	as	8%	of	their	weight	coming
from	citric	acid.	The	small,	seedy	Mexican	or
Key	lime,	C.	aurantifolia,	is	the	standard	sour
citrus	fruit	in	the	tropics,	where	lemons	don’t
grow	 well.	 In	 western	 Asia	 it’s	 sun-dried
whole,	 then	 ground	 and	 used	 as	 an	 aromatic,
somewhat	 musty	 acidifier.	 The	 larger,



seedless,	more	cold-tolerant	Persian	or	Tahiti
or	 Bearss	 lime,	C.	 latifolia,	may	 be	 a	 hybrid
between	the	true	lime	and	citron,	and	is	more
common	 in	 the	 United	 States	 and	 Europe.
Despite	 the	general	 impression	that	 limes	are
characteristically	“lime-green,”	both	turn	pale
yellow	 when	 fully	 ripe.	 They	 owe	 their
distinctive	 limeness	 to	pine,	 floral,	 and	spicy
aroma	notes	(from	terpenes).
Lemon	Lemons	may	have	originated	as	a	two-
step	hybrid,	the	first	(citron	crossed	with
lime)	arising	in	the	area	of	northwest	India
and	Pakistan,	the	second	([citron	crossed	with
lime]	crossed	with	pummelo)	in	the	Middle
East.	Lemons	arrived	in	the	Mediterranean
around	100	CE,	were	planted	in	orchards	in
Moorish	Spain	by	400,	and	are	now	mainly
cultivated	in	subtropical	regions.	They’re
valued	for	their	acidity,	often	5%	of	the	juice,
and	their	fresh,	bright	aroma,	which	is	the
base	for	many	popular	fresh	and	bottled
drinks.	There	are	many	varieties	of	true



lemon,	and	also	a	couple	of	further	hybrids.
The	large,	coarse	Ponderosa	variety	is
probably	a	lemon-citron	cross,	and	the	Meyer
lemon,	a	thin-skinned,	less	acid	version
brought	to	California	in	the	early	20th
century,	is	probably	a	cross	between	the
lemon	and	either	orange	or	mandarin,	with	a
distinctive	flavor	due	in	part	to	a	thyme	note
(from	thymol).	Lemons	are	generally	“cured”
for	better	shelf	life;	they’re	picked	green	and
held	in	controlled	conditions	for	several
weeks,	where	their	skin	yellows,	thins,	and
develops	a	waxy	surface,	and	the	juice
vesicles	enlarge.

The	preserved	lemons	of	northern	Africa
have	recently	become	more	widely
appreciated	as	a	condiment.	They’re	made	by
cutting	and	salting	lemons	and	letting	them
ferment	for	some	weeks.	The	growth	of
bacteria	and	yeasts	softens	the	rind	and
changes	their	aroma	from	bright	and	sharp	to
rich	and	rounded.	Short	versions	of	the



process	—	for	example,	freezing	and	thawing
the	lemons	to	speed	salt	penetration,	then
salting	for	a	few	hours	or	days	—	will	bring
about	some	chemical	changes	as	the	oil	glands
are	disrupted	and	their	contents	mix	with
other	substances,	but	not	the	full	flavor
development	of	fermentation.

Other	 Citrus	 Fruits	 Lesser-known	 citrus
fruits	 that	 are	 worth	 knowing	 about	 include
the	following:

Bergamot,	C.	bergamia,	possibly	a	cross
between	the	sour	orange	and	sweet	lime
(C.	limettoides),	is	grown	mainly	in	Italy
for	its	floral-scented	rind	oil.	It	was	one
of	the	components	of	the	original	eau	de
cologne	developed	in	17th-century
Germany,	and	is	mainly	used	in
perfumes,	tobaccos,	and	Earl	Grey	tea.
Kumquats,	species	of	the	genus
Fortunella,	are	bite-size	fruits	that	are
eaten	whole,	thin	rind	and	all.	They	are



generally	tart	but	not	bitter.	The
calamondin	or	calamansi,	also	a
diminutive	citrus,	is	probably	derived	in
part	from	the	kumquat.
The	finger	lime,	Microcitrus
australasica,	is	a	small,	elongated	citrus
relative	native	to	Australia.	Its	fruit	has
robust,	decorative	round	juice	vesicles
that	can	be	pale	or	pink-red,	and	a
distinctive	aroma.
The	makrut	or	kaffir	lime,	Citrus	hystrix,
is	common	throughout	Southeast	Asia.
Its	rough	green	peel	has	a	lime-like
aroma	with	general	citrus	and	pine	notes
(from	limonene,	pinene),	and	is	used	to
flavor	various	prepared	dishes,	as	are	its
intensely	lemon-scented	leaves	(p.	410).
The	tangelo	and	tangor	are	modern
hybrids	between	the	tangerine	and
grapefruit,	and	tangerine	and	orange,
with	hybrid	flavors	as	well,	and	mostly
eaten	as	fresh	fruit.



The	yuzu,	Citrus	junos,	possibly	a
mandarin	hybrid,	came	from	China	but
was	developed	in	Japan	beginning	around
a	thousand	years	ago.	The	rind	of	the
small	yellow-orange	fruit	is	used	to
flavor	various	dishes,	and	to	make
vinegar,	teas,	and	preserves.	It	has	a
complex	flavor	that	includes	musky
sulfur	compounds,	and	clove	and	oregano
notes	(from	the	phenolics	eugenol	and
carvacrol).

Food	Words:	Orange,	Lemon,	Lime
The	orange	fruit	got	its	modern	name	from
its	ancient	Sanskrit	name,	naranga,	and	the
fruit	 then	 lent	 its	 name	 to	 the	 vivid	 color
that	 characterizes	 it.	Lemon	 and	lime	 both
come	 via	 Arabic	 from	 a	 Persian	 word,
reflecting	 the	 route	 by	 which	 these	Asian
fruits	were	brought	to	the	West.

Some	Common	Tropical	Fruits



A	century	ago,	only	a	handful	of	tropical
fruits	were	available	to	Europe	and	North
America,	and	they	were	luxuries.	Nowadays
the	banana	is	a	common	breakfast	food	and
new	fruits	appear	in	the	market	every	year.
Here	are	the	most	familiar.

Banana	 and	 Plantain	 Thanks	 to	 their
productivity	 and	 starchy	 nutritiousness,
bananas	and	plantains	 top	 the	roster	of	world
fruit	 production	 and	 trade.	 The	 worldwide
annual	 per	 capita	 consumption	 is	 almost	 30
lb/14	kg,	and	in	regions	where	they’re	a	staple
food,	 individuals	 consume	 several	 hundred
kilograms	per	year.	Bananas	and	plantains	are
the	 seedless	 berries	 of	 a	 tree-sized	 herb
related	to	the	grasses,	Musa	sapientum,	which
originated	in	the	tropics	of	Southeast	Asia.	A
banana	 plant	 produces	 a	 single	 flower
structure	 with	 from	 1	 to	 20	 “hands”	 or	 fruit
clusters,	 as	 many	 as	 300	 “fingers”	 of
individual	 fruit,	 each	 fruit	 weighing	 from	 a



couple	 of	 ounces	 to	 2	 lb/50–900	 gm.	 The
characteristic	 curve	 of	 long	 fruits	 develops
because	the	fruit	tip	grows	upward,	against	the
downward	 pull	 of	 gravity.	 Bananas	 and
plantains	 are	 climacteric	 fruits,	 store	 their
energy	as	starch,	and	convert	some	or	most	of
that	 starch	 to	 sugar	 during	 ripening.	 In	 the
dramatic	case	of	the	banana,	a	starch-to-sugar
ratio	of	25	to	1	in	the	mature	but	unripe	fruit
becomes	1	to	20	in	the	ripe	fruit.

The	terms	banana	and	plantain	are	used
for	two	broad	and	overlapping	categories	for
the	many	varieties	of	these	fruits.	Bananas	are
generally	sweet	dessert	varieties,	and
plantains	are	starchy	cooking	varieties.
Bananas	are	very	sweet	when	ripe,	their	nearly
20%	sugar	content	exceeded	only	by	dates	and
jujubes,	while	ripe	plantains	may	be	only	6%
sugar	and	25%	starch.	Both	are	picked	green
and	ripened	in	storage,	and	are	very	perishable
once	ripe	thanks	to	their	active	metabolism.
Bananas	develop	a	meltingly	smooth



consistency,	and	a	distinctive	aroma	due
primarily	to	amyl	acetate	and	other	esters,	and
green,	floral,	and	clove	(eugenol)	notes.
Banana	acidity	also	increases	during	ripening,
sometimes	twofold,	so	the	flavor	becomes
more	full	in	several	dimensions.	Ripe
plantains	generally	retain	a	dry,	starchy
texture	and	can	be	treated	as	potatoes	are,
fried	or	mashed	or	cooked	in	chunks.

The	pulp	of	these	fruits	is	colored	by
carotenoids	—	plantain	varieties	often	more
noticeably	—	and	tannins	often	make	the
unripe	pulp	astringent.	Bananas	and	plantains
are	very	prone	to	brown-black	discoloration
thanks	to	browning	enzymes	and	phenolic
substances	in	defensive	latex-bearing	vessels
associated	with	the	vascular	system.	These
substances	slowly	decline	by	about	half
during	ripening,	so	once	a	fruit	is	ripe,	it	can
be	refrigerated	with	relatively	little
discoloration	of	the	flesh	(the	peel	will	still
turn	black).



Though	a	small	handful	of	banana	varieties
(Grand	Nain,	Gros	Michel,	Cavendish)
dominate	in	international	trade,	there	are
many	interesting	Latin	American	and	Asian
varieties	to	be	found	in	ethnic	markets,
usually	shorter,	with	tinted	skin	and	flesh	and
intriguingly	different	flavors.

Cherimoya	and	Atemoya	The	cherimoya	and
atemoya	are	tree	fruits	of	species	in	the	genus
Annona,	 a	 native	 of	 tropical	 and	 subtropical
South	America	(the	soursop	or	guanabana	and
the	 custard	 apple	 belong	 to	 the	 same	 genus).
They	 are	 medium-sized	 masses	 of	 fused
ovaries	with	 their	 seeds,	 enclosed	 in	 inedible
green	 or	 tan	 skins.	 Like	 pears,	 they	 can
contain	 gritty	 stone	 cells.	 Cherimoyas	 and
atemoyas	 are	 climacteric	 fruit	 that	 store
starch	and	convert	it	to	sugar	during	ripening;
the	result	is	a	soft,	sweet,	low-acid	flesh	with
about	 double	 the	 calories	 of	 common
temperate	fruits.	They	owe	a	vaguely	banana-



like	 note	 to	 esters,	 and	 flowery	 and	 citrus
notes	 to	 a	number	of	 terpenes.	They	must	be
kept	warmer	 than	55ºF/13ºC	until	 they	 ripen,
after	which	they	can	be	refrigerated	for	a	few
days.	 Cherimoyas	 and	 atemoyas	 are	 eaten
with	a	spoon	both	chilled	and	frozen,	and	are
pulped	and	made	into	drinks	and	sorbets.

Durian	 Durian	 is	 the	 large,	 thorn-covered
fruit	of	a	tree,	Durio	zibethinus,	that’s	a	native
of	 Southeast	 Asia	 and	 cultivated	 mainly	 in
Thailand,	 Vietnam,	 and	 Malaysia.	 Durian	 is
notorious	 for	 its	 very	 unfruit-like	 aroma,	 a
powerful	 smell	 that	 can	 be	 reminiscent	 of
onions,	cheese,	and	meat	at	various	stages	of
decay!	At	the	same	time	many	people	prize	it
for	 its	 delicious	 flavor	 and	 creamy,	 custard-
like	 texture.	 The	 armored	 mass	 of	 fused
ovaries,	 each	 containing	 a	 seed,	 can	 weigh
more	than	13	lb/6	kg,	and	apparently	evolved
to	appeal	 to	elephants,	 tigers,	pigs,	 and	other
large	 jungle	 creatures,	which	 are	 drawn	 to	 it



by	 its	 battery	 of	 powerful	 sulfur	 compounds,
including	 some	 found	 in	 onions,	 garlic,
overripe	cheese,	skunk	spray,	and	rotten	eggs.
These	 compounds	 are	 mainly	 found	 in	 the
outer	 rind,	 while	 the	 fleshy	 segments
surrounding	 the	 seeds	 are	 more
conventionally	 fruity	 and	 savory,	 with	 an
especially	 high	 content	 of	 sugars	 and	 other
dissolved	solids	 (36%).	Durian	 is	eaten	as	 is,
made	 into	 drinks,	 candies,	 and	 cakes,	 and
incorporated	 into	 rice	 and	 vegetable	 dishes.
It’s	 also	 fermented	 to	make	 it	 even	 stronger-
tasting	(Malaysian	tempoyak).

Guava	 and	 Feijoa	 Guavas	 are	 the	 large
berries	 of	 a	 bush	 or	 small	 tree	 in	 the	 genus
Psidium,	 a	 native	 of	 the	 tropical	 Americas,
and	 a	 member	 of	 the	 myrtle	 family,	 which
includes	 the	 clove,	 cinnamon,	 nutmeg,	 and
allspice	 trees.	 True	 to	 their	 family
background,	 they	 have	 a	 strong,	 spicy/musky
aroma	(from	cinnamate	esters	and	some	sulfur



compounds).	Their	flesh	contains	hundreds	of
small	 seeds	 and	 many	 gritty	 stone	 cells,	 so
guavas	 are	 most	 often	 used	 to	 make	 purees,
juices,	 syrups,	 and	 preserves.	 The	 Spanish
colonizers	exploited	 their	high	pectin	content
to	make	a	New	World	version	of	quince	paste.
Guavas	 are	 remarkable	 for	 a	 vitamin	 C
content	that	can	reach	1	gram	per	100	grams,
with	much	of	 it	 concentrated	near	 and	 in	 the
thin,	fragile	peel.

The	so-called	pineapple	guava,	or	feijoa,
comes	from	the	shrub	Feijoa	sellowiana,	also
a	South	American	member	of	the	myrtle
family.	It	shares	a	similar	size	and	structure
and	some	flavor	elements	with	guava,	but	its
strong	aroma	is	distinctive	and	less	complex,
dominated	by	a	particular	group	of	esters
(from	benzoic	acid).	It	too	is	usually	pulped
and	strained	for	use	in	liquid	preparations.

Breadfruit	 and	 Jackfruit	 Breadfruit	 and
jackfruit	are	fruits	of	two	species	of	the	Asian



genus	Artocarpus,	 a	 relative	 of	 the	mulberry
and	fig,	and	resemble	each	other	in	structure.
They’re	 very	 large	 assemblies	 of	 fused
ovaries	and	their	seeds;	breadfruits	may	reach
9	lb/4	kg,	and	jackfruits	10	times	that	weight.
Jackfruit,	a	native	of	India,	has	a	conventional
composition	for	a	fruit	—	mostly	water,	with
8%	 sugar	 and	 4%	 starch	 —	 and	 develops	 a
strong,	 complex	 aroma	 with	 musky,	 berry,
pineapple,	 and	 caramel	 notes.	 It’s	 eaten	 raw
and	in	ice	creams,	as	well	as	dried,	preserved,
and	 pickled.	Breadfruit,	whose	 origins	 in	 the
Pacific	 islands	 remain	 unclear,	 gets	 its	 name
from	its	very	high	starch	content,	as	much	as
65%	by	weight	(with	18%	sugar	and	just	10%
water)	 when	 mature	 but	 unripe,	 and	 when
cooked	 into	 a	 dry,	 absorbent	 mass.	 It’s	 a
staple	 food	 in	 the	 South	 Pacific	 and	 in	 the
Caribbean,	 where	 it	 was	 taken	 by	 Captain
Bligh	of	 the	notorious	Bounty	mutiny.	 It	may
be	 boiled,	 roasted,	 fried,	 or	 fermented	 into	 a
sour	 paste,	 then	 dried	 and	 ground	 into	 flour.



Ripe	 breadfruit	 is	 sweet	 and	 soft,	 even
semiliquid,	and	made	into	desserts.

Lychee	 Lychees	 are	 subtropical	 Asian	 tree
fruits	 (from	Litchi	 chinensis)	 the	 size	 of	 a
small	plum,	with	a	dry,	loose	skin	and	a	large
seed.	 The	 edible	 portion	 is	 its	 fleshy	 seed
covering,	 or	 aril,	which	 is	 pale	white,	 sweet,
and	distinctively	floral	due	to	the	presence	of
a	 number	 of	 terpenes	 (rose	 oxide,	 linalool,
geraniol;	 Gewürztraminer	 grapes	 and	 wine
share	many	of	 the	same	notes).	Lychees	with
small,	undeveloped	seeds	are	called	“chicken-
tongue”	 fruit	 and	 are	 prized	 because	 there’s
more	 flesh	 than	seed.	Lychees	don’t	 improve
in	flavor	once	taken	from	the	tree.	A	common
problem	with	lychees	is	a	brown	discoloration
of	 the	 flesh	 due	 to	 drying	 out	 or	 chilling
injury.	 They’re	 best	 held	 at	 cool	 room
temperatures	 in	 a	 loose	 plastic	 bag.	 When
cooked,	 fresh	 lychees	 sometimes	 develop	 a
pink	 undertone	 as	 phenolic	 aggregates	 are



broken	 apart	 and	 converted	 into	 anthocyanin
pigments	(p.	281).	They’re	eaten	fresh,	canned
in	 syrup,	 made	 into	 drinks,	 sauces,	 and
preserves,	 cooked	 briefly	 and	 served	 with
meats	 and	 seafood,	 and	 frozen	 into	 sorbets
and	 ice	 creams.	 “Lychee	 nuts”	 are	 the	 dried
fruits,	not	the	seeds.

Rambutans,	longans,	and	pulasans	are	all
arils	of	Asian	fruits	in	the	same	family	as	the
lychee	(the	Sapindaceae),	and	have	similar
qualities.

Mango	Mangoes	 are	 the	 succulent,	 aromatic
fruits	 of	 an	 Asian	 tree,	Mangifera	 indica,	 a
distant	 relative	 of	 the	 pistachio	 and	 cashew
trees,	 that	 has	 been	 cultivated	 for	 many
thousands	 of	 years.	 There	 are	 hundreds	 of
varieties	 with	 very	 different	 qualities,
including	 flavor	 and	 degrees	 of	 fibrousness
and	astringency.	The	mango	 skin	contains	 an
irritant	 and	 allergenic	 phenolic	 compound
similar	 to	 that	 in	 the	 cashew.	 Their	 deep



orange	 color	 comes	 from	 carotenoid
pigments,	 mainly	 betacarotene.	 Mangoes	 are
climacteric	 fruits	 that	 accumulate	 starch,	 so
they	can	be	picked	green	and	will	sweeten	and
soften	as	 they	 ripen,	 from	 the	seed	outwards.
Their	 flavor	 is	 especially	 complex,	 and	 may
be	 dominated	 by	 the	 compounds	 that
characterize	peaches	and	coconuts	 (lactones),
generically	 fruity	 esters,	 medicinal	 or	 even
turpentiny	terpenes,	and	caramel	notes.	Green
mangoes	 are	 very	 tart,	 and	 are	 made	 into
pickles	as	well	as	dried	and	ground	to	make	an
acidifying	 powder	 (Hindi	amchur).	 Mango
pickles	 were	 so	 admired	 in	 18th-century
England	 that	 the	 fruit	 lent	 its	 name	 to	 the
preparation	 and	 to	 other	 suitable	 materials:
hence	“mango	peppers.”

Mangosteen	The	mangosteen	is	 the	medium-
sized,	 leathery-skinned	fruit	of	an	Asian	tree,
G	arcinia	mangostana.	Its	white	flesh	consists
of	the	arils	around	several	seeds,	and	is	moist



and	has	 a	 pleasing	 sweet-tart	 balance,	with	 a
delicate,	fruity	and	flowery	aroma,	something
like	 a	 lychee.	 It’s	 usually	 eaten	 fresh	 or	 in
preserves,	and	is	also	canned.

Food	Words:	Tropical	Fruits
Many	of	our	words	for	tropical	fruits	come
from	 the	 peoples	 among	 whom	 Western
travelers	 first	 encountered	 them.	Banana
comes	 from	 several	 West	 African
languages,	mango	 from	 south	 Indian
Tamil,	papaya	 from	 Carib,	durian	 from
Malay	(a	word	meaning	“thorn”).

Papaya	Papayas	are	species	of	the	genus
Carica,	a	native	of	the	American	tropics	that
looks	like	a	small	tree	but	is	actually	a	large
herbaceous	plant.	The	common	papaya,	C.
papaya,	consists	of	a	thickened	ovary	wall,
orange	to	orange-red	with	carotenoid
pigments,	and	a	few	dark	seeds	in	a	large
central	cavity.	It	is	a	climacteric	fruit	that
doesn’t	store	any	starch.	Ripening	begins	at



the	center	and	progresses	outward,	and	causes
a	manyfold	increase	in	carotenoid	pigments
and	aroma	molecules,	as	well	as	a	marked
softening.	Softening	causes	the	apparent
sweetness	to	increase	even	though	the	actual
sugar	content	doesn’t	change	(the	sugars	are
more	readily	released	from	the	softened
tissue).	A	ripe	papaya	is	a	low-acid	fruit	with
a	delicate,	flowery	aroma	thanks	to	terpenes,
and	a	touch	of	cabbage-like	pungency	due	to
the	surprising	presence	of	isothiocyanates	(p.
321).	These	compounds	are	especially
concentrated	in	the	seeds,	which	can	be	dried
and	used	as	a	mildly	mustardy	seasoning.

Unripe,	crisp	green	papaya	is	made	into
salads	and	pickles.	The	green	fruit	contains
vessels	of	milky	latex	rich	in	the	protein-
digesting	enzyme	papain,	which	is	found	in
some	meat	tenderizers.	Papain	levels	drop
during	ripening,	but	can	still	cause	texture	and
taste	problems	like	those	caused	by	the
pineapple	enzyme	bromelain	(p.	384).



Two	other	papaya	species	can	be	found	in
markets.	The	large	cool-climate	mountain
papaya,	C.	pubescens,	is	less	sweet	than	the
lowland	papaya,	but	richer	in	papain	and	in
carotenoid	pigments,	often	including
lycopene,	which	gives	its	flesh	a	reddish
tinge.	The	babaco,	C.	pentagona,	is	apparently
a	natural	hybrid,	and	has	cream-colored,	tart,
seedless	flesh.

Passion	Fruit,	Granadilla	Passion	fruits	and
the	 granadilla	 come	 from	 about	 a	 dozen
species	of	vines	of	the	genera	Passi-flora	and
Tacsonia,	 natives	 of	 tropical	 lowlands	 and
subtropical	highlands	in	South	America.	They
consist	 of	 a	 brittle	 (Passi-flora)	 or	 soft
(Tacsonia)	 outer	 husk,	 with	 a	 mass	 of	 hard
seeds	 embedded	 in	 pulpy	 seed	 coverings,	 or
arils.	The	arils	are	the	only	edible	portion,	and
make	 up	 barely	 a	 third	 of	 the	 fruit	 weight.
Though	 the	 pulp	 is	 sparse,	 its	 flavor	 is
concentrated	 and	 actually	 benefits	 from



dilution.	 Passion	 fruits	 are	 unusual	 for	 their
relatively	 high	 acid	 content,	mainly	 citric	—
more	 than	 2%	 of	 the	 pulp	 weight	 in	 purple-
skinned	types,	and	double	that	in	most	yellow
ones	—	 and	 their	 strong,	 penetrating	 aroma,
which	 appears	 to	 be	 a	 complex	 mixture	 of
fruity	 and	 flowery	 notes	 (esters,	 peach-like
lactones,	 violet-like	 ionone),	 and	 unusual
musky	 notes	 (from	 sulfur	 compounds	 like
those	 in	 black	 currants	 and	 sauvignon	 blanc
wines).	 Passion	 fruit	 pulp	 is	 used	 mainly	 to
make	 beverages,	 ices,	 and	 sauces,	 with	 the
milder	 purple	P.	 edulis 	 generally	 consumed
fresh	 and	 the	 stronger	 yellow	P.	 edulis	 var.
flavicarpa	 processed	 (an	 early	 commercial
application	was	Hawaiian	punch).

Meat-Eating	Fruits:	The	Puzzle	of	Plant
Proteases

At	first	glance,	it	seems	strange	that	fruits
should	 contain	 meat-and	 gelatin-digesting
enzymes,	the	molecules	that	prevent	cooks



from	making	 jellies	with	 those	 raw	 fruits.
Of	 course	 there	 are	 a	 few	 carnivorous
plants	 that	 trap	 insects	 and	 other	 small
creatures	 in	digestive	 juices.	And	 in	 some
plant	 parts,	 similar	 enzymes	 probably
provide	protection	against	attack	by	insects
and	larger	animals,	whose	insides	they	can
irritate	or	injure.	But	fruits	are	meant	to	be
eaten	 by	 animals	 so	 that	 the	 animals	 will
disperse	the	plant’s	seeds.	So	why	fill	them
with	proteases?

In	 the	 cases	 of	 papaya,	 pineapple,
melon,	 fig,	 and	 kiwi,	 the	 enzymes	 may
limit	 the	 number	 of	 fruits	 that	 any	 one
animal	 eats:	 too	 many	 and	 the	 animal’s
digestive	 system	 suffers.	 Another
intriguing	suggestion	is	that	in	moderation,
the	 enzymes	 actually	 benefit	 seed-
dispersing	 animals	 by	 ridding	 them	 of
intestinal	 parasites.	Some	 tropical	 peoples
use	 fig	 and	 papaya	 latex	 for	 this	 purpose,
and	it’s	known	that	the	enzymes	do	indeed



dissolve	live	tapeworms.

Flavor	Elements	in	Some	Common
Fruits

The	sugar	and	acid	contents	of	fruits	vary,
and	depend	largely	on	ripeness.	The	figures
below	 generally	 represent	 commercial
reality	rather	than	the	ideal,	and	are	meant
to	 provide	 a	 rough	 way	 to	 compare	 the
qualities	of	different	 fruits.	Generally,	 the
sweeter	a	fruit	is,	the	tastier	it	is;	but	even
a	 sweet	 fruit	 will	 seem	 one-dimensional
without	 some	 counterbalancing	 acidity.
The	 aroma	 notes	 listed	 represent	 volatile
chemicals	 that	 flavor	chemists	have	found
in	the	fruit	but	that	don’t	smell	simply	like
the	 fruit;	 they	 have	 qualities	 of	 their	 own
that	contribute	to	the	overall	flavor.	Blank
entries	indicate	a	lack	of	information,	not	a
lack	of	interesting	aroma!



Pineapple	Pineapples	are	the	large,	pinecone-
like	fruit	of	Ananas	comosus,	a	member	of	the
bromeliad	 family	 (which	 includes	 bromeliad
houseplants)	 and	 native	 to	 tropical	 but	 arid
South	 America.	 (Ananas	 comes	 from	 a



Guarani	 Indian	 word	 for	 the	 fruit;	pineapple
from	 the	Spanish	piña	due	to	its	resemblance
to	 the	 similarly	 composite	 pinecone.)	 The
plant	 had	 already	 spread	 to	 the	 Caribbean
before	 Columbus	 saw	 it	 there	 in	 1493,	 and
modern	 breeding	 efforts	 began	 shortly
thereafter	in	French	and	Dutch	glasshouses.

Pineapples	consist	of	spirals	of	separate
seedless	fruitlets,	between	100	and	200	of
which	fuse	together	and	become	joined	to	a
central	core.	During	the	fusing	process,
bacteria	and	yeasts	become	incorporated	in
the	interior	and	may	later	cause	hidden
spoilage.	The	fruit	doesn’t	store	starch,	is	not
a	climacteric	fruit,	and	will	not	sweeten	or
improve	in	flavor	once	picked,	though	it	will
soften.	Fully	ripe	pineapples	don’t	ship	well,
so	exported	pineapples	are	harvested	early,
with	as	little	as	half	the	sugar	content	that
they’re	capable	of	developing,	and	a	fraction
of	the	aroma.	Brown	or	black	regions	in	the
interior	are	caused	by	chilling	injury	during



shipment	or	storage;	translucent	areas	seem	to
be	caused	by	growing	conditions	that	load	the
fruit	cell	walls	with	sugars.	The	quality	of
pineapples	from	the	subtropics	is	less	reliable
than	that	of	fruit	from	near	the	equator,	where
seasonal	and	climatic	variation	is	minimal.

Pineapple	 Flavor	 Pineapples	 are	 remarkable
for	the	intensity	of	their	flavor,	the	experience
of	 which	 the	 19th-century	 English	 writer
Charles	 Lamb	 described	 as	 “almost	 too
transcendent…a	 pleasure	 bordering	 on	 pain,
from	the	fierceness	and	insanity	of	her	relish.”
At	 their	 best	 they	 are	 both	 very	 sweet	 and
quite	 tart	 (from	 citric	 acid),	 and	 with	 a	 rich
aroma	 provided	 by	 a	 complex	 mixture	 of
fruity	 esters,	 pungent	 sulfur	 compounds,
essences	 of	 vanilla	 and	 clove	 (vanillin,
eugenol),	 and	 several	 oxygen-containing
carbon	 rings	 with	 caramel	 and	 sherry
overtones.	 A	 given	 pineapple	 has	 many
different	 flavor	 zones.	 The	 fruitlets	 near	 the



base	 form	 first	 and	 are	 therefore	 the	 oldest
and	 sweetest,	 and	 the	 acidity	 of	 the	 flesh
doubles	 from	 the	 core	 to	 the	 surface.	Thanks
to	 their	 assertive	 flavor	 and	 firm,	 somewhat
fibrous	 flesh,	 pineapples	 can	 be	 cut	 into
chunks	and	baked,	grilled,	or	fried.	They	have
an	 affinity	 for	 the	 flavors	 of	 butter	 and
caramel	and	work	well	in	baked	goods,	as	well
as	 various	 raw	 preparations	 (salsas,	 drinks,
sorbets).

Pineapple	 Enzymes	 Pineapples	 contain
several	 active	protein-digesting	 enzymes	 that
are	 used	 in	 meat	 tenderizers,	 but	 can	 cause
problems	 in	 other	 prepared	 dishes.	 (In
medicine	they	have	been	exploited	as	a	means
of	cleaning	burns	and	other	wounds,	and	they
help	 control	 inflammatory	 diseases	 in
animals.)	Bromelain,	 the	major	 enzyme,	will
break	down	gelatin,	 so	pineapple	 for	 gelatin-
based	 desserts	 must	 be	 cooked	 first,	 to
inactivate	 the	 enzyme.	 And	 if	 incorporated



into	 a	 mixture	 containing	 milk	 or	 cream,
bromelain	will	break	down	the	casein	proteins
and	 produce	 bitter-tasting	 protein	 fragments.
Again,	precooking	 the	pineapple	will	 prevent
this.

Star	Fruit	Star	fruit	or	carambola	come	from
the	 small	 Southeast	 Asian	 tree	Aver-rhoa
carambola,	 a	 member	 of	 the	 wood	 sorrel
(Oxalis)	 family.	 These	 medium-sized,
yellowish	 fruits	 are	 notable	 for	 their	 starlike
cross	section,	a	decorative	touch	in	salads	and
garnishes,	for	an	aroma	with	notes	of	Concord
grapes	 and	 quince,	 and	 for	 the	 presence	 of
oxalic	 acid,	mainly	 in	 the	 five	 ridges.	When
unripe	and	especially	 rich	 in	oxalic	acid,	star
fruit	 are	 sourly	 reminiscent	 of	 similarly
endowed	sorrel	(p.	411)	and	are	used	to	clean
and	 polish	 metal!	 Star	 fruit	 are	 colored	 by
carotenoid	pigments,	 including	beta-carotene.
A	relative,	the	bilimbi,	is	too	tart	to	eat	fresh
and	 in	 the	 tropics	 is	made	 into	preserves	and



drinks.



Chapter	8

Flavorings	From	Plants
Herbs	and	Spices,	Tea	and	Coffee

The	Nature	of	Flavor	and	Flavorings
Flavor	Is	Part	Taste,	Mostly	Smell
The	Evolving	World	of	Taste	and	Smell
Flavorings	Are	Chemical	Weapons
Turning	Weapons	into	Pleasures:	Just	Add
Food

The	Chemistry	and	Qualities	of	Herbs	and
Spices

Most	Flavorings	Resemble	Oils
The	Flavor	of	an	Herb	or	Spice	Is	Several
Flavors	Combined
Flavor	Families:	The	Terpenes
Flavor	Families:	The	Phenolics
Flavor	Families:	Pungent	Chemicals
Why	Pain	Can	Be	Pleasurable



Herbs,	Spices,	and	Health
Handling	and	Storing	Herbs	and	Spices

Preserving	Aroma	Compounds
Storing	Fresh	Herbs
Drying	Fresh	Herbs

Cooking	with	Herbs	and	Spices
Flavor	Extraction
Marinades	and	Rubs
Herbs	and	Spices	as	Coatings
Extracts:	 Flavored	 Oils,	 Vinegars,
Alcohols
Flavor	Evolution
Herbs	and	Spices	as	Thickeners

A	Survey	of	Common	Herbs
The	Mint	Family
The	Carrot	Family
The	Laurel	Family
Other	Common	Herbs

A	Survey	of	Temperate-Climate	Spices
The	Carrot	Family
The	 Cabbage	 Family:	 Pungent	 Mustards,
Horseradish,	Wasabi



The	Bean	Family:	Licorice	and	Fenugreek
Chillis
Other	Temperate-Climate	Spices

A	Survey	of	Tropical	Spices
Tea	and	Coffee

Caffeine
Tea,	Coffee,	and	Health
Water	for	Making	Tea	and	Coffee
Tea
Coffee

Wood	Smoke	and	Charred	Wood
The	Chemistry	of	Burning	Wood
Liquid	Smoke

Herbs	 and	 spices	 are	 ingredients	 that	we	 use
to	 add	 flavor	 to	 foods	 and	 drinks.	 Herbs	 are
plant	leaves,	fresh	or	dried,	and	spices	are	bits
of	dry	seed,	bark,	and	root.	We	consume	them
in	tiny	amounts,	and	they	have	practically	no
nutritional	 value.	 Yet	 from	 earliest	 times,
these	aromatic	bits	have	been	among	the	most
highly	prized	and	costly	of	all	 ingredients.	In



the	 ancient	world	 they	were	more	 than	mere
foods:	 they	 were	 thought	 to	 have	 medicinal
and	even	transcendental	properties.	Sacrificial
fires	wafted	the	fumes	of	aromatics	upward	to
please	the	gods,	and	at	the	same	time	offered
earth-bound	humans	a	whiff	of	heaven.	Spices
came	from	the	ends	of	the	earth,	from	Arabia
and	 legendary	 lands	 to	 the	east.	The	growing
hunger	 for	 the	 aromas	 of	 paradise	 helped
drive	 the	 European	 exploration	 of	 the	 globe,
the	 discovery	 of	 the	 Americas,	 and	 the
biological	 and	 cultural	 exchange	 that	 helped
shape	the	modern	world.

Few	people	today	think	of	herbs	and	spices
as	emissaries	from	paradise	or	to	heaven.	Yet
they’re	more	popular	than	ever:	because	herbs
and	spices	do	indeed	bring	other	worlds	to	our
table.	They	mark	the	foods	of	different
cultures	with	distinctive	flavors,	and	provide
us	a	taste	of	Morocco	at	one	meal	and
Thailand	the	next.	They	help	us	recapture	the
kind	of	sensory	variety	that	our	ancestors



enjoyed	in	foods	before	agriculture	made
eating	both	more	reliable	and	more
monotonous.	And	because	smell	is	one	of	the
senses	through	which	we	experience	our
immediate	surroundings,	herbs	and	spices
delight	by	lending	our	foods	hints	reminiscent
of	the	forest,	the	meadow,	the	flower	garden,
the	seacoast.	They	can	conjure	a	familiar	part
of	the	natural	world	in	a	bite	or	sip.

This	chapter	surveys	herbs,	spices,	and
three	other	important	flavorings	derived	from
plants.	Tea	and	coffee	are	such	prominent
ingredients	in	their	own	right	that	we	don’t
think	of	them	as	herb	or	spice,	but	that’s
essentially	what	they	are:	tea	is	a	dried	leaf
and	coffee	a	roasted	seed,	and	we	use	them	to
flavor	water	(and	infuse	it	with	a	useful	drug,
caffeine).	And	wood	smoke	is	a	flavoring
created	when	intense	heat	breaks	plant	tissues
down	into	some	of	the	same	aromatics	found
in	true	spices.



A	Brief	History	of	Spices
The	 story	 of	 spices	 is	 a	 colorful	 one,	 and
has	been	told	many	times.	It	turned	out	that
tropical	Asia	 was	 especially	 rich	 in	 spice
plants.	To	the	peoples	of	the	Mediterranean
and	Europe,	who	depended	on	Arab	traders
for	 both	 the	 spices	 and	 information	 about
them,	this	meant	that	cinnamon	and	pepper
and	ginger	were	rare	treasures	from	fabled
lands.

The	Romans	knew	a	number	of	Eastern
spices	but	 in	cooking	used	mainly	pepper.
A	 thousand	 years	 later,	 Arab	 cultural
influence	 introduced	 other	 spices	 to
wealthy	 medieval	 tables	 throughout
Europe,	 and	 demand	 for	 them	 grew	 with
the	middle	 classes.	Medieval	 sauces	 often
call	 for	 a	 half-dozen	 spices,	 usually
beginning	 with	 cinnamon,	 ginger,	 and
grains	 of	 paradise.	The	Turkish	 control	 of
supply	routes	and	prices	impelled	Portugal
and	Spain	to	search	for	a	new	sea	route	to



Asia;	Columbus	reached	the	Americas,	the
home	 of	 chillis	 and	 vanilla,	 in	 1492,	 and
Vasco	da	Gama	reached	India	in	1498.	The
Portuguese	and	then	the	Spanish	controlled
the	 Spice	 Islands	 and	 the	 trade	 in	 nutmeg
and	 cloves	 until	 around	 1600,	 when	 the
Dutch	 embarked	 on	 two	 centuries	 of
brutally	efficient	control.

As	spices	were	planted	in	other	tropical
countries	 and	 became	 cheaper	 and	 more
commonly	 available,	 they	 slowly	 faded
from	their	former	prominence	in	European
dishes,	persisting	mainly	 in	sweets.	But	at
the	 end	 of	 the	 20th	 century,	 the
consumption	 of	 herbs	 and	 spices	 rose
sharply	in	the	West.	In	the	United	States	it
tripled	between	1965	and	2000	(to	about	4
grams	 per	 day	 per	 person),	 thanks	 to	 a
growing	 appreciation	 of	 Asian	 and	 Latin
American	 foods,	 and	 especially	 the
spiciness	of	“hot”	chillis.

The	Nature	of	Flavor



The	Nature	of	Flavor
and	Flavorings

Flavor	is	Part	Taste,
Mostly	Smell

The	function	of	herbs	and	spices	is	to	add
flavor	to	our	foods.	Flavor	is	a	composite
quality,	a	combination	of	sensations	from	the
taste	buds	in	our	mouth	and	the	odor	receptors
in	the	upper	reaches	of	our	nose.	And	these
sensations	are	chemical	in	nature:	we	taste
tastes	and	smell	odors	when	our	receptors	are
triggered	by	specific	chemicals	in	foods.
There	are	only	a	handful	of	different	tastes	—
sweet,	sour,	salty,	bitter,	and	savory	or	umami
(p.	342),	while	there	are	many	thousands	of
different	odors.	It’s	odor	molecules	that	make
an	apple	“taste”	like	an	apple,	not	like	a	pear
or	radish.	If	our	nose	is	blocked	by	a	cold	or
pinching	fingers,	it’s	hard	to	tell	the
difference	between	an	apple	and	a	pear.	So
most	of	what	we	experience	as	flavor	is	odor,



or	aroma.	Herbs	and	spices	heighten	flavor	by
adding	their	characteristic	aroma	molecules.
(The	exceptions	to	this	rule	are	the	pungent
spices	and	herbs,	which	stimulate	and	irritate
nerves	in	the	mouth;	seep.	394.)

Odors	 and	 the	 Suggestiveness	 of	Volatility
The	aroma	chemicals	of	herbs	and	spices	are
volatile:	 that	 is,	 they’re	 small	 and	 light
enough	to	evaporate	from	their	source	and	fly
through	 the	 air,	 which	 allows	 them	 to	 rise
with	 our	 breath	 into	 the	 nose,	 where	 we	 can
detect	them.	High	temperatures	make	volatile
chemicals	more	volatile,	so	heating	herbs	and
spices	 liberates	 more	 of	 their	 aroma
molecules	 and	 fills	 the	 air	 with	 their	 odor.
Unlike	 most	 of	 the	 objects	 that	 we	 sense
around	 us,	 which	 we	 see	 or	 touch	 or	 hear,
aromas	 are	 an	 invisible,	 intangible	 presence.
To	 cultures	 that	 knew	 nothing	 of	 molecules
and	 odor	 receptors,	 this	 ethereal,	 penetrating
quality	 suggested	 a	 realm	of	 invisible	 beings



and	 powers.	 So	 herbs	 and	 spices	 became
important	 in	 the	 sacrificial	 fires	 and	 incense
of	 religious	 ceremonies;	 they	 were	 offerings
to	 the	 gods,	 a	way	 of	 evoking	 their	 presence
and	 imagining	 their	 heaven.	 Perfumes	 —	 a
word	 that	 comes	 from	 the	Latin	 for	 “through
fire”	 —	 have	 long	 been	 the	 source	 of	 a
similarly	mysterious	appeal.

The	Aromas	of	Holiness	and	Paradise
In	the	religions	of	the	ancient	world,	spices
were	 a	 means	 by	 which	 spiritual
fulfillment	 could	 be	 symbolized	 and
experienced	as	a	form	of	sensuous	delight.
A	garden	inclosed	is	my	sister,	my	spouse;
a	spring	shut	up,	a	fountain	sealed.

Thy	 plants	 are	 an	 orchard	 of
pomegranates,	 with	 pleasant	 fruits;
camphire,	 with	 spikenard,	 Spikenard	 and
saffron,	 calamus	 and	 cinnamon,	 with	 all
trees	 of	 frankincense;	 myrrh	 and	 aloes,
with	 all	 the	 chief	 spices:	 A	 fountain	 of



gardens,	 a	 well	 of	 living	 waters,	 and
streams	 from	 Lebanon.	 Awake,	 O	 north
wind;	and	come,	thou	south;	blow	upon	my
garden,	 that	 the	 spices	 thereof	 may	 flow
out.

—	Song	of	Solomon,	4:12–15
Allah	 will	 deliver	 them	 from	 the	 evil	 of
that	 day	 and	 make	 their	 faces	 shine	 with
joy.	 He	 will	 reward	 them	 for	 their
steadfastness	 with	 robes	 of	 silk	 and	 the
delights	 of	 Paradise….	 They	 shall	 be
served	 with	 silver	 dishes,	 and	 beakers	 as
large	as	goblets;	silver	goblets	which	 they
themselves	 shall	measure:	 and	 cups	 brim-
full	 with	 ginger-flavored	 water	 from	 the
Fount	of	Selsabil.

—	The	Koran,	“Man,”	76:	11–15

The	Evolving	World	of	Taste	and	Smell

We	humans	are	animals,	and	for	all	animals,



the	sense	of	smell	does	far	more	than	provide
information	about	a	mouthful	of	food.	Smell
detects	whatever	volatile	molecules	are	in	the
air.	It	therefore	tells	an	animal	about	its
surroundings:	the	air,	the	ground,	the	plants
growing	in	the	ground,	other	animals	moving
nearby	that	might	be	enemies,	mates,	or	a
meal.	This	more	general	role	explains	why
we’re	sensitive	to	aroma	notes	in	foods	that
are	reminiscent	of	the	world:	wood,	stone,
soil,	air,	animals,	flowers,	dry	grass,	the
seacoast	and	the	forest.	It’s	also	essential	for
animals	to	learn	from	experience,	and
therefore	to	associate	particular	sensations
with	the	situations	they	accompany.	This	may
be	why	odors	are	so	evocative	of	memories
and	the	emotions	associated	with	them.

The	 Variety	 of	 Gathered	 Foods,	 the
Monotony	of	Agriculture	Our	earliest	human
ancestors	were	 omnivores:	 they	 ate	whatever
they	 could	 find	 worth	 eating	 on	 the	African



savanna,	 from	 meat	 scraps	 on	 an	 animal
carcass	to	nuts,	fruits,	leaves,	and	tubers.	They
relied	 on	 taste	 and	 smell	 to	 judge	whether	 a
new	 object	 was	 edible	 —	 sweetness	 meant
nourishing	 sugars,	 bitterness	 toxic	 alkaloids,
foulness	 dangerous	 decay	 —	 and	 to	 help
identify	and	 recall	 the	effects	of	objects	 they
had	encountered	before.	And	they	ate	a	varied
diet	 that	 probably	 included	 several	 hundred
different	 kinds	 of	 foods.	 They	 had	 a	 lot	 of
flavors	to	keep	track	of.

When	humans	developed	agriculture
around	10,000	years	ago,	they	traded	their
diverse	but	chancy	diet	for	a	more	predictable
and	monotonous	one.	Now	they	lived	largely
on	wheat,	barley,	rice,	and	corn,	all
concentrated	sources	of	energy	and	protein,
and	all	relatively	bland.	They	had	very	few
flavors	to	keep	track	of.	But	they	still	had
their	senses	of	taste	and	smell.

Spices	Haven’t	Always	Gone	with	Foods



In	 the	 time	of	classical	Greece	and	Rome,
when	 spices	 were	 much	 used	 in	 religious
ceremonies	and	 in	perfumes,	not	everyone
thought	that	they	also	belong	in	foods!
The	question	may	be	raised,	why	aromatics
and	other	fragrant	things,	while	they	give	a
pleasant	 taste	 to	 wine,	 do	 not	 have	 this
effect	 on	 any	 other	 article	 of	 food.	 In	 all
cases,	they	spoil	food,	whether	it	be	cooked
or	not.
—	Theophrastus,	De	causis	plantarum,	3rd

century	BCE
Today	 we	 need	 “supplements”	 for	 meat.
We	 mix	 oil,	 wine,	 honey,	 fish	 paste,
vinegar,	with	Syrian	and	Arabian	spices,	as
though	we	were	really	embalming	a	corpse
for	burial.

—	Plutarch,	Moralia,	2nd	century	CE

Flavorings	 Provide	 Stimulation	 and	 Play
One	distinctly	human	characteristic	is	a	drive



to	explore	and	manipulate	the	world	of	natural
materials	around	us,	to	change	those	materials
to	 suit	 our	 needs	 and	 interests.	 And	 these
needs	and	interests	include	the	stimulation	of
our	 senses,	 the	 creation	 of	 sensory	 patterns
that	engage	our	brains.	After	the	development
of	agriculture	and	its	radically	simplified	diet,
our	 ancestors	 found	 ways	 to	 give	 our	 taste
buds	and	nose	more	to	experience	again.	One
way	was	 to	make	 use	 of	 plant	 parts	 that	 are
especially	 concentrated	 sources	 of	 flavor.
Herbs	and	spices	made	it	possible	not	only	to
give	bland	foods	more	flavor,	but	to	give	them
more	 varied	 flavors,	 to	 ornament	 foods	 and
highlight	flavor	for	flavor’s	sake.

Flavorings	are
Chemical	Weapons

And	why	are	some	plants’	parts	especially
potent,	intense	sources	of	flavor?	What	role
do	the	chemicals	that	give	them	their	flavor



play	in	the	lives	of	the	plants	themselves?
One	simple	clue	is	their	very	potency.	Try

the	experiment	of	chewing	on	an	oregano	leaf,
or	a	clove,	or	a	vanilla	bean.	The	result	is	far
from	pleasurable!	When	eaten	as	is,	most
spices	and	herbs	are	acrid,	irritating,	numbing.
And	the	chemicals	responsible	for	these
sensations	are	actually	toxic.	The	purified
essence	of	oregano	and	of	thyme	can	be
bought	from	chemical	supply	companies,	and
come	with	bright	warning	labels:	these
chemicals	damage	skin	and	lungs,	so	don’t
touch	or	inhale.	This	is	precisely	the	primary
function	of	these	chemicals:	to	make	the
plants	that	produce	them	obnoxious	and
therefore	resistant	to	attack	by	animals	or
microbes.	The	flavors	of	herbs	and	spices	are
defensive	chemical	weapons	that	are	released
from	plant	cells	when	the	plant	is	chewed	on.
Their	volatility	gives	them	the	advantage	of
counterattacking	through	the	air,	not	just	on
direct	contact,	and	of	being	a	warning	signal



that	can	train	some	animals	to	be	deterred	by
smell	alone.

Turning	Weapons	Into
Pleasures:	Just	Add	Food

And	yet	humans	have	come	to	prize	these
weapons	that	are	meant	to	repel	us.	What
makes	herbs	and	spices	not	only	nontoxic	and
edible	but	delicious	is	a	simple	principle	of
cooking:	dilution.	If	we	bite	into	an	intact	leaf
of	oregano	or	a	peppercorn,	the	concentrated
dose	of	defensive	chemicals	overwhelms	and
irritates	our	senses;	but	those	same	chemicals
diffused	throughout	a	dish	of	other	foods	—	a
few	milligrams	in	a	pound	or	two	—	stimulate
without	overwhelming.	They	add	favors	that
our	grains	and	meats	don’t	have,	and	make
those	foods	more	complex	and	appealing.

The	Chemistry	and	Qualities
Of	Herbs	and	Spices



Most	Flavorings	Resemble	Oils

The	flavorful	material	in	an	herb	or	spice	is
traditionally	called	its	essential	oil.	The	term
reflects	an	important	practical	fact:	aroma
chemicals	are	more	similar	to	oils	and	fats
than	they	are	to	water,	and	are	therefore	more
soluble	in	oil	than	they	are	in	water	(p.	797).
This	is	why	cooks	make	prepared	flavor
extracts	by	infusing	herbs	and	spices	in	oil,
not	water.	They	do	infuse	herbs	in	watery
vinegar	and	in	alcohols,	but	both	alcohol	and
vinegar’s	acetic	acid	are	small	cousins	of	fat
molecules,	and	help	dissolve	more	aromatics
than	plain	water	could.	The	defensive	aroma
chemicals	can	have	disruptive	effects	on	a
plant’s	own	cells	as	well	as	on	predators,	so
plants	take	care	to	isolate	them	from	their
inner	workings.	Herbs	and	spices	stockpile
their	aroma	chemicals	in	specialized	oil-
storage	cells,	in	glands	on	the	surfaces	of
leaves,	or	in	channels	that	open	up	between



cells.	Some	dry	spices	are	as	much	as	15%
essential	oil	by	weight,	and	many	are	5–10%.
Fresh	and	dry	herbs	generally	contain	much
less,	around	1%,	fresh	herbs	because	their
water	content	is	much	higher,	and	dry	herbs
because	they	lose	aroma	chemicals	in	the
drying	process.

The	Flavor	of	an	Herb	or	Spice	is
Several	Flavors	Combined

As	we’ve	seen	many	times	and	in	many	foods,
flavor	is	a	composite	quality.	A	ripe	fruit	may
contain	hundreds	of	different	aromatic
compounds;	and	the	same	goes	for	a	roast.
Though	we	tend	to	think	of	a	particular	herb
or	spice	as	having	its	own	distinctive	flavor,	it
too	is	always	a	composite	of	several	different
aroma	compounds.	Sometimes	one	of	those
compounds	predominates	and	provides	the
main	character	—	as	in	cloves,	cinnamon,
anise,	thyme	—	but	often	it’s	the	mixture	that



creates	the	character,	and	that	makes	a	spice
well	suited	to	serve	as	a	unifying	bridge
among	several	different	ingredients.
Coriander	seed,	for	example,	is
simultaneously	flowery	and	lemony;	bay	leaf
combines	eucalyptus,	clove,	pine,	and	flowery
notes.	It	can	be	fascinating	—	and	useful	—	to
taste	spices	analytically,	trying	to	perceive	the
separate	components	and	how	their	flavors	are
built.	Terms	from	perfumery	can	be	helpful:
there	are	“top	notes,”	perceived	right	away,
ethereal	and	quick	to	fade;	there	are	“mid-
notes,”	the	main	flavors;	and	there	are
“bottom	notes,”	which	are	slow	to	develop
and	which	persist.	The	charts	on	pp.	392	and
393	list	the	prominent	aroma	components	in	a
selection	of	herbs	and	spices.	There	are	two
particular	chemical	families	that	contribute
many	of	the	aroma	compounds	in	herbs	and
spices.

Flavor	Families:	The	Terpenes



Terpene	compounds	are	constructed	from	a
zigzag	building	block	of	five	carbon	atoms,
which	turns	out	to	be	amazingly	versatile	and
can	be	combined,	twisted,	and	decorated	into
tens	of	thousands	of	different	molecules.
Plants	usually	produce	a	mixture	of	defensive
terpenes.	They	are	characteristic	of	the
needles	and	bark	of	coniferous	trees,	of	citrus
fruits	(p.	374),	and	of	flowers,	and	provide
pine-like,	citrusy,	floral,	leaf-like,	and	“fresh”
notes	to	the	overall	flavor	of	many	herbs	and
spices.	As	a	family,	terpenes	tend	to	be
especially	volatile	and	reactive.	This	means
that	they’re	often	the	first	molecules	to	reach
the	nose,	and	provide	the	initial	impression	of
these	lighter,	more	ethereal	notes.	It	also
means	that	they’re	readily	boiled	off	or
modified	by	even	brief	cooking,	which	is	why
these	fresh,	light	notes	disappear.	If	desired,
they	can	be	restored	to	a	cooked	dish	by
adding	a	new	dose	of	the	herb	or	spice	just
before	serving.



Flavor	Families:	The	Phenolics

Phenolic	compounds	are	constructed	from	a
simple	closed	ring	of	six	carbon	atoms	and	at
least	one	fragment	of	a	water	molecule	(an
oxygen-hydrogen	combination).	Single	rings
can	then	be	modified	by	adding	other	atoms	to
one	or	more	of	the	carbons,	and	two	or	more
rings	can	be	linked	together	to	form
polyphenolic	compounds,	including
anthocyanin	pigments	and	lignin.	Unlike	the
terpene	aromatics,	which	often	have	a	generic
quality	to	them,	the	phenolic	aromatics	are
distinctive	and	define	the	flavor	of	such	spices
as	cloves,	cinnamon,	anise,	and	vanilla,	as
well	as	the	herbs	thyme	and	oregano.	The
pungent	components	of	chillis,	black	pepper,
and	ginger	are	also	synthesized	from	a
phenolic	base.



Examples	 of	 terpene	 aroma	 compounds.	 The
black	 dots	 show	 the	 backbone	 of	 carbon
atoms.	Limonene	and	menthol	are	distinctive,
while	myrcene	provides	a	background	note	in
a	number	of	spices	and	herbs.

Thanks	to	the	water	fragment	on	the
carbon	ring,	phenolic	compounds	are
somewhat	more	soluble	in	water	than	most
terpenes.	They	tend	to	be	more	persistent	in
foods	and	in	the	mouth	as	we	eat	and	taste.

Examples	of	phenolic	aroma	compounds.

Flavor	Families:	Important	Terpenes	and
Phenolics	and	Their	Aromas



Chemical	Compound Aroma

Terpenes

Pinenes Pine	needles	and	bark
Limonene,	terpinene,	citral Citrus	fruits
Geraniol Roses
Linalool Lily	of	the	valley
Cineole Eucalyptus
Menthol	and	menthone Peppermint
L-carvone Spearmint
D-carvone Caraway

Phenolics

Eugenol Clove
Cinnamaldehyde Cinnamon	and	cassia
Anethole Anise



Vanillin Vanilla
Thymol Thyme
Carvacrol Oregano
Estragole Tarragon

The	Flavor	Components	in	Common
Herbs

This	 chart	 and	 the	 chart	 opposite	 are	 a
guide	 to	 experiencing	 flavorings	 from
plants	as	the	flavor	mixtures	they	truly	are.
The	 charts	 identify	 some	of	 the	 important
flavor	notes	in	individual	herbs	and	spices,
both	by	general	sensory	quality	and	by	the
names	 of	 the	 chemicals	 that	 contribute
them.	 This	 information	 can	 help	 us
perceive	more	in	the	flavor	of	a	given	herb
or	 spice,	 and	 understand	 its	 affinities	 for
other	ingredients.

The	 lists	 of	 flavor	 qualities	 and
chemicals	are	selective,	and	 the	groupings
informal.	 The	 “light”	 category	 comprises



mainly	 terpene	 compounds,	 the	 “warm”
and	 “penetrating”	 categories	 mainly
phenolic	 compounds.	 “Distinctive”
compounds	are	those	that	are	found	almost
exclusively	 in	 one	 herb	 or	 spice	 and
contribute	much	of	its	character.

The	Flavor	Components	in	Common	Spices



Flavor	Families:
Pungent	Chemicals

There	is	a	major	exception	to	the	rule	that
herbs	and	spices	provide	aroma.	The	two	most
popular	spices	in	the	world	are	chillis	and
black	pepper.	They	and	a	handful	of	other
spices	—	ginger,	mustard,	horseradish,	wasabi
—	are	especially	valued	for	a	quality	often
called	hotness,	but	best	called	pungency:
neither	a	taste	nor	a	smell,	but	a	general
feeling	of	irritation	that	verges	on	pain.
Pungency	is	caused	by	two	general	groups	of



chemicals.	One	group,	the	thiocyanates,	are
formed	in	mustard	plants	and	their	relatives,
horseradish	and	wasabi,	when	the	plant	cells
are	damaged.	Most	thiocyanates	are	small,
light,	water-repelling	molecules	—	a	dozen	or
two	atoms	—	that	readily	escape	from	the
food	into	the	air	in	our	mouth,	and	up	our
nasal	passages.	In	both	the	mouth	and	nose
they	stimulate	nerve	endings	that	then	send	a
pain	message	to	the	brain.	The	second	group
of	pungent	chemicals,	the	alkyl-amides,	are
found	preformed	in	a	number	of	unrelated
plants,	including	the	chilli,	black	pepper,
ginger,	and	Sichuan	pepper.	These	molecules
are	larger	and	heavier	—	40	or	50	atoms	—
and	therefore	less	prone	to	escape	the	food
and	get	up	our	nose;	they	mostly	affect	the
mouth.	And	their	action	turns	out	to	be	very
specific.	They	bind	to	particular	receptors	on
certain	sensory	nerves	and	essentially	cause
those	nerves	to	become	hypersensitive	to
ordinary	sensations	—	and	thus	to	register	the



sensation	of	irritation	or	pain.	The	mustard
thiocyanates	appear	to	act	in	a	similar	way	in
the	mouth	and	nose.

Why	Pain	Can	Be	Pleasurable

Why	should	irritating	spices	be	our	favorites?
Psychologist	Paul	Rozin	has	proposed	a
couple	of	different	explanations.	Perhaps
spicy	foods	are	the	edible	equivalent	of	riding
a	rollercoaster	or	jumping	into	Lake	Michigan
in	January,	an	example	of	“constrained	risk”
that	sets	off	uncomfortable	warning	signals	in
the	body.	But	since	the	situations	are	not	truly
dangerous,	we	can	ignore	the	normal	meaning
of	these	sensations	and	savor	the	vertigo,
shock,	and	pain	for	their	own	sakes.	The
sensation	of	pain	may	also	cause	the	brain	to
release	natural	pain-relieving	body	chemicals
that	leave	a	pleasant	glow	when	the	burning
fades.



Stimulation	 and	 Sensitizing	 We	 may	 also
enjoy	spicy	food	because	irritation	adds	a	new
dimension	to	the	experience	of	eating.	Recent
research	has	found	that,	at	least	in	the	case	of
the	 pepper	 and	 chilli	 irritants,	 there’s	 a	 lot
more	 to	 pungency	 than	 a	 simple	 burn.	These
compounds	 induce	a	 temporary	 inflammation
in	 the	 mouth,	 transforming	 it	 into	 an	 organ
that	is	more	“tender,”	more	sensitive	to	other
sensations.	 Those	 heightened	 sensations
include	 touch,	 temperature,	 and	 the	 irritating
aspects	of	various	other	ingredients,	including
salt,	 acids,	 carbonation	 (which	 becomes
carbonic	 acid),	 and	 alcohol.	 It’s	 the	 pepper
that	makes	Chinese	hot	and	sour	soup,	which
is	 hot	 and	 acidic	 and	 salty,	 into	 such	 an
intense	 experience.	A	 few	mouthfuls	 and	we
become	 conscious	 of	 simply	 breathing:	 our
mouth	 becomes	 so	 sensitive	 that	 exhaling
body-temperature	air	feels	like	a	textured	hot
bath,	 inhaling	 room-temperature	 air	 like	 a
refreshingly	cool	breeze.



Examples	 of	 pungent	 flavor	 compounds.
capsaicin

Strong	pungency	actually	diminishes	our
sensitivity	to	true	tastes	—	to	sweetness,
tartness,	saltiness,	bitterness	—	and	to	aroma,
in	part	because	it	usurps	some	of	the	attention
our	brains	would	normally	pay	to	these	other
sensations.	Our	sensitivity	to	pungent
flavorings	also	declines	with	exposure	to	it,
and	that	desensitization	lasts	for	2–4	days.
This	is	part	of	the	reason	that	regular	chilli-
eaters	can	tolerate	hotter	dishes	than	people
who	enjoy	pungent	food	only	occasionally.

Herbs,	Spices,	and	Health



Herbs	and	Spices	as	General	Medicinals
The	idea	that	herbs	and	spices	have	medicinal
value	is	an	ancient	one,	and	grounded	in	fact:
plants	are	virtuosos	of	biochemical	invention,
and	have	been	the	original	source	of	many
important	drugs	(aspirin,	digitalis,	quinine,
taxol	are	just	a	few).	The	health	effects	of
plant	foods	in	general	are	discussed	above,	p.
253.	Herbs	and	spices,	with	their
specialization	in	phenolic	and	terpene
compounds,	are	notable	for	three	broadly
helpful	tendencies.	Phenolic	compounds	often
have	antioxidant	activity;	oregano,	bay	leaf,
dill,	rosemary,	and	turmeric	are	among	the
most	effective.	Antioxidants	are	useful	both	in
the	body,	to	prevent	damage	to	DNA,
cholesterol	particles,	and	other	important
materials,	but	also	in	foods,	to	slow	the
deterioration	in	their	flavor.	Terpenes	don’t
prevent	oxidation,	but	they	do	help	reduce	the
body’s	production	of	DNA-damaging
molecules	that	can	cause	cancer,	and	help



control	the	growth	of	tumors.	And	some
phenolic	compounds	and	terpenes	are
antiinflammatory	agents;	they	moderate	the
body’s	overreaction	to	cell	damage,	which	can
otherwise	contribute	to	the	development	of
both	heart	disease	and	cancer.

The	Relative	Strengths	of	Pungent
Chemicals	in	Black	Pepper,	Chillis,	and

Ginger
In	 this	 list,	 the	 pungency	 of	 piperine,	 the
active	 ingredient	 in	 black	 pepper,	 is
arbitrarily	 set	 at	 1.	 The	 ingredients	 in
ginger	and	grains	of	paradise	are	similar	in
strength,	while	the	capsaicins	in	chillis	are
much	 stronger.	 The	 actual	 pungency	 of	 a
given	spice	depends	both	on	the	identity	of
the	 active	 ingredient	 and	 its	 concentration
in	the	spice.

Pungent
Compound Spice Relative

Pungency



Piperine Black	pepper 1
Gingerol Ginger,	fresh 0.8
Shogaol Ginger,	old	(from	gingerol) 1.5
Zingerone Ginger,	heated	(from	gingerol) 0.5
Paradol Grains	of	paradise 1
Capsaicin Chilli 150–300
Capsaicin	variants Chilli 85–90

We	don’t	yet	know	whether	the
consumption	of	herbs	and	spices	can
significantly	reduce	the	risk	of	any	disease;
but	it’s	a	real	possibility.

Herbs,	 Spices,	 and	 Food	 Poisoning	 It	 has
been	 suggested	 that	people	 first	began	 to	use
herbs	 and	 spices,	 particularly	 in	 tropical
countries,	 because	 their	 defensive	 chemicals
help	 control	 the	 microbes	 that	 cause	 food
poisoning,	 and	 thus	 made	 food	 safer	 to	 eat.
While	 some	 —	 garlic,	 cinnamon,	 cloves,
oregano,	 thyme	 —	 are	 fairly	 effective	 at
killing	 important	 disease	microbes,	most	 are



not.	And	 many,	 especially	 black	 pepper	 and
others	that	take	several	days	to	dry	in	tropical
climates,	carry	millions	of	microbes	 in	every
pinch,	 sometimes	 including	E.	 coli	 and
disease-causing	 species	 of	Salmonella,
Bacillus,	 and	Aspergillus.	 This	 is	why	 spices
are	 often	 fumigated	 with	 various	 chemicals
(ethylene	 or	 propylene	 oxide	 in	 the	 United
States)	 or	 steamed.	 About	 10%	 of	 imported
spices	are	irradiated	to	eradicate	microbes.

Handling	and	Storing
Herbs	and	Spices

Preserving	Aroma	Compounds

The	aim	in	handling	herbs	and	spices	is	to
retain	their	characteristic	aroma	compounds.
The	volatility	of	these	compounds	means	that
they	readily	evaporate,	and	their	reactive
nature	means	that	they	are	likely	to	be	altered
if	they’re	exposed	to	oxygen	and	moisture	in



the	air,	or	to	reaction-causing	heat	or	light.	To
preserve	herbs	and	spices,	their	tissues	must
be	killed	and	dried	out,	so	that	they	don’t	rot,
but	as	gently	as	possible,	so	that	water	is
removed	without	removing	all	the	flavor.
Then	the	dried	material	must	be	kept	in	closed
containers,	in	a	dark,	cool	place.	As	a	general
rule,	herbs	and	spices	keep	best	in	opaque
glass	containers	in	the	freezer	(the	container
should	be	warmed	to	room	temperature	before
opening	to	prevent	moisture	in	the	air	from
condensing	onto	cold	flavorings).	In	practice,
most	cooks	keep	their	flavorings	at	room
temperature.	As	long	as	they	aren’t	regularly
exposed	to	strong	light,	whole	spices	keep
well	for	a	year,	and	ground	spices	for	a	few
months.	The	fine	particles	of	ground	spices
have	a	large	surface	area	and	lose	their	aroma
molecules	to	the	air	more	rapidly,	while
whole	spices	retain	the	aromas	within	intact
cells.

Storing	Fresh	Herbs



Storing	Fresh	Herbs

Many	herbs	are	young,	delicate	stems	and
leaves,	and	so	more	fragile	than	other
produce.	Because	their	stems	have	been	cut,
they’re	likely	to	be	producing	the	wound
hormone	ethylene,	which	in	a	closed	container
will	accumulate	and	trigger	general
deterioration.	Most	are	best	stored	in	the
refrigerator	in	partly	open	plastic	bags,
loosely	wrapped	in	cloth	or	paper	that	will
absorb	moisture	and	prevent	microbes	from
growing	rapidly	on	wet	leaves.	Because	they
come	from	warm	climates,	basil	and	perilla
suffer	chilling	injury	in	the	refrigerator	and	so
are	best	kept	at	room	temperature,	with
freshly	cut	stems	immersed	in	water.

The	flavor	of	many	herbs	is	well	preserved
by	freezing,	though	the	tissues	suffer	damage
from	ice	crystals	and	become	unattractively
dark	and	limp	when	thawed.	Immersion	in	oil,
which	protects	the	tissue	from	oxygen,	also
works	for	a	few	weeks,	after	which	much	of



the	flavor	has	oozed	into	the	oil.	Herbs	in	oil
should	always	be	kept	in	the	refrigerator,
because	the	same	absence	of	oxygen	that’s
good	for	flavor	preservation	is	also	good	for
the	growth	of	botulism	bacteria.	The	bacteria
don’t	grow	or	produce	toxins	at	refrigerator
temperatures.

Drying	Fresh	Herbs

Drying	is	a	process	that	removes	most	of	the
water	in	an	herb,	which	when	fresh	may	be
more	than	90%	water.	The	basic	dilemma	is
that	many	aroma	chemicals	are	more	volatile
than	water,	so	any	process	that	evaporates
most	of	the	water	will	also	evaporate	most	of
the	flavor.	This	is	why	many	dried	herbs	don’t
taste	anything	like	the	fresh	version,	and
instead	have	a	generic	dried-leaf,	hay	aroma.
There	are	a	few	exceptions	to	this	rule,	mainly
Mediterranean	herbs	in	the	mint	family	that
are	native	to	hot,	arid	areas	and	have



aromatics	that	persist	in	drying	conditions
(oregano,	thyme,	rosemary,	as	well	as	bay
laurel	from	the	laurel	family).	Though
sundrying	sounds	appealing,	its	high
temperatures	and	strong	dose	of	visible	and
ultraviolet	light	mean	that	it	generally
removes	and	alters	flavor.	Air-drying	over	the
course	of	a	few	days	in	the	shade	is	much
preferable.	Herbs	can	be	dried	in	just	a	few
hours	in	a	low	oven	or	a	dehydrator,	but	the
higher	temperature	usually	causes	greater
flavor	losses	than	air-drying.	Some
commercial	herbs	are	freeze-dried,	which
often	preserves	more	of	the	original	flavor.

The	microwave	oven	turns	out	to	work
fairly	well	for	drying	small	quantities	of
herbs,	thanks	to	the	selective	and	rapid	effects
of	its	radiation.	Microwave	energy	excites
water	molecules	while	leaving	non-polar	oil
molecules	relatively	unaffected,	and	it
penetrates	instantly	throughout	thin	leaves
and	stems	(p.	786).	This	means	that	all	the



water	molecules	in	a	batch	of	herbs	reach	the
boiling	point	within	a	few	seconds	and	begin
to	escape	from	the	leaves,	while	the	structures
containing	the	oil-like	flavor	compounds
(glands	and	canals,	pp.	402	and	407)	heat	up
more	gradually	and	indirectly,	via	the	heat	of
the	water	molecules.	The	herbs	dry	in	a	matter
of	a	few	minutes,	with	less	drastic	flavor
losses	than	result	from	ordinary	oven	drying.

Cooking	With	Herbs
and	Spices

Herbs	and	spices	are	generally	cooked	along
with	other	ingredients,	and	as	a	relatively
minor	component	of	the	mixture,	1%	or	less
of	the	total	weight.	This	section	explores	the
extraction	and	transformation	of	flavor	in
such	dishes.	But	some	preparations	rely	on
flavorings	to	provide	more	than	just	flavor	(p.
401).	And	a	number	of	herbs	—	parsley,	sage,
basil	—	are	delicious	on	their	own,	deep-fried



just	long	enough	to	become	crisp	and	mellow
their	flavor.

Flavor	Extraction

For	herbs	and	spices	to	provide	us	with	flavor,
cooks	must	find	ways	to	liberate	the	flavor
chemicals	from	within	their	tissue	and	convey
them	to	our	taste	and	odor	receptors.	For
fragile	herbs,	this	may	be	as	simple	as
strewing	the	fresh	leaves	on	the	dish,	as	in
Vietnamese	soups:	the	eater	liberates	the
aromas	by	chewing	on	the	leaves,	and	enjoys
them	at	their	freshest.	But	if	the	flavors	are	to
be	incorporated	into	the	dish,	then	the	flavor
compounds	must	somehow	escape	from	the
herb	or	spice.	The	cook	may	leave	the
flavoring	intact	and	use	liquids	and	heat	to
encourage	the	flavors	to	seep	out	gradually,	or
he	may	break	it	into	particles	—	chopping
fresh	herbs,	crumbling	dry	ones,	grinding
spices	—	to	expose	the	flavor	molecules



directly	to	the	dish.	The	finer	the	crumble	or
grind,	the	greater	the	surface	area	from	which
flavor	molecules	can	escape,	and	so	the	more
rapidly	the	flavor	moves	from	flavoring	into
dish.

Rapid	extraction	may	or	may	not	be
desirable.	In	a	briefly	cooked	dish,	it’s
essential.	In	a	long-cooked	stew,	however,	a
slower	release	from	coarser	particles	or	whole
leaves	and	seeds	may	be	preferable.	In	pickles
and	preserves,	whole	spices	provide	flavor
without	clouding	the	liquid.	Once	flavor
molecules	have	been	extracted	into	a
preparation,	they	begin	to	react	with	oxygen
and	with	other	food	molecules,	and	their
original	flavor	is	transformed,	however
subtly.	Larger	particles	release	the	original
flavors	over	a	longer	time.	Another	way	to
assure	some	fresh	flavors	in	a	long-cooked
dish	is	to	add	the	herb	or	spice	—	either
altogether	or	a	supplemental	dose	—	toward
the	end	of	cooking,	or	even	after	the	cooking



is	done.
Prepared	flavor	extracts	such	as	vanilla

extract	are	handy	because	the	flavor
molecules	have	already	been	dissolved	in	a
liquid	and	immediately	permeate	the	dish.
Because	cooking	will	only	cause	their	flavor
to	evolve	or	to	evaporate,	extracts	are	best
added	toward	the	end	of	a	preparation.

Grinding,	 Crushing,	 Chopping	 There	 are
several	ways	of	crushing	herbs	and	spices,	and
they	have	different	effects	on	flavor.	Grinders,
choppers,	 and	mortars	 all	 generate	 heat.	 The
hotter	 the	 aroma	 molecules	 get,	 the	 more
volatile	 they	 become	 and	 the	 more	 readily
they	 escape,	 and	 the	 more	 reactive	 and
changeable	they	become.	The	original	flavors
are	 best	 preserved	 by	 prechilling	 both	 spice
and	 grinder	 to	 keep	 the	 aromatics	 as	 cool	 as
possible.	Food	processors	slice	into	herbs	and
introduce	 a	 lot	 of	 air	 and	 therefore	 aroma-
altering	oxygen,	while	a	pestle	pounding	 in	a



mortar	crushes	herbs	and	minimizes	aeration.
Careful	 chopping	 with	 a	 sharp	 knife	 leaves
much	 of	 the	 herb	 structure	 intact	 to	 provide
fresh	flavor	while	minimizing	cell	damage	to
the	cut	edges;	by	contrast,	a	dull	knife	crushes
rather	than	cuts,	bruises	a	wide	swath	of	cells,
and	 can	 result	 in	 rapid	 brown-black
discoloration.

Some	Classic	Mixtures	of	Herbs	and
Spices

France

Bouquet	garni Bay,	thyme,	parsley
Fines	herbes Tarragon,	chervil,	chive
Quatre Black	pepper,	nutmeg,	clove,
épices cinnamon
Herbes	de Thyme,	marjoram,	fennel,	basil,
Provence rosemary,	lavender



Morocco

Onion,	garlic,	coriander	leaf,
Chermoula chilli,	cumin,	black	pepper,

saffron
Ras	el 20+,	including	cardamom,	cassia,
hanout mace,	clove,	cumin,	chilli,	rose	petals

Middle	East

Za’atar Marjoram,	oregano,	thyme,	sesame,
sumac

Zhug Cumin,	cardamom,	garlic,	chilli

India

Garam Cumin,	coriander,	cardamom,	black
masala pepper,	clove,	mace,	cinnamon
Panch cumin,	fennel,	nigella,	fenugreek,
phoran mustard



China

Five- Star	anise,	Sichuan	pepper,	cassia,
spice clove,	fennel

Japan

Sansho,	mustard,	poppyseed,
Shichimi sesame	seed,	mustard,	dried

mandarin	peel

Mexico

Recado Annatto,	Mexican	oregano,	cumin,
rojo clove,	cinnamon,	black	pepper,

allspice,	garlic,	salt

One	 positive	 effect	 of	 oxygen	 on	 finely
ground	 spices	 is	 manifested	 in	 the	 aging	 of
ground	 blended	 spices,	 which	 are	 said	 to
mellow	 over	 the	 course	 of	 several	 days	 or
weeks.



The	Influence	of	Other	Ingredients	Because
aroma	 chemicals	 are	 generally	 more	 soluble
in	 oils,	 fats,	 and	 alcohol	 than	 in	 water,	 the
ingredients	in	the	dish	will	also	influence	the
speed	and	degree	of	flavor	extraction,	as	well
as	the	release	of	flavor	during	eating.	Oils	and
fats	 dissolve	 more	 aroma	 molecules	 than
water	 during	 cooking,	 but	 also	 hang	 on	 to
them	 during	 eating,	 so	 that	 their	 flavor
appears	 more	 gradually	 and	 persists	 longer.
Alcohol	also	extracts	aromas	more	efficiently,
but	because	it	too	is	volatile,	it	releases	them
relatively	quickly.

Two	methods	of	flavor	extraction	that	take
advantage	of	the	volatility	of	aroma
molecules	are	steaming	and	smoking.	Herbs
and	spices	can	be	immersed	in	the	steaming
water,	or	can	form	a	bed	on	which	the	food
sits	above	the	steam;	either	way,	heat	drives
aroma	molecules	into	the	steam,	which	then
condenses	onto	the	cooler	surface	of	the	food,
and	flavors	it.	If	placed	on	smoldering	coals,



or	onto	a	heated	pan,	herbs	and	spices	will
emit	not	only	their	usual	aromatics,	but
aromatics	transformed	by	the	high	heat.

Marinades	and	Rubs

In	the	case	of	large	solid	chunks	of	meat	or
fish,	it’s	easy	to	get	herb	and	spice	flavors
onto	the	food	surface,	but	not	so	easy	to	get
them	inside.	Water-and	oil-based	marinades
coat	the	meat	with	flavorful	liquid,	while
pastes	and	dry	rubs	put	the	solid	aromatics	in
more	direct	contact	with	the	meat	surface.
Because	flavors	are	mainly	fat-soluble
molecules,	and	meat	is	75%	water,	flavor
molecules	can’t	move	very	far	inside.	A
distinctly	salty	marinade	or	rub	can	help
somewhat	by	disrupting	the	meat	tissue	(p.
155)	and	making	it	easier	for	some	slightly
water-soluble	aromas	to	penetrate	it.	A	more
efficient	method	is	to	use	a	cooking	syringe,
and	inject	small	portions	of	the	flavorful



liquid	into	many	different	parts	of	the	meat
interior.

Herbs	and	Spices
as	Coatings

A	useful	side	effect	of	coating	meat	and	fish
with	a	paste	or	rub	of	herbs	and	spices	is	that
such	a	coating	acts	as	a	protective	layer	—
like	the	skin	on	poultry	—	that	insulates	the
meat	itself	from	the	direct	high	heat	of	oven
or	grill.	This	means	that	the	outer	layers	of
meat	end	up	less	overcooked,	and	so	moister.
Coarsely	cracked	spices,	coriander	in
particular,	can	provide	a	crunchy	counterpoint
to	the	softer	insides.	The	flavor	of	a	spice
crust	is	improved	if	the	coating	contains	some
oil,	which	essentially	causes	the	crust	to	fry
rather	than	simply	dry	out.

Extracts:	Flavored	Oils,
Vinegars,	Alcohols



A	special	case	of	flavor	extraction	is	the
making	of	flavor	extracts	themselves:
preparations	that	serve	as	instant	sources	of
flavor	for	other	dishes.	The	most	common
materials	used	for	extraction	are	oils,
vinegars,	sugar	syrups	(especially	for
flowers),	and	alcohols	(for	example,	a	neutral
vodka	for	flavoring	with	citrus	peel).	The	herb
and/or	spice	is	usually	bruised	to	damage	the
cellular	structure	and	make	it	easier	for	the
liquid	to	penetrate	and	aromas	to	escape.	Oils,
vinegars,	and	syrups	are	often	heated	before
the	herb	or	spice	is	added	to	kill	bacteria	and
facilitate	their	initial	penetration	into	the
tissue,	then	are	allowed	to	cool	to	avoid
changing	the	flavor.	Delicate	flowers	may
require	less	than	an	hour	to	flavor	a	syrup,
while	leaves	and	seeds	are	usually	infused	in
the	extracting	liquids	for	weeks	at	a	cool	room
temperature.	When	the	extract	has	reached	its
desired	strength,	the	liquid	is	strained	off	and
then	stored	in	a	cool,	dark	place.



Because	alcohol,	acetic	acid,	and
concentrated	sugar	all	kill	bacteria	or	inhibit
their	growth,	flavored	alcohols,	vinegars,	and
syrups	pose	few	safety	problems.	Oils,
however,	actually	encourage	the	growth	of
deadly	Clostridium	botulinum,	whose	spores
can	survive	brief	boiling	and	germinate	when
protected	from	the	air.	Most	herbs	and	spices
don’t	provide	enough	nutrients	for	botulism
bacteria	to	grow	on,	but	garlic	does.	Infused
oils	are	safest	when	they’re	made	and	stored
at	refrigerator	temperatures,	which	do	slow
extraction,	but	also	prevent	bacterial	growth
and	slow	deterioration.

Commercial	 Extracts	 Commercial	 flavor
extracts,	 unlike	 kitchen-made	 extracts,	 are
highly	concentrated	and	are	added	to	foods	in
tiny	quantities,	a	few	drops	or	a	fraction	of	a
spoonful	 in	 a	 whole	 dish.	 Vanilla,	 almond,
mint,	and	anise	are	common	examples.	Some
extracts	 and	 oils	 are	 prepared	 from	 actual



herbs	 and	 spices,	 while	 others	 are	 prepared
from	 one	 or	 a	 few	 synthetic	 chemicals	 that
capture	the	essence	of	the	flavoring,	but	don’t
match	 it	 in	 complexity	 and	 mellowness
(artificial	 extracts	 often	 taste	 harsh	 and	 off).
The	 advantage	 of	 synthetic	 extracts	 is	 their
low	price.

Flavor	Evolution

Once	the	aroma	molecules	in	herbs	and	spices
are	released	into	a	preparation	and	exposed	to
other	ingredients,	the	air,	and	heat,	they	begin
to	undergo	a	host	of	chemical	reactions.	Some
fraction	of	the	original	aroma	chemicals
becomes	altered	into	a	variety	of	other
chemicals,	so	the	initially	strong,
characteristic	notes	become	more	subdued,
and	the	general	complexity	of	the	mixture
increases.	This	maturing	can	be	a	simple	side
effect	of	cooking	the	flavorings	with	the	other
ingredients,	but	it	often	constitutes	a	separate



preparation	step.	When	cumin	or	coriander	are
toasted	on	their	own,	for	example,	their	sugars
and	amino	acids	undergo	browning	reactions
and	generate	savory	aroma	molecules	typical
of	roasted	and	toasted	foods	(pyrazines),	thus
developing	a	new	layer	of	flavor	that
complements	the	original	raw	aroma.

Maturing	Spice	Flavors:	The	Indian	System
The	 use	 of	 spices	 is	 especially	 ancient	 and
sophisticated	 in	 India	 and	 Southeast	 Asia.
Indian	 cooks	 have	 several	 different	 ways	 of
maturing	 spice	 flavors	 before	 their
incorporation	into	a	dish.

The	toasting	on	a	hot	pan	of	whole	dry
spices,	typically	mustard,	cumin,	or
fenugreek,	for	a	minute	or	two	until	the
seeds	begin	to	pop,	the	point	at	which
their	inner	moisture	has	vaporized	and
they	are	just	beginning	to	brown.	Spices
cooked	in	this	way	are	mellowed,	but
individually;	they	retain	their	own



identities.
The	frying	in	oil	or	ghee	of	mixed
powdered	spices,	often	including
turmeric,	cumin,	and	coriander.	This	step
allows	the	different	aroma	chemicals	to
react	with	each	other	so	that	the	flavors
become	more	integrated,	and	is	usually
followed	by	the	sequential	addition	of
garlic,	ginger,	onions,	and	other	fresh
components	of	what	will	become	the
sauce-like	phase	of	the	dish.
The	slow	frying	of	a	paste	of	powdered
and	fresh	spices,	with	constant	stirring
until	much	of	the	moisture	evaporates,
the	oil	separates	from	the	paste,	and	the
spice	mixture	begins	to	darken.	Mexican
cooks	treat	their	pureed	chilli	mixtures	in
much	the	same	way.	This	technique
yields	its	own	unique	flavors,	since	dried
and	fresh	ingredients	(including	active
enzymes	from	the	latter)	can	interact
from	the	beginning,	and	moisture	from



the	fresh	spices	prevents	the	dried	spices
from	being	as	affected	by	the	heat	as	they
are	when	fried	on	their	own.
The	brief	frying	in	ghee	of	whole	spices,
which	are	then	sprinkled	on	top	of	a	just-
cooked	dish	as	a	final	garnish.

Indian	 cooks	 also	 aromatize	 some	 dishes
with	 a	 remarkable	 combination	 of	 smoking
and	spicing	called	dhungar.	They	put	the	dish
into	 a	 pot	 along	 with	 a	 hollowed	 onion	 or
small	bowl	 that	contains	a	 live	coal,	 sprinkle
the	coal	with	ghee	and	sometimes	spices,	and
cover	 the	 pot	 tightly	 to	 infuse	 the	 dish	 with
the	fumes.

In	sum,	herbs	and	spices	are	remarkably
diverse	ingredients	in	themselves,	and	are
capable	of	producing	a	remarkable	diversity
of	effects.	Combinations,	proportions,	particle
sizes,	the	temperature	and	duration	of
cooking,	all	have	an	influence	on	the	flavor	of
a	dish.



Herbs	and	Spices	as	Thickeners

Some	herbs	and	spices	are	used	to	provide	the
substance	of	a	dish	as	well	as	its	aromatic
essence.	A	puree	of	fresh	herbs,	as	in	the
Italian	pesto	sauce	made	from	basil,	is	thick
because	the	herb’s	own	moisture	is	already
bound	up	with	various	cell	materials.	And
thanks	to	the	abundance	of	those	cell
materials	—	mainly	cell	walls	and	membranes
—	such	purees	also	do	a	good	job	of	coating
oil	droplets	and	so	creating	a	stable,	luxurious
emulsion	(p.	628).	Fresh	chillis,	which	are
fruits,	produce	a	watery	puree,	but	one	that
cooks	down	to	a	wonderful	smoothness	thanks
to	its	abundant	cell-wall	pectins.	Many
Mexican	sauces	are	made	from	a	backbone	of
dried	chillis,	which	are	easily	rehydrated	to
produce	the	same	smooth	puree;	and
Hungarian	paprikashes	are	thickened	with
powdered	chillis.

Indian	and	Southeast	Asian	dishes	often



owe	their	thickness	to	a	combination	of	dried
and	fresh	spices.	Ground	coriander	absorbs	a
lot	of	water	thanks	to	its	thick	dry	husk;
ginger,	turmeric,	and	galangal	are	starchy
root-like	rhizomes,	and	their	starch	dissolves
during	prolonged	simmering	to	provide	a
thickening	tangle	of	long	molecular	chains.
Ground	dried	sassafras	leaves,	or	filé	powder,
similarly	thickens	Louisianan	gumbo.	And
fenugreek	is	remarkable	for	its	high	content	of
a	mucilaginous	carbohydrate	called
galactomannan,	which	is	released	simply	by
soaking	the	ground	seeds.

A	Survey	of	Common	Herbs

Most	of	the	herbs	used	in	traditional	European
cooking	are	members	of	two	plant	groups,	the
mint	family	and	the	carrot	family.	The	family
members	resemble	each	other	to	varying
degrees,	so	in	this	survey	I’ve	grouped	them
together.	The	remaining	herbs	then	follow	in



mostly	alphabetical	order.
Fresh	herbs	are	usually	harvested	from

mature	plants,	often	as	they’re	beginning	to
flower,	when	their	defensive	essential	oil
content	is	at	its	peak.	The	oil	content	of
Mediterranean	herbs	is	higher	on	the	side	of
the	plant	facing	the	sun.	An	interesting
variation	is	to	harvest	them	as	young	sprouts
with	just	a	few	leaves,	when	their	essential	oil
content	can	be	very	different.	Fennel	sprouts,
for	example,	contain	relatively	little	anise-
like	anethole,	which	dominates	the	flavor	of
the	mature	plant.

The	Mint	Family

The	mint	family	is	a	large	one,	with	around
180	genera,	and	it	provides	more	of	our
familiar	kitchen	herbs	than	any	other	family.
Why	such	generosity?	A	fortunate
combination	of	several	factors.	Members	of
the	mint	family	dominate	the	dry,	rocky



Mediterranean	scrublands	where	few	other
plants	grow,	and	they	cope	with	their	exposed
situation	with	a	vigorous	chemical	defense.
Their	chemical	defenses	are	located	mainly	in
small	glands	that	project	from	their	leaves,
external	and	therefore	expandable	storage
tanks	that	can	make	up	as	much	as	10%	of	the
leaf’s	weight.	And	members	of	the	mint
family	are	both	promiscuous	chemists	and
promiscuous	breeders:	individual	species
make	a	broad	range	of	aromatic	chemicals,
and	they	readily	hybridize	with	each	other.
The	result	is	a	great	variety	of	plants	and
aromas.

Basil	Basils	are	a	large	and	fascinating	group
of	 herbs.	 They’re	 members	 of	 the	 tropical
genus	Ocimum,	 which	 probably	 originated	 in
Africa,	 and	was	domesticated	 in	 India.	There
are	 around	165	 species	 in	 the	genus	Ocimum,
several	 of	which	 are	 eaten.	Basil	was	 known
to	 the	Greeks	 and	Romans,	 took	 firmest	 root



in	 Liguria	 and	 Provence,	 inventors	 of	 the
popular	 basil	 purees	 called	 pesto	 and	 pistou,
and	 was	 hardly	 known	 in	 the	 United	 States
until	the	1970s.	The	standard	“sweet	basil”	of
Europe	 and	 North	 America,	Ocimum
basilicum,	is	among	the	more	virtuosic	of	the
herbs,	 and	 has	 been	 developed	 into	 several
different	 flavor	 varieties,	 including	 lemon,
lime,	 cinnamon,	 anise,	 and	 camphor.	 Most
varieties	 of	 sweet	 basil	 are	 dominated	 by
flowery	and	tarragon	notes,	though	the	variety
used	in	Genoa	to	make	the	classic	sauce	pesto
genovese	 is	 apparently	 dominated	 by	 mildly
spicy	 methyleugenol	 and	 clove-like	 eugenol,
with	 no	 tarragon	 aroma	 at	 all.	 Thai	 basil	 (O.
basilicum	 and	tenuiflorum)	 tends	 toward	 the
anise-like	 and	 camphoraceous;	 Indian	 holy
basil	 (O.	 tenuiflorum)	 is	 dominated	 by
eugenol.

The	flavor	of	basil	depends	not	only	on	the
variety,	but	on	growing	conditions	and	the
stage	at	which	it	is	harvested.	Generally,



aroma	compounds	make	up	a	larger
proportion	of	young	sweet	basil	leaves	than
old,	by	as	much	as	five	times.	In	leaves	that
are	still	growing,	the	relative	proportions	of
the	different	compounds	actually	vary	along
the	length	of	the	leaf,	with	the	older	tip	richer
in	tarragon	and	clove	notes,	the	younger	base
in	eucalyptus	and	floral	notes.

Bergamot	This	herb,	also	known	as	bee	balm
and	 Oswego	 tea,	 comes	 from	 a	 North
American	 member	 of	 the	 mint	 family,
Monarda	 didyma,	 whose	 aroma	 is	 somewhat
lemony.	The	same	name	is	given	to	a	member
of	the	citrus	family	whose	essential	oil	is	rich
in	 flowery	 linalyl	 acetate,	 and	 which	 is	 the
distinctive	 addition	 to	 Earl	 Grey	 tea.
(Confusingly,	European	watermint	[p.	404]	is
also	sometimes	called	bergamot.)	Horehound
Horehound,	 so	 called	 for	 its	 hairy	 white
(hoary)	 leaves,	 is	 a	 Eurasian	 species,
Marrubium	vulgare,	 with	 a	musky	 and	 bitter



flavor,	 more	 often	 used	 in	 candies	 than	 in
cooking.

Mint	 family	 anatomy.	 A	 leaf	 of	 oregano,
showing	the	microscopic	oil	glands	that	cover
the	 surfaces	 of	 herbs	 in	 the	mint	 family.	 The
fragile,	 exposed	 glands	 filled	 with	 pungent
essential	 oil	 offer	 a	 first	 line	 of	 defense
against	predators.

Hyssop	 Hyssop	 is	 an	 ambiguous	 name.	 It	 is
sometimes	 applied	 to	 a	 kind	 of	 plant
mentioned	 in	 the	Bible	and	much	used	 in	 the
Middle	East,	a	cluster	of	species	characterized
by	the	penetrating	quality	of	true	oregano	(see
below).	 Hyssop	 proper,	Hyssopus	 officinalis,
is	 a	 milder-mannered	 European	 herb	 with
fresh-spicy	and	camphor	notes.	It	was	enjoyed
in	 ancient	Rome	but	 is	 now	more	 commonly



used	in	Thai	and	Vietnamese	cooking.	Hyssop
contributes	 to	 the	flavors	of	several	alcohols,
including	Pernod,	Ricard,	and	Chartreuse.

Lavender	 Lavender	 is	 a	Mediterranean	 plant
long	 and	 widely	 valued	 for	 its	 tenacious
floral-woody	perfume	(from	a	mix	of	flowery
linalyl	 acetate	 and	 linalool,	 plus	 eucalyptus-
like	 cineole),	 but	more	 familiar	 in	 soaps	 and
candles	 than	 in	 foods;	 its	 name	 comes	 from
the	Latin	for	“wash.”	Still,	the	dried	blossoms
o f	Lavandula	 dentata	 are	 a	 traditional
ingredient	 in	 the	mixture	herbes	de	provence
(along	with	basil,	rosemary,	marjoram,	thyme,
and	fennel).	They	and	the	blossoms	of	English
lavender,	L.	angustifolia,	are	also	useful	alone
when	used	discreetly	as	a	garnish	or	to	infuse
their	 qualities	 in	 sauces	 and	 sweets.	 Spanish
lavender	 (L.	 stoechas)	 has	 a	 complex	 scent
reminiscent	of	Indian	chutneys.

Lemon	Balm	 Lemon	 or	 bee	 balm	 is	 an	 Old
World	 species,	Melissa	 officinalis,



distinguished	 by	 its	 mixture	 of	 citrusy	 and
floral	 terpenes	 (citronellal	 and	 -ol,	 citral,
geraniol).	Lemon	balm	is	usually	paired	with
fruit	dishes	and	other	sweets.

Marjoram	Marjoram	was	 once	 classified	 as
coming	 from	 a	 sister	 genus	 of	 oregano,	 but
now	 is	 officially	 a	 species	 of	 oregano	 itself,
Origanum	 majorana.	 Whatever	 the	 precise
family	 relationship,	 marjoram	 differs	 from
the	oreganos	 in	having	 a	milder	 flavor,	 fresh
and	 green	 and	 floral,	 with	 little	 of	 their
penetrating	quality.	It	therefore	works	well	as
one	 component	 in	 many	 herb	 blends	 and
dishes.

Mints	 The	 true	 mints	 are	 mainly	 small
natives	of	damp	habitats	 in	Europe	and	Asia.
There	 are	 about	 25	 species	 in	 the	 genus
Mentha	 and	 some	 600	 varieties,	 though	 the
family	 tendency	 to	 hybridizing	 and	 chemical
variation	 confuses	 the	 picture.	 The	 mints	 of
most	 interest	 to	 the	 cook	 are	 spearmint



(Mentha	 spicata)	 and	 peppermint	 (M.
piperata),	which	is	an	ancient	hybrid	between
spearmint	and	watermint	(M.	aquatica).

Herbs	of	the	Mint	Family

Basil Ocimum	basilicum
Bergamot Monarda	didyma
Horehound Marrubium	vulgare
Hyssop Hyssopus	officinalis
Lavender Lavendula	dentata,	L.	angustifolia
Lemon	balm Melissa	officinalis
Marjoram Origanum	majorana
Mints Mentha	species
Oregano Origanum	species
Perilla Perilla	frutescens
Rosemary Rosmarinus	officinalis
Sage Salvia	officinalis
Savory Satureja	species



Thyme Thymus	vulgaris

Both	 of	 the	 major	 culinary	 mints	 have	 a
refreshing	quality,	but	they	are	quite	different.
Spearmint	has	a	distinctive	aroma	thanks	to	a
particular	 terpene,	 L-carvone,	 and	 a	 richness
and	complexity	thanks	to	pyridines,	nitrogen-
containing	compounds	more	typical	of	roasted
foods	than	raw	ones.	Spearmint	is	widely	used
in	 the	 Eastern	 Mediterranean	 as	 well	 as	 in
India	 and	Southeast	Asia,	 in	 large	quantities,
both	fresh	and	cooked,	and	in	both	sweet	and
savory	 contexts.	 Simpler,	 clearer-tasting
peppermint	 contains	 little	 or	 no	 carvone	 or
pyridines;	 instead	 it	 makes	 a	 terpene	 called
menthol,	 which	 gives	 it	 a	 uniquely	 cooling
quality.	 In	 addition	 to	having	 its	 own	aroma,
menthol	 actually	 binds	 to	 receptors	 on
temperature-sensing	nerve	cells	in	the	mouth,
and	causes	those	cells	to	signal	the	brain	that
they	 are	 cooler	 than	 they	 really	 are	 by	 7–
13ºF/4–7ºC.	 Menthol	 is	 a	 reactive	 chemical



that	 rapidly	 degenerates	 when	 heated,	 so
peppermint	 is	 usually	 not	 cooked.	 Its
concentration	 increases	 with	 the	 age	 of	 the
leaf,	 so	 older	 leaves	 taste	 more	 cooling;	 hot
and	dry	growing	conditions	cause	menthol	 to
be	 transformed	 into	 a	 noncooling,	 somewhat
harsh	by-product	(pulegone,	the	characteristic
volatile	in	pennyroyal).

A	handful	of	other	mints	are	worth
knowing	about.	Watermint,	one	of	the	parents
of	peppermint	and	sometimes	called	bergamot
or	orange	mint,	has	a	strong	aroma	and	used
to	be	much	cultivated	in	Europe,	but	now	is
more	popular	in	Southeast	Asia.	Pennyroyal
(M.	pulegium)	is	an	especially	pungent,
peppery	minor	mint,	apple	or	pineapple	mint
(M.	suaveolens)	a	sweet,	apple-like	one,	and
Mentha	x	piperata	“citrata”	the	perfumy
lemon	or	eau	de	cologne	mint.	Nepitella	is	the
Italian	name	for	Calamintha	nepeta,	a
sometimes	minty,	sometimes	pungent	herb
native	to	the	southern	Mediterranean,	used	in



Tuscany	to	flavor	pork,	mushroom,	and
artichoke	dishes.	“Korean	mint”	comes	from
an	anise-flavored	Asian	member	of	the	mint
family,	Agastache	rugosa.

Oregano	 There	 are	 about	 40	 species	 in	 the
Mediterranean	genus	Origanum,	most	of	them
low,	shrubby	inhabitants	of	rocky	places.	The
name	 comes	 from	 the	 Greek	 for	 “joy	 (or
ornament)	of	the	mountains,”	though	we	have
no	evidence	about	how	the	Greeks	enjoyed	it.
Oregano	was	little	known	in	the	United	States
until	the	rise	of	the	pizza	after	World	War	II.
Oregano	 species	 easily	 form	 hybrids	 with
each	 other,	 so	 it’s	 not	 easy	 to	 sort	 out
identities.	The	important	thing	for	the	cook	is
that	 they	 come	 in	 a	 range	 of	 flavors,	 from
mild	 to	 strong	 and	 penetrating.	 The
penetrating	 quality	 comes	 from	 the	 phenolic
compound	 carvacrol.	 Greek	 oreganos	 are
typically	 rich	 in	 carvacrol,	 while	 milder
Italian,	Turkish,	and	Spanish	oreganos	contain



more	 thyme-like	 thymol	 and	 fresh,	 green,
floral,	and	woody	terpenes.

Mexican	oregano	is	an	entirely	different
plant,	various	species	of	the	Mexican	genus
Lippia,	a	member	of	the	verbena	family.
Some	varieties	do	have	a	high	carvacrol
content,	some	more	resemble	thyme,	and
some	are	more	woody	and	piney.	They	all
have	a	substantially	higher	essential	oil
content	than	true	oregano	(3–4%	in	the	dry
leaf,	vs.	1%),	and	therefore	seem	stronger.

Despite	its	name,	Cuban	oregano	is	an
Asian	member	of	the	mint	family,
Plectranthus	amboinicus,	with	fuzzy
succulent	leaves	and	a	good	dose	of	carvacrol.
It’s	now	widely	cultivated	throughout	the
tropics;	in	India	the	fresh	leaves	are	battered
and	fried.

Perilla	or	Shiso	 Perilla	 is	 the	 leaf	 of	Perilla
frutescens,	a	mint	relative	native	to	China	and
India.	 It	was	 taken	 to	 Japan	 in	 the	8th	or	9th



century	 and	 named	 shiso;	 many	 Westerners
get	 their	 first	 taste	 of	 it	 in	 sushi	 restaurants.
The	 distinctive	 aroma	 of	 perilla	 is	 due	 to	 a
terpene	 called	 perillaldehyde,	 which	 has	 a
fatty,	 herbaceous,	 spicy	 character.	 There	 are
several	different	perilla	varieties,	some	green,
some	 red	 to	 purple	 with	 anthocyanins,	 some
with	 no	 perillaldehyde	 and	 instead	 tasting	 of
dill	or	lemon.	The	Japanese	eat	the	leaves	and
flower	heads	with	 seafood	 and	grilled	meats,
and	 use	 a	 red	 variety	 to	 color	 and	 flavor	 the
popular	 pickled	 plum,	 umeboshi.	 Koreans
obtain	 both	 flavor	 and	 cooking	 oil	 from
perilla	seeds.

Rosemary	 Rosemary	 is	 a	 distinctive	 woody
shrub,	Rosmarinus	 officinalis,	 that	 grows	 in
the	dry	Mediterranean	scrublands,	with	leaves
so	narrow	and	tightly	rolled	that	they	look	like
pine	needles.	It	has	a	strong,	composite	scent,
made	 up	 of	 woody,	 pine,	 floral,	 eucalyptus,
and	clove	notes.	 In	southern	France	and	Italy



it	traditionally	flavors	grilled	meats,	but	it	can
also	 complement	 sweet	 dishes.	 Rosemary
aroma	is	unusually	well	preserved	by	drying.

Sage	 The	 genus	Salvia	 is	 the	 largest	 in	 the
mint	 family,	 with	 around	 a	 thousand	 species
that	 are	 rich	 in	 unusual	 chemicals,	 and	 have
been	 used	 in	 many	 different	 folk	 medicines.
The	 genus	 name	 comes	 from	 a	 Latin	 root
meaning	 “health.”	 Sage	 extracts	 have	 been
found	 to	 be	 excellent	 antimicrobial	 and
antioxidant	 materials.	 However,	 common
garden	 sage,	S.	 officinalis,	 is	 rich	 in	 two
terpene	derivatives,	thujone	and	camphor,	that
are	 toxic	 to	 the	nervous	system,	so	 its	use	as
anything	but	 an	 occasional	 flavoring	 is	 not	 a
good	idea.

Common	or	Dalmatian	sage	has	a
penetrating,	warm	quality	from	thujone,	the
note	of	camphor,	and	a	eucalyptus	note	from
cineole.	Greek	sage	(S.	fruticosa)	has	more
cineole,	while	clary	sage	(S.	sclarea)	is	very



different,	with	a	tea-like	quality	and	floral	and
sweet	notes	from	a	number	of	other	terpenes
(linalool,	geraniol,	terpineol).	Spanish	sage,	S.
lavandulaefolia,	is	fresher-smelling	and	less
distinctive,	with	pine,	eucalyptus,	citrus,	and
other	notes	partly	replacing	thujone.
Pineapple	sage,	S.	elegans	(rutilans),	comes
from	Mexico	and	is	said	to	have	a	sweet,
fruity	aroma.

Sage	is	especially	prominent	in	northern
Italian	cooking,	and	in	the	U.S.	flavors	poultry
stuffings	and	seasonings	and	pork	sausages;	it
seems	to	have	an	affinity	for	fat.	Most	dried
sage	used	to	be	“Dalmatian”	sage,	from	the
Balkan	coast;	today	Albania	and	other
Mediterranean	countries	are	the	largest
producers.	“Rubbed”	sage	is	minimally
ground	and	coarsely	sieved	leaves;	it	loses	its
aroma	more	slowly	than	finely	ground	sage.

Savory	Savory	comes	in	two	types,	which	are
two	species	of	the	northern-hemisphere	genus



Satureja.	 Both	 summer	 savory	 (S.	 hortensis)
and	 winter	 savory	 (S.	 montana)	 taste	 like	 a
mixture	 of	 oregano	 and	 thyme;	 they	 contain
both	carvacrol	and	thymol.	Summer	savory	is
often	 the	milder	 of	 the	 two.	 It’s	 thought	 that
savory	 may	 well	 be	 the	 parent	 genus	 of	 the
various	 oreganos	 and	 marjoram.	A	 native	 of
western	North	America,	S.	douglasii,	is	known
as	yerba	buena	 in	California,	and	has	a	mild,
mint-like	flavor.

Thyme	Thyme	got	its	name	from	the	Greeks,
who	 used	 it	 as	 an	 aromatic	 in	 their	 burnt
sacrifices;	it	shares	its	root	with	the	words	for
“spirit”	 and	 “smoke.”	 There	 are	 a	 lot	 of
thymes:	 60–70	 species	 in	 the	 shrubby,	 tiny-
leaved,	 mainly	Mediterranean	 genus	Thymus,
and	as	many	or	more	varieties	of	the	common
thyme,	Thymus	vulgaris.	There	are	also	many
flavors	 of	 thyme,	 including	 lemon,	 mint,
pineapple,	caraway,	and	nutmeg.	A	number	of
thyme	 species	 and	 varieties	 taste	 much	 like



oregano	 because	 they	 contain	 carvacrol.
Distinctive	 thyme	 species	 and	 varieties	 are
rich	in	the	phenolic	compound	called	thymol.
Thymol	 is	 a	 kinder,	 gentler	 version	 of
carvacrol,	 penetrating	 and	 spicy,	 but	 not	 as
aggressively	so.	It’s	this	moderate	quality	that
probably	 endeared	 thymol	 thyme	 to	 the
French,	 and	 that	 makes	 it	 a	 more	 versatile
flavoring	 than	 oregano	 and	 savory;	European
cooks	have	long	used	it	in	meat	and	vegetable
dishes	of	all	kinds.	Despite	its	gentler	aroma,
thymol	is	as	powerful	a	chemical	as	carvacrol,
which	is	why	thyme	oil	has	long	been	used	as
an	 antimicrobial	 agent	 in	 mouthwashes	 and
skin	creams.

The	Carrot	Family

Though	the	carrot	family	gave	fewer	flavoring
plants	to	Europe	than	the	mint	family,	it	is
remarkable	for	including	several	that	provide
aromatic	interest	as	both	herb	and	spice,	and



some	even	as	vegetables.	Members	of	the
carrot	family	grow	in	less	extreme	conditions
than	the	Mediterranean	mints,	are	generally
tender	biennials	rather	than	shrubby	or	woody
perennials,	and	have	flavors	that	are	generally
milder,	sometimes	even	sweet.	The	seeds
(actually	small	dry	fruits)	may	have	chemical
defenses	—	and	therefore	are	spices	—
because	they’re	fairly	large	and	tempting	to
insects	and	birds.	One	terpene,	myristicin,
shared	by	dill,	parsley,	fennel,	and	carrots,
and	giving	them	a	common	woody,	warm
note,	is	thought	to	be	a	defense	against	molds.
The	aromatic	compounds	are	stored	in	oil
canals	within	the	leaves,	under	large	and
small	veins,	and	are	generally	found	in
smaller	quantities	than	the	externally	stored
defenses	of	the	mint	family.

Angelica	Angelica	 is	 a	 large,	 rangy	 plant	 of
northern	 Europe,	Angelica	 archangelica,	 that
has	 fresh,	 pine,	 and	 citrus	 notes,	 but	 is



dominated	 by	 a	 sweet-smelling	 compound
called	 the	angelica	 lactone.	 Its	candied	stems
were	a	popular	delicacy	from	medieval	 times
through	 the	 19th	 century,	 but	 they’re	 seldom
seen	in	the	kitchen	nowadays.	Various	parts	of
the	 plant	 now	 flavor	 gins,	 ver-mouths,
liqueurs,	 candies,	 perfumes,	 and	 other
manufactured	products.

Celery	 Celery	 was	 a	 thin-stalked,	 aromatic
but	 bitter	 herb	 called	 smallage	 before
gardeners	 developed	 the	 mild,	 thick-stalked
vegetable.	Apium	 graveolens	 is	 a	 native	 of
damp	 European	 habitats	 near	 the	 sea.	 The
distinctive	 flavor	 of	 its	 leaves	 and	 stalks
comes	 from	 compounds	 called	 phthalides,
which	it	shares	with	lovage	and	with	walnuts.
It	 also	 has	 citrus	 and	 fresh	 notes.	 Celery	 is
often	 simmered	 or	 sautéed	 with	 onions	 and
carrots	 to	 provide	 a	 broad	 aromatic	 base	 for
sauces	and	braises.

Chervil	 Chervil	 (Anthriscus	 cerefolium)	 has



small,	 pale,	 finely	 divided	 leaves,	 and	 a
delicate	 flavor	 that	 comes	 from	 relatively
small	 amounts	 of	 the	 tarragon	 aromatic
estragole;	 it’s	 best	 used	 raw	 or	 barely
warmed,	 since	 heat	 drives	 away	 its	 flavor.
Chervil	is	a	component	of	the	French	mixture
fines	herbes.

Herbs	of	the	Carrot	Family

Angelica Angelica	archangelica
Celery Apium	graveolens
Chervil Anthriscus	cerefolium
Coriander	leaf Coriandrum	sativum
Dill Anethum	graveolens
Fennel Foeniculum	vulgare
Lovage Levisticum	officinale
Mitsuba Cryptotaenia	japonica
Parsley Petroselinum	crispum
Saw-leaf	herb Eryngium	foetidum



Coriander	Coriander	or	cilantro	is	said	to	be
the	most	world’s	most	widely	consumed	fresh
herb.	Coriandrum	 sativum	 is	 a	 native	 of	 the
Middle	 East.	 Its	 seed	 has	 been	 found	 in
Bronze	 Age	 settlements	 and	 in	 the	 tomb	 of
King	Tut;	 it	was	 taken	 early	 to	China,	 India,
and	 Southeast	 Asia,	 and	 later	 to	 Latin
America,	 and	 its	 rounded,	 notched,	 tender
leaves	 are	 popular	 in	 all	 these	 regions.	 In
Central	 and	 South	 America	 they	 came	 to
replace	 culantro	 (p.	 408),	 an	 indigenous
relative	 with	 very	 similar	 flavor,	 but	 with
large,	tough	leaves.	Coriander	herb	is	not	very
popular	 in	 the	 Mediterranean	 and	 Europe,
where	 its	 aroma	 is	 sometimes	 described	 as
“soapy.”	The	main	component	of	the	aroma	is
a	fatty	aldehyde,	decenal,	which	also	provides
the	 “waxy”	 note	 in	 orange	 peel.	 Decenal	 is
very	 reactive,	 so	 coriander	 leaf	 quickly	 loses
its	 aroma	 when	 heated.	 It’s	 therefore	 used
most	 often	 as	 a	 garnish	 or	 in	 uncooked
preparations.	In	Thailand,	the	root	of	the	herb



is	an	ingredient	in	some	pounded	spice	pastes;
the	 root	 contains	 no	 decenal	 and	 instead
contributes	woody	and	green	notes,	something
like	parsley.

Dill	Dill	 (Anethum	graveolens)	 is	 a	 native	of
southwest	Asia	and	India	with	tough	stalks	but
very	 delicate,	 feather-like	 leaves.	 Dill	 was
known	 in	ancient	Egypt,	 and	became	popular
in	 northern	 Europe,	 perhaps	 thanks	 to	 its
affinity	 with	 the	 local	 native	 caraway.
Dillweed	 blends	 the	 distinctive	 flavor	 of	 its
seed	 with	 pleasant	 green,	 fresh	 notes	 and	 a
unique,	 characteristic	 note	 of	 its	 own	 (dill
ether),	 and	 in	Western	 cooking	 is	most	 often
used	with	fish.	It	is	prepared	in	large	amounts,
almost	 as	 a	 vegetable	 and	 often	with	 rice,	 in
Greece	 and	 in	 Asia.	 India	 has	 its	 own
distinctive	 variety,	A.	 graveolens	 var.	sowa,
which	is	used	as	a	vegetable	as	well	as	for	its
seeds.

Fennel	 Fennel	 is	 a	 native	 of	 the



Mediterranean	and	southwest	Asia;	like	dill,	it
has	 fibrous	 leaf	 stalks	 but	 feathery,	 tender
leaves.	 There	 is	 one	 species	 of	 fennel,
Foeniculum	 vulgare,	 and	 it	 comes	 in	 three
different	 forms.	 The	 wild	 subspecies,
piperitum,	 is	 sometimes	 collected	 from	 the
countryside	 in	 southern	 Italy	 and	 Sicily,
where	 it’s	 known	as	 carosella	 and	valued	 for
its	 sharpness	 in	 meat	 and	 fish	 cooking.
(Fennel	 now	 grows	 wild	 throughout	 central
California	as	well.)	The	cultivated	subspecies
vulgare	is	known	as	sweet	fennel	thanks	to	its
far	 richer	 content	 of	 the	 phenolic	 compound
anethole,	which	is	13	times	sweeter	than	table
sugar,	 and	also	gives	 the	 characteristic	 sweet
aroma	 of	 anise.	And	 a	 specialized	 variety	 of
sweet	 fennel,	 var.	azoricum,	 develops	 the
enlarged	 leaf-stalk	 bases	 of	 bulb	 or	 Florence
fennel,	 which	 is	 used	 as	 an	 aromatic
vegetable.

Lovage	 Lovage	 (Levisticum	 officinale)	 is	 a



large	western	Asian	plant	 that	has	aromat-ics
in	 common	 with	 celery	 and	 oregano,	 along
with	 a	 sweet,	 flowery	 note.	 It	 was	 used	 in
ancient	 Greece	 and	 Rome	 and	 known	 as
Ligurian	 celery.	Today	 its	 large	 lobed	 leaves
flavor	 beef	 dishes	 in	 central	 Europe,	 and
tomato	sauces	in	Liguria.	Elsewhere	it’s	little
known.

Carrot	 family	 anatomy.	 A	 leaf	 of	 parsley.
Herbs	 in	 the	carrot	 family	have	defensive	oil
glands	within	their	leaves,	not	on	the	surfaces.
The	glands	cluster	around	long	canals	and	fill
them	with	the	essential	oil.

Mitsuba	Mitsuba,	sometimes	called	Japanese
parsley,	 is	 a	 native	 of	 both	 Asia	 and	 North
Am e r i c a ,	Cryptotaenia	 japonica	 (or



canadensis),	 whose	 mild,	 large	 leaves	 are
used	 by	 the	 Japanese	 in	 soups	 and	 salads.
They’re	 flavored	 mainly	 by	 a	 mixture	 of
minor,	woody-resinous	 terpenes	(germacrene,
selinene,	farnesene,	elemene).

Parsley	 Parsley	 is	 a	 native	 of	 southeast
Europe	 and	west	Asia;	 its	 name	 comes	 from
the	 Greek	 and	 means	 “rock	 celery.”
Petroselinum	 crispum	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most
important	herbs	in	European	cooking,	perhaps
because	 its	 distinctive	 flavor	 (from
menthatriene)	is	accompanied	by	fresh,	green,
woody	 notes	 that	 are	 somewhat	 generic	 and
therefore	 complement	 many	 foods.	 When
parsley	 is	 chopped,	 its	distinctive	note	 fades,
the	 green	 notes	 become	 dominant,	 and	 a
faintly	 fruity	 note	 develops.	 There	 are	 both
curly-and	 flat-leaf	 varieties	 with	 different
characteristics;	 the	 flat	 leaves	 have	 a	 strong
parsley	flavor	when	young	and	later	develop	a
woody	note,	while	curly	leaves	start	out	mild



and	woody	and	develop	 the	parsley	character
when	 more	 mature.	 The	 curly	 leaves	 are
smaller	 and	more	 incised	 and	 therefore	 crisp
faster	when	fried.

Saw-Leaf	Herb	 Saw-leaf	 herb	 or	 culantro	 is
the	 New	 World’s	 version	 of	 coriander	 leaf
(cilantro),	still	used	in	the	Caribbean	but	now
most	 commonly	 found	 in	 Asian	 cooking.
There	 are	 more	 than	 a	 hundred	 species	 of
Eryngium,	 some	 of	 them	 in	 Europe,	 but	E.
foetidum	 comes	 from	 subtropical	 South
America,	and	is	easier	to	grow	in	hot	climates.
Culantro	has	 almost	 the	 same	 flavor	 as	 fresh
coriander	 leaf,	 the	main	 aromatic	 component
being	 a	 slightly	 longer	 fatty	 aldehyde	 than
coriander’s	 (dodecanal).	 Its	 leaves	 are	 large
and	 elongated,	 with	 a	 serrated	 edge,	 and
thicker	 and	 tougher	 than	 coriander	 leaves.
They’re	frequently	used	in	Vietnamese	dishes,
often	torn	and	strewn	on	just	before	eating.

The	Laurel	Family



The	ancient	laurel	family,	mostly	large
tropical	trees,	is	most	notable	for	giving	us
cinnamon;	but	it	does	give	us	one	well-known
herb	and	three	less	familiar	but	interesting
ones.	The	leaves	of	various	cinnamon	species
are	also	used	as	herbs	in	Asia,	but	are	seldom
seen	in	the	West.

Avocado	Leaf	Mexican	 races	of	 the	 avocado
tree	 (Persea	 americana)	 have	 leaves	 with	 a
distinct	 tarragon	 aroma,	 thanks	 to	 the	 same
volatiles	 that	 flavor	 tarragon	 and	 anise
(estragole,	 anethole).	 More	 tropical	 avocado
races	 (p.	 337)	 lack	 this	 aroma.	 In	 Mexico,
avocado	 leaves	 are	 dried,	 then	 crumbled	 or
ground	 to	 flavor	 chicken,	 fish,	 and	 bean
dishes.

Bay	Laurel
Bay	leaves,	one	of	the	most	useful	European
herbs,	come	from	an	evergreen	tree	or	shrub
native	to	the	hot	Mediterranean,	Laurus
nobilis.	The	medium-sized,	tough,	dry	leaf



accumulates	oils	in	spherical	glands	in	the
leaf	interior,	and	has	a	well-rounded	mixture
of	woody,	floral,	eucalyptus,	and	clove	notes.
The	leaves	are	generally	dried	in	the	shade.
Laurel	branches	were	made	into	fragrant
crowns	in	the	ancient	world;	today	the	leaves
are	a	standard	ingredient	in	many	savory
dishes.

California	 Bay	 California	 bay	 leaves	 come
from	an	entirely	different	 tree,	 the	California
native	Umbellularia	californica.	 Their	 aroma
bears	some	resemblance	to	bay	laurel,	though
it	 is	 distinctly	 stronger,	 with	 a	 dominant
eucalyptus	note	(from	cineole).

Sassafras	or	Filé	Sassafras	leaves	come	from
a	 North	 American	 tree,	Sassafras	 albidum.
The	 Choctaw	 Indians	 introduced	 them	 to
French	settlers	in	Louisiana,	and	they	are	still
most	 commonly	 encountered	 as	 the	 dry	 filé
powder	 used	 to	 thicken	 and	 flavor	 Louisiana
gumbos.	They	carry	woody,	 floral,	 and	green



notes,	 and	 contain	 little	 or	 no	 safrole,	 a
compound	that’s	prominent	in	the	tree’s	roots
and	 bark,	 and	 that	 used	 to	 give	 root	 beer	 its
characteristic	flavor	until	it	was	found	to	be	a
likely	carcinogen	(see	hoja	santa	below).

Other	Common	Herbs

Borage	Borage	is	a	medium-sized
Mediterranean	native,	Borago	officinalis,	with
bright	blue	flowers	and	large,	fuzzy	leaves
that	have	the	distinct	flavor	of	cucumber,
thanks	to	enzymes	that	convert	its	fatty	acids
into	the	same	nine-carbon	chain	(nonanal)
produced	by	cucumber	enzymes.	It	was	once	a
common	ingredient	of	mixed	salads	(see	the
recipe	on	p.	251).	Plants	in	the	borage	family
accumulate	potentially	toxic	alkaloids,	so
borage	should	be	eaten	in	moderation.

Capers	Capers	are	 the	unopened	 flower	buds
of	 a	 Mediterranean	 bush,	Capparis	 spinosa,



which	 have	 been	 gathered	 from	 the	wild	 and
pickled	 for	 thousands	 of	 years,	 though
cultivated	only	for	a	couple	of	centuries.	The
caper	bush	 is	distantly	 related	 to	 the	cabbage
family	and	has	its	pungent	sulfur	compounds,
which	 dominate	 in	 the	 raw	 flower	 bud.	 The
bud	 is	preserved	 in	various	ways	—	in	brine,
in	 vinegar,	 dry-salted	—	and	 used	 as	 a	 sour-
salty	 accent	 in	 sauces	 and	 dishes,	 especially
with	 fish.	 When	 drysalted,	 the	 caper	 bud
undergoes	 an	 astonishing	 transformation:	 its
radish	 and	 onion	 notes	 are	 displaced	 by	 the
distinct	 aroma	 (from	 ionone	 and	 raspberry
ketone)	of	violets	and	raspberries!

Curry	Leaf	Curry	 leaf	 is	 the	 leaf	 of	 a	 small
tree	 in	 the	 citrus	 family,	Murraya	koenigii,	 a
native	 of	 south	Asia.	 It	 is	 primarily	 used	 in
south	 India	 and	 Malaysia,	 where	 households
often	have	their	own	plant	and	add	it	to	many
dishes.	 Despite	 its	 name,	 the	 curry	 leaf
doesn’t	taste	like	Indian	curries;	it	is	mild	and



subtle,	with	woody,	 fresh	notes.	Curry	 leaves
are	added	 to	stews	or	other	simmered	dishes,
or	 briefly	 sautéed	 to	 flavor	 a	 cooking	 oil.
They	 are	 also	 remarkable	 for	 containing
unusual	 alkaloids	 (carbazoles)	 with
antioxidant	and	antiin-flammatory	properties.

Curry	 Plant	 Curry	 plant	 is	 a	Mediterranean
member	 of	 the	 lettuce	 family,	Helichrysum
italicum,	 that	has	been	said	to	be	reminiscent
of	Indian	curries.	It	does	contain	a	number	of
terpenes	that	give	it	a	vaguely	spicy,	pleasant
aroma;	it’s	used	to	flavor	egg	dishes,	teas,	and
sweets.

Epazote	Epazote	 is	 a	 scented	member	of	 the
large	“goosefoot”	family,	which	also	provides
us	with	 spinach,	 beets,	 and	 the	 grain	 quinoa.
Chenopodium	ambrosioides	 is	a	weedy	native
of	 temperate	 central	America	 that	has	 spread
throughout	 much	 of	 the	 world,	 and	 lends	 a
characteristic	aroma	to	Mexican	beans,	soups,
and	 stews.	That	 aroma	 is	variously	described



as	 fatty,	 herbaceous,	 and	 penetrating,	 and	 is
due	to	a	terpene	called	ascaridole.	Ascaridole
is	 also	 responsible	 for	 the	 use	 of	 epazote	 in
folk	medicine;	it	is	toxic	to	intestinal	worms.

Hoja	Santa	 This	 herb’s	 name	 is	 Spanish	 for
“holy	leaf,”	and	refers	to	the	large	leaf	of	New
World	 relatives	 of	 black	 pepper,	Piper
auritum	 and	P.	 sanctum. 	 It’s	 used	 from
southern	 Mexico	 to	 northern	 South	America
to	wrap	 foods	 and	 flavor	 them	while	 they’re
cooked,	and	is	also	added	directly	to	dishes	as
a	 flavoring.	The	main	 aromatic	 in	 hoja	 santa
is	 safrole,	 the	characteristic	note	of	 sassafras
familiar	 from	 root	 beers,	 and	 a	 suspected
carcinogen.

Houttuynia	 Houttuynia	 is	 a	 small	 perennial
Asian	 plant,	Houttuynia	 cordata,	 in	 the
primitive	lizard’s-tail	family	(Saururaceae),	a
relative	of	black	pepper.	Its	leaves	are	used	in
Vietnamese	and	Thai	salads,	stews,	and	other
dishes.	There	are	two	main	varieties,	one	with



a	citrus	aroma,	and	the	other	with	an	unusual
scent	said	to	resemble	a	mixture	of	meat,	fish,
and	coriander.

Juniper	 Berries	 Juniper	 berries	 are	 not
leaves,	but	 their	essence	is	 the	aroma	of	pine
needles,	so	I	include	them	here,	along	with	the
observation	 that	 pine	 and	 other	 evergreen
needles	 are	 often	 used	 as	 flavorings.	 The
Chinese	steam	fish	over	pine	needles,	and	the
original	 flavoring	 for	 salt-cured	 salmon
(gravlax)	 was	 probably	 pine	 needles	 rather
than	dill.	Pineyness	is	also	one	element	in	the
aromas	of	many	herbs	and	spices	(see	charts,
pp.	392,	393).

There	are	about	10	species	of	Juniperus,	a
distant	relative	of	the	pine,	all	native	to	the
northern	hemisphere.	They	make	small	cone-
like	reproductive	structures,	about	a	third	of
an	inch	or	10	mm	across,	but	the	scales
remain	fleshy	and	coalesce	to	form	a	“berry”
that	surrounds	the	seeds.	The	berries	take



from	one	to	three	years	to	mature,	during
which	they	turn	from	green	to	purplish	black.
When	immature,	their	aroma	is	dominated	by
the	terpene	pinene;	when	mature,	they	carry	a
mix	of	pine,	green-fresh,	and	citrus	notes.
After	two	years	in	a	spice	bottle	there	is	very
little	aroma	left:	so	juniper	berries	are	best
when	foraged	and	fresh.	They	are	much	used
in	northern	Europe	and	Scandinavia	to	flavor
meats,	especially	game,	and	cabbage	dishes.
Juniper	is	the	distinguishing	flavor	in	gin,	and
gave	gin	its	name	(originally	Dutch	genever).

Lemongrass	 Lemongrass	 is	 one	 of	 a	 small
group	of	aromatic	species	in	the	grass	family.
Cymbopogon	citratus	accumulates	the	lemony
terpene	 citral	 (a	 mixture	 of	 two	 compounds,
neral	 and	 geranial),	 as	 well	 as	 flowery
geraniol	and	linalool,	in	special	oil	cells	in	the
middle	 of	 its	 leaves.	 It	 is	 a	 native	 of
seasonally	 dry	 southern	 Asia,	 including	 the
foothills	of	the	Himalayas,	and	is	important	in



the	 cooking	 of	 Southeast	 Asia.	 Lemongrass
forms	 clumps	 of	 thick	 shoots;	 all	 parts	 are
aromatic,	 but	 only	 the	 lower	 stalk	 is	 tender
enough	 to	 be	 edible	 itself.	 The	 older	 outer
leaves	can	be	used	to	infuse	a	dish	with	their
flavor,	 or	 be	 made	 into	 an	 herbal	 tea.	 In
Thailand	 the	 tender	 stalk	 is	 a	 standard
component	 of	 pounded	 spice	 pastes,	 and	 it’s
also	eaten	fresh	in	salads.

Lemon	 Verbena	 Lemon	 verbena	 is	 a	 South
American	 plant,	Aloysia	 triphylla,	 a	 relative
of	Mexican	oregano.	The	lemony	flavor	of	its
leaves	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 terpenes,
collectively	 called	 citral,	 that	 flavor
lemongrass;	 other	 terpenes	 lend	 a	 flowery
note.

Lolot	Lolot	is	the	large,	heart-shaped	leaf	of	a
black-pepper	 relative,	Piper	 lolot,	a	native	of
Southeast	Asia,	and	used	 there	as	a	 flavoring
wrap	for	grilling	meats.



Orange	 Flowers	 Orange	 flowers	 come	 from
the	bitter	or	Seville	orange,	Citrus	aurantium,
and	 they	 have	 been	 used	 for	 millennia	 to
flavor	 sweets	 and	 other	 dishes	 in	 the	Middle
East,	 usually	 in	 the	 extract	 called	 orange-
flower	water.	The	distinctive	perfume	 results
from	a	mixture	of	terpenes	also	found	in	roses
and	 lavender,	with	 an	 important	 contribution
from	the	same	compound	that	flavors	concord
grapes	(methyl	anthranilate).

Makrut	or	Kaffir	Lime	Ma	krut	 is	 the	Thai
name	 for	 the	 tree	 also	 known	 as	 kaffir	 lime
(“kaffir”	 is	 Arabic	 for	 “unbeliever”	 and	 has
derogatory	 connotations).	 This	 Southeast
Asian	 member	 of	 the	 citrus	 family,	Citrus
hystrix,	 has	distinctively	 aromatic	 leaves	 and
fruit	rinds	 that	are	an	important	 ingredient	 in
Thai	 and	 Laotian	 cooking,	 especially	 soups,
stews,	 and	 fish	 dishes.	 The	 rind	 has	 an
unremarkable	 mix	 of	 citrus,	 pine,	 and	 fresh
notes,	but	the	tough	leaves	are	richly	endowed



with	citronellal,	which	gives	them	an	intense,
fresh,	lingering	lemon-green	character	distinct
from	 that	 of	 sweeter	 citral-flavored
lemongrass	 (with	 which	 it’s	 often	 cooked).
Citronellal	is	named	for	citronella,	its	original
and	main	 source,	which	 is	 a	 sister	 species	 to
lemongrass	(Cymbopogon	winterianus).

Nasturtium	 The	 flowers,	 leaves,	 and
immature	 fruits	 of	 the	 familiar	 South
American	native	Tropaeolum	major	all	have	a
pungency	 like	 that	of	watercress,	and	enliven
salads.

Nightshade	 Nightshade	 is	 a	 relative	 of	 the
potato,	Solanum	 torvum,	 which	 grows	 into	 a
small	and	short-lived	tree.	It’s	a	native	of	the
West	 Indies,	 but	 is	 now	 found	 throughout
tropical	 Asia.	 Its	 small	 berry-like	 fruits	 are
intensely	 bitter,	 and	 are	 used	 in	 Thailand,
Malaysia,	and	Indonesia	to	contribute	just	that
quality	to	sauces	and	salads.



Rau	Ram	 Rau	 ram	 is	 the	 Vietnamese	 name
for	a	sprawling	herb	in	 the	buckwheat	family
known	 in	 English	 as	 fragrant	 knotweed,	 and
now	 as	 Vietnamese	 cilantro.	Polygonum
odoratum	is	a	native	of	Southeast	Asia	whose
leaves	mix	the	aromas	of	coriander	and	lemon
with	a	slightly	peppery	taste.	It’s	often	paired
with	mint,	and	eaten	fresh	with	many	foods.

Rice-Paddy	 Herb	 Rice-paddy	 herb	 is	 an
aquatic	 plant	 in	 the	 snapdragon	 family,
Limnophila	chinensis	 ssp.	aromatica,	a	native
of	Asia	 and	 the	 Pacific	 islands,	whose	 small
leaves	are	used	in	Southeast	Asian	fish	dishes,
soups,	 and	 curries,	 especially	 in	 Vietnam.	 It
has	a	lemony	but	complex	aroma	produced	by
small	 quantities	 of	 a	 citrusy	 terpene	 and	 the
main	ingredient	of	perilla	(perillaldehyde).

Rose	 Flowers	 Roses,	 mainly	 from	 the
Eurasian	hybrid	Rosa	x	damascena,	have	been
used	 for	 millennia	 from	 the	 Middle	 East
through	Asia,	usually	dried	or	 in	 the	 form	of



an	 extract	 (rose	 water).	 Their	 aroma	 comes
mainly	 from	 the	 terpene	 geraniol.	 Roses	 are
most	often	used	in	sweets,	but	are	also	found
in	 the	 savory	Moroccan	 spice	mixture	 ras	 el
hanout,	and	in	North	African	sausages.

Screwpine	 or	 Pandan	 Screwpine	 is	 the
aromatic,	 strap-like	 leaf	 of	 shrubs	 related	 to
the	 lily	 family	 that	 are	 native	 to	 Indonesia
(species	 of	Pandanus).	 Screwpine	 leaves	 are
used	in	India	and	southeast	Asia	to	flavor	rice
dishes	and	sweets,	and	to	wrap	meats	and	fish.
Their	primary	volatile	compound	 is	 the	same
one	that	gives	basmati	and	jasmine	rices	their
distinctive	 nutty	 aroma	 (2-acetyl-1-pyrroline,
which	 is	 also	 prominent	 in	 the	 aroma	 of
popcorn	 and	 of	 crabmeat).	 The	 screwpine
flower	 is	 also	 aromatic	 and	 the	 source	 of	 a
more	 perfume-like	 extract	 called	 kewra,
which	flavors	many	Indian	milk	sweets.

Sorrel	 Sorrel	 is	 the	 startlingly	 sour	 leaf	 of
several	 European	 relatives	 of	 rhubarb	 and



buckwheat	that	are	rich	in	oxalic	acid:	Rumex
acetosa,	 scutatus,	 and	acetosella.	 Cooks	 use
them	mainly	 as	 a	 source	of	 acidity,	 and	 they
also	 provide	 a	 more	 generic	 green	 aroma.
Sorrel	 readily	 disintegrates	 with	 a	 little
cooking	 into	 a	 sauce-like	 puree	 that
complements	 fish,	 but	 whose	 chlorophyll
turns	 drab	 olive	 from	 the	 acidity.	 The	 color
can	 be	 brightened	 by	 pureeing	 some	 raw
sorrel	and	adding	that	to	the	sauce	just	before
serving.

Tarragon	 Tarragon	 is	 the	 small,	 narrow	 leaf
of	 a	 native	 of	 western	 and	 northern	 Asia,
Artemisia	 dracunculus,	 a	 member	 of	 the
lettuce	family.	The	robust	wild	tarragon,	often
sold	 in	 plant	 nurseries	 as	 Russian	 tarragon,
has	a	harsh	and	uninteresting	flavor,	while	the
relatively	 fragile	 cultivated	 form,	 “French”
tarragon,	has	a	distinctive	aroma	thanks	to	the
presence	 of	 a	 phenolic	 compound	 called
estragole	(from	the	French	name	for	the	plant,



estragon)	 in	 oil	 cavities	 alongside	 the	 leaf
veins.	Estragole	is	a	close	chemical	relative	of
the	anise	aromatic	anethole,	and	does	have	an
anise-like	character.	Tarragon	is	a	component
of	the	French	mix	fines	herbes,	is	the	primary
flavoring	in	béarnaise	sauce,	and	is	often	used
to	flavor	vinegars.

“Mexican	tarragon”	is	a	marigold-like
New	World	native,	Tagetes	lucida,	whose
leaves	do	indeed	contain	a	mixture	of	anise-
like	anethole	and	tarragon’s	estragole.

Tobacco	Tobacco	is	used	occasionally	as	a
food	flavoring,	and	its	curing	resembles	the
making	of	tea	(p.	437).	The	leaves	of	the
notorious	North	American	native	Nicotiana
tabacum,	a	relative	of	the	potato	and	tomato,
are	harvested	when	they	begin	to	turn	yellow
and	develop	resinous	secretions,	then	either
sun-cured	or	fermented	in	heaps	for	several
weeks,	and	dried	by	contact	with	hot	metal.
These	treatments	develop	a	complex	aroma
with	woody,	leathery,	earthy,	and	spicy	notes,



and	these	are	sometimes	augmented	with	the
addition	of	various	essential	oils	(vanilla,
cinnamon,	clove,	rose,	and	others).	Tobacco
leaves	contain	astringent	tannins	and	bitter
nicotine,	so	they	are	usually	infused	only
lightly	into	sauces,	syrups,	and	creams.
Sometimes	whole	leaves	are	used	as	a
disposable	wrapper	to	flavor	a	food	during
cooking.

Water	 Pepper	Water	 pepper	 is	 a	 relative	 of
rau	ram,	or	Vietnamese	coriander.	Polygonum
hydropiper	is	a	widespread	native	of	wet	areas
in	 the	 Northern	 Hemisphere.	 Its	 leaves	 have
been	 used	 as	 a	 pepper	 substitute	 in	 Europe,
and	are	now	used	mainly	in	Japan	to	provide	a
peppery,	 somewhat	 numbing	pungency	 (from
polygodial).	 Water	 pepper	 also	 has	 woody,
pine,	and	eucalyptus	notes.

Wintergreen	 Wintergreen	 is	 the	 leaf	 of
Gaultheria	 procumbens	 or	fragrantissima,	 a
North	 American	 bush	 in	 the	 blueberry	 and



cranberry	 family,	 whose	 distinctive,
refreshing	aroma	is	created	mainly	by	methyl
salicylate.

A	Survey	of	Temperate-Climate
Spices

As	is	true	of	herbs,	many	of	our	temperate-
climate	spices	come	from	just	a	few	plant
families.	In	the	following	survey,	I	group
together	spices	that	are	botanically	related,
and	list	the	rest	in	alphabetical	order.	Tropical
spices	are	surveyed	separately	in	the	next
section.

The	Carrot	Family

In	addition	to	many	leafy	herbs,	the	carrot
family	also	gives	us	a	number	of	our	favorite
spices.	The	aromatic	“seeds”	of	plants	in	the
carrot	family	are	actually	small	but	complete
fruits	that	are	dry	rather	than	fleshy.	They	are



borne	in	pairs,	enclosed	in	a	protective	husk,
and	are	usually	sold	husked	and	separated.
The	individual	fruits	have	a	characteristic
ridged	surface,	and	their	aromatic	oil	is
contained	in	canals	that	lie	under	the	ridges.

Ajwain	 Ajwain	 (Trachyspermum	 ammi)	 is	 a
close	 relative	 of	 caraway,	 used	 in	 North
Africa	and	Asia,	 especially	 India,	 and	can	be
thought	 of	 as	 a	 seed	 version	 of	 thyme:	 it
carries	 the	 essence	 of	 thyme,	 thymol,	 in	 a
caraway-like	seed.

Carrot	family	anatomy.	Fennel	seeds.	Seeds	of
plants	 in	 the	 carrot	 family	 carry	 their
essential	oil	in	hollow	chambers	beneath	their
outer	ridges.



Anise	 Anise	 is	 the	 seed	 of	 a	 small	 central
Asian	 plant,	Pimpinella	 anisum,	 which	 has
been	 prized	 since	 ancient	 time.	 It’s
remarkable	for	its	high	content	of	the	phenolic
compound	 anethole,	 which	 is	 both
distinctively	 aromatic	 and	 sweet-tasting,	 and
has	 been	 mainly	 used	 to	 flavor	 sweets	 and
alcohols	 (Pernod,	 pastis,	 ouzo),	 though	 the
Greeks	also	use	 it	 in	meat	dishes	and	 tomato
sauces.

Asafoetida	Asafoetida	is	one	of	 the	strangest
and	 strongest	 of	 all	 spices.	 It	 comes	 from	 a
perennial	 plant	 in	 the	 carrot	 family	 native	 to
the	 mountains	 of	 Central	Asia,	 from	 Turkey
through	 Iran	 and	 Afghanistan	 to	 Kashmir;
India	 and	 Iran	 are	 major	 producers.	Ferula
asafoetida,	 F.	 alliacea,	 F.	 foetida, 	 and	F.
narthex	 look	 something	 like	 giant	 carrot
plants,	growing	to	5	feet/1.5	m	and	developing
massive	 carrot-like	 roots	 6	 in/15	 cm	 in
diameter,	from	which	new	sprouts	arise	every



spring.	 The	 spice	 is	 obtained	 after	 the	 new
foliage	 begins	 to	 turn	 yellow.	The	 top	 of	 the
root	is	exposed,	the	foliage	pulled	out,	and	the
root	 surface	periodically	 scraped	 to	wound	 it
and	 gather	 the	 protective	 sap	 that	 collects	 in
the	 wound.	 The	 sap	 slowly	 hardens	 and
develops	 a	 strong,	 sulfurous	 aroma
reminiscent	of	human	sweat	and	washed-rind
cheese	(p.	58).	Sometimes	the	resin	is	aged	in
fresh	goat	or	sheep	skin	to	augment	its	aroma,
which	is	so	strong	that	the	resin	is	commonly
ground	 and	 diluted	 for	 sale	 with	 gum	 arabic
and	flour.	The	aroma	of	asafoetida	is	due	to	a
complex	 mixture	 of	 sulfur	 compounds,	 a
dozen	 identical	 with	 volatiles	 in	 the	 onion
family,	and	a	number	of	less	common	di-,	tri-,
and	 tetrasulfides.	 Asafoetida	 can	 give	 the
impression	of	 onions,	 garlic,	 eggs,	meat,	 and
white	 truffles,	 and	 in	 India	 is	 a	 prominent
ingredient	 in	 the	 cooking	 of	 the	 Jains,	 who
avoid	animal	 foods	and	also	onion	and	garlic
(because	 they	 contain	 a	 bud	 that	 would



otherwise	grow	into	a	new	plant).

Caraway	Caraway	comes	from	the	small	herb
Carum	 carvi.	 There	 are	 annual	 and	 biennial
forms,	 the	 first	 native	 to	 central	 Europe,	 the
second	 to	 the	 Eastern	 Mediterranean	 and
Middle	 East.	 The	 biennial	 form	 develops	 a
taproot	 the	 first	 summer,	 then	 flowers	 and
fruits	 the	 second;	 the	 taproots	 are	 sometimes
cooked	 like	 carrots	 in	 northern	 Europe.
Caraway	may	have	been	among	the	first	spice
plants	 cultivated	 in	 Europe;	 its	 seeds	 were
found	 in	 ancient	 Swiss	 lake	 dwellings,	 and
have	continued	 to	be	an	 important	 ingredient
in	 Eastern	 Europe.	 The	 distinctive	 flavor	 of
caraway	 comes	 from	 the	 terpene	 D-carvone
(which	 it	 shares	 with	 dill),	 with	 citrusy
limonene	 the	 only	 other	 major	 volatile.
Caraway	is	used	in	cabbage,	potato,	and	pork
dishes,	 in	 breads	 and	 cheeses,	 and	 in	 the
Scandinavian	alcohol	aquavit.



Spices	of	the	Carrot	Family

Ajwain Trachyspermum	ammi
Anise Pimpinella	anisum
Asafoetida Ferula	asafoetida
Caraway Carum	carvi
Celery	seed Apium	graveolens
Coriander Coriandrum	sativum
Cumin Cuminum	cyminum
Cumin,	black Cuminum	nigrum
Dill	seed Anethum	graveolens
Fennel	seed Foeniculum	vulgare

Celery	Seed
Celery	seed	is	essentially	a	concentrated,
dried	version	of	the	same	aromas	found	in
fresh	celery	(Apium	graveolens),	though	of
course	it	lacks	the	fresh	green	notes.	The	main
aromas	are	a	distinctive	celery	note	from
unusual	compounds	called	phthalides,



together	with	citrus	and	sweet	notes.	Celery
seed	was	used	in	the	ancient	Mediterranean
and	is	still	common	in	European	and
American	sausages,	pickling	mixes,	and	salad
dressings.	“Celery	salt”	is	a	mixture	of	salt
and	ground	celery	seeds.

Coriander	 Coriander	 (Coriandrum	 sativum)
has	 been	 valued	 and	 cultivated	 since	 ancient
times,	more	for	its	dried	fruits	than	its	leaves,
which	 have	 entirely	 different	 flavors.	 The
flavor	of	 the	 fruit	oil	 is	 startlingly	 floral	 and
lemony,	 and	 makes	 coriander	 unique	 and
irreplaceable	in	the	cook’s	arsenal	of	aromas.
It’s	generally	used	 in	combination	with	other
spices,	 as	 a	 component	 of	 a	 pickling	 or
sausage	mix,	 in	gin	 and	other	 alcohols,	 or	 as
half	of	the	coriander-cumin	backbone	of	many
Indian	 dishes.	 Coriander	 is	 also	 one	 of	 the
distinguishing	flavors	in	American	hot	dogs.

There	are	two	common	types	of	coriander.
The	European	type	has	small	fruits	(1.5–3



mm),	a	relatively	high	essential	oil	content,
and	a	large	proportion	of	flowery	linalool;	the
Indian	type	has	larger	fruits	(to	5	mm),	a
lower	oil	content,	less	linalool,	and	several
aromatics	not	found	in	the	European	type.

Coriander	seed	is	generally	supplied
whole,	with	the	two	dry	fruits	still	enclosed	in
their	husk.	When	it’s	ground	along	with	the
aromatic	fruits,	the	brittle,	fibrous	husk	makes
a	good	water	absorber	and	thickener	for
sauces	(the	liquid	portion	of	a	curry,	for
example).	Coarsely	ground	coriander	is	also
used	to	coat	meats	and	fish	and	provide
flavor,	crunch,	and	insulation	at	the	same
time.

Cumin	 Cumin	 comes	 from	 a	 small	 annual
plant	(Cuminum	cyminum)	native	to	southwest
Asia,	 and	 was	 enjoyed	 by	 the	 Greeks	 and
Romans;	 the	Greeks	kept	 it	at	 the	 table	 in	 its
own	box,	much	as	pepper	is	treated	today.	For
some	 reason	 cumin	 largely	 disappeared	 from



European	 cooking	 during	 the	 Middle	 Ages,
though	the	Spanish	kept	it	long	enough	to	help
it	 take	 root	 in	 Mexican	 cooking.	 The	 Dutch
still	 make	 a	 cumin-flavored	 cheese,	 and	 the
Savoie	French	a	cumin	bread,	but	cumin	now
mainly	 marks	 the	 foods	 of	 North	 Africa,
western	 Asia,	 India,	 and	 Mexico.	 Its
distinctive	 aroma	 comes	 from	 an	 unusual
chemical	 (cuminaldehyde)	 that	 is	 related	 to
the	 essence	 of	 bitter	 almond	 (benzaldehyde).
It	also	has	fresh	and	pine	notes.

The	Flavor	of	Anise
The	 volatile	 chemical	 that	 creates	 the
typical	 aroma	 of	 anise	 —	 as	 well	 as	 of
fennel,	 star	 anise,	 the	 Central	 American
pepper	 relative	Piper	marginatum,	and	 the
herb	 sweet	 cicely	 (Myrrhis	odorata)	—	 is
called	trans	anethole.	It	is	one	of	a	group	of
compounds	 that	 are	 not	 only	 distinctively
aromatic,	 but	 also	 intensely	 sweet	 —	 13
times	 sweeter	 than	 table	 sugar,	weight	 for



weight.	Star	anise	is	chewed	in	China,	and
fennel	 seed	 in	 India,	 to	 “sweeten	 the
breath,”	 and	 they	 are	 also	 literally	 sweet
for	 the	 person	 chewing.	 A	 related	 sweet
aromatic	 is	 estragole	 (methyl	 chavicol),
which	is	most	prominent	in	sweet	basil	and
tarragon.

Anethole	 is	 unusual	 among	 phenolic
flavor	 compounds	 for	 remaining	 pleasant
to	the	taste	at	high	concentrations.	Its	very
high	 concentration	 in	 anise-flavored
liquors	 is	 the	 reason	 for	 the	 dramatic
clouding	that	results	when	these	liquors	are
diluted	 with	 water:	 anethole	 dissolves	 in
alcohol	but	not	in	water,	so	when	the	added
water	 dilutes	 the	 alcohol,	 the	 anethole
molecules	 cluster	 together	 in	 bunches	 big
enough	to	scatter	light.
Black	cumin	is	the	seed	of	a	different

species	(Cuminum	nigrum),	darker	and
smaller,	with	less	cuminaldehyde	and	a	more
complex	aroma.	It	is	much	used	in	savory



dishes	of	North	Africa,	the	Middle	East,	and
North	India.

Dill	Seed	Dill	seed	has	a	stronger	flavor	than
dill	 weed,	 the	 feathery	 leaves	 of	 the	 same
plant	 (Anethum	 graveolens).	 It’s	 mildly
reminiscent	 of	 caraway	 thanks	 to	 its	 content
of	 the	 caraway	 terpene	 carvone,	 but	 also	 has
fresh,	spicy,	and	citrus	notes.	It’s	mainly	used
in	 central	 and	 northern	 Europe	 in	 cucumber
pickles	(the	combination	goes	back	at	least	to
the	 17th	 century),	 sausages,	 condiments,
cheeses,	 and	 baked	 goods.	 Indian	 dill,	 var.
sowa,	produces	a	larger	seed	with	a	somewhat
different	balance	of	aromas;	it’s	used	in	spice
mixtures	of	northern	India.

Fennel	Seed	and	Pollen	 Fennel	 seed	has	 the
same	anise-like	aroma	and	 sweet	 taste	 as	 the
stalk	 and	 leaves	 of	 the	 plant	 that	 bears	 it,
Foeniculum	 vulgare.	 Its	 dominant	 volatile	 is
the	 phenolic	 compound	 anethole	 (see	 anise,
above),	 supported	 by	 citrus,	 fresh,	 and	 pine



notes.	 Most	 fennel	 seed	 comes	 from	 sweet
fennel	varieties	(p.	407)	and	tastes	sweet;	seed
from	 the	 less	 cultivated	 types	 are	 also	 bitter
due	 to	 the	 presence	 of	 a	 particular	 terpene
(fenchone).	 Fennel	 seed	 is	 a	 distinctive
ingredient	 in	 Italian	 sausages	 and	 in	 Indian
spice	 mixes,	 and	 in	 India	 is	 chewed	 as	 an
after-meal	breath	freshener.

The	fine	yellow	pollen	of	the	fennel	flower
is	also	collected	and	used	as	a	spice.	Fennel
pollen	combines	anise	and	floral	aromas,	and
in	Italy	is	sprinkled	on	dishes	at	the	last
minute.

The	Cabbage	Family:
Pungent	Mustards,
Horseradish,	Wasabi

Of	the	various	spices	that	manage	to	please	us
by	causing	irritation	and	pain,	the	mustards
and	their	relatives	are	unique	in	providing	a
volatile	pungency,	one	that	travels	from	the



food	through	the	air	to	irritate	our	nasal
passages	as	well	as	our	mouth.	The	active
ingredients	of	chillis	and	black	pepper
become	significantly	volatile	only	at	high
temperatures,	above	about	140ºF/	60ºC,	which
is	why	roasting	hot	chillis	or	toasting
peppercorns	can	cause	everyone	in	the	kitchen
to	start	sneezing.	But	mustard	and	horseradish
and	wasabi	can	get	into	the	nose	even	at	room
or	mouth	temperature.	Theirs	is	a	head-filling
hotness.

The	pungency	of	mustards	and	their
relatives	arises	from	the	same	chemical-
defense	system	used	by	their	vegetable
relatives	in	the	cabbage	family	(p.	321).	The
plants	store	their	irritant	defenses,	the
isothiocyanates,	by	combining	them	with	a
sugar	molecule.	The	storage	form	is	not
irritating,	but	it	does	taste	bitter.	When	their
cells	are	damaged,	special	enzymes	reach	the
storage	form	and	break	it	apart,	liberating	the
irritant	molecules	(and	at	the	same	time



eliminating	the	bitterness).	Mustard	seeds	and
horseradish	roots	are	pungent	because	we
grind	them	up	raw	and	encourage	their
enzymes	to	liberate	the	irritant	molecules.
When	mustard	seeds	are	cooked	—	for	many
Indian	dishes	they	are	toasted	or	fried	until
they	pop	—	the	liberating	enzymes	are
inactivated,	no	irritants	are	liberated,	and	their
flavor	ends	up	nutty	and	bitter	rather	than
pungent.

Mustards	 Mustard	 seed	 has	 been	 found	 in
prehistoric	 sites	 from	 Europe	 to	 China,	 and
was	 the	 first	 and	 only	 native	 pungent	 spice
available	 to	 early	 Europe.	 It	 has	 been	 made
into	the	familiar	European	condiment	at	least
since	 Roman	 times;	 its	 name	 in	 most
European	languages	comes	not	from	the	Latin
name	of	 the	seed	or	plant	 (sinapis),	but	 from
the	 condiment,	which	was	made	with	 freshly
fermented	 wine	 (mustum),	 and	 the	 hot
(ardens)	 seeds.	 Different	 nations	 have



distinctive	prepared	mustards	whose	 roots	go
back	 as	 far	 as	 the	 Middle	Ages.	 Mustard	 is
also	widely	used	as	the	whole	seed,	especially
in	 Indian	 cooking,	 and	 flavors	 a	 broad	 range
of	 dishes,	 including	 fruits	 preserved	 in	 sugar
(Italian	mostarda	di	frutta).

Black,	Brown,	and	White	Mustards	There	are
three	main	kinds	of	mustard	plants	 and	 seed,
each	with	its	own	character.

Black	mustard,	Brassica	nigra,	is	a
Eurasian	native,	small	and	dark-hulled,
with	a	high	content	of	the	defensive
storage	compound	sinigrin	and	therefore
a	high	pungency	potential.	It	was	long
important	in	Europe	and	still	is	in	India,
but	is	an	inconvenient	crop	and	in	many
countries	has	been	replaced	by	brown
mustard.
Brown	mustard,	B.	juncea,	is	a	hybrid	of
black	mustard	and	the	turnip	(B.	rapa)
that	is	easier	to	cultivate	and	harvest.	It



has	large,	brown	seeds	that	contain
somewhat	less	sinigrin	than	black
mustard	and	therefore	less	potential
pungency.	Most	European	prepared
mustards	are	made	with	brown	mustard.
White	or	yellow	mustard,	Sinapis	alba
(or	Brassica	hirta),	is	a	European	native
with	large	pale	seeds	and	a	different
defensive	storage	compound,	sinalbin.
The	irritating	portion	of	sinalbin	is	much
less	volatile	than	the	irritant	in	sinigrin,
so	little	of	white	mustard’s	pungency
rises	into	the	nose.	It	mostly	affects	the
mouth,	and	generally	seems	milder	than
black	or	brown	mustard.	White	mustard
is	used	mainly	in	the	United	States,	in
prepared	mustards	as	well	as	whole	in
pickle	mixes.

Making	and	Using	Mustard	Prepared	mustard
condiments	 can	 be	 made	 either	 from	 whole
seeds	 or	 from	powdered	mustard,	 also	 called



mustard	 flour,	 which	 has	 been	 ground	 and
sieved	 to	 remove	 the	 seed	 coat.	Dry	mustard
seeds	and	their	powder	are	not	pungent.	Their
pungency	 develops	 over	 the	 course	 of	 a	 few
minutes	 or	 a	 few	 hours	 when	 the	 seeds	 are
soaked	in	liquid	and	ground,	or	the	preground
seeds	are	simply	moistened.	The	combination
of	 moisture	 and	 cell	 damage	 revives	 the
seeds’	 enzymes	 and	 allows	 them	 to	 liberate
the	 pungent	 compounds	 from	 their	 storage
forms.	Most	prepared	mustards	are	made	with
acidic	liquids	—	vinegar,	wine,	fruit	juices	—
which	 slow	 the	 enzymes,	 but	 also	 slow	 the
later	disappearance	of	the	pungent	compounds
as	they	gradually	react	with	oxygen	and	other
substances	in	the	mix.

Roman	Mustard
Carefully	 cleanse	 and	 sift	 mustard-seed,
then	wash	it	in	cold	water,	and	when	it	has
been	well	cleaned,	leave	it	in	the	water	for
two	hours.	Next	take	it	out	and	after	it	has



been	 squeezed	 in	 the	 hands,…add	 pine-
kernels,	 which	 should	 be	 as	 fresh	 as
possible,	and	almonds,	and	carefully	crush
them	 together	 after	 pouring	 in	 vinegar….
You	willfind	this	mustard	not	only	suitable
as	a	sauce	but	also	pleasing	to	the	eye;	for
if	it	is	carefully	made,	it	is	of	an	exquisite
brilliance.
—	Columella,	De	re	rustica,	1st	century	CE
Once	the	pungency	has	developed,	cooking

will	drive	off	and	modify	the	irritant
molecules	and	so	reduce	the	pungency,
leaving	behind	a	more	generic	cabbage-family
aroma.	Mustard	is	therefore	usually	added	at
the	end	of	the	cooking	process.

Other	Uses	for	Mustards	 In	addition	 to	 their
chemical	defenses,	mustard	seeds	are	about	a
third	protein,	a	third	carbohydrate,	and	a	third
oil.	 When	 the	 seeds	 are	 ground,	 the	 small
protein	 and	 carbohydrate	 particles	 and
dissolved	mucilage	from	the	seedcoat	can	coat



the	surfaces	of	oil	droplets	and	 thus	stabilize
such	 sauce	 emulsions	 as	 mayonnaise	 and
vinaigrette	 (p.	 628).	 The	 seedcoat	 of	 white
mustard	 is	 especially	 rich	 in	mucilage	 (up	 to
5%	 of	 the	 seed	 weight),	 and	 ground	 white
mustard	 is	 used	 in	 sausages	 to	 help	 bind	 the
meat	particles	together.

Mustard	oil	is	a	traditional	cooking	oil	in
Pakistan	and	in	Northern	India,	where	it	lends
a	distinctive	flavor	to	Bengali	fish	dishes,
pickles,	and	other	preparations.	In	much	of	the
West,	the	sale	of	mustard	oil	for	food	use	is
illegal,	for	two	reasons:	it	contains	large
quantities	of	an	unusual	fatty	acid,	erucic
acid;	and	it	contains	irritating	isothiocyanates.
Erucic	acid	causes	heart	damage	in	laboratory
animals;	its	significance	for	human	health
isn’t	known.	Though	our	mustard	condiments
contain	the	same	isothiocyanates	as	mustard
oil,	it’s	possible	that	daily	exposure	through
foods	cooked	in	the	oil	could	have	harmful
long-term	effects.	So	far,	medical	studies	are



inconclusive.	In	Asia,	it’s	thought	that
preheating	the	oil	to	the	smoking	point
reduces	isothiocyanate	content.

Horseradish	 Horseradish	 is	 a	 west	 Asian
cabbage	 relative,	Armoracia	 rusticana,
remarkable	for	large	fleshy	white	roots	rich	in
sinigrin	 and	 its	 volatile	 pungent	 compound.
Horseradish	pungency	develops	when	the	raw
root	is	grated,	or	when	the	ground	dried	root	is
rehydrated.	Horseradish	doesn’t	seem	to	have
been	 cultivated	 in	 Europe	 until	 the	 Middle
Ages;	 today	 it’s	 used	 as	 a	 relish	 or	 dressing
for	meats	 and	 seafood,	 often	 in	 the	 company
of	cream	to	take	the	edge	off	its	strong	flavor.

Wasabi	 Wasabi	 is	 the	 enlarged	 stem	 of	 an
East	 Asian	 cabbage	 relative	 that	 also
accumulates	 sinigrin	 as	 a	 chemical	 defense.
Wasabia	 japonica 	 is	 a	 native	 of	 Japan	 and
Sakhalin	Island,	where	it	grows	alongside	cool
mountain	 streams.	 Wasabi	 is	 now	 cultivated
in	 several	 countries	 and	 is	 occasionally



available	 fresh	 in	 the	West;	whole	and	partly
used	 roots	 keep	 for	 several	 weeks	 in	 the
refrigerator.

Most	wasabi	served	in	restaurants	is	in	fact
ordinary	dried	horseradish	powder,	colored
green	and	reconstituted	with	water.	It	has	a
similar	pungency,	but	little	else	in	common
with	true	wasabi.	When	the	fresh	stem	is
grated	a	few	minutes	before	the	meal,	it
releases	more	than	20	enzyme-generated
volatiles,	some	pungent,	some	oniony,	some
green,	some	even	sweet.

Dealing	with	an	Overdose	of	Wasabi	or
Horseradish

Though	a	mouthful	of	food	overdosed	with
chilli	can	be	painful,	it’s	not	as	startling	as
too	 much	 horseradish	 or	 wasabi,	 whose
volatile	 irritants	 can	 quickly	 get	 into	 the
airstream	and	cause	a	bout	of	coughing	or
choking.	These	reactions	can	be	minimized
by	remembering	to	breathe	out	through	the



mouth	—	sparing	the	nasal	passages	—	and
breathing	 in	 through	 the	 nose,	 to	 avoid
drawing	 irritants	 from	 the	mouth	 into	 the
lungs.

The	Bean	Family:
Licorice	And	Fenugreek

Licorice	Licorice	comes	from	the	roots	of
Glycyrrhiza	glabra,	a	native	of	southwest
Asia.	Its	English	name	is	a	much-altered
version	of	its	genus	name,	which	derives	from
the	Greek	for	“sweet	root.”	The	woody	roots
of	this	shrub	are	remarkable	for	containing	a
steroid-like	chemical,	glycyrrhizic	acid,	that
is	50–150	times	sweeter	than	table	sugar.	The
water	extract	of	the	roots	contains	many
different	compounds,	including	sugars	and
amino	acids,	which	undergo	flavor-and
pigment-producing	browning	reactions	with
each	other	when	the	extract	is	concentrated.
Licorice	extracts	are	available	as	dark	syrups,



blocks,	or	powders,	and	are	used	in	various
confections,	to	give	color	and	flavor	to	dark
beers,	porter,	and	stout,	and	to	flavor	tobacco
for	cigars,	cigarettes,	and	chewing.	Many
licorice	candies	are	flavored	with	anise-like
anethole	(p.	414),	but	licorice	root	itself	has	a
more	complex	aroma,	with	almond	and	floral
notes.

Thanks	to	its	hormone-like	chemical
structure,	glycyrrhizic	acid	has	a	number	of
effects	on	the	human	body,	some	helpful	and
some	not.	It	helps	soothe	coughs,	but	it	also
can	disrupt	normal	regulation	of	mineral	and
blood	pressure	levels.	Licorice	is	therefore
best	consumed	in	moderation	and
infrequently;	daily	consumption	can
sometimes	cause	a	significant	rise	in	blood
pressure	and	other	problems.

Fenugreek	Fenugreek	 is	 the	small,	hard	seed
of	a	bean	relative,	Trigonella	foenumgraecum,
that’s	 native	 to	 southwest	 Asia	 and	 the



Mediterranean.	Its	name	comes	from	the	Latin
for	 “Greek	 hay.”	 Fenugreek	 is	 somewhat
bitter	and	has	a	very	distinctive	sweet	aroma,
reminiscent	of	dry	hay	as	well	as	maple	syrup
and	 caramel,	 that	 comes	 from	 a	 chemical
called	 sotolon,	 which	 is	 also	 an	 important
volatile	 in	molasses,	 barley	malt,	 coffee,	 soy
sauce,	cooked	beef,	and	sherry.	The	outer	cell
layer	of	 the	 fenugreek	seed	contains	a	water-
soluble	 storage	 carbohydrate
(galactomannan),	 so	 that	 when	 the	 seeds	 are
soaked,	 they	 exude	 a	 thick,	mucilaginous	gel
that	 gives	 a	 pleasant	 slipperiness	 to	 some
Middle-Eastern	 sauces	 and	 condiments
(Yemen’s	hilbeh).	 Fenugreek	 is	 a	 component
of	various	spice	mixtures,	including	Ethiopian
berber	and	some	Indian	curry	powders.

Fenugreek	leaves	are	bitter	and	slightly
aromatic,	and	are	enjoyed	as	a	fresh	or	dried
herb	in	India	and	Iran.

Chillis



Chillis,	or	“chile	peppers,”	the	fruits	of	small
shrubs	native	to	South	America,	are	the	most
widely	grown	spice	in	the	world.	Their	active
ingredient,	the	spectacularly	pungent
chemical	capsaicin,	protects	the	seeds	of	the
chilli	fruit,	and	appears	to	be	a	chemical
repellant	aimed	specifically	at	mammals.
Birds,	which	swallow	the	fruits	whole	and
disperse	the	seeds	widely,	are	immune	to
capsaicin;	mammals,	whose	teeth	grind	up	the
fruit	and	destroy	the	seeds,	are	pained	by	it.
It’s	a	wonderfully	perverse	achievement	for
our	mammal	species	to	have	fallen	in	love
with	this	anti-mammalian	weapon	and	spread
the	chillis	much	further	than	any	bird	ever
did!

The	success	of	the	chilli	has	been
remarkable.	World	production	and
consumption	are	now	some	20	times	that	of
the	other	major	pungent	spice,	black	pepper.	It
is	ubiquitous	in	Central	and	South	America,
Southeast	Asia,	India,	the	Middle	East,	and



North	Africa.	In	China	the	chilli	is	a	major
spice	in	Sichuan	and	Hunan	provinces;	in
Europe,	Hungary	has	its	paprika	and	Spain	its
pimenton.	In	the	United	States,	salsas	became
more	popular	than	ketchup	in	the	1980s,
thanks	to	the	influence	of	Mexican
restaurants.	Mexico	remains	the	most
advanced	chilli	culture,	where	several
different	varieties	may	be	blended	to	obtain	a
particular	flavor,	and	where	the	substance	of
many	sauces	is	contributed	by	chillis,	without
the	aid	of	flavorless	flours	or	starches.

Chillis	 and	 Capsaicins	 There	 are	 about	 25
species	 of	Capsicum,	 most	 natives	 of	 South
America,	 of	 which	 five	 have	 been
domesticated.	 Most	 of	 our	 common	 chillis
come	 from	 one	 species,	Capsicum	 annuum,
which	was	 first	 cultivated	 in	Mexico	 at	 least
5,000	years	ago.	Chillis	are	hollow	fruits,	with
an	outer	wall	rich	in	carotenoid	pigments	that
encloses	 the	 seeds	 and	 the	 tissue	 that	 bears



them,	a	pale,	spongy	mass	called	the	placenta.
(For	 chillis	 as	 vegetables,	 see	 p.	 331).	 Their
pungent	 chemicals,	 the	 capsaicins,	 are	 only
synthesized	 by	 the	 surface	 cells	 of	 the
placenta,	 and	 accumulate	 in	 droplets	 just
under	the	cuticle	of	the	placenta	surface.	That
cuticle	can	split	under	the	pressure	and	allow
the	 capsaicin	 to	 escape	 and	 spread	 onto	 the
seeds	and	the	inner	fruit	wall.	Some	capsaicin
also	seems	to	enter	the	plant’s	circulation,	and
can	 be	 found	 in	 small	 quantities	 within	 the
fruit	wall	and	in	nearby	stems	and	leaves.

The	amount	of	capsaicin	that	a	chilli
contains	depends	not	only	on	the	plant’s
genetic	makeup,	but	on	growing	conditions	—
high	temperatures	and	drought	increase
production	—	and	on	its	ripeness.	The	fruit
accumulates	capsaicin	from	pollination	until
it	begins	to	ripen,	when	its	pungency	declines
somewhat:	so	maximum	pungency	comes
around	the	time	that	the	green	fruit	begins	to
change	color.



There	are	several	different	versions	of	the
capsaicin	molecule	found	in	chillis.	This	may
be	why	different	kinds	of	chillis	seem	to
produce	different	kinds	of	pungency	—	quick
and	transient,	slow	and	persistent	—	and	to
affect	different	parts	of	the	mouth.

Capsaicin’s	Effects	on	the	Body	The	effects
of	capsaicin	on	the	human	body	are	many	and
complex.	As	I	write	 in	2004,	 the	scorecard	 is
fairly	 positive.	 Capsaicin	 does	 not	 appear	 to
increase	the	risk	of	cancer	or	stomach	ulcers.
It	 affects	 the	 body’s	 temperature	 regulation,
making	 us	 feel	 hotter	 than	 we	 actually	 are,
and	 inducing	 cooling	mechanisms	 (sweating,
increased	blood	flow	in	the	skin).	It	increases
the	 body’s	 metabolic	 rate,	 so	 that	 we	 burn
more	 energy	 (and	 therefore	 retain	 less	 in
storage	 as	 fat).	 It	 may	 trigger	 brain	 signals
that	 make	 us	 feel	 less	 hungry	 and	 more
satiated.	 In	 sum,	 it	 may	 encourage	 us	 to	 eat
less	 of	 the	meal	 it’s	 in,	 and	 to	 burn	more	 of



the	calories	that	we	do	eat.
Of	course	there’s	also	capsaicin’s	irritating

effects,	which	can	be	pleasurable	in	the	mouth
but	not	necessarily	elsewhere.	(This	is	why
“pepper	spray”	is	an	effective	weapon;	it
makes	breathing	and	seeing	difficult	for	about
an	hour.)	Capsaicin	is	potent	and	oily	and	hard
to	wash	off	surfaces,	so	small	amounts	left	on
fingers	can	end	up	hours	later	being	rubbed
into	an	eye.	Knives,	cutting	boards,	and	hands
should	be	thoroughly	washed	with	hot	soapy
water	to	avoid	this	and	similar	unhappy
surprises.	On	the	other	hand,	capsaicin
irritation	has	found	a	number	of	medical
applications;	for	example,	when	applied	to	the
skin	it	helps	reduce	muscle	pain	by	increasing
local	blood	flow.



The	 chilli	 fruit.	 The	 pungent	 chemical
capsaicin	is	secreted	by	cells	on	the	surface	of
the	 placenta,	 the	 pithy	 tissue	 that	 bears	 the
seeds.

Controlling	 Capsaicin	 Pungency	 The
pungency	 of	 any	 dish	 that	 contains	 chillis	 is
influenced	by	four	main	factors:	the	variety	of
chilli	 used,	 the	 amount	 of	 chilli	 added,	 the
presence	 or	 absence	 of	 the	 capsaicin-rich
tissues,	and	the	length	of	time	that	the	chilli	is
in	contact	with	the	other	ingredients.	The	cook
can	 reduce	 the	 pungency	 of	 chillis
substantially	 by	 cutting	 them	 in	 half	 and
carefully	dissecting	and	removing	the	spongy
placental	tissue	and	the	seeds.

What	about	quenching	the	burn	once	the
mouth	is	already	on	fire?	The	two	surest
remedies	—	though	they’re	only	temporary	—
are	to	get	something	ice-cold	into	the	mouth,
or	something	solid	and	rough,	rice	or	crackers
or	a	spoonful	of	sugar.	Cold	liquid	or	ice	cools



the	receptors	down	below	the	temperature	at
which	they	are	activated,	and	the	rough	food
distracts	the	nerves	with	a	different	kind	of
signal.	Though	capsaicin	is	more	soluble	in
alcohol	and	oil	than	it	is	in	water,	alcoholic
drinks	and	fatty	foods	appear	to	be	no	more
effective	than	cold	or	sweetened	water	at
relieving	the	burn	(carbonation	adds	to	the
irritation).	If	all	else	fails,	take	comfort	in	the
fact	that	capsaicin	pain	generally	fades	within
15	minutes.

Dried	 Chillis	 Dried	 chillis	 are	 much	 more
than	a	conveniently	stable	source	of	pungency
and	 thickening	 power:	 they’re	 the	 source	 of
flavor	 complexity	 that	 is	 rare	 even	 among
herbs	 and	 spices.	 The	 drying	 process
concentrates	 the	 contents	 of	 the	 cells	 in	 the
fruit	 wall,	 encouraging	 them	 to	 react	 with
each	 other	 and	 generate	 dried-fruit,	 earthy,
woody,	 nutty,	 and	 other	 aromatics.	 Drying
traditionally	 took	 several	 weeks	 in	 sun	 or



shade,	and	 in	much	of	 the	world	 it	 still	does.
Modern	machine	 drying	 offers	more	 control,
and	 can	 minimize	 the	 loss	 of	 light-sensitive
pigments	 and	 vitamin	 C,	 though	 it	 brings
flavor	 differences	 as	 well.	 Chillis	 are
sometimes	 smoke-dried	 (Mexican	 chipotles,
some	 Spanish	 pimentons),	 which	 lends	 a
characteristic	note.

Other	Temperate-Climate	Spices

Hops	Hops	are	the	dried	seed-bearing	“cones”
of	Humulus	lupulus,	a	perennial	native	of	the
Northern	Hemisphere	that	is	a	relative	of
marijuana	and	hemp.	The	hop	plant	was
cultivated	in	the	Hallertau	region	of	Germany
by	the	8th	century,	and	spread	to	Flanders	by
the	14th.	Though	now	used	almost	exclusively
in	beer,	they	also	flavor	bread	and	are	made
into	an	herbal	tea.	Hop	aroma	depends	on	the
variety,	and	may	include	woody,	floral,	and
complex	sulfur	notes.	It’s	described	in	more



detail	in	chapter	13.

Pepper	Terminology
In	 the	 United	 States,	 pungent	 capsicum
fruits	 are	 generally	 called	 “peppers,”	 or
“hot	 peppers,”	 terms	 that	 stem	 from	 the
early	 Spanish	 identification	 of	 capsicum
pungency	with	black-pepper	pungency.	The
native	Nahuatl	word	was	chilli,	which	gave
rise	 to	 Spanish	chile,	 and	 in	 turn	 to
American	chili	 (both	 a	 capsicum-flavored
stew	 and	 the	 powder	 used	 to	 make	 it).
Chile	 the	 country	 got	 its	 name	 from	 an
entirely	 unrelated	 word	 (Araucanian	 for
“the	 end	 of	 the	 earth”).	 Given	 the	 many
possibilities	 for	 confusion,	 I	 agree	 with
Alan	 Davidson	 and	 others	 that	 we	 should
refer	 to	 pungent	 capsicums	 with	 the
original	 and	 unambiguous	 Nahuatl	 name
chilli.

Mahleb	 Mahleb	 or	 mahaleb	 is	 the	 dried



kernel	of	a	small	kind	of	cherry	native	to	Iran,
Prunus	 mahaleb.	 The	 kernels	 have	 a	 warm
aroma	 vaguely	 suggestive	 of	 bitter	 almond,
and	are	used	to	flavor	baked	goods	and	sweets
in	much	of	the	eastern	Mediterranean.

Mastic	 Mastic	 is	 a	 resin	 exuded	 from	 the
trunk	 of	 a	 relative	 of	 the	 pistachio,	Pistacia
lentiscus,	 a	 tree	 native	 to	 the	 Eastern
Mediterranean	 that	 now	 grows	 only	 on	 the
Greek	 island	 of	 Chios.	 Mastic	 was	 chewed
like	 chewing	 gum	 (hence	 its	 name,	 from	 the
same	 root	 as	masticate),	 and	 is	 also	 used	 to
flavor	 various	 preparations,	 from	 breads	 and
pastries	 to	 ice	 cream,	 candies,	 and	 alcohol
(ouzo).	The	main	aromatic	components	of	the
gum	 are	 two	 terpenes,	 pine-like	 pinene	 and
woody	myrcene.	Myrcene	is	also	the	molecule
from	which	the	long	resin	polymers	are	built.
The	 resin	 is	 not	 very	 soluble	 in	 water,	 so	 it
must	 be	 ground	 fine	 and	mixed	with	 another
powdery	 ingredient	 (flour,	 sugar)	 to	 help



disperse	it	evenly	in	liquid	ingredients.

Chilli	Varieties	and	Pungencies
Here	 is	 a	 list	 of	 common	 chilli	 varieties
and	 their	 relative	pungencies.	Pungency	 is
rated	in	Scoville	units,	a	measure	invented
around	 1912	 by	 pharmaceutical	 chemist
Wilbur	 Scoville	 and	 later	 adapted	 to
modern	 chemical	 analyses.	 The	 original
method	 involved	 an	 overnight	 alcohol
extraction	of	the	pepper,	and	then	a	tasting
of	 increasing	dilutions	of	 the	 extract	 until
the	 pungency	 is	 barely	 detectable.	 The
more	 the	 extract	 can	 be	 diluted,	 the	more
pungent	 it	 is,	 and	 the	 higher	 the	 Scoville
score.

Chilli	Variety Pungency,	Scoville	Units
Capsicum	annuum
Bell 0–600
New	Mexican 500–2,500



Wax 0–40,000
Paprika 0–2,500
Pimento 0
Jalapeno 2,500–10,000
Ancho/	poblano 1,000–1,500
Serrano 10,000–25,000
Cayenne 30,000–50,000

Capsicum	chinense
Habanero,	scotch	bonnet 80,000–150,000
Capsicum	frutescens
Tabasco 30,000–50,000
Capsicum	pubescens
Rocoto 30,000–60,000
Capsicum	baccatum
Aji 30,000–50,000

Nigella	 The	 small,	 black,	 angular	 seed	 of
Nigella	sativa,	a	close	Eurasian	relative	of	the



common	 ornamental	 plant	 love-in-a-mist,
tastes	like	a	milder,	more	complex	version	of
thyme	or	oregano,	with	a	hint	of	caraway.	It’s
used	 from	 India	 through	 southwest	 Asia	 in
breads	and	other	dishes.

Saffron	Saffron	is	the	world’s	most	expensive
spice:	 a	 testament	 not	 only	 to	 the	 labor
required	to	produce	it,	but	to	its	unique	ability
to	 impart	 both	 an	 unusual	 flavor	 and	 an
intense	 yellow	 color	 to	 foods.	 It	 is	 a	 part	 of
the	flower	of	a	kind	of	crocus,	Crocus	sativus,
which	 was	 probably	 domesticated	 in	 or	 near
Greece	 during	 the	 Bronze	 Age.	 The	 saffron
crocus	 was	 carried	 eastward	 to	 Kashmir
before	 500	BCE;	 in	medieval	 times	 the	Arabs
took	 it	westward	 to	Spain,	 and	 the	Crusaders
to	 France	 and	 England.	 (The	 name	 comes
from	the	Arabic	for	“thread.”)	Today	Iran	and
Spain	 are	 the	major	 producers	 and	 exporters.
They	 use	 saffron	 in	 their	 respective	 rice
dishes,	 pilaf	 and	 paella;	 the	 French	 in	 their



fish	stew,	bouillabaisse;	the	Italians	in	risotto
milanese;	 the	 Indians	 in	 biryanis	 and	 milk
sweets.

The	numbers	that	figure	in	saffron
production	are	startling.	It	takes	about	70,000
crocus	flowers	to	produce	5	lb/2.25	kg	of
stigmas,	the	three	dark	red	ends	of	the	tube
(“style”)	that	carries	pollen	down	to	the
plant’s	ovary.	These	5	pounds	in	turn	dry
down	to	about	1	lb/450	gm	of	saffron.	And
because	they’re	so	delicate,	the	stigmas	are
still	harvested	and	separated	from	the	other
flower	parts	by	hand,	with	nearly	200	hours	of
labor	required	for	that	same	1	pound	of	dried
saffron.	Each	purple-petaled	flower	must	be
harvested	on	the	same	day	that	it	begins	to
open,	in	late	autumn.	Once	separated,	the
stigmas	are	carefully	dried,	either	with	a	30-
minute	toasting	over	a	fire	(Spain),	or	longer
times	in	the	sun	(Iran),	or	in	a	warm	room	or
modern	oven.



Saffron	Color	 Saffron’s	 intense	 color	 comes
from	 a	 set	 of	 carotenoid	 pigments	 (p.	 267)
that	 account	 for	 10%	 or	 more	 of	 the	 dried
spice’s	 weight.	 The	 most	 abundant	 form,
called	crocin,	is	a	molecular	sandwich	of	one
pigment	 molecule	 with	 a	 sugar	 molecule
attached	 at	 each	 end.	 The	 sugars	 make	 the
normally	 oil-soluble	 pigment	 into	 a	 water-
soluble	 one	 —	 and	 this	 is	 why	 saffron	 is
easily	 extracted	 in	 hot	 water	 or	 milk	 and
works	so	well	as	a	coloring	agent	for	rice	and
other	 nonfatty	 foods.	 Crocin	 is	 a	 powerful
colorant,	and	gives	a	noticeable	tinge	to	water
even	at	1	part	per	million.

The	 saffron	 crocus.	 Pure	 saffron	 consists	 of
the	dried	stigmas,	the	deep	red	tips	that	catch
pollen	 grains	 and	 send	 them	 down	 the	 long



style	 to	 the	 ovary.	 Second-quality	 saffron
often	 includes	 the	 pale,	 relatively	 flavorless
styles.

Saffron	Flavor	Saffron	flavor	is	characterized
by	a	notable	bitterness	and	a	penetrating,	hay-
like	 aroma.	 It	 arises	 largely	 from	 another
sugar-hydrocarbon	 combination,	 picrocrocin,
which	may	be	up	to	4%	of	the	fresh	weight	of
the	stigmas,	and	is	probably	a	defense	against
insects	 and	 other	 predators.	The	 combination
itself	 is	bitter.	When	 the	stigmas	dry	out	and
their	 cell	 structures	 are	 damaged,	 both	 the
drying	heat	and	an	enzyme	act	on	picrocrocin
to	liberate	the	hydrocarbon	portion,	which	is	a
volatile	 terpene	 called	 safranal.	 Drying	 the
saffron	stigmas	 thus	moderates	 the	bitterness
and	 develops	 the	 aroma.	 Several	 chemical
relatives	 of	 safranal	 round	 out	 the	 overall
aroma.

Using	 Saffron	 Saffron	 is	 typically	 used	 in
small	quantities	—	a	few	threads,	or	a	“pinch”



—	and	rehydrated	in	a	small	amount	of	warm
or	hot	 liquid	before	being	added	 to	a	dish,	 in
order	 to	 extract	 both	 flavor	 and	 color.	 The
main	 pigment	 is	 water	 soluble,	 but	 the
inclusion	 of	 some	 alcohol	 or	 fat	 in	 the
extraction	 liquid	will	 dissolve	 additional	 fat-
soluble	carotenoids.

Saffron’s	color	and	flavor	molecules	are
readily	altered	by	light	and	heat,	so	this
valuable	spice	is	best	stored	in	an	airtight
container	in	the	freezer.

Sumac	 Sumac	 is	 the	 small,	 dried,	 purplered
berry	of	a	shrubby	relative	(Rhus	coriaria)	of
the	 cashew	 and	 mango	 trees,	 a	 native	 of
southwest	 Asia.	 Sumac	 is	 unusual	 for	 being
very	 tart	 (from	 malic	 and	 other	 acids),
astringent	 (from	 abundant	 tannins,	 to	 4%	 of
its	 weight),	 and	 aromatic,	 with	 pine,	 woody
and	 citrus	 notes.	 Sumac	 is	 ground	 and	 added
to	 a	 number	 of	 savory	 dishes	 in	 the	 Middle
East	and	North	Africa.



A	Survey	of
Tropical	Spices

Among	the	tropical	spices,	family
relationships	don’t	readily	translate	into
flavor	relationships.	I’ve	therefore	listed	them
all	in	simple	alphabetical	order.	It’s
interesting	to	note,	though,	that	the	ginger
family	includes	turmeric,	galangal,
cardamoms,	and	grains	of	paradise;	and	that
allspice	and	clove	are	members	of	the	myrtle
family,	and	thus	relatives	of	each	other	and	of
two	strong-scented	fruits,	guava	and	feijoa.

Allspice	Allspice	 is	 the	 brown,	mediumsized
dried	berry	of	a	tree	of	the	New	World	tropics.
Pimenta	 dioica	 is	 a	 member	 of	 the	 myrtle
family	 and	 a	 relative	 of	 the	 clove.	 Allspice
took	on	 its	modern	name	 in	 the	17th	 century
because	it	was	thought	to	combine	the	aromas
of	 several	 spices,	 and	 today	 it’s	 often
described	 as	 tasting	 like	 a	 mellow



combination	of	clove,	cinnamon,	and	nutmeg.
It	is	indeed	rich	in	clove’s	eugenol	and	related
phenolic	 volatiles,	 with	 fresh,	 sweet,	 and
woody	notes	(but	no	cinnamon	volatiles).	The
main	 producer	 is	 Jamaica.	 The	 berries	 are
picked	when	green	and	at	the	height	of	flavor,
briefly	fermented	in	heaps,	“sweated”	in	bags
to	accelerate	 their	drying	and	browning,	 then
sun-dried	 for	 five	 to	 six	 days	 (or	 machine-
dried).	Allspice	 finds	 notable	 use	 in	 pickling
fish,	meats,	 and	vegetables,	 as	well	 as	 in	 pie
seasonings.

Annatto	 Annatto,	 also	 known	 as	 achiote,	 is
both	a	flavoring	and	a	colorant.	It	 is	 the	seed
of	 a	 bush,	Bixa	 orellana,	 native	 to	 tropical
America,	and	is	much	used	in	various	cooked
dishes	 from	 southern	 Mexico	 to	 northern
South	 America.	 The	 bright	 red-orange
pigment	bixin	is	found	in	the	waxy	coating	of
the	 seeds,	 and	 readily	changes	 into	a	number
of	chemical	variants	 that	are	different	shades



of	orange,	yellow,	and	red.	Some	of	these	are
soluble	 in	 water,	 others	 in	 oil;	 large	 food
manufacturers	 use	 annatto	 extracts	 to	 give	 a
vivid	 color	 to	 cheddar-style	 cheeses,	 butter,
and	 other	 products.	 Annatto	 seeds	 are	 hard,
and	difficult	 to	 grind	 finely,	 so	 they’re	 often
heated	 in	 a	 liquid	 to	 extract	 their	 flavor	 and
color	and	then	are	strained	out.	Commercially
ground	annatto	pastes	 are	 also	available.	The
aroma	of	annatto	is	dominated	by	the	woody,
dry	terpene	humulone,	which	is	also	found	in
hops.

Cardamom	 Cardamom	 is	 the	 world’s	 third
most	expensive	spice	after	saffron	and	vanilla.
It’s	 the	 seed	 of	 a	 herbaceous	 plant	 in	 the
ginger	 family	 that	 is	 indigenous	 to	 the
mountains	of	southwest	India,	and	was	grown
only	 there	 until	 around1900.	 German
immigrants	 then	 brought	 it	 to	 Guatamala,
which	is	now	the	largest	producer.	Cardamom
seeds	are	borne	in	clusters	of	fibrous	capsules



that	 ripen	 at	 different	 times,	 so	 the	 capsules
must	 be	 picked	 by	 hand	 one	 by	 one,	 and
slightly	before	full	ripeness,	when	the	capsule
splits.	 The	 word	 comes	 from	 an	Arabic	 root
meaning	 “to	 warm”;	 and	 cardamom	 has	 a
delicate,	warming	quality	due	to	two	different
sets	 of	 aromatics,	 both	 stored	 in	 a	 layer	 just
below	 the	 seed	 surface:	 a	 group	 of	 floral,
fruity,	and	sweet	terpene	compounds	(linalool
and	 acetate	 esters),	 and	 more	 penetrating,
eucalyptus-like	cineole.

There	are	two	broadly	different	varieties	of
cardamom:	Malabar,	a	small,	round	capsule
with	a	high	content	of	delicate,	flowery
compounds,	and	Mysore,	a	larger,	three-
angled	capsule	with	mainly	pine,	woody,	and
eucalyptus	notes.	Both	are	slightly	astringent
and	pungent.	Malabar	cardamom	develops	its
best	flavor	after	the	pods	have	begun	to	turn
from	green	to	off-white,	so	it	is	usually
available	only	in	bleached	form,	after	sun-
drying	or	chemical	bleaching	to	make	the	pod



color	more	uniform.	Mysore	cardamom	is
often	sold	green,	its	color	fixed	by	a	three-
hour	dose	of	moderate	heat	(130ºF/55ºC)
before	drying.

Cardamom	is	mentioned	along	with
cinnamon	in	the	Old	Testament,	but	doesn’t
seem	to	have	reached	Europe	until	the	Middle
Ages.	Today	the	Nordic	countries	consume
10%	of	world	trade,	mainly	in	baked	goods,
while	Arab	countries	take	80%	for	their
cardamom	coffee.	Gahwa	is	made	by	boiling
together	freshly	roasted	and	ground	coffee
with	freshly	broken	green	cardamom	pods.

Large	cardamom,	also	called	Nepal	or
greater	Indian	cardamom,	is	the	seed	of	a
cardamom	relative,	Amomum	subulatum,
which	grows	in	the	eastern	Himalayas	of
North	India,	Nepal,	and	Bhutan.	(Other
species	of	Amomum	and	Aframomum	are	also
used.)	The	seeds	are	borne	in	a	reddish	pod	an
inch/2.5	cm	long,	with	a	sweet	surrounding
pulp.	Large	cardamom	has	a	strong,	harsh



flavor	for	two	reasons:	much	of	the	crop	is
smoke-dried,	and	the	seeds	are	rich	in	the
penetrating	terpenes	cineole	and	camphor.
Large	cardamoms	are	often	used	in	India,
west	Asia,	and	China	in	savory	and	rice	dishes
and	in	pickles.

Cinnamon	Cinnamon	 is	 the	 dried	 inner	 bark
of	 trees	 in	 the	 tropical	 Asian	 genus
Cinnamomum,	 a	 distant	 relative	 of	 the	 bay
laurel.	 Its	 inner	 bark	 or	 phloem	 layer,	which
carries	 nutrients	 from	 the	 leaves	 toward	 the
roots,	 contains	 protective	oil	 cells.	When	 the
inner	 bark	 is	 cut	 and	 peeled	 from	 the	 new
growth	 of	 these	 trees,	 it	 curls	 to	 form	 the
familiar	 long	 “quills”	 or	 sticks.	 Cinnamon
was	 one	 of	 the	 first	 spices	 to	 reach	 the
Mediterranean;	 the	 ancient	 Egyptians	 used	 it
in	 embalming,	 and	 it’s	mentioned	 repeatedly
in	the	Old	Testament.	Asian	and	Near	Eastern
peoples	 have	 long	 used	 cinnamon	 to	 flavor
meat	dishes,	and	thanks	to	the	influence	of	the



Arabs,	 medieval	 European	 cooks	 did	 too.
Nowadays	 most	 cinnamon	 goes	 into	 sweet
dishes	and	candies.

There	are	several	different	species	of
Cinnamomum	that	provide	aromatic	bark,	but
cinnamons	fall	into	two	general	categories.
One	is	Ceylon	or	Sri	Lankan	cinnamon	(from
C.	verum	or	zeylanicum),	light	brown	in	color,
papery	and	brittle,	coiled	in	a	single	spiral,
and	with	a	mild,	delicate	cinnamon	flavor
often	described	as	sweet.	The	other	is	the
Southeast	Asian	or	Chinesecinnamon,	often
called	cassia,	which	is	typically	thick	and
hard,	forming	a	double	spiral,	darker	in	color
and	much	stronger	in	flavor,	bitter	and
somewhat	harsh	and	burning,	as	in	the
American	“red-hot”	candy.	These	cinnamons
come	mainly	from	China	(C.	cassia),	Vietnam
(C.	loureirii),	and	Indonesia	(C.	burmanii).
Cassia	types	are	preferred	in	most	of	the
world,	Sri	Lankan	types	in	Latin	America.	The
typical	hot,	spicy	cinnamon	aroma	comes



from	a	phenolic	compound,	cinnamaldehyde,
of	which	cassia	types	have	significantly	more
than	Sri	Lankan	types;	the	latter	are	more
subtle	and	complex,	with	floral	and	clove
notes	(linalool,	eugenol).

Cloves	Cloves	are	among	the	most	distinctive
and	 strongest	 of	 all	 spices.	They’re	 the	dried
immature	 flower	buds	of	a	 tree	 in	 the	myrtle
family,	Syzygium	aromaticum,	which	is	native
to	 a	 few	 islands	 in	 present-day	 Indonesia.
Cloves	 were	 enjoyed	 in	 China	 2,200	 years
ago,	but	weren’t	much	used	in	European	foods
until	 the	Middle	Ages.	 Today	 Indonesia	 and
Madagascar	are	the	biggest	producers.

The	flower	buds	of	the	clove	tree	are
picked	just	before	they	open,	and	then	dried
for	several	days.	Their	distinctiveness	results
from	a	high	content	of	the	phenolic	compound
called	eugenol,	which	has	a	unique	aroma	that
is	both	somewhat	sweet	and	very	penetrating.
Clove	buds	contain	the	highest	concentration



of	aroma	molecules	of	any	spice.	They	are	as
much	as	17%	volatile	chemicals	by	weight,
most	of	this	stored	just	under	the	surface	of
the	elongated	portion,	in	the	flower	cap,	and
in	the	delicate	filaments	of	the	stamens
within.	The	oil	is	about	85%	eugenol.	Thanks
mainly	to	eugenol,	clove	oil	is	good	at
suppressing	microbes,	and	it	temporarily
numbs	our	nerve	endings,	properties	that	have
led	to	its	use	in	mouthwashes	and	dental
products.

In	much	of	the	world	cloves	flavor	meat
dishes,	while	Europeans	use	them	mainly	in
sweets.	Cloves	are	an	important	element	in	a
number	of	spice	mixes	(see	box,	p.	398).	By
far	their	largest	role	is	in	the	Indonesian
flavored	cigarette,	kretek,	which	may	be	40%
shredded	clove.

Galangal	 Galangal	 is	 a	 name	 given	 to	 the
underground	 stem,	 or	 rhizome,	 of	 two	Asian
ginger	 relatives,	Alpinia	 galanga	 or	 greater



galangal,	 and	Alpinia	 officinarum	 or	 lesser
galangal.	 The	 former,	 sometimes	 also	 called
Thai	ginger,	 is	 the	more	prized	and	common.
Galangal	is	more	austere	than	ginger,	pungent
and	with	overtones	of	eucalyptus,	pine,	clove,
and	 camphor,	 but	 none	 of	 ginger’s	 lemony
character.	 In	 Thai	 and	 other	 Southeast	Asian
cuisines	 it’s	often	combined	with	 lemongrass
and	many	other	aromatics.	Galangal	is	also	an
ingredient	 in	 Chartreuse,	 bitters,	 and	 some
soft	drinks.

Ginger	 Ginger	 is	 the	 pungent,	 aromatic
rhizome	 of	 a	 herbaceous	 tropical	 plant,
Zingiber	officinale,	that	is	distantly	related	to
the	 banana.	 It	 lends	 its	 name	 to	 a	 family	 of
about	45	genera	that	are	found	throughout	the
tropics,	 and	 that	 include	 galangal,	 grains	 of
paradise,	cardamom,	and	 turmeric.	The	name
comes	via	Latin	 from	 the	Sanskrit	singabera,
meaning	horns	or	antlers,	which	the	branched
rhizomes	resemble.



Ginger	was	domesticated	in	prehistoric
times	somewhere	in	southern	Asia,	had	been
brought	in	dried	form	to	the	Mediterranean	by
classical	Greek	times,	and	was	one	of	the
most	important	spices	in	medieval	Europe.
The	cake	known	as	gingerbread	dates	from
this	time;	ginger	beer	and	ginger	ale	from	the
19th	century,	when	English	taverns	sprinkled
powdered	ginger	on	their	drinks.

To	make	the	dried	spice,	mature	rhizomes
are	cleaned,	scraped	to	remove	most	of	the
skin,	sometimes	treated	with	lime	or	acid	to
bleach	them,	and	then	dried	in	the	sun	or	a
machine.	Dried	ginger	is	about	40%	starch	by
weight.	Today	the	main	producers	of	dried
ginger	are	India	and	China,	while	Jamaican
ginger	is	considered	one	of	the	finest.	A
surprisingly	large	fraction	of	the	ginger	trade
goes	to	Yemen,	where	it	is	added	to	coffee	(as
much	as	15%	of	the	coffee’s	weight).

In	Asia,	and	increasingly	in	the	rest	of	the
world,	ginger	is	used	fresh.	Most	fresh	ginger



in	the	United	States	now	comes	from	Hawaii,
where	the	main	harvest	runs	from	December
to	June.	Fresh	ginger	contains	a	protein-
digesting	enzyme	that	can	cause	problems	in
gelatin-based	preparations	(p.	607).

Ginger	 Aromas	 Ginger	 has	 a	 remarkable
culinary	 range,	 flavoring	 sausages	 and	 fish
dishes	 as	 well	 as	 sodas	 and	 sweets.	 It	 has
something	of	the	quality	of	lemon	juice	in	that
it	 adds	 a	 refreshing,	 bright	 aroma	 —	 from
fresh,	 floral,	 citrus,	 woody,	 and	 eucalyptus
notes	—	and	mild,	pepper-like	pungency	 that
complements	 other	 flavors	 without
dominating	them.	Gingers	from	different	parts
of	 the	world	have	different	qualities.	Chinese
ginger	 tends	 to	 be	 mainly	 pungent;	 South
Indian	 and	Australian	 gingers	 have	 a	 notable
quantity	 of	 citral	 and	 so	 a	 more	 distinctly
lemony	 aroma;	 Jamaican	 ginger	 is	 delicate
and	sweet,	African	ginger	penetrating.

Ginger	 Pungency	 Is	 Variable 	 The	 pungency



of	 ginger	 and	 members	 of	 its	 family	 comes
from	 the	 gingerols,	 chemical	 relatives	 of	 the
chilli’s	capsaicin	and	black	pepper’s	piperine
(p.	394).	The	gingerols	are	the	least	powerful
of	 the	 group,	 and	 the	 most	 easily	 altered	 by
drying	and	cooking.	When	ginger	is	dried,	its
gingerol	molecules	lose	a	small	side	group	of
atoms	 and	 are	 transformed	 into	 shogaols,
which	 are	 about	 twice	 as	 pungent:	 so	 dried
ginger	is	stronger	than	fresh.	Cooking	reduces
ginger	 pungency	 by	 transforming	 some
gingerols	 and	 shogaols	 into	 zingerone,	which
is	only	slightly	pungent	and	has	a	sweet-spicy
aroma.

Grains	 of	 Paradise	 Grains	 of	 paradise,
guinea	grains,	alligator	pepper,	and	melegueta
pepper	 are	 all	 names	 for	 the	 small	 seeds	 of
Aframomum	 melegueta.	 This	 member	 of	 the
ginger	family	 is	a	native	of	West	Africa,	and
was	 used	 in	 Europe	 from	 the	 Middle	 Ages
until	 the	 19th	 century,	 when	 it	 became	 a



rarity.	 It’s	 both	 somewhat	 pungent	 from
gingerol	 and	 relatives	 (paradols,	 shogaols),
and	 faintly	 but	 pleasantly	 aromatic,	 with
woody	 and	 evergreen	 notes	 (humulone	 and
caryophyllene).	 It	 is	 a	 component	 of	 the
Moroccan	spice	mixture	ras	el	hanout,	and	can
serve	 as	 an	 interesting	 alternative	 to	 black
pepper.

Mace	 and	 Nutmeg	 Mace	 and	 nutmeg	 have
similar	 aromas	 and	 come	 from	 the	 same
source:	 the	 fruit	 of	 a	 tropical	 Asian	 tree,
Myristica	 fragrans,	 which	 appears	 to	 have
originated	in	New	Guinea.	Along	with	cloves,
nutmeg	 put	 the	 Spice	 Islands,	 the	 Malaccas
that	are	now	part	of	Indonesia,	on	the	maps	of
European	 sea	 powers.	 The	 Portuguese	 and
then	the	Dutch	monopolized	the	nutmeg	trade
until	 the	 19th	 century,	 when	 the	 tree	 was
successfully	 planted	 in	 the	 Caribbean	 and
elsewhere.	 Nutmeg	 and	 mace	 didn’t	 make
much	 of	 an	 impression	 on	 European	 foods



until	the	Middle	Ages.	Today	they	provide	the
characteristic	 flavoring	 for	 doughnuts	 and
eggnog,	 and	 are	 added	 to	 hot	 dogs	 and	 other
sausages.	 Nutmeg	 is	 also	 an	 important
element	of	the	classic	French	béchamel	sauce.

Both	nutmeg	and	mace	are	borne	inside	the
plum-to	peach-sized	fruits	of	the	tree.	When
the	fruit	is	ripe,	it	splits	to	reveal	a	shiny,
brown-black	shell;	and	entwined	around	the
shell,	a	narrow,	irregular,	bright	red	ribbon.
The	red	ribbon	is	an	aril,	a	fruit	part	whose
color	and	sugars	attract	birds	to	carry	it	and
the	seed	away.	The	aril	is	the	spice	called
mace,	and	the	seed	inside	the	shell	is	the
nutmeg.	The	aril	is	removed	from	the	shell
and	dried	separately.	The	aroma	compounds
in	nutmeg	are	concentrated	in	a	layer	of	oil-
containing	tissue	that	weaves	through	the
seed’s	main	body	of	starchy	and	fatty	storage
tissue,	which	also	contains	astringent	tannins.

Nutmeg	and	mace	have	similar	but	distinct
flavors,	with	mace	the	gentler	and	more



rounded.	Both	spices	carry	fresh,	pine,
flowery,	and	citrus	notes,	but	are	dominated
by	woody,	warm,	somewhat	peppery
myristicin	(also	a	minor	component	in	fresh
dill).	Grated	nutmeg	includes	tannic	particles
of	the	main	seed	storage	tissue,	and	is	also
darker	in	color	than	powdered	mace.	Nutmeg
has	generally	been	put	to	use	in	sweets	and
dishes	based	on	cream,	milk,	and	eggs;	mace
in	meat	dishes	as	well	as	pickles	and
ketchups.	Their	flavors	tend	to	become
unpleasant	with	prolonged	heat,	so	they’re
often	grated	over	a	dish	at	the	last	minute.

Nutmeg	is	reputed	to	have	hallucinogenic
effects	if	several	grated	seeds	are	consumed	at
once.	Myristicin	has	been	suggested	as	the
active	ingredient,	but	the	evidence	is	scanty.

Black	 Pepper	 and	 Relatives	 Black	 pepper
was	 one	 of	 the	 first	 spices	 to	 be	 traded
westward	from	Asia,	and	today	it	remains	the
preeminent	 spice	 in	 Europe	 and	 North



America.	We	think	of	it	as	a	basic	seasoning,
like	 salt,	 and	 use	 its	moderate	 pungency	 and
pleasant	aroma	 to	 fill	out	 the	 flavor	of	many
savory	 dishes,	 often	 just	 before	 eating	 them.
Pepper	 is	 native	 to	 the	 tropical	 coastal
mountains	 of	 southwest	 India,	where	 sea	 and
overland	trade	with	the	ancient	world	began	at
least	 3,500	 years	 ago.	 It	 is	 mentioned	 in
Egyptian	 papyruses,	 was	 well	 known	 to	 the
Greeks,	and	a	popular	spice	 in	Rome.	During
this	 time	 it	 was	 largely	 gathered	 from	 wild
forest	plants,	though	sometime	before	the	7th
century	 the	 vine	 was	 transplanted	 to	 the
Malay	archipelago,	Java,	and	Sumatra.
Vasco	da	Gama	discovered	the	sea	route	from
Europe	to	southwest	India	in	1498,	and	the
Portuguese	subsequently	controlled	exports	of
black	pepper	for	several	decades.	They	were
followed	by	the	Dutch	and,	beginning	around
1635,	the	British,	who	established	pepper
plantations.	In	the	20th	century,	a	number	of
countries	in	South	America	and	Africa	began



producing	black	pepper.	Today	India,
Indonesia,	and	Brazil	are	the	major	world
sources.

Pepper	Production	Black	pepper	 is	 the	small
dried	 berry	 of	 a	 climbing	 vine	 in	 the	 genus
Piper,	which	includes	a	number	of	other	spice
and	herb	plants	(see	box,	p.	429).	The	berries
of	Piper	nigrum	form	on	a	flower	spike	a	few
centimeters	long,	and	take	about	six	months	to
mature.	 As	 berries	 mature	 and	 ripen,	 their
content	 of	 pungent	 piperine	 continuously
increases,	while	 their	 aromatics	 reach	 a	 peak
and	 then	 decline.	 Fully	 ripe	 berries	 may
contain	 less	 than	 half	 of	 the	 aroma	 that	 they
had	at	the	late	green	stage.	The	ripe	berry	skin
is	 red,	 but	 turns	 dark	 brown	 to	 black	 after
harvest	 thanks	 to	 the	 activity	 of	 browning
enzymes.	 The	 inner	 seed	 is	 largely	 starch,
with	 some	 oil,	 from	 3–9%	 pungent	 piperine,
and	2–3%	volatile	oil.

Black,	 White,	 Green,	 and	 Rose-Colored



Peppers	Pepper	berries	are	processed	to	make
several	different	versions	of	the	spice.

Black	 and	 white	 pepper.	 Pepper	 comes	 from
the	 small	 fruits	 of	 a	 tropical	 vine.	 Black
pepper	is	made	by	drying	the	whole	fruit;	the
wrinkled	dark	outer	coating	is	the	dried	fleshy
fruit	layer.	White	pepper	is	made	by	removing
the	fleshy	layer	before	drying	the	seed.

Black	pepper,	the	most	common,	is	made
from	mature	but	unripe	berries,	still
green	and	rich	in	aromatics.	The	berry
spikes	are	harvested	from	the	vines	and
the	berries	threshed	from	the	spikes.	The
berries	are	then	blanched	for	a	minute	in
hot	water	to	clean	them	and	rupture	the
cells	of	the	fruit	layer	to	speed	the	work
of	the	browning	enzymes.	Finally	they’re



sun-or	machine-dried	for	several	days,
during	which	the	outer	fruit	layer
darkens.
White	pepper	consists	of	the	pepper	seed
only,	without	the	outer	fruit	layer.	It’s
made	from	fully	ripe	berries,	which	are
soaked	in	water	for	a	week	to	allow	the
fruit	layer	to	be	degraded	by	bacteria,
then	rubbed	to	remove	the	fruit	layer,	and
finally	dried.	White	pepper	is	mainly
valued	for	providing	pungency	while
remaining	invisible	in	light-colored
sauces	and	other	preparations.	It	was
developed	into	a	major	commercial
product	in	Indonesia,	which	is	still	its
major	producer.
Green	pepper	is	made	from	berries
harvested	a	week	or	more	before	they
would	otherwise	begin	to	ripen.	The
berries	are	simply	preserved	by	treating
with	sulfur	dioxide	and	dehydration,	by
canning	or	bottling	in	brine,	or	by	freeze-



drying.	The	flavor	depends	on	the
method	of	preservation,	but	includes
some	pungency	and	pepper	aromatics	as
well	as	a	fresh	green-leaf	note.
Pink	pepper,	or	poivre	rose,	is	a	rarity
made	by	preserving	just-ripened	red
berries	in	brine	and	vinegar.	(Pink
peppercorns	are	entirely	different;	see
below.)

Pepper	Flavor	 The	 main	 pungent	 compound
in	 pepper	 is	 piperine,	 which	 is	 found	 in	 the
thin	 fruit	 layer	 and	 the	 surface	 layers	 of	 the
seed.	Piperine	is	about	100	times	less	pungent
than	the	capsaicin	in	chillis.	The	major	aroma
components	 in	 black	 pepper	 (the	 terpenes
pinene,	 sabinene,	 limonene,	 caryophyllene,
linalool)	 create	 an	 overall	 impression	 that	 is
fresh,	citrusy,	woody,	warm,	and	floral.	White
pepper	 is	 about	 as	 pungent	 as	 black	 pepper,
but	 lacks	 much	 of	 its	 aroma	 due	 to	 the
removal	 of	 the	 outer	 fruit	 layer.	 It	 often	 has



musty	 and	 horse-stable	 notes,	 probably	 from
the	 prolonged	 fermentation	 of	 the	 fruit	 layer
(skatole,	cresol).

Pepper	is	used	in	the	form	of	whole
“corns”	in	preparations	that	allow	time	to
extract	their	flavor:	such	things	as	pickles	and
preserves,	and	some	stocks	and	sauces.
Grinding	the	peppercorns	allows	their	flavor
to	be	extracted	faster	for	last-minute
adjustments.	Grinding	also	frees	their
aromatics	to	evaporate,	so	the	most	and
freshest	flavor	comes	from	whole	peppercorns
ground	directly	into	the	preparation.	Even
whole	peppercorns	lose	much	of	their	aroma
after	a	month	in	a	grinder.	Some	cooks	briefly
toast	them	in	a	hot	pan	to	enrich	their	aroma.

Pepper	is	best	stored	tightly	sealed	in	the
cold	and	dark.	If	exposed	to	light	during
storage,	it	loses	its	pungency	because	the	light
energy	rearranges	piperine	to	form	a	nearly
tasteless	molecule	(isochavicine).



Pink	Peppercorns	Pink	peppercorns	are	fruits
of	 the	 Brazilian	 pepper	 tree,	Schinus
terebinthifolius,	 which	 was	 brought	 to	 the
southern	United	 States	 as	 an	 ornamental	 and
has	 become	 an	 invasive	 pest.	 Its	 attractive
pink	 fruits	 were	 first	 marketed	 as	 a	 kind	 of
pepper	in	the	1980s.	The	tree	is	in	the	cashew
and	mango	family,	which	also	includes	poison
ivy	 and	 poison	 oak,	 and	 its	 brittle,
peppercorn-sized	 fruits	 contain	 cardanol,	 an
irritating	 phenolic	 compound	 that	 limits	 its
usefulness	 in	 foods.	 Pink	 peppercorns	 have
fresh,	 pine,	 citrus,	 and	 sweet	 aroma	 notes
thanks	 to	 several	 terpenes.	 A	 close	 relative
from	 Peru,	S.	 molle,	 is	 also	 grown	 as	 an
ornamental	and	is	called	the	California	pepper
tree.	 Its	 fruits	 have	 a	 more	 resinous	 aroma
(thanks	 to	 myrcene),	 with	 less	 irritant
cardanol.

Sichuan	 Pepper,	 Sansho 	 The	 Chinese	 spice
known	 as	 Sichuan	 pepper	 and	 the	 Japanese



sansho	 both	 offer	 a	 strange	 and	 interesting
version	 of	 pungency.	 They	 come	 from	 two
small	 trees	 in	 the	 citrus	 family	 sometimes
called	“prickly	ash.”	Sichuan	pepper	trees	are
Zanthoxylum	 simulans	 or	Z.	 bungeanum,	 and
sansho	 trees	 are	Zanthoxylum	 piperitum.
(Xanthoxylum	 is	another	spelling.)	The	spices
are	 the	 small	 dried	 fruit	 rinds,	 which	 are
aromatic	 with	 lemony	 citronellal	 and
citronellol.	 The	 pungent	 compounds,	 the
sanshools,	are	members	of	the	same	family	as
piperine	 from	 black	 pepper	 and	 capsaicin
from	 chillis.	But	 the	 sanshools	 aren’t	 simply
pungent.	 They	 produce	 a	 strange,	 tingling,
buzzing,	numbing	sensation	that	is	something
like	 the	 effect	 of	 carbonated	 drinks	 or	 of	 a
mild	electrical	current	(touching	the	terminals
of	 a	 nine-volt	 battery	 to	 the	 tongue).
Sanshools	 appear	 to	 act	 on	 several	 different
kinds	 of	 nerve	 endings	 at	 once,	 induce
sensitivity	to	touch	and	cold	in	nerves	that	are
ordinarily	nonsensitive,	and	so	perhaps	cause



a	kind	of	general	neurological	confusion.
The	Chinese	and	Japanese	versions	of	this

spice	are	different.	Chinese	Sichuan
peppercorns	are	always	toasted,	so	their	citrus
affinities	are	overshadowed	by	browned,
woody	notes	that	go	well	with	meats.	Japanese
sansho	is	distinctly	lemony,	and	is	used	to
mask	or	balance	the	fattiness	of	some	fish	and
meats.	These	spices	are	almost	always	used	as
part	of	a	mixture.

Sandalwood	 Sandalwood	 is	more	 familiar	 in
incense	 than	 in	 foods,	 but	 the	 roots	 and
heartwood	 of	 the	 tree	Santalum	 album	 are
sometimes	used	 in	 India	 to	 flavor	 sweets.	 Its
aroma	comes	mainly	from	santalol,	which	has
woody,	floral,	milky,	musky	qualities.

Some	Relatives	of	Pepper
There	 are	 about	 a	 thousand	 different
species	 in	 the	 genus	Piper,	 and	 many
relatives	 of	Piper	 nigrum	 have	 been	 also



been	used	as	food	flavorings,	including	the
herbs	 hoja	 santa	 and	 lolot	 (pp.	 409,	 410).
Other	 notable	 pepper	 relatives	 include	 the
following:
Long	pepper	(Piper	longum).	This	native
of	India	was	probably	the	first	pungent
spice	after	mustard	to	be	appreciated	in
Europe	—	the	Greeks	and	Romans
preferred	it	to	black	pepper	—	and	it
gave	us	our	word	pepper	via	its	Sanskrit
name	pippali	(black	pepper	is	marichi).
Long	pepper	is	so	called	because	it	is	the
entire	flower	spike	with	tiny	fruits
embedded	in	its	surface.	It	has	a
somewhat	more	pungent	taste	(due	to	a
larger	supply	of	piperine),	and	a	woody
aroma.	Today	it’s	mainly	used	in
vegetable	pickles,	though	it’s	also	found
in	some	North	African	spice	mixtures.
Another	plant	called	long	pepper	is	Piper
retrofractum,	a	native	of	Java	and	still
used	in	Indonesia	and	Malaysia.	It	is	said



to	be	more	aromatic	than	Indian	long
pepper
Cubeb	or	tailed	pepper	(P.	cubeba).	This
version	of	pepper	consists	of	individual
berries	and	their	tail-like	stems.	It	is	a
native	of	Indonesia,	and	was	used	in
European	cooking	in	the	17th	century;	in
its	home	region	it	still	flavors	sauces,
liquors,	lozenges,	and	cigarettes.	In
addition	to	pungency,	it	has	fresh,
eucalyptus,	woody,	spicy,	and	floral
aromatics.
Ashanti	pepper	(P.	guineense).	In	West
Africa	this	spice	lends	nutmeg	and
sassafras	notes	to	various	dishes.
Betel	leaf	(P.	betle).	The	clove-scented
leaves	of	this	Asian	pepper	species	have
long	been	wrapped	around	other
ingredients	into	a	bite-sized	packet	and
chewed.	The	Indian	packet,	supari,
includes	lime,	the	betel	nut	from	the
areca	palm,	and	sometimes	tobacco.



Star	Anise	 Star	 anise	 is	 the	 strikingly	 star-
shaped	woody	 fruit	 of	 a	 tree	 in	 the	magnolia
family,	Illicium	 verum,	 a	 native	 of	 South
China	 and	 Indochina.	 Its	 anise	 flavor	 comes
from	 the	 same	 phenolic	 chemical,	 anethole,
that	 flavors	 the	 entirely	 unrelated	 European
anise	 (p.	 414).	 The	 fruit	 itself,	 which	 may
have	 six	 to	 eight	 chambers,	 carries	 more	 of
the	flavor	than	the	seeds,	and	the	unripe	fruit
is	traditionally	chewed	as	a	breath	sweetener.
One	traditional	and	important	use	of	star	anise
is	 in	 Chinese	 meat	 dishes	 simmered	 in	 soy
sauce;	when	onions	are	included,	the	result	is
the	 production	 of	 sulfur-phenolic	 aromatics
that	intensify	the	meatiness	of	the	dish.

Tamarind	 Tamarind	 is	 the	 fibrous,	 sticky,
aromatic,	 and	 intensely	 sour	 pulp	 that
surrounds	 the	 seeds	 in	 pods	 of	Tamarindus
indica,	 a	 tree	 in	 the	 bean	 family	 native	 to
Africa	 and	 Madagascar.	 The	 pulp	 can	 be
extracted	 by	 soaking	 it	 in	 water	 for	 a	 few



minutes,	 squeezing	 the	 fibrous	 mass,	 and
straining	 off	 the	 flavored	 water;	 tamarind
extract	 is	 also	 manufactured	 and	 sold	 as	 a
thick	 paste.	 The	 pulp	 is	 about	 20%	 acids,
mainly	 tartaric,	 35–50%	 sugars,	 and	 about
30%	 moisture,	 and	 has	 a	 complex,	 savory,
roasted	 aroma	 thanks	 to	 browning	 reactions
that	take	place	on	the	tree	as	the	pulp	becomes
concentrated	in	the	hot	sun.	In	much	of	Asia,
tamarind	 is	used	 to	acidify	and	 flavor	 sweet-
sour	 preserves,	 sauces,	 soups,	 and	 drinks.
Tamarind	 is	 also	popular	 in	 the	Middle	East,
and	 it’s	 one	 of	 the	 defining	 ingredients	 in
Worcestershire	sauce.

Turmeric	Turmeric	 is	 the	dried	underground
stem,	 or	 rhizome,	 of	 a	 herbaceous	 tropical
plant	 in	 the	ginger	 family,	Curcuma	longa.	 It
appears	 to	 have	 been	 domesticated	 in
prehistoric	 times	 in	 India,	 probably	 for	 its
deep	 yellow	 pigment	 (curcuma	 comes	 from
the	Sanskrit	for	“yellow”).	Turmeric	has	long



been	 used	 to	 color	 skin,	 clothing,	 and	 foods
for	 ceremonies	 surrounding	 marriage	 and
death.	 In	 the	 United	 States,	 the	 main	 use	 of
turmeric	 is	 to	 provide	 color	 and	 nonpungent
filler	in	prepared	mustards.	It’s	also	the	major
component	 of	 most	 prepared	 curry	 powders,
making	up	25–50%	of	their	weight.

The	major	pigment	in	turmeric	is	a
phenolic	compound	called	curcumin,	which
turns	out	to	be	an	excellent	antioxidant.	This
may	explain	why	turmeric	is	considered	to
have	preservative	properties;	in	India	fish	and
other	foods	are	often	first	dusted	with	it
before	cooking,	and	it	goes	into	many
prepared	dishes.	The	color	of	curcumin	is
sensitive	to	pH.	In	acid	conditions	it’s	yellow,
while	in	alkaline	conditions	it	turns	orange-
red.

To	make	the	spice,	turmeric	rhizomes	are
steamed	or	boiled	in	slightly	alkaline	water	to
set	the	color	and	precook	the	abundant	starch,
then	sun-dried.	Turmeric	is	usually	sold



preground,	though	fresh	and	dried	rhizomes
can	be	found	in	ethnic	markets.	Turmeric	has
a	woody,	dry	earth	aroma	(from	mildly
aromatic	terpenes	called	turmerone	and
zingiberene),	with	slight	bitterness	and
pungency.

Vanilla	 Vanilla	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 popular
flavorings	in	the	world.	Among	the	spices	it’s
unique	for	the	richness,	depth,	and	persistence
of	its	flavor.	And	it’s	the	second	most	costly,
after	 saffron.	 So	 in	 fact	 most	 of	 the	 vanilla
flavoring	 consumed	 in	 the	 world	 today	 is	 a
synthetic	imitation	of	the	original	spice.

True	vanilla	comes	from	the	pod	fruit,
often	called	the	“bean,”	of	a	climbing	orchid
native	to	Central	and	northern	South	America.
There	are	about	100	species	in	the	tropical
genus	Vanilla.	V.	planifolia(or	V.	fragrans)
was	first	cultivated	by	the	Totonac	Indians
along	the	eastern	coast	of	Mexico	near
Veracruz,	perhaps	as	long	as	1,000	years	ago.



They	sent	it	north	to	the	Aztecs,	who	flavored
their	chocolate	drinks	with	it	(p.	695).	The
first	Europeans	to	taste	vanilla	were	the
Spanish,	who	gave	it	its	name;	vainilla	is	the
Spanish	diminutive	for	“sheath”	or	“husk”
(from	the	Latin	vagina).	A	19th-century
Belgian	botanist,	Charles	Morren,	figured	out
how	to	pollinate	vanilla	flowers	by	hand,	and
thus	made	it	possible	to	produce	the	spice	in
regions	that	lacked	the	proper	pollinating
insects.	And	the	French	took	the	vine	to	the
islands	off	the	coast	of	southeast	Africa	that
now	supply	much	of	the	world:	Madagascar,
Réunion,	and	Comoros,	which	collectively
produce	what	is	called	Bourbon	vanilla.

Today,	Indonesia	and	Madagascar	are	the
world’s	largest	producers.	It’s	the	attentive
and	extensive	labor	required	to	hand-pollinate
the	vanilla	flowers	and	cure	the	pods,	and	the
low	production	of	the	few	regions	that
cultivate	it,	that	make	vanilla	so	expensive.

Vanilla’s	rich	flavor	is	the	creation	of



three	factors:	the	pod’s	wealth	of	phenolic
defensive	compounds,	preeminently	vanillin;
a	good	supply	of	sugars	and	amino	acids	to
generate	browning-reaction	flavors;	and	the
curing	process.	The	plant	stores	most	of	its
defensive	aromatics	in	inert	form	by	bonding
them	to	a	sugar	molecule.	The	active	defenses
—	and	aromas	—	are	released	when	damage
to	the	pod	brings	the	storage	forms	into
contact	with	bond-breaking	enzymes.	The	key
to	making	good	vanilla	is	thus	deliberate
damage	to	the	pods,	followed	by	a	prolonged
drying	process	that	develops	and	concentrates
the	flavor,	and	prevents	the	pod	from	spoiling.

Making	Vanilla	The	making	of	vanilla	begins
six	 to	 nine	 months	 after	 the	 orchid	 flowers
have	 been	 pollinated,	 with	 green	 pods	 6–10
inches/15–25	cm	 long	 that	are	 just	beginning
to	 ripen.	On	 the	pod’s	 inner	walls,	 thousands
of	 tiny	 seeds	 are	 embedded	 in	 a	 complex
mixture	 of	 sugars,	 fats,	 amino	 acids,	 and



phenolic-sugar	 storage	 compounds.	 The
enzymes	 that	 can	 liberate	 the	 aromatic
phenolics	 from	 storage	 are	 concentrated
closer	 to	 the	 outer	 walls.	 The	 first	 step	 in
curing	is	to	kill	the	pod	so	that	it	doesn’t	use
up	its	sugars	and	amino	acids,	and	to	damage
the	pod’s	cells	and	allow	the	phenolic	storage
compounds	 to	 migrate	 to	 the	 liberating
enzymes.	 Both	 of	 these	 goals	 are
accomplished	by	briefly	exposing	the	pods	to
high	 temperatures,	either	 in	 the	sun	or	 in	hot
water	 or	 steam.	 The	 cell	 damage	 that	 this
causes	 also	 allows	 the	 browning	 enzymes
(polyphenoloxidases,	 p.	 269)	 to	 cluster	 some
phenolic	 compounds	 together	 into	 colored
aggregates,	 so	 the	 pod	 color	 changes	 from
green	to	brown.

Then	follow	several	days	during	which	the
pods	are	alternately	exposed	to	the	sun	until
they’re	almost	too	hot	to	handle,	then	wrapped
in	cloth	to	“sweat”	with	the	residual	heat.
During	this	stage,	the	main	flavor	components



of	vanilla	—	vanillin	and	related	phenolic
molecules	—	are	freed	from	their	bondage	to
sugar	molecules.	The	heat	and	sunlight	also
evaporate	some	of	the	pod	moisture,
discourage	microbial	growth	on	the	humid
surface,	and	generate	pigments	and	complex
aromas	via	browning	reactions	between	sugars
and	amino	acids	(p.778).	It	takes	3	to	5
pounds	of	fresh	pods	to	produce	1	pound	of
cured	beans.

Pods	 of	 the	 vanilla	 orchid.	 The	 fresh	 pod
contains	thousands	of	tiny	seeds	embedded	in
a	 sticky	 resin	 of	 sugars,	 amino	 acids,	 and	 a
storage	 form	 of	 the	 main	 vanilla	 aroma
compound,	vanillin.	The	process	of	drying	and
curing	 the	 pod	 frees	 the	 vanillin	 and	 creates
additional	aroma	molecules.



In	the	last	stage	of	vanilla	processing,	the
pods	are	straightened	and	smoothed	by	hand,
dried	for	several	weeks,	then	“aged,”	or	stored
for	some	time	to	develop	flavor	further
(flavor	compounds	react	with	oxygen,	some
heat-resistant	enzymes,	and	each	other	to
form	fruity	esters	and	other	new	notes).	In
Madagascar,	vanilla	curing	takes	35–40	days,
while	the	Mexican	process	lasts	several
months.

The	 Flavors	 of	 Vanilla 	 The	 cured	 pod	 is
about	 20%	water	 by	weight,	 20%	 fiber,	 25%
sugars,	 15%	 fat,	 and	 the	 remainder	 amino
acids,	phenolic	compounds,	other	flavors,	and
brown	 pigments.	 The	 sugars	 provide
sweetness,	 free	 amino	 acids	 provide	 some
savoriness,	 fat	 richness,	 and	 tannins	 some
astringency.	 The	 aroma	 of	 natural	 vanilla	 is
complex.	 More	 than	 200	 different	 volatile
compounds	have	been	found	in	vanilla	beans.
The	 principal	 one,	 the	 phenolic	 compound



vanillin,	 does	 suggest	 vanilla	on	 its	 own,	but
without	 the	 whole	 spice’s	 richness.	 Some	 of
the	 other	 important	 vanilla	 volatiles
contribute	 flavor	 notes	 described	 as	 woody,
floral,	 green-leaf,	 tobacco,	 dried-fruit,	 clove-
like,	 honey-like,	 caramel,	 smoky,	 earthy,	 and
buttery.

Kinds	 of	 Vanilla 	 The	 different	 vanilla-
producing	regions	produce	beans	with	broadly
different	 flavors.	 Bourbon	 vanilla	 from
Madagascar	 and	 neighboring	 islands	 is
generally	considered	to	be	the	finest,	with	the
richest,	 most	 balanced	 flavor.	 Indonesian
beans	 seem	 lighter,	 with	 less	 vanillin,	 and
sometimes	 smoky	 qualities.	 Mexican	 beans
contain	 about	 half	 the	 vanillin	 of	 Bourbon
beans,	 and	 have	 distinctive	 fruity	 and	 winy
aromas.	Rare	Tahitian	vanilla	beans	—	from	a
different	 species,	V.	 tahitensis, 	 also	 have
much	 less	 vanillin	 than	 Bourbon	 beans,	 but
carry	unique	flowery	and	perfumed	notes.



Vanilla	 Extracts	 and	 Flavorings 	 Vanilla
extracts	 are	made	 by	 chopping	whole	 vanilla
beans	 and	 repeatedly	 passing	 a	 mixture	 of
alcohol	and	water	over	them	for	several	days,
then	 aging	 the	 extract	 to	 develop	 a	 more
complex,	 full	 flavor.	 Vanillin	 and	 the	 other
flavor	components	are	more	soluble	in	alcohol
than	 water,	 so	 the	 higher	 the	 flavor	 content
desired	 in	 the	 extract,	 the	 higher	 the
proportion	of	alcohol	necessary	to	carry	it.

Artificial	vanilla	flavoring	contains
synthetic	vanillin	made	from	various
industrial	by-products,	especially	wood	lignin,
and	doesn’t	have	the	full,	complex,	subtle
flavor	of	whole	vanilla	beans	or	their	extracts.
The	demand	for	vanilla	flavoring	far	exceeds
the	available	crop,	and	natural	vanillin	costs
about	100	times	more	than	synthetic.	About
90%	of	the	vanilla	flavoring	consumed	in	the
United	States	is	artificial;	in	France,	about
50%.



The	Virtues	of	Vanillin
In	 addition	 to	 making	 vanilla	 taste	 like
vanilla,	 vanillin	 is	 formed	 during	 certain
cooking	 and	 manufacturing	 procedures,
especially	 those	 involving	wood	 fires	 and
wood	 barrels	 (pp.	 448,	 721).	 It	 thus
contributes	 to	 the	 flavor	 of	 such	 foods	 as
grilled	 and	 smoked	 meats,	 wines	 and
whiskeys,	 bread,	 and	 boiled	 peanuts.
Vanillin	also	has	several	potentially	useful
biological	 properties.	 It	 is	 toxic	 to	 many
microbes,	an	antioxidant,	and	inhibits	DNA
damage.

Cooking	with	Vanilla 	Vanilla	 is	used	mainly
in	 sweet	 foods.	 Almost	 half	 of	 the	 vanilla
flavoring	consumed	in	the	United	States	goes
into	ice	cream,	and	much	of	the	rest	into	soft
drinks	 and	 chocolate.	 But	 it	 also	 works	 in
savory	 dishes:	 lobster	 and	 pork	 are	 popular
examples.	 Added	 with	 a	 light	 touch,	 vanilla
can	 contribute	 a	 sense	 of	 depth,	 warmth,



roundness,	and	persistence	to	almost	any	food.
The	flavor	of	the	whole	vanilla	bean

resides	in	two	different	parts	of	the	bean:	the
sticky,	resinous	material	in	which	the	tiny
seeds	are	embedded,	and	the	fibrous	pod	wall.
The	first	is	easily	scraped	out	of	the	bean	and
dispersed	in	a	preparation,	while	the	pod	itself
must	be	soaked	for	some	time	in	order	to
extract	its	flavor.	Because	the	volatiles	are
generally	more	soluble	in	fat	than	in	water,
the	cook	can	extract	more	flavor	if	the
extraction	liquid	includes	either	alcohol	or	fat.
Prepared	vanilla	extracts	can	be	dispersed
throughout	a	dish	instantly,	and	are	usually
best	added	toward	the	end	of	cooking;	any
period	of	time	spent	at	a	high	temperature
causes	aroma	loss.

Tea	and	Coffee

Tea	and	coffee	are	the	most	widely	consumed
drinks	in	the	world,	and	their	popularity	stems



from	the	same	source	as	that	of	herbs	and
spices:	the	plant	materials	they’re	made	from
are	crammed	with	chemical	defenses	that	we
have	learned	to	dilute,	modify,	and	love.	Tea
leaves	and	coffee	beans	have	one	defense	in
common,	and	that’s	caffeine,	a	bitter	alkaloid
that	has	significant	effects	on	our	bodies.	And
they	both	contain	large	doses	of	phenolic
compounds.	However,	they’re	very	different
materials.	Coffee	begins	as	a	seed,	a
storehouse	of	protein,	carbohydrate,	and	oil,
and	is	the	creation	of	high	heat,	a	robust
epitome	of	roasted	foods	and	flavors.	Tea
begins	as	a	new,	actively	growing	leaf,	rich	in
enzymes,	and	is	the	delicate	creation	of	those
enzymes,	carefully	captured	and	preserved	by
minimal	heat	and	drying.	Coffee	and	tea	thus
offer	two	very	different	experiences	of
botanical	inventiveness	and	human	art.

Caffeine



Caffeine	is	the	most	widely	consumed
behavior-modifying	chemical	in	the	world.	It
is	an	alkaloid	(p.	238)	that	interferes	with	a
particular	signaling	system	used	by	many
different	cells,	and	therefore	has	several
different	effects	on	the	human	body.	Above
all,	caffeine	stimulates	the	central	nervous
system,	relieves	drowsiness	and	fatigue,	and
quickens	reaction	times.	It	also	increases
energy	production	in	muscles	and	so	their
capacity	for	work.	It’s	said	to	improve	mood
and	mental	performance,	though	recent
studies	suggest	that	these	may	be	the	result	of
relieving	the	initial	symptoms	of	overnight
caffeine	withdrawal!	Less	desirably,	in	high
doses	it	causes	restlessness,	nervousness,	and
insomnia.	It	has	complex	effects	on	the	heart
and	arteries,	and	can	produce	an	abnormally
fast	heartbeat.	There	is	some	evidence	that
caffeine	speeds	the	loss	of	calcium	from	bone,
so	habitual	consumption	may	contribute	to
osteoporosis.



Caffeine	reaches	its	maximum	levels	in	the
blood	between	15	minutes	and	two	hours	after
consumption,	and	its	levels	are	reduced	by
half	within	three	to	seven	hours.	Its	effects	are
more	noticeable	in	people	who	don’t	normally
consume	it.	Withdrawal	symptoms	can	be
unpleasant,	but	usually	disappear	within	three
days	of	abstaining.

A	chemical	relative	of	caffeine	called
theophylline	is	found	in	tea	and	is	in	some
respects	more	potent	than	caffeine,	but	tea
contains	only	trace	amounts.	Though	coffee
beans	are	1–2%	caffeine	and	tea	leaves	2–3%,
brewed	coffee	contains	more	caffeine	than
brewed	tea	because	a	larger	weight	of	coffee
is	extracted	per	cup	(8–10	grams,	vs.	2–5
grams	for	tea).

Tea,	Coffee,	and	Health

Not	so	many	years	ago,	both	coffee	and	tea
were	suspected	of	contributing	to	various



diseases,	including	cancers,	so	they	were
among	the	many	pleasures	to	feel	guilty
about.	No	longer!	Coffee	is	now	recognized	as
the	major	source	of	antioxidant	compounds	in
the	American	diet	(medium	roasts	have	the
highest	antioxidant	activity).	Black	and
especially	green	teas	are	also	rich	in
antioxidant	and	other	protective	phenolic
compounds	that	appear	to	reduce	damage	to
arteries	and	cancer	risk.

Certain	kinds	of	brewed	coffee	do	turn	out
to	have	an	undesirable	effect	on	blood
cholesterol	levels.	Two	lipid	(fat-like)
substances,	cafestol	and	kahweol,	raise	those
levels,	though	they	only	get	into	the	coffee
when	the	brewing	technique	doesn’t	filter
them	out.	Boiled,	plunger-pot,	and	espresso
coffees	contain	them.	The	significance	of	this
effect	isn’t	known	and	may	well	be	small,
since	the	cholesterol	raisers	are	accompanied
by	a	large	dose	of	substances	that	protect	the
cholesterol	from	oxidation	and	causing



damage	(p.	255).

Water	For	Making	Tea
and	Coffee

Brewed	tea	and	coffee	are	95–98%	water,	so
their	quality	is	strongly	influenced	by	the
quality	of	the	water	used	to	make	them.	The
off-flavors	and	disinfectant	chlorine
compounds	of	most	tap	waters	are	largely
driven	off	by	boiling.	Very	hard	water,	high	in
calcium	and	magnesium	carbonates,	has
several	undesirable	effects:	in	coffee,	these
minerals	slow	flavor	extraction,	cloud	the
brew,	clog	the	pipes	in	espresso	machines	and
reduce	the	fine	espresso	foam;	in	tea,	they
cause	the	formation	of	a	surface	scum	made
up	of	precipitated	calcium	carbonate	and
phenolic	aggregates.	Softened	water
overextracts	both	coffee	and	tea	and	gives	a
salty	flavor.	And	very	pure	distilled	water
gives	a	brew	best	described	as	flat,	with	a



missing	dimension	of	flavor.
The	ideal	water	has	a	moderate	mineral

content,	and	a	pH	that	is	close	to	neutral,	so
that	the	final	brew	will	have	a	moderately	acid
pH	of	around	5,	just	right	to	support	and
balance	the	other	flavors.	Some	bottled	spring
waters	are	suitable	(Volvic	is	used	in	Hong
Kong).	Many	municipal	tap	waters	are
intentionally	made	alkaline	to	reduce	pipe
corrosion,	and	this	can	reduce	the	acidity	and
liveliness	of	both	tea	and	dark-roasted	coffee
(light	roasts	contribute	plenty	of	their	own
acid).	Alkaline	tap	water	can	be	corrected	by
adding	tiny	pinches	of	cream	of	tartar	—
tartaric	acid	—	until	it	just	begins	to	have	a
slightly	tart	taste.

Caffeine	Numbers

Daily	caffeine	consumption	in	milligrams
per	capita,	1990s



Norway,	Netherlands,	Denmark 400
Germany,	Austria 300
France 240
Britain 200
United	States 170

Caffeine	content,	milligrams	per	serving

Brewed	coffee 65–175
Espresso 80–115
Tea 50
Cola 40–50
Cocoa 15

Tea

Though	it	has	lent	its	name	to	many	other
infusions,	tea	—	from	the	Chinese	word	cha
—	is	a	drink	prepared	from	the	green	leaves
of	a	kind	of	camellia.	Young	tea	leaves	turn



out	to	be	as	packed	with	interesting	defensive
chemicals	as	any	spice.	Beginning	in
southwest	China	around	2,000	years	ago,
people	learned	how	to	use	physical	pressure,
mild	heat,	and	time	to	coax	a	number	of
different	flavors	and	colors	from	the	tea	leaf.
Tea	became	a	staple	of	the	Chinese	diet
around	1000	CE.	In	12th-century	Japan,
Buddhist	monks	who	valued	tea	as	an	aid	to
long	hours	of	study	found	that	tea	itself	was
worthy	of	their	contemplation.	They
developed	the	formal	tea	ceremony,	which
remains	remarkable	for	the	attention	it	pays	to
the	simplest	of	preparations,	an	infusion	of
leaves	in	water.

The	History	of	Tea

Tea	in	China 	The	 tea	 tree,	Camellia	sinensis,
is	 native	 to	 Southeast	 Asia	 and	 southern
China,	 and	 its	 caffeine-rich,	 tender	 young
leaves	were	probably	chewed	raw	long	before
recorded	history.	The	preparation	of	tea	leaves



for	 infusion	 in	water	evolved	slowly.	There’s
evidence	that	by	the	3rd	century	CE	the	leaves
were	 boiled	 and	 then	 dried	 for	 later	 use,	 and
that	 by	 the	 8th	 century	 they	 were	 also	 stir-
fried	 before	 drying.	 These	 techniques	 would
give	 green	 or	 yellow-green	 leaves	 and
infusions,	 and	 mild	 but	 bitter	 and	 astringent
flavor.	More	strongly	flavored	and	orange-red
teas	 like	 modern	 oolongs	 were	 developed
around	 the	 17th	 century,	 probably	 beginning
with	the	accidental	observation	that	the	leaves
develop	 a	 distinctive	 aroma	 and	 color	 when
they’re	 allowed	 to	wilt	 or	 are	 pressed	 before
being	dried.	It	was	around	this	time	that	China
began	 to	 trade	 extensively	 with	 Europe	 and
Russia,	 and	 the	 new,	 more	 complex	 style	 of
tea	 conquered	 England,	 where	 consumption
rose	from	20,000	pounds	in	1700	to	20	million
in1800.	 The	 strong	 “black”	 tea	 that’s	 most
familiar	 in	 the	 West	 today	 is	 a	 relatively
recent	 invention,	 the	 result	 of	 intensive
pressing;	 the	 Chinese	 developed	 it	 in	 the



1840s	specifically	for	export	to	the	West.

The	Spread	of	Tea	Production 	Until	 the	 late
19th	century,	all	tea	in	world	trade	was	China
tea.	But	when	China	began	 to	 resist	Britain’s
practice	of	paying	 for	 its	 expensive	 tea	habit
with	 opium,	 the	 British	 intensified	 tea
production	 in	 their	own	colonies,	particularly
India.	 For	 warm	 regions	 they	 cultivated	 an
indigenous	 variety,	Camellia	 sinensis	 var.
assamica,	 or	 Assam	 tea,	 which	 has	 more
phenolic	 compounds	 and	 caffeine	 than	China
tea	and	produces	a	stronger,	darker	black	tea.
They	 planted	 the	 hardier	 China	 types	 in	 the
Himalayan	foothills	of	Darjeeling	and	at	high
elevations	 in	 the	 south.	 India	 is	 now	 the
world’s	largest	tea	producer.

Today	about	three-quarters	of	the	tea
produced	in	the	world	is	black	tea.	China	and
Japan	still	produce	and	drink	more	green	tea
than	black.

The	 Tea	 Leaf	 and	 Its	 Transformation 	 A



fresh	 tea	 leaf	 tastes	bitter	and	astringent,	and
not	much	else.	This	is	a	reflection	of	the	fact
that	its	major	chemical	component,	even	more
abundant	 than	 its	 structural	 materials,	 is	 a
host	 of	 bitter	 and	 astringent	 phenolic
substances	whose	purpose	is	to	make	the	leaf
unattractive	 to	 animals.	 And	 its	 aromatic
molecules	 are	 locked	 up	 in	 nonvolatile
combinations	with	sugar	molecules.	Green	tea
retains	many	of	the	qualities	of	the	fresh	leaf.
But	 the	key	 to	making	oolong	and	black	 teas
is	 encouraging	 the	 leaf’s	 own	 enzymes	 to
transform	 these	 austere	 defensive	 materials
into	very	different,	delightful	molecules.

How	Tea	Enzymes	Create	Flavor,	Color,	and
Body	 The	 period	 of	 enzyme	 activity	 during
tea-making	 has	 traditionally	 been	 called
“fermentation,”	 but	 it	 doesn’t	 involve	 any
significant	microbial	 activity.	 In	 tea-making,
“fermentation”	 means	 enzymatic
transformation.	 It	 occurs	when	 the	 tea	maker



presses	 the	 leaves	 to	 break	 open	 their	 cells,
and	then	allows	the	leaves	to	sit	for	some	time
while	the	enzymes	do	their	work.

There	are	two	general	kinds	of	enzymatic
transformation	in	making	tea.	One	is	the
liberation	of	a	large	range	of	aroma
compounds,	which	in	the	intact	leaf	are	bound
up	with	sugars	and	so	can’t	escape	into	the	air.
When	the	cells	are	crushed,	enzymes	break
the	aroma-sugar	complex	apart.	This
liberation	makes	the	aroma	of	oolong	and
black	teas	fuller	and	richer	than	the	aroma	of
green	teas.

The	second	transformation	builds	large
molecules	from	small	ones,	and	thereby
modifies	flavor,	color,	and	body.	The	small
molecules	are	the	tea	leaf’s	abundant	supply
of	three-ring	phenolic	compounds,	which	are
astringent,	bitter,	and	colorless.	The	leaf’s
browning	enzyme,	polyphenoloxidase,	uses
oxygen	from	the	air	to	join	the	small	phenolic
molecules	together	into	larger	complexes	(p.



269).	A	combination	of	two	phenolics	gives	a
kind	of	molecule	(theaflavin)	that’s	yellow	to
light	copper	in	color,	less	bitter	but	still
astringent.	Complexes	of	from	three	to	ten	of
the	original	phenolics	are	orange-red	and	less
astringent	(thearubigens).	Even	larger
complexes	are	brown	and	not	astringent	at	all.
The	more	the	tea	leaves	are	pressed,	and	the
longer	they’re	allowed	to	sit	before	the
enzymes	are	killed	by	heating,	the	less	bitter
and	astringent	and	the	more	colored	they
become.	In	oolong	teas,	about	half	of	the
small	phenolics	have	been	transformed;	in
black	teas,	about	85%.

The	red	and	brown	phenolic	complexes	—
and	another	complex,	between	double-ring
molecules	of	caffeine	and	the	theaflavins	—
lend	body	to	brewed	tea,	because	they’re	large
enough	to	obstruct	each	other	and	slow	the
movement	of	the	water.



The	 evolution	 of	 tea	 taste.	 The	 fresh	 tea	 leaf
contains	 rich	 stores	 of	 simple	 phenolic
compounds	 (catechin,	 left)	that	 are	 colorless
and	 bitter	 but	 not	 astringent.	 When	 the	 tea
leaf	 is	 bruised	 or	 rolled,	 leaf	 enzymes	 and
oxygen	 combine	 the	 simple	 compounds	 into
larger	 ones	 with	 different	 colors	 and	 tastes.
Brief	 enzyme	 action	 produces	 a	 yellowish
compound(theaflavin,	center)	that	is	both	very
bitter	 and	 astringent.	More	 extensive	 enzyme
action	 produces	 a	 compound(theaflavin
digallate,	 right)that	 is	 moderately	 bitter	 and
astringent.	 As	 the	 phenolic	 molecules	 get
larger,	 they	 get	 progressively	 darker	 and
milder.

Making	Tea



The	Tea	Plant	and	Its	Leaves 	The	best	 tea	is
made	from	the	plant’s	small	young	shoots	and
unopened	leaf	buds,	which	are	the	most	tender
and	 vulnerable	 and	 contain	 the	 highest
concentrations	 of	 chemical	 defenses	 and
related	 enzymes.	 The	 choice	 “pluck”	 is	 the
terminal	 bud	 and	 two	 adjacent	 leaves.	 Most
tea	 is	 now	 harvested	 by	 machine,	 and
therefore	contains	a	 large	proportion	of	older
and	less	flavorful	leaves.

Tea	 Manufacturing 	 The	 production	 of	 tea
involves	 several	 different	 steps,	 some
standard	and	some	optional.

The	newly	harvested	leaves	may	be
allowed	to	“wither,”	or	sit	and	wilt	for
minutes	or	hours.	Withering	causes	them
to	shift	their	metabolism	in	ways	that
change	their	flavor,	and	to	become
physically	more	fragile.	The	longer	the
withering,	the	deeper	the	flavor	and	color
of	the	leaves	and	the	brew	they	make.



The	leaves	are	almost	always	“rolled,”	or
pressed	to	break	down	the	tissue
structure	and	release	the	cell	fluids.	If	the
leaves	are	rolled	while	they’re	still	raw,
this	allows	the	leaf	enzymes	and	oxygen
to	transform	the	cell	fluids	and	generate
additional	flavor,	color,	and	body.
The	leaves	may	be	heated	to	inactivate
their	enzymes	and	stop	the	enzymatic
production	of	flavor	and	color.	High	dry
heat	will	also	generate	flavor.
The	leaves	are	heated	to	dry	them	out	and
preserve	them	for	long	keeping.
The	dry	leaves	are	sieved	and	graded	by
piece	size,	which	ranges	from	whole
leaves	to	“dust.”	The	smaller	the	piece,
the	faster	the	extraction	of	color	and
flavor.

Major	 Tea	 Styles	 The	 Chinese	 developed	 a
half-dozen	 different	 styles	 of	 tea.	 Three	 of
them	account	for	most	of	the	tea	consumed	in



the	world.

Green	 Tea 	 Green	 tea	 preserves	 some	 of	 the
original	 qualities	 of	 the	 fresh	 leaf,	 while
heightening	them	and	rounding	them	out.	It’s
made	by	cooking	the	fresh	or	briefly	withered
leaves	 to	 inactivate	 their	 enzymes,	 then
pressing	 them	 to	 release	 their	 moisture,	 and
drying	 them	 in	 hot	 air	 or	 on	 a	 hot	 pan.	 In
China,	 the	cooking	 is	done	on	a	hot	pan,	and
this	 “pan-firing”	 produces	 aroma	 molecules
characteristic	 of	 roasted	 foods	 (pyrazines,
pyrroles)	 and	 a	 yellow-green	 infusion.	 In
Japan,	the	cooking	is	done	with	steam,	which
preserves	more	of	the	grassy	flavor	and	green
color	in	both	leaf	and	tea.

Oolong	Tea 	Oolong	 tea	 is	made	 by	 allowing
some	 modest	 enzyme	 transformation	 of	 leaf
juices.	 The	 leaves	 are	 withered	 until	 they
become	 significantly	 wilted	 and	 weakened.
Then	 they	 are	 lightly	 agitated	 to	 bruise	 the
leaf	 edges,	 allowed	 to	 rest	 for	 a	 few	 hours



until	 enzyme	 action	 has	 turned	 the	 bruised
edges	 red,	 pan-fired	 at	 a	 high	 temperature,
rolled,	 and	 finally	 dried	 gently,	 at
temperatures	just	below	212ºF/	100ºC.	Oolong
tea	 brews	 to	 a	 light	 amber	 color	 with	 a
distinctive	fruity	aroma.

Tea.	The	choicest	pluck	consists	of	the	bud	tip
and	two	youngest	leaves	of	each	branch	of	the
tea	bush.

Making	Green,	Oolong,	and	Black	Teas



Black	 Tea 	 Black	 tea	 is	 made	 by	 allowing	 a
profound	enzymatic	transformation	of	the	leaf
fluids.	 The	 leaves	 are	 withered	 for	 hours,
rolled	repeatedly	for	as	much	as	an	hour,	then
are	 allowed	 to	 rest	 for	 between	 one	 and	 four
hours,	during	which	enzyme	action	turns	them
a	coppery	brown	and	causes	them	to	emit	the
aroma	 of	 apples.	 Finally,	 the	 leaves	 are	 air-
dried	 at	 temperatures	 around	 100ºC,	 and
become	quite	dark.

Tea	 Flavor	 The	 taste	 of	 tea,	 a	 lively,
mouthfilling	 quality,	 comes	 from	 several
different	sources.	Tea	is	mildly	acid	and	bitter



and	contains	 traces	of	 salt.	 It’s	also	 rich	 in	a
unique	 amino	 acid,	 theanine,	 which	 is	 itself
sweet	 and	 savory,	 and	 partly	 breaks	 down
during	manufacturing	to	savory	glutamic	acid.
Chinese	green	teas	also	contain	synergizers	of
savoriness	 (GMP	 and	 IMP,	 p.	 342).	 Finally,
bitter	 caffeine	 and	 astringent	 phenolics	 bond
to	 and	 take	 the	 edge	 off	 each	 other	 and
produce	 the	 impression	 of	 a	 stimulating	 but
not	 harsh	 body.	 This	 effect	 is	 especially
important	 to	 the	 taste	of	black	 teas,	 in	which
it’s	called	“briskness.”

The	aromas	of	different	teas	are	strikingly
different.	In	green	teas,	early	application	of
heat	prevents	much	enzyme	activity	in	the
leaves.	Steam	heat	gives	grassy	and	seaweed,
shellfish	notes	to	Japanese	green	teas	(the	sea
notes	from	dimethyl	sulfide),	while	pan-firing
and	drying	produce	moresavory,	toasted	notes
in	Chinese	green	teas.	In	oolong	and	black
teas,	enzyme	activity	liberates	floral	and
fruity	aroma	molecules	from	their	odorless



storage	forms,	and	produces	a	much	richer,
stronger	aroma	(more	than	600	volatiles	have
been	identified	in	black	tea).

Some	Prized	and	Unusual	Teas
Here	are	a	number	of	teas	made	in	unusual
ways,	with	unusual	qualities:
White	tea:	a	Chinese	green	tea	made
almost	exclusively	from	buds	whose
hairs	make	them	look	white,	withered	for
two	to	three	days,	sometimes	steamed,
then	dried	without	rolling.
Pu-erh:	a	Chinese	green	tea	that	is	made
in	the	usual	way,	then	moistened	and
fermented	in	heaps	for	some	time	by	a
variety	of	microbes.	All	of	its	phenolic
contents	are	converted	into	nonastringent
thearubigens	and	brown	complexes,	and
it	develops	a	complex,	spicy,	clove
aroma.
Lapsang	souchong:	a	Chinese	black	tea,



dried	over	smoky	pine	fires.
Scented	teas:	Chinese	teas	of	various
types,	scented	by	being	held	for	8–12
hours	in	the	same	container	with	flowers,
including	jasmine,	cassia	bud,	rose,
orchid,	and	gardenia.	The	packaged	tea
may	include	1–2%	flower	petals.
Gyokura	and	kabesucha:	Japanese	green
teas	made	from	shoots	that	have	been
covered	with	bamboo	boxes	and	almost
completely	shaded	for	the	two	weeks
before	harvest.	They	develop	a	higher
content	of	carotenoid	pigments	that
contribute	violet	notes	to	the	unique
“covered	aroma.”
Hoji-cha:	Japanese	green	tea	of	standard
grade	that	is	roasted	at	high	temperatures
(360ºF/180ºC),	which	triples	the	volatile
content	and	so	boosts	flavor.

OPPOSITE:	Making	green,	oolong,	and	black
teas.	Variations	in	processing	produce	very



different	colors	and	flavors	from	the	same
fresh	leaves.

Cooks	exploit	tea	flavor	in	a	number	of
different	preparations:	marinades	and	cooking
liquids,	ices	and	ice	creams,	in	steamed	foods,
and	as	a	source	of	aromatic	smoke	(e.g.,
Chinese	tea-smoked	duck).

Keeping	and	Brewing	Tea	Well-made	 tea	 is
fairly	 stable	 and	 can	 be	 stored	 for	 several
months	 in	 an	 airtight	 container	 that	 is	 kept
cool	 and	 dark.	 Tea	 quality	 does	 eventually
deteriorate	thanks	to	the	effects	of	oxygen	and
some	 residual	 enzyme	 activity;	 aroma	 and
briskness	 are	 lost,	 and	 the	 color	 of	 black	 tea
infusions	becomes	 less	orange-red,	more	dull
brown.

Teas	are	brewed	in	various	ways	in
different	parts	of	the	world.	In	the	West,	a
relatively	small	quantity	of	black	tea	leaves
—	a	teaspoon	per	6-oz	cup/2–5	gm	per	180	ml
—	is	brewed	once,	for	several	minutes,	then



discarded.	In	Asia,	a	larger	quantity	of	leaves
of	any	tea	—	as	much	as	a	third	the	volume	of
the	pot	—	is	first	rinsed	with	hot	water,	then
infused	briefly	several	times,	with	the	second
and	third	infusions	offering	more	delicate,
subtle	flavor	balances.	The	infusion	time
ranges	from	15	seconds	to	5	minutes,	and
depends	on	two	factors.	One	is	leaf	size;	small
particles	and	their	great	surface	area	require
less	time	for	their	contents	to	be	extracted.
The	other	is	water	temperature,	which	in	turn
varies	depending	on	the	kind	of	tea	being
brewed.	Both	oolong	and	black	teas	are
infused	in	water	close	to	the	boil,	and
relatively	briefly.	Green	tea	is	infused	longer
in	much	cooler	water,	160–110ºF/70–45ºC,
which	limits	extraction	of	its	still	abundant
bitter	and	astringent	phenolics,	and	minimizes
damage	to	its	chlorophyll	pigment.

In	a	typical	3–5	minute	infusion	of	black
tea,	about	40%	of	the	leaf	solids	are	extracted
into	the	water.	Caffeine	is	rapidly	extracted,



more	than	three	quarters	of	the	total	in	the
first	30	seconds,	while	the	larger	phenolic
complexes	come	out	much	more	slowly.

Serving	Tea	Once	tea	is	properly	brewed,	the
liquid	 should	 be	 separated	 from	 the	 leaves
immediately;	 otherwise	 extraction	 continues
and	the	tea	gets	harsh.	All	kinds	of	tea	are	best
drunk	 fresh;	 as	 they	 stand,	 their	 aroma
dissipates,	 and	 their	 phenolic	 components
react	 with	 dissolved	 oxygen	 and	 each	 other,
changing	the	color	and	taste.

Tea	is	sometimes	mixed	with	milk.	When
it	is,	the	phenolic	compounds	immediately
bind	to	the	milk	proteins,	become	unavailable
to	bind	to	our	mouth	surfaces	and	salivary
proteins,	and	the	taste	becomes	much	less
astringent.	It’s	best	to	add	hot	tea	to	warm
milk,	rather	than	vice	versa;	that	way	the	milk
is	heated	gradually	and	to	a	moderate
temperature,	so	it’s	less	likely	to	curdle.

Lemon	juice	is	sometimes	added	to	tea	to



bolster	its	tartness	and	add	the	fresh	citrus
note	to	its	aroma.	It	also	lightens	the	color	of
brewed	black	tea	by	altering	the	structure	of
the	red	phenolic	complexes	(the	complexes
are	weak	acids	themselves,	and	take	up
hydrogen	ions	from	the	lemon	juice).	Alkaline
brewing	water,	conversely,	tends	to	produce
blood-red	infusions	from	black	tea,	and	can
even	make	green	tea	red.

Iced	Tea	Iced	tea	is	the	most	popular	form	of
tea	 in	 the	United	States;	 it	 first	 caught	 on	 at
the	 1904	 World’s	 Fair	 in	 steamy	 St.	 Louis.
It’s	 made	 by	 brewing	 tea	 with	 about	 half-
again	as	much	dry	tea	per	cup,	to	compensate
for	 the	 later	 dilution	 by	 melting	 ice.	 The
addition	 of	 ice	 to	 normally	 brewed	 tea	 tends
to	make	 the	 tea	 cloudy,	due	 to	 the	 formation
of	 particles	 of	 a	 complex	 between	 caffeine
and	 theaflavin.	 The	 way	 to	 avoid	 this	 is	 to
brew	 the	 initial	 tea	 at	 room	 or	 refrigerator
temperature,	 over	 several	 hours.	 This



technique	extracts	less	caffeine	and	theaflavin
than	 brewing	 in	 hot	 water,	 so	 the	 caffeine-
theaflavin	complexes	don’t	form	in	sufficient
quantities	to	become	visible	in	the	chilled	tea.

Coffee

Coffee	trees	are	native	to	east	Africa,	and
were	probably	first	valued	for	their	sweet
cherry-like	fruits	and	for	their	leaves,	which
could	be	made	into	a	kind	of	tea.	Even	today
an	infusion	of	the	dried	fruit	pulp	is	enjoyed
in	Yemen,	where	the	seeds	or	“beans”	were
apparently	first	roasted,	ground,	and	infused
in	the	14th	century.	Our	word	coffee	comes
from	the	Arabic	qahwah,	whose	own	origin	is
unclear.	The	coffee	tree	was	taken	to	south
India	around	1600,	from	India	to	Java	around
1700,	and	from	Java	(via	Amsterdam	and
Paris)	to	the	French	Caribbean	shortly
thereafter.	Today	Brazil,	Vietnam,	and
Colombia	are	the	largest	exporters	of	coffee;



African	countries	contribute	about	a	fifth	of
world	production.

The	History	of	Coffee	Brewing	The	original
version	of	brewed	roasted	coffee	beans	 is	 the
Arab	version,	which	still	thrives	in	the	Middle
East,	 Turkey,	 and	 Greece.	 The	 finely
powdered	beans	are	combined	with	water	and
sugar	in	an	open	pot,	the	mixture	boiled	until
the	 pot	 foams,	 then	 settled	 and	 boiled	 to	 a
foam	once	or	twice	more,	and	finally	decanted
into	small	cups.	This	 is	 the	coffee	 that	 found
its	 way	 to	 Europe	 around	 1600;	 it’s
concentrated,	 includes	 some	 sediment,	 and
has	 to	 be	 drunk	 right	 away	 or	 the	 sediment
will	 increase	 the	 already	 considerable
bitterness.

French	 Refinements	 The	 first	 Western
modifications	 of	 coffee	 brewing	 date	 from
around	1700,	when	French	cooks	 isolated	 the
solid	beans	within	the	liquid	by	enclosing	the
grounds	 in	 a	 cloth	 bag,	 and	 thus	 produced	 a



clearer,	 less	 gritty	 brew.	 Around	 1750,	 the
French	 came	 up	 with	 the	 most	 important
advance	 before	 espresso:	 the	 drip	 pot,	 in
which	 hot	 water	 was	 poured	 onto	 a	 bed	 of
grounds	 and	 allowed	 to	 pass	 through	 into	 a
separate	 chamber.	 This	 invention	 did	 three
things:	 it	 kept	 the	 temperature	 of	 the
extracting	water	below	the	boil,	it	limited	the
contact	time	between	water	and	ground	coffee
to	a	matter	of	a	few	minutes,	and	it	produced	a
sedimentless	brew	that	would	keep	for	a	while
without	 getting	 stronger.	 The	 limits	 on
brewing	 temperature	 and	 time	 meant	 a	 less
complete	 extraction	 of	 the	 coffee.	 This
reduced	 the	 bitterness	 and	 astringency,	 and
allowed	 the	 other	 elements	 of	 coffee	 flavor
more	prominence,	the	tartness	and	aroma	that
were	more	appealing	to	European	tastes.

Machine-Age	 Espresso	 The	 19th	 century
brought	the	invention	of	several	new	brewing
methods.	 There	 was	 percolation,	 or	 allowing



boiling	 water	 to	 rise	 in	 a	 central	 tube	 and
irrigate	 a	 bed	 of	 ground	 coffee.	 There	 were
plunger	pots,	which	allowed	the	coffee	brewer
to	steep	the	grounds,	then	push	the	grounds	to
the	 bottom	 with	 the	 plunger	 and	 pour	 the
beverage	 off.	 But	 the	 biggest	 innovation	 in
coffee	 brewing	 made	 its	 debut	 at	 the	 Paris
Exhibition	of	1855.	That	was	Italian	espresso,
a	 word	 which	 means	 something	 made	 at	 the
moment	 it’s	 ordered,	 rapidly,	 and	 for	 one
customer.	 The	way	 to	make	 coffee	 fast	 is	 to
force	 water	 through	 the	 grounds	 with	 high
pressure.	In	 the	process,	 the	pressure	extracts
a	substantial	amount	of	 the	coffee	bean’s	oil,
and	emulsifies	it	into	tiny	droplets	that	create
a	 velvety	 texture	 and	 lingering	 flavor	 in	 the
drink.	Espresso	is	an	expression	of	the	power
of	the	machine	to	force	the	most	and	the	best
from	a	traditional	ingredient	and	make	it	into
something	new.



Coffee	 berries	 and	 seeds.	 Each	 red	 berry
contains	two	seeds.

Coffee	Beans

Arabica	 and	 Robusta	 Coffees	 Coffee	 beans
are	 the	 seeds	 of	 two	 species	 of	 a	 tropical
relative	 of	 the	 gardenia.	Coffea	arabica,	a	15
ft/5	m	tree	that	is	native	to	the	cool	highlands
of	Ethiopia	and	the	Sudan,	produces	what	are
known	 as	 “arabica”	 beans;	 and	Coffea
canephora,	a	larger	tree	native	to	hotter,	more
humid	West	Africa,	produces	“robusta”	beans.
About	two-thirds	of	the	beans	in	international
trade	 are	 arabicas,	 which	 develop	 a	 more
complex	 and	 balanced	 flavor	 than	 the
robustas.	They	contain	less	caffeine	(less	than
1.5%	by	weight	of	 the	dry	bean,	vs.	2.5%	for
robustas),	 less	 phenolic	 material	 (6.5%	 vs.
10%),	and	more	oil	(16%	vs.	10%)	and	sugar



(7%	 vs.	 3.5%).	 Robusta	 varieties	 didn’t
become	 prominent	 until	 the	 end	 of	 the	 19th
century,	when	their	disease	resistance	became
important	in	Indonesia	and	elsewhere.

Dry	 and	 Wet	 Processing 	 To	 prepare	 coffee
beans,	the	ripe	coffee	berries	are	picked	from
the	 trees,	 and	 the	 seeds	 cleaned	 of	 the	 fruit
pulp	by	one	of	 two	basic	methods.	 In	 the	dry
method,	 the	berries	are	 left	 in	 the	sun	to	dry,
or	 first	 piled	 to	 ferment	 for	 a	 few	days,	 then
spread	 out	 in	 the	 sun.	 The	 fruit	 is	 then
removed	by	machine.	In	the	wet	method,	most
of	 the	 pulp	 is	 rubbed	 from	 the	 seeds	 by
machine,	then	the	remainder	is	liquefied	by	a
day	or	 two	of	 fermentation	by	microbes.	The
seeds	are	then	washed	in	copious	water,	dried
to	about	10%	moisture,	and	the	adherent	inner
“parchment	shell”	removed	by	machine.	Some
sugars	 and	 minerals	 are	 leached	 out	 of	 wet-
processed	 beans,	 so	 they	 tend	 to	 produce
coffee	 with	 less	 body	 and	 more	 acidity	 than



dry-processed	beans.	However	they	often	have
more	aroma,	and	 tend	 to	be	of	more	uniform
quality.

Roasting	Raw	green	coffee	beans	are	as	hard
as	 unpopped	 popcorn,	 and	 about	 as	 tasty.
Roasting	 transforms	 them	 into	 fragile,	 easily
opened	 packages	 of	 flavor.	 Most	 people	 let
the	professionals	take	care	of	roasting,	but	it’s
a	fascinating	(and	smoky)	experience	to	roast
coffee	 at	 home,	 as	 cooks	 in	 many	 countries
have	 long	 done	 and	 still	 do	 with	 equipment
ranging	 from	 frying	pans	 to	popcorn	poppers
to	special	roasters.

Coffee	beans	are	roasted	to	temperatures
between	375	and	425ºF/190–220ºC;	the
process	usually	takes	between	90	seconds	and
15	minutes.	As	the	bean	temperature
approaches	the	boiling	point	of	water,	the
small	amounts	of	moisture	inside	the	cells
turn	into	steam	and	puff	the	bean	up	to	half
again	its	original	volume.	Then	at



progressively	higher	temperatures,	the
proteins,	sugars,	phenolic	materials,	and	other
constituents	begin	to	break	into	molecular
fragments	and	react	with	each	other,	and
develop	the	brown	pigments	and	roasted
aromas	typical	of	the	Maillard	reactions	(p.
778).	At	around	320ºF/160ºC,	these	reactions
become	self-sustaining,	like	a	candle	flame,
and	extreme	molecular	breakdown	generates
more	water	vapor	and	carbon	dioxide	gas,
whose	production	rises	sharply	at
400ºF/200ºC.	If	the	roasting	continues,	oil
begins	to	escape	from	the	damaged	cells	to
the	bean	surface,	where	it	provides	a	visible
gloss.

When	the	beans	have	reached	the	desired
degree	of	roast,	the	roaster	cools	the	beans
immediately	with	cold	air	or	a	water	spray	to
quench	the	molecular	breakdown.	The	result
is	a	brown,	brittle,	spongelike	bean,	with	the
holes	in	the	sponge	filled	with	carbon	dioxide.



The	Development	of	Coffee	Flavor	The	hotter
the	bean	is	roasted,	 the	darker	 it	gets,	and	its
color	is	a	good	indicator	of	flavor	balance.	In
the	early	stages	of	roasting,	sugars	are	broken
down	 into	 various	 acids	 (formic,	 acetic,
lactic),	which	together	with	their	own	organic
acids	 (citric,	malic)	give	 light-brown	beans	a
pronounced	 tartness.	 As	 roasting	 proceeds,
both	 the	 acids	 and	 astringent	 phenolic
materials	(chlorogenic	acid)	are	destroyed,	so
acidity	 and	 astringency	 decline.	 However,
bitterness	 increases	 because	 some	 of	 the
browning-reaction	products	are	bitter.	And	as
the	bean’s	color	becomes	darker	than	medium
brown,	the	distinctive	aromas	characteristic	of
prized	 beans	 become	 overwhelmed	 by	 more
generic	 roasted	 flavors	—	or,	conversely,	 the
flavor	 deficiencies	 of	 second-rate	 beans
become	 less	 obvious.	 Finally,	 as	 acids	 and
tannins	 and	 soluble	 carbohydrates	 decline
with	dark	roasting,	so	does	the	brew’s	fullness
of	 body:	 there’s	 less	 there	 to	 stimulate	 our



tongue.	Medium	roasts	give	the	fullest	body.

Storing	 Coffee	 Once	 roasted,	 whole	 coffee
beans	 keep	 reasonably	 well	 for	 a	 couple	 of
weeks	 at	 room	 temperature,	 or	 a	 couple	 of
months	 in	 the	 freezer,	 before	 becoming
noticeably	stale.	One	reason	that	whole	beans
keep	 as	 long	 as	 they	 do	 is	 that	 they’re	 filled
with	 carbon	 dioxide,	 which	 helps	 exclude
oxygen	 from	 the	 porous	 interior.	 Once	 the
beans	 have	 been	 ground,	 room-temperature
shelf	life	is	only	a	few	days.

Grinding	 Coffee	 The	 key	 to	 proper	 coffee
grinding	 is	 obtaining	 a	 fairly	 consistent
particle	size	that’s	appropriate	to	the	brewing
method.	 The	 smaller	 the	 particle	 size,	 the
greater	the	surface	area	of	bean	exposed	to	the
water,	and	the	faster	its	contents	are	extracted.
Too	 great	 a	 range	 of	 particle	 sizes	 makes	 it
hard	to	control	the	extraction	during	brewing.
Small	 particles	 may	 be	 overextracted	 and
large	 ones	 underextracted,	 and	 the	 resulting



brew	 can	 be	 both	 bitter	 and	 weak.	 The
common	 propellor	 grinder	 smashes	 all	 the
bean	 pieces	 until	 the	machine	 is	 stopped,	 no
matter	how	small	the	pieces	get,	so	coarse	and
medium	 grinds	 end	 up	 containing	 some	 fine
powder.	 More	 expensive	 burr	 grinders	 allow
small	pieces	to	escape	through	grooves	in	the
grinding	 surfaces,	 and	 give	 a	 more	 even
particle	size.

The	Effects	of	Roasting	on	Coffee	Beans

Weight	Loss	of	Roasted	Coffee	Beans

Degree	of	Roast Weight	Loss,	%
Cinnamon 12,	mostly
(375ºF/190ºC) moisture
Medium 13
City 15
Full 16,	half	moisture	and	half	bean
city solids



French 17
Italian 18–20,	mostly	bean
(425ºF/220ºC) solids

Composition	of	Raw	and	Roasted	Coffee
Beans,	Percent	by	Weight

RawRoasted
Water 12 4
Protein 10 7
Carbohydrate 47 34
Oil 14 16
Phenolics 6 3
Large	complex	aggregates	that	provide
color,	body 0 25

Coffee	Flavor,	from	the	Bean	into	the
Cup

This	chart	shows	the	relationships	between



coffee	flavor	and	the	fraction	of	the	coffee
bean	 extracted	 into	 the	 water	 by	 various
brewing	 methods.	 Balanced	 flavor
corresponds	 to	 an	 extraction	 of	 around
20%	 of	 the	 coffee	 solids.	 The	 strength	 of
the	 flavor	 depends	 on	 the	 relative
proportions	 of	 coffee	 and	 water:	 espresso
is	made	with	a	much	higher	proportion	of
coffee	than	other	brews.

Brewing	 Coffee	 Brewing	 is	 the	 extraction
into	 water	 of	 desirable	 substances	 from	 the
coffee	 bean,	 in	 amounts	 that	 produce	 a
balanced,	 pleasing	 drink.	 These	 substances



include	many	aroma	and	taste	compounds,	as
well	as	browning	pigments	that	provide	color
(almost	 a	 third	 of	 the	 total	 extract)	 and	 cell-
wall	 carbohydrates	 that	 provide	 body	 (also
almost	a	third).	The	flavor,	color,	and	body	of
the	 finished	 drink	 are	 determined	 by	 how
much	 ground	 coffee	 is	 used	 for	 a	 given
volume	 of	 water,	 and	 by	 what	 proportion	 of
that	 coffee	 is	 extracted	 into	 the	 water.
Inadequate	extraction	and	a	watery,	acid	brew
are	caused	by	grinding	the	beans	too	coarsely,
so	 that	 flavor	 is	 left	 inside	 the	 particles,	 by
too	 brief	 a	 contact	 time	 between	 coffee	 and
water,	 or	 by	 too	 low	 a	 brewing	 temperature.
Overextraction	and	a	harsh,	bitter	brew	result
from	 an	 excessively	 fine	 grind,	 or	 long
contact	time,	or	high	brewing	temperature.

The	ideal	brewing	temperature	for	any
style	of	coffee	is	190–200ºF/85–93ºC;
anything	higher	extracts	bitter	compounds	too
quickly.	For	a	standard	cup	of	American
coffee,	the	usual	brewing	time	ranges	from	1



to	3	minutes	for	a	fine	grind,	to	6	to	8	minutes
for	a	coarse	grind.

Brewing	 Methods	 There	 are	 a	 number	 of
different	methods	for	brewing	coffee.	Most	of
them	 extract	 between	 20	 and	 25%	 of	 the
bean’s	 substance,	 and	 produce	 a	 cup
containing	somewhere	between	1.3%	and5.5%
bean	solids	by	weight.	The	facing	chart	places
some	 of	 the	 major	 styles	 in	 relation	 to	 each
other.	Standard	American	filter-drip	coffee	is
the	lightest,	and	Italian	espresso	the	strongest.
The	 initial	 proportion	 of	 coffee	 to	 water	 is
1:15	for	American,	1:5	for	espresso.	One	clear
lesson	from	the	chart	is	that	it’s	always	best	to
use	 too	much	 coffee	 rather	 than	 too	 little:	 a
strong	 but	 balanced	 cup	 can	 be	 diluted	 with
hot	 water	 and	 remain	 balanced,	 but	 a	 weak
cup	can’t	be	improved.	This	principle	can	help
avoid	 problems	 caused	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 cup
and	 coffee	 scoop	 measures	 vary,	 and	 that
scoops	 themselves	 are	 a	 very	 approximate



measure	 (one	 2-tablespoon/30-ml	 scoop	may
deliver	 anywhere	 from	 8	 to	 12	 gm	 coffee,
depending	on	grind	and	packing).

Each	brewing	method	has	its	drawbacks.
Percolators	operate	at	the	boil	and	tend	to
overextract.	Many	automatic	drip	brewers
aren’t	able	to	deliver	near-boiling	water,	so
they	brew	for	a	long	time	to	compensate,	lose
aroma,	and	extract	some	bitterness.	Manual
drip	cones	give	little	control	over	extraction
time.	The	plunger	pot	leaves	tiny	suspended
particles	in	the	brew	that	keep	releasing
bitterness.	The	Italian	stovetop	moka	pot
operates	above	the	boil,	at	around
230ºF/110ºC	(and	1.5	atmospheres	of
pressure),	and	produces	a	somewhat	harsh
brew.	Overnight	extraction	in	cold	water
doesn’t	obtain	as	many	aromatic	compounds
from	the	ground	coffee	as	the	hot-water
methods.

Espresso	True	espresso	is	made	very	quickly,



in	 about	 30	 seconds.	 A	 piston	 or	 spring	 or
electrical	 pump	 drives	 200ºF/93ºC	 water
through	finely	ground	coffee	at	9	atmospheres
of	pressure.	(Inexpensive	household	machines
rely	on	excessively	hot	steam,	develop	far	less
pressure,	and	take	longer	to	brew,	so	the	result
is	relatively	thin	and	harsh.)	The	proportion	of
ground	 coffee	 is	 three	 to	 four	 times	 the
amount	 used	 in	 unpressurized	 brewing,	 and
deposits	three	to	four	times	the	concentration
of	 coffee	 materials	 in	 the	 brew,	 creating	 a
substantial,	 velvety	 body	 and	 intense	 flavor.
These	extracted	materials	include	a	relatively
large	 amount	 of	 coffee	 oils,	 which	 the	 high
pressure	 forces	 from	 the	 bean	 particles	 to
form	a	creamy	emulsion	of	tiny	droplets,	and
which	 contribute	 to	 the	 slow,	 prolonged
release	 of	 coffee	 flavor	 in	 the	 mouth,	 long
after	 the	 last	 sip.	Another	 unique	 feature	 of
espresso	 is	 the	crema,	 the	 remarkably	 stable,
creamy	foam	that	develops	from	the	brew	and
covers	 its	 surface.	 It’s	 the	 product	 of	 carbon



dioxide	gas	still	trapped	in	the	ground	coffee,
and	 the	 mixture	 of	 dissolved	 and	 suspended
carbohydrates,	 proteins,	 phenolic	 materials,
and	 large	 pigment	 aggregates,	 all	 of	 which
bond	in	one	way	or	another	to	each	other	and
hold	 the	bubble	walls	 together.	 (For	 the	milk
foams	often	served	with	coffee,	seep.	26.)
This	chart	summarizes	the	important	features
of	some	common	ways	of	brewing	coffee,	and
the	kinds	of	brew	they	produce.	The	sta	bility
of	a	brew	is	determined	by	how	many	coffee
particles	remain	in	it;	the	more	particles,	the
more	bitterness	and	astringency	continue	to	be
extracted	in	the	cup	or	pet

Methods	of	Brewing	Coffee



Serving	and	Holding	Coffee	Freshly	brewed
coffee	 is	 best	 enjoyed	 immediately	 —	 its
flavor	 is	 evanescent.	 The	 ideal	 drinking
temperature	 is	 around	 140ºF/	 60ºC,	 where	 a
sip	 won’t	 scald	 the	 mouth,	 and	 the	 coffee’s
full	aroma	comes	out.	Because	it	cools	in	the
cup,	 coffee	 is	 usually	 held	 in	 the	 pot	 just
below	 the	 brewing	 temperature.	 High	 heat
accelerates	chemical	reactions	and	the	escape
of	 volatile	 molecules,	 so	 coffee	 flavor
changes	 noticeably	 after	 less	 than	 an	 hour	 in
the	 pot;	 it	 becomes	 more	 acid	 and	 less
aromatic.	Coffee	is	best	kept	hot	by	retaining
its	 original	 heat	 in	 a	 preheated,	 insulated,
closed	 container,	 not	 on	 a	 hot	 plate	 that
constantly	supplies	excessive	heat	from	below
while	heat	and	aroma	escape	above.

Coffee	 Flavor	 Coffee	 has	 one	 of	 the	 most
complex	flavors	of	all	our	foods.	At	its	base	is
a	mouth-filling	balance	of	acidity,	bitterness,
and	 astringency.	 A	 third	 or	 less	 of	 the



bitterness	 is	 due	 to	 easily	 extracted	 caffeine,
the	 rest	 to	 more	 slowly	 extracted	 phenolic
compounds	 and	 browning	 pigments.	 More
than	 800	 aroma	 compounds	 have	 been
identified,	 and	 they	 supply	 notes	 that	 are
described	 as	 nutty,	 earthy,	 flowery,	 fruity,
buttery,	 chocolate-like,	 cinnamon,	 tea,
honeyed,	caramel,	bready,	 roasty,	spicy,	even
winey	 and	 gamy.	Robusta	 coffees,	with	 their
substantially	 higher	 content	 of	 phenolic
substances	 than	 arabicas,	 develop	 a
characteristic	 smoky,	 tarry	 aroma	 that	 is
valued	in	dark	roasts	(they	are	also	distinctly
less	 acidic	 than	 arabicas).	 Milk	 and	 cream
reduce	the	astringency	of	coffee	by	providing
proteins	 that	 bind	 to	 the	 tannic	 phenolic
compounds,	but	these	liquids	also	bind	aroma
molecules	 and	 weaken	 the	 overall	 coffee
flavor.

Decaffeinated	 Coffee	 Decaffeinated	 coffee
was	 invented	 in	 Germany	 around	 1908.	 It’s



made	 by	 soaking	 green	 coffee	 beans	 with
water	 to	 dissolve	 the	 caffeine,	 extracting	 the
caffeine	 from	 the	 beans	 with	 a	 solvent
(methylene	 chloride,	 ethyl	 acetate),	 and
steaming	 the	 beans	 to	 evaporate	 off	 any
remaining	 solvent.	 In	 the	 “Swiss”	or	 “water”
process,	 water	 is	 the	 only	 solvent	 used,	 the
caffeine	 removed	 from	 the	water	by	charcoal
filters,	 and	 the	 other	 water-solubles	 are	 then
added	back	to	the	beans.	Some	of	the	organic
solvents	 used	 in	 other	 processes	 have	 been
suspected	of	being	health	hazards	even	in	the
tiny	traces	left	in	the	beans	(around	1	part	per
million).	The	commonest,	methylene	chloride,
is	 now	 thought	 to	 be	 safe.	 More	 recently,
highly	 pressurized	 (“supercritical”)	 and
nontoxic	carbon	dioxide	has	been	used.	Where
ordinary	 brewed	 coffee	 may	 contain	 60–180
milligrams	 caffeine	 per	 cup,	 decaffeinated
coffee	will	contain	2–5	mg.

Instant	 Coffee	 Instant	 coffee	 became



commercially	 practical	 in	 Switzerland	 just
before	 World	 War	 II.	 It’s	 made	 by	 brewing
ground	 coffee	 near	 the	 boil	 to	 obtain	 aroma,
then	 a	 second	 time	 at	 340ºF/170ºC	 and	 high
pressure	 to	 maximize	 the	 extraction	 of
pigments	 and	 body-producing	 carbohydrates.
Water	 is	 removed	 from	 the	 two	 extracts	 by
hot	 spray-drying	 or	 by	 freeze-drying,	 which
retains	more	of	the	volatile	aroma	compounds
and	produces	a	fuller	flavor.	The	two	are	then
blended	 together	 and	 supplemented	 with
aromas	 captured	 during	 the	 drying	 stage.
Instant	 coffee	 crystals	 contain	 about	 5%
moisture,	 20%	 brown	 pigments,	 10%
minerals,	 7%	 complex	 carbohydrate,	 8%
sugars,	 6%	 acids,	 and	 4%	 caffeine.	 As	 an
essentially	dry	concentrate,	instant	coffee	is	a
valuable	 flavoring	 for	 baked	 goods,
confections,	and	ice	creams.

Wood	Smoke
and	Charred	Wood



Neither	wood	nor	the	smoke	it	gives	off	is	an
herb	or	a	spice,	strictly	speaking.	Yet	cooks
and	makers	of	alcoholic	liquids	often	use
burned	or	burning	wood	as	flavoring	agents	—
in	barbecuing	meats,	in	barrel-aging	wines
and	spirits	—	and	some	of	the	flavors	they
supply	are	identical	to	spice	flavors:	vanilla’s
vanillin,	for	example,	and	clove’s	eugenol.
That’s	because	wood	is	strengthened	with
masses	of	interlinked	phenolic	units,	and	high
heat	breaks	these	masses	apart	into	smaller
volatile	phenolics	(p.	390).

The	Chemistry
of	Burning	Wood

Charred	wood	and	smoke	are	products	of	the
incomplete	combustion	of	organic	materials
in	the	presence	of	limited	oxygen	and	at	the
relatively	low	temperatures	of	ordinary
burning	(below	1,800ºF/1,000ºC).	Complete
combustion	would	produce	only	odorless



water	and	carbon	dioxide.

The	Nature	of	Wood	Wood	consists	of	three
primary	 materials:	 cellulose	 and
hemicellulose,	which	form	the	framework	and
the	 filler	of	all	plant	cell	walls,	 and	 lignin,	 a
reinforcing	 material	 that	 binds	 neighboring
cell	 walls	 together	 and	 gives	 wood	 its
strength.	Cellulose	and	hemicellulose	are	both
aggregates	 of	 sugar	molecules	 (pp.	 265,266).
Lignin	 is	 made	 of	 intricately	 inter-locked
phenolic	 molecules	 —	 essentially	 rings	 of
carbon	 atoms	 with	 various	 additional
chemical	groups	attached	—	and	is	one	of	the
most	complex	natural	substances	known.	The
higher	the	lignin	content	of	a	wood,	the	harder
it	 is	 and	 the	 hotter	 it	 burns;	 its	 combustion
releases	 50%	 more	 heat	 than	 cellulose.
Mesquite	 wood	 is	 well-known	 for	 its	 high-
temperature	 fire,	 which	 it	 owes	 to	 its	 64%
lignin	content	(hickory,	a	common	hardwood,
is	 18%	 lignin).	 Most	 wood	 also	 contains	 a



small	 amount	 of	 protein,	 enough	 to	 support
the	 browning	 reactions	 that	 generate	 typical
roasted	 flavors	 (p.	 778)	 at	 moderately	 hot
temperatures.	 Evergreens	 such	 as	 pine,	 fir,
and	spruce	also	contain	significant	amounts	of
resin,	a	mixture	of	compounds	related	 to	 fats
that	produce	a	harsh	soot	when	burned.

How	 Burning	 Transforms	 Wood	 into
Flavor	 Burning	 temperatures	 transform	 each
of	 the	wood	components	 into	 a	 characteristic
group	 of	 compounds	 (see	 box,	 p.449).	 The
sugars	 in	 cellulose	 and	 hemicellulose	 break
apart	into	many	of	the	same	molecules	found
in	caramel,	with	sweet,	fruity,	flowery,	bready
aromas.	And	the	interlocked	phenolic	rings	of
lignin	break	apart	from	each	other	into	a	host
of	 smaller,	 volatile	 phenolics	 and	 other
fragments,	which	have	the	specific	aromas	of
vanilla	 and	 clove	 as	 well	 as	 a	 generic
spiciness,	sweetness,	and	pungency.	Cooks	get
these	volatiles	into	solid	foods,	usually	meats



and	fish,	by	exposing	 the	foods	 to	 the	smoky
vapors	 emitted	 by	 burning	 wood.	 Makers	 of
wine	 and	 spirits	 store	 them	 in	 wood	 barrels
whose	 interiors	 have	 been	 charred;	 the
volatiles	 are	 trapped	 in	 and	 just	 below	 the
barrels’	 inner	 surface,	 and	 are	 slowly
extracted	by	the	liquid	(p.	721).

The	flavor	that	wood	smoke	imparts	to
food	is	determined	by	several	factors.	Above
all	there’s	the	wood.	Oak,	hickory,	and	the
fruit-tree	woods	(cherry,	apple,	pear)	produce
characteristic	and	pleasing	flavors	thanks	to
their	moderate,	balanced	quantities	of	the
wood	components.	A	second	important	factor
is	the	combustion	temperature,	which	is	partly
determined	by	the	wood	and	its	moisture
content.	Maximum	flavor	production	takes
place	at	relatively	low,	smoldering
temperatures,	between	570	and	750ºF/300–
400ºC;	at	higher	temperatures,	the	flavor
molecules	are	themselves	broken	down	into
simpler	harsh	or	flavorless	molecules.	High-



lignin	woods	burn	too	hot	unless	their
combustion	is	slowed	by	restricted	airflow	or
a	high	moisture	content.	When	smoking	is
done	by	throwing	wood	chips	onto	glowing
charcoal,	the	wood	chips	should	be	pre-soaked
in	water	so	that	they’ll	cool	the	coals.	Because
it’s	largely	pure	carbon,	charcoal	burns
mostly	smokelessly	at	temperatures
approaching	1,800ºF/1,000ºC.

Though	smoke	helps	stabilize	the	flavors
of	meats	and	fish,	smoke	flavor	itself	is
unstable.	The	desirable	phenolic	compounds
are	especially	reactive,	and	largely	dissipate
in	a	few	weeks	or	months.

The	Toxins	 in	Wood	Smoke:	Preservatives
and	Carcinogens	 In	 the	 beginning,	 smoking
was	 not	 just	 a	 way	 of	 giving	 foods	 an
interesting	 flavor:	 it	 was	 a	 way	 of	 delaying
their	 spoilage.	 Wood	 smoke	 contains	 many
chemicals	 that	 slow	 the	 growth	 of	microbes.
Among	 them	 are	 formaldehyde,	 and	 acetic



acid	(vinegar)	and	other	organic	acids,	thanks
to	which	the	pH	of	smoke	is	a	very	microbe-
unfriendly	 2.5.	 Many	 of	 the	 phenolic
compounds	 in	 wood	 smoke	 are	 also
antimicrobials,	 and	 phenol	 itself	 is	 a	 strong
disinfectant.	The	phenolic	compounds	are	also
effective	 antioxidants,	 and	 slow	 the
development	 of	 rancid	 flavors	 in	 smoked
meats	and	fish.

In	addition	to	antimicrobial	compounds,
smoke	also	contains	antihuman	compounds,
substances	that	are	harmful	to	our	long-term
health.	Prominent	among	these	are	the
polycyclic	aromatic	hydrocarbons,	or	PAHs,
which	are	proven	carcinogens	and	are	formed
from	all	of	the	wood	components	in
increasing	amounts	as	the	temperature	is
raised.	Hot-burning	mesquite	wood	generates
double	the	quantity	that	hickory	wood	does.
The	deposition	of	PAHs	on	meat	can	be
minimized	by	limiting	the	fire	temperature,
keeping	the	meat	as	far	as	possible	from	the



fire,	and	allowing	free	air	circulation	to	carry
soot	and	other	PAH-containing	particles	away.
Commercial	smokers	use	air	filters	and
temperature	control	for	these	purposes.

Liquid	Smoke

Liquid	smoke	is	essentially	smoke-flavored
water.	Smoke	consists	of	two	phases:
microscopic	droplets	that	make	it	visible	as	a
haze,	and	an	invisible	vapor.	It	turns	out	that
much	of	the	flavor	and	preservative	materials
are	in	the	vapor,	while	the	droplets	are	largely
aggregates	of	tars,	resins,	and	heavier
phenolic	materials,	including	the	PAHs.	PAHs
are	largely	insoluble	in	water,	while	most	of
the	flavor	and	preservative	compounds	do
dissolve	to	some	extent.	This	difference
makes	it	possible	to	separate	most	of	the
PAHs	from	the	vapors	and	dissolve	the	vapors
in	water.	Cooks	then	use	this	liquid	extract	of
smoke	to	flavor	foods.	Toxicological	studies



of	liquid	smoke	have	found	that	though	it	is
full	of	biologically	active	compounds,	the
quantities	normally	used	in	foods	are
harmless.	Those	PAHs	that	do	make	it	into
liquid	smoke	tend	to	aggregate	and	sink	over
time,	so	it’s	best	not	to	shake	bottles	of	liquid
smoke	before	use.	Leave	the	sediment	at	the
bottom.

Wood	Components	and	Smoke	Flavors

Wood Combustion
Component Combustion By-Products
%	of	dry Temperature and	Their
weight Aromas
Cellulose
(cell-wall 540– Furans:	sweet,	bready,

floral	Lactones:
frame,	from 610ºF coconut,	peach
glucose)	40– 280–
45% 320ºC Acetaldehyde:	green

apple
Hemicellulose	(cell- Acetic	acid:
wall	filler,	from 390–



mixed	sugars)	20– 480ºF vinegar	200–
35% 250ºC	Diacetyl:

buttery
Lignin	(cell- Guaiacol:	smoky,	spicy
wall Vanillin:	vanilla
strengthener, 750ºF Phenol:	pungent,
from	phenolic 400ºC smoky	Isoeugenol:
compounds) sweet,	cloves	Syringol:
20–40% spicy,	sausage-like



Chapter	9

Seeds
Grains,	Legumes,	and	Nuts

Seeds	as	Food
Some	Definitions

Seeds	and	Health
Valuable	Phytochemicals	from	Seeds
Problems	Caused	by	Seeds
Seeds	Are	Common	Food	Allergens
Seeds	and	Food	Poisoning

The	Composition	and	Qualities	of	Seeds
Parts	of	the	Seed
Seed	Proteins:	Soluble	and	Insoluble
Seed	Starches:	Orderly	and	Disorderly
Seed	Oils
Seed	Flavors

Handling	and	Preparing	Seeds
Storing	Seeds



Sprouts
Cooking	Seeds

The	Grains,	or	Cereals
Grain	Structure	and	Composition
Milling	and	Refining
Breakfast	Cereals
Wheat
Barley
Rye
Oats
Rice
Maize,	or	Corn
Minor	Cereals
Pseudocereals

Legumes:	Beans	and	Peas
Legume	Structure	and	Composition
Legumes	 and	 Health:	 The	 Intriguing
Soybean
The	Problem	of	Legumes	and	Flatulence
Bean	Flavor
Bean	Sprouts
Cooking	Legumes



Characteristics	of	Some	Common	Legumes
Soybeans	and	Their	Transformations

Nuts	and	Other	Oil-Rich	Seeds
Nut	Structures	and	Qualities
The	Nutritional	Value	of	Nuts
Nut	Flavor
Handling	and	Storing	Nuts
Cooking	Nuts
Characteristics	of	Some	Common	Nuts
Characteristics	of	Other	Oil-Rich	Seeds

Seeds	as	Food

Seeds	are	our	most	durable	and	concentrated
foods.	They’re	rugged	lifeboats,	designed	to
carry	a	plant’s	offspring	to	the	shore	of	an
uncertain	future.	Tease	apart	a	whole	grain,	or
bean,	or	nut,	and	inside	you	find	a	tiny
embryonic	shoot.	At	harvest	time	that	shoot
had	entered	suspended	animation,	ready	to
survive	months	of	drought	or	cold	while
waiting	for	the	right	moment	to	come	back	to



life.	The	bulk	of	the	tissue	that	surrounds	it	is
a	food	supply	to	nourish	this	rebirth.	It’s	the
distillation	of	the	parent	plant’s	lifework,	its
gathering	of	water	and	nitrogen	and	minerals
from	the	soil,	carbon	from	the	air,	and	energy
from	the	sun.	And	as	such	it’s	an	invaluable
resource	for	us	and	other	creatures	of	the
animal	kingdom	who	are	unable	to	live	on	soil
and	sunlight	and	air.	In	fact,	seeds	gave	early
humans	both	the	nourishment	and	the
inspiration	to	begin	to	shape	the	natural	world
to	their	own	needs.	Ten	thousand	turbulent
years	of	civilization	have	unfolded	from	the
seed’s	pale	repose.

The	story	began	when	inhabitants	of	the
Middle	East,	Asia,	and	Central	and	South
America	learned	to	save	some	large,	easily
harvested	seeds	from	wild	plants,	and	sow
them	in	clearings	to	produce	more	seeds	of	a
similar	kind.	It	appears	that	agriculture	first
arose	in	the	highlands	of	southeastern	Turkey,
around	the	upper	reaches	of	the	Tigris	and



Euphrates	rivers,	and	in	the	Jordan	River
valley.	The	first	plants	to	be	brought	under
human	selection	there	were	einkorn	and
emmer	wheat,	barley,	lentil,	pea,	bitter	vetch,
and	chickpea:	a	mixture	of	seed-bearing
cereals	and	legumes.	Gradually	the	nomadic
life	of	the	hunter-gatherer	gave	way	to
growing	settlements	alongside	the	large
grainfields	that	fed	them.	The	need	arose	for
planning	the	sowing	and	the	distribution	of
the	harvests,	for	anticipating	seasonal	changes
before	they	occurred,	for	organizing	the	work,
and	for	keeping	records.	Some	of	the	earliest
known	writing	and	arithmetical	systems,
dating	from	at	least	5,000	years	ago,	are
devoted	to	the	accounting	of	grain	and
livestock.	So	the	culture	of	the	fields
encouraged	the	culture	of	the	mind.	At	the
same	time	it	brought	problems,	among	them	a
drastic	simplification	of	the	hunter-gatherer’s
varied	diet	and	consequent	damage	to	human
health,	and	the	development	of	a	social



hierarchy	in	which	a	few	benefit	from	the
labor	of	many.

Seeds	of	Thought
The	development	of	agriculture	had	a	deep
influence	on	human	feeling	and	thought,	on
mythology	and	religion	and	science,	that	is
hard	 to	 capture	 in	 a	 few	 quotations.	 The
religious	 historian	 Mircea	 Eliade
summarized	it	this	way:
We	are	used	to	thinking	that	the	discovery
of	agriculture	made	a	radical	change	in	the
course	of	human	history	by	ensuring
adequate	nourishment	and	thus	allowing	a
tremendous	increase	in	the	population.	But
the	discovery	of	agriculture	had	decisive
results	for	a	quite	different	reason….
Agriculture	taught	man	the	fundamental
oneness	of	organic	life;	and	from	that
revelation	sprang	the	simpler	analogies
between	women	and	field,	between	the
sexual	act	and	sowing,	as	well	as	the	most



advanced	intellectual	syntheses:	life	as
rhythmic,	death	as	a	return,	and	so	on.
These	syntheses	were	essential	to	man’s
development,	and	were	possible	only	after
the	discovery	of	agriculture.
—	Patterns	in	Comparative	Religion,	1958
In	the	Odyssey,	Homer	called	wheat	and

barley	“the	marrow	of	men’s	bones.”	It’s	less
obvious	to	us	in	the	modern	industrialized
world	than	it	has	been	through	much	of	human
history,	but	seeds	remain	the	essential	food	of
our	species.	Grains	directly	provide	the	bulk
of	the	caloric	intake	for	much	of	the	world’s
population,	especially	in	Asia	and	Africa.	The
grains	and	legumes	together	provide	more
than	two-thirds	of	the	world’s	dietary	protein.
Even	the	industrial	countries	are	fed	indirectly
by	the	shiploads	of	corn,	wheat,	and	soybeans
on	which	their	cattle,	hogs,	and	chickens	are
raised.	The	fact	that	the	grains	come	from	the
grass	family	adds	a	layer	of	significance	to
the	Old	Testament	prophet	Isaiah’s



admonishment	that	“All	flesh	is	grass.”
As	ingredients,	seeds	have	much	in

common	with	milk	and	eggs.	All	consist	of
basic	nutrients	created	to	nourish	the	next
generation	of	living	things;	all	are	relatively
simple	and	bland	in	themselves,	but	have
inspired	cooks	to	transform	them	into	some	of
the	most	complex	and	delightful	foods	we
have.

Some	Definitions

Seeds	Seeds	are	structures	by	which	plants
create	a	new	generation	of	their	kind.	They
contain	an	embryonic	plant	together	with	a
food	supply	to	fuel	its	germination	and	early
growth.	And	they	include	an	outer	layer	that
insulates	the	embryo	from	the	soil	and
protects	it	from	physical	damage	and	from
attack	by	microbes	or	animals.

The	most	important	seeds	in	the	kitchen
fall	into	three	groups.



Grains,	 or	 Cereals	 These	 words	 are	 near
synonyms.	 The	cereals	 (from	Ceres,	 the
Roman	 goddess	 of	 agriculture)	 are	 plants	 in
the	 grass	 family,	 the	 Gramineae,	 whose
members	produce	edible	and	nutritious	seeds,
t he	grains.	 But	cereal	 is	 also	 used	 to	 mean
their	 seeds	 and	products	made	 from	 them	—
as	in	“breakfast	cereals”	—	and	the	plants	are
sometimes	 called	grains.	 The	 cereals	 and
other	grasses	are	creatures	of	the	open	plain	or
high-altitude	 steppe,	 areas	 too	 dry	 for	 trees.
They	live	and	die	in	a	season	or	 two,	and	are
easily	 gathered	 and	 handled.	 They	 grow	 in
densely	 packed	 stands	 that	 crowd	 out
competition,	 and	 produce	 many	 small	 seeds,
relying	 on	 numbers	 rather	 than	 chemical
defenses	 to	 ensure	 that	 some	 offspring	 will
survive.	 These	 characteristics	 made	 the
grasses	 ideal	 for	 agriculture.	 With	 our	 help,
they	 have	 come	 to	 cover	 vast	 areas	 of	 the
globe.

Wheat,	barley,	oats,	and	rye	have	been	the



most	important	grains	in	the	Middle	East	and
Europe;	in	Asia,	rice;	in	the	New	World,
maize,	or	corn;	in	Africa	sorghum	and	millets.
The	grains	are	of	special	culinary	significance
because	they	make	possible	beer	and	bread,
both	staples	in	the	human	diet	for	at	least
5,000	years.

An	 oat	 kernel,	 lentils	 in	 their	 pod,	 and	 a
hazelnut.	All	are	seeds,	and	consist	of	a	living
embryonic	 plant	 together	 with	 a	 food	 supply
to	 fuel	 its	 early	growth.	 In	 the	cereal	grains,
the	 food	 supply	 is	 a	 separate	 tissue,	 the
endosperm.	 In	 the	 beans	 and	 their	 relatives,
and	in	most	nuts,	the	food	supply	fills	the	first
two	 leaves	 of	 the	 embryo,	 the	 cotyledons,
which	are	unusually	massive	and	thick.



Legumes	The	legumes	(from	the	Latin	legere,
“to	gather”)	are	plants	in	the	bean	family,	the
Leguminosae,	whose	members	bear	pods	 that
contain	several	seeds.	The	term	legume	is	also
used	 to	 name	 their	 seeds.	Many	 legumes	 are
vines	 that	 climb	 on	 tall	 grasses	 and	 other
plants	 to	 reach	 full	 sunlight,	 and	 like	 the
grasses	 grow,	 go	 to	 seed,	 and	die	 over	 a	 few
months.	 The	 legumes	 produce	 seeds	 that	 are
especially	 rich	 in	 protein,	 thanks	 to	 their
symbiosis	with	bacteria	that	live	in	their	roots
and	feed	them	with	nitrogen	from	the	air.	The
same	 symbiosis	means	 that	 legumes	 actually
enrich	 the	 soil	 they	 grow	 in	 with	 nitrogen
compounds,	 which	 is	 why	 various	 legumes
have	 been	 grown	 as	 rotation	 crops	 at	 least
since	 Roman	 times.	 Their	 relatively	 large
seeds	 are	 attractive	 to	 animals,	 and	 it’s
thought	that	much	of	the	remarkable	diversity
in	the	beans	and	peas	is	the	result	of	survival
pressures	 exerted	 by	 insects.	 Legume	 seeds
are	 camouflaged	 by	 colored	 coats,	 and



protected	with	an	array	of	several	biochemical
defenses.

Lentils,	broad	beans,	peas,	and	chick	peas
are	all	native	to	the	Fertile	Crescent	of	the
Near	East.	They	were	adapted	for	sprouting
and	quickly	reproducing	in	the	cool,	wet
season	before	the	summer	drought,	and	were
the	first	substantial	foods	to	ripen	in	the
spring.	The	soy	and	mung	beans	were
indigenous	to	Asia,	and	peanuts,	lima	beans,
and	common	beans	to	the	Americas.

Nuts	 The	nuts	 (from	 an	 Indo-European	 root
meaning	 “compressed”)	 come	 from	 several
different	plant	families,	not	just	one.	They	are
generally	 large	seeds	enclosed	 in	hard	shells,
and	 borne	 on	 long-lived	 trees.	 The	 seeds	 are
large	both	 to	make	 them	attractive	 to	 animal
dispersers	(which	bury	some	for	later	use	and
effectively	plant	the	ones	they	forget),	and	to
give	the	seedling	an	adequate	food	supply	for
slow,	 prolonged	 growth	 in	 the	 partial	 shade.



Most	of	 them	store	 their	energy	not	 in	starch
but	 in	 oil,	 a	 more	 compact,	 concentrated
chemical	form	(p.	121).

Nuts	are	much	less	important	in	the	human
diet	than	grains	or	legumes	because	nut	trees
don’t	begin	to	bear	until	years	after	they’re
planted,	and	can’t	produce	as	much	per	acre	as
the	quick-growing	grains	and	legumes.	The
biggest	exception	to	this	rule	is	the	coconut,	a
staple	food	in	many	tropical	countries.
Another	is	the	peanut,	which	is	a	legume	with
an	uncharacteristically	oily,	tender	seed,	and
which	can	be	grown	quickly	in	massive
numbers.

Seeds	and	Health

Our	seed	foods	provide	us	with	many
nutritional	benefits.	To	begin	with,	they’re	our
most	important	staple	sources	of	energy	and
protein,	and	carry	the	B	vitamins	that	are
required	for	the	chemical	work	of	generating



energy	and	building	tissue.	In	fact,	they’re
such	a	good	source	of	these	essential	nutrients
that	cultures	have	occasionally	relied	on	the
grains	too	heavily,	and	suffered	from	dietary
deficiencies	as	a	result.	The	debilitating
disease	called	beriberi	plagued	rice-eating
Asia	in	the	19th	century	when	milling
machines	made	it	easier	to	remove	the
inconvenient,	unattractive	outer	bran	layer
from	rice	grains	—	and	along	with	it	their
thiamin,	which	the	rest	of	the	largely
vegetarian	diet	couldn’t	make	up	(meats	and
fish	are	rich	in	thiamin).	A	different
deficiency	disease	called	pellagra	struck	the
rural	poor	in	Europe	and	the	southern	United
States	in	the	18th	and	19th	centuries,	when
they	adopted	corn	from	Central	and	South
America	as	a	staple	food,	but	without	the
processing	method	(cooking	in	alkaline	water)
that	makes	its	stores	of	niacin	available	to	the
human	body.

Beriberi	and	pellagra	led	early	in	the	20th



century	to	the	discovery	of	the	vitamins
whose	deficiencies	cause	them.	Today,	even
though	most	people	in	Asia	eat	refined	rice,
and	polenta	and	grits	are	still	not	cooked	in
alkaline	water,	more	balanced	diets	have
made	these	deficiency	diseases	far	less
common.

Valuable	Phytochemicals
From	Seeds

Toward	the	end	of	the	20th	century,	we	came
to	realize	that	seeds	have	more	to	offer	us
than	the	basic	machinery	of	life.
Epidemiological	studies	have	found	a	general
association	between	the	consumption	of	whole
grains,	legumes,	and	nuts	and	a	reduced	risk
of	various	cancers,	heart	disease,	and	diabetes.
What	do	these	foods	provide	that	refined
grains	do	not?	Hundreds	or	even	thousands	of
chemicals	that	are	concentrated	in	the	outer
protective	and	active	layers	of	the	seeds,	and



that	are	not	found	in	inner	storage	tissues,
which	are	mainly	depots	of	starch	and	protein.
Among	the	chemicals	that	have	been
identified	and	seem	likely	to	be	helpful	are

a	variety	of	vitamins,	including
antioxidant	vitamin	E	and	its	chemical
relatives	the	tocotrienols
soluble	fiber:	soluble	but	undigestible
carbohydrates	that	slow	digestion,
moderate	blood	insulin	and	blood	sugar
levels,	and	reduce	cholesterol	levels,	and
provide	energy	for	beneficial	intestinal
bacteria,	which	alter	their	chemical
environment,	suppress	the	growth	of
harmful	bacteria,	and	influence	the
health	of	intestinal	cells
insoluble	fiber,	which	speeds	passage	of
food	through	the	digestive	system	and
reduces	our	absorption	of	carcinogens
and	other	undesirable	molecules
a	variety	of	phenolic	and	other	defensive
compounds,	some	of	which	are	effective



antioxidants,	some	of	which	resemble
human	hormones	and	may	restrain	cell
growth	and	thereby	the	development	of
cancer

Medical	scientists	are	still	 in	the	early	stages
of	 identifying	 and	 evaluating	 these
substances,	 but	 in	 general	 it	 looks	 as	 though
regular	 consumption	 of	 whole	 grains,
legumes,	 and	 nuts	 can	 indeed	 make	 a	 real
contribution	to	our	long-term	health.

Problems	Caused	by	Seeds

Seeds	are	not	perfect	foods.	Legumes	in
particular	contain	defensive	chemicals	—
lectins	and	protease	inhibitors	—	that	can
cause	malnourishment	and	other	problems.
Fortunately,	simple	cooking	disarms	these
defenses	(p.	259).	The	fava	bean	contains
amino-acid	relatives	that	cause	serious
anemia	in	susceptible	people	(p.	490),	but



both	the	bean	and	the	susceptibility	are
relatively	rare.	Two	other	problems	are	more
common.

Seeds	are	Common
Food	Allergens

True	food	allergies	are	overreactions	of	the
body’s	immune	system,	which	mistakes	a
food	component	as	a	sign	of	invasion	by	a
bacterium	or	virus	and	initiates	a	defense	that
damages	the	body.	The	damage	may	be	mild
and	manifest	itself	as	discomfort,	itchiness,	or
a	rash,	or	it	may	be	a	life-threatening	asthma
or	change	in	blood	pressure	or	heart	rhythm.
It’s	estimated	that	about	2%	of	adults	in	the
United	States	have	one	or	more	food	allergies,
and	up	to	8%	of	young	children.	Allergic
reactions	to	food	cause	around	200	deaths	per
year	in	the	United	States.	Peanuts,	soybeans,
and	tree	nuts	are	among	the	most	common
food	allergens.	The	offending	components	are



usually	seed	proteins,	and	cooking	does	not
render	them	less	allergenic.	Tiny	quantities	of
nut	proteins	are	sufficient	to	cause	reactions,
including	the	levels	sometimes	found	in
mechanically	extracted	nut	oils.

Gluten	 Sensitivity	 A	 special	 form	 of	 food
allergy	 is	 the	 disease	 called	 gluten-sensitive
enteropathy,	celiac	disease,	or	sprue,	in	which
the	body	forms	defensive	antibodies	against	a
portion	 of	 the	 harmless	 gliadin	 proteins	 in
wheat,	 barley,	 rye,	 and	 possibly	 oats.	 These
defenses	 end	 up	 attacking	 the	 nutrient-
absorbing	cells	 in	 the	 intestine,	and	 therefore
cause	serious	malnourishment.	Celiac	disease
can	develop	in	early	childhood	or	later,	and	is
a	 lifelong	 condition.	 The	 standard	 remedy	 is
strict	 avoidance	 of	 all	 gluten-containing
foods.	 Several	 grains	 don’t	 contain	 gliadin
proteins	 and	 therefore	 don’t	 aggravate	 celiac
disease;	 they	 are	 corn,	 rice,	 amaranth,
buckwheat,	millet,	quinoa,	sorghum,	and	teff.



Seeds	and	Food	Poisoning

Seeds	are	generally	dry,	with	only	about	10%
of	their	weight	coming	from	water.	As	a
result,	they	keep	well	without	special
treatment;	and	because	we	prepare	them	by
thoroughly	boiling	or	roasting	them,	freshly
cooked	grains,	beans,	and	nuts	generally	don’t
carry	bacteria	that	cause	food	poisoning.
However,	moist	grain	and	bean	dishes	become
very	hospitable	to	bacteria	as	they	cool	down.
Leftovers	should	be	refrigerated	promptly	and
reheated	to	the	boil	before	serving.	Rice
dishes	are	particularly	vulnerable	to
contamination	by	Bacillus	cereus	and	require
special	care	(p.	475).

Even	dry	seeds	aren’t	entirely	immune	to
contamination	and	spoilage.	Molds,	or	fungi,
are	able	to	grow	with	relatively	little
moisture,	and	can	contaminate	seed	crops
both	in	the	field	and	in	storage.	Some
synthesize	deadly	toxins	that	can	cause	cancer



and	other	diseases	(for	example,	species	of
Aspergillus	produce	a	carcinogen	called
aflatoxin,	and	Fusarium	moniliforme	produces
another	called	fumonisin).	The	presence	of
fungal	toxins	in	our	foods	is	generally
invisible	to	the	consumer,	and	is	monitored	by
producers	and	government	agencies.	They’re
not	now	considered	a	major	health	risk.	But
the	least	sign	of	mold	or	other	spoilage	on
grains	and	nuts	means	that	the	food	should	be
discarded.

The	Composition
and	Qualities	of	Seeds

Parts	of	the	Seed

All	of	our	food	seeds	consist	of	three	basic
parts:	an	outer	protective	coat,	a	small
embryonic	portion	capable	of	growing	into	the
mature	plant,	and	a	large	mass	of	storage
tissue	that	contains	proteins,	carbohydrates,



and	oils	to	feed	the	embryo.	Each	part
influences	the	texture	and	flavor	of	the	cooked
seeds.

The	outer	protective	coat,	called	the	bran
in	grains	and	the	seed	coat	in	legumes	and
nuts,	is	a	dense	sheet	of	tough,	fibrous	tissue.
It’s	rich	in	defensive	or	camouflaging
phenolic	compounds,	including	anthocyanin
pigments	and	astringent	tannins.	And	it	slows
the	passage	of	water	into	grains	and	legumes
during	cooking.	It’s	often	removed	from
grains	(especially	rice	and	barley),	legumes
(notably	in	Indian	dals),	and	nuts	(almonds,
chestnuts)	to	speed	the	cooking	and	obtain	a
more	refined	appearance,	texture,	and	flavor.

The	embryonic	portion	of	legumes	and
nuts	is	not	of	much	practical	significance,	but
the	germ	of	the	grains	is:	it	contains	much	of
the	oil	and	enzymes	in	these	seeds,	and	thus	is
the	source	of	potential	flavor,	both	desirable
cooked	aromas	and	undesirable	stale	ones.

The	bulk	of	the	seed	is	a	mass	of	storage



tissue,	and	its	makeup	determines	the	seed’s
basic	texture.	The	storage	cells	are	filled	with
particles	of	concentrated	protein,	granules	of
starch,	and	sometimes	with	droplets	of	oil.	In
some	grains,	notably	barley,	oats,	and	rye,	the
cell	walls	are	also	filled	with	storage
carbohydrates	—	not	starch,	but	other	long
sugar	chains	that	like	starch	can	absorb	water
during	cooking.	The	strength	of	the	cement
that	holds	the	storage	cells	together,	and	the
nature	and	proportions	of	the	materials	they
contain,	determine	the	seed’s	texture.	Bean
cells	and	grain	cells	are	filled	with	solid,	hard
starch	granules	and	protein	bodies;	most	nut
cells	are	filled	with	liquid	oil,	and	so	are	more
fragile.	Grains	retain	their	shape	and	some
firmness	even	when	we	mill	away	their
protective	bran	envelope	and	boil	them	in
plenty	of	water.	Beans	remain	intact	as	long
as	we	cook	them	in	their	seed	coats;	otherwise
they	rapidly	disintegrate	into	a	puree.

The	particular	contents	of	the	seed	storage



cells	influence	texture	and	culinary	usefulness
in	a	number	of	ways.	So	it’s	worth	knowing
about	the	proteins,	starches,	and	oils	in	some
detail.

Seed	Proteins:	Soluble	and	Insoluble

Seed	proteins	are	classified	by	a	particular
aspect	of	their	chemical	behavior,	which	also
determines	their	behavior	during	cooking:	the
kind	of	liquid	in	which	they	dissolve.	This
may	be	pure	water,	water	and	some	salt,	water
and	dilute	acid,	or	alcohol	(these	types	are
called	“albumins,”	“globulins,”	“glutelins,”
and	“prolamins”).	Most	of	the	proteins	in
legumes	and	nuts	are	soluble	in	a	salt	solution
or	water	alone,	so	during	ordinary	cooking	in
salted	water,	bean	and	pea	proteins	become
dispersed	in	the	moisture	within	the	seeds	and
the	cooking	liquid	surrounding	them.	By
contrast,	the	main	storage	proteins	in	wheat,
rice,	and	other	grains	are	acid-soluble	and



alcohol-soluble	types.	In	ordinary	water,	these
proteins	don’t	dissolve;	instead	they	bond	to
each	other	and	clump	up	into	a	compact	mass.
Wheat,	rice,	corn,	and	barley	kernels	develop
a	chewy	consistency	in	part	because	their
insoluble	proteins	clump	together	in	the	grain
during	cooking	and	form	a	sticky	complex
with	the	starch	granules.

Seed	Starches:	Orderly	and	Disorderly

All	the	grains	and	legumes	contain	a
substantial	amount	of	starch,	enough	that	it
plays	a	significant	role	in	the	texture	of	the
cooked	seeds	and	their	products.	It	can	make
one	grain	variety	behave	very	differently	from
another	variety	of	the	same	grain.

Two	Kinds	 of	 Starch	Molecules	 The	 parent
plant	 lays	 down	 starch	 molecules	 in
microscopic,	 solid	 granules	 that	 fill	 the	 cells
of	 the	seed	storage	 tissue.	All	 starch	consists



of	chains	of	individual	molecules	of	the	sugar
called	 glucose	 (p.	 804).	 But	 there	 are	 two
different	 kinds	 of	 starch	molecules	 in	 starch
granules,	 and	 they	 behave	 very	 differently.
Amylose	 molecules	 are	 made	 from	 around
1,000	 glucose	 sugars,	 and	 are	 mainly	 one
extended	chain,	with	just	a	few	long	branches.
Amylopectin	 molecules	 are	made	 from	 5,000
to	 20,000	 sugars	 and	 have	 hundreds	 of	 short
branches.	Amylose	 is	 thus	a	 relatively	 small,
simple	 molecule	 that	 can	 easily	 settle	 into
compact,	 orderly,	 tightly	 bonded	 clusters,
while	 amylopectin	 is	 a	 large,	 bushy,	 bulky
molecule	that	doesn’t	cluster	easily	or	tightly.
Both	 amylose	 and	 amylopectin	 are	 packed
together	 in	 the	 raw	 starch	 granule,	 in
proportions	 that	 depend	 on	 the	 kind	 and
variety	 of	 seed.	 Legume	 starch	 granules	 are
30%	 or	 more	 amylose,	 and	 wheat,	 barley,
maize,	and	long-grain	rice	granules	are	around
20%.	 Short-grain	 rice	 granules	 contain	 about
15%	 amylose,	 while	 “sticky”	 rice	 starch



granules	are	almost	pure	amylopectin.

The	Proportions	of	Proteins	in	Seeds

Cooking	 Separates	 Starch	 Molecules	 and
Softens	Granules	When	 a	 seed	 is	 cooked	 in
water,	 the	 starch	 granules	 absorb	 water
molecules,	 and	 swell	 and	 soften	 as	 the	water
molecules	 intrude	 and	 separate	 the	 starch
molecules	 from	 each	 other.	 This	 granule
softening,	 or	gelation,	 takes	 place	 in	 a
temperature	 range	 that	 depends	 on	 the	 seed
and	 starch,	 but	 is	 in	 the	 region	 of	 140–
160ºF/60–70ºC.	 (The	 conversion	 of	 solid
starch	into	a	starch-water	gel	is	often	referred
to	as	“gelatinization,”	but	this	is	unnecessarily
confusing;	 starch	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	 with



gelatin.)	 The	 tightly	 ordered	 clusters	 of
amylose	 molecules	 require	 higher
temperatures,	more	water,	 and	more	 cooking
time	 to	 be	 pulled	 and	 kept	 apart	 than	 do	 the
looser	 clusters	 of	 amylopectin	 molecules.
This	is	why	long-grain	Chinese	rices	are	made
with	 more	 water	 than	 short-grain	 Japanese
rices.

Cooling	Reorganizes	 Starch	Molecules	 and
Firms	Granules	Once	the	cooking	is	finished
and	 the	 seeds	 cool	 down	 below	 the	 gelation
temperature,	the	starch	molecules	begin	to	re-
form	 some	 clusters	 with	 pockets	 of	 water	 in
between,	and	the	soft,	gelated	starch	granules
begin	to	firm	up	again.	This	process	is	called
retrogradation.	 The	 simpler	 amylose
molecules	 start	 bonding	 to	 each	 other	 again
almost	 immediately,	 and	 finish	within	 a	 few
hours	 at	 room	 or	 refrigerator	 temperatures.
Sprawling,	bushy	amylopectin	molecules	take
a	 day	 or	 more	 to	 reassociate,	 and	 form



relatively	 loose,	 weak	 clusters.	 This
difference	explains	why	long-grain	rices	high
in	amylose	have	a	firm,	springy	texture	when
served	 right	 after	 cooking	 and	 get	 inedibly
hard	when	refrigerated	overnight,	while	short-
grain	 rices	 low	 in	 amylose	 have	 a	 softer,
sticky	 texture	 and	 harden	 much	 less	 during
overnight	 refrigeration.	 The	 hardness	 of	 all
leftover	 grains	 can	 be	 largely	 remedied
simply	 by	 reheating	 and	 so	 regelating	 their
starch.

Starch	 gelation	 and	 retrogradation.	 Starch
granules	 are	 compact,	 organized	 masses	 of
long	 starch	 chains	 (left)	.	 When	 a	 starchy
cereal	is	cooked,	water	penetrates	the	granule
and	separates	the	chains	from	each	other,	thus
swelling	 and	 softening	 the	 granule	 in	 the
process	 called	 gelation	 (center)	.	 When	 the



cooked	 cereal	 cools	 down,	 the	 starch	 chains
slowly	 rebond	 to	 each	 other	 in	 tighter,	more
organized	 associations,	 and	 the	 granule
becomes	 firmer	 and	 harder,	 a	 process	 called
retrogradation	(right).

Starch	 Firming	 Can	 Be	 Useful	 Reheated
grains	 never	 get	 quite	 as	 soft	 as	 they	 were
when	first	cooked.	This	is	because	during	the
process	of	 retrogradation,	 amylose	molecules
manage	 to	 form	 some	 clusters	 that	 are	 even
more	highly	organized	than	the	clusters	in	the
original	 starch	 granule,	 crystalline	 regions
that	 resist	 breaking	 even	 at	 boiling
temperatures.	These	regions	act	as	reinforcing
junctions	 in	 the	 overall	 network	 of	 amylose
and	 amylopectin	 molecules,	 and	 give	 the
granules	greater	strength	and	integrity.	Cooks
take	 advantage	of	 this	 strengthening	 to	make
bread	puddings	and	starch	noodles;	parboiled
(converted)	 rice	 and	 American	 breakfast
cereals	keep	their	shape	because	much	of	their



starch	 has	 been	 allowed	 to	 retrograde	 during
manufacturing.	 And	 it	 turns	 out	 that
retrograded	 starch	 is	 good	 for	 our	 bodies!	 It
resists	 our	 digestive	 enzymes	 and	 therefore
slows	 the	 rise	 in	 blood	 sugar	 following	 a
meal,	and	feeds	desirable	bacteria	in	the	large
intestine	(p.	258).

Seed	Oils

Nuts	and	soybeans	are	rich	in	oil,	which	is
kept	in	the	mass	of	storage	tissue	in	tiny
packages	called	oil	bodies.	Each	is	a	tiny	oil
droplet	whose	surface	is	covered	with	two
protective	materials:	phospholipid	relatives	of
lecithin,	and	proteins	called	oleosins.	The
surface	coating	prevents	the	oil	droplets	from
pooling	together.	Seed	oil	bodies	are	very
similar	in	size	and	structure	to	the	fat	globules
in	animal	milk.	This	is	why	when	we	eat	nuts,
they	become	creamy	in	the	mouth	rather	than
simply	greasy.	It’s	also	one	reason	why	for	a



thousand	years	cooks	have	made	“milks”	from
almonds,	soybeans,	and	other	oil-rich	seeds
(pp.	494,	504).

Seed	Flavors

The	most	important	contributors	to	the	flavors
of	grains,	legumes,	and	nuts	are	fragments	of
the	unsaturated	fatty	acids	in	the	oils	and	cell
membranes,	which	have	individual	aromas
described	as	green,	fatty,	oily,	floral,	and
mushroomy.	The	outer	bran	layer	grains
contains	the	bulk	of	the	seed’s	oils	and
enzymes,	and	so	gives	whole	grains	a	stronger
flavor,	as	well	as	contributing	some	vanilla
and	toasted	notes	from	its	phenolic
compounds.	Beans	are	especially	rich	in	green
and	mushroom	notes.	Nuts,	which	are	usually
cooked	with	dry	heat,	contain	products	of	the
browning	reactions	with	typical	roasted
aromas.	The	flavors	of	particular	seeds	are
described	below.



Handling	and
Preparing	Seeds

Preparations	of	particular	seeds	are	described
in	more	detailed	surveys	below.	Here	are
some	common	aspects	of	using	seeds	in	the
kitchen.

Storing	Seeds

Because	most	of	the	seeds	we	eat	are	designed
to	survive	a	dormant,	dry	period,	they	are	the
easiest	food	ingredients	to	store.	Whole	seeds
keep	well	for	months	in	a	dry,	cool,	dark
place.	Moisture	encourages	the	growth	of
spoilage	microbes,	and	physical	damage,	heat
and	light	can	accelerate	the	oxidation	of	seed
oils	that	leads	to	stale,	rancid	aromas	and
bitter	tastes.

The	pest	that	sometimes	infests	grains,
beans,	nuts,	and	flours	is	the	Indian	meal
moth	(Plodia	interpunctella).	It	originally



came	from	ears	of	grain	in	the	field	but	is	now
a	common	inhabitant	of	our	pantries,	where
its	eggs	hatch	into	larvae	that	consume	the
seeds	and	generate	unpleasant	smells.	There’s
nothing	to	do	with	a	contaminated	batch	but
discard	it.	Keeping	seeds	in	separate	glass	or
plastic	jars	will	prevent	one	batch	from
contaminating	another.

Sprouts

The	sprouted	seed	is	a	culinary	custom	of
ancient	lineage	in	Asia,	but	a	very	recent
arrival	in	the	West.	Thanks	to	the	sprout,
anyone,	anytime	—	even	an	apartment-
dweller	in	Anchorage	in	February	—	can	raise
a	good	approximation	to	fresh	vegetables	with
very	little	effort.	Sprouting	often	improves	a
seed’s	vitamin	content	and	digestibility.	And
with	their	nutty	flavor	and	crisp	texture,
sprouts	are	simply	a	nice	change	from	the
usual	vegetables.



Beans	are	most	commonly	sprouted,	but
many	of	our	food	seeds	can	be	sprouted	to
advantage.	Sprouted	wheat	and	barley,	for
example,	develop	a	sweetness	as	their
enzymes	begin	to	break	down	stored	starch
into	sugars	for	the	embryonic	plant.	Sprouts
have	a	nutritional	value	midway	between	that
of	the	dry	seed,	which	they	just	were,	and	a
leafy	green	vegetable,	which	they’re	on	the
way	to	becoming.	Sprouts	are	higher	in
vitamin	C	and	lower	in	calories	than	most
seeds,	and	higher	than	most	vegetables	in
protein	(5%	versus	about	2%)	and	in	the	B
vitamins	and	iron.

Cooking	Seeds

Seeds	are	the	driest	and	hardest	ingredients
that	cooks	deal	with.	Most	require	both
moisture	and	heat	to	make	them	edible.	Most,
but	not	all:	the	nuts	are	generally	edible	and
nutritious	fresh	out	of	the	shell	or	after	a	brief



application	of	dry	heat,	thanks	to	their
relatively	tender	cell	walls	and	the	cells’
content	of	liquid	oil	rather	than	solid	starch.
But	dry	grains	and	legumes	are	hard	and
starchy.	Hot	water	softens	them	by	dissolving
the	strengthening	carbohydrates	from	their
cell	walls,	and	moving	into	the	cells	to	gelate
the	starch	granules	and	either	dissolve	or
moisten	the	storage	proteins.	This	makes	the
seed	more	nutritious	by	exposing	its	nutrients
to	our	digestive	enzymes.

There	are	a	few	simple	facts	to	remember
about	cooking	grains	and	legumes	in	water.

The	outer	bran	layer	or	seed	coat	is
designed	to	control	the	passage	of	soil
moisture	into	the	embryo	and	storage
tissues	during	germination.	It	also	slows
the	passage	of	cooking	water.	Seeds	that
have	been	milled	free	of	their	coats	or
into	small	pieces	cook	much	faster	than
whole	seeds.
Heat	penetrates	seeds	faster	than	water



can,	so	much	of	the	cooking	time	is
moistening	time.	Presoaking	seeds	for	a
few	hours	or	overnight	can	cut	cooking
times	by	half	or	more.
Most	seeds	get	quite	soft	when	they’ve
absorbed	enough	liquid	to	be	about	60–
70%	water	by	weight.	That	quantity	of
water	is	the	equivalent	of	about	1.7	times
the	dry	weight	of	the	seeds,	or	about	1.4
times	their	volume.	Recipes	generally
call	for	much	more	water	than	this	to
allow	for	water	lost	to	evaporation	during
cooking.
The	texture	of	fully	cooked	seeds	is	soft
and	fragile	at	cooking	temperatures,	but
firms	during	cooling.	If	an	intact
appearance	is	important,	it’s	good	to	let
grains	and	legumes	cool	down	before
handling	them.

Turning	Seeds	into	Meat	Substitutes
Vegetarian	cooks,	particularly	Buddhists	in



China	 and	 Japan,	 have	 long	 used	 grains,
beans,	 and	 nuts	 to	 make	 foods	 with	 the
chewy	 texture	 and	 savory	 flavor	 of	 meat.
Protein	 extracts	 from	 wheat	 (gluten	 or
seitan,	p.	468)	and	soybean	(yuba,	 p.	 494)
can	 be	 manipulated	 to	 simulate	 meat-
protein	 fibers,	 and	 fermented	 to	 produce
savory,	 meaty	 flavors.	 In	 seed	 mixtures,
whole	grains	lend	chewiness,	beans	a	softer
background	 and	 some	 sweetness	 and
complexity	 of	 flavor,	 and	 nuts	 both
richness	and	roastiness.
Of	course	the	most	important	grain	and

legume	foods	are	made	from	finely	ground
flours	or	extracts.	Mix	water	with	ground
grains	or	with	starch	extracted	from	beans	and
the	result	is	a	dough	or	batter,	which	heat	can
turn	into	noodles	or	flat	breads	or	cakes.
Aerate	doughs	or	batters	with	the	help	of
yeasts	or	bacteria	or	chemical	leaveners,	and
the	result	is	raised	breads	and	cakes.	Doughs
and	batters	are	special	materials	in	their	own



right,	and	are	described	in	detail	in	the	next
chapter.

Seeds	Concentrate	Cooking	Liquids	Because
grains	 and	 beans	 are	 dry	 and	 soak	 up	 water,
they	 remove	 water	 from	 the	 liquid	 they’re
cooked	 in,	 and	 therefore	 effectively
concentrate	 other	 materials	 in	 the	 liquid.	 In
this	 way	 they	 create	 a	 sauce	 for	 themselves.
When	 rice	 or	 polenta	 is	 cooked	 in	 milk,	 for
example,	 the	 liquid	 between	 the	 grains
becomes	 richer	 in	 both	milk	 proteins	 and	 fat
globules,	 and	 so	 more	 like	 cream.	 When
grains	 are	 cooked	 in	 a	meat	 stock,	 the	 stock
become	more	 concentrated	 in	 gelatin,	 and	 so
comes	 to	 resemble	 a	 reduced	 stock	 or
demiglace.

The	Grains,	or	Cereals

Of	the	approximately	8,000	species	in	the
grass	family,	only	a	handful	play	a	significant



role	in	the	human	diet.	Aside	from	bamboo
and	sugar	cane,	these	are	the	cereals.	While
their	grains	are	very	similar	in	structure	and
composition,	the	differences	have	made	for
widely	divergent	culinary	histories.

The	major	Eurasian	cereals	—	wheat,
barley,	rye,	and	oats	—	originally	grew	wild
in	extensive	stands	on	the	temperate	high
plains	of	the	Near	East.	Groups	of	early
humans	could	harvest	enough	wheat	and
barley	from	these	wild	fields	in	a	few	weeks
to	sustain	themselves	for	a	year.	Some	12,000
to	14,000	years	ago,	the	first	agriculturalists
began	to	plant	and	tend	wheat	and	barley
seeds	selected	for	their	size	and	the	ease	with
which	they	could	be	harvested	and	used;	and
farmers	gradually	spread	these	crops
throughout	western	and	central	Asia,	Europe,
and	north	Africa.	Each	cereal	had	its
advantages.	Barley	was	especially	hardy,
while	rye	and	oats	were	able	to	adapt	to	wet,
cold	climates,	and	wheat	produced	a	uniquely



elastic	paste	that	could	be	filled	with	tiny
bubbles	and	baked	into	tender	raised	breads.
Around	the	same	time,	the	inhabitants	of
tropical	and	semitropical	Asia	domesticated
rice,	with	its	special	ability	to	grow	in	wet,
hot	growing	conditions.	Somewhat	later	in
warm	central	and	South	America	arose	maize,
or	corn,	whose	plants	and	kernels	dwarf	those
of	the	other	cereals.

Grain	Structure
and	Composition

The	edible	portion	of	the	cereal	plant,
commonly	called	the	grain	or	kernel,	is
technically	a	complete	fruit	whose	ovary-
derived	layer	is	very	thin	and	dry.	Three	of	the
cereals	—	barley,	oats,	and	rice	—	bear	fruits
that	are	covered	by	small,	tough,	leaf-like
structures	that	fuse	to	form	the	husk	or	hull.
Bread	and	durum	wheats,	rye,	and	maize	bear
naked	fruits	and	don’t	have	to	be	husked



before	milling.
All	the	grains	have	the	same	basic

structure.	The	fruit	tissue	consists	of	a	layer
of	epidermis	and	several	thin	inner	layers,
including	the	ovary	wall;	altogether,	it’s	only
a	few	cells	thick.	Just	underneath	the	seed
coat	is	the	aleurone	layer,	only	one	to	four
cells	thick	and	yet	containing	oil,	minerals,
protein,	vitamins,	enzymes,	and	flavor	out	of
proportion	to	its	size.	The	aleurone	layer	is
the	outer	layer	and	only	living	part	of	the
endosperm;	the	rest	is	a	mass	of	dead	cells
that	stores	most	of	the	carbohydrates	and
protein,	and	that	takes	up	most	of	the	grain’s
volume.	Abutting	onto	the	endosperm	from
one	side	is	the	scutellum,	a	single	modified
leaf	that	absorbs,	digests,	and	conducts	food
from	the	endosperm	to	the	embryo,	or	“germ,”
which	is	at	the	base	of	the	fruit,	and	which	is
also	well	endowed	with	oil,	enzymes,	and
flavor.

The	endosperm	(from	the	Greek:	“within



the	seed”)	is	often	the	only	part	of	the	grain
consumed.	It	consists	of	storage	cells	that
contain	starch	granules	embedded	in	a	matrix
of	protein.	This	matrix	is	made	up	of	normal
cell	proteins	and	membrane	materials,	and
sometimes	of	spherical	bodies	of	special
storage	proteins	which,	squeezed	together	as
the	starch	granules	grow,	lose	their	individual
identity	and	form	a	monolithic	mass.	There’s
generally	more	starch	and	less	protein	per	cell
near	the	center	of	the	grain	than	there	is	near
the	surface.	This	gradient	means	that	the	more
grains	are	refined	by	milling	and	polishing,
the	less	nutritious	they	get.

Milling	and	Refining

People	began	treating	the	grains	to	remove
their	tough	protective	layers	in	prehistoric
times.	Milling	breaks	the	grains	into	pieces,
and	refining	sifts	away	the	bran	and	germ.	The
very	different	mechanical	properties	of



endosperm,	germ,	and	bran	make	this
separation	possible:	the	first	is	easily
fragmented,	and	the	others	are	oily	and
leathery	respectively.	The	germ	and	the	bran
—	which	in	practice	include	the	aleurone
layer	just	underneath	it	—	together	account
for	most	of	the	fiber,	oil,	and	B	vitamins
contained	in	the	whole	grain,	as	well	as	some
25%	of	its	protein.	Yet	these	parts	of	the	grain
are	usually	removed	entirely	or	in	part	from
rice	and	barley	grains,	and	from	cornmeal	and
wheat	flours.	Why	this	waste?	Refined	grains
are	easier	to	cook	and	to	chew,	and	more
attractively	light	in	color.	And	in	the	case	of
flours,	the	high	lipid	concentrations	in	the
germ	and	aleurone	layer	shorten	the	shelf	life
of	whole-grain	flours	substantially.	The	oils
are	susceptible	to	oxidation	and	develop
rancid	flavors	(stale	aroma,	harsh	taste)	in	a
matter	of	weeks.	Today	most	refined	cereals
in	industrial	countries	are	fortified	with	B
vitamins	and	iron	in	order	to	compensate	for



the	nutrients	lost	with	the	bran.

Breakfast	Cereals

Apart	from	breads	and	pastries,	the	most
common	form	in	which	Americans	consume
grain	is	probably	the	breakfast	cereal.	There
are	two	basic	types	of	breakfast	cereals:	hot,
which	require	cooking,	and	ready-to-eat,
which	are	eaten	as	is,	often	with	some	cold
milk.

The	 anatomy	 of	 a	 wheat	 kernel.	 It’s	 a
miniature	but	complete	fruit,	with	a	dry	rather
than	 fleshy	 ovary	 wall.	 The	 large	 mass	 of
endosperm	 cells	 stores	 food	 to	 nourish	 the
early	growth	of	the	embryo	or	“germ.”
Hot	Cereals	Hot	cereals	have	been	eaten



since	the	dawn	of	civilization	in	the	form	of
gruels,	porridges,	and	congees.	Corn	grits,
oatmeal,	and	cream	of	wheat	are	modern
examples.	Cooking	the	whole	or	milled	cereal
in	excess	of	hot	water	softens	the	cell	walls,
gelates	the	starch	grains	and	leaches	starch
molecules	out,	and	produces	a	digestible,
bland	mush.	The	only	significant
improvement	brought	by	the	machine	age	has
been	a	reduction	in	cooking	time,	either	by
grinding	the	cereal	finely	enough	that	it’s
quickly	cooked,	or	by	partly	precooking	it.	it

Ready-to-Eat	 Cereals	 Ready-to-eat	 cereals
are	 the	more	common	breakfast	cereal	by	far
in	 the	 United	 States.	 Ironically,	 the	 industry
that	 has	 come	 under	 fire	 for	 giving	 children
little	 more	 than	 empty	 calories,	 a	 sort	 of
early-morning	 junk	 food,	 began	 as	 a	 “pure”
and	“scientific”	health	 food,	an	alternative	 to
the	 destructive	 diet	 of	 turn-of-the-century
America.	 Its	 story	 involves	 a	 uniquely



American	mix	 of	 eccentric	 health	 reformers,
fringe	religion,	and	commercial	canniness.

In	the	middle	third	of	the	19th	century,	a
vegetarian	craze	arose	in	opposition	to	the
diet	of	salt	beef	and	pork,	hominy,
condiments,	and	alkali-raised	white	bread	that
was	prevalent	at	the	time.	A	pure,	plain	diet
for	America	was	the	object,	and	the	issue	was
not	only	medical	but	moral.	As	Dr.	John
Harvey	Kellogg	put	it	somewhat	later	in	his
Plain	Facts	for	Old	and	Young,	“A	man	that
lives	on	pork,	fine-flour	bread,	rich	pies	and
cakes,	and	condiments,	drinks	tea	and	coffee,
and	uses	tobacco,	might	as	well	try	to	fly	as	to
be	chaste	in	thought.”	Kellogg	and	his	brother
Will	Keith	Kellogg,	C.	W.	Post,	and	others
invented	such	virtuous	preparations	as
shredded	wheat,	wheat	and	corn	flakes,	and
Grape	Nuts.	These	precooked	cereals	did	offer
a	light,	simple	alternative	to	the	substantial
breakfasts	of	the	day,	became	widely	popular,
and	quickly	generated	a	large,	inventive,	and



profitable	industry.	Today	there	are	several
major	varieties	of	ready-to-eat	cereals:

The	Composition	of	Grains
Grain	 composition	 varies	 a	 great	 deal;
these	 are	 rough	 figures,	 assuming	 a
moisture	 content	 of	 about	 10%.	 Unless
otherwise	noted,	the	grains	are	whole.

Grain Protein Carbohydrate Oil
Wheat 14 67 2
Barley 12 73 2
Barley,	pearled 10 78 1
Rye 15 70 3
Oats 17 66 7
Rice,	white 7 80 0.5
Rice,	brown 8 77 3
Rice,	wild 15 75 1
Corn	(maize) 10 68 5



Fonio 8 75 3
Millet 13 73 6
Sorghum 12 74 4
Teff 9 77 2
Triticale 13 72 2
Amaranth 18 57 8
Buckwheat 13 72 4
Quinoa 13 69 6

Muesli	is	a	simple	mixture	of	thinly
rolled	grains,	sugar,	dried	fruits,	and
nuts.
Flakes	are	made	from	whole	grains
(wheat)	or	grain	fragments	(corn)	that	are
flavored,	steam-cooked,	cooled,	rolled
into	thin	flakes,	and	toasted	in	a	drum
oven.
Granola,	a	term	coined	by	the	Kelloggs
100	years	ago,	is	now	rolled	oats	flavored
with	sweeteners	(honey,	malt,	sugar)	and



spices,	enriched	with	vegetable	oil,
toasted	and	mixed	with	nuts	and/or	dried
fruit.
Oven-puffed	rice	and	corn	are	made	by
cooking	rice	grains	or	corn	grits	with
water	and	flavorings,	partly	drying	and
lightly	rolling	them,	then	toasting	in	an
oven	that	may	reach	650ºF/340ºC,	when
the	remaining	moisture	evaporates
quickly	enough	to	expand	the	grain
structure.
Puffed	rice	and	wheat	are	made	from
whole	grains,	which	are	wetted	and
enclosed	in	a	pressure-cooker	“gun”	at	a
temperature	of	500–800ºF/260–	430ºC.
The	steam	pressure	reaches	14
atmospheres,	and	is	suddenly	released,
expelling	the	grains.	As	the	steam	within
the	grains	expands	from	the	pressure
drop,	it	expands	the	grain	structure,
which	then	sets	as	it	cools	down	into	a
light,	porous	mass.



Baked	cereals	follow	in	the	mold	of	the
19th	century	original,	C.	W.	Post’s	Grape
Nuts:	dough	of	some	sort	is	formed,
baked,	sometimes	granulated	and
rebaked.
Extruded	cereals,	usually	small	crunchy
shapes,	are	made	from	doughs	that	are
forced	at	high	pressure	through	small
openings,	much	as	dried	pastas	are	made.
The	pressure	and	friction	generate	high
temperatures	that	cook	the	dough	as	it’s
shaped,	and	the	pressure	drop	as	the
formed	dough	exits	the	extruder	can
cause	it	to	expand	as	well.

Grains	 are	 still	 the	 base	 for	 these	 cereals,
but	they	may	actually	be	outweighed	by	sugar
and	 other	 sweeteners.	 Sucrose	 is	 especially
favored	 for	 its	 ability	 to	 give	 a	 frosty	 or
glassy	 surface	 to	 the	 crisp	 grain	 flakes	 and
slow	 the	 penetration	 of	 milk	 and	 resulting
sogginess.



Wheat

Wheat	was	one	of	the	first	food	plants	to	be
cultivated	by	humans,	and	was	the	most
important	cereal	in	the	ancient	Mediterranean
civilizations.	After	a	long	hiatus	from	the
Middle	Ages	to	the	19th	century,	when	hardier
but	less	versatile	cereals	and	potatoes	were
the	principal	staple	foods,	it	regained	its
preeminence	in	much	of	Europe.	Wheat	was
brought	to	America	early	in	the	17th	century
and	had	reached	the	Great	Plains	by	1855.
Compared	to	other	temperate-zone	cereals,
wheat	is	a	demanding	crop.	It’s	susceptible	to
disease	in	warm,	humid	regions	and	does	best
in	a	cool	climate,	but	it	can’t	be	grown	as	far
north	as	rye	and	oats.

Food	Words:	Cereal,	Wheat,	Barley,	Rye,
Oat

Our	word	“cereal”	comes	from	the	Roman
goddess	 of	 the	 fields,	 Ceres,	 whose	 name



came	 in	 turn	 from	an	 Indo-European	 root,
ker,	 that	 meant	 “to	 grow”;	 the	 same	 root
also	 led	 to	 “create,”	 “increase,”	 and
“crescent.”	Bhares	 was	 the	 word	 for
“barley”	and	also	gave	us	“barn”;	wrughyo
meant	“rye.”	“Wheat”	came	from	the	same
root	 that	 gives	 us	 “white”	 (kweit),
apparently	 because	 its	 flour	 was	 light	 in
color;	and	“oat”	came	from	oid,	“to	swell.”

Ancient	 and	Modern	Wheats	 A	 handful	 of
different	 wheats	 have	 been	 grown	 from
prehistoric	 times	 to	 the	 present.	 Their
evolution	 is	 fascinating	 and	 still	 somewhat
mysterious,	and	 is	 summarized	 in	 the	box	on
p.	466.	The	simplest	wheat	and	one	of	the	first
to	 be	 cultivated	 was	einkorn,	 which	 had	 the
standard	 genetic	 endowment	 of	 most	 plants
and	 animals:	 namely	 two	 sets	 of
chromosomes	 (a	 “diploid”	 species).
Somewhat	 less	 than	 a	 million	 years	 ago,	 a
chance	 mating	 of	 a	 wild	 wheat	 with	 a	 wild



goatgrass	produced	a	wheat	species	with	four
sets	 of	 chromosomes,	 and	 this	 “tetraploid”
species	 gave	 us	 the	 two	 most	 important
wheats	 of	 the	 ancient	 Mediterranean	 world,
emmer	and	durum.	Then,	just	8,000	years	ago,
another	 unusual	 mating	 between	 a	 tetraploid
wheat	 species	 and	 a	 goatgrass	 gave	 an
offspring	with	 six	 sets	 of	 chromosomes:	 and
this	 offspring	 gave	 us	 our	 modern	bread
wheats.	The	extra	chromosomes	are	thought	to
contribute	 to	 the	 agricultural	 and	 culinary
diversity	 found	 in	 modern	 wheats,	 most
importantly	 the	 elasticity	 of	 the	 gluten
proteins.	 Today	 90%	 of	 the	 wheat	 grown	 in
the	world	 is	 hexaploid	 bread	wheat.	Most	 of
the	 remaining	 10%	 is	 durum	 wheat,	 whose
main	 purpose	 is	 making	 pasta	 (p.	 571).	 The
other	 wheats	 are	 still	 cultivated	 on	 a	 small
scale.

Durum	 Wheat	 Durum	 wheat,	T.	 turgidum
durum,	is	the	most	important	of	the	tetraploid



wheats.	It	arose	in	the	Near	East	and	spread	to
the	Mediterranean	before	Roman	times,	when
it	was	one	of	 two	major	wheats.	Emmer	was
better	 suited	 to	 humid	 climates	 and	 had	 a
starchy	 grain,	while	 durum	was	 better	 suited
to	semiarid	conditions	and	had	a	glassy	grain.
Both	were	used	 to	make	breads	 leavened	and
unleavened,	 bulgur,	 couscous,	 injera,	 and
other	preparations.	Southern	and	central	 Italy
is	 now	 the	 main	 producer	 in	 Europe;	 India,
Turkey,	 Morocco,	 Algeria,	 and	 the	 United
States	 and	 Canada	 are	 large	 producers
elsewhere.

World	Grain	Production
The	leading	figure	for	maize	is	misleading
because	 a	 large	 fraction	 of	 the	 maize
harvest	is	used	to	feed	animals	and	produce
industrial	 chemicals.	 Some	 wheat	 is	 also
used	for	animal	 feed,	while	nearly	all	 rice
is	eaten	directly	by	humans.



Grain Whole	Grain	Production,	2002
Millions	of	Metric	Tons

Maize 602
Rice 579
Wheat 568
Barley 132
Sorghum 55
Oats 28
Millets 26
Rye 21
Buckwheat 2
Source:	 Food	 and	 Agriculture
Organization,	United	Nations

Einkorn	 Wheat	 Einkorn	 wheat,	T.
monococcum,	 was	 rediscovered	 in	 the	 early
1970s	 in	 the	 Vaucluse	 region	 of	 France	 and
the	 southern	Alps,	where	 it	was	 being	 grown
to	make	a	 local	porridge.	It	was	probably	 the



first	 wheat	 to	 be	 cultivated,	 around	 10,000
years	 ago.	 It	 grows	 best	 in	 cool	 conditions,
tends	to	be	rich	in	yellow	carotenoid	pigments
and	 is	 high	 in	 protein.	 However,	 where	 the
proportions	 of	 elastic	 glutenin	 and	 flowing
gliadin	 (p.	521)	are	1	 to	1	 in	bread	wheat,	 in
einkorn	 they’re	1	 to	2.	The	 result	 is	a	 sticky,
fluid	gluten	that’s	unsuited	to	breadmaking.

Emmer	 Wheat	 or	 Farro	 Emmer	 wheat,	T.
turgidum	dicoccum,	 was	 probably	 the	 second
wheat	 to	 be	 cultivated.	 It	 grew	 in	 warmer
climates	 than	 einkorn,	 and	 became	 the	 most
important	cultivated	form	from	the	Near	East
through	 northern	 Africa	 and	 Europe	 until
early	 Roman	 times,	 when	 it	 was	 superseded
by	 durum	 and	 bread	 wheats.	 But	 pockets	 of
emmer	 cultivation	 survived	 in	 parts	 of
Europe,	 and	 emmer	 is	 now	 widely	 available
under	 its	 Italian	 name,	farro.	 In	 Tuscany
whole	farro	grains	go	with	beans	into	a	winter
soup;	the	pre-soaked	grains	are	also	made	into



a	risotto-like	dish	called	farrotto.

The	Wheat	Family
Relationships	 in	 the	 wheat	 family	 are
complicated	 and	 still	 the	 subject	 of
scholarly	 argument.	 Here	 is	 one	 plausible
version	 of	 the	 family	 tree.	 Those	 wheats
whose	 grains	 are	 enclosed	 in	 adhering
papery	husks	are	noted	as	“hulled”;	all	the
rest	 are	 hullless	 and	 are	 therefore	 much
easier	 to	 prepare	 for	 cooking	 or	 milling.
Wheats	 in	 common	 use	 today	 are
highlighted	in	bold	type.

Wild	einkorn Cultivated	einkorn
(diploid;	hulled; (diploid;	hulled;	T.

Triticum	monococcum monococcum
boeticum) monococcum)
A	wild	wheat,	Triticum	urartu	+	a
goatgrass,	Aegilops	speltoides



Triticum	turgidum	(tetraploid):
Emmer	(hulled;	T.	turgidum	dicoccum)

Durum	(T.	turgidum	durum)
Khorasan	(T.	turgidum	turanicum)
Polish	(T.	turgidum	polonicum)
Persian	(T.	turgidum	carthlicum)

Triticum	turgidum	+	a	goatgrass,	Aegilops
tauschii

Triticum	aestivum(hexaploid):
Common,	bread	wheat	(T.	aestivum

aestivum)
Spelt	(hulled;	T.	aestivum	spelta)
Club	(T.	aestivum	compactum)

Kamut	Kamut	is	 the	registered	trademark	for
an	 ancient	 relative	 of	 durum	 wheat,	 a
subspecies	 of	T.	 turgidum. 	 The	 modern
production	 and	 commercialization	 of	 kamut
(Egyptian	 for	 “wheat”)	 began	 after	 World
War	 II,	 when	 seeds	 said	 to	 have	 been



collected	 in	 Egypt	 were	 planted	 in	Montana.
It’s	 characterized	by	 a	 large	grain	 size	 and	 a
high	 protein	 content,	 though	 its	 gluten	 is
better	suited	to	pasta	than	to	raised	breads.

Spelt	Spelt,	T.	spelta	became	known	as	Dinkel
in	southern	Germany,	where	it	has	been	grown
since	 4000	BCE.	 It’s	 often	 confused	 with
emmer	(farro).	Spelt	is	remarkable	for	its	high
protein	 content,	 as	 much	 as	 17%.	 It’s	 still
used	 to	 make	 breads	 and	 soups.	 Central
Europeans	make	Grünkern,	or	“green	kernel,”
by	 gently	 drying	 or	 roasting	 the	 green	 grain
and	 milling	 it	 for	 use	 in	 soups	 and	 other
preparations.

Varieties	 of	 Bread	 and	 Pasta	 Wheats
Something	on	the	order	of	30,000	varieties	of
wheat	are	known,	and	they’re	classified	into	a
few	 different	 types	 according	 to	 planting
schedule	and	endosperm	composition.	They’re
mostly	 used	 to	 make	 breads,	 pastries,	 and
pastas,	and	are	described	in	the	next	chapter.



Wheat	Pigments	Most	wheat	varieties	have	a
reddish-brown	 bran	 layer	 that	 owes	 its	 color
to	 various	 phenolic	 compounds	 and	 to
browning	 enzymes	 (p.	 269)	 that	 assemble
them	 into	 large	 colored	 aggregates.	 Less
common	are	white	wheats,	whose	bran	layer	is
cream-colored	due	to	a	much	lower	content	of
phenolic	 compounds	 and	 browning	 enzymes.
White	wheats	have	a	less	astringent	taste	and
discolor	 less	 when	 some	 of	 the	 bran	 is
included	 in	 the	 flour;	 they’re	used	 to	 replace
ordinary	 wheats	 when	 an	 especially	 mild
flavor	or	light	color	is	desired.

The	color	of	durum	wheat,	its	coarse
semolina	flour,	and	dry	pasta	is	due	mainly	to
the	carotenoid	xanthophyll	lutein,	which	can
be	oxidized	to	a	colorless	form	by	enzymes	in
the	grain	and	oxygen.	This	maturation	has
traditionally	been	desired	in	wheats
(remember	that	the	name	comes	from	an
ancient	root	meaning	“white”),	but	is	not	in
durum.	Some	of	the	minor	wheats	are	also



rich	in	carotenoid	pigments.

Protein	Content	and	Quality	of	Different
Wheat	Varieties

Gluten	quality	determines	the	suitability	of
a	 given	 wheat	 for	 particular	 dishes.	 Both
bread	 and	 pasta	 benefit	 from	 a	 strong,
cohesive	 gluten.	 Elasticity	 improves	 the
gas-trapping	ability	and	 lightness	of	bread
doughs,	 but	 interferes	 with	 the	 rolling	 of
pasta	dough	into	thin	sheets.

Wheat Protein	Content,	% Gluten
Variety grain	weight Quality
Bread 10–15 Strong	and	elastic
Durum 15 Strong,	not	very	elastic
Einkorn 16 Weak,	sticky
Emmer
(farro) 17 Moderately	strong,	not	very

elastic
Spelt, Moderately	strong,	not	very

16



hard elastic
Spelt,	soft 15 Strong,	moderately	elastic

Wheat	Gluten

Gluten	 in	 Wheat	 Flour	 Doughs	 Wheat	 has
long	been	the	West’s	premier	grain	primarily
because	 its	 storage	 proteins	 have	 unique
chemical	 properties.	 When	 flour	 is	 mixed
with	 water,	 the	 gluten	 proteins	 bond	 to	 each
other	 and	 form	 an	 elastic	 mass	 that	 can
expand	to	accommodate	gas	bubbles	produced
by	yeast.	Without	wheat,	 then,	we	would	 not
have	 raised	 breads,	 cakes,	 and	 pasta	 as	 we
know	 them.	Gluten	quantity	 and	quality	 vary
significantly	 among	 different	 wheats,	 and
determine	 the	 uses	 to	 which	 a	 given	 type	 is
put.

Gluten	 as	 a	 Separate	 Ingredient	 Because
they’re	both	cohesive	and	 insoluble	 in	water,
the	 gluten	 proteins	 are	 easily	 separated	 from



the	 rest	 of	 the	 flour:	 you	 simply	 make	 a
dough,	then	knead	it	 in	water.	The	starch	and
water-soluble	 substances	 wash	 away,	 and
tough,	 chewy	 gluten	 remains.	 Gluten	 as	 a
unique	 food	 ingredient	 was	 discovered	 by
Chinese	 noodle	 makers	 around	 the	 6th
century,	 and	 by	 the	 11th	was	 known	 as	mien
chin,	or	 the	“muscle	of	 flour.”	 (The	Japanese
call	 it	seitan.)	 When	 cooked,	 concentrated
gluten	does	develop	a	chewy,	slippery	texture
like	 that	 of	meats	 from	 animal	muscle.	Mien
chin	 became	 a	 major	 ingredient	 in	 the
vegetarian	cooking	that	developed	in	Buddhist
monasteries;	there	are	recipes	dating	from	the
11th	century	 for	 imitation	venison	and	 jerky,
and	 for	 fermented	 gluten.	 Because	 gluten
contains	 a	 high	 proportion	 of	 glutamic	 acid,
fermentation	breaks	it	down	into	a	condiment
that	 was	 an	 early	 version	 of	 savory-tasting
MSG	 (p.	 342).	 One	 of	 the	 simplest	 ways	 to
prepare	 gluten	 is	 to	 pinch	 off	 small	 bits	 and
deep-fry	 them;	 they	puff	up	 into	 light	 chewy



balls	 that	 readily	 absorb	 the	 flavor	 from	 a
sauce.	 Today	 gluten	 is	 widely	 available	 and
used	to	make	a	variety	of	vegetarian	“meats.”

Notable	 Wheat	 Preparations	 Whole	 grains
of	 wheat,	 often	 called	 wheat	 berries,	 are
usually	 sold	with	 their	 bran	 fully	 intact,	 and
can	 take	 an	 hour	 or	 more	 to	 cook	 unless
presoaked.	Farro	is	now	available	with	part	of
its	 bran	 milled	 away	 —	 similar	 to	 partly
milled	 pigmented	 rice	 and	 wild	 rice	 —	 and
cooks	much	more	quickly,	while	retaining	the
stronger	flavor	and	integrity	of	separate	grains
provided	by	the	bran.

Wheat	germ	is	sometimes	added	to	baked
goods	or	other	foods;	it	is	a	good	source	of
protein	(20%	by	weight),	oil	(10%),	and	fiber
(13%).	Wheat	bran	is	mainly	fiber,	with	about
4%	oil.	Their	oil	content	makes	both	bran	and
germ	susceptible	to	developing	stale	flavors.
They’re	best	stored	in	the	refrigerator.

Bulgur	 Bulgur	 or	 burghul	 is	 an	 ancient



preparation	 of	 wheat	 —	 usually	 durum	 —
that’s	 still	 popular	 in	 North	 Africa	 and	 the
Middle	 East.	 It’s	 made	 by	 cooking	 whole
grains	 in	 water,	 drying	 them	 so	 that	 the
interior	 becomes	 glassy	 and	 hard,	 then
moistening	 them	 to	 toughen	 the	 outer	 bran
layer,	 and	 finally	 pounding	 or	 milling	 to
remove	 the	 bran	 and	 germ	 and	 leave	 the
endosperm	 in	 coarse	 chunks.	 It’s	 the	 wheat
version	of	 parboiled	 rice	 (p.	 473).	The	 result
is	 a	 nutritious	 form	 of	 wheat	 that	 keeps
indefinitely	 and	 cooks	 relatively	 quickly.
Coarse	 bulgur	 (to	 3.5	 mm	 across)	 is	 used
much	as	rice	or	couscous	is,	boiled	or	steamed
to	go	with	a	moist	dish	or	made	into	a	pilaf	or
a	salad,	while	fine	bulgur	(0.5–2	mm)	is	made
into	 falafel	 (deep-fried	 balls	 of	 bulgur	 and
fava-bean	 flour),	 and	 various	 pudding-like
sweets.

Green,	 or	 Immature	 Wheat	 Green	 wheat
grains	 have	 also	 been	 enjoyed	 for	 their



sweetness	 and	 unusual	 flavor.	 The	 stalks	 are
cut	while	the	grains	are	still	moist	inside,	the
grains	 charred	 over	 a	 small	 straw	 fire	 to
weaken	 the	 husks	 and	 add	 flavor,	 then	 eaten
fresh	or	dried	for	keeping	(Turkish	firig,	Arab
frikke).

Barley

Barley,	Hordeum	vulgare,	may	have	been	the
first	cereal	to	be	domesticated	in	the
grasslands	of	southwest	Asia,	where	it	grew
alongside	wheat.	It	has	the	advantage	of	a
relatively	short	growing	season	and	a	hardy
nature;	it’s	grown	from	the	Arctic	Circle	to
the	tropical	plains	of	northern	India.	It	was	the
primary	cereal	in	ancient	Babylon,	Sumeria,
Egypt,	and	the	Mediterranean	world,	and	was
grown	in	the	Indus	valley	civilization	of
western	India	long	before	rice.	According	to
Pliny,	barley	was	the	special	food	of	the
gladiators,	who	were	called	hordearii,	or



“barley	eaters”;	barley	porridge,	the	original
polenta,	was	made	with	roasted	flaxseed	and
coriander.	In	the	Middle	Ages,	and	especially
in	northern	Europe,	barley	and	rye	were	the
staple	foods	of	the	peasantry,	while	wheat	was
reserved	for	the	upper	classes.	In	the	medieval
Arab	world,	barley	dough	was	fermented	for
months	to	produce	a	salty	condiment,	murri,
that	food	historian	Charles	Perry	has
discovered	tastes	much	like	soy	sauce.

Today,	barley	is	a	minor	food	in	the	West;
half	of	production	is	fed	to	animals,	and	a
third	is	used	in	the	form	of	malt.	Elsewhere,
barley	is	made	into	various	staple	dishes,
including	the	Tibetan	roasted	barley	flour
tsampa,	often	eaten	simply	moistened	with
tea;	it’s	an	important	ingredient	in	the
Japanese	fermented	soy	paste	miso;	and	in
Morocco	(the	largest	per	capita	consumer)
and	other	countries	of	north	Africa	and
western	Asia	it’s	used	in	soups,	porridges,	and
flat	breads.	In	Ethiopia	there	are	white,	black,



and	purple-grained	barleys,	some	of	which	are
made	into	drinks.	Water	simmered	with	raw
or	roasted	barley	has	been	enjoyed	for	two
thousand	years	or	more,	from	western	Europe
to	Japan.

The	barley	grain	is	notable	for	containing
significant	quantities	—	about	5%	each	of	the
grain	weight	—	of	two	carbohydrates	other
than	starch:	the	pentosans	that	give	rye	flours
their	stickiness,	and	the	glucans	that	give	oats
their	gelatinous	and	cholesterol-lowering
qualities	(pp.	470,	471).	Both	are	found	in	the
walls	of	endosperm	cells	as	well	as	in	the
bran,	and	together	with	barley’s	water-
insoluble	proteins	they	contribute	to	the
distinctively	springy	texture	of	the	cooked
grain.	They	also	cause	barley	flour	to	absorb
twice	the	water	that	wheat	flour	does.

Pearled	 Barley	 There	 are	 hull-less	 barleys,
but	 most	 food	 varieties	 have	 adherent	 hulls
that	 are	 removed	 as	 part	 of	 the	 milling



process.	Barley	has	more	of	its	grain	removed
than	 does	 rice,	 the	 other	 grain	 frequently
prepared	 as	 a	 whole	 grain.	 This	 is	 partly
because	 barley	 bran	 is	 brittle	 and	 doesn’t
come	 off	 in	 large	 flakes,	 so	 it	 can’t	 be
removed	 during	 normal	 milling;	 and	 partly
because	 processors	 eliminate	 the	 deep	 crease
in	 the	barley	grain	 to	give	 it	 a	more	uniform
appearance.	 The	 process	 of	 “pearling”	 in	 a
stone	mill	removes	the	hull	and	then	portions
of	 the	 bran.	 “Pot	 barley”	 has	 lost	 7–15%	 of
the	grain,	but	retains	the	germ	and	some	of	the
bran,	 and	 so	more	 nutrients	 and	 flavor.	 Fine
pearled	 barley	 has	 lost	 the	 bran,	 germ,	 and
aleurone	 and	 subaleurone	 layers,	 a	 loss	 of
about	33%	of	the	grain’s	initial	weight.

Food	Words:	From	Barley	Water	to
Orgeat,	Horchata,	Tisane

The	 European	 habit	 of	 drinking	 barley
water	 has	mostly	 faded	 away,	 but	 it	 lives
on	in	the	names	of	several	other	beverages



or	beverage	flavorings.	The	Latin	word	for
barley,	hordeum,	 became	 the	 French	orge;
orge	 mondé,	 meaning	 hulled	 barley,
became	orgemonde	and	in	the	16th	century
orgeat.	Orgeat	is	still	around,	but	it’s	now
an	 almond-flavored	 syrup.	Orgeat	 also
became	 the	Spanish	word	horchata,	which
gradually	evolved	from	a	barley	drink	to	a
drink	made	with	either	rice	or	the	chufa	or
tiger	 “nut”	 (p.	 308).	 And	tisane,	 the
modern	 French	 term	 for	 an	 infusion	 of
herbs	or	 flowers?	 It	comes	 from	 the	Latin
ptisana,	which	meant	both	crushed	cleaned
barley	or	the	drink	made	therefrom,	which
was	sometimes	flavored	with	herbs.

Barley	 Malt	 The	 most	 important	 form	 in
which	 we	 consume	 barley	 is	malt,	 a	 major
ingredient	in	beers	and	some	distilled	liquors,
and	a	minor	ingredient	in	many	baked	goods.
Malt	 is	 a	 powder	 or	 syrup	made	 from	barley
grains	 that	 are	 moistened	 and	 allowed	 to



germinate,	and	that	become	sweet	with	sugars.
Its	 production	 and	 qualities	 are	 described
below	(pp.	679,	743).

Rye

Rye	apparently	arose	in	southwest	Asia,
migrated	with	domesticated	wheat	and	barley
as	a	weed	in	the	crops	of	early	farmers,
reached	the	coast	of	the	Baltic	Sea	around
2000	BCE,	grew	better	than	the	other	cereals	in
the	typically	poor,	acid	soil	and	cool,	moist
climate,	and	was	domesticated	around	1000
BCE.	It’s	exceptionally	hardy,	and	is	grown	as
far	north	as	the	Arctic	Circle	and	as	high	as
12,000	feet/4,000	meters.	Up	through	the	last
century	it	was	the	predominant	bread	grain	for
the	poor	of	northern	Europe,	and	even	today
the	taste	for	rye	persists,	especially	in
Scandinavia	and	eastern	Europe.	Poland,
Germany,	and	Russia	are	the	leading
producers.	In	Germany,	wheat	production



exceeded	rye	for	the	first	time	only	in	1957.
Rye	has	unusual	carbohydrates	and

proteins,	and	as	a	result	produces	a	distinctive
kind	of	bread.	It’s	described	in	the	next
chapter	(p.	545).

Rye	 Carbohydrates	 Rye	 contains	 a	 large
quantity,	 up	 to	 7%	 of	 its	 weight,	 of
carbohydrates	 called	pentosans	 (an	 old	 term;
the	 new	 one	 is	arabinoxylans).	 These	 are
medium-sized	 aggregates	 of	 sugars	 that	 have
the	 very	 useful	 property	 of	 absorbing	 large
amounts	 of	 water	 and	 producing	 a	 thick,
viscous,	 sticky	 consistency.	 Thanks	 to	 its
pentosans,	 rye	 flour	 absorbs	 eight	 times	 its
weight	 in	 water,	 while	 wheat	 flour	 absorbs
two.	 Unlike	 starch,	 the	 pentosans	 don’t
retrograde	and	harden	after	being	cooked	and
cooled.	 So	 they	 provide	 a	 soft,	moist	 texture
that	 helps	 gives	 rye	 breads	 a	 shelf	 life	 of
weeks.	 Rye	 pentosans	 also	 help	 control
appetite;	the	dried	carbohydrates	in	rye	crisps



swell	in	the	stomach,	thus	giving	the	sensation
of	 fullness,	 and	 they	 are	 slowly	 and	 only
partly	digested.

Rye	and	LSD
In	 addition	 to	 its	 role	 as	 a	 food,	 rye	 has
also	 had	 an	 indirect	 influence	 on	 modern
medicine	 and	 recreational	 pharmacology.
The	cool,	moist	climate	 in	which	rye	does
well	is	also	favorable	for	the	growth	of	the
ergot	 fungus	 (Claviceps	 purpurea).	 From
the	 11th	 to	 the	 16th	 centuries,	 ergot
contamination	of	rye	flour	was	responsible
for	 frequent	epidemics	of	what	was	called
Holy	 Fire	 or	 Saint	 Anthony’s	 Fire,	 a
disease	 with	 two	 sets	 of	 symptoms:
progressive	gangrene,	in	which	extremities
turned	black,	shrank,	and	dropped	off;	and
mental	derangement.	Occasional	outbreaks
of	ergot	poisoning	from	contaminated	flour
continued	well	into	the	20th	century.

Early	 in	 the	 20th	 century,	 chemists



isolated	 from	 ergot	 a	 handful	 of	 alkaloids
with	very	different	 effects:	 one	 stimulates
the	 uterine	 muscle;	 some	 are
hallucinogens;	 and	 some	 constrict	 the
blood	 vessels,	 an	 action	 that	 can	 cause
gangrene,	but	 that	also	has	useful	medical
applications.	 All	 these	 alkaloids	 have	 a
basic	 component	 in	 common	 called
lysergic	 acid.	 In	 1943	 the	 Swiss	 scientist
Albert	 Hofman	 discovered	 the	 particular
variant	 that	 would	 come	 to	 such
prominence	in	the	1960s:	the	hallucinogen
lysergic	acid	diethylamide,	or	LSD.

Oats

The	world	produces	more	oats	than	rye	today,
but	95%	of	the	crop	is	fed	to	animals.	Oats	are
the	grains	of	Avena	sativa,	a	grass	that
probably	originated	in	south-west	Asia	and
gradually	came	under	cultivation	as	a
companion	of	wheat	and	barley.	In	Greek	and



Roman	times	it	was	considered	a	weed	or	a
diseased	form	of	wheat.	By	1600	it	had
become	an	important	crop	in	northern	Europe,
in	whose	wet	climate	it	does	best;	oats	require
more	moisture	than	any	other	cereal	but	rice.
Other	countries,	however,	continued	to
disdain	it.	Samuel	Johnson’s	Dictionary
(London,	1755)	gives	this	definition	for	oats:
“A	grain,	which	in	England	is	generally	given
to	horses,	but	in	Scotland	supports	the
people.”

Today	the	United	Kingdom	and	the	United
States	are	the	largest	consumers	of	food	oats.
U.S.	consumption	was	boosted	in	the	late	19th
century	by	Ferdinand	Schumacher,	a	German
immigrant	who	developed	quick-cooking
rolled	oats	for	breakfast,	and	Henry	Crowell,
who	was	the	first	to	turn	a	cereal	from	a
commodity	into	a	retail	brand	by	packaging
oats	neatly	with	cooking	instructions,	labeling
it	“Pure,”	and	naming	it	“Quaker	Oats.”	Oats
are	now	a	mainstay	in	ready-to-eat	granolas,



mueslis,	and	manufactured	breakfast	cereals.
There	are	several	reasons	for	the	relatively

minor	status	of	oats.	Like	barley,	oats	have	no
gluten-producing	proteins,	which	means	that
they	can’t	be	made	into	light	raised	breads.
The	kernel	has	adherent	husks	that	make	it
difficult	to	process.	Oats	contain	from	two	to
five	times	the	fat	that	wheat	does,	mainly	in
the	bran	and	endosperm	rather	than	the	germ,
and	also	carry	large	amounts	of	a	fat-digesting
enzyme.	The	combination	means	that	oats
have	a	tendency	to	become	rancid.	They
require	a	heat	treatment	that	inactivates	the
enzyme	in	order	to	prevent	rapid	deterioration
during	storage.

On	the	other	hand,	oats	do	have	several
virtues.	They’re	rich	in	indigestible
carbohydrates	called	beta-glucans,	which
absorb	and	hold	water,	give	hot	oatmeal	its
smooth,	thick	consistency,	have	a	tenderizing,
moistening	effect	in	baked	goods,	and	help
lower	our	blood	cholesterol	levels.	The



glucans	are	found	mainly	in	the	outer	layers
of	the	endosperm	under	the	aleurone	layer,
and	so	are	especially	concentrated	in	oat	bran.
Oats	also	contain	a	number	of	phenolic
compounds	that	have	antioxidant	activity.

Oat	 Processing	 Oats	 are	 generally	 used	 as
whole	 grains,	 also	 called	 groats,	 because
they’re	 much	 softer	 than	 wheat	 or	 corn	 and
don’t	break	cleanly	into	endosperm,	germ,	and
bran.	 The	 first	 stage	 in	 their	 processing	 is	 a
low-temperature	 “roasting,”	 which	 gives	 the
grain	 much	 of	 its	 characteristic	 flavor	 and
inactivates	the	fat-splitting	enzyme.	(This	step
also	denatures	the	storage	proteins	and	makes
them	 less	 soluble,	 giving	 the	 grain	 greater
integrity	 during	 cooking.)	 The	 whole	 groats
are	 then	processed	 into	various	shapes,	all	of
which	have	 the	same	nutritional	value.	Steel-
cut	oats	are	simply	whole	groats	cut	 into	two
to	 four	pieces	 for	 faster	 cooking.	Rolled	oats
are	 whole	 kernels	 that	 are	 steamed	 to	 make



them	soft	and	malleable,	then	pressed	between
rollers	 to	 make	 them	 thin	 and	 quick	 to
reabsorb	 water	 during	 cooking	 or	 simple
soaking	 (as	 for	muesli).	 The	 thinner	 the	 oats
are	 rolled,	 the	 faster	 they	 rehydrate:	 regular
oats	are	about	0.8	mm	thick,	“quick-cooking”
oats	 are	 around	 0.4	 mm,	 and	 “instant”	 even
thinner.

Rice

Rice	is	the	principal	food	for	about	half	of	the
world’s	population,	and	in	such	countries	as
Bangladesh	and	Cambodia	provides	nearly
three-quarters	of	the	daily	energy	intake.
Oryza	sativa	is	a	native	of	the	tropical	and
semitropical	Indian	subcontinent,	northern
Indochina,	and	southern	China,	and	was
probably	domesticated	in	several	places
independently,	the	short-grain	types	around
7000	BCE	in	the	Yangtze	River	valley	of
south-central	China,	and	long-grain	types	in



Southeast	Asia	somewhat	later.	A	sister
species	with	a	distinctive	flavor	and	red	bran,
Oryza	glaberrima,	has	been	grown	in	west
Africa	for	at	least	1,500	years.

Rice	found	its	way	from	Asia	to	Europe	via
Persia,	where	the	Arabs	learned	to	grow	and
cook	it.	The	Moors	first	grew	large	quantities
in	Spain	in	the	8th	century,	then	somewhat
later	in	Sicily.	The	valley	of	the	Po	River	and
the	Lombardy	plain	in	northern	Italy,	the
home	of	risotto,	first	produced	rice	in	the	15th
century.	The	Spanish	and	Portuguese
introduced	rice	throughout	the	Americas	in
the	16th	and	17th	centuries.	South	Carolina
was	the	location	of	the	first	commercial
American	planting	in	1685,	where	the	rice-
growing	expertise	of	African	slaves	was
important;	today	most	U.S.	rice	comes	from
Arkansas	and	the	lower	Mississippi	region,
Texas,	and	California.

Kinds	of	Rice	 There	 are	 thought	 to	 be	more



than	 100,000	 distinct	 varieties	 of	 rice
throughout	the	world.	They	all	fall	into	one	of
two	 traditionally	 recognized	 subspecies	 of
Oryza	sativa.	Indica	rices	are	generally	grown
in	lowland	tropics	and	subtropics,	accumulate
a	large	amount	of	amylose	starch,	and	produce
a	long,	firm	grain.	Japonica	rices,	with	upland
varieties	 that	 do	 well	 both	 in	 the	 tropics
(Indonesian	 and	 Filipino	 types	 sometimes
known	 as	javanicas)	 and	 in	 temperate
climates	(Japan,	Korea,	Italy,	and	California),
accumulate	 substantially	 less	 amylose	 starch
than	 the	indicas,	 and	 produce	 a	 shorter,
stickier	grain.	There	are	also	varieties	that	are
intermediate	 between	indica	 and	japonica.
Generally,	the	higher	the	amylose	content	in	a
rice	variety,	the	more	organized	and	stable	the
starch	 granules,	 and	 so	 the	more	water,	 heat,
and	time	it	takes	to	cook	the	grains.

Most	rice	is	milled	to	remove	the	bran	and
most	of	the	germ,	and	then	“polished”	with
fine	wire	brushes	to	grind	away	the	aleurone



layer	and	its	oil	and	enzymes.	The	result	is	a
very	stable	refined	grain	that	keeps	well	for
months.

Common	categories	of	rice	include	the
following:

Long-grain	rice	has	an	elongated	shape,
its	length	four	to	five	times	its	width.
Thanks	to	its	relatively	high	proportion
of	amylose	(22%),	it	tends	to	require	the
largest	proportion	of	water	to	rice	(1.7	to
1	by	weight,	1.4	to	1	by	volume),	and	to
produce	separate	springy	grains	that
become	firm	as	they	cool,	and	distinctly
hard	if	chilled.	Most	Chinese	and	Indian
rices	are	long-grain	indicas,	as	is	most	of
the	rice	sold	in	the	United	States.
Medium-grain	rice	is	two	to	three	times
longer	than	it	is	wide,	contains	less
amylose	(15–17%)	than	long-grain	rice
and	requires	less	water,	and	develops
tender	grains	that	cling	to	each	other.
Italian	risotto	rices	and	Spanish	paella



rices	are	medium-grain	japonicas.
Short-grain	rice	is	only	slightly	longer
than	it	is	wide,	and	otherwise	similar	to
medium-grain	rice.	Short-and	medium-
grain	japonicas	are	the	preferred	types	in
north	China,	Japan,	and	Korea.	They’re
ideal	for	sushi	because	they	cling
together	in	small	masses	and	remain
tender	even	when	served	at	room
temperature.
Sticky	rice,	also	called	waxy,	glutinous,
or	sweet	rice,	is	a	short-grain	type	whose
starch	is	practically	all	amylopectin.	It
requires	the	least	water	(1	to	1	by	weight,
0.8	to	1	by	volume)	and	becomes	very
clingy	and	readily	disintegrates	when
cooked	(it’s	often	soaked	and	then
steamed,	not	boiled).	Despite	its	names,
it	contains	no	gluten	and	isn’t	sweet,
though	it’s	often	used	to	make	sweet
dishes	in	Asia.	It’s	the	standard	rice	in
Laos	and	northern	Thailand.



Aromatic	rices	are	a	distinctive	group	of
mainly	long-and	medium-grain	varieties
that	accumulate	unusually	high
concentrations	of	volatile	compounds.
Indian	and	Pakistani	basmati	(Urdu	for
“fragrant,”	accent	on	the	first	syllable),
Thai	jasmine	(an	unusual	long-grain	but
low-amylose	type),	and	U.S.	Della	are
well-known	aromatic	rices.
Pigmented	rices	have	bran	layers	that	are
rich	in	anthocyanin	pigments.	Red	and
purple-black	colors	are	the	most
common.	The	bran	may	be	left	intact,	or
partly	milled	away	so	that	only	traces	of
color	are	left.

Brown	Rice	Brown	rice	 is	unmilled,	 its	bran,
germ,	and	aleurone	layers	intact.	Any	kind	of
rice,	 whether	 long-grain,	 short-grain,	 or
aromatic,	 may	 be	 sold	 in	 its	 brown	 form.	 It
takes	 two	 to	 three	 times	 longer	 to	 cook	 than
the	 milled	 version	 of	 the	 same	 variety,	 and



has	 a	 chewy	 texture	 and	 a	 rich	 aroma,	 often
described	 as	 nutty.	 Thanks	 to	 the	 oil	 in	 its
bran	and	germ,	it’s	more	susceptible	to	staling
than	 polished	 rice,	 and	 is	 best	 stored	 in	 the
refrigerator.

Parboiled	 or	 Converted	 Rice	 For	 more	 than
2,000	 years,	 rice	 producers	 in	 India	 and
Pakistan	have	parboiled	nonaromatic	varieties
before	they	remove	the	hull	and	mill	 them	to
white	 rice.	 They	 steep	 the	 freshly	 harvested
grain	in	water,	boil	or	steam	it,	and	then	dry	it
again	 before	 hulling	 and	 milling.	 This
precooking	 brings	 several	 advantages.	 It
improves	the	nutritional	quality	of	the	milled
grain	 by	 causing	 vitamins	 in	 the	 bran	 and
germ	 to	 diffuse	 into	 the	 endosperm,	 and
causing	 the	 aleurone	 layer	 to	 adhere	 to	 the
grain.	Precooking	 the	 starch	 also	hardens	 the
grain	 and	 makes	 its	 surface	 less	 sticky,	 so
when	 cooked	 again,	 parboiled	 rice	 produces
separate	firm	intact	grains.	Parboiled	rice	also



has	 a	 distinctive	 nutty	 flavor;	 the	 soaking
activates	 enzymes	 that	 generate	 sugars	 and
amino	acids	that	then	participate	in	browning
reactions	 during	 drying;	 and	 partial
breakdown	 of	 lignin	 in	 the	 attached	 hull
provides	 vanillin	 and	 related	 compounds.
Parboiled	 rice	 takes	 longer	 to	 cook	 than
ordinary	white	 rice,	 a	 third	 to	 half	 again	 the
time,	and	its	texture	is	so	firm	that	it	can	seem
coarse.

Different	 forms	 of	 rice.	 Brown	 rice	 includes
the	outer	fruit	and	seed	coats	that	make	up	the
bran,	and	the	embryo	and	oil-and	enzyme-rich
aleurone	 layer.	 Polished	 rice	 is	 the	 central
mass	of	endosperm	cells,	 freed	from	all	other
parts	 of	 the	 grain;	 it’s	 mainly	 starch	 and
protein.	 Wild	 rice	 is	 the	 whole	 grain	 of	 a



North	 American	 grass;	 it	 is	 heated	 to	 dry	 it
out	 and	 develop	 flavor,	 and	 this	 processing
gives	 its	 endosperm	 a	 distinctive	 glassy
appearance.

Quick-Cooking	 Rice	 Quick-cooking	 rice	 is
manufactured	 by	 cooking	 white,	 brown,	 or
parboiled	 rice,	 thus	 disrupting	 its	 cell	 walls
and	gelating	its	starch,	then	fissuring	the	grain
in	order	 to	speed	 the	 infiltration	of	hot	water
when	 the	 consumer	 cooks	 it,	 and	 finally
drying	it.	The	fissuring	may	be	accomplished
with	dry	heat,	 rolling,	microwave	 treatments,
or	freeze-drying.

Rice	Flavor	The	flavor	of	rice	depends	on	the
variety	 and	 the	 degree	 to	which	 it	 is	milled.
The	 outer	 portions	 of	 the	 rice	 grain	 contain
more	 free	 amino	 acids,	 sugars,	 and	minerals,
and	proportionally	less	starch.	The	more	a	rice
kernel	is	milled,	and	so	the	more	of	its	surface
is	 removed,	 the	 less	 flavor	 and	 the	 higher
proportion	of	starch	it	contains.



The	aroma	of	standard	white	rices	has
green,	mushroomy,	cucumber-like,	and
“fatty”	components	(from	6,	8,	9,	and	10-
carbon	aldehydes),	as	well	as	a	slight	popcorn
note	and	floral,	corn-like,	hay-like,	and
animal	qualities.	Brown	rices	contain	these
and	also	small	amounts	of	vanillin	and	maple-
sugar-like	sotolon.	Aromatic	rices	are
especially	rich	in	the	popcorn-like	aromatic
component	(acetylpyrroline),	which	is	also	an
important	element	in	screwpine	leaves	(p.
411),	and	cooked	popcorn	and	bread	crust.
Because	it	is	volatile	and	not	regenerated
during	cooking,	the	popcorn	aromatic	escapes
during	cooking,	and	its	concentration
declines.	This	is	one	reason	for	pre-soaking
aromatic	rices;	this	step	shortens	the	cooking
and	minimizes	aroma	loss.

Cooking	with	Rice

Many	 Traditional	 Methods	 The	 cooking	 of
rice	 is	 a	 matter	 of	 introducing	 moisture



throughout	 the	 grains	 and	 heating	 them
enough	 to	 gelate	 and	 soften	 the	 starch
granules.	 Indian	 cooks	 boil	 the	 rice	 in	 an
excess	 of	 water	 that’s	 poured	 off	 when	 the
rice	 is	 done,	 so	 the	 grains	 end	 up	 intact	 and
separate.	Chinese	and	Japanese	cooks	boil	rice
with	just	enough	water	to	moisten	and	cook	it
through	 in	 a	 closed	 pot,	 which	 produces	 a
mass	 of	 grains	 that	 cling	 together	 and	 are
easily	 eaten	with	 chopsticks.	Where	 rice	 has
always	been	an	everyday	staff	of	life,	through
much	 of	 East	 Asia,	 it’s	 usually	 prepared
simply	in	water,	and	judged	by	the	intactness
of	 its	 grains	 and	 their	 whiteness,	 gloss,
tenderness,	 and	 flavor.	Where	 rice	was	more
unusual	and	even	a	luxury,	in	central	Asia,	the
Middle	East,	and	the	Mediterranean,	it’s	often
enriched	 with	 broths,	 oils,	 butter,	 and	 other
ingredients	 to	 make	 such	 dishes	 as	 pilafs,
risottos,	 and	 paellas.	 Iranians,	 perhaps	 the
most	 sophisticated	 rice	 cooks,	 make	polo	 by
partly	boiling	long-grain	rice	in	excess	water,



layering	 it	 with	 a	 variety	 of	 cooked	 meats,
vegetables,	dried	 fruits,	 and	nuts,	 then	gently
steaming	to	finish	the	cooking,	and	managing
the	 heat	 so	 that	 a	 brown	 crust	 of	 rice,	 the
prized	tahdig,	forms	at	the	bottom.

Rinsing	and	Soaking	An	initial	rinsing	of	the
dry	 rice	 removes	 surface	 starch	 and	 thus	 a
source	 of	 added	 stickiness.	 Some	 rices,
notably	 basmatis	 and	 Japanese	 varieties,	 are
either	 soaked	 in	water	 or	 allowed	 to	 rest	 for
20–30	minutes	after	washing;	they	thus	absorb
some	water,	which	will	 speed	 the	 subsequent
cooking.	Brown	and	wild	rices	can	be	treated
similarly.

After	 Cooking:	 Resting,	 Reheating	 Once
cooked,	rice	benefits	from	a	resting	period	to
allow	 the	 grains	 to	 cool	 down	 somewhat	 and
become	 firmer,	 so	 that	 they	 aren’t	 as	 easily
broken	when	scooped	from	the	pot	and	served.
Leftover	 rice	 is	 often	 hard	 due	 to	 the
retrogradation	of	the	starch,	which	is	cured	by



heating	 it	 up	 to	 the	 gelation	 temperature
again.	Rice	 is	easily	softened	by	 reheating	 to
160ºF/70ºC	or	above,	either	with	a	little	added
water	 in	 a	 pot	 or	 in	 the	microwave	 oven,	 or
fried	 to	 make	 fried	 rice,	 rice	 cakes,	 or
croquettes.

Keeping	Rice	 Safe	 Cooked	 rice	 turns	 out	 to
be	a	potential	 source	of	 food	poisoning.	Raw
rice	 almost	 always	 carries	 dormant	 spores	 of
the	bacterium	Bacillus	cereus,	which	produces
powerful	 gastrointestinal	 toxins.	 The	 spores
can	 tolerate	 high	 temperatures,	 and	 some
survive	 cooking.	 If	 cooked	 rice	 is	 left	 for	 a
few	 hours	 at	 room	 temperature,	 the	 spores
germinate,	 bacteria	 multiply,	 and	 toxins
accumulate.	 Ordinary	 cooked	 rice	 should
therefore	 be	 served	 promptly,	 and	 leftovers
refrigerated	 to	 prevent	 bacterial	 growth.	 The
rice	 in	 Japanese	 sushi	 is	 served	 at	 room
temperature,	 but	 the	 surface	 of	 its	 cooked
grains	 are	 coated	 with	 a	 flavorful	 and



antimicrobial	 mixture	 of	 rice	 vinegar	 and
sugar.	 Rice	 salads	 should	 be	 similarly
acidified	with	vinegar,	lemon	or	lime	juice.

Some	 Other	 Rice	 Preparations	 and
Products	 Cultures	 across	 the	 world	 have
found	many	different	 inventive	uses	 for	 rice.
Here	is	a	brief	sampling.

Rice	 Flour	 Rice	 flour	 is	 notable	 for	 being
around	 90%	 starch,	 and	 for	 having	 the
smallest	starch	granules	of	 the	major	cereals,
a	 half	 to	 a	 quarter	 the	 size	 of	 wheat	 starch
granules.	 When	 used	 to	 thicken	 sauces	 or
fillings,	it	provides	an	especially	fine	texture.
And	thanks	to	its	low	protein	content,	the	dry
flour	 absorbs	 relatively	 little	 water.	 This
means	 that	 when	 it’s	 used	 to	 make	 a	 frying
batter	for	Japanese	tempura,	rice	flour	gives	a
thin	 consistency	 with	 relatively	 little	 water,
and	 so	 the	 batter	 readily	 fries	 to	 a	 crisp,	 dry
texture.

Because	rice	flour	contains	no	elastic



gluten	proteins,	it	can’t	be	used	to	make
raised	breads.	But	the	same	lack	of	gluten
makes	rice	flour	a	useful	ingredient	for	people
with	gluten	intolerance.	Bakers	make	a
reasonable	approximation	of	raised	bread	by
supplementing	rice	flour	with	xanthan	or	guar
gum	or	other	long-chain	carbohydrates,	which
help	bind	the	dough	together	and	retain	the
gas	bubbles	produced	by	yeasts	or	chemical
leavenings.

Risotto:	Turning	Rice	into	Its	Own
Sauce

The	risotto	of	Italy	is	made	with	medium-
grain	varieties	that	are	fairly	large	and	can
tolerate	the	unique	cooking	method,	which
abrades	 and	 removes	 starch	 from	 the	 rice
surface	 so	 that	 it	 can	 thicken	 the	 cooking
liquid	to	a	creamy	consistency.

To	 make	 risotto,	 the	 rice	 is	 cooked
through	 by	 adding	 a	 small	 amount	 of	 hot
cooking	 liquid	 at	 a	 time	 and	 stirring	 the



rice	 until	 the	 liquid	 is	 absorbed,	 then
repeating	until	the	rice	is	soft	but	still	has	a
kernel	 of	 chewiness	 at	 the	 center.	 This
time-consuming	technique	subjects	the	rice
grains	 to	 constant	 friction,	 and	 rubs
softened	 endosperm	 from	 the	 surface	 so
that	 it	 can	 become	 dissolved	 in	 the	 liquid
phase	 (stirring	 only	 at	 the	 end	 of	 cooking
breaks	the	softened	grains	apart	rather	than
removing	 the	 surface	 layer).	 In	 addition,
the	 cooking	of	 small	 amounts	of	 liquid	 in
an	 open	 pan	 causes	much	 of	 the	moisture
to	evaporate,	which	means	that	more	of	the
cooking	liquid	must	be	used,	and	thus	that
more	 of	 the	 cooking	 liquid’s	 flavor
becomes	concentrated	in	the	dish.

Restaurant	 cooks	 prepare	 risotto	 to
order	 by	 cooking	 the	 rice	 well	 ahead	 of
time	the	traditional	way	until	it’s	just	short
of	 done,	 then	 refrigerating	 it.	 This	 allows
some	 of	 the	 cooked	 starch	 in	 the	 rice	 to
firm	 (p.	 458),	 giving	 the	 grain	 more



resilience	 than	 it	 would	 have	 if	 cooked
fully	 and	 simply	 rewarmed.	 Then	 just
before	serving,	 the	chilled	rice	 is	 reheated
and	 finished	 with	 hot	 broth	 and
enrichments.

Rice	 Powder	 Rice	 powder	 is	 a	 condiment
made	in	Vietnam	and	Thailand	by	roasting	the
grains,	then	grinding	them;	it’s	sprinkled	on	a
variety	of	dishes	just	before	eating.

Rice	 Noodles	 and	 Rice	 Paper	 Despite	 rice’s
lack	of	gluten,	noodles	and	thin	sheets	can	be
made	 from	 rice-flour	 doughs	 (p.	 579).	 Rice
paper	is	used	as	a	wrapper	to	enclose	meat	and
vegetable	 preparations,	 and	 can	 be	 eaten
either	simply	moistened	or	fried.

Mochi	 Mochi	 is	 the	 Japanese	 name	 for	 a
chewy,	 almost	 elastic	 preparation	 of	 sticky
rice	that	may	be	formed	into	balls	or	into	thin
sheets	 for	wrapping	 around	 a	 filling	 of	 some
kind.	 It’s	made	by	 steaming	 sticky	 rice,	 then



pounding	it	 to	a	paste,	or	by	making	a	dough
from	 sticky	 rice	 flour	 and	kneading	 it	 for	 30
minutes.	The	pounding	or	kneading	organizes
the	 bushy	 amylopectin	 starch	molecules	 into
an	intermeshed	mass	that	resists	changes	in	its
structure.

Lao	 Chao	 Lao	 chao	 is	 a	 Chinese	 fermented
rice	 made	 from	 sticky	 rice.	 The	 rice	 is
steamed,	cooled,	made	into	small	cakes	with	a
starter	 that	 includes	 the	 mold	Aspergillus
oryzae	 (p.	 755)	 and	yeasts,	 and	held	 at	 room
temperature	 for	 two	 to	 three	 days	 until	 it
becomes	 soft,	 sweet,	 and	 tart,	 with	 a	 fruity
and	alcoholic	aroma.

Wild	Rice	Wild	 rice	 is	 not	 a	 species	 of	 the
true	 tropical	 rice	 genus	Oryza.	 It’s	 a	 distant
relative,	 a	 cool-climate	 water	 grass	 that
produces	 unusually	 long	 grains,	 to	 three-
quarters	 of	 an	 inch	 (2	 cm),	 with	 a	 dark
seedcoat	 and	 a	 complex,	 distinctive	 flavor.
Zizania	 palustris	 is	 a	 native	 of	 the	 upper



midwestern	 Great	 Lakes	 region	 of	 North
America,	where	it	grows	in	shallow	lakes	and
marshes	 and	 was	 gathered	 in	 canoes	 by	 the
Ojibway	 and	 other	 native	 peoples.	 It’s	 the
only	 cereal	 from	 North	 America	 to	 have
become	important	as	a	human	food.	Wild	rice
is	 unusual	 among	 the	 cereals	 for	 containing
double	 the	 usual	 amount	 of	 moisture	 at
maturity,	around	40%	of	the	kernel	weight.	It
thus	 requires	more	 elaborate	 processing	 than
true	 rice	 in	 order	 to	 be	 stored.	 It’s	 first
matured	 in	 moist	 piles	 for	 a	 week	 or	 two,
during	 which	 immature	 grains	 continue	 to
ripen	 and	 microbes	 grow	 on	 the	 grain
surfaces,	generating	flavor	and	weakening	the
husks.	Then	it	is	parched	over	a	fire	to	dry	the
grain,	flavor	it,	and	make	the	husk	brittle;	and
finally	it’s	threshed	to	remove	the	husk.

Texture	 and	 Flavor 	 Wild	 rice	 has	 a	 firm,
chewy	 texture	 thanks	 to	 its	 intact	 bran	 layer
and	 the	 parching	 process,	 which	 gelates	 and



then	 anneals	 the	 starch	 much	 as	 parboiling
does	for	true	rice.	It	takes	longer	to	cook	than
most	 grains,	 sometimes	 an	 hour	 or	 more,
because	 its	 starch	 has	 been	 precooked	 into	 a
hard,	glassy	mass,	and	because	its	bran	layers
are	 impregnated	 with	 cutins	 and	 waxes	 (p.
262)	 to	 resist	 the	 absorption	 of	 water	 (in
nature,	 the	 grains	 fall	 into	 the	 water	 and	 lie
dormant	 for	 months	 or	 even	 years	 before
germinating).	The	dark	pigmentation	may	also
contribute;	it	is	partly	green-black	chlorophyll
derivatives	 and	 partly	 black	 phenolic
complexes	 generated	 by	 browning	 enzymes.
Producers	 often	 slightly	 abrade	 the	 grains	 to
improve	 their	 water	 absorption	 and	 shorten
cooking	 time.	 Cooks	 can	 also	 pre-soak	 the
grains	for	hours	in	warm	water.

The	flavor	of	the	raw	grain	has	earthy	and
green,	flowery,	tea-like	notes.	Curing
amplifies	the	tea	notes	(from	pyridines)	but
may	add	an	undesirable	mustiness;	parching
generates	browning	reactions	and	a	toasted,



nutty	character	(from	pyrazines).	Different
producers	use	different	methods	for	curing
(none,	brief,	extended)	and	parching	(low	or
high	temperatures,	open	fires	or	indirectly
heated	metal	drums),	so	the	flavor	of	wild	rice
varies	greatly.

Domesticated	Wild	Rice	Relatively	little	wild
rice	 is	 still	 gathered	 from	 uncultivated,
naturally	 occurring	 stands.	 Today	 most	 is
grown	 in	 artificially	 flooded	 paddies,	 and
harvested	 mechanically	 after	 the	 fields	 are
drained.	 Cultivated	 wild	 rice	 therefore	 has
more	consistently	mature,	dark	seedcoats	than
the	 gathered	 grain.	 To	 taste	 truly	 wild	 rice
from	 its	 native	 region	 and	 savor	 the
differences	 among	 small	 producers,	 it’s
necessary	to	read	labels	carefully.

Maize,	or	Corn

Maize,	known	in	the	United	States	as	“corn”



and	among	biologists	as	Zea	mays,	was
domesticated	in	Mexico	some	7,000	to	10,000
years	ago	from	a	large	grass	called	teosinte
(Zea	mexicana),	which	grows	in	open
woodlands.	Unlike	the	Old	World	cereals	and
the	legumes,	which	human	selection	altered	in
relatively	minor	ways,	corn	is	the	result	of
several	drastic	changes	in	the	structure	of
teosinte	that	concentrated	pollen	production	at
the	top	of	the	plant	and	female	flower
production	—	and	cob	and	kernel	production
—	along	the	main	stalk.	The	large	size	of	both
plant	and	fruit	made	corn	agriculture
relatively	easy,	and	corn	quickly	became	the
basic	food	plant	of	many	other	early
American	cultures.	The	Incas	of	Peru,	the
Mayas	and	Aztecs	of	Mexico,	the	cliff
dwellers	of	the	American	Southwest,
Mississippi	mound	builders,	and	many
seminomadic	cultures	in	North	and	South
America	depended	on	corn	as	a	dietary	staple.
Columbus	brought	corn	back	with	him	to



Europe,	and	within	a	generation	it	was	being
grown	throughout	southern	Europe.

Corn	is	now	the	third	largest	human	food
crop	in	the	world	after	wheat	and	rice,	and	is
the	primary	nourishment	for	millions	of
people	in	Latin	America,	Asia,	and	Africa.	In
Europe	and	the	United	States,	where	more
corn	is	fed	to	livestock	than	to	people,	it’s
appreciated	for	its	unique	flavor,	for	the
texture	and	substance	it	contributes	to	a
variety	of	boiled,	baked	and	fried	foods,	and
as	a	snack	food.	Corn	also	provides	mash	for
making	whiskey,	corn	starch	for	thickening
sauces	and	fillings,	corn	syrup	for	flavoring
and	lending	viscosity	to	various	sweet
preparations,	and	corn	oil.	Different	parts	of
the	plant	are	also	turned	into	many	industrial
products.

Kinds	 and	 Colors	 of	 Corn	 There	 are	 five
general	kinds	of	corn,	each	characterized	by	a
different	 endosperm	 composition.	 It	 appears



that	a	high-protein	popcorn	type	was	the	first
corn	to	be	cultivated,	but	all	five	were	known
to	 native	Americans	 long	 before	 the	 coming
of	Europeans.

Popcorn	and	flint	corn	have	a	relatively
large	amount	of	storage	protein	that
surrounds	granules	of	high-amy-lose
starch.
Dent	corn,	the	variety	most	commonly
grown	for	animal	feed	and	for	milled
food	ingredients	(grits,	meals,	flours),
has	a	localized	deposit	of	low-amylose,
“waxy”	starch	at	the	crown	of	the	kernel,
which	produces	a	depression,	or	dent,	in
the	dried	kernel.
Flour	corns,	including	the	standard
varieties	of	blue	corn,	are	soft	and	easily
ground	because	their	endosperm	is	a
discontinuous	and	weak	combination	of
relatively	little	protein,	mostly	waxy
starch,	and	air	pockets.	What	we	call
Indian	corn	today	are	flour	and	flint



varieties	with	variegated	kernels.
Sweet	corn,	a	popular	vegetable	in	the
United	States	when	immature,	stores
more	sugar	than	starch,	and	therefore	has
translucent	kernels	and	loose,	wrinkled
skins	(starch	grains	reflect	light	and
plump	out	the	kernels	in	the	other	types).
Most	corn-producing	countries	also	eat
immature	corn,	but	use	the	other	general-
purpose	corn	types.	The	native
Americans	who	first	developed	it
apparently	enjoyed	sweet	corn	for	its	full
flavor	when	parched.

Food	Words:	Corn	and	Maize
The	 grain	 that	Americans	 call	 “corn”	was
originally	known	in	English	as	“maize”	or
“Indian	 corn.”	 “Maize”	 comes	 from	 the
Taino	name	used	in	the	West	Indies,	and	is
the	 source	 of	 the	 Spanish,	 Italian,	 and
French	 names.	The	word	corn	 is	a	generic
term	 that	 comes	 from	 the	 same	 root	 as



kernel	 and	grain	 and	 has	 the	 same	 broad
meaning;	 so	 “corned”	 beef	 is	 beef	 cured
with	grains	of	 salt.	 “Corn”	 is	 also	used	 in
different	 parts	 of	 Britain	 as	 shorthand	 for
the	 most	 important	 grain	 of	 the	 region.
Only	 in	 the	 United	 States	 did	 it	 come	 to
refer	exclusively	to	maize.
The	different	kinds	of	corn	also	come	in

various	colors,	some	of	which	were	originally
selected	by	native	Americans	for	ceremonial
use.	The	interior	is	usually	either
unpigmented	and	white,	or	yellow	with
nutritionally	valuable	fat-soluble	carotenes
and	xanthophylls	(beta	carotene,	lutein,
zeaxanthin).	Blue,	purple,	and	red	kernels
carry	water-soluble	anthocyanins	in	their
aleurone	layer,	the	nutrient-rich	cell	layer	just
under	the	hull.

Alkaline	Treatment:	 Several	 Benefits	 Corn
is	unusual	among	the	grains	for	its	large	size,
and	 for	 the	 thickness	 and	 toughness	 of	 its



outer	 pericarp,	 or	 hull.	 Early	 corn	 eaters
developed	 a	 special	 pretreatment	 to	 ease	 the
removal	 of	 the	 hull,	 which	 is	 called
nixtamalization	 (from	 an	 Aztec	 word):	 they
cooked	 the	 kernels	 in	 water	 made	 alkaline
with	 a	 variety	 of	 substances.	 The	Mayas	 and
Aztecs	 used	 ashes	 or	 lime;	 North	 American
tribes,	 ashes	 and	 naturally	 occurring	 sodium
carbonate	 deposits;	 and	 a	 contemporary
Mayan	group	burns	mussel	shells	for	the	same
purpose.	 One	 of	 the	 major	 glue-like
components	 of	 plant	 cells	 walls,
hemicellulose,	 is	 especially	 soluble	 in
alkaline	 conditions.	 Nixtamalization	 softens
the	hull	and	partly	detaches	it	from	the	rest	of
the	 kernel	 so	 that	 it	 can	 be	 rubbed	 off	 and
washed	 away.	 It	 also	 helps	 transform	 the
kernels	 into	 a	 cohesive	 dough	 for	 making
tortillas	 and	 other	 preparations	 (see	 below),
and	it	 releases	much	of	 their	bound	niacin	so
that	we	can	absorb	and	benefit	from	it.



Corn	 Flavor	 Corn	 has	 a	 distinctive	 flavor
unlike	 that	 of	 any	 other	 grain.	 Popcorn	 and
other	 dry	 corn	 products	 toasted	 at	 a	 high
temperature	 develop	 a	 number	 of
characteristic	 carbon-ring	 compounds,
including	 one	 that	 they	 share	 with	 basmati
rice	 (acetylpyrroline).	 Alkaline	 processing
gives	 rise	 to	 yet	 another	 set	 of	 distinctive
aroma	 molecules,	 including	 one	 that	 is	 a
breakdown	 product	 of	 the	 amino	 acid
tryptophan,	and	a	close	chemical	and	aromatic
relative	 of	 a	 characteristic	 note	 in	 concord
grapes	 and	 wood	 strawberries
(aminoacetophenone,	 related	 to	 the	 fruits’
methyl	 anthranilate).	 Masa	 can	 also	 have
violet-like	 and	 spicy	 notes	 (from	 ionone	 and
vinylguaiacol).



Types	 of	 corn.	 Left	 to	 right:	Kernels	 of	 pop,
dent,	 and	 sweet	 corn.	 Its	 abundant	 hard
endosperm	 helps	 popcorn	 contain	 the	 steam
pressure	that	eventually	explodes	it.

Whole-grain	 Corns:	 Hominy,	 Corn	 Nuts
Common	 corn	 ingredients	 and	 foods	 can	 be
divided	 into	 two	 general	 groups:	 those	 based
on	the	whole	grain,	and	those	based	on	ground
grain.	 There’s	 also	 a	 basic	 division	 between
dry,	 untreated	materials	 and	 “wet-processed”
alkaline-treated	materials.

Whole-grain	versions	of	corn	are	relatively
few,	with	popcorn	by	far	the	most	common.
Hominy	consists	of	whole	corn	kernels,
preferably	white,	cooked	for	20–40	minutes	in
a	solution	of	lime	or	lye,	then	washed	of	their
hulls	and	excess	alkaline	solution.	Hominy	is
used	in	soups	(pozole),	stews,	and	side	dishes,
and	has	a	dense,	chewy	consistency.	Corn
Nuts	are	a	familiar	snack	food	made	from	the
largest	kernels	known,	the	Cuzco	gigante



variety	from	Peru.	The	kernels	are	treated
with	alkali	to	remove	the	hulls,	soaked	for
some	hours	in	warm	water,	fried	to	develop
color,	flavor,	and	a	crunchy	texture,	then
flavored.

Popcorn	 It	 appears	 from	 archaeological
remains	in	Mexico	that	popping	in	the	embers
of	 a	 fire	may	 have	 been	 the	 first	method	 for
cooking	 corn.	 Early	 explorers	 described
popped	 corn	 among	 the	 Aztecs,	 Incas,	 and
North	 American	 tribes.	 In	 the	 19th	 century,
Americans	 served	 popcorn	 as	 a	 breakfast
cereal,	made	 it	 into	 porridges,	 puddings,	 and
cakes,	 added	 it	 to	 soups,	 salads,	 and	 main
dishes,	and	mixed	it	with	molasses	to	make	an
ancestor	 of	 the	 sweet	 popcorn	 ball	 and
Cracker	 Jack.	 Popcorn	 was	 a	 popular	 finger
food	 in	 the	 United	 States	 in	 the	 1880s,	 then
became	 associated	 with	 movie	 theatres,	 and
later	with	watching	television	in	the	home.	In
the	21st	century,	most	of	 the	popcorn	sold	 in



supermarkets	 is	 packaged	 for	 microwave
cooking.

How	 Popcorn	 Pops	 Some	 flint	 and	 dent
varieties	of	corn	will	explode	and	form	a	crisp
puff,	 but	 expand	 far	 less	 than	 true	 popping
varieties,	 which	 are	 generally	 smaller	 and
contain	 a	 greater	 proportion	 of	 hard
translucent	 endosperm.	 Thanks	 to	 a	 denser
arrangement	 of	 cellulose	 fibers,	 the	 popcorn
hull	 (pericarp)	 conducts	 heat	 several	 times
faster	 than	 the	 hull	 of	 ordinary	 corn;	 and
thanks	 to	 both	 its	 density	 and	 greater
thickness,	 it	 is	 several	 times	 stronger:	 so	 the
hull	 transmits	 heat	 more	 rapidly	 to	 the
endosperm,	 and	 can	 withstand	 higher	 steam
pressure	from	within	before	giving	way.

Mud-Fermented	Corn
While	 exploring	 just	 east	 of	 Lake	 Huron
around	 1616,	 Samuel	 de	 Champlain
observed	 what	 might	 be	 called	 a



“fermenting”	 technique	 practiced	 by	 the
Huron	Indians.	Here	 is	a	challenge	for	 the
anthropologist:	 is	 there	 a	 nutritional	 basis
for	 this	 recipe,	 did	 it	 just	 involve	 the
microbial	conversion	of	starch	to	sugar,	or
is	 it	 the	 Huron	 equivalent	 of	 the	 “noble
rot?”
They	 have	 another	 way	 of	 eating	 Indian
corn,	 to	 prepare	which	 they	 take	 it	 in	 the
ear	 and	 put	 it	 in	 water	 under	 the	 mud,
leaving	it	two	or	three	months	in	that	state,
until	 they	judge	that	 it	 is	putrid;	 then	they
take	it	out	and	boil	it	with	meat	or	fish	and
then	 eat	 it.	 They	 also	 roast	 it,	 and	 it	 is
better	 this	 way	 than	 boiled,	 but	 I	 assure
you	that	nothing	smells	so	bad	as	this	corn
when	it	comes	out	of	the	water	all	covered
with	mud;	yet	the	women	and	children	take
it	 and	 suck	 it	 like	 sugar	 cane,	 there	 being
nothing	 they	 like	 better,	 as	 they	 plainly
show.
As	the	temperature	inside	the	corn	kernel



reaches	and	passes	the	boiling	point,	the
protein	matrix	and	starch	granules	soften,	and
moisture	in	the	granules	turns	into	steam.	The
steam	softens	the	starch	even	more,	and	the
many	thousands	of	little	steam	pockets	exert	a
growing	pressure	against	the	hull.	The
softening	of	starch	and	protein	continues	until
the	internal	pressure	approaches	seven	times
the	external	pressure	of	the	atmosphere,	at
which	point	the	hull	breaks	open.	The	sudden
pressure	drop	inside	the	kernel	causes	the
pockets	of	steam	to	expand,	and	with	them
expands	the	soft	protein-starch	mixture,	which
puffs	up	and	then	stiffens	as	it	cools	off,
becoming	light	and	crisp.	(If	the	popping	is
done	in	a	tightly	covered	pan	that	offers	no
escape	for	the	water	vapor,	the	endosperm
will	retain	it	and	be	tough	and	chewy;	the	pan
lid	should	be	left	slightly	ajar.)

Popcorn	pops	best	at	a	temperature	around
380ºF/190ºC,	and	can	be	popped	in	hot	oil,	in
hot	air	poppers,	and	in	the	microwave	oven.



Different	hybrids	pop	best	with	different
methods.	Microwave	popcorn	bags	develop
the	necessary	high	temperatures	by	means	of	a
thin	layer	of	microwave-reflecting	mylar.

Dry-milled	 Corn	 Foods:	 Grits,	 Cornmeal,
Corn	Flour	Most	 corn	 is	 prepared	 and	 eaten
in	 ground	 form,	 and	 dry-milled	 products	 are
ground	directly	from	the	stored	grain,	usually
yellow	 dent	 corn,	 without	 any	 pretreatment.
These	 days	 they’re	 generally	 refined	 to
exclude	the	hull	and	germ,	an	innovation	that
dates	 from	around	1900	and	 that	made	 large-
scale	milling	practical.	The	rarer	whole-grain
corn	 meal	 and	 flour,	 sometimes	 ground
between	 stone	 wheels,	 are	 richer	 in	 fiber,
flavor,	 and	 nutrients,	 but	 also	 stale	 rapidly
thanks	to	the	oils	and	related	substances	in	the
germ,	which	become	oxidized	on	contact	with
air.
Grits	are	relatively	coarse	corn	endosperm

particles	between	0.6	and	1.2	mm	across.



They’re	used	to	manufacture	breakfast
cereals,	snacks,	and	beer,	and	are	cooked	into
a	kind	of	porridge	that’s	especially	beloved	in
the	American	South.	Grits	were	once	made
from	alkaline-treated	hominy,	but	this	is	now
rare.
Cornmeal	is	finer	than	grits,	with	particles

down	to	0.2	mm	across,	absorbs	water	and
cooks	faster	than	grits,	and	provides	a	subtler
graininess.	It’s	used	to	make	unleavened
mush,	polenta,	and	johnnycakes	as	well	as
corn	breads,	muffins,	and	other	baked	and
fried	foods	that	include	some	wheat	flour	and
leavening	for	lightness.

Popcorn	Blossoms
Leave	 it	 to	 Henry	 David	 Thoreau	 to	 see
popcorn	 with	 fresh	 eyes.	 In	 midwinter	 of
1842	he	wrote	in	his	journal:
I	have	been	popping	corn	to-night,	which	is
only	 a	more	 rapid	 blossoming	of	 the	 seed



under	a	greater	than	July	heat.	The	popped
corn	 is	 a	 perfect	winter	 flower,	 hinting	 of
anemones	 and	houstonias….	By	my	warm
hearth	 sprang	 these	 cerealious	 blossoms;
here	was	the	bank	where	they	grew.
Corn	flour	is	the	finest-ground	form	of

corn,	with	particles	smaller	than	0.2	mm,	and
is	usually	mixed	with	other	ingredients	to
provide	flavor	in	various	baked	and	fried
foods.

Wet-milled	Corn:	Masa,	Tortillas,	Tamales,
Chips	 Tortillas,	 tamales,	 and	 corn	 chips	 are
made	 from	 corn	 grains	 that	 are	milled	when
wet,	 after	 they	 have	 undergone	 the
preliminary	 cooking	 step	 called
nixtamalization	 (p.	 478).	 The	 corn	 is	 first
cooked	 in	 a	 solution	 (0.8–5%)	 of	 calcium
hydroxide,	 or	 lime,	 for	 a	 few	 minutes	 to	 an
hour,	then	is	left	to	steep	and	slowly	cool	for	8
to	16	hours.	During	the	steeping,	the	alkalinity
softens	 the	 hull	 and	 cell	 walls	 throughout,



causes	 the	 storage	 proteins	 to	 bond	 to	 each
other,	 and	 breaks	 apart	 some	 of	 the	 corn	 oil
into	 excellent	 emulsifiers	 (monoand
diglycerides).	 After	 steeping,	 the	 soaking
solution	and	softened	hulls	are	washed	away,
and	 the	kernels,	 including	 the	germ,	 are	 then
stone	 ground	 to	 produce	 the	 dough-like
material	 called	masa.	Stone	grinding	cuts	 the
kernels,	 mashes	 them,	 and	 kneads	 the	 mass,
mixing	 together	 starch,	 protein,	 oils,
emulsifiers,	 and	 cell	 wall	 materials,	 and	 the
lime’s	 molecule-bridging	 calcium.	 With
further	 kneading,	 this	 combination	 develops
into	a	cohesive,	plastic	dough.

The	convenience	form	of	masa	is	masa
harina,	a	flour	made	by	flash-drying	freshly
made	masa	into	small	particles.	Because	it’s
made	with	less	water	than	normal	masa	and
then	is	dried,	masa	harina	has	less	masa
aroma	and	an	added	browned,	toasty	aroma,
and	produces	a	softer	texture	than	fresh	masa.



Tortillas,	Tamales,	and	Corn	Chips 	Tortillas
are	made	by	forming	finely	ground	masa	into
thin	 sheets,	 then	 quickly	 cooking	 them,
traditionally	on	a	hot	pan	for	a	minute	or	two,
now	in	continuous	commercial	ovens	for	20–
40	seconds.	Tamales	are	small	cakes	of	masa
that	 enclose	 a	 filling,	 and	 are	 traditionally
formed	 in	 the	 papery	 husks	 of	 corn	 ears	 and
steamed.	The	dough	is	moistened	with	a	broth
and	enriched,	flavored,	and	aerated	by	beating
it	 thoroughly	with	 lard.	The	 lard	 is	semisolid
at	 room	 temperature	 and	 helps	 lubricate	 the
masa	materials	and	trap	air	bubbles	in	a	fluffy
mass	that	expands	during	steaming.	And	fried
chips	are	made	both	from	tortillas	and	directly
from	masa.	Tortilla	 chips	 are	made	by	 deep-
frying	tortillas,	while	corn	chips	are	made	by
forming	strips	of	lower-moisture,	coarse	masa
and	then	deep-frying	them.

Minor	Cereals



The	following	cereals	are	only	occasionally
encountered	in	Europe	and	the	United	States,
though	some	are	very	important	in	the	dry
tropics	and	subtropics.

Polenta	Lore
Polenta,	 the	 Italian	 version	 of	 corn	 meal
mush	 (originally	 made	 with	 barley),	 has
become	a	popular	dish	in	the	United	States,
and	 is	 the	 subject	 of	 much	 lore.	 Some
cooks	 make	 it	 quickly	 in	 the	 microwave
oven,	 while	 traditionalists	 insist	 on	 the
necessity	 of	 slow	 cooking	 and	 constant
stirring	for	an	hour	or	more.	Long	cooking
at	 the	 stove	 does	 do	 one	 useful	 thing:	 it
develops	 the	 corn	 flavor	 by	 the	 constant
application	 of	 higher-than-boiling	 heat	 to
the	 pot	 bottom	 (hence	 the	 need	 to	 stir	 to
prevent	 burning)	 and	 the	 exposure	 to	 air
and	drying	 that	 takes	place	 at	 the	 surface.
Busy	 cooks	 can	 develop	 just	 as	 much
flavor	 with	 less	 labor	 by	 partly	 covering



the	pot	of	just-thickened	polenta,	putting	it
into	a	low	oven	(250ºF/130ºC),	which	heats
the	 bottom	 and	 sides	 in	 a	 controlled	 and
even	way,	and	stirring	only	occasionally.

Fonio	 Fonio	 and	 black	 fonio	 are	 African
grasses	 distantly	 related	 to	 maize	 and
sorghum.	Digitaria	exilis	 and	D.	 iburua	were
domesticated	 on	 the	 West	 African	 savanna
around	 5000	BCE,	 and	 are	 typical	 cereals	 in
most	 respects.	 The	 tiny	 grains	 are	made	 into
porridge	 and	 couscous,	 popped,	 brewed	 into
beer,	and	mixed	with	wheat	to	make	breads.

Millet	Millet	 is	 the	name	used	 for	 a	 number
of	different	grains,	all	of	them	with	very	small
round	seeds,	1–2	mm	in	diameter	 (species	of
Panicum,	Setaria,	Pennisetum,	Eleusine).	The
millets	are	native	to	Africa	and	Asia,	and	have
been	 cultivated	 for	 6,000	 years.	 They’re
especially	 important	 in	 arid	 lands	 because
they	 have	 one	 of	 the	 lowest	 water
requirements	 of	 any	 cereal,	 and	will	 grow	 in



poor	soils.	The	grains	are	remarkable	for	their
high	protein	content,	from	16	to	22%,	and	are
popped	 and	 also	made	 into	 porridge,	 breads,
malts,	and	beers.

Sorghum	 Sorghum	 (Sorghum	 bicolor)
evolved	in	the	steppes	and	savannas	of	central
and	 south	 Africa,	 was	 domesticated	 there
around	 2000	BCE,	and	soon	after	was	taken	to
India	 and	 then	 to	 China.	 Thanks	 to	 their
tolerance	of	drought	and	heat,	sorghums	have
become	 established	 in	 most	 warm	 countries
with	marginal	croplands.	The	fruits	are	small,
around	 4	 mm	 long	 and	 2	 mm	wide,	 and	 are
boiled	 like	 rice,	 popped,	 and	 used	 in	 many
different	 variations	 on	 porridges,	 flatbreads,
couscous,	 and	 beers.	 Sorghum	 shouldn’t	 be
sprouted;	as	the	seed	germinates,	it	produces	a
protective	cyanide-generating	system	(p.	258).

Teff	 Teff,	Eragrostis	tef,	 is	the	major	crop	in
Ethiopia,	but	rarely	grown	elsewhere.	Its	 tiny
(1	 mm)	 seeds	 come	 in	 a	 variety	 of	 colors,



from	dark	to	red	and	brown	to	white,	with	the
pigmented	varieties	said	to	have	more	flavor.
Teff	 is	 most	 often	 made	 into	 the	 spongy
flatbread	 called	 injera,	 which	 unlike	 most
breads	stays	soft	and	chewy	for	several	days.

Triticale	Triticale	is	a	modern,	artificial	cross
between	 wheat	 and	 rye	 (Triticum	 x	Secale),
first	documented	 late	 in	 the	19th	century	and
grown	 commercially	 around1970.	 There	 are
many	 different	 forms,	 the	 most	 commonly
grown	a	cross	between	durum	wheat	and	rye.
Its	grains	are	generally	more	similar	to	wheat
than	to	rye,	though	the	breadmaking	qualities
of	 most	 varieties	 aren’t	 as	 good	 as	 wheat’s.
Triticale	 is	 now	 mostly	 grown	 for	 animal
feed,	 and	 is	 sometimes	 sold	 in	 health	 food
stores.

Pseudocereals

Amaranth,	buckwheat,	and	quinoa	are	not



members	of	the	grass	family	and	so	are	not
true	cereals,	but	their	seeds	resemble	the
cereal	grains	and	are	used	in	similar	ways.

Amaranth	Amaranth	is	the	tiny	seed,	just	1–2
mm	 across,	 of	 three	 species	 of	Amaranthus
that	 originated	 in	 Mexico	 and	 Central	 and
South	America,	and	were	cultivated	more	than
5,000	 years	 ago.	 (There	 are	 also	 species	 of
amaranth	 native	 to	 the	 Old	 World,	 but	 they
are	 used	 exclusively	 as	 green	 vegetables.)
Today	 amaranth	 supplements	 other	 grains	 in
many	 baked	 goods,	 breakfast	 cereals,	 and
snacks.	 The	 Aztec	 combination	 of	 popped
seeds	 and	 sticky	 sweetener	 lives	 on	 in	 the
Mexican	alegria	 (“joy”)	 and	 Indian	laddoo.
Amaranth	 seeds	 contain	 substantially	 more
protein	and	oil	than	the	cereals.

Buckwheat	 Buckwheat,	Fagopyrum
esculentum,	 is	 a	 plant	 in	 the	 Polygonum
family,	a	relative	of	rhubarb	and	sorrel.	It’s	a
native	 of	 central	 Asia,	 was	 domesticated	 in



China	 or	 India	 relatively	 recently,	 around
1,000	years	ago,	and	was	brought	 to	northern
Europe	 during	 the	 Middle	 Ages.	 It	 tolerates
poor	 growing	 conditions	 and	 matures	 in	 a
little	 over	 two	 months,	 so	 it	 has	 long	 been
valued	 in	 cold	 regions	 with	 short	 growing
seasons.

Buckwheat	kernels	are	triangular,	a	sixth
to	a	third	of	an	inch/4–9	mm	across,	with	a
dark	hull	(pericarp).	The	inner	seed	is	a	mass
of	starchy	endosperm	surrounding	a	small
embryo	and	contained	in	a	light	green-yellow
seed	coat.	Intact	seeds	with	the	hull	removed
are	called	groats.	Buckwheat	is	about	80%
starch	and	14%	protein,	mostly	salt-soluble
globulins.	It	contains	about	double	the	oil	of
most	cereals,	and	this	limits	the	shelf	life	of
groats	and	flour.	The	hulled	groats	are	about
0.7%	phenolic	compounds,	some	of	which
give	the	grain	its	characteristic	astringency.
The	distinctive	aroma	of	cooked	buckwheat
has	nutty,	smoky,	green,	and	slightly	fishy



notes	(due	respectively	to	pyrazines,
salicylaldehyde,	aldehydes,	and	pyridines).

Buckwheat	flour	contains	a	small	amount
of	mucilage,	a	complex	carbohydrate	a	bit	like
amylopectin	—	it’s	made	up	of	about	1,500
sugar	molecules	bonded	together	into	a
branched	structure.	Though	a	minor
component	in	the	flour,	the	mucilage	absorbs
water	and	may	provide	some	of	the	stickiness
that	barely	holds	an	all-buckwheat	noodle
together	(p.	577).

Buckwheat	is	a	staple	food	in	parts	of
China,	Korea,	and	Nepal.	In	the	Himalayan
region,	buckwheat	is	used	to	make	chillare,	a
flatbread,	as	well	as	fritter-like	pakoras	and
sweets.	In	northern	Italy,	it’s	mixed	with
wheat	to	make	flat	noodles	called	pizzoccheri,
and	mixed	with	corn	meal	in	polenta.	In
Russia	it’s	used	to	make	the	small	pancakes
called	blini;	and	whole	groats	are	toasted	to
make	the	nutty-tasting	porridge	kasha.	In
Brittany	it	produces	distinctive	crêpes.	The



Japanese	make	soba,	buckwheat	noodles.	In
the	United	States	it’s	most	often	encountered
in	pancakes,	to	which	it	contributes	tenderness
and	a	nutty	aroma.

Quinoa	Quinoa	 is	a	native	of	northern	South
America,	 was	 domesticated	 near	 Lake
Titicaca	 in	 the	 Andes	 around	 5000	BCE,	 and
was	 a	 staple	 food	 of	 the	 Incas,	 second	 in
importance	 only	 to	 the	 potato.	Chenopodium
quinoa	 is	 in	 the	 same	 family	 as	 beets	 and
spinach.	The	grains	 are	 small	 yellow	 spheres
between	 1	 and	 3	 mm	 across.	 The	 outer
pericarp	 of	 many	 quinoa	 varieties	 contains
bitter	 defensive	 compounds	 called	 saponins,
which	 can	 be	 removed	 by	 brief	 washing	 and
rubbing	 in	 cold	 water	 (prolonged	 soaking
deposits	 saponins	 within	 the	 seed).	 Quinoa
can	be	cooked	like	rice	or	added	to	soups	and
other	 liquid	 dishes;	 it’s	 also	 popped,	 and	 is
ground	and	made	into	a	variety	of	flatbreads.

Legumes:



Beans	and	Peas

Beans	and	peas	belong	to	the	third	largest
family	among	the	flowering	plants	(after	the
orchid	and	daisy	families),	and	the	second
most	important	family	in	the	human	diet,	after
the	grasses.	The	distinctive	contribution	of	the
legumes	is	their	high	content	of	protein,	two
to	three	times	that	of	wheat	and	rice,	which
they	develop	thanks	to	their	symbiosis	with
certain	soil	bacteria.	Species	of	Rhizobium
bacteria	invade	the	roots	of	legume	plants	and
convert	abundant	nitrogen	in	the	air	into	a
form	that	the	plant	can	use	directly	to	make
amino	acids	and	thus	proteins.	Legumes	have
long	been	an	essential	alternative	to	protein-
rich	but	more	costly	animal	foods,	and	are
especially	prominent	in	the	foods	of	Asia,
Central	and	South	America,	and	the
Mediterranean.	A	remarkable	sign	of	their
status	in	the	ancient	world	is	the	fact	that	each
of	the	four	major	legumes	known	to	Rome



lent	its	name	to	a	prominent	Roman	family:
Fabius	comes	from	the	fava	bean,	Lentulus
from	the	lentil,	Piso	from	the	pea,	and	Cicero
—	most	distinguished	of	them	all	—	from	the
chick	pea.	No	other	food	group	has	been	so
honored!

There	are	about	20	different	species	of
legume	cultivated	on	a	large	scale	(see	box,	p.
484).	The	oil	crops,	soybean	and	peanut,	far
outdistance	the	legumes	eaten	more	or	less
whole;	the	oils	are	used	industrially	as	well	as
in	the	kitchen,	and	soybeans	are	a	major
livestock	feed	in	the	United	States.

Legume	Structure	and	Composition

Legume	seeds	consist	of	an	embryonic	plant
surrounded	by	a	protective	seed	coat.	The
embryo	in	turn	is	made	up	of	two	large
storage	leaves,	the	cotyledons,	together	with	a
tiny	stem.	The	cotyledons	provide	the	bulk	of
the	nourishment,	as	the	endosperm	does	in	the



grains.	In	fact,	the	cotyledons	are	actually	a
transformed	endosperm.	When	pollen	joins
ovule	in	the	process	of	fertilization,	both	an
embryo	and	a	primitive	nutritional	tissue,	the
endosperm,	are	formed.	In	the	grains,	the
endosperm	develops	along	with	the	embryo
and	remains	the	storage	organ	of	the	mature
fruit.	But	in	the	legumes,	the	endosperm	is
absorbed	by	the	embryo,	which	repackages	the
nutrients	in	its	cotyledons.

Some	Common	Beans	and	Peas

Common	Name Scientific	Name

Natives	of	Europe	and	Southwest	Asia

Chickpea,	garbanzo,	bengal Cicer
gram arietinum
Lentil,	masoor	dal Lens	culinaris
Pea Pisum	sativum



Fava	bean,	broad	bean Vicia	faba
Lupine Lupinus	species
Alfalfa Medicago	sativa

Natives	of	India	and	East	Asia

Soybean Glycine	max
Mung	bean,	green/golden
gram Vigna	radiata

Black	gram,	urad	dal Vigna	mungo
Azuki	bean Vigna	acutifolia
Rice	bean Vigna	umbellata
Moth	bean Vigna	aconitifolia
Pigeon	pea,	red	gram Cajanus	cajan
Lathyrus,	vetch,	khesari	dal Lathyrus	sativus
Hyacinth	bean Lablab	purpureus
Winged	bean Psophocarpus	tetragonolobus

Natives	of	Africa



Black-eyed	pea,	cowpea, Vigna
crowder unguiculata
Bambara	groundnut Vigna	subterranea

Natives	of	Central	and	South	America

Bean,	common	bean, Phaseolus
haricot,	etc. vulgaris
Lima	bean,	butter	bean Phaseolus	lunatus
Tepary	bean Phaseolus	acutifolius
Runner	bean Phaseolus	coccineus
Peanut Arachis	hypogaea

The	 seed	 coat	 is	 interrupted	 only	 at	 the
hilum,	 the	 small	 depression	 where	 the	 seed
has	been	attached	to	the	pod,	and	where	it	will
absorb	 water	 once	 it’s	 in	 the	 ground	 or	 the
pot.	The	seed	coat	may	be	fairly	thin,	as	in	the
peanut,	 but	 is	 as	much	 as	 15%	 by	weight	 of
the	 chickpea	 and	 30%	 of	 the	 lupin.	 The



legume	 seed	 coat	 is	 almost	 entirely	 cell-wall
carbohydrates,	and	includes	most	of	the	seed’s
indigestible	 fiber.	 The	 coats	 of	 colorful
varieties	—	 pinks,	 reds,	 black	—	 are	 rich	 in
anthocyanin	 pigments	 and	 related	 phenolic
compounds,	 and	 therefore	 in	 antioxidant
power.

Most	beans	and	peas	are	mainly	protein
and	starch	(see	box,	p.	489).	The	major
exceptions	are	soybeans	and	peanuts,	which
are	around	25%	and	50%	oil	respectively.
Many	legumes	are	several	percent	sucrose	by
weight,	and	noticeably	sweet.

Some	legume	seeds	are	rich	in	defensive
secondary	compounds	(p.	258),	notably
protease	inhibitors,	lectins,	and	in	the	case	of
tropical	lima	beans,	cyanide-generating
compounds	(American	and	European	lima
varieties	generate	little	or	no	cyanide).
Animals	fed	a	diet	of	raw	beans	will	actually
lose	weight.	All	of	these	potentially	toxic
compounds	are	disabled	or	removed	by



cooking.

Seed	Colors	The	colors	of	beans	and	peas	are
determined	 mainly	 by	 anthocyanin	 pigments
in	 the	 seed	 coat.	 Solid	 reds	 and	 blacks
generally	 survive	 cooking,	 while	 mottled
patterns	 become	washed	out	when	 the	water-
soluble	 pigments	 leak	 into	 adjacent
nonpigmented	 areas	 and	 into	 the	 cooking
water.	 The	 intensity	 of	 color	 is	 best
maintained	 by	 minimizing	 the	 amount	 of
cooking	water;	 start	 the	beans	 in	 just	 enough
water	 to	cover,	and	add	water	only	as	needed
to	 keep	 them	 barely	 covered.	 Persistently
green	peas	and	dried	beans	owe	their	color	to
chlorophyll.

Pale	beans	with	translucent	seed	coats
sometimes	develop	a	delicate	pink	color	in	the
small	embryonic	stem	when	they’re	cooked.
This	is	probably	a	result	of	the	same	reaction
that	causes	the	reddening	of	poached	quinces
and	pears	(p.	281).



Legumes	and	Health:
The	Intriguing	Soybean

Beans	and	peas	are	generally	excellent
sources	of	a	number	of	nutrients,	including
protein,	iron,	various	B	vitamins,	folic	acid,
and	starch	or	oil.	Varieties	with	colored	seed
coats	provide	valuable	antioxidants.	Among
all	the	legumes,	however,	soybeans	appear	to
have	unusual	potential	for	affecting	human
health.	Epidemiological	studies	have	shown
that	countries	in	which	soybeans	are	a	staple
food,	notably	China	and	Japan,	have
significantly	lower	rates	of	heart	disease	and
cancer.	It	may	be	that	soybeans	are	part	of	the
explanation.

The	 anatomy	 of	 a	 legume	 seed.	 A	 side	 view
with	 one	 of	 the	 two	 cotyledons	 removed	 to



show	 the	 embryo.	 The	 hilum	 is	 a	 small	 pore
through	which	water	 can	pass	directly	 to	 the
embryo;	 it	and	 the	seed	coat	control	 the	rate
at	which	dry	beans	and	peas	absorb	water	and
soften	during	cooking.

It	turns	out	that	soybeans	contain	storage
forms	of	several	phenolic	compounds	called
isoflavones,	which	are	liberated	by	the	action
of	our	intestinal	bacteria	as	active	compounds
(genistein,	daidzein,	and	glycitein)	that
resemble	the	human	hormone	estrogen.	The
active	forms	are	therefore	referred	to	as
“phytoestrogens”	(from	the	Greek	phyton,
“leaf”).	Mung	beans	and	other	legumes	also
contain	isoflavones,	but	in	much	smaller
quantities.	(Of	commonly	eaten	soy	foods,	the
boiled	whole	beans	contain	by	far	the	greatest
concentration	of	isoflavones,	about	double	the
amount	found	in	tofu.)	Phytoestrogens	do
appear	to	have	hormone-like	and	other	effects
on	the	human	body.	There’s	evidence	that
they	may	slow	bone	loss	and	the	development



of	prostate	cancer	and	heart	disease.	However,
some	studies	suggest	that	phytoestrogens	can
worsen	preexisting	breast	cancer,	and	are
protective	against	some	cancers	only	when
consumed	during	adolescence.	Our
understanding	of	phytoestrogens	is	still	very
incomplete.	It’s	too	early	to	say	whether
soybeans	are	more	beneficial	to	human	health
than	any	other	seed,	or	whether	it’s	a	good
idea	to	eat	them	often.
Saponins	are	soap-like	defensive

compounds	that	have	a	water-soluble	end	and
a	fat-soluble	end,	so	they	can	act	as
emulsifiers	and	foam	stabilizers.	They’re	one
of	the	reasons	that	a	pot	of	soybeans	boils
over	so	readily!	Soybeans	are	a	rich	source	of
saponins,	which	may	make	up	5%	of	their
total	weight,	about	half	of	which	is	in	the
hulls.	Some	plant	saponins	are	so	strong	that
they	damage	our	cell	membranes.	Soy
saponins	are	gentler,	and	bind	to	cholesterol
so	that	the	body	can’t	absorb	it	efficiently.



Soybeans	are	also	a	good	source	of
phytosterols,	chemical	relatives	of	cholesterol
that	also	interfere	with	our	absorption	of
cholesterol	and	thus	lower	blood	cholesterol
levels.

The	Problem	of	Legumes
and	Flatulence

Several	chemical	constituents	of	beans	are
responsible	for	an	uncomfortable,	sometimes
embarrassing	consequence	of	eating	legumes:
the	generation	of	gas	in	the	digestive	system.

The	 Cause:	 Indigestible	 Carbohydrates
Everyone	 produces	 a	 mixture	 of	 gases	 from
their	 intestine,	 about	a	quart	 a	day,	 thanks	 to
the	 growth	 and	 metabolism	 of	 our	 resident
bacteria.	Many	legumes,	especially	soy,	navy,
and	 lima	 beans,	 cause	 a	 sudden	 increase	 in
bacterial	 activity	 and	 gas	 production	 a	 few
hours	after	they’re	consumed.	This	is	because



they	 contain	 large	 amounts	 of	 carbohydrates
that	 human	 digestive	 enzymes	 can’t	 convert
into	 absorbable	 sugars.	 These	 carbohydrates
therefore	leave	the	upper	intestine	unchanged
and	 enter	 the	 lower	 reaches,	 where	 our
resident	 bacterial	 population	does	 the	 job	we
are	unable	to	do.

One	kind	of	troublesome	carbohydrate	is
the	oligosaccharides,	molecules	consisting	of
three,	four,	and	five	sugar	molecules	linked
together	in	an	unusual	way.	But	the	latest
research	suggests	that	the	oligosaccharides	are
not	the	primary	source	of	gas.	The	cell-wall
cements	generate	just	as	much	carbon	dioxide
and	hydrogen	as	the	oligosaccharides	—	and
beans	generally	contain	about	twice	as	much
of	these	carbohydrates	as	they	do
oligosaccharides.

The	 Cures:	 Soaking,	 Long	 Cooking	 A
commonly	 used	 method	 for	 reducing	 the
gassiness	 of	 beans	 is	 to	 boil	 them	 briefly	 in



excess	water,	let	them	stand	for	an	hour,	then
discard	 the	 soaking	 water	 and	 start	 the
cooking	with	fresh	water.	This	does	leach	out
most	of	the	water-soluble	oligosaccharides	—
but	it	also	leaches	out	significant	quantities	of
water-soluble	 vitamins,	 minerals,	 simple
sugars,	 and	 seed-coat	 pigments:	 that	 is,
nutrients,	 flavor,	 color,	 and	 antioxidants.
That’s	 a	 high	 price	 to	 pay.	An	 alternative	 is
simple	 prolonged	 cooking,	 which	 helps	 by
eventually	 breaking	 down	 much	 of	 the
oligosaccharides	 and	 cell-wall	 cements	 into
digestible	single	sugars.	Oligosaccharides	are
also	 consumed	 by	 the	 bean	 during
germination,	 and	 consumed	 by	 microbes
during	fermentation:	so	sprouts,	miso,	and	soy
sauce,	 as	well	 as	 extracts	 like	 bean	 curd,	 are
less	offensive	than	whole	beans.

Bean	Flavor

Beans	owe	their	typical	beany	flavor	to	a	large



endowment	of	the	enzyme	lipoxygenase,
which	breaks	unsaturated	fatty	acids	into
small,	odorous	molecules.	The	main
components	of	beaniness	are	grassy	hexanal
and	hexanol	and	mushroomy	octenol.
Lipoxygenase	gets	its	chance	to	act	when	the
bean	cells	are	damaged	and	there’s	enough
moisture	and	oxygen	available:	for	example,
when	fresh	beans	are	bruised,	or	dried
damaged	beans	are	soaked	or	brought	slowly
to	a	boil.	The	strong	beaniness	of	soybean
products	is	generally	accepted	in	Asia	but
objected	to	in	the	West,	where	food	scientists
have	developed	techniques	to	minimize	it	(see
box,	p.	494).	The	aroma	of	cooked	beans	also
has	a	distinct	sweet	note,	which	comes	from
lactones,	furans,	and	maltol.

Some	beans	may	be	warehoused	for	years
before	they	find	their	way	to	supermarkets	or
into	prepared	foods.	Prolonged	storage	causes
legumes	to	lose	some	typical	flavor	notes	and
accumulate	stale	ones.



Bean	Sprouts

Bean	sprouts	are	best	known	from	the	cooking
of	China,	where	mung	bean	sprouts	became
popular	in	the	south	and	soybean	sprouts	in
the	north	about	1,000	years	ago.	Many	other
legumes	are	sprouted	in	Asia	and	elsewhere,
from	the	tiny	alfalfa	seed	to	the	massive	fava
bean.	Cooks	sometimes	trim	larger	sprouts	of
their	rootlets,	primordial	leaves,	and	dense
cotyledons,	so	that	the	subtle	texture	and
flavor	of	the	stems	can	be	enjoyed	without
distraction.	Sprouts	are	generally	cooked
minimally	if	at	all	to	preserve	the	delicate
flavor	and	tender	but	crunchy	texture.

Cooking	Legumes

Most	mature	legume	seeds	are	starchy,	and
require	cooking	in	water	to	soften	the
cotyledon	cell	walls	and	starch	granules.
Fresh	shell	beans	are	mature	but	still	moist,



and	so	cook	fairly	quickly,	in	10	to	30
minutes.	They’re	also	sweeter	than	the	dried
beans.	Peas,	lima	beans,	cranberry	beans,	and
soybeans	(edamame)	are	the	legumes	most
commonly	eaten	fresh.

Whole	dried	beans	and	peas	can	take	an
hour	or	two	to	cook,	much	longer	than	the
dried	grains.	This	is	due	in	part	to	their	larger
size,	but	also	to	the	effectiveness	of	their	seed
coat	at	controlling	the	absorption	of	water,
which	is	necessary	for	softening	the	cell	walls
and	starch.	Initially	water	can	enter	only
through	the	hilum,	the	little	pore	on	the
curved	back	of	the	bean.	After	30–60	minutes
in	cool	water	(more	quickly	in	hot),	the	seed
coat	has	become	fully	hydrated	and	expanded.
From	this	point	on,	most	of	the	water	flowing
into	the	bean	passes	across	the	entire	seed
coat	surface,	but	the	rate	of	flow	is	still
limited.	Legumes	whose	hulls	have	been
removed	—	split	peas,	many	Indian	dals	—
cook	more	quickly	and	disintegrate	into	a



mush.

The	 Cooking	 Liquid	 The	 quality	 of	 cooked
beans	 and	 the	 time	 it	 takes	 to	 cook	 them
depend	 on	 the	 cooking	 liquid.	 In	 vegetable
cooking,	 large	volumes	of	vigorously	boiling
water	 minimize	 enzyme	 damage	 to	 vitamins
and	pigments	by	keeping	the	temperature	high
when	 the	 vegetables	 are	 added.	 Long-cooked
legumes	are	a	different	story.	The	greater	the
volume	 of	 cooking	 water,	 the	 more	 color,
flavor,	 and	 nutrients	 are	 leached	 out	 of	 the
beans,	and	 the	more	 they’re	diluted.	So	 these
seeds	are	best	cooked	in	just	enough	water	for
them	 to	 soak	 up	and	 to	 cook	 in.	And	 though
boiling	 temperatures	 speed	 cooking,	 the
turbulence	 of	 boiling	 water	 can	 damage	 the
seed	coats	and	cause	the	beans	to	disintegrate;
lower	 temperatures	 (180–200ºF/80–93ºC)	 are
slower	but	gentler.

The	cooking	water’s	content	of	dissolved
substances	also	affects	cooking	times	and



textures.	Hard	water	with	high	levels	of
calcium	or	magnesium	actually	reinforces	the
bean	cell	walls	(p.	282).	It	can	therefore	slow
the	softening	of	the	beans	or	even	prevent
them	from	softening	fully.	Acidic	cooking
liquids	slow	the	dissolving	of	cell-wall
hemicelluloses	and	therefore	the	softening
process,	while	alkaline	cooking	water	has	the
reverse	effect.	Finally,	many	cooks	and
cookbooks	say	that	adding	salt	to	the	cooking
water	prevents	beans	from	softening.	It	does
slow	the	rate	at	which	they	absorb	water,	but
they	do	eventually	absorb	it	and	soften.	And
when	beans	are	pre-soaked	in	salted	water,
they	actually	cook	much	faster	(below).

Maintaining	 the	 Texture	 of	 Cooked	 Beans
Three	substances	slow	 the	softening	of	beans
and	therefore	make	it	possible	for	the	cook	to
simmer	 beans	 for	 hours	 or	 reheat	 them
without	 disintegrating	 them.	Acids	 make	 the
cell-wall	hemicelluloses	more	stable	and	 less



dissolvable;	sugar	 helps	 reinforce	 cell-wall
structure	and	slows	the	swelling	of	the	starch
granules;	 and	calcium	 cross-links	 and
reinforces	 cell-wall	 pectins.	 So	 such
ingredients	as	molasses	—	somewhat	acid	and
rich	 in	both	 sugar	 and	calcium	—	and	acidic
tomatoes	 can	 preserve	 bean	 structure	 during
long	 cooking	 or	 reheating,	 as	 for	 example	 in
baked	beans.

Reducing	 Cooking	 Times	 by	 Presoaking
Though	beans	are	an	ideal	food	for	slow,	easy
cooking	 in	 a	 low	 oven,	 it’s	 sometimes
desirable	to	cook	them	faster.	In	mountainous
areas,	where	 high	 altitude	 lowers	 the	 boiling
point,	the	cooking	of	dry	beans	can	become	an
all-day	affair.

There	are	several	different	ways	to	reduce
the	cooking	time	of	beans	and	peas.	The
simplest	way	is	to	soak	dried	beans	in	water
before	cooking	them.	This	reduces	cooking
time	by	25%	or	more,	and	for	a	very	basic



reason:	heat	penetrates	a	dry	seed	faster	than
water	does.	If	beans	are	cooked	directly	from
the	dry	state,	much	of	the	cooking	time	is
actually	spent	waiting	for	water	to	get	to	the
center.	Meanwhile	the	outer	portions	of	the
bean	cook	more	than	they	need	to	and	may	get
undesirably	fragile.

Briefly	Fermented	Legumes	in	India
Though	 India	 isn’t	 as	 fond	 of	 fermented
foods	 as	many	 other	 countries,	 it	 did	 find
ways	of	turning	legume	and	rice	gruels	into
slightly	 raised	 pancakes	 and	 steamed
cakes.	 In	 the	 making	 of	 the	 cakes	 called
idli,	cooked	black	gram	and	rice	are	ground
and	 mixed	 to	 make	 a	 thick	 batter,	 then
allowed	 to	 ferment	 overnight.	 The	 same
lactic	 acid	 bacteria	 found	 in	 fermented
milks	 and	 creams	 (Leuconostoc
mesenteroides,	 Lactobacillus	 delbrueckii
a n d	L.	 lactis,	 Streptococcus	 faecalis)	 as
well	 as	 some	 yeasts	 (Geotrichum



candidum,	Torulopsis 	 species)	 feed	on	 the
sugars	 and	 produce	 acids,	 aroma
compounds,	 carbon	 dioxide	 gas,	 and
viscous,	 sticky	 carbohydrates	 that	 thicken
the	 batter	 and	 help	 trap	 the	 gas	 bubbles.
The	 batter	 is	 then	 steamed	 to	 produce	 a
spongy,	delicately	flavored	cake.	Dhokla	is
a	 similar	 preparation	made	 using	 rice	 and
chickpeas.	 The	dosa,	 a	 large	 fried	 disc,
crêpe-like	 but	 crisp,	 is	 made	 from	 a	 thin
fermented	 batter	 of	 rice	 and	 black	 gram.
Papadums,	 a	 familiar	 side	 dish	 in	 Indian
restaurants	 in	 the	West,	are	 thin	wafers	of
black	gram	paste	 that	has	been	allowed	 to
ferment	 for	 a	 few	 hours	 before	 being	 cut
into	discs	and	dried;	they’re	then	fried	and
develop	 a	 blistered,	 delicately	 brittle
texture.

Soaking	Times	Depend	on	Temperature
Medium-sized	beans	absorb	more	than	half	of
their	total	water	capacity	in	the	first	two	hours
of	soaking,	and	plateau	at	about	double	their



original	weight	after	10–12	hours.	As	the
soaking	temperature	goes	up,	absorption
accelerates;	and	if	the	beans	are	first	blanched
for	1.5	minutes	in	boiling	water,	the
subsequent	water	absorption	takes	only	two	to
three	hours	in	cool	water,	because	the
blanching	rapidly	hydrates	the	seed	coat	that
controls	water	movement.

Salt	 and	 Baking	 Soda	 Speed	 Cooking
Cooking	 times	 can	 be	 reduced	 even	more	 by
adding	 various	 salts	 to	 the	 soaking	 water.
Plain	 salt	 at	 a	 concentration	 around	 1%	 (10
g/l,	or	2	teaspoons/qt)	speeds	cooking	greatly,
apparently	 because	 the	 sodium	 displaces
magnesium	from	 the	cell-wall	pectins	and	so
makes	 them	 more	 easily	 dissolved.	 Baking
soda	 at	 0.5%	 (1	 teaspoon/qt)	 can	 reduce	 the
cooking	 time	 by	 nearly	 75%;	 it	 contains
sodium	 and	 in	 addition	 is	 alkaline,	 which
facilitates	 the	 dissolving	 of	 the	 cell-wall
hemicelluloses.	 Of	 course,	 added	 salts	 affect



both	the	taste	and	texture	of	the	cooked	beans.
The	 alkalinity	 of	 baking	 soda	 can	 give	 an
unpleasantly	 slippery	 mouth	 feel	 and	 soapy
taste.	 And	 salt	 reduces	 the	 swelling	 and
gelation	 of	 starch	 granules	 within	 beans,
which	 means	 that	 it	 favors	 a	 mealy	 internal
texture	over	a	creamy	one.

Pressure	Cooking	 Thanks	 to	 its	 temperature
of	 around	250ºF/120ºC,	 pressure	 cooking	 can
cut	the	cooking	time	of	beans	and	peas	by	half
or	more.	 Salt-presoaked	 beans	may	 take	 just
10	minutes.

Persistently	 Hard	 Beans	 One	 problem	 that
cooks	commonly	encounter	when	cooking	dry
beans	is	that	some	batches	take	unusually	long
to	 soften,	or	never	quite	do	 soften.	This	may
have	 been	 caused	 by	 growing	 conditions	 on
the	farm,	or	storage	conditions	after	harvest.

“Hard-seed”	is	a	characteristic	found	in
beans	when	temperatures	are	high	and
humidity	and	water	supply	are	low	during	the



growing	season.	The	outer	seed	coat	gets	very
water-resistant,	so	it	takes	much	longer	for
water	to	move	into	the	bean	interior.	Hard-
seed	beans	are	usually	smaller	than	normal
beans,	so	they	can	sometimes	be	avoided	by
picking	over	the	beans	and	discarding	the
smallest	ones	before	cooking.

“Hard-to-cook”	beans,	on	the	other	hand,
are	normal	when	harvested,	but	become
resistant	to	softening	when	they’re	stored	for
a	long	time	—	months	—	at	warm
temperatures	and	high	humidities.	This
resistance	results	from	a	number	of	changes	in
bean	cell	walls	and	interiors,	including	the
formation	of	woody	lignin,	the	conversion	of
phenolic	compounds	into	tannins	that	cross-
link	proteins,	and	the	denaturation	of	storage
proteins	to	form	a	water-resistant	coating
around	the	starch	granules.	There’s	no	way	to
reverse	these	changes	and	make	hard-to-cook
beans	as	soft	as	regular	beans.	And	there’s	no
way	to	spot	them	before	cooking.	Once



cooked,	they’re	likely	to	be	smaller	than
normal	and	so	may	be	picked	out	before
serving.

The	Composition	of	Dry	and	Sprouted
Legumes

Legume
Seed Water Protein Carbohydrate Oil

Common	bean 14 22 61 2
Fava	bean 14 25 58 1
Lima	bean 14 20 64 2
Mung	bean 14 24 60 1
sprout 90 4 7 0.2
Soybean 10 37 34 18
sprout 86 6 6 1
Lentil 14 25 60 1
Chickpea 14 21 61 5
Pea 14 24 60 1



Roasting	Though	most	legumes	are	cooked	in
liquid	 to	 soften	 their	 starch	 and	 cell	walls,	 a
few	 are	 parched	 in	 dry	 heat	 to	 create	 a	 crisp
texture.	 Peanuts	 are	 the	 most	 commonly
roasted	 of	 the	 legumes,	 thanks	 to	 their	 nut-
like	 oil	 content	 and	 relatively	 tender
cotyledons.	 Other	 beans	 with	 lower	 oil
contents,	notably	soybeans	and	chickpeas,	are
also	roasted	to	make	a	nut-like	seed.	Because
their	cotyledons	are	harder,	 they’re	soaked	in
water	 first,	 then	 roasted.	 The	 initial	 high
temperature	and	moisture	soften	the	cotyledon
cell	 walls	 and	 starch	 granules;	 continued
roasting	evaporates	most	of	 the	water	 to	give
a	 crisp	 rather	 than	hard	 texture.	The	 roasting
can	be	done	 in	a	hot	pan	or	oven,	or	—	as	 is
done	 in	Asia	—	 in	 sand	 that	has	been	heated
to	 500–600ºF/	 250–300ºC.	 In	 India,	 for
example,	 chickpeas	 are	 heated	 to	 around
180ºF/80ºC,	moistened	with	water,	 rested	 for
some	 hours,	 then	 roasted	 in	 hot	 sand	 so	 that



they	puff	and	the	seed	coat	can	be	rubbed	off.

Characteristics	of	Some
common	Legumes

Fava	or	Broad	Beans	The	fava	bean	or	broad
bean,	Vicia	faba,	is	the	largest	of	the
commonly	eaten	legumes,	and	was	the	only
bean	known	to	Europe	until	the	discovery	of
the	New	World.	It	apparently	originated	in
west	or	central	Asia,	and	was	among	the
earliest	domesticated	plants.	Larger	cultivated
forms	have	been	found	in	Mediterranean	sites
dating	to	3000	BCE.	There	are	several	sizes,
the	largest	of	which	seems	to	have	been
developed	in	the	Mediterranean	region	around
500	CE.	China	is	the	world’s	largest	producer.

Fava	beans	are	unusual	in	having	a	thick,
tough	seed	coat	that’s	often	removed	from
both	the	meaty	cotyledons	of	the	unripe	green
seeds	and	from	the	hard	dry	seeds.	A
blanching	in	alkaline	water	loosens	and



softens	the	coat.	In	Egypt,	the	popular	dish
called	ful	medames	is	made	by	boiling	the
mature	beans	until	soft,	then	flavoring	with
salt,	lemon	juice,	oil,	and	garlic.	Mature	fava
beans	are	also	sprouted,	then	boiled	to	make	a
soup.

Favism	 Eating	 fava	 beans	 is	 the	 cause	 of	 a
serious	disease,	favism,	in	people	who	have	an
inherited	 deficiency	 of	 a	 particular	 enzyme.
Most	 victims	 are	 children	 who	 live	 in	 the
southern	 Mediterranean	 and	 Middle	 East,	 or
whose	ancestors	came	from	that	region.	When
they	 are	 exposed	 to	 two	 unusual	 amino-acid
relatives	 (vicine	 and	 convicine)	 in	 the	 beans
and	 in	 the	 flower	 pollen,	 their	 bodies
metabolize	 these	 chemicals	 to	 forms	 that
damage	 their	 red	 blood	 cells	 and	 cause
serious,	sometimes	fatal	anemia.	The	enzyme
deficiency	 also	 turns	 out	 to	 suppress	 the
growth	 of	 the	 malaria	 parasite	 in	 red	 blood
cells,	 so	 it	 may	 actually	 have	 been	 an



advantageous	genetic	trait	before	malaria	was
brought	under	control.

Food	Words:	Bean,	Frijol
The	 term	 “bean”	 that	 we	 apply	 to	 many
different	legumes	from	Eurasia,	East	Asia,
and	 the	Americas	 originally	 referred	 only
to	 the	 fava	 bean.	 The	 Indo-European	 root
bhabha	gave	us	both	“fava”	and	“bean.”	By
Greek	 and	 Roman	 times,	 the	 African
cowpea	or	black-eyed	pea	was	also	known
in	 the	Mediterranean	 and	 given	 the	 Latin
n am e	phaseolus	 —	 the	 source	 of	 the
Spanish	frijol,	 and	 the	 scientific	 name	 for
the	common	beans	from	the	New	World.

Chickpea	 or	 Garbanzo	 Chickpeas	 are	 a
native	 of	 arid	 southwest	 Asia,	 and	 like	 the
fava	bean,	pea,	and	lentil	have	been	cultivated
for	 about	 9,000	 years.	 There	 are	 two	 general
types,	 desi	 and	 kabuli.	Desi	 are	 closer	 to	 the
wild	chickpea,	with	small	seeds,	a	thick,	tough



seed	 coat,	 and	 a	 dark	 color	 from	 abundant
phenolic	 compounds.	 They’re	 the	 main
variety	 grown	 in	 Asia,	 Iran,	 Ethiopia,	 and
Mexico.	The	kabuli	type,	more	common	in	the
Middle	 East	 and	 Mediterranean,	 is	 larger,
cream-colored,	 with	 a	 thin,	 light	 seed	 coat.
There	 are	 also	 varieties	 with	 dark	 green
cotyledons.	Chickpeas	 are	notable	 among	 the
legumes	 for	 being	 about	 5%	 oil	 by	 weight;
most	others	are	1–2%.

The	name	comes	from	the	bean’s	Latin
name,	cicer;	in	the	botanical	name,	Cicer
arietinum,	the	second	word	means	“ram-like”
and	refers	to	the	seed’s	resemblance	to	a
ram’s	head,	complete	with	curling	horns.	The
Spanish	garbanzo	derives	from	the	Greek
name.	Today,	this	legume	is	a	frequent
ingredient	in	many	Middle	Eastern	and	Indian
dishes.	Hummus	is	a	chickpea	paste	flavored
with	garlic,	paprika,	and	lemon	that	is	popular
in	the	eastern	Mediterranean;	in	parts	of	Italy,
flatbreads	are	made	from	chickpea	flour.



Chickpeas	are	the	most	important	legume	in
India,	where	they’re	hulled	and	split	to	make
chana	dal,	ground	into	flour	for	papadums,
pakoras,	and	other	fried	goods,	and	are	boiled,
roasted,	and	sprouted.

Common	 Bean,	 Lima	 Bean,	 Tepary	 Bean
The	common	bean,	lima	bean,	and	tepary	bean
are	the	important	domesticated	species	of	the
30	 or	 so	 species	 in	 the	 Central	 American
genus	Phaseolus.
Common	Bean	The	most	important	species	of
Phaseolus	is	P.	vulgaris,	or	the	common	bean.
The	ancestral	plant	was	a	native	of
southwestern	Mexico,	and	the	highest
consumption	of	the	common	bean	is	still	in
Latin	America.	It	first	came	under	cultivation
about	7,000	years	ago,	and	gradually	diffused
both	north	and	south,	reaching	the	major
continents	about	2,000	years	ago,	and	Europe
during	the	age	of	exploration.	The	common
bean	has	been	developed	into	many	hundreds



of	varieties	of	different	sizes,	shapes,	seed-
coat	colors	and	color	patterns,	shininess,	and
flavors.	Most	large-seeded	varieties	(kidney,
cranberry,	large	red,	and	white)	came
originally	from	the	Andes,	and	became
established	in	the	American	Northeast,
Europe,	and	Africa;	smaller-seeded	central
American	types	(pinto,	black,	small	red,	and
white)	were	concentrated	in	the	American
Southwest.	In	the	United	States,	there	are
more	than	a	dozen	commercial	categories
based	on	color	and	size.	Beans	are	cooked	in
many	ways:	simply	boiled,	made	into	stews,
soups,	pastes,	cakes,	and	sweet	desserts.

Popping	 Bean	 A	 special	 kind	 of	 common
bean	 is	 the	nuña,	or	popping	bean,	which	has
been	 cultivated	 for	 several	 thousand	 years	 in
the	high	Andes.	 It	can	be	popped	by	 just	3–4
minutes	of	high	dry	heat	—	a	great	advantage
in	 the	 fuel-poor	 mountains	 —	 or	 in	 the
microwave	 oven.	 It	 doesn’t	 expand	 nearly	 as



much	 as	 popcorn	 and	 remains	 fairly	 dense,
with	a	powdery	texture	and	nutty	flavor.

Lima	Bean	 The	 use	 of	 the	 common	 bean	 in
Peru	was	predated	by	the	larger	lima	bean	—
the	name	derives	from	Peru’s	capital	—	which
was	 native	 to	 Central	 America	 and
domesticated	 somewhat	 later	 than	 the
common	bean.	Both	species	were	exported	to
Europe	 by	 Spanish	 explorers.	 The	 lima	 bean
was	 introduced	 to	Africa	 via	 the	 slave	 trade,
and	 is	 now	 the	 main	 legume	 of	 that
continent’s	 tropics.	 The	 wild	 type	 and	 some
tropical	 varieties	 contain	 potentially	 toxic
quantities	 of	 a	 cyanide	 defense	 system,	 and
must	 be	 thoroughly	 cooked	 to	 be	 safe
(common	 commercial	 varieties	 are	 cyanide-
free).	 Lima	 beans	 are	 eaten	 both	 fresh	 and
dried.

Tepary	 Bean 	 Tepary	 beans,	 small	 brown
natives	 of	 the	 American	 southwest,	 are
unusually	 tolerant	 of	 heat	 and	 water	 stress.



They’re	 especially	 rich	 in	 protein,	 iron,
calcium,	 and	 fiber,	 and	 have	 a	 distinctive,
sweet	 flavor	 reminiscent	 of	 maple	 sugar	 or
molasses.

Lentil	 The	 lentil	 is	 probably	 the	 oldest
cultivated	 legume,	 contemporaneous	 with
wheat	and	barley	and	often	growing	alongside
these	 grasses.	 Its	 native	 ground	 is	 arid
Southwest	Asia,	and	it’s	now	commonly	eaten
across	 Europe	 and	 Asia.	 Most	 lentils	 are
produced	 in	 India	and	Turkey,	with	Canada	a
distant	 third.	 The	 Latin	 word	 for	 lentil,	lens,
gives	 us	 our	 word	 for	 a	 lentil-shaped,	 or
doubly	 convex,	 piece	 of	 glass	 (the	 coinage
dates	 from	 the	 17th	 century).	Lentils	 contain
low	 levels	of	antinutritional	 factors	and	cook
quickly.

Lentils	are	divided	into	two	groups:
varieties	with	flat	and	large	seeds,	5	mm	or
more	across,	and	varieties	with	small,	more
rounded	seeds.	Large	varieties	are	more



commonly	grown,	while	the	small,	finer-
textured	ones	include	the	prized	green	French
lentille	du	Puy,	the	black	beluga,	and	the
green	Spanish	pardina.	There	are	varieties
with	brown,	red,	black,	and	green	seedcoats;
most	have	yellow	cotyledons,	though	some
are	red	or	green.	Green	seed	coats	can	turn
brown	with	age	and	during	cooking,	thanks	to
the	clustering	of	phenolic	compounds	into
large	pigmented	complexes	(p.	269).	Because
they	are	flat	and	thin,	with	thin	seed	coats,
cooking	water	only	has	to	penetrate	a
millimeter	or	two	from	each	side,	so	lentils
soften	much	more	quickly	than	most	beans
and	peas,	in	an	hour	or	less.

Traditional	lentil	dishes	include	Indian
masoor	dal,	whole	or	hulled	and	split	red
lentils	cooked	into	a	porridge,	and	Middle
Eastern	koshary	or	mujaddharah,	a	mixture	of
whole	lentils	and	rice.
Pea,	Black-eyed	Pea,	Pigeon	Pea



Pea	 The	 pea	 has	 been	 cultivated	 for	 around
9,000	 years	 and	 spread	 quite	 early	 from	 the
Middle	East	 to	 the	Mediterranean,	 India,	 and
China.	 It’s	 a	 cool-climate	 legume	 that	 grows
during	 the	 wet	 Mediterranean	 winter	 and	 in
the	 spring	 of	 temperate	 countries.	 It	 was	 an
important	 protein	 source	 in	 Europe	 in	 the
Middle	Ages	 and	 later,	 as	 the	 old	 children’s
rhyme	 attests:	 “Pease	 porridge	 hot,	 Pease
porridge	cold,	Pease	porridge	in	the	pot,	Nine
days	 old.”	 Today,	 two	 main	 varieties	 are
cultivated:	 a	 starchy,	 smooth-coated	 one	 that
gives	 us	 dried	 and	 split	 peas,	 and	 a	 wrinkly
type	 with	 a	 higher	 sugar	 content,	 which	 is
usually	 eaten	 when	 immature	 as	 a	 green
vegetable.	Peas	are	unusual	among	legumes	in
retaining	some	green	chlorophyll	 in	 their	dry
cotyledons;	 their	 characteristic	 flavor	 comes
from	 a	 compound	 related	 to	 the	 aroma
compound	 in	 green	 peppers	 (a	 methoxy-
isobutyl	pyrazine).



Black-eyed	Pea	The	so-called	black-eyed	pea
or	cowpea	 is	not	 really	a	pea,	but	an	African
relative	of	 the	mung	bean	 that	was	known	 to
Greece	and	Rome	and	brought	to	the	southern
United	 States	 with	 the	 slave	 trade.	 It	 has	 an
eye-like	anthocyanin	pigmentation	around	the
hilum,	and	a	distinctive	aroma.	A	variety	that
produces	 a	 very	 long	 pod	 and	 small	 seeds	 is
the	 yard-long	 bean,	 a	 common	 green
vegetable	in	China	(p.	336).

Pigeon	Pea	Pigeon	pea	is	a	distant	relative	of
the	 common	 bean,	 native	 to	 India,	 and	 now
grown	 throughout	 the	 tropics.	 In	 India	 it’s
called	 toor	dal	 or	 redgram	because	 the	 tough
seed	coat	of	many	varieties	is	reddish	brown,
though	 it’s	 most	 often	 hulled	 and	 split,	 and
the	cotyledons	are	yellow.	It’s	been	cultivated
for	 around	 2,000	 years,	 and	 is	 made	 into	 a
simple	 porridge.	 Like	 the	 other	 grams,	 it
contains	 little	 in	 the	 way	 of	 antinutritional
factors.



Mung	Bean,	Black	Gram,	Azuki

The	Grams	The	legume	genus	Vigna,	which	is
native	 to	 the	Old	World,	 provides	 the	 small-
seeded	“grams”	of	India	and	a	few	other	Asian
and	 African	 seeds.	 Most	 of	 them	 have	 the
advantages	of	being	small,	quick-cooking,	and
relatively	 free	 of	 antinutritional	 and
discomforting	 compounds.	 Green	 gram,	 or
mung	beans,	are	native	 to	 India,	 spread	early
on	 to	 China,	 and	 are	 now	 the	 most	 widely
grown	 of	 this	 group	 thanks	 to	 the	 popularity
of	their	sprouts.	Black	gram	or	urad	dal	is	the
most	prized	of	the	legumes	in	India,	where	it
has	been	cultivated	for	more	than	5,000	years
and	 is	 eaten	 whole,	 split	 and	 dehulled,	 and
ground	into	flour	for	cakes	and	breads.

Rice	beans	are	eaten	primarily	in	Thailand
and	elsewhere	in	Indochina.	The	African
bambara	groundnut	resembles	the	peanut	in
being	borne	underground	and	containing	oil,
but	it	isn’t	nearly	as	rich	as	the	peanut.	In



West	Africa,	the	seeds	are	eaten	fresh,	canned,
boiled,	roasted,	and	made	into	porridges	and
cakes.

Azuki	 Bean	 Azuki	 or	 adzuki	 (Chinese	chi
dou)	 is	 an	 East	 Asian	 species	 of	Vigna,	 V.
angularis,	 about	 8	 by	 5	 by	 5	mm,	 and	most
commonly	a	deep	maroon	color,	which	makes
it	a	favorite	ingredient	for	festive	occasions.	It
was	 cultivated	 in	 Korea	 and	 China	 at	 least
3,000	years	ago,	and	taken	later	to	Japan;	it’s
now	 the	 second	most	 important	 legume	 after
the	 soybean	 in	 both	 Korea	 and	 Japan.	Azuki
are	 a	 favorite	 sprouting	 seed,	 and	 are	 also
candied,	infused	with	sugar	to	make	a	dessert
topping,	and	used	as	a	base	for	a	hot	drink.	In
Japan	most	of	the	azuki	crop	is	made	into	an,
a	 sweet	 paste	 composed	 of	 equal	 parts	 sugar
and	 ground	 twice-boiled	 azuki,	 which	 are
kneaded	together.

Lupins	 Lupins,	lupini	 in	 Italian,	 come	 from
several	 different	 species	 of	Lupinus	 (albus,



angustifolius,	 luteus).	 They’re	 unusual
because	they	contain	no	starch	—	they’re	30–
40%	 protein,	 5–10%	 oil,	 and	 up	 to	 50%
soluble	 but	 indigestible	 carbohydrates
(soluble	fiber,	p.	258).	Though	there	are	some
“sweet”	 types	 that	 require	 no	 special
processing,	many	 varieties	 contain	 bitter	 and
toxic	alkaloids	and	so	are	soaked	in	water	for
up	 to	 several	 days	 to	 leach	 these	 substances
out.	They’re	then	boiled	until	soft,	and	served
in	 oil,	 or	 toasted	 and	 salted.	 A	 New	 World
species,	L.	mutabilis,	grown	in	the	Andes,	has
a	protein	content	approaching	50%	of	the	dry
seed	weight.

Soybeans	and	Their
Transformations

Finally,	the	most	versatile	legume.	Soybeans
were	domesticated	in	northern	China	more
than	3,000	years	ago,	and	eventually	became	a
staple	food	throughout	much	of	Asia;	their



spread	was	probably	contemporary	with	and
encouraged	by	the	vegetarian	doctrine	of
Buddhism.	They	were	little	known	in	the	West
until	late	in	the	19th	century,	but	today	the
United	States	supplies	half	of	the	world
production,	with	China	in	fourth	place	after
Brazil	and	Argentina.	However,	most	U.S.
soybeans	feed	not	people	but	livestock,	and
much	of	the	rest	are	processed	to	make
cooking	oil	and	a	host	of	industrial	materials.

The	soybean’s	many	guises	have	been
inspired	by	both	its	great	virtues	and	its
defects.	Soybeans	are	exceptionally	nutritious,
with	double	the	protein	content	of	other
legumes,	a	near-ideal	balance	of	amino	acids,
a	rich	endowment	of	oil,	and	a	number	of
minor	constituents	that	may	contribute	to	our
long-term	health	(p.	485).	At	the	same	time,
they’re	pretty	unappealing.	They	contain
abundant	antinutritional	factors	and	gas-
producing	oligosaccharides	and	fiber.	When
boiled	in	the	usual	way,	they	develop	a	strong



“beany”	flavor.	And	when	cooked	whole	as
other	beans	are,	they	don’t	become
appealingly	creamy;	since	they	contain	a
negligible	amount	of	starch,	their	texture
remains	somewhat	firm.	The	Chinese	and
others	developed	two	basic	ways	of	making
soybeans	more	palatable:	extracting	their
protein	and	oil	in	the	form	of	a	milk	and	then
concentrating	them	in	cheese-like	curds;	and
encouraging	the	growth	of	microbes	that
consume	undesirable	substances	and	generate
an	appealing	flavor.	The	results	were	bean
curd	and	soymilk	skins;	and	soy	sauce	and
miso,	tempeh	and	natto.

Fresh	 Soybeans	 One	 other	 way	 to	 make
soybeans	more	palatable	is	to	eat	them	before
they’re	 fully	 mature,	 when	 they’re	 sweeter,
contain	 lower	 levels	 of	 gassy	 and
antinutritional	 substances,	 and	 have	 a	 less
pronounced	 beany	 flavor.	 Fresh	 soybeans,
Japanese	edamame	 or	 Chinese	mao	 dou,	 are



specialized	 varieties	 harvested	 at	 80%
maturity,	still	sweet	and	crisp	and	green,	then
boiled	 for	 a	 few	 minutes	 in	 salted	 water.
Green	 soybeans	 are	 around	 15%	 protein	 and
10%	oil.

Soybean	 Milk	 The	 traditional	 method	 for
making	soymilk	is	to	soak	the	beans	until	soft,
grind	them,	and	either	sieve	out	the	solids	and
cook	 the	milk	 (China)	or	cook	 the	slurry	and
then	sieve	out	the	solids	(Japan).	The	result	is
a	 watery	 fluid	 filled	 with	 soy	 proteins	 and
microscopic	droplets	of	soy	oil.	Either	method
results	 in	 a	 strong	 soy	 flavor.	 The	 modern
method	that	minimizes	enzyme	action	and	soy
flavor	 is	 to	 soak	 the	 dry	 beans	 (an	 hour	 at
150ºF/65ºC	 allows	 them	 to	 absorb	 their	 full
weight	 in	 water	 without	 significant	 cell
damage),	and	then	either	quickly	cook	them	to
180–212ºF/80–100ºC	before	grinding,	or	grind
them	in	that	temperature	range	in	a	preheated
grinder	and	preheated	water.



In	the	West,	soymilk	has	become	a	popular
alternative	to	cow’s	milk,	with	a	roughly
similar	protein	and	fat	content,	but	the	fat	less
saturated	(soy	milk	must	be	fortified	with
calcium	in	order	to	be	a	good	nutritional
substitute).	But	it	is	dilute,	textureless,	bland,
and	not	very	versatile.	The	Chinese	found	two
ways	to	make	it	more	interesting	(and	to
remove	the	gas-causing	oligosaccharides):
coagulate	the	milk	into	surface	skins,	or
coagulate	it	into	curd.

Soymilk	Skin	When	animal	or	seed	milks	are
heated	 in	 an	 uncovered	 pot,	 a	 skin	 of
coagulated	protein	 forms	on	 the	 surface.	The
skin	 forms	 because	 proteins	 unfolded	 by	 the
heat	concentrate	at	the	surface,	get	tangled	up
with	 each	other,	 and	 then	 lose	 their	moisture
to	the	dry	room	air.	As	they	dry,	they	get	even
more	tightly	tangled,	and	form	a	thin	but	solid
protein	 sheet,	 entrapping	 oil	 droplets	 and
developing	a	fibrous,	chewy	texture.



The	Beany	Flavor	of	Soybeans
The	 strong	 aroma	 of	 simply	 cooked
soybeans	 results	 from	 two	 qualities:	 their
high	content	of	polyunsaturated	oil,	which
is	 especially	 vulnerable	 to	 oxidation,	 and
their	 highly	 active	 oil-breaking	 enzymes.
When	 the	 cells	 of	 the	 bean	 are	 damaged
and	 their	 contents	 mixed	 together,	 the
enzymes	and	oxygen	break	the	long	carbon
chains	 of	 the	 oil	 into	 fragments	 five,	 six,
and	 eight	 carbon	 atoms	 long.	 These
fragments	 have	 aromas	 reminiscent	 of
grass,	paint,	cardboard,	and	rancid	fat,	and
the	 combination	 creates	 a	 smell	 usually
described	as	“beany.”	Some	bitter	taste	and
astringency	 also	 develop,	 probably	 due	 to
free	 fatty	 acids	 or	 to	 soy	 isoflavones	 that
are	 liberated	 from	 their	 storage	 form	 (p.
485).

The	key	to	minimizing	the	development
of	beany	 flavor	 is	 to	 inactivate	 the	beans’
enzymes	 quickly,	 before	 they	 have	 a



chance	 to	 attack	 the	 oils.	 This	 is	 done	 by
soaking	 the	 beans	 to	 speed	 subsequent
cooking,	 and	 then	 immersing	 them	 in
boiling	water	or	pressure-cooking	them.
Such	skins	are	usually	an	annoyance,	but

some	cultures	make	a	virtue	of	them	and	turn
them	into	a	dish.	The	Indians	do	this	with
cow’s	milk,	and	for	several	centuries	the
Chinese	have	been	using	soymilk	to	make	dou
fu	pi,	the	Japanese	yuba,	which	they	layer
together	to	form	a	variety	of	sweet	and	savory
products,	some	of	them	shaped	into	flowers,
fish,	birds,	even	pigs’	heads.	The	skins	are
also	meltingly	delicious	when	eaten	just	as
they’re	taken	from	the	milk.	At	some
Japanese	restaurants,	a	small	pot	of	soy	milk
is	heated	at	the	table	so	diners	can	remove	and
eat	the	skins	as	they	form,	then	add	a	pinch	of
salts	to	the	remaining	liquid	and	coagulate	it
into	soft	tofu.

Bean	Curd,	or	Tofu	Bean	curd	is	curdled	soy



milk,	 a	 concentrated	mass	 of	 protein	 and	 oil
formed	by	coagulating	 the	dissolved	proteins
with	 salts	 that	 yoke	 them	 and	 the	 protein-
coated	 oil	 droplets	 together.	 Bean	 curd	 was
invented	in	China	around	2,000	years	ago,	was
well	 known	 by	 500	CE,	 and	 became	 a	 daily
food	 beginning	 around	 1300.	 Chinese	 bean
curd	 is	 traditionally	 coagulated	with	 calcium
sulfate,	 Japanese	 bean	 curd	 and	 bean	 curd
from	 coastal	 regions	 of	 China	with	what	 the
Japanese	call	nigari,	a	mixture	of	magnesium
and	 calcium	 salts	 left	 over	 when	 table	 salt,
sodium	 chloride,	 is	 crystallized	 from
seawater.

Making	 Bean	 Curd	 To	 make	 bean	 curd,
cooked	 soy	 milk	 is	 cooled	 to	 about
175ºF/78ºC,	 then	 coagulated	with	 calcium	 or
magnesium	salts	dissolved	in	a	small	amount
of	water.	The	coagulation	takes	8–30	minutes.
When	 the	 delicate,	 cloud-like	 curds	 have
formed,	the	remaining	“whey”	is	ladled	off,	or



the	 curd	 is	 broken	 up	 to	 release	 water	 and
drained.	The	resulting	mass	is	then	pressed	for
15–25	 minutes	 while	 still	 quite	 hot,	 around
160ºF/70ºC,	in	order	to	form	a	cohesive	mass
that’s	around	85%	water,	8%	protein,	and	4%
oil.	In	commercial	production,	the	curd	is	cut
into	 blocks,	 packaged	 in	 water,	 and	 the
packages	 pasteurized	 by	 immersion	 in	 hot
water.

Soft	or	silken	tofu,	with	a	custard-like
texture,	is	made	by	coagulating	the	soymilk	in
the	package	so	that	the	curd	remains	intact,
full	of	moisture,	and	delicate.

Freezing	Bean	Curd	 Tofu	 is	 one	 of	 the	 few
foods	that	can	be	usefully	altered	by	freezing.
When	 it	 freezes,	 the	 coagulated	 proteins
become	even	more	concentrated,	and	the	solid
ice	 crystals	 form	 pockets	 in	 the	 protein
network.	 When	 the	 frozen	 curd	 thaws,	 the
liquid	water	flows	from	the	toughened	spongy
network,	especially	when	 the	curd	 is	pressed.



The	 sponge	 is	 then	 ready	 to	 absorb	 flavorful
cooking	 liquids,	 and	 has	 a	 chewier,	 meatier
texture.

An	Early	Description	of	Tofu
One	 of	 the	 earliest	 European	 accounts	 of
soybean	 curd	 is	 Friar	 Domingo
Navarrete’s,	 which	 dates	 from	 the	 17th
century.	He	called	it
the	most	usual,	common,	and	cheap	sort	of
food	all	China	abounds	in,	and	which	all	in
that	empire	eat,	from	the	Emperor	to	the
meanest	Chinese;	the	Emperor	and	great
men	as	a	dainty,	the	common	sort	as
necessary	sustenance.	It	is	called	Teu	Fu,
that	is	paste	of	kidney	beans.	I	did	not	see
how	they	made	it.	They	drew	the	milk	out
of	the	kidney	beans,	and	turning	it,	make
great	cakes	of	it	like	cheeses,	as	big	as	a
large	sieve,	and	five	or	six	fingers	thick.
All	the	mass	is	as	white	as	the	very	snow,
to	look	to	nothing	can	be	finer…Alone	it	is



insipid,	but	very	good	dressed	as	I	say	and
excellent	fried	in	butter.

Fermented	Bean	Curd	Sufu	 (tou	 fu	ru,	 fu	ru)
is	 soybean	 curd	 fermented	 by	 molds	 in	 the
genera	Actinomucor	and	Mucor,	producing	the
Chinese	 and	 vegetarian	 equivalent	 of	 mold-
ripened	milk	cheeses.

Fermented	 Soybean	 Products:	 Soy	 Sauce,
Miso,	 Tempeh,	 Natto	 The	 great	 appeal	 of
miso	 and	 soy	 sauce,	 long-fermented	 soy
products,	 is	 their	 strong,	 distinctive,	 and
delicious	 flavor.	 It	 develops	 when	 microbes
break	 down	 the	 bean	 proteins	 and	 other
components	 and	 transform	 them	 into	 savory
substances	 that	 then	 react	with	 each	 other	 to
generate	 additional	 layers	 of	 flavor.	 Tempeh
and	 natto	 are	 quick-fermented	 soy	 products
with	their	own	unusual	qualities.

Two-Stage	 Fermentations	 Asian	 mold
fermentations	 generally	 involve	 two	 distinct



stages.	 In	 the	 first,	 dormant	 green	 spores	 of
Aspergillus	 molds	 are	 mixed	 with	 cooked
grains	or	soybeans,	which	are	then	kept	warm,
moist,	and	well	aerated.	The	spores	germinate
and	develop	into	a	mass	of	thread-like	hyphae,
which	 produce	 digestive	 enzymes	 that	 break
down	the	food	for	energy	and	building	blocks.
The	second	stage	begins	after	about	two	days,
when	 the	 enzymes	 are	 at	 their	 peak.	 The
mixture	 of	 food	 and	 hyphae,	 called	chhü	 in
China	and	koji	in	Japan,	is	now	immersed	in	a
salt	 brine,	 often	 along	 with	 more	 cooked
soybeans.	In	the	oxygen-poor	brine,	the	molds
die,	 but	 their	 enzymes	 continue	 to	 work.	At
the	 same	 time,	 microbes	 that	 thrive	 in	 the
absence	of	oxygen	—	salt-tolerant	 lactic	acid
bacteria	 and	 yeasts	 —	 grow	 in	 the	 brine,
consume	 some	 of	 the	 building	 blocks,	 and
contribute	 their	 own	 flavorful	 by-products	 to
the	mixture.

The	Origins	of	Miso	and	Soy	Sauce	The	first



foods	 that	 the	 ancient	 Chinese	 fermented	 in
brine	were	pieces	of	meat	or	fish.	These	were
eventually	replaced	by	whole	soybeans	around
the	 2nd	 century	BCE.	 Soy	 paste	 became	 the
major	condiment	around	200	CE	and	remained
so	through	around	1600,	when	it	was	replaced
by	 soy	 sauce.	 Soy	 sauce	 began	 as	 a	 residue
resulting	 when	 soy	 paste	 was	 made	 with
excess	 liquid,	 but	 it	 became	 more	 popular
than	 the	paste,	and	by	1000	was	prepared	 for
its	own	sake.

Chinese	Soy	Pastes	and	Sauces
A	 number	 of	 the	 condiments	 used	 in
Chinese	 cooking	 as	 sauces	 or	 sauce	 bases
are	 variations	 on	 mold-fermented
soybeans,	 or	chiang.	 Their	Chinese	 names
reflect	this.	Some	examples	are:
Bean	sauce,	yuen-shi	chiang,	made	from
the	residue	of	soy-sauce	making,	used	to
make	savory	sauces



Bean	paste,	to-pan	chiang,	essentially	a
chunky	wheat-barley-soy	miso,	used	to
make	savory	sauces
Hoisin	sauce,	ha-hsien	chiang,	made
from	the	residue	of	soy-sauce	making,
mixed	with	wheat	flour,	sugar,	vinegar,
chilli	pepper;	served	with	Peking	duck
and	mu	shu	pork
Sweet	wheat	chiang,	t’inmin	chiang,
smooth,	soft,	brown;	made	from	wheat
flour	formed	into	steamed	buns	or	flat
sheets,	allowed	to	mold,	then	brined;
used	as	the	base	for	Peking	duck	dipping
sauce

Fermented	soy	pastes	and	soy	sauce	were
carried	by	Buddhist	monks	to	Japan,	where
sometime	around	700	CE	a	new	Japanese
name,	miso	—	mi	meaning	flavor	—	was
given	to	distinctive	Japanese	versions	of	the
paste.	These	involved	the	use	of	a	grain-based
koji	that	provided	sweetness,	alcohol,	finer



aromatics,	and	delicacy.	Until	the	15th
century,	Japanese	soy	sauce	was	simply	the
excess	fluid,	or	tamari,	ladled	from	finished
soybean	miso.	By	the	17th	century,	the	now-
standard	formula	of	roasted	cracked	wheat
and	soybeans	had	been	established	for	making
the	sauce,	and	the	resulting	product	given	a
new	name,	shoyu.	Shoyu	began	to	appear	on
western	tables	as	an	exotic	and	expensive	item
by	the	17th	century.

Miso	 Miso	 is	 used	 as	 a	 soup	 base,	 as	 a
seasoning	 for	 various	 dishes,	 in	 marinades,
and	 as	 a	 medium	 for	 pickling	 vegetables.
There	are	dozens	of	different	varieties.

Miso	is	made	by	cooking	a	grain	or	legume
—	usually	rice,	sometimes	barley,	sometimes
soybean	—	and	fermenting	it	in	shallow	trays
with	koji	starter	for	several	days	to	develop
enzymes.	The	resulting	koji	is	then	mixed
with	ground	cooked	soybeans,	salt	(5–15%),
and	a	dose	of	an	earlier	batch	of	miso	(to



provide	bacteria	and	yeasts).	In	traditional
miso	making,	the	mixture	is	allowed	to
ferment	(and	eventually	age)	in	barrels	for
months	to	years	at	a	warm	86–100ºF/30–38ºC.
Various	lactic	acid	bacteria	(Lactobacilli,
Pediococci)	and	salt-tolerant	yeasts
(Zygosaccharomyces,	Torulopsis)	break	down
the	seed	proteins,	carbohydrates,	and	oils	and
produce	a	host	of	flavor	molecules	and	flavor
precursors.	Browning	reactions	generate
deeper	layers	of	flavor	and	color.

Traditionally	made	miso	ends	up	with	a
rich,	savory,	complex	flavor	dominated	by
sweet	and	roasted	notes,	and	sometimes	by
esters	reminiscent	of	pineapple	and	other
fruits.	Modern	industrial	production	cuts	the
fermentation	and	aging	from	months	to	a	few
weeks,	and	compensates	for	the	resulting	lack
of	flavor	and	color	with	various	additives.

Soy	 Sauce	 Soy	 sauce	 is	 made	 in	 several
different	 styles	 today.	 Broadly	 speaking,	 the



flavor	of	traditional	soy	sauce	depends	on	the
proportions	 of	 soybeans	 and	 wheat.	 Most
Chinese	 soy	 sauces,	 and	 Japanese	 tamari,	 are
made	primarily	or	exclusively	from	soybeans.
Japanese	soy	sauce	is	generally	made	from	an
even	mixture	of	 soybeans	and	wheat,	and	 the
starch	from	the	wheat	gives	it	a	characteristic
sweetness,	a	higher	alcohol	content,	and	more
alcohol-derived	 aromatics.	Shiro,	 or	 “white”
soy	sauce,	lighter	in	color	and	flavor,	is	made
with	more	wheat	than	soybeans.

The	Delightful	Physics	of	Miso	Soup
Miso	 soup	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 common
Japanese	 dishes.	 It	 typically	 includes	 a
dashi	 broth	 (p.	 238)	 and	 small	 cubes	 of
tofu.	 As	 is	 true	 of	 many	 Japanese
preparations,	miso	soup	 is	a	delight	 to	 the
eye	as	well	as	the	palate.	When	the	soup	is
made	 and	 poured	 into	 the	 bowl,	 the	miso
particles	 disperse	 throughout	 in	 an	 even
haze.	 But	 left	 undisturbed	 for	 a	 few



minutes,	 the	 particles	 gather	 around	 the
center	of	 the	bowl	 in	discrete	 little	clouds
that	slowly	change	shape.	The	clouds	mark
convection	 cells,	 columns	 in	 the	 broth
where	 hot	 liquid	 from	 the	 bowl	 bottom
rises,	is	made	cooler	and	so	more	dense	by
evaporation	 at	 the	 surface,	 falls	 again;	 is
reheated	and	becomes	less	dense,	rises,	and
so	 on.	 Miso	 soup	 enacts	 at	 the	 table	 the
same	 process	 that	 produces	 towering
thunderhead	clouds	in	the	summer	sky.

Making	Japanese	Soy	Sauce



Japanese	 Soy	 Sauce	 Most	 of	 the	 soy	 sauce
sold	 in	 the	West	 is	 made	 in	 Japan	 or	 in	 the
Japanese	 style,	 which	 is	 summarized	 in	 the
box	 on	 p.	 498.	 During	 the	 initial	 brief
fermentation,	 the	Aspergillus	 mold	 produces
enzymes	 that	 will	 break	 down	 wheat	 starch
into	sugars,	wheat	and	soy	proteins	into	amino
acids,	 and	 seed	 oils	 into	 fatty	 acids.	 Then
during	 the	 longer	 main	 fermentation,	 these
enzymes	 do	 their	 work;	 yeasts	 produce
alcohol	 and	 a	 range	 of	 taste	 and	 aroma
compounds;	 and	 bacteria	 produce	 lactic,
acetic,	and	other	acids,	and	yet	other	aromas.
Over	time,	the	various	enzymes	and	microbial
products	also	react	with	each	other,	the	sugars
and	 amino	 acids	 forming	 roasty-smelling
pyrazines,	 acids	 and	 alcohols	 combining	 to
form	 fruity	 esters.	 The	 high-temperature
pasteurization	 develops	 yet	 another	 layer	 of
flavor	 by	 encouraging	 browning	 reactions
between	amino	acids	and	sugars.	The	result	is
a	liquid	that’s	salty,	 tart,	sweet,	savory	(from



a	 high	 concentration	 of	 amino	 acids,	 mainly
glutamic	 acid),	 with	 a	 rich	 aroma.	 Several
hundred	 aroma	 molecules	 have	 been
identified	 in	 soy	 sauce,	 with	 roasty
compounds	 (furanones	 and	 pyrazines),	 sweet
maltol,	 and	 a	 number	 of	 meaty	 sulfur
compounds	among	the	more	prominent.	All	in
all,	soy	sauce	is	a	concentrated,	mouth-filling
liquid,	 a	 versatile	 flavor	 enhancer	 for	 other
foods.

Tamari	Tamari	names	a	kind	of	Japanese	soy
sauce	 closest	 to	 its	 Chinese	 original:	 made
with	 little	or	no	wheat,	 and	 therefore	poor	 in
alcohol	 and	 fruity	 esters	 derived	 from	 it,	 but
with	a	darker	color	and	richer	flavor	thanks	to
the	 higher	 concentration	 of	 soybean	 amino
acids.	 Today	 tamari	 is	 sometimes	 stabilized
with	 added	 alcohol,	 which	 makes	 its	 aroma
closer	to	that	of	ordinary	shoyu.	Even	stronger
than	 true	 tamari	 is	 twice-fermented
saishikomi,	made	by	making	up	the	mash	not



with	 salt	water,	 but	with	 a	 previous	 batch	 of
soy	sauce.

“Chemical”	 Soy	 Sauce	 Industrial	 producers
have	 been	 making	 nonfermented
approximations	of	soy	sauce	since	 the	1920s,
when	 the	 Japanese	 first	 used	 chemically
modified	 soy	 protein	 (“hydrolyzed	 vegetable
protein”)	as	an	ingredient.	Nowadays,	defatted
soy	 meal,	 the	 residue	 of	 soybean	 oil
production,	 is	broken	down	—	hydrolyzed	—
into	amino	acids	and	sugars	with	concentrated
hydrochloric	acid.	This	caustic	mixture	is	then
neutralized	 with	 alkaline	 sodium	 carbonate,
and	 flavored	 and	 colored	 with	 corn	 syrup,
caramel,	 water,	 and	 salt.	 Such	 quick
“chemical”	 soy	 sauce	 has	 a	 very	 different
character	 from	 the	 slow	 fermented	 version,
and	 is	 usually	 blended	 with	 at	 least	 some
genuine	 fermented	 soy	 sauce	 to	 make	 it
palatable.

The	Original	Ketchup



Fermented	 soy	 pastes	 and	 sauces
developed	 into	 many	 different	 regional
variations	 in	 Asia.	 Among	 them	 is	 the
Indonesian	 condiment	kecap,	 whose	 name
gave	 us	 our	 term	 for	 a	 sweet-sour	 tomato
condiment.	Kecap	 is	 made	 by	 allowing
Aspergillus	 mold	 to	 grow	 on	 cooked
soybeans	 for	 about	 a	 week,	 brine-
fermenting	 the	 moldy	 mass	 for	 2	 to	 20
weeks,	then	boiling	it	for	4	to	5	hours,	and
filtering	off	the	solids.	The	salty	version	is
called	kecap	 asin.	 To	 make	 sweet	kecap
manis,	 palm	 sugar	 and	 a	 variety	 of	 spices
—	 among	 them	 galangal,	 makrut	 lime,
fennel,	 coriander,	 and	 garlic	—	 are	 added
to	 the	 fermented	 beans	 just	 before	 the
boiling.

OPPOSITE:	Making	soy	sauce.	The	more
involved	and	time-consuming	fermentation
produces	a	much	more	flavorful	result	than
the	quick	chemical	production	method.

To	make	sure	you’re	buying	genuine	soy



sauce,	read	the	label	carefully,	and	avoid
products	that	include	added	flavorings	and
colors.

Tempeh	 Tempeh	 was	 invented	 in	 Indonesia,
and	 unlike	miso	 and	 soy	 sauce	 is	 not	 a	 salty
preserved	 condiment	 but	 an	 unsalted,	 quick-
fermented,	 perishable	 main	 ingredient.	 It’s
made	 by	 cooking	 whole	 soybeans,	 forming
them	 into	 thin	 layers,	 and	 fermenting	with	 a
mold,	Rhizopus	oligosporus	 or	R.	 oryzae,	 for
24	hours	at	a	warm,	tropical	temperature	(85–
90ºF/30–33ºC).	The	mold	grows	and	produces
thread-like	hyphae,	which	penetrate	the	beans
and	bind	them	together,	and	digest	significant
amounts	 of	 protein	 and	 oil	 to	 flavorful
fragments.	 Fresh	 tempeh	 has	 a	 yeasty,
mushroomy	 aroma;	 when	 sliced	 and	 fried,	 it
develops	a	nutty,	almost	meaty	flavor.

Natto
Natto	has	been	made	in	Japan	for	at	least
1,000	years,	and	is	notable	for	being	distinctly



alkaline	(from	the	breakdown	of	amino	acids
into	ammonia)	and	for	developing	a	sticky,
slippery	slime	that	can	be	drawn	with	the	tip
of	a	chopstick	into	threads	up	to	3	ft/1	m	long!
As	with	tempeh,	no	salt	is	used	and	the
product	is	perishable.	The	whole	beans	are
cooked,	inoculated	with	a	culture	of	the
bacterium	Bacillus	subtilis	natto,	and	held	at
about	100ºF/40ºC	for	20	hours.	Some	bacterial
enzymes	break	down	proteins	into	amino
acids	and	oligosaccharides	into	simple	sugars,
while	others	produce	a	range	of	aroma
compounds	(buttery	diacetyl,	various	volatile
acids,	nutty	pyrazines),	as	well	as	long	chains
of	glutamic	acid	and	long	branched	chains	of
sucrose,	which	form	the	slimy	strings.	Natto
is	served	atop	rice	or	noodles,	in	salads	and
soups,	or	cooked	with	vegetables.

Some	Traditional	Fermented	Soybean
Preparations



Nuts	and	Other
Oil-Rich	Seeds

From	the	first,	the	English	word	nut	meant	an
edible	seed	surrounded	by	a	hard	shell,	and
this	remains	the	common	meaning.	Botanists
later	appropriated	the	word	to	refer
specifically	to	one-seeded	fruits	with	a	tough,
dry	fruit	layer	rather	then	a	fleshy,	succulent
one.	Under	this	restricted	definition,	among
common	nuts	only	acorns,	hazelnuts,
beechnuts,	and	chestnuts	qualify	as	true	nuts.
The	details	of	anatomy	aside,	the	various
seeds	that	we	call	nuts	differ	from	grains	and
legumes	in	three	important	ways:	they’re



generally	larger,	richer	in	oil,	and	require
little	or	no	cooking	to	be	edible	and
nourishing.	This	combination	of	qualities
made	nuts	an	important	source	of	nourishment
in	prehistoric	times.	Today,	they’re	especially
appreciated	for	their	characteristic	rich	flavor.

Walnuts,	hazelnuts,	chestnuts,	and	pine
nuts	all	have	both	Old	World	and	New	World
species,	because	nut-bearing	trees	have	been
around	a	lot	longer	than	the	other	food	plants,
long	enough	that	they	existed	before	North
America	and	Europe	split	apart	some	60
million	years	ago.	Over	the	last	few	centuries,
humans	have	spread	their	prized	nut	species	to
nearly	every	region	on	the	globe	with	a
suitable	climate.	California	has	become	the
largest	producer	of	southwest	Asian	almonds
and	walnuts,	South	American	peanuts	are
grown	throughout	the	subtropics,	and	Asian
coconuts	throughout	the	tropics.

Nut	Structures	and	Qualities



The	bulk	of	most	nuts	consists	of	the
embryo’s	swollen	storage	leaves,	or
cotyledons,	but	coconuts	and	pine	nuts	are
monolithic	masses	of	endosperm,	and	the
Brazil	nut	is	a	swollen	embryonic	stem.
Unlike	most	grains	and	legumes,	nuts	are
delicious	when	eaten	in	their	dry,	nutrient-
concentrated	state,	somewhat	crisped	and
browned	by	a	quick	roasting.	Their	weak	cell
walls	make	them	tender,	their	low	starch
content	prevents	them	from	seeming	floury,
and	their	oil	gives	them	a	mouth-watering
moistness.

An	important	feature	of	the	nuts	is	the
skin,	a	protective	layer	of	varying	thickness
that	adheres	to	the	kernel.	Chestnut	skins	are
thick	and	tough,	hazelnut	skins	papery	and
brittle.	The	nut	skin	is	usually	reddish-brown
in	color	and	astringent	to	the	taste.	Both
qualities	are	due	to	the	presence	of	tannins
and	other	phenolic	compounds,	which	may
make	up	a	quarter	of	the	skin’s	dry	weight.



Many	of	these	same	phenolic	compounds	are
effective	antioxidants	and	so	nutritionally
valuable.	But	because	they’re	astringent	and
discolor	other	ingredients	(walnut	skins	turn
breads	purple-gray),	cooks	often	remove	the
skins	from	nuts.

The	 chestnut,	 with	 its	 shell	 and	 tough,
adherent	seed	coat.

The	Nutritional	Value	of	Nuts

Nuts	are	very	nutritious.	After	pure	fats	and
oils,	they’re	the	richest	foods	that	we	eat,
averaging	around	600	calories	(kcal)	per
quarter-pound/100	gm;	by	comparison,	fatty
beef	averages	200	calories,	and	dry	starchy
grains	350.	Nuts	can	be	50%	or	more	oil,	10–
25%	protein,	and	are	a	good	source	of	several



vitamins	and	minerals	and	of	fiber.	Notable
among	the	vitamins	is	the	antioxidant	vitamin
E,	especially	concentrated	in	hazelnuts	and
almonds,	and	folic	acid,	which	is	thought	to
be	important	for	cardiovascular	health.	Most
nut	oils	are	made	up	primarily	of
monounsaturated	fatty	acids,	and	have	more
polyunsaturates	than	saturated	fats
(exceptions	are	coconuts	with	a	large	dose	of
saturated	fat,	and	walnuts	and	pecans,	which
are	predominantly	polyun-saturated).	And	nut
seed	coats	are	rich	in	antioxidant	phenolic
compounds.	This	cluster	of	characteristics	—
a	favorable	balance	of	fats,	copious
antioxidants,	and	folic	acid	—	may	explain
why	epidemiological	surveys	have	found	nut
consumption	to	be	associated	with	a	reduced
risk	of	heart	disease.

Compositions	of	Common	Nuts	and
Seeds

The	 following	 table	 gives	 the	 major



components	 of	 nuts	 and	 seeds	 by
percentage	 of	 the	 seed’s	 edible	 weight.
Chestnuts	 and	 coconut	meat	 are	 generally
sold	 fresh	 and	 so	 have	 a	 relatively	 high
water	content.

Nut	or
Seed Water Protein Oil Carbohydrates

Almond 5 19 54 20
Brazil 5 14 67 11
Cashew 5 17 46 29
Chestnut 52 3 2 42
Coconut	(meat) 51 4 35 9
Flaxseed 9 20 34 36
Hazelnut 6 13 62 17
Macadamia 3 8 72 15
Peanut 6 26 48 19
Pecan 5 8 68 18
Pine	nut 6 31 47 12



Pistachio 5 20 54 19
Poppy	seed 7 18 45 24
Sesame	seed 5 18 50 24
Sunflower 5 24 47 20
Walnut,	black 3 21 59 15
Walnut,	English 4 15 64 16

Nut	Flavor

Nuts	provide	us	with	a	distinctive,	appealing,
and	versatile	set	of	flavors.	Nuttiness	is	a
cluster	of	qualities:	slightly	sweet,	slightly
fatty,	slightly	roasted	or	toasted;	a	delicate
flavor,	yet	with	some	depth.	The	nuts’	ample
endowment	of	oil	is	key	to	their	character;	the
less	rich	grains	take	on	a	pleasant	flavor	when
simply	toasted	dry,	but	develop	an	added
dimension	when	cooked	in	oil	or	fat.	The
quality	of	nuttiness	complements	many	other
foods,	whether	savory	or	sweet,	all	the	way
from	fish	to	chocolate.



Most	nuts	contain	at	least	traces	of	free
sugars.	Some	contain	more	than	a	trace	and
are	noticeably	sweet;	these	include	chestnuts,
cashews,	pistachios,	and	pine	nuts.

Handling	and	Storing	Nuts

The	same	high	oil	content	that	makes	nuts
nutritious	and	delicious	also	makes	them
much	more	fragile	than	grains	and	legumes:
that	oil	readily	absorbs	odors	from	the
surroundings,	and	goes	rancid	when	it’s	split
into	its	component	fatty	acids	and	the	fatty
acids	are	then	fragmented	by	oxygen	and
light.	The	fatty	acids	have	an	irritating	effect
on	the	mouth,	while	their	fragments	have
cardboard,	paint-like	aromas.	Walnuts,
pecans,	cashews,	and	peanuts	are	rich	in
fragile	polyunsaturated	fats	and	are	especially
susceptible	to	staling.	Fat	rancidity	is	favored
by	bruising,	light,	heat,	and	moisture,	so	it’s
best	to	store	nuts	in	opaque	containers	at	cool



temperatures.	Shell-less	kernels	are	best
refrigerated.	Because	they	contain	very	little
water	and	so	don’t	suffer	from	the	formation
of	damaging	ice	crystals,	nuts	can	be	frozen
for	long	keeping.	Storage	containers	should	be
truly	air-and	odor-tight	—	glass	jars,	for
example,	rather	than	permeable	plastic	bags.

Nuts	are	at	their	best	when	they’re	freshly
harvested,	usually	in	late	summer	and	fall
(early	summer	for	almonds).	Newly	harvested
nuts	are	too	moist	to	keep	without	being
vulnerable	to	molds,	so	producers	dry	them
with	as	little	heat	as	possible,	usually	at	90–
100ºF/32–38ºC.	When	buying	fresh	nuts,	look
for	an	opaque,	off-white	interior.	Any
translucency	or	darkening	is	a	sign	that	the
cells	are	damaged,	oil	has	been	released,	and
rancidity	is	developing.

Cooking	Nuts

Unlike	most	other	seed	foods,	nuts	are	good



simply	oven-toasted	or	fried	for	a	few
minutes,	which	transforms	the	chewy,	pliable,
bland,	pale	seeds	into	crisp,	flavorful,
browned	morsels.	They	can	also	be	roasted	in
the	microwave	oven.	Since	nuts	are	small	and
dry,	frying	is	generally	done	at	relatively	low
temperatures	for	relatively	short	times,	250–
350ºF/120–175ºC	for	a	few	minutes,	with
lower	temperatures	and	longer	times	for	large
nuts	(Brazil	nuts,	macadamias).	Doneness
should	be	judged	by	color	and	flavor,	not
texture;	heat	softens	the	tissue,	which	gets
crisp	as	it	cools.	Stop	the	cooking	just	short	of
the	ideal	doneness,	since	nuts	continue	to
cook	for	some	time	after	they’re	taken	from
the	heat.	Nuts	are	less	brittle	when	they’re
warm,	so	slicing	them	while	warm	can	give
cleaner	pieces	with	fewer	flakes	and	crumbs.

Commercially	prepared	nuts	are	often
roasted,	salted	with	special	flake-shaped
particles	that	have	more	of	a	surface	to	adhere
to	the	nut,	then	coated	with	a	layer	of	oil	or	a



protein-emulsifier	blend	to	help	retain	the
salt.	Peanuts	are	salted	in	the	shell	by	being
soaked	in	brine	under	a	vacuum,	which	pulls
the	air	from	inside	the	shell	and	forces	the
brine	in.

Removing	 Skins	 Many	 preparations	 call	 for
nut	 skins	 to	 be	 removed	 so	 that	 they	 don’t
discolor	the	dish	or	add	unwanted	astringency.
Thin	skins	—	those	on	peanuts	and	hazelnuts,
for	 example	 —	 can	 often	 be	 made	 brittle
enough	 to	 rub	 off	 by	 a	 brief	 toasting	 in	 the
oven.	 The	 thicker	 skins	 of	 almonds	 are
toughened	and	loosened	by	a	minute	or	two	in
boiling	water.	Others	can	often	be	removed	by
immersing	the	nuts	in	hot	water	made	alkaline
with	baking	soda	(3	Tb	soda	per	quart/45	gm
per	 liter),	 rubbing	 the	 softened	 skins	 off
(alkalinity	 helps	 dissolve	 hemicellulose
cement	 in	 the	 cell	 walls),	 then	 reimmersing
the	nuts	in	a	dilute	acid	solution	to	neutralize
the	slight	amount	of	absorbed	alkaline	liquid.



The	 color	 and	 astringency	 of	 hard-to-remove
walnut	skins	can	be	lightened	significantly	by
a	 brief	 boiling	 in	 acidified	 water,	 which
leaches	out	 tannins	and	bleaches	 the	color	of
those	 that	 remain.	 Tough	 chestnut	 skins	 are
softened	by	roasting	or	boiling	in	the	shell,	or
by	 a	 brief	 period	 in	 the	 microwave	 oven.
They’re	also	simply	peeled	off	like	the	skin	of
an	apple.

Nut	Pastes	and	Butters	All	dry	and	fatty	nuts
can	 be	 ground	 in	 a	 mortar	 or	 blender	 into	 a
butter-like	 paste,	 with	 the	 oil	 from	 ruptured
cells	 coating	 and	 lubricating	 the	 cell
fragments	and	particles	of	intact	cells.	One	of
the	 most	 venerable	 nut	 pastes	 is	 the	 Middle
Eastern	 tahini,	 made	 from	 ground	 sesame
seeds;	 it’s	 used	 with	 chickpeas	 to	 make
hummus,	 and	 with	 eggplant	 to	 make	 baba
ghanoush.	 Throughout	 the	 world,	 nut	 pastes
are	 added	 to	 soups	 and	 stews	 to	 contribute
flavor,	 richness,	 and	 body;	 almond	 soups	 are



made	 in	 Spain	 and	 Turkey,	 walnut	 soups	 in
Mexico,	 coconut	 soups	 in	 Brazil,	 pecan	 and
peanut	soups	in	the	American	South.

Nut	 Oils	 The	 oils	 of	 a	 number	 of	 nuts	 are
prized	 for	 their	 flavor	 —	 walnut	 oil	 and
coconut	oil,	for	example	—	and	several	others
as	 ordinary	 cooking	 oils	 (peanut	 oil,
sunflower	 seed	 oil).	 Oils	 are	 extracted	 from
nuts	 by	 two	 different	 means.	 “Cold-pressed”
or	 “expeller-pressed”	 nut	 oils	 are	 made	 by
crushing	 the	nut	 cells	 and	 forcing	 the	oil	 out
with	 mechanical	 pressure.	 The	 nuts	 get	 hot
from	 the	 pressure	 and	 friction,	 but	 generally
don’t	 exceed	 the	 boiling	 point.	 Solvent-
extracted	 oils	 are	made	 by	 dissolving	 the	 oil
out	 of	 the	 crushed	 nuts	 with	 a	 solvent	 at
temperatures	 around	 300ºF/150ºC,	 then
separating	 the	 oil	 from	 the	 solvent.	They	 are
more	 refined	 than	 pressed	 oils,	 having	 fewer
of	 the	 trace	 compounds	 that	 make	 oils	 both
flavorful	 and	 potentially	 allergenic	 (p.	 455).



Cold-pressed	 oils	 are	 generally	 used	 as	 a
flavoring,	 refined	 oils	 as	 cooking	 oils.	 Nut
oils	 have	 a	 stronger	 flavor	 if	 the	 nuts	 are
roasted	before	 extraction.	Because	 they	often
have	 a	 large	 proportion	 of	 fragile
polyunsaturated	 fatty	 acids,	 they’re	 more
vulnerable	 to	 oxidation	 than	 ordinary
vegetable	 oils,	 and	 are	 best	 kept	 in	 dark
bottles	 in	 the	refrigerator.	The	leftover	solids
—	nut	meal	or	flour	—	make	a	flavorful	and
nutritious	contribution	to	baked	goods.

Nut	Milks	If	nuts	are	ground	while	dry,	their
microscopic	 oil	 bodies	 (p.	 459)	 merge	 and
coalesce	 to	 make	 oil	 the	 continuous	 liquid
phase	of	the	paste.	But	if	the	raw	nuts	are	first
soaked	in	water,	then	grinding	releases	the	oil
bodies	 relatively	 intact	 into	 the	 continuous
water	phase.	When	 the	solid	nut	particles	are
strained	off,	this	leaves	behind	a	fluid	similar
to	 milk,	 with	 oil	 droplets,	 proteins,	 sugars,
and	 salts	 dispersed	 in	 water.	 In	 medieval



Europe,	 which	 learned	 about	 them	 from	 the
Arabs,	 almond	 milks	 and	 creams	 were	 both
luxurious	ingredients	and	dairy	substitutes	for
fasting	 days.	 Today,	 the	 most	 common	 seed
milk	 is	 made	 from	 coconuts,	 but	 it	 can	 be
made	from	any	oil-rich	nut	and	from	soybeans
(p.	494).

Argan	Oil
An	unusual	nut	known	in	 the	West	almost
exclusively	for	its	oil	is	argan,	the	seed	of
a	 drought-tolerant	 tree	 native	 to	Morocco
(Argania	 spinosa,	 a	 relative	 of	 the	 chicle
and	 miracle	 fruit	 trees).	 The	 almond-like
nuts	 are	 removed	 from	 their	 fruits	 (a
process	 formerly	 assigned	 to	 goats,	which
eat	the	fruits	and	excrete	the	nuts),	shelled
and	 roasted,	 then	 ground	 and	 pressed.
Argan	 oil	 has	 a	 distinctive,	 almost	 meaty
aroma.
Modern	cooks	can	use	nut	milks	to	make

rich	and	delicious	ices,	and	to	enrich	sauces



and	soups.	Thanks	to	the	tendency	of	the	nut
proteins	to	coagulate,	cooks	can	thicken	nut
milks	with	acid	into	the	equivalent	of	yogurt,
and	cook	them	into	a	cross	between	a	pudding
and	custard.	Almonds	with	their	high	protein
content	produce	the	most	easily	thickened
milk.	Other	nut	milks	can	be	boiled	to
coagulate	the	proteins	into	curds,	then	the
curds	can	be	drained	of	excess	fluid,	blended
until	smooth,	and	heated	gently	to	thicken
them	further.	To	impart	more	flavor	to	the
milk,	a	small	fraction	of	the	nuts	can	be
roasted	before	grinding.

Characteristics
of	Some	Common	Nuts

Almonds	Almonds	are	the	world’s	largest
tree-nut	crop.	They’re	the	seed	of	a	plum-like
stone	fruit,	or	drupe;	the	tree	is	a	very	close
relative	of	the	plum	and	peach.	There	are
several	dozen	wild	or	minor	species,	but	the



cultivated	almond,	Prunus	amygdalus,	came
from	western	Asia	and	had	been	domesticated
by	the	Bronze	Age.	California	is	now	the
largest	producer.	Thanks	to	their	high	content
of	antioxidant	vitamin	E	and	low	levels	of
polyunsaturated	fats,	almonds	have	a
relatively	long	shelf	life.

Almonds	are	the	main	ingredient	in
marzipan,	a	paste	of	sugar	and	almonds	finely
ground	together	and	molded	and	dried	into
decorative	shapes,	a	Middle	Eastern	invention
that	became	popular	in	Europe	during	the
medieval	Crusades.	Leonardo	da	Vinci	made
marzipan	sculptures	for	the	Milanese	court	of
Ludovico	Sforza	in	1470,	and	wrote	that	he
“observed	with	pain	that	[they]	gobble	up	all
the	sculptures	I	give	them,	right	to	the	last
morsel.”	Almond	paste	is	also	commonly	used
as	a	pastry	filling	or	the	base	for	macaroons,
cookies	whose	only	other	structural	ingredient
is	egg	whites.



Almond	Milk	and	Cream	in	Medieval
Times

Blancmange
Take	 capons	 and	 seeth	 them,	 then	 take
them	 up.	 Take	 blanched	 almonds,	 grind
them,	 and	mix	 them	with	 the	 same	 broth.
Cast	this	milk	in	a	pot.	Wash	rice,	and	add,
and	let	it	seeth.	Then	take	brawn	of	capons,
tear	it	small	and	add.	Take	lard,	sugar	and
salt,	 and	 cast	 therein.	 Let	 it	 seeth.	 Then
assemble	 it	 and	 decorate	 it	 with	 aniseed
confected	 white	 or	 red,	 and	 with	 fried
almonds,	and	serve	it	forth.

—	The	Forme	of	Cury,	ca.	1390
Cream	of	Almond	Milk

Take	almond	milk,	and	boil	it,	and	when	it
is	boiled	take	it	from	the	fire,	and	sprinkle
on	 a	 little	 vinegar.	 Then	 spread	 it	 on	 a
cloth,	 and	 cast	 sugar	 on	 it,	 and	when	 it	 is
cold	gather	 it	 together,	and	leche	[slice]	 it



in	dishes,	and	serve	it	forth.
—	From	a	medieval	manuscript,	published

in	R.	Warner,	Antiquitates	Culinariae,
1791

Why	 Almonds	 Don’t	 Taste	 Like	 Almond
Flavoring	 Curiously,	 standard	 domesticated
almonds	 taste	 delicately	 nutty,	 nothing	 like
the	 strong	 and	 distinctive	 flavoring	 called
“almond	 extract.”	 Strong	 almond	 flavor	 is
found	 only	 in	 wild	 or	 bitter	 almonds,	 which
are	 inedibly	 bitter	 and	 toxic.	 They	 contain	 a
defensive	 system	 that	 generates	 deadly	 and
bitter	 hydrogen	 cyanide	 when	 the	 kernel	 is
damaged	(p.	258).	It’s	estimated	that	eating	a
few	 bitter	 almonds	 at	 a	 sitting	 could	 kill	 a
child.	But	 it	 turns	out	 that	one	by-product	of
cyanide	production	is	benzaldehyde,	a	volatile
molecule	 that	 is	 the	 essence	 of	 wild	 almond
flavor,	 and	 that	 contributes	 to	 the	 aromas	 of
cherry,	 apricot,	 plum,	 and	 peach.	 Our	 safe
“sweet”	 almond	 varieties	 lack	 both	 the



bitterness	and	the	characteristic	aroma.
Bitter	almonds	are	generally	unavailable	in

the	United	States,	while	in	Europe	they’re
used	like	a	spice,	added	in	small	numbers	to
flavor	marzipan	made	from	sweet	almonds,	as
well	as	to	amaretti	cookies,	amaretto	liqueur,
and	other	dishes.	Apricot	and	peach	kernels
are	readily	available	alternative	sources	of
benzaldehyde,	though	they	don’t	have	the
intense	and	otherwise	fine	flavor	of	bitter
almonds.	German	cooks	make	versions	of
marzipan	called	persipan	with	apricot	and
peach	kernels.

Brazil	Nuts	 Brazil	 nuts	 are	 unusually	 large,
an	 inch/2.5	 cm	or	more	 long,	 and	double	 the
weight	 of	 almonds	 and	 cashews.	 They’re	 the
seeds	of	a	large	tree	(Bertholletia	excelsa,	150
ft/50	 m	 tall,	 6	 ft/2	 m	 across)	 native	 to	 the
Amazon	region	of	South	America,	where	they
develop	 in	 groups	 of	 8	 to	 24	 inside	 a	 hard,
coconutsized	shell.	South	American	countries



are	 still	 the	 main	 producers.	 The	 pods	 are
gathered	 only	 after	 they	 fall	 to	 the	 ground.
Because	they	weigh	about	5	pounds,	they	can
be	 lethal	missiles,	 and	 harvesters	must	 carry
shields	 to	 protect	 themselves.	 The	 edible
portion	 of	 the	 seed	 is	 an	 immensely	 swollen
embryonic	stem.	Thanks	to	their	size	and	high
oil	 content,	 two	 large	 Brazil	 nuts	 are	 the
caloric	equivalent	of	one	egg.

Brazil	nuts	are	notable	for	containing	the
highest	levels	of	selenium	of	any	food.
Selenium	helps	to	prevent	the	development	of
cancer,	apparently	by	several	different	means,
including	an	antioxidant	enzyme	and	by
inducing	damaged	cells	to	die.	However,	an
overdose	is	toxic.	The	World	Health
Organization	recommends	a	maximum	daily
selenium	intake	corresponding	to	just	a	half-
oz/14	gm	of	Brazil	nuts.



The	 almond,	 a	 close	 relative	 of	 the	 peach,
plum,	and	cherry,	with	its	stony	shell.

Almond	Extracts	and	Imitations
The	 commonest	 form	 of	 bitter-almond
flavor	 is	 a	 bottled	 extract,	which	 contains
aromatic	benzaldehyde	without	the	cyanide
that	 accompanies	 it	 in	 the	 almonds
themselves.	 “Pure”	 almond	 extract	 is
derived	 from	 bitter	 almonds,	 while
“natural”	 extract	 usually	 contains
benzaldehyde	 produced	 from	 cassia	 bark
(p.	 424),	 and	 “imitation”	 extract	 contains
benzaldehyde	 synthesized	 from	 pure
chemicals.

Cashews	 Like	 the	 Brazil	 nut,	 cashews	 come
from	the	Amazon	region,	whose	natives	gave
us	 the	 name.	 But	 the	 tree	 was	 successfully



transplanted	 to	 India	 and	 East	Africa	 by	 the
Portuguese,	 and	 today	 these	 regions	 are	 the
world’s	 largest	 producers.	 The	 cashew	 is
second	only	to	the	almond	in	world	trade.	It’s
a	 relative	 of	 poison	 ivy,	 and	 that’s	 why	 we
never	 see	 cashews	 for	 sale	 in	 the	 shell.	 The
shell	 contains	 an	 irritating	 oil	 that	 must	 be
driven	 off	 by	 heating	 before	 the	 seed	 can	 be
carefully	 extracted	without	 contamination.	 In
the	 producing	 countries,	 the	 seed-containing
fruit	is	often	discarded	in	favor	of	the	swollen
stem	 tip	 or	 “false	 fruit”	 called	 the	 cashew
apple,	which	 is	 enjoyed	 either	 fresh,	 cooked,
or	fermented	into	an	alcoholic	drink.

Cashews	are	unusual	among	oily	nuts	in
containing	a	significant	amount	of	starch
(around	12%	of	their	weight),	which	makes
them	more	effective	than	most	nuts	at
thickening	water-based	dishes	(soups,	stews,
Indian	milk-based	desserts).

Chestnuts	 Chestnuts	 come	 from	 several



different	 species	 of	 large	 trees	 in	 the	 genus
Castanea,	 which	 are	 found	 in	 Europe,	 Asia,
and	North	America.	They’re	 unlike	 the	 other
common	 nuts	 in	 storing	 their	 energy	 for	 the
future	seedling	 in	 the	 form	of	starch,	not	oil.
Chestnuts	are	thus	usually	thoroughly	cooked
and	 have	 a	 mealy	 texture.	 Since	 prehistory
they	 have	 been	 dried,	 ground	 into	 flour,	 and
used	in	the	same	way	that	 the	starchy	cereals
are,	to	make	gruels,	breads,	pastas,	cakes,	and
provide	substance	in	soups.	Before	the	arrival
of	 the	 potato	 and	 corn	 from	 the	New	World,
chestnuts	 were	 an	 essential	 subsistence	 food
in	 mountainous	 and	 marginal	 agricultural
areas	 of	 Italy	 and	 France.	 At	 the	 opposite
extreme,	 a	 luxurious	 chestnut	 specialty
invented	 in	 the	 17th	 century	 is	marrons
glacés,	large	chestnuts	that	are	cooked,	slowly
infused	 over	 a	 day	 or	 two	 with	 a	 vanilla-
flavored	 syrup,	 then	 glazed	 with	 a	 more
concentrated	syrup.

The	American	enjoyment	of	our	native



chestnut,	Castanea	dentata,	was	brought	to	a
sad	end	in	the	early	20th	century,	when	in	the
course	of	a	few	decades,	an	imported	Asian
fungal	blight	wiped	out	a	tree	that	used	to
make	up	25%	or	more	of	the	eastern
hardwood	forest.	Today,	the	world’s	leading
chestnut	producers	are	China,	Korea,	Turkey,
and	Italy.

Because	of	its	high	initial	moisture
content,	the	chestnut	is	quite	perishable.
Chestnuts	are	best	kept	covered	and
refrigerated,	and	should	be	eaten	fairly
quickly.	If	freshly	gathered,	however,	they
should	be	cured	at	room	temperature	for	a	few
days.	This	improves	the	flavor	by	permitting
some	starch	to	be	converted	into	sugar	before
the	cells’	metabolism	is	slowed	down.

Why	Brazil	Nuts	Rise	to	the	Top	of	the
Bowl

A	 paper	 published	 in	 the	 1987	Physical
Review	 Letters	 tried	 to	 crack	 a	 hard	 nut:



why	is	it	that	in	a	bowl	of	mixed	nuts,	the
small	 nuts	 end	 up	 at	 the	 bottom	 and	 the
Brazil	 nuts	 on	 top?	 The	 same	 kind	 of
segregation	 by	 size	 takes	 place	 in	 many
different	mixtures,	from	corn	flakes	to	the
soil.	 It	 turns	 out	 that	 objects	 in	 a	mixture
are	 pulled	 downward	 through	 gaps	 in	 the
mixture	 by	 gravity	—	 and	 small	 gaps	 are
more	 common	 than	 large	 gaps,	 so	 small
objects	 more	 frequently	 sink	 than	 large
ones.

Coconuts	 Coconuts	 are	 the	 largest	 and	most
important	of	all	nuts.	They	are	 the	stone	of	a
drupe,	 the	 fruit	 of	Cocos	 nucifera,	 large	 (to
100	 ft/30	 m)	 tree-like	 palms	 that	 are	 more
closely	related	to	the	grasses	than	to	other	nut
trees.	 They’re	 thought	 to	 have	 originated	 in
tropical	Asia,	but	their	hardy	fruits	apparently
floated	 to	 many	 parts	 of	 the	 world	 before
humans	 began	 to	 transport	 them.	 They	 were
largely	 unknown	 to	 Europe	 until	 the	 early



Middle	 Ages.	 About	 20	 billion	 nuts	 are
produced	each	year,	mainly	in	the	Philippines,
India,	and	Indonesia.	The	word	coconut	comes
from	 the	 Portuguese	coco,	 which	 means
goblin	or	monkey.	The	markings	on	 the	stem
end	of	the	nut	can	look	uncannily	like	a	face.
The	 tiny	 embryo	 resides	 under	 one	 of	 the
eyes,	through	which	it	grows	when	it	sprouts.

Coconuts	consist	of	a	thick	fibrous	fruit
layer,	the	husk,	within	which	is	the	seed
proper	enclosed	in	a	woody	shell.	The	meat
and	milk	constitute	the	seed’s	endosperm,
which	contains	enough	nutrients	and	moisture
to	support	the	seedling’s	growth	for	more	than
a	year.	The	entire	fruit	may	weight	2–5	lb/1–2
kg,	of	which	about	a	quarter	is	meat,	15%	free
water.

Coconut	provides	a	backbone	flavor	in
many	tropical	cuisines,	from	southern	India
and	Southeast	Asia	to	Africa	and	South
America.	It’s	often	used	in	the	form	of
coconut	milk,	which	provides	a	rich,	flavorful



liquid	in	which	to	cook	all	kinds	of	foods,
from	meats	and	fish	to	vegetables	and	rice.
Since	the	coconut	meat	can’t	be	roasted	intact,
its	flavor	is	developed	by	carefully	toasting
small	flakes	or	shreds.	Unlike	other	nuts,
which	provide	crunchiness	or	smooth	richness
depending	on	how	finely	they’re	broken,
coconut	has	a	persistent,	chewy	texture	unless
toasted	and	kept	very	dry.

The	distinctive	sweet,	rich	aroma	of
coconut	is	created	by	derivatives	of	saturated
fatty	acids	called	lactones	(octa-,	deca-,
dodeca-,	tetradecalactones)	—	peaches	are
also	flavored	by	lactones	—	while	roasting
generates	more	generic	nutty	notes	(from
pyrazines,	pyrroles,	furans).

Coconut	 Development	 Coconut	 fruits	 are
borne	and	mature	year-round.	At	around	 four
months,	 the	 nut	 fills	 with	 liquid;	 at	 five,	 it
reaches	 its	 full	 size	 and	 begins	 to	 develop	 a
jelly-like	 meat;	 at	 seven	 its	 shell	 begins	 to



harden,	 and	 it’s	 mature	 at	 a	 year.	 Immature
coconuts,	 around	 five	 to	 seven	 months	 old,
offer	 their	 own	 pleasures:	 a	 sweet	 liquid
called	coconut	water	(about	2%	sugars);	and	a
moist,	delicate,	gelatinous	meat	that’s	mainly
water,	 sugars	 and	other	 carbohydrates.	 In	 the
mature	 coconut	 of	 11–12	 months,	 the	 liquid
has	become	less	sweet	and	less	abundant,	and
the	 meat	 has	 become	 firm,	 fatty,	 and	 white.
The	meat	 is	 about	 45%	water,	 35%	 fat,	 10%
carbohydrate,	5%	protein.

The	coconut.	This	massive	 seed	 is	borne	 in	a
thick,	 dry	 husk	 and	 contains	 both	 solid	 and
liquid	 endosperm	 to	 feed	 the	 small	 embryo,
which	emerges	from	one	of	the	three	“eyes”	at
the	end	of	the	shell.

Coconut	Meat	and	Milk	A	good	fresh	coconut



should	 feel	 heavy	 and	 contain	 enough	 liquid
to	 slosh	 audibly.	 If	 coconut	meat	 is	 pounded
in	 a	mortar	 or	 ground	 finely	 in	 a	 blender,	 it
forms	a	thick	paste	consisting	of	microscopic
oil	 droplets	 and	 cell	 debris	 suspended	 in
water,	which	makes	up	about	half	the	volume.
Coconut	 milk	 is	 made	 by	 mixing	 the	 paste
with	 some	 additional	 water	 and	 straining	 to
remove	the	solid	particles.	Left	to	stand	for	an
hour,	this	milk	separates	into	a	fat-rich	cream
layer	 and	 a	 thin	 “skim”	 layer.	 Coconut	milk
can	 also	 be	 made	 from	 dried	 shredded
coconut,	and	is	readily	available	canned.

Coconut	 Oil	 For	 part	 of	 the	 20th	 century,
coconut	oil	was	the	most	important	vegetable
oil	 in	 the	world.	 It	 can	 be	 produced	 in	 large
quantities,	 is	 very	 stable,	 and	 has	 a	 melting
point	similar	to	that	of	milk	fat.	But	the	very
quality	that	makes	it	stable	and	versatile	also
made	it	appear	to	be	nutritionally	undesirable.
The	 fats	 that	make	 up	 coconut	 oil	 are	 nearly



90%	saturated	(15%	caprylic	and	capric,	45%
lauric,	 18%	myristic,	 10%	 palmitic,	 and	 just
8%	monounsaturated	oleic),	which	means	that
they	raise	blood	cholesterol	levels.	During	the
1970s	 and	 ’80s,	 manufacturers	 of	 processed
foods	therefore	replaced	coconut	oil	with	less
saturated,	 partly	 hydrogenated	 seed	 oils	 —
which	 now	 turn	 out	 to	 contain	 undesirable
trans	fatty	acids	(p.	38).

Given	our	current	and	broader
understanding	of	other	dietary	influences	on
heart	disease	(p.	255),	there’s	no	reason	not	to
enjoy	the	coconut’s	riches	as	part	of	a
balanced	diet	that	includes	plenty	of
protective	fruits,	vegetables,	and	other	seeds.

Ginkgo	 Nuts	 Gingko	 nuts	 are	 the	 starchy
kernels	 of	Ginkgo	biloba,	 the	 last	survivor	of
a	 tree	 family	 that	 was	 prominent	 during	 the
age	of	the	dinosaurs.	The	nuts	are	borne	inside
fleshy	 fruits	 that	 develop	 a	 strong	 rancid
smell	when	ripe.	In	Asia,	the	tree’s	home,	the



fruits	are	fermented	in	vats	of	water	to	soften
and	 remove	 the	 pulp,	 and	 the	 seeds	 are
washed,	dried,	and	roasted	or	boiled,	either	in-
shell	 or	 shelled.	 The	 kernel	 has	 a	 distinctive
but	mild	flavor.

Hazelnuts	Hazelnuts	come	from	a	few	of	the
15	 species	 of	 mainly	 bushy	 trees	 in	 the
northern-hemisphere	 genus	Corylus.	 Corylus
avellana	 and	C.	 maxima	 are	 native	 to
temperate	Eurasia	 and	were	widely	 exploited
in	prehistoric	times	for	their	nuts	and	rapidly
produced	shoots,	which	were	used	as	walking
sticks	 and	 a	 surface	 for	 marshy	 ground.	 A
much	 taller	 tree,	C.	 colurna,	 accounts	 for
much	 of	 the	 production	 in	 the	 Black	 Sea
region	of	Turkey.	Another	term	for	the	nut	is
“filbert,”	 which	 in	 the	 United	 Kingdom	 is
applied	 to	 the	 more	 elongated	 varieties,	 and
which	may	 come	 from	St.	 Philibert’s	Day	 in
late	 August,	 when	 hazelnuts	 begin	 to	 ripen.
The	 late	 Roman	 cookbook	 of	Apicius	 called



for	 hazelnuts	 in	 sauces	 for	 birds,	 boar,	 and
mullet;	 they’re	 an	 alternative	 to	 almonds	 in
Spanish	 picada	 and	 romesco	 sauces,	 and	 an
ingredient	in	the	spicy	Egyptian	spread	called
dukka	 and	 the	 Italian	 liqueur	 frangelico.
Hazelnuts	 remain	 especially	 popular	 in
Europe,	where	Turkey,	Italy,	and	Spain	are	the
main	 producers.	 In	 the	 United	 States,	 nearly
all	hazelnuts	are	produced	in	Oregon.

Coconut	“Gelatin”
In	addition	to	products	from	the	seed	itself,
the	 coconut	 palm	 offers	 several	 other
distinctive	food	materials.	One	of	the	more
unusual	 is	nata	 de	 coco,	 or	 “coconut
gelatin,”	 a	 moist,	 translucent	 mass	 of
cellulose	produced	by	a	vinegar	bacterium
(Acetobacter	 xylinum)	 on	 the	 surface	 of
fermenting	 coconut	 water.	 It	 has	 little
flavor	 of	 its	 own	 and	 a	 uniquely	 crunchy
texture.	 In	 the	 Philippines	 it’s	 washed	 of
its	 vinegary	 home,	 flavored,	 packed	 in



sugar	syrup,	and	eaten	as	a	sweet.
The	distinctive	aroma	of	hazelnuts	comes

from	a	compound	dubbed	filbertone
(heptenone),	which	is	present	in	small
quantities	in	the	raw	nut,	but	increases	600-to
800-fold	when	the	nuts	are	fried	or	boiled.

Macadamia	 Nuts	 Macadamia	 nuts	 are
newcomers	 to	 the	 world’s	 table.	 They	 come
from	 two	 evergreen	 tropical	 trees
(Macadamia	 tetraphylla	 and	M.	 integrifolia)
native	 to	 northeastern	 Australia,	 where	 the
aborigines	 enjoyed	 them	 for	 thousands	 of
years	before	they	were	noticed	and	named	by
Europeans	 (for	 John	Macadam,	 a	 Scots-born
chemist,	 in	 1858).	 Macadamias	 were
introduced	 to	 Hawaii	 in	 the	 1890s,	 and
became	commercially	significant	there	around
1930.	 Today	 Australia	 and	 Hawaii	 are	 the
main	 producers,	 but	 their	 output	 remains
relatively	 small,	 and	 macadamias	 are
therefore	 among	 the	 most	 expensive	 nuts.



Because	 their	 shells	 are	 extremely	hard,	 they
are	sold	almost	exclusively	out-of-shell,	often
packed	in	cans	or	bottles	to	protect	them	from
air	 and	 rancidity.	 Macadamias	 have	 the
highest	 fat	 content	 of	 the	 tree	 nuts,	 and	 it’s
mostly	 monounsaturated	 (65%	 oleic	 acid).
Their	flavor	is	mild	and	delicate.

Peanut	This	popular	nut	 is	not	a	nut,	but	 the
seed	 of	 a	 small	 leguminous	 bush,	Arachis
hypogaea,	which	pushes	 its	 thin,	woody	 fruit
capsules	 below	 ground	 as	 they	 mature.	 The
peanut	 was	 domesticated	 in	 South	 America,
probably	Brazil,	around	2000	BCE,	and	was	an
important	crop	in	Peru	before	the	time	of	the
Incas.	In	the	16th	century,	the	Portuguese	took
it	 to	 Africa,	 India,	 and	 Asia,	 and	 it	 soon
became	 a	 major	 source	 of	 cooking	 oil	 in
China	(peanuts	have	double	the	oil	content	of
soybeans).	It	wasn’t	until	the	19th	century	that
Americans	thought	of	peanuts	as	anything	but
animal	 feed,	 and	 not	 until	 the	 early	 20th



century	 that	 the	 remarkable	 agricultural
scientist	 George	 Washington	 Carver
encouraged	 southern	 farmers	 to	 replace
weevil-ravaged	cotton	with	peanuts.

Today	India	and	China	are	by	far	the
largest	peanut	producers,	with	the	United
States	a	distant	third.	Most	Asian	peanuts	are
crushed	for	oil	and	meal;	in	the	United	States
most	are	eaten	as	food.	Peanuts	are	now
prominent	in	several	Asian	and	African
traditions.	Pureed,	they	lend	richness,
substance,	and	flavor	to	sauces	and	soups.
Whole	and	pureed	peanuts	are	used	in	Thai
and	Chinese	noodle	dishes,	in	sweet	bun
fillings,	in	Indonesian	dipping	sauces	and
sambal	condiments,	and	in	West	African
stews,	soups,	cakes,	and	confections.	A
popular	snack	food	in	both	Asia	and	the
southern	United	States	is	peanuts	boiled	in
salted	water.	When	boiled	in	their	shells,
peanuts	develop	a	potato-like	aroma,	with
sweet	vanilla	highlights	thanks	to	the



liberation	of	vanillin	from	the	shell.
In	the	United	States,	four	varieties	are

grown	for	different	purposes:	large	Virginia
and	small	Valencia	for	nuts	sold	in	the	shell,
Virginia	and	small	Spanish	for	mixed	nuts	and
candies,	and	Runner	for	baked	goods	and
peanut	butter,	since	its	higher	content	of
monounsaturated	fat	makes	it	less	vulnerable
to	rancidity.

Peanut	Butter	The	modern	version	of	peanut
butter	was	apparently	developed	around	1890
in	 St.	 Louis	 or	 in	 Battle	 Creek,	 Michigan.
Commercial	peanut	butter	is	made	by	heating
the	 nuts	 to	 an	 internal	 temperature	 around
300ºF/150ºC	 to	 develop	 flavor,	 blanching	 in
hot	 water	 to	 remove	 the	 skin,	 and	 finally
grinding	 them	with	 about	 2%	 salt	 and	 up	 to
6%	 sugar.	 The	 oil	 can	 be	 prevented	 from
separating	 from	 the	 solid	 peanut	 particles	 by
adding	 3–5%	 of	 a	 hydrogenated	 shortening
that	solidifies	as	the	butter	cools	and	forms	a



host	 of	 tiny	 crystals	 that	 hold	 the	 very
unsaturated,	 liquid	 peanut	 oil	 in	 place.	 Low-
fat	 peanut	 butter	 is	 made	 by	 replacing	 a
portion	 of	 the	 peanuts	 with	 soy	 protein	 and
with	sugar.

Peanut	 Flavor	 Several	 hundred	 volatile
compounds	 have	 been	 identified	 in	 roasted
peanuts.	The	 raw	 seed	 has	 a	 green,	 bean-like
flavor	 (mainly	 from	 green-leaf	 hexanal	 and
the	 pyrazine	 that	 characterizes	 peas).	 The
roasted	aroma	is	a	composite	of	several	sulfur
compounds,	 a	 number	 of	 generically	 “nutty”
pyrazines,	 and	 others,	 some	 of	 which	 have
fruity,	 flowery,	 fried,	 and	 smoky	 characters.
During	 storage	 and	 staling,	 the	 nutty
pyrazines	 disappear	 and	 painty,	 cardboard
notes	increase.

Peanut	Oil	Thanks	 to	 the	productivity	 of	 the
peanut	 plant	 in	 warm	 climates,	 peanut	 oil	 is
an	 important	 cooking	 oil,	 especially	 in	Asia.
It’s	 made	 by	 steaming	 the	 peanuts	 to



inactivate	 enzymes	 and	 soften	 the	 cellular
structure,	 then	 pressing	 them;	 the	 oil	 is	 then
clarified	 and	 sometimes	 refined	 to	 remove
some	of	 the	 distinctive	 flavor	 and	 impurities
that	would	lower	the	smoke	point.

Pecans	 Pecans	 are	 the	 soft,	 fatty	 seeds	 of	 a
very	large	tree,	a	distant	relative	of	the	walnut
that	 is	 native	 to	 the	 Mississippi	 and	 other
river	 valleys	 of	 central	 North	 America,	 and
found	 as	 far	 south	 as	 Oaxaca.	Carya
illinoiensis	 is	 one	 of	 about	 14	 species	 of
hickories,	and	 its	nuts	among	 the	 tastiest	and
easiest	to	shell.	Wild	pecans	were	enjoyed	by
the	 native	 Americans,	 and	 apparently	 made
into	a	kind	of	milk	that	was	used	for	drinking,
cooking,	and	possibly	fermenting.	The	earliest
intentional	plantings	may	have	been	made	by
the	Spanish	around	1700	in	Mexico,	and	a	few
decades	 later	 the	 trees	 were	 grown	 in	 the
eastern	 British	 colonies.	 The	 first	 improved
varieties	were	made	possible	in	the	1840s	by	a



Louisiana	 slave	 named	Antoine,	who	worked
out	 how	 to	 graft	 wood	 from	 superior	 trees
onto	seedling	stocks.	Georgia,	Texas,	and	New
Mexico	 are	 now	 the	 largest	 producers	 of
pecans.

Compared	to	the	walnut,	the	pecan	is	more
elongated,	the	cotyledons	thicker	and
smoother,	with	a	larger	proportion	of	meat	to
shell.	As	with	walnuts,	light-skinned	varieties
are	less	astringent	than	dark-skinned.	The
distinctive	flavor	of	pecans	remains	somewhat
mysterious.	In	addition	to	the	generic	nutty
notes	of	the	pyrazines,	one	study	found	a
lactone	(octalactone)	that	is	also	present	in
coconuts.

Pecans	and	walnuts	are	among	the	nuts
with	the	highest	oil	and	unsaturated	fatty	acid
contents.	High	oil	content	generally	goes
along	with	fragile	texture,	which	means	that
the	kernels	are	easily	bruised,	with	seepage	of
oil	to	the	surface	and	rapidoxidation	and
staling.	Roasting	increases	the	rate	of	staling



by	weakening	cells	and	allowing	oil	to	come
into	contact	with	the	air.	Carefully	handled,
raw	pecans	can	be	stored	for	years	in	the
freezer.

Food	Words:	Pine,	Walnut,	Flax,	Sesame
A	 number	 of	 nut	 names	 seem	 simply	 to
name	 the	 nuts,	 without	 a	 penumbra	 of
related	meanings.	This	is	an	indication	that
almonds	 and	 pistachios	 (from	 the	 Greek)
and	 hazelnuts	 (from	 the	 Indo-European)
have	been	basic	 fare	 for	a	very	 long	 time.
Pine	 comes	 from	 an	 Indo-European	 root
meaning	“to	swell,	 to	be	fat,”	probably	an
allusion	 to	 the	 fat-like	 resin	 that	 the	 tree
exude s .	Walnut	 is	 an	 Old	 English
compound	 of	wealh,	 meaning	 “Celt”	 or
“foreigner,”	 and	hnutu,	 “nut,”	 a	 reflection
of	the	fact	that	walnuts	were	introduced	to
the	British	Isles	from	the	east.	Flax	comes
from	 an	 Indo-European	 root	 meaning	 “to
plait,”	 because	 flax	 was	 originally	 grown



for	its	stem	fibers.	And	sesame	comes	from
two	 words	 in	 the	 ancient	 Middle	 Eastern
Akkadian	 language	 that	 meant	 “oil”	 and
“plant.”

Pine	Nuts	Pine	nuts	are	gathered	from	about	a
dozen	of	 the	100	species	of	pines,	one	of	 the
most	 familiar	 evergreen	 tree	 families	 in	 the
Northern	 Hemisphere.	 Among	 the	 more
important	 sources	 are	 the	 Italian	 stone	 pine
Pinus	 pinea,	 the	 Korean	 or	 Chinese	 pine	P.
koraiensis,	and	the	southwestern	U.S.	pinyons
P.	 monophylla 	 and	P.	 edulis. 	 The	 nuts	 are
borne	 on	 the	 scales	 of	 the	 pine	 cone,	 which
takes	 three	 years	 to	 mature.	 The	 cones	 are
sun-dried,	threshed	to	shake	out	the	seeds,	and
the	kernels	then	hulled,	nowadays	by	machine.
They	 have	 a	 distinctive,	 resinous	 aroma	 and
are	rich	even	for	nuts;	Asian	pine	nuts	have	a
higher	oil	content	(78%)	than	either	American
or	 European	 types	 (62%	 and	 45%
respectively).	 They’re	 used	 in	 many	 savory



and	 sweet	 preparations,	 and	 pressed	 to	make
oil.	 In	 Korea,	 pine	 pollen	 is	 used	 to	 make
sweets,	 and	 Romanians	 flavor	 game	 sauces
with	the	green	cones.

Pistachios	Pistachios	are	the	seeds	of	a	native
of	 arid	 western	 Asia	 and	 the	 Middle	 East,
Pistacia	vera,	a	relative	of	the	cashew	and	the
mango.	Along	with	 almonds,	 they	 have	 been
found	 at	 the	 sites	 of	 Middle	 Eastern
settlements	 dating	 to	 7000	BCE.	 A	 close
relat ive,	Pistacia	 lentiscus,	 provides	 the
aromatic	 gum	 called	 mastic	 (p.	 421).
Pistachios	 first	 became	 a	 prominent	 nut	 in
America	 in	 the	 1880s,	 thanks	 to	 their
popularity	 among	 immigrants	 in	 New	 York
City.	 Iran,	 Turkey,	 and	 California	 are	 the
major	producers	today.

Pistachios	grow	in	clusters,	with	a	thin,
tannin-rich	hull	around	the	inner	shell	and
kernel.	As	the	seeds	mature,	the	outer	hull
turns	purple-red	and	the	expanding	kernel



cracks	the	inner	shell	open.	Traditionally,	the
ripe	fruits	were	knocked	from	the	trees	and
sun-dried,	and	the	hull	pigments	stained	the
shell,	so	the	shells	were	often	dyed	to	make
them	a	uniform	red.	Today,	most	California
pistachios	are	hulled	before	drying,	so	the
shells	are	their	natural	pale	tan	color.

Pistachios	are	remarkable	among	the	nuts
for	having	green	cotyledons.	The	color	comes
from	chlorophyll,	which	remains	vivid	when
the	trees	grow	in	a	relatively	cool	climate,	for
example	at	high	elevation,	and	when	the	nuts
are	harvested	early,	several	weeks	before	full
maturity.	Pistachios	thus	offer	not	only	flavor
and	texture	but	a	contrasting	color	in	pâtés,
sausages,	and	other	meat	dishes,	and	in	ice
creams	and	sweets.	The	color	is	best	retained
by	roasting	or	otherwise	cooking	the	kernels
at	low	temperatures	that	minimize	chlorophyll
damage.

Walnuts	 Walnuts	 come	 from	 trees	 in	 the



genus	Juglans,	 of	which	 there	 are	 around	 15
species	 native	 to	 southwestern	 Asia,	 eastern
Asia,	 and	 the	 Americas.	 The	 most	 widely
cultivated	 is	 the	 Persian	 or	 English	 walnut,
Juglans	regia,	whose	seeds	have	been	enjoyed
since	 ancient	 times	 in	 western	 Asia	 and
Europe,	and	among	 tree	nuts	are	second	only
to	 almonds	 in	 worldwide	 consumption.	 In
many	 European	 languages,	 the	 generic	 term
for	nut	is	also	the	word	for	walnut.	The	United
States,	 France,	 and	 Italy	 are	 the	 major
producers	 today.	 Walnuts	 have	 long	 been
pressed	for	their	aromatic	oil,	were	once	made
into	milk	 in	 Europe	 and	 China,	 and	 came	 to
provide	the	rich,	flavorful	backbone	of	sauces
in	 Persia	 (fesenjan),	 Georgia	 (satsivi),	 and
Mexico	 (nogado).	 In	 some	 countries,
immature	 “green”	 walnuts	 are	 harvested	 in
early	 summer	and	pickled	 (England),	used	 to
flavor	 sweetened	 alcohol	 (Sicilian	nocino,
French	vin	de	noix),	or	preserved	in	syrup	(the
Middle	East).



Pine	 nuts.	 They	 are	 borne	 on	 the	 scales	 of
pine	 cones,	 and	 like	 the	 coconut,	 are	mainly
endosperm	tissue	rather	than	cotyledons.

Like	its	cousins	the	pecan	and	hickories,
the	walnut	is	the	stone	of	a	thin-walled	fruit,
the	edible	portion	being	two	lobed,	wrinkled
cotyledons.	Walnuts	are	exceptionally	rich	in
the	omega-3	polyunsaturated	linolenic	acid,
which	makes	them	nutritionally	valuable	but
also	especially	liable	to	become	rancid;	they
should	be	kept	in	the	cold	and	dark.	The
aroma	of	walnuts	is	created	by	a	complex
mixture	of	molecules	derived	from	the	oil
(aldehydes,	alcohols,	and	ketones).

Walnut	Relatives 	A	North	American	 relative
of	 the	 Persian	 walnut,	 the	 black	 walnut	 (J.
nigra)	 is	 smaller,	 with	 a	 harder	 shell	 and	 a
stronger,	 distinctive	 flavor.	 It	 was	 once



commonly	 used	 to	make	 breads,	 confections,
and	 ice	 creams,	 but	 it’s	 difficult	 to	 extract
from	 the	 shell	 in	 large	 pieces	 and	 has	 been
largely	 ignored.	 Most	 still	 come	 from	 wild
trees	 in	Missouri.	Another	American	species,
the	butternut	(J.	cinerea),	is	even	less	known,
but	remarkable	for	its	high	protein	content	—
near	 30%	—	 and	 esteemed	 by	 enthusiasts	 as
among	the	tastiest	nuts.	The	Japanese	have	an
indigenous	 walnut,	J.	 ailantifolia,	 one	 of
whose	 varieties	 is	 the	 distinctively	 heart-
shaped	heartnut.

Characteristics
of	Other	Oil-Rich	Seeds

Flaxseed	Flaxseed	comes	from	plants	native
to	Eurasia,	species	of	Linum	and	especially	L.
usitatissimum,	which	have	been	used	for	more
than	7,000	years	as	a	food	and	to	make	linen
fiber.	The	small,	tough,	reddish-brown	seed	is
about	35%	oil	and	30%	protein,	and	has	a



pleasantly	nutty	flavor	and	an	attractively
glossy	appearance.	Two	qualities	set	it	apart
from	other	edible	seeds.	First,	its	oil	is	over
half	linolenic	acid,	an	“omega-3”	fatty	acid
that	the	body	can	convert	into	the	healthful
long-chain	fatty	acids	(DHA,	EPA)	found	in
seafoods	(p.	183).	Flax	oil	(also	known	as
linseed	oil,	and	valued	in	manufacturing	for
drying	to	a	tough	water-resistant	layer)	is	by
far	the	richest	source	of	omega-3	fatty	acids
among	plant	foods.	Second,	flaxseed	is	about
30%	dietary	fiber,	a	quarter	of	which	is	a	gum
in	the	seed	coat	made	up	of	long	chains	of
various	sugars.	Thanks	to	the	gum,	ground
flaxseed	forms	a	thick	gel	when	mixed	with
water,	is	an	effective	emulsifier	and	foam
stabilizer,	and	can	improve	the	volume	of
baked	goods.

Poppy	Seeds	 Poppy	 seeds	 come	 from	a	west
Asian	 plant,	Papaver	 somniferum,	 that	 was
cultivated	 by	 the	 ancient	 Sumerians.	 It’s	 the



same	plant	whose	immature	seed	capsules	are
cut	 to	 collect	 the	 latex	 called	 opium,	 a
mixture	 of	 morphine,	 heroin,	 codeine,	 and
other	 related	 alkaloid	 drugs.	 The	 seeds	 are
harvested	 from	 the	 capsules	 after	 the	 latex
flow	 has	 stopped.	 They	 may	 carry	 traces	 of
opiate	alkaloids	as	well,	not	enough	to	have	an
effect	 on	 the	 body,	 but	 enough	 to	 cause
positive	 results	 in	 drug	 tests	 after	 the
consumption	 of	 a	 poppy-flavored	 cake	 or
pastry.

Poppy	seeds	are	tiny;	it	takes	3,300	to
make	a	gram,	90,000	an	ounce,	1–2	million	a
pound.	The	seed	is	50%	oil	by	weight.	Poppy
seeds	sometimes	have	a	bitter,	peppery	taste,
the	result	of	damage	to	the	seeds,	which	mixes
oil	with	enzymes	and	generates	free	fatty
acids.	The	striking	blue	color	of	some	poppy
seeds	is	apparently	an	optical	illusion.
Microscopic	examination	demonstrates	that
the	actual	pigment	layer	of	the	seed	is	brown.
Two	layers	above	it,	however,	is	a	layer	of



cells	containing	tiny	crystals	of	calcium
oxalate:	and	the	crystals	act	like	tiny	prisms,
refracting	light	rays	in	such	a	way	that	blue
wavelengths	are	selectively	reflected.

Pumpkin	 Seeds	 Pumpkin	 seeds	 come	 from
the	fruits	of	 the	New	World	native	Cucurbita
pepo,	 are	 notable	 for	 being	 deep	 green	 with
chlorophyll,	 and	 for	 containing	 no	 starch,	 as
much	as	50%	oil,	 and	35%	protein.	Pumpkin
seeds	 are	 eaten	 widely	 as	 a	 snack	 and	 in
Mexico	 are	 used	 as	 a	 sauce	 thickener.	 There
are	 “naked”	 varieties	 that	 lack	 the	 usual
tough,	 adherent	 seed	 coat	 and	 are	 therefore
much	easier	to	work	with.

Pumpkin	seed	oil	is	a	prominent	salad	oil
in	central	Europe.	The	oil,	containing	mainly
polyunsaturated	linoleic	and	monounsaturated
oleic	acids,	is	intriguingly	changeable	in
color.	Pumpkin	seeds	contain	both	yellow-
orange	carotenoid	pigments,	mainly	lutein,
and	chlorophyll.	Oil	pressed	from	raw	seeds	is



green;	but	when	the	seed	meal	is	wetted	and
heated	to	increase	the	yield,	more	carotenoids
are	extracted	than	chlorophyll.	The	result	is	an
oil	that	looks	dark	brown	in	the	bottle	or	bowl
from	the	combination	of	orange	and	green
pigments;	but	in	a	thin	layer,	for	example	on	a
piece	of	bread	dipped	into	the	oil,	there	are
fewer	pigment	molecules	to	absorb	light,	the
chlorophyll	dominates,	and	the	oil	becomes
emerald	green.

Sesame	Seeds	Sesame	seeds	are	 the	seeds	of
Sesamum	 indicum,	 a	 plant	 of	 the	 central
African	savanna	 that	 is	now	mostly	grown	 in
India,	China,	Mexico,	and	the	Sudan.	Sesame
seeds	 are	 small,	 with	 250–300	 per	 gram	 and
7,500–9,000	 per	 ounce,	 come	 in	 a	 variety	 of
colors,	 from	 golden	 to	 brown,	 violet,	 and
black,	 and	 are	 about	 50%	 oil	 by	 weight.
They’re	 usually	 lightly	 toasted	 (250–
300ºF/120–150ºC	for	5	minutes)	 to	develop	a
nutty	flavor,	which	has	some	sulfur	aromatics



in	common	with	roasted	coffee	(furfurylthiol).
Sesame	 seeds	 are	 made	 into	 the	 seasoned
Middle	Eastern	paste	called	 tahini,	 are	added
to	 rice	 balls	 and	 made	 into	 a	 tofu-like	 cake
with	 arrowroot	 in	 Japan,	 and	 made	 into	 a
sweet	paste	 in	China,	 as	well	 as	decorating	a
variety	 of	 baked	 goods	 in	 Europe	 and	 the
United	 States.	 Sesame	 oil	 is	 also	 extracted
from	toasted	seeds	(360–400ºF/180–200ºC	for
10–30	minutes)	 and	 used	 as	 a	 flavoring.	The
oil	 is	 remarkable	 for	 its	 resistance	 to
oxidation	 and	 rancidity,	 which	 results	 from
high	 levels	 of	 antioxidant	 phenolic
compounds	 (lignans),	 some	 vitamin	 E,	 and
products	of	the	browning	reactions	that	occur
during	the	more	thorough	toasting.

Sunflower	 Seeds	 The	 flower	 of	Helianthus
annuus,	 the	 only	 North	 American	 native	 to
become	 a	 significant	 world	 crop,	 is	 a
composite	 of	 a	 hundred	 or	 more	 small
flowers,	each	of	which	produces	a	small	fruit



like	the	“seed”	of	the	strawberry,	a	single	seed
contained	 in	 a	 thin	 hull.	 The	 seed	 is	 mainly
storage	 cotyledons.	 The	 sunflower	 originated
in	the	American	Southwest,	was	domesticated
in	 Mexico	 nearly	 3,500	 years	 before	 the
arrival	of	European	explorers,	and	brought	 to
Europe	around	1510	as	a	decorative	plant.	The
first	 large	 crops	 were	 grown	 in	 France	 and
Bavaria	 in	 the	 18th	 century	 to	 produce
vegetable	 oil.	 Today,	 the	 world’s	 leading
producer	 by	 far	 is	 Russia.	 Improved	Russian
oil	 varieties	 were	 grown	 in	 North	 America
during	World	 War	 II,	 and	 sunflower	 is	 now
one	of	the	top	annual	oil	crops	worldwide.	The
eating	 varieties	 are	 larger	 than	 the	 oil	 types,
with	decoratively	striped	hulls	 that	are	easily
removed.	Sunflower	 seeds	are	especially	 rich
in	phenolic	antioxidants	and	vitamin	E.



Chapter	10

Cereal	Doughs
and	Batters

Bread,	Cakes,	Pastry,	Pasta

The	Evolution	of	Bread
Prehistoric	Times
Greece	and	Rome
The	Middle	Ages
Early	Modern	Times
The	 Decline	 and	 Revival	 of	 Traditional
Breads

The	Basic	Structure	of	Doughs,	Batters,	and
Their	Products

Gluten
Starch
Gas	Bubbles
Fats:	Shortening



Dough	 and	 Batter	 Ingredients:	 Wheat
Flours

Kinds	of	Wheat
Turning	Wheat	into	Flour
Minor	Flour	Components
Kinds	of	Flour

Dough	 and	 Batter	 Ingredients:	Yeasts	 and
Chemical	Leavenings

Yeasts
Baking	 Powders	 and	 Other	 Chemical
Leaveners

Breads
The	Choice	of	Ingredients
Preparing	 the	 Dough:	 Mixing	 and
Kneading
Fermentation,	or	Rising
Baking
Cooling
The	 Staling	 Process;	 Storing	 and
Refreshing	Bread
Bread	Flavor
Mass-Produced	Breads



Special	Kinds	of	Loaf	Breads:	Sourdough,
Rye,	Sweet,	Gluten-Free
Other	Breads:	Flatbreads,	Bagels,	Steamed
Breads,	Quick	Breads,	Doughnuts

Thin	 Batter	 Foods:	 Crêpes,	 Popovers,
Griddle	Cakes,	Cream	Puff	Pastry

Batter	Foods
Crêpes
Popovers
Griddle	Cakes:	Pancakes	and	Crumpets
Griddle	Cakes:	Waffles	and	Wafers
Cream	Puff	Pastry,	Pâte	à	Choux
Frying	Batters

Thick	 Batter	 Foods:	 Batter	 Breads	 and
Cakes

Batter	Breads	and	Muffins
Cakes

Pastries
Pastry	Styles
Pastry	Ingredients
Cooking	Pastries
Crumbly	Pastries:	Short	Pastry,	Pâte	Brisée



Flaky	Pastries:	American	Pie	Pastry
Laminated	 Pastries:	 Puff	 Pastry,	 Pâte
Feuilleté
Sheet	Pastries:	Phyllo,	Strudel
Pastry-Bread	 Hybrids:	 Croissants,	 Danish
Pastries
Tender	 Savory	 Pastry:	 Hot-Water	 Pastry,
Pâte	à	Pâté

Cookies
Cookie	Ingredients	and	Textures
Making	and	Keeping	Cookies

Pasta,	Noodles,	and	Dumplings
The	History	of	Pasta	and	Noodles
Making	Pasta	and	Noodle	Doughs
Cooking	Pasta	and	Noodles
Couscous,	Dumplings,	Spätzle,	Gnocchi
Asian	Wheat	Noodles	and	Dumplings
Asian	Starch	and	Rice	Noodles

Bread	 is	 the	 most	 everyday	 and	 familiar	 of
foods,	 the	 sturdy	 staff	 of	 life	 on	 which
hundreds	 of	 generations	 have	 leaned	 for



sustenance.	 It	 also	 represents	 a	 truly
remarkable	discovery,	a	 lively	pole	on	which
the	young	human	 imagination	may	well	have
vaulted	forward	in	insight	and	inspiration.	For
our	prehistoric	ancestors	it	would	have	been	a
startling	 sign	 of	 the	 natural	 world’s	 hidden
potential	for	being	transformed,	and	their	own
ability	 to	 shape	 natural	 materials	 to	 human
desires.	 Bread	 is	 nothing	 like	 the	 original
grain,	 loose,	hard,	 chalky,	 and	bland!	Simply
grinding	 grains,	 wetting	 the	 particles	 with
water,	and	dropping	the	paste	on	a	hot	surface,
creates	 a	 flavorful,	 puffy	mass,	 crisp	 outside
and	 moist	 within.	 And	 raised	 bread	 is	 even
more	startling.	Let	the	paste	sit	for	a	couple	of
days,	 and	 it	 comes	 alive	 and	 grows,	 inflated
from	 within,	 and	 cooks	 into	 a	 bread	 with	 a
delicately	 chambered	 interior	 that	 the	 human
hand	could	never	sculpt.	Plain	parched	grains
and	 dense	 gruels	 provide	 just	 as	 much
nourishment,	 but	 bread	 introduced	 a	 new
dimension	 of	 pleasure	 and	 wonder	 to	 the



mainstays	of	human	life.
So	it	was	bread	that	became	synonymous

with	food	itself	in	the	lands	from	western	Asia
through	Europe,	and	took	a	prominent	place	in
religious	and	secular	rituals	(Passover
matzoh,	Communion	bread,	wedding	cakes).
In	England,	it	provided	a	foundation	for
naming	social	relations.	“Lord”	comes	from
the	Anglo-Saxon	hlaford,	“loaf	ward,”	the
master	who	supplies	food;	“lady”	from
hlaefdige,	“loafkneader,”	the	person	whose
retinue	produces	what	her	husband	distributes;
“companion”	and	“company”	from	the	late
Latin	companio,	or	“one	who	shares	bread.”
The	staff	of	life	has	also	been	a	mainstay	for
Western	thought.

Food	Words:	Dough,	Bread
Dough	comes	from	an	Indo-European	root
that	 meant	 “to	 form,	 to	 build,”	 and	 that
also	gave	us	 the	words	figure,	 fiction,	 and
paradise	(a	walled	garden).	This	derivation



suggests	the	importance	to	early	peoples	of
dough’s	malleability,	its	clay-like	capacity
to	 be	 shaped	 by	 the	 human	 hand.	 (Cooks
have	 long	 used	 both	 clay	 and	 dough	 to
make	 containers	 for	 cooking	 other	 foods,
especially	birds,	meats,	and	fish.)

The	 word	bread	 comes	 from	 a
Germanic	 root,	 and	 originally	 meant	 a
piece	or	bit	of	a	loaf,	with	loaf	meaning	the
leavened,	 baked	 substance	 itself.	 Over
time,	loaf	 came	 to	mean	 the	 intact	 baked
mass,	 and	bread	 took	 over	loaf’	 s	original
meaning.	Otherwise	we	would	now	ask	for
a	bread	of	loaf!

The	Evolution
of	Bread

Bread’s	evolution	has	been	influenced	by	all
the	elements	that	go	into	its	making:	the
grains,	the	machines	for	milling	them,	the
microbes	and	chemicals	that	leaven	the



dough,	the	ovens	that	bake	the	loaves,	the
people	who	make	the	bread	and	eat	it.	One
consistent	theme	from	ancient	times	has	been
the	prestige	of	refined	and	enriched	versions
of	this	basic	sustenance.	Bread	has	become	a
product	increasingly	defined	by	the	use	of
high-rising	bread	wheats,	the	milling	of	that
wheat	into	a	white	flour	with	little	of	the
grain’s	bran	or	germ,	leavening	with	ever
purer	cultures	of	mild-flavored	yeasts,
enrichment	with	ever	greater	quantities	of	fat
and	sugar.	In	the	20th	century	we	managed	to
take	refinement	and	enrichment	to	the
extreme,	and	now	have	industrial	breads	with
little	flavor	or	texture	left	in	them,	and	cakes
that	contain	more	sugar	than	flour.	In	the	last
couple	of	decades,	bread	lovers	have	led	a
rediscovery	of	the	pleasures	of	simple,	less
refined	breads	freshly	baked	in	old-fashioned
brick	ovens,	and	even	supermarket	breads	are
getting	more	flavorful.

Prehistoric	Times



Prehistoric	Times

Two	prehistoric	discoveries	laid	the
foundation	for	the	transformation	of	grains
into	breads	and	noodles,	pastries	and	cakes.
The	first	was	that	in	addition	to	being	cooked
into	a	porridge,	pastes	of	crushed	grain	and
water	could	also	be	turned	into	an	interesting
solid	by	cooking	them	on	hot	embers	or
stones:	the	result	was	flatbread.	The	second
was	that	a	paste	set	aside	for	a	few	days	would
ferment	and	become	inflated	with	gases:	and
such	a	paste	made	a	softer,	lighter,	more
flavorful	bread,	especially	when	cooked	from
all	sides	at	once	in	an	enclosed	oven.

Flatbreads	were	a	common	feature	of	late
Stone	Age	life	in	parts	of	the	world	where
grains	were	the	chief	food	in	the	diet;
surviving	versions	include	Middle	Eastern
lavash,	Greek	pita,	Indian	roti	and	chapati,	all
made	mainly	from	wheat	but	also	other
grains,	and	the	Latin	American	tortilla	and
North	American	johnnycake,	both	made	from



maize.	Such	breads	were	probably	first
cooked	alongside	an	open	fire,	then	on	a
griddle	stone,	and	some	of	them	much	later	in
beehive-shaped	ovens,	which	were	open	at	the
top	and	contained	both	coals	and	bread;	pieces
of	dough	were	slapped	onto	the	inside	wall.

Bread	wheat,	the	unique	species	that	can
make	large,	light	loaves,	had	evolved	by	8000
BCE	(p.	465),	but	the	earliest	archaeological
evidence	for	leavened	breads	comes	from
Egyptian	remains	of	around	4000	BCE.	The
first	raised	doughs	arose	spontaneously,	since
yeast	spores	are	ubiquitous	in	the	air	and	on
grain	surfaces,	and	they	readily	infect	a	moist,
nutritious	grain	paste.	Bread	makers
throughout	history	have	harnessed	this	natural
process	by	leavening	new	dough	with	a
leftover	piece	in	which	yeast	was	already
growing,	but	they’ve	also	valued	less	sour
starters,	especially	the	frothy	residue	from
brewing	beer;	yeast	production	had	become	a
specialized	profession	in	Egypt	by	300	BCE.



Meanwhile	grinding	equipment	progressed
from	the	mortar	and	pestle	to	two	flat	stones
and	then,	around	800	BCE	in	Mesopotamia,	to
stones	that	could	rotate	continuously.
Continuous	milling	made	feasible	the
eventual	use	of	animal,	water,	and	wind
power,	and	thus	the	grinding	of	grains	into
very	fine	flours	with	little	human	labor.

Greece	and	Rome

Leavened	loaves	of	bread	arrived	fairly	late
along	the	northern	rim	of	the	Mediterranean.
Bread	wheat	was	not	grown	in	Greece	until
about	400	BCE,	and	flat	barley	breads	were
probably	the	norm	well	after.	We	do	know
that	the	Greeks	enjoyed	breads	and	cakes
flavored	with	honey,	anise,	sesame,	and	fruits,
and	that	they	made	both	whole-grain	and
partly	refined	breads.	At	least	from	the	Greeks
on,	whiteness	in	bread	was	a	mark	of	purity
and	distinction.	Archestratus,	a	contemporary



of	Aristotle	and	author	of	the	Gastronomia,	a
compendious	account	of	ancient
Mediterranean	eating	whose	title	gave	us	the
word	“gastronomy,”	accorded	extravagant
praise	to	a	barley	bread	from	the	island	of
Lesbos	on	just	these	grounds,	calling	it	“bread
so	white	that	it	outdoes	the	ethereal	snow	in
purity.	If	the	celestial	gods	eat	barley	bread,
no	doubt	Hermes	goes	to	Eresus	to	buy	it	for
them.”
By	late	Roman	times,	wheat	bread	was	a
central	feature	of	life,	and	huge	amounts	of
durum	and	bread	wheats	were	imported	from
northern	Africa	and	other	parts	of	the	empire
to	satisfy	the	public	demand.	Pliny	offers	a
touching	reminder	that	enriched	breads	—
early	cakes	and	pastries	—	were	great	luxuries
in	turbulent	times:

Some	people	use	eggs	or	milk	in	kneading
the	dough,	while	even	butter	has	been	used
by	peoples	enjoying	peace,	when	attention



can	be	devoted	to	the	varieties	of	bakers’
goods.

The	Middle	Ages

During	the	European	Middle	Ages,	bakers
were	specialists,	producing	either	common
brown	or	luxurious	white	bread.	It	wasn’t
until	the	17th	century	that	improvements	in
milling	and	in	per	capita	income	led	to	the
wide	availability	of	more	or	less	white	bread
and	the	dissolution	of	the	brown	guild	as	a
separate	body.	In	northern	areas,	rye,	barley,
and	oats	were	more	common	than	wheat	and
were	made	into	coarse,	heavy	breads.	One	use
of	flat	bread	at	this	time	was	the	“trencher,”	a
dense,	dry,	thick	slice	that	served	as	a	plate	at
medieval	meals	and	then	was	either	eaten	or
given	away	to	the	poor.	And	pastry	was	often
made	to	serve	as	a	kind	of	all-purpose	cooking
and	storage	container,	a	protective	and	edible
wrapping	for	meat	dishes	in	particular.



Four	 stages	 in	 the	 evolution	 of	machines	 for
grinding	 grain.	 Clockwise	 from	 upper	 left:
The	saddlestone	and	lever	mill	were	limited	by
their	 back-and-forth	 motion.	 The	 hourglass
mill,	 which	 could	 be	 turned	 continuously	 in
one	 direction	 by	 man	 or	 animal,	 was	 widely
used	 by	 Roman	 times.	 Flat	 millstones	 finally
made	 it	 possible	 to	 harness	 more	 elemental
forces,	and	were	put	to	use	in	water	and	wind
mills.	 In	 the	 modern	 industrial	 world,	 most
grain	is	milled	between	grooved	metal	rollers,
but	some	is	still	stone-ground.

Early	Modern	Times

The	late	medieval	period	and	Renaissance
brought	notable	progress	in	the	art	of	enriched
breads;	both	puff	pastry	and	choux	pastry	date



from	this	time.	Domestic	recipes	for	bread
begin	to	appear	in	cookbooks	for	the	emerging
middle	class,	and	already	look	much	like
modern	recipes.	English	and	American
cookbooks	from	the	18th	century	on	contain
dozens	of	recipes	for	breads,	cakes,	and
cookies.	In	England	around	1800,	most	bread
was	still	baked	in	domestic	or	communal
village	ovens.	But	as	the	Industrial	Revolution
spread	and	more	of	the	population	moved	to
crowded	city	quarters,	the	bakeries	took	over
an	ever	increasing	share	of	bread	production,
and	some	of	them	adulterated	their	flour	with
whiteners	(alum)	and	fillers	(chalk,	ground
animal	bones).	The	decline	of	domestic
baking	was	criticized	on	economic,
nutritional,	and	even	moral	grounds.	The
English	political	journalist	William	Cobbett
wrote	in	Cottage	Economy	(1821),	a	tract
addressed	to	the	working	class,	that	it	is
reasonable	to	buy	bread	only	in	cities	where
space	and	fuel	are	in	short	supply.	Otherwise,



How	wasteful,	then,	and	indeed,	how
shameful,	for	a	labourer’s	wife	to	go	to	the
baker’s	shop…

Give	me,	for	a	beautiful	sight,	a	neat
and	smart	woman,	heating	her	oven	and
setting	in	her	bread!	And,	if	the	bustle	does
make	the	sign	of	labour	glisten	on	her
brow,	where	is	the	man	that	would	not	kiss
that	off,	rather	than	lick	the	plaster	from
the	cheek	of	a	duchess?

The	 scolding	 of	Cobbett	 and	 others	 failed
to	reverse	the	trend.	Bread	making	was	one	of
the	 most	 time-consuming	 and	 laborious	 of
household	tasks,	a	kiss	on	the	sweaty	forehead
notwithstanding,	 and	 more	 and	 more	 of	 the
work	was	delegated	to	the	baker.

Innovations	 in	Leavening	A	 new	method	 of
leavening	made	its	first	appearance	in	the	first
American	cookbook,	Amelia	Simmons’s	1796
American	 Cookery.	 Four	 recipes,	 two	 for
cookies	 and	 two	 for	 gingerbread,	 call	 for	 the



use	of	“pearlash,”	a	refined	version	of	potash,
which	was	made	by	soaking	the	ash	produced
when	plant	materials	are	burned,	draining	off
the	 liquid,	 and	drying	 it	 down	 to	 concentrate
the	 substances	 dissolved	 in	 it.	 Pearlash	 is
mostly	 alkaline	 potassium	 carbonate,	 which
reacts	 with	 acid	 ingredients	 in	 doughs	 to
generate	 carbon	 dioxide	 gas.	 It	 was	 the
precursor	to	baking	soda	and	baking	powders,
which	arrived	between	1830	and	1850.	These
chemical	 ingredients	 made	 it	 possible	 to
leaven	 instantly	 mixtures	 that	 living,	 slow-
growing	yeasts	couldn’t	very	well:	such	things
as	fluid	cake	batters	and	sweet	cookie	doughs.
Purified	 commercial	 yeast	 cultures	 for	 loaf
breads,	more	predictable	 and	 less	 acidic	 than
brewer’s	 yeast,	 became	 available	 from
specialist	 manufacturers	 around	 the	 turn	 of
the	20th	century.

Food	Words:	Flour
While	 the	 words	 for	 ground	 grain	 in



French,	 Italian,	 and	 Spanish,	farine	 and
farina,	 come	 from	 the	Latin	 for	 a	 kind	 of
grain	(far),	 the	English	word	“flour”	arose
in	medieval	times	from	“flower,”	meaning
the	 best	 part	 of	 the	 ground	 grain:	 that	 is,
the	 portion	 left	 after	 screening	 out	 the
large	 particles	 of	 germ	 and	 bran.	 To	 a
medieval	Englishman,	“whole	wheat	flour”
would	have	been	a	contradiction	in	terms!

The	Decline	and	Revival
Of	Traditional	Breads

Twentieth-Century	Industrialization	The
20th	century	brought	two	broad	trends	to
Europe	and	North	America.	One	was	a	decline
in	the	per	capita	consumption	of	plain	bread.
As	incomes	rose,	people	could	afford	to	eat
more	meat	and	more	high-sugar,	high-fat
cakes	and	pastries.	So	we	now	lean	less
heavily	than	did	our	ancestors	on	the	staff	of
life.	The	other	trend	was	the	industrialization



of	bread	making.	Today	very	little	bread	is
made	in	the	home,	and	with	the	exception	of
countries	with	a	strong	tradition	of	buying
fresh	bread	every	day	—	especially	France,
Germany,	and	Italy	—	most	bread	is	made	in
large	central	factories,	not	in	small	local
bakeries.	Mechanical	aids	to	breadmaking,
powered	mixers	and	others,	began	to	appear
around	1900,	and	culminated	in	the	1960s	in
largely	automated	factories	that	produce	bread
in	a	fraction	of	the	usual	time.	These
manufacturing	systems	replace	biological
dough	development,	the	gradual,	hours-long
leavening	and	gluten	strengthening	of	the
dough	by	yeast,	with	nearly	instantaneous,
mechanical	and	chemical	dough	development.
This	production	method	produces	breads	with
a	soft,	cake-like	interior,	an	uncrusty	crust,
and	an	uncharacteristic	flavor.	They	are
formulated	to	remain	soft	and	edible	in	plastic
bags	for	a	week	or	more.	Industrial	breads
bear	little	resemblance	to	traditional	breads.



The	 Return	 of	 Flavor	 and	 Texture
Europeans	and	North	Americans	began	 to	eat
significantly	 more	 bread	 in	 the	 1980s	 than
they	 had	 the	 decade	 before.	 One	 reason	 was
the	revival	of	traditional	bread	making.	Small
bakeries	 began	 to	 produce	 bread	 using	 less
refined	 grains	 and	 grain	 mixtures,	 building
flavor	 with	 long,	 slow	 fermentation,	 and
baking	 small	 batches	 in	 brick	 ovens	 that
produce	 a	 dark,	 crusty	 loaf.	 Another	 reason
was	 the	 home	 cook’s	 rediscovery	 of	 the
pleasures	 of	 baking	 and	 eating	 fresh	 warm
bread.	 The	 Japanese	 invention	 of	 the	 bread
machine	 made	 it	 possible	 for	 busy	 home
cooks	 to	 put	 all	 the	 ingredients	 into	 a	 single
chamber,	close	the	lid,	and	fill	the	house	with
the	forgotten	aroma	of	fresh-baked	bread.

Breads	baked	by	home	cooks	and	artisans
account	for	a	small	fraction	of	the	overall
bread	production	in	England	and	North
America.	But	their	revival	demonstrates	that
people	still	enjoy	the	flavors	and	textures	of



freshly	made	traditional	breads,	and	this	fact
has	caught	the	attention	of	industrial
producers.	They	have	recently	developed	the
“par-baking”	system,	in	which	manufacturers
ship	partly	baked	and	frozen	loaves	to
supermarkets,	where	they’re	baked	again
locally	and	sold	while	still	crusty	and
flavorful.

Industrial	breads	were	first	“optimized”	to
make	bread-like	products	at	minimum	cost
and	with	maximum	shelf	life.	Finally	taste
and	texture	are	entering	the	calculations,	and
at	least	some	products	are	improving.

Chemical	Leavening	and	the	First
American	Cookie	Recipe

Cookies
One	pound	sugar	boiled	slowly	in	half	pint
water,	 scum	 well	 and	 cool,	 add	 two	 tea
spoons	 pearl	 ash	 dissolved	 in	 milk,	 then
two	 and	 a	 half	 pounds	 flour,	 rub	 in	 4



ounces	 butter,	 and	 two	 large	 spoons	 of
finely	 powdered	 coriander	 seed,	 wet	 with
above;	 make	 rolls	 half	 an	 inch	 thick	 and
cut	to	the	shape	you	please;	bake	fifteen	or
twenty	 minutes	 in	 a	 slack	 oven	 —	 good
three	weeks.
—	Amelia	Simmons,	American	Cookery,

1796

The	Basic	Structure
of	Doughs,	Batters,
and	Their	Products

Wheat	flour	is	strange	and	wonderful	stuff!
Mix	pretty	much	any	other	powdery
ingredient	with	water	and	we	get	a	simple,
inert	paste.	But	mix	some	flour	with	about
half	its	weight	in	water,	and	the	combination
seems	to	come	alive.	At	first	it	forms	a
cohesive	mass	that	changes	its	shape
reluctantly.	With	time	and	kneading,
reluctance	gives	way	to	liveliness,	a	bouncy



responsiveness	to	pressure	that	persists	even
after	the	kneader	lets	go.	It’s	these	qualities	of
cohesiveness	and	liveliness	that	set	wheat
doughs	apart	from	other	cereal	doughs,	and
that	make	possible	light,	delicate	loaves	of
bread,	flaky	pastries,	and	silken	pastas.

The	various	textures	of	baked	goods	and
pastas	are	created	by	the	structures	of	their
doughs	and	batters.	Those	structures	are
composed	of	three	basic	elements:	water,	the
flour’s	gluten	proteins,	and	its	starch	granules.
Together,	these	elements	create	an	integrated,
cohesive	mass.	That	cohesiveness	is	what
gives	pasta	its	close-textured	silkenness.	It’s
also	what	makes	bread	doughs,	pastry	doughs,
and	cake	batters	divisible	into
microscopically	thin	but	intact	sheets.	Breads
and	cakes	are	light	and	tender	because	the
protein-starch	mass	is	divided	up	by	millions
of	tiny	bubbles;	pastries	are	flaky	and	tender
because	the	protein-starch	mass	is	interrupted
by	hundreds	of	thin	layers	of	fat.



We	call	a	mixture	of	flour	and	water	either
a	dough	or	a	batter,	depending	on	the	relative
proportions	of	the	two	major	ingredients.
Generally,	doughs	contain	more	flour	than
water	and	are	stiff	enough	to	be	manipulated
by	hand.	All	the	water	is	bound	to	the	gluten
proteins	and	to	the	surfaces	of	the	starch
granules,	which	are	embedded	in	the
semisolid	gluten-water	matrix.	Batters,	on	the
other	hand,	contain	more	water	than	flour	and
are	loose	enough	to	pour.	Much	of	the	water	is
free	liquid,	and	both	gluten	proteins	and
starch	granules	are	dispersed	in	it.

The	structure	of	a	dough	or	batter	is
temporary.	When	it’s	cooked,	the	starch
granules	absorb	water,	swell,	and	create	a
permanent	solid	structure	from	the	original,
semisolid	or	liquid	one.	In	the	case	of	breads
and	cakes,	that	solid	structure	is	a	sponge-like
network	of	starch	and	protein	filled	with
millions	of	tiny	air	pockets.	Bakers	use	the
term	crumb	for	this	network,	which



constitutes	the	bulk	of	the	bread	or	cake.	The
outer	surface,	which	usually	has	a	dryer,
denser	texture,	is	the	crust.

With	this	overview	in	mind,	let’s	look
more	closely	at	the	structural	elements	of
doughs	and	batters.

Gluten

Chew	on	a	small	piece	of	dough,	and	it
becomes	more	compact	but	persists	as	a	gum-
like,	elastic	mass,	the	residue	that	the	Chinese
named	“the	muscle	of	flour”	and	that	we	call
gluten.	It	consists	mainly	of	protein,	and
includes	what	may	well	be	the	largest	protein
molecules	to	be	found	in	the	natural	world.
These	remarkable	molecules	are	what	give
wheat	dough	its	liveliness	and	make	raised
breads	possible.

Gluten	 Proteins	 Form	 Long	 Chains	 That
Stick	 to	 Each	 Other	 Gluten	 is	 a	 complex



mixture	 of	 certain	 wheat	 proteins	 that	 can’t
dissolve	 in	 water,	 but	 do	 form	 associations
with	 water	 molecules	 and	 with	 each	 other.
When	 the	 proteins	 are	 dry,	 they’re	 immobile
and	 inert.	When	wetted	with	water,	 they	 can
change	 their	 shape,	 move	 relative	 to	 each
other,	 and	 form	 and	 break	 bonds	 with	 each
other.

Proteins	are	long,	chain-like	molecules
built	up	from	smaller	molecules	called	amino
acids	(p.	805).	Most	of	the	gluten	proteins,	the
gliadins	and	the	glutenins,	are	around	a
thousand	amino	acids	long.	The	gliadin	chains
fold	onto	themselves	in	a	compact	mass,	and
bond	only	weakly	with	each	other	and	with	the
glutenin	proteins.	The	glutenins,	however,
bond	with	each	other	in	several	ways	to	form
an	extensive,	tightly	knit	network.

At	each	end	of	the	glutenin	chain	are
sulfur-containing	amino	acids	that	can	form
strong	sulfur-sulfur	bonds	with	the	same
amino	acids	at	the	ends	of	other	glutenin



chains.	To	do	this	they	require	the	availability
of	oxidizing	agents	—	oxygen	in	the	air,
certain	substances	produced	by	yeasts,	or
“dough	improvers”	(p.	529)	added	by	the	flour
manufacturer	or	baker.	The	long,	coiled
middle	stretch	of	the	glutenin	molecule
consists	mainly	of	amino	acids	that	form
weaker,	temporary	bonds	(hydrogen	and
hydrophobic	bonds)	with	similar	amino	acids.
Glutenin	chains	thus	link	up	with	each	other
end-to-end	to	form	super-chains	a	few
hundred	glutenins	long,	and	coiled	stretches
along	their	lengths	readily	form	many
temporary	bonds	with	similar	stretches	along
neighboring	gluten	proteins.	The	result	is	an
extensive	interconnected	network	of	coiled
proteins,	the	gluten.

Gluten	 Plasticity	 and	 Elasticity	 The	 gluten
of	the	bread	wheats	is	both	plastic	and	elastic;
that	is,	it	will	change	its	shape	under	pressure,
yet	 it	 resists	 the	 pressure	 and	 moves	 back



toward	its	original	shape	when	the	pressure	is
removed.	 Thanks	 to	 this	 combination	 of
properties,	 wheat	 dough	 can	 expand	 to
incorporate	 the	 carbon	 dioxide	 gas	 produced
by	yeast,	and	yet	resists	enough	that	its	bubble
walls	won’t	thin	to	the	breaking	point.

Gluten	plasticity	results	from	the	presence
of	the	gliadin	proteins	among	the	glutenins;
because	they’re	compact,	the	gliadins	act
something	like	ball	bearings,	allowing
portions	of	the	glutenins	to	slide	past	each
other	without	bonding.	Elasticity	results	from
the	kinked	and	coiled	structure	of	the
interconnected	gluten	proteins.	Kneading
unfolds	and	aligns	the	protein	molecules,	but
there	are	still	loops	and	kinks	along	their
lengths.	Stretching	the	dough	straightens	out
these	loops	and	kinks,	but	when	the	pressure
is	relieved,	the	molecules	tend	to	revert	to
their	original	kinkiness.	In	addition,	the	coiled
spring-like	structure	of	individual	proteins
can	extend	and	store	some	of	the	energy	of



stretching,	but	when	the	stretching	is	stopped,
the	molecules	spring	back	to	their	compact
coiled	form.	The	visible	result	of	these
submicroscopic	events:	the	stretched	dough
creeps	back	toward	its	original	shape.

Gluten	 formation.	 When	 flour	 is	 mixed	 with
water	and	made	into	a	dough,	glutenin	protein
molecules	 link	 up	 end-to-end	 to	 form	 long,
composite	 gluten	molecules.	Dough	 is	 elastic
because	 the	 gluten	 molecules	 are	 coiled	 and
have	 many	 kinks	 in	 them.	 When	 a	 mass	 of
dough	is	stretched,	the	kinks	are	straightened
out,	 the	 coils	 extended,	 and	 the	 proteins	 get
longer(bottom).	 When	 the	 stretching	 tension
is	 released,	 many	 of	 the	 kinks	 and	 coils	 re-
form,	 the	 protein	 mass	 shortens,	 and	 the
dough	shrinks	back	toward	its	original	shape.



Gluten	 Relaxation	 Another	 important
characteristic	 of	 wheat	 flour	 doughs	 is	 that
their	 elasticity	 relaxes	 with	 time.	An	 elastic
dough	 that	 never	 relaxed	 could	 never	 be
formed	into	the	many	shapes	of	raised	doughs
and	 pastas!	 In	 a	 well	 developed	 dough,	 the
protein	 molecules	 have	 been	 organized	 and
aligned,	 and	 have	 formed	 many	 weak	 bonds
with	each	other.	Because	there	are	so	many	of
them,	these	bonds	hold	the	proteins	firmly	in
place	and	resist	stretching,	so	a	ball	of	dough
is	 firm	 and	 taut.	 But	 because	 the	 bonds	 are
weak,	 the	 physical	 tension	 of	 the	 taut	 ball
shape	 slowly	 breaks	 some	 of	 them,	 and	 the
dough	 structure	 gradually	 relaxes	 into	 a
flatter,	more	malleable	mass.

Controlling	 Gluten	 Strength	 Not	 all	 baked
goods	 benefit	 from	 a	 strong,	 elastic	 gluten.
It’s	desirable	in	yeasted	breads,	bagels,	and	in
puff	 pastry;	 but	 it	 gives	 an	 undesirable
toughness	 to	 other	 forms	 of	 pastry,	 to	 raised



cakes,	 griddle	 cakes,	 and	 cookies.	 For	 tender
preparations,	 bakers	 intentionally	 limit	 the
development	of	gluten.	There	are	a	number	of
ingredients	and	techniques	by	which	the	baker
controls	the	gluten	strength	and	consistency	of
doughs	and	batters.	They	include:

The	kind	of	flour	used.	High-protein
bread	flours	produce	a	strong	gluten,
low-protein	pastry	and	cake	flours	a
weak	one,	durum	semolina	(for	pasta)	a
strong	but	plastic	one.
The	presence	in	the	flour	of	oxidizing
substances	—	aging	and	improving
agents	—	which	can	increase	the	end-to-
end	linking	of	glutenin	molecules	and
thus	dough	strength	(p.	529).
The	water	content	of	the	dough,	which
determines	how	concentrated	the	gluten
proteins	are,	and	how	extensively	they
can	bond	to	each	other.	Little	water	gives
an	incompletely	developed	gluten	and	a
crumbly	texture;	a	lot	of	water	gives	a



less	concentrated	gluten	and	a	softer,
moister	dough	and	bread.
Stirring	and	kneading	the	flour-water
mixture,	actions	that	stretch	and	organize
the	gluten	proteins	into	an	elastic
network.
Salt,	which	greatly	strengthens	the	gluten
network.	The	electrically	positive	sodium
and	negative	chlorine	ions	cluster	around
the	few	charged	portions	of	the	glutenin
proteins,	prevent	those	charged	portions
from	repelling	each	other,	and	so	allow
the	proteins	to	come	closer	to	each	other
and	bond	more	extensively.
Sugar,	which	at	the	concentrations
typical	of	raised	sweet	breads,	10%	or
more	of	the	flour	weight,	limits	the
development	of	gluten	by	diluting	the
flour	proteins.
Fats	and	oils,	which	weaken	gluten	by
bonding	to	the	hydrophobic	amino	acids
along	the	protein	chains	and	so



preventing	them	from	bonding	to	each
other.
Acidity	in	the	dough	—	as	from	a
sourdough	culture	—	which	weakens	the
gluten	network	by	increasing	the	number
of	positively	charged	amino	acids	along
the	protein	chains,	and	increasing	the
repulsive	forces	between	chains.

Food	Words:	Gluten
Though	 Chinese	 cooks	 discovered	 the
useful	 properties	 of	 gluten	 long	 before
anyone	 else	 (p.	 468),	 it	 was	 two	 Italian
scientists	who	brought	it	to	the	attention	of
Europe.	 In	 a	 posthumously	 published
manual	 of	 1665	 on	 optics,	 the	 Jesuit
scholar	 Francesco	 Maria	 Grimaldi	 noted
that	 durum	 semolina	 dough	 for	 pasta
contains	a	thick,	sticky	substance	that	dries
to	 a	 hard,	 brittle	 one.	 He	 named	 this
substance	gluten,	using	 the	Latin	word	for
“glue.”	Gluten	 in	turn	came	from	an	Indo-



European	 root	gel-¸	 which	 gave	 rise	 to	 a
number	 of	 words	 meaning	 to	 form	 into	 a
ball,	 to	 make	 a	 coagulated	 lump,	 to	 be
thick	or	sticky:	these	include	cloud,	globe,
gluteus,	 clam,	 cling,	 and	clay.	 In	 1745,
Giambattista	 Beccari	 studied	 gluten	 more
carefully	 and	 noted	 its	 similarity	 to
substances	 characteristic	 of	 animals:	 that
is,	 he	 recognized	 that	 it	 is	 what	 we	 now
call	a	protein.

Ingredients	That	Contribute	to	the	Structure	of
Doughs,	Batters,	and	Their	Products

Starch



Starch

The	elastic	gluten	proteins	are	essential	to	the
making	of	raised	breads.	But	proteins	account
for	only	about	10%	of	flour	weight,	while
about	70%	is	starch.	Starch	granules	serve
several	functions	in	doughs	and	batters.
Together	with	the	water	they	hold	on	their
surfaces,	they	make	up	more	than	half	the
volume	of	the	dough,	inter-penetrate	the
gluten	network	and	break	it	up,	and	so
tenderize	it.	In	the	case	of	cakes,	starch	is	the
major	structural	material,	the	gluten	being	too
dispersed	in	the	large	amount	of	water	and
sugar	to	contribute	solidity.	During	the	baking
of	bread	and	cakes,	the	starch	granules	absorb
water,	swell,	and	set	to	form	the	rigid	bulk	of
the	walls	that	surround	the	bubbles	of	carbon
dioxide.	At	the	same	time	their	swollen
rigidity	stops	the	expansion	of	the	bubbles	and
so	forces	the	water	vapor	inside	to	pop	the
bubbles	and	escape,	turning	the	foam	of



separate	bubbles	into	a	continuous	spongy
network	of	connected	holes.	If	this	didn’t
happen,	then	at	the	end	of	baking	the	cooling
water	vapor	would	contract	and	cause	the
bread	or	cake	to	collapse.

Gas	Bubbles

Gas	bubbles	are	what	make	leavened	doughs
and	batters	light	and	tender.	Breads	and	cakes
are	aerated	to	the	point	that	as	much	as	80%
of	their	volume	is	empty	space!	Gas	bubbles
interrupt	and	therefore	weaken	the	network	of
gluten	and	starch	granules,	dividing	it	into
millions	of	very	thin,	delicate	sheets	that	form
the	bubble	walls.

Food	Words:	Starch
As	far	back	as	the	Romans,	purified	starch
has	been	incorporated	into	paper	to	give	it
body	 and	 smooth	 its	 surface.	 In	 the	 14th
century,	 Holland	 and	 other	 northern



European	 countries	 began	 stiffening	 their
linen	 cloth	 with	 wheat	 starch.	 The	 word
starch	 dates	 from	 the	 15th	 century,	 and
comes	from	a	German	root	that	means	“to
stiffen,	 to	make	rigid,”	which	is	also	what
starch	 does	 to	 convert	 bread	 dough	 into
bread.	 The	German	 in	 turn	 came	 from	 an
Indo-European	 root	 meaning	 “stiff”;
related	 words	 are	stare,	 stark,	 stern,	 and
starve	 (which	 results	 in	 the	 rigidity	 of
death).
Bakers	use	yeasts	or	chemical	leavenings

to	fill	their	products	with	gas	bubbles	(p.	531).
However,	these	ingredients	don’t	create	new
bubbles:	their	carbon	dioxide	is	released	into
the	water	phase	of	the	dough	or	batter,	and
diffuses	into	and	enlarges	whatever	tiny
bubbles	are	already	there.	These	primordial
bubbles	are	air	bubbles,	and	are	created	when
the	baker	first	kneads	a	dough,	or	creams
butter	and	sugar,	or	whips	eggs.	The	initial
aeration	of	doughs	and	batters	thus	strongly



influences	the	final	texture	of	baked	goods.
The	more	bubbles	produced	during	the
preparation	of	a	dough	or	batter,	the	finer	and
tenderer	the	result.

Fats:	Shortening

Since	the	early	19th	century,	the	term
shortening	has	been	used	to	mean	fats	or	oils
that	“shorten”	a	dough,	or	weaken	its	structure
and	thus	make	the	final	product	more	tender
or	flaky.	This	role	is	most	evident	in	pie
crusts	and	puff	pastry	(p.	561),	where	layers
of	solid	fat	separate	thin	layers	of	dough	from
each	other	so	that	they	cook	into	separate
layers	of	pastry.	It’s	less	evident	but	also
important	in	cakes	and	enriched	breads,	where
fat	and	oil	molecules	bond	to	parts	of	the
gluten	protein	coils	and	prevent	the	proteins
from	forming	a	strong	gluten.	To	make	a	rich
bread	with	a	strong	gluten	(e.g.	Italian
panettone,	p.	546),	the	baker	mixes	the	flour



and	water	alone,	kneads	the	mix	to	develop
the	gluten,	and	only	then	works	in	the	fat.

Fats	and	related	substances	also	play	an
important	but	indirect	role	in	the	formation	of
the	cooked	structure	of	breads	and	cakes,
where	the	addition	of	small	quantities
significantly	increases	volume	and	textural
lightness	(p.	530).

Dough	and	Batter
Ingredients:	Wheat	Flours

Though	other	grains	and	seeds	can	also	be
used,	most	familiar	baked	goods	and	pastas
are	made	from	wheat.

Kinds	of	Wheat

Several	kinds	of	wheat	are	grown	today,	each
with	its	own	characteristics	and	uses	(see	box,
p.	527).	Most	are	species	of	bread	wheat,
Triticum	aestivum.	Their	most	important



distinguishing	characteristic	is	the	content	and
quality	of	gluten	proteins,	with	high	protein
content	and	strong	gluten	often	coinciding
with	a	hard,	glassy,	translucent	grain	interior.
Hard	wheat	grains	constitute	about	75%	of	the
American	crop.	Soft	wheats,	which	make	up
20%	of	the	crop,	have	a	lower	amount	of
somewhat	weaker	gluten	proteins.	Club	wheat
is	a	distinct	species,	T.	compactum,	whose
proteins	form	an	especially	weak	gluten.
Durum	wheat	is	another	distinct	species	(T.
turgidum	durum,	p.	465)	used	mainly	to	make
pasta	(p.	571).

A	 close-up	 view	 of	 bread	 dough.	 The	 dense
mass	 of	 gluten	 and	 starch	 is	 divided	 and
tenderized	 by	 gas	 bubbles.	 starch	 granules



gluten	sheet	gas	bubbles

Doughs	and	Batters:	Representative
Compositions

The	 numbers	 shown	 indicate	 the	 relative
weights	 of	 ingredients	 in	 doughs	 and
batters,	with	the	weight	of	flour	constant	at
100.	 This	 chart	 is	 meant	 to	 give	 only	 a
general	 idea	 of	 the	 proportions	 used	 in
common	 baked	 foods;	 individual	 recipes
vary	widely.

Major	Wheat	Types



Protein	Content,
%	by	Weight	Use
Hard	red	spring	wheat 13–16.5 Bread	flours
Hard	red	winter 10– All-purpose
wheat 13.5 flours
Soft	red 9– All-purpose,	pastry
wheat 11 flours
Hard	white 10– Specialty	whole-grain
wheat 12 flours
Soft	white 10– Specialty	whole-grain
wheat 11 flours
Club	wheat 8–9 Cake	flours
Durum 12– Semolina	for	dried
wheat 16 pasta

In	addition	to	their	classification	by
protein	content,	North	American	wheats	are
named	by	their	growth	habit	and	kernel	color.
Spring	wheats	(including	durum)	are	sown	in
the	spring	and	harvested	in	the	fall,	while



winter	wheats	are	sown	in	late	fall,	live
through	the	winter	as	a	seedling,	and	are
harvested	in	the	summer.	The	most	common
wheat	varieties	are	red,	their	seed	coat	reddish
brown	with	phenolic	compounds.	White
wheats,	with	a	much	lower	phenolic	content
and	a	light	tan	seed	coat,	are	becoming
increasingly	popular	for	the	light	color	and
less	astringent	“sweet”	taste	of	their	whole-
wheat	flours	and	products	containing	part	or
all	of	the	bran.

Turning	Wheat	into	Flour

The	baking	qualities	of	a	particular	flour	are
determined	by	the	wheat	from	which	it’s
made,	and	how	that	wheat	is	turned	into	flour.



Wheat	 grain	 and	 flour. 	 Left	:	 The	 wheat
kernel	 before	 milling.	 Its	 actual	 length	 is
about	a	quarter	of	an	inch/6	mm.	Upper	right	:
Soft	 wheat	 flour.	 The	 protein	 in	 this	 kind	 of
wheat	 comes	 in	 thin,	 weak	 sections
interrupted	 by	 starch	 granules	 and	 air
pockets.	When	milled,	 it	 produces	 small,	 fine
particles.	Soft	 flour	makes	a	weak	gluten	and
is	 preferred	 for	 tender	 pastries	 and	 cakes.
Lower	 right	:	 Hard	 wheat	 flour.	 The	 protein
matrix	 in	 hard	 wheat	 endosperm	 is	 strong
enough	to	break	off	 in	chunks	during	milling.
Hard	 flours	 make	 strong	 gluten	 and	 are
preferred	for	most	bread	making.
Milling:	Conventional	and	Stone	Grinding
Milling	is	the	process	of	breaking	the	wheat



kernel	down	into	small	particles,	and	sifting
the	particles	to	make	a	flour	of	the	desired
qualities.	Most	flours	are	refined:	that	is,	they
have	been	sieved	to	remove	the	germ	and	bran
layers	from	the	particles	of	protein-and
starch-rich	endosperm.	Bran	and	germ	are	rich
in	nutrients	and	flavor,	but	they	go	rancid	in	a
few	weeks,	and	interfere	physically	and
chemically	with	the	formation	of	a
continuous,	strong	gluten;	so	whole-grain
flours	make	denser,	darker	breads	and
pastries.	In	conventional	milling,	grooved
metal	rollers	shear	open	the	grain,	squeeze	out
the	germ,	and	scrape	the	endosperm	away	to
be	ground,	sieved,	and	reground	until	the
particles	reach	the	desired	size.	Stone
grinding,	which	is	much	rarer,	crushes	the
whole	grain	more	thoroughly	before	sieving,
so	that	some	of	the	germ	and	bran	end	up	in
even	the	refined	flours.	Stone-ground	flour	is
therefore	more	flavorful	than	conventionally
milled	flour,	but	also	has	a	shorter	shelf-life.



Improving	 and	 Bleaching	 Bakers	 have
known	 for	 a	 long	 time	 that	 freshly	 milled
flour	makes	a	weak	gluten,	a	slack	dough,	and
a	dense	loaf.	As	the	flour	ages	for	a	few	weeks
in	 contact	with	 the	 air,	 its	 gluten	 and	 baking
properties	 improve.	We	 understand	 now	 that
oxygen	in	 the	air	gradually	frees	 the	glutenin
proteins’	end	sulfur	groups	to	react	with	each
other	and	form	ever	longer	gluten	chains	that
give	 the	 dough	 greater	 elasticity.	 Beginning
around	 1900,	 millers	 began	 to	 save	 time,
space,	 and	 money	 by	 supplementing	 freshly
milled	 flour	 with	 oxidizing	 chlorine	 gas	 and
then	 with	 potassium	 bromate.	 However,
worries	 about	 the	 potential	 toxicity	 of
bromate	 residues	 in	 the	 late	 1980s	 led	 most
millers	 to	replace	bromate	with	ascorbic	acid
(vitamin	 C)	 or	 azodicarbonamide.	 (Ascorbic
acid	 itself	 is	 an	 antioxidant,	 but	 becomes
oxidized	 to	 dehydroascorbic	 acid,	 which	 in
turn	oxidizes	 the	gluten	proteins.)	 In	Europe,
fava	bean	flour	and	soy	flour	have	been	used



as	 flour	 improvers;	 their	 active	 fat-oxidizing
enzymes,	 which	 generate	 the	 typical	 beany
flavor,	also	indirectly	cause	the	oxidation	and
elongation	of	gluten	proteins.

The	traditional	air-aging	of	flour	had	a
visible	side	effect:	the	yellowish	flour
becomes	progressively	paler	as	the
xanthophyll	pigments	are	oxidized	to	a
colorless	form.	Once	the	chemistry	of	this
change	was	understood,	millers	began	using
bleaching	agents	(azodicarbonamide,
peroxide)	to	whiten	flours.	Many	bakers
prefer	to	use	unbleached	flours	because	they
have	been	subjected	to	less	chemical
alteration.	Bleaching	is	not	allowed	in	Europe.

Minor	Flour	Components

The	gluten	proteins	and	starch	granules	in
flour	account	for	about	90%	of	flour	weight,
and	for	much	of	the	behavior	of	flour	doughs
and	batters.	But	some	minor	components	have



an	important	influence.

Extraction	Rates
The	 degree	 to	 which	 a	 flour	 has	 been
refined	 is	 designated	 by	 the	 “extraction
rate,”	or	the	percentage	of	the	whole	grain
remaining	 in	 the	 finished	 flour.	 Whole
wheat	flour	has	an	extraction	rate	of	90%.
Most	 commercial	 white	 flours	 contain
between	 70	 and	 72%	 of	 the	 whole	 grain;
French	bread	flour	ranges	from	72	to	78%,
and	 so	 carries	 more	 flavor	 of	 the	 whole
grain.	 Home	 bakers	 can	 make	 their	 own
higher-extraction	 refined	 flours	 by
supplementing	 commercial	 white	 flour
with	 a	 portion	 of	 whole	 wheat	 flour	 that
they	have	sifted	to	remove	coarse	bran	and
germ	particles.

Fats	and	Related	Molecules	Although	white
flour	is	only	about	1%	fats,	fat	fragments,	and
phospholipids	by	weight,	these	substances	are



essential	 to	 the	development	 of	 a	well-raised
bread.	 There’s	 evidence	 that	 some	 fatty
materials	can	help	stabilize	 the	dough	bubble
walls	 as	 they	 expand	 and	 prevent	 premature
rupture	and	collapse.	Others	become	attached
to	 starch	 granules	 and	 help	 soften	 the	 bread
structure	and	slow	staling.	Similar	ingredients
added	 by	 the	 cook	 or	 manufacturer	 can
magnify	these	useful	effects	(p.	524).

Enzymes	Since	the	flour’s	normal	endowment
of	sugars	is	enough	to	feed	yeast	cells	for	only
a	 short	 period	 of	 time,	 flour	 manufacturers
have	 long	 supplemented	 the	 ground	 wheat
with	malted	wheat	or	barley:	grains	that	have
been	 allowed	 to	 sprout	 and	 develop	 the
enzymes	 that	 break	 down	 starch	 to	 sugars.
Because	malt	flours	give	a	dark	cast	to	flours
and	 doughs,	 and	 because	 their	 activity	 is
somewhat	 variable,	 manufacturers	 are
increasingly	 replacing	 them	 with	 enzymes
extracted	 and	 purified	 from	 microscopic



molds	(“fungal	amylase”).

The	Protein	Contents	of	Common	Wheat
Flours

These	figures	are	approximate,	and	assume
that	 the	 flour	 contains	 12%	moisture.	The
bulk	 of	 flour	 weight,	 from	 70	 to	 80%,	 is
starch	and	other	seed	carbohydrates.	High-
protein	 flours	 absorb	 substantially	 more
water	 than	 low-protein	 flours,	 and	 so	will
produce	 stiffer	 doughs	 with	 the	 same
proportion	of	water.

Flour Protein	Content
Whole	wheat,	graham 11–15
Durum	semolina 13
Bread 12–13
All-purpose	(U.S.	national	brands) 11–12
All-purpose	(U.S.	regional	brands, 7.5–
South,	Pacific	Northwest) 9.5



Pastry 8–9
Cake 7–8
0	or	00	(Italian	soft	wheat) 11–12
Type	55	(French	blend	of	soft	and	hard 9–
wheat) 10
English	plain 7–10
Vital	gluten 70–85
Because	 different	 flours	 have	 not	 only
different	 protein	 contents,	 but	 different
protein	qualities,	it’s	not	really	possible	to
turn	 all-purpose	 flour	 into	 pastry	 flour	 or
vice	versa.	However,	it’s	possible	to	dilute
the	gluten	proteins	of	a	given	flour	by	 the
addition	 of	 cornstarch	 or	 another	 pure
starch,	 or	 strengthen	 them	 by	 adding
powdered	 vital	 gluten.	 To	 approximate
pastry	flour	with	all-purpose,	add	one	part
by	 weight	 of	 starch	 to	 two	 parts	 of	 all-
purpose	 flour;	 to	 approximate	 all-purpose
flour	 with	 pastry	 flour,	 add	 one-quarter
part	of	gluten	 to	 two	parts	of	pastry	flour.



(Purified	gluten	loses	a	little	less	than	half
its	strength	in	the	drying	process.)	With	its
chlorine-altered	starch	and	fats,	cake	flour
is	inimitable.

Kinds	of	Flour

Though	manufacturers	and	professional
bakers	can	obtain	flours	from	particular
wheats,	most	flours	for	sale	in	supermarkets
are	labeled	according	to	their	intended	use,
with	no	direct	indication	of	the	kind	of	wheat
or	wheats	they	contain	—	they’re	usually	a
blend	—	or	their	protein	content	or	quality.
Flour	compositions	can	vary	significantly
from	region	to	region;	“all-purpose”	flour	in
much	of	the	United	States	and	Canada	has	a
higher	protein	content	than	“all-purpose”
flours	in	the	South	or	Pacific	Northwest.	Not
surprisingly,	recipes	developed	with	a
particular	flour	often	turn	out	very	differently
when	made	with	another,	unless	care	is	taken



to	find	a	replacement	that	closely
approximates	the	original.	The	box	on	p.	530
lists	the	compositions	of	common	wheat
flours.

Whole	wheat	flours	are	high	in	protein,	but
a	significant	fraction	of	that	protein	comes
from	the	germ	and	aleurone	layer	and	does	not
form	gluten;	and	germ	and	bran	particles
interfere	with	gluten	formation.	They
therefore	tend	to	make	dense	but	flavorful
breads.	Bread	flours	are	high	in	strong	gluten
proteins,	and	give	the	lightest,	highest,	and
chewiest	loaf	breads.	Both	pastry	and	cake
flours	have	low	levels	of	weak	gluten	protein
for	making	tender	baked	goods.	Cake	flour	is
distinctive	because	it’s	treated	with	chlorine
dioxide	or	chlorine	gas.	This	treatment	has
several	effects	on	the	starch	granules	that	are
useful	in	cake	making	(p.	555),	and	leaves	a
trace	of	hydrochloric	acid	in	the	flour,	which
gives	batters	and	doughs	an	acid	pH	and
slightly	acid	taste.



“Self-rising”	flours	are	flours	that	contain
baking	powder	(11/2	teaspoons	baking	powder
per	cup	flour/5–7	gm	per	100	g),	and	therefore
don’t	require	added	leavening	for	the	making
of	quickbreads,	pancakes,	and	other
chemically	raised	foods.	“Instant”	or
“instantized”	flours	(two	brand	names	are
Shake	&	Blend	and	Wondra)	are	low-protein
flours	whose	starch	granules	have	been
precooked	until	they	gelate,	then	dried	again.
The	precooking	and	drying	make	it	easier	for
water	to	penetrate	them	again	during	cooking.
Instant	flours	are	well	suited	to	tender	pastries
and	last-minute	thickening	of	sauces	and
gravies.

Dough	and	Batter
Ingredients:	Yeasts
and	Chemical	Leavenings

Leavenings	are	the	ingredients	that	fill	doughs
and	batters	with	bubbles	of	gas,	thus	reducing



the	amount	of	solid	material	in	a	given
volume	and	making	the	bread	or	cake	less
dense,	more	light	and	tender.

Yeasts

Humans	have	been	eating	raised	breads	for
6,000	years,	but	it	wasn’t	until	the
investigations	of	Louis	Pasteur	150	years	ago
that	we	began	to	understand	the	nature	of	the
leavening	process.	The	key	is	the	gas-
producing	metabolism	of	a	particular	class	of
fungus,	the	yeasts.	The	word	“yeast,”
however,	is	as	old	as	the	language,	and	first
meant	the	froth	or	sediment	of	a	fermenting
liquid	that	could	be	used	to	leaven	bread.

Food	Words:	Leavening	and	Yeast
Leavening	 comes	 from	 an	 Indo-European
root	meaning	“light,	having	 little	weight.”
Related	words	 from	 the	same	 root	 include
levity,	lever,	relieve,	and	lung.	Yeast	comes



from	 a	 root	 word	 that	 meant	 “to	 seethe,
boil,	 bubble	 over.”	 This	 derivation
underlines	 the	 way	 in	 which	 fermentation
seemed	 to	 be	 a	 kind	 of	 cooking	 of	 the
cereal	gruel,	a	transformation	from	within.
The	yeasts	are	a	group	of	microscopic

single-celled	fungi,	relatives	of	the
mushrooms.	More	than	100	different	species
are	known.	Some	cause	human	infections,
some	contribute	to	food	spoilage,	but	one
species	in	particular	—	Saccharomyces
cerevisiae,	whose	name	means	“brewer’s
sugar	fungus”	—	is	put	to	good	use	in	both
brewing	and	baking.	For	much	of	human
history,	yeast	was	simply	recruited	from	the
grain	surface	or	supplied	by	an	earlier	piece	of
dough,	or	obtained	from	the	surface	of	beer
brewing	vats.	Today	strains	especially
selected	for	breadmaking	are	grown	on
molasses	in	industrial	fermentation	tanks.

Yeast	Metabolism 	Yeasts	metabolize	 sugars



for	 energy,	 and	 produce	 carbon	 dioxide	 gas
and	 alcohol	 as	 by-products	 of	 that
metabolism.	 The	 overall	 equation	 for	 the
conversion	 that	 takes	 place	 in	 yeast	 cells	 is
this:
C6H12O6 	2C2H5OH	+	2CO2	(1	molecule	of
glucose	sugar	yields	2	molecules	of	alcohol

plus	2	molecules	of	carbon	dioxide)
In	making	beer	and	wine,	the	carbon	dioxide
escapes	from	the	fermenting	liquid,	and
alcohol	accumulates.	In	making	bread,	both
carbon	dioxide	and	alcohol	are	trapped	by	the
dough,	and	both	are	expelled	from	the	dough
by	the	heat	of	baking.

In	an	unsweetened	dough,	yeasts	grow	on
the	single-unit	sugars	glucose	and	fructose
and	on	the	double-glucose	sugar	maltose,
which	enzymes	in	the	flour	produce	from
broken	starch	granules.	A	small	amount	of
added	table	sugar	in	a	dough	will	increase
yeast	activity,	while	a	large	amount	decreases
it	(see	sweet	breads,	p.	546),	as	does	added



salt.	Yeast	activity	is	also	strongly	affected	by
temperature:	the	cells	grow	and	produce	gas
most	rapidly	at	about	95ºF/35ºC.

In	addition	to	providing	carbon	dioxide	gas
to	inflate	the	dough,	yeasts	release	a	number
of	chemicals	that	affect	the	dough
consistency.	The	overall	effect	is	to
strengthen	the	gluten	and	improve	its
elasticity.

Forms	of	Baker’s	Yeast 	Commercial	yeast	is
sold	 to	 home	 and	 restaurant	 cooks	 in	 three
common	forms,	each	a	different	genetic	strain
of	S.	cerevisiae	with	different	traits.

Cake	or	compressed	yeast	is	a	moist
block	of	fresh	yeast	cells,	direct	from	the
fermentation	vat.	Its	cells	are	alive,	and
produce	more	leavening	gas	than	the
other	forms.	Cake	yeast	is	perishable,
must	be	kept	refrigerated,	and	has	a	brief
shelf	life	of	one	to	two	weeks.
Active	dry	yeast,	which	was	introduced



in	the	1920s,	has	been	removed	from	the
fermentation	tank	and	dried	into	granules
with	a	protective	coating	of	yeast	debris.
The	yeast	cells	are	dormant	and	can	be
stored	at	room	temperature	for	months.
The	cook	reactivates	them	by	soaking
them	in	warm	water,	105–110ºF/	41–
43ºC,	before	mixing	the	dough.	At	cooler
soaking	temperatures,	the	yeast	cells
recover	poorly	and	release	substances
that	interfere	with	gluten	formation
(glutathione).
Instant	dry	yeast,	an	innovation	of	the
1970s,	is	dried	more	quickly	than	active
dry	yeast,	and	in	the	form	of	small
porous	rods	that	take	up	water	more
rapidly	than	granules.	Instant	yeast
doesn’t	need	to	be	prehydrated	before
mixing	with	other	dough	ingredients,	and
produces	carbon	dioxide	more	vigorously
than	active	dry	yeast.



An	Unusual	Chemical	Leavening:
Hartshorn

The	leavening	that	doesn’t	involve	an	acid-
base	 reaction	 is	 ammonium	 salts	 —
ammonium	carbonate	and/or	carbamate	—
which	 were	 once	 known	 as	 “hartshorn”
because	 they	 were	 produced	 by	 the
distillation	of	deer	antlers.	(Hartshorn	was
also	 a	 common	 source	 of	 gelatin.)	 When
these	compounds	are	heated	to	140ºF/60ºC,
they	 decompose	 into	 two	 leavening	 gases,
carbon	 dioxide	 and	 ammonia,	 and	 don’t
produce	water.	They’re	especially	suited	to
thin,	very	dry	cookies	and	crackers	with	a
large	 surface	 area	 to	 release	 the	 pungent
ammonia	during	baking.

Baking	Powders	and	Other
Chemical	Leaveners

Yeast	cells	produce	carbon	dioxide	slowly,
over	the	course	of	an	hour	or	more,	so	the



material	surrounding	them	must	be	elastic
enough	to	contain	it	for	that	much	time.	Weak
doughs	and	runny	batters	can’t	hold	gas
bubbles	for	more	than	a	few	minutes,	and	are
therefore	usually	raised	with	a	faster-acting
gas	source.	This	is	the	role	played	by
chemical	leavenings.	These	ingredients	are
concentrated,	and	small	differences	in	the
amount	added	can	cause	large	variations	in
the	quality	of	the	finished	food.	Too	little
leavening	will	leave	it	flat	and	dense,	while
too	much	will	cause	the	batter	to	overexpand
and	collapse	into	a	coarse	structure	with	a
harsh	flavor.

Nearly	all	chemical	leavenings	exploit	a
reaction	between	certain	acidic	and	alkaline
compounds	that	results	in	the	production	of
carbon	dioxide,	the	same	gas	produced	by
yeast.	The	first	chemical	leavening	was	a
dried	water	extract	of	wood	ash	—	potash,
mainly	potassium	carbonate	—	which	reacts
with	the	lactic	acid	in	a	soured	dough	as



follows:
2(C3H6O3)	+	K2CO3 2(KC3H5O3)+	H2O	+
CO2(2	molecules	of	lactic	acid	plus	1	of
potassium	carbonate	yield	2	molecules	of
potassium	lactate,	plus	a	molecule	of	water,

plus	a	molecule	of	carbon	dioxide)

The	Acid	Components	of	Baking
Powders

Some	 of	 these	 acids	 are	 available	 only	 to
manufacturers.	 Most	 double-acting
supermarket	baking	powders	are	a	mixture
of	 sodium	 bicarbonate,	 MCP,	 and	 SAS.
Single-acting	 powders	 omit	 the	 SAS,	 and
the	 MCP	 is	 coated	 to	 delay	 its	 release
artificially.

Leavening	Acid Time	of	Reaction
Cream	of	tartar, Immediately,	during
tartaric	acid mixing
Monocalcium Immediately,	during



phosphate	(MCP) mixing
Sodium	aluminum Slow	release
pyrophosphate	(SAPP) after	mixing
Sodium	aluminum Slow	release	and
sulfate	(SAS) heat-activated
Sodium Heat-activated,	early	in
aluminum cooking	(100–104ºF/38–
phosphate	(SALP) 40ºC)
Dimagnesium Heat-activated,	early	in
phosphate cooking	(104–111ºF/40–
(DMP) 44ºC)
Dicalcium Heat-activated,	late	in
phosphate cooking	(135–140ºF/57–
dihydrate	(DCPD) 60ºC)

Baking	 Soda	 The	 most	 common	 alkaline
component	of	 chemical	 leavenings	 is	 sodium
bicarbonate	 (or	 sodium	 acid	 carbonate,
NaHCO3),	usually	called	baking	soda.

Baking	soda	can	be	the	sole	added
leavening	if	the	dough	or	batter	contains	acids



to	react	with	it.	Common	acid	ingredients
include	sourdough	cultures,	fermented	milks
(buttermilk,	yogurt),	brown	sugar	and
molasses,	chocolate,	and	cocoa	(if	not
dutched,	p.	705),	as	well	as	fruit	juices	and
vinegar.	A	general	rule	of	thumb:	½
teaspoon/2	gm	baking	soda	is	neutralized	by	1
cup/240	ml	of	fermented	milk,	or	1
teaspoon/5ml	of	lemon	juice	or	vinegar,	or	¼
teaspoons/5	gm	cream	of	tartar.

Baking	 Powders	 Baking	 powders	 are
complete	 leavening	 systems:	 they	 contain
both	 alkaline	 baking	 soda	 and	 an	 acid	 in	 the
form	of	solid	crystals.	(The	active	ingredients
are	 mixed	 with	 ground	 dry	 starch,	 which
prevents	premature	 reactions	 in	humid	air	by
absorbing	 moisture,	 and	 gives	 the	 powder
more	 bulk	 so	 that	 it’s	 easier	 to	 measure.)
When	added	 to	 liquid	 ingredients,	 the	baking
soda	dissolves	almost	immediately.	If	the	acid
is	 very	 soluble,	 it	 too	 will	 dissolve	 quickly



during	 mixing	 and	 react	 with	 the	 soda	 to
inflate	an	initial	set	of	gas	bubbles.	Cream	of
tartar,	 for	 example,	 releases	 two-thirds	 of	 its
leavening	 potential	 during	 two	 minutes	 of
mixing.	If	the	acid	is	not	very	soluble,	then	it
will	remain	in	crystal	form	for	a	characteristic
length	 of	 time,	 or	 until	 cooking	 raises	 the
temperature	high	enough	to	dissolve	it	—	and
then	 it	 reacts	 with	 the	 soda	 to	 produce	 a
delayed	 burst	 of	 gas.	 There	 are	 several
different	 acids	 used	 in	 baking	 powders,	 each
with	a	different	pattern	of	gas	production	(see
box,	p.	533).

Most	supermarket	baking	powders	are
“double-acting”;	that	is,	they	inflate	an	initial
set	of	gas	bubbles	upon	mixing	the	powder
into	the	batter,	and	then	a	second	set	during
the	baking	process.	Baking	powders	for
restaurant	and	manufacturing	production
contain	slow-release	acids	so	that	leavening
power	doesn’t	dissipate	while	the	batter	sits
before	being	cooked.



Chemical	leavenings	can	have	adverse
effects	on	both	flavor	and	color.	Some
leavening	acids	have	a	distinctly	astringent
taste	(sulfates,	pyrophosphates).	When	acid
and	base	are	properly	matched,	neither	is	left
behind	in	excess.	But	when	too	much	soda	is
added,	or	when	the	batter	is	poorly	mixed	and
not	all	the	powder	dissolves,	a	bitter,	soapy,	or
“chemical”	flavor	results.	Colors	are	also
affected	in	even	slightly	alkaline	conditions:
browning	reactions	are	enhanced,	chocolate
turns	reddish,	and	blueberries	turn	green.

Breads

There	are	four	basic	steps	in	the	making	of
yeast	bread.	We	mix	together	the	flour,	water,
yeast,	and	salt;	we	knead	the	mixture	to
develop	the	gluten	network;	we	give	the	yeast
time	to	produce	carbon	dioxide	and	fill	the
dough	with	gas	cells;	and	we	bake	the	dough
to	set	its	structure	and	generate	flavor.	In



practice,	each	step	involves	choices	that	affect
the	qualities	of	the	finished	loaf.	There	are
many	ways	to	make	basic	bread!	The
following	paragraphs	explain	some	of	the
more	significant	choices	and	their	effects.
Breads	made	with	special	ingredients	or
methods	—	sourdoughs,	sweet	breads,
flatbreads	—	are	described	later.

The	Choice	of	Ingredients

Bread	making	begins	with	the	ingredients,
especially	the	flour	and	the	yeasts.	Because
proportions	are	important,	and	the	weight	of	a
given	volume	of	flour	can	vary	by	as	much	as
50%	depending	on	whether	it	has	been	fluffed
up	(sifted)	or	packed	down,	it’s	best	to	weigh
ingredients	rather	than	measure	them	in	cups.

Flour	 The	 texture	 and	 flavor	 of	 bread	 are
strongly	influenced	by	the	kind	of	flour	used.
“Bread	 flours”	 are	 milled	 from	 high-protein



wheats,	 require	 a	 long	 kneading	 period	 to
develop	their	strong	gluten,	and	produce	well-
raised	loaves	with	a	distinctive,	slightly	eggy
flavor	and	chewy	texture.	Lower-protein	“all-
purpose”	 flours	 give	 breads	 with	 a	 lower
maximum	 volume,	 more	 neutral	 flavor,	 and
less	 chewy	 texture,	 while	 flours	 from	 soft
wheats	with	weak	gluten	proteins	make	denser
loaves	 with	 a	 tender,	 cake-like	 crumb.	 The
more	 of	 the	 outer	 aleurone,	 bran,	 and	 germ
that	 makes	 it	 into	 the	 flour,	 the	 darker	 and
denser	 the	 bread	 and	 the	 stronger	 the	whole-
grain	 flavor.	 The	 baker	 can	 mix	 different
flours	 to	 obtain	 a	 particular	 character.	Many
artisan	 breadmakers	 prefer	 flours	 with	 a
moderate	 protein	 content,	 11–12%,	 and	 an
extraction	 rate	 somewhere	 between	 standard
white	and	whole	wheat	flours.

Water	The	chemical	composition	of	the	water
used	 to	 make	 the	 dough	 influences	 the
dough’s	 qualities.	 Distinctly	 acid	 water



weakens	 the	 gluten	 network,	 while	 a
somewhat	 alkaline	water	 strengthens	 it.	Hard
water	 will	 produce	 a	 firmer	 dough	 thanks	 to
the	 cross-linking	 effects	 of	 calcium	 and
magnesium.	 The	 proportion	 of	 water	 also
influences	 dough	 consistency.	 The	 standard
proportion	 for	a	 firm	bread	dough	capable	of
good	 aeration	 is	 65	 parts	 water	 to	 100	 parts
all-purpose	 flour	 by	 weight	 (40%	 of	 the
combined	weight).	Less	water	will	 produce	a
firmer,	 less	 extensible	 dough	 and	 a	 denser
loaf,	 while	 more	 water	 produces	 a	 soft,	 less
elastic	dough	and	an	open-textured	 loaf.	Wet
doughs	 that	 are	 barely	 kneadable	 —	 for
example	 the	 Italian	cia-batta	 —	 may	 be	 80
parts	 water	 or	 more	 per	 100	 flour	 (45%).
High-protein	flours	absorb	as	much	as	a	third
more	water	 than	 all-purpose	 flours,	 so	 water
proportions	 and	 corresponding	 textures	 also
depend	on	the	nature	of	the	flour	used.

Salt	Though	some	traditional	breads	are	made



without	salt,	most	include	it,	and	not	just	for	a
balanced	taste.	At	1.5–2%	of	the	flour	weight,
salt	tightens	the	gluten	network	and	improves
the	 volume	 of	 the	 finished	 loaf.	 (The
tightening	is	especially	evident	in	the	autolyse
mixing	 method,	 below.)	 Unrefined	 sea	 salts
that	 contain	 calcium	 and	 magnesium
impurities	may	produce	 the	 additional	gluten
strengthening	 that	 mineral-rich	 hard	 water
does.	 In	 sourdoughs,	 salt	 also	helps	 limit	 the
protein-digesting	 activity	 of	 the	 souring
bacteria,	 which	 can	 otherwise	 damage	 the
gluten.

Yeast	The	baker	can	incorporate	yeast	in	very
different	forms	and	proportions.	For	a	simple
dough	to	be	fully	leavened	and	baked	in	a	few
hours,	 the	 standard	 proportion	 for	 cake	 yeast
is	 0.5–4%	 of	 the	 flour	weight,	 or	 2.5–20	 gm
per	 pound/500	 gm	 flour;	 for	 dried	 yeast,
approximately	 half	 these	 numbers.	 If	 the
dough	 is	 to	 be	 fermented	 slowly	 overnight,



only	0.25%	of	flour	weight,	barely	a	gram	per
pound/500	 gm	 is	 needed.	 (One	 gram	 still
contains	millions	of	yeast	cells.)	As	a	general
rule,	 the	 less	 prepared	 yeast	 goes	 into	 the
dough,	 and	 the	 longer	 dough	 is	 allowed	 to
rise,	the	better	the	flavor	of	the	finished	bread.
This	is	because	the	concentrated	yeast	has	its
own	 somewhat	 harsh	 flavor,	 and	 because	 the
process	of	fermentation	generates	a	variety	of
desirable	flavor	compounds	(p.	543).

Durum	Breads
Durum	 wheat	 flour	 forms	 an	 inelastic
dough	 that	 doesn’t	 rise	 well,	 but	 has
nevertheless	 been	 used	 to	 make	 dense,
distinctively	flavored,	golden	breads	in	the
Mediterranean	 region	 for	 thousands	 of
years.	 Durum	 flour	 absorbs	 nearly	 50%
more	 water	 than	 bread	 flour	 does,	 a	 fact
that	 is	 part	 of	 the	 reason	 for	 the	 longer
shelf	life	of	durum	bread.



Starters	A	 general	method	 for	 incorporating
yeast	 into	 bread	 dough	 that	 maximizes	 the
effective	 fermentation	 time	 and	 flavor
production	 is	 the	 use	 of	pre-ferments	 or
starters,	portions	of	already	fermenting	dough
or	 batter	 that	 are	 added	 to	 the	 new	 mass	 of
flour	and	water.	The	starter	may	be	a	piece	of
dough	 saved	 from	 the	 previous	 batch,	 or	 a
stiff	 dough	 or	 runny	 batter	 made	 up	 with	 a
small	 amount	 of	 fresh	 yeast	 and	 allowed	 to
ferment	for	some	hours,	or	a	culture	of	“wild”
yeasts	 and	 bacteria	 obtained	 without	 any
commercial	 yeast	 at	 all.	 This	 last	 is	 called	 a
“sourdough”	 starter	 because	 it	 includes	 large
numbers	of	acid-forming	bacteria.	Starters	go
by	 many	 names	 —	 French	poolish,	 Italian
biga,	 Belgian	desem,	 English	sponge	 —	 and
develop	 different	 qualities	 that	 depend	 on
ingredient	 proportions,	 fermentation	 times
and	 temperatures,	 and	 other	 details	 of	 their
making.	Sourdough	breads	are	described	on	p.
544.



Preparing	The	Dough:
Mixing	and	Kneading

Mixing	The	first	step	in	making	bread	is	to
mix	the	ingredients	together.	The	moment
flour	meets	water,	several	processes	begin.
Broken	starch	granules	absorb	water,	and
enzymes	digest	their	exposed	starch	into
sugars.	The	yeast	cells	feed	on	the	sugars,
producing	carbon	dioxide	and	alcohol.	The
glutenin	proteins	absorb	some	water	and
sprawl	out	into	their	elongated	coils;	the	coils
of	neighboring	molecules	form	many	weak
bonds	with	each	other	and	thus	form	the	first
strands	of	gluten.	We	see	the	dough	take	on	a
vaguely	fibrous	appearance,	and	feel	it	cohere
to	itself.	When	it’s	stirred	with	a	spoon,	the
protein	aggregates	are	drawn	together	into
visible	filaments	and	form	what	has	been
vividly	described	as	a	“shaggy	mass.”	At	the
same	time,	a	number	of	substances	in	the
flour	cause	breaks	in	and	blocking	of	the	end-



to-end	bonds	of	the	gluten	molecules,	and	so
an	initial	shortening	of	the	gluten	chains.	As
oxygen	from	the	air	and	oxidizing	compounds
from	the	yeasts	enter	the	dough,	the	breaking
and	blocking	stop,	and	the	gluten	molecules
begin	to	bond	end-to-end	and	form	long
chains.

Mixing	can	be	done	by	hand,	in	a	stand
mixer,	or	in	a	food	processor.	The	processor
works	in	less	than	a	minute,	a	fraction	of	the
time	required	for	hand	or	mixer	kneading,	and
therefore	offers	the	advantage	of	minimizing
exposure	to	air	and	oxygen,	an	excess	of
which	bleaches	the	remaining	wheat	pigments
and	alters	flavor.	The	high	energy	input	heats
the	dough,	which	should	be	allowed	to	cool
before	fermentation.

Two-Stage	Mixing:	Autolysis
An	 alternative	 to	 mixing	 all	 the	 dough
ingredients	 at	 once	 is	 the	autolyse	 or
“autolysis”	 method	 championed	 by	 a



legendary	 French	 bread	 authority,
Raymond	Calvel,	 to	 compensate	 for	 some
of	 the	 disadvantages	 of	 rapid	 industrial
production.	 It	 has	 also	 been	 adopted	 by
many	 artisan	 bakers.	 Autolysis	 involves
combining	 only	 the	 flour	 and	 water	 and
letting	 them	 sit	 for	 15–30	minutes	 before
adding	the	leavening	and	salt.	According	to
Calvel,	 this	 initial	 preparation	 gives	 the
starch	 and	 the	 gluten	 proteins	 a	 chance	 to
absorb	 as	much	water	 as	 possible	without
the	 interference	 of	 salt,	 and	 allows	 the
gluten	 chains	 to	 shorten	 more	 (autolysis
means	 “self-digestion”).	 The	 result	 is	 a
dough	that’s	easier	to	manipulate,	requires
less	 kneading	 and	 therefore	 less	 exposure
to	oxygen,	and	so	better	retains	the	wheat’s
light	golden	color	and	characteristic	taste.

Dough	 Development:	 Kneading	 Once	 the
ingredients	have	been	mixed	and	the	dough	is
formed,	 the	 process	 of	 dough	 development



begins.	Whether	the	dough	is	kneaded	by	hand
or	 in	 an	 electrical	 mixer,	 it	 undergoes	 a
similar	 kind	 of	 physical	 manipulation:	 it	 is
stretched,	folded	over,	compressed,	stretched,
folded,	 and	 compressed	 many	 times.	 This
manipulation	 strengthens	 the	 gluten	 network.
It	 unfolds	 the	 proteins	 further,	 orients	 them
side	by	side	and	encourages	 the	development
of	many	weak	bonds	between	neighbors.	The
glutenin	 molecules	 also	 form	 strong	 end-to-
end	bonds	with	each	other	and	thus	a	cohering
network	of	extensive	gluten	chains.	The	dough
gradually	gets	stiff,	harder	to	manipulate,	and
takes	 on	 a	 fine,	 satiny	 appearance.	 (If	 the
dough	is	worked	so	hard	that	many	end-to-end
bonds	 start	 breaking,	 its	 overall	 structure
breaks	 down,	 and	 the	 dough	 becomes	 sticky
and	 inelastic.	 Overdevelopment	 is	 a	 real
problem	 only	 when	 kneading	 is	 done
mechanically.)



Gluten	 formation.	 The	 view	 of	 wetted	 flour
through	a	light	microscope. 	Left:	When	water
is	first	added	to	flour,	the	gluten	proteins	are
randomly	 oriented	 in	 a	 thick	 fluid.	 Right:	As
this	fluid	is	stirred,	it	quickly	develops	into	a
tangle	of	 fibers	as	 the	glutenin	proteins	 form
elongated	bundles	of	molecules.

Gluten	 orientation.	 When	 flour	 is	 initially
mixed	with	water,	the	glutenin	molecules	form
a	random	network	of	gluten	chains.	Kneading
helps	 orient	 the	 gluten	 chains	 in	 orderly
arrays.



Kneading	 dough.	 Kneading	 repeatedly
stretches	and	elongates	the	gluten,	helping	to
orient	the	long	chains	and	encourage	the	side-
by-side	 bonding	 that	 contributes	 to	 gluten
strength.

Kneading	also	aerates	the	dough.	As	it’s
repeatedly	folded	over	and	compressed,
pockets	of	air	are	trapped	and	squeezed	under
pressure	into	smaller,	more	numerous
pockets.	The	more	pockets	formed	during
kneading,	the	finer	the	texture	of	the	final
bread.	Most	of	the	air	pockets	are
incorporated	as	the	dough	reaches	its
maximum	stiffness.

Some	bread	recipes	call	for	a	bare
minimum	of	kneading.	This	generally	results
in	fewer	and	larger	air	cells,	and	so	a	coarse,
irregular	texture	that	has	its	own	appeal.	The
gluten	of	such	doughs	is	less	developed	as



they	begin	fermentation,	but	the	rising	of	the
dough	continues	to	develop	gluten	structure
(below),	so	little-kneaded	doughs	can
eventually	rise	well	to	give	an	airy,	tender
crumb.

Fermentation,	or	Rising

Fermentation	is	the	stage	during	which	the
dough	is	set	aside	for	the	yeast	cells	to
produce	carbon	dioxide,	which	diffuses	into
the	air	pockets,	slowly	inflates	them,	and	thus
raises	the	dough.	This	gentle	stretching	action
continues	the	process	of	gluten	orientation
and	development,	as	does	the	oxidizing	effect
of	other	yeast	by-products,	which	continue	to
help	the	glutenin	molecules	to	link	up	end-to-
end.	As	a	result,	even	initially	wet,	barely
cohesive	doughs	become	more	manageable
after	fermentation.

Yeasts	produce	carbon	dioxide	most
rapidly	at	around	95ºF/35ºC,	but	they	also



produce	more	noticeable	quantities	of	sour
and	unpleasant-smelling	by-products.	A
fermentation	temperature	of	80ºF/27ºC	is
often	suggested	for	a	relatively	quick	rising
time	of	a	couple	of	hours.	Lower	temperatures
may	extend	fermentation	times	by	an	hour	or
more,	and	with	them	the	generation	of
desirable	yeast	flavors.

The	end	of	the	fermentation	period	is
signaled	by	the	dough’s	volume	—	it
approximately	doubles	—	and	by	the
condition	of	the	gluten	matrix.	When	poked
with	the	finger,	fully	fermented	dough	will
retain	the	impression	and	won’t	spring	back:
the	gluten	has	been	stretched	to	the	limit	of	its
elasticity.	The	dough	is	now	gently	handled	to
reconsolidate	the	gluten,	divide	the	gas
pockets,	redistribute	the	yeast	cells	and	their
food	supply,	and	even	out	the	temperature	and
moisture	(fermentation	generates	heat,	water,
and	alcohol).	Thanks	to	the	added	moisture
and	to	the	gluten-interrupting	bubbles,



fermented	doughs	feel	softer	and	easier	to
work	than	newly	kneaded	dough.

Food	Words:	Knead
The	 word	knead	 comes	 from	 an	 Indo-
European	root	meaning	“to	compress	into	a
ball”;	 related	words	 are	gnocchi,	quenelle,
knoll,	and	knuckle.
Doughs	made	from	high-protein	flours

may	be	put	through	a	second	rising	to	develop
their	tougher	gluten	fully.	Either	way,	the
fermented	dough	is	then	divided,	gently
rounded	into	balls,	rested	for	a	few	minutes	to
allow	the	gluten	to	relax	somewhat,	and	then
molded	into	loaves.	The	loaves	are	then
allowed	another	partial	rise,	or	“proof,”	to
prepare	them	for	the	final	and	dramatic	rise
during	baking.

Retarding	 the	 Fermentation	 Traditional
breadmaking	can	last	many	hours,	and	bakers
would	often	have	to	work	through	the	night	in



order	to	sell	fresh	bread	in	the	morning.	In	the
1920s,	bakers	 in	Vienna	began	 to	experiment
with	 breaking	 the	 work	 into	 two	 periods,	 a
daytime	 stint	 for	 mixing,	 fermentation,	 and
molding	 into	 loaves,	 and	 then	 an	 early-
morning	baking.	During	the	night,	the	formed
loaves	 were	 kept	 in	 a	 refrigerated	 chamber.
Cool	 temperatures	 slow	 the	 activity	 of
microbes	 substantially;	 yeasts	 take	 10	 times
longer	to	raise	bread	in	the	refrigerator	than	at
warm	 room	 temperature.	 Refrigeration	 of
dough	 is	 therefore	 called	retarding,	 and	 the
cold	 chamber	 a	retarder.	 Retarding	 is	 now	 a
common	practice.

In	addition	to	giving	the	baker	greater
flexibility,	retarding	has	useful	effects	on	the
dough.	Long,	slow	fermentation	allows	both
yeasts	and	bacteria	more	time	to	generate
flavor	compounds.	Cold	dough	is	stiffer	than
warm	dough,	so	it’s	easier	to	handle	without
causing	a	loss	of	leavening	gas.	And	the	cycle
of	cooling	and	rewarming	redistributes	the



dough	gases	(from	small	bubbles	into	the
water	phase,	then	back	out	into	larger
bubbles),	and	encourages	the	development	of
a	more	open,	irregular	crumb	structure.

Baking

Ovens,	Baking	Temperatures,	and	Steam
The	kind	of	oven	in	which	bread	is	baked	has
an	important	influence	on	the	qualities	of	the
finished	loaf.

Traditional	Bread	Ovens	Until	 the	middle	of
the	 19th	 century,	 bread	 was	 baked	 in	 clay,
stone,	or	brick	ovens	that	were	preheated	by	a
wood	fire,	and	that	could	store	a	large	amount
of	 heat	 energy.	 The	 baker	 started	 the	 fire	 on
the	 floor	 of	 the	 oven,	 let	 it	 burn	 for	 hours,
cleaned	out	the	ashes,	and	then	introduced	the
loaves	of	dough	and	closed	the	oven	door.	The
oven	 surfaces	 start	 out	 at	 700–900ºF/350–
450ºC,	 the	 domed	 roof	 radiating	 its	 stored



heat	 from	 above,	 the	 floor	 conducting	 heat
directly	 into	 the	 loaves	 from	beneath.	As	 the
dough	heats	 it	 releases	steam,	which	 fills	 the
closed	chamber	and	further	speeds	the	transfer
of	heat	to	the	loaves.	Slowly	the	oven	surfaces
lose	 their	 heat,	 and	 the	 temperature	 declines
during	the	bake,	at	the	same	time	that	the	loaf
is	 browning	 and	 therefore	 becoming	 more
efficient	 at	 absorbing	 heat.	 The	 result	 is	 a
rapid	initial	heating	that	encourages	the	dough
to	 expand,	 and	 temperatures	 high	 enough	 to
dry	 the	crust	well	 and	generate	 the	color	and
flavors	of	the	browning	reactions	(p.	778).

Modern	Metal	Ovens	The	modern	metal	oven
is	 certainly	 easier	 to	 bake	 in	 than	 the	wood-
fired	 oven,	 but	 it	 isn’t	 as	 ideally	 suited	 to
breadmaking.	 It	 usually	 has	 a	 maximum
cooking	 temperature	 of	 500ºF/250ºC.	And	 its
thin	walls	are	incapable	of	storing	much	heat,
so	 its	 temperature	 is	maintained	by	means	of
gas	flames	or	electrical	elements	that	get	red-



hot.	When	these	heat	sources	switch	on	during
baking,	 the	effective	 temperature	 temporarily
rises	 well	 above	 the	 target	 baking
temperature,	 and	 the	 bread	 can	 be	 scorched.
Because	they	are	vented	to	allow	the	escape	of
combustion	gases	(carbon	dioxide	and	water),
gas	ovens	don’t	retain	 the	 loaves’	steam	well
during	 the	 important	 early	 stage.	 Electric
ovens	do	a	better	job.	Some	of	the	advantages
of	 the	 traditional	 stored-heat	 oven	 can	 be
obtained	 from	 the	 use	 of	 ceramic	 baking
stones	 or	 wraparound	 ceramic	 oven	 inserts,
which	 are	 preheated	 to	 the	 oven’s	maximum
temperature	 and	 provide	 more	 intensive	 and
even	heat	during	baking.

Steam	 Steam	 does	 several	 useful	 things
during	 the	 first	 few	 minutes	 of	 baking.	 It
greatly	increases	the	rate	of	heat	transfer	from
oven	 to	 dough.	 Without	 steam,	 the	 dough
surface	reaches	195ºF/90ºC	in	4	minutes;	with
steam,	in	1	minute.	Steam	thus	causes	a	rapid



expansion	 of	 the	 gas	 cells.	 As	 the	 steam
condenses	onto	 the	dough	 surface,	 it	 forms	 a
film	 of	 water	 that	 temporarily	 prevents	 the
loaf	surface	from	drying	out	into	a	crust,	thus
keeping	 it	 flexible	 and	 elastic	 so	 that	 it
doesn’t	 hinder	 the	 initial	 rapid	 expansion	 of
the	loaf,	the	“oven	spring.”	The	overall	result
is	 a	 larger,	 lighter	 loaf.	 In	 addition,	 the	 hot
water	 film	 gelates	 starch	 at	 the	 loaf	 surface
into	a	thin,	transparent	coating	that	later	dries
into	an	attractively	glossy	crust.

Professional	bakers	often	inject	steam
under	low	pressure	into	the	oven	for	the	first
several	minutes	of	baking.	In	home	ovens,
spraying	water	or	throwing	ice	cubes	into	the
hot	chamber	can	produce	enough	steam	to
improve	the	oven	spring	and	crust	gloss.

Early	Baking:	Oven	Spring	When	 the	bread
first	 enters	 the	 oven,	 heat	 moves	 into	 the
bottom	 of	 the	 dough	 from	 the	 oven	 floor	 or
pan,	 and	 into	 the	 top	 from	 the	 oven	 ceiling



and	the	hot	air.	If	steam	is	present,	it	provides
an	initial	blast	of	heat	by	condensing	onto	the
cold	dough	surface.	Heat	then	moves	from	the
surface	through	the	dough	by	two	means:	slow
conduction	 through	 the	 viscous	 gluten-starch
matrix,	 and	 much	 more	 rapid	 steam
movement	 through	 the	 network	 of	 gas
bubbles.	 The	 better	 leavened	 the	 dough,	 the
faster	 steam	can	move	 through	 it,	 and	 so	 the
faster	the	loaf	cooks.

As	the	dough	heats	up,	it	becomes	more
fluid,	its	gas	cells	expand,	and	the	dough	rises.
The	main	cause	of	this	oven	spring	is	the
vaporization	of	alcohol	and	water	into	gases
that	fill	the	gas	cells,	and	that	expand	the
dough	by	as	much	as	half	its	initial	volume.
Oven	spring	is	usually	over	after	6–8	minutes
of	baking.

Mid-Baking:	 From	 Foam	 to	 Sponge	 Oven
spring	stops	when	the	crust	becomes	firm	and
stiff	enough	to	resist	it,	and	when	the	interior



of	 the	 loaf	 reaches	 155–180ºF/68–80ºC,	 the
temperature	 range	 in	 which	 the	 gluten
proteins	 form	 strong	 cross-links	 with	 each
other	 and	 the	 starch	 granules	 absorb	 water,
swell,	gelate,	and	amylose	molecules	leak	out
of	the	granules.	Now	the	walls	of	the	gas	cells
can	 no	 longer	 stretch	 to	 accommodate	 the
rising	 pressure	 inside,	 so	 the	 pressure	 builds
and	eventually	ruptures	 the	walls,	 turning	the
structure	of	the	loaf	from	a	closed	network	of
separate	 gas	 cells	 into	 an	 open	 network	 of
communicating	pores:	from	an	aggregation	of
little	 balloons	 into	 a	 sponge	 through	 which
gases	can	easily	pass.	 (If	 the	dough	were	not
transformed	into	a	sponge,	then	cooling	would
cause	each	isolated	gas	cell	to	shrink,	and	the
loaf	would	collapse.)



Bread	 dough	 before	 and	 after	 baking.	As	 the
dough	 heats	 up,	 starch	 granules	 absorb
moisture	from	the	gluten,	swell,	and	leak	some
starch	 molecules,	 creating	 reinforcement	 for
the	dough	walls	that	surround	the	gas	pockets.

Late	 Baking:	 Flavor	 Development	 and
Cooking	 Through	 Baking	 is	 continued	 for
some	 time	 after	 the	 bread	 center	 approaches
the	 boiling	 point.	 This	 gelates	 the	 starch	 as
thoroughly	 as	 possible,	 thus	 preventing	 the
center	 from	 remaining	 damp	 and	 heavy,	 and
slowing	subsequent	staling.	Continued	baking
also	 encourages	 the	 surface	 browning
reactions	 that	 improve	both	 color	 and	 flavor.
Though	 limited	 to	 the	 hot,	 dry	 crust,	 these
reactions	 affect	 the	 flavor	 of	 the	 whole	 loaf
because	their	products	diffuse	inward.	A	light-
colored	 loaf	will	 be	 noticeably	 less	 flavorful
than	a	dark	one.

Bread	is	judged	to	be	done	when	its	crust
has	browned	and	its	inner	structure	has



become	fully	set.	The	second	condition	can	be
verified	indirectly	by	tapping	on	the	bottom	of
the	loaf.	If	the	interior	still	contains	a
continuous	gluten	mass	with	embedded
bubbles,	it	will	sound	and	feel	heavy	and
dense.	If	it	has	cooked	through	and	become	an
open	sponge,	the	loaf	will	sound	hollow.

Cooling

Immediately	after	being	removed	from	the
oven,	the	loaf’s	outer	layer	is	very	dry,	around
15%	water,	and	close	to	400ºF/200ºC,	while
the	interior	is	as	moist	as	the	original	dough,
around	40%	water,	and	around	200ºF/93ºC.
During	cooling,	these	differences	partly	even
themselves	out.	Moisture	diffuses	outward,
and	much	of	the	loaf’s	moisture	loss	occurs
now.	It	ranges	from	10%	to	20%	of	the	dough
weight,	depending	on	surface	area,	with	small
rolls	losing	the	most	and	large	loaves	the
least.



As	the	temperature	declines,	the	starch
granules	become	firmer	and	so	the	loaf	as	a
whole	becomes	easier	to	slice	without	tearing.
This	desirable	firming	continues	over	the
course	of	a	day	or	so,	and	turns	out	to	be	the
first	step	in	the	process	called	staling.

The	Staling	Process;
Storing	and	Refreshing	Bread

Staling	Staling	takes	place	in	the	days
following	baking,	and	seems	to	involve	the
loss	of	moisture:	the	bread	interior	gets	dry,
hard,	and	crumbly.	It	turns	out	that	bread	will
stale	even	when	there’s	no	net	loss	of
moisture	from	the	loaf.	This	was	shown	in	the
landmark	study	of	bread	staling	in	1852,	when
the	Frenchman	Jean-Baptiste	Boussingault
showed	that	bread	could	be	hermetically
sealed	to	prevent	it	from	losing	water,	and	yet
still	go	stale.	He	further	showed	that	staling	is
reversed	by	reheating	the	bread	to	140ºF/60ºC:



the	temperature,	we	now	know,	at	which
starch	gelates.

Staling	is	now	understood	to	be	a
manifestation	of	starch	retrogradation,	the
recrystallization,	water	migration	out	of	the
granules,	and	hardening	that	take	place	when
cooked	starch	is	then	cooled	(p.	548).	The
initial	firming	of	the	freshly	baked	bread	loaf,
which	improves	its	ability	to	be	sliced,	is
caused	by	the	retrogradation	of	the	simple
straight-chain	amylose	molecules,	and	is
essentially	complete	within	a	day	of	baking.

Food	Words:	Stale
Though	stale	 now	 suggests	 a	 food	 that	 is
past	 its	prime,	old	and	dried	out,	 it	hasn’t
always	had	 these	negative	connotations.	 It
is	 a	 medieval	 Teutonic	 word,	 and
originally	meant	“to	stand”	or	“to	age.”	 It
was	 applied	 to	 wines	 and	 liquors,	 which
became	 clarified	 and	 stronger	 in	 flavor
when	they	were	allowed	to	stand	for	some



time	 and	 settle.	 A	 kind	 of	 settling	 and
strengthening	 also	 takes	 place	 among	 the
starch	molecules	 in	 bread,	 but	 these	 have
toughening	 effects	 that	 are	 undesirable,	 at
least	 for	 bread	 to	 be	 eaten	 fresh.	 Stale
toughened	 bread	 does	 have	 its	 uses	 (see
box,	p.	542).
The	majority	of	starch	molecules,	the

branched	amylopectins	within	the	granul,	also
retrograde.	But	thanks	to	their	irregular
structure,	they	form	crystalline	regions	and
expel	water	much	more	slowly,	over	the
course	of	several	days.	This	is	the	process
responsible	for	the	undesirable	firming	in
texture	after	the	bread	has	become	sliceable.
For	some	reason,	both	the	rate	and	the	extent
of	staling	are	lower	in	lighter,	less	dense
breads.

Certain	emulsifying	agents	have	been
found	to	retard	staling	substantially	and	for
this	reason	have	been	added	to	mass-produced
bread	doughs	for	about	50	years.	True



buttermilk	(p.	50)	and	egg	yolks	are	rich	in
emusifiers	and	have	the	same	effect.	It’s
thought	that	these	substances	complex	with
starch	or	in	some	other	way	interfere	with
water	movement,	thereby	inhibiting
recrystallization.

Reheating	Reverses	Staling	As	long	as	much
of	 the	 water	 released	 by	 the	 starch	 granules
remains	 in	 the	 surrounding	 gluten	—	 that	 is,
as	 long	 as	 the	 loaf	 isn’t	 too	 old,	 or	 has	 been
wrapped	 and	 refrigerated	 —	 staling	 can	 be
reversed	 by	 heating	 the	 bread	 above	 the
gelation	 temperature	 of	 wheat	 starch,
140ºF/60ºC.	Once	more	the	crystalline	regions
are	 disrupted,	 water	 molecules	 move	 in
between	 the	 starch	 molecules,	 and	 the
granules	 and	 amylose	 gels	 become	 tender
again.	This	is	why	toasting	sliced	bread	makes
the	 interior	soft,	and	why	a	 loaf	of	bread	can
be	refreshed	by	heating	it	in	the	oven.

Storing	 Bread:	 Avoid	 the	 Refrigerator



Staling	proceeds	most	rapidly	at	temperatures
just	 above	 freezing,	 and	 very	 slowly	 below
freezing.	 In	 one	 experiment,	 bread	 stored	 in
the	refrigerator	at	46ºF/7ºC	staled	as	much	in
one	day	as	bread	held	at	86ºF/30ºC	did	in	six
days.	If	you’re	going	to	use	bread	in	a	day	or
two,	 then	 store	 it	 at	 room	 temperature	 in	 a
breadbox	 or	 paper	 bag,	 which	 reduces
moisture	 loss	 while	 allowing	 the	 crust	 to
remain	 somewhat	 crisp.	 If	 you	 need	 to	 keep
bread	 for	 several	 days	 or	more,	 then	wrap	 it
well	in	plastic	or	foil	and	freeze	it.	Refrigerate
bread	 (well	wrapped)	only	 if	 you’re	going	 to
toast	or	otherwise	reheat	it.

Bread	 Spoilage	 Compared	 to	 many	 foods,
bread	contains	relatively	little	water,	and	so	it
often	dries	out	before	 it	becomes	 infected	by
spoilage	 microbes.	 Keeping	 bread	 at	 room
temperature	 in	 a	 plastic	 bag	 allows	moisture
from	 the	staling	starch	granules	 to	collect	on
the	bread	surfaces	and	encourages	the	growth



of	 potentially	 toxic	 molds,	 especially	 blue-
green	 species	 of	Aspergillus	 and	Penicillium,
gray-white	Mucor	 species,	 and	 red	Monilia
sitophila.

The	Virtues	of	Stale	Bread
Cooks	have	long	known	that	stale	bread	is
a	very	useful	ingredient	in	its	own	right.	It
is	more	robust	than	fresh	bread,	and	retains
its	 sponge-like	 structure	 in	 wet
preparations	 that	 would	 cause	 fresh	 bread
to	disintegrate,	such	dishes	as	bread	salads,
bread	puddings,	and	pain	perdu.	Similarly,
bread	 crumbs	 retain	 their	 individual
identity	 when	 wetted,	 and	 can	 serve	 as
tender	binding	agent	 in	stuffings,	panades,
and	breadings	for	frying.	The	source	of	dry
bread’s	 structural	 integrity	 is	 its	 starch.
When	it	retrogrades,	it	forms	some	regions
that	 are	 extremely	 ordered	 and	 stable	 and
that	 hold	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 starch	 network
strongly	together	(p.	458).



Bread	Flavor

The	incomparable	flavor	of	simple	wheat
bread	has	three	sources:	the	flavor	of	wheat
flour,	the	products	of	yeast	and	bacterial
fermentation,	and	the	reactions	caused	by
oven	heat	during	baking.	The	aroma	of	low-
extraction	white	flour	is	dominated	by	vanilla,
spicy,	metallic,	and	fatty	notes	(from	vanillin,
a	furanone,	and	fatty	aldehydes),	while	whole-
meal	flour	is	richer	in	most	of	these	and	in
addition	has	cucumber,	fried,	“sweaty,”	and
honey	notes	(from	other	fatty	aldehydes	and
alcohols	and	phenylacetic	acid).	Yeast
fermentation	generates	a	“yeasty”	character,	a
large	part	of	which	comes	from	fruity	esters
and	eggy	sulfur	compounds.	Baking
contributes	the	toasty	products	of	browning
reactions.	Starters	add	general	complexity	and
a	distinctive	sour	note	from	acetic	and	other
organic	acids.

Mass-Produced	Breads



Mass-Produced	Breads

The	manufacture	of	commercial	breads	bears
little	resemblance	to	the	process	described
above.	Ordinary	mixing,	kneading,	and
fermentation	require	several	hours	of	work
and	waiting	from	the	bread	maker.	In	bread
factories,	high-powered	mechanical	dough
developers	and	chemical	maturing	agents
(oxidizers)	can	produce	a	“ripe”	dough,	with
good	aeration	and	gluten	structure,	in	four
minutes.	Yeast	is	added	to	such	doughs
mainly	as	flavoring.	The	formed	loaves	are
proofed	briefly	and	then	baked	as	they	move
through	a	tunnel-like	metal	oven.	These
breads	tend	to	have	a	very	fine,	cakelike
texture,	because	machines	are	far	more
efficient	at	aerating	dough	than	are	hands	or
stand	mixers.	The	flavor	of	manufactured
bread	can	sometimes	be	marked	by	such
unpleasant	aroma	compounds	as	sour,	sweat-
like	isovaleric	and	isobutyric	acids,	which	are



produced	by	flour	and	yeast	enzymes	in
unbalanced	amounts	during	intensive	mixing
and	high-temperature	proofing.

A	Scientific	Definition	of	Bread	Quality
Raymond	 Calvel	 is	 an	 eminent	 figure	 in
the	 world	 of	 baking,	 a	 researcher	 and
teacher	 who	 made	 great	 contributions	 to
the	 understanding	 and	 improvement	 of
bread	 quality	 in	 postwar	 France.	 His
definition	 of	 high	 quality	 in	 good	 French
bread	doesn’t	necessarily	apply	in	detail	to
other	bread	styles,	but	 it	shows	how	much
there	is	to	appreciate	in	a	well-made	loaf.
A	good	bread	—	a	 real	quality	 loaf	—	…
will	 have	 a	 creamy	 white	 crumb.	 The
proper	 creamy-white	 color	 of	 the	 crumb
shows	 that	 the	 dough	 oxidation	 during
mixing	 has	 not	 been	 excessive.	 It	 also
presages	 the	 distinctive	 aroma	 and	 taste
that	are	a	subtle	blend	of	the	scent	of	wheat



flour	—	that	of	wheat	germ	oil,	along	with
the	 delicate	 hint	 of	 hazelnut	 aroma	 that
comes	 from	 the	 germ.	 All	 of	 these	 are
combined	with	the	heady	smell	that	comes
from	 alcoholic	 dough	 fermentation,	 along
with	the	discreet	aromas	that	are	the	results
of	 caramelization	 and	 crust	 baking….	 the
grain	 of	 French	 bread	 should	 be	 open,
marked	 here	 and	 there	 by	 large	 gas	 cells.
These	 should	 be	 thin-walled	 cells,	 with	 a
lightly	pearlescent	appearance.	This	unique
structure,	 resulting	 from	 the	 combination
of	numerous	factors	 including	 the	 level	of
dough	 maturation	 and	 the	 loaf	 forming
method,	 is	 basic	 to	 the	 eating	 qualities,
flavor,	 and	 gustatory	 appeal	 of	 French
bread.
—	The	Taste	of	Bread,	transl.	R.	L.	Wirtz.

Special	Kinds	of	Loaf	Breads:
Sourdough,	Rye,	Sweet,
Gluten-Free



Bakers	make	distinctive	variations	on	the
basic	loaf	bread	from	a	variety	of	grains	and
other	ingredients.	Here	are	brief	descriptions
of	some	of	them.

Sourdough	 Breads	 Sourdough	 breads	 get
their	name	 from	 the	 fact	 that	both	 the	dough
and	 bread	 are	 acid.	 The	 acidity,	 along	 with
other	 distinctive	 flavor	 components,	 is
produced	 by	 bacteria	 that	 grow	 in	 the	 dough
along	with	various	yeasts.	The	bacteria	 often
include	some	of	 the	same	lactic	acid	bacteria
that	make	milk	into	yogurt	and	buttermilk	(p.
44).	 The	 leavening	 for	 this	 kind	 of	 bread
begins	 as	 a	 “wild”	 starter,	 a	 mixture	 of
whatever	 microbes	 happened	 to	 be	 on	 the
grain	and	in	the	air	and	other	ingredients	when
flour	 was	 mixed	 with	 water.	 The	 mixture	 of
yeasts	 and	 bacteria	 is	 then	 perpetuated	 by
saving	 a	 portion	 of	 the	 dough	 to	 leaven	 the
next	batch	of	bread.

The	first	breads	probably	resembled



modern	sourdoughs,	and	bread	in	much	of	the
world	is	made	with	sourdough	starters	that
give	distinctive	regional	flavors.	The	bacteria
somehow	delay	starch	retrogradation	and
staling,	and	the	acids	they	produce	make	the
bread	resistant	to	spoilage	microbes:	so
sourdough	breads	are	especially	flavorful	and
keep	well.	Because	browning	reactions	are
slowed	in	acid	conditions,	sourdough	breads
tend	to	be	lighter	in	color	than	straight	yeast
breads,	and	their	flavor	less	toasty.

It	isn’t	easy	to	make	good	bread	with
sourdough	cultures.	There	are	two	reasons	for
this.	One	is	that	the	bacteria	grow	faster	than
the	yeasts,	almost	always	outnumber	them	by
factors	of	a	hundred	or	a	thousand,	and	inhibit
the	yeasts’	gas	production:	so	sourdoughs
often	don’t	rise	very	well.	The	other	is	that
acid	conditions	and	bacterial	protein-digesting
enzymes	weaken	the	dough	gluten,	which
makes	it	less	elastic	and	the	resulting	bread
more	dense.



Guidelines	 for	 Working	 with	 Sourdoughs
The	key	 to	 successful	baking	with	sourdough
starters	 is	 to	 limit	 bacterial	 growth	 and
acidification,	 and	 encourage	 a	 healthy	 yeast
population.	 In	 general,	 this	 means	 keeping
sourdough	 starters	 relatively	 cool,	 and
“refreshing”	 them	 frequently	 by	 adding	 new
flour	and	water	and	aerating	them	vigorously.
Here	are	rules	of	thumb	to	keep	in	mind.

Frozen	and	Par-baked	Doughs	and
Breads

Bread	 dough	 can	 be	 frozen,	 thawed,	 and
baked	into	bread,	but	freezing	kills	a	large
proportion	of	the	yeast	cells,	which	means
less	leavening	power,	a	slower	rise,	and	the
spread	 of	 yeast	 chemicals	 that	 weaken
gluten.	 Sweet	 rich	 doughs	 turn	 out	 to
freeze	the	best.

The	best	stage	at	which	to	freeze	bread
dough	 is	 after	 the	 dough	 has	 risen	 and
baked	 for	 70	 to	 80%	 of	 its	 usual	 baking



time.	This	frozen	“par-baked”	bread	can	be
thawed	 and	 finished	 with	 just	 a	 few
minutes	in	a	hot	oven.	Yeast	survival	is	no
longer	 important,	 because	 the	 yeast	 cells
have	 done	 their	 leavening	 and	 are	 killed
during	the	initial	bake.
Both	yeasts	and	bacteria	grow	fastest	in

liquid	starters,	which	allow	the	microbes
easier	access	to	nutrients;	in	a	semisolid
dough	they	grow	more	slowly	and	require	less
frequent	attention.	Because	growing	microbes
consume	nutrients	rapidly,	and	produce	acid
and	other	growth-inhibiting	substances,
starters	need	to	be	divided	and	refreshed
frequently,	two	or	more	times	per	day.	Adding
new	water	and	flour	dilutes	the	accumulated
acids	and	other	growth	inhibitors,	and
provides	a	fresh	supply	of	food.	Aerating	the
starter	—	whisking	a	liquid	one,	or	kneading	a
doughy	one	—	supplies	the	oxygen	that	yeasts
require	to	build	cell	membranes	for	new	cells.
The	more	frequently	the	starter	is	divided	and



refreshed,	the	better	the	yeasts	will	be	able	to
grow,	and	the	more	leavening	power	the
starter	will	have.	Starters	should	be
incorporated	into	a	dough	when	they’re
actively	growing	and	at	their	bubbliest.	While
bacteria	thrive	at	warm	temperatures,	86–
96ºF/30–35ºC,	yeasts	in	an	acid	environment
grow	better	at	a	cooler	68–78ºF/20–25ºC;	so
both	starters	and	rising	doughs	should	be	kept
relatively	cool.

Finally,	sourdoughs	should	be	well	salted.
Salt	limits	bacterial	protein-digesting
enzymes,	and	tightens	the	vulnerable	gluten.

Rye	Breads	Though	a	minor	grain	 compared
to	wheat,	rye	is	still	found	in	many	breads	in
Germany	 and	 elsewhere	 in	 northern	 Europe
and	Scandinavia.	Most	rye	breads	baked	today
are	 made	 from	 mixtures	 of	 rye	 and	 wheat
flours,	with	 rye	providing	 its	 distinctive,	 full
flavor	 and	 wheat	 the	 rising	 power	 of	 gluten.
Rye	 proteins	 simply	 don’t	 form	 an	 elastic



network	 like	 gluten,	 apparently	 because	 the
glutenin	 molecules	 can’t	 link	 up	 end-to-end
into	 long	 chains.	 Rye	 has	 another	 major
breadmaking	 liability:	 it	 tends	 to	 begin
sprouting	 before	 harvest,	 so	 its	 starch-
digesting	 enzymes	 are	 active	 during	 baking
and	 break	 down	 the	 other	 major	 source	 of
dough	 structure.	 Nevertheless	 bakers	 in
northern	 Europe	 found	 a	 way	 of	 making	 a
unique	raised	bread	from	pure	rye	flour.

Pumpernickel	 True	 pumpernickel	 was
apparently	 born	 during	 a	 famine	 in
Westphalia	 in	 the	16th	century.	 It	 starts	with
coarse	 whole-grain	 rye	 flour	 and	 a	 several-
stage	 sourdough	 fermentation;	 the	 acidity
helps	 limit	 starch	breakdown	and	also	makes
the	dough	more	elastic.	The	dough	manages	to
retain	some	carbon	dioxide	bubbles	 thanks	to
its	high	content	of	gummy	cell-wall	materials
called	 pentosans	 (p.	 470).	The	 fermented	 rye
dough	 is	 baked	 in	 a	 pan	 at	 a	 low	 oven



temperature,	 or	 steamed,	 and	 for	 a	 very	 long
time:	16	to	24	hours.	The	loaf	develops	only	a
thin	 crust,	 and	 turns	 a	 dark	 chocolate-brown
and	 takes	 on	 a	 rich	 flavor	 thanks	 to	 the	 long
cooking	 time	 and	 high	 concentration	 of	 free
sugars	 and	 amino	 acids,	 which	 undergo
browning	 reactions.	 Because	 the	 abundant
starch-digesting	enzymes	are	active	for	a	long
time	 during	 the	 slow	 baking,	 pumpernickel
may	end	up	very	 sweet,	with	 a	 sugar	 content
of	20%.

Food	Words:	Pumpernickel,	Bagel,
Pretzel,	Brioche,	Panettone,	Pandoro

Three	of	these	bread	names	are	German	in
origin,	 three	 from	 Romance	 languages.
Pumpernickel	 comes	 from	 Westphalian
dialect	words	 for	 the	 devil	 (St.	 Nick)	 and
for	“fart”:	this	is	a	high-fiber	bread.	Bagel
comes	 via	 Yiddish	 from	 a	 German	 root
meaning	“ring,”	and	pretzel	directly	from	a
German	 word	 of	 Latin	 origin	 meaning



“little	 bracelet,”	 so	 both	 are	 named	 for
their	 shape.	Brioche	 is	 French,	 its	 root
apparently	broyer,	 meaning	 to	 grind	 or
knead.	 It	 first	 appears	 in	 the	 15th	 century
to	name	breads	enriched	with	butter	but	not
yet	 with	 eggs.	Panettone	 and	pandoro	 are
19th-century	 Italian	 coinages	 meaning
“grand	bread”	and	“golden	bread.”
The	distinctive,	complex	flavor	of	rye

bread	comes	largely	from	the	grain	itself,
which	has	mushroom,	potato,	and	green	notes
(from	octenone,	methional,	nonenal).	The
traditional	sourdough	fermentation	adds
malty,	vanilla,	fried,	buttery,	sweaty,	and
vinegar	notes.

Sweet	and	Rich	Breads:	Brioche,	Panettone,
Pandoro	 Bread	 doughs	 that	 contain
substantial	 amounts	 of	 fat	 and/or	 sugar	 pose
special	 challenges	 to	 the	 baker.	Both	 fat	 and
sugar	slow	gluten	development	and	weaken	it,
sugar	because	it	binds	up	water	molecules	and



interrupts	 the	 gluten-water	 network,	 fat
because	 it	bonds	 to	 fat-loving	portions	of	 the
gluten	chains	and	prevents	them	from	bonding
to	 each	 other.	 Rich	 doughs	 are	 therefore
relatively	soft	and	fragile.	Bakers	often	build
them	 by	 holding	 back	 the	 fat	 and	 sugar	 and
kneading	 these	 in	 only	 after	 developing	 the
gluten	 network,	 and	 then	 bake	 the	 doughs	 in
containers	 that	 support	 their	 weight	 and
prevent	 them	 from	 sagging	 and	 flattening.
Large	 amounts	 of	 sugar	 slow	 the	 growth	 of
yeast	 by	 dehydrating	 the	 cells,	 so	 sweet
doughs	 are	 often	made	with	more	 yeast	 than
ordinary	breads,	 and	 they	may	 take	 longer	 to
rise.	Sugar	also	makes	sweet	doughs	prone	to
begin	browning	early	in	the	baking,	so	they’re
usually	 baked	 at	 a	 relatively	 low	 oven
temperature	 to	 prevent	 the	 surface	 from
browning	before	the	interior	has	set.

French	brioche	dough	is	especially	rich	in
butter	and	eggs.	It’s	often	retarded	(chilled,	p.
539)	for	6–18	hours	to	stiffen	it,	then	rolled



out	and	briefly	rested.	This	makes	the	dough
easier	to	handle	and	form	before	its	final	rise.
Italian	panettone	and	pandoro	are	remarkable
holiday	breads	that	are	enriched	with	large
quantities	of	sugar,	egg	yolks,	and	butter,	but
that	keep	well	because	they	are	built	from	a
sourdough	that	starts	with	a	naturally
leavened	sponge.

Gluten-Free	 Breads	 People	 whose	 immune
systems	 are	 intolerant	 of	 gluten	 must	 avoid
wheat	 and	 its	 close	 relatives,	 and	 therefore
can’t	eat	ordinary	bread,	where	gluten	plays	a
major	 role	 in	 texture.	A	 reasonable	 facsimile
of	 raised	bread	can	be	made	with	gluten-free
flours	 or	 starches	—	 rice	 flour,	 for	 example
—	 that	 are	 supplemented	 with	 xanthan	 gum
and	 emulsifiers.	 The	 gum,	 which	 is	 secreted
by	 a	 bacterium	 and	 purified	 from	 industrial-
scale	 fermenters,	 provides	 a	 modest	 gluten-
like	 elasticity,	while	 the	 emulsifiers	 stabilize
the	 gas	 bubbles	 and	 slow	 the	 diffusion	 of



carbon	dioxide	from	the	dough	during	baking.

Other	Breads:	Flatbreads,	Bagels,	Steamed	Breads,	Quick
Breads,	Doughnuts

Light	oven-baked	loaves	are	the	standard	form
of	bread	in	Europe	and	North	America,	but
there	are	many	other	versions	of	the	staff	of
life.	Here	are	brief	descriptions	of	some	of
them.

Milk	in	Bread
Both	 fresh	 and	 powdered	 milk	 are
sometimes	 included	 in	 doughs	 for	 their
flavor	 and	 nutritiousness,	 but	 they	 can
weaken	 the	 gluten	 of	 bread	 dough	 and
produce	 a	 dense	 loaf.	 The	 culprit	 appears
to	 be	 a	 whey	 protein,	 which	 can	 be
inactivated	 by	 scalding	 the	 milk	 —
bringing	 it	 just	 to	 the	 boil	—	 before	 use.
(The	milk	must	be	cooled	before	mixing	to
avoid	 precooking	 the	 flour	 and	 damaging



the	yeast.)

Flatbreads	 Thin	 flatbreads	were	 the	 original
breads,	 and	 are	 still	 a	 major	 source	 of
nourishment	in	many	countries	throughout	the
world.	 The	 essential	 characteristic	 of
flatbreads	is	that	they	cook	very	quickly,	in	as
little	as	two	minutes,	on	a	simple	hot	surface,
whether	 a	 pan,	 an	 oven	 floor	 or	 wall,	 or	 a
mass	 of	 hot	 pebbles.	 The	 heat	 is	 often	 very
high	—	pizza	ovens	can	run	at	900ºF/450ºC	—
and	 this	 means	 that	 tiny	 air-pockets	 in	 the
dough	 are	 puffed	 up	 by	 rapidly	 vaporizing
steam,	 essentially	 leavening	 the	 dough
without	the	necessity	of	fermentation	(though
many	 flatbreads	 are	 made	 with	 leavened
doughs).	 This	 puffing,	 and	 the	 breads’
thinness,	make	them	tender;	and	since	neither
requires	 a	 strong	 gluten,	 flatbreads	 can	 be
made	 from	 all	 kinds	 of	 grains.	 Despite	 the
short	 baking	 time,	 the	 high	 temperatures
develop	 a	 delicious	 toasted	 flavor	 across	 the



extensive	surface	of	flatbreads.
Flatbreads	often	puff	to	an	impressive	if

temporary	volume,	and	the	central	cavity	of
pita	and	similar	breads	is	used	as	a	pocket	for
filling	with	other	foods.	Puffing	occurs	when
the	two	bread	surfaces	have	set	in	the	heat	and
become	tougher	than	the	inner	layer,	where
steam	accumulates	and	eventually	tears	the
tender	interior,	forcing	the	two	surfaces	apart.
When	puffing	is	undesirable	—	in	crackers,
for	example,	which	would	become	too	fragile
—	the	sheeted	dough	is	“docked,”	or	pricked
in	a	regular	pattern	with	a	pointed	utensil	—	a
fork,	or	a	special	stamp	—	to	form	dense
gluten	nodes	that	resist	puffing.

Pretzels	 Pretzels	 are	 unusual	 for	 their	woven
shape,	 dark	 brown	 crust,	 and	 unusual	 flavor.
Like	crackers,	they’re	made	from	a	stiff	yeast
dough	 of	 soft	wheat	 flour.	 In	manufacturing,
the	 formed	 dough	 is	 sprayed	 for	 10–15
seconds	 with	 a	 hot	 1%	 solution	 of	 alkaline



sodium	hydroxide	 (lye)	or	 sodium	carbonate.
The	heat	 and	moisture	 combine	 to	 gelate	 the
surface	 starch.	 The	 dough	 is	 then	 salted	 and
baked	 for	 about	 five	 minutes	 in	 a	 very	 hot
oven.	The	starch	gel	hardens	to	a	shiny	finish
and	 thanks	 to	 the	 alkaline	 conditions	 created
by	 the	 lye,	 browning-reaction	 pigments	 and
flavor	 compounds	 rapidly	 accumulate.	 (The
lye	 reacts	with	carbon	dioxide	 in	 the	oven	 to
form	 a	 harmless	 edible	 carbonate.)	 The	 final
step	 is	 a	 long,	 slow	 bake	 to	 dry	 the	 whole
pretzel	 out.	 The	 pretzel	 is	 crisp	 but	 fragile
thanks	 to	 tiny	 airy	 bubbles	 and	 ungelated
starch	 granules	 throughout,	 and	 it	 has	 a
distinctive	 flavor	 from	 its	 alkaline-browned
surface.

Soft	and	homemade	pretzels	may	be
allowed	to	rise	before	being	boiled	briefly	in	a
solution	of	baking	soda	and	then	baked	for	10
or	15	minutes	in	a	hot	oven.

Bagels	 The	 bagel	 is	 a	 relatively	 small,	 ring-



shaped	bread	that	arose	in	Eastern	Europe,	and
was	 introduced	 to	 the	 United	 States	 by
immigrants	 to	 New	 York	 in	 the	 early	 20th
century.

Traditionally,	the	bagel	had	a	shiny,	thick,
chewy	crust	and	a	dense	interior;	after	its
popularity	grew	in	the	late	20th	century,	many
bakers	began	to	make	it	larger	and	softer.
Bagels	are	made	with	strong-gluten	flour,
which	is	made	into	a	very	stiff	dough	(a
standard	bread	dough	has	65	parts	water	to
100	flour;	bagel	dough	has	only	45	to	50).
Traditional	bagels	are	made	by	forming	the
dough,	allowing	it	to	rise	somewhat	(an	18-
hour	retardation	gives	a	good	crumb),
immersing	it	in	boiling	water	for	1.5–3
minutes	on	both	sides	to	expand	the	interior
and	develop	a	thick	crust,	and	then	baking	it.
In	the	modern	method,	which	is	simpler	to
automate	and	takes	a	fraction	of	the	usual
time,	the	formed	dough	is	steamed	and	then
baked,	with	no	slow	rise	and	no	immersion	in



boiling	water.	The	steaming	puffs	the	dough
up	more	than	rising	and	boiling	do,	and
produces	a	thinner	crust.	The	result	is	a
lighter,	softer	ring.

Asian	 Steamed	 Breads	 The	 Chinese	 have
been	 making	 and	 eating	 steamed	 breads	 and
buns	for	around	2,000	years.	Asian	breads	are
generally	 small,	 round,	 very	 white,	 with	 a
smooth,	 shiny	 surface	 and	 thin	 skin,	 and	 a
moist,	 springy	 texture	 that	 may	 be	 chewy
(mantou)	or	tender	and	fluffy	(bao).	They	are
generally	 made	 from	 soft	 wheats	 with
moderate	 gluten	 content	 and	 strength.	 The
relatively	stiff	dough	is	fermented,	rolled	out
several	 times,	 then	 cut,	 formed,	 proofed,	 and
steamed	for	10–20	minutes.

Some	Flatbreads	of	the	World

Country Bread Qualities
Unleavened



Israel Matzoh Very	thin,	cracker-like

Armenia Lavash Paper-thin,	often	dried	and
rehydrated

Italy Parchment	bread, Semolina
(Sardinia) carta	di	musica flour,	very

thin

Norway Lefse Flour	&	potatoes,	often	with
butter,	cream

Scandinavia Various	rye,	oat,	barley Many
flatbreads dry

Scotland Bannocks Oat	cakes

Tibet Barley From	roasted	barley	flour,
bread tsampa

China Shaobing Flour,	water,	lard,	folded
and	rolled,	layered

Baobing Hot-water	dough,	rolled	very	thin
for	wrappers

India Chapati Whole-wheat,	dry-roasted	on
pan

Chapati	cooked,	then	puffed	directly



Phulka on	coals
Paratha Folded	with	ghee,	rolled,	layered
Puri,	golegappa,	lucchi Deep-fried,	puffed
Mexico Tortillas Wheat	flour	or	maize
Leavened

Iran Sangak Whole	wheat,	baked	on	hot
pebbles

Italy Focaccia Moderate	thickness

Pizza Thin,	cooked	in	very	hot	oven	(to
900ºF/450ºC)

Egypt Baladi Pocket	bread

Ethiopia Injera Soured	teff	batter,	bubbly
and	soft

India Naan Dough	enriched	with	yogurt,
baked	in	tandoor

United Soda Sourdough	neutralized	by
States cracker baking	soda
English	muffin Small	diameter,	thick
Pretzel Thin	knotted	cylinder



Quickbreads:	 Biscuits,	 Biscotti,	 Scones
Quickbreads	 are	 appropriately	 named	 in	 two
ways:	 they	 are	 quick	 to	 prepare,	 being
leavened	 with	 rapid-acting	 chemicals	 and
mixed	 briefly	 to	 minimize	 gluten
development;	 and	 they	 should	 be	 quickly
eaten,	 because	 they	 stale	 rapidly.	 Batter
breads	are	moister,	richer,	and	keep	longer	(p.
554).

The	term	biscuit	is	an	ambiguous	one.	It
comes	from	the	French	for	“twice-cooked,”
and	originally	referred	to	breads	and	pastries
that	were	baked	until	dry	and	hard.	The	Italian
hard	cookies	called	biscotti	remain	true	to	this
heritage;	they’re	lean	doughs	leavened	with
baking	powder,	baked	in	flattish	loaves,	then
cut	crosswise	into	thin	pieces	and	rebaked	at	a
low	oven	temperature	to	dry	them	out.	French
biscuits	proper,	and	English	biskets,	were
long-keeping	sweets,	small	bread-like	loaves
made	from	foamed	egg	whites,	flour,	and
sugar.	To	this	day	in	England,	the	word	is



used	for	little	sweet	dry	cakes,	what
Americans	call	cookies.	Modern	French
biscuits	are	dryish	cakes	made	from	egg
foams,	usually	moistened	with	a	flavored
syrup	or	cream.

Biscuits	became	something	entirely
different	in	America,	and	early	in	its	history
(see	box	below).	American	biscuits	contain	no
sugar	and	often	no	eggs,	are	made	from	a
moist	dough	of	milk	or	buttermilk,	flour,
pieces	of	solid	fat,	and	baking	soda,	and	are
cooked	briefly	into	a	soft,	tender	morsel.
There	are	two	styles:	one	with	a	crusty,
irregular	top	and	tender	interior;	another	with
a	flat	top	and	flaky	interior.	The	first	is	made
with	minimal	handling	to	avoid	gluten
development,	the	second	with	just	enough
folding	and	kneading	to	develop	a	structure
with	alternating	layers	of	dough	and	fat.	The
simple	recipe	and	short	cooking	mean	that	the
flavor	of	the	flour	itself	is	prominent.

English	scones	are	similar	to	American



biscuits	in	their	simplicity,	basic	composition,
and	floury	taste.	Irish	soda	bread	is	made	with
soft	whole-wheat	flour	and	without	fat.

Early	American	Biscuits
Despite	 their	 name,	 these	 American
biscuits	were	 cooked	 only	 once,	 and	were
rich	and	moist,	not	dry.

Biscuit
One	 pound	 flour,	 one	 ounce	 butter,	 one
egg,	wet	with	milk	and	break	while	oven	is
heating;	and	in	same	proportion.

Butter	Biscuit
One	 pint	 each	 milk	 and	 emptins	 [liquid
yeast],	 laid	 into	 flour,	 in	 sponge;	 next
morning	add	one	pound	butter	melted,	not
hot,	 and	 knead	 into	 as	much	 flour	 as	will
with	another	pint	of	warmed	milk,	be	of	a
sufficient	 consistence	 to	 make	 soft	 —
some	melt	the	butter	in	the	milk.



—	Amelia	Simmons,	American	Cookery,
1796

Doughnuts	 and	 Fritters	 Doughnuts	 and
fritters	 are	 essentially	 pieces	 of	 bread	 or
pastry	 dough	 that	 are	 fried	 in	 oil	 rather	 than
baked.	 Doughnuts	 have	 a	 moist	 interior	 and
little	 or	 no	 crust,	 while	 fritters	 are	 usually
fried	until	crisp.

The	word	doughnut	was	coined	in	the
United	States	in	the	19th	century	to	name
what	the	Dutch	called	olykoeks,	portions	of
fried	sweetened	dough.	Their	great	popularity
flowered	in	the	1920s,	when	machinery
simplified	the	handling	of	the	soft,	sticky
doughs,	which	are	rich	in	sugar,	fat,	and
sometimes	eggs.	There	are	two	main	styles:
yeasted	doughnuts	are	light	and	fluffy,	while
cake	doughnuts,	leavened	with	baking	powder,
are	denser.	Light,	yeasted	doughnuts	ride	on
the	oil	surface	and	must	be	turned,	which
leaves	a	white	band	around	their



circumference	where	the	oil	surface	cooks	the
dough	less	thoroughly.	Doughnuts	are	fried	at
a	moderate	temperature,	originally	in	lard	and
now	usually	in	a	hydrogenated	vegetable
shortening,	which	solidifies	when	the
doughnut	cools	to	provide	a	dry	rather	than
oily	surface.

Thin	Batter	Foods:
CrÊpes,	Popovers,	Griddle
Cakes,	Cream	Puff	Pastry

Batter	Foods

The	difference	between	doughs	and	batters	is
reflected	in	their	names.	Dough	comes	from	a
root	meaning	“to	form,”	while	batter	comes
from	a	root	meaning	“to	beat.”	Doughs	are
firm	enough	to	develop	and	sculpt	by	hand.
Batters	are	too	fluid	and	elusive	to	hold,	so	we
contain	them	in	a	bowl,	mix	them	by	battering
them	repeatedly	from	within	—	by	stirring	—



and	cook	them	in	a	container	to	give	them
form	and	solidity.

Batters	are	fluid	because	they	include	two
to	four	times	more	water	than	doughs.	The
water	disperses	the	gluten	proteins	so	widely
that	they	form	only	a	very	loose,	fluid
network.	When	we	cook	a	batter,	the	starch
granules	absorb	much	of	the	water,	swell,
gelate,	leak	amylose,	stick	to	each	other,	and
thus	turn	the	fluid	into	a	solid	but	tender,
moist	structure.	The	gluten	proteins	play	a
secondary	structural	role,	providing	an
underlying	cohesiveness	that	prevents	the
food	from	being	crumbly.	But	if	the	gluten	is
overdeveloped,	it	makes	the	food	elastic	and
chewy.	Batters	often	contain	eggs,	and	the	egg
proteins	also	contribute	a	nonelastic	solidity
when	they	coagulate	in	the	cooking	heat.	Fluid
batters	can’t	retain	much	of	the	gas	slowly
evolved	by	yeast,	and	are	usually	leavened
either	chemically,	or	else	mechanically,	by
beating	air	into	the	batter	or	its	components.



Most	batter	products	are	meant	to	be
delicate	and	tender.	Tenderness	can	be
encouraged	in	several	different	ways.

The	concentration	of	gluten	proteins	in
the	batter	is	reduced	by	the	use	of	pastry
flour,	or	low-or	no-gluten	flours
(buckwheat,	rice,	oat),	or	all-purpose
flour	mixed	with	cornstarch	or	other	pure
starches.
Gluten	development	is	minimized	by
minimal	stirring	of	the	ingredients.
Replacing	milk	or	water	with	soured
dairy	products,	notably	buttermilk	and
yogurt,	helps	produce	an	especially
tender	texture.	This	is	mainly	an	effect	of
their	thick	consistency,	which	means	that
it	takes	less	flour	to	make	the	batter
properly	thick.	A	spoonful	of	the	finished
batter	therefore	contains	less	flour,	less
starch	and	gluten,	and	cooks	to	a	more
delicate	structure.
Leavening	the	batter	with	gas	bubbles	not



only	divides	it	up	into	innumerable	thin
sheets	surrounding	the	gas	bubbles,	it
makes	the	batter	more	viscous	(as	in
sauce	foams,	p.	595),	which	again	means
that	less	flour	is	needed	to	thicken	it.

It’s	useful	to	divide	batter	foods	into	two
groups.	Thin	batters	are	both	thin	in
consistency	and	cooked	in	the	form	of	small,
thin,	free-standing	cakes.	Quickbreads	and
cakes	are	made	from	thicker	batters,	and	are
cooked	in	pans	in	larger,	deeper	masses.

Crêpes

Crêpes	and	their	relatives	(Eastern	European
blintzes	and	palaschinki),	thin	unleavened
pancakes	that	are	cooked	on	a	shallow	pan	and
folded	over	a	filling	of	some	kind,	have	been
made	for	a	thousand	years	from	a	simple
batter	of	flour,	milk	and/or	water,	and	eggs.
Their	delicacy	comes	from	their	thinness.	The



batter	is	carefully	mixed	to	minimize	gluten
formation,	allowed	to	stand	for	an	hour	or
more	to	allow	the	proteins	and	damaged
starch	to	absorb	water	and	air	bubbles	to	rise
and	escape,	and	then	cooked	for	just	a	couple
of	minutes	per	side.	In	France,	the	milk	in
crêpe	batter	is	sometimes	partly	replaced	with
beer,	and	wheat	flour	with	buckwheat,
especially	in	Brittany.

Popovers

Popovers	are	an	American	version	of	English
Yorkshire	pudding,	which	is	cooked	in	the	fat
rendered	from	a	beef	roast.	The	batter	is
almost	identical	to	crêpe	batter,	but	a	different
cooking	method	transforms	it	into	a	large	air
pocket	surrounded	by	a	thin	layer	of	pastry.
Popover	batter	is	vigorously	beaten	to
incorporate	air	and	cooked	immediately,
before	the	air	bubbles	have	a	chance	to
escape.	The	batter	is	poured	into	a	preheated,



liberally	oiled	pan	and	set	in	a	hot	oven.	The
surfaces	of	the	batter	set	almost	immediately.
The	air	bubbles	within	the	batter	are	trapped,
expand	with	the	rising	temperature,	coalesce
into	one	large	bubble,	and	the	liquid	batter
balloons	around	it	and	sets	into	a	thin	blister.
When	cooked	in	a	pan	with	many	cups,
popovers	rise	unevenly,	because	the	cups
around	the	outside	heat	faster	than	the	ones	in
the	middle	of	the	pan.

Griddle	Cakes:	Pancakes
and	Crumpets

Griddle	cakes	are	made	from	a	more	floury,
viscous	batter	than	crêpes,	popovers,	and
choux	pastry,	and	can	retain	gas	cells	for	the
few	minutes	that	it	takes	to	cook	them;	so
they	rise	on	the	hot	pan	surface	and	develop
an	aerated,	tender	structure.	Pancakes	may	be
leavened	(and	flavored)	with	yeast,	or	with
whipped	egg	whites	folded	into	the	batter,	or



chemical	leavening,	or	some	combination	of
these.	Russian	blinis	sometimes	include	beer,
which	may	contribute	effervescence.	The
batter	is	poured	onto	the	griddle	and	allowed
to	cook	until	bubbles	begin	to	rise	and	break
on	the	upper	surface;	the	cook	then	flips	the
cake	to	set	the	second	side	before	the
leavening	gas	escapes.

Crumpets	are	an	English	invention,	small,
flat,	yeast-raised	cakes	with	a	distinctively
pale,	cratered	top	surface.	They’re	made	from
a	somewhat	thick	pancake	batter	that’s
allowed	to	become	bubbly	from	yeast	activity,
then	poured	into	ring	molds	to	a	depth	of
about	0.75	in/2	cm,	cooked	very	slowly	until
bubbles	break	and	set	on	the	surface,	then
unmolded	and	turned	to	cook	briefly	on	the
hole-y	side.

Food	Words:	Crêpe
The	 French	 word	crêpe	 comes	 from	 the
Latin	 for	 “curled,	 wavy,”	 and	 probably



refers	to	the	curling	of	the	edge	as	it	dries
during	cooking.

Griddle	Cakes:
Waffles	and	Wafers

Waffles	and	wafers	have	two	things	in
common:	the	root	word	for	their	names,	and
the	unique	method	by	which	they’re	cooked.
Their	flour-water	mixture	is	spread	in	a	thin
layer	and	pressed	between	two	heated	and
embossed	metal	plates,	which	spread	them
even	thinner,	conduct	heat	into	them	rapidly,
and	imprint	them	with	an	attractive	and	often
useful	pattern.	The	usual	square	indentations
increase	the	area	of	crisp,	browned	surface
and	collect	the	butter,	syrup,	and	other
enrichments	that	are	often	added	on	top.	The
French	version,	the	gaufre,	goes	back	to
medieval	times,	when	street	vendors	would
make	them	to	order	and	serve	them	hot	on
religious	feast	days.



Today	the	difference	between	wafers	and
waffles	is	a	matter	of	texture.	Wafers	are	thin,
dry,	crisp,	and	when	high	in	sugar	are	dense,
almost	hard.	The	most	familiar	wafer	is	the
ice	cream	cone;	there	are	also	French	cookies
called	gaufres	that	are	similar	to	very	thin,
crisp	tuiles.	Waffles	came	to	the	United	States
from	Holland	in	the	18th	century	and	are
thicker,	lighter,	and	more	delicate	thanks	to
leavening	by	either	yeast	or	a	baking	powder,
which	interrupts	the	cooked	structure	with	gas
bubbles.	They’re	served	fresh	and	hot,	their
honeycomb	structure	filled	with	butter	or
syrup.

Modern	waffle	recipes	are	often	essentially
a	lean	pancake	batter	cooked	in	a	waffle	iron
instead	of	on	a	griddle,	and	they	often	produce
a	disappointing	result	that	is	more	leathery
than	crisp.	Crispness	requires	a	high
proportion	of	fat,	sugar,	or	both:	otherwise	the
batter	essentially	steams	rather	than	fries,	the
flour	proteins	and	starch	absorb	too	much



softening	water,	and	the	surface	ends	up
tough.

Cream	Puff	Pastry,
Pâte	À	Choux

Choux	is	the	French	word	for	“cabbage,”	and
choux	pastry	forms	little	irregular	cabbage-
like	balls	that	are	hollow	inside	like	popovers.
Unlike	popovers,	choux	pastry	becomes	firm
and	crisp	when	baked.	It	provides	the	classic
container	for	cream	fillings	in	such	pastries	as
cream	puffs	(profiteroles)	and	éclairs,	and
also	makes	such	savory	bites	as	cheese-
flavored	gougères	and	deep-fried	beignets,
whose	lightness	inspired	the	name	pets	de
nonne,	“nun’s	farts.”

Choux	paste	was	apparently	invented	in
late	medieval	times,	and	is	prepared	in	a	very
distinctive	way.	It’s	a	cross	between	a	batter
and	a	dough,	and	is	cooked	twice:	once	to
prepare	the	paste	itself,	and	once	to	transform



the	paste	into	hollow	puffs.	A	large	amount	of
water	and	some	fat	are	brought	to	the	boil	in	a
pan,	the	flour	is	added,	and	the	mixture	stirred
and	cooked	over	low	heat	until	it	forms	a
cohesive	ball	of	dough.	Several	eggs	are	then
beaten	sequentially	into	the	dough	until	it
becomes	very	soft,	almost	a	batter.	This	paste
is	then	formed	into	balls	or	other	shapes	and
baked	in	a	hot	oven	or	deep-fried.	As	with	the
popover,	the	surface	sets	while	the	interior	is
still	nearly	liquid,	so	the	trapped	air	coalesces
and	expands	into	one	large	bubble.

An	Early	French	Waffle	Recipe
Waffles	of	Milk	or	Cream

Put	 a	 litron	 [13	 oz/375	 g]	 of	 flour	 in	 a
bowl,	 break	 in	 two	 or	 three	 eggs	 and	mix
together	while	adding	some	cream	or	milk
and	a	pinch	of	salt.	Add	a	piece	the	size	of
two	eggs	of	freshly	made	cream	cheese,	or
simply	soft	cheese	from	whole	milk,	and	a



quarteron	[4	oz/125	g]	of	melted	butter.	If
you	 only	 add	 a	 half	 quarteron	 of	 butter,
that	is	enough	provided	that	you	add	a	half
quarteron	 of	 good	 beef	 marrow	 crushed
very	small.

Mix	 all	 this	 together,	 and	 when	 it	 is
well	bound,	one	should	put	the	waffle	irons
on	 the	 fire,	 and	 make	 the	 waffles.	 These
waffles	should	be	eaten	while	they’re	hot.
—	La	Varenne,	Le	Cuisinier	françois,	1651

Frying	Batters

A	number	of	foods,	especially	seafood,
poultry,	and	vegetables,	are	sometimes	coated
with	a	layer	of	flour	batter	before	deep-frying
(or	sometimes	baking).	A	good	batter	adheres
well	to	the	food,	and	fries	into	a	crust	that	has
a	long-lasting	crunchiness	and	that	readily
breaks	apart	in	the	mouth	without	an	oily
residue.	Problematic	batters	fall	away	during
frying	or	produce	a	crust	that’s	greasy,	chewy,



and	tough,	or	soft	and	mushy.
Batters	include	some	kind	of	flour,	a	liquid

that	might	be	water,	milk,	or	beer,	sometimes
a	chemical	leavening	to	provide	gas	bubbles
and	lightness,	and	often	eggs,	whose	proteins
promote	adherence	to	the	food	and	allow	the
use	of	less	flour.	Of	all	the	ingredients,	the
flour	has	the	largest	influence	on	batter
quality.	Too	much	can	produce	a	tough,
bready	coating;	too	little	and	it	will	be	fragile.
The	gluten	proteins	in	ordinary	wheat	flour
are	valuable	for	the	clinginess	they	provide,
but	they	form	elastic	gluten	and	absorb	both
moisture	and	fat,	and	so	are	responsible	for
both	chewiness	and	oiliness	in	the	fried	crust.
For	these	reasons,	moderate-protein	flours
make	better	batters	than	bread	flour,	and	some
batters	are	made	from	other	grains,	or	from	a
mixture	of	wheat	flour	and	other	flours	or
starches.	Rice	proteins	don’t	form	gluten	and
absorb	less	moisture	and	fat,	so	batters	that
contain	a	substantial	proportion	of	rice	flour



fry	crisper	and	drier.	Similarly,	corn	flour
improves	crispness	because	its	relatively	large
particles	are	less	absorbant,	and	its	proteins
dilute	wheat	gluten	and	reduce	the	chewiness
of	the	crust.	Adding	some	pure	corn	starch
also	reduces	the	proportion	and	influence	of
wheat	gluten	proteins.	Root	flours	and
starches	don’t	work	well	in	batters	because
their	starch	granules	gelate	and	disintegrate	at
relatively	low	temperatures,	do	so	early	in
frying,	and	produce	a	soft	crust	that	gets
soggy	quickly.

Batters	adhere	better	to	moist	foods	when
the	foods	are	predipped	in	dry	particles,
whether	seasoned	flour	or	bread-crumbs;	the
dry	particles	stick	to	the	moist	surface,	and
the	moist	batter	then	clings	to	the	rough
surface	created	by	the	particles.	Batters	are
more	likely	to	produce	crisp,	tender	crusts	if
they’re	prepared	just	before	frying,	with	cold
liquid	and	little	mixing	to	minimize	water
absorption	and	gluten	development	(see



Japanese	tempura,	p.	214).	If	a	batter	stands
for	a	long	time	before	the	food	is	dipped	and
fried,	many	of	its	air	and	gas	bubbles	can	leak
out,	and	some	of	the	remaining	chemical
leavening	reacts	too	early;	the	result	is	a
dense	casing	rather	than	a	light	puff.

The	Logic	of	Cream	Puff	Pastry
The	 technique	 for	 preparing	 cream	 puff
pastry	 may	 seem	 tediously	 elaborate,	 but
it’s	 a	 brilliant	 invention.	 It	 produces	 an
especially	 rich	 and	 moist	 paste	 that	 the
cook	 can	 shape	 and	 cook	 into	 a	 hollow,
crisp	vessel	for	other	ingredients.	Cooking
the	flour	with	water	and	fat	 tenderizes	 the
gluten	 proteins,	 preventing	 them	 from
developing	 elasticity,	 and	 it	 swells	 and
gelates	 the	 starch	 to	 turn	 what	 would
normally	 be	 a	 batter	 into	 a	 dough.	 The
subsequent	 addition	 of	 raw	 eggs
contributes	 the	 richness	 of	 the	 yolks	 and
the	cohesive,	structure-building	proteins	of



the	 whites,	 and	 thins	 the	 dough	 into	 a
nearbatter	so	that	air	pockets	in	the	interior
will	 be	 able	 to	move	 and	 coalesce	 during
cooking.	 During	 the	 baking,	 the	 fat	 helps
crisp	and	flavor	the	outer	surface.	And	both
eggs	 and	 fat	 contribute	 to	 a	 structure	 that
resists	 moisture	 and	 stays	 crisp	 while
holding	the	cream	filling.

Thick	Batter	Foods:
Batter	Breads	and	Cakes

Batter	Breads	and	Muffins

Batter	breads	and	muffins	are	moister,	usually
sweeter	versions	of	quickbreads	(p.	549).
They’re	leavened	with	baking	powder	or	soda,
and	often	contain	moderate	amounts	of	egg
and	fat	in	addition	to	sugar.	They	develop	a
dense,	moist	texture	that	accommodates	nuts,
dried	fruits,	and	even	such	fresh	fruits	and
vegetables	as	apples,	blueberries,	carrots	and



zucchini,	whose	moistness	readily	blends	into
the	moistness	of	the	crumb.	Potatoes	and
bananas	can	be	mashed	to	become	part	of	the
batter	itself.

Muffin	batters	generally	contain	less
sugar,	eggs,	and	fat	than	quickbreads.	The
ingredients	are	mixed	together	just	enough	to
dampen	the	solids,	and	the	mix	baked	in	small
portions	rather	than	a	large	loaf.	Well-made
muffins	have	an	even,	open,	tender	interior.
They	stale	quickly	because	the	small
proportion	of	fat	is	dispersed	unevenly	by	the
minimal	mixing	and	can’t	protect	much	of	the
starch.	Overmixing	produces	a	less	tender,
finer	interior	with	occasional	coarse	tunnels,
which	develop	when	the	overly	elastic	batter
traps	the	leavening	gas	in	large	pockets.

Green	 Blueberries	 and	 Blue	 Walnuts
Sometimes	 the	 solid	 ingredients	 folded	 into
bread	 and	 muffin	 batters	 turn	 disconcerting
colors:	 blueberries,	 carrots,	 and	 sunflower



seeds	 may	 go	 green,	 and	 walnuts	 blue.	 This
happens	 when	 the	 mix	 contains	 too	 much
baking	 soda,	 or	 when	 the	 soda	 isn’t	 evenly
mixed	 in	 the	 batter,	 so	 that	 there	 are
concentrated	 alkaline	 pockets.	 Because	 the
anthocyanin	 and	 related	 pigments	 in	 fruits,
vegetables,	 and	 nuts	 are	 sensitive	 to	 pH,	 and
their	normal	surroundings	are	acidic,	alkaline
batters	 cause	 their	 colors	 to	 change	 (p.	 281).
Small	 brown	 spots	 on	 the	 surface	 of	 the
finished	 bread	 or	 muffin	 are	 also	 a	 sign	 of
incomplete	 mixing;	 the	 browning	 reactions
proceed	faster	in	more	alkaline	portions	of	the
batter.

Cakes

The	essence	of	most	cakes	is	sweetness	and
richness.	A	cake	is	a	web	of	flour,	eggs,	sugar,
and	butter	(or	shortening),	a	delicate	structure
that	readily	disintegrates	in	the	mouth	and
fills	it	with	easeful	flavor.	Cakes	often	contain



more	sugar	and	fat	than	they	do	flour!	And
they	serve	as	a	base	for	even	sweeter	and
richer	custards,	creams,	icings,	jams,	syrups,
chocolate,	and	liqueurs.	As	suits	their
luxurious	nature,	they’re	often	elaborately
shaped	and	decorated.

A	cake’s	structure	is	created	mainly	by
flour	starch	and	by	egg	proteins.	The	tender,
melt-in-the-mouth	texture	comes	from	gas
bubbles,	which	subdivide	the	batter	into
fragile	sheets,	and	from	the	sugar	and	fat,
which	interfere	with	gluten	formation	and	egg
protein	coagulation,	and	interrupt	the	network
of	gelated	starch.	The	sugar	and	fat	can
compromise	lightness	if	they	weaken	the	cake
structure	so	much	that	it	can’t	support	its	own
weight.	Of	course	dense,	heavy	cakes	can	be
delicious	in	their	own	way.	Flourless
chocolate	cakes,	nut	cakes,	and	fruit	cakes	are
examples.

Traditional	 Cakes:	 Limited	 Sweetness	 and



Hard	Work	Well	into	the	20th	century,	risen
cakes	were	typified	by	the	English	pound	cake
or	 French	quatre	 quarts,	 “four	 quarters,”
which	contain	equal	weights	of	the	four	major
ingredients:	structure-building	flour	and	eggs,
and	 structure-weakening	 butter	 and	 sugar.
These	proportions	push	the	flour’s	starch	and
the	 eggs’	 proteins	 to	 their	 limit	 for	 holding
the	fat	and	sugar	in	a	tender,	light	scaffolding;
more	butter	or	sugar	collapses	the	scaffolding
and	 makes	 dense,	 heavy	 cakes.	And	 because
cake	 batter	 must	 be	 filled	 with	 many	 small
bubbles	 without	 the	 help	 of	 yeasts,	 which
generate	gas	 too	slowly	for	 the	batter	 to	hold
them,	traditional	cake	making	was	hard	work.
In	1857,	Miss	Leslie	described	a	technique	by
which	 the	 cook	 could	 beat	 eggs	 “for	 an	 hour
without	 fatigue”	 and	 then	 added:	 “But	 to	 stir
butter	 and	 sugar	 is	 the	 hardest	 part	 of	 cake
making.	 Have	 this	 done	 by	 a	 manservant.”
Fannie	 Farmer	 warned	 in	 1896	 that	 “A	 cake
can	 be	 made	 fine	 grained	 only	 with	 long



beating.”

Modern	 American	 Cakes:	 Help	 from
Modified	Fats	and	Flours	Beginning	around
1910,	 several	 innovations	 in	 oil	 and	 flour
processing	 led	 to	major	changes	 in	American
cakes.	The	first	innovation	made	it	possible	to
leaven	 cakes	 with	 much	 less	 work.	 The
hydrogenation	 of	 liquid	 vegetable	 oils	 to
make	 solid	 fats	 allowed	 manufacturers	 to
produce	specialized	shortenings	with	the	ideal
properties	 for	 incorporating	 air	 quickly	 at
room	 temperature	 (p.	 557).	 Modern	 cake
shortenings	 also	 contain	 tiny	 bubbles	 of
nitrogen	 that	provide	preformed	gas	 cells	 for
leavening,	 and	 emulsifiers	 that	 help	 stabilize
the	 gas	 cells	 during	 mixing	 and	 baking,	 and
disperse	 the	fat	 in	droplets	 that	won’t	deflate
the	gas	cells.

The	second	major	innovation	was	the
development	of	specialized	cake	flour,	a	soft,
low-protein	flour	that	is	very	finely	milled



and	strongly	bleached	with	chlorine	dioxide	or
chlorine	gas.	The	chlorine	treatment	turns	out
to	cause	the	starch	granules	to	absorb	water
and	swell	more	readily	in	high-sugar	batters,
and	produce	a	stronger	starch	gel.	It	also
causes	fats	to	bind	more	readily	to	the	starch
granule	surface,	which	may	help	disperse	the
fat	phase	more	evenly.	In	combination	with
the	new	shortening	and	with	double-acting
baking	powders,	cake	flour	allowed	U.S.	food
manufacturers	to	develop	“high-ratio”
packaged	cake	mixes,	in	which	the	sugar	can
outweigh	the	flour	by	as	much	as	40%.The
texture	of	the	cakes	they	make	is	distinctively
light	and	moist,	fine	and	velvety.

Thanks	to	these	qualities	and	to	the
convenience	of	premeasured	ingredients,
packaged	cake	mixes	were	a	great	success:
just	10	years	after	their	major	introduction
following	World	War	II,	they	accounted	for
half	of	all	cakes	baked	in	U.S.	homes.	The
very	sweet,	tender,	moist,	light	cake	became



the	American	standard;	and	hydrogenated
shortening	and	chlorinated	flour	became
standard	kitchen	supplies	for	cakes	made
“from	scratch.”

An	Early	English	Pound	Cake	Recipe
In	the	centuries	before	electric	mixers	and
preleavened	 shortenings,	 filling	 a	 dense
cake	batter	with	many	fine	air	bubbles	was
hard,	prolonged	work!

To	Make	a	Pound	Cake
Take	 a	 pound	 of	 butter,	 beat	 it	 in	 an
earthen	pan,	with	your	hand	one	way,	till	it
is	like	a	fine	thick	cream;	then	have	ready
twelve	eggs,	but	half	the	whites,	beat	them
well,	 and	 beat	 them	 up	 with	 the	 butter,	 a
pound	 of	 flour	 beat	 in	 it,	 and	 a	 pound	 of
sugar,	and	a	few	caraways;	beat	 it	all	well
together	 for	 an	 hour	with	 your	 hand,	 or	 a
great	wooden	spoon.	Butter	a	pan,	and	put
it	in	and	bake	it	an	hour	in	a	quick	oven.



—	Hannah	Glasse,	The	Art	of	Cookery
Made	Plain	and	Easy,	1747

The	 Disadvantages	 of	 Modified	 Fats	 and
Flours	 Hydrogenated	 vegetable	 shortenings
and	chlorinated	flour	are	very	useful,	but	have
drawbacks	 that	 lead	 some	 bakers	 to	 avoid
them.	Hydrogenated	shortening	does	not	have
the	 flavor	 that	 butter	 does,	 and	 has	 the	more
serious	disadvantage	of	containing	high	levels
of	 trans	 fatty	 acids	 (10–35%	 compared	 to
butter’s	 3–4%;	 seep.	 38).	 Chlorinated	 flour
has	a	distinctive	taste	that	some	bakers	dislike
(others	find	that	it	enhances	cake	aroma).	And
the	 chlorine	 ends	 up	 in	 fat-like	 flour
molecules	 that	 accumulate	 in	 animal	 bodies.
There’s	no	evidence	that	this	accumulation	is
harmful,	 but	 the	 European	 Union	 and	 the
United	 Kingdom	 consider	 the	 safety	 of
chlorinated	flour	unproven,	and	forbid	its	use.
The	 U.S.	 FDA	 and	 the	 World	 Health
Organization	consider	chlorinated	flour	a	safe



ingredient	for	human	consumption.
Manufacturers	are	addressing	some	of

these	problems	and	uncertainties.	For
example,	the	effects	of	flour	chlorination	can
be	approximated	by	heat	treatment,	and
vegetable	oils	can	be	hardened	without	the
production	of	trans	fatty	acids.	So	it’s	likely
that	cooks	will	eventually	be	able	to	make
high-ratio	cakes	with	less	questionable
ingredients.

Cake	 Ingredients	 Cakes	 are	 generally	 made
with	 flour,	 eggs,	 sugar,	 and	 either	 butter	 or
shortening.	 Eggs	 are	 75%	 water	 and	 may
provide	all	the	moisture	in	a	recipe;	or	various
dairy	 products	 —	 milk,	 buttermilk,	 sour
cream	—	may	be	included	to	provide	moisture
as	 well	 as	 richness	 and	 flavor.	 Because	 the
sugar	 is	used	 to	 incorporate	 air	 into	 the	mix,
the	 preferred	 form	 is	 finely	 granulated
(“Extra-Fine,”	“Superfine”)	so	as	to	maximize
the	numbers	of	small	sharp	edges	that	will	cut



into	 the	 fat	 or	 eggs.	 Because	 they’re	 filled
with	 bubbles	 in	 the	 mixing	 process,	 cake
recipes	 usually	 call	 either	 for	 no	 chemical
leavening,	or	for	less	than	other	batter	recipes
do.

Flours,	Starches,	Cocoa	Cake	bakers	use	low-
protein	pastry	or	cake	 flours	 to	minimize	 the
toughening	that	comes	with	gluten	formation.
They’re	 not	 really	 interchangeable;	 cake
flours	 are	 both	 chlorinated	 and	 milled	 into
very	small	particles	to	produce	a	fine,	velvety
texture.	 Cooks	 who	 prefer	 not	 to	 use	 cake
flours	 can	 approximate	 their	 protein	 content
and	increase	fineness	by	adding	starch	to	all-
purpose	 or	 pastry	 flours.	 Corn	 starch	 is	 the
most	commonly	available	starch	in	the	United
States;	 potato	 and	 arrowroot	 starches	 lack
cornstarch’s	cereal	 flavor	and	gelate	at	 lower
temperatures,	which	can	reduce	cooking	times
and	 produce	 a	moister	 cake.	 Some	 cakes	 are
made	 with	 pure	 starch	 or	 starchy	 chestnut



flour	only,	and	no	wheat	flour	at	all.

Standard	Cake	Proportions	and	Qualities

In	chocolate	cakes,	cocoa	powder	takes	on
some	 of	 the	 water-absorbing	 and	 structural
duties	of	flour;	it’s	around	50%	carbohydrate,
including	 starch,	 and	 20%	nongluten	 protein.
Cocoa	powders	may	be	“natural”	and	acidic	or
“dutched”	 and	 alkaline	 (p.	 705),	 a	 difference
that	affects	both	leavening	and	flavor	balance;
cake	recipes	should	specify	which	kind	to	use,
and	the	baker	should	not	substitute	one	for	the
other.	If	chocolate	rather	than	cocoa	is	used,	it
must	 be	 melted	 and	 carefully	 incorporated
into	 the	 fat	 or	 eggs.	 Different	 chocolates
contain	 widely	 varying	 proportions	 of	 cocoa
fat,	cocoa	solids,	and	sugar	(p.	704),	so	again,
bakers	and	recipes	should	be	clear	about	what



kind	of	chocolate	is	to	be	used.

Fats	In	the	standard	method	for	making	pound
and	 layer	cakes,	 the	cook	beats	 fat	 and	 sugar
together	 to	 incorporate	 air	 bubbles,	 until	 the
mixture	 reaches	 the	 fluffy	 consistency	 of
whipped	 cream.	 Solid	 fats	 retain	 air	 bubbles
thanks	 to	 their	 semisolid	 consistency:	 the	 air
carried	along	by	the	sugar	crystals	and	beater
becomes	 immobilized	 in	 the	 mixture	 of
crystalline	 and	 liquid	 fat.	 Butter	 is	 the
traditional	 cake	 fat,	 and	 is	 still	 the	 fat	 of
choice	for	bakers	who	value	flavor	more	than
lightness	of	texture.

But	modern	vegetable	shortenings	do	a
better	job	of	incorporating	air	bubbles	into	the
cake	batter.	Animal	fats	—	butter	and	lard	—
tend	to	form	large	fat	crystals	that	collect
large	air	pockets,	which	rise	in	thin	batter	and
escape.	Vegetable	shortenings	are	made	to
contain	small	fat	crystals	that	trap	small	air
bubbles,	and	these	bubbles	stay	in	the	batter.



Manufacturers	also	fill	shortenings	with
preformed	bubbles	of	nitrogen	(around	10%
of	the	volume),	and	bubble-stabilizing
emulsifiers	(up	to	3%	of	the	shortening
weight).	Butter	is	best	aerated	at	a	relatively
cool	65ºF/18ºC,	while	shortening	creams	most
effectively	at	a	warm	room	temperature,
between	75	and	80ºF/24–27ºC.

Fat	Replacers	The	moistening	and	tenderizing
effects	 of	 fat	—	but	 not	 its	 aerating	 abilities
—	can	be	imitated	by	some	concentrated	fruit
purees,	 notably	 prune,	 apple,	 apricot,	 and
pear.	 Their	 high	 levels	 of	 viscous	 plant
carbohydrates,	 mainly	 pectins	 and
hemicelluloses,	 bind	water	 and	 also	 interrupt
the	gluten	and	starch	networks.	So	these	fruit
purees	can	be	used	to	replace	some	of	the	fat
in	 cake	 recipes.	 The	 result	 is	 usually	 moist
and	 tender,	 but	 also	 denser	 than	 a	 full-fat
cake.

Techniques	for	Aerating	Cakes



Fat-sugar	aeration:	Sugar	beaten	into
butter	or	shortening;	other	ingredients
then	folded	in

Pound	 cake,	 French	quatre	 quarts,
American	butter	and	layer	cakes,	fruit	cake

Egg-sugar	aeration:	Sugar	beaten	with
whole	eggs,	or	separated	yolks	or	whites;
other	ingredients	then	folded	in

Whole	eggs:	Génoise
Yolks	 and	 whites	 aerated	 separately:

French	biscuit,	Black	Forest	cake
Yolks	only:	Sponge	cake
Whites	 only:	Angel	 food	 cake;	 chiffon

cake;	flourless	meringue	and	dacquoise

All-ingredients	aeration:	Flour,	eggs,
sugar,	shortening	all	beaten	together

Commercial	cake	mixes



No	aeration:	Ingredients	stirred	together
with	minimal	incorporation	of	air

Dissolved-sugar	 cakes:	pain	 d’épices,
spice	cake

Mixing	 Cake	 Batters	 In	 cake	 making,	 the
mixing	 step	 doesn’t	 just	 combine	 the
ingredients	 into	a	homogeneous	batter:	 it	has
the	 critical	 purpose	 of	 incorporating	 air
bubbles	 into	 the	 batter,	 and	 thereby	 strongly
influencing	 the	 final	 texture	of	 the	cake.	The
various	ways	of	aerating	the	batter	help	define
families	 of	 cakes	 (see	 box,	 p.	 557).	 They
involve	beating	the	sugar	and/or	the	flour	into
the	fat,	the	eggs,	or	all	the	liquid	ingredients.
The	fine	solid	particles	carry	 tiny	air	pockets
on	their	surfaces,	and	the	particles	and	beating
utensils	 carry	 those	 pockets	 into	 the	 fat	 or
liquid.	 Flour	 is	 often	 added	 only	 after	 the
foam	is	formed,	and	then	by	gently	folding	it
in,	 not	 beating,	 to	 avoid	 popping	 a	 large



fraction	 of	 the	 bubbles,	 and	 to	 avoid
developing	 gluten.	 (For	 folding	 as	 a	 mixing
technique,	 see	 p.	 112.)	 Mixing	 the	 dry	 flour
and	 fat	 together	 also	 prevents	 the	 gluten
proteins	from	bonding	strongly	to	each	other.

Preleavened	shortening	and	electric	mixers
have	helped	to	turn	cake	making	into	a	far	less
onerous	task	than	it	once	was,	but	the	mixing
stage	can	still	take	15	minutes	or	more.

Bakers	often	modify	or	combine	elements
of	these	techniques.	In	the	“pastry-blend”
method,	the	flour,	sometimes	with	the	sugar,
is	creamed	with	the	fat,	then	the	liquid
ingredients	are	added	and	mixed	long	enough
to	augment	the	initial	aeration.

Another	alternative	is	a	combination	of	the
fat	and	egg	aerations:	some	of	the	sugar	is
used	to	aerate	the	fat,	some	the	eggs,	and	the
two	foams	are	then	combined.

Baking	 Cakes	 Cake	 baking	 can	 be	 divided
into	 three	 stages:	 expansion,	 setting,	 and



browning.	 During	 the	 first	 stage,	 the	 batter
expands	 to	 its	 full	 volume.	 As	 the	 batter
temperature	 rises,	 the	 gases	 in	 the	 air	 cells
expand,	 chemical	 leavening	 releases	 carbon
dioxide,	 and	 beginning	 around	 140ºF/60ºC,
water	vapor	begins	to	form	and	expand	the	air
cells	even	further.	During	the	second	stage	of
cake	 baking,	 the	 risen	 batter	 is	 set	 into	 its
permanent	shape	by	the	oven	heat.	Beginning
around	 180ºF/80ºC,	 the	 egg	 proteins
coagulate,	 and	 starch	 granules	 absorb	 water,
swell,	 and	 gelate.	 The	 actual	 setting
temperature	 depends	 strongly	 on	 the
proportion	of	sugar,	which	delays	both	protein
coagulation	 and	 starch	 swelling;	 in	 a	 high-
ratio	 cake,	 the	 starch	 may	 not	 gelate	 until
close	 to	212ºF/100ºC.	 In	 the	 last	stage,	batter
solidification	 is	 completed,	 flavor-enhancing
browning	 reactions	 take	 place	 in	 the	 now-
dried	 surface,	 and	 the	 cake	 often	 shrinks
slightly,	 an	 indication	 that	 it	 should	be	 taken
out	of	the	oven.	Another	test	of	doneness	is	to



probe	the	center	with	a	toothpick	or	wire	cake
tester,	 which	 should	 come	 out	 clean	 of	 any
batter	or	crumb	particles.

Baking	 a	 cake.	 Left:	A	 typical	 cake	 batter
includes	 starch	 granules	 from	 flour,	 egg
proteins	 that	coagulate	when	heated,	and	gas
bubbles	 incorporated	 during	 mixing,	 all
swimming	 in	 a	 syrup	 of	 water	 and	 sugar.
(Most	cakes	include	some	form	of	fat,	which	is
not	 shown	 here	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 clarity.)
Center:	When	 the	 mix	 is	 heated,	 the	 gas
bubbles	expand,	causing	the	mix	to	rise.	At	the
same	 time,	 the	 proteins	 begin	 to	 unfold	 and
the	starch	granules	begin	to	absorb	water	and
swell.	 Right:	At	 the	 end	 of	 baking,	 the	 fluid
batter	 has	 set	 into	 a	 porous	 solid,	 thanks	 to



the	 continued	 swelling	 and	 gelation	 of	 the
starch	granules	and	the	coagulation	of	the	egg
proteins.

Cakes	are	generally	baked	at	moderate
oven	temperatures,	350	to	375ºF/	175–190ºC.
Below	this	range,	the	batter	sets	slowly,
expanding	gas	cells	can	coalesce	to	produce	a
coarse,	heavy	texture,	and	the	upper	surface
sinks.	Above	this	range,	the	outer	portions	of
the	batter	set	before	the	inside	has	finished
expanding,	which	produces	a	peaked,	volcano-
like	surface,	and	the	surface	browns
excessively.

Cake	 Pans	 By	 affecting	 the	 rate	 and
distribution	of	heating,	cake	pans	can	have	an
important	 influence	 on	 their	 contents.	 The
ideal	pan	size	is	 that	which	matches	the	final
volume	of	the	cake,	which	is	usually	50–100%
greater	 than	 the	 initial	 batter	 volume.
Doughnut-shaped	 tube	 pans,	with	 the	 hole	 at
their	center,	provide	a	greater	surface	area	and



speed	 the	 penetration	 of	 heat	 into	 the	 batter.
Bright	 surfaces	 reflect	 radiant	 heat,	 transmit
heat	poorly	to	the	food	they	contain,	and	slow
the	baking	process.	A	dull	metal	pan	or	a	glass
one	 (which	 also	 transmits	 radiant	 heat	 well)
will	cook	a	cake	as	much	as	20%	faster	than	a
shiny	 pan,	 while	 a	 black	 surface	 tends	 to
absorb	 heat	 quickly	 and	 cause	 rapid	 surface
browning.	 Recent	 innovations	 in	 nonmetal
baking	 containers	 include	 flexible	 silicone
molds	and	paper	molds,	larger	and	stiffer	and
more	elegant	versions	of	muffin	and	cupcake
papers.

Baking	Cakes	at	High	Altitudes
Cake	 recipes	 that	 work	 well	 at	 sea	 level
can	 produce	 dry,	 dense	 disasters	 in
kitchens	 at	 high	 altitudes.	 The	 reason	 for
this	 is	 that	 the	 low	 air	 pressure	 in	 the
mountains	 allows	water	 to	 boil	 at	 a	 lower
temperature	 than	 the	 212ºF/100ºC
characteristic	 of	 sea	 level.	 The	 drops	 in



pressure	 and	 boiling	 point	 have	 several
effects	 on	 a	 cake	 in	 the	 oven.	 The	 batter
starts	 to	 lose	 moisture	 at	 lower
temperatures,	 and	 dries	 out	 more	 rapidly.
The	 air	 bubbles	 and	 leavening	 expand
faster	 at	 temperatures	 below	 the	 setting
temperature,	and	the	protein	and	starch	set
and	stabilize	that	structure	slowly,	because
the	 batter	 temperature	 doesn’t	 get	 as	 hot.
So	a	cake	baked	in	the	mountains	tends	to
end	up	dry,	coarse,	and	flat.
A	cake	recipe	developed	at	sea	 level	must
be	 adjusted	 in	 order	 for	 it	 to	 work	 at
several	thousand	feet.	The	loss	of	moisture
can	be	compensated	for	by	the	addition	of
extra	 liquid.	The	overexpansion	of	 the	gas
cells	 can	 be	 reduced	 by	 reducing	 the
amount	 of	 leavening.	 And	 the	 structure-
stabilizing	 elements	 can	 be	 set	 earlier	 by
reducing	 the	 levels	 of	 sugar	 and	 fat	 and
increasing	the	eggs	and/or	flour.	Increasing
the	 oven	 temperature	 also	 speeds	 the



protein	coagulation	and	starch	gelation	that
set	the	structure.

Cooling	 and	 Storing	 Cakes	 Most	 cakes
require	 a	 cooling	 period	 before	 they’re
removed	 from	 their	 pans	 or	 otherwise
handled.	 Their	 structures	 are	 quite	 delicate
when	still	hot,	but	become	firm	as	 the	starch
molecules	 begin	 to	 settle	 back	 into	 close,
orderly	 associations	 with	 each	 other.	 Pound
and	 butter	 cakes	 are	 fairly	 robust,	 their
structure	coming	mainly	 from	gelated	starch,
and	can	be	removed	from	their	pans	after	just
10–20	minutes.	The	sweeter	eggaerated	cakes
are	 held	 up	 largely	 by	 the	 coagulated	 egg
proteins,	 which	 form	 a	 more	 gas-tight	 film
around	 the	 gas	 cells	 than	 starch	 does,	 and
therefore	 shrink	 as	 the	 gas	 within	 cools	 and
contracts.	The	result	can	be	a	collapsed	cake.
To	 avoid	 this,	 angel,	 sponge,	 and	 chiffon
cakes	 are	 cooked	 in	 tube	 pans	 that	 can	 be
inverted	and	 suspended	over	a	bottle	 to	cool.



Gravity	 keeps	 the	 cake	 structure	 stretched	 to
its	 maximum	 volume	 while	 the	 walls	 of	 the
gas	 cells	 firm	 and	 develop	 cracks	 that	 allow
the	 pressure	 inside	 and	 outside	 the	 cells	 to
equalize.

Cakes	keep	for	several	days	at	room
temperature,	and	they	can	be	refrigerated	or
frozen.	They	stale	more	slowly	than	bread,
thanks	to	the	presence	of	emulsifiers	and	their
high	proportions	of	moisture,	fat,	and
moisture-retaining	sugar.

Pastries

Pastries	bear	little	family	resemblance	to
cakes	or	breads	or	pastas.	They’re	a	very
different	expression	of	the	nature	of	the	wheat
grain.	In	making	other	dough	and	batter	foods,
we	use	water	to	fuse	the	particles	of	wheat
flour	into	an	integrated	mass	of	gluten	and
starch	granules,	and	further	knit	that	mass
together	with	cooking.	By	contrast,	pastry	is



an	expression	of	the	fragmentary,
discontinuous,	particulate	qualities	of	wheat
flour.	We	use	just	enough	water	to	make	a
cohesive	dough	from	the	flour,	and	work	in
large	amounts	of	fat	to	coat	and	separate	flour
particles	and	dough	regions	from	each	other.
Cooking	gelates	half	or	less	of	the	water-
deprived	starch,	and	produces	a	dry	mass	that
readily	crumbles	or	flakes	in	the	mouth,
releasing	the	fat’s	complementary	moist
richness.

Many	pastries	are	not	prepared	and	eaten
on	their	own	as	other	dough	and	batter	foods
are.	Instead	they	serve	as	a	contrasting
container	for	a	moist	filling,	whether	savory
(quiche,	pâté,	meat	pies,	vegetable	tarts)	or
sweet	(fruit	pies	and	tarts,	creams,	custards).
The	container	may	be	open,	as	in	tarts	and
open-faced	pies,	a	closed	double-crust	pie,	or
fully	enclosed	turnovers	—	samosas,
empanadas,	pasties,	pierogi,	piroshki.	We	also
use	the	term	“pastry”	for	what	are	essentially



sweet	breads	whose	structure	is	divided	by
layers	of	fat.	Croissants	and	Danish	pastries
are	really	bread-pastry	hybrids.

Varieties	of	Pastry	in	Elizabethan	Times
Beginning	 in	 the	Middle	Ages,	 one	 of	 the
primary	purposes	of	pastry	was	 to	contain
and	 help	 preserve	 preparations	 of	 meat.
Meat	 brought	 to	 a	 simmer	 inside	 a	 thick,
durable	 crust	 would	 essentially	 be
pasteurized	 and	 protected	 against
contamination	by	microbes	in	the	air,	so	in
a	cool	place	 it	would	keep	for	many	days.
Other	 dishes	 to	 be	 eaten	 freshly	 baked
would	be	made	with	a	more	delicate	pastry.
As	 Gervase	 Markham	 wrote	 around	 1615
in	The	English	Housewife,
our	English	housewife	must	be	skilful	in
pastry,	and	know	how	and	in	what	manner
to	bake	all	sorts	of	meat,	and	what	paste	is
fit	for	every	meat,	and	how	to	handle	and
compound	such	pastes.



Pastry	making	flowered	in	the
Mediterranean	region	in	the	late	Middle	Ages
and	early	Renaissance,	when	puff	and	cream
puff	pastries	first	appeared.	By	the	time	of	La
Varenne	in	the	17th	century,	both	crumbly	and
puff	pastries	were	standard	preparations.	The
bread-pastry	hybrids	are	a	more	recent
invention	from	the	late	19th	and	20th
centuries.

Pastry	Styles

There	are	several	different	styles	of	pastry,
each	with	a	different	texture	that	is	created	by
the	kinds	of	particles	into	which	they	come
apart	when	chewed.

Crumbly	pastries	—	short	pastry,	pâte
brisée	—	come	apart	into	small,	irregular
particles.
Flaky	pastries	—	American	pie	crusts	—
come	apart	in	small,	irregular,	thin



flakes.
Laminated	pastries	—	puff	pastry,
phyllo,	strudel	—	are	constructed	of
large,	separate,	very	thin	layers	that
shatter	in	the	mouth	into	small,	delicate
shards.
Laminated	breads	—	croissants,	Danish
pastries	—	combine	the	layering	of	the
laminated	pastries	with	the	soft
chewiness	of	bread.

These	 varied	 structures	 and	 textures	 depend
on	 two	 key	 elements:	 the	 way	 the	 fat	 is
incorporated	 into	 the	 dough,	 and	 the
development	 of	 the	 flour	 gluten.	 Pastry
makers	 work	 fat	 in	 so	 that	 it	 either	 isolates
very	 small	 dough	 particles	 from	 each	 other,
isolates	larger	masses	or	even	whole	sheets	of
dough	 from	 each	 other,	 or	 both.	And	 pastry
cooks	carefully	control	gluten	development	to
avoid	making	a	dough	that’s	hard	to	shape	and
a	 pastry	 that’s	 tough	 and	 chewy	 instead	 of



tender	and	delicate.

Pastry	Ingredients

Flours	Pastries	are	made	from	several
different	kinds	of	flour.	A	crumbly	texture,
which	requires	minimal	gluten	development,
is	best	obtained	with	a	pastry	flour	moderately
low	in	protein;	some	protein	is	necessary	to
provide	continuity	in	the	dough	particles,	or
the	pastry	comes	out	chalky	rather	than
crumbly.	Flakiness	and	the	laminated
structure	of	puff	pastry	depend	on	controlled
gluten	development,	and	can	be	achieved	with
pastry	flour	or	with	flour	of	a	higher	protein
content,	the	equivalent	of	U.S.	national	all-
purpose	flours	(11–12%).	Highly	stretched
strudel	and	phyllo	can	benefit	from	the	very
high	protein	content	of	bread	flours	and	the
strong	gluten	they	form.



Pastry	structures	 (uncooked	doughs	shown	at
bottom;	 cooked	 pastries	 at	 top).	 The	 key	 to
pastry	 structure	 is	 the	distribution	of	 the	 fat,
here	 shown	 as	 a	 light	 layer	 surrounding
darker	 masses	 of	 dough.	 Left:	In	 crumbly
pastries,	 fat	 coats	 and	 separates	 small
particles	 of	 dough.	 Center:	In	 flaky	 pastries,
fat	 coats	 and	 separates	 flattened	 pieces	 of
dough.	 Right:	In	laminated	pastries,	 fat	coats
and	separates	extended,	 thin	sheets	of	dough.
The	 sheets	 in	 laminated	 pastries	 are	 so	 light
that	 cooking	 steams	 them	 apart	 into	 a	 light,
airy	structure.

Fats	 Much	 of	 the	 flavor	 of	 pastry	 —	 and
much	 of	 the	 pleasure	—	 comes	 from	 its	 fat,
which	may	 be	 a	 third	 or	more	 of	 its	weight.
But	pastry	makers	often	choose	a	fat	 that	has



little	or	no	flavor.	This	is	because	the	fat	must
have	 the	necessary	consistency	 for	producing
the	desired	texture.	Broadly	speaking,	any	fat
or	oil	can	be	worked	finely	into	flour	to	make
crumbly	 pastry,	 while	 flaky	 and	 laminated
pastries	 require	 fats	 that	 are	 solid	 but
malleable	 at	 cool	 room	 temperature:	 namely
butter,	lard,	or	vegetable	shortening.	Of	these,
shortenings	 are	 the	 easiest	 to	work	with,	 and
produce	the	best	textures.

Fat	 Consistency:	 Butter	 and	 Lard	 Are
Demanding	 At	 any	 given	 temperature,	 solid
fats	 have	 different	 consistencies	 that	 depend
on	what	fraction	of	their	molecules	is	in	solid
crystals,	 and	 what	 fraction	 is	 liquid.	 Above
about	25%	solids,	fat	is	too	hard	and	brittle	to
roll	 into	 an	 even	 layer.	 Below	 about	 15%
solids,	 fat	 is	 too	soft	 to	work;	 it	 sticks	 to	 the
dough,	doesn’t	hold	its	shape,	and	leaks	liquid
oil.	 The	 ideal	 fat	 for	 flaky	 and	 laminated
pastries	 is	 therefore	 one	 that	 has	 between	 15



and	25%	solids	at	kitchen	temperature,	and	at
the	temperatures	that	the	pastry	dough	reaches
as	 it’s	 mixed	 and	 formed.	 It	 turns	 out	 that
butter	 has	 the	 right	 consistency	 for	 making
pastry	 in	 a	 relatively	 narrow	 temperature
range,	between	58	and	68ºF/15–20ºC.	Lard	 is
properly	 workable	 at	 only	 slightly	 warmer
temperatures,	 up	 to	 75ºF/25ºC.	 Our	 flavorful
natural	fats	easily	get	too	soft	in	the	kitchen	to
make	good	pastry.	This	is	why	pastry	makers
often	 prechill	 ingredients	 and	 utensils,	 work
on	 a	 cold	 marble	 surface	 that	 keeps	 the
ingredients	cool	during	the	mixing	and	rolling
out,	and	value	assistants	with	constitutionally
cold	hands.

Fat	Consistency:	Shortenings	Are	Forgiving
Manufacturers	 of	 vegetable	 shortenings
control	 the	 consistency	 of	 their	 products	 by
controlling	 how	 much	 of	 the	 base	 oil’s
unsaturated	 fat	 is	 hydrogenated	 (p.	 801).
Standard	 cake	 shortening	 has	 the	 desirable



15–25%	solids	over	a	temperature	range	triple
that	 of	 butter,	 from	 53	 to	 85ºF/12–30ºC.	 It’s
therefore	 much	 easier	 to	 make	 flaky	 pastry
with	 shortening	 than	 with	 butter.	 Because
laminated	 pastries	 and	 breads	 are	 especially
tricky	 to	 make,	 professionals	 and
manufacturers	often	use	shortenings	that	have
been	 formulated	 specifically	 for	 their
production.	 Danish	 margarines	 are	 workable
up	 to	 95ºF/35ºC,	 and	 puff-pastry	 margarines
to	115ºF	/46ºC:	they	don’t	melt	until	well	into
the	 baking	 process!	 However,	 high	 melting
points	 have	 an	 important	 drawback:	 they
mean	 that	 the	 fat	 remains	 solid	 at	 mouth
temperature.	Where	butter	and	lard	melt	in	the
mouth	 and	 release	 luscious	 flavor,
manufactured	 pastry	 shortenings	 can	 leave	 a
pasty	or	waxy	residue	in	the	mouth,	and	have
no	 true	 flavor	 of	 their	 own	 (they’re	 often
flavored	with	milk	solids).

Food	Words:	Pastry,	Pasta,	Pâté,	Pie



The	English	word	pastry,	Italian	pasta,	and
French	pâte	 and	pâté	 all	 go	 back	 to	 a
suggestive	 group	 of	 ancient	 Greek	 words
having	 to	do	with	 small	particles	 and	 fine
textures:	they	variously	referred	to	powder,
salt,	 barley	 porridge,	 cake,	 and	 an
embroidered	veil.	A	later	Latin	derivative,
pasta,	 was	 applied	 to	 flour	 that	 had	 been
wetted	 to	 a	 paste,	 then	 dried;	 it	 led	 to
Italian	pasta	and	to	pâte	meaning	“dough.”
Pâté	 is	 a	 medieval	 French	 word	 that	 was
given	 originally	 to	 a	 chopped	 meat
preparation	 enclosed	 in	 a	 dough,	 but
eventually	 came	 to	 name	 the	 meat
preparation	 itself,	 with	 or	 without
enclosure.	Pie	 was	 the	 near	 equivalent	 of
the	 original	pâté	 in	medieval	English,	 and
meant	 a	 dish	 of	 any	 sort	 —	 meat,	 fish,
vegetable,	 fruit	—	enclosed	 in	pastry.	The
word	had	less	to	do	with	doughs	than	with
odds	and	ends:	it	came	from	magpie,	a	bird
with	 variegated	 coloring	 that	 collects



miscellaneous	objects	for	its	nest.

Water	in	Pastry	Fats 	An	important	difference
between	butter	and	either	lard	or	shortening	is
that	butter	is	about	15%	water	by	weight,	and
therefore	 doesn’t	 separate	 dough	 layers	 as
thoroughly	as	the	pure	fats	do;	water	droplets
in	 the	 fat	 can	 glue	 adjacent	 layers	 together.
Pastry	makers	generally	prefer	European-style
butters,	 which	 contain	 less	 water	 than
standard	 American	 butter	 (p.	 35).	 However,
some	water	is	useful	for	producing	steam	that
pushes	 apart	 the	 dough	 layers	 of	 laminated
pastries.	Manufacturers	 formulate	puff-pastry
margarine	with	about	10%	water.

Other	 Ingredients	 Water	 is	 essential	 for
binding	 the	 flour	 particles	 into	 a	 dough,	 and
the	 water	 content	 is	 especially	 critical	 in
pastries	because	there	is	so	little.	Pastry	cooks
say	that	as	little	as	1/2	teaspoon/3	ml	variation
in	water	 in	1	cup/120	gm	flour	can	make	 the



difference	 between	 a	 crumbly	 texture	 and	 a
tough	 one.	 Eggs	 are	 often	 used	 to	 provide
richness	 and	 added	 cohesiveness	 to	 crumbly
pastries,	 and	 of	 course	 also	 contribute	water.
Various	 dairy	 products,	 including	 milk,
cream,	sour	cream,	crème	 fraîche,	and	cream
cheese	may	 replace	 some	or	all	of	 the	water,
and	at	the	same	time	provide	flavor	and	fat	as
well	 as	 sugars	 and	 proteins	 for	 the	 browning
reactions.	 Salt	 is	 added	 mainly	 for	 flavor,
though	 it	 does	 have	 a	 tightening	 effect	 on
gluten.

Cooking	Pastries

Baking	Pans	Two	portions	of	the	same	pastry
dough,	baked	in	the	same	oven	but	in	different
kinds	of	pan,	will	cook	differently.	Shiny	pans
reflect	much	of	the	oven’s	radiant	heat	(p.
782)	away	from	the	crust	and	so	are	slow
cooking.	Black	pans	absorb	most	of	the
radiant	heat	and	conduct	it	to	the	crust,	and



clear	glass	allows	it	to	pass	right	through	and
heat	the	crust	directly.	Thin	metal	pans	can’t
hold	much	heat	in	themselves	and	so	tend	to
slow	heating	and	produce	uneven	browning.
Heavier	gauge	metal	pans	and	ceramic	plates
and	molds	can	accumulate	oven	heat,	get
hotter	than	thin	pans,	and	transmit	the	heat
more	evenly	to	the	pastry.

Baking	 Apart	 from	 bready	 croissants	 and
Danish,	most	pastry	doughs	contain	very	little
water,	 not	 nearly	 enough	 to	 gelate	 all	 the
starch	 granules.	 Cooking	 therefore	 partly
gelates	the	starch	and	dries	the	gluten	network
well,	 and	 produces	 a	 firm,	 crunchy	 or	 crisp
texture	 and	 a	 golden	 brown	 exterior.	 Pastry
crusts	 in	 particular	 are	 cooked	 at	 relatively
high	 oven	 temperatures	 so	 that	 the	 dough
heats	 through	 and	 sets	 quickly.	 Slow	 heating
just	 melts	 the	 pastry	 dough’s	 fat,	 and	 the
protein-starch	 network	 slumps	 before	 the
starch	 gets	 hot	 enough	 to	 absorb	water	 from



the	gluten	and	set	the	structure.
The	filling	in	open	pies	and	tarts	blocks

oven	heat	from	reaching	the	pastry	surface
directly,	and	can	prevent	the	crust	from
cooking	through,	so	that	it	ends	up	pale	and
soggy	rather	than	brown	and	dry.	This
problem	is	prevented	by	precooking	the	crust
on	its	own	(baking	it	“blind,”	or	empty,	often
with	dry	beans	or	ceramic	pie	weights	to
support	the	dough	and	prevent	slumping).	A
crisper	bottom	crust	also	results	from	higher
oven	temperatures	and	from	putting	the
container	on	the	lowest	rack	or	directly	on	the
oven	floor.	Crispness	can	be	preserved	under	a
moist	filling	by	sealing	the	crust	surface
during	precooking	with	a	moisture-resistant
layer	of	egg	yolk	or	white,	or	afterwards	with
cooked-down	jams	or	jellies,	or	chocolate,	or
a	moisture-absorbing	layer	of	compatible
crumbs.

Crumbly	Pastries:
Short	Pastry,	Pâte	Brisée



Crumbly	but	firm	pastries	are	especially
prominent	in	French	cooking,	where	thin	but
robust	crusts	support	quiches,	various	savory
pies,	and	fruit	tarts.	Where	American	pie
crusts	are	too	tender	to	support	themselves
and	are	served	from	the	pan,	French	tarts	are
almost	always	removed	from	the	pan	and
stand	on	their	own.	In	the	standard	French
version	of	crumbly	pastry,	pâte	brisée,	coarse
pieces	of	butter	and	egg	yolks	are	placed	in
the	midst	of	the	proper	amount	of	flour,	and
the	liquid	and	solids	gently	worked	together
with	the	fingers	to	form	a	rough	dough.	The
dough	is	then	kneaded	by	pushing	it	into	and
along	the	work	surface	with	the	heel	of	the
hand,	an	action	that	disperses	the	butter	finely
into	the	dough.	The	butter	separates	small
flour	aggregates	from	each	other	and	prevents
them	from	forming	a	continuous,	tough	mass,
while	the	egg	yolks	provide	moisture,	fats,
and	proteins	that	will	coagulate	during
cooking	and	help	hold	the	flour	aggregates



together.	The	butter	may	be	replaced	by
vegetable	oils,	poultry	fats	—	chicken,	duck,
goose	—	and	lard	and	beef	tallow,	depending
on	the	nature	of	the	filling.	The	dough	is
allowed	to	rest	in	the	refrigerator	to	firm	its
consistency	for	the	subsequent	rolling	out	and
shaping.

Pâte	sucrée	and	pâte	sablée	—	“sugar
pastry”	and	“sandy	pastry”	—	are	versions	of
crumbly	pastry	made	with	sugar.	The	large
proportion	of	sugar	in	pâte	sablée	gives	a
distinctly	grainy	character	to	the	pastry.

One	simple	way	to	make	crumbly	pastry
crusts	is	to	start	with	premade	crumbs,	bread
or	cookie	crumbs	moistened	with	fat	and
simply	pressed	into	the	pan	before	a	quick
baking.

Flaky	Pastries:
American	Pie	Pastry

The	methods	for	making	American-style	pie



dough	produce	a	crust	that	is	both	tender	and
flaky.	They	disperse	some	of	the	fat	evenly
into	the	dough,	separating	small	particles
from	each	other,	and	some	coarsely,
separating	different	layers	of	the	dough	from
each	other.	There	are	various	ways	to
accomplish	this.	One	is	to	work	the	fat	into
the	dry	flour	in	two	different	stages,	the	first
time	finely,	the	second	in	pea-sized	pieces.
Another	is	to	add	the	fat	all	at	once,	and	use
the	fingers	to	fragment	and	gently	rub	the
chunks	down	to	pea	size;	the	rubbing	does	the
fine	dispersion.	(This	method	works	better
with	shortening	than	with	butter,	which	warm
fingers	can	soften	excessively.)	A	small
amount	of	cold	water,	2–4	tablespoons	per
cup/15–30	gm	per	100	gm	flour,	is	then	added
and	the	mixture	manipulated	very	briefly,	just
until	the	water	is	absorbed	and	a	dough	forms.

Early	American	Pie	Pastries
American	 pie	 pastry	 is	 notable	 for	 having



some	 of	 its	 fat	 rubbed	 into	 the	 flour	 to
tenderize,	and	some	rolled	in	for	flakiness.
The	 first	 American	 recipes	 —	 Amelia
Simmons’s	 “Puff	 Pastes	 for	 Tarts”	—	 are
notable	for	their	terseness	and	variety.	She
gives	several;	here	are	three.
No.	 1.	 Rub	 one	 pound	 of	 butter	 into	 one
pound	of	flour,	whip	2	whites	and	add	with
cold	water	 and	one	yolk;	make	 into	paste,
roll	 in	 six	 or	 seven	 times	 one	 pound	 of
butter,	 flouring	 it	 each	 roll.	 This	 is	 good
for	any	small	thing.

No.	 3.	To	 any	 quantity	 of	 flour,	 rub	 in
three	fourths	of	its	weight	in	butter	(twelve
eggs	 to	 a	 peck),	 rub	 in	 one	 third	 or	 half,
and	roll	in	the	rest.

No.	8.	Rub	in	one	and	half	pound	of	suet
to	six	pounds	of	flour,	and	a	spoon	full	of
salt,	wet	with	cream,	roll	in,	in	six	or	eight
times,	 two	 and	 half	 pounds	 of	 butter	 —
good	for	a	chicken	or	meat	pie.

—	American	Cookery,	1796



The	dough	is	rested	in	the	refrigerator	to
rechill	the	fat	and	let	the	water	become	more
evenly	distributed,	and	then	is	rolled	out.	The
rolling	stretches	the	dough	and	thus	develops
some	gluten,	and	flattens	the	fat	chunks	into
thin	sheets.	The	combination	creates	the
layered	texture.	The	rolled	dough	is	then
rested	to	allow	the	gluten	sheets	to	relax,	and
shaped	with	minimal	stretching;	otherwise	the
gluten	may	rebound	and	the	crust	shrink
during	baking.	In	the	oven,	the	sheets	of	fat,
trapped	air,	and	steam	from	the	dough	water
(and	the	water	in	any	butter)	all	help	to
separate	the	dough	into	layers	and	give	it	a
flaky	texture.

Shortening	and	lard	generally	produce
more	tender	and	flaky	crusts	than	butter,
which	melts	into	the	dough	at	a	lower
temperature	and	whose	water	can	cause	dough
particles	and	flakes	to	stick	to	each	other.

Laminated	Pastries:
Puff	Pastry,	Pâte	Feuilleté



According	to	the	food	historian	Charles	Perry,
puff	and	sheet	pastries	appear	to	have	been
invented	by	the	Arabs	and	the	Turks
respectively,	sometime	around	1500.	Though
the	aim	in	both	is	to	produce	many	layers	of
very	thin	pastry,	they	involve	two	very
different	techniques.

Making	 Puff	 Pastry	 Preparing	 puff	 pastry
dough	is	elaborate	and	time	consuming.	There
are	 several	 different	 ways	 to	 construct	 the
dough-fat	 sandwich,	 and	 several	 different
ways	 to	 make	 the	 folds;	 here	 for	 simplicity
I’ll	describe	the	standard	one.

The	cook	first	mixes	pastry	flour	with	ice
water	to	make	a	moderately	moist	initial
dough,	with	about	50	parts	water	per	100	parts
flour.	Sometimes	butter	and/or	lemon	juices
are	included	to	weaken	the	gluten	and	make
the	dough	more	easily	shaped.	The	mixing	is
done	with	minimal	manipulation	to	minimize
gluten	development,	which	the	later	rollings-



out	accomplish.	The	dough	is	shaped	into	a
square.

Early	Recipes	for	Laminated	Pastry:
Early	English	“Puff	Paste”

Gervase	Markham’s	recipe	for	“puff	paste”
is	 a	 cross	 between	 laminated	 and	 sheet
pastries.
Now	 for	 the	 making	 of	 puff	 paste	 of	 the
best	 kind,	 you	 shall	 take	 the	 finest	 wheat
flour	 after	 it	 hath	 been	 a	 little	 baked	 in	 a
pot	 in	 the	 oven,	 and	 blend	 it	 well	 with
eggs,	 whites	 and	 yolks	 all	 together,	 after
the	 paste	 is	 well	 kneaded,	 roll	 out	 a	 part
thereof	 as	 thin	 as	 you	 please,	 and	 then
spread	 cold	 sweet	 butter	 over	 the	 same,
then	upon	the	same	butter	roll	another	leaf
of	 the	 paste	 as	 before;	 and	 spread	 it	 with
butter	 also;	 and	 thus	 roll	 leaf	 upon	 leaf
with	 butter	 between	 till	 it	 be	 as	 thick	 as
you	 think	 good:	 and	 with	 it	 either	 cover



any	baked	meat,	or	make	paste	for	venison,
Florentine,	 tart	 or	 what	 dish	 else	 you
please	and	so	bake	it.

—	The	English	Housewife,	1615
Now	the	fat,	traditionally	butter	and

weighing	about	half	the	initial	dough	weight
is	pounded	with	a	rolling	pin	until	it	warms	up
to	about	60ºF/15ºC	and	becomes	pliable,	its
consistency	matching	the	consistency	of	the
dough.	(Firmer	fat	would	tear	the	dough,
softer	fat	would	be	squeezed	out	during	the
later	rolling.	Shortenings,	with	their	low	water
content,	produce	a	lighter	and	crisper	puff
pastry,	though	a	less	flavorful	one.)	The	fat	is
formed	into	a	flat	piece,	placed	on	the	dough
square,	and	the	combination	repeatedly	folded
onto	itself	and	rolled	out,	with	turns	to	vary
the	direction	of	rolling	and	rests	in	the
refrigerator	to	give	the	fat	a	chance	to
resolidify	and	the	gluten	to	relax.	The
sequence	of	turning,	rolling,	folding,	and
refrigerating	is	repeated	several	times,	for	a



total	of	six	“turns.”	With	each	rolling	out,	the
gluten	becomes	more	developed,	and	the
dough	more	elastic	and	difficult	to	shape.

The	result	of	this	work,	which	takes
several	hours,	is	a	dough	made	up	of	729
layers	of	moistened	flour	separated	by	728
layers	of	fat.	(The	term	millefeuille,	or
“thousand-leaf,”	is	applied	to	a	pastry	made
by	stacking	two	baked	pieces	of	puff	pastry,
with	a	layer	of	pastry	cream	in	between.)	The
dough	is	rested	for	at	least	an	hour	after	the
final	turn,	and	then	is	rolled	out	for	baking	to
a	thickness	of	about	a	quarter	of	an	inch/6
mm.	This	means	that	each	layer	in	the	dough
is	microscopically	thin,	around	a	thousandth
of	an	inch	or	a	hundredth	of	a	millimeter.	This
is	much	thinner	than	paper	thin,	about	the
diameter	of	an	individual	starch	granule.	The
dough	must	be	cut	with	a	very	sharp	knife;	a
dull	blade	will	press	the	many	layers	together
at	the	edge	and	restrain	their	expansion.	When
puff	pastry	is	baked	in	a	very	hot	oven,	the



expanding	air	and	water	vapor	puff	the
separate	layers	apart	from	each	other	and
cause	the	volume	to	increase	by	four	or	more
times.

Quick	Puff	Pastry	 “Quick”	puff	 pastry,	 also
known	 as	 “flaky	 pastry”	 (England),
“American”	puff	pastry,	or	demi-feuilleté,	is	a
shortcut	 hybrid	 of	 true	 puff	 pastry	 and
American	 flaky	 pie	 pastry.	 Again	 there	 are
many	versions.	Usually	some	or	all	of	the	fat
is	cut	coarsely	into	the	flour	as	for	pie	pastry,
cold	 water	 added	 to	 make	 a	 dough,	 any
remaining	fat	sandwiched	with	the	dough,	and
the	 dough	 then	 folded	 and	 rolled	 out	 two	 or
three	 times,	 with	 periods	 of	 refrigeration	 to
rechill	the	fat	and	relax	the	gluten.

Even	quick	puff	pastry	dough	takes	a
couple	of	hours	to	make.	Fortunately	these
doughs	freeze	well	and	are	commercially
available	in	frozen	form.

Sheet	Pastries:



Phyllo,	Strudel

Unlike	puff	pastry	doughs,	sheet	pastry
doughs	are	prepared	one	layer	at	a	time,	and
are	assembled	into	pastries	with	a	few	dozen
layers	just	before	cooking.	Charles	Perry
speculates	that	phyllo	pastry	was	invented	in
Istanbul	in	the	time	of	the	early	Ottoman
empire	around	1500;	it’s	now	used	to	make
the	Eastern	Mediterranean	honey-nut	sweet
baklava,	savory	turnovers	(Turkish	boreks),
and	many	savory	pies	(Greek	spanakopita	and
others).	During	the	period	when	the	Ottoman
Turks	ruled	parts	of	eastern	Europe,	the	phyllo
leaf	was	adopted	in	Hungary	as	retes	and	in
Austria	as	strudel.

Food	Words:	Phyllo,	Strudel
Phyllo	 is	 the	 Greek	 ancestor	 of	 French
feuille	 and	 like	 it	 means	 “leaf.”	Strudel
reflects	 the	 unusual	 rolled	 form	 of	 this
version	 of	 sheet	 pastry:	 it	 is	 German	 for



“eddy”	or	“whirlpool.”
Phyllo	dough	is	prepared	by	making	a	stiff

flour-water	dough	(about	40	parts	water	to
100	flour)	with	a	little	salt	and	often	some
tenderizing	acid	or	oil.	The	dough	is
thoroughly	kneaded	to	develop	the	gluten,
rested	overnight,	and	then	stretched	out	either
in	a	single	mass,	or	in	small	balls	that	are
rolled	out	into	a	thin	disc,	sprinkled	with
starch,	and	rolled	out	again.	The	dough
eventually	gets	thin	enough	to	become
translucent,	around	5	thousandths	of	an
inch/0.1	mm	thick.	This	is	so	thin	that	the
silken	dough	quickly	dries	out	and	becomes
brittle,	so	it’s	brushed	with	oil	or	melted
butter	to	keep	it	supple	until	it’s	cut,	stacked
into	a	many-layered	pastry,	and	baked.

The	variant	of	phyllo	called	strudel	is
made	somewhat	differently.	The	initial	dough
is	wetter,	55–70	parts	water	per	100	flour,	and
contains	a	small	amount	of	fat	and	often
whole	egg.	The	dough	is	kneaded,	rested,



rolled	fairly	thin,	rested	again,	and	then
gradually	stretched	with	the	hands	into	one
large	sheet,	which	is	then	used	as	a	wrapper	to
roll	around	a	variety	of	savory	and	sweet
preparations.

Both	phyllo	and	strudel	doughs	are
especially	tricky	to	make,	and	are	available
refrigerated	and	frozen.

Pastry-Bread	Hybrids:
Croissants,	Danish	Pastries

Croissants	and	Danish	pastries	are	made	in
very	much	the	same	way	that	puff	pastry	is.
Because	the	doughs	for	croissants	and	Danish
pastries	are	essentially	bread	doughs,	both
moister	and	softer	than	puff	dough,	they	are
easily	torn	by	cold,	hard	fat.	The	proper
consistency	of	butter	or	margarine	is	therefore
especially	important	in	making	croissants	and
Danish	pastries.



Croissants	 According	 to	 Raymond	 Calvel,
croissants	 first	 made	 a	 splash	 at	 the	 1889
Paris	 World’s	 Fair,	 where	 they	 were	 one	 of
many	 kinds	 of	Wienerbrod,	 or	Vienna	 goods
brought	from	the	city	that	specialized	in	rich,
sweet	 pastries.	 The	 original	 croissants	 were
enriched	 yeast-raised	 breads	 shaped	 into	 a
crescent.	 It	 wasn’t	 until	 the	 1920s	 that
Parisian	bakers	had	the	 idea	of	forming	them
from	 a	 laminated	 dough,	 thus	 creating	 a
marvelous	 pastry	 that	 is	 both	 flaky	 and
moistly,	richly,	tenderly	bready.

Croissants	are	made	by	preparing	a	firm
but	malleable	dough	with	minimal	kneading
from	flour,	milk,	and	yeast;	the	proportion	of
liquid	is	50–70	parts	to	100	flour.	Some	butter
may	be	added	to	the	dough	during	mixing	to
make	the	dough	more	extensible	and	easily
rolled	out.	In	earlier	times,	the	dough	was
allowed	an	initial	rise	of	six	to	seven	hours;
today	it’s	only	around	one	hour.	The	more
time	allowed	for	fermentation,	the	fuller	the



flavor	and	the	lighter	the	finished	pastry.	The
risen	dough	is	deflated	and	chilled,	then	rolled
out,	covered	with	a	layer	of	butter	or	pastry
margarine,	and	repeatedly	folded,	rolled	out,
and	chilled	as	puff	pastry	is,	for	a	total	of	four
to	six	turns.	The	finished	dough	is	then	rolled
out	to	around	a	quarter	of	an	inch/6	mm	thick,
cut	into	triangles,	the	triangles	rolled	up	into
tapered	cylinders	and	allowed	a	final	rise	of
about	an	hour	at	a	temperature	cool	enough	to
prevent	the	fat	from	melting.	When	baked,	the
outer	layers	of	the	dough	expand	and	dry	out
to	form	flaky,	puff	pastry–like	sheets,	while
the	inner	layers	remain	moist	and	bake	into
exquisitely	delicate	sheets	of	bread,
translucent	and	pebbled	with	tiny	bubbles.

Danish	 Pastries	 What	 Americans	 call
“Danish”	 pastries	 also	 originated	 as	 Vienna
goods,	 but	 were	 introduced	 to	 the	 United
States	 via	 Copenhagen.	 In	 the	 19th	 century,
Danish	bakers	took	a	basic	Viennese	enriched



bread	 dough	 and	 added	 even	 more	 layering
butter,	 thus	 making	 a	 lighter,	 crisper	 pastry
than	the	original.	They	also	used	the	dough	to
surround	a	variety	of	fillings,	notably	remonce
(butter	 creamed	 with	 sugar	 and	 often
including	 some	 form	 of	 almonds).	 Danish
pastries	are	made	in	essentially	the	same	way
as	croissants.	The	initial	dough	is	moister	and
softer,	includes	sugar	and	also	whole	eggs,	so
it’s	 sweeter,	 richer,	 and	 distinctively	 yellow,
and	it	isn’t	given	an	initial	rising.	Often	more
butter	 or	 margarine	 is	 used	 for	 the
laminations,	 and	 the	 dough	 may	 only	 be
turned	three	times,	so	the	layers	are	fewer	and
thicker.	Danish	pastry	dough	is	often	used	as	a
container	 for	 sweet	 or	 rich	 fillings,	 or	 rolled
out,	 covered	 with	 a	 combination	 of	 nuts,
raisins	 or	 flavored	 sugar,	 rolled	 up,	 and	 cut
into	 spiral	 cross-sections.	 Once	 the	 final
pastry	 is	 formed,	 it’s	 allowed	 to	 rise	 until
about	 doubled	 in	 volume	 (again,	 at
temperatures	 that	 keep	 the	 shortening	 solid),



and	then	is	baked.

Tender	Savory	Pastry:
Hot-Water	Pastry,
Pâte	À	pâté

Hot-water	pastry,	or	pâté	pastry,	is	unlike	the
other	pastries.	Its	original	purpose	in
medieval	times	was	to	provide	a	sturdy
container	for	meat	dishes	meant	to	be	kept	for
some	time	(p.	560).	Today	it’s	used	to	enclose
meat	pâtés,	to	make	meat	pies,	and	sometimes
as	an	alternative	to	puff	pastry	that	surrounds
the	tenderloin	in	beef	Wellington	and	the
salmon	in	coulibiac.	It	is	easily	rolled	out	and
formed	into	a	container,	able	to	retain	juices
released	during	cooking,	yet	tender	to	both
knife	and	tooth.	It’s	made	with	a	relatively
large	amount	of	water	—	50	parts	per	100
flour	—	and	about	35	parts	lard.	The	water
and	lard	are	heated	together	near	the	boil,	and
the	flour	is	then	added,	the	mixture	stirred	just



until	it	forms	a	homogeneous	mass,	then
rested.	The	large	proportion	of	fat	limits
gluten	development,	thus	providing
tenderness,	and	also	acts	as	a	kind	of	water
repellant,	thus	providing	a	barrier	against
cooking	juices.	The	precooking	swells	and
gelates	some	of	the	flour	starch,	which	takes
up	water	and	gives	the	dough	a	thick,
workable	consistency	in	place	of	an	elastic
gluten	structure.

Cookies

Common	cookies	are	simple	pleasures,	but	the
microcosm	of	all	cookies	is	a	summa	of	the
baker’s	art.	Cookies	include	sweet	bitesized
baked	goods	of	all	sorts:	crumbly	and
laminated	pastries,	wafers,	butter	and	sponge
cakes,	biscuits,	meringues,	nut	pastes.	The
term	comes	from	the	medieval	Dutch	for
“little	cake.”	The	French	equivalent	is	petits
fours,	or	“little	oven	goods,”	and	the	German



klein	Gebäck	means	much	the	same.	Their
miniature	size	and	the	numerous	possibilities
for	shaping,	decorating,	and	flavoring	have
resulted	in	a	great	diversity	of	cookies,	many
of	them	developed	by	the	French	and	named
in	the	same	spirit	that	gave	us	Italian	pastas
called	butterflies,	little	worms,	and	priest-
stranglers:	hence	cat’s	tongues,	Russian
cigarettes,	eyeglasses,	and	Nero’s	ears.

Cookie	Ingredients
and	Textures

Most	cookies	are	both	sweet	and	rich,	with
substantial	proportions	of	sugar	and	fat.
They’re	also	tender,	thanks	to	ingredients,
proportions,	and	mixing	techniques	that
minimize	the	formation	of	a	gluten	network.
But	then	they	may	be	moist	or	dry,	crumbly	or
flaky	or	crisp	or	chewy.	The	diversity	of
textures	arises	from	a	handful	of	ingredients,
and	from	the	proportions	and	methods	of



combining	them.

Flour	Most	 cookies	 are	made	with	 pastry	 or
all-purpose	 flour,	 but	 both	 bread	 flour	 and
cake	 flour	 produce	 doughs	 and	 batters	 that
spread	 less	 (thanks	 respectively	 to	 more
gluten	 and	 more	 absorbant	 starch).	 A	 high
proportion	of	 flour	 to	water,	 as	 in	 shortbread
and	 pastry-dough	 cookies,	 limits	 both	 gluten
development	and	starch	gelation	—	as	little	as
20%	 of	 the	 starch	 in	 some	 dry	 cookies	 is
gelated	—	and	produces	a	crumbly	texture.	A
high	proportion	of	water	to	flour,	as	in	batter-
based	cookies,	dilutes	gluten	proteins,	 allows
extensive	starch	gelation,	and	produces	either
a	 soft,	 cakelike	 texture	 or	 a	 crisp,	 crunchy
one,	depending	on	the	method	and	how	much
moisture	 is	 baked	 out	 of	 the	 cookie.	 For
doughs	 that	 need	 to	 hold	 their	 shape	 during
baking	—	those	rolled	out	and	stamped	with	a
cookie	cutter	—	a	high	flour	content	and	some
gluten	 development	 are	 necessary.	The	 baker



gives	 fluid	 batters	 some	 solidity	 by	 chilling
them,	and	then	shapes	them	by	extruding	them
through	 a	 pastry	 pipe	 or	 setting	 them	 in
molds.

A	coarser	but	more	fragile	backbone	can
be	created	by	replacing	some	or	all	of	the
flour	with	ground	nuts,	as	in	classic
macaroons	made	only	with	egg	whites,	sugar,
and	almonds.

Sugar	 Sugar	 makes	 several	 contributions	 to
cookie	 structure	 and	 texture.	 When	 creamed
with	the	fat,	or	beaten	with	egg,	it	 introduces
air	 bubbles	 into	 the	 mix	 and	 lightens	 the
texture.	 It	 competes	with	 the	 flour	 starch	 for
water,	 and	 raises	 the	 starch	 gelation
temperature	 nearly	 to	 the	 boiling	 point:	 so	 it
adds	 hardness	 and	 crispness.	 A	 large
proportion	 of	 pure	 table	 sugar,	 sucrose,
contributes	 to	 hardness	 in	 another	 way.	 The
proportion	of	sugar	in	some	cookie	doughs	is
so	 high	 that	 only	 about	 half	 the	 sugar



dissolves	 in	 the	 limited	 amount	 of	moisture.
When	the	dough	heats	up	during	baking,	more
sugar	 can	 dissolve,	 and	 the	 added	 liquid
causes	 the	 cookie	 to	 soften	 and	 spread.	Then
when	 the	 cookie	 cools,	 some	 of	 the	 sugar
recrystallizes,	 and	 the	 initially	 soft	 cookie
develops	 a	 distinctive	 snap	—	a	 process	 that
may	 take	a	day	or	 two.	Other	 forms	of	 sugar
—	 honey,	 molasses,	 corn	 syrup	 —	 tend	 to
absorb	 water	 rather	 than	 crystallize	 (chapter
12),	 so	 when	 heated	 they	 form	 a	 syrup	 that
permeates	 the	 cookie,	 helps	 it	 to	 spread,	 and
firms	as	it	cools,	making	it	moist	and	chewy.

Eggs	 Eggs	 generally	 provide	 most	 of	 the
water	in	a	cookie	mix,	as	well	as	proteins	that
help	 bind	 the	 flour	 particles	 together	 and
coagulate	 during	 baking	 to	 add	 solidity.	 The
fat	 and	 emulsifiers	 in	 the	 yolk	 enrich	 and
moisten.	 The	 higher	 the	 proportion	 of	 whole
eggs	or	yolks	 in	 a	 recipe,	 the	more	 cake-like
the	texture.



Fat	 Fat	 provides	 richness,	 moistness,	 and
suppleness.	When	 it	melts	 during	 cooking,	 it
lubricates	 the	 solid	 particles	 of	 flour	 and
sugar	and	encourages	the	cookie	to	spread	and
thin	—	a	quality	 that	 is	sometimes	desirable,
sometimes	 not.	 Because	 butter	 melts	 at	 a
lower	 temperature	 than	 margarine	 or
shortening,	 it	 gives	 cookies	 more	 time	 to
spread	 before	 the	 protein	 and	 starch	 set.
Butter	is	about	15%	water,	and	is	the	main	or
only	 source	 of	 moisture	 in	 such	 low-egg
recipes	as	shortbread	and	tea	cookies.

Leavening	 Leavening,	 whether	 tiny	 bubbles
of	 air	 or	 of	 carbon	 dioxide,	 helps	 tenderize
cookies,	 and	 encourages	 them	 to	 puff.	Many
cookies	 are	 leavened	 only	 with	 air	 bubbles
incorporated	when	 the	 sugar	 is	 creamed	with
the	 fat,	 or	 beaten	 with	 the	 eggs.	 Some	 are
supplemented	 with	 chemical	 leavenings.
Alkaline	 baking	 soda	may	 be	 used	 when	 the
dough	 includes	 such	 acid	 ingredients	 as



honey,	brown	sugar,	and	cake	flour.

Making	and	Keeping	Cookies

There	are	as	many	ways	to	prepare	cookies	as
there	are	ways	to	produce	cakes	and	pastries
—	and	then	some.	The	standard	American
categories	are:

Drop	cookies,	formed	from	a	soft	dough
that	is	portioned	by	spoonfuls	onto	the
baking	sheet,	where	they	spread	out
during	baking.	Chocolate	chip	and
oatmeal	cookies	are	examples.
Cut-out	cookies,	formed	from	a	stiffer
dough	that	holds	its	shape.	The	dough	is
rolled	out	and	porcookietioned	with	a
cookie	cutter;	baking	sets	the	cookies	in
their	original	shape.	Sugar	cookies	and
butter	cookies	are	examples.
Hand-shaped	cookies,	formed	from
batters	that	are	stiffened	by	chilling	and



then	carefully	piped	or	molded	for
baking.	Examples	are	ladyfingers	and
madeleines.
Bar	cookies,	shaped	after	baking,	not
before.	They’re	cut	from	the	thin	cake-
like	mass	produced	when	the	batter	is
baked	in	a	shallow	pan.	Date	and	nut	bars
and	brownies	are	examples.
Icebox	cookies,	formed	by	slicing	cross-
sections	from	a	premade	cylinder	of
dough	kept	in	the	refrigerator	for	use
when	needed.	Many	cookie	doughs	can
be	treated	this	way.

Thanks	to	their	small	size,	 thinness,	and	high
sugar	content,	cookies	quickly	brown	at	oven
temperatures.	 Their	 bottoms	 and	 edges	 may
get	too	dark	while	the	centers	finish	cooking,
a	problem	that	can	be	minimized	by	lowering
the	 oven	 temperature	 and	 using	 light	 baking
sheets	 that	 reflect	 radiant	 heat,	 rather	 than
dark	 ones	 that	 absorb	 it.	 Slight	 underbaking



helps	 produce	 a	 moister,	 chewier	 texture.
Immediately	 after	 baking,	 many	 cookies	 are
soft	and	malleable,	a	fact	that	allows	the	cook
to	 shape	 thin	 wafer	 cookies	 into	 flower-like
cups,	 rolled	 cylinders,	 and	 arched	 tiles	 that
then	stiffen	as	they	cool.

Some	Cookie	Doughs	and	Batters:	Ingredients
and	Typical	Proportions

With	 their	 low	water	 content,	 cookies	 are
especially	prone	to	losing	their	texture	during
storage.	 Crisp,	 dry	 cookies	 absorb	 moisture



from	 the	 air	 and	 get	 soft;	 moist,	 chewy
cookies	 lose	 moisture	 and	 become	 dry.
Cookies	are	therefore	best	stored	in	an	airtight
container.	With	 their	 low	 moisture	 and	 high
sugar	 levels,	 they	 are	 not	 very	 hospitable	 to
microbes,	and	keep	well.

Pasta,	Noodles,
and	Dumplings

One	of	the	simplest	preparations	of	cereal
flour	gave	us	one	of	the	most	popular	foods	in
the	world:	pasta.	The	word	is	Italian	for
“paste”	or	“dough,”	and	pasta	is	nothing	more
than	wheat	flour	and	water	combined	to	make
a	clay-like	mass,	formed	into	small	pieces,
and	boiled	in	water	until	cooked	through	—
not	baked,	as	are	nearly	all	other	doughs.
Noodle	comes	from	the	German	word	for	the
same	preparation,	and	generally	refers	to
pasta-like	preparations	made	outside	the
Italian	tradition.	The	keys	to	pasta’s	appeal



are	its	moist,	fine,	satisfyingly	substantial
texture	and	its	neutral	flavor,	which	makes	it	a
good	partner	for	a	broad	range	of	other
ingredients.

Two	cultures	in	the	world	have	thoroughly
explored	the	possibilities	of	boiled	grain
paste:	Italy	and	China.	Their	discoveries	were
different,	and	complementary.	In	Italy,	the
availability	of	high-gluten	durum	wheat	led	to
the	development	of	a	sturdy,	protein-rich
pasta,	one	that	can	be	dried	and	stored
indefinitely,	one	that	readily	lent	itself	to
industrial	manufacturing,	and	that	can	be
formed	into	hundreds	of	fanciful	shapes.	The
Italians	also	refined	the	art	of	making	fresh
pastas	from	soft	wheat	flours,	and	evolved	an
entire	branch	of	cooking	based	on	pasta	as	the
principal	ingredient,	its	combination	of
substance	and	tenderness	providing	the
foundation	for	flavorful	sauces	—	usually	just
enough	to	coat	the	surfaces	—	and	fillings.	In
China,	which	had	soft,	low-gluten	wheats,



cooks	concentrated	on	simple	long	noodles
and	thin	wrappers,	prepared	them	fresh	and	by
hand,	sometimes	with	great	panache	and	just
moments	before	cooking,	and	served	the	soft,
slippery	results	almost	exclusively	in	large
amounts	of	thin	broth.	More	remarkably,
Chinese	cooks	found	ways	to	make	noodles
from	many	different	materials,	including
other	grains	and	even	pure,	protein-free	starch
from	beans	and	root	vegetables.

The	History	of	Pasta
and	Noodles

It’s	a	story	often	told,	and	often	refuted,	that
the	medieval	traveler	Marco	Polo	found
noodles	in	China	and	introduced	them	to	Italy.
A	recent	book	by	Silvano	Serventi	and
Françoise	Sabban	has	set	the	record	straight	in
authoritative	and	fascinating	detail.	China	was
indeed	the	first	country	to	develop	the	art	of
noodle	making,	but	there	were	pastas	in	the



Mediterranean	world	long	before	Marco	Polo.

Noodles	in	China	Despite	the	fact	that	wheat
was	 grown	 in	 the	Mediterranean	 region	 long
before	 it	 arrived	 in	 China,	 the	 northern
Chinese	 appear	 to	 have	 been	 the	 first	 to
develop	 the	 art	 of	 noodle	 making,	 sometime
before	200	BCE.	Around	300	CE,	Shu	Xi	wrote
an	 ode	 to	 wheat	 products	 (bing)	 that	 names
several	 kinds	 of	 noodles	 and	 dumplings,
describes	 how	 they’re	 made,	 and	 suggests
their	 luxurious	 qualities:	 poets	 frequently
likened	 their	 appearance	 and	 texture	 to	 the
qualities	of	 silk	 (see	box,	p.	572).	 In	544,	 an
agricultural	 treatise	 called	Important	Arts	 for
the	 People’s	 Welfare 	 devoted	 an	 entire
chapter	to	dough	products.	These	included	not
only	several	different	shapes	of	wheat	noodle,
most	 made	 by	mixing	 flour	 with	meat	 broth
and	one	made	with	egg,	but	also	noodles	made
from	rice	flour	and	even	from	pure	starch	(p.
579).



China	also	invented	filled	pasta,	the
original	ravioli,	in	which	the	dough	surrounds
and	encloses	a	mass	of	other	ingredients.	Both
small,	thin-skinned,	delicate	hundun	or
wontons,	now	usually	served	in	southern
soups,	and	the	thicker	chiao-tzu	or	pot	sticker,
often	steamed	and	fried	in	the	north,	are
mentioned	in	written	records	before	700	CE,
and	archaeologists	have	found	well-preserved
specimens	that	date	to	the	9th	century.	Over
the	next	few	hundred	years,	recipes	describe
making	thin	noodles	by	slicing	a	rolled	dough
sheet	and	by	repeatedly	pulling	and	folding	a
dough	rope;	and	the	doughs	themselves	are
made	with	a	variety	of	liquids,	including
radish	and	leaf	juices,	vegetable	purees,	juice
pressed	from	raw	shrimp	(which	makes	the
noodles	pink),	and	sheep’s	blood.

Noodles	—	mian	or	mein	—	and	filled
dumplings	began	in	the	north	as	luxury	foods
for	the	ruling	class.	They	gradually	became
staples	of	the	working	class,	with	dumplings



retaining	the	suggestion	of	prosperity,	and
spread	to	the	south	around	the	12th	century.
Noodles	made	their	way	to	Japan	by	the	7th	or
8th	century,	where	several	kinds	of	men
evolved	(p.	578).

Pasta	 in	 the	 Middle	 East	 and
Mediterranean	 Far	 to	 the	 west	 of	 China,	 in
the	 homeland	 of	 wheat,	 the	 earliest
indications	of	pasta-like	preparations	come	in
the	 6th	 century.	 A	 9th	 century	 Syrian	 text
gives	 the	Arabic	 name	itriya	 to	a	preparation
of	 semolina	 dough	 shaped	 into	 strings	 and
dried.	In	11th-century	Paris,	mention	is	made
of	 vermicelli,	 or	 “little	 worms.”	 In	 the	 12th
century	 —	 around	 200	 years	 before	 Marco
Polo’s	 travels	—	 the	Arab	 geographer	 Idrisi
reported	 that	 the	 Sicilians	 made	 thread-like
itriya	 and	 exported	 them.	 The	 Italian	 term
macaroni	 first	 appeared	 in	 the	 13th	 century
and	was	applied	to	various	shapes,	from	flat	to
lumpy.	 Medieval	 cooks	 made	 some	 pastas



from	fermented	doughs;	they	cooked	pasta	for
an	 hour	 or	more	 until	 it	 was	 very	moist	 and
soft;	they	frequently	paired	it	with	cheese,	and
used	it	to	wrap	around	fillings.

Dumplings	and	Noodles	in	Early	China
Flour	sifted	twice,
Flying	snow	of	white	powder,
In	a	stretchy,	sticky	dough
Kneaded	with	water	or	broth,	it	becomes
shiny.
…
Then	water	is	set	to	boil	over	the	fire,
Waiting	for	the	steam	to	rise,
We	hitch	up	our	clothes,
we	roll	up	our	sleeves,
And	we	knead,	and	we	shape,	and	we
smooth,	and	we	stretch.
Finally	the	dough	detaches	from	our
fingers,
Under	the	palm	it	is	perfectly	rolled	out	in
all	directions



And	without	a	break	in	the	haste	and	hurry
The	stars	separate	and	the	hailstones	fall.
In	the	basket,	no	spattered	stuffing.
On	the	bing	not	a	trace	of	extra	dough.
Perfectly	lined	up,	of	great	beauty,
Without	breaking,	the	dough	is	fine	and
thin.
It	swells	so	that	one	can	guess	at	the
stuffing	below,
Soft	as	silk	floss	in	the	springtime,
White	as	autumn	silk,	cooked	just	in	time.
—	Shu	Xi,	“Ode	to	Bing,”	ca.	300,	transl.

Antony	Shugaar
The	postmedieval	evolution	of	pasta	took

place	largely	in	Italy.	Pasta	makers	formed
guilds	and	made	fresh	types	from	soft	wheat
flour	throughout	Italy,	dried	types	from
durum	semolina	in	the	south	and	in	Sicily.
Italian	cooks	developed	the	distinctive
preparation	style	called	pastasciutta	or	“dry
pasta,”	pasta	served	as	the	main	component	of
the	dish,	moistened	with	sauce	but	not



drowning	in	it	or	dispersed	in	a	soup	or	stew.
With	its	ideal	climate	for	drying	raw	noodles,
a	tricky	process	that	took	one	to	four	weeks,
Naples	became	the	center	of	durum	pasta
manufacturing.

Thanks	to	the	mechanization	of	dough
kneading	and	extrusion,	by	the	18th	century
durum	pasta	had	become	street	food	in
Naples,	and	common	in	much	of	Italy.
Perhaps	because	street	vendors	minimized
cooking	and	open-air	consumers	enjoyed
chewing	on	something	substantial,	it	was	in
Naples	that	people	began	to	prefer	pasta
cooked	for	minutes	rather	than	hours,	so	that
it	retains	some	firmness.	This	practice	spread
to	the	rest	of	the	country	in	the	late	19th
century,	and	the	term	al	dente,	or	cooked	“to
the	tooth,”	appeared	after	World	War	I.
Subsequent	decades	brought	effective
artificial	drying	and	the	machinery	and
understanding	necessary	to	turn	pasta	making
from	a	batch-by-batch	process	to	a	continuous



one.	Dried	durum	pasta	is	now	made	on	an
industrial	scale	in	many	countries.	In	addition,
modern	heat	treatments	and	vacuum-packing
have	also	made	it	possible	to	keep	fresh	pasta
for	several	weeks	in	the	refrigerator.

Recent	decades	have	brought	a	revival	in
Italy	of	small-scale	manufacturing	using
selected	wheat	varieties,	old-fashioned
extrusion	dies	that	produce	a	rough,	sauce-
holding	surface,	and	longer-time,	low-
temperature	drying	that	is	said	to	produce	a
finer	flavor.

Making	Pasta	and	Noodle	Doughs

Basic	Ingredients	and	Methods	The	aim	in
making	pasta	and	noodle	dough	is	to
transform	dry	flour	particles	into	a	cohesive
mass	that	is	malleable	enough	to	be	shaped
into	thin	strips,	but	strong	enough	to	stay
intact	when	boiled.	With	wheat	flours,	the
cohesiveness	is	provided	by	the	gluten



proteins.	Durum	wheats	have	the	advantage	of
a	high	gluten	content,	and	a	gluten	that	is	less
elastic	than	bread-wheat	gluten	and	so	easier
to	roll	out.	Water	normally	makes	up	around
30%	of	the	dough	weight,	compared	to	40%	or
more	for	bread	doughs.

Pasta,	Cheese,	and	Wine	Without	End
By	 the	 time	 of	 the	 great	 storyteller
Giovanni	 Boccaccio,	 who	 died	 in	 1375,
pasta	 was	 familiar	 enough	 in	 Italy	 to	 be
part	of	a	glutton’s	paradise:
in	 a	 country	 called	 Bengodi…there	was	 a
mountain	 made	 entirely	 of	 grated
Parmesan	 cheese,	 on	 which	 lived	 people
who	 did	 nothing	 but	 make	 macaroni	 and
ravioli	and	cook	them	in	capon	broth.	And
then	 they	 threw	 them	down,	 and	 the	more
of	 them	you	 took,	 the	more	you	had.	And
nearby	 ran	 a	 rivulet	 of	 white	 wine	 whose
better	was	never	drunk,	and	without	a	drop



of	water	in	it.
—	Decameron,	Day	8,	Tale	3

After	the	ingredients	are	mixed	and	briefly
kneaded	into	a	homogenous	but	stiff	mass,
pasta	dough	is	rested	to	allow	the	flour
particles	to	absorb	the	water	and	the	gluten
network	to	develop.	With	time	the	dough
becomes	noticeably	easier	to	work,	and	the
finished	noodles	end	up	with	a	cohesive
consistency	rather	than	a	crumbly	one.	The
dough	is	then	rolled	gently	and	repeatedly	to
form	an	ever	thinner	sheet.	This	gradual
sheeting	presses	out	air	bubbles	that	weaken
the	dough	structure,	and	organizes	the	gluten
network,	compressing	and	aligning	the	protein
fibers,	but	also	spreading	them	out	so	that	the
dough	becomes	more	easily	stretched	without
snapping	back.

Egg	 Pasta	 and	 Fresh	 Pasta	 Noodles	 made
from	 standard	 bread	 wheat	 and	 eggs	 are
preferred	 in	 much	 of	 northern	 Europe,	 and



most	fresh	pastas	sold	in	the	United	States	are
of	 this	 type.	 Eggs	 perform	 two	 functions	 in
noodles.	One	is	to	enhance	color	and	richness.
Here	the	yolk	is	the	primary	factor,	and	yolks
alone	can	be	used;	their	fat	content	also	makes
the	 dough	 more	 delicate	 and	 the	 noodles
tender.	 The	 second	 function	 is	 to	 provide
additional	protein	for	moderate-protein	flours
used	 in	 both	home	and	 industrial	 production.
The	 egg	 white	 proteins	 make	 the	 dough	 and
noodles	 more	 cohesive	 and	 firm,	 reduce	 the
gelation	 and	 leaking	 of	 starch	 granules,	 and
reduce	 cooking	 losses.	 In	 U.S.	 commercial
noodles,	 dried	 egg	 is	 added	 at	 5–10%	 of	 the
weight	of	the	flour.	In	Italy,	Alsace,	Germany,
and	in	specialty	and	homemade	noodles	in	the
United	 States,	 fresh	 eggs	 are	 used,	 and	 in
larger	 proportions.	 They	 may	 be	 the	 only
source	 of	 water	 in	 the	 dough.	 Some	 pastas
from	 the	 Piedmont	 region	 in	 northwest	 Italy
contain	 as	 many	 as	 18	 yolks	 per	 pound	 of
flour/40	yolks	per	kg.



To	make	egg	pasta,	the	ingredients	are
mixed	in	proportions	that	give	a	stiff	dough;
the	dough	is	kneaded	until	smooth,	allowed	to
rest	and	relax,	rolled	out,	and	then	cut	into	the
desired	shapes.	The	fresh	pasta	is	perishable,
and	if	made	with	eggs	carries	a	slight
possibility	of	salmonella	contamination;	it
should	be	cooked	immediately	or	wrapped	and
refrigerated.	Prolonged	drying	at	kitchen
temperature	may	allow	microbes	to	multiply
to	hazardous	levels.	Fresh	pasta	cooks
quickly,	in	a	few	seconds	or	minutes
depending	on	thickness.

Dried	 Durum	 Pasta	 The	 standard	 Italian
pastas,	 and	 Italian-style	 pastas	 from	 around
the	world,	 are	made	 from	durum	wheat,	with
its	 distinctive	 flavor,	 attractive	 yellow	 color,
and	 abundant	 gluten	 proteins.	 Durum	 pastas
are	 seldom	 made	 with	 eggs.	 Their	 gluten
proteins	give	the	dried	noodles	a	hard,	glassy
interior;	during	cooking	they	limit	the	loss	of



dissolved	 proteins	 and	 gelated	 starch,	 and
make	a	firm	noodle.

Making	 Durum	 Pasta	 Dough	 and	 Shapes
Durum	pasta	is	made	from	semolina,	which	is
milled	 durum	 endosperm	 with	 a
characteristically	 coarse	 particle	 size,	 0.15–
0.5	 mm	 across,	 thanks	 to	 the	 hard	 nature	 of
durum	 endosperm	 (finer	 grinding	 causes
excessive	 damage	 to	 starch	 granules).	 Flat
pasta	shapes	are	punched	from	out	of	a	sheet
of	 dough.	Long	 noodles	 and	 short	 thick	 ones
are	 formed	 by	 extruding	 the	 dough	 through
the	 holes	 of	 a	 die	 at	 high	 pressure.	 The
movement,	 pressure,	 and	 heat	 of	 extrusion
change	the	structure	of	the	dough	by	shearing
the	 protein	 network	 apart,	 mixing	 it	 more
intimately	with	starch	granules	that	have	been
partly	 gelated	 by	 the	 heat	 and	 pressure,	 and
allowing	broken	protein	bonds	to	re-form	and
stabilize	 the	 new	 network.	 Noodles	 extruded
through	modern	 low-friction	 Teflon	 dies	 end



up	 with	 a	 glossier,	 smoother	 surface,	 with
fewer	 pores	 and	 cracks	 through	 which	 hot
water	 can	 leak	 in	 and	 dissolved	 starch	 can
leak	out.	They	generally	lose	less	starch	to	the
cooking	water,	absorb	less	cooking	water,	and
therefore	have	a	firmer	texture	than	the	same
noodle	 extruded	 through	 a	 traditional	 bronze
die.	 Proponents	 of	 traditional	 dies	 prefer	 the
rougher	surface,	which	they	say	better	retains
the	sauce	in	the	finished	dish.

Drying	Durum	Pasta	Before	 the	 invention	of
mechanical	 driers,	 manufacturers	 held	 the
new	 pasta	 at	 ambient	 temperatures	 and
humidities	for	days	or	weeks.	Early	industrial
driers	 operated	 at	 100–140ºF/	 40–60ºC	 and
took	 about	 a	 day.	 Modern	 drying	 takes	 only
two	to	five	hours	and	involves	rapid	predrying
at	 or	 above	 185ºF/84ºC,	 and	 then	 a	 more
extended	phase	of	drying	and	resting	periods.
The	modern	high-temperature	method	rapidly
inactivates	 enzymes	 that	 can	 destroy	 the



yellow	xanthophyll	pigments	and	cause	brown
discoloration,	 and	 it	 cross-links	 some	 of	 the
gluten	 protein	 and	 produces	 a	 firmer,	 less
sticky	cooked	noodle.	However,	proponents	of
slow	 drying	 say	 that	 high	 heat	 also	 damages
flavor.

Cooking	Pasta	and	Noodles

When	pasta	is	cooked	in	water,	the	protein
network	and	starch	granules	absorb	water	and
expand,	the	outer	protein	layer	is	ruptured,
and	the	dissolving	starch	escapes	into	the
cooking	water.	Deeper	within	the	noodle
there’s	less	water	available,	so	the	starch
granules	aren’t	completely	disrupted:	the
center	of	the	noodle	therefore	stays	more
intact	than	the	surface.	Cooking	pasta	al	dente
means	stopping	the	cooking	when	the	center
of	the	noodle	still	remains	slightly	underdone
and	offers	some	resistance	to	chewing;	at	this
point,	the	noodle	surface	is	80–90%	water,	the



center	40–60%	(somewhat	moister	than
freshly	baked	bread).	Pasta	is	sometimes
cooked	just	short	of	this	point	and	then
finished	in	the	sauce	that	will	dress	it.

Cooking	Water	 It’s	 generally	 recommended
that	 pasta	 be	 cooked	 in	 10	 or	more	 times	 its
weight	of	vigorously	boiling	water	 (around	5
quarts	or	liters	water	per	pound/500	gm).	This
allows	 for	 the	 pasta’s	 absorption	 of	 1.6–1.8
times	 its	 weight,	 and	 leaves	 plenty	 to	 dilute
the	starch	that	escapes	during	cooking,	and	to
separate	 the	 noodles	 from	 each	 other	 so	 that
they	 cook	 evenly	 and	 without	 sticking.	 Hard
water	—	 water	 that	 is	 alkaline	 and	 contains
calcium	 and	 magnesium	 ions	 —	 increases
both	cooking	losses	and	stickiness	 in	noodles
(it	probably	weakens	the	protein-starch	film	at
the	noodle	surface,	and	the	 ions	act	as	a	glue
to	bond	noodle	 surfaces	 to	 each	other).	Most
city	 tap	 water	 has	 been	 made	 alkaline	 to
reduce	pipe	corrosion,	so	pasta	cooking	water



can	 often	 be	 improved	 by	 adding	 some	 form
of	 acid	 (lemon	 juice,	 cream	 of	 tartar,	 citric
acid)	to	adjust	the	pH	to	a	slightly	acidic	6.

Cooking	 pasta.	 Left:	Uncooked	 pasta	 dough
consists	of	raw	starch	granules	embedded	in	a
matrix	of	gluten	protein.	Right:	When	pasta	is
cooked	 in	water,	 starch	granules	at	and	near
the	noodle	surface	absorb	water,	swell,	soften,
and	 release	 some	 dissolved	 starch	 into	 the
cooking	 water.	 In	 pasta	 done 	 al	 dente,	hot
water	 has	 penetrated	 to	 the	 center	 of	 the
noodle,	 but	 the	 starch	 granules	 there	 have
absorbed	 relatively	 little,	 and	 the	 starch-
gluten	matrix	remains	firm.

Stickiness	Noodles	stick	to	each	other	during
cooking	when	they’re	allowed	to	rest	close	to



each	 other	 just	 after	 they’re	 added	 to	 the
cooking	water.	 Their	 dry	 surfaces	 absorb	 the
small	 amount	 of	 water	 between	 them	 so
there’s	none	left	for	lubrication,	and	the	partly
gelated	 surface	 starch	 glues	 the	 noodles
together.	 Sticking	 can	 be	 minimized	 by
constantly	 stirring	 the	 noodles	 for	 the	 first
few	 minutes	 of	 cooking,	 or	 by	 adding	 a
spoonful	 or	 two	 of	 oil	 to	 the	 pot	 and	 then
lifting	the	noodles	through	the	water	surface	a
few	 times	 to	 lubricate	 them.	 Salt	 in	 the
cooking	 water	 not	 only	 flavors	 the	 noodles,
but	 limits	 starch	 gelation	 and	 so	 reduces
cooking	losses	and	stickiness.

Stickiness	after	cooking	is	caused	by
surface	starch	that	dries	out	and	cools	down
after	the	noodles	have	been	drained,	and
develops	a	gluey	consistency.	It	can	be
minimized	by	rinsing	the	drained	noodles,	or
moistening	them	with	some	sauce,	cooled
cooking	water,	oil,	or	butter.

Couscous,	Dumplings,



Couscous,	Dumplings,
Spätzle,	Gnocchi

Couscous	Couscous	is	an	elegantly	simple
pasta	that	appears	to	have	been	invented	by
the	Berber	peoples	of	northern	Algeria	and
Morocco	between	the	11th	and	13th	centuries.
It	remains	a	staple	dish	in	North	Africa,	the
Middle	East,	and	Sicily.	In	its	traditional
form,	couscous	is	made	by	sprinkling	salted
water	into	a	bowl	containing	whole	wheat
flour,	then	stirring	with	the	fingers	to	form
little	bits	of	dough.	The	bits	are	rubbed
between	the	hands	and	sieved	to	obtain
granules	of	uniform	size,	usually	1–3	mm	in
diameter.	There	is	no	kneading	and	therefore
no	gluten	development,	so	this	gentle
technique	can	be	and	is	applied	to	many	other
grains.	Couscous	granules	are	small	enough
that	they	can	be	cooked	not	in	a	large	excess
of	water	but	in	steam	(traditionally	over	the
fragrant	stew	that	it	will	accompany),	which
allows	them	to	develop	a	uniquely	light,



delicate	texture.	Couscous	works	best	with
thin	sauces	that	spread	easily	over	the	large
surface	area	of	the	small	granules.

“Israeli”	or	“large”	couscous	is	actually	an
extruded	pasta	invented	in	Israel	in	the	1950s.
It’s	made	from	a	dough	of	hard	wheat	flour
formed	into	balls	a	few	millimeters	in
diameter	and	lightly	toasted	in	an	oven	to	add
depth	to	the	flavor.	It’s	cooked	and	served	in
the	same	ways	as	pasta	and	rice.

Dumplings	 and	 Spätzle	 Western	 dumplings
and	 Spätzle	 (a	 word	 in	 a	 Bavarian	 dialect
meaning	 “clod,	 clump,”	 not	 “sparrow”	 as	 is
often	 said)	 are	 essentially	 coarse,	 informal
portions	 of	 dough	 or	 batter	 that	 are	 dropped
into	 a	 pot	 of	 boiling	 water	 and	 cooked
through,	and	served	as	is	in	a	stew	or	braise	or
sautéed	 to	 accompany	 a	 meat	 dish.	 Unlike
pasta	doughs,	dumpling	doughs	are	minimally
kneaded	 to	maximize	 tenderness,	 and	 benefit
from	 the	 inclusion	of	 tiny	 air	 pockets,	which



provide	 lightness.	The	progress	of	cooking	 is
judged	by	the	position	of	the	dumpling	in	the
pot;	 when	 it	 rises	 to	 the	 top,	 it’s	 considered
almost	done,	given	another	minute	or	so,	and
then	 scooped	 out.	 This	 tendency	 to	 rise	with
cooking	is	due	to	the	expansion	of	the	dough’s
air	pockets,	which	fill	with	vaporized	water	as
the	 dumpling	 interior	 approaches	 the	 boiling
point	and	make	the	dough	less	dense	than	the
surrounding	water.

Gnocchi	 Gnocchi	—	 the	word	 is	 Italian	 and
means	“lumps”	—	got	their	start	in	the	1300s
as	 ordinary	 dumplings	 made	 from	 bread
crumbs	 or	 flour	 (Roman	 gnocchi	 are	 still
made	by	baking	squares	of	a	cooked	dough	of
milk	and	semolina).	But	with	the	arrival	of	the
New	 World’s	 potato,	 Italian	 cooks
transformed	gnocchi	into	a	form	of	dumpling
with	 an	 unusually	 light	 texture.	 The	 starchy
potato	 flesh	 became	 the	 main,	 tender
ingredient,	 with	 just	 enough	 flour	 added	 to



absorb	moisture	and	provide	gluten	to	hold	it
together	 into	 a	 formable	 dough.	 Eggs	 are
sometimes	 added	 to	 provide	 additional
binding	 and	 yolky	 richness,	 though	 they	 also
add	a	springy	quality.	Old	potatoes,	and	mealy
rather	 than	 waxy	 varieties,	 are	 preferred	 for
their	 lower	water	 and	 higher	 starch	 contents,
which	means	that	less	flour	is	needed	to	make
the	 dough,	 so	 less	 gluten	 forms	 and	 the
dumpling	 is	 more	 tender.	 The	 potatoes	 are
cooked,	 peeled,	 and	 riced	 immediately	 to
allow	 as	 much	 moisture	 as	 possible	 to
evaporate;	 then	 cooled	 or	 even	 chilled,	 and
kneaded	into	a	dough	with	just	as	much	flour
as	necessary,	 usually	 less	 than	1	 cup/120	gm
per	 lb/500	gm	potatoes.	The	dough	is	formed
into	a	thin	rope	and	cut	into	small	pieces,	the
pieces	 shaped,	 and	 then	 boiled	 in	water	 until
they	 rise	 to	 the	 top	 of	 the	 pot.	 Gnocchi	 can
also	 be	 made	 by	 replacing	 the	 potato	 with
other	 starchy	 vegetables	 or	 with	 ricotta
cheese.



Asian	Wheat	Noodles
and	Dumplings

Two	very	different	families	of	noodles	are
made	in	Asia.	Starch	noodles	are	described
below.	Asian	wheat	noodles	—	Chinese	mian
—	bear	some	resemblance	to	European	pastas
made	from	bread	wheat.	They’re	typically
made	from	low-or	moderate-protein	flours,
and	are	formed	not	by	extrusion	but	by
sheeting	and	cutting	or	by	stretching.	The
most	spectacular	form	of	noodle	production	is
that	of	Shanghai’s	hand-pulled	noodles,	la
mian,	for	which	the	maker	starts	with	a	thick
rope	of	dough,	swings,	twists,	and	stretches	it
to	arms’	length,	brings	the	ends	together	to
make	the	one	strand	into	two	—	and	repeats
the	stretching	and	folding	as	many	as	eleven
times	to	make	up	to	4,096	thin	noodles!	Asian
noodles	are	both	elastic	and	soft,	their	texture
created	by	both	their	weak	gluten	and	by
amylopectin-rich	starch	granules.	Salt,	usually



at	around	2%	of	the	noodle	weight,	is	an
important	ingredient	in	Asian	noodles.	It
tightens	the	gluten	network	and	stabilizes	the
starch	granules,	keeping	them	intact	even	as
they	absorb	water	and	swell.

Soba:	Japanese	Buckwheat	Noodles
Buckwheat	noodles	were	made	in	northern
China	in	the	14th	century,	and	had	become
a	 popular	 food	 in	 Japan	 by	 around	 1600.
It’s	 difficult	 to	 make	 noodles	 exclusively
with	 buckwheat	 flour	 because	 the
buckwheat	proteins	do	not	form	a	cohesive
gluten.	Japanese	soba	noodles	may	be	from
10%	 to	 90%	 buckwheat,	 the	 remainder
wheat.	 They’re	 traditionally	 made	 from
freshly	milled	 flour,	 which	 is	mixed	 very
quickly	with	the	water	and	worked	until	the
water	 is	 evenly	 absorbed	 and	 the	 dough
firm	and	smooth.	Salt	is	omitted	because	it
interferes	 with	 the	 proteins	 and	 mucilage
that	 help	 bind	 the	 dough	 (p.	 483).	 The



dough	 is	 rested,	 then	rolled	out	 to	about	3
mm	 thick	 and	 rested	 again,	 then	 cut	 into
fine	noodles.	The	noodles	are	cooked	fresh,
and	when	done,	are	washed	and	firmed	in	a
container	of	ice	water,	drained,	and	served
either	 in	a	hot	broth	or	cold,	accompanied
by	a	dipping	sauce.

Chinese	Wheat	Noodles
and	Dumplings

White	 and	 Yellow	 Noodles 	 Salted	 white
noodles	 arose	 in	northern	China	 and	 are	now
most	widely	known	in	their	Japanese	version,
udon	 (below).	 Yellow	 noodles,	 which	 are
made	 with	 alkaline	 salts,	 appear	 to	 have
originated	 in	 southeast	 China	 sometime
before	 1600,	 and	 then	 spread	 with	 Chinese
migrants	 to	 Indonesia,	 Malaysia,	 and
Thailand.	 The	 yellowness	 of	 the	 traditional
noodles	 (modern	ones	are	 sometimes	colored
with	 egg	 yolks)	 is	 caused	 by	 phenolic
compounds	in	the	flour	called	flavones,	which



are	 normally	 colorless	 but	 become	 yellow	 in
alkaline	 conditions.	 The	 flavones	 are
especially	concentrated	in	the	bran	and	germ,
so	 less	 refined	 flours	develop	a	deeper	color.
Because	 they’re	 based	 on	 harder	 wheats,
southern	yellow	noodles	have	a	firmer	texture
than	white	 salted	noodles,	 and	 alkalinity	 (pH
9–11,	 the	 equivalent	 of	 old	 egg	 whites)
increases	 this	 firmness.	 The	 alkaline	 salts
(sodium	and	potassium	carbonates	at	0.5–1%
of	 noodle	 weight)	 also	 cause	 the	 noodles	 to
take	 longer	 to	 cook	 and	 absorb	 more	 water,
and	they	contribute	a	characteristic	aroma	and
taste.

Dumplings	 The	 Chinese	 version	 of	 filled
pasta	 is	 thin	 sheets	 of	 wheat-flour	 dough
enclosing	seasoned	morsels	of	meat,	shellfish,
or	vegetables.	Some	doughs	are	simply	made
from	 flour	 and	 water,	 but	 robust	 pot-sticker
dough	 is	 made	 by	 boiling	 part	 of	 the	 water
before	 adding	 the	 flour,	 so	 that	 some	 of	 the



starch	 is	 gelated	 and	 contributes	 to	 the
dough’s	cohesiveness.	The	formed	dumplings
may	be	steamed,	boiled,	fried,	or	deep-fried.

Japanese	Wheat	Noodles	The	standard	 thick
Japanese	 noodles	 (2–4	 mm	 in	 diameter),
called	udon,	 are	 descendents	 of	 the	 Chinese
white	 salted	 noodle.	 They’re	 white	 and	 soft
and	 made	 from	 soft	 wheat	 flour,	 water,	 and
sal t .	Ra-men	 noodles	 are	 light	 yellow	 and
somewhat	stiff,	and	are	made	from	hard	wheat
flour,	water,	and	alkaline	salts	(kansui).	Very
thin	noodles	(around	1	mm)	are	called	so-men.
Japanese	noodles	are	usually	cooked	in	water
of	pH	5.5–6,	which	is	often	adjusted	by	adding
some	 acid.	 After	 cooking,	 the	 noodles	 are
drained	 and	 washed	 and	 cooled	 in	 running
water,	which	 causes	 the	 surface	 starch	 to	 set
into	a	moist,	slippery,	nonsticky	layer.

Tapioca
Tapioca	 pearls,	 which	 are	 widely	 used	 to



absorb	 moisture	 and	 flavor,	 thicken
puddings	and	pie	fillings,	and	nowadays	to
provide	chewy	“bubbles”	in	teas	and	other
drinks,	are	translucent,	glossy,	and	elastic,
and	 based	 on	 the	 same	 principle	 as	 the
starch	 noodle.	 They	 are	 spheres	 1–6	 mm
across	made	up	of	 tapioca	 starch	granules
held	 together	 by	 a	 matrix	 of	 gelatinized
tapioca	starch	(about	17%	amylose).	A	wet
mass	of	the	starch	granules	(40–50%	water
by	weight)	is	broken	up	into	coarse	grains,
and	 the	grains	 then	 fed	 into	 rotating	pans,
where	 they	 roll	 around	 and	 gradually
agglomerate	 into	 little	 balls.	 They’re	 then
steamed	 until	 a	 little	 more	 than	 half	 the
starch	is	gelated,	mostly	in	the	outer	layer,
and	 then	 are	 dried,	 so	 that	 a	 firm
retrograded	 starch	 matrix	 forms.	 When
cooked	 in	 liquid,	 they	 soak	 up	 water	 and
the	 rest	 of	 their	 starch	 gelates	 while	 the
retrograded	 matrix	 maintains	 their
structure.



The	Japanese	instant	version	of	Chinese-
style	noodles,	ra-men,	was	born	in1958.
They’re	manufactured	by	making	thin,
quickly	rehydrated	noodles,	then	steaming
them,	frying	them	at	280ºF/	140ºC,	and	air-
drying	at	180ºF/80ºC.

Asian	Starch
and	Rice	Noodles

All	the	pastas	we’ve	looked	at	so	far	are	held
together	by	the	gluten	proteins	of	wheat	flour.
Starch	and	rice	noodles	contain	no	gluten
whatsoever.	Starch	noodles	in	particular	are	a
remarkable,	even	startling	invention:	unlike
all	other	noodles,	they’re	translucent.	They’re
often	called	glass	or	cellophane	noodles,	and
in	Japan	are	given	the	lovely	name	harusame,
“spring	rain”	noodles.

Starch	 Noodles	 Dried	 noodles	 made	 out	 of
pure	 starch	 —	 usually	 from	 mung	 beans



(China),	 rice	 (Japan),	 or	 sweet	 potato	—	 are
prized	 for	 several	 qualities:	 their	 clarity	 and
glossy	brilliance,	 their	 slippery,	 firm	 texture,
and	their	readiness	for	eating	after	 just	a	few
minutes	 of	 soaking	 in	 hot	 liquid,	 whether
plain	hot	water	or	a	soup	or	braised	dish.

The	firmest	noodles	are	made	from
starches	high	in	the	straight-chain	amylose
form	(p.	457).	Where	ordinary	long-grain	rice
is	21–23%	amylose,	special	noodle	rices	are
30–36%,	and	mung-bean	starch	is	35–40%
amylose.	Starch	noodles	are	made	by	first
cooking	a	small	amount	of	dry	starch	with
water	to	make	a	sticky	paste	that	will	bind	the
rest	of	the	starch	into	a	cohesive	dough.	The
paste	is	mixed	with	the	rest	of	the	dry	starch
and	more	water	to	make	a	dough	with	35–45%
moisture,	and	the	dough	is	then	extruded
through	small	holes	in	a	metal	plate	to	form
noodles.	The	noodles	are	immediately	boiled
to	gelate	all	the	starch	and	form	a	continuous
network	of	starch	molecules	throughout,	and



then	are	drained	and	held	at	the	ambient
temperature	or	chilled	for	12–48	hours	before
being	air-dried.	During	the	holding	period,	the
gelated	starch	molecules	fall	into	a	more
orderly	arrangement,	or	retrograde	(p.	458).
The	smaller	amylose	molecules	cluster
together	to	form	junctions	in	the	network,
crystalline	regions	that	resist	disruption	even
by	boiling	temperatures.	The	dried	noodles
are	thus	firm	and	strong,	but	the	less	orderly
parts	of	the	network	readily	absorb	hot	liquid
and	swell	to	become	tender	without	the	need
for	active	cooking.

Starch	noodles	are	translucent	because
they’re	a	uniform	mixture	of	starch	and	water,
with	no	particles	of	insoluble	protein	or	intact
starch	granules	to	scatter	light	rays.

Rice	 Noodles	 and	 Wrappers	 Like	 starch
noodles,	 rice	 noodles	 are	 held	 together	 by
amylose,	not	gluten;	but	because	they	contain
protein	 and	 cell-wall	 particles	 that	 scatter



light,	 they’re	 opaque	 rather	 than	 translucent.
Rice	 noodles	 are	 made	 by	 soaking	 high-
amylose	rice	in	water,	grinding	it	into	a	paste,
cooking	 the	paste	so	 that	much	but	not	all	of
the	starch	is	gelated,	kneading	the	paste	into	a
dough	 and	 extruding	 it	 to	 form	 noodles,
steaming	 the	 noodles	 to	 finish	 the	 gelation
process,	 cooling	 and	 holding	 for	 12	 hours	 or
more,	 and	 drying	 with	 hot	 air	 or	 by	 frying
them	 in	 oil.	 Again,	 the	 holding	 and	 drying
cause	starch	retrogradation	and	the	formation
of	a	structure	that	stands	up	to	rehydration	in
hot	water.	Fresh	 rice	noodles,	chow	fun,	need
no	rehydration	before	being	stir-fried.

Rice	papers,	banh	trang	in	Vietnamese,	are
thin,	parchment-like	discs	that	are	used	as
wrappers	for	southeast	Asian	versions	of	the
spring	roll.	They’re	made	by	soaking	and
grinding	rice,	soaking	it	again,	pounding	it
into	a	paste	and	spreading	it	into	a	thin	layer,
steaming	it	and	then	drying	it.	Rice	papers	are
rehydrated	briefly	in	lukewarm	water,	then



used	immediately	as	wrappers	that	can	be
eaten	fresh	or	fried.



Chapter	11

Sauces

The	History	of	Sauces	in	Europe
Ancient	Times
The	 Middle	 Ages:	 Refinement	 and
Concentration
Early	 Modern	 Sauces:	 Meat	 Essences,
Emulsions
The	 Classic	 French	 System:	 Carême	 and
Escoffier
Sauces	in	Italy	and	England
Modern	 Sauces:	 Nouvelle	 and	 Post-
Nouvelle

The	 Science	 of	 Sauces:	 Flavor	 and
Consistency

Flavor	in	Sauces:	Taste	and	Smell
Sauce	Consistency
The	Influence	of	Consistency	on	Flavor

Sauces	 Thickened	 with	 Gelatin	 and	 Other



Proteins
The	Uniqueness	of	Gelatin
Extracting	Gelatin	and	Flavor	from	Meats
Meat	Stocks	and	Sauces
Commercial	 Meat	 Extracts	 and	 Sauce
Bases
Fish	and	Shellfish	Stocks	and	Sauces
Other	Protein	Thickeners

Solid	 Sauces:	 Gelatin	 Jellies	 and
Carbohydrate	Jellies

Jelly	Consistency
Jellies	from	Meat	and	Fish:	Aspics
Other	 Jellies	 and	 Gelées;	 Manufactured
Gelatins
Carbohydrate	 Gelling	 Agents:	 Agar,
Carrageenan,	Alginates

Sauces	Thickened	with	Flour	and	Starch
The	Nature	of	Starch
Different	Starches	and	Their	Qualities
The	 Influence	 of	 Other	 Ingredients	 on
Starch	Sauces
Incorporating	Starch	into	Sauces



Starch	in	Classic	French	Sauces
Gravy

Sauces	 Thickened	 with	 Plant	 Particles:
Purees

Plant	 Particles:	 Coarse	 and	 Inefficient
Thickeners
Fruit	and	Vegetable	Purees
Nuts	and	Spices	as	Thickeners
Complex	 Mixtures:	 Indian	 Curries,
Mexican	Moles

Sauces	 Thickened	 with	 Droplets	 of	 Oil	 or
Water:	Emulsions

The	Nature	of	Emulsions
Guidelines	 for	 Successful	 Emulsified
Sauces
Cream	and	Butter	Sauces
Eggs	as	Emulsifiers
Cold	Egg	Sauces:	Mayonnaise
Hot	 Egg	 Sauces:	 Hollandaise	 and
Béarnaise
Vinaigrettes

Sauces	Thickened	with	Bubbles:	Foams



Making	and	Stabilizing	Foams
Salt

Salt	Production
Kinds	of	Salt
Salt	and	the	Body

Sauces	 are	 liquids	 that	 accompany	 the
primary	ingredient	in	a	dish.	Their	purpose	is
to	 enhance	 the	 flavor	 of	 that	 ingredient	—	 a
portion	 of	meat	 or	 fish	 or	 grain	 or	 vegetable
—	either	by	deepening	and	broadening	its	own
intrinsic	 flavor,	or	by	providing	a	contrast	or
complement	to	it.	While	the	meat	or	grain	or
vegetable	is	always	more	or	less	itself,	a	sauce
can	 be	 anything	 the	 cook	wants	 it	 to	 be,	 and
makes	 the	 dish	 a	 richer,	more	 various,	more
satisfying	 composition.	 Sauces	 help	 the	 cook
feed	 our	 perpetual	 hunger	 for	 stimulating
sensations,	 for	 the	 pleasures	 of	 taste	 and
smell,	touch	and	sight.	Sauces	are	distillations
of	desire.

The	word	sauce	comes	from	an	ancient



root	word	meaning	“salt,”	which	is	the
original	concentrated	flavoring,	pure	mineral
crystals	from	the	sea	(p.	639).	Our	primary
foods	—	animal	flesh,	grains	and	breads	and
pastas,	starchy	vegetables	—	are	pretty	bland,
and	cooks	have	found	or	invented	a	vast	range
of	ingredients	with	which	to	make	them	more
flavorful.	The	simplest	are	seasonings
provided	by	nature:	salt,	pungent	black	pepper
and	chillis,	sour	juices	of	unripe	fruits,	sweet
honey	and	sugar,	distinctively	aromatic	herbs
and	spices.	More	complex	are	prepared
condiments,	many	of	them	foods	preserved
and	transformed	by	fermentation:	sour	and
aromatic	vinegar,	salty	and	savory	soy	sauce
and	fish	sauce,	salty	and	sour	pickles,	pungent
and	sour	mustard,	sweet	and	sour	and	fruity
ketchup.	And	then	there	are	s	auces,	the
ultimate	composed	flavorings.	The	cook
conceives	and	prepares	sauces	for	particular
dishes,	and	can	give	them	any	flavor.	They
always	include	seasonings,	sometimes



condiments,	and	sometimes	artfully
intensified	flavors	of	the	primary	foods
themselves,	or	of	other	foods,	or	of	the
cooking	process.

In	addition	to	their	heightened	flavor,
sauces	give	tactile	pleasure	by	the	way	they
move	in	the	mouth.	Cooks	construct	sauces	to
have	a	consistency	somewhere	between	the
resistant	solidity	of	animal	or	plant	tissues
and	the	elusive	thinness	of	water.	This	is	the
consistency	of	luscious	ripe	fruit	that	melts	in
the	mouth	and	seems	to	feed	us	willingly,	and
of	the	fats	that	give	a	persistent,	moist
fullness	to	animal	flesh	and	to	cream	and
butter.	The	fluidity	of	a	sauce	allows	it	to	coat
the	solid	food	evenly	and	lend	it	a	pleasing
moistness,	while	the	substantial,	lingering
quality	helps	the	sauce	cling	to	the	food	and	to
our	tongue	and	palate	as	well,	prolonging	the
experience	of	its	flavor	and	providing	a
sensation	of	richness.

A	last	pleasure	that	a	sauce	can	provide	is



an	attractive	appearance.	Many	sauces	are
nondescript,	but	others	have	the	vibrant	color
of	their	parent	fruit	or	vegetable,	or	the	depth
of	tone	that	comes	with	roasting	and	long
cooking.	Some	have	an	attractive	sheen,	and
some	are	intriguingly	transparent.	The	visual
beauty	of	a	sauce	is	a	sign	of	the	care	with
which	it	was	made,	a	suggestion	of	intensity
and	clarity	of	flavor	and	of	presence	on	the
tongue:	an	anticipation	of	pleasures	to	come.

There	are	several	basic	ways	of	making
sauces.	Many	of	them	involve	disrupting
organized	plant	and	animal	tissues	and	freeing
the	juices	that	carry	their	flavor.	Once
extracted	from	their	source,	the	juices	can	be
combined	with	other	flavorful	materials,	and
then	often	benefit	from	thickening	to	help
them	linger	on	the	food	and	in	the	mouth.	The
cook	thickens	juices	by	filling	them	with	a
variety	of	large	molecules	or	particles	that
obstruct	the	flow	of	the	water	molecules.
Most	of	this	chapter	deals	with	different



thickening	methods	and	their	applications.
Sauces	are	closely	related	to	two	other

basic	preparations.	Soups	are	also	liquid	foods
of	various	consistencies,	and	may	differ	from
sauces	only	in	being	somewhat	less
concentrated	in	flavor,	so	that	they	can	be
eaten	as	a	food	in	themselves,	not	an	accent.
And	jellies	are	thickened	liquids	with	enough
gelatin	in	them	to	set	at	room	temperature,
thus	becoming	a	temporarily	solid	food	that
melts	into	a	sauce	in	the	mouth.

The	History	of	Sauces
In	europe

Europe	is	just	one	of	several	regions	in	the
world	that	have	evolved	sauces	with	broad
appeal	in	modern	times.	Many	sauces	are	now
popular	far	from	their	birthplaces,	among
them	Chinese	soy-based	sauces,	Indian	sauces
thickened	and	flavored	with	spices,	and
Mexican	salsas	and	chillithickened	moles.	But



it	was	in	Europe,	more	precisely	in	France,
that	generations	of	cooks	developed	sauce
making	into	a	systematic	art,	and	made	it	the
heart	of	a	national	cuisine	that	became	an
international	standard.

Ancient	Times

Our	first	real	knowledge	of	sauce-like
preparations	in	Europe	comes	from	Roman
times.	A	Latin	poem	from	around	25	CE
describes	a	peasant	farmer	making	a	spread	of
pounded	herbs,	cheese,	oil,	and	vinegar	—	an
ancestor	of	pesto	genovese	—	that	gave	a
pungent,	salty,	aromatic	savor	to	his	flatbread
(see	box,	p.	583).

A	few	centuries	later,	the	Latin	recipe	book
attributed	to	Apicius	makes	it	clear	that
sauces	played	an	essential	part	in	the	dining	of
the	Roman	elite.	More	than	a	quarter	of	the
nearly	500	recipes	are	for	sauces,	the	term	for
which	was	ius,	the	ancestor	of	our	“juice.”



Most	contained	at	least	a	half	dozen	herbs	and
spices,	as	well	as	vinegar	and/or	honey,	and
some	form	of	the	fermented	fish	sauce	garum
(p.	235),	which	provided	saltiness,	savoriness,
and	a	distinctive	aroma	(much	as	anchovies
do	today).	And	they	were	thickened	in	a
variety	of	ways:	with	the	pounded	flavorings
themselves;	with	pounded	nuts	or	rice;	with
pounded	liver	or	sea	urchins;	with	pounded
bread,	pieces	of	pastry,	and	with	pure	wheat
starch	itself;	with	egg	yolks,	both	raw	and
cooked.	The	sauce	maker’s	most	important
tool	was	clearly	the	mortar,	but	the	sea
urchins,	eggs,	and	starch	are	early	versions	of
more	refined	thickening	methods.

Harmonizing	Flavors	in	Ancient	China
The	addition,	 intensification,	and	blending
of	 flavors	 that	 characterize	 good	 sauce
making	 are	 central	 to	 the	 art	 of	 cooking,
and	have	been	considered	such	for	at	 least
2,000	 years.	 Here	 is	 an	 ancient	 Chinese



description	 of	 the	 process	 that	 centers	 on
the	making	of	a	stew	or	soup,	a	preparation
in	which	 the	solid	 food	both	provides	part
of	the	sauce	and	cooks	in	the	sauce.
In	 the	 business	 of	 harmonious	 blending,
one	 must	 make	 use	 of	 the	 sweet,	 sour,
bitter,	 pungent	 and	 salty.	 Whether	 things
are	to	be	added	earlier	or	later	and	in	what
amounts	—	 their	 balancing	 is	 very	 subtle
and	 each	 thing	 has	 its	 own	 characteristic.
The	 transformation	 which	 occurs	 in	 the
cauldron	 is	 quintessential	 and	 wondrous,
subtle	 and	 delicate.	 The	 mouth	 cannot
express	 it	 in	 words;	 the	 mind	 cannot	 fix
upon	 an	 analogy.	 It	 is	 like	 the	 subtlety	 of
archery	 and	 horsemanship,	 the
transformation	 of	 Yin	 and	 Yang,	 or	 the
revolution	 of	 the	 four	 seasons.	 Thus	 [the
food]	 is	 long-lasting	 yet	 does	 not	 spoil;
thoroughly	 cooked	 yet	 not	 mushy;	 sweet
yet	 not	 cloying;	 sour	 yet	 not	 corrosive;
salty	 yet	 not	 deadening;	 pungent	 yet	 not



acrid;	mild	yet	not	insipid;	oily-smooth	yet
not	greasy.

—	attributed	to	the	chef	I	Yin	in	the	Lü
Shih	Chhun	Chhiu	(Master	Lü’s	Spring	and
Autumn	Annals),	239	BCE,	transl.	Donald

Harper	and	H.	T.	Huang

The	Middle	Ages:	Refinement
and	Concentration

We	don’t	know	much	about	cooking	in	Europe
between	the	time	of	Apicius	and	the	14th
century,	the	period	from	which	a	number	of
manuscript	recipe	collections	survive.	In
some	respects,	sauce	making	hadn’t	changed
much.	Medieval	sauces	often	contained	many
spices,	the	mortar	and	pestle	still	pounded
ingredients	—	now	including	meats	and
vegetables	—	and	most	of	the	Roman
thickeners	were	still	used.	Bread	was	most
common,	toasted	to	provide	additional	color
and	flavor,	while	pure	starch	was	no	longer



used,	and	cream	and	butter	still	weren’t.

Sauce	Recipes	from	Ancient	Rome
…the	 bulb	 [of	 garlic]	 with	 the	 leaves	 he
kept	and	dipped	in	water,	then	dropped	into
the	round	hollow	stone.	On	it	he	sprinkled
some	 grains	 of	 salt,	 and	 as	 the	 salt
dissolved	 added	 hard	 cheese,	 then	 heaped
on	the	herbs	he	had	gathered	[parsley,	rue,
coriander],	 and	with	 his	 left	 hand	wedged
the	mortar	 into	his	shaggy	groin;	his	 right
hand	 first	mashed	 the	 pungent	 garlic	with
the	 pestle,	 then	 pounded	 everything	 so	 as
to	mix	the	juices	evenly.	Round	and	round
went	 his	 hand;	 gradually	 the	 original
ingredients	 lost	 their	 own	 properties	 and
one	 color	 emerged	 from	 several,	 not
wholly	 green,	 since	 the	 milky	 fragments
held	 out,	 nor	 shining	 milky	 white,	 being
variegated	by	all	the	herbs….	he	poured	in
some	drops	of	olive	oil	and	on	top	added	a
tiny	 drop	 of	 pungent	 vinegar,	 and	 once



again	 mixed	 and	 thoroughly	 remixed	 the
mass.	 Finally	 with	 two	 fingers	 he	 wiped
round	 the	 whole	 mortar	 and	 brought
together	the	parts	into	a	single	ball	so	as	to
produce	 a	moretum,	 perfect	 in	 appearance
as	in	name.

—	Moretum,	transl.	E.J.	Kenney
White	Sauce	for	Boiled	Foods

Pepper,	liquamen	 [fish	 sauce],	 wine,	 rue,
onion,	pine	nuts,	spiced	wine,	a	few	pieces
of	bread	cut	up	to	thicken,	oil.

For	Stuffed	Squid
Pepper,	lovage,	coriander,	celery-seed,	egg
yolk,	 honey,	 vinegar,	 liquamen,	 wine,	 and
oil.	You	will	thicken	it	[by	heating].

Pastry-Milk	Chicken
Cook	 the	 chicken	 in	liquamen,	 oil,	 and
wine,	 to	 which	 you	 add	 a	 bundle	 of
coriander	and	onion.	Then	when	it	is	done,



lift	it	from	its	sauce	and	put	into	a	new	pan
some	milk,	a	little	salt	and	honey,	and	very
little	water.	Set	 it	by	a	slow	fire	 to	warm,
crumble	some	pastry,	and	add	it	gradually,
stirring	 carefully	 so	 that	 it	 doesn’t	 burn.
Add	the	chicken,	whole	or	cut	up,	turn	out
on	 a	 dish,	 and	 pour	 over	 the	 following
sauce:	 pepper,	 lovage,	 oregano,	 honey,	 a
little	grape	syrup,	and	cooking	liquid.	Mix.
Bring	it	to	the	boil	in	a	pan.	When	it	boils,
thicken	with	starch,	and	serve.

—	Apicius

New	 Flavors,	 New	 Clarity,	 and	 Jellies	 But
there	 were	 some	 important	 differences,	 and
genuine	progress.	Fish	sauce	had	disappeared,
its	 place	 taken	 by	 vinegar	 and	 unripe	 grape
juice,	 or	verjus.	 Thanks	 in	 part	 to	 the
Crusades,	 which	 brought	 Europeans	 to	 the
Middle	East	and	into	contact	with	Arab	trade
and	 traditions,	 many	 local	 Mediterranean
flavorings	 had	 been	 displaced	 by	 exotic



imports	 from	 Asia,	 especially	 cinnamon,
ginger,	and	grains	of	paradise;	and	the	nut	of
choice	 for	 thickening	 was	 now	 the	 almond.
The	 mortar	 was	 joined	 by	 a	 second
indispensable	 utensil:	 the	 cloth	 sieve	 or
strainer	 (French	étamine	 or	tamis)	 through
which	 sauces	 were	 passed	 to	 remove	 coarse
particles	of	spice	and	thickener	and	produce	a
finer	 consistency.	 Cooks	 had	 discovered	 the
principle	 of	 thickening	 meat	 broths	 by
concentration	 —	 by	 boiling	 off	 unwanted
water	—	and	so	developed	both	the	consommé
and	 the	 solid	 jelly,	 part	 of	 whose	 value	 was
the	way	it	could	coat	cooked	meat	or	fish	and
protect	 it	 from	 the	 air	 and	 spoilage.	 The
transparency	of	clear	jellies	in	turn	led	by	the
15th	 century	 to	 an	 improved	 strainer	 for
removing	 the	 tiniest	 particles	 from	 them:	 a
protein	 “fabric”	 of	 whipped	 egg	 whites	 that
clarified	the	liquid	from	within.

Refinements	in	Medieval	Sauce	Making



These	 recipes	 from	 more	 than	 500	 years
ago	 show	 the	 great	 care	 with	 which
medieval	 cooks	 made	 sauces	 and	 jellies.
The	broth	recipe	is	remarkable	for	its	exact
descriptions	 of	 consistency	 and	 stirring
time	off	the	heat	to	prevent	curdling.

Fish	or	Meat	Jelly
Cook	 [the	 fish	 or	meat]	 in	wine,	 verjuice,
and	vinegar…then	grind	ginger,	cinnamon,
cloves,	grains	of	paradise,	long	pepper,	and
infuse	 this	 in	 your	 bouillon,	 strain	 it,	 and
put	it	to	boil	with	your	meat;	then	take	bay
leaves,	spikenard,	galingale,	and	mace,	and
tie	 them	 in	 your	 bolting	 [flour-sieving]
cloth,	 without	 washing	 it,	 along	 with	 the
residue	of	 the	other	spices,	and	put	 this	 to
boil	with	your	meat;	keep	 the	pot	covered
while	it	is	on	the	fire,	and	when	it	is	off	the
fire	keep	skimming	it	until	the	preparation
is	served	up;	and	when	it	 is	cooked,	strain
your	 bouillon	 into	 a	 clean	 wooden	 vessel



and	 let	 it	 sit.	 Set	 your	 meat	 on	 a	 clean
cloth;	 if	 it	 is	 fish,	 skin	 and	 clean	 it	 and
throw	your	skins	into	your	bouillon	until	it
has	 been	 strained	 for	 the	 last	 time.	Make
certain	that	your	bouillon	is	clear	and	clean
and	 do	 not	 wait	 for	 it	 to	 cool	 before
straining	 it.	 Set	 out	 your	 meat	 in	 bowls,
and	 afterwards	 put	 your	 bouillon	 back	 on
the	fire	in	a	bright	clean	vessel	and	boil	it
constantly	 skimming,	 and	 pour	 it	 boiling
over	 your	 meat;	 and	 on	 your	 plates	 or
bowls	in	which	you	have	put	your	meat	and
broth	 sprinkle	 ground	 cassia	 buds	 and
mace,	and	put	your	plates	in	a	cool	place	to
set.	 Anyone	 making	 jelly	 cannot	 let
himself	fall	asleep….
—	Taillevent,	Le	Viandier,	ca.	1375,	transl.

Terence	Scully
A	Fine	Thick	Broth

For	 ten	 servings,	 get	 three	 egg	 yolks	 per
serving,	good	verjuice,	good	meat	broth,	a



little	 saffron	 and	 fine	 spices;	 mix
everything	together,	strain	it	and	put	it	into
a	pot	on	the	coals,	stirring	constantly	until
it	 coats	 the	 spoon;	 and	 so	 take	 it	 off	 the
fire,	 stirring	 constantly	 for	 the	 length	 of
two	Our	Father	s;	 then	dish	it	out,	putting
mild	spices	on	top….
—	The	Neapolitan	Recipe	Collection,	ca.

1475,	transl.	Terence	Scully

Sauce	 Terminology	 Another	 important
development	during	the	Middle	Ages	was	the
elaboration	 of	 a	 new	 vocabulary	 for	 sauces
and	 other	 flavorful	 fluids,	 and	 a	 more
systematic	 approach	 to	 them.	 The	 Roman
term	ius	 was	 replaced	 by	 derivatives	 of	 the
La t i n	salsus,	 meaning	 “salted”:	sauce	 in
France,	salsa	in	Italy	and	Spain.	In	French,	jus
came	 to	 mean	 meat	 juices;	bouillon	 was	 a
stock	 produced	 by	 simmering	meat	 in	water;
coulis	was	 a	 thickened	meat	 preparation	 that
gave	flavor	and	body	to	sauces,	to	potages	—



substantial	 soups	 —	 and	 other	 prepared
dishes.	 The	 French	soupe	 was	 the	 equivalent
of	 the	English	sop,	a	flavorful	liquid	imbuing
a	 piece	 or	 pieces	 of	 bread.	 A	 number	 of
manuscripts	 divide	 their	 recipes	 into
categories:	there	are	uncooked	sauces,	cooked
sauces,	 sauces	 in	 which	 to	 cook	 meat,	 and
others	 with	 which	 to	 serve	 meats,	 thin	 and
thick	 potages,	 and	 so	 on.	 And	 the	 English
word	gravy	 appears,	 derived	 apparently	 but
mysteriously	 from	 the	 French	grané.	 The
latter,	 whose	 name	 derives	 from	 the	 Latin
granatus,	 “made	 with	 grains,	 grainy,”	 was	 a
kind	of	stew	made	with	meat	and	meat	juices,
and	 not	 a	 separate	 mixture	 of	 spices	 and
liquid.

French	Sauces	from	the	17th	Century
In	 the	 recipe	 books	 of	 La	 Varenne	 and
Pierre	de	Lune,	we	can	find	a	hollandaise-
like	 “fragrant	 sauce,”	 the	 cream-like
emulsion	 still	 called	beurre	 blanc	 or



“white	butter,”	and	 the	 thin	court	bouillon
(“short-cooked	 bouillon”)	 traditionally
used	for	poaching	and	serving	fish.	Notice
the	simplicity	of	flavoring	compared	to	the
medieval	dishes.

Asparagus	in	Fragrant	Sauce
Choose	the	largest,	scrape	the	bottoms	and
wash,	 then	 cook	 in	 water,	 salt	 well,	 and
don’t	 let	 them	 cook	 too	 much.	 When
cooked,	 put	 them	 to	 drain,	 make	 a	 sauce
with	good	fresh	butter,	a	little	vinegar,	salt,
and	 nutmeg,	 and	 an	 egg	 yolk	 to	 bind	 the
sauce;	take	care	that	it	doesn’t	curdle;	and
serve	the	asparagus	garnished	as	you	like.
—	La	Varenne,	Le	Cuisinier	françois,	1651

Trout	in	Court	Bouillon
Cook	 your	 trout	 with	 water,	 vinegar,	 a
packet	 [of	 chive,	 thyme,	 cloves,	 chervil,
parsley,	sometimes	a	piece	of	lard,	all	tied
with	 a	 string],	 parsley,	 salt,	 bay,	 pepper,



lemon,	and	serve	the	same	way.
Perches	in	Beurre	Blanc

Cook	 them	 with	 wine,	 verjus,	 water,	 salt,
cloves,	 bay;	 remove	 the	 scales	 and	 serve
with	a	thickened	sauce	that	you	make	with
butter,	vinegar,	nutmeg,	slices	of	lemon;	it
should	be	well	thickened.

—	Pierre	de	Lune,	Le	Cuisinier,	1656

Early	Modern	Sauces:
Meat	essences,	Emulsions

It’s	in	the	three	centuries	between	1400	and
1700	that	the	sauces	of	our	own	time	have
their	roots.	Recipes	call	for	fewer	spices	and	a
lighter	hand	with	them;	vinegar	and	verjus
begin	to	give	way	to	lemon	juice;	coarse	bread
and	almond	thickeners	are	replaced	by	flour
and	by	butter	and	egg	emulsions	(see	box,	p.
585).	And	in	France,	meat	broths	become	the
central	element	of	fine	cooking.	This	is	the



era	in	which	experimental	science	began	to
flourish,	and	some	influential	French	cooks
conceived	of	themselves	as	the	chemists	—	or
alchemists	—	of	meat.	Around	1750,	François
Marin	echoed	the	Chinese	description	of
flavor	harmony	from	2,000	years	before,	but
with	some	telling	twists	(see	box	below).

Both	Marin	and	I	Yin	speak	of	harmony
and	balance.	But	the	Chinese	cauldron	brings
together	sweet,	sour,	bitter,	salty,	and	pungent
ingredients,	while	the	French	pot	contains
only	meat	juices,	and	generates	complexity
and	harmony	by	concentrating	them.	Marin
said	that	“Good	taste	has	forbidden	the
burning	juices	and	caustic	ragouts	of	the
ancienne	cuisine,”	with	their	Asian	spices	and
abundant	vinegar	and	verjus.	Meat	bouillon
was	now	“the	soul	of	cooking.”	The	meat’s
juices	are	its	essence,	and	the	cook	extracts
them,	concentrates	them,	and	then	uses	them
to	imbue	other	foods	with	their	flavor	and
nourishment.	The	purpose	of	a	sauce	is	not	to



add	new	flavors	to	a	food,	but	to	deepen	its
flavor	and	integrate	it	with	the	underlying
flavor	of	the	other	dishes.

Many	of	these	preparations	required
prodigious	amounts	of	flesh,	the	solid	part	of
which	did	not	appear	in	the	final	dish.	A	small
amount	of	consommé,	for	example,	was	made
with	2	lb/1	kg	each	of	beef	and	veal,	two
partridges,	a	hen,	and	some	ham.	This	meat
was	first	cooked	with	some	bouillon	—	itself
already	a	meat	extract	—	until	the	liquid
bouillon	and	meat	juices	evaporated,	and	the
meat	began	to	stick	to	the	pan	and	caramelize.
Then	yet	more	bouillon	was	added	along	with
some	vegetables,	the	mixture	cooked	for	four
hours,	and	strained	to	produce	a	liquid
“yellow	like	gold,	mild,	smooth,	and	cordial.”

The	 Flowering	 of	 French	 Sauces	 Marin
called	his	collection	of	bouillons,	potages,	jus,
consommés,	 restaurants	 (“restoring”	 soups),
coulis,	 and	sauces	 “the	 foundation	 of



cooking,”	 and	 said	 that	 by	 adopting	 a
systematic	 approach	 to	 them,	 even	 a
bourgeois	 family	 with	 limited	 resources
would	 be	 “able	 to	 imagine	 an	 infinity	 of
sauces	 and	 different	 stews.”	 French
cookbooks	 soon	 began	 to	 include	 dozens	 of
different	soups	and	sauces,	and	several	of	the
classic	 sauces	 were	 soon	 developed	 and
named.	Among	 these	were	alternatives	 to	 the
meat-juice	 preparations,	 including	 two	 egg-
emulsified	 sauces,	 hollandaise	 and
mayonnaise,	 and	 the	 economical	 béchamel,
the	basic,	neutral	white	sauce	of	milk,	butter,
and	 flour.	 But	 the	 great	 majority	 of	 sauces
were	made	 from	meat,	 and	meat	 juices	were
the	 underlying,	 unifying	 element	 in	 French
cooking.

François	Marin	on	Cooking	as	a
Chemical	Art

Modern	cooking	is	a	species	of	chemistry.
The	 science	 of	 the	 cook	 today	 is	 to	 break



down,	 digest,	 and	 distill	 meats	 into	 their
quintessence,	 to	 take	 their	 light	 and
nourishing	 juices,	mix	and	confound	 them
together,	 in	 such	 a	 way	 that	 none
dominates	and	all	can	be	tasted;	finally,	to
give	 them	 that	 unity	 which	 painters	 give
their	colors,	and	render	them	homogeneous
enough	 that	 their	 different	 flavors	 result
only	in	a	fine	and	piquant	taste;	in,	if	I	may
say	 it,	 a	 harmony	 of	 all	 tastes	 joined
together….

—	Dons	de	Comus,	1750

The	Classic	French	System:
Carême	and	Escoffier

In	1789	came	the	French	Revolution.	The
great	houses	of	France	were	much	reduced,
and	their	cooks	no	longer	had	unlimited	help
and	resources.	Some	lost	their	positions,	and
survived	by	opening	the	first	fine	restaurants.
The	culinary	impact	of	these	upheavals	was



assessed	by	the	renowned	chef	Antonin
Carême	(1784–1833).	In	the	“Preliminary
Discourse”	to	his	Maître	d’Hôtel	français,	he
noted	that	the	“splendor	of	the	old	cuisine”
was	made	possible	by	the	lavish	expenditures
of	the	master	on	personnel	and	materials.
After	the	Revolution,	cooks	lucky	enough	to
retain	a	position

were	thus	obliged,	for	want	of	help,	to
simplify	the	work	in	order	to	be	able	to
serve	dinner,	and	then	to	do	a	great	deal
with	very	little.	Necessity	brought
emulation;	talent	made	up	for	everything,
and	experience,	that	mother	of	all
perfection,	brought	important
improvements	to	modern	cuisine,	making
it	at	the	same	time	both	healthier	and
simpler.

Restaurants	 too	 brought	 improvements;	 “in
order	 to	 flatter	 the	 public	 taste,”	 the
commercial	chefs	had	to	come	up	with	novel,



ever	 more	 “elegant”	 and	 “exquisite”
preparations.	 So	 social	 revolution	 became	 a
new	motivating	force	for	culinary	progress.

Sauce	 Families	 Carême	 made	 a	 number	 of
contributions	to	this	progress,	and	perhaps	the
most	notable	involved	the	sauces.	His	idea,	set
forth	in	The	Art	of	French	Cooking	in	the	19th
Century,	 was	 to	 organize	 the	 infinity	 of
possibilities	 that	Marin	 foresaw,	 and	 thereby
help	 cooks	 realize	 them.	 He	 classified	 the
sauces	 of	 the	 time	 into	 fourfamilies,	 each
headed	by	a	basic	or	 leading	 sauce,	 and	each
expandable	by	playing	variations	on	that	basic
theme.	 Only	 one	 of	 the	 leading	 sauces,
espagnole,	 was	 based	 on	 expensive,	 highly
concentrated	 meat	 extract;	 both	 velouté	 and
allemande	 used	 unreduced	 stock,	 and
béchamel	 used	 milk.	 Many	 of	 these	 sauces
were	 thickened	 with	 flour,	 which	 is	 much
more	economical	than	reduced	meat	bouillon.
This	 approach	 suited	 the	 limits	 and	 needs	 of



postrevolutionary	 cuisine.	 The	 parent	 sauces
could	be	prepared	 in	advance,	with	 the	novel
but	minor	modifications	and	seasonings	to	be
done	at	the	last	minute	on	the	day	of	the	meal.
As	 Raymond	 Sokolov	 puts	 it	 in	 his	 guide	 to
the	 classic	 sauces,	The	 Saucier’s	Apprentice,
these	 sauces	were	conceived	as	“convenience
foods	at	the	highest	level.”

Less	than	a	century	after	Carême,	the	great
compilation	of	classic	French	cuisine,
Auguste	Escoffier’s	Guide	Culinaire	(1902),
lists	nearly	200	different	sauces,	not	including
dessert	sauces.	And	Escoffier	attributed	the
eminence	of	French	cooking	directly	to	its
sauces.	“The	sauces	represent	the	partie
capitale	of	the	cuisine.	It	is	they	which	have
created	and	maintained	to	this	day	the
universal	preponderance	of	French	cuisine.”

Of	course	this	flavoring	system	was	the
creation	of	the	line	of	professional	cooks
going	back	to	medieval	times.	Alongside	it
there	developed	a	more	modest	domestic



tradition,	which	is	accomplished	in	its	own
way.	Disinclined	to	the	labor	and	expense	of
long-simmered	stocks	and	sauces,	middle-
class	home	cooks	refined	other	methods:	for
example,	making	a	broth	from	the	trimmings
of	a	roast,	using	the	broth	to	dissolve	the
flavorful	crust	from	the	roasting	pan,	and
boiling	this	relatively	small	amount	of	liquid
to	reduce	and	thicken	it,	or	binding	it	with
cream	or	flour.

Sauces	in	Italy	and	England

Purees	and	Meat	Juices	From	the	Middle
Ages	through	the	16th	century,	Italian	court
cooking	was	as	innovative	as	French	cooking,
and	sometimes	more	so.	Yet	it	stagnated	in
the	17th	century,	according	to	historian
Claudio	Benporat,	as	part	of	a	general
political	and	cultural	decline	caused	by	an
absence	of	strong	Italian	leaders	and	the
influence	of	other	European	powers	on	the



several	Italian	courts.	The	sauces	that	have
come	to	be	known	as	distinctively	Italian	are
mainly	domestic	and	relatively	unrefined	in
character,	based	not	so	much	on	essences	as
on	whole	materials:	the	purees	of	tomato
fruits	and	basil	leaves,	for	example.	The	basic
Italian	meat	sauce,	or	sugo,	is	made	in	the
manner	of	Marin’s	18th-century	consommé:
meat	is	slowly	cooked	to	liberate	its	juices,
which	are	allowed	to	cook	down	and	brown	on
the	pan	bottom;	then	meat	broth	is	used	to
redissolve	the	browned	residues,	and	allowed
to	concentrate	and	itself	brown:	and	the
process	repeated	to	produce	a	concentrated
flavor.	The	meat	is	not	discarded,	but
becomes	part	of	the	sauce.	Not	only	Italy	but
much	of	the	Mediterranean	region,	including
southern	France,	has	been	less	interested	in
extracting	meat	essences	than	in	highlighting
and	combining	flavors.

The	Classic	French	Sauce	Families



Carême’s	 original	 classification	 of	 the
sauces	 has	 undergone	 various
modifications,	 as	 have	 the	 ingredients	 in
many	 of	 the	 derived	 sauces.	 Here	 is	 one
modern	 version	 of	 the	 family	 tree	 that
shows	 a	 number	 of	 the	 more	 familiar
derived	sauces.	Stocks	and	roux	are	brown
if	 the	 meat,	 vegetables,	 or	 flour	 are
browned	 at	 relatively	 high	 heat	 before
liquid	 is	 added;	otherwise	 they	are	yellow
or	white,	and	lighter	in	flavor	as	well.
Basic	Sauce:	Brown,	or	Espagnole,	made
with	brown	stock	(beef,	veal),	brown	roux,

tomatoes

Bordelaise	(“from Red	wine,
Bordeaux”) shallots

Diable White	wine,	shallots,
(“devil”) cayenne
Lyonnaise	(“from	Lyon”) White	wine,	onion
Madeira Madeira	wine



Périgueux	(village	in Madeira	wine,
Perigord	region) truffles

Piquante White	wine,	vinegar,	gherkins,
capers

Poivrade (“peppered”)	Vinegar,	peppercorns
Red	wine	sauces Red	wine
Robert White	wine,	onion,	mustard

Basic	Sauce:	Velouté	(“velvety”),	made	with
white	stock	(veal,	poultry,	fish),	yellow	roux

Allemande Egg	yolks,
(“German”) mushrooms
White	Bordelaise White	wine,	shallots
Ravigote
(“invigorated”) White	wine,	vinegar

Suprême Poultry	stock,	cream,	butter

Basic	Sauce:	Béchamel	(a	gourmand),	made
with	milk,	white	roux



Crème Cream
Mornay	(a Cheese,	fish	or	poultry
family) stock
Soubise	(army	commander) Onion	puree

Basic	Sauce:	Hollandaise	(“from	Holland”),
made	with	butter,	eggs,	lemon	juice,	or

vinegar

Mousseline	(light	cloth) Whipped	cream
Béarnaise	(“from White	wine,	vinegar,
Béarn”) shallots,	tarragon

Basic	Sauce:	Mayonnaise	(uncertain
etymology),	made	with	vegetable	oil,	eggs,

vinegar,	or	lemon	juice

Rémoulade Gherkins,	capers,	mustard,
(twice	ground) anchovy	paste
Sauces	in	England:	Gravies	and



Condiments	According	to	an	18th-century
bon	mot	attributed	to	Domenico	Caracciolli,
with	implicit	contrast	to	France:	“England	has
sixty	religions	and	one	sauce”	—	that	one
sauce	being	melted	butter!	And	the	sharp-
toothed	Alberto	Denti	di	Pirajno	begins	the
chapter	on	sauces	in	his	Educated	Gastronome
(Venice,	1950)	with	these	pointed	sentences:

Doctor	Johnson	defined	a	sauce	as
something	which	is	eaten	with	food	in
order	to	improve	its	flavor.	It	would	be
difficult	to	believe	that	a	man	of	the
intelligence	and	culture	of	Dr.	Johnson…
had	expressed	himself	in	these	terms,	if	we
did	not	know	that	Dr.	Johnson	was	English.
Even	today	his	compatriots,	incapable	of
giving	any	flavor	to	their	food,	call	on
sauces	to	furnish	their	dishes	that	which
their	dishes	do	not	have.	This	explains	the
sauces,	the	jellies	and	prepared	extracts,
the	bottled	sauces,	the	chutneys,	the



ketchups	which	populate	the	tables	of	this
unfortunate	people.

England’s	 culinary	 standards	 were	 not
formed	 at	 the	 Court	 or	 in	 the	 noble	 houses;
they	 remained	 grounded	 in	 the	 domestic
habits	 and	 economies	 of	 the	 countryside.
English	cooks	ridiculed	French	cooks	for	their
essences	 and	 quintessences.	 The	 French
gastronome	Brillat-Savarin	 (1755–1826)	 tells
the	 story	 of	 the	 prince	 of	 Soubise	 being
presented	with	a	request	from	his	chef	for	50
hams,	to	be	used	at	one	supper	party.	Accused
of	 thievery,	 the	 chef	 responds	 that	 all	 this
meat	 is	 essential	 for	 the	 sauces	 to	 be	 made:
“Command	me,	and	I	can	put	these	fifty	hams
which	 seem	 to	 bother	 you	 into	 a	 glass	 bottle
no	 bigger	 than	 your	 thumb!”	 The	 prince	 is
astonished,	and	won	over,	by	this	assertion	of
the	 cook’s	 power	 to	 concentrate	 flavor.	 By
contrast,	 in	 her	 popular	 18th-century
cookbook,	 the	 English	 writer	 Hannah	 Glasse



gives	several	French	sauce	recipes	that	require
more	 meat	 than	 the	 meal	 they	 will
accompany,	and	then	remarks	on	“the	Folly	of
these	 fine	French	Cooks”	 in	 running	up	 such
huge	expenses	for	so	little.	Glasse’s	principal
sauce	 is	 “gravy,”	 made	 by	 browning	 some
meat,	 carrots,	 onions,	 several	 herbs	 and
spices,	 shaking	 in	 some	 flour,	 adding	 water,
and	 stewing.	 In	 the	 19th	 century,	 similarly
homely	 anchovy,	 oyster,	 parsley,	 egg,	 caper,
and	butter	sauces	were	popular.

And	the	Worcestershire	sauces	and
chutneys	and	ketchups	that	Denti	di	Pirajno
mocked?	These	condiments	had	become	a	part
of	English	cooking	in	the	17th	century	thanks
to	the	commercial	activities	of	the	East	India
Company,	which	brought	back	Asian	soy	and
fish	sauces	—	including	Indonesian	kecap	(p.
499)	—	and	pickled	fruits	and	vegetables,	all
preserved	foods	with	intensified	flavors.
Many	of	these	preparations	are	rich	in	savory
amino	acids,	and	the	English	imitations	were



often	made	with	similarly	savory	mushrooms
and	anchovies.	Our	familiar	tomato	ketchup	is
a	sweetened	version	of	salty,	vinegary,	spicy
tomato	preserves.	So	an	English	contemporary
of	Carême’s,	William	Kitchiner,	includes	a
recipe	for	béchamel	in	his	recipe	book,	but
also	presents	“Wow	Wow	Sauce,”	which
contains	parsley,	pickled	cucumbers	or
walnuts,	butter,	flour,	broth,	vinegar,	catsup,
and	mustard.	These	strongly	flavored
concoctions	were	quick	and	easy	to	use,	and
were	evidently	enjoyed	for	their	strong
contrast	to	the	flavor	of	the	foods	they
accompanied,	not	for	subtle	enhancement.

Modern	Sauces:	Nouvelle
and	Post-Nouvelle

The	20th	Century:	Nouvelle	Cuisine	Back	in
the	18th	century,	François	Marin	and	his
colleagues	described	their	bouillon-based
cooking	as	nouvelle	cuisine,	or	the	“new



cooking.”	In	the	hands	of	Carême	and
Escoffier,	that	nouvelle	cuisine	was
augmented	with	a	few	new	sauces	and	became
classic	French	cooking,	the	standard
throughout	the	western	world	for	fine	dining.
In	time,	the	classic	system	became
increasingly	rigid	and	predictable,	with	most
chefs	essentially	preparing	the	same	standard
dishes	from	the	same	precooked	sauce	bases.
The	20th	century	brought	a	new	nouvelle
cuisine,	along	with	the	New	Novel	and	the
New	Wave	in	cinema.	In	the	1960s	a	number
of	well	established	French	chefs,	including
Paul	Bocuse,	Michel	Guérard,	the	Troisgros
family,	and	Alain	Chapel,	led	the	way	in
rethinking	the	French	tradition.	They	asserted
the	chef’s	creative	role	and	the	virtues	of
simplicity,	economy,	and	freshness.	Foods
were	no	longer	to	be	distilled	into	their
essences,	but	were	to	be	presented	intact,	as
themselves.

In	1976,	the	journalists	Henri	Gault	and



Christian	Millau	published	the	Ten
Commandments	of	nouvelle	cuisine,	of	which
the	seventh	was:	“You	shall	eliminate	brown
and	white	sauces.”	The	new	cooks	still
thought	that,	in	the	words	of	Michel	Guérard,
“the	great	sauces	of	France	must	be	described
as	the	cornerstones	of	cuisine,”	but	they	used
them	more	selectively	and	with	restraint.
Lighter-flavored	veal,	chicken,	and	fish	stocks
served	as	poaching	and	braising	liquids;
reductions	of	these	were	used	to	give	depth	to
last-minute	pan	sauces;	and	sauces	in	general
were	thickened	less	with	flour	and	starch,
more	often	with	cream,	butter,	yogurt	and
fresh	cheese,	vegetable	purees,	and	with
bubbly	foams.

Post-Nouvelle:	 Diverse	 and	 Innovative
Sauces	At	the	opening	of	the	21st	century,	the
classic	 brown	and	white	 sauces	have	become
scarce,	so	much	so	that	perhaps	we’re	ready	to
appreciate	 their	 virtues	 again.	 Those



restaurant	and	home	cooks	who	do	serve	time-
consuming	meat	stocks	and	reductions	seldom
make	 them	 from	 scratch;	 these	 products	 are
well	 suited	 to	 manufacture	 on	 an	 industrial
scale,	 and	 good	 versions	 are	 available	 in
frozen	form.	The	rich	cream	and	butter	sauces
popularized	 by	 the	nouvelle	 cuisine	 have
become	less	common;	simpler	broths,	reduced
pan	 deglazings,	 and	 vinaigrettes	 more	 so.
Thanks	 to	 the	 international	 scope	 of	 modern
cooking,	 restaurant	 diners	 encounter	 a	 wider
range	 of	 sauces	 than	 ever	 before.	 Many	 of
them	are	contrasting	purees	made	from	fruits,
vegetables,	 nuts,	 and	 spices,	 or	 else	 thinner
soy-and	 fish-based	 Asian	 dipping	 sauces;
these	 are	 attractive	 to	 restaurateurs	 because
they	 require	 less	 time,	 labor,	 and	 often	 less
skill	than	the	classic	French	sauces.	Similarly,
home	cooks	are	now	likely	to	buy	time-saving
and	 versatile	 bottled	 sauces	 and	 dressings.
And	a	 few	 inventive	chefs	 are	 experimenting
with	 unusual	 tools	 and	 materials	 —	 among



them	 liquid	 nitrogen,	 high-powered
pulverizers,	thickeners	derived	from	seaweeds
and	 microbes	 —	 to	 make	 new	 forms	 of
suspensions,	emulsions,	foams,	and	jellies.

The	subtleness	and	delicacy	described	by	I
Yin	and	François	Marin	are	not	especially
prominent	among	contemporary	sauces.	On
the	other	hand,	never	before	in	history	have
we	had	so	many	distillations	of	desire	from
which	to	choose!

The	Science	of	Sauces:
Flavor	and	Consistency

Flavor	in	Sauces:
Taste	and	Smell

The	primary	purpose	of	a	sauce	is	to	provide
flavor	in	the	form	of	a	liquid	with	a	pleasing
consistency.	It’s	much	easier	to	generalize
about	consistency,	how	it	is	created,	and	how
it	can	go	wrong,	than	to	generalize	about



flavor.	There	are	many	thousands	of	different
flavor	molecules;	they	can	be	combined	in
untold	numbers	of	ways,	and	different	people
perceive	them	differently.	Still,	it’s	useful	to
keep	a	few	basic	facts	about	flavor	in	mind
when	constructing	a	sauce.

The	 Nature	 of	 Flavor	 Flavor	 is	 mainly	 a
combination	of	two	different	sensations,	taste
and	 smell.	 Taste	 is	 perceived	 on	 the	 tongue,
and	 comes	 in	 five	 different	 sensations:
saltiness,	 sweetness,	 sourness,	 savoriness,
bitterness.	The	molecules	that	we	taste	—	salt,
sugars,	 sour	 acids,	 savory	amino	acids,	bitter
alkaloids	 —	 are	 all	 easily	 soluble	 in	 water.
(The	 astringent	 sensation	 caused	 by	 tea	 and
red	 wine	 is	 a	 form	 of	 touch,	 and	 the	 “hot”
pungency	of	mustard	 is	a	 form	of	pain.	They
are	not	true	tastes,	but	we	also	perceive	them
on	the	tongue	and	their	causes	are	also	water-
soluble	molecules.)	Smell	 is	perceived	 in	 the
upper	nasal	region,	and	comes	in	thousands	of



different	 aromas	 that	we	 usually	 describe	 by
the	foods	they	remind	us	of,	fruity	or	flowery
or	 spicy	 or	 herbaceous	 or	 meaty.	 The
molecules	 that	we	 smell	 are	more	 soluble	 in
fat	 than	 in	 water,	 and	 tend	 to	 escape	 from
water	 into	 the	 air,	where	 our	 smell	 detectors
can	sniff	them.

It	can	be	useful	to	think	of	taste	as	the
backbone	of	a	flavor,	and	smell	as	its	fleshing
out.	Taste	alone	is	what	we	experience	when
we	take	some	food	in	the	mouth	and	pinch	our
nostrils	shut;	smell	alone	is	what	we
experience	when	we	sniff	some	food	without
putting	it	in	the	mouth.	Neither	is	fully
satisfying	on	its	own.	And	recent	research	has
shown	that	taste	sensations	affect	our	smell
sensations.	In	a	sweet	food,	the	presence	of
sugar	enhances	our	perception	of	aromas,	and
in	savory	foods,	the	presence	of	salt	has	the
same	effect.

The	 Spectrum	 of	 Sauce	 Flavors	 When



considered	as	carriers	of	flavor,	sauces	form	a
broad	 spectrum.	 At	 one	 end	 are	 simple
mixtures	 that	 provide	 a	 pleasing	 contrast	 to
the	 food	 itself,	 or	 add	 a	 flavor	 that	 it	 lacks.
Melted	 butter	 offers	 a	 subtle	 richness,
vinaigrette	 salad	 dressings	 and	mayonnaise	 a
tart	richness,	salsas	tartness	and	pungency.	At
the	 other	 end	 of	 the	 spectrum	 are	 complex
flavor	 mixtures	 that	 fill	 the	 mouth	 and	 nose
with	 sensations,	 and	 provide	 a	 rich
background	 into	which	 the	 flavor	of	 the	 food
itself	blends.	Among	these	are	the	meat-based
sauces	 of	 the	 French	 tradition,	 whose
complexity	comes	largely	from	the	extraction
and	 concentration	 of	 savory	 amino	 acids	 and
other	taste	molecules,	and	from	the	generation
of	 meaty	 aromas	 by	 way	 of	 the	 browning
reactions	between	amino	acids	and	sugars	 (p.
778).	 Chinese	 braising	 liquids	 based	 on	 soy
sauce	 are	 similarly	 complex	 thanks	 to	 the
cooking	and	fermentation	of	 the	soybeans	(p.
496),	 while	 the	 spice	 blends	 of	 India	 and



Thailand	 and	 the	 moles	 of	 Mexico	 typically
combine	 a	 half	 dozen	 or	 more	 strongly
aromatic	and	pungent	ingredients.

Improving	 Sauce	 Flavor	 Perhaps	 the	 most
common	 problem	 with	 sauce	 flavor	 is	 that
there	doesn’t	seem	to	be	enough	of	it,	or	that
“there’s	 something	missing”	 in	 it.	 Perfecting
the	flavor	of	any	dish	is	an	art	that	depends	on
the	 perceptiveness	 and	 skill	 of	 the	 cook,	 but
there	 are	 two	 basic	 principles	 that	 can	 help
anyone	analyze	and	improve	a	sauce’s	flavor.

Sauces	are	an	accompaniment	to	a
primary	food,	are	eaten	in	small	amounts
compared	to	the	primary	food,	and
therefore	need	to	have	a	concentrated
flavor.	A	spoonful	of	sauce	alone	should
taste	too	strong,	so	that	a	little	sauce	on	a
piece	of	meat	or	pasta	will	taste	just
right.	Thickening	agents	tend	to	reduce
the	flavor	of	a	sauce	(p.	596),	so	it’s
important	to	check	and	adjust	the	flavor



after	thickening.
A	satisfying	sauce	offers	stimulation	to
most	of	our	chemical	senses.	A	sauce
that	doesn’t	seem	quite	right	is	probably
deficient	in	one	or	more	tastes,	or	doesn’t
carry	enough	aroma.	The	cook	can	taste
the	sauce	actively	for	its	saltiness,
sweetness,	acidity,	savoriness,	and
aroma,	and	then	try	to	correct	the
deficiencies	while	maintaining	the
overall	balance	of	flavors.

Sauce	Consistency

Though	the	main	point	of	sauces	is	their
flavor,	we	also	enjoy	them	for	their
consistency,	their	feeling	in	the	mouth.	And
problems	with	consistency	—	with	the	sauce’s
physical	structure	—	are	far	more	likely	than
flavor	problems	to	make	a	sauce	unusable.
Curdled	or	congealed	or	separated	sauces	are
not	pleasant	to	look	at	or	to	feel	in	the	mouth.



So	it’s	good	to	understand	the	physical
structures	of	common	sauces,	how	they’re	put
together	and	how	they’re	ruined.

Food	 Dispersions:	 Mixtures	 That	 Create
Texture	 The	 base	 ingredient	 in	 nearly	 all
flavorful	food	liquids	is	water.	That’s	because
foods	 themselves	 are	 mostly	 water.	 Meat
juices,	 vegetable	 and	 fruit	 purees	 are	 all
obviously	watery;	cream	and	mayonnaise	and
the	hot	egg	sauces	less	obviously	so,	but	they
too	 are	 built	 on	 water.	 In	 each	 of	 these
preparations,	 water	 is	 the	continuous	 phase:
the	 material	 that	 bathes	 all	 the	 other
components,	 the	 material	 in	 which	 all	 the
other	 components	 swim.	 (The	 only	 common
exceptions	 are	 some	 vinaigrettes	 and	 butter
and	nut	butters,	in	which	fat	is	the	continuous
phase.)	 Those	 other	 components	 are	 the
dispersed	phase.	 The	 task	 of	 giving	 sauces	 a
desirable	 consistency	 is	 a	 matter	 of	 making
the	continuous,	base	phase	of	water	seem	less



watery,	more	substantial.	The	way	this	is	done
is	 to	 add	 some	 nonwatery	 substance	 —	 a
dispersed	 phase	 —	 to	 the	 water.	 This
substance	may	be	particles	of	plant	or	animal
tissue,	or	various	molecules,	or	droplets	of	oil,
or	even	bubbles	of	air.	And	how	do	the	added
substances	 make	 the	 water	 seem	 more
substantial?	 By	 obstructing	 the	 free
movement	of	the	water	molecules.

Obstructing	 the	 Movement	 of	 Water
Molecules	 Individual	 water	 molecules	 are
small	 —	 just	 three	 atoms,	 H2O.	 Left	 to
themselves,	 they’re	 very	mobile:	 so	 water	 is
runny	 and	 flows	 as	 easily	 as	 a	 stream.	 (Oil
molecules,	 by	 contrast,	 have	 three	 chains
stuck	 together,	 each	 14	 to	 20	 atoms	 long,	 so
they	 drag	 against	 each	 other	 and	move	more
slowly.	 This	 is	why	 oil	 is	more	 viscous	 than
water.)	But	intersperse	solid	particles	or	long,
tangly	 molecules,	 or	 oil	 droplets,	 or	 air
bubbles	 among	 the	water	molecules,	 and	 the



water	 molecules	 can	 move	 only	 a	 small
distance	before	they	collide	with	one	of	these
foreign,	 less	mobile	 substances.	They’re	 then
able	to	make	only	slow	progress,	so	they	flow
more	reluctantly.

Food	Words:	Liaison
To	name	both	the	act	of	thickening	and	the
agents	 of	 thickening,	 early	 French	 cooks
used	the	word	liaison,	which	meant	a	close
connection	 or	 bond,	 whether	 physical,
political,	 or	 amorous.	 When	 the	 English
got	 around	 to	 borrowing	 the	 word	 in	 the
17th	 century,	 it	 was	 the	 culinary
application	 that	 came	 first;	 military	 and
romantic	 liaisons	 didn’t	 arrive	 until	 the
19th	century.
Thickening	agents	in	saucemaking	are	just

such	obstructing	agents.	Cooks	have
traditionally	thought	of	them	as	binding
agents,	and	this	view	makes	its	own	kind	of
sense.	The	dispersed	materials	essentially



divide	the	liquid	into	many	small,	local
masses:	and	by	dividing,	they	organize	and
collect	it	and	give	it	a	kind	of	coherence	that
it	lacked	beforehand.	Some	thickening	agents
also	literally	bind	water	molecules	to
themselves	and	so	take	them	out	of	circulation
altogether,	and	this	too	has	the	effect	of
reducing	the	fluidity	of	the	continuous	phase.

In	addition	to	giving	watery	fluids	a
thicker	consistency,	the	substances	in	the
dispersed	phase	can	give	them	textures	of
various	kinds.	Solid	particles	may	make	them
grainy	or	smooth,	depending	on	the	particle
size;	oil	droplets	make	them	seem	creamy;
dispersed	molecules	with	a	tendency	to	adhere
to	each	other	may	make	them	seem	sticky	or
slimy;	air	bubbles	make	them	seem	light	and
evanescent.

There	are	four	common	ways	of	thickening
watery	food	juices.	Each	produces	a	different
kind	of	physical	system,	and	lends	different
qualities	to	the	finished	sauce.



Cloudy	 Suspensions:	 Thickening	 with
Particles	 Most	 of	 our	 raw	 ingredients	 —
vegetables,	fruits,	herbs,	meats	—	are	plant	or
animal	 tissues	 built	 from	 microscopic	 cells
that	are	filled	with	watery	fluids.	The	cells	are
contained	 within	 walls,	 membranes,	 or	 thin
sheets	 of	 connective	 tissue.	 (Dry	 seeds	 and
spices	contain	no	juices,	but	are	still	made	up
of	 solid	 cells	 and	 cell	 walls.)	 When	 any	 of
these	 foods	 is	 broken	 apart	 into	 small	 pieces
by	being	ground	in	a	mortar	or	pulverized	in	a
blender,	 they	 are	 turned	 inside	 out,	 so	 the
fluids	 form	 a	 continuous	 phase	 that	 contains
fragments	 of	 the	 solid	 cell	 walls	 and
connective	 tissue.	 These	 fragments	 obstruct
and	 bind	 the	 water	 molecules,	 and	 thus
thicken	the	consistency	of	the	mixture.	Such	a
mixture	of	a	fluid	and	solid	particles	is	called
a	 suspension:	 the	 particles	 are	 suspended	 in
the	fluid.	Sauces	made	from	pureed	foods	are
suspensions.

The	texture	of	a	suspension	depends	on	the



size	of	its	particles.	The	smaller	the	particles,
the	less	noticeable	they	are	to	the	tongue,	and
the	smoother	the	texture.	Also,	the	smaller	the
particles	are,	the	more	of	them	there	are	to	do
the	obstructing	and	the	more	surface	area	they
have	to	take	up	a	layer	of	water	molecules:
and	so	the	thicker	the	consistency	they
produce.	Suspensions	are	always	opaque,
because	the	solid	particles	are	large	enough	to
block	the	passage	of	light	rays	and	either
absorb	them	or	bounce	them	back	toward	their
source.	Because	the	particles	and	water	are
very	different	materials,	suspensions	tend	to
settle	and	separate	into	thin	fluid	and
concentrated	particles.	Cooks	work	to	prevent
separation	by	reducing	the	volume	of	the
continuous	phase	(draining	off	or	boiling
away	excess	water),	or	by	augmenting	the
dispersed	phase	(adding	starch	or	other	long
molecules	or	fat	droplets).

Nut	butters	and	chocolate	are	suspensions
of	solid	seed	particles	not	in	water,	but	in	oils



and	fats.

Thickening	 a	 liquid	with	 food	 particles.	 In	 a
suspension,	 microscopic	 chunks	 of	 plant	 or
animal	 tissue	 are	 suspended	 in	 liquid,	 and
give	the	impression	of	thickness	by	interfering
with	the	liquid’s	flow.
Clear	Dispersions	and	Gels:	Thickening
with	Molecules	A	single	microscopic
fragment	of	a	tomato	cell	wall	or	muscle	fiber
is	built	up	of	many	thousands	of
submicroscopic	molecules.	Not	all	of	the
large	molecules	in	those	fragments	can	be
teased	away	from	each	other	so	that	they	are
individually	dispersed	in	water.	But	those	that
can	be	extracted	in	this	way	—	starch,	pectins,
such	proteins	as	gelatin	—	are	very	useful
thickening	agents.	Because	single	molecules



are	so	much	smaller	and	lighter	than	intact
starch	granules	and	cell	fragments,	they	don’t
settle	out	and	separate.	And	they	are	too	small
and	too	widely	separated	to	block	the	passage
of	light	rays:	so	unlike	suspensions,	molecular
dispersions	are	usually	translucent	and	glassy-
looking.	In	general,	the	longer	the	molecule,
the	better	it	is	at	obstructing	water	movement,
because	long	molecules	more	readily	get
tangled	up	in	each	other.	So	a	small	quantity
of	long	amylose	starch	molecules	will	do	the
same	thickening	job	as	a	large	quantity	of
short	amylopectin	(p.	611),	and	long	gelatin
molecules	thicken	more	efficiently	than	short
ones.	Thickening	with	molecules	often
requires	heat,	either	to	liberate	the	molecules
from	the	larger	structures	—	starch	molecules
from	their	granules,	gelatin	molecules	from
meat	connective	tissue	—	or	to	shake	out
compactly	folded	molecules	—	egg	proteins
—	into	their	long,	extended,	tangly	form.



Solid	 Dispersions:	 Jellies	 When	 the	 water
phase	 of	 a	 food	 fluid	 has	 enough	 thickening
molecules	dissolved	in	it,	and	the	fluid	is	left
undisturbed	 and	 allowed	 to	 cool,	 those
molecules	can	bond	to	each	other	and	form	a
loose	 but	 continuous	 tangle	 or	 network	 that
permeates	 the	 fluid,	 with	 the	 water
immobilized	 in	 pockets	 between	 the	 network
molecules.	Such	a	network	 thickens	 the	 fluid
to	the	point	that	it	becomes	a	very	moist	solid,
or	 a	gel.	 It’s	 possible	 to	 make	 a	 solid	—	 if
wobbly	—	jelly	that	is	99%	water	and	just	1%
gelatin.	 If	 the	 gel	 is	 made	 from	 dissolved
molecules,	then	it	will	be	translucent,	like	the
dispersion	 from	which	 it	 is	 formed.	 Familiar
examples	are	savory	jellies	made	from	gelatin
and	sweet	jellies	made	from	fruit	pectin.	If	the
solution	also	contains	particles	—	the	remains
of	 starch	 granules,	 for	 example	 —	 then	 the
jelly	will	be	opaque.



Thickening	a	liquid	with	long	food	molecules.
Dissolved	molecules	of	plant	starch	or	animal
gelatin	 get	 tangled	 up	 with	 each	 other	 and
impede	the	flow	of	the	liquid.
Emulsions:	Thickening	with	Droplets
Thanks	to	their	very	different	structures	and
properties,	water	molecules	and	oil	molecules
don’t	mix	evenly	with	each	other(p.	797).
Neither	can	dissolve	in	the	other.	If	we	use	a
whisk	or	blender	to	force	a	small	portion	of
oil	to	mix	into	a	larger	one	of	water,	the	two
form	a	milky,	thick	fluid.	Both	the	milkiness
and	the	thickness	are	caused	by	small	droplets
of	oil,	which	block	light	rays	and	the	free
movement	of	water	molecules.	The	oil
droplets	thus	behave	much	as	the	solid
particles	in	a	suspension	do.	Such	a	mixture	of



two	incompatible	liquids,	with	droplets	of	one
liquid	dispersed	in	a	continuous	phase	of	the
other,	is	called	an	emulsion.	The	term	comes
from	the	Latin	word	for	“milk,”	which	is	just
such	a	mixture	(p.	17).

Emulsifiers	 In	 addition	 to	 the	 two
incompatible	 liquids,	 a	 successful	 emulsion
requires	 a	 third	 ingredient:	 an	emulsifier.	An
emulsifier	 is	 a	 substance	 of	 some	 kind	 that
coats	the	oil	droplets	and	prevents	them	from
coalescing	with	 each	 other.	 Several	 different
materials	 can	 serve	 this	 function,	 including
proteins,	 cell-wall	 fragments,	 and	 a	 group	 of
hybrid	 molecules	 (for	 example,	 egg-yolk
lecithin)	that	have	an	oil-like	end	and	a	water-
soluble	 end	 (p.	 802).	 To	make	 an	 emulsified
sauce,	 we	 add	 oil	 to	 a	 mixture	 of	 water	 and
emulsifiers	(egg	yolk,	ground	herbs	or	spices),
and	break	the	oil	up	into	microscopic	droplets,
which	 the	 emulsifiers	 immediately	 coat	 and
stabilize.	 Or	 we	 can	 begin	 with	 a	 premade



emulsion.	 Cream	 is	 an	 especially	 robust	 and
versatile	base	for	emulsified	sauces.

Foams:	Thickening	with	Bubbles	At	 first	 it
seems	surprising	that	a	fluid	can	be	thickened
by	 adding	 air	 to	 it.	 Air	 is	 the	 opposite	 of
substantial!	 Yet	 think	 of	 the	 foams	 on	 an
espresso	 coffee	 or	 a	 glass	 of	 beer:	 they	 all
have	 enough	 body	 to	 hold	 their	 shape	 when
scooped	 with	 a	 spoon.	 Similarly,	 a	 pancake
batter	 gets	 noticeably	 thicker	 if	 you	 stir	 the
chemical	 leavening	 in	 last.	 In	 a	 fluid,	 air
bubbles	 have	 much	 the	 same	 effect	 as	 solid
particles:	 they	 interrupt	 the	 mass	 of	 water
molecules	and	obstruct	the	water’s	flow	from
one	 place	 to	 another.	 The	 disadvantage	 of
foams	is	that	they	are	fragile	and	evanescent.
The	 force	of	 gravity	 unceasingly	drains	 fluid
from	the	bubble	walls,	and	when	the	walls	get
just	 a	 few	 molecules	 thick,	 they	 break,	 the
bubbles	 pop,	 and	 the	 foam	 collapses.	 This
outcome	can	be	delayed	 in	a	couple	of	ways.



The	 cook	 can	 thicken	 the	 fluid	 with	 truly
substantial	 particles	 or	 molecules	 (oil
droplets,	 egg	 proteins)	 to	 slow	 its	 drainage
from	 the	 bubble	 cell	 walls,	 or	 include
emulsifiers	 (egg-yolk	 lecithin)	 that	 stabilize
the	bubble	structure	itself.	On	the	other	hand,
the	 very	 delicacy	 and	 evanescence	 of
unreinforced	 foams	 is	 a	 part	 of	 their	 appeal.
Such	 foams	 must	 be	 prepared	 at	 the	 last
minute	and	savored	as	they	disappear.

Thickening	a	 liquid	with	 oil	 droplets	 and	air
bubbles.	These	tiny	spheres	act	much	as	solid
food	particles	do,	interfering	with	the	flow	of
the	liquid	surrounding	them.

Real	 Sauces:	 Multiple	 Thickeners	 The
sauces	 that	 cooks	 actually	 make	 are	 seldom



simple	 suspensions,	 molecular	 dispersions,
emulsions,	 or	 foams.	 They’re	 usually	 a
combination	 of	 two	 or	 more.	 Purees	 usually
contain	 both	 suspended	 particles	 and
dispersed	 molecules,	 starch-thickened	 sauces
contain	 both	 dispersed	 molecules	 and
remnants	 of	 the	 granules,	 emulsified	 sauces
include	 proteins	 and	 particles	 from	 milk	 or
eggs	or	spices.	Cooks	often	thicken	and	enrich
sauces	 of	 all	 kinds	 at	 the	 last	 minute	 by
melting	a	piece	of	butter	into	it	or	stirring	in	a
spoonful	of	cream,	thus	making	them	in	part	a
milkfat	 emulsion.	 Such	 complexity	 of	 the
dispersed	phase	may	well	make	sauce	texture
more	subtle	and	intriguing.

The	Influence	of	Consistency	on	Flavor

Thickeners	Reduce	Flavor	Intensity	In
general,	the	components	of	a	sauce	that	create
its	consistency	have	little	or	no	flavor	of	their
own.	They	therefore	only	dilute	whatever



flavors	the	sauce	has.	Thickening	agents	also
actively	reduce	the	effectiveness	of	the	flavor
molecules	in	the	sauce.	They	bind	some	of
those	molecules	so	that	our	palate	never
senses	them,	and	they	slow	their	movement
from	the	sauce	into	our	taste	buds	or	nasal
passages.	Because	aroma	molecules	tend	to	be
more	fat	soluble	than	water	soluble,	fat	in	a
sauce	hangs	onto	aroma	molecules	and
decreases	aromatic	intensity.	Amylose	starch
molecules	trap	aroma	molecules	(the	aroma
molecules	in	turn	make	the	starch	molecules
more	likely	to	bond	to	each	other	into	light-
scattering,	milky	aggregates).	And	wheat	flour
binds	more	sodium	than	pure	starches,	so
flour-thickened	preparations	require	more
added	salt	than	starch-thickened	sauces.

As	a	general	rule,	then,	a	thin	sauce	will
have	a	more	intense	and	immediate	flavor
than	the	same	sauce	with	thickeners	added.
But	the	thickened	sauce	will	release	its	flavor
more	gradually	and	persistently.	Each	effect



has	its	uses.
Many	sauces	can	be	thickened	not	just	by

adding	thickeners,	but	by	removing	some	of
the	continuous	phase	—	boiling	off	water	—
so	that	the	thickeners	already	present	in	the
sauce	become	more	concentrated.	This
technique	doesn’t	diminish	flavor,	because
whatever	flavor	the	sauce’s	particles	and
molecules	can	bind	have	already	been	bound.
And	in	fact	it	can	intensify	flavor,	because	the
concentration	of	flavor	molecules	may
increase	just	as	the	thickeners’	concentration
does.

The	Importance	of	Salt	Recent	 research	has
uncovered	 intriguing	 indications	 that
thickeners	 reduce	our	perception	of	 aroma	 in
part	 because	 they	 reduce	 our	 perception	 of
saltiness.	 Various	 long-chain	 carbohydrates,
including	 starch,	 first	 reduce	 the	 apparent
saltiness	 of	 the	 sauce,	 either	 by	 binding
sodium	 ions	 to	 themselves	 or	 by	 adding



another	 sensation	 (viscosity)	 for	 the	 brain	 to
attend	to.	Then	this	reduced	saltiness	reduces
the	 apparent	 aroma	 intensity	 —	 despite	 the
fact	that	the	same	number	of	aroma	molecules
are	 flowing	 out	 of	 the	 sauce	 and	 across	 the
smell	 receptors	 in	 our	 nose.	 The	 practical
significance	of	 this	 finding	 is	 that	 thickening
a	 sauce	 with	 flour	 or	 starch	 diminishes	 its
overall	 flavor,	 and	 that	 both	 taste	and	 aroma
can	be	 restored	 to	some	extent	by	 the	simple
addition	of	more	salt.

Sauces	Thickened
with	Gelatin	and
Other	Proteins

If	we	gently	heat	a	piece	of	meat	or	fish	alone
in	a	pan,	it	releases	flavorful	juices.	Normally
we	make	the	pan	hot	enough	to	evaporate	the
water	the	moment	it	comes	out,	so	that	the
flavor	molecules	become	concentrated	on	the
meat	and	pan	surfaces,	and	react	with	each



other	to	form	brown	pigments	and	a	host	of
new	flavor	molecules	(p.	778).	But	if	the
juices	remain	juices,	they	constitute	a	very
basic	sauce,	a	product	of	the	meat	that	can	be
added	back	to	moisten	and	flavor	the	mass	of
coagulated	muscle	protein	from	which	they’ve
been	squeezed.	The	problem	is	that	the	meat
or	fish	only	gives	up	a	small	amount	of	juice
compared	to	the	solid	mass.	To	satisfy	fully
our	appetite	for	those	juices,	cooks	have
invented	methods	for	making	meat	and	fish
sauces	for	their	own	sake,	and	in	any	quantity.
The	main	thickening	agent	in	these	sauces	is
gelatin,	an	unusual	protein	that	cooking
releases	from	the	meat	and	fish.	Cooks	also
use	other	animal	proteins	to	thicken	sauces,
but	their	behavior	is	very	different	and	more
problematic,	as	we’ll	see	(p.	603).

The	Uniqueness	of	Gelatin

Gelatin	is	a	protein,	but	it’s	unlike	the	other



proteins	that	the	cook	works	with.	Nearly	all
food	proteins	respond	to	the	heat	of	cooking
by	unfolding,	bonding	permanently	to	each
other,	and	coagulating	into	a	firm,	solid	mass.
It	turns	out	that	gelatin	molecules	can’t	easily
form	permanent	bonds	with	each	other,	due	to
their	particular	chemical	makeup.	So	heat
simply	causes	them	to	shake	loose	from	the
weak,	temporary	bonds	that	hold	them
together,	and	disperses	them	in	water.
Because	gelatin	molecules	are	very	long	and
get	tangled	up	with	each	other,	they	give	the
mixture	a	definite	body,	and	can	even	set	it
into	a	solid	gel	(p.	605).	However,	gelatin	is
relatively	inefficient	at	thickening.	Its
molecules	are	very	flexible,	while	those	of
starch	and	other	carbohydrates	are	rigid	and
better	at	interfering	with	the	movement	of
water	and	each	other.	This	is	one	reason	why
gelatin-thickened	sauces	are	usually
augmented	with	starch.	A	sauce	that	contains
only	gelatin	requires	a	large	concentration,



10%	or	more,	to	have	real	weight.	But	at	that
concentration,	the	sauce	is	quick	to	congeal	on
a	cooling	plate,	and	it	can	also	cause	the	teeth
to	stick	together	(gelatin	makes	an	excellent
glue!).

Gelatin	 Comes	 from	 Collagen	 Free	 gelatin
molecules	 don’t	 exist	 in	 meat	 and	 fish.
They’re	 woven	 tightly	 together	 to	 form	 the
fibrous	 connective-tissue	 protein	 called
collagen	 (p.	 130),	 which	 gives	 mechanical
strength	to	muscles,	tendons,	skin,	and	bones.
Single	gelatin	molecules	are	chains	of	around
1,000	 amino	 acids.	 Thanks	 to	 the	 repeating
pattern	 of	 their	 amino	 acids,	 three	 gelatin
molecules	 naturally	 fit	 alongside	 each	 other
and	form	weak,	 reversible	bonds	 that	arrange
the	 three	 molecules	 in	 the	 form	 of	 a	 triple
helix.	Many	triple	helixes	then	become	cross-
linked	to	each	other	to	form	the	strong,	rope-
like	fibers	of	collagen.

Cooks	generate	gelatin	from	collagen	by



using	heat	to	dismantle	the	collagen	fibers.
For	the	muscles	of	land	animals,	it	takes	a
temperature	of	around	140ºF/60ºC	to	agitate
the	muscle	molecules	enough	to	break	the
weak	bonds	of	the	triple	helix.	The	orderly
structure	of	the	collagen	fibers	then	collapses
and	the	fibers	shrink,	thus	squeezing	juices
from	the	muscle	fibers.	Some	of	the	juices
bathe	the	fibers,	and	single	gelatin	molecules
or	small	aggregates	may	disperse	into	the
juice.	The	higher	the	meat	temperature	goes,
the	more	gelatin	becomes	dispersed.	However,
many	of	the	collagen	fibers	remain	intact
thanks	to	the	strong	cross-linking	bonds.	The
older	the	animal	and	the	more	work	its
muscles	do,	the	more	strongly	cross-linked	its
collagen	fibers	are.

Extracting	Gelatin
and	Flavor	from	Meats

The	muscles	that	make	up	meat	are	mainly



water	and	the	protein	fibers	that	do	the	work
of	contraction,	which	are	not	dispersable	in
water.	The	soluble	and	dispersable	materials
in	muscle	include	about	1%	by	weight	of
collagen,	5%	other	cell	proteins,	2%	amino
acids	and	other	savory	molecules,	1%	sugars
and	other	carbohydrates,	and	1%	minerals,
mainly	phosphorus	and	potassium.	Bones	are
around	20%	collagen,	pig	skin	around	30%,
and	cartilaginous	veal	knuckles	up	to	40%.
Bones	and	skin	are	thus	much	better	sources
of	gelatin	and	thickening	power	than	meat.
However,	they	carry	only	a	small	fraction	of
the	other	soluble	molecules	that	provide
flavor.	To	make	sauces	with	good	meat	flavor,
it’s	meat	that	must	be	extracted,	not	bones	or
skin.

When	meat	is	thoroughly	cooked,	it
releases	about	40%	of	its	weight	in	juice,	and
the	flow	of	juice	pretty	much	ends	when	the
tissue	reaches	160ºF/70ºC.	Most	of	the	juice	is
water,	and	the	rest	the	soluble	molecules



carried	in	the	water.	If	meat	is	cooked	in
water,	then	gelatin	can	be	freed	from	the
connective	tissue	and	extracted	over	a	long
period	of	time.	When	cooks	make	stocks,
extraction	times	range	from	less	than	an	hour
for	fish,	to	a	few	hours	for	chicken	or	veal
stocks,	to	a	day	for	beef.	Optimum	extraction
times	depend	on	the	size	of	the	bones	and
meat	pieces,	and	on	the	age	of	the	animal;	the
more	cross-linked	collagen	of	a	steer	takes
longer	to	free	than	the	collagen	from	a	veal
calf.	At	long	extraction	times,	the	gelatin
molecules	that	have	already	been	dissolved
are	gradually	broken	down	into	smaller	pieces
that	are	less	efficient	thickeners.

Meat	Stocks	and	Sauces

There	are	several	general	strategies	for
making	meat	and	fish	sauces.	The	simplest	of
them	center	on	the	juices	produced	when	the
meat	for	the	final	dish	is	cooked,	which	can	be



flavored	and/or	thickened	at	the	last	minute
with	purees,	emulsions,	or	a	starch-based
mixture.	In	the	more	versatile	system
developed	by	French	cooks,	one	begins	by
making	a	water	extract	of	meat	and	bones
ahead	of	time,	and	then	uses	that	stock	to	cook
the	final	dish,	or	concentrates	it	to	make
intensely	flavored,	full-bodied	sauces.	These
stocks	and	concentrates	used	to	be	the	heart	of
restaurant	cooking.	They’re	less	important
now,	but	still	represent	the	state	of	the	art	in
meat	sauces.

Collagen	 and	 gelatin.	 Collagen	 molecules
( l e f t )	contribute	 mechanical	 strength	 to
connective	tissue	and	bone	in	animal	muscles.
They	are	made	up	of	 three	 individual	protein
chains	wound	closely	 together	 into	a	helix	 to



make	a	rope-like	fiber.	When	heated	in	water,
the	 individual	 protein	 chains	 come	 apart
(r ight )	and	 dissolve	 into	 the	 water.	 The
unwound,	 separate	 chains	 are	 what	 we	 call
gelatin.
The	Choice	of	Ingredients	The	aim	in
making	meat	stock	is	to	produce	a	full-
flavored	liquid	with	enough	gelatin	that	it	will
also	become	full-bodied	when	reduced.	Meat
is	an	expensive	ingredient,	an	excellent	source
of	flavor,	and	a	modest	source	of	gelatin.
Bones	and	skins	are	less	expensive,	poor
sources	of	flavor,	but	excellent	sources	of
gelatin.	So	the	most	flavorful	and	expensive
stocks	are	made	with	meat,	the	fullest	bodied
and	cheapest	with	bones	and	pork	skin,	and
everyday	stocks	with	some	of	each.	Beef	and
chicken	stocks	taste	distinctly	of	their
respective	meats,	while	veal	bones	and	meat
are	valued	for	their	more	neutral	character,	as
well	as	their	higher	yield	of	soluble	gelatin.
Cartilaginous	veal	knuckles	and	feet	give



especially	large	amounts.	Typically,	the	meat
and	bones	are	cooked	in	between	one	and	two
times	their	weight	in	water	(1–2	quarts	or
liters	per	2	lb/1	kg	solids),	and	yield	about
half	their	weight	in	stock,	thanks	to	gradual
evaporation	during	cooking.	The	smaller	the
pieces	into	which	they’re	cut,	the	more
quickly	their	contents	can	be	extracted	in	the
water.

In	order	to	round	out	the	flavor	of	a	stock,
cooks	usually	cook	the	meat	and	bones	along
with	aromatic	vegetables	—	celery,	carrots,
onions	—	a	packet	of	herbs,	and	sometimes
wine.	Carrots	and	onions	contribute	sweetness
as	well	as	aroma,	wine	tartness	and
savoriness.	Salt	is	never	added	at	this	stage,
because	the	meats	and	vegetables	release
some,	and	it	becomes	concentrated	as	the
stock	reduces.

Cooking	 the	 Stock	 A	 classic	 meat	 stock
should	be	as	clear	as	possible,	so	that	it	can	be



made	into	soup	broths	and	aspics	that	will	be
attractive	 to	 the	 eye.	Many	 of	 the	 details	 of
stock	 making	 have	 to	 do	 with	 removing
impurities,	especially	the	soluble	cell	proteins
that	coagulate	into	unsightly	gray	particles.

The	bones	and	often	meat	as	well	(and
skin,	if	any)	are	first	washed	thoroughly.	To
make	a	light	stock,	they	are	then	put	in	a	pot
of	cold	water	that	is	brought	to	the	boil;
they’re	then	removed	from	the	pot	and	rinsed.
This	blanching	step	removes	surface
impurities	and	coagulates	surface	proteins	on
the	bones	and	meat	so	that	they	won’t	cloud
the	cooking	liquid.	To	make	a	dark	stock	for
brown	sauces,	the	bones	and	meat	are	first
roasted	in	a	hot	oven	to	produce	color	and	a
more	intense	roasted-meat	flavor	with	the
Maillard	reactions	between	proteins	and
carbohydrates.	This	process	also	coagulates
the	surface	proteins	and	makes	blanching
unnecessary.



The	 Importance	 of	 a	 Cold	 Start	 and
Uncovered,	Slow	Heating	After	the	blanching
or	browning,	the	meat	solids	are	started	in	an
uncovered	 pot	 of	 cold	water,	which	 the	 cook
brings	 slowly	 to	 a	 gentle	 simmer	 and	 keeps
there,	 regularly	 skimming	 off	 the	 fat	 and
scum	that	accumulate	at	the	surface.	The	cold
start	 and	 slow	 heating	 allow	 the	 soluble
proteins	 to	 escape	 the	 solids	 and	 coagulate
slowly,	 forming	 large	 aggregates	 that	 either
rise	to	the	surface	and	are	easily	skimmed	off,
or	settle	onto	the	sides	and	bottom.	A	hot	start
produces	 many	 separate	 and	 tiny	 protein
particles	that	remain	suspended	and	cloud	the
stock;	 and	 a	 boil	 churns	 particles	 and	 fat
droplets	 into	 a	 cloudy	 suspension	 and
emulsion.	 The	 pot	 is	 left	 uncovered	 for
several	 reasons.	Because	 this	 allows	water	 to
evaporate	and	cool	the	surface,	it	makes	it	less
likely	 that	 the	 stock	 will	 boil.	 It	 also
dehydrates	 the	 surface	 scum,	which	 becomes
more	 insoluble	 and	 easier	 to	 skim.	 And	 it



starts	 the	 process	 of	 concentration	 that	 will
give	the	stock	a	more	intense	flavor.

Food	Words:	Stock,	Broth
The	 word	stock	 as	 it’s	 applied	 in	 the
kitchen	 reflects	 the	 professional	 cook’s
approach	to	sauce	making.	It	derives	from
an	 old	 Germanic	 root	 meaning	 “tree
trunk,”	 and	 has	 more	 than	 60	 related
meanings	 revolving	 around	 the	 idea	 of
basic	materials,	 sources,	 and	supplies.	 It’s
thus	 the	 culinary	 application	 of	 a	 very
general	term,	and	was	first	used	in	the	18th
century.	Much	more	specific	and	ancient	is
broth,	 which	 goes	 back	 to	 1000	CE	 and	 a
Germanic	root	bru	meaning	“to	prepare	by
boiling”	and	the	material	so	prepared,	both
it	and	the	boiling	liquid.	Bouillon	and	brew
are	related	terms.

Single	and	Double	Stocks	After	the	scum	has
mostly	stopped	forming,	the	vegetables,
herbs,	and	wine	are	added	and	the	cooking	is



continued	at	a	gentle	simmer	until	most	of	the
flavor	and	gelatin	have	been	extracted	from
the	solids.	The	liquid	is	strained	through
cheesecloth	or	a	metal	strainer	without
pressing	on	the	solids,	which	would	extract
cloudy	particles.	It’s	then	thoroughly	chilled,
and	the	solidified	fat	removed	from	the
surface.	(If	the	cook	doesn’t	have	the	time	to
chill	the	stock,	he	can	soak	away	much	of	the
fat	from	the	surface	with	cloth	or	paper	towels
or	specially	designed	plastic	blotters.)	The
stock	is	now	ready	to	use	as	an	ingredient,	to
make	braised	and	stewed	meats	and	meat
soups,	or	as	a	savory	cooking	liquid	for
vegetables;	or	it	may	be	reduced	for	use	in	a
sauce.	The	cook	may	also	use	stock	to	extract
a	new	batch	of	meat	and	bones	and	produce
the	especially	flavorful,	highly	prized	—	and
expensive	—	double	stock.	(Double	stock	can
in	turn	be	combined	with	more	fresh	meat	and
bones	to	make	a	triple	stock.)

Because	a	standard	kitchen	extraction	of



eight	hours	releases	only	about	20%	of	the
gelatin	in	beef	bones,	the	bones	may	be
extracted	for	a	second	time,	for	a	total	of	up	to
24	hours.	The	resulting	liquid	can	then	be
used	to	start	the	next	fresh	extraction	of	meat
and	bones.

Concentrating	 Meat	 Stocks:	Glace	 and
Demi-glace	 Slowly	 simmered	 until	 it’s
reduced	 to	 a	 tenth	 its	 original	 volume,	 stock
becomes	glace	de	viande,	 literally	“meat	ice”
or	 “meat	 glass,”	which	 cools	 to	 a	 stiff,	 clear
jelly.	 Glace	 has	 a	 thick,	 syrupy,	 sticky
consistency	thanks	to	its	high	gelatin	content,
about	25%,	an	intensely	savory	taste	thanks	to
the	concentrated	amino	acids,	and	a	 rounded,
mellow,	 but	 somewhat	 flat	 aroma	 thanks	 to
the	 long	 hours	 during	 which	 volatile
molecules	 have	 been	 boiled	 off	 or	 reacted
with	 each	 other.	Meat	 glace	 is	 used	 in	 small
quantities	 to	 lend	 flavor	 and	 body	 to	 sauces.
Intermediate	between	stock	and	glace	is	demi-



glace	 or	 “half-glace,”	 which	 is	 stock
simmered	 down	 to	 25–40%	 of	 its	 original
volume,	 often	 with	 some	 tomato	 puree	 or
paste	 to	 add	 flavor	 and	color,	 and	with	 some
flour	or	starch	to	supplement	its	lower	gelatin
content	 (10–15%).	 The	 tomato	 particles	 and
flour	 gluten	 proteins	 cloud	 the	 stock	 and	 are
removed	by	skimming	the	stock	as	it	reduces,
and	 then	 by	 a	 final	 straining.	 The	 starch	 in
demi-glace,	 around	3–5%	of	 its	 final	weight,
is	 largely	 an	 economy	measure	—	 it	 gives	 a
greater	thickness	with	less	stock	reduction	and
loss	 of	 volume	 to	 evaporation	—	 but	 it	 also
has	 the	 advantage	 of	 sparing	 some	 of	 the
stock’s	 flavor	 from	 being	 boiled	 off,	 and
avoiding	 the	 sticky	 consistency	 of	 very
concentrated	gelatin.

Demi-glace	is	the	base	for	many	classic
French	brown	sauces,	which	are	given
particular	flavors	and	nuances	with	the
addition	of	various	other	ingredients	(meats,
vegetables,	herbs,	wine)	and	final	enriching



thickeners	(butter,	cream).	Because	they’re
versatile	but	tedious	to	prepare,	demi-glace
and	glace	are	manufactured	and	widely
available	in	frozen	form.

Concentrating	Stock	and	Flavor	to
Finish	a	Dish

An	 alternative	 to	 cooking	 stock	 down	 in
bulk	 is	 to	 reduce	 it	 in	 small	 quantities	 to
augment	the	pan	juices	of	a	roast	or	sauté.
Once	 the	 meat	 is	 cooked	 and	 its	 juices
concentrated	 and	 browned	 on	 the	 pan
bottom,	 the	 cook	 can	 repeatedly	 add	 a
small	quantity	of	stock	to	the	pan	and	cook
it	down	until	its	solids	begin	to	brown,	then
dissolve	 the	 successive	 brownings	 in	 a
final	 dose	 of	 stock	 to	 make	 the	 liquid
sauce.	 The	 high	 pan	 temperature	 helps
break	 down	 the	 gelatin	 molecules	 into
shorter	 lengths,	 so	 the	 resulting	 sauce	 is
less	 sticky	and	congeals	more	slowly	 than
it	would	if	the	gelatin	were	intact.



Consommé	and	Clarification	with	Egg
Whites	One	of	the	most	remarkable	soups	is
consommé,	an	intensely	flavored,	amber-
colored,	clear	liquid	with	a	distinct	but
delicate	body.	(The	name	comes	from	the
French	for	“to	consume,”	“to	use	up,”	and
referred	to	the	medieval	practice	of	cooking
the	meat	broth	down	until	it	reached	the	right
consistency.)	It	is	made	by	preparing	a	basic
stock	mainly	from	meat,	not	flavor-poor
bones	or	skin,	and	then	clarifying	it	while
simultaneously	extracting	a	second	batch	of
meat	and	vegetables.	It’s	a	kind	of	double
stock	made	expressly	for	soup;	as	much	as	a
pound/0.5	kg	of	meat	may	go	into	producing
one	serving.

The	clarification	of	consommé	is
accomplished	by	stirring	finely	chopped	meat
and	vegetables	into	the	cold	stock	along	with
several	lightly	whisked	egg	whites.	The
mixture	is	then	brought	slowly	to	the	simmer,
and	kept	there	for	around	an	hour.	As	the



stock	heats	up,	the	abundant	egg	white
proteins	begin	to	coagulate	into	a	fine
cheesecloth-like	network,	and	essentially
strain	the	liquid	from	within.	Soluble	proteins
from	the	fresh	batch	of	meat	help	produce
large	protein	particles	that	are	easily	trapped
by	the	egg-white	network.	Gradually	the
protein	mesh	rises	to	the	top	of	the	pot	to
form	a	“raft,”	which	continues	to	collect
particles	brought	to	the	surface	by	convection
in	the	liquid.	When	the	cooking	is	done,	the
raft	is	skimmed	off	and	any	remaining
particles	are	removed	by	a	final	straining.	The
resulting	liquid	is	very	clear.	Clarification
with	egg	whites	does	remove	both	flavor
molecules	and	some	gelatin	from	the	stock,
which	is	why	the	cook	supplies	fresh	meat	and
vegetables	during	the	clarification.

Commercial	Meat	Extracts
and	Sauce	Bases



These	days	many	restaurants	and	home	cooks
rely	on	commercial	meat	extracts	and	bases
for	making	their	sauces	and	soups.	The
pioneer	of	mass-produced	meat	extracts	was
Justus	von	Liebig,	inventor	of	the	mistaken
theory	that	searing	meat	seals	in	the	juices	(p.
161),	who	was	motivated	by	the	equally
mistaken	belief	that	the	soluble	substances	in
meat	contain	most	of	its	nutritional	value.
However,	they	do	contain	much	of	its	savory
flavor.	Today,	meat	extracts	are	made	by
simmering	meat	scraps	and/or	bones	in	water,
then	clarifying	the	stock	and	evaporating	off
more	than	90%	of	the	water.	The	initial	stock
is	more	than	90%	water	and	3–4%	dissolved
meat	components;	the	finished	extract	is	a
viscous	material	that	is	about	20%	water,	50%
amino	acids,	peptides,	gelatin,	and	related
molecules,	20%	minerals,	mainly	phosphorus
and	potassium,	and	5%	salt.	(There	are	also
less	concentrated	fluid	extracts,	and	solid
bouillon	cubes	that	have	various	natural	and



artificial	flavors	added.)	Because	gelatin
would	make	such	concentrated	material	too
thick	to	work	with,	manufacturers
intentionally	break	it	down	into	smaller
molecules	by	extending	the	initial	cooking	by
several	hours,	and	by	pressure-cooking	the
clarified	stock	(at	around	275ºF/135ºC	for	6–8
minutes;	this	step	also	coagulates	the
remaining	soluble	proteins).	In	order	to	limit
browning	reactions	and	keep	the	extract	light
in	both	color	and	roasted	flavor,	much	of	the
water	evaporation	is	done	at	temperatures
below	170ºF/75ºC.

Chinese	Meat	Stock:	Clarifying	Without
Eggs

The	 proteins	 in	 egg	 whites	 are	 especially
effective	 at	 removing	 tiny	 protein	 and
other	particles	from	meat	stocks,	but	meat
proteins	 themselves	 can	 also	 do	 the	 job.
Chinese	 cooks	make	 clear	meat	 broths	 by
cooking	the	meat	and	bones	of	chicken	and



pork	 in	 water,	 and	 then	 clarifying	 the
liquid	twice	with	batches	of	finely	chopped
chicken	meat,	which	 are	 gently	 simmered
for	10	minutes	and	 then	carefully	 strained
off.
Manufacturers	now	also	produce	more

conventional	sauce	bases	with	their	gelatin
intact.	These	are	often	sold	in	the	form	of
demi-glace	or	glace	de	viande.

Cooks	can	improve	the	flavor	of
commercial	meat	extracts	and	canned	broths
by	cooking	them	briefly	with	herbs	and/or
diced	aromatic	vegetables.	This	fills	out	the
extract’s	aroma,	which	is	generically	meaty	to
begin	with	and	depleted	during	the
concentration	process.

Fish	and	Shellfish	Stocks
and	Sauces

Like	mammals	and	birds,	fish	have	bones	and
skin	rich	in	connective	tissue.	But	thanks	to



the	cold	environment	in	which	fish	bodies
function	(p.	189),	their	collagen	differs	from
mammal	and	bird	collagens.	Fish	collagen	is
less	cross-linked,	and	so	melts	and	dissolves
at	much	lower	temperatures.	The	collagen	and
gelatin	of	warm-water	fish	like	tilapia	melt	at
around	77ºF/25ºC,	that	of	cold-water	cod
around	50ºF/10ºC.	So	we	can	extract	fish
gelatin	at	cooking	temperatures	far	below	the
boil,	and	in	relatively	short	times.	The
collagen	of	squid	and	octopus	is	more	cross-
linked	than	fish	collagen,	so	these	molluscs
require	more	prolonged	heating	at	180ºF/80ºC
to	give	up	much	of	their	gelatin.	Most	cooks
recommend	cooking	fish	stocks	for	less	than
an	hour	so	as	to	avoid	making	the	stock
cloudy	and	chalky	with	calcium	salts	from	the
dis-integrating	bones.	Another	reason	for
short	and	gentle	extractions	is	that	fish
gelatins	are	relatively	fragile	and	more	readily
break	down	into	small	pieces	when	cooked.
And	because	they	associate	more	loosely	with



each	other,	they	form	delicate	gels	that	melt
far	below	mouth	temperature,	at	70ºF/20ºC
and	lower.

Wine	in	Sauce	Making
Wines	enter	into	the	making	of	a	variety	of
sauces,	 and	 sometimes	 are	 the	 main
ingredient,	 as	 in	 the	 Burgundian	sauce
meurette	 (red	 wine	 reduced	 by	 half	 with
meat	 and	 vegetables,	 then	 thickened	 with
flour	 and	 butter).	 They	 contribute	 several
flavor	 elements,	 including	 the	 tartness	 of
their	 acids,	 the	 sweetness	 of	 any	 residual
sugar,	 the	savoriness	of	 succinic	acid,	and
their	 distinctive	 aromas.	 The	 aromas	 are
modified	 by	 cooking,	 while	 the	 tartness,
sweetness,	 and	 savoriness	 are	 not,	 and
become	concentrated	if	the	wine	is	cooked
long	 enough	 to	 reduce	 it.	 The	 alcohol	 in
wine	 can	 seem	 harsh	 when	 warm,	 so	 the
wine	is	usually	cooked	enough	to	evaporate
much	 of	 it.	 Gentle	 simmering	 is	 said	 to



produce	a	finer	flavor	than	a	fast	boil.	The
tannins	 in	 red	 wine	 can	 be	 a	 problem,
especially	when	a	bottle	of	wine	is	reduced
down	 to	 a	 few	 syrupy	 tablespoons:	 the
tannins	 become	 concentrated	 and
unbearably	astringent.	This	outcome	can	be
avoided	 by	 cooking	 the	 wine	 down	 with
protein-rich	 ingredients,	 including	 finely
chopped	 meat	 or	 a	 gelatinous	 stock
reduction.	The	tannins	bind	to	the	proteins
in	 those	 ingredients	 instead	 of	 to	 the
proteins	 in	 our	mouth	 (just	 as	 tea	 tannins
bind	 to	 milk	 proteins),	 and	 so	 lose	 their
astringent	effect.
Because	fish	flavor	deteriorates	quickly,

it’s	important	that	fish	stock	or	fumet	be	made
with	very	fresh	ingredients.	Whole	fish,
bones,	and	skin	should	be	thoroughly	cleaned
and	rinsed,	and	the	blood-rich,	very	perishable
gills	discarded.	Cooks	often	briefly	cook	the
ingredients	in	butter	to	develop	the	flavor.	A
gelatin-bodied	sauce	can	be	made	from	the



cooking	liquid	of	poached	or	steamed	fish,
since	even	brief	cooking	will	extract	flavor
and	gelatin	into	the	liquid.	The	traditional
cooking	liquid	for	fish	is	a	court	bouillon	or
“quick	bouillon”	made	by	briefly	cooking
water,	salt,	wine,	and	aromatics	together	(p.
215).

The	bony	shells	of	crustaceans	don’t
contain	collagen,	so	cooking	them	in	water
won’t	give	body	to	the	extract.	In	fact
crustacean	shells	are	normally	extracted	in
butter	or	oil,	since	their	pigments	and	flavors
are	more	soluble	in	fat	than	in	water(p.	220).

Other	Protein	Thickeners

Gelatin	is	the	easiest,	most	forgiving	protein
any	cook	deals	with.	Heat	it	up	with	water	and
its	molecules	let	go	of	each	other	and	become
dispersed	among	the	water	molecules;	cool	it
and	they	rebond	to	each	other;	heat	it	again
and	they	disperse	again.	Nearly	all	other



proteins	in	animals	and	plants	behave	in
exactly	the	opposite	way:	heat	causes	them	to
unfold	from	their	normally	compact	shape,
become	entangled,	and	form	strong	bonds
with	each	other,	so	that	they	coagulate
permanently	and	irreversibly	into	a	firm	solid.
Thus	liquid	eggs	solidify,	pliable	muscle
tissue	becomes	stiff	meat,	and	milk	curdles.
Of	course	a	solid	piece	of	coagulated	protein
can’t	be	a	sauce.	But	it’s	possible	to	control
protein	coagulation	so	that	it	can	give	body	to
sauces.

Protein	thickening	and	curdling.	Two	possible
outcomes	of	heating	egg	proteins,	which	start
out	 folded	 in	 compact	 shapes	 (left).	If
conditions	 favor	 their	 unfolding,	 they	 form	 a
loose	 network	 of	 long	 chains	 (center)	and



thicken	 the	 sauce.	 If	 heated	 excessively,	 the
chains	 aggregate	 and	 coagulate	 in	 compact
clumps	 (right)	that	 give	 the	 sauce	 a	 curdled
consistency	and	appearance.
Careful	Temperature	Control	Cooks	first
make	the	flavorful	but	thin	liquid	that	will	be
the	bulk	of	the	sauce	and	then	add	a	source	of
finely	suspended	proteins.	An	example	is	the
fricassee,	in	which	the	liquid	is	the	stock	in
which	chicken	or	another	meat	has	been
cooked,	and	the	protein	source	is	egg	yolks.
The	mixture	is	then	heated	gently.	At	the
point	that	the	proteins	unfold	and	begin	to
tangle	—	but	before	they	form	strong	bonds
—	the	sauce	thickens	noticeably:	it	clings	to	a
spoon	rather	than	running	off.	The	attentive
cook	immediately	takes	the	sauce	from	the
heat	and	stirs,	thus	preventing	the	proteins
from	forming	very	many	strong	bonds,	until
the	sauce	cools	enough	to	prevent	further
bonding.	If	the	sauce	gets	too	hot	and	the
proteins	do	form	strong	bonds,	they	clot



together	into	dense	particles,	and	the	sauce
becomes	grainy	and	thins	out	again.	Most
animal	proteins	coagulate	beginning	around
140ºF/60ºC,	but	this	critical	point	can	vary,	so
there’s	no	substitute	for	careful	monitoring	of
the	sauce’s	consistency.	Once	the	sauce	has
thickened,	careful	straining	can	remove	the
few	particles	that	may	have	formed.

In	all	protein-thickened	sauces,	the	cook
must	take	care	when	mixing	the	hot	sauce
with	the	cool	thickener.	It’s	always	safest	to
stir	some	of	the	sauce	into	the	thickener,	thus
heating	the	thickener	gently	and	diluting	it,
and	then	add	that	mixture	to	the	rest	of	the
sauce.	If	the	thickener	goes	directly	into	the
sauce,	then	some	of	the	thickener	will	get
instantly	overheated	and	coagulate	into	grainy
particles.	Cooks	sometimes	work	pastes	of
liver	or	shellfish	organs	into	butter	and	then
chill	the	mix.	When	a	chunk	of	the	mix	is
added	to	the	sauce,	the	butter	melts	and
slowly	releases	the	thickener	into	the	sauce,



while	making	it	somewhat	harder	for	the
thickener	proteins	to	bond	to	each	other	and
coagulate.	The	inclusion	of	flour	or	starch	can
protect	sauce	proteins	from	coagulating;	the
long	starch	molecules	get	in	the	way	of	the
proteins	and	prevent	them	from	forming	many
strong	bonds	with	each	other.

If	you	do	overcook	a	protein-thickened
sauce	and	it	separates	into	thin	liquid	and
grainy	particles,	you	can	salvage	it	by
remixing	the	sauce	in	a	blender,	straining	it	of
any	remaining	coarse	particles,	and	if
necessary	rethickening	it	with	whatever
materials	are	handy	(egg	yolks,	flour,	or
starch).

Egg	Yolks 	 Egg	 yolks	 are	 the	 most	 efficient
protein	thickeners,	in	part	because	they	are	so
concentrated:	 egg	 yolks	 are	 only	 50%	 water
and	16%	protein.	They	 are	 also	 the	 handiest,
being	a	common,	 inexpensive	 ingredient,	and
their	proteins	are	already	finely	dispersed	in	a



rich,	 creamy	 fluid.	 They’re	 mainly	 used	 to
thicken	 light-colored	 white	 sauces,
blanquettes,	 and	 fricassees.	 Yolk-thickened
sauces	 can	 be	 brought	 to	 the	 boil	 as	 long	 as
they’re	also	partly	thickened	by	starch.

Sabayon	sauces	are	also	partly	thickened
by	the	coagulation	of	yolk	proteins(p.	639).

Liver	 Liver	 is	 a	 flavorful	 thickener,	 but	 has
the	 disadvantage	 of	 requiring	 disintegration
before	it	can	be	used.	The	coagulable	proteins
are	 concentrated	 inside	 its	 cells,	 so	 the	 cook
must	 break	 the	 cells	 open	 by	 pounding	 the
tissue,	 and	 then	 strain	 away	 the	 particles	 of
connective	tissue	that	hold	the	cells	together.

Blood	 Blood	 is	 the	 traditional	 thickening
agent	in	coq	au	vin,	the	French	rooster	in	wine
sauce,	and	in	braises	of	game	animals	(civets).
It’s	 about	 80%	 water	 and	 17%	 protein,	 and
consists	 of	 two	 phases:	 the	 various	 cells,
including	the	red	cells	colored	by	hemoglobin,
and	 the	 fluid	plasma	 in	which	 the	cells	 float.



The	 plasma	 makes	 up	 about	 two	 thirds	 of
cattle	 and	 pig	 blood	 and	 contains	 dispersed
proteins,	about	7%	by	weight.	Albumin	is	the
protein	 that	 causes	 blood	 to	 thicken	 when
heated	above	167ºF/75ºC	.

Shellfish	 Organs	 The	 liver	 and	 eggs	 of
crustaceans,	 and	 the	 sexual	 tissues	 of	 sea
urchins	 have	 the	 same	 advantages	 and
disadvantages	 as	 liver,	 and	 thicken	 and
coagulate	 at	 much	 lower	 temperatures.	 They
should	be	added	carefully	 to	a	 sauce	 that	has
first	been	allowed	to	cool	well	below	the	boil.

Cheese	 and	 Yogurt 	 These	 cultured	 milk
products	 differ	 from	 the	 other	 protein
thickeners	 in	 that	 their	 casein	 proteins	 have
already	 been	 coagulated	 by	 enzyme	 activity
and/or	acidity.	They’re	thus	unable	to	develop
a	new	thickness	by	being	heated	with	a	sauce.
Instead,	 they	 lend	 their	 own	 thickness	 as
they’re	 mixed	 into	 the	 sauce.	 They’re	 best
subjected	 to	 only	 moderate	 heat,	 since



temperatures	 approaching	 the	 boil	 can	 cause
curdling.	Yogurt	is	a	more	effective	thickener
if	it	has	been	drained	of	its	watery	whey.	The
best	 cheeses	 for	 thickening	 have	 a	 creamy
consistency	themselves,	an	indication	that	the
protein	 network	 has	 been	 broken	 down	 into
small,	 easily	 dispersed	 pieces;	 more	 intact
casein	 fibers	 can	 form	 stringy	 aggregates	 (p.
65).	Most	cheeses	are	a	concentrated	source	of
fat,	 emulsified	 droplets	 of	 which	 also
contribute	body.

Almond	Milk	 This	 water	 extract	 of	 soaked
ground	almonds	contains	a	significant	amount
of	 protein	 that	 causes	 the	 liquid	 to	 thicken
when	heated	or	acidified(p.	504).

Solid	Sauces:	Gelatin	Jellies
and	Carbohydrate	Jellies

When	a	meat	or	fish	stock	is	allowed	to	cool
to	room	temperature,	it	may	set	into	a	fragile



solid,	or	gel.	This	behavior	can	be
undesirable,	for	example	when	it	causes	some
sauce	to	congeal	on	the	plate.	But	cooks	also
exploit	it	to	make	delightful	jellies,	a	sort	of
solid	sauce.	A	gel	forms	when	the	gelatin
concentration	is	sufficiently	high,	around	1%
or	more	of	the	stock’s	total	weight.	At	these
concentrations,	there	are	enough	gelatin
molecules	in	the	stock	that	their	long	chains
can	overlap	with	each	other	to	form	a
continuous	network	throughout	the	stock.	As
the	hot	stock	cools	down	to	the	melting
temperature	of	gelatin,	around	100ºF/40ºC,	the
extended	gelatin	chains	begin	to	assume	the
coiled	shape	that	they	had	in	the	original
triple	helix	of	the	collagen	fibers	(p.	597).
And	when	coils	on	different	molecules
approach	each	other,	they	nest	closely
alongside	each	other	and	bond	to	form	new
double	and	triple	helixes.	These	reassembled
collagen	junctions	give	some	rigidity	to	the
network	of	gelatin	molecules,	and	they	and



the	water	molecules	they	surround	can	no
longer	flow	freely:	so	the	liquid	turns	into	a
solid.	A	1%	gelatin	gel	is	fragile	and	quivery
and	breaks	easily	when	handled;	the	more
familiar	and	robust	dessert	jellies	made	with
commercial	gelatin	are	usually	3%	gelatin	or
more.	The	higher	the	proportion	of	gelatin,	the
more	firm	and	rubbery	the	gel	is.

Jellies	are	remarkable	in	two	ways.	At
their	best	they	are	translucent,	glistening,
beautiful	on	their	own	or	as	settings	for	the
foods	embedded	in	them.	And	the	temperature
at	which	the	gelatin	junctions	are	shaken	apart
is	right	around	body	temperature:	so	gelatin
gels	melt	effortlessly	in	the	mouth	to	a	full-
bodied	fluid.	They	bathe	the	mouth	in	sauce.
No	other	thickener	has	this	quality.

Protein-Thickened	Sauces	and	Health
Sauces	 thickened	 with	 proteins	 are	 very
nutritious,	 and	 microbes	 can	 multiply
rapidly	 in	 them.	 They’re	 best	 held	 either



above	 140ºF/60ºC	 or	 below	 40ºF/5ºC	 to
prevent	 the	 growth	 of	 bacteria	 that	 can
cause	 food	poisoning.	When	cooling	 large
quantities	 of	 meat	 stock,	 the	 cook	 should
divide	the	stock	into	small	portions	so	that
their	 temperature	will	 fall	 rapidly	 through
the	 potentially	 dangerous	 temperature
range.

Like	 well-browned	 meats	 themselves,
meat	 stocks	 and	 sauces	 whose	 flavor
comes	 from	 browned	 pan	 juices	 or	 from
long	 reduction	 carry	 small	 quantities	 of
chemicals	 called	 heterocyclic	 amines.
HCAs	 are	 known	 to	 damage	 DNA	 and
therefore	 may	 contribute	 to	 the
development	of	 cancer	 (p.	124).	We	don’t
yet	know	whether	the	levels	found	in	meats
and	 sauces	 pose	 a	 significant	 risk.
Vegetables	 in	 the	 cabbage	 family	 contain
chemicals	 that	 prevent	 HCAs	 from
damaging	 DNA,	 so	 it	 may	 be	 that	 other
foods	 in	 a	 well-balanced	 diet	 protect	 us



from	the	toxic	effects	of	HCAs.

Jelly	Consistency

The	firmness	or	strength	of	a	gelatin	gel,	and
therefore	its	tolerance	of	handling	and	its
texture	in	the	mouth,	depends	on	several
factors:	the	gelatin	molecules	themselves,	the
presence	of	other	ingredients,	and	the	way	in
which	the	mixture	is	cooled.

Gelatin	 Quality	 and	 Concentration	 The
most	 important	 influence	 on	 the	 texture	 of	 a
jelly	 is	 the	 concentration	 and	 quality	 of	 its
gelatin.	Gelatin	 is	 a	highly	variable	material.
Even	 manufactured	 gelatin	 (below)	 is	 only
60–70%	 intact,	 full-length	gelatin	molecules;
the	 remainder	 consists	 of	 smaller	 pieces	 that
are	 less	 efficient	 thickeners.	The	 gelatin	 in	 a
stock	 is	 especially	 unpredictable,	 since	 meat
and	bones	vary	 in	 their	collagen	content,	and
long	cooking	causes	progressive	breakdown	of



the	gelatin	chains.	The	best	way	to	assess	gel
strength	is	to	cool	a	spoonful	of	the	liquid	in	a
bowl	resting	in	ice	water,	see	if	the	liquid	sets,
and	 how	 firm	 the	 gel	 is.	A	 liquid	 lacking	 in
firmness	can	be	reduced	further	to	concentrate
the	gelatin,	 or	 it	 can	be	 supplemented	with	 a
small	amount	of	pure	gelatin.

How	gelatin	turns	a	liquid	into	a	solid.	When
the	gelatin	solution	is	hot	(left),	the	water	and
protein	 molecules	 are	 in	 constant,	 forceful
movement.	 As	 the	 solution	 cools	 and	 the
molecules	 move	 more	 gently,	 the	 proteins
naturally	 begin	 to	 form	 little	 regions	 of
collagen-like	 helical	 association	 (right).
These	 “junctions”	 gradually	 form	 a
continuous	 meshwork	 of	 gelatin	 molecules
that	 traps	 the	 liquid	 in	 its	 interstices,



preventing	 any	 noticeable	 flow.	 The	 solution
has	become	a	solid	gel.
Additional	Ingredients	Other	common
ingredients	have	various	effects	on	gel
strength	when	included	in	a	jelly.

Salt	lowers	gel	strength	by	interfering
with	gelatin	bonding.
Sugars	(except	for	fructose)	increase	gel
strength	by	attracting	water	molecules
away	from	the	gelatin	molecules.
Milk	increases	gel	strength.
Alcohol	increases	gel	strength	until	it
becomes	30	to	50%	of	the	gel,	when	it
will	cause	the	gelatin	to	precipitate	into
solid	particles.
Acids	—	vinegar,	fruit	juices,	wine	—
with	a	pH	below	4	produce	a	weaker	jelly
by	increasing	repulsive	electrical	charges
on	the	gelatin	molecules.

The	 gel-weakening	 effects	 of	 salt	 and	 acids
can	 be	 compensated	 for	 by	 increasing	 the



gelatin	concentration.
Both	strongly	acid	ingredients	and	the

tannins	in	tea	or	red	wine	can	cloud	a	jelly,
the	acids	by	precipitating	proteins	in	a	meat	or
fish	stock	into	tiny	particles,	and	the	tannins
by	binding	to	and	precipitating	the	gelatin
molecules	themselves.	These	ingredients	are
best	cooked	briefly	with	the	gelatin	solution
so	that	it	can	be	strained	or	clarified	before
setting.

A	number	of	fruits	—	papaya,	pineapple,
melons,	and	kiwi	among	them	—	contain
protein-digesting	enzymes	that	break	gelatin
chains	into	short	pieces	and	thus	prevent	them
from	setting	into	a	gel	at	all.	They	and	their
juices	can	be	made	into	a	jelly	only	after	a
brief	cooking	to	inactivate	the	enzymes.

Cooling	 Temperatures	 The	 temperature	 at
which	 the	 gel	 forms	 and	 ages	 affects	 its
texture.	 When	 “snap-chilled”	 in	 the
refrigerator,	 the	 gelatin	 molecules	 are



immobilized	 in	place	 and	bond	 to	 each	other
quickly	 and	 randomly,	 so	 the	 bonds	 and	 the
structure	 of	 the	 network	 are	 relatively	weak.
When	 allowed	 to	 set	 slowly	 at	 room
temperature,	 the	gelatin	molecules	have	 time
to	move	around	and	 form	more	 regular	 helix
junctions,	 so	 once	 it	 forms,	 the	 network	 is
more	 firm	 and	 stable.	 In	 practice,	 jellies
should	 be	 set	 in	 the	 refrigerator	 to	minimize
the	growth	of	bacteria.	Gelatin	bonds	continue
to	 form	 slowly	 in	 the	 solid	 jelly,	 so	 snap-
chilled	jellies	become	as	firm	as	slow-chilled
jellies	after	a	few	days.

Jellies	from	Meat
and	Fish:	Aspics

Meat	and	fish	jellies	go	back	to	the	Middle
Ages	(p.	584),	and	are	still	delightful
showpieces.	They’re	made	much	as
consommé	is,	ideally	from	a	flavorful	meat
stock	—	often	cooked	with	a	veal	foot	to



provide	enough	gelatin	—	or	from	a	double
fish	stock.	The	stocks	are	clarified	with	egg
whites	and	chopped	meat	or	fish,	then	filled
and	flavored	just	before	they	set.	Aspics
should	be	firm	enough	to	be	cut	as	necessary,
but	quivery	and	tender	in	the	mouth,	not
rubbery.	When	made	to	coat	a	terrine	or	whole
portion	of	meat,	or	to	bind	chopped	meat
together,	they	must	be	firmer,	around	10–15%
gelatin,	so	that	they	don’t	run	off	the	food	or
crumble.	Fish	jellies	and	aspics	are	especially
delicate	due	to	the	low	melting	temperature	of
fish	gelatin;	they	and	their	plates	should	be
kept	distinctly	cold	to	prevent	premature
melting.	A	homely	version	of	the	meat	aspic
is	boeuf	à	la	mode,	a	pot	roast	braised	in	stock
and	wine	along	with	a	veal	foot,	then	sliced
and	embedded	in	the	strained	jelly	made	by
the	cooking	liquid.	Chauds-froids	are	meat	or
fish	jellies	that	include	cream.

Food	Words:	Gel,	Gelatin,	Jelly



Gel	and	jelly,	words	for	a	fragile	solid	that
is	 largely	 water,	 and	gelatin,	 the	 name	 of
the	protein	 that	can	gel	water	 into	a	solid,
all	 come	 from	 an	 Indo-European	 root
meaning	 “cold”	 or	 “to	 freeze.”	 The	 jelly
maker	 freezes	 liquids	 with	 molecules
instead	of	icy	temperatures.

Other	Jellies	and	Gelées;
Manufactured	Gelatins

The	first	jellies	were	meat	and	fish	dishes,	but
cooks	soon	began	to	use	animal	gelatins	to	set
other	ingredients	into	pleasing	solids,
especially	creams	and	fruit	juices,	and
prepared	gelatin	became	a	standard	ingredient
for	the	pastry	cook,	who	also	uses	it	to	give	a
melting	firmness	to	some	mousses,	whipped
creams,	and	pastry	creams.	The	most	familiar
jellies	in	the	United	States	today,	both	made
from	manufactured	gelatin	powders,	are
sweet,	fruit-flavored,	fluorescently	colored



desserts,	and	“shooters”	fortified	with	vodka
and	other	spirits.	More	refined	preparations,
often	named	by	the	French	gelée,	take
advantage	of	the	fact	that	other	ingredients
can	be	added	at	the	last	minute	when	the	mix
is	barely	warm	and	about	to	set,	so	fresh	and
delicate	flavors	can	be	preserved	in	the	jelly:
such	things	as	champagne	or	the	“water”	from
a	seeded	tomato.

Gelatin	 Production	 Most	 manufactured
gelatin	in	the	United	States	and	Europe	comes
from	pigskin,	though	some	is	also	made	from
cattle	 skins	 and	 from	 bones.	 Industrial
extraction	is	far	more	efficient	and	gentler	on
the	 gelatin	 chains	 than	 kitchen	 extractions.
The	pigskins	are	soaked	in	dilute	acid	for	18–
24	hours	to	break	the	collagen’s	cross-linking
bonds,	 and	 then	 are	 extracted	 in	 several
changes	 in	 water,	 beginning	 at	 just
130ºF/55ºC,	 and	 ending	 around	 195ºF/90ºC.
The	 low-temperature	 extracts	 contain	 the



most	 intact	 gelatin	 molecules,	 produce	 the
strongest	 gels,	 and	 are	 the	 lightest	 in	 color;
higher	 temperatures	 damage	 more	 gelatin
chains	 and	 cause	 a	 yellow	discoloration.	The
extracts	 are	 then	 filtered,	 purified,	 their	 pH
adjusted	 to	 5.5,	 evaporated,	 sterilized,	 and
dried	into	sheets	or	granules	that	are	85–90%
gelatin,	 8–15%	 water,	 1–2%	 salts,	 and	 1%
glucose.	 Gelatin	 quality	 is	 sometimes
indicated	 by	 a	 “Bloom”	 number	 (named	 for
Oscar	 Bloom,	 inventor	 of	 the	 measuring
device),	 with	 high	 numbers	 (250)	 indicating
high	gelling	power.

Types	 of	 Gelatin	 Gelatin	 is	 sold	 in	 several
different	 forms.	Granulated	 gelatin	 and	 sheet
gelatin	 are	 given	 an	 initial	 soaking	 in	 cold
water	 so	 that	 the	 solid	 gelatin	 network	 can
absorb	 moisture	 and	 dissolve	 readily	 when
warm	 liquid	 is	 added.	 If	 added	 to	 the	 warm
liquid	 directly,	 the	 outer	 layers	 of	 the	 solid
granules	 can	 become	 gluey	 and	 stick



neighboring	 granules	 together,	 though	 even
these	clusters	eventually	disperse.	Sheets	with
their	small	surface	area	introduce	less	air	into
the	 liquid,	 which	 can	 be	 an	 advantage	 when
the	cook	wants	great	clarity	in	the	jelly.	There
is	 also	 an	 “instant”	 gelatin	 that	 is
manufactured	 by	 drying	 the	 extract	 rapidly
before	 the	 gelatin	 chains	 can	 form	 junctions,
so	 it	 disperses	 directly	 in	 warm	 liquid.	And
hydrolyzed	 gelatins	 have	 been	 intentionally
broken	 into	 chains	 too	 short	 to	 form	 a	 gel;
they’re	 used	 in	 food	 manufacturing	 as	 an
emulsifying	agent	(p.	627).

The	standard	proportion	advised	by	dessert
gelatin	packages	is	one	7-gm	package	per
cup/240	ml,	or	about	a	3%	solution;	2%	and
1%	solutions	are	progressively	more	tender.

Gelatin	Doesn’t	Strengthen	Nails	or
Hair

Though	 it’s	 widely	 believed	 that	 gelatin
supplements	strengthen	both	nails	and	hair,



there	 is	no	good	evidence	that	 this	 is	 true.
Nails	and	hair	are	made	of	a	very	different
protein	 called	 keratin,	 and	 gelatin	 has	 no
advantage	 over	 other	 protein	 sources	 in
supplying	 the	 building	 blocks	 for	 keratin
production.

Carbohydrate	Gelling
agents:	Agar,	Carrageenan,
Alginates

Gelatin	isn’t	the	only	ingredient	that	cooks
have	at	their	disposal	for	turning	a	flavorful
liquid	into	an	intriguing	solid.	Starch	gels
give	us	various	pie	fillings	and	the	candy
called	Turkish	Delight,	and	pectin	gels	the
many	fruit	jellies	and	jams	(p.	296).	Along	the
seacoasts	of	the	world,	cooks	found	long	ago
that	various	seaweeds	release	a	viscous
substance	into	hot	water	that	forms	a	gel	when
the	water	cools.	These	substances	are	not
proteins	like	gelatin,	but	unusual



carbohydrates	with	some	unusual	and	useful
properties.	Food	manufacturers	use	them	to
make	gels	and	to	stabilize	emulsions	(cream
and	ice	cream,	for	example).

Agar	Agar,	a	shortened	version	of	 the	Malay
agar	 agar, 	 is	 a	 mixture	 of	 several	 different
carbohydrates	 and	 other	 materials	 that	 has
long	been	extracted	from	several	genera	of	red
algae	 (p.	 341).	 It’s	 now	 manufactured	 by
boiling	the	seaweeds,	filtering	the	liquid,	and
freeze-drying	 it	 in	 the	 form	 of	 sticks	 or
strands,	which	 are	 readily	 available	 in	Asian
groceries.	 The	 solid	 pieces	 of	 agar	 can	 be
eaten	uncooked	as	a	chewy	ingredient	in	cold
salads,	 soaked	 and	 cut	 into	 bite-sized	 pieces.
In	China	agar	 is	made	 into	an	unflavored	gel
that’s	 sliced	 and	 served	 in	 a	 complex	 sauce;
it’s	also	used	to	gel	flavorful	mixtures	of	fruit
juice	 and	 sugar,	 and	 stews	 of	meats,	 fish,	 or
vegetables.	In	Japan	agar	 is	made	into	 jellied
sweets.



Agar	forms	gels	at	even	lower
concentrations	than	gelatin	does,	less	than	1%
by	weight.	An	agar	jelly	is	somewhat	opaque,
and	has	a	more	crumbly	texture	than	a	gelatin
jelly.	To	make	an	agar	jelly,	the	dried	agar	is
soaked	in	cold	water,	then	heated	to	the	boil	to
fully	dissolve	the	carbohydrate	chains,	mixed
with	the	other	ingredients,	and	the	mixture
strained	and	cooled	until	it	sets,	at	around
110ºF/38ºC.	But	where	a	gelatin	gel	sets	and
remelts	at	around	the	same	temperature,	an
agar	gel	only	melts	again	when	its
temperature	reaches	185ºF/85ºC.	So	an	agar
gel	won’t	melt	in	the	mouth;	it	must	be
chewed	into	particles.	On	the	other	hand,	it
will	remain	solid	on	hot	days,	and	can	even	be
served	hot.	Modern	cooks	have	used	this
property	to	disperse	small	agar-gelled	morsels
of	contrasting	flavor	into	a	hot	dish.

Gelatinous	Delicacies:	Tendons,	Fins,
and	Nests



The	 Chinese	 are	 great	 admirers	 of
gelatinous	 textures,	 the	 semi-solid
stickiness	 of	 long-cooked	 gelatin-rich
connective	 tissue,	 and	 make	 soups	 from
several	 ingredients	 that	 in	 the	 West	 are
hardly	 considered	 to	 be	 edible.	 Beef
tendons	 are	 one	 example;	 they	 are
essentially	 pure	 connective	 tissue,	 and
when	simmered	for	hours	develop	a	texture
that	 is	 simultaneously	 gelatinous	 and
crunchy.	Shark	fins	are	a	delicacy	that	are
dried	 after	 being	 taken	 from	 that
cartilaginous	 fish,	 then	 rehydrated,
simmered	 in	 several	 changes	 of	 water	 to
remove	 off-flavors,	 and	 then	 simmered	 in
broth.

Most	 unusual	 of	 all	 are	 the	 nests	 of
cave-dwelling	birds	in	the	swallow	family,
swiftlets	of	the	genus	Collocalia,	which	are
found	 throughout	 Southeast	 and	 South
Asia.	The	males	build	 their	 nests	 up	 from
strands	 of	 their	 saliva,	 which	 stick	 to	 the



cave	 walls	 and	 dry	 to	 form	 a	 small	 but
strong	cup.	The	harvested	nests	are	soaked
in	cold	water	to	rinse	out	impurities	and	to
let	 them	 absorb	 water	 and	 swell.	 They’re
then	 simmered	 in	 broth,	 and	 enjoyed	 for
their	 semisolid,	 gelatinous	 consistency,
which	 is	 due	 not	 to	 gelatin	 itself,	 but	 to
salivary	proteins	called	mucins,	which	are
related	to	the	mucins	in	egg	white	(p.	77).

Carrageenan,	Alginates,	Gellan
Experimentally	minded	cooks	are	exploring	a
number	of	other	unusual	carbohydrate	gelling
agents,	some	traditional	and	some	not.
Carrageenan,	from	certain	red	algae(p.	341),
has	long	been	used	in	China	to	gel	stews	and
flavored	liquids,	and	in	Ireland	to	make	a	kind
of	milk	pudding.	Purified	fractions	of	crude
carrageenan	produce	gels	with	a	range	of
textures,	from	brittle	to	elastic.	Alginates
come	from	a	number	of	brown	seaweeds,	and
form	gels	only	in	the	presence	of	calcium	(in
milk	and	cream,	for	example).	Inventive



cooks	have	taken	advantage	of	this	to	make
small	flavored	spheres	and	threads:	they
prepare	a	calcium-free	alginate	solution	of	the
desired	flavor	and	color,	and	then	drip	or
inject	it	into	a	calcium	solution,	where	it
immediately	gels.	Gellan,	an	industrial
discovery,	is	a	carbohydrate	secreted	by	a
bacterium,	and	in	the	presence	of	salts	or	acid
forms	very	clear	gels	that	release	their	flavor
well.

Sauces	Thickened
with	Flour	and	Starch

Many	sauces,	from	long-simmered	classic
French	brown	sauces	to	last-minute	gravies,
owe	at	least	part	of	their	consistency	to	the
substance	called	starch.	Unlike	the	other
thickening	agents,	starch	is	a	major
component	of	our	daily	diet.	It’s	the	molecule
in	which	most	plants	store	the	energy	they
generate	from	photosynthesis,	and	provides



about	three-quarters	of	the	calories	for	the
earth’s	human	population,	mainly	in	the	form
of	grains	and	root	vegetables.	It’s	the	least
expensive	and	most	versatile	thickener	the
cook	has	to	work	with,	a	worthy	adjunct	to
gelatin	and	fat.	The	cook	can	choose	among
several	different	kinds	of	starch,	each	with	its
own	qualities.

Agar:	From	Pudding	to	Petri	Dish
Solid	gels	made	from	agar	have	long	been
a	 standard	 tool	 in	 the	 study	 of	 microbes.
Scientists	make	them	up	to	include	various
nutrients,	 and	 then	 grow	 colonies	 of
microbes	 on	 their	 surface.	Agar	 gels	 have
several	 important	 advantages	 over	 the
original	 growth	 medium,	 which	 was
gelatin.	 Very	 few	 bacteria	 can	 digest	 the
unusual	 agar	 carbohydrates,	 so	 agar	 gels
remain	 intact	 and	 the	 bacterial	 colonies
separate,	 while	 many	 bacteria	 digest
proteins	 and	 can	 quickly	 liquefy	 a	 gelatin



gel	 into	 a	 useless	 soup.	 And	 agar	 gels
remain	 solid	 at	 the	 ideal	 temperatures	 for
bacterial	growth,	often	around	100ºF/38ºC,
a	 temperature	 at	 which	 gelatin	 begins	 to
melt.

How	 did	 microbiologists	 come	 to	 use
agar?	In	the	late	19th	century,	Lina	Hesse,
the	American	wife	 of	 a	 German	 scientist,
recalled	 the	 advice	 of	 family	 friends	who
had	 lived	 in	 Asia,	 and	 made	 agar	 jellies
and	 puddings	 that	 stayed	 solid	 in	 the
summer	 heat	 of	 Dresden.	 Her	 husband
relayed	 his	 wife’s	 suggestion	 to	 his	 boss,
the	 pioneering	 microbiologist	 Robert
Koch,	 who	 then	 used	 agar	 to	 isolate	 the
bacterium	that	causes	tuberculosis.

The	Nature	of	Starch

Starch	molecules	are	long	chains	of	thousands
of	glucose	sugar	molecules	linked	up	together.
There	are	two	kinds	of	starch	molecules:	long



straight	chains	called	amylose,	and	short,
branched,	bushy	chains	called	amylopectin.
Plants	deposit	starch	molecules	in
microscopic	solid	granules.	The	size,	shape,
amylose	and	amylopectin	contents,	and
cooking	qualities	of	the	starch	granules	vary
from	species	to	species.

Linear	 Amylose	 and	 Bushy	 Amylopectin
The	 shapes	 of	 amylose	 and	 amylopectin
molecules	have	a	direct	effect	on	their	ability
to	 thicken	 a	 sauce.	 The	 straight	 amylose
chains	 coil	 up	 into	 long	 helical	 structures
when	dissolved	in	water,	but	they	retain	their
basically	linear	shape.	Their	elongation	makes
it	 very	 likely	 that	 one	 chain	 will	 knock	 into
another	or	into	a	granule:	each	sweeps	through
a	 relatively	 large	 volume	 of	 liquid.	 By
contrast,	 the	 branched	 shape	 of	 amylopectin
makes	 for	 a	 compact	 target	 and	 therefore	 a
molecule	 less	 likely	 to	 collide	 with	 others;
and	 even	 if	 it	 does	 collide,	 it’s	 less	 likely	 to



get	 tangled	 up	 and	 slow	 the	motion	 of	 other
molecules	 and	 granules	 in	 the	 vicinity.	 A
small	 number	 of	 very	 long	 amylose
molecules,	 then,	will	 do	 the	 job	 of	more	 but
shorter	amylose	molecules,	and	of	many	more
bushy	amylopectins.	For	this	reason,	the	cook
can	obtain	the	same	degree	of	thickening	from
a	 smaller	 amount	 of	 long-amylose	 potato
starch	than	from	moderate-amylose	wheat	and
corn	starches.

Two	 kinds	 of	 starch.	 Starch	 molecules	 are
chains	made	 up	 of	 hundreds	 or	 thousands	 of
glucose	molecules	bonded	together.	They	take
two	 forms:	 straight	 chains	 of	 amylose	 (left),
and	branched	chains	of	amylopectin	 (right).	A



long	amylose	chain	moves	around	in	a	larger
volume	 than	 the	 more	 compact	 amylopectin
containing	 the	 same	 number	 of	 glucose
molecules,	 and	 is	 more	 likely	 to	 tangle	 with
other	 chains.	 Amylose	 is	 therefore	 a	 more
effective	thickener	than	amylopectin.

Pure	Starch
Starch	 has	 been	 separated	 from	 the
proteins	and	other	materials	in	grains	since
ancient	 times.	 The	 Romans	 called	 it
amylum,	 which	 meant	 “not	 ground	 at	 the
mill.”	They	made	it	by	grinding	wheat	in	a
mortar	and	then	soaking	the	flour	for	days,
during	 which	 bacteria	 grew	 and	 digested
the	 grain’s	 cell	 walls	 and	 gluten	 proteins
while	leaving	the	dense,	solid	starch	grains
intact.	 They	 reground	 the	 dregs,	 and	 then
pressed	 them	 through	 fine	 linen,	 which
retained	the	small	grains.	The	starch	grains
were	 dried	 in	 the	 sun,	 and	 then	 either
cooked	 in	 milk	 or	 used	 to	 thicken	 sauces



(p.	583).
Swelling	and	Gelation	What	makes	starch	so
useful	is	its	behavior	in	hot	water.	Mix	some
flour	or	cornstarch	into	cold	water,	and
nothing	much	happens.	The	starch	granules
slowly	absorb	a	limited	amount	of	water,
about	30%	of	their	own	weight,	and	they
simply	sink	to	the	bottom	of	the	pot	and	sit
there.	But	when	the	water	gets	hot	enough,	the
energy	of	its	molecules	is	sufficient	to	disrupt
the	weaker	regions	of	the	granule.	The
granules	then	absorb	more	water	and	swell	up,
thereby	putting	greater	and	greater	stress	on
the	more	organized,	stronger	granule	regions.
Within	a	certain	range	of	temperatures
characteristic	of	each	starch	source	but
usually	beginning	around	120–140ºF/50–60ºC,
the	granules	suddenly	lose	their	organized
structure,	absorb	a	great	deal	of	water,	and
become	amorphous	networks	of	starch	and
water	intermingled.	This	temperature	is	called
the	gelation	range,	because	the	granules



become	individual	gels,	or	water-containing
meshworks	of	long	molecules.	This	range	can
be	recognized	by	the	fact	that	the	initially
cloudy	suspension	of	granules	suddenly
becomes	more	translucent.	The	individual
starch	molecules	become	less	closely	packed
together	and	don’t	deflect	as	many	light	rays,
and	so	the	mixture	becomes	clearer.

Thickening:	 The	 Granules	 Leak	 Starch
Depending	 on	 how	 concentrated	 the	 starch
granules	 are	 to	 begin	 with,	 the	 starch-water
mixture	 may	 noticeably	 thicken	 at	 various
points	 during	 their	 swelling	 and	 gelation.
Most	 sauces	 are	 rather	 dilute	 (less	 than	 5%
starch	by	weight)	and	thicken	during	gelation,
when	 the	 mixture	 begins	 to	 become
translucent.	 They	 reach	 their	 greatest
thickness	 after	 the	 gelated	 granules	 begin	 to
leak	amylose	and	amylopectin	molecules	into
the	 surrounding	 liquid.	 The	 long	 amylose
molecules	 form	 something	 like	 a	 three-



dimensional	 fishnet	 that	 not	 only	 entraps
pockets	of	water,	but	blocks	the	movements	of
the	whale-like,	water-swollen	starch	granules.

Thinning:	 The	 Granules	 Break	 Once	 it
reaches	 its	 thickest	 consistency,	 the	 starch-
water	 mixture	 will	 slowly	 thin	 out	 again.
There	are	 three	different	 things	 that	 the	cook
may	do	that	encourage	thinning:	heating	for	a
long	 period	 of	 time	 after	 thickening	 occurs,
heating	 all	 the	way	 to	 the	 boil,	 and	 vigorous
stirring.	 All	 of	 these	 have	 the	 same	 effect:
they	 shatter	 the	 swollen	 and	 fragile	 granules
into	 very	 small	 fragments.	 While	 this	 does
mean	that	even	more	amylose	is	released	into
the	water,	 it	 also	means	 that	 there	 are	many
fewer	 large	 bodies	 to	 get	 caught	 in	 the
amylose	tangle.	In	other	words,	the	amount	of
netting	increases,	the	mesh	grows	finer,	but	at
the	 same	 time	 the	 big	 whales	 become	 small
minnows.	 This	 thinning	 effect	 is	 especially
striking	 in	 the	 case	of	 very	 thick	pastes,	 less



obvious	 in	normal	 sauces.	 If	 the	granules	are
few	 and	 far	 between	 to	 begin	 with,	 their
disintegration	is	less	noticeable.	This	thinning
is	 accompanied	 by	 a	 greater	 refinement	 of
texture,	 as	 the	 starch	 particles	 disappear	 and
only	indetectably	small	molecules	remain.

Some	of	the	thinning	of	long-simmered
starch-based	sauces	is	caused	by	the	gradual
breakdown	of	the	starch	molecules	themselves
into	smaller	fragments.	Acidity	accelerates
this	breakdown.

Thickening	 a	 sauce	 with	 starch.	 Uncooked
starch	granules	 offer	 little	 obstruction	 to	 the
flow	 of	 the	 surrounding	 liquid	 (left).	As	 the
sauce	 heats	 up	 and	 the	 temperature	 reaches
the	gelation	range,	the	granules	absorb	water
and	swell,	and	the	sauce	consistency	begins	to



thicken	(center).	As	cooking	continues	and	the
temperature	approaches	the	boil,	the	granules
swell	 even	 more	 and	 leak	 starch	 chains	 into
the	 liquid	 (right).	It’s	 at	 this	 stage	 that	 the
sauce	reaches	its	maximum	thickness.
Cooling,	Further	Thickening,	and
Congealing	Once	the	starch	in	a	sauce	has
gelated,	its	amylose	has	leaked	out,	and	the
cook	judges	the	sauce	to	be	properly	cooked,
he	stops	the	cooking,	and	the	temperature	of
the	sauce	begins	to	fall.	As	the	mixture	cools
down,	the	water	and	starch	molecules	move
with	less	and	less	energy,	and	at	a	certain
point	the	force	of	the	temporary	bonds	among
them	begins	to	hold	the	molecules	together
longer	than	they	are	kept	apart	by	random
collisions.	Gradually,	the	longer	amylose
molecules	form	stable	bonds	among
themselves,	the	kind	of	bonds	that	held	them
together	in	the	granule	initially.	Water
molecules	settle	in	the	pockets	between	starch
chains.	As	a	result,	the	liquid	mixture	gets



progressively	thicker.	If	the	amylose
molecules	are	concentrated	enough,	and	the
temperature	falls	far	enough,	the	liquid
mixture	congeals	into	a	solid	gel,	just	as	a
gelatin	solution	settles	into	a	jelly.	(Bushy
amylopectin	molecules	take	much	longer	to
bond	to	each	other,	so	low-amylose	starches
are	slow	to	congeal.)	This	is	the	way	in	which
pie	fillings,	puddings,	and	similar	solid	but
moist	starch	concoctions	are	made.

Judge	 Sauce	 Consistency	 at	 Serving
Temperatures	 It’s	 important	 for	 the	 cook	 to
anticipate	 this	 cooling	 and	 thickening.	 We
create	 and	 evaluate	most	 sauces	on	 the	 stove
at	 high	 temperatures,	 around	200ºF/93ºC,	 but
when	they’re	poured	in	a	thin	layer	onto	food
and	 served,	 they	 immediately	 begin	 to	 cool
and	 thicken.	However	 thick	 a	 sauce	 is	 in	 the
pan,	 it’s	 going	 to	 be	 thicker	 when	 the	 diner
actually	tastes	it,	and	it	may	even	congeal	on
the	 plate.	 So	 sauces	 should	 be	 thinner	 at	 the



stove	 than	 they’re	 meant	 to	 be	 at	 the	 table.
(Minimizing	the	amount	of	thickener	will	also
reduce	 the	extent	 to	which	 the	 sauce’s	 flavor
is	 muted.)	 The	 best	 way	 to	 predict	 the	 final
texture	of	a	sauce	is	to	pour	a	spoonful	into	a
cool	dish	and	then	sample	it.

Starch	in	sauce	making.	A	swollen	granule	of
potato	 starch	 caught	 in	 a	 meshwork	 of
molecules	 freed	 from	 it	 and	 other	 granules
(left).	A	 starch-thickened	 sauce	 is	 thickest	 at
this	 stage,	 when	 both	 starch	 granules	 and
molecules	 block	 the	 movement	 of	 water.	 A
granule	 of	 wheat	 starch	 that	 has	 lost	 nearly
all	of	 its	starch	molecules	 to	 the	surrounding
liquid	 (right).	As	 the	 granules	 in	 a	 starch-
thickened	 sauce	 disintegrate,	 they	 no	 longer
get	caught	in	the	mesh	of	free	starch,	and	the
sauce	thins	out.



Different	Starches
and	Their	Qualities

Cooks	have	several	different	forms	of	starch
to	choose	among	for	thickening	sauces,	each
with	its	own	particular	qualities.	They	fall
into	two	families:	starches	from	grains,
including	flour	and	cornstarch,	and	starches
from	tubers	and	roots,	including	potato	starch
and	arrowroot.	Less	commonly	seen	except	on
the	ingredient	labels	of	processed	foods	is
sago	starch,	from	the	stem	pith	of	a	Pacific
palm	(Metroxylon	sagu).

Grain	Starches	Starches	 from	grains	 tend	 to
share	 several	 characteristics.	 Their	 starch
granules	are	medium-sized,	and	contain	small
but	 significant	 amounts	 of	 lipids	 (fats,	 fatty
acids,	 phospholipids)	 and	 protein.	 These
impurities	 somehow	 give	 the	 starch	 granules
some	structural	stability,	which	means	 that	 it
takes	a	higher	temperature	to	gelate	them;	and



they	 lend	 a	 cloudiness	 and	 distinct	 “cereal”
flavor	 to	 starch-water	 mixtures.	 Light	 that
passes	 right	 through	 a	 gelated	 mesh	 of	 pure
starch	 and	 water	 is	 scattered	 by	 tiny	 starch-
lipid	or	starch-protein	complexes,	producing	a
milky,	 impenetrable	 appearance.	 Grain
starches	 contain	 a	 high	 proportion	 of
moderately	 long	 amylose	 molecules	 that
readily	form	a	network	with	each	other,	and	so
make	sauces	that	quickly	thicken	and	congeal
when	cooled.

Wheat	Flour	Wheat	flour	is	made	by	grinding
wheat	 grains	 and	 sieving	 the	 bran	 and	 germ
from	 the	 starch-rich	 endosperm(p.	 528).
Wheat	 flour	 is	 only	 about	 75%	 starch,	 and
includes	 about	 10%	 by	 weight	 of	 protein,
mainly	 the	 insoluble	 gluten	 proteins.	 It’s
therefore	 a	 less	 efficient	 thickener	 than	 pure
cornstarch	or	potato	starch;	it	takes	more	flour
to	 obtain	 the	 same	 consistency.	 A	 common
rule	 of	 thumb	 is	 to	 use	 1.5	 times	 as	 much



flour	 as	 starch.	 Flour	 has	 a	 distinct	 wheat
flavor	 that	 cooks	 often	 transform	 by
precooking	 the	 flour	 before	 adding	 it	 to	 a
sauce	 (p.	 617).	 The	 suspended	 particles	 of
gluten	 protein	 make	 flour-based	 sauces
especially	 opaque	 and	 give	 their	 surface	 a
matte	 appearance,	unless	 the	 sauce	 is	 cooked
for	hours	and	skimmed	to	remove	the	gluten.

Cornstarch	 Cornstarch	 is	 practically	 pure
starch	 and	 so	 a	more	 efficient	 thickener	 than
flour.	Cornstarch	 is	manufactured	by	soaking
the	whole	maize	 grain,	milling	 it	 coarsely	 to
remove	 the	 germ	 and	 hull,	 and	 grinding,
sieving,	 and	 centrifuging	 the	 remainder	 to
separate	 the	 seed	 proteins.	 The	 resulting
starch	 is	 washed,	 dried,	 and	 reground	 into	 a
fine	 powder	 consisting	 of	 single	 granules	 or
small	aggregates.	During	this	wet	processing,
the	 starch	granules	 absorb	odors	 and	develop
their	 own	 when	 their	 traces	 of	 lipids	 are
oxidized,	so	cornstarch	has	a	distinctive	flavor



unlike	 that	 of	 wheat	 flour,	 which	 is	 milled
dry.

Rice	 Starch	 Rice	 starch	 is	 seldom	 seen	 in
Western	 markets.	 Its	 granules	 have	 the
smallest	 average	 size	 of	 the	 starches,	 and
produce	an	especially	fine	texture	in	the	early
stages	of	thickening.

Tuber	 and	 Root	 Starches	 Compared	 to	 the
starches	 from	 dry	 grains,	 the	 starches	 from
moist	underground	storage	organs	come	in	the
form	of	larger	granules	that	retain	more	water
molecules,	 cook	 faster,	 and	 release	 starch	 at
lower	 temperatures.	 They	 contain	 less
amylose,	 but	 their	 amylose	 chains	 are	 up	 to
four	 times	 longer	 than	cereal	 amyloses.	Root
and	 tuber	 starches	 contain	 a	 fraction	 of	 the
lipids	 and	 proteins	 that	 are	 associated	 with
cereal	 starches,	 which	 makes	 them	 more
readily	 gelated	 —	 lipids	 delay	 gelation	 by
stabilizing	 granule	 structure	 —	 and	 gives
them	 less	pronounced	 flavors.	These	 starches



leave	 their	 sauces	 with	 a	 translucent,	 glossy
appearance.	 The	 properties	 of	 root	 starches
suit	them	for	last-minute	corrections	of	sauce
consistency:	less	of	them	is	required	to	lend	a
given	 thickness,	 they	 thicken	 quickly,	 and
don’t	need	precooking	to	improve	their	flavor.

Potato	 Starch	 Potato	 starch	 was	 the	 first
commercially	 important	 refined	starch	and	 is
still	an	 important	 food	starch	 in	Europe.	 It	 is
unusual	 for	 several	 characteristics.	 Its
granules	 are	 very	 large,	 up	 to	 a	 tenth	 of	 a
millimeter	across,	 and	 its	amylose	molecules
are	 very	 long.	This	 combination	gives	 potato
starch	 an	 initial	 thickening	 power	 far	 greater
than	 that	 of	 any	 other	 starch.	 The	 long
amylose	 chains	 tangle	 with	 each	 other	 and
with	 the	 giant	 granules	 to	 block	 easy
movement	 of	 the	 sauce	 fluid.	 This
entanglement	 also	 creates	 long	 aggregates	 of
amylose	 and	 granules	 that	 can	 give	 the
impression	 of	 stringiness.	 And	 the	 large



swollen	 granules	 give	 a	 noticeable	 initial
graininess	to	sauces.	However	the	granules	are
fragile,	 and	 readily	 fragment	 into	 finer
particles;	 so	 having	 reached	 its	 thickest	 and
grainiest,	 the	 consistency	 of	 a	 potato-starch
sauce	 rapidly	 gets	 both	 finer	 and	 thinner.
Potato	 starch	 is	 also	 unusual	 for	 having	 a
large	 number	 of	 attached	 phosphate	 groups,
which	carry	a	weak	electric	charge	and	cause
the	 starch	 chains	 to	 repel	 each	 other.	 This
repulsion	helps	keep	 the	starch	chains	evenly
dispersed	 in	 a	 sauce,	 and	 contributes	 to	 the
thickness	and	clarity	of	the	dispersion	and	its
low	tendency	to	congeal	into	a	gel	on	cooling.

Tapioca	 Tapioca,	 derived	 from	 the	 root	 of	 a
tropical	 plant	 known	 as	 manioc	 or	 cassava
(Manihot	 esculenta,	 p.	 305),	 is	 a	 root	 starch
used	 mostly	 in	 puddings.	 It	 tends	 to	 form
unpleasantly	stringy	associations	in	water	and
so	 is	 usually	 made	 into	 large	 pregelatinized
pearls	 (p.	 578),	 which	 are	 then	 cooked	 only



long	 enough	 to	 be	 softened.	 Because	 tapioca
keeps	well	in	the	ground	and	is	processed	into
starch	 within	 days	 of	 harvest,	 it	 doesn’t
develop	the	strong	aromas	found	in	wheat	and
corn	 starches	 or	 in	 potato	 starch,	 which	 is
typically	 extracted	 from	 long-stored,	 second-
quality	 tubers.	 Tapioca	 starch	 is	 especially
prized	for	its	neutral	flavor.

Properties	of	Some	Common	Thickening
Starches	Cooked	in	Water

Gelation Maximum
Temperature Thickness

Wheat 126–185ºF	52–85ºC +
Corn 144–180ºF	62–80ºC ++
Potato 136–150ºF	58–65ºC +++++
Tapioca 126–150ºF	52–65ºC +++
Arrowroot 140–187ºF	60–86ºC +++

Consistency Stability	to	Prolonged
Cooking



Wheat Short Good
Corn Short Moderate
Potato Stringy Poor
Tapioca Stringy Poor
Arrowroot Stringy Good
Appearance Flavor
Wheat Opaque Strong
Corn Opaque Strong
Potato Clear Moderate
Tapioca Clear Neutral
Arrowroot Clear Neutral

Arrowroot	Arrowroot	 starch	 as	 it’s	 known	 in
the	West	 is	 refined	 from	 the	 roots	of	 a	West
Indian	 plant	 (Maranta	 arundinacea).
Arrowroot	 starch	 has	 smaller	 granules	 than
potato	 or	 tapioca	 starches,	 produces	 a	 less
stringy	 consistency,	 and	 doesn’t	 thin	 out	 as
much	 on	 prolonged	 cooking.	 Its	 gelation



temperature	 is	 higher	 than	 the	 other	 root
starches,	more	like	the	range	for	cornstarch.	A
number	of	other	plants	 and	 their	 starches	are
also	 called	 arrowroot	 in	 Asia	 and	 Australia
(species	of	Tacca,	Hutchenia,	Canna).

Root	Starches	 in	China	 In	China,	 starch	was
originally	 extracted	 from	 millet	 and	 water
chestnuts.	Nowadays	most	Chinese	sauces	are
thickened	 with	 corn,	 potato,	 or	 sweet	 potato
starch	 —	 all	 plants	 from	 the	 New	 World.
Other	 Asian	 sources	 of	 starch	 are	 yams,
ginger,	 lotus,	and	the	 tuber	of	 the	kudzu	vine
(Pueraria).

Modified	Starches	 Food	manufacturers	 have
not	been	content	with	the	starches	available	in
nature,	 mainly	 because	 the	 consistency	 they
create	 isn’t	 stable	 throughout	 the	 cycle	 of
production,	 distribution,	 storage,	 and	 use	 by
the	consumer.	They’ve	therefore	engineered	a
variety	of	starches	that	are	more	stable.	Plant
breeders	 have	 developed	 so-called	 “waxy”



varieties	of	corn	whose	seeds	contain	little	or
no	 amylose	 and	 are	 nearly	 all	 amylopectin,
which	 doesn’t	 form	 networks	 as	 readily	 as
amylose.	 Waxy	 starches	 therefore	 make
sauces	 and	 gels	 that	 resist	 congealing	 and
separation	into	a	firm	solid	phase	and	watery
residue,	 a	 problem	 to	 which	 high-amylose
starches	are	prone.

Ingredient	manufacturers	also	use	physical
and	chemical	treatments	to	modify	the	starch
molecules	from	standard	plant	varieties.	They
precook	and	dry	starches	in	various	ways	to
produce	powders	or	granules	that	readily
absorb	cold	water	or	disperse	in	and	thicken
liquids	without	requiring	cooking.	And	they
alter	them	with	chemicals	—	cross-linking
chains	to	each	other,	or	oxidizing	them,	or
substituting	fat-soluble	side	groups	along	the
chain	—	to	make	them	less	prone	to
breakdown	during	cooking,	to	make	them
more	effective	emulsion	stabilizers,	and	to
give	them	other	qualities	that	“native”



starches	don’t	normally	have.	Such	starches
are	listed	on	ingredient	labels	as	“modified
starch.”

The	Influence	of	Other
Ingredients	on	Starch	Sauces

Flavorings:	Salt,	Sugar,	Acid	Starch	and
water	are	the	basis	for	a	sauce’s	structure,	and
most	other	ingredients	have	only	secondary
effects	on	that	structure.	Salt,	acid,	and	sugar
are	frequently	added	for	their	contributions	to
flavor.	Salt	slightly	lowers	the	gelation
temperature	of	starch,	while	sugars	increase
it.	Acids	in	the	form	of	wine	or	vinegar
encourage	the	fragmentation	of	starch	chains
into	much	shorter	lengths,	so	that	starch
granules	gelate	and	disintegrate	at	lower
temperatures,	and	the	final	product	is	less
viscous	for	a	given	amount	of	starch.	Root
starches	are	noticeably	affected	by	moderate
acidity	(a	pH	lower	than	5),	while	grain



starches	can	withstand	the	acidities	typical	of
yogurt	and	many	fruits	(pH	4).	Gentle	and
brief	cooking	will	minimize	acid	breakdown.

Proteins	 and	 Fats	 Two	 other	 materials	 are
commonly	 found	 in	 sauces	 and	 have	 some
influence	on	their	texture.	Flour	is	about	10%
protein	by	weight,	and	much	of	this	fraction	is
insoluble	 gluten.	 Gluten	 aggregations
probably	get	caught	in	the	starch	network	and
so	 slightly	 increase	 the	 viscosity	 of	 the
solution,	 though	 the	 pure	 starches	 are
generally	 more	 powerful	 thickeners	 overall.
Sauces	 based	 on	 concentrated	 meat	 stocks
also	contain	a	good	deal	of	gelatin,	but	gelatin
and	 starch	 seem	 not	 to	 affect	 each	 other’s
behavior.

Finally,	fats	are	usually	present	in	the	form
of	butter,	oil,	or	the	drippings	from	a	roast.
They	do	not	mix	with	water	or	water-soluble
compounds,	but	they	do	slow	the	penetration
of	water	into	starch	granules.	Fat	does



contribute	the	sensations	of	smoothness	and
moistness	to	a	sauce,	and	when	used	to
precook	the	flour	in	a	roux,	it	coats	the	flour
particles,	prevents	them	from	clumping
together	in	the	water,	and	so	safeguards
against	lumps.

Incorporating	Starch	into
Sauces

In	order	to	thicken	a	sauce	with	starch,	the
cook	must	get	the	starch	into	the	sauce.	Very
basic,	but	not	so	simple!	If	you	add	flour	or
starch	directly	to	a	hot	sauce,	it	lumps	up	and
never	disperses	evenly:	the	moment	they	hit
the	hot	liquid,	the	clumps	of	starch	granules
develop	a	partly	gelated,	sticky	surface	that
seals	the	dry	granules	inside	and	prevents
them	from	dispersing.

Slurries,	 Beurre	 Manié,	 Floured	 Meat
Cooks	 use	 four	 methods	 for	 incorporating



starch	 into	 a	 sauce.	 The	 first	 is	 to	 mix	 the
starch	 with	 some	 cold	 water,	 so	 that	 the
granules	are	wetted	and	separated	before	they
encounter	 gelation	 temperatures.	 The	 starch-
water	slurry	can	then	be	added	directly	to	the
sauce.	 A	 second	 method	 is	 to	 separate	 the
starch	 or	 flour	 particles	 not	 with	 water,	 but
with	fat.	Beurre	manié,	or	“kneaded	butter,”	is
flour	 worked	 into	 a	 paste	 with	 its	 weight	 in
butter.	When	a	piece	of	the	paste	is	added	to	a
hot	 sauce	 in	 need	 of	 last-minute	 thickening,
the	 butter	 melts	 and	 gradually	 releases
greased	starch	particles	into	the	liquid,	where
their	 swelling	and	gelation	are	slowed	by	 the
water-repelling	surface	layer.

A	third	method	for	getting	starch	into	a
sauce	is	to	introduce	it	early	in	the	cooking,
not	late.	Many	stews	and	fricassees	are	made
by	dusting	pieces	of	meat	with	flour,	then
sautéing	the	pieces,	and	only	then	adding	a
cooking	liquid	that	will	become	the	sauce.	In
this	way	the	starch	has	already	been	dispersed



over	the	large	surface	area	of	the	meat	pieces,
and	it	has	been	precoated	with	the	sautéing
fat,	which	prevents	clumping	when	the	liquid
is	added.

Roux	 The	 fourth	 method	 for	 getting	 starch
into	a	sauce,	and	one	that	has	been	developed
into	 a	minor	 art	 of	 its	 own,	 is	 to	 preheat	 the
starch	 separately	 in	 fat	 to	 make	 what	 the
French	 call	 a	roux,	 from	 the	word	 for	 “red.”
The	 basic	 principle	 works	 with	 any	 form	 of
starch	 and	 any	 fat	 or	 oil.	 In	 the	 traditional
French	system,	the	cook	carefully	heats	equal
weights	of	flour	and	butter	in	a	pan	to	one	of
three	 consecutive	 endpoints:	 the	mixture	 has
had	 the	 moisture	 cooked	 out	 of	 it,	 but	 the
flour	remains	white;	the	flour	develops	a	light
yellow	color;	or	the	flour	develops	a	distinctly
brown	color.

Improvements	 in	 Flavor,	 Color,	 and
Dispersability	In	addition	to	coating	the	flour
particles	with	 fat	 and	making	 them	 easier	 to



disperse	in	a	hot	liquid,	roux	making	has	three
other	useful	effects	on	the	flour.	First,	it	cooks
out	 the	 raw	 cereal	 flavor	 and	 develops	 a
rounded,	 toasty	 flavor	 that	 becomes	 more
pronounced	 and	 intense	 as	 the	 color	 darkens.
Second,	 the	color	 itself	—	the	product	of	 the
same	 browning	 reactions	 between
carbohydrates	 and	 proteins	 that	 produce	 the
toasty	 flavor	—	 can	 lend	 some	 depth	 to	 the
color	of	the	sauce.

Finally,	the	heat	causes	some	of	the	starch
chains	to	split,	and	then	to	form	new	bonds
with	each	other.	This	generally	means	that
long	chains	and	branches	are	broken	down
into	smaller	pieces	that	then	form	short
branches	on	other	molecules.	The	short,
branched	molecules	are	less	efficient	at
thickening	liquids	than	the	long	chains,	but
they’re	also	slower	to	bond	to	each	other	and
form	a	continuous	network	as	the	liquid	cools.
The	sauce	is	therefore	less	prone	to	congeal
on	the	plate.	The	darker	the	roux,	the	more



starch	chains	are	modified	in	this	way,	and	so
the	more	roux	is	required	to	create	a	given
thickness.	It	takes	more	of	a	dark	brown	roux
than	a	light	one	to	thicken	a	given	amount	of
liquid.	(The	industrial	version	of	roux	making
to	make	a	starch	more	dispersable	and	stable
to	cooling	is	called	dextrinization,	and
involves	heating	dry	starch	together	with
some	dilute	acid	or	alkali	to	375ºF/190ºC.)

Outside	of	France,	roux	are	especially
prominent	in	the	cooking	of	New	Orleans,
where	flour	is	cooked	to	a	number	of	different
stages	from	pale	to	chocolate-brown,	and
where	cooks	may	use	several	roux	in	a	single
gumbo	or	stew	to	lend	their	distinct	layers	of
flavor.

Starch	in	Classic	French	Sauces

In	the	code	formalized	by	Auguste	Escoffier
in	1902,	there	are	three	leading	mother	sauces
that	are	thickened	in	part	with	flour:	the



stock-based	brown	and	white	sauces,	or
espagnole	and	velouté;	and	the	milk-based
béchamel.	Each	of	these	relies	on	a	distinctive
combination	of	roux	and	liquid.	Brown	sauce
consists	of	a	stock	made	from	browned
vegetables,	meat,	and	bones,	then	reduced
after	thickening	with	a	roux	that	is	cooked
until	the	flour	browns	as	well.	White	sauce
uses	a	stock	made	from	un	browned	meat,
vegetables,	and	bones,	and	is	bound	with	a
pale	yellow	roux.	Béchamel	combines	milk
with	a	roux	that	is	not	allowed	to	change	color
at	all.	From	these	three	parent	sauces,	the
cook	can	produce	scores	of	offspring	simply
by	finishing	the	sauce	with	different
seasonings	and	enrichments.

Once	the	roux	has	been	added	to	the	stock,
the	mixture	is	allowed	to	simmer	for	quite	a
while	—	two	hours	for	velouté,	and	up	to	ten
in	the	case	of	brown	sauce.	During	this	time,
the	flavor	is	concentrated	as	water	evaporates,
and	the	starch	granules	dissolve	and	disperse



among	the	gelatin	molecules,	with	a	very
smooth	texture	the	result.	Brown	sauce	is
cooked	for	the	longest	time	because	it’s	meant
to	be	quite	clear	to	the	eye,	and	this	requires
that	the	gluten	proteins	coagulate	and	be
carried	to	the	surface,	where	they	and	the
tomato	solids	can	be	skimmed	off.

Escoffier	said	that	a	sauce	should	have
three	characteristics:	a	“decided”	taste,	a
texture	that’s	smooth	and	light	without	being
runny,	and	a	glossy	appearance.	The	taste	is	a
matter	of	making	fine	stocks	and	being
judicious	in	seasoning,	while	the	consistency
and	appearance	depend	on	how	the	thickening
is	accomplished.	Generally,	long	and	patient
simmering	is	necessary,	so	that	there	will	be
little	or	no	vestige	of	granular	structure	left	to
the	starch,	and	the	insoluble	gluten	proteins
will	be	caught	up	in	the	surface	scum	and	so
removed	from	the	sauce.	Gelatin	contributes
some	body	to	the	stock-based	sauces,	but	the
starch	is	what	gives	them	most	of	their



viscosity.	After	reduction,	the	concentration
of	starch	in	these	sauces	is	around	5%,	the
gelatin	concentration	probably	about	half	that.

The	First	Printed	Recipe	for	Roux
It	was	long	thought	that	the	first	recipes	for
roux	 appeared	 in	 late	 17th-century	French
cookbooks,	but	here	is	one	of	two	German
recipes	from	150	years	before	La	Varenne.
They	suggest	that	this	version	of	the	starch
thickener	 was	 developed	 in	 late	 medieval
times.

How	to	Cook	a	Wild	Boar’s	Head,	Also
How	to	Prepare	a	Sauce	for	It

A	wild	boar’s	head	should	be	boiled	well	in
water	and,	when	it	is	done,	laid	on	a	grate
and	basted	with	wine,	then	it	will	be
thought	to	have	been	cooked	in	wine.
Afterwards	make	a	black	or	yellow	sauce
with	it.	First,	when	you	would	make	a



black	sauce,	you	should	heat	up	a	little	fat
and	brown	a	small	spoonful	of	wheat	flour
in	the	fat	and	after	that	put	good	wine	into
it	and	good	cherry	syrup,	so	that	it
becomes	black,	and	sugar,	ginger,	pepper,
cloves	and	cinnamon,	grapes,	raisins	and
finely	chopped	almonds.	And	taste	it,
however	it	seems	good	to	you,	make	it	so.

—	Das	Kochbuch	der	Sabina
Welserin,	1533,	transl.	Valoise	Armstrong

Milk-Based	Sauces:	Béchamel	and	Boiled
Sauces	based	on	milk	rather	than	stock	are	of
course	much	easier	to	make,	and	more
forgiving;	because	they’re	already	milky,	the
cook	doesn’t	have	to	worry	about	long
simmering	to	clarify	them.	The	classic	starch-
thickened	milk	sauce	is	béchamel,	whose	only
other	ingredients	are	seasonings	and	the	butter
in	which	the	starch	is	precooked	for	a	couple
of	minutes.	Once	the	milk	has	been	added	to
the	roux,	the	sauce	is	simmered	for	30–60
minutes	with	occasional	skimming	of	the	skin



of	milk	and	flour	proteins	that	forms	at	the
surface.	Starch	is	more	effective	at	thickening
milk	than	it	is	meat	stocks,	apparently
because	it	bonds	both	to	the	milk	proteins	and
the	fat	globules	and	so	recruits	these	weighty
ingredients	into	its	flow-slowing	network.
Thanks	to	its	pleasant	but	neutral	flavor,
béchamel	is	a	versatile	sauce	that	can	be
imbued	with	many	flavors	and	served	with
many	mainingredients.	It’s	also	made	in
several	thicknesses	for	a	variety	of	purposes.
Thick	preparations	(6%	flour	by	weight)	serve
as	the	base	for	soufflés,	somewhat	thinner
ones	as	a	moistening	and	enrichment	for
gratins.

In	the	“boiled	dressing”	often	used	in	the
United	States	to	moisten	coleslaw	and	other
robust	salads,	flour	not	only	thickens	the	milk
and/or	cream,	but	also	helps	prevent	the
vinegar	from	curdling	the	milk	and	egg-yolk
proteins	into	coarse	particles.

Gravy



Gravy

We	come	now	to	the	homely	Anglo-American
cousin	of	French	sauces,	the	starch-thickened
gravy	typically	made	to	accompany	a	roast.
This	is	a	last-minute	sauce	that’s	put	together
just	before	serving,	and	consists	of	the	roast’s
juices,	extended	with	additional	liquid,	and
thickened	with	flour.	The	drippings	from	the
roast,	both	fat	and	browned	solids,	give	the
gravy	its	flavor	and	color.	First	the	fat	is
poured	off	and	reserved,	and	the	pan	is
“deglazed”:	the	browned	solids	are	lifted	from
the	roasting	pan	with	a	small	amount	of	water,
wine,	beer,	or	stock.	The	liquid	dissolves	the
browning-reaction	products	that	have	stuck	to
the	pan	and	so	takes	up	their	especially	rich
flavors.	The	deglazing	liquid	is	poured	off	and
reserved	separately.	Now	some	of	the	fat	is
returned	to	the	pan	with	an	equal	volume	of
flour,	and	the	flour	cooked	until	it	has	lost	its
raw	aroma.	The	deglazing	liquid	is	added,
around	a	cup/250	ml	for	every	1–2



tablespoons/10–20	gm	flour.	The	mixture	is
cooked	until	it	thickens,	a	matter	of	a	few
minutes.

Escoffier	on	Future	Roux
Though	 he	 was	 a	 traditionalist	 in	 many
ways,	 Escoffier	 openly	 looked	 forward	 to
the	 day	 when	 pure	 starch	 would	 replace
flour	 as	 the	 thickener	 in	 stock-based
sauces.

Indeed,	if	[starch]	is	absolutely	necessary
to	give	the	mellowness	and	velvetiness	to
the	sauce,	it	is	much	simpler	to	give	it
pure,	which	permits	one	to	bring	it	to	the
point	in	as	little	time	as	possible,	and	to
avoid	a	too	prolonged	sojourn	on	the	fire.
It	is	therefore	infinitely	probable	that
before	long	starch,	fecula,	or	arrowroot
obtained	in	a	state	of	absolute	purity	will
replace	flour	in	the	roux.
Today’s	 proponents	 of	 the	 classic	 sauces,



however,	generally	remain	loyal	to	flour.
Because	they’re	made	at	the	last	minute,

gravies	are	not	cooked	long	enough	to	cause
the	disintegration	of	the	starch	granules,	and
therefore	generally	have	a	slightly	coarse
texture,	even	when	lump-free.	This	gives
gravies	a	character	very	different	from	that	of
the	suave	sauce:	hearty,	and	when	they	are
extremely	thick,	almost	bready.	The	cook	can
obtain	a	smoother	consistency	by	making	an
initial	preparation	from	the	flour	and	a
fraction	of	the	deglazing	liquid,	heating	the
mixture	until	the	starch	granules	gelate	and
crowd	up	against	each	other	to	form	a	thick
paste,	and	whisking	the	paste	vigorously	to
smash	the	granules	into	each	other	and	break
them	up	into	finer	pieces.	This	paste	is	then
mixed	with	the	rest	of	the	deglazing	liquid
and	simmered	until	it’s	evenly	dispersed	and
the	liquid	reaches	the	desired	consistency.

Sauces	Thickened	with
Plant	Particles:	Purees



Some	of	the	most	delicious	sauces	we	eat,
including	tomato	sauces	and	applesauce,	are
made	simply	by	crushing	fruits	and
vegetables.	Crushing,	or	pureeing,	frees	the
juices	from	the	cells	of	the	fruit	or	vegetable,
and	breaks	the	cell	walls	into	fragments	that
become	suspended	in	the	juices	and	block
their	flow,	so	giving	them	some	thickness.
Crushed	nuts	and	spices	have	no	juices	of
their	own,	but	they	thicken	a	liquid	to	which
they’re	added	by	absorbing	some	of	its	water
and	providing	dry	cell	particles	that	obstruct
the	liquid’s	flow.

Until	recently,	most	purees	of	plant	tissue
would	have	been	made	by	cooking	the	tissue
to	soften	it,	and	then	either	grinding	it	in	a
mortar	or	forcing	it	through	a	fine	sieve.	Raw
purees	could	only	be	made	from	fruits
softened	by	ripening,	or	from	brittle	nuts.
Today’s	cooks	can	use	powerful	machines	—
blenders,	food	processors	—	to	puree	any	fruit
or	vegetable	or	seed	with	ease,	whether



they’re	raw	or	cooked.

Plant	Particles:	Coarse
and	Inefficient	Thickeners

Compared	to	the	other	ways	of	thickening,
simple	pureeing	tends	to	produce	a	coarse
sauce	that	more	readily	separates	into	solid
particles	and	thin	fluid.	The	solid	fragments
of	plant	cell	walls	are	clumps	of	many
thousands	of	carbohydrate	and	protein
molecules.	If	those	molecules	were	dispersed
separately	and	finely	throughout	the	fluid	—
as	gelatin	or	starch	molecules	are	in	other
sauces	—	they	would	bind	many	more	water
molecules,	get	tangled	up	in	each	other,	and
be	far	too	small	for	the	tongue	to	detect	as
particles.	But	plant-cell	fragments	range	from
0.01	to	1	millimeter	across;	they	give	a	grainy
impression	on	the	tongue	and	they’re	far	less
efficient	than	individual	molecules	at	binding
water	or	interfering	with	fluid	flow.	And



because	the	fragments	are	usually	denser	than
the	cell	fluids,	they	end	up	sinking	and
separating	from	the	fluids.	Heating	without
stirring	tends	to	speed	this	separation,	because
the	free	water	is	able	to	flow	and	rise	from	the
bottom	of	the	pot	through	the	thicker	particle
phase,	and	accumulate	above	it.

Some	sauces	and	related	preparations
aren’t	meant	to	be	suave	and	smooth;	instead
the	cook	leaves	some	pieces	of	tissue	intact	to
highlight	the	texture	of	the	fruit	or	vegetable
itself.	Mexican	tomato	and	tomatillo	salsas,
unstrained	cranberry	sauce,	and	applesauce
are	familiar	examples.

Food	Words:	Puree
The	 word	puree,	 meaning	 thoroughly
crushed	fruits,	vegetables,	or	animal	tissue,
comes	 ultimately	 from	 the	 Latin	purus,
meaning	“pure.”	England	borrowed	a	form
of	 the	 French	 descendent,	 the	 verb	purer,
which	 had	 both	 a	 general	 meaning,	 “to



purify,”	and	a	specific	one:	to	drain	excess
water	from	beans	and	peas	left	to	soak.	The
beans	 and	peas	would	go	on	 to	 be	 cooked
into	 a	 mush,	 and	 the	 consistency	 of	 that
mush	appears	 to	be	 the	prototype	of	other
purees.

Refining	the	Texture	of	Purees	Cooks	can
refine	the	basic	coarseness	of	purees	by
modifying	either	the	solid	plant	particles	or
the	fluid	that	surrounds	them.

Making	the	Plant	Particles	Smaller	There	are
several	 ways	 to	 make	 the	 plant	 particles	 as
fine	as	possible.

The	pureeing	process	itself	is	a	physical
crushing	or	shearing	that	breaks	the	plant
tissue	into	pieces	and	liberates
thickening	molecules	from	them.
Blenders	and	mortars	are	the	most
effective	tools	for	this;	food	processors
slice	rather	than	crush.	Producing	a	fine
puree	can	take	some	time	even	in	a



blender,	several	minutes	or	more.
Straining	through	a	sieve	or	cheesecloth
removes	the	large	particles,	and	forcing
the	puree	through	a	fine	mesh	breaks
large	particles	into	smaller	ones.
Heating	softens	cell	walls	so	that	they’ll
break	into	smaller	pieces,	and	shakes
loose	long-chain	carbohydrates	from	the
cell	walls	and	gets	them	into	the	watery
phase,	where	they	can	act	as	separate
starch	and	gelatin	molecules	do.
Freezing	a	puree	and	then	thawing	it
causes	ice	crystals	to	damage	cell	walls,
which	can	help	liberate	more	pectin	and
hemicellulose	molecules	into	the	liquid.

A	 fruit	 or	 vegetable	 puree.	 Grinding	 plant
tissue	 turns	 it	 inside	 out,	 freeing	 the	 cell



fluids	 and	 breaking	 the	 cell	 walls	 and	 other
structures	 into	 small	 particles.	 A	 puree	 is	 a
mixture	 of	 plant	 particles	 and	 molecules
floating	 in	water	 (left).	If	 left	 to	 stand,	most
purees	will	separate,	with	the	larger	particles
settling	to	the	bottom	(center).	This	separation
can	 be	 prevented,	 and	 the	 puree	 consistency
thickened,	 by	 cooking	 the	 puree	 down	 and
evaporating	the	excess	water	(right).
Preventing	Separation	The	consistency	of	a
puree	is	also	improved	by	reducing	the
amount	of	water	in	the	continuous	phase.	The
simplest	way	to	do	this	is	to	cook	the	whole
puree	down,	simmering	gently,	until	the
separate	thin	phase	disappears.	Another	way
that	better	preserves	the	puree’s	fresh	flavor	is
to	drain	the	thin	fluid	off	the	solids	and	either
discard	it,	or	cook	it	down	separately	and	then
add	it	back.	Or	the	cook	can	remove	some	of
the	fruit’s	or	vegetable’s	water	before
crushing	it,	for	example	by	partly	drying
halved	tomatoes	in	the	oven.



The	binding	power	of	the	puree	particles
themselves	can	be	supplemented	by	adding
some	other	thickener,	dry	spices	or	nuts	for
example,	or	flour	or	starch.

Fruit	and	Vegetable	Purees

Any	fruit	or	vegetable	can	be	turned	into	a
sauce	by	crushing	it.	Here	are	brief
observations	about	some	of	the	more
commonly	pureed	foods.

Raw	Purees:	Fruits	Raw	purees	are	generally
made	 from	 fruits,	 whose	 ripening	 enzymes
often	break	down	their	cell	walls	from	within,
and	thus	allow	their	intact	flesh	to	turn	into	a
puree	in	the	mouth.	Raspberries,	strawberries,
melons,	 mangoes,	 and	 bananas	 are	 examples
of	 such	 naturally	 soft	 fruits.	 The	 flavor	 of	 a
raw	 puree	 is	 usually	 accentuated	 by	 the
addition	 of	 sugar,	 lemon	 juice,	 and	 aromatic
herbs	or	 spices.	But	 that	 flavor	 is	 fragile	and



changeable.	 Pureeing	mixes	 the	 cell	 contents
with	each	other	and	with	oxygen	in	the	air,	so
enzyme	 action	 and	 oxidation	 begin
immediately	 (see	 below	 for	 the	 effects	 in
cooked	 purees	 of	 tomato,	 a	 botanical	 fruit).
The	 best	 way	 to	 minimize	 this	 change	 is	 to
chill	 the	 puree,	 which	 slows	 all	 chemical
reactions.

Raw	Purees:	Pesto	The	Italian	puree	of	basil
leaves,	pesto	genovese,	also	contains	olive	oil
and	 so	 is	 partly	 an	 emulsion	 as	 well.	 Pesto
takes	 its	name	 from	 the	 same	 root	 that	gives
us	pestle,	and	the	basil	leaves	and	garlic	were
traditionally	ground	with	a	pestle	and	mortar.
Because	 this	 takes	 some	 time	 and	 effort,
modern	 cooks	 usually	 prepare	 pesto	 in	 a
blender	 or	 food	 processor.	 The	 choice	 of
appliance	 and	 how	 it’s	 used	 influence	 both
consistency	 and	 flavor.	 The	 crushing	 and
shearing	 action	 of	 the	 pestle,	 the	 shearing
action	of	the	blender,	and	the	slicing	action	of



the	processor	all	produce	different	proportions
of	 intact	 and	 broken	 cells.	 The	 more
thoroughly	the	cells	are	broken,	the	more	their
contents	are	exposed	to	each	other	and	to	 the
air,	 and	 the	 more	 their	 flavor	 evolves.	 A
coarse	pesto	will	 have	 a	 flavor	most	 like	 the
flavor	of	fresh	basil	leaves.

Cooked	 Purees:	 Vegetables,	 Applesauce
Most	 vegetable	 purees	 are	 made	 by	 first
cooking	 the	 vegetable	 to	 soften	 its	 tissues,
break	apart	the	cells,	and	free	their	thickening
molecules.	 Some	 that	 develop	 an	 especially
suave	 smoothness	 have	 cell	 walls	 rich	 in
soluble	 pectin,	 which	 escapes	 from	 the
softened	 wall	 fragments	 during	 pureeing.
These	vegetables	include	carrots,	cauliflower,
and	capsicum	peppers;	more	than	75%	of	 the
cell-wall	 solids	 in	 capsicum	 puree	 is	 pectin.
Many	 root	 and	 tuber	 vegetables	 (though	 not
carrots)	 contain	 starch	 granules,	 which	when
cooked	 absorb	 much	 of	 the	 water	 in	 the



vegetable	 and	make	 it	 less	watery.	However,
such	 vegetables	 are	 best	 crushed	 gently,
without	 breaking	 open	 the	 cells.	 Thorough
pureeing	that	liberates	the	gelated	starch	turns
the	vegetable	 into	a	super-thick	potato	gravy,
gluey	and	stringy.

Even	though	fruits	are	presoftened	by
ripening,	cooks	often	heat	them	to	improve
their	texture,	flavor,	and	storage	life.	One	of
the	most	popular	cooked	fruit	sauces	is
applesauce,	which	is	meant	to	have	a	certain
coarseness	and	yet	not	seem	grainy.	The	cells
of	different	varieties	have	different	tendencies
to	adhere	to	each	other,	and	that	tendency	can
change	with	time	in	storage.	Most	of	the	soft
varieties	used	to	make	sauce	produce	finer-
grained	purees	with	time,	while	the	Macintosh
produces	coarser	ones.

Tomato	Sauce:	The	Importance	of	Enzymes
and	 Temperatures	 The	 most	 familiar
vegetable	 puree	 in	 the	West,	 and	 perhaps	 in



the	 world,	 is	 tomato	 sauce	 and	 paste.	 The
solids	 in	 tomatoes	 are	 about	 two-thirds
flavorful	 sugars	 and	 organic	 acids,	 and	 20%
cell-wall	 carbohydrates	 that	 have	 some
thickening	 power	 (10%	 cellulose,	 and	 5%
each	pectin	and	hemicelluloses).	In	the	United
States,	 commercial	 tomato	 purees	 may
include	all	the	water	in	the	original	tomatoes,
or	 just	 a	 third.	Tomato	paste	 is	 tomato	puree
cooked	 down	 so	 that	 it	 contains	 less	 than	 a
fifth	 of	 the	 water	 of	 the	 raw	 vegetable.
Tomato	paste	is	thus	a	concentrated	source	of
flavor,	color,	and	thickening	power.	(It’s	also
an	effective	emulsion	stabilizer;	see	p.	628.)

There	are	several	variables	in	the
preparation	of	purees	that	can	affect	their
final	texture	and	flavor.	Food	scientists	have
shown	this	most	clearly	for	mass-produced
tomato	puree.	The	general	lessons	are	also
relevant	to	the	preparation	of	purees	from
other	fruits	and	vegetables.



Tomato	Enzymes	 and	Consistency 	 The	 final
consistency	 of	 a	 tomato	 puree	 depends	 not
just	 on	 how	 much	 water	 has	 been	 removed,
but	 also	 on	 how	 long	 the	 puree	 spends	 at
either	 moderate	 or	 high	 temperatures.	 Ripe
tomatoes	have	very	active	enzymes	whose	job
is	 to	 break	 down	 pectin	 and	 cellulose
molecules	 in	 the	 fruit	 cell	walls,	 and	 so	give
the	 fruit	 its	 soft,	 fragile	 texture.	 When	 the
tomatoes	 are	 firstcrushed,	 the	 enzymes	 and
their	 target	 molecules	 are	 thoroughly	 mixed
together,	and	the	enzymes	start	breaking	down
the	 cell-wall	 structures.	 If	 the	 raw	 puree	 is
held	 at	 room	 temperature	 for	 a	 while,	 or
heated	 to	 a	 temperature	 below	 the
denaturation	 temperature	 of	 the	 pectin
enzymes,	 around	 180ºF/80ºC,	 then	 the
enzymes	will	break	down	a	lot	of	the	cell-wall
reinforcements,	and	these	liberated	molecules
will	 give	 a	 noticeably	 thicker	 consistency	 to
the	puree.

However,	when	the	puree	is	then	heated	to



remove	water	and	concentrate	it,	the	high
temperatures	break	the	already	enzyme-
damaged	molecules	into	smaller	pieces	that
are	less	efficient	thickeners,	and	the	paste
requires	that	much	greater	reduction	to	obtain
the	desired	thickness.	If	instead	the	raw	puree
is	cooked	quickly	close	to	the	boil,	the	result
is	a	thicker	sauce	that	requires	less	subsequent
reduction.	The	pectin	and	cellulose	enzymes
are	denatured	and	become	inactive,	while	at
the	same	time	the	cell	walls	are	disrupted	by
the	heat.	The	cell-wall	pectins	that	escape	into
the	fluid	phase	during	the	concentration
heating	are	longer	molecules	and	more
efficient	thickeners.

The	Thickening	Components	of
Tomatoes

Total	Solids, Pectin	and	Hemicellulose
%	by	weight Content,	%	by	weight

Raw	tomatoes 5–10 0.5–1.0



Canned	tomato	puree 8–24 0.8–2.4
Canned	tomato	paste 40 4
Tomato	Enzymes	and	Flavor	In	addition	to
tomato	enzymes	that	affect	texture,	there	are
enzymes	that	affect	flavor:	and	in	the	case	of
flavor,	some	initial	enzyme	activity	can	be
desirable.	The	fresh,	“green”-smelling
molecules	(hexanal	and	hexanol,	p.	274)	that
are	an	important	element	in	ripe	tomato	flavor
are	generated	by	the	action	of	enzymes	on
fatty	acids	when	the	fruit	tissue	is	crushed,
either	in	the	mouth	or	in	the	pot.	Rapid
cooking	to	the	boil	minimizes	this	fresh	flavor
element,	while	allowing	the	raw	puree	to	sit	at
room	temperature	—	in	a	Mexican	salsa,	for
example	—	or	only	slowly	heating	it,	will
cause	the	accumulation	of	these	flavor
molecules	in	the	puree.	A	method	that	home
cooks	sometimes	use	is	to	halve	or	quarter
tomatoes,	then	bake	them	in	a	slow	oven	to
remove	water,	and	finally	cook	them
relatively	quickly	into	a	sauce.	This	technique



minimizes	the	mixing	of	enzymes	and	targets,
so	cells	stay	relatively	intact,	and	relatively
little	green	aroma	develops.

Then	there’s	the	traditional	Italian
preparation	called	estratto,	which	begins	with
fresh	tomatoes	cooked	down	to	some	extent,
and	then	mixes	them	with	some	olive	oil	and
spreads	the	paste	on	boards	to	dry	down
further	in	the	sun.	This	is	often	described	as	a
relatively	“gentle”	process	compared	to
cooking,	and	it	probably	does	spare	some
damage	to	the	pectin	molecules.	But	in	fact	it
subjects	a	number	of	sensitive	molecules	—
including	the	antioxidant	tomato	pigment
lycopene	and	unsaturated	fatty	acids	in	the
olive	oil	—	to	powerful	and	damaging
ultraviolet	light,	which	gives	estratto	a
distinctively	strong,	cooked	flavor.

Nuts	and	Spices	as	Thickeners

Among	seeds	and	other	dry	plant	materials,



only	oily	nuts	can	be	made	into	a	sauce	base
on	their	own.	When	such	nuts	are	ground	into
“butters,”	the	oil	provides	the	fluid	continuous
phase	that	lubricates	the	particles	of	cell	walls
and	proteins.	But	most	of	the	time,	nuts	are
mixed	with	other	ingredients,	including
liquids,	so	they	become	part	of	a	complex
suspension	and	help	thicken	both	with	their
dry	particles	and	with	their	oil,	which
becomes	emulsified	into	tiny	droplets.
Almonds	have	long	served	this	purpose	in	the
Middle	East	and	Mediterranean	in	such	sauces
as	romesco	(with	red	peppers,	tomatoes,	and
olive	oil)	and	picada	(garlic,	parsley,	oil),	and
the	coconut	in	tropical	Asia,	where	it’s
pounded	along	with	spices	and	herbs	to
become	part	of	the	sauce	for	cooked	meats,
fish,	and	vegetables.

Nuts	and	other	finely	ground	seeds	and
spices	help	thicken	liquid	sauces	thanks	to
their	very	dryness,	which	allows	their
particles	to	absorb	water	from	the	sauce	and



thus	reduce	the	amount	of	liquid	that	needs	to
be	filled	with	particles.	At	the	same	time,	the
particles	themselves	swell	and	become	larger
obstacles	to	the	liquid’s	flow.	Dry	spices	such
as	turmeric,	cumin,	and	cinnamon	are	both
flavorings	and	thickeners	in	Indian	sauces,
and	coriander	is	especially	effective	thanks	to
its	fibrous,	absorbant	seed	coat.	Dried	chilli
peppers,	ground	nuts,	and	spices	thicken
Mexican	mole	sauces.	Powdered	versions	of
dried	chilli	pepper	are	prominent	in	Spanish
and	Hungarian	sauces	(pimenton,	paprika);
mustard	is	also	widely	used.	Some	spices	also
release	efficient	thickening	molecules	into	the
liquid.	Fenugreek	seeds	exude	a	gum	that
gives	a	gelatinous	consistency	to	the	Yemeni
sauce	hilbeh;	and	the	dried	leaves	of	the
sassafras	tree,	ground	to	make	filé	powder,
release	carbohydrates	that	give	Louisiana
gumbos	a	slightly	stringy	viscosity.

Complex	Mixtures:
Indian	Curries,	Mexican	Moles



The	most	complex	and	sophisticated	puree
sauces	are	made	in	Asia	and	Mexico.	The
sauce	or	“gravy”	for	many	Indian	and	Thai
dishes	begins	with	finely	ground	plant	tissues
—	onions,	ginger,	garlic	in	northern	India,
coconut	in	southern	India	and	in	Thailand	—
and	a	number	of	different	spices	and	herbs.
These	ingredients	are	then	fried	in	hot	oil
until	much	of	the	moisture	has	boiled	off,	and
the	plant	solids	are	sufficiently	concentrated
that	the	sauce	clings	to	itself	and	the	oil
separates.	The	frying	also	cooks	the	sauce,
eliminating	raw	flavors	and	developing	new
ones.	The	sauce	is	then	slightly	thinned	with
some	water,	and	the	main	ingredient	cooked
in	it.	Mexican	mole	sauces	are	prepared	in
much	the	same	way,	except	that	the
foundation	ingredient	is	usually	rehydrated
dried	chillis;	pumpkin	and	other	seeds	are
another	major	element.	Thanks	to	the	high
pectin	content	of	the	chillis,	moles	have	a
more	suave,	finer	consistency	than	the	Asian



purees.	But	both	are	marvels	of	mouth-filling
pleasure.

Sauces	Thickened
with	Droplets	of	Oil
or	Water:	Emulsions

The	sauces	we’ve	examined	so	far	are	liquids
thickened	with	a	fine	dispersion	of	solid
materials:	protein	molecules,	starch	granules
and	molecules,	particles	of	plant	tissue	and
cell-wall	molecules.	A	very	different
thickening	method	is	to	fill	the	water-based
liquid	with	droplets	of	oil,	which	are	much
more	massive	and	slow-moving	than
individual	molecules	of	water,	impede	their
motion,	and	so	create	a	thick	and	creamy
consistency	in	the	mixture	as	a	whole.	Such	a
dispersion	of	one	liquid	in	another	is	called	an
emulsion.	The	word	comes	from	the	Latin	for
“to	milk	out,”	and	referred	originally	to	the
milky	fluids	that	can	be	pressed	from	nuts	and



other	plant	tissues.	Milk,	cream,	and	egg
yolks	are	natural	emulsions,	while	sauce
emulsions	include	mayonnaise,	hollandaise
sauce,	beurre	blanc,	and	oil-and-vinegar	salad
dressings.	Modern	chefs	have	applied	the
basic	idea	to	the	thickening	of	all	kinds	of
liquids,	and	often	actually	describe	the	result
on	the	menu	as	an	emulsion,	a	word	that
lingers	on	the	tongue	longer	than	sauce	does.

Emulsified	sauces	offer	a	special	challenge
to	the	cook:	unlike	sauces	thickened	with
solids,	emulsions	are	basically	unstable.
Whisk	oil	and	a	little	vinegar	together	in	a
bowl,	and	the	vinegar	forms	droplets	in	the
oil:	but	they	soon	sink	and	coalesce,	and	in	a
few	minutes	the	two	liquids	have	separated
again.	Cooks	not	only	have	to	form	the
emulsion,	they	also	have	to	prevent	the
emulsion	from	being	undone	by	the	basic
incompatibility	of	the	two	liquids.

The	Nature	of	Emulsions



An	emulsion	can	only	be	made	from	two
liquids	that	don’t	dissolve	in	each	other,	and
therefore	retain	their	distinct	identities	even
when	mixed.	The	molecules	of	water	and
alcohol,	for	example,	mix	freely	and	so	can’t
form	an	emulsion.	In	addition	to	sauces,
cosmetic	creams,	floor	and	furniture	waxes,
some	paints,	asphalt,	and	crude	oil	are	all
emulsions	of	water	and	oil.

The	Relative	Proportions	of	Fat	and
Water	in	Common	Food	Emulsions

Food Parts	Fat	to	100	Parts	Water
Fat-in-Water	Emulsions

Whole	milk 5
Half-and-half 15
Light	cream 25
Heavy	cream 70
Heavy	cream	reduced	by	a	third 160



Egg	yolk 65
Mayonnaise 400

Water-in-Fat	Emulsions

Butter 550
Vinaigrette 300

Two	Liquids:	Continuous	 and	Divided	 The
two	 liquids	 in	an	emulsion	can	be	 thought	of
as	the	container	and	the	contained:	one	liquid
is	broken	up	into	separate	droplets,	and	these
droplets	 are	 contained	 in	 and	 surrounded	 by
the	intact	mass	of	the	other	liquid.	In	the	usual
shorthand,	 an	 “oil-in-water”	 emulsion	 is	 one
in	which	oil	is	dispersed	in	a	continuous	water
phase;	 “water-in-oil”	 names	 the	 reverse
situation.	The	dispersed	liquid	takes	the	form
of	tiny	droplets,	between	a	ten-thousandth	and
a	 tenth	 of	 a	 millimeter	 across.	 The	 droplets
are	 large	 enough	 to	 deflect	 light	 rays	 from
their	 normal	 path	 through	 the	 surrounding



liquid,	 and	 give	 emulsions	 their
characteristically	milky	appearance.

The	more	droplets	that	are	crowded	into
the	continuous	phase,	the	more	they	get	in	the
water’s	and	each	other’s	way,	and	the	more
viscous	the	emulsion	is.	In	light	cream,	the	fat
droplets	take	up	about	20%	of	the	total
volume	and	water	80%;	in	heavy	cream,	the
droplets	are	about	40%	of	the	volume;	and	in
stiff,	semisolid	mayonnaise,	oil	droplets
occupy	nearly	80%	of	the	volume.	If	the	cook
works	more	of	the	dispersed	liquid	into	the
emulsion,	then	it	gets	thicker;	if	he	adds	more
of	the	continuous	liquid,	then	there’s	more
space	between	droplets,	and	the	emulsion
becomes	thinner.	Clearly	it’s	important	to
keep	in	mind	which	phase	is	which.

Because	nearly	all	emulsified	sauces	are
oil-in-water	systems,	I’ll	assume	in	most	of
the	following	discussion	that	the	continuous
phase	is	water,	the	dispersed	phase	oil.



Forming	Emulsions:	Overcoming	the	Force
of	Surface	Tension	It	 takes	work	to	make	an
emulsion.	We	 all	 know	 from	 experience	 that
when	 we	 pour	 water	 and	 oil	 into	 the	 same
bowl,	 they	 form	 two	 separate	 layers:	 one
doesn’t	just	turn	into	tiny	droplets	and	invade
the	other.	The	reason	for	this	behavior	is	that
when	 liquids	can’t	mix	 for	chemical	 reasons,
they	 spontaneously	 arrange	 themselves	 in	 a
way	 that	 minimizes	 their	 contact	 with	 each
other.	 They	 form	 a	 single	 large	mass,	 which
exposes	 less	 surface	 area	 to	 the	 other	 liquid
than	 does	 the	 same	 total	 mass	 broken	 into
pieces.	 This	 tendency	 of	 liquids	 to	minimize
their	surface	area	is	an	expression	of	the	force
called	surface	tension.

Mayonnaise	 formation.	Two	stages	 in	making
mayonnaise	 as	 seen	 through	 a	 light
microscope.	 One	 tablespoon/15	 ml	 of	 oil



beaten	 into	 1	 egg	 yolk	 plus	 water	 gives	 a
sparse	emulsion	of	coarse,	unevenly	 sized	oil
droplets	(left).	Eight	tablespoons/120	ml	of	oil
give	 a	 tightly	 packed,	 semisolid	 emulsion	 of
small	 droplets	 (right).	The	 yolk	 emulsifiers
and	 stabilizing	 proteins	 must	 be	 effective
enough	 to	 withstand	 considerable	 physical
pressure	 in	 order	 to	 prevent	 the	 oil	 droplets
from	coalescing	into	a	separate	layer.
Making	Billions	of	Droplets	from	One
Tablespoon	It’s	on	account	of	surface
tension,	then,	that	the	cook	must	pour	energy
into	the	liquid	to	be	dispersed.	To	make	a
sauce,	its	natural	monolithic	arrangement
must	be	shattered.	And	seriously	shattered:
when	you	beat	a	single	tablespoon/15	ml	of
oil	into	a	mayonnaise,	you	break	it	up	into
about	30	billion	separate	droplets!	Serious
whisking	by	hand	or	in	a	kitchen	mixer
provides	enough	shearing	force	to	make
droplets	as	small	as	3	thousandths	of	a
millimeter	across.	A	blender	can	get	them



somewhat	smaller,	and	a	powerful	industrial
homogenizer	can	reduce	them	to	less	than	one
thousandth	of	a	millimeter.	The	size	of	the
droplets	matters,	because	smaller	droplets	are
less	likely	to	coalesce	with	each	other	and
break	the	sauce	into	two	separate	phases
again.	They	also	produce	a	thicker,	finer
consistency,	and	seem	more	flavorful	because
they	have	a	larger	surface	area	from	which
aroma	molecules	can	escape	and	reach	our
nose.

Two	factors	make	it	easier	for	the	cook	to
generate	small	droplets.	One	is	the	thickness
of	the	continuous	phase,	which	drags	harder
on	the	droplets	and	transfers	more	shearing
force	to	them	from	the	whisk.	Shake	a	little
oil	in	a	bottle	of	water,	and	the	oil	droplets	are
coarse	and	quickly	coalesce;	shake	a	little
water	in	the	more	viscous	oil,	and	the	water
gets	broken	into	a	persistent	cloud	of	small
droplets.	It’s	helpful,	then,	to	start	with	as
viscous	a	part	of	the	continuous	phase	as



possible,	and	dilute	it	with	any	other
ingredients	after	the	emulsion	has	formed.

The	second	factor	that	makes	it	easier	to
produce	small	droplets	in	an	emulsion	is	the
presence	of	emulsifiers.

Emulsifiers:	 Lecithin	 and	 Proteins
Emulsifiers	 are	 molecules	 that	 lower	 the
surface	 tension	 of	 one	 liquid	 dispersed	 in
another,	and	therefore	make	it	easier	to	make
small	 droplets	 and	 a	 fine,	 creamy	 emulsion.
They	 do	 so	 by	 coating	 the	 surface	 of	 the
droplets,	 and	 shielding	 the	 droplet	 surface
from	 the	 continuous	 liquid.	 Emulsifiers	 are
therefore	 a	 true	 liaison:	 they	 must	 be	 partly
soluble	 in	 each	 of	 the	 two	 mutually
incompatible	 liquids.	 They	 manage	 this	 by
having	 two	 different	 regions	 on	 the	 same
molecule,	 one	 soluble	 in	water	 and	 the	 other
in	fat.

There	are	two	general	kinds	of	molecules
that	can	act	as	emulsifiers.	One	kind	is



typified	by	the	egg	phosopholipid	lecithin.
These	are	relatively	small	molecules	with	a
fat-like	tail	that	buries	itself	in	the	fat	phase
and	an	electrically-charged	head	that	is
attracted	to	water	molecules	(p.	802).	The
other	kind	of	emulsifier	is	the	proteins,	which
are	much	larger	molecules,	long	chains	of
amino	acids	that	have	a	number	of	different
fat-compatible	and	water-compatible	regions.
The	yolk	proteins	in	eggs	and	the	casein
proteins	in	milk	and	cream	are	the	best
protein	emulsifiers.

Unstable	and	stable	emulsions.	Oil	and	water
are	 incompatible	 substances;	 they	 can’t	 mix
evenly	 with	 each	 other.	 When	 oil	 is	 whisked
into	 water,	 the	 resulting	 oil	 droplets	 tend	 to



coalesce	with	each	other	and	 separate	 into	a
layer	 on	 top	 of	 the	 water	 (left).	Emulsifiers
are	molecules	 with	 a	 fat-compatible	 tail	 and
water-compatible	 head	 (p.	 802).	 They	 embed
their	 long	 tails	 in	 the	 fat	 droplets,	 leaving
their	 electrically-charged	 heads	 projecting
into	 the	 surrounding	 water.	 Coated	 in	 this
way,	 the	droplets	 repel	 each	other	 instead	of
coalescing	 (center).	Large	 water-soluble
molecules,	including	starch	and	proteins,	help
stabilize	 emulsions	 by	 blocking	 the	 fat
droplets	from	each	other	(right).
Stabilizers:	Proteins,	Starch,	Plant
Particles	Emulsifiers	make	it	easier	for	the
cook	to	prepare	an	emulsion,	but	they	don’t
necessarily	result	in	a	stable	emulsion.	Once
formed,	the	droplets	may	be	so	crowded	that
they	bump	into	each	other	or	are	forced	up
against	each	other,	and	the	force	of	surface
tension	may	pull	them	together	and	cause
them	to	coalesce	again.	Fortunately,	there	are
many	kinds	of	molecules	and	particles	that



can	help	stabilize	an	emulsion	once	it’s
formed.	They	all	have	in	common	the
property	of	getting	in	the	way,	so	that	two
approaching	droplets	encounter	the	stabilizers
rather	than	each	other.	Large,	bulky	molecules
like	proteins	do	this	well,	as	do	starch,
pectins,	and	gums,	and	particles	of	pulverized
plant	tissue.	Ground	white	mustard	seed	is
especially	effective	thanks	both	to	its	particles
and	to	a	gum	that	it	releases	when	wetted.
Tomato	paste	contains	a	considerable	amount
of	protein	(around	3%)	as	well	as	cell
particles,	and	is	a	useful	emulsifier	and
stabilizer.

Bouillabaisse,	an	Emulsified	Soup
Bouillabaisse	is	a	Provençal	fish	soup	that
takes	advantage	of	gelatin’s	thickening	and
emulsifying	 properties.	 It’s	 made	 by
cooking	 a	 variety	 of	 whole	 fish	 and	 fish
parts,	 some	 of	 them	 bony	 and	 gelatin-
producing	 rather	 than	 meaty,	 in	 an



aromatic	 broth	 with	 some	 olive	 oil.	 The
soup	 is	 finished	 at	 a	 vigorous	 boil,	which
breaks	 the	 oil	 into	 tiny	 droplets	 and	 coats
them	 with	 a	 stabilizing	 layer	 of	 gelatin.
The	 consistency	 is	 thus	 a	 combination	 of
gelatin’s	 viscosity	 and	 the	 enriching
creaminess	of	the	emulsified	oil	droplets.

Guidelines	for	Successful
Emulsified	Sauces

Forming	Emulsions	Emulsions	have	always
been	considered	fickle	concoctions,	by
chemists	as	well	as	cooks.	One	chemist	wrote
in	1921	that	contemporary	books	on	pharmacy
were	“filled	with	elaborate	details	as	to	the
making	of	emulsions,”	and	recorded	two	such
details:	“If	one	starts	stirring	to	the	right,	one
must	continue	stirring	to	the	right,	or	no
emulsion	will	be	formed.	Some	books	go	so
far	as	to	say	that	a	left-handed	man	cannot
make	an	emulsion,	but	that	seems	a	little



absurd.”	The	worry	is	always	that	at	some
point	the	emulsion	may	break	and	separate
into	blobs	of	oil	and	water	again.	This	can
happen,	but	it’s	almost	always	because	the
cook	has	made	one	of	three	mistakes:	he	has
added	the	liquid	to	be	dispersed	too	quickly	to
the	continuous	liquid,	or	added	too	much	of
the	dispersed	liquid,	or	allowed	the	sauce	to
get	either	too	hot	or	too	cold.

There	are	several	basic	rules	that	apply	to
the	making	of	any	emulsified	sauce:

The	first	materials	into	the	bowl	are	the
continuous	phase	—	usually	the	water-
based	ingredient	—	and	at	least	some
emulsifying	and	stabilizing	ingredients.
The	dispersed	phase	is	always	added	to
the	continuous	phase,	not	the	other	way
around:	otherwise	it	can’t	be	dispersed!
The	dispersed	phase	should	be	added
very	gradually	to	begin	with,	a	small
spoonful	at	a	time,	while	the	cook	whisks
or	blends	the	mixture	vigorously.	Only



after	an	emulsion	has	formed	and
developed	some	viscosity	should	the	oil
be	added	more	rapidly.
The	proportions	of	the	two	phases	must
be	kept	in	balance.	For	most	emulsified
sauces,	the	volume	of	the	dispersed	phase
shouldn’t	exceed	three	times	the	volume
of	the	continuous	phase.	If	the	droplets
are	crowded	so	closely	together	that	they
are	in	continuous	contact,	then	they’re
more	likely	to	pool	together.	When	the
consistency	of	an	emulsion	becomes
stiff,	this	is	a	sign	that	the	cook	should
add	more	of	the	continuous	phase	to	give
the	droplets	more	room.

Starting	 Slowly	 There’s	 a	 simple	 reason	 for
starting	 the	 emulsion	 slowly	 and	 carefully,
with	small	amounts	of	the	dispersed	phase.	In
the	early	mixing,	when	little	or	no	oil	has	yet
been	emulsified,	it’s	easy	for	large	droplets	to
avoid	 the	 churning	 action	 of	 the	 whisk	 and



collect	at	the	surface.	If	a	large	volume	of	oil
is	 added	 before	 the	 previous	 one	 has	 been
fully	 emulsified,	 then	 the	 bowl	 may	 end	 up
with	 more	 unemulsified	 oil	 than	 water.	 The
oil	 then	 becomes	 the	 continuous	 phase,	 the
normally	continuous	water	becomes	dispersed
in	it,	and	the	result	is	an	inside-out	emulsion,
oily	 and	 runny.	 By	 whisking	 in	 the	 first
portion	of	oil	 in	small	doses,	 the	cook	makes
sure	 to	 produce	 and	 maintain	 a	 growing
population	 of	 small	 droplets.	 Then	 when	 the
rest	 of	 the	 oil	 is	 incorporated	 more	 rapidly
into	 the	 already	 well-emulsified	 system,	 the
existing	 droplets	 work	 as	 a	 kind	 of	 mill,
automatically	breaking	down	the	incoming	oil
into	 particles	 of	 their	 own	 size.	 In	 the	 last
stages	of	sauce	making	the	cook’s	whisk	need
not	break	up	the	oil	drops	directly,	but	has	the
easier	 job	 of	 mixing	 the	 new	 oil	 with	 the
sauce,	distributing	it	evenly	to	all	parts	of	the
droplet	“mill.”



Using	 and	 Storing	Emulsified	 Sauces	 Once
emulsified	 sauces	 have	 been	 successfully
made,	 there	 are	 two	 basic	 rules	 for	 using
them.

The	sauce	must	not	get	too	hot.	At	high
temperatures,	the	molecules	and	droplets
in	a	sauce	are	moving	very	energetically,
and	the	droplets	may	collide	hard	enough
to	coalesce.	Temperatures	above
140ºF/60ºC	also	cause	the	proteins	in
egg-emulsified	sauces	to	coagulate,	so
they’re	no	longer	able	to	protect	the
droplets.	And	a	cooked	sauce	that	is	held
before	serving	on	gentle	heat	may	lose
enough	water	by	evaporation	that	the
dispersed	fat	droplets	become
overcrowded.	So	cooked	emulsions
should	be	made	and	held	at	warm,	rather
than	hot,	temperatures	and	should	not	be
spooned	onto	a	piece	of	food	still
sizzling	from	the	pan.
The	sauce	must	not	get	too	cold.	At	low



temperatures,	surface	tension	increases,
making	it	more	likely	that	neighboring
droplets	will	coalesce.	Butterfat
solidifies	at	room	temperature,	and	some
oils	do	so	in	the	refrigerator.	The
resulting	sharp-edged	fat	crystals	rupture
the	layer	of	emulsifier	on	the	droplets,	so
that	they	coalesce	and	separate	when
stirred	or	warmed.	Refrigerated
emulsions	often	need	to	be	reemulsified
before	use.	(Manufactured	mayonnaise	is
made	with	oils	that	remain	liquid	at
refrigerator	temperatures.)

Rescuing	 a	 Separated	 Sauce	 When	 an
emulsified	 sauce	 breaks	 and	 the	 droplets	 of
the	dispersed	phase	puddle	together,	there	are
two	 ways	 to	 reemulsify	 it.	 One	 is	 simply	 to
throw	 the	 sauce	 in	 a	 blender	 and	 use	 its
mechanical	 power	 to	 break	 the	 dispersed
phase	 apart	 again.	 This	 generally	 works	 for
sauces	 that	 still	 have	 plenty	 of	 intact



emulsifier	 and	 stabilizer	 molecules	 in	 the
sauce,	but	not	for	cooked	egg	sauces	that	have
been	overheated	and	their	proteins	coagulated.
The	second	and	more	 reliable	 technique	 is	 to
start	 with	 a	 small	 amount	 of	 the	 continuous
phase,	perhaps	supplemented	with	an	egg	yolk
and	 its	 wealth	 of	 emulsifiers	 and	 stabilizers,
and	carefully	beat	the	broken	sauce	back	into
it.	 If	 proteins	 in	 the	 initial	 sauce	 had
coagulated	 from	 overheating,	 the	 lumps
should	 be	 strained	 out	 before	 reemulsifying;
otherwise	 the	 rescue	 process	 may	 leave	 the
protein	 particles	 too	 small	 to	 strain	 out,	 but
large	 enough	 to	 leave	 a	 grainy	 impression	 in
the	mouth.

Cream	and	Butter	Sauces

Cream	and	butter	don’t	need	to	be	made	into
sauces	—	they	themselves	are	sauces!	In	fact
they’re	prototypes	for	sauces	in	general,	with
their	lingering,	mouthfilling	consistency	and



rich	but	delicate	flavor.	A	ramekin	of	melted
butter	in	which	to	dip	a	morsel	of	lobster	or	an
artichoke	leaf,	a	pour	of	cream	over	fresh
berries	or	pastry	—	these	are	wonderful
combinations.	But	cream	and	butter	are
versatile	ingredients,	and	cooks	have	found
other	ways	to	exploit	them	in	saucemaking.

Milk	and	Cream	Emulsions	Cream	owes	 its
versatility	 to	 its	 origins	 in	 milk.	 Milk	 is	 a
complex	dispersion	whose	continuous	phase	is
water,	and	whose	dispersed	phases	are	milkfat
in	 the	 form	 of	 microscopic	 droplets,	 or
globules,	and	protein	particles	 in	 the	 form	of
casein	 aggregates	 (p.	 19).	 The	 droplets	 are
coated	with	 a	 thin	membrane	 of	 emulsifiers,
both	 lecithin-like	 phospholipids	 and	 certain
proteins;	 and	 other	 noncasein	 proteins	 float
free	in	the	water.	Both	the	globule	membranes
and	 the	 various	 proteins	 are	 tolerant	 of	 heat:
so	 plain	 milk	 and	 cream	 can	 be	 boiled	 hard
without	 the	 fat	 globules	 coalescing	 and



separating,	 or	 the	 proteins	 coagulating	 and
curdling.

Whole	milk	is	only	about	4%	fat,	so	its	fat
globules	are	too	few	and	far	between	to	block
the	flow	of	the	water	phase	and	give	much	of
an	impression	of	thickness.	Cream	is	a	portion
of	milk	in	which	the	fat	globules	have	been
concentrated	and	crowded:	light	cream	is
around	18%	fat,	and	heavy	or	whipping	cream
around	38%.	In	addition	to	its	fat	supply,
cream	offers	proteins	and	emulsifying
molecules	that	can	help	stabilize	other,	more
fragile	emulsions	(beurre	blanc).

Heavy	 Cream	 Resists	 Curdling	 The	 casein
proteins	 in	 milk	 and	 cream	 are	 stable	 to
boiling	 temperatures,	 but	 they’re	 sensitive	 to
acidity,	and	the	combination	of	heat	and	acid
will	 cause	 them	 to	 curdle.	 Many	 sauces
include	 flavorful	 acid	 ingredients:	 sauté	pans
are	 often	 deglazed	 with	 wine,	 for	 example.
This	 means	 that	 most	 milk	 and	 cream



products,	 including	 light	 cream	 and	 sour
cream,	 can’t	 actually	 be	 cooked	 to	 make	 a
sauce;	 they	 must	 be	 added	 as	 a	 last-minute
enrichment.	 The	 exceptions	 are	 heavy	 cream
and	 crème	 fraîche,	 which	 contain	 so	 little
casein	that	its	curdling	simply	isn’t	noticeable
(p.	29).

Reduced	Cream	When	heavy	cream	is	added
to	another	liquid	to	enrich	and	thicken	it	—	to
a	 meat	 sauce,	 or	 deglazing	 liquid,	 or	 a
vegetable	 puree	 —	 then	 of	 course	 its	 fat
globules	 are	diluted	and	 its	 consistency	 thins
down.	 In	 order	 to	 make	 cream	 a	 more
effective	 thickener,	cooks	concentrate	 it	even
further	 by	 boiling	 off	 water	 from	 the
continuous	phase.	When	the	volume	of	cream
is	 reduced	 by	 a	 third,	 the	 globule
concentration	 reaches	 55%	 and	 the
consistency	 is	 like	 that	 of	 a	 light
starchthickened	sauce;	when	 reduced	by	half,
the	 globules	 take	 up	 75%	of	 the	 volume	 and



the	 consistency	 is	 very	 thick,	 almost
semisolid.	Stirred	 into	 a	 thinner	 liquid,	 these
reduced	 creams	 have	 enough	 fat	 globules	 to
fill	 it	 and	 lend	 a	 substantial	 body.	 Cream
reduction	 and	 thickening	 can	 also	 be	 done	 at
the	last	minute,	for	example	after	a	sauté	pan
has	been	deglazed;	the	cook	adds	cream	to	the
deglazing	liquid	and	boils	the	mixture	until	it
reaches	the	desired	consistency.

Crème	 Fraîche	 in	 Sauce	 Making	 Reduced
creams	have	several	disadvantages.	They	take
time	 and	 attention	 to	 prepare,	 develop	 a
cooked	 flavor,	 and	 are	 very	 rich,	 sometimes
overly	so	for	 the	balance	of	a	given	sauce.	A
useful	alternative	to	reduced	creams	is	crème
fraîche,	 a	 version	 of	 heavy	 cream	 whose
consistency	has	been	thickened	not	by	boiling
down,	 but	 by	 fermentation	 (p.	 49).	 The	 acid
produced	by	 lactic	 bacteria	 causes	 the	 casein
proteins	in	the	water	phase	to	cluster	together
and	 form	 a	 network	 that	 immobilizes	 the



water.	 Some	 strains	 of	 bacteria	 also	 secrete
long	 carbohydrate	 molecules	 that	 further
thicken	the	water	phase	and	act	as	stabilizers.
Used	in	place	of	reduced	cream,	crème	fraîche
requires	no	preparation,	is	less	rich,	and	has	a
fresher	 flavor.	 Thanks	 to	 its	 low	 protein
content,	 it	 tolerates	 temperatures	 that	 would
curdle	sour	cream.

Butter	Like	its	parent	material,	cream,	butter
is	 an	 emulsion:	 but	 it’s	 one	 of	 the	 few	 food
emulsions	 in	 which	 the	 continuous	 phase	 is
fat,	 not	 water.	 In	 fact,	 butter	 is	 made	 by
“inverting”	 the	 fat-in-water	 cream	 emulsion
to	 produce	 a	 water-in-fat	 emulsion	 (p.	 33).
The	 continuous	 fat	 phase	 of	 butter,	 together
with	 some	 intact	 fat	 globules	 that	 survived
churning,	 takes	 up	 about	 80%	 of	 its	 volume,
and	 the	 dispersed	 water	 droplets	 about	 15%.
When	it	melts,	the	heavier	water	droplets	sink
to	 the	bottom	and	 form	a	 separate	 layer.	The
consistency	 of	 melted	 butter,	 then,	 is	 the



consistency	 of	 the	 butterfat	 itself,	 which
thanks	 to	 its	 long	 fat	 molecules	 is	 naturally
more	slow-flowing	and	viscous	than	water.	So
melted	butter,	whole	or	clarified	(“drawn”)	to
remove	 the	water	phase,	makes	 a	 simple	 and
delicious	sauce.	Cooks	also	heat	whole	butter
until	 the	 water	 boils	 off	 and	 the	 milk	 solids
turn	brown,	which	gives	the	fat	a	nutty	aroma.
The	French	beurre	noisette	and	beurre	noir,	or
“hazelnut”	 and	 “black”	 butters,	 are	 such
browned	butters,	often	made	into	a	temporary
emulsion	 with	 lemon	 juice	 and	 vinegar
respectively.

Compound	 and	 Whipped	 Butters	 There	 are
other	 ways	 to	 take	 advantage	 of	 butter’s
semisolid	 consistency	 and	 background
richness.	One	is	to	make	a	“compound	butter”
by	 incorporating	 pounded	 herbs,	 spices,
shellfish	 eggs	 or	 livers,	 or	 other	 ingredients;
another	 is	 to	 whip	 softened	 butter	 with	 a
flavorful	liquid	into	a	combined	emulsion	and



foam.	 Pieces	 or	 dollops	 of	 these	 flavored
butters	 can	 then	 be	 melted	 into	 a	 rich,
flavorful	coating	atop	a	piece	of	meat	or	fish,
or	on	some	vegetables	or	pasta,	or	they	can	be
swirled	into	an	otherwise	finished	sauce.

Turning	 Butter	 Back	 into	 Cream:
Enriching	 Sauces	 with	 Butter	 Butter	 is
remarkable	 for	being	 a	 convertible	 emulsion.
This	 offspring	 of	 cream	 can	 be	 turned	 back
into	 cream!	 Its	 convertibility	 is	 what	 makes
butter	so	useful	as	a	finishing	enrichment	for
many	 sauces,	 including	 simple	 pan
deglazings,	 and	 it’s	what	makes	 possible	 the
sauce	 called	 beurre	 blanc,	 literally	 “white
butter.”	 There’s	 only	 one	 requirement	 for
converting	butter	into	the	equivalent	of	cream
with	80%	fat:	the	process	must	start	in	a	small
amount	 of	 water.	 If	 you	 melt	 butter	 on	 its
own,	 the	 fat	 phase	 remains	 the	 continuous
phase,	 and	 the	water	droplets	 settle	out	of	 it.
But	 if	 you	 melt	 butter	 in	 some	 water,	 then



you’re	 starting	 with	 water	 as	 the	 continuous
phase.	As	 the	 fat	molecules	 are	 released	 into
the	water,	they’re	surrounded	by	water	—	and
by	 the	 substances	 contained	 in	 the	 butter’s
own	 water	 droplets,	 which	 merge	 right	 into
the	cooking	water.	The	droplets	 contain	milk
proteins	 and	 remnants	 of	 the	 emulsifier
membranes	that	coated	the	fat	globules	in	the
original	 cream.	 And	 those	 protein	 and
phospholipid	remnants	reassemble	themselves
onto	the	fat	as	it	melts	into	the	water,	coating
and	 protecting	 separate	 fat	 droplets	 and
forming	 the	 fat-in-water	 emulsion.	 However,
the	 droplet	 coatings	 in	 this	 reconstituted
cream	 are	 sparser	 and	 more	 fragile	 than	 the
original	 fat-globule	 membranes,	 and	 will
begin	to	leak	fat	if	heated	close	to	140ºF/60ºC.

Any	water-based	sauce	can	thus	be
thickened	and	enriched	simply	by	swirling	a
pat	of	butter	into	it	at	the	end.	This	is
especially	handy	in	the	last-minute	thickening
of	pan	juices,	which	don’t	have	the	benefit	of



containing	much	gelatin	or	any	starch.
Incorporating	one	volume	of	butter	into	three
volumes	of	deglazing	liquid	—	off	the	heat,	to
avoid	damaging	the	fragile	droplet	coatings
—	will	produce	a	consistency	(and	fat
content)	approximating	that	of	light	cream.

In	purees	and	starch-thickened	sauces,	a
small	amount	of	butter	(or	cream)	lubricates
the	solid	thickeners	and	lends	a	smoother
consistency.	Because	these	sauces	are	rich	in
emulsion-stabilizing	molecules	and	particles,
they	can	be	heated	to	the	boil	without	causing
the	reconstituted	fat	droplets	to	separate.

Beurre	Blanc	The	French	sauce	beurre	blanc
probably	 evolved	 from	 the	 practice	 of
enriching	 cooking	 liquids	 with	 butter.	 It’s
made	 by	 preparing	 a	 flavorful	 reduction	 of
vinegar	 and/or	wine,	 then	whisking	pieces	 of
butter	into	the	reduction.	Each	piece	of	butter
carries	all	the	ingredients	necessary	for	a	new
portion	of	sauce,	so	the	cook	can	whisk	in	one



piece	 of	 butter,	 or	 100.	 The	 proportions	 are
entirely	up	to	the	cook’s	taste	and	needs.	The
consistency	 of	 beurre	 blanc	 is	 like	 that	 of
thick	 cream,	 and	 can	 be	 made	 somewhat
thicker	 by	 adding	 water-free	 clarified	 butter
once	 the	 initial	 emulsion	 has	 been	 formed.
The	phospholipids	and	proteins	carried	in	 the
butter’s	water	are	capable	of	emulsifying	two
to	 three	 times	 the	 butterfat	 in	 which	 they’re
embedded.

Beurre	blanc	will	begin	to	separate	and
leak	butterfat	if	its	temperature	rises	above
about	135ºF/58ºC.	However,	the	phospholipid
emulsifiers	can	tolerate	heat	and	re-form	a
protective	layer.	An	overheated	sauce	can
usually	be	restored	with	a	small	amount	of
cool	water	and	brisk	whisking.	The	addition	of
a	spoonful	of	cream	supplies	more
emulsifying	materials	and	can	make	a	beurre
blanc	more	stable.	Most	damaging	to	beurre
blanc	is	letting	it	cool	below	body
temperature.	The	butterfat	solidifies	and



forms	crystals	around	85ºF/30ºC,	and	the
crystals	poke	through	the	thin	membrane	of
emulsifiers	and	fuse	with	each	other,	forming
a	continuous	network	of	fat	that	separates
when	the	sauce	is	reheated.	Ideally,	beurre
blanc	should	be	kept	at	around	125ºF/52ºC.
Because	water	will	evaporate	at	this
temperature	and	may	overconcentrate	the	fat
phase,	it’s	a	good	idea	to	add	a	little	water
periodically	if	the	sauce	has	to	be	held	for	any
time.

Beurre	Monté	A	 preparation	 closely	 related
to	beurre	blanc	 is	beurre	monté,	“worked	up”
or	 “prepared”	 butter,	 which	 is	 simply	 an
unflavored	 beurre	 blanc	made	with	 an	 initial
dose	 of	 water	 rather	 than	 vinegar	 or	 wine.
Beurre	monté	is	used	among	other	things	as	a
poaching	 medium.	 Thanks	 to	 the	 relatively
low	heat	conductivity	and	heat	capacity	of	fat
compared	 to	water,	 it	 cooks	delicate	 fish	and
meats	more	gradually	than	does	a	broth	at	the



same	temperature.

Eggs	as	Emulsifiers

As	we’ve	already	seen,	cooks	can	use	egg
yolks	to	thicken	all	kinds	of	hot	sauces.	The
yolk	proteins	unfold	and	bond	to	each	other
when	heated,	and	so	form	a	liquid-
immobilizing	network	(p.	604).	Egg	yolks	are
also	very	effective	emulsifiers,	and	for
asimple	reason:	they	themselves	are	a
concentrated	and	complex	emulsion	of	fat	in
water,	and	are	therefore	filled	with
emulsifying	molecules	and	molecule
aggregates.

Emulsifying	 Particles	 and	 Proteins	 Of	 the
various	 yolk	 components,	 two	 in	 particular
provide	most	of	the	emulsifying	power.	One	is
the	 low-density	 lipoproteins	 or	 LDLs	 (the
same	 LDLs	 that	 circulate	 in	 our	 blood	 and
whose	 levels	 are	 measured	 in	 blood	 tests



because	they	carry	potentially	artery-blocking
cholesterol).	 LDLs	 are	 particles	 made	 up	 of
emulsifying	 proteins,	 phospholipids,	 and
cholesterol,	 all	 surrounding	 a	 core	 of	 fat
molecules.	The	intact	LDL	particles	appear	to
be	more	effective	emulsifiers	than	any	of	their
components.	 The	 other	 major	 emulsifying
particles	 are	 the	 larger	 yolk	 granules,	 which
contain	 both	 LDLs	 and	 HDLs	 (the	 “good-
cholesterol”	 high-density	 lipoproteins	 are
even	more	effective	emulsifiers	than	LDL)	as
well	 as	 dispersed	 emulsifying	 protein,
phosvitin.	Yolk	granules	are	so	large	that	they
can’t	 cover	 a	 droplet	 surface	 very	 well,	 but
when	 they’re	 exposed	 to	 moderate
concentrations	of	salt	they	fall	apart	into	their
separate	LDLs,	HDLs,	and	proteins,	and	these
are	very	effective	indeed.

Using	 Eggs	 to	 Emulsify	 Sauces	 As
emulsifiers,	 egg	 yolks	 are	 most	 effective
when	 they’re	 raw,	 and	 when	 they’re	 warm.



Fresh	out	of	the	refrigerator,	the	various	yolk
particles	move	only	sluggishly	and	don’t	coat
the	 fat	 droplets	 as	 quickly	 and	 completely.
When	 yolks	 are	 cooked,	 the	 proteins	 unfold
and	coagulate,	thus	ending	their	usefulness	as
flexible	 surface	 coatings.	 Hard-cooked	 yolks
are	 sometimes	 used	 instead	 of	 raw	 yolks	 to
make	emulsified	sauces;	their	disadvantage	is
that	 the	 proteins	 have	 been	 coagulated	 in
place	 and	 phospholipids	 probably	 trapped	 in
the	coagulated	particles,	so	they	have	far	less
emulsifying	 power,	 and	 the	 yolk	 texture	 can
give	a	subtle	graininess.

And	egg	whites?	They’re	a	less
concentrated	source	of	protein,	and	designed
for	a	fat-free,	watery	environment,	and
therefore	of	little	help	in	coating	fat	droplets.
However,	the	white	proteins	provide	some
viscosity	thanks	to	their	large	size	and	loose
associations	with	each	other,	so	they	have
some	value	as	emulsion	stabilizers.



Oil	droplets	in	mayonnaise.	A	view	through	an
electron	 microscope.	 Protein	 and	 emulsifier
molecules	 and	aggregates,	 all	 from	egg	 yolk,
are	present	between	the	large	droplets	and	on
their	 surfaces,	 and	 help	 prevent	 them	 from
coalescing.

Cold	Egg	Sauces:	Mayonnaise

Mayonnaise	is	an	emulsion	of	oil	droplets
suspended	in	a	base	composed	of	egg	yolk,
lemon	juice	or	vinegar,	water,	and	often
mustard,	which	provides	both	flavor	and
stabilizing	particles	and	carbohydrates	(p.
417).	It’s	the	sauce	most	tightly	packed	with
oil	droplets	—	as	much	as	80%	of	its	volume



is	oil	—	and	is	usually	dense	and	too	stiff	to
pour.	It	can	be	thinned	and	flavored	with
various	water-based	liquids,	including	purees
and	stocks,	or	it	can	enrich	such	liquids	the
way	cream	does;	it	can	also	be	aerated	with
the	addition	of	whipped	cream	or	egg	whites.
As	a	room-temperature	preparation,
mayonnaise	is	generally	served	with	cold
dishes	of	various	sorts.	But	thanks	to	the	yolk
proteins,	it	also	reacts	usefully	to	heat.	It
lends	body	and	richness	when	added	to	thin
broths	and	briefly	cooked;	and	when	layered
onto	fish	or	vegetables	and	broiled,	it
moderates	the	heat,	puffs	up	and	sets	into	a
rich	coating.

Traditionally,	mayonnaise	is	made	with
raw	egg	yolks,	and	therefore	carries	a	slight
risk	of	salmonella	infection.	Manufacturers
use	pasteurized	yolks,	and	cooks	concerned
about	salmonella	can	now	find	pasteurized
eggs	in	supermarkets.	Both	vinegar	and	extra-
virgin	olive	oil	kill	bacteria,	but	mayonnaise



is	best	treated	as	a	highly	perishable	food	that
should	be	served	immediately	or	kept
refrigerated.

Making	 Mayonnaise	 All	 of	 the	 ingredients
for	 making	 mayonnaise	 should	 be	 at	 room
temperature;	 warmth	 speeds	 the	 transfer	 of
emulsifiers	 from	 the	 yolk	 particles	 to	 the	 oil
droplet	 surfaces.	 The	 simplest	 method	 is	 to
mix	 together	 everything	 but	 the	 oil	 —	 egg
yolks,	lemon	juice	or	vinegar,	salt,	mustard	—
and	 then	whisk	 in	 the	oil,	 slowly	 at	 first	 and
more	 rapidly	 as	 the	 emulsion	 thickens.
However,	 the	 cook	 can	 produce	 more	 stable
small	droplets	by	whisking	a	portion	of	the	oil
into	 just	 the	 yolks	 and	 salt	 to	 start,	 and	 then
adding	 the	 remaining	 ingredients	 when	 the
emulsion	 gets	 stiff	 and	 needs	 to	 be	 thinned.
The	salt	causes	the	yolk	granules	to	fall	apart
into	its	component	particles,	which	makes	the
yolks	 become	 both	 more	 clear	 and	 more
viscous.	 If	 left	 undiluted,	 this	 viscosity	 will



help	break	the	oil	into	smaller	droplets.
Though	cookbooks	often	say	that	the	ratio

of	oil	to	egg	yolk	is	critical,	that	one	yolk	can
only	emulsify	a	half-cup	or	cup	of	oil,	this
just	isn’t	true.	A	single	yolk	can	emulsify	a
dozen	cups	of	oil	or	more.	What	is	critical	is
the	ratio	of	oil	to	water:	there	must	be	enough
of	the	continuous	phase	for	the	growing
population	of	oil	droplets	to	fit	into.	For	every
volume	of	oil	added,	the	cook	should	provide
about	a	third	of	that	volume	in	the
combination	of	yolks,	lemon	juice,	vinegar,
water,	or	some	other	water-based	liquid.

A	 Sensitive	 Sauce	 Because	 mayonnaise	 is
chock-full	of	oil,	so	much	so	that	the	droplets
press	 up	 against	 each	 other,	 its	 emulsion	 is
easily	damaged	by	extremes	of	cold,	heat,	and
agitation.	 It	 will	 tend	 to	 leak	 oil	 in	 near-
freezing	 refrigerators	 and	 on	 hot	 rather	 than
warm	 food.	 These	 problems	 are	 ameliorated
in	 manufactured	mayonnaise	 by	 the	 addition



of	 stabilizers,	 usually	 long	 carbohydrate	 or
protein	molecules	that	fill	the	spaces	between
droplets.	American	bottled	“salad	dressing”	is
a	 very	 stable	 hybrid	 of	 mayonnaise	 and	 a
boiled	white	sauce	made	with	water	instead	of
milk.	 The	 texture	 of	 such	 modified	 sauces,
however,	 is	 noticeably	 different	 from	 the
dense,	 creamy	 original.	 Refrigerated
mayonnaise	 should	 be	 handled	 gently,	 since
some	 oil	 may	 have	 crystallized	 and	 escaped
from	 their	 droplets.	 If	 so,	 stir	 gently	 to
reemulsify	 it,	 perhaps	with	 the	 addition	 of	 a
few	drops	of	water.

Making	 mayonnaise.	 The	 cook	 begins	 with	 a
small	volume	of	the	water	phase	—	mostly	egg
yolk	—	 and	 slowly	 beats	 oil	 into	 droplets	 in



this	 base	 (left).	As	more	 oil	 is	 incorporated,
the	 mixture	 becomes	 thicker	 and	 the	 oil	 is
broken	 into	 smaller	 droplets 	 (center).	When
the	 sauce	 is	 done,	 as	 much	 as	 80%	 of	 its
volume	 is	 occupied	 by	 oil	 droplets,	 and	 its
consistency	is	semisolid	(right).

Hot	Egg	Sauces:
Hollandaise	and	Béarnaise

The	classic	hot	egg	sauces,	hollandaise	and
béarnaise	and	their	offspring,	are	egg-
emulsified	butter	sauces.	They	are	similar	to
mayonnaise	in	many	respects,	but	of	course
must	be	hot	to	keep	the	butter	fluid.	Their
dispersed	fat	phase	is	usually	a	smaller
proportion	of	the	sauce,	between	one-and	two-
thirds	of	the	total	volume.	Hollandaise	and
béarnaise	differ	mainly	in	seasoning;
hollandaise	is	only	lightly	flavored	with
lemon	juice,	while	béarnaise	begins	with	a	tart
and	aromatic	reduction	of	wine,	vinegar,



tarragon,	and	shallots.

Heat	 Thickens	 —	 and	 Curdles	 The
consistency	of	 the	hot	egg	sauces	depends	on
two	 factors.	 One	 is	 the	 form	 and	 amount	 in
which	the	butter	is	incorporated.	Whole	butter
is	about	15%	water,	so	each	addition	thins	the
egg	phase	and	the	sauce	as	a	whole;	clarified
butter	 is	 all	 butterfat,	 and	 thickens	 the	 sauce
with	every	addition.	The	second	 influence	on
consistency	 is	 the	 degree	 to	 which	 the	 egg
yolks	 are	 heated	 and	 thickened.	 The	 main
trick	in	making	these	sauces	is	to	heat	the	egg
yolks	enough	 to	obtain	 the	desired	 thickness,
but	 not	 so	 much	 that	 the	 yolk	 proteins
coagulate	into	little	solid	curds	and	the	sauce
separates.	 This	 happens	 at	 around	 160–
170ºF/70–77ºC.	A	double	boiler	or	a	saucepan
resting	above	a	larger	pan	of	simmering	water
will	guarantee	a	gentle	and	even	heat	but	will
also	 slow	 the	 cooking;	 for	 this	 reason,	 some
cooks	 prefer	 the	 riskier	 but	 rapid	 direct	 heat



of	a	burner.	Heating	the	yolks	with	the	acidic
reduction	 also	minimizes	 curdling;	 if	 the	 pH
is	 around	 4.5,	 the	 equivalent	 of	 yogurt’s
acidity,	 the	 yolks	 can	 be	 safely	 heated	 to
195ºF/90ºC.	 (The	 acid	 causes	 the	 proteins	 to
repel	 each	 other,	 so	 that	 they	 unfold	 before
bonding	 to	 each	 other	 and	 form	 an	 extended
network	 rather	 than	 dense	 curds.)	 Cooks
concerned	about	salmonella	should	make	sure
the	yolks	are	cooked	at	least	to	160ºF/70ºC,	or
else	should	use	pasteurized	eggs.

Olive	Oil	Can	Make	Crazy	Mayonnaise
Mayonnaise	can	be	made	with	any	kind	of
oil.	 One	 popular	 choice,	 unrefined	 extra
virgin	olive	oil,	often	produces	an	unstable
mayonnaise,	 one	 that	 forms	 properly,	 but
then	 separates	 just	 an	 hour	 or	 two	 later.
Ironically,	 the	 likely	 troublemakers	 are
molecules	 with	 emulsifying	 abilities:	 oil
molecules	 that	 have	 been	 broken	 into
fragments	 that	 have	 a	 fat-like	 tail	 and



water-soluble	 head,	 just	 like	 lecithin	 (p.
802).	They	are	concentrated	in	the	oil,	and
when	the	cook	breaks	the	oil	into	droplets,
they	 move	 to	 the	 droplet	 surface,	 where
they	 end	 up	 pushing	 the	 bulkier,	 more
effective	 egg	 emulsifiers	 off	 the	 droplet
surfaces.	Because	the	droplets	are	crowded
tightly	together,	this	causes	the	droplets	to
coalesce	and	form	puddles	of	oil.

This	delayed	disintegration	of	olive-oil
mayonnaise	 is	well	 known	 in	 Italy,	where
the	sauce	is	said	to	“go	crazy”	(impazzire).
Old	 and	 improperly	 stored	 oils	 are	 most
likely	to	have	suffered	damage	to	their	oil
molecules	and	therefore	to	cause	problems
in	 mayonnaise.	 Two	 ways	 to	 avoid	 crazy
mayonnaise	 are	 to	 use	 refined	 olive	 oil,
and	 to	 use	 extra-virgin	 oil	 as	 a	 flavoring,
with	 the	 bulk	 of	 the	 oil	 being	 any
flavorless	refined	oil.

Making	Hollandaise	and	Béarnaise	There
are	at	least	five	different	ways	of	making



hollandaise	and	béarnaise,	each	with	its
advantages	and	disadvantages.

Cook	the	egg	and	water-based
ingredients	first	to	a	thick	consistency,
then	whisk	in	pats	of	whole	butter	to
emulsify	the	butterfat	and	thin	the
continuous	phase.	This	is	Carême’s
method,	and	is	the	trickiest	because	the
small	volume	of	the	initial	egg	mixture	is
easily	overcooked.
Warm	the	yolks	and	water-based
ingredients,	whisk	in	either	whole	or
clarified	butter,	then	cook	the	mixture
until	it	reaches	the	desired	consistency.
This	is	Escoffier’s	method,	and	has	the
advantage	that	the	cook	can	control	the
final	consistency	directly,	and	by	heating
the	entire	volume	of	sauce.
Put	all	of	the	ingredients	for	the	sauce	in
a	cold	saucepan,	turn	the	heat	on	low,	and
start	stirring.	The	butter	gradually	melts
and	releases	itself	into	the	egg	phase	as



both	heat	up	together,	and	the	cook	then
continues	to	heat	the	formed	sauce	until
it	reaches	the	desired	consistency.	This	is
the	simplest	method.
Don’t	cook	the	yolks	at	all;	just	warm
them	and	the	water-based	ingredients
above	the	melting	point	of	butter,	then
whisk	clarified	butter	in	until	the
crowding	of	droplets	creates	the	desired
consistency.	This	is	essentially	a	butter
mayonnaise,	and	eliminates	the
possibility	of	overcooking	the	yolks.
Make	the	butter-sauce	version	of	a
sabayon	(p.	639).	Whisk	the	egg	yolks
and	some	water	while	heating	them	until
they	form	an	airy	foam,	and	then	gently
incorporate	melted	or	clarified	butter	and
the	lemon	juice	or	acid	reduction.	This
version	is	of	course	much	lighter,	and	is
also	made	with	less	butter	per	yolk.

It’s	 possible	 to	make	 hot	 egg	 sauces	with



fats	 and	 oils	 other	 than	 butter,	 and	 to	 flavor
the	 water	 phase	 with	 meat	 reductions	 or
vegetable	purees.

Alternative	Oil	Emulsions
These	 days	 we	 think	 of	 mayonnaise
exclusively	as	an	egg-emulsified	sauce,	but
this	hasn’t	always	been	the	case,	and	there
are	 a	 number	 of	 other	 ways	 to	 form	 and
stabilize	a	flavorful	oil	emulsion.	In	1828,
perhaps	 a	 few	 decades	 after	 the	 supposed
invention	 of	 mayonnaise,	 the	 great	 chef
and	 sauce-systematizer	 Antonin	 Carême
gave	 three	 recipes	 for	magnonnaise
blanche,	 only	 one	 of	 which	 includes	 egg
yolks.	The	others	are	made	with	a	ladleful
of	 starchy	velouté	or	béchamel	 sauce,	 and
with	 a	 gelatinous	 reduced	 extract	 of	 veal
meat	 and	bones.	 In	 these	versions,	 gelatin
and	 milk	 proteins	 (in	 the	 béchamel)	 are
emulsifiers,	 and	 starch	 is	 a	 stabilizer.
Some	versions	of	 the	herb-flavored	Italian



salsa	verde,	 “green	 sauce,”	emulsify	olive
oil	with	a	hard-boiled	yolk	and	bread.	The
Provençal	aïoli	 and	 Greek	skorthaliá	 are
emulsified	with	a	combination	of	pounded
garlic	and	cooked	potato;	garlic	and	bread
are	also	used,	as	are	fresh	cheeses.	None	of
these	 ingredients	 is	 as	 effective	 at
emulsifying	 and	 stabilizing	 as	 a	 raw	 egg
yolk,	so	they	will	emulsify	less	oil	and	the
sauces	will	tend	to	leak	some	free	oil.

Holding	and	Salvaging	Hot	Egg	Sauces
Butter	sauces	need	to	be	kept	warm	to	prevent
the	butter	from	solidifying,	and	are	best	held
at	around	145ºF/63ºC	to	discourage	the	growth
of	bacteria.	Because	the	egg	proteins	slowly
continue	to	bond	to	each	other	at	this
temperature,	the	cook	should	stir	the	sauce
occasionally	to	keep	it	from	thickening.	The
container	should	be	covered	to	prevent	the
sauce’s	moisture	from	evaporating	and
overcrowding	the	fat	droplets,	and	to	prevent
the	formation	of	a	protein	skin	on	the	surface.



Curdled	egg	sauces	can	be	rescued	by
straining	out	the	solid	bits	of	protein,	keeping
the	whole	mess	warm,	beginning	with	another
warm	egg	yolk	and	one	tablespoon/15	ml
water,	and	slowly	whisking	the	sauce	into	the
new	yolk.	The	same	technique	will	revive	a
sauce	that	has	been	refrigerated	and	so	had	its
butterfat	crystallized;	the	crystals	melt	to
form	fat	puddles	when	the	sauce	is	simply
rewarmed.

Vinaigrettes

A	Water-in-Oil	Emulsion	The	most
commonly	and	easily	made	emulsified	sauce
is	the	simple	oil-and-vinegar	salad	dressing
known	as	vinaigrette,	from	the	French	word
for	“vinegar.”	Vinaigrette	does	a	good	job	of
clinging	to	lettuce	leaves	and	other
vegetables,	and	lending	a	refreshing	tart
counterpoint	to	their	taste.	The	standard
proportions	for	a	vinaigrette	are	3	parts	oil	to



1	vinegar,	similar	to	the	proportions	in
mayonnaise,	but	the	preparation	is	much
simpler.	The	liquids	and	other	flavorings	—
salt,	pepper,	herbs	—	are	often	simply	shaken
into	a	cloudy,	temporary	emulsion	at	the	last
minute,	then	poured	onto	and	mixed	with	the
salad.	When	made	in	this	casual	way,	a
vinaigrette	is	the	odd	sauce	out:	instead	of
being	oil	droplets	dispersed	in	water,	it’s
water	(vinegar)	droplets	dispersed	in	oil.
Without	the	help	of	an	emulsifier,	one	part	of
water	simply	cannot	accommodate	three	parts
of	oil,	so	the	more	voluminous	phase,	the	oil,
becomes	the	continuous	phase.

There	are	good	reasons	for	making	oil	the
continuous	phase	of	a	vinaigrette,	and	for	not
worrying	about	the	stability	of	the	emulsion.
Where	many	sauces	are	served	under	or	atop
large	pieces	of	food,	oil-and-vinegar
emulsions	are	used	almost	exclusively	as
salad	dressings,	whose	role	is	to	provide	a
very	fine	and	even	coat	for	the	extensive



surface	area	of	lettuce	leaves	and	cut
vegetables.	A	thin,	mobile	sauce	is	more
effective	at	this	than	a	thick,	creamy	one,	and
oil	adheres	to	the	vegetable	surfaces	better
than	the	water-based	vinegar,	whose	high
surface	tension	causes	it	to	bead	up	rather
than	leave	a	film.	And	because	the	sauce	is	so
spread	out,	it	doesn’t	matter	as	much	that	the
dispersed	droplets	be	carefully	stabilized.
Because	water	and	oil	are	antagonists,	the
salad	fixings	should	be	well	dried	before
they’re	tossed	with	vinaigrette;	surfaces	wet
with	water	will	repel	the	oil.

Making	a	vinaigrette	dressing.	The	proportion
of	 oil	 to	 the	 water	 phase	 in	 a	 vinaigrette	 is
similar	 to	 the	 proportion	 in	 mayonnaise,	 but
in	 a	 vinaigrette	 the	 water	 is	 the	 phase



dispersed	 in	 droplets,	 and	 the	 oil	 is	 the
continuous	phase.	This	emulsion	 is	much	 less
crowded	 with	 droplets,	 and	 accordingly	 a
vinaigrette	is	more	fluid	than	mayonnaise.
Untraditional	Vinaigrettes	Nowadays	the
term	vinaigrette	is	used	very	broadly	to	mean
almost	any	kind	of	emulsified	sauce	enlivened
with	vinegar,	whether	water-in-oil	or	oil-in-
water,	cold	or	hot,	destined	for	salads	or
vegetables	or	meats	or	fish.	You	can	make	an
oil-in-water	version	simply	by	changing	the
proportions:	reducing	the	oil	content	and
diluting	the	vinegar	with	other	watery
ingredients	to	provide	more	of	the	continuous
phase	without	excessive	acidity.	Creamy	but
thin	oil-in-water	vinaigrettes	can	spread	and
cling	reasonably	well,	and	have	the	advantage
over	a	classic	vinaigrette	of	being	slower	to
discolor	and	wilt	lettuce	leaves.	(Oil	seeps
through	breaks	in	the	waxy	leaf	cuticle	and
spreads	into	the	leaf	interior,	where	it
displaces	air	and	causes	the	leaf	to	darken	and



its	structure	to	collapse.)
Inventive	cooks	now	make	vinaigrettes

with	a	variety	of	fats,	including	flavorsome
olive	and	nut	oils,	neutral	vegetable	and	seed
oils,	melted	butter,	and	even	hot	meat	and
poultry	fats	(pork,	duck);	the	water	phase	may
contain	vegetable	or	fruit	juices	or	purees,
meat	juices	or	stock	reductions;	and	the
droplets	may	be	emulsified	or	stabilized	by
thorough	pulverizing	to	a	small	size	in	a
blender,	or	with	pounded	herbs	or	spices,
vegetable	purees,	mustard,	gelatin,	or	cream.
Today’s	vinaigrette	is	a	very	versatile	kind	of
sauce!

Bottled	salad	dressings	that	look	like
vinaigrettes	are	generally	stabilized	and	given
body	with	starch	or	carbohydrate	gums,	which
in	low-fat	versions	can	produce	a	slimy
consistency.

Sauces	Thickened
with	Bubbles:	Foams



Like	emulsions,	foams	are	a	dispersion	of	one
fluid	in	another.	In	the	case	of	foams,	the	fluid
is	not	a	liquid,	but	a	gas,	and	the	dispersed
particles	are	not	droplets,	but	bubbles.	Still,
the	bubbles	do	the	same	thing	that	droplets	do
in	a	sauce:	they	get	in	the	way	of	water
molecules	in	the	sauce,	prevent	them	from
flowing	easily,	and	thus	give	the	sauce	as	a
whole	a	thicker	body.	At	the	same	time,	they
provide	two	unique	characteristics:	a	large
surface	area	in	contact	with	air	that	can
enhance	the	release	of	aromas	to	the	nose;	and
a	light	insubstantiality	and	evanescence	that
offers	a	refreshing	contrast	to	the	texture	of
nearly	any	food	they	accompany.

There’s	one	classic	foam	sauce,	the
sabayon,	which	is	made	by	cooking	and
whipping	egg	yolks	at	the	same	time	to	form	a
stable	mass	of	bubbles.	And	both	whipped
cream	and	whipped	egg	whites	can	be	folded
with	their	bubbles	into	any	water-based	sauce.
But	cooks	nowadays	make	foams	from	all



kinds	of	water-based	liquids	and	semisolids
that	contain	dissolved	or	suspended	or
structure-stabilizing	molecules	of	some	kind.
The	Catalan	chef	Ferran	Adrià	pioneered	this
development,	with	foams	of	—	among	other
ingredients	—	cod,	shellfish,	foie	gras,
asparagus,	potatoes,	raspberries,	and	cheese.
Cooking	broths	and	their	reductions,	protein-
and	starch-thickened	sauces,	juices,	purees,
and	emulsified	sauces	can	all	be	lightened	by
incorporating	bubbles	into	them.	And	it’s	a
quick	last-minute	preparation:	just	agitate
some	of	the	liquid	until	it	froths,	then	scoop
off	the	bubble-rich	portion,	add	it	to	the	food,
and	serve.

Making	and	Stabilizing	Foams

There	are	several	different	ways	of	getting
bubbles	into	a	liquid	and	stabilizing	them.
Whipping	with	a	whisk	or	hand-heldblender
introduces	air	by	agitating	the	liquid	surface;



the	foaming	wands	on	espresso	machines
shoot	steam,	a	mixture	of	water	vapor	and	air;
and	foaming	devices	for	whipped	cream	and
seltzer	water	mix	a	stream	of	pressurized
carbon	dioxide	or	nitrous	oxide	with	the
liquid.	Any	dissolved	or	suspended	molecules
in	the	liquid	collect	at	the	interface	of	the	air
and	liquid	and	give	the	bubble	wall	some	solid
reinforcement.

However,	the	reinforcement	will	be
momentary	and	the	bubbles	short-lived	unless
the	molecules	can	form	a	stable	layer	at	the
interface.	This	is	exactly	what	emulsifiers	like
lecithin	and	proteins	do,	and	for	the	same
reason	that	they	stabilize	oil	droplets	in
emulsions:	they	have	a	water-soluble	portion
that	rests	in	the	bubble	wall,	and	a	water-
insoluble	portion	that	rests	in	the	air.	Because
the	bubbles	in	a	typical	foam	are	between	0.1
and	1	millimeter	across,	much	larger	than
most	emulsion	droplets,	they	require	very
little	emulsifier	to	cover	their	surface	area,



typically	just	0.1%	of	the	liquid	weight	(1
gram	per	quart	or	liter).

Stabilizing	 Foams	 A	 liquid	 that	 is	 even
modestly	 supplied	 with	 proteins	 or	 yolk
phospholipids	 will	 form	 an	 impressive	 mass
of	 bubbles,	 solid	 enough	 to	 stand	 up	without
flowing	or	even	slumping.	However,	the	foam
may	still	collapse	within	a	minute	or	two.	Air
and	 water	 have	 very	 different	 densities,	 so
when	the	foam	is	left	to	stand	on	its	own,	the
air	bubbles	rise	while	gravity	pulls	 the	 liquid
in	 their	 walls	 in	 the	 opposite	 direction.	 This
means	 that	 liquid	 drains	 from	 the	 bubble
walls,	 which	 also	 lose	 water	 to	 evaporation.
Eventually,	 the	 foam	 at	 the	 surface	 becomes
dry,	 around	 95%	 air	 and	 just	 5%	 liquid,	 the
bubble	 walls	 become	 too	 thin,	 fail,	 and	 the
bubbles	pop.

This	instability	of	the	foam	as	a	whole	can
be	prevented	by	the	same	materials	that
stabilize	the	emulsified	sauces:	namely



materials	that	interfere	with	the	free
movement	of	water	molecules,	and	thereby
slow	the	drainage	and	thinning	of	the	bubble
walls.	Foam	stabilizers	include	the
microscopic	particles	in	purees,	proteins,
thickening	carbohydrates	like	starch,	pectin,
and	gums	—	and	even	emulsified	fat.	Free	fat
or	oil	is	a	foam	killer,	because	the	fat	spreads
at	the	interface	with	the	air	—	it’s	chemically
more	compatible	with	air	than	with	water	—
and	prevents	emulsifiers	from	settling	at	the
interface	and	stabilizing	it.	However,	if	the	fat
is	emulsified	—	for	example	in	an	egg	yolk	or
yolk-based	sauce	—	then	it	remains	dispersed
in	the	water	phase,	and	its	droplets	only
interfere	with	the	flow	of	liquid	from	the
bubble	walls.

Heat-Stabilized	 Foams:	 Sabayons	 Both	 the
method	 and	 the	 name	 of	 the	 French	 sabayon
derive	 from	 the	 Italian	zabaglione,	 a	 sweet,
winy	foam	of	egg	yolks	(p.	113).	Though	rich



in	proteins	and	phospholipids,	egg	yolks	don’t
foam	 well	 on	 their	 own	 because	 they	 don’t
contain	enough	water.	Add	water	and	beat	and
they	 foam	prodigiously	but	 temporarily;	 heat
while	beating	and	the	yolk	proteins	unfold	and
bond	 to	 each	 other	 into	 a	 thickening,
stabilizing	network.	This	is	how	sabayons	are
made,	with	 the	water	 replaced	 by	 a	 flavorful
liquid	of	 some	 some	sort,	 a	broth	or	 juice	or
puree	 for	 example.	 The	 hot	 egg-emulsified
butter	 sauces	 can	 be	 made	 in	 the	 style	 of	 a
sabayon,	with	the	butter	folded	in	gently	at	the
end	 so	 as	 not	 to	 pop	 too	 many	 of	 the	 foam
bubbles.	(The	butter	doesn’t	need	to	be	beaten
in	 because	 the	 foam	 has	 created	 a	 large
surface	area	over	which	the	butter	can	spread
and	 stay	 suspended,	much	 as	 a	 vinaigrette	 is
spread	 over	 lettuce	 leaves.)	 The	 proteins	 in
aerated	yolks	thicken	around	120ºF/50ºC,	and
may	 coagulate	 and	 separate	 if	 heated	 much
above	 that,	 so	many	 cooks	 prepare	 sabayons
over	a	pot	of	hot	water	rather	than	over	direct



stovetop	heat.

Salt

The	word	sauce	comes	via	Latin	from
anancient	root	word	meaning	“salt,”	the
primordial	condiment	that	was	prepared	by
the	earth	billions	of	years	before	early	humans
learned	to	enliven	their	foods	with	it.	Salt	is
an	important	flavoring,	but	also	much	more
than	that,	and	is	an	ingredient	in	nearly	every
preparation	described	in	this	book.	The
relevant	chapters	explain	its	role	in	the
making	of	such	foods	as	cheese,	cured	meats
and	fish,	pickled	vegetables,	boiled
vegetables,	soy	sauce,	and	bread.	Here	are	a
few	pages	about	salt	itself.

The	 Virtues	 of	 Salt	 Salt	 is	 like	 no	 other
substance	we	eat.	Sodium	chloride	is	a	simple,
inorganic	mineral:	it	comes	not	from	plants	or
animals	or	microbes,	but	from	the	oceans,	and



ultimately	 from	 the	 rocks	 that	 erode	 into
them.	 It’s	 an	 essential	 nutrient,	 a	 chemical
that	our	bodies	can’t	do	without.	It’s	the	only
natural	 source	of	one	of	our	handful	of	basic
tastes,	and	we	therefore	add	it	 to	most	of	our
foods	 to	 fill	 out	 their	 flavor.	 Salt	 is	 also	 a
taste	 enhancer	 and	 taste	 modifier:	 it
strengthens	 the	 impression	 of	 aromas	 that
accompany	it,	and	it	suppresses	 the	sensation
of	 bitterness.	 It’s	 one	 of	 the	 very	 few
ingredients	 that	we	 keep	 in	 pure	 form	 at	 the
table,	to	be	added	to	individual	taste	as	we	eat.

In	addition	to	sauces	and	salads,	somewhat
bitter	leaves	dressed	to	make	them	more
palatable,	another	food	named	for	salt	is
sausage,	one	of	the	preparations	in	which	salt
is	more	than	just	a	flavoring.	Thanks	to	its
basic	chemical	nature,	salt	can	alter	other
ingredients	in	useful	ways.	Sodium	chloride
dissolves	in	water	into	separate	single	atoms
that	carry	electrical	charge	—	positively
charged	sodium	ions	and	negatively	charged



chloride	ions.	These	atoms	are	smaller	and
more	mobile	than	any	molecule,	and	therefore
readily	penetrate	our	foods,	where	they	react
in	useful	ways	with	proteins	and	with	plant
cell	walls.	And	because	a	concentrated
solution	of	any	kind	draws	water	out	of	living
cells	by	osmosis	—	water	in	the	less
concentrated	cell	fluid	moves	out	of	the	cell
to	relieve	the	imbalance	—	the	presence	of
sufficient	salt	in	a	food	discourages	the
growth	of	spoilage	bacteria	while	allowing
harmless	flavor-producing	(and	salt-tolerant)
bacteria	to	grow.	It	thus	preserves	the	food
and	improves	it	at	the	same	time.

Salt	is	a	remarkable	ingredient.	No	wonder
that	people	from	earliest	times	have	found	it
indispensable,	that	it’s	embedded	in	everyday
words	and	sayings	(salary,	from	the	Roman
practice	of	paying	soldiers	in	salt;	worth	his
salt;	salt	of	the	earth),	and	that	it	has	been	the
occasion	for	governmental	monopolies	and
taxes	and	popular	revolts	against	them,	from



revolutionary	France	to	Gandhi’s	1930	salt
march	to	Dandi.

Salt	Production

People	have	been	gathering	crystalline	salt
since	prehistoric	times,	both	from	the
seacoasts	and	from	inland	salt	deposits.	The
rock-salt	deposits,	some	of	which	are
hundreds	of	millions	of	years	old,	are	masses
of	sodium	chloride	that	crystallized	when
ancient	seas	were	isolated	by	rising	land
masses	and	evaporated,	and	their	beds	then
covered	over	by	later	geological	processes.
Until	the	19th	century,	salt	was	produced
mainly	for	the	preservation	and	flavoring	of
foods.	Nowadays	large	amounts	are	used	in
industrial	manufacturing	of	all	kinds,	as	well
as	in	the	de-icing	of	winter	roads,	and	salt
production	itself	has	been	industrialized.	Most
rock	salt	is	now	mined	by	solution,	or
pumping	water	into	the	deposits	to	dissolve



the	salt,	then	evaporating	the	brine	down	in
vacuum	chambers	to	form	solid	crystals.
While	some	sea	salt	is	still	produced	by
gradual	solar	evaporation	from	open-air	salt
pans	in	sufficiently	warm,	dry	regions,	much
is	now	produced	by	more	rapid	vacuum
evaporation.

Removing	Bitter	Minerals	 Salt	 comes	 from
seawater,	 and	 seawater	 contains	 significant
quantities	 of	 several	 bitter	 minerals,	 the
chloride	 and	 sulfate	 salts	 of	 magnesium	 and
calcium.	Producers	have	 a	 couple	of	ways	of
dealing	with	these	minerals.	They	can	remove
them	 from	 rock	 salt	 by	 dissolving	 the	 salt,
then	 adding	 sodium	 hydroxide	 and	 carbon
dioxide	to	the	brine	to	precipitate	magnesium
and	 calcium.	 They	 can	 remove	 them	 from
seawater	by	 the	same	means,	or	else	by	slow
and	 gradual	 concentration	 in	 open-air	 pans,
during	 which	 the	 calcium	 salts	 become
insoluble,	 crystallize,	 and	 settle	 before	 the



sodium	 chloride	 does,	 and	 so	 can	 be
separated.	 The	 sodium	 chloride	 in	 turn
crystallizes	 before	 the	 magnesium	 salts,
whose	 slight	 residue	 on	 the	 crystal	 surfaces
can	then	be	washed	off	in	new	brine.

Crystal	 Shapes	 These	 days	 both	 edible	 rock
salt	and	sea	salts	are	produced	from	brines	by
evaporating	 the	water	 away.	 The	 evaporation
process	 determines	 the	 kinds	 of	 salt	 crystals
produced.	 If	 the	 brine	 becomes	 concentrated
rapidly	 in	 a	 closed	 tank	 and	 crystallization
takes	 place	 throughout	 the	 brine,	 then	 many
small,	 regular	 cubic	 crystals	 are	 formed:	 the
familiar	 granulated	 salt	 of	 the	 salt	 shaker.
However,	 if	 the	 evaporation	 proceeds	 slowly
and	at	least	partly	in	an	open	container	or	sea-
side	 pool,	 so	 that	 crystallization	 occurs
primarily	 at	 the	 brine	 surface,	 then	 the	 salt
solidifies	into	fragile,	hollow,	pyramid-shaped
flakes,	 a	 useful	 shape	 for	 sticking	 to	 the
surfaces	 of	 baked	 goods,	 and	 for	 dissolving



rapidly.	 To	 be	 preserved,	 the	 flakes	must	 be
scooped	off	the	surface	before	they	settle	and
sink	 into	 the	 brine,	 where	 they	 fill	 in	 and
become	the	large,	coarse	crystal	often	seen	in
minimally	processed	sea	salts.

Once	collected	and	dried,	both	granular
and	flake	salts	can	be	rolled,	compacted,	and
crushed	to	make	various	particle	sizes	and
shapes.

Kinds	of	Salt

Worldwide,	about	half	of	all	salt	production
comes	from	the	sea,	and	about	half	from	salt
mines;	in	the	United	States,	95%	is	mined.
Depending	on	how	they’ve	been	processed,
edible	salts	range	from	98	to	99.7%	sodium
chloride,	with	the	lower	figures	typical	of
table	salts	treated	with	anticaking	additives.

Granulated	Table	Salt	Granulated	table	salts
come	 in	 the	 form	 of	 small,	 regular,	 cubic



crystals,	 are	 the	 densest	 salts,	 and	 take	 the
longest	to	dissolve.	Standard	table	salt	is	often
supplemented	with	 additives,	 as	much	 as	 2%
of	 the	 total	 weight,	 that	 prevent	 the	 crystal
surfaces	from	absorbing	moisture	and	sticking
to	 each	 other.	 These	 additives	 include
aluminum	 and	 silicon	 compounds	 of	 sodium
and	 calcium,	 silicon	 dioxide	—	 the	 material
of	 glass	 and	 ceramics	 (p.	 788)	 —	 and
magnesium	 carbonate.	 Other	 compounds
called	humectants	may	be	added	to	keep	these
additives	 from	 excessive	 drying	 and	 caking.
Most	 anticaking	 additives	 do	 not	 dissolve	 as
readily	 as	 salt,	 and	 cloud	 the	 brines	 for
pickled	 vegetables,	 so	 specialized	 pickling
salts	 omit	 them.	 These	 additives	 may	 also
contribute	 slight	 undesirable	 tastes	 of	 their
own.

Iodized	Salt	Many	granulated	 table	salts	and
some	 sea	 salts	 are	 fortified	 with	 potassium
iodide	 to	 help	 prevent	 devastating	 iodide



deficiency	(below).	This	practice	began	in	the
United	 States	 in	 1924.	 Because	 iodide	 is
sensitive	 to	 acidity,	 manufacturers	 usually
supplement	iodized	salt	with	stabilizing	traces
of	sodium	carbonate	or	 thiosulfate	and	sugar.
When	 dissolved	 in	 chlorinated	 tap	 water,
iodized	 salt	 can	 develop	 a	 distinct	 seaweed-
like	 iodine	 odor,	 the	 result	 of	 a	 reaction
between	the	iodide	and	chlorine	compounds.

Flake	Salt	Flake	salts	come	 in	 flat,	extended
particles	rather	than	compact,	dense	granules.
Flake	 salts	 are	 produced	 by	 surface
evaporation	 of	 the	 mother	 brine,	 or	 by
mechanically	rolling	granulated	salts.	Maldon
sea	 salt	 from	 the	 south	 coast	 of	 England
includes	 individual	 hollow-pyramid	 crystals
measuring	as	much	as	a	half-inch/1	cm	across.
The	 large	 particles	 of	 flake	 salts	 and
minimally	 processed	 sea	 salts	 are	 easier	 to
measure	and	add	by	the	pinch.	Sprinkled	onto
a	food	at	the	last	minute,	flake	salt	provides	a



crunchy	texture	and	a	burst	of	flavor.	The	flat
crystals	 don’t	 pack	 together	 as	 compactly	 as
cubic	crystals,	so	a	given	volume	measure	of
flake	 salt	weighs	 less	 than	 the	 same	measure
of	granulated	salt.

Kosher	 Salt	 Kosher	 salt	 is	 salt	 used	 for	 the
koshering	 process,	 the	 preparation	 of	 meats
according	 to	 Jewish	 dietary	 laws	 (p.	 143).	 It
comes	in	coarse	particles,	often	flakes,	and	is
sprinkled	 on	 the	 freshly	 butchered	 meat	 for
the	purpose	of	drawing	out	blood.	Because	it’s
meant	 to	 remove	 impurities,	 the	 salt	 itself	 is
not	 iodized.	 Many	 cooks	 like	 to	 use	 kosher
salt	 in	 general	 cooking	 for	 its	 relative	 purity
and	ease	of	dispensing	by	hand.

Unrefined	 Sea	 Salt	 Unrefined	 sea	 salts	 are
produced	 in	 the	 way	 that	 agricultural	 crops
are:	 their	 beds	 are	 managed	 and	 tended,	 the
salt	 is	 harvested	 when	 ready,	 and	 minimally
processed.	 The	 tending	 consists	 of	 a	 slow
progressive	concentration	of	the	seawater,	and



can	take	as	much	as	five	years.	In	most	places
the	 freshly	 harvested	 salt	 is	 washed	 of	 its
surface	 impurities	 before	 drying.	 Unrefined
versions	 are	 not	 systematically	 washed	 of
their	 coating	 of	 minor	minerals,	 algae	 and	 a
few	 salt-tolerant	 bacteria.	 They	 therefore
carry	 traces	 of	 magnesium	 chloride	 and
sulfate	 and	 calcium	 sulfate,	 as	 well	 as
particles	of	clay	and	other	sediments	that	give
the	crystals	a	dull	gray	cast	(unrefined	French
salts	are	called	sel	gris,	“gray	salt”).	Because
taste	 and	 aroma	 compounds	 are	 often
detectable	in	minute	concentrations,	and	these
salts	 include	 both	 organic	 and	 mineral
impurities,	 it’s	possible	 that	 they	would	have
a	 more	 complex	 flavor	 than	 refined	 salts,
though	 that	 complexity	 would	 be
overwhelmed	by	any	food	to	which	the	salt	is
added.

Fleur	de	sel	Fleur	de	sel,	 literally	“flower	of
salt,”	meaning	the	finest	and	most	delicate,	is



a	special	product	of	the	sea-salt	beds	of	west-
central	France.	 It	consists	of	 the	crystals	 that
form	and	accumulate	at	the	surface	of	the	salt
pans	when	the	humidity	and	breezes	are	right;
they’re	 gently	 raked	 off	 the	 surface	 before
they	have	a	 chance	 to	 fall	 below	 the	 surface,
where	the	ordinary	gray	sea	salt	accumulates.
Fleur	 de	 sel	 forms	 delicate	 flakes,	 doesn’t
carry	the	particles	of	sediment	that	darken	and
dull	the	gray	salt,	but	is	said	to	carry	traces	of
algae	 and	 other	 materials	 that	 contribute	 a
characteristic	 aroma.	 This	 is	 possible,	 since
the	 interface	 between	water	 and	 air	 is	where
aroma	 molecules	 and	 other	 fatty	 materials
would	 concentrate;	 but	 to	 date	 the	 aroma	 of
sea	salts	has	not	been	much	studied.	Thanks	to
the	 labor	 required	 to	make	 it,	 fleur	 de	 sel	 is
expensive,	 and	 is	 used	 as	 a	 last-minute
condiment	rather	than	as	a	cooking	salt.

Flavored	 and	 Colored	 Salts	 In	 addition	 to
providing	its	own	saltiness,	salt	 is	sometimes



turned	 into	a	carrier	 for	other	 flavors	and	for
decorative	 colors.	Examples	of	 flavored	 salts
include	 celery	 salt	with	 ground	 celery	 seeds,
garlic	 salt	 with	 dehydrated	 garlic	 granules,
and	 the	 smoked	 and	 roasted	 salts	 found	 in
Wales,	Denmark,	and	Korea.	The	“black	salt”
of	India,	more	of	a	gray-pink	when	ground,	is
an	 unrefined	 mixture	 of	 minerals	 with	 a
sulfurous	smell.	Black	and	red	Hawaiian	salts
are	 made	 by	 mixing	 ordinary	 sea	 salt	 with
finely	ground	lava,	clay,	or	coral.

Salt	and	the	Body

Salt	and	Blood	Pressure	Sodium	and
chloride	ions	are	essential	components	of	the
system	that	keeps	our	general	body	chemistry
in	working	balance.	They	mostly	remain	in
the	fluid	that	surrounds	all	our	cells,	the
plasma,	the	fluid	portion	of	the	blood,	where
they	balance	the	potassium	and	other	ions
inside	the	cells.	It’s	estimated	that	we	need



something	like	1	gram	of	salt	per	day,	a
requirement	that	goes	up	with	physical
activity	since	we	lose	body	fluids	and
minerals	in	sweat.	Thanks	to	its	presence	in
nearly	all	manufactured	foods,	the	average
daily	salt	intake	in	the	United	States	is	around
ten	times	the	requirement.

Medical	scientists	have	long	suspected	that
constant	excessive	salt	intake	results	in	an
excessive	volume	of	plasma	being	contained
in	our	blood	vessels,	and	therefore	causes	high
blood	pressure,	which	damages	the	blood
vessels	and	increases	the	risk	of	heart	disease
and	stroke.	However,	low-salt	diets	have	been
found	to	lower	high	blood	pressure	only
modestly,	and	only	in	some	people.	And	low-
salt	diets	have	surprising	side	effects	of	their
own,	including	undesirable	increases	in	blood
cholesterol	levels.	At	this	time,	it	appears	that
the	most	beneficial	nonmedical	influences	on
blood	pressure	are	general	dietary	balance	—
more	vegetables,	fruits,	and	seeds	rich	in



potassium,	calcium,	and	other	minerals	—
together	with	physical	exercise	that	conditions
the	whole	cardiovascular	system.

Effects	 on	 Kidneys,	 Bones,	 and	 the
Digestive	System	Excess	sodium	is	absorbed
from	 the	 blood	 and	 excreted	 by	 the	 kidneys,
which	help	regulate	many	body	systems.	High
sodium	 levels	 thus	 have	 the	 potential	 for
having	 indirect	 effects	 on	 those	 systems.
There’s	 evidence	 that	 they	 can	 cause	 loss	 of
bone	 calcium	 and	 thus	 increase	 our	 dietary
calcium	 requirement,	 as	 well	 as	 worsening
chronic	kidney	disease.

Though	our	bodies	have	ways	of	diluting
and	excreting	excessive	doses	of	salt,	eating
salty	foods	exposes	the	surfaces	of	our
digestive	system	to	potentially	cell-damaging
concentrations.	There	is	evidence	from	China
and	elsewhere	in	Asia	that	diets	high	in	salt
increase	the	risk	of	several	cancers	of	the
digestive	system.



Iodized	 Salt	 Some	 salts	 do	 carry	 an
undisputed	 health	 benefit.	 Iodized	 salts
include	 trace	 amounts	 of	 potassium	 iodide,
and	 thus	 are	 a	 source	 of	 a	 mineral	 that’s
essential	for	proper	functioning	of	the	thyroid
gland,	 which	 regulates	 the	 body’s	 heat
production,	 protein	 metabolism,	 and
development	of	the	nervous	system.	Iodine	is
a	 chemical	 relative	 of	 chlorine	 and	 readily
found	 in	ocean	 fish,	 seaweeds,	and	crops	and
animals	 raised	 near	 the	 seacoast.	 Iodine
deficiency	was	once	common	in	inland	areas,
and	 is	 still	 a	 significant	 problem	 in	 rural
China.	 It	 causes	 both	 physical	 and	 mental
impairment,	especially	in	children.

Salt	 to	 Taste:	 Salt	 Preference	 Both	 the
sensitivity	 to	 salt	 and	 the	 preference	 for
saltiness	 in	 foods	 vary	 a	 great	 deal	 from
person	 to	 person.	 They	 depend	 on	 several
factors,	 including	 inherited	differences	 in	 the
numbers	 and	 effectiveness	 of	 taste	 receptors



on	 the	 tongue,	 general	 health,	 age,	 and
experience.	Most	young	adults	can	identify	as
salty	 a	 water	 solution	 with	 0.05%	 salt,	 or	 1
teaspoon	 in	 10	 quarts/liters,	 while	 people
older	 than	 sixty	 years	 generally	 detect
saltiness	 only	 at	 double	 that	 concentration.
Many	 manufactured	 soups,	 which	 many
people	experience	as	moderately	to	very	salty,
are	around	1%	salt	(10	grams,	or	2	teaspoons
per	 quart/liter),	 approximately	 the	 same
concentration	as	our	blood	plasma.	Some	may
be	 3%	 salt,	 which	 is	 the	 average	 salinity	 of
seawater.
It	appears	that	the	basic	liking	for	saltiness	is
innate	in	humans,	no	doubt	because	salt	is	an
essential	nutrient.	The	preference	for	a	certain
level	of	saltiness	is	learned	through	repeated
eating	experiences	and	the	expectations	they
create	in	us.	Preferences	can	be	changed	by
constant	exposure	to	different	salt	levels,
which	changes	expectations.	But	this	takes
time,	usually	two	to	four	months.



The	Physical	Properties	of	Salt
Salt	 generally	 remains	 a	 solid	 in	 the
kitchen	 unless	 it’s	 dissolved.	 Room-
temperature	 water	 can	 dissolve	 around
35%	 of	 its	 weight	 in	 salt,	 to	 give	 a
saturated	solution	of	26%	salt	that	boils	at
around	228ºF/109ºC	at	sea	level.

The	 particle	 size	 of	 salt	 crystals
determines	 how	 fast	 they	 will	 dissolve,	 a
fact	 that	 can	 make	 a	 big	 difference	 when
adding	 salt	 to	 a	 low-moisture	 food,	 for
example	 to	 a	 bread	 dough	 that	 has	 been
made	 by	 the	 autolysis	 method	 (p.	 536).
Flake	salts	may	dissolve	four	to	five	times
faster	 than	 granulated	 salt,	 and	 finely
ground	salt	nearly	20	times	faster.

Solid	 salt	 crystals	 melt	 at
1,600ºF/800ºC,	 and	 evaporate	 at	 around
3,000ºF/1,500ºC,	 temperatures	 reached	 in
wood	 fires	 and	 glowing	 coals,	 which	 can
vaporize	 salt	 and	 deposit	 a	 thin	 film	 on
foods	above	them.



Chapter	12

Sugars,	Chocolate,
and	Confectionery

The	History	of	Sugars	and	Confectionery
Before	Sugar:	Honey
Sugar:	Beginnings	in	Asia
Early	Confectionery	in	Southwest	Asia
In	Europe:	A	Spice	and	Medicine
Confectionery	for	Pleasure
A	Pleasure	for	All
Sugar	in	Modern	Times

The	Nature	of	Sugars
Kinds	of	Sugar
The	Complexities	of	Sweetness
Crystallization
Caramelization
Sugars	and	Health
Sugar	Substitutes

Sugars	and	Syrups



Honey
Tree	 Syrups	 and	 Sugars:	 Maple,	 Birch,
Palm
Table	 Sugar:	 Cane	 and	 Beet	 Sugars	 and
Syrups
Corn	Syrups,	Glucose	and	Fructose	Syrups,
Malt	Syrup

Sugar	Candies	and	Confectionery
Setting	 the	 Sugar	 Concentration:	 Cooking
the	Syrup
Setting	 the	 Sugar	 Structure:	 Cooling	 and
Crystallization
Kinds	of	Candies
Chewing	Gum
Candy	Storage	and	Spoilage

Chocolate
The	History	of	Chocolate
Making	Chocolate
The	Special	Qualities	of	Chocolate
The	Kinds	of	Chocolate
Chocolate	and	Cocoa	as	Ingredients
Tempered	 Chocolate	 for	 Coating	 and



Molding
Chocolate	and	Health

Ordinary	sugar	is	an	extraordinary	food.	Sugar
is	 pure	 sensation,	 crystallized	 pleasure.	 All
human	 beings	 share	 an	 innate	 liking	 for	 its
sweetness,	 which	 we	 first	 experience	 in
mother’s	milk,	 and	 which	 is	 the	 taste	 of	 the
energy	 that	 fuels	all	 life.	Thanks	 to	 this	deep
appeal,	 sugar	 and	 sugar-rich	 foods	 are	 now
among	the	most	popular	and	widely	consumed
of	all	foods.	In	centuries	past,	when	sugar	was
rare	 and	 expensive,	 they	 were	 luxuries
reserved	for	the	wealthy	and	for	the	climax	of
the	 meal.	 Today	 sugar	 is	 cheap,	 and
manufactured	 sweets	 have	 become	 everyday,
casual	 pleasures,	 affordable	 and	 entertaining
morsels.	 Some	 are	 soothing	 classics,	 cream
and	sugar	cooked	into	rich	brown	caramels,	or
clear	 sugar	 tinted	 to	 look	 like	 a	 shard	 of
stained	 glass.	 And	 others	 are	 provocative
novelties	 with	 glaringly	 unnatural	 colors,



whimsical	 shapes,	 hidden	 pockets	 of	 hissing
gas,	and	burningly	excessive	doses	of	acidity
or	spice.

In	the	kitchen,	sugar	is	a	versatile
ingredient.	Because	sweetness	is	one	of	a
small	handful	of	basic	taste	sensations,	cooks
add	sugar	to	dishes	of	all	kinds	to	fill	out	and
balance	their	flavor.	Sugar	interferes	usefully
with	the	coagulation	of	proteins,	and	so
tenderizes	the	gluten	network	of	baked	goods
and	the	albumen	network	of	custards	and
creams.	If	we	heat	sugar	enough	to	break	its
molecules	apart,	it	generates	both	appealing
colors	and	an	increasing	complexity	of	flavor:
no	longer	just	sweetness,	but	acidity,
bitterness,	and	a	full,	rich	aroma.	And	sugar	is
a	sculptural	material.	Provide	it	with	some
moisture	and	high	heat,	and	we	can	coax	from
it	a	broad	range	of	shapeable	consistencies,
creamy	and	chewy	and	brittle	and	rock	hard.

The	story	of	sugar	is	not	all	sweetness	and
light.	Its	appeal	was	a	destructive	force	in	the



history	of	Africa	and	the	Americas,	whose
peoples	were	enslaved	to	satisfy	the	European
hunger	for	it.	And	today,	by	displacing	more
nourishing	foods	from	our	diet,	sugar
contributes	indirectly	to	several	modern
diseases	of	affluence.	Like	most	good	things
in	life,	it’s	best	enjoyed	in	moderation.	And
like	that	other	good	thing,	fat,	it’s	easy	to
consume	a	lot	of	sugar	in	manufactured	foods
without	realizing	it.

Chocolate,	the	cooked,	sculptable	paste	of
a	South	American	tree	seed,	has	been	married
to	sugar	ever	since	its	arrival	in	Europe	nearly
500	years	ago,	and	is	in	some	respects	sugar’s
complement.	Where	sugar	is	a	single
molecule	purified	from	complex	plant	fluids,
chocolate	is	a	mixture	of	hundreds	of	different
molecules	produced	by	fermenting	and
roasting	a	plain	bland	seed.	It’s	one	of	the
most	complex	flavors	we	experience,	and	yet
it	lacks	and	is	completed	by	basic,	simple
sweetness.



Gathering	 honey	 in	 prehistoric	 times.	 This
rock	 painting,	 found	 in	 the	 Spider	 Cave	 at
Valencia,	Spain,	dates	back	to	about	8000	BCE
and	 appears	 to	 show	 two	 people	 raiding	 a
wild	 beehive.	 The	 leader	 (enlarged	 at	 right)
may	be	carrying	a	basket	 for	 the	honeycomb.
Artificial	hives	and	the	domestication	of	bees
are	 known	 from	 about	 2500	BCE	 in	 Egypt.
(Redrawn	from	H.	Ransome,	The	Sacred	Bee,
1937.)

The	History	of	Sugars
and	Confectionery

Before	Sugar:	Honey



After	mother’s	milk,	the	first	significant
source	of	sweetness	in	human	experience
must	have	been	fruits.	Some	warm-climate
fruits	like	the	date	can	approach	a	sugar
content	of	60%,	and	even	temperate	fruits
become	very	sweet	when	they	dry	out.	But	the
most	concentrated	natural	source	of	sweetness
is	honey,	the	stored	food	of	certain	species	of
bees,	which	reaches	80%	sugars.	It’s	clear
from	a	remarkable	painting	in	the	Spider	Cave
of	Valencia	that	humans	have	gone	out	of
their	way	to	collect	honey	for	at	least	10,000
years.	The	“domestication”	of	bees	probably
goes	back	4,000	years,	judging	by	Egyptian
hieroglyphs	that	show	clay	hives.

However	our	ancestors	obtained	it,	honey
came	to	represent	pleasure	and	fulfillment	to
them,	and	is	a	prominent	metaphor	in	some	of
the	earliest	literature	we	know.	A	love	poem
inscribed	4,000	years	ago	on	a	Sumerian	clay
tablet	describes	a	bridegroom	as
“honeysweet,”	the	bride’s	caress	as	“more



savory	than	honey,”	and	their	bedchamber	as
“honeyfilled.”	In	the	Old	Testament,	the
promised	land	is	pictured	several	times	as	a
land	flowing	with	milk	and	honey,	a	metaphor
of	delightful	plenty	that	is	itself	used
figuratively	in	the	Song	of	Songs,	where
another	bridegroom	chants,	“Thy	lips,	O	my
spouse,	drop	as	the	honeycomb:	honey	and
milk	are	under	thy	tongue…”

Honey	remained	an	important	ingredient	in
both	the	food	and	culture	of	classical	Greece
and	Rome.	The	Greeks	offered	it	in
ceremonies	to	the	dead	and	the	gods,	and
priestesses	of	the	goddesses	Demeter,
Artemis,	and	Rhea	were	called	melissai:	the
Greek	melissa,	like	the	Hebrew	deborah,
means	“bee.”	The	prestige	of	honey	was	due
in	part	to	its	mysterious	origins	and	to	a	belief
that	it	was	a	little	bit	of	heaven	fallen	to	earth.
The	Roman	natural	historian	Pliny	speculated
in	entertaining	detail	on	honey’s	nature.



Honey	comes	out	of	the	air…At	early	dawn
the	leaves	of	trees	are	found	bedewed	with
honey…Whether	this	is	the	perspiration	of
the	sky	or	a	sort	of	saliva	of	the	stars,	or
the	moisture	of	the	air	purging	itself,
nevertheless	it	brings	with	it	the	great
pleasure	of	its	heavenly	nature.

It	 was	 more	 than	 1,000	 years	 before	 the
true	roles	of	flower	and	bee	in	the	creation	of
honey	were	uncovered	(p.	663).	In	fact,	honey
making	 is	 the	 natural	 model	 for	 all	 human
sugar	 production.	 We	 too	 take	 sweet	 juices
from	plants	 and	 separate	 the	 sugars	 from	 the
water.	 Palm	 trees	 in	 South	Asia,	 maple	 and
birch	 trees	 in	 northern	 forests,	 agave	 plants
and	 maize	 stalks	 in	 the	 Americas:	 all	 these
have	 provided	 the	 sweet	 juices.	 But	 none	 of
them	has	been	as	generous	as	sugarcane.

Sweet	Manna
In	the	Old	Testament	book	of	Exodus,	God



fed	the	exiled	Israelites	with	manna,	which
is	described	as	“like	coriander	seed,	white;
and	 the	 taste	 of	 it	 was	 like	 wafers	 made
with	 honey.”	 Today	 this	 term	 is	 used	 for
the	sugar-rich	secretion	of	certain	trees	and
also	certain	insects.	In	the	Middle	East,	the
tamarisk	 tree	produces	enough	manna	 that
Bedouin	 nomads	 can	 collect	 several
pounds	 in	 a	 morning,	 and	 go	 on	 to	 make
halvah	with	 it.	The	sugar	alcohol	mannitol
(p.	 662)	 owes	 its	 name	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 it
was	 first	 found	 in	 and	 extracted	 from
manna.

Sugar:	Beginnings	in	Asia

Europe	barely	knew	what	we	now	consider
ordinary	table	sugar	until	around	1100,	and	it
was	a	luxury	until	1700.	Our	first	major
source	of	sucrose	was	the	sugar	cane,
Saccharum	officinarum,	a	20-foot-tall
member	of	the	grass	family	with	an	unusually



high	sucrose	content	—	about	15%	—	in	its
fluids.	Sugar	cane	originated	in	New	Guinea
in	the	South	Pacific	and	was	carried	by
prehistoric	human	migration	into	Asia.
Sometime	before	500	BCE,	people	in	India
developed	the	technology	of	making
unrefined,	“raw”	sugar	by	pressing	out	the
cane	juice	and	boiling	it	down	into	a	dark
mass	of	syrup-coated	crystals.	By	350	BCE,
Indian	cooks	were	combining	this	dark	gur
with	wheat,	barley,	and	rice	flours	and	with
sesame	seeds	to	make	a	variety	of	shaped
confections,	some	of	them	fried.	A	couple	of
centuries	later,	Indian	medical	texts
distinguished	among	a	number	of	different
syrups	and	sugars	from	cane,	including
crystals	from	which	the	dark	coating	had	been
washed.	These	were	the	first	refined	white
sugars.

Early	Confectionery	in	Southwest	Asia



Around	the	6th	century	CE,	both	the	cane	and
sugar-making	technology	were	carried
westward	from	the	delta	of	the	Indus	River	to
the	head	of	the	Persian	Gulf	and	the	delta	of
the	Tigris	and	Euphrates	rivers,	where	the
Persians	made	sugar	a	prized	ingredient	in
their	cooking.	One	modern	survival	of	this
esteem	is	the	sprinkling	of	large	sugar	crystals
over	a	dish	called	“jeweled	rice.”	Islamic
Arabs	conquered	Persia	in	the	7th	century	and
took	the	cane	to	northern	Africa,	Syria,	and
eventually	Spain	and	Sicily.	Arab	cooks
combined	sugar	with	almonds	to	make
marzipan	paste,	cooked	it	down	with	sesame
seeds	and	other	ingredients	to	make	chewy
halvah,	made	great	use	of	sugar	in	syrups
aromatized	with	rose	petals	and	orange
blossoms,	and	were	pioneers	in	confectionery
and	in	sugar	sculpture.	There	are	records	of	a
10th-century	feast	in	Egypt	that	was	adorned
with	sugar	models	of	trees,	animals,	and
castles!



Pulled	Sugar	and	Almond	Confection	in
13th-century	Baghdad

Medieval	Arab	cooks	were	among	the	first
to	 explore	 sugar’s	 remarkable	 sculptural
qualities,	as	these	early	examples	of	pulled
sugar	and	marzipan	show.

Dry	Halwa
Take	sugar,	dissolve	in	water,	and	boil
until	set:	then	remove	from	the	dish,	and
pour	onto	a	soft	surface	to	cool.	Take	an
iron	stake	with	a	smooth	head	and	plant	it
in	the	mass,	then	pull	up	the	sugar,
stretching	it	with	the	hands	and	drawing	it
up	the	stake	all	the	time,	until	it	becomes
white:	then	throw	once	more	onto	the
surface.	Knead	in	pistachios,	and	cut	into
strips	and	triangles.	If	desired,	it	may	be
colored,	either	with	saffron	or	with
vermilion.

Faludhaj



Take	a	pint	of	sugar	and	one-third	of	a	pint
of	almonds	and	grind	both	together	fine,
then	scent	with	camphor.	Take	one-third	of
a	pint	of	sugar,	and	dissolve	in	an	ounce	of
rose-water	over	a	slow	fire,	then	remove.
When	cooled,	throw	in	the	ground	sugar
and	almonds,	and	knead.	If	the	mixture
needs	strengthening,	add	more	sugar	and
almonds.	Make	into	middling	pieces,
melons,	triangles,	etc.	Then	lay	on	a	dish
and	serve.

—	Kitab	al	Tabikh,	transl.	A.	J.
Arberry

In	Europe:
A	Spice	and	Medicine

Western	Europeans	first	encountered	sugar
during	their	Crusades	to	the	Holy	Land	in	the
11th	century.	Shortly	thereafter	Venice
became	the	hub	of	the	sugar	trade	from	Arab
countries	to	the	West,	and	the	first	large



shipment	to	England	that	we	know	of	came	in
1319.	At	first,	Europeans	treated	sugar	the
way	they	treated	pepper,	ginger,	and	other
exotic	imports,	as	a	flavoring	and	a	medicine.
In	medieval	Europe,	sugar	was	used	in	two
general	sorts	of	preparations:	preserved	fruits
and	flowers,	and	small	medicinal	morsels.
Sweets,	or	candy,	began	not	as	little
entertaining	treats	but	as	“confections”	(from
the	Latin	conficere,	“to	put	together,”	“to
prepare”)	composed	by	the	apothecaries,	or
druggists,	to	balance	the	body’s	principles.
Sugar	served	several	medicinal	purposes.	Its
sweetness	covered	the	bitterness	of	some
drugs	and	made	all	preparations	more
pleasant.	Its	meltability	and	stickiness	made	it
a	good	vehicle	for	mixing	and	carrying	other
ingredients.	The	solidity	of	a	fused	mass	of
sugar	meant	that	it	could	release	its	medicine
slowly	and	gradually.	And	its	own	supposed
effect	on	the	body	—	encouraging	both	heat
and	moisture	—	was	thought	to	balance	the



effects	of	other	foods	and	enhance	the
digestive	process.	A	number	of	soothing
medicinal	sweets	remain	popular	to	this	day,
including	lozenges,	pastilles,	and	comfits.

Confectionery	for	Pleasure

It’s	thought	that	the	first	nonmedical
confection	in	Europe	may	have	been	made
around	1200	by	a	French	druggist	who	coated
almonds	with	sugar.	Medieval	recipes	from
the	French	and	English	courts	call	for	sugar	to
be	added	to	fish	and	fowl	sauces,	to	ham,	and
to	various	fruit	and	cream-egg	desserts.
Chaucer’s	Tale	of	Sir	Topas,	a	14th-century
parody	of	the	chivalric	romance,	included
sugar	in	a	list	of	“royal	spicery,”	along	with
gingerbread,	licorice,	and	cumin.	By	the	15th
century,	wealthy	Europeans	had	come	to
appreciate	the	purely	pleasurable	virtues	of
sugar	and	its	ability	to	complement	the
flavors	of	many	foods.	The	Vatican	librarian



Platina	wrote	around	1475	that	sugar	was
being	produced	in	Crete	and	Sicily	as	well	as
India	and	Arabia,	and	added,

The	ancients	used	sugar	only	in	medicines,
and	for	this	reason	make	no	mention	of
sugar	in	their	foods.	They	certainly	missed
out	on	a	great	delight,	since	nothing	given
us	to	eat	is	so	flavorless	that	sugar	cannot
make	it	savory….	By	melting	it,	we	make
almonds…pine	nuts,	hazelnuts,	coriander,
anise,	cinnamon,	and	many	other	foods
into	beautiful	things.	The	quality	of	sugar
then	almost	crosses	over	into	the	qualities
of	the	things	to	which	it	clings	in	the
confection.

Food	Words:	Sugar	and	Candy
Our	 language	 bears	 the	 traces	 of	 sugar’s
passage	 from	 India	 through	 the	 Middle
East	 to	 Europe.	 The	 English	 word	sugar
comes	 from	 the	 Arabic	 imitation	 of	 the



Sanskrit	sharkara,	meaning	gravel	or	small
chunks	of	material;	candy	from	the	Arabic
version	 of	 the	 Sanskrit	 for	 sugar	 itself,
khandakah.

Advances	in	Confectionery	In	the	15th	and
16th	centuries,	confectionery	became	more	of
an	art,	done	with	greater	sophistication	and
intended	more	and	more	to	delight	the	eye.
Molten	sugar	was	now	spun	into	delicate
threads	and	pulled	to	develop	a	satiny	sheen,
and	confectioners	began	to	develop	ways	of
determining	the	different	states	of	a	sugar
syrup	and	their	appropriateness	to	different
preparations.	By	the	17th	century,	court
confectioners	were	making	whole	table
settings	and	massive	decorations	out	of	sugar,
hard	sugar	candies	had	become	common,	and
cooks	had	developed	systems	for	marking	the
syrup	concentrations	suitable	for	different
confections	—	ancestors	of	today’s	thread-
ball-crack	scale	(see	box,	p.	651).

A	Pleasure	for	All



A	Pleasure	for	All

Sugar	became	more	widely	available	in	the
18th	century,	when	whole	cookbooks	were
devoted	to	confectionery.	England	developed
an	especially	strong	sugar	habit,	and
consumed	large	amounts	in	the	tea	and	jams
that	fueled	the	working	class.	The	per	capita
consumption	rose	from	4	pounds/2	kg	a	year
in	1700	to	12	pounds/5	kg	in	1780.	By
contrast,	the	French	limited	their	use	of	sugar
mainly	to	preserves	and	to	desserts.	In	the
19th	century,	the	growing	production	of	sugar
from	beets,	and	the	development	of	machines
that	automated	the	cooking,	manipulation,	and
shaping	of	sugar	preparations,	brought
inexpensive	candies	for	all	and	encouraged	an
inventiveness	that	continues	to	this	day.	It’s	in
the	19th	century	that	familiar	modern	candies
and	chocolates	were	invented,	and	the	control
of	crystallization	was	refined.	Taffy	or	toffee,
from	the	Creole	for	a	mixture	of	sugar	and
molasses,	and	nougat,	from	the	vulgar	Latin



for	“nut	cake,”	entered	the	language	early	in
the	century;	fondant,	from	the	French	for
“melting,”	the	basic	material	of	fudge	and	all
semisoft	or	creamy	centers,	was	developed
around	1850.	Most	candy	today	is	a	variation
of	some	kind	on	bonbons,	taffy,	and	fondant.

Sugar	as	Disguise
The	 medicinal	 origins	 of	 confections	 live
on	in	expressions	that	we	use	today.	While
“honey”	 is	 almost	 invariably	 a	 term	 of
praise,	“sugar”	is	often	ambivalent.	Sugary
words,	 a	 sugary	 personality,	 suggest	 a
certain	 calculation	 and	 artificiality.	 And
the	idea	of	“sugaring	over”	something,	the
deception	 of	 hiding	 something	 distasteful
in	 a	 sweet	 shell,	 would	 seem	 to	 be	 taken
directly	 from	 the	 druggist’s	 confections.
As	 early	 as	 1400,	 the	 phrase,	 “Gall	 in	 his
breast	and	sugar	in	his	face”	was	used,	and
Shakespeare	has	Hamlet	say	to	Ophelia,



’Tis	too	much	prov’d,	that	with	devotion’s
visage
And	pious	action	we	do	sugar	o’er
The	devil	himself.	(III.i)

The	Rise	of	the	Sugar	Industry	The	18th-
century	explosion	in	European	sugar
consumption	was	made	possible	by	colonial
rule	in	the	West	Indies	and	the	enslavement	of
millions	of	Africans.	Columbus	carried	the
cane	to	Hispaniola	(now	Haiti	and	the
Dominican	Republic)	on	his	second	voyage	in
1493.	By	about	1550,	the	Spanish	and
Portuguese	had	occupied	many	Caribbean
islands	and	the	coasts	of	western	Africa,
Brazil,	Mexico,	and	were	producing	sugar	in
significant	quantities;	English,	French,	and
Dutch	colonists	followed	in	the	next	century.
By	1700,	some	10,000	Africans	were	being
traded	via	the	Portuguese	colony	São	Tomé	to
the	Americas	every	year.	The	sugar	industry
was	not	the	only	force	behind	the	great
expansion	of	slavery,	but	it	probably	was	the



major	force	and	helped	ease	its	introduction
into	the	southern	American	colonies	and	the
cotton	plantations.	According	to	one	estimate,
fully	two-thirds	of	the	20	million	Africans
enslaved	in	the	Americas	worked	on	sugar
plantations.	The	intricate	trade	in	sugar,
slaves,	rum,	and	manufactured	goods	made
major	ports	out	of	the	hitherto	minor	cities	of
Bristol	and	Liverpool	in	England,	and
Newport,	Rhode	Island.	And	the	huge	fortunes
made	by	plantation	owners	helped	finance	the
opening	stages	of	the	Industrial	Revolution.

In	the	18th	century,	just	when	it	seemed	at
its	strongest,	the	West	Indian	sugar	industry
began	a	rapid	decline.	The	horrors	of	slavery
gave	rise	to	abolition	movements,	especially
in	Britain.	Slaves	staged	revolts,	and	received
some	support	from	the	very	countries	that	had
carried	them	to	the	plantations.	One	by	one,
through	the	mid-19th	century,	European
countries	outlawed	slavery	in	the	colonies.



The	Development	of	Beet	Sugar	The	severest
blow	 to	 West	 Indian	 sugar	 was	 the
development	 of	 an	 alternative	 to	 the	 sugar
cane	 that	could	grow	in	northern	climates.	 In
1747,	 a	Prussian	 chemist,	Andreas	Marggraf,
showed	 that	 by	 using	 brandy	 to	 extract	 the
juice	 of	 the	 white	 beet	 (Beta	 vulgaris,	 var.
altissima),	a	common	European	vegetable,	he
could	 isolate	 crystals	 that	 were	 identical	 to
those	 purified	 from	 sugar	 cane,	 and	 in
comparable	 quantities.	 Marggraf	 foresaw	 a
kind	 of	 cottage	 industry	 by	which	 individual
farmers	 could	 satisfy	 their	 own	 needs	 for
sugar,	 but	 this	 never	 came	 about,	 and	 many
years	 passed	 before	 the	 idea	 escaped	 the
laboratory.	 In	 1811,	 the	 Emperor	 Napoleon
officially	set	 the	goal	of	 freeing	France	 from
dependence	 on	 the	 English	 colonies	 for
various	 commodities,	 and	 in	 1812	personally
awarded	a	medal	 to	Benjamin	Delessert,	who
had	 developed	 a	 working	 sugar-beet	 factory.
In	the	next	year,	300	such	factories	sprang	up.



A	 treaty	 resuming	 trade	 between	 France	 and
England	 was	 signed	 in	 1814,	 making	 West
Indian	 sugar	 available	 once	 again,	 and	 the
fledgling	 industry	 crashed	 as	 suddenly	 as	 it
had	begun.	But	it	rose	again	in	the	1840s	and
has	flourished	ever	since.

Stages	of	Sugar	Cooking	in	the	17th
Century

This	 early	 system	 for	 recognizing	 the
concentration	of	boiled	sugar	syrups	comes
from	Le	Confiturier	françois.	Then	as	now,
the	confectioner	needed	tough	fingers.

Cookings	of	Sugar
The	first	is	to	the	ribbon.	It	is	reached
when	the	syrup	begins	to	thicken,	so	that	in
taking	it	with	the	finger	and	putting	it	on
the	thumb,	it	doesn’t	flow,	and	remains
round	as	a	pea.

Cooked	to	the	pearl.	The	second
cooking	is	reached	when,	in	taking	the



syrup	with	the	finger	and	putting	it	on	the
thumb,	and	opening	the	fingers,	it	forms	a
small	thread….

Cooked	to	the	feather.	This	cooking	has
many	different	names….	It	is	recognized
by	placing	a	spatula	in	the	syrup,	and
shaking	the	syrup	in	the	air;	the	syrup	flies
away	as	if	dry	feathers	without
stickiness….	This	cooking	is	the	one	for
preserves	and	tablets.

Cooking	to	the	burning	smell.	This
cooking	is	recognized	when	one	dips	the
finger	in	cool	water,	then	in	the	sugar,	and
when	putting	the	finger	back	into	the	cool
water,	the	sugar	breaks	neatly	like	a	glass
without	stickiness….	This	cooking	is	for
the	large	citron	biscuit,	for	caramel,	and
pulled	sugar,	or	penide,	and	this	is	the	last
cooking	of	the	sugar.

Sugar	in	Modern	Times



At	present,	beet	sugar	accounts	for	about	30%
of	the	sucrose	produced	in	the	world.	Russia,
Germany,	and	the	United	States	are	the	major
beet	growers,	with	California,	Colorado,	and
Utah	the	leading	states.	The	Caribbean	is	now
a	minor	source	of	cane	sugar,	its	role	having
been	assumed	by	India	and	Brazil.	Florida,
Hawaii,	Louisiana,	and	Texas	also	produce
sugar	cane.	Spurred	by	the	demand	of	an
increasingly	populous	and	affluent	West,
world	sugar	production	increased	sevenfold
between	1900	and	1964,	a	rate	matched	by	no
other	major	crop	in	history.	And	thanks	to	the
development	of	methods	for	making
sweeteners	from	corn,	an	even	less	expensive
source,	sugar	has	never	been	cheaper	or	more
abundant	in	our	diet.	This	is	not	necessarily
good	for	our	long-term	health	(p.	657),	and
one	of	the	major	developments	in	20th-
century	food	manufacturing	has	been	the
development	of	ingredients	that	mimic	the
flavor	and	physical	characteristics	of	sugar



without	having	adverse	effects	on	body	weight
and	the	regulation	of	blood	sugar	(p.	659).

Recipes	for	Caramel,	Pulled	Sugar,	and
Sugar	Ham	in	the	17th	Century

Caramelle
Make	 some	 sugar	 cooked	 to	 the	 burning
smell,	 take	 it	 off	 the	 fire,	 put	 in	 a	 little
amber,	rub	a	stone	of	marble	or	plate	with
oil	 of	 sweet	 almonds,	 throw	your	 caramel
on	in	little	pieces	as	if	preserves,	and	take
them	up	with	a	spoon.

Twisted	Sugar
Make	 some	 sugar	 cooked	 to	 the	 burning
smell;	take	from	the	fire	and	throw	it	on	a
marble	 stone	 that	 you	 have	 rubbed	 with
sweet-almond	oil;	rub	your	hands	also,	and
work	 it	 well,	 have	 iron	 hooks	 to	 pull	 and
draw	 out,	 and	 dress	 as	 a	 wreathed
marzipan.



Slices	of	Ham
Make	 some	 sugar	 cooked	 to	 the	 feather,
put	 it	 in	 three	containers;	 in	one	put	some
lemon	 juice,	 in	 another	 some	 roses	 of
Provence,	and	in	the	other	some	powdered
cochenille,	 or	 pomegranate	 juice	 or
powdered	 barberry.	 Make	 a	 layer	 of	 the
white	 on	 some	 paper,	 two	 layers	 of	 red,
continue	 until	 the	 sugar	 has	 the	 thickness
of	a	ham,	and	cut	it	by	the	slice	in	the	form
of	a	slice	of	ham.

—	Le	Confiturier	françois

The	Nature	of	Sugars

Ordinary	sugar	is	one	member	of	a	group	of
many	chemicals,	all	of	which	are	given	the
general	name	sugars.	All	sugars	are	made
from	just	three	kinds	of	atoms,	carbon,
hydrogen,	and	oxygen,	with	the	carbon	atoms
providing	a	kind	of	backbone	to	which	the



other	atoms	are	attached.	Some	sugars	are
simple	molecules,	while	others	are	made	from
two	or	more	simple	sugars	joined	together.
Glucose	and	fructose	are	simple
monosaccharides,	while	table	sugar,	or
sucrose,	is	a	disaccharide	made	up	of	one
glucose	and	one	fructose	joined	together.

Living	things	put	the	sugars	to	two	primary
uses.	The	first	is	the	storage	of	chemical
energy.	All	life	depends	on	sugars	for	the
energy	that	fuels	the	activity	of	cells.	This	is
why	we	have	taste	receptors	that	register	the
presence	of	sugars,	and	why	our	brain	attaches
pleasure	to	that	sensation:	sweetness	is	the
sign	of	a	food	that	can	help	supply	our	need
for	calories.	The	second	major	role	for	sugars
is	to	provide	building	blocks	for	physical
structures,	especially	in	plants.	The	cellulose,
hemicellulose,	and	pectin	that	give	bulk	and
strength	to	plant	cell	walls	are	long	chains	of
various	sugars.	The	simple	physical	bulk	of
sugar	is	also	useful	to	the	cook,	who	can



construct	from	it	a	variety	of	interesting
textures.

One	chemical	characteristic	of	sugars	is
especially	important	in	the	kitchen.	Sugars
have	a	strong	affinity	for	water,	so	they
readily	dissolve	in	water,	and	form	temporary
but	strong	bonds	to	water	molecules	in	their
vicinity.	Sugars	therefore	retain	moisture	in
baked	goods,	keep	frozen	desserts	from
solidifying	into	a	solid	block	of	ice,	form	a
sticky	matrix	that	holds	food	particles
together	in	such	things	as	marzipan	and
granola	bars,	maintain	a	moist,	glossy
appearance	in	glazes,	and	help	preserve	fruits
by	drawing	moisture	out	of	spoilage	microbes
and	preventing	their	growth.

Kinds	of	Sugar

The	cook	works	with	just	a	handful	of	the
many	different	sugars	in	nature.	All	of	them
are	sweet,	but	each	has	its	distinctive



qualities.

Glucose	 Glucose,	 also	 called	dextrose,	 is	 a
simple	 sugar,	 and	 the	 most	 common	 sugar
from	 which	 living	 cells	 directly	 extract
chemical	 energy.	 Glucose	 is	 found	 in	 many
fruits	 and	 in	 honey,	 but	 always	 in	 a	mixture
with	other	sugars.	It’s	the	building	block	from
which	 starch	 chains	 are	 constructed.	 Cooks
encounter	it	most	often	as	the	sweet	substance
in	 corn	 syrup,	 which	 is	 made	 by	 breaking
starch	down	into	individual	glucose	molecules
and	small	glucose	chains	(p.	677).	A	chain	of
two	 glucoses	 is	 called	maltose.	 Compared	 to
table	sugar,	or	sucrose,	glucose	 is	 less	sweet,
less	 soluble	 in	water,	 and	 produces	 a	 thinner
solution.	It	melts	and	begins	 to	caramelize	at
around	300ºF/150ºC.

Sweets	Around	the	World
Sugar	 is	 universally	 popular,	 but	 different
cultures	 have	 made	 different	 uses	 of	 it.



Here	 are	 examples	 of	 sweets	 that	 are
characteristic	of	some	nations	and	regions.

Reduced-milk	sweets,	deep-fried
India batters	in	syrup,	halvah	(pastes	of

sugar,	wheat,	or	chickpea	flour,	fruits,
vegetables)

Middle Halvah	(pastes	of	sugar	syrup	and
East semolina,	sesame),	pastries	in	syrup

(baklava),	marzipan
Greece Spoon	fruits,	pastries	in	syrup
France Caramel,	nougat,	dragées
England,	United	States Novelty	candies
Scandinavia Licorice

Mexico Dulce	de	leche	(reduced	milk),
penuche	(brown-sugar	fudge)

Japan Agar	jelly	candies,	bean-paste	candies,
sweet-rice	mochi,	tea	ceremony	sweets

Fructose	Fructose,	also	called	levulose,	has
exactly	the	same	chemical	formula	as	glucose,



but	the	atoms	are	arranged	in	a	different
structure.	Like	glucose,	fructose	is	found	in
fruits	and	honey,	and	certain	corn	syrups	are
treated	with	enzymes	to	convert	their	glucose
into	fructose.	It’s	also	sold	in	pure	crystalline
form.	Fructose	is	the	sweetest	of	the	common
sugars,	the	most	soluble	in	water	(4	parts	will
dissolve	in	1	part	room-temperature	water),
and	absorbs	and	retains	water	most
effectively.	Our	bodies	metabolize	fructose
more	slowly	than	glucose	and	sucrose,	so	it
causes	a	slower	rise	in	blood	glucose	levels,	a
quality	that	makes	it	preferable	to	other
sugars	for	diabetics.	Fructose	melts	and
begins	to	caramelize	at	a	much	lower
temperature	than	the	other	sugars	do,	just
above	the	boiling	point	of	water	at
220ºF/105ºC.

The	fructose	molecule	exists	in	several
different	shapes	when	dissolved	in	water,	and
the	different	shapes	have	different	effects	on
our	sweet	receptors.	The	sweetest	shape,	a	six-



corner	ring,	predominates	in	cold,	somewhat
acid	solutions;	in	warm	or	hot	conditions,	this
shape	shifts	to	less	sweet	five-corner	rings.
The	apparent	sweetness	of	fructose	is	cut
nearly	in	half	at	140ºF/60ºC.	Neither	glucose
nor	sucrose	changes	so	drastically.	Fructose	is
thus	a	useful	substitute	for	table	sugar	in	cold
drinks,	where	it	can	provide	the	same
sweetness	with	half	the	concentration	and	a
calorie	savings	approaching	50%.	In	hot
coffee,	however,	its	sweetness	drops	to	the
level	of	table	sugar.

Sucrose	 Sucrose	 is	 the	 scientific	 name	 for
table	 sugar.	 It	 is	 a	 composite	molecule	made
of	one	molecule	each	of	glucose	and	fructose.
Green	plants	produce	sucrose	in	the	process	of
photosynthesis,	 and	 we	 extract	 it	 from	 the
stalks	of	 sugar	cane	and	 the	storage	stems	of
sugar	beets.	Of	all	 the	common	sugars,	 it	has
the	most	 useful	 combination	of	 properties.	 It
is	 the	 second	 sweetest,	 after	 fructose,	 but	 is



alone	 in	 having	 a	 pleasant	 taste	 even	 at	 the
very	high	concentrations	found	in	candies	and
preserves;	 other	 sugars	 can	 seem	 harsh.
Sucrose	is	also	the	second	most	soluble	sugar
—	two	parts	can	dissolve	in	one	part	of	room-
temperature	 water	 —	 and	 it	 produces	 the
greatest	 viscosity,	 or	 thickness,	 in	 a	 water
solution.	 Sucrose	 begins	 to	 melt	 around
320ºF/160ºC,	 and	 caramelizes	 at	 around
340ºF/170ºC.

When	a	solution	of	sucrose	is	heated	in	the
presence	of	some	acid,	it	breaks	apart	into	its
two	subsugars.	Certain	enzymes	will	do	the
same	thing.	Breaking	sucrose	into	glucose	and
fructose	is	often	referred	to	as	inversion,	and
the	resulting	mixture	is	called	invert	sugar	or
invert	syrup.	(“Inversion”	refers	to	a
difference	in	optical	properties	between
sucrose	and	a	mixture	of	its	components
parts.)	Invert	syrups	are	about	75%	glucose
and	fructose,	25%	sucrose.	Invert	sugar	only
exists	as	a	syrup,	since	the	fructose



component	won’t	fully	crystallize	in	the
presence	of	glucose	and	sucrose.	Sucrose
inversion	and	invert	sugars	are	useful	in	candy
making	because	they	help	limit	the	extent	of
sucrose	crystallization	(p.	685).

Common	sugars.	Carbon	atoms	are	 shown	as
dots.	 Glucose	 and	 fructose	 have	 the	 same
chemical	 formula,	 C6H12O6,	 but	 different
chemical	 structures,	 and	 different	 degrees	 of
sweetness.	 A	 given	 concentration	 of	 fructose
tastes	 much	 sweeter	 than	 the	 same
concentration	 of	 glucose.	 Table	 sugar,	 or
sucrose,	 is	 a	 combination	 of	 glucose	 and
fructose	(a	molecule	of	water	is	released	when
the	two	sugars	bond	to	make	sucrose).
Lactose	Lactose	is	the	sugar	found	in	milk.	It
is	a	composite	of	two	simple	sugars,	glucose
and	galactose.	Cooks	seldom	encounter	it	in



pure	form.	Because	it’s	much	less	sweet	than
table	sugar,	manufacturers	use	it	much	as	they
do	the	sugar	alcohols	(p.	662),	more	for	its
physical	bulk	than	for	its	sweetness.

The	Complexities
of	Sweetness

There’s	more	to	the	sweetness	of	sugars	than
the	sensation	of	sweetness	pure	and	simple.
Sweetness	helps	mask	or	balance	both
sourness	and	bitterness	from	other
ingredients.	And	flavor	chemists	have	shown
that	it	has	a	strong	enhancing	effect	on	our
perception	of	food	aromas,	perhaps	by
signaling	the	brain	that	the	food	is	a	good
energy	source	and	therefore	deserves	special
attention.

Different	sugars	give	different	impressions
of	sweetness.	Sucrose	takes	some	time	to	be
detected	on	the	tongue,	and	its	sweetness
lingers.	By	comparison,	the	sweetness	of



fructose	registers	quickly	and	strongly,	but	it
also	fades	quickly.	And	corn	syrup	is	slow	to
taste	sweet,	peaks	at	about	half	the	intensity
of	sucrose,	and	lingers	even	longer	than
sucrose.	The	quick	action	of	fructose	is	said	to
enhance	certain	other	flavors	in	foods,
especially	fruitiness,	tartness,	and	spiciness,
by	allowing	us	to	perceive	them	clearly
without	the	masking	effect	of	residual
sweetness.

The	Composition	and	Relative
Sweetnesses	of	Different	Sugars

Sugar	 sweetness	 is	 designated	 by
comparison	to	the	sweetness	of	table	sugar,
which	is	assigned	a	value	of	100.

Sugar Composition Sweetness
Fructose 120
Glucose 70
Sucrose	(table	sugar) 100



Maltose 45
Lactose 40
Corn	syrup Glucose,	maltose 30–50
High-fructose	corn Fructose, 80–
syrup maltose 90
Invert	sugar Glucose,	fructose,
syrup sucrose 95

Crystallization

Sugars	are	wonderfully	robust	materials!
Unlike	proteins	that	easily	denature	and
coagulate,	unlike	fats	that	are	damaged	by	air
and	heat	and	go	rancid,	unlike	starch	chains
that	break	apart	into	smaller	chains	of	glucose
molecules,	sugars	themselves	are	small	and
stable	molecules.	They	mix	easily	with	water,
tolerate	the	heat	of	boiling,	and	when
sufficiently	concentrated	in	water,	they
readily	bond	to	each	other	and	collect
themselves	into	pure,	solid	masses,	or



crystals.	This	tendency	to	form	crystals	is	the
means	by	which	we	obtain	pure	sugar	from
plant	juices,	and	it’s	the	way	that	we	make
many	kinds	of	candies.	Sugar	crystallization
is	described	in	detail	on	p.	682.

Caramelization

Caramelization	is	the	name	given	to	the
chemical	reactions	that	occur	when	any	sugar
is	heated	to	the	point	that	its	molecules	begin
to	break	apart.	This	destruction	triggers	a
remarkable	cascade	of	chemical	creation.
From	a	single	kind	of	molecule	in	the	form	of
colorless,	odorless,	simply	sweet	crystals,	the
cook	generates	hundreds	of	new	and	different
compounds,	some	of	them	small	fragments
that	are	sour	or	bitter,	or	intensely	aromatic,
others	large	aggregates	with	no	flavor	but	a
deep	brown	color.	The	more	the	sugar	is
cooked,	the	less	sugar	and	sweetness	remain,
and	the	darker	and	more	bitter	it	gets.



Though	caramel	is	most	often	made	with
table	sugar,	its	sucrose	molecules	actually
break	apart	into	their	glucose	and	fructose
components	before	they	begin	to	fragment	and
recombine	into	new	molecules.	Glucose	and
fructose	are	“reducing	sugars,”	meaning	that
they	have	reactive	atoms	that	perform	the
opposite	of	oxidation	(they	donate	electrons	to
other	molecules).	A	sucrose	molecule	is	made
from	one	glucose	and	one	fructose	joined	by
their	reducing	atoms,	so	sucrose	has	no
reducing	atoms	free	to	react	with	other
molecules,	and	is	therefore	less	reactive	than
glucose	and	fructose.	This	is	why	sucrose
requires	a	higher	temperature	for
caramelization	(340ºF/170ºC)	than	glucose
(300ºF/150ºC)	and	especially	fructose
(220ºF/105ºC).



The	 flavors	 of	 caramelization.	 Heat
transforms	 table	 sugar,	 a	 sweet,	 odorless,
single	 kind	 of	 molecule,	 into	 hundreds	 of
different	 molecules	 that	 generate	 a	 complex
flavor	 and	 rich	 brown	 color.	 A	 few	 aromatic
examples	 (clockwise	 from	 top	 left)	:	alcohol,
sherry-like	 acetaldehyde,	 vinegary	 acetic
acid,	 buttery	 diacetyl,	 fruity	 ethyl	 acetate,
nutty	 furan,	 solvent-like	 benzene,	 and	 toasty
maltol.
Making	Caramel	The	usual	technique	for
making	caramel	is	to	mix	table	sugar	with
some	water,	then	heat	until	the	water	has
boiled	off	and	the	molten	sugar	colors.	Why
add	water	if	the	first	thing	you	do	is	boil	it
off?	Water	makes	it	possible	to	cook	the	sugar
over	high	heat	from	the	very	beginning
without	the	danger	of	burning	it.	In	addition,



the	presence	of	water	prolongs	the	period
during	which	the	syrup	is	cooked,	gives	these
reactions	more	time	to	proceed,	and	develops
a	stronger	flavor	than	heating	the	sugar	on	its
own	very	quickly.	And	water	enhances	the
conversion	of	sucrose	into	its	glucose	and
fructose	components.	Cooking	the	syrup	in	the
microwave	oven	has	been	found	to	produce	a
somewhat	different	spectrum	of	flavors	than
ordinary	stovetop	cooking.

Once	caramelization	and	color	and	flavor
generation	begin,	the	overall	set	of	reactions
actually	gives	off	heat,	and	can	run	away	and
burn	the	sugar	if	it’s	not	carefully	controlled.
It’s	helpful	to	have	a	bowl	of	cold	water	ready
to	cool	the	pan	down	as	soon	as	the	caramel	is
done.	Excessive	caramelization	turns	the
syrup	very	dark,	bitter,	and	viscous	or	even
solid.

The	 Flavor	 of	 Caramelized	 Sugar	 The
aroma	 of	 a	 simple	 caramelized	 sugar	 has



several	 different	 notes,	 among	 them	 buttery
and	milky	 (from	 diacetyl),	 fruity	 (esters	 and
lactones),	 flowery,	 sweet,	 rum-like,	 and
roasted.	As	the	reactions	proceed,	the	taste	of
the	mixture	becomes	less	sweet	as	more	of	the
original	 sugar	 is	 destroyed,	 with	 more
pronounced	 acidity	 and	 eventually	 bitterness
and	 an	 irritating,	 burning	 sensation.	 Some	of
the	chemical	products	in	caramel	are	effective
antioxidants	and	can	help	protect	food	flavors
from	damage	during	storage.

When	sugars	are	cooked	with	ingredients
that	include	proteins	or	amino	acids	—	milk
or	cream,	for	example	—	then	in	addition	to
true	caramelization,	some	of	the	sugars
participate	with	the	proteins	and	amino	acids
in	the	Maillard	browning	reactions	(p.	778),
which	produce	a	larger	range	of	compounds
and	a	richer	aroma.

Sugars	and	Health



“Empty	Calories”	In	one	sense,	sugars	are
highly	nourishing.	Pure	sugars	are	pure
energy.	After	fats	and	oils,	they’re	the	most
concentrated	source	of	calories	we	have.	The
problem	is	that	most	people	in	the	developed
world	consume	more	energy	than	they	need	to
fuel	their	activity,	and	less	than	they	need	of
hundreds	of	other	nutrients	and	plant
substances	that	contribute	to	long-term	health
(p.	253).	To	the	extent	that	sugar-rich	foods
displace	more	broadly	nourishing	foods	from
our	diet,	they	are	detrimental	to	human	health,
a	source	of	calories	“empty”	of	any	other
nutritional	value,	and	a	major	contributor	to
the	modern	epidemic	of	obesity	and
associated	health	problems,	including	diabetes
(p.	659).

People	in	the	developed	world,	particularly
in	the	United	States,	consume	large	amounts
of	refined	sugars.	Adults	in	the	United	States
get	about	20%	of	their	calories	from	refined
sugars,	children	between	20%	and	40%.	Most



of	this	sugar	intake	comes	not	from	candies
and	confections,	but	from	soft	drinks.
Significant	amounts	of	sugar	also	find	their
way	into	most	processed	foods,	including
many	savory	sauces,	dressings,	meats,	and
baked	goods.	The	total	sugar	content	in
processed	foods	is	often	unclear	from	the
ingredients	list,	where	different	sugars	can	be
listed	separately	as	sucrose,	dextrose,
levulose,	fructose,	corn	syrup,	high-fructose
corn	syrup,	etc.

Food	Words:	Caramel
Our	 word	 for	 browned	 sugar	 may	 come
from	 its	 resemblance	 in	 color	 to	 straw.
Caramel	first	appears	in	French	in	the	17th
century	 as	 a	 borrowing	 via	 Spanish	 from
the	 Portuguese	caramel,	which	meant	both
the	 elongated	 sugar	 loaf	 and	 “icicle,”
perhaps	 because	 they	 shared	 a	 similar
shape	 and	 sparkly	 appearance.	 The
Portuguese	 in	 turn	 seems	 to	 derive	 from



the	 Latin	calamus,	 meaning	 “reed.”	 The
Greek	kalamos	 meant	 “straw,”	 and	 the
original	Indo-European	root	meant	“grass.”
The	 Italian	calamari,	“squid,”	comes	from
the	 same	 root!	 Perhaps	 the	 common
element	 is	 the	 brown	 color	 of	 dry	 grass,
partly	 refined	 sugar,	 cooked	 sugar	 syrup,
and	camouflaging	squid	skin.

Sugars	and	Tooth	Decay	It	has	been	common
knowledge	for	thousands	of	years	that	sweet
foods	encourage	tooth	decay.	In	the	Greek
book	of	Problems	attributed	to	Aristotle,	the
question	is	asked,	“Why	do	figs,	which	are
soft	and	sweet,	destroy	the	teeth?”	Nearly
2,000	years	later,	as	sugar	cane	was	being
established	in	the	West	Indies,	a	German
visitor	to	the	English	court	named	Paul
Hentzner	described	Queen	Elizabeth	I	as	she
appeared	in	1598:

Next	came	the	Queen,	in	the	Sixty-fifth
Year	of	her	Age,	as	we	were	told,	very



majestic;	her	Face	oblong,	fair,	but
wrinkled;	her	Eyes	small,	yet	black	and
pleasant;	her	Nose	a	little	hooked;	her	Lips
narrow,	and	her	Teeth	black;	(a	defect	the
English	seem	subject	to,	from	their	too
great	use	of	Sugar)…

We	 now	 know	 that	 certain	 kinds	 of
Streptococcus	bacteria	colonize	the	mouth	and
cling	to	undisturbed	surfaces,	where	they	live
on	food	residues,	converting	sugars	into	sticky
“plaque”	 carbohydrates	 that	 anchor	 and
protect	them,	and	into	defensive	acids	that	eat
away	 at	 tooth	 enamel	 and	 so	 cause	 decay.
Clearly,	 the	 more	 food	 there	 is	 for	 the
bacteria,	 the	 more	 active	 they	 will	 be,	 and
hard	sugar	candies	that	slowly	dissolve	in	the
mouth	 provide	 a	 feast	 for	 them.	 But	 pure
sugar	 is	 not	 the	 only	 culprit	 in	 tooth	 decay.
Starchy	 foods	 like	 bread,	 cereals,	 pasta,	 and
potato	 chips	 are	 also	 harmful	 because	 they
stick	 to	 the	 teeth	 and	 then	 are	 broken	 down



into	 sugars	 by	 enzymes	 in	 the	 saliva.	A	 few
other	 foods,	 notably	 chocolate,	 cocoa,	 and
licorice	 extract	 among	 candy	 ingredients,	 as
well	 as	 coffee,	 tea,	 beer,	 and	 some	 cheeses,
actually	 inhibit	 decay-causing	 bacteria.
There’s	 evidence	 that	 phenolic	 compounds
interfere	with	 the	 adhesion	 of	 bacteria	 to	 the
teeth.	 The	 sugar	 alcohols	 in	 low-calorie
candies	(p.	662)	are	generally	not	metabolized
by	bacteria	in	the	mouth	and	don’t	contribute
to	tooth	decay.

Caramel	Food	Colorings
Cooks	 have	 been	 confecting	 caramel
candies	and	syrups	for	many	centuries,	and
have	 been	 making	 “burnt”	 sugar	 for	 its
brown	 color	 since	 ancient	 times.	 The
commercial	 production	 of	 caramel	 syrups
as	food	colorings	began	in	Europe	and	the
United	 States	 in	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 19th
century.	 They’re	 now	 the	 most	 common
food	coloring,	and	provide	the	deep	brown



of	 colas,	 root	 beers	 and	 other	 soft	 drinks,
spirits,	 candies,	 and	many	prepared	 foods.
In	addition	to	color,	the	pigment	molecules
also	 have	 some	 antioxidant	 activity	 that
helps	preserve	flavor.	Caramel	colors	were
originally	produced	by	heating	sugar	syrup
in	an	open	pan.	With	time,	closed	vacuum
pans	 were	 introduced	 to	 control	 color
development	 more	 finely,	 and
manufacturers	 began	 to	 add	 various
chemicals	 to	 obtain	 pigments	 with	 good
dispersing	or	emulsifying	properties.

Food	Sugars	and	Blood	Sugar:	The	Problem
of	Diabetes	Some	foods	rich	in	sugars	can
contribute	to	the	disruption	of	the	body’s
system	for	controlling	its	own	sugar	levels.
Glucose	is	the	body’s	primary	form	of
chemical	energy,	so	it’s	distributed	to	all	cells
via	the	blood.	On	the	other	hand,	glucose	is	a
reactive	molecule,	and	excess	quantities	can
damage	the	circulatory	system,	eyes,	kidneys,
and	nervous	system.	So	the	body	tightly



regulates	blood	glucose	levels,	and	does	so
with	the	hormone	insulin.	Diabetes	is	a
disease	in	which	the	insulin	system	is	unable
to	control	blood	glucose	adequately.	And	a
high	intake	of	some	food	sugars	overloads	the
blood	with	glucose	and	puts	stress	on	the
insulin	system.	This	is	dangerous	for	people
who	suffer	from	diabetes.	The	foods	that	raise
blood	glucose	levels	the	most	are	foods	rich	in
glucose	itself,	including	such	starchy	foods	as
potatoes	and	rice	that	our	enzymes	digest	into
glucose.	Table	sugar,	a	combination	of
glucose	and	fructose,	has	a	somewhat	smaller
effect,	and	fructose	itself	has	a	much	smaller
effect,	since	it	must	be	metabolized	in	the
liver	before	the	body	can	use	it	for	energy.
One	valuable	property	of	many	sugar
substitutes	is	that	they	do	not	raise	blood
sugar	levels.

Sugar	Substitutes



Sugars	combine	several	useful	qualities	in	one
ingredient:	energy,	sweetness,	substance,
moisture	binding,	and	the	ability	to
caramelize.	The	problem	with	this	versatility
is	that	each	quality	comes	with	the	others.
And	sometimes	we	want	just	one	or	two
alone:	the	pleasure	of	sweetness	without	the
calories	or	stress	on	the	body’s	system	for
regulating	blood	sugar	levels,	for	example,	or
the	substance	without	the	sweetness,	or
substance	and	sweetness	without	the	tendency
to	brown	when	cooked.	Manufacturers	have
therefore	developed	ingredients	that	offer
some	but	not	all	of	the	properties	of	sugars.
Many	of	these	ingredients	were	originally
discovered	in	plants;	a	few	are	entirely
artificial.	Inventive	cooks	are	now
experimenting	with	some	to	make	candy-like
savory	foods	and	other	novelties.

There	are	two	main	kinds	of	sugar
substitutes.	The	first	includes	various
carbohydrates	that	provide	bulk	without	being



as	digestible	as	the	sugars.	They	therefore
don’t	raise	blood	sugar	levels	as	quickly,	and
supply	fewer	calories.	The	second	is	high-
intensity	sweeteners:	molecules	that	provide
the	sensation	of	sweetness	without	supplying
many	calories,	usually	because	they	are
hundreds	or	thousands	of	times	sweeter	than
sugar,	and	are	used	in	tiny	quantities.	Low-
and	no-calorie	sweets	are	made	by	combining
these	two	kinds	of	ingredients,	whose
qualities	are	summarized	in	the	chart	on	pp.
660–661.

The	Glycemic	Index	of	Various	Sugars
and	Foods

The	“glycemic	index”	is	a	measure	of	how
much	 a	 given	 food	 raises	 blood	 glucose
levels.	 The	 glycemic	 index	 of	 glucose
itself	is	set	at	100.

Sugar Glycemic	Index



Maltose 110
Glucose 100
Potatoes 95
White	rice 95
Honey 90
Table	sugar 90
Banana 60
Fruit	preserves 55
Fructose 20

Some	Sugar	Substitutes	and	Their
Qualities

In	this	table,	the	sweetness	of	table	sugar	is
represented	 as	 100.	 A	 sweetness	 of	 50
means	that	the	substance	is	half	as	sweet	as
table	sugar;	a	sweetness	of	500	means	that
it	 is	 5	 times	 sweeter.	 The	 sugar	 alcohols
and	corn	syrups	with	sweetnesses	less	than
1	are	mainly	useful	for	providing	bulk	and
viscosity	with	reduced	calories	and	effects



on	 blood	 sugar.	 The	 intensive	 sweeteners,
with	sweetnesses	greater	than	100,	provide
taste	with	 reduced	 calories	 and	 effects	 on
blood	 sugar.	 Even	 those	 sugar	 substitutes
that	 were	 originally	 found	 in	 nature	 are
now	 manufactured	 by	 chemical
modification	 of	 a	 natural	 or	 synthetic
starting	material.

Ingredient Polydextrose	(Litesse)
Relative	Sweetness 0
Original	Source Glucose	(modified)
Date	of	Commercialization 1980s
Notable	Qualities Produces	high	viscosities
Ingredient Corn	syrup
Relative	Sweetness 40
Original	Source Starch
Date	of	Commercialization 1860s
Notable	Qualities



Ingredient Trehalose
Relative	Sweetness 50
Original	Source Honey,	mushrooms,	yeasts
Date	of	Commercialization 2000s?
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Sugar	alcohols:
Relative	Sweetness
Original	Source
Date	of	Commercialization
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Lactitol
Relative	Sweetness 40
Original	Source Lactose,	modified
Date	of	Commercialization 1980s
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Isomalt	(Palatinit)
Relative	Sweetness 50
Original	Source Sucrose,	modified



Date	of	Commercialization 1980s
Notable Less	prone	than	sugar	to
Qualities crystallize	or	absorb	moisture
Ingredient Sorbitol
Relative	Sweetness 60
Original	Source Fruits
Date	of	Commercialization 1980s

Notable
Qualities Cooling;	absorbs	moisture

Ingredient Erythritol
Relative	Sweetness 70
Original	Source Fruits,	fermentation
Date	of	Commercialization 2000s?
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Mannitol
Relative	Sweetness 70
Original	Source Mushrooms,	algae
Date	of	Commercialization 1980s



Notable	Qualities Cooling
Ingredient Maltitol
Relative	Sweetness 90
Original	Source Maltose,	modified
Date	of	Commercialization 1980s
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Xylitol
Relative	Sweetness 100
Original	Source Fruits,	vegetables
Date	of	Commercialization 1960s
Notable	Qualities Especially	cooling
Ingredient Tagatose
Relative	Sweetness 90
Original	Source Heated	milk
Date	of	Commercialization 2000s?
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Sucrose
Relative	Sweetness 100



Original	Source Sugar	cane	&	beet
Date	of	Commercialization Traditional
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient High-fructose	corn	syrup
Relative	Sweetness 100
Original	Source Starch
Date	of	Commercialization 1970s
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Fructose	crystals
Relative	Sweetness 120–170
Original	Source Fruits,	honey
Date	of	Commercialization 1970s
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Cyclamate
Relative	Sweetness 3,000
Original	Source Synthetic
Date	of	Commercialization 1950s

Notable Banned	in	U.S.,	allowed	in



Qualities Europe
Ingredient Glycyrrhizin
Relative	Sweetness 5,000–10,000
Original	Source Licorice	root
Date	of	Commercialization Traditional
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Aspartame
Relative	Sweetness 18,000
Original	Source Amino	acids	(modified)
Date	of	Commercialization 1970s

Notable Not	stable	at	cooking
Qualities temperatures

Ingredient Acesulfame	K
Relative	Sweetness 20,000
Original	Source Synthetic
Date	of	Commercialization 1980s

Notable Stable	at	cooking
Qualities temperatures



Ingredient Saccharin
Relative	Sweetness 30,000
Original	Source Synthetic
Date	of	Commercialization 1880s

Notable Stable	at	cooking
Qualities temperatures

Ingredient Stevioside
Relative	Sweetness 30,000
Original	Source South	American	plant
Date	of	Commercialization 1970s
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Sucralose
Relative	Sweetness 60,000
Original	Source Sucrose	+	chlorine
Date	of	Commercialization 1990s

Notable Stable	at	cooking
Qualities temperatures

Ingredient Neohesperidin	dihydrochalcone



Relative	Sweetness 180,000
Original	Source Citrus	fruits	(modified)
Date	of	Commercialization 1990s
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Alitame
Relative	Sweetness 200,000
Original	Source Amino	acids	(modified)
Date	of	Commercialization 1990s
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Thaumatin
Relative	Sweetness 200,000–300,000
Original	Source African	plant
Date	of	Commercialization 1980s
Notable	Qualities
Ingredient Neotame
Relative	Sweetness 800,000
Original	Source Aspartame	(modified)
Date	of	Commercialization 2000s?



Notable	Qualities

Bulking	 Ingredients:	 Sugar	 Alcohols	 The
most	common	ingredients	that	provide	sugar-
like	bulk	are	the	sugar	alcohols,	or	polyols	—
chemicals	whose	names	end	in	-itol	—	which
are	essentially	sugars	with	one	corner	of	their
molecule	 modified	 (for	 example,	 sorbitol	 is
derived	 in	 this	 way	 from	 glucose).	 Small
amounts	 of	 some	 sugar	 alcohols	—	 sorbitol,
mannitol	 —	 are	 found	 in	 many	 fruits	 and
plant	 parts.	 Because	 the	 human	 body	 is
designed	 to	 make	 use	 of	 sugars,	 not	 sugar
alcohols,	 we	 absorb	 only	 a	 fraction	 of	 these
molecules	 from	 food,	 and	 use	 that	 fraction
inefficiently:	so	they	cause	only	a	slow	rise	in
blood	insulin	levels.	The	rest	are	metabolized
by	 the	 microbes	 in	 our	 intestines,	 and	 we
obtain	 their	 energy	 indirectly.	All	 told,	 sugar
alcohols	provide	50–75%	of	the	caloric	value
of	sugar.

Sugar	alcohols	don’t	have	the	chemical



structure	(aldehyde	group)	that	initiates	the
browning	reactions	with	each	other	and	with
amino	acids,	so	they	have	the	sometimes
useful	property	of	being	resistant	to
discoloration	and	flavor	changes	when	heated
to	make	confections.

Intensive	 Sweeteners	 Though	 most	 of	 the
intensive	 sweeteners	 that	 we	 consume	 today
were	 synthesized	 in	 industrial	 laboratories,	 a
number	of	them	occur	in	nature	and	have	been
enjoyed	 for	 centuries.	 Glycyrrhizin	 or
glycyrrhizic	 acid,	 a	 compound	 found	 in
licorice	 root,	 is	 50–100	 times	 sweeter	 than
sucrose,	 and	 is	 the	 reason	 that	 licorice	 was
first	made	into	a	sweet	by	extracting	the	root
in	 hot	 water,	 then	 boiling	 down	 the	 extract.
The	sweetness	of	 the	extract	builds	slowly	 in
the	 mouth	 and	 lingers.	 And	 the	 leaves	 of	 a
South	 American	 plant	 commonly	 known	 as
stevia,	Stevia	rebaudiana,	have	been	used	for
centuries	in	its	homeland	to	sweeten	maté	tea.



Its	active	ingredient,	stevioside,	is	available	in
a	 purified	 powdered	 form.	Neither	 it	 nor	 the
plant	has	been	approved	by	the	U.S.	FDA	as	a
food	 additive,	 so	 they’re	 sold	 as	 dietary
supplements.

Intensive	sweeteners	often	have	some
flavor	qualities	that	make	them	imperfect
replacements	for	table	sugar.	For	example,
saccharin	has	a	metallic	aftertaste	and	can
seem	bitter;	stevioside	has	a	woody	after-
taste.	Many	are	slower	than	table	sugar	to
trigger	the	sensation	of	sweetness,	and	their
taste	persists	longer	after	swallowing.	The
relative	sweetness	of	these	sweeteners
actually	goes	down	as	their	individual
concentration	goes	up,	while	combining	them
produces	a	synergistic	effect.	So
manufacturers	often	use	two	or	more	to
minimize	their	odd	qualities	and	maximize
their	taste	intensity.

Aspartame,	a	synthetic	combination	of	two
amino	acids,	is	the	most	widely	used



noncaloric	sweetener.	It	is	180–200	times
sweeter	than	table	sugar,	so	that	though	it
carries	the	same	number	of	calories	in	a	given
weight,	much	smaller	amounts	are	needed.
Aspartame’s	disadvantage	is	that	it	is	broken
down	by	heat	and	by	acidity	and	therefore
can’t	be	used	in	cooked	preparations.

Modern	Licorice
Today	 licorice	 is	 seldom	 used	 as	 a
sweetener.	The	root	of	the	licorice	plant	is
extracted	 with	 ammonia	 to	 produce	 an
ammonium	 salt	 of	 the	 sweet-tasting
glycyrrhizic	 acid.	 The	 extract	 is	 much
more	 expensive	 than	molasses	 (the	 source
of	 blackness	 in	 traditional	 licorice
candies),	 sugar,	 gelatin,	 starch,	 and	 other
ingredients	 in	 licorice	 candy,	 so	 it’s	 used
mainly	 as	 an	 aromatic	 flavoring.	 Licorice
is	 especially	 popular	 in	 Denmark,	 where
it’s	strangely	combined	in	candies	with	salt
and	 with	 ammonia.	 Glycyrrhizin	 also	 has



effects	 on	 the	 hormone	 system	 that
controls	blood	pressure	and	volume,	and	so
in	 large	 doses	 can	 cause	 high	 blood
pressure	and	swelling.

Sweetness	Inhibitors	Not	only	are	there
artificial	sweeteners:	there	are	also	substances
that	block	us	from	experiencing	the	sweetness
of	sugars.	These	taste	inhibitors	are	useful	for
reducing	the	sweetness	of	a	preparation	whose
texture	depends	on	a	high	sugar	concentration.
Lactisole	(tradename	Cypha)	is	a	phenolic
compound	found	in	small	quantities	in	roasted
coffee,	patented	as	a	flavor	modifier	in	1985,
and	used	in	confectionery	and	snacks.	In	very
small	amounts	it	reduces	the	apparent
sweetness	of	sugar	by	two-thirds.

Sugars	and	Syrups



Honey

Honey	was	the	most	important	sweetener	in
Europe	until	the	16th	century,	when	cane
sugar	and	its	more	neutral	sweetness	became
more	widely	available.	Germany	and	the
Slavic	countries	were	leading	producers	in	the
meantime,	and	honey	wine	or	mead	(from	the
Sanskrit	word	for	“honey”)	was	a	great
favorite	in	both	central	Europe	and
Scandinavia.	Honey	is	now	valued	as	an
alternative	to	sugar,	a	premade	syrup	with
many	distinctive	flavors	to	offer.

The	 Honeybee	 While	 the	 New	 World
certainly	knew	and	 enjoyed	honey	before	 the
arrival	of	European	explorers,	North	America
did	 not.	 The	 bees	 native	 to	 the	 New	World,
species	 of	 the	 genera	Melipona	 and	Trigona,
are	exclusively	tropical.	They	also	differ	from
the	European	honeybees	in	being	stingless	and
in	collecting	fluids	not	just	from	flowers,	but



also	 from	fruits,	 resins,	and	even	carrion	and
excrement	 —	 sources	 that	 make	 for
unhealthful	honeys	as	well	as	rich	and	strange
flavors.	 European	 colonization	 brought	 a
fundamental	 change	 to	 North	 America	 by
introducing,	 around	 1625,	 the	 bee	 that
produces	practically	all	the	honey	in	the	world
today,	Apis	mellifera.

Bees	are	social	insects	that	have	evolved
along	with	nectar-producing	flowering	plants.
The	two	organisms	help	each	other	out:	plants
provide	the	insects	with	food,	and	insects
carry	cross-fertilizing	pollen	from	one	flower
to	another.	Honey	is	the	form	in	which	flower
nectar	is	stored	in	the	hive.	It	appears	from
the	fossil	record	that	bees	have	been	around
for	some	50	million	years,	their	social
organization	for	half	that	time.	Apis,	the
principal	honey-producing	genus,	originated
in	India.	Apis	mellifera,	the	honey	bee	proper,
evolved	in	subtropical	Africa	and	now
inhabits	the	whole	of	the	Northern



Hemisphere	up	to	the	Arctic	Circle.

How	Bees	Make	Honey

Nectar	The	principal	raw	material	of	honey	is
the	 nectar	 collected	 from	 flowers,	 which
produce	 it	 in	 order	 to	 attract	 pollinating
insects	 and	 birds.	 Secondary	 sources	 include
nectaries	 elsewhere	 on	 the	 plant	 and
honeydew,	the	secretions	of	a	particular	group
of	 bugs.	The	 chemical	 composition	 of	 nectar
varies	widely,	but	 its	major	 ingredient	by	 far
is	 sugars.	 Some	 nectars	 are	 mostly	 sucrose,
some	 are	 evenly	 divided	 among	 sucrose,
glucose,	 and	 fructose,	 and	 some	 (sage	 and
tupelo)	are	mostly	fructose.	A	few	nectars	are
harmless	 to	 bees	 but	 poisonous	 to	 humans,
and	so	generate	toxic	honeys.	Honey	from	the
Pontic	region	of	eastern	Turkey	was	notorious
in	 ancient	Greece	 and	Rome;	 a	 local	 species
of	 rhododendron	 carries	 “grayanotoxins,”
which	 interfere	 with	 both	 lung	 and	 heart
action.



The	most	important	sources	of	nectar	are
the	flowers	of	plants	in	the	bean	family,
especially	clover,	and	in	the	lettuce	family,	a
large	group	that	includes	the	sunflower,
dandelion,	and	thistles.	Though	most	honey	is
made	from	a	mixture	of	nectars	from	different
flowers,	some	300	different	“monofloral”
honeys	are	produced	in	the	world,	with	citrus,
chestnut,	buckwheat,	and	lavender	honeys
especially	valued	for	their	distinctive	tastes.
Some	honeys,	chestnut	and	buckwheat	in
particular,	are	much	darker	than	others,	thanks
in	part	to	the	higher	protein	content	in	their
nectars,	which	reacts	with	the	sugars	to
produce	dark	pigments	as	well	as	a	toasted
aroma.

Gathering	Nectar	The	bee	gathers	nectar	from
a	flower	by	inserting	its	long	proboscis	down
into	the	nectary.	In	the	process,	its	hairy	body
picks	up	pollen	from	the	flower’s	anthers.	The
nectar	passes	through	the	bee’s	esophagus	into



the	 honey	 sac,	 a	 storage	 tank	 that	 holds	 the
nectar	until	the	bee	returns	to	the	hive.	Certain
glands	secrete	enzymes	into	the	sac,	and	these
work	to	break	down	starch	into	smaller	chains
of	 sugars	 and	 sucrose	 into	 its	 constituent
glucose	and	fructose	molecules.

A	few	remarkable	figures	are	worth
quoting.	A	strong	hive	contains	one	mature
queen,	a	few	hundred	male	drones,	and	some
20,000	female	workers.	For	every	pound	of
honey	taken	to	market,	eight	pounds	are	used
by	the	hive	in	its	everyday	activities.	The	total
flight	path	required	for	a	bee	to	gather	enough
nectar	for	this	pound	of	surplus	honey	has
been	estimated	at	three	orbits	around	the
earth.	The	average	bee	forages	within	one
mile	of	the	hive,	makes	up	to	25	round	trips
each	day,	and	carries	a	load	of	around	0.002	of
an	ounce,	or	0.06	grams	—	approximately	half
its	weight.	With	its	light	chassis,	a	bee	would
get	about	7	million	miles	to	a	gallon	(3
million	km	per	liter)	of	honey.	In	a	lifetime	of



gathering,	a	bee	contributes	only	a	small
fraction	of	an	ounce	of	honey	to	the	hive.

The	Advance	of	the	Bee	in	North
America

We’re	 lucky	 to	 have	 a	 near-contemporary
description	 of	 the	 honey	 bee’s	 movement
across	 North	 America.	 In	 1832,
Washington	Irving	 toured	what	 is	now	the
Oklahoma	 region	 and	 published	 his
observations	in	A	Tour	on	the	Prairies.	The
ninth	 chapter	 describes	 a	 “Bee-hunt,”	 the
practice	 of	 finding	 honey	 in	 the	 wild	 by
following	bees	back	to	their	hive.

It	is	surprising	in	what	countless	swarms
the	bees	have	overspread	the	Far	West
within	but	a	moderate	number	of	years.
The	Indians	consider	them	the	harbinger	of
the	white	man,	as	the	buffalo	is	of	the	red
man;	and	say	that,	in	proportion	as	the	bee
advances,	the	Indian	and	buffalo	retire.	We



are	always	accustomed	to	associate	the
hum	of	the	bee-hive	with	the	farm-house
and	flower-garden,	and	to	consider	those
industrious	little	animals	as	connected	with
the	busy	haunts	of	man,	and	I	am	told	that
the	wild	bee	is	seldom	to	be	met	with	at
any	great	distance	from	the	frontier.	They
have	been	the	heralds	of	civilization,
steadfastly	preceding	it	as	it	advanced
from	the	Atlantic	borders,	and	some	of	the
ancient	settlers	of	the	West	pretend	to	give
the	very	year	when	the	honeybee	first
crossed	the	Mississippi.	The	Indians	with
surprise	found	the	mouldering	trees	of
their	forests	suddenly	teeming	with
ambrosial	sweets,	and	nothing,	I	am	told,
can	exceed	the	greedy	relish	with	which
they	banquet	for	the	first	time	upon	this
unbought	luxury	of	the	wilderness.

For	 those	 of	 us	who	 buy	 our	 luxury	 in
jars,	 this	 initial	 sense	 of	 wonder	 is	 worth
reimagining.



Transforming	Nectar	into	Honey	In	the	hive,
the	bees	concentrate	the	nectar	to	the	point
that	it	will	resist	bacteria	and	molds	and	so
keep	until	it	is	needed.	“House	bees”	pump
the	nectar	in	and	out	of	themselves	for	15	or
20	minutes,	repeatedly	forming	a	thin	droplet
under	their	proboscises	from	which	water	can
evaporate,	until	the	water	content	of	the	nectar
has	dropped	to	50	or	40%.	The	bees	then
deposit	the	concentrated	nectar	in	a	thin	film
on	the	honeycomb,	which	is	a	waxy	network
of	hexagonal	cylinders	about	0.20	inch/5	mm
across,	built	up	from	the	secretions	of	the	wax
glands	of	young	workers.	Here,	with	workers
keeping	the	hive	air	in	continuous	motion	by
fanning	their	wings,	the	nectar	loses	more
moisture,	until	it’s	less	than	20%	water.	This
process,	known	as	“ripening,”	takes	about
three	weeks.	The	bees	then	fill	the	honeycomb
cells	to	capacity	with	fully	ripe	honey	and	cap
them	with	a	layer	of	wax.

The	ripening	of	honey	involves	both



evaporation	and	the	continuing	work	of	bee
enzymes.	One	important	enzyme	converts	the
sucrose	almost	entirely	to	glucose	and
fructose,	because	a	mixture	of	single-unit
sugars	is	more	soluble	in	water	than	the
equivalent	amount	of	its	parent	sucrose,	and
so	can	be	more	highly	concentrated	without
crystallizing.	Another	enzyme	oxidizes	some
glucose	to	form	gluconic	acid	and	peroxides.
Gluconic	acid	lowers	the	honey’s	pH	to	about
3.9	and	makes	it	less	hospitable	to	microbes,
and	the	peroxides	also	act	as	an	antiseptic.	In
addition	to	these	and	other	enzyme	activities,
the	various	components	of	ripening	honey
react	with	each	other	and	cause	gradual
changes	in	color	and	flavor.	Hundreds	of
different	substances	have	been	identified	in
honey,	including	more	than	20	different
sugars,	savory	amino	acids,	and	a	variety	of
antioxidant	phenolic	compounds	and
enzymes.



Honeycomb,	 and	 the	 anatomy	 of	 the	 worker
bee.	Worker	bees	hold	freshly	gathered	nectar
in	 the	honey	sac,	 together	with	enzymes	 from
various	glands,	until	they	return	to	the	hive.

Sweet	Ants
Among	 the	 more	 unusual	 sweeteners	 are
the	 honey	 or	 honeypot	 ants	 (species	 of
Melophorus,	Camponotus,	Myrmecocystus)
of	 Australia,	 Mexico,	 and	 the	 American
southwest.	 Their	 colonies	 include	 a	 caste
of	workers	whose	 role	 it	 is	 to	store	nectar
and	 honeydew	 in	 their	 abdomens,	 which
swell	 to	 the	 size	 of	 a	 pea	 or	 grape	 and
become	 translucent.	 Honey	 ants	 are
enjoyed	by	pinching	off	the	abdomens	and
popping	 them	 directly	 into	 the	 mouth,	 or
by	folding	them	into	tortillas.



Processing	Honey	Some	honey	is	sold	in	its
beeswax	honeycomb,	but	producers	extract
most	of	their	honey	from	the	comb	and	then
treat	it	to	extend	its	shelf	life.	They	remove
the	honeycomb	from	the	hive	and	spin	it	in	a
centrifuge	to	separate	liquid	honey	from	solid
wax.	They	then	generally	heat	the	honey	to
around	155ºF/68ºC	to	destroy	sugar-
fermenting	yeasts,	strain	it	to	remove	pieces
of	wax	and	debris,	sometimes	blend	it	with
other	honeys,	and	finally	filter	it	under
pressure	to	remove	pollen	grains	and	very
small	air	bubbles	that	would	cloud	the	liquid.
The	honey	may	be	packaged	as	a	liquid	at	this
stage,	or	else	crystallized	to	form	a	spreadable
paste,	or	“cream,”	that	doesn’t	run	and	drip
the	way	liquid	honey	does.	Though	it	seems
solid,	85%	of	cream	honey	remains	in	its
liquid	form,	dispersed	around	the	15%	that
has	solidified	into	tiny	crystals	of	glucose.

Because	all	sugars	become	increasingly
soluble	as	the	temperature	rises,	cream	honey



softens	and	begins	to	melt	into	liquid	honey
when	it’s	warmed	above	about	80ºF/26ºC.	By
the	same	token,	liquid	honey	that	has
granulated	during	storage	can	be	reliquefied
with	gentle	heat.

Storing	 Honey	 Honey	 is	 one	 of	 our	 more
stable	 foods,	 but	 unlike	 table	 sugar	 it	 can
spoil.	 This	 is	 because	 it	 contains	 some
moisture	 and	 absorbs	 more	 from	 the	 air
whenever	the	relative	humidity	exceeds	60%.
Sugar-tolerant	 yeasts	 can	 grow	 on	 the	 honey
and	produce	off-flavors.	It’s	 therefore	best	 to
store	honey	in	a	moisture-tight	container.

Thanks	to	its	high	concentration	of	sugars
and	the	presence	of	some	amino	acids	and
proteins,	honey	is	prone	to	undesirable,
flavor-flattening	browning	reactions,	not	just
when	heated,	but	also	when	stored	for	a	long
time	at	room	temperature.	If	you	use	honey
infrequently,	it’s	best	to	keep	it	at
temperatures	below	50ºF/15ºC.	Liquid	honey



will	slowly	granulate	in	the	refrigerator,	and
cream	honey	will	get	somewhat	coarser.

Honey	Flavor	The	most	delightful	quality	of
honeys	is	their	flavors,	which	make	them	into
natural	 sauce-like	 condiments.	 All	 honeys
share	 a	 sweet	 taste	 base	 that	 is	 slightly	 tart
and	savory	as	well,	and	a	complex	aroma	that
has	 several	 different	 elements:	 caramel,
vanilla,	 fruity	 (esters),	 floral	 (aldehydes),
buttery	 (diacetyl),	 sweet-spicy	 (sotolon,	 p.
418).	 Then	 honeys	made	 from	 single	 nectars
add	 their	 own	 distinctive	 notes.	 Buckwheat
honey	 is	 malty	 (methylbutanal);	 chestnut
honey	carries	the	distinct	note	of	corn	tortillas
(aminoacetophenone,	 with	 both	 floral	 and
animal	elements);	citrus	and	 lavender	honeys
are	 citrusy	and	herbal	but	 share	 a	grapy	note
(methyl	anthranilate);	linden	honey	includes	a
mixture	of	mint,	thyme,	oregano,	and	tarragon
aromatics.

The	Composition	of	a	Typical	Honey



%	by	weight
Water 17
Fructose 38
Glucose 31
Sucrose 1.5
Other	disaccharides 7
Higher	sugars 1.5
Acids 0.6
Minerals 0.2
Honey	in	Cooking	Unlike	sugar,	which	is
often	a	hidden	ingredient	in	processed	foods,
honey	is	a	very	visible	sweetener;	most	of	it	is
added	to	foods	by	individual	consumers.	With
its	syrup-like	viscosity,	glossiness,	and	range
of	brown	shades,	it	makes	an	attractive
topping	for	pastries	and	other	foods.	It	is	the
characteristic	sweetener	in	such	pastries	as
baklava	and	lebkuchen,	such	confections	as
nougat	and	torrone,	halvah	and	pasteli,	and	in



such	liqueurs	as	Benedictine,	Drambuie,	and
Irish	Mist.	Although	honey	wine,	or	mead,	has
all	but	disappeared,	honey	beer	is	popular	in
Africa.	Americans	use	honey	in	many	baked
goods	for	a	variety	of	reasons.	It	can	be
substituted	for	sugar	—	1	measure	of	honey	is
considered	the	sweetening	equivalent	of	1.25–
1.5	measures	of	sugar,	although	the	amount	of
added	liquid	must	be	decreased	because	honey
does	contain	some	water.	Because	it	is	more
hygroscopic,	or	water	attracting,	than	table
sugar,	honey	will	keep	breads	and	cakes
moister	than	sugar	will,	losing	water	to	the	air
more	slowly,	and	even	absorbing	it	on	humid
days.	Thanks	to	its	antioxidant	phenolic
compounds,	it	slows	the	development	of	stale
flavors	in	baked	goods	and	warmed-over
flavors	in	meats.	Bakers	can	use	its	acidity	to
react	with	baking	soda	and	leaven
quickbreads.	And	its	reactive	reducing	sugars
accelerate	desirable	browning	reactions	and
the	development	of	flavor	and	color	in	the



crusts	of	baked	goods,	in	marinades	and
glazes,	and	other	preparations.

Honey	and	Health;	Infant	Botulism	Though
honey	 has	 not	 been	 refined	 the	 way	 table
sugar	 is	 and	 is	 chemically	 complex,	 it	 is	 no
wonder	food.	Its	vitamin	content	is	negligible;
bees	 get	 most	 of	 theirs	 from	 pollen.	 Its
antibacterial	 properties,	 which	 led	 early
physicians	 to	use	 it	 to	dress	wounds,	 are	due
largely	 to	 hydrogen	 peroxide,	 one	 of	 the
products	 of	 glucose-oxidizing	 enzyme	 and	 a
substance	 well	 known	 and	 long	 employed	 in
medicine.	 And	 honey	 should	 not	 be	 fed	 to
children	 less	 than	 a	 year	 old.	 It	 often	 carries
the	 seed-like	 dormant	 spores	 of	 the	 botulism
bacterium	(Clostridium	botulinum),	which	are
able	 to	 germinate	 in	 immature	 digestive
systems.	 Infant	 botulism	 can	 cause	 difficulty
in	breathing	and	paralysis.

Tree	Syrups	and	Sugars:	Maple,	Birch,	Palm



When	bees	make	honey,	they	perform	two
basic	tasks:	they	remove	a	very	dilute	solution
of	sugar	from	plants,	and	then	evaporate	off
most	of	the	water.	What	the	bees	evolved	to
do	instinctively	and	with	their	own	muscles
and	enzymes,	humans	have	learned	to	do	with
the	help	of	tools	and	fire.	We	make	syrups	and
sugars	by	extracting	dilute	juices	from	plants,
and	then	boiling	off	most	or	all	of	the	water.
Of	the	man-made	sweets,	tree	syrups	and
sugars	are	most	like	honey	in	that	they	retain
nearly	all	the	original	contents	of	the	sap,	and
are	not	refined	to	the	extent	that	cane	and	beet
sugars	are.

Food	Words:	Honey
Though	we	think	of	the	essence	of	honey	as
sweetness,	the	English	word	arises	from	its
c o l o r .	Honey	 comes	 from	 an	 Indo-
European	 root	 meaning	 “yellow.”	 The
Indo-Europeans	 of	 course	 enjoyed	 honey
and	 had	 a	 name	 for	 it.	 The	 modern



descendants	 of	 that	 root,	melit-,	 include
molasses,	 marmalade,	 mellifluous,	 and
mousse	 (via	 the	 Latin	mulsus,	 “honey-
sweet”).

Maple	Syrup	and	Sugar	Long	before
Europeans	introduced	the	honeybee,	the
natives	of	North	America	had	developed	their
own	delicious	concentrated	sweets.	Several
Indian	tribes,	notably	the	Algonquins,
Iroquois,	and	Ojibways,	had	well-established
myths	about	and	terminologies	for	maple
sugaring	by	the	time	that	European	explorers
encountered	them.	Thanks	to	a	remarkable
document,	we	have	some	idea	of	how
ingenious	they	were	at	extracting	and
concentrating	the	tree	sap	(see	box	below).	All
they	needed	was	a	tomahawk	to	cut	into	the
tree,	a	wood	chip	to	keep	the	wound	open,
sheets	of	elm	bark	for	containers,	and	cold
nights	to	freeze	the	water	into	pure	ice
crystals	that	could	then	be	removed	from	the
ever	more	concentrated	sap.



Maple	sugar	was	an	important	part	of	the
native	Americans’	diet,	worked	into	bear	fat,
or	mixed	with	corn	meal	to	make	a	light,
compact	provision	for	journeys.	For	the
colonists,	maple	sugar	was	cheaper	and	more
available	than	the	heavily	taxed	cane	sugar
from	the	West	Indies.	Even	after	the
Revolution,	many	Americans	found	a	moral
reason	for	preferring	maple	sugar	to	cane;
cane	sugar	was	produced	largely	with	slave
labor.	Toward	the	end	of	the	nineteenth
century,	cane	and	beet	sugar	became	so	cheap
that	the	demand	for	maple	sugar	declined
steeply.	Today	the	production	of	maple	syrup
is	a	cottage	industry	concentrated	in	the
eastern	Canadian	provinces,	especially
Quebec,	and	in	the	American	Northeast.

The	Sap	Run	The	maple	family	originated	in
China	or	Japan	and	numbers	some	100	species
throughout	 the	 Northern	 Hemisphere.	 Of	 the
four	 North	 American	 species	 good	 for



sugaring,	 the	 hard	 or	 rock	 maple,	Acer
saccharum,	 produces	 sap	 of	 greater	 quality
and	 in	 greater	 quantity	 than	 the	 others,	 and
accounts	 for	 most	 of	 the	 syrup	 produced
today.	In	the	spring,	sap	is	collected	from	the
first	major	 thaw	 until	 the	 leaf	 buds	 burst,	 at
which	 point	 the	 tree	 fluids	 begin	 to	 carry
substances	 that	give	 the	syrup	a	harsh	flavor.
The	sap	run	is	improved	by	four	conditions:	a
severe	 winter	 that	 freezes	 the	 roots,	 snow
cover	 that	keeps	 the	 roots	 cold	 in	 the	 spring,
extreme	 variations	 in	 temperatures	 from	 day
to	 night,	 and	 good	 exposure	 to	 the	 sun.	 The
northeastern	 states	 and	 eastern	 Canadian
provinces	meet	these	needs	most	consistently.

Sap	does	run	in	other	trees	in	early	spring,
and	some	of	them	—	birch,	hickory,	and	elm,
for	example	—	have	been	tapped	for	sugar.
But	maples	produce	more	and	sweeter	sap
than	any	other	tree,	thanks	to	an	intricate
physical	mechanism	by	which	the	tree	forces
sugars	from	the	previous	growing	season	out



of	storage	in	the	trunk	and	into	the	outer,
actively	growing	zone,	the	cambium.

Maple	Sugaring	Without	Metal	or	Fire
In	1755,	a	young	colonist	was	captured	and
“adopted”	 by	 a	 small	 group	 of	 natives	 in
the	 region	 that	 is	 now	 Ohio.	 In	 1799	 he
published	 his	 story	 in	An	 Account	 of	 the
Remarkable	 Occurrences	 in	 the	 Life	 and
Travels	 of	 Col.	 James	 Smith,	 which
includes	 several	 descriptions	 of	 how	 the
Indians	made	maple	sugar.	Here’s	the	most
ingenious	method.

We	had	no	large	kettles	with	us	this	year,
and	the	squaws	made	the	frost,	in	some
measure,	supply	the	place	of	fire,	in
making	sugar.	Their	large	bark	vessels,	for
holding	the	stock-water,	they	made	broad
and	shallow;	and	as	the	weather	is	very
cold	here,	it	frequently	freezes	at	night	in
sugar	time;	and	the	ice	they	break	and	cast



out	of	the	vessels.	I	asked	them	if	they
were	not	throwing	away	the	sugar?	they
said	no;	it	was	water	they	were	casting
away,	sugar	did	not	freeze	and	there	was
scarcely	any	in	that	ice….	I	observed	that
after	several	times	freezing,	the	water	that
remained	in	the	vessel,	changed	its	colour
and	became	brown	and	very	sweet.

Syrup	Production	From	colonial	times	to	the
20th	century,	sugar	producers	collected	the
sap	by	punching	a	small	hole	in	the	maple
tree,	inserting	a	wooden	or	metal	spout	into
the	cambium,	and	hanging	a	bucket	into	which
the	sap	dripped.	This	picturesque	collection
method	has	mostly	given	way	to	systems	of
plastic	taps	and	tubing,	which	carry	the	sap
from	many	trees	to	a	central	holding	tank.
Over	a	six-week	season,	the	taps	remove
around	10%	of	a	tree’s	sugar	stores,	in	an
average	of	5	to	15	gallons/20–60	liters	per
tree	(some	give	as	much	as	80	gallons).	It
takes	around	40	parts	of	sap	to	make	1	part



syrup.	The	sap	contains	around	3%	sucrose	at
the	beginning	of	the	season,	half	that	at	the
end;	so	late-season	sap	must	be	boiled	longer
and	is	therefore	darker	and	stronger-flavored.
Today,	many	producers	use	energy-efficient
reverse	osmosis	devices	to	remove	about	75%
of	the	sap	water	without	heat,	then	boil	the
concentrated	sap	to	develop	its	flavor	and
obtain	the	desired	sugar	concentration.	They
aim	for	a	temperature	around	7ºF/4ºC	above
the	boiling	point	of	water,	the	equivalent	of	a
syrup	that’s	around	65%	sugars.

The	 Flavors	 of	 Maple	 Syrups	 The	 final
composition	of	maple	syrup	is	approximately
62%	 sucrose,	 34%	 water,	 3%	 glucose	 and
fructose,	and	0.5%	malic	and	other	acids,	and
traces	 of	 amino	 acids.	 The	 characteristic
flavor	 of	 the	 syrup	 includes	 sweetness	 from
the	 sugars,	 a	 slight	 tartness	 from	 the	 acids,
and	a	range	of	aroma	notes,	 including	vanilla
from	 vanillin	 (a	 common	 wood	 by-product)



and	various	 products	 of	 sugar	 caramelization
and	 browning	 reactions	 between	 the	 sugars
and	 amino	 acids.	 The	 longer	 and	 hotter	 the
syrup	 is	 boiled,	 the	 darker	 the	 color	 and	 the
heavier	 the	 taste.	 Maple	 syrups	 are	 graded
according	 to	 color,	 flavor,	 and	 sugar	 content,
with	 grade	 A	 assigned	 to	 the	 lighter,	 more
delicately	 flavored,	 sometimes	 less
concentrated	 syrups	 that	 are	 poured	 directly
onto	 foods.	 Grades	 B	 and	 C	 are	 stronger	 in
caramel	 flavor	 and	 are	 more	 often	 used	 for
cooking,	for	example	in	baked	goods	and	meat
glazes.	 Because	 true	 maple	 syrup	 is
expensive,	 many	 supermarket	 syrups	 contain
little	or	none,	and	are	artificially	flavored.

Maple	 Sugar	 Maple	 sugar	 is	 made	 by
concentrating	the	syrup’s	sucrose	to	the	point
that	 it	 will	 crystallize	 when	 the	 syrup	 cools.
This	point	is	marked	by	a	boiling	temperature
of	25–40ºF/14–25ºC	above	the	boiling	point	of
water,	 or	 237–250ºF/114–125ºC	 at	 sea	 level.



Left	 to	 itself,	 the	 syrup	 will	 form	 coarse
crystals	 thinly	 coated	 with	 the	 remainder	 of
the	 brown,	 flavorful	 syrup.	 Maple	 cream,	 a
malleable	 mixture	 of	 very	 fine	 crystals	 in	 a
small	 amount	of	dispersed	 syrup,	 is	made	by
cooling	 the	 syrup	 very	 rapidly	 to	 about
70ºF/21ºC	 by	 immersing	 the	 pan	 in	 baths	 of
iced	 water,	 and	 then	 beating	 it	 continuously
until	 it	becomes	very	stiff.	This	mass	 is	 then
gently	rewarmed	until	it	becomes	smooth	and
semisoft.

Birch	 Syrup	 The	 inhabitants	 of	 far	 northern
parts	 of	 the	 globe,	 including	 Alaska	 and
Scandinavia,	 have	 long	 made	 a	 sweet	 syrup
from	the	sap	of	birch	trees,	various	species	of
Betula	 that	 are	 the	 dominant	 forest	 trees	 in
northern	 latitudes.	 Birch	 sap	 runs	 for	 two	 to
three	weeks	 in	 early	 spring.	 It	 is	much	more
dilute	 than	 maple	 sap,	 around	 1%	 sugars,
mainly	 an	 even	 mixture	 of	 glucose	 and
fructose.	 It	 takes	 around	 100	 parts	 of	 sap	 to



make	 1	 of	 syrup,	 both	 because	 there’s	 less
sugar	to	begin	with,	and	because	a	mixture	of
glucose	 and	 fructose	 is	 thinner	 than	 the
equivalent	 amount	 of	 sucrose;	 producers
therefore	 aim	 for	 a	 final	 sugar	 concentration
of	70–75%.	Thanks	to	the	different	sugars	and
their	reactions,	the	syrup	is	reddish	brown	and
has	 a	 more	 caramel-like	 flavor	 than	 maple
syrup;	the	level	of	vanillin	is	lower,	too.

Palm	 Syrup	 and	 Sugar;	 Agave	 Syrup
Among	 sugar-giving	 trees,	 certain	 tropical
palms	are	by	far	the	most	generous.	The	Asian
sugar	 palm	(Borassus	 flabellifer)	 can	 be
tapped	for	up	to	half	the	year,	and	yields	15–
25	quarts/liters	 per	 day	of	 a	 sap	 that	may	be
12%	sucrose!	Individual	trees	can	give	10–80
pounds	 of	 raw	 sugar	 every	 year.	 Coconut,
date,	 sago,	and	oil	palms	are	 less	productive,
but	still	far	more	so	than	maples	and	birches.
The	sap	is	collected	either	from	the	flowering
stalks	at	the	top	of	the	tree,	or	from	taps	in	the



trunk,	 and	 then	 is	 boiled	 down	 either	 to	 a
syrup	 called	 palm	honey,	 or	 to	 a	 crystallized
mass,	which	in	India	 is	known	as	gur	 (Hindi)
o r	jaggery(English,	 via	 Portuguese	 from	 the
Sanskrit	sharkara).	These	same	words	are	also
used	 for	 unrefined	 cane	 sugars.	 Unrefined
palm	sugar	has	a	distinctive,	winey	aroma	that
contributes	 to	 the	 flavor	 of	 Indian,	 Thai,
Burmese,	 and	 other	 South	Asian	 and	African
cuisines.	Some	palm	sugar	is	refined	to	make
more	neutral	white	sugar.

Agave	syrup	is	produced	from	the	sap	of
various	species	of	agave,	desert	plants	native
to	the	New	World	that	are	related	to	the	cactus
family.	The	sugars	in	agave	syrup	are	about
70%	fructose	and	20%	glucose,	so	this	syrup
tastes	sweeter	than	most.

Table	Sugar:	Cane	and	Beet	sugars	and	Syrups

The	processing	of	cane	and	beet	sugar	is	much
more	complicated	than	the	production	of



honey	and	maple	and	palm	sugars,	and	for	one
basic	reason.	Bees	and	tree	tappers	begin	with
an	isolated	plant	fluid	that	contains	little	else
besides	water	and	sugar.	But	the	raw	material
for	table	sugar	is	the	crushed	whole	stem	of
the	cane,	or	the	whole	root	of	the	beet.	Cane
and	beet	juices	include	many	substances	—
proteins,	complex	carbohydrates,	tannins,
pigments	—	that	not	only	interfere	with	the
sweet	taste	themselves,	but	decompose	into
even	less	palatable	chemicals	at	the	high
temperatures	necessary	for	the	concentration
process.	Cane	and	beet	sugar	must	therefore
be	separated	from	these	impurities.

Preindustrial	 Sugar	Refining	 From	 the	 late
Middle	 Ages	 until	 the	 19th	 century,	 when
machinery	 changed	 nearly	 every	 sort	 of
manufacturing,	 the	 treatment	 of	 sugar
followed	 the	 same	 basic	 procedure.	 There
were	four	separate	stages:

clarifying	the	cane	juice



boiling	it	down	into	a	thick	syrup	to
concentrate	and	crystallize	the	sucrose
draining	the	impurity-laden	syrup	from
the	solid	crystals
washing	the	remaining	syrup	from	the
crystals

The	 cane	 stalks	 were	 first	 crushed	 and
pressed,	and	the	resulting	juice	was	cleared	of
many	 organic	 impurities	 by	 heating	 it	 with
lime	 and	 a	 substance	 such	 as	 egg	 white	 or
animal	blood,	which	would	coagulate	and	trap
the	coarse	 impurities	 in	a	scum	that	could	be
skimmed	 off.	 The	 remaining	 liquid	was	 then
boiled	down	in	a	series	of	shallow	pans	until	it
had	 lost	 nearly	 all	 of	 its	 water,	 and	 poured
into	 cone-shaped	 clay	 molds	 a	 foot	 or	 two
long	 with	 a	 capacity	 of	 5	 to	 30	 lb/2–14	 kg.
There	 it	 was	 cooled,	 stirred,	 and	 allowed	 to
crystallize	 into	 “raw	 sugar,”	 a	dense	mass	of
sucrose	 crystals	 coated	 with	 a	 thin	 layer	 of
syrup	 containing	 other	 sugars,	 minerals,	 and



various	 dissolved	 impurities.	 The	 clay	 cones
were	 left	 to	 stand	 inverted	 for	 a	 few	 days,
during	which	time	the	syrup	film,	or	molasses,
would	run	off	through	a	small	hole	in	the	tip.
In	the	final	phase,	a	fine	wet	clay	was	packed
over	 the	 wide	 end	 of	 the	 cone,	 and	 its
moisture	was	allowed	to	percolate	through	the
solid	 block	 of	 sugar	 crystals	 for	 eight	 to	 ten
days.	 This	washing,	which	 could	 be	 repeated
several	 times,	 would	 remove	 most	 of	 the
remaining	 molasses,	 though	 the	 resulting
sugar	was	generally	yellowish.

Modern	 Sugar	 Refining	 Today,	 sugar	 is
produced	 by	 somewhat	 different	 means.
Because	 most	 sugarcane	 has	 been	 grown	 in
colonies	 or	 developing	 countries,	 and	 sugar
refining	 requires	 expensive	 machinery,	 cane
sugar	production	came	to	be	divided	into	two
stages:	 the	 crystallization	 of	 raw,	 unrefined
sugar	 in	 factories	 near	 the	 plantations;	 and
refining	 into	 white	 sugar	 in	 industrial



countries	that	are	the	major	consumers.	Sugar
beets,	on	the	other	hand,	are	a	temperate	crop,
grown	mainly	 in	Europe	 and	North	America,
so	 they	 are	 processed	 all	 the	 way	 to	 refined
sugar	in	a	single	factory.	Harvested	sugarcane
is	 very	 perishable	 and	 must	 be	 processed
immediately;	 sugar	 beets	 may	 be	 stored	 for
weeks	 to	 months	 before	 they	 are	 processed
into	sugar.

Sugar	production	requires	two	basic	kinds
of	work:	crushing	the	cane	to	collect	the	juice,
and	then	boiling	off	the	juice’s	water.	The
crushing	is	hard	physical	labor,	and	the
boiling	requires	large	amounts	of	heat.	In	the
Caribbean,	these	needs	were	filled	by	slave
labor	and	deforestation.	Three	19th-century
innovations	helped	make	sugar	a	less	costly
pleasure:	the	application	of	steam	power	to
the	crushing;	the	vacuum	pan,	which	boils	the
syrup	at	reduced	pressure	and	so	at	a	lower,
gentler	temperature;	and	the	multiple
evaporator,	which	recycles	the	heat	of	one



evaporation	stage	to	heat	the	next.
The	initial	clarification	of	cane	and	beet

juice	is	now	accomplished	without	eggs	or
blood;	heat	and	lime	are	generally	used	to
coagulate	and	remove	proteins	and	other
impurities.	Rather	than	waiting	for	gravity	to
draw	off	molasses,	refiners	use	centrifuges,
which	spin	the	raw	sugar	as	a	salad	spinner
spins	greens,	forcing	the	liquid	off	the	crystals
in	minutes	rather	than	weeks.	The	sucrose	is
whitened	by	the	technique	of	decolorization,
in	which	granular	carbon	—	a	material	like
activated	charcoal	that	can	absorb	undesirable
molecules	on	its	large	surface	area	—	is	added
to	the	centrifuged,	redissolved	sugar.	After	it
absorbs	the	last	remaining	impurities,	the
charcoal	is	filtered	out.	The	final
crystallization	process	is	carefully	controlled
to	give	individual	sugar	crystals	of	uniform
size.	Our	table	sugar	is	an	astonishingly	pure
99.85%	sucrose.



From	Sugarloaf	to	Sugar	Cube
Until	the	late	19th	century,	sugar	was	sold
in	 the	 conical	 masses	 formed	 by	 the
draining	molds.	These	masses	were	 called
loaves:	 hence	 the	 name	 “Sugarloaf”	 that
has	 been	 given	 to	 various	 hills	 and
mountains	for	their	supposed	resemblance.
In	 1872,	 a	 onetime	 grocer’s	 assistant
named	 Henry	 Tate,	 who	 had	 worked	 his
way	 to	 the	 top	 of	 a	 Liverpool	 sugar
refinery,	 was	 shown	 an	 invention	 that	 cut
up	 sugarloaves	 into	 small	 pieces	 for
household	 use.	 Tate	 patented	 the	 device,
went	 into	 production,	 and	 in	 a	 short	 time
made	a	 fortune	with	“Tate’s	Sugar	Cube.”
He	 became	 a	 philanthropist	 and	 built	 the
National	 Gallery	 of	 British	 Art,	 better
known	as	the	Tate	Gallery,	which	he	filled
with	his	own	collection.

Making	Sugar



Impurities	in	White	Sugar	It	turns	out	that
the	tiny	fraction	of	impurities	in	table	sugar
can	make	a	noticeable	difference	in	its	color
and	flavor.	Make	a	concentrated	syrup	from
just	water	and	sugar	and	it	will	have	a	yellow,
sometimes	hazy	cast,	thanks	to	large
carbohydrate	and	pigment	molecules	that
either	get	trapped	between	sucrose	molecules
as	they	crystallize,	or	remain	stuck	to	the
crystal	surface.	Beet	sugar	in	particular
sometimes	carries	earthy,	rancid	off-odors.
Where	sugarcane	grows	above	the	ground	and
is	so	perishable	that	it	is	processed
immediately	after	harvest,	the	beet	grows
underground	and	may	be	stored	for	weeks	or



months	between	harvest	and	processing,
during	which	time	it	can	be	tainted	by	soil
bacteria	and	molds	that	remain	on	its	surface.
In	addition,	beet	sugar	sometimes	carries
traces	of	defensive	chemicals	called	saponins,
which	resemble	soaps.	These	are	known	to
cause	the	development	of	a	scum	in	syrups,
and	may	also	be	responsible	for	the	poor
baking	performance	sometimes	attributed	to
beet	sugar.	(This	reputation	may	be	an
undeserved	legacy	of	the	early	20th	century,
when	refining	techniques	weren’t	as	effective
and	the	quality	of	beet	sugar	often	didn’t
measure	up	to	that	of	cane	sugar.)

Kinds	of	White	Sugar	White	sugar	comes	in
a	 number	 of	 different	 forms,	 which	 differ
mainly	in	the	size	of	the	crystals.	They	go	by
many	 different	 names.	 Ordinary	 table	 sugar,
used	 for	 general	 cooking	 and	 dissolving	 in
drinks,	 is	 midsized.	 Coarser	 crystals	 are
mainly	 used	 for	 decorating	 baked	 goods	 and



confections,	 and	 for	 that	 reason	 are	 specially
treated	 to	 produce	 a	 sparkling,	 crystal-clear
appearance.	 They	 are	 made	 from
exceptionally	 pure	 batches	 of	 sucrose,	 with
the	 least	 possible	 residue	 of	 the	 impurities
that	give	ordinary	sugar	solutions	a	yellowish
look.	 They’re	 even	 washed	 with	 alcohol	 to
remove	sucrose	dust	on	their	surfaces.	When	a
cook	 wants	 to	 make	 the	 whitest	 possible
fondant,	 or	 the	 clearest	 possible	 syrup,	 it’s
best	to	use	these	coarse	or	“sanding”	sugars.

At	the	finer	end	of	the	scale,	there	are	a
number	of	sugars	with	smaller	particles	than
table	sugar.	Extra-fine,	baker’s	special,	and
English	caster	sugars	all	offer	more
crystalline	surfaces	that	can	introduce	air	into
fat	during	the	creaming	stage	of	making	cakes
(p.	556).	“Powdered”	sugars	have	been	ground
into	even	smaller	particles,	some	small
enough	that	they	offer	no	roughness	to	the
tongue,	and	can	be	made	directly	into	very
smooth	icings,	frostings,	and	fillings.



Powdered	sugars	contain	around	3%	starch	by
weight	to	absorb	moisture	and	prevent	caking,
and	therefore	have	a	slightly	floury	taste	and
feeling	on	the	tongue.

Forms	of	White	Sugar:	Names	and
Dimensions

The	 lengths	 listed	 below	 are	 the
approximate	 largest	 dimension	 of	 the
whole	 or	 powdered	 crystals.	 Our	 tongues
sense	particles	 larger	 than	 about	 0.02	mm
as	gritty.
Large-grain	sugars:	1–2	mm

Coarse
Sanding
Pearl

Standard	granulated	table	sugar:	0.3–0.5
mm
Fine	granulated	sugars:	0.1–0.3	mm

Fruit
Baker’s	special



Caster
Superfine,	ultrafine

Powdered	sugars:	0.01–0.1	mm
Confectioner’s
Powdered
Fondant
Icing

OPPOSITE:	 Making	 cane	 sugar.	 The	 initial
processing	 of	 sugar	 cane	 into	 raw	 sugar	 is
carried	out	in	tropical	and	sub-tropical	cane-
growing	 countries;	 most	 of	 the	 subsequent
refining	 of	 raw	 sugar	 into	 white	 sugar	 in
consuming	 countries.	 Beet	 sugar	 is	 made	 in
essentially	 the	 same	 way,	 except	 that	 most
sugar	 beets	 are	 grown	 in	 temperate
industrialized	 countries	 and	 processed	 there,
and	 beet	 molasses	 and	 syrups	 are	 not
palatable.

Brown	 Sugars	 Brown	 sugars	 are	 sucrose
crystals	 that	 are	 coated	 with	 a	 layer	 of	 dark
syrup	 from	 one	 or	 another	 stage	 of	 sugar



refining,	 and	 therefore	 have	 a	more	 complex
flavor	 than	 pure	 sucrose.	 There	 are	 several
basic	kinds	of	brown	sugars.

Factory	 Brown	 Sugars	 “Factory”	 brown
sugars	 were	 originally	 produced	 during	 the
initial	 processing	 of	 the	 cane	 juice	 into
unrefined	 sugar.	 These	 include	demerara,
turbinado,	 and	muscovado	 sugars.	 Demerara
(named	after	 a	 region	 in	Guyana)	came	 from
the	 first	 crystallization	 stage	 of	 light	 cane
juice,	 and	 took	 the	 form	 of	 sticky,	 large,
yellow-gold	 crystals.	 Turbinado	 was	 raw
sugar	 partly	 washed	 of	 its	 molasses	 coat
during	 the	 centrifugation,	 also	 yellow-gold
and	 large	 but	 not	 as	 sticky	 as	 demerara.
Muscovado	 was	 the	 product	 of	 the	 final
crystallization	from	the	dark	mother	liquor	(p.
675);	it	was	brown,	small-grained,	sticky,	and
strong-flavored.

Refinery	 Brown	 Sugars	 Today,	 these
evocative	 names	 of	 factory	 sugars	 are	 often



applied	 to	 a	 different	 product,	 brown	 sugars
produced	 at	 the	 refinery	 using	 raw	 sugar	 as
the	 starting	 material,	 not	 the	 cane	 juice.	All
ordinary	brown	sugar	is	also	made	in	this	way.
There	 are	 two	 ways	 to	 make	 refinery	 brown
sugars:	 redissolving	 the	 raw	 sugar	 in	 a	 syrup
of	 some	 kind	 and	 then	 recrystallizing	 it,	 so
that	it	retains	some	of	the	syrup	on	its	crystal
surfaces;	or	refining	the	raw	sugar	all	the	way
to	 pure	 white	 sugar,	 and	 then	 coating	 or
“painting”	 its	 surfaces	 with	 a	 thin	 film	 of
syrup	or	molasses.

The	basic	difference	between	factory	and
refinery	brown	sugars	is	that	true	factory
sugars	retain	more	of	the	flavor	of	the	original
cane	juice,	including	green,	fresh,	and
vegetable-ocean	aromas	(from	hexanol,
acetaldehyde,	and	dimethyl	sulfide).	Both
kinds	have	an	important	vinegar	aroma	(from
acetic	acid),	as	well	as	caramel	and	buttery
notes	(the	buttery	one	from	diacetyl,	indeed
found	in	butter),	and	salty	and	bitter	tastes



(from	minerals).	Refinery	brown	sugars	also
develop	what’s	described	as	a	licorice	aroma
from	the	long,	slow	heating	of	the	syrups.

The	Compositions	of	White	and	Brown
Sugars

“Soft”	brown	sugars	retain	a	coating	of	the
syrup	 from	 which	 they	 were	 crystallized;
“coated”	sugars	are	white	sugars	that	have
had	a	thin	film	of	brown	syrup	added	after
they’ve	been	crystallized	and	washed.

Sugar
White	Sugar Sucrose 99.85
White	Sugar Glucose	+	Fructose 0.05
White	Sugar Other	Organic	Material 0.02
White	SugarMinerals 0.03
White	SugarWater 0.05

Sugar



Brown	Sugars

Sucrose Soft 85–93
Sucrose Coated 90–96
Glucose	+	Fructose Soft 1.5–4.5
Glucose	+	Fructose Coated 2–5
Other	Organic	Material Soft 2–4.5
Other	Organic	Material Coated 1–3
Minerals Soft 1–2
Minerals Coated 0.3–1
Water Soft 2–3.5
Water Coated 1–2.5

Whole	Sugars	 It’s	still	possible	 to	 taste	what
might	be	called	whole	sugar,	crystalline	sugar
still	enveloped	in	 the	cooked	cane	juice	from
which	 it	 formed.	 This	 is	 the	 sugar	 sold	 in
Indian	 groceries	 as	jaggery	 or	gur,	 and	 in
Latin	American	 shops	 as	piloncillo,	 papelon,
o r	panela.	 The	 flavor	 is	 highly	 variable,	 and



ranges	from	mild	caramel	to	strong	molasses.
Using	Brown	Sugars	Brown	sugar	is	soft	and
clingy	because	its	molasses	film	—	whose
glucose	and	fructose	are	more	hygroscopic
than	sucrose	—	contains	a	significant	amount
of	water.	Of	course,	if	brown	sugar	is	left
exposed	to	dry	air,	it	will	lose	its	moisture
through	evaporation	and	become	hard	and
lumpy.	It	can	be	kept	moist	by	storing	it	in	an
airtight	container,	and	resoftened	by	closing	it
up	with	a	damp	towel	or	piece	of	apple	from
which	it	can	absorb	moisture.	Because	brown
sugar	tends	to	trap	air	pockets	between	groups
of	adhering	crystals,	it	should	be	packed	down
before	its	volume	is	measured.

Molasses	and	Cane	Syrups

Molasses	Molasses,	which	is	called	treacle	in
the	 United	 Kingdom,	 is	 generally	 defined	 as
the	 syrup	 left	 over	 in	 cane	 sugar	 processing
after	 the	 readily	 crystallizable	 sucrose	 has
been	removed	from	the	boiled	juice.	(There	is



such	 a	 thing	 as	 beet	 molasses,	 but	 it	 has	 a
strong,	unpleasant	odor,	and	so	is	used	to	feed
animals	 and	 industrial	 fermentation
microbes.)	In	order	to	extract	as	much	sucrose
as	possible	from	cane	juices,	crystallization	is
performed	 in	 several	 different	 steps,	 each	 of
which	results	in	a	different	grade	of	molasses.
“First”	molasses	is	the	product	of	centrifuging
off	 the	 raw	 sugar	 crystals,	 and	 still	 contains
some	 sucrose.	 It	 is	 then	 mixed	 with	 some
uncrystallized	sugar	syrup,	recrystallized,	and
recentrifuged.	 The	 resulting	 “second”
molasses	 is	 even	 more	 concentrated	 in
impurities	 than	 the	 first.	 Repeating	 this
process	once	more	yields	“third,”	or	 final,	or
“blackstrap”	molasses	(from	the	Dutch	stroop
for	 “syrup”).	 The	 brown-black	 color	 of	 final
molasses	is	due	to	the	extreme	caramelization
of	 the	 remaining	 sugars	 and	 to	 chemical
reactions	 induced	 by	 the	 high	 temperatures
reached	 during	 the	 repeated	 boilings.	 These
reactions,	together	with	the	high	concentration



of	minerals,	give	final	molasses	a	harsh	flavor
that	makes	it	generally	unfit	for	direct	human
consumption,	 although	 it’s	 sometimes	 sold
blended	 with	 corn	 syrup.	A	 small	 amount	 is
also	used	in	tobacco	curing.

Food	Words:	Molasses,	Treacle
Molasses	 comes	 from	 the	 late	 Latin	word
mellaceus,	which	meant	“like	honey.”	The
English	 term	treacle	comes	via	the	French
triacle	 from	 the	 Latin	theriaca,	 meaning
antidotes	 against	 poison.	 Medieval
pharmacists	 used	 sugar	 syrups	 to
compound	their	drugs,	and	came	to	refer	to
the	 syrups	 by	 a	 term	 for	 the	 remedies.
Today,	 treacle	can	mean	both	dark,	strong
molasses	 or	 the	 lighter,	 more	 delicate
refiner’s	syrups.

Kinds	of	Molasses	First	and	second	molasses
have	been	used	in	foods	for	many	years,	and
for	a	long	time	were	the	only	form	of	sugar
available	to	slaves	and	the	poor	of	the	rural



South,	usually	bleached	with	sulfur	dioxide
and	strongly	sulfurous	to	the	taste.	Today,
most	molasses	available	to	consumers	are
actually	blends	of	molasses	and	syrups	from
various	stages	throughout	the	sugar-making
process.	They	range	from	mild	to	pungent	and
bitter,	from	golden	brown	to	brown-black.	The
darker	the	molasses,	the	more	its	sugars	have
been	transformed	by	caramelization	and
browning	reactions,	and	so	the	less	sweet	and
more	bitter	it	is.	Light	molasses	may	be	35%
sucrose	and	35%	invert	sugars,	and	2%
minerals;	blackstrap	molasses	may	be	35%
sucrose,	20%	invert	sugars,	and	10%
minerals.

Molasses	 in	 Cooking	 The	 flavor	 of	 cane
molasses	 is	 complex,	 with	 woody	 and	 green
notes	as	well	as	sweet,	caramel,	buttery	ones.
Its	 complexity	 has	 made	 it	 a	 popular
background	 flavor	 in	 many	 foods;	 popcorn
balls,	 gingerbread,	 licorice,	 barbeque	 sauces,



and	baked	beans	are	examples.	Cane	molasses
is	 usually	 but	 unpredictably	 acidic;	 its	 pH
varies	 between	 5	 and	 neutral	 7,	 so	 it	 can
sometimes	 react	 with	 baking	 soda	 and
produce	 leavening	 carbon	 dioxide	 in	 baked
goods.	 Thanks	 to	 its	 invert	 sugars,	 it	 helps
retain	 moisture	 in	 foods.	 And	 a	 variety	 of
components	 contribute	 to	 a	 general
antioxidant	 capacity,	 which	 helps	 slow	 the
development	of	off-flavors.

Cane	and	Sorghum	Syrups	Cane	syrups	may
be	produced	directly	from	cane	juice	at	sugar
factories,	 or	 from	 raw	 sugar	 at	 refineries.
They	 generally	 contain	 a	 combination	 of
sucrose	 (25–30%)	 and	 invert	 sugars	 (50%),
are	 golden	 to	 medium	 brown	 in	 color,	 and
have	a	mild	flavor	with	caramel,	butterscotch,
and	leafy	aromas.	Louisiana	cane	syrups	were
traditionally	 made	 from	 whole	 cane	 juice,
concentrated	 and	 clarified.	 The	 same	 basic
product,	 with	 about	 half	 of	 its	 sucrose



inverted	 by	 acid	 or	 enzymes,	 is	 now
sometimes	called	“high-test	molasses.”	It	has
been	heated	less,	and	so	has	a	more	aromatic,
less	bitter	flavor	 than	true	molasses.	“Golden
syrup”	 is	 a	 refinery	 syrup	 made	 from	 raw
sugar,	 filtered	 through	 charcoal	 to	 give	 it	 a
characteristic	 light,	 crystal-clear	 appearance
and	 delicate	 flavor.	 Cane	 syrups	 offer	 more
character	 (though	 also	 a	 more	 intense
sweetness)	 than	 corn	 syrup	 in	 such	 dishes	 as
pecan	pie.

Sorghum	syrup	is	made	in	small	quantities
in	the	American	South	and	Midwest	from	the
stalk	juice	of	sweet	sorghum,	specialized
varieties	of	a	cereal	plant	normally	grown	for
its	grain	(Sorghum	bicolor,	p.	482).	Sorghum
syrup	is	mainly	sucrose,	and	has	a	distinctive
pungency.

Fruit	Syrups:	Ancient	Saba,	Modern
Fruit	Sweeteners

In	Europe,	 the	 original	 sweet	 syrups	were



made	 not	 from	 cane,	 but	 from	 grapes.
Italian	saba	 is	grape	juice	cooked	down	to
a	 concentrated,	 viscous	 syrup.	 It	 contains
about	 equal	 amounts	 of	 glucose	 and
fructose,	 and	 in	 addition	 has	 a	 distinct
tartness	 due	 to	 the	 simultaneous
concentration	 of	 the	 grape	 acids.	 In	 the
16th	 century,	 Nostradamus	 described
making	 various	 sweet	 preparations	 with
saba,	and	noted	that	“in	places	where	there
is	 neither	 sugar	 nor	 honey,	 the	 sovereign
sun	 produces	 and	 nourishes	 other	 fruits
which…come	 to	 satisfy	 our	 sensuous
desire….”

Manufactured	 fruit	 syrups	 are	 a
relatively	 recent	 version	 of	 the	 traditional
syrups.	 They’re	 made	 from	 batches	 of
various	fruits,	 including	apples,	pears,	and
grapes,	 that	 are	 in	 surplus,	 damaged,	 or
otherwise	not	suitable	for	other	uses.	Both
aroma	 and	 color	 are	 removed	 from	 the
juice,	which	 is	 concentrated	 to	 about	75%



sugars,	mainly	glucose	and	fructose	due	to
the	action	of	the	fruit	acids	on	sucrose.	The
acids	 are	 also	 concentrated,	 so	 the	 pH	 of
the	syrup	is	around	4.	Food	manufacturers
value	 these	 fruit	 syrups	 in	 part	 because
they	can	be	identified	appealingly	as	“fruit
sweeteners”	 on	 the	 label,	 rather	 than	 as
sugar	or	corn	syrup.	They	may	also	contain
significant	 amounts	 of	 pectin	 and	 other
cell-wall	 carbohydrates	 that	 help	 stabilize
emulsions	and	reduce	crystal	size	in	frozen
preparations.

Corn	Syrups,	Glucose	and	Fructose	Syrups,	Malt	Syrup

Sugars	from	Starch	We	come	now	to	a
source	of	sugar	that	is	relatively	new,	but
today	rivals	cane	and	beet	sugars	in
commercial	importance.	In	1811,	a	Russian
chemist,	K.	S.	Kirchof,	found	that	if	he	heated
potato	starch	in	the	presence	of	sulfuric	acid,
the	starch	was	transformed	into	sweet	crystals



and	a	viscous	syrup.	A	few	years	later,	he
discovered	that	malted	barley	had	the	same
effect	as	the	acid	(and	thereby	laid	the
foundations	for	a	scientific	understanding	of
beer	brewing).	We	now	know	that	starch
consists	of	long	chains	of	glucose	molecules,
and	that	both	acids	and	certain	plant,	animal,
and	microbial	enzymes	will	break	these	long
chains	down	into	smaller	pieces	and
eventually	into	individual	glucose	molecules.
The	sugars	make	the	syrup	sweet,	and	the
remaining	fragments	of	glucose	chains	give
the	solution	a	thick,	viscous	consistency.	In
the	United	States,	the	acid	technique	was	used
to	produce	syrup	from	potato	starch	in	the
1840s,	and	from	corn	starch	beginning	in	the
1860s.

High-Fructose	 Corn	 Syrups	 The	 1960s
brought	 the	 invention	 of	 fructose	 syrups.
These	start	out	as	plain	corn	or	potato	syrups,
but	 an	 additional	 enzyme	 process	 converts



some	 of	 the	 glucose	 sugars	 into	 fructose,
which	is	much	sweeter	and	therefore	gives	the
syrups	a	higher	sweetening	power.	The	solids
in	 standard	 high-fructose	 corn	 syrup	 are
around	 53%	 glucose	 and	 42%	 fructose,	 and
provide	 the	 same	 sweetness	 as	 the	 syrup’s
equivalent	 weight	 in	 table	 sugar.	 Because
high-fructose	 syrups	 are	 relatively	 cheap,
soft-drink	 manufacturers	 began	 to	 replace
cane	and	beet	sugars	with	 them	in	 the	1980s,
and	Americans	 began	 to	 consume	more	 corn
syrups	 than	 cane	 and	 beet	 sugar.	 Today
they’re	 a	 very	 important	 sweetener	 in	 food
manufacturing.

Making	 Corn	 Syrups	 To	 make	 corn	 syrups,
manufacturers	 extract	 starch	 granules	 from
the	kernels	of	common	dent	corn	(p.	477),	and
then	 treat	 them	 with	 acid	 and/or	 with
microbial	or	malt	enzymes	to	develop	a	sweet
syrup	 that	 is	 then	 clarified,	 decolorized,	 and
evaporated	 to	 the	 desired	 concentration.



Nowadays,	 enzymes	 from	 the	 easily	 cultured
molds	Aspergillus	oryzae	 (also	used	 in	 Japan
to	 break	 rice	 starch	 down	 into	 fermentable
sugars	 for	sake)	 and	A.	niger	are	used	almost
exclusively.	 In	 Europe,	 potato	 and	 wheat
starch	are	the	main	sources	for	making	what	is
called	“glucose”	or	“glucose	syrup,”	which	is
essentially	the	same	as	American	corn	syrup.

Fructose	Crystals
Crystalline	fructose	has	been	commercially
available	 for	only	a	 few	decades.	Fructose
is	so	hygroscopic,	or	water-absorbing,	that
it’s	 hard	 to	 get	 it	 to	 crystallize	 from	 a
water	 solution.	 It’s	 now	 made	 by	 mixing
high-fructose	 corn	 syrup	 with	 alcohol,	 in
which	 fructose	 is	 much	 less	 soluble.	 If
fructose	crystals	are	sprinkled	onto	a	 food
as	 decoration,	 they’ll	 quickly	 disappear
into	 a	 thin,	 sticky	 syrup	 as	 they	 absorb
moisture	 from	 the	 food	 and	 air	 and
dissolve.



The	Properties	and	Uses	of	Corn	Syrups
Among	the	usual	sweeteners	available	to	the
cook,	corn	syrups	are	alone	in	providing	long
carbohydrate	molecules	that	get	tangled	up
with	each	other	and	slow	down	the	motion	of
all	molecules	in	the	syrup,	thus	giving	it	a
thicker	consistency	than	any	but	the	most
concentrated	sucrose	syrups.	It’s	largely	these
long	tangly	molecules	that	have	made	corn
syrup	increasingly	important	in	confectionery
and	other	prepared	foods.	Because	the
tangling	interferes	with	molecular	motion,	it
also	has	the	valuable	effect	of	preventing
other	sugars	in	candy	from	crystallizing	and
producing	a	grainy	texture.	All	molecules	in
the	syrup	are	flowing	very	slowly,	and	the
sucrose	crystal	faces	keep	getting	covered
with	chains	that	can’t	become	part	of	the
crystal.	(The	same	behavior	helps	minimize
the	size	of	ice	crystals	in	ice	cream	and	fruit
ices,	thus	encouraging	a	smooth,	creamy
consistency.)	Another	consequence	of	corn



syrup’s	viscosity	is	that	it	imparts	a	thick,
chewy	texture	to	foods.	And	because	it
includes	glucose,	a	water-binding	sugar	that	is
less	sweet	than	table	sugar,	corn	syrup	helps
prevent	moisture	loss	and	prolongs	the	storage
life	of	various	foods	without	the	cloying
sweetness	that	honey	or	sucrose	syrup
imparts.	Finally,	all	corn	syrups	are	somewhat
acid,	with	a	pH	between	3.5	and	5.5,	so	in
baked	goods	they	can	react	with	baking	soda
to	produce	carbon	dioxide	and	thus	contribute
to	leavening.

Corn	 syrups.	 Standard	 corn	 syrup	 is	 a	water
solution	of	 glucose	 chains	 of	 varying	 lengths
(left).	One-and	 two-unit	 sugars	 taste	 sweet,
while	taste-free	longer	chains	make	the	syrup
viscous.	 By	 controlling	 the	 relative



populations	 of	 different	 chains,	 the
manufacturer	 can	 tailor	 the	 syrup’s	 balance
of	 sweetening	 and	 thickening	 powers.	 High-
fructose	 corn	 syrup	 (right)	has	 been	 treated
with	 an	 enzyme	 to	 convert	 a	 portion	 of	 the
single	 glucose	 molecules	 (small	 hexagons)
into	 fructose	 molecules	 (small	 pentagons),
which	taste	sweeter.
Grades	of	Corn	Syrup	Corn	syrup	is	an
especially	versatile	ingredient	in	food
manufacturing	because	its	sweetness	and
viscosity	can	be	varied	simply	by	controlling
the	thoroughness	of	the	enzymatic	digestion
of	starch	into	sugars.	The	most	common
consumer	grade	of	corn	syrup	is	about	20%
water,	14%	glucose,	11%	maltose,	and	55%
longer	glucose	chains.	It	is	only	moderately
sweet,	and	fairly	viscous.	Several	others
grades	are	available	to	manufacturers:

Maltodextrins	are	syrups	that	contain
less	than	20%	glucose	plus	maltose,	and
are	used	mainly	to	give	viscosity	and



body	with	little	sweetness	and	moisture
absorption.
High-fructose	corn	syrups	are	around
75%	fructose	plus	glucose,	and	give	an
overall	sweetness	around	that	of	table
sugar.	They	and	high-glucose	syrups	help
develop	color	and	retain	moisture	in
baked	goods.
High-maltose	syrups	are	valuable	in	ice
creams,	and	some	confections,	where
lowered	freezing	points	or	interference
with	crystallization	are	desired	but
sweetness	is	not;	maltose	is	less	sweet
than	either	table	sugar	or	glucose.	In
baked	goods,	maltose	feeds	yeasts	and
improves	leavening.

Malt	Syrup	and	Extract	Malt	syrup	is	made
from	 a	 combination	 of	 germinated	 cereal
grains,	 preeminently	 barley,	 and	 ordinary
cooked	 grains.	 It’s	 among	 the	 most	 ancient
and	 versatile	 of	 sweetening	 agents,	 and	 was



the	predecessor	of	modern-day	high-tech	corn
syrups.	Along	with	honey,	malt	syrup	was	the
primary	 sweetener	 in	 China	 for	 2,000	 years,
until	 around	 1000	CE;	 it’s	 still	 made	 in	 both
China	 and	 Korea.	 Malt	 syrup	 had	 the
advantage	that	it	could	be	made	in	households
from	 readily	 available	 and	 easily	 stored
materials,	 the	 same	 whole	 grains	 that	 were
grown	 as	 staple	 foods,	 including	wheat,	 rice,
and	 sorghum.	 It	 was	 therefore	 a	 far	 more
affordable	sweetener	than	cane	sugar.

There	are	three	stages	to	making	malt
syrup.	First	a	portion	of	whole	grain	is	malted:
soaked	in	water	and	allowed	to	germinate
partly,	then	dried	again	by	means	of	carefully
controlled	heating	(p.	744).	The	germinating
embryo	produces	enzymes	that	will	digest	the
grain’s	starch	into	sugars	to	fuel	its	growth;
barley	is	preferred	in	malting	because	it
produces	unusually	copious	and	active
enzymes.	Drying	preserves	these	enzymes,
and	also	develops	color	and	flavor	by	means



of	browning	reactions.	In	the	second	stage,	the
malted	grain	is	mixed	with	some	water	and
with	unmalted	but	cooked	grains	—	rice,
wheat,	barley	—	and	the	malt	enzymes	digest
the	cooked	starch	granules	to	produce	a	sweet
slurry.	In	the	final	stage,	the	slurry	is
extracted	with	additional	water,	and	the	liquid
is	boiled	down	to	concentrate	it.	The	result	is
a	concentrated	syrup	of	maltose,	glucose,	and
some	longer	glucose	chains.	Malt	syrup	is
therefore	much	less	sweet	than	a	similarly
viscous	sucrose	syrup.	In	Asia	it	is	used	to
provide	color	and	gloss	in	savory	dishes	—
for	example,	it’s	painted	onto	the	skin	of
Peking	duck	—	as	well	as	in	confections.

The	Composition	of	Malt	Extract

%	of	Malt	Extract	by	Weight
Water 20%
Protein 5



Minerals 1
Total	sugars 60
Glucose 7–10
Maltose	(double-glucose	chains) 40
Maltotriose	(triple-glucose	chains) 10–15
Longer	glucose	chains 25–30

Malt	 syrup	 has	 a	 relatively	 mild	 malt
aroma	 because	 the	 malted	 barley	 is	 a	 small
fraction	 of	 the	 grain	 mixture.	 If	 the	 malted
barley	is	soaked	on	its	own,	without	any	added
cooked	 grains,	 then	 the	 malt	 flavor	 is	 much
stronger.	Such	a	preparation	 is	usually	called
“malt	extract.”	It	is	frequently	used	in	baking
to	 provide	 maltose	 and	 glucose	 for	 yeast
growth	and	moisture	retention	(p.	530).	In	the
United	States,	malted	milk	and	malt	balls	are
made	 from	 a	 mixture	 of	 barley	 malt	 and
powdered	milk.

Sugar	Candies



and	Confectionery

All	sugar	candies,	whether	brittle	or	creamy
or	chewy,	are	essentially	mixtures	of	two
ingredients:	sugar	and	water.	Cooks	manage
to	create	very	different	textures	from	the	same
materials	by	varying	the	relative	proportions
of	sugar	and	water,	and	the	physical
arrangement	of	the	sugar	molecules.	They
control	the	proportions	as	they	cook	the	sugar
syrup,	and	they	control	the	physical
arrangement	as	they	cool	it.	Depending	on
how	hot	the	syrup	gets,	how	quickly	it	cools,
and	how	much	it’s	stirred,	it	can	solidify	into
coarse	sugar	crystals,	fine	sugar	crystals,	or	a
monolithic	crystal-free	mass.	To	a	large
extent,	the	art	of	the	confectioner	depends	on
the	science	of	crystallization.

Setting	the	Sugar
Concentration:
Cooking	the	Syrup



The	first	factor	that	influences	candy	texture
is	the	concentration	of	sugar	in	the	cooked
syrup.	Confectioners	have	found	from	long
experience	that	certain	syrup	concentrations
are	best	for	making	certain	kinds	of	candy.
Generally,	the	more	water	the	syrup	contains,
the	softer	the	final	product	will	be.	So	the
cook	must	know	how	to	make	and	recognize
particular	syrup	concentrations.	This	turns	out
to	be	pretty	simple.	When	we	dissolve	sugar
or	salt	in	water,	the	boiling	point	of	the
solution	becomes	higher	than	the	boiling	point
of	pure	water	(see	p.	785).	This	increase	in	the
boiling	point	depends	predictably	on	the
amount	of	material	dissolved:	the	more
dissolved	molecules	in	the	water,	the	higher
the	boiling	point.	So	the	boiling	point	of	a
solution	is	an	indicator	of	the	concentration	of
the	dissolved	material.	The	graph	in	the	box
below	shows,	for	example,	that	a	sugar	syrup
that	boils	at	250ºF/125ºC	is	about	90%	sugar
by	weight.



Frostings,	Icings,	and	Glazes
Frostings,	 icings,	 and	 glazes	 are	 sweet
coatings	 for	 cakes	 and	other	 baked	goods.
In	 addition	 to	 being	 tasty	 and	 decorative,
they	 protect	 the	 food	 underneath	 from
drying	out.	These	preparations	began	in	the
17th	 century	 as	 plain	 syrup	 glazes,	 and
gradually	 evolved	 into	 more	 elaborate
forms.	 Today,	 glazes	 are	 glossy,	 thin,
dense	coatings	made	with	a	combination	of
powdered	 sugar,	 a	 small	 amount	of	water,
corn	 syrup,	 and	 sometimes	 fat	 (butter,
cream).	The	corn	syrup	and	fat	prevent	the
sugar	from	forming	coarse	crystals,	and	the
corn	 syrup	 provides	 a	 moisture-attracting
liquid	phase	to	fill	the	space	between	sugar
particles	 and	 create	 a	 smooth,	 glass-like
surface.	 A	 warm	 fondant	 (around
100ºF/38ºC)	poured	over	the	cake	or	pastry
produces	a	similar	effect.	Simple	frostings
are	made	by	whipping	sugar	and	air	into	a
solid	 fat	 —	 butter,	 cream	 cheese,	 or



vegetable	 shortening	—	 to	make	 a	 sweet,
creamy,	 light	 mass.	 The	 sugar	 particles
must	 be	 small	 enough	 not	 to	 make	 the
frosting	 seem	 grainy,	 so	 fine	 grades	 of
powdered	 sugar	 are	 the	 usual	 choice.
Cooked	 frostings	 and	 icings	 include	 eggs
or	 flour	 and	owe	 their	 body	 in	 part	 to	 the
egg	 proteins	 or	 flour	 starch.	 Because	 the
sugar	 dissolves	 during	 the	 cooking,	 its
particle	size	is	unimportant.

Cooking	the	Syrup	Raises	the	Sugar
Concentration	As	a	sugar	solution	boils,
water	molecules	evaporate	from	the	liquid
phase	into	the	air,	while	the	sugar	molecules
stay	behind.	The	sugar	molecules	therefore
account	for	a	larger	and	larger	proportion	of
all	the	molecules	in	the	solution.	So	as	it
boils,	the	syrup	gets	more	and	more
concentrated:	and	this	in	turn	causes	its
boiling	point	to	continue	to	rise.	In	order	to
make	a	syrup	of	a	given	sugar	concentration,
all	the	candy	maker	has	to	do	is	heat	a	mixture



of	sugar	and	water	until	it	boils,	and	then	keep
it	at	the	boil	and	watch	its	temperature.	At
235ºF/113ºC,	or	about	85%	sugar,	the	cook
can	stop	the	concentration	process	and	make
fudge;	at	270ºF/132ºC,	or	90%,	taffy;	at
300ºF/149ºC	and	above,	nearing	100%	sugar,
brittles	and	hard	candies.

The	 Cold-Water	 Test 	 Although	 it	 was
invented	 400	 years	 ago	 by	 Sanctorius,	 the
thermometer	 has	 been	 a	 common	 household
appliance	 for	 only	 a	 few	 decades.	 Beginning
in	the	16th	century	and	continuing	to	this	day,
confectioners	have	used	a	more	direct	means
of	 sampling	 the	 syrup’s	 fitness	 for	 different
candies:	 they	scoop	out	a	small	amount,	cool
it	quickly,	and	note	 its	behavior.	Thin	syrups
will	 simply	 form	 a	 thread	 in	 the	 air.
Somewhat	 more	 concentrated	 syrups	 form	 a
ball	 when	 dropped	 into	 cold	 water,	 and	 the
ball	 will	 be	 soft	 and	 malleable	 between	 the
fingers;	 as	 the	 concentration	 increases,	 the



cooled	 ball	 becomes	 harder.	 The	 most
concentrated	syrups	make	a	cracking	sound	as
they	 turn	 into	 hard,	 brittle	 threads.	 Each	 of
these	stages	indicates	a	particular	temperature
range	 and	 suitability	 for	 a	 particular	 kind	 of
candy	(see	box	below).

Syrup	Boiling	Points	Depend	on	Sugar
Concentration

The	 boiling	 point	 of	 a	 sugar	 solution
increases	 as	 the	 concentration	 of	 sugar
increases.	 This	 graph	 shows	 the
relationship	 between	 boiling	 point	 and
sugar	concentration	at	sea	level.

The	Heating	Rate	Accelerates	During
Cooking	As	we	cook	a	sugar	syrup,	most	of



the	heat	goes	into	the	work	of	evaporating
water	molecules	from	the	syrup,	and	less	into
actually	raising	the	temperature	of	the	syrup;
so	the	syrup	temperature	rises	only	gradually.
But	as	the	sugar	concentration	passes	80%,
there’s	so	little	water	left	that	both	the
temperature	of	the	syrup	and	its	boiling	point
rise	more	rapidly.	As	the	concentration
approaches	100%,	the	temperature	rises	very
fast,	and	can	easily	overshoot	the	desired
range	and	brown	or	scorch	the	sugar.	To	avoid
this,	the	cook	should	reduce	the	heat	toward
the	end	of	cooking	and	keep	a	careful	eye	on
the	syrup	temperature.

Setting	the	Sugar	Structure:	Cooling	and	Crystallization

The	final	texture	of	a	candy	is	determined	by
the	way	in	which	the	sugar	molecules	in	the
cooked	syrup	cool	and	settle	into	a	solid
structure.	If	the	sugar	forms	a	few	large
crystals,	then	the	candy	texture	will	be	coarse



and	grainy.	If	it	forms	many	millions	of
microscopic	crystals	that	are	lubricated	by
just	the	right	amount	of	syrup,	then	the	candy
will	be	smooth	and	creamy.	And	if	it	forms	no
crystals	at	all,	then	it	will	be	a	hard,
monolithic	mass.	The	trickiest	stage	of	candy
making	thus	comes	after	the	cooking,	when
the	syrup	cools	from	250–350ºF/	120–175ºC
down	to	room	temperature.	The	rate	of
cooling,	the	movement	of	the	syrup,	and	the
presence	of	the	smallest	particles	of	dust	or
sugar	can	have	drastic	effects	on	the	candy’s
structure	and	texture.

Confections	and	the	Sugar	Syrups
They’re	Made	from

Sugar	 confections	 are	 made	 from	 syrups
with	 particular	 sugar	 concentrations.	 This
chart	 lists	 some	 common	 confections	 and
two	distinguishing	qualities	of	their	syrups.

Syrup	Behavior Syrup



in	Cold-Water Boiling Confection
Test Point*	ºF/ºC
Thread 215–235/102–113 Syrups,	preserves
Soft	ball 235–240/113–116 Fondant,	fudge
Firm	ball 245–250/118–121 Caramel	candies
Hard 240–265/121– Marshmallows,
ball 130 nougat
Soft	crack 270–290/132–143 Taffy
Hard 300–310/149– Butterscotch,
crack 154 brittle
320–335/160–168 Hard	candies,	toffee

340/170 Light	caramel	for	syrups,	color,
and	flavor

355– Spun	sugar,	sugar	cages;
360/180–182 medium	caramel
375–380/188–190 Dark	caramel
410/205 Black	caramel
*Above	 330ºF/165ºC,	 the	 sugar	 syrup	 is
more	than	99%	sucrose.	It	no	longer	boils,



but	 begins	 to	 break	 down	 and	 caramelize.
Boiling	 points	 depend	 on	 elevation.	 For
each	1,000	feet/305	meters	above	sea	level,
subtract	 2ºF/1ºC	 from	 every	 boiling	 point
listed.

How	Sugar	Crystals	Form	Sugar	molecules
have	a	natural	tendency	to	bond	to	each	other
in	orderly	arrays	and	form	dense	solid	masses,
or	crystals.	When	sugar	crystals	are	dissolved
in	water	to	make	a	syrup,	the	water	molecules
overcome	that	tendency	by	forming	their	own
bonds	with	the	sugar	molecules,	surrounding
and	separating	them	from	each	other.	If	the
dissolved	sugar	molecules	in	a	syrup	get	too
crowded	for	the	water	molecules	to	keep	the
sugars	apart	from	each	other,	the	sugars	will
begin	to	bond	to	each	other	again	and	form
crystals.	When	the	tendency	of	a	dissolved
substance	to	bond	to	itself	is	exactly	balanced
by	the	water’s	ability	to	prevent	this	bonding,
the	solution	is	called	saturated.

The	saturation	point	depends	on



temperature.	The	rapidly	moving	water
molecules	in	a	hot	sugar	solution	can	keep
more	sugar	molecules	dissolved	than	the
sluggish	water	molecules	in	a	cold	solution
can.	The	moment	that	a	hot	and	saturated
solution	begins	to	cool,	it	becomes	super
saturated.	That	is,	it	temporarily	contains
more	dissolved	sugar	than	it	normally	could	at
that	temperature.	And	once	the	solution	has
become	supersaturated,	the	smallest
disturbance	will	induce	sugar	crystals	to	form
and	grow.	As	the	sugar	molecules	gather	into
solid	crystals,	they	leave	the	solution	around
them	less	concentrated.	When	the	solution
reaches	the	sugar	concentration	appropriate
for	its	new	temperature,	the	sugar	crystals
stop	forming	and	growing.	The	sugar	is	now
in	two	different	states:	some	remains
dissolved	in	the	syrup,	and	some	is	packed	in
the	solid	crystals	surrounded	by	the	syrup.

There	are	two	steps	in	sugar
crystallization:	the	formation	of	crystal



“seeds,”	and	the	growth	of	those	seeds	into
mature,	full-sized	crystals.	Seed	formation
determines	how	many	crystals	will	form,	and
crystal	growth	determines	how	large	they	get.
Both	steps	affect	the	final	texture	of	a	candy.

The	 growth	 of	 sugar	 crystals	 as	 a	 hot	 syrup
cools.	 Left:	Crystals	 are	 tightly	 organized,
solid	 clusters	 of	 molecules.	 Center:	When
conditions	 favor	 the	 formation	 of	 crystal
seeds,	 the	dissolved	sugar	molecules	can	join
many	 seeds,	 the	 resulting	 crystals	 are	 small,
and	 the	 candy	 texture	 is	 fine.	 Right:	When
conditions	limit	the	formation	of	crystal	seeds,
the	dissolved	sugar	molecules	can	join	only	a
few	seeds,	the	resulting	crystals	are	large,	and
the	candy	texture	is	coarse.



Particles,	Temperature,	and	Stirring
Influence	Crystallization	The	crystal	“seed”
is	an	initial	surface	to	which	sugar	molecules
can	attach	themselves	and	accumulate	in	a
solid	mass.	The	seed	can	be	a	few	sugar
molecules	that	happen	to	come	together
during	random	movements	in	the	syrup.
Stirring	and	agitation	have	the	effect	of
bumping	solution	molecules	together	more
often	than	they	otherwise	would,	and	thereby
encourage	the	formation	of	crystal	seeds.
Other	things	can	also	serve	as	seeds	in	a
cooling	syrup	and	initiate	crystallization.
Among	the	more	common	are	the	tiny	crystals
that	form	when	the	syrup	spatters	on	the	side
of	the	pan	or	dries	off	on	a	spoon,	and	that
then	are	stirred	back	into	the	syrup.	Dust
particles	and	even	tiny	air	bubbles	can	also	act
as	crystal	seeds.	A	metal	spoon	can	induce
crystallization	by	conducting	heat	away	from
local	areas	of	the	syrup,	cooling	them	and	so
leaving	them	super-supersaturated.



Experienced	candy	makers	therefore	prevent
premature	crystallization	by	using	wooden
spoons,	avoiding	agitation	of	the	syrup	once
it’s	cooked	and	begins	to	cool,	and	carefully
removing	dried	syrup	spatter	from	the	pan
walls	with	a	moist	brush.

Controlling	 Crystal	 Size	 and	 Candy
Texture	 The	 cook	 has	 to	 worry	 about
premature	 crystallization	 because	 candy
texture	is	affected	by	the	syrup	temperature	at
which	 crystallization	 begins.	 Generally,	 hot
syrups	 produce	 coarse	 crystals,	 and	 cool
syrups	produce	fine	crystals.	Here’s	the	logic.
Because	more	 sugar	molecules	will	 arrive	 at
the	crystal	surface	during	a	given	time	in	a	hot
syrup	 with	 fast-moving	 molecules	 than	 in	 a
cold,	 lethargic	 one,	 crystals	 grow	 more
rapidly	 in	 hot	 syrups.	 At	 the	 same	 time,
because	 stable	 crystal	seeds	 are	less	 likely	 to
form	 at	 higher	 temperatures	—	 an	 aggregate
of	 a	 few	 sugar	 molecules	 is	 more	 easily



knocked	apart	in	fast-moving	surroundings	—
the	 total	 number	 of	 crystals	 formed	 in	 a	 hot
syrup	 will	 be	 lower.	 Put	 these	 two	 trends
together,	 and	 we	 see	 that	 when	 a	 hot	 syrup
begins	to	crystallize,	it	will	produce	fewer	and
larger	crystals	than	a	cool	one,	and	therefore	a
coarse	 texture.	This	 is	why	 recipes	 for	 fudge
or	 fondant,	 candies	 with	 a	 fine,	 creamy
texture,	 call	 for	 the	 syrup	 to	 be	 cooled
drastically	 —	 from	 235ºF/113ºC	 down	 to
around	 110ºF/43ºC	 —	 before	 the	 cook
initiates	crystallization	by	stirring.

Stirring	Makes	Smaller	Crystals	Crystal	size
and	 texture	 are	 also	 influenced	 by	 stirring.
We’ve	 seen	 that	 agitation	 favors	 the
formation	 of	 crystal	 seeds	 by	 pushing	 sugar
molecules	 into	 each	 other.	 A	 syrup	 that	 is
stirred	 infrequently	 will	 develop	 only	 a	 few
crystals,	 while	 one	 that	 is	 kept	 in	 motion
continuously	will	produce	great	numbers.	And
the	 more	 crystals	 there	 are	 in	 a	 syrup,	 all



competing	 for	 the	 remaining	 free	molecules,
the	 fewer	 free	 molecules	 there	 are	 to	 go
around,	and	so	the	smaller	the	average	size	of
each	crystal.	The	more	a	syrup	is	stirred,	then,
the	 finer	 the	 consistency	 of	 the	 final	 candy.
This	is	the	justification	for	wearing	your	arm
out	when	making	 fudge:	 the	moment	 you	 let
up,	 the	 formation	 of	 seeds	 slows	 down,	 the
crystals	you’ve	made	up	to	that	point	begin	to
grow	 in	 size,	 and	 the	 candy	 gets	 coarse	 and
grainy.

Rules	for	Creating	Fine-Textured
Candies

In	 order	 to	 produce	 many	 small	 sugar
crystals	 from	 a	 syrup,	 the	 candy	 maker
should
include	some	corn	syrup	in	the	recipe	to
interfere	with	crystal	formation
remove	dried	syrup	from	the	pan	interior
before	cooling	the	syrup



allow	the	syrup	to	cool	before	initiating
crystallization
avoid	agitating	the	syrup	while	it	cools
when	the	syrup	is	cool,	agitate
continuously	and	vigorously	for	as	long
as	the	syrup	is	workable

Preventing	Crystal	Formation:	Making
Sugar	into	a	Glass	Candy	makers	produce	an
entirely	different	structure	and	texture	when
they	cool	a	syrup	so	rapidly	that	the	sugar
molecules	stop	moving	before	they	have	a
chance	to	form	any	crystals	at	all.	This	is	how
transparent	hard	candies	are	made.	If	the
water	content	of	the	cooked	syrup	is	just	1	or
2%,	then	it’s	essentially	molten	sugar	with	a
trace	of	water	dispersed	in	it.	The	syrup	is
very	viscous,	and	if	it	cools	quickly,	the
sucrose	molecules	never	have	a	chance	to
settle	into	orderly	crystals.	Instead,	they	just
set	in	place	in	a	disorganized	mass.	Such	an
amorphous,	noncrystalline	material	is	called	a



glass.	Ordinary	window	and	table	glass	is	a
noncrystalline	version	of	silicon	dioxide.	Like
this	mineral	glass,	sugar	glass	is	brittle	and
transparent	(and	often	stands	in	for	its	harder
and	more	dangerous	cousin	in	the	movies	and
on	stage!).	Glasses	are	transparent	because
individual	sugar	molecules	are	too	small	to
deflect	light	when	they’re	randomly	arranged.
Crystalline	solids	appear	opaque	because	even
tiny	crystals	are	solid	masses	of	many
molecules,	and	their	surfaces	are	big	enough
to	deflect	light.

Limiting	 Crystal	 Growth	 with	 Interfering
Agents	In	practice,	it’s	not	easy	to	control	or
prevent	 the	 crystallization	 of	 pure	 sucrose
syrups,	and	candy	makers	have	long	relied	on
other	 ingredients	 that	 interfere	 with	 and
therefore	 limit	 crystal	 formation	 and	 growth.
These	interfering	agents	help	the	cook	prepare
clear	 noncrystalline	 hard	 candies	 and	 fine-
textured	 creams,	 fudges,	 and	 other	 soft



candies.

Crystalline	and	glassy	 candies.	 Left:	When	 a
hot	 syrup	 cools	 slowly	 enough	 for	 the
molecules	 to	 cluster	 together,	 they	 form
tightly	organized	crystals.	Right:	When	a	very
concentrated	 syrup	 cools	 quickly	 and	 traps
the	 sugar	molecules	 in	place	before	 they	 can
cluster,	 they	 solidify	 into	 a	 disorganized,
noncrystalline	glass.
Invert	Sugar	The	original	interfering	agents
were	glucose	and	fructose,	or	“invert	sugar”
(p.	655).	When	heated	along	with	a	small
amount	of	acid	(often	cream	of	tartar),
sucrose	is	broken	down	into	its	two
components,	glucose	and	fructose.	Glucose
and	fructose	interfere	with	sucrose
crystallization	by	bonding	temporarily	to	the



crystal	surface	and	blocking	the	way	of
sucrose	molecules.	Honey	is	a	natural	source
of	invert	sugar,	and	“invert	syrup”	is	an
artificial	preparation	of	a	glucose-fructose
mixture.	Thanks	to	their	fructose	content,	both
honey	and	invert	syrup	readily	caramelize	and
can	cause	undesirable	browning	in	some
sweets.	Acid-inverted	syrups	brown	less
because	their	acidity	slows	caramelization.

Corn	Syrup	Because	acid	treatment	of	sucrose
is	 somewhat	 unpredictable,	 most	 modern
confectioners	instead	use	corn	syrup,	which	is
an	 especially	 effective	 inhibitor	 of
crystallization,	 and	 doesn’t	 readily
caramelize.	The	assorted	 long	glucose	 chains
form	a	tangle	that	impedes	the	motion	of	both
sugar	and	water	molecules	and	makes	it	more
difficult	for	the	sucrose	to	find	a	crystal	onto
which	 to	 fit.	 The	 glucose	 and	 maltose
molecules	 interfere	 in	 the	 same	 way	 that
invert	 sugar	 does.	 Corn	 syrup	 also	 provides



body	and	chewiness,	is	less	sweet	than	sugars,
and	 has	 the	 advantage	 for	 manufacturers	 of
being	less	expensive	than	crystalline	sugar.

Other	Candy	Ingredients	Confectioners	 add
a	 number	 of	 other	 ingredients	 to	 the	 basic
sugar	 syrup	 for	 candies	 to	 modify	 taste	 and
texture.	 All	 interfere	 with	 sucrose
crystallization	 to	 some	 extent	 and	 so	 tend	 to
encourage	finer	crystals.

Milk	Proteins	and	Fat	Milk	proteins	 thicken
candy	 body	 and,	 because	 they	 brown	 easily,
add	 a	 rich	 flavor	 to	 caramels	 and	 fudge.	The
casein	 proteins	 contribute	 to	 a	 chewy	 body,
whey	 proteins	 to	 browning	 and	 flavor
development,	 and	 both	 help	 emulsify	 and
stabilize	 butterfat	 droplets.	 Butterfat	 lends
smoothness	 and	 moistness	 to	 butterscotch,
caramel,	 toffee,	 and	 fudge,	 and	 reduces	 the
tendency	 of	 chewy	 candies	 to	 stick	 to	 the
teeth.	 Because	 milk	 proteins	 curdle	 in	 acid
conditions,	 and	 caramelization	 and	 browning



reactions	generate	 acids,	 candies	 that	 include
milk	 solids	 are	 sometimes	 neutralized	 with
baking	 soda.	 The	 reaction	 between	 acids	 and
baking	 soda	 generates	 bubbles	 of	 carbon
dioxide,	 so	 such	 candies	 may	 be	 filled	 with
small	 bubbles	 that	 give	 them	 a	 more	 fragile
texture,	less	chewy	or	hard	or	clinging.

Gelling	 Agents	 Confectioners	 also	 give	 a
firmer	body	to	certain	candies	with	a	number
of	 ingredients	 that	 bond	 to	 each	other	 and	 to
water	 to	 form	 solid	 but	 moist	 gels.	 These
ingredients	 include	 gelatin,	 egg	 white,	 grain
starches	 and	 flours,	 pectin,	 and	 plant	 gums.
Gelatin	 and	 pectin	 in	 particular	 are	 used	 to
make	 gummy	 and	 jelly	 candies,	 often	 in
combination.	 Gelatin	 provides	 a	 tough
chewiness,	while	pectin	makes	a	more	 tender
gel.	 Gum	 tragacanth,	 a	 carbohydrate	 from	 a
West	 Asian	 shrub	 in	 the	 bean	 family
(Astragalus),	 has	 been	 used	 for	 centuries	 to
make	 the	 sugar	 dough	 from	 which	 lozenges



are	cut	and	dried.

Candy	Colors
Many	 candies	 are	 intensely	 colored	 to
strike	the	eye	as	strongly	as	the	taste	buds.
The	pigments	in	such	candies	are	generally
synthesized	 from	 petroleum	 by-products,
and	are	much	more	intense	and	stable	than
natural	 colorings.	 Iridescent	 effects	 are
produced	with	a	combination	of	thin	plates
of	mica	(potassium	aluminum	silicate)	and
either	 titanium	 dioxide	 or	 ferric	 oxide
(mineral	pigments).

Acids	Many	candies	include	an	acid
ingredient	to	balance	the	overwhelming
sweetness.	Jelly	beans,	for	example,	have	a
tart	surface.	These	flavoring	acids	are	added
after	the	syrup	has	cooled	down,	so	as	to	avoid
excessive	inversion	of	the	sucrose	into
glucose	and	fructose.	Different	acids	are	said
to	have	different	taste	profiles.	Citric	and
tartaric	acids	give	a	rapid	impression	of



acidity,	while	malic,	lactic,	and	fumaric	acids
are	slower	to	register	on	the	tongue.

Kinds	of	Candies

It’s	convenient	to	divide	sugar	confections
into	three	groups:	noncrystalline	candies,
crystalline	candies,	and	candies	whose	texture
is	modified	with	gums,	gels,	and	pastes.	In
practice	these	groups	overlap:	there	are
crystalline	and	noncrystalline	versions	of
caramels,	hard	candies,	nougat,	sugar	work,
and	so	on.	Here	are	brief	descriptions	of	the
principal	candies	made	today.

Noncrystalline	Candies:
Hard	Candies,	Brittles,
Caramel	and	Taffy,	Sugar	Work

Hard	Candies	 Hard	 candies	 are	 the	 simplest
noncrystalline	 candies;	 they	 include	 hard
drops,	 clear	 mints,	 butterscotch,	 bonbons,



lollipops,	 and	 so	 on.	Hard	 candy	 is	made	 by
boiling	 the	 syrup	 high	 enough	 that	 the	 final
solid	will	contain	only	1	or	2%	moisture,	then
pouring	the	syrup	onto	a	surface	and	cooling	it
down,	 kneading	 in	 colors	 and	 flavors	 while
it’s	 still	 malleable,	 and	 shaping	 it.	 The	 very
high	 sugar	 concentration	 makes	 this	 syrup
liable	to	form	crystals	at	the	slightest	excuse,
so	 a	 substantial	 proportion	 of	 corn	 syrup	 is
used	to	prevent	this	and	produce	a	clear	sugar
glass.	 The	 high	 cooking	 temperatures	 also
encourage	caramelization	and	a	yellow-brown
discoloration,	which	are	not	desirable	in	these
candies;	 they’re	 often	 manufactured	 under
reduced	pressure,	which	allows	them	to	reach
the	 proper	 sugar	 concentration	 at	 a	 lower
temperature.

The	Composition	of	Some	Popular
Candies



The	 more	 sugars	 and	 the	 less	 water	 a
candy	 contains,	 the	 harder	 its	 texture.
Glucose	 sugars	 and	 chains	 (corn	 syrup)
are	 included	 in	 candy	 syrups	 to	 prevent
sucrose	 crystallization	 (hard	 candies,
gummy	 candies)	 or	 to	 limit	 it	 (caramels,
fudge,	fondant).

Intentionally	Crystalline	Hard	Candies	The
development	of	crystals	is	considered	a	defect
in	many	hard	candies,	and	results	from	too
little	interfering	corn	syrup,	or	the
introduction	of	seed	crystals	from	the	pan
sides,	or	too	much	moisture	in	the	syrup.	But
some	hard	candies	are	intentionally
manipulated	to	form	tiny	crystals,	which	give
the	candy	a	“short,”	more	crumbly	texture.



Candy	canes	and	after-dinner	mints	are
common	examples	of	such	confections.	An
opaque	but	satin-or	silk-like	sheen	results
when	the	cooled	but	malleable	syrup	is
repeatedly	pulled	and	folded	back	onto	itself.
This	working	incorporates	some	air	bubbles,
and	these	in	turn	encourage	the	formation	of
tiny	sucrose	crystals.	Both	bubbles	and
crystals	interrupt	the	candy	structure,	giving	it
a	crisp,	light	quality	and	making	it	easier	to
break	between	the	teeth.	(See	“Sugar	Work”
below.)

Cotton	Candy	Cotton	candy	or	candy	floss	is	a
very	different	kind	of	hard	candy,	filaments	of
sugar	 glass	 so	 fine	 that	 they	 have	 the
consistency	of	a	cotton	ball	and	dissolve	away
the	 moment	 they	 touch	 the	 moist	 mouth.
Cotton	 candy	 is	 made	 in	 a	 special	 machine
that	melts	the	sugar	and	forces	it	through	tiny
spinnerets	 into	 the	 air,	 where	 it	 instantly
solidifies	into	threads.	It	was	introduced	at	the



1904	World’s	Fair	in	St.	Louis.

Brittles	Brittles	are	also	cooked	to	a	very	low
moisture	 content,	 around	 2%,	 but	 unlike	 the
other	 hard	 candies,	 they	 include	 butter	 and
milk	 solids,	 and	 usually	 pieces	 of	 nuts.
They’re	 thus	 opaque	 with	 fat	 droplets	 and
protein	particles,	and	brown	in	color	thanks	to
extensive	 browning	 reactions	 between	 sugars
and	 proteins.	 Baking	 soda	 is	 often	 added	 to
brittle	syrups	after	they’re	cooked,	for	several
reasons:	 alkaline	 conditions	 favor	 browning
reactions,	 help	 neutralize	 some	 of	 the	 acids
produced	 thereby,	 and	 the	 bubbles	 of	 carbon
dioxide	 that	 result	 from	 this	 neutralization
become	 trapped	 in	 the	 candy,	 giving	 it	 a
lighter	 texture.	 The	 original	 French	praline
was	a	brittle	made	with	almonds.	(The	modern
New	Orleans	praline	 is	soft	and	chewy,	more
like	 a	 caramel,	 and	 contains	 New-World
pecans	instead	of	almonds.)

Caramel,	Caramels,	Caramelization



These	very	 similar	words	mean	 somewhat
different	 things,	 and	 aren’t	 always	 used
consistently.
Caramelization	is	the	cooking	of	a	plain
sugar	syrup	until	it	turns	brown	and
aromatic.	It	is	similar	to	the	browning	or
Maillard	reactions	that	give	color	and
aroma	to	roasted	meats,	baked	goods,	and
other	complex	foods,	but	unlike	the
browning	reactions	it	proceeds	in	the
absence	of	amino	acids	and	proteins.	It
requires	higher	temperatures	than	the
browning	reactions,	and	produces	a
different	mixture	of	aromatic	compounds
and	therefore	a	different	flavor	(p.	777).
Cooks	have	spoken	of	“caramelized”	or
“carmelized”	meats	for	better	than	a
century,	but	this	is	not	really	correct.
Caramel	is	first	of	all	the	brown,	sweet,
aromatic	syrup	produced	in
caramelization,	which	may	be	used	as
coloring	and/or	flavoring	ingredient	in



many	preparations.	But	cooks	use	the
same	word	to	mean	the	combination	of
caramelized	sugar	and	various	milk
products,	ideally	cream,	which	are	mixed
while	the	sugar	is	still	hot	so	that	the
milk	solids	are	browned	and	generate
color	and	aroma	as	well.	This	kind	of
caramel	is	often	used	as	a	sauce.
Caramels	are	solid	candies	made	from	a
mixture	of	caramelized	sugar	and	cream.

Caramels,	Toffees,	and	Taffies	Caramels	and
their	relatives	are	generally	noncrystalline
candies	that	contain	milkfat	and	milk	solids,
usually	in	the	concentrated	form	of	sweetened
condensed	milk.	(Cheap	versions	are	made
with	milk	powder	and	vegetable	shortening.)
They	are	chewy	rather	than	hard,	and
wonderfully	mouthwatering	because	chewing
liberates	droplets	of	butterfat	from	the	sugar
mass.	Their	chewiness	comes	from	a	lower
cooking	temperature	and	so	a	higher	moisture



content	than	hard	candies,	a	large	proportion
of	corn	syrup,	and	the	presence	of	milk	casein
proteins.	The	characteristic	caramel	flavor
develops	from	the	milk	ingredients	and
reactions	between	these	and	the	syrup	sugars
during	the	cooking.	In	Britain,	butter	for
toffee	was	often	stored	to	develop	some
rancidity	(from	free	butyric	acid),	which
produced	a	desirably	stronger	dairy	flavor	in
the	finished	candy.	(American	chocolate
manufacturers	have	done	much	the	same
thing;	see	box,	p.	703).	The	higher	the	fat
content,	the	less	these	candies	stick	to	the
teeth.

Caramels	are	cooked	to	the	lowest
temperature	of	the	noncrystalline	candies,
have	the	highest	moisture	content,	and	are	the
softest.	Toffees	and	taffies	contain	less	butter
and	milk	solids	—	taffies	sometimes	none	at
all	—	and	are	cooked	50ºF	hotter	than
caramels,	so	they’re	more	firm.	Taffies	are
often	pulled	to	produce	an	aerated,	finely



crystalline,	less	dense,	less	chewy	version.
Caramels	made	with	dairy	products	owe	some
of	their	flavor	to	caramelized	sugar,	but	they
include	flavors	from	the	Maillard	reactions.
Like	the	terminology,	caramelized	sugar	and
dairy	flavors	blend	easily	with	each	other.
This	may	be	in	part	because	one	of	the
important	products	of	sugar	caramelization	is
diacetyl,	an	aromatic	chemical	that	provides
the	pronounced	buttery	aroma	of	cultured
butter(p.	35).	Caramel	has	a	rich,	complex
flavor	and	consistency,	viscous	and	sticky	and
creamy	all	at	once,	that	works	well	with	most
sweets	and	fruits,	with	coffee	and	chocolate,
and	even	with	salt:	the	prized	caramels	of
Brittany	are	made	with	a	notable	dose	of	sea
salt.

Sugar	 Work 	 The	 most	 spectacular	 sugar
preparations	 are	 those	 that	 take	 advantage	 of
sugar’s	 similarity	 to	 glass:	 its	 transparency
and	capacity	to	be	sculpted,	blown,	and	drawn



out	 into	 countless	 shapes.	 “Sugar	 work,”	 as
such	 preparations	 are	 called,	 goes	 back	 at
least	 500	 years.	 A	 “nest	 of	 silken	 threads,”
probably	similar	to	our	spun	sugar,	was	made
from	 malt	 syrup	 for	 the	 Chinese	 Imperial
household	 before	 1600;	 and	 in	 17th-century
Italy,	 various	 banquet	 decorations,	 including
dishes,	were	made	from	sugar.	In	Japan,	there
is	 a	 traditional	 street	 entertainment	 called
“sweet	 candy	 craft,”	amezaiku,	 in	 which	 the
performers	sculpt	flowers,	animals,	and	other
shapes	while	people	watch.

The	basic	material	for	sugar	work	is
molten	sucrose	mixed	with	a	large	portion	of
glucose	and	fructose	to	help	prevent
crystallization.	The	glucose	and	fructose	may
be	added	in	the	form	of	corn	syrup,	or	the	pure
sugars,	or	they	may	be	formed	from	the
sucrose	itself	during	the	cooking	of	the	syrup
with	added	acid	(cream	of	tartar).	The	sugar
mixture	is	heated	until	it	reaches	315–
330ºF/157–166ºC,	at	which	point	there	is



practically	no	water	left.	Any	residual	water
can	cause	crystallization	and	milkiness	by
making	it	easier	for	the	sucrose	molecules	to
move	around	and	nest	together.	At	somewhat
higher	temperatures,	the	sugar	begins	to
caramelize	and	turn	yellow-brown,	which	is
undesirable	for	much	sugar	work	but
encouraged	for	spun	sugar	and	sugar	cages,
which	are	made	by	drizzling	the	hot	syrup	in
threads	over	a	solid	form	or	a	wooden	rack,
where	they	harden	almost	instantly.	For	more
elaborate	sugar	work,	the	entire	sugar	mass	is
cooled	to	around	130–120ºF/55–50ºC,	a	range
in	which	it	has	a	pliable,	doughy	consistency.
Now	it	can	be	handled	and	formed,	blown	like
glass	into	hollow	spheres	and	other	shapes,
and	kept	workable	with	a	heat	lamp.	Though
pastry	chefs	with	seasoned	fingertips	can
sculpt	sugar	barehanded,	many	use	thin	latex
gloves	in	order	to	avoid	transferring	moisture
and	skin	oils	from	their	fingers.

One	of	the	more	striking	forms	of	sugar



work	is	pulled	sugar,	which	develops	a	lovely
delicate	satin-like	opacity.	The	cook	pulls	a
piece	of	the	sugar	mixture	into	a	long	rope,
then	folds	and	twists	it	onto	itself	and	pulls
again.	By	repeating	this	action	many	times,	he
forms	the	sugar	mixture	into	many	fine,	partly
crystalline	strands	separated	by	columns	of
air,	a	combination	that	becomes	a	solid	fabric
of	shiny	threads.

Crystalline	Candies:	Rock	Candy,	Fondant,
Fudge,	Panned	Candies,	Lozenges	About	the
only	candy	in	which	large,	coarse	crystals	are
valued	is	rock	candy,	a	vivid	demonstration	of
crystal	 growth.	 Simply	 cook	 a	 syrup	 to	 the
hard	 ball	 stage,	 then	 pour	 into	 a	 small	 glass,
with	 a	 toothpick	 to	 serve	 as	 a	 removable
foundation,	 and	 let	 it	 sit	 for	 a	 few	days.	The
resulting	crystals	can	be	preserved	by	washing
the	 encrusted	 stick	 briefly	 under	 cold	 water,
shaking	off	the	excess,	and	letting	it	dry.

Fondant	 and	 Fudge	 Fondant	 and	 fudge	 are



the	 two	 most	 common	 finely	 crystalline
candies,	 whose	 nature	 is	 to	 dissolve	 to	 a
creamy	consistency	on	 the	 tongue.	The	name
fondant	 comes	 from	 the	 French	fondre,
meaning	“to	melt,”	and	fondant	is	the	base	for
what	are	called	candy	“creams,”	the	flavored,
moist,	 melt-in-the-mouth	 interiors	 of	 filled
chocolates	and	other	candies.	It	also	serves	as
an	icing	for	cakes	and	pastries;	it	can	be	rolled
out	 and	 molded	 onto	 a	 cake,	 or	 warmed	 or
thinned	 until	 runny	 and	 poured	 into	 a	 thin
layer.	Fudge	is	essentially	fondant	made	with
added	 milk,	 fat,	 and	 sometimes	 chocolate
solids	 (it	 can	 also	 be	 thought	 of	 as	 a
crystallized	 version	 of	 caramel).	 Penuche	 is
fondant	 made	 with	 brown	 sugar	 (some	 New
Orleans	 pralines	 are	 penuche	 that	 includes
pecans).

Fondant	and	fudge	are	made	with	the	help
of	corn	syrup,	which	favors	the	production	of
small	crystals.	After	the	syrup	has	been	boiled
and	then	cooled	to	130–100ºF/54–38ºC,	the



cook	beats	it	continuously	for	about	15
minutes,	until	crystallization	is	complete.

The	texture	of	these	candies	depends	on
how	much	water	they’re	left	with.	If	the	syrup
has	become	especially	concentrated,	the
texture	will	be	dry	and	crumbly,	the
appearance	dull;	if	it’s	less	cooked	or	absorbs
moisture	from	the	air	during	cooling	and
beating,	it	will	be	soft,	even	runny,	the
appearance	glossy	thanks	to	the	abundance	of
syrup	between	crystals.	Small	variations	in
water	content	—	just	1	or	2%	—	make	a
noticeable	difference.	Fudge	is	more	complex
than	fondant,	its	syrup	carrying	milk	solids
and	fat	droplets	as	well	as	sugar	crystals.

Panned	 Candies	 These	 are	 the	 modern
version	 of	 the	 medieval	dragées:	 flavorful
nuts	or	 spices	coated	 in	 sugar.	There	are	 two
basic	ways	 to	 coat	 candies	 in	 a	 pan.	 In	 hard
panning,	 the	 nut	 or	 spice	 or	 other	 center	 is
rolled	 around	 a	 hot	 pan	 and	 periodically



sprayed	 with	 a	 concentrated	 sucrose	 syrup,
whose	moisture	evaporates	and	leaves	behind
tightly	 interlocked,	 hard	 layers	 of	 crystals,
just	 0.01–0.02	 mm	 thick.	 In	 soft	 panning,
most	 often	 applied	 to	 jellybeans,	 the	 jelly
candy	 is	 rolled	 around	 in	 a	 cool	 pan	 with	 a
glucose	syrup	and	powdered	sugar.	Instead	of
crystallizing,	 the	 syrup	 is	 absorbed	 by	 the
powder,	 and	 excess	 moisture	 is	 dried	 off.
Soft-panned	 layers	 are	 thicker	 and	 less
crystalline.

Lozenges	Lozenges	are	among	 the	oldest	and
simplest	 of	 confections	 —	 they	 require	 no
high-temperature	 cooking.	 They’re	 made	 by
preparing	 a	 binding	 agent	 in	 water	 —	 gum
tragacanth	 is	 standard,	 though	 gelatin	 also
works	 —	 and	 then	 making	 a	 “dough”	 by
adding	 finely	 ground	 icing	 sugar	 and
flavoring.	 The	 dough	 is	 then	 rolled	 out,	 cut
into	 pieces,	 and	 dried.	 Lozenges	 have	 a
crumbly	texture.



Aerated	 Candies:	 Marshmallow,	 Nougat
Candies	with	a	 light,	chewy	texture	are	made
by	combining	a	sugar	syrup	with	an	ingredient
that	forms	a	stable	foam.	Egg	whites,	gelatin,
and	soy	protein	are	the	most	common	foaming
agents.	 Usually	 they	 and	 interfering	 agents
prevent	the	syrup	from	crystallizing,	but	some
aerated	 candies	 are	 made	 crystalline	 by
combining	a	fine	fondant	with	the	foam.

Marshmallows	 Marshmallows	 were	 first
made	in	France	from	the	gummy	root	juice	of
the	 marsh	 mallow	 (Althaea	 officinalis),	 a
weedy	 relative	 of	 the	 hollyhock;	 the
confection	was	 called	pâte	de	Guimauve.	The
juice	was	mixed	with	eggs	and	sugar	and	then
beaten	 to	 a	 foam.	 Today,	 marshmallows	 are
made	 by	 combining	 a	 viscous	 protein
solution,	 usually	 gelatin,	 with	 a	 sugar	 syrup
concentrated	 to	 about	 the	 caramel	 stage,	 and
whipping	 the	 mixture	 to	 incorporate	 air
bubbles.	The	protein	molecules	collect	 in	 the



bubble	walls,	and	this	reinforcement,	together
with	 the	viscosity	of	 the	 syrup,	 stabilizes	 the
foam	structure.	The	gelatin	accounts	for	2–3%
of	 the	 mixture,	 and	 produces	 a	 somewhat
elastic	 texture.	Marshmallows	made	with	egg
whites	are	lighter	and	softer.

Nougat	 Nougat	 is	 a	 traditional	 sugar	 candy
made	 in	 Provence	 that	 contains	 nuts	 and	 is
aerated	 with	 egg-white	 foam.	 Italian	torrone
and	 Spanish	turron	 are	 similar.	 It’s	 a	 cross
between	a	meringue	and	a	candy,	and	is	made
by	 preparing	 a	 meringue	 and	 then	 streaming
hot,	 concentrated	 sugar	 syrup	 into	 it	 while
continuing	 to	 beat.	 It	 can	 be	 either	 soft	 and
chewy	or	hard	and	crunchy	depending	on	 the
degree	to	which	the	sugar	syrup	is	cooked	and
the	 proportion	 of	 sugar	 syrup	 to	 egg	 white.
Honey	is	often	an	ingredient.

Flashy	Candies:	Lightning	in	the	Mouth
Mix	 together	 crystals	 of	 table	 sugar	 and



essence	 of	 wintergreen	 and	 you	 get
something	startling:	a	candy	that	seems	to
give	 off	 sparks	 when	 you	 eat	 it!	 When
highly	 orderly	 sucrose	 crystals	 are
fractured	 between	 the	 teeth,	 the	 sudden
split	 leaves	 an	 imbalance	 of	 electrical
charge	 between	 the	 two	 pieces:	 there	 are
more	electrons	on	one	side	 than	 the	other.
The	 electrons	 then	 jump	 the	 gap	 to	 the
more	 positively	 charged	 piece.	 En	 route,
they	collide	with	nitrogen	molecules	in	the
air,	which	then	discharge	the	sudden	jolt	of
kinetic	energy	in	the	form	of	light	energy.
The	 same	 kinds	 of	 electron	 jumping	 and
colliding	produce	lightning	strikes	between
electrically	 charged	 clouds	 and	 the	 earth.
Of	 course,	 sugar	 crystals	 give	 off	 a	much
weaker	glow	than	true	lightning.	And	much
of	 that	 glow	 is	 in	 the	 invisible	 ultraviolet
part	 of	 the	 light	 spectrum.	 Here’s	 where
the	 wintergreen	 plays	 a	 role.	 Its	 aromatic
essence,	 methyl	 salicylate,	 is	 fluorescent:



it	absorbs	the	invisible	ultraviolet	rays	and
re-radiates	 them	 in	 the	 visible	 part	 of	 the
light	 spectrum.	 It	 thus	 amplifies	 the
dimmer	sucrose	glow	to	the	point	that,	in	a
dark	 room,	 we	 can	 see	 blue	 flashes	 when
the	candy	is	crushed.

Chewy	Jelly	and	Paste	Candies;	Marzipan
A	number	of	different	candies	are	made	by
incorporating	a	sugar	syrup	into	a	solution	of
starch,	gelatin,	pectin,	or	plant	gums,	and	then
allowing	the	mixture	to	solidify	into	a	dense,
chewy	mass.	In	Japan	and	elsewhere	in	Asia,
sweets	are	often	gelled	with	the	seaweed
extract	agar	(p.	609),	which	is	effective	in
unusually	small	amounts	(as	little	as	0.1%	of
the	mix).

Turkish	 Delight	 Turkish	 delight,	 or	lokum
rahat	in	Turkish,	is	one	of	the	most	venerable
of	this	kind,	having	been	made	in	the	Middle
East	 and	 the	 Balkans	 for	 centuries.	 It	 is
thickened	 with	 starch	 (around	 4%),



translucent,	 and	 traditionally	 flavored	 with
essence	of	rose.

Licorice	Licorice	is	usually	made	with	wheat
flour	 and	molasses,	 around	 30%	 and	 60%	 of
the	 mix	 respectively,	 with	 licorice	 extract
around	 5%;	 it’s	 dense	 and	 opaque,	 like	 its
flavor.	 The	 licorice	 is	 often	 complemented
with	 anise,	 and	 in	 Scandinavian	 countries
there’s	 a	 curious	 pairing	 of	 licorice	 with
ammonia	 —	 in	 foods,	 an	 aroma	 usually
encountered	only	in	overripe	cheeses!

Jelly	 Beans	 and	 Gummy	 Candies	 These
favorites	 are	made	with	 approximately	 equal
weights	 of	 sucrose	 and	 corn	 syrup	 and	 a
mixture	of	gelatin	and	pectin.	The	gelatin	may
be	 between	 5	 and	 15%	 of	 the	 candy	 weight,
and	by	itself	produces	an	increasingly	elastic,
even	 rubbery	 texture;	 pectin	 at	 around	 1%
introduces	 a	 complex	microstructure	 into	 the
candy,	 gives	 a	 shorter,	more	 crumbly	 texture
and	 also	 causes	 candy	 tastes	 and	 aromas	 to



seem	 more	 intense.	 Gelatin	 is	 degraded	 in
high	heat,	so	a	concentrated	solution	is	added
to	the	sugar	syrup	after	it	has	been	cooked	and
mostly	 cooled.	 These	 candies	 are	 relatively
moist,	being	about	15%	water.

Marzipan	 Marzipan	 is	 essentially	 a	 paste	 of
sugar	 and	 almonds,	 has	 been	 made	 in	 the
Middle	 East	 and	 Mediterranean	 region	 for
centuries,	 and	 is	 especially	 prized	 as	 a
sculptural	material;	it’s	shaped	and	colored	to
resemble	 fruits	 and	 vegetables,	 animals,
people,	 and	 many	 other	 objects.	 The	 solid
phase	in	nut	pastes	 like	marzipan	is	provided
by	finely	granulated	sugar	and	the	particles	of
nut	proteins	and	carbohydrates.	It	can	be	made
by	 cooking	 almonds	 and	 syrup	 together	 and
then	cooling	and	crystallizing	the	mixture;	or
ground	almonds	can	be	mixed	with	a	premade
fondant	 and	 powdered	 sugar.	 Egg	 white	 or
gelatin	 is	 sometimes	 added	 to	 improve	 the
binding.



Fizzy	and	Crackling	Candies
Candies	that	fizz	and	crackle	in	the	mouth
were	 developed	 in	 the	 19th	 century	 by
embedding	 the	 equivalent	 of	 baking
powder	in	a	very	low-moisture	sugar	syrup
as	 it	 cools	 and	 hardens.	 Remember	 that
baking	 powder	 is	 a	 mixture	 of	 an	 acid
together	 with	 alkaline	 baking	 soda.	When
the	two	components	are	moistened	together
in	 a	 batter,	 they	 react	 to	 produce	 carbon
dioxide	 gas.	 Similarly,	 when	 the	 dry
crystals	of	citric	or	malic	acid	and	sodium
bicarbonate	 in	 a	 candy	 are	 moistened
together	in	the	mouth,	they	react	and	form
bubbles	of	carbon	dioxide	that	provide	the
sensation	 of	 tartness	 and	 prickly
foaminess.

A	 20th-century	 industrial	 twist	 on	 this
idea	produced	Pop	or	Space	Rocks,	which
instantly	 burst	 and	 then	 disappear	 in	 the
mouth.	A	scientist	at	General	Foods	found
that	 he	 could	 supercharge	 a	 concentrated



sugar	 syrup	with	 carbon	 dioxide	 gas,	 then
chill	it	down	quickly	and	under	pressure	to
lock	the	gas	in	the	solidified	candy.	When
the	candy	is	depressurized	much	of	the	gas
escapes,	 but	 some	 remains.	And	when	 the
candy	 dissolves	 in	 the	 mouth’s	 moisture,
the	gas	bursts	out	with	a	 startling	crackle.
Some	chefs	use	these	gasified	candies	as	a
source	 of	 unexpected	 sensations;	 they
embed	 them	in	dishes	 that	are	sufficiently
dry	 or	 cold	 not	 to	 dissolve	 them
prematurely.

Chewing	Gum

This	quintessentially	American	confection	has
ancient	roots.	Humans	have	chewed	on	gums,
resins,	and	latexes	secreted	by	various	plants
for	thousands	of	years.	The	Greeks	named	the
resin	of	a	kind	of	pistachio	tree	with	their
word	for	“to	grind	the	teeth	together,	to
chew”:	that	was	mastic	(p.	421),	whose	root



also	gives	us	“masticate.”	Europeans	and
North	Americans	chewed	the	relatively	harsh
resin	of	spruce	trees;	and	the	Maya	chewed
chicle,	the	latex	of	the	sapodilla	tree	(Achras
sapote),	ten	centuries	before	it	was
commercialized	in	New	York	City.	The	idea
of	mixing	gum	with	sugar	goes	back	to	the
early	Arab	sugar	traders,	who	used	the
exudation	of	certain	kinds	of	acacia,	a
substance	now	known	as	gum	arabic.	It	and
gum	tragacanth	are	slightly	soluble	and
eventually	dissolve	when	chewed;	they	were
used	in	early	medicine	as	carriers	that	would
release	drugs	slowly.	This	is	still	one	of	the
purposes	of	chewing	gum,	which	are	to
release	a	pleasant	flavor	for	some	time	while
giving	the	jaw	muscles	something	to	do	and
stimulating	a	cleansing	flow	of	saliva.

Gum	 in	 America	 The	 history	 of	 modern
chewing	 gums	 begins	 in	 1869,	 when	 a	 New
York	inventor	by	the	name	of	Thomas	Adams



was	 introduced	 to	 chicle	 from	 Central	 and
South	 America.	 Chicle	 is	 a	 latex,	 a	 milky,
water-based	 plant	 fluid	 that	 carries	 tiny
droplets	 of	 long,	 coiled	 carbon-hydrogen
chains.	 These	 chains	 have	 the	 property	 of
being	elastic:	they	uncoil	and	stretch	out	when
pulled,	but	snap	back	when	released.	The	best
known	 of	 these	 latex	 substances	 is	 rubber.
Adams	 got	 the	 idea	 of	 using	 the	 chicle	 as	 a
gum	 base,	 and	 patented	 chicle	 gum	 in	 1871.
With	 sugar	 and	 sassafras	 or	 licorice
flavorings,	 it	 quickly	 caught	 on.	 By	 1900,
entrepreneurs	 with	 such	 names	 as	 Fleer	 and
Wrigley	 had	 developed	 gumballs	 and
peppermint	 and	 spearmint	 flavors,	 and	 in
1928	a	Fleer	employee	perfected	bubble	gum
by	 developing	 a	 very	 elastic	 latex	 mixture
from	longer	hydrocarbon	polymers.

Modern	 Synthetic	 Gums	 Today,	 chewing
gum	 is	 made	 mostly	 of	 synthetic	 polymers,
especially	 styrene-butadiene	 rubber	 —	 also



found	in	auto	tires	—	and	polyvinyl	acetate	—
in	 adhesives	 and	 paints	 —	 though	 some
brands	 still	 contain	 chicle	 or	 jelutong,	 a
natural	 latex	 from	 the	 Far	 East.	 The	 crude
gum	 base	 is	 first	 filtered,	 dried,	 and	 then
cooked	in	water	until	syrupy.	Powdered	sugar
and	 corn	 syrup	 are	mixed	 in,	 then	 flavorings
and	softeners	—	vegetable	oil	derivatives	that
make	 the	 gum	 easier	 to	 chew	 —	 and	 the
material	 is	 cooled,	 kneaded	 to	 an	 even,
smooth	texture,	cut,	rolled	thin,	and	cut	again
into	strips,	and	packaged.	The	final	product	is
about	 60%	 sugar,	 20%	 corn	 syrup,	 and	 20%
gum	 materials.	 Sugar-free	 gums	 are	 made
using	sugar	alcohols	and	intensive	sweeteners
(p.	659).

Candy	Storage	and	Spoilage

Because	of	their	generally	low	water	content
and	concentrated	sugars,	which	draw	moisture
out	of	living	cells,	candies	are	seldom	spoiled



by	the	growth	of	bacteria	or	molds.	Their
flavor	can	be	degraded,	however,	by	the
oxidation	and	consequent	rancidity	of	added
fats,	whether	in	milk	solids	or	butter.	This
process	can	be	slowed	down	by	refrigeration
or	freezing,	but	cold	storage	encourages
another	problem	called	“sugar	bloom.”
Changes	in	temperature	can	cause	moisture
from	the	air	to	condense	on	the	candy	surface,
and	some	sugar	will	dissolve	into	the	liquid.
When	the	moisture	evaporates	again	or	is
drawn	deeper	into	the	candy,	the	surface	sugar
crystallizes	into	a	rough,	white	coating.
Airtight	wrapping	will	prevent	sugar	bloom.

Chocolate

Chocolate	is	one	of	our	most	remarkable
foods.	It	is	made	from	the	astringent,	bitter,
and	otherwise	bland	seeds	of	a	tropical	tree,
yet	its	flavor	is	exceptionally	rich,	complex,
and	versatile,	the	product	of	both	fermentation



and	roasting.	Its	consistency	is	like	no	other
food’s:	hard	and	dry	at	room	temperature,
melting	and	creamy	in	the	warmth	of	the
mouth.	It	can	be	sculpted	into	almost	any
shape,	and	its	surface	can	be	made	as	glossy
as	glass.	And	chocolate	is	one	of	the	few
examples	of	a	food	whose	full	potential	was
first	revealed	in	industrial	manufacturing.	The
chocolate	that	we	know	and	love,	a	dense,
smooth,	sweet	solid,	has	existed	for	only	a
tiny	fraction	of	chocolate’s	full	history.

The	History	of	Chocolate

An	Exotic	Drink	The	story	of	chocolate
begins	in	the	New	World	with	the	cacao	tree,
which	probably	evolved	in	the	river	valleys	of
equatorial	South	America.	The	tree	bears
large,	tough	seed	pods	that	also	contain	a
sweet,	moist	pulp,	and	early	peoples	may	have
carried	the	pods	into	Central	America	and
southern	Mexico	as	a	portable	source	of



energy	and	moisture.	It	appears	that	the	first
people	to	cultivate	the	tree	were	the	Olmecs
of	the	southern	Gulf	coast	of	Mexico.	They	in
turn	introduced	it	sometime	before	600	BCE	to
the	Maya,	who	produced	it	in	the	tropical
Yucatan	peninsula	and	Central	America,	and
traded	it	to	the	Aztecs	in	the	cool	and	arid
north.	The	Aztecs	roasted	and	ground	cacao
seeds	and	made	them	into	a	drink	that	was
served	in	religious	ceremonies	and	associated
with	human	blood.	The	seeds	were	valuable
enough	to	serve	as	a	form	of	currency.	The
first	Europeans	to	see	the	cacao	bean	were
probably	the	crew	of	Columbus’s	fourth
voyage	in	1502,	who	brought	some	back	to
Spain.	In	1519	one	of	Cortez’s	lieutenants,
Bernal	Diaz	del	Castillo,	saw	the	Aztec
emperor	Montezuma	at	table	and	in	passing
described	the	prepared	drink:

Fruit	of	all	the	kinds	that	the	country
produced	were	laid	before	him;	he	ate	very



little,	but	from	time	to	time	a	liquor
prepared	from	cocoa,	and	of	an	aphrodisiac
nature,	as	we	were	told,	was	presented	to
him	in	golden	cups….	I	observed	a	number
of	jars,	above	fifty,	brought	in,	filled	with
foaming	chocolate,	of	which	he	took
some….

One	 of	 the	 first	 detailed	 accounts	 of	 the
original	 chocolate	 comes	 from	 the	History	 of
the	 New	 World 	 (1564)	 by	 the	 Milanese
Girolamo	 Benzoni,	 who	 traveled	 in	 Central
America.	 He	 remarked	 that	 the	 region	 had
made	 two	 unique	 contributions	 to	 the	world:
Indian	 fowls,”	 or	 turkeys,	 and	 “cavacate,”	 or
the	cacao	bean.

Food	Words:	Cocoa,	Chocolate
The	 word	cocoa	 comes	 via	 the	 Spanish
cacao,	 which	 in	 turn	 came	 via	 the	 Maya
and	 Aztec	 from	 a	 probable	 Olmec	 word
kakawa	 coined	3,000	years	ago.	Chocolate



has	a	more	complicated	history.	The	Aztec
(Nahuatl)	 word	 for	 cocoa-water	 was
cacahuatl,	 but	 the	 early	 Spanish	 coined
chocolate	 for	 themselves.	 According	 to
historians	 Michael	 and	 Sophie	 Coe,	 they
may	 have	 done	 so	 to	 distinguish	 the	 hot
Maya	version	 that	 they	preferred	from	the
cold	 Aztec	 one	 —	 in	 the	 Yucatan,	 “hot”
was	chocol;	the	Aztec	for	“water”	atl.

They	pick	out	the	kernels	and	lay	them	on
the	mats	to	dry;	then	when	they	wish	for
the	beverage,	they	roast	them	in	an	earthen
pan	over	the	fire,	and	grind	them	with	the
stones	which	they	use	for	preparing	bread.
Finally,	they	put	the	paste	into	cups…and
mixing	it	gradually	with	water,	sometimes
adding	a	little	of	their	spice,	they	drink	it,
though	it	seems	more	suited	for	pigs	than
men.

…The	flavor	is	somewhat	bitter,	but	it
satisfies	and	refreshes	the	body	without



intoxicating:	the	Indians	esteem	it	above
everything,	wherever	they	are	accustomed
to	it.

Benzoni	and	other	visitors	reported	that	the
Maya	 and	 Aztecs	 flavored	 their	 chocolate
drinks	with	a	number	of	different	ingredients,
including	 aromatic	 flowers,	 vanilla,	 chilli,
wild	 honey,	 and	 achiote	 (p.	 423).	 The
Europeans	 then	 began	 to	 add	 their	 own
flavorings,	 among	 them	 sugar,	 cinnamon,
cloves,	 anise,	 almonds,	 hazel-nuts,	 vanilla,
orange-flower	water,	and	musk.	According	 to
the	 English	 Jesuit	 Thomas	 Gage,	 they	 dried
the	 cocoa	 beans	 and	 spices,	 ground	 them	 up
and	mixed	them	together,	and	heated	them	to
melt	 the	cocoa	butter	and	form	a	paste.	Then
they	 scraped	 the	 paste	 onto	 a	 large	 leaf	 or
piece	of	paper,	allowed	it	to	solidify,	and	then
peeled	 it	 off	 as	 a	 large	 tablet.	According	 to
Gage,	 there	 were	 several	 ways	 of	 preparing
chocolate,	both	hot	and	cold.



The	one	most	used	in	Mexico	is	to	take	it
hot	with	atole	[a	maize	gruel],	dissolving	a
tablet	in	hot	water,	and	then	stirring	and
beating	it	in	the	cup	with	a	molinet,	and
when	it	is	well	stirred	to	a	scum	or	froth,
then	to	fill	the	cup	with	hot	atole,	and	so
drink	it	sup	by	sup.

The	 first	European	“factories”	 for	making
the	spiced	chocolate	paste	were	built	in	Spain
around	 1580,	 and	 within	 70	 years	 chocolate
had	 found	 its	 way	 into	 Italy,	 France,	 and
England.	These	countries	purged	 the	drink	of
most	 added	 flavorings	 except	 sugar	 and
vanilla.	At	 first,	 vendors	 of	 lemonade	 sold	 it
in	 Paris;	 coffeehouses	 —	 themselves	 an
innovation	 —	 served	 it	 London.	 But	 by	 the
late	 17th	 century,	 chocolate	 houses	 were
thriving	 in	 London	 as	 a	 kind	 of	 specialty
coffeehouse.	 The	 idea	 of	 making	 hot
chocolate	 from	milk	 seems	 to	 have	 arisen	 in
these	places.



Early	Chocolate	Confections	For	a	couple	of
centuries,	 Europe	 knew	 chocolate	 almost
exclusively	 as	 a	 beverage.	 The	 use	 of	 the
cacao	bean	in	confectionery	was	quite	limited.
The	 Englishman	 Henry	 Stubbe	 noted	 in	 his
treatise	 on	 chocolate,	The	 Indian	 Nectar
(1662),	that	in	Spain	and	the	Spanish	colonies
“there	 is	 another	 way	 of	 taking	 it	made	 into
Lozenges,	 or	 shaped	 into	Almonds,”	 and	 that
people	were	aware	of	what	we	now	know	to	be
the	effects	of	 the	caffeine	 in	chocolate:	 “The
Cacao-nut	 being	 made	 into	 Confects,	 being
eaten	at	night,	makes	Men	 to	wake	all	night-
long:	and	is	therefore	good	for	Souldiers,	that
are	 upon	 the	Guard.”	 Cookbooks	 of	 the	 18th
century	 generally	 included	 a	 handful	 of
recipes	 that	 call	 for	 chocolate,	 among	 them
dragées,	marzipans,	 and	 biscuits,	 creams	 and
ices	and	mousses.	There	are	some	remarkable
Italian	 recipes	 for	 lasagna	 sauced	 with
almonds,	 walnuts,	 anchovies,	 and	 chocolate,
for	 liver	 with	 chocolate,	 and	 polenta	 with



chocolate.	 And	 in	 the	 18th-century	 French
Encyclopédie,	 we	 find	 that	chocolat	 was
commonly	 sold	 as	 a	 half-cocoa,	 half-sugar
cake	 flavored	 with	 some	 vanilla	 and
cinnamon,	 and	was	 not	 so	much	 a	 delightful
confection	 as	 an	 emergency	meal	—	perhaps
the	first	instant	breakfast!

When	one	is	in	a	hurry	to	leave	one’s
lodgings,	or	when	during	travel	one	does
not	have	the	time	to	make	it	into	a	drink,
one	can	eat	a	tablet	of	one	ounce	and	drink
a	cup	[of	water]	on	top	of	that,	and	let	the
stomach	churn	to	dissolve	this	impromptu
breakfast.

Even	in	the	middle	of	the	19th	century,	the
English	 compendium	Gunter’s	 Modern
Confectioner	 devoted	 only	 four	 pages	 out	 of
220	to	chocolate	recipes.
Dutch	and	English	Innovations:	Cocoa
Powder	and	Eating	Chocolates	The	main
reason	for	this	lack	of	interest	in	solid



chocolate	was	probably	the	coarse,	crumbly
texture	of	the	chocolate	paste.	The	suave
confections	that	are	so	popular	today	were
made	possible	by	several	innovations,	the	first
of	which	came	in	1828.	Conrad	van	Houten,
whose	family	ran	a	chocolate	business	in
Amsterdam,	was	trying	to	find	a	way	to	make
chocolate	less	oily	so	that	the	drink	would	be
less	heavy	and	filling.	The	weight	of	the	cacao
bean	is	better	than	half	fat,	or	“cocoa	butter.”
Van	Houten	developed	a	screw	press	that
removed	most	of	the	cocoa	butter	from	the
ground	bean	—	in	itself,	not	a	novelty	—	and
then	sold	the	defatted	cocoa	powder,	which
carries	nearly	all	the	flavor,	for	making	hot
chocolate.	Cocoa	powder	was	a	long-lasting
success,	though	recently	there	has	been	a
revival	of	interest	in	richer	versions	of	hot
chocolate	full	of	cocoa	butter.

At	first,	the	pure	cocoa	butter	extracted	by
Van	Houten’s	screw	press	was	a	mere	by-
product.	But	it	turned	out	to	be	the	key	to	the



development	of	modern	chocolate	candy.	This
was	cocoa	butter	that	could	be	added	to	a
paste	of	ordinary	ground	cocoa	beans	and
sugar	to	provide	a	rich,	melting	matrix	for	the
dry	particles,	and	make	the	paste	seem	less
pasty.	The	first	solid	“eating	chocolate”	was
introduced	by	the	English	firm	of	Fry	and
Sons	in	1847,	and	soon	inspired	many
imitations	throughout	Europe	and	the	United
States.

Swiss	 Innovations:	 Milk	 Chocolate	 and
Refined	 Texture	 In	 1917,	 Alice	 Bradley’s
Candy	Cook	Book	devoted	an	entire	chapter	to
“assorted	 Chocolates,”	 and	 noted	 that”	 more
than	one	hundred	different	chocolates	may	be
found	 in	 the	 price	 lists	 of	 some
manufacturers.”	 The	 South	 American	 bean
had	 come	 of	 age	 as	 a	 major	 ingredient	 in
confectionery.

Two	technical	developments	had	helped
expand	chocolate’s	appeal.	In	1876,	a	Swiss



confectioner	named	Daniel	Peter	used	the	new
dried	milk	powder	produced	by	his
countryman	Henri	Nestlé	to	make	the	first
solid	milk	chocolate.	Not	only	do	milk	flavors
blend	well	with	chocolate,	but	the	milk
powder	dilutes	the	strong	chocolate	flavor,
and	milk	proteins	reduce	its	astringency	and
make	the	taste	milder.	Today,	most	chocolate
is	now	consumed	in	the	form	of	milk
chocolate.	Then	in	1878,	a	Swiss
manufacturer	named	Rudolphe	Lindt	invented
the	conche,	a	machine	which	ground	cacao
beans,	sugar,	and	milk	powder	slowly	for
hours	and	even	days,	and	developed	a	much
finer	consistency	than	had	been	possible
before.	This	is	the	consistency	that	we	now
take	for	granted	in	even	the	most	ordinary
chocolates.

Having	contributed	so	much	to	the
evolution	of	modern	chocolate,	the	Swiss	are
understandably	the	world’s	champion
chocolate	eaters,	and	have	been	so	for	a	long



time.	At	about	an	ounce/30	gm	per	day,
Switzerland’s	per	capita	consumption	is
nearly	double	that	of	the	United	States.

Making	Chocolate

The	transformation	of	the	fresh	cacao	bean
into	a	finished	chocolate	is	an	intriguing
collaboration	between	the	tremendous
potential	of	the	natural	world	and	human
ingenuity	at	finding	nourishment	and	pleasure
in	the	most	unpromising	materials.	Right	out
of	the	pod,	the	bean	is	astringent,	bitter,	and
essentially	aroma-less.	Cacao	farmers	and
chocolate	manufacturers	develop	its	potential
in	several	distinct	processing	steps:

Farmers	ferment	the	mass	of	beans	and
pulp	in	order	to	generate	the	precursors
to	chocolate	flavor.
Manufacturers	roast	the	fermented	beans
to	transform	flavor	precursors	into



flavors.
Manufacturers	grind	the	beans,	add
sugar,	and	then	physically	work	the
mixture	to	refine	its	flavor	and	create	a
silken	texture.

The	Cacao	Bean	The	cacao	tree,	named
Theobroma	cacao	by	Linnaeus	—	theobroma
is	Greek	for	“food	of	the	gods”	—	is	a	broad-
leaved	evergreen	that	grows	between	20º	north
and	south	of	the	equator,	and	reaches	about	20
feet/7	m	in	height.	It	produces	fruits	in	the
form	of	fibrous	pods	from	6	to	10	inches/15–
25	cm	long,	3	or	4	inches/7.5–10	cm	in
diameter,	and	containing	20	to	40	seeds,	or
“beans,”	each	about	an	inch/2.5	cm	long,
embedded	in	a	sweet-tart	pulp.

Varieties	 There	 are	 a	 number	 of	 different
cacao	 varieties	 that	 fall	 into	 three	 botanical
groups:	 the	 Criollos,	 Forasteros,	 and
Trinitarios.	 Criollo	 trees	 produce	 relatively



mild	 beans	 with	 some	 of	 the	 finest,	 most
delicate	 flavors,	 reminiscent	 of	 flowers	 and
tea.	 Unfortunately,	 they	 are	 also	 disease-
prone,	low-yielding	trees,	and	so	provide	less
than	 5%	 of	 the	 world	 crop.	 High-yielding,
robust	Forasteros	provide	most	of	the	world’s
cacao	crop	in	the	form	of	full-flavored	“bulk”
beans.	Trinitarios	are	hybrids	of	a	Criollo	and
Forastero,	and	have	intermediate	qualities.

West	Africa	(Ivory	Coast	and	Ghana)	now
accounts	for	more	than	half	of	world	cacao
production,	and	Indonesia	also	out-produces
Brazil,	the	largest	producer	in	cacao’s	original
homeland.

Storage	 and	 Defensive	 Cells	 Cacao	 beans
consist	mainly	of	the	embryo’s	storage	leaves,
or	 cotyledons	 (p.	 453),	 and	 contain	 two
distinct	 groups	 of	 cells.	 Around	 80%	 of	 the
cells	are	storage	depots	of	protein	and	of	 fat,
or	 cocoa	 butter,	 nutrients	 that	 will	 feed	 the
seedling	as	it	germinates	and	develops	on	the



shady	 floor	 of	 the	 tropical	 forest.	 The	 other
20%	 are	 defensive	 cells	 meant	 to	 deter	 the
many	 forest	 animals	 and	 microbes	 from
feasting	 on	 the	 seed	 and	 its	 nutrients.	 These
cells	are	visible	 in	 the	cotyledons	as	purplish
dots,	 and	 contain	 astringent	 phenolic
compounds,	 their	 chemical	 relatives	 the
anthocyanin	 pigments,	 and	 two	 bitter
alkaloids,	 theobromine	 and	 caffeine.	 The
beans	 are	 moist,	 around	 65%	 water.	 The
composition	 of	 the	 dried	 fermented	 beans	 is
shown	in	the	box	on	p.	698.

Fermentation	 and	 Drying	 The	 first
important	 step	 in	 the	 development	 of
chocolate	 flavor	 is	 the	 least	 controlled	 and
predictable.	 Fermentation	 takes	 place	 where
cacao	 is	 grown,	 on	 thousands	 of	 small	 farms
and	 larger	 plantations,	 and	 may	 be	 done
carefully	 or	 casually	 or	 not	 at	 all,	 depending
on	 the	 resources	 and	 skill	 of	 the	 farmer.	The
quality	 of	 cacao	 beans	 thus	 varies



tremendously,	 from	 unfermented	 to	 badly
overfermented	 and	 even	 moldy.	 The	 first
challenge	for	the	chocolate	manufacturer	is	to
find	good-quality,	fully	fermented	beans.

Soon	after	the	cacao	pods	are	harvested,
workers	break	them	open	and	pile	the	beans
and	sugary	pulp	together	at	the	ambient
tropical	temperature.	Microbes	immediately
begin	growing	on	the	sugars	and	other
nutrients	in	the	pulp.	A	proper	fermentation
lasts	from	two	to	eight	days,	and	generally	has
three	phases.	In	the	first,	yeasts	predominate,
converting	sugars	to	alcohol	and	metabolizing
some	of	the	pulp	acids.	As	the	yeasts	use	up
the	oxygen	trapped	in	the	pile,	they	are
succeeded	by	lactic	acid	bacteria,	many	of
which	are	the	same	species	found	in
fermented	dairy	products	and	vegetables.
When	workers	turn	the	mass	of	beans	and
pulp	to	aerate	it,	the	lactic	bacteria	are
succeeded	by	acetic	acid	bacteria,	the	makers
of	vinegar,	which	consume	the	yeasts’	alcohol



and	convert	it	into	acetic	acid.

Cacao	pods	contain	many	large	seeds	that	are
covered	with	 a	 sweet	 pulp.	 The	 seeds	 consist
mainly	 of	 the	 embryo’s	 tightly	 folded	 food-
storage	 cotyledons,	 which	 are	 speckled	 with
purple	 defensive	 cells	 rich	 in	 alkaloids	 and
astringent	phenolic	compounds.
Fermentation	Transforms	the	Beans	Cacao
fermentation	is	a	fermentation	of	the	pulp,	not
the	beans,	but	it	transforms	the	beans	as	well.
The	acetic	acid	produced	by	the	vinegar
bacteria	penetrates	into	the	beans	and	etches
holes	in	cells	as	it	does	so,	spilling	the
contents	of	the	cells	together	and	allowing
them	to	react	with	each	other.	The	astringent
phenolic	substances	mix	with	proteins,
oxygen,	and	each	other,	and	form	complexes



that	are	much	less	astringent.	Most	important,
the	beans’	own	digestive	enzymes	mix	with
the	storage	proteins	and	sucrose	sugar	and
break	them	down	into	their	building	blocks	—
amino	acids	and	simple	sugars	—	which	are
much	more	reactive	than	their	parent
molecules,	and	will	produce	more	aromatic
molecules	during	the	roasting	process.
Finally,	the	perforated	beans	soak	up	some
flavor	molecules	from	the	fermenting	pulp,
including	sugars	and	acids,	fruity	and	flowery
and	winey	notes.	So	a	properly	conducted
fermentation	converts	the	astringent	but	bland
beans	into	vessels	laden	with	desirable	flavors
and	flavor	precursors.

Drying	 Once	 fermentation	 is	 complete,	 the
cacao	 farmers	 dry	 the	 beans,	 often	 just	 by
spreading	 them	 out	 on	 a	 flat	 surface	 in	 the
sun.	Drying	can	 take	 several	days,	 and	 if	 not
done	carefully	can	allow	undesirable	bacteria
and	 molds	 to	 grow	 both	 on	 and	 within	 the



beans	and	taint	them	with	undesirable	flavors.
Once	dried	to	about	7%	moisture,	the

beans	are	resistant	to	further	microbial
spoilage.	They’re	then	cleaned,	bagged,	and
shipped	to	manufacturers	all	over	the	world.

Roasting	 Dried	 fermented	 cacao	 beans	 are
less	 astringent	 and	 more	 flavorful	 than
unfermented	 beans,	 but	 their	 flavor	 is	 still
unbalanced	 and	 undeveloped,	 and	 often
dominated	 by	 vinegary	 acetic	 acid.	 After
selecting,	 sorting,	 and	 blending	 the	 dried
beans,	the	chocolate	manufacturer	roasts	them
to	 develop	 their	 flavor.	 The	 time	 and
temperature	 vary	 according	 to	 whether	 the
beans	 are	 to	 be	 roasted	 whole,	 in	 their	 thin
shell,	or	as	the	cracked	inner	kernels,	the	nibs,
or	 as	 nibs	 that	 have	 been	 ground	 into	 small,
quickly	 heated	 particles.	 Whole	 beans	 take
30–60	minutes	at	250–320ºF/	120–160ºC.	This
is	a	much	gentler	treatment	than	coffee	beans
require,	 thanks	 to	 the	 abundance	 of	 reactive



amino	acids	and	sugars	that	readily	participate
in	 Maillard	 browning	 to	 generate	 flavor	 (p.
778).	 In	 fact,	 gentle	 roasting	 helps	 preserve
some	 of	 the	 flavors	 that	 are	 intrinsic	 to	 the
beans	or	developed	during	fermentation.

The	Composition	of	Dried	Fermented
Cacao	Beans

%	by	weight
Water 5
Cacao	butter 54
Protein	and	amino	acids 12
Starch 6
Fiber 11
Sugars 1
Phenolic	compounds 6
Minerals 3
Theobromine 1.2
Caffeine 0.2



Grinding	 and	 Refining	 After	 roasting,	 the
beans	 are	 cracked	 open	 and	 the	 nibs	 are
separated	 from	 the	 shells.	 The	 nibs	 are	 then
passed	 between	 several	 sets	 of	 steel	 rollers,
and	 are	 transformed	 from	 solid	 chunks	 of
plant	 tissue	 into	 a	 thick,	 dark	 fluid	 called
cocoa	 liquor.	 This	 grinding	 stage	 has	 two
purposes:	 to	 break	 the	 bean	 cells	 open	 and
release	 their	 stores	 of	 cocoa	 butter;	 and	 to
break	 the	 cells	 down	 into	 particles	 too	 small
for	 the	 tongue	 to	 detect	 as	 separate,	 gritty
grains.	 Because	 the	 nibs	 are	 around	 55%
cocoa	butter,	 this	 fat	becomes	 the	continuous
phase,	and	the	solid	fragments	of	the	cells	—
mainly	 protein,	 fiber,	 and	 starch	 —	 are
suspended	 in	 the	 fat.	 The	 final	 grinding,	 or
refining,	 brings	 the	 particle	 size	 down	 to
0.02–0.03	mm.	Swiss	and	German	chocolates
have	traditionally	been	ground	smoother	 than
English	and	American.

Further	treatment	of	the	cocoa	liquor



varies	according	to	the	manufacturer’s	needs.
To	make	cocoa	powder	and	cocoa	butter,	the
liquor	is	pressed	through	a	fine	filter	that
retains	the	cocoa	particles	while	allowing	the
butter	to	flow	through.	The	compacted	cake	of
cocoa	particles	is	then	made	into	cocoa
powder	(below),	while	the	butter	becomes	an
important	ingredient	in	all	kinds	of
manufactured	chocolate.

Conching	 Pure	 cocoa	 liquor	 has	 a
concentrated	 chocolate	 taste,	 and	 may	 be
hardened	and	packaged	as	is	for	use	in	baked
goods.	But	its	flavor	is	relatively	rough,	bitter,
and	 astringent	 and	 acidic.	 To	 make	 it	 into
something	 not	 only	 edible	 but	 delicious,
manufacturers	 add	 a	 few	 other	 ingredients:
sugar	 for	 dark	 chocolate,	 sugar	 and	 dry	milk
solids	 for	 milk	 chocolate,	 some	 vanilla	 (the
whole	 bean,	 or	 an	 extract,	 or	 artificial
vanillin),	 and	 a	 supplement	 of	 pure	 cocoa
butter.	 And	 they	 subject	 the	 mixture	 to	 an



extended	 agitation	 called	conching,	 a	 process
named	 after	 the	 shell-like	 shape	 of	 the	 first
machines.	Conches	rub	and	smear	the	mixture
of	cocoa	liquor,	sugar,	and	milk	solids	against
a	 solid	 surface.	 The	 combination	 of	 friction
and	 supplemental	heat	 raises	 the	 temperature
of	 the	 mass	 to	 115–175ºF/45–80ºC	 (milk
chocolate	 is	 kept	 at	 110–135ºF/43–57ºC).
Depending	on	the	machine	and	manufacturer,
conching	may	last	for	8	to	36	hours.

Refining	 Texture	 and	 Flavor 	 The	 original
conche	 was	 a	 mechanized	 version	 of	 the
Mayan	 stone	 grinding	 slab:	 a	 heavy	 granite
roller	 moved	 back	 and	 forth	 over	 a	 granite
bed,	both	mixing	the	ingredients	together	and
grinding	the	still	somewhat	coarse	particles	to
a	 finer	 size.	 Today	 the	 various	 solids	 are
ground	 to	 the	 proper	 dimensions	 before
conching,	 which	 now	 serves	 two	 main
functions.	First,	it	breaks	up	small	aggregates
of	 the	 solid	 particles,	 separates	 them	 from



each	other,	and	coats	all	of	 them	evenly	with
cocoa	 butter,	 so	 that	 when	 the	 finished
chocolate	 melts,	 it	 flows	 smoothly.	 Second,
conching	 greatly	 improves	 the	 flavor	 of	 the
chocolate,	 not	 by	 heightening	 it,	 but	 by
mellowing	it.	The	aeration	and	moderate	heat
causes	 as	 much	 as	 80%	 of	 the	 volatile
aromatic	compounds	(and	excess	moisture)	to
evaporate	 out	 of	 the	 chocolate	 liquor.
Fortunately,	 many	 of	 these	 are	 undesirable
volatiles,	 including	 various	 acids	 and
aldehydes;	 acidity	 steadily	 declines	 during
conching.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 a	 number	 of
desirable	volatiles	are	augmented	by	 the	heat
and	 mixing,	 notably	 those	 with	 roasted,
caramel,	 and	 malty	 aromas	 (pyrazines,
furaneol,	maltol).

Both	cocoa	butter	and	a	small	amount	of
the	emulsifier	lecithin	(p.	802)	are	added	to
the	chocolate	mass	toward	the	end	of
conching.	The	additional	cocoa	butter	is
necessary	to	provide	sufficient	lubrication	for



all	the	added	sugar	particles	to	make	the
mixture	creamily	fluid	rather	than	pasty	when
it	melts.	The	higher	the	ratio	of	sugar	to
ground	nibs,	the	more	added	cocoa	butter	is
required.	Lecithin,	whose	use	in	chocolate
dates	to	the	1930s,	coats	the	sugar	particles
with	the	fat-like	ends	of	its	molecules	and
helps	reduce	the	amount	of	cocoa	butter
needed	to	lubricate	the	particles;	one	part	of
lecithin	replaces	10	parts	of	butter.	It	typically
makes	up	0.3–0.5%	of	chocolate	weight.

Manufacturing	Chocolate	and	Cocoa

Cooling	and	Solidifying	After	conching,	dark
chocolate	is	essentially	a	warm	fluid	mass	of



cocoa	butter	that	contains	suspended	particles
of	the	original	cacao	beans	and	of	sugar.	Milk
chocolate	also	contains	butterfat,	milk
proteins,	and	lactose,	and	proportionally	less
cacao	bean	solids.

The	last	step	in	manufacturing	chocolate	is
to	cool	the	fluid	chocolate	to	room
temperature	and	form	the	familiar	solid	bars.
It	turns	out	that	this	transition	from	fluid	to
solid	is	a	tricky	one.	To	obtain	stable	cocoa
butter	crystals	and	a	glossy,	snappy	chocolate,
manufacturers	carefully	cool	and	then	rewarm
the	liquid	chocolate	to	particular	temperatures
before	portioning	it	into	molds,	where	it
finally	cools	to	room	temperature	and
solidifies.

Cooks	often	melt	manufactured	chocolate
in	order	to	give	it	a	special	shape	or	to	coat
other	foods.	If	they	want	it	to	resolidify	with
its	original	gloss	and	snap,	then	they	must
repeat	in	the	kitchen	this	cycle	of	warming	up
and	cooling	down,	or	tempering	(p.	709).



The	composition	of	dark	and	milk	chocolates.
Left:	Dark	 chocolate	 consists	 of	 cacao-bean
particles	 and	 sugar	 crystals	 embedded	 in	 a
base	of	cocoa	butter.	Right:	In	milk	chocolate,
a	 significant	 proportion	 of	 cacao-bean
particles	 is	 replaced	 with	 particles	 of	 dried
milk	protein	and	sugar.

OPPOSITE:	Making	chocolate.	As	is	true	of	cane
sugar,	 chocolate	 is	 processed	 in	 two	 stages,
the	 first	 in	 the	 tropical	 cacao-growing
countries	 and	 the	 second	 in	 manufacturing
plants	throughout	the	world.

The	Special	Qualities	of	Chocolate

Consistency	and	Appearance:	The



Creations	of	Cocoa	Butter	The	remarkable
appearance	and	consistency	of	chocolate	are	a
direct	expression	of	the	physical	qualities	of
cocoa	butter,	the	part	of	chocolate	that
surrounds	the	solid	particles	of	cacao	bean
and	holds	them	together.	When	carefully
prepared,	chocolate	has	a	silken	or	glassy
surface,	is	hard	and	not	greasy	at	room
temperature,	breaks	with	a	delightful	snap,	yet
melts	to	a	smooth	creaminess	in	the	mouth.
These	are	very	unlike	the	qualities	of	any
other	food,	and	are	a	consequence	of	the
structure	of	cacao	fat	molecules,	which	are
mostly	saturated	and	unusually	regular	(most
of	them	are	constructed	from	just	three	kinds
of	fatty	acids).	This	structure	means	that	the
fat	molecules	are	capable	of	forming	a	dense
network	of	compact,	stable	crystals,	with	little
liquid	fat	left	over	to	ooze	out	between	the
crystals.

However,	this	special	network	only
develops	when	the	fat	crystallization	is



carefully	controlled.	Cocoa	butter	can	solidify
into	six	different	kinds	of	fat	crystals!	Only
two	are	stable	kinds	that	produce	a	glossy,
dry,	hard	chocolate;	the	other	four	are
unstable	kinds	that	produce	a	looser,	less
organized	network,	with	more	liquid	fat,	and
crystals	whose	fat	molecules	readily	detach
and	ooze	away.	When	chocolate	melts	and
then	resolidifies	in	an	uncontrolled	way	—	for
example,	when	it’s	temporarily	left	too	close
to	a	hot	stove,	or	in	a	hot	car	—	it’s	the
unstable	crystals	that	predominate,	and	they
produce	a	greasy,	soft,	mottled	chocolate.	To
rescue	its	original	consistency,	such	chocolate
must	be	tempered.

The	 crystallization	 of	 cocoa	 butter. 	 Left:	In



melted	chocolate,	the	fat	molecules	(p.	798)	of
cocoa	 butter	 are	 in	 constant	 random	motion.
Cen t e r :	When	 chocolate	 cools	 in	 an
uncontrolled	 way,	 the	 fat	 molecules	 form
loosely	 packed,	 unstable	 crystals,	 and	 the
chocolate	 is	 soft	 and	 greasy. 	 Right:	When
chocolate	is	carefully	cooled,	its	fat	molecules
form	 tightly	 packed,	 stable	 crystals,	 and	 the
chocolate	is	snappy	and	dry.
Chocolate	Flavor	Chocolate	has	one	of	the
richest	and	most	complex	flavors	of	any	food.
In	addition	to	its	slight	acidity,	pronounced
bitterness	and	astringency,	and	the	sweetness
of	its	added	sugar,	chemists	have	detected
more	than	600	different	kinds	of	volatile
molecules	in	chocolate.	While	a	handful	of
these	may	account	for	the	basic	roasted
quality,	many	others	contribute	to	its	depth
and	wide	range.	The	richness	of	chocolate
flavor	arises	from	two	factors.	One	is	the
cacao	bean’s	intrinsic	flavor	potential,	its
combination	of	sugars	and	proteins,	and	the



enzymes	that	break	these	down	into	the
building	blocks	of	flavor.	The	second	factor	is
the	complexity	of	chocolate’s	preparation,
which	combines	the	chemical	creativity	of
microbes	and	of	high	heat.

Among	the	flavors	that	an	attentive	taster
can	detect	in	chocolate	are	these:

From	the	bean	itself,	astringency	and
bitterness	(phenolic	compounds,
theobromine)
From	the	fermented	pulp,	the	flavors	of
fruits	and	wine	and	sherry	and	vinegar
(acids,	esters;	alcohols;	acetaldehyde;
acetic	acid)
From	the	self-digested	bean,	almond	and
dairy	and	flowery	notes	(benzaldehyde;
diacetyl	and	methyl	ketones;	linalool)
From	roasting	and	the	browning
reactions,	roasted,	nutty,	sweet,	earthy,
flowery,	and	spicy	notes	(pyrazines	and
thiazoles;	phenyls;	phenylalkanals;
dienals),	as	well	as	a	more	pronounced



bitterness	(diketopiperazines)
From	added	sugar	and	vanilla,	sweetness
and	the	warm	character	of	the	spice
From	added	milk	solids,	caramel	and
butterscotch	and	cooked-milk	and	cheese
notes

Chocolate	 made	 from	 poorly	 fermented	 or
handled	 beans	 can	 have	 a	 variety	 of
unpleasant	 aromas,	 among	 them	 rubbery,
burned,	 smoky,	 hammy,	 fishy,	 moldy,
cardboard,	and	rancid	notes.

Some	confectioners	add	a	small	amount	of
salt	to	their	products,	especially	milk
chocolates.	Saltiness	is	the	one	basic	taste
sensation	missing	from	simply	sweetened
chocolate,	and	adding	it	is	said	to	give	the
overall	flavor	a	certain	bite	and	clarity.

The	Different	Flavors	of	Milk	Chocolate
The	 milk	 chocolates	 made	 in	 Europe,
England,	 and	 the	 United	 States	 have



traditionally	 had	 distinct	 flavors.	 In
continental	Europe,	where	it	was	invented,
milk	 chocolate	 is	made	using	dried	whole
milk	 powder,	which	 has	 a	 relatively	 fresh
milk	flavor.	In	England,	the	preference	has
been	 to	 mix	 liquid	 milk	 with	 sugar,
concentrate	the	mixture	to	90%	solids,	mix
it	with	 chocolate	 liquor,	 and	 finish	drying
it	into	a	material	called	“chocolate	crumb.”
The	 milk	 proteins	 and	 sugars	 undergo
browning	 reactions	 during	 the
concentration	 and	 drying	 and	 produce	 a
special	 cooked-milk,	 caramelized	 flavor
that	isn’t	obtained	by	ordinary	drying.	And
in	 the	 United	 States,	 large	 manufacturers
have	 long	 encouraged	 their	 milk	 fat	 to
undergo	 some	 breakdown	 by	 fat-digesting
enzymes.	This	breakdown	develops	a	slight
note	 of	 rancidity,	 whose	 cheesy,	 animal
overtones	blend	well	in	their	own	way	with
chocolate	 flavor	 and	 make	 a	 positive
contribution	to	the	complexity	of	flavor.



The	Kinds	of	Chocolate

Manufacturers	produce	a	wide	range	of
different	chocolates,	some	meant	for	eating	as
is,	some	meant	for	cooking	or	confectionery,
some	for	all	three.	They	fall	into	several
general	categories.

Mass-produced,	inexpensive	chocolates
are	made	from	ordinary	beans	that	are
processed	in	largely	automated	plants,
and	contain	the	minimum	amount	of
cocoa	solids	and	cocoa	butter	and	the
maximum	amounts	of	sugar	and	milk
solids.	Their	flavor	is	mild	and
unremarkable.
“Fine”	expensive	chocolates	are	made
from	beans	selected	for	their	excellent
flavor	potential,	often	processed	in	small
batches	to	optimize	flavor	development,
and	contain	far	more	than	the	minimum
amount	of	cocoa	solids	and	cocoa	butter.



Their	flavor	is	stronger	and	more
complex.
Dark	chocolate	contains	cocoa	solids,
cocoa	butter,	and	sugar,	but	no	milk
solids.	It	is	manufactured	in	a	range	of
compositions,	from	sugarless	bitter,	to
bittersweet,	to	sweet.	Some
manufacturers	now	label	their	premium
chocolates	with	their	content	of	cocoa
beans:	“70%	chocolate”	is	70%	by
weight	cocoa	butter	and	cocoa	solids,	and
about	30%	sugar;	“62%	chocolate”	is
about	38%	sugar	(there	are	also	small
amounts	of	lecithin	and	vanilla).	The
higher	the	proportion	of	cocoa	solids,	the
more	intense	the	chocolate	flavor,
including	its	bitterness	and	astringency.
Strong	chocolates	deliver	more	flavor	to
cream,	egg,	and	flour	mixtures,	whose
proteins	bind	to	the	phenolic	substances
and	reduce	the	apparent	astringency.
Milk	chocolate	is	the	most	popular	form



of	chocolate,	and	the	mildest.	It	contains
milk	solids	and	a	large	proportion	of
sugar,	which	together	usually	outweigh
the	combination	of	cocoa	solids	and
cocoa	butter.	Thanks	to	its	relatively	low
cocoa	butter	content,	milk	chocolate
tends	to	be	softer	and	less	snappy	than
bittersweet	chocolate.
Couverture	chocolate	(from	the	French
for	“to	cover”)	is	dark	or	milk	chocolate
formulated	to	flow	easily	when	melted,
and	therefore	to	work	well	for	forming
thin,	delicate	chocolate	coatings.	This
means	adding	more	cocoa	butter	than
usual	to	provide	plenty	of	room	for	the
cocoa	and	sugar	particles	to	move	past
each	other.	Most	couvertures	are	31–38%
fat.
“White	chocolate”	is	chocolate-less
chocolate:	it	contains	no	cocoa	particles
whatsoever,	and	therefore	has	little	or	no
chocolate	flavor.	White	chocolate	was



invented	around	1930,	and	is	a	mixture	of
purified,	usually	deodorized	cocoa	butter,
milk	solids,	and	sugar.	It	does	offer	a
valuable	decorative	contrast	to	ordinary
chocolate.

Some	 manufacturers	 are	 now	 packaging
nibs,	 or	 small	 pieces	 of	 the	 roasted	 beans,
which	 offer	 crunchy	 particles	 of	 intense
flavor.	Whole	roasted	beans	can	sometimes	be
found	in	Latin	markets.

The	Composition	of	Some	Kinds	of
Chocolate

Chocolates	 vary	 widely	 in	 composition,
especially	 among	 “bittersweet”	 and
“semisweet”	 versions.	 The	 figures	 below,
which	are	given	in	percent	of	the	chocolate
weight,	 are	 very	 approximate,	 but	 useful
for	broad	comparisons.

Minimum	cocoa	solids	+	added Cocoa



cocoa	butter,	U.S. liquor
Unsweetened 99
Bittersweet/semisweet 35 70–35
Sweet	(dark) 15 15
Milk 10 10
Unsweetened	cocoa	powder
Added	cocoa	butter Sugar
Unsweetened 0 0
Bittersweet/semisweet 0–15 30–50
Sweet	(dark) 20 60
Milk 20 50
Unsweetened	cocoa	powder
Milk	solids Total	fat
Unsweetened 0 53
Bittersweet/semisweet 0 25–38
Sweet	(dark) 0 32
Milk 15 30
Unsweetened	cocoa	powder 20



Total	carbohydrates Protein
Unsweetened 30 13
Bittersweet/semisweet 45–65 4–6
Sweet	(dark) 72 2
Milk 60 8
Unsweetened	cocoa	powder 40 15
Storing	Chocolate;	Fat	Bloom	The	best
storage	temperature	for	chocolate	is	a
constant	60–65ºF/15–18ºC,	without
fluctuations	that	would	encourage	the	melting
and	recrystallization	of	the	cocoa	butter	fats.
Sometimes	stored	chocolate	will	develop	a
white,	powdery-looking	coating	on	its	surface.
This	“fat	bloom”	is	cocoa	butter	that	has
melted	out	of	unstable	crystals,	migrated	to
the	surface,	and	formed	new	crystals	there.
Fat	bloom	is	normally	prevented	by	proper
tempering	of	the	chocolate	in	the	first	place.
Its	development	can	be	slowed	down	by	the
addition	to	the	melted	chocolate	of	some
clarified	butter,	which	makes	the	mix	of	fats



more	random	and	so	retards	the	formation	of
crystals.

Thanks	to	its	abundant	antioxidant
molecules	and	chemically	stable	saturated
fats,	chocolate	has	a	remarkably	long	shelf
life.	It	keeps	for	many	months	at	room
temperature.	White	chocolate,	which	lacks	the
antioxidants	in	the	cocoa	solids,	has	a	room-
temperature	shelf	life	of	only	a	few	weeks;
after	that,	or	sooner	if	it’s	exposed	to	bright
light,	its	fats	are	damaged	and	it	develops	a
stale,	rancid	flavor.

Cocoa	Powder	Manufacturers	 produce	 cocoa
powder	from	the	cakes	of	roasted	cocoa	bean
particles	 left	 behind	when	 they	 extract	 cocoa
butter	 (p.	 699).	 The	 particles	 remain	 coated
with	 a	 thin	 layer	 of	 cocoa	 butter;	 the	 fat
content	of	 the	powder	 ranges	from	8	 to	26%.
The	 solid	 particles	 of	 the	 cacao	 bean	 are	 the
source	of	chocolate’s	flavor	and	color.	Cocoa
is	 therefore	 the	most	 concentrated	version	of



chocolate,	and	a	valuable	ingredient	in	its	own
right.	 Natural	 cocoa	 powder	 has	 a	 strong
chocolate	 taste	 and	 pronounced	 astringency
and	bitterness.	It’s	also	distinctly	acid,	with	a
pH	around	5.

“Dutched”	or	Alkalized	Cocoa	In	Europe	and
sometimes	the	United	States,	cocoa	powder	is
produced	 from	 cocoa	 beans	 that	 have	 been
treated	with	an	alkaline	 substance,	potassium
carbonate.	 This	 treatment,	 sometimes	 called
“dutching”	because	its	inventor	was	the	Dutch
chocolate	 pioneer	 Conrad	 van	Houten,	 raises
the	cocoa	pH	to	a	neutral	7	or	alkaline	8.	The
application	 of	 an	 alkaline	 material	 to	 the
beans	 either	 before	 or	 after	 roasting	 has	 a
strong	 influence	 on	 their	 general	 chemical
composition.	In	addition	to	adding	a	distinctly
alkaline	 taste	 (like	 that	 of	 baking	 soda),
alkaline	 treatment	 reduces	 the	 levels	 of
roasty,	 caramel-like	 molecules	 (pyrazines,
thiazoles,	pyrones,	furaneol)	and	of	astringent,



bitter	 phenolics,	 which	 now	 bond	 to	 each
other	 to	 form	 flavorless	 dark	 pigments.	 The
result	 is	a	cocoa	powder	with	a	milder	flavor
and	 darker	 color.	 Dutched	 cocoa	 can	 be
produced	 in	shades	running	from	light	brown
to	 nearly	 black;	 the	 darker	 the	 color,	 the
milder	the	flavor.

Chocolate	Cools	the	Mouth
Well-made	 chocolate	 has	 an	 unusual	 and
refreshing	 characteristic	 for	 such	 a	 rich
food:	 as	 it	melts,	 it	 cools	 the	mouth.	This
happens	because	its	stable	fat	crystals	melt
in	 a	 very	 narrow	 temperature	 range,	 and
just	 below	 body	 temperature.	 The	 phase
change	 from	 solid	 to	 liquid	 absorbs	much
of	the	mouth’s	heat	energy	and	leaves	little
to	 raise	 the	 temperature	 of	 the	 chocolate,
which	therefore	feels	persistently	cool.

Cocoas	in	Baking	It’s	important	for	bakers	to
be	aware	of	the	difference	between	“natural”
and	alkalized	cocoa	powders.	Some	recipes



rely	on	acidic	natural	cocoa	to	react	with
baking	soda	and	generate	leavening	carbon
dioxide.	If	the	same	recipe	is	made	with	an
alkalized	cocoa,	the	reaction	won’t	take	place,
no	carbon	dioxide	will	be	generated,	and	the
taste	will	be	alkaline	and	soapy.

Instant	Cocoa	 So-called	 “instant”	 cocoas	 for
hot	 chocolate	 include	 lecithin,	 an	 emulsifier
that	 helps	 separate	 the	 particles	 so	 that	 they
mix	 readily	 with	 water.	 Sugar	 is	 frequently
added	 to	 instant	 cocoa	mix	 and	may	 account
for	up	to	70%	of	its	weight.

Chocolate	and	Cocoa	as	Ingredients

Chocolate	and	cocoa	are	versatile	ingredients.
They’re	incorporated	into	many	mixtures	of
ingredients,	and	not	just	sweets;	savory
Mexican	mole	sauces	and	some	European
meat	stews	and	sauces	borrow	depth	and
complexity	from	them.	Chocolate	and	cocoa



provide	flavor,	richness,	and	structure-
building	capacity;	their	dry	particles	contain
both	starch	and	protein,	absorb	moisture,	and
contribute	thickness	and	solidity	to	baked
goods,	soufflés,	fillings	and	icings.	Flourless
cakes	can	be	made	with	chocolate	or	cocoa	as
the	starchy	and	fatty	ingredients,	eggs	as	the
moistening	and	setting	agent.	In	a	chocolate
mousse,	the	foam	structure	provided	by	the
whipped	eggs	is	reinforced	by	both	the	dry
particles	and	the	gradually	crystallizing	cocoa
butter.

Of	course,	chocolate	can	be	presented	as	is,
part	of	a	pastry	construction	for	example,	or
melted	over	a	preparation	and	then	hardened
to	provide	a	coating.	It’s	when	we	melt	and
cool	it	for	coating	or	molding	that	it	requires
the	most	care	(p.	708).	Otherwise,	keeping	in
mind	a	few	facts	about	chocolate	will	prevent
most	problems.

Working	with	Chocolate	Dark	chocolate	is	a



fully	cooked,	fully	developed	ingredient	in	its
own	 right,	 robust	 and	 forgiving.	 Remember
that	it	has	been	roasted	and	then	heated	again
to	fairly	high	temperatures	in	the	conche,	and
that	 it’s	 a	 relatively	 simple	 physical	mixture
of	cocoa	and	sugar	particles	 in	 fat.	The	most
that	 a	 cook	 needs	 to	 do	 to	 it	 is	 melt	 it	 to
perhaps	 120ºF/50ºC,	 but	 it	 can	 be	 heated	 to
200ºF/93ºC	 and	 then	 some	 without	 suffering
disastrous	 effects.	 It	 won’t	 separate,	 and	 it
won’t	burn	unless	it’s	left	over	direct	stovetop
heat	or	in	a	microwave	oven	without	stirring.
It	 can	 be	melted	 and	 solidified	 repeatedly	 if
necessary.

Because	they	contain	more	milk	solids
than	they	do	cocoa	solids,	milk	chocolate	and
white	“chocolate”	are	less	robust	than	dark
chocolate	and	are	best	melted	gently.

Melting	 Chocolate	 Chocolate	 can	 be
successfully	melted	in	several	different	ways:
quickly,	over	direct	stove	heat,	with	care	and



constant	 stirring	 to	 avoid	 burning;	 more
slowly,	 but	with	 less	 attention;	 in	 a	 bowl	 set
over	 a	 pan	 of	 hot	water,	 from	 100ºF/38ºC	 to
the	simmer	(the	hotter	 the	water,	 the	faster	 it
melts);	 in	 the	microwave	oven,	with	frequent
interruptions	 for	 stirring	 and	 checking	 the
temperature.	Because	chocolate	is	a	poor	heat
conductor,	 it’s	 best	 to	 chop	 it	 into	 small
pieces	 or	 process	 it	 into	 crumbs	 to	 speed	 its
melting,	or	its	blending	with	hot	ingredients.

Chocolate	 and	Moisture	 The	 one	 vulnerable
aspect	of	chocolate	is	its	extreme	dryness,	and
the	 vast	 number	 of	 tiny	 sugar	 and	 cacao
particles	whose	surfaces	attract	moisture.	If	a
small	 amount	 of	water	 is	 stirred	 into	molten
chocolate,	 the	 chocolate	 will	 seize	 up	 into
stiff	 paste.	 It	 seems	 perverse	 that	 adding
liquid	 to	 a	 liquid	 produces	 a	 solid:	 but	 the
small	amount	of	water	acts	as	a	kind	of	glue,
wetting	the	many	millions	of	sugar	and	cocoa
particles	just	enough	to	make	patches	of	syrup



that	 stick	 the	 particles	 together	 and	 separate
them	 from	 the	 liquid	 cocoa	 butter.	 It’s
important,	 then,	 either	 to	 keep	 chocolate
completely	 dry,	 or	 to	 add	 enough	 liquid	 to
dissolve	the	sugar	into	a	syrup,	not	just	wet	it.
It’s	 therefore	 best	 to	 add	 solid	 chocolate	 to
hot	 liquid	 ingredients,	 or	 pour	 the	 hot	 liquid
all	at	once	onto	the	chocolate,	rather	than	add
the	 liquid	 gradually	 to	 molten	 chocolate.
Seized	 chocolate	 can	 be	 salvaged	 by	 adding
more	warm	liquid	until	 the	paste	 turns	 into	a
thick	fluid.

Different	 Chocolates	 Are	 Not
Interchangeable	 Both	 recipe	 writers	 and
cooks	need	to	be	as	precise	as	possible	about
the	 kinds	 of	 chocolate	 they	 use.	 Different
chocolates	have	very	different	proportions	of
cocoa	 butter,	 cocoa	 particles,	 and	 sugar.	 The
proportions	 of	 cocoa	 particles	 and	 sugar	 are
especially	 important	 when	 chocolate	 is
combined	 with	 wet	 ingredients.	 Sugar



dissolves	 into	 syrup,	 thereby	 increasing	 the
volume	 of	 a	 preparation’s	 liquid	 phase	 and
contributing	 fluidity,	 while	 cocoa	 particles
absorb	moisture,	 decrease	 the	 volume	 of	 the
liquid	 phase,	 and	 reduce	 fluidity.	 A	 recipe
developed	for	sweet	chocolate	may	fail	badly
if	 it’s	made	with	a	70%	premium	bittersweet
chocolate,	 which	 has	 far	 more	 drying	 cocoa
particles	and	far	less	syrup-making	sugar.

Ganache	 Once	 of	 the	 simplest	 and	 most
familiar	of	chocolate	preparations	is	ganache,
a	mixture	of	chocolate	and	cream	that	can	be
infused	with	many	 other	 flavors,	 whipped	 to
lighten	 its	 richness,	 or	 further	 enriched	 with
butter.	 It	 serves	 as	 a	 filling	 for	 chocolate
truffles	 and	 pastries,	 and	 as	 both	 filling	 and
topping	 for	 cakes.	 The	 dessert	 called	 pot	 de
crème,	made	by	melting	 some	chocolate	 into
about	twice	its	weight	of	cream,	is	essentially
a	ganache	served	on	its	own.

Ganache	 Structure	 A	 soft	 ganache	 is	 made



with	 approximately	 equal	 weights	 of	 cream
and	chocolate.	A	firm	ganache,	more	suitable
for	 holding	 a	 shape	 and	 with	 a	 stronger
chocolate	 flavor,	 is	 made	 with	 two	 parts
chocolate	 for	 every	 one	 of	 cream.	 To	 make
ganache,	 the	 cream	 is	 scalded	 and	 the
chocolate	 melted	 into	 it	 to	 form	 a	 complex
combination	of	an	emulsion	and	a	suspension
(p.	 818).	 The	 continuous	 phase	 of	 this
mixture,	 the	 portion	 that	 permeates	 it,	 is	 a
syrup	 made	 from	 the	 cream’s	 water	 and	 the
chocolate’s	sugar.	Suspended	in	the	syrup	are
the	 milk	 fat	 globules	 from	 the	 cream,	 and
cocoa	butter	droplets	and	solid	cocoa	particles
from	the	chocolate.

Food	Words:	Ganache
The	word	ganache	 is	French,	and	before	it
was	applied	 to	a	mixture	of	chocolate	and
cream,	 it	 meant	 “cushion.”	 The
confectioner’s	ganache	is	 indeed	a	kind	of
melting	 cushion	 for	 the	 mouth,	 soft	 and



plush.	 Ganache	 seems	 to	 have	 been
invented	 in	 France	 or	 Switzerland	 in	 the
middle	 of	 the	 19th	 century.	 Chocolate
truffles,	 morsels	 of	 ganache	 shaped	 into
rough	 balls	 and	 coated	 either	 with	 cocoa
powder	 or	 a	 thin	 layer	 of	 hard	 chocolate,
were	a	 simple	homemade	sweet	until	well
into	 the	 20th	 century,	 when	 they	 became
fashionable	luxuries.
In	an	even	mixture	of	cream	and	chocolate,

there’s	an	abundance	of	the	syrup	phase	to
hold	the	fat	and	particles;	but	in	a	firm,	high-
chocolate	mixture,	there’s	less	syrup,	and
proportionally	more	cocoa	particles	that
slowly	absorb	moisture	from	the	syrup	and
reduce	its	volume	even	further.	With
chocolates	high	in	cocoa	solids,	the	cocoa
particles	can	eventually	absorb	so	much
moisture	that	they	swell	and	stick	to	each
other.	The	water-deprived	emulsion	then	fails,
allowing	the	fat	globules	and	droplets	to
coalesce,	and	the	fat	to	separate	from	the



swollen	particles.	This	is	why	high-chocolate
ganaches	are	often	unstable	and	coarsen	with
time.

Maturing	 Ganache	 Many	 confectioners	 let
ganache	 mixtures	 stand	 at	 a	 cool	 room
temperature	 overnight	 before	 working	 with
them.	 This	 gradual	 cooling	 allows	 the	 cocoa
butter	to	crystallize	so	that	when	the	ganache
is	 shaped	or	eaten,	 it	 softens	and	melts	more
slowly.	 Ganache	 refrigerated	 immediately
after	 making	 hardens	 without	 forming	 many
crystals,	and	becomes	soft	and	greasy	when	it
warms.

Thanks	to	the	initial	scalding	of	the	cream
and	the	chocolate’s	sugar	content,	moisture-
absorbing	cocoa	particles,	and	abundant
microbe-unfriendly	phenolic	compounds,
ganache	has	a	surprisingly	long	shelf	life	of	a
week	or	more	at	room	temperature.

Tempered	Chocolate	for	Coating	and	Molding



Like	sugar,	chocolate	can	be	shaped	to	please
the	eye.	Pastry	cooks	and	confectioners	make
thin	chocolate	sheets	by	brushing	melted
chocolate	onto	a	surface,	then	letting	the
chocolate	set	completely,	and	stamping	or
cutting	it	into	shapes,	or	nudging	it	into	a
ruffle.	Melted	chocolate	can	be	painted	onto
plant	leaves,	allowed	to	harden	into	the
leaves’	mirror	images,	then	gently	peeled	off.
It	can	be	squeezed	through	a	pastry	bag	and
tip	to	form	a	myriad	of	lines,	drops,	and	filled
shapes.	And	of	course	it	can	be	used	to	line
molds	and	produce	shapes	from	hollow
spheres	to	Easter	bunnies.

Chocolate	lovers	often	melt	chocolate	and
then	use	it	as	a	coating	for	cookies	or
strawberries	or	handmade	truffles.	This	can	be
done	easily	and	casually,	the	chocolate	simply
warmed	until	it	melts	and	then	used
immediately,	the	results	sometimes	chilled	in
the	refrigerator	to	speed	their	solidification.
Chocolate	handled	in	this	way	will	taste	fine,



but	it’s	likely	to	look	dull	and	mottled,	and	to
be	soft	instead	of	snappy.	This	is	because	the
chocolate	cooled	down	so	quickly	that	its
cocoa	fat	solidified	into	a	loose,	weak	network
of	unstable	crystals	instead	of	the	dense,	hard
network	of	stable	crystals.	If	appearance	and
consistency	matter,	as	they	do	to	professional
cooks	and	confectioners,	then	the	cook	must
temper	the	melted	chocolate,	or	prime	it	with
desirable	stable	crystals	of	cocoa	fat,	just	as
the	manufacturer	did	before	forming	it	into
bars.

The	 structure	 of	 ganache.	 Left:	Soft	 ganache
is	made	with	an	equal	proportion	of	chocolate
and	cream,	with	cocoa	particles	and	droplets
of	cocoa	and	milk	fat	surrounded	by	a	syrup	of



the	chocolate’s	 sugar	and	 the	cream’s	water.
Center:	A	 firm	 ganache,	 made	 with	 more
chocolate	than	cream,	contains	proportionally
more	 dry	 cocoa	 particles	 and	 less	 water.
Right:	With	time,	the	cocoa	particles	in	a	firm
ganache	 absorb	 water	 from	 the	 syrup	 and
swell.	 This	 can	 crowd	 the	 fat	 droplets	 so
tightly	 that	 they	 coalesce	 and	 the	 ganache
separates.
Tempering	Chocolate	The	tempering	process
consists	of	three	basic	steps:	heating	the
chocolate	to	thoroughly	melt	all	of	its	fat
crystals,	cooling	it	somewhat	to	form	a	new
set	of	starter	crystals,	and	carefully	heating	it
again	to	melt	the	unstable	crystals,	so	that
only	desirable	stable	crystals	remain.	The
stable	starter	crystals	will	then	direct	the
development	of	the	dense,	hard	crystal
network	when	the	chocolate	finally	cools	and
solidifies.

Unstable	cocoa	butter	crystals	are	crystals
that	melt	relatively	easily,	which	means	at



relatively	cool	temperatures,	between	about
59	and	82ºF/15–28ºC.	The	desirable	stable
crystals	(sometimes	referred	to	as	“beta”	or
“beta	prime”	or	“Form	V”	crystals)	melt	only
at	warmer	temperatures,	between	89	and
93ºF/32–34ºC.	The	temperature	range	in
which	a	particular	kind	of	crystal	melts	is	also
the	range	in	which	it	forms	as	the	chocolate
cools.	Unstable	crystals	therefore	form	when
molten	chocolate	is	cooled	rapidly,	so	that	the
stable	crystal	types	—	the	ones	that	begin	to
form	at	warmer	temperatures	—	don’t	have
time	to	gather	most	of	the	fat	molecules	to
themselves	before	the	unstable	crystals	begin
to	form.	Stable	crystals	predominate	in	melted
chocolate	when	the	cook	carefully	holds	it	at
temperatures	above	the	melting	point	of	the
unstable	crystals,	but	below	the	melting	point
of	the	stable	crystals.	This	tempering	range	is
88–90ºF/31–32ºC	for	dark	chocolate,
somewhat	lower	for	milk	and	white
chocolates	thanks	to	their	mixture	of	cocoa



and	milk	fats.

Temperatures	for	Tempering	Different
Kinds	of	Chocolate

The	 ideal	 temperatures	 for	preparing	milk
and	 white	 chocolates	 depend	 on	 the
formulation	 of	 the	 particular	 chocolate,
and	 are	 best	 obtained	 from	 the
manufacturer.	 This	 chart	 gives	 figures
generally	used	in	the	chocolate	industry.

Kind	of	Chocolate Melting	Temperature
Dark 113–122ºF/45–50ºC
Milk 104–113ºF/40–45ºC
White 104ºF/40ºC
Kind	of	Chocolate Cooling	Temperature
Dark 82–84ºF/28–29ºC
Milk 80–82ºF/27–28ºC
White 74–76ºF/24–25ºC
Kind	of	Chocolate Tempering	Range



Dark 88–90ºF/31–32ºC
Milk 86–88ºF/30–31ºC
White 80–82ºF/27–28ºC

Tempering	 Methods 	 There	 are	 several
different	ways	to	obtain	melted	chocolate	that
is	 in	 temper.	All	of	 them	require	an	accurate
thermometer,	a	gentle	heat	source	(often	a	pot
of	hot	water	over	which	the	bowl	of	chocolate
can	 be	 held),	 and	 the	 cook’s	 full	 attention.
And	 all	 of	 them	 end	with	 the	 chocolate	 at	 a
temperature	 where	 stable	 crystals	 can	 form
and	unstable	crystals	can’t.

Of	the	two	common	methods	for	tempering
chocolate,	one	creates	the	stable	crystals	from
scratch,	while	the	other	uses	a	small	amount
of	tempered	chocolate	to	“seed”	the	melted
chocolate	with	stable	crystals.

To	temper	the	chocolate	from	scratch,
heat	it	to	120ºF/50ºC	to	melt	all	crystals,
and	cool	it	down	to	around	105ºF/40ºC.



Then	either	stir	the	chocolate	as	it	cools
further,	until	it	thickens	noticeably	(an
indication	of	crystal	formation),	or	pour
a	portion	onto	a	cool	surface	and	scrape
and	mix	it	until	it	thickens,	and	return	it
to	the	bowl.	Then	carefully	raise	the
temperature	of	the	chocolate	to	the
tempering	range,	88–90ºF/31–32ºC,	and
stir	to	melt	any	unstable	crystals	that
might	have	formed	during	the	stirring	or
scraping.
To	seed	melted	chocolate	with	stable
crystals,	chop	and	hold	in	reserve	a
portion	of	solid	tempered	chocolate.	Heat
the	chocolate	to	be	tempered	to
120ºF/50ºC	to	melt	all	crystals,	and	cool
it	to	95–100ºF/35–38ºC,	just	above	the
temperature	range	in	which	stable
crystals	form.	Then	stir	in	the	solid
portion	with	its	stable	crystals,	while
keeping	the	temperature	in	the	tempering
range,	88–90ºF/31–32ºC.



No	 matter	 how	 chocolate	 is	 tempered,	 its
temperature	 must	 be	 held	 in	 the	 tempering
range	until	it	is	used.	If	allowed	to	cool,	it	will
begin	 to	 solidify	 prematurely,	 won’t	 flow
evenly,	 and	 produces	 an	 uneven	 consistency
and	appearance.

Melting	 Tempered	 Chocolate	 While
Maintaining	It	in	Temper	It’s	also	possible	to
obtain	 tempered	 melted	 chocolate	 without
actually	 doing	 the	 tempering.	 Nearly	 all
manufactured	 chocolate	 is	 sold	 in	 tempered
form.	A	cook	using	new,	well-made	chocolate
can	 warm	 it	 carefully	 and	 directly	 to	 the
tempering	 range,	 88–90ºF/31–32ºC,	 so	 that	 it
melts	but	still	retains	some	of	its	desirable	fat
crystals.	 This	 is	 easily	 done	 by	 stirring	 the
finely	chopped	chocolate	in	a	bowl	over	a	pot
filled	 with	 water	 at	 90–95ºF/32–34ºC.	 If	 for
some	 reason	 the	 chocolate	 is	 overheated,	 so
that	 it	 loses	 all	 of	 its	 fat	 crystals,	 or	 if	 the
cook	 is	 using	 previously	 melted	 and



resolidified	 chocolate	 with	 a	 mixture	 of
crystals,	 then	 it’s	 necessary	 to	 temper	 the
chocolate	with	 one	 of	 the	methods	 described
above.

Tempering	chocolate.	To	make	chocolate	with
stable	 fat	 crystals,	 the	 cook	 first	 heats	 the
chocolate	 to	 melt	 all	 the	 crystals.	 In	 one
method,	 he	 then	 cools	 the	 chocolate	 to	 the
temperature	 range	 in	 which	 only	 stable
crystals	can	form,	adds	a	portion	of	tempered
chocolate	to	provide	stable	crystal	seeds,	and
keeps	 the	 mixture	 warm	 until	 it’s	 used	 for
molding	 or	 coating.	 In	 a	 second	 method
(dotted	 line)	,	 the	 cook	 allows	 the	 molten
chocolate	 to	 cool	 below	 the	 stable-crystal
temperature	 and	 form	 a	 mixture	 of	 crystal
types,	 then	 warms	 it	 to	 melt	 the	 unstable



crystals	while	retaining	the	stable	ones.
The	Art	of	Tempering	Though	an	accurate
thermometer	and	careful	temperature	control
are	necessary	for	successful	tempering,	they
aren’t	sufficient.	The	art	of	tempering	lies	in
recognizing	when	the	chocolate	has
accumulated	enough	stable	crystals	to	form	a
dense,	hard	network	as	it	cools.	Insufficient
tempering	time,	or	insufficient	stirring,
produce	too	few	stable	crystal	seeds	and
undertempered	chocolate,	which	will	form
some	unstable	crystals	when	it	cools.	Too
much	stirring	or	time	produce	too	many	or	too
large	stable	crystals	and	overtempered
chocolate,	in	which	individual	crystals
predominate	over	the	joined	network.
Overtempered	chocolate	is	stable,	but	it	can
seem	coarse,	crumbly	rather	than	snappy,	dull
in	appearance,	and	waxy	in	the	mouth.

Testing	for	Temper 	Molten	 chocolate	 can	be
tested	 for	 its	 temper	by	placing	a	 small,	 thin



portion	on	a	room-temperature	surface,	a	plate
or	piece	of	 foil.	Properly	 tempered	chocolate
solidifies	 in	 a	 few	minutes	 to	 a	 clean,	 silky-
surfaced	 mass;	 the	 side	 in	 contact	 with	 the
cool	surface	is	shiny.	Chocolate	out	of	temper
takes	 many	 minutes	 to	 harden,	 and	 has	 an
irregular	powdery	or	grainy	appearance.

Working	 with	 Tempered	 Chocolate 	 Once
chocolate	 has	 been	 tempered,	 it	 must	 be
handled	so	that	it	stays	in	temper.	It	should	be
kept	 warm,	 in	 the	 tempering	 range	 of	 88–
90ºF/31–32ºC.	 When	 shaped,	 it	 should	 be
poured	into	molds	or	coated	onto	fillings	that
are	 neither	 so	 cold	 that	 they	 cause	 the	 cocoa
butter	to	solidify	quickly	and	unstably,	nor	so
warm	that	they	melt	the	stable	crystal	seeds	in
the	 chocolate.	 Confectioners	 recommend	 a
temperature	 around	 77ºF/25ºC.	 Similarly,	 the
room	temperature	should	be	moderate,	neither
chilly	nor	hot.

It	turns	out	that	tempered	chocolate



shrinks	by	about	2%	in	each	dimension	as	it
solidifies,	because	the	fat	molecules	in	the
stable	crystals	are	more	densely	packed	than
they	were	in	liquid	form.	This	shrinkage	is
helpful	in	making	molded	chocolates,	because
the	chocolate	pulls	away	from	the	mold	as	it
hardens.	But	it	can	cause	the	thin	coating	on	a
candy	or	truffle	to	crack,	especially	if	the
filling	is	cold	and	expands	slightly	when
coated	with	the	warm	chocolate.	The	snappy
hardness	of	tempered	chocolate	takes	several
days	to	develop	fully	as	the	crystal	network
continues	to	grow	and	become	stronger.

Specialty	Coatings
Ordinary	 chocolate	 is	 not	 well	 suited	 for
certain	 kinds	 of	 coatings,	 including	 those
on	ice	cream	and	other	frozen	ingredients,
and	candies	that	are	eaten	in	the	heat	of	the
summer	 or	 the	 tropics.	 For	 these	 kinds	 of
products,	 manufacturers	 have	 developed
replacements	 for	 cocoa	 butter	 that	 don’t



require	tempering	to	look	good,	break	with
a	 snap,	 and	 remain	 hard	 at	 high
temperatures.	 Some	 closely	 resemble
cocoa	 butter	 and	 can	 be	 mixed	 with
chocolate,	while	 others	 are	 very	 different,
not	compatible	with	chocolate,	and	must	be
flavored	 with	 low-fat	 cocoa.	 Among	 the
former	are	 fats	purified	 from	a	number	of
tropical	 nuts	 (palm,	 shea,	 illipe,	 sal);
among	 the	 latter	 are	 “lauric	 fats”	 derived
from	 coconut	 and	 palm	 oils.	 Coatings
made	 with	 these	 ingredients	 are	 often
called	“nontempering”	chocolates.

Modeling	Chocolate	“Modeling”	or
“molding”	chocolate	is	a	version	made
expressly	for	shaping	into	decorations.	It’s
made	by	mixing	molten	chocolate	with	a	third
to	half	its	weight	of	corn	syrup	and	sugar,	then
kneading	the	mixture	into	a	pliable	mass.	The
resulting	“chocolate”	is	now	a	concentrated
sugar	syrup	that	is	filled	and	thickened	with
cocoa	particles	and	droplets	of	cocoa	butter.



The	pieces	stiffen	as	the	syrup	phase	loses
moisture	to	the	air	and	to	the	dry	cocoa
particles.

Chocolate	and	Health

Fats	and	Antioxidants	Cocoa	beans,	like	all
seeds,	are	rich	in	nutrients	that	support	the
plant	embryo	until	it	develops	leaves	and
roots.	They’re	especially	rich	in	saturated	fats,
which	are	notorious	for	contributing	to	raised
blood	cholesterol	levels	and	therefore	to	the
risk	of	heart	disease.	However,	much	of	the
saturated	fat	in	cocoa	butter	is	a	particular
fatty	acid	that	the	body	immediately	converts
into	an	unsaturated	one	(stearic	acid	is
converted	to	oleic	acid).	So	chocolate	is	not
thought	to	pose	a	risk	to	the	heart.	In	fact,	it
may	well	be	beneficial.	Cocoa	particles	are	a
tremendously	rich	source	of	antioxidant
phenolic	compounds,	which	account	for	8%	of
the	weight	of	cocoa	powder.	The	higher	the



cocoa	solids	content	of	a	chocolate	or	candy,
the	higher	its	antioxidant	content.	Any	added
sugar,	milk	products,	or	cocoa	butter	simply
dilute	the	cocoa	solids	and	their	phenolics.
The	dutching	process	also	reduces	the	levels
of	desirable	phenolics	in	cocoa	powder,	and
the	milk	proteins	in	milk	chocolate	appear	to
bind	to	the	same	molecules	and	prevent	us
from	absorbing	them.

Caffeine	 and	 Theobromine	 Chocolate
contains	 two	 related	 alkaloids,	 theobromine
and	 caffeine,	 in	 the	 ratio	 of	 about	 10	 to	 1.
Theobromine	 is	 a	 weaker	 stimulant	 of	 the
nervous	 system	 than	 caffeine	 is	 (p.	 433);	 its
main	 effect	 seems	 to	 be	 a	 diuretic	 one.
(However	 it	 is	 quite	 toxic	 to	 dogs,	 who	 can
suffer	 serious	 poisoning	 from	 chocolate
candies.)	A	1-oz	/30	gm	piece	of	unsweetened
chocolate	contains	around	30	mg	of	caffeine,
around	 a	 third	 the	 dose	 in	 a	 cup	 of	 coffee;
sweetened	 and	 milk	 chocolates	 contain



substantially	 less.	 Cocoa	 powder	 has	 around
20	mg	caffeine	per	tablespoon/10	g.

Cravings	 for	 Chocolate	 Because	 many
people,	 especially	 women,	 experience
cravings	 for	 chocolate	 that	 border	 on	 the
symptoms	 of	 addiction,	 it	 has	 been	 thought
that	 chocolate	 might	 contain	 psychoactive
chemicals.	Chocolate	does	turn	out	to	contain
both	 “cannabinoid”	 chemicals	 —	 chemicals
similar	 to	 the	 active	 ingredient	 in	 marijuana
—	as	well	as	other	molecules	that	cause	brain
cells	 to	 accumulate	 cannabinoid	 chemicals.
But	 these	 are	 present	 in	 extremely	 small
amounts	 that	 probably	 have	 no	 practical
significance.	 Similarly,	 chocolate	 contains
phenylethylamine,	a	naturally	occurring	body
chemical	 that	 has	 amphetamine-like	 effects
—	 but	 then	 so	 do	 sausages	 and	 other
fermented	 foods.	 In	 fact	 there	 is	 good
experimental	evidence	that	chocolate	does	not
contain	 any	 drug-like	 substances	 capable	 of



inducing	a	 true	addiction.	Psychologists	have
shown	that	chocolate	cravings	can	be	satisfied
by	 imitations	 that	 have	 no	 real	 chocolate	 in
them,	while	these	cravings	are	not	satisfied	by
capsules	 of	 genuine	 cocoa	 powder	 or
chocolate	 that	 are	 swallowed	without	 tasting.
It	 appears	 to	 be	 the	 sensory	 experience	 of
eating	chocolate,	no	more	and	no	less,	 that	 is
powerfully	appealing.



Chapter	13

Wine,	Beer,
and	Distilled	Spirits

The	Nature	of	Alcohol
Yeasts	and	Alcoholic	Fermentation
The	Qualities	of	Alcohol
Alcohol	as	a	Drug:	Intoxication
How	the	Body	Metabolizes	Alcohol
Cooking	with	Alcohol
Alcoholic	Liquids	and	Wood	Barrels

Wine
The	History	of	Wine
Wine	Grapes
Making	Wine
Special	Wines
Storing	and	Serving	Wine
Enjoying	Wine

Beer
The	Evolution	of	Beer



Brewing	Ingredients:	Malt
Brewing	Ingredients:	Hops
Brewing	Beer
Storing	and	Serving	Beer
Kinds	and	Qualities	of	Beer

Asian	 Rice	 Alcohols:	 Chinese	Chiu	 and
Japanese	Sake

Sweet	Moldy	Grains
Starch-Digesting	Molds
Brewing	Rice	Alcohols

Distilled	Spirits
The	History	of	Distilled	Spirits
Making	Distilled	Alcohols
Serving	and	Enjoying	Spirits
Kinds	of	Spirits

Vinegar
An	Ancient	Ingredient
The	Virtues	of	Acetic	Acid
The	Acetic	Fermentation
Vinegar	Production
Common	Kinds	of	Vinegar
Balsamic	Vinegar



Sherry	Vinegar

Like	 all	 good	 foods,	 wine,	 beer,	 and	 spirits
nourish	and	satisfy	 the	body.	What	sets	 them
apart	 is	 the	 very	 direct	 way	 in	 which	 they
touch	 the	mind.	 They	 contain	 alcohol,	which
is	 both	 a	 source	 of	 energy	 and	 a	 drug.	 In
moderate	 amounts,	 alcohol	 causes	 us	 to	 feel
and	 express	 emotions	 of	 all	 kinds	 —
happiness,	 conviviality,	 sadness,	 anger	 —
with	 more	 freedom.	 In	 large	 amounts,	 it’s	 a
narcotic:	it	numbs	feeling	and	clouds	thought.
Alcoholic	drinks	thus	offer	various	degrees	of
release	 from	 our	 usual	 state	 of	 mind.	 Small
wonder	 that	 they	 were	 once	 considered	 an
earthly	version	of	the	nectar	of	the	gods,	foods
that	 give	 mortals	 a	 taste	 of	 being	 carefree
masters	of	life!

Humankind	has	always	had	a	thirst	for
alcohol,	and	now	satisfies	it	with	mass-
produced	drinks	that	offer	an	inexpensive
respite	from	the	world	and	its	cares.	But	some



wines	and	beers	and	spirits	are	among	the
most	finely	crafted	foods	there	are,	the	best
that	the	world	and	care	have	to	offer.	Their
flavor	can	be	so	rich,	balanced,	dynamic,	and
persistent	that	they	touch	the	mind	not	with
release	from	the	world,	but	with	a	heightened
attentiveness	and	connection	to	it.

Wine,	beer,	and	spirits	are	the	creation	of
microscopic	yeasts,	which	break	food	sugars
down	into	alcohol	molecules.	Alcohol	is	a
volatile	substance	whose	own	aroma	is
relatively	diffuse.	It	has	the	effect	of	lending	a
new	dimension	to	the	flavor	of	grapes	and
grains,	a	kind	of	open	stage	on	which	the
food’s	own	volatile	molecules	can	appear.
Yeasts	are	also	prodigious	flavor	chemists,	so
during	the	fermentation	they	fill	that	stage
with	dozens	of	new	aromas.	The	winemaker	or
brewer	then	directs	the	transformation	of	this
teeming,	unruly	cast	into	a	balanced,
harmonious	ensemble.

Though	they	share	this	basic	nature,	wine



and	beer	and	spirits	are	very	different	foods.
Wine	begins	with	fruits	that	are	fragrant	and
sweet	with	sugars,	and	therefore	ready-made
to	ferment	into	an	aromatic	drink	—	but	only
during	the	few	days	of	the	year	when	they’re
ripe.	Grapes	and	wine	are	a	gift	of	nature,	a
form	of	grace,	which	the	winemaker	must
accept	when	they’re	given,	and	can	leave
largely	to	themselves	to	realize	their	innate
potential	for	producing	flavor.	Beer	and	rice
alcohols,	by	contrast,	are	the	expression	of
everyday	human	effort	and	ingenuity.	They’re
made	from	sugarless,	aroma-less	dry	grains,
the	charmless	but	dependable	staff	of	life.
Brewers	transform	grains	into	something
fermentable	and	aromatic	by	sprouting	them
or	cultivating	molds	on	them	for	days,	and
cooking	them	for	hours.	They	can	do	this	at
any	time	of	the	year,	anywhere	in	the	world.
Beer	is	thus	our	universal	alcohol,
comfortably	local	and	everyday	and	ordinary,
yet	sometimes	extraordinary.	And	distilled



spirits	are	the	heart	of	wine	and	beer,
concentrates	of	their	volatile	and	aromatic
content,	and	drinks	of	unmatched	intensity.

The	pleasure	of	tasting	a	good	beer	or	wine
or	spirit	grows	with	the	recognition	that	its
flavor	is	the	expression	of	many	natural,
cultural,	and	personal	particulars:	a	place	and
its	traditions,	certain	plants	and	the	soil	they
grew	in,	a	year	and	its	weather,	the	course	of
fermentation	and	maturation,	the	taste	and
skills	of	the	maker.	Their	rich	natural	and
human	parentage	explains	why	alcohols	are	so
absorbingly	diverse,	and	why	a	thoughtful	sip
can	momentarily	fill	us	with	the	world	and
delight.

The	Drink	of	Happiness
Nearly	 4,000	 years	 ago,	 a	 Sumerian	 poet
put	 these	 words	 into	 the	 mouth	 of	 the
goddess	Inanna,	who	ruled	both	heaven	and
earth	and	was	as	delighted	as	any	mortal	by
the	 experience	 of	 drinking	 beer.	 Ninkasi



was	the	goddess	of	beer.	 (I’ve	omitted	the
poem’s	many	repetitions.)

May	Ninkasi	live	together	with	you!
Let	her	pour	for	you	beer	[and]	wine,
Let	[the	pouring]	of	the	sweet	liquor
resound

pleasantly	for	you!
In	the…reed	buckets	there	is	sweet	beer,
I	will	make	cupbearers,	boys,	[and]

brewers	stand	by,
While	I	circle	around	the	abundance	of
beer,
While	I	feel	wonderful,	I	feel	wonderful,
Drinking	beer,	in	a	blissful	mood,
Drinking	liquor,	feeling	exhilarated,
With	joy	in	the	heart	[and]	a	happy	liver	—
While	my	heart	full	of	joy,
[And]	[my]	happy	liver	I	cover	with	a

garment	fit	for	a	queen!
The	heart	of	Inanna	is	happy	again,
The	heart	of	the	queen	of	heaven	is	happy



again!
—	Transl.	Miguel	Civil

The	Nature	of	Alcohol

Alcohol	molecules	are	made	in	many	living
cells	as	a	by-product	of	breaking	down	sugar
molecules	for	their	chemical	energy.	Most
cells	then	break	down	the	alcohol	molecules
to	extract	their	energy	content	too.	The	great
exception	to	this	rule	is	certain	yeasts,	which
excrete	alcohol	into	their	surroundings.	Like
the	lactic	acid	in	cheeses	and	pickled
vegetables,	like	the	powerful	aromas	in	herbs
and	spices,	the	alcohol	in	wine	and	beer	is	a
defensive	chemical	weapon,	which	the	yeasts
deploy	to	protect	themselves	against
competition	from	other	microbes.	Alcohol	is
toxic	to	living	cells.	Even	the	yeasts	that	make
it	for	us	can	only	tolerate	a	certain	amount.
The	pleasant	feeling	that	it	gives	us	is	a
manifestation	of	the	fact	that	it’s	disrupting



the	normal	function	of	our	brain	cells.

Yeast.	Cells	of	brewer’s	yeast, 	Saccharomyces
cerevisiae,	as	 seen	 through	 an	 electron
microscope.	 Each	 is	 about	 0.005	 mm	 in
diameter.	The	cell	at	the	upper	right	center	is
in	 the	 process	 of	 reproducing,	 and	 bears	 the
scars	of	previous	buddings.

Yeasts	and	Alcoholic	Fermentation

Yeasts	are	a	group	of	about	160	species	of
single-celled	microscopic	molds.	Not	all	are
useful:	some	cause	the	spoilage	of	fruits	and
vegetables,	some	cause	human	disease	(for
example,	the	yeast	infection	of	Candida



albicans).	Most	of	the	yeasts	used	in	making
bread	and	alcoholic	drinks	are	members	of	the
genus	Saccharomyces,	whose	name	means
“sugar	fungus.”	We	cultivate	them	for	the
same	reason	that	we	use	particular	bacteria	to
sour	milk:	they	make	foods	resistant	to
infection	by	other	microbes,	and	produce
substances	that	are	mainly	pleasant	to	us.
Essential	to	the	yeasts’	production	of	alcohol
is	their	ability	to	survive	on	very	little
oxygen,	which	most	living	cells	use	to	burn
fuel	molecules	for	energy,	leaving	behind
only	carbon	dioxide	and	water.	In	the	absence
of	oxygen,	the	fuel	can	be	broken	down	only
partly.	The	overall	equation	for	the	production
of	energy	from	glucose	without	oxygen	goes
like	this:
C6H12O6 	2CH3CH2OH	+	2CO2	+	energy

Glucose	 	alcohol	+	carbon	dioxide	+	energy
Yeasts	introduce	a	variety	of	other

compounds	into	the	grape	juice	or	grain	mash
that	contributes	characteristic	flavors.	For



example,	they	produce	savory	succinic	acid,
and	transform	amino	acids	in	the	liquid	into
“higher,”	or	longer-chain	alcohols;	they
combine	alcohols	with	acids	to	make	fruity-
smelling	esters;	they	produce	sulfur
compounds	reminiscent	of	cooked	vegetables,
coffee,	and	toast.	And	when	a	yeast	cell	dies,
its	enzymatic	machinery	digests	the	cell	and
releases	its	contents	into	the	liquid,	where
they	continue	to	generate	flavor.	Because
growing	yeast	cells	synthesize	proteins	and	B
vitamins,	they	can	actually	make	a	fruit	juice
or	cereal	mash	more	nutritious	than	it	was
when	fresh.

The	Qualities	of	Alcohol

In	chemistry,	the	term	alcohol	is	applied	to	a
large	family	of	substances	with	a	similar
molecular	structure.	Our	everyday	word
alcohol	refers	to	one	particular	member	of
this	family,	which	chemists	call	ethyl	alcohol,



or	ethanol.	In	this	chapter	I’ll	use	alcohol	in
its	common	sense,	but	I’ll	also	refer	to
“higher”	alcohols,	or	molecules	in	the	alcohol
family	with	more	atoms	than	ethanol	has.

Ethanol,	 or	 common	 alcohol.	 The	 versatile
ethanol	molecule	 has	 one	 end	 that	 resembles
the	 fatty-acid	 carbon	 chain	 of	 fats	 and	 oils,
and	one	end	that	resembles	water.

Alcoholic	Fermentation	Helped	Form
Modern	Biology

The	 mystery	 of	 fermentation	 attracted
some	 of	 the	 best	 and	 most	 headstrong
scientists	 of	 the	 19th	 century,	 including
Justus	 von	 Liebig	 and	 Louis	 Pasteur,	 and
helped	 give	 rise	 to	 the	 science	 of
microbiology.	The	first	microorganisms	to



be	 isolated	 in	pure	cultures	were	beer	 and
wine	 yeasts	 prepared	 in	 the	 laboratory	 of
the	 Carlsberg	 Brewery	 in	 Copenhagen
around	 1880.	 And	 scientists	 coined	 the
wo r d	enzyme,	 denoting	 the	 remarkable
protein	 molecules	 that	 living	 cells	 use	 to
transform	other	molecules,	from	the	Greek
words	 for	 “in	 yeast,”	 where	 sugar	 is
transformed	into	alcohol.

Physical	and	Chemical	Qualities	Pure
alcohol	is	a	clear,	colorless	liquid.	The
alcohol	molecule	is	a	small	one,	CH3CH2OH,
whose	backbone	is	just	two	carbon	atoms.	One
end	of	the	alcohol	molecule,	the	CH3,
resembles	fats	and	oils,	while	the	OH	group	at
the	other	end	is	two-thirds	of	a	water
molecule.	Alcohol	is	therefore	a	versatile
liquid.	It	mixes	easily	with	water,	but	also
with	fatty	substances,	including	cell
membranes,	which	it	excels	at	penetrating,
and	aroma	molecules	and	carotenoid
pigments,	which	it	excels	at	extracting	from



cells.	The	higher	alcohols,	which	yeasts	also
produce	in	small	quantities	and	which	become
concentrated	in	distilled	spirits,	have	a	longer
fat-like	end	to	their	molecules	(p.	762),	and
behave	more	like	fats.	They	lend	an	oily,
viscous	quality	to	whiskies	and	other	spirits.
They	also	tend	to	concentrate	in	the
membranes	of	our	cells,	and	therefore	are
more	irritating	and	more	potent	narcotics	than
simple	alcohol.

Several	of	alcohol’s	physical	properties
have	important	consequences	for	the	cook	and
food	lover.

Alcohol	is	more	volatile	than	water,
more	easily	evaporated	and	brought	to
the	boil.	Its	low	boiling	point,
176ºF/78ºC,	is	what	makes	it	possible	to
distill	alcohol	into	a	much	stronger
solution	than	wine	or	beer.
Alcohol	is	flammable,	which	makes
possible	spectacular	flaming	dishes
fueled	by	brandy	or	rum.	The	food



doesn’t	get	scorched	because	the	heat	of
combustion	is	fully	absorbed	by	the
vaporization	of	the	spirits’	water.
Alcohol	has	a	much	lower	freezing	point
than	water,	–173ºF/–114ºC.	This	makes	it
possible	to	concentrate	alcoholic	liquids
in	winter	cold	or	the	freezer	(see	box,	p.
761).
A	given	volume	of	alcohol	weighs	80%
as	much	as	the	same	volume	of	water,	so
a	mixture	of	alcohol	and	water	is	lighter
than	pure	water.	This	helps	makes
possible	layered	cocktails	(see	box,	p.
770).

Alcohol	 and	 Flavor	 We	 experience	 the
presence	 of	 alcohol	 in	 a	 food	 through	 our
senses	of	taste,	smell,	and	touch.	The	alcohol
molecule	 bears	 some	 resemblance	 to	 a	 sugar
molecule,	 and	 indeed	 it	 has	 a	 slightly	 sweet
taste.	At	high	concentrations,	those	typical	of
distilled	 spirits	 and	 even	 some	 strong	wines,



alcohol	 is	 irritating,	 and	 produces	 a	 pungent,
“hot”	sensation	in	the	mouth,	as	well	as	in	the
nose.	As	 a	 volatile	 chemical,	 alcohol	 has	 its
own	 distinctive	 aroma,	 which	 we	 experience
at	 its	 purest	 in	 unflavored	 grain	 alcohol	 or
vodka.	 Its	 chemical	 compatibility	 with	 other
aroma	 compounds	 means	 that	 concentrated
alcohol	 tends	 to	 bind	 aromas	 in	 foods	 and
drinks	 and	 inhibit	 their	 release	 into	 the	 air.
But	at	very	low	concentrations,	around	1%	or
less,	 alcohol	 actually	 enhances	 the	 release	of
fruity	 esters	 and	 other	 aroma	molecules	 into
the	 air.	 This	 is	 one	 reason	 that	 wine,	 vodka,
and	other	alcohols	are	valuable	ingredients	in
general	cooking,	provided	 that	 the	proportion
is	 small	 or	 the	 alcohol	 mostly	 removed	 by
long	cooking.

The	Tears	of	Strong	Wine	and	Spirits
Regular	 drinkers	 of	 strong	 wines	 and
spirits	 have	probably	mused	upon	 the	odd
phenomenon	 known	 as	 “tears”	 or	 “legs,”



films	 of	 liquid	 on	 the	 inside	 of	 the	 glass
that	 seem	 to	 be	 in	 slow	 but	 constant
movement	 up	 and	 down.	 These	 moving
films	are	created	by	the	dynamic	nature	of
alcohol-water	mixtures.	Alcohol	lowers	the
forces	 of	 attraction	 between	 water
molecules	 in	 wine	 or	 spirits;	 but	 at	 the
edge	 of	 the	 surface,	 alcohol	 evaporates
from	 the	 water,	 the	 water	 bonds	 more
strongly	 to	 itself	 and	 to	 the	glass,	 and	 the
decreasingly	alcoholic	water	pulls	itself	up
the	side	of	the	glass	until	gravity	wins	out
and	 it	 falls	 back	 in	 a	 droplet.	 The	 higher
the	alcoholic	content	of	the	liquid,	and	the
easier	 it	 is	 for	 alcohol	 to	 evaporate	 —
warm	 temperatures	 and	 wide-mouthed
shallow	glasses	 are	most	 favorable	—	 the
more	pronounced	the	tears	and	legs	are.

Effects	on	Living	Things	One	consequence	of
alcohol’s	chemical	versatility	is	that	it	readily
penetrates	the	membranes	of	living	cells,
which	are	made	in	part	of	fat-like	molecules.



When	it	does	so,	it	disturbs	the	action	of	the
membrane	proteins.	A	high	enough
concentration	of	alcohol	will	cause	such	a
disturbance	that	this	critical	boundary
between	cell	and	environment	fails,	and	the
cell	dies.	The	yeasts	that	produce	alcohol	can
tolerate	a	concentration	of	about	20%,	and
most	other	microbes	are	killed	by	much	less.
When	the	solution	also	contains	acid	or	sugar,
as	in	wines,	alcohol	is	an	even	more	effective
microbial	poison.	This	is	why,	unlike	beer	and
wine,	distilled	spirits	and	such	alcohol-
fortified	wines	as	sherry	and	port	don’t	spoil
after	they’re	opened.

Our	own	pleasant	inebriation	when	we
drink	alcohol	is	in	part	a	symptom	of	mild
membrane	and	protein	disturbance	throughout
our	nervous	system.

Alcohol	as	a	Drug:	Intoxication

Alcohol	is	a	drug:	it	alters	the	operation	of	the



various	tissues	into	which	it	diffuses.	We
value	it	most	for	its	influence	on	the	central
nervous	system,	where	it	acts	as	a	narcotic.
The	fact	that	it	seems	to	stimulate	more
animated,	excited	behavior	than	usual	is
actually	a	symptom	of	its	depressant	effect	on
the	higher	functions	of	the	brain,	those	that
normally	control	our	behavior	with	various
kinds	of	inhibition.	As	more	alcohol	reaches
the	brain,	it	interferes	with	more	basic
processes:	memory,	concentration,	and
thinking	in	general;	muscular	coordination,
speech,	vision.	With	regard	to	the	idea	that
alcohol	is	an	aphrodisiac,	modern
investigators	continue	to	cite	the	authority	of
the	Porter	in	Shakespeare’s	Macbeth,	who
says	of	drink	that	“Lechery,	sir,	it	provokes,
and	unprovokes:	it	provokes	the	desire,	but	it
takes	away	the	performance.”

The	degree	to	which	someone	is
intoxicated	depends	on	the	concentration	of
alcohol	in	the	cells.	Once	alcohol	is	absorbed



from	the	digestive	tract,	the	blood	rapidly
distributes	it	to	all	body	fluids,	and	it	readily
diffuses	into	and	across	membranes	to
penetrate	all	cells.	Large	people	can	therefore
drink	more	than	small	people	without	being
drunker:	they	have	a	greater	volume	of	body
fluids	and	cells	in	which	to	dilute	the	alcohol.
Impaired	coordination	and	impulsive	behavior
usually	appear	when	the	concentration	of
alcohol	in	the	blood	is	0.02–0.03%.	Falling-
over	drunkenness	is	the	result	at	0.15%,	and
0.4%	can	be	fatal.

As	drugs	go,	alcohol	is	a	relatively	weak
one.	It	takes	grams	of	pure	alcohol,	not
milligrams,	to	have	noticeable	effects,	and
this	allows	us	to	enjoy	moderate	amounts	of
wine	and	beer	without	harming	ourselves.	But
like	other	narcotic	drugs,	alcohol	can	be
addictive,	and	the	habitual	consumption	of
large	quantities	is	destructive.	It	has	been	the
cause	of	widespread	misery	and	premature
death	for	thousands	of	years,	and	it	still	is.



Alcohol	and	the	molecule	to	which	it’s	first
metabolized,	acetalde-hyde,	disrupt	many
systems	and	organs	in	the	body.	Their
constant	presence	can	therefore	cause	a	broad
range	of	serious	and	even	fatal	diseases.

The	Source	of	Happiness	and	Oblivion
Observers	 of	 the	 human	 condition	 have
long	 remarked	 on	 the	 ways	 in	 which
alcohol	 helps	 people	 deal	 with	 that
condition.	Here	are	two	of	the	earliest	and
simplest	formulations,	from	the	Ayurvedic
tradition	 of	 India,	 and	 from	 the	 Old
Testament.

Wine	is	the	foremost	of	all	things	that	lead
to	cheerfulness.
Abuse	of	wine	is	the	foremost	of	all	causes
that	lead	to	loss	of	intelligence	and
memory.

—	Charaka-Samhita,	ca.	400	BCE
Give	strong	drink	unto	him	that	is	ready	to



perish,	and	wine	unto	them	that	be	of
heavy	hearts.	Let	him	drink,	and	forget	his
poverty,	and	remember	his	misery	no
more.

—	Proverbs,	ca.	500	BCE

How	the	Body	Metabolizes	Alcohol

Our	bodies	eliminate	alcohol	by	breaking	it
down	in	a	series	of	chemical	reactions	and
using	the	energy	freed	by	those	reactions.
Alcohol’s	chemical	structure	has	similarities
to	both	sugar	and	fat,	and	it	has	a	nutritional
value	between	the	two,	around	7	calories	per
gram	(sugar	has	4	calories	per	gram,	fat	9).	It
provides	around	5%	of	the	calories	in	the
American	diet,	much	more	among	heavy
drinkers.

Alcohol	is	broken	down	and	converted	into
energy	in	two	organs,	the	stomach	and	the
liver.	The	“first-pass”	metabolism	of	alcohol
in	the	stomach	consumes	a	portion	before	it



gets	to	the	small	intestine	and	then	into	the
blood.	That	portion	is	around	30%	in	men,	but
only	10%	in	women.	Men	therefore
experience	a	slower	rise	in	blood	alcohol
when	they	drink,	and	can	drink	more	before
they	feel	its	effects.	And	there	are	strong
genetic	influences	on	how	well	individuals	are
able	to	handle	alcohol.

Overall,	the	body	can	metabolize	around
10–15	grams	of	alcohol	per	hour,	the
equivalent	of	one	standard-sized	drink	every
60–90	minutes.	The	level	of	alcohol	in	the
blood	reaches	a	maximum	30–60	minutes
after	consumption.	Foods,	and	especially	fats
and	oils,	delay	the	passage	of	the	stomach’s
contents	into	the	small	intestine,	giving	the
stomach	enzymes	more	time	to	work,	slowing
the	rise	in	blood	alcohol,	and	reducing	its
peak	to	about	half	of	what	it	reaches	on	an
empty	stomach.	On	the	other	hand,	aspirin
interferes	with	the	stomach’s	alcohol
metabolism	and	so	causes	a	quicker	rise	in



blood	alcohol	levels.	The	carbon	dioxide
bubbles	in	sparkling	wines	and	beer	cause	the
same	accelerated	rise	by	as	yet	unknown
means.

The	Benefits	of	Moderate	Drinking
One	 consistent	 finding	 from	 several
decades’	 worth	 of	 studies	 is	 that	 people
who	 regularly	 consume	 the	 equivalent	 of
one	or	two	alcoholic	drinks	per	day	die	less
often	 from	 heart	 disease	 and	 stroke.
(Higher	 consumption	 is	 associated	 with
higher	 death	 rates	 from	 cancer	 and
accidents.)	Alcohol	 itself	 raises	 the	 levels
of	 desirable	 HDL	 cholesterol	 and	 lowers
the	 levels	 of	 blood	 factors	 that	 induce
clotting	 and	 thus	 contribute	 to	 blockages.
And	 red	 wine	 and	 dark	 beer	 are	 good
sources	of	antioxidant	phenolic	compounds
(p.	 255).	 Wine	 phenolics	 also	 cause
arteries	 to	widen	 and	 reduce	 the	 tendency
of	 red	 blood	 cells	 to	 stick	 together,	 and	 a



few	 of	 these	 compounds,	 notably
resveratrol	 and	 its	 relatives,	 inhibit	 an
enzyme	(cyclooxygenase)	that’s	associated
with	damaging	inflammation	reactions	and
the	 development	 of	 arthritis	 and	 certain
cancers.

The	Hangover	Then	there’s	the	misery	of	the
hangover,	the	general	feeling	of	illness	that
we	wake	up	with	the	morning	after	we’ve	had
too	much	alcohol.	The	folk	remedies	for	this
affliction	are	many	and	ancient.	In	medieval
times,	the	medical	school	of	Salerno	was
already	recommending	the	hair	of	the	dog:
Si	nocturna	tibi	noceat	potatio	vini,
Hoc	 tu	 mane	 bibas	 iterum,	 et	 fuerit
medicina.
If	an	evening	of	wine	does	you	in,
More	the	next	morning	will	be	medicine.

The	hangover	is	in	part	a	mild	withdrawal
syndrome.	The	night	before,	the	body	adjusted
to	a	high	concentration	of	alcohol	and	related
narcotic	chemicals,	but	by	morning	the	drug	is



going	or	gone.	Hyper-sensitivity	to	sound	and
light,	for	example,	may	be	a	leftover
compensation	for	the	general	depression	of
the	nervous	system.	The	logic	of	the	morning-
after	drink	is	simple	but	insidious:	it	restores
many	of	the	conditions	to	which	the	body	had
become	accustomed,	as	well	as	lightly
anesthetizing	it.	But	this	only	postpones	the
body’s	true	recovery	from	intoxication.

Only	a	few	of	the	different	symptoms	that
constitute	a	hangover	can	be	directly	treated.
The	dry	mouth	and	headache	can	be	due	to	the
dehydration	that	alcohol	causes,	so	that
drinking	liquids	may	relieve	them.	Alcohol
can	also	cause	a	headache	by	enlarging	the
cranial	blood	vessels;	the	caffeine	in	coffee
and	tea	has	the	opposite	effect,	and	may	bring
some	relief.

Cooking	with	Alcohol

Cooks	use	wines,	beers,	and	distilled	spirits	as



ingredients	in	a	broad	range	of	dishes,	from
savory	soups	and	sauces	and	stews	to	sweet
creams	and	cakes,	soufflés	and	sorbets.	They
contribute	distinctive	flavors,	often	including
acidity,	sweetness,	and	savoriness	(from
glutamic	and	succinic	acids),	and	the	aromatic
dimension	provided	by	alcohol	and	other
volatile	substances.	Some	qualities	can	be	a
challenge	for	the	cook	to	work	with,	including
the	astringency	of	red	wines	(p.	737)	and	the
bitterness	of	most	beers.	The	alcohol	itself
also	provides	a	third	kind	of	liquid	—	in
addition	to	water	and	oil	—	into	which	flavor
and	color	molecules	can	be	extracted	and
dissolved,	as	well	as	reactive	molecules	that
can	combine	with	other	substances	in	the	food
to	generate	new	aromas	and	greater	depth	of
flavor.	While	large	amounts	of	alcohol	tend	to
trap	other	volatile	molecules	in	the	food,
small	traces	boost	their	volatility	and	so
intensify	aroma.

At	the	same	time	that	alcohol	itself	can	be



an	asset	for	the	cook,	it	can	also	be	a	liability.
Alcohol	has	its	own	pungent,	slightly
medicinal	qualities,	and	these	qualities	are
heightened	and	can	become	harsh	in	hot
foods.	Cooks	may	therefore	simmer	or	boil
sauces	for	some	time	to	evaporate	off	as	much
alcohol	as	possible.	In	the	showy	preparation
called	the	flambé,	from	the	French	for	“to
flame,”	they	ignite	the	heated	vapors	of	spirits
and	high-alcohol	wines	into	flickering,
ghostly	blue	flames	to	burn	off	the	alcohol
and	give	a	lightly	singed	flavor	to	a	dish.
However,	none	of	these	techniques	leave	a
food	free	of	alcohol.	Experiments	have	shown
that	long-simmered	stews	retain	about	5%	of
the	alcohol	initially	added,	briefly	cooked
dishes	from	10	to	50%,	and	flambés	as	much
as	75%.

Alcoholic	Liquids	and	Wood	Barrels

The	great	good	fortune	of	wine	and	beer	is



that	microbes	can	“spoil”	fruit	juice	and	gruel
into	something	both	delicious	and	pleasantly
inebriating.	A	few	centuries	ago,	winemakers
and	distillers	discovered	another	remarkable
piece	of	good	luck:	simply	storing	wine,
spirits,	and	vinegars	in	wood	barrels	turns	out
to	give	them	a	new	and	complementary
dimension	of	flavor.

Oak	 and	 Its	Qualities	 Though	 chestnut	 and
cedar	have	been	used	 in	Europe	and	redwood
in	 the	 United	 States,	 most	 barrels	 for	 aging
wines	 and	 spirits	 are	 made	 from	 oak.	 Oak
heartwood,	the	older	inner	wood,	is	a	mass	of
dead	 cells	 that	 supports	 the	 outer	 living
layers.	 The	 heartwood	 cells	 are	 filled	 with
compounds	 that	 deter	 boring	 insects.	 These
are	 mainly	 tannins,	 but	 they	 include	 such
aromatic	 compounds	 as	 clove-like	 eugenol,
vanilla-like	vanillin,	and	oaky	“oak	lactones,”
relatives	 of	 the	 characteristic	 aromatics	 of
coconut	 and	 peach.	 From	 90	 to	 95%	 of	 the



heartwood	 solids	 are	 cell-wall	 molecules,
cellulose,	hemicellulose,	and	lignin.	These	are
mostly	insoluble,	but	the	lignins	can	be	partly
broken	down	and	extracted	by	strong	alcohol,
and	all	can	be	transformed	into	new	aromatic
molecules	 when	 the	 wood	 is	 heated	 during
barrel	making	(p.	449).

Coopers	rely	mainly	on	two	European	oak
species	(Quercus	robur	and	Q.	sessilis),	and
ten	North	American	species,	the	most
important	being	the	white	oak	(Q.	alba).	The
European	species	are	mostly	made	into	wine
barrels,	American	oak	into	barrels	for	aging
distilled	spirits.	American	oak	tends	to	have
lower	levels	of	extractable	tannins	and	higher
levels	of	the	oak	lactones	and	vanillin.

Making	 Barrels:	 Forming	 and	 Cooking	 In
order	 to	 make	 barrels,	 the	 cooper	 splits	 the
heartwood	 into	pieces,	dries	 them,	and	 forms
them	 into	 thin,	 elongated	 staves,	 which	 are
then	 roughly	 hooped	 together	 and	 heated	 to



make	 them	more	pliable	 and	 easily	bent	 into
the	 final	 barrel	 shape.	 In	 Europe,	 the	 barrel
interior	 is	 heated	 with	 a	 small	 brazier	 of
burning	wood	scraps	to	400ºF/200ºC.	Once	the
softened	staves	have	been	tightly	hooped	into
their	 final	 positions,	 the	 interior	 is	 “toasted”
further	 at	 300–400ºF/150–200ºC,	 for	 5	 to	 20
minutes,	depending	on	 the	degree	of	 cooking
desired:	less	for	wine	barrels,	more	for	spirits.
In	 the	 United	 States,	 the	 heat	 treatment	 for
whiskey	barrels	is	more	extreme.	The	hooped
staves	 are	 first	 steamed	 to	 soften	 them,	 and
then	the	barrel	interior	is	charred	with	an	open
gas	burner	for	from	15	to	45	seconds.

Barrel	 Flavors	 Several	 things	 happen	 when
alcoholic	 liquids	 are	 stored	 in	 new	 barrels.
First,	the	liquid	extracts	soluble	materials	that
contribute	color	and	flavor,	including	tannins,
oak	 and	 clove	 and	 vanilla	 aromas,	 and	 the
sugars,	 browning-reaction	 products,	 and
smoky	 volatiles	 formed	when	 the	 barrel	 was



heated.	 In	 the	 charred	American	barrels	 used
for	 whiskey,	 the	 carbonized	 surface	 acts
something	 like	 an	 activated	 charcoal
absorbant,	removing	some	materials	from	the
whiskey	and	so	accelerating	the	maturation	of
its	 flavor.	Gaps	 and	 pores	 in	 the	wood	 allow
the	 liquid	 to	 absorb	 limited	 amounts	 of
oxygen.	And	 the	 rich	 chemical	 brew	of	wine
or	 spirits,	 wood	 components,	 and	 oxygen
slowly	 undergoes	 innumerable	 reactions	 and
evolves	toward	a	harmonious	equilibrium.

New	oak	barrels	give	a	pronounced	flavor
to	liquids	stored	in	them,	one	that	can
overwhelm	the	inherent	qualities	of	delicate
wines.	The	producer	can	control	the
contribution	of	the	wood	by	limiting	the	aging
time	in	new	barrels,	or	by	working	with	used
barrels,	which	have	already	had	much	of	their
flavor	components	extracted.

Barrel	Fermentation
Some	wines	and	vinegars	are	fermented	in



the	 barrel	 as	 well	 as	 matured	 there	 after
fermentation,	 and	 develop	 a	 distinctive
barrel-fermented	 flavor.	 One	 unusual
component	of	 that	 flavor,	produced	by	 the
action	 of	 yeast	 enzymes	 on	 compounds
found	in	toasted	oak,	is	a	sulfur-containing
chemical	 whose	 aroma	 is	 reminiscent	 of
roasted	 coffee	 and	 roasted	 meat
(furfurylthiol).

Alternatives	to	Barrels	Oak	barrels	are
expensive,	so	only	relatively	expensive	wines
and	spirits	are	aged	in	them.	There	are	other
ways	of	getting	oak	flavor	into	less	expensive
products.	Boisés,	extracts	made	by	boiling
wood	chips	in	water,	are	a	traditional
finishing	additive	in	French	brandies,
including	Cognac	and	Armagnac.	In	recent
years,	large-volume	winemakers	have	begun
putting	barrel	staves,	oak	chips,	and	even
sawdust	into	wines	while	they	mature	in
containers	made	of	steel	and	other	inert
materials.



Wine

The	juice	of	the	grape	is	just	one	of	the
naturally	sweet	liquids	with	which	our
ancestors	learned	to	make	alcoholic	drinks.
Perhaps	just	as	ancient	as	grape	wine	is
koumiss,	the	fermented	mare’s	milk	of	the
central	Asian	nomads.	One	Greek	word	for
wine,	methu,	came	from	the	Indo-European
word	for	fermented	honey	water,	whose	name
in	English	is	mead.	The	Romans	fermented
dates	and	figs.	And	before	they	tasted	wine,
the	inhabitants	of	northern	Europe	drank	apple
juice	fermented	into	cider.

But	the	grape	turned	out	to	be	uniquely
suited	to	the	development	of	a	diverse	family
of	alcoholic	drinks.	The	grapevine	is	a	highly
productive	plant	that	can	adapt	to	a	wide
range	of	soils	and	climates.	Its	fruits	retain
large	amounts	of	an	unusual	acid,	tartaric
acid,	which	few	microbes	can	metabolize,	and
which	favors	the	growth	of	yeasts.	The	grapes



ripen	with	enough	sugar	that	the	yeasts’
alcohol	production	can	suppress	the	growth	of
nearly	all	other	microbes.	And	they	offer
striking	colors	and	a	variety	of	flavors.

Thanks	largely	to	these	qualities,	grapes
are	the	world’s	largest	fruit	crop,	with	about
70%	of	the	annual	production	used	to	make
wine.	France,	Italy,	and	Spain	are	the	world’s
largest	wine	producers	and	exporters.

The	History	of	Wine

The	evolution	of	wine	is	long	and	fascinating,
and	ongoing.	Here	are	a	few	highlights.

Ancient	 Times:	 Aged	 Wines	 and
Connoisseurship	 As	 I	 write,	 the	 earliest
evidence	we	have	for	wine	made	from	grapes,
residues	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 a	 pot	 found	 in
western	 Iran,	 dates	 from	 around	 6000	BCE.
From	3000	BCE	on,	wine	was	a	prominent	part
of	 trade	 in	 western	 Asia	 and	 Egypt.	 Wild



grapes	 and	 the	 first	 wines	 were	 red,	 but	 the
Egyptians	 had	 a	 color	 mutant	 of	 the	 grape
plant	 and	 made	 white	 wines	 from	 it.	 They
would	 ferment	 grape	 juice	 in	 large	 clay	 jars.
The	 contents	 of	 the	 jars	 were	 eventually
sampled	 and	 graded,	 and	 the	 jars	 marked,
stoppered,	 and	 sealed	with	mud.	 The	 airtight
containers	allowed	wine	to	be	aged	for	years.
Many	 wine	 amphoras	 found	 in	 the	 tombs	 of
the	 pharaohs	 carry	 labels	 with	 the	 date	 of
production,	 the	region	 in	which	 the	wine	was
made,	 sometimes	 a	 brief	 description	 and	 the
name	 of	 the	 winemaker.	 Wine
connoisseurship	is	ancient!

Greece	 and	 Rome	 Phoenician	 and	 Greek
traders	 introduced	 the	 cultivated	 vine
throughout	 the	 Mediterranean	 basin,	 where
the	 Greeks	 developed	 the	 cult	 of	 Dionysos,
god	of	vegetation,	the	vine,	and	the	temporary
release	 from	 ordinary	 life	 that	 wine	 made
possible.	 By	 Homer’s	 time,	 about	 700	BCE,



wine	 had	 become	 a	 standard	 beverage	 in
Greece,	 one	 that	 was	 made	 strong,	 watered
down	 before	 drinking,	 and	 graded	 in	 quality
for	freeman	and	slave.	The	culture	of	the	vine
was	 not	 established	 in	 Italy	 until	 about	 200
BCE,	 but	 it	 took	 hold	 so	well	 that	 the	Greeks
took	 to	calling	 southern	 Italy	Oenotria,	“land
of	the	grape.”

Over	the	next	couple	of	centuries,	Rome
advanced	the	art	of	winemaking	considerably.
Pliny	devoted	a	full	book	of	his	Natural
History	to	the	grape.	He	noted	that	there	were
now	an	infinite	number	of	varieties,	that	the
same	grape	could	produce	very	different
wines	in	different	places,	and	named	Italy,
Greece,	Egypt,	and	Gaul	(France)	as	admired
sources.	Like	the	Egyptians,	the	Romans	had
airtight	amphoras	that	allowed	them	to	age
wine	for	years	without	spoiling.	The	Greeks
and	Romans	also	preserved	and	flavored
wines	with	tree	resins	or	the	pitch	refined
from	them,	salt,	and	spices.



It	was	in	Roman	times	that	wooden	casks
—	an	innovation	of	northern	Europe	—
arrived	along	the	Mediterranean	as	an
alternative	to	clay	amphoras.	During
subsequent	centuries,	they	became	the
standard	wine	vessel,	and	amphoras
disappeared.	Casks	had	the	advantage	of	being
lighter	and	less	fragile,	but	the	disadvantage
of	not	being	airtight.	This	meant	that	wines
could	only	be	stored	in	them	for	a	handful	of
years	before	they	became	overoxidized	and
unpleasant	to	drink.	Excellent	aged	wines
therefore	disappeared	along	with	the	amphora,
and	only	reappeared	after	more	than	a
thousand	years	with	the	invention	of	the	cork-
stoppered	bottle	(p.	724).

The	Spread	of	Winemaking	 in	Europe;	 the
Rise	of	France	After	the	fall	of	Rome	around
the	 5th	 century	CE,	 Christian	 monasteries
advanced	 the	 arts	 of	 viticulture	 and
winemaking	 in	Europe.	Local	 rulers	endowed



them	 with	 tracts	 of	 land,	 which	 they	 then
cleared	of	forest	and	reclaimed	from	swamps,
bringing	 systematic,	 organized	 agriculture	 to
sparsely	 settled	 regions,	 and	 the	 grape	 to
northern	 France	 and	 Germany.	 Wine	 was
required	 for	 the	 sacrament	 of	 Communion,
and	 it	 and	 beer	 were	 made	 for	 daily
consumption,	 to	 serve	 guests,	 and	 to	 sell.	 It
was	 in	 the	 Middle	 Ages	 that	 the	 wines	 of
Burgundy	became	famous.

From	the	late	Middle	Ages	on,	France
slowly	became	the	preeminent	source	of	wine
in	Europe.	By	the	1600s	the	wines	of	France,
and	especially	Bordeaux,	which	had	the
advantage	being	a	port,	were	important
exports	to	England	and	Holland.	Meanwhile
Italy	fell	behind,	a	victim	of	political	and
economic	circumstance.	Until	the	middle	of
the	19th	century	it	was	not	a	nation	but	a
collection	of	city-states,	each	with	protective
tariffs	and	little	of	the	international	trade	that
brought	competition	and	improvement	to	the



wine	regions	of	France.	Most	of	the	wine	was
consumed	locally,	and	the	grapevines	grown
not	in	vineyards	but	in	sharecroppers’	plots,
between	rows	of	food	plants	or	trained	on
trees.

Food	Words:	Wine,	Vine,	Grape
Our	language	bears	witness	to	the	fact	that
from	 the	 very	 earliest	 times,	 people
thought	of	 the	grapevine	not	as	 the	source
of	 edible	 fruit,	 but	 as	 the	 source	 of	wine.
Our	 words	vine	 and	wine	 come	 from	 the
same	 root	 word,	 and	 that	 word	meant	 the
fermented	 juice	 of	 the	 vine’s	 fruit.	 This
root	 is	 so	 ancient	 that	 it	 predates	 the
divergence	 of	 Indo-European	 from	 other
prehistoric	languages	of	western	Asia.	The
words	for	the	fruit	itself,	on	the	other	hand,
are	 different	 in	 different	 languages.	 The
English	 word	grape	appears	 to	come	from
an	 Indo-European	 root	 meaning	 “curved”
or	 “crooked,”	 probably	 referring	 to	 the



curved	 blade	 of	 the	 knife	 used	 to	 harvest
grape	bunches,	or	to	the	shape	of	the	bunch
s t em.	Grapple	 and	crumpet	 are	 related
words.

New	Wines	and	New	Containers	Early
modern	times	brought	the	invention	of	several
wonderful	variants	on	plain	fermented	grape
juice,	and	important	improvements	in	wine
storage.	Sometime	before	1600,	Spanish
winemakers	found	that	they	could	both
stabilize	and	give	a	new	character	to	wines	by
fortifying	them	with	brandy;	the	result	was
sherry.	Around	1650,	Hungarian	winemakers
managed	to	make	deliciously	concentrated
and	very	sweet	Tokaji	wine	from	grapes
infected	by	an	otherwise	destructive	fungus,
which	came	to	be	known	as	the	“noble	rot.”
This	was	the	forerunner	of	French	Sauternes
and	similar	sweet	German	wines.	At	about	the
same	time,	English	importers	of	white	wine
from	the	Champagne	region	east	of	Paris
discovered	that	they	could	make	the	wine



delightfully	bubbly	by	transferring	it	from
barrel	to	bottles	before	it	had	finished
fermenting.	And	a	few	decades	later,	the
English	developed	port	in	the	effort	to
stabilize	strong	red	wines	during	their	sea
journey	from	Portugal.	The	shippers	added
distilled	alcohol	to	the	wines	to	prevent
spoilage,	and	thus	discovered	the	pleasures	of
fortified	sweet	red	wines.

Bottles	and	Corks	The	17th	and	18th	centuries
brought	two	major	innovations	that	once	again
made	it	possible	to	age	wines	for	many	years,
a	 possibility	 that	 had	 disappeared	 when	 the
impermeable	 amphora	was	 replaced	by	wood
barrels.	These	momentous	developments	were
slim	 bottles	 and	 cork	 stoppers!	 The	 English
discovery	 of	 sparkling	 Champagne	 depended
on	the	fact	that	they	had	begun	plugging	bottle
necks	 with	 compressible	 gas-tight	 cork
instead	of	 cloth,	 and	 that	 they	had	 especially
strong	 bottles	 that	 could	 withstand	 the	 inner



pressure	 (the	 glass	 strength	 came	 from
manufacturing	with	hot	 coal	 fires	 rather	 than
wood	fires).	And	during	the	18th	century,	the
wine	 bottle	 gradually	 evolved	 from	 a	 short,
stout	 flask	 to	 the	 familiar	 elongated	 bottle.
The	 bulky	 bottles	 were	 only	 used	 to	 convey
the	wine	from	barrel	to	table	or	to	hold	it	for	a
day	or	 two.	When	bottles	had	 slimmed	down
enough	that	they	could	lie	on	their	sides,	their
contents	 wetting	 the	 cork	 and	 preventing	 it
from	 shrinking	 and	 admitting	 air,	 then	 wine
could	 be	 stored	 in	 them	 for	 many	 years
without	 spoiling,	 and	 sometimes	 with	 great
improvements	in	flavor.

Pasteur	 and	 the	 Beginnings	 of	 a	 Scientific
Understanding	 of	Wine	 In	 1863	 the	 French
Emperor	 Louis	 Napoleon	 asked	 the	 great
chemist	Louis	Pasteur	to	study	the	“maladies”
of	wine.	 Three	 years	 later,	 Pasteur	 published
the	 landmark	Etudes	 sur	 le	 vin.	 Pasteur	 and
others	had	already	demonstrated	 that	yeast	 is



a	living	mass	of	microbes,	and	thus	had	made
it	possible	to	begin	to	identify	and	control	the
kinds	 of	 microbes	 that	 both	 make	 wine	 and
spoil	 it.	 But	 Pasteur	was	 the	 first	 to	 analyze
the	 development	 of	 wine,	 to	 discover	 the
central	 role	 of	 oxygen,	 and	 show	 why	 both
barrel	 and	 bottle	 were	 indispensable	 for
making	 good	 wine,	 the	 barrel	 for	 providing
oxygen	 to	 the	 young	wine	 to	 help	mature	 it,
and	 the	bottle	 for	excluding	oxygen	 from	 the
mature	wine	to	help	preserve	it.

In	my	view,	it	is	oxygen	which	makes
wine;	it	is	by	its	influence	that	wine	ages;
it	is	oxygen	which	modifies	the	harsh
principles	of	new	wine	and	makes	the	bad
taste	disappear…

It	is	necessary	to	aerate	the	wine	slowly
to	age	it,	but	the	oxidation	must	not	be
pushed	too	far.	It	weakens	the	wine	too
much,	wears	it	out,	and	removes	from	red
wine	nearly	all	its	color.	There	exists	a



period…during	which	the	wine	must	pass
from	a	permeable	container	[the	barrel]	to
one	nearly	impermeable	[the	bottle].

Scientific	 Approaches	 to	 Making	 Wine
Pasteur	 planted	 the	 seed	 of	 a	 scientific
approach	to	winemaking.	That	seed	soon	took
root	 in	both	France	and	 the	United	States.	 In
the	1880s,	the	University	of	Bordeaux	and	the
University	of	California	established	institutes
of	oenology.	The	Bordeaux	group	 focused	on
understanding	 and	 improving	 traditional
French	methods	for	producing	fine	wines,	and
discovered	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 malolactic
fermentation	(p.	730).	The	California	institute
moved	 from	 Berkeley	 to	 Davis	 in	 1928,	 and
studied	 how	 best	 to	 build	 a	wine	 industry	 in
the	 absence	 of	 a	 local	 tradition,	 including
determining	 what	 grape	 varieties	 were	 best
suited	 to	 various	 climatic	 conditions.	 Today,
thanks	to	this	and	similar	work	in	a	number	of
countries,	and	to	the	general	modernization	of



winemaking,	 more	 good	 wine	 is	 being	made
in	more	parts	of	the	world	than	ever	before.

Traditional	 and	 Industrial	 Wines	 There’s
now	 a	 spectrum	 of	 approaches	 among
winemakers,	and	so	a	spectrum	of	wines	from
which	 we	 can	 choose.	 At	 one	 end	 is	 the
relatively	 straightforward	 approach	 found	 in
traditional	winemaking	regions:	the	grapes	are
grown	 in	 a	 place	 and	 with	 methods	 that
maximize	 wine	 quality;	 they’re	 simply
crushed,	fermented,	the	new	wine	matured	for
some	time,	and	bottled.	At	the	other	end	of	the
spectrum	 are	 advanced	 manufacturing
processes	that	treat	grapes	and	wine	like	other
industrial	 materials.	 These	 aim	 to
approximate	 the	 qualities	 of	 the	 traditionally
produced	 wine	 by	 nontraditional	 means	 that
are	 less	 labor	 intensive	 and	 less	 expensive.
The	grapes	 themselves	need	not	be	coaxed	to
an	 ideal	 ripeness	 because	 the	winemaker	 can
use	 various	 separation	 technologies	 to	 adjust



their	 content	 of	 water,	 sugar,	 acid,	 alcohol,
and	 other	 components.	 The	 effects	 of	 barrel
and	 bottle	 aging	 can	 be	 simulated
inexpensively	 and	 rapidly	 by	 means	 of	 oak
chips	 or	 sawdust,	 and	 the	 bubbling	 of	 pure
oxygen	 through	 wine	 stored	 in	 huge	 steel
tanks.

Industrial	wines	are	marvels	of	reverse
engineering,	and	often	taste	good,	clean,	and
without	obvious	faults.	Wine	made	on	a	small
scale	with	minimal	manipulation	is	less
predictable	in	its	quality,	but	this	is	because	it
is	more	distinctive,	an	expression	of	grapes
that	were	grown	in	a	particular	place	and	year,
and	transformed	by	a	particular	winemaker.
Such	wine	is	more	expensive	than	industrial
wine,	sometimes	much	better,	and	usually
more	interesting.

Wine	Grapes

Grapes	provide	the	substance	of	wine,	and



therefore	determine	many	of	its	qualities.
Their	most	important	components	are

Sugars,	which	the	yeasts	feed	on	and
convert	into	alcohol.	Wine	grapes	are
generally	harvested	with	20–30%	sugar,
mainly	glucose	and	fructose.
Acids,	mainly	tartaric	and	some	malic,
which	help	prevent	the	growth	of
undesirable	microbes	during
fermentation,	and	are	a	major	component
of	wine	flavor.
Tannins	and	related	phenolic	compounds,
which	contribute	an	astringent	feeling
and	thereby	a	body	and	weightiness	to
wine	(p.	737).
Pigment	molecules	that	provide	color,
and	sometimes	contribute	to	astringency
as	well.	Red	grapes	contain	anthocyanin
pigments	(p.	267),	mainly	in	the	skins.
“White”	grapes	lack	anthocyanins;	their
yellowish	color	comes	from	a	different
group	of	phenolic	compounds,	the



flavonols.
Aroma	compounds,	which	may	be
generically	grapey,	or	distinctive	of	a
particular	grape	variety.	Many	aromatics
are	chemically	bound	to	other	molecules,
often	sugars,	and	so	aren’t	evident	in	the
raw	fruit;	during	winemaking,	fruit	and
yeast	enzymes	liberate	the	aromatics	and
so	make	them	available	for	us	to	enjoy.

Grape	 Varieties	 and	 Clones	 The	 grapevine
evolved	 with	 the	 ability	 to	 regenerate	 itself
and	grow	vigorously	 in	 the	spring.	 It’s	easily
propagated	 by	 cuttings,	 and	 readily	 lends
itself	 to	 creating	 identical	 versions,	 or	clones
of	 a	 given	 plant.	And	 it’s	 a	 variable	 species,
one	 that	 offers	 many	 differences	 in	 growth
habit,	requirements	for	water	and	temperature,
and	 fruit	 composition.	 For	 several	millennia,
and	 until	 around	 1800,	 grapes	 were	 mostly
cultivated	 and	 made	 into	 wine	 throughout
western	Asia	 and	Europe	 by	 small	 groups	 of



people	 essentially	 isolated	 from	 each	 other
and	living	in	different	environments.	So	there
developed	a	large	number	of	distinctive	grape
varieties,	 each	 selected	 by	 particular	 people
for	characteristics	they	found	desirable.

Today	it’s	estimated	that	there	are	around
15,000	different	varieties	of	the	Eurasian
grape,	Vitis	vinifera.	A	single	variety	—	Pinot
Noir,	for	example,	or	Cabernet	Sauvignon	—
may	exist	in	the	form	of	several	hundred
different	clones,	each	a	somewhat	different
version	of	that	variety.	Some	varieties	have
very	distinctive	aromas;	others	are	more
subtle	or	even	anonymous	and	therefore	allow
the	aromas	of	the	fermentation	and	aging
more	prominence.	The	term	noble	is	applied
to	varieties	that	produce	wines	with	the
potential	for	developing	great	complexity
over	many	years	in	the	bottle;	these	include
the	French	Cabernet	Sauvignon,	Pinot	Noir,
and	Chardonnay,	the	Italian	Nebbiolo	and
Sangiovese,	and	the	German	Riesling.



The	 Influence	 of	 Growing	 Conditions;
Vintage	and	“Terroir”

Pampered	Vines	Don’t	Make	the	Best	Wines
As	Pliny	observed	2,000	years	ago,	“the	same
vine	has	a	different	value	in	different	places.”
The	 quality	 of	 grapes,	 and	 of	 the	wine	made
from	them,	is	influenced	by	the	conditions	in
which	 the	 grapes	 grow	 and	 mature.	 To
produce	a	decent	wine,	 the	grapes	must	ripen
to	 an	 adequate	 sweetness,	 and	 so	 the	 vine
must	 get	 enough	 sun,	 warmth,	 minerals,	 and
water.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 abundant	 water
produces	watery	 fruit,	 abundant	 soil	 nitrogen
produces	 excess	 foliage	 that	 shades	 the	 fruit
and	gives	it	odd	flavors,	and	abundant	sun	and
warmth	produce	fruit	with	plenty	of	sugar	but
reduced	 acidity	 and	 aroma	 compounds,	 and
thus	a	strong	but	flat	wine.

Vintage	Wines 	The	grapes	that	make	the	best
wines	seem	to	be	produced	in	a	narrow	range
of	 conditions	 —	 barely	 adequate	 water,



minerals	and	light	and	heat	—	that	encourage
complete	 but	 slow,	 gradual	 ripening.	 Those
conditions	 may	 or	 may	 not	 be	 realized	 in	 a
given	 year.	 Hence	 the	 significance	 for	 many
wines	 of	 the	vintage,	 the	 particular	 year	 in
which	 the	 grapes	 are	 grown	 and	 harvested.
Some	years	yield	better	wines	than	others.

Hybrid	and	American	Wine	Grapes
The	Eurasian	wine	grape	Vitis	vinifera	has
a	 number	 of	 sister	 species	 in	 North
America	with	which	it	can	breed,	and	over
the	centuries	plant	breeders	have	produced
a	 number	 of	 different	 Euro-American
hybrids.	 These	 were	 generally	 denigrated
by	European	connoisseurs	and	bureaucrats
for	their	untypical	flavors,	but	the	better	of
them,	 and	American	 varieties	 themselves,
are	coming	to	be	appreciated	for	their	own
qualities.	They	include	grapes	based	on	the
mainly	 northeastern	Vitis	 labrusca
(Concord,	 floral	 Catawba,	 strawberry-like



Ives),	 midwestern	Vitis	aestivalis	 (Norton,
Cynthiana),	 southeastern	Vitis	rotundifolia
(floral-citrus	 Scuppernong),	 and	 on
complex	 parentage	 (Chambourcin,
developed	in	the	Loire	region	of	France).

Terroir	In	recent	times,	much	has	been	said
and	written	about	the	importance	in
winemaking	of	terroir:	the	influence	on	a
wine	of	the	particular	place	in	which	the
grapes	were	grown.	The	French	word	includes
the	entire	physical	environment	of	the
vineyard:	the	soil,	its	structure	and	mineral
content;	the	water	held	in	the	soil;	the
vineyard’s	elevation,	slope,	and	orientation;
and	the	microclimate,	the	regime	of
temperature,	sunlight,	humidity,	and	rainfall.
Each	of	these	aspects	can	vary	over	small
distances,	from	one	vineyard	to	the	next;	and
each	can	affect	the	growth	of	the	vine	and	the
development	of	its	fruit,	sometimes	in
indirect	ways.	For	example,	sloping	ground
and	certain	kinds	of	soil	encourage	water	to



drain	away	from	the	roots,	and	absorb	and
release	the	sun’s	heat	to	the	vine	in	different
ways.	A	south-facing	slope	can	increase	the
exposure	to	autumn	sunlight	by	50%	over	a
planting	on	level	ground,	and	thus	extend	the
growing	season	and	accumulation	of	flavor
compounds.

The	wine	connoisseur	enjoys	detecting	and
marveling	at	the	expression	of	terroir	in
wines,	the	palpable	differences	in	the	wines
made	from	neighboring	vineyards.	The
winemaker,	on	the	other	hand,	generally	tries
to	manage	and	minimize	the	effects	of	less
than	ideal	terroirs	and	vintages.	There’s
nothing	new	about	this	effort	to	make	the	best
of	things.	The	French	have	been	adding	sugar
to	their	fermenting	grapes	for	centuries	to
compensate	for	incomplete	ripening.	What’s
new	nowadays	is	the	degree	to	which	the
grape	composition	can	be	manipulated	after
harvest,	so	that	the	wine	becomes	less	the
product	of	a	particular	place	and	year,	and



more	the	product	of	modern	fermentation
technology.

Making	Wine

The	making	of	a	basic	table	wine	can	be
divided	into	three	stages.	In	the	first,	the	ripe
grapes	are	crushed	to	free	their	juice.	In	the
second,	the	grape	juice	is	fermented	by	sugar-
consuming,	alcohol-producing	yeasts	into	new
wine.	The	third	stage	is	the	aging	or	maturing
of	the	new	wine.	This	is	a	period	during	which
the	chemical	constituents	of	the	grape	and	the
products	of	fermentation	react	with	each	other
and	with	oxygen	to	form	a	relatively	stable
ensemble	of	flavor	molecules.

Crushing	 Grapes	 to	 Make	 the	 Must
Crushing	 extracts	 from	 the	 grape	 the	 liquid
that	 will	 become	 wine.	 This	 step	 therefore
determines	 to	 a	 large	 extent	 the	 final	wine’s
composition	and	potential	qualities.



The	substances	important	to	wine	quality
are	not	evenly	distributed	in	the	grape.	The
stems	contain	bitter-tasting	resins	and	are
usually	separated	from	the	grapes	as	they	are
crushed.	The	skin	holds	much	of	the	fruit’s
phenolic	compounds,	both	pigments	and
tannins,	as	well	as	most	of	the	acid	and	the
many	compounds	that	give	the	grape	its
characteristic	aroma.	Like	the	stem,	the	seeds
at	the	center	are	full	of	tannins,	oils,	and
resins,	and	care	is	taken	not	to	break	them
open	during	the	pressing.

As	a	mass	of	grapes	is	crushed	in	a
mechanical	press,	the	first	juice	to	come	out,
the	free	run,	is	primarily	from	the	middle	of
the	pulp,	and	is	the	clearest,	purest	essence	of
the	grape,	sweet	and	largely	tannin	free.	As
mechanical	pressure	is	applied,	juices	from
just	under	the	skin	and	around	the	seeds
augment	the	free	run	with	a	more	complex
character.	The	extent	of	pressing	will	have	an
important	influence	on	the	character	of	the



final	wine.	The	liquid	portion,	called	the	must,
is	70	to	85%	water,	12	to	27%	sugars,	mainly
glucose	and	fructose,	and	about	1%	acids.

Fruits	 of	 the	 grape	 vine,	 Vitis	 vinifera.	The
different	 regions	 of	 the	 grape	 contain
different	proportions	of	sugar,	acid,	and	other
flavor	components.

Making	Wine



After	the	Crush	In	the	case	of	white	wines,
the	must	is	left	in	contact	with	the	skins	for	a
few	hours	and	removed	with	gentle	pressure
before	fermentation.	It	thus	picks	up	little
tannic	material	or	pigmentation.	Rosé	musts
and	red	wine	musts	are	partly	fermented	in
contact	with	the	red	skins.	The	longer	the
must	is	in	contact	with	skin	and	seeds,	and	the
harder	it	is	pressed,	the	deeper	the	color
(whether	yellow	or	red)	and	the	more
astringent	the	taste.

Before	beginning	the	fermentation,	the
winemaker	usually	adds	two	substances	to	the
must.	One,	sulfur	dioxide,	suppresses	the
growth	of	undesirable	wild	yeasts	and
bacteria,	and	prevents	the	oxidation	of	both
flavor	and	pigment	molecules	(the	same
treatment	is	given	to	many	dried	fruits,	and
for	the	same	reason).	Though	this	treatment
may	sound	antiseptically	modern,	it	is
centuries	old.	One	of	the	natural	by-products
of	fermentation	that	is	increased	by	sulfuring



is	sulfites,	sulfur	compounds	that	can	induce
an	allergic	reaction	in	sensitive	people.

The	second	additive	is	either	sugar	or	acid,
and	it	is	used	to	correct	the	balance	between
these	two	substances.	Grapes	that	ripen	in	a
cool	climate	can	lack	the	sugar	to	produce
enough	alcohol	for	a	stable	wine;	grapes	that
ripen	in	a	hot	climate	metabolize	some	of
their	acids	and	can	produce	a	flat-tasting
wine.	French	winemakers	usually	add	sugar;
California	winemakers	often	add	tartaric	acid.

The	Alcoholic	Fermentation

The	 Fermentation	 Yeasts 	 Fermentation	 can
begin	with	or	without	the	addition	of	a	starter
culture	 of	 yeast.	 The	 winemaker	 can	 choose
among	 many	 different	 strains	 of
Saccharomyces,	 or	 allow	 the	 fermentation	 to
begin	 spontaneously	with	 “wild”	 yeasts	 from
the	 grape	 skins	 (species	 of	Kloeckera,
Candida,	 Pichia,	 Hansenula,	 and	 others).
These	 are	 always	 eventually	 displaced	 by



Saccharomyces	 cerevisiae, 	 which	 has	 a
greater	 tolerance	 for	 alcohol,	 but	 they	 do
contribute	 flavor	 compounds	 to	 the	 finished
wine.

The	primary	job	of	the	yeast	is	to	convert
sugar	to	alcohol,	but	it	also	produces	various
volatile,	aromatic	molecules	that	the	grape
itself	cannot	supply.	Prominent	among	them
are	the	longer-chain	alcohols,	and	esters,	a
class	of	compounds	that	combine	an	acid	with
an	alcohol	or	phenol.	Both	yeast	and	grape
enzymes	and	the	acid	conditions	also	liberate
aromatic	molecules	from	the	nonvolatile
sugar	complexes	in	which	some	are	stored	in
the	grape,	so	fermentation	also	brings	out	the
grape’s	own	flavor	potential.

Temperatures	 and	 Times 	 The	 winemaker
varies	 the	 conditions	 of	 fermentation
according	to	the	particular	kind	of	wine	being
made.	In	the	case	of	delicate	white	wines,	the
must	 is	 fermented	 for	 four	 to	 six	 weeks	 at



about	60ºF/16ºC.	With	more	robust	red	wines,
the	 must	 is	 fermented	 at	 a	 temperature
between	65	and	80ºF/18–27ºC	in	contact	with
the	 skins,	 to	 extract	 pigments,	 tannins,	 and
flavor.	 This	 phase	may	 last	 for	 4	 to	 14	 days
(less	 if	 heat	 or	 a	 carbon	dioxide	 treatment	 is
applied).	Then	the	must	is	separated	from	the
skins	and	fermented	again	for	a	total	of	two	to
three	weeks.	One	of	the	most	critical	variables
during	fermentation	is	temperature.	The	lower
the	 temperature,	 the	 slower	 and	 longer	 the
fermentation,	 and	 the	 more	 aromatic
molecules	accumulate.

The	main	fermentation	is	considered
complete	when	essentially	all	the	sugar	in	the
must	has	been	converted	into	alcohol.	A	wine
with	no	residual	sugar	is	called	dry.	Sweet
wines	are	made	by	stopping	the	fermentation
before	all	the	sugar	has	been	consumed,	or
more	commonly,	by	adding	some	reserved
sweet	grape	juice	to	the	dry	wine	after	its
yeast	has	been	removed.



OPPOSITE:	Making	red	and	white	wines.	White
wines	are	fermented	at	a	lower	temperature
and	without	the	grape	skins	and	seeds;	they’re
also	clarified	at	a	lower	temperature,	in	part
so	that	they	won’t	cloud	when	served	chilled.

Malolactic	 Fermentation	 Winemakers
sometimes	 allow	 or	 even	 induce	 a	 second
bacterial	 fermentation	 in	 the	 new	 wine	 after
the	 main	 yeast	 fermentation.	 The	 bacterium
Leuconostoc	oenos	consumes	the	wine’s	malic
acid	and	converts	 it	 into	 lactic	acid,	which	 is
less	 strong	 and	 sour.	 This	 “malolactic”
fermentation	 thus	 reduces	 the	 apparent
tartness	of	the	wine.	It	also	produces	a	number
of	distinctive	aroma	compounds,	among	them
buttery	 diacetyl.	 (A	 relative	 of	L.	 oenos,	 L.
mesenteroides,	 contributes	 the	 same
compound	 to	 cultured	 butter	 itself!)	 Some
winemakers	 work	 to	 prevent	 a	 spontaneous
malolactic	 fermentation	 from	 developing,	 so
that	 they	 can	 retain	 the	 sharpness	 and	 flavor



of	the	original	wine.

Maturation	 Once	 fermentation	 is	 complete,
the	 new	 wine	 is	 drained	 out	 of	 the
fermentation	 tanks	 to	 begin	 the	 work	 of
clarification	 and	 aging,	 in	 which	 the	 cloudy,
rough-tasting	 liquid	 develops	 into	 a	 clear,
smooth	one.

Racking	 and	 Fining	 The	 solid	 particles	 of
grape	and	yeasts	are	cleared	from	the	wine	by
the	process	of	 racking:	 letting	 the	yeast	 cells
and	 other	 large	 particles	 settle,	 carefully
drawing	the	wine	off	the	sediment	into	a	new
container,	and	repeating	the	process	every	few
months.	Interesting	exceptions	to	this	rule	are
wines	 intentionally	 aged	 for	 months	 or	 even
years	sur	lie,	or	“on	the	lees,”	in	contact	with
the	yeast	 sediment,	whose	 cells	 slowly	break
apart	and	contribute	more	 flavor	and	body	 to
the	 wine.	 Champagne	 and	Muscadet	 are	 two
wines	that	are	aged	on	the	lees.

The	cool	racking	temperatures	—	less	than



60ºF/16ºC	for	red	wines,	around	32ºF/0ºC	for
whites	—	reduce	the	solubility	of	all	the
dissolved	solids,	and	cause	the	wine	to	cloud
up	with	a	fine	precipitate	of	various
complexes	of	proteins,	carbohydrates,	and
tannins.	Late	in	the	racking	procedure,	the
wine	may	be	fined:	that	is,	a	substance	will	be
added	to	the	wine	that	attracts	these
suspended	particles	to	itself,	and	then	settles
to	the	bottom,	carrying	them	with	it.	Gelatin,
egg	white,	bentonite	clay,	and	synthetic
materials	are	used.	Any	particles	remaining	in
the	wine	after	racking	and	fining	can	be
removed	by	passing	it	through	a	centrifuge	or
filter.	Winemakers	may	choose	to	limit	or
omit	the	fining	and	filtration	steps,	since	they
remove	some	flavor	and	body	along	with	the
undesirable	particles.

Brettanomyces,	the	Controversial	Barrel
Yeast

Some	 wines,	 including	 classic	 reds	 from



Burgundy	 and	 Bordeaux,	 develop	 striking
and	unusual	aroma	notes	suggestive	of	the
barnyard	or	horse	stable.	Oenologists	have
recently	 discovered	 the	 major	 source	 of
these	aromas	to	be	a	group	of	yeasts	in	the
g e n u s	Brettanomyces,	 which	 readily
colonize	wine	barrels.	At	 low	 levels,	 their
unusual	aromas	may	suggest	 tobacco	 leaf;
they	also	include	smoky,	medicinal,	clove-
like,	 and	musty	 notes	 (the	 barnyard	 notes
come	 from	 ethyl	 phenols	 and	 isovaleric
and	 isobutyric	 acids).	 Some	 wine	 lovers
consider	the	“brett”	aroma	a	defect	caused
by	 contamination	 and	 inadequate	 winery
sanitation,	while	others	appreciate	 it	as	an
intriguing	 contribution	 to	 the	 variety	 and
complexity	of	wine	flavors.

Barrel	Aging	New	wine	has	a	raw	flavor	and	a
strong,	simple,	fruity	aroma.	As	the	wine	rests
after	fermentation,	a	host	of	chemical
reactions	slowly	proceeds,	and	results	in	the
development	of	balance	and	complexity	in	the



flavor.	If	the	wine	is	being	held	in	a	new	wood
barrel,	it	also	absorbs	various	substances	from
the	wood	that	either	provide	flavor	directly	—
for	example,	vanilla-like	vanillin	and	the
coconut-woody	oak	lactones	—	or	that	modify
the	wine’s	own	flavor	molecules.	In
traditional	winemaking,	the	months	during
which	the	wine	is	racked	and	shifted	from
container	to	container	are	a	time	when	the
wine’s	chemical	evolution	is	directed	by
periodic	exposure	to	the	air.	In	the	presence	of
oxygen,	the	tannins,	anthocyanin	pigments,
and	other	phenolic	compounds	react	with	each
other	to	form	large	complexes,	so	the	wine’s
astringency	and	bitterness	decline.	Some	of
the	molecules	that	provide	aroma	break	apart
or	react	with	oxygen	and	each	other	to	form	a
new	suite	of	aromas,	so	fruity,	floral	notes
fade	in	favor	of	a	more	subdued	general
“wineyness.”	White	and	light	red	wines	are
generally	bottled	young,	after	6–12	months,
with	a	fairly	fresh,	fruity	bouquet,	while



astringent	dark	reds	may	require	a	year	or	two
to	develop	and	smooth	out.

Most	wines	are	made	by	blending	two	or
more	different	varieties,	and	this	important
test	of	the	winemaker’s	art	occurs	just	before
bottling.	The	final	wine	may	then	be	filtered
to	remove	any	remaining	microbes	and	haze,
and	given	a	final	dose	of	sulfur	dioxide	to
prevent	microbial	growth	during	storage.	It
may	also	be	pasteurized.	This	practice	is	not
limited	to	inexpensive	wines.	The	Burgundy
wines	of	Louis	Latour	are	flash-heated	for	2–3
seconds	at	165ºF/72ºC,	a	treatment	that	is	said
not	to	have	a	detrimental	effect	on	the	wine’s
continuing	flavor	development.

Corks,	Cork	Taints,	Corked	Wine
Cork	 is	 the	 outer	 protective	 layer	 of	 an
evergreen	 oak,	Quercus	 suber, 	 that	 is
native	 to	 the	 western	 Mediterranean.
Where	 most	 tree	 bark	 is	 fibrous,	 cork	 is
composed	of	 tiny	air	cells.	Nearly	60%	of



the	cell	wall	in	cork	is	made	up	of	suberin,
a	 complex	 waxy	 substance	 similar	 to	 the
cutin	that	coats	many	fruits,	and	this	makes
cork	water-resistant	and	long-lived.

Cork	is	a	natural,	organic	material,	and
as	 such	 can	 be	 infected	 by	 molds	 and
bacteria.	 Molds	 produce	 moldy,	 earthy,
mushroomy,	 and	 smoky	 smells.	 And
certain	 bacteria	 can	 act	 on	 phenolic
compounds	 in	 the	 cork	 and	 traces	 of
chlorine	 disinfectant	 to	 produce
trichloroanisole,	 an	 especially	 unpleasant
and	potent	molecule	that	smells	like	a	dank
cellar.	 It’s	 estimated	 that	 cork	 taints	 spoil
from	 1	 to	 5	 percent	 of	 the	 wine	 bottles
stoppered	 with	 cork.	 The	 problem	 of
“corked”	 wine	 has	 led	 wine	 producers	 to
experiment	 with	 alternative	 stoppers,
including	 metal	 caps	 and	 stoppers	 made
from	foamed	plastic.

Bottle	Aging	After	a	period	of	a	few	months
to	two	years	in	barrels	or	tanks	that	allow



controlled	contact	with	oxygen,	the	wine	goes
into	impermeable	glass	bottles.	For	the	last
two	centuries,	the	standard	stopper	for	wine
bottles	has	been	cork,	which	is	made	from	the
bark	of	a	species	of	oak.	Because	cork	can	be
the	source	of	off-flavors,	some	wine
producers	are	now	using	metal	and	plastic
stoppers	(see	box	below).

Wine	continues	to	be	affected	by	oxidation
long	after	it	leaves	the	cask.	It	picks	up	some
air	when	it	is	filled	into	the	bottle,	and	the
bottle	is	sealed	with	a	small	space	between
wine	and	cork.	So	while	oxidation	is	greatly
slowed	in	the	bottle,	it	does	continue,	though
it	may	be	outweighed	by	a	different	set	of
reactions,	“reductive”	rather	than	oxidative.
The	chemical	changes	that	occur	are	not	well
understood,	but	include	the	ongoing	liberation
of	aromatic	molecules	from	nonaromatic
complexes,	and	aggregation	reactions	among
tannins	and	pigments	that	further	lower
astringency	and	cause	a	shift	in	pigment	hues,



usually	toward	the	brown.
White	wines	and	light-red	rosés	benefit

from	about	a	year	of	bottle	aging,	during
which	time	the	aroma	develops	and	the
amount	of	free,	odorous	sulfur	dioxide
decreases.	Many	red	wines	improve	greatly
after	a	year	or	two	in	the	bottle,	and	some	may
develop	for	decades.	All	wines	have	a	finite
life	span,	and	their	quality	eventually
declines.	White	wines	develop	overtones	of
honey,	hay,	wood,	and	chemical	solvents;	red
wines	lose	much	of	their	aroma	and	become
flat-tasting	and	more	plainly	and	harshly
alcoholic.

Special	Wines

In	the	last	few	pages,	I’ve	described	the
general	method	for	making	dry	table	wines,
which	usually	accompany	meals.	Sparkling,
sweet,	and	fortified	wines	are	often	sipped	on
their	own.	Here	is	a	brief	account	of	their



special	qualities	and	how	they	are	produced.

Sparkling	 Wines:	 Champagne	 and	 Others
Sparkling	 wines	 delight	 by	 emitting	 bubbles
that	catch	the	 light	and	prick	 the	 tongue.	The
bubbles	 come	 from	 the	 wine’s	 considerable
dissolved	 reserves	 of	 carbon	 dioxide	 gas,	 a
by-product	 of	 yeast	 metabolism	 that
ordinarily	 escapes	 into	 the	 air	 from	 the
surface	 of	 the	 fermenting	 wine.	 To	 make	 a
sparkling	 wine,	 the	 wine	 is	 confined	 under
pressure	—	 either	 in	 the	 bottle	 or	 in	 special
tanks	 —	 so	 that	 the	 carbon	 dioxide	 can’t
escape	as	it’s	produced,	and	instead	comes	to
saturate	 the	 liquid.	 A	 bottle	 of	 Champagne
holds	 a	 gas	 pressure	 of	 3–4	 atmospheres,
somewhat	higher	than	the	pressure	in	car	tires,
and	 contains	 about	 six	 times	 its	 volume	 in
carbon	dioxide!

When	we	remove	the	cork	and	thus	relieve
the	pressure,	the	excess	carbon	dioxide	leaves
the	solution	in	the	form	of	gas	bubbles.	The



bubbles	form	wherever	the	liquid	comes	into
contact	with	a	microscopic	air	pocket	into
which	the	dissolved	carbon	dioxide	can
diffuse.	In	the	glass,	the	bubbles	form	on
scratches	and	other	surface	imperfections.	The
refreshingly	sharp	prickle	in	the	mouth	comes
from	the	irritating	dose	of	carbonic	acid	that
the	bubbles	deliver	as	they	redissolve	into	the
unsaturated	layer	of	saliva.

Many	countries	have	their	own	versions	of
sparking	wine,	which	range	from	the	carefully
crafted	to	the	mass-produced.	The	best-known
example	of	a	sparkling	wine	is	Champagne,
which	strictly	speaking	is	the	wine	made	in
the	region	of	that	name	east	of	Paris,	and
accounts	for	less	than	a	tenth	of	the	world’s
production	of	sparkling	wine.	From	the	late
17th	century	to	the	late	19th,	Champagne
evolved	to	become	the	most	refined
expression	of	this	style.	The	French	invented
the	method	of	inducing	a	bubble-making
second	fermentation	in	the	bottle,	and	this



méthode	champenoise	has	become	a
worldwide	benchmark	for	making	fine
sparkling	wines.

Making	Champagne	The	first	stage	in	making
Champagne	 is	 to	produce	a	base	wine,	which
is	 made	 primarily	 from	 Pinot	 Noir	 and/or
Chardonnay	grapes.	Next	comes	the	secondary
fermentation,	which	must	 be	 carried	 out	 in	 a
closed	 container	 in	 order	 to	 retain	 the	 gas.
Sugar	 is	 added	 to	 the	 dry	 base	wine	 as	 food
for	 the	 yeast.	 The	wine,	 sugar,	 and	 yeast	 are
put	 into	 individual	 bottles,	 corked,	 clamped,
and	kept	at	about	55ºF/13ºC.

Though	the	secondary	fermentation	is
usually	complete	after	about	two	months,	the
wine	is	left	to	age	in	contact	with	the	yeast
sediment	for	anywhere	from	a	few	months	to
several	years.	During	this	time,	most	of	the
yeast	cells	die,	fall	apart,	and	release	their
contents	into	the	wine,	giving	it	a	distinctive,
complex	flavor	with	toasted,	roasted,	nutty,



coffee,	even	meaty	notes	(due	in	large	part	to
complex	sulfur	compounds).	In	addition	to
flavor,	yeast	proteins	and	carbohydrates	will
stabilize	bubbles	when	they	form	in	the	glass,
and	help	produce	the	very	fine	bubbles	typical
of	Champagne.	After	aging	on	the	yeast,	the
sediment	is	removed	and	the	bottle	topped	off
with	additional	wine,	and	finished	with	a
small	amount	of	aged	wine	mixed	with	sugar
and	brandy.	The	bottle	is	then	recorked.

Making	 Other	 Sparkling	 Wines	 The
traditional	 Champagne	 process	 is	 labor
intensive,	 time	 consuming,	 and	 expensive.
More	 affordable	 and	 less	 complex	 sparkling
wines	are	made	all	over	the	world	in	a	number
of	different	ways.	One	is	simply	to	minimize
or	 eliminate	 aging	 on	 the	 yeast	 sediment.
Others	 involve	 fermenting	 the	 base	 wine	 for
the	second	 time	not	 in	 individual	bottles,	but
in	 large	 tanks,	or	not	fermenting	again	at	all:
the	 cheapest	 sparkling	 wines	 are	 simply



carbonated	 as	 soft	 drinks	 are,	 with	 tanks	 of
pressurized	carbon	dioxide.

Sweet	 Wines	 Table	 wines	 are	 generally
fermented	until	 they	are	dry:	that	is,	until	the
yeast	 consumes	 essentially	 all	 the	 grape’s
sugars	and	converts	 them	into	alcohol.	Sweet
or	 dessert	 wines	 with	 10–20%	 “residual”
sugar	are	made	in	several	different	ways:

An	ordinary	dry	wine	is	sweetened	with
some	unfermented	grape	juice,	and	the
combination	treated	to	prevent	further
fermentation	with	a	dose	of	sulfur
dioxide,	or	filtration	that	removes	all
yeast	and	bacteria	from	the	wine.
Grapes	are	dried	on	the	vine	or	after
picking	to	concentrate	their	sugars	to
35%	or	more	of	the	grape	weight.	This
leaves	residual	sugar	in	the	wine	when
the	yeasts	reach	their	maximum	alcohol
level	and	the	fermentation	stops.	German
Trockenbeerenauslese	and	Italian	recioto



wines	are	examples.
Grapes	are	left	on	the	vine	past	the	first
frost	and	picked	when	frozen	(or	frozen
artificially),	and	then	gently	pressed
while	cold	to	separate	the	concentrated
juice	from	the	ice	crystals.	The
concentrated	juice	ferments	into	a	stable
wine	with	residual	sugar.	German
Eiswein	dates	from	around	1800.
The	grapes	are	allowed	to	become
infected	with	“noble	rot,”	the	mold
Botrytis	cinerea,	which	dehydrates	the
grapes,	concentrates	their	sugars,	and
transforms	their	flavor	and	consistency.
This	method	originated	in	the	Tokaji
region	of	Hungary	around	1650,	and	was
adopted	in	the	German	Rheingau	by	1750
and	in	the	Sauternes	region	of	Bordeaux
around	1800.

Enjoying	Sparkling	Wines
In	 order	 to	 appreciate	 their	 sparkle,



sparkling	wines	are	best	 served	very	cold,
around	 40ºF/5ºC,	 in	 tall,	 narrow	 glasses
that	 allow	 their	 rising	 bubbles	 to	 be
admired	 for	 several	 seconds.	 Carbon
dioxide	 is	 more	 soluble	 in	 water	 at	 low
temperatures,	 so	 the	 bubbles	 will	 be
smaller	 and	 longer-lasting	 in	 cold	 wine.
Because	soaps,	fats,	and	oils	cause	bubbles
to	collapse	(p.	639),	bubbliness	 is	 reduced
when	our	lips	deposit	 lipstick	or	oils	from
food	 on	 the	 glass,	 or	 when	 the	 glass	 has
been	incompletely	rinsed	and	carries	traces
of	dish	soap.

The	Noble	Rot:	Tokaji,	Sauternes,	and
Others	The	noble	rot	(French	pourriture
noble,	German	Edelfäule)Botrytis	cinerea	is
also	known	as	bunch	rot,	and	it	is	mainly	a
destructive	disease	of	grapes	and	other	fruits.
It	becomes	noble	only	in	the	right	climatic
conditions,	when	the	initial	infection	in	humid
weather	is	followed	by	a	dry	period	that	limits
the	infection.	In	this	situation,	the	mold	does



several	useful	things.	It	perforates	the	skin	of
the	grape,	thus	allowing	it	to	lose	moisture
and	become	concentrated	during	the
subsequent	dry	period;	it	metabolizes	some	of
the	tartaric	acid	at	the	same	time	that	it
consumes	some	of	the	grape’s	sugars,	so	the
balance	between	sweetness	and	acidity
doesn’t	suffer;	it	produces	glycerol,	which
lends	the	eventual	wine	an	incomparably
dense	body;	and	it	synthesizes	a	number	of
pleasing	aroma	compounds,	notably	the
maple-sugar-like	sotolon,	mushroomy
octenol,	and	a	number	of	terpenes.	The
honeyed	flavor	of	these	wines	can	develop	in
the	bottle	for	decades.

Fortified	Wines	Fortified	wines	are	so	called
because	 the	 strength	 of	 the	 base	 wine	 is
boosted	 by	 the	 addition	 of	 distilled	 spirits	 to
18–20%	alcohol,	a	level	that	prevents	spoilage
by	 vinegar	 bacteria	 and	 other	 microbes.
Fortification	 appears	 to	 have	 begun	 in	 the



sherry-producing	 region	 of	 Spain	 sometime
before	 1600.	 Winemakers	 take	 advantage	 of
the	 stability	 of	 fortified	 wines	 by	 exposing
them	to	the	air	for	months	or	years.	They	thus
make	 a	 virtue	 of	 the	 normally	 undesirable
oxidative	 changes	 in	 flavor	 that	 come	 with
keeping	 leftover	 wine.	 Most	 fortified	 wines
keep	 well	 for	 weeks	 in	 an	 opened	 bottle	 or
decanter.

Madeira	 Beginning	 in	 the	 15th	 century,
Portuguese	 ships	 embarking	 on	 long	 voyages
to	the	Indies	would	pick	up	barrels	of	ordinary
wine	 on	 the	 Portuguese	 island	 of	 Madeira.
Sailors	and	producers	soon	found	that	the	long
barrel	aging	in	extreme	temperatures	and	with
constant	 agitation	 produced	 an	 unusual	 but
attractive	wine.	By	1700,	ships	were	sailing	to
the	East	Indies	and	back	just	to	age	the	barrels
of	Madeira	stored	on	board;	by	1800,	the	wine
was	being	 fortified	with	brandy	and	hot-aged
on	the	island.	Today,	the	base	wine,	which	can



be	 white	 or	 red,	 is	 fortified,	 sometimes
sweetened,	 then	 artificially	 heated	 to	 a
temperature	 around	 120ºF/50ºC,	 where	 it’s
held	 for	 three	 months	 before	 slowly	 cooling
down	 again.	 It’s	 then	 aged	 in	 barrels	 in	 a
sherry-like	solera	 system	 (below)	 before
bottling.	There	 are	 several	 different	 styles	 of
Madeira,	from	sweet	to	nearly	dry.

Styles	of	Port
Today	 there	 are	 several	 distinct	 styles	 of
port,	the	most	common	of	which	are	these:
Vintage	port	is	made	from	the	best
grapes	in	especially	good	years,	and	is
barrel-aged	for	two	years	and	bottle-aged
unfiltered	for	a	minimum	of	10	years,
often	many	decades	longer.	It’s	dark	and
fruity,	must	be	decanted	off	its
considerable	sediment,	and	must	be
drunk	within	a	few	days	after	the	bottle	is
opened.



Tawny	port,	so	named	for	its	brown	color
(the	result	of	precipitation	of	the	red
pigments),	is	typically	barrel-aged	for	10
years	before	being	filtered	and	bottled.	It
is	much	more	oxidized	than	vintage	port
of	the	same	age,	and	can	be	kept	in	an
opened	bottle	or	decanter	for	weeks.
Ruby	port	is	an	intermediate	product,
aged	for	three	years	in	barrels	before
filtration	and	bottling.

Port	The	name	port	was	originally	the	English
term	for	any	Portuguese	wine.	The	addition	of
brandy	was	introduced	in	the	18th	century	as	a
way	of	guaranteeing	that	the	wines	would	get
to	England	in	drinkable	condition,	and	it
resulted	in	the	development	of	an	unusual
group	of	sweet	red	wines.	Port	is	made	by
stopping	the	fermentation	of	the	base	red	wine
while	about	half	the	grape	sugar	is	left,	and
fortifying	it	with	distilled	spirits	to	give	an
alcohol	content	around	20%.	The	wine	is	then



aged	in	barrel	and	finally	in	bottle	for
anywhere	from	two	to	50	years.	Older	ports
are	characterized	by	the	maple-like	compound
sotolon	and	other	sweetly	aromatic
compounds,	likely	products	of	browning
reactions,	which	are	also	found	in	botrytized
wines	and	sherries.

Sherry	 Sherry	 is	 a	 fortified,	 oxidized	 white
wine	 that	 was	 developed	 in	 the	 Spanish	 port
city	 Jerez	 de	 la	 Frontera,	 whose	 name	 was
Anglicized	 to	 “sherry”	 around	 1600.	 True
sherry	 gets	 its	 distinctive	 flavor	 from	 the
solera	 system	 of	 maturing	 wine,	 which	 was
developed	 early	 in	 the	 19th	 century.	 The
solera	 is	 a	 series	 of	 casks,	 each	 initially
containing	 the	 fortified	 new	 wine	 of	 a
particular	year,	but	not	completely	filled,	so	a
significant	 area	 of	 wine	 surface	 is	 in	 direct
contact	 with	 the	 air.	 The	 wine	 therefore
develops	 a	 characteristic	 intense,	 oxidized
flavor.	 As	 the	 cask	 contents	 evaporate	 and



become	 more	 concentrated,	 each	 is
replenished	with	wine	 from	 the	next	younger
cask.	The	final	wine	is	bottled	from	the	casks
containing	 the	 oldest	 wines,	 and	 thus	 is	 a
blend	 of	wines	 from	many	 different	 vintages
and	degrees	of	development.

There	are	a	variety	of	rapid	industrial
methods	for	making	sherry-like	wines.	The
fortified	base	wines	may	be	heated	to	develop
the	flavor,	or	cultured	with	a	“submerged
flor”:	the	wine	and	flor	yeasts	(see	box)	are
kept	in	large	tanks	and	agitated	and	aerated.

Vermouth	 Modern-day	 vermouth	 derives
from	 a	medicinal	wine	made	 in	 18th-century
Italy,	which	the	Germans	named	Vermut	after
its	 main	 ingredient,	 wormwood	 (see	 box,	 p.
771).	 Today	 it’s	 essentially	 a	 flavored	 wine
fortified	to	about	18%	alcohol,	used	mainly	in
mixed	 drinks	 and	 in	 cooking.	 Vermouth	 is
made	in	both	Italy	and	France	from	a	neutral
white	wine	flavored	with	dozens	of	herbs	and



spices,	and	sometimes	sweetened	 (up	 to	16%
sugar).	 The	 French	 usually	 extract	 the
flavorings	in	the	wine	itself,	while	the	Italians
extract	or	co-distill	them	with	the	fortification
alcohol.	 Once	 fortified,	 the	 wine	 is	 aged	 for
several	months.

Styles	of	Sherry
True	sherry	from	the	Jerez	region	of	Spain
is	 made	 in	 several	 different	 ways	 to
produce	different	styles	of	wine.
Fino	is	the	lightest,	least	fortified,	and
least	oxidized.	Its	surface	in	the	solera	is
protected	from	the	air	by	a	layer	of
unusual	yeasts	called	the	flor.
Amontillado	is	essentially	fino	sherry
that	did	not	develop	or	retain	a	flor	in	the
solera,	and	so	is	more	oxidized,	darker,
and	heavier.
Oloroso	sherries	(from	the	Spanish	for
“fragrant,”	“perfumed”)	are	made	from



heavier,	more	strongly	fortified	base
wines	that	don’t	develop	a	flor,	reach
24%	alcohol,	and	become	dark	brown
and	concentrated.

Storing	and	Serving	Wine

Wine	Storage	Wines	are	sensitive	liquids,
and	require	some	care	in	order	to	keep	well
and	even	improve	during	storage.	They’re	best
kept	in	some	version	of	the	traditional	cellar:
a	moderately	humid,	dark,	cool	place.	Bottles
are	stored	on	their	sides,	so	that	the	wine	wets
the	cork	and	prevents	it	from	drying	out,
shrinking,	and	allowing	air	in.	Moderate
humidity	keeps	the	outer	portion	of	the	cork
from	shrinking,	and	constant	temperature
prevents	volume	and	pressure	changes	in	the
liquid	and	air	inside	the	bottle,	which	can
cause	air	and	wine	movement	in	the	space
between	bottle	and	cork.	Darkness	minimizes
the	penetration	of	high-energy	light	into



sparkling	and	other	white	wines,	where	it	can
cause	a	sulfury	off-aroma	similar	to	that
found	in	light-struck	beer	and	milk	(pp.	749,
21).	And	low	temperatures,	between	50	and
60ºF/10–15ºC,	slow	the	wine’s	development,
so	that	it	remains	complex	and	interesting	for
the	longest	possible	time.

Serving	 Temperatures	 Different	 kinds	 of
wine	 taste	 their	 best	 at	 different	 serving
temperatures.	The	colder	a	wine,	the	less	tart,
sweet,	and	aromatic	it	seems.	Intrinsically	tart
and	mildly	aromatic	wines,	usually	light	white
and	 rosé	 wines,	 are	 best	 served	 cold,	 42–
55ºF/5–13ºC.	 Less	 tart,	 more	 aromatic	 red
wines	 are	 more	 full-flavored	 at	 60–68ºF/16–
20ºC.	The	 strongly	 alcoholic,	 richly	 aromatic
port	 is	 said	 to	 taste	best	at	65–72ºF/18–22ºC.
Complex	white	wines	may	be	served	at	higher
temperatures	 than	 their	 light	 cousins;
similarly,	many	 light	 red	wines	 are	 better	 at
cooler	temperatures.



“Breathing”	 and	 Aeration	 Wines	 can
sometimes	be	improved	just	before	serving	by
a	 period	 of	 aeration	 or	 “breathing.”	 Such	 a
treatment	 allows	 volatile	 substances	 in	 the
wine	 to	 escape	 into	 the	 air,	 and	 it	 allows
oxygen	from	the	air	to	enter	the	wine,	where	it
reacts	 with	 volatile	 and	 other	 molecules	 and
changes	 the	 wine’s	 aroma.	 No	 significant
aeration	 occurs	 when	 a	 wine	 is	 simply
uncorked	and	left	to	sit	in	the	open	bottle.	The
most	effective	way	to	aerate	a	wine	is	to	pour
it,	 and	 into	 a	 broad,	 shallow	 decanter	 that
continues	to	expose	a	large	surface	area	to	the
air.	Aeration	can	 improve	a	wine’s	 aroma	by
accelerating	the	escape	of	some	off-odors	(for
example,	excess	sulfur	dioxide	in	some	white
wines),	and	by	providing	a	kind	of	accelerated
aging	to	young,	undeveloped	red	wines.	But	it
allows	desirable	aromas	to	escape	as	well,	and
can	undo	the	complexity	of	a	mature	wine	that
has	developed	slowly	over	years	in	the	bottle.

Wine	also	absorbs	oxygen	when	it’s



poured	into	the	glass	and	as	it	rests	there,	and
its	aroma	often	evolves	noticeably	between
the	first	sip	and	the	last.	To	discover	this
dynamic	quality	and	follow	its	course	is	one
of	the	pleasures	of	drinking	wine.

The	Alcohol	Content	of	Wines
In	 the	 United	 States,	 the	 approximate
alcohol	 content	 of	 a	 wine	 is	 listed	 on	 its
label.	 There	 is	 a	 total	 of	 3%	 leeway
allowed,	 so	 a	 wine	 labeled	 as	 containing
12%	 alcohol	 by	 volume	 may	 contain
anywhere	from	10.5%	to	13.5%.

Keeping	Leftovers	The	key	to	preserving	the
quality	of	leftover	wine	is	to	minimize
chemical	change.	Lowering	the	wine’s
temperature	slows	all	chemical	activity,	and
simple	refrigeration	works	well	for	white
wines,	which	usually	keep	well	simply	by
being	recorked	and	refrigerated.	However,
chilling	causes	dissolved	substances	in	more
complex	red	wines	to	precipitate	into	solid



particles,	and	this	causes	irreversible	changes
in	flavor.	Leftover	red	wine	is	best	handled	by
a	minimizing	its	exposure	to	flavor-altering
oxygen,	which	can	be	done	by	means	of
inexpensive	devices	that	pull	the	air	out	of	a
partly	empty	bottle,	or	by	replacing	the	air
with	inert	nitrogen	gas,	or	by	gently	pouring	a
partial	bottle	into	smaller	bottles	that	can	be
filled	all	the	way	to	the	top	—	though	the	act
of	pouring	itself	introduces	some	air	into	the
wine.

Enjoying	Wine

For	those	who	love	it,	wine	can	be	endlessly
fascinating.	The	varieties	of	grape,	the	place
they	were	grown	in,	the	weather	that	year,	the
yeasts	that	ferment	them,	the	skills	of	the
winemaker	in	handling	them,	the	years	they
spend	in	oak	or	in	glass:	all	these	factors	and
more	affect	what	we	taste	in	a	sip	of	wine.
And	there’s	a	lot	to	taste	in	that	sip,	because



wine	has	one	of	the	most	complex	flavors	of
all	our	foods.	Wine	connoisseurs	have
developed	an	elaborate	vocabulary	to	try	to
capture	and	describe	these	fugitive	sensations,
one	that	may	seem	forbiddingly	complicated
and	fanciful.	Many	of	us	most	of	the	time
would	be	content	with	the	five	F’s	proposed
800	years	ago	in	the	Regimen	of	Health	for
the	School	of	Salerno:

Si	bona	vina	cupis,	quinque	haec	laudantur
in	illis:
Fortia,	 formosa,	 et	 fragrantia,	 frigida,
frisca.
If	you	desire	good	wines,	these	five	things
are	praised	in	them:
Strength,	 beauty,	 and	 fragrance,	 coolness,
freshness.
On	the	other	hand,	we	can	learn	to	taste

much	more	in	a	sip	of	wine,	and	get	more
pleasure	from	it,	if	we	know	something	about
what’s	in	that	sip,	about	the	kinds	of



substances	that	can	and	do	contribute	to	the
flavor	of	wine	(see	box,	p.	738).

Clarity	and	Color	The	appearance	of	a	wine
can	 give	 some	 important	 clues	 about	 how	 it
will	 taste.	 If	 the	 wine	 is	 cloudy	 and	 the
particles	 don’t	 settle	 with	 a	 few	 hours’
standing,	 it	 has	 probably	 undergone	 an
unintended	 bacterial	 fermentation	 in	 the
bottle,	 and	 its	 flavor	 is	 likely	 to	be	off.	Tiny
crystals	 (which	do	 settle)	 are	usually	 salts	 of
excess	 tartaric	 or	 oxalic	 acid,	 and	 are	 not
signs	of	spoilage;	in	fact	they	indicate	a	good
level	of	acidity.	“White”	wines	actually	range
in	color	from	straw	yellow	to	deep	amber.	The
darker	 the	 color,	 the	 older	 the	 wine	 —	 the
yellow	pigments	turn	brownish	when	oxidized
—	and	 the	more	mature	 the	 flavor.	Most	 red
wines	retain	a	deep,	 ruby-like	color	 for	some
years,	 along	 with	 a	 fruity	 character	 in	 the
flavor.	As	they	age,	the	anthocyanin	pigments
complex	 with	 some	 of	 the	 tannins	 and



precipitate,	 leaving	 more	 of	 the	 brownish
tannins	 visible.	 The	wine	 develops	 an	 amber
or	 tawny	 tint,	which	 goes	 along	with	 its	 less
fruity,	more	complex	flavor.

Feeling	 and	 Taste	 in	 the	 Mouth	 When	 we
experience	 a	 sip	 of	 wine	 in	 the	 mouth,	 the
senses	of	both	touch	and	taste	come	into	play.

Astringency	 The	feel	 of	 a	 wine	 is	 largely	 a
matter	 of	 its	 astringency	 and	 viscosity.
Astringency	 —	 the	 word	 comes	 from	 the
Latin	for	“to	bind	together”	—	is	the	sensation
we	 have	 when	 the	 tannins	 in	 wine	 “tan”	 the
lubricating	proteins	in	our	saliva	the	way	they
do	 leather:	 they	 cross-link	 the	 proteins	 and
form	 little	 aggregates	 that	 make	 the	 saliva
feel	 rough	 rather	 than	 slick.	 This	 dry,
constricting	 feeling,	 together	 with	 the
smoothness	 and	 viscosity	 caused	 by	 the
presence	 of	 alcohol	 and	 other	 extracted
components,	and	in	sweet	wines	sugar,	create
the	 impression	 of	 the	 wine’s	 body,	 of



substance	 and	 volume.	 In	 strong	 young	 red
wines,	the	tannins	can	be	palpable	enough	that
“chewy”	seems	a	good	description.	In	excess,
they	are	drying	and	harsh.

Some	Aromas	and	Molecules	in	Wines
Here	 are	 examples	 of	 the	 molecules	 and
aromas	 that	 chemists	have	 found	 in	wines
and	 that	 contribute	 significantly	 to	 wine
flavor.

Aroma	Quality Wine Chemical
Fruits:	Apple,	pear Many	wines Ethyl	esters
Banana, Many Acetate
pineapple wines esters
Strawberry Concord	grape	wine Furaneol
Guava, Sauvignon
grapefruit, Blanc, Sulfur
passion	fruit Champagne compounds

Citrus	fruits Riesling,	Muscat Terpenes



Apple Sherries Acetaldehyde
Flowers: Pinot	Noir,	Cabernet
Violets Sauvignon Ionone

Citrus,	lavender Muscat Linalool
Rose Gewürtztraminer Geraniol
Rose Sake Phenethyl	alcohol
Rose,	Citrus Riesling Nerol
Wood:	Oak Barrel-aged	wines Lactones
Nuts: Barrel-aged
Almond wines Benzaldehyde

Vegetables: Cabernet
Bell Sauvignon,
pepper, Sauvignon Methoxyisobutylpyrazines
green	peas Blanc
Grass,	tea Many	wines Norisoprenoids
Asparagus,	cooked Many Dimethyl
vegetables wines sulfide
Spices:	Vanilla Barrel-aged	wines Vanillin

Barrel-aged	red Ethyl,	vinyl



Clove wines guaiacol
Tobacco Barrel-aged	red Ethyl,	vinyl

wines guaiacol
Earthiness: Botrytized
Mushrooms wines Octenol

Stone Cabernet	Sauvignon, Sulfur
Sauvignon	Blanc compound

Smoke, Many	red Ethyl	phenol,	ethyl
Tar wines guaiacol,	vinyl	guaiacol
Sweet,	caramel:	Maple Sherry,
syrup,	fenugreek port Sotolon

Butter Many	white	wines Diacetyl
Roasted:	Coffee,
toasted	brioche Champagne Sulfur

compounds
Grilled Sauvignon Sulfur
meats Blanc compounds

Animals: Many Ethyl	phenol,	ethyl
Leather,	horse, red guaiacol,	vinyl
stable wines guaiacol



Cat Sauvignon	Blanc Sulfur	compounds
Solvent:
Kerosene Riesling TDN

(trimethyldihydronaphthalene)
Nail	polish Many Ethyl
remover wines acetate

Taste	The	taste	of	a	wine	is	mostly	a	matter	of
its	 sourness,	 or	 a	 balance	 between	 sour	 and
sweet,	 and	 a	 savory	 quality	 that	 has	 been
attributed	 to	succinic	acid	and	other	products
of	yeast	metabolism.	Phenolic	compounds	can
sometimes	 contribute	 a	 slight	 bitterness.	The
acid	 content	 of	 a	 wine	 is	 important	 in
preventing	 it	 from	 tasting	 bland	 or	 flat;	 it’s
sometimes	said	to	provide	the	“backbone”	for
the	 wine’s	 overall	 flavor.	 White	 wines	 are
usually	around	0.85%	acid,	 red	wines	0.55%.
Wines	that	are	fermented	dry,	with	no	residual
sugar,	may	still	have	a	slight	sweetness	thanks
to	 the	 alcohol	 and	 glycerol,	 a	 sugar-like
molecule	produced	by	the	yeasts.	Fructose	and
glucose	are	the	predominant	sugars	in	grapes,



and	 they	 begin	 to	 provide	 a	 noticeable
sweetness	when	left	in	wines	at	levels	around
1%.	 Sweet	 dessert	 wines	 may	 contain	 more
than	 10%	 sugars.	 In	 strong	 wines,	 alcohol
itself	 can	 dominate	 other	 sensations	 with	 its
pungent	harshness.

Wine	Aroma	 If	 acidity	 is	 the	 backbone	 of	 a
wine,	viscosity	and	astringency	its	body,	then
aroma	 is	 its	 life,	 its	animating	spirit.	Though
they	 account	 for	 only	 about	 one	 part	 in	 a
thousand	 of	 wine’s	 weight,	 the	 volatile
molecules	 that	 can	 escape	 the	 liquid	 and
ascend	 into	 the	 nose	 are	 what	 fill	 out	 its
flavor,	 and	 make	 wine	 much	 more	 than	 tart
alcoholic	water.

An	Ever-Changing	Microcosm	A	given	wine
contains	 several	 hundred	 different	 kinds	 of
volatile	molecules,	 and	 those	molecules	have
many	different	kinds	of	odors.	In	fact	they	run
the	gamut	of	our	olfactory	world.	Some	of	the
same	 molecules	 are	 also	 found	 in	 temperate



and	 tropical	 fruits,	 flowers,	 leaves,	 wood,
spices,	 animal	 scents,	 cooked	 foods	 of	 all
kinds,	 even	 fuel	 tanks	 and	 nail	 polish
remover.	That’s	why	wine	can	be	so	evocative
and	 yet	 so	 hard	 to	 describe:	 at	 its	 best,	 it
offers	a	kind	of	sensory	microcosm.	And	that
little	world	of	molecules	is	a	dynamic	one.	It
evolves	 over	months	 and	 years	 in	 the	 bottle,
by	 the	minute	 in	 the	 glass,	 and	 in	 the	mouth
with	every	passing	second.	The	vocabulary	of
wine	 tasting	 thus	 amounts	 to	 a	 catalogue	 of
things	 in	 the	world	 that	 can	 be	 smelled,	 and
whose	 smell	 can	 be	 recognized,	 however
fleetingly,	in	an	attentive	sip.

A	few	of	the	aromatic	substances	in	wine
are	contributed	directly	by	particular	varieties
of	grape,	mainly	the	flowery	terpenes	of	some
white	grapes	and	unusual	sulfur	compounds	in
the	Cabernet	Sauvignon	family.	But	the
primary	creators	of	wine	aroma	are	the	yeasts,
which	apparently	generate	most	of	the	volatile
molecules	as	incidental	by-products	of	their



metabolism	and	growth.	The	yeasts	and	400
generations	of	winemakers,	who	noticed	and
cultivated	those	incidental	pleasures,	made	a
tart	alcoholic	liquid	into	something	much
more	stimulating.

Beer

Wine	and	beer	are	made	from	very	different
raw	materials:	wine	from	fruits,	beer	from
grains,	usually	barley.	Unlike	grapes,	which
accumulate	sugars	in	order	to	attract	animals,
the	grains	are	filled	with	starch	to	provide
energy	for	the	growing	embryo	and	seedling.
Yeasts	can’t	exploit	starch	directly,	and	this
means	that	before	they	can	be	fermented,
grains	must	be	treated	to	break	down	their
starch	to	sugars.	While	it’s	true	that	grapes
are	much	more	easily	fermented	—	yeasts
begin	to	flourish	in	the	sweet	juice	as	soon	as
they	break	open	—	grain	has	several
advantages	as	a	material	for	producing



alcohol.	It’s	quicker	and	easier	to	grow	than
the	grapevine,	much	more	productive	in	a
given	acreage,	can	be	stored	for	many	months
before	being	fermented,	and	it	can	be	made
into	beer	any	day	of	the	year,	not	just	at
harvest	time.	Of	course	grains	bring	a	very
different	flavor	to	beer	than	grapes	do	to
wine;	it’s	the	flavor	of	the	grasses,	of	bread,
and	of	cooking,	which	is	essential	to	the	beer-
making	process.

The	Evolution	of	Beer

Three	Ways	to	Sweeten	Starchy	Grains	Our
ingenious	prehistoric	ancestors	discovered	no
fewer	than	three	different	ways	to	turn	grains
into	alcohol!	The	key	to	each	was	enzymes
that	convert	the	grain	starch	into	fermentable
sugars.	Because	every	enzyme	molecule	can
do	its	starch-splitting	operation	perhaps	a
million	times,	a	small	quantity	of	the	enzyme
source	can	digest	a	large	quantity	of	starch



into	fermentable	sugars.	Inca	women	found
the	enzymes	in	their	own	saliva:	they	made
chicha	by	chewing	on	ground	corn,	then
mixing	that	corn	with	cooked	corn.	In	the	Far
East,	brewers	found	the	enzymes	in	a	mold,
Aspergillus	oryzae,	which	readily	grew	on
cooked	rice	(p.	754).	This	preparation,	called
the	chhü	in	China,	koji	in	Japan,	was	then
mixed	with	a	fresh	batch	of	cooked	rice.	In	the
Near	East,	the	grain	itself	supplied	the
enzyme.	Brewers	soaked	the	grain	in	water
and	allowed	it	to	germinate	for	several	days,
then	heated	the	ground	seedling	with
ungerminated	grain.	This	technique,	called
malting,	is	the	one	most	widely	used	today	to
make	beer.

Beer	in	Ancient	Times	Malting	is	much	like
the	 making	 of	 sprouts	 from	 beans	 and	 other
seeds,	and	may	have	begun	in	the	sprouting	of
grains	 simply	 to	 make	 them	 softer,	 moister,
and	 sweeter.	 There’s	 clear	 evidence	 that



barley	and	wheat	beers	were	being	brewed	 in
Egypt,	 Babylon,	 and	 Sumeria	 by	 the	 third
millennium	BCE,	and	that	somewhere	between
a	 third	 and	 half	 of	 the	 barley	 crop	 in
Mesopotamia	 was	 reserved	 for	 brewing.	 We
know	that	brewers	preserved	the	malted	grain,
or	 malt,	 by	 baking	 it	 into	 a	 flat	 bread,	 then
soaked	the	bread	in	water	to	make	beer.

The	knowledge	of	beer	making	seems	to
have	passed	from	the	Middle	East	through
western	Europe	to	the	north,	where	in	a
climate	too	cold	for	the	vine,	beer	became	the
usual	beverage.	(Among	the	nomadic	tribes	of
northern	Europe	and	central	Asia	who	did	not
even	cultivate	grain,	milk	was	fermented	into
the	drinks	called	kefir	and	koumiss.)	To	this
day,	beer	remains	the	national	beverage	of
Germany,	Belgium,	Holland,	and	Britain.

Wherever	both	have	been	available,	beer
has	been	the	drink	of	the	common	people	and
wine	the	drink	of	the	rich.	The	raw	material
for	beer,	grain,	is	cheaper	than	grapes	and	its



fermentation	is	less	tricky	and	drawn	out.	To
the	Greeks	and	Romans,	beer	remained	an
imitation	wine	made	by	barbarians	who	did
not	cultivate	the	grape.	Pliny	described	it	as	a
cunning	if	unnatural	invention:

The	nations	of	the	West	also	have	their
own	intoxicant,	made	from	grain	soaked	in
water.	There	are	a	number	of	ways	of
making	it	in	the	various	provinces	of	Gaul
and	Spain….	Alas,	what	wonderful
ingenuity	vice	possesses!	A	method	has
actually	been	discovered	for	making	even
water	intoxicated.

Some	Beer-like	Brewed	Drinks
This	 chapter	 concentrates	 on	 standard
beers	 brewed	 with	 barley	 malt,	 but	 there
are	many	other	ways	to	make	an	alcoholic
drink	 from	 starchy	 foods.	 Here	 are	 a	 few
examples.



Name	of	Drink Region Main	Ingredient
Chicha South Boiled	maize,	chewed	to

America contribute	saliva	enzymes
South

Manioc America Boiled	manioc	root,
beer and chewed	to	contribute

elsewhere saliva	enzymes

Millet,	sorghum, Africa, Millet,
rice	beers Asia sorghum,	rice

Southwest Bread	made	from
Boza/bouza Asia,	North malted	millet,

Africa wheat
Pombe	ya
ndizi Kenya Bananas	and	malted

millet
Kvass Russia Rye	bread
Roggenbier Germany Malted	rye

Germany:	 Hops	 and	 Lagering	 In	 the
centuries	 following	 the	 fall	 of	 Rome,	 beer
continued	 to	 be	 an	 important	 beverage	 in



much	 of	 Europe.	 Monasteries	 brewed	 it	 for
themselves	and	for	nearby	settlements.	By	the
9th	 century,	 alehouses	 had	 become	 common
in	 England,	 with	 individual	 keepers	 brewing
their	own.	Until	1200,	the	English	government
considered	ale	to	be	a	food,	and	did	not	tax	it.

It	was	in	medieval	Germany	that	two	great
innovations	made	beer	largely	what	it	is
today:	brewers	preserved	and	flavored	it	with
hops,	and	began	to	ferment	it	slowly	in	the
cold	to	make	mild-flavored	lager.

Hops	 The	 earliest	 brewers	 probably	 added
herbs	and	spices	to	beer,	both	to	give	it	flavor
and	 to	 delay	 the	 development	 of	 off-flavors
from	 oxidation	 and	 the	 growth	 of	 spoilage
microbes.	In	early	Europe	this	mixture,	called
gruit	 in	 German,	 included	 bog-myrtle,
rosemary,	yarrow,	and	other	herbs.	Coriander
was	also	sometimes	used,	 juniper	 in	Norway,
and	 sweet	 gale	 (Myrica	 gale)	 especially	 in
Denmark	and	Scandinavia.	It	was	around	900



that	 hops,	 the	 resinous	 cones	 of	 the	 vine
Humulus	 lupulus,	 a	 relative	 of	 marijuana,
came	 into	 use	 in	 Bavaria.	 Thanks	 to	 its
pleasant	 taste	 and	 effectiveness	 in	 delaying
spoilage,	 it	 had	 largely	 replaced	gruit	 and
other	herbs	by	the	end	of	the	14th	century.	In
1574,	 Reginald	 Scot	 noted	 in	A	 Perfite
Platforme	 of	 a	 Hoppe	 Garden	 that	 the
advantages	 of	 hops	 were	 overwhelming:	 “If
your	 ale	 may	 endure	 a	 fortnight,	 your	 beer
through	the	benefit	of	the	hops,	shall	continue
a	 month,	 and	 what	 grace	 it	 yieldeth	 to	 the
taste,	 all	 men	 may	 judge	 that	 have	 sense	 in
their	 mouths.”	 Still,	 it	 was	 not	 until	 about
1700	that	English	ale	was	hopped	as	a	matter
of	course.

Food	Words:	Malt
Our	ancestors	probably	began	soaking	and
sprouting	 grains	 because	 it	 was	 an	 easy
way	to	make	them	soft	enough	to	eat	as	is,
and	 quicker	 to	 cook.	 In	 fact	 our	word	 for



soaked,	partly	sprouted	cereal	grain	comes
from	 an	 Indo-European	 root	 meaning
“soft.”	 Words	 that	 are	 related	 to	malt
include	melt,	mollusc	(p.	226),	and	mollify.

Lager	From	the	times	of	Egypt	and	Sumeria
to	the	Middle	Ages,	brewers	made	beer
without	much	control	over	the	temperature	of
fermentation,	and	with	yeasts	that	grew	at	the
surface	of	the	liquid.	The	beer	fermented	in	a
few	days,	and	it	was	consumed	within	days	or
weeks.	Sometime	around	1400,	in	the	foothills
of	the	Bavarian	Alps,	there	evolved	a	new
kind	of	beer.	It	was	fermented	in	cool	caves
over	the	period	of	a	week	or	more,	and	with	a
special	yeast	that	grew	below	the	surface	of
the	liquid.	Then	it	was	packed	in	ice	for
several	months	before	it	was	drawn	off	the
yeast	sediment	for	drinking.	The	cool,	slow
fermentation	gave	the	beer	a	distinctive,
relatively	mild	flavor,	and	the	cold
temperature	and	long	settling	time	produced	a
sparkling-clear	appearance.	This	lager	beer



(from	the	German	lagern,	“to	store,”	“to	lay
down”)	remained	distinctly	Bavarian	until	the
1840s,	when	the	special	yeast	and	techniques
were	taken	to	Pilsen,	Czechoslovakia,	to
Copenhagen,	and	to	the	United	States,	and
became	the	prototype	of	most	modern	beers.
England	and	Belgium	are	the	only	major
producers	that	still	brew	most	of	their	beer	in
the	original	way,	at	warm	temperatures	and
with	top-fermenting	yeasts.

England:	 Bottles	 and	 Bubbles,	 Specialty
Malts	 The	 English	were	 late	 to	 accept	 hops,
but	 pioneered	 in	 the	making	 of	 bottled	 beer.
Ordinary	ale	—	the	original	English	word	for
beer	—	was	 fermented	 in	 an	 open	 tank,	 and
like	wine	 it	 lost	 all	 its	 carbon	 dioxide	 to	 the
air:	the	bubbles	simply	rose	to	the	surface	and
burst.	 Some	 residual	 yeast	might	 grow	while
the	liquid	was	stored	in	a	barrel,	but	it	would
lose	 its	 light	 gassiness	 as	 soon	 as	 the	 barrel
was	 tapped.	 Sometime	 around	 1600,	 it	 was



discovered	 that	 ale	 kept	 in	 a	 corked	 bottle
would	 become	 bubbly.	 Quite	 early	 on,	 the
discovery	was	attributed	to	Alexander	Nowell,
dean	 of	 St.	 Paul’s	 Cathedral.	 Thomas	 Fuller,
in	 his	 1662	History	 of	 the	 Worthies	 of
England,	wrote:

Without	offense	it	may	be	remembered,
that	leaving	a	bottle	of	ale,	when	fishing,	in
the	grass,	[Nowell]	found	it	some	days
after,	no	bottle,	but	a	gun,	such	the	sound
at	the	opening	thereof:	and	this	is	believed
(casualty	is	mother	of	more	invention	than
industry)	the	original	of	bottled	ale	in
England.

By	1700,	glass-bottled	ale	sealed	with	cork
and	 thread	 had	 become	 popular,	 along	 with
sparkling	Champagne	(p.	724).	But	both	were
largely	novelties.	Most	beer	was	drunk	flat,	or
close	to	it,	from	barrels.	Centuries	later,	with
the	 development	 of	 airtight	 kegs,	 of
carbonation,	 and	 the	 increasing	 tendency	 to



drink	 beer	 at	 home	 instead	 of	 at	 the	 tavern,
bubbly	beer	became	the	rule.

Specialty	Malts	 The	 18th	 and	 19th	 centuries
were	an	innovative	time	in	Britain,	and	it	was
early	 in	 this	 period	 that	 many	 of	 today’s
familiar	 British	 brewing	 names	 —	 Bass,
Guinness,	 and	 others	 —	 got	 their	 start.	 By
1750,	 the	 greater	 control	 that	 coke	 and	 coal
heat	gave	the	maltster	made	gently	dried	pale
malts	possible,	 and	 thereby	pale	ales.	And	 in
1817,	“patent	malt”	was	developed.	This	was
malted	 barley	 roasted	 very	 dark,	 and	 used	 in
small	 amounts	 only	 to	 adjust	 the	 color	 and
flavor	 of	 ales	 and	 beers,	 not	 to	 provide
fermentable	 sugars.	 Patent	 and	 pale	 malts
made	 it	 possible	 to	 produce	 a	 range	 of	 dark
beers	 with	 a	 combination	 of	 light,	 largely
fermentable	malt	and	very	dark	coloring	malt.
This	was	the	beginning	of	porter	and	stout	as
we	know	them	today:	darker	and	heavier	than
ordinary	 brews,	 but	 much	 lighter	 and	 less



caloric	than	they	were	200	years	ago.

Food	Words:	Ale	and	Beer;	Brew
The	original	English	word	for	a	fermented
barley	 drink	 was	 not	beer,	 but	ale.	 It
apparently	 derives	 from	 the	 effects	 of
alcohol;	the	Indo-European	root	of	ale	had
to	do	with	intoxication,	magic,	and	sorcery,
and	may	 be	 related	 to	 a	 root	meaning	 “to
wander,	 to	 be	 in	 exile.”	 The	 alternative
name,	beer,	 comes	via	Latin	 from	a	much
more	 prosaic	 connection:	 its	 root	 is	 the
word	 for	 “to	 drink.”	Brew	 is	 related	 to
bread,	 broil,	 braise, 	 and	ferment;	 they	 all
come	from	an	Indo-European	root	meaning
“to	boil,	to	bubble,	to	effervesce.”

Beer	 in	 America	 The	 U.S.	 preference	 for
light,	even	characterless	brews	would	seem	to
be	 the	 result	 of	 climate	 and	 history.	 Heavy
beer	 is	 less	 refreshing	when	 the	summers	get
as	 hot	 as	 ours	 do.	 And	 the	 original	 British



colonists	 seem	 to	 have	 been	more	 interested
in	making	whiskey	than	beer	(p.	760).	We	had
no	 strong	 national	 tradition	 in	 the	 matter	 of
beer,	 so	 the	 way	was	 clear	 for	 later	 German
immigrants	to	set	the	taste	around	1840,	when
someone	 —	 perhaps	 one	 John	 Wagner	 near
Philadelphia	 —	 introduced	 the	 newly
available	 lager	 yeast	 and	 technique,	 and	 the
distinctive	brew	caught	on.

Both	Milwaukee	and	St.	Louis	quickly
became	centers	of	lager	brewing:	in	the
former,	Pabst,	Miller,	and	Schlitz;	in	the
latter,	Anheuser	and	Busch;	and	Stroh	in
Detroit	all	got	their	starts	in	the	1850s	and
1860s,	and	Coors	in	Denver	in	the	1870s.
Several	of	these	names	and	their	light,
Pilsner-style	beers	remain	dominant	today,
while	the	stronger	traditional	brews	of
England	and	Germany	appeal	to	a	relatively
small	number	of	beer	lovers.	The	only
indigenous	American	style	of	beer	is	“steam
beer,”	a	rare	relic	of	the	California	Gold	Rush.



Without	the	large	supply	of	ice	necessary	to
make	lager	beer,	San	Francisco	brewers	used
the	yeast	and	techniques	appropriate	to	cool
bottom	fermentation,	but	brewed	at	top-
fermentation	temperatures.	The	result:	a	full-
flavored	and	gassy	beer	that	gave	off	a	lot	of
foam	when	the	keg	was	tapped.

Beer	 Today	 Today,	 the	 countries	 with	 the
largest	 per	 capita	 consumption	 of	 beer	 are
mainly	 traditional	 European	 beer	 producers:
Germany,	 the	 Czech	 Republic,	 Belgium,	 and
Britain	and	its	former	colony	Australia.	In	the
United	 States,	 beer	 accounts	 for	 more	 than
three	 quarters	 of	 the	 alcoholic	 drinks
consumed.	Most	American	beer	remains	bland
and	 uniform,	 produced	 by	 a	 handful	 of	 large
companies	 in	 largely	 automated	 factory-like
breweries.	 The	 1970s	 brought	 a	 revival	 of
interest	 in	 more	 flavorful	 alternatives,	 and	 a
flourishing	 of	 “microbreweries”	 making
specialty	 beers	 in	 small	 quantities,	 brewpubs



that	 both	 brew	 and	 serve	 beer,	 and	 home
brewing.	Some	of	these	small	enterprises	have
grown	 with	 their	 success,	 and	 the	 giant
brewers	 are	 now	 making	 microbrew
lookalikes.	And	it’s	now	possible	to	find	beers
from	 all	 over	 the	 world	 in	 liquor	 stores	 and
supermarkets.	 These	 are	 good	 times	 for
exploring	 the	 many	 different	 styles	 of	 beer
and	ale.

Brewing	Ingredients:	Malt

Beer	begins	with	barley.	Other	grains	—	oats,
wheat,	corn,	millet,	sorghum	—	have	also
been	used,	but	barley	has	become	the	grain	of
choice	because	it’s	the	best	at	generating
starch-digesting	enzymes.

Malting	 The	 first	 step	 in	 converting	 barley
grain	into	malt	is	to	steep	the	dry	grain	in	cool
water	 and	 then	 allow	 it	 to	 germinate	 for
several	days	at	around	65ºF/18ºC.	The	embryo



restarts	 its	 biochemical	 machinery	 and
produces	 various	 enzymes,	 including	 some
that	 break	 down	 the	 barley	 cell	 walls,	 and
others	that	break	down	the	starch	and	proteins
inside	the	cells	of	the	food-storage	tissue,	the
endosperm.	These	enzymes	then	diffuse	from
the	 embryo	 into	 the	 endosperm,	 where	 they
work	together	to	dissolve	away	the	cell	walls,
penetrate	 the	 cells,	 and	 digest	 some	 of	 the
starch	granules	and	protein	bodies	inside.	The
embryo	also	secretes	the	hormone	gibberellin,
which	stimulates	the	aleurone	cells	to	produce
digestive	enzymes	as	well.

The	maltster’s	aim	is	to	maximize	the
breakdown	of	the	endosperm	cell	walls	and
the	grain’s	production	of	starch-and	protein-
digesting	enzymes.	The	cell	walls	have	been
adequately	weakened	by	the	time	that	the
growing	tip	of	the	embryo	reaches	the	end	of
the	kernel,	some	five	to	nine	days	after	the
grain	is	first	soaked.	If	the	maltster	is	going	to
make	a	pale	malt,	then	he	keeps	starch



digestion	to	a	minimum	and	malts	for	a
shorter	time;	for	a	darker	malt	that	will
benefit	from	more	sugars	for	the	browning
reactions,	he	malts	for	a	longer	time,	and	may
finish	by	holding	the	moist	barley	at	140–
180ºF/60–80ºC	to	maximize	the	action	of	the
starch-digesting,	sugar-producing	enzymes.

Kilning	 Once	 the	 barley	 reaches	 the	 desired
balance	 of	 enzymes	 and	 sugars,	 the	 maltster
fixes	that	balance	by	drying	and	heating	it	in	a
kiln.	 The	 dehydration	 and	 heat	 kill	 the
embryo,	 and	 they	 also	 generate	 color	 and
flavor.	 To	 make	 malts	 with	 high	 enzyme
activities,	the	maltster	dries	the	barley	gently,
over	 about	 24	 hours,	 and	 brings	 the
temperature	 slowly	 up	 to	 around	180ºF/80ºC.
Such	 a	 malt	 is	 pale,	 and	 makes	 a	 light-
colored,	 light-flavored	 brew.	 To	 make	 malts
that	have	little	enzyme	activity	but	are	rich	in
color	and	flavor,	he	kilns	the	barley	at	a	high
temperature,	 300–360ºF/150–180ºC,	 to



encourage	 browning	 reactions.	 Dark	 malts
develop	 flavors	 that	 range	 from	 toasted	 to
caramelized	 to	 sharp,	 astringent,	 and	 smoky.
Brewers	have	many	different	kinds	of	malt	to
choose	 from	—	 their	 names	 include	 pale	 or
lager,	 ale,	 crystal,	 amber,	 brown,	 caramel,
chocolate,	and	black	—	and	often	mix	two	or
more	 malts	 in	 a	 single	 brew	 to	 obtain	 a
particular	 combination	 of	 flavor,	 color,	 and
enzyme	power.

Once	the	malt	has	been	kilned,	the	dried
kernels	can	be	stored	for	several	months	until
they’re	needed,	when	they’re	ground	into	a
coarse	powder.	They’re	also	made	into	malt
extracts	for	both	commercial	and	home
brewers:	the	malted	barley	is	soaked	in	hot
water	to	remove	its	carbohydrates,	enzymes,
color,	and	flavor,	and	the	liquid	then
concentrated	to	a	syrup	or	a	dry	powder	(p.
679).

Brewing	Ingredients:	Hops



Hops	are	the	female	flowers,	or	“cones,”	of	a
Eurasian-American	vine,	Humulus	lupulus,
which	bear	small	resin	and	aromatic	oil
glands	near	the	base	of	their	floral	leaves,	or
bracts.	They	are	an	essential	flavoring
ingredient	in	beers.	There	are	now	several
dozen	brewing	varieties,	most	of	them
European	or	European-American	hybrids.
Hops	are	picked	off	the	plant	when	mature,
dried,	sometimes	powdered	and	formed	into
pellets,	and	then	stored	until	needed.	They’re
added	to	the	brew	liquid	at	the	rate	of	about
0.5	to	5	grams	per	quart/liter,	with	the	low
figure	typical	of	bland	commercial	brews,	the
high	figure	of	flavorful	microbrews	and
traditional	Pilsners.

Four	 stages	 in	 the	 malting	 process.	 As	 the
barley	 kernel	 germinates,	 it	 generates



digestive	 enzymes,	 weakens	 cell	 walls,	 and
begins	 the	 process	 of	 converting	 starch	 into
fermentable	sugars.	The	shading	indicates	the
progress	 of	 cell-wall	 weakening	 and	 starch
digestion.	 Malting	 is	 stopped	 when	 the
growing	 shoot	 just	 reaches	 the	 tip	 of	 the
kernel.
Bitterness	and	Aroma	Hops	provide	two
different	elements:	bitterness	from	phenolic
“alpha	acids”	in	their	resins,	and	aroma	from
their	essential	oil.	Some	hop	varieties
contribute	a	dependable	level	of	bitterness,
while	others	are	prized	for	their	aroma.	The
important	bittering	compounds	are	the	alpha
acids	humulone	and	lupulone.	In	their	native
form	they’re	not	very	soluble	in	water,	but
prolonged	boiling	transforms	them	into
soluble	structures	that	flavor	the	beer
effectively.	(Brewers	sometimes	use	hop
extracts	that	have	been	pretreated	to	produce
the	more	soluble	alpha	acids.)	Because	boiling
evaporates	away	many	of	the	volatile	aroma



compounds,	another	dose	of	hops	is
sometimes	added	to	the	brew	after	the	boiling,
specifically	to	add	aroma.	The	aroma	of
ordinary	hops	is	characterized	by	the	terpene
myrcene,	which	is	also	found	in	bay	leaf	and
verbena,	and	is	woody	and	resinous.	“Noble”
hop	varieties	are	dominated	by	humulene,
which	is	more	delicate,	and	often	contain	pine
and	citrus	notes	from	other	terpenes	(pinene,
limonene,	citral).	The	American	variety
“Cascades”	has	a	distinctive	floweriness	(due
to	linalool	and	geraniol).

Brewing	Beer

The	brewing	of	beer	takes	place	in	several
stages.

Mashing:	ground	barley	malt	is	soaked	in
hot	water.	This	revives	the	barley
enzymes,	which	break	starch	into	sugar
chains	and	sugars,	and	protein	into	amino



acids.	The	result	is	a	sweet,	brown	liquid
called	the	wort.
Boiling:	hops	are	added	to	the	wort,	and
the	two	are	boiled	together.	This
treatment	extracts	the	hop	resins	that
flavor	the	beer,	inactivates	the	enzymes,
kills	any	microbes	present,	deepens	the
color	of	the	wort,	and	concentrates	it.
Fermentation:	yeasts	are	added	to	the
cooled	wort	and	allowed	to	consume
sugars	and	produce	alcohol	until	the
desired	levels	of	each	are	reached.
Conditioning:	the	new	beer	is	held	for
some	time	to	purge	it	of	off-flavors,	clear
it	of	yeasts	and	other	materials	that	give
it	a	cloudy	appearance,	and	develop
carbonation.

Here	are	some	details	of	each	stage.



The	hop	vine,	Humulus	lupulus,	and	its	female
flower	structure,	 the	cone,	with	a	close-up	of
one	of	the	cone’s	clustered	leaves,	or	bracts.

Brewing	Beer

Mashing	In	the	stage	known	as	mashing,	the
coarsely	ground	malt	is	soaked	in	water	at
between	130	and	160ºF/54–70ºC	for	a	couple
of	hours.	Typical	proportions	are	around	eight
parts	water	per	one	part	malt.	Mashing	is



completed	by	running	the	wort	off	the	solid
remains	of	the	malt,	which	are	then	rinsed
with	hot	water	—	“sparged”	—	to	remove
some	remaining	extractable	materials	before
being	discarded.

Mashing	accomplishes	several	purposes.
Above	all,	it	gelates	the	starch	granules	and
allows	the	barley’s	enzymes	to	break	down
long	starch	molecules	into	shorter	sugar
chains	and	small	fermentable	sugars,	and
proteins	into	foam-stabilizing	amino-acid
chains	and	fermentable	single	amino	acids.
And	it	extracts	all	these	substances,	along
with	color	and	flavor	substances,	from	the
grain	particles	and	into	the	water.

Because	the	different	enzymes	work	fastest
at	different	temperatures,	the	brewer	can
adjust	the	ratio	of	fermentable	sugars	to	sugar
chains,	and	amino	acids	to	amino-acid	chains,
by	varying	the	temperature	and	time	of
mashing.	By	this	means	he	controls	the	beer’s
final	body,	and	the	stability	of	its	foam.	Fully



85%	of	the	carbohydrate	in	malt	is	starch.	In
the	liquid	wort,	70%	or	more	is	in	the	form	of
various	sugars,	mainly	the	two-glucose	sugar
called	maltose.	Most	of	the	remaining
carbohydrates,	5	to	25%	of	the	dissolved
solids,	are	the	so-called	dextrins,	or	sugar
chains	of	from	four	glucose	units	to	a	few
hundred,	which	get	tangled	up	with	each
other,	impede	the	movement	of	the	water,	and
so	provide	a	full-bodied	consistency	to	the
wort	and	beer.	The	dextrins	and	amino-acid
chains	will	also	slow	the	draining	of	fluid
from	the	bubble	walls	of	the	beer	foam,	and	so
contribute	to	its	stability	in	the	glass.

Cereal	 Adjuncts	 Making	 the	 wort	 with
nothing	 but	 barley	malt	 and	 hot	water	 is	 the
standard	 method	 in	 Germany,	 and	 in	 many
U.S.	microbreweries.	 In	most	 large	breweries
in	 the	United	States	and	elsewhere,	unmalted
“adjunct”	 sources	 of	 carbohydrate	—	 ground
or	flaked	rice,	corn,	wheat,	barley,	even	sugar



—	are	commonly	added	to	the	liquid	to	lower
the	 amount	 of	 malt	 needed,	 and	 so	 the
brewer’s	 production	 costs.	 Unlike	 malt,	 they
contribute	 little	 or	 no	 flavor	 of	 their	 own.
They’re	therefore	mostly	limited	to	pale,	mild
brews	 like	 standard	 American	 lagers,	 which
may	 start	with	 almost	 as	much	 adjunct	 grain
as	malt.

Water	Water	is	the	main	ingredient	in	beer,	so
its	 quality	 has	 a	 definite	 influence	 on	 beer
quality.	Though	modern	brewers	can	tailor	the
mineral	 content	 of	 their	water	 to	 the	 kind	 of
beer	 they’re	 making,	 early	 brewers	 tailored
their	beers	in	part	to	make	the	best	of	the	local
waters.	 The	 sulfate-rich	 water	 of	 Burton-on-
Trent	gave	English	pale	ales	a	bitterness	 that
limited	the	use	of	hops,	while	 the	mild	water
of	 Pilsen	 encouraged	 Czech	 brewers	 to	 add
large	 amounts	 of	 bitter	 and	 aromatic	 hops.
The	 alkaline,	 carbonate-rich	 waters	 of
Munich,	 southern	 England,	 and	 Dublin	 can



balance	 the	 acidity	 of	 dark	 malts	 that
normally	extract	too	much	astringent	material
from	 barley	 husks,	 and	 encouraged	 the
development	 of	 dark	 German	 beers	 and
British	porters	and	stouts.

Boiling	 the	Wort	 Once	 the	 liquid	 wort	 has
been	 drawn	 off	 the	 grain	 solids,	 the	 brewer
runs	it	into	a	large	metal	tank,	adds	hops,	and
boils	 it	 vigorously	 for	 up	 to	 90	 minutes.
Boiling	converts	the	insoluble	hop	alpha	acids
into	 their	 soluble	 form	 and	 develops	 the
beer’s	 bitterness,	 and	 inactivates	 the	 barley
enzymes	and	so	fixes	the	carbohydrate	mix	—
a	 certain	 portion	 of	 sugar	 for	 the	 yeasts	 to
convert	 into	 alcohol,	 a	 certain	 portion	 of
dextrins	 for	 the	 beer’s	 body.	 It	 sterilizes	 the
wort	 so	 that	 the	 brewing	 yeasts	 won’t	 have
any	 competition	 during	 fermentation,	 and	 it
concentrates	the	wort	by	evaporating	off	some
of	its	water.	Boiling	deepens	the	wort’s	color
by	 encouraging	 browning	 reactions,	 mainly



between	the	sugar	maltose	and	the	amino	acid
proline.	 And	 it	 begins	 the	 process	 of
clarifying	 the	 brew	 by	 coagulating	 large
proteins	 and	 causing	 them	 to	 bind	 with
tannins	 from	 the	 barley	 hulls,	 form	 large
masses,	 and	 precipitate	 out	 of	 the	 solution.
When	boiling	is	finished,	the	wort	is	strained,
then	cooled	and	aerated.

OPPOSITE:	Making	 beer.	 Beer	 is	 made	 in	 two
basic	ways.	Ales	are	 fermented	in	 less	 than	a
week	at	a	warm	temperature	and	matured	for
days,	 while	 lagers	 are	 fermented	 for	 more
than	 a	 week	 at	 a	 cold	 temperature	 and
matured	for	weeks.

Fermentation	 With	 boiling,	 the	 brewer	 has
finished	 transforming	 the	 bland	 barley	 grain
into	 a	 rich,	 sweet	 liquid.	Now	 the	yeast	 cells
transform	 this	 liquid	 into	 beer,	 which	 is	 far
less	sweet,	but	more	complex	in	flavor.

There	are	two	basic	methods	for
fermenting	beer,	and	they	produce	distinctive



results.	One	is	rapid	fermentation	at	a	high
temperature	with	ale	yeasts	(strains	of
Saccharomyces	cerevisiae)	that	clump
together,	trap	the	carbon	dioxide	gas	that	they
produce,	and	rise	to	the	wort	surface.	The
other	is	slow	fermentation	at	a	low
temperature	with	lager	yeasts	(Saccharomyces
uvarum	or	carlsbergensis)	that	remain
submerged	in	the	wort	and	fall	to	the	bottom
when	fermentation	is	over.	These	are	often
called	“top”	and	“bottom”	fermentations.

Top	fermentation	is	usually	carried	out	at
between	64	and	77ºF/18–25ºC	and	takes	two
to	seven	days,	during	which	the	yeasty	foam	is
skimmed	off	several	times.	Because	the	yeast
layer	at	the	top	has	a	good	supply	of	oxygen
and	is	inevitably	contaminated	by	other
airborne	microbes,	including	lactic-acid
bacteria,	top-fermented	beers	are	often
relatively	acidic	and	strong	in	flavor.	Bottom
fermentation	goes	on	at	distinctly	lower
temperatures,	43	to	50ºF/6–10ºC,	takes	six	to



ten	days,	and	produces	a	milder	flavor.
Bottom	fermentation	is	the	standard	technique
in	the	United	States.	Because	warm
temperatures	encourage	yeasts	to	generate
particular	aroma	compounds	(esters,	volatile
phenols),	top	fermentation	produces	fruity,
spicy	aromas;	cold,	slow	fermentation
produces	crisp	beers	with	a	dry,	bready	flavor.

Conditioning	 The	 treatment	 of	 beer	 after
fermentation	 varies	 according	 to	 the	 type	 of
fermentation	 that	 has	 taken	 place:	 brief	 for
fast	 top	 fermentation,	 prolonged	 for	 slow
bottom	fermentation.

Top-fermented	beer	is	cleared	of	yeast	and
then	run	into	a	tank	or	cask	for	conditioning.
The	green	beer,	as	it’s	called	fresh	from
fermentation,	contains	little	carbon	dioxide,
has	a	sulfurous,	harsh	flavor,	and	is	hazy	with
the	detritus	of	dead	yeast	cells.	In
conditioning,	a	secondary	fermentation	is
induced	by	adding	to	the	green	beer	either	a



small	amount	of	yeast	and	some	sugar	or	fresh
wort,	or	some	actively	fermenting	wort	(this
is	called	Kräusening).	Inside	the	closed	cask
or	tank,	the	liquid	traps	and	absorbs	the
carbon	dioxide	produced.	Undesirable	odors
can	be	forced	out	of	the	beer	by	opening	the
container	briefly	and	allowing	some	gas	to
escape.	These	traditional	techniques	are
sometimes	replaced	by	simply	pumping	pure
carbon	dioxide	into	the	beer	—	carbonating	it.
Some	hops	or	hop	extract	may	also	be	added
at	this	point	to	augment	aroma,	bitterness,	or
both.	A	few	days	of	cooling	and	the	use	of	a
“fining”	agent	—	isinglass	(fish	gelatin),	clay,
and	vegetable	gums	are	common	—
precipitate	suspended	proteins	and	tannins
that	might	later	form	a	haze	when	the	beer	is
chilled	for	drinking;	this	is	called	“cold
stabilization.”	The	beer	is	then	centrifuged	to
remove	any	remaining	yeast	and	precipitate,
filtered,	packaged,	and	usually	pasteurized.



The	Different	Flavor	of	Beer	on	Tap
Bottled	 and	 canned	 beers	 and	 ales	 are
generally	 cold	 stabilized	 and	 pasteurized
(at	140–160ºF/60–70ºC)	to	survive	extreme
temperatures	 during	 shipping	 and	 storage,
while	 keg	 beers,	 which	 are	 kept
refrigerated	continuously,	may	not	be.	This
is	why	bottle	and	keg	versions	of	the	same
beer	 can	 taste	 very	 different.	 However,
even	 keg	 beer	 is	 a	 world	 apart	 from	 the
traditional	cask-conditioned	beer.	Keg	beer
has	been	cleared	of	all	its	yeast	before	the
keg	 is	 filled,	 while	 in	 cask	 conditioning,
the	 new	 beer	 and	 the	 yeast	 that	 will	 help
mature	 it	 are	 sealed	 together	 in	 the	 cask.
Cask-conditioned	 beer	 is	 thus	 in	 contact
with	yeast	until	the	moment	it’s	dispensed,
and	 its	 flavor	 reflects	 this.	 Cask	 beer	 is
fragile	 and	has	 a	drinkable	 life	of	 about	 a
month,	 compared	 with	 three	 months	 for
keg	beer.

Lagering	The	conditioning	process	for



bottom-fermented	beer	is	somewhat	different.
The	original	Bavarian	lager	was	packed	in	ice
and	allowed	to	rest	in	contact	with	its	yeast
dregs	for	several	months.	The	yeast	slowly
produced	carbon	dioxide,	which	helped	purge
the	beer	of	sulfury	off-odors.	Today,	some
traditional	lagers	are	still	aged	for	several
months;	but	because	storage	has	the	economic
disadvantage	of	tying	up	money	and
materials,	the	tendency	is	to	lager	the	green
beer	at	temperatures	just	above	freezing	for
two	to	three	weeks.	Carbon	dioxide	may	be
pumped	in	to	purge	undesired	aromas;	and
centrifuges,	filters,	and	additives	help	clarify
the	beer.	As	a	replacement	for	wooden	casks,
some	beech	or	hazelwood	chips	may	be
thrown	into	the	tank	for	flavor.

Additives	 More	 than	 50	 additives	 are
permitted	 in	 American	 beer,	 including
preservatives,	 foaming	 agents	 (usually
vegetable	 gums),	 and	 enzymes	—	 similar	 to



meat	 tenderizers	—	that	break	down	proteins
into	 smaller	molecules	 that	 are	 less	 likely	 to
cloud	 the	 brew.	 Some	 companies	 avoid	 the
use	of	preservatives,	and	usually	advertise	this
fact	on	the	label.

The	 Finished	 Beer	 In	 the	 end,	 brewing	 has
transformed	 the	 dry,	 tasteless	 barley	 grain
into	 a	 bubbly,	 bitter,	 acidic	 liquid	 (its	 pH	 is
about	4)	 that	 is	 90%	water,	 1	 to	6%	alcohol,
and	between	2	and	10%	carbohydrates,	mainly
the	long-chain	dextrins	that	provide	body.

Storing	and	Serving	Beer

In	contrast	to	wines,	with	their	higher	alcohol
and	antioxidant	contents,	most	beers	do	not
improve	with	age,	and	are	at	their	best	fresh
from	the	brewery.	Oxidation	causes	the
gradual	development	of	a	stale,	cardboard
aroma	(from	nonenal,	a	fatty-acid	fragment)
and	harshness	on	the	tongue	(from	hop



phenolic	substances).	Browning	reactions
cause	other	undesirable	changes.	Top-
fermented	ales	develop	a	solvent-like	note.
Staling	is	slowed	at	low	temperatures,	so
when	possible	beer	should	be	stored	in	the
cold.	Britain	does	make	“laying-down	beers,”
and	Belgium	bières	de	garde,	which	start	out
fermentation	with	a	very	high	soluble
carbohydrate	content	and	continue	to	ferment
slowly	in	the	bottle,	the	continuous	production
of	carbon	dioxide	and	other	substances
helping	to	prevent	oxidation	and	staling.	They
end	with	alcohol	levels	of	8%	or	more,	and
improve	for	a	year	or	two.

Keep	Beer	 in	 the	Dark	Beer	 should	 also	 be
kept	 away	 from	 bright	 light,	 especially
sunlight,	and	especially	 if	 it	has	been	bottled
in	 clear	 or	 green	 glass:	 otherwise	 it	 will
develop	a	strong	sulfurous	odor.	A	cup	of	beer
at	 a	 picnic	 can	 go	 skunky	 in	 a	 few	minutes;
bottled	 beer	 in	 a	 fluorescent-lit	 display	 case



may	deteriorate	in	a	few	days.	It	turns	out	that
light	 in	 the	 blue-green	 to	 ultraviolet	 parts	 of
the	 light	spectrum	reacts	with	one	of	 the	hop
acids	 to	 form	an	unstable	 free	 radical,	which
in	turn	reacts	with	sulfur	compounds	to	form	a
close	 relative	 of	 chemicals	 in	 the	 skunk’s
defensive	 arsenal.	 Brown	 glass	 can	 absorb
blue-green	wavelengths	before	they	get	to	the
beer	 inside,	 but	 green	 bottles	 don’t.	 As	 a
result,	green-bottled	German	and	Dutch	beers
are	often	sulfurous,	and	many	consumers	now
expect	 this!	 One	 American	 brewer	 with
trademark	clear	bottles	developed	a	modified
hop	 extract	 that’s	 free	 of	 the	 vulnerable	 hop
acid,	 and	 this	 prevents	 its	 beer	 from	 going
skunky.

Serving	 Beer	 In	 the	 United	 States,	 beer	 is
often	drunk	ice-cold	and	straight	from	the	can
or	 bottle.	 This	 is	 fine	 for	 a	 light,	 thirst-
quenching	beer,	but	doesn’t	do	justice	to	beers
designed	 to	 have	 some	 character.	 The	 colder



any	food	is,	 the	less	full	 its	flavor	will	seem.
Lager	beers	are	usually	best	served	somewhat
warmer	 than	 refrigerator	 temperature,	 around
50ºF/10	 C,	 while	 top-fermented	 ales	 are
served	at	a	cool	room	temperature,	from	50	to
60ºF/10–15ºC.	 Beers	 worth	 savoring	 are
poured	into	a	glass,	where	some	of	the	carbon
dioxide	 gas	 can	 escape	 and	 moderate	 their
prickliness,	and	where	their	color	and	head	of
foam	can	be	appreciated.

Beer	Foam:	The	“Head”	Beer	is	not	the	only
intrinsically	 bubbly	 liquid	 we	 enjoy,	 but	 it’s
the	 only	 one	 whose	 bubbles	 we	 expect	 to
persist	long	enough	to	form	a	“head”	of	foam
atop	 the	 glass.	 Beer	 lovers	 even	 value	 the
ability	of	the	foam	to	cling	to	the	glass	as	the
liquid	 level	 drops,	 a	 quality	 known	 as	lacing
(or,	 in	 more	 impressive	 German,
Schaumhaftvermögen).	There	are	many	factors
that	 influence	 foaming,	 from	 the	 amount	 of
carbon	 dioxide	 dissolved	 in	 the	 beer	 to	 the



way	the	beer	is	released	from	keg	or	can.	Here
are	some	of	the	most	interesting.

Grain	 Proteins	 Stabilize	 the	 Head	 Foam
stability	 depends	 on	 the	 presence	 in	 the
bubble	 walls	 of	 emulsifier	 molecules	 with
water-loving	 and	 water-avoiding	 ends	 (p.
802);	the	water-avoiding	ends	project	into	the
gas	 while	 the	 water-loving	 ends	 stay	 in	 the
liquid,	 and	 thus	 reinforce	 the	 gas-liquid
interface.	In	beer,	these	molecules	are	mostly
medium-sized	 proteins	 that	 come	 from	 the
malt	 or	 from	 cereal	 adjuncts,	whose	 proteins
are	more	 intact	 than	malt’s	 and	 significantly
improve	 head	 stability.	 Hop	 acids	 also
contribute	 to	 foam	 stability,	 and	 become
concentrated	 enough	 in	 the	 foam	 to	 make	 it
noticeably	more	bitter	than	the	liquid	beneath.
Cool-fermented	 lagers	 generally	 give	 more
persistent	 foams	 than	 warm-fermented	 ales
because	 the	 latter	 contain	 more	 foam-
destabilizing	 higher	 alcohols	 from	 yeast



metabolism	(p.	762).

Nitrogen	 Makes	 Creamy	 Foams	 In	 the	 last
decade,	many	beers	have	come	to	be	endowed
with	an	especially	fine,	creamy	head	that	used
to	 be	 largely	 limited	 to	 stouts.	 The	 creamy
head	comes	from	an	artificial	dose	of	nitrogen
gas	 that	 may	 be	 injected	 into	 beer	 at	 the
brewery,	 or	 in	 the	 bar	 or	 pub	 by	 the	 tap	 that
delivers	 beer	 from	 the	 keg,	 or	 by	 a	 small
device	inside	an	individual	beer	can.	Nitrogen
is	less	soluble	in	water	than	carbon	dioxide,	so
its	 bubbles	 are	 slower	 to	 lose	 gas	 to	 the
surrounding	liquid,	and	slower	to	coarsen	and
deflate.	 Nitrogen	 bubbles	 remain	 small,	 and
persist.	 They	 also	 don’t	 carry	 the	 tart
prickliness	of	carbon	dioxide,	which	becomes
carbonic	acid	when	it	dissolves	in	beer	and	on
the	surface	of	our	tongue.

Foam	 in	 the	 Glass	 An	 initially	 vigorous
pouring	action	develops	the	head	of	foam	with
a	small,	easily	controlled	portion	of	 the	beer.



Once	the	foam	is	of	the	desired	thickness,	the
rest	of	the	beer	can	be	poured	in	gently	along
the	 side	 of	 the	 glass,	 avoiding	 aeration	 and
nucleation	 of	 new	 bubbles.	 The	 glass	 itself
should	be	clean	of	any	residues	of	oil	or	soap,
which	 interfere	 with	 foaming.	 (These
molecules	have	water-avoiding	ends	 that	pull
the	 similar	 ends	 of	 the	 bubble-stabilizing
proteins	 out	 of	 the	 bubbles.)	 By	 the	 same
token,	 if	 a	 newly	 poured	 beer	 threatens	 to
foam	over,	it	can	often	be	stopped	in	its	tracks
by	touching	the	rim	with	a	finger	or	lip,	which
carry	traces	of	oil.

Kinds	and	Qualities	of	Beer

Beers	are	a	wonderfully	diverse	group	of
drinks,	and	a	good	beer	can	be	a	mouth-filling
experience,	one	that	rewards	slow	savoring.
There	are	several	qualities	worth	appreciating:

Color,	which	can	range	from	pale	yellow



to	impenetrable	brown-black,	and	comes
from	the	kinds	of	malt	used
Body,	or	weightiness	in	the	mouth,	which
comes	from	the	long	remnants	of	starch
molecules	in	the	malt
Astringency,	from	malt	phenolic
compounds
Prickly	freshness,	from	dissolved	carbon
dioxide
Taste,	which	may	include	saltiness	from
the	water,	sweetness	from	unfermented
malt	sugars,	acidity	from	roasted	malt
and	from	fermentation	microbes,
bitterness	from	hops	and	from	dark-
roasted	malts,	savoriness	from	malt
amino	acids
Aroma,	from	woody,	floral,	citrusy	hops;
malty,	caramel,	and	even	smoky	malt;
and	from	the	yeasts	and	other	microbes,
which	can	produce	notes	that	seem	fruity
(apple,	pear,	banana,	citrus),	flowery
(rose),	buttery,	spicy	(clove),	and	even



horsey	or	stable-like	(p.	738)

Ales	 develop	 a	 characteristic	 tartness	 and
fruitiness	 from	 their	 diverse	 group	 of
fermentation	 microbes.	 Lagers	 have	 a	 more
subdued	 aroma,	 part	 of	 whose	 foundation	 is
cooked-corn-like	 DMS	 (dimethyl	 sulfide),
which	 comes	 from	 a	 precursor	 in	 the	 lightly
roasted	malt	and	is	produced	while	the	wort	is
boiled	 and	 then	 cooled.	 But	 there’s
tremendous	 variation	 in	 the	 flavors	 of	 these
basic	 beers.	Rich	 and	 somewhat	 sweet	 brews
—	 porter,	 stout,	 barley	wine	—	 can	 even	 go
well	with	desserts.

In	addition	to	the	many	variations	on	the
two	themes	of	beer	and	ale,	there	are	two
kinds	of	beer	that	are	worth	special	mention
for	their	distinctiveness.

Beers	Low	in	Calories,	Alcohol,	and	Beer
Flavor

Nowadays	 there	 are	 versions	 of	 beer	 for



people	 who	 like	 beer	 but	 don’t	 want	 to
consume	 alcohol,	 or	 want	 to	 consume
alcohol	but	reduce	their	intake	of	calories.
A	 standard	 12	 oz/360	 ml	 container	 of
American	lager	contains	about	14	grams	of
alcohol	and	11	grams	of	carbohydrate,	 for
a	 total	 of	 about	 140	 calories.	 Low-calorie
“light”	 or	 “dry”	 beers	 have	 100–110
calories,	 a	 savings	 produced	 by	 using	 a
lower	 proportion	 of	 malt	 and	 adjuncts	 to
water,	and	then	adding	enzymes	that	digest
more	of	the	carbohydrates	into	fermentable
sugars.	 The	 fermentation	 then	 produces	 a
brew	 with	 only	 a	 slightly	 lower	 alcohol
content,	but	about	half	the	sugar	chains	—
and	very	little	body.

“Nonalcoholic	 beers”	 can	 be	 made	 by
modifying	 the	 fermentation	 so	 that	 the
yeasts	 produce	 little	 alcohol	 (very	 low
temperatures,	 abundant	 oxygen),	 or	 by
removing	 the	 alcohol	 from	 normally
fermented	 beer	 using	 a	molecular	 version



of	 sieving	 called	 “reverse	 osmosis.”	 The
lowest-alcohol	 malt	 product	 is	 “malta,”	 a
popular	 drink	 in	 the	 Caribbean	 made	 by
bottling	 a	 full-fledged	 wort	 without	 any
fermentation	at	all.	It	is	dense	and	sweet.

Then	there	are	“malt	beverages,”	which
have	 the	 alcohol	 and	 calorie	 content	 of
beer,	 but	 taste	 nothing	 like	 beer:	 they’re
more	like	soft	drinks.	In	these	products,	the
only	 purpose	 of	 the	 malt	 is	 to	 generate
sugars	 for	 fermentation	 into	 alcohol;
neither	 it	 nor	 the	 yeast	 contributes	 any
flavor.

Some	Styles	and	Qualities	of	Beer

Beer	Style Pale	lager:	European
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 4–6
Unusual	Ingredients

Qualities Malty,	bitter	and	spicy/floral	from
hops



Beer	Style American/International
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 3.5–5
Unusual	Ingredients Unmalted	grains

Little	malt	or	hop	aroma	or
Qualities bitterness;	cooked-corn,	green

apple	notes
Beer	Style Dark	lager:	European
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by 4.3–
Volume 5.6
Unusual	Ingredients
Qualities Malty,	somewhat	sweet
Beer	Style American
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 4–5
Unusual Unmalted	grains,	caramel
Ingredients coloring

Qualities Little	malt	or	hop	aroma;	cooked-
corn	note;	some	sweetness

Beer	Style Bock
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 6–12



Unusual	Ingredients
Qualities Malty,	caramel,	somewhat	sweet
Beer	Style Pale	ale:	English
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 3–6.2
Unusual	Ingredients

Qualities Balanced	malt	and	hop	aromas,
fruity,	moderately	bitter

Beer	Style Belgian
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 4–5.6
Unusual	Ingredients Spices
Qualities Spicy,	fruity,	moderately	bitter
Beer	Style American
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 4–5.7
Unusual	Ingredients
Qualities
Beer	Style India
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 5–7.8
Unusual	Ingredients



Qualities Strong	hop	aroma	and	bitterness
Beer	Style Brown	ale
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 3.5–6
Unusual	Ingredients
Qualities Somewhat	sweet,	nutty,	fruity
Beer	Style Porter
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 3.8–6
Unusual	Ingredients Dark	malts

Qualities Malty,	roasted	coffee/chocolate
notes,	somewhat	sweet

Beer	Style Stout
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 3–6
Unusual Dark	malts,	roasted
Ingredients unmalted	barley

Qualities Like	porter	but	less	sweet,	more
bitter

Beer	Style Imperial	stout
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 8–12



Unusual Dark	malts,	roasted
Ingredients unmalted	barley

Qualities Like	stout,	but	stronger	(originally
for	export	to	Russia)

Beer	Style Wheat	beer:	Bavarian
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by 2.8–
Volume 5.6
Unusual Wheat	malt,	special
Ingredients yeasts

Qualities Wheat,	grain,	tartness,	banana	and
clove	notes

Beer	Style Berlin
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by 2.8–
Volume 3.6
Unusual	Ingredients Lactobacillus	culture
Qualities Wheat,	slightly	fruity,	sour
Beer	Style Belgian
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by 4.2–
Volume 5.5



Unusual Unmalted	wheat,	spices,	bitter
Ingredients orange	peel,	special	yeasts,

Lactobacillus	culture
Qualities Wheat,	spice,	citrus,	tartness
Beer	Style American
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by 3.7–
Volume 5.5
Unusual	Ingredients Normal	yeasts

Qualities Wheat,	grain,	light	hop	aromas,
light	bitterness

Beer	Style Belgian	lambics
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume
Unusual Unmalted	wheat,	aged	hops,
Ingredients wild	yeasts	and	bacteria
Qualities
Beer	Style Faro
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by 4.7–
Volume 5.8
Unusual	Ingredients Spices,	sugar



Qualities Spicy,	sweet
Beer	Style Gueuze
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by 4.7–
Volume 5.8
Unusual	Ingredients Blends	of	several	ages
Qualities Tart,	fruity,	complex
Beer	Style Fruit
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by 4.7–
Volume 5.8
Unusual Cherry,	raspberry,	other
Ingredients fruits
Qualities Tart,	fruity,	complex
Beer	Style Barley	wine
Alcohol	Content,	Percent	by	Volume 8–12+
Unusual	Ingredients
Qualities Malty,	fruity,	full-bodied
Adapted	from	“Guide	to	Beer	Styles,”	Beer
Judge	 Certification	 Program	 2001,	 and



other	sources.
Wheat	Beers	German	wheat	beers	differ	from
the	usual	Bavarian	brew	in	four	ways.	First,	a
large	fraction	of	the	barley	malt	is	replaced	by
wheat	malt,	which	carries	more	protein,
produces	a	more	foamy	and	hazy	brew,	and
lightens	the	typical	malt	flavor.	Second,	wheat
beers	are	top-fermented	like	ales,	and	so
develop	more	tartness	and	fruitiness.	Third,
the	culture	often	includes	an	unusual	yeast
(Torulaspora)	that	produces	aroma
compounds	not	usually	found	in	beer.	These
volatile	phenols	(vinyl	guaiacol,	p.	738)	may
suggest	cloves	and	similar	spices,	but	also	a
medicinal	quality	like	that	of	plastic
bandages,	or	an	animal	quality	reminiscent	of
the	barnyard	or	stable.	Finally,	some	wheat
beers	are	not	fully	clarified,	and	retain	some
of	their	yeast,	which	gives	them	a	cloudy
appearance	and	yeasty	flavor.	German	wheat
beers	may	be	called	Weizen	for	“wheat,”
Hefe-weizen	for	“yeast-wheat,”	or	Weissen	for



“white,”	referring	to	their	cloudy	appearance.
Some	American	breweries	now	produce

wheat	beers	on	the	German	model,	but	usually
without	the	phenol-producing	yeast;	they	are
mild,	tart,	and	cloudy.

Belgian	 Lambic	 Beers	 The	 brewers	 of
Belgium	 have	 been	 more	 inventive	 than	 any
others.	They	allow	many	different	microbes	to
participate	 in	 the	 fermentation;	 they	 ferment
some	 beers	 for	 years,	 either	 continuously	 or
by	 restarting	 them;	 they	 flavor	 their	 beers
with	 spices	 and	 herbs,	 and	 even	 re-ferment
them	with	 fresh	 fruits	 to	make	 a	 hybrid	beer
and	fruit	wine.	They	generally	used	aged	hops,
which	are	less	harmful	to	the	unusual	brewing
microbes,	 less	 bitter,	 and	 higher	 in	 drying,
slightly	astringent,	wine-like	tannins.

The	most	unusual	Belgian	beers	are	the
lambics.	The	hallmark	of	brewing	traditional
lambic	is	a	spontaneous	and	months-long
fermentation	of	the	wort	in	wood	barrels.



Once	the	wort	has	been	boiled,	it	is	cooled	in
a	broad	open	tank,	where	it	picks	up	microbes
from	the	ambient	air.	The	cool	wort	is	then
poured	into	wooden	casks	that	contribute
microbes	from	previous	batches,	and	ferments
in	the	casks	for	6	to	24	months.	The
fermentation	proceeds	in	four	stages:	an
initial	growth	of	wild	yeasts	(Kloeckera	and
others)	and	various	bacteria	(Enterobacter	and
others)	that	takes	10–15	days	and	produces
acetic	acid	and	vegetable	aromas;	the	main
alcohol-producing	growth	of	Saccharomyces
yeasts,	which	dominate	for	several	months;	at
6	to	8	months,	the	acid-producing	growth	of
lactic	and	acetic	bacteria	(Pediococcus,
Acetobacter);	and	finally	the	growth	of
Brettanomyces	yeasts,	which	produce	a	range
of	fruity,	spicy,	smoky,	and	animal	aromas
(see	box,	p.	730).	The	resulting	brew	may	then
be	blended	with	other	lambics	and	aged	to
make	gueuze,	with	a	wine-like	acidity	and
complexity;	or	blended	with	some	ordinary



top-fermented	ale	and	flavored	with	sugar	and
coriander	to	make	faro;	or	re-fermented	in	the
barrel	for	four	to	six	months	with	fresh	whole
cherries	or	raspberries,	to	make	kriek	and
framboise.

Asian	Rice	Alcohols:	Chinese	Chiu	and	Japanese	Sake

Sweet	Moldy	Grains

The	peoples	of	eastern	Asia	developed	their
own	distinctive	form	of	alcohol,	one	that	the
rest	of	the	world	is	coming	to	appreciate	more
and	more.	It’s	not	exactly	a	wine,	because	it’s
fermented	from	starchy	grains,	mainly	rice.
But	it’s	not	exactly	a	beer	either,	because	the
grain	starch	is	not	digested	into	fermentable
sugars	by	grain	enzymes.	Instead,	Asian
brewers	use	a	mold	to	supply	the	starch-
digesting	enzymes,	and	the	mold	digests	the
grain	starch	at	the	same	time	that	the	yeasts
are	converting	the	sugars	into	alcohol.	The



resulting	liquid	can	reach	an	alcohol
concentration	of	20%,	far	stronger	than
Western	beers	and	wines.	Chinese	chiu	and
Japanese	sake	don’t	have	the	grapey	fruitiness
or	acidity	of	wine,	nor	the	malt	or	hop
characters	of	beer.	Because	it’s	made	from
only	the	starchy	heart	of	the	rice	grain,	sake	is
perhaps	the	purest	expression	of	the	flavor	of
fermentation	itself,	surprisingly	fruity	and
flowery	even	though	no	fruit	or	flower	has
come	near	it.

Why	and	how	did	Asians	come	up	with	this
alternative	to	sprouting	grains?	The	historian
H.	T.	Huang	suggests	that	the	key	was	their
reliance	on	small,	fragile	millet	and	rice
grains,	which	unlike	barley	and	wheat	are
easily	and	usually	cooked	whole.	Huang
speculates	that	leftover	cooked	grains	were
frequently	left	sitting	out	long	enough	to	get
moldy;	and	because	there	are	air	spaces	in	a
mass	of	grains,	the	oxygen-requiring	molds
would	have	grown	well	and	digested	starch



throughout	the	mass.	People	eventually
noticed	that	moldy	rice	tasted	sweet	and
smelled	alcoholic.	Sometime	before	the	3rd
century	BCE,	these	simple	observations	led	to
a	regular	technique	for	producing	alcoholic
liquids.	By	500	CE,	a	Chinese	source	lists	nine
different	mold	preparations	and	37	different
alcoholic	products.

Today,	few	people	outside	of	China	have
heard	of	chiu,	but	many	millions	have	heard
of	its	Japanese	counterpart,	sake(pronounced
“sa-kay”).	Rice	cultivation	and	probably	chiu
production	were	brought	to	Japan	from	the
Asian	mainland	around	300	BCE.	Over	the
following	centuries,	Japanese	brewers	so
refined	chiu	that	it	became	something
distinctive.

Starch-Digesting	Molds

Though	modern	industrial	production	has
brought	a	number	of	common	shortcuts	and



simplifications,	Chinese	and	Japanese	brewers
have	traditionally	used	very	different
preparations	for	breaking	rice	starch	down
into	fermentable	sugars.

Chinese	Chhü	 :	 Several	 Molds	 and	Yeasts
The	 ancient	 Chinese	 preparation,	chhü,	 is
usually	made	from	wheat	or	rice,	and	includes
several	different	kinds	of	mold	as	well	as	the
yeasts	 that	 will	 eventually	 produce	 the
alcohol.	Some	of	the	wheat	may	be	roasted	or
left	 raw,	 but	 most	 is	 steamed,	 coarsely
ground,	 shaped	 into	 cakes,	 and	 then	 left	 to
mold	 in	 incubation	 rooms	 for	 several	weeks.
Species	 of	Aspergillus	 grow	 on	 the	 outside,
and	 species	 of	Rhizopus	 and	Mucor	 on	 the
inside.	Aspergillus	 is	 the	 same	 kind	 of	mold
used	to	digest	soybeans	to	make	soy	sauce	and
Rhizopus	is	the	major	mold	in	soybean	tempeh
(p.	 496,	 500),	 while	Mucor	 is	 important	 in
some	 kinds	 of	 aged	 cheeses.	 All	 of	 them
accumulate	 starch-and	 protein-digesting



enzymes,	 and	 generate	 trace	 byproducts	 that
contribute	 flavor.	 Once	 the	 grain	 cakes	 have
been	 well	 permeated	 with	 microbes,	 they’re
dried	 for	 storage.	 When	 needed	 for	chiu
production,	 they’re	 soaked	 in	 water	 for
several	 days	 to	 reactivate	 the	 microbes	 and
their	enzymes.

Pasteurization	Before	Pasteur
Unlike	European	wines	and	beers,	chiu	was
usually	 served	 warm	 or	 hot.	 Perhaps
because	 they	 noticed	 that	 heated	 leftovers
kept	 better	 than	 the	 original	 batch,	 by
1000CE	 the	 Chinese	 had	 developed	 the
practice	 of	 steaming	 containers	 of	 newly
fermented	chiu	to	slow	its	deterioration.	In
the	16th	century,	Japanese	brewers	refined
this	 method	 by	 lowering	 the	 heating
temperature	 to	 140–150ºF/60–65ºC,	which
is	 high	 enough	 to	 kill	 most	 enzymes	 and
microbes,	 but	 does	 less	 damage	 to	 the
flavor	of	the	sake.	Asian	brewers	were	thus



“pasteurizing”	 their	 alcohols	 centuries
before	 Louis	 Pasteur	 suggested	 gently
heating	 wine	 and	 milk	 to	 kill	 spoilage
microbes.

Japanese	Koji	and	Moto:	One	Mold,
Separate	Yeast	The	Japanese	koji,	by
contrast,	is	made	fresh	for	each	particular
sake	brewing,	is	based	only	on	polished,
unground	rice,	and	is	inoculated	with	a
selected	culture	of	Aspergillus	oryzae	alone,
with	no	other	molds.	The	mold	preparation	for
sake	therefore	doesn’t	provide	the	complexity
of	flavor	that	the	Chinese	preparation	does,
with	its	roasted	wheat,	variety	of	microbes,
and	period	of	drying.

Because	the	koji	contains	no	yeasts,	the
Japanese	system	requires	a	separate	source	of
yeast.	The	traditional	yeast	preparation,	the
moto,	is	made	by	allowing	a	mixture	of	koji
and	cooked	rice	gruel	to	sour	spontaneously
with	a	mixed	population	of	bacteria,	mainly
lactic	acid	producers	(Lactobacillus	sake,



Leuconostoc	mesenteroides,	and	others)	that
contribute	tart	and	savory	tastes	and	some
aroma.	A	pure	yeast	culture	is	then	added	and
allowed	to	multiply.	Because	this	microbe-
soured	moto	takes	more	than	a	month	to
mature,	it	has	been	largely	replaced	by	the
simple	addition	of	organic	acids	to	the	moto
mash,	or	by	the	addition	of	acids	and
concentrated	yeasts	directly	to	the	main
fermentation.	These	time-saving	methods	tend
to	produce	lighter,	less	complex	sakes.

Brewing	Rice	Alcohols

Simultaneous,	 Stepwise	 Fermentation
Chinese	and	Japanese	brewing	methods	differ
in	 important	 details,	 but	 they	 also	 share
several	 important	 features.	 The	 starch-
digesting	molds	and	alcohol-producing	yeasts
are	 added	 to	 the	 cooked	 rice	 gruel	 together,
and	work	 simultaneously.	Unlike	 the	making
of	 beer,	where	 a	 liquid	 is	 extracted	 from	 the



grain	 and	 only	 the	 liquid	 is	 fermented,	 the
thick	gruel	of	cooked	rice	is	fermented	whole.
And	 the	 rice	 is	 introduced	 gradually	 into	 the
fermentation,	not	all	at	once:	new	portions	of
cooked	rice	and	water	are	added	to	 the	vat	at
intervals	during	the	fermentation,	which	lasts
from	 two	 weeks	 to	 several	 months.	 All	 of
these	 practices	 apparently	 contribute	 to	 the
yeasts’	 ability	 to	 continue	 producing	 alcohol
to	 high	 concentrations.	 When	 rice	 is	 added
toward	 the	 end	 of	 fermentation,	 some	 sugar
remains	unmetabolized	by	the	yeasts,	and	the
resulting	alcohol	is	sweet.

Chinese	Practice:	Ordinary	Rice	 and	High
Temperatures	 Traditional	 Chinese	 brewing
begins	 with	 soaking	 the	 mold	 preparation	 in
water	for	several	days,	and	then	proceeds	with
the	periodic	 addition	of	 ordinary	 cooked	 rice
over	the	course	of	an	initial	fermentation	that
may	 last	 one	 or	 two	 weeks	 at	 a	 temperature
around	 85ºF/30ºC.	 At	 the	 end	 of	 this	 phase,



the	 mash	 is	 often	 divided	 into	 smaller
containers	and	held	at	cooler	temperatures	for
weeks	 or	 months.	 The	 liquid	 is	 then	 pressed
from	 the	 solids,	 filtered,	 adjusted	with	water
and	colored	with	caramel,	pasteurized	at	190–
200ºF/85–90ºC	for	5–10	minutes,	matured	for
several	 months,	 then	 filtered	 and	 packaged.
The	 high-temperature	 pasteurization	 helps
develop	the	finished	flavor.

Japanese	 Practice:	 Polished	 Rice	 and	 Low
Temperatures	 Chinese	 brewers	 use	 rice	 that
has	 been	milled	 to	 remove	 about	 10%	of	 the
grain,	 only	 slightly	more	 than	 is	 removed	 to
make	ordinary	white	rice	for	cooking	(p.	472).
In	Japan,	however,	the	rice	for	anything	above
the	 standard	grade	of	 sake	must	be	milled	 to
remove	a	minimum	of	30%	of	 the	grain,	and
the	highest	grades	of	sake	are	made	with	rice
that	has	been	polished	down	to	50%	or	less	of
its	 original	 weight.	 The	 center	 of	 the	 rice
grain	 is	 the	 portion	 that	 contains	 the	 most



starch	and	the	least	protein	or	oil,	so	the	more
the	 outer	 layers	 of	 the	 rice	 are	 ground	 away,
the	simpler	and	purer	the	remaining	grain,	and
the	less	grain	flavor	it	contributes	to	the	final
liquid.

Sake	is	also	fermented	at	significantly
lower	temperatures	than	Chinese	rice
alcohols.	Beginning	in	the	18th	century,	most
sake	brewing	was	reserved	for	the	winter
months,	and	this	remains	largely	the	case
today.	The	upper	limit	for	sake	brewing	is
around	64ºF/18ºC,	and	brewers	of	the	highest
grades	will	keep	the	temperature	at	a
distinctly	chilly	50ºF/10ºC.	In	these
conditions,	the	fermentation	takes	about	a
month	instead	of	two	to	three	weeks,	and	the
mash	accumulates	two	to	five	times	the
normal	quantity	of	aroma	compounds,	notably
the	esters	that	provide	apple,	banana,	and
other	fruity	notes.

Once	the	sake	fermentation	is	complete,
the	liquid	is	pressed	from	the	solids,	then



filtered,	diluted	with	water	to	15–16%
alcohol,	and	held	for	some	weeks	to	allow	the
flavor	to	mellow.	It’s	also	pasteurized	(at
140–150ºF/60–65ºC)	after	filtering	and	again
before	bottling	to	denature	any	remaining
enzymes,	one	of	which	otherwise	slowly
generates	a	particularly	unpleasant	volatile
(sweaty	isovaleraldehyde).

Making	Sake

Varieties	 of	 Sake	 There	 is	 a	 broad	 range	 of
different	 grades	 and	 kinds	 of	 sake.	 Both	 the
cheapest	and	the	standard	grades	are	made	by
adding	substantial	amounts	of	pure	alcohol	to



the	 mash	 just	 before	 pressing.	 This	 became
standard	 industrial	 practice	 during	 the	 war
years	 because	 it	 greatly	 increases	 the	 yield
from	 a	 given	 quantity	 of	 rice.	 Sugar	 and
various	 organic	 acids	 can	 also	 be	 added	 to
these	 grades.	 At	 the	 other	 end	 of	 the	 scale,
there	 are	 premium	 versions	 made	 with
nothing	 but	 rice,	 water,	 and	 microbes,
painstakingly	 cultured	 in	 the	 traditional	way.
The	box	below	gives	examples	of	some	kinds
worth	seeking	out.

Though	much	sake	is	drunk	warm	as
Chinese	rice	alcohols	are,	connoisseurs	prefer
to	chill	finer	examples.	In	general,	sake	is	less
tart	and	more	delicately	flavored	than	wine.
Savory	amino	acids	are	an	important	element.
Its	aroma	varies	a	great	deal	depending	on
how	it	was	made,	and	features	the
biochemical	artistry	of	the	yeasts.	Fruity
esters	and	flowery	complex	alcohols	are
usually	prominent.



Some	Kinds	of	Sake
Sake	made	 to	be	 savored	 is	usually	of	 the
grade	ginjo,	 or	 “special,”	 in	 which	 pure
alcohol	is	the	only	allowed	additive	and	at
least	 40%	 of	 the	 rice	 grain	 has	 been
removed.	Junmaishu	 is	 sake	 made	 only
with	 rice	 and	 water.	 Some	 interesting
specialty	sakes	include	the	following:

Genmaishu Brewed	with	brown	rice

Genshu Undiluted,	and	so	around	20%
alcohol
“Live”	moto,	the	yeast	preparation

Kimoto soured	slowly	by	bacteria	and	not
instantly	with	pure	acids

“Live”	sake	because
Namazake unpasteurized	and	so	containing

active	enzymes,	to	be	kept
refrigerated	and	drunk	soon

Orizake Cloudy	sakes	that	include	lees,



and yeast	cells,	and	other	fine
Nigorizake particles	from	the	mash

“Droplets”	sake,	made	by	allowing
Shizuku the	liquid	to	drain	by	gravity	from

the	mash	rather	than	pressing
Taruzake “Keg”	sake,	aged	in	cedar	barrels

OPPOSITE:	Making	 sake.	 One	 of	 the	 unusual
features	 of	 sake	 fermentation	 is	 the	 repeated
addition	of	cooked	rice	to	the	fermenting	mash
over	the	course	of	several	weeks.

Sake	Is	Fragile	Sake	 and	 its	 delicate	 flavors
are	 vulnerable	 to	 alteration	 by	 exposure	 to
both	 light	 and	 high	 temperatures.	 It’s	 best
drunk	as	young	as	possible.	The	clear	and	blue
bottles	 in	 which	 it’s	 usually	 packaged	 offer
little	protection,	so	sake	should	be	kept	in	the
cool	 and	 dark	 of	 the	 refrigerator,	 and	 once
opened	should	be	consumed	quickly.

Distilled	Spirits



Distilled	 spirits	 are	 the	 concentrated	 essence
of	 wine	 and	 beer.	 They’re	 the	 product	 of	 a
basic	chemical	 fact:	different	 substances	boil
at	different	temperatures.	The	boiling	point	of
alcohol	 is	 about	 173ºF/78ºC,	 well	 below
water’s	 212ºF/100ºC.	 This	 means	 that	 if	 a
mixture	of	water	and	alcohol	 is	heated,	more
of	the	alcohol	than	the	water	will	end	up	in	the
vapor.	 That	 vapor	 can	 then	 be	 cooled	 and
condensed	back	into	a	liquid	that	has	a	higher
alcoholic	 content	 than	 the	 original	 beer	 or
wine.

Distilled	spirits	were	first	valued,	and	still
are,	for	their	high	alcohol	content.	But	there’s
much	more	to	them	than	their	intoxicating
power.	Like	alcohol,	the	substances	that	give
wine	and	beer	their	aroma	are	also	volatile:	so
the	same	process	that	concentrates	alcohol
also	concentrates	aroma.	Distilled	alcohols
are	some	of	the	most	intensely	flavorful	foods
we	have.

The	History	of	Distilled	Spirits



The	History	of	Distilled	Spirits

The	 Discovery	 of	 Distillation	 High
concentrations	 of	 alcohol	 are	 toxic	 to	 all
living	 things,	 including	 the	 yeasts	 that
produce	it.	Brewing	yeasts	can’t	tolerate	more
than	about	20%.	So	stronger	drink	can	only	be
made	by	physically	concentrating	 the	alcohol
in	 fermented	 liquids.	 The	 key	 to	 discovering
distilled	 alcohol	 would	 have	 been	 two
observations:	 that	 the	 vapors	 of	 a	 heated
liquid	 can	be	 recaptured	by	 condensing	 them
on	 a	 cool	 surface,	 and	 that	 the	 vapors	 of
heated	 wine	 or	 beer	 are	 more	 strongly
alcoholic	than	the	original	liquid.

The	practice	of	distillation	itself	appears	to
be	very	old.	There’s	evidence	that	the
Mesopotamians	were	concentrating	the
essential	oils	of	aromatic	plants	more	than
5,000	years	ago,	using	a	simple	heated	pot	and
a	lid	onto	which	vapors	condensed	and	could
be	collected.	And	Aristotle	noted	in	the	4th
century	BCE	in	his	Meteorology	that	“Sea



water,	when	it	is	converted	into	vapor,
becomes	drinkable,	nor	does	it	form	sea	water
when	it	condenses	again.”	Concentrated
alcohol	may	have	been	discovered	for	the	first
time	in	ancient	China.	Archaeological	finds
and	written	documents	suggest	that	Chinese
alchemists	were	distilling	small	amounts	of
concentrated	alcohol	from	grain	preparations
around	2,000	years	ago.	A	privileged	few	were
drinking	it	before	the	10th	century,	and	by	the
13th	it	was	a	commercial	product.

Japanese	Cooking	Alcohols:	Mirin	and
Sake	Lees

Mirin	is	a	sweet	Japanese	cooking	alcohol.
It’s	 made	 by	 combining	 cooked	 polished
rice,	 koji,	 and	shochu,	 a	 distilled	 spirit
made	 from	 a	 low-grade	 sake.	 The	 alcohol
inhibits	any	further	alcoholic	fermentation.
Instead,	during	two	months	at	a	warm	77–
86ºF/25–30ºC,	 the	 koji	mold	 and	 enzymes
slowly	convert	the	rice	starch	into	glucose.



The	 full-bodied	 liquid	 is	 drawn	 off	 and
clarified,	 and	 ends	 up	 at	 around	 14%
alcohol	and	from	10%	to	as	much	as	45%
sugar.	Industrial	 imitations	are	made	from
grain	alcohol,	sugar,	and	flavorings.

The	 solids	 left	 after	 pressing	 and
filtering	 the	 sake	 mash	 are	 called	sake
kasu,	 or	 sake	 lees.	 They	 include	 starch,
proteins,	 the	cell	walls	of	rice,	yeasts,	and
molds,	 and	 some	 acids,	 alcohol,	 and
enzymes.	These	sake	lees	are	much	used	in
Japanese	cooking,	especially	in	the	making
of	 vegetable	 pickles,	 marinades	 for	 fish,
and	soups.

Spirits	and	Waters	of	Life	In	Europe,
significant	quantities	of	distilled	alcohol	were
produced	around	1100	at	the	medical	school
in	Salerno,	Italy,	where	it	developed	its
reputation	as	a	uniquely	valuable	medicine.
Two	hundred	years	later,	the	Catalan	scholar
Arnaud	of	Villanova	dubbed	the	active
principle	of	wine	aqua	vitae,	the	“water	of



life,”	a	term	that	lives	on	in	Scandinavia
(aquavit),	in	France	(eau	de	vie),	and	in
English:	whisky	is	the	anglicized	version	of
the	Gaelic	for	“water	of	life,”	uisge	beatha	or
usquebaugh,	which	is	what	Irish	and	Scots
monks	called	their	distilled	barley	beer.
Throughout	the	Old	World,	alchemists
thought	of	distilled	alcohol	as	a	uniquely
powerful	substance,	the	quintessence	or	fifth
element	that	was	as	fundamental	as	earth,
water,	air,	and	fire.	The	first	printed	book
devoted	to	distillation,	Hieronymus
Brunschwygk’s	Liber	de	arte	distillandi
(1500),	explained	that	the	process	achieves

the	separation	of	the	gross	from	the	subtle
and	the	subtle	from	the	gross,	the
breakable	and	destructible	from	the
indestructible,	the	material	from	the
immaterial,	so	as	to	make	the	body	more
spiritual,	the	unlovely	lovely,	to	make	the
spiritual	lighter	by	its	subtlety,	to	penetrate



with	its	concealed	virtues	and	force	into
the	human	body	to	do	its	healing	duty.

It’s	 this	 connection	 between	 distillation	 and
the	 pure	 and	 ethereal	 that	 gives	 us	 our
synonym	for	distilled	alcohol,	spirits.

From	 Medicine	 to	 Pleasure	 and	 Drug	 of
Oblivion	 For	 several	 centuries	 after	 its
discovery,	aqua	 vitae	 was	 produced	 in
apothecaries	 and	 monasteries	 and	 prescribed
as	 a	cordial,	 a	 medicine	 to	 stimulate	 the
circulation	 (the	 word	 comes	 from	 the	 Latin
for	 “heart”).	 It	 seems	 to	 have	 been	 liberated
from	 the	pharmacy	and	drunk	 for	pleasure	 in
the	 15th	 century,	 when	 the	 terms	Bernewyn
a n d	brannten	 Wein, 	 ancestors	 of	 our	 word
brandy	that	meant	“burning”	or	“burnt”	wine,
appear	 in	 German	 laws	 about	 public
drunkenness.	This	is	also	when	winemakers	in
the	 Armagnac	 region	 of	 southwest	 France
began	 to	 distill	 their	 wine	 into	 spoilage-
resistant	 brandy	 for	 shipping	 to	 northern



Europe.	 Gin,	 a	 whisky-like	 medicinal
concoction	 from	 rye,	 with	 juniper	 added	 for
its	 flavor	 and	 diuretic	 effect,	 was	 first
formulated	 in	 16th	 century	 Holland.	 The
renowned	brandy	of	France’s	Cognac,	 just	 to
the	 north	 of	 Bordeaux,	 arose	 around	 1620.
Rum	 was	 first	 made	 from	 molasses	 in	 the
English	 West	 Indies	 around	 1630,	 and
monastic	 liqueurs	 like	 Benedictine	 and
Chartreuse	date	from	about	1650	on.

Over	the	next	couple	of	centuries,	the
drinkability	of	spirits	improved	as	distillers
learned	how	to	refine	their	composition.	First
came	double	distillation,	in	which	a	wine	or
beer	is	distilled,	and	the	distillate	then
distilled	a	second	time;	then	in	the	late	18th
and	early	19th	centuries	came	ingenious
French	and	English	column	stills,	which
produce	alcohols	of	greater	purity	in	one
continuous	process.	The	growing	availability
and	drinkability	of	distilled	liquors	meant	that
addiction	became	a	serious	problem,



particularly	among	the	urban	populations	of
the	Industrial	Revolution.	In	England	the
principal	scourge	was	cheap	gin,	which	the
average	Londoner	in	the	late	18th	century
consumed	at	the	rate	of	nearly	a	pint/400	ml	a
day	“to	seek	relief	in	the	temporary	oblivion
of	his	own	misery,”	as	Charles	Dickens	later
wrote	in	Sketches	by	Boz.	Government	control
of	production	and	social	progress	later
moderated	the	problem	of	alcohol	addiction,
but	hasn’t	eliminated	it.

Food	Words:	Distill
The	 word	distill	 comes	 from	 the	 Latin
destillare,	 “to	 drip.”	 It	 thus	 captures	 the
moment	at	which	the	barely	visible	vapors
from	 a	 hot	 liquid	 condense	 and
rematerialize	on	a	cool	surface.

Whiskey	in	America	Distilled	alcohol	was	so
popular	 in	 North	America	 that	 it	 gave	 us	 an
enduring	 legacy:	 the	 Internal	 Revenue



Service!	In	the	early	days	of	the	colonies	and
then	 the	 United	 States,	 molasses	 was	 more
plentiful	 than	barley,	and	 rum	more	common
than	 beer.	 Rye	 and	 barley	 spirits	 were	 also
being	 distilled	 in	 the	 northern	 colonies	 by
1700,	 and	 Kentuckycorn	 whiskey	 by	 1780.
After	 the	 Revolutionary	 War,	 the	 new
American	government	 tried	 to	 raise	 revenues
for	its	war	debts	by	taxing	distillation,	and	in
1794	the	largely	Scots-Irish	region	of	western
Pennsylvania	 rose	 in	 the	short-lived	Whiskey
Rebellion.	When	President	Washington	called
out	federal	troops	to	put	it	down,	the	rebellion
went	 underground	 and	 “moon-shining”
became	 entrenched,	 especially	 in	 the	 poor
hills	of	 the	South	where	 the	small	amount	of
corn	that	could	be	grown	would	fetch	a	better
price	 if	 fermented	and	distilled.	This	evasion
led	the	federal	government	to	form	the	Office
of	Internal	Revenue	in	1862.	Sixty	years	later,
the	 national	 taste	 for	 hard	 liquor	 was	 an
important	 stimulus	 to	 the	 temperance



movement	that	culminated	in	Prohibition.

Recent	 Times:	 The	 Rise	 of	 the	 Cocktail	 It
was	 in	 the	 19th	 century	 that	 mixtures	 of
distilled	 and	 other	 alcohols,	 or	 cocktails,
became	 fashionable	 before-dinner	 drinks	 in
Europe	 and	 the	Americas.	 This	 development
led	 to	 a	 mind-numbing	 explosion	 of
inventiveness:	 bartenders’	 manuals	 now	 list
hundreds	 of	 different	 named	 cocktails.	 The
origins	of	the	preeminent	cocktail,	the	martini
(gin	and	vermouth),	are	disputed;	it	may	have
been	 invented	 several	 times	 in	 different
places.	The	gin	and	tonic	comes	from	British
India,	 where	 gin	 helped	 make	 antimalarial
quinine	 water	 more	 palatable.	 In	 the	 United
States,	 one	 of	 the	 first	 famous	mixed	 drinks
was	 the	 sazerac	 of	New	Orleans	 (brandy	 and
bitters),	while	Winston	Churchill’s	mother	 is
said	 to	 have	 incited	 the	 creation	 of	 the
manhattan	 (whiskey,	 vermouth,	 bitters)	 at	 a
New	 York	 club.	 Prohibition	 and	 harsh



“bathtub	 gin”	 slowed	 further	 progress	 from
1920	 to	 1934.	 In	 the	 1950s,	 mixologists
discovered	 the	 value	 of	 vodka	 as	 a	 largely
flavorless	 alcohol,	 and	 the	 appeal	 of	 sweet-
tart	 fruit	 juices	 and	 sweet	 liqueurs.	Over	 the
next	few	decades	they	concocted	such	broadly
popular	 drinks	 as	 the	 mai	 tai,	 piña	 colada,
screwdriver,	 daiquiri,	 margarita,	 and	 tequila
sunrise.	 In	 the	 1970s,	 vodka	 dethroned
whiskey	as	America’s	best-selling	spirit.

The	late	20th	century	brought	a	modest
revival	of	interest	in	the	more	austere	classic
cocktails,	and	in	fine	distilled	spirits	of	all
kinds,	mixed	with	nothing	more	than	water.

Food	Words:	Alcohol
Our	 word	alcohol	 comes	 from	 medieval
Arab	 alchemy,	 which	 strongly	 influenced
Western	 science	 and	 gave	 it	 several	 other
important	 terms,	 including	chemistry,
alkali,	 and	algebra.	 To	 the	Arabs,	al	 kohl
was	 the	 dark	 powder	 of	 the	 metal



antimony,	 which	 women	 used	 to	 darken
their	 eyelids.	 By	 a	 process	 of
generalization,	 it	 came	 to	 mean	 any	 fine
powder,	 and	 then	 for	 the	 essence	 of	 any
material.	Alcohol	 was	 first	 used	 to	 mean
the	 essence	 of	 wine	 itself	 by	 the	 16th-
century	German	alchemist	Paracelsus.

Making	Distilled	Alcohols

All	distilled	alcohols	are	made	in	basically	the
same	way.

Fruits,	grains,	or	other	sources	of
carbohydrates	are	fermented	with	yeasts
to	make	a	liquid	with	a	moderate	alcohol
content,	from	5	to	12%	by	volume.
This	liquid	is	heated	in	a	chamber	that
collects	the	alcohol-and	aroma-rich
vapors	as	they	escape	from	the	boiling
liquid,	and	then	passes	them	across
cooler	metal	surfaces,	where	the	vapors



condense	and	are	collected	as	a	separate
liquid.
The	concentrated	alcoholic	liquid	is	then
modified	in	various	ways	for
consumption.	It	may	be	flavored	with
herbs	or	spices,	or	aged	in	wood	barrels.
The	alcohol	content	is	usually	adjusted
with	the	addition	of	water	before	it’s
bottled	for	sale.

The	Distilling	Process	The	essential	principle
of	 distillation	 is	 a	 simple	 one:	 both	 alcohol
and	 aromatic	 substances	 are	more	 volatile	 in
water	 than	 water	 itself,	 so	 they	 evaporate	 in
disproportionate	amounts	from	wine	and	beer
and	become	concentrated	in	the	vapor.	But	it’s
not	 a	 simple	 matter	 to	 make	 a	 delicious
distilled	 alcohol,	 or	 even	 a	 drinkable	 one.
Yeast	 fermentation	 produces	 thousands	 of
volatile	 substances,	 and	 not	 all	 of	 them	 are
desirable.	 Some	 are	 unpleasant,	 and	 others,
notably	methanol,	are	dangerously	toxic.



Selecting	Desirable	 Volatiles 	 Distillers	must
therefore	 control	 the	 composition	 of	 the
distilled	 liquid.	 They	 do	 this	 by	 subdividing
the	vapor	into	fractions	that	are	more	and	less
volatile,	 and	 collecting	 mainly	 the	 fraction
that	 is	 richest	 in	 alcohol.	 The	 fraction	 more
volatile	than	alcohol,	often	called	the	“heads”
or	 “foreshots”	 because	 it	 evaporates	 earlier
than	 alcohol,	 includes	 toxic	 methanol,	 or
wood	alcohol,	and	acetone.	The	fraction	that’s
less	 volatile	 than	 alcohol,	 the	 “tails”	 or
“feints,”	 includes	 a	 host	 of	 aromatic
substances	 that	 are	 desirable.	 Among	 these
“congeners”	 (substances	 that	 accompany
alcohol)	 are	 esters,	 terpenes,	 and	 volatile
phenolics,	 along	 with	 some	 substances	 that
are	 desirable	 in	 limited	 amounts.	 The	 most
notable	of	the	latter	are	the	“higher”	alcohols,
whose	 long,	 fat-like	 chains	 can	give	 spirits	 a
full,	 almost	 oily	 body,	 but	 also	 contribute	 a
pronounced	 harsh	 flavor	 and	 unpleasant
aftereffects.	 They’re	 often	 called	fusel	 oils.



(Fusel	 is	 the	 German	 for	 “rotgut.”)	A	 small
dose	 of	 fusel	 oils	 gives	 a	 distilled	 alcohol
character;	too	much	makes	it	unpleasant.

Concentration	by	Freezing
Distillation	 is	 the	 most	 common	 way	 of
making	concentrated	 alcohols,	 but	 it’s	 not
the	 only	 way.	 Freezing	 also	 concentrates
the	 alcohol	 in	 fermented	 liquids,	 by
causing	 the	water	 to	 form	a	mass	of	 solid
crystals	 from	 which	 an	 alcohol-enriched
fluid	can	be	drained.	(Alcohol	freezes	at	–
173ºF/–114ºC,	 far	 below	 water’s	 freezing
point	 of	 32ºF/0ºC.)	 In	 the	 17th	 century,
Francis	 Bacon	 noted	 Paracelsus’s	 claim
that	 “if	 a	 glass	 of	 wine	 be	 set	 upon	 a
terrace	 in	 bitter	 frost,	 it	 will	 leave	 some
liquor	 unfrozen	 in	 the	 center	 of	 the	 glass,
which	 excelleth	spiritus	 vini	 [spirit	 of
wine]	 drawn	 by	 fire.”	 The	 nomads	 of
central	Asia	 apparently	 applied	 “freezing-
out”	 to	 their	 alcoholic	 mare’s	 milk,



koumiss,	 and	 European	 settlers	 in	 North
America	 made	 apple	 brandy	—	 applejack
—	in	the	same	way.	Freezing-out	produces
a	 different	 kind	 of	 concentrated	 alcohol.
There’s	 no	 heating	 step	 that	 alters	 the
aroma,	and	unlike	distillation	it	retains	and
concentrates	 the	 sugars,	 savory	 amino
acids,	and	other	nonvolatile	substances	that
contributed	 to	 the	 original	 liquid’s	 taste
and	body.

Purity	and	Flavor	The	best	indication	of	how
strongly	flavored	a	distilled	alcohol	will	be	is
the	percentage	of	alcohol	in	the	liquid
immediately	after	distillation,	before	it’s
further	treated	by	aging	and/or	dilution	with
water	to	its	final	strength	(see	box,	p.	765).
The	higher	the	alcohol	content	to	which	it’s
distilled,	the	purer	a	mixture	of	alcohol	and
water	it	is,	the	lower	the	proportion	of	fusel
oils	and	other	aromatics,	and	so	the	more
neutral	the	flavor.	Vodkas	are	usually	distilled
to	90%	alcohol	or	more;	brandies	and



flavorful	malt	and	corn	whiskies	to	60–80%.
Crudely	distilled	moonshine	is	only	20–30%
alcohol,	and	therefore	harsh	and	even
hazardous.

Pot	or	Batch	Distillation:	Selecting	Volatiles
by	Time	 There	 are	 two	ways	 for	 distillers	 to
separate	 the	 vapor	 into	 undesirable	 heads,
somewhat	 desirable	 tails,	 and	 the	 desirable
main	run	of	alcohol.	The	original	way,	and	the
way	 that	 is	 still	 used	 for	 many	 of	 the	 finest
liquors,	 is	 separation	 in	 a	 simple	 pot	 still	 by
time.	It	can	take	12	hours	or	more	for	a	batch
of	beer	or	wine	to	be	heated	close	to	the	boil
and	 then	 distilled.	 The	 very	 volatile	 head
vapors	 come	 off	 first,	 followed	 by	 the	 main
alcohol-rich	 run,	 and	 then	 the	 less	 volatile
fusel-oil	 tails.	 So	 the	 distiller	 can	 divert	 the
initial	 vapors,	 collect	 the	 desirable	main	 run
in	 a	 different	 container,	 and	 then	 divert	 the
late	vapors	again.	In	practice,	distillers	repeat
the	pot	distillation,	the	first	pass	giving	spirits



with	 20–30%	 alcohol,	 and	 the	 second	 50–
70%.

The	 structures	 of	 several	 different	 alcohols.
Methanol	 is	 a	 poison	 because	 our	 bodies
convert	it	into	formic	acid,	which	accumulates
and	 damages	 the	 eyes	 and	 brain.	 Ethanol	 is
the	 main	 alcohol	 produced	 by	 yeasts.	 Butyl
and	amyl	alcohols	are	two	of	the	“higher,”	or
longer-chain	alcohols.	When	concentrated	by
distillation,	 they	 contribute	 an	 oily
consistency	 to	 spirits	 thanks	 to	 their	 fat-like
hydrocarbon	tails.

Continuous	 Distillation:	 Selecting	 Volatiles
by	 Position	 The	 second	 way	 in	 which
distillers	 can	 separate	 the	 desirable	 volatiles
from	the	rest	 is	by	 their	position	 in	a	column



still,	 an	 elongated	 chamber	 developed	 by
French	 and	 British	 distillers	 during	 the
Industrial	 Revolution.	 In	 a	 column	 still,	 the
starting	 wine	 or	 beer	 is	 fed	 into	 the	 column
from	 the	 top,	 and	 the	 column	 is	 heated	 from
the	 bottom	 with	 steam.	 The	 bottom	 of	 the
column	is	therefore	the	hottest	region,	the	top
the	 coolest.	 Methanol	 and	 other	 low-boiling
substances	 remain	 vaporized	 throughout	 all
but	 the	 very	 top	 of	 the	 column,	 while	 fusel
oils	 and	 other	 aromatics	 with	 high	 boiling
points	 will	 condense	 on	 collection	 plates	 at
hotter	 positions	 toward	 the	 bottom	 of	 the
column,	and	alcohol	will	condense	—	and	can
be	collected	—	at	 an	 intermediate	point.	The
advantage	of	the	column	still	is	that	it	can	be
operated	 continuously	 and	 without	 the
necessity	 of	 close	 monitoring;	 the
disadvantage	 is	 that	 it	offers	 less	opportunity
than	the	pot	still	for	the	distiller	to	control	the
composition	 of	 the	 distillate.	 When	 two	 or
more	 columns	 are	 run	 together	 in	 series,



they’re	 capable	 of	 producing	 a	 neutral
distillate	that	is	90–95%	alcohol.

Pot	distillation.	As	wine	or	beer	 is	gradually
heated,	the	composition	of	its	vapors	changes,
with	 very	 volatile	 substances	 evaporating
first,	 less	 volatile	 substances	 later.	 The
distiller	 diverts	 early	 and	 late	 vapors	 with
their	 undesirable	 volatiles,	 and	 collects	 the
“main	 run,”	 rich	 in	 alcohol	 and	 desirable
aromas.



Continuous	distillation	 in	a	column	still.	The
plates	in	each	column	are	hottest	at	the	steam
input	and	coolest	at	the	other	end.	Substances
with	low	boiling	points,	including	alcohol,	are
concentrated	in	the	vapor	that	leaves	the	first
column	 and	 rises	 in	 the	 second,	 and	 the
alcohol-rich	 fraction	 is	 collected	 at	 a
particular	position	in	the	second	column.
Maturation	and	Aging	Fresh	from	the	still,
distilled	liquors	are	as	colorless	as	water,	or
“white.”	They’re	also	rough	and	harsh,	so	all
are	matured	for	weeks	or	months	to	allow	the
various	components	to	react	with	each	other,
form	new	combinations,	and	become	less
irritating.	From	this	point,	the	spirits	are
handled	differently	according	to	the	kind	of
product	they’re	meant	to	become.	“White”
spirits,	including	vodka	and	eaux	de	vie	made
from	fruits,	are	not	aged;	they	may	be
flavored,	then	adjusted	to	the	proper	alcohol
content	by	the	addition	of	water,	and	bottled.
“Brown”	spirits,	including	brandies	and



whiskies,	are	so	called	because	they’re	aged	in
wood	barrels,	from	which	they	derive	a
characteristic	tawny	color	and	complexity	of
flavor.	(Some	brown	spirits	may	be	colored
with	caramel	instead.)	Spirits	may	be	barrel-
aged	for	anything	from	a	few	months	to
decades,	during	which	their	flavor	changes
considerably.

The	extraction,	absorption,	and	oxidation
processes	that	take	place	during	barrel	aging
result	in	the	development	of	a	mellow,	rich
flavor	(p.	720).	And	the	barrel	allows	both
water	and	alcohol	to	evaporate	from	the
spirits,	thus	concentrating	the	remaining
substances.	A	barrel	may	lose	several	percent
of	its	volume	per	year;	that	portion	is	called
“the	angels’	share,”	and	it	may	approach	half
the	barrel	volume	after	15	years.

Final	Adjustments	 When	 spirits	 are	 judged
ready	 for	bottling,	 they’re	usually	blended	 to
obtain	 a	 consistent	 flavor,	 and	 diluted	 with



water	 to	 the	 desired	 final	 alcohol	 content,	 in
the	neighborhood	of	40%.	Small	quantities	of
other	 ingredients	 may	 be	 added	 to	 fine-tune
the	 flavor	 and	 color;	 these	 include	 caramel
coloring,	 sugar,	 a	 water	 extract	 made	 by
boiling	wood	 chips	 (the	boisé	 of	Cognac	 and
Armagnac),	and	wine	or	sherry	(blended	U.S.
and	Canadian	whiskeys).

Chill-Filtering	Many	spirits	are	chill-filtered:
chilled	 to	 below	 the	 freezing	 point	 of	 water,
and	 then	 filtered	 to	 remove	 the	 cloudy
material	that	forms.	The	substances	that	form
the	 cloud	 are	 poorly	 soluble	 fusel	 oils	 and
volatile	 fatty	 acids	 from	 the	 original	 spirits,
and	 a	 variety	 of	 similar	 substances	 extracted
from	 the	 barrel.	 Their	 removal	 prevents	 the
spirits	 from	clouding	when	 the	drinker	 chills
them	 or	 dilutes	 them	 with	 water,	 but	 it	 also
removes	 some	 flavor	 and	 body,	 so	 some
producers	choose	not	 to	chill-filter.	Clouding
does	not	occur	in	spirits	with	more	than	about



46%	 alcohol,	 so	 such	 undiluted	 “cask-
strength”	 spirits	 are	 often	 not	 chill-filtered.
(Some	spirits	cloud	spectacularly;	see	p.	771).

Serving	and	Enjoying	Spirits

Crystal	Decanters	Can	Be	Hazardous	High-
alcohol	spirits	are	biologically	and	chemically
stable	and	can	be	kept	for	years	without
spoiling.	One	traditional	and	decorative	way
of	storing	them	has	been	the	decanter	made	of
glass	crystal,	which	derives	its	weight	and
appearance	from	the	element	lead.
Unfortunately,	lead	is	powerfully	toxic	to	the
nervous	system,	and	readily	leaches	from
crystal	into	spirits	and	other	acidic	liquids.
Old	decanters	that	have	been	used	many	times
have	been	preextracted	and	are	safe	to	use;
new	ones	should	either	be	pretreated	to
remove	lead	from	the	inner	surfaces,	or	only
used	for	serving,	not	storing.



Concentrated	Alcohol:	Proof
The	 term	proof	 is	 sometimes	 used	 to
designate	the	alcoholic	content	of	distilled
liquors.	 In	 the	 United	 States,	 the	 proof
designation	 is	 just	 about	 double	 the
percentage	 by	 volume	 of	 alcohol,	 so	 that
100	 proof,	 for	 example,	 designates	 50%
alcohol.	 (The	 proof	 number	 is	 slightly
more	 than	 double	 the	 percentage,	 because
alcohol	 causes	 a	 volume	 of	 water	 to
contract	on	mixing.)	The	term	proof	comes
from	 a	 17th	 century	 test	 for	 proving	 the
quality	of	 spirits	 that	 involved	moistening
gunpowder	 with	 the	 spirits,	 and	 then
putting	 a	 flame	 to	 it.	 If	 the	 gunpowder
burned	slowly,	the	spirits	were	at	proof;	if
it	spluttered	or	burst	into	flame,	they	were
under	or	over	proof	respectively.

The	 Flavors	 of	 Spirits	 Spirits	 are	 served	 at
temperatures	 ranging	 from	 ice	 cold	 (Swedish
aquavit)	 to	 steaming	 hot	 (Calvados).	 To



appreciate	 nuances	 of	 flavor,	 they’re	 best
served	at	 room	 temperature,	 and	 if	necessary
warmed	 in	 the	hands.	Their	aroma	 is	 intense,
so	much	so	that	it	can	be	just	as	enjoyable	to
sniff	as	 to	sip;	Scotch	 lovers	call	 this	nosing.
At	distilled	strengths,	alcohol	has	an	irritating
and	 then	 numbing	 effect	 on	 the	 nose	 that	 is
accentuated	 at	 high	 temperatures.	 To	 reduce
the	interference	of	alcohol	and	bring	out	more
delicate	 aromas,	 connoisseurs	 often	 dilute
whiskies	 with	 good-quality	 water	 to	 30%	 or
20%	 alcohol.	 Different	 kinds	 of	 spirits	 have
very	different	 flavors,	which	derive	 from	 the
original	 ingredient	—	grape	or	grain	—	from
the	 yeasts	 and	 fermentation,	 from	 the
prolonged	 heat	 of	 distillation,	 and	 from
contact	 with	 wood	 and	 the	 passage	 of	 time.
Spirits	 with	 a	 high	 fusel	 oil	 content	 have	 an
unctuous	 quality	 in	 the	 mouth,	 while	 more
neutral	spirits	give	a	cleansing,	drying	effect.
The	 aromas	 of	 spirits	 often	 persist	 in	 the
mouth	 long	 after	 the	 liquid	 itself	 has	 been



swallowed.

Some	Popular	Distilled	Spirits
The	alcohol	content	after	distillation	 is	an
indicator	 of	 how	 much	 flavor	 is	 carried
over	 from	 the	 base	 wine	 or	 beer	 to	 the
spirits.	The	higher	the	alcohol	content,	 the
lower	 the	 content	 of	 other	 aromatics	 and
the	more	neutral	the	flavor.

Kinds	of	Spirits

Distilled	spirits	are	made	all	over	the	world
from	all	kinds	of	alcoholic	liquids.	Here	are
brief	descriptions	of	the	more	prominent.



Brandies	 Brandies	 are	 spirits	 distilled	 from
grape	 wine.	 The	 two	 classic	 brandies	 are
Cognac	 and	Armagnac,	 the	 first	 named	 for	 a
town	 and	 the	 second	 for	 a	 region	 in
southwestern	 France,	 each	 not	 far	 from
Bordeaux.	Both	 are	made	 from	neutral	white
grapes	 (mainly	Ugni	 blanc)	 that	 are	 casually
fermented	 into	 wine,	 and	 the	 wines	 distilled
between	 harvest	 and	 mid-spring	 (the	 best
brandies	are	distilled	first;	as	the	wine	sits,	it
loses	esters	and	develops	volatile	acidity	and
off-aromas).	 Cognac	 is	 double-distilled	 from
the	 wine	 with	 its	 yeast	 lees	 to	 an	 alcohol
content	of	about	70%,	most	Armagnac	single-
distilled	without	yeast	in	a	traditional	column
still	 to	 about	 55%.	Each	 is	 then	 aged	 in	 new
French	 oak	 barrels	 for	 a	 minimum	 of	 six
months;	 some	Cognacs	are	aged	 for	60	years
or	 more.	 Before	 bottling,	 each	 is	 diluted	 to
about	40%	alcohol	and	may	be	adjusted	with
sugar,	oak	extract,	and	caramel.	Cognac	has	a
fruity,	 flowery	 character	 thanks	 to	 the



distillation	 of	 esters	 from	 the	 wine	 yeasts.
Armagnac	 is	 relatively	 rough	 and	 complex
thanks	 to	 its	higher	content	of	volatile	 acids;
it’s	 said	 to	 have	 a	 prune-like	 aroma.	 With
long	 aging,	 both	 develop	 a	 prized	rancio
(“rancid”)	 character	 from	 the	 transformation
of	fatty	acids	into	methyl	ketones,	which	also
provide	 the	 distinctive	 aroma	 of	 blue
cheese(p.	62).

Less	renowned	brandies	are	made
elsewhere	in	France	and	throughout	the	world
in	a	variety	of	ways,	from	the	industrial	to	the
artisanal.	Especially	interesting	are	brandies
distilled	from	more	distinctive	grape	varieties
than	the	purposely	neutral	Ugni	blanc.

Eaux	de	vie,	Fruit	Alcohols,	White	Alcohols
These	 are	 various	 terms	 that	 are	 less
confusing	 than	 their	 synonym	“fruit	brandy”:
they	 name	 spirits	 that	 are	 distilled	 from
fermented	 fresh	 fruits	 other	 than	 grapes.
Unlike	 true	 “burned	 wines,”	 which	 offer	 a



complicated,	 transformed	wineyness,	 eaux	de
vie	 capture	 and	 concentrate	 the	 distinctive
essence	of	the	fruits	from	which	they’re	made,
so	they	can	be	savored	almost	pure	rather	than
in	 their	 flesh.	 France,	 Germany,	 Italy,	 and
Switzerland	are	especially	noted	for	their	fine
fruit	 alcohols.	 Some	 popular	 examples	 are
apple	 (Calvados),	 pear	 (Poire	 Williams),
cherry	 (Kirsch),	 plum	 (Slivovitz,	 Mirabelle,
Quetsch),	 and	 raspberry	 (Framboise);	 less
widely	 known	 are	 apricot	 (French	 Abricot),
figs	 (North	 African	 and	 Middle	 Eastern
Boukha),	and	watermelon	(Russian	Kislav).

A	single	bottle	of	eau	de	vie	may	represent
from	10	to	30	lb/4.5–13.5	kg	of	the	fruit.	Fruit
alcohols	are	generally	double-distilled	to
about	70%	alcohol	and	are	not	aged	in	barrels
—	hence	their	lack	of	color	—	because	their
point	is	to	concentrate	the	fruit’s	own	flavor
into	an	intense,	full,	but	pure	essence.	One
prominent	exception	to	this	rule	is	Calvados,
an	apple	eau	de	vie	that	is	distilled	in	Brittany



from	a	blend	of	varieties,	some	too	sour	or
bitter	for	eating.	The	apples	are	slowly
fermented	into	cider	over	the	course	of
several	cool	weeks	in	the	autumn,	and	the
cider	is	then	distilled	in	either	pot	or	column
stills,	depending	on	the	district.	The	distillate
is	then	matured	in	old	barrels	for	a	minimum
of	two	years.	Slivovitz,	a	Balkan	plum
alcohol,	is	also	barrel-aged.

Whiskies	 and	 Whiskeys	 Whiskies	 (United
Kingdom)	 and	 whiskeys	 (elsewhere)	 are
spirits	that	have	been	distilled	from	fermented
grains,	mainly	barley,	maize,	 rye,	 and	wheat,
and	 then	 aged	 in	 barrels.	 The	 term	 comes
from	 a	 barley	 distillate	 of	 medieval	 Britain,
but	is	now	applied	to	largely	maize	distillates
in	 the	 United	 States	 and	 Canada,	 and	 mixed
grain	distillates	in	many	countries.

Scotch	 and	 Irish	 Whiskies	 There	 are	 three
kinds	 of	 Scotch	whisky.	One,	malt	whisky,	 is
made	 in	 the	 Highlands	 and	 islands	 entirely



from	malted	barley.	It’s	distilled	twice	in	pot
stills	 to	about	70%	alcohol,	and	has	a	strong,
distinctive	 flavor.	 Another,	 grain	 whisky,	 is
less	flavorful	and	less	costly;	it	is	made	in	the
lowlands	from	various	cereals	and	just	a	small
portion	(10–15%)	of	malted	barley	to	convert
their	 starches	 into	 sugars,	 and	 distilled	 in	 a
continuous	still	to	a	neutral	95%	alcohol.	The
third	and	most	common	is	a	blend	of	malt	and
grain	whiskies,	with	grain	whisky	accounting
for	40–70%.	Such	blending	began	in	the	1860s
for	 economic	 reasons,	 and	 turned	 out	 to
produce	 a	 milder,	 more	 widely	 appealing
drink	just	 in	time	to	replace	brandy	when	the
insect	 scourge	 phylloxera	 devastated
European	 vineyards	 in	 the	 1870s	 and	 1880s.
This	 is	 when	 Scotch	 developed	 its
international	 reputation.	 Today,	 Scotch
connoisseurs	 prize	 the	 distinctive	 “single-
malt”	 whiskies	 produced	 by	 the	 few
remaining	small	distillers	of	all-malt	whisky.

Whisky	makers	produce	beer,	omitting	the



hops,	and	then	distill	it,	yeasts	and	all.	The
distillate	is	aged	in	used	oak	barrels	for	a
minimum	of	three	years,	then	diluted	with
water	to	around	40%	alcohol,	and	is	usually
chill-filtered.	Scotch	whisky	owes	its	special
flavor	largely	to	the	barley	malt.	Malt
whiskies	from	Scotland’s	west	coast	have	a
unique,	smoky	flavor	that	comes	from	the	use
of	peat	fire	for	drying	the	malt,	and	peaty
water	for	mashing	the	grain	before
fermentation.	Peat,	the	mat	of	decaying	and
decayed	vegetation	that	once	was	the	cheapest
fuel	available	in	swampy	areas	of	Britain,
contributes	volatile	organic	molecules	to	the
brew	that	find	their	way	into	the	distillate.

Most	Irish	whisky	is	made	from	a	mixture
of	about	40%	malted	and	60%	unmalted
barley.	For	this	reason,	and	because	it	is	pot-
distilled	twice	and	then	again	in	a	column
still,	Irish	whisky	is	milder	than	malt	Scotch
and	even	some	Scotch	blends.



American	 and	 Canadian	 Whiskeys	 North
American	whiskeys	are	produced	mainly	from
the	 New	 World’s	 indigenous	 grain,	 maize.
The	most	prominent	corn	whiskey	is	bourbon,
which	 is	 named	 for	 a	 county	 in	 Kentucky
where	maize	grew	well	in	colonial	times,	and
where	 there	 was	 abundant	 water	 for	 both
mashing	the	grains	and	cooling	the	distillate.

Food	Words	:	Aperitif,	Digestif
These	French	words	describe	two	functions
attributed	 to	 concentrated	 alcohols	 in	 the
Middle	Ages,	ideas	that	live	on	in	both	the
words	 and	 drinking	 habits.	Aperitif	 comes
from	 an	 Indo-European	 root	 meaning	 “to
uncover,	to	open,”	and	is	a	drink	to	be	had
before	a	meal	 in	order	 to	open	our	system
to	 the	 nourishment	 to	 come.	Digestif
comes	 from	 an	 ancient	 root	 meaning	 “to
act,	 to	do,”	and	names	a	drink	 for	 the	end
of	 the	meal	 that	will	stimulate	our	system
to	 assimilate	 the	 meal’s	 nourishment.



Research	 has	 found	 that	 alcohol	 does
indeed	stimulate	the	secretion	of	digestive
hormones	in	the	stomach.
Bourbon	is	made	from	a	mash	that’s

usually	70–80%	maize,	10–15%	malted	barley
to	digest	the	starch,	and	the	remainder	rye	or
wheat.	After	fermenting	for	two	to	four	days,
the	whole	mash,	grain	residues	and	yeast
included,	is	distilled	in	a	column	and	then	a
kind	of	continuous	pot	still	to	60–80%
alcohol.	The	distillate	is	aged	for	at	least	two
years	in	new,	charred	American	oak	barrels,
which	give	bourbon	a	deeper	color	and
stronger	vanilla	note	than	Scotch	whiskies
have.	Summer	temperatures	that	can	reach
125ºF/53ºC	in	the	warehouses	modify	and
accelerate	the	chemical	reactions	of	aging.
Bourbons	are	generally	chill-filtered;	in	fact
this	technique	was	invented	by	the	Tennessee
whiskey	maker	George	Dickel	around	1870.
Unlike	French	brandies	and	Canadian
whiskeys,	bourbon	cannot	be	colored,



sweetened,	or	flavored;	the	only	additive
allowed	is	water.

Canadian	whiskeys	are	among	the	mildest
and	most	delicate	of	the	spirits	made	from
grains.	They	are	a	blend	of	a	light-flavored
column-distilled	grain	whiskey	with	small
amounts	of	stronger	whiskeys;	they	can	also
include	wines,	rum,	and	brandy,	up	to	9%	of
the	blend.	They’re	aged	for	a	minimum	of
three	years	in	used	oak	casks.

Gins	 There	 are	 two	 principal	 styles	 of
distilled	 gin	made	 today,	 English	 and	Dutch,
as	 well	 as	 cheaper	 gin	 that	 cannot	 be	 called
distilled	 because	 its	 flavorings	 are	 simply
added	to	neutral	alcohol.

The	traditional	Dutch	production	method	is
to	distill	a	fermented	mixture	of	malt,	corn,
and	rye	two	or	three	times	in	pot	stills	at	low
proof:	that	is,	the	distillate	contains	a	fair
amount	of	congeners,	and	resembles	a	light
whisky.	Then	this	distillate	is	distilled	one



last	time,	to	a	minimum	of	37.5%	alcohol,
along	with	juniper	berries	and	other	spices
and	herbs,	whose	aromatic	molecules	end	up
in	the	final	gin.

English-style,	or	“dry”	gin,	begins	with
neutral	96%	alcohol	produced	from	grain	or
molasses	by	other	distilleries.	This	flavorless
liquid	is	then	diluted	with	water	and
redistilled	in	a	pot	with	juniper	and	other
flavorings.	Juniper	is	required	for	the	product
to	be	called	gin,	and	most	gins	also	contain
coriander.	The	other	ingredients	may	include
citrus	peel	and	a	great	variety	of	spices.	This
distillate	is	diluted	before	bottling	to	37.5	to
47%	alcohol.

The	primary	aromas	in	gin	come	from	the
terpene	aromatics	(p.	390)	in	the	spices	and
herbs,	especially	notes	of	pine,	citrus,	flowers,
and	wood	(pinene,	limonene,	linalool,
myrcene).	Dutch	gin	is	generally	enjoyed	on
its	own,	while	beginning	in	the	1890s,	English
dry	gin	inspired	many	cocktails	and	tall	mixed



drinks,	including	the	martini,	gimlet,	and	gin
and	tonic.

Rums	 Rum	 got	 its	 start	 in	 the	 early	 17th
century	as	a	by-product	of	sugar	making	in	the
West	 Indies.	 Yeasts	 and	 other	 microbes
readily	 grew	 in	 the	 leftover	 molasses	 and
wash	waters,	the	yeasts	producing	alcohol	and
the	bacteria	all	kinds	of	aromatic	 substances,
many	of	 them	not	 pleasant.	 From	 this	mixed
material,	primitive	distillation	equipment	and
methods	 produced	 a	 strong,	 harsh	 liquid	 that
was	 given	 mainly	 to	 slaves	 and	 sailors,	 and
traded	 to	Africa	 for	 more	 slaves.	 Controlled
fermentations	 and	 improvements	 in	 distilling
technology	 brought	 more	 drinkable	 rums	 in
the	18th	and	19th	centuries.

There	are	now	two	distinct	styles	of	rum.
The	modern	light	style	is	made	by	fermenting
a	molasses	solution	with	a	pure	yeast	culture
for	12–20	hours,	then	distilling	it	to	about
95%	alcohol	in	a	continuous	still,	aging	it	for



a	few	months	to	eliminate	roughness	in	the
flavor,	and	diluting	and	bottling	it	at	around
43%	alcohol.	Some	light	rums	are	given	a
brief	time	in	barrels,	but	then	are	passed	over
charcoal	to	remove	the	color	and	some	of	the
flavor.

Traditional	Rums	Traditional	 rums	are	made
very	 differently,	 and	 have	 a	 much	 stronger
flavor	 and	 darker	 color.	 Most	 come	 from
Jamaica	 and	 the	 French-speaking	 Caribbean
(Martinique,	 Guadeloupe).	 They	 were	 once
fermented	 for	 up	 to	 two	 weeks	 with	 a
spontaneous	group	of	microbes,	 and	often	by
adding	the	already	strong-flavored	lees	of	one
fermentation	 to	 the	 next	 vat.	 Today,	 most
traditional	 rums	 are	 fermented	 for	 a	 day	 or
two	with	mixed	microbial	cultures	dominated
by	 an	 unusual	 yeast	 (Schizosaccharomyces)
that	 excels	 in	 ester	 production.	 They’re	 then
pot-distilled	to	a	much	lower	alcohol	content,
and	 therefore	 end	 up	with	 four	 to	 five	 times



the	 quantity	 of	 aroma	 compounds	 that	 light
rum	 has.	 Finally	 they’re	 aged	 in	 used
American	whiskey	casks,	where	they	get	most
of	their	color.	Caramel	can	be	added	to	deepen
the	 color	 and	 flavor,	 a	 procedure	 that	 seems
appropriate	 since	 rum	 is	made	 from	 sugar	 in
the	first	place.

Rums	 as	 Ingredients	 Rums	 are	 delicious	 on
their	 own,	 but	 it’s	 their	 aptitude	 for	 other
foods	 that	 accounts	 for	 much	 of	 their
popularity.	Light	rums	go	well	with	tart-sweet
fruits	and	are	the	base	for	a	number	of	tropical
cocktails,	 including	 piña	 coladas	 and
daiquiris.	Medium	and	dark	rums	are	a	useful
ingredient	 in	 sweets	 of	 all	 kinds	 thanks	 to
their	full	caramel	flavor.

Vodkas	Vodka	was	first	distilled	in	Russia	in
medieval	times	and	for	medical	purposes,	and
became	 a	 popular	 drink	 in	 the	 16th	 century.
Its	 name	 means	 “little	 water.”	 It	 has
traditionally	 been	 made	 from	 the	 cheapest



source	 of	 starch	 available,	 usually	 grain,	 but
sometimes	 potatoes	 and	 sugarbeets.	 The
source	 is	 unimportant,	 since	 the	 fermented
base	 is	distilled	 to	 eliminate	most	 aromatics,
and	 the	 remainder	 is	 removed	 by	 filtration
through	 powdered	 charcoal	 to	 produce	 a
smooth,	 neutral	 flavor.	 The	 essentially	 pure
mixture	 of	 alcohol	 and	 water	 is	 then	 diluted
with	water	to	the	desired	strength,	a	minimum
of	around	38%,	and	bottled	without	aging.

Vodka	was	scarcely	known	in	the	United
States	until	the	1950s,	when	it	was	discovered
as	an	ideal	alcohol	for	blending	with	fruit	and
other	flavors	in	cocktails	and	tall	mixed
drinks.	Recent	years	have	brought	vodkas
flavored	with	citrus	and	other	fruits,	with
chillis,	and	with	barrel	aging.

Grappa,	 Marc	 These	 are	 the	 Italian	 and
French	 names	 for	 spirits	 distilled	 from
pomace,	 the	 residue	 of	 grape	 skins	 and	 pulp,
seeds	and	stems	left	behind	when	wine	grapes



are	 pressed.	 These	 drinks	 were	 born	 from
frugality,	as	a	way	of	getting	 the	most	out	of
the	grapes.	The	solid	remains	still	have	juice,
sugar,	and	flavor	in	them,	so	with	some	water
and	 another	 period	 of	 fermentation,	 they
generate	alcohol	 and	 flavors	 that	 can	 then	be
concentrated	 by	 distillation,	 leaving	 behind
the	 harsh	 astringency	 and	 bitterness.	 Pomace
distillates	 were	 very	 much	 a	 by-product,
usually	 distilled	 just	 once	 and	 often	 without
diverting	the	heads	and	tails,	and	were	bottled
as	 is:	 so	 they	 were	 strong	 and	 harsh,
something	to	warm	and	stimulate	the	vineyard
workers,	 but	 not	 something	 to	 savor.	 In	 the
last	 few	 decades,	 producers	 have	 been
distilling	 more	 selectively	 and	 sometimes
aging	the	results	to	make	a	fine	drink.

Tequila	 and	 Mezcal	 These	 spirits	 are
distilled	 from	 the	 carbohydrate-rich	 heart	 of
certain	 Mexican	 species	 of	 the	 agave,	 a
succulent	 plant	 in	 the	Amaryllis	 family	 that



resembles	a	cactus.	Tequila	is	made	mainly	by
large	 distilleries	 around	 the	 northerly	 city	 of
Jalisco	from	the	blue	agave,	Agave	 tequilana,
while	the	more	rustic	mezcal	is	made	by	small
producers	 around	 central	 Oaxaca	 from	 the
maguey,	Agave	angustifolia.

The	agave	stores	its	energy	in	the	sugar
fructose	and	the	long	fructose	chains	called
inulin	(p.	805).	Because	humans	lack	an
enzyme	for	digesting	inulin,	people	have
learned	to	cook	inulin-rich	foods	for	a	long
time	at	a	low	temperature,	a	treatment	that
breaks	the	chains	into	their	component	sugars,
and	also	develops	an	intense	and
characteristic	browned	flavor.	Tequila	makers
steam	the	inulin-rich	agave	hearts,	which	may
weight	20–100	lb/9–45	kg,	while	mezcal
producers	roast	them	in	large	charcoalfired	pit
ovens	and	generate	smoky	aromas	that	carry
over	into	the	spirits.	The	cooked,	sweet	hearts
are	then	mashed	with	water	and	fermented,
and	the	resulting	alcoholicliquid	distilled.



Tequila	distillation	is	industrial;	mezcal	is
double-distilled,	first	in	small	clay	pots,	then
in	a	larger	metal	pot	still.	Most	tequila	and
mezcal	is	bottled	without	aging.

Tequila	and	mezcal	have	distinctive
flavors	that	include	roasty	aromas,	but	also
flowery	ones	(linalool,	damascenone,
phenylethyl	alcohol),	and	vanilla	(vanillin).

Flavored	 Alcohols:	 Bitters	 and	 Liqueurs
Alcohol’s	 split	 chemical	 personality,	 its
resemblance	to	fats	as	well	as	water,	makes	it
an	 excellent	 solvent	 for	 other	 volatile,
aromatic	 molecules.	 It	 does	 a	 good	 job	 of
extracting	 and	 holding	 flavors	 from	 solid
ingredients.	 Herbs,	 spices,	 nuts,	 flowers,
fruits:	 all	 these	 and	 more	 are	 soaked	 in
alcohol,	 or	 distilled	 along	 with	 alcohol,	 to
make	 a	 host	 of	 flavored	 liquids.	 Gin	 is	 the
best	 known	 of	 these.	Most	 of	 the	 others	 fall
into	two	families:	bitters,	which	are	just	 that,
and	 liqueurs,	which	are	 sweetened	 to	varying



degrees	with	sugar.

Bitters	 Bitters	 are	 modern	 descendents	 of
medicinal	 herbal	 brews	 that	 were	 first	 made
with	 wine.	 Purely	 bitter	 ingredients	 include
angostura	 (Galipea	 cusparia),	 a	 South
American	 relative	 of	 the	 citrus	 family,
Chinese	 rhubarb	 root,	 and	 gentian	 (Gentiana
species);	 plant	 materials	 that	 are	 both	 bitter
and	aromatic	include	wormwood,	chamomile,
bitter	orange	peel,	saffron,	bitter	almond,	and
myrrh	 (Commifera	 molmol).	 Most	 bitter
alcohols	 are	 complex	mixtures.	They	may	be
made	by	macerating	 the	 plant	material	 or	 by
distilling	 it	 along	with	 the	 source	of	 alcohol.
Among	 the	 bitters	 commonly	 used	 today	 are
Angostura	and	Peychaud’s	bitters,	condiment-
like	19th	century	formulations	 that	are	added
to	mixed	drinks	and	foods	as	a	flavor	accent,
and	 such	 drinkable	 aperitifs	 and	 digestifs	 as
Campari	(unusually	sweet)	and	Fernet	Branca.

Some	Examples	of	Flavored	Alcohols



Flowers:	 Sambuca	 (elderflower),	 Gul
(rose)
Spices:	Anisette	(anise),	Pimento
(allspice)
Nuts:	Amaretto	(almond);	Frangelico
(hazel);	nocino	(green	walnuts)
Coffee:	Kahlúa,	Tia	Maria
Chocolate:	Crème	de	cacao
Fruits:	Cointreau,	Curaçao,	Grand
Marnier,	Triple	Sec	(orange);	Midori
(melon);	Cassis	(black	currants);
limoncello	(lemon);	sloe	“gin”	(plum)
Herbs:	Benedictine,	Chartreuse,
Jaegermeister,	Crème	de	menthe,
peppermint	schnapps

Layering	Liqueurs
The	 added	 sugar	 that	 sweetens	 liqueurs
also	contributes	 to	 their	body	and	density.
And	 because	 different	 liqueurs	 have
different	 proportions	 of	 light	 alcohol	 and
dense	 sugar,	 they	 have	 densities	 different



enough	 to	 allow	 the	 mixologist	 to	 form
distinct	layers	in	the	glass,	with	the	densest
liqueurs	 at	 the	 bottom	 (red	 grenadine,
brown	Kahlúa)	 and	 the	 lightest	 at	 the	 top
(amber	 Cointreau,	 green	 Chartreuse).
When	 the	 liqueurs	 have	 different	 colors
and	 complementary	 flavors,	 this	 can
produce	 a	 pleasant	 novelty	 drink.	 Fruit
juices	 and	 syrups	 can	 also	 play	 a	 part	 in
such	 constructions.	 Eventually,	 adjacent
liquids	will	diffuse	into	each	other	and	the
layers	disappear.

Liqueurs	 Liqueurs	 are	 a	 distilled	 alcohol
sweetened	with	sugar	and	flavored	with	herbs,
spices,	 nuts,	 or	 fruits.	 The	 flavoring	 agents
may	 be	 extracted	 by	 soaking	 in	 the	 distilled
alcohol,	 or	 they	may	 themselves	 be	 distilled
along	with	 the	 alcohol.	Most	 liqueurs	 have	 a
neutral	 grain	 alcohol	 as	 their	 base,	 but	 there
are	 a	 few	whose	 base	 is	 a	 brandy	 or	whisky.
Examples	 are	 Grand	 Marnier,	 Cognac	 plus



orange	 peel;	 Dram-buie,	 Scotch	 whisky	 plus
honey	 plus	 herbs;	 and	 Southern	 Comfort,
bourbon	 whiskey	 plus	 peach	 brandy	 and
peaches.	 Some	 liqueurs	 include	 stabilized
cream.
Anise	and	Caraway	Alcohols	These	spirits	get
their	dominant	flavor	from	the	seeds	of	plants
in	the	carrot	family,	and	may	be	either	sweet
or	dry.	Anise	is	especially	popular;	there	are
French,	Greek,	Turkish,	and	Lebanese
versions	among	others	(pernod	and	anisette,
ouzo,	raki,	araq).	Caraway	seeds	flavor	dry
Scandinavian	aquavits	and	the	sweet	German
Kümmel.	When	clear	anise	alcohols	are
diluted	with	clear	liquid	water	or	ice	cubes
that	melt,	the	mixture	becomes	surprisingly
cloudy.	This	is	because	the	aromatic	terpene
molecules	are	insoluble	in	water,	and	soluble
in	alcohol	only	when	the	alcohol	is	highly
concentrated.	As	the	alcohol	becomes	diluted,
the	terpenes	separate	from	the	continuous
liquid	into	little	water-avoiding	droplets,	and



these	scatter	light	like	the	fat	globules	in
milk.

Vinegar

Vinegar	is	alcohol’s	fate,	the	natural	sequel	to
an	alcoholic	fermentation.	Alcohol	makes	a
liquid	more	resistant	to	spoilage	because	most
microbes	can’t	tolerate	it.	But	there	are	a	few
important	and	ubiquitous	exceptions:	bacteria
that	can	use	oxygen	to	metabolize	alcohol	and
extract	energy	from	it.	In	the	process	they
convert	it	to	acetic	acid,	which	is	a	far	more
potent	antimicrobial	agent	than	alcohol,	and
came	to	be	one	of	the	most	effective
preservatives	of	ancient	and	modern	times.
Alcoholic	wine	thus	becomes	pungently	acidic
wine:	in	French,	vin	aigre.

Absinthe
The	 most	 notorious	 herbal	 alcohol	 is
absinthe,	 a	 green-tinged,	 anise-flavored



liqueur	 whose	main	 ingredient	 is	 parts	 of
the	 wormwood	 plant,	Artemisia
absinthium.	Wormwood	has	a	harsh,	bitter
flavor	 and	 carries	 an	 aromatic	 compound,
thujone,	that	in	high	doses	is	toxic	not	only
to	intestinal	parasites	and	insects	—	hence
the	plant’s	name	—	but	also	to	the	human
nervous	 system,	 muscles,	 and	 kidneys.
Absinthe	was	hugely	popular	 in	 late	19th-
century	 France,	 and	l’heure	 verte,	 “the
green	 hour”	 of	 the	 afternoon	when	 people
dripped	water	through	a	sugar	cube	into	the
absinthe	 and	 caused	 it	 to	 cloud	 up,	 was
depicted	 by	 a	 number	 of	 Impressionist
painters	 and	 by	 the	 young	 Picasso.
Absinthe	 developed	 a	 reputation	 for
inducing	convulsions	and	insanity,	and	was
therefore	 outlawed	 in	 many	 countries
around	 1910,	 and	 replaced	 by	 simpler
anise-flavored	 spirits.	 Whatever	 toxicity
wormwood	 had	 for	 the	 heavy	 drinker	was
probably	 exacerbated	 by	 absinthe’s	 high



alcohol	 content,	 around	 68%	 and	 nearly
double	 the	 strength	 of	 most	 spirits.
Absinthe	 remains	 legal	 in	 a	 number	 of
countries	 and	 has	 recently	 enjoyed	 a
modest	and	moderate	revival.

An	Ancient	Ingredient

Because	fermented	plant	juices	naturally	turn
sour	with	acetic	acid,	our	ancestors	discovered
wine	and	vinegar	together.	In	fact,	a	major
challenge	in	winemaking	was	to	delay	this
souring	by	limiting	the	wine’s	exposure	to	the
air.	The	Babylonians	were	making	vinegar
from	date	wine,	raisin	wine,	and	beer	around
4000	BCE.	They	flavored	their	vinegar	with
herbs	and	spices,	used	it	to	pickle	vegetables
and	meats,	and	added	it	to	water	to	make	it
safe	to	drink.	The	Romans	mixed	vinegar	and
water	to	make	an	ordinary	drink	called	posca,
pickled	vegetables	in	vinegar	and	brine,	and
judging	by	the	late	Roman	recipe	book	of



Apicius,	often	enjoyed	vinegar	in	combination
with	honey.	Pliny	said	that	“no	other	sauce
serves	so	well	to	season	food	or	to	heighten	a
flavor.”	In	the	Philippines	there	developed	a
tradition	of	serving	a	variety	of	uncooked	fish,
meats,	and	vegetables	in	vinegar	made	from
palm	sap	and	tropical	fruits.	And	the	Chinese
evolved	dark,	complex	vinegars	from	rice,
wheat,	and	other	grains,	which	are	sometimes
roasted	before	fermentation.

For	millennia,	vinegar	was	made	simply	by
allowing	partly	filled	containers	of	wine	and
other	alcoholic	liquids	to	sour,	an
unpredictable	process	that	took	weeks	or
months.	The	first	system	for	more	rapid
production,	a	bed	of	grapevine	twigs	over
which	the	wine	was	regularly	poured	to	aerate
it,	was	invented	in	France	in	the	17th	century.
In	the	18th	a	Dutch	scientist,	Hermann
Boerhaave,	introduced	the	continuous
trickling	of	wine	over	an	aerating	bed.	In	the
19th	century,	Louis	Pasteur	demonstrated	the



essential	roles	of	microbes	and	oxygen	in	the
traditional	Orléans	process	(p.	773).	Modern
methods	for	growing	baker’s	yeast	and
producing	penicillin	were	adapted	to	vinegar
manufacture	after	World	War	II,	and	now
produce	finished	vinegar	in	a	day	or	two.

The	Virtues	of	Acetic	Acid

Acetic	acid	contributes	two	different	flavor
elements	to	foods.	One	is	its	acidity	on	the
tongue,	and	the	other	is	its	characteristic
aroma	in	the	nose,	which	can	intensify	to	a
kind	of	startling	pungency,	particularly	when
the	vinegar	is	heated.	The	vinegar	molecule
can	exist	in	two	forms:	as	the	intact	molecule,
and	broken	into	its	main	portion	and	a	free
hydrogen	ion.	The	hydrogen	ion	gives	the
main	impression	of	acidity,	while	only	the
intact	molecule	is	volatile	and	can	escape
from	the	vinegar	or	food,	travel	through	the
air,	and	reach	the	nose.	Both	the	intact	and



“dissociated”	forms	coexist	side	by	side,	in
proportions	that	are	determined	by	their
chemical	surroundings.	If	the	food	is	already
acidic	—	thanks	to	the	presence	of	tartaric
acid	in	wine	vinegar,	for	example	—	then	less
of	the	acetic	acid	dissociates,	more	is	intact
and	volatile,	and	the	vinegar	aroma	is
stronger.

Acetic	acid	is	an	especially	effective
preserving	agent.	A	solution	as	weak	as	0.1%
—	the	equivalent	of	a	teaspoon	of	standard-
strength	vinegar	in	a	cup	of	water/5	ml	in	250
ml	—	will	inhibit	the	growth	of	many
microbes.

Acetic	acid	has	a	higher	boiling	point	than
water,	236ºF/118ºC.	This	means	that	vinegar
will	get	more	concentrated	if	it’s	boiled.
Because	half	of	its	molecule	is	more	fat-like
than	water-like,	it	is	a	better	solvent	than
water	for	many	chemical	relatives	of	fats,
including	the	aroma	compounds	in	herbs	and
spices.	This	is	why	cooks	flavor	vinegars	by



steeping	herbs	and	spices	in	them,	and	why
vinegar	can	help	remove	greasy	films	from
various	surfaces.

Food	Words:	Vinegar,	Acid,	Acetic
Though	 it	 doesn’t	 look	 or	 sound	 related,
the	 word	vinegar	 comes	 from	 the	 same
root	 as	 both	acid	 and	acetic:	 the	 Indo-
European	ak-,	meaning	“sharp.”	(The	aigre
i n	vinaigre	 was	 originally	 the	 Latin
acer.)Edge,	 acute,	 acrid,	 ester, 	 andoxygen
are	 related	 words,	 oxygen	 because	 its
presence	 was	 once	 thought	 necessary	 to
make	an	acid.

The	Acetic	Fermentation

It	takes	three	ingredients	to	make	vinegar:	an
alcoholic	liquid,	oxygen,	and	bacteria	of	the
genus	Acetobacter	or	Gluconobacter,	mainly
A.	pasteurianus	and	A.	aceti.	These	bacteria
are	among	the	few	microbes	that	are	able	to



use	alcohol	as	an	energy	source.	Their
metabolism	of	alcohol	leaves	behind	two	by-
products,	acetic	acid	and	water.

CH3CH2OH	+	O2 	CH3COOH	+	H2O
Alcohol	+	oxygen	 	acetic	acid	+	water

Acetic	acid	bacteria	require	oxygen,	and	so
live	on	the	surface	of	the	fermenting	liquid,
where	with	other	microbes	they	form	a	film
sometimes	called	the	“mother.”	Especially
thick	films	are	created	by	Acetobacter
xylinum,	which	secretes	a	form	of	cellulose.
(Such	mats	are	sometimes	cultivated	and
eaten	for	themselves;	see	p.	509.)
Acetobacteria	thrive	in	warm	conditions,	so
vinegar	fermentations	are	often	carried	out	at
relatively	high	temperatures,	from	82	to
104ºF/28–40ºC.

The	concentration	of	alcohol	in	the	starting
liquid	affects	the	acetic	fermentation	and	the
stability	of	the	resulting	vinegar.	An	alcohol
concentration	around	5%	will	produce	a
vinegar	that	is	around	4%	acetic	acid,	which	is



strong	enough	to	prevent	the	vinegar	solution
itself	from	spoiling.	Above	5%	alcohol,	the
resulting	vinegar	will	be	stronger	in	acetic
acid	and	so	more	stable,	but	the	fermentation
proceeds	more	slowly	because	the	high
alcohol	levels	inhibit	the	activity	of	the
bacteria.	For	this	reason,	and	to	minimize
residual	alcohol	in	the	finished	vinegar,	wines
of	10–12%	alcohol	are	usually	diluted	with
water	before	acetic	fermentation.	However
this	also	dilutes	the	wine’s	flavorful
components;	so	patient	vinegar	makers	may
still	choose	to	ferment	their	wine	straight.

Vinegar	Production

There	are	three	standard	ways	of	producing
vinegar	in	the	West.

The	 Orléans	 Process	 The	 simplest,	 oldest,
and	 slowest	 method	 was	 perfected	 in	 the
Middle	 Ages	 in	 the	 French	 city	 of	 Orléans,



where	 spoiled	 barrels	 of	 Bordeaux	 and
Burgundy	 wine	 on	 their	 way	 to	 Paris	 were
identified	 and	 salvaged	 as	 vinegar.	 In	 the
Orléans	process,	wood	barrels	are	partly	filled
with	 diluted	 wine,	 inoculated	 with	 a	 mother
from	 a	 previous	 batch,	 and	 allowed	 to
ferment.	 Periodically,	 some	vinegar	 is	 drawn
off	and	replaced	by	new	wine.	This	method	is
slow,	because	the	transformation	of	alcohol	to
acetic	 acid	 is	 limited	 to	 the	 wine	 surface
exposed	to	 the	air.	But	 the	slow	fermentation
leaves	 time	 for	 reactions	 among	 the	 alcohol,
acetic	acid,	and	other	molecules,	and	produces
the	 finest	 flavor.	 When	 optimized,	 this
process	 can	 yield	 a	 barrel	 full	 of	 vinegar	 in
two	months.

Streamlined	 Trickling	 and	 Submerged
Cultures	 In	 the	 second,	 “trickling”	 method,
the	wine	 is	 poured	 repeatedly	 over	 a	 porous,
air-rich	 matrix	 —	 wood	 shavings,	 or	 a
synthetic	 material	 —	 onto	 which	 the	 acetic



bacteria	 cling.	 This	 greatly	 increases	 the
effective	 surface	 area	 of	 the	 wine,	 and
regularly	 exposes	 all	 parts	 of	 the	 liquid	 to
both	oxygen	and	bacteria.	The	result	is	a	quick
fermentation	 that	 takes	 only	 a	 few	 days.
Finally,	 there	 is	 the	 “submerged	 culture”
method,	in	which	free-swimming	bacteria	are
supplied	 oxygen	 in	 the	 form	 of	 air	 that	 is
bubbled	 through	 the	 tank.	 This	 industrial
method	 converts	 the	 liquid’s	 alcohol	 into
acetic	acid	in	24–48	hours.

The	 intact	acetic	acid	molecule,	and	 the	acid
dissociated	into	its	acetate	and	hydrogen	ions.
Only	 the	 intact	 molecule	 is	 volatile	 and
detectable	in	the	nose	by	its	distinctive	smell.
Adding	 vinegar	 to	 an	 alkaline	 ingredient	 —
egg	 whites	 or	 baking	 soda,	 for	 example	 —



causes	the	acetic	acid	molecules	to	dissociate,
and	diminishes	its	aroma.

After	 Fermentation	 After	 fermentation,
nearly	 all	 vinegars	 are	 pasteurized	 at	 150–
160ºF/65–70ºC	 to	 kill	 remaining	 bacteria	 of
all	 kinds,	 but	 especially	 the	 acetobacteria
themselves,	 which	 respond	 to	 the
disappearance	of	 the	alcohol	by	metabolizing
acetic	 acid	 to	 water	 and	 carbon	 dioxide	 and
thus	weakening	the	vinegar.	Most	vinegars	are
aged	for	a	few	months,	a	period	in	which	their
flavor	 becomes	 less	 harsh	 and	more	mellow,
thanks	in	part	to	the	combination	of	acetic	and
other	 acids	 with	 various	 compounds	 to	 form
new,	less	pungent,	often	aromatic	substances.

Common	Kinds	of	Vinegar

Cooks	 can	 choose	 among	 several	 different
kinds	 of	 vinegar.	 Though	 all	 have	 the	 basic
aroma	 and	 pungency	 of	 acetic	 acid,	 each	 is



distinctive,	 because	 they’re	 made	 with
different	 starting	materials,	 and	may	 or	may
not	be	matured	in	wood.

Wine	Vinegars	Wine	vinegars	are	made	from
a	 base	 of	 yeast-fermented	 grape	 juice.	 They
therefore	 have	 a	 winey	 character	 from	 the
aromatic	and	savory	by-products	of	 the	yeast
fermentation.	Interestingly	prominent	in	wine
and	 cider	 vinegars	 are	 buttery	 aroma
compounds	 (diacetyl,	butyric	acid).	Balsamic
and	 sherry	 vinegars	 are	 specialized	 versions
of	wine	vinegar	(see	pp.	775–776).

Cider	Vinegars	Cider	vinegar	is	made	from	a
base	 of	 yeast-fermented	 apple	 juice.	 It
therefore	 includes	 some	 of	 the	 characteristic
aroma	 components	 of	 apples,	 and	 others	 that
are	 especially	 accentuated	 in	 apple
fermentation;	 these	 include	 the	 volatile
phenols	that	give	animal	and	stable	aromas	to
grape	wines	(ethyl	guaiacol	and	ethyl	phenol,
p.	738).	Apples	are	rich	in	malic	acid,	so	cider



vinegars	 undergo	 a	 malolactic	 fermentation
(p.	 730)	 that	 may	 augment	 aroma	 while
softening	 acidity.	 Thanks	 to	 its	 pulp	 and
tannin	 content,	 cider	 vinegar	 often	 becomes
cloudy	with	tannin-protein	complexes.

Fruit	Vinegars	Fruit	vinegars	may	simply	be
ordinary	 vinegars	 flavored	 by	 contact	 with
fresh	 fruit,	 including	 apples,	 but	 they’re	 also
made	 by	 fermenting	 the	 fresh	 fruit	 juices.
Pineapple	and	coconut	vinegars	are	examples.
Fruit	 vinegars	 are	 interesting	 for	 their
expression	 of	 the	 fruit’s	 flavor	 through	 the
alcoholic	and	acetic	fermentations.

Making	Vinegars	in	the	Kitchen
Cooks	can	easily	make	 their	own	vinegars
from	 leftover	wine	 or	 from	 fruits	 of	 their
own	 choosing.	 A	 few	 guidelines	 will
improve	 the	odds	of	getting	a	good	result.
Sweet	 liquids	 will	 become	 alcoholic	 and
sour	 spontaneously,	 but	 “wild”	 microbes



may	produce	off-flavors.	This	possibility	is
minimized	by	starting	with	a	cultured	yeast
and	 a	 vinegar	 “mother”	 from	 an	 active
vinegar	 crock	 or	 commercial	 source.	 The
warmer	 the	 temperature	 (up	 to	 around
85ºF/30ºC)	 and	 the	 larger	 the	 surface	 area
exposed	to	the	air,	the	faster	the	liquid	will
acetify.	 Fruits	 with	 less	 than	 about	 10%
sugar	in	their	juices	will	produce	less	than
5%	 alcohol	 and	 thus	 less	 than	 4%	 acetic
acid	 in	 the	 final	 vinegar,	 which	 will	 be
prone	 to	 spoiling.	 Such	 fruits	 should	 be
supplemented	 with	 table	 sugar,	 which
boosts	 the	 subsequent	 alcohol	 and	 acetic
acid	levels.

Malt	 Vinegars	 Malt	 vinegar	 is	 essentially
made	from	unhopped	beer:	that	is,	from	cereal
grains	and	sprouted	barley.	It	has	overtones	of
barley	 malt.	 This	 was	 the	 standard	 form	 of
vinegar	in	beer-drinking	Britain,	where	it	was
originally	called	alegar.



Asian	Vinegars	Asian	rice	and	grain	vinegars
are	made	 from	grains	whose	starch	 is	broken
down	 to	 sugars	 by	 means	 of	 a	 mold	 culture
rather	 than	 sprouted	 grains	 (p.	 753).	Chinese
vinegars	 can	 be	 especially	 flavorful	 and
savory	 because	 they’re	 made	 from	 whole,
sometimes	 roasted	 grains,	 fermented	 in
continuous	 contact	with	 the	 grain	 solids,	 and
often	 aged	 in	 contact	with	 the	molds,	 yeasts,
and	 bacteria,	 all	 of	which	 release	 amino	 and
other	 organic	 acids	 and	 other	 flavor
compounds	into	the	vinegar.

White	Vinegars	White	vinegar	is	among
the	purest	sources	of	acetic	acid.	It’s	made	by
acetic	fermentation	of	pure	alcohol	that	has
been	either	distilled	or	synthesized	from
natural	gas,	and	is	not	aged	in	or	softened	by
contact	with	wood.	It	contains	few	or	none	of
the	aromatic	and	savory	byproducts	of	the
alcoholic	fermentation.	In	the	United	States,
more	white	vinegar	is	made	than	any	other
kind.	It’s	used	mainly	in	the	manufacture	of



pickles,	salad	dressings,	and	mustards.

Distilled	 Vinegars	 Distilled	 vinegar	 in	 the
United	 States	 is	 white	 vinegar	 made	 with
distilled	alcohol;	 in	 the	United	Kingdom,	 it’s
vinegar	that	is	made	by	acetic	fermentation	of
unhopped	 beer,	 and	 then	 distilled	 to
concentrate	the	acetic	acid.

Vinegar	 Strength	 When	 developing	 and
following	 recipes	 in	 which	 vinegar	 is	 a
prominent	 ingredient,	 cooks	 should	 take	 care
to	note	not	only	 the	kind	of	vinegar,	but	also
the	strength,	which	is	usually	indicated	on	the
label.	 In	 the	United	 States,	most	 industrially
produced	 vinegars	 are	 adjusted	 to	 5%	 acetic
acid,	but	many	wine	vinegars	are	7%	or	even
stronger.	 Mild	 Japanese	 rice	 vinegars,	 by
contrast,	 may	 be	 4%	 (the	 U.S.	 minimum),
black	 Chinese	 vinegars	 as	 little	 as	 2%.	 A
spoonful	may	thus	provide	half	as	much	acetic
acid	as	expected,	or	twice	as	much,	depending
on	the	vinegars	that	are	called	for	and	actually



used.

Balsamic	Vinegar

True	balsamic	vinegar,	aceto	balsamico,	is	a
vinegar	like	no	other:	almost	black	in	color,
syrupy,	sweet,	remarkably	complex	in	flavor,
and	remarkably	expensive,	all	thanks	to
decades-long	fermentation,	aging,	and
concentration	in	wood	casks.	It	has	been	made
in	the	northern	Italian	state	of	Emilia-
Romagna	since	medieval	times.	Individual
households	produced	their	own	as	a	kind	of
general-purpose,	soothing	tonic,	or	balsam.	It
wasn’t	until	the	1980s	that	the	rest	of	the
world	discovered	balsamic	vinegar,	a
discovery	that	fostered	the	development	of
less	elaborate	and	less	costly	approximations.
The	label	term	tradizionale,	“traditional,”	is
reserved	for	the	original	version.

Using	Balsamic	Vinegar



Traditional	balsamic	vinegar	 is	applied	by
the	drop	to	a	variety	of	dishes,	from	salads
and	 grilled	 meats	 and	 fish	 to	 fruits	 and
cheese.	Mass-produced	versions	are	added
in	larger	quantities	 to	 lend	depth	of	flavor
to	soups	and	stews,	and	to	make	mellower
vinaigrette	 dressings	 than	 plain	 wine
vinegar	does.
Making	Traditional	Balsamic	Vinegar

Traditional	balsamic	vinegar	begins	with	wine
grapes:	white	Trebbiano,	red	Lambrusco,	and
a	number	of	other	varieties	are	used.	Their
juice	is	boiled	until	the	volume	is	reduced	by
about	a	third.	Boiling	removes	enough	water
to	concentrate	the	juice	to	around	40%
dissolved	sugars	and	acids,	and	begins	the
sequence	of	browning	reactions	between
sugars	and	proteins	that	generate	both	rich
flavor	and	color	(p.	778).	The	juice	is	then
placed	in	the	first	of	a	sequence	of
progressively	smaller	barrels,	often	made
from	a	variety	of	woods	(oak,	chestnut,



cherry,	juniper),	which	are	kept	in	an	attic	or
other	location	where	they’re	exposed	to	the
variations	and	extremes	of	the	local	climate.
In	summer	heat,	the	concentrated	sugars	and
amino	acids	react	with	each	other	to	produce
aroma	molecules	more	commonly	found	in
roasted	and	browned	foods,	and	the
fermentation	products	and	by-products	react
with	each	other	to	form	a	heady	mixture.	As
evaporation	continues	to	remove	water	and
concentrate	the	must	(about	10%	of	the	barrel
disappears	each	year),	each	barrel	is
replenished	with	must	from	the	next	younger
barrel.	Finished	vinegar,	whose	average	age
must	be	a	minimum	of	12	years,	is	removed
from	the	oldest	barrel.	According	to	one
estimate,	it	takes	about	70	lb/36	kg	of	grapes
to	make	1	cup/250	ml	of	traditional	balsamic
vinegar.

Notice	that	there’s	no	initial	alcoholic
fermentation	before	the	acetification	begins.
Instead,	a	mixed	culture	of	yeasts	and	bacteria



simultaneously	converts	a	portion	of	the
abundant	grape	sugars	into	alcohol,	and	that
alcohol	into	acetic	acid.	These	conversions
proceed	slowly,	over	the	course	of	several
years,	because	the	high	concentration	of	grape
sugars	and	acids	inhibits	the	growth	of	all
microbes.	The	alcoholic	fermentation	is
carried	out	by	unusual	yeasts,
Zygosaccharomyces	bailii	or	bisporus,	that
are	adapted	to	surviving	in	environments	high
in	sugars	and	in	acetic	acid.	At	the	same	time
that	the	two	fermentations	take	place,	so	do
the	processes	of	maturation	and	aging.

In	the	end,	traditional	balsamic	vinegar
may	contain	anywhere	from	20	to	70%
unfermented	sugars,	about	8%	acetic	and	4%
tartaric,	malic,	and	other	nonvolatile	acids,	an
aroma-enhancing	1%	alcohol,	and	up	to	12%
glycerol,	a	product	of	the	yeast	fermentation
that	contributes	to	the	velvety	viscosity.

The	“condiment”	grades	of	balsamic
vinegar	are	made	much	more	rapidly	than	the



traditional	grade,	and	are	far	less	concentrated
and	fine-flavored.	The	better	mass-produced
vinegars	include	some	cooked-down	grape
must	and	young	balsamic	vinegar,	and	are
aged	for	a	year	or	so.	Cheap	balsamic	vinegars
are	no	more	than	ordinary	wine	vinegar
colored	with	caramel	and	sweetened	with
sugar.

Sherry	Vinegar

A	style	of	vinegar	that	lies	somewhere
between	ordinary	wine	vinegar	and	balsamic
vinegar	is	the	solera-aged	sherry	vinegar	of
Spain.	This	starts	from	the	young	sherry	wine,
which	contains	no	residual	sugar.	Like	sherry
wines	and	balsamic	vinegars,	sherry	vinegar	is
blended	with	older	batches	and	matured	for
years	or	decades	in	a	series	of	partly-filled
barrels.	The	concentration	by	evaporation,	and
extended	contact	with	microbes	and	wood,
leave	sherry	vinegar	with	high	levels	of



savory	amino	acids	and	organic	acids,	and
viscous	glycerol.	In	old	soleras,	the	acetic
acid	concentration	can	reach	10%	and	more.
Sherry	vinegar	isn’t	as	dark	and	savory	as
balsamic	vinegar,	but	is	noticeably	more
intense	and	nutty	than	other	wine	vinegars.



Chapter	14

Cooking	Methods
and	Utensil	Materials

Browning	Reactions	and	Flavor
Caramelization
The	Maillard	Reactions
High	 Temperatures	 and	 Dry	 Cooking
Methods
Slow	Browning	in	Moist	Foods
Drawbacks	of	the	Browning	Reactions

Forms	of	Heat	Transfer
Conduction:	Direct	Contact
Convection:	Movement	in	Fluids
Radiation:	 The	 Pure	 Energy	 of	 Radiant
Heat	and	Microwaves

Basic	Methods	of	Heating	Foods
Grilling	and	Broiling:	Infrared	Radiation
Baking:	Air	Convection	and	Radiation
Boiling	and	Simmering:	Water	Convection



Steaming:	Heating	by	Vapor	Condensation
and	Convection
Pan-Frying	and	Sautéing:	Conduction
Deep	Frying:	Oil	Convection
Microwaving:	Microwave	Radiation

Utensil	Materials
The	 Different	 Behaviors	 of	 Metals	 and
Ceramics
Ceramics
Aluminum
Copper
Iron	and	Steel
Stainless	Steel
Tin

Each	 of	 the	 basic	 methods	 of	 cooking,	 from
grilling	 over	 a	 fire	 to	 irradiating	 in	 a
microwave	 oven,	 has	 its	 own	 particular
influence	 on	 food.	 This	 chapter	 briefly
explains	 how	 these	 methods	 work,	 and
describes	 the	 properties	 of	 the	 various	metal
and	ceramic	utensils	we	use	to	heat	foods.



First,	though,	it’s	good	to	consider	an
important	transformation	that	foods	undergo
when	they’re	subjected	to	sufficient	heat,	no
matter	what	the	cooking	method.	The
browning	reactions	come	up	in	every	chapter
this	book.	They	have	remarkable	effects	on
both	the	flavor	and	appearance	of	a	host	of
foods,	from	condensed	milk	to	grilled	meats,
from	chocolate	to	beer.

Browning	Reactions	and	Flavor

While	the	chemical	changes	caused	by
moderate	heat	modify	or	intensify	flavors	that
are	intrinsic	to	a	food,	the	browning	reactions
produce	new	flavors,	flavors	that	are
characteristic	of	the	cooking	process.	These
reactions	are	named	for	the	typical	colors	that
they	also	create,	which	may	actually	range
from	yellow	to	red	to	black,	depending	on	the
conditions.

Caramelization



Caramelization

The	simplest	browning	reaction	is	the
caramelization	of	sugar,	and	it’s	not	simple	at
all	(p.	656).	When	we	heat	plain	table	sugar,
essentially	just	molecules	of	sucrose,	it	first
melts	into	a	thick	syrup,	then	slowly	changes
color,	becoming	light	yellow	and
progressively	deepening	to	a	dark	brown.	At
the	same	time,	its	flavor,	initially	sweet	and
odorless,	develops	acidity,	some	bitterness,
and	a	rich	aroma.	The	chemical	reactions
involved	in	this	transformation	are	many,	and
they	result	in	the	formation	of	hundreds	of
different	reaction	products,	among	them	sour
organic	acids,	sweet	and	bitter	derivatives,
many	fragrant	volatile	molecules,	and	brown-
colored	polymers.	It’s	a	remarkable	change,
and	a	fortunate	one:	it	contributes	to	the
pleasures	of	many	candies	and	other	sweets.

The	Maillard	Reactions



Even	more	fortunate	and	complex	are	the
reactions	responsible	for	the	cooked	color	and
flavor	of	bread	crusts,	chocolate,	coffee	beans,
dark	beers,	and	roasted	meats,	all	foods	that
are	not	primarily	sugar.	These	are	known	as
the	Maillard	reactions,	after	Louis	Camille
Maillard,	a	French	physician,	who	discovered
and	described	them	around	1910.	The
sequence	begins	with	the	reaction	of	a
carbohydrate	molecule	(a	free	sugar	or	one
bound	up	in	starch;	glucose	and	fructose	are
more	reactive	than	table	sugar)	and	an	amino
acid	(free	or	part	of	a	protein	chain).	An
unstable	intermediate	structure	is	formed,	and
this	then	undergoes	further	changes,
producing	hundreds	of	different	by-products.
Again,	a	brown	coloration	and	full,	intense
flavor	result.	Maillard	flavors	are	more
complex	and	meaty	than	caramelized	flavors,
because	the	involvement	of	the	amino	acids
adds	nitrogen	and	sulfur	atoms	to	the	mix	of
carbon,	hydrogen,	and	oxygen,	and	produces



new	families	of	molecules	and	new	aromatic
dimensions	(see	illustration	below,	and	box,	p.
779).

Representative	 aroma	molecules	 produced	by
caramelization	 (left;	 see	 p.	 656)	and	 by	 the
Maillard	 reactions	 between	 carbohydrates
and	 amino	 acids( r i g h t ) .	Amino	 acids
contribute	 nitrogen	 and	 sulfur	 atoms	 to
produce	 the	 distinctive	 central	 rings	 of
(clockwise	 from	 top)	pyrroles,	 pyridines,
pyrazines,	thiophenes,	thiazoles,	and	oxazoles.
Each	 ring	 can	 be	 augmented	 with	 other
structures	 attached	 to	 the	 carbon	 atoms.
Maillard	 products	 have	 a	 range	 of	 qualities,
from	leafy	and	floral	to	earthy	and	meaty.

High	Temperatures	and	Dry	Cooking	Methods



Both	caramelization	and	Maillard	browning
proceed	at	a	rapid	rate	only	at	relatively	high
temperatures.	Caramelization	in	table	sugar
becomes	noticeable	at	around	330ºF/165ºC,
Maillard	browning	perhaps	100ºF/50ºC	below
that.	Large	amounts	of	energy	are	required	to
force	the	initial	molecular	interactions.	The
practical	consequence	of	this	is	that	most
foods	brown	only	on	the	outside	and	during
the	application	of	dry	heat.	The	temperature
of	water	can’t	rise	above	212ºF/100ºC	until	it
is	vaporized	(unless	it’s	under	high	pressure
in	a	pressure	cooker).	So	foods	that	are
cooked	in	hot	water	or	steamed,	and	the	moist
interiors	of	meats	and	vegetables,	will	never
exceed	212ºF.	But	the	outer	surfaces	of	foods
cooked	in	oil	or	in	an	oven	quickly	dehydrate
and	reach	the	temperature	of	their
surroundings,	perhaps	300	to	500ºF/159–
260ºC.	So	it	is	that	foods	cooked	by	“moist”
techniques	—	boiling,	steaming,	braising	—
are	generally	pale	and	mild	compared	to	the



same	foods	cooked	by	“dry”	methods	—
grilling,	baking,	frying.	This	is	a	useful	rule	to
keep	in	mind.	For	example,	one	key	to	a	rich-
tasting	stew	is	to	brown	the	meat,	vegetables,
and	flour	quite	well	by	frying	them	before
adding	any	liquid.	On	the	other	hand,	if	you
want	to	emphasize	the	intrinsic	flavors	of	the
foods,	avoid	the	high	temperatures	that	create
the	intense	but	less	individualized	browning
flavors.

Slow	Browning	in	Moist	Foods

There	are	exceptions	to	the	rule	that	browning
reactions	require	temperatures	above	the	boil.
Alkaline	conditions,	concentrated	solutions	of
carbohydrates	and	amino	acids,	and	prolonged
cooking	times	can	all	generate	Maillard	colors
and	aromas	in	moist	foods.	For	example,
alkaline	egg	whites,	rich	in	protein,	with	a
trace	of	glucose,	but	90%	water,	will	become
tan-colored	when	simmered	for	12	hours.	The



base	liquid	for	brewing	beer,	a	water	extract
of	barley	malt	that	contains	reactive	sugars
and	amino	acids	from	the	germinated	grains,
deepens	in	color	and	flavor	with	several	hours
of	boiling.	Watery	meat	or	chicken	stock	will
do	the	same	as	it’s	boiled	down	to	make	a
concentrated	demiglace.	Persimmon	pudding
turns	nearly	black	thanks	to	its	combination	of
reactive	glucose,	alkaline	baking	soda,	and
hours	of	cooking;	balsamic	vinegar	turns
nearly	black	over	the	course	of	years!

Some	of	the	Flavors	Produced	by
Caramelization	and	Maillard	Browning

Caramelization Maillard	Reactions
330ºF/165ºC	and 250ºF/120ºC	and

above above
Sweet	(sucrose,	other Savory	(peptides,

sugars) amino	acids)
Sour	(acetic	acid) Floral	(oxazoles)



Bitter	(complex Onions,	meatiness	(sulfur
molecules) compounds)
Fruity Green	vegetables	(pyridines,
(esters) pyrazines)

Sherry-like Chocolate
(acetaldehyde) (pyrazines)
Butterscotch Potato,	earthy
(diacetyl) (pyrazines)

Caramel	(maltol)
Nutty	(furans) Plus	caramelization	flavors

Drawbacks	of	the	Browning	Reactions

Browning	reactions	do	have	some	drawbacks.
First,	many	dehydrated	fruits	are	prone	to
gradual	browning	over	weeks	or	months	at
room	temperature,	because	the	carbohydrates
and	amine-containing	molecules	are
especially	concentrated	(browning	caused	by
enzymes	can	also	be	a	factor).	Small	amounts
of	sulfur	dioxide	are	commonly	added	to	these



foods	to	block	these	unwanted	changes	in
color	and	taste.	Second,	the	nutritional	value
of	the	foods	is	slightly	reduced	because	amino
acids	are	altered	or	destroyed.

Finally,	there’s	evidence	that	some
products	of	the	browning	reactions	can
damage	DNA	and	may	cause	cancer.	In	2002,
Swedish	researchers	found	worrisome	levels
of	acrylamide,	a	known	carcinogen	in	rats,	in
potato	chips,	french	fries,	and	other	starchy
fried	foods,	apparently	the	product	of
reactions	between	sugars	and	the	amino	acid
asparagine.	The	health	significance	of	this	and
similar	findings	remains	unclear.	The	ubiquity
of	browned	foods,	both	today	and	through
thousands	of	years	of	history,	would	suggest
that	they	do	not	constitute	a	major	threat	to
public	health.	And	other	browning-reaction
products	have	been	found	to	protect	against
DNA	damage!	But	it’s	probably	prudent	to
make	charred	meats	and	fried	snacks
occasional	pleasures,	not	everyday	ones.



Forms	of	Heat	Transfer

Cooking	can	be	defined	in	a	general	way	as
the	transformation	of	raw	foods	into
something	different.	Most	often,	we	transform
foods	by	heating	them	—	by	transferring
energy	from	a	heat	source	into	the	foods,	so
that	the	food	molecules	move	faster	and
faster,	collide	harder	and	harder,	and	react	to
form	new	structures	and	flavors.	Our	various
cooking	methods	—	boiling,	broiling,	baking,
frying,	and	so	on	—	achieve	their	various
effects	by	employing	very	different	materials
as	the	medium	through	which	the	heat	moves,
and	by	drawing	on	different	forms	of	heat
transfer.	There	are	three	ways	to	transfer	heat,
and	an	acquaintance	with	them	will	help	us
understand	how	particular	cooking	techniques
affect	foods	the	way	they	do.

Conduction:	Direct	Contact



When	thermal	energy	is	exchanged	from	one
particle	to	a	nearby	one	by	means	of	a
collision	or	a	movement	that	induces
movement	(for	example,	through	electrical
attraction	or	repulsion),	the	process	is	called
conduction.	Though	it’s	the	most
straightforward	means	of	heat	transfer	in
matter,	conduction	takes	different	forms	in
different	materials.	For	example,	metals	are
usually	good	conductors	of	heat	because,
while	their	atoms	are	fixed	in	a	lattice-like
structure,	some	of	their	electrons	are	very
loosely	held	and	tend	to	form	a	free-moving
“fluid”	or	“gas”	in	the	solid	that	can	carry
energy	from	one	region	to	another.	This	same
electron	mobility	makes	metals	good
electrical	conductors.	But	in	nonmetallic
solids	like	ceramics,	conduction	is	more
mysterious.	It	seems	that	heat	is	propagated
not	by	the	movement	of	energetic	electrons	—
in	solids	of	ionic-or	covalent-bonded
compounds,	the	electrons	are	not	free	to	move



—	but	by	the	vibration	of	individual
molecules	or	a	portion	of	the	lattice,	which	is
transferred	to	neighboring	areas.	This	transfer
of	vibration	is	a	much	slower	and	less
efficient	process	than	electron	movement,	and
nonmetals	are	therefore	usually	referred	to	as
thermal	or	electrical	insulators,	rather	than
conductors.	Liquids	and	gases,	because	their
molecules	are	relatively	far	apart,	are	very
poor	conductors.

The	conductivity	of	a	material	determines
its	behavior	on	the	stove.	The	better	the
conductor,	the	faster	a	pan	heats	up	and	cools
off,	and	the	more	evenly	heat	is	distributed
across	the	pan	bottom.	Uneven	heating	creates
hot	spots	that	can	burn	foods:	during	frying,
for	example,	or	the	boiling	down	of	a	puree	or
sauce.

Conduction	Within	a	Food	Heat	also	travels
from	the	outside	to	the	center	of	a	solid	piece
of	food	—	a	piece	of	meat	or	fish	or	vegetable



—	 by	 means	 of	 conduction.	 Because	 the
cellular	 structure	 of	 foods	 impedes	 the
movement	of	heat	energy,	foods	behave	more
like	 insulators	 than	 like	 metals,	 and	 heat	 up
relatively	 slowly.	 One	 of	 the	 keys	 to	 good
cooking	is	knowing	how	to	heat	a	food	to	the
desired	 doneness	 at	 its	 center	 without
overheating	 its	 outer	 regions.	 This	 is	 not	 a
simple	 task,	 because	different	 kinds	of	 foods
heat	 through	 at	 different	 rates.	 One	 of	 the
most	 important	 variables	 is	 the	 thickness	 of
the	 food.	 Though	 common	 sense	 might
suggest	 that	 a	 piece	 of	 meat	 one	 inch	 thick
would	take	twice	as	long	to	cook	through	as	a
half-inch	 piece,	 it	 turns	 out	 that	 it	 takes
somewhere	 between	 twice	 and	 four	 times
longer,	 depending	 on	 the	 overall	 shape:	 less
for	a	compact	chop	or	chunk,	more	for	a	broad
steak	 or	 fillet.	 There’s	 no	 absolutely	 reliable
way	 to	 predict	 how	 long	 it	 will	 take	 heat	 to
move	 from	 the	 food	 surface	 to	 its	 center,	 so
the	 best	 rule	 is	 to	 check	 the	 doneness



frequently.

Convection:	Movement	in	Fluids

In	the	form	of	heat	transfer	called	convection,
heat	is	transferred	by	the	movement	of
molecules	in	a	fluid	from	a	warm	region	to	a
cooler	one.	The	fluid	may	be	a	liquid	such	as
water,	or	it	may	be	the	air	or	other	gases.
Convection	is	a	process	that	combines
conduction	and	mixing:	energetic	molecules
move	from	one	point	in	space	to	another,	and
then	collide	with	slower	particles.	Convection
is	an	influential	phenomenon,	contributing	as
it	does	to	winds,	storms,	ocean	currents,	the
heating	of	our	homes,	and	the	boiling	of	water
on	the	stove.	It	occurs	because	air	and	water
take	up	more	space	—	become	less	dense	—
when	their	molecules	absorb	energy	and	move
faster,	and	so	they	rise	when	they	heat	up	and
sink	again	as	they	cool	off.

Radiation:	the	Pure	Energy	Of	radiant	Heat	and



Radiation:	the	Pure	Energy	Of	radiant	Heat	and
Microwaves

We	all	know	that	the	earth	is	warmed	by	the
sun.	How	does	solar	energy	reach	us	across
millions	of	miles	of	nearly	empty	space,
where	there’s	nothing	there	to	conduct	or
convect?	The	answer	is	thermal	radiation,	a
process	that	does	not	require	direct	physical
contact	between	heat	source	and	object.	All
matter	emits	thermal	radiation	all	the	time,
though	normally	we	can	detect	it	only	when
something	is	very	hot.	The	warmth	we	feel
from	sunlight	or	a	stove	burner	comes	from
thermal	radiation.	It’s	emitted	by	atoms	and
molecules	which,	having	absorbed	energy,
release	it	again	not	in	the	form	of	faster
movement,	but	as	waves	of	pure	energy.

Radiant	 Heat	 Is	 Invisible	 “Infrared”
Radiation	 As	 unlikely	 as	 it	 may	 seem,
radiated	 heat	 is	 close	 kin	 to	 radio	 waves,
microwaves,	visible	light,	and	X	rays.	Each	of



these	 phenomena	 is	 a	 part	 of	 the
electromagnetic	 spectrum,	 waves	 of	 varying
energies	 created	 by	 the	 movement	 of
electrically	 charged	 particles,	 often	 electrons
within	 atoms.	 Such	 movement	 creates
electrical	 and	magnetic	 fields	 that	 radiate,	or
spread	 out,	 as	 waves.	And	 conversely,	 when
such	 energetic	 waves	 hit	 other	 atoms,	 they
cause	 increased	 movement	 in	 those	 atoms.
One	 of	 the	 first	 to	 recognize	 that	 heat
radiation	 is	 related	 to	 light	 was	 the	 English
oboist	and	astronomer	William	Herschel,	who
noticed	 in	 1800	 that	 if	 a	 thermometer	 was
moved	 from	 one	 end	 of	 a	 prism-produced
light	 spectrum	 to	 the	 other,	 the	 highest
temperatures	 would	 register	 below	 the	 red
band,	where	 no	 light	was	 visible.	Because	 of
its	position	 in	 the	 spectrum,	heat	 radiation	 is
called	infrared	(infra	is	Latin	for	“below”).

Different	 Kinds	 of	 Radiation	 Carry
Different	 Amounts	 of	 Energy	 Different



kinds	of	radiation	carry	different	energies,	and
the	 energy	 of	 a	 given	 kind	 of	 radiation
determines	the	kind	of	effect	that	it	will	have.

At	the	bottom	end	of	the	scale,	radio
waves	are	so	weak	that	they	can	only
cause	increased	movement	in	free
electrons.	This	is	why	metal	antennas	and
their	mobile	electrons	are	necessary	to
transmit	and	receive	such	radiation.
Next	come	microwaves,	which	are
energetic	enough	to	set	polar	molecules
like	water	moving	faster.	(Microwave
refers	to	the	fact	that	their	wavelength	is
shorter	than	radio	wavelengths.)	Since
most	foods	are	mostly	water	molecules,
microwave	radiation	is	an	effective
means	of	cooking.
Then	there’s	heat	radiation,	the	cook’s
standard	energy	source,	which	causes	the
increased	movement	of	nonpolar
molecules	—	including	carbohydrates,
proteins,	and	fats	—	as	well	as	polar



water.
Visible	and	ultraviolet	light	is	capable	of
altering	the	orbits	of	electrons	bound	in
molecules,	and	so	can	initiate	chemical
reactions	that	cause	damage	to	pigments
and	fats	and	the	development	of	stale,
rancid	flavors.	Visible	and	ultraviolet
rays	from	the	sun	can	ruin	the	flavor	of
milk	and	beer,	and	ultraviolet	rays	can
burn	our	skin,	damage	our	DNA,	and
cause	cancer.
X	and	gamma	rays	penetrate	matter	and
ionize	it,	or	strip	electrons	from	its
molecules.	Along	with	controlled	beams
of	certain	subatomic	particles,	they
damage	DNA	and	kill	microbes,	and	are
used	to	“cold-pasteurize”	and	sterilize
some	foods.

Useful	 Heat	 Radiation	 Is	 Generated	 by
High	 Temperatures	 Because	 all	 molecules
are	 vibrating	 to	 some	 extent,	 everything



around	 us	 is	 emitting	 at	 least	 some	 infrared
radiation	 all	 the	 time.	 The	 hotter	 an	 object
gets,	 the	 more	 energy	 it	 radiates	 in	 higher
regions	of	the	spectrum.	So	it	is	that	glowing
metal	is	hotter	than	metal	that	does	not	radiate
visible	 light,	 and	 that	 yellow-hot	 metal	 is
hotter	than	red-hot.	It	turns	out	that	the	rate	of
infrared	 radiation	 is	 relatively	 low	 below
about	 1,800ºF/980ºC,	 or	 the	 point	 at	 which
objects	begin	to	glow	visibly	red.	Cooking	by
radiation	is	thus	a	slow	process	except	at	very
high	 cooking	 temperatures,	 those
characteristic	 of	 grilling	 and	 broiling	 near
glowing	 coals,	 electrical	 elements,	 or	 gas
flames.	 At	 typical	 baking	 and	 frying
temperatures,	conduction	and	convection	tend
to	be	more	significant	than	infrared	radiation.
But	 as	 the	 oven	 temperature	 goes	 up,	 the
proportion	of	heat	contributed	by	the	radiating
oven	 walls	 goes	 up	 with	 it.	 The	 cook	 can
control	 this	 contribution	 by	moving	 the	 food
close	 to	 the	walls	or	ceiling	 to	 increase	 it,	or



shielding	 the	 food	with	 reflective	 foil,	which
reduces	it.

Basic	Methods	of	Heating	Foods

Pure	examples	of	the	three	different	forms	of
heat	transfer	are	seldom	found	in	everyday
life.	All	hot	utensils	radiate	heat	to	some
degree,	and	cooks	usually	work	with
combinations	of	solid	containers	that	conduct
and	fluids	that	circulate.	As	simple	an
operation	as	heating	a	pan	of	water	on	the
stove	involves	radiation	and	conduction	from
an	electrical	element	(radiation	and
convection	from	a	gas	flame),	conduction
through	the	pan,	and	convection	in	the	water.
Still,	one	kind	of	heat	transfer	usually
predominates	in	a	given	cooking	technique
and,	together	with	the	cooking	medium,	has	a
distinctive	influence	on	foods.



The	 spectrum	 of	 electromagnetic	 radiation.
We	 use	 both	 microwave	 and	 infrared
radiation	 to	 cook	 our	 foods.	 (The	 scale
employs	a	standard	scientific	abbreviation	for
large	 numbers;	 105means	 a	 1	 followed	 by	 5
zeroes,	or	100,000.)

Grilling	and	Broiling:	Infrared	Radiation

Grilling	and	broiling	are	the	modern,
controlled	versions	of	the	oldest	culinary
technique,	roasting	over	an	open	fire	or
glowing	coals.	In	grilling,	the	heat	source	is
below	the	food;	in	broiling,	above.	Though	air
convection	contributes	some	heat,	especially
as	the	distance	between	heat	source	and	food
is	increased,	broiling	is	largely	a	matter	of
infrared	radiation.	The	heat	sources	used	in



these	techniques	all	emit	visible	light	and	so
are	also	intense	radiators	of	infrared	energy.
Glowing	coals	or	the	nickel-chrome	alloys
used	in	electrical	appliances	reach	about
2,000ºF/1,100ºC,	and	a	gas	flame	is	closer	to
3,000ºF/1,600ºC.	The	walls	of	an	oven,	by
contrast,	rarely	exceed	500ºF/250ºC.	The	total
amount	of	energy	radiated	by	a	hot	object	is
proportional	to	the	fourth	power	of	the
absolute	temperature,	so	that	a	coal	or	metal
rod	at	2,000ºF	is	radiating	more	than	40	times
as	much	energy	as	the	equivalent	area	of	oven
wall	at	500ºF.

This	tremendous	amount	of	heat	is	at	once
the	great	advantage	and	the	principal
challenge	of	grilling	and	broiling.	On	one
hand,	it	makes	possible	a	rapid	and	thorough
browning	of	the	surface,	and	so	produces
intense	flavors.	On	the	other,	there’s	a	huge
disparity	between	the	rate	of	heat	radiation	at
the	surface	and	the	rate	of	heat	conduction
within	the	food.	This	is	why	it’s	so	easy	to	end



up	with	a	steak	that’s	charred	on	the	outside
and	cold	at	the	center.

The	key	to	grilling	and	broiling	is	to
position	the	food	far	enough	from	the	heat
source	to	match	the	browning	rate	with	the
inner	conduction	rate,	or	to	brown	the	surface
well	with	intense	heat,	and	then	move	the	food
to	finish	cooking	through	with	a	more	distant
or	weaker	heat	source.	This	might	be	a	spot	on
the	grill	with	fewer	coals	below,	or	a
moderate	oven.

Induction	Cooking
An	 innovative	 version	 of	 heating	 with
electromagnetic	 radiation	 is	 induction
heating.	 It’s	 an	 alternative	 to	 the	 stovetop
burner	or	electrical	element,	and	heats	 the
pot	 that	 then	 heats	 the	 food.	 In	 induction
heating,	 the	 heating	 element,	 under	 a
ceramic	 cook-top	 surface,	 is	 a	 wire	 coil
through	 which	 a	 rapidly	 alternating
electrical	 current	 flows	 (between	 25,000



and	40,000	cycles	per	second).	The	current
causes	the	coil	to	generate	a	magnetic	field
that	 extends	 some	 distance	 from	 the	 coil,
and	that	alternates	at	the	same	rate.	If	a	pot
made	 from	 a	 magnetic	 material	 —	 cast
iron,	 steel,	 stainless	 steel	 of	 the	 proper
crystal	structure	(ferritic)	—	is	placed	near
the	coil,	then	the	alternating	magnetic	field
induces	an	alternating	electrical	current	 in
the	pot.	That	is,	it	causes	electrons	to	move
in	 the	 pot,	 and	 that	 movement	 rapidly
generates	heat.

Induction	 heating	 has	 two	 notable
advantages	 over	 burners	 and	 radiant
elements.	 Like	 microwave	 heating,	 it’s
more	efficient,	because	all	the	energy	goes
into	 the	 object	 to	 be	 heated,	 not	 into	 the
surrounding	 air.	And	 only	 the	 pot	 and	 its
contents	get	very	hot.	The	ceramic	surface
above	 the	 induction	 coil	 is	 heated	 only
indirectly	by	the	pot,	because	its	electrons
aren’t	 free	 to	 be	 moved	 by	 the	 magnetic



field.

Baking:	Air	Convection	and	Radiation

When	we	bake	a	food,	we	surround	it	with	a
hot	enclosure,	the	oven,	and	rely	on	a
combination	of	radiation	from	the	walls	and
hot-air	convection	to	heat	the	food.	Baking
easily	dehydrates	the	surface	of	foods,	and	so
will	brown	them	well	provided	the	oven
temperature	is	high	enough.	Typical	baking
temperatures	are	well	above	the	boiling	point,
from	300	to	500ºF/150–250ºC),	and	yet	baking
is	nowhere	near	as	efficient	a	means	of	heat
transfer	as	is	boiling.	A	potato	can	be	boiled
in	less	time	than	it	takes	to	be	baked	at	a
much	hotter	temperature.	This	is	so	because
neither	radiation	nor	air	convection	at	500ºF
transfers	heat	very	rapidly	to	food.	Oven	air	is
less	than	a	thousandth	as	dense	as	water,	so
the	collisions	between	hot	molecules	and	food
are	much	less	frequent	in	the	oven	than	in	the



pot	(this	is	why	we	can	reach	into	a	hot	oven
without	immediately	burning	our	hand).
Convection	ovens	increase	the	rate	of	heat
transfer	by	using	fans	to	force	more	air
movement,	and	significantly	reduce	baking
times.

Because	baking	requires	a	fairly
sophisticated	container,	it	was	probably	a	late
addition	to	the	culinary	repertoire.	The
earliest	ovens	seem	to	have	accompanied	the
refinement	of	bread	making	around	3000	BCE
in	Egypt;	they	were	hollow	cones	of	clay	that
contained	a	layer	of	coals,	with	the	bread
stuck	onto	an	inside	wall.	As	a	relatively
compact	metal	box	easily	installed	in
individual	homes,	the	modern	oven	dates	from
the	late	19th	century.	Before	then,	most	meat
cooking	was	done	over	the	fire.

Boiling	and	Simmering:	Water	Convection

In	boiling	and	its	lower-temperature	versions,



simmering	and	poaching,	food	is	heated	by
the	convection	currents	in	hot	water.	The
maximum	temperature	possible	is	the	boiling
point,	212ºF/100ºC	at	sea	level,	which	is
usually	not	high	enough	for	these	“moist”
cooking	methods	to	trigger	browning
reactions.	Despite	the	relatively	low	cooking
temperature,	boiling	is	a	very	efficient
process.	The	entire	surface	of	the	food	is	in
contact	with	the	cooking	medium,	and	water
is	dense	enough	that	its	molecules	constantly
collide	with	the	food	and	rapidly	impart	their
energy	to	it.

As	a	cooking	technique,	boiling	probably
followed	roasting	and	preceded	baking.	It
requires	containers	that	are	both	water-and
fireproof,	and	so	probably	had	to	await	the
development	of	pottery,	around	10,000	years
ago.

The	Boiling	Point:	A	Reliable	Landmark 	 It
isn’t	 always	 easy	 for	 the	 cook	 to	 recognize



and	 maintain	 a	 particular	 cooking
temperature,	 and	 reproduce	 the	 same
temperature	 reliably.	 Thermostats,
thermometers,	and	our	 senses	are	all	 fallible.
So	one	of	 the	 great	 advantages	 of	water	 as	 a
cooking	 medium	 is	 that	 its	 boiling	 point	 is
constant	—	 212ºF/100ºC	 at	 sea	 level	—	 and
it’s	 instantly	 recognizable.	 The	 sure	 sign	 of
boiling	 water	 is	 bubbling.	 Why?	 When	 the
water	 in	 a	 pan	 is	 heated	 near	 boiling,
molecules	 at	 the	 bottom,	 where	 the	 pan	 is
hottest,	vaporize	and	become	steam,	and	form
regions	 that	 are	 less	 dense	 than	 the
surrounding	 liquid.	 (The	 small	 bubbles	 that
form	very	early	on	are	pockets	of	air	that	had
been	 dissolved	 in	 the	 cold	water	 but	 became
less	soluble	as	the	temperature	rose.)	Because
all	 the	 pan	 heat	 at	 the	 boil	 goes	 into
vaporizing	 the	 liquid	 water,	 the	 temperature
of	the	water	itself	stays	the	same	(p.	816).	It’s
only	slightly	higher	at	a	full,	rolling	boil	than
in	a	gently	bubbling	pot,	and	will	not	get	any



higher	 until	 the	 phase	 change	 from	 liquid	 to
gas	has	been	completed.

The	Boiling	Point	Depends	on	Elevation	The
boiling	 point	 of	 water	 is	 constant	 given	 a
constant	 physical	 environment,	 but	 it	 varies
from	 place	 to	 place	 and	 even	 in	 the	 same
place.	The	boiling	point	of	any	liquid	depends
on	the	atmospheric	pressure	bearing	down	on
its	 surface:	 the	higher	 the	pressure,	 the	more
energy	it	takes	for	liquid	molecules	to	escape
the	 surface	 and	 become	 a	 gas,	 and	 so	 the
higher	 the	 temperature	 at	 which	 the	 liquid
boils.	 Every	 1,000	 feet/305	 meters	 in
elevation	 above	 sea	 level	 lowers	 the	 boiling
point	 about	2ºF	below	 the	 standard	212ºF	 (or
1ºC	 below	 100ºC).	And	 food	 takes	 longer	 to
cook	at	200º	than	it	does	at	212º.	Even	a	low-
pressure	 weather	 front	 can	 lower	 the	 boiling
point,	 or	 a	 high-pressure	 front	 raise	 it,	 by	 as
much	as	a	degree	or	two.

Pressure	Cooking:	Raising	the	Boiling	Point



The	 same	 principal	 is	 put	 to	 use	 to	speed
cooking	in	the	pressure	cooker.	This	appliance
reduces	 cooking	 times	 by	 trapping	 the	 steam
that	 escapes	 from	 boiling	 water,	 thereby
increasing	 the	 pressure	 on	 the	 liquid,	 and	 so
raising	 its	 boiling	 point	 —	 and	 maximum
temperature	—	to	about	250ºF/120ºC.	This	 is
the	equivalent	of	boiling	water	in	an	open	pan
at	the	bottom	of	a	pit	19,000	feet/5,800	meters
below	sea	level.

The	pressure	cooker	was	invented	by	the
French	physician	Denis	Papin	in	the	17th
century.

The	Boiling	Point	 Is	 Increased	by	Dissolved
Sugar	and	Salt	When	salt,	sugar,	or	any	other
water-soluble	 substance	 is	 added	 to	 pure
water,	 the	 boiling	 point	 of	 the	 resulting
solution	becomes	higher	than	the	boiling	point
of	 water,	 and	 the	 freezing	 point	 lower	 than
water’s	freezing	point.	Both	effects	are	due	to
the	 fact	 that	 the	water	molecules	 are	 diluted



by	 the	 dissolved	 particles,	 which	 interfere
with	the	water	molecules	as	they	change	phase
from	 liquid	 to	 gas	 or	 liquid	 to	 solid.	 In	 the
case	of	the	boiling	point,	the	solution	contains
sugar	molecules	 or	 salt	 ions	 that	 also	 absorb
heat	energy,	but	cannot	themselves	turn	into	a
gas.	So	at	water’s	normal	boiling	point,	 there
is	 a	 smaller	 proportion	 of	 molecules	 with
enough	 energy	 to	 escape	 from	 the	 liquid	 and
form	 a	 bubble	 of	 vapor,	 and	 the	 cook	 has	 to
add	 more	 energy	 than	 usual	 in	 order	 to	 get
those	bubbles	 to	 form.	The	boiling	point	 and
freezing	point	 rise	and	fall	predictably	as	 the
concentration	 of	 dissolved	 sugar	 or	 salt
increases,	a	fact	that	is	handy	for	making	both
sugar	candies	and	ice	creams.

It’s	true	that	adding	salt	to	water	raises	its
boiling	point,	and	so	speeds	cooking.
However,	it	takes	one	ounce	of	salt	in	a	quart
of	water	—	around	the	salinity	of	the	ocean	—
to	raise	the	boiling	point	a	negligible	1ºF.	A
Denverite	who	wanted	to	boil	water	at	the



same	temperature	as	someone	in	Boston
would	have	to	add	more	than	half	a	pound	of
salt	to	that	quart	of	liquid	(225	grams	to	a
liter).

Cooking	Below	the	Boil	Though	the	boil	is	a
handy	 temperature	 landmark,	 it’s	 not
necessarily	 the	 best	 temperature	 at	 which	 to
cook	 foods	 in	 water.	 Fish	 and	 many	 meats
develop	 an	 ideal	 texture	 at	 temperatures
around	 140ºF/60ºC.	 If	 they’re	 cooked	 in
boiling	 water,	 which	 is	 70ºF	 hotter,	 then	 the
outer	 portions	 of	 the	 food	 overcook	 and	 dry
out	 while	 the	 interior	 heats	 through.	 Lower
water	 temperatures	 reduce	 this	 overcooking,
though	 they	 also	 prolong	 cooking	 times.	 A
water	 temperature	 of	 180ºF/80ºC,	 verified	 by
thermometer,	 offers	 a	 good	 compromise
between	gentle	and	efficient	cooking.

Steaming:	Heating	by	Vapor	condensation	and
Convection



Though	it’s	less	dense	than	liquid	water	and
so	makes	less	frequent	contact	with	the	food,
steam	compensates	for	this	loss	in	efficiency
with	a	gain	in	energy.	It	takes	a	large	amount
of	energy	to	turn	liquid	water	into	a	gas,	and
conversely	gaseous	water	releases	that	same
large	amount	of	energy	when	it	condenses
onto	a	cooler	object.	So	molecules	of	steam
don’t	just	impart	their	energy	of	motion	to	the
food;	they	impart	their	energy	of	vaporization
also.	This	means	that	steaming	does	an
especially	quick	job	of	bringing	the	surface	of
the	food	up	to	the	boiling	point,	and	an
effective	job	of	keeping	it	there.

Pan-Frying	and	Sautéing:	Conduction

Frying	and	sautéing	are	methods	that	heat
foods	for	the	most	part	by	conduction	from	a
hot,	oiled	pan,	with	temperatures	between	350
and	450ºF/175–225ºC	that	encourage	Maillard
browning	and	flavor	development.	The	fat	or



oil	has	several	roles	to	play:	it	brings	the
uneven	surface	of	the	food	into	uniform
contact	with	the	heat	source,	it	lubricates	and
prevents	sticking,	and	it	supplies	some	flavor.
As	is	true	in	broiling,	the	trick	in	frying	is	to
prevent	the	outside	from	overcooking	before
the	inside	is	done.	The	surface	is	quickly
dehydrated	by	the	high	temperatures	—	odd	as
it	sounds,	frying	in	oil	is	a	“dry”	technique	—
while	the	interior	remains	largely	water	and
never	exceeds	212ºF/100ºC.	In	order	to	reduce
the	disparity	between	outer	and	inner	cooking
times,	we	generally	fry	only	thin	cuts	of	food.
It’s	also	common	practice	to	fry	meats	at	a
high	initial	temperature	—	to	sear	them	—	in
order	to	accomplish	the	browning,	and	then	to
reduce	the	heat	while	the	interior	heats
through.	Yet	another	way	to	avoid
overcooking	the	outer	portions	of	the	food	is
to	coat	it	in	another	material	that	develops
pleasant	flavors	when	fried,	and	acts	as	a	kind
of	insulation	to	protect	the	inner	food	from



direct	contact	with	high	heat.	Breadings	and
batters	are	such	insulators.

How	far	back	frying	goes	is	hard	to	tell.
The	rules	for	sacrifice	in	Leviticus	2,	which
dates	from	about	600	BCE,	distinguish	between
bread	baked	in	an	oven	and	cooked	“on	the
griddle”	or	“in	the	pan.”	Pliny,	in	the	1st
century	CE,	records	a	prescription	for	spleen
disease	that	calls	for	eggs	steeped	in	vinegar
and	then	fried	in	oil.	And	by	Chaucer’s	time,
the	14th	century,	frying	was	common	enough
to	serve	as	a	colorful	metaphor.	The	Wife	of
Bath	says	of	her	fourth	husband

That	in	his	owene	grece	I	made	hym	frye
For	angre,	and	for	verray	jalousye.
By	God!	in	erthe	I	was	his	purgatorie,
For	which	I	hope	his	soule	be	in	glorie.

Deep	Frying:	Oil	Convection

Deep	frying	differs	from	pan	frying	by



employing	enough	oil	to	immerse	the	food
altogether.	As	a	technique,	it	resembles
boiling	more	than	pan	frying,	with	the
essential	difference	that	the	oil	is	heated	far
above	the	boiling	point	of	water,	and	so	will
dehydrate	the	food	surface	and	brown	it.

Microwaving:
Microwave	Radiation

Microwave	ovens	transfer	heat	via
electromagnetic	radiation,	but	with	waves	that
carry	only	a	ten-thousandth	the	energy	of
infrared	radiation	from	glowing	coals.	This
shift	makes	for	a	unique	heating	effect.
Whereas	infrared	waves	are	energetic	enough
to	increase	the	vibratory	movement	of	nearly
all	molecules,	microwaves	tend	to	affect	only
polar	molecules	(p.	793),	whose	electrical
imbalance	gives	the	radiation	a	kind	of	handle
with	which	to	move	them.	So	foods	that
contain	water	are	heated	directly	and	rapidly



by	microwaves.	But	the	oven	air,	composed	of
nonpolar	nitrogen,	oxygen,	and	hydrogen
molecules,	and	nonpolar	container	materials
like	glass,	stoneware,	and	plastic	(made	of
hydrocarbon	chains),	are	unaffected	by	the
microwaves;	the	food	heats	them	as	it	heats
up.

Here’s	how	a	microwave	oven	works.	A
transmitter,	very	much	like	a	radio
transmitter,	sets	up	an	electromagnetic	field
in	the	oven	which	reverses	its	polarity	some	2
or	5	billion	times	every	second.	(It	operates	at
a	frequency	of	either	915	or	2,450	million
cycles	per	second,	compared	to	wall	socket
currents	at	60	cycles,	and	FM	radio	signals	at
some	100	million	cycles	per	second.)	Polar
water	molecules	in	the	food	are	pulled	by	the
field	to	orient	themselves	with	it,	but	because
the	field	is	constantly	changing,	the	molecules
oscillate	back	and	forth	with	it.	The	water
transmits	this	motion	to	neighboring
molecules	by	knocking	into	them,	and	the



temperature	of	the	food	as	a	whole	quickly
rises.

Metal	foil	and	utensils	can	be	put	in	the
microwave	oven	with	moist	foods	without
causing	problems,	provided	they’re
reasonably	large	and	kept	some	distance	from
the	walls	and	each	other	to	prevent	arcing.
Fine	metallic	decoration	on	china	will	spark
and	suffer	damage.	Foil	is	useful	for	partly
shielding	some	foods	from	the	radiation,	the
thin	edges	of	fish	fillets,	for	example.

Microwave	ovens	are	a	recent	invention.	In
1945	Dr.	Percy	Spencer,	a	scientist	working
for	Raytheon	in	Waltham,	Massachusetts,
filed	a	patent	for	the	use	of	microwaves	in
cooking	after	he	had	successfully	popped	corn
with	them.	This	kind	of	radiation	had	already
been	used	in	diathermy,	or	deep	heat
treatment	for	patients	with	arthritis,	as	well	as
in	communications	and	navigation.
Microwave	ovens	became	a	popular	appliance
in	the	1970s.



Advantages	 and	 Disadvantages	 of
Microwaves	 Microwave	 radiation	 has	 one
great	advantage	over	 infrared:	 the	 fact	 that	 it
cooks	 food	 much	 faster.	 Microwaves	 can
penetrate	food	to	a	depth	of	about	an	inch/2.5
cm,	 while	 infrared	 energy	 is	 almost	 entirely
absorbed	 at	 the	 surface.	 Because	 heat
radiation	can	travel	to	the	center	of	foods	only
by	the	slow	process	of	conduction,	 it’s	easily
beaten	by	microwaves,	with	their	substantially
deeper	 reach.	 This	 reach,	 along	 with	 the
microwaves’	 concentration	 on	 heating	 the
food	and	not	its	surroundings,	results	in	a	very
efficient	use	of	energy.

Microwave	cooking	has	several
disadvantages.	One	is	that,	in	the	case	of
meats,	speedy	heating	can	cause	greater	fluid
loss	and	so	a	drier	texture,	and	makes	it	more
difficult	to	control	doneness.	This	can	be
partly	overcome	by	pulsing	the	oven	on	and
off	to	slow	the	heating.	Another	problem	is
that	microwaves	cannot	brown	many	foods



unless	they	essentially	dehydrate	them,	since
the	food	surface	gets	no	warmer	than	the
interior.	Thin,	radiation-concentrating	metal
sheets	in	special	microwavable	food
packaging	can	help	heat	the	food	surface	to
the	point	that	it	browns.

Utensil	Materials

Finally,	a	brief	discussion	of	the	materials
from	which	we	make	our	pots	and	pans.	We
generally	want	two	basic	properties	in	a
utensil.	Its	surface	should	be	chemically
unreactive	so	that	it	won’t	change	the	taste	or
edibility	of	food.	And	it	should	conduct	heat
evenly	and	efficiently,	so	that	local	hot	spots
won’t	develop	and	burn	the	contents.	No
single	material	provides	both	properties.

The	Different	Behaviors
of	Metals	and	Ceramics



As	we’ve	seen,	heat	conduction	in	a	solid
proceeds	either	by	the	movement	of	energetic
electrons,	or	by	vibration	in	crystal	structures.
A	material	whose	electrons	are	mobile	enough
to	conduct	heat	well	is	also	likely	to	give	up
those	electrons	to	other	atoms	at	its	surface:
in	other	words,	good	conductors	like	metals
are	usually	chemically	reactive.	By	the	same
token,	inert	compounds	are	poor	conductors.
Ceramics	are	stable,	unreactive	mixtures	of
compounds	(magnesium	and	aluminum
oxides,	silicon	dioxide)	whose	covalent	bonds
hold	electrons	tightly.	They	therefore	transmit
heat	slowly	by	means	of	inefficient	vibrations.
If	subjected	to	the	direct	and	intense	heat	of
the	stovetop,	ceramics	can’t	distribute	the
energy	evenly.	Hot	areas	expand	while	cooler
areas	do	not,	mechanical	stresses	build	up,
and	the	utensil	cracks	or	shatters.	This	is	why
ceramics	are	generally	used	only	in	the	oven,
where	they	encounter	only	moderate	and
diffuse	heat,	or	are	applied	in	thin	coatings	on



the	surface	of	metals,	so	that	the	metals	can
do	the	job	of	distributing	the	heat	evenly.

Spontaneous	Ceramic	Coatings	on	Metals	It
turns	 out	 that	 most	 of	 the	metals	 commonly
used	 in	 kitchen	 utensils	 naturally	 cover
themselves	with	 a	very	 thin	 layer	of	 ceramic
material.	 Metallic	 electrons	 are	 mobile,	 and
oxygen	 is	 electron-hungry.	 When	 metal	 is
exposed	to	the	air,	the	surface	atoms	undergo
a	 spontaneous	 reaction	 with	 atmospheric
oxygen	 to	 form	 a	 very	 stable	 metal	 oxide
compound.	 (The	 discoloration	 on	 silver	 and
copper	 that	 we	 call	tarnish	 is	 a	 metal-sulfur
compound;	 the	 sulfur	 comes	mainly	 from	air
pollution.)	 These	 oxide	 films	 are	 both
unreactive	and	fairly	tough.	Aluminum	oxide,
when	it	occurs	in	crystals	rather	than	on	pans,
makes	up	the	abrasive	called	corundum,	and	is
also	 the	 principal	 material	 of	 rubies	 and
sapphires	 (the	 gem	 colors	 come	 from
chromium	 and	 titanium	 impurities).	 The



problem	is	that	these	natural	coatings	are	only
a	 few	 molecules	 thick,	 and	 are	 easily
scratched	 through	 or	 worn	 away	 during
cooking.

Metallurgists	have	found	two	ways	to	take
advantage	of	metal	oxidation	at	the	pan
surface.	The	film	over	aluminum	can	be	made
up	to	a	thousandth	of	an	inch/0.03	mm	thick,
and	so	fairly	impervious,	by	a	chemical
treatment.	And	iron	can	be	protected	by
mixing	it	with	other	metals	that	form	a
tougher	oxide	surface	and	so	produce	stainless
steel	(p.	791).

Here	are	brief	descriptions	of	the	materials
from	which	most	kitchen	utensils	are	made
today,	and	their	particular	advantages	and
disadvantages.

Ceramics

Earthenware,	Stoneware,	Glass	Ceramics
are	varying	mixtures	of	a	number	of	different



compounds,	notably	the	oxides	of	silicon,
aluminum,	and	magnesium.	Glass	is	a
particular	variety	of	ceramic	whose
composition	is	more	regular,	and	usually
includes	a	preponderance	of	silica	(silicon
dioxide).	Until	fairly	recently,	these	materials
were	made	from	naturally	occurring	mineral
aggregates:	the	word	ceramic	comes	from	the
Greek	for	“potter’s	clay.”	The	molding	and
drying	of	simple	clay	pottery,	or	earthenware,
dates	from	about	9,000	years	ago,	or	about	the
time	that	plants	and	animals	were	first
domesticated.	Less	porous	and	coarse	than
earthenware,	and	much	stronger,	is	stoneware,
which	contains	enough	silica	and	is	fired	at	a
high	enough	temperature	that	it	vitrifies,	or
becomes	partly	glass.	The	Chinese	invented
this	refinement	sometime	before	1500	BCE.
Porcelain	is	a	white	but	translucent	stoneware
made	by	mixing	kaolin,	a	very	light	clay,	with
a	silicate	mineral,	and	firing	at	high	kiln
temperatures;	it	dates	from	the	T’ang	Dynasty



(618–907	CE).	This	fine	ceramic	was
introduced	to	Europe	with	the	tea	trade	in	the
17th	century,	and	in	England	was	first	called
“Chinaware,”	and	then	simply	“China.”	The
first	glass	containers	were	not	molded	or
blown,	but	laboriously	sculpted	from	blocks,
and	date	from	4,000	years	ago	in	the	Near
East.
The	Qualities	of	Ceramic	Pots	The
outstanding	characteristic	of	ceramic
materials	is	chemical	stability:	they	are
unreactive,	resist	corrosion,	and	don’t	affect
the	flavor	or	other	qualities	of	foods.	(One
exception	to	this	rule	is	the	fact	that	clays	and
glazes	sometimes	contain	lead,	which	is	a
nerve	poison,	and	which	can	be	leached	out
into	acidic	foods.	Imported	ceramic
containers	made	with	high-lead	clays	or
glazes	still	occasionally	cause	cases	of	lead
poisoning.)	Ceramic	pots	tend	to	be	used	only
in	slow,	uniform	cooking	processes,
especially	oven	baking	and	braising,	because



direct	high	heat	can	shatter	them.	Heat-
resistant	forms	of	glass	incorporate	an	oxide
of	boron	that	has	the	effect	of	reducing
thermal	expansion	by	a	factor	of	about	3,	and
for	this	reason	are	less	affected	by	thermal
shock,	though	they’re	still	not	immune.

Enamelware	 In	 utensils	 called	enamelware,
powdered	glass	is	fused	into	a	thin	layer	onto
the	surface	of	 iron	or	steel	utensils.	This	was
first	 done	 to	 cast	 iron	 early	 in	 the	 19th
century,	 and	 today	 enameled	metal	 is	widely
used	 in	 the	 dairy,	 chemical,	 and	 brewing
industries,	 as	well	 as	 on	 bathtubs.	 In	 kitchen
utensils,	 the	 metal	 diffuses	 the	 direct	 heat
evenly,	the	ceramic	layer	is	thin	enough	that	it
can	 expand	 and	 contract	 uniformly,	 and	 it
protects	the	food	from	direct	contact	with	the
metal.	 Enamelware	 is	 reasonably	 durable,
though	it	still	requires	some	care:	the	ceramic
layer	 can	 be	 chipped	 or	 damaged	 by
quenching	a	hot	pan	in	cold	water.



The	Advantages	 of	 Poor	 Conductivity	 The
poor	 conductivity	 of	 ceramic	materials	 is	 an
advantage	if	the	cook	needs	to	keep	food	hot.
Good	 conductors	 like	 copper	 and	 aluminum
quickly	 give	 up	 heat	 to	 their	 surroundings,
while	ceramics	retain	it	well.	Similarly,	ovens
with	 ceramic	 (brick)	 walls	 are	 unparalleled
for	 the	 evenness	 of	 their	 heating.	 The	 walls
slowly	 absorb	 and	 store	 large	 quantities	 of
energy	while	 the	oven	 is	heated	up,	 and	 then
release	 it	 when	 the	 food	 is	 placed	 inside.
Modern	 metal	 ovens	 can’t	 store	 much	 heat
and	 so	must	 cycle	 their	 heating	 elements	 on
and	 off.	 This	 causes	 large	 temperature
fluctuations,	and	can	scorch	breads	and	other
foods	that	are	baked	at	high	temperatures.

Aluminum

Aluminum	has	been	used	in	pots	and	pans	for
barely	a	century,	despite	the	fact	that	it’s	the
most	abundant	metal	in	the	earth’s	crust.	It	is



never	found	in	nature	in	the	pure	state,	and	a
good	method	for	separating	the	metal	from	its
ore	wasn’t	developed	until	1890.	In	cookware,
it	is	usually	alloyed	with	small	amounts	of
manganese	and	sometimes	copper.
Aluminum’s	prime	advantages	are	its
relatively	low	cost,	a	heat	conductivity	second
only	to	copper’s,	and	a	low	density	that	makes
it	lightweight	and	easily	handled.	Its
ubiquitous	presence	in	the	form	of	foil
wrappings	and	beer	and	soft	drink	cans
testifies	to	its	usefulness.	But	because
unanodized	aluminum	develops	only	a	thin
oxide	layer,	reactive	food	molecules	—	acids,
alkalis,	the	hydrogen	sulfide	evolved	by
cooked	eggs	—	will	easily	penetrate	to	the
metal	surface,	and	a	variety	of	aluminum
oxide	and	hydroxide	complexes,	some	of	them
gray	or	black,	are	formed.	These	can	mar
light-colored	foods.	Today,	most	aluminum
utensils	are	either	given	a	nonstick	coating	or
are	anodized,	a	process	that	involves	making



the	metal	the	positive	pole	(anode)	in	a
solution	of	sulfuric	acid,	and	so	forcing	the
oxidation	of	its	surface	to	make	a	thick
protective	oxide	layer.

Nonstick	Coatings	and	Silicone	“Pans”
The	 materials	 for	 nonstick	 coatings	 were
developed	 around	 the	 middle	 of	 the	 20th
century	 by	 industrial	 chemists,	 and
nonstick	 utensils	 were	 introduced	 in	 the
1960s.	 Teflon	 and	 its	 relatives	 are	 long
chains	of	carbon	atoms	with	fluorine	atoms
projecting	 from	 the	 backbone.	 They
produce	 a	 plastic-like	 material	 with	 a
smooth,	 slippery	 surface,	 and	 are	 as	 inert
as	 ceramics	 at	 moderate	 cooking
temperatures.	 Above	 about	 500ºF/250ºC,
however,	they	decompose	into	a	number	of
noxious	and	 toxic	gases.	Nonstick	utensils
therefore	 need	 to	 be	 used	 with	 care	 to
avoid	 overheating.	 The	 coatings	 have	 the
additional	 disadvantage	 of	 being	 easily



scratched,	and	food	sticks	to	the	scratches.
Beginning	in	the	1980s,	flexible	nonstick
sheets	and	containers	made	of	silicone
have	been	used	by	bakers	to	line	metal
baking	sheets	or	replace	molded	metal
pans.	Silicone	is	also	a	long-chain
molecule,	with	a	backbone	of	alternating
silicon	and	oxygen	atoms,	and	small	fat-
like	carbon	chains	projecting	from	it.	The
backbone	gives	the	material	its	flexibility,
and	the	hydrophobic	projections	make	the
surface	behave	like	a	permanently	well-
oiled	pan	surface.	Food-grade	silicones
decompose	at	temperatures	above	about
480ºF/240ºC,	so	like	nonstick	pans,
silicone	bakeware	must	be	used	with	some
caution.

Copper

Copper	is	unique	among	the	common	metals
because	it	can	be	found	naturally	in	the



metallic	state.	For	this	reason	it	was	the	first
metal	to	be	used	in	tool	making,	about	10,000
years	ago.	In	the	kitchen,	it	is	prized	for	its
unmatched	conductivity,	which	makes	fast
and	even	heating	a	simple	matter.	But	copper
is	also	relatively	expensive,	since	its
conductivity	has	made	it	the	preferred
material	for	millions	of	miles	of	electrical
circuitry.	It	is	troublesome	to	keep	polished,
because	it	has	a	high	affinity	for	oxygen	and
sulfur,	and	forms	a	greenish	coating	when
exposed	to	air.	Most	important,	copper
cookware	can	be	harmful.	Its	oxide	coating	is
sometimes	porous	and	powdery,	and	copper
ions	are	easily	leached	into	food	solutions.
Copper	ions	can	have	useful	effects:	they
stabilize	foamed	egg	whites	(p.	102),	and	the
green	color	of	cooked	vegetables	is	improved
by	their	presence.	But	the	human	body	can
excrete	copper	in	only	limited	amounts,	and
excessive	intake	may	cause	gastrointestinal
problems	and,	in	more	extreme	cases,	liver



damage.	No	one	will	be	poisoned	by	the
occasional	meringue	whipped	in	a	copper
bowl,	but	bare	copper	isn’t	a	good	candidate
for	everyday	cooking.	To	overcome	this	major
drawback,	manufacturers	line	copper	utensils
with	stainless	steel	or,	more	traditionally,
with	tin.	Tin	has	its	own	limitations	(p.	791).

Iron	and	Steel

Iron	was	a	relatively	late	discovery	because	it
exists	 in	 the	 earth’s	 crust	 primarily	 in	 the
form	of	oxides,	and	had	 to	be	encountered	 in
its	pure	form	by	accident,	perhaps	when	a	fire
was	 built	 on	 an	 outcropping	 of	 ore.	 Iron
artifacts	have	been	found	that	date	from	3000
BCE,	 though	 the	 Iron	 Age,	 when	 the	 metal
came	 into	 regular	 use	 without	 replacing
copper	 and	 bronze	 (a	 copper-tin	 alloy)	 in
preeminence,	 is	 said	 to	 begin	 around	 1200
BCE.	 Cast	 iron	 is	 alloyed	 with	 about	 3%
carbon	to	harden	the	metal,	and	also	contains



some	 silicon;	carbon	 steel	 contains	 less
carbon,	 and	 is	 heat-treated	 to	 obtain	 a	 less
brittle,	 tougher	 alloy	 that	 can	be	 formed	 into
thinner	pans.	The	chief	attractions	of	cast	iron
and	 carbon	 steel	 in	 kitchen	 work	 are	 their
cheapness	 and	 safety.	 Excess	 iron	 is	 readily
eliminated	 from	 the	 body,	 and	 most	 people
can	 actually	 benefit	 from	 additional	 dietary
iron.	Their	greatest	disadvantage	is	a	tendency
to	 corrode,	 though	 this	 can	 be	 avoided	 by
regular	seasoning	(below)	and	gentle	cleaning.
Like	 aluminum,	 iron	 and	 carbon	 steel	 can
discolor	 foods.	 And	 iron	 turns	 out	 to	 be	 a
poorer	 conductor	 of	 heat	 than	 copper	 or
aluminum.	 But	 exactly	 for	 this	 reason,	 and
because	it’s	denser	than	aluminum,	a	cast	iron
pan	will	 absorb	more	heat	 and	hold	 it	 longer
than	a	similar	aluminum	pan.	Thick	cast	 iron
pans	provide	steady,	even	heat.

“Seasoning”	 Cast	 Iron	 and	 Carbon	 Steel
Cooks	 who	 appreciate	 cast	 iron	 and	 carbon



steel	 pans	 improve	 their	 easily	 corroded
surface	by	building	up	an	artificial	protective
layer.	 They	 “season”	 them	 by	 coating	 them
with	cooking	oil	and	heating	them	for	several
hours.	 The	 oil	 penetrates	 into	 the	 pores	 and
fissures	 of	 the	 metal,	 sealing	 it	 from	 the
attack	of	 air	 and	water.	And	 the	combination
of	heat,	metal,	and	air	oxidizes	 the	fatty	acid
chains	 and	 encourages	 them	 to	 bond	 to	 each
other	 (“polymerize”)	 to	 form	 a	 dense,	 hard,
dry	 layer	 (just	 as	 linseed	 and	 other	 “drying
oils”	 doon	 wood	 and	 on	 paintings).	 Highly
unsaturated	 oils	 —	 soy	 oil,	 corn	 oil	 —	 are
especially	 prone	 to	 oxidation	 and
polymerizing.	 To	 avoid	 removing	 the
protective	 oil	 layer,	 cooks	 carefully	 clean
seasoned	cast	iron	pans	with	mild	soaps	and	a
dissolving	abrasive	 like	salt,	 rather	 then	with
detergents	and	scouring	pads.

Stainless	Steel



The	important	exception	to	the	rule	that
metals	form	protective	surface	coatings	is
iron,	which	rusts	in	the	presence	of	air	and
moisture.	The	orange	complex	of	ferric	oxide
and	water	(Fe2O3•	 2O)	is	a	loose	powder
rather	than	a	continuous	film,	and	so	does	not
protect	the	metal	surface	from	further	contact
with	the	air.	Unless	it’s	protected	by	some
other	means,	iron	metal	will	corrode
continuously	(this	is	why	pure	iron	is	not
found	in	nature).	Efforts	to	make	this	cheap
and	abundant	element	more	resistant	to
rusting	resulted	in	the	19th	century	in	the
development	of	stainless	steel,	an	iron-carbon
alloy	that	—	in	cookware	—	is	formulated
with	about	18%	chromium	and	8–10%	nickel.
Chrome	is	synonymous	with	bright	and
permanent	shininess	because	chromium	is
extremely	prone	to	oxidation	and	naturally
forms	a	thick	protective	oxide	coat.	In	the
stainless	steel	mixture,	oxygen	reacts
preferentially	with	the	chromium	atoms	at	the



surface,	and	the	iron	never	gets	the
opportunity	to	rust.

This	chemical	stability	is	bought	at	a	price.
Stainless	steel	is	more	expensive	than	cast
iron	and	carbon	steel,	and	it’s	an	even	poorer
heat	conductor.	The	addition	of	large	numbers
of	foreign	atoms	apparently	interferes	with
electron	movement	by	causing	structural	and
electrical	irregularities	in	the	metal.	The
transfer	of	heat	in	a	stainless	pan	can	be
evened	out	by	coating	the	underside	of	the	pan
with	copper,	or	by	inserting	a	copper	or
aluminum	plate	in	the	pan	bottom,	or	by
making	the	pan	out	of	two	or	more	layers,
with	a	good	conductor	just	under	the	surface.
Of	course	these	refinements	add	further	to	the
cost	of	the	utensil.	Still,	these	hybrids	are	the
closest	thing	we	have	to	the	ideal	chemically
inert	but	thermally	responsive	pan.

Tin



Tin	was	probably	first	used	in	combination
with	copper	to	make	the	mechanically	tougher
alloy	called	bronze.	Today	tin	is	generally
found	only	as	a	nontoxic,	unreactive	lining	in
copper	utensils.	This	limited	role	is	the	result
of	two	inconvenient	properties:	a	low	melting
point,	450ºF/230ºC,	that	can	be	reached	in
some	cooking	procedures,	and	a	softness	that
makes	the	metal	very	susceptible	to	wear.	The
tin	alloy	called	pewter,	which	used	to	contain
some	lead	and	now	is	made	with	7%	antimony
and	2%	copper,	is	not	much	used	today.



Chapter	15

The	Four	Basic
Food	Molecules

Water
Water	Clings	Strongly	to	Itself
Water	 Is	 Good	 at	 Dissolving	 Other
Substances
Water	and	Heat:	From	Ice	to	Steam
Water	and	Acidity:	The	pH	Scale

Fats,	Oils,	and	Relatives:	Lipids
Lipids	Don’t	Mix	with	Water
The	Structure	of	Fats
Saturated	 and	 Unsaturated	 Fats,
Hydrogenation,	and	Trans	Fatty	Acids
Fats	and	Heat
Emulsifiers:	 Phospholipids,	 Lecithin,
Monoglycerides

Carbohydrates
Sugars



Oligosaccharides
Polysaccharides:	Starch,	Pectins,	Gums

Proteins
Amino	Acids	and	Peptides
Protein	Structure
Proteins	in	Water
Protein	Denaturation
Enzymes

This	 chapter	 describes	 the	 characters	 of	 the
four	 chemical	 protagonists	 in	 foods	 and	 the
cooking	 process,	 the	 molecules	 referred	 to
constantly	in	the	first	fourteen	chapters.

Water	is	the	major	component	of	nearly
all	foods	—	and	of	ourselves!	It’s	also	a
medium	in	which	we	heat	foods	in	order
to	change	their	flavor,	texture,	and
stability.	One	particular	property	of
water	solutions,	their	acidity	or
alkalinity,	is	a	source	of	flavor,	and	has
an	important	influence	on	the	behavior	of



the	other	food	molecules.
Fats,	oils,	and	their	chemical	relatives
are	water’s	antagonists.	Like	water,
they’re	a	component	of	living	things	and
of	foods,	and	they’re	also	a	cooking
medium.	But	their	chemical	nature	is
very	different	—	so	different	that	they
can’t	mix	with	water.	Living	things	put
this	incompatibility	to	work	by	using
fatty	materials	to	contain	the	watery
contents	of	cells.	Cooks	put	this	quality
to	work	when	they	fry	foods	to	crisp	and
brown	them,	and	when	they	thicken
sauces	with	microscopic	but	intact	fat
droplets.	Fats	also	carry	aromas,	and
produce	them.
Carbohydrates,	the	specialty	of	plants,
include	sugars,	starch,	cellulose,	and
pectic	substances.	They	generally	mix
freely	with	water.	Sugars	give	many	of
our	foods	flavor,	while	starch	and	the
cell-wall	carbohydrates	provide	bulk	and



texture.
Proteins	are	the	sensitive	food
molecules,	and	are	especially
characteristic	of	foods	from	animals:
milk	and	eggs,	meat	and	fish.	Their
shapes	and	behavior	are	drastically
changed	by	heat,	acid,	salt,	and	even	air.
Cheeses,	custards,	cured	and	cooked
meats,	and	raised	breads	all	owe	their
textures	to	altered	proteins.

Water

Water	is	our	most	familiar	chemical
companion.	It’s	the	smallest	and	simplest	of
the	basic	food	molecules,	just	three	atoms:
H2O,	two	hydrogens	and	an	oxygen.	And	its
significance	is	hard	to	overstate.	Leaving
aside	the	fact	that	it	shapes	the	earth’s
continents	and	climate,	all	life,	including	our
own,	exists	in	a	water	solution:	a	legacy	of
life’s	origin	billions	of	years	ago	in	the



oceans.	Our	bodies	are	60%	water	by	weight;
raw	meat	is	about	75%	water,	and	fruits	and
vegetables	up	to	95%.

Water	Clings	Strongly	to	Itself

The	important	properties	of	ordinary	water
can	be	understood	as	different	manifestations
of	one	fact.	Each	water	molecule	is
electrically	unsymmetrical,	or	polar:	it	has	a
positive	end	and	a	negative	end.	This	is
because	the	oxygen	atom	exerts	a	stronger
pull	than	the	hydrogen	atoms	on	the	electrons
they	share,	and	because	the	hydrogen	atoms
project	from	one	side	of	the	oxygen	to	form	a
kind	of	V	shape:	so	there’s	an	oxygen	end	and
a	hydrogen	end	to	the	water	molecule,	and	the
oxygen	end	is	more	negative	than	the
hydrogen	end.	This	polarity	means	that	the
negative	oxygen	on	one	water	molecule	feels
an	electrical	attraction	to	the	positive
hydrogens	on	other	water	molecules.	When



this	attraction	brings	the	two	molecules	closer
to	each	other	and	holds	them	there,	it’s	called
a	hydrogen	bond.	The	molecules	in	ice	and
liquid	water	are	participating	in	from	one	to
four	hydrogen	bonds	at	any	given	moment.
However,	the	motion	of	the	molecules	in	the
liquid	is	forceful	enough	to	overcome	the
strength	of	hydrogen	bonds	and	break	them:
so	the	hydrogen	bonds	in	liquid	water	are
fleeting,	and	are	constantly	being	formed	and
broken.

This	natural	tendency	of	water	molecules
to	form	bonds	with	each	other	has	a	number	of
effects	in	life	and	in	the	kitchen.

Water	 molecules.	 Here	 are	 three	 different
ways	 of	 representing	 a	 molecule	 of	 water,
which	 is	 formed	 from	 one	 oxygen	 and	 two
hydrogen	 atoms.	 Because	 the	 oxygen	 atom



exerts	a	stronger	pull	on	the	electrons	(small
dots)	 it	 shares	 with	 the	 hydrogen	 atoms,	 the
water	molecule	 is	 electrically	unsymmetrical.
The	 separation	 of	 positive	 and	 negative
centers	 of	 charge	 leads	 to	 the	 formation	 of
weak	 bonds	 between	 oppositely	 charged
centers	 on	 different	 molecules.	 These	 weak
bonds	 between	 molecules,	 shown	 here	 by
dashed	lines,	are	called	hydrogen	bonds.

Water	Is	Good	at	Dissolving	other	Substances

Water	forms	hydrogen	bonds	not	only	with
itself,	but	with	other	substances	that	have	at
least	some	electrical	polarity,	some
unevenness	in	the	distribution	of	positive	and
negative	electrical	charges.	Of	the	other	major
food	molecules,	which	are	much	larger	and
more	complex	than	water,	both	carbohydrates
and	proteins	have	polar	regions.	Water
molecules	are	attracted	to	these	regions	and
cluster	around	them.	When	they	do	this,	they



effectively	surround	the	larger	molecules	and
separate	them	from	each	other.	If	they	do	this
more	or	less	completely,	so	that	each
molecule	is	mostly	surrounded	by	a	cloud	of
water	molecules,	then	that	substance	has
dissolved	in	the	water.

Water	and	Heat:	From	Ice	to	Steam

The	hydrogen	bonds	among	its	molecules
have	a	strong	effect	on	how	water	absorbs	and
transmits	heat.	At	low	temperatures,	water
exists	as	solid	ice,	its	molecules	immobilized
in	organized	crystals.	As	it	warms	up,	it	first
melts	to	become	liquid	water;	and	then	the
liquid	water	is	vaporized	to	form	steam.	Each
phase	is	affected	by	hydrogen	bonding.
Ice	Damages	Cells	Normally,	the	solid	phase
of	a	given	substance	is	denser	than	the	liquid
phase.	As	the	molecules’	attraction	for	each
other	becomes	stronger	than	their	movements,
the	molecules	settle	into	a	compact



arrangement	determined	by	their	geometry.	In
solid	water,	however,	the	molecular	packing	is
dictated	by	the	requirement	for	even
distribution	of	hydrogen	bonds.	The	result	is	a
solid	with	more	space	between	molecules	than
the	liquid	phase	has,	by	a	factor	of	about	one-
eleventh.	It’s	because	water	expands	when	it
freezes	that	water	pipes	burst	when	the	heat
fails	in	winter;	that	bottles	of	beer	put	in	the
freezer	for	a	quick	chill	and	then	forgotten
will	pop	open;	that	containers	of	leftover	soup
or	sauce	will	shatter	in	the	freezer	if	they’re
too	full	for	the	liquid	to	expand	freely.	And
it’s	why	raw	plant	and	animal	tissues	are
damaged	when	they’re	frozen	and	leak	liquid
when	thawed.	During	freezing,	the	expanding
ice	crystals	rupture	cell	membranes	and	walls,
which	then	lose	internal	fluids	when	the
crystals	melt.

Hard	Water:	Dissolved	Minerals
Water	 is	 so	 good	 at	 dissolving	 other



substances	 that	 apart	 from	distilled	water,
it’s	 seldom	 found	 in	 anything	 like	 pure
form.	 Tap	 water	 is	 quite	 variable	 in
composition,	 depending	 on	 its	 ultimate
source	(well,	lake,	river)	and	its	municipal
treatment	 (chlorination,	 fluoridation,	 and
so	on).	Two	common	minerals	in	tap	water
are	 carbonate	 (CO3)	 and	 sulfate	 (SO4)
salts	 of	 calcium	and	magnesium.	Calcium
and	 magnesium	 ions	 are	 troublesome
because	 they	 react	 with	 soaps	 to	 form
insoluble	 scums,	 and	 because	 they	 leave
crusty	 precipitates	 on	 showerheads	 and
teapots.	Such	so-called	hard	water	can	also
affect	 the	 color	 and	 texture	 of	 vegetables,
and	 the	 consistency	 of	 bread	 dough	 (pp.
282,	 535).	 Hard	 water	 can	 be	 softened
either	city-wide	or	in	the	home,	usually	by
one	 of	 two	 methods:	 precipitating	 the
calcium	and	magnesium	by	adding	lime,	or
using	 an	 ion-exchange	 mechanism	 to
replace	 the	 calcium	 and	 magnesium	 with



sodium.	Distilled	water,	which	is	produced
by	 boiling	 ordinary	 water	 and	 collecting
the	 condensed	 steam,	 is	 fairly	 free	 of
impurities.

Liquid	 Water	 Is	 Slow	 to	 Heat	 Up	 Again
thanks	to	the	hydrogen	bonding	between	water
molecules,	 liquid	 water	 has	 a	 high	specific
heat,	 the	 amount	 of	 energy	 required	 to	 raise
its	 temperature	 by	 a	 given	 amount.	 That	 is,
water	 absorbs	 a	 lot	 of	 energy	 before	 its
temperature	 rises.	 For	 example,	 it	 takes	 10
times	the	energy	to	heat	an	ounce	of	water	1º
as	 it	 does	 to	 heat	 an	 ounce	of	 iron	1º.	 In	 the
time	that	it	takes	to	get	an	iron	pan	too	hot	to
handle	 on	 the	 stove,	 water	 will	 have	 gotten
only	 tepid.	 Before	 the	 heat	 energy	 added	 to
the	 water	 can	 cause	 its	 molecules	 to	 move
faster	and	its	temperature	to	rise,	some	of	the
energy	must	first	break	the	hydrogen	bonds	so
that	the	molecules	are	free	to	move	faster.

The	basic	consequence	of	this



characteristic	is	that	a	body	of	water	—	our
body,	or	a	pot	of	water,	or	an	ocean	—	can
absorb	a	lot	of	heat	without	itself	quickly
becoming	hot.	In	the	kitchen,	it	means	that	a
covered	pan	of	water	will	take	more	than
twice	as	long	as	a	pan	of	oil	to	heat	up	to	a
given	temperature;	and	conversely,	it	will
hold	that	temperature	longer	after	the	heat	is
removed.

Liquid	Water	Absorbs	 a	Lot	 of	Heat	 as	 It
Vaporizes	into	Steam	Hydrogen	bonding	also
gives	water	 an	unusually	high	“latent	heat	of
vaporization,”	 or	 the	 amount	 of	 energy	 that
water	absorbs	without	a	rise	in	temperature	as
it	changes	from	a	liquid	to	a	gas.	This	is	how
sweating	cools	us:	as	the	water	on	the	skin	of
our	 over-heated	 body	 evaporates,	 it	 absorbs
large	 amounts	 of	 energy	 and	 carries	 it	 away
into	 the	 air.	Ancient	 cultures	 used	 the	 same
principle	 to	 cool	 their	 drinking	 water	 and
wine,	storing	them	in	porous	clay	vessels	that



evaporate	moisture	 continuously.	 Cooks	 take
advantage	 of	 it	 when	 they	 bake	 delicate
preparations	 like	 custards	 gently	 by	 partly
immersing	 the	 containers	 in	 an	 open	 water
bath,	 or	 oven-roast	 meats	 slowly	 at	 low
temperatures,	or	simmer	stock	in	an	open	pot.
In	 each	 case,	 evaporation	 removes	 energy
from	the	food	or	its	surroundings	and	causes	it
to	cook	more	gently.

Steam	 Releases	 a	 Lot	 of	 Heat	 When	 It
Condenses	 into	 Water	 Conversely,	 when
water	vapor	hits	a	cool	surface	and	condenses
into	 liquid	water,	 it	 gives	 up	 that	 same	 high
heat	 of	 vaporization.	 This	 is	 why	 steam	 is
such	 an	 effective	 and	 quick	 way	 of	 cooking
foods	compared	with	plain	air	—	also	a	gas	—
at	 the	 same	 temperature.	We	 can	 put	 a	 hand
into	an	oven	at	212ºF/100ºC	and	hold	it	 there
for	 some	 time	 before	 it	 gets	 uncomfortably
warm;	 but	 a	 steaming	 pot	 will	 scald	 us	 in	 a
second	or	two.	In	bread	baking,	an	initial	blast



of	 steam	 increases	 the	dough’s	 expansion,	 or
oven	spring,	and	produces	a	lighter	loaf.

Water	and	Acidity:	The	pH	Scale

Acids	 and	 Bases	 Despite	 the	 fact	 that	 the
molecular	 formula	 for	 water	 is	 H2O,	 even
absolutely	 pure	 water	 contains	 other
combinations	 of	 oxygen	 and	 hydrogen.
Chemical	bonds	are	continually	being	formed
and	 broken	 in	 matter,	 and	 water	 is	 no
exception.	 It	 tends	 to	 “dissociate”	 to	 a	 slight
extent,	with	a	hydrogen	occasionally	breaking
off	 from	 one	 molecule	 and	 rebonding	 to	 a
nearby	intact	water	molecule.	This	leaves	one
negatively	 charged	 OH	 combination,	 and	 a
positively	 charged	 H3O.	 Under	 normal
conditions,	a	very	small	number	of	molecules
exist	in	the	dissociated	state,	something	on	the
order	of	two	ten-millionths	of	a	percent.	This
is	 a	 small	 number	 but	 a	 significant	 one,
because	 the	 presence	 of	 relatively	 mobile



hydrogen	 ions,	 which	 are	 the	 basic	 units	 of
positive	 charge	 (protons),	 can	 have	 drastic
effects	 on	 other	 molecules	 in	 solution.	 A
structure	 that	 is	 stable	 with	 a	 few	 protons
around	 may	 be	 unstable	 when	 many	 protons
are	in	the	vicinity.	So	significant	is	the	proton
concentration	 that	humans	have	a	 specialized
taste	 sensation	 to	 estimate	 it:	 sourness.	 Our
term	for	the	class	of	chemicalcompounds	that
release	 protons	 into	 solutions,	acids,	 derives
from	 the	 Latin	acere,	 meaning	 to	 taste	 sour.
We	 call	 the	 complementary	 chemical	 group
that	 accepts	 protons	 and	 neutralizes	 them,
bases	or	alkalis.

The	properties	of	acids	and	bases	affect	us
continually	in	our	daily	life.	Practically	every
food	we	eat,	from	steak	to	coffee	to	oranges,
is	at	least	slightly	acidic.	And	the	degree	of
acidity	of	the	cooking	medium	can	have	great
influence	on	such	characteristics	as	the	color
of	fruits	and	vegetables	and	the	texture	of
meat	and	egg	proteins.	Some	measure	of



acidity	would	clearly	be	quite	useful.	A
simple	scale	has	been	devised	to	provide	just
that.

The	pH	Scale	The	standard	measure	of	proton
activity	 in	 solutions	 is	pH,	 a	 term	 suggested
by	 the	 Danish	 chemist	 S.	 P.	 L.	 Sørenson	 in
1909.	 It’s	 essentially	 a	 more	 convenient
version	 of	 the	 minuscule	 percentages	 of
molecules	involved	(for	some	details,	see	box
below).	The	pH	scale	 runs	 from	0	 to	14.	The
pH	of	neutral,	pure	water,	with	equal	numbers
of	 protons	 and	 OH	 ions,	 is	 set	 at	 7.	 A	 pH
lower	than	7	indicates	a	greater	concentration
of	 protons	 and	 so	 an	 acidic	 solution,	while	 a
pH	above	7	 indicates	 a	 greater	 prevalence	 of
proton-accepting	 groups,	 and	 so	 a	 basic
solution.	 Here’s	 a	 list	 of	 common	 solutions
and	their	usual	pH.

Liquid pH
Human	gastric	juice 1.3–3.0



Lemon	juice 2.1
Orange	juice 3.0
Yogurt 4.5
Black	coffee 5.0
Milk 6.9
Egg	white 7.6–9.5
Baking	soda	in	water 8.4
Household	ammonia 11.9

Acids.	 Acids	 are	 molecules	 that	 release
reactive	 hydrogen	 ions,	 or	 protons,	 in	water,
where	 neutral	 water	 molecules	 pick	 them	 up
and	 become	 positively	 charged.	 The	 acids
themselves	 become	 negatively	 charged.	 Left:
Water	itself	is	a	weak	acid.	Right:	Acetic	acid.

The	Definition	of	pH
The	 pH	 of	 a	 solution	 is	 defined	 as	 “the



negative	 logarithm	 of	 the	 hydrogen	 ion
concentration	 expressed	 in	 moles	 per
liter.”	 The	 logarithm	 of	 a	 number	 is	 the
exponent,	 or	 power,	 to	 which	 10	 must	 be
raised	 in	 order	 to	 obtain	 the	 number.	 For
example,	the	hydrogen	ion	concentration	in
pure	water	is	10-7	moles	per	liter,	so	the	pH
of	 pure	 water	 is	 7.	 Larger	 concentrations
are	 described	 by	 smaller	 negative
exponents,	 so	 a	 more	 acidic	 solution	 will
have	a	pH	 lower	 than	7,	and	a	 less	acidic,
more	basic	solution	will	have	a	pH	higher
than	7.	Each	increment	of	1	in	pH	signifies
an	 increase	 or	 decrease	 in	 proton
concentration	 by	 a	 factor	 of	 10;	 so	 there
are	 1,000	 times	 the	 number	 of	 hydrogen
ions	in	a	solution	of	pH	5	as	there	are	in	a
solution	of	pH	8.

Fats,	Oils,	and
Relatives:	Lipids



Lipids	Don’t	Mix	with	Water

Fats	and	oils	are	members	of	a	large	chemical
family	called	the	lipids,	a	term	that	comes
from	the	Greek	for	“fat.”	Fats	and	oils	are
invaluable	in	the	kitchen:	they	provide	flavor
and	a	pleasurable	and	persistent	smoothness;
they	tenderize	many	foods	by	permeating	and
weakening	their	structure;	they’re	a	cooking
medium	that	allows	us	to	heat	foods	well
above	the	boiling	point	of	water,	thus	drying
out	the	food	surface	to	produce	a	crisp	texture
and	rich	flavor.	Many	of	these	qualities	reflect
a	basic	property	of	the	lipids:	they	are
chemically	unlike	water,	and	largely
incompatible	with	it.	And	thanks	to	this
quality,	they	have	played	an	essential	role	in
the	function	of	all	living	cells	from	the	very
beginnings	of	life.	Because	they	don’t	mix
with	water,	lipids	are	well	suited	to	the	job	of
forming	boundaries	—	membranes	—
between	watery	cells.	This	function	is



performed	mainly	by	phospholipids	similar	to
lecithin	(p.	802),	molecules	that	cooks	also
use	to	form	membranes	around	tiny	oil
droplets.	Fats	and	oils	themselves	are	created
and	stored	by	animals	and	plants	as	a
concentrated,	compact	form	of	chemical
energy,	packing	twice	the	calories	as	the	same
weight	of	either	sugar	or	starch.

In	addition	to	fats,	oils,	and	phospholipids,
the	lipid	family	includes	betacarotene	and
similar	plant	pigments,	vitamin	E,	cholesterol,
and	waxes.	These	are	all	molecules	made	by
living	things	that	consist	mainly	of	chains	of
carbon	atoms,	with	hydrogen	atoms	projecting
from	the	chain.	Each	carbon	atom	can	form
four	bonds	with	other	atoms,	so	a	given
carbon	atom	in	the	chain	is	usually	bonded	to
two	carbon	atoms,	one	on	each	side,	and	two
hydrogens.

This	carbon-chain	structure	has	one
overriding	consequence:	lipids	can’t	dissolve
in	water.	They	are	“hydrophobic”	or	“water-



fearing”	substances.	The	reason	for	this	is	that
carbon	and	hydrogen	atoms	pull	with	a	similar
force	on	their	shared	electrons.	So	unlike	the
oxygen-hydrogen	bond,	the	carbon-hydrogen
bond	is	not	polar,	and	the	hydrocarbon	chain
as	a	whole	is	nonpolar.	When	polar	water	and
nonpolar	lipids	are	mixed	together,	the	polar
water	molecules	form	hydrogen	bonds	with
each	other,	the	long	lipid	chains	form	a
weaker	kind	of	bond	with	each	other	(van	der
Waals	bonds,	p.	814),	and	the	two	substances
segregate	themselves.	Oils	minimize	the
surface	at	which	they	contact	water	by
coalescing	into	large	blobs,	and	resist	being
divided	into	smaller	droplets.

Thanks	to	their	chemical	relatedness,
different	lipids	can	dissolve	in	each	other.
This	is	why	the	carotenoid	pigments	—	the
betacarotene	in	carrots,	the	lycopene	in
tomatoes	—	and	intact	chlorophyll,	whose
molecule	has	a	lipid	tail,	color	cooking	fats
much	more	intensely	than	they	do	cooking



water.
Lipids	share	two	other	characteristics.	One

is	their	clingy,	viscous,	oily	consistency,
which	results	from	the	many	weak	bonds
formed	between	their	long	carbon-hydrogen
molecules.	And	those	same	molecules	are	so
bulky	that	all	natural	fats,	solid	or	liquid,	float
on	water.	Water	is	a	denser	substance	due	to
its	extensive	hydrogen	bonding,	which	packs
its	small	molecules	more	tightly	together.

The	Structure	of	Fats

Fats	and	oils	are	members	of	the	same	class	of
chemical	compounds,	the	triglycerides.	They
differ	from	each	other	only	in	their	melting
points:	oils	are	liquid	at	room	temperature,
fats	solid.	Rather	than	use	the	technical
triglyceride	to	denote	these	compounds,	I’ll
use	fats	as	the	generic	term.	Oils	are	liquid
fats.	These	are	invaluable	ingredients	in
cooking.	Their	clingy	viscosity	provides	a



moist,	rich	quality	to	many	foods,	and	their
high	boiling	point	makes	them	an	ideal
cooking	medium	for	the	production	of	intense
browning-reaction	flavors	(p.	778).

Glycerol	 and	 Fatty	 Acids	 Though	 they
contain	traces	of	other	lipids,	natural	fats	and
oils	 are	 triglycerides,	 a	 combination	 of	 three
fatty	 acid	 molecules	 with	 one	 molecule	 of
glycerol.	 Glycerol	 is	 a	 short	 3-carbon	 chain
that	 acts	 as	 a	 common	 frame	 to	which	 three
fatty	 acids	 can	 attach	 themselves.	 The	 fatty
acids	are	 so	named	because	 they	consist	of	a
long	hydrocarbon	chain	with	one	end	that	has
an	 oxygen-hydrogen	 group	 and	 that	 can
release	 the	 hydrogen	 as	 a	 proton.	 It’s	 the
acidic	group	of	the	fatty	acid	that	binds	to	the
glycerol	 frame	 to	 construct	 a	 glyceride:
glycerol	 plus	 one	 fatty	 acid	 makes	 a
monoglyceride,	 glycerol	 plus	 two	 fatty	 acids
makes	 a	 diglyceride,	 and	 glycerol	 plus	 three
fatty	 acids	 makes	 a	 triglyceride.	 Before	 it



bonds	to	the	glycerol	frame,	the	acidic	end	of
the	 fatty	 acid	 is	 polar,	 like	 water,	 and	 so	 it
gives	 the	 free	 fatty	 acid	 a	 partial	 ability	 to
form	hydrogen	bonds	with	water.

Fatty	acid	chains	can	be	from	4	to	about	35
carbons	long,	though	the	most	common	in
foods	are	from	14	to	20.	The	properties	of	a
given	triglyceride	molecule	depend	on	the
structure	of	its	three	fatty	acids	and	their
relative	positions	on	the	glycerol	frame.	And
the	properties	of	a	fat	depend	on	the	particular
mixture	of	triglycerides	it	contains.

Saturated	And	Unsaturated	Fats,	Hydrogenation,	and
Trans	Fatty	Acids

The	 Meaning	 of	 Saturation	 The	 terms
“saturated”	and	“unsaturated”	fats	are	familiar
from	nutrition	labels	and	ongoing	discussions
of	diet	and	health,	but	their	meaning	is	seldom
explained.	 A	saturated	 lipid	 is	 one	 whose
carbon	chain	is	saturated	—	filled	to	capacity



—	with	hydrogen	atoms:	 there	are	no	double
bonds	between	 carbon	 atoms,	 so	 each	 carbon
within	 the	 chain	 is	 bonded	 to	 two	 hydrogen
atoms.	An	unsaturated	 lipid	has	one	or	more
double	bonds	between	carbon	atoms	along	its
backbone.	 The	 double-bonded	 carbons
therefore	 have	 only	 one	 bond	 left	 for	 a
hydrogen	 atom.	 A	 fat	 molecule	 with	 more
than	 one	 double	 bond	 is	 called
polyunsaturated.

Fats	 and	 fatty	 acids.	 Fatty	 acids	 are	 mainly
chains	of	 carbon	atoms,	 shown	here	as	black
dots.	 (Each	 carbon	 atom	 has	 two	 hydrogen
atoms	projecting	from	it;	 the	hydrogen	atoms
are	 not	 shown.)	 A	 fat	 molecule	 is	 a



triglyceride,	which	 is	 formed	 from	 one
molecule	of	glycerol	and	three	fatty	acids.	The
acidic	heads	of	the	fatty	acids	are	capped	and
neutralized	by	the	glycerol,	so	the	triglyceride
as	 a	 whole	 no	 longer	 has	 a	 polar,	 water-
compatible	 end.	 The	 fatty-acid	 chains	 can
rotate	around	the	glycerol	head	to	form	chair-
like	arrangements	(bottom).
Fat	Saturation	and	Consistency	Saturation
matters	in	the	behavior	of	fats	because	double
bonds	significantly	alter	the	geometry	and	the
regularity	of	the	fatty-acid	chain,	and	so	its
chemical	and	physical	properties.	A	saturated
fatty	acid	is	very	regular	and	can	stretch	out
completely	straight.	But	because	a	double
bond	between	carbon	atoms	distorts	the	usual
bonding	angles,	it	has	the	effect	of	adding	a
kink	to	the	chain.	Two	or	more	kinks	can
make	it	curl.

A	group	of	identical	and	regular	molecules
fits	more	neatly	and	closely	together	than
different	and	irregular	molecules.	Fats



composed	of	straight-chain	saturated	fatty
acids	fall	into	an	ordered	solid	structure	—
the	process	has	been	described	as	“zippering”
—	more	readily	than	do	kinked	unsaturated
fats.	Animal	fats	are	about	half	saturated	and
half	unsaturated,	and	solid	at	room
temperature,	while	vegetable	fats	are	about
85%	unsaturated,	and	are	liquid	oils	in	the
kitchen.	Even	among	the	animal	fats,	beef	and
lamb	fats	are	noticeably	harder	than	pork	or
poultry	fats,	because	more	of	their
triglycerides	are	saturated.

Double	bonds	are	not	the	only	factor	in
determining	the	melting	point	of	fats.	Short-
chain	fatty	acids	are	not	as	readily	“zippered”
together	as	the	longer	chains,	and	so	tend	to
lower	the	melting	point	of	fats.	And	the	more
variety	in	the	structures	of	their	fatty	acids,
the	more	likely	the	mixture	of	triglycerides
will	be	an	oil.



Saturated	 and	 unsaturated	 fatty	 acids.	 An
unsaturated	fatty	acid	has	one	or	more	double
bonds	along	its	carbon	chain,	and	a	rigid	kink
at	 that	 point	 in	 the	 chain.	 The	 structural
irregularity	caused	by	the	double	bond	makes
it	more	difficult	for	these	molecules	to	solidify
into	 compact	 crystals,	 so	 at	 a	 given
temperature,	 unsaturated	 fats	 are	 softer	 than
saturated	 fats.	 In	 the	 hydrogenation	 of
vegetable	oils	to	make	them	harder,	some	cis-
unsaturated	fatty	acids	are	converted	to	trans-
unsaturated	fatty	acids,	which	are	less	kinked
and	 behave	more	 like	 a	 saturated	 fatty	 acid,
both	in	cooking	and	in	the	body.
Fat	Saturation	and	Rancidity	Saturated	fats
are	also	more	stable,	slower	to	become	rancid
than	unsaturated	fats.	The	double	bond	of	an



unsaturated	fat	opens	a	space	unprotected	by
hydrogen	atoms	on	one	side	of	the	chain.	This
exposes	the	carbon	atoms	to	reactive
molecules	that	can	break	the	chain	and
produce	small	volatile	fragments.
Atmospheric	oxygen	is	just	such	a	reactive
molecule,	and	is	one	of	the	major	causes	of
flavor	deterioration	in	foods	containing	fats.
Water	and	metal	atoms	from	other	food
ingredients	also	help	fragmentfats	and	cause
rancidity.	The	more	unsaturated	the	fat,	the
more	prone	it	is	to	deterioration.	Beef	has	a
longer	shelf	life	than	chicken,	pork,	or	lamb
because	its	fat	is	more	saturated	and	so	more
stable.

Some	small	volatile	fragments	of
unsaturated	lipids	actually	have	desirable	and
distinctive	aromas.	The	typical	aroma	of
crushed	green	leaves	and	of	cucumber	both
come	from	fragments	of	membrane
phospholipids	generated	not	just	by	oxygen,
but	by	special	plant	enzymes.	And	the



characteristic	aroma	of	deep-fried	foods
comes	in	part	from	particular	fatty-acid
fragments	created	at	high	temperatures.

Saturated	and	Unsaturated	Fatty	Acids
in	Foods	and	Cooking	Fats

Proportions	 of	 fatty	 acids	 are	 given	 as	 a
percentage	of	the	total	fatty-acid	content.

Fat Saturated
or Fatty Monounsaturated Polyunsaturated
Oil Acids Fatty	Acids Fatty	Acids

Butter 62 29 4
Beef 50 42 4
Lamb 47 42 4
Pork 40 45 11
Chicken 30 45 21
Coconut	oil 86 6 2
Palm	kernel	oil 81 11 2
Palm	oil 49 37 9



Cocoa	butter 60 35 2
Vegetable	shortening 31 51 14
Cottonseed	oil 26 18 50
Stick	margarine 19 59 18
Tub	margarine 17 47 31
Peanut	oil 17 46 32
Soybean	oil 14 23 58
Olive	oil 13 74 8
Corn	oil 13 24 59
Sunflower	seed	oil 13 24 59
Grapeseed	oil 11 16 68
Canola	oil 7 55 33
Safflower	oil 9 12 75
Walnut	oil 9 16 70

Hydrogenation:	Altering	Fat	Saturation	For
more	than	a	century	now,	manufacturers	have
been	 making	 solid,	 fat-like	 shortenings	 and
margarines	 from	 liquid	 seed	 oils	 to	 obtain



both	the	desired	texture	and	improved	keeping
qualities.	 There	 are	 several	 ways	 to	 do	 this,
the	 simplest	 and	 most	 common	 being	 to
saturate	 the	 unsaturated	 fatty	 acids
artificially.	 This	 process	 is	 called
hydrogenation,	 because	 it	 adds	 hydrogen
atoms	 to	 the	 unsaturated	 chains.	 A	 small
amount	 of	 nickel	 is	 added	 to	 the	 oil	 as	 a
catalyst,	 and	 the	 mixture	 is	 then	 exposed	 to
hydrogen	 gas	 at	 high	 temperature	 and
pressure.	 After	 the	 fat	 has	 absorbed	 the
desired	 amount	 of	 hydrogen,	 the	 nickel	 is
filtered	out.

Trans	 Fatty	 Acids 	 It	 turns	 out	 that	 the
hydrogenation	 process	 straightens	 a	 certain
proportion	 of	 the	 kinks	 in	 unsaturated	 fatty
acids	not	by	adding	hydrogen	atoms	 to	 them,
but	by	rearranging	the	double	bond,	twisting	it
so	 that	 its	 bend	 is	 less	 extreme.	 These
molecules	 remain	 chemically	 unsaturated	—
the	double	bond	between	two	carbons	remains



—	 but	 they	 have	 been	 transformed	 from	 an
acutely	 irregular	cis	 geometry	 to	 a	 more
regular	trans	 structure	 (see	 illustration,	 p.
799).	Cis	 is	 Latin	 for	 “on	 this	 side	 of,”	 and
trans	 for	 “across	 from”;	 the	 terms	 describe
the	 positions	 of	 neighboring	 hydrogen	 atoms
on	 the	 double	 bond	 between	 carbon	 atoms.
Because	 the	 trans	 fatty	acids	are	 less	kinked,
more	 like	 a	 saturated	 fat	 chain	 in	 structure,
they	 make	 it	 easier	 for	 the	 fat	 to	 crystallize
and	 so	 make	 it	 firmer.	 They	 also	 make	 the
fatty	 acid	 less	 prone	 to	 attack	 by	 oxygen,	 so
it’s	 more	 stable.	 Unfortunately,	 trans	 fatty
acids	 also	 resemble	 saturated	 fats	 in	 raising
blood	cholesterol	levels,	which	can	contribute
to	 the	 development	 of	 heart	 disease	 (p.	 38).
Manufacturers	will	soon	be	required	to	list	the
trans	 fatty	 acid	 content	 of	 their	 foods,	 and
they’re	 beginning	 to	 implement	 other
processing	 techniques	 that	 harden	 fat
consistency	without	creating	trans	fatty	acids.

Fats	and	Heat



Fats	and	Heat

Most	fats	do	not	have	sharply	defined	melting
points.	 Instead,	 they	 soften	 gradually	 over	 a
broad	 temperature	 range.	As	 the	 temperature
rises,	the	different	kinds	of	fat	molecules	melt
at	 different	 points	 and	 slowly	 weaken	 the
whole	 structure.	 (An	 interesting	 exception	 to
this	 rule	 is	 cocoa	 butter,	 p.	 705).	 This
behavior	 is	 especially	 important	 in	 making
pastries	and	cakes,	and	it’s	what	makes	butter
spreadable	 at	 room	 temperature.	 butter,	 p.
705).	This	behavior	is	especially	important	in
making	 pastries	 and	 cakes,	 and	 it’s	 what
makes	butter	spreadable	at	room	temperature.

Melted	fats	do	eventually	change	from	a
liquid	to	a	gas:	but	only	at	very	high
temperatures,	from	500º	to	750ºF/260–	400ºC.
This	high	boiling	point,	far	above	water’s,	is
the	indirect	result	of	the	fats’	large	molecular
size.	While	they	can’t	form	hydrogen	bonds,
the	carbon	chains	of	fats	do	form	weaker
bonds	with	each	other(p.	814).	Because	fat



molecules	are	capable	of	forming	so	many
bonds	along	their	lengthy	hydrocarbon	chains,
the	individually	weak	interactions	have	a
large	net	effect:	it	takes	a	lot	of	heat	energy	to
knock	the	molecules	apart	from	each	other.

Omega-3	fatty	acids.	Omega-3	fatty	acids	are
unsaturated	 fatty	 acids	 whose	 first	 double
bond	begins	at	the	third	carbon	atom	from	the
end.	 (The	 most	 common	 unsaturated	 fatty
acids	 are	 omega-6	 fatty	 acids.)	 They	 are
essential	 in	our	diet	 for,	among	other	 things,
the	 proper	 function	 of	 the	 immune	 and
cardiovascular	 systems.	 Linolenic	 acid	 has	 3
double	bonds	among	its	18	carbon	atoms,	and
is	found	in	green	leaves	and	in	some	seed	oils.
Eicosapentaenoic	 acid	 has	 20	 carbons	 and	 5
double	bonds,	and	is	found	almost	exclusively
in	seafood	(p.	183).



The	Smoke	Point	Most	fats	begin	to
decompose	at	temperatures	well	below	their
boiling	points,	and	may	even	spontaneously
ignite	on	the	stovetop	if	their	fumes	come	into
contact	with	the	gas	flame.	These	facts	limit
the	maximum	useful	temperature	of	cooking
fats.	The	characteristic	temperature	at	which	a
fat	breaks	down	into	visible	gaseous	products
is	called	the	smoke	point.	Not	only	are	the
smoky	fumes	obnoxious,	but	the	other
materials	that	remain	in	the	liquid,	including
chemically	active	free	fatty	acids,	tend	to	ruin
the	flavor	of	the	food	being	cooked.

The	smoke	point	depends	on	the	initial	free
fatty	acid	content	of	the	fat:	the	lower	the	free
fatty	acid	content,	the	more	stable	the	fat,	and
the	higher	the	smoke	point.	Free	fatty	acid
levels	are	generally	lower	in	vegetable	oils
than	in	animal	fats,	lower	in	refined	oils	than
unrefined	ones,	and	lower	in	fresh	fats	and
oils	than	in	old	ones.	Fresh	refined	vegetable
oils	begin	to	smoke	around	450ºF/230ºC,



animal	fats	around	375ºF/190ºC.	Fats	that
contain	other	substances,	such	as	emulsifiers,
preservatives,	and	in	the	case	of	butter,
proteins	and	carbohydrates,	will	smoke	at
lower	temperatures	than	pure	fats.	Fat
breakdown	during	deep	frying	can	be	slowed
by	using	a	tall,	narrow	pan	and	so	reducing	the
area	of	contact	between	fat	and	atmosphere.
The	smoke	point	of	a	deep-frying	fat	is
lowered	every	time	it’s	used,	since	some
breakdown	is	inevitable	even	at	moderate
temperatures,	and	trouble-making	particles	of
food	are	always	left	behind.

Emulsifiers:	Phospholipids,	Lecithin,	Monoglycerides

Some	very	useful	chemical	relatives	of	the
true	fats,	the	triglycerides,	are	the
diglycerides	and	monoglycerides.	These
molecules	act	as	emulsifiers	to	make	fine,
cream-like	mixtures	of	fat	and	water	—	such
sauces	as	mayonnaise	and	hollandaise	—	even



though	fat	and	water	don’t	normally	mix	with
each	other.	The	most	prominent	natural
emulsifiers	are	the	diglyceride	phospholipids
in	egg	yolks,	the	most	abundant	of	which	is
lecithin	(it	makes	up	about	a	third	of	the	yolk
lipids).	Diglycerides	have	only	two	fatty-acid
chains	attached	to	the	glycerol	frame,	and
monoglycerides	just	one,	with	the	remaining
positions	on	the	frame	being	occupied	by
small	polar	groups	of	atoms.	These	molecules
are	thus	water-soluble	at	the	head,	and	fat-
soluble	at	the	tail.	In	cell	membranes,	the
phospholipids	assemble	themselves	in	two
layers,	with	one	set	of	polar	heads	facing	the
watery	interior,	the	other	set	the	watery
exterior,	and	the	tails	of	both	sets	mingling	in
between.	When	the	cook	whisks	some	fat	into
a	water-based	liquid	that	contains	emulsifiers
—	oil	into	egg	yolks,	for	example	—	the	fat
forms	tiny	droplets	that	would	normally
coalesce	and	separate	again.	But	the
emulsifier	tails	become	dissolved	in	the



droplets,	and	the	electrically	charged	heads
project	from	the	droplets	and	shield	the
droplets	from	each	other.	The	emulsion	of	fat
droplets	is	now	stable.

These	“surface-active”	molecules	have
many	other	applications	as	well.	For	example,
monoglycerides	have	been	used	for	decades	in
the	baking	business	because	they	help	retard
staling,	apparently	by	complexing	with
amylose	and	blocking	starch	retrogradation.

Carbohydrates

The	name	for	this	large	group	of	molecules
comes	from	the	early	idea	that	they	were
made	up	of	carbon	and	water.	They	are	indeed
made	up	of	carbon,	hydrogen,	and	oxygen
atoms,	though	the	oxygen	and	hydrogen	are
not	found	as	intact	water	complexes	within
the	molecules.	Carbohydrates	are	produced	by
all	plants	and	animals	for	the	purpose	of
storing	chemical	energy,	and	by	plants	to



make	a	supporting	skeleton	for	its	cells.
Simple	sugars	and	starch	are	energy	stores,
while	pectins,	cellulose,	and	other	cell-wall
carbohydrates	are	the	plant’s	structural
materials.

SUGARS

Sugars	are	the	simplest	carbohydrates.	There
are	many	different	kinds	of	sugar	molecules,
each	distinguished	by	the	number	of	carbon
atoms	it	contains,	and	then	by	the	particular
arrangement	it	assumes.	Five-carbon	sugars
are	especially	important	to	all	life	because
two	of	them,	ribose	and	deoxyribose,	form	the
backbones	of	ribonucleic	acid	(RNA)	and
deoxyribonucleic	acid	(DNA),	the	carriers	of
the	genetic	code.	And	the	6-carbon	sugar
glucose	is	the	molecule	from	which	most
living	things	obtain	the	energy	to	run	the
biochemical	machinery	of	their	cells.	Sugars
are	such	an	important	nutrient	that	we	have	a



special	sense	designed	specifically	to	detect
them.	Sugars	taste	sweet,	and	sweetness	is	a
nearly	universal	source	of	pleasure.	It’s	the
essence	of	the	dishes	we	serve	at	the	end	of
the	meal,	as	well	as	of	candies	and
confections.	Sugars	and	their	properties	are
described	in	detail	in	chapter	12.

Oligosaccharides

The	oligosaccharides	(“several-unit	sugars”)
raffinose,	stachyose,	and	verbascose	are	3-,	4-,
and	5-ring	sugars,	respectively,	all	too	large	to
trigger	our	sweet	detectors,	so	they’re
tasteless.	They’re	commonly	found	in	the
seeds	and	other	organs	of	plants,	where	they
make	up	part	of	the	energy	supply.	These
sugars	all	affect	our	digestive	system,	thanks
to	the	fact	that	we	don’t	have	digestive
enzymes	capable	of	breaking	them	down	into
single	sugars	that	can	be	absorbed	by	the
intestine.	As	a	result,	the	oligosaccharides	are



not	digested	and	pass	intact	into	the	colon,
where	various	bacteria	do	digest	them,
producing	large	quantities	of	carbon	dioxide
and	other	gases	in	the	process	(p.	486).

Phospholipid	 emulsifiers.	 Phospholipids	 are
diglycerides,	 and	 are	 excellent	 emulsifiers,
molecules	that	make	possible	a	stable	mixture
of	 oil	 and	 water.	 Unlike	 the	 triglycerides	 of
fat	 and	 oil,	 they	 have	 a	 polar,	 water-
compatible	 head.	 Such	 emulsifiers	 bury	 their
fatty-acid	 tails	 in	 oil	 droplets,	 while	 their
water-compatible,	 electrically	 charged	 heads
project	 from	 the	 surface	 and	 block	 the
droplets	 from	 contacting	 each	 other	 and
coalescing.

Polysaccharides:	Starch,	Pectins,	Gums



Polysaccharides,	 which	 include	 starch	 and
cellulose,	 are	 sugar	polymers,	 or	 molecules
composed	of	numerous	individual	sugar	units,
as	many	as	several	thousand.	Usually	only	one
or	 a	 very	 few	kinds	 of	 sugars	 are	 found	 in	 a
given	 polysaccharide.	 Polysaccharides	 are
classified	 according	 to	 the	 overall
characteristics	 of	 the	 large	 molecules:	 a
general	 size	 range,	 an	 average	 composition,
and	 a	 common	 set	 of	 properties.	 Like	 the
sugars	 of	 which	 they’re	 composed,
polysaccharides	 contain	 many	 exposed
oxygen	and	hydrogen	atoms,	so	they	can	form
hydrogen	 bonds	 and	 absorb	 water.	 However,
they	 may	 or	 may	 not	 dissolve	 in	 water,
depending	on	 the	attractive	 forces	among	 the
polymers	themselves.

Starch	 By	 far	 the	 most	 important
polysaccharide	 for	 the	 cook	 is	starch,	 the
compact,	 unreactive	 polymer	 in	which	 plants



store	their	supply	of	sugar.	Starch	is	simply	a
chain	of	glucose	sugars.	Plants	produce	starch
in	 two	different	 configurations:	 a	 completely
linear	 chain	 called	amylose,	 and	 a	 highly
branched	 form	 called	amylopectin,	 each	 of
which	may	contain	thousands	of	glucose	units.
Starch	molecules	 are	 deposited	 together	 in	 a
series	 of	 concentric	 layers	 to	 form	 solid
microscopic	 granules.	 When	 starchy	 plant
tissue	is	cooked	in	water,	the	granules	absorb
water,	 swell,	 and	 release	 starch	 molecules;
when	 cooled	 again,	 the	 starch	 molecules
rebond	to	each	other	and	can	form	a	moist	but
solid	gel.	Various	aspects	of	starch	—	the	way
it	 determines	 the	 texture	 of	 cooked	 rice,	 its
formation	into	pure	starch	noodles,	its	role	in
breads,	 pastries,	 and	 sauces	—	 are	 described
in	detail	in	chapters	9–11.

Glycogen	Glycogen,	or	“animal	starch,”	is
an	animal	carbohydrate	similar	to
amylopectin,	though	more	highly	branched.
It’s	a	fairly	minor	component	of	animal	tissue



and	so	of	meats,	although	its	concentration	at
the	time	of	slaughter	will	affect	the	ultimate
pH	of	the	meat,	and	thereby	its	texture	(p.
142).

A	 sugar,	 glucose,	 and	 a	 polysaccharide,
starch,	which	is	a	chain	of	glucose	molecules.
Plants	produce	two	broadly	different	forms	of
starch:	 simple	 long	 chains	 called	 amylose,
and	 highly	 branched	 chains	 called
amylopectin.
Cellulose	Cellulose	is,	like	amylose,	a	linear
plant	polysaccharide	made	up	solely	of
glucose	sugars.	Yet	thanks	to	a	minor
difference	in	the	way	the	sugars	are	linked	to
each	other,	the	two	compounds	have	very
different	properties:	cooking	dissolves	starch



granules	but	leaves	cellulose	fibers	intact;
most	animals	can	digest	starch,	but	not
cellulose.	Cellulose	is	a	structural	support
that’s	laid	down	in	cell	walls	in	the	form	of
tiny	fibers	analogous	to	steel	reinforcing	bars,
and	it’s	made	to	be	durable.	Few	animals	can
digest	cellulose,	and	hay-eating	cattle	and
wood-eating	termites	can	do	so	only	because
their	guts	are	populated	by	cellulose-digesting
bacteria.	To	other	animals,	including
ourselves,	cellulose	is	indigestible	fiber
(which	has	its	own	value;	see	p.	258).
Hemicelluloses	and	Pectic	Substances	These
polysaccharides	(made	from	a	variety	of
sugars,	including	galactose,	xylose,	arabinose)
are	found	together	with	cellulose	in	the	plant
cell	walls.	If	the	cellulose	fibrils	are	the
reinforcing	bars	in	the	cell	walls,	the
amorphous	hemicelluloses	and	pectic
substances	are	a	sort	of	jelly-like	cement	in
which	the	bars	are	embedded.	Their
significance	for	the	cook	is	that,	unlike



cellulose,	they	are	partly	soluble	in	water,	and
therefore	contribute	to	the	softening	of	cooked
vegetables	and	fruits.	Pectin	is	abundant
enough	to	be	extracted	from	citrus	fruits	and
apples	and	used	to	thicken	fruit	syrups	into
jams	and	jellies.	These	carbohydrates	are
described	in	detail	in	chapter	5.

Inulin	Inulin	is	a	polymer	of	fructose	sugars,
from	 a	 handful	 to	 hundreds	 per	 molecule.
Inulin	is	a	form	of	energy	storage	and	a	source
of	antifreeze	(sugars	 lower	 the	freezing	point
of	a	water	solution)	 in	members	of	 the	onion
and	 lettuce	 families,	 notably	 garlic	 and	 the
sunchoke.	Like	the	oligosaccharides,	inulin	is
not	 digestible,	 and	 so	 feeds	 bacteria	 in	 our
large	intestine	and	generates	gas.

Plant	 Gums	 There	 are	 a	 number	 of	 other
plant	 carbohydrates	 that	 cooks	 and
manufacturers	 have	 found	 useful	 for
thickening	and	gelling	liquid	foods,	helping	to
stabilize	 emulsions,	 and	 producing	 smoother



consistencies	 in	 frozen	 goods	 and	 candies.
Like	 the	 cell-wall	 cements,	 they’re	 generally
complex	polymers	of	several	different	sugars
or	related	carbohydrates.	They	include:

Agarose,	alginates,	and	carrageenans,
cell-wall	polymers	from	various
seaweeds
Gum	arabic,	which	exudes	from	cuts	in
various	species	of	Acacia	trees
Gum	tragacanth,	an	exudate	from	various
species	of	Astralagus	shrubs
Guar	gum,	from	seeds	of	a	shrub	in	the
bean	family	(Cyamopsis	tetragonobola)
Locust-bean	gum,	from	seeds	of	the
carob	tree,	Ceratonia	siliqua
Xanthan	gum	and	gellan,	polysaccharides
produced	by	certain	bacteria	in	industrial
fermentation

Proteins



Of	all	the	major	food	molecules,	proteins	are
the	most	challenging	and	mercurial.	The
others,	water	and	fats	and	carbohydrates,	are
pretty	stable	and	staid.	But	expose	proteins	to
a	little	heat,	or	acid,	or	salt,	or	air,	and	their
behavior	changes	drastically.	This
changeability	reflects	their	biological
mission.	Carbohydrates	and	fats	are	mainly
passive	forms	of	stored	energy,	or	structural
materials.	But	proteins	are	the	active
machinery	of	life.	They	assemble	all	the
molecules	that	make	a	cell,	themselves
included,	and	tear	them	down	as	well;	they
move	molecules	from	one	place	in	the	cell	to
another;	in	the	form	of	muscle	fibers,	they
move	whole	animals.	They’re	at	the	heart	of
all	organic	activity,	growth,	and	movement.
So	it’s	the	nature	of	proteins	to	be	active	and
sensitive.	When	we	cook	foods	that	contain
them,	we	take	advantage	of	their	dynamic
nature	to	make	new	structures	and
consistencies.



Amino	Acids	and	Peptides

Like	starch	and	cellulose,	proteins	are	large
polymers	of	smaller	molecular	units.	The
smaller	units	are	called	amino	acids.	They
consist	of	between	10	and	40	atoms,	mainly
carbon,	hydrogen,	and	oxygen,	with	at	least
one	nitrogen	atom	in	an	amine	group	—
NH>2—	that	gives	the	amino	acids	their
family	name.	A	couple	of	amino	acids	include
sulfur	atoms.	There	are	about	20	different
kinds	of	amino	acids	that	occur	in	significant
quantities	in	food.	Particular	protein
molecules	are	dozens	to	hundreds	of	amino
acids	long,	and	often	contain	many	of	the	20
different	kinds.	Short	chains	of	amino	acids
are	called	peptides.

Amino	 Acids	 and	 Peptides	 Contribute
Flavor	 Three	 aspects	 of	 amino	 acids	 are
especially	important	to	the	cook.	First,	amino
acids	 participate	 in	 the	 browning	 reactions



that	 generate	 flavor	 at	 high	 cooking
temperatures	 (p.	 778).	 Second,	 many	 single
amino	acids	and	short	peptides	have	tastes	of
their	 own,	 and	 in	 foods	 where	 proteins	 have
been	 partly	 broken	 down	 —	 aged	 cheeses,
cured	 hams,	 soy	 sauce	 —	 these	 tastes	 can
contribute	 to	 the	 overall	 flavor.	 Most	 tasty
amino	acids	are	either	sweet	or	bitter	to	some
degree,	 and	 a	 number	 of	 peptides	 are	 also
bitter.	But	 glutamic	 acid,	 better	 known	 in	 its
concentrated	 commercial	 form	 MSG
(monosodium	 glutamate),	 and	 some	 peptides
have	a	unique	taste	that	is	designated	by	such
words	as	savory,	brothy,	and	umami	(Japanese
for	 “delicious”).	 They	 lend	 an	 added
dimension	 of	 flavor	 to	 foods	 that	 are	 rich	 in
them,	 including	 tomatoes	 and	 certain
seaweeds	as	well	as	salt-cured	and	fermented
products.	 When	 heated,	 sulfur-containing
amino	acids	break	down	and	contribute	eggy,
meaty	aroma	notes.



Amino	 Acids	 Influence	 Protein	 Behavior
The	 third	 important	 characteristic	 of	 amino
acids	 is	 that	 they	 have	 a	 variety	 of	 chemical
natures,	and	 these	 influence	 the	structure	and
behavior	of	the	protein	they’re	a	part	of.	Some
amino	 acids	 have	 portions	 resembling	 water
and	 can	 form	 hydrogen	 bonds	 with	 other
molecules,	 including	water.	 Some	 have	 short
carbon	 chains	 or	 carbon	 rings	 that	 resemble
fats,	and	can	 form	van	der	Waals	bonds	with
other	similar	molecules.	And	some,	especially
those	that	include	a	sulfur	atom,	are	especially
reactive,	 and	can	 form	strong	covalent	bonds
with	 other	molecules,	 including	 other	 sulfur-
containing	 amino	 acids.	 This	 means	 that	 a
single	 protein	 has	 many	 different	 chemical
environments	along	its	chain:	parts	that	attract
water	 molecules,	 parts	 that	 avoid	 water
molecules,	 and	 parts	 that	 are	 ready	 to	 form
strong	 bonds	 with	 similar	 parts	 on	 other
proteins,	or	on	other	parts	of	the	same	protein.

Protein	Structure



Protein	Structure

Proteins	are	formed	by	linking	the	amine
nitrogen	of	one	amino	acid	with	a	carbon
atom	on	another	amino	acid,	and	then
repeating	this	“peptide	bond”	to	make	a	chain
dozens	or	hundreds	of	amino	acids	long.	The
carbon-nitrogen	backbone	of	the	protein
molecule	forms	a	sort	of	zigzag	pattern,	with
the	“side	groups”	—	the	other	atoms	on	each
amino	acid	—	sticking	out	to	the	sides.
The	Protein	Helix	One	effect	of	the	peptide
bond	is	a	certain	kind	of	regularity	that	causes
the	molecule	as	a	whole	to	twist	and	form	a
spiral,	or	helix.	Very	few	proteins	exist	as	a
simple	regular	helix,	but	those	that	do	tend	to
join	together	in	strong	fibers.	These	include
connective-tissue	collagen	in	meat,	an
important	factor	in	its	tenderness,	and	the
source	of	gelatin	(pp.	130,	597).
Protein	Folds	The	other	influence	on	protein
structure	is	the	side	groups	of	its	amino	acids.
Because	the	protein	chain	is	so	long,	it	can



bend	back	on	itself	and	bring	together	amino
acids	that	are	some	distance	along	the	chain
from	each	other.	Amino	acids	with	similar
side	groups	can	then	bond	to	each	other	in
various	ways,	including	via	hydrogen	bonds,
van	der	Waals	bonds,	ionic	bonds	(p.	813),
and	strong	covalent	bonds	(especially	between
sulfur	atoms).	This	bonding	is	what	gives	a
particular	protein	molecule	the	characteristic
shape	that	allows	it	to	carry	out	its	particular
job.	The	weak,	temporary	nature	of	the
hydrogen	and	hydrophobic	bonds	allows	it	to
change	its	shape	as	it	works.	The	overall
shape	of	a	protein	can	range	from	a	long,
extended,	mostly	helical	molecule	with	a	few
kinks	or	loops,	to	compact,	elaborately	folded
molecules	that	are	called	“globular”	proteins.
Collagen	is	an	example	of	a	helical	protein,
and	the	various	proteins	in	eggs	are	mainly
globular.



Amino	 acids	 and	 proteins,	 denaturation	 and
coagulation.	 Top:	Three	of	 the	20-odd	amino
acids	important	in	food.	Each	amino	acid	has
a	 common	 end	 including	 an	 amino	 (NH2)
group,	 by	 which	 amino	 acids	 bond	 to	 each
other	 into	 long	 chains	 called	 proteins,	 and	a
variable	 end	 or	 “side	 group”	 that	 can	 form
different	 kinds	 of	 bonds	 with	 other	 amino
acids.	 Center:	A	 chain	 of	 amino	 acids	 shown
schematically,	 with	 some	 of	 the	 side	 groups
projecting	 from	 the	 chain.	 The	 amino	 acid
chain	can	fold	back	on	itself,	and	some	of	the
side	 groups	 form	 bonds	 with	 each	 other	 to
hold	 the	 chain	 in	 a	 folded	 shape.	 Bottom:



Heating	 and	 other	 cooking	 processes	 can
break	the	fold-stabilizing	bonds	and	cause	the
long	 chains	 to	 unfold,	 or	 denature	 (left,
center)	.	 Eventually	 the	 exposed	 side	 groups
form	 new	 bonds	 between	 different	 protein
chains,	and	the	proteins	coagulate	,	or	form	a
permanently	bonded	solid	mass	(right)	.

Proteins	in	Water

In	living	systems	and	in	most	foods,	protein
molecules	are	surrounded	by	water.	Because
all	proteins	are	capable	to	some	extent	of
hydrogen	bonding,	they	absorb	and	hold	at
least	some	water,	although	the	amounts	vary
greatly	according	to	the	kinds	of	side	groups
present	and	the	overall	structure	of	the
molecule.	Water	molecules	can	be	held
“inside”	the	protein,	along	the	backbone,	and
“outside,”	on	polar	side	groups.

Whether	or	not	a	protein	is	soluble	in
water	depends	on	the	strength	of	the	bonds



between	molecules,	and	on	whether	water	can
separate	the	molecules	from	each	other	by
hydrogen	bonding.	The	wheat	proteins	that
form	gluten	when	flour	is	mixed	with	water
are	a	kind	of	protein	that	absorbs	considerable
amounts	of	water	but	doesn’t	dissolve,
because	many	fat-like	groups	along	their
molecules	bond	with	each	other,	hold	the
proteins	together,	and	exclude	water.
Similarly,	the	proteins	that	make	up	the
contracting	muscle	fibers	in	meat	are	held
together	by	ionic	and	other	bonds.	On	the
other	hand,	many	of	the	proteins	in	milk	and
eggs	are	quite	soluble.

Protein	Denaturation

A	very	important	characteristic	of	proteins	is
their	susceptibility	to	denaturation,	or	the
undoing	of	their	natural	structure	by	chemical
or	physical	means.	This	change	involves
breaking	the	bonds	that	maintain	the



molecule’s	folded	shape.	(The	strong
backbone	bonds	are	broken	only	in	extreme
conditions	or	with	the	help	of	enzymes.)
Denaturation	is	not	a	change	in	composition,
only	a	change	in	structure.	But	structure
determines	behavior,	and	denatured	proteins
behave	very	differently	from	their	originals.

Proteins	can	be	denatured	in	many	ways:
by	exposing	them	to	heat	—	usually	to
somewhere	between	140–180ºF/60–80ºC	—	or
to	high	acidity,	or	to	air	bubbles,	or	to	a
combination	of	these.	In	each	case,	the
unusual	chemical	or	physical	conditions	—
increased	molecular	agitation,	or	lots	of
reactive	protons,	or	the	drastic	difference
between	the	air	bubble	and	the	liquid	wall	that
surrounds	it	—	breaks	many	of	the	bonds
between	amino	acid	side	groups	that	hold	the
protein	molecule	in	its	specific	folded	shape.
The	long	proteins	therefore	unfold,	exposing
many	more	of	their	reactive	side	groups	to	the
watery	environment.



Protein	 Coagulation	 There	 are	 several
general	 consequences	 of	 denaturation	 that
follow	 for	 most	 food	 proteins.	 Because	 the
molecules	 have	 been	 extended	 in	 length,
they’re	more	 likely	 to	 bump	 into	 each	 other.
And	 because	 their	 side	 groups	 are	 now
exposed	 and	 available	 for	 forming	 bonds,
denatured	 proteins	 begin	 to	 bond	 with	 each
other,	 or	coagulate.	 This	 happens	 throughout
the	 food,	and	 results	 in	 the	development	of	a
continuous	 network	 of	 proteins,	 with	 water
held	 in	 the	 pockets	 between	 protein	 strands.
The	 food	 therefore	 develops	 a	 kind	 of
thickness	 or	 density	 that	 can	 be	 delicate	 and
delightful,	 as	 in	 a	 barely	 set	 custard	 or
perfectly	 cooked	 piece	 of	 fish.	 However,	 if
cooking	 or	 other	 denaturing	 conditions
continue,	 given	 the	 extreme	 physical	 or
chemical	environment	that	caused	the	proteins
to	denature	in	the	first	place,	only	the	stronger
bonds	can	form	and	survive,	which	means	that
the	 proteins	 bond	 together	 more	 and	 more



tightly,	densely,	and	irreversibly.	And	as	they
do	 so,	 they	 squeeze	 the	 pockets	 of	water	 out
from	 between	 them.	 The	 custard	 gets	 dense
and	 a	 watery	 fluid	 separates	 from	 the	 solid
portion;	the	fish	gets	tough	and	dry.

The	details	of	protein	denaturation	and
coagulation	in	any	given	food	are	intricate	and
fascinating.	For	example,	acidity	and	salts	can
cause	egg	proteins	to	cluster	together	even
before	they	begin	to	unfold,	and	thus	affect
the	consistency	of	scrambled	eggs	and
custards.	Such	details	are	noted	in	the
descriptions	of	particular	foods.

Enzymes

There’s	a	particular	group	of	proteins	that	are
important	to	the	cook	not	so	much	for	their
direct	contribution	to	food	texture	and
consistency,	but	for	the	way	they	change	the
other	components	of	the	food	they’re	in.
These	proteins	are	the	enzymes.	Enzymes	are



biological	catalysts:	that	is,	they	increase	the
rate	of	specific	chemical	reactions	that
otherwise	would	occur	only	very	slowly,	if	at
all.	Enzymes	thus	cause	chemical	change.
Some	enzymes	build	molecules	up,	or	modify
them;	some	break	molecules	down.	Human
digestive	enzymes,	for	example,	break
proteins	into	individual	amino	acids,	and
starch	into	individual	glucose	units.	A	singe
enzyme	molecule	can	catalyze	as	many	as	a
million	reactions	per	second.

Enzymes	matter	to	the	cook	because	foods
contain	enzymes	that	once	did	important	work
for	the	plant	or	animal	when	it	was	alive,	but
that	can	now	harm	the	food	by	changing	its
color,	texture,	taste,	or	nutritiousness.
Enzymes	help	turn	green	chlorophyll	in
vegetables	dull	olive,	cause	cut	fruits	to	turn
brown	and	oxidize	their	vitamin	C,	and	turn
fish	flesh	mushy.	And	bacterial	spoilage	is
largely	a	matter	of	bacterial	enzymes	breaking
the	food	down	for	the	bacteria’s	own	use.



With	a	few	exceptions	—	the	tenderizing	of
meat	by	its	own	internal	enzymes,	the	firming
of	some	vegetables	before	further	cooking,
and	fermentations	in	general	—	the	cook
wants	to	prevent	enzymatic	activity	in	food.
Storing	foods	at	low	temperatures	delays
spoilage	in	part	because	it	slows	the	growth	of
spoilage	microbes,	but	also	because	it	slows
the	activity	of	the	food’s	own	enzymes.

Cooking	Accelerates	Enzyme	Action	Before
Stopping	 It	 Because	 the	 activity	 of	 an
enzyme	 depends	 on	 its	 structure,	 any	 change
in	that	structure	will	destroy	its	effectiveness.
So	 cooking	 foods	 sufficiently	 will	 denature
and	inactivate	any	enzymes	they	may	contain.
One	 vivid	 example	 of	 this	 principle	 is	 the
behavior	 of	 raw	 and	 cooked	 pineapple	 in
gelatin.	 Pineapples	 and	 certain	 other	 fruits
contain	an	enzyme	 that	breaks	proteins	down
into	 small	 fragments.	 If	 raw	 pineapple	 is
combined	 with	 gelatin	 to	 make	 a	 jelly,	 the



enzyme	 digests	 the	 gelatin	 molecules	 and
liquifies	 the	 jelly.	 But	 canned	 pineapple	 has
been	 heated	 enough	 to	 denature	 the	 enzyme,
and	makes	a	firm	gelatin	jelly.

There’s	a	complication,	though.	The
reactivity	of	most	chemicals	increases	with
increasing	temperature.	The	rule	of	thumb	is
that	reactivity	doubles	with	each	rise	of
20ºF/10ºC.	The	same	tendency	goes	for
enzymes,	up	to	a	range	in	which	they	begin	to
denature,	become	less	effective,	and	finally
become	completely	inactive.	This	means	that
cooking	gives	enzymes	a	chance	to	do	their
damage	more	and	more	quickly	as	the
temperature	rises,	and	only	stops	them	once
they	reach	their	denaturation	temperature.	In
general,	the	best	rule	is	to	heat	foods	as
rapidly	as	possible,	thereby	minimizing	the
period	during	which	the	enzymes	are	at	their
optimum	temperatures,	and	to	get	them	all	the
way	to	the	boiling	point.	Conversely,
desirable	enzyme	action	—	meat	tenderizing,



for	example	—	can	be	maximized	by	slow,
gradual	heating	to	denaturing	temperatures.



Appendix

A	Chemistry	Primer
Atoms,	Molecules,	Energy

Atoms,	Molecules,	and	Chemical	Bonds
Atoms	and	Molecules
Electrical	 Imbalance,	 Reactions,	 and
Oxidation
Electrical	Imbalance	and	Chemical	Bonds

Energy
Energy	Causes	Change
The	Nature	of	Heat:	Molecular	Movement
Bond	Energy

The	Phases	of	Matter
Solids
Liquids
Gases
Many	Food	Molecules	Can’t	Change	Phase
Mixtures	 of	 Phases:	 Solutions,



Suspensions,	Emulsions,	Gels,	Foams

Cooking	 is	 applied	 chemistry,	 and	 the	 basic
concepts	 of	 chemistry	—	molecules,	 energy,
heat,	 reactions	 —	 are	 keys	 to	 a	 clearer
understanding	of	what	our	foods	are	and	how
we	 transform	 them.	 A	 casual	 acquaintance
with	these	concepts	 is	enough	to	follow	most
of	 the	 explanations	 in	 this	 book.	 For	 readers
who’d	like	to	get	to	know	them	better,	here’s
a	brief	review.

Atoms,	Molecules,	and	Chemical	Bonds

It	was	the	ancient	Greeks	who	gave	us	the	idea
of	atoms,	fundamental	and	invisibly	small
particles	of	matter,	and	also	the	word	atom,
which	means	“uncuttable,”	“indivisible.”
Greek	philosophers	proposed	that	there	are
just	four	basic	kinds	of	particles	in	the	world
—	atoms	of	earth,	air,	water,	and	fire	—	and
that	all	material	things,	our	bodies	and	our



foods	and	everything	else,	are	built	from	these
primary	particles.	The	modern	scientific	view
of	matter’s	invisible	innards	is	more
complicated,	but	also	more	precise	and
illuminating.

Atoms	and	Molecules

All	matter	on	earth	is	a	mixture	of	around	100
pure	substances,	which	we	call	the	elements:
hydrogen,	oxygen,	nitrogen,	carbon,	and	so
on.	An	atom	is	the	smallest	particle	into
which	an	element	can	be	subdivided	without
losing	its	characteristic	properties.	Atoms	are
very	small	indeed:	several	million	would	fit
into	the	period	at	the	end	of	this	sentence.	All
atoms	are	made	up	of	smaller	“subatomic”
particles,	electrons,	protons,	and	neutrons.
The	different	properties	of	the	elements	arise
from	the	varying	combinations	of	subatomic
particles	that	make	up	their	atoms,	and	in
particular	their	quotas	of	protons	and



electrons.	Hydrogen	atoms	contain	one	proton
and	one	electron;	oxygen	carries	8	of	each,
and	iron	26.

When	two	or	more	atoms	bond	together,
which	they	do	by	sharing	electrons	with	each
other,	they	form	a	molecule	(from	the	Latin
for	“mass,”	“bulk”).	The	molecule	is	to	a
chemical	compound	what	the	atom	is	to	an
element:	the	smallest	unit	that	retains	the
properties	of	the	original	material.	Most
matter	on	earth,	including	food,	is	a	mixture
of	different	chemical	compounds.

Protons	 and	 Electrons	 Carry	 Positive	 and
Negative	 Electrical	 Charges	 There’s	 one
primary	driving	force	behind	all	the	chemical
activity	that	makes	life	and	cooking	possible,
and	 that’s	 the	 electrical	 attraction	 between
protons	and	electrons.	Protons	carry	a	positive
electrical	 charge,	 and	 electrons	 an	 exactly
balancing	 negative	 charge.	 (The	 neutral
neutron	carries	no	charge.)	Opposite	electrical



charges	 attract	 each	 other;	 similar	 electrical
charges	 repel	 each	 other.	 In	 each	 atom,
protons	 in	 the	 central	 nucleus	 attract	 a	 cloud
of	 electrons	 that	 orbit	 constantly	 at	 various
distances	 from	 the	 nucleus.	 Stable	 forms	 of
the	 elements	 are	 electrically	 neutral,	 which
means	that	their	atoms	contain	equal	numbers
of	protons	and	electrons.

(If	like	charges	repel	each	other	and
opposite	charges	attract,	then	why	is	it	that	the
protons	in	the	nucleus	don’t	push	each	other
away	and	the	orbiting	electrons	fall	straight
into	the	nucleus?	It	turns	out	that	there	are
forces	besides	electricity	at	work	in	the	atom.
The	protons	and	neutrons	are	bound	together
by	very	strong	nuclear	forces,	while	it’s	the
nature	of	electrons	to	be	in	continual	motion.
So	protons	and	electrons	are	always	attracted
to	each	other	and	move	in	response	to	the
other’s	presence,	but	they	never	consummate
their	attraction.)

Electrical	Imbalance,	Reactions,	and	Oxidation



Electrical	Imbalance,	Reactions,	and	Oxidation

The	electrons	in	atoms	are	arranged	around
the	nucleus	in	orbits	that	determine	how
strongly	any	particular	electron	is	held	there.
Some	electrons	are	held	close	and	tightly	to
the	nucleus,	while	others	range	far	away	and
are	held	more	weakly.	The	behavior	of	the
outermost	electrons	largely	determines	the
chemical	behavior	of	the	elements.	For
example,	the	elements	classi-fied	as	metals	—
copper,	aluminum,	iron	—	hold	their
outermost	electrons	very	weakly,	and	easily
give	them	away	to	the	atoms	of	other
elements	—	oxygen,	chlorine	—	that	are
hungrier	for	electrons,	and	that	tend	to	grab	up
any	that	are	loosely	held.	This	imbalance	in
electrical	pulls	among	different	elements	is
the	basis	of	most	chemical	reactions.
Reactions	are	encounters	among	atoms	and
molecules	that	result	in	the	loss,	gain,	or
sharing	of	electrons,	and	thus	changes	in	the
properties	of	the	atoms	and	molecules



involved.

An	 atom	 of	 carbon.	 Carbon	 has	 six	 protons
and	 six	 neutrons	 in	 its	 nucleus,	 and	 six
electrons	orbiting	around	the	nucleus.

Of	all	the	electron-grabbing	elements,	the
most	important	is	oxygen,	so	much	so	that
chemists	use	the	term	oxidation	to	name	the
general	chemical	activity	of	grabbing
electrons	from	other	atoms,	even	if	a	chlorine
atom	is	doing	the	grabbing.	Oxidation	is	very
important	in	the	kitchen,	because	oxygen	is
always	present	in	the	air,	and	readily	robs
electrons	from	the	carbon-hydrogen	chains	of
fats,	oils,	and	aroma	molecules.	This	initial
oxidation	triggers	a	cascade	of	further
oxidations	and	other	reactions	that	end	up



breaking	the	original	large	fat	molecules	into
small,	strong-smelling	fragments.	Antioxidant
substances	—	for	example,	phenolic
compounds	found	in	many	foods	made	from
plants	—	prevent	this	breakdown	by	giving
oxygen	the	electrons	it	wants	without	starting
a	reaction	cascade,	thus	sparing	the	fat
molecules	from	oxidation.

Electrical	Imbalance	and	Chemical	Bonds

Electron	hunger	is	also	the	basis	for	the
chemical	bond,	an	interaction	between	atoms
or	molecules	that	holds	them	together,	either
loosely	or	tightly,	momentarily	or
indefinitely.	There	are	several	different	kinds
of	chemical	bonds	that	are	important	in	the
kitchen,	as	they	are	throughout	nature.

Ionic	Bonds;	Salt	One	kind	of	chemical	bond
is	 the	ionic	 bond,	 in	 which	 one	 atom
completely	 captures	 the	 electron(s)	 of



another,	 so	 great	 is	 the	 difference	 between
their	 electron	 hungers.	 Chemical	 compounds
held	 together	 by	 ionic	 bonds	 don’t	 simply
dissolve	 in	 water;	 they	 come	 apart	 into
separate	ions,	 or	 atoms	 that	 are	 electrically
charged	 because	 they	 either	 carry	 extra
electrons	 or	 gave	 up	 some	of	 their	 electrons.
(The	 term	 was	 coined	 by	 the	 pioneer	 of
electricity,	Michael	 Faraday,	 from	 the	Greek
word	 for	 “going,”	 to	 name	 those	 electrically
charged	particles	that	move	when	an	electrical
field	 is	 set	 up	 in	 a	water	 solution.)	 Salt,	 our
most	 common	 seasoning,	 is	 a	 compound	 of
sodium	and	chlorine	held	 together	with	 ionic
bonds.	 In	 a	 solid	 crystal	 of	 pure	 salt,
positively	charged	sodium	ions	alternate	with
negatively	charged	chloride	ions,	the	sodiums
having	 lost	 their	 electrons	 to	 the	 chlorines.
Because	 several	 positive	 sodium	 ions	 are
always	 in	 a	 state	 of	 attraction	 to	 several
negative	 chloride	 ions,	we	 can’t	 really	 speak
of	 individual	 molecules	 of	 salt,	 with	 one



particular	sodium	atom	bonded	to	a	particular
chlorine	 atom.	 In	 water,	 salt	 dissolves	 into
separate	 positive	 sodium	 ions	 and	 negative
chloride	ions.

Ionic	and	covalent	bonds.	Left:	An	ionic	bond
results	when	an	atom	completely	captures	one
or	 more	 electrons	 of	 another	 atom,	 and	 the
two	 atoms	 experience	 an	 attractive	 force
(dotted	 line)	 due	 to	 their	 opposite	 electrical
charges.	 Right:	In	 the	 covalent	 bond,	 atoms
share	 electrons,	 and	 thereby	 form	 stable
combinations	called	molecules.

Strong	 Bonds	 That	 Make	 Molecules	 A
second	kind	of	chemical	bond,	called	covalent
(from	 the	Latin,	 “of	 equal	 power”),	 produces
s t ab l e	molecules.	 When	 two	 atoms	 have



roughly	 similar	 affinities	 for	 electrons,	 they
will	share	them	rather	than	gain	or	lose	them
entirely.	 In	 order	 for	 sharing	 to	 occur,	 the
electron	 clouds	 of	 two	 atoms	 must	 overlap,
and	 this	 condition	 results	 in	 a	 fixed
arrangement	 in	 space	 between	 two	 particular
atoms,	 which	 thus	 form	 a	 stable	 combined
structure.	 The	 bonding	 geometry	 determines
the	 overall	 shape	 of	 the	 molecule,	 and
molecular	 shape	 in	 turn	 defines	 the	 ways	 in
which	one	molecule	can	react	with	others.

The	elements	most	important	to	life	on
earth	—	hydrogen,	oxygen,	carbon,	nitrogen,
phosphorus,	sulfur	—	all	tend	to	form
covalent	bonds,	and	these	make	possible	the
complex,	stable	assemblages	that	constitute
our	bodies	and	our	foods.	The	most	familiar
pure	chemical	compounds	in	the	kitchen	are
water,	a	covalent	combination	of	two
hydrogen	atoms	and	an	oxygen;	and	sucrose,
or	table	sugar,	a	combination	of	carbon,
oxygen,	and	hydrogen	atoms.	Covalent	bonds



are	generally	strong	and	stable	at	room
temperature:	that	is,	they’re	not	broken	in
significant	numbers	unless	subjected	to	heat
or	to	reactive	chemicals,	including	enzymes.
Unlike	salt,	which	dissolves	into	electrically
charged	ions,	covalently	bonded	molecules
that	can	dissolve	in	water	generally	do	so	as
intact,	electrically	neutral	molecules.

Weak	 Bonds	 Between	 Polar	 Molecules:
Water	A	third	kind	of	chemical	bond,	about	a
tenth	as	strong	and	stable	as	covalent	bonds,	is
the	hydrogen	bond.	The	hydrogen	bond	is	one
of	 several	 “weak”	 bonds	 that	 do	 not	 form
molecules,	 but	 do	 make	 temporary	 links
between	 different	 molecules,	 or	 between
different	 parts	 of	 one	 large	 molecule.	 Weak
bonds	 come	 about	 because	 most	 covalent
bonds	 leave	 at	 least	 a	 slight	 electrical
imbalance	 among	 the	 participating	 atoms.
Consider	 water,	 whose	 chemical	 formula	 is
H2O.	 The	 oxygen	 atom	 has	 a	 greater	 hunger



for	 electrons	 than	 the	 two	 hydrogen	 atoms,
and	so	 the	shared	electrons	are	held	closer	 to
the	oxygen	than	to	the	hydrogens.	As	a	result,
there’s	 an	 overall	 negative	 charge	 in	 the
vicinity	of	the	oxygen,	and	an	overall	positive
charge	 around	 the	 hydrogen	 atoms.	 This
unequal	 distribution	 of	 charge,	 together	 with
the	geometry	of	the	covalent	bonds,	results	in
a	molecule	with	a	positive	end	and	a	negative
end.	Such	a	molecule	 is	 called	polar	 because
it	 has	 two	 separate	 centers,	 or	 poles,	 of
charge.

A	 hydrogen	 bond	 results	 from	 the	 attraction
between	 oppositely	 charged	 ends	 of	 polar
molecules	 (or	 portions	 of	 molecules).	 This
kind	 of	 bond	 is	 important	 because	 it’s	 very
common	 in	 materials	 that	 contain	 water,
because	it	brings	different	kinds	of	molecules
into	 close	 association,	 and	 because	 it’s	weak
enough	 that	 these	molecular	 associations	 can
change	rapidly	at	room	temperature.	Many	of



the	chemical	 interactions	 in	plant	and	animal
cells	occur	via	hydrogen	bonds.

Very	 Weak	 Bonds	 Between	 Nonpolar
Molecules:	 Fats	 and	 Oils	 A	 fourth	 kind	 of
chemical	bond	is	very	weak	indeed,	between	a
hundredth	and	a	ten-thousandth	as	strong	as	a
molecule-making	 covalent	 bond.	 These	van
der	 Waals 	 bonds,	 named	 after	 the	 Dutch
chemist	who	first	described	them,	are	the	kind
of	 flickering	 electrical	 attraction	 that	 even
nonpolar	 molecules	 can	 feel	 for	 each	 other,
thanks	to	brief	fluctuations	in	their	structures.
Where	electrically	polar	water	is	held	together
as	 a	 liquid	 by	 hydrogen	 bonds,	 nonpolar	 fat
molecules	 are	 held	 together	 as	 a	 liquid	 and
given	 their	 appealingly	 thick	 consistency	 by
van	der	Waals	bonds.	Though	these	bonds	are
indeed	 weak,	 their	 effect	 can	 add	 up	 to	 a
significant	 force:	 fat	 molecules	 are	 long
chains	and	include	dozens	of	carbon	atoms,	so
each	 fat	 molecule	 can	 interact	 with	 many



more	 other	 molecules	 than	 a	 small	 water
molecule	can.

Energy

Energy	Causes	Change

The	paragraphs	directly	above	describe
various	bonds	as	“weak”	and	“strong,”	easily
or	not	so	easily	formed	and	broken.	The	idea
of	bond	strength	is	useful	because	most
cooking	is	a	matter	of	the	systematic	breaking
of	certain	chemical	bonds	and	the	formation
of	others.	The	key	to	the	behavior	of	chemical
bonds	is	energy.	The	word	is	a	Greek
compound	of	“in”	and	“force”	or	“activity,”
and	now	has	as	its	standard	definition	“the
capacity	for	doing	work,”	or	“the	exertion	of	a
force	across	a	distance.”	Most	simply,	energy
is	that	property	of	physical	systems	that
makes	possible	change.	A	system	with	little
energy	is	largely	unchanging.	Conversely,	the



more	energy	available	to	an	object,	the	more
likely	that	object	is	to	be	changed,	or	to
change	its	surroundings.	Our	kitchens	are
organized	around	this	principle.	Stoves	and
ovens	change	the	qualities	of	food	by	pouring
heat	energy	into	it,	while	the	refrigerator
preserves	food	by	removing	heat	and	thus
slowing	down	the	chemical	changes	that
constitute	spoilage.
Atoms	and	molecules	can	absorb	or	release
energy	in	several	different	forms,	two	of
which	are	important	in	the	kitchen.

The	Nature	of	Heat:	Molecular	Movement

One	kind	of	energy	is	the	energy	of	motion,	or
kinetic	energy.	Atoms	and	molecules	can
move	from	one	place	to	another;	or	spin	in
place,	or	vibrate,	and	all	of	these	changes	in
position	or	orientation	require	energy.	Heat	is
a	manifestation	of	a	material’s	kinetic	energy,
and	temperature	is	a	measure	of	that	energy:



the	higher	the	temperature	of	a	food	or	pan,
the	hotter	it	is,	the	faster	its	molecules	are
moving	and	colliding	with	each	other.	And
simple	movement	is	the	key	to	transforming
molecules	and	foods.	As	molecules	move
faster	and	more	forcefully,	their	motions	and
collisions	begin	to	overcome	the	electrical
forces	holding	them	together.	This	frees	some
atoms	to	find	new	partners	and	rearrange
themselves	in	new	molecules.	Heat	thus
encourages	chemical	reactions	and	chemical
change.

Bond	Energy

The	second	kind	of	energy	that’s	important	in
the	kitchen	is	the	energy	of	the	chemical
bonds	that	hold	molecules	together.	When	two
or	more	atoms	become	a	molecule	by	sharing
electrons	and	bonding	with	each	other,	they’re
pulled	together	by	an	electrical	force.	So	in
the	process	of	forming	the	bond,	some	of	their



electrical	energy	is	transformed	into	energy	of
motion.	And	the	stronger	the	electrical	force,
the	more	rapidly	they	accelerate	toward	each
other.	The	stronger	the	bond,	the	more	energy
is	released	—	lost	—	from	the	molecule	in	the
form	of	motion.	Strong	bonds,	then,	“contain”
less	energy	than	weak	bonds.	This	is	another
way	of	saying	that	they	are	more	stable,	less
susceptible	to	change,	than	weak	bonds.

Van	der	Waals	 bonds.	Thanks	 to	 fluctuations
in	the	positions	of	their	shared	electrons,	even
the	 nonpolar	 chains	 of	 carbon	 and	 hydrogen
atoms	 in	 fats	 experience	 weakly	 attractive
electrical	forces	(dotted	lines).

Bond	strength	is	defined	as	the	amount	of
energy	released	from	the	participating	atoms
when	they	form	the	bond.	This	is	the	same	as
the	amount	of	energy	required	to	break	that



bond	once	it’s	formed.	When	the	atoms	in	a
molecule	are	heated	up	so	they	move	with	the
same	kinetic	energy	that	they	had	released
when	they	bonded	to	each	other,	then	those
bonds	begin	to	break	apart,	and	the	molecule
begins	to	react	and	change.

The	strong	covalent	bonds	typical	of	our
major	food	molecules	—	proteins,
carbohydrates,	fats	—	are	broken	by	about
100	times	the	average	kinetic	energy	of
molecules	at	room	temperature.	This	means
that	they	break	very	rarely	at	room
temperature,	and	don’t	change	at	a	significant
rate	until	we	heat	them.	The	weaker,
temporary	hydrogen	and	van	der	Waals	bonds
between	molecules	are	constantly	being
broken	and	re-formed	at	room	temperature,
and	this	welter	of	activity	increases	as	the
temperature	rises.	This	is	why	fats	melt	and
become	thinner	in	consistency	as	we	heat
them:	the	energy	of	their	motion	increasingly
overpowers	the	forces	attracting	them	to	each



other.

The	Phases	of	Matter

In	our	everyday	life,	we	encounter	matter	in
three	different	states,	or	phases	(the	word
comes	from	the	Greek	for	“appearance”	or
“manifestation”).	These	states	are	the	solid
phase,	the	liquid	phase,	and	the	gas	phase.	The
temperatures	at	which	a	material	melts	—
changes	from	solid	to	liquid	—	and	boils	—
changes	from	liquid	to	gas	—	are	determined
by	the	bonding	forces	among	the	atoms	or
molecules.	The	stronger	the	bonds,	the	more
energy	needed	to	overcome	them,	and	so	the
higher	the	temperature	at	which	the	material
shifts	from	one	phase	to	another.	During	that
shift,	all	the	heat	added	to	the	material	goes
into	completing	the	phase	change.	The
temperature	of	a	solid-liquid	mix	will	remain
fairly	constant	until	all	the	solid	has	melted.
Similarly,	the	temperature	of	a	pot	of	boiling



water	on	a	high	flame	remains	constant	—	at
the	boiling	point	—	until	all	the	liquid	water
has	been	turned	into	steam.

States	 of	 matter.	 Crystalline	 solids	 such	 as
salt	 and	 sugar	 are	 made	 up	 of	 atoms	 or
molecules	bonded	 together	 in	highly	ordered,
regular	 arrays.	 Amorphous	 solids,	 such	 as
hard	 candies	 and	 glass,	 are	masses	 of	 atoms
or	molecules	 that	 have	 bonded	 to	 each	 other
in	 a	 random	 arrangement.	 Liquids	 are	 a
loosely	 bonded,	 fluid	 mass	 of	 atoms	 or
molecules,	while	a	gas	is	a	fluid	and	dispersed
group	of	atoms	or	molecules.

Solids



At	low	temperatures,	atomic	motion	is	limited
to	rotation	and	vibration,	and	the	immobilized
atoms	or	molecules	bond	tightly	to	each	other
in	solid,	closely	packed,	well-defined
structures.	Such	structures	define	the	solid
phase.	In	a	crystalline	solid	—	salt,	sugar,
tempered	chocolate	—	the	particles	are
arranged	in	a	regular,	repeating	array,	while	in
amorphous	solids	—	boiled	candies,	glass	—
they	are	randomly	oriented.	Large,	irregular
molecules	like	proteins	and	starch	often	form
both	highly	ordered,	crystalline	regions	and
disordered	amorphous	regions	in	the	same
chunk	of	material.	Ionic	bonds,	hydrogen
bonds,	and	van	der	Waals	bonds	may	be
involved	in	holding	the	particles	of	a	solid
together.

Liquids

At	a	temperature	that	is	characteristic	of	each
solid	substance,	the	rotation	and	vibration	of



individual	molecules	in	that	substance
becomes	forceful	enough	that	the	electrical
forces	holding	them	in	place	are	overpowered.
The	fixed	structure	then	breaks	up,	leaving	the
molecules	free	to	move	from	one	place	to
another.	However,	most	of	the	molecules	are
still	moving	slowly	enough	that	they	remain
influenced	by	the	forces	that	once
immobilized	them,	and	so	they	remain	loosely
associated	with	each	other.	They’re	free	to
move,	but	move	together.	This	fluid	but
cohesive	phase	is	a	liquid.

Gases

If	the	temperature	continues	to	rise	and	the
molecules	move	with	a	kinetic	energy	high
enough	that	they	can	break	away	from	each
other’s	influence	completely	and	move	freely
into	the	air,	the	substance	become	a	different
kind	of	fluid,	a	gas.	The	most	familiar
transition	from	the	liquid	phase	to	the	gas



phase	is	boiling,	in	which	we	transform	liquid
water	into	bubbles	of	water	vapor,	or	steam.
Less	obvious	to	the	eye,	because	it’s	so
gradual,	is	the	evaporation	of	water	at
temperatures	below	the	boiling	point.	The
molecules	in	a	liquid	move	with	a	wide	range
of	kinetic	energies,	and	a	small	portion	of	the
molecules	in	room-temperature	water	are
moving	fast	enough	to	escape	from	the
surface	and	move	into	the	air.

In	fact,	water	molecules	can	even	escape	as
a	gas	from	solid	ice!	This	direct
transformation	of	a	solid	into	a	gas	is	called
sublimation,	and	is	the	cause	of	that
deterioration	in	foods	known	as	“freezer
burn,”	in	which	crystalline	water	evaporates
into	the	freezer’s	cold,	dry	air.	Freeze-drying
is	a	controlled	version	of	the	same	process.

Many	Food	Molecules	Can’t	Change	Phase

Most	of	the	molecules	that	the	cook	works



with	can’t	simply	change	from	one	phase	to
another	when	heated.	Instead,	they	react	to
form	entirely	different	kinds	of	molecules.
This	is	because	food	molecules	are	large,	and
form	so	many	weak	bonds	between	molecules
that	they’re	in	fact	held	very	strongly
together.	It	takes	as	much	energy	to	break
them	apart	from	each	other	as	it	does	to	break
the	molecules	themselves	apart:	and	so	rather
than	melting	or	evaporating,	the	molecules
become	transformed.	For	example,	sugar	will
melt	from	a	solid	into	a	liquid,	but	rather	than
then	vaporize	into	a	gas	as	water	does,	it
breaks	apart	and	forms	hundreds	of	new
compounds:	a	process	we	call	caramelization.
Fats	and	oils	melt,	but	break	down	and	smoke
before	they	begin	to	boil.	Starch,	which	is	a
long	chain	of	sugar	molecules	joined	together,
won’t	even	melt:	it	and	proteins,	also	very
large	molecules,	begin	to	break	down	as
solids.

Mixtures	of	Phases:	Solutions,	Suspensions,	Emulsions,



Mixtures	of	Phases:	Solutions,	Suspensions,	Emulsions,
Gels,	Foams

Cooks	seldom	deal	with	pure	chemical
compounds	or	even	single	phases.	Foods	are
mixtures	of	different	molecules,	different
phases,	and	even	different	kinds	of	mixtures!
Here	are	brief	definitions	of	mixtures	that	are
important	in	the	kitchen.

A	solution	is	a	material	in	which
individual	ions	or	molecules	are
dispersed	in	a	liquid.	Salt	brines	and
sugar	syrups	are	simple	culinary
examples.
A	suspension	is	a	material	in	which	a
substance	is	dispersed	in	a	liquid	in
clusters	or	particles	consisting	of	many
molecules.	Nonfat	milk	is	a	suspension
of	milk-protein	particles	in	water.
Suspensions	are	usually	cloudy	because
the	clusters	are	large	enough	to	deflect
light	rays	(individual	dissolved



molecules	are	too	small	to	do	so,	so
solutions	are	clear).	•An	emulsion	is	a
special	kind	of	suspension,	one	in	which
the	dispersed	substance	is	a	liquid	that
can’t	mix	evenly	with	the	containing
liquid.	Cream	is	an	emulsion	of	butterfat
in	water,	and	an	oil-and-vinegar	dressing
is	usually	an	emulsion	of	vinegar	in	oil.
A	gel	is	a	dispersion	of	water	in	a	solid:
the	molecules	of	the	solid	form	a	sponge-
like	network,	and	the	pockets	of	water
are	trapped	in	the	network.	Examples	are
savory	or	sweet	jellies	made	with	gelatin,
and	fruit	jellies	made	with	pectin.
A	foam	is	a	dispersion	of	gas	bubbles	in	a
liquid	or	solid.	Soufflés,	bread,	and	the
head	on	a	glass	of	beer	are	all	foams.



Selected	References

The	 scientific	 and	 historical	 literatures	 on
food	 are	 vast,	 as	 is	 the	 literature	 of	 cooking
itself!	The	following	 list	 is	a	selection	of	 the
sources	 that	 I’ve	 referred	 to	 in	 the	 course	 of
writing	 this	 book.	 It	 provides	 documentation
for	 the	more	 important	 facts	 and	 ideas,	 leads
for	 finding	 more	 detailed	 information,	 and
gives	 credit	 to	 researchers	 and	 translators.	 I
begin	 by	 listing	 works	 that	 I’ve	 relied	 on
throughout	 the	 book.	 Then	 follow
bibliographies	by	chapter.	Each	is	divided	into
two	sections:	first,	books	and	articles	intended
for	 the	 general	 reader;	 and	 second,	 more
specialized	and	technical	studies.

General	Sources



Books	on	Food	and	Cooking
Behr,	E.	The	Artful	Eater. 	New	York:	Atlantic
Monthly,	1992.
Child,	 J.,	 and	 S.	 Beck.	Mastering	 the	 Art	 of
French	 Cooking.	 2	 vols.	 New	 York:	 Knopf,
1961,	1970.
Davidson,	A.	The	Oxford	Companion	to	Food.
Oxford:	Oxford	Univ.	Press,	1999.
Kamman,	M.	The	New	Making	of	a	Cook.	New
York:	Morrow,	1997.
Keller,	 T.,	 S.	 Heller,	 and	 M.	 Ruhlman.	The
French	 Laundry	 Cookbook.	 New	 York:
Artisan,	1999.
Mariani,	 J.	The	Dictionary	of	American	Food
and	Drink.	New	York:	Hearst,	1994.
Robuchon,	 J.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Larousse
gastronomique.	Paris:	Larousse,	1996.
Steingarten,	 J.	It	 Must’ve	 Been	 Something	 I
Ate.	New	York:	Knopf,	2002.
———.	The	 Man	 Who	 Ate	 Everything.	 New
York:	Knopf,	1998.
Stobart,	T.	The	Cook’s	Encyclopedia. 	London:



Papermac,	1982.
Weinzweig,	 A.	Zingerman’s	 Guide	 to	 Good
Eating.	Boston:Houghton	Mifflin,	2003.
Willan,	 A.	La	 Varenne	 Pratique. 	 New	York:
Crown,	1989.

Word	Meanings	and	Etymologies
Battaglia,	 S.,	 ed.	Grande	 dizionario	 della
lingua	 italiana.	 21	 vols.	 Turin:	 Unione
tipograficoeditrice	torinese,	1961–2002.
Bloch,	 O.	Dictionnaire	 étymologique	 de	 la
langue	 française.	 5th	 ed.	 Paris:	 Presses
universitaires,	1968.
Oxford	 English	 Dictionary. 	 2nd	 ed.	 20	 vols.
Oxford:	Clarendon,	1989.
Watkins,	 C.	The	 American	 Heritage
Dictionary	 of	 Indo-European	 Roots.	 2nd	 ed.
Boston:	Houghton	Mifflin,	2000.

Writings	 on	 Food	 Science	 for	 the	 General
Reader
Barham,	 P.	The	 Science	 of	 Cooking.	 Berlin:
Springer-Verlag,	2001.



Corriher,	 S.	CookWise.	 New	 York:	 Morrow,
1997.
Kurti,	 N.	 The	 physicist	 in	 the	 kitchen.
Proceedings	 of	 the	 Royal	 Institution	 42
(1969):	451–67.
McGee,	H.	The	Curious	Cook.	San	Francisco:
North	Point,	1990.
This,	 H.	Révélations	 gastronomiques.	 Paris:
Belin,	1995.
This,	 H.	Les	 Secrets	 de	 la	 casserole. 	 Paris:
Belin,	1993.

Books	on	Major	Regional	Cuisines
Achaya,	 K.T.	A	 Historical	 Dictionary	 of
Indian	Food.	New	Delhi:	Oxford	Univ.	Press,
1998.
— — — .	Indian	 Food:	 A	 Historical
Companion.	Delhi:	Oxford	Univ.	Press,	1994.
Anderson,	 E.N.	The	 Food	 of	 China.	 New
Haven:	Yale	Univ.	Press,	1988.
Artusi,	 P.	La	 Scienza	 in	 cucina	 e	 l’arte	 di
mangiar	 bene.	 1891	 and	 later	 eds.	 Florence:



Giunti	Marzocco,	1960.
Bertolli,	 P.	Cooking	 by	 Hand.	 New	 York:
Clarkson	Potter,	2003.
Bugialli,	 G.	The	Fine	Art	 of	 Italian	Cooking.
New	York:	Times	Books,	1977.
Chang,	 K.C.,	 ed.	Food	 in	 Chinese	 Culture.
New	Haven:	Yale	Univ.	Press,	1977.
Cost,	B.	Bruce	Cost’s	Asian	Ingredients. 	New
York:	Morrow,	1988.
Ellison,	 J.A.,	 ed.	 and	 trans.	The	 Great
Scandinavian	Cook	Book.	New	York:	Crown,
1967.
Escoffier,	 A.	Guide	Culinaire,	1903	and	 later
editions.	 Translated	 by	 H.L.	 Cracknell	 and
R.J.	 Kaufmann	 as	Escoffier:	 The	 Complete
Guide	 to	 the	 Art	 of	 Modern	 Cooking.	 New
York:	Wiley,	1983.
Hazan,	 M.	Essentials	 of	 Classic	 Italian
Cooking.	New	York:	Knopf,	1992.
Hosking,	 R.	A	 Dictionary	 of	 Japanese	 Food.
Boston:	Tuttle,	1997.
Kennedy,	 D.	The	 Cuisines	 of	 Mexico.	 New



York:	Harper	and	Row,	1972.
Lo,	K.	The	Encyclopedia	of	Chinese	Cooking.
New	York:	Bristol	Park	Books,	1990.
Mesfin,	 D.J.	Exotic	 Ethiopian	Cooking.	 Falls
Church,	VA:	Ethiopian	Cookbook	Enterprises,
1993.
Roden,	 C.	The	 New	 Book	 of	 Middle	 Eastern
Food.	New	York:	Knopf,	2000.
St.-Ange,	 E.	La	 Bonne	 cuisine	 de	 Mme	 E.
Saint-	Ange.	Paris:	Larousse,	1927.
Shaida,	 M.	The	Legendary	Cuisine	of	Persia.
Henley-on-Thames:	Lieuse,	1992.
Simoons,	 F.J.	Food	 in	 China.	 Boca	 Raton:
CRC,	1991.
Toomre,	 J.,	 trans.	 and	 ed.	Classic	 Russian
Cooking:	 Elena	 Molokhovets’	 A	 Gift	 to
Young	 Housewives.	 Bloomington:	 Indiana
Univ.	Press,	1992.
Tsuji,	 S.	Japanese	 Cooking:	 A	 Simple	 Art.
Tokyo:	Kodansha,	1980.

Books	About	the	History	of	Food



Benporat,	 C.	Storia	 della	 gastronomia
italiana.	Milan:	Mursia,	1990.
Coe,	 S.	America’s	 First	 Cuisines. 	 Austin:
Univ.	of	Texas	Press,	1994.
Dalby,	A.	Siren	Feasts:	A	History	of	Food	and
Gastronomy	 in	 Greece. 	 London:	 Routledge,
1996.
Darby,	W.J.	et	al.	Food:	The	Gift	of	Osiris.	2
vols.	New	York:	Academic,	1977.
Food	 in	 ancient	 Egypt.	 Flandrin,	 J.L.
Chronique	 de	 Platine.	 Paris:	 Odile	 Jacob,
1992.
Grigg,	 D.B.	The	 Agricultural	 Systems	 of	 the
World:	 An	 Evolutionary	 Approach.
Cambridge:	Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	1974.
Huang,	 H.T.,	 and	 J.	 Needham.	Science	 and
Civilisation	 in	 China.	 Vol.	 6,	 part	 V:
Fermentations	and	Food	Science	.	Cambridge:
Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	2000.
Kiple,	 K.F.,	 and	 K.C.	 Ornelas,	 eds.	The
Cambridge	 World	 History	 of	 Food. 	 2	 vols.
Cambridge:	Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	2000.



Peterson,	 T.S.	Acquired	 Taste:	 The	 French
Origins	 of	 Modern	 Cooking.	 Ithaca:	 Cornell
Univ.	Press,	1994.
Redon,	O.	et	al.	The	Medieval	Kitchen.	Trans.
E.	 Schneider.	 Chicago:	 Univ.	 of	 Chicago
Press,	1998.
Rodinson,	 M.,	 A.J.	 Arberry,	 and	 C.	 Perry.
Medieval	 Arab	 Cookery.	 Totnes,	 Devon:
Prospect	Books,	2001.
Scully,	 T.	The	 Art	 of	 Cookery	 in	 the	Middle
Ages.	Rochester,	NY:	Boydell,	1995.
Singer,	C.E.	et	al.	A	History	of	Technology. 	7
vols.	Oxford:	Clarendon,	1954–78.
Thibaut-Comelade,	 E.	La	table	médiévale	des
Catalans.	Montpellier:	Presses	du	Languedoc,
2001.
Toussaint-Samat,	 M.	History	 of	 Food.	 Trans.
Anthea	Bell.	Oxford:	Blackwell,	1992.
Trager,	 J.	The	 Food	 Chronology. 	 New	York:
Holt,	1995.
Wheaton,	B.K.	Savoring	the	Past:	The	French
Kitchen	and	Table	from	1300	to	1789.



Philadelphia:	Univ.	of	Penn.	Press,	1983.
Wilson,	 C.A.	Food	 and	 Drink	 in	 Britain.
Harmondsworth:	Penguin,	1984.

Historical	Sources
Anthimus.	On	 the	 Observation	 of	 Foods.
Trans.	 M.	 Grant.	 Totnes,	 Devon:	 Prospect
Books,	1996.
Apicius,	 M.G.	De	 re	 coquinaria:	 L’Art
culinaire.	J.	André,	ed.	Paris:	C.	Klincksieck,
1965.
Edited	 and	 translated	 by	 B.	 Flower	 and	 E.
Rosenbaum	 as	The	 Roman	 Cookery	 Book.
London:	Harrap,	1958.
Brillat-Savarin,	 J.	A.	La	Physiologie	du	goût.
Paris,	1825.
Translated	 by	 M.F.K.	 Fisher	 as	The
Physiology	 of	 Taste. 	 New	 York:	 Harcourt
Brace	Jovanovich,	1978.
Cato,	 M.P.	On	 Agriculture.	 Trans.	 W.D.
Hooper.	 Cambridge,	 MA:	 Harvard	 Univ.
Press,	1934.



Columella,	 L.J.M.	On	 Agriculture.	 3	 vols.
Trans.	 H.B.	 Ash.	 Cambridge,	 MA:	 Harvard
Univ.	 Press,	 1941–55.	 Grewe,	 R.	 and	 C.B.
Hieatt,	 eds.	Libellus	 De	 Arte	 Coquinaria.
Tempe,	AZ:	Arizona	Center	for	Medieval	and
Renaissance	Studies,	2001.
Hieatt,	C.B.	and	S.	Butler.	Curye	on	Inglysch.
London:	Oxford	Univ.	Press,	1985.
La	 Varenne,	 F.P.	 de.	 Le	 Cuisinier	 françois.
1651.
Reprint,	 Paris:	 Montalba,	 1983.	 Platina.	De
honesta	 voluptate	 et	 valetudine	 .	 Ed.	 and
trans.	 by	M.E.	Milham	 as	On	Right	Pleasure
and	 Good	 Health	 .	 Tempe,	AZ:	 Renaissance
Soc.	America,	1998.
Pliny	 the	 Elder.	Natural	 History.	 10	 vols.
Trans.	 H	 Rackham	 et	 al.	 Cambridge,	 MA:
Harvard	Univ.	Press,	1938–62.
Scully,	 T.,	 ed.	 and	 trans.	The	 Neapolitan
Recipe	 Collection.	 Ann	 Arbor:	 Univ.	 of
Michigan	Press,	2000.
———,	 ed.	 and	 trans.	The	 Viandier	 of



Taillevent.	 Ottawa:	 Univ.	 of	 Ottawa	 Press,
1988.
———,	 ed.	 and	 trans.	The	Vivendier. 	Totnes,
Devon:	Prospect	Books,	1997.
Warner,	 R.	Antiquitates	 culinariae.	 London:
1791;	Reprint,	London:	Prospect	Books,	n.d.

Encyclopedias	 of	 Food	 Science	 and
Technology	 (Referred	 to	 Below	 as
“Caballero”	and	“Macrae	”)”
Caballero,	B.	et	al.,	eds.	Encyclopedia	of	Food
Sciences	and	Nutrition.	 10	 vols.	Amsterdam:
Academic,	2003.	[2nd	ed.	of	Macrae	et	al.]
Macrae,	R.	et	al.,	eds.	Encyclopaedia	of	Food
Science,	 Food	 Technology,	 and	 Nutrition. 	 8
vols.	London:	Academic,	1993.

Comprehensive	Writings	on	Food	Chemistry,
Microbiology,	Botany,	Physiology
Ang,	C.Y.W.	et	al.,	eds.	 Asian	Foods:	Science
and	 Technology.	 Lancaster,	 PA:	 Technomic,
1999.
Ashurst,	 P.R.	Food	Flavorings.	 Gaithersburg,



MD:	Aspen,	1999.
Belitz,	H.D.,	and	W.	Grosch.	Food	Chemistry.
2nd	English	ed.	Berlin:	Springer,	1999.
Campbell-Platt,	 G.	Fermented	 Foods	 of	 the
World.	London:	Butterworth,	1987.
Charley,	H.	Food	Science.	2nd	ed.	New	York:
Wiley,	1982.
Coultate,	 T.P.	Food:	 The	 Chemistry	 of	 Its
Components.	 2nd	 ed.	 Cambridge:	 Royal
Society	of	Chemistry,	1989.
Doyle,	 M.P.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Food	 Microbiology.
2nd	ed.	Washington,	DC:	American	Society	of
Microbiology,	2001.
Facciola,	 S.	Cornucopia	II:	A	Source	Book	of
Edible	Plants.	Vista,	CA:	Kampong,	1998.
Fennema,	 O.,	 ed.	Food	 Chemistry.	 3rd	 ed.
New	York:	Dekker,	1996.
Ho,	 C.T.	 et	 al.	 Flavor	 chemistry	 of	 Chinese
foods.	Food	 Reviews	 International	 5	 (1989):
253–87.
Maarse,	H.,	 ed.	Volatile	Compounds	in	Foods
and	Beverages.	New	York:	Dekker,	1991.



Maincent,	 M.	Technologie	 culinaire. 	 Paris:
BPI,	1995.
Paul,	P.C.,	and	H.H.	Palmer,	eds.	Food	Theory
and	Applications.	New	York:	Wiley,	1972.
Penfield,	 M.P.,	 and	 A.M.	 Campbell.
Experimental	 Food	 Science.	 3rd	 ed.	 San
Diego,	CA:	Academic,	1990.
Silverthorn,	 D.U.	 et	 al.	Human	 Physiology.
Upper	Saddle	River,	NJ:Prentice	Hall,	2001.
Smartt,	 J.,	 and	 N.	 W.	 Simmonds,	 eds.
Evolution	 of	 Crop	 Plants.	 2nd	 ed.	 Harlow,
Essex:	Longman,	1995.
Steinkraus,	K.H.,	ed.	Handbook	of	Indigenous
Fermented	Foods.	2nd	ed.	New	York:	D	ekker,
1996.

Chapter	1:	Milk	and	Dairy	Products

Brown,	 N.W.	 India	 and	 Indology	 .	 Delhi:
Motilal	Banarsidass,	1978.
Brunet,	 P.,	 ed.	Histoire	 et	 géographie	 des
fromages.	Caen:	Université	de	Caen,	1987.



Calvino,	 I.	Mr.	 Palomar. 	 Trans.	W.	Weaver.
San	 Diego.	 CA:	 Harcourt	 Brace	 Jovanovich,
1985.
Grant,	 A.J.,	 trans.	Early	 Lives	 of
Charlemagne.	 London:	 Chatto	 and	 Windus,
1922.
Macdonnell,	 A.A.	A	 Vedic	 Reader	 for
Students.	Oxford:	Oxford	Univ.	Press,	1917.
Masui,	 K.,	 and	 T.	 Yamada.	 French	 Cheeses.
New	York:	Dorling	Kindersley,	1996.
O’Flaherty,	W.D.,	ed.	and	trans.	The	Rig	Veda.
Harmondsworth:	Penguin,	1981.
Polo,	 M.	Travels	 (ca.	 1300).	 Trans.	 W.
Marsden.	New	York:	Dutton,	1908.
Rance,	 P.	The	 French	Cheese	 Book.	 London:
Macmillan,	1989.
———.	The	 Great	 British	 Cheese	 Book.
London:	Macmillan,	1982.
Blackburn,	D.G.	et	al.	The	origins	of	lactation
and	the	evolution	of	milk.	Mammal	Review	19
(1989):	1–26.
Bodyfelt,	 F.W.	 et	 al.	The	Sensory	Evaluation



of	Dairy	Products.	 New	York:	Van	Nostrand
Reinhold,	1988.
Buchin,	 S.	 et	 al.	 Influence	 of	 pasteurization
and	 fat	 composition	 of	 milk	 on	 the	 volatile
compounds	 and	 flavor	 characteristics	 of	 a
semi-hard	 cheese.	J	 Dairy	 Sci.	 81	 (1998):
3097–108.
Curioni,	 P.M.G.,	 and	 J.O.	 Bosset.	 Key
odorants	 in	 various	 cheese	 types	 as
determined	 by	 gas	 chromatography-
olfactometry.	International	Dairy	J	12	(2002):
959–84.
Dupont,	 J.,	 and	 P.J.	 White.	 “Margarine.”	 In
Macrae,	2880–95.
Durham,	W.	 H.	Coevolution:	Genes,	Culture,
and	Human	Diversity.	Stanford,	CA:	Stanford
Univ.	Press,	1991.
Fox,	 P.F.,	 ed.	Cheese:	 Chemistry,	 Physics,
Microbiology.	2	vols.	London:	Elsevier,	1987.
Garg,	 S.K.,	 and	 B.N.	 Johri.	 Rennet:	 Current
trends	 and	 future	 research.	Food	 Reviews
International	10	(1994):	313–55.



Gunderson,	 H.L.	Mammalogy.	 New	 York:
McGraw-Hill,	1976.
Jensen,	 R.G.,	 ed.	Handbook	 of	 Milk
Composition.	 San	 Diego,	 CA:	 Academic,
1995.
Juskevich,	 J.C.,	 and	 C.G.	 Guyer.	 Bovine
growth	 hormone:	 Human	 food	 safety
evaluation.	Science	249	(1990):	875–84.
Kosikowski,	 F.V.,	 and	 V.V.	 Mistry.	 Cheese
and	Fermented	Milk	Foods.	3rd	ed.	Westport,
CT:	F.V.	Kosikowski	LLC,	1997.
Kurmann,	 J.A.	 et	 al.	Encyclopedia	 of
Fermented	 Fresh	 Milk	 Products. 	 New	York:
Van	Nostrand	Reinhold,	1992.
Mahias,	M.C.	Milk	 and	 its	 transmutations	 in
Indian	 society.	Food	and	Foodways	2	 (1988):
265–88.
Marshall,	 R.T.,	 and	 W.S.	 Arbuckle.	 Ice
Cream.	5th	ed.	New	York:	Chapman	and	Hall,
1996.
Miller,	 M.J.S.	 et	 al.	 Casein:	 A	 milk	 protein
with	 diverse	 biologic	 consequences.	Proc



Society	 Experimental	 Biol	 Medicine	 195
(1990):	143–59.
Muhlbauer,	 R.C.	 et	 al.	 Various	 selected
vegetables,	 fruits,	 mushrooms	 and	 red	 wine
residue	 inhibit	 bone	 resorption	 in	 rats.	J
Nutrition	133	(2003):	3592–97.
Queiroz	 Macedo,	 I.	 et	 al.	 Caseinolytic
specificity	 of	 cardosin,	 an	 aspartic	 protease
from	 the	 cardoon:	 Action	 on	 bovine	 casein
and	comparison	with	chymosin.	J	Agric	Food
Chem.	44	(1996):	42–47.
Reid,	G.	 et	 al.	Potential	 uses	of	probiotics	 in
clinical	 practice.	Clinical	 and
Microbiological	Reviews	16	(2003):	658–72.
Robinson,	 R.K.,	 ed.	Modern	 Dairy
Technology.	 2	 vols.	 London:	 Chapman	 and
Hall,	1993.
Schmidt,	 G.H.	 et	 al.	Principles	 of	 Dairy
Science.	 2nd	 ed.	 Englewood	 Cliffs,	 NJ:
Prentice	Hall,	1988.
Scott,	 R.	Cheesemaking	 Practice.	 London:
Applied	Science,	1981.



Stanley,	 D.W.	 et	 al.	 Texture-structure
relationships	in	foamed	dairy	emulsions.	Food
Research	International	29	(1996):	1–13.
Starr,	 M.P.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	The	 Prokaryotes:	 A
Handbook	 on	 Habitats,	 Isolation,	 and
Identification	 of	 Bacteria.	 2	 vols.	 Berlin:
Springer-Verlag,	1981.
Stini,	 W.A.	 Osteoporosis	 in	 biocultural
perspective.	Annual	Reviews	 of	Anthropology
24	(1995):	397–421.
Suarez,	 F.L.	 et	 al.	Diet,	 genetics,	 and	 lactose
intolerance.	Food	Technology 	 51	 (1997):	 74–
76.
Tamime,	 A.Y.,	 and	 R.K.	 Robinson.	 Yoghurt:
Science	and	Technology. 	 2nd	 ed.	 Cambridge,
UK:	Woodhead,	1999.
Virgili,	 R.	 et	 al.	 Sensory-chemical
relationships	 in	 Parmigiano-reggiano	 cheese.
Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft	 und	 Technologie
27	(1994):	491–95.
The	 Water	 Buffalo. 	 Rome:	 U.N.	 Food	 and
Agriculture	Organization,	1977.



Wheelock,	 V.	Raw	 Milk	 and	 Cheese
Production:	 A	 Critical	 Evaluation	 of
Scientific	 Research.	 Skip-ton,	 UK:	 V.
Wheelock	Associates,	1997.

Chapter	2:	Eggs

Davidson,	A.,	J.	Davidson,	and	J.	Lang.	Origin
of	 crême	 brulée.	Petits	 propos	 culinaires 	 31
(1989):	61–63.
Healy,	 B.,	 and	 P.	 Bugat.	The	 French	 Cookie
Book.	New	York:	Morrow,	1994.
Hume,	 R.E.	The	 Thirteen	 Principal
Upanishads	 Translated	 from	 the	 Sanskrit 	 .
Oxford:	Oxford	Univ.	Press,	1921.
Radhakrishnan,	 S.	The	 Principal	 Upanisads.
Atlantic	Highlands,	NJ:	Humanities,	1992.
Smith,	 P.,	 and	 C.	 Daniel.	The	Chicken	 Book.
Boston:	 Little	 Brown,	 1975.	 Wolfert,	 P.
Couscous	 and	 Other	 Good	 Foods	 from
Morocco	.	New	York:	Harper	and	Row,	1973.
Board,	R.G.,	and	R.	Fuller,	eds.	Microbiology



of	the	Avian	Egg.	London:	Chapman	and	Hall,
1994.
Burley,	 R.W.,	 and	 D.V.	 Vadehra.	 The	 Avian
Egg:	 Chemistry	 and	 Biology.	 New	 York:
Wiley,	1989.
Chang,	C.M.	et	al.	Microstructure	of	egg	yolk.
J	Food	Sci.	42	(1977):	1193–1200.
Gosset,	 P.O.,	 and	 R.C.	 Baker.	 Prevention	 of
gray-green	 discoloration	 in	 cooked	 liquid
whole	eggs.	J	Food	Sci.	46	(1981):	328–31.
Jänicke,	 O.	Zur	 Verbreitungsgeschichte	 und
Etymologie	 des	 fr. 	 meringue.	Zeitschrift	 für
roman-ischen	Philologie	84	(1968):	558–71.
Jiang,	 Y.	 et	 al.	 Egg	 phosphatidylcholine
decreases	 the	 lymphatic	 absorption	 of
cholesterol	 in	 rats.	J	 Nutrition	 131	 (2001):
2358–63.
Maga,	 J.A.	 Egg	 and	 egg	 product	 flavor.	J
Agric	Food	Chem.	30	(1982):	9–14.
McGee,	 H.	 On	 long-cooked	 eggs.	Petits
propos	culinaires	50	(1995):	46–50.
McGee,	 H.	 J.,	 S.R.	 Long,	 and	 W.R.	 Briggs.



Why	 whip	 egg	 whites	 in	 copper	 bowls?
Nature	308	(1984):	667–68.
Packard,	G.C.,	and	M.J.	Packard.	Evolution	of
the	cleidoic	egg	among	 reptilian	ancestors	of
birds.	American	Zoologist	20	(1980):	351–62.
Perry,	M.M.,	 and	A.B.	Gilbert.	 The	 structure
of	 yellow	 yolk	 in	 the	 domestic	 fowl.	J
Ultrastructural	Res.	90	(1985):	313–22.
Stadelman,	 W.J.,	 and	 O.J.	 Cotterill.	Egg
Science	 and	 Technology. 	 3rd	 ed.	 Westport,
CT:	AVI,	1986.
Su,	 H.P.,	 and	 C.W.	 Lin.	 A	 new	 process	 for
preparing	 transparent	 alkalised	 duck	 egg	 and
its	quality.	J	Sci	Food	Agric.	61	(1993):	117–
20.
Wang,	 J.,	 and	 D.Y.C.	 Fung.	 Alkaline-
fermented	 foods:	A	 review	with	emphasis	on
pidan	 fermentation.	CRC	 Critical	 Revs	 in
Microbiology	22	(1996):	101–38.
Wilson,	 A.J.,	 ed.	Foams:	 Physics,	 Chemistry
and	 Structure.	 London:	 Springer-Verlag,
1989.



Woodward,	 S.A.,	 and	 O.J.	 Cotterill.	 Texture
and	microstructure	of	cooked	whole	egg	yolks
and	 heat-formed	 gels	 of	 stirred	 egg	 yolk.	J
Food	Sci.	52	(1987):	63–67.
———.	 Texture	 profile	 analysis,	 expressed
serum,	and	microstructure	of	heat-formed	egg
yolk	gels.	J	Food	Sci.	52	(1987):	68–74.

Chapter	3:	Meat

Cronon,	 W.	Nature’s	Metropolis. 	 New	York:
Norton,	1991.	1991
Kinsella,	 J.,	 and	 D.T.	 Harvey.	Professional
Charcuterie.New	York:	Wiley,	1996.
Paillat,	M.,	ed.	Le	Mangeur	et	l’animal.	Paris:
Autrement,	1997.
Rhodes,	V.J.	How	the	marking	of	beef	grades
was	 obtained.	J	 Farm	 Economics	 42	 (1960):
133–49.
Serventi,	 S.	La	 grande	 histoire	 du	 foie	 gras.
Paris:	Flammarion,	1993.
Woodard,	 A.	 et	 al.	Commercial	 and



Ornamental	Game	 Bird	 Breeders	 Handbook.
Surrey,	BC:	Hancock	House,	1993.
Abs,	 M.,	 ed.	Physiology	 and	 Behavior	 of	 the
Pigeon.	London:	Academic,	1983.
Ahn,	 D.U.,	 and	 A.J.	 Maurer.	 Poultry	 meat
color:	 Heme-complex-forming	 ligands	 and
color	 of	 cooked	 turkey	 breast	 meat.	Poultry
Science	69	(1990):	1769–74.
Bailey,	 A.J.,	 ed.	Recent	 Advances	 in	 the
Chemistry	of	Meat.	London:	Royal	Society	of
Chemistry,	1984.
Bechtel,	 P.J.,	 ed.	Muscle	 as	 Food.	 Orlando,
FL:	Academic,	1986.
Campbell-Platt,	 G.,	 and	 P.E.	 Cook,	 eds.
Fermented	Meats.	London:	Blackie,	1995.
Carrapiso,	A.I.	 et	 al.	 Characterization	 of	 the
most	 odor-active	 compounds	 of	 Iberian	 ham
headspace.	J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 50	 (2002):
1996–2000.
Cornforth,	D.P.	et	al.	Carbon	monoxide,	nitric
oxide,	 and	 nitrogen	 dioxide	 levels	 in	 gas
ovens	 related	 to	 surface	 pinking	 of	 cooked



beef	 and	 turkey.	J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 46
(1998):	255–61.
Food	 Standards	Agency,	 U.K.	Review	of	BSE
Controls.	 2000,	 http://www.bsereview.org.uk.
Gault,	 N.F.S.,	 “Marinaded	 meat.”	 In
Developments	 in	 Meat	 Science,	 edited	 by	 R.
Lawrie,	5,	191–246.	London:	Applied	Science,
1991.
Jones,	 K.W.,	 and	 R.W.	 Mandigo.	 Effects	 of
chopping	 temperature	 on	 the	 microstructure
of	 meat	 emulsions.	J	 Food	 Sci.	 47	 (1982):
1930–35.
Lawrie,	 R.A.	Meat	 Science.	 5th	 ed.	 Oxford:
Pergamon,	1991.
Lijinsky,	W.	N-nitroso	compounds	in	the	diet.
Mutation	Research	443	(1999):	129–38.
Maga,	 J.A.	Smoke	 in	 Food	 Processing.	 Boca
Raton,	FL:	CRC,	1988.
———.	 Pink	 discoloration	 in	 cooked	 white
meat.	Food	Reviews	 International	 10	 (1994):
273–386.
Mason,	 I.L.,	 ed.	Evolution	 of	 Domesticated



Animals.	London:	Longman,	1984.
McGee,	H.,	 J.	McInerny,	 and	A.	Harrus.	 The
virtual	 cook:	 Modeling	 heat	 transfer	 in	 the
kitchen.	Physics	Today	(November	1999):	30–
36.
Melton,	 S.	 Effects	 of	 feeds	 on	 flavor	 of	 red
meat:	 A	 review.	 J	 Animal	 Sci.	 68	 (1990):
4421–35.
Milton,	K.	A	hypothesis	to	explain	the	role	of
meat-eating	in	human	evolution.	Evolutionary
Anthropology	8	(1999):	11–21.
Morgan	 Jones,	 S.D.,	 ed.	Quality	 Grading	 of
Carcasses	of	Meat	Animals.	Boca	Raton,	FL:
CRC,	1995.
Morita,	H.	 et	 al.	Red	 pigment	 of	 Parma	ham
and	 bacterial	 influence	 on	 its	 formation.	J
Food	Sci.	61	(1996):	1021–23.
Oreskovich,	 D.C.	 et	 al.	 Marinade	 pH	 affects
textural	 properties	 of	 beef.	J	 Food	 Sci.	 57
(1992):	305–11.
Pearson,	A.M.,	 and	T.R.	Dutson.	Edible	Meat
Byproducts.	London:	Elsevier,	1988.



Pinotti,	 A.	 et	 al.	 Diffusion	 of	 nitrite	 and
nitrate	 salts	 in	 pork	 tissue	 in	 the	presence	of
sodium	chloride.	J	Food	Sci.	67	(2002):	2165–
71.
Rosser,	 B.W.C.,	 and	 J.C.	 George.	 The	 avian
pectoralis:	 Biochemical	 characterization	 and
distribution	of	muscle	fiber	types.	Canadian	J
Zoology	64	(1986):	1174–85.
Rousset-Akrim,	 S.	 et	 al.	 Influence	 of
preparation	on	sensory	characteristics	and	fat
cooking	 loss	of	goose	 foie	gras.	Sciences	 des
aliments	15	(1995):	151–65.
Salichon,	M.R.	et	al.	Composition	des	3	types
de	foie	gras:	Oie,	canard	mulard	et	canard	de
barbarie.	Annales	 Zootechnologie	 43	 (1994):
213–20.
Saveur,	B.	Les	critères	et	facteurs	de	la	qualité
des	 poulets	 Label	 Rouge.	INRA	 Productions
Animales	10	(1997):	219–26.
Skog,	 K.I.	 et	 al.	 Carcinogenic	 heterocyclic
amines	in	model	systems	and	cooked	foods:	A
review	 on	 formation,	 occurrence,	 and	 intake.



Food	 and	 Chemical	 Toxicology 	 36	 (1998):
879–96.
Solyakov,	 A.	 et	 al.	 Heterocyclic	 amines	 in
process	 flavours,	 process	 flavour	 ingredients,
bouillon	concentrates	and	a	pan	residue.	Food
and	Chemical	Toxicology	37	(1999):	1–11.
Suzuki,	 A.	 et	 al.	 Distribution	 of	 myofiber
types	in	thigh	muscles	of	chickens.	Journal	of
Morphology	185	(1985):	145–54.
Varnam,	A.H.,	 and	 J.P.	Sutherland.	 Meat	 and
Meat	 Products:	 Technology,	 Chemistry,	 and
Microbiology.	 London:	 Chapman	 and	 Hall,
1995.	Wilding,	P.	et	al.	Salt-induced	swelling
of	meat.	Meat	Science	18	(1986):	55–75.
Wilson,	 D.E.	 et	 al.	 Relationship	 between
chemical	 percentage	 intramuscular	 fat	 and
USDA	 marbling	 score.	 A.S.	 Leaflet	 R1529.
Iowa	State	University:	1998.
Young,	 O.A.	 et	 al.	 Pastoral	 and	 species
flavour	in	lambs	raised	on	pasture,	lucerne	or
maize.	J	Sci	Food	Agric.	83	(2003):	93–104.

Chapter	4:	Fish	and	Shellfish



Chapter	4:	Fish	and	Shellfish

Alejandro,	 R.	The	Philippine	Cookbook.	 New
York:	Putnam,	1982.
Bliss,	 D.	Shrimps,	 Lobsters,	 and	Crabs.	 New
York:	Columbia	Univ.	Press,	1982.
Davidson,	A.	Mediterranean	Seafood.	2nd	ed.
London:	Allan	Lane,	1981.
———.North	 Atlantic	 Seafood.	 New	 York:
Viking,	1979.
Kurlansky,	M.	Cod.	New	York:	Walker,	1997.
McClane,	 A.J.	The	 Encyclopedia	 of	 Fish
Cookery.	 New	York:	 Holt	 Rinehart	Winston,
1977.
McGee,	 H.	 “The	 buoyant,	 slippery	 lipids	 of
the	 snake	 mackerels	 and	 orange	 roughy.”	 In
Fish:	 Foods	 from	 the	 Waters ,	 edited	 by	 H.
Walker,	 205–9.	 Totnes,	UK:	 Prospect	Books,
1998.
Peterson,	 J.	Fish	 and	 Shellfish.	 New	 York:
Morrow,	1996.
Riddervold,	A.	Lutefisk,	Rakefisk	and	Herring
in	Norwegian	Tradition.	Oslo:	Novus,	1990.



Ahmed,	F.E.	Review:	Assessing	and	managing
risk	 due	 to	 consumption	 of	 seafood
contaminated	with	microorganisms,	parasites,
and	 natural	 toxins	 in	 the	US.	Int	 J	Food	 Sci.
and	Technology	27	(1992):	243–60.
Borgstrom,	G.,	ed.	Fish	as	Food.	4	vols.	New
York:	Academic,	1961–65.
Chambers,	 E.,	 and	 A.	 Robel.	 Sensory
characteristics	 of	 selected	 species	 of
freshwater	 fish	 in	 retail	 distribution.	J	 Food
Sci.	58	(1993):	508–12.
Chattopadhyay,	 P.	 et	 al.	 “Fish.”	 In	 Macrae,
1826–87.
Doré,	 I.	Fish	 and	 Shellfish	 Quality
Assessment.	 New	 York:	 Van	 Nostrand
Reinhold,	1991.
Flick,	G.J.,	and	R.E.	Martin,	eds.	Advances	 in
Seafood	 Biochemistry.	 Lancaster,	 PA:
Technomic,	1992.
Funk,	 C.D.	 Prostaglandins	 and	 leukotrienes:
Advances	 in	 eicosanoid	 biology.	Science	 294
(2001):	1871–75.



Gomez-Guillen,	 M.C.	 et	 al.	 Autolysis	 and
protease	 inhibition	 effects	 on	 dynamic
viscoelastic	 properties	 during	 thermal
gelation	 of	 squid	 muscle.	J	 Food	 Sci.	 67
(2002):	2491–96.
Gosling,	 E.	The	 Mussel	 Mytilus:	 Ecology,
Physiology,	 Genetics	 and	 Culture.
Amsterdam:	Elsevier,	1992.
Haard,	 N.F.,	 and	 B.K.	 Simon.	Seafood
Enzymes.	New	York:	Dekker,	2000.
Hall,	 G.M.,	 ed.	Fish	 Processing	 Technology.
2nd	ed.	New	York:	VCH,	1992.
Halstead,	 B.W.	Poisonous	 and	 Venomous
Marine	 Animals	 of	 the	 World. 	 2nd	 rev.	 ed.
Princeton,	NJ:	Darwin,	1988.
Hatae,	 K.	 et	 al.	 Role	 of	 muscle	 fibers	 in
contributing	 firmness	 of	 cooked	 fish.	J	 Food
Sci.	55	(1990):	693–96.
Iversen,	 E.S.	 et	 al.	Shrimp	 Capture	 and
Culture	 Fisheries	 of	 the	 United	 States.
Cambridge,	MA:	Fishing	News,	1993.
Jones,	 D.A.	 et	 al.	 “Shellfish.”	 In	 Macrae,



4084–118.
Kobayashi,	 T.	 et	 al.	 Strictly	 anaerobic
halophiles	 isolated	 from	 canned	 Swedish
fermented	 herring.	International	 J	 Food
Microbiology	54	(2000):	81–89.
Korringa,	 P.	Farming	 the	 Cupped	 Oysters	 of
the	Genus	Crassostrea.	Amsterdam:	Elsevier,
1976.
Kugino,	 M.,	 and	 K.	 Kugino.	 Microstructural
and	 rheological	 properties	 of	 cooked	 squid
mantle.	J	Food	Sci.	59	(1994):	792–96.
Lindsay,	 R.	 “Flavour	 of	 Fish.”	 In	Seafoods:
Chemistry,	 Processing,	 Technology,	 and
Quality,	 edited	 by	 F.	 Shahidi	 and	 J.R.	 Botta,
74–84.	London:	Blackie,	1994.
Love,	 R.M.	The	Food	Fishes:	 Their	 Intrinsic
Variation	and	Practical	Implications.	London:
Far-rand,	1988.
Mantel,	 L.H.,	 ed.	Biology	 of	 Crustacea.	 Vol.
5 ,	Internal	 Anatomy	 and	 Physiological
Regulation	;	vol.	9,	Integument,	Pigments,	and
Hormonal	 Processes	 .	 New	York:	Academic,



1983;
Orlando,	FL:	Academic,	1985.	Martin,	R.E.	et
al.,	 eds.	Chemistry	 and	 Biochemistry	 of
Marine	 Food	 Products.	 Westport,	 CT:	 AVI,
1982.
Morita,	 K.	 et	 al.	 Comparison	 of	 aroma
characteristics	 of	 16	 fish	 species	 by	 sensory
evaluation	and	gas	chromatographic	analysis.
J	Sci	Food	Agric.	83	(2003):	289–97.
Moyle,	 P.B.,	 and	 J.J.	 Cech.	Fishes:	 An
Introduction	 to	 Ichthyology. 	 4th	 ed.	 Upper
Saddle	River,	NJ:	Prentice	Hall,	2000.
Nelson,	J.S.	Fishes	of	the	World. 	3rd	ed.	New
York:	Wiley,	1994
Ò	Foighil,	D.	et	al.	Mitochondrial	cytochrome
oxidase	 I	 gene	 sequences	 support	 an	 Asian
origin	 for	 the	 Portuguese	 oyster	Crassostrea
angulata.	Marine	 Biology	 131	 (1998):	 497–
503.
Ofstad,	R.	 et	 al.	 Liquid	 holding	 capacity	 and
structural	 changes	 during	 heating	 of	 fish
muscle.	Food	Microstructure 	12	(1993):	163–



74.
Oshima,	 T.	 Anisakiasis:	 Is	 the	 sushi	 bar
guilty?	Parasitology	Today 	 3	 (2)	 (1987):	44–
48.
Pennarun,	A.L.	et	al.	Identification	and	origin
of	 the	 character-impact	 compounds	 of	 raw
oyster	Crassostrea	gigas.	J	Sci	Food	Agric.	82
(2002):	1652–60.
Royce,	 W.F.	 Introduction	 to	 the	 Practice	 of
Fishery	 Science.	 San	 Diego,	 CA:	 Academic,
1994.	 Shimizu,	Y.	 et	 al.	 Species	 variation	 in
the	 gel-forming	 [and	 disintegrating]
characteristics	of	fish	meat	paste.	Bulletin	Jap
Soc	Scientific	Fisheries	47	(1981):	95–104.
Shumway,	 S.	 E.,	 ed.	Scallops:	 Biology,
Ecology,	 and	 Aquaculture. 	 Amsterdam:
Elsevier,	1991.
Sikorski,	 Z.E.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Seafood	 Proteins.
New	York:	Chapman	and	Hall,	1994.
Sternin,	V.,	and	I.	Doré.	Caviar:	The	Resource
Book.	 Moscow	 and	 Stanwood,	 WA:	 Cultura,
1993.



Tanikawa,	 E.	Marine	 Products	 in	 Japan.
Tokyo:	Koseisha-Koseikaku,	1971.
Taylor,	 R.G.	 et	 al.	 Salmon	 fillet	 texture	 is
determined	 by	 myofiber-myofiber	 and
myofibermyocommata	 attachment.	J	 Food
Sci.	67	(2002):	2067–71.
Triqui,	 R.,	 and	 G.A.	 Reineccius.	 Flavor
development	 in	 the	 ripening	 of	 anchovy.	J
Agric	Food	Chem.	43	(1995):	453–58.
Ward,	D.	R.,	and	C.	Hackney.	Microbiology	of
Marine	 Food	 Products.	 New	 York:	 Van
Nostrand	Reinhold,	1991.
Whitfield,	 F.B.	 Flavour	 of	 prawns	 and
lobs t er s .	Food	 Reviews	 International	 6
(1990):	505–19.
Wilbur,	K.M.,	ed.	The	Mollusca.	12	vols.	New
York:	Academic,	1983.

Chapter	5:	Edible	Plants

Harlan,	 J.R.	Crops	 and	 Man.	 Madison,	 WI:
Am.	Soc.	Agronomy,	1992.



Heiser,	 C.B.	Seed	 to	Civilization.	Cambridge,
MA:	Harvard	Univ.	Press,	1990.
Thoreau,	H.D.	“Wild	Apples”	(1862).	In	H.D.
Thoreau,	Wild	 Apples	 and	 Other	 Natural
History	 Essays,	 ed.	 W.	 Rossi.	 Athens,	 GA:
Univ.	of	Georgia	Press,	2002.
Wilson,	 C.	A.	The	 Book	 of	Marmalade.	 New
York:	St.	Martin’s,	1985.
Bidlack,	 W.R.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Phytochemicals:	 A
New	 Paradigm.Lancaster,	 PA:	 Technomic,
1998.
Borchers,	A.T.	et	al.	Mushrooms,	tumors,	and
immunity.	Proc	 Society	 Experimental	 Biol
Medicine	221	(1999):	281–93.
Buchanan,	 B.B.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Biochemistry	 and
Molecular	Biology	of	Plants.	Rockville,	MD:
Am.	Society	of	Plant	Physiologists,	2000.
Coulombe,	 R.A.	 “Toxicants,	 natural.”	 In
Wiley	 Encyclopedia	 of	 Food	 Science	 and
Technology.	Edited	by	F.J.	Francis,	2nd	ed.,	4
vols,	2336–54.	New	York:	Wiley,	2000.
Daschel,	 M.A.	 et	 al.	 Microbial	 ecology	 of



fermenting	 plant	 materials.	FEMS
Microbiological	Revs.	46	(1987):	357–67.
Dewanto,	 V.	 et	 al.	 Thermal	 processing
enhances	the	nutritional	value	of	tomatoes	by
increasing	 total	 antioxidant	 activity.	J	 Agric
Food	Chem.	50	(2002):	3010–14.
Dominy,	N.J.,	and	P.W.	Lucas.	Importance	of
trichromic	 vision	 to	 primates.	Nature	 410
(2001):	363–66.
Elson,	 C.E.	 et	 al.	 Isoprenoid-mediated
inhibition	 of	 mevalonate	 synthesis:	 Potential
application	 to	 cancer.	Proc	 Society
Experimental	Biol	Medicine	221	(1999):	294–
305.
Francis,	 F.J.	 Anthocyanins	 and	 betalains:
Composition	 and	 applications.	Cereal	 Foods
World	45	(2000):	208–13.
Gross,	 J.	Pigments	 in	 Vegetables:
Chlorophylls	 and	 Carotenoids. 	 New	 York:
Van	Nostrand	Reinhold,	1991.
Karlson-Stiber,	C.,	and	H.	Persson.	Cytotoxic
fungi:	 an	 overview.	Toxicon	 42	 (2003):	 339–



49.
Larsen,	 C.S.	 Biological	 changes	 in	 human
populations	 with	 agriculture.	Annual	 Reviews
Anthropology	24	(1995):	185–213.
Luck,	G.	 et	 al.	 Polyphenols,	 astringency,	 and
proline-rich	 proteins.	Phytochemistry	 37
(1994):	357–71.
Muhlbauer,	 R.C.	 et	 al.	 Various	 selected
vegetables,	 fruits,	 mushrooms	 and	 red	 wine
residue	 inhibit	 bone	 resorption	 in	 rats.	J
Nutrition	133	(2003):	3592–97.
Santos-Buelga,	 C.,	 and	 A.	 Scalbert.
Proanthocyanidins	and	tannin-like	compounds
—	 nature,	 occurrence,	 dietary	 intake	 and
effects	 on	 nutrition	 and	 health.	J	 Sci	 Food
Agric.	80	(2000):	1094–1117.
Smith,	 D.,	 and	 D.	 O’Beirne.	 “Jams	 and
preserves.”	In	Macrae,	2612–21.
Vincent,	 J.E.V.	 Fracture	 properties	 of	 plants.
Advances	 in	 Botanical	 Research	 17	 (1990):
235–87.
Vinson,	J.A.	et	al.	Phenol	antioxidant	quantity



and	quality	in	foods:	Vegetables.	J	Agric	Food
Chem.	46	(1998):	3630–34.
———.	 Phenol	 antioxidant	 quantity	 and
quality	 in	 foods:	 Fruits.	J	 Agric	 Food	Chem.
49	(2001):	5315–21.
Walter,	 R.H.,	 ed.	The	 Chemistry	 and
Technology	 of 	 Pectin.	 San	 Diego,	 CA:
Academic,	 1991.	 Tomás-Barberán,	 F.A.,	 and
R.J.	Robins,	 eds.	Phytochemistry	of	Fruit	and
Vegetables.	 New	 York:	 Oxford	 Univ.	 Press,
1997.
Waldron,	 K.W.	 et	 al.	 New	 approaches	 to
understanding	 and	 controlling	 cell	 separation
in	 relation	 to	 fruit	 and	 vegetable	 texture.
Trends	 Food	Sci	 Technology 	 8	 (1997):	 213–
21.

Chapter	6:	A	Survey	of	Common	Vegetables

Arora,	 D.	Mushrooms	 Demystified.	 2nd	 ed.
Berkeley,	CA:	Ten	Speed,	1986.
Chapman,	 V.J.	Seaweeds	and	Their	Uses.	3rd



ed.	New	York:	Chapman	and	Hall,	1980.
Dunlop,	 F.	Land	 of	 Plenty.	 New	 York:
Morrow,	2003.
Fortner,	 H.J.	The	Limu	Eater:	A	Cookbook	of
Hawaiian	 Seafood.	 Honolulu:	 Univ.	 of
Hawaii,	1978.
Olivier,	 J.M.	 et	 al.	Truffe	 et	 trufficulture.
Perigueux:	FANLAC,	1996.
Phillips,	 R.,	 and	M.	 Rix.	The	 Random	House
Book	 of	 Vegetables. 	 New	 York:	 Random
House,	1993.
Schneider,	 E.	Uncommon	 Fruits	 and
Vegetables.	 New	 York:	 Harper	 and	 Row,
1986.
— — — .	Vegetables	 from	 Amaranth	 to
Zucchini.	New	York:	Morrow,	2001.
Alasalvar,	C.	et	al.	Comparison	of	volatiles…
and	sensory	quality	of	different	colored	carrot
varieties.	J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 49	 (2001):
1410–16.
Andersson,	A.	 et	 al.	 Effect	 of	 preheating	 on
potato	 texture.	CRC	 Critical	 Revs	 Food	 Sci



Nutrition	34	(1994):	229–51.
Aparicio,	 R.	 et	 al.,	 “Biochemistry	 and
chemistry	 of	 volatile	 compounds	 affecting
consumers’	attitudes	towards	virgin	olive	oil.”
I n	Flavour	 and	 Fragrance	 Chemistry,	 edited
by	V.	Lanzotti	 and	O.	Tagliatela-Scarfati,	 3–
14.	Amsterdam:	Kluwer,	2000.
Bates,	 D.M.	 et.	 al.,	 eds.	Biology	 and
Utilization	of	 the	Cucurbitaceae.	 Ithaca,	NY:
Comstock,	1990.
Block,	E.	Organosulfur	chemistry	of	the	genus
Allium.	 Angewandte	 Chemie,	 International
Edition	31	(1992):	1135–78.
Buttery,	R.G.	et	al.	Studies	on	flavor	volatiles
of	 some	 sweet	 corn	 products.	J	 Agric	 Food
Chem.	42	(1994):	791–95.
Duckham,	 S.C.	 et	 al.	 Effect	 of	 cultivar	 and
storage	time	in	the	volatile	flavor	components
of	 baked	 potato.	J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 50
(2002):	5640–48.
Fenwick,	 G.R.,	 and	 A.B.	 Hanley.	 The	 genus
Allium.	 CRC	 Critical	 Reviews	 in	 Food	 Sci



Nutrition	22	(1985):	199–271,	273–377.
Fukomoto,	 L.R.	 et	 al.	 Effect	 of	 wash	 water
temperature	 and	 chlorination	 on	 phenolic
metabolism	 and	 browning	 of	 stored	 iceberg
lettuce	 photosynthetic	 and	 vascular	 tissues.	J
Agric	Food	Chem.	50	(2002):	4503–11.
Gomez-Campo,	 C.,	 ed.	Biology	 of	 Brassica
Coenospecies.	Amsterdam:	Elsevier,	1999.
Heywood,	V.H.	Relationships	and	evolution	in
the	Daucus	 carota	 complex.	Israel	 J	 Botany
32	(1983):	51–65.
Hurtado,	 M.C.	 et	 al.	 Changes	 in	 cell	 wall
pectins	 accompanying	 tomato	 paste
manufacture.	J	Agric	Food	Chem.	 50	 (2002):
273–78.
Jirovetz,	 L.	 et	 al.	Aroma	 compound	 analysis
of	Eruca	sativa	SPME	headspace	leaf	samples
using	GC,	GC-MS,	 and	olfactometry.	J	Agric
Food	Chem.	50	(2002):	4643–46.
Kozukue,	 N.,	 and	 M.	 Friedman.	 Tomatine,
chlorophyll,	 ß-carotene	 and	 lycopene	 content
in	 tomatoes	 during	 growth	 and	maturation.	J



Sci	Food	Agric.	83	(2003):	195–200.
Lipton,	 W.J.	 Postharvest	 biology	 of	 fresh
asparagus.	Horticultural	 Reviews	 12	 (1990):
69–155.
Lu,	 Z.	 et	 al.	 Effects	 of	 fruit	 size	 on	 fresh
cucumber	 composition….	J	 Food	 Sci.	 67
(2002):	2934–39.
Mau,	J.-L.	et	al.	1-octen-3-ol	in	the	cultivated
mushroom…J	Food	Sci.	57	(1992):	704–6.
McDonald,	 R.E.	 et	 al.	 Bagging	 chopped
lettuce	 in	 selected	 permeability	 films.
HortScience	25	(1990):	671–73.
Mithen,	 R.F.	 et	 al.	 The	 nutritional
significance,	 biosynthesis	 and	 bioavailability
of	glucosinolates	 in	human	 foods.	J	Sci	Food
Agric.	80	(2000):	967–84.
Mottur,	G.P.	A	scientific	look	at	potato	chips.
Cereal	Foods	World	34	(1989):	620–26.
Noble,	 P.S.,	 ed.	Cacti:	 Biology	 and	 Uses.
Berkeley:	Univ.	of	Calif.	Press,	2001.
Oruna-Concha,	M.J.	 et	 al.	Comparison	of	 the
volatile	components	of	two	cultivars	of	potato



cooked	 by	 boiling,	 conventional	 baking,	 and
microwave	 baking.	J	 Sci	 Food	 Agric.	 82
(2002):	1080–87.
Petersen,	 M.A.	 et	 al.	 Identification	 of
compounds	 contributing	 to	boiled	potato	off-
flavour	(POF).	Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft	und
Technologie	32	(1999):	32–39.
Pacioni,	G.	et	al.	Insects	attracted	by	Tuber:	A
chemical	 explanation.	Mycological	 Res.	 95
(1991):	1359–63.
Rodger,	G.	Mycoprotein	—	a	meat	alternative
new	 to	 the	 U.S.	Food	 Technology 	 55	 (7)
(2001):	36–41.
Rouseff,	 R.L.,	 ed.	Bitterness	 in	 Foods	 and
Beverages.	Amsterdam:	Elsevier,	1990.
Smith,	 D.S.	 et	 al.	Processing	 Vegetables:
Science	 and	 Technology. 	 Lancaster,	 PA:
Technomic,	1997.
Suarez,	 F.	 et	 al.	 Difference	 of	 mouth	 versus
gut	as	site	of	origin	of	odiferous	breath	gases
after	 garlic	 ingestion.	American	 J	Physiology
276	(1999):	G425–30.



Takahashi,	H.	 et	 al.	 Identification	 of	 volatile
compounds	 of	 kombu	 and	 their	 odor
description.	Nippon	 Shokuhin	 Kagaku	 Kaishi
49	(2002):	228–37.
Talou,	T.	et	al.	“Flavor	profiling	of	12	edible
European	 truffles.”	 In	Food	 Flavors	 and
Chemistry,	 edited	 by	 A.M.	 Spanier	 et	 al.
London:	Royal	Society	of	Chemistry,	2000.
Tanikawa,	 E.	Marine	 Products	 in	 Japan.
Tokyo:	Koseisha-Koseikaku,	1971.
Terrell,	E.E.,	and	L.R.	Batra.	Zizania	 latifolia
a n d	Ustilago	 esculenta,	 a	 grass-fungus
association.	Economic	Botany	36	(1982):	274–
85.
Valverde,	 M.E.	 et	 al.	 Huitlacoche	 as	 a	 food
source	 —	 biology,	 composition,	 and
production.	CRC	 Critical	 Revs	 Food	 Sci
Nutrition	35	(1995):	191–229.
Van	Buren,	J.P.	et	al.	Effects	of	salts	and	pH
on	 heating-related	 softening	 of	 snap	 beans.	J
Food	Sci.	55	(1990):	1312–14.
Walter,	 W.M.	 Effect	 of	 curing	 on	 sensory



properties	 and	 carbohydrate	 composition	 of
baked	 sweet	 potato.	J	 Food	 Sci.	 52	 (1987):
1026–29.

Chapter	7:	A	Survey	of	Common	Fruits

Foust,	 C.W.	Rhubarb.	 Princeton,	 NJ:
Princeton	Univ.	Press,	1992.
Grigson,	 J.	Jane	 Grigson’s	 Fruit	 Book. 	 New
York:	Atheneum,	1982.
Morgan,	 J.,	 and	 A.	 Richards.	The	 Book	 of
Apples.	London:	Ebury,	1993.
Saunt,	 J.	Citrus	 Varieties	 of	 the	 World.
Norwich,	UK:	Sinclair,	1990.
Schneider,	 E.	Uncommon	 Fruits	 and
Vegetables.	 New	 York:	 Harper	 and	 Row,
1986.
Arnold,	 J.	 Watermelon	 packs	 a	 powerful
lycopene	 punch.	Agricultural	 Research	 (June
2002):	12–13.
Arthey,	 D.,	 and	 P.R.	 Ashurst.	 Fruit
Processing.	2nd	ed.	Gaithersburg,	MD:	Aspen,



2001.	 Buettner,	 A.,	 and	 P.	 Schieberle.
Evaluation	 of	 aroma	 differences	 between
hand-squeezed	 juices	 from	Valencia	 late	 and
navel	 oranges….J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 49
(2001):	2387–94.
Dawson,	 D.	 M.	 et	 al.	 Cell	 wall	 changes	 in
nectarines.	Plant	 Physiology	 100	 (1992):
1203–10.
Hulme,	 A.C.,	 ed.	The	 Biochemistry	 of	 Fruits
and	 Their	 Products.	 2	 vols.	 London:
Academic,	1970–71.
Janick,	 J.,	 and	 J.N.	 Moore,	 eds.	Advances	 in
Fruit	 Breeding.	 West	 Lafayette,	 IN:	 Purdue
Univ.	Press,	1975.
Lamikanra,	 O.,	 and	 O.A.	 Richard.	 Effect	 of
storage	on	some	volatile	aroma	compounds	in
fresh-cut	 cantaloupe	 melon.	J	 Agric	 Food
Chem.	50	(2002):	4043–47.
Lota,	M.L.	et	al.	Volatile	components	of	peel
and	 leaf	 oils	 of	 lemon	 and	 lime	 species.	J
Agric	Food	Chem.	50	(2002):	796–805.
Mithra,	 S.K.	Postharvest	 Physiology	 and



Storage	 of	 Tropical	 and	 Subtropical	 Fruits.
Wallingford,	UK:	CAB,	1997.
Morton,	 I.D.,	 and	 A.J.	 Macleod,	 eds.	Food
Flavours	 C:	 Flavours	 of	 Fruits.	 Amsterdam:
Elsevier,	1990.
Nagy,	 S.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Fruits	 of	 Tropical	 and
Subtropical	Origin.	 Lake	Alfred,	 FL:	 Florida
Science	Source,	1990.
Somogyi,	 L.P.	 et	 al.	Processing	 Fruits:
Science	 and	 Technology.	 Vol	 1.	 Lancaster,
PA:	Technomic,	1996.
Wilhelm,	 S.	 The	 garden	 strawberry:	A	 study
of	 its	 origin.	American	 Scientist	 62	 (1974):
264–71.
Wyllie,	S.G.	et	al.	“Key	aroma	compounds	in
melons.”	 In	Fruit	 Flavors,	 edited	 by	 R.L.
Rouseff	and	M.M.	Leahy,	248–57.
Washington,	 DC:	 American	 Chemical
Society,	1995.

Chapter	8:	Flavorings	From	Plants



Dalby,	 A.	Dangerous	 Tastes:	 The	 Story	 of
Spices.	Berkeley:	Univ.	of	Calif.	Press,	2000.
Knox,	 K.	 and	 J.S.	 Huffaker.	Coffee	 Basics.
New	York:	Wiley,	1997.
Koran.	Trans.	N.J.	Dawood.	London:	Penguin,
1974.
Kummer,	 C.	The	 Joy	 of	 Coffee.	 Shelburne,
VT:	Chapters,	1995.
Man,	R.,	and	R.	Weir.	The	Compleat	Mustard.
London:	Constable,	1988.
Ortiz,	E.L.	The	Encyclopedia	of	Herbs,	Spices,
and	 Flavorings.	 New	 York:	 Dorling
Kindersley,	1992.
Peterson,	 T.S.	Acquired	 Taste:	 The	 French
Origins	 of	 Modern	 Cooking.	 Ithaca:	 Cornell
Univ.	Press,	1994.
Staples,	G.	Ethnic	Culinary	Herbs:	A	Guide	to
Identification	 and	 Cultivation	 in	 Hawaii.
Honolulu:	Univ.	of	Hawaii	Press,	1999.
Stobart,	 T.	Herbs,	 Spices,	 and	 Flavorings.
Woodstock,	NY:	Overlook,	1982.
Bryant,	B.P.,	and	I.	Mezine.	Alkylamides	that



produce	 tingling	 paraesthesia	 activate	 tactile
and	 thermal	 trigeminal	 neurons.	Brain
Research	842	(1999):	452–60.
Caterina,	 M.J.,	 and	 D.	 Julius.	 The	 vanilloid
receptor.	Annual	Rev	Neuroscience	24	(2001):
487–517.
Chadwick,	 C.I.	 et	 al.	 The	 botany,	 uses,	 and
production	 of	Wasabia	 japonica .	 Economic
Botany	47	(1993):	113–35.
Charalambous,	 G.,	 ed.	Spices,	 Herbs,	 and
Edible	Fungi.	Amsterdam:	Elsevier,	1994.
Charles,	D.J.	 et	 al.	 “Essential	oil	 content	 and
chemical	composition	of	finocchio	fennel.”	In
New	 Crops,	 edited	 by	 J.	 Janick	 and	 J.E.
Simon,	570–73.	New	York:	Wiley,	1993.
Clarke,	 R.J.,	 and	 O.G.	 Vizthum.	Coffee:
Recent	 Developments.	 Oxford:	 Blackwell,
2001.
Clarke,	 R.J.,	 and	 R.	 Macrae,	 eds.	Coffee.	 6
vols.	 Vol.	 2:	 Technology.	 London:	 Elsevier,
1985.
Dalla	Rosa,	M.	et	al.	Changes	in	coffee	brews



in	relation	to	storage	temperature.	J	Sci	Food
Agric.	50	(1990):	227–35.
del	Castillo,	M.D.	et	al.	Effect	of	roasting	on
the	 antioxidant	 activity	 of	 coffee	 brews.	J
Agric	Food	Chem.	50	(2002):	3698–703.
Dignum,	 M.J.W.	 et	 al.	 Vanilla	 production.
Food	Revs	International	17	(2001):	199–219.
Hiltunen,	 R.,	 and	 Y.	 Holm,	 eds.	Basil.
Amsterdam:	Harwood,	1999.
Illy,	A.,	 and	 R.	 Viani,	 eds.	Espresso	 Coffee:
The	 Chemistry	 of	 Quality.	 San	 Diego,	 CA:
Academic,	1995.
Jagella,	 T.,	 and	W.	Grosch.	 Flavour	 and	 off-
flavour	compounds	of	black	and	white	pepper
II	 [black	 pepper].	Eur	 J	 Food	 Research	 and
Technology	209	(1999):	22–26.
———.	 Flavour	 and	 off-flavour	 compounds
of	black	and	white	pepper	 III	 [white	pepper].
Eur	 J	 Food	 Research	 and	 Technology 	 209
(1999):	27–31.
Jordt,	 S.E.	 et	 al.	 Mustard	 oils	 and
cannabinoids	 excite	 sensory	 nerve	 fibers



through	 the	 TRP	 channel	 ANKTM1.	Nature
427	(2004):	260–65.
Kintzios,	 S.E.,	 ed.	Sage.	 Amsterdam:
Harwood,	2000.
Maga,	 J.	A.	Smoke	 in	Food	Processing.	 Boca
Raton,	FL:	CRC,	1988.
McGee,	 H.	 In	 victu	 veritas.	Nature	 392
(1998):	649–50.
Nasrawi,	C.W.,	and	R.M.	Pangborn.	Temporal
effectiveness	 of	 mouth-rinsing	 on	 capsaicin
mouth-burn.	Physiology	 and	 Behavior	 47
(1990):	617–23.
Nemeth,	 E.,	 ed.	Caraway.	 Amsterdam:
Harwood,	1998.
Noleau,	 E.	 et	 al.	Volatile	 compounds	 in	 leek
and	 asafoetida.	J	of	Essential	Oil	Research	 3
(1991):	241–56.
Peter,	 K.V.,	 ed.	Handbook	 of	 Herbs	 and
Spices.	 Cambridge,	 UK:	 Woodhead,	 2001.
Prescott,	 J.	 et	 al.	 Effects	 of	 oral	 chemical
irritation	on	tastes	and	flavors	in	frequent	and
infrequent	 users	 of	 chili.	Physiology	 and



Behavior	58	(1995):	1117–27.
Rozin,	 P.,	 and	 D.	 Schiller.	 The	 nature	 and
acquisition	 of	 a	 preference	 for	 chili	 peppers
by	humans.	Motivation	and	Emotion	4	(1980):
77–101.
Shimoda,	 M.	 et	 al.	 Comparison	 of	 volatile
compounds	 among	 different	 grades	 of	 green
tea	 and	 their	 relations	 to	 odor	 attributes.	J
Agric	Food	Chem.	43	(1995):	1621–25.
Sivetz,	 M.,	 and	 N.W.	 Desrosier.	Coffee
Technology.	Westport,	CT:	AVI,	1979.
Takeoka,	 G.	 “Volatile	 constituents	 of
asafoetida.”	 In	Aroma	 Active	 Constituents	 of
Foods,	 33–44.	 Oxford:	 Oxford	 Univ.	 Press,
2001.
Taucher,	 J.	 et	 al.	 Analysis	 of	 compounds	 in
human	 breath	 after	 ingestion	 of	 garlic	 using
proton-transfer-reaction	mass	 spectrometry.	J
Agric	Food	Chem.	44	(1996):	3778–82.
Werker,	E.	et	al.	Glandular	hairs	and	essential
oil	 in	 developing	 leaves	 of	 [basil].	Annals	 of
Botany	71	(1993):	43–50.



Winterhalter	 P.,	 and	M.	 Straubinger.	 Saffron
—	renewed	 interest	 in	an	ancient	spice.	Food
Revs	International	16	(2000):	39–59.
Yamanishi,	T.,	ed.	Special	 issue	on	 tea.	Food
Revs	International	11	(1995),	no.	3.	Yu,	H.C.
et	 al.,	 eds.	Perilla.	 Amsterdam:	 Harwood,
1997.
Zamski,	 E.	 et	 al.	 Ultrastructure	 of
capsaicinoid-secreting	 cells	 in	 pungent	 and
nonpungent	 red	 pepper	 (	Capsicum	 annuum
L.)	 cultivars.	Botanical	 Gazette	 148	 (1987):
1–6.

Chapter	9:	Seeds

Champlain,	 S.,	 ed.	The	 Voyages,	 1619.
Translated	by	H.H.	Langton	and	W.F.	Ganong.
The	 Works	 of	 Samuel	 Champlain, 	 vol.	 3.
Toronto:	Champlain	Society,	1929.
Eliade,	 M.	Patterns	 in	Comparative	Religion.
Trans.	R.	Sheed.	New	York:	Sheed	and	Ward,
1958.



Fussell,	 B.	The	 Story	 of	 Corn.	 New	 York:
Knopf,	1992.
National	 Research	 Council.	Lost	 Crops	 of
Africa.	 Vol.	 1,	Grains.	 Washington,	 DC:
National	Academy	Press,	1996.
Rosengarten,	 F.J.	The	 Book	 of	 Edible	 Nuts.
New	York:	Walker,	1984.
Shurtleff,	 W.,	 and	 A.	 Aoyagi.	 The	 Book	 of
Miso.	New	York:	Ballantine,	1981.
——— .	The	 Book	 of	 Tofu. 	 New	 York:
Ballantine,	1979.
Thoreau,	H.D.	“Journal,	Jan.	3,	1842.	”	In	The
Writings	of	Henry	David	Thoreau:	Journal	 I,
1837–46,	 edited	 by	 B.	 Torrey.	 New	 York:
AMS,	1968.
Bakshi,	 A.S.,	 and	 R.P.	 Singh.	 Kinetics	 of
water	 diffusion	 and	 starch	 gelatinization
during	rice	parboiling.	J	Food	Sci.	45	(1980):
1387–92.
Bernath,	J.,	ed.	Poppy.	Amsterdam:	Harwood,
1998.
Bett-Garber,	 K.L.	 et	 al.	 Categorizing	 rice



cultivars	based	on	cluster	analysis	of	amylose
content,	 protein	 content	 and	 sensory
attributes.	Cereal	Chemistry	 78	 (2001):	 551–
58.
Bhattacharjee,	 P.	 et	 al.	 Basmati	 rice:	 A
review.	International	 J	 Food	 Sci	 Technology
37	(2002):	1–12.
Bushuk,	 W.	Rye:	Production,	Chemistry,	 and
Technology.	2nd	ed.	St.	Paul,	MN:	Am.	Assoc.
of	Cereal	Chemists,	2001.
Cassidy,	 A.	 Potential	 risks	 and	 benefits	 of
phytoestrogen-rich	 diets.	International	 J
Vitamin	Nutrition	 Research	 73	 (2003):	 120–
26.
Fast,	 R.B.,	 and	 E.F.	 Caldwell,	 eds.	Breakfast
Cereals	and	How	They	Are	Made. 	2nd	ed.	St.
Paul,	MN:	Am.	Assoc.	Cereal	Chemists,	2000.
Fischer,	 K.H.,	 and	 W.	 Grosch.
Untersuchungen	 zum	 Leguminosenaroma
roher	 Erdnusse.	Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft
und	Technologie	15	(1982):	173–76.
Fujimura,	 T.,	 and	 M.	 Kugimiya.



Gelatinization	 of	 starches	 inside	 cotyledon
cells	of	kidney	beans.	Starch	46	(1994):	374–
78.
Glaszmann,	 J.C.	 Isozymes	 and	 classification
of	 Asian	 rice	 varieties.	Theoretical	 and
Applied	Genetics	74	(1987):	21–30.
Granito,	 M.	 et	 al.	 Identification	 of	 gas-
producing	components	in	different	varieties	of
Phaseolus	vulgaris	by	in	vitro	fermentation.	J
Sci	Food	Agric.	81	(2001):	543–50.
Hahn,	D.M.	et	al.	Light	and	scanning	electron
microscope	 studies	 on	dry	beans.	J	Food	Sci.
42	(1977):	1208–12.
Hallauer,	 A.R.,	 ed.	Specialty	 Corns.	 2nd	 ed.
Boca	Raton,	FL:	CRC,	2001.
Harries,	 H.C.	 “Coconut	 Palm.”	 In	 Macrae,
1098–1104.
Hickenbottom,	 J.W.	 Processing,	 types,	 and
uses	 of	 barley	 malt	 extracts	 and	 syrups.
Cereal	Foods	World	41	(1996):	788–90.
Huang,	S.	et	al.	Genes	encoding	plastid	acetyl-
Co-A	 carboxylase…and	 the	 evolutionary



history	of	wheat.	Proceedings	of	the	National
Academy	of	Sciences	99	(2002):	8133–38.
Jezussek,	M.	et	al.	Comparison	of	key	aroma
compounds	 in	cooked	brown	rice	varieties….
JAgric	Food	Chem.	50	(2002):	1101–5.
Khush,	G.S.	Origin,	dispersal,	cultivation,	and
variation	of	 rice.	Plant	Molecular	Biology	35
(1997):	25–34.
Kimber,	 I.,	 and	 R.J.	 Dearman.	 Factors
affecting	 the	 development	 of	 food	 allergies.
Proceedings	 Nutrition	 Society	 61	 (2002):
435–39.
Lentz,	 D.L.	 et	 al.	 Prehistoric	 sunflower	 (
Helianthus	 annuus	 L.)	 domestication	 in
Mexico.	Economic	Botany	55	(2001):	370–76.
Lin,	 S.H.	Water	 uptake	 and	 gelatinization	 of
white	 rice.	Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft	 und
Technologie	26	(1993):	276–78.
Liu,	K.	Soybeans:	Chemistry,	Technology,	and
Utilization.	Gaithersburg,	MD:	Aspen,	1999.
———.	 Storage	 proteins	 and	 hard-to-cook
phenomenon	 in	 legume	 seeds.	Food



Technology	51	(1997):	58–61.
Lumpkin,	 T.A.,	 and	 D.C.	 McClary.	Azuki
Bean:	 Botany,	 Production,	 and	 Uses.
Wallingford,	UK:	CAB,	1994.
MacGregor,	 A.W.,	 and	 R.S.	 Bhatty,	 eds.
Barley:	Chemistry	 and	 Technology. 	 St.	 Paul,
MN:	Am.	Assoc.	of	Cereal	Chemists,	1993.
Marshall,	 H.G.,	 and	 M.E.	 Sorrells,	 eds.	Oat
Science	 and	 Technology. 	 Madison,	 WI:
American	Society	of	Agronomy,	1992.
O’Donnell,	A.U.,	and	S.E.	Fleming.	Influence
of	 frequent	 and	 longterm	 consumption	 of
legume	seeds	on	excretion	of	intestinal	gases.
American	 J	 of	 Clinical	 Nutrition	 40	 (1984):
48–57.
Oelke,	 E.A.	 et	 al.	 Wild	 rice.	Cereal	 Foods
World	42	(1997):	234–47.
Paredes-Lopez,	 O.,	 ed.	Amaranth:	 Biology,
Chemistry,	Technology.	Boca	Raton,	FL:	CRC,
1994.
Pattee,	 H.E.,	 and	H.T.	 Stalker,	 eds.	Advances
in	 Peanut	 Science.	 Stillwater,	OK:	American



Peanut	Research	and	Education	Assoc.,	1995.
Rockland,	 L.B.,	 and	 F.T.	 Jones.	 Scanning
electron	 microscope	 studies	 on	 dry	 beans.	J
Food	Sci.	39	(1974):	342–46.
Rosato,	A.	D.	et	al.	Why	the	Brazil	nuts	are	on
top:	Size	segregation	of	particulate	matter	by
shaking.	Physical	 Review	 Letters	 58	 (1987):
1038–42.
Salunkhe,	 D.K.	 et	 al.	Postharvest
Biotechnology	of	Food	Legumes.	Boca	Raton,
FL:	CRC,	1985.
— — — .	World	 Oilseeds:	 Chemistry,
Technology,	 and	Utilization. 	 New	York:	Van
Nostrand	Reinhold,	1992.
Santerre,	 C.R.	Pecan	Technology. 	 New	York:
Chapman	and	Hall,	1994.
Shan,	 L.	 et	 al.	 Structural	 basis	 for	 gluten
intolerance	 in	 celiac	 sprue.	Science	 297
(2002):	2275–79.
Smartt,	 J.	Grain	 Legumes.	 Cambridge:
Cambridge	Univ.	Press,	1990.
Smith,	 C.W.,	 and	 R.A.	 Frederiksen,	 eds.



Sorghum:	 Origin,	 History,	 Technology,	 and
Production.	New	York:	Wiley,	2000.
Sobolev,	 V.S.	 Vanillin	 content	 in	 boiled
peanuts.	J	Agric	Food	Chem.	49	(2001):	3725–
27.
van	 Schoonhoven,	 A.,	 and	 O.	 Voysest,	 eds.
Common	 Beans:	 Research	 for	 Crop
Improvement.	Wallingford,	UK:	CAB,	1991.
Wang,	 J.,	 and	 D.Y.C.	 Fung.	 Alkaline-
fermented	 foods:	A	 review	with	emphasis	on
pidan	 fermentation.	CRC	 Critical	 Revs	 in
Microbiology	22	(1996):	101–38.
Williams,	 J.T.,	 ed.	Cereals	 and
Pseudocereals.	 London:	 Chapman	 and	 Hall,
1995.
Woodruff,	 J.G.	Coconuts:	 Production,
Processing,	 Products.2nd	 ed.	 Westport,	 CT:
AVI,	1979.
———.	Tree	 Nuts.	 2nd	 ed.	 Westport,	 CT:
AVI,	1979.
Wrigley,	 C.	 The	 lupin	 —	 the	 grain	 with	 no
starch.	Cereal	Foods	World	48	(2003):	30–31.



Chapter	10:	Cereal	Doughs	and	Batters

Beranbaum,	 R.L.	The	Cake	Bible.	New	York:
Morrow,	1988.
———.	The	 Pie	 and	 Pastry	 Bible.	 New
York:Scribner,	1998.
David,	 E.	English	 Bread	 and	 Yeast	 Cookery.
London:	Penguin	1977.
Friberg,	 B.	The	Professional	Pastry	Chef.	3rd
ed.	New	York:	Van	Nostrand	Reinhold,	1996.
Glezer,	 M.	Artisan	 Baking.	 New	 York:
Artisan,	2000.
Healy,	B.,	 and	P.	Bugat.	The	Art	of	 the	Cake.
New	York:	Morrow,	1999.
———.	The	French	Cookie	Book.	New	York:
Morrow,	1994.
Perry,	 C.	 “Couscous	 and	 its	 cousins.”	 In
Medieval	 Arab	 Cookery,	 edited	 by	 M.
Rodinson	et	al.,	233–38.	Totnes,	UK:	Prospect
Books,	2001.
———.	 Puff	 Paste	 Is	 Spanish.	Petits	 propos



culinaires	17	(1984):	57–61.
———.	 “The	 taste	 for	 layered	 bread	 among
the	 nomadic	 Turks	 and	 the	 Central	 Asian
origins	 of	 baklava.”	 In	Culinary	 Cultures	 of
the	Middle	East,	 edited	 by	 R.	 Tapper	 and	 S.
Zubaida,	87–92.	London:	I.B.	Tauris,	1994.
Serventi,	 S.,	 and	F.	Sabban.	Pasta:	The	Story
of	a	Universal	Food.	Trans.	A.	Shugaar.	New
York:	Columbia	Univ.	Press,	2002.
Siesby,	 B.	 The	 Turkish	 crescent	 and	 the
Danish	 pastry.	Petits	 propos	 culinaires 	 30
(1988):	7–10.	Udesky,	J.
The	Book	of	Soba.	Tokyo:	Kodansha,	1995.
Wolfert,	 P.	Couscous	 and	 Other	 Good	 Food
from	Morocco. 	 New	York:	 Harper	 and	 Row,
1973.
Barsby,	 T.L.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Starch:	 Advances	 in
Structure	 and	 Function.	 Cambridge:	 Royal
Society	of	Chemistry,	2001.
Bath,	 D.E.,	 and	 R.C.	 Hoseney.	A	 laboratory-
scale	 bagel-making	 procedure.	Cereal
Chemistry	71	(1994):	403–8.



Bernardin,	 J.E.,	 and	 D.D.	 Kasarda.	 The
microstructure	of	wheat	protein	fibrils.	Cereal
Chemistry	50	(1973):	735–45.
Bhattacharya,	 M.	 et	 al.	 Physicochemical
properties	 related	 to	 quality	 of	 rice	 noodles.
Cereal	Chemistry.76	(1999):	861–67.
Blanshard,	 J.M.V.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Chemistry	 and
Physics	 of	Baking.	London:	Royal	Society	of
Chemistry,	1986.
Brooker,	B.E.	The	stabilisation	of	air	 in	cake
batters	—	the	role	of	fat.	Food	Microstructure
12	(1993):	285–96.
Calvel,	 R.	The	 Taste	 of	 Bread. 	 Trans.	 R.L.
Wirtz.	 Gaithersburg,	 MD:	 Aspen,	 2001.
Czerny,	 M.,	 and	 P.	 Schieberle.	 Important
aroma	 compounds	 in	 freshly	 ground
wholemeal	 and	 white	 wheat	 flour:
Identification	and	quantitative	changes	during
sourdough	 fermentation.	J	Agric	 Food	Chem.
50	(2002):	6835–40.
Dexter,	 J.E.	 et	 al.	 Scanning	 electron
microscopy	 of	 cooked	 spaghetti.	Cereal



Chemistry	55	(1978):	23–30.
Eliasson,	 A.C.,	 and	 K.	 Larsson.	Cereals	 in
Bread-making:	 A	 Molecular	 Colloidal
Approach.	New	York:	Dekker,	1993.
Fabriani,	 G.,	 and	 C.	 Lintas,	 eds.	Durum
Wheat:	Chemistry	 and	 Technology. 	 St.	 Paul,
MN:	Am.	Assoc.	Cereal	Chemists,	1988.	Fik,
M.,	and	K.	Surowka.	Effect	of	prebaking	and
frozen	 storage	 on	 the	 sensory	 quality	 and
instrumental	 texture	 of	 bread.	J	 Sci	 Food
Agric.	82	(2002):	1268–75.
Frazier,	P.J.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Starch:	Structure	and
Functionality.	 Cambridge:	 Royal	 Society	 of
Chemistry,	1997.
Heidolph,	B.B.	Designing	chemical	leavening
systems.	Cereal	Foods	World 	41	(1996):	118–
26.	 Hoseney,	 R.C.	 “Physical	 chemistry	 of
bread	 dough.”	 In	Physical	 Chemistry	 of
Foods,	edited	by	H.G.	Schwartzberg	and	R.W.
Hartel.	New	York:	Dekker,	1992.
Hoseney,	 R.C.,	 and	 P.A.	 Seib.	 Structural
differences	 in	 hard	 and	 soft	 wheats.	Bakers



Digest	47	(1973):	26–28.
Kruger,	 J.E.	 et	 al.	Pasta	 and	 Noodle
Technology.	St.	Paul,	MN:	Am.	Assoc.	Cereal
Chemists,	1996.
Loewe,	 R.	 Role	 of	 ingredients	 in	 batter
systems.	Cereal	Foods	World 	38	(1993):	673–
77.
Matsunaga,	 K.	 et	 al.	 Influence	 of
physicochemical	 properties	 of	 starch	 on
crispness	 of	 tempura	 fried	 batter.	Cereal
Chemistry	80	(2003):	339–45.
O’Brien,	R.D.	Fats	and	Oils:	Formulating	and
Processing	 for	 Applications.	 Lancaster,	 PA:
Technomic,	1998.
Pomeranz,	 Y.,	 ed.	Wheat:	 Chemistry	 and
Technology.	2	vols.	St.	Paul,	MN:	Am.	Assoc.
Cereal	Chemists,	1988.
Schieberle,	 P.,	 and	 W.	 Grosch.	 Potent
odorants	 of	 rye	 bread	 crust	 —	 differences
from	 the	 crumb	 and	 from	wheat	 bread	 crust.
Zeitschrift	für	Lebensmittel-Untersuchung	und
Forschung	198	(1994):	292–96.



Sluimer,	 I.P.	 Principles	 of	 dough	 retarding.
Bakers	Digest	55,	no.	4	(1981):	6–10.
Stear,	 C.A.	Handbook	 of	 Breadmaking
Technology.	London:	Elsevier,	1990.
Tester,	 R.F.,	 and	 S.J.J.	 Debon.	Annealing	 of
starch	 —	 a	 review.	Int	 J	 Biological
Macromolecules	27	(2000):	1–12.
Thiele,	 C.	 et	 al.	 Contribution	 of	 sourdough
lactobacilli,	 yeast,	 and	 cereal	 enzymes	 to	 the
generation	 of	 amino	 acids	 in	 dough	 relevant
for	bread	flavor.	Cereal	Chemistry	79	(2002):
45–51.
Weiss,	T.J.	Food	Oils	and	Their	Uses.	2nd	ed.
Westport,	CT:	AVI,	1983.
Zweifel,	 C.	 et	 al.	 Influence	 of	 high-
temperature	 drying	 on	 structural	 and	 textural
properties	 of	 durum	 wheat	 pasta.	Cereal
Chemistry	80	(2003):	159–67.

CHAPTER	11:	Sauces

Armstrong,	 V.,	 trans.	Cookbook	 of	 Sabina



Welserin.	 1553.
www.daviddfriedman.com/Medieval/Cookbooks/Sabrina_Welserin.html
Brears,	 P.	Transparent	 pleasures	—	 the	 story
of	the	jelly.	Petits	propos	culinaires 	53:	8–19
and	54	(1996):	25–37.
Harper,	 D.	 Gastronomy	 in	 ancient	 China	 —
cooking	 for	 the	Sage	King.	Parabola	9,	no.	4
(1984):	38–47.
Kenney,	 E.J.,	 trans.	The	 Ploughman’s	 Lunch:
Moretum.	 Bristol:	 Bristol	 Classical	 Press,
1984.
Kurlansky,	 M.	Salt:	 A	 World	 History. 	 New
York:	Walker,	2002.
Mennell,	 S.	Lettre	 d’un	 pâtissier	 anglois,	 et
autres	 contributions	 à	 une	 polémique
gastronomique	 du	 XVIIIème	 siècle.	 Exeter:
Univ.	of	Exeter	Press,	1981.
Mortimer,	P.	Koch’s	colonies	and	the	culinary
con-tribution	 of	 Fanny	 Hesse.	Microbiology
Today	28	(2001):	136–37.
Peterson,	 J.	Sauces:	 Classical	 and
Contemporary	Sauce	Making.	New	York:	Van



Nostrand	Reinhold,	1991.
Rao,	 H.	 et	 al.	 Institutional	 change	 in	 Toque
Ville:	 Nouvelle	 cuisine	 as	 an	 identity
movement	 in	 French	 gastronomy.	American
Journal	of	Sociology	108	(2003):	795–843.
Sokolov,	 R.	The	 Saucier’s	 Apprentice.	 New
York:	Knopf,	1983.
Augustin,	 J.	 et	 al.	Alcohol	 retention	 in	 food
preparation.	J	 Am	Dietetic	 Assoc.	 92	 (1992):
486–88.
Chang,	 C.M.	 et	 al.	 Electron	 microscopy	 of
mayonnaise.	Canadian	 Institute	 of	 Food
Science	 and	 Technology	 Journal 	 5	 (1972):
134–37.
Cook,	 D.J.	 et	 al.	 Effect	 of	 hydrocolloid
thickeners	on	the	perception	of	savory	flavors.
J	Agric	Food	Chem.	51	(2003):	3067–72.
Dickinson,	E.,	and	J.M.	Rodriguez	Patino,	eds.
Food	 Emulsions	 and	 Foams.	 Cambridge:
Royal	Society	of	Chemistry,	1999.
Frazier,	P.J.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	 Starch:	Structure	and
Functionality.	 Cambridge:	 Royal	 Society	 of



Chemistry,	1997.
Gudmundsson,	 M.	 Rheological	 properties	 of
fish	gelatins.	J	Food	Science	67	(2002):	2172–
76.	 Harris,	 P.,	 ed.	Food	 Gels.	 London:
Elsevier,	1990.
Hoover,	R.	Composition,	molecular	structure,
and	 physicochemical	 properties	 of	 tuber	 and
root	 starches:	 A	 review.	Carbohydrate
Polymers	45	(2001):	253–67.
Leuenberger,	 B.H.	 Investigation	 of	 viscosity
and	 gelation	 properties	 of	 different
mammalian	 and	 fish	 gelatins.	Food
Hydrocolloids	5	(1991):	353–62.
Martinez	 Padilla,	 L.,	 and	 J.	 Hardy.
“Rheological	 study	 of	 interactions	 among
wheat	 flour	 milk	 proteins	 and	 lipids	 of
bechamel	sauce.”	 In	Food	Colloids,	edited	by
R.D.	 Bee	 et	 al.,	 395–99.	 Cambridge:	 Royal
Society	of	Chemistry,	1989.
Miller,	B.S.	 et	 al.	A	pictorial	 explanation	 for
the	 increase	 in	 viscosity	 of	 a	 heated	 wheat
starch-water	 suspension.	Cereal	Chemistry	50



(1973):	271–80.
Niman,	 S.	 Using	 one	 of	 the	 oldest	 food
ingredients	 —	 salt.	Cereal	 Foods	 World 	 41
(1996):	729–31.
Oda,	M.	et	al.	Study	on	food	components:	The
structure	 of	 N-linked	 asialo	 carbohydrate
from	the	edible	bird’s	nest	built	by	Collocalia
fuciphaga.	 J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 46	 (1998):
3047–53.
Pearson,	A.M.,	 and	T.R.	Dutson.	Edible	Meat
Byproducts.	London:	Elsevier,	1988.	Sayaslan,
A.	et	al.	Volatile	compounds	in	five	starches.
Cereal	Chemistry	77	(2000):	248–53.
Solyakov,	 A.	 et	 al.	 Heterocyclic	 amines	 in
process	 flavors,	 process	 flavor	 ingredients,
bouillon	concentrates	and	a	pan	residue.	Food
and	Chemical	Toxicology	37	(1999):	1–11.
Thebaudin,	 J.Y.	 et	 al.	 Rheology	 of	 starch
pastes	 from	 starches	 of	 different	 origins:
Applications	 to	 starch-based	 sauces.
Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft	 und	 Technologie
31	(1998):	354–60.



Walstra,	 P.,	 and	 I.	 Smulders.	 Making
emulsions	 and	 foams:	An	 overview.	 In	Food
Colloids,	 edited	 by	 E.	 Dickinson	 and	 B.
Bergenstahl,	367–81.
Cambridge,	UK:	Royal	Society	of	Chemistry,
1997.
Ward,	A.G.,	 and	A.	 Courts,	 eds.	 Science	 and
Technology	of	Gelatin. 	New	York:	Academic,
1977.
Weel,	 K.G.C.	 et	 al.	 Flavor	 release	 and
perception	 of	 flavored	 whey	 protein	 gels:
Perception	 is	 determined	 by	 texture	 rather
than	 release.	J	 Agric	Food	Chem.	 50	 (2002):
5149–55.
Westphal,	 G.	 et	 al.	 “Sodium	 chloride.”	 In
Ullmann’s	 Encyclopedia	 of	 Industrial
Chemistry,	 A24:	 317–39.	 Weinheim:	 VCH,
1993.	Whistler,	R.L.,	 and	 J.N.	BeMiller,	 eds.
Industrial	 Gums.	 3rd	 ed.	 San	 Diego,	 CA:
Academic,	1993.
Whistler,	 R.L.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Starch:	 Chemistry
and	 Technology. 	 2nd	 ed.	 Orlando,	 FL:



Academic,	1984.

CHAPTER	12:	Sugars,	Chocolate,	and	Confectionery

Alper,	 J.	 Crazy	 candies.	ChemMatters.
October	11,	1993.
Benzoni,	G.	History	of	the	New	World 	(1565).
Trans.	W.H.	Smyth.	London:	Hakluyt	Society,
1857.
Beranbaum,	 R.L.	 Rose’s	 sugar	 bible.	Food
Arts	(April	2000).
Coe,	S.D.,	and	M.D.	Coe.	The	True	History	of
Chocolate.	 London:	 Thames	 and	 Hudson,
1996.
Gage,	 T.	The	 English-American:	 His	 Travail
by	Sea	and	Land,	1648	.	Ed.	J.E.S.	Thompson.
Norman:	Univ.	of	Oklahoma	Press,	1958.
Presilla,	 M.	The	 New	 Taste	 of	 Chocolate.
Berkeley,	CA:	Ten	Speed,	2001.
Richardson,	 T.	Sweets:	 A	 History	 of	 Candy.
New	York:	Bloomsbury,	2002.
Teubner,	 C.	The	Chocolate	Bible.	New	York:



Penguin	Studio,	1997.
Alexander,	 R.J.	Sweeteners:	 Nutritive.	 St.
Paul,	MN:	Eagan,	1997.
Baikow,	 V.E.	Manufacture	 and	 Refining	 of
Raw	Cane	Sugar.	Amsterdam:	Elsevier,	1982.
Beckett,	 S.T.	The	 Science	 of	 Chocolate.
Cambridge:	 Royal	 Society	 of	 Chemistry,
2000.
Beckett,	 S.T.,	 ed.	Industrial	 Chocolate
Manufacture	 and	 Use.	 3rd	 ed.	 Oxford:
Blackwell,	1999.
Birch,	 G.G.,	 and	 K.J.	 Parker.	Sugar:	 Science
and	 Technology. 	 London:	 Applied	 Science,
1979.
Blackburn,	 F.	Sugar-cane.	London:	Longman,
1984.
Clarke,	M.A.	“Syrups.”	In	Macrae,	5711–16.
Edwards,	 W.P.	 Science	 of	 Sugar
Confectionery.	 Cambridge:	 Royal	 Society	 of
Chemistry,	2000.
Galloway,	 J.H.	The	 Sugar	Cane	 Industry:	 An
Historical	 Geography	 From	 Its	 Origins	 to



1914.	 Cambridge:	 Cambridge	 Univ.	 Press,
1989.
Godshall,	 M.A.	 et	 al.	 Sensory	 properties	 of
white	 beet	 sugars.	International	 Sugar	 J	 97
(1995):	296–300.
Harris,	 N.	 et	 al.	A	 Formulary	 of	 Candy
Products.	 New	 York:	 Chemical	 Publishing
Co.,	1991.
Harris,	 P.,	 ed.	Food	 Gels.	 London:	 Elsevier,
1990.
Hickenbottom,	 J.W.	 Processing,	 types,	 and
uses	 of	 barley	 malt	 extracts	 and	 syrups.
Cereal	Foods	World	41	(1996):	788–90.
Hurst,	W.J.	et	al.	Cacao	usage	by	 the	earliest
Maya	civilization.	Nature	418	(2002):	289.
Jackson,	 E.B.,	 ed.	Sugar	 Confectionery
Manufacture.	 New	 York:	 Van	 Nostrand
Reinhold,	1990.
Kroh,	 L.W.	 Caramelisation	 in	 food	 and
beverages.	Food	 Chemistry	 51	 (1994):	 373–
79.
Michener,	W.,	and	P.	Rozin.	Pharmacological



versus	 sensory	 factors	 in	 the	 satiation	 of
chocolate	 craving.	Physiology	 and	 Behavior
56	(1994):	419–22.
Minifie,	 B.	Chocolate,	 Cocoa,	 and
Confectionery:	 Science	 and	 Technology. 	 3rd
ed.	New	York:	Van	Nostrand	Reinhold,	1989.
Nabors,	 L.O.,	 ed.	Alternative	Sweeteners.	 3rd
ed.	New	York:	Dekker,	2001.
Pennington,	 N.L.,	 and	 C.W.	 Baker.	 Sugar:	 A
User’s	 Guide	 to	 Sucrose.	 New	 York:	 Van
Nostrand	Reinhold,	1990.
Sweeting,	 L.M.	 Experiments	 at	 home:
Wintergreen	candy	and	other	triboluminescent
materials.	 1998,
http://www.towson.edu/˜sweeting/wg/candywww.htm.
Taylor,	 C.N.	 Truffles	 and	 pralines.	The
Manufacturing	Confectioner	(May	1997),	90–
94.
Vinson,	J.A.	et	al.	Phenol	antioxidant	quantity
and	 quality	 in	 foods:	 Cocoa,	 dark	 chocolate,
and	 milk	 chocolate.	J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 47
(1999):	4821–24.



Whistler,	 R.L.,	 and	 J.N.	 BeMiller,	 eds.
Industrial	 Gums.	 3rd	 ed.	 San	 Diego,	 CA:
Academic,	1993.
Whistler,	 R.L.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	Starch:	 Chemistry
and	Technology. 	 2nd	 ed.	Orlando:	Academic,
1984.
Winston,	 M.	The	 Biology	 of	 the	 Honey	 Bee.
Cambridge,	MA:	Harvard	Univ.	Press,	1987.

Chapter	13:	Wine,	Beer,	and	Distilled	Spirits

Brode,	 B.	 et	 al.	Beer	 Judge	 Certification
Program:	Guide	to	Beer	Styles	for	Home	Brew
Beer	 Competitions.	 Hayward,	 CA:	 BJCP,
2001.
Civil,	M.	Modern	brewers	re-create	an	ancient
beer.	http://oi.uchicago.edu/OI/IS/CIVIL/NN_
FAL91/NN_Fal91.html	 Harper,	 P.	 The
Insider’s	 Guide	 to	 Saké.	 Tokyo:	 Kodansha,
1998.
Jackson,	 M.	Great	 Beer	 Guide.	 New	 York:
Dorling	Kindersley,	2000.



Johnson,	H.	Vintage:	The	Story	of	Wine. 	New
York:	Simon	and	Schuster,	1989.
Johnson,	H.,	and	J.	Robinson.	The	World	Atlas
of	Wine.	 5th	 ed.	 London:	 Mitchell	 Beazley,
2001.
Kramer,	 M.	Making	 Sense	 of	 Wine.	 2nd	 ed.
Philadelphia:	Running	Press,	2003.
McGovern,	 P.E.	 et	 al.,	 eds.	The	 Origins	 and
Ancient	History	of	Wine.	Amsterdam:	Gordon
and	Breach,	1996.
Papazian,	 C.	The	Home	Brewer’s	Companion.
New	York:	Avon,	1994.
Robinson,	 J.	The	Oxford	Companion	 to	Wine.
Oxford:	Oxford	Univ.	Press,	1994.
Waymack,	M.H.,	and	J.F.	Harris.	The	Book	of
Classic	 American	 Whiskeys.	 Chicago:	 Open
Court,	1995.
Wilson,	 J.E.	Terroir:	 The	 Role	 of	 Geology,
Climate,	and	Culture	in	the	Making	of	French
Wines.	 Berkeley:	 Univ.	 of	 California	 Press,
1998.
Adams,	 M.R.	 “Vinegar.”	 In	Microbiology	 of



Fermented	 Foods,	 edited	 by	 B.J.B.	 Wood,	 2
vols.	Vol.	1,	1–45.	New	York:	Elsevier,	1985.
Augustin,	 J.	 et	 al.	Alcohol	 retention	 in	 food
preparation.	J	 American	 Dietetic	 Assoc.	 92
(1992):	486–88.
Aylott,	 R.I.,	 and	 E.G.	 Hernandez.	 “Gin.”	 In
Caballero,	2889–98.
Bakalinsky,	 A.T.,	 and	 M.H.	 Penner.
“Alcohol.”	In	Caballero,	107–28.
Bertrand,	A.,	 and	 R.	 Cantagrel.	 “Brandy	 and
Cognac.”	In	Caballero,	584–605.
Blanchard,	L.	et	al.	Formation	of	furfurylthiol
exhibiting	 a	 strong	 coffee	 aroma	 during	 oak
barrel	 fermentation	 from	furfural	 released	by
toasted	staves.	J	Agric	Food	Chem.	49	(2001):
4833–35.
Cocchi,	M.	et	al.	Determination	of	carboxylic
acids	 in	 vinegars	 and	 in	 aceto	 balsamico
tradizionale	 di	 Modena	 by	 HPLC	 and	 GC
methods.	J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 50	 (2002):
5255–61.
Conner,	H.A.,	 and	R.J.	Allgeier.	Vinegar:	 Its



History	 and	 Development.	Advances	 in
Applied	Microbiology	20	(1976):	81–133.
Conner,	J.M.	et	al.	Release	of	distillate	flavor
compounds	in	Scotch	malt	whisky.	J	Sci	Food
Agric.	79	(1999):	1015–20.
De	 Keersmaecker,	 J.	 The	 mystery	 of	 lambic
beer.	Scientific	American	 (August	 1996),	 74–
78.
Ebeler,	 S.	 Analytical	 chemistry:	 Unlocking
the	 secrets	 of	 wine	 flavor.	Food	 Reviews
International	17	(2001):	45–64.
Fahrasmane,	 L.,	 and	 A.	 Parfait.	 “Rum.”	 In
Caballero,	5021–27.
Fix,	 G.	Principles	 of	 Brewing	 Science.
Boulder,	CO:	Brewers	Publications,	1989.
Fleming,	M.	et	al.	“Ethanol.”	In	Goodman	and
Gilman’s	 The	 Pharmacological	 Basis	 of
Therapeutics,	 edited	 by	L.S.	Goodman	 et	 al.,
10th	 ed.	 429–45.	 New	 York:	 McGraw-Hill,
2001.
Harris,	 R.,	 and	 D.H.	 West.	 “Caribbean	 rum:
Its	 manufacture	 and	 quality.”	 In	Chemistry



and	Processing	 of	 Sugarbeet	 and	 Sugarcane,
edited	 by	 M.A.	 Clarke	 and	 M.A.	 Godshall,
313–40.	Amsterdam:	Elsevier,	1988.
Hayman,	 C.F.	 “Vodka.”	 In	 Caballero,	 6068–
69.
Jackson,	 R.J.	Wine	 Tasting:	 A	 Professional
Handbook.	San	Diego,	CA:	Academic,	2002.
Jackson.	 R.S.	Wine	 Science.	 2nd	 ed.	 San
Diego,	CA:	Academic,	2000.
Lavigne,	 V.	 et	 al.	 Identification	 and
determination	 of	 sulfur	 compounds
responsible	 for	 “grilled”	 aroma	 in	 wines.
Science	des	Aliments	18	(1998):	175–91.
Ledauphin,	 J.	 et	 al.	 Chemical	 and	 sensorial
aroma	 characterization	 of	 freshly	 distilled
Calvados.	J	 Agric	 Food	 Chem.	 51	 (2003):
433–42.
Licker,	 J.L.	 et	 al.	 “What	 is	 ‘Brett’
(Brettanomyces)	 flavor?	 A	 preliminary
investigation.”	 In	Chemistry	 of	Wine	 Flavor,
edited	 by	 A.L.	 Waterhouse	 and	 S.E.	 Ebeler,
96–115.	Washington,	DC:	American	Chemical



Society,	1998.
Mosedale,	 J.R.,	 and	 J.L.	 Puech.	 “Barrels:
wine,	 spirits,	 and	 other	 beverages.”	 In
Caballero,	393–402.
Neve,	R.A.	Hops.	London:	Chapman	and	Hall,
1991.
Noble,	 A.C.,	 and	 G.F.	 Bursick.	 The
contribution	of	glycerol	to	perceived	viscosity
and	 sweetness	 in	 white	 wine.	Am	 J	 Enology
and	Viticulture	35	(1984):	110–12.
Olson,	 R.W.	 et	 al.	 Absinthe	 and	 [.gamma]-
aminobutyric	 acid	 receptors.	Proceedings	 of
the	National	Academy	of	 Sciences	 97	 (2000):
4417–18.
Peynaud,	 E.	The	 Taste	 of	 Wine. 	 London:
Macdonald,	1987.
Piggott,	 J.R.,	 and	 Conner,	 J.M.	 “Whisky,
whiskey,	 and	 bourbon.”	 In	 Caballero,	 6171–
83.
Swings,	 J.	 “The	 genera	Acetobacter	 and
Gluconobacter.	 ”	 In	The	 Prokaryotes,	 edited
by	A.	Balows	et	al.,	2nd	ed.	Vol.	3,	2268–86.



New	York:	Springer,	1992.
Verachtert,	 H.,	 and	 R.	 De	 Mot,	 eds.	Yeast:
Biotechnology	 and	 Biocatalysis.	 New	 York:
Dekker,	1990.
Wiese,	 J.G.	 et	 al.	 The	 alcohol	 hangover.
Annals	of	Internal	Medicine	132	(2000):	897–
902.

Chapter	14:	Cooking	Methods	and	Utensil	Materials

Fennema,	 O.,	 ed.	Food	 Chemistry.	 3rd	 ed.
New	York:	Dekker,	1996.
Hallström,	 B.	 et	 al.	Heat	 Transfer	 and	 Food
Products.London:	Elsevier,	1990.
McGee,	 H.	 From	 raw	 to	 cooked:	 The
transformation	 of	 flavor.	 In	The	 Curious
Cook:	More	Kitchen	 Science	 and	 Lore,	 297–
313.	San	Francisco:	North	Point,	1990.
McGee,	H.,	 J.	McInerny,	 and	A.	Harrus.	 The
virtual	 cook:	 modeling	 heat	 transfer	 in	 the
kitchen.	Physics	Today	(November	1999):	30–
36.



Scientific	 American.	 Special	 issue	 on
“Materials.”	September	1967.

Chapter	15:	The	Four	Basic	Food	Molecules

Barham,	 P.	The	 Science	 of	 Cooking.Berlin:
Springer-Verlag,	2001.
Fennema,	 O.,	 ed.	Food	 Chemistry.	 3rd	 ed.
New	York:	Dekker,	1996.
Penfield,	 M.P.,	 and	 A.M.	 Campbell.
Experimental	 Food	 Science.	 3rd	 ed.	 San
Diego,	CA:	Academic,	1990.

APPENDIX:	A	CHEMISTRY	PRIMER

Hill,	 J.W.,	 and	 D.K.	 Kolb.	Chemistry	 for
Changing	Times.	8th	ed.	Upper	Saddle	River,
NJ:	Prentice	Hall,	1998.
Snyder,	 C.H.	The	Extraordinary	Chemistry	of
Ordinary	Things.	New	York:	Wiley,	1992.



Permissions

Micrographs	 of	 whipped	 cream	 courtesy	 of
H.D.	 Goff	 and	 A.K.	 Smith,	 University	 of
Guelph.

Diagram	of	cheesemaking,	created	by
Soyoung	Scanlan,	Andante	Dairy,	and
reprinted	by	permission.

Micrograph	of	egg	yolk	from	C.M.	Chang,
W.D.	Powrie,	and	O.	Fennema,	Microstructure
of	egg	yolk.	Journal	of	Food	Science	42
(1977):	1193–1200.	Reprinted	with
permission.

Excerpts	from	The	Viandier	of	Taillevent,
translated	and	edited	by	Terence	Scully.
Copyright	©	1988	by	the	University	of	Ottawa
Press	(Web	site:	www.uopress.uottawa.ca).
Reprinted	with	permission.

“The	Rage	of	Achilles”	by	Homer,	from



The	Iliad	by	Homer,	translated	by	Robert
Fagles,	copyright	©	1990	by	Robert	Fagles.
Used	by	permission	of	Viking	Penguin,	a
division	of	Penguin	Group	(USA)	Inc.

Micrographs	of	meat	fibers	and	oil
droplets	from	Palmer,	Helen	Hanson;	Osman,
Elizabeth;	Campbell,	Ada	Marie;	Bowers,
Jane;	Drahn,	Marcia;	Palumbo,	Mary;
Jacobson,	Marion;	Charley,	Helen	G.;
Berkeley,	Selma;	Food	Theory	and
Applications,	1st	edition,	copyright	©1986.
Reprinted	by	permission	of	Pearson
Education,	Inc.,	Upper	Saddle	River,	NJ.

Micrograph	of	wheat	grain	courtesy	of	Ann
Hirsch.	Flour	micrographs	from	R.C.	Hoseney
and	P.A.	Seib,	Structural	differences	in	hard
and	soft	wheats.	Bakers	Digest	47	(1973):	26–
28.	Reprinted	by	permission.

Micrographs	of	gluten	from	J.E.	Bernardin
and	D.D.	Kasarda,	The	microstructure	of
wheat	protein	fibrils.	Cereal	Chemistry
40(1973):	735–45.	Reprinted	by	permission.



Excerpt	from	“Ode	to	Bing”	from	Pasta:
The	Story	of	a	Universal	Food	by	Silvano
Serventi	and	Françoise	Sabban,	translated	by
Antony	Shugaar.	Copyright	©	2002	Columbia
University	Press.	Reprinted	with	permission
of	the	publisher.

Excerpt	from	Moretum,	translated	by	E.J.
Kenney.	Copyright	©	1984	E.J.	Kenney.
Reprinted	with	permission	of	Gerald
Duckworth	and	Co.,	Ltd.

Micrographs	of	starch	granules	from	B.S.
Miller,	R.I.	Derby,	and	H.B.	Trimbo,	A
pictorial	explanation	for	the	increase	in
viscosity	of	a	heated	wheat	starch-water
suspension.	Cereal	Chemistry	50(1973):	271–
80.	Reprinted	by	permission.

Micrograph	of	oil	droplets	from	C.M.
Chang,	W.D.	Powrie,	and	O.	Fennema,
Electron	microscopy	of	mayonnaise.
Canadian	Institute	of	Food	Science	and
Technology	Journal	5	(1972):	134–37.
Reprinted	by	permission.



Excerpt	from	Hymn	to	Ninkasi,	English
translation	by	Miguel	Civil.
http://oi.uchicago.edu/OI/IS/CIVIL/NN_FAL91/NN_Fal91_hymn.html.
Copyright	©	2002	Oriental	Institute,
University	of	Chicago.	Reprinted	courtesy	of
the	Oriental	Institute	of	the	University	of
Chicago.

Micrograph	of	yeast	courtesy	of	Alastain
Pringle,	Research	Director,	Anheuser	Busch
Inc.



eBook	Info
	
Title:

On	Food	and	Cooking
	
Creator:

Harold	McGee
	
Date:

2004
	
Type:

novel
	
Format:

text/html
	
Identifier:

ISBN	1-4165-5637-0
	
Source:

PDF



	
Language:

en
	
Relation:

None
	
Coverage:

None
	
Rights:

Copyright	©	2004	by	Harold	McGee