BY	JULIA	CHILD	AND	SIMONE	BECK

Mastering	the	Art	of	French	Cooking	(1970)
VOLUME	TWO

BY	JULIA	CHILD

The	French	Chef	Cookbook	(1968)
From	Julia	Child’s	Kitchen	(1975)
Julia	Child	&	Company	(1978)

Julia	Child	&	More	Company	(1979)
The	Way	to	Cook	(1989)

Cooking	with	Master	Chefs	(1993)
In	Julia’s	Kitchen	with	Master	Chefs	(1995)

Julia’s	Kitchen	Wisdom	(2000)
My	Life	in	France,	with	Alex	Prud’homme	(2006)	

BY	JULIA	CHILD	AND	JACQUES	PÉPIN

Julia	and	Jacques	Cooking	at	Home	(1999)

BY	SIMONE	BECK

Simca’s	Cuisine	(1972)
More	Recipes	From	Simca’s	Cuisine	(1979)



	

Illustrations	by	Sidonie	Coryn






THIS	IS	A	BORZOI	BOOK
PUBLISHED	BY	ALFRED	A.	KNOPF

Copyright	©	1961,	1983,	2001	by	Alfred	A.	Knopf
All	rights	reserved	under	International	and	Pan-American	Copyright	Conventions.	Published	in	the
United	States	by	Alfred	A.	Knopf,	a	division	of	Random	House,	Inc.,	New	York,	and	simultaneously	in
Canada	by	Random	House	of	Canada	Limited,	Toronto.	Distributed	by	Random	House,	Inc.,	New	York.

www.aaknopf.com
Knopf,	Borzoi	Books,	and	the	colophon	are	registered	trademarks	of	Random	House,	Inc.

Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data	Child,	Julia.	Mastering	the	art	of	French	cooking.
Rev.	ed.	of:	Mastering	the	art	of	French	cooking	/	Simone	Beck,	Louisette	Bertholle,	Julia	Child.

Vol.	2	by	Julia	Child	and	Simone	Beck.
Includes	index.

1.	Cookery,	French.	I.	Bertholle,	Louisette.	II.	Beck,	Simone.	III.	Beck,	Simone.	Mastering	the	art	of
French	cooking.	IV.	Title.

TX719.C454		1983		641.5944		83–48113
eISBN:	978-0-30795817-4

PUBLISHED	OCTOBER	16,	1961
REPRINTED	FROM	NEW	PLATES,	OCTOBER	1971

THIRTY-FOURTH	PRINTING	(REVISED),	SEPTEMBER	1983
FORTIETH	ANNIVERSARY	HARDCOVER	EDITION,	OCTOBER	16,	2001

TWENTY-SECOND	PRINTING,	JANUARY	2011
FIRST	FORTIETH	ANNIVERSARY	PAPERBACK	EDITION,	OCTOBER	2004

THIRTEENTH	PRINTING,	JANUARY	2011

v3.1



TO

La	Belle	France
WHOSE	PEASANTS,	FISHERMEN,	HOUSEWIVES,

AND	PRINCES	—	NOT	TO	MENTION	HER	CHEFS	—

THROUGH	GENERATIONS	OF	INVENTIVE	AND

LOVING	CONCENTRATION	HAVE	CREATED	ONE

OF	THE	WORLD’S	GREAT	ARTS



INTRODUCTION	TO
THE	ANNIVERSARY	EDITION

by	Julia	Child
WHAT	 WAS	 AMERICAN	 food	 like	 forty	 years	 ago	 when	 this	 book	 first

appeared?	It’s	hard	for	me	to	remember	since	the	“now”	is	so	much	with
me.	 I	 grew	 up	 in	 Southern	 California,	 in	 a	 comfortable	 family,	with	 a
New	England	background	since	my	mother	was	from	Massachusetts.	We
ate	 in	 the	 typically	middle-class	WASP	American	way	of	 the	 teens	and
twenties—a	big	prime-rib	roast	of	beef	for	the	traditional	family	Sunday
lunch	of	twelve	to	fourteen	people.	If	not	beef	we	might	have	a	fine,	big,
well-aged	 leg	 of	 lamb—always	 cooked	 medium	 gray,	 never	 pinky-red
rare,	and	always	served	with	mint	sauce	as	well	as	gravy.	Or	there	would
be	 a	 fat	 roasted	 chicken	 with	 creamed	 onions	 and	 mashed	 potatoes.
Always	an	enthusiastic	carnivore,	I	particularly	remember	the	beef,	not
only	rib	roasts	but	also	magnificent	big	well-marbled	porterhouse	steaks.
They	were	full	of	real	beefy	flavor	in	those	days,	and	they	were	juicy.	Of
course,	that	was	the	happy	era	when	emphasis	was	on	the	quality	of	the
beef,	not	the	fat	content.	Our	family	cooking	was	essentially	simple	and
straightforward,	 and	 since	 it	 was	 California	 we	 always	 had	 plenty	 of
fresh	fruits	and	vegetables.

As	to	specifics,	I	remember	aspics.	Jellied	madrilene	was	a	favorite
fancy	 soup	of	 the	period,	a	beef	 consommé	 flavored	with	 fresh	 tomato
and	topped	with	a	splash	of	whipped	cream—that	was	before	sour	cream
came	upon	us.	Melba	toast	was	a	standard	accompaniment	to	the	soup	at
ladies’	luncheons—and	there	were	many	of	them	then	because	running	a
household	 rather	 than	 having	 a	 career	 gave	 many	 women	 the	 leisure
time.	These	 carefully	orchestrated	meals	often	 featured	a	 large	molded
ring	of	tomato	aspic,	its	center	filled	with	chicken,	crab,	or	lobster	salad.

I	 cannot	 forget	 one	 ladies’	 lunch	 back	 in	 the	 1950s.	 Our	 hostess
proudly	 led	 us	 to	 our	 seats	 around	 a	 nicely	 appointed	 table	where	we
each	 sat	 down	 to	 a	 pretty	 china	 plate	 upon	 which	 stood	 an	 upright,
somewhat	 phallic-shaped	 molded	 aspic	 holding	 in	 suspension	 diced
green	 grapes,	 diced	 marshmallows,	 and	 diced	 bananas.	 Surrounded
lavishly	 but	 neatly	 with	 squirts	 of	 whipped	 cream,	 this	 lovingly



constructed	 edifice	 rested	 on	 several	 leaves	 of	 iceberg	 lettuce	 far	 too
small	 to	 hide	 anything	 under.	 After	 the	 main	 course,	 and	 grandly
brought	 in	 to	 the	 acclaim	 of	 the	 guests,	 was	 a	 very	 large	 and	 high
coconut	 cake,	 almost	 certainly	 made	 from	 a	 cake	 mix	 and,	 again,
constructed	with	utmost	care.	That	was	a	quite	typical,	dressy	example
of	the	period,	created	earnestly	and	with	the	most	generous	intentions.
When	Paul	and	I	married	in	the	mid	1940s	I	had	very	little	kitchen

experience,	 but	 since	 his	mother	was	 a	 fine	 cook	 and	 he	 had	 lived	 in
France,	 I	 went	 into	 it	 seriously	 with	 Gourmet	 magazine	 and	 Joy	 of
Cooking	 as	my	guides.	 It	 took	hours	 to	get	dinner	on	 the	 table,	 but	he
was	 encouraging.	 A	 year	 or	 so	 after	 our	 marriage	 he	 was	 offered	 a
position	at	the	American	embassy	in	Paris.
It	was	a	dream	fulfilled.	I	had	always	yearned	to	know	France,	and

Paul,	 having	 lived	 there	 for	 several	 years	 as	 a	 penniless	 young	 man,
dreamed	of	 returning.	He	had	a	gift	 for	 languages	 and	 spoke	beautiful
French.	 As	 for	me,	 although	 I	 had	 taken	 French	 all	 during	my	 school
years,	it	was	taught	in	that	useless	old-fashioned	way	where	you	rarely
heard	 the	 spoken	 language	 but	 you	 knew	 the	 declensions	 of	 all	 the
verbs.	 Thus,	 I	 could	 neither	 speak	 French	 nor	 understand	 it.	We	were
fortunate	indeed	to	rent	the	top	floor	of	a	fine	old	Louis	XVI-style	private
house,	and	as	soon	as	we	settled	ourselves	I	enrolled	in	the	Berlitz	school
of	 languages	 for	 two	hours	every	day.	Then,	when	 I	had	a	 foot	on	 the
language,	I	enrolled	in	the	Cordon	Bleu	cooking	school.	With	Paul’s	help
plus	 the	Berlitz,	and	especially	being	at	 the	Cordon	Bleu	where	at	 that
time	all	 the	 lessons	were	 in	French,	conversation	was	slowly	beginning
to	come.
Nobody	I	knew,	either	American	or	French,	seemed	at	all	interested

in	 la	 cuisine	 française.	 My	 American	 colleagues	 had	 little	 femmes	 de
ménage	 who	 did	 the	 housekeeping,	 shopping,	 and	 cooking,	 and	 I	 was
considered	 more	 than	 a	 little	 odd	 because	 I	 did	 all	 the	 cooking	 and
marketing—such	 fun!—as	 well	 as	 the	 serving	 when	 we	 had	 company.
Then	 one	 day	 a	 friend	 in	 the	 embassy	 introduced	me	 to	 Simone	 Beck
Fischbacher—a	 tall,	 blond,	 vivacious	 Frenchwoman,	 known	 as	 Simca.
She	was	passionate	about	cooking,	had	grown	up	in	a	household	of	fine
food,	and	had	taken	many	lessons	with	the	Cordon	Bleu	school’s	master
chef,	Henri	Pellaprat.	We	took	to	each	other	at	once,	and	she	introduced
me	to	Le	Cercle	des	Gourmettes,	a	French	ladies’	gastronomical	club	that



met	 every	 other	 Tuesday	 to	 cook	 and	 eat	 lunch	 in	 the	 kitchens	 of	 the
electric	company.
The	 members	 of	 Les	 Gourmettes	 were	 mostly	 in	 their	 sixties	 and

seventies	and	came	 just	 for	 the	 luncheon.	Simca’s	 friend	and	colleague
Louisette	Bertholle	was	also	a	member,	and	the	three	of	us	made	a	point
of	arriving	at	9:00	a.m.	so	that	we	could	work	with	the	chef.	We	helped
in	 the	 preparation	 of	 wonderfully	 elaborate	 dishes	 such	 as	 stuffed
pheasants,	poached	oysters	served	in	classic	wine	sauces,	and	beautifully
molded	 desserts.	 What	 a	 marvelous	 opportunity	 it	 was	 for	 me,	 a
foreigner,	 to	 be	 accepted	 in	 a	 totally	 French	 atmosphere	 and	 to	 be
witness	to	and	participant	in	the	preparation	of	the	most	stylish	type	of
la	 cuisine	 bourgeoise.	 My	 several	 Paris	 years	 with	 them	 gave	 me	 an
invaluable	experience	and	background.
During	this	period	some	American	friends	of	mine	asked	Louisette,

Simca,	 and	 me	 to	 give	 them	 cooking	 lessons.	 They	 wanted	 a	 real
introduction,	from	cuisine	ménagère,	such	as	how	to	boil	a	potato,	on	up
to	pâtés	en	croûte.	They	didn’t	speak	the	language	and	preferred	us	to	a
school.	 Simca,	 always	 the	 enthusiast,	 agreed,	 and	 L’Ecole	 des	 3
Gourmandes—School	of	the	3	Happy	Eaters—was	born	in	1950.	We	not
only	 conducted	 the	 classes	 ourselves,	 but	 we	 also	 enlisted	 the
professional	help	of	my	favorite	Cordon	Bleu	teacher,	Chef	Max	Bugnard.
Chef	 Bugnard	 had	 begun	 as	 a	 young	 apprentice	 in	 his	 family’s

restaurant	kitchen,	then	did	classic	“stages”	in	Paris,	on	several	luxurious
transatlantic	 steamers	 of	 the	 period,	 as	well	 as	 at	 the	 Ritz	 in	 London,
where	he	worked	briefly	under	the	great	Escoffier.	Before	World	War	II
Chef	 Bugnard	 had	 had	 his	 own	 restaurant	 in	 Bruxelles,	 Le	 Petit	 Vatel,
but	was	 forced	 to	 flee	 before	 the	 occupying	Germans.	When	 I	 became
one	of	his	pupils,	he	had	retired	from	restaurant	life	and	was	teaching.
We	 raided	 the	 Cordon	 Bleu	 again	 in	 soliciting	 the	 services	 of	 its

excellent	 pastry	 chef	 and	 teacher	 Claude	 Thilmont.	 As	 a	 younger	man
Chef	Thilmont	had	been	the	pâtissier	at	the	Café	de	Paris,	during	which
period	 he	 also	 worked	 with	 the	 author	 herself	 in	 the	 writing	 of	 her
seminal	book	 for	 the	French	home	cook,	Le	Livre	de	Cuisine	de	Mme.	E.
Saint-Ange.
You	 may	 well	 wonder	 how	 we	 were	 able	 to	 acquire	 such	 real

treasures	 in	 our	modest	 classes.	 I	 think	 that	 in	 their	 later	 years	many
chefs	of	 the	old	 school	welcomed	 teaching.	They	were	adored	by	 their



pupils,	 their	 work	 hours	 were	 civilized,	 and	 the	 pay	was	 undoubtedly
superior	 to	 what	 they	 could	 make	 in	 restaurant	 kitchens.	 We	 three
teachers	were	thus	being	subsidized	by	our	own	pupils—not	a	bad	idea!

For	 several	 years	before	we	met	one	another,	 Simca	and	Louisette
had	been	involved	in	writing	a	book	on	French	cooking	for	Americans.
They	 needed	 an	 American	 collaborator,	 and	 I	 was	 delighted	 to	 join.
Because	we	had	to	write	up	all	the	recipes	for	our	school,	the	basis	for
our	book	slowly	took	shape.	We	gave	especially	full	directions	for	all	the
dishes	we	cooked	in	class,	and	we	also	wanted	to	discuss	in	detail	hows
and	whys	and	basic	techniques.	In	general	our	aim	was	to	take	out	the
mystique	 and	 to	 make	 French	 cooking	 make	 sense.	 As	 the	 work
progressed	Paul	and	I	were	transferred	from	Paris	to	Marseilles,	and	then
to	 Germany.	 Our	 last	 post	 was	 in	 Norway,	 where	 he	 finally	 left	 the
diplomatic	service.	We	then	settled	in	our	big,	old,	gray-clapboard	three-
story	 house	 in	 Cambridge,	 Massachusetts.	 During	 this	 separation,
voluminous	recipes	and	discussions	flew	back	and	forth.

When	 at	 last	 our	 book	 was	 published	 the	 Kennedys	 were	 in	 the
White	House	and	whatever	they	did	was	news,	including	how	they	lived
and	even	what	 they	ate.	They	had	a	 talented	French	chef	 in	 residence,
René	Verdon,	and	one	read	frequently	about	their	spectacular	dinners.	In
1961	 Americans	 were	 beginning	 to	 go	 to	 Europe	 almost	 by	 droves,
taking	 but	 a	 few	 hours	 for	 the	 voyage	 by	 plane	 rather	 than	 almost	 a
week	 by	 boat.	 People	were	 interested	 in	more	 adventurous	 foods,	 and
serving	those	meals	at	home	was	becoming	a	matter	of	pride.

Simca	 came	 from	Paris	 to	 help	 launch	 the	 book—her	 first	 visit	 to
America.	Although	she	spoke	English,	she	did	so	in	a	delightfully	French
way,	 and	 was	 in	 every	 aspect	 very	 French	 indeed.	 In	 fact	 Paul	 and	 I
always	called	her	“La	Super	Française.”	The	cooking	classes	that	she	had
been	conducting	for	Americans	in	Paris	during	the	years	before	the	book
came	 out	 meant	 that	 she	 had	 friends	 and	 former	 students	 in	 various
cities	here.	It	was	she	who	suggested	we	go	out	and	drum	up	some	sales.
Book	 tours	 were	 something	 of	 a	 novelty	 then	 even	 for	 well-known
authors,	 and	 certainly	 unusual	 for	 writers	 of	 cookbooks.	 I	 don’t	 know
how	we	had	the	chutzpah,	but	off	we	went,	Simca	and	Paul	and	I.	We
had	announced	 to	our	 friends	 that	we	were	coming	and	asked	 them	to
provide	us	with	opportunities.

Our	first	stop	was	in	Chicago,	where	Simca	and	I	both	had	friends,



and	we	did	interviews	and	cooking	demonstrations	in	private	houses	and
for	 the	Chicago	Tribune.	Then	we	went	on	 to	Detroit,	 and	when	 in	San
Francisco	 we	 were	 asked	 to	 do	 a	 demonstration	 at	 one	 of	 the	 big
department	 stores.	 The	wife	 of	 the	 owner,	 in	 a	 fit	 of	 exuberance,	 had
purchased	dozens	of	madeleine	pans—the	kind	you	use	 for	 those	shell-
shaped	 little	 French	 cakes	 made	 famous	 by	 Marcel	 Proust	 in
Remembrance	 of	Things	Past.	But	nobody	 there	was	 familiar	with	 them.
Simca,	of	 course,	knew	all	about	madeleines,	 so	we	made	 them	by	 the
score	during	our	demonstrations,	 the	 audiences	 gobbled	 them,	 and	 the
store	sold	so	many	pans	it	had	to	order	more.
The	demonstration	in	my	hometown	of	Pasadena,	California,	was	in

the	 theater	 of	 a	 private	 club	 where	 there	 were	 no	 cooking	 facilities.
However,	 we	 had	 managed	 to	 procure	 a	 portable	 stove	 and	 cooktop,
buckets	for	water,	and	a	six-foot	demonstration	table,	and	were	able	to
produce	 a	 quite	 complicated	 menu.	 We	 started	 out	 with	 Roquefort
quiche,	 an	 exotic	 dish	 at	 that	 time,	 which	 you’ll	 find	 here.	 Then	 we
demonstrated	a	handsome	fish	mousse	baked	in	a	ring	mold,	an	example
of	which	is	on	this	page,	and	we	finished	with	Simca’s	signature	Queen
of	Sheba	chocolate	almond	cake,	and	my	all-time	favorite.	Looking	back
on	the	menu,	I	am	amazed	that	we	managed	such	sophisticated	food	in
such	minimal	conditions.
The	morning	 went	 off	 very	 well,	 but	 then	 we	 were	 to	 repeat	 the

performance	for	the	afternoon	demonstration.	While	Simca	and	I	had	to
stay	 onstage	 signing	 cookbooks	 and	 receiving	 the	 audience,	 my	 Paul,
who	always	volunteered	to	do	anything	that	was	needed,	was	left	alone
to	clean	up—a	sticky,	fishy,	chocolatey	mess.	And	where	did	he	wash	the
dishes?	He	took	over	the	tiny	closet-size	ladies’	room	with	its	little	sink
and	soap	dispenser,	and	he	cleaned	up	every	plate,	utensil,	and	platter.	I
often	marvel	at	this	valiant	and	uncomplaining	contribution	to	our	cause
by	a	former	diplomat	and	cultural	attaché.
Our	 tour	 ended	 in	 New	 York,	 with	 a	 dinner	 at	 the	 restaurant	 of

Dione	 Lucas,	 the	 country’s	 most	 revered	 and	 well-known	 teacher	 of
French	cooking.	When	Simca	had	arrived	in	New	York	before	our	tour,
Judith	 Jones,	 our	 young	 editor	 at	 Knopf,	 asked	 us	 whom	 we	 would
especially	like	to	meet.	I	had	always	wanted	to	know	James	Beard,	and
Simca	 wanted	 to	 see	 Dione	 Lucas,	 since	 they	 had	 mutual	 friends	 in
Normandy.	A	date	was	made	in	Dione’s	restaurant,	where	we	sat	up	at



her	counter	and	talked	while	she	made	us	her	famous	omelets	for	lunch.
She	and	Simca	had	immediately	started	an	animated	conversation	about
Normandy,	and	finally	Dione	said	to	Simca,	“I	want	to	give	you	a	dinner
party!”	What	unheard-of	generosity!	We	fixed	a	date	in	December,	when
we	were	to	have	finished	our	tour.

We	had	numerous	 telephone	calls	with	Dione	during	our	 trip,	 and
one	endless	conversation	between	Simca	and	our	future	hostess	involved
a	pay	telephone	at	Disneyland,	and	multiple	quarters	supplied	by	Paul.
The	 menu	 was	 finally	 agreed	 upon.	 Dione	 was	 to	 prepare	 the	 first
course,	 her	 renowned	 filets	 of	 sole	 in	 a	 splendid	 classical	 white	 wine
sauce,	 and	 the	 dessert.	 We	 were	 to	 furnish	 the	 main	 course,	 Epaule
d’Agneau	Viroflay—the	boned	shoulder	of	lamb	but	with	a	spinach	and
mushroom	 stuffing.	We	were	 to	 provide	 the	wines—fortunately,	 Simca
had	a	cousin	in	the	business.	We	were	also	to	supply	the	guest	list.

The	three	of	us	professional	neophytes,	however,	had	no	friends	in
the	New	York	food	establishment,	although	we	knew	some	of	the	names.
So	we	turned	to	nice	James	Beard,	who	entered	into	the	project	with	his
usual	 enthusiasm.	 Under	 his	 guidance	 we	 invited	 all	 the	 “who’s-a-
whoms”	we	could	think	of,	and	surprisingly	almost	all	of	them	accepted
—some	thirty	or	so	people.

On	the	day	of	the	dinner,	while	Simca	and	I	were	closeted	with	our
lamb	in	my	niece’s	tiny	fourth-floor	walk-up	apartment	way	off	on	New
York’s	 east	 side,	 Paul	 took	 over	 the	 front	 of	 the	 house.	 He	 found	 a
printer	 to	 produce	 the	 menus	 in	 record	 time.	 He	 made	 out	 the	 place
cards,	 arranged	 the	 seating,	 and	 even	 opened	 the	wine	 just	 before	 the
guests	arrived.	Kind	James	Beard	got	there	early	and	introduced	us	and
our	Knopf	 friends,	 Judith	 Jones	 and	Bill	Koshland,	 to	 all	 the	 guests	 as
they	arrived.	It	was	a	wonderful	dinner,	everyone	had	a	good	time,	and
no	one	left	until	after	midnight.

That	was	our	beginning.	We	had	 received	a	marvelously	 favorable
review	from	Craig	Claiborne,	the	influential	food	editor	of	the	New	York
Times,	and	we	even	appeared	on	NBC-TV’s	morning	Today	show.	A	few
months	later,	while	Public	Television	was	still	“Educational	Television,”
our	local	Boston	station	decided	to	enlarge	its	programming	from	almost
exclusively	 academic	 “talking	 heads”	 to	 a	 more	 diverse	 menu.	 They
inaugurated	 an	 art	 program	 and	 a	 science	 program,	 and	 I	 was	 asked
about	 trying	 out	 a	 cooking	 session.	 I	 had	 already	 done	 a	 book	 review



with	 them,	 which	 involved,	 besides	 talk,	 the	 then	 highly	 unusual
methods	of	making	a	tossed	French	omelet	and	the	beating	of	egg	whites
in	a	big	copper	bowl.	We	agreed	to	try	out	three	pilot	programs,	which
appeared	in	the	summer	of	1962.

The	 station	 put	 us	 in	 the	 charge	 of	 Russell	Morash,	 then	 a	 young
producer	 of	 science	 programs,	 now	 the	well-known	master	 of	This	Old
House,	The	Victory	Garden,	and	other	successful	series.	They	also	gave	me
Ruth	 Lockwood	 as	 associate	 producer—she	 had	 been	with	 the	 Eleanor
Roosevelt	 series.	 Ruthie	 and	 I	 worked	 closely	 together,	 with	 Paul	 in
attendance,	to	block	out	three	half-hour	shows.	They	were	on	coq	au	vin,
that	 famous	 chicken	 stew	 in	 red	wine,	 see	 this	 page,	 a	 non-collapsible
cheese	soufflé,	 titled	as	an	unmolded	soufflé,	and	French	omelets,	 fully
described	and	illustrated,	see	this	page.

The	first	was	shown	on	a	Monday	in	July,	at	8:00	p.m.	The	evening
was	so	hot	and	humid,	and	we	had	no	air-conditioning,	that	we	set	the
television	out	 in	 the	garden,	 turned	on	a	 large	 fan,	and	watched	while
dining	with	friends.	Our	other	two	shows	in	succeeding	weeks	gathered
an	 appreciable	 audience	 even	 for	 that	 time	 of	 year.	 Although	 Dione
Lucas	had	hosted	the	first	full	television	cooking	series,	she	had	been	off
the	air	 for	 several	 seasons,	 and	we	had	 the	only	one	at	 that	 time.	The
station	asked	us	if	we	would	do	thirteen	more—a	year’s	fifty-two	weeks,
by	the	way,	are	divided	into	four	thirteen-week	sessions.	We	agreed,	and
The	French	Chef	was	launched,	following	the	general	ideas	in	this	book.

Why	The	French	Chef,	since	I	am	neither	the	one	nor	the	other?	The
first	 reason	was	 that	 I	 always	hoped	we	would	have	 some	 real	 French
chefs	on	 the	shows.	We	never	managed	 that	until	 later	on.	The	second
and	more	 important	reason:	The	title	was	short,	 it	described	the	shows
as	real	French	cooking,	and,	of	equal	significance,	it	fit	on	a	single	line
in	 the	TV	guides.	 It	 seemed	that	a	goodly	number	of	people	wanted	to
know	about	la	cuisine	française,	and	it	was	an	almost	immediate	success.
At	first	we	were	on	only	in	the	Boston	area,	then	Pittsburgh	took	us	up,
then	San	Francisco,	finally	New	York—and	I	felt	we	were	made!	WGBH-
Boston	asked	us	to	do	thirteen	more,	we	continued	on,	and	the	television
shows	 certainly	 helped	 the	 book.	 We	 even	 made	 the	 cover	 of	 Time
magazine	at	one	point.

This	 fortieth	 anniversary	 edition	 is	 essentially	 the	 same	 book	 that
first	 came	 out	 in	 1961,	 which	was	 reedited	 in	 1983	 to	 bring	 it	 up	 to



date,	 especially	 because	 the	 food	 processor	 had	 appeared	 in	 American
kitchens.	Before	the	arrival	of	that	incomparable	machine,	we	did	have
the	 electric	 blender	 and	 heavy	 duty	 mixer,	 but	 the	 food	 processor
revolutionized	many	otherwise	almost	hopelessly	onerous	 tasks	such	as
the	making	of	fish	mousses	and	quenelles.	It	simplified	such	often	tricky
procedures	as	pie	doughs,	and	made	fast	work	of	routine	dog	work	like
mushroom	dicing,	cheese	grating,	bread	crumbing,	and	onion	slicing.
Mastering	 the	Art	 of	 French	Cooking	 is	 just	what	 the	 title	 says.	 It	 is

how	 to	 produce	 really	 wonderful	 food—food	 that	 tastes	 good,	 looks
good,	 and	 is	 a	 delight	 to	 eat.	 That	 doesn’t	 mean	 it	 has	 to	 be	 fancy
cooking,	 although	 it	 can	 be	 as	 elaborate	 as	 you	wish.	 It	 simply	means
careful	 cooking,	 la	 cuisine	 soignée,	 by	 people	who	 know	what	 they	 are
doing.	 According	 to	 me,	 if	 you	 are	 thoroughly	 skilled	 in	 French
techniques,	because	 the	 repertoire	 is	 so	vast,	you	have	 the	background
for	almost	any	type	of	cuisine.	In	other	words,	and	at	the	risk	of	creating
mayhem	in	some	circles,	I	think	you	are	better	as	an	Italian,	Mexican,	or
even	Chinese	cook	when	you	have	a	solid	French	foundation.
There	is	certainly	nothing	particularly	difficult	about	the	basics.	It	is

a	question	of	getting	started,	and	of	 learning	how	to	pick	 the	best	and
freshest	 ingredients,	 and	 of	 knowing,	 reading,	 seeing,	 or	 being	 shown
how	 to	 hold	 the	 knife,	 chop	 the	 onion,	 peel	 the	 asparagus,	 make	 the
butter	and	flour	roux,	and	above	all	of	taking	it	seriously.	If	you	are	not
used	 to	 slicing	 potatoes	 by	 hand	 or	 peeling,	 seeding,	 and	 juicing
tomatoes	you	will	be	slow	and	a	little	clumsy	at	first.	However,	once	you
decide	 you	 are	 really	 going	 to	 do	 it	 right,	 you	 will	 find	 that	 with
surprisingly	little	practice	you	are	mastering	the	techniques.
The	 recipes	 here	 are	 thoroughly	 detailed	 since	 this	 is	 a	 teaching

book.	How	about	eight	pages	on	making	a	simple	omelet?	You’ve	got	all
the	directions	 and	 if	 you	 can	 read,	 you	 can	 cook.	You	 are	 learning	by
doing,	and	 if	 the	dish	 is	 to	 turn	out	as	 it	 should,	no	essential	direction
can	be	 left	 out.	How	 far,	 for	 instance,	 should	 the	 chicken	be	 from	 the
heat	element	when	you	are	broiling	 it?	Five	 to	 six	 inches.	Or	how	 fast
should	the	oil	be	beaten	in	when	you	are	making	the	garlic-and-mustard
coating	 for	 a	 roast	 leg	 of	 lamb?	 Drop	 by	 drop.	 Every	 detail	 takes	 up
space,	making	some	actually	quite	simple	recipes	look	long.
Certainly	 one	 of	 the	 important	 requirements	 for	 learning	 how	 to

cook	 is	 that	 you	 also	 learn	 how	 to	 eat.	 If	 you	 don’t	 know	 how	 an



especially	 fine	dish	 is	 supposed	 to	 taste,	how	can	you	produce	 it?	 Just
like	becoming	an	expert	in	wine—you	learn	by	drinking	it,	the	best	you
can	 afford—you	 learn	 about	 great	 food	 by	 finding	 the	 best	 there	 is,
whether	simple	or	luxurious.	Then	you	savor	it,	analyze	it,	and	discuss	it
with	your	companions,	and	you	compare	it	with	other	experiences.
In	the	1950s,	when	this	book	was	conceived,	and	on	into	the	1980s,

we	in	this	country	pretty	well	ate	as	we	liked	with	little	or	no	attention
paid	to	lashings	of	the	best	butter	and	the	heaviest	cream.	You	will	note
this	 indulgence	here,	especially	in	sauces,	where	you	reduce	them	with
cream	or	where	you	swirl	in	fresh	butter	a	generous	tablespoon	at	a	time
to	render	them	smooth,	shining,	and	luscious.	I	have	not	changed	any	of
these	 original	 proportions	 or	 directions,	 because	 this	 is	 the	 way	 the
dishes	were	conceived.	However,	do	use	your	own	judgment	as	to	how
much	or	how	little	of	the	enrichments	you	care	to	use,	since	the	amounts
will	not	interfere	with	the	basic	recipe.	In	my	case,	for	instance,	I	have
been	 known	 to	 substitute	 a	 modest	 teaspoon	 for	 the	 generous
tablespoon.
Finally,	I	do	think	the	way	to	a	full	and	healthy	life	is	to	adopt	the

sensible	system	of	“small	helpings,	no	seconds,	no	snacking,	and	a	little
bit	of	everything.”	Above	all—have	a	good	time!
What	a	happy	 task	you	have	 set	 for	yourself!	The	pleasures	of	 the

table	are	infinite.	Toujours	bon	appétit!

THE	STORY	OF	“MASTERING”	AT	KNOPF
by	Judith	Jones

IN	JUNE	OF	1960	a	hefty	manuscript—a	treatise	on	French	cooking	by
an	American	woman,	 Julia	Child,	 and	 two	French	 ladies,	 Simone	Beck
and	 Louisette	 Bertholle—landed	 on	 my	 desk.	 I	 had	 been	 an	 editor	 at
Knopf	for	about	three	years,	working	primarily	on	translations	of	French
books.	But	it	was	no	secret	that	I	had	a	passion	for	French	cooking,	so	I
was	the	logical	person	to	read	it.
The	 manuscript	 had	 been	 sent	 down	 from	 Cambridge	 by	 Avis	 de

Voto,	who	worked	 as	 a	 scout	 for	 the	 Knopfs.	 She	was	 the	wife	 of	 the
historian	and	writer	Bernard	de	Voto,	who	had	had	a	lively	transatlantic
correspondence	with	Julia	on	the	subject	of	knives	as	a	result	of	a	piece
he	had	done	 in	The	Atlantic	Monthly.	Avis	 soon	became	 involved	when



she	heard	that	Julia	was	working	on	a	cookbook	in	Paris	with	Mesdames
Beck	and	Bertholle,	and	she	offered	to	try	to	find	an	American	publisher.
Her	first	submission	met	rejection,	the	publisher’s	comment	being,	Why
would	any	American	want	to	know	this	much	about	French	cooking?

Well,	 it	 so	 happened	 that	 I	 did.	 As	 I	 turned	 the	 pages	 of	 this
manuscript,	 I	 felt	 that	 my	 prayers	 had	 been	 answered.	 I	 had	 lived	 in
Paris	for	three	and	a	half	years—at	just	about	the	same	time	the	Childs
were	 there,	although	our	paths	had	never	crossed—and	most	of	what	 I
learned	then	about	cooking	I	absorbed	from	the	butcher,	the	baker,	the
greengrocer,	and	the	fishmonger.	I	would	ask	questions	of	them	all,	and
then	back	in	my	tiny	kitchen	I	would	try	to	remember	what	the	butcher’s
wife	had	told	me	about	making	frites	or	the	poissonière	about	sautéing	a
dorade.

When	I	returned	to	the	States,	I	realized	how	totally	inadequate	the
few	 books	 that	 dealt	 with	 French	 food	 really	 were.	 They	were	 simply
compendiums	 of	 shorthand	 recipes	 and	 there	was	 no	 effort	 to	 instruct
the	home	cook.	Techniques	were	not	explained,	proper	ingredients	were
not	discussed,	and	there	was	no	indication	in	a	recipe	of	what	to	expect
and	how	to	rectify	mistakes.	So	the	home	cook,	particularly	an	American
home	cook,	was	flying	blind.

Yet	here	were	all	the	answers.	I	pored	over	the	recipe,	for	instance,
for	 a	 beef	 stew	 and	 learned	 the	 right	 cuts	 of	 meat	 for	 braising,	 the
correct	 fat	 to	use	 (one	 that	would	not	burn),	 the	 importance	of	drying
the	meat	and	browning	it	in	batches,	the	secret	of	the	herb	bouquet,	the
value	of	sautéing	the	garnish	of	onions	and	mushrooms	separately.	I	ran
home	 to	make	 the	 recipe—and	my	 first	 bite	 told	me	 that	 I	 had	 finally
produced	an	authentic	French	boeuf	bourguignon—as	good	as	one	I	could
get	in	Paris.	This,	I	was	convinced,	was	a	revolutionary	cookbook,	and	if
I	was	so	smitten,	certainly	others	would	be.

Below	is	the	report	I	wrote	at	the	time	on	“The	French	Cookbook,”
which	 I	 hoped	 would	 convince	 the	 Knopfs	 that	 this	 book	 would	 be	 a
credit	 to	 their	 imprint.	 I	 also	 enlisted	 the	 help	 of	 a	 senior	 colleague,
Angus	 Cameron.	 He	 had	 been	 an	 editor	 at	 Bobbs-Merrill	 when	 Joy	 of
Cooking	was	published	and	he	loved	to	say	that	he	had	enough	larceny	in
his	soul	to	know	just	how	to	pitch	a	book.	So	his	report,	I’m	convinced,
did	the	trick	(also	included	is	his	final	paragraph).

The	rest	is	history.	In	the	fall	of	1961	we	published	Mastering	the	Art



of	French	Cooking	 (incidentally,	Alfred	Knopf,	when	 I	 told	him	 the	 title
we	 had	 settled	 on,	 said	 if	 anyone	 would	 buy	 a	 book	 by	 that	 title,	 he
would	 eat	 his	 hat),	 and	 after	 Craig	 Claiborne	 pronounced	 the	 book	 a
classic,	 the	 book	 went	 into	 a	 second	 printing	 before	 Christmas.	 Of
course,	 when	 Julia	 went	 on	 television	 the	 following	 summer	 as	 the
French	 Chef	 all	 of	 America	 fell	 in	 love	 with	 her.	 But	 everything	 she
taught	on	camera	was	grounded	in	this	seminal	book—understand	what
you	are	cooking,	do	it	with	care,	use	the	right	ingredients	and	the	proper
equipment,	and,	above	all,	enjoy	yourself.

My	Report	on	French	Cookbook	by	Julia	Child,
Simone	Beck,	and	Louisette	Bertholle

I’ve	 had	 this	 French	 cookbook	 for	 Americans	 for	 almost	 two
months	 now,	 have	 read	 it	 through,	 tried	 innumerable	 recipes,
some	simple	and	some	challenging,	and	I	think	it’s	not	only	first-
rate	 but	 unique.	 I	 don’t	 know	 of	 another	 book	 that	 succeeds	 so
well	 in	 defining	 and	 translating	 for	 Americans	 the	 secrets	 of
French	 cuisine.	 The	 reason?	 Because	 the	 authors	 emphasize
technique—not	 the	 number	 of	 recipes	 they	 can	 cram	 into	 a
volume,	nor	the	exotic	nature	of	the	dishes.	Reading	and	studying
this	 book	 seems	 to	 me	 as	 good	 as	 taking	 a	 basic	 course	 at	 the
Cordon	 Bleu.	 Actually	 it’s	 better	 than	 that	 because	 the	 authors’
whole	 focus	 is	 on	 how	 to	 translate	 the	 tricks	 learned	 to	 the
problems	that	confront	you	at	home	(i.e.,	the	differences	in	meat
cuts,	utensils,	materials).	It	is	not	a	book	for	the	lazy	but	for	the
cook	who	wants	 to	 improve,	 to	take	that	giant	step	from	fair-to-
good	accomplishment	to	that	subtle	perfection	that	makes	French
cooking	 an	 art.	 I	 swear	 that	 I	 learned	 something	 from	 this
manuscript	every	few	pages.
As	 to	 recipes,	 they	 have	 very	 intelligently	 selected	 the	 dishes
that	are	really	the	backbone	of	the	classic	cuisine.	(Attached	is	the
table	 of	 contents.)	 The	 approach	 is	 to	 introduce	 the	 general
subject	 first:	 what	 to	 look	 for	 in	 buying,	 best	 utensil	 to	 use,
timing,	 testing	 for	 doneness,	 tricks	 to	 improve.	 Then	 there	 is
usually	a	master	recipe,	presented	in	painstaking	detail,	followed
by	 variations,	 different	 choices	 of	 sauces	 for	 embellishing	 the
same	dish.	There	is	a	good	deal	of	text	devoted	not	to	cuisine	lore



but	 to	practical	detail;	 you	are	 seldom	directed	 to	do	 something
without	 being	 told	 why.	 The	 authors	 are	 perfectionists,
opinionated,	 and	 culinary	 snobs	 in	 the	 best	 sense—that	 is,	 they
will	approve	of	a	frozen	short	cut,	when	time	demands	it,	but	they
tell	 you	 how	 to	 add	 some	 tastiness	 to	 the	 packaged	 good.	 They
also	give	of	themselves;	their	dos	and	don’ts	are	not	arbitrary	but
they	 stress	 that	 their	 method	 is	 one	 that	 they	 have	 arrived	 at
through	experimentation.
Finally,	 I	 do	 not	 believe	 that	 this	 book	 will	 in	 any	 way	 hurt
others,	such	as	Donon’s	Classic	French	Cuisine,	on	our	list.	The	fact
is	 that	 it	 enhances	other	French	 cookery	books	because	one	 can
apply	 techniques	 learned	 in	 it	 in	 order	 to	 use	 effectively	 the
recipes	offered	so	sketchily,	by	comparison,	in	all	the	other	books,
and	 it	 should	 be	 so	 promoted.	 I	 think	 this	 book	 will	 become	 a
classic.

From	Angus	Cameron’s	Report
This	manuscript	is	an	astonishing	achievement	and	there	is	simply
nothing	like	it.	Cooks	will	know	this	by	word	of	mouth	very	soon,
I’m	 sure.	 I	 think	we	 should	 have	 this	 confidence	 and	 venture	 it
with	the	knowledge	that	others	will	have	to	look	to	their	 laurels
when	this	one	is	available.

THE	RECEPTION	OF	THE	BOOK	IN	1961

“Probably	 the	 most	 comprehensive,	 laudable,	 and	 monumental
work	 on	 [French	 cuisine]	 was	 published	 this	 week,	 and	 it	 will
probably	remain	as	the	definitive	work	for	nonprofessionals	…	[It
is]	a	masterpiece.”

—Craig	Claiborne’s	review	in	the	New	York
Times	when	Mastering	the	Art	of	French	Cooking
was	first	published	on	October	16,	1961

“I	only	wish	that	I	had	written	it	myself.”
—James	Beard

THE	INFLUENCE	OF	“MASTERING”



OVER	THE	LAST	FORTY	YEARS

“Julia	Child	paved	the	way	for	Chez	Panisse	and	so	many	others
by	 demystifying	 French	 food	 and	 by	 reconnecting	 pleasure	 and
delight	with	cooking	and	eating	at	the	table.	She	brought	forth	a
culture	of	American	ingredients	and	gave	us	all	the	confidence	to
cook	with	them	in	the	pursuit	of	flavor.”

—Alice	Waters,	Chez	Panisse

“It’s	hard	to	believe	that	forty	years	have	passed	since	wonderful
Julia	 freed	 the	 American	 public	 from	 their	 fears	 of	 cooking
French.	 By	 doing	 so,	 she	 greatly	 expanded	 the	 audience	 for	 all
serious	food	writers.	Her	demystification	prepared	that	public	for
the	 rest	 of	 us.	 I	 believe	 that	 the	 television	 shows	 based	 on	 that
landmark	book	did	even	more	to	encourage	reluctant	cooks	to	try
their	hands	…	much	to	our	benefit.”

—Mimi	Sheraton

“Julia	Child	was	the	opposite	of	the	mid-western,	mid-American,
mid-century,	 middlebrow	 food	 I	 grew	 up	 on.	 She	 was	 also	 the
antithesis	of	 the	women	 I	 saw	cooking,	all	of	whom	had	serious
June	 Lockhart	 aspirations.	 Julia,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 turned
imperfection	 into	 a	 hoot	 and	 a	 holler.	 She	 seemed	 to	 teach
cooking,	 but	 she	 was	 really	 celebrating	 the	 human,	 with	 all	 its
flaws	and	appetites.	I	was	a	goner	the	first	time	I	heard	her	voice,
which	happened	to	be	while	I	was	a	cook	in	a	feminist	restaurant
that	 served	 nonviolent	 cuisine.	 If	 it	 weren’t	 for	 Julia	 Child,	 I
might	never	have	moved	past	brown	rice	and	tofu.	Worse,	I	might
still	 be	 afraid	 of	 being	 less	 than	 perfect.	 Cooking	 through
Mastering	the	Art	of	French	Cooking,	I	learned	how	to	cook	without
fear	because	I	got	over	fearing	failure.	Julia	Child	gave	an	entire
generation	this	gift—and	dinner,	too.”

—Molly	O’Neill

“The	more	I	have	come	to	know	Julia	over	the	years,	the	more	I
realize	that	Julia,	the	friend,	the	author,	the	TV	superstar,	are	one
and	the	same.	Mastering	the	Art	of	French	Cooking	was	one	of	the



most	 influential	 books	 in	 twentieth-century	 America.	 It	 was	 the
book,	 more	 than	 any	 other,	 that,	 combined	 with	 her	 television
shows,	 taught	 Americans	 how	 to	 cook	 simple	 and	 not-so-simple
classic	 French	 dishes.	 Like	 Julia	 herself,	 the	 book	 is	 a	 classic,	 a
catalyst	 in	 the	 refinement	of	American	 culture.	My	own	copy	of
Volume	 One	 (a	 1975	 edition)	 is	 so	 worn	 that	 the	 duct	 tape
holding	 it	 together	 looks	 natural.	 Although	 this	 book	 wasn’t
intended	 for	 professionals,	 I	 knew	 a	 few	 young	 American	 chefs
who,	 like	 me,	 referred	 to	 it	 often	 because	 Julia	 was	 a	 trusted
secret	 mentor,	 and	 her	 recipes	 were	 clear-cut	 and	 dependable.
They	still	are.”

—Jasper	White,	Summer	Shack

“The	recipes	 in	Mastering	 the	Art	of	French	Cooking	are	classics—
dishes	 that	 taste	 so	 good	 because	 the	 ingredients	work	 together
with	 no	 need	 for	 gimmicks.	 Julia’s	 opening	 sentence	 in	 the
foreword	to	the	’83	edition	couldn’t	be	more	true:	‘This	is	a	book
for	the	American	cook	who	can	be	unconcerned	on	occasion	with
budgets,	 waistlines,	 time	 schedules	 …	 or	 anything	 else	 which
might	interfere	with	the	enjoyment	of	something	wonderful	to	eat
[emphasis	mine].’
I	remember	the	excitement	and	pride	I	 felt	when	I	 first	served
Julia’s	Veal	Orloff.	The	Soubise,	on	its	own,	that	glorious	mixture
of	melting	onion	and	rice,	has	never	left	my	repertoire.	But	mostly
my	old	Volume	One	wears	 its	badge	of	use	with	all	 those	errant
chocolate	 fingerprints	wandering	across	 its	 torn	 cover	as	 I	make
Julia’s	Le	Marquis	or	Soufflé	au	Chocolat.
This	book	will	 teach	you	to	cook,	show	you	How	and	tell	you
Why!”

—Lydia	Shire,	Biba

“I	remember	it	was	in	the	early	1970s	when	I	first	began	to	pour
through	Mastering	 the	Art	of	French	Cooking.	 I	was	 in	heaven.	All
this	technique	that	I	knew	nothing	about	all	laid	out	in	English!	It
was	all	very	meticulous	and	the	descriptions	were	so	detailed	and
that’s	just	what	I	needed	because	I	had	no	experience	as	a	cook.	I
told	my	mother	what	 I	was	reading	and	she	said,	 ‘Oh	that	crazy



woman?	She’s	way	too	complicated	for	me	and	the	way	I	cook.’	I
never	 listened	 much	 to	 my	 mother	 back	 then	 and	 just	 kept	 on
reading.	 Today,	 JULIA,	 as	 I	 call	 it,	 remains	 the	 book	 I	 turn	 to
when	I	need	to	know	how	to	do	something.”

—Gordon	Hamersley,	Hamersley’s	Bistro

“Long	 before	 there	 was	 a	 TV	 Food	 Network	 or	 Celebrity	 Chefs,
there	was	 Julia	Child.	 The	 first	 cookbook	my	mother	 purchased
for	our	home	was	Mastering	the	Art	of	French	Cooking.	It	was	this
book,	along	with	Julia’s	first	television	series	and	her	obvious	joy
for	cooking,	that	helped	influence	me	to	enter	the	culinary	field.
Always	 warm	 and	 gracious,	 still	 working	 hard	 sharing	 her
knowledge	and	love	of	life,	Julia	continues	to	be	an	inspiration	to
all	who	are	privileged	to	know	her	and	choose	to	be	part	of	this
profession.	She	is	and	will	always	be	the	‘Grand	Lady	of	Cooking.’
Thank	you,	Julia,	for	your	encouragement	and	friendship.”

—David	Cecchini,	Wine	Cask

“Mastering	 the	 Art	 of	 French	 Cooking	 was	 one	 of	 my	 first
introductions	to	my	foundation	of	understanding	the	art	of	French
cooking.	The	combination	of	reading	Julia’s	book,	working	in	the
kitchen,	and	watching	her	television	shows	helped	lead	me	to	my
beginnings	 in	 serious	 cuisine.	 Julia	 is	 a	 dear	 friend	 and	 a	 great
cook—the	 grande	 dame	 of	 cooking,	who	 has	 touched	 all	 of	 our
lives	with	her	immense	respect	and	appreciation	of	cuisine.”

—Emeril	Lagasse,	Emeril’s	Restaurant

“Julia	 has	 slowly	 but	 surely	 altered	 our	 way	 of	 thinking	 about
food.
She	has	taken	the	fear	out	of	the	term	‘haute	cuisine.’	She	has

increased	gastronomic	awareness	a	thousandfold	by	stressing	the
importance	 of	 good	 foundation	 and	 technique,	 and	 she	 has
elevated	 our	 consciousness	 to	 the	 refined	 pleasures	 of	 dining.
Through	the	years	her	shows	have	kept	me	in	rapt	attention,	and
her	humor	has	kept	me	in	stitches.
She	 is	 a	 national	 treasure,	 a	 culinary	 trendsetter,	 and	 a	 born

educator	beloved	by	all.”
—Thomas	Keller,	The	French	Laundry



—Thomas	Keller,	The	French	Laundry

“1961	was	 the	 year	 that	 gave	 us	 three	 important	 and	 enjoyable
events:

Picasso	painted	his	Still	Life	with	a	Lamp;
Breakfast	 at	Tiffanys	had	 its	premier	with	Audrey
Hepburn;
Mastering	 the	Art	of	French	Cooking	was	published
by	Knopf,	starring	our	very	own	Julia	Child.

Trying	 to	avoid	 the	current	 fashion	 for	exaggeration,	 let	me	 just
say	 that	 this	volume	not	only	clarified	what	 real	French	 food	 is,
but	simply	taught	us	to	cook.”

—George	Lang,	Café	des	Artistes

“1961	 A.D.	 Julia	 Child’s	 Mastering	 the	 Art	 of	 French	 Cooking	 is
published.	 Her	 black-and-white	 TV	 show	 on	 WGBH	 in	 Boston
soon	follows.	Child	is	one	of	the	great	teachers	of	the	millennium:
She	 is	 intelligent	 and	 charismatic,	 and	 her	 undistinguished
manual	 skills	 are	 not	 daunting	 to	 her	 viewers.	 An	 entire
generation	of	ambitious	American	home	cooks	is	instantly	born.”

—Jeffrey	Steingarten,	conferring	the	Vogue	Millennial
Food	and	Drink	Awards	on	“those	events	and	persons	who
have	most	advanced	the	joys	and	beauties	of	mealtime

over	the	previous	thousand	years”



FOREWORD
TO	THE

1983	EDITION

THE	 FIRST	 EDITION	 of	Mastering	 was	 conceived	 and	 written	 in	 the	 late
1950s,	and	many	changes,	particularly	in	kitchen	equipment,	have	taken
place	since	then.	Probably	the	most	significant	has	been	the	appearance
of	the	electric	food	processor,	which	has	made	amazingly	light	work	out
of	many	formerly	long	and	arduous	cooking	procedures	like	the	mincing
of	 mushrooms	 and	 onions,	 the	 slicing	 of	 potatoes,	 the	 making	 of
mayonnaise,	 pie	 doughs,	 many	 yeast	 doughs,	 as	 well	 as	 purées	 and
mousses.	 We	 have	 redone	 numerous	 recipes	 here	 to	 include	 the
processor,	but	had	it	been	around	when	we	began,	we	would	have	had	a
host	 of	 dishes	 created	 because	 of	 it.	 No-stick	 pans	 were	 not	 available
then.	All-purpose	flour	needed	sifting,	and	that	required	a	cumbersome
measuring	 system,	 which	 we	 have	 eliminated	 here.	 Chocolate	 has
changed	character,	and	that	gave	rise	to	a	different	melting	technique	as
well	as	a	new	chocolate	 soufflé	 recipe.	Rice	 is	now	enriched	and	 takes
shorter	 cooking,	 and	 we	 have	 revised	 a	 number	 of	 meat-thermometer
readings.	Little	details	here	and	there	wanted	fixing,	little	remarks	now
and	 then	 needed	 updating,	 and	 a	 few	 drawings	 have	 been	 added	 or
improved.

On	the	whole,	however,	it	is	the	same	book,	written	for	those	who
love	to	cook—it	is	a	primer	of	classical	French	cuisine.	And	no	wonder
that	cuisine	has	always	been	and	will	always	remain	so	popular,	said	a
friend	of	ours;	it	just	makes	such	wonderfully	good	eating!

S.	B.	and	J.	C.
Bramafam	and	Santa	Barbara

February	1983



FOREWORD

THIS	 IS	 A	 BOOK	 for	 the	 servantless	 American	 cook	 who	 can	 be
unconcerned	 on	 occasion	 with	 budgets,	 waistlines,	 time	 schedules,
children’s	 meals,	 the	 parent-chauffeur-den-mother	 syndrome,	 or
anything	 else	 which	 might	 interfere	 with	 the	 enjoyment	 of	 producing
something	 wonderful	 to	 eat.	 Written	 for	 those	 who	 love	 to	 cook,	 the
recipes	are	as	detailed	as	we	have	felt	they	should	be	so	the	reader	will
know	exactly	what	is	involved	and	how	to	go	about	it.	This	makes	them
a	bit	 longer	 than	usual,	and	some	of	 the	recipes	are	quite	 long	 indeed.
No	out-of-the-ordinary	ingredients	are	called	for.	In	fact	the	book	could
well	be	titled	“French	Cooking	from	the	American	Supermarket,”	for	the
excellence	 of	 French	 cooking,	 and	 of	 good	 cooking	 in	 general,	 is	 due
more	to	cooking	techniques	than	to	anything	else.	And	these	techniques
can	 be	 applied	 wherever	 good	 basic	 materials	 are	 available.	 We	 have
purposely	 omitted	 cobwebbed	 bottles,	 the	 patron	 in	 his	 white	 cap
bustling	 among	 his	 sauces,	 anecdotes	 about	 charming	 little	 restaurants
with	gleaming	napery,	and	so	 forth.	Such	romantic	 interludes,	 it	 seems
to	us,	 put	French	 cooking	 into	a	never-never	 land	 instead	of	 the	Here,
where	 happily	 it	 is	 available	 to	 everybody.	 Anyone	 can	 cook	 in	 the
French	manner	 anywhere,	with	 the	 right	 instruction.	 Our	 hope	 is	 that
this	book	will	be	helpful	in	giving	that	instruction.

Cooking	 techniques	 include	 such	 fundamentals	 as	 how	 to	 sauté	 a
piece	 of	meat	 so	 that	 it	 browns	 without	 losing	 its	 juices,	 how	 to	 fold
beaten	egg	whites	 into	a	 cake	batter	 to	 retain	 their	maximum	volume,
how	to	add	egg	yolks	to	a	hot	sauce	so	they	will	not	curdle,	where	to	put
the	tart	in	the	oven	so	it	will	puff	and	brown,	and	how	to	chop	an	onion



quickly.	 Although	 you	 will	 perform	 with	 different	 ingredients	 for
different	dishes,	the	same	general	processes	are	repeated	over	and	over
again.	As	you	enlarge	your	repertoire,	you	will	 find	that	 the	seemingly
endless	 babble	 of	 recipes	 begins	 to	 fall	 rather	 neatly	 into	 groups	 of
theme	 and	 variations;	 that	 homard	 à	 l’américaine	 has	 many	 technical
aspects	 in	 common	 with	 coq	 au	 vin,	 that	 coq	 au	 vin	 in	 turn	 is	 almost
identical	 in	 technique	 to	 boeuf	 bourguignon;	 all	 of	 them	 are	 types	 of
fricassees,	so	follow	the	fricassee	pattern.	In	the	sauce	realm,	the	cream
and	egg-yolk	sauce	for	a	blanquette	of	veal	is	the	same	type	as	that	for	a
sole	in	white-wine	sauce,	or	for	a	gratin	of	scallops.	Eventually	you	will
rarely	 need	 recipes	 at	 all,	 except	 as	 reminders	 of	 ingredients	 you	may
have	forgotten.
All	of	the	techniques	employed	in	French	cooking	are	aimed	at	one

goal:	 how	 does	 it	 taste?	 The	 French	 are	 seldom	 interested	 in	 unusual
combinations	 or	 surprise	 presentations.	With	 an	 enormous	 background
of	traditional	dishes	to	choose	from	(1000	Ways	to	Prepare	and	Serve	Eggs
is	the	title	of	one	French	book	on	the	subject)	the	Frenchman	takes	his
greatest	pleasure	from	a	well-known	dish	impeccably	cooked	and	served.
A	perfect	navarin	of	lamb,	for	instance,	requires	a	number	of	operations
including	brownings,	simmerings,	strainings,	skimmings,	and	flavorings.
Each	 of	 the	 several	 steps	 in	 the	 process,	 though	 simple	 to	 accomplish,
plays	a	critical	role,	and	if	any	is	eliminated	or	combined	with	another,
the	texture	and	taste	of	the	navarin	suffer.	One	of	the	main	reasons	that
pseudo-French	 cooking,	 with	 which	 we	 are	 all	 too	 familiar,	 falls	 far
below	 good	 French	 cooking	 is	 just	 this	matter	 of	 elimination	 of	 steps,
combination	 of	 processes,	 or	 skimping	 on	 ingredients	 such	 as	 butter,
cream—and	 time.	 “Too	much	 trouble,”	 “Too	 expensive,”	 or	 “Who	will
know	the	difference”	are	death	knells	for	good	food.
Cooking	 is	 not	 a	 particularly	 difficult	 art,	 and	 the	more	 you	 cook

and	 learn	 about	 cooking,	 the	more	 sense	 it	makes.	 But	 like	 any	 art	 it
requires	practice	and	experience.	The	most	important	ingredient	you	can
bring	to	it	is	love	of	cooking	for	its	own	sake.

SCOPE

A	 complete	 treatise	 on	 French	 cooking	 following	 the	 detailed
method	 we	 have	 adopted	 would	 be	 about	 the	 size	 of	 an	 unabridged



dictionary;	even	printed	on	Bible	paper,	it	would	have	to	be	placed	on	a
stand.	To	produce	a	book	of	convenient	size,	we	have	made	an	arbitrary
selection	 of	 recipes	 that	we	 particularly	 like,	 and	which	we	 hope	will
interest	our	readers.	Many	splendid	creations	are	not	included,	and	there
are	 tremendous	 omissions.	 One	 may	 well	 ask:	 “Why	 is	 there	 no	 pâte
feuilletée?	Where	 are	 the	 croissants?”	 These	 are	 the	 kinds	 of	 recipes,	 in
our	 opinion,	 which	 should	 be	 demonstrated	 in	 the	 kitchen,	 as	 each
requires	 a	 sense	 of	 touch	which	 can	 only	 be	 learned	 through	 personal
practice	 and	 observation.	Why	 only	 five	 cakes	 and	 no	 petits	 fours?	 No
boiled,	souffléed,	or	mashed	potatoes?	No	zucchini?	No	tripe?	No	poulet
à	la	Marengo?	No	green	salads?	No	pressed	duck	or	sauce	rouennaise?	No
room!

A	NOTE	ON	THE	RECIPES

All	of	the	master	recipes	and	most	of	the	subrecipes	in	this	book	are
in	 two-column	 form.	 On	 the	 left	 are	 the	 ingredients,	 often	 including
some	special	piece	of	equipment	needed;	on	the	right	is	a	paragraph	of
instruction.	Thus	what	 to	cook	and	how	to	cook	 it,	at	each	step	 in	 the
proceedings,	 are	 always	 brought	 together	 in	 one	 sweep	 of	 the	 eye.
Master	recipes	are	headed	in	large,	bold	type;	a	special	sign,	 ,	precedes
those	which	are	followed	by	variations.	Most	of	the	recipes	contain	this
sign,	(*),	in	the	body	of	the	text,	indicating	up	to	what	point	a	dish	may
be	 prepared	 in	 advance.	Wine	 and	 vegetable	 suggestions	 are	 included
with	all	master	recipes	for	main-course	dishes.
Our	primary	purpose	 in	 this	book	 is	 to	 teach	you	how	 to	cook,	 so

that	 you	will	 understand	 the	 fundamental	 techniques	 and	gradually	be
able	 to	 divorce	 yourself	 from	 a	 dependence	 on	 recipes.	 We	 have
therefore	divided	each	category	of	 food	into	related	groups	or	sections,
and	each	recipe	in	one	section	belongs	to	one	family	of	techniques.	Fish
filets	 poached	 in	 white	 wine,	 are	 a	 good	 example,	 or	 the	 chicken
fricassees	or	 the	group	of	quiches.	 It	 is	our	hope	 that	you	will	 read	 the
introductory	pages	preceding	each	chapter	and	section	before	you	start
in	on	a	recipe,	as	you	will	then	understand	what	we	are	about.	For	the
casual	 reader,	 we	 have	 tried	 to	 make	 every	 recipe	 stand	 on	 its	 own.
Cross	references	are	always	a	problem.	If	there	are	not	enough,	you	may
miss	 an	 important	 point,	 and	 if	 there	 are	 too	 many	 you	 will	 become



enraged.	Yet	 if	 every	 technique	 is	 explained	every	 time	 it	 comes	up,	 a
short	recipe	is	long,	and	a	long	one	forbidding.

QUANTITIES

Most	of	 the	 recipes	 in	 this	book	are	 calculated	 to	 serve	 six	people
with	 reasonably	 good	 appetites	 in	 an	 American-style	 menu	 of	 three
courses.	 The	 amounts	 called	 for	 are	 generally	 twice	 what	 would	 be
considered	 sufficient	 for	 a	 typical	 French	 menu	 comprising	 hors
d’oeuvre,	soup,	main	course,	salad,	cheese,	and	dessert.	We	hope	that	we
have	arrived	at	quantities	which	will	be	correct	for	most	of	our	readers.
If	a	recipe	states	that	the	ingredients	listed	will	serve	4	to	6	people,	this
means	the	dish	should	be	sufficient	for	4	people	if	the	rest	of	your	menu
is	small,	and	for	6	if	it	is	large.

SOME	WORDS	OF	ADVICE

Our	years	of	teaching	cookery	have	impressed	upon	us	the	fact	that
all	too	often	a	debutant	cook	will	start	in	enthusiastically	on	a	new	dish
without	 ever	 reading	 the	 recipe	 first.	 Suddenly	 an	 ingredient,	 or	 a
process,	 or	 a	 time	 sequence	 will	 turn	 up,	 and	 there	 is	 astonishment,
frustration,	 and	 even	 disaster.	 We	 therefore	 urge	 you,	 however	 much
you	 have	 cooked,	 always	 to	 read	 the	 recipe	 first,	 even	 if	 the	 dish	 is
familiar	 to	 you.	 Visualize	 each	 step	 so	 you	 will	 know	 exactly	 what
techniques,	 ingredients,	 time,	and	equipment	are	required	and	you	will
encounter	no	surprises.	Recipe	language	is	always	a	sort	of	shorthand	in
which	a	lot	of	information	is	packed,	and	you	will	have	to	read	carefully
if	you	are	not	to	miss	small	but	important	points.	Then,	to	build	up	your
over-all	 knowledge	 of	 cooking,	 compare	 the	 recipe	mentally	 to	 others
you	are	familiar	with,	and	note	where	one	recipe	or	technique	fits	 into
the	larger	picture	of	theme	and	variations.

We	have	 not	 given	 estimates	 for	 the	 time	 of	 preparation,	 as	 some
people	 take	 half	 an	 hour	 to	 slice	 three	 pounds	 of	 mushrooms	 while
others	take	five	minutes.

Pay	 close	 attention	 to	 what	 you	 are	 doing	 while	 you	 work,	 for
precision	 in	 small	 details	 can	 make	 the	 difference	 between	 passable
cooking	 and	 fine	 food.	 If	 a	 recipe	 says,	 “cover	 casserole	 and	 regulate
heat	 so	 liquid	 simmers	 very	 slowly,”	 “heat	 the	 butter	 until	 its	 foam



begins	to	subside,”	or	“beat	the	hot	sauce	into	the	egg	yolks	by	driblets,”
follow	it.	You	may	be	slow	and	clumsy	at	first,	but	with	practice	you	will
pick	up	speed	and	style.
Allow	 yourself	 plenty	 of	 time.	 Most	 dishes	 can	 be	 assembled,	 or

started,	or	partially	cooked	in	advance.	If	you	are	not	an	old	campaigner,
do	not	plan	more	than	one	long	or	complicated	recipe	for	a	meal	or	you
will	wear	yourself	out	and	derive	no	pleasure	from	your	efforts.
If	food	is	to	be	baked	or	broiled,	be	sure	your	oven	is	hot	before	the

dish	goes	in.	Otherwise	soufflés	will	not	rise,	piecrusts	will	collapse,	and
gratinéed	dishes	will	overcook	before	they	brown.
A	pot	 saver	 is	a	 self-hampering	cook.	Use	all	 the	pans,	bowls,	and

equipment	you	need,	but	soak	them	in	water	as	soon	as	you	are	through
with	them.	Clean	up	after	yourself	frequently	to	avoid	confusion.
Train	 yourself	 to	 use	 your	 hands	 and	 fingers;	 they	 are	 wonderful

instruments.	Train	yourself	also	to	handle	hot	foods;	this	will	save	time.
Keep	your	knives	sharp.
Above	all,	have	a	good	time.

S.	B.,	L.	B.,	J.	C.

July	1961



Acknowledgments

OUR	FRIENDS,	students,	families,	and	husbands	who	have	gracefully	and
often	 courageously	 acted	 as	 guinea	 pigs	 for	 years	 are	 owed	 a	 special
thank	you	from	the	authors.	But	there	are	others	toward	whom	we	feel
particular	gratitude	because	of	help	of	a	different	kind.	The	Agricultural
Research	Service	of	the	U.S.	Department	of	Agriculture	has	been	one	of
our	 greatest	 sources	 of	 assistance	 and	 has	 unfailingly	 and	 generously
answered	 all	 sorts	 of	 technical	 questions	 ranging	 from	 food	 to	 plastic
bowls.	The	Meat	 Institute	of	Chicago,	 the	National	Livestock	and	Meat
Board,	and	the	Poultry	and	Egg	National	Board	have	answered	floods	of
inquiries	with	prompt	and	precise	information.	Wonderfully	helpful	also
have	 been	 the	 Fish	 and	 Wildlife	 Service	 of	 the	 Department	 of	 the
Interior,	and	the	California	Department	of	Fish	and	Game.	Sessions	with
L’École	 Professionelle	 de	 la	 Boucherie	 de	 Paris	 and	 with	 the	 Office
Scientifique	et	Technique	de	la	Pêche	Maritime	have	been	invaluable	in	our
research	 on	 French	 meat	 cuts	 and	 French	 fish.	 During	 our	 years	 of
practical	kitchen-training	in	Paris,	Chef	de	Cuisine	Max	Bugnard	and	Chef
Pâtissier	Claude	Thillmont	have	been	our	beloved	teachers.	More	recently
we	 have	 also	 had	 the	 good	 fortune	 to	work	with	Mme	Aimée	Cassiot,
whose	long	years	as	a	professional	cordon	bleu	in	Paris	have	given	her	a
vast	store	of	working	knowledge	which	she	has	willingly	shared	with	us.
We	 are	 also	 greatly	 indebted	 to	 Le	 Cercle	 des	 Gourmettes	 whose	 bi-
monthly	cooking	sessions	in	Paris	have	often	been	our	proving	grounds,
and	whose	culinary	ideas	we	have	freely	used.	We	give	heartfelt	thanks
to	 our	 editors	 whose	 enthusiasm	 and	 hard	 work	 transformed	 our
manuscript-in-search-of-a-publisher	 into	 this	book.	 Finally	 there	 is	Avis
DeVoto,	our	foster	mother,	wet	nurse,	guide,	and	mentor.	She	provided
encouragement	 for	 our	 first	 steps,	 some	 ten	 years	 ago,	 as	 we	 came
tottering	 out	 of	 the	 kitchen	with	 the	 gleam	 of	 authorship	 lighting	 our
innocent	faces.



CONTENTS

Other	Books	by	This	Author
Dedication
Introduction	to	the	Anniversary	Edition
Foreword	to	the	1983	Edition
Foreword
Acknowledgments
Illustrations

KITCHEN	EQUIPMENT
DEFINITIONS
INGREDIENTS
MEASURES
TEMPERATURES
CUTTING:	Chopping,	Slicing,	Dicing,	and	Mincing
WINES
CHAPTER	I	–	SOUPS
CHAPTER	II	–	SAUCES
White	Sauces
Brown	Sauces
Tomato	Sauces
The	Hollandaise	Family
The	Mayonnaise	Family
Vinaigrettes
Hot	Butter	Sauces
Cold	Flavored	Butters
List	of	Miscellaneous	Sauces
Stocks	and	Aspics



CHAPTER	III	—	EGGS
Poached	Eggs
Shirred	Eggs
Eggs	in	Ramekins
Scrambled	Eggs
Omelettes

CHAPTER	IV	—	ENTRÉES	AND	LUNCHEON	DISHES
Pie	Dough	and	Pastry	Shells
Quiches,	Tarts,	and	Gratins
Soufflés	and	Timbales
Pâte	à	Choux,	Puffs,	Gnocchi,	and	Quenelles
Crêpes
Cocktail	Appetizers

CHAPTER	V	—	FISH
Fish	Filets	Poached	in	White	Wine
Two	Recipes	from	Provence
Two	Famous	Lobster	Dishes
Mussels
List	of	Other	Fish	Dishes

CHAPTER	VI	—	POULTRY
Roast	Chicken
Casserole-roasted	Chicken
Sautéed	Chicken
Fricasseed	Chicken
Broiled	Chicken
Chicken	Breasts
Duck
Goose

CHAPTER	VII	—	MEAT
Beef
Lamb	and	Mutton
Veal
Pork
Ham
Cassoulet
Liver
Sweetbreads
Brains
Kidneys



CHAPTER	VIII	—	VEGETABLES
Green	Vegetables
Carrots,	Onions,	and	Turnips
Lettuce,	Celery,	Endive,	and	Leeks
The	Cabbage	Family
Cucumbers
Eggplant
Tomatoes
Mushrooms
Chestnuts
Potatoes
Rice

CHAPTER	IX	—	COLD	BUFFET
Cold	Vegetables
Composed	Salads
Aspics
Molded	Mousses
Pâtés	and	Terrines
List	of	Other	Cold	Dishes

CHAPTER	X	—	DESSERTS	AND	CAKES
Fundamentals
Sweet	Sauces	and	Fillings
Custards,	Mousses,	and	Molded	Desserts
Sweet	Soufflés
Fruit	Desserts
Tarts
Crêpes
Clafoutis
Babas	and	Savarins
Ladyfingers
Cakes

INDEX

A	Note	About	the	Authors



Illustrations

Kitchen	Equipment
How	to	Measure	Flour
How	to	Use	a	Knife:	Chopping,	Slicing,	Dicing,	and	Mincing
Two	Omelette-making	Methods
How	to	Make	Pastry	Dough	and	Pastry	Shells
How	to	Beat	Egg	Whites
How	to	Fold	Beaten	Egg	Whites	into	a	Soufflé	Mixture
Soufflé	Molds
Puff	Shells
Forming	Quenelles
Making	Crêpes
How	to	Truss	a	Chicken
Chicken	on	a	Spit
Filet	of	Beef
The	Bone	Structure	of	a	Leg	of	Lamb
How	to	Prepare	Whole	Artichokes
How	to	Prepare	Artichoke	Hearts
How	to	Prepare	Fresh	Asparagus
How	to	Peel,	Seed,	and	Juice	Tomatoes
How	to	Mince,	Slice,	Quarter,	and	Flute	Mushrooms
How	to	Bake	a	Stuffed,	Boned	Duck	in	a	Pastry	Crust
How	to	Line	a	Dessert	Mold	with	Ladyfingers



Decorative	Designs	for	Fruit	Tarts
Baba	Mold
Savarin	Molds
How	to	Ice	a	Cake



Mastering	the	Art	of	French	Cooking

	 							THIS	SYMBOL	preceding	a	recipe	title	indicates	that
variations	follow.

(*)						WHEREVER	you	see	this	symbol	in	the	body	of	recipe	texts
you	may	prepare	the	dish	ahead	of	time	up	to	that
point,	then	complete	the	recipe	later.



KITCHEN	EQUIPMENT
Batterie	de	Cuisine

THEORETICALLY	 A	 GOOD	 COOK	 should	 be	 able	 to	 perform	 under	 any
circumstances,	but	cooking	is	much	easier,	pleasanter,	and	more	efficient
if	 you	 have	 the	 right	 tools.	 Good	 equipment	 which	will	 last	 for	 years
does	 not	 seem	 outrageously	 expensive	 when	 you	 realize	 that	 a	 big,
enameled-iron	 casserole	 costs	 no	more	 than	 a	 6-rib	 roast,	 that	 a	 large
enameled	skillet	can	be	bought	for	the	price	of	a	leg	of	lamb,	and	that	a
fine	paring	knife	may	cost	 less	 than	 two	 small	 lamb	chops.	One	of	 the
best	places	to	shop	for	reasonably	priced	kitchen-ware	is	in	a	hotel-and
restaurant-supply	 house	 where	 objects	 are	 sturdy,	 professional,	 and
made	for	hard	use.

STOVES	AND	OVENS

For	top-of-stove	cooking	you	want	to	switch	from	very	high	indeed
to	 very	 low	 heat	 with	 gradations	 in	 between,	 which	 a	 restaurant	 gas
range	 can	 provide	 if	 you	 have	 the	 space	 and	 gas	 pressure	 for	 one.
Otherwise	 a	 good	 modern	 electric	 cooktop	 is	 far	 better	 than	 weak
domestic	gas	burners.

Electric	 ovens	 give	 more	 even	 heat	 for	 pastry	 baking	 (especially
meringues)	 than	 gas,	 which	 has	 surges	 of	 heat.	 Gas	 is	 desirable	 for
broiling,	but	electricity	does	well	especially	if	you	have	a	rheostat	heat
control	setting.	One	of	each	is	ideal!

POTS,	PANS,	AND	CASSEROLES



Pots,	 pans,	 and	 casseroles	 should	 be	 heavy-bottomed	 so	 they	 will
not	tip	over,	and	good	heat	conductors	so	that	 foods	will	not	stick	and
scorch.	 With	 the	 exception	 of	 heavy	 tin-lined	 copper	 (expensive	 to
maintain),	enameled	iron	or	stainless-steel-lined	heavy	aluminum	is	our
choice.	 The	 smooth	 surface	 does	 not	 discolor	 foods,	 and	 it	 is	 easy	 to
clean.	Stainless	steel	with	a	wash	of	copper	on	the	bottom	for	looks	is	a
poor	heat	conductor—the	copper	bottom	should	be	⅛	inch	thick	to	be	of
any	 value.	 Stainless	 steel	 with	 a	 cast	 aluminum	 bottom,	 on	 the	 other
hand,	 is	 good,	 as	 the	 thick	 aluminum	 spreads	 the	 heat.	 Glazed
earthenware	is	all	right	as	long	as	it	has	not	developed	cracks	where	old
cooking	 grease	 collects	 and	 exudes	 whenever	 foods	 are	 cooked	 in	 it.
Pyrex	and	heatproof	porcelain	are	fine	but	fragile.	Thick	aluminum	and
iron,	though	good	heat	conductors,	will	discolor	foods	containing	white
wine	or	egg	yolks.	Because	of	the	discoloration	problem,	we	shall	specify
an	enameled	saucepan	in	some	recipes	to	indicate	that	any	nonstaining
material	 is	 to	 be	 used,	 from	 enamel	 to	 stainless	 steel,	 lined	 copper,
pyrex,	glazed	pottery,	or	porcelain.

A	Note	on	Copper	Pots
Copper	pots	 are	 the	most	 satisfactory	of	 all	 to	 cook	 in,	 as	 they	hold
and	spread	the	heat	well,	and	their	tin	lining	does	not	discolor	foods.
A	great	many	tourist	or	decorative	types	are	currently	sold;	these	are
thin	 and	 glittering,	 and	 have	 shiny	 brass	 handles.	 To	 get	 the	 full
benefit	out	of	cooking	in	copper,	the	metal	must	be	⅛	inch	thick,	and
the	 handle	 should	 be	 of	 heavy	 iron.	 The	 interior	 of	 the	 pot	 is	 lined
with	a	wash	of	tin,	which	must	be	renewed	every	several	years	when
it	wears	off	and	the	copper	begins	to	show	through.	A	copper	pot	can
still	be	used	when	this	happens	if	 it	 is	scrubbed	just	before	you	cook
with	it,	and	if	the	food	is	removed	as	soon	as	it	is	done.	If	cooked	food
remains	in	a	poorly	lined	pot,	some	kind	of	a	toxic	chemical	reaction
can	take	place.	It	is	thus	best	to	have	the	pot	re-tinned	promptly.
In	 addition	 to	 re-tinning,	 there	 is	 the	 cleaning	 problem,	 as	 copper

tarnishes	 quickly.	 There	 are	 fast	 modern	 copper	 cleaners	 available.	 A
good	homemade	mixture	is	half	a	cup	of	white	vinegar,	and	¼	cup	each
of	 table	 salt	 and	 scouring	 powder.	 Rub	 the	 mixture	 over	 the	 copper,
using	 steel	wool	 if	 the	 pot	 is	 badly	 tarnished,	 then	 rinse	 in	 hot	water.



The	 tin	 lining	 is	 cleaned	with	 steel	wool	 and	 scouring	powder,	 but	 do
not	expect	it	ever	to	glitter	brightly	again	once	you	have	used	the	pot	for
cooking.	(All	cleaning,	alas,	removes	infinitesimal	bits	of	the	tin	lining.)
Never	 let	a	copper	pot	 sit	 empty	over	heat,	or	 the	 tin	 lining	will	melt.
For	the	same	reason,	watch	your	heat	when	browning	meats	in	copper.	If
the	tin	begins	to	glisten	brightly	in	places,	lower	your	heat.

No-stick	Pots	and	Pans
Since	 our	 first	 edition,	 pans	 with	 no-stick	 surfaces	 have	 appeared
everywhere,	 and	 modern	 improvements	 have	 made	 their	 surfaces
increasingly	more	resistant.	We	are	enthusiastic	about	no-stick	cookie
sheets,	 cake	 pans,	 muffin	 tins,	 and	 especially	 no-stick	 frying	 pans.
What	 a	 particular	 blessing	 they	 are	 for	 omelettes,	 sautéed	 potatoes,
and	hash.	Treat	no-stick	surfaces	with	care,	however:	use	wooden	or
plastic	utensils,	hide	your	pans	 from	kooks	and	non-cooks,	and	don’t
expect	the	surface	to	last	forever.
Any	of	the	following	items	come	in	enameled	cast	iron:

Oval	Casseroles

Oval	casseroles	are	more	practical	than	round	ones	as	they	can	hold
a	 chicken	or	 a	 roast	 of	meat	 as	well	 as	 a	 stew	or	 a	 soup.	A	good	pair
would	 be	 the	 2-quart	 size	 about	 6	 by	 8	 inches	 across	 and	 3½	 inches
high;	and	a	7-to	8-quart	size	about	9	by	12	 inches	across	and	6	 inches
high.

Baking	Dishes



Round	 and	 oval	 baking	 dishes	 can	 be	 used	 for	 roasting	 chicken,
duck,	or	meats,	or	can	double	as	gratin	dishes.

Saucepans

Saucepans	in	a	range	of	sizes	are	essential.	One	with	a	metal	handle
can	also	be	set	in	the	oven.

Chef’s	Skillet	and	Sauté	Pan

A	chef’s	skillet,	poêle,	has	sloping	sides	and	is	used	for	browning	and
tossing	small	pieces	of	 food	 like	mushrooms	or	chicken	 livers;	 the	 long
handle	 makes	 it	 easy	 to	 toss	 rather	 than	 turn	 the	 food.	 A	 sauté	 pan,
sautoir,	has	straight	sides	and	is	used	for	sautéing	small	steaks,	liver,	or



veal	 scallops,	 or	 foods	 like	 chicken	 that	 are	 browned	 then	 covered	 to
finish	their	cooking	in	the	sauté	pan.

Besides	 the	 usual	 array	 of	 pots,	 roasters,	 vegetable	 peelers,	 spoons,	 and
spatulas,	here	are	some	useful	objects	which	make	cooking	easier:

Knives	and	Sharpening	Steel

A	knife	should	be	as	sharp	as	a	razor	or	it	mashes	and	bruises	food
rather	than	chopping	or	cutting	it.	It	can	be	considered	sharp	if	just	the
weight	of	it,	drawn	across	a	tomato,	slits	the	skin.	No	knife	will	hold	a
razor-edge	 for	 long.	 The	 essential	 point	 is	 that	 it	 take	 an	 edge,	 and
quickly.	Plain	rustable	steel	is	the	easiest	to	sharpen	but	discoloration	is
an	 annoying	 problem.	 Good	 stainless	 steel	 knives	 are	 available	 in
cookware	 and	 cutlery	 shops,	 and	 probably	 the	 best	 way	 to	 test	 their
quality	 is	 to	 buy	 a	 small	 one	 and	 try	 it	 out.	 The	 French	 chef’s	 knives,
pictured	here,	are	the	most	useful	general-purpose	shapes	for	chopping,
mincing,	 and	 paring.	 If	 you	 cannot	 find	 good	 knives,	 consult	 your
butcher	or	a	professionally	trained	chef.
Knives	 should	 be	 washed	 separately	 and	 by	 hand	 as	 soon	 as	 you

have	finished	using	them.	Tarnished	blades	are	cleaned	easily	with	steel
wool	and	scouring	powder.	A	magnetic	holder	screwed	to	the	wall	 is	a
practical	way	of	keeping	knives	always	within	 reach	and	 isolated	 from
other	 objects	 that	 could	 dull	 and	 dent	 the	 blades	 by	 knocking	 against
them.

Wooden	Spatulas	and	Rubber	Scrapers



A	 wooden	 spatula	 is	 more	 practical	 for	 stirring	 than	 a	 wooden
spoon;	its	flat	surfaces	are	easily	scraped	off	on	the	side	of	a	pan	or	bowl.
You	 will	 usually	 find	 wooden	 spatulas	 only	 at	 stores	 specializing	 in
French	 imports.	 The	 rubber	 spatula,	 which	 can	 be	 bought	 almost
anywhere,	is	indispensable	for	scraping	sauces	out	of	bowls	and	pans,	for
stirring,	folding,	creaming,	and	smearing.

Wire	Whips	or	Whisks

Wire	 whips,	 or	 whisks,	 are	 wonderful	 for	 beating	 eggs,	 sauces,
canned	 soups,	 and	 for	 general	mixing.	 They	 are	 easier	 than	 the	 rotary
egg	beater	because	you	use	one	hand	only.	Whisks	range	from	minute	to
gigantic,	 and	 the	 best	 selections	 are	 in	 restaurant-supply	 houses.	 You
should	 have	 several	 sizes	 including	 the	 balloon	 whip	 for	 beating	 egg
whites	at	the	far	left;	its	use	is	illustrated.

Bulb	Baster	and	Poultry	Shears



The	bulb	baster	is	particularly	good	for	basting	meats	or	vegetables
in	a	casserole,	and	for	degreasing	roasts	as	well	as	basting	them.	Some
plastic	models	collapse	in	very	hot	fat;	a	metal	tube-end	is	usually	more
satisfactory.	 Poultry	 shears	 are	 a	 great	 help	 in	 disjointing	 broilers	 and
fryers;	regular	steel	is	more	practical	than	stainless,	as	the	shears	can	be
sharpened	more	satisfactorily.

Drum	Sieve	and	Pestle

The	drum	sieve,	 tamis,	 is	used	 in	France	when	one	 is	 instructed	 to
force	 food	 through	 a	 sieve.	 The	 ingredients,	 such	 as	 pounded	 lobster
shells	and	butter,	are	placed	on	 the	 screen	and	rubbed	 through	 it	with
the	pestle.	An	ordinary	sieve	placed	over	a	bowl	or	a	food	mill	can	take
the	place	of	a	tamis.

The	Vegetable	Mill	(or	Food	Mill)	and	Garlic	Press



Two	wonderful	 inventions,	 the	vegetable	mill	and	 the	garlic	press.
The	vegetable	mill	purées	 soups,	 sauces,	vegetables,	 fruits,	 raw	 fish,	or
mousse	mixtures.	The	best	type	has	3	removable	disks	about	5½	inches
in	diameter,	one	for	fine,	one	for	medium,	and	one	for	coarse	puréeing.
The	garlic	press	will	purée	a	whole,	unpeeled	clove	of	garlic,	or	pieces	of
onion.

The	Food	Processor

This	marvelous	machine	came	into	our	kitchens	in	the	mid-seventies
—fifteen	 years	 after	 the	 first	 edition	 of	 this	 book!	 The	 processor	 has
revolutionized	 cooking,	 making	 child’s	 play	 of	 some	 of	 the	 most



complicated	dishes	of	the	haute	cuisine—mousses	in	minutes.	Besides	all
kinds	of	rapid	slicing,	chopping,	puréeing,	and	the	like,	 it	makes	a	fine
pie	crust	dough,	mayonnaise,	and	many	of	the	yeast	doughs.	No	serious
cook	 should	 be	 without	 a	 food	 processor,	 especially	 since	 respectable
budget	models	can	be	bought	very	reasonably.

Mortar	and	Pestle

Small	mortars	 of	wood	 or	 porcelain	 are	 useful	 for	 grinding	 herbs,
pounding	nuts,	 and	 the	 like.	 The	 large	mortars	 are	 of	marble,	 and	 are
used	 for	 pounding	 or	 puréeing	 shellfish,	 forcemeats,	 and	 so	 on.	 The
electric	blender,	meat	grinder,	and	food	mill	take	the	place	of	a	mortar
and	pestle	in	many	instances.

Heavy-Duty	Electric	Mixer

1.	Whip,	for	eggs
2.	Dough	Hook
3.	Flat	Beater,	for	heavy	batters,	ground	meat,	etc.



A	 heavy-duty	 electric	 mixer	 makes	 light	 work	 of	 heavy	 meat
mixtures,	 fruit	 cake	 batters,	 and	 yeast	 doughs	 as	 well	 as	 beating	 egg
whites	 beautifully	 and	 effortlessly.	 Its	 efficient	whip	 not	 only	 revolves
about	 itself,	but	circulates	around	 the	properly	designed	bowl,	keeping
all	 of	 the	 mass	 of	 egg	 whites	 in	 motion	 all	 of	 the	 time.	 Other	 useful
attachments	 include	 a	 meat	 grinder	 with	 sausage-stuffing	 horn	 and	 a
hot-water	jack	which	attaches	to	the	bottom	of	the	stainless	steel	bowl.
It’s	expensive,	but	 solidly	built	and	a	 life-long	aid	 to	anyone	who	does
lots	of	cooking.



DEFINITIONS

WE	 HAVE	 TRIED,	 in	 this	book,	 to	use	ordinary	American	cooking	terms
familiar	 to	 anyone	who	 has	 been	 around	 a	 kitchen,	 but	 we	 list	 a	 few
definitions	here	to	avoid	possible	misunderstanding.

BASTE,	arroser	To	spoon	melted	butter,	fat,	or	liquid	over	foods.
BEAT,	fouetter	To	mix	foods	or	liquids	thoroughly	and	vigorously	with
a	 spoon,	 fork,	 or	 whip,	 or	 an	 electric	 beater.	 When	 you	 beat,	 train
yourself	 to	 use	 your	 lower-arm	 and	wrist	muscles;	 if	 you	 beat	 from
your	shoulder	you	will	tire	quickly.
BLANCH,	 blanchir	 To	 plunge	 food	 into	 boiling	 water	 and	 to	 boil	 it
until	it	has	softened,	or	wilted,	or	is	partially	or	fully	cooked.	Food	is
also	 blanched	 to	 remove	 too	 strong	 a	 taste,	 such	 as	 for	 cabbage	 or
onions,	or	for	the	removal	of	the	salty,	smoky	taste	of	bacon.
BLEND,	mélanger	To	mix	foods	together	in	a	less	vigorous	way	than	by
beating,	usually	with	a	fork,	spoon,	or	spatula.
BOIL,	 bouillir	 Liquid	 is	 technically	 at	 the	 boil	 when	 it	 is	 seething,
rolling,	 and	 sending	 up	 bubbles.	 But	 in	 practice	 there	 are	 slow,
medium,	 and	 fast	 boils.	 A	 very	 slow	 boil,	when	 the	 liquid	 is	 hardly
moving	except	for	a	bubble	at	one	point,	is	called	to	simmer,	mijoter.



An	even	slower	boil	with	no	bubble,	only	the	barest	movement	on	the
surface	 of	 the	 liquid,	 is	 called	 “to	 shiver,”	 frémir,	 and	 is	 used	 for
poaching	fish	or	other	delicate	foods.
BRAISE,	braiser	To	brown	 foods	 in	 fat,	 then	cook	 them	 in	a	 covered
casserole	with	a	small	amount	of	 liquid.	We	have	also	used	the	term
for	vegetables	cooked	 in	butter	 in	a	covered	casserole,	as	 there	 is	no
English	equivalent	for	étuver.
COAT	A	 SPOON,	napper	 la	 cuillère	 This	 term	 is	 used	 to	 indicate	 the
thickness	of	a	sauce,	and	it	seems	the	only	way	to	describe	it.	A	spoon
dipped	into	a	cream	soup	and	withdrawn	would	be	coated	with	a	thin
film	 of	 soup.	Dipped	 into	 a	 sauce	 destined	 to	 cover	 food,	 the	 spoon
would	emerge	with	a	fairly	thick	coating.
DEGLAZE,	déglacer	 After	meat	 has	 been	 roasted	 or	 sautéed,	 and	 the
pan	 degreased,	 liquid	 is	 poured	 into	 the	 pan	 and	 all	 the	 flavorful
coagulated	cooking	juices	are	scraped	into	it	as	it	simmers.	This	is	an
important	step	in	the	preparation	of	all	meat	sauces	from	the	simplest
to	 the	 most	 elaborate,	 for	 the	 deglaze	 becomes	 part	 of	 the	 sauce,
incorporating	 into	 it	 some	of	 the	 flavor	of	 the	meat.	Thus	 sauce	and
meat	are	a	logical	complement	to	each	other.
DEGREASE,	dégraisser	To	remove	accumulated	fat	from	the	surface	of
hot	liquids.

Sauces,	Soups,	and	Stocks
To	remove	accumulated	fat	from	the	surface	of	a	sauce,	soup,	or
stock	which	is	simmering,	use	a	 long-handled	spoon	and	draw	it
over	the	surface,	dipping	up	a	thin	layer	of	fat.	It	is	not	necessary
to	remove	all	the	fat	at	this	time.
When	 the	 cooking	 is	 done,	 remove	 all	 the	 fat.	 If	 the	 liquid	 is

still	 hot,	 let	 it	 settle	 for	 5	 minutes	 so	 the	 fat	 will	 rise	 to	 the
surface.	 Then	 spoon	 it	 off,	 tipping	 the	 pot	 or	 kettle	 so	 that	 a
heavier	fat	deposit	will	collect	at	one	side	and	can	more	easily	be
removed.	 When	 you	 have	 taken	 up	 as	 much	 as	 you	 can—it	 is
never	 a	 quick	 process—draw	 strips	 of	 paper	 towels	 over	 the
surface	until	the	last	floatíng	fat	globules	have	been	blotted	up.
It	 is	 easier,	 of	 course,	 to	 chill	 the	 liquid,	 for	 then	 the	 fat



congeals	on	the	surface	and	can	be	scraped	off.

Roasts
To	remove	fat	from	a	pan	while	the	meat	is	still	roasting,	tilt	the
pan	and	scoop	out	the	fat	which	collects	in	the	corner.	Use	a	bulb
baster	or	a	big	spoon.	It	is	never	necessary	to	remove	all	the	fat	at
this	time,	just	the	excess.	This	degreasing	should	be	done	quickly,
so	your	oven	will	not	cool.	If	you	take	a	long	time	over	it,	add	a
few	extra	minutes	to	your	total	roasting	figure.
After	the	roast	has	been	taken	from	the	pan,	tilt	 the	pan,	then

with	a	spoon	or	a	bulb	baster	remove	the	fat	that	collects	in	one
corner,	 but	 do	 not	 take	 up	 the	 browned	 juices,	 as	 these	will	 go
into	your	sauce.	Usually	a	 tablespoon	or	 two	of	 fat	 is	 left	 in	 the
pan;	it	will	give	body	and	flavor	to	the	sauce.
Another	 method—and	 this	 can	 be	 useful	 if	 you	 have	 lots	 of

juice—is	to	place	a	trayful	of	ice	cubes	in	a	sieve	lined	with	2	or	3
thicknesses	 of	 damp	 cheesecloth	 and	 set	 over	 a	 saucepan.	 Pour
the	 fat	and	 juices	over	 the	 ice	cubes;	most	of	 the	 fat	will	collect
and	 congeal	 on	 the	 ice.	 As	 some	 of	 the	 ice	 will	 melt	 into	 the
saucepan,	rapidly	boil	down	the	juices	to	concentrate	their	flavor.

Casseroles
For	stews,	daubes,	and	other	foods	which	cook	in	a	casserole,	tip
the	casserole	and	the	fat	will	collect	at	one	side.	Spoon	it	off,	or
suck	 it	 up	with	 a	 bulb	 baster.	Or	 strain	 off	 all	 the	 sauce	 into	 a
pan,	 by	 placing	 the	 casserole	 cover	 askew	 and	 holding	 the
casserole	 in	both	hands	with	your	 thumbs	 clamped	 to	 the	 cover
while	you	pour	out	the	liquid.	Then	degrease	the	sauce	in	the	pan,
and	return	the	sauce	to	the	casserole.

New	Edition	Note:	An	efficient	degreasing	pitcher	now	exists:	pour	 in
the	hot	meat	 juices	and	 let	 the	 fat	rise	 to	 the	surface.	Pour	out	clear
juices—the	 spout	opening	 is	at	 the	bottom	of	 the	pitcher;	 stop	when
fat	appears	in	the	spout.
DICE,	couper	en	dés	To	cut	food	into	cubes	the	shape	of	dice,	usually
about	⅛	inch	in	size	as	illustrated	on	this	page.



FOLD,	 incorporer	 To	 blend	 a	 fragile	 mixture,	 such	 as	 beaten	 egg
whites,	delicately	into	a	heavier	mixture,	such	as	a	soufflé	base.	This	is
described	 and	 illustrated	 in	 the	 Soufflé	 section	on	 this	 page.	To	 fold
also	 means	 to	 mix	 delicately	 without	 breaking	 or	 mashing,	 such	 as
folding	cooked	artichoke	hearts	or	brains	into	a	sauce.
GRATINÉ	 To	 brown	 the	 top	 of	 a	 sauced	 dish,	 usually	 under	 a	 hot
broiler.	 A	 sprinkling	 of	 bread	 crumbs	 or	 grated	 cheese,	 and	 dots	 of
butter,	help	to	form	a	light	brown	covering	(gratin)	over	the	sauce.
MACERATE,	macérer;	MARINATE,	mariner	To	place	foods	in	a	 liquid
so	 they	 will	 absorb	 flavor,	 give	 off	 flavor,	 or	 become	 more	 tender.
Macerate	 is	 the	 term	 usually	 reserved	 for	 fruits,	 such	 as:	 cherries
macerated	 in	 sugar	 and	 alcohol.	 Marinate	 is	 used	 for	 meats:	 beef
marinated	 in	 red	wine.	A	marinade	 is	 a	 pickle,	 brine,	 or	 souse,	 or	 a
mixture	of	wine	or	vinegar,	oil,	and	condiments.
MINCE,	hacher	To	chop	foods	very	fine,	as	illustrated	on	this	page.
NAP,	 napper	 To	 cover	 food	 with	 a	 sauce	 which	 is	 thick	 enough	 to
adhere,	 but	 supple	 enough	 so	 that	 the	 outlines	 of	 the	 food	 are
preserved.
POACH,	pocher	Food	submerged	and	cooked	in	a	liquid	that	is	barely
simmering	or	shivering.	The	term	can	also	be	used	poetically	for	such
things	as	“chicken	breasts	poached	in	butter.”
PURÉE,	 réduire	 en	 purée	 To	 render	 solid	 foods	 into	 a	mash,	 such	 as
applesauce	or	mashed	potatoes.	This	may	be	done	in	a	mortar,	a	meat
grinder,	a	food	mill,	an	electric	blender,	or	through	a	sieve.
REDUCE,	 réduire	To	boil	down	a	 liquid,	 reducing	 it	 in	quantity,	 and
concentrating	its	taste.	This	is	a	most	important	step	in	saucemaking.
REFRESH,	 rafraîchir	 To	 plunge	 hot	 food	 into	 cold	water	 in	 order	 to
cool	it	quickly	and	stop	the	cooking	process,	or	to	wash	it	off.
SAUTÉ,	 sauter	 To	 cook	 and	 brown	 food	 in	 a	 very	 small	 quantity	 of
very	hot	fat,	usually	in	an	open	skillet.	You	may	sauté	food	merely	to
brown	it,	as	you	brown	the	beef	for	a	stew.	Or	you	may	sauté	until	the
food	 is	 cooked	 through,	 as	 for	 slices	 of	 liver.	 Sautéing	 is	 one	 of	 the
most	 important	 of	 the	 primary	 cooking	 techniques,	 and	 it	 is	 often



badly	done	because	one	of	the	following	points	has	not	been	observed:
1)	 The	 sautéing	 fat	must	 be	 very	 hot,	 almost	 smoking,	 before	 the

food	goes	 into	 the	pan,	otherwise	 there	will	 be	no	 sealing-in	of	 juices,
and	no	browning.	The	 sautéing	medium	may	be	 fat,	 oil,	 or	 butter	 and
oil.	Plain	butter	 cannot	be	heated	 to	 the	 required	 temperature	without
burning,	so	it	must	either	be	fortified	with	oil	or	be	clarified—rid	of	its
milky	residue	as	described	on	this	page.
2)	The	food	must	be	absolutely	dry.	If	 it	 is	damp,	a	layer	of	steam

develops	 between	 the	 food	 and	 the	 fat	 preventing	 the	 browning	 and
searing	process.
3)	 The	 pan	 must	 not	 be	 crowded.	 Enough	 air	 space	 must	 be	 left

between	each	piece	of	 food	or	 it	will	 steam	rather	 than	brown,	and	 its
juices	will	escape	and	burn	in	the	pan.
TOSS,	 faire	 sauter	 Instead	of	 turning	 food	with	a	 spoon	or	a	 spatula,
you	can	make	 it	 flip	over	by	 tossing	 the	pan.	The	classic	 example	 is
tossing	a	pancake	so	it	flips	over	in	mid-air.	But	tossing	is	also	a	useful
technique	for	cooking	vegetables,	as	a	toss	is	often	less	bruising	than	a
turn.	If	you	are	cooking	in	a	covered	casserole,	grasp	it	in	both	hands
with	your	thumbs	clamped	to	the	cover.	Toss	the	pan	with	an	up-and-
down,	slightly	 jerky,	circular	motion.	The	contents	will	 flip	over	and
change	cooking	levels.	For	an	open	saucepan	use	the	same	movement,
holding	 the	 handle	 with	 both	 hands,	 thumbs	 up.	 A	 back-and-forth
slide	is	used	for	a	skillet.	Give	it	a	very	slight	upward	jerk	just	as	you
draw	it	back	toward	you.



INGREDIENTS

EXCEPT	 FOR	 WINES	 AND	 SPIRITS,	 and	 possibly	 foie	 gras	 and	 truffles,	 all	 the
ingredients	called	for	in	this	book	are	available	in	the	average	American
grocery	 store.	 The	 following	 list	 is	 an	 explanation	 of	 the	 use	 of	 some
items:

BACON,	lard	de	poitrine	fumé	The	kind	of	bacon	used	in	French	recipes
is	 fresh,	 unsalted,	 and	 unsmoked,	 lard	 de	 poitrine	 frais.	 As	 this	 is
difficult	to	find	in	America,	we	have	specified	smoked	bacon;	its	taste
is	 usually	 fresher	 than	 that	 of	 salt	 pork.	 It	 is	 always	 blanched	 in
simmering	water	to	remove	its	smoky	taste.	If	this	were	not	done,	the
whole	dish	would	taste	of	bacon.

Blanched	Bacon
Place	 the	bacon	 strips	 in	a	pan	of	 cold	water,	 about	1	quart	 for
each	4	ounces.	Bring	to	the	simmer	and	simmer	10	minutes.	Drain
the	bacon	and	rinse	it	thoroughly	in	fresh	cold	water,	then	dry	it
on	paper	towels.

BUTTER,	 beurre	 French	 butter	 is	 made	 from	 matured	 cream	 rather
than	 from	 sweet	 cream,	 is	 unsalted,	 and	 has	 a	 special	 almost	 nutty
flavor.	 Except	 for	 cake	 frostings	 and	 certain	 desserts	 for	 which	 we



have	 specified	 unsalted	 butter,	 American	 salted	 butter	 and	 French
butter	are	interchangeable	in	cooking.	(Note:	It	has	recently	become	a
habit	 in	 America	 to	 call	 unsalted	 butter,	 “sweet	 butter”;	 there	 is	 an
attractive	ring	to	it.	But	technically	any	butter,	salted	or	not,	which	is
made	from	sweet,	unmatured	cream	is	sweet	butter.)

Clarified	Butter,	beurre	clarifié
When	ordinary	butter	is	heated	until	it	 liquefies,	a	milky	residue
sinks	 to	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 saucepan.	 The	 clear,	 yellow	 liquid
above	 it	 is	 clarified	 butter.	 It	 burns	 less	 easily	 than	 ordinary
butter,	 as	 it	 is	 the	 milky	 particles	 in	 ordinary	 butter	 which
blacken	 first	 when	 butter	 is	 heated.	 Clarified	 butter	 is	 used	 for
sautéing	 the	 rounds	 of	 white	 bread	 used	 for	 canapés,	 or	 such
delicate	items	as	boned	and	skinned	chicken	breasts.	It	is	also	the
base	 for	 brown	 butter	 sauce,	 and	 is	 used	 rather	 than	 fat	 in	 the
brown	 roux	 for	particularly	 fine	brown	sauces.	To	clarify	butter,
cut	it	 into	pieces	and	place	it	 in	a	saucepan	over	moderate	heat.
When	 the	 butter	 has	 melted,	 skim	 off	 the	 foam,	 and	 strain	 the
clear	yellow	 liquid	 into	a	bowl,	 leaving	 the	milky	residue	 in	 the
bottom	 of	 the	 pan.	 The	 residue	 may	 be	 stirred	 into	 soups	 and
sauces	to	serve	as	an	enrichment.

Butter	Temperatures,	Butter	Foam
Whenever	you	are	heating	butter	for	an	omelette	or	butter	and	oil
for	 a	 sauté	 your	 recipe	 will	 direct	 you	 to	 wait	 until	 the	 butter
foam	 looks	 a	 certain	 way.	 This	 is	 because	 the	 condition	 of	 the
foam	is	a	sure	indication	of	how	hot	the	butter	is.	As	it	begins	to
melt,	the	butter	will	foam	hardly	at	all,	and	is	not	hot	enough	to
brown	 anything.	 But	 as	 the	 heat	 increases,	 the	 liquids	 in	 the
butter	evaporate	and	cause	the	butter	to	foam	up.	During	this	full-
foaming	period	 the	butter	 is	 still	 not	 very	hot,	 only	 around	212
degrees.	When	 the	 liquids	 have	 almost	 evaporated,	 you	 can	 see
the	 foam	 subsiding.	And	when	you	 see	practically	no	 foam,	you
will	also	observe	the	butter	begin	to	turn	light	brown,	then	dark
brown,	and	finally	a	burnt	black.	Butter	fortified	with	oil	will	heat
to	 a	 higher	 temperature	 before	 browning	 and	 burning	 than	will
plain	butter,	but	the	observable	signs	are	the	same.	Thus	the	point



at	which	you	add	your	eggs	to	the	omelette	pan	or	your	meat	to
the	 skillet	 is	when	 the	butter	 is	 very	hot	but	not	browning,	 and
that	is	easy	to	see	when	you	look	at	the	butter.	If	it	is	still	foaming
up,	wait	a	few	seconds;	when	you	see	the	foam	begin	to	subside,
the	butter	is	hot	enough	for	you	to	begin.

CHEESE,	 fromage	 The	 two	 cheeses	 most	 commonly	 used	 in	 French
cooking	 are	 Swiss	 and	 Parmesan.	 Imported	 Swiss	 cheese	 is	 of	 two
types,	either	of	which	may	be	used:	the	true	Gruyère	with	small	holes,
and	 the	 Emmenthal	 which	 is	 fatter,	 less	 salty,	 and	 has	 large	 holes.
Wisconsin	“Swiss”	may	be	substituted	for	imported	Swiss.	Petit	suisse,	a
cream	 cheese	 that	 is	 sometimes	 called	 for	 in	 French	 recipes,	 is
analogous	to	Philadelphia	cream	cheese.

CREAM,	crème	 fraîche,	 crème	double	 French	cream	 is	matured	cream,
that	is,	lactic	acids	and	natural	ferments	have	been	allowed	to	work	in
it	until	the	cream	has	thickened	and	taken	on	a	nutty	flavor.	It	is	not
sour.	Commercially	made	sour	cream	with	a	butterfat	content	of	only
18	 to	 20	 per	 cent	 is	 no	 substitute;	 furthermore,	 it	 cannot	 be	 boiled
without	curdling.	French	cream	has	a	butterfat	content	of	at	 least	30
per	 cent.	 American	 whipping	 cream	 with	 its	 comparable	 butterfat
content	may	be	used	in	any	French	recipe	calling	for	crème	fraîche.	If	it
is	allowed	to	 thicken	with	a	 little	buttermilk,	 it	will	 taste	quite	a	bit
like	French	cream,	can	be	boiled	without	curdling,	and	will	keep	 for
10	days	or	more	under	refrigeration;	use	it	on	fruits	or	desserts,	or	in
cooking.

1	tsp	commercial	buttermilk
1	cup	whipping	cream

Stir	the	buttermilk	into	the	cream	and	heat	to	luke-warm—not	over
85	degrees.	Pour	the	mixture	into	a	loosely	covered	jar	and	let	it	stand	at
a	temperature	of	not	over	85	degrees	nor	under	60	degrees	until	 it	has
thickened.	This	will	take	5	to	8	hours	on	a	hot	day,	24	to	36	hours	at	a
low	temperature.	Stir,	cover,	and	refrigerate.
[NOTE:	French	unmatured	or	sweet	cream	is	called	fleurette]



FLOUR,	 farine	 Regular	 French	 household	 flour	 is	 made	 from	 soft
wheat,	 while	 most	 American	 flour	 is	 made	 from	 hard	 wheat;	 in
addition,	French	flour	 is	usually	unbleached.	This	makes	a	difference
in	cooking	quality,	especially	when	you	are	translating	French	recipes
for	 yeast	 doughs	 and	 pastries.	 We	 have	 found	 that	 a	 reasonable
approximation	of	 French	 flour,	 if	 you	need	one,	 is	 3	parts	American
all-purpose	unbleached	flour	to	1	part	plain	bleached	cake	flour.
Be	accurate	when	you	measure	flour	or	you	will	run	into	cake	and

pastry	problems.	Although	a	 scale	 is	 ideal,	 and	essential	when	you	are
cooking	 in	 large	 quantities,	 cups	 and	 spoons	 are	 accurate	 enough	 for
home	cooking	when	you	use	the	scoop-and-level	system	illustrated	here.

For	all	flour	measurements	in	this	volume,	scoop	the	dry-measure
cup	 directly	 into	 your	 flour	 container	 and	 fill	 the	 cup	 to
overflowing	 (A);	 do	 not	 shake	 the	 cup	 or	 pack	 down	 the	 flour.
Sweep	 off	 excess	 so	 that	 flour	 is	 even	 with	 the	 lip	 of	 the	 cup,
using	a	straight	edge	of	some	sort	(B).	Sift	only	after	measuring.

In	first	edition	copies	of	this	volume	all	 flour	had	to	be	sifted,	and
we	 advised	 that	 our	 flour	 be	 sifted	 directly	 into	 the	 cup;	 cake	 flour
weighed	 less	 per	 cup	 than	 all-purpose	 flour,	 and	 it	was	 a	 cumbersome
system	all	around.	The	scoop-and-level	is	far	easier,	and	just	as	reliable.
See	 next	 page	 for	 a	 chart	 of	weights	 and	measures	 for	 flour	measured
this	way.

FLOUR	 WEIGHTS:	 Approximate	 Equivalents	 (scoop-and-level
method)



NOTE:	1	cuillère	de	farine	in	a	French	recipe	usually	means	1	heaping
French	 tablespoon,	 or	 15	 to	 20	 grams—the	 equivalent	 of	 2	 level
American	Tb.

GLACÉED	 FRUITS,	 CANDIED	 FRUITS,	 fruits	 confits	 These	 are	 fruits
such	 as	 cherries,	 orange	 peel,	 citron,	 apricots,	 and	 angelica,	 which
have	 undergone	 a	 preserving	 process	 in	 sugar.	 They	 are	 sometimes
coated	with	sugar	so	they	are	not	sticky;	at	other	times	they	are	sticky,
depending	 on	 the	 specific	 process	 they	 have	 been	 through.	 Glacéed
fruits	are	called	for	in	a	number	of	the	dessert	recipes;	most	groceries
carry	selections	or	mixtures	in	jars	or	packages.

HERBS,	herbes	Classical	French	cooking	uses	far	fewer	herbs	than	most
Americans	would	 suspect.	 Parsley,	 thyme,	 bay,	 and	 tarragon	 are	 the
stand-bys,	plus	 fresh	chives	and	chervil	 in	season.	A	mixture	of	 fresh
parsley,	 chives,	 tarragon,	 and	 chervil	 is	 called	 fines	 herbes.
Mediterranean	France	 adds	 to	 the	 general	 list	 basil,	 fennel,	 oregano,
sage,	and	saffron.	The	French	feeling	about	herbs	 is	 that	 they	should
be	 an	 accent	 and	 a	 complement,	 but	 never	 a	 domination	 over	 the
essential	 flavors	 of	 the	main	 ingredients.	 Fresh	 herbs	 are,	 of	 course,
ideal;	and	some	varieties	of	herbs	freeze	well.	Excellent	also	are	most
of	 the	 dried	 herbs	 now	 available.	 Be	 sure	 any	 dried	 or	 frozen	 herbs
you	use	retain	most	of	their	original	taste	and	fragrance.

A	Note	on	Bay	Leaves
American	 bay	 is	 stronger	 and	 a	 bit	 different	 in	 taste	 than
European	bay.	We	suggest	you	buy	imported	bay	leaves;	they	are
bottled	by	several	of	the	well-known	American	spice	firms.



HERB	 BOUQUET,	 bouquet	 garni	 This	 term	 means	 a	 combination	 of
parsley,	 thyme,	 and	 bay	 leaf	 for	 flavoring	 soups,	 stews,	 sauces,	 and
braised	meat	 and	 vegetables.	 If	 the	 herbs	 are	 fresh	 and	 in	 sprigs	 or
leaf,	the	parsley	is	folded	around	them	and	they	are	tied	together	with
string.	 If	 the	herbs	are	dried,	 they	are	wrapped	in	a	piece	of	washed
cheesecloth	and	tied.	A	bundle	is	made	so	the	herbs	will	not	disperse
themselves	into	the	liquid	or	be	skimmed	off	it,	and	so	that	they	can
be	 removed	 easily.	 Celery,	 garlic,	 fennel,	 or	 other	 items	 may	 be
included	in	the	packet,	but	are	always	specifically	mentioned,	such	as
“a	 medium	 herb	 bouquet	 with	 celery	 stalk.”	 A	 small	 herb	 bouquet
should	 contain	 2	 parsley	 sprigs,	 ⅓	 of	 a	 bay	 leaf,	 and	 1	 sprig	 or	 ⅛
teaspoon	of	thyme.
MARROW,	 moelle	 The	 fatty	 filling	 of	 beef	 leg-bones,	 marrow	 is
poached	and	used	in	sauces,	garnitures,	and	on	canapés.	It	is	prepared
as	follows:

A	beef	marrowbone	about	5	inches	long
Stand	 the	 bone	 on	 one	 end	 and	 split	 it	 with	 a	 cleaver.	 Remove	 the
marrow	in	one	piece	if	possible.	Slice	or	dice	it	with	a	knife	dipped	in
hot	water.

Boiling	bouillon	or	boiling	salted	water
Shortly	before	using,	drop	the	marrow	into	the	hot	liquid.	Set	aside	for
3	to	5	minutes	until	the	marrow	has	softened.	Drain,	and	it	is	ready	to
use.

OIL,	 huile	 Classical	 French	 cooking	 uses	 almost	 exclusively	 odorless,
tasteless	 vegetable	oils	 for	 cooking	and	 salads.	These	 are	made	 from
peanuts,	 corn,	 cottonseed,	 sesame	 seed,	 poppy	 seed,	 or	 other
analogous	 ingredients.	 Olive	 oil,	 which	 dominates	 Mediterranean
cooking,	 has	 too	much	 character	 for	 the	 subtle	 flavors	 of	 a	 delicate
dish.	In	recipes	where	it	makes	no	difference	which	you	use,	we	have
just	specified	“oil.”
SHALLOTS,	 échalotes	 Shallots	with	 their	 delicate	 flavor	 and	 slightest



hint	of	garlic	are	small	members	of	the	onion	family.	They	are	used	in
sauces,	stuffings,	and	general	cooking	to	give	a	mild	onion	taste.	The
minced	white	part	of	green	onions	 (spring	onions,	 scallions,	ciboules)
may	take	the	place	of	shallots.	If	you	can	find	neither,	substitute	very
finely	minced	onion	dropped	for	one	minute	in	boiling	water,	rinsed,
and	drained.	Or	omit	them	altogether.
TRUFFLES,	 truffes	Truffles	are	 round,	pungent,	wrinkled,	black	 fungi
usually	an	inch	or	two	in	diameter	which	are	dug	up	in	certain	regions
of	 France	 and	 Italy	 from	 about	 the	 first	 of	 December	 to	 the	 end	 of
January.	They	are	always	expensive.	If	you	have	ever	been	in	France
during	 this	 season,	 you	will	 never	 forget	 the	 exciting	 smell	 of	 fresh
truffles.	 Canned	 truffles,	 good	 as	 they	 are,	 give	 only	 a	 suggestion	 of
their	 original	 glory.	 But	 their	 flavor	 can	 be	 much	 enhanced	 if	 a
spoonful	or	two	of	Madeira	is	poured	into	the	can	half	an	hour	before
the	truffles	are	to	be	employed.	Truffles	are	used	in	decorations,	with
scrambled	 eggs	 and	 omelettes,	 in	 meat	 stuffings	 and	 pâtés,	 and	 in
sauces.	 The	 juice	 from	 the	 can	 is	 added	 to	 sauces	 and	 stuffings	 for
additional	truffle	flavor.	A	partially	used	can	of	truffles	may	be	frozen.



MEASURES

A	 PINT’S	 A	 POUND	 the	world	around	except	 in	England	where	a	pint	of
water	weighs	a	pound	and	a	quarter,	and	all	measurements	in	this	book
are	level.	The	following	table	is	for	those	who	wish	to	translate	French
measurements	into	the	nearest	convenient	American	equivalent	and	vice
versa:	

A	 pinch,	 une	 pincée	 The	 amount	 of	 any	 ingredient	 you	 can	 take	 up
between	your	thumb	and	forefinger.	There	are	big	and	little	pinches.

BRITISH	MEASURES



BRITISH	MEASURES
British	dry	measures	for	ounces	and	pounds	and	linear	measures	for

inches	and	feet	are	the	same	as	American	measures.	However,	the	British
liquid	ounce	 is	 .96	 times	 the	American	ounce;	 the	British	pint	contains
20	British	ounces;	and	the	quart,	40	ounces.	A	gill	is	5	ounces,	or	about
⅔	of	an	American	cup.

CONVERSION	FORMULAS	American,	British,	Metric
TO	CONVERT MULTIPLY BY
Ounces	to	grams The	ounces 28.35
Grams	to	ounces The	grams 0.035
Liters	to	U.S.	quarts The	liters 0.95
Liters	to	British	quarts The	liters 0.88
U.S.	quarts	to	liters The	quarts 1.057
British	quarts	to	liters The	quarts 1.14
Inches	to	centimeters The	inches 2.54
Centimeters	to	inches The	centimeters 0.39

CUP-DECILITER	EQUIVALENTS	1	deciliter	equals	6	⅔	tablespoons	

GRAM-OUNCE	EQUIVALENTS

MISCELLANEOUS	MEASURES



MISCELLANEOUS	MEASURES
We	 have	 used	 the	 following	 measurements	 and	 equivalents
throughout.

ALMONDS
4	ounces	of	whole	 shelled,	powdered,	or	 slivered	almonds	equal
about	¾	cup.
APPLES
3	pounds	of	whole	apples	yield	about	8	cups	of	sliced	apples,	and
3½	cups	of	applesauce.
BACON
2	ounces	of	diced	raw	bacon	yield	about	⅓	cup.
BREAD	CRUMBS
2	ounces	of	lightly	packed	fresh	bread	crumbs	make	about	1	cup;
2	ounces	of	dry	bread	crumbs	make	about	¾	cup.
BUTTER
1	pound	of	butter	equals	16	ounces,	2	cups,	or	32	tablespoons.	A
¼-pound	stick	of	butter	is	4	ounces,	½	cup,	or	8	tablespoons.	For
easy	measurement	of	butter	in	tablespoons,	mark	a	¼-pound	stick
with	the	edge	of	a	knife	 into	8	equal	portions;	each	portion	 is	1
tablespoon.
CABBAGE
½	pound	of	minced	or	sliced	cabbage,	pressed	down,	equals	about
3	cups.
CARROTS
1	 medium	 carrot	 equals	 2½	 to	 3	 ounces;	 1	 pound	 of	 sliced	 or
diced	carrots	equals	3½	to	4	cups.
CELERY	STALK
1	 celery	 stalk	 of	 medium	 size	 weighs	 1½	 to	 2	 ounces;	 2	 sliced
celery	stalks	equal	¾	to	1	cup.
CHEESE
2	ounces	of	lightly	packed	grated	cheese	equal	about	½	cup.
EGGS
1	U.S.	large	graded	egg	weighs	about	2	ounces.



1	U.S.	large	egg	white	equals	1	ounce	or	2	tablespoons.
1	U.S.	large	egg	yolk	equals	½	ounce	or	1	tablespoon.
FLOUR
See	table	of	equivalents	and	measuring	directions.
GARLIC
1	 medium	 clove	 of	 garlic	 equals	 1/ 	 ounce	 or	 ⅛	 teaspoon.	 To

16

remove	 the	 smell	 of	 garlic	 from	 your	 hands,	 rinse	 them	 in	 cold
water,	 rub	with	 table	 salt.	 rinse	 again	 in	 cold	water,	 then	wash
with	soap	and	warm	water.	Repeat	if	necessary.
MUSHROOMS
½	pound	of	sliced	fresh	mushrooms	equals	about	2½	cups.
½	pound	of	diced	fresh	mushrooms	equals	about	2	cups.
ONIONS
1	medium	onion	equals	2½	to	3	ounces.
1	pound	of	sliced	or	diced	onions	yields	3½	to	4	cups.
See	 the	note	on	garlic	about	how	to	 remove	 the	 smell	of	onions
from	your	hands.
POTATOES
1	medium	potato	equals	3½	to	4	ounces.
1	pound	of	sliced	or	diced	potatoes	yields	3½	to	4	cups.
1	pound	of	unpeeled	raw	potatoes	yields	about	2	cups	of	mashed
potatoes.
RICE
½	pound	of	 raw	 rice	equals	about	1	cup;	and	1	cup	of	 raw	 rice
yields	about	3	cups	of	cooked	rice.
SALT
Use	1	to	1½	teaspoons	of	salt	per	quart	of	liquid	for	the	boiling	of
vegetables	 and	 the	 flavoring	 of	 unsalted	 soups	 and	 sauces.	 Also
use	1	to	1½	teaspoons	of	salt	per	pound	of	boneless	raw	meat.	If
you	have	oversalted	a	sauce	or	a	soup,	you	can	remove	some	of
the	 saltiness	by	grating	 in	 raw	potatoes.	 Simmer	 the	potatoes	 in
the	liquid	for	7	to	8	minutes,	then	strain	the	liquid;	the	potatoes
will	have	absorbed	quite	a	bit	of	the	excess	salt.



SHALLOTS
1	medium	shallot	equals	½	ounce	or	1	tablespoon	when	minced.
SUGAR,	GRANULATED
1	cup	equals	6½	ounces	or	190	grams.
1	pound	equals	2½	cups	or	454	grams.
100	grams	equals	3½	ounces	or	½	cup.
SUGAR,	POWDERED
1	cup	equals	2¾	ounces	or	80	grams.
TOMATOES
1	tomato	equals	4	to	5	ounces;	1	pound	of	fresh	tomatoes	peeled,
seeded,	 juiced,	 and	 chopped	 as	 illustrated	 will	 yield	 about	 1½
cups	of	tomato	pulp.



TEMPERATURES
Fahrenheit	and	Centigrade

TO	CONVERT	FAHRENHEIT	INTO	CENTIGRADE,	subtract	32,	multiply
by	5,	divide	by	9.
Example: 212	(Fahrenheit)	minus	32	equals	180

180	multiplied	by	5	equals	900
900	divided	by	9	equals	100,	or	the	temperature	of
boiling	water	in	centigrade

TO	CONVERT	CENTIGRADE	INTO	FAHRENHEIT,	multiply	by	9,	divide
by	5,	add	32.
Example: 100	(centigrade)	multiplied	by	9	equals	900

900	divided	by	5	equals	180
180	plus	32	equals	212,	or	the	temperature	of	boiling
water	in	Fahrenheit

TEMPERATURE	CONVERSION	TABLE

American—French—British






CUTTING
Chopping,	Slicing,	Dicing,	and	Mincing

FRENCH	 COOKING	 requires	 a	 good	 deal	 of	 slicing,	 dicing,	mincing,	 and
fancy	 cutting,	 and	 if	 you	 have	 not	 learned	 to	 wield	 a	 knife	 rapidly	 a
recipe	calling	for	2	cups	of	finely	diced	vegetables	and	2	pounds	of	sliced
mushroom	 caps	 is	 often	 too	 discouraging	 to	 attempt.	 It	 takes	 several
weeks	of	off-and-on	practice	to	master	the	various	knife	techniques,	but
once	 learned	 they	 are	 never	 forgotten.	 You	 can	 save	 a	 tremendous
amount	of	time,	and	also	derive	a	modest	pride,	in	learning	how	to	use	a
knife	professionally.

The	Knife	Grip



For	cutting	and	slicing,	hold	 the	knife	with	your	 thumb	and	 index
finger	gripping	the	top	of	the	blade,	and	wrap	your	other	fingers	around
the	handle.

Chopping
For	 chopping,	 hold	 the	 knife	 blade	 by	 both	 ends	 and	 chop	 with

rapid	up-and-down	movements,	brushing	the	ingredients	repeatedly	into
a	heap	again	with	the	knife.

Slicing	Round	Objects	(a)



To	 slice	potatoes	or	other	 round	or	oval	 objects,	 cut	 the	potato	 in
half	and	lay	it	cut-side	down	on	the	chopping	board.	Use	the	thumb	of
your	 left	 hand	as	 a	pusher,	 and	grip	 the	 sides	 of	 the	potato	with	your
fingers,	 pointing	 your	 fingernails	 back	 toward	 your	 thumb	 so	 you	will
not	cut	them.

Slicing	Round	Objects	(b)

Cut	straight	down,	at	a	right	angle	to	board,	with	a	quick	stroke	of
the	knife	blade,	pushing	the	potato	slice	away	from	the	potato	as	you	hit
the	 board.	 The	 knuckles	 of	 your	 left	 hand	 act	 as	 a	 guide	 for	 the	 next
slice.	 This	 goes	 slowly	 at	 first,	 but	 after	 a	 bit	 of	 practice,	 2	 pounds	 of
potatoes	can	be	sliced	in	less	than	5	minutes.

Slicing	Long	Objects	Like	Carrots

To	slice	long	objects	like	carrots,	cut	a	thin	strip	off	one	side	so	the



carrot	 will	 lie	 flat	 on	 the	 board.	 Then	 cut	 crosswise	 slices	 as	 for	 the
potatoes	in	the	preceding	paragraph.

Julienne	(a)

To	 cut	 vegetables	 such	 as	 carrots	 or	 potatoes	 into	 julienne
matchsticks,	 remove	 a	 thin	 strip	 off	 one	 side	 of	 the	 carrot	 and	 lay	 the
carrot	on	the	board.	Then	cut	it	into	lengthwise	slices	⅛	inch	thick.

Julienne	(b)



Two	at	a	time,	cut	the	slices	into	strips	⅛	inch	across,	and	the	strips
into	whatever	lengths	you	wish.

Dicing	Solid	Vegetables

Proceed	as	for	the	julienne,	but	cut	the	strips,	a	handful	at	a	time,
crosswise	into	dice.

Dicing	Onions	and	Shallots	(a)



Once	mastered,	 this	method	 of	 dicing	 onions	 or	 shallots	 goes	 like
lightning.	Cut	 the	onion	 in	half	 through	the	root.	Lay	one	half	cut-side
down,	 its	 root-end	 to	your	 left.	Cut	vertical	 slices	 from	one	side	 to	 the
other,	coming	just	to	the	root	but	leaving	the	slices	attached	to	it,	thus
the	onion	will	not	fall	apart.

Dicing	Onions	and	Shallots	(b)

Then	make	horizontal	slices	 from	bottom	to	top,	still	 leaving	them
attached	to	the	root	of	the	onion.

Dicing	Onions	and	Shallots	(c)

Finally,	make	downward	cuts	and	the	onion	falls	into	dice.

Mushrooms



Various	methods	for	cutting	mushrooms	are	illustrated	on	this	page.



WINES
I	·	Cooking	with	Wine

FOOD,	 like	 the	 people	 who	 eat	 it,	 can	 be	 stimulated	 by	 wine	 or
spirits.	And,	as	with	people,	it	can	also	be	spoiled.	The	quality	in	a	white
or	 red	 wine,	 vermouth,	 Madeira,	 or	 brandy	 which	 heightens	 the
character	 of	 cooking	 is	 not	 the	 alcohol	 content,	 which	 is	 usually
evaporated,	but	the	flavor.	Therefore	any	wine	or	spirit	used	in	cooking
must	be	a	good	one.	If	 it	 is	excessively	fruity,	sour,	or	unsavory	in	any
way,	 these	 tastes	 will	 only	 be	 emphasized	 by	 the	 cooking,	 which
ordinarily	 reduces	 volume	 and	 concentrates	 flavor.	 If	 you	 have	 not	 a
good	wine	 to	use,	 it	 is	 far	better	 to	omit	 it,	 for	a	poor	one	can	spoil	a
simple	dish	and	utterly	debase	a	noble	one.

WHITE	WINE

White	wine	for	cooking	should	be	strong	and	dry,	but	never	sour	or
fruity.	A	most	satisfactory	choice	 is	white	Mâcon,	made	from	the	Pinot
Blanc	 or	 the	 Chardonnay	 grape.	 It	 has	 all	 the	 right	 qualities	 and,	 in
France,	is	not	expensive.	As	the	right	white	wine	is	not	as	reasonable	to
acquire	in	America,	we	have	found	that	a	good,	dry,	white	vermouth	is
an	excellent	 substitute,	 and	much	better	 than	 the	wrong	kind	of	white
wine.

RED	WINE

A	good,	young,	full-bodied	red	wine	is	the	type	you	should	use	for
cooking.	 In	 France	 you	 would	 pick	 a	 Mâcon,	 one	 of	 the	 lesser



Burgundies,	one	of	 the	more	 full-bodied	regional	Bordeaux	such	as	St.-
Émilion,	or	a	good	local	wine	having	these	qualities.

FORTIFIED	WINES,	SPIRITS,	AND	LIQUEURS

Fortified	 wines,	 spirits,	 and	 liqueurs	 are	 used	 principally	 for	 final
flavorings,	 As	 they	 must	 be	 of	 excellent	 quality	 they	 are	 always
expensive;	but	usually	only	a	small	quantity	is	called	for,	so	your	supply
should	last	quite	a	while.	Here,	particularly,	if	you	do	not	want	to	spend
the	money	for	a	good	bottle,	omit	the	ingredient	or	pick	another	recipe.
RUM	and	LIQUEURS	are	called	for	in	desserts.	Dark	Jamaican	rum

is	 the	 best	 type	 to	 use	 here,	 to	 get	 a	 full	 rum	 flavor.	 Among	 liqueurs,
orange	 is	 most	 frequently	 specified;	 good	 imported	 brands	 as
touchstones	for	flavor	are	Cointreau,	Grand	Marnier,	and	curaçao.
MADEIRA	and	PORT	are	often	the	final	flavor-fillip	for	sauces,	as	in

a	brown	Madeira	 sauce	 for	ham,	or	 chicken	 in	port	wine.	These	wines
should	be	the	genuine	imported	article	of	a	medium-dry	type,	but	can	be
the	more	moderately	priced	examples	from	a	good	firm.
SHERRY	and	MARSALA	are	rare	in	French	cooking.	If	used	in	place

of	port	or	Madeira	they	tend	to	give	an	un-French	flavor	to	most	French
recipes.
BRANDY	 is	 the	 most	 ubiquitous	 spirit	 in	 French	 cooking	 from

desserts	 to	 sauces,	 consommés,	 aspics,	 and	 flambées.	 Because	 there	 are
dreadful	 concoctions	 bottled	 under	 the	 label	 of	 brandy,	 we	 have
specified	cognac	whenever	brandy	is	required	in	a	recipe,	as	a	reminder
that	you	use	a	good	brand.	You	do	not	have	to	buy	Three-star	or	V.S.O.P,
but	 whatever	 you	 use	 should	 compare	 favorably	 in	 taste	 with	 a	 good
cognac.

II	·	Wine	and	Food

THE	 WONDERFUL	 THING	 about	 French	wines	 is	 that	 they	 go	 so	well	with
food.	And	 there	 is	 always	 that	 enjoyable	 problem	of	 just	which	 of	 the
many	possible	 choices	 you	 should	use	 for	 a	 particular	 occasion.	 If	 you
are	a	neophyte	wine	drinker,	the	point	to	keep	in	mind	in	learning	about
which	wine	to	serve	with	which	dish	is	that	the	wine	should	complement
the	food	and	the	food	should	accentuate	and	blend	with	the	qualities	of



the	wine.	A	robust	wine	overpowers	the	taste	of	a	delicate	dish,	while	a
highly	spiced	dish	will	kill	the	flavor	of	a	light	wine.	A	dry	wine	tastes
sour	if	drunk	with	a	sweet	dessert,	and	a	red	wine	often	takes	on	a	fishy
taste	 if	 served	 with	 fish.	 Great	 combinations	 of	 wine	 and	 food	 are
unforgettable:	kidneys	and	one	of	the	great	red	Burgundies,	where	each
rings	reminiscent	changes	on	the	characteristics	of	the	other;	sole	in	one
of	 the	 rich	white	 wine	 sauces	 and	 a	 fine	white	 Burgundy;	 soufflé	 à	 la
liqueur	 and	 a	 Château	 d’	 Yquem.	 And	 then	 there	 are	 the	more	 simple
pleasures	 of	 a	 stout	 red	 wine	 and	 a	 strong	 cheese,	 white	 wine	 and
oysters,	 red	 wine	 and	 a	 beef	 stew,	 chilled	 rosé	 and	 a	 platter	 of	 cold
meats.	 Knowledge	 of	 wines	 is	 a	 lifetime	 hobby,	 and	 the	 only	 way	 to
learn	 is	 to	 start	 in	 drinking	 and	 enjoying	 them,	 comparing	 types,
vintages,	and	good	marriages	of	certain	wines	with	certain	foods.
Wine	 suggestions	 go	with	 all	 the	master	 recipes	 for	main	 courses.

Here	is	a	list	of	generally	accepted	concordances	to	reverse	the	process.
As	 this	 is	 a	 book	 on	 French	 cooking,	we	 have	 concentrated	 on	 French
wines.

SWEET	WHITE	WINES	(not	champagnes)
The	best	known	of	these	are	probably	the	Sauternes,	the	greatest	of

which	is	Château	d’	Yquem.	They	may	range	from	noble	and	full	bodied
to	relatively	light,	depending	on	the	vineyard	and	vintage.
Sweet	white	wines	are	too	often	neglected.	Those	of	good	quality	can	be

magnificent	 with	 dessert	 mousses,	 creams,	 soufflés,	 and	 cakes.	 And	 a	 fine
Sauternes	 is	 delicious	with	 foie	gras	or	a	 pâté	of	 chicken	 livers.	 In	 the	old
days	sweet	wines	were	drunk	with	oysters.

LIGHT,	DRY,	WHITE	WINES

Typical	 examples	 are	 Alsatian	 Riesling,	 Muscadet,	 Sancerre,	 and
usually	 Pouilly-Fumé,	 Pouilly-Fuissé,	 and	 Chablis.	 Local	 wines,	 vins	 du
pays,	often	fall	into	this	category.
Serve	 with	 oysters,	 cold	 shellfish,	 boiled	 shellfish,	 broiled	 fish,	 cold

meats,	egg	dishes,	and	entrées.

FULL-BODIED	DRY,	WHITE	WINES

White	Burgundy,	Côtes	du	Rhône,	and	the	dry	Graves	are	examples.
Serve	with	fish,	poultry,	and	veal	in	cream	sauces.	White	Burgundy	can



also	be	drunk	with	 foie	gras,	and	 it	 is	not	unheard	of	 to	serve	a	Meursault
with	Roquefort	cheese.

ROSÉS

Rosés	 can	 be	 served	 with	 anything,	 but	 are	 usually	 reserved	 for	 cold
dishes,	pâtés,	eggs,	and	pork.

LIGHT-BODIED	RED	WINES

These	 are	 typically	 Bordeaux	 from	 the	 Médoc	 or	 Graves	 districts.
Many	of	the	regional	wines	and	local	vins	du	pays	can	also	be	included
here.

Serve	Bordeaux	with	roast	chicken,	turkey,	veal,	or	lamb;	also	with	filet
of	beef,	ham,	liver,	quail,	pheasant,	foie	gras,	and	soft	fermented	cheese	like
camembert.	Regional	wines	and	vins	du	pays	go	especially	well	with	informal
dishes	such	as	beef	or	 lamb	stew,	daubes,	bouillabaisse,	hamburgers,	 steals,
and	pâtés.

FULL-BODIED	RED	WINES

All	of	the	great	Burgundies	and	Rhônes	fall	into	this	category;	the	full
bodied	Bordeaux	from	St.	Émilion	may	be	included	also.
Serve	with	duck,	goose,	kidneys,	well-hung	game,	meats	marinated	in	red

wine,	 and	 authoritative	 cheeses	 such	 as	 Roquefort.	 They	 are	 called	 for
wherever	strong-flavored	foods	must	meet	strong-flavored	wines.

CHAMPAGNE

Brut
Serve	as	an	apéritif,	or	at	the	end	of	an	evening.	Or	it	may	accompany

the	whole	meal.

Dry,	Sec
Serve	as	an	apéritif,	or	with	crustaceans,	or	foie	gras,	or	with	nuts	and

dried	fruits.

Sweet,	Doux,	Demi-sec
Sweet	champagne	is	another	neglected	wine,	yet	is	the	only	kind	to	serve

with	desserts	and	pastries.



III	·	The	Storage	and	Serving	of	Wine

Except	for	champagne,	which	has	sugar	added	to	it	 to	produce	the
bubbles,	great	French	wines	are	the	unadulterated,	fermented	juice	from
the	pressings	of	one	type	of	grape	originating	in	one	vineyard	during	one
harvest	 season.	 Lesser	 wines,	 which	 can	 be	 very	 good,	 may	 also	 be
unadulterated.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 they	 may	 be	 fortified	 with	 sugar
during	a	 lean	year	 to	build	up	their	alcoholic	strength,	or	 they	may	be
blended	with	wines	from	other	vineyards	or	localities	to	give	them	more
body	or	uniformity	of	taste.	The	quality	of	a	wine	is	due	to	the	variety	of
grape	it	is	made	from,	the	locality	in	which	it	is	grown,	and	the	climate
during	 the	 wine-growing	 year.	 In	 exceptional	 years	 such	 as	 1929	 and
1947,	 even	 lesser	 wines	 can	 be	 great,	 and	 the	 great	 ones	 become
priceless.	 Vintage	 charts,	 which	 you	 can	 pick	 up	 from	 your	 wine
merchant,	evaluate	the	various	wines	by	region	for	each	year.
Fine	 wine	 is	 a	 living	 liquid	 containing	 no	 preservatives.	 Its	 life

comprises	 youth,	maturity,	 old	 age,	 and	 death.	When	 not	 treated	with
reasonable	respect	it	will	sicken	and	die.	If	it	is	left	standing	upright	for
a	length	of	time,	the	cork	will	dry	out,	air	will	enter	the	bottle,	and	the
wine	will	spoil.	Shaking	and	joggling	are	damaging	to	it,	as	are	extreme
fluctuations	 of	 heat	 and	 cold.	 If	 it	 is	 to	 be	 laid	 down	 to	 grow	 into
maturity,	 it	 should	rest	on	 its	 side	 in	a	dark,	well-ventilated	place	at	a
temperature	of	around	50	degrees	Fahrenheit.	If	it	is	to	be	kept	only	for
a	year	or	two,	it	can	be	laid	in	any	dark	and	quiet	corner	as	long	as	the
temperature	remains	fairly	constant	and	is	neither	below	50	degrees	nor
over	65.
Even	 the	 most	 modest	 wine	 will	 improve	 if	 allowed	 to	 rest	 for

several	days	before	it	is	drunk.	This	allows	the	wine	to	reconstitute	itself
after	 its	 journey	 from	 shop	 to	 home.	Great	wines,	 particularly	 the	 red
ones,	benefit	from	a	rest	of	at	least	two	to	three	weeks.

TEMPERATURE	AT	WHICH	WINE	SHOULD	BE	SERVED

Red	 wines,	 unless	 they	 are	 very	 young	 and	 light,	 are	 generally
served	at	a	normal	room	temperature	of	around	65	degrees	Fahrenheit.
At	lower	temperatures	they	do	not	show	off	their	full	qualities.	At	least
four	hours	in	the	dining	room	are	required	to	bring	them	slowly	up	from
the	temperature	of	a	50-degree	cellar.	Never	warm	a	wine	artificially;	an



old	wine	can	be	ruined	if	the	bottle	is	heated.	It	is	better	to	pour	it	out
too	cold,	and	let	it	warm	in	the	glass.

White	wines,	 champagnes,	 and	 rosés	 are	 served	 chilled.	 As	 a	 rule,
the	 sweeter	 the	 wine,	 the	 colder	 it	 should	 be.	 A	 Sauternes	 or	 sweet
champagne	 will	 take	 four	 to	 five	 hours	 in	 the	 refrigerator.	 For	 other
white	wines,	two	to	three	hours	are	sufficient;	if	they	are	too	cold,	they
lose	much	of	their	taste.

UNCORKING

White	wines,	 rosés,	 and	many	 red	wines,	 particularly	 young	 reds,
are	 uncorked	 just	 before	 serving,	 but	 there	 is	 no	 set	 rule;	 this	 applies
especially	 to	 the	 Bordeaux	 reds	 and	 other	 cabernets.	Many	 authorities
recommend	that	these	be	uncorked	and	poured	at	once,	then	one	waits
upon	them	in	the	glass,	tasting	them	as	they	develop.	Some	fine	old	reds
fade	 within	 a	 few	 minutes	 of	 opening,	 while	 other	 wines	 are	 utterly
wasted	if	drunk	before	they	have	had	time	to	bloom	forth	in	the	glass.	If
you	 know	 your	 particular	 bottles	 from	 previous	 tastings,	 you	 can,	 of
course,	judge	the	pouring	and	drinking	of	them	accordingly.	Therein	lies
the	 science	 of	 the	 experienced	 wine	 connoisseur—the	more	 you	 drink
(and	think	upon	it),	the	more	you’ll	know.

WINE	BASKETS,	DECANTERS,	AND	GLASSES

Old	red	wines	that	throw	a	deposit	in	the	bottom	of	the	bottle	must
be	handled	so	as	not	to	disturb	the	deposit	and	circulate	it	through	the
wine.	Either	pour	the	wine	into	a	decanter	leaving	the	deposit	behind,	or
serve	 it	 from	 a	wine	 basket	 where	 it	 will	 remain	 in	 a	 prone	 position.
When	 serving	 from	a	basket,	pour	very	 smoothly	 so	 the	wine	does	not
slop	back	into	the	bottle	and	agitate	the	sediment.

Young	 red	 wines,	 white	 wines,	 rosés,	 and	 champagnes	 throw	 no
deposit,	so	the	use	of	a	wine	basket	 is	silly.	The	bottle	 is	stood	upright
after	the	wine	is	poured.

The	 bigger	 the	 wine,	 the	 bigger	 the	 glass.	 A	 small	 glass	 gives	 no
room	for	the	bouquet	to	develop,	nor	for	the	drinker	to	swirl.	A	good	all-
purpose	glass	is	tulip-shaped	and	holds	¾	to	1	cup.	It	should	be	filled	to
just	below	the	halfway	mark.



CHAPTER	ONE

SOUP
Potages	et	Soupes

AN	EXCELLENT	LUNCH	or	light	supper	need	be	no	more	than	a	good	soup,	a
salad,	 cheese	 and	 fruit.	 And	 combined	 according	 to	 your	 own	 taste,	 a
good	homemade	soup	in	these	days	of	the	can	opener	is	almost	a	unique
and	 always	 a	 satisfying	 experience.	 Most	 soups	 are	 uncomplicated	 to
make,	 and	 the	 major	 portion	 of	 them	 can	 be	 prepared	 several	 hours
before	serving.	Here	is	a	varied	handful	of	good	recipes.

A	NOTE	ON	BLENDERS,	PROCESSORS,	AND	PRESSURE	COOKERS

Although	 we	 are	 enthusiastic	 supporters	 of	 blenders	 and	 food
processors,	we	almost	invariably	prefer	a	vegetable	mill	when	soups	are
to	 be	 puréed.	 Blenders	 and	 processors	 chop	 up	 and	 serve	 forth	 tough
woody	 vegetable	 bits,	 while	 a	 vegetable	mill	 holds	 them	 back	 to	 give
you	a	fiber-free	brew.

A	 pressure	 cooker	 can	 save	 time,	 but	 the	 vegetables	 for	 a	 long-
simmered	 soup	 should	have	only	5	minutes	under	15	pounds	pressure;
more	 gives	 them	 a	 pressure-cooker	 taste.	 Then	 the	 pressure	 should	 be
released	and	the	soup	simmered	for	15	to	20	minutes	so	it	will	develop
its	full	flavor.

		POTAGE	PARMENTIER
[Leek	or	Onion	and	Potato	Soup]



Leek	 and	 potato	 soup	 smells	 good,	 tastes	 good,	 and	 is	 simplicity
itself	to	make.	It	is	also	versatile	as	a	soup	base;	add	water	cress	and	you
have	a	water-cress	soup,	or	stir	in	cream	and	chill	it	for	a	vichyssoise.	To
change	the	formula	a	bit,	add	carrots,	string	beans,	cauliflower,	broccoli,
or	anything	else	you	think	would	go	with	it,	and	vary	the	proportions	as
you	wish.

For	about	2	quarts	serving	6	to	8	people

A	3-to	4-quart	saucepan	or	pressure	cooker
3	to	4	cups	or	1	lb.	peeled	potatoes,	sliced	or	diced
3	cups	or	1	lb.	thinly	sliced	leeks	including	the	tender	green;	or
yellow	onions

2	quarts	of	water
1	Tb	salt

Either	 simmer	 the	 vegetables,	 water,	 and	 salt	 together,	 partially
covered,	for	40	to	50	minutes	until	the	vegetables	are	tender;	or	cook
under	15	pounds	pressure	for	5	minutes,	release	pressure,	and	simmer
uncovered	for	15	minutes.

Mash	the	vegetables	in	the	soup	with	a	fork,	or	pass	the	soup	through
a	food	mill.	Correct	seasoning.	(*)	Set	aside	uncovered	until	just	before
serving,	then	reheat	to	the	simmer.

4	to	6	Tb	whipping	cream	or	2	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley	or	chives

Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 stir	 in	 the	 cream	 or	 butter	 by
spoonfuls.	 Pour	 into	 a	 tureen	 or	 soup	 cups	 and	 decorate	 with	 the
herbs.

VARIATIONS
Potage	au	Cresson
[Water-cress	Soup]



This	 simple	 version	 of	water-cress	 soup	 is	 very	 good.	 See	 also	 the
more	elaborate	recipe.
For	6	to	8	people

Ingredients	for	the	leek	and	potato	soup,	omitting	cream	or	butter
enrichment	until	later

¼	lb.	or	about	1	packed	cup	of	water-cress	leaves	and	tender	stems
Follow	the	preceding	master	recipe,	but	before	puréeing	the	soup,	stir
in	the	water	cress	and	simmer	for	5	minutes.	Then	purée	in	a	food	mill
and	correct	seasoning.

4	to	6	Tb	whipping	cream	or	2	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
Optional:	a	small	handful	of	water-cress	leaves	boiled	½	minute	in
water,	rinsed	in	cold	water,	and	drained
Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 stir	 in	 the	 cream	 or	 butter	 by
spoonfuls.	Decorate	with	the	optional	water-cress	leaves.

Cold	Water-cress	Soup

Use	the	following	vichyssoise	recipe,	adding	water	cress	to	simmer	for
5	minutes	before	puréeing	the	soup.

Vichyssoise
[Cold	Leek	and	Potato	Soup]

This	is	an	American	invention	based	on	the	leek	and	potato	soup	in
the	preceding	master	recipe.
For	6	to	8	people

3	cups	peeled,	sliced	potatoes
3	cups	sliced	white	of	leek
1½	quarts	of	white	stock,	chicken	stock,	or	canned	chicken	broth
Salt	to	taste



Simmer	the	vegetables	in	stock	or	broth	instead	of	water	as	described
in	the	master	recipe.	Purée	the	soup	either	in	the	electric	blender,	or
through	a	food	mill	and	then	through	a	fine	sieve.

½	to	1	cup	whipping	cream
Salt	and	white	pepper
Stir	in	the	cream.	Season	to	taste,	oversalting	very	slightly	as	salt	loses
savor	in	a	cold	dish.	Chill.

Chilled	soup	cups
2	to	3	Tb	minced	chives
Serve	in	chilled	soup	cups	and	decorate	with	minced	chives.

OTHER	VARIATIONS	on	Leek	and	Potato	Soup

Using	the	master	recipe	for	leek	and	potato	soup	a	cup	or	two	of	one
or	a	combination	of	the	following	vegetables	may	be	added	as	indicated.
Proportions	are	not	important	here,	and	you	can	use	your	imagination	to
the	full.	Many	of	the	delicious	soups	you	eat	in	French	homes	and	little
restaurants	are	made	just	this	way,	with	a	leek-and-potato	base	to	which
leftover	vegetables	or	sauces	and	a	few	fresh	items	are	added.	You	can
also	experiment	on	your	own	combinations	for	cold	soups,	by	stirring	a
cup	 or	 more	 of	 heavy	 cream	 into	 the	 cooked	 soup,	 chilling	 it,	 then
sprinkling	 on	 fresh	 herbs	 just	 before	 serving.	 You	 may	 find	 you	 have
invented	a	marvelous	concoction,	which	you	can	keep	as	a	secret	of	the
house.

To	be	simmered	or	cooked	in	the	pressure	cooker	with	the	potatoes	and
leeks	or	onions	at	the	start

Sliced	or	diced	carrots	or	turnips
Peeled,	 seeded,	 and	 chopped	 tomatoes;	 or	 strained	 canned

tomatoes
Half-cooked	 dried	 beans,	 peas,	 or	 lentils,	 including	 their

cooking	liquid
To	 be	 simmered	 for	 10	 to	 15	minutes	 with	 the	 soup	 after	 it	 has	 been

puréed



Fresh	 or	 frozen	 diced	 cauliflower,	 cucumbers,	 broccoli,	 Lima
beans,	peas,	string	beans,	okra,	or	zucchini
Shredded	lettuce,	spinach,	sorrel,	or	cabbage
To	be	heated	in	the	soup	just	before	serving
Diced,	cooked	leftovers	of	any	of	the	preceding	vegetables
Tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	diced.

POTAGE	VELOUTÉ	AUX	CHAMPIGNONS
[Cream	of	Mushroom	Soup]

Here	is	a	fine,	rich,	mushroom	soup	either	for	grand	occasions	or	as
the	main	course	for	a	Sunday	supper.
For	6	to	8	people

A	2½-quart,	heavy-bottomed	enameled	saucepan
¼	cup	minced	onions
3	Tb	butter
Cook	 the	onions	 slowly	 in	 the	butter	 for	8	 to	10	minutes,	until	 they
are	tender	but	not	browned.

3	Tb	flour
Add	 the	 flour	 and	 stir	 over	 moderate	 heat	 for	 3	 minutes	 without
browning.

6	cups	boiling	white	stock	or	chicken	stock;	or	canned	chicken	broth
and	2	parsley	sprigs,	⅓	bay	leaf,	and	⅛	tsp	thyme

Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
The	chopped	stems	from	¾	to	1	lb.	fresh	mushrooms
Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 boiling	 stock	 or	 broth	 and	 blend	 it	 thoroughly
with	 the	 flour.	 Season	 to	 taste.	 Stir	 in	 the	 mushroom	 stems,	 and
simmer	 partially	 covered	 for	 20	 minutes	 or	 more,	 skimming
occasionally.	 Strain,	 pressing	 juices	 out	 of	 mushroom	 stems.	 Return
the	soup	to	the	pan.



2	Tb	butter
An	enameled	saucepan
The	thinly	sliced	caps	from	¾	to	1	lb.	fresh	mushrooms
¼	tsp	salt
1	tsp	lemon	juice

Melt	the	butter	in	a	separate	saucepan.	When	it	is	foaming,	toss	in	the
mushrooms,	 salt,	 and	 lemon	 juice.	 Cover	 and	 cook	 slowly	 for	 5
minutes.
Pour	 the	mushrooms	 and	 their	 cooking	 juices	 into	 the	 strained	 soup
base.	Simmer	for	10	minutes.

(*)	 If	 not	 to	 be	 served	 immediately,	 set	 aside	 uncovered,	 and	 film
surface	with	a	spoonful	of	cream	or	milk.	Reheat	to	simmer	just	before
proceeding	to	the	step	below,	which	will	take	2	or	3	minutes.

2	egg	yolks
½	to	¾	cup	whipping	cream
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
A	wooden	spoon

Beat	 the	 egg	 yolks	 and	 cream	 in	 the	mixing	 bowl.	 Then	 beat	 in	 hot
soup	 by	 spoonfuls	 until	 a	 cup	 has	 been	 added.	Gradually	 stir	 in	 the
rest.	 Correct	 seasoning.	 Return	 the	 soup	 to	 the	 pan	 and	 stir	 over
moderate	heat	for	a	minute	or	two	to	poach	the	egg	yolks,	but	do	not
let	the	soup	come	near	the	simmer.

1	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
Optional:	6	to	8	fluted	mushroom	caps	cooked	in	butter	and	lemon
juice;	and/or	2	or	3	Tb	minced	fresh	chervil	or	parsley
Off	heat,	stir	in	the	butter	by	tablespoons.	Pour	the	soup	into	a	tureen
or	soup	cups,	and	decorate	with	optional	mushrooms	and	herbs.



		POTAGE	CRÈME	DE	CRESSON
[Cream	of	Water-cress	Soup]

This	is	a	lovely	soup,	and	a	perfect	one	for	an	important	dinner.
For	6	servings

⅓	cup	minced	green	onions,	or	yellow	onions
3	Tb	butter
A	heavy-bottomed,	2½-quart	saucepan

Cook	the	onions	slowly	in	the	butter	in	a	covered	saucepan	for	5	to	10
minutes,	until	tender	and	translucent	but	not	browned.

3	to	4	packed	cups	of	fresh	water	cress	leaves	and	tender	stems,
washed,	and	dried	in	a	towel
½	tsp	salt

Stir	 in	 the	water	 cress	 and	 salt,	 cover,	 and	 cook	 slowly	 for	 about	 5
minutes	or	until	the	leaves	are	tender	and	wilted.

3	Tb	flour
Sprinkle	in	the	flour	and	stir	over	moderate	heat	for	3	minutes.

5½	cups	boiling	white	stock	or	canned	chicken	broth
Off	heat,	beat	in	the	boiling	stock.	Simmer	for	5	minutes,	then	purée
through	a	food	mill.	Return	to	saucepan	and	correct	seasoning.
(*)	 If	 not	 to	 be	 served	 immediately,	 set	 aside	 uncovered.	 Reheat	 to
simmer	before	proceeding.

2	egg	yolks
½	cup	whipping	cream
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter



Blend	 the	yolks	 and	 cream	 in	 the	mixing	bowl.	Beat	 a	 cupful	 of	hot
soup	into	them	by	driblets.	Gradually	beat	in	the	rest	of	the	soup	in	a
thin	stream.	Return	soup	to	saucepan	and	stir	over	moderate	heat	for	a
minute	or	two	to	poach	the	egg	yolks,	but	do	not	bring	the	soup	to	the
simmer.	Off	heat,	stir	in	the	enrichment	butter	a	tablespoon	at	a	time.

A	handful	of	water-cress	leaves	dropped	for	½	minute	in	boiling
water,	refreshed	in	cold	water,	and	drained
Pour	the	soup	into	a	tureen	or	soup	cups	and	decorate	with	optional
water-cress	leaves.

TO	SERVE	COLD:	Omit	final	butter	enrichment	and	chill.	If	too	thick,
stir	in	more	cream	before	serving.

VARIATIONS
Potage	Crème	d’Oseille	or	Potage	Germiny
[Cream	of	Sorrel	Soup]

Potage	Crème	d’Épinards
[Cream	of	Spinach	Soup]

Follow	 the	 recipe	 for	 the	 preceding	 crème	 de	 cresson,	 using	 sorrel	 or
spinach	leaves	instead	of	water	cress,	but	cut	the	leaves	into	chiffonade
(thin	slices	or	shreds).	Do	not	purée	the	soup.

		SOUPE	À	L’OIGNON
[Onion	Soup]

The	onions	 for	 an	onion	 soup	need	a	 long,	 slow	cooking	 in	butter
and	oil,	 then	 a	 long,	 slow	 simmering	 in	 stock	 for	 them	 to	develop	 the
deep,	 rich	 flavor	 which	 characterizes	 a	 perfect	 brew.	 You	 should
therefore	 count	 on	 2½	 hours	 at	 least	 from	 start	 to	 finish.	 Though	 the
preliminary	 cooking	 in	 butter	 requires	 some	 watching,	 the	 actual
simmering	can	proceed	almost	unattended.



For	6	to	8	servings

1½	lbs.	or	about	5	cups	of	thinly	sliced	yellow	onions
3	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
A	heavy-bottomed,	4-quart	covered	saucepan

Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	 with	 the	 butter	 and	 oil	 in	 the	 covered
saucepan	for	15	minutes.

1	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	sugar	(helps	the	onions	to	brown)

Uncover,	raise	heat	to	moderate,	and	stir	 in	the	salt	and	sugar.	Cook
for	30	to	40	minutes	stirring	frequently,	until	the	onions	have	turned
an	even,	deep,	golden	brown.

3	Tb	flour
Sprinkle	in	the	flour	and	stir	for	3	minutes.

2	quarts	boiling	brown	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	or	1	quart	of
boiling	water	and	1	quart	of	stock	or	bouillon

½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste

Off	heat,	blend	in	the	boiling	liquid.	Add	the	wine,	and	season	to	taste.
Simmer	 partially	 covered	 for	 30	 to	 40	 minutes	 or	 more,	 skimming
occasionally.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	 Set	 aside	 uncovered	 until	 ready	 to	 serve.	 Then	 reheat	 to	 the
simmer.

3	Tb	cognac
Rounds	of	hard-toasted	French	bread	(see	recipe	following)
1	to	2	cups	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese

Just	before	serving,	stir	in	the	cognac.	Pour	into	a	soup	tureen	or	soup



cups	over	the	rounds	of	bread,	and	pass	the	cheese	separately.

GARNISHINGS	FOR	ONION	SOUP
Croûtes—hard-toasted	French	bread

12	to	16	slices	of	French	bread	cut	¾	to	1	inch	thick
Place	the	bread	in	one	layer	in	a	roasting	pan	and	bake	in	a	preheated
325-degree	 oven	 for	 about	 half	 an	 hour,	 until	 it	 is	 thoroughly	 dried
out	and	lightly	browned.

Olive	oil	or	beef	drippings	A	cut	clove	of	garlic
Halfway	through	the	baking,	each	side	may	be	basted	with	a	teaspoon
of	 olive	 oil	 or	 beef	 drippings;	 and	 after	 baking,	 each	 piece	 may	 be
rubbed	with	cut	garlic.

Croûtes	au	Fromage—cheese	croûtes

Grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese
Olive	oil	or	beef	drippings

Spread	one	 side	of	 each	 croûte	with	 grated	 cheese	 and	 sprinkle	with
drops	of	olive	oil	or	beef	drippings.	Brown	under	a	hot	broiler	before
serving.

VARIATIONS
Soupe	à	l’Oignon	Gratinée
[Onion	Soup	Gratinéed	with	Cheese]

The	preceding	onion	soup
A	fireproof	tureen	or	casserole	or	individual	onion	soup	pots
2	ounces	Swiss	cheese	cut	into	very	thin	slivers
1	Tb	grated	raw	onion



12	to	16	rounds	of	hard-toasted	French	bread
1½	cups	grated	Swiss,	or	Swiss	and	Parmesan	cheese
1	Tb	olive	oil	or	melted	butter

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.
Bring	the	soup	to	the	boil	and	pour	into	the	tureen	or	soup	pots.	Stir	in
the	slivered	cheese	and	grated	onion.	Float	the	rounds	of	toast	on	top
of	the	soup,	and	spread	the	grated	cheese	over	it.	Sprinkle	with	the	oil
or	butter.	Bake	 for	20	minutes	 in	 the	oven,	 then	 set	 for	a	minute	or
two	 under	 a	 preheated	 broiler	 to	 brown	 the	 top	 lightly.	 Serve
immediately.

Soupe	Gratinée	des	Trois	Gourmandes
[Onion	Soup	Gratinéed	de	Luxe]

A	 final	 fillip	 to	 the	preceding	onion	 soup	may	be	accomplished	 in
the	kitchen	just	before	serving	or	by	the	server	at	the	table.

A	2-quart	bowl
1	tsp	cornstarch
1	egg	yolk
1	tsp	Worcestershire	sauce
3	Tb	cognac

Beat	the	cornstarch	into	the	egg	yolk,	then	the	Worcestershire	and	the
cognac.

The	preceding	onion	soup
A	soup	ladle
A	serving	fork

Just	before	serving	 the	soup,	 lift	up	an	edge	of	 the	crust	with	a	 fork
and	remove	a	 ladleful	of	 soup.	 In	a	 thin	stream	of	droplets,	beat	 the
soup	 into	 the	 egg	 yolk	 mixture	 with	 a	 fork.	 Gradually	 beat	 in	 two
more	ladlefuls,	which	may	be	added	more	rapidly.



Again	lifting	up	the	crust,	pour	the	mixture	back	into	the	soup.	Then
reach	 in	 under	 the	 crust	with	 the	 ladle	 and	 stir	 gently	 to	 blend	 the
mixture	into	the	rest	of	the	soup.	Serve.

SOUPE	AU	PISTOU
[Provençal	Vegetable	Soup	with	Garlic,	Basil	and	Herbs]

Early	summer	is	the	Mediterranean	season	for	soupe	au	pistou,	when
fresh	 basil,	 fresh	 white	 beans,	 and	 broad	 mange-tout	 beans	 are	 all
suddenly	 available,	 and	 the	 market	 women	 shout	 in	 the	 streets,
“Mesdames,	 faites	 le	 bon	 piste,	 faites	 le	 pistou!”	 The	pistou	 itself,	 like	 the
Italian	pesta,	is	a	sauce	made	of	garlic,	basil,	tomato	and	cheese,	and	is
just	as	good	on	spaghetti	as	it	is	in	this	rich	vegetable	soup.	Fortunately,
this	 soup	 is	 not	 confined	 to	 summer	 and	 fresh	 vegetables,	 for	 you	 can
use	canned	navy	beans	or	kidney	beans,	fresh	or	frozen	string	beans,	and
a	fragrant	dried	basil.	Other	vegetables	in	season	may	be	added	with	the
green	beans	as	you	wish,	such	as	peas,	diced	zucchini,	and	green	or	red
bell	peppers.

For	6	to	8	servings

3	quarts	water
2	cups	each:	diced	carrots,	diced	boiling	potatoes,	diced	white	of	leek
or	onions
1	Tb	salt
(If	available,	2	cups	fresh	white	beans,	and	omit	the	navy	beans
farther	on)
Either	boil	the	water,	vegetables,	and	salt	slowly	in	a	6-quart	kettle	for
40	 minutes;	 or	 pressure-cook	 for	 5	 minutes,	 release	 pressure,	 and
simmer	uncovered	for	15	to	20	minutes.	Correct	seasoning.

2	cups	diced	green	beans	or	1	package	frozen	“cut”	beans
2	cups	cooked	or	canned	navy	beans	or	kidney	beans
⅓	cup	broken	spaghetti	or	vermicelli
1	slice	stale	white	bread,	crumbled



⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	saffron

Twenty	 minutes	 before	 serving,	 so	 the	 green	 vegetables	 will	 retain
their	 freshness,	 add	 the	 beans,	 spaghetti	 or	 vermicelli,	 bread	 and
seasonings	 to	 the	 boiling	 soup.	 Boil	 slowly	 for	 about	 15	minutes,	 or
until	 the	 green	 beans	 are	 just	 cooked	 through.	 Correct	 seasoning
again.

4	cloves	mashed	garlic
6	Tb	fresh	tomato	purée,	or	4	Tb	tomato	paste
¼	cup	chopped	fresh	basil	or	1½	Tb	fragrant	dried	basil
½	cup	grated	Parmesan	cheese
¼	to	½	cup	fruity	olive	oil

Prepare	 the	 following	 pistou	 while	 the	 soup	 is	 cooking:	 place	 the
garlic,	tomato	purée	or	paste,	basil,	and	cheese	in	the	soup	tureen	and
blend	to	a	paste	with	a	wooden	spoon;	then,	drop	by	drop,	beat	in	the
olive	oil.	When	the	soup	is	ready	for	serving,	beat	a	cup	gradually	into
the	pistou.	Pour	in	the	rest	of	the	soup.	Serve	with	hot	French	bread,	or
hard-toasted	bread	rounds	basted	with	olive	oil,	this	page.

		AÏGO	BOUÏDO
[Garlic	Soup]

Enjoying	 your	 first	 bowl	 of	 garlic	 soup,	 you	 might	 never	 suspect
what	it	is	made	of.	Because	the	garlic	is	boiled,	its	after-effects	are	at	a
minimum,	 and	 its	 flavor	 becomes	 exquisite,	 aromatic,	 and	 almost
undefinable.	Along	the	Mediterranean,	an	aïgo	bouïdo	is	considered	to	be
very	good	indeed	for	the	liver,	blood	circulation,	general	physical	tone,
and	spiritual	health.	A	head	of	garlic	is	not	at	all	too	much	for	2	quarts
of	soup.	For	some	addicts,	it	is	not	even	enough.

For	6	to	8	people

1	separated	head	or	about	16	cloves	whole,	unpeeled	garlic



Drop	 garlic	 cloves	 in	 boiling	 water	 and	 boil	 30	 seconds.	 Drain,	 run
cold	water	over	them,	and	peel.

2	quarts	water
2	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
2	cloves
¼	tsp	sage
¼	tsp	thyme
½	bay	leaf
4	parsley	sprigs
3	Tb	olive	oil
A	3-quart	saucepan

Place	 the	 garlic	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 ingredients	 in	 the	 saucepan	 and
boil	slowly	for	30	minutes.	Correct	seasoning.

A	wire	whip
3	egg	yolks
A	soup	tureen
3	to	4	Tb	olive	oil

Beat	the	egg	yolks	in	the	soup	tureen	for	a	minute	until	they	are	thick
and	 sticky.	 Drop	 by	 drop,	 beat	 in	 the	 olive	 oil	 as	 for	 making	 a
mayonnaise.

A	strainer
Rounds	of	hard-toasted	French	bread
1	cup	of	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese

Just	before	serving,	beat	a	ladleful	of	hot	soup	into	the	egg	mixture	by
droplets.	Gradually	 strain	 in	 the	 rest,	 beating,	 and	pressing	 the	 juice
out	 of	 the	 garlic.	 Serve	 immediately,	 accompanied	by	 the	bread	 and
cheese.



VARIATIONS
Soupe	à	l’Oeuf,	Provençale
[Garlic	Soup	with	Poached	Eggs]

The	preceding	garlic	soup,	omitting	the	egg	yolk	and	olive	oil	liaison
6	very	fresh	eggs

After	 the	 soup	 has	 been	 simmered	 for	 half	 an	 hour,	 strain	 it	 into	 a
wide,	 shallow	 saucepan.	 Correct	 seasoning	 and	 bring	 to	 a	 simmer.
Following	directions	here	poach	the	eggs	in	the	soup.

6	to	8	rounds	of	hard-toasted	French	bread
2	to	3	Tb	chopped	parsley
1	cup	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese

Place	a	round	of	bread	in	each	soup	plate	and	top	with	a	poached	egg.
Pour	 in	 the	 soup	 and	 decorate	 with	 parsley.	 Pass	 the	 cheese
separately.

Soupe	à	l’Ail	aux	Pommes	de	Terre
[Saffron-flavored	Garlic	Soup	with	Potatoes]

Ingredients	for	garlic	soup,	omitting	the	egg	yolk	and	olive	oil	liaison
3	cups	diced	“boiling”	potatoes
Pinch	of	saffron

After	the	garlic	soup	has	simmered	for	30	minutes,	strain	it	and	return
it	 to	 the	saucepan.	Simmer	 the	potatoes	 in	 the	soup	with	 the	saffron
for	 about	 20	minutes	 or	 until	 tender.	 Correct	 seasoning.	 Serve	 with
French	bread	and	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese.

SOUPE	AUX	CHOUX	—	GARBURE
[Main-course	Cabbage	Soup]

This	fine	and	uncomplicated	peasant	soup	is	a	comforting	dish	for	a



cold	 winter	 day.	 In	 the	 Basque	 country,	 a	 good	 cabbage	 soup	 must
always	 include	 a	 chunk	 of	 lard	 rance,	 their	 slightly	 rancid	 and	 much
appreciated	 salt	 pork;	 otherwise,	 the	 dish	 is	 considered	 to	 lack
distinction.	 In	 neighboring	 Béarn,	 confit	 d’oie—preserved	 goose—is
added	to	the	pot	to	warm	up	in	the	soup	at	the	end	of	its	cooking.
For	about	8	people

3½	quarts	water
3	to	4	cups	peeled,	quartered	“boiling”	potatoes
A	1½-pound	chunk	of	lean	salt	pork,	lean	bacon,	or	smoked,
unprocessed	ham
Place	 the	water,	potatoes,	 and	meat	 in	 the	kettle	and	bring	 it	 to	 the
boil.

2	pounds	or	3	quarts	of	roughly	sliced	cabbage
8	crushed	peppercorns	or	a	big	pinch	of	ground	chili	peppers
Salt	as	necessary,	added	near	the	end
6	parsley	sprigs	tied	with	1	bay	leaf
½	tsp	marjoram
½	tsp	thyme
4	cloves	mashed	garlic
2	medium	onions	studded	with	2	cloves
2	peeled,	quartered	carrots	Optional	additions:
2	to	4	peeled,	quartered	turnips
2	to	3	sliced	celery	stalks	1	to	2	cups	fresh	white	beans,	or	half-
cooked	navy	beans,	or	add	canned	white	or	red	beans	to	soup	10	to
15	minutes	before	end	of	simmering
Add	 the	 cabbage	 and	 all	 the	 other	 ingredients.	 Simmer	 partially
covered	for	1½	to	2	hours	or	until	the	meat	is	tender.	Discard	parsley
bundle.	Remove	the	meat,	slice	it	into	serving	pieces,	and	return	it	to
the	kettle.	Correct	seasoning.	Skim	off	accumulated	fat.	(*)	If	not	to	be
served	 immediately,	 set	 aside	 uncovered.	 Reheat	 to	 simmer	 before



serving.

Rounds	of	hard-toasted	French	bread
Serve	in	a	tureen	or	soup	plates,	accompanied	by	the	bread.

TWO	MEDITERRANEAN	FISH	SOUPS
How	to	make	a	real	Mediterranean	fish	soup	is	always	a	subject	of

lively	and	utterly	dogmatic	discussion	among	French	experts;	and	if	you
do	 not	 happen	 to	 live	 on	 the	 Mediterranean,	 you	 cannot	 obtain	 the
particular	 rockfish,	 gurnards,	 mullets,	 weavers,	 sea	 eels,	 wrasses,	 and
breams	which	 they	consider	absolutely	essential.	But	you	can	make	an
extremely	good	fish	soup	even	if	you	have	only	frozen	fish	and	canned
clam	 juice	 to	 work	 with	 because	 the	 other	 essential	 flavorings	 of
tomatoes,	 onions	 or	 leeks,	 garlic,	 herbs,	 and	 olive	 oil	 are	 always
available.

FISH	TO	USE

Fish	soups	are	usually	made	from	lean	fish.	The	flavor	of	the	soup	is
more	interesting	if	as	many	varieties	of	fish	are	included	as	possible,	and
the	soup	has	more	body	if	a	proportion	of	gelatinous	fish	such	as	halibut,
eel,	 and	 some	 of	 the	 firmer-fleshed	 flounder	 types	 are	 used.	 Here	 are
some	suggestions:
Rock,	Calico,	or	Sea	Bass
Cod	or	Lingcod
Conger	or	Sea	Eel
Flounder
Grouper
Grunt
Haddock
Hake	or	Whiting
Halibut
Lemon	Sole
Perch
Pollock	or	Boston	Bluefish



Porgy	or	Scup
Redfish	or	Red	Drum
Rockfish	or	Sculpin
Scrod
Red	or	Gray	Snapper
Spot
Fresh-water	Trout;	Sea	Trout	or	Weakfish
Shellfish—Clams,	Scallops,	Mussels,	Crab,	Lobster
To	 prepare	 the	 fish	 for	 cooking,	 have	 them	 cleaned	 and	 scaled.

Discard	the	gills.	Save	heads	and	trimmings	for	fish	stock.	Cut	large	fish
into	 crosswise	 slices	 2	 inches	 wide.	 Scrub	 clams.	 Scrub	 and	 soak	 the
mussels.	 Wash	 scallops.	 If	 using	 live	 crab	 or	 lobster,	 split	 them	 just
before	cooking.	Remove	the	sand	sack	and	intestinal	tube	from	lobsters.

SOUPE	DE	POISSON
[Strained	Fish	Soup]

Soupe	de	poisson	has	the	same	taste	as	bouillabaisse,	but	the	soup	is
strained	 and	 pasta	 is	 cooked	 in	 it	 to	 give	 a	 light	 liaison.	 If	 you	 are
making	the	soup	on	the	Mediterranean,	you	will	come	home	with	dozens
of	 tiny,	 freshly	 caught	 fish	 all	 colors	 of	 the	 rainbow.	 Elsewhere,	 use
whole	fish,	fish	heads,	bones,	and	trimmings,	shellfish	carcasses,	or	just
bottled	clam	juice.
For	6	to	8	people

A	soup	kettle
1	cup	minced	onions
¾	cup	of	minced	leek,	or	½	cup	more	onions
½	cup	olive	oil

Cook	 the	 onions	 and	 leeks	 slowly	 in	 olive	 oil	 for	 5	minutes	 or	 until
almost	tender	but	not	browned.

4	cloves	mashed	garlic
1	lb.	of	ripe,	red	tomatoes	roughly	chopped,	or	1½	cups	drained
canned	tomatoes,	or	¼	cup	tomato	paste



Stir	 in	 the	 garlic	 and	 tomatoes.	 Raise	 heat	 to	moderate	 and	 cook	 5
minutes	more.

2½	quarts	water
6	parsley	sprigs
1	bay	leaf
½	tsp	thyme	or	basil
⅛	tsp	fennel
2	big	pinches	of	saffron
A	2-inch	piece	or	½	tsp	dried	orange	peel
⅛	tsp	pepper
1	Tb	salt	(none	if	clam	juice	is	used)
3	to	4	lbs.	lean	fish,	fish	heads,	bones,	and	trimmings,	shellfish
remains,	or	frozen	fish	from	the	list,	this	page.	Or,	1	quart	clam
juice,	1½	quarts	of	water,	and	no	salt
Add	 the	 water,	 herbs,	 seasonings,	 and	 fish	 to	 the	 kettle	 and	 cook
uncovered	at	a	moderate	boil	for	30	to	40	minutes.

½	cup	to	⅔	cup	spaghetti	or	vermicelli	broken	into	2-inch	pieces
A	3-quart	saucepan
Strain	 the	 soup	 into	 the	 saucepan,	pressing	 juices	out	of	 ingredients.
Correct	 seasoning,	adding	a	bit	more	 saffron	 if	you	 feel	 it	necessary.
Stir	in	the	pasta	and	boil	for	10	to	12	minutes	or	until	tender.	Correct
seasoning	again.

Rounds	of	hard-toasted	French	bread
1	to	2	cups	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese	and	rouille	(following
recipe)
Pour	the	soup	into	a	tureen	or	soup	plates	over	the	bread	rounds,	and
pass	the	cheese	and	rouille	separately.

VARIATION



Substitute	3	or	4	cups	of	diced	“boiling”	potatoes	 for	 the	pasta,	or
poach	eggs	in	the	soup	as	for	the	garlic	soup.

Rouille
[Garlic,	Pimiento,	and	Chili	Pepper	Sauce]
The	 following	 strong	 sauce	 is	 passed	 separately	 with	 fish	 soup	 or

bouillabaisse;	each	guest	helps	himself	and	stirs	it	into	the	soup.
For	about	1	cup

¼	cup	chopped	red	bell	pepper	simmered	for	several	minutes	in
salted	water	and	drained,	or	canned	pimiento
A	small	chili	pepper	boiled	until	tender,	or	drops	of	Tabasco	sauce
1	medium	potato	cooked	in	the	soup
4	cloves	mashed	garlic
1	tsp	basil,	thyme,	or	savory
Pound	all	ingredients	in	a	bowl	or	mortar	for	several	minutes	to	form
a	very	smooth,	sticky	paste.

4	to	6	Tb	fruity	olive	oil	Salt	and	pepper
Drop	 by	 drop,	 pound	 or	 beat	 in	 the	 olive	 oil	 as	 for	 making	 a
mayonnaise.	Season	to	taste.

2	or	3	Tb	hot	soup
Just	 before	 serving,	 beat	 in	 the	 hot	 soup	 by	 driblets.	 Pour	 into	 a
sauceboat.

BOUILLABAISSE
[Bouillabaisse]

You	 can	 make	 as	 dramatic	 a	 production	 as	 you	 want	 out	 of	 a
bouillabaisse,	 but	 remember	 it	 originated	 as	 a	 simple,	 Mediterranean
fisherman’s	 soup,	made	 from	 the	day’s	 catch	or	 its	 unsalable	 leftovers,
and	flavored	with	the	typical	condiments	of	the	region—olive	oil,	garlic,
leeks	or	onions,	 tomatoes,	 and	herbs.	The	 fish	are	 rapidly	boiled	 in	an



aromatic	 broth	 and	 are	 removed	 to	 a	 platter;	 the	 broth	 is	 served	 in	 a
tureen.	Each	guest	helps	himself	to	both	and	eats	them	together	in	a	big
soup	plate.	 If	you	wish	 to	serve	wine,	choose	a	 rosé,	or	a	 light,	 strong,
young	 red	 such	as	a	Côtes	de	Provence	or	Beaujolais,	or	a	 strong,	dry,
white	wine	from	the	Côtes	de	Provence,	or	a	Riesling.

Ideally	you	should	pick	six	or	more	varieties	of	fresh	fish,	which	is
why	a	bouillabaisse	is	at	its	best	when	made	for	at	least	six	people.	Some
of	 the	 fish	 should	 be	 firm-fleshed	 and	 gelatinous	 like	 halibut,	 eel,	 and
winter	 flounder,	 and	 some	 tender	and	 flaky	 like	hake,	baby	cod,	 small
pollock,	and	lemon	sole.	Shellfish	are	neither	necessary	nor	particularly
typical,	 but	 they	 always	 add	 glamor	 and	 color	 if	 you	 wish	 to	 include
them.

The	fish,	except	for	live	lobsters	and	crabs,	may	be	cleaned,	sliced,
and	 refrigerated	 several	 hours	 before	 the	 final	 cooking.	 The	 soup	 base
may	be	boiled	and	strained.	The	actual	cooking	of	 the	 fish	 in	 the	soup
will	 take	 only	 about	 20	 minutes,	 and	 then	 the	 dish	 should	 be	 served
immediately.

For	6	to	8	people

Ingredients	for	the	preceding	soupe	de	poisson,	minus	the	pasta.	Use
fish	heads,	bones,	and	trimmings,	and	if	you	have	not	enough	of
them,	strengthen	the	soup	base	with	bottled	clam	juice
Boil	the	soup	ingredients	for	30	to	40	minutes	as	described	in	the	fish
soup	recipe.	Strain,	pressing	 juices	out	of	 ingredients.	Taste	carefully
for	 seasoning	 and	 strength.	 It	 should	be	delicious	 at	 this	 point,	 so	 it
will	 need	 no	 further	 fussing	 with	 later.	 You	 should	 have	 about	 2½
quarts	in	a	high,	rather	narrow	kettle.

6	to	8	pounds	assorted	lean	fish,	and	shellfish	if	you	wish,	selected
and	prepared	from	the	suggestions
Bring	the	soup	to	a	rapid	boil	20	minutes	before	serving.	Add	lobsters,
crabs,	 and	 firm-fleshed	 fish.	 Bring	 quickly	 back	 to	 the	 boil	 and	 boil
rapidly	for	5	minutes.	Add	the	tender-fleshed	fish,	the	clams,	mussels,
and	scallops.	Bring	rapidly	to	the	boil	again	and	boil	5	minutes	more
or	 until	 the	 fish	 are	 just	 tender	 when	 pierced	 with	 a	 fork.	 Do	 not
overcook.



A	hot	platter
A	soup	tureen
Rounds	of	hard-toasted	French	bread
⅓	cup	roughly	chopped	fresh	parsley
Optional:	A	bowl	of	rouille
Immediately	 lift	 out	 the	 fish	 and	 arrange	 on	 the	 platter.	 Correct
seasoning,	 and	 pour	 the	 soup	 into	 the	 tureen	 over	 rounds	 of	 French
bread.	Spoon	a	ladleful	of	soup	over	the	fish,	and	sprinkle	parsley	over
both	 fish	 and	 soup.	 Serve	 immediately	 accompanied	 by	 the	 optional
rouille.



CHAPTER	TWO

SAUCES
Sauces

SAUCES	 ARE	 the	 splendor	 and	 glory	 of	 French	 cooking,	 yet	 there	 is
nothing	 secret	 or	mysterious	 about	making	 them.	While	 their	 roster	 is
stupendous	to	look	at,	it	is	not	mind-boggling	when	you	begin	to	realize
that	their	multitude	divides	itself	into	a	half-dozen	very	definite	groups,
and	 that	each	 sauce	 in	a	particular	group	 is	made	 in	 the	 same	general
way.	 For	 instance,	 every	 sauce	 in	 the	white	 sauce	 group	 of	 béchamels
and	 veloutés	 calls	 for	 an	 identical	 technique,	 but	 any	 change	 in
ingredients	 or	 trimmings	 gives	 the	 sauce	 a	 new	 name:	 béchamel	 with
grated	cheese	 is	 a	mornay,	with	minced	herbs,	 a	chivry;	while	a	white-
wine	fish	velouté	with	dollops	of	cream,	egg	yolk,	and	butter	becomes	an
elegant	 sauce	 parisienne.	 The	 same	 is	 true	 of	 the	 egg	 yolk	 and	 butter
group.	When	flavored	with	tarragon,	pepper,	and	vinegar	it’s	a	béarnaise,
but	 lemon	makes	 it	 a	hollandaise—yet	hollandaise	with	a	 folding-in	of
whipped	cream	becomes	a	mousseline.	Thus	as	soon	as	you	have	put	into
practice	the	basic	formulas	for	the	few	mother	sauces,	you	are	equipped
to	command	the	whole	towering	edifice.	Here	are	the	mother	groups	in
the	 sauce	 family:	 THE	WHITE	 SAUCES	 These	 stem	 from	 those	 two	 cousins,
béchamel	and	velouté.	Both	use	a	 flour	and	butter	 roux	as	a	 thickening
agent	 but	 béchamel	 is	 a	milk-based	 sauce	while	 the	 velouté	 has	 a	 fish,
meat,	 or	 poultry	 base.	 These	 are	 fundamental	 to	 the	 great	 tradition	 of
French	cooking,	as	well	as	being	indispensable	to	the	home	cook.	Their
most	useful	function,	these	easy	white	sauces,	 is	to	make	an	appetizing
and	 interesting	dish	out	of	 such	 simple	 ingredients	as	hard-boiled	eggs



and	 diced	 mushrooms—gratiner	 them	 with	 a	 sauce	 mornay.	 Or	 flake
leftover	 poached	 fish,	 mix	 it	 with	 cooked	 onions,	 and	 fold	 it	 with	 a
cream	sauce	before	browning	it	with	buttered	bread	crumbs	in	the	oven.
A	 boiled	 hen	 becomes	 a	 poule	 à	 l’ivoire	 when	 napped	 with	 a	 creamy
chicken	velouté	and	accompanied	with	little	braised	onions	and	steamed
rice.	It	would	be	hard	for	the	everyday	cook	to	get	along	without	these
good	simple	sauces.
THE	 BROWN	 SAUCES	 Long	 simmered	 daubes	 and	 pot	 roasts,	 stews	 and

ragouts,	 these	 need	 brown	 sauces,	 as	 do	 sautés,	 brown	 fricassees,	 and
roasts.	More	complicated	to	make	than	the	white	sauces,	they	have	gone
through	 some	changes	 since	 the	 grande	 cuisine	 of	Escoffier,	 as	 you	will
see	in	their	discussion.
TOMATO	SAUCE,	EGG	YOLK	 AND	BUTTER	SAUCES	 (Hollandaise	 family),	and	THE

OIL	AND	VINEGAR	(French	dressing)	GROUP	These	need	no	introduction.
FLAVORED	 BUTTERS	 Butters	 creamed	with	 various	 herbs,	 seasonings,	 or

purées	are	 included	in	the	sauce	roster.	But	the	most	 important	here	 is
the	hot	butter	sauce	beurre	blanc,	a	signature	of	the	nouvelle	cuisine	which
emerged	in	the	early	1970s.	Originally	it	was	a	specialty	sauce	reserved
usually	for	boiled	fish	and	vegetables,	but,	easy	to	make	(once	you	know
how!),	 it	has	become	the	ubiquitous	restaurant	sauce	 for	all	manner	of
fish,	meat,	and	fowl.
Rich	 sauces,	 especially	 the	 butter	 sauces	 and	 white	 sauces	 with

cream	and	butter,	 should	be	used	 sparingly,	never	more	 than	one	 to	 a
meal.	A	sauce	should	not	be	considered	a	disguise	or	a	mask;	its	role	is
to	 point	 up,	 to	 prolong,	 or	 to	 complement	 the	 taste	 of	 the	 food	 it
accompanies,	 or	 to	 contrast	 with	 it,	 or	 to	 give	 variety	 to	 its	 mode	 of
presentation.

WHITE	SAUCES
Sauces	Blanches

White	sauces	are	rapidly	made	with	a	white	roux	(butter	and	flour
cooked	 together)	 plus	 milk,	 or	 white	 stock.	 They	 go	 with	 eggs,	 fish,
chicken,	 veal,	 and	 vegetables.	 They	 are	 also	 the	 base	 for	 cream	 soups,
soufflés,	and	many	of	the	hot	hors	d’oeuvres.
Sauce	béchamel	in	the	time	of	Louis	XIV	was	a	more	elaborate	sauce



than	it	 is	today.	Then	it	was	a	simmering	of	milk,	veal,	and	seasonings
with	an	enrichment	of	cream.	In	modern	French	cooking,	a	béchamel	is
a	 quickly	 made	 milk-based	 foundation	 requiring	 only	 the	 addition	 of
butter,	cream,	herbs,	or	other	flavorings	to	turn	it	into	a	proper	sauce.
Sauce	 velouté	 is	 made	 in	 exactly	 the	 same	 way,	 but	 its	 roux	 is

moistened	with	chicken,	veal,	or	fish	stock,	often	with	a	wine	flavoring.
Milk	or	cream	are	included	if	you	wish.

The	roux
In	French	cooking,	 the	 flour	and	butter,	which	act	as	a	 thickening

agent	 for	 the	 sauce,	 are	 always	 cooked	 slowly	 together	 for	 several
minutes	 before	 any	 liquid	 is	 added.	 This	 is	 called	 a	 roux.	 The	 cooking
eliminates	that	raw,	pasty	taste	uncooked	flour	will	give	to	a	sauce,	and
also	prepares	the	flour	particles	to	absorb	the	liquid.	The	thickness	of	a
sauce	is	 in	direct	relation	to	the	proportion	of	flour	you	use	per	cup	of
liquid.	The	following	table	is	based	on	American	all-purpose	hard-wheat
flour.	All	flour	measurements	are	for	level	tablespoons	or	fractions.
THIN	SAUCE	OR	SOUP 1	Tb	flour	per	cup	of	liquid
MEDIUM,	GENERAL-PURPOSE	SAUCE 1½	Tb	flour	per	cup	of	liquid
THICK	SAUCE 2	Tb	flour	per	cup	of	liquid
SOUFFLÉ	BASE 3	Tb	flour	per	cup	of	liquid

Cooking	time
Many	 of	 the	 old	 cookbooks	 recommend	 that	 a	 white	 sauce,

especially	a	velouté,	be	 simmered	 for	 several	hours,	 the	object	being	 to
rid	 the	 sauce	of	 its	 floury	 taste,	 and	 to	 concentrate	 flavor.	However,	 if
the	 flour	 and	 butter	 roux	 is	 properly	 cooked	 to	 begin	 with,	 and	 a
concentrated,	well-flavored	 stock	 is	 used,	 both	 of	 these	 problems	 have
been	 solved	 at	 the	 start.	 After	 a	 long	 simmering,	 a	 perfectly	 executed
velouté	will	acquire	a	certain	added	finesse;	and	if	you	have	the	time	to
simmer,	by	all	means	do	so.	But	for	the	practical	purposes	of	this	book,
we	shall	seldom	consider	it	necessary.

Saucepan	note
White	 sauces	 should	 always	 be	 made	 in	 a	 heavy-bottomed



enameled,	stainless	steel,	pyrex,	porcelain,	or	tin-lined	copper	saucepan.
If	a	thin-bottomed	pan	is	used,	it	is	a	poor	heat	conductor	and	the	sauce
may	 scorch	 in	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 pan.	 Aluminum	 tends	 to	 discolor	 a
white	sauce,	particularly	one	containing	wine	or	egg	yolks.

A	NOTE	ON	STOCKS	FOR	VELOUTÉ	SAUCES
The	 recipe	 for	 homemade	 white	 stock	 is	 here;	 for	 white	 chicken

stock	is	here;	for	fish	stock	is	here;	and	for	clam-juice	fish	stock	is	here.
Canned	chicken	broth	may	be	substituted	 for	homemade	white	stock	 if
you	give	it	the	following	preliminary	treatment:	Canned	chicken	broth

2	cups	canned	chicken	broth	or	strained	clear	chicken	and	vegetable
soup
3	Tb	each:	sliced	onions,	carrots,	and	celery
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth
2	parsley	sprigs,	⅓	bay	leaf,	and	a	pinch	of	thyme
Simmer	 the	 chicken	 broth	 or	 soup	 with	 the	 vegetables,	 wine,	 and
herbs	for	30	minutes.	Season	to	taste,	strain,	and	it	is	ready	to	use.

		SAUCE	BÉCHAMEL
				SAUCE	VELOUTÉ
[White	Sauce]

This	basic	sauce	takes	about	5	minutes	to	make,	and	is	 then	ready
for	 the	addition	of	 flavors	or	 enrichments.	 Suggestions	 for	 these	are	at
the	end	of	the	master	recipe.

For	2	cups	(medium	thickness)

A	heavy-bottomed,	6-cup	enameled,	stainless	steel,	lined	copper,
porcelain,	or	pyrex	saucepan
2	Tb	butter
3	Tb	flour
A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon



In	the	saucepan	melt	the	butter	over	low	heat.	Blend	in	the	flour,	and
cook	 slowly,	 stirring,	 until	 the	 butter	 and	 flour	 froth	 together	 for	 2
minutes	without	coloring.	This	is	now	a	white	roux.

2	cups	of	milk	and	¼	tsp	salt	heated	to	the	boil	in	a	small	saucepan
OR	2	cups	boiling	white	stock	(see	notes	in	preceding	paragraph)
A	wire	whip
Remove	roux	from	heat.	As	soon	as	roux	has	stopped	bubbling,	pour	in
all	 the	 hot	 liquid	 at	 once.	 Immediately	 beat	 vigorously	 with	 a	 wire
whip	 to	blend	 liquid	and	 roux,	gathering	 in	all	bits	of	 roux	 from	 the
inside	edges	of	the	pan.
Set	 saucepan	over	moderately	high	heat	and	 stir	with	 the	wire	whip
until	the	sauce	comes	to	the	boil.	Boil	for	1	minute,	stirring.

Salt	and	white	pepper
Remove	from	heat,	and	beat	in	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Sauce	is	now
ready	for	final	flavorings	or	additions.
(*)	If	not	used	immediately,	clean	sauce	off	inside	edges	of	pan	with	a
rubber	scraper.	To	prevent	a	skin	from	forming	on	its	surface,	float	a
thin	film	of	milk,	stock,	or	melted	butter	on	top.	Set	aside	uncovered,
keep	it	hot	over	simmering	water,	refrigerate,	or	freeze	it.

Remarks
If	 you	 follow	 the	 preceding	 directions,	 you	 will	 always	 obtain	 a

smooth	 sauce	 of	 the	 correct	 consistency.	 But	 here	 are	 some	 remedial
measures	in	case	you	need	them:

If	sauce	is	lumpy
If	 your	 roux	 is	 hot,	 and	 your	 liquid	 near	 the	 boil,	 you	 should	 never
have	a	lumpy	sauce.	But	if	there	are	lumps,	force	the	sauce	through	a
very	fine	sieve	or	whirl	it	in	an	electric	blender.	Then	simmer	it	for	5
minutes.

If	sauce	is	too	thick



Bring	the	sauce	to	the	simmer.	Thin	it	out	with	milk,	cream,	or	stock,
beaten	in	a	tablespoon	at	a	time.

If	sauce	is	too	thin
Either	 boil	 it	 down	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat,	 stirring	 continually
with	a	wooden	spoon,	until	it	has	reduced	to	the	correct	consistency;
Or	blend	half	a	tablespoon	of	butter	into	a	paste	with	half	a	tablespoon
of	flour	(beurre	manié).	Off	heat,	beat	the	paste	into	the	sauce	with	a
wire	whip.	Boil	for	1	minute,	stirring.

ENRICHMENTS	FOR	WHITE	SAUCES
The	three	following	enrichments	complete	the	whole	master	system

of	white-sauce	making.	While	a	plain,	well-seasoned	béchamel	or	velouté
may	be	 served	 just	 as	 it	 is,	 the	addition	of	butter,	 cream,	or	 egg	yolks
transforms	it	into	something	infinitely	more	delicious.
Butter	Enrichment
Fresh	butter	stirred	into	a	sauce	just	before	serving	is	the	simplest	of

the	enrichments.	 It	 smooths	out	 the	sauce,	gives	 it	a	slight	 liaison,	and
imparts	that	certain	French	taste	which	seems	to	be	present	in	no	other
type	of	cooking.	For	a	cup	of	simple	sauce,	½	to	1	tablespoon	of	butter	is
sufficient;	as	much	as	½	cup	may	be	beaten	into	a	fine	fish	sauce.	But	if
more	than	a	tablespoon	of	butter	is	beaten	into	a	cup	of	sauce,	the	sauce
should	then	be	served	immediately.	If	it	is	reheated,	or	is	kept	hot,	or	if
it	 is	 used	 for	 a	 gratinéed	 dish,	 the	butter	 either	 liquefies	 and	 the	 sauce
thins	 out	 just	 as	 though	 it	 had	 been	 diluted	 with	 milk,	 or	 the	 butter
releases	itself	from	suspension	and	floats	on	top	of	the	sauce.	However,	if
you	slip	up	and	heat	a	heavily	buttered	sauce,	it	will	quickly	reconstitute
itself	if	you	treat	it	like	turned	hollandaise.

To	enrich	2	cups	of	béchamel	or	velouté

2	to	8	Tb	butter	(1	to	2	Tb	is	the	usual	amount)
A	wire	whip

Just	 before	 serving	 the	 sauce,	 and	 after	 all	 the	 final	 flavorings	 have



been	added,	remove	it	from	heat.	Stir	in	the	butter,	a	half-tablespoon
at	a	time,	beating	until	each	piece	of	butter	has	been	absorbed	into	the
sauce	before	adding	 the	next.	 Spoon	 the	 sauce	over	 the	hot	 food,	or
pour	the	sauce	into	a	warmed	bowl,	and	serve	immediately.

Cream	Enrichment—Cream	Sauce
[Sauce	Crème	—	Sauce	Suprěme]

With	the	addition	of	cream,	a	béchamel	becomes	a	sauce	crème;	and
a	 velouté,	 a	 sauce	 suprême.	 As	 the	 cream	 thins	 out	 the	 sauce,	 the	 basic
béchamel	or	velouté	must	be	thick	enough	initially	so	the	finished	sauce
will	be	of	the	correct	consistency.

Cream	 sauces	 are	 used	 for	 vegetables,	 eggs,	 fish,	 poultry,	 hot	 hors
d’oeuvres,	and	for	dishes	which	are	to	be	gratinéed.

For	2	cups

1½	cups	of	thick	béchamel	or	velouté	(3	Tb	flour,	2½	Tb	butter,	and
1½	cups	liquid)
½	cup	whipping	cream
Salt	and	white	pepper
Lemon	juice

Bring	 the	 sauce	 to	 the	 simmer.	 Beat	 in	 the	 cream	 by	 spoonfuls,
simmering,	until	the	sauce	is	the	consistency	you	wish	it	to	be.	Season
to	taste	with	salt,	pepper,	and	drops	of	lemon	juice.

Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter	(no	butter	if	sauce	is	to	be	used	for
a	gratinéed	dish)
Off	heat,	and	 just	before	serving,	beat	 in	 the	optional	butter	by	half-
tablespoons.

Egg	Yolk	and	Cream	Enrichment
[Sauce	Parisienne	—	formerly	Sauce	Allemande]



Sauces	 enriched	 with	 egg	 yolks	 and	 cream	 are	 among	 the	 richest
and	most	velvety	in	all	 the	French	repertoire.	Sauce	parisienne,	or	sauce
allemande,	 is	 the	 generic	 term,	 but	 it	 invariably	 goes	 by	 another	 name
according	 to	 its	 special	 flavorings	 or	 to	 the	 dish	 it	 accompanies.	 The
simplest,	sauce	poulette,	has	a	base	of	velouté	flavored	with	meat	or	fish,
onions	and	mushrooms.	The	famous	sauce	normande	is	a	velouté	based	on
white-wine	 fish	 stock	 and	 the	 cooking	 liquors	 of	 mussels,	 oysters,
shrimps,	écrevisses,	and	mushrooms.	The	shellfish	sauces	such	as	cardinal,
Nantua,	and	Joinville	are	shellfish	veloutés	with	special	 trimmings	and	a
shellfish	butter	enrichment	beaten	 in	at	 the	end.	As	all	of	 these	 sauces
are	 a	 basic	 velouté	 with	 a	 final	 enrichment	 of	 egg	 yolks,	 cream,	 and
usually	butter,	if	you	can	make	one,	you	can	make	all.
Success	in	making	the	egg	yolk	liaison	is	but	a	realization	that	egg

yolks	will	curdle	and	turn	granular	unless	they	are	beaten	with	a	bit	of
cold	liquid	first,	before	a	hot	liquid	is	gradually	incorporated	into	them
so	 that	 they	 are	 slowly	 heated.	 Once	 this	 preliminary	 step	 has	 been
completed,	 the	 sauce	may	be	brought	 to	 the	boil;	 and	because	 the	egg
yolks	are	supported	by	a	flour-based	sauce	they	may	boil	without	danger
of	curdling.
The	 sauce	 parisienne	 described	 in	 the	 following	 recipe	 is	used	with

eggs,	 fish,	 poultry,	 hot	 hors	 d’oeuvres,	 and	 dishes	 which	 are	 to	 be
gratinéed.	A	heavily	buttered	sauce	parisienne	 is	used	principally	for	fish
poached	in	white	wine,	as	described	beginning	on	this	page	in	the	Fish
chapter.
For	about	2	cups

1½	cups	thick	béchamel	or	velouté	(3	Tb	flour,	2½	Tb	butter,	and	1½
cups	liquid)

A	heavy-bottomed,	8-cup	enameled	saucepan
Bring	the	sauce	to	the	simmer	in	its	saucepan.

2	egg	yolks
½	cup	whipping	cream
An	8-cup	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip



Blend	the	egg	yolks	and	cream	in	the	mixing	bowl	with	a	wire	whip.	A
few	drops	at	a	time,	beat	in	½	cup	of	hot	sauce.	Slowly	beat	in	the	rest
of	the	sauce	in	a	thin	stream.	Pour	the	mixture	back	into	the	saucepan.

A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon
Set	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 and	 stir	 constantly	 with	 a	 wooden
spoon,	reaching	all	over	the	bottom	of	the	pan	until	the	sauce	comes
to	the	boil.	Boil	and	stir	for	1	minute.

Salt	and	white	pepper
Lemon	juice
More	cream	if	necessary

Strain	the	sauce	through	a	fine	sieve	to	remove	coagulated	bits	of	egg
white	 which	 always	 cling	 to	 the	 yolk.	 Rinse	 out	 the	 saucepan	 and
return	 the	 sauce	 to	 it.	 Simmer	 over	 low	 heat	 to	 check	 seasoning,
adding	salt,	pepper,	and	drops	of	lemon	juice	to	taste.	If	sauce	is	too
thick,	beat	in	more	cream	by	spoonfuls.
(*)	If	not	used	immediately,	clean	off	sides	of	pan,	and	float	a	film	of
cream	or	stock	over	the	surface.	Sauce	will	thicken	and	look	custardy
as	 it	 cools,	which	 is	 normal.	 It	will	 smooth	 out	when	 it	 is	 reheated.
(Sauce	may	be	frozen.)

Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter	(occasionally	more	is	called	for;
use	no	butter	if	sauce	is	for	a	gratinéed	dish)
Off	heat,	and	just	before	serving,	stir	in	the	optional	butter	by	bits.

SAUCES	DERIVED	FROM	BÉCHAMEL
AND	VELOUTÉ

Here	are	some	of	 the	principal	 sauces	derived	 from	 sauce	béchamel
and	sauce	velouté,	the	recipes	for	which	are	here.

Sauce	Mornay



[Cheese	Sauce]

For:	 eggs,	 fish,	 poultry,	 veal,	 vegetables,	 pastas,	 and	 hot	 hors
d’oeuvres

Note:	 If	 the	sauce	covers	 foods	which	are	 to	be	baked	or	gratinéed,
use	 the	 minumum	 amount	 of	 cheese	 suggested,	 and	 omit	 the	 butter
enrichment	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 recipe.	 Too	 much	 cheese	 can	 make	 the
sauce	 stringy,	 and	 a	 butter	 enrichment	will	 exude	 from	 the	 top	 of	 the
sauce.

2	cups	of	medium	béchamel	or	velouté
¼	to	½	cup	of	coarsely	grated	Swiss	cheese,	or	a	combination	of
coarsely	grated	Swiss	and	finely	grated	Parmesan
Bring	the	sauce	to	the	boil.	Remove	from	heat,	and	beat	in	the	cheese
until	it	has	melted	and	blended	with	the	sauce.

Salt	and	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Optional:	pinch	of	cayenne	pepper	and	1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter

Season	 to	 taste	with	 salt,	pepper,	nutmeg,	and	optional	 cayenne.	Off
heat	and	just	before	serving,	stir	in	the	optional	butter	a	bit	at	a	time.

Sauce	Aurore
[Béchamel	or	Velouté	with	Tomato	Flavoring]

For:	eggs,	fish,	chicken,	vegetables

2	cups	béchamel	or	velouté,	or	the	cream	sauce
2	to	6	Tb	cooked,	fresh	tomato	purée,	or	tomato	paste

Bring	the	sauce	to	the	simmer.	Stir	in	the	tomato,	a	spoonful	at	a	time,
until	 you	 have	 achieved	 the	 color	 and	 flavor	 you	 wish.	 Correct
seasoning.



1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	fresh	parsley,	chervil,	basil,	or	tarragon

Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 stir	 in	 the	 butter,	 and	 the	 optional
herbs.

Sauce	Chivry
Sauce	à	L’Estragon
[Herbal	White	Wine	Sauce	and	Tarragon	Sauce]

For:	eggs,	fish,	vegetables,	or	poached	chicken

A	small	enameled	saucepan
1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
4	Tb	minced	fresh	chervil,	tarragon,	and	parsley,	or	tarragon	only;
OR	2	Tb	dried	herbs
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions

Place	all	 ingredients	 in	 the	saucepan	and	boil	 slowly	 for	10	minutes,
allowing	 the	wine	 to	 reduce	 to	 about	 3	 tablespoons.	 This	 is	 now	 an
herb	essence.

2	cups	béchamel	or	velouté,	or	the	cream	sauce
Strain	the	essence	into	the	sauce,	pressing	the	juice	out	of	 the	herbs.
Simmer	for	2	to	3	minutes.

3	to	4	Tb	minced	fresh	green	herbs,	or	parsley,	or	tarragon	1	to	2	Tb
softened	butter
Off	 heat,	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 stir	 in	 the	 fresh	 herbs	 and	 the
enrichment	butter.

Sauce	au	Cari
[Light	Curry	Sauce]



For:	fish,	veal,	lamb,	chicken,	turkey,	eggs,	and	vegetables
Here	the	béchamel	or	velouté	sauce	is	made	simultaneously	with	the

curry	flavorings.
For	2½	cups

½	cup	finely	minced	white	or	yellow	onions
4	Tb	butter
An	8-cup	enameled	saucepan

Cook	 the	 onions	 and	 butter	 over	 low	 heat	 for	 10	 minutes	 without
allowing	the	onions	to	color.

2	to	3	Tb	curry	powder
Stir	in	the	curry	powder	and	cook	slowly	for	2	minutes.

4	Tb	flour
Add	the	flour	and	stir	over	low	heat	for	3	minutes	more.

2	cups	boiling	milk,	white	stock,	or	fish	stock
Off	heat,	blend	in	the	boiling	liquid.	Return	sauce	to	heat	and	simmer
slowly	for	10	to	15	minutes,	stirring	occasionally.

4	to	6	Tb	whipping	cream	Salt	and	pepper	Lemon	juice
Then	 stir	 in	 the	 cream	 by	 tablespoons,	 until	 sauce	 has	 thinned	 to
consistency	you	wish.	Check	seasoning,	and	add	lemon	juice	to	taste.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
Optional:	2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley

Off	 heat,	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 stir	 in	 the	 butter	 by	 bits,	 then	 the
optional	parsley.

Sauce	Soubise
[Onion	Sauce]



For:	eggs,	veal,	chicken,	turkey,	 lamb,	vegetables,	and	foods	which
are	to	be	gratinéed

Another	version	of	this	excellent	sauce	is	in	the	Veal	section.
For	about	2½	cups

1	lb.	or	4	cups	of	sliced	yellow	onions
¼	tsp	salt
6	Tb	butter
A	2½-quart,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan

Cook	the	onions	slowly	with	salt	and	butter	in	a	covered	saucepan	for
20	to	30	minutes,	or	until	the	onions	are	very	tender	but	not	browned.

4	Tb	flour
Add	the	flour	and	stir	over	low	heat	for	3	minutes.

2	cups	boiling	milk,	white	stock,	or	fish	stock
Off	heat,	blend	in	the	boiling	liquid.	Then	simmer	the	sauce	slowly	for
15	minutes,	 stirring	occasionally.	Force	 the	 sauce	 through	a	 sieve	or
food	mill,	or	purée	it	in	the	electric	blender.

6	to	8	Tb	whipping	cream	Salt	and	pepper	Pinch	of	nutmeg
Bring	 again	 to	 the	 simmer,	 and	 thin	 out	 to	 desired	 consistency	with
spoonfuls	of	cream.	Add	salt,	pepper,	and	nutmeg	to	taste.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter	(no	butter	if	sauce	is	to	be	used	for	a
gratinéed	dish)
Off	heat	and	just	before	serving,	stir	in	the	enrichment	butter.

		SAUCE	BÂTARDE
				SAUCE	AU	BEURRE
[Mock	Hollandaise]

For:	 boiled	 fish,	 boiled	 chicken,	 boiled	 lamb,	 boiled	 potatoes,



asparagus,	cauliflower,	celery,	broccoli
This	quickly	made	and	useful	sauce	does	not	belong	to	the	béchamel

and	velouté	 family	because	 it	 is	made	with	an	uncooked	roux,	or	beurre
manié.	 A	 golden	 color	 is	 given	 it	 by	 the	 addition	 of	 an	 egg	 yolk,	 and
when	flavored	with	enough	butter	it	suggests	a	hollandaise.

For	2	cups	(medium	thickness)

2	Tb	melted	or	softened	butter
3	Tb	flour
An	8-cup,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan
A	rubber	scraper

Place	 the	 butter	 and	 flour	 in	 the	 saucepan	 and	 blend	 them	 into	 a
smooth	paste	with	a	rubber	scraper.

2	cups	boiling	white	stock,	or	vegetable	cooking	water,	or	water	and
¼	tsp	salt
A	wire	whip

Pour	on	all	the	boiling	liquid	at	once	and	blend	vigorously	with	a	wire
whip.

1	egg	yolk
2	Tb	whipping	cream
An	8-cup	mixing	bowl
Salt	and	white	pepper
1	to	2	Tb	lemon	juice

Blend	the	egg	yolk	and	cream	with	a	wire	whip,	then,	a	few	drops	at	a
time,	beat	in	½	cup	of	sauce.	Beat	in	the	rest	in	a	thin	stream.	Pour	the
mixture	 back	 into	 the	 saucepan.	 Bring	 to	 the	 boil	 over	 moderately
high	heat,	beating,	and	boil	5	seconds.	Remove	from	heat	and	season
to	 taste	 with	 salt,	 pepper,	 and	 lemon	 juice.	 (*)	 If	 not	 used
immediately,	film	surface	with	a	half-tablespoon	of	melted	butter.

4	to	8	Tb	softened	butter



Off	heat,	and	just	before	serving,	beat	in	the	butter,	a	tablespoon	at	a
time.

VARIATIONS
Sauce	aux	Câpres
[Caper	Sauce]

For:	boiled	fish	or	boiled	leg	of	lamb

2	cups	sauce	bâtarde
2	to	3	Tb	capers

Just	before	stirring	in	the	enrichment	butter,	beat	in	the	capers.	Then,
off	heat,	beat	in	the	enrichment	butter.

Sauce	à	la	Moutarde
[Mustard	Sauce]

For:	broiled	mackerel,	herring,	tuna,	or	swordfish

2	cups	sauce	bâtarde	omitting	final	butter	enrichment
2	Tb	strong	Dijon-type	prepared	mustard
4	to	8	Tb	softened	butter

Blend	the	mustard	and	butter	together	with	a	rubber	scraper.	Off	heat,
and	 just	 before	 serving,	 beat	 the	mustard/butter	 by	 tablespoons	 into
the	hot	sauce.

Sauce	aux	Anchois
[Anchovy	Sauce]

For:	boiled	fish	or	boiled	potatoes



2	Tb	canned	anchovies	mashed	into	a	purée	or	1	Tb	anchovy	paste
2	cups	sauce	bâtarde

Just	before	buttering	the	sauce,	beat	in	the	anchovy	mixture	to	taste.
Then	off	heat,	and	before	serving,	beat	in	the	enrichment	butter.

BROWN	SAUCES
Sauces	Brunes

The	 classical	 French	 brown	 sauce	 starts	 out	with	 a	 long-simmered
brown	 meat	 stock	 that	 goes	 into	 the	 making	 of	 an	 equally	 long-
simmered,	lightly	thickened	sauce	base	called	an	espagnole.	The	espagnole
is	simmered	and	skimmed	for	several	hours	more	with	additional	stock
and	flavorings	until	it	finally	develops	into	the	traditional	mother	of	the
brown	sauces,	demi-glace.	This	may	take	several	days	to	accomplish,	and
the	result	is	splendid.	But	as	we	are	concerned	with	less	formal	cooking,
we	shall	discuss	it	no	further.
A	good	brown	sauce	may	have	as	its	thickening	agent	a	brown	roux

of	 flour	 and	 butter,	 or	 cornstarch,	 potato	 starch,	 rice	 starch,	 or
arrowroot.	 A	 flour-thickened	 brown	 sauce	 must	 be	 simmered	 and
skimmed	for	 two	hours	at	 least	 if	 it	 is	 to	develop	 its	 full	 flavor.	Starch
and	arrowroot	 thickenings	 take	but	 a	 few	minutes;	 and	when	properly
made	 they	 are	 very	 good	 indeed.	 Because	 they	 are	 far	more	 useful	 in
home	cooking	than	the	long	simmered	and	more	conventional	sauce,	we
have	used	them	in	most	of	the	main-course	recipes	throughout	this	book.
Following	 are	 three	 interchangeable	 methods	 for	 making	 a	 basic

brown	 sauce.	 Any	 of	 them	 may	 rapidly	 be	 converted	 into	 one	 of	 the
composed	sauces.

A	NOTE	ON	MEAT	STOCKS	FOR	BROWN	SAUCES

Recipes	 for	 making	 brown	 stocks	 are	 here.	 Canned	 beef	 bouillon
may	be	 substituted,	 as	 is,	 for	 stocks	 in	 the	 first	 two	 recipes	 for	 brown
sauce.	If	it	is	to	be	used	in	the	last	recipe,	for	starch-thickened	sauce,	its
canned	flavor	should	first	be	disguised	and	enriched	as	follows	(canned
consommé	tends	to	be	sweet	and	is	not	recommended):

					Canned	beef	bouillon
2	cups	canned	beef	bouillon



3	Tb	each:	finely	minced	onions	and	carrots
1	Tb	finely	minced	celery
½	cup	red	wine,	dry	white	wine,	or	dry	white	vermouth
2	parsley	sprigs
⅓	bay	leaf
⅛	tsp	thyme
Optional:	1	Tb	tomato	paste

Simmer	the	canned	bouillon	with	the	rest	of	the	ingredients	listed	for
20	to	30	minutes.	Strain	through	a	fine	sieve,	and	the	bouillon	is	ready
to	be	turned	into	a	sauce.

BROWN	SAUCE	(1)
SAUCE	BRUNE
[Flour-based	Brown	Sauce]

This	 is	 the	best	of	 the	group	and	the	one	most	nearly	approaching
the	traditional	demi-glace.	Its	preliminaires	are	somewhat	exacting,	and	it
requires	at	least	two	hours	of	simmering;	the	longer	it	cooks	the	better	it
will	be.	It	may	be	refrigerated	for	several	days	and	freezes	perfectly	for
several	weeks.

A	NOTE	ON	BROWN	ROUX

Brown	roux,	which	is	the	thickening	for	this	type	of	sauce,	 is	 flour
and	 fat	 cooked	 together	 until	 the	 flour	 has	 turned	 an	 even,	 nut-brown
color.	For	an	ordinary	sauce,	the	flour	is	cooked	in	rendered	fresh	pork
fat,	or	 in	cooking	oil.	But	 if	 the	sauce	 is	 to	accompany	a	delicate	dish,
such	 as	 foie	 gras,	 eggs,	 or	 vol-au-vent,	 the	 flour	 should	 be	 cooked	 in
clarified	butter—meaning	the	butter	is	melted	and	decanted,	leaving	its
milky	particles	behind,	as	these	burn	and	taste	bitter.
It	 is	 important	 that	 the	 roux	 be	 cooked	 slowly	 and	 evenly.	 If	 the

flour	is	burned,	it	will	not	thicken	the	sauce	as	it	should,	and	it	will	also
impart	an	unpleasant	taste.



For	about	1	quart	of	brown	sauce

A	heavy-bottomed,	2-quart	saucepan
⅓	cup	each:	finely	diced	carrots,	onions,	and	celery
3	Tb	diced	boiled	ham	(or	diced	lean	bacon	simmered	for	10	minutes
in	water,	rinsed,	and	drained)

6	Tb	clarified	butter,	rendered	fresh	pork	fat,	or	cooking	oil
Cook	the	vegetables	and	ham	or	bacon	slowly	in	the	butter,	fat,	or	oil
for	10	minutes.

4	Tb	flour
A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon

Blend	 the	 flour	 into	 the	 vegetables	 and	 stir	 continually	 over
moderately	low	heat	for	8	to	10	minutes,	until	the	flour	slowly	turns	a
golden,	nut	brown.

A	wire	whip
6	cups	boiling	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
2	Tb	tomato	paste
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	3	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp
thyme	tied	in	cheesecloth
Remove	 from	 heat.	With	 a	 wire	 whip,	 immediately	 blend	 in	 all	 the
boiling	liquid	at	once.	Beat	in	the	tomato	paste.	Add	the	herb	bouquet.
Simmer	 slowly,	partially	 covered,	 for	2	hours	or	more,	 skimming	off
fat	 and	 scum	 as	 necessary.	 Add	 more	 liquid	 if	 sauce	 thickens	 too
much.	You	should	end	up	with	about	4	cups	of	sauce,	thick	enough	to
coat	a	spoon	lightly.

Salt	and	pepper
Correct	 seasoning.	 Strain,	 pressing	 juice	 out	 of	 vegetables.	 Degrease
thoroughly,	and	the	sauce	is	ready	to	use.
(*)	If	not	used	immediately,	clean	off	sides	of	pan,	and	float	a	film	of



stock	over	the	top	of	the	sauce	to	prevent	a	skin	from	forming.	When
cold,	cover	and	refrigerate	or	freeze.

BROWN	SAUCE	(2)
		SAUCE	RAGOÛT
[Flour-based	Brown	Sauce	with	Giblets]

Sauce	 ragoût	 is	 essentially	 like	 the	preceding	brown	 sauce,	but	has
more	character,	as	it	includes	bones,	trimmings,	or	giblets	gathered	from
the	 game,	 beef,	 lamb,	 veal,	 goose,	 duck,	 or	 turkey	 the	 sauce	 is	 to	 be
served	with.

For	4	cups

A	heavy-bottomed,	3-to	4-quart	saucepan
1	to	4	cups	of	giblets,	bones,	and	meat	trimmings,	raw	or	cooked
½	cup	chopped	carrots
½	cup	chopped	onions
6	Tb	clarified	butter,	rendered	fresh	pork	fat,	or	cooking	oil;	more	if
needed
Brown	 the	 giblets,	 bones,	 meat	 trimmings	 and	 vegetables	 in	 hot
clarified	butter,	fat,	or	oil.	Remove	them	to	a	side	dish.

4	Tb	flour
Slowly	brown	 the	 flour	 in	 the	 fat	 remaining	 in	 the	 saucepan,	adding
more	fat	if	necessary.

5	to	6	cups	boiling	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Optional:	1	cup	dry	white	wine,	red	wine,	or	⅔	cup	dry	white
vermouth
Optional:	3	Tb	tomato	paste
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	3	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	¼	tsp	thyme
tied	in	cheesecloth



Off	heat,	beat	in	the	boiling	liquid,	optional	wine,	and	optional	tomato
paste.	 Add	 the	 herb	 bouquet	 and	 return	 the	 browned	 ingredients.
Simmer,	 skimming	 as	 necessary,	 for	 2	 to	 4	 hours.	 Strain,	 degrease,
correct	seasoning,	and	the	sauce	is	ready	to	use.

VARIATIONS
Sauce	Poivrade
[Brown	Game	Sauce]

This	is	the	same	as	sauce	ragoût.	If	the	game	has	been	marinated,	a
cup	 or	 two	 of	 the	marinade	 is	 used	 instead	 of	 the	 optional	wine.	 The
final	sauce	is	highly	seasoned	with	pepper.

Sauce	Venaison
[Brown	Sauce	for	Venison]

This	 is	 sauce	 poivrade	 with	 ½	 cup	 red	 currant	 jelly	 and	 ½	 cup
whipping	cream	beaten	into	it	just	before	serving.

BROWN	SAUCE	(3)

		JUS	LIÉ
[Starch-thickened	Brown	Sauce]

Jus	 lié	 is	 a	most	useful	alternative	 to	 the	preceding	 long-simmered
brown	 sauces,	 and	 takes	 about	 5	 minutes	 to	 prepare.	 But	 it	 has	 no
culinary	interest	whatsoever	if	it	is	not	made	with	an	excellent	base,	as	it
is	 only	 stock	 thickened	 with	 cornstarch	 or	 arrowroot.	 The	 sauce	 is
usually	made	with	the	liquids	obtained	from	the	simmering	or	stewing	of
meats,	 and	 therefore	 acquires	 a	 good,	 strong	 flavor.	 If	 it	 is	made	 from
canned	 bouillon,	 the	 bouillon	 should	 first	 be	 simmered	with	wine	 and
seasonings	as	described	under	meat	stocks.	Cornstarch	is	the	thickening
for	ordinary	brown	sauces	of	this	type.	Arrowroot	is	used	when	the	sauce



is	 to	 be	 very	 clear	 and	 limpid,	 such	 as	 that	 for	 the	 ham	 braised	 in
Madeira	 or	 the	 duck	 with	 orange.	 (Potato	 starch	 and	 rice	 starch	 are
French	equivalents	of	cornstarch.)	For	2	cups

2	Tb	cornstarch	or	arrowroot
2	cups	of	excellent	brown	stock,	or	canned	beef	bouillon	simmered
with	wine	and	seasonings
A	4-cup	saucepan
A	wire	whip
Blend	 the	 cornstarch	 or	 arrowroot	with	 2	 tablespoons	 of	 cold	 stock,
then	beat	in	the	rest	of	the	stock.	Simmer	for	5	minutes,	or	until	sauce
has	cleared	and	is	lightly	thickened.	Correct	seasoning.

Optional:	¼	cup	Madeira,	port,	or	cognac
Add	optional	wine	or	cognac,	and	simmer	for	2	to	3	minutes,	tasting,
until	 the	 alcohol	 has	 evaporated.	 (*)	 Sauce	 may	 be	 set	 aside,	 and
reheated	when	needed.

SAUCES	DERIVED	FROM	BROWN	SAUCE
Following	 are	 some	 of	 the	 principal	 composed	 sauces	 which	 are

made	with	 any	 of	 the	 three	 preceding	 brown	 sauces.	 They	 are	 almost
always	combined	with	the	cooking	juices	of	the	dishes	they	accompany,
and	thereby	pick	up	additional	flavor.

Sauce	Diable
[Peppery	Brown	Sauce]

For:	 broiled	 chicken,	 roast	 or	 braised	 pork,	 pork	 chops,	 hot	 meat
leftovers
A	4-cup	saucepan	or	your	meat-cooking	pan	with	its	degreased	juices
1	to	2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions



1	Tb	butter	or	cooking	fat
1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
Cook	the	shallots	or	green	onions	slowly	with	the	butter	or	cooking	fat
for	2	minutes	without	browning.	Then	add	the	wine	and	boil	it	down
rapidly	until	it	has	reduced	to	3	or	4	tablespoons.

2	cups	brown	sauce
Black	pepper
Cayenne	pepper
Pour	 in	 the	 sauce	 and	 simmer	 for	 2	 minutes.	 Season	 with	 enough
pepper	to	give	it	a	spicy	taste.

1	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
2	to	3	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley	or	mixed	green	herbs
Off	heat,	and	just	before	serving,	swirl	butter	into	the	sauce	a	bit	at	a
time.	Stir	in	the	parsley	or	herbs.

Sauce	Piquante
[Brown	Sauce	with	Pickles	and	Capers]

For:	 roast	 or	 braised	 pork,	 pork	 chops,	 boiled	 or	 braised	 tongue,
boiled	beef,	and	hot	meat	leftovers

The	preceding	sauce	diable	plus:
2	Tb	finely	chopped	pickles
2	Tb	capers
Just	 before	 removing	 the	 sauce	 from	 heat,	 stir	 in	 the	 pickles	 and
capers.	Simmer	a	moment,	then,	off	heat,	beat	in	the	butter	and	herbs.

Sauce	Robert



[Brown	Mustard	Sauce]

For:	roast	or	braised	pork,	pork	chops,	boiled	beef,	broiled	chicken,
or	turkey,	hot	meat	leftovers,	hamburgers
A	heavy-bottomed,	6-cup	saucepan	or	your	meat-cooking	pan	with	its
degreased	juices
¼	cup	finely	minced	yellow	onions
1	Tb	butter
1	tsp	oil	or	cooking	fat
Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	with	 the	 butter	 and	 oil	 or	 fat,	 for	 10	 to	 15
minutes	until	they	are	tender	and	lightly	browned.

1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	vermouth
Add	the	wine	and	boil	 it	down	rapidly	until	 it	has	reduced	to	3	or	4
tablespoons.

2	cups	brown	sauce
Add	the	brown	sauce	and	simmer	10	minutes.	Correct	seasoning.

3	to	4	Tb	Dijon-type	prepared	mustard	creamed	with	2	or	3	Tb
softened	butter	and	⅛	tsp	sugar
2	to	3	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley
Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 beat	 the	mustard	mixture	 into	 the
sauce,	tasting.	Beat	in	the	parsley,	and	serve.

Sauce	Brune	aux	Fines	Herbes
Sauce	Brune	à	l’Estragon
[Brown	Herb	or	Tarragon	Sauce]

For:	 sautéed	 chicken,	 veal,	 rabbit,	 braised	 vegetables,	 hot	 meat
leftovers,	and	poached	or	baked	eggs
A	2-to	3-cup	enameled	saucepan



1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
4	Tb	fresh	herbs	or	2	Tb	dried	herbs	as	follows:	parsley,	basil,	chervil,
rosemary,	oregano,	and	tarragon	only
Place	 all	 the	 ingredients	 in	 the	 saucepan	 and	 boil	 slowly	 for	 10
minutes,	reducing	the	wine	to	2	or	3	tablespoons.	This	is	now	an	herb
essence.

2	cups	of	brown	sauce
A	6-to	8-cup	saucepan
Strain	the	herb	essence	into	the	brown	sauce,	pressing	the	juices	out	of
the	herbs.	Simmer	for	1	minute.

1	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
2	to	3	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley,	mixed	green	herbs,	or	tarragon
Off	heat,	and	just	before	serving,	beat	the	butter	into	the	sauce	by	bits,
then	beat	in	the	herbs.

Sauce	Brune	au	Cari
[Brown	Curry	Sauce]

For:	lamb,	chicken,	beef,	rice,	and	egg	dishes

A	heavy-bottomed,	8-cup	saucepan
1½	cups	finely	minced	yellow	onions
2	Tb	butter
1	tsp	oil
Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	 in	 the	 butter	 and	 oil	 for	 about	 15	minutes,
until	they	are	tender	and	lightly	browned.

3	to	4	Tb	curry	powder



Blend	in	the	curry	powder	and	cook	slowly	for	1	minute.

Optional:	2	cloves	mashed	garlic
Stir	in	the	optional	garlic	and	cook	slowly	for	half	a	minute.

2	cups	brown	sauce
Add	the	brown	sauce	and	simmer	for	10	minutes.

2	to	3	tsp	lemon	juice
Correct	seasoning	and	add	lemon	juice	to	taste.

1	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
2	to	3	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley
Off	heat,	and	just	before	serving,	beat	in	the	butter	by	bits.	Stir	in	the
parsley.

Sauce	Duxelles
[Brown	Mushroom	Sauce]

For:	broiled	or	sautéed	chicken,	veal,	 rabbit,	or	 for	egg	dishes,	hot
meat	leftovers,	or	pastas

A	heavy-bottomed,	8-cup	saucepan
¼	lb.	(1	cup)	finely	minced	fresh	mushrooms	or	mushroom	stems
only
2	Tb	shallots	or	green	onions
1	Tb	butter
½	Tb	oil
Sauté	the	mushrooms	with	the	shallots	or	onions	in	hot	butter	and	oil
for	4	to	5	minutes.

½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth



Add	 the	 wine	 and	 boil	 it	 down	 rapidly	 until	 it	 has	 reduced	 almost
completely.

1½	cups	brown	sauce
1½	Tb	tomato	paste
Stir	 in	 the	brown	sauce	and	tomato	paste	and	simmer	for	5	minutes.
Correct	seasoning.

1	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
3	to	4	Tb	mixed	green	herbs	or	parsley
Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 stir	 in	 the	 butter	 by	 bits,	 then	 the
herbs	or	parsley.

Sauce	Chasseur
[Brown	Mushroom	Sauce	with	Fresh	Tomatoes,	Garlic,	and	Herbs]

For:	same	as	preceding	sauce	duxelles
Sauce	chasseur	 is	almost	 the	 same	as	 sauce	duxelles,	but	a	bit	more

hearty	in	flavor.	The	recipe	for	it	is	described	in	the	Veal	section	under
escalopes	de	veau	chasseur.

Sauce	Madère
[Brown	Madeira	Sauce]

Sauce	au	Porto
[Brown	Port-wine	Sauce]

For:	filet	of	beef,	or	for	ham,	veal,	chicken	livers,	and	egg	dishes,	or
to	sauce	a	garniture	for	vol-au-vents

½	cup	Madeira	or	port
A	6-cup	saucepan



Boil	 the	 wine	 in	 the	 saucepan	 until	 it	 has	 reduced	 to	 about	 3
tablespoons.

2	cups	excellent	brown	sauce
Optional:	1	to	2	tsp	meat	glaze
3	to	4	Tb	Madeira	or	port,	if	necessary
Add	the	brown	sauce	and	simmer	for	a	minute	or	two.	Taste	carefully
for	seasoning	and	strength,	adding	meat	glaze	if	you	have	it	and	feel	it
necessary.	 If	more	wine	 is	needed,	 add	 it	 by	 tablespoons,	 simmering
briefly	to	evaporate	the	alcohol.

2	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
Off	heat	and	just	before	serving,	beat	in	the	butter	by	bits.

Sauce	Périgueux
[Brown	Madeira	Sauce	with	Truffles]

For:	filet	of	beef,	fresh	foie	gras,	ham,	veal,	egg	dishes,	and	timbales

The	preceding	sauce	Madère
2	to	4	diced	canned	truffles	and	their	juice
Prepare	 the	 Madeira	 sauce	 as	 in	 the	 preceding	 recipe,	 but	 add	 the
truffle	 juice	 to	 reduce	 with	 the	 Madeira	 at	 the	 beginning.	 After
flavoring	 the	 sauce,	 stir	 in	 the	 truffles	 and	 simmer	 for	 a	minute.	Off
heat,	beat	the	butter	into	the	sauce	just	before	serving.

OTHER	BROWN	SAUCES

The	 following	brown	 sauces	 are	 incorporated	 into	 recipes	 in	 other
parts	of	the	book.

Brown	deglazing	sauce



This	sauce	is	made	by	dissolving	the	coagulated	cooking	juices	in	a
roasting	 or	 sautéing	 pan	 with	 wine	 or	 stock	 after	 the	 meat	 has	 been
removed.	The	liquid	is	boiled	down	until	it	is	syrupy.	Off	heat	a	lump	of
butter	is	swirled	in	to	give	the	sauce	a	slight	liaison.	It	is	one	of	the	most
delicious,	useful,	and	simple	of	all	the	brown	sauces,	and	is	described	in
countless	 recipes.	 A	 good	 illustration	 is	 the	 deglazing	 sauce	 for	 roast
chicken.

Sauce	à	l’Italienne,	a	brown	sauce	with	ham,	mushrooms,	and	herbs,	as
described	under	braised	sweetbreads.	The	sauce	may	also	be	used	for
brains,	sautéed	liver,	egg	dishes,	and	pastas.

Sauce	Bordelaise,	a	red	wine	sauce	with	beef	marrow,	described	in	the
Kidney	section	under	rognons	de	veau	à	la	bordelaise.	The	sauce	is	also
good	with	steaks,	hamburgers,	and	egg	dishes.

Sauce	à	l’Orange,	a	brown	sauce	with	orange	flavoring	and	orange	peel,	as
described	in	the	Duck	section	for	canard	à	l’orange.	The	same	sauce	could
also	be	used	with	baked	ham	or	roast	pork.

Sauce	Bourguignonne,	a	red	wine	sauce	always	accompanied	by	a	garniture
of	bacon,	mushrooms,	and	braised	onions,	as	described	under	poached
eggs	à	la	bourguignonne.	It	also	goes	with	sweetbreads	or	brains,	sautéed
beef,	and	chicken.	Boeuf	bourguignon	and	coq	au	vin	are	examples.

TOMATO	SAUCES
Sauces	Tomate

SAUCE	TOMATE
[Tomato	Sauce]

This	 good	 basic	 tomato	 sauce	 is	 served	 just	 as	 it	 is,	 or	 may	 be
flavored	with	herbs	or	combined	with	other	sauces	whenever	you	wish	a
tomato	 flavoring.	 It	 is	 at	 its	 best	 with	 fresh	 tomatoes,	 but	 canned
tomatoes	or	 canned	 tomato	purée	will	 also	produce	a	good	 sauce.	You
will	notice,	during	its	simmering,	that	it	really	should	cook	for	about	an
hour	and	a	half	to	develop	its	full	flavor.



For	about	2½	cups

A	heavy-bottomed,	2½-quart	saucepan
¼	cup	each:	finely	diced	carrots,	onions,	and	celery
2	Tb	minced	boiled	ham;	OR	2	Tb	minced	lean	bacon,	simmered	for
10	minutes	in	water,	rinsed,	and	drained

3	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
Cook	the	vegetables	and	the	ham	or	bacon	slowly	in	the	butter	and	oil
for	10	minutes	without	letting	them	brown.

1½	Tb	flour
Blend	 the	 flour	 into	 the	 ham	 and	 vegetables,	 and	 cook	 slowly	 for	 3
minutes,	stirring.

1½	cups	boiling	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Off	heat,	beat	in	the	stock	or	bouillon.

2	lbs.	(4	cups)	chopped,	ripe,	red	tomatoes	which	need	not	be	peeled;
OR	3	cups	canned	tomatoes;	OR	1½	cups	canned	tomato	purée	and
1½	cups	water

¼	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	sugar
2	unpeeled	cloves	garlic
4	parsley	sprigs
½	bay	leaf
¼	tsp	thyme
Stir	in	the	tomatoes,	salt,	and	sugar.	Add	the	garlic	and	herbs.	Simmer
for	1½	to	2	hours,	skimming	occasionally,	and	adding	water	 if	sauce
reduces	 and	 thickens	 too	much.	 You	 should	 end	 up	 with	 about	 2½
cups	of	rich,	fairly	thick	sauce.



1	to	2	Tb	tomato	paste,	if	necessary
Strain,	pressing	juice	out	of	ingredients.	Correct	seasoning.	Stir	in	1	to
2	 tablespoons	 of	 tomato	 paste	 if	 you	 feel	 the	 sauce	 lacks	 color,	 and
simmer	again	for	5	minutes.
(*)	If	not	used	immediately,	film	surface	with	stock	or	a	few	drops	of
oil.	May	be	refrigerated	or	frozen.

COULIS	DE	TOMATES	À	LA	PROVENCALE
[Fresh	Tomato	Purée	with	Garlic	and	Herbs]

For:	 broiled	or	boiled	 chicken,	 boiled	beef,	meat	patties,	 hot	meat
leftovers,	eggs,	pastas,	and	pizzas
Here	is	a	thick,	concentrated	tomato	sauce	with	real	Mediterranean

flavor.
For	about	2	cups

A	heavy-bottomed,	3-quart	saucepan
⅓	cup	finely	minced	yellow	onions
2	Tb	olive	oil
Cook	 the	onions	 and	olive	 oil	 slowly	 together	 for	 about	10	minutes,
until	the	onions	are	tender	but	not	browned.

2	tsp	flour
Stir	in	the	flour	and	cook	slowly	for	3	minutes	without	browning.

3	lbs.	ripe	red	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	chopped	(about
4½	cups)

⅛	tsp	sugar
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp
thyme	tied	in	cheesecloth

⅛	tsp	fennel
⅛	tsp	basil



Small	pinch	of	saffron
Small	pinch	of	coriander
A	1-inch	piece	(¼	tsp)	dried	orange	peel
½	tsp	salt

1	to	2	Tb	tomato	paste,	if	necessary
Salt	and	pepper
Stir	 in	 the	 tomatoes,	 sugar,	 garlic,	 herbs,	 and	 seasonings.	 Cover	 pan
and	cook	slowly	for	10	minutes,	so	the	tomatoes	will	render	more	of
their	 juice.	Then	uncover	and	simmer	for	about	half	an	hour,	adding
spoonfuls	 of	 tomato	 juice	 or	 water	 if	 the	 sauce	 becomes	 so	 thick	 it
risks	 scorching.	 The	 purée	 is	 done	when	 it	 tastes	 thoroughly	 cooked
and	 is	 thick	 enough	 to	 form	 a	 mass	 in	 the	 spoon.	 Remove	 herb
bouquet.	 If	 necessary,	 stir	 in	 1	 or	 2	 tablespoons	 of	 tomato	 paste	 for
color,	 and	 simmer	 2	 minutes.	 Correct	 seasoning.	 Strain	 the	 sauce	 if
you	wish.
(*)	May	be	refrigerated	or	frozen.

THE	HOLLANDAISE	FAMILY
SAUCE	HOLLANDAISE
[Hollandaise	 Sauce:	 Egg	 Yolk	 and	 Butter	 Sauce	 flavored	 with
Lemon	Juice]

Hollandaise	sauce	is	made	of	warmed	egg	yolks	flavored	with	lemon
juice,	 into	 which	 butter	 is	 gradually	 incorporated	 to	 make	 a	 thick,
yellow,	creamy	sauce.	It	is	probably	the	most	famous	of	all	sauces,	and	is
often	 the	most	dreaded,	as	 the	egg	yolks	can	curdle	and	 the	 sauce	can
turn.	 It	 is	 extremely	 easy	 and	 almost	 foolproof	 to	make	 in	 the	 electric
blender,	and	we	give	 the	recipe	on	this	page.	But	we	 feel	 it	 is	of	great
importance	that	you	learn	how	to	make	hollandaise	by	hand,	for	part	of
every	good	cook’s	general	knowledge	is	a	thorough	familiarity	with	the
vagaries	 of	 egg	 yolks	 under	 all	 conditions.	 The	 following	 recipe	 takes



about	5	minutes,	and	is	almost	as	fast	as	blender	hollandaise.	It	is	only
one	of	numerous	methods	 for	hollandaise,	 all	 of	which	accomplish	 the
same	 result,	 that	 of	 forcing	 egg	 yolks	 to	 absorb	 butter	 and	 hold	 it	 in
creamy	suspension.

TWO	POINTS	TO	REMEMBER	when	making	hollandaise	by	hand
The	heating	and	thickening	of	the	egg	yolks
So	that	the	egg	yolks	will	thicken	into	a	smooth	cream,	they	must	be

heated	slowly	and	gradually.	Too	sudden	heat	will	make	them	granular.
Overcooking	scrambles	them.	You	may	beat	them	over	hot	water	or	over
low	 heat;	 it	 makes	 no	 difference	 as	 long	 as	 the	 process	 is	 slow	 and
gentle.
The	butter
Egg	yolks	will	readily	absorb	a	certain	quantity	of	butter	when	it	is

fed	 to	 them	 gradually,	 giving	 them	 time	 to	 incorporate	 each	 addition
before	 another	 is	 presented.	 When	 too	 much	 is	 added	 at	 a	 time,
particularly	at	first,	the	sauce	will	not	thicken.	And	if	the	total	amount	of
butter	is	more	than	the	yolks	can	absorb,	the	sauce	will	curdle.	About	3
ounces	of	butter	is	the	usual	maximum	amount	per	yolk.	But	if	you	have
never	made	hollandaise	before,	it	is	safer	not	to	go	over	2	ounces	or	¼
cup.
For	1	to	1½	cups	hollandaise—serving	4	to	6	people

6	to	8	ounces	of	butter	(¾	to	1	cup	or	1½	to	2	sticks)
A	small	saucepan
Cut	the	butter	into	pieces	and	melt	 it	 in	the	saucepan	over	moderate
heat.	Then	set	it	aside.

A	4-to	6-cup,	medium-weight,	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
A	wire	whip
3	egg	yolks
Beat	 the	egg	yolks	 for	about	1	minute	 in	 the	saucepan,	or	until	 they
become	thick	and	sticky.

1	Tb	cold	water



1	Tb	lemon	juice
Big	pinch	of	salt
Add	the	water,	lemon	juice,	and	salt,	and	beat	for	half	a	minute	more.

1	Tb	cold	butter
A	pan	of	cold	water	(to	cool	off	the	bottom	of	the	saucepan	if
necessary)
Add	the	tablespoon	of	cold	butter,	but	do	not	beat	it	in.	Then	place	the
saucepan	over	very	 low	heat	or	barely	 simmering	water	and	 stir	 the
egg	 yolks	with	 a	wire	whip	 until	 they	 slowly	 thicken	 into	 a	 smooth
cream.	This	will	take	1	to	2	minutes.	If	they	seem	to	be	thickening	too
quickly,	 or	 even	 suggest	 a	 lumpy	 quality,	 immediately	 plunge	 the
bottom	of	the	pan	in	cold	water,	beating	the	yolks	to	cool	them.	Then
continue	 beating	 over	 heat.	 The	 egg	 yolks	 have	 thickened	 enough
when	you	can	begin	to	see	the	bottom	of	the	pan	between	strokes,	and
the	mixture	forms	a	light	cream	on	the	wires	of	the	whip.

1	Tb	cold	butter
Immediately	remove	from	heat	and	beat	in	the	cold	butter,	which	will
cool	the	egg	yolks	and	stop	their	cooking.

The	melted	butter
Then	 beating	 the	 egg	 yolks	 with	 a	 wire	 whip,	 pour	 on	 the	 melted
butter	 by	 droplets	 or	 quarter-teaspoonfuls	 until	 the	 sauce	 begins	 to
thicken	 into	 a	 very	heavy	 cream.	Then	pour	 the	butter	 a	 little	more
rapidly.	Omit	the	milky	residue	at	the	bottom	of	the	butter	pan.

Salt	and	white	pepper
Drops	of	lemon	juice
Season	the	sauce	to	taste	with	salt,	pepper,	and	lemon	juice.
Keeping	the	sauce	warm
Hollandaise	 is	 served	warm,	not	hot.	 If	 it	 is	kept	 too	warm,	 it	will

thin	out	or	curdle.	It	can	be	held	perfectly	for	an	hour	or	more	near	the
very	faint	heat	of	a	gas	pilot	light	on	the	stove,	or	in	a	pan	of	lukewarm



water.	 As	 hollandaise	 made	 with	 the	 maximum	 amount	 of	 butter	 is
difficult	 to	 hold,	 use	 the	 minimum	 suggested	 in	 the	 recipe,	 then	 beat
softened	or	tepid	butter	into	the	sauce	just	before	serving.
A	restaurant	technique
A	 tablespoon	or	 two	of	béchamel	or	velouté	 sauce,	beaten	 into	 the

hollandaise,	or	a	teaspoon	of	cornstarch	beaten	into	the	egg	yolks	at	the
beginning,	will	help	to	hold	a	sauce	that	is	to	be	kept	warm	for	a	long
period	of	time.
If	the	sauce	is	too	thick
Beat	 in	 1	 to	 2	 tablespoons	 of	 hot	water,	 vegetable	 cooking	 liquid,

stock,	milk,	or	cream.
If	the	sauce	refuses	to	thicken
If	you	have	beaten	in	your	butter	too	quickly,	and	the	sauce	refuses

to	thicken,	it	is	easily	remedied.	Rinse	out	a	mixing	bowl	with	hot	water.
Put	 in	 a	 teaspoon	 of	 lemon	 juice	 and	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 the	 sauce.	 Beat
with	 a	 wire	 whip	 for	 a	 moment	 until	 the	 sauce	 creams	 and	 thickens.
Then	beat	 in	 the	 rest	of	 the	 sauce	half	 a	 tablespoon	at	a	 time,	beating
until	 each	 addition	has	 thickened	 in	 the	 sauce	before	 adding	 the	next.
This	always	works.
If	the	sauce	curdles	or	separates—“turned	sauce”
If	 a	 finished	 sauce	 starts	 to	 separate,	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 cold	 water

beaten	 into	 it	 will	 often	 bring	 it	 back.	 If	 not,	 use	 the	 preceding
technique.
Leftover	hollandaise
Leftover	hollandaise	may	be	refrigerated	for	a	day	or	two,	or	may	be

frozen.	It	is	fine	as	an	enrichment	for	veloutés	and	béchamels;	beat	it	into
the	 hot	 white	 sauce	 off	 heat	 and	 a	 tablespoon	 at	 a	 time	 just	 before
serving.
If	 the	 leftover	 sauce	 is	 to	 be	 used	 again	 as	 a	 hollandaise,	 beat	 2

tablespoons	 of	 it	 in	 a	 saucepan	 over	 very	 low	 heat	 or	 hot	 water.
Gradually	beat	in	the	rest	of	the	sauce	by	spoonfuls.
Hollandaise	Sauce	Made	in	the	Electric	Blender
This	 very	 quick	 method	 for	 making	 hollandaise	 cannot	 fail	 when

you	add	your	butter	in	a	small	stream	of	droplets.	If	the	sauce	refuses	to
thicken,	pour	 it	 out,	 then	pour	 it	back	 into	 the	whizzing	machine	 in	a
thin	stream	of	droplets.	As	the	butter	cools,	it	begins	to	cream	and	forms



itself	 into	a	 thick	 sauce.	 If	you	are	used	 to	handmade	hollandaise,	you
may	find	the	blender	variety	lacks	something	in	quality;	this	is	perhaps
due	to	complete	homogenization.	But	as	the	technique	is	well	within	the
capabilities	of	an	8-year-old	child,	it	has	much	to	recommend	it.
For	about	¾	cup

3	egg	yolks
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
1	to	2	Tb	lemon	juice
Place	 egg	 yolks,	 seasonings,	 and	 1	 tablespoon	 lemon	 juice	 in	 the
blender	jar.	You	can	beat	in	more	when	sauce	is	done	and	will	know
what	proportions	you	like	for	the	next	time.

4	ounces	or	1	stick	of	butter
Cut	 the	 butter	 into	 pieces	 and	 heat	 it	 to	 foaming	 hot	 in	 a	 small
saucepan.

A	towel,	if	you	do	not	have	a	splatterproof	blender	jar
Cover	 the	 jar	 and	 blend	 the	 egg	 yolk	 mixture	 at	 top	 speed	 for	 2
seconds.	 Uncover,	 and	 still	 blending	 at	 top	 speed,	 immediately	 start
pouring	on	the	hot	butter	in	a	thin	stream	of	droplets.	(You	may	need
to	 protect	 yourself	with	 a	 towel	 during	 this	 operation.)	 By	 the	 time
two	thirds	of	the	butter	has	gone	in,	the	sauce	will	be	a	thick	cream.
Omit	 the	 milky	 residue	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 butter	 pan.	 Taste	 the
sauce,	and	blend	in	more	seasonings	if	necessary.
(*)	If	not	used	immediately,	set	the	jar	in	tepid,	but	not	warm,	water.

For	More	Sauce
The	 amount	 of	 butter	 you	 can	 use	 in	 a	 blender	 is	 only	 half	 the

amount	 the	 egg	 yolks	 could	 absorb	 if	 you	 were	 making	 the	 sauce	 by
hand,	when	3	egg	yolks	can	take	8	to	9	ounces	of	butter	rather	than	the
4	ounces	in	the	preceding	recipe.	However,	if	you	added	more	butter	to
the	 blender	 than	 the	 4	 ounces	 specified,	 the	 sauce	 would	 become	 so



thick	that	 it	would	clog	the	machine.	To	double	your	amount	of	sauce,
then,	pour	it	out	of	the	blender	jar	into	a	saucepan	or	bowl	and	beat	into
it	an	additional	½	cup	of	melted	butter,	added	in	a	stream	of	droplets.

OTHER	MEMBERS	OF	THE	HOLLANDAISE	FAMILY
Except	 for	 the	 mousseline	 sabayon	 mentioned	 at	 the	 end	 of	 this

section,	 all	 the	 other	 members	 of	 the	 family	 are	 made	 in	 exactly	 the
same	way	as	hollandaise	sauce.	The	basic	flavorings	may	be	vinegar	and
herbs	instead	of	lemon	juice,	or	concentrated	white-wine	fish	stock,	but
the	technique	does	not	vary.

Stirred-in	Trimmings
A	plain	 hollandaise	may	 have	 a	 number	 of	 trimmings	 such	 as	 the

following	stirred	into	it:

HERBS

For	poached	eggs	or	boiled	fish,	stir	in	a	mixture	of	minced	parsley,
chives,	and	tarragon.

PURÉES	AND	MINCES

From	2	to	3	tablespoons	of	puréed	artichoke	hearts,	asparagus	tips,
or	 cooked	 shellfish	 stirred	 into	 a	hollandaise	make	 it	 a	 good	 sauce	 for
egg	dishes.	Or	use	finely	minced	sautéed	mushrooms—see	the	recipe	for
mushroom	duxelles.

Hollandaise	avec	Blancs	d’Oeufs
[Hollandaise	with	Beaten	Egg	Whites]

For:	 fish,	 soufflés,	 asparagus,	 egg	 dishes	 Stiffly	 beaten	 egg	 whites
folded	into	hollandaise	swell	and	lighten	the	sauce	so	that	it	may	serve
more	people.

2	or	3	stiffly	beaten	egg	whites
1½	cups	sauce	hollandaise



Just	before	serving,	fold	the	egg	whites	into	the	hollandaise.

Sauce	Mousseline
Sauce	Chantilly
[Hollandaise	with	Whipped	Cream]

For:	fish,	soufflés,	asparagus

½	cup	chilled	whipping	cream
Beat	 the	 chilled	 cream	 in	 a	 chilled	 bowl	 with	 a	 chilled	 beater	 as
described	on	this	page.

1½	cups	sauce	hollandaise
Fold	it	into	the	hollandaise	just	before	serving.

Sauce	Maltaise
[Orange-flavored	Hollandaise]

For:	asparagus	or	broccoli

This	sauce	is	made	like	an	ordinary	hollandaise	except	for	the	orange
flavoring.	Proceed	as	follows:

3	egg	yolks
1	Tb	lemon	juice
1	Tb	orange	juice
Pinch	of	salt
2	Tb	cold	butter
⅓	to	⅔	cup	melted	butter
Beat	 the	egg	yolks	until	 thickened,	 then	beat	 in	 the	 liquids	and	 salt.
Add	 1	 tablespoon	 of	 cold	 butter,	 and	 thicken	 the	 mixture	 over	 low



heat.	 Beat	 in	 the	 other	 tablespoon	 of	 cold	 butter,	 then	 the	 melted
butter.

2	to	4	Tb	orange	juice
The	grated	peel	of	an	orange
Finish	the	sauce	by	beating	in	the	orange	juice	by	spoonfuls,	then	the
orange	peel.

HOLLANDAISE	SAUCES	FOR	FISH
When	 a	 hollandaise	 type	 of	 sauce	 is	 to	 accompany	 filets	 of	 fish

poached	 in	 white	 wine,	 or	 a	 fish	 soufflé,	 the	 fish-poaching	 liquid	 is
boiled	down	to	a	concentrated	essence,	or	fumet,	and	is	used	in	place	of
lemon	juice	as	a	flavoring	for	the	sauce.

Sauce	Vin	Blanc
[Hollandaise	with	White-wine	Fish	Fumet]

1	cup	white-wine	fish	stock
Boil	down	the	fish	stock	until	it	has	reduced	to	3	tablespoons.	This	is
now	a	fumet	de	poisson.	Allow	it	to	cool.

Ingredients	for	the	sauce	hollandaise,	omitting	lemon	juice	and	water
Proceed	with	 the	hollandaise	as	usual,	 substituting	 the	 fish	 fumet	 for
the	lemon	juice	and	water.

Sauce	Mousseline	Sabayon
[Hollandaise	with	Cream	and	White-wine	Fish	Fumet]

The	recipe	for	this	extremely	good	sauce,	in	which	the	egg	yolks	are
thickened	with	cream	and	fish	fumet,	is	under	soufflé	de	poisson.



		Sauce	Béarnaise
[Béarnaise	Sauce]

For:	steaks,	boiled	or	fried	fish,	broiled	chicken,	egg	dishes,	timbales
Béarnaise	 sauce	 differs	 from	 hollandaise	 only	 in	 taste	 and	 strength;
instead	of	lemon	juice,	its	basic	flavoring	is	a	reduction	of	wine,	vinegar,
shallots,	pepper,	and	tarragon.	The	techniques	for	making	the	two	sauces
are	similar.

For	1½	cups

¼	cup	wine	vinegar
¼	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	Tb	minced	fresh	tarragon	or	½	Tb	dried	tarragon
⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	salt
A	small	saucepan
Boil	the	vinegar,	wine,	shallots	or	onions,	herbs,	and	seasonings	over
moderate	 heat	 until	 the	 liquid	 has	 reduced	 to	 2	 tablespoons.	 Let	 it
cool.

3	egg	yolks
2	Tb	cold	butter
½	to	⅔	cup	melted	butter
2	Tb	fresh	minced	tarragon	or	parsley
Then	proceed	as	though	making	a	hollandaise.	Beat	the	egg	yolks	until
thick.	Strain	in	the	vinegar	mixture	and	beat.	Add	1	tablespoon	of	cold
butter	 and	 thicken	 the	 egg	 yolks	 over	 low	 heat.	 Beat	 in	 the	 other
tablespoon	of	cold	butter,	then	the	melted	butter	by	droplets.	Correct
seasoning,	and	beat	in	the	tarragon	or	parsley.

VARIATIONS
The	two	following	sauces	are	also	for	steaks,	fish,	chicken,	and	eggs.



Sauce	Choron
[Tomato-flavored	Béarnaise]

2	to	4	Tb	tomato	paste	or	purée
1½	cups	sauce	béarnaise
Beat	 the	 tomato	 by	 tablespoons	 into	 the	 sauce	 béarnaise	 and	 correct
seasoning.

Sauce	Colbert
[Béarnaise	with	Meat	Glaze]

1	to	1½	Tb	meat	glaze,	melted	in	1	Tb	white	wine
1½	cups	sauce	béarnaise
Stir	the	melted	meat	glaze	into	the	sauce	béarnaise.

THE	MAYONNAISE	FAMILY

MAYONNAISE

[Mayonnaise:	Egg	Yolk	and	Oil	Sauce]

Mayonnaise	 like	 hollandaise	 is	 a	 process	 of	 forcing	 egg	 yolks	 to
absorb	 a	 fatty	 substance,	 oil	 in	 this	 case,	 and	 to	 hold	 it	 in	 thick	 and
creamy	suspension.	But	as	the	egg	yolks	do	not	have	to	be	warmed,	the
sauce	is	that	much	simpler	to	make	than	hollandaise.	You	can	make	it	by
machine	 in	 a	 blender,	 although	 the	 processor	 produces	 a	 larger	 and
better	 sauce.	 Either	 way	 it	 is	 almost	 automatic,	 and	 takes	 no	 skill
whatsoever.	 Mayonnaise	 done	 by	 hand	 or	 with	 an	 electric	 beater
requires	familiarity	with	egg	yolks.	And	again,	as	with	hollandaise,	you
should	be	able	to	make	it	by	hand	as	part	of	your	general	mastery	of	the
egg	 yolk.	 It	 is	 certainly	 far	 from	 difficult	 once	 you	 understand	 the
process,	and	after	you	have	done	 it	a	 few	times,	you	should	easily	and
confidently	 be	 able	 to	 whip	 together	 a	 quart	 of	 sauce	 in	 less	 than	 10



minutes.

POINTS	TO	REMEMBER	when	making	mayonnaise	by	hand

Temperature
Mayonnaise	 is	 easiest	 to	make	when	 all	 ingredients	 are	 at	 normal

room	temperature.	Warm	the	mixing	bowl	in	hot	water	to	take	the	chill
off	the	egg	yolks.	Heat	the	oil	to	tepid	if	it	is	cold.

Egg	Yolks
Always	 beat	 the	 egg	 yolks	 for	 a	 minute	 or	 two	 before	 adding

anything	to	them.	As	soon	as	they	are	thick	and	sticky,	they	are	ready	to
absorb	the	oil.

Adding	the	Oil
The	 oil	 must	 be	 added	 very	 slowly	 at	 first,	 in	 droplets,	 until	 the

emulsion	 process	 begins	 and	 the	 sauce	 thickens	 into	 a	 heavy	 cream.
After	this,	the	oil	may	be	incorporated	more	rapidly.

Proportions
The	maximum	amount	of	oil	one	U.S.	Large	egg	yolk	will	absorb	is	6

ounces	 or	 ¾	 cup.	 When	 this	 maximum	 is	 exceeded,	 the	 binding
properties	 of	 the	 egg	 yolks	 break	 down,	 and	 the	 sauce	 thins	 out	 or
curdles.	 If	 you	 have	 never	made	mayonnaise	 before,	 it	 is	 safest	 not	 to
exceed	½	cup	of	oil	per	egg	yolk.	Here	is	a	table	giving	proportions	for
varying	 amounts	 of	 sauce:	

For	2	to	2¾	Cups	of	Hand-beaten	Mayonnaise

NOTE:	The	following	directions	are	for	a	hand-beaten	sauce.	Exactly	the
same	system	is	 followed	for	an	electric	beater.	Use	the	 large	bowl,	and
the	 moderately	 fast	 speed	 for	 whipping	 cream.	 Continually	 push	 the
sauce	into	the	beater	blades	with	a	rubber	scraper.



A	round-bottomed,	2½-to	3-quart	glazed	pottery,	glass,	or	stainless-
steel	mixing	bowl.	Set	it	in	a	heavy	casserole	or	saucepan	to	keep	it
from	slipping.
3	egg	yolks
A	large	wire	whip
Warm	the	bowl	in	hot	water.	Dry	it.	Add	the	egg	yolks	and	beat	for	1
to	2	minutes	until	they	are	thick	and	sticky.

1	Tb	wine	vinegar	or	lemon	juice
½	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	dry	or	prepared	mustard
Add	the	vinegar	or	lemon	juice,	salt,	and	mustard.	Beat	for	30	seconds
more.

1½	to	2¼	cups	of	olive	oil,	salad	oil,	or	a	mixture	of	each.	If	the	oil	is
cold,	heat	it	to	tepid;	and	if	you	are	a	novice,	use	the	minimum
amount.
The	egg	yolks	are	now	ready	to	receive	the	oil,	and	while	 it	goes	 in,
drop	by	drop,	you	must	not	stop	beating	until	the	sauce	has	thickened.
A	speed	of	2	strokes	per	second	is	fast	enough.	You	can	switch	hands
or	 switch	 directions,	 it	 makes	 no	 difference	 as	 long	 as	 you	 beat
constantly.	Add	the	drops	of	oil	with	a	teaspoon,	or	rest	the	lip	of	the
bottle	on	the	edge	of	the	bowl.	Keep	your	eye	on	the	oil	rather	than	on
the	sauce.	Stop	pouring	and	continue	beating	every	10	seconds	or	so,
to	be	sure	the	egg	yolks	are	absorbing	the	oil.	After	⅓	to	½	cup	of	oil
has	been	incorporated,	the	sauce	will	thicken	into	a	very	heavy	cream
and	the	crisis	is	over.	The	beating	arm	may	rest	a	moment.
Then	beat	in	the	remaining	oil	by	1	to	2	tablespoon	dollops,	blending
it	thoroughly	after	each	addition.

Drops	of	wine	vinegar	or	lemon	juice	as	needed
When	the	sauce	becomes	too	thick	and	stiff,	beat	in	drops	of	vinegar
or	lemon	juice	to	thin	it	out.	Then	continue	with	the	oil.



2	Tb	boiling	water
Vinegar,	lemon	juice,	salt,	pepper,	and	mustard
Beat	 the	 boiling	 water	 into	 the	 sauce.	 This	 is	 an	 anti-curdling
insurance.	Season	to	taste.

If	 the	sauce	is	not	used	immediately,	scrape	it	 into	a	small	bowl	and
cover	it	closely	so	a	skin	will	not	form	on	its	surface.

REMEDY	FOR	TURNED	MAYONNAISE
You	will	 never	 have	 trouble	with	 freshly	made	mayonnaise	 if	 you

have	beaten	the	egg	yolks	thoroughly	in	a	warmed	bowl	before	adding
the	 oil,	 if	 the	 oil	 has	 been	 added	 in	 droplets	 until	 the	 sauce	 has
commenced	 to	 thicken,	 and	 if	 you	 have	 not	 exceeded	 the	 maximum
proportions	of	¾	cup	of	oil	per	egg	yolk.	A	mayonnaise	has	turned	when
it	refuses	to	thicken,	or,	in	a	finished	mayonnaise,	when	the	oil	releases
itself	from	suspension	and	the	sauce	curdles.	In	either	case,	the	remedy
is	simple.

Warm	 a	 mixing	 bowl	 in	 hot	 water.	 Dry	 it.	 Add	 1	 teaspoon	 of
prepared	mustard	and	1	tablespoon	of	sauce.	Beat	with	a	wire	whip	for
several	seconds	until	they	cream	and	thicken	together.	Beat	in	the	rest	of
the	sauce	by	teaspoons,	thickening	each	addition	before	adding	the	next.
This	always	works.	Just	be	sure	you	add	the	turned	sauce	a	little	bit	at	a
time,	particularly	at	first.

REFRIGERATION
After	 several	 days	 under	 refrigeration,	mayonnaise	 has	 a	 tendency

to	thin	out,	especially	if	it	is	stirred	before	it	comes	to	room	temperature.
If	it	does	turn,	bring	it	back	using	the	preceding	system.

Mayonnaise	Made	in	the	Electric	Blender	or	Food	Processor
Mayonnaise	in	the	blender	takes	a	whole	egg	whirled	with	a	pinch

of	 mustard	 and	 salt	 for	 30	 seconds,	 then	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 lemon	 juice
whirled	another	10	seconds,	and	finally,	with	the	machine	at	full	speed,
in	goes	a	thin	stream	of	oil,	about	a	cupful.	Add	more,	and	the	machine
clogs.	You	scrape	it	out,	your	rubber	spatula	impaling	itself	on	the	sharp-



pointed	 blade,	 and	 you	 get	 less	 than	 the	 1¼	 cups	 of	mayonnaise	 you
should	 have	 because	 part	 of	 it	 remains	 plastered	 in	 the	 machine.	 It’s
mayonnaise,	 all	 right,	 but	 the	 processor	makes	more	 sauce	 of	 a	 better
quality.	 Here’s	 how:	 For	 about	 2	 cups	 of	 mayonnaise	 in	 the	 food
processor	(with	steel	blade)

1	egg	and	2	yolks
Process	the	egg	and	the	yolks	for	1	minute.

¼	tsp	dry	mustard
½	tsp	salt
Fresh	lemon	juice	and/or	wine	vinegar
With	 the	machine	 running,	 add	 the	mustard,	 salt,	 and	1	 teaspoon	of
lemon	juice	or	vinegar.

2	cups	best	quality	oil—olive	oil	and/or	salad	oil
More	salt,	pepper,	and	lemon	juice	or	vinegar	as	needed
With	 the	 machine	 still	 running,	 start	 adding	 the	 oil	 in	 a	 stream	 of
droplets,	continuing	until	you	have	used	half	the	oil	and	the	sauce	is
very	thick—do	not	stop	processing	until	sauce	has	thickened.	Thin	out
with	 lemon	 juice	 or	 vinegar,	 then	 continue	 with	 the	 oil.	 Season
carefully	with	more	salt,	pepper,	and	lemon	juice	or	vinegar.

MAYONNAISE	VARIATIONS
Mayonnaise	aux	Fines	Herbes
[Mayonnaise	with	Green	Herbs]

For:	hors	d’oeuvres,	eggs,	fish,	meats

3	to	4	Tb	of	fresh,	minced	green	herbs,	such	as	tarragon,	basil,
chervil,	chives,	parsley,	oregano
1½	cups	mayonnaise
If	 the	 sauce	 is	 to	 be	 kept	 for	 several	 days,	 blanch	 the	 herbs	 for	 1



minute	in	boiling	water.	Drain,	run	cold	water	over	them,	and	pat	dry
with	a	towel.	The	herbs	will	look	greener,	and	will	not	turn	sour	in	the
sauce.	Stir	them	into	the	mayonnaise.

Mayonnaise	Verte
[Green	Herbal	Mayonnaise]

For:	hors	d’oeuvres,	eggs,	fish,	meats

Ingredients	for	about	4	Tb	of	herb	purée:
8	to	10	spinach	leaves
2	Tb	chopped	shallots	or	green	onions
¼	cup	water-cress	leaves
¼	cup	parsley	leaves
1	Tb	fresh	tarragon	or	½	Tb	dried	tarragon
Optional:	2	Tb	fresh	chervil
Bring	1	cup	of	water	to	the	boil	in	a	small	saucepan.	Add	the	spinach
and	 shallots	 or	 onions	 and	 boil	 2	minutes.	 Then	 add	 the	 rest	 of	 the
ingredients	 and	 boil	 1	minute	more.	 Strain,	 run	 cold	water	 over	 the
herbs,	and	pat	dry	with	a	towel.

Ingredients	for	1½	cups	of	mayonnaise
If	you	are	making	the	mayonnaise	in	an	electric	blender,	add	the	herbs
to	 the	blender	with	 the	egg,	 then	proceed	as	usual.	For	a	handmade
mayonnaise,	either	purée	the	herbs	in	a	blender,	or	chop	them	into	a
purée	 and	 force	 them	 through	 a	 sieve,	 then	 stir	 the	 herbs	 into	 the
finished	sauce.

Sauce	Riviera
Beurre	Montpellier
[Green	Mayonnaise	with	Butter	or	Cream	Cheese,	Pickles,	Capers,
and	Anchovies]



For:	hors	d’oeuvres,	sandwich	spreads,	eggs,	fish,	and	as	a	spread	for
cold	sliced	veal,	beef,	or	pork

For	about	2¼	cups

2	Tb	each:	sour	pickles,	capers,	and	canned	anchovies	or	anchovy
paste
½	cup	softened	butter	or	cream	cheese
The	preceding	mayonnaise	verte
Chop	 the	pickles,	 capers,	and	anchovies	 into	a	very	 fine	mince,	 then
cream	them	with	the	butter	or	cheese.	Beat	the	mixture,	a	tablespoon
at	a	time,	into	the	green	mayonnaise.

Sauce	Tartare
[Hard	Yolk	Mayonnaise]

The	 yolks	 of	 hard-boiled	 eggs	will	 also	 absorb	 oil	 and	 turn	 into	 a
mayonnaise,	but	with	its	own	characteristic	taste	and	consistency.	When
sieved	egg	whites	are	beaten	into	it,	the	sauce	acquires	a	nice	lightness
and	body	which	makes	it	useful	for	spooning	over	cold	foods.	This	sauce
cannot	be	made	 in	an	electric	blender;	 it	becomes	 so	 stiff	 the	machine
clogs.

For	1½	to	2	cups

3	hard-boiled	egg	yolks
1	Tb	prepared	mustard
¼	tsp	salt
Pound	and	mash	the	egg	yolks	in	a	mixing	bowl	with	the	mustard	and
salt	until	you	have	a	very	smooth	paste.	Unless	the	yolks	are	smooth
and	free	from	lumps,	they	will	not	absorb	the	oil.

1	cup	oil
Wine	vinegar	or	lemon	juice	as	needed
Proceed	 as	 for	 regular	mayonnaise,	 beating	 in	 the	 oil	 by	 droplets	 at



first	until	 the	 sauce	has	 thickened,	 and	 thinning	out	with	vinegar	or
lemon	juice	as	necessary.

3	to	4	Tb	minced	sour	pickles
3	to	4	Tb	minced	capers
2	to	4	Tb	minced	fresh	green	herbs	such	as	parsley,	chives,	tarragon
Optional:	2	or	3	sieved	hard-boiled	egg	whites
Twist	 the	 minced	 pickles	 and	 capers	 into	 a	 ball	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 a
towel	to	extract	their	juice.	Beat	them	gradually	into	the	sauce.	Then
beat	 in	 the	 herbs,	 and	 finally	 the	 optional	 egg	 whites.	 Correct
seasoning.

Sauce	Rémoulade
[Mayonnaise	with	Anchovies,	Pickles,	Capers,	and	Herbs]

With	 the	addition	of	half	a	 teaspoon	or	 so	of	anchovy	paste,	 sauce
rémoulade	 has	 the	 same	 flavorings	 as	 sauce	 tartare,	 but	 it	 is	 a	 regular
mayonnaise	rather	than	one	made	with	hard	yolks.

Mayonnaise	Collée
[Gelatin	Mayonnaise	—	for	Decorating	Cold	Dishes]

When	gelatin	is	dissolved	and	congealed	in	mayonnaise,	the	sauce	will
hold	 its	 shape	 and	 can	 be	 used	 for	 coating	 cold	 eggs,	 fish,	 and
vegetables,	 or	 may	 be	 squeezed	 out	 of	 a	 pastry	 bag	 to	 make	 fancy
decorations.

For	about	1¾	cups
(This	is	the	correct	consistency	for	coating	cold	foods	with	a	spoon.

If	the	mayonnaise	is	to	be	forced	through	a	pastry	bag,	it	must	be	stiffer;
you	would	use	2	tablespoons	of	gelatin	dissolved	in	½	cup	of	liquid	then
beaten	into	2	cups	of	mayonnaise.)
⅓	cup	of	liquid	as	follows:
2	Tb	white	wine	or	white	vermouth



1	Tb	wine	vinegar
2½	Tb	chicken-,	beef-,	or	fish-stock
1	Tb	(1	envelope)	gelatin
Pour	the	liquid	into	a	small	saucepan.	Sprinkle	the	gelatin	on	it	and	let
it	 dissolve	 for	 several	minutes.	 Then	 stir	 the	mixture	 over	 low	 heat
until	the	gelatin	is	completely	free	of	granules.	Let	it	cool	to	tepid.

1½	cups	mayonnaise
Beat	 the	 gelatin	 mixture	 gradually	 into	 the	 mayonnaise.	 Correct
seasoning.	 The	 sauce	 will	 thin	 out,	 then	 gradually	 thicken	 as	 the
gelatin	sets.

Use	 it	 just	 before	 it	 sets.	 If	 it	 becomes	 too	 stiff,	 stir	 it	 briefly	 over
gentle	heat.

Sauce	Aïoli
[Provençal	Garlic	Mayonnaise]

For:	 boiled	 fish,	 especially	 cod,	 bourride	 (Provençal	 fish	 soup),
snails,	boiled	potatoes,	green	beans,	and	hard-boiled	eggs	This	rich,	thick
mayonnaise	 with	 its	 fine	 garlic	 flavor	 must	 be	 made	 in	 a	 fairly
traditional	 way	 if	 it	 is	 to	 have	 its	 correct	 taste	 and	 consistency.	 The
garlic	 should	 be	 pounded	 in	 a	 mortar	 until	 it	 is	 mashed	 into	 a	 very
smooth	 paste.	 You	 cannot	 make	 it	 successfully	 in	 an	 electric	 blender
because	for	some	unfortunate	reason	the	garlic	acquires	a	raw	and	bitter
taste,	 and	 the	 egg	 white	 required	 for	 blender-made	 sauce	 does	 not
produce	 the	 fine,	 heavy	 texture	 that	 is	 characteristic	 of	 a	 proper
Mediterranean	aïoli.

For	about	2	cups

1	slice—⅜	inch	thick—of	stale,	white	homemade-type	bread
3	Tb	milk	or	wine	vinegar
Remove	crusts	and	break	the	bread	into	a	small	bowl.	Stir	in	the	milk



or	vinegar	and	let	the	bread	soak	for	5	to	10	minutes	into	a	soft	pulp.
Twist	 the	 bread	 into	 a	 ball	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 a	 towel	 to	 extract	 the
liquid.

A	heavy	bowl	or	mortar
A	wooden	pestle
4	to	8	cloves	mashed	garlic
Place	the	bread	and	garlic	in	the	bowl	and	pound	with	the	pestle	for	at
least	5	minutes	to	mash	the	garlic	and	bread	into	a	very,	very	smooth
paste.

1	egg	yolk
¼	tsp	salt
Pound	in	the	egg	yolk	and	salt	until	the	mixture	is	thick	and	sticky.

1½	cups	good	olive	oil
A	wire	whip
3	to	4	Tb	boiling	water	or	fish	stock
2	to	3	Tb	lemon	juice
Then,	drop	by	drop,	pound	and	blend	in	the	olive	oil.	When	the	sauce
has	thickened	into	a	heavy	cream,	you	may	switch	from	a	pestle	to	a
wire	 whip	 and	 add	 the	 oil	 a	 little	 bit	 faster.	 Thin	 out	 the	 sauce	 as
necessary	with	drops	of	water	or	stock,	and	lemon	juice.	Sauce	should
remain	quite	heavy,	so	it	holds	its	shape	in	a	spoon.	Correct	seasoning.

NOTE:	If	the	sauce	turns	or	curdles,	you	can	reconstitute	it	by	following
the	directions	for	turned	mayonnaise.
Fish	Soup	Note

If	 the	aïoli	 is	 to	be	stirred	 into	a	 fish	soup,	more	egg	yolks	are	used,
usually	one	per	person.



Sauce	Alsacienne
Sauce	de	Sorges
[Herbal	Mayonnaise	Made	with	Soft-boiled	Eggs]

For:	hot	boiled	beef,	chicken,	or	fish
For	about	2	cups

2	eggs
Boil	the	eggs	for	3	minutes	(3½	if	they	are	chilled).	Place	the	yolks	in
a	mixing	bowl	and	put	the	whites—which	should	be	just	set—aside.

1	Tb	prepared	mustard
½	tsp	salt
1	Tb	wine	vinegar	or	lemon	juice
1	cup	oil
Proceed	 as	 for	 making	 mayonnaise	 beating	 the	 yolks	 until	 they	 are
thick	 and	 sticky,	 then	 beating	 in	 the	 mustard,	 salt,	 and	 vinegar	 or
lemon	juice.	Finally	beat	in	the	oil,	drop	by	drop	at	first.

¼	cup	whipping	cream,	sour	cream,	or	beef,	chicken,	or	fish	stock
1½	Tb	finely	minced	shallot	or	green	onions
1½	Tb	capers
3	to	4	Tb	minced	parsley,	tarragon,	basil,	etc.;	or	dill	only
The	soft-boiled	egg	whites,	chopped	or	seived
Gradually	beat	the	additional	liquid	into	the	sauce.	Beat	in	the	rest	of
the	ingredients.	Season	to	taste.

OIL	AND	VINEGAR	SAUCES

Vinaigrettes

		SAUCE	VINAIGRETTE



[French	Dressing]

For:	salads	and	simple	marinades
The	 basic	 French	 dressing	 of	 France	 is	 a	 mixture	 of	 good	 wine

vinegar,	good	oil,	salt,	pepper,	fresh	green	herbs	in	season,	and	mustard
if	 you	 like	 it.	 Garlic	 is	 employed	 usually	 only	 in	 southern	 France.
Worcestershire,	 curry,	 cheese,	 and	 tomato	 flavorings	 are	 not	 French
additions,	and	sugar	is	heresy.

The	 usual	 proportion	 of	 vinegar	 to	 oil	 is	 one	 to	 three,	 but	 you
should	 establish	 your	 own	 relationship.	 Lemon	 juice	 or	 a	 mixture	 of
lemon	and	vinegar	may	be	used,	and	the	oil	may	be	a	tasteless	salad	oil,
or	olive	oil.	For	salads,	make	the	dressing	in	the	empty	bowl	or	a	jar,	so
that	 all	 ingredients	 are	 well	 blended	 and	 flavored	 before	 the	 salad	 is
mixed	with	the	dressing.	And	be	sure	the	salad	greens	are	perfectly	dry
so	the	dressing	will	adhere	to	the	leaves.	Salad	dressings	are	always	best
when	 freshly	made;	 if	 they	 stand	 around	 for	 several	 days	 they	 tend	 to
acquire	a	rancid	taste.

For	about	½	cup

½	to	2	Tb	good	wine	vinegar	or	a	mixture	of	vinegar	and	lemon	juice
⅛	tsp	salt
Optional:	¼	tsp	dry	mustard
6	Tb	salad	oil	or	olive	oil
Big	pinch	of	pepper
Either	 beat	 the	 vinegar	 or	 lemon	 juice	 in	 a	 bowl	 with	 the	 salt	 and
optional	 mustard	 until	 the	 salt	 is	 dissolved,	 then	 beat	 in	 the	 oil	 by
droplets,	and	season	with	pepper,	or	place	all	 ingredients	 in	a	screw-
top	jar	and	shake	vigorously	for	30	seconds	to	blend	thoroughly.

Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	green	herbs,	such	as	parsley,	chives,
tarragon,	basil;	or	pinch	of	dried	herbs.
Stir	 in	 the	 optional	 herbs	 and	 correct	 seasoning	 just	 before	 dressing
the	salad.



VARIATIONS
Sauce	Ravigote
[Vinaigrette	with	Herbs,	Capers,	and	Onion]

For:	 cold	or	hot	boiled	beef,	boiled	chicken,	boiled	 fish,	pig’s	 feet,
calf’s	head,	and	vegetables

1	cup	vinaigrette
1	tsp	chopped	capers
1	tsp	very	finely	minced	shallot	or	green	onions
2	Tb	minced	fresh	green	herbs,	parsley,	chives,	tarragon,	chervil,	or
parsley	only
Stir	all	the	ingredients	into	the	vinaigrette	and	taste	for	seasoning.

Vinaigrette	à	la	Crème
[Sour	Cream	Dressing—Dill	Sauce]

For:	cold	eggs,	vegetables,	and	cold	or	hot	fish

1	egg	yolk
4	Tb	whipping	cream	or	sour	cream
½	cup	vinaigrette
Lemon	juice	to	taste
2	Tb	minced	fresh	green	herbs,	parsley,	chives,	tarragon,	chervil,
burnet,	or	just	dill
Beat	the	egg	yolk	and	cream	in	a	bowl	until	thoroughly	blended.	Then
beat	 in	 the	 vinaigrette	 in	 a	 stream	 of	 droplets	 as	 though	 making	 a
mayonnaise.	Season	to	taste	with	lemon	juice,	and	stir	in	the	herbs.

Sauce	Moutarde
[Cold	Mustard	Sauce	with	Herbs]



For:	cold	beef,	pork,	and	vegetables

2	Tb	prepared	mustard,	preferably	the	strong	Dijon	type
3	Tb	boiling	water
Rinse	 a	 small	mixing	 bowl	 in	 hot	water.	 Add	 the	mustard	 and	 beat
with	a	wire	whip,	adding	the	water	by	droplets.

⅓	to	½	cup	olive	oil	or	salad	oil
Again	by	droplets,	beat	in	the	olive	oil	to	make	a	thick,	creamy	sauce.

Salt	and	pepper
Lemon	juice
1	to	2	Tb	parsley	or	minced	fresh	green	herbs
Beat	in	salt,	pepper,	and	lemon	juice	to	taste.	Then	beat	in	the	herbs.

HOT	BUTTER	SAUCES

Sauces	au	Beurre

		BEURRE	BLANC-BEURRE	NANTAIS
[White	Butter	Sauce]

For:	boiled	fish	originally,	but	now	for	all	kinds	of	fish	and	shellfish,
and	 vegetables	 such	 as	 asparagus,	 broccoli,	 cauliflower,	 as	 well	 as	 for
sautés	of	veal,	chicken,	kidneys,	livers,	and	so	forth.

This	 famous	 sauce	originated	 in	Nantes,	on	 the	Loire	River,	and	 is
traditionally	 served	 with	 pike,	 brochet	 au	 beurre	 blanc.	 Warm,	 thick,
creamy,	 and	 butter-colored,	 the	 original	 sauce	 is	 only	 butter	 creamed
with	shallots,	wine	vinegar,	lemon,	and	seasonings.	The	idea	was	taken
up	by	nouvelle	cuisine	chefs	in	the	early	seventies	because	it	is	a	far	easier
sauce	system	than	the	long-simmered	classics,	and	it	is	delicious	with	so
many	dishes.	 Rather	 than	 a	 lemon	 and	 vinegar	 base,	 you	 use	 a	 strong
reduction	 of	 fish	 or	 meat	 juices—the	 residue,	 for	 instance,	 of	 sautéed



chicken	livers	or	foie	gras	deglazed	with	wine	and	shallots	and,	perhaps,
a	 dash	 of	 wine	 vinegar	 all	 reduced	 almost	 to	 a	 syrup;	 this	 is	 then
enriched	by	the	beating	in	of	a	large	quantity	of	butter.	It	is,	in	fact,	the
usual	 buttered	 deglazing	 sauce,	 but	 rather	 than	 beating	 in	 2	 or	 3
tablespoons	of	butter	for	4	to	6	servings,	you	might	add	as	much	as	half
a	pound.	With	butter	at	100	calories	per	tablespoon,	an	otherwise	simple
sauté	 can	 be	 marvelously	 yet	 astronomically	 (even	 lethally)	 fattening;
but,	as	we	imply	in	most	of	our	recipes,	“the	amount	of	butter	is	up	to
you.”
The	 trick	 in	 making	 a	 beurre	 blanc	 is	 to	 prevent	 the	 butter	 from

turning	 oily	 like	melted	 butter;	 it	must	 retain	 its	warm,	 thick,	 creamy
consistency.	A	chemical	process	takes	place	once	the	base	is	boiled	down
and	 the	 acids	 are	 well	 concentrated	 so	 that	 the	milk	 solids	 remain	 in
suspension	 rather	 than	 sinking	 to	 the	 bottom	of	 the	 pan.	We	 give	 two
methods	here,	 first	 the	classic	way	where	 the	butter	 is	 slowly	creamed
in,	and	second	the	newer	fast-boil	system.	In	either	case	you	may	beat	in
more	butter	than	the	amount	given,	but	if	you	beat	in	less	you	may	have
too	acid-tasting	a	sauce.
For	about	1	cup

The	flavor	base
A	6-cup	medium-weight,	stainless	saucepan
2½	Tb	white-wine	vinegar
2½	Tb	dry	white	wine,	vermouth,	or	lemon	juice
1	Tb	very	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	white	pepper
2	Tb	butter
Boil	the	liquid,	shallots	or	onions,	and	seasonings	with	the	butter	until
reduced	 to	 a	 syrupy	 consistency—about	 1½	 tablespoons	 should
remain.

The	butter—Added	the	classic	way
A	wire	whip



8	ounces	(2	sticks)	best	quality	unsalted	butter,	well	chilled,	and	cut
into	16	pieces

Salt,	pepper,	and	lemon	juice	as	needed
Remove	 saucepan	 from	 heat	 and	 immediately	 beat	 in	 2	 pieces	 of
chilled	butter.	As	the	butter	softens	and	creams	in	the	liquid,	beat	in
another	piece.	Then	set	the	saucepan	over	very	low	heat	and,	beating
constantly,	 continue	 adding	 successive	 pieces	 of	 butter	 as	 each
previous	piece	has	almost	creamed	 into	 the	 sauce.	The	 sauce	will	be
thick	 and	 ivory-colored,	 the	 consistency	 of	 a	 light	 hollandaise.
Immediately	remove	from	heat	as	soon	as	all	the	butter	has	been	used.
Beat	in	additional	seasonings	to	taste.
OR—Adding	butter—The	fast-boil	way
Make	 the	 same	 flavor	 base	 described	 above,	 and	 cut	 the	 same

amount	 of	 butter	 into	 pieces;	 however,	 the	 butter	 need	not	 be	 chilled.
Bring	the	reduced	flavor	base	to	the	fast	boil	and	start	beating	in	butter
piece	by	piece—it	will	at	once	produce	thick	creamy	bubbles.	When	all
the	butter	has	been	added,	boil	 for	2	 seconds	only	and	pour	 the	 sauce
into	 a	 bowl	 or	 another	 saucepan	 to	 stop	 the	 cooking.	 (If	 you	 continue
boiling	you	will	reduce	the	sauce	base	liquid	to	nothing	and	the	butter
will	quickly	clarify	 itself—no	more	creamy	sauce.)	Holding	 the	 sauce.	 It
will	thin	out	and	turn	oily	almost	at	once	if	you	reheat	it	or	if	you	keep
it	 too	warm.	Hold	 it	over	barely	 tepid	water,	or	place	 it	near	 the	 faint
heat	of	a	gas	pilot	light,	or	on	the	slightly	warm	shelf	over	a	cooktop.	If
it	does	thin	out,	cream	it	by	beating	a	spoonful	of	sauce	in	a	cold	mixing
bowl,	 gradually	 beat	 in	 the	 rest	 by	 very	 small	 spoonfuls;	 reheat	 it	 by
beating	in	dribbles	(2	to	3	tablespoons	in	all)	of	hot	liquid	such	as	wine,
concentrated	meat	juices,	or	heavy	cream.

VARIATION
Beurre	au	Citron
[Lemon	Butter	Sauce]

For:	broiled	or	boiled	fish,	asparagus,	broccoli,	cauliflower
A	 minor	 variation	 of	 beurre	 blanc,	 and	 very	 nice	 with	 fish	 or

vegetables.



For	about	½	cup

A	2-to	4-cup,	medium-weight,	enameled	saucepan
¼	cup	lemon	juice
⅛	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	white	pepper
Boil	 down	 the	 lemon	 juice	 with	 the	 salt	 and	 pepper	 until	 it	 has
reduced	to	1	tablespoon.

A	wire	whip
4	ounces	(1	stick)	chilled	butter	cut	into	8	pieces
Remove	from	heat	and	immediately	beat	in	2	pieces	of	chilled	butter.
Set	over	very	low	heat	and	beat	in	the	rest	of	the	butter,	a	piece	at	a
time,	to	make	a	thick,	creamy	sauce.	Immediately	remove	from	heat.

2	to	3	Tb	hot	fish	or	vegetable	stock	or	hot	water
Just	 before	 serving,	 beat	 in	 the	 hot	 liquid	 by	 driblets	 to	 warm	 the
sauce.	Correct	seasoning	and	serve	in	a	barely	warmed	sauceboat.

BEURRE	NOIR-BEURRE	NOISETTE
[Brown	Butter	Sauce]

For:	 shirred	 eggs,	 calf’s	 brains,	 boiled	 or	 sautéed	 fish,	 chicken
breasts,	vegetables
A	properly	made	brown	butter	 sauce	has	 a	deliciously	nutty	 smell

and	 taste,	 but	 is	 never	 black	 despite	 the	 poesy	 of	 the	 title.	When	 you
heat	butter	to	the	boil,	its	milk	solids	begin	to	darken	from	golden	nutty,
noisette,	 to	 golden	 brown,	 noir,	 but	 you	 never	 let	 it	 darken	 to	 black,
burned,	and	bitter.	It	is	a	quick	sauce,	and	you	can	make	it	right	in	the
pan	when	 you	 are	 serving	 it	 over	 browned	 foods	 like	 liver	 or	 sautéed
chicken	 breasts.	 For	 pale	 foods	 like	 poached	 eggs	 or	 poached	 calf’s
brains,	 make	 it	 separately	 and	 pour	 the	 browned	 butter	 off	 the	 dark
sediment	in	the	pan.



For	about	¾	cup,	serving	6	to	8

6	ounces	(1½	sticks)	butter
Salt	and	pepper
3	to	4	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley
3	to	4	Tb	wine	vinegar	or	lemon	juice,	or	1	to	2	Tb	capers

Making	the	sauce	in	the	sauté	pan—just	before	serving
Cut	the	butter	into	pieces,	and	add	to	pan	after	food	has	been	sautéed
and	 removed.	 Salt	 and	 pepper	 food	 if	 necessary,	 and	 sprinkle	 the
parsley	over	it.	Holding	sauté	pan	by	handle,	swirl	over	moderate	heat
as	 butter	 foams	 up;	 it	 will	 begin	 to	 color	 as	 foam	 subsides.	 At	 the
moment	 the	 butter	 is	 a	 nutty	 brown—a	 matter	 of	 seconds—pour	 it
over	the	food.	Then	add	the	vinegar,	lemon	juice	or	capers	to	the	pan,
rapidly	 boil	 down	 to	 reduce	 excess	 acidity,	 pour	 over	 the	 brown
butter,	and	serve	at	once.

Making	the	sauce	separately—may	be	done	in	advance
Cut	the	butter	into	pieces	and	add	to	a	small	saucepan.	Swirl	pan	by
its	handle	over	moderate	heat	as	butter	melts	and	foams	up.	Continue
cooking	for	a	few	seconds	as	foam	subsides	and	butter	starts	to	color.
As	 soon	 as	 it	 is	 a	 nutty	 brown,	 remove	 from	 heat	 and	 let	 sediment
settle	for	a	moment.	Either	pour	clear	brown	butter	over	hot	food	that
you	have	seasoned	and	sprinkled	with	parsley,	or	pour	the	butter	off
its	sediment	and	into	a	bowl	or	another	pan.	Rinse	out	butter	pan,	add
vinegar,	lemon	juice	or	capers,	and	boil	down	rapidly	to	reduce	excess
acidity.	 Either	 pour	 over	 the	 food	 and	 serve;	 or	 pour	 the	 browned
butter	back	in,	set	aside,	and	reheat	before	serving.

COLD	FLAVORED	BUTTERS

Beurres	Composés
Butter	can	be	put	 to	a	variety	of	appetizing	uses	when	 it	has	been

creamed	with	herbs,	wine,	mustard,	 egg	yolks,	 shellfish	meat,	or	other



flavorings.

On	Hot	Dishes:	Place	a	piece	of	cold	flavored	butter	on	top	of	grilled
fish	or	meat	just	as	it	is	sent	to	the	table.

For	Basting:	Baste	meat,	fish,	or	mushrooms	with	flavored	butter	as	it
cooks	in	oven.

Sauce	 and	 Soup	 Enrichment:	 Stir	 flavored	 butter	 into	 a	 sauce	 or
soup	just	before	serving.

Egg	Filling	or	Sandwich	Spread:	Cream	butter,	egg	yolks,	and	herbs
together	 and	 use	 as	 a	 filling	 for	 hard-boiled	 eggs,	 or	 as	 a	 sandwich
spread.

Decorations:	Fill	a	pastry	bag	with	chilled	but	still	malleable	flavored
butter	and	squeeze	it	out	in	fancy	designs	to	decorate	appetizers	or	cold
dishes.

Cutout	Designs:	Spread	flavored	butter	on	a	plate	and	chill	 it.	Then
dip	a	knife	or	cutter	in	hot	water	and	form	fancy	shapes	for	canapés	or
cold	dishes.

HOW	TO	CREAM	BUTTER
[Beurre	en	Pommade]

The	 butter	 must	 always	 be	 creamed	 or	 beaten	 before	 the
flavoring	is	added	to	it.	You	can	blend	the	butter	to	a	cream	in	an
electric	beater,	pound	it	in	a	bowl	with	a	pestle,	or	mash	it,	a	bit
at	 a	 time,	 with	 the	 back	 of	 a	 wooden	 spoon,	 then	 beat	 it
vigorously	until	it	is	light	and	creamy.	Then	the	flavorings	and	the
butter	are	creamed	together,	and	the	mixture	is	put	in	a	cool	place
to	 firm	 up.	 If	 it	 is	 refrigerated,	 it	 will	 become	 as	 hard	 as	 an
ordinary	piece	of	chilled	butter.



Beurre	de	Moutarde
[Mustard	Butter]

For:	kidneys,	liver,	steaks,	broiled	fish,	and	sauce	enrichments

½	cup	butter
1	to	2	Tb	prepared	mustard,	the	strong	Dijon	type
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
Optional:	2	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley	or	mixed	green	herbs
Cream	the	butter	well.	A	half-teaspoon	at	a	time,	beat	in	the	mustard.
Beat	in	seasonings	and	optional	parsley	or	mixed	herbs	to	taste.

Beurre	d’Anchois
[Anchovy	Butter]

For:	broiled	fish,	egg	fillings,	sandwiches,	sauce	enrichments

½	cup	butter
2	Tb	mashed	canned	anchovies	or	1	Tb	anchovy	paste
Pepper
Lemon	juice	to	taste
Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	parsley	or	mixed	green	herbs
Cream	the	butter	well.	A	half-teaspoon	at	a	time,	beat	in	the	anchovies
or	anchovy	paste.	Season	 to	 taste	with	pepper,	drops	of	 lemon	 juice,
and	optional	herbs.

Beurre	d’Ail
[Garlic	Butter]

For:	broiled	or	boiled	 fish,	 steaks,	hamburgers,	 lamb	chops,	boiled
potatoes,	canapés,	sauce	and	soup	enrichments



The	smoothest	and	best-tasting	result	will	be	obtained	if	the	garlic	is
pounded	 to	 a	 paste	with	 a	 pestle	 and	 the	 butter	 is	 gradually	 pounded
into	it.	A	garlic	press	may	be	used	if	you	have	not	the	time	or	patience	to
pound,	but	the	result	will	not	be	as	good	either	in	flavor	or	in	texture.

2	to	8	cloves	garlic
1	quart	boiling	water
Set	the	unpeeled	cloves	of	garlic	in	the	boiling	water,	bring	to	the	boil
for	 5	 seconds.	 Drain,	 peel,	 and	 rinse	 under	 cold	water.	 Bring	 to	 the
boil	again	for	30	seconds,	drain,	and	rinse.	Pound	to	a	smooth	paste	in
a	mortar	(or	put	through	a	garlic	press).

½	cup	butter
Salt	and	pepper
Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	parsley	or	mixed	green	herbs
Pound	 or	 cream	 the	 butter	 and	 garlic	 together.	 Season	 to	 taste	with
the	salt,	pepper,	and	optional	herbs.

Beurre	à	l’Oeuf
[Egg	Yolk	Butter]

For:	sandwiches,	canapés,	hard-boiled	eggs,	and	general	decoration

½	cup	butter
Cream	the	butter	well.

4	sieved	hard-boiled	egg	yolks
Salt	and	pepper
Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	chives	or	mixed	green	herbs.
Beat	the	sieved	egg	yolks	into	the	butter	and	season	to	taste	with	salt,
pepper,	and	optional	herbs.



Beurre	Maître	d’Hôtel
[Parsley	Butter]

Beurre	de	Fines	Herbes
[Mixed	Herb	Butter]

Beurre	d’Estragon
[Tarragon	Butter]

For:	broiled	meats	and	fish,	and	for	sauce	and	soup	enrichments

½	cup	butter
1	Tb	lemon	juice
2	to	3	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley,	or	mixed	green	herbs,	or	tarragon	(or
dried	tarragon	and	fresh	parsley)

Salt	and	pepper
Cream	the	butter.	Drop	by	drop,	beat	in	the	lemon	juice.	Then	beat	in
the	herbs,	and	season	to	taste	with	salt	and	pepper.

Beurre	Colbert
[Tarragon	Butter	with	Meat	Flavoring]

For:	broiled	meats	and	fish

Ingredients	for	the	preceding	butter	using	tarragon
1	Tb	melted	meat	glaze	(meat	stock	reduced	to	a	syrup)
Drop	by	drop,	beat	the	meat	glaze	into	the	tarragon	butter.

Beurre	pour	Escargots
[Snail	Butter]



For:	snails,	broiled	meats	and	fish;	for	basting	baked	or	broiled	fish
or	mushrooms;	for	broiled	mussels,	clams,	or	oysters

½	cup	butter
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	to	3	cloves	mashed	garlic,	depending	on	your	taste	for	garlic
2	Tb	minced	parsley
Salt	and	pepper
Cream	the	butter	well.	Twist	 the	shallots	or	onions	 into	a	ball	 in	the
corner	of	a	towel	to	extract	their	juice.	Beat	them	into	the	butter	with
the	garlic	and	parsley.	Season	to	taste	with	salt	and	pepper.

Beurre	Marchand	de	Vins
[Shallot	Butter	with	Red	Wine]

For:	steaks,	hamburgers,	liver,	and	enrichment	of	brown	sauces

¼	cup	red	wine
1	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onions
1	Tb	meat	glaze	or	½	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Big	pinch	of	pepper
Boil	the	wine	with	the	shallots	or	onions,	meat	flavoring,	and	pepper
until	the	liquid	has	reduced	to	about	1	½	tablespoons.	Let	it	cool.

½	cup	butter
1	to	2	Tb	minced	parsley
Salt	and	pepper
Cream	 the	butter	well,	 then	beat	 it,	 a	 tablespoon	at	 a	 time,	 into	 the
wine	flavoring.	Beat	in	the	parsley,	and	season	to	taste.



Beurre	Bercy
[Shallot	Butter	with	White	Wine]

For:	steaks,	hamburgers,	liver,	and	enrichment	of	brown	sauces

Ingredients	for	the	preceding	shallot	butter,	but	substitute	dry	white
wine	or	vermouth	for	the	red	wine
Follow	the	preceding	recipe,	then	proceed	to	the	optional	next	step.

Optional:	3	to	4	Tb	diced	beef	marrow	softened	for	3	or	4	minutes	in
hot	salted	water
Stir	in	the	optional	beef	marrow	along	with	the	final	seasonings.

Beurre	de	Crustacés
[Shellfish	Butter]

For:	sandwich	spreads,	canapés,	hard-boiled	eggs,	decoration	of	cold
dishes;	 for	 enrichment	of	 shellfish	 sauces	and	bisques,	 and	canned	and
frozen	shellfish	soups	Shellfish	butters	are	made	with	the	cooked	debris,
such	as	legs,	chests,	eggs,	and	green	matter	of	lobster,	crab,	crayfish,	or
shrimps.	 The	 red	 shells	 color	 the	 butter	 a	 creamy	 rose,	 and	 both	 shell
and	bits	of	flesh	give	a	lovely	flavor	to	the	mixture.	You	can	also	make
shellfish	butter	with	 the	meat	alone,	and	color	 the	butter	with	a	bit	of
tomato	paste.
Traditionally,	 the	 shells	 and	 meat	 are	 placed	 in	 a	 large	 marble

mortar,	and	are	pounded	into	a	purée	with	a	heavy	wooden	pestle.	Then
they	 are	 pounded	 with	 the	 butter	 so	 every	 bit	 is	 thoroughly	 mixed
together.	Finally	 the	whole	mass	 is	 forced	through	a	 fine-meshed	drum
sieve	to	remove	all	minute	pieces	of	shell.	This	long	and	arduous	process
needs	no	further	explanation.	You	just	pound;	the	result	is	exquisite.	An
excellent	butter	may	be	made	in	an	electric	blender	in	a	fraction	of	the
time:	For	about	⅔	cup

1	cup	cooked	shellfish	debris	OR	½	cup	cooked,	whole,	unpeeled



shrimp	Or	½	cup	cooked	shellfish	meat	and	1½	Tb	tomato	paste
Chop	the	debris	or	meat	into	¼-inch	pieces,	or	put	it	through	a	meat
grinder.

¼	lb	(½	cup)	hot	melted	butter
Fill	 the	 electric	 blender	 jar	 with	 hot	 water	 to	 heat	 it	 thoroughly.
Empty	 and	dry	quickly.	Then	add	 the	 shellfish.	 Immediately	pour	 in
the	hot	melted	butter,	cover,	and	blend	at	top	speed.	The	butter	will
cream	 into	 a	 stiff	 paste	 in	 a	 few	 seconds.	 Pour	 the	 mixture	 into	 a
saucepan,	heat	until	the	butter	has	warmed	and	melted.	Blend	again.
Repeat,	if	you	feel	it	necessary.

A	fine-meshed	sieve	set	over	a	bowl
A	pestle	or	wooden	spoon
Salt	and	white	pepper
Rub	through	a	very	fine	sieve,	extracting	as	much	butter	and	shellfish
meat	 as	 possible.	 As	 the	 butter	 cools	 and	 partially	 congeals,	 beat	 it
with	a	wooden	spoon.	Season	to	taste	with	salt	and	pepper.
(*)	May	be	frozen.

Second	pressing

To	extract	the	remaining	butter	and	flavor	from	the	debris	left	in	the
sieve,	steep	the	debris	in	an	equal	amount	of	almost	simmering	water	for
5	 minutes	 in	 a	 saucepan	 over	 very	 low	 heat.	 Strain,	 and	 chill.	 The
congealed	butter	on	top	of	the	liquid	may	be	used	for	sauce	enrichments.
The	liquid	itself	may	serve	as	the	basis	for	a	fish	stock.

OTHER	SAUCES

Following	is	a	list	of	regional	or	special	sauces	described	in	recipes
elsewhere	in	this	book.

Sauce	Speciale	à	l’Ail	pour	Gigot,	a	special	garlic	sauce	for	roast	lamb	Sauce



Moutarde	à	la	Normande,	a	cream	and	mustard	sauce	for	pork	Sauce
Nénette,	cream,	mustard,	and	tomato	sauce	for	pork	or	boiled	beef	Sauce
Fondue	de	Fromage,	a	creamy,	wine-flavored	cheese	sauce	with	a	whiff	of
garlic,	in	the	Poached	Egg	section.	This	is	also	good	for	vegetables,	fish,
chicken,	or	pastas	which	are	to	be	gratinéed	under	a	broiler,	or	as	a
spread	for	hot	hors	d’oeuvres	that	are	to	be	browned	quickly	in	the	oven
or	under	the	broiler.

Sauce	Chaud-froid,	Blanche-neige,	a	reduction	of	heavy	cream,	meat,
poultry,	or	fish	stock,	and	tarragon,	plus	gelatin.	For	coating	cold
chicken,	fish,	or	cold	molded	mousses.	This	is	an	excellent	cold	sauce,
and	in	our	opinion	far	more	delicate	than	the	traditional	sauce	chaud-
froid	made	from	a	flour-thickened	velouté.	See	the	recipes	for	cold	breast
of	chicken	on	this	page,	for	crab	on	this	page,	and	for	fish	mousse	on	this
page.

STOCKS	AND	ASPICS

Fonds	de	Cuisine	—	Gelée
The	wonderful	flavor	of	good	French	food	is	the	result,	more	often

than	not,	of	the	stock	used	for	its	cooking,	its	flavoring,	or	its	sauce.	The
French	term	fonds	de	cuisine	means	literally	the	foundation	and	working
capital	of	the	kitchen.	A	stock	is	the	liquid	obtained	from	the	simmering
together	 of	 meat,	 bones—or	 fish	 trimmings—with	 vegetables,
seasonings,	 and	 water.	 This	 liquid,	 strained,	 and	 boiled	 down	 to
concentrate	its	flavor	if	necessary,	is	the	basis	for	soups,	the	moistening
element	 for	 stews,	braised	meats,	or	vegetables,	 and	 the	 liquid	used	 in
making	 all	 the	 sauces	 that	 have	 a	 meat	 or	 fish	 flavoring.	 Stocks	 are
extremely	 easy	 to	 make,	 and	 can	 simmer	 quietly	 by	 themselves	 with
little	or	no	attention	from	the	cook.	They	may	be	frozen	and	stored	for
weeks,	 or	 they	 may	 be	 boiled	 down	 until	 all	 their	 water	 content	 has
evaporated,	and	they	become	a	glace	de	viande,	or	flavor	concentrate.

SUBSTITUTES	FOR	HOMEMADE	STOCK



If	 you	do	not	have	a	homemade	 stock	 in	 the	 larder,	 you	can	always
use	 canned	 beef	 bouillon,	 canned	 chicken	 broth,	 canned	 mushroom
broth,	 or	 bottled	 clam	 juice.	 Such	 economical	 substitutes	 for	 stock	 are
not	usually	available	to	French	cooks,	and	when	simmered	with	meats,
or	 with	 wine	 and	 aromatic	 vegetables,	 these	 canned	 alternatives	 are
entirely	satisfactory.	A	recipe	 for	 improving	canned	beef	bouillon	 is	on
this	page;	for	canned	chicken	broth;	and	for	bottled	clam	juice.	Bouillon
cubes	 are	 less	 successful,	 but	 they	 should	 certainly	 be	 used	 in	 an
emergency.	 Canned	 consommé	 tends	 to	 be	 sweet	 and	 we	 do	 not
recommend	it.

INGREDIENTS	FOR	MAKING	STOCKS

The	most	luxurious	stocks	are	made	from	fresh	soup	bones,	fresh	meat,
and	vegetables.	But	unless	you	intend	to	make	a	stock	for	an	absolutely
remarkable	 consommé,	use	what	 you	have	on	hand	and	add	any	 fresh
ingredients	you	wish	to	buy.	It	is	a	good	idea	to	make	a	collection	in	the
freezer	of	beef,	veal,	and	poultry	bones,	and	meat	scraps.	Then	when	a
sufficient	amount	has	accumulated,	you	can	boil	up	a	stock.	Both	meat
and	 bones	 give	 flavor,	 and	 the	 bones,	 in	 addition,	 contain	 a	 certain
amount	 of	 gelatin	 which	 gives	 body	 to	 the	 stock.	 Raw	 veal	 bones,
especially	the	knuckle,	and	calf’s	feet,	if	you	can	find	them,	contain	the
most	gelatin.	If	you	want	a	stock	that	will	jell	naturally,	include	these	in
the	proportions	listed.

Lamb,	Ham,	and	Pork
A	few	pork	bones	may	be	added	 to	 the	 stock	kettle,	but	 too	much

pork	tends	to	give	the	stock	a	sweet	flavor.	Lamb	or	ham	bones	should
not	 be	used;	 their	 flavor	 is	 too	 strong	 for	 a	 general-purpose	 stock.	But
lamb	or	ham	stocks	are	made	in	the	same	way	as	simple	stock.

Vegetables
Carrots,	 onions,	 celery,	 and	 leeks	 are	 the	usual	 soup	vegetables.	A

parsnip	 or	 two	 may	 be	 included	 if	 you	 wish.	 Starchy	 vegetables	 will
cloud	the	stock.	Turnips,	cauliflower,	and	the	cabbage	family	in	general
have	too	strong	a	flavor	for	a	general-purpose	stock.



THE	PRESSURE	COOKER

One	 would	 expect	 a	 pressure	 cooker	 to	 be	 the	 ideal	 stock-making
instrument;	but	our	experiments	have	shown	otherwise.	After	about	45
minutes	of	cooking	under	15	pounds	of	pressure,	a	meat	stock	acquires
its	 maximum	 pressure-cooked	 flavor.	 To	 reach	 its	 optimum	 flavor,	 it
must	 then	 be	 simmered	 quietly	 in	 an	 open	 pot	 an	 hour	 or	 two	more.
Poultry	stock,	in	our	experience,	acquires	an	unpleasant	flavor	if	cooked
for	more	than	20	minutes	under	15	pounds	of	pressure.	After	this	lapse
of	time	the	pressure	should	be	released	and	the	stock	allowed	to	simmer,
uncovered,	for	an	hour	or	so	longer.

		FONDS	DE	CUISINE	SIMPLE
[Simple	Meat	Stock]

This	 is	 the	 general	 formula	 for	 a	 simple	 stock	 made	 from	 a
miscellaneous	collection	of	bones	and	meat	scraps.	It	may	be	employed
for	meat	 sauces,	 the	braising	of	meats	 and	vegetables,	 the	 flavoring	of
soups,	 and	 for	 deglazing	 a	 roasting	 pan.	 The	 stock	may	be	made	 from
bones	alone,	but	will	have	more	character	if	some	meat	is	included;	ideal
proportions	 are	 about	 half	 and	 half.	 The	more	 elaborate	 stocks	 follow
exactly	the	same	cooking	procedure.
For	2	to	3	quarts

3	quarts	of	meat	and	bones	chopped	into	2-to	3-inch	pieces	(raw	or
cooked	veal	or	beef	bones	and	meat,	and/or	poultry	carcasses,
scraps,	and	giblets)

An	8-to	10-quart	kettle
Cold	water
Place	 the	meat	 and	bones	 in	 the	 kettle	 and	 add	 cold	water	 to	 cover
them	by	2	inches.	Set	over	moderate	heat.	As	the	liquid	comes	slowly
to	the	simmer,	scum	will	start	to	rise.	Remove	it	with	a	spoon	or	ladle
for	5	minutes	or	so,	until	it	almost	ceases	to	accumulate.

2	tsp	salt



2	medium-sized	scraped	carrots
2	medium-sized	peeled	onions
2	medium-sized	celery	stalks
The	following	tied	in	washed	cheesecloth:

¼	tsp	thyme
1	bay	leaf
6	parsley	sprigs
2	unpeeled	garlic	cloves
2	whole	cloves
Optional:	2	washed	leeks
Add	all	 the	 ingredients	at	 the	 left,	and	more	water	 if	 the	 liquid	does
not	 cover	 the	 ingredients	 by	 a	 full	 inch.	 When	 liquid	 is	 simmering
again,	skim	as	necessary.	Partially	cover	the	kettle,	leaving	a	space	of
about	 1	 inch	 for	 steam	 to	 escape.	 Maintain	 liquid	 at	 a	 very	 quiet
simmer—just	 a	 bubble	 or	 two	 of	 motion	 at	 the	 surface—for	 4	 to	 5
hours	 or	 more.	 Accumulated	 fat	 and	 scum	 may	 be	 skimmed	 off
occasionally.	 Boiling	water	 should	 be	 added	 if	 the	 liquid	 evaporates
below	the	level	of	the	ingredients.

Never	 allow	 the	 liquid	 to	 boil;	 fat	 and	 scum	 incorporate	 themselves
into	the	stock	and	will	make	it	cloudy.
Cooking	may	be	stopped	at	any	time,	and	continued	later.
Never	 cover	 the	 kettle	 airtight	 unless	 its	 contents	 have	 cooled

completely,	or	the	stock	will	sour.
When	 your	 taste	 convinces	 you	 that	 you	 have	 simmered	 the	most

out	of	your	ingredients,	strain	the	stock	out	of	the	kettle	into	a	bowl.

TO	DEGREASE

Either	 let	 the	 stock	 settle	 for	 5	 minutes,	 remove	 the	 fat	 from	 its
surface	with	a	spoon	or	 ladle,	 then	draw	scraps	of	paper	toweling	over
the	top	of	the	stock	to	blot	up	the	last	globules	of	fat;	Or	set	the	stock,
uncovered,	 in	the	refrigerator	until	 the	fat	has	hardened	on	the	surface
and	can	be	scraped	off.



FINAL	FLAVORING

Taste	 the	degreased	 stock	 for	 strength.	 If	 its	 flavor	 is	weak,	boil	 it
down	 to	 evaporate	 some	 of	 its	 water	 content	 and	 to	 concentrate	 its
strength.	Correct	seasoning,	and	it	is	ready	to	use.

STORAGE

When	the	stock	is	cold,	cover	and	refrigerate	it,	or	bottle	and	freeze
it.	Stock	kept	in	the	refrigerator	must	be	brought	to	the	boil	every	3	or	4
days	to	keep	it	from	spoiling.

VARIATIONS
The	following	are	traditional	recipes	for	classical	stocks	made	with

fresh	ingredients.	You	can,	of	course,	vary	the	proportions	according	to
your	pocket-book	and	store	of	leftover	bones	and	meat	scraps.	These	are
all	 simmered	 in	 exactly	 the	 same	 way	 as	 the	 simple	 stock	 in	 the
preceding	master	recipe.

Fonds	Blanc
[White	Stock	—	Veal	Stock]

White	 stock	 is	 used	 when	 you	 want	 to	 make	 a	 particularly	 fine
white	velouté	sauce	or	soup.	Raw	veal	releases	a	tremendous	amount	of
gray	and	granular	scum	that	can	cloud	your	stock	if	it	is	not	completely
removed.	The	easiest	way	to	deal	with	this	problem	is	to	blanch	the	veal
as	described	here.
For	2	to	3	quarts

3	lbs.	lean,	raw	veal	shank	meat
4	lbs.	cracked,	raw	veal	bones
Place	the	meat	and	bones	in	a	kettle.	Cover	with	cold	water,	bring	to
the	boil	and	boil	slowly	for	5	minutes.	Drain,	and	rinse	the	bones	and
meat	under	cold	water	to	remove	all	scum.	Rinse	the	kettle	clean.

Same	vegetables,	herbs,	and	seasonings	as	for	the	master	recipe
Place	 the	bones	and	meat	again	 in	 the	kettle,	cover	with	cold	water,



bring	to	the	simmer,	and	skim	as	necessary.	Then	add	the	vegetables,
herbs,	and	seasonings.	Simmer	 the	stock	 for	4	 to	5	hours	or	more	as
described	in	the	master	recipe.

Fonds	Blanc	de	Volaille
[White	Poultry	Stock]

This	 stock	 is	 used	 for	 soups	 and	 sauces.	 Employ	 the	 same	method
and	ingredients	as	for	the	preceding	white	veal	stock,	but	add	a	whole	or
parts	 of	 a	 stewing	 hen	 to	 the	 kettle	 along	 with	 the	 vegetables.	 The
chicken	may	be	removed	when	tender,	and	the	stock	simmered	several
hours	longer.

Fonds	Brun
[Brown	Stock]

Brown	 stock	 is	 used	 for	 brown	 sauces,	 consommés,	 and	 for	 the
braising	of	vegetables	and	red	meats.	To	give	the	stock	a	good	color,	the
meat,	bones,	and	vegetables	are	browned	before	they	go	into	the	kettle,
otherwise	the	cooking	procedure	is	the	same	as	for	a	simple	stock,	which
may	also	be	turned	into	a	brown	stock	if	you	brown	the	ingredients.
For	3	to	4	quarts

A	shallow	roasting	pan
3	lbs.	beef	shank	meat
3	to	4	lbs.	cracked	beef	and	veal	bones
2	scrubbed,	quartered	carrots
2	halved,	peeled	onions
Heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	Arrange	the	meat,	bones,	and	vegetables	in
the	roasting	pan	and	place	in	the	middle	portion	of	the	oven.	Turn	the
ingredients	 occasionally	 so	 they	 will	 brown	 evenly,	 in	 30	 to	 40
minutes.

An	8-to	10-quart	kettle



Remove	 from	 oven	 and	 drain	 fat	 out	 of	 roasting	 pan.	 Transfer	 the
browned	ingredients	to	a	soup	kettle.	Pour	a	cup	or	two	of	water	into
the	pan,	set	over	heat,	and	scrape	up	all	coagulated	browning	juices.
Pour	them	into	the	kettle.

2	tsp	salt
2	celery	stalks
Herbs	and	flavorings	listed	in	the	master	recipe,	tied	in	cheesecloth

Then,	 following	 the	 procedure	 in	 the	 master	 recipe	 cover	 the
ingredients	 in	 the	kettle	with	cold	water,	bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 skim.
Add	 the	 ingredients	 at	 the	 left	 and	proceed	with	 the	 recipe.	 Simmer
the	stock	4	to	5	hours	or	more.

Fonds	Brun	de	Volaille
[Brown	Poultry	Stock]

The	 recipe	 for	 a	 simple	 brown	 poultry	 stock	 is	 in	 the	 Poultry
chapter.	You	will	note	that	poultry	bones	and	scraps	should	be	browned
in	a	skillet,	as	they	tend	to	burn	and	to	acquire	an	unpleasant	flavor	 if
browned	in	the	oven.

Glace	de	Viande
[Meat	Glaze]

Meat	glaze	 is	any	one	of	 the	preceding	stocks	boiled	down	until	 it
has	reduced	to	a	syrup	that	becomes	a	hard	jelly	when	it	is	cold.	Three
quarts	 of	 stock	will	 reduce	 to	 1½	 cups	 or	 less	 of	 glaze,	 so	 it	 is	 easily
stored.	Half	a	 teaspoon	stirred	 into	a	sauce	or	a	soup	will	often	give	 it
just	that	particular	boost	of	flavor	which	it	lacks.	Meat	glaze	dissolved	in
hot	water	may	always	be	used	in	place	of	stock.	It	is	thus	a	most	useful
commodity	 to	 have	 on	 hand	 and	 almost	 invariably	 has	 a	 better	 flavor
than	commercial	meat	extracts	and	bouillon	cubes.

2	to	3	quarts	of	any	homemade	stock



Strain	the	stock	and	degrease	it	thoroughly.	Bring	it	to	the	boil	in	an
uncovered	saucepan	and	boil	it	slowly	until	it	has	reduced	to	about	1
quart.	Strain	it	through	a	very	fine	sieve	into	a	smaller	saucepan	and
continue	 to	boil	 it	down	until	 it	has	 reduced	 to	a	 syrup	which	coats
the	spoon	lightly.	Watch	it	during	the	last	stages	to	be	sure	it	does	not
burn.	 Strain	 it	 into	 a	 jar.	When	 it	 is	 cold	 and	 has	 turned	 to	 a	 jelly,
cover	and	refrigerate,	or	freeze	it.

Meat	glaze	will	keep	for	weeks	under	refrigeration.	If	it	develops	a	few
spots	 of	mold,	 no	 harm	 is	 done.	 Pry	 it	 out	 of	 its	 jar,	wash	 it	 under
warm	 water.	 Then	 simmer	 it	 in	 a	 saucepan	 over	 low	 heat	 with	 a
spoonful	of	water	until	it	has	again	reduced	to	a	thick	syrup.

CLARIFICATION	OF	STOCK

Clarification	du	Bouillon
If	 you	wish	 to	 serve	 a	 rich	 homemade	 consommé,	 jellied	 soup,	 or

aspic,	 you	 should	 clarify	 your	 stock	 so	 it	 is	 beautifully	 clear	 and
sparkling.	 This	 is	 accomplished	 by	 beating	 egg	whites	 into	 cold	 stock,
then	heating	it	to	just	below	the	simmer	for	15	minutes.	The	egg-white
globules	 dispersed	 into	 the	 stock	 act	 as	 a	 magnet	 for	 all	 its	 minute
cloudy	 particles.	 These	 gradually	 rise	 to	 the	 surface,	 leaving	 a	 crystal-
clear	liquid	below	them.

Clarification	is	a	simple	process	if	you	remember	that	the	stock	must
be	 perfectly	 degreased,	 that	 all	 equipment	 must	 be	 absolutely	 free	 of
grease,	and	that	you	must	handle	the	stock	gently	so	the	egg	whites	are
not	unduly	disturbed.

For	about	1	quart

5	cups	cold	stock
Salt	and	pepper
A	very	clean	2	½-quart	saucepan

Degrease	 the	 stock	 thoroughly;	 any	 fat	 particles	 will	 hinder	 the
clarification	process.	Taste	carefully	for	seasoning	and	oversalt	slightly
if	stock	is	to	be	served	cold;	salt	loses	savor	in	a	cold	dish.



A	very	clean	2-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
2	egg	whites
Optional:	¼	cup	or	2	ounces	of	absolutely	lean,	scraped,	or	minced
beef

¼	cup	minced	green	leek	tops	or	green	onion	tops
2	Tb	minced	parsley
½	Tb	tarragon	or	chervil

Beat	1	cup	of	stock	 in	 the	mixing	bowl	with	 the	egg	whites	and	add
optional	ingredients	for	richer	flavor.	Bring	the	rest	of	the	stock	to	the
boil	 in	 the	 saucepan.	Then,	beating	 the	egg-white	mixture,	gradually
pour	 on	 the	 hot	 stock	 in	 a	 very	 thin	 stream.	 Pour	 the	mixture	 back
into	the	saucepan	and	set	over	moderate	heat.	Until	the	stock	reaches
the	simmer,	agitate	it	slowly	and	continually	with	a	wire	whip	so	that
the	egg	whites,	which	will	 begin	 to	 turn	white,	 are	being	 constantly
circulated	throughout	the	 liquid.	 Immediately	the	simmer	is	reached,
stop	 stirring.	The	 egg	whites	 now	will	 have	mounted	 to	 the	 surface.
Gently	move	the	saucepan	to	the	side	of	the	heat	so	that	one	edge	of
the	 liquid	 is	 barely	 bubbling.	 In	 5	 minutes,	 rotate	 the	 saucepan	 a
quarter	turn.	Turn	it	again	in	5	minutes,	and	once	more	for	a	final	5
minutes.

5	layers	of	well-washed,	damp	cheesecloth
A	very	clean	colander
A	very	clean	3-quart	bowl
A	very	clean	ladle
⅓	cup	Madeira,	port,	or	cognac

Line	the	colander	with	the	cheesecloth	and	place	it	over	the	bowl.	The
colander	should	be	of	a	size	so	that	its	bottom	will	remain	above	the
surface	of	the	liquid	which	is	to	be	poured	into	the	bowl.	Very	gently
ladle	the	stock	and	egg	whites	into	the	cheesecloth,	disturbing	the	egg
whites	as	 little	as	possible.	The	clarified	stock	will	drain	through	the
cheesecloth,	 leaving	 the	 egg-white	 particles	 behind.	 Allow	 the	 egg



whites	to	drain	undisturbed	for	5	minutes,	then	remove	the	colander,
and	stir	the	wine	or	cognac	into	the	clarified	stock.

JELLIED	STOCKS-ASPICS

Gelée

Homemade	Jellied	Stock
Calf’s	feet	and	veal	knuckles	contain	enough	natural	gelatin	to	make

a	 stock	 jell	 by	 itself;	 pork	 rind	 helps	 the	 process.	 They	 are	 added	 to
simmer	with	any	of	the	stocks	and	will	provide	about	3	quarts	of	 jelly.
Prepare	them	as	follows:
Either	2	calf’s	feet

These	 can	 usually	 be	 ordered	 from	 your	 butcher,	 and	 come	 skinned
and	cleaned.	Scrub	them	under	cold	water.	Soak	them	for	8	hours	in
several	changes	of	cold	water.	Then	cover	them	with	cold	water,	boil
for	5	minutes,	and	wash	under	cold	water.	They	are	now	ready	to	use,
and	are	added	to	the	stock	along	with	the	vegetables.

Or	1	lb.	cracked	veal	knuckles
Cover	 the	 knuckles	 with	 cold	 water,	 boil	 for	 5	 minutes,	 then	 wash
under	 cold	 water.	 Add	 the	 knuckles	 to	 the	 stock	 along	 with	 the
vegetables.

And	¼	lb.	fresh	or	salt	pork	rind
Scrub	the	pork	rind	in	cold	water.	Cover	with	cold	water	and	simmer
for	 10	 minutes.	 Rinse	 under	 cold	 water.	 Add	 the	 rind	 to	 the	 stock
along	with	the	vegetables,	calf’s	feet,	or	knuckles.

USING	COMMERCIAL	GELATIN
Plain	stock,	clarified	stock,	canned	bouillon,	and	canned	consommé

are	turned	into	aspic	(or	meat	jelly)	by	adding	unflavored	gelatin	in	the
following	proportions:



(1	 envelope	 of	 powdered	 American	 gelatin	 equals	 ¼	 ounce,	 8
grams,	or	a	 scant	 tablespoon.	1	 sheet	of	French	gelatin	equals	2
grams;	 4	 sheets	 are	 the	 equivalent	 of	 1	 envelope	 of	 powdered
gelatin.)	For	jellied	soup:	1	envelope	of	gelatin	for	each	3	cups	of
liquid
For	aspics	or	for	the	decoration	of	cold	dishes:	1	envelope	of	gelatin
for	each	2	cups	of	liquid
For	lining	a	mold:	1	envelope	of	gelatin	for	each	1½	cups	of	liquid

How	to	Use	Powdered	Gelatin
Sprinkle	1	envelope	of	gelatin	into	¼	to	½	cup	of	cold	stock	and	let

it	soften	for	3	to	4	minutes.	Then	blend	it	into	the	rest	of	the	stock	and
stir	 over	 moderate	 heat	 for	 several	 minutes	 until	 the	 gelatin	 has
completely	dissolved	and	the	liquid	is	absolutely	free	of	granules.

How	to	Use	Sheet	Gelatin
If	 you	 are	 living	 in	 France,	 you	will	 usually	 buy	gelatin	 in	 sheets.

Soak	the	sheets	in	cold	water	for	about	10	minutes,	until	they	are	soft.
Drain	them,	then	stir	them	in	the	stock	over	gentle	heat	until	the	gelatin
has	completely	dissolved.

Wine	Flavoring
The	wine	used	for	flavoring	a	jelly	 is	almost	always	port,	Madeira,

or	cognac.	From	1	to	2	tablespoons	per	cup	is	usually	sufficient.	Stir	the
wine	or	cognac	into	the	hot	stock	after	the	gelatin	has	been	dissolved.	As
most	of	the	alcohol	will	evaporate,	this	small	additional	amount	of	liquid
will	not	disturb	the	proportions	of	gelatin.

TESTING	JELLIES
Always	 test	out	a	 jelly	before	using	 it;	 the	 few	minutes	you	 spend

can	save	you	from	disaster.	Pour	½	inch	of	jelly	into	a	chilled	saucer	and
refrigerate	it	for	about	10	minutes	until	it	has	set.	Then	break	it	up	with
a	fork	and	let	it	sit	at	room	temperature	for	10	minutes.	For	jellied	soups
it	should	hold	its	shape	softly.	For	aspics	its	broken	lumps	should	stand
alone,	but	not	be	rubbery.	A	jelly	that	is	to	line	a	mold	should	be	stiffer,
so	it	can	support	the	ingredients	it	is	to	enclose.	If	the	jelly	is	too	hard,



add	 unjellied	 stock	 and	 test	 again.	 If	 the	 jelly	 is	 too	 soft,	 add	 more
gelatin	and	test	again.

FISH	STOCKS

Fumets	de	Poisson

Fumet	de	Poisson	au	Vin	Blanc
[White-wine	Fish	Stock]

The	 following	 proportions	 are	 for	 the	 production	 of	 a	 fine,	 well-
flavored	 fish	 stock	 to	 be	 used	 as	 the	 basis	 of	 a	 fish	 velouté	 sauce.	 A
smaller	quantity	of	 fish	would	produce	a	 lighter	stock	suitable	 for	 fish-
poaching,	or	fish	soups.

For	about	2	cups

A	6-to	8-quart	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan	or	kettle
2	pounds	(about	2	quarts)	lean,	fresh	fish,	fish	heads,	and/or	bones
and	trimmings	(halibut,	whiting,	or	flounder	are	recommended,	or
use	frozen	fish	of	good	quality.	Fresh	or	cooked	shellfish	leftovers
may	be	included.)
1	thinly	sliced	onion
6	to	8	parsley	stems—not	the	leaves,	which	will	darken	the	stock
1	tsp	lemon	juice
¼	tsp	salt
1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
Cold	water	to	cover	ingredients
Optional:	¼	cup	fresh	mushroom	stems

Place	 all	 the	 ingredients	 in	 the	 saucepan	 or	 kettle.	 Bring	 to	 the
simmer,	skim,	then	simmer	uncovered	for	30	minutes.	Strain	through
a	fine	sieve,	and	correct	seasoning.	Fish	stock	may	be	refrigerated	or
frozen.	If	refrigerated,	boil	it	up	every	2	days	to	keep	it	from	spoiling.



Emergency	Fish	Stock	—	Clam	Juice
A	 good	 substitute	 for	 fresh	 fish	 stock	 may	 be	 made	 with	 bottled

clam	juice;	but	remember	that	clam	juice	is	very	salty	and	becomes	even
saltier	if	it	is	reduced.

For	about	2	cups

A	6-cup	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
1½	cups	bottled	clam	juice
1	cup	water
1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
1	thinly	sliced	onion
6	parsley	stems
Optional:	¼	cup	fresh	mushroom	stems

Place	 all	 ingredients	 in	 the	 saucepan	 and	 simmer	 for	 30	 minutes,
allowing	 the	 liquid	 to	 reduce	 to	 about	 2	 cups.	 Strain,	 and	 correct
seasoning.	If	very	salty,	use	in	diluted	form.



CHAPTER	THREE

EGGS
Oeufs

ONCE	AN	EGG	is	taken	out	of	the	breakfast	category	and	put	to	use	as	a
hot	 entrée,	 a	 luncheon,	 or	 a	 supper	 dish,	 it	 offers	 a	 great	 variety	 of
presentations	 and	 you	 can	 draw	 on	 practically	 your	 whole	 cooking
experience	 for	 its	 saucing	and	garnishing.	 In	 the	 following	 selection	of
recipes,	we	have	concentrated	on	poaching,	shirring,	baking,	scrambling,
and	omelette	making,	with	a	fundamental	recipe	for	each,	and	a	group
of	variations.

Wine	and	eggs	have	no	great	 sympathy	 for	each	other,	but	as	one
usually	 likes	 to	 serve	wine	with	an	entrée,	 the	best	 choice	would	be	a
fairly	 dry	 white	 wine	 with	 some	 body—such	 as	 Graves,	 Chablis,	 or
Pouilly-Fuissé—or	a	rosé.

		POACHED	EGGS
[Oeufs	Pochés]

A	poached	egg	is	one	that	has	been	dropped	without	its	shell	into	a
pan	of	barely	simmering	liquid	and	cooked	for	about	4	minutes	until	the
white	is	set	but	the	yolk	remains	liquid.	A	perfect	specimen	is	neat	and
oval	 in	 shape,	 and	 the	 white	 completely	 masks	 the	 yolk.	 The	 most
important	 requirement	 for	poaching	 is	 that	 the	 eggs	be	very	 fresh;	 the
yolk	 stands	high,	 the	white	 clings	 to	 it	 in	a	 cohesive	mass,	 and	only	a
small	 amount	 of	 watery	 liquid	 falls	 away	 from	 the	 main	 body	 of	 the



white.	 A	 stale	 egg	 with	 a	 relaxed	 and	 watery	 white	 is	 unpoachable
because	 the	 white	 trails	 off	 in	 wisps	 in	 the	 water	 leaving	 the	 yolk
exposed.	 If	 the	 eggs	 are	 not	 quite	 as	 fresh	 as	 you	 could	wish,	 simmer
them	in	their	shells	for	8	to	10	seconds	before	poaching.	This	will	often
firm	up	the	white	just	enough	so	it	will	hold	its	shape	around	the	yolk
when	 the	egg	 is	broken	 into	 the	water.	And	a	 fine	 solution	 is	 the	oval
metal	 perforated	 egg	 poacher,	 carried	 in	most	 gourmet-type	 cookware
shops.	Simmer	the	eggs	10	seconds	in	their	shells,	as	suggested;	place	the
poachers	in	the	simmering	water,	adding	vinegar	if	you	think	your	eggs
need	help,	and	break	an	egg	into	each	poacher,	time	as	usual,	and	you
get	 a	 beautiful	 egg.	 A	 final	 solution	 is	 the	 6-minute	 boiled	 egg,	 l’oeuf
mollet;	when	you	peel	 it,	you	can	substitute	 it	 for	poached	eggs	 in	any
recipe.

How	to	poach	eggs
To	transfer	the	egg	from	the	shell	to	the	water	you	may	either	break

it	directly	 into	 the	water	as	described	below,	or	break	 it	 into	a	 saucer,
tilt	the	saucer	directly	over	the	water,	and	slip	the	egg	in.

A	saucepan	or	a	skillet	8	to	10	inches	in	diameter	and	2½	to	3	inches
deep

Vinegar	(which	helps	the	eggs	to	hold	their	shape)
Pour	2	inches	of	water	into	the	pan	or	skillet	and	add	1	tablespoon	of
vinegar	per	quart	of	water.	Bring	to	the	simmer.

4	very	fresh	eggs
A	wooden	spoon	or	spatula
A	skimmer	or	slotted	spoon

Break	 one	 of	 the	 eggs,	 and,	 holding	 it	 as	 closely	 over	 the	 water	 as
possible,	let	it	fall	in.	Immediately	and	gently	push	the	white	over	the
yolk	with	a	wooden	spoon	 for	2	 to	3	seconds.	Maintain	 the	water	at
the	 barest	 simmer	 and	 proceed	 with	 the	 other	 eggs	 in	 the	 same
manner.

A	bowl	of	cold	water



After	4	minutes,	remove	the	first	egg	with	the	skimmer	and	test	with
your	 finger.	The	white	 should	be	set,	 the	yolk	 still	 soft	 to	 the	 touch.
Place	the	egg	in	the	cold	water;	this	washes	off	the	vinegar	and	stops
the	cooking.	Remove	the	rest	of	the	eggs	as	they	are	done,	and	poach
others	in	the	same	water	if	you	are	doing	more.
(*)	The	eggs	may	 remain	 for	 several	hours	 in	cold	water,	or	may	be
drained	and	refrigerated.

A	bowl	of	hot	water	containing	1½	tsp	salt	per	quart
A	clean	towel
To	 reheat	 the	 eggs,	 trim	 off	 any	 trailing	 bits	 of	 white	 with	 a	 knife.
Place	 them	in	hot	 salted	water	 for	about	half	a	minute	 to	heat	 them
through.	Remove	one	at	a	time	with	a	slotted	spoon.	Holding	a	folded
towel	 under	 the	 spoon,	 roll	 the	 egg	 back	 and	 forth	 for	 a	 second	 to
drain	it,	and	it	is	ready	to	serve.

A	SUBSTITUTE	FOR	POACHED	EGGS
Oeufs	Mollets
[Six-minute	Boiled	Eggs]

This	 is	a	boiled	egg	with	a	set	white	and	a	soft	yolk	which	can	be
peeled	and	substituted	for	poached	eggs.

2	quarts	boiling	water
6	eggs	with	uncracked	shells
Lower	the	eggs	into	the	boiling	water	and	boil	slowly	according	to	the
following	table,	adding	1	minute	if	the	eggs	are	chilled.
U.S.	Large	Eggs 6	minutes
Extra	Large 6½	minutes
Jumbo 7	minutes

As	 soon	 as	 the	 time	 is	 up,	 drain	 off	 the	 boiling	water	 and	 run	 cold



water	into	the	pan	for	a	minute	to	set	the	white,	and	to	cool	the	eggs
enough	to	remove	the	shells.	Tap	gently	on	a	hard	surface	to	break	the
shells,	peel	carefully	under	a	stream	of	water.

If	to	be	served	cold,	refrigerate.	If	to	be	served	hot,	warm	for	a	minute
in	a	bowl	of	hot	water.

OEUFS	SUR	CANAPÉS
OEUFS	EN	CROUST	ADES
[Poached	Eggs	on	Canapés,	Artichoke
Bottoms,	Mushroom	Caps,	or	in
Pastry	Shells]

A	 practically	 limitless	 series	 of	 elegant	 little	 hot	 first	 courses	 or
luncheon	dishes	may	be	 concocted	with	 poached	 eggs,	 sauces,	minces,
and	imagination.	Here	are	some	ideas:

Oeufs	à	la	Fondue	de	Fromage
[Poached	Eggs	on	Canapés	with
Cheese	Fondue	Sauce]

This	 is	 a	 particularly	 good	 sauce	 for	 eggs;	 it	 is	 creamy,	 wine-
flavored,	cheesy,	and	has	just	a	whiff	of	garlic.	Sauce	mornay	(béchamel
with	cheese)	may	always	be	substituted.

For	6	servings	(1½	cups)

A	4-cup	saucepan
1	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onions
1	Tb	butter
A	small	clove	mashed	garlic
Cook	 the	 shallots	or	onions	 for	1	 to	2	minutes	 in	 the	butter	without
browning.	Add	garlic	and	cook	30	seconds	more.

1½	cups	dry	white	wine	or	¾	cup	dry	white	vermouth
¼	cup	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon



Then	add	the	wine	and	stock	and	boil	rapidly	until	liquid	has	reduced
to	3	or	4	tablespoons.

1½	Tb	cornstarch
1¼	cups	whipping	cream
A	small	mixing	bowl
Blend	the	cornstarch	with	2	tablespoons	of	the	cream,	then	stir	in	half
of	the	remaining	cream.	Pour	it	into	the	wine	and	shallots	and	simmer,
stirring,	for	2	minutes.	Add	more	cream	by	spoonfuls	to	thin	the	sauce
—it	should	coat	a	spoon	fairly	heavily.

½	to	⅔	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
Salt	and	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Stir	in	the	cheese	and	simmer,	stirring,	until	the	cheese	has	melted	and
the	 sauce	 is	 smooth	 and	 creamy.	 Add	 more	 spoonfuls	 of	 cream	 if
necessary.	Correct	seasoning,	set	aside,	and	reheat	when	needed.

6	poached	eggs	or	6-minute	boiled	eggs
canapés	(oval	slices	of	white	bread	sautéed	in	clarified	butter)
Prepare	the	eggs	and	canapés.

3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	melted	butter
A	broiling	pan	or	fireproof	serving	platter
Shortly	 before	 serving,	 preheat	 broiler	 to	 very	 hot.	 Place	 a	 cold
drained	 egg	 on	 each	 canapé,	 spoon	 the	 sauce	 over,	 sprinkle	 with
cheese	 and	 butter.	 Run	 for	 about	 a	minute	 under	 the	 hot	 broiler	 to
reheat	the	eggs	but	not	to	overcook	them,	and	to	brown	the	top	of	the
sauce	lightly.	Serve	on	a	platter	or	on	serving	plates.

Other	Ideas



Mix	 a	 spoonful	 or	 two	 of	 cooked,	 chopped	 spinach,	 or	 minced
sautéed	ham	with	a	bit	of	the	sauce	and	spread	over	each	canapé	to	act
as	 a	 bed	 for	 the	 egg.	 Use	 pastry	 shells,	 broiled	 mushroom	 caps,	 or
cooked	artichoke	bottoms	instead	of	canapés.

Oeufs	en	Croustades	à	la	Béarnaise
[Poached	Eggs	and	Mushrooms,
Béarnaise	Sauce]

For	8	servings

1	lb.	finely	minced	fresh	mushrooms
3	Tb	butter
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
An	enameled	skillet

A	handful	at	a	time,	twist	the	mushrooms	into	a	ball	in	the	corner	of	a
towel	 to	 extract	 their	 juice.	 Sauté	 the	mushrooms	 in	hot	butter	with
the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 for	 7	 to	 8	 minutes,	 until	 the	 pieces	 begin	 to
separate	from	each	other.

1½	Tb	flour
Sprinkle	on	the	flour	and	stir	over	moderate	heat	for	3	minutes.

¼	cup	Madeira	or	port
½	cup	whipping	cream
½	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper

Stir	 in	the	wine	and	boil	 for	a	minute.	Then	stir	 in	 two	thirds	of	 the
cream.	Add	 the	 seasonings.	Simmer	 for	2	 to	3	minutes,	adding	more
cream	 by	 spoonfuls	 if	 the	 mushroom	 mixture	 becomes	 too	 thick.
Correct	seasoning	and	set	aside.

8	cooked	pastry	shells	2	to	2½	inches	in	diameter	and	1½	inches	high



8	poached	eggs	or	6-minute	boiled	eggs
2	to	2½	cups	sauce	béarnaise,	or	sauce	choron	(béarnaise	with	tomato)

Just	before	serving,	reheat	the	mushrooms,	pastry	shells,	and	eggs.	Put
2	 or	 3	 tablespoons	 of	 the	mushroom	mixture	 into	 each	 shell,	 lay	 an
egg	over	it,	and	coat	with	the	sauce.	Serve	immediately	on	a	platter	or
individual	serving	plates.

Other	Ideas
Instead	of	mushrooms,	use	creamed	shellfish;	 follow	 the	 recipe	 for

fondue	 de	 crustacés,	 and	 top	with	 hollandaise.	 Broiled	mushroom	 caps,
broiled	tomatoes,	or	cooked	artichoke	bottoms	may	replace	pastry	shells.

Oeufs	à	la	Bourguignonne
[Eggs	Poached	in	Red	Wine]

This	is	a	good	dish	for	a	light	supper	or	a	winter	luncheon,	and	can
be	made	more	important	if	it	is	garnished	with	sautéed	chicken	livers	or
braised	onions,	and	sautéed	or	broiled	mushrooms.	Accompany	it	with	a
light	red	Burgundy	or	Beaujolais.	Traditionally	the	eggs	are	poached	in
the	wine,	but	they	may	be	done	in	water	in	the	usual	way,	if	you	wish.

For	8	servings

2	cups	of	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
2	cups	good,	young	red	wine
An	8-inch	saucepan
8	very	fresh	eggs

Bring	 the	 stock	 and	 wine	 to	 the	 simmer	 and	 poach	 the	 eggs	 in	 it.
Remove	the	eggs	to	a	fireproof	dish,	add	 1/ 	inch	of	poaching	liquid,

16

and	set	aside.	About	5	minutes	before	serving,	set	the	dish	uncovered
over	simmering	water	to	reheat	the	eggs.

½	bay	leaf	tied	with	2	or	3	parsley	sprigs
¼	tsp	thyme



1	clove	mashed	garlic
1	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onion
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
Pinch	of	pepper

After	 poaching	 the	 eggs,	 add	 the	herbs,	 garlic,	 shallot	 or	 onion,	 and
seasonings	to	the	wine	and	boil	it	down	rapidly	until	it	has	reduced	to
2	cups.	Remove	parsley	and	bay	leaf.

1½	Tb	softened	butter
2	Tb	flour
Optional:	1	Tb	red	currant	jelly

Blend	the	butter	and	flour	to	a	smooth	paste—beurre	manié.	Off	heat,
beat	 it	 into	 the	wine	mixture	with	a	wire	whip.	Boil	 for	30	 seconds.
Beat	 in	 the	 optional	 currant	 jelly	 for	 color	 and	 flavor,	 and	 correct
seasoning.
(*)	If	not	to	be	used	immediately,	set	aside	uncovered,	top	dotted	with
part	of	the	enrichment	butter.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
Just	before	serving,	reheat	the	sauce	to	the	simmer.	Off	heat,	beat	in
the	butter.

canapés	(ovals	of	white	bread	sautéed	in	clarified	butter.	They	may
be	rubbed	with	a	cut	clove	of	garlic	if	you	wish.)

2	to	3	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley
Place	 a	 hot	 egg	 on	 each	 canapé	 and	 arrange	 on	 a	 platter	 or	 serving
plates.	Surround	with	whatever	garniture	you	may	have	chosen,	and
spoon	the	hot	sauce	over.	Decorate	with	parsley,	and	serve.

Oeufs	en	Gelée
[Poached	Eggs	in	Aspic]



This	recipe	is	in	the	chapter	on	cold	buffets.

		SHIRRED	EGGS
[Oeufs	sur	le	Plat	—	Oeufs	Miroir]

A	shirred	egg	is	one	that	 is	broken	into	a	small,	 flat,	buttered	dish
and	cooked	quickly	under	the	broiler.	The	white	is	softly	set	and	tender,
and	 the	 yolk	 is	 liquid,	 but	 covered	 by	 a	 shimmering,	 translucent	 film.
Shirred	eggs	should	never	be	attempted	in	the	oven,	as	it	toughens	them.
For	each	serving
Preheat	broiler	to	very	hot.

A	shallow,	fireproof	dish	about	4	inches	in	diameter
½	Tb	butter
1	or	2	eggs

Place	 the	dish	over	moderate	heat	 and	add	 the	butter.	As	 soon	as	 it
has	melted,	break	the	egg	or	eggs	into	the	dish	and	cook	for	about	30
seconds	until	a	 thin	 layer	of	white	has	set	 in	the	bottom	of	 the	dish.
Remove	 from	 heat,	 tilt	 dish,	 and	 baste	 the	 egg	 with	 the	 butter.	 Set
aside.

Salt	and	pepper
A	minute	or	 so	before	 serving,	 place	 the	dish	 an	 inch	under	 the	hot
broiler.	Slide	 it	 in	and	out	every	few	seconds	and	baste	the	egg	with
the	butter.	In	about	a	minute	the	white	will	be	set,	and	the	yolk	filmed
and	glistening.	Remove,	season,	and	serve	immediately.

VARIATIONS
Using	 the	 technique	 of	 the	 preceding	 recipe,	 shirred	 eggs	may	 be

dressed	up	in	the	following	ways:

Au	Beurre	Noir
[With	Black	Butter	Sauce]



Substitute	beurre	noir,	for	plain	butter.

Aux	Fines	Herbes
[With	Herb	Butter]

Substitute	herb	or	tarragon	butter	for	plain	butter.

À	la	Crème
[With	Cream]

Use	half	the	amount	of	butter.	After	bottom	of	egg	has	been	lightly
cooked	on	top	of	the	stove,	pour	2	tablespoons	of	whipping	cream	over
the	egg,	then	set	it	under	the	broiler.	Basting	is	not	necessary.

Gratinés
[Browned	with	Cheese]

This	 is	 the	 same	 as	 à	 la	 crème,	 but	 sprinkle	 a	 teaspoon	 of	 grated
cheese	over	the	cream,	and	dot	with	butter.

Pipérade
[With	Tomatoes,	Onions,	and	Peppers]

Prepare	 the	pipérade	mixture	of	cooked	onions,	green	peppers,	and
tomatoes.	 Then	 proceed	 as	 for	 the	main	 recipe,	 spooning	 the	 pipérade
around	the	egg	before	it	goes	under	the	broiler.

Other	Suggestions
Just	 before	 serving,	 surround	 the	 egg	 with	 sautéed	 mushrooms,

kidneys,	 chicken	 livers,	 sausages,	 asparagus	 tips,	 broiled	 tomatoes,
tomato	sauce,	or	whatever	else	strikes	your	fancy.

		EGGS	BAKED	IN	RAMEKINS
[Oeufs	en	Cocotte]

These	 are	 individual	 servings	 of	 1	 or	 2	 eggs	 baked	 in	 porcelain,
pyrex,	or	earthenware	 ramekins.	The	 ramekins	must	be	 set	 in	a	pan	of



boiling	 water,	 otherwise	 the	 intense	 heat	 of	 the	 oven	 toughens	 the
outside	layer	of	egg	before	the	inside	has	cooked.

For	each	serving
Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

½	tsp	butter
1	ramekin	2½	to	3	inches	in	diameter	and	about	1½	inches	high
2	Tb	whipping	cream
A	pan	containing	¾	inch	of	simmering	water
1	or	2	eggs

Butter	the	ramekin,	saving	a	dot	for	later.	Add	1	tablespoon	of	cream
and	set	the	ramekin	in	the	simmering	water	over	moderate	heat.	When
the	 cream	 is	 hot,	 break	 into	 it	 one	 or	 two	 eggs.	 Pour	 the	 remaining
spoonful	of	cream	over	the	egg	and	top	with	a	dot	of	butter.

Place	 in	middle	 level	of	 the	hot	oven	and	bake	 for	7	 to	10	minutes.
The	eggs	are	done	when	they	are	 just	set	but	still	 tremble	slightly	 in
the	 ramekins.	 They	 will	 set	 a	 little	 more,	 when	 the	 ramekins	 are
removed,	so	they	should	not	be	overcooked.

Salt	and	pepper
Season	with	salt	and	pepper,	and	serve.
(*)	The	ramekins	may	remain	in	the	pan	of	hot	water,	out	of	the	oven,
for	10	to	15	minutes	before	serving.	To	prevent	overcooking,	remove
eggs	from	oven	when	slightly	underdone.

VARIATIONS
Aux	Fines	Herbes
[With	Herbs]

Add	half	a	 teaspoon	of	mixed	fresh	parsley,	chives,	and	chervil,	or
tarragon	to	the	cream	in	the	preceding	recipe.



Sauces
Instead	of	cream,	use	one	of	the	brown	sauces,	especially	those	with

herbs,	mushrooms,	or	tomatoes.	Or	substitute	one	of	the	white	sauces	of
which	 sauce	 soubise	 with	 onions,	 or	 sauce	 au	 cari	 (curry	 sauce)	 are
especially	good.	The	tomato	sauces	are	other	alternatives.

Other	Suggestions
A	spoonful	or	 two	of	any	of	 the	 following	cooked	 ingredients	may

be	put	in	the	bottom	of	the	ramekins	along	with	either	cream	or	sauce:
Minced	mushrooms,	asparagus,	spinach,	artichoke	hearts

Diced	lobster,	shrimp,	crab
Diced	truffles,	and/or	a	slice	of	foie	gras

		SCRAMBLED	EGGS
[Oeufs	Brouillés]

Scrambled	eggs	in	French	are	creamy	soft	curds	that	just	hold	their
shape	 from	 fork	 to	 mouth.	 Their	 preparation	 is	 entirely	 a	 matter	 of
stirring	the	eggs	over	gentle	heat	until	they	slowly	thicken	as	a	mass	into
a	custard.	Salt	plus	half	a	 teaspoon	of	 liquid	per	egg	helps	blend	yolks
and	 white,	 but	 no	 more	 liquid	 or	 liquid-producing	 ingredients	 or	 the
eggs	will	turn	watery.

For	4	or	5	servings

A	fork	or	a	wire	whip
8	eggs,	or	7	eggs	and	2	yolks
A	mixing	bowl
Salt	and	pepper
4	tsp	water	or	milk

Beat	the	eggs	in	the	bowl	with	the	seasonings	and	liquid	for	20	to	30
seconds,	just	to	blend	yolks	and	whites.

2	Tb	softened	butter
A	heavy-weight	saucepan	or	skillet	7	to	8	inches	bottom	diameter



(no-stick	suggested).	Depth	of	eggs	in	pan	should	be	⅔	to	1	inch
A	rubber	spatula	or	wooden	spoon

Smear	 the	 bottom	 and	 sides	 of	 the	 pan	with	 the	 butter.	 Pour	 in	 the
eggs	 and	 set	 over	moderately	 low	 heat.	 Stir	 slowly	 and	 continually,
reaching	all	over	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	Nothing	will	seem	to	happen
for	2	to	3	minutes	as	the	eggs	gradually	heat.	Suddenly	they	will	begin
to	 thicken	 into	 a	 custard.	 Stir	 rapidly,	moving	 pan	 on	 and	 off	 heat,
until	 the	 eggs	 have	 almost	 thickened	 to	 the	 consistency	 you	 wish.
Then	remove	from	heat,	as	they	will	continue	to	thicken	slightly.

1½	to	2	Tb	softened	butter	or	whipping	cream
A	warm	buttered	platter
Parsley	sprigs

Just	as	soon	as	they	are	of	the	right	consistency,	stir	in	the	enrichment
butter	or	cream,	which	will	stop	the	cooking.	Season	to	taste,	turn	out
onto	the	platter,	decorate	with	parsley,	and	serve.
(*)	 The	 eggs	 may	 be	 kept	 for	 a	 while	 in	 their	 saucepan	 over	 tepid
water,	but	the	sooner	they	are	served	the	better.

VARIATIONS
Aux	Fines	Herbes
[With	Herbs]

Beat	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 minced	 fresh	 herbs	 such	 as	 parsley,	 chervil,
chives,	and	tarragon	into	the	eggs	at	the	start.	Sprinkle	more	herbs	over
the	eggs	just	before	serving.

Au	Fromage
[With	Cheese]

Stir	4	to	6	spoonfuls	of	grated	Swiss	cheese	into	the	eggs	along	with
the	enrichment	butter	at	the	end.

Aux	Truffes



[With	Truffles]

Stir	 1	 or	 2	 diced	 truffles	 into	 the	 eggs	 before	 scrambling	 them.
Sprinkle	a	bit	of	chopped	truffle	over	the	eggs	before	serving.

Garnishings
Aside	 from	ham,	bacon,	or	 sausages,	 the	platter	may	be	garnished

with	such	things	as:	broiled	or	sautéed	mushrooms,	kidneys,	or	chicken
livers;	sautéed	eggplant	or	zucchini;	broiled	tomatoes,	tomato	sauce,	or
the	pipérade	mixture	on	this	page;	diced	sautéed	potatoes;	buttered	peas,
asparagus	tips,	or	artichoke	hearts.

OMELETTES

A	 good	 French	 omelette	 is	 a	 smooth,	 gently	 swelling,	 golden	 oval
that	is	tender	and	creamy	inside.	And	as	it	takes	less	than	half	a	minute
to	make,	 it	 is	 ideal	 for	a	quick	meal.	There	 is	a	 trick	to	omelettes,	and
certainly	the	easiest	way	to	learn	is	to	ask	an	expert	to	give	you	a	lesson.
Nevertheless	we	hope	one	of	the	two	techniques	we	describe	will	enable
you,	if	you	have	never	made	an	omelette	before,	to	produce	a	good	one.
The	 difficulty	with	 all	written	 recipes	 for	 omelettes	 is	 that	 before	 you
even	 start	 to	 make	 one	 you	 must	 read,	 remember,	 and	 visualize	 the
directions	 from	 beginning	 to	 end,	 and	 practice	 the	 movements.	 For
everything	must	go	so	quickly	once	the	eggs	are	in	the	pan	that	there	is
no	time	at	all	to	stop	in	the	middle	and	pore	over	your	book	in	order	to
see	 what	 comes	 next.	 Learning	 to	make	 a	 good	 omelette	 is	 entirely	 a
matter	 of	 practice.	 Do	 one	 after	 another	 for	 groups	 of	 people	 every
chance	 you	 get	 for	 several	 days,	 and	 even	 be	 willing	 to	 throw	 some
away.	 You	 should	 soon	 develop	 the	 art,	 as	well	 as	 your	 own	 personal
omelette	style.

The	 two	methods	 set	 forth	here	are	 rapid,	professional	 techniques.
The	first	is	the	simplest.	The	second	takes	more	manual	skill.

OMELETTE	PANS

An	omelette	cannot	be	made	in	a	sticky	pan;	the	eggs	must	be	able
to	 slide	 around	 freely,	 and	 if	 they	 cannot,	 you	 simply	 cannot	make	an



omelette	at	all.	Since	the	first	edition	of	this	book,	professionally	shaped
omelette	pans	of	heavy	aluminum	with	no-stick	interiors	are	everywhere
available,	 and	 that’s	 what	 we	 use—gratefully.	 However,	 the	 great
omelette	 maker	 Dione	 Lucas	 insisted	 on	 her	 specially	 made	 cast-
aluminum	 pan	 half	 an	 inch	 thick,	 while	 that	 other	 famous	 omelette
queen	Mme	Romaine	de	Lyon	and	many	another	French	cook	swear	only
by	 the	 plain	 iron	 pan	 ⅛	 inch	 thick	 like	 the	 one	 in	 our	 illustrations.
Whatever	 you	 buy,	 you	 should	 have	 the	 long	 handle	 and	 the	 straight-
sloping	 sides	 2	 inches	 deep;	 the	 bottom	 diameter	 should	 be	 about	 7
inches,	since	this	is	the	perfect	size	for	the	perfect	2-to	3-egg	omelette.
If	you	prefer	the	French	iron	pan	illustrated,	you	must	first	scrub	it

with	steel	wool	and	scouring	powder,	rinse	and	dry	it,	then	heat	it	for	a
minute	or	two	just	until	its	bottom	is	too	hot	for	your	hand.	Rub	it	with
paper	 towels	and	cooking	oil	and	 let	 it	 stand	overnight.	Before	making
your	 first	omelette,	 sprinkle	a	 teaspoon	of	 table	salt	 in	 the	pan,	heat	 it
again,	and	rub	vigorously	for	a	moment	with	paper	towels;	rub	the	pan
clean,	 and	 it	 is	 ready	 for	 an	 omelette.	 If	 the	 pan	 is	 used	 only	 for
omelettes	(a	wise	decision),	it	needs	no	washing	afterwards;	merely	rub
it	 clean	with	paper	 towels.	 If	 the	pan	 is	washed,	dry,	warm,	 and	oil	 it
lightly	before	putting	it	away.	If	it	becomes	sticky	again,	rub	again	with
salt.	 Never	 allow	 any	 pan,	 particularly	 an	 iron	 one,	 to	 sit	 empty	 over
heat—this	does	something	to	its	internal	structure	so	that	foods	stick	to
it	forevermore.

EGGS	AND	HOW	TO	BEAT	THEM

An	omelette	can	contain	up	to	8	eggs,	but	the	individual	2-to	3-egg
omelette	 is	 usually	 the	 tenderest,	 and	 by	 far	 the	 best	 size	 to	 practice
making.	At	 under	 30	 seconds	 an	 omelette,	 a	 number	 of	 people	 can	 be
served	in	a	very	short	time.	In	fact,	unless	you	are	extremely	expert	and
have	 a	 restaurant-size	 heat	 source,	 we	 do	 not	 recommend	 larger
omelettes	at	all.	But	if	you	do	want	to	attempt	them,	be	sure	to	have	the
correct	size	of	pan.	The	depth	of	the	egg	mass	in	the	pan	should	not	be
over	¼	inch,	as	the	eggs	must	cook	quickly.	A	pan	with	a	7-inch	bottom
is	right	for	the	2-to	3-egg	omelette;	a	10-to	11-inch	pan	is	required	for	8
eggs.
Just	 before	 heating	 the	 butter	 in	 the	 pan,	 break	 the	 eggs	 into	 a

mixing	bowl	and	add	salt	and	pepper.	With	a	large	table	fork,	beat	the



eggs	only	enough	to	blend	the	whites	and	yolks	thoroughly.	From	30	to
40	vigorous	strokes	should	be	sufficient.
If	you	are	making	 several	2-to	3-egg	omelettes,	beat	 the	necessary

number	 of	 eggs	 and	 seasonings	 together	 in	 a	 large	 mixing	 bowl,	 and
provide	yourself	with	a	 ladle	or	measure.	Two	U.S.	 large	eggs	measure
about	 6	 tablespoons;	 3	 eggs,	 about	 9	 tablespoons.	 Measure	 out	 the
required	quantity	for	each	omelette	as	you	are	ready	to	make	it,	giving
the	 eggs	 4	 or	 5	 vigorous	 beats	 before	 dipping	 them	 out	 with	 your
measure.

TRANSFERRING	THE	OMELETTE	FROM	PAN	TO	PLATE

In	each	of	the	methods	described,	the	finished	omelette	ends	up	in
the	far	lip	of	the	pan.	This	is	the	way	to	transfer	it	from	the	pan	to	the
plate.

Hold	the	plate	in	your	left	hand.	Turn	the	omelette	pan	so	its	handle	is
to	your	right.	Grasp	 the	handle	with	your	right	hand,	 thumb	on	top.
Rest	 the	 lip	 of	 the	 pan	 slightly	 off	 the	 center	 of	 the	 plate	 so	 the
omelette	will	land	in	the	middle	of	the	plate.	Then	tilt	plate	and	pan
against	each	other	at	a	45-degree	angle.



Quickly	turn	the	pan	upside	down	over	the	plate	and	the	omelette	will
drop	into	position.

If	it	has	not	formed	neatly,	push	it	into	shape	with	the	back	of	a	fork.
Rub	the	top	of	the	omelette	with	softened	butter	and	serve	as	soon	as
possible,	for	omelettes	toughen	if	they	are	kept	warm.

I	·	L’OMELETTE	BROUILLÉE
[Scrambled	Omelette]

This	is	best	in	a	French	omelette	pan,	but	a	skillet	can	be	used.
For	1	omelette,	1	to	2	servings.	Time:	Less	than	30	seconds	of
cooking

2	or	3	eggs
Big	pinch	of	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
A	mixing	bowl



A	table	fork
Beat	the	eggs	and	seasonings	in	the	mixing	bowl	for	20	to	30	seconds
until	the	whites	and	yolks	are	just	blended.

1	Tb	butter
An	omelette	pan	7	inches	in	diameter	at	the	bottom
A	table	fork

Place	the	butter	in	the	pan	and	set	over	very	high	heat.	If	you	have	an
electric	heat	element,	it	should	be	red	hot.	As	the	butter	melts,	tilt	the
pan	in	all	directions	to	film	the	sides.	When	you	see	that	the	foam	has
almost	subsided	in	the	pan	and	the	butter	is	on	the	point	of	coloring,	it
is	an	indication	that	it	is	hot	enough	to	pour	in	the	eggs.



Hold	 the	 panhandle	 with	 your	 left	 hand,	 thumb	 on	 top,	 and
immediately	start	sliding	the	pan	back	and	forth	rapidly	over	the	heat.
At	the	same	time,	fork	in	right	hand,	its	flat	side	against	the	bottom	of
the	pan,	stir	the	eggs	quickly	to	spread	them	continuously	all	over	the
bottom	of	the	pan	as	they	thicken.	In	3	or	4	seconds	they	will	become
a	light,	broken	custard.	(A	filling	would	go	in	at	this	point.)

Then	lift	the	handle	of	the	pan	to	tilt	it	at	a	45-degree	angle	over	the



heat,	 and	 rapidly	 gather	 the	 eggs	 at	 the	 far	 lip	 of	 the	 pan	with	 the
back	of	your	fork.	Still	holding	the	pan	tilted	over	the	heat,	run	your
fork	around	the	lip	of	the	pan	under	the	far	edge	of	the	omelette	to	be
sure	it	has	not	adhered	to	the	pan.

Give	 4	 or	 5	 short,	 sharp	 blows	 on	 the	 handle	 of	 the	 pan	with	 your
right	fist	to	loosen	the	omelette	and	make	the	far	edge	curl	over	onto
itself.
Hold	the	pan	tilted	over	heat	for	1	or	2	seconds	to	brown	the	bottom
of	 the	 omelette	 very	 lightly,	 but	 not	 too	 long	 or	 the	 eggs	 will
overcook.	The	center	of	the	omelette	should	remain	soft	and	creamy.

A	warm	plate
Softened	butter
Turn	 the	omelette	onto	 the	plate	 as	 illustrated	on	 this	page,	 rub	 the
top	with	a	bit	of	butter,	and	serve	as	soon	as	possible.



II	·	L’OMELETTE	ROULÉE
[Rolled	Omelette]

This	omelette	should	be	made	in	a	French	omelette	pan	and	a	high
gas	 flame	is	usually	more	successful	 than	an	electric	heat	element.	The
rolled	 omelette	 is	 the	 most	 fun	 of	 any	 method,	 but	 requires	 more
practice.	Here	 the	pan	 is	 jerked	over	high	heat	at	an	angle	 so	 that	 the
egg	mass	 is	 continually	 hurled	 against	 the	 far	 lip	 of	 the	 pan	 until	 the
eggs	thicken.	Finally,	as	the	pan	is	tilted	further	while	it	is	being	jerked,
the	eggs	roll	over	at	the	far	lip	of	the	pan,	forming	an	omelette	shape.	A
simple-minded	 but	 perfect	way	 to	master	 the	movement	 is	 to	 practice
outdoors	with	half	a	 cupful	of	dried	beans.	As	 soon	as	you	are	able	 to
make	them	flip	over	themselves	 in	a	group,	you	have	the	right	 feeling;
but	the	actual	omelette-making	gesture	is	sharper	and	rougher.
For	1	omelette,	1	to	2	servings.	Time:	Less	than	30	seconds	of
cooking

2	or	3	eggs
Big	pinch	of	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
A	mixing	bowl
A	table	fork
Beat	the	eggs	and	seasonings	in	the	mixing	bowl	for	20	to	30	seconds
until	the	whites	and	yolks	are	just	blended.

1	Tb	butter
An	omelette	pan	7	inches	in	diameter	at	the	bottom
A	table	fork
Place	the	butter	in	the	pan	and	set	over	very	high	heat.	As	the	butter
melts,	tilt	the	pan	in	all	directions	to	film	the	sides.	When	you	see	that
the	foam	has	almost	subsided	in	the	pan	and	the	butter	is	on	the	point
of	 coloring	 (indicating	 it	 is	 hot	 enough),	 pour	 in	 the	 eggs.	 It	 is	 of
utmost	 importance	 in	 this	 method	 that	 the	 butter	 be	 of	 the	 correct
temperature.



Let	 the	 eggs	 settle	 in	 the	 pan	 for	 2	 or	 3	 seconds	 to	 form	 a	 film	 of
coagulated	egg	in	the	bottom	of	the	pan.

Grasp	 the	 handle	 of	 the	 pan	 with	 both	 hands,	 thumbs	 on	 top,	 and
immediately	begin	jerking	the	pan	vigorously	and	roughly	toward	you
at	an	even,	20-degree	angle	over	the	heat,	one	jerk	per	second.
It	 is	 the	 sharp	 pull	 of	 the	 pan	 toward	 you	 which	 throws	 the	 eggs
against	the	far	lip	of	the	pan,	then	back	over	its	bottom	surface.	You



must	 have	 the	 courage	 to	 be	 rough	 or	 the	 eggs	 will	 not	 loosen
themselves	 from	 the	bottom	of	 the	pan.	After	 several	 jerks,	 the	 eggs
will	begin	to	thicken.	(A	filling	would	go	in	at	this	point.)

Then	 increase	 the	angle	of	 the	pan	slightly,	which	will	 force	 the	egg
mass	to	roll	over	on	itself	with	each	jerk	at	the	far	lip	of	the	pan.



As	soon	as	the	omelette	has	shaped	up,	hold	it	in	the	angle	of	the	pan
to	brown	the	bottom	a	pale	golden	color,	but	only	a	second	or	two,	for
the	eggs	must	not	overcook.	The	center	of	the	omelette	should	remain
soft	and	creamy.	 If	 the	omelette	has	not	 formed	neatly,	push	 it	with
the	back	of	your	fork.

Turn	 the	omelette	onto	 the	plate	 as	 illustrated	on	 this	page,	 rub	 the
top	with	a	bit	of	butter,	and	serve	as	soon	as	possible.

GARNISHINGS	AND	FILLINGS	FOR	OMELETTES
Aux	Fines	Herbes
[With	Herbs]

Beat	 into	 the	 eggs	 at	 the	 beginning	 1	 tablespoon	 of	minced	 fresh
herbs	such	as	chervil,	parsley,	chives,	and	tarragon.	Sprinkle	more	of	the
same	over	the	finished	omelette.

Au	Fromage
[With	Cheese]



After	 the	 eggs	have	 set	 for	2	or	3	 seconds	 in	 the	pan	at	 the	point
indicated	 in	 either	 of	 the	 two	 omelette	 recipes,	 sprinkle	 in	 1	 or	 2
tablespoons	of	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese	and	finish	the	omelette.
If	you	wish,	sprinkle	more	cheese	over	the	completed	omelette,	dot	with
butter,	and	run	quickly	under	a	very	hot	broiler	to	melt	and	brown	the
cheese.

Aux	Épinards
[With	Spinach]

Beat	2	or	3	tablespoons	of	cooked	purée	of	spinach,	into	the	eggs	at
the	beginning,	then	proceed	with	the	omelette	as	usual.

Other	Suggestions
Sprinkle	¼	cup	of	any	of	the	following	cooked	ingredients	over	the

eggs	 after	 they	 have	 set	 for	 2	 or	 3	 seconds	 in	 the	 pan	 at	 the	 point
indicated	 in	 either	 of	 the	 two	 omelette	 recipes,	 then	 proceed	with	 the
omelette	as	usual:	Diced	sautéed	potatoes	and	minced	herbs

Diced	truffles
Diced	sautéed	ham,	chicken	livers,	or	mushrooms
Diced	cooked	asparagus	tips	or	artichoke	hearts
Diced	cooked	shrimp,	crab,	or	lobster
Cubes	of	stale	white	bread	sautéed	in	butter

Omelettes	Gratinées	à	la	Tomate
[Tomato-filled	Omelettes	Gratinéed	With	Cream	and	Cheese]

Here	 is	 a	 delicious	 supper	 or	 luncheon	 dish	 that	 can	 be	 prepared
ahead	and	gratinéed	just	before	serving.

For	4	to	6	people

4	two-egg	omelettes	or	2	three-egg	omelettes
A	buttered	plate
A	shallow,	buttered,	fireproof	serving	platter
Cook	the	omelettes	according	to	one	of	 the	master	recipes,	but	 leave
them	slightly	underdone.	Slip	each	as	it	is	made	onto	a	buttered	plate,



then	slide	it	onto	the	buttered	platter,	arranging	the	omelettes	side	by
side.

1	cup	fresh	tomato	purée
Cut	a	slit	along	the	length	of	each	omelette	to	within	½	inch	of	the	2
ends.	Fill	the	slits	with	the	tomato	purée.
(*)	If	not	to	be	used	immediately,	rub	tops	of	omelettes	with	softened
butter	and	cover	with	waxed	paper.
Preheat	broiler	to	very	hot.

½	to	⅔	cup	whipping	cream	or	crème	fraîche
⅓	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
½	Tb	melted	butter
Just	before	 serving,	pour	 the	 cream	over	 the	omelettes,	 and	 sprinkle
with	cheese	and	melted	butter.	Set	platter	3	inches	from	hot	broiler	for
1	 or	 2	 minutes	 to	 reheat	 the	 omelettes	 and	 to	 brown	 the	 cheese
lightly,	but	do	not	let	the	omelettes	overcook.	Serve	immediately.

Pipérade
[Open-faced	Omelette	Garnished	with	Onions,	Peppers,	Tomatoes,
and	Ham]

This	is	a	Basque	specialty,	and	quick	to	make	if	the	pipérade	mixture
has	 been	 prepared	 in	 advance.	 As	 the	 omelette	 is	 not	 folded,	 and	 is
served	in	its	cooking	vessel,	it	is	not	a	disaster	if	it	sticks	a	little	on	the
bottom.	You	may	therefore	cook	the	eggs	in	a	low,	glazed	pottery	dish,
or	a	fancy	skillet.

For	4	to	6	servings

8	to	12	strips	of	ham	¼	inch	thick	and	about	2	by	3	inches	across
2	Tb	olive	oil	or	butter
An	8-to	9-inch	enameled	skillet
Brown	 the	 ham	 slices	 lightly	 on	 both	 sides	 in	 hot	 oil	 or	 butter.	 Set



them	aside,	and	reheat	just	before	using	them	at	the	end	of	the	recipe.

½	cup	thinly	sliced	yellow	onions
½	cup	thinly	sliced	green	or	red	bell	peppers
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
In	 the	 same	 oil	 or	 butter	 in	which	 you	 browned	 the	 ham,	 cook	 the
onions	and	peppers	slowly,	covering	the	skillet,	until	 they	are	tender
but	not	browned.	Season	to	taste	with	salt	and	pepper.

½	clove	mashed	garlic
Speck	of	cayenne	pepper
2	or	3	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	sliced
Salt	and	pepper
Stir	 in	 the	 garlic	 and	 pepper.	 Lay	 the	 tomatoes	 over	 the	 onions	 and
sprinkle	with	salt.	Cover	and	cook	slowly	for	5	minutes.	Uncover,	raise
heat,	 and	 boil	 for	 a	 few	minutes,	 shaking	 the	 pan	 occasionally	 until
the	juice	from	the	tomatoes	has	almost	entirely	evaporated.	Season	to
taste,	and	reheat	just	before	using.
(*)	Recipe	may	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.

1½	Tb	olive	oil	or	butter
An	11-to	12-inch	serving	skillet	or	shallow,	fireproof	serving	dish
8	to	10	eggs	beaten	lightly	with	¼	tsp	salt	and	a	pinch	of	pepper
A	large	table	fork
2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley	or	mixed	fresh	green	herbs
Heat	the	oil	or	butter	in	the	skillet	or	dish.	When	very	hot,	pour	in	the
eggs.	Stir	rapidly	with	a	fork	until	the	eggs	have	just	set	into	a	creamy
mass.	 Remove	 from	 heat	 and	 spread	 over	 them	 the	 hot	 pipérade,
mixing	 a	 bit	 of	 it	 delicately	 into	 the	 eggs.	 Lay	 the	warm	ham	 strips
over	the	pipérade.	Sprinkle	with	the	herbs	and	serve	immediately.



CHAPTER	FOUR

ENTRÉES
AND	LUNCHEON	DISHES

PIE	DOUGH—PASTRY	CRUSTS

Pâte	Brisée

PÂTE	BRISÉE
[Short	Paste,	Pastry	Dough,	Pie	Crust]

A	good	French	pastry	crust	is	tender,	crunchy,	and	buttery.	The	best
one,	pâte	brisée	fine,	is	made	in	the	proportions,	according	to	weight,	of	5
parts	 flour	 to	 4	 parts	 butter.	 American	 all-purpose,	 hard-wheat	 flour
produces	 a	 slightly	 brittle	 crust	 if	 only	 butter	 is	 used.	 However,	 a
mixture	 of	 3	 parts	 butter	 and	 1	 part	 vegetable	 shortening	 will	 give	 a
tender	 crust	 with	 a	 good	 buttery	 flavor.	 Unlike	 standard	 American
methods,	 the	 French	 system	 calls	 for	 a	 fraisage	 at	 the	 end	 of	 the
operation,	which	is	a	short	pushing	out	of	the	dough	with	the	heel	of	the
hand	to	insure	an	even	blending	of	fat	and	flour.

Proportions	per	cup	of	flour

(Directions	for	measuring	flour	and	tables	of	equivalents	are	here.)	1	cup
all-purpose	flour	(5	ounces)

3	ounces	(¾	stick)	butter	and	1	ounce	(2	Tb)	vegetable	shortening
3	to	4½	Tb	iced	water



½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	sugar	(optional,	for	color)

Directions	 for	 making	 short	 paste	 by	 hand	 and	 in	 the	 food
processor

Hand	mixing.	You	must	 train	yourself	 to	work	 rapidly,	particularly	 if
your	kitchen	is	warm,	so	that	the	butter	will	soften	as	little	as	possible.
Use	very	quick,	light	finger	movements,	and	do	not	linger	on	the	dough
at	all	with	the	warm	palms	of	your	hands.	A	pastry	blender	may	be	used
if	you	wish,	but	a	necessary	part	of	 learning	how	to	cook	 is	 to	get	 the
feel	of	the	dough	in	your	fingers.	Il	faut	mettre	la	main	à	la	pâte!

2	cups	all-purpose	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
1	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	sugar
6	ounces	(1½	sticks)	chilled	butter	cut	into	½-inch	bits
4	Tb	chilled	shortening

Place	 flour,	 salt,	 sugar,	 butter,	 and	 vegetable	 shortening	 in	 a	 big
mixing	bowl.	Rub	the	flour	and	fat	together	rapidly	between	the	tips
of	your	 fingers	until	 the	 fat	 is	broken	 into	pieces	 the	size	of	oatmeal
flakes.	 Do	 not	 overdo	 this	 step	 as	 the	 fat	 will	 be	 blended	 more
thoroughly	later.

A	scant	half	cup	of	iced	water,	plus	droplets	more	as	needed
Add	the	water	and	blend	quickly	with	one	hand,	fingers	held	together
and	 slightly	 cupped,	 as	 you	 rapidly	 gather	 the	 dough	 into	 a	 mass.
Sprinkle	 up	 to	 1	 tablespoon	 more	 water	 by	 droplets	 over	 any	 un-
massed	 remains	and	add	 them	 to	 the	main	body	of	 the	dough.	Then
press	the	dough	firmly	into	a	roughly	shaped	ball.	It	should	just	hold
together	and	be	pliable,	but	not	sticky.	Proceed	to	the	fraisage.

Short	paste	in	the	food	processor.	The	preceding	proportions	are	right
for	 machines	 with	 a	 2-quart	 capacity;	 a	 large	 container	 would	 take



double	the	amount.	Measure	the	dry	ingredients	into	the	bowl	(equipped
with	the	steel	blade).	Quarter	the	chilled	sticks	of	butter	lengthwise	and
cut	crosswise	into	⅜-inch	pieces;	add	to	the	flour	along	with	the	chilled
shortening.	Flick	the	machine	on	and	off	4	or	5	times,	then	measure	out
a	scant	half	cup	of	iced	water.	Turn	the	machine	on	and	pour	it	all	in	at
once;	 immediately	 flick	 the	machine	 on	 and	off	 several	 times,	 and	 the
dough	should	begin	to	mass	on	the	blade.	If	not,	dribble	in	a	little	more
water	 and	 repeat,	 repeating	 again	 if	 necessary.	Dough	 is	 done	when	 it
has	begun	 to	mass;	do	not	overmix	 it.	Scrape	 the	dough	out	onto	your
work	surface,	and	proceed	to	the	fraisage.

The	 fraisage—or	 final	 blending	 (for	 hand-made	 and	 machine
dough)

Place	the	dough	on	a	lightly	floured	pastry	board.	With	the	heel	of	one
hand,	 not	 the	 palm	which	 is	 too	 warm,	 rapidly	 press	 the	 pastry	 by
two-spoonful	 bits	 down	 on	 the	 board	 and	 away	 from	 you	 in	 a	 firm,
quick	 smear	of	 about	6	 inches.	This	 constitutes	 the	 final	blending	of
fat	and	flour,	or	fraisage.

With	a	scraper	or	spatula,	gather	the	dough	again	into	a	mass;	knead	it
briefly	 into	 a	 fairly	 smooth	 round	 ball.	 Sprinkle	 it	 lightly	with	 flour
and	wrap	 it	 in	waxed	 paper.	 Either	 place	 the	 dough	 in	 the	 freezing
compartment	of	 the	 refrigerator	 for	 about	1	hour	until	 it	 is	 firm	but
not	congealed,	or	refrigerate	for	2	hours	or	overnight.

Uncooked	pastry	dough	will	keep	for	2	to	3	days	under	refrigeration,



or	may	be	frozen	for	several	weeks.	Always	wrap	it	airtight	in	waxed
paper	and	a	plastic	bag.

Rolling	out	the	dough
Because	of	its	high	butter	content,	roll	out	the	dough	as	quickly	as

possible,	so	that	it	will	not	soften	and	become	difficult	to	handle.
Place	the	dough	on	a	lightly	floured	board	or	marble.	If	the	dough	is

hard,	beat	it	with	the	rolling	pin	to	soften	it.	Then	knead	it	briefly	into	a
fairly	 flat	circle.	 It	 should	be	 just	malleable	enough	to	roll	out	without
cracking.

Lightly	 flour	 the	 top	 of	 the	 dough.	 Place	 rolling	 pin	 across	 center
and	roll	the	pin	back	and	forth	with	firm	but	gentle	pressure	to	start	the
dough	moving.	Then,	with	a	firm,	even	stroke,	and	always	rolling	away
from	you,	start	just	below	the	center	of	the	dough	and	roll	to	within	an
inch	of	the	far	edge.



Lift	dough	and	turn	it	at	a	slight	angle.

Give	 it	 another	 roll.	 Continue	 lifting,	 turning,	 and	 rolling,	 and,	 as
necessary,	 sprinkle	 board	 and	 top	 of	 dough	 lightly	 with	 flour	 to
prevent	sticking.	Roll	it	into	a	circle	⅛	inch	thick	and	about	2	inches
larger	 all	 around	 than	 your	 pie	 pan	 or	 flan	 ring.	 If	 your	 circle	 is
uneven,	cut	off	a	too-large	portion,	moisten	the	edge	of	the	too-small
portion	 with	 water,	 press	 the	 two	 pieces	 of	 pastry	 together,	 and
smooth	them	with	your	rolling	pin.
The	dough	should	be	used	as	soon	as	it	has	been	rolled	out,	so	that

it	will	not	soften.

Making	a	pastry	shell

Flan	ring,	false-bottomed	cake	pan



A	French	 tart,	quiche,	 or	 pie	 is	 straight	 sided	 and	open	 faced,	 and
stands	supported	only	by	its	pastry	shell.	In	France	the	shell	is	molded	in
a	bottomless	metal	flan	ring	that	has	been	set	on	a	baking	sheet.	When
the	tart	is	done,	the	ring	is	removed	and	the	tart	is	slid	from	the	baking
sheet	to	a	rack	or	the	serving	dish.	You	can	achieve	the	same	effect	by
molding	 your	 pastry	 in	 a	 false-bottomed,	 straight-sided,	 cake	 pan	 1	 to
1½	 inches	deep.	When	 the	 shell	 is	 ready	 for	unmolding,	 the	pan	 is	 set
over	a	jar	and	the	false	bottom	frees	the	shell	from	the	sides	of	the	pan.
It	is	then,	with	the	aid	of	a	long-bladed	spatula,	slid	off	its	false	bottom
and	 onto	 a	 rack	 or	 the	 serving	 dish.	 You	 can	 also	 make	 pastry	 shells
using	 two	matching	pie	pans;	once	 in	a	while	 the	weight	of	 the	 filling
will	 force	 the	outward-slanting	sides	of	 the	shell	 to	collapse,	 so	we	are
not	recommending	it.

Quiches

Partially	baked	pastry	shells	are	used	for	quiches	and	for	tarts	whose
filling	 cooks	 in	 the	 shell.	 Fully	 baked	 shells	 are	 for	 tarts	 filled	 with
cooked	 ingredients	 that	 need	 only	 a	 brief	 reheating,	 or	 for	 fresh	 fruit
tarts	that	are	served	cold.



Butter	the	inside	of	the	mold.	If	you	are	using	a	flan	mold,	butter	the
baking	sheet	also.

Either	reverse	the	dough	onto	the	rolling	pin,	and	unroll	it	over	the
mold;	or	fold	the	dough	in	half,	in	half	again,	then	lay	it	in	the	mold	and
unfold	it.

Press	the	dough	lightly	into	the	bottom	of	the	cake	pan,	or	onto	the
baking	sheet	if	you	are	using	a	flan	ring.	Then	lift	the	edges	of	the	dough
and	 work	 it	 gently	 down	 the	 inside	 edges	 of	 mold	 with	 your	 fingers,
taking	in	about	⅜	inch	of	dough	all	around	the	circumference.	This	will
make	the	sides	of	 the	pastry	shell	a	 little	thicker	and	sturdier.	Trim	off
excess	dough	by	rolling	the	pin	over	the	top	of	the	mold.



Then	with	your	thumbs,	push	the	dough	⅛	inch	above	the	edge	of
the	mold,	to	make	an	even,	rounded	rim	of	dough	all	around	the	inside
circumference	of	the	mold.

Press	a	decorative	edge	around	the	rim	of	 the	pastry	with	 the	dull
edge	of	a	knife.

Prick	bottom	of	pastry	with	a	fork	at	½-inch	intervals.

To	keep	the	sides	of	the	pastry	shell	from	collapsing	and	the	bottom
from	puffing	up,	either	butter	the	bottom	of	another	mold,	weight	it	with
a	handful	of	dry	beans,	and	place	it	inside	the	pastry;	or	line	the	pastry
with	 buttered,	 lightweight	 foil,	 or	 buttered	 brown	 paper.	 Press	 it	 well
against	the	sides	of	the	pastry,	and	fill	it	with	dried	beans.	The	weight	of
the	beans	will	hold	the	pastry	against	the	mold	during	the	baking.



Refrigerate	if	not	baked	immediately.
For	a	partially	cooked	shell:	Bake	at	the	middle	level	of	a	preheated

400-degree	oven	for	8	to	9	minutes	until	pastry	is	set.	Remove	mold	or
foil	and	beans.	Prick	bottom	of	pastry	with	a	fork	to	keep	it	from	rising.
Return	 to	 oven	 for	 2	 to	 3	minutes	more.	When	 the	 shell	 is	 starting	 to
color	and	just	beginning	to	shrink	from	sides	of	mold,	remove	it	from	the
oven.	If	it	seems	to	you	that	the	sides	of	the	shell	are	fragile,	or	are	liable
to	crack	or	 leak	with	 the	weight	of	 the	 filling	 to	come,	do	not	unmold
until	your	tart	or	quiche	is	filled	and	finally	baked.

For	a	fully	cooked	shell:	Bake	7	to	10	minutes	more,	or	until	the	shell	is
very	lightly	browned.

Unmolding:	When	the	shell	is	done,	unmold	it	and	slip	it	onto	a	rack.
Circulation	 of	 air	 around	 it	 while	 it	 cools	will	 prevent	 it	 from	 getting
soggy.

OPEN-FACED	TARTS

Quiches
Quiche	 Lorraine,	 although	 it	 seems	 to	 be	 the	 most	 well	 known,	 is

only	one	of	a	series	of	generally	simple-to-make	and	appetizing	entrées.
A	quiche	is	a	mixture	of	cream	and	bacon,	such	as	the	quiche	Lorraine,	or
cheese	and	milk,	or	tomatoes	and	onions,	or	crab,	or	anything	else	which
is	combined	with	eggs,	poured	into	a	pastry	shell,	and	baked	in	the	oven
until	it	puffs	and	browns.	It	is	practically	foolproof,	and	you	can	invent
your	own	combinations.	Serve	 it	with	a	salad,	hot	French	bread,	and	a
cold	white	wine;	 follow	 it	with	 fruit,	 and	 you	have	 a	 perfect	 lunch	 or
supper	menu.	Or	 let	 it	be	 the	 first	course	of	your	dinner.	You	can	also
make	tiny	quiches	for	hot	hors	d’oeuvres.
The	 following	recipes	are	all	designed	 for	pastry	 shells	8	 inches	 in

diameter.	 The	quiche	 ingredients	 should	 fill	 the	 shell	 by	 no	more	 than
three	fourths,	to	allow	room	for	puffing.	An	8-inch	shell	will	hold	about
2½	cups	of	filling	and	serves	4	to	6	people.	A	10-inch	shell,	serving	6	to
8,	will	hold	one	and	a	half	times	this	amount	of	filling	or	slightly	more.
The	partially	cooked	shell	may	be	baked	hours	ahead	of	 time,	and



the	 filling	 prepared	 and	 refrigerated	 in	 its	 mixing	 bowl.	 Half	 an	 hour
before	serving,	the	filling	is	poured	into	the	shell	and	the	quiche	is	set	in
a	375-degree	oven.	In	25	to	30	minutes	it	will	have	puffed	and	the	top
browned.	A	knife	plunged	into	the	center	should	come	out	clean,	and	the
quiche	 is	ready	to	serve.	It	will	stay	puffed	for	about	10	minutes	 in	the
turned-off	hot	oven	with	the	door	ajar.	As	it	cools,	it	sinks	down.	It	may
be	reheated,	but	will	not	puff	again.	A	cold	quiche	makes	a	good	snack
and	is	easy	to	take	along	on	a	picnic.

		QUICHE	LORRAINE
[Cream	and	Bacon	Quiche]

The	classic	quiche	Lorraine	 contains	heavy	cream,	eggs,	and	bacon,
no	cheese.	The	bacon	is	usually	blanched	in	simmering	water	to	remove
its	 smoky,	 salty	 taste,	 but	 this	 step	 is	 optional.	 Diced,	 cooked	 ham,
sautéed	briefly	in	butter,	may	replace	the	bacon.

For	4	to	6	servings

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

3	to	4	ounces	lean	bacon	(6	to	8	slices,	medium	thickness)
1	quart	water
An	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	placed	on	a	baking	sheet

Cut	bacon	into	pieces	about	an	inch	long	and	¼	inch	wide.	Simmer	for
5	 minutes	 in	 the	 water.	 Rinse	 in	 cold	 water.	 Dry	 on	 paper	 towels.
Brown	 lightly	 in	 a	 skillet.	 Press	 bacon	 pieces	 into	 bottom	 of	 pastry
shell.

3	eggs	or	2	eggs	and	2	yolks
1½	to	2	cups	whipping	cream	or	half	cream	and	half	milk
½	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
1	to	2	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots



Beat	 the	eggs,	cream	or	cream	and	milk,	and	seasonings	 in	a	mixing
bowl	 until	 blended.	 Check	 seasonings.	 Pour	 into	 pastry	 shell	 and
distribute	the	butter	pieces	on	top.

Set	in	upper	third	of	preheated	oven	and	bake	for	25	to	30	minutes,	or
until	quiche	 has	 puffed	 and	 browned.	 Slide	quiche	 onto	 a	 hot	 platter
and	serve.

Quiche	au	Fromage	de	Gruyère
[Swiss	Cheese	Quiche]

Follow	 the	 preceding	 recipe,	 but	 stir	 2	 to	 4	 ounces	 (½	 to	 1	 cup)
grated	 Swiss	 cheese	 into	 the	 egg	 and	 cream	 mixture.	 The	 bacon	 is
usually	omitted,	and	you	may	use	all	milk	instead	of	cream.

		QUICHE	AU	ROQUEFORT
[Roquefort	Cheese	Quiche]

For	4	to	6	servings
Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

3	ounces	(6	Tb)	Roquefort	or	blue	cheese
6	ounces	(2	small	packages)	cream	cheese	or	cottage	cheese
2	Tb	softened	butter
3	Tb	whipping	cream
2	eggs
Salt	and	white	pepper
Cayenne	pepper	to	taste
½	Tb	minced	fresh	chives	or	½	tsp	minced	green	onion	tops
An	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	placed	on	a	baking	sheet

Blend	the	cheese,	butter,	and	cream	with	a	fork,	then	beat	in	the	eggs.
Force	the	mixture	through	a	sieve,	to	get	rid	of	the	lumps.	Season	to



taste	and	stir	 in	 the	chives	or	green	onion	 tops.	Pour	 into	 the	pastry
shell	 and	 set	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 preheated	 oven.	 Bake	 for	 25	 to	 30
minutes,	or	until	quiche	has	puffed	and	top	has	browned.

Quiche	au	Camembert
[Camembert	Cheese	Quiche]

Instead	 of	 Roquefort	 cheese,	 use	 the	 same	 amount	 of	 Camembert,
Brie,	or	Liederkranz,	but	remove	the	outside	crust	of	the	cheese.	Or	use	a
mixture	of	all	or	some	of	these,	including	Roquefort	cheese,	if	you	have
leftovers.

QUICHE	À	LA	TOMATE,	NIÇOISE
[Fresh	Tomato	Quiche	with	Anchovies	and	Olives]

For	4	to	6	servings

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

An	8-to	9-inch	enameled	or	stainless	steel	skillet
¼	cup	minced	onions
2	Tb	olive	oil

Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	 in	 the	 olive	 oil	 for	 5	 minutes	 or	 so,	 until
tender	but	not	browned.

1¾	to	2	lbs.	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes
1	large	clove	mashed	garlic
½	tsp	oregano,	basil,	or	thyme
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper

Peel,	seed,	and	juice	the	tomatoes,	and	chop	the	pulp	roughly.	Stir	the
tomatoes	 into	 the	 skillet	 and	 add	 the	 garlic,	 herbs,	 and	 seasonings.



Cover	 skillet	 and	 cook	 for	 5	 minutes	 over	 low	 heat.	 Uncover,	 raise
heat	and	cook	for	5	minutes	or	so	more,	shaking	pan	occasionally,	to
evaporate	the	juice	almost	entirely.	Allow	to	cool	slightly.

1	egg	and	3	egg	yolks
8	chopped	anchovy	filets
3	Tb	olive	oil	(including	oil	from	anchovy	can)
3	Tb	tomato	paste
3	Tb	chopped	parsley
1	tsp	paprika
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper

Beat	 the	 egg,	 egg	 yolks,	 anchovies,	 oil,	 tomato	 paste,	 parsley	 and
seasonings	 in	 a	 mixing	 bowl	 until	 blended.	 Gradually	 fold	 in	 the
cooked	tomatoes.	Check	seasoning.

An	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	on	a	baking	sheet
12	pitted	black	olives	(the	dry	Mediterranean	type)
¼	cup	grated	Parmesan	or	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	olive	oil

Spread	 tomato	mixture	 in	pastry	shell.	Place	olives	over	 the	 top	 in	a
decorative	 design.	 Spread	 on	 the	 cheese	 and	 dribble	 the	 oil	 over	 it.
Bake	in	upper	third	of	preheated	oven	for	25	to	30	minutes,	or	until
quiche	has	puffed	and	browned	on	top.

QUICHE	AUX	FRUITS	DE	MER
[Shrimp,	Crab,	or	Lobster	Quiche]

For	4	to	6	servings

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
3	Tb	butter



¼	lb.	(1	cup)	cooked	fresh	or	canned	crab,	or	diced	cooked	fresh	or
canned	shrimp	or	lobster
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
2	Tb	Madeira	or	dry	white	vermouth

Cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 in	 the	 butter	 for	 1	 to	 2	 minutes	 over
moderate	heat	until	tender,	but	not	browned.	Add	shellfish	meat	and
stir	gently	for	2	minutes.	Sprinkle	on	salt	and	pepper.	Add	wine,	raise
heat,	and	boil	for	a	moment.	Allow	to	cool	slightly.

3	eggs
1	cup	whipping	cream
1	Tb	tomato	paste
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper

Beat	 the	 eggs	 in	 a	 mixing	 bowl	 with	 the	 cream,	 tomato	 paste,	 and
seasonings.	Gradually	blend	in	the	shellfish	and	taste	for	seasoning.

An	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	on	a	baking	sheet
¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese

Pour	mixture	into	pastry	shell	and	sprinkle	the	cheese	over	it.	Bake	in
upper	 third	of	preheated	oven	 for	25	 to	30	minutes,	until	quiche	has
puffed	and	browned.

QUICHE	AUX	OIGNONS
[Onion	Quiche]

For	4	to	6	servings

2	lbs.	minced	onions	(about	7	cups)
3	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil



Cook	 the	onions	 in	a	heavy	 skillet	with	 the	oil	 and	butter	over	very
low	heat,	 stirring	occasionally	until	 they	are	 extremely	 tender	 and	a
golden	yellow.	This	will	take	about	an	hour.

1½	Tb	flour
Sprinkle	with	the	flour,	mix	well,	and	cook	slowly	for	2	or	3	minutes.
Allow	to	cool	slightly.

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

2	eggs	or	3	yolks
⅔	cup	whipping	cream
1	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
2	ounces	(½	cup)	grated	Swiss	cheese
An	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	on	a	baking	sheet
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots

Beat	 the	 eggs	 or	 egg	 yolks	 in	 a	 mixing	 bowl	 with	 the	 cream	 and
seasonings	until	blended.	Gradually	mix	in	the	onions	and	half	of	the
cheese.	Check	seasoning.	Pour	into	tart	shell.	Spread	on	the	rest	of	the
cheese	 and	 distribute	 the	 butter	 over	 it.	 Bake	 in	 upper	 third	 of
preheated	 oven	 for	 25	 to	 30	 minutes,	 until	 quiche	 has	 puffed	 and
browned.

PISSALADIÈRE	NIÇOISE
[Onion	Tart	with	Anchovies	and	Black	Olives]

This	is	not	a	quiche,	properly	speaking,	because	it	contains	no	eggs.
In	Nice	 it	 is	made	 either	 in	 a	 pastry	 shell	 or	 on	 a	 flat	 round	 of	 bread
dough	like	the	Italian	pizza.
For	4	to	6	servings

2	lbs.	minced	onions



4	Tb	olive	oil
1	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	¼	tsp	thyme,	and	½	bay
leaf	tied	in	washed	cheesecloth

2	cloves	unpeeled	garlic
½	tsp	salt
1	pinch	of	powdered	cloves
⅛	tsp	pepper

Cook	 the	 onions	 very	 slowly	 in	 the	 olive	 oil	with	 the	 herb	 bouquet,
garlic,	 and	 salt	 for	 about	 1	 hour,	 or	 until	 very	 tender.	 Discard	 herb
bouquet	and	garlic.	Stir	 in	cloves	and	pepper,	and	 taste	carefully	 for
seasoning.

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

An	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	on	a	baking	sheet
8	canned	anchovy	filets
16	pitted	black	olives	(the	dry	Mediterranean	type)
1	Tb	olive	oil

Spread	the	onions	in	the	pastry	shell.	Arrange	anchovy	filets	over	it	in
a	fan-shaped	design.	Place	the	olives	at	decorative	intervals.	Drizzle	on
the	 oil.	 Bake	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 the	 preheated	 oven	 for	 10	 to	 15
minutes,	or	until	bubbling	hot.

		FLAMICHE	—	QUICHE	AUX	POIREAUX
[Leek	Quiche]

For	4	to	6	servings

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

1	lb.	sliced	white	of	leek	(about	3½	cups)
½	cup	water
1	tsp	salt



3	Tb	butter
Boil	the	leeks	over	moderately	high	heat	in	a	heavy-bottomed,	covered
saucepan	 with	 the	 water,	 salt,	 and	 butter	 until	 liquid	 has	 almost
evaporated.	 Lower	 heat	 and	 stew	 gently	 for	 20	 to	 30	minutes	 until
leeks	are	very	tender.

3	eggs
1½	cups	whipping	cream
Pinch	of	nutmeg
⅛	tsp	pepper
An	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	on	a	baking	sheet
¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots

Beat	 the	 eggs,	 cream,	 and	 seasonings	 in	 a	 mixing	 bowl	 to	 blend.
Gradually	 stir	 in	 the	 leeks.	 Check	 seasoning.	 Pour	 into	 pastry	 shell.
Spread	on	the	cheese	and	distribute	the	butter	over	it.	Bake	in	upper
third	 of	 preheated	 oven	 for	 25	 to	 30	 minutes,	 or	 until	 puffed	 and
browned.

Quiche	aux	Endives
[Endive	Quiche]

Follow	 the	preceding	 recipe,	using	 sliced	endive	 rather	 than	 leeks;
add	a	teaspoon	of	lemon	juice	to	their	cooking	water.

Quiche	aux	Champignons
[Mushroom	Quiche]

Use	the	same	proportions	of	cream,	eggs,	grated	cheese,	and	dots	of
butter	 as	 for	 the	 preceding	 leek	 quiche	 and	 an	 8-inch	 partially	 cooked
pastry	shell.	Prepare	the	mushrooms	as	follows:



2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
3	Tb	butter
1	lb.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms
1	tsp	salt
1	tsp	lemon	juice
Optional:	2	Tb	Madeira	or	port

Cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 in	 a	 heavy-bottomed	 saucepan	with	 the
butter	 for	 a	 moment.	 Stir	 in	 the	 mushrooms,	 salt,	 lemon	 juice	 and
optional	 wine.	 Cover	 pan	 and	 cook	 over	moderately	 low	 heat	 for	 8
minutes.	Uncover.	Raise	heat	and	boil	for	several	minutes	until	liquid
is	 completely	 evaporated	 and	 mushrooms	 are	 beginning	 to	 sauté	 in
their	butter.

Gradually	 stir	 the	 mushrooms	 into	 the	 eggs	 and	 cream.	 Pour	 into
pastry	shell,	sprinkle	with	cheese,	dot	with	butter,	and	bake	for	25	to
30	minutes	in	a	preheated	375-degree	oven.

Quiche	aux	Épinards
[Spinach	Quiche]

Use	the	same	proportions	of	cream,	eggs,	cheese,	and	butter	as	 for
the	 leek	quiche	and	an	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell.	Prepare	the
spinach	as	follows:

An	enameled	saucepan
2	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onion
2	Tb	butter
1¼	cups	chopped	blanched	spinach,	or	frozen	spinach
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg

Cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 for	 a	 moment	 in	 the	 butter.	 Add	 the
spinach	and	stir	over	moderate	heat	for	several	minutes	to	evaporate



all	 its	water.	 Stir	 in	 salt,	 pepper,	 and	nutmeg	and	 taste	 carefully	 for
seasoning.	 Gradually	 stir	 the	 spinach	 into	 the	 eggs	 and	 cream.	 Pour
into	pastry	 shell,	 sprinkle	with	cheese,	dot	with	butter,	and	bake	 for
25	to	30	minutes	in	a	preheated	375-degree	oven.

GRATINÉED	DISHES

Gratins
Any	of	the	quiche	mixtures	in	the	preceding	section	may	be	baked	in

a	 shallow	 fireproof	 dish	 or	 pyrex	 pie	 plate	 rather	 than	 a	 pastry	 shell.
They	then	officially	become	gratins.	Most	of	the	following,	although	they
look	 more	 grand	 in	 a	 shell,	 are	 so	 substantial	 that	 they	 are	 perhaps
better	in	a	dish.

RÂPÉE	MORVANDELLE
[Gratin	of	Shredded	Potatoes	with	Ham	and	Eggs	and	Onions]

For	4	people

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

½	cup	finely	minced	onions
2	Tb	olive	oil
2	Tb	butter
Cook	the	onions	slowly	in	the	oil	and	butter	for	5	minutes	or	so,	until
tender	but	not	browned.

½	cup	(3	ounces)	finely	diced	cooked	ham
Raise	heat	slightly,	stir	in	ham,	and	cook	a	moment	more.

4	eggs
½	clove	crushed	garlic
2	Tb	minced	parsley	and/or	chives	and	chervil



⅔	cup	(3	ounces)	grated	Swiss	cheese
4	Tb	whipping	cream,	light	cream,	or	milk
Pinch	of	pepper
¼	tsp	salt
Beat	the	eggs	in	a	mixing	bowl	with	the	garlic,	herbs,	cheese,	cream	or
milk,	and	seasonings.	Then	blend	in	the	ham	and	onions.

3	medium-sized	potatoes	(about	10	ounces)
Peel	 the	 potatoes	 and	 grate	 them,	 using	 large	 holes	 of	 grater.	 A
handful	 at	 a	 time,	 squeeze	 out	 their	 water.	 Stir	 potatoes	 into	 egg
mixture.	Check	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.

2	Tb	butter
An	11-to	12-inch	baking	dish	or	skillet	about	2	inches	deep	or
individual	baking	dishes	about	6	inches	in	diameter
½	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Heat	the	butter	in	the	dish.	When	foaming,	pour	in	the	potato	and	egg
mixture.	 Dot	 with	 butter.	 Set	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 preheated	 oven	 and
bake	 for	 30	 to	 40	 minutes,	 or	 until	 top	 is	 nicely	 browned.	 Serve
directly	from	the	dish	or	skillet.

		GRATIN	DE	POMMES	DE	TERRE	AUX	ANCHOIS
[Gratin	of	Potatoes,	Onions,	and	Anchovies]

For	4	people

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

⅔	cup	minced	onions
2	Tb	butter
Cook	the	onions	slowly	in	butter	for	5	minutes	or	so,	until	tender	but



not	browned.

½	Ib.	diced	raw	potatoes	(about	2	cups)
Drop	potatoes	in	boiling	salted	water	and	cook	for	6	to	8	minutes,	or
until	barely	done.	Drain	thoroughly.

A	3-to	4-cup	baking	dish,	1½	to	2	inches	deep,	such	as	an	8-inch
pyrex	pie	plate
8	to	10	anchovy	filets	packed	in	olive	oil
Butter	 the	baking	dish.	 Spread	half	 the	potatoes	 in	 the	bottom,	 then
half	the	cooked	onions.	Over	them	lay	the	anchovy	filets,	then	the	rest
of	the	onions,	and	finally	the	remaining	potatoes.

3	eggs	beaten	with	1½	cups	whipping	cream,	½	tsp	salt,	and	⅛	tsp
pepper;	OR	2	cups	well-seasoned	béchamel	sauce
Pour	 the	 eggs	 and	 cream,	 or	 the	 béchamel	 sauce,	 over	 the	 potatoes
and	shake	dish	to	send	liquid	to	bottom.

¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	oil	from	anchovy	can	or	butter
Spread	on	the	cheese.	Dribble	on	the	oil,	or	dot	with	the	butter.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.

Bake	 for	30	 to	40	minutes	 in	upper	 third	of	 oven	until	 top	 is	nicely
browned.

VARIATIONS
Gratin	de	Pommes	de	Terre	et	Saucisson
[Gratin	of	Potatoes,	Onions,	and	Sausages]

Follow	 the	 preceding	master	 recipe,	 but	 cut	 the	 potatoes	 in	 slices
rather	 than	dice,	 and	 substitute	 sliced	uncooked	Polish	 sausage	 for	 the
anchovies,	interspersing	the	sausage	between	the	potato	slices.



Gratin	de	Poireaux
[Gratin	of	Leeks	with	Ham]

Use	the	same	amount	of	eggs	and	cream	or	of	béchamel	sauce,	as	in
the	 preceding	 potato	 and	 anchovy	 gratin,	 or	 substitute	 a	 sauce	mornay
(béchamel	with	cheese),	and	prepare	the	leeks	as	follows:
12	leeks,	¾	inch	thick
Use	the	white	of	the	leeks	only.	Cut	each	into	crosswise	sections	about
2	inches	long.

A	heavy-bottomed	saucepan
½	tsp	salt
2	Tb	butter
1	cup	water
Boil	 the	 leeks	 in	a	covered	saucepan	over	moderately	high	heat	with
salt,	butter,	and	water	until	liquid	has	almost	completely	evaporated.
Lower	heat	and	 stew	gently	 for	20	 to	30	minutes	until	 the	 leeks	are
very	tender.

6	to	8	thin	slices	of	cooked	ham
Wrap	each	piece	of	 leek	 in	a	piece	of	ham,	arrange	 in	buttered	dish,
cover	 with	 eggs	 and	 cream,	 or	 sauce,	 and	 bake	 as	 in	 the	 preceding
master	recipe.

Gratin	d’Endives
[Gratin	of	Endive	with	Ham]

Use	whole	endives	braised	 in	butter	wrap	 in	ham,	cover	with	eggs
and	 cream,	 or	 béchamel	 sauce,	 and	 bake	 as	 in	 the	 preceding	 master
recipe.



		GRATIN	AUX	FRUITS	DE	MER
[Gratin	of	Creamed	Salmon	or	Other	Fish]

A	quick	and	delicious	main-course	dish	can	be	made	by	combining	a
good	 cream	 sauce	 with	 canned	 salmon,	 tuna,	 or	 clams,	 or	 leftover
cooked	 fish	 or	 shellfish.	 If	 you	 are	 using	 a	 baking	 dish,	 all	 may	 be
prepared	ahead,	then	set	in	the	oven	shortly	before	serving,	but	a	pastry
shell	 should	 not	 be	 filled	 until	 just	 before	 it	 goes	 into	 the	 oven.	 The
following	recipe	is	for	salmon,	but	other	fish	may	be	substituted:	For	4
to	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

¼	cup	finely	minced	onions
3	Tb	butter
A	heavy-bottomed,	2-quart	saucepan
Cook	the	onions	in	butter	in	the	saucepan	over	low	heat	for	5	minutes
or	so,	until	onions	are	tender	but	not	browned.

3	Tb	flour
Stir	in	the	flour,	and	cook	slowly	for	2	minutes	without	coloring.

1	cup	boiling	milk
¼	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
Juice	from	salmon	can,	if	any
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
¼	tsp	oregano
4	to	6	Tb	whipping	cream
Off	heat,	beat	in	the	boiling	milk,	then	the	wine,	salmon	juice,	and	the
seasonings.	Now	bring	 this	 sauce	 to	 boil	 over	moderately	 high	heat,
stirring.	Boil	several	minutes	to	evaporate	the	alcohol	in	the	wine,	and
allow	the	sauce	to	thicken	considerably.	Then	thin	it	out	to	a	medium
consistency	with	tablespoons	of	cream.	Taste	carefully	for	seasoning.



1½	cups	cooked	or	canned	salmon
Optional:	sautéed	mushrooms;	sliced	hard-boiled	eggs
An	8-inch,	shallow,	baking	dish	1½	to	2	inches	deep,	or	a	cooked
pastry	shell
¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter
Fold	 the	 salmon	 and	 optional	 ingredients	 into	 the	 sauce,	 and	 check
seasoning	again.	Spread	in	baking	dish	or	pastry	shell.	Sprinkle	on	the
cheese,	and	distribute	the	butter	in	pea-sized	dots.	Bake	in	upper	third
of	 preheated	 oven	 for	 about	 15	 minutes,	 or	 until	 top	 is	 nicely
browned.

VARIATIONS
Gratin	de	Volaille
Gratin	de	Cervelles
Gratin	de	Ris	de	Veau
[Gratin	 of	 Chicken,	 Turkey,	 Brains,	 or	 Sweetbreads	 with
Mushrooms]

Exactly	 the	 same	 system	 as	 that	 for	 the	 preceding	master	 recipe	 for
fish	gratin	may	be	followed,	using	diced	cooked	chicken,	turkey,	brains,
or	 sweetbreads.	 Combine	 with	 sautéed	 mushrooms,	 and	 warm	 the
mixture	briefly	 in	butter	with	shallots	or	green	onions.	 If	you	are	short
on	meat,	or	wish	 to	make	 the	dish	more	 filling,	 include	cooked	rice	or
noodles.	 Concentrated	 chicken	 stock	 or	 mushroom	 juice,	 or	 leftover
chicken	sauce	may	substitute	for	part	of	the	milk	in	the	béchamel	sauce.
If	 your	 sauce	 is	 carefully	 flavored,	 this	 is	 an	 attractive	 way	 to	 use
leftovers.

SOUFFLÉS

A	 soufflé,	 quickly	 described,	 is	 a	 sauce	 containing	 a	 flavoring	 or
purée	into	which	stiffly	beaten	egg	whites	are	incorporated.	It	is	turned



into	a	mold	and	baked	in	the	oven	until	it	puffs	up	and	the	top	browns.

EGG	WHITES

The	 glory	 and	 lightness	 of	 French	 soufflés	 are	 largely	 a	matter	 of
how	voluminously	stiff	the	egg	whites	have	been	beaten	and	how	nicely
they	 have	 been	 incorporated	 into	 the	 soufflé	 base.	 Both	 beating	 and
folding	 are	 perfectly	 simple	 operations	 when	 you	 know	 the	 reasons
behind	the	directions.

A	fluffy	mass	of	beaten	egg	whites	is	actually	hundreds	of	minute	air
bubbles	all	connected	and	enclosed	by	a	film	of	egg	white;	the	bubbles
of	air	expand	as	the	soufflé	cooks	in	the	oven,	and	that	is	what	pushes	it
into	 its	magnificent	puff.	Whether	 you	beat	 them	by	hand	 in	 a	 copper
bowl	in	the	time-honored	way	of	the	old	chefs	of	France,	or	whether	you
use	electricity,	your	egg	whites	should	mount	7	or	8	times	their	original
volume.	They	should	be	perfectly	smooth	and	have	a	velvety	sheen,	and
they	should	be	firm	enough	to	stand	in	peaks	as	in	the	illustration	on	the
opposite	page.

Warnings
Egg	whites	will	not	mount	properly	if	they	contain	particles	of	egg

yolk,	or	if	either	bowl	or	beater	is	oily	or	greasy.	Any	of	these	elements
interfere	 with	 the	 action	 of	 the	 egg	 whites	 in	 forming	 and	 sustaining
those	all-important	air	bubbles.	Before	you	begin,	 therefore,	wash	your
equipment	 with	 an	 efficient	 detergent,	 and	 dry	 it	 well.	 Room-
temperature	 egg	 whites	 mount	 more	 voluminously	 than	 chilled	 egg
whites,	and	chilled	egg	whites	will	often	 form	coagulated	 specks	when
beaten.	Thus	either	set	chilled	whole	eggs	in	a	bowl	of	tepid	water	for	10
minutes	before	separating	them,	or	let	the	whites	sit	15	to	20	minutes	at
room	temperature	before	beating.

Whips	and	bowls
One	 of	 the	 unexplained	mysteries	 of	 la	 cuisine	 is	 that	 the	 unlined

copper	 bowl	 used	 by	 old	 French	 chefs	 produces	 splendidly	 smooth,
velvety,	and	high-rising	egg	whites	that	remain	stable	for	a	surprisingly
long	time.	Stable	means	that	they	do	not	lose	their	sheen	or	get	watery	a
few	minutes	after	you	beat	them.	Fortunately	a	stainless	steel	bowl	or	a
plastic	 bowl	 used	 only	 for	 egg	whites	 (oil	might	 get	 into	 the	 pores	 of



plastic	if	you	use	it	for	mayonnaise,	for	instance),	plus	a	pinch	of	cream
of	 tartar,	works	very	well	also.	The	cream	of	 tartar	acts	as	a	stabilizer.
Glass	and	porcelain	bowls	are	not	 recommended	because	 their	 slippery
sides	don’t	hold	up	the	whites.	You	may	use	a	large	balloon-shaped	wire
whip	5	 to	6	 inches	across	at	 its	widest	diameter,	or	an	electric	beater.
Here	are	directions	for	each.

How	to	beat	egg	whites	by	hand	—	for	2	to	8	egg	whites
Provide	 yourself	 with	 a	 clean,	 dry	 balloon	whip	 and	 a	 clean,	 dry

round-bottomed	 bowl	 of	 unlined	 copper,	 stainless	 steel,	 or	 pristine
plastic.	The	bowl	should	be	9	to	10	inches	in	diameter	and	5	to	6	inches
deep,	 and	 the	whip	5	 to	6	 inches	 in	diameter.	 To	 keep	 the	bowl	 from
jumping	about,	either	place	it	on	a	wet	pot	holder	or	set	it	in	a	heavy	pot
or	casserole.

Place	 the	 egg	 whites	 in	 the	 bowl,	 letting	 them	 sit	 for	 15	 to	 20
minutes	 at	 room	 temperature	 if	 they	 have	 just	 come	 from	 the
refrigerator.	 Start	 beating	 at	 a	 speed	 of	 2	 strokes	 per	 second	 with	 a
vertical,	circular	motion	for	20	to	30	seconds,	until	the	egg	whites	have
begun	to	foam.	Then,	for	4	egg	whites,	add	a	pinch	of	salt—salt	gives	a
slight	 flavor	 to	 the	 egg	whites	 and	 is	 added	 even	 for	 sweet	 soufflés.	 If
you	are	not	using	unlined	copper,	add	also	a	scant	¼	teaspoon	of	cream
of	tartar	for	the	4	egg	whites.



Using	 your	 lower-arm	 and	 wrist	 muscles	 for	 beating—shoulder
muscles	 tire	quickly—gradually	 increase	 the	beating	 speed	 to	4	 strokes
per	 second,	 beating	 as	 much	 air	 as	 possible	 into	 the	 mixture,	 and
circulating	the	bowl	so	all	the	egg	whites	are	entering	into	the	action.

Start	 testing	 as	 soon	 as	 the	whites	 seem	 to	be	 stiff	 by	 gathering	 a
dollop	 in	 the	 wires	 of	 the	 whip	 and	 holding	 it	 upright.	 If	 peaks	 are
formed	 like	 those	 in	 the	 illustration,	 you	have	 achieved	 “stiffly	 beaten
egg	whites.”	 If	not,	beat	a	 few	seconds	more	and	test	again.	When	you
arrive	at	 the	 right	 consistency,	 the	egg	whites	 should	be	 folded	almost
immediately	into	the	soufflé	mixture.

How	to	beat	egg	whites	by	machine—for	2	or	more	egg	whites
For	the	successful	beating	of	egg	whites	by	machine,	you	must	have

the	kind	of	equipment	that	will	keep	all	of	the	egg	whites	in	motion	all
of	 the	 time.	This	 is	best	accomplished	by	 the	kind	of	whip	mechanism
that	rotates	about	 itself	as	well	as	circulating	about	 the	bowl,	and	that
bowl	must	be	of	a	rather	narrow	and	rounded	shape.	In	other	words,	you
want	a	machine	of	the	type	illustrated	on	this	page.	If	you	have	the	old-
fashioned	mixer	with	a	wide	 flat-bottomed	bowl,	 substitute	a	narrower
rounded	bowl	and	you	will	be	more	successful.	Otherwise	use	a	rounded
bowl	 and	 a	 hand-held	 electric	 beater	 that	 you	 circulate	 all	 around	 the
bowl,	pretending	you	are	a	heavy-duty	mixer.

Always	 start	 at	 slow	 speed	 for	 a	 minute	 or	 more,	 until	 the	 egg
whites	are	broken	up	and	begin	to	foam;	gradually	increase	your	speed
and	when	the	whites	are	softly	foaming—in	about	another	minute—beat
in	 ¼	 teaspoon	 of	 cream	 of	 tartar	 and	 a	 big	 pinch	 of	 salt	 (for	 4	 egg
whites).	Gradually	increase	your	speed	to	fast,	taking	another	minute	or
so.	 Stand	 right	 over	 your	 egg	whites	 all	 the	 time	because	 it	 is	 easy	 to
overbeat	 them.	 Stop	 and	 check	 them	when	 the	 beater	 begins	 to	 leave
traces	on	the	surface,	and	beat	 to	stiff	shining	peaks	as	 in	the	previous
illustration.

Egg	whites	with	sugar	added
When	 the	egg	whites	are	 to	be	 folded	 into	a	cake	or	 sweet	 soufflé

batter,	you	are	usually	directed	to	sprinkle	in	sugar	after	the	whites	have
formed	 soft	 peaks,	 and	 you	 continue	 to	 the	 stiff	 shining-peak	 stage.
Sugar	stabilizes	the	egg	whites	and	also	makes	for	a	stiffer	texture.



Overbeaten	egg	whites
You	 can	 easily	 overbeat	 egg	whites	 in	 an	 efficient	machine—they

lose	their	velvety	shine,	 turn	dull,	 look	grainy	and	slightly	 lumpy,	and,
worse,	lose	their	puffing	abilities.	You	can	usually	bring	them	back	into
shape	 by	 beating	 in	 another	 egg	 white,	 which	 will	 not	 disturb	 your
recipe	proportions.
Freezing	egg	whites
Raw	 egg	 whites	 freeze,	 thaw,	 and	 whip	 up	 perfectly.	 Two	 egg

whites	make	¼	cup,	which	you	can	freeze	in	custard	cups,	unmold,	and
pack	in	plastic	containers	for	later	defrosting.
Folding	in	the	egg	whites
After	the	main	ingredients	of	the	soufflé	have	been	blended	together

and	 seasoned,	 the	 beaten	 egg	 whites	 are	 incorporated	 gently	 and
delicately	 so	 that	 they	will	 retain	as	much	of	 their	volume	as	possible.
This	 process	 is	 known	 as	 folding,	 and	 is	 accomplished	 as	 follows:	

First	 stir	 a	 big	 spoonful	 of	 egg	 whites	 into	 the	 soufflé	mixture	 to
lighten	it.	Then	with	a	rubber	scraper,	scoop	the	rest	of	the	egg	whites	on
top.	 Finally,	 still	 using	 your	 rubber	 scraper,	 cut	 down	 from	 the	 top
center	 of	 the	 mixture	 to	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 saucepan,	 then	 draw	 the
scraper	quickly	 toward	you	against	 the	edge	of	 the	pan,	and	up	 to	 the
left	 and	 out,	 as	 illustrated.	 You	 are	 thus	 bringing	 a	 bit	 of	 the	 soufflé
mixture	at	the	bottom	of	the	pan	up	over	the	egg	whites.	Continue	the
movement	while	slowly	rotating	the	saucepan,	and	rapidly	cutting	down,
toward	you,	and	out	 to	 the	 left,	until	 the	egg	whites	have	been	 folded



into	 the	 body	 of	 the	 soufflé.	 The	whole	 process	 should	 not	 take	more
than	 a	minute,	 and	 do	 not	 attempt	 to	 be	 too	 thorough.	 It	 is	 better	 to
leave	a	few	unblended	patches	than	to	deflate	the	egg	whites.

AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTES

After	 your	 soufflé	mold	 has	 been	 filled	 and	 is	 ready	 for	 the	 oven,
you	may	set	it	aside	in	a	warm	place	free	from	drafts.	Cover	it	with	a	big
empty	pot	or	soup	kettle.	As	long	as	it	is	protected,	it	will	not	begin	to
collapse	for	an	hour.

SOUFFLÉ	MOLDS

Although	 a	 soufflé	 can	 be	 cooked	 in	 a	 fairly	 shallow	 porcelain	 or
pyrex	 dish—the	 usual	 type	 sold	 in	 America	 for	 this	 purpose—a	 more
practical	 one	 is	 the	 cylindrical,	 metal	 mold	 known	 in	 France	 as	 a
charlotte.	 Charlotte	molds	 come	 in	 the	 following	 sizes,	 are	 inexpensive,
and	can	be	ordered	from	one	of	the	French	import	shops	if	you	cannot
find	them	elsewhere.

CHARLOTTE	MOLDS
HEIGHT BOTTOM	DIAMETER APPROXIMATE	CAPACITY

3⅜	inches 4⅜	inches 3	cups
3½	inches 5½	inches 6	cups
4	inches 6	inches 8	to	9	cups

If	 you	 do	 not	 have	 one	 of	 these,	 use	 a	 porcelain	 or	 pyrex	 mold
holding	 whatever	 capacity	 your	 recipe	 specifies.	 American	 recipes	 for
soufflés	often	direct	that	you	use	the	regular	American	type	of	mold	and
give	 it	 added	 height	 by	 tying	 a	 double	 strip	 of	 buttered	 foil	 or	 brown
paper	 around	 the	 dish	 and	 removing	 it	 when	 the	 soufflé	 is	 done.	We
have	 found	 this	 a	 nuisance,	 but	 if	 you	 like	 this	method,	 calculate	 the
capacity	 of	 the	 mold-plus-paper-collar	 according	 to	 the	 height	 and
diameter	measurements	in	the	preceding	table.



Soufflé	Molds

Preparing	the	mold	for	the	soufflé
So	 that	 the	 soufflé	 may	 slide	 easily	 up	 during	 its	 rise,	 butter	 the

sides	and	bottom	of	the	mold	heavily.	Then	roll	grated	cheese	or	bread
crumbs	 around	 in	 it,	 paying	 particular	 attention	 to	 the	 inner
circumference,	which	must	be	lightly	but	evenly	coated.	Turn	the	mold
upside	down	and	knock	it	on	the	table	to	dislodge	excess	cheese	or	bread
crumbs.

PLACEMENT	IN	THE	OVEN

A	soufflé	will	always	perform	as	it	should	if	it	is	placed	on	a	rack	in
the	middle	level	of	a	preheated	400-degree	oven	and	the	temperature	is
immediately	reduced	to	375	degrees.

GENERAL	PROPORTIONS

Whether	your	soufflé	is	made	with	cheese,	fish,	spinach,	or	anything
else,	the	proportions	with	few	exceptions	remain	the	same.
Ingredients Amounts	for	a Amounts	for	an

6-cup	mold 8-cup	mold
Thick	béchamel	or	velouté 2½	Tb	butter 3½	Tb	butter
sauce 3	Tb	flour 4½	Tb	flour

1	cup	liquid 1½	cups	liquid
Egg	yolks,	beaten	into	sauce 4 6
Flavoring	added:	cheese, ¾	cup 1¼	cups



fish,	meat,	vegetables
Stiffly	beaten	egg	whites 5 7	or	8
folded	in

WHEN	IS	IT	DONE?

After	25	to	30	minutes	of	baking	in	a	375-degree	oven,	the	soufflé
will	 have	 risen	 2	 or	 3	 inches	 over	 the	 rim	 of	 the	mold	 and	will	 have
browned	on	top.	If	you	like	the	center	creamy,	it	may	be	served	at	this
point,	but	it	is	fragile	and	will	sink	rapidly.	It	will	collapse	less	readily	if
you	allow	it	to	cook	4	to	5	minutes	more,	until	a	trussing	needle	or	thin
knife	 plunged	 into	 the	 center	 through	 the	 side	 of	 the	 puff	 comes	 out
clean.	A	well-cooked	soufflé	will	stay	puffed	for	about	5	minutes	in	the
turned-off	hot	oven.	As	it	cools,	it	begins	to	sink.	Therefore,	there	should
be	no	lingering	when	a	soufflé	is	to	be	eaten.

HOW	TO	SERVE	A	SOUFFLÉ

Puncture	the	top	of	the	soufflé	lightly	with	a	serving	spoon	and	fork
—held	vertically—and	spread	it	apart	for	each	serving.

		SOUFFLÉ	AU	FROMAGE
[Cheese	Soufflé]

This	recipe	is	intended	as	a	detailed	guide	to	those	that	follow.	All
main-course	soufflés	follow	this	general	pattern:
For	4	people

The	soufflé	sauce	base
A	6-cup	soufflé	mold
Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

1	tsp	butter
1	Tb	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese



Measure	 out	 all	 your	 ingredients.	 Butter	 inside	 of	 soufflé	 mold	 and
sprinkle	with	cheese.

3	Tb	butter
A	2½-quart	saucepan
3	Tb	flour
A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon
1	cup	boiling	milk
A	wire	whip
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
A	pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Melt	 the	 butter	 in	 the	 saucepan.	 Stir	 in	 the	 flour	 with	 a	 wooden
spatula	or	 spoon	and	cook	over	moderate	heat	until	butter	and	 flour
foam	 together	 for	 2	 minutes	 without	 browning.	 Remove	 from	 heat;
when	mixture	 has	 stopped	 bubbling,	 pour	 in	 all	 the	 boiling	milk	 at
once.	 Beat	 vigorously	 with	 a	 wire	 whip	 until	 blended.	 Beat	 in	 the
seasonings.	Return	over	moderately	high	heat	 and	boil,	 stirring	with
the	wire	whip,	for	1	minute.	Sauce	will	be	very	thick.

4	egg	yolks
Remove	 from	heat.	 Immediately	 start	 to	 separate	 the	 eggs.	Drop	 the
white	into	the	egg	white	bowl,	and	the	yolk	into	the	center	of	the	hot
sauce.	Beat	 the	 yolk	 into	 the	 sauce	with	 the	wire	whip.	Continue	 in
the	same	manner	with	the	rest	of	the	eggs.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.	Dot	top	of	sauce	with	butter.
Heat	to	tepid	before	continuing.

The	egg	whites	and	cheese
5	egg	whites
A	pinch	of	salt
Coarsely	grated	Swiss,	or	Swiss	and	Parmesan	cheese—¾	to	1	cup	(3



to	4	ounces)	depending	on	its	strength
Add	an	extra	egg	white	to	the	ones	in	the	bowl	and	beat	with	the	salt
until	stiff,	as	described	and	illustrated.	Stir	a	big	spoonful	(about	one
quarter	of	the	egg	whites)	into	the	sauce.	Stir	in	all	but	a	tablespoon	of
the	cheese.	Delicately	fold	in	the	rest	of	the	egg	whites.	Be	careful	not
to	overfold.
Baking

Turn	 the	 soufflé	 mixture	 into	 the	 prepared	 mold,	 which	 should	 be
almost	 three	 quarters	 full.	 Tap	 bottom	 of	mold	 lightly	 on	 the	 table,
and	smooth	the	surface	of	the	soufflé	with	the	flat	of	a	knife.	Sprinkle
the	remaining	cheese	on	top.
Set	 on	 a	 rack	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 preheated	 400-degree	 oven	 and
immediately	 turn	heat	down	 to	375.	 (Do	not	open	oven	door	 for	20
minutes.)	 In	 25	 to	 30	minutes	 the	 soufflé	 will	 have	 puffed	 about	 2
inches	over	the	rim	of	the	mold,	and	the	top	will	be	nicely	browned.
Bake	4	to	5	minutes	more	to	firm	it	up,	then	serve	at	once.

VARIATION
Soufflé	Vendčme
[Soufflé	with	Poached	Eggs]

Prepare	the	soufflé	mixture	as	in	the	preceding	master	recipe.	Turn
half	of	it	into	the	prepared	mold.	Arrange	4	to	6	cold	poached	eggs	over
the	soufflé,	and	cover	with	the	rest	of	the	soufflé	mixture.	Sprinkle	with
cheese	and	bake	for	25	to	30	minutes	in	a	375-degree	oven.	Dig	carefully
into	 the	 soufflé	 so	 as	 to	 lift	 out	 an	 unbroken	 egg	 with	 each	 serving.
Poached	 eggs	 also	 may	 be	 baked	 in	 the	 following	 spinach	 soufflé:	

		SOUFFLÉ	AUX	ÉPINARDS
[Spinach	Soufflé]

For	4	people

6-cup	soufflé	mold



Butter	 the	 mold	 and	 sprinkle	 with	 cheese.	 Preheat	 oven	 to	 400
degrees.	Measure	out	your	ingredients.

An	enameled	saucepan
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onion
1	Tb	butter
¾	cup	blanched	chopped	spinach	(or	chopped	frozen	spinach—which
will	take	several	minutes	more	cooking)

¼	tsp	salt
Cook	the	shallots	or	onions	 for	a	moment	 in	 the	butter.	Add	spinach
and	 salt,	 and	 stir	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 for	 several	 minutes	 to
evaporate	 as	 much	 moisture	 as	 possible	 from	 the	 spinach.	 Remove
from	heat.

The	soufflé	sauce	base
Prepare	 the	soufflé	sauce	base.	After	 the	egg	yolks	have	been	beaten
in,	stir	in	the	spinach.	Correct	seasoning.

5	egg	whites
A	pinch	of	salt
⅓	to	½	cup	(1½	to	2	ounces)	grated	Swiss	cheese
Beat	the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	stiff.	Stir	one	fourth	of	them	into	the
sauce.	Stir	in	all	but	a	tablespoon	of	the	cheese.	Fold	in	the	rest	of	the
egg	 whites	 and	 turn	 mixture	 into	 prepared	 mold.	 Sprinkle	 with
remaining	cheese	and	 set	on	a	 rack	 in	 the	middle	 level	of	preheated
oven.	Turn	heat	down	to	375	degrees	and	bake	for	25	to	30	minutes.

VARIATIONS	to	be	added	to	the	preceding	spinach	soufflé:
Ham

⅓	cup	finely	minced	boiled	ham
Mushrooms
¼	lb.	finely	minced	mushrooms



1	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper
Cook	the	ham	with	the	butter	and	shallots	for	a	moment	before	adding
the	spinach.

A	handful	at	a	time,	twist	the	mushrooms	in	the	corner	of	a	towel	to
extract	 their	 juice.	 Sauté	 in	 the	 butter	 for	 5	minutes	 or	 so	 until	 the
mushroom	pieces	begin	to	separate	from	one	another.	Season	to	taste.
Stir	them	into	the	soufflé	mixture	with	the	spinach.
Other	vegetable	soufflés

These	are	all	done	in	exactly	the	same	manner	as	the	spinach	soufflé.
Use	 ¾	 cup	 of	 cooked	 vegetables,	 finely	 diced	 or	 pureed,	 such	 as
mushrooms,	broccoli,	artichoke	hearts,	or	asparagus	tips.

		SOUFFLÉ	DE	SAUMON
[Salmon	Soufflé]

For	4	people

A	6-cup	soufflé	mold
1	tsp	butter
1	Tb	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese
Butter	 the	 mold	 and	 sprinkle	 with	 cheese.	 Preheat	 oven	 to	 400
degrees.	Measure	out	all	your	ingredients.

2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
3	Tb	butter
A	2½-quart	saucepan
3	Tb	flour
1	cup	boiling	liquid	(juice	from	canned	salmon,	if	any,	and	milk)
½	tsp	salt



⅛	tsp	pepper
1	Tb	tomato	paste	(for	color)
½	tsp	oregano	or	marjoram
Cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 in	 the	 butter	 for	 a	 moment	 in	 the
saucepan.	 Add	 the	 flour	 and	 cook	 2	 minutes.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the
boiling	liquid,	then	the	seasonings,	tomato	paste,	and	herbs.	Bring	to
boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.

4	egg	yolks
¾	cup	shredded	cooked	or	canned	salmon
½	cup	(2	ounces)	grated	Swiss	cheese
Off	heat,	beat	 in	 the	egg	yolks	one	by	one.	Then	beat	 in	 the	 salmon
and	all	but	a	tablespoon	of	cheese.

5	egg	whites
A	pinch	of	salt
Beat	the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	stiff.	Stir	one	fourth	of	them	into	the
soufflé	mixture.	Fold	in	the	rest.	Turn	into	prepared	mold	and	sprinkle
with	 the	 remaining	 cheese.	 Set	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 preheated	 oven.
Turn	heat	down	to	375	degrees	and	bake	for	about	30	minutes.

VARIATIONS
With	 the	 same	 method	 and	 proportions,	 you	 can	 make	 a	 soufflé

using	¾	cup	of	any	of	the	following:
Flaked	canned	tuna	or	any	cooked	fish
Finely	diced	or	ground	cooked	lobster,	shrimp,	or	crab
Ground	cooked	chicken	or	turkey
Puréed	cooked	sweetbreads	or	brains
If	you	wish	to	use	raw	fish	or	chicken,	grind	it,	add	it	to	the	sauce

base	with	the	boiling	milk,	and	boil	for	2	minutes.	Then	beat	in	the	egg
yolks	and	proceed	with	the	recipe.

FISH	SOUFFLÉS	FROM	THE



FISH	SOUFFLÉS	FROM	THE
HAUTE	CUISINE

These	are	only	more	complicated	than	the	preceding	soufflés	in	that
each	requires	fish	filets	poached	in	white	wine,	and	each	is	accompanied
by	 a	 delicious	 type	 of	 hollandaise	 called	 sauce	mousseline	 sabayon.	 The
fish	may	be	poached	ahead	of	time,	and	the	soufflé	sauce	base	as	well	as
the	hollandaise	may	also	be	prepared	in	advance.	Remember	that	if	the
hollandaise	is	to	wait,	it	must	be	kept	barely	warm	or	it	will	thin	out.	If
it	is	set	aside	to	cool,	reheat	it	very	gently	and	not	too	much.

		SOUFFLÉ	DE	POISSON
[Fish	Soufflé]

For	4	to	6	people

A	6-cup	soufflé	mold
1	tsp	butter
1	Tb	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese
Butter	 the	 mold	 and	 sprinkle	 with	 cheese.	 Measure	 out	 ingredients.
Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

				Preparing	the	fish
¾	lb.	skinless	flounder	filets
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth

				The	soufflé	mixture
2½	Tb	flour
3	Tb	butter
A	2½-quart	saucepan
1	cup	boiling	milk



½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
The	ground	fish
Grind	half	 the	 fish;	you	will	have	⅔	to	¾	cup	of	purée.	Set	 it	aside.
Following	directions	for	fish	filets	in	white	wine,	season	the	rest	of	the
filets,	arrange	them	in	a	buttered	baking	dish	with	the	shallots,	wine,
and	 enough	water	 barely	 to	 cover	 them.	Bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 cover
with	 buttered	 paper,	 and	 bake	 in	 bottom	 third	 of	 oven	 for	 8	 to	 10
minutes	 or	 until	 a	 fork	 just	 pierces	 them	 easily.	 Strain	 out	 all	 the
cooking	 liquor,	 boil	 it	 down	 in	 an	 enameled	 saucepan	 until	 it	 has
reduced	to	¼	cup,	and	set	it	aside	until	later	for	your	sauce	mousseline
sabayon.

Cook	 the	 flour	 and	 butter	 together	 slowly	 in	 the	 saucepan	 for	 2
minutes	 without	 coloring.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 boiling	 milk,	 salt,
pepper,	and	ground	fish.	Boil,	stirring,	for	2	minutes.

4	egg	yolks
Remove	from	heat	and	immediately	beat	in	the	egg	yolks	one	by	one.
Taste	for	seasoning.

5	egg	whites
A	pinch	of	salt
⅓	cup	(1½	ounces)	grated	Swiss	cheese

Beat	the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	stiff.	Stir	one	fourth	of	them	into	the
soufflé	mixture.	Stir	in	the	cheese.	Delicately	fold	in	the	rest	of	the	egg
whites.

				Filling	the	mold
Turn	 a	 third	 of	 the	 soufflé	mixture	 into	 the	 prepared	mold.	 Cut	 the
poached	 fish	 filets	 into	2-inch	 strips	about	½	 inch	wide,	and	arrange
half	 of	 them	 over	 the	 soufflé.	 Cover	 them	 with	 half	 the	 remaining



soufflé	mixture,	and	arrange	 the	rest	of	 the	 filets	over	 it.	Cover	 them
with	the	last	of	the	soufflé	mixture.

				Baking	the	soufflé
1	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
Sprinkle	the	cheese	on	top,	and	set	the	mold	in	the	middle	level	of	the
preheated,	400-degree	oven.	Immediately	reduce	heat	to	375	degrees,
and	 bake	 for	 about	 30	minutes,	 or	 until	 the	 soufflé	 has	 puffed	 and
browned	and	a	needle	or	knife	plunged	into	the	side	of	the	puff	comes
out	clean.	While	the	soufflé	is	cooking,	prepare	the	following	sauce	as
an	accompaniment.	Serve	the	soufflé	as	soon	as	it	is	done.
Sauce	Mousseline	Sabayon	(1½	cups)

3	egg	yolks
½	cup	whipping	cream
The	¼	cup	concentrated	fish	liquor
A	4-cup	enameled	saucepan	and	a	wire	whip
Beat	 the	 egg	 yolks,	 cream,	 and	 fish	 liquor	 over	 low	 heat	 until	 they
gradually	thicken	into	a	 light	cream	that	coats	 the	wires	of	 the	whip
(165	degrees).	Do	not	overheat	or	the	egg	yolks	will	scramble.

6	ounces	(1½	sticks)	softened	butter	divided	into	10	pieces
Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 butter	 a	 piece	 at	 a	 time,	 beating	 until	 each	 is
almost	absorbed	before	adding	another.	The	sauce	will	thicken	like	a
hollandaise.

Salt	and	pepper
Lemon	juice	if	necessary
Taste	carefully	for	seasoning,	and	add	drops	of	lemon	juice	if	you	feel
they	 are	 needed.	 Keep	 sauce	 over	 tepid—not	 hot—water,	 and	when
the	 soufflé	 is	 done,	 pour	 the	 sauce	 into	 a	 warm	 sauceboat	 to
accompany	the	soufflé.



VARIATIONS
Soufflé	de	Homard
Soufflé	de	Crabe
Soufflé	aux	Crevettes
[Lobster,	Crab	or	Shrimp

Soufflé]
Use	the	same	soufflé	mixture	as	in	the	preceding	recipe,	with	about

¾	 cup	 of	 ground	 flounder	 filets.	 Instead	 of	 poached	 fish	 filets	 in	 the
center	of	the	soufflé,	use:
⅔	cup	cooked	diced	lobster,	crab,	or	shrimp
2	Tb	butter
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
3	Tb	Madeira,	sherry,	or	dry	white	vermouth
Cook	 the	 diced	 shellfish	 gently	 in	 the	 butter	 and	 seasonings	 for	 3
minutes.	Then	add	the	wine,	cover	the	pan,	and	simmer	for	1	minute.
Raise	heat	and	let	liquid	boil	off	quickly.

Filets	de	Poisson	en	Soufflé
[Fish	Soufflé	Baked	on	a	Platter]

A	 soufflé	will	 also	 rise	 impressively	when	baked	on	a	platter.	This
recipe	is	lighter	than	the	preceding	fish	soufflé	as	it	has	no	ground	fish	in
its	sauce	base	and	only	one	egg	yolk.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

½	lb.	skinless	flounder	filets
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
½	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions



Measure	 out	 ingredients.	 Poach	 the	 fish	 filets	 for	 8	 to	 10	minutes	 in
wine,	 seasonings,	and	shallots	as	described	 in	 filets	poached	 in	white
wine.	Drain	out	all	the	cooking	liquor	and	boil	it	down	in	an	enameled
saucepan	 until	 it	 has	 reduced	 to	¼	 cup.	 Set	 it	 aside	 for	 your	 sauce
mousseline	sabayon.	Turn	oven	up	to	425	degrees.

2½	Tb	butter
3	Tb	flour
A	2½-quart	saucepan
1	cup	boiling	milk
½	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
1	egg	yolk
Cook	 the	 butter	 and	 flour	 slowly	 in	 the	 saucepan	 for	 2	 minutes
without	 coloring.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 boiling	milk	 and	 seasonings.
Boil,	 stirring,	 for	 1	 minute.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 egg	 yolk.	 Check
seasoning.

4	or	5	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
½	cup	(2	ounces)	coarsely	grated	Swiss	cheese
Beat	the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	stiff.	Stir	one	fourth	of	them	into	the
soufflé	base.	Stir	 in	all	but	 two	 tablespoons	of	 the	cheese.	Delicately
fold	in	the	rest	of	the	egg	whites.

A	buttered	oval	fireproof	platter	about	16	inches	long
Spread	a	¼-inch	layer	of	soufflé	in	the	bottom	of	the	platter.	Flake	the
poached	fish	filets	and	divide	into	6	portions	on	the	platter.	Heap	the
rest	 of	 the	 soufflé	mixture	over	 the	 fish,	making	6	mounds.	 Sprinkle
with	 the	 remaining	 cheese	 and	 set	 on	 a	 rack	 in	 upper	 third	 of
preheated	425-degree	oven.	Bake	for	15	to	18	minutes,	or	until	soufflé
has	puffed	and	browned	on	top.



Ingredients	for	1½	cups	sauce	mousseline	sabayon
Meanwhile,	 prepare	 the	 sauce	 as	 directed	 in	 the	 master	 fish	 soufflé
recipe.	Pass	it	separately	in	a	warm	sauceboat.

SOUFFLÉ	DÉMOULÉ,	MOUSSELINE
[Unmolded	Soufflé]

Most	unmolded	soufflés	are	heavy,	puddinglike	affairs,	but	this	one
is	 light	and	delicious.	You	bake	it	slowly	in	a	pan	of	water	for	over	an
hour,	and	then	unmold	it.	Although	it	does	not	rise	as	high	as	its	molded
relatives,	it	sinks	only	a	little	bit,	and	may	be	kept	warm	for	a	good	30
minutes	 before	 it	 is	 served.	 You	 may	 adapt	 any	 of	 the	 soufflé
combinations	in	the	preceding	recipes	for	unmolding	if	you	use	the	same
number	 of	 egg	 yolks	 and	 egg	 whites,	 and	 the	 same	 cooking	 method
specified	 in	 the	 following	 recipe.	 Unmolded	 cheese	 soufflé	 makes	 a
handsome	 first	 course,	 and	 a	 fine	 main	 course	 surrounded	 by	 or
accompanied	with	 chicken	 livers,	 sausages,	mushrooms,	 green	peas,	 or
asparagus	tips.

For	6	people	as	a	first	course;	4,	as	a	main	course

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

1½	cups	tomato	sauce	or	fresh	tomato	purée	or	78
Set	the	tomato	sauce	to	simmering.

½	Tb	butter
An	8-cup	soufflé	mold,	preferably	one	4	inches	deep
2	Tb	finely	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese
Butter	your	mold	heavily,	especially	on	the	bottom	so	the	soufflé	will
unmold	easily.	Roll	cheese	around	in	it	to	cover	the	bottom	and	sides.

2½	Tb	butter
3	Tb	flour
A	2½-quart	saucepan



A	wooden	spoon
¾	cup	boiling	milk
A	wire	whip
½	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Stir	the	butter	and	flour	over	moderate	heat	in	the	saucepan	until	they
foam	 and	 froth	 together	 for	 2	 minutes	 without	 coloring.	 Off	 heat,
vigorously	 beat	 in	 the	 boiling	 milk,	 then	 the	 seasonings.	 Boil	 over
moderate	heat,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Remove	from	heat.

3	egg	yolks
A	wire	whip
One	by	one,	beat	the	egg	yolks	into	the	hot	sauce.	Correct	seasoning.

6	egg	whites
A	pinch	of	salt
1	cup	(4	ounces)	coarsely	grated	Swiss	cheese,	or	a	combination	of
Swiss	and	Parmesan
In	a	 separate	bowl,	beat	 the	egg	whites	and	 salt	until	 stiff	peaks	are
formed.	Stir	one	fourth	of	the	egg	whites	into	the	sauce	base;	then	stir
in	the	cheese.	Delicately	fold	in	the	rest	of	the	egg	whites.

Turn	the	mixture	into	the	prepared	mold,	which	the	soufflé	will	fill	by
about	two	thirds.	Set	in	a	pan	and	pour	boiling	water	around	the	mold
to	come	up	to	the	level	of	the	soufflé	mixture.	Place	in	middle	level	of
preheated	oven	and	bake	for	about	1¼	hours.	Regulate	heat	so	water
in	 pan	 never	 quite	 simmers—this	 is	 important;	 soufflé	 must	 cook
slowly.	The	soufflé	is	done	when	it	has	risen	about	half	an	inch	over
the	top	of	the	mold,	is	brown	and	crusty,	and	has	just	begun	to	show	a
faint	line	of	shrinkage	from	the	sides	of	the	mold.
Turn	 a	 warm	 serving	 plate	 over	 the	 soufflé;	 reverse	 them.	 Then,
clamping	mold	and	plate	together,	give	a	sharp	downward	jerk	or	two,



and	the	soufflé	will	dislodge	itself.	If	the	mold	was	properly	buttered,
and	 the	 soufflé	 sufficiently	 cooked,	 it	 will	 unmold	 perfectly,	 and
present	a	golden	brown	exterior.	Surround	the	soufflé	with	the	tomato
sauce,	 and	 serve.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 blemishes,	 pour	 the	 sauce	 over	 the
soufflé	and	decorate	with	parsley.
(*)	For	a	wait	of	30	minutes	or	so,	 leave	 the	soufflé	unmolded	 in	 its
pan	of	hot	water,	and	return	to	hot,	turned-off	oven	with	door	ajar.

SOUFFLÉ	AUX	BLANCS	D’OEUFS
[Cheese	Soufflé	with	Egg	Whites	Only]

The	following	light	soufflé	with	its	strong	cheese	flavor	is	one	way
of	 using	 leftover	 egg	 whites.	 Remember	 that	 egg	 whites	 take	 well	 to
freezing,	so	you	can	make	a	collection	and	do	the	soufflé	when	you	have
the	right	amount.	One	egg	white	equals	2	tablespoons.

If	 you	 wish	 to	 make	 this	 type	 of	 soufflé	 with	 other	 flavorings,
substitute	 ⅔	 cup	 of	 ground	 fish,	 chicken,	 sweetbreads,	 ham,	 or
vegetables	for	two	thirds	of	the	diced	cheese.

For	4	people
Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

A	6-cup	soufflé	mold
Butter	the	soufflé	mold	and	sprinkle	with	grated	cheese.	Measure	out
your	ingredients.

2½	Tb	butter
3	Tb	flour
A	2½-quart	saucepan
¾	cup	simmering	light	cream
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Big	pinch	of	nutmeg
Cook	 the	 butter	 and	 flour	 slowly	 together	 in	 the	 saucepan	 for	 2



minutes	without	coloring.	Off	heat,	beat	in	the	simmering	cream	and
seasonings.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Remove	from	heat.

6	or	7	egg	whites	(¾	to	⅞	cup)	Big	pinch	of	salt
¾	cup	(3	ounces)	coarsely	grated	Swiss	cheese
¾	cup	(3	ounces)	Swiss	cheese	cut	into	¼-inch	dice
Beat	the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	stiff.	Stir	one	fourth	of	them	into	the
soufflé	mixture.	Stir	in	all	but	a	tablespoon	of	the	grated	cheese,	then
the	diced	cheese.	Fold	in	the	rest	of	the	egg	whites.

Turn	 mixture	 into	 the	 prepared	 mold,	 sprinkle	 with	 the	 remaining
cheese,	 and	 set	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 pre	 heated,	 400-degree	 oven.
Immediately	 reduce	 heat	 to	 375	 degrees	 and	 bake	 for	 25	 to	 30
minutes,	until	soufflé	has	puffed	and	browned.	Serve	immediately.

		TIMBALES	DE	FOIES	DE	VOLAILLE
[Unmolded	Chicken	Liver	Custards]

These	delicate	little	entrées	(also	called	mousses,	pains,	and	soufflés)
are	usually	baked	in	individual	ramekins	and	served	hot	with	a	béarnaise
sauce.	Or	you	can	bake	 the	 ingredients	 in	one	 large	 ring	mold	and	 fill
the	center	with	the	sauce.	It	can	be	prepared	very	quickly	in	an	electric
blender,	 but	 if	 you	 do	 not	 have	 one,	 put	 the	 livers	 through	 a	 meat
grinder,	 push	 them	 through	 a	 sieve,	 then	 beat	 in	 the	 rest	 of	 the
ingredients.

For	4	cups	serving	8	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

1½	Tb	butter
2	Tb	flour
1	cup	boiling	milk
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper



Make	 a	 thick	 béchamel	 sauce	 in	 a	 small	 saucepan	 by	 cooking	 the
butter	 and	 flour	 together	 until	 they	 foam	 for	 2	 minutes	 without
coloring.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 boiling	 milk	 and	 seasonings.	 Boil,
stirring,	for	1	minute.	Allow	to	cool	while	preparing	other	ingredients,
beating	occasionally.

1	lb.	or	about	2	cups	of	chicken	livers
2	eggs
2	egg	yolks
¼	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Place	the	livers,	eggs,	egg	yolks,	and	seasonings	in	the	blender,	cover,
and	blend	at	top	speed	for	1	minute.

6	Tb	whipping	cream
2	Tb	port,	Madeira,	or	cognac
Add	the	cool	béchamel	sauce,	cream,	and	wine	to	the	liver	and	blend
for	15	seconds.	Strain	through	a	sieve	into	a	bowl.

Optional:	1	chopped,	canned	truffle
Stir	 in	 the	 optional	 truffle	 and	 correct	 seasoning.	 (*)	 If	 not	 used
immediately,	cover	and	refrigerate.

1	Tb	butter
8	ramekins	of	½-cup	capacity,	or	a	4-cup	ring	mold
Butter	the	interior	of	the	ramekins	or	mold	heavily.	Pour	in	the	liver
mixture	filling	each	ramekin	or	the	mold	to	within	about	⅛	inch	of	the
top.

A	pan	containing	1	to	1½	inches	of	boiling	water
Set	 in	 pan	 of	 boiling	water,	 then	 place	 on	 a	 rack	 in	middle	 level	 of
preheated	oven	for	25	to	30	minutes,	until	a	needle	or	knife	plunged
into	the	center	comes	out	clean,	and	the	timbales	have	just	begun	to



show	a	line	of	shrinkage	from	the	ramekins.
(*)	If	not	served	immediately,	leave	in	hot	turned-off	oven,	with	door
ajar,	for	15	to	20	minutes.

2	cups	sauce	béarnaise
Run	 a	 knife	 around	 the	 edge	 of	 each	 timbale	 and	 reverse	 onto	 a
serving	platter	 or	 serving	plates.	 Top	 each	with	 a	 spoonful	 of	 sauce,
and	pass	the	rest	of	the	sauce	separately.

VARIATIONS
Using	the	same	proportions	and	method,	substitute	for	the	chicken

livers	 any	 of	 the	 following	 cooked	 ingredients:	 ham,	 chicken,	 turkey,
sweetbreads,	salmon,	lobster,	crab,	scallops,	mushrooms,	asparagus	tips,
or	spinach.

Other	Sauces
Sauce	 Aurore,	 béchamel	 or	 velouté	 with	 cream	 and	 a	 flavoring	 of

tomato	paste
Sauce	Madère,	brown	sauce	with	Madeira	wine
Sauce	Périgueux,	brown	sauce	with	truffles
Sauce	Estragon,	brown	sauce	with	tarragon

PUFFS,	GNOCCHI,	AND
QUENELLES

		PÂTE	À	CHOUX
[Cream	Puff	Paste]

Pâte	à	choux	is	one	of	those	quick,	easy,	and	useful	preparations	like
béchamel	sauce	which	every	cook	should	know	how	to	make.	Probably
the	only	reason	for	the	packaged	mix,	which	in	addition	to	its	purchase
price	 requires	 fresh	 eggs	 and	 hot	 water,	 is	 that	 most	 people	 do	 not



realize	cream	puff	paste	is	only	a	very,	very	thick	white	sauce	or	panade
of	flour,	water,	seasonings,	and	buttter,	into	which	eggs	are	beaten.	The
eggs	make	the	paste	swell	as	 it	cooks.	For	half	 the	price	of	a	packaged
mix,	and	 in	 less	 than	 ten	minutes,	you	can	make	your	own	cream	puff
paste	with	the	good	taste	of	fresh	butter.

Baked	just	as	it	is	in	the	following	recipe	or	mixed	with	cheese,	pâte
à	 choux	 becomes	 puffs	 for	 hors	 d’oeuvres.	 Sweetened	with	 sugar,	 it	 is
ready	 to	be	cream	puffs.	When	mashed	potatoes	or	cooked	semolina	 is
beaten	in,	it	turns	into	gnocchi.	And	with	ground	fish,	veal,	or	chicken,	it
is	quenelle	paste,	or	can	become	a	mousse.

For	about	2	cups

A	1½-quart,	heavy-bottomed	saucepan
1	cup	water
3	ounces	(6	Tb	or	¾	stick)	butter	cut	into	pieces
1	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Bring	 water	 to	 boil	 with	 the	 butter	 and	 seasonings	 and	 boil	 slowly
until	the	butter	has	melted.	Meanwhile	measure	out	the	flour.

¾	cup	all-purpose	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
Remove	from	heat	and	immediately	pour	in	all	the	flour	at	once.	Beat
vigorously	 with	 a	 wooden	 spatula	 or	 spoon	 for	 several	 seconds	 to
blend	 thoroughly.	 Then	 beat	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 for	 1	 to	 2
minutes	until	mixture	leaves	the	sides	of	the	pan	and	the	spoon,	forms
a	mass,	and	begins	to	film	the	bottom	of	the	pan.

4	eggs	(U.S.	graded	“large”)
Remove	saucepan	from	heat	and	make	a	well	in	the	center	of	the	paste
with	your	spoon.	Immediately	break	an	egg	into	the	center	of	the	well.
Beat	 it	 into	 the	 paste	 for	 several	 seconds	 until	 it	 has	 absorbed.
Continue	with	 the	 rest	of	 the	eggs,	beating	 them	 in	one	by	one.	The
third	and	fourth	eggs	will	be	absorbed	more	slowly.	Beat	for	a	moment



more	to	be	sure	all	is	well	blended	and	smooth.

Pâte	à	choux	for	Dessert	Puffs
For	dessert	puffs,	only	a	suggestion	of	sugar—1	teaspoon—is	added

to	boil	with	the	water	and	butter	in	the	preceding	recipe,	and	the	salt	is
reduced	from	1	teaspoon	to	a	pinch.	Otherwise	there	is	no	difference	in
ingredients	or	method.

Leftover	pâte	à	choux
Pâte	à	choux	is	usually	employed	as	soon	as	it	is	made,	and	while	it

is	 still	warm.	 If	 it	 is	not	used	 immediately,	 rub	 the	surface	with	butter
and	cover	with	waxed	paper	 to	prevent	a	 skin	 from	 forming	over	 it.	 If
your	 recipe	 then	 specifies	 warm	 pâte	 à	 choux,	 beat	 it	 vigorously	 in	 a
heavy-bottomed	saucepan	over	low	heat	for	a	moment	until	it	is	smooth
and	free	from	lumps	and	is	barely	warm	to	your	finger.	Be	very	careful
not	 to	 warm	 it	 to	 more	 than	 tepid	 or	 the	 paste	 will	 lose	 its	 puffing
ability.	Pâte	à	choux	may	be	kept	under	refrigeration	for	several	days,	or
it	may	 be	 frozen.	 Reheated	 gently	 as	 just	 described,	 it	 will	 produce	 a
good	small	puff;	 large	puffs	may	not	always	rise	as	high	as	those	made
with	fresh	paste.

If	 you	wish	 to	make	hot	hors	d’oeuvres	 in	a	hurry,	 leftover	pâte	à
choux	can	help	you.	Beat	3	or	4	tablespoons	of	heavy	cream	into	½	cup
of	 warmed	 pâte	 à	 choux,	 then	 several	 tablespoons	 of	 grated	 cheese,
minced	ham,	or	minced	clams.	Spread	the	mixture	on	crackers,	toast,	or
triangles	of	bread,	pop	them	into	a	hot	oven,	and	in	15	minutes	you	will
have	lovely	puffed	canapés.

PUFF	SHELLS

Choux



You	cannot	fail	with	puff	shells—as	mounds	of	pâte	à	choux	puff	and
brown	 automatically	 in	 a	 hot	 oven—if	 you	 take	 the	 proper	 final
measures	to	insure	the	shells	remain	crisp.	A	perfect	puff	 is	firm	to	the
touch,	tender	and	dry	to	the	taste.	Hot	puffs	will	seem	perfectly	cooked
when	 taken	 from	 the	 oven,	 but,	 if	 left	 as	 they	 are,	 they	 will	 become
soggy	as	 they	cool	because	 there	 is	always	an	uncooked	center	portion
that	 gradually	 spreads	 its	 dampness	 through	 to	 the	 outside	 crust.	 To
prevent	this	sad	effect,	small	puffs	are	punctured	to	release	steam;	large
puffs	 are	 slit,	 and	 often	 their	 uncooked	 centers	 are	 removed.	 This	 is
actually	the	only	secret	to	puff	making.

When	you	have	done	puff	shells	once	or	twice	you	will	find	that	it
takes	 less	 than	30	minutes	 from	start	 to	 finish	 to	make	 them	ready	 for
the	 oven,	 and	 that	 they	 are	 a	wonderfully	 useful	 invention.	 Hot,	 bite-
sized,	 filled	 puffs	 make	 delicious	 appetizers.	 Large	 ones	 may	 contain
creamed	fish,	meat,	or	mushrooms	and	be	a	hot	first	course.	And	sweet
puffs	with	ice	cream	or	custard	filling	and	chocolate	or	caramel	topping
are	always	an	attractive	dessert.

The	Pastry	Bag
A	pastry	bag	makes	the	neatest	puffs.	If	you	do	not	have	one,	drop

the	paste	on	the	baking	sheet	with	a	spoon.

Small	Puffs
For	36	to	40	puffs	1¼	to	1½	inches	in	diameter



Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

Ingredients	for	2	cups	warm	pâte	à	choux	from	the	preceding	recipe
A	pastry	bag	with	½-inch,	round	tube	opening
Make	the	pâte	à	choux.
Fold	 the	 top	 3	 inches	 of	 the	 pastry	 bag	 over	 your	 left	 hand	 as
illustrated.	Using	a	 rubber	 spatula,	 fill	 the	bag	with	 the	warm	 choux
paste.

2	buttered	baking	sheets
Squeeze	 the	 paste	 onto	 the	 baking	 sheets,	 making	 circular	 mounds
about	1	inch	in	diameter	and	½	inch	high.	Space	the	mounds	2	inches
apart.



1	egg	beaten	with	½	tsp	water	in	a	small	bowl
A	pastry	brush
Then	dip	your	pastry	brush	into	the	beaten	egg	and	flatten	each	puff
very	slightly	with	the	side	of	the	brush.	Avoid	dripping	egg	down	the
puff	 and	 onto	 the	 baking	 sheet,	 as	 this	 will	 prevent	 the	 puff	 from
rising.

Set	 the	sheets	 in	 the	upper	and	 lower	 thirds	of	your	preheated,	425-
degree	oven,	and	bake	for	about	20	minutes.	The	puffs	are	done	when
they	have	doubled	in	size,	are	a	golden	brown,	and	firm	and	crusty	to
the	 touch.	 Remove	 them	 from	 the	 oven	 and	 pierce	 the	 side	 of	 each
puff	with	a	sharp	knife.	Then	set	in	the	turned-off	oven	and	leave	the
door	ajar	for	10	minutes.	Cool	the	puffs	on	a	rack.

Large	Puffs
For	10	to	12	puffs	about	3	inches	in	diameter

Use	the	same	ingredients	as	in	the	preceding	recipe,	but	provide	your
pastry	bag	with	a	¾-inch,	round	tube	opening.	Squeeze	the	choux	paste
onto	the	baking	sheets	in	mounds	2	to	2¼	inches	in	diameter	and	1	inch
at	 the	 highest	 point.	 Space	 the	 mounds	 2	 inches	 apart.	 Flatten	 each
mound	slightly	with	the	flat	of	your	pastry	brush	dipped	into	the	beaten
egg.	 Place	 the	 baking	 sheets	 in	 the	 upper	 and	 lower	 thirds	 of	 a
preheated,	425-degree	oven	and	bake	for	20	minutes,	or	until	the	puffs
have	doubled	in	size	and	are	lightly	browned.	Then	reduce	heat	to	375
degrees	 and	 bake	 for	 10	 to	 15	 minutes	 more,	 or	 until	 the	 puffs	 are
golden	brown,	and	firm	and	crusty	to	the	touch.	Remove	from	oven,	and
make	a	1-inch	slit	 in	the	side	of	each	puff.	Return	the	puffs	to	the	hot,
turned-off	oven,	and	leave	its	door	ajar	 for	10	minutes.	Then	open	one
puff	 as	 a	 test.	 If	 its	 center	 is	 damp,	 either	 reach	 into	 the	 other	 puffs
through	their	slits	with	the	handle	of	a	teaspoon	and	remove	their	damp
centers,	 or	 cut	 all	 the	 puffs	 in	 two	 horizontally,	 and	 scrape	 out	 the
uncooked	portions	with	a	fork.	Allow	the	halves	to	cool	and	crisp,	then
re-form	the	puffs.



Freezing	Puff	Shells
Puff	shells	freeze	perfectly.	Just	before	using	frozen	puffs,	set	them

in	a	425-degree	oven	for	3	to	4	minutes	to	thaw	and	crisp	them.

Filling	Puff	Shells
For	 appetizer	 or	 entrée	 puffs,	 use	 any	 of	 the	 cream	 fillings.	Either

place	the	filling	in	a	pastry	bag,	slit	the	sides	of	the	puffs,	and	squeeze	in
the	 filling,	or	 remove	 the	 tops	of	 the	puffs	and	 insert	 the	 filling	with	a
spoon.	Reheat	for	2	to	3	minutes	in	a	425-degree	oven.	For	dessert	puffs,
use	ice	cream,	or	the	custard	filling,	crème	pâtissière,	plain	or	with	beaten
egg	whites.

Petits	Choux	au	Fromage
[Cheese	Puffs]

As	cocktail	appetizers,	these	may	be	served	hot	or	cold,	and	need	no
filling.	Because	of	the	large	amount	of	cheese,	they	do	not	rise	as	high	as
plain	puffs.

For	about	40	puffs,	1½	inches	in	diameter	when	baked
Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

1	cup	(4	ounces)	grated	Swiss,	or	Swiss	and	Parmesan,	cheese



2	cups	warm	pâte	à	choux
Beat	 the	 cheese	 into	 the	 warm	 pâte	 à	 choux.	 Correct	 seasoning.
Squeeze	 into	 circular	 mounds	 on	 a	 baking	 sheet,	 paint	 with	 beaten
egg,	and	bake	as	in	the	preceding	recipe	for	small	puffs.	After	painting
with	 egg,	 you	may,	 if	 you	wish,	 sprinkle	 each	 puff	 with	 a	 pinch	 of
grated	cheese.

GNOCCHI

Gnocchi	and	quenelles	are	types	of	dumplings	made	of	pâte	à	choux
into	which	a	purée	is	beaten.	They	are	shaped	into	ovals	or	cylinders	and
are	poached	for	15	to	20	minutes	in	salted	water	or	bouillon	until	they
swell	 almost	 double	 in	 size.	 After	 they	 have	 drained,	 they	 may	 be
covered	 with	 a	 hot	 sauce,	 or	 they	 may	 be	 gratinéed	 with	 cheese	 and
butter,	or	with	a	sauce.
Both	 gnocchi	 and	 quenelles	 are	 relatively	 simple	 to	 make,	 and	 as

they	may	 be	 poached	 ahead	 of	 time	 and	 either	 refrigerated	 or	 frozen,
they	are	a	useful	addition	to	one’s	cooking	repertoire.

		GNOCCHI	DE	POMMES	DE	TERRE
[Potato	Gnocchi]

These	 make	 a	 good	 luncheon	 dish,	 or	 may	 be	 used	 as	 a	 starchy
vegetable	to	accompany	a	roast.
For	about	12	gnocchi,	3	by	1½	inches	when	cooked

3	to	4	medium-sized	baking	potatoes	(1	pound)
Peel	and	quarter	the	potatoes.	Boil	in	salted	water	until	tender.	Drain
and	put	through	a	ricer.	You	should	have	2	cups.

Dry	out	 the	potatoes	by	 stirring	 them	 in	a	heavy-bottomed	saucepan
over	moderate	heat	for	a	minute	or	two	until	they	film	the	bottom	of
the	pan.	Remove	from	heat.



1	cup	warm	pâte	à	choux
⅓	cup	(1½	ounces)	grated	Swiss,	or	Swiss	and	Parmesan,	cheese
Beat	 the	 pâte	 à	 choux	 and	 the	 cheese	 into	 the	 potatoes.	 Correct
seasoning.

Take	 the	mixture	 by	 dessert-spoonfuls	 and	 roll	 it	 with	 the	 palms	 of
your	 hands	 on	 a	 lightly	 floured	 board	 to	 form	 cylinders	 about	 2½
inches	long	and	1	inch	in	diameter.

A	12-inch	skillet	of	simmering	salted	water
Slip	 the	gnocchi	 into	 the	 simmering	water	and	poach,	uncovered,	 for
15	 to	 20	minutes.	Water	 should	 remain	 almost	 but	 not	 quite	 at	 the
simmer	 throughout	 the	 cooking.	 If	 it	 boils,	 the	 gnocchi	 may
disintegrate.	 When	 they	 have	 swelled	 almost	 double,	 and	 roll	 over
easily	in	the	water,	they	are	done.	Drain	on	a	rack	or	a	towel.	Serve	as
in	 the	 following	 suggestions:	

TO	SERVE
Gnocchi	Gratinés	au	Frontage
[Gnocchi	Baked	with	Cheese]

The	preceding	gnocchi
½	cup	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese
2	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Arrange	 the	 drained	 gnocchi	 in	 a	 shallow,	 buttered,	 baking	 dish.
Spread	 the	 cheese	 over	 them	 and	 dot	 with	 the	 butter.	 Set	 aside
uncovered.

Ten	 minutes	 before	 serving	 time,	 reheat	 and	 brown	 them	 slowly
under	a	moderately	hot	broiler.

Gnocchi	Mornay
[Gnocchi	Baked	with	Cheese	Sauce]



For	about	3	cups	of	sauce

4	Tb	butter
4½	Tb	flour
A	2-quart	saucepan
3	cups	boiling	milk
¾	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Big	pinch	of	nutmeg
Cook	 the	 butter	 and	 flour	 together	 slowly	 in	 the	 saucepan	 for	 2
minutes	 without	 coloring.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 boiling	 milk	 and
seasonings.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.

¾	cup	(3	ounces)	coarsely	grated	Swiss	cheese
Remove	from	heat	and	beat	for	a	moment	to	cool	slightly.	Then	beat
in	the	cheese	and	correct	seasoning.

The	potato	gnocchi
3	Tb	finely	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Arrange	 the	 gnocchi	 in	 a	 buttered	 baking	 dish	 about	 2	 inches	 deep.
Spoon	the	cheese	sauce	over	them,	sprinkle	with	cheese,	and	dot	with
the	butter.	Set	aside	uncovered.

About	10	minutes	before	serving	time,	reheat	and	brown	slowly	under
a	moderately	hot	broiler.

ADDITIONS	TO	THE	POTATO	GNOCCHI	PASTE.
Any	of	the	following	may	be	mixed	into	the	gnocchi	paste	along	with

the	cheese,	and	are	especially	good	if	your	gnocchi	are	to	be	served	as	a
main	course.
3	to	4	TB	minced	fresh	green	herbs,	such	as	chives	and	parsley



¼	to	½	cup	minced	cooked	ham	or	bacon
¼	to	½	cup	sautéed	diced	mushrooms	or	chicken	livers

GNOCCHI	DE	SEMOULE	AVEC	PÂTE	À	CHOUX	—	PATALINA
[Semolina	Gnocchi]

Italian	 gnocchi	 are	 made	 of	 semolina	 with	 butter	 and	 seasonings.
This	 French	version	with	pâte	 à	 choux	 gives	 the	 semolina	a	puff	 and	a
lighter	 texture.	 Semolina	 is	 farina,	 which	 in	 turn	 is	 the	 residue	 of
middle-sized	particles	left	over	from	the	sifting	of	durum	wheat,	the	type
of	wheat	used	for	making	macaroni.	Untreated	semolina	takes	20	to	30
minutes	 to	 cook.	 Quick-cooking	 farina	 breakfast	 cereal,	 which	 is
semolina,	cooks	in	3	or	4	minutes.
For	about	12	pieces,	3	by	1½	inches	when	cooked

1½	cups	water
1	Tb	butter
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Bring	the	water	to	a	boil	in	a	saucepan	with	the	butter	and	seasonings.

¼	cup	(2	ounces)	quick-cooking	farina	breakfast	cereal
Stirring	the	boiling	water	with	a	wooden	spoon,	gradually	sprinkle	in
the	 farina.	 Boil,	 stirring,	 for	 3	 to	 4	minutes	 until	 the	 cereal	 is	 thick
enough	to	form	a	mass	on	the	back	of	the	spoon.	(You	will	have	about
1¼	cups	of	cereal.)

½	cup	(2	ounces)	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese
2	cups	warm	pâte	à	choux
Beat	 the	 cereal,	 then	 the	 cheese,	 into	 the	 pâte	 à	 choux.	 Correct
seasoning.

Roll	 the	 gnocchi	 paste	 into	 cylinders	 on	 a	 floured	 board,	 poach	 in



salted	water,	drain,	and	brown	under	the	broiler	with	grated	cheese	or
cheese	sauce	as	for	the	potato	gnocchi	in	the	preceding	recipes.

QUENELLES

A	quenelle,	for	those	who	are	not	familiar	with	this	delicate	triumph
of	French	cooking,	is	a	mixture	of	pâte	à	choux,	cream,	and	purée	of	raw
fish,	veal,	or	chicken	that	is	formed	into	ovals	or	cylinders	and	poached
in	 a	 seasoned	 liquid.	 Served	 hot	 in	 a	 fine	 sauce,	 quenelles	 make	 a
distinguished	 first	 course	 or	 luncheon	 dish—they	 are	 individual	 small
independent	 mousses	 really,	 almost	 as	 light	 as	 a	 soufflé,	 with	 just
enough	body	to	hold	themselves	in	shape	for	poaching.	If	the	mixture	is
too	solid,	the	quenelle	will	have	a	dry	and	heavy	texture.	You	therefore
want	 to	 choose	 the	 kind	 of	 fish—if	 it’s	 fish	 quenelles	 you’re	making—
that	has	the	firm	gelatinous	flesh	that	will	absorb	the	maximum	amount
of	cream.	It’s	the	cream	that	makes	for	lightness	and	delicacy	of	texture.

Manufacturing	note
In	the	1950s,	when	we	were	working	on	our	book	in	France,	any	kind
of	a	mousse	mixture	 like	 this	was	an	arduous	process	because	 it	was
the	era	BFP—Before	Food	Processor.	Quenelles	were	the	province	of	the
haute	cuisine,	or	at	least	of	the	great	restaurants	with	plenty	of	young
apprentice	cooks	to	do	the	dog	work.	First	the	fish	had	to	be	pounded
with	a	large	wooden	pestle	in	a	vast	marble	mortar.	When	reduced	to
a	purée,	it	was	beaten	into	a	pâte	à	choux	and	turned	out	onto	a	large
drum-shaped	 sieve.	 Then	 began	 the	 hateful	 process	 of	 rubbing	 it
through	 that	 sieve	 with	 a	 wooden	 masher—you	 had	 to	 eliminate
gristly	 bits,	 bones,	 and	 so	 forth.	 After	 you	 rubbed	 it	 through,	 you
removed	 the	 sticky	 mass	 off	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 sieve	 with	 an	 oval-
shaped	 palm-sized	 scraper	made	 of	 horn—actual	 animal	 horn.	 (That
was	also	 the	era	 BP,	Before	Plastics.)	Then	you	beat	 the	mixture	over
ice	to	chill	it	so	that	you	could	beat	in	as	much	cream	as	it	would	take
and	 still	 hold	 its	 shape.	 It	 took,	 literally,	 hours	 to	 do,	 and	 was
perfectly	 delicious—but	 not	 the	 least	 of	 it	 was	 the	 washing	 of	 that
drum	 sieve	when	you	were	 through,	 scrubbing	bone	bits	 out	 of	 tiny



mesh	crevices.	Not	an	everyday	affair,	for	the	home	cook	at	least.
We	 thought	 we	 were	 clever	 indeed,	 in	 our	 first	 edition,	 to	 have

eliminated	the	mortar	and	pestle.	The	electric	blender,	which	did	exist	at
that	 time,	 was	 not	 at	 all	 satisfactory,	 but	 we	 found	 that	 two	 times
through	the	fine	blade	of	the	meat	grinder,	a	chilling,	and	a	beating	up
with	 the	 electric	 mixer	 made	 a	 more	 than	 satisfactory	 quenelle.	 We
eliminated	that	self-torture,	the	sieve,	and	eliminate	it	still;	some	cooks,
however,	do	use	it,	and	sieving	does	undeniably	produce	a	more	velvety
texture.	Sieving	is	optional,	in	this	book.
Now,	 of	 course,	 with	 the	 food	 processor,	 all	 of	 the	 preceding	 is

ancient	 lore.	 Quenelles	 and	 mousses	 take	 literally	 minutes	 and	 have
stepped	out	of	the	never-never	land	of	ultra	fancy	food	into	the	everyday
life	of	the	average	home	cook.

		QUENELLES	DE	POISSON
[Fish	Quenelles]

Fish	quenelles	in	France	are	usually	labeled	quenelles	de	brochet,	and
are	presumably	made	from	pike,	a	fish	of	excellent	flavor	but	so	webbed
with	little	shadlike	bones	that	a	quenelle	is	the	most	convenient	way	of
eating	it.	If	you	do	use	pike,	then,	you	will	have	to	pound	it	in	a	mortar
and	then	sieve	it	or	you’ll	never	rid	it	of	bones.	However,	boneless	fish
filets	may	be	pureed	as	is.

Choice	of	fish
Choose	 fish	 with	 lean,	 close-grained	 flesh	 of	 a	 slightly	 gelatinous

quality.	Flimsy,	 light-textured	fish,	 like	most	flounder,	will	absorb	little
cream	and	will	therefore	produce	a	rather	dull	and	dry	quenelle.	Halibut
and	monkfish	do	nicely,	as	does	gray	sole	or	winter	flounder.	Very	fresh
petrale	 sole	 is	 also	 excellent.	 Less	 available	 choices	 are	 silver	 hake
(merlan),	green	or	ocean	cod	(colin),	conger	or	sea	eel	(congre).
For	about	16	quenelles
The	pâte	à	choux—for	2	cups

1	cup	water



A	1½-quart	heavy-bottomed	saucepan
1	tsp	salt
4	Tb	butter
¾	cup	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
2	“large”	eggs
2	egg	whites	(¼	cup)
A	4-quart	mixing	bowl	with	a	tray	of	ice	cubes	and	water	to	cover
them
Following	 the	general	directions	 for	pâte	à	 choux,	bring	 the	water	 to
the	boil	in	the	saucepan	with	the	salt	and	butter.	As	soon	as	the	butter
has	melted,	remove	the	saucepan	from	heat	and	beat	in	all	the	flour	at
once	with	a	wooden	spatula	or	spoon.	Then	beat	over	moderately	high
heat	for	several	minutes	until	the	mixture	forms	a	mass.	Off	heat	and
one	by	one,	beat	in	the	eggs,	then	the	egg	whites.	Set	saucepan	in	the
bowl	of	ice	and	stir	for	several	minutes	to	cool;	leave	in	the	ice	while
you	prepare	the	fish,	and	be	sure	the	pâte	à	choux	is	well	chilled	before
you	combine	the	two.

The	quenelle	mixture
1¼	lbs.	(2½	packed	cups)	well-chilled	skinless	and	boneless	lean	fish
filets	from	the	preceding	suggestions

A	food	processor	(steel	blade)
½	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	white	pepper
4	to	6	to	8	or	more	Tb	chilled	heavy	whipping	cream
A	rubber	spatula
Cut	the	chilled	fish	filets	into	1-inch	strips,	then	into	1-inch	pieces,	and
place	in	the	bowl	of	the	processor,	along	with	the	chilled	pâte	à	choux
from	 the	 previous	 step,	 salt,	 pepper,	 and	 4	 tablespoons	 of	 chilled
cream.	Process	30	seconds	or	so,	stopping	if	necessary	to	scrape	down
sides	of	bowl	with	rubber	spatula.	If	the	mixture	seems	stiff,	blend	in
more	 cream	by	 the	 tablespoon—you	want	 to	 add	 as	much	 as	 it	will
take,	but	the	mixture	must	hold	its	shape	well	in	a	mass	on	the	spoon.



A	saucepan	of	almost	simmering	salted	water
2	Tb	chopped	truffle	OR,	a	big	pinch	of	nutmeg
Scoop	out	a	dollop	as	a	test,	drop	it	into	the	almost	simmering	water,
and	let	it	poach	several	minutes.	Taste	it:	process	in	more	cream	if	you
think	 it	 can	 be	 absorbed—but	 better	 too	 little	 than	 too	 much!	 Add
more	seasonings,	too,	if	you	think	them	necessary.	Then	blend	in	the
truffle	or	nutmeg.	(If	you	are	not	proceeding	at	once	to	the	next	step,
refrigerate	the	mixture.)	
			Shaping	quenelles	and	poaching	them

2	dessert	spoons	in	a	cup	of	cold	water
A	12-inch	skillet	containing	3	to	4	inches	of	barely	simmering	fish
stock	or	salted	water
(The	spoon	method	described	here	makes	the	most	delicate	quenelles.
A	neater-looking	but	less	light-textured	alternative	is	to	roll	them	into
cylinders	on	a	floured	board	as	for	the	gnocchi.)	With	a	wet	spoon,	dip
out	a	rounded	mass	of	the	cold	quenelle	paste.	Transfer	the	spoon	to
your	left	hand.	Smooth	the	top	of	the	paste	with	the	inverted	bowl	of
the	second	wet	spoon.	Then	slip	the	bowl	of	the	second	spoon	under
the	quenelle	to	loosen	it	and	drop	it	into	the	barely	simmering	liquid.
Rapidly	form	quenelles	with	the	rest	of	the	paste	in	the	same	manner.
Poach	them	uncovered	for	15	to	20	minutes,	never	allowing	the	water
to	come	beyond	the	barest	suggestion	of	a	simmer.	The	quenelles	are
done	 when	 they	 have	 about	 doubled	 in	 size	 and	 roll	 over	 easily.
Remove	with	a	slotted	spoon,	and	drain	on	a	rack	or	a	towel.
(*)	If	the	quenelles	are	not	to	be	served	immediately,	arrange	them	in
a	 lightly	 buttered	 dish,	 brush	 them	 with	 melted	 butter,	 cover	 with
waxed	paper,	and	refrigerate.	They	will	keep	perfectly	for	one	to	two
days.



Fish	Mousse
In	Case	of	Disaster
If	 by	 any	 chance	 your	 quenelle	 paste	 turns	 out	 to	 be	 too	 soft	 to

poach	as	quenelles,	it	will	taste	every	bit	as	good	if	you	declare	it	to	be	a
mousse.	Pack	it	into	a	buttered	soufflé	mold,	a	ring	mold,	or	individual
serving	molds.	 Set	 in	 a	 pan	 of	 boiling	water	 and	 bake	 in	 a	 preheated
350-degree	 oven	 until	 the	mousse	 has	 risen	 and	 shows	 a	 faint	 line	 of
shrinkage	from	the	sides	of	the	mold.	Unmold	and	serve	with	any	of	the
fish	 sauces	 suggested	 or	with	 the	 delicious	 sauce	mousseline	 sabayon	 in
the	fish	soufflé	recipe.

Sauces	for	Quenelles
Quenelles	may	be	 served	as	 in	 the	 following	recipe,	 in	which	 they

may	 be	 sauced	 ahead	 of	 time	 and	 gratinéed	 just	 before	 serving;	 or	 hot
quenelles	 may	 be	 coated	 with	 a	 hot	 sauce.	 If	 you	 choose	 the	 latter
system	 and	 the	 quenelles	 have	 been	 prepared	 in	 advance,	 cover	 them
and	heat	them	through	in	a	buttered	dish	for	10	to	15	minutes	in	a	350-
degree	 oven.	 Then	 sauce	 them.	 Fish	 quenelles	 may	 be	 substituted	 for
poached	fish	 filets	 in	any	of	 the	recipes	 for	 fish	which	 include	the	 fine,
rich,	buttery	sauces	such	as	Nantua	and	normande.

Gratin	de	Quenelles	de	Poisson
[Quenelles	Gratinéed	in	White	Wine	Sauce]

Sauce	suprème	de	poisson	(4	cups)	enough	for	16	poached	quenelles



5	Tb	butter
7	Tb	flour
A	2-quart	enameled	saucepan
1½	cups	boiling	milk
1½	cups	boiling,	concentrated,	white-wine	fish	stock
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	white	pepper
Cook	 the	 butter	 and	 flour	 slowly	 together	 in	 the	 saucepan	 for	 2
minutes	without	coloring.	Off	heat,	beat	in	the	boiling	milk,	fish	stock,
and	seasonings.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Sauce	will	be	very	thick.

¾	to	1	cup	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Lemon	juice
Slowly	simmering	the	sauce,	thin	it	out	with	the	cream,	stirred	in	by
tablespoons.	 Sauce	 should	 be	 thick	 enough	 to	 coat	 the	 spoon	 fairly
heavily.	Taste	carefully	for	seasoning,	adding	salt,	pepper	and	drops	of
lemon	juice	as	you	feel	it	necessary.

A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	2	inches	deep
3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Pour	 ¼	 inch	 of	 sauce	 in	 the	 baking	 dish.	 Arrange	 the	 drained
quenelles	on	top	and	spoon	the	rest	of	the	sauce	over	them.	Sprinkle
with	cheese	and	dot	with	the	butter.	Set	aside	uncovered.

About	10	to	15	minutes	before	serving	time,	reheat	and	brown	slowly
under	a	moderate	broiler.

Quenelles	aux	Huîtres
[Fish	Quenelles	with	Oysters]



½	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	Tb	butter
12	large	oysters,	shelled
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Sauté	the	shallots	in	butter	for	a	moment	in	a	small	saucepan.	Add	the
oysters,	wine,	and	seasonings.	Poach	at	just	below	the	simmer	for	3	to
4	minutes,	until	the	oysters	swell.	Drain	the	oysters.	Boil	the	poaching
liquid	over	high	heat	until	it	is	reduced	by	half,	and	reserve	it	for	your
sauce.

Ingredients	for	the	fish	quenelle	paste
Roll	one	oyster	into	each	cylinder	of	the	fish	quenelle	paste.	Poach	and
sauce	 the	 quenelles	 in	 the	 same	manner	 as	 the	 fish	 quenelles	 in	 the
preceding	recipes.

Quenelles	de	Sa mon
[Salmon	Quenelles]

Use	exactly	the	same	proportions	and	method	as	given	in	the	master
recipe	for	the	fish	quenelles,	substituting	2	cups	of	raw	salmon,	or	well-
drained	 canned	 salmon,	 for	 the	 white-fleshed	 fish.	 You	 may	 wish	 to
include	a	tablespoon	of	tomato	paste	for	added	color.	Serve	with	the	fish
velouté	 sauce,	 or	 with	 any	 of	 the	 other	 sauces	 suggested	 for	 fish
quenelles.

Quenelles	de	Crustacés
[Shrimp,	Lobster,	or	Crab	Quenelles]

Using	exactly	the	same	proportions	and	method	as	given	in	the	master
recipe	 for	 the	 fish	 quenelles,	 substitute	 2	 cups	 of	 raw,	 cooked,	 or
canned	 shrimps,	 lobster,	 or	 crab	 for	 the	 fish.	 The	 same	 sauces	 also



apply.

Quenelles	de	Veau—Quenelles	de	Volaille
[Veal,	Chicken,	or	Turkey	Quenelles]

These	 can	 be	 delicious	 as	 a	 light	 luncheon	 or	 supper	 dish,	 and
follow	the	same	procedure	as	for	the	fish	quenelles	in	the	master	recipe.

Ingredients	for	quenelles,	but	substitute	the	following	for	the	2	cups
of	fish:	2	cups	raw	veal,	chicken,	or	turkey,	minus	all	skin,	bones,
and	gristle

A	12-inch	buttered	skillet
Boiling	well-seasoned	chicken	or	veal	stock,	or	salted	water
Have	both	meat	and	pâte	à	choux	well	chilled	before	pureeing	 in	the
processor,	and	cut	the	meat	into	1-inch	cubes.	You	can	probably	add
more	cream	for	meat	than	fish,	because	meat	has	more	body.	Test	in
almost	 simmering	 stock	 or	 lightly	 salted	 water	 before	 forming,	 and
make	sure	of	the	seasoning.	Then	form	into	quenelles	and	arrange	in
the	skillet.	Cover	by	2	inches	with	boiling	stock	or	water.	Poach	for	15
to	 20	 minutes.	 Drain,	 and	 serve	 in	 one	 of	 the	 following	 ways:	

TO	SERVE

Quenelles	au	Gratin.	Use	the	same	proportions	and	method	as	for	the	velouté
with	cream	in	the	gratin	recipe,	substituting	the	veal	or	chicken	stock	in
which	you	poached	the	quenelles	for	the	fish	stock	and	all	or	part	of	the
milk.

Or	use	the	cheese	sauce	in	the	gnocchi	recipe.
Quenelles,	Sauce	Madère.	Pour	over	the	hot	quenelles	a	brown	sauce
flavored	with	Madeira:	sauce	madère,	or	sauce	périgueux	(with	trufflés).

FRENCH	PANCAKES



Crêpes
Every	 French	household	makes	 use	 of	 crêpes,	 not	 only	 as	 a	 festive

dessert	 for	Mardi	Gras	and	Candlemas	Day,	but	as	an	attractive	way	to
turn	leftovers	or	simple	ingredients	 into	a	nourishing	main-course	dish.
Crêpes	may	be	rolled	around	a	filling	of	fish,	meat,	or	vegetables,	spread
with	sauce,	and	browned	under	the	broiler.	More	spectacular	is	a	gâteau
de	crêpes	in	which	the	pancakes	are	piled	upon	each	other	in	a	stack	of
24,	 each	 spread	 with	 a	 filling.	 This	 is	 then	 heated	 in	 the	 oven	 and
gratinéed	with	a	good	sauce.	Or	the	crêpes	may	be	piled	in	a	soufflé	mold
with	 alternating	 layers	 of	 filling,	 heated	 in	 the	 oven,	 unmolded,	 and
coated	with	 sauce.	Whatever	 system	you	decide	upon,	 including	 rolled
crêpes,	your	dish	may	be	prepared	in	advance	and	heated	up	when	you
are	ready	to	serve.
Dessert	crêpes,	 called	crêpes	 sucrées,	and	entrée	crêpes,	 crêpes	 salées,

have	 slightly	 different	 proportions,	 but	 their	 batters	 are	 blended	 and
cooked	in	the	same	way.	The	following	recipe	 is	made	with	an	electric
blender,	because	it	is	so	quick.	If	you	do	not	have	one,	gradually	blend
the	eggs	into	the	flour,	beat	in	the	liquid	by	spoonfuls,	then	the	butter,
and	strain	the	batter	to	get	rid	of	any	possible	lumps.	Crêpe	batter	should
be	made	 at	 least	 2	 hours	 before	 it	 is	 to	 be	 used;	 this	 allows	 the	 flour
particles	to	expand	in	the	liquid	and	insures	a	tender,	light,	thin	crêpe.

PÂTE	À	CRÊPES
[Crêpe	Batter]

For	about	25	to	30	crêpes,	6	to	6½	inches	in	diameter

1	cup	cold	water
1	cup	cold	milk
4	eggs
½	tsp	salt
1½	cups	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
4	Tb	melted	butter
A	rubber	scraper



Put	the	liquids,	eggs,	and	salt	into	the	blender	jar.	Add	the	flour,	then
the	butter.	Cover	and	blend	at	top	speed	for	1	minute.	If	bits	of	flour
adhere	to	sides	of	jar,	dislodge	with	a	rubber	scraper	and	blend	for	2
to	3	seconds	more.	Cover	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	2	hours.

The	batter	 should	be	a	very	 light	 cream,	 just	 thick	enough	 to	coat	a
wooden	 spoon.	 If,	 after	making	 your	 first	 crêpe,	 it	 seems	 too	 heavy,
beat	in	a	bit	of	water,	a	spoonful	at	a	time.	Your	cooked	crêpe	should
be	about	1/ 	inch	thick.

16

Method	for	Making	Crêpes
The	 first	 crêpe	 is	 a	 trial	 one	 to	 test	 out	 the	 consistency	 of	 your

batter,	the	exact	amount	you	need	for	the	pan,	and	the	heat.

An	iron	skillet	or	a	crêpe	pan	with	a	6½-to	7-inch	bottom	diameter
A	piece	of	fat	bacon	or	pork-rind;	OR	2	to	3	Tb	cooking	oil	and	a
pastry	brush
Rub	 the	 skillet	 with	 the	 rind	 or	 brush	 it	 lightly	 with	 oil.	 Set	 over
moderately	high	heat	until	the	pan	is	just	beginning	to	smoke.

Iron	Crêpe	Pans

Top—French	Crêpe	Pan
Left—American	Skillet



Right—Omelette	Pan

A	ladle	or	measure	to	hold	3	to	4	Tb	or	¼	cup
Immediately	 remove	 from	 heat	 and,	 holding	 handle	 of	 pan	 in	 your
right	hand,	pour	with	your	left	hand	a	scant	¼	cup	of	batter	into	the
middle	 of	 the	 pan.	 Quickly	 tilt	 the	 pan	 in	 all	 directions	 to	 run	 the
batter	all	over	the	bottom	of	the	pan	in	a	thin	film.	(Pour	any	batter
that	does	not	adhere	to	the	pan	back	into	your	bowl;	judge	the	amount
for	your	next	crêpe	accordingly.)	This	whole	operation	takes	but	2	or	3
seconds.

Return	 the	pan	to	heat	 for	60	 to	80	seconds.	Then	 jerk	and	toss	pan
sharply	back	and	 forth	and	up	and	down	 to	 loosen	 the	crêpe.	Lift	 its
edges	with	a	 spatula	and	 if	 the	under	 side	 is	a	nice	 light	brown,	 the
crêpe	is	ready	for	turning.

Turn	the	crêpe	by	using	2	spatulas;	or	grasp	the	edges	nearest	you	in
your	fingers	and	sweep	it	up	toward	you	and	over	again	into	the	pan
in	a	reverse	circle;	or	toss	it	over	by	a	flip	of	the	pan.

Brown	lightly	for	about	½	minute	on	the	other	side.	This	second	side
is	 rarely	 more	 than	 a	 spotty	 brown,	 and	 is	 always	 kept	 as	 the
underneath	or	nonpublic	 aspect	 of	 the	 crêpe.	As	 they	are	done,	 slide
the	crêpes	onto	a	rack	and	let	cool	several	minutes	be	fore	stacking	on
a	 plate.	 Grease	 the	 skillet	 again,	 heat	 to	 just	 smoking,	 and	 proceed
with	the	rest	of	the	crêpes.	Crêpes	may	be	kept	warm	by	covering	them
with	a	dish	and	setting	them	over	simmering	water	or	in	a	slow	oven.



Or	 they	may	 be	made	 several	 hours	 in	 advance	 and	 reheated	when
needed.	 (Crêpes	 freeze	 perfectly.)	 As	 soon	 as	 you	 are	 used	 to	 the
procedure,	you	can	keep	2	pans	going	at	once,	and	make	24	crêpes	in
less	than	half	an	hour.

		Gâteau	de	Crêpes	À	la	Florentine
[Mound	of	French	Pancakes	Filled	with	Cream	Cheese,	Spinach,	and

Mushrooms]

An	amusing	entrée	or	main-course	dish	can	be	made	by	piling	crêpes,	a
filling	 between	 each,	 in	 a	 shallow	 baking	 dish.	 (It	 looks	 like	 a	many-
layered	 cake	or	 cylindrical	mound.)	Then	 the	whole	mound	 is	 covered
with	 a	 good	 sauce	 and	 heated	 in	 the	 oven.	 Instead	 of	 the	 spinach,
cheese,	and	mushrooms	suggested,	use	any	type	of	filling	you	wish,	even
three	 or	 four	 different	 kinds	 rather	 than	 one	 or	 two.	 Like	 the	 cream
fillings	 on	 this	 page,	 they	 are	 all	 a	 combination	 of	well-flavored	 sauce
and	 a	 mince	 or	 purée	 of	 cooked	 fish,	 shellfish,	 veal,	 ham,	 chicken	 or
chicken	livers,	to	which	are	added	cooked	vegetables	such	as	asparagus
tips,	eggplant,	tomatoes,	spinach,	or	mushrooms	if	you	wish.	Other	sauce
suggestions,	depending	on	your	filling,	are	tomato	sauce,	brown	Madeira
sauce,	sauce	soubise	(béchamel	with	puréed	onions).	You	may	use	one	or
more	types	of	sauce	for	the	fillings,	and	still	another	to	top	the	mound	of
crêpes.
This	type	of	dish	may	be	made	ready	for	the	oven	in	the	morning,

and	heated	up	at	dinnertime.
For	4	to	6	people

Batter	for	24	crêpes	6½	inches	in	diameter
Make	the	crêpes	and	set	them	aside.

Sauce	Mornay	(béchamel	with	cheese),	3	cups
5	Tb	flour
4	Tb	butter
A	1½-quart	saucepan



Cook	 the	 flour	 and	 butter	 slowly	 together	 in	 the	 saucepan	 for	 2
minutes	without	coloring.

2	¾	cups	boiling	milk
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Big	pinch	of	nutmeg
Off	heat,	beat	 in	the	boiling	milk	and	seasonings.	Boil,	stirring,	 for	1
minute.

¼	cup	whipping	cream
1	cup	coarsely	grated	Swiss	cheese
Reduce	 to	 the	 simmer	 and	 stir	 in	 the	 cream	 by	 tablespoons.	 Sauce
should	be	thick	enough	to	coat	the	spoon	fairly	heavily.	Remove	from
heat	 and	 correct	 seasoning.	 Stir	 in	 all	 but	 two	 tablespoons	 of	 the
cheese.	Film	top	of	sauce	with	milk	to	prevent	a	skin	from	forming.

The	spinach	filling
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	Tb	butter
1½	cups	blanched	chopped	spinach
¼	tsp	salt
Cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 in	 butter	 for	 a	moment	 in	 an	 enameled
saucepan.	Add	spinach	and	salt,	and	stir	over	moderately	high	heat	for
2	to	3	minutes	to	evaporate	moisture.	Stir	in	½	to	⅔	cup	of	the	cheese
sauce.	 Cover	 and	 simmer	 slowly	 for	 8	 to	 10	 minutes,	 stirring
occasionally.	Correct	seasoning	and	set	aside.

The	cheese	and	mushroom	filling
1	cup	cottage	cheese	or	8	ounces	cream	cheese
Salt	and	pepper
1	egg



Mash	the	cheese	in	a	mixing	bowl	with	the	seasonings.	Beat	in	⅓	to	½
cup	of	the	cheese	sauce,	and	the	egg.

¼	lb.	(1	cup)	minced	mushrooms
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	Tb	butter
½	Tb	oil

Sauté	the	mushrooms	and	shallots	in	butter	and	oil	for	5	to	6	minutes
in	a	skillet.	Stir	them	into	the	cheese	mixture,	and	correct	seasoning.

Forming	the	mound
A	round	baking	dish	about	9	inches	in	diameter	and	1½	inches	deep
3	Tb	grated	cheese
½	Tb	butter

Butter	 the	 baking	 dish,	 and	 center	 a	 crêpe	 in	 the	 bottom.	 Spread	 it
with	a	layer	of	cheese	and	mushroom	filling.	Press	a	crêpe	on	top	and
spread	 it	 with	 a	 layer	 of	 spinach	 filling.	 Continue	 with	 alternating
layers	 of	 crêpes	 and	 filling,	 ending	with	 a	 crêpe.	 Pour	 the	 remaining
cheese	sauce	over	the	top	and	sides	of	the	mound.	Sprinkle	with	the	3
tablespoons	of	cheese	and	dot	with	3	or	4	pea-sized	bits	of	butter.	Set
aside.
Baking
About	25	to	30	minutes	before	serving	time,	place	in	upper	third	of	a
preheated	350-degree	oven	to	heat	through	thoroughly	and	brown	the
top	lightly.	To	serve,	cut	in	pie-shaped	wedges.

VARIATIONS
Timbale	de	Crêpes
[Molded	French	Pancakes	with	Various	Fillings]

For	6	people



A	1½-quart	cylindrical	mold,	preferably	a	charlotte,	about	3½	inches
high	and	6¼	inches	in	diameter
10	cooked	crêpes	6	½	to	7	inches	in	diameter	and	12	crêpes	6	inches	in
diameter
3	to	4	cups	of	cream	fillings,	one	or	several	varieties

Butter	 the	mold.	Cut	 the	10	 large	 crêpes	 in	half.	 Line	 the	mold	with
them—their	best	sides	against	the	mold,	their	pointed	ends	meeting	at
the	 bottom	 center	 of	 the	mold,	 and	 the	 other	 ends	 folded	 down	 the
outside	of	 the	mold.	 Fill	 the	mold	with	 alternating	 layers	 of	 stuffing
and	 crêpes.	 Fold	 the	dangling	 ends	of	 the	halved	 crêpes	 over	 the	 last
layer	of	stuffing	and	top	with	a	final	crêpe.

2½	cups	of	sauce,	such	as	tomato,	cheese,	or	whatever	will	go	with
your	fillings
Set	 mold	 in	 a	 pan	 of	 boiling	 water	 and	 bake	 in	 lower	 third	 of	 a
preheated	350-degree	oven	for	30	to	40	minutes,	or	until	 thoroughly
heated.	Unmold	on	a	buttered	 serving	dish	and	cover	with	whatever
sauce	you	have	chosen.

Crêpes	Farcies	et	Roulées
[Stuffed	and	Rolled	French	Pancakes]

Place	a	big	spoonful	of	filling	on	the	lower	third	of	each	crêpe	and
roll	the	crêpes	into	cylinders.

Either	sauté	in	butter,	remove	to	a	hot	serving	dish	and	sprinkle	with
parsley;

Or	arrange	in	a	shallow	baking	dish,	cover	with	sauce,	sprinkle	with
cheese	and	brown	slowly	under	a	moderate	broiler.

The	 shellfish	 or	 chicken	 fillings	 are	 especially	 good	 for	 this	 if	 you
wish	to	be	fairly	elaborate.	Both	call	for	a	good	sauce	velouté;	in	making
it,	use	half	the	sauce	to	mix	with	an	equal	amount	of	shellfish	or	chicken
for	your	filling.	Thin	out	the	rest	with	a	bit	of	heavy	cream,	and	use	that
for	coating	the	crêpes.



COCKTAIL	APPETIZERS

Hors	d’Oeuvres
For	those	who	enjoy	making	pastries,	here	are	a	few	good	hot	hors

d’oeuvres	 and	one	 cold	one.	The	 series	of	 canapés	 and	 tartlets	 starting
and	 the	 chaussons,	 can	 be	made	 larger,	 and	 served	 as	 a	 first	 course	 or
luncheon	dish.

AMUSE-GUEULE	AU	ROQUEFORT
[Roquefort	Cheese	Balls—Cold]

For	about	24

½	lb.	Roquefort	or	blue	cheese
4	to	6	Tb	softened	butter
1½	Tb	chives	or	minced	green	onion	tops
1	Tb	finely	minced	celery
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
Salt	if	needed
⅛	tsp	pepper
1	tsp	cognac	or	a	few	drops	of	Worcestershire	sauce

Crush	the	cheese	in	a	bowl	with	4	tablespoons	of	the	butter	and	work
it	 into	 a	 smooth	 paste.	 Beat	 in	 the	 chives	 or	 onion	 tops,	 celery,
seasonings,	and	cognac	or	Worcestershire.	If	mixture	is	very	stiff,	beat
in	more	butter	by	fractions.	Check	seasoning	carefully.	Roll	into	balls
about	½	inch	in	diameter.

½	cup	fine,	stale,	white	breadcrumbs
2	Tb	very	finely	minced	parsley

Toss	bread	crumbs	and	parsley	in	a	plate.	Roll	the	cheese	balls	in	the
mixture	so	they	are	well	covered.	Chill.

Serve	as	they	are	or	pierced	with	a	toothpick.

CHEESE	BISCUITS



CHEESE	BISCUITS

Bouchées,	Galettes,	Baguettes
Any	 of	 the	 following	 are	more	 attractive	 when	 hot,	 but	 are	 quite

good	served	cold.	They	may	be	baked,	 then	 frozen,	and	reheated	 for	5
minutes	or	so	in	a	hot	oven.

		GALETTES	AU	FROMAGE
[Cheese	Wafers]

These	featherweight	wafers	are	often	made	of	Swiss	cheese,	but	you
can	 use	 other	 cheese	 or	 a	 mixture	 of	 cheeses	 if	 you	 wish,	 and	 thus
employ	 leftovers.	 The	 dough	 contains	 just	 enough	 flour	 to	 hold	 the
galettes	together	while	they	bake,	and	¾	cup	of	flour	is	usually	right	for
Swiss	cheese.	You	will	probably	need	more	if	you	are	using	soft	cheeses,
and	should	always	bake	one	as	a	test.

For	about	30	wafers
Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

½	lb.	(about	2	pressed-down	cups)	grated	Swiss	cheese	or	a	mixture
of	cheeses
½	lb.	softened	butter
½	cup	all-purpose	flour,	more	if	needed
¼	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
Salt	to	taste

Knead	all	 ingredients	 together	 in	a	bowl	or	on	a	board.	The	mixture
will	be	sticky.	Roll	a	1-tablespoon	bit	into	a	ball	in	the	palms	of	your
hands,	then	flatten	it	into	a	cake	¼	inch	thick.	Bake	10	to	15	minutes
in	hot	oven	to	observe	how	it	holds	together;	it	should	spread	slightly,
puff	lightly,	and	brown.	If	it	spreads	out	more	than	you	wish,	or	is	too
fragile,	knead	in	¼	cup	more	flour	and	make	another	test.

Lightly	buttered	baking	sheets



1	egg	beaten	with	½	tsp	water	in	a	small	bowl
A	pastry	brush
½	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
A	cooling	rack

When	 you	 are	 satisfied,	 form	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 dough	 into	 cakes	 and
place	on	baking	 sheets.	Paint	 the	 tops	with	beaten	egg	and	 top	each
with	 a	 pinch	 of	 grated	 cheese.	 Bake	 for	 10	 to	 15	minutes	 until	 the
galettes	have	puffed,	and	browned	lightly.	Cool	them	on	a	rack.

Galettes	au	Roquefort
[Roquefort	Cheese	Biscuits]

The	 dough	 for	 these	 galettes	may	 also	 serve	 as	 a	 pastry	 dough	 for
tarts	and	turnovers.

For	about	30	biscuits

¼	lb.	Roquefort	or	blue	cheese
A	2-quart	mixing	bowl
¼	lb.	softened	butter
2	Tb	whipping	cream
1	egg	yolk
¾	cup	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)

Mash	 the	 cheese	 in	 the	bowl	with	 a	mixing	 fork.	Beat	 in	 the	butter,
cream,	and	egg	yolk.	Then	knead	in	the	flour.	Form	into	a	ball,	wrap
in	waxed	paper,	 and	 chill	 until	 firm.	Roll	 out	¼	 inch	 thick,	 cut	 into
1½-inch	rounds,	brush	with	egg,	and	bake	as	in	the	preceding	recipe.

Galettes	au	Camembert
[Camembert	Biscuits]

This	dough	may	substitute	for	the	usual	pastry	dough	for	tarts	and



turnovers.
For	about	50	biscuits

6	to	8	ounces	ripe	Camembert,	Brie,	or	Liederkranz	cheese
A	2-quart	mixing	bowl
3	ounces	(¾	stick)	softened	butter
2	eggs
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
2	cups	sifted	all-purpose	flour

Scrape	off	the	crusts	and	mash	the	cheese	in	the	bowl	with	a	mixing
fork.	Blend	in	the	butter,	then	beat	in	the	eggs	and	seasoning.	Work	in
the	 flour	 and	 knead	 everything	 together	 for	 a	 moment	 to	 make	 a
smooth	 and	 fairly	 supple	 dough.	 Knead	 in	 a	 tablespoon	 or	 so	more
flour	 if	 dough	 seems	 too	 soft.	 Wrap	 in	 waxed	 paper	 and	 chill	 until
firm.	Roll	out	¼	inch	thick,	cut	into	1½-inch	rounds,	and	brush	with
egg	 as	 in	 the	 preceding	 master	 recipe	 for	 cheese	 biscuits.	 Bake	 in
upper	third	of	a	preheated	350-degree	oven	for	about	15	minutes,	or
until	lightly	browned.

BOUCHÉES	PARMENTIER	AU	FROMAGE
[Potato	Cheese	Sticks]

Mashed	 potato	 gives	 these	 little	 cheese	 mouthfuls	 a	 nice,	 tender
quality.

For	about	60	pieces

½	lb.	baking	potatoes	(2	medium	potatoes)
Peel	and	quarter	the	potatoes.	Boil	in	salted	water	until	tender.	Drain,
and	put	through	a	ricer.	You	should	have	1	cup.

Stir	 the	 potatoes	 over	moderate	 heat	 in	 a	 heavy-bottomed	 saucepan
for	2	 to	3	minutes	until	 they	 form	a	 light	 film	on	 the	bottom	of	 the



pan,	indicating	most	of	their	moisture	has	been	evaporated.

⅔	cup	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
4	ounces	(1	stick)	softened	butter
1	egg
4	ounces	(1	cup)	grated	Swiss	cheese
⅕	tsp	white	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
Salt	as	needed

Beat	the	flour	into	the	potatoes,	then	the	butter	by	fractions,	then	the
egg,	cheese,	and	seasonings.	Taste	for	seasoning.	Preheat	oven	to	425
degrees.

2	lightly	buttered	baking	sheets
With	a	 fluted	pastry	 tube	¼	 inch	diameter,	 squeeze	 the	mixture	 into
2½-inch	lengths	spaced	½	inch	apart	onto	the	baking	sheets.

Bake	both	sheets	at	a	time	in	preheated	oven	for	about	15	minutes,	or
until	sticks	are	lightly	browned.

CANAPÉS,	BREAD	CASES,	AND	TARTLET	SHELLS

Although	Melba	 toast	and	crackers	make	good	 foundations	 for	hot
appetizers,	 the	 following	 are	 more	 elegant.	 They	 may	 be	 used
interchangeably,	all	of	them	may	be	prepared	ahead,	and	they	may	also
be	filled	and	browned,	then	reheated.	When	bread	is	specified,	use	only
a	homemade	type	of	white	bread	with	body,	not	the	soft	squashy	type.
French	recipes	call	for	pain	de	mie.

Canapés	—	Croûtons
[Plain	or	Sautéed	Bread	Rounds]



Plain,	sliced,	white	bread	works	perfectly	well	for	canapés	when	cut
into	 triangles	 or	 rounds,	 spread	with	 a	 filling,	 then	 set	 in	 a	 preheated
425-degree	oven	until	the	bread	is	toasted	on	the	bottom	and	the	filling
has	puffed	and	browned	on	 top.	But	 if	you	wish	 to	be	more	elaborate,
proceed	as	follows:	Slice	the	bread	¼	inch	thick,	and	cut	it	into	rounds
1½	to	2	inches	in	diameter	with	a	fluted	cutter.	Heat	⅛	inch	of	clarified
butter	 in	 a	 skillet	 and	 sauté	 the	 rounds	on	 each	 side	until	 very	 lightly
browned,	 adding	 more	 butter	 as	 necessary.	 (These	 are	 called	 croûtons
when	 they	 are	 triangular	 and	 garnish	 an	 entrée.)	 Heap	 the	 filling
(recipes	 are	 on	 following	 pages)	 upon	 each	 canapé	 in	 a	½-inch	 dome.
Top	with	a	pinch	of	grated	cheese,	and	a	drop	of	melted	butter.	Arrange
on	a	baking	sheet	and	slip	 for	a	moment	under	a	hot	broiler	 to	brown
the	tops	lightly.	If	prepared	in	advance,	reheat	in	a	350-degree	oven	for
several	minutes.

Croûtes
[Toasted	Bread	Cases]

Slice	 off	 the	 crust.	 Cut	 the	 bread	 into	 1-inch	 slices,	 and	 the	 slices
either	into	1-inch	cubes	or,	with	a	cutter,	into	rounds.	Cut	out	a	well	in
the	center	of	each.	Tamp	down	the	bread	on	the	sides	and	bottom	of	the
well	with	your	finger	to	make	an	open-topped	case	about	¼	inch	thick.
Paint	the	tops	and	sides	with	melted	butter.	Place	on	a	baking	sheet	and
brown	lightly	for	5	minutes	in	the	upper	third	of	a	preheated	450-degree
oven.

Place	filling	in	the	hollow	centers.	Top	with	a	pinch	of	grated	cheese
and	a	drop	of	melted	butter.	Brown	top	of	filling	delicately	under	a	hot
broiler	for	a	moment.	Reheat,	if	they	have	been	prepared	in	advance,	in
a	350-degree	oven	for	several	minutes.

Tartelettes
[Little	Pastry	Shells]

Following	 the	 general	 procedure	 for	 pastry	 dough,	 and	 for	 pastry
shells,	roll	 the	dough	a	bit	 less	 than	⅛	inch	thick.	Line	buttered	pastry
molds	½	inch	deep	and	2	 to	2½	inches	 in	diameter,	or	 shallow	muffin



tins,	with	the	dough.	Flute	the	rims	with	the	back	of	a	knife.	Prick	the
bottom	of	the	dough	with	a	fork.	Fill	each	mold	or	cup	with	a	round	of
buttered	brown	paper	and	a	small	handful	of	dried	beans;	or	set	another
mold	on	the	pastry.	Either	will	keep	the	bottom	from	puffing	up	and	the
sides	 from	 collapsing.	 Bake	 in	 a	 preheated	400-degree	 oven	 for	 7	 to	 8
minutes,	or	until	pastry	will	hold	its	shape.	Remove	paper	and	beans	or
empty	molds.	Prick	bottom	of	shells	again	and	return	to	oven	for	2	to	3
minutes	more,	 or	until	 shells	 are	 just	 beginning	 to	 color	 and	 to	 shrink
from	sides	of	molds.	Remove	shells	and	cool	on	a	rack.

Place	a	filling	(following)	in	center.	Top	with	a	pinch	of	cheese	and
a	 drop	 of	melted	 butter.	 Arrange	 on	 a	 baking	 sheet	 and	 set	 in	 a	 450-
degree	oven	for	5	minutes	or	so,	until	filling	has	browned	on	top.	If	done
ahead,	reheat	in	a	350-degree	oven	for	several	minutes.

SPREADS	AND	FILLINGS

Farces
Use	these	multipurpose	cream	fillings	for	the	sautéed	bread	rounds,

bread	 cases	 or	 tartelettes.	 They	 may	 also	 garnish	 the	 cream	 puffs,	 the
pastry	turnovers,	the	croquettes,	and	the	crêpes.

		FONDUE	AU	GRUYÈRE
[Cream	Filling	with	Swiss	Cheese]

For	about	2	cups

2½	Tb	butter
3	Tb	flour
A	2-quart	saucepan
A	wire	whip
1½	cups	boiling	milk	or	boiling	light	cream
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper



Pinch	of	nutmeg
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper

Cook	 the	 butter	 and	 flour	 slowly	 together	 in	 the	 saucepan	 for	 2
minutes	without	coloring.	Off	heat,	beat	in	the	boiling	milk	or	cream,
then	the	seasonings.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Sauce	should	be	very
thick.	Taste	for	seasoning.

1	egg	yolk
4	ounces	(1	cup)	coarsely	grated	Swiss,	or	Swiss	and	Parmesan,
cheese
2	Tb	butter

Remove	 sauce	 from	 heat.	 Place	 egg	 yolk	 in	 center	 of	 sauce	 and
immediately	 beat	 it	 vigorously	 in	 with	 the	 wire	 whip.	 Beat	 for	 a
moment	 to	 cool	 slightly,	 then	 beat	 in	 the	 cheese,	 and	 finally	 the
butter.	Taste	carefully	for	seasoning.	If	not	used	immediately,	dot	top
of	sauce	with	butter	to	prevent	a	skin	from	forming.

VARIATIONS
Garlic	and	Wine	Flavoring

½	Tb	butter
1½	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	small	clove	mashed	garlic
½	cup	dry	white	vermouth

Using	 a	 small	 enameled	 saucepan,	 cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions,	 and
garlic	 slowly	 in	butter	 for	 a	moment.	Add	wine,	 raise	heat,	 and	boil
down	rapidly	until	wine	is	reduced	to	¼	cup-Substitute	this	for	¼	cup
of	milk	in	the	master	recipe.

Ham



½	cup	minced	ham	or	Canadian	bacon
½	Tb	butter

Sauté	 the	 ham	 for	 a	 moment	 in	 butter.	 Substitute	 it	 for	 half	 of	 the
cheese	in	the	master	recipe.

Mushrooms	or	Chicken	Livers

¼	lb.	diced	mushrooms	or	chicken	livers
1	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper

Sauté	the	mushrooms	or	chicken	livers	 in	the	butter.	Season	to	taste,
and	substitute	for	half	of	the	cheese	in	the	master	recipe.

		FONDUE	DE	CRUSTACÉS
[Cream	Filling	with	Shellfish	or	Clams]

For	about	2	cups

½	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	Tb	butter
1¼	cups	diced	or	flaked,	cooked	or	canned	shellfish;	or	canned
minced	clams
⅓	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth;	or
3	to	4	Tb	Madeira	or	sherry
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
Optional:	1	Tb	minced	fresh	herbs	such	as	tarragon	or	chervil;	or	½
tsp	dried	tarragon	or	oregano
Using	a	2-quart	saucepan	or	a	small	enameled	skillet,	cook	the	shallots
or	 onions	 in	 the	 butter	 for	 a	 moment	 over	 low	 heat.	 Stir	 in	 the
shellfish	or	clams	and	cook	slowly	 for	2	minutes	over	 low	heat.	Add
the	wine.	 Cover	 and	 simmer	 for	 1	minute.	 Uncover,	 raise	 heat,	 and



boil	rapidly	until	liquid	has	almost	evaporated.	Season	to	taste	and	stir
in	optional	herbs.

2	Tb	butter
2½	Tb	flour
1	cup	boiling	liquid	(milk,	plus—if	you	have	it—concentrated	fish
stock	or	mushroom	juice,	or	clam	juice)
⅛	tsp	pepper
Salt	to	taste

In	 a	 separate	 2-quart	 saucepan,	 cook	 the	 butter	 and	 flour	 slowly
together	for	2	minutes	without	coloring.	Off	heat,	beat	in	the	boiling
liquid,	pepper,	and	salt	to	taste.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.

1	egg	yolk
¼	cup	whipping	cream

Beat	egg	yolk	and	cream	in	a	bowl.	Remove	sauce	from	heat	and	beat
it	into	the	bowl	by	tablespoons.	Return	to	saucepan	and	boil,	stirring,
for	1	minute.	Sauce	should	be	very	thick.	Correct	seasoning.

¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
Fold	the	previously	prepared	shellfish,	then	the	cheese	into	the	sauce,
and	check	seasoning	again.	If	not	used	immediately,	dot	top	of	sauce
with	butter	to	prevent	a	skin	from	forming.

VARIATION
Fondue	de	Volaille
[Cream	Filling	with	Chicken	or	Turkey]

Using	exactly	the	same	method	and	proportions	as	for	the	preceding
fondue	 de	 crustacés,	 substitute	 1	 cup	 of	 diced,	 cooked	 chicken,	 turkey,
duck,	or	game	for	the	shellfish	or	clams.

CROQUETTES



CROQUETTES

Crèmes	Frites,	Fondues,	Cromesquis
Any	of	the	preceding	fondues,	starting	may	be	chilled,	cut	into	squares
or	 balls,	 rolled	 in	 egg	 and	 bread	 crumbs,	 then	 browned	 in	 deep	 fat.
But	as	you	need	a	far	thicker	sauce,	here	is	a	different	method.
For	24	pieces	1½	inches	square	and	½	inch	thick

½	cup	flour	(measure	by	scooping	into	cup;	level	off	with	knife)
1½	cups	milk
2	egg	yolks
Salt,	pepper,	and	nutmeg
2	Tb	butter
1	cup	any	of	the	preceding	flavorings
1	Tb	melted	butter

Place	flour	in	a	heavy	saucepan,	gradually	blend	in	milk	with	a	wire
whip.	Stir	over	moderate	heat	until	mixture	begins	 to	 lump.	Remove
from	heat	and	vigorously	blend	in	egg	yolks.	When	smooth,	beat	over
heat	2	minutes	to	thicken	sauce.	Remove	from	heat;	beat	in	seasonings
and	butter.	When	sauce	is	slightly	cool,	add	flavoring.	Spread	½	inch
thick	 in	 a	 lightly	 buttered	 platter.	 Film	 surface	 with	 melted	 butter;
cover	and	chill	several	hours.

1	cup	flour
3	pie	plates
1	egg	and	2	egg	whites	beaten	with	1	Tb	oil,	1	tsp	water,	salt	and
pepper
2	cups	fine,	dry,	white	bread	crumbs
Frying	oil	and	deep-fat	frying	equipment

Turn	the	flour	in	one	plate,	beaten	egg	in	second,	and	crumbs	in	third.
Scoop	 up	 1½	 tablespoons	 chilled	 mixture	 with	 a	 spatula;	 drop	 into
flour.	Dredge	 lightly	and	shape	 into	a	 square	with	 fingers.	Drop	 into
egg	 and	 spoon	 it	 over	 entire	 surface.	Drain	 on	 a	 fork	 and	 drop	 into
crumbs.	Pat	crumbs	evenly	over	entire	surface.	(*)	Croquettes	may	be



crumbed	a	day	in	advance;	cover	and	refrigerate.

Brown	4	to	5	croquettes	at	a	 time	for	2	to	3	minutes	 in	 frying	oil	at
375	degrees.	Drain	on	crumpled	paper	towels.	Reheat	if	necessary	for
2	to	3	minutes	only	in	a	preheated	450-degree	oven.

TURNOVERS

Chaussons

PETITS	CHAUSSONS	AU	ROQUEFORT
[Pastry	Turnovers	with	Roquefort	Cheese]

These	nice	little	mouthfuls	are	made	of	pastry	dough	rolled	out	and
cut	into	squares,	ovals,	or	circles.	In	the	center	a	small	lump	of	filling	is
placed.	 The	 edges	 of	 the	 pastry	 are	 moistened	 with	 beaten	 egg,	 then
either	another	piece	of	pastry	is	placed	on	top,	or	the	original	pastry	is
folded	over	upon	 itself	 to	enclose	 the	 filling.	They	are	 then	baked	 in	a
hot	oven	until	they	puff	and	brown.	In	making	them,	avoid	putting	in	so
much	 filling	 that	 the	 pastry	 cannot	 be	 sealed,	 and	 be	 sure	 to	 seal
carefully	so	the	turnovers	do	not	burst	while	baking.	A	ravioli	stamp—a
heavy	metal	 ring	 about	 2	 inches	 in	 diameter	with	 serrated	 teeth—will
seal	2	rounds	of	pastry	most	efficiently	together.

Turnovers	may	enclose	a	variety	of	 stuffings	other	 than	Roquefort,
such	as	the	cream	fillings	or	any	of	the	liver,	sausage,	or	veal	mixtures	in
the	pâté	section,	or	the	ground	meat	mixtures	in	the	Beef,	Lamb,	or	Veal
sections.	 You	 can	 also	 use	 little	 pork	 sausages	 or	 store-bought	 sausage
meat.	 Chaussons	 may	 be	 made	 in	 any	 size	 or	 shape,	 from	 about	 2½
inches	for	appetizers	to	12	inches	for	an	entrée.

For	about	40	pieces

½	lb.	Roquefort	or	blue	cheese
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
¼	lb.	(1	stick)	softened	butter
2	egg	yolks



1	to	2	Tb	kirsch	or	cognac
1¼	tsp	pepper
2	Tb	minced	chives	or	minced	green	onion	tops

Mash	 the	 cheese	 in	 the	bowl	with	 a	mixing	 fork.	Beat	 in	 the	butter,
then	the	egg	yolks,	kirsch	or	cognac,	pepper,	and	chives	or	onion	tops.

2	to	6	Tb	whipping	cream
Beat	in	the	cream	by	tablespoons	but	do	not	let	the	mixture	thin	out
too	much.	It	should	remain	a	fairly	thick	paste.	Correct	seasoning.

Chilled	pastry	dough	made	from	4	cups	of	flour
Roll	out	the	dough	into	a	rectangle	⅛	inch	thick.	With	a	ravioli	wheel
or	a	knife,	cut	the	dough	into	2½-inch	squares.

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

1	egg	beaten	in	a	bowl	with	½	tsp	water
A	pastry	brush
Lightly	buttered	baking	sheets

Place	1	 teaspoon	of	 filling	 in	 the	center	of	each	square.	One	by	one,
paint	a	¼-inch	border	of	beaten	egg	around	 the	edges	of	 the	pastry.
Fold	the	pastry	over	on	itself	into	a	triangle.	Press	the	edges	together
firmly	with	your	 fingers.	Press	 them	again	making	a	design	with	 the
tines	of	a	fork.	Place	on	a	buttered	baking	sheet	and	continue	with	the
rest	 of	 the	 turnovers.	 Paint	 the	 tops	with	 beaten	 egg.	Make	 shallow
Crosshatch	 lines	 with	 the	 point	 of	 a	 knife,	 and	 poke	 a	⅛-inch	 hole
through	the	center	of	each	pastry	top	so	cooking	steam	can	escape.

Bake	in	upper	third	of	preheated	oven	for	about	15	minutes,	or	until
puffed	and	lightly	browned.

Turnovers	may	be	baked,	then	reheated.	Baked	turnovers	may	also	be
frozen,	then	set	in	a	425-degree	oven	for	5	minutes	or	so	to	thaw	and
heat	through.



CHAPTER	FIVE

FISH
Poisson

THE	FRENCH	are	magnificent	with	fish.	Not	only	is	fresh	fish	abundant
all	 year	 round,	 but	 the	 art	 of	 its	 cooking	 and	 saucing	 is	 accomplished
with	great	taste	and	skill.

This	chapter	 includes	 two	fine	recipes	 for	scallops,	one	 for	 tuna	or
swordfish,	 three	 for	 lobster,	 and	 a	 group	 for	 mussels.	 But	 the	 main
emphasis	 is	on	the	 important	and	typically	French	method	of	poaching
filets	 of	 fish	 in	white	wine	 and	 serving	 them	 in	 a	wine	 sauce,	 starting
with	 the	 simplest	 type	 of	 sauce	 and	 ending	 with	 several	 of	 the	 most
famous	 of	 la	 grande	 cuisine.	 These	 last,	 as	 you	 will	 observe,	 are	 fish
veloutés	 (flour	 and	 butter	 roux	 simmered	with	 the	 fish	 cooking	 liquid),
which	 are	 then	 enriched	 with	 cream	 and	 egg	 yolks.	 They	 are	 all	 the
same	 basic	 sauce	 described	 in	 detail	 in	 the	 Sauce	 chapter.	 Under
numerous	 disguises	 and	 with	 various	 flavorings,	 this	 sauce	 appears
throughout	almost	every	phase	of	French	cookery.

A	NOTE	ON	BUYING	FISH

Fish	must	be	fresh	smelling	and	fresh	tasting.	If	it	is	whole,	its	eyes
are	bright	and	full,	not	filmed,	opaque,	and	flat.	Its	gills	are	bright	red,
its	flesh	firm	to	the	touch,	its	skin	fresh	and	glistening.

Frozen	 fish	 should	 be	 bought	 from	 a	 dealer	 who	 has	 the	 proper
facilities	to	ship	and	store	it	at	a	constant	temperature	of	zero	degrees.	It
should	be	 solidly	 frozen.	A	block	of	 frozen	 juices	 at	 the	bottom	of	 the
package	 is	proof	 that	 it	has	been	thawed	and	refrozen.	Before	cooking,



defrost	it	in	the	refrigerator,	or	under	cold	running	water.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

A	beautifully	sauced	fish	can	well	be	considered	as	a	separate	course
and	needs	nothing	but	French	bread	and	a	good	wine	to	go	with	it.	If	it
is	 a	 main	 course,	 include	 risotto	 or	 steamed	 rice	 for	 shellfish,	 boiled
potatoes	 for	other	 fish.	A	salad	or	vegetable	should	come	afterward,	so
as	not	to	disturb	the	harmony	of	the	fish,	the	sauce,	and	the	wine.

FISH	FILETS	IN	WHITE	WINE	SAUCE

THE	FISH	FILETS

Most	 of	 the	 famous	 French	 dishes	 involving	 filet	 of	 sole	 center
around	 fish	 poached	 in	 white	 wine	 and	 coated	 with	 a	 lovely,	 creamy
sauce	made	from	the	poaching	liquid.	Although	many	types	of	American
flat	fish	and	fish	filets	are	called	sole,	they	are	usually	flounder	because
the	true	sole	is	not	a	native	American	fish.	European	sole	is	flown	over
to	 America,	 and	 can	 be	 bought,	 but	 it	 is	 rarely	 seen	 in	 the	 usual
American	market.	The	sole’s	ease	of	skinning	and	filleting,	and	its	close-
grained	yet	delicate	flesh	make	it	ideal	for	poaching.	The	best	substitutes
for	European	sole	are	winter	flounder	or	gray	sole,	Pacific	petrale	sole	or
brill.	 Each	 of	 these	 is	 a	 common	 sole	 filet	 in	 America,	 depending	 on
where	 you	 live.	 Other	 worthy	 substitutes	 of	 a	 different	 nature	 are
whiting	or	 silver	hake,	dab,	 tilefish,	 fresh-water	 trout,	 and	 (if	 the	 filets
are	too	thick,	slice	these	horizontally	to	make	them	about	⅜	inch	thick)
halibut,	cod,	pollack,	striped	bass,	monkfish.	Any	of	the	lean	white	fish,
in	 other	words,	may	 be	 used	 in	 these	 recipes	 in	 place	 of	 sole;	 if	 they
flake	during	poaching,	plan	to	sauce	and	serve	them	in	their	baking	dish.

		FILETS	DE	POISSON	POCHÉS	AU	VIN	BLANC
[Fish	Filets	Poached	in	White	Wine]

For	6	people



Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	buttered,	10-to	12-inch,	fireproof	baking	and	serving	dish,	1½	to	2
inches	deep

2	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2½	lbs.	skinless	and	boneless	sole	or	flounder	filets	cut	into	serving
pieces

Salt	and	pepper
1½	Tb	butter	cut	into	bits
1¼	to	1½	cups	cold,	whitewine	fish	stock	made	from	heads,	bones,
and	trimmings

OR	¾	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth	plus	¼	cup
bottled	clam	juice,	and	water

OR	1½	cups	wine	and	water	mixed
Sprinkle	half	the	shallots	or	onions	in	the	bottom	of	the	dish.	Season
the	filets	lightly	with	salt	and	pepper	and	arrange	them	in	one	slightly
overlapping	layer	in	the	dish.	If	filets	are	thin,	they	may	be	folded	in
half	 so	 they	 make	 triangles.	 Sprinkle	 the	 filets	 with	 the	 remaining
shallots	 or	 onions,	 and	 dot	with	 butter.	 Pour	 in	 the	 cold	 liquid	 and
enough	water	so	fish	is	barely	covered.

Buttered	brown	paper	or	waxed	paper	(do	not	use	aluminum	foil—it
will	discolor	the	wine)
Bring	almost	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Lay	the	buttered	paper
over	 the	 fish.	 Then	 place	 dish	 in	 bottom	 third	 of	 preheated	 oven.
Maintain	 liquid	almost	at	 the	simmer	 for	8	 to	12	minutes	depending
on	the	thickness	of	the	filets.	The	fish	is	done	when	a	fork	pierces	the
flesh	easily.	Do	not	overcook;	the	fish	should	not	be	dry	and	flaky.

An	enameled	saucepan
Place	a	cover	over	the	dish	and	drain	out	all	the	cooking	liquid	into	an
enameled	 saucepan.	 (*)	 The	 fish	 is	 now	 poached	 and	 ready	 for
saucing.	It	may	be	covered	and	kept	warm	for	a	few	minutes	over	hot,
but	 not	 simmering,	 water.	 Or	 set	 it	 aside,	 covered	with	 its	 piece	 of



paper,	 and	 reheat	 later	 for	 a	 few	minutes	 over	 simmering	water.	 Be
very	sure	the	fish	does	not	overcook	as	it	reheats.	Before	saucing	the
fish,	drain	off	any	liquid	which	may	have	accumulated	in	the	dish.

Filets	de	Poisson	Bercy	aux	Champignons
[Fish	Filets	Poached	in	White	Wine	with	Mushrooms]

Bercy	 is	 the	 simplest	 of	 the	 whitewine	 fish	 sauces.	 The	 poaching
liquid	 is	 thickened	 with	 beurre	 manié—a	 flour	 and	 butter	 paste—then
enriched	with	cream.	This	 combination	of	 fish,	mushrooms,	and	cream
sauce	 is	an	 informal	version	of	 sole	bonne	 femme.	Serve	with	 it	a	white
Burgundy,	Graves,	or	Traminer.

For	6	people

¾	lb.	or	3½	cups	sliced	fresh	mushrooms
2	Tb	butter
An	enameled	skillet
⅛	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Toss	 the	 mushrooms	 in	 hot	 butter	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 for	 a
minute	or	two	without	browning.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper,	and	set
aside.

2½	lbs.	filets	of	sole	or	flounder	and	the	ingredients	for	poaching
them	in	white	wine	(see	preceding	recipe)
A	2-quart	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
Arrange	 the	 seasoned	 filets	 in	 a	buttered	baking	dish	 as	described	 in
the	 master	 recipe.	 Spread	 the	 mushrooms	 over	 them.	 Pour	 in	 the
liquids,	 and	 poach	 the	 fish.	 Then	 drain	 the	 poaching	 liquid	 into	 the
saucepan.	Preheat	broiler.

Rapidly	boil	down	the	poaching	liquid	until	it	has	reduced	to	1	cup.



2½	Tb	flour	blended	to	a	paste	with	3	Tb	softened	butter
¾	to	1	cup	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Lemon	juice
Off	heat,	 beat	 the	 flour	 and	butter	paste	 into	 the	hot	 liquid,	 then	½
cup	of	the	cream.	Bring	to	the	boil.	Thin	out	the	sauce	with	additional
tablespoons	 of	 cream	until	 it	 coats	 the	 spoon	nicely.	 Season	 to	 taste
with	salt,	pepper,	and	drops	of	lemon	juice.

¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	bits
Spoon	 the	 sauce	 over	 the	 fish.	 Sprinkle	 on	 the	 cheese,	 and	dot	with
butter.	Place	dish	6	to	7	inches	from	a	hot	broiler	for	2	to	3	minutes	to
reheat	fish	and	brown	top	of	sauce	lightly.	Serve	as	soon	as	possible.
(*)	 Dish	 may	 be	 prepared	 ahead	 and	 reheated	 as	 follows:	 After
sprinkling	on	 the	cheese	and	butter,	 set	aside.	Before	 serving,	 reheat
just	 to	the	simmer	on	top	of	 the	stove,	 then	run	for	a	minute	or	two
under	a	hot	broiler	to	brown	the	top	of	the	sauce.

VARIATION
Filets	de	Poisson	à	la	Bretonne
[Fish	Filets	Poached	in	White	Wine	and	a	Julienne	of	Vegetables]

This	 is	 the	 same	 recipe,	 but	 with	 a	 julienne	 of	 carrots,	 onions,
celery,	 and	mushrooms	 cooked	 in	 butter,	 then	 spread	 over	 the	 fish.	 It
makes	a	pretty	dish	with	a	delicious	flavor.

Ingredients	for	the	preceding	recipe,	but	use	only	¼	lb.	of
mushrooms,	and	the	following	vegetables:

1	carrot
2	leeks,	white	part	only;	or	2	yellow	onions
2	tender	celery	stalks



Cut	the	vegetables	into	julienne	matchsticks	1½	inches	long	and	⅛
inch	 across.	 Keep	 the	 mushrooms	 separate.	 Cook	 the	 other	 vegetables
slowly	in	butter	for	about	20	minutes	in	a	covered	saucepan,	until	they
are	 tender	 but	 not	 browned.	 Then	 add	 the	mushrooms	 and	 cook	 for	 2
minutes.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper.

Spread	 the	 vegetables	 over	 the	 seasoned	 fish	 filets,	 cover	with	 the
liquids,	and	poach	the	fish.	Make	the	sauce	as	in	the	preceding	recipe.

		Filets	de	Poisson	Gratinés,	à	la	Parisienne
[Fish	Filets	Poached	in	White	Wine;	Cream	and	Egg	Yolk	Sauce]

In	 the	 following	 recipe,	 the	 fish	 poaching	 liquid	 is	 cooked	with	 a
flour	and	butter	roux	to	make	a	fish	velouté.	The	velouté	is	then	combined
with	cream	and	egg	yolks	to	produce	a	delicious,	velvety	sauce	called	a
parisienne.	Although	it	uses	almost	the	same	elements	as	the	sauce	Bercy,
because	of	its	cooked	roux	and	its	egg	yolks,	sauce	parisienne	is	far	more
subtle	 in	 taste	 and	 texture.	 It	 is	 the	 basis	 for	 all	 the	 great	 fish	 sauces
described	 later.	 When	 the	 sauce	 is	 to	 be	 used	 for	 a	 gratin,	 as	 in	 this
recipe,	 the	 whole	 dish	 may	 be	 prepared	 ahead	 of	 time,	 and	 reheated
later.	 Before	 the	 fish	 is	 sauced,	 it	 may	 be	 surrounded	 with	 various
cooked	shellfish	as	suggested	at	the	end	of	the	recipe.	Serve	with	this	a
chilled	white	Burgundy,	or	an	excellent	white	Graves.

For	6	people

2½	lbs.	sole	or	flounder	filets	poached	in	white	wine
Poach	the	fish	in	white	wine	as	described	in	the	master	recipe.	Drain
the	 poaching	 liquid	 into	 an	 enameled	 saucepan	 and	 rapidly	 boil	 it
down	until	it	has	reduced	to	1	cup.

Sauce	Parisienne	(2½	cups)
A	2-quart,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
3	Tb	butter
4	Tb	flour



A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon
The	boiling	fish-poaching	liquid
¾	cup	milk
A	wire	whip

Melt	the	butter,	blend	in	the	flour,	and	cook	slowly,	stirring,	until	they
foam	and	froth	together	for	2	minutes	without	coloring.	Off	heat,	beat
in	the	boiling	liquid,	then	the	milk.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Sauce
will	be	very	thick.
Preheat	broiler.

2	egg	yolks
½	cup	whipping	cream
A	2-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
A	wooden	spoon
More	cream	as	needed
Salt	and	white	pepper
Lemon	juice

Blend	the	yolks	and	cream	in	the	mixing	bowl.	Beat	in	driblets	of	hot
sauce	until	a	cup	has	been	added.	Beat	in	the	rest	of	the	hot	sauce	in	a
thin	 stream.	 Return	 the	 sauce	 to	 the	 pan.	 Set	 over	moderately	 high
heat	and	stir	with	wooden	spoon,	reaching	all	over	the	bottom	of	the
pan,	until	the	sauce	comes	to	the	boil.	Boil	and	stir	for	1	minute.	Thin
out	with	additional	spoonfuls	of	cream	until	the	sauce	coats	the	spoon
nicely.	Season	carefully	to	taste	with	salt,	pepper,	and	drops	of	lemon
juice.	Strain.

2	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese,	to	help	brown	top	of	sauce
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	bits

Spoon	 the	 sauce	 over	 the	 fish.	 Sprinkle	 with	 cheese,	 and	 dot	 with
butter.
(*)	If	not	to	be	served	immediately,	set	aside.



Just	 before	 serving,	 reheat	 slowly	 almost	 to	 simmer	 on	 top	 of	 the
stove.	Run	under	hot	broiler	to	brown	the	top	of	the	sauce.

SHELLFISH	GARNITURES
Before	 saucing	 the	 fish	 in	 the	 preceding	 or	 following	 recipes,	 you

may	 surround	 it	 with	 one	 or	 various	 types	 of	 cooked	 shellfish	 meat.
Their	cooking	juices	are	added	to	reduce	with	the	liquid	in	which	your
fish	filets	were	poached,	giving	it	even	more	character.
The	 following	 brief	 directions	 include	 the	 cooking	 of	 the	 raw

shellfish,	and	then	the	warming	of	the	meat	in	butter	and	seasonings	to
give	 it	 additional	 flavor.	 If	 you	 are	using	previously	 cooked	or	 canned
meat,	it	will	need	only	the	final	warming	in	butter.

Lobster
Steam	 the	 lobster	 in	wine	 and	 aromatic	 flavorings	 as	 described	 at

the	beginning	of	the	lobster	Thermidor	recipe.	When	the	lobster	is	cool,
remove	the	meat	and	dice	or	slice	it.	Sauté	the	meat	for	2	to	3	minutes
in	2	tablespoons	of	hot	butter,	1	tablespoon	of	minced	shallots	or	green
onions,	and	salt	and	pepper.	Stir	 in	3	tablespoons	of	dry	white	wine	or
dry	white	 vermouth	 and	 boil	 for	 1	minute	 until	 the	 liquid	 has	 almost
completely	evaporated.	The	lobster	is	now	ready	to	be	used.

Shrimp
Follow	the	preceding	directions	 for	 lobster,	but	 simmer	 the	whole,

unpeeled	shrimp	for	5	minutes	only.	Allow	them	to	cool	in	the	cooking
liquid.	Then	peel	them,	and	warm	them	in	butter,	seasonings,	and	wine.

Écrevisses
These	 fresh-water	 shellfish	 are	 also	 called	 crayfish	 or	 crawfish,

depending	 on	 what	 part	 of	 the	 country	 you	 come	 from.	 They	 look
exactly	like	baby	lobsters	but	are	only	4	to	5	inches	long.	Prepare	them
like	the	shrimps	in	the	preceding	directions.	Only	the	tail	meat	is	used	as
a	 garnish.	 The	 chests	 and	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 shells	 may	 be	 ground	 up	 to
make	a	shellfish	butter.



Shelled	Fresh	Oysters
Poach	 the	 oysters	 at	 just	 below	 the	 simmer	 for	 3	 or	 4	minutes	 in

their	natural	 juices	until	 they	swell.	Drain	 them,	and	they	are	ready	to
use.

Mussels
Scrub	 and	 soak	 1	 quart	 of	 fresh	 mussels	 as	 directed.	 Then	 place

them	 in	a	 covered	enameled	or	 stainless	 steel	 saucepan	with	½	cup	of
dry	 white	 wine	 or	 ⅓	 cup	 of	 dry	 white	 vermouth,	 3	 tablespoons	 of
minced	shallot	or	green	onion,	3	parsley	sprigs,	and	a	pinch	of	pepper.
Boil	 rapidly	 for	 about	5	minutes,	 tossing	 several	 times,	until	 the	 shells
swing	open.	Remove	the	mussels	from	their	shells,	and	they	are	ready	to
use.

SOME	CLASSIC	COMBINATIONS
The	same	cream	and	egg-yolk	fish	sauce	described	in	the	recipe	for

filets	 de	 poisson	 gratinés	 à	 la	 parisienne	 becomes	 even	 more	 rich	 and
velvety	 if	 a	 fairly	 large	 quantity	 of	 butter	 is	 beaten	 into	 it	 just	 before
serving.	 The	more	 you	 beat	 in,	 the	more	 delicious	 the	 sauce	 becomes.
But	 as	 in	 all	 heavily	 buttered	 sauces,	 it	 cannot	 be	 kept	 warm	 once
buttered	or	the	butter	will	liquefy	and	either	thin	out	the	sauce,	or	rise
up	and	float	on	top.	Here	in	outline	are	some	traditional	combinations	of
poached	fish	filets	and	various	shellfish	garnitures	to	give	you	an	idea	of
what	 you	 can	do.	You	 can,	 of	 course,	make	up	 your	 own	 selection.	 In
each	case,	 in	the	following	recipes,	 the	sauce	takes	on	the	name	of	 the
dish.	 Serve	 your	 finest	 white	 Burgundy	 with	 any	 of	 these,	 and	 they
should	be	considered	a	separate	course,	accompanied	only	by	hot	French
bread.

		SOLE	À	LA	DIEPPOISE
[Fish	Filets	with	Mussels	and	Shrimp]

This	recipe	is	the	model	for	the	variations	to	follow.
For	6	people



Poaching	the	fish
2½	lbs.	sole	or	flounder	filets	poached	in	whitewine
1	quart	fresh	mussels	steamed	in	white	wine
½	lb.	shelled	shrimp	warmed	in	butter	and	seasonings

Arrange	the	poached	fish	filets	on	a	lightly	buttered	serving	platter	and
surround	them	with	the	mussels	and	shrimp.	Just	before	serving,	cover
the	 platter	 and	 reheat	 the	 fish	 for	 a	 few	 minutes	 over	 simmering
water.	Drain	off	any	accumulated	liquid	before	napping	the	fish	with
the	following	sauce:
For	2½	cups	of	sauce

A	2½-quart	enameled	saucepan
3	Tb	butter
4	Tb	flour
The	fish-poaching	and	mussel-steaming	liquids	combined	and	boiled
down	to	1	cup
¾	cup	milk
2	egg	yolks	and	½	cup	whipping	cream	blended	in	a	2-quart	mixing
bowl
Salt	and	pepper
Drops	of	lemon	juice

Following	the	technique	for	sauce	parisienne,	cook	the	flour	and	butter
slowly	together	until	they	foam	and	froth	for	2	minutes.	Off	heat,	beat
in	the	hot	fish	cooking	liquid,	then	the	milk.	Boil	1	minute.	Beat	the
hot	 sauce	 by	 droplets	 into	 the	 yolks	 and	 cream.	 Return	 mixture	 to
saucepan	and	boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Thin	out	with	more	cream	if
necessary,	 and	 correct	 seasoning.	 Strain.	 Film	 top	 of	 sauce	 with	 a
tablespoon	of	melted	butter	if	not	to	be	served	immediately.

4	to	16	Tb	softened	butter	(6	to	8	Tb	is	usual)
Just	 before	 serving	 the	 fish,	 bring	 the	 sauce	 to	 the	 simmer.	 Then
remove	it	from	heat	and	beat	in	the	butter	1	tablespoon	at	a	time.



Final	assembly
6	whole	cooked	shrimp	in	their	shells
6	to	12	thin	slices	of	canned	truffles

Immediately	spoon	the	sauce	over	the	hot	fish	and	shellfish.	Decorate
with	the	shrimp	and	truffles	and	serve.

VARIATIONS
The	following	are	all	constructed	in	exactly	the	same	manner	as	the

preceding	sole	à	la	dieppoise.	Directions	for	poaching	the	fish	are	here;	for
the	shellfish	garnitures.

Sole	à	la	Normande
[Fish	Filets	with	Shellfish	and	Mushrooms]

Follow	 the	 preceding	 recipe,	 but	 to	 the	 garniture	 add	 oysters,
mushrooms,	 and	 écrevisses,	 if	 available.	 Decorate	 the	 sauced	 fish	 with
whole	shrimps	or	écrevisses,	truffle	slices,	and	croûtons	(triangles	of	white
bread	sautéed	in	butter).

Sole	Walewska
[Fish	Filets	with	Shellfish	and	Truffles]

Same	 as	 the	 sole	 à	 la	 dieppoise,	 but	 the	 filets	 are	 garnished	 with
écrevisses	or	shrimp,	and	lobster	meat,	and	instead	of	beating	plain	butter
into	 the	 sauce,	 use	 the	 shellfish	 butter.	 Decorate	 the	 sauced	 fish	 with
truffle	slices,	and	cooked	lobster	claws	or	whole	shrimp.

Sole	à	la	Nantua
[Fish	Filets	with	Écrevisses]

Same	 as	 the	 sole	 à	 la	 dieppoise,	 but	 the	 fish	 is	 garnished	 with
écrevisses,	and	shellfish	butter,	rather	than	plain	butter	is	beaten	into	the
sauce.



Sole	Bonne	Femme
[Fish	Filets	with	Mushrooms]

Poach	the	fish	filets	in	white	wine	and	sliced	mushrooms	as	for	the
sole	Bercy.	Make	the	sauce	following	the	recipe	for	the	sole	à	la	dieppoise.
Garnish	the	sauced	fish	with	6	fluted	mushroom	caps,	which	have	been
stewed	in	butter	and	lemon	juice.

Filets	de	Sole	Farcis
[Stuffed	Fish	Filets]

Make	1	cup	of	the	fish	quenelle	mixture.	Mix	into	it	¼	cup	of	finely
diced	mushroom	 duxelles,	 and	 2	 to	 3	 tablespoons	 additional	 whipping
cream.	 Place	 a	 spoonful	 in	 the	 center	 of	 each	 seasoned,	 raw	 filet,	 and
fold	or	roll	 the	 filet	 to	enclose	 the	 filling.	Tie	with	white	string.	Poach,
garnish,	and	sauce	the	filets	following	any	of	the	preceding	suggestions.

COQUILLES	ST.	JACQUES	À	LA	PARISIENNE

[Scallops	and	Mushrooms	in	White	Wine	Sauce]

Exactly	the	same	sauce	parisienne	as	that	for	the	poached	fish	filets	in
the	preceding	recipes	 is	delicious	with	scallops	gratinéed	 in	 their	shells.
This	 dish	may	 be	 prepared	 ahead,	 and	 gratinéed	 just	 before	 serving.	 A
fine,	chilled	white	Burgundy	or	a	very	good	white	Graves	would	go	well
with	 it.	 Scallops	 are	 usually	 served	 as	 a	 first	 course,	 or	 as	 a	 light
luncheon	dish.

For	6	scallop	shells

		Cooking	the	scallops
1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	¾	cup	dry	white	vermouth
½	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
½	bay	leaf



2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
A	2-quart	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan

Simmer	the	wine	and	flavorings	for	5	minutes.

1	lb.	washed	scallops
½	lb.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms

Add	 the	 scallops	 and	 mushrooms	 to	 the	 wine,	 and	 pour	 in	 enough
water	 barely	 to	 cover	 ingredients.	 Bring	 to	 the	 simmer.	 Cover,	 and
simmer	slowly	for	5	minutes.	Remove	scallops	and	mushrooms	with	a
slotted	spoon,	and	set	aside	in	a	bowl.
The	sauce
Rapidly	boil	down	the	cooking	liquid	until	it	has	reduced	to	1	cup.

A	2-quart	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
3	Tb	butter
4	Tb	flour
¾	cup	milk
2	egg	yolks
½	cup	whipping	cream,	more	if	needed
Salt	and	pepper
Drops	of	lemon	juice

Following	the	directions	in	sauce	parisienne,	cook	the	butter	and	flour
slowly	 together	 for	2	minutes.	Off	heat,	blend	 in	 the	boiling	cooking
liquid,	then	the	milk.	Boil	1	minute.	Blend	the	egg	yolks	and	cream	in
a	bowl,	then	beat	the	hot	sauce	into	them	by	driblets.	Return	the	sauce
to	the	pan	and	boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Thin	out	with	more	cream	if
necessary.	Season	to	taste	with	salt,	pepper,	and	lemon	juice.	Strain.

6	scallop	shells	or	pyrex	or	porcelain	shells	of	⅓	cup	capacity
Cut	the	scallops	into	crosswise	pieces	about	⅛	inch	thick.

½	Tb	butter



6	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
1½	Tb	butter	cut	into	6	pieces

Blend	two	thirds	of	the	sauce	with	the	scallops	and	mushrooms.	Butter
the	 shells.	 Spoon	 the	 scallops	 and	mushrooms	 into	 them,	 and	 cover
with	 the	rest	of	 the	sauce.	Sprinkle	with	cheese	and	dot	with	butter.
Arrange	the	shells	on	a	broiling	pan.
(*)	Set	aside	or	refrigerate	until	ready	to	gratiné.

Fifteen	minutes	before	serving,	set	the	scallops	8	to	9	inches	under	a
moderately	 hot	 broiler	 to	 heat	 through	 gradually,	 and	 to	 brown	 the
top	of	the	sauce.	Serve	as	soon	as	possible.

TWO	RECIPES	FROM	PROVENCE

COQUILLES	ST.	JACQUES	À	LA	PROVENÇALE

[Scallops	Gratinéed	with	Wine,	Garlic,	and	Herbs]

This	 good	 recipe	 may	 be	 prepared	 in	 advance	 and	 gratinéed	 just
before	serving.	The	following	proportions	are	sufficient	for	a	first	course.
Double	them	for	a	main	course.	Serve	a	chilled	rosé,	or	a	dry	white	wine
such	as	côtes	de	Provence.

For	6	scallop	shells

⅓	cup	minced	yellow	onions
1	Tb	butter
1½	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onions
1	clove	minced	garlic

Cook	the	onions	slowly	in	butter	in	a	small	saucepan	for	5	minutes	or
so,	until	tender	and	translucent	but	not	browned.	Stir	in	the	shallots	or
onions,	and	garlic,	and	cook	slowly	for	1	minute	more.	Set	aside.

1½	lbs.	washed	scallops
Salt	and	pepper



1	cup	sifted	flour	in	a	dish
Dry	the	scallops	and	cut	into	slices	¼	inch	thick.	Just	before	cooking,
sprinkle	with	salt	and	pepper,	roll	in	flour,	and	shake	off	excess	flour.

2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	olive	oil
A	10-inch	enameled	skillet

Sauté	the	scallops	quickly	in	very	hot	butter	and	oil	for	2	minutes	to
brown	them	lightly.

⅔	cup	dry	white	wine,	or	½	cup	dry	white	vermouth	and	3	Tb	water
½	bay	leaf
⅛	tsp	thyme

Pour	 the	wine,	 or	 the	 vermouth	 and	water,	 into	 the	 skillet	with	 the
scallops.	 Add	 the	 herbs	 and	 the	 cooked	 onion	 mixture.	 Cover	 the
skillet	and	simmer	for	5	minutes.	Then	uncover,	and	if	necessary	boil
down	 the	 sauce	 rapidly	 for	 a	 minute	 until	 it	 is	 lightly	 thickened.
Correct	seasoning,	and	discard	bay	leaf.

6	buttered	scallop	shells,	or	porcelain	or	pyrex	shells,	of	⅓	cup
capacity

¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
2	Tb	butter	cut	into	6	pieces

Spoon	the	scallops	and	sauce	into	the	shells.	Sprinkle	with	cheese	and
dot	with	butter.
(*)	Set	aside	or	refrigerate	until	ready	to	gratiné.

Just	 before	 serving,	 run	 under	 a	 moderately	 hot	 broiler	 for	 3	 to	 4
minutes	to	heat	through,	and	to	brown	the	cheese	lightly.

THON	À	LA	PROVENÇALE
[Tuna	or	Swordfish	Steaks	with	Wine,	Tomatoes,	and	Herbs]



Tomatoes,	 wine,	 herbs,	 and	 garlic	 are	 a	 good	 contrast	 to	 tuna	 or
swordfish,	and	this	dish	can	be	served	either	hot	or	cold.	Boiled	potatoes
and	green	beans	would	go	well,	and	a	chilled	rosé	wine,	or	a	dry	white
such	as	côtes	de	Provence,	or	Riesling.
For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	fresh	tuna	or	swordfish	cut	into	steaks	¾	inch	thick	(if	fish	is
frozen,	thaw	it)

A	9-by	14-inch	pyrex	baking	dish	about	2½	inches	deep
1	tsp	salt
2	Tb	lemon	juice
6	Tb	olive	oil
⅛	tsp	pepper

Remove	 skin,	 and	 cut	 fish	 steaks	 into	 serving	 pieces.	 Blend	 salt	 and
lemon	 juice	 in	baking	dish,	 then	beat	 in	 the	oil	and	pepper.	Arrange
the	 fish	 in	 the	dish,	and	baste	with	 the	marinade.	Cover	with	waxed
paper	and	marinate	1½	to	2	hours,	turning	and	basting	the	fish	with
the	marinade	 several	 times.	 Drain	 the	 fish	 and	 dry	 it	 thoroughly	 on
paper	towels.	Discard	the	marinade,	which	will	be	strong	and	fishy.

3	to	4	Tb	olive	oil,	more	if	needed
A	skillet

Sauté	the	fish	rapidly	in	very	hot	olive	oil	for	a	minute	or	two	on	each
side	to	brown	lightly.	Rearrange	the	fish	in	the	baking	dish.

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

1	cup	minced	yellow	onions
3	lbs.	fresh,	ripe,	red	tomatoes	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	chopped
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
½	tsp	oregano
¼	tsp	thyme
¼	tsp	salt



⅛	tsp	pepper
Cook	the	onions	slowly	in	the	skillet	for	5	minutes	or	so	until	tender
but	 not	 browned.	 Stir	 in	 the	 tomato	 pulp,	 garlic,	 seasonings,	 and
herbs.	Cover	skillet	and	cook	slowly	for	5	minutes.	Correct	seasoning,
and	spread	the	tomato	mixture	over	the	fish.

1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
Place	a	cover	or	aluminum	foil	over	the	baking	dish	and	bring	to	the
simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Then	set	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven
and	bake	 for	15	minutes.	Pour	 in	 the	wine	and	bake	 for	30	minutes
more,	turning	oven	down	to	325	degrees	as	soon	as	fish	is	simmering.

A	serving	platter
Remove	 fish	 to	 a	 serving	platter,	 scraping	 the	 sauce	off	 the	 fish	 and
back	into	the	baking	dish.	Keep	fish	warm	for	about	5	minutes	while
finishing	the	sauce.

1	to	2	Tb	tomato	paste	for	added	flavor	and	color
Optional:	1	Tb	meat	glaze,	page	no,	for	depth	of	flavor

Boil	 down	 the	 sauce	 over	 high	 heat	 until	 it	 has	 reduced	 to	 about	 2
cups.	Stir	 in	the	tomato	paste	and	optional	meat	glaze.	Simmer	for	a
moment,	and	correct	seasoning.

1	Tb	flour	blended	to	a	paste	with	1	Tb	softened	butter
2	to	3	Tb	chopped	parsley

Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 flour	 and	 butter	 paste,	 and	 bring	 again	 to	 the
simmer	for	1	minute.	Stir	in	the	chopped	parsley,	spoon	the	sauce	over
the	fish,	and	serve.
(*)	Fish	may	be	set	aside,	then	covered	and	reheated	in	the	oven,	but
be	careful	not	to	overcook	it.

Other	Fish—Green	cod	or	coalfish,	ocean	pollack,	and	halibut	may
be	cooked	in	the	same	way.	They	need	no	marinating	and	require	only
20	to	30	minutes	of	baking.



TWO	FAMOUS	LOBSTER	DISHES

A	NOTE	ON	DEALING	WITH	LIVE	LOBSTERS

If	you	object	to	steaming	or	splitting	a	live	lobster,	it	may	be	killed
almost	 instantly	 just	 before	 cooking	 if	 you	plunge	 the	 point	 of	 a	 knife
into	 the	 head	 between	 the	 eyes,	 or	 sever	 the	 spinal	 cord	 by	making	 a
small	incision	in	the	back	of	the	shell	at	the	juncture	of	the	chest	and	the
tail.

HOMARD	THERMIDOR
[Lobster	Thermidor-Gratinéed	in	its	Shell]

So	many	steps	are	 involved	 in	 the	preparation	of	a	 really	 splendid
lobster	Thermidor,	no	wonder	it	costs	a	fortune	in	any	restaurant!	But	it
is	 not	 a	 particularly	 difficult	 dish	 to	 execute,	 and	 everything	 may	 be
prepared	 in	 advance	 and	 heated	 up	 just	 before	 serving.	 This	 is	 an
especially	 attractive	 recipe	 for	 lobster	 Thermidor	 because	 the	 meat	 is
stirred	 in	 hot	 butter	 before	 it	 is	 sauced,	 and	 turns	 a	 rosy	 red.	 Buy
lobsters	 weighing	 a	 good	 2	 pounds	 each,	 so	 the	 shells	 will	 be	 large
enough	to	hold	the	filling.
For	6	people

Steaming	the	lobsters
A	covered,	enameled	or	stainless	steel	kettle	with	tight-fitting	cover
3	cups	dry	white	wine	(or	2	cups	dry	white	vermouth)	and	2	cups
water

A	large	onion,	a	medium	carrot,	and	a	celery	stalk,	all	thinly	sliced
6	parsley	sprigs
1	bay	leaf
¼	tsp	thyme
6	peppercorns
1	Tb	fresh	or	dried	tarragon
3	live	lobsters,	2	lbs.	each



Simmer	wine,	water,	vegetables,	herbs,	and	seasonings	in	the	kettle	for
15	 minutes.	 Then	 bring	 to	 a	 rolling	 boil	 and	 add	 the	 live	 lobsters.
Cover	and	boil	for	about	20	minutes.	The	lobsters	are	done	when	they
are	bright	red	and	the	long	head-feelers	can	be	pulled	from	the	sockets
fairly	easily.

½	lb.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms
1	Tb	butter
1	tsp	lemon	juice
¼	tsp	salt
A	covered	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan

The	sauce
While	 the	 lobsters	 are	 steaming,	 stew	 the	mushrooms	 slowly	 in	 the
covered	 saucepan	 with	 the	 butter,	 lemon	 juice,	 and	 salt	 for	 10
minutes.

When	 the	 lobsters	 are	 done,	 remove	 them	 from	 the	 kettle.	 Pour	 the
mushroom	cooking	juices	into	the	lobster	steaming	juices	in	the	kettle
and	boil	down	rapidly	until	liquid	has	reduced	to	about	2¼	cups.

A	4-cup	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
Strain	into	the	saucepan	and	bring	to	the	simmer.

5	Tb	butter
6	Tb	flour
A	1½-quart,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
A	wooden	spoon
A	wire	whip
1	Tb	cream
Cook	the	butter	and	flour	slowly	together	in	the	second	saucepan	for	2
minutes	 without	 browning.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 simmering	 lobster-



cooking	liquid.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Set	aside.	Film	top	of	sauce
with	the	cream.

A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
1	Tb	dry	mustard
2	egg	yolks
½	cup	whipping	cream
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
Split	 the	 lobsters	 in	 half	 lengthwise,	 keeping	 the	 shell	 halves	 intact.
Discard	sand	sacks	in	the	heads,	and	the	intestinal	tubes.	Rub	lobster
coral	and	green	matter	through	a	fine	sieve	into	the	mixing	bowl,	and
blend	 into	 it	 the	 mustard,	 egg	 yolks,	 cream,	 and	 pepper.	 Beat	 the
sauce	into	this	mixture	by	driblets.

4	to	6	Tb	more	whipping	cream
Return	the	sauce	to	the	pan	and,	stirring	with	a	wooden	spoon,	bring
it	to	the	boil	and	boil	slowly	for	2	minutes.	Thin	out	with	tablespoons
of	cream.	Sauce	should	be	thick	enough	to	coat	a	spoon	fairly	heavily.
Taste	carefully	for	seasoning.	Set	aside,	top	filmed	with	a	spoonful	of
cream.

		Sautéing	the	lobster	meat

Remove	the	meat	from	the	lobster	tails	and	claws,	and	cut	it	into	⅜-
inch	cubes.

A	12-inch	enameled	or	stainless	steel	skillet
4	Tb	butter
⅓	cup	cognac
Set	 the	 skillet	with	 the	 butter	 over	moderate	 heat.	When	 the	 butter
foam	 begins	 to	 subside,	 stir	 in	 the	 lobster	 meat	 and	 sauté,	 stirring
slowly,	 for	 about	 5	minutes	 until	 the	meat	 has	 turned	 a	 rosy	 color.
Pour	 in	 the	cognac	and	boil	 for	a	minute	or	 two,	shaking	the	skillet,
until	the	liquid	has	reduced	by	half.



				Final	assembly

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

Fold	 the	 cooked	 mushrooms	 and	 two	 thirds	 of	 the	 sauce	 into	 the
skillet	with	the	lobster	meat.

A	shallow	roasting	pan	or	fireproof	serving	platter
½	cup	grated	Parmesan	or	Swiss	cheese
2	Tb	butter	cut	into	bits
Arrange	 the	 split	 lobster	 shells	 in	 the	 roasting	pan.	Heap	 the	 lobster
mixture	into	the	shells;	cover	with	the	remaining	sauce.	Sprinkle	with
cheese	and	dot	with	butter.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	up	to	this	point	and	refrigerated.

Place	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 425-degree	 oven	 for	 10	 to	 15	minutes,	 until
lobster	 is	bubbling	and	the	top	of	the	sauce	is	nicely	browned.	Serve
immediately	on	a	platter	or	serving	plates.

VARIATION
Homard	aux	Aromates
[Lobster	Steamed	in	Wine	with	Herb	Sauce]

This	 is	 not	 a	 variation	 of	 lobster	 Thermidor	 at	 all,	 but	 it	 fits	well
into	this	niche.

Ingredients	for	steaming	3	lobsters	in	wine,	herbs,	and	aromatic
vegetables	as	in	the	preceding	Thermidor	recipe
Steam	the	lobsters	for	about	20	minutes	as	described	in	the	preceding
recipe.	Remove	them.	Rapidly	boil	down	their	cooking	 liquid	until	 it
has	 reduced	 to	 2	 cups.	 The	 sliced	 carrots	 and	 onions	 need	 not	 be
removed.

1½	Tb	flour	blended	to	a	paste	with	1½	Tb	softened	butter



About	1	cup	of	whipping	cream
Off	heat,	beat	in	the	flour	and	butter	paste.	Then	bring	to	the	boil	for
15	seconds.	Reduce	to	the	simmer	and	stir	in	the	cream	by	tablespoons
until	 the	 sauce	 is	 the	 consistency	 of	 a	 light	 cream	 soup.	 Correct
seasoning	and	stir	in	the	herbs.

3	to	4	Tb	fresh	minced	green	herbs:	parsley,	chervil,	and	tarragon,	or
parsley	only
Split	the	lobsters	in	two,	lengthwise.	Remove	stomach	sacks	in	heads
and	 intestinal	 tubes.	Arrange	 the	 lobsters	 in	a	 serving	dish,	pour	 the
sauce	over	them,	and	serve.

HOMARD	À	L’AMÉRICAINE
[Lobster	Simmered	with	Wine,	Tomatoes,	Garlic,	and	Herbs]

Homard	 à	 l’américaine	 is	 live	 lobster	 chopped	 into	 serving	 pieces,
sautéed	 in	 oil	 until	 the	 shells	 turn	 red,	 then	 flamed	 in	 cognac,	 and
simmered	 with	 wine,	 aromatic	 vegetables,	 herbs,	 and	 tomatoes.	 In
France,	unless	you	are	at	a	 formal	dinner,	 the	meat	 is	 left	 in	 the	shells
and	guests	dig	in,	 flanked	by	finger	bowl	and	napkin.	We	have	noticed
that	many	Americans	 prefer	 that	 the	meat	 be	 removed	 from	 the	 shells
before	 the	dish	 is	 served,	which	 is	 too	bad,	as	 it	makes	more	work	 for
the	cook.

The	origin	of	homard	à	l’américaine	is	a	subject	for	discussion.	Some
authorities	call	it	à	l’armoricaine,	after	the	ancient	province	of	Armorique
in	 Brittany	 where	 lobsters	 grow.	 Others	 say	 armoricaine	 is	 nonsense
because	the	tomato	flavoring	is	quite	untypical	of	Brittany	and	that	the
recipe	 is	 far	 more	 likely	 the	 product	 of	 a	 Paris	 chef	 with	 Provençal
inclinations	 who	 titled	 his	 dish	 after	 an	 American	 client,	 or	 after	 the
exotic	origins	of	the	tomato.	In	any	case	it	is	a	splendid	creation	for	fresh
lobster,	and	though	we	are	not	partial	to	frozen	lobster	tails,	it	is	one	of
the	best	ways	we	know	to	cook	them.

Risotto	 simmered	 in	 fish	 stock,	 or	 steamed	 rice,	 and	 a	 dry	 white
wine	 with	 body	 such	 as	 Burgundy,	 Côtes	 du	 Rhône,	 or	 Graves	 would
make	fine	accompaniments.



For	6	people

Three	1½-lb.	live	lobsters	(or	6	frozen	lobster	tails	partially	defrosted
and	cut	in	half	lengthwise)
Split	 the	 lobsters	 in	 two	 lengthwise.	 Remove	 stomach	 sacks	 (in	 the
head)	 and	 intestinal	 tubes.	 Reserve	 coral	 and	 green	matter.	 Remove
claws	and	joints	and	crack	them.	Separate	tails	from	chests.

3	Tb	olive	oil
A	heavy	12-inch	enameled	skillet	or	casserole
Heat	the	oil	in	the	skillet	until	it	is	very	hot	but	not	smoking.	Add	the
lobster	pieces,	meat-side	down,	and	sauté	for	several	minutes,	turning
them,	until	the	shells	are	bright	red.	Remove	lobster	to	a	side	dish.

1	medium	carrot,	finely	diced
1	medium	onion,	finely	diced
Stir	 in	 the	diced	carrot	and	onion,	and	cook	slowly	 for	5	minutes	or
until	almost	tender.

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

Salt	and	pepper
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	clove	mashed	garlic
⅓	cup	cognac
1	lb.	fresh,	ripe,	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	chopped
2	Tb	tomato	paste
1	cup	fish	stock,	or	⅓	cup	bottled	clam	juice
1½	cups	dry	white	wine	or	1	cup	dry	white	vermouth
Optional:	½	Tb	meat	glaze
2	Tb	chopped	parsley
1	Tb	fresh	tarragon	or	1	tsp	dried	tarragon



Season	 the	 lobster,	 return	 if	 to	 the	 skillet,	 and	 add	 the	 shallots	 or
green	onions,	and	the	garlic.	With	the	skillet	over	moderate	heat,	pour
in	 the	 cognac.	 Avert	 your	 face	 and	 ignite	 the	 cognac	with	 a	 lighted
match	and	shake	the	skillet	slowly	until	the	flames	have	subsided.	Stir
in	 all	 the	 ingredients	 to	 the	 left.	 Bring	 to	 the	 simmer	 on	 top	 of	 the
stove.	 Cover	 and	 place	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 preheated	 oven.	 Regulate
heat	so	lobster	simmers	quietly	for	20	minutes.

6	Tb	softened	butter
The	lobster	coral	and	green	matter
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
While	 the	 lobster	 is	 simmering,	 force	 the	 lobster	 coral	 and	 green
matter	with	the	butter	through	a	fine	sieve	into	the	mixing	bowl	and
set	aside.

When	the	lobster	is	done,	remove	it	to	a	side	dish.	Take	the	meat	out
of	the	shells	if	you	wish.	Set	skillet	with	its	cooking	liquids	over	high
heat	 and	 boil	 down	 rapidly	 until	 sauce	 has	 reduced	 and	 thickened
slightly.	 It	 will	 acquire	 more	 body	 later	 when	 the	 butter	 and	 coral
mixture	is	added.	Taste	very	carefully	for	seasoning.
(*)	Recipe	may	be	completed	to	this	point,	and	finished	later.

Return	the	lobster	to	the	sauce	and	bring	to	the	simmer	to	reheat	the
lobster.	Beat	a	cupful	of	hot	sauce	by	driblets	into	the	coral	and	butter
mixture,	then	pour	the	mixture	into	the	skillet	with	the	lobster.	Shake
and	 swirl	 the	 skillet	 over	 low	 heat	 for	 2	 to	 3	minutes	 to	 poach	 the
coral	 and	green	matter,	 but	do	not	bring	 the	 sauce	near	 the	 simmer
again.

A	ring	of	risotto	or	steamed	rice
2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley,	or	parsley	and	fresh	tarragon
Arrange	 the	 lobster	 and	 sauce	 in	 the	 rice	 ring,	 decorate	with	 herbs,
and	serve	immediately.



MUSSELS

Moules

Mussels,	with	their	long,	oval,	blue-black	shells	and	delicious	pink-
orange	flesh	are	often	called	the	poor	man’s	oyster.	Clinging	to	rocks	and
piers	along	the	seacoasts	everywhere,	they	can	be	had	for	the	picking	at
low	 tide.	 If	 you	 are	 gathering	 mussels	 yourself,	 take	 them	 only	 from
places	washed	by	clear,	clean,	sea	water.

SCRUBBING	AND	SOAKING	MUSSELS

Before	 they	 can	 be	 cooked,	 mussels	 must	 have	 a	 rather	 long	 and
careful	cleaning	process	to	remove	all	possible	sand	from	their	interiors,
and	 to	 rid	 the	 shells	 of	 any	 slime	 and	 dirt	 which	 might	 spoil	 the
excellent	juices	they	render	as	they	steam	open.	Discard	any	mussels	that
are	 not	 firmly	 closed,	 or	 which	 feel	 lighter	 in	 weight	 than	 the	 rest.
Discard	 also	 any	 too-heavy	mussels,	 as	 they	may	 be	 nothing	 but	 sand
enclosed	between	two	mussel	shells.	Scrub	each	mussel	very	clean	with	a
rough	brush	under	running	water.	Then	with	a	small	knife,	scrape	off	the
tuft	 of	 hairs,	 or	 beard,	which	 protrudes	 from	 between	 one	 side	 of	 the
closed	shell	halves.	Set	 the	mussels	 in	a	basin	or	bucket	of	 fresh	water
for	an	hour	or	two	so	they	will	disgorge	their	sand	and	also	lose	a	bit	of
their	 saltiness.	 Lift	 the	mussels	 out	 of	 the	water	 into	 a	 colander,	wash
and	drain	them	again,	and	they	are	ready	to	cook.

Note:	Some	cooks	add	flour	to	the	soaking	water	on	the	theory	that
while	 the	mussels	 eat	 the	 flour	and	become	 fatter	and	more	 succulent,
they	are	at	the	same	time	disgorging	their	sand	more	thoroughly.	Use	⅓
cup	 of	 flour	 for	 each	 2	 quarts	 of	water,	 beating	 the	 flour	 and	 a	 bit	 of
water	with	 a	whip	 first,	 to	mix	 it	 thoroughly.	 Then,	 after	 soaking	 the
mussels,	lift	them	into	a	colander,	and	rinse	them	in	cold	water.

CANNED	MUSSELS

Beware	of	sand	if	you	are	using	canned	mussels.	If	there	is	any	sand
at	all	in	the	juices	at	the	bottom	of	the	can,	soak	the	mussels	in	several
changes	of	cold	water.	Eat	one,	and	if	it	is	sandy,	continue	washing	the
mussels.	 Good	 quality	 canned	 mussels	 may	 be	 substituted	 for	 fresh
mussels	in	all	but	the	first	two	of	the	following	recipes;	the	canned	juices



may	 be	 used	 as	 stock	 for	 your	 sauce.	 Simmer	 the	 juices	with	 a	 bit	 of
white	wine	or	vermouth,	and	fill	out	the	quantity	of	stock	called	for	in
your	recipe	with	boiling	milk.

MOULES	À	LA	MARINIÈRE	·	I
[Fresh	Mussels	Steamed	Open	in	Wine	and	Flavorings]

Here	is	the	simplest	version	of	this	most	typical	of	French	methods
for	cooking	mussels.	They	are	steamed	open	in	a	big	pot	with	wine	and
flavorings,	 and	 it	 takes	only	 about	5	minutes.	Then	 the	mussels,	 shells
and	all,	are	dipped	out	into	soup	plates,	and	the	cooking	liquor	is	poured
over	them.	Each	guest	removes	the	mussels	one	by	one	from	their	shells
with	fingers	or	a	fork	and	discards	the	shells	into	a	side	dish.	In	addition
to	shell	dish	and	fork,	provide	your	guests	with	a	soupspoon	for	drinking
up	 the	mussel	 juices,	 a	 big	 napkin,	 and	 a	 finger	 bowl.	Along	with	 the
mussels	serve	French	bread,	butter,	and	a	chilled,	light,	dry	white	wine
such	as	Muscadet,	dry	Graves,	or	one	of	the	Pouillys.

For	6	to	8	people

2	cups	of	light,	dry	white	wine	or	1	cup	dry	white	vermouth
An	8-to	10-quart	enameled	kettle	with	cover
½	cup	minced	shallots,	or	green	onions,	or	very	finely	minced	onions
8	parsley	sprigs
½	bay	leaf
¼	tsp	thyme
⅛	tsp	pepper
6	Tb	butter
Bring	the	wine	to	the	boil	in	the	kettle	with	the	rest	of	the	ingredients
listed.	Boil	for	2	to	3	minutes	to	evaporate	its	alcohol	and	to	reduce	its
volume	slightly.

6	quarts	scrubbed,	soaked	mussels
Add	the	mussels	to	the	kettle.	Cover	tightly	and	boil	quickly	over	high
heat.	 Frequently	 grasp	 the	 kettle	 with	 both	 hands,	 your	 thumbs



clamped	 to	 the	 cover,	 and	 toss	 the	mussels	 in	 the	 kettle	with	 an	up
and	down	slightly	jerky	motion	so	the	mussels	will	change	levels	and
cook	 evenly.	 In	 about	 5	minutes	 the	 shells	will	 swing	 open	 and	 the
mussels	are	done.

½	cup	roughly	chopped	parsley
With	a	big	skimmer,	dip	the	mussels	into	wide	soup	plates.	Allow	the
cooking	 liquid	 to	 settle	 for	 a	 moment	 so	 any	 sand	 will	 sink	 to	 the
bottom.	Then	ladle	the	liquid	over	the	mussels,	sprinkle	with	parsley
and	serve	immediately.

MOULES	À	LA	MARINIÈRE	·	II
[Mussels	Steamed	with	Wine,	Flavorings,	and	Bread	Crumbs]

In	this	quite	different	method,	bread	crumbs	cook	with	the	mussels
and	give	a	liaison	to	the	sauce.	Here	you	must	be	sure	that	the	mussels
are	most	 carefully	washed	and	 soaked	 so	 there	will	be	no	 sand	 to	mix
itself	with	the	crumbs.

For	6	to	8	people

3	cups	finely	minced	onions
¼	lb.	(8	Tb)	butter
An	8-to	10-quart	enameled	kettle	with	cover
Cook	the	onions	slowly	in	the	butter	for	about	10	minutes,	until	they
are	tender	and	translucent	but	not	browned.

2	cups	light,	dry	white	wine	or	1	cup	dry	white	vermouth
1½	cups	fine,	dry,	white	bread	crumbs	from	homemade	type	of	bread
½	cup	chopped	parsley
⅛	tsp	pepper
1	bay	leaf
¼	tsp	thyme
Stir	in	all	the	ingredients	at	the	left,	cover	the	kettle,	and	simmer	very



slowly	 for	 10	 minutes,	 stirring	 occasionally,	 and	 making	 sure	 the
mixture	does	not	scorch.	Remove	bay	leaf.

6	quarts	scrubbed,	soaked	mussels
⅓	cup	chopped	parsley
Add	the	mussels.	Cover	and	toss	them	in	the	kettle.	Set	over	high	heat,
tossing	 frequently	 until	 the	 mussel	 shells	 swing	 open.	 Ladle	 the
mussels	and	sauce	into	soup	plates,	sprinkle	with	parsley,	and	serve.

MOULES	AU	BEURRE	D’ESCARGOT
MOULES	À	LA	PROVENÇALE
[Mussels	on	the	Half	Shell,	Gratinéed]

These	are	delicious	as	a	first	course.	Serve	them	with	French	bread
and	a	 rather	 strong,	dry,	white	wine	 such	as	Mâcon,	côtes	de	Provence,
white	Chianti,	or	a	domestic	equivalent.
For	4	to	6	people

48	extra	large,	scrubbed	and	soaked	mussels
For	 this	 recipe	 you	 may	 steam	 the	 mussels	 open	 as	 for	moules	 à	 la
marinière	I,	preceding,	or	you	may	open	the	raw	mussels	with	a	knife.
We	prefer	the	latter	method.	When	the	mussels	are	open,	discard	the
empty	 shell	 halves.	 Arrange	 the	 remaining	 half	 shells	 holding	 the
mussels	 in	a	shallow	baking	and	serving	dish,	or	 individual	 fireproof
dishes.

6	ounces	or	1½	sticks	of	softened	butter
A	2-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wooden	spoon
3	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	to	3	cloves	mashed	garlic,	depending	on	your	love	of	garlic
¼	cup	minced	parsley
½	cup	fine,	white,	dry	bread	crumbs



Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
Beat	the	butter	in	the	mixing	bowl	until	it	is	light	and	creamy.	Beat	in
the	rest	of	the	ingredients	and	taste	for	seasoning.	Spread	a	bit	of	the
mixture	over	each	mussel.
(*)	May	 be	 prepared	 ahead	 of	 time	 to	 this	 point.	 Cover	 the	mussels
with	waxed	paper	and	refrigerate.

About	2	or	3	minutes	before	serving,	run	the	mussels	under	a	very	hot
broiler	until	the	butter	is	bubbling	in	the	shells	and	the	crumbs	have
browned	lightly.	Serve	immediately.

SALADE	DE	MOULES
[Mussels	Marinated	in	Oil	and	Herbs]

2	cups	of	cooked,	fresh	mussels	(or	canned	or	frozen	mussels)
Steam	fresh	mussels	open	as	directed	in	moules	à	la	marinière	I.	Discard
shells.

4	Tb	light	olive	oil	or	salad	oil
1	Tb	dry	white	vermouth	and	1	Tb	lemon	juice
2	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
3	Tb	minced	parsley	or	a	mixture	of	fresh	green	herbs
Pinch	of	pepper
Toss	the	mussels	 in	a	bowl	with	the	ingredients	at	the	left	and	allow
them	to	marinate	half	an	hour	before	serving.	They	may	be	served	just
as	they	are,	or	you	may	drain	them	and	fold	into	them	half	a	cup	of
mayonnaise.	Place	them	in	a	bowl	or	individual	shells.

		MOULES	EN	SAUCE
				MOUCLADES
				MOULES	À	LA	POULETTE
				MOULES	À	LA	BÉARNAISE



[Sauced	Mussels	Served	in	Scallop	Shells]

This	 is	 a	more	 formal	 recipe	 for	mussels.	 They	 are	 steamed	 open
with	 wine	 and	 flavorings,	 then	 a	 rich,	 creamy,	 buttery	 sauce	 is	 made
with	 their	 cooking	 liquid.	 This	 is	 the	 same	 heavily	 buttered	 sauce
parisienne	 found,	 but	 with	 a	 quite	 different	 flavor.	 If	 the	 mussels	 are
served	 on	 the	 half	 shell,	 as	 they	 often	 are	 in	 Brittany,	 they	 are	 called
mouclades.	 We	 have	 suggested	 in	 the	 following	 recipe	 that	 they	 be
shelled,	sauced,	and	served	in	scallop	shells;	done	this	way	they	may	be
prepared	 ahead	 of	 time.	 There	 are	 naturally	 many	 versions	 and
flavorings	for	mussels	served	in	a	sauce.	For	instance,	if	you	omitted	the
curry,	 garlic,	 and	 fennel	 in	 the	 recipe,	 and	 substituted	 ½	 cup	 of
mushroom	stems,	your	mussel	dish	would	be	à	 la	poulette.	Also,	 if	 you
omitted	 the	 special	 flavorings,	 and	 the	 cream,	 egg	 yolks,	 and	 butter
enrichment,	 then	 stirred	a	 cup	of	béarnaise	 sauce	 into	your	velouté	 just
before	serving,	you	would	have	moules	à	la	béarnaise.
For	6	people

5	to	6	quarts	scrubbed,	soaked	mussels.	(A	2-hour	soaking	is
advisable	here	to	rid	the	mussels	of	as	much	salt	as	possible)

The	wine	and	flavoring	for	moules	à	la	marinière	I	plus:

¼	tsp	curry	powder
A	pinch	of	fennel
1	clove	mashed	garlic
Steam	the	mussels	open	in	wine	and	flavorings,	following	the	method
for	moules	à	la	marinière	I.	Shell	the	mussels	and	place	them	in	a	bowl.
Strain	 the	 mussel	 cooking	 liquor	 into	 an	 enameled	 saucepan	 and
rapidly	boil	 it	down	over	high	heat	 to	concentrate	 its	 flavor.	Taste	 it
frequently	as	it	boils;	you	may	find	that	if	you	reduce	it	too	much,	the
salt	 content	 will	 be	 overpowering.	 Measure	 out	 1½	 cups	 of	 the
concentrated	liquor	to	be	used	in	the	following	sauce:

3	Tb	butter
4	Tb	flour
A	2-quart,	heavy-bottomed	enameled	saucepan



A	wooden	spoon
Stir	the	butter	and	flour	over	low	heat	in	the	saucepan	until	they	foam
and	froth	together	for	2	minutes	without	coloring.	Remove	roux	from
heat.

A	wire	whip
Strain	 the	 hot	mussel	 cooking	 liquor	 into	 the	 flour	 and	 butter	 roux,
being	sure	not	to	add	any	sand	that	may	have	collected	at	the	bottom
of	 the	mussel	kettle.	Beat	 roux	and	 liquid	with	a	wire	whip	 to	blend
thoroughly.	Bring	to	the	boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Sauce	will	be	very
thick.

2	egg	yolks
½	cup	whipping	cream
A	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
A	wooden	spoon	Salt	and	pepper
Drops	of	lemon	juice
Blend	the	egg	yolks	and	cream	in	the	mixing	bowl.	Gradually	beat	in
the	hot	 sauce,	 in	a	 thin	stream	of	droplets.	Pour	 the	sauce	back	 into
the	pan.	Set	over	moderately	high	heat	and	stir	with	a	wooden	spoon,
reaching	all	over	the	bottom	of	the	pan,	until	the	sauce	comes	to	the
boil.	Boil	1	minute,	stirring.	Remove	from	heat	and	taste	carefully	for
seasoning,	 stirring	 in	 salt,	 pepper,	 and	 drops	 of	 lemon	 juice	 if
necessary.	Fold	the	mussels	into	the	sauce.
(*)	 If	not	 to	be	served	 immediately,	clean	sauce	off	 sides	of	pan	and
film	top	of	sauce	with	milk.	Set	aside	uncovered,	and	reheat	to	simmer
when	ready	to	use.

4	to	8	Tb	softened	butter
6	buttered	scallop	shells	or	porcelain	or	pyrex	shells	of	½	cup
capacity

Parsley	sprigs



Just	before	serving,	and	off	heat,	fold	the	butter	into	the	hot	sauce	and
mussels	1	tablespoon	at	a	time.	Fold	until	each	bit	is	absorbed	before
adding	 the	 next.	 Heap	 the	 mixture	 into	 the	 shells,	 decorate	 with
parsley,	and	serve	immediately.

VARIATIONS
Pilaf	de	Moules
[Sauced	Mussels	in	a	Rice	Ring]

Prepare	 and	 sauce	 the	mussels	 exactly	 as	 in	 the	 preceding	 recipe,
but	serve	them	in	a	ring	of	risotto.

Soupe	aux	Moules
[Mussel	Soup]

The	very	same	recipe	may	also	be	turned	into	a	mussel	soup.	After
enriching	 the	 sauce	with	 cream	 and	 egg	 yolks,	 thin	 it	 out	 to	 a	 cream
soup	 consistency	 with	 several	 cups	 of	 boiling	 milk.	 Then	 add	 the
mussels,	and	bring	just	to	the	simmer.	Off	heat,	and	just	before	serving,
fold	 in	 2	 tablespoons	 of	 butter,	 one	 by	 one.	 Decorate	 with	 minced
parsley	or	chervil.

OTHER	RECIPES–OTHER	SAUCES

Fish	Recipes	Appearing	in	Other	Chapters
FISH	SOUFFLÉS
Salmon	Soufflé
Flounder	Soufflé	with	sauce	mousseline	sabayon
Shellfish	Soufflé
Fish	Soufflé	Baked	on	a	Platter
Unmolded	Soufflés



Fish	Timbales
Fish	Quenelles
Creamed	Shellfish
Shellfish	Quiche,	open-faced	tart	Gratin	of	Canned	Salmon	or	Tuna,	or
of	Fish	Leftovers
Bouillabaisse
Crab	or	Lobster	in	Aspic
Salmon	Mousse
Fish	and	Shellfish	Mousse

Sauces	for	Boiled	or	Baked	Fish
Hollandaise	and	Variations
Mock	Hollandaise	and	Variations
White	Butter	Sauce	and	Lemon	Butter	Sauce
Brown	Butter	Sauce
Sauce	Chivry,	whitewine	herb	sauce	Aïoli,	garlic	mayonnaise
Sauce	 Alsacienne,	 herbal	 mayonnaise	 with	 soft-boiled	 eggs	 Sauce
Ravigote,	vinaigrette	with	herbs,	capers	and	onions
Sour	Cream	Dressing

Sauces	for	Sautéed	or	Broiled	Fish
Mustard	Sauce
Brown	Butter	Sauce
Many	of	the	Flavored	Butters

Sauces	for	Cold	Fish
Mayonnaise	and	Variations
Sauce	Ravigote,	vinaigrette	with	herbs,	capers,	and	onions
Sour	Cream	Dressing



CHAPTER	SIX

POULTRY
Volaille

CHICKEN

Poulet—Poularde

SOME	 OF	 THE	 most	 glorious	 dishes	 of	 the	 French	 cuisine	 have	 been
created	for	chicken,	and	almost	all	the	fundamentals	of	French	cookery
and	sauce	making	are	to	be	found	somewhere	in	the	chicken	realm.	The
most	important	aspect	of	chicken	cooking	is	that	you	procure	a	good	and
flavorsome	bird.	Modern	poultry	raising	has	done	wonders	in	making	it
possible	to	grow	a	fine-looking	chicken	in	record	time	and	to	sell	it	at	a
most	 reasonable	 price,	 but	 rarely	 does	 anyone	 in	 the	 country	 discuss
flavor.	 If	 you	are	 interested	 in	price	alone,	you	will	often	end	up	with
something	 that	 tastes	 like	 the	 stuffing	 inside	 a	 teddy	 bear	 and	 needs
strong	dousings	of	herbs,	wines,	and	spices	to	make	it	at	all	palatable.	A
chicken	 should	 taste	 like	 chicken	 and	be	 so	 good	 in	 itself	 that	 it	 is	 an
absolute	delight	to	eat	as	a	perfectly	plain,	buttery	roast,	sauté,	or	grill.
So	when	you	buy	chicken,	make	every	attempt	 to	 find	a	market	which
takes	special	pride	in	the	quality	and	flavor	of	its	poultry.

CHICKEN	TYPES

Chickens	fall	into	several	categories,	all	of	which	relate	to	age.	Age
dictates	the	cooking	method.	A	broiler,	for	instance,	may	be	broiled,	or
roasted,	 but	 its	 very	 tender	 flesh	 becomes	 dry	 and	 stringy	 if	 it	 is



fricasseed.	 The	 fullflavored	 stewing	 hen,	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 must	 be
fricasseed	or	 stewed,	 as	 its	 flesh	 is	 too	 firm	 to	be	 cooked	 in	 any	other
way.

DEFROSTING	FROZEN	CHICKEN

The	best	method	for	defrosting	frozen	chicken,	according	to	those	in
the	business,	is	the	slowest:	leave	it	in	its	transparent	wrapper	and	let	it
thaw	in	the	refrigerator.	It	will	lose	much	less	of	its	juice	and	flavor.	The
best	alternative	 is	 to	unwrap	 it	and	thaw	it	 in	a	basin	of	cold,	 running



water,	removing	the	package	of	giblets	from	the	cavity	as	soon	as	it	can
be	pried	 loose,	 and	pulling	 the	 legs	 and	wings	 away	 from	 the	body	as
soon	as	they	will	move.
Sometimes	 frozen	 roasters,	 fryers,	 and	 broilers	 can	 be	 quite	 tough

and	 stringy.	 According	 to	 the	 Poultry	 and	 Egg	 National	 Board,	 this	 is
usually	the	result	of	their	having	been	frozen	while	they	were	too	fresh.
If	the	frozen	chicken	is	flavorless,	it	may	have	thawed	and	been	refrozen
several	 times,	 so	 the	 juices	 escaped;	 or	 it	may	 be	 too	 young	 a	 bird	 to
have	a	developed	flavor.

WASHING	AND	DRYING

Because	commercially	raised	chickens,	on	the	whole,	are	packed	in
a	 communal	 tub	 of	 ice	 during	 at	 least	 part	 of	 their	 processing,	 it	 is
probably	 wise	 to	 give	 them	 a	 thorough	 washing	 and	 drying	 before
storing	or	cooking—just	to	be	on	the	safe	side.

SINGEING

Usually	 American	 chickens	 have	 been	 plucked	 absolutely	 clean.	 If
not,	 pluck	 and	 squeeze	 out	 feather	 follicles,	 then	 turn	 the	 chicken
rapidly	over	a	gas	or	alcohol	flame	to	burn	off	any	hairs	or	feather	bits.

		CHICKEN	STOCK
A	little	concentrated	chicken	stock	is	easy	to	make	with	the	giblets

and	 neck	 of	 a	 chicken	 and	 will	 always	 give	 more	 character	 to	 your
sauce,	however	simple	it	may	be.

Brown	Chicken	Stock
For	about	1	cup

A	heavy-bottomed,	2-quart	saucepan
The	chicken	neck,	gizzard,	heart,	and	miscellaneous	scraps
1	sliced	onion
1	sliced	carrot
1½	rendered	fresh	pork	fat	or	cooking	oil



Chop	the	chicken	 into	pieces	of	1½	inches	or	 less.	Brown	them	with
the	vegetables	in	hot	fat	or	oil.

2	cups	white	or	brown	stock,	or	canned	beef	bouillon,	or	chicken
broth
2	parsley	sprigs
⅓	bay	leaf
⅛	tsp	thyme
Pour	 out	 the	 browning	 fat.	 Add	 the	 liquid,	 the	 herbs,	 and	 enough
water	 to	 cover	 the	 chicken	 by	½	 inch.	 Simmer	 partially	 covered	 for
1½	hours	or	more,	 skimming	as	necessary.	 Strain,	degrease,	 and	 the
stock	is	ready	to	use.

White	Chicken	Stock
Same	as	brown	chicken	stock,	but	do	not	brown	the	ingredients,	and

use	white	stock	or	canned	chicken	broth.

STUFFING	WARNING

Stuffings	may	be	prepared	 in	advance,	but	a	 chicken	 should	never
be	stuffed	until	 just	before	it	 is	cooked,	as	the	mixture	may	sour	inside
the	chicken	and	spoil	the	meat.

HOW	TO	TRUSS	A	CHICKEN

A	whole	chicken	should	be	trussed	so	the	legs,	wings,	and	neck	skin
are	held	in	place	during	its	cooking,	and	the	bird	will	make	a	neat	and
attractive	 appearance	 on	 the	 table.	 The	 following	 French	method	 calls
for	 a	 trussing	 or	mattress	 needle	 and	white	 string.	 There	 are	 two	 ties,
one	at	the	tail	end	to	secure	the	drumsticks,	and	one	at	the	breast	end	to
fasten	the	wings	and	neck	skin.



Tie	Number	1

Thrust	the	needle	through	the	lower	part	of	the	carcass.

Come	back	over	one	drumstick,	 through	 the	 tip	of	 the	breastbone,
and	over	the	second	drumstick.	Tie.



Tie	Number	2

Push	 the	 needle	 through	 the	 carcass	 where	 the	 second	 joint	 and
drumstick	join,	coming	out	at	the	corresponding	point	on	the	other	side.

Turn	the	chicken	on	its	breast.	Fold	the	wings	akimbo.	Go	through
one	wing,	catch	 the	neck	skin	against	either	 side	of	 the	backbone,	and
come	out	the	other	wing.	Draw	the	string	tightly	and	tie.



The	chicken	is	now	ready	for	oven	roasting,	spit	roasting,	or	poaching.

HOW	TO	TELL	WHEN	A	CHICKEN	IS	DONE

A	stewing	chicken	is	done	when	its	meat	is	tender	if	pierced	with	a
fork.	Roasters,	fryers,	and	broilers	are	tender	to	begin	with	and	are	done
when	 the	 flesh	 is	 cooked	 through	 so	 that	 the	 juices,	when	 the	meat	 is
pricked	deeply	with	a	fork,	run	clear	yellow	with	no	trace	of	rosy	color.
For	a	whole	chicken,	 the	 last	drops	of	 juice	drained	 from	the	vent	will
run	clear	yellow	with	no	rosy	traces.	While	an	underdone	chicken	is	not
fit	to	eat,	it	is	a	shame	to	overcook	chicken,	allowing	the	meat	to	dry	out
and	lose	its	juice	and	flavor.	However,	we	have	noticed	that	the	French
criterion	 of	 doneness	 seems	 like	 underdoneness	 to	 some	 American
palates.	 We	 consider	 a	 chicken	 to	 be	 cooked	 at	 a	 meat-thermometer
reading	 of	 175	 to	 180	 degrees,	 and	 have	 based	 our	 recipes	 on	 these
figures.	The	figure	on	American	thermometers	is	190	degrees.

TIMETABLE	 FOR	 WHOLE	 CHICKENS:	 Oven	 Roasting,	 Casserole	 Roasting,	 Spit
Roasting,	and	Poaching

This	 table	 is	 based	 on	 unchilled,	 unstuffed	 chicken.	 Oven
temperature	for	open-pan	roasting	is	350	degrees,	 for	covered	roasting,
325	degrees.	Meat-thermometer	reading	is	175	to	180	degrees.	Add	5	to
10	minutes	more	to	the	total	roasting	time	if	you	wish	a	reading	of	190
degrees.	You	will	note	that	larger	chickens	require	less	cooking	time	per
pound	than	smaller	chickens.	A	4-pound	chicken	takes	an	hour	and	10	to
20	minutes,	while	a	7-pound	bird	requires	only	20	to	30	minutes	more.
Stuffed	chicken	will	 take	10	to	30	minutes	additional	roasting	than	the
total	time	indicated.

ROASTING	TIMETABLE-OVEN	TEMPERATURE:	350	DEGREES



ROAST	CHICKEN

		POULET	RÔTI
[Roast	Chicken]

You	can	always	judge	the	quality	of	a	cook	or	a	restaurant	by	roast
chicken.	While	 it	does	not	require	years	of	 training	 to	produce	a	 juicy,
brown,	buttery,	crisp-skinned,	heavenly	bird,	it	does	entail	such	a	greed
for	perfection	that	one	is	under	compulsion	to	hover	over	the	bird,	listen
to	it,	above	all	see	that	it	is	continually	basted,	and	that	it	is	done	just	to
the	proper	turn.	Spit	roasting,	where	the	chicken	is	wrapped	in	fat	and
continually	 rotated,	 is	 far	 less	 exacting	 than	 oven	 roasting	 where	 you
must	constantly	turn	and	baste.
Small	French	chickens	are	frequently	roasted	without	a	stuffing.	The

cavity	is	seasoned	with	salt	and	butter,	and	the	skin	rubbed	with	butter.
For	 oven	 roasting,	 it	 is	 browned	 lightly	 for	 10	 to	 15	 minutes	 at	 a
temperature	of	425	degrees,	then	the	temperature	is	reduced	to	350,	and
the	 chicken	 is	 turned	 and	 basted	 until	 it	 is	 done.	 A	 simple,	 short
deglazing	sauce	is	made	with	stock	and	the	juices	in	the	pan,	giving	just
a	scant	spoonful	for	each	serving.



VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Broiled	 tomatoes,	 buttered	 green	 beans	 or	 peas,	 and	 sautéed,
roasted,	souffléed,	or	fried	potatoes,	or	potato	crêpes
One	 of	 the	 potato	 casseroles	 and	 green	 peas	 or	 beans	 Stuffed

mushrooms,	glazed	carrots,	and	glazed	onions
Ratatouille	(eggplant	casserole),	and	sautéed	potatoes	WINE	SUGGESTIONS
A	light	red	wine,	such	as	a	Bordeaux-Médoc,	or	a	rosé

For	4	people

Estimated	 roasting	 time	 for	a	3-pound	chicken:	1	hour	and	10	 to	20
minutes

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

A	3-lb.,	ready-to-cook	roasting	or	frying	chicken
¼	tsp	salt
2	Tb	softened	butter

Sprinkle	the	inside	of	the	chicken	with	the	salt,	and	smear	in	half	the
butter.	Truss	the	chicken.	Dry	it	thoroughly,	and	rub	the	skin	with	the
rest	of	the	butter.

A	shallow	roasting	pan	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	chicken	easily
To	flavor	the	sauce:	a	small	sliced	carrot	and	onion
For	basting:	a	small	saucepan	containing	2	Tb	melted	butter,	1	Tb
good	cooking	oil;	a	basting	brush
Place	the	chicken	breast	up	in	the	roasting	pan.	Strew	the	vegetables
around	 it,	 and	 set	 it	 on	a	 rack	 in	 the	middle	of	 the	preheated	oven.
Allow	the	chicken	 to	brown	 lightly	 for	15	minutes,	 turning	 it	on	 the
left	side	after	5	minutes,	on	the	right	side	for	the	last	5	minutes,	and
basting	 it	 with	 the	 butter	 and	 oil	 after	 each	 turn.	 Baste	 rapidly,	 so
oven	does	not	cool	off.	Reduce	oven	to	350	degrees.	Leave	the	chicken
on	 its	 side,	 and	 baste	 every	 8	 to	 10	 minutes,	 using	 the	 fat	 in	 the
roasting	 pan	 when	 the	 butter	 and	 oil	 are	 exhausted.	 Regulate	 oven



heat	so	chicken	is	making	cooking	noises,	but	fat	is	not	burning.

¼	tsp	salt
Halfway	through	estimated	roasting	time,	salt	the	chicken	and	turn	it
on	its	other	side.	Continue	basting.

¼	tsp	salt
Fifteen	minutes	before	end	of	estimated	roasting	time,	salt	again	and
turn	the	chicken	breast	up.	Continue	basting.

Indications	 that	 the	 chicken	 is	 almost	 done	 are:	 a	 sudden	 rain	 of
splutters	 in	 the	 oven,	 a	 swelling	 of	 the	 breast	 and	 slight	 puff	 of	 the
skin,	 the	 drumstick	 is	 tender	when	pressed	 and	 can	 be	moved	 in	 its
socket.	To	check	further,	prick	the	thickest	part	of	the	drumstick	with
a	 fork.	 Its	 juices	 should	 run	 clear	 yellow.	 As	 a	 final	 check,	 lift	 the
chicken	and	drain	 the	 juices	 from	its	vent.	 If	 the	 last	drops	are	clear
yellow,	the	chicken	is	definitely	done.	If	not,	roast	another	5	minutes,
and	test	again.

When	 done,	 discard	 trussing	 strings	 and	 set	 the	 chicken	 on	 a	 hot
platter.	 It	 should	sit	at	 room	temperature	 for	5	 to	10	minutes	before
being	carved,	so	its	juices	will	retreat	back	into	the	tissues.

½	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onion
1	cup	brown	chicken	stock,	canned	chicken	broth,	or	beef	bouillon
Salt	and	pepper
1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter

Remove	all	but	two	tablespoons	of	fat	from	the	pan.	Stir	in	the	minced
shallot	or	onion	and	cook	slowly	for	1	minute.	Add	the	stock	and	boil
rapidly	over	high	heat,	scraping	up	coagulated	roasting	 juices	with	a
wooden	spoon	and	letting	liquid	reduce	to	about	½	cup.	Season	with
salt	 and	 pepper.	 Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 swirl	 in	 the
enrichment	butter	by	bits	until	it	has	been	absorbed.	Pour	a	spoonful
of	 the	 sauce	 over	 the	 chicken,	 and	 send	 the	 rest	 to	 the	 table	 in	 a
sauceboat.



(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE

Roast	 chicken	 can	 wait	 for	 20	 to	 30	 minutes	 in	 the	 turned-off	 hot
oven,	 its	door	ajar.	 It	 cannot	be	 reheated	or	 it	 loses	 its	 fresh	and	 juicy
quality.

Poulet	à	la	Broche
[Spit-roasted	Chicken]

Estimated	 roasting	 time:	 same	 as	 for	 oven-roasted	 chicken,	 see
chart.

3	to	4	strips	of	blanched	bacon	(never	use	regular	bacon;	it	will	flavor
the	whole	chicken)

Season	and	 truss	 the	 chicken	as	described	 in	 the	preceding	master
recipe.	 Push	 the	 spit	 through	 it	 starting	 at	 the	 breast	 end.	 Dry	 it
thoroughly,	 rub	with	butter	and	sprinkle	with	 salt.	Secure	 the	 strips	of
blanched	bacon	over	the	breast	and	thighs	with	white	string.	Because	of
the	bacon,	no	basting	is	necessary	until	the	very	end.

If	 you	have	a	 rotisserie,	use	 the	moderate	heat	 and	 roast	with	 the
door	closed.	Remove	bacon	15	minutes	before	 the	end,	and	baste	with
the	pan	drippings	until	the	chicken	is	browned	and	done.

If	 you	have	 a	 spit	 attachment	 in	 the	 oven,	 use	 a	moderate	 broiler
temperature,	leave	oven	door	ajar,	and	place	a	pan	under	the	chicken	to
catch	 the	 fat	 and	 juices.	 Fifteen	 minutes	 before	 the	 end,	 remove	 the
bacon,	 increase	 broiler	 temperature,	 and	 continue	 roasting,	 basting
frequently	until	the	chicken	is	browned	and	done.

Use	 the	 same	 tests	 as	 for	 oven	 roasting	 in	 determining	 when	 the
chicken	is	done,	and	the	same	method	for	making	the	sauce.



Poulet	Rôti	à	la	Normande
[Roast	Chicken	Basted	with	Cream,	Herb	and	Giblet	Stuffing]

In	 this	 lush	 combination,	 the	 chicken	 is	 roasted	 as	 usual,	 but	 is
basted	for	the	last	minutes	with	heavy	cream,	which	rolls	off	the	buttery,
brown	chicken	skin	and	combines	with	the	pan	and	stuffing	juices.

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Serve	sautéed	mushrooms	and	sautéed	potatoes,	or	green	peas	and
braised	onions.

WINE	SUGGESTIONS

A	chilled	white	Burgundy	or	white	Graves,	or	a	red	Bordeaux-Médoc
would	be	appropriate.

For	4	or	5	people

Herb	and	giblet	stuffing
The	chicken	gizzard,	peeled	and	minced
1	Tb	butter
⅛	tsp	oil
A	small	skillet
The	chicken	heart,	chopped
1	to	4	chopped	chicken	livers
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions

Sauté	the	gizzard	in	hot	butter	and	oil	for	2	minutes.	Then	stir	in	the
heart,	liver,	and	shallots	or	onions.	Sauté	for	2	minutes	more,	or	until
the	 liver	 has	 stiffened	 but	 is	 still	 rosy	 inside.	 Scrape	 into	 a	 mixing
bowl.

⅔	cup	coarse	crumbs	from	fresh	homemade	type	of	bread
4	Tb	cream	cheese
2	Tb	softened	butter
3	Tb	minced	parsley



⅛	tsp	tarragon	or	thyme
⅛	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper

Blend	 in	 the	rest	of	 the	 ingredients	and	taste	carefully	 for	seasoning.
Let	the	stuffing	cool.

A	3-lb.	ready-to-cook	roasting	or	frying	chicken
¼	tsp	salt
1	Tb	butter

Sprinkle	salt	inside	the	chicken,	and	loosely	fill	with	the	stuffing.	Sew
or	skewer	 the	vent.	Truss	and	dry	 the	chicken,	and	rub	 its	 skin	with
butter.

Roasting	the	chicken
1	cup	whipping	cream

Roast	it	either	in	the	oven,	or	on	a	spit.	About	10	minutes	before	the
end	of	 the	 estimated	 roasting	 time,	 remove	 all	 but	 1	 spoonful	 of	 fat
from	the	roasting	pan.	Start	basting	with	2	or	3	tablespoons	of	cream
every	 3	 to	 4	 minutes	 until	 the	 chicken	 is	 done.	 The	 cream	 will
probably	look	curdled	in	the	pan,	but	this	will	be	corrected	later.

¼	tsp	salt
Remove	the	chicken	to	a	hot	platter	and	sprinkle	with	salt.

The	sauce
3	Tb	strong	brown	chicken	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon

Add	 the	 stock	or	bouillon	 to	 the	 cream	 in	 the	 roasting	pan	and	boil
rapidly	 for	 2	 to	 3	minutes,	 scraping	 up	 coagulated	 chicken	 roasting
juices.

3	to	4	Tb	whipping	cream



Salt	and	pepper
Drops	of	lemon	juice

Just	before	serving,	remove	from	heat	and	stir	in	additional	cream	by
spoonfuls	 to	smooth	out	 the	sauce.	Correct	seasoning,	and	add	drops
of	lemon	juice	to	taste.

Spoon	a	bit	of	sauce	over	the	chicken	and	send	the	rest	to	the	table	in
a	warmed	sauceboat.

Poulet	au	Porto
[Roast	Chicken	Steeped	with	Port	Wine,	Cream,	and	Mushrooms]

Chicken,	cream,	and	mushrooms	occur	again	and	again,	as	it	is	one
of	the	great	combinations.	This	perfectly	delicious	recipe	is	not	difficult,
but	it	cannot	be	prepared	ahead	of	time	or	the	chicken	will	lose	its	fresh
and	juicy	quality.	The	chicken	is	roasted,	then	carved,	flamed	in	cognac,
and	 allowed	 to	 steep	 for	 several	minutes	with	 cream,	mushrooms,	 and
port	wine.	It	 is	the	kind	of	dish	to	do	when	you	are	entertaining	a	few
good,	food-loving	friends	whom	you	can	receive	in	your	kitchen.

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Nothing	should	interfere	with	these	special	flavors.	It	would	be	best
to	serve	only	potatoes	sautéed	in	butter,	or	a	perfectly	seasoned	risotto.
Peas,	or	asparagus	tips,	or	braised	onions,	could	be	added	if	you	feel	the
necessity	for	more	vegetables.

WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Serve	 very	 good,	 chilled,	 white	 Burgundy	 such	 as	 a	 Meursault	 or
Montrachet,	or	an	excellent,	chateâu-bottled	white	Graves.

For	4	people

A	3-lb.,	ready-to-cook,	roasting	or	frying	chicken
Roast	 the	 chicken	 as	 described	 in	 the	master	 recipe.	 Be	 sure	 not	 to
overcook	it.



1	lb.	fresh	mushrooms
Meanwhile,	 trim	 and	 wash	 the	 mushrooms.	 Quarter	 them	 if	 large,
leave	them	whole	if	small.

A	2½-quart	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
¼	cup	water
½	Tb	butter
½	tsp	lemon	juice
¼	tsp	salt

Bring	 the	water	 to	 boil	 in	 the	 saucepan	with	 the	 butter,	 lemon,	 and
salt.	 Toss	 in	 the	 mushrooms,	 cover,	 and	 boil	 slowly	 for	 8	 minutes.
Pour	out	the	cooking	liquid	and	reserve.

1	cup	whipping	cream
½	Tb	cornstarch	blended	with	1	Tb	of	the	cream
Salt	and	pepper

Pour	 the	 cream	 and	 the	 cornstarch	 mixture	 into	 the	 mushrooms.
Simmer	for	2	minutes.	Correct	seasoning,	and	set	aside.

When	the	chicken	is	done,	remove	it	to	a	carving	board	and	let	it	rest
at	room	temperature	while	completing	the	sauce.

½	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
⅓	cup	medium-dry	port
The	mushroom	cooking	liquid
The	mushrooms	in	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Drops	of	lemon	juice

Remove	all	but	2	tablespoons	of	fat	from	the	roasting	pan.	Stir	in	the
shallots	or	onions	and	cook	slowly	for	1	minute.	Add	the	port	and	the
mushroom	 juice,	 and	 boil	 down	 rapidly,	 scraping	 up	 coagulated
roasting	 juices,	 until	 liquid	 has	 reduced	 to	 about	 ¼	 cup.	 Add	 the



mushrooms	 and	 cream	and	 simmer	 for	 2	 to	 3	minutes,	 allowing	 the
liquid	 to	 thicken	 slightly.	 Correct	 seasoning	 and	 add	 lemon	 juice	 to
taste.

A	fireproof	casserole	or	a	chafing	dish
1	Tb	butter
⅛	tsp	salt

Smear	the	inside	of	the	casserole	or	chafing	dish	with	butter.	Rapidly
carve	 the	 chicken	 into	 serving	 pieces.	 Sprinkle	 lightly	with	 salt,	 and
arrange	in	the	casserole	or	chafing	dish.

¼	cup	cognac
Set	over	moderate	heat	or	an	alcohol	flame	until	you	hear	the	chicken
begin	 to	 sizzle.	 Then	 pour	 the	 cognac	 over	 it.	 Avert	 your	 face,	 and
ignite	 the	 cognac	 with	 a	 lighted	 match.	 Shake	 the	 casserole	 slowly
until	 the	flames	have	subsided.	Then	pour	in	the	mushroom	mixture,
tilting	 the	 casserole	 and	 basting	 the	 chicken.	 Cover	 and	 steep	 for	 5
minutes	without	allowing	the	sauce	to	boil.	Serve.
(*)	Chicken	may	remain	in	its	casserole	over	barely	simmering	water
or	in	the	turned-off	hot	oven	with	its	door	ajar,	for	10	to	15	minutes,
but	the	sooner	it	is	served,	the	better	it	will	be.

Coquelets	sur	Canapés
[Roast	 Squab	 Chickens	 with	 Chicken	 Liver	 Canapés	 and
Mushrooms]

Also	for:	squab	pigeons,	game	hens,	partridge,	quail,	dove
This	is	one	of	the	classic	French	recipes	for	serving	small	roast	birds.

The	 livers	 are	 chopped,	 seasoned,	 and	 spread	 over	 sautéed	 bread
rectangles;	just	before	serving,	these	are	run	under	the	broiler.	Then	the
roast	birds	are	placed	on	 them,	and	 the	dish	 is	garnished	with	a	wine-
flavored	deglazing	sauce	and	sautéed	mushrooms.

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS



Only	sautéed,	shoestring,	or	souffléed	potatoes,	or	homemade	potato
chips	are	suggested.

WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Serve	 a	 red	Bordeaux-Médoc	 for	 chicken,	 game	hens,	 or	 pigeon;	 red
Bordeaux-St.	Émilion	or	red	Burgundy	for	game.

For	6	people,	1	bird	apiece

A	Note	 on	 the	Order	 of	 Battle:	 Although	 the	mushrooms	 and	 canapés
may	be	prepared	while	the	birds	are	roasting,	it	seems	best	to	do	them
ahead	and	relieve	pressure,	for	the	roast	birds	should	be	served	almost
as	soon	as	they	are	done.

The	mushrooms
1½	lbs.	fresh	mushrooms
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
A	10-to	12-inch	enameled	skillet

Trim	and	wash	the	mushrooms.	Leave	whole	if	small,	quarter	if	large.
Dry	in	a	towel.	Sauté	for	5	to	6	minutes	in	hot	butter	and	oil	until	they
are	very	lightly	browned.

1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	clove	mashed	garlic

Stir	in	the	shallots	or	onions,	and	garlic,	and	cook	over	moderate	heat
for	2	minutes.	Set	aside.

The	canapés
Homemade-type	of	white	bread

Cut	6	slices	of	bread	¼	inch	thick.	Remove	crusts,	and	cut	slices	into
rectangles	2	by	3½	inches.



½	cup	clarified	butter
A	skillet

Sauté	the	bread	lightly	on	each	side	in	hot	clarified	butter.

6	poultry	or	game	livers	from	the	birds
3	Tb	fresh,	raw	pork	fat;	OR	fat	bacon	simmered	in	water	for	10
minutes,	rinsed,	and	dried

¼	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
1	Tb	Madeira,	port,	or	cognac
Optional:	2	to	3	Tb	foie	gras

Trim	the	 livers,	cutting	off	any	black	or	green	spots.	Chop	very	 fine,
almost	into	a	purée,	with	the	pork	fat	or	bacon.	Then	blend	the	liver
in	a	bowl	with	the	seasonings,	wine,	and	optional	foie	gras.	Spread	the
mixture	on	one	side	of	each	rectangle	of	sautéed	bread.	Arrange	on	a
broiling	pan	and	set	aside.	(Preheat	broiler	in	time	to	cook	the	canapés
just	before	serving.)	Roasting	the	birds

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

Six	10-to	12-ounce,	ready-to-cook	squab	chickens,	game	hens,	squab
pigeons,	or	game	birds

½	Tb	salt
2	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	tsp	dried	tarragon
4	Tb	butter
6	strips	of	bacon	simmered	in	water	for	10	minutes,	rinsed,	and	dried

Season	 the	 cavities	 of	 the	 birds	with	 a	 sprinkling	 of	 salt,	 shallots	 or
onion,	 and	 tarragon,	 and	 1	 teaspoon	 of	 butter.	 Truss	 the	 birds,	 dry
them,	and	rub	with	butter.	Cut	the	blanched	bacon	in	half,	crosswise,
and	tie	2	strips	over	the	breast	and	thighs	of	each	bird.



A	shallow	roasting	pan	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	birds	easily	on
their	sides
3	Tb	butter	melted	with	1	Tb	good	cooking	oil
A	basting	brush
Place	the	birds	in	the	roasting	pan,	and	set	on	a	rack	in	the	middle	of
the	 preheated	 oven.	 Baste	 and	 turn	 the	 birds	 every	 5	 to	 7	 minutes
until	they	are	done:	CHICKENS	will	take	from	30	to	40	minutes;	they
are	done	when	the	last	drops	of	juice	from	their	vents	run	clear	yellow
with	no	trace	of	rose.
GAME	HENS,	as	their	flesh	is	usually	firmer	than	chicken,	take	about
45	minutes;	they	are	done	when	the	flesh	of	their	drumsticks	is	soft.
PARTRIDGE	 and	 QUAIL,	 if	 young	 and	 tender,	 may	 be	 judged	 like
chicken;	if	older,	like	game	hens.
PIGEON	 and	 DOVE	 may	 be	 served	 slightly	 underdone	 if	 you	 wish,
when	their	juices	run	a	very	pale	rose	rather	than	a	clear	yellow.

½	Tb	salt
When	done,	remove	trussing	strings,	sprinkle	the	birds	with	salt,	and
place	them	on	a	warm	platter.	Set	in	turned-off	oven,	its	door	ajar.

		The	sauce
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Remove	all	but	2	tablespoons	of	fat	from	the	roasting	pan.	Stir	in	the
shallots	 or	 onions	 and	 cook	 slowly	 for	 1	 minute.	 Add	 the	 stock	 or
bouillon	 and	wine	 and	 boil	 rapidly,	 scraping	 up	 coagulated	 cooking
juices	until	liquid	has	reduced	to	about	½	cup.	Correct	seasoning.	Off
heat	and	just	before	serving,	swirl	the	butter	into	the	sauce.

1½	cups	brown	chicken	stock,	brown	stock,	or	canned	beef	bouillon
¼	cup	Madeira	or	port
1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter

Final	assembly



Just	 before	 serving,	 run	 the	 liver	 canapés	 under	 a	 hot	 broiler	 for	 a
minute,	until	they	are	sizzling.

1	Tb	butter
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Toss	 the	mushrooms	over	moderately	high	heat	with	the	butter,	 salt,
and	pepper.

A	handful	of	water-cress	leaves	or	parsley	sprigs
Place	 a	 canapé	under	 each	bird.	 Surround	with	 the	mushrooms,	 and
decorate	with	water	cress	or	parsley.	Spoon	the	sauce	over	the	birds,
and	serve.

CASSEROLE-ROASTED	CHICKEN

		POULET	POÊLÉ	À	L’ESTRAGON
[Casserole-roasted	Chicken	with	Tarragon]

For:	roasters,	large	fryers,	and	capons
When	a	chicken	is	cooked	this	way,	it	is	trussed,	browned	in	butter

and	 oil,	 then	 set	 to	 roast	 in	 a	 covered	 casserole	 with	 herbs	 and
seasonings.	 It	 is	a	 lovely	method,	as	the	buttery,	aromatic	steam	in	the
casserole	 gives	 the	 chicken	 great	 tenderness	 and	 flavor.	 While	 oven
cooking	is	more	even,	the	top	of	the	stove	may	be	used	if	your	casserole
is	heavy;	then	the	chicken	must	be	turned	and	basted	frequently,	and	the
cooking	will	be	a	little	longer	than	for	oven	cooking.

VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS

They	are	the	same	as	for	a	roast	chicken.

For	4	people

Estimated	roasting	time:	1	hour	and	10	to	20	minutes	for	a	3-lb.	bird.



See	chart	for	other	sizes.

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	3-lb.,	ready-to-cook	roasting	chicken
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
2	Tb	butter
3	or	4	sprigs	of	fresh	tarragon	or	½	tsp	of	dried	tarragon
Season	the	cavity	of	the	chicken	with	salt,	pepper,	and	1	tablespoon	of
the	 butter.	 Insert	 the	 tarragon	 leaves,	 or	 sprinkle	 in	 dried	 tarragon.
Truss	the	chicken.	Dry	it	thoroughly	and	rub	the	skin	with	the	rest	of
the	butter.

A	heavy	fireproof	casserole	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	chicken	on
its	back	and	on	its	side
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil,	more	if	needed
Set	 the	 casserole	 over	moderately	high	heat	with	 the	 butter	 and	oil.
When	the	butter	foam	has	begun	to	subside,	lay	in	the	chicken,	breast
down.	Brown	 for	2	 to	3	minutes,	 regulating	heat	 so	butter	 is	 always
very	hot	but	not	burning.	Turn	 the	chicken	on	another	 side,	using	2
wooden	 spoons	 or	 a	 towel.	 Be	 sure	 not	 to	 break	 the	 chicken	 skin.
Continue	 browning	 and	 turning	 the	 chicken	until	 it	 is	 a	 nice	 golden
color	almost	all	over,	particularly	on	the	breast	and	legs.	This	will	take
10	to	15	minutes.	Add	more	oil	if	necessary	to	keep	the	bottom	of	the
casserole	filmed.

3	Tb	butter,	if	necessary
Remove	the	chicken.	Pour	out	the	browning	fat	 if	 it	has	burned,	and
add	fresh	butter.

½	cup	sliced	onions
¼	cup	sliced	carrots



¼	tsp	salt
3	or	4	sprigs	of	fresh	tarragon	or	½	tsp	dried	tarragon
Cook	 the	 carrots	 and	 onions	 slowly	 in	 the	 casserole	 for	 5	 minutes
without	browning.	Add	the	salt	and	tarragon.

¼	tsp	salt
A	bulb	baster	Aluminum	foil
A	tight-fitting	cover	for	the	casserole
Salt	the	chicken.	Set	it	breast	up	over	the	vegetables	and	baste	it	with
the	 butter	 in	 the	 casserole.	 Lay	 a	 piece	 of	 aluminum	 foil	 over	 the
chicken,	cover	the	casserole,	and	reheat	it	on	top	of	the	stove	until	you
hear	 the	 chicken	 sizzling.	 Then	 place	 the	 casserole	 on	 a	 rack	 in	 the
middle	level	of	the	preheated	oven.

Roast	 for	1	hour	and	10	to	20	minutes,	regulating	heat	so	chicken	is
always	 making	 quiet	 cooking	 noises.	 Baste	 once	 or	 twice	 with	 the
butter	 and	 juices	 in	 the	 casserole.	 The	 chicken	 is	 done	 when	 its
drumsticks	 move	 in	 their	 sockets,	 and	 when	 the	 last	 drops	 drained
from	its	vent	run	clear	yellow.

Remove	the	chicken	to	a	serving	platter	and	discard	trussing	strings.

Brown	tarragon	sauce
2	cups	brown	chicken	stock,	or	1	cup	canned	beef	bouillon	and	1	cup
canned	chicken	broth
1	Tb	cornstarch	blended	with	2	Tb	Madeira	or	port
2	Tb	fresh	minced	tarragon	or	parsley
1	Tb	softened	butter

Add	the	stock	or	bouillon	and	broth	to	the	casserole	and	simmer	for	2
minutes,	scraping	up	coagulated	roasting	juices.	Then	skim	off	all	but
a	tablespoon	of	fat.	Blend	in	the	cornstarch	mixture,	simmer	a	minute,
then	raise	heat	and	boil	rapidly	until	sauce	is	lightly	thickened.	Taste
carefully	for	seasoning,	adding	more	tarragon	if	you	feel	it	necessary.



Strain	into	a	warmed	sauceboat.	Stir	in	the	herbs	and	the	enrichment
butter.

To	serve
Optional	but	attractive:	10	to	12	fresh	tarragon	leaves	blanched	for
30	seconds	in	boiling	water	then	rinsed	in	cold	water,	and	dried	on
paper	towels
Pour	a	spoonful	of	sauce	over	the	chicken,	and	decorate	the	breast	and
legs	 with	 optional	 tarragon	 leaves.	 Platter	 may	 be	 garnished	 with
sprigs	of	 fresh	parsley	or—if	you	are	serving	them—sautéed	potatoes
and	broiled	tomatoes.

(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE
If	the	chicken	is	not	to	be	served	for	about	half	an	hour,	make	the

sauce	 except	 for	 its	 butter	 enrichment,	 and	 strain	 it	 into	 a	 saucepan.
Return	the	chicken	to	the	casserole.	Place	aluminum	foil	over	it	and	set
the	cover	askew.	Keep	the	casserole	warm	over	almost	simmering	water,
or	in	the	turned-off	hot	oven,	its	door	ajar.	Reheat	and	butter	the	sauce
just	before	serving.

OPTIONAL:
Farce	Duxelles
[Mushroom	Stuffing]

A	 chicken	will	 need	 10	 to	 15	minutes	more	 cooking	 if	 you	 fill	 it
with	this	stuffing.

For	a	3-lb.	chicken

¾	lb.	finely	minced	fresh	mushrooms
1	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
1½	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
A	10-inch	skillet



A	handful	at	a	time,	twist	the	mushrooms	into	a	ball	in	the	corner	of	a
towel	to	extract	their	juice.	Sauté	them	in	hot	butter	and	oil	with	the
shallots	or	onions	for	5	to	8	minutes,	until	the	pieces	begin	to	separate
from	each	other.	Place	them	in	a	mixing	bowl.

The	chicken	gizzard,	peeled	and	minced
The	chopped	chicken	liver
1	Tb	butter
A	small	skillet
Sauté	the	gizzard	for	2	minutes	in	hot	butter.	Add	the	liver	and	sauté	2
minutes	more.	Add	to	the	mixing	bowl.

¼	cup	Madeira	or	port
Pour	 the	 wine	 into	 the	 mushroom	 cooking	 skillet	 and	 boil	 it	 down
rapidly	until	it	has	reduced	to	a	spoonful.	Scrape	into	the	mixing	bowl.

¼	cup	dry,	white	crumbs	from	homemade-type	of	bread
3	Tb	cream	cheese
1	Tb	softened	butter
½	tsp	minced	fresh	or	dried	tarragon
2	Tb	minced	parsley
¼	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
Blend	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 ingredients	 into	 the	 mixing	 bowl	 and	 season
carefully	 to	 taste.	 Let	 the	 stuffing	 cool.	 Pack	 it	 loosely	 into	 the
chicken.	 Sew	or	 skewer	 the	 vent	 and	 truss	 the	 chicken.	 Then	brown
and	roast	it	as	described	in	the	preceding	master	recipe.

VARIATION
Poulet	en	Cocotte	Bonne	Femme
[Casserole-roasted	Chicken	with	Bacon,	Onions,	and	Potatoes]



This	 is	 an	 all-in-one	 dish	where	 bacon	 and	 vegetables	 are	 cooked
with	 the	 chicken	 and	 each	 item	 takes	 on	 a	 bit	 of	 flavor	 from	 its
neighbors.	No	 other	 vegetables	 are	 needed	 to	make	up	 a	main	 course,
but	you	may	wish	to	serve	broiled	tomatoes	along	with	it	for	color.

For	4	people

A	½-lb.	chunk	of	bacon
A	fireproof	casserole	for	cooking	the	chicken
1	Tb	butter
Remove	the	rind	and	cut	the	bacon	into	 lardons	(rectangular	strips	½
inch	wide	and	1½	inches	long).	Simmer	for	10	minutes	in	2	quarts	of
water.	Rinse	in	cold	water,	and	dry.	In	the	casserole,	sauté	the	bacon
for	2	to	3	minutes	 in	butter	until	very	 lightly	browned.	Remove	to	a
side	dish,	leaving	the	fat	in	the	casserole.

A	3-lb.,	ready-to-cook	roasting	chicken,	trussed	and	buttered
Brown	 the	 chicken	 in	 the	 hot	 fat,	 as	 described	 in	 the	master	 recipe.
Remove	it	to	a	side	dish	and	pour	the	fat	out	of	the	casserole.

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

15	to	25	peeled	white	onions	about	1	inch	in	diameter
Drop	the	onions	in	boiling,	salted	water	and	boil	slowly	for	5	minutes.
Drain	and	set	aside.

1	to	1½	lbs.	“boiling”	potatoes	or	small	new	potatoes
Peel	 the	 potatoes	 and	 trim	 them	 into	 uniform	 ovals	 about	 2	 inches
long	and	1	inch	in	diameter.	Cover	with	cold	water,	and	bring	to	the
boil.	Drain	immediately.

3	Tb	butter
¼	tsp	salt
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp
thyme	tied	in	washed	cheesecloth



A	bulb	baster
Aluminum	foil
A	tight-fitting	cover	for	the	casserole
Heat	 the	butter	 in	 the	 casserole	until	 it	 is	 foaming.	Add	 the	drained
potatoes	 and	 roll	 them	 around	 over	moderate	 heat	 for	 2	minutes	 to
evaporate	 their	 moisture;	 this	 will	 prevent	 their	 sticking	 to	 the
casserole.	Spread	them	aside,	salt	 the	chicken,	and	place	 it	breast	up
in	the	casserole.	Place	the	bacon	and	onions	over	the	potatoes,	and	the
herb	bouquet.	Baste	all	ingredients	with	the	butter	in	the	casserole,	lay
the	aluminum	foil	over	the	chicken,	and	cover	the	casserole.

Heat	the	casserole	on	top	of	the	stove	until	 the	contents	are	sizzling,
then	place	 in	 the	middle	 level	of	 the	preheated	oven	and	roast	 for	1
hour	and	10	to	20	minutes	or	until	the	chicken	is	done.	Baste	once	or
twice	with	the	butter	and	juices	in	the	pan.	No	sauce	is	necessary.

SAUTÉED	CHICKEN

		POULET	SAUTÉ
[Sautéed	Chicken]

For:	frying	chickens

In	 a	 true	 sauté	 the	 cut-up	 chicken	 is	 cooked	 entirely	 in	 butter,	 or
butter	and	oil,	with	seasonings.	No	liquid	comes	in	contact	with	it	until
the	very	end.	It	is	a	quick	and	delicious	way	to	cook	chicken,	but	should
be	 served	 as	 soon	 as	 possible	 after	 it	 is	 done	 or	 it	 loses	 the	 fresh	 and
juicy	characteristics	of	a	sauté.	The	fricassees,	however,	as	they	cook	in	a
sauce,	take	well	to	reheating.

A	NOTE	ON	DISJOINTING	THE	CHICKEN

French	chicken	is	disjointed	so	that	each	wing	includes	a	strip	from
the	 lower	 part	 of	 the	 breast.	 The	 breast	 minus	 ribs	 is	 cut	 in	 two,
crosswise.	 The	 drumsticks	 are	 separated	 from	 the	 second	 joints.	 This



makes	8	good	serving	pieces,	plus	the	back	cut	in	two,	crosswise,	if	you
wish	to	include	it.

American	chicken	 is	usually	disjointed	 into	2	drumsticks,	2	second
joints,	 the	2	halves	of	 the	breast,	and	the	2	wings	with	no	breast	meat
attached.	So	that	the	breasts	will	cook	evenly,	slip	a	knife	under	the	ribs
and	remove	them.	Each	breast	half	may	be	chopped	in	two,	crosswise,	if
you	wish.

WINE	AND	VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

These	are	the	same	as	for	roast	chicken.

For	4	to	6	people.

Total	cooking	time:	30	to	35	minutes

Browning	the	chicken	(8	to	10	minutes)

2½	to	3	lbs.	of	cut-up	frying
Dry	each	piece	of	chicken	thoroughly.	It	will	not	chicken	brown	if	it	is
damp.

A	heavy,	10-inch	casserole,	skillet,	or	electric	skillet
2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil,	more	if	necessary	to	keep	bottom	of	pan
filmed	with	fat
Tongs	for	turning	the	chicken
Place	the	casserole	or	skillet	over	moderately	high	heat	with	the	butter
and	 oil	 (360	 degrees	 for	 an	 electric	 skillet).	When	 you	 see	 that	 the
butter	 foam	 has	 almost	 subsided,	 add	 as	many	 chicken	 pieces,	 skin-
side	down,	as	will	fit	easily	in	one	layer.	In	2	to	3	minutes,	when	the
chicken	 has	 browned	 to	 a	 nice	 golden	 color	 on	 one	 side,	 turn	 it	 to
brown	on	another	side.	Regulate	heat	so	fat	is	always	very	hot	but	not
burning.	Remove	browned	pieces	as	they	are	done	and	add	fresh	ones
until	all	pieces	have	browned.

Finishing	the	cooking	(20	to	25	minutes)



Salt	and	pepper
Optional:	1	to	2	tsp	fresh	green	herbs:	thyme,	basil,	and	tarragon,	or
tarragon	only;	or	1	tsp	dried	herbs

2	or	3	Tb	butter,	if	necessary
Season	 the	 dark	 meat	 with	 salt,	 pepper,	 and	 optional	 herbs.	 (The
wings	and	breasts	are	done	later,	as	they	cook	faster.)	If	the	browning
fat	has	burned,	pour	 it	out	of	 the	casserole	and	add	the	fresh	butter.
Place	over	moderate	heat	(300	degrees	for	an	electric	skillet).	Add	the
dark	meats,	cover	the	casserole,	and	cook	slowly	for	8	to	9	minutes.

Salt	and	pepper
A	bulb	baster
Season	the	white	meat,	add	it	to	the	dark	meat,	and	baste	the	chicken
with	the	butter	in	the	casserole.	Cover	and	continue	cooking	for	about
15	minutes,	turning	and	basting	the	chicken	2	or	3	times.

The	meat	 is	done	when	the	fattest	part	of	 the	drumsticks	 is	 tender	 if
pinched	 and	 the	 chicken	 juices	 run	 clear	 yellow	 when	 the	 meat	 is
pricked	deeply	with	a	fork.

Remove	the	chicken	to	a	hot	serving	platter.	Cover	and	keep	warm	for
2	to	3	minutes	while	finishing	the	sauce.

Brown	deglazing	sauce

1	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onions
Optional:	½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth
¾	to	1	cup	brown	chicken	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	or	canned
chicken	broth

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	parsley	or	fresh	green	herbs
Remove	all	but	2	or	3	tablespoons	of	fat	 from	the	casserole.	Add	the
shallots	or	onions	and	cook	slowly	for	1	minute.	Pour	in	the	optional
wine,	 and	 the	 stock.	 Raise	 heat	 and	 boil	 rapidly,	 scraping	 up



coagulated	 sauté	 juices	 and	 reducing	 liquid	 to	 about	⅓	 cup.	Correct
seasoning.	 Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 swirl	 in	 the	 enrichment
butter	and	optional	herbs.

Arrange	 around	 the	 platter	 whatever	 vegetables	 you	 have	 chosen.
Pour	the	sauce	over	the	chicken	and	serve.
(*)	FOR	A	WAIT	UP	TO	HALF	AN	HOUR
Finish	 the	 sauce	 except	 for	 its	 final	 buttering.	Arrange	 the	 cooked

chicken	 in	 an	 enameled,	 glazed,	 pyrex,	 or	 stainless	 steel	 casserole	 and
baste	 it	 with	 the	 sauce.	 Cover	 loosely	 and	 set	 over	 barely	 simmering
water.	 Just	 before	 serving,	 and	 off	 heat,	 tip	 casserole,	 add	 enrichment
butter,	and	baste	the	chicken	with	the	sauce.
(*)	PARTIAL	COOKING	IN	ADVANCE
The	 chicken	 may	 be	 browned,	 the	 dark	 meat	 cooked	 for	 8	 to	 9

minutes,	 and	 the	 white	 meat	 added	 and	 cooked	 for	 5	 minutes	 more.
Then	set	the	casserole	aside,	uncovered.	About	10	to	15	minutes	before
serving	 time,	cover	and	 finish	 the	cooking	on	 top	of	 the	 stove;	or	heat
the	 casserole	 and	 set	 it	 in	 a	 preheated	 350-degree	 oven	 for	 15	 to	 20
minutes.

OTHER	SAUCES
Poulet	Sauté	à	la	Crème
[Deglazing	Sauce	with	Cream]

1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth
1	cup	whipping	cream
Sauté	the	chicken	as	described	in	the	preceding	recipe	and	place	it	on
a	hot	platter.	Remove	all	but	1	 tablespoon	of	 fat	 from	 the	casserole.
Stir	in	the	shallots	or	onions	and	cook	slowly	for	1	minute.	Then	add
the	wine	and	boil	it	rapidly	down	to	about	3	tablespoons,	scraping	up
coagulated	cooking	juices.	Add	the	cream	and	boil	it	down	until	it	has
thickened	slightly.



1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	parsley	or	mixed	green	herbs
Correct	seasoning.	Off	heat	and	just	before	serving,	swirl	in	the	butter
and	optional	herbs.

Pour	the	sauce	over	the	chicken.

Poulet	Sauté	Chasseur
[Tomato	and	Mushroom	Sauce]

Use	 the	 same	 technique	 as	 for	 the	 veal	 scallops	 escalopes	 de	 veau
chasseur

VARIATION
Poulet	Sauté	aux	Herbes	de	Provence
[Chicken	 Sautéed	 with	 Herbs	 and	 Garlic,	 Egg	 Yolk	 and	 Butter
Sauce]

Basil,	thyme	or	savory,	a	pinch	of	fennel,	and	a	bit	of	garlic	give	this
sauté	a	fine	Provençal	flavor	that	is	even	more	pronounced	if	your	herbs
are	fresh.	The	sauce	is	a	type	of	hollandaise,	as	the	herbal,	buttery	pan
juices	 are	 beaten	 into	 egg	 yolks	 to	 make	 a	 thick	 and	 creamy	 liaison.
Serve	this	dish	with	potatoes	sautéed	in	butter	or	potato	crêpes,	broiled
tomatoes	and	a	chilled	rosé	wine.
For	4	to	6	people

A	heavy-10-inch	fireproof	casserole,	skillet,	or	electric	skillet	set	at
300	degrees

¼	lb.	(1	stick)	butter
2½	to	3	lbs.	of	cut-up	frying	chicken	dried	in	a	towel
1	tsp	thyme	or	savory
1	tsp	basil



¼	tsp	ground	fennel
Salt	and	pepper
3	cloves	unpeeled	garlic
Heat	the	butter	until	 it	 is	 foaming,	 then	turn	the	chicken	pieces	 in	 it
for	7	 to	8	minutes,	not	 letting	 them	color	more	 than	a	deep	yellow.
Remove	 the	white	meat.	 Season	 the	 dark	meat	with	 herbs,	 salt,	 and
pepper,	and	add	the	garlic	to	the	casserole.	Cover	and	cook	slowly	for
8	 to	 9	minutes.	 Season	 the	 white	meat	 and	 add	 it	 to	 the	 casserole,
basting	 the	 chicken	 with	 the	 butter.	 Cook	 for	 about	 15	 minutes,
turning	 and	basting	2	or	3	 times,	 until	 the	 chicken	 is	 tender	 and	 its
juices	run	pale	yellow	when	the	meat	is	pricked	with	a	fork.

When	the	chicken	is	done,	remove	it	to	a	hot	platter,	cover,	and	keep
warm.

⅔	cup	dry	white	wine	or	½	cup	dry	white	vermouth
Mash	the	garlic	cloves	in	the	casserole	with	a	spoon,	then	remove	the
garlic	peel.	Add	the	wine	and	boil	it	down	over	high	heat,	scraping	up
coagulated	sauté	juices	until	the	wine	has	been	reduced	by	half.

2	egg	yolks
1	Tb	lemon	juice
1	Tb	dry	white	wine	or	white	vermouth
A	small	enameled	saucepan
A	wire	whip
Beat	the	egg	yolks	in	the	saucepan	until	they	are	thick	and	sticky.	Beat
in	the	lemon	juice	and	wine.	Then	beat	in	the	casserole	liquid,	a	half-
teaspoon	at	a	time	to	make	a	thick	creamy	sauce	like	a	hollandaise.

Optional:	2	or	3	Tb	softened	butter
2	Tb	fresh	minced	basil,	fresh	fennel	tops,	or	parsley
Beat	 the	 sauce	 over	 very	 low	 heat	 for	 4	 to	 5	 seconds	 to	 warm	 and
thicken	it.	Remove	from	heat	and	beat	in	more	butter	by	tablespoons



if	you	wish.	Beat	in	the	herbs,	and	correct	seasoning.	Spoon	the	sauce
over	the	chicken,	and	serve.

CHICKEN	FRICASSEE

For:	fryers,	roasters,	and	young	stewing	chicken

One	 frequently	 runs	 into	 chicken	 recipes	 labeled	 sautés	 which	 are
actually	 fricassees,	 and	 others	 labeled	 fricassees	 which	 are	 actually
stews.	The	fricassee	is	halfway	between	the	two.	No	liquid	is	included	in
the	 cooking	 of	 a	 sauté.	 For	 a	 stew,	 the	 chicken	 is	 simmered	 in	 liquid
from	 the	 start	 of	 its	 cooking.	When	 chicken	 is	 fricasseed,	 the	 meat	 is
always	 cooked	 first	 in	 butter—or	 butter	 and	 oil—until	 its	 flesh	 has
swelled	 and	 stiffened,	 then	 the	 liquid	 is	 added.	 There	 is	 a	 subtle	 but
definite	difference	in	taste	between	the	three	methods.	Fricassees	can	be
white,	 like	 the	 following	 recipe,	 or	brown,	 like	 the	 coq	au	 vin.	 It	 is	 an
ideal	technique	for	ahead-of-time	dishes,	as	the	chicken	loses	none	of	its
essential	 qualities	 if	 it	 is	 allowed	 to	 cool	 in	 its	 sauce	 and	 is	 then
reheated.

TYPE	OF	CHICKEN	TO	USE

The	 following	 recipes	 are	 all	 based	 on	 frying	 chicken.	 Younger
chickens,	such	as	broilers,	should	never	be	used;	their	flesh	is	so	soft	and
tender	that	it	dries	out	and	becomes	stringy.	Older	chickens	need	longer
cooking	than	the	25	to	30	minutes	of	simmering	required	for	a	fryer.
Roasting	chicken—35	to	45	minutes	of	simmering
Young	stewing	chicken—1½	hours	or	more	of	simmering,	or	until

the	flesh	is	tender	when	pricked	with	a	fork.

		FRICASSÉE	DE	POULET	À	L’ANCIENNE
[Old-fashioned	 Chicken	 Fricassee	 with	 Wine-flavored	 Cream
Sauce,	Onions,	and	Mushrooms]

For	 this	 traditional	 Sunday	 dinner	 dish,	 which	 is	 not	 difficult	 to
execute,	the	chicken	pieces	are	turned	in	hot	butter,	sprinkled	with	flour



and	seasonings,	then	simmered	in	wine	and	white	stock.	The	sauce	is	a
reduction	 of	 the	 cooking	 liquid,	 enriched	 with	 cream	 and	 egg	 yolks.
Braised	 onions	 and	 mushrooms	 accompany	 the	 chicken.	 Include	 also
steamed	rice	or	risotto,	or	buttered	noodles.	If	you	want	other	vegetables,
buttered	peas	or	asparagus	tips	may	serve	as	a	garnish.

WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Serve	a	chilled,	fairly	full-bodied	white	Burgundy,	Côtes	du	Rhône,
or	Bordeaux-Graves.

For	4	to	6	people

Preliminary	cooking	in	butter

2½	to	3	lbs.	of	cut-up	frying	chicken
Dry	the	chicken	thoroughly	in	a	towel.

A	heavy,	10-inch,	fireproof	casserole	or	electric	skillet
1	thinly	sliced	onion,	carrot,	and	celery	stalk
4	Tb	butter
Cook	the	vegetables	slowly	in	the	butter	for	about	5	minutes,	or	until
they	are	almost	 tender	but	not	browned	 (260	degrees	 for	an	electric
skillet).	Push	them	to	one	side.	Raise	heat	slightly	(290	degrees),	and
add	 the	 chicken.	 Turn	 it	 every	minute	 for	 3	 or	 4	minutes	 until	 the
meat	 has	 stiffened	 slightly,	 without	 coloring	 to	 more	 than	 a	 light
golden	yellow.

Lower	heat	 (260	 for	 an	electric	 skillet),	 cover,	 and	 cook	very	 slowly
for	 10	 minutes,	 turning	 the	 chicken	 once.	 It	 should	 swell	 slightly,
stiffen	more,	but	not	deepen	in	color.
Adding	the	flour

½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	white	pepper
3	Tb	flour



Sprinkle	salt,	pepper,	and	flour	on	all	sides	of	the	chicken,	turning	and
rolling	each	piece	to	coat	the	flour	with	the	cooking	butter.	Cover	and
continue	cooking	slowly	for	4	minutes,	turning	it	once.
Simmering	in	stock	and	wine

3	cups	boiling	white	chicken	stock,	white	stock,	or	canned	chicken
bouillon

1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
A	small	herb	bouquet:	2	parsley	sprigs,	⅓	bay	leaf	and	⅛	tsp	thyme
tied	in	washed	cheesecloth

Remove	from	heat	and	pour	in	the	boiling	liquid,	shaking	casserole	to
blend	the	liquid	and	flour.	Add	the	wine,	the	herb	bouquet,	and	more
stock,	 or	 water,	 so	 the	 liquid	 just	 covers	 the	 chicken.	 Bring	 to	 the
simmer.	Taste	for	seasoning,	and	salt	lightly	if	necessary.

Cover	and	maintain	at	a	slow	simmer	for	25	to	30	minutes	(180	to	190
degrees	 for	 an	 electric	 skillet).	 The	 chicken	 is	 done	 when	 the
drumsticks	 are	 tender	 if	 pinched	 and	 the	 chicken	 juices	 run	 clear
yellow	when	the	meat	is	pricked	with	a	fork.	When	done,	remove	the
chicken	to	a	side	dish.
Onion	and	mushroom	garniture

16	to	20	white-braised	onions
½	lb.	fresh	mushrooms	stewed	in	butter,	lemon	juice,	and	water
While	the	chicken	is	cooking,	prepare	the	onions	and	mushrooms.	Add
their	cooking	juices	to	the	chicken	cooking	sauce	in	the	next	step.
The	sauce

Simmer	 the	 cooking	 liquid	 in	 the	 casserole	 for	 2	 to	 3	 minutes,
skimming	off	fat.	Then	raise	heat	and	boil	rapidly,	stirring	frequently,
until	 the	 sauce	 reduces	 and	 thickens	 enough	 to	 coat	 a	 spoon	 nicely.
Correct	seasoning.	You	should	have	2	to	2½	cups.

2	egg	yolks



½	cup	whipping	cream
A	2-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
Blend	the	egg	yolks	and	cream	in	the	mixing	bowl	with	a	wire	whip.
Continue	beating,	and	add	the	hot	sauce	by	small	tablespoonfuls	until
about	 a	 cupful	 has	 gone	 in.	 Beat	 in	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 sauce	 in	 a	 thin
stream.

A	wooden	spoon
Pour	 the	 sauce	 back	 into	 the	 casserole,	 or	 into	 an	 enameled	 or
stainless	 steel	 saucepan	 (do	not	use	 aluminum).	 Set	 over	moderately
high	heat	and,	stirring	constantly,	reach	all	over	the	bottom	and	sides
of	 the	 casserole,	 until	 the	 sauce	 comes	 to	 a	 boil.	 Boil	 for	 1	minute,
stirring.

Salt	and	white	pepper	Drops	of	lemon	juice	Pinch	of	nutmeg
Correct	seasoning,	adding	drops	of	lemon	juice	to	taste,	and	a	pinch	of
nutmeg.	Strain	the	sauce	through	a	fine	sieve.
Final	assembly

A	clean	casserole
Arrange	 the	 chicken,	 and	 the	onion	 and	mushroom	garniture,	 in	 the
casserole.	Pour	the	sauce	over	it.
(*)	Except	for	reheating,	and	the	final	buttering	of	the	sauce,	the	dish
is	now	ready	and	can	wait	indefinitely.	To	prevent	a	skin	from	forming
over	 the	 sauce,	 spoon	 over	 it	 a	 film	 of	 cream,	 stock,	 or	milk.	 Set	 it
aside	uncovered.
Reheating	and	serving

Set	casserole	over	moderate	heat	and	bring	to	the	simmer.	Cover	and
simmer	very	slowly	for	5	minutes,	or	until	the	chicken	is	hot	through,
basting	it	frequently	with	the	sauce.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter



Off	heat	and	just	before	serving,	tilt	casserole,	add	enrichment	butter,
and	baste	the	chicken	with	the	sauce	until	the	butter	has	absorbed	into
it.

Sprigs	of	fresh	parsley
Serve	the	chicken	from	the	casserole;	or	arrange	it	with	the	onions	and
mushrooms	 on	 a	 hot	 platter,	 surrounded	 with	 rice	 or	 noodles,	 and
covered	with	the	sauce.	Decorate	with	sprigs	of	fresh	parsley.

VARIATIONS:	SAUCES
Using	the	preceding	recipe,	you	may	vary	the	sauce	in	a	number	of

ways.	The	egg	yolk	liaison	at	the	end	may	be	omitted	and	a	cream	sauce
substituted;	 just	 reduce	 the	 cooking	 liquid	 until	 it	 is	 quite	 thick,	 then
simmer	 it	 slowly	while	 thinning	 it	 out	with	 spoonfuls	 of	 heavy	 cream
until	it	is	the	consistency	you	wish	it	to	be.	Here	are	some	other	ideas:	

VARIATIONS
Fricassée	de	Poulet	à	l’Indienne
[Curry	Sauce]

1	to	2	Tb	fragrant	curry	powder
After	 the	 chicken	 has	 had	 its	 preliminary	 turning	 of	 5	 minutes	 in
butter,	 blend	 in	 the	 curry	 powder.	 Cover,	 and	 proceed	with	 the	 10-
minute	cooking	period.	Then	continue	with	the	recipe.

Fricassée	de	Poulet	au	Paprika
[Paprika	Sauce]

1½	Tb	fresh-smelling	and	fragrant	paprika
After	 the	 chicken	 has	 had	 its	 preliminary	 turning	 of	 5	 minutes	 in
butter,	blend	 in	 the	paprika.	Cover,	and	proceed	with	 the	10-minute
cooking	period.	Then	continue	with	the	recipe.



½	Tb	more	paprika,	if	necessary
After	 completing	 the	 sauce,	 stir	 in	 more	 paprika	 if	 the	 sauce	 needs
color.	It	should	be	a	creamy	pink.

Fricassée	de	Poulet	à	l’Estragon
[Tarragon	Sauce]

4	or	5	sprigs	fresh	tarragon	or	2	tsp	dried	tarragon
Add	 the	 tarragon	 to	 the	 wine	 and	 stock	 for	 the	 simmering	 of	 the
chicken.

2	Tb	fresh	minced	tarragon	or	parsley
Stir	fresh	tarragon	or	parsley	into	the	finished	sauce.

FONDUE	DE	POULET	À	LA	CRÈME
[Chicken	Simmered	with	Cream	and	Onions]

In	this	rich	and	delectable	dish,	the	chicken	is	cooked	in	butter	and
onions,	 then	 simmered	 with	 wine	 and	 heavy	 cream.	 Serve	 it	 with
steamed	rice	or	 risotto,	buttered	green	peas	or	baked	cucumbers,	and	a
fairly	full-bodied	white	Burgundy	or	white	Bordeaux-Graves.
For	4	to	6	people

2½	to	3	lbs.	of	cut-up	frying	chicken
3	Tb	butter
A	heavy,	10-inch,	fireproof	casserole
Dry	the	chicken	thoroughly.	Turn	it	 in	hot	butter	for	4	to	5	minutes,
until	the	meat	has	stiffened	slightly	but	has	not	browned.	Remove	it	to
a	side	dish.

1½	cups	thinly	sliced	yellow	onions
Stir	the	onions	into	the	butter	in	the	pan.	Cover	and	cook	very	slowly



for	5	minutes,	or	until	the	onions	are	fairly	tender	but	not	browned.

Return	 the	 chicken	 to	 the	 casserole,	 cover	 and	 cook	 slowly	 for	 10
minutes	until	it	swells	slightly	and	stiffens,	but	does	not	brown.	Turn
it	once	during	this	period.

½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	white	pepper
¼	tsp	curry	powder
⅓	cup	cognac,	Calvados,	Madeira,	or	port;	or	¾	cup	dry	white	wine,
or	½	cup	dry	white	vermouth
Season	 the	chicken	with	 salt,	pepper,	and	curry	powder.	Pour	 in	 the
spirits	or	wine,	raise	heat,	and	boil	rapidly	until	the	liquid	has	almost
entirely	evaporated.

3	cups	whipping	cream	brought	to	the	boil	in	a	small	saucepan
Pour	 on	 the	 hot	 cream,	 bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 baste	 the	 chicken,	 and
cover	 the	 casserole.	 Maintain	 at	 the	 barest	 simmer	 for	 30	 to	 35
minutes,	or	until	the	chicken	is	tender	and	its	juices	run	a	clear	yellow
when	 the	meat	 is	 pricked	with	 a	 fork.	 The	 cream	may	 look	 slightly
curdled,	but	will	be	smoothed	out	later.

Remove	 the	 chicken	 to	 a	 hot	 platter,	 cover,	 and	 keep	 warm	 for	 5
minutes	while	finishing	the	sauce.

Salt	and	white	pepper
Drops	of	lemon	juice
3	to	4	Tb	whipping	cream
Skim	 fat	 off	 the	 sauce,	 then	 boil	 it	 rapidly,	 stirring,	 until	 it	 reduces
enough	 to	 coat	 the	 spoon	 lightly.	 Correct	 seasoning,	 adding	 lemon
juice	 to	 taste.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 additional	 cream	 by	 spoonfuls	 to
smooth	out	the	sauce.

Sprigs	of	fresh	parsley



Pour	the	sauce	over	the	chicken,	decorate	with	parsley,	and	serve.

COQ	AU	VIN
[Chicken	in	Red	Wine	with	Onions,	Mushrooms,	and	Bacon]

This	popular	dish	may	be	called	coq	au	Chambertin,	coq	au	riesling,
or	coq	au	whatever	wine	you	use	for	its	cooking.	It	is	made	with	either
white	 or	 red	 wine,	 but	 the	 red	 is	 more	 characteristic.	 In	 France	 it	 is
usually	accompanied	only	by	parsley	potatoes;	buttered	green	peas	could
be	 included	 if	you	wish	a	green	vegetable.	Serve	with	 it	 a	young,	 full-
bodied	red	Burgundy,	Beaujolais,	or	Côtes	du	Rhône.

For	4	to	6	people

A	3-to	4-ounce	chunk	of	lean	bacon
Remove	 the	 rind	 and	 cut	 the	 bacon	 into	 lardons	 (rectangles	¼	 inch
across	and	1	inch	long).	Simmer	for	10	minutes	in	2	quarts	of	water.
Rinse	in	cold	water.	Dry.

A	heavy,	10-inch,	fireproof	casserole	or	an	electric	skillet
2	Tb	butter
Sauté	 the	bacon	 slowly	 in	hot	butter	until	 it	 is	 very	 lightly	browned
(temperature	of	260	degrees	for	an	electric	skillet).	Remove	to	a	side
dish.

2½	to	3	lbs.	cut-up	frying	chicken
Dry	 the	 chicken	 thoroughly.	 Brown	 it	 in	 the	hot	 fat	 in	 the	 casserole
(360	degrees	for	the	electric	skillet).

½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Season	 the	 chicken.	 Return	 the	 bacon	 to	 the	 casserole	 with	 the
chicken.	Cover	and	cook	slowly	(300	degrees)	for	10	minutes,	turning
the	chicken	once.



¼	cup	cognac
Uncover,	and	pour	in	the	cognac.	Averting	your	face,	ignite	the	cognac
with	a	 lighted	match.	Shake	 the	 casserole	back	and	 forth	 for	 several
seconds	until	the	flames	subside.

3	cups	young,	full-bodied	red	wine	such	as	Burgundy,	Beaujolais,
Côtes	du	Rhône,	or	Chianti
1	to	2	cups	brown	chicken	stock,	brown	stock,	or	canned	beef
bouillon
½	Tb	tomato	paste
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
¼	tsp	thyme
1	bay	leaf
Pour	the	wine	into	the	casserole.	Add	just	enough	stock	or	bouillon	to
cover	the	chicken.	Stir	in	the	tomato	paste,	garlic,	and	herbs.	Bring	to
the	 simmer.	Cover	and	 simmer	 slowly	 for	25	 to	30	minutes,	or	until
the	chicken	is	tender	and	its	juices	run	a	clear	yellow	when	the	meat	is
pricked	with	a	fork.	Remove	the	chicken	to	a	side	dish.

12	to	24	brown-braised	onions
½	lb.	sautéed	mushrooms
While	the	chicken	is	cooking,	prepare	the	onions	and	mushrooms.

Salt	and	pepper
Simmer	 the	 chicken	 cooking	 liquid	 in	 the	 casserole	 for	 a	minute	 or
two,	skimming	off	fat.	Then	raise	heat	and	boil	rapidly,	reducing	the
liquid	 to	 about	 2¼	 cups.	 Correct	 seasoning.	 Remove	 from	heat,	 and
discard	bay	leaf.

3	Tb	flour
2	Tb	softened	butter
A	saucer
A	rubber	spatula



A	wire	whip
Blend	the	butter	and	flour	together	into	a	smooth	paste	(beurre	manié).
Beat	 the	 paste	 into	 the	 hot	 liquid	 with	 a	 wire	 whip.	 Bring	 to	 the
simmer,	stirring,	and	simmer	for	a	minute	or	two.	The	sauce	should	be
thick	enough	to	coat	a	spoon	lightly.

Arrange	the	chicken	in	the	casserole,	place	the	mushrooms	and	onions
around	it,	and	baste	with	the	sauce.
(*)	 If	 the	 dish	 is	 not	 to	 be	 served	 immediately,	 film	 the	 top	 of	 the
sauce	 with	 stock	 or	 dot	 with	 small	 pieces	 of	 butter.	 Set	 aside
uncovered.	It	can	now	wait	indefinitely.

Shortly	before	serving,	bring	to	the	simmer,	basting	the	chicken	with
the	 sauce.	 Cover	 and	 simmer	 slowly	 for	 4	 to	 5	 minutes,	 until	 the
chicken	is	hot	through.

Sprigs	of	fresh	parsley
Serve	 from	 the	 casserole,	 or	 arrange	 on	 a	hot	 platter.	Decorate	with
sprigs	of	parsley.

BROILED	CHICKEN

POULETS	GRILLÉS	À	LA	DIABLE

[Chicken	Broiled	with	Mustard,	Herbs,	and	Bread	Crumbs]

Here	is	a	fine	method	for	broiled	chicken	which	is	good	either	hot
or	cold.	The	chicken	is	partially	cooked	under	the	broiler,	then	smeared
with	mustard	and	herbs,	 rolled	 in	 fresh	bread	crumbs,	and	 returned	 to
the	broiler	 to	brown	and	 finish	 cooking.	A	practical	 attribute	 is	 that	 it
can	be	 almost	 entirely	 cooked	ahead	of	 time,	 set	 aside	or	 refrigerated,
and	then	finished	off	in	the	oven.	With	the	mustard	dip,	a	sauce	is	not	a
necessity.	 But	 if	 you	want	 one,	 serve	melted	 butter	mixed	with	 lemon
juice	and	minced	herbs,	or	sauce	diable	(herbal	brown	sauce	with	shallots
and	wine).	Baked,	whole	tomatoes	and	green	beans	would	go	well	with



it,	and	a	chilled	rosé	wine.
For	4	to	8	people

Preheat	oven	broiler	to	moderately	hot.

Two	ready-to-cook,	2½-lb.	broilers,	halved	or	quartered
A	saucepan	containing	6	Tb	melted	butter	and	2	Tb	oil
A	pastry	brush
A	broiling	pan	minus	rack
Salt
Dry	the	chicken	thoroughly,	paint	it	with	butter	and	oil,	and	arrange	it
skin-side	down	in	the	bottom	of	the	broiling	pan.	Place	it	so	that	the
surface	of	 the	chicken	 is	5	 to	6	 inches	 from	the	hot	broiling	element
and	 broil	 10	 minutes	 on	 each	 side,	 basting	 every	 5	 minutes.	 The
chicken	should	be	very	lightly	browned.	Salt	it	lightly.

6	Tb	prepared	mustard	of	the	strong	Dijon	type
3	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	tsp	thyme,	basil,	or	tarragon
⅛	tsp	pepper	Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
Blend	the	mustard	with	 the	shallots	or	onions,	herbs,	and	seasonings
in	 a	 bowl.	 Drop	 by	 drop,	 beat	 in	 half	 the	 basting	 fat	 to	 make	 a
mayonnaiselike	 cream.	 Reserve	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 basting	 fat	 for	 later.
Paint	the	chicken	pieces	with	the	mustard	mixture.

4	cups	fresh,	white	crumbs	from	homemade-type	of	bread	(make	the
crumbs	in	an	electric	blender,	3	or	4	slices	of	bread	at	a	time)
Pour	the	crumbs	into	a	big	plate,	then	roll	the	chicken	in	the	crumbs,
patting	them	on	so	they	will	adhere.

A	broiling	pan	with	rack
The	rest	of	the	basting	fat
Arrange	the	chicken	pieces	skin-side	down	on	the	rack	in	the	broiling



pan	 and	 dribble	 half	 the	 remaining	 basting	 fat	 over	 them.	 Brown
slowly	for	10	minutes	under	a	moderately	hot	broiler.	Turn,	baste	with
the	last	of	the	fat,	and	brown	10	minutes	more	on	the	other	side.	The
chicken	is	done	when	the	thickest	part	of	the	drumstick	is	tender,	and,
when	the	meat	is	pricked	with	a	fork,	the	juices	run	clear	yellow.

Transfer	to	a	hot	platter	and	serve.
(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTES
If	 you	 wish	 to	 do	 most	 of	 the	 cooking	 in	 advance,	 brown	 the

crumbed	 chicken	under	 the	broiler	 for	5	minutes	only	on	 each	 side.	 It
then	may	be	finished	off	several	hours	later,	placed	in	a	preheated	350-
degree	oven	for	20	to	30	minutes.	Do	not	allow	it	to	overcook.

CHICKEN	BREASTS

Suprêmes	de	Volaille

Breast	of	chicken	when	it	is	removed	raw	from	one	side	of	the	bird
in	a	skinless,	boneless	piece	is	called	a	suprême.	Each	chicken	possesses
two	of	them.	If	the	upper	part	of	the	wing	is	left	on,	the	suprême	becomes
a	côtelette.	The	breast	of	a	cooked	chicken	is	not	a	suprême,	but	a	blanc	de
poulet,	or	white	meat	of	chicken.	A	suprême	may	be	poached	in	butter	in
a	covered	casserole	à	blanc,	or	sautéed	or	broiled	with	butter	à	brun.	It	is
never,	in	good	French	cooking,	simmered	in	a	liquid.	The	suprême	is	an
easy	morsel	to	cook,	but	attention	must	be	exercised	to	be	sure	it	is	not
overdone,	as	even	a	minute	too	much	can	toughen	the	meat	and	make	it
dry.	 The	 flesh	 of	 a	 perfectly	 cooked	 suprême	 is	white	with	 the	 faintest
pinky	blush,	its	juices	run	clear	yellow,	and	it	is	definitely	juicy.	Its	point
of	doneness	is	easily	determined	as	it	cooks.	Press	the	top	of	it	with	your
finger;	if	it	is	still	soft	and	yields	slightly	to	the	touch,	it	is	not	yet	done.
As	 soon	 as	 the	 flesh	 springs	 back	with	 gentle	 resilience,	 it	 is	 ready.	 If
there	is	no	springiness,	it	is	overcooked.	As	a	suprême	cooks	in	only	6	to
8	minutes	and	may	be	served	very	simply,	it	can	make	an	exquisite	quick
meal.

PREPARING	THE	SUPRÊMES	FOR	COOKING



Choose	 whole	 or	 half	 breasts	 from	 a	 2¼-to	 3-lb.	 fryer.	 Slip	 your
fingers	 between	 skin	 and	 flesh,	 and	pull	 off	 the	 skin.	Then	 cut	 against
the	 ridge	of	 the	breastbone	 to	 loosen	 the	 flesh	 from	 the	bone.	Disjoint
the	 wing	 where	 it	 joins	 the	 carcass	 and	 continue	 down	 along	 the	 rib
cage,	pulling	flesh	from	bone	as	you	cut	until	the	meat	from	one	side	of
the	breast	separates	from	the	bone	in	one	piece.	Remove	the	wing.	Cut
and	 pull	 out	 the	 white	 tendon	 that	 runs	 about	 two	 thirds	 of	 the	 way
down	the	under	side	of	the	meat.	Trim	off	any	jagged	edges	and	flatten
the	suprêmes	lightly	with	the	side	of	a	heavy	knife.	They	are	now	ready
for	cooking.	If	they	are	not	to	be	used	immediately,	wrap	in	waxed	paper
and	refrigerate.

		SUPRÊMES	DE	VOLAILLE	À	BLANC
[Breast	of	Chicken	with	Cream]

Serve	 these	 with	 buttered	 asparagus	 tips,	 green	 peas,	 artichoke
hearts,	or	creamed	spinach,	a	good	risotto	cooked	in	chicken	stock,	and	a
bottle	of	chilled	white	Burgundy	or	Traminer.

For	4	people

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

suprêmes	(boned	breasts	from	two	fryers;	see	directions	in
paragraph	preceding	recipe)
½	tsp	lemon	juice
¼	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	white	pepper
A	heavy,	covered,	fireproof	casserole	about	10	inches	in	diameter
A	round	of	waxed	paper	10	inches	in	diameter	and	buttered	on	one
side
4	Tb	butter
Rub	the	suprêmes	with	drops	of	 lemon	juice	and	sprinkle	 lightly	with
salt	 and	pepper.	Heat	 the	 butter	 in	 the	 casserole	 until	 it	 is	 foaming.
Quickly	 roll	 the	 suprêmes	 in	 the	 butter,	 lay	 the	 buttered	 paper	 over



them,	cover	casserole	and	place	in	hot	oven.	After	6	minutes,	press	top
of	suprêmes	with	your	finger.	If	still	soft,	return	to	oven	for	a	moment
or	two.	When	the	meat	is	springy	to	the	touch	it	is	done.	Remove	the
suprêmes	to	a	warm	platter	and	cover	while	making	the	sauce	(2	to	3
minutes).
For	the	sauce:

¼	cup	white	or	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
¼	cup	port,	Madeira,	or	dry	white	vermouth
1	cup	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Lemon	juice	as	needed
2	Tb	fresh	minced	parsley
Pour	 the	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 and	 wine	 into	 the	 casserole	 with	 the
cooking	 butter	 and	 boil	 down	 quickly	 over	 high	 heat	 until	 liquid	 is
syrupy.	 Stir	 in	 the	 cream	 and	 boil	 down	 again	 over	 high	 heat	 until
cream	 has	 thickened	 slightly.	 Off	 heat,	 taste	 carefully	 for	 seasoning,
and	 add	 drops	 of	 lemon	 juice	 to	 taste.	 Pour	 the	 sauce	 over	 the
suprêmes,	sprinkle	with	parsley,	and	serve	at	once.

VARIATIONS
Suprêmes	de	Volaille	Archiduc
[Chicken	Breasts	with	Paprika,	Onions,	and	Cream]

This	 is	a	delicious	combination,	 the	onions	giving	 the	chicken	and
the	sauce	a	subtle	flavor,	while	the	paprika	lends	fragrance	and	rosiness
to	the	finished	dish.

⅔	cup	finely	minced	white	onions
5	Tb	butter
1	Tb	fragrant	red	paprika
⅛	tsp	salt
Drop	 the	minced	 onions	 into	 boiling	water	 for	 1	minute.	Drain,	 run



cold	water	over	them,	and	drain	again.	Cook	the	onions	with	the	salt,
paprika,	and	butter	in	the	covered	casserole	for	about	10	minutes	over
very	 low	 heat	 until	 the	 onions	 are	 tender	 and	 translucent,	 but	 not
browned.

suprêmes	and	the	sauce	ingredients	in	the	preceding	master	recipe
Following	the	master	recipe,	cook	the	suprêmes	in	the	onions,	paprika,
and	 butter.	 Remove	when	 done,	 leaving	 the	 onions	 in	 the	 casserole.
Complete	the	sauce,	also	as	described	in	the	master	recipe.

Suprêmes	de	Volaille	à	l’Écossaise
[Chicken	Breasts	with	Diced	Aromatic	Vegetables	and	Cream]

The	following	vegetables	cut	into	neat	1/ -inch	cubes,	making	⅔	to	¾
16

cup	in	all:

1	medium	carrot
1	to	2	tender	celery	stalks
1	medium	white	onion

Cook	the	diced	vegetables	slowly	with	the	salt	and	butter	for	about
10	minutes	in	the	covered	casserole	until	tender,	but	not	browned.

⅛	tsp	salt
5	Tb	butter
suprêmes	and	the	sauce	ingredients	in	the	master	recipe
Following	the	master	recipe,	cook	the	suprêmes	 in	the	vegetables	and
butter.	 Remove	 them	 when	 done,	 leaving	 the	 vegetables	 in	 the
casserole.	Complete	the	sauce,	as	described	in	the	master	recipe.

Suprêmes	de	Volaille	aux	Champignons
[Chicken	Breasts	with	Mushrooms	and	Cream]



5	Tb	butter
1	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onion
¼	lb.	diced	or	sliced	fresh	mushrooms
⅛	tsp	salt
Heat	the	butter	in	the	casserole	over	moderate	heat	until	foaming.	Stir
in	 the	minced	 shallots	 or	 green	 onion	 and	 sauté	 a	moment	 without
browning.	Then	stir	in	the	mushrooms	and	sauté	lightly	for	a	minute
or	two	without	browning.	Sprinkle	with	salt.

suprêmes	and	the	sauce	ingredients	in	the	master	recipe
Following	the	master	recipe,	cook	the	suprêmes	in	the	mushrooms	and
butter.	Remove	when	done,	 leaving	 the	mushrooms	 in	 the	 casserole.
Complete	the	sauce,	as	described	in	the	master	recipe.

		SUPRÊMES	DE	VOLAILLE	À	BRUN
[Chicken	Breasts	Sautéed	in	Butter]

Here	 the	 chicken	 breasts	 are	 lightly	 dusted	 with	 flour	 and	 are
sautéed	 in	 clarified	 butter.	 (Ordinary	 butter	 will	 burn	 and	 form	 black
specks	 on	 the	 suprêmes.	 Clarified	 butter	 may	 be	 heated	 to	 a	 higher
temperature	before	burning.)	A	good	accompaniment	for	this	dish	would
be	grilled	or	stuffed	tomatoes,	buttered	green	peas	or	beans,	and	potato
balls	sautéed	in	butter.	Serve	with	it	a	red	Bordeaux-Médoc.
For	4	people

suprêmes	(boned	breasts	from	2	fryers)
¼	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
1	cup	flour	spread	on	an	8-inch	plate
Just	before	 sautéing,	 sprinkle	 the	 suprêmes	with	 salt	 and	pepper,	 roll
them	in	the	flour,	and	shake	off	excess	flour.



An	8-to	9-inch	skillet
6	to	8	Tb	clarified	butter	(note	that	you	will	need	¼	cup	more	for
your	sauce)
A	hot	platter
Pour	clarified	butter	into	skillet	to	a	depth	of	about	 1/ 	inch.	Set	over

16

moderately	high	heat.	When	the	butter	begins	to	deepen	in	color	very
slightly,	put	in	the	suprêmes.	Regulate	heat	so	butter	is	always	hot	but
does	 not	 turn	 more	 than	 a	 deep	 yellow.	 After	 3	 minutes,	 turn	 the
suprêmes	 and	 sauté	 on	 the	 other	 side.	 In	 two	minutes,	 press	 tops	 of
suprêmes	with	your	 finger.	As	 soon	as	 they	are	 springy	 to	 the	 touch,
they	 are	 done.	 Remove	 to	 a	 hot	 platter,	 leaving	 the	 butter	 in	 the
skillet.
Brown	Butter	Sauce	(Beurre	Noisette)

4	Tb	clarified	butter
3	Tb	minced	parsley
1	Tb	lemon	juice
Add	additional	clarified	butter	to	skillet	and	set	over	moderately	high
heat	until	 the	butter	has	turned	a	very	light	golden	brown	(a	minute
or	 two).	 Immediately	 remove	 from	 heat,	 sir	 in	 parsley	 and	 lemon
juice,	and	taste	for	seasoning.	Pour	over	the	suprêmes	and	serve.

VARIATIONS
Brown	Deglazing	Sauce	with	Wine

1	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onion
¼	cup	port	or	Madeira
⅔	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
2	Tb	minced	parsley
After	removing	the	sautéed	suprêmes,	stir	minced	shallot	or	onion	into
skillet	 and	 sauté	 a	 moment.	 Then	 pour	 in	 the	 wine	 and	 stock	 or
bouillon	 and	boil	 down	 rapidly	 over	 high	heat	 until	 liquid	 is	 lightly



syrupy.	Pour	over	the	suprêmes,	sprinkle	with	parsley,	and	serve.

Deglazing	Sauce	with	Truffles

1	minced	canned	truffle	and	the	juice	from	its	can
Ingredients	for	the	preceding	brown	deglazing	sauce	minus	the
parsley
After	 sautéing	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions,	 as	 in	 the	 preceding	 master
recipe,	add	 the	wine,	 stock	or	bouillon,	and	 the	 truffle	and	 its	 juice.
Boil	down	liquid	until	syrupy,	and	pour	over	the	suprêmes.

Suprêmes	de	Volaille	à	la	Milanaise
[Chicken	Breasts	Rolled	in	Parmesan	and	Fresh	Bread	Crumbs]

suprêmes	(boned	breasts	from	two	fryers)
¼	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
1	cup	flour	spread	on	an	8-inch	plate
1	egg,	⅛	tsp	salt,	and	½	tsp	olive	oil	beaten	together	in	an	8-inch
soup	plate
½	cup	freshly	grated	Parmesan	cheese	and	½	cup	fine,	white,	fresh
bread	crumbs	mixed	together	in	an	8-inch	dish
Season	the	suprêmes	with	salt	and	pepper.	One	at	a	time,	roll	them	in
the	 flour	 and	 shake	 off	 excess.	 Dip	 in	 beaten	 egg.	 Then	 roll	 in	 the
cheese	 and	 bread	 crumbs,	 patting	 them	 in	 place	 with	 the	 flat	 of	 a
knife.	 Lay	 the	 suprêmes	 on	waxed	paper	and	allow	cheese	and	bread
crumbs	to	set	for	10	to	15	minutes	or	several	hours.

Ingredients	for	brown	butter	sauce,	master	recipe
Sauté	on	both	sides	in	clarified	butter	until	resilient	to	the	pressure	of
your	finger.	Serve	with	brown	butter	sauce	as	described	in	the	master
recipe.



DUCK

Canard	—	Caneton

Only	the	genuine	duckling	or	caneton—a	bird	under	6	months	old—
is	 good	 for	 roasting.	 Fortunately	 that	 is	 the	only	 kind	of	 duck	you	are
liable	 to	 find	 in	 any	 American	market.	 It	 generally	 weighs	 4½	 to	 5½
pounds	ready	to	cook,	has	been	beautifully	plucked	and	cleaned,	and	is
usually	 frozen,	 a	 state	 to	 which	 it	 takes	 much	 better	 than	 chicken.	 It
needs	 only	 to	 be	 thawed	 out	 in	 the	 refrigerator	 or	 in	 a	 basin	 of	 cold,
running	water,	and	it	is	ready	for	cooking.

A	NOTE	ON	FRENCH	DUCKS

While	American	commercially	raised	birds	are	usually	of	one	variety
—the	White	Pekin—French	ducks	are	of	various	breeds.	These	are:	 the
nantais,	 which	 rarely	 weighs	 over	 3	 pounds	 and	 is	 the	 most	 common
table	duckling;	the	rouennais,	famous	as	pressed	duck;	and	the	canard	de
barbarie,	often	older	and	always	larger,	which	is	used	for	braising.

PREPARING	A	DUCK	FOR	ROASTING

Pull	out	all	loose	fat	from	the	cavity	and	from	around	the	neck.	To
make	 the	carving	of	 the	breast	meat	easier,	 cut	out	 the	wishbone.	The
lower	part	of	the	wing	is	mostly	bone;	chop	it	off	at	the	elbow	and	add	it
to	the	stock	pot.	Be	sure	the	fat	glands	on	the	back	at	the	base	of	the	tail
have	 been	 removed;	 dig	 out	 any	 yellow	 residue	 that	may	 remain,	 and
rub	the	area	with	salt	and	lemon	juice.	To	help	the	layer	of	subcutaneous
duck	 fat	 to	 escape	 during	 cooking,	 prick	 the	 skin	 at	 ½-inch	 intervals
along	 the	 thighs,	 the	 back,	 and	 the	 lower	 part	 of	 the	 breast.	 After
seasoning	 the	 cavity,	or	 stuffing	 it,	 sew	or	 skewer	 the	 legs,	wings,	 and
neck	 skin	 to	 the	body	 so	 the	bird	will	make	a	neat	 appearance	on	 the
table;	see	the	illustrated	directions	for	trussing	a	chicken	which	may	be
adapted	for	duck.

DUCK	STOCK

The	 neck,	 heart,	 gizzard,	 and	 lower	 wings	 may	 be	 used	 for	 the
making	of	a	duck	stock.	Follow	the	same	method	as	for	chicken	stock.



CARVING	NOTE

Duck	has	 far	more	carcass	and	 far	 less	meat	 than	a	chicken	of	 the
same	weight;	a	4½-pound	duck	will	serve	only	4	or	5	people.	The	French
method	 of	 carving	 is	 to	 make	 as	 many	 thin	 slices	 of	 breast	 meat	 as
possible,	 4	 to	 6	 per	 side,	 as	 follows:	 After	 the	 second	 joints	 and
drumsticks	 have	 been	 removed,	 the	 duck	 is	 turned	 on	 its	 side,	 its	 tail
facing	the	carver.	Thin	slices	of	meat	are	cut	diagonally	starting	from	the
lower	 part	 of	 the	 breast	 nearest	 the	 tail	 and	 running	 toward	 the
breastbone.	 The	 same	 system	 is	 used	 for	 the	 other	 side,	 cutting	 in	 the
opposite	direction.

ROASTING	TIMETABLE

French	taste	 is	 for	ducks	roasted	to	a	medium	rare—the	 juices	run
slightly	rosy	when	the	meat	 is	pricked.	 If	 the	duck	is	 to	be	served	well
done,	its	juices	should	run	clear	yellow.	Overcooked	duck	meat	is	brown,
dry,	and	disappointing.

The	 following	 table	 is	 for	unstuffed,	unchilled	duck.	Add	20	 to	30
minutes	to	the	times	listed	if	the	duck	is	stuffed.

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Caneton	 aux	 petits	 pois,	 duckling	 with	 green	 peas,	 is	 one	 of	 the
favorite	 French	 combinations,	 especially	 in	 the	 spring.	Other	 vegetable
suggestions	 are	 broccoli	 or	 Brussels	 sprouts,	 or	 braised	 lettuce,	 celery,
celeriac,	 onions,	 or	 turnips.	 Among	 starchy	 vegetables,	 if	 you	 wish	 to
serve	one,	are	braised	or	pureéd	chestnuts,	potatoes	mashed	with	celery
root	or	turnips,	or	a	purée	of	lentils	or	navy	beans.

WINE	SUGGESTIONS



Serve	 full	 red	 wine,	 such	 as	 Burgundy,	 Côtes	 du	 Rhône,
Châteauneuf-du-Pape,	 or	 Bordeaux-St.	 Émilion.	 Or	 a	 chilled	 Alsatian
Traminer.

		CANETON	RÔTI
[Roast	Duckling]

For	5	to	6	people

Estimated	roasting	time:	1	hour	and	20	to	40	minutes

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

A	5½-lb.	ready-to-cook	duckling
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
A	pinch	of	thyme	or	sage
A	small	sliced	onion
Season	the	inside	of	the	duck	with	salt,	pepper,	herbs,	and	the	sliced
onion.	 Secure	 the	 legs,	 wings,	 and	 neck	 skin	 to	 the	 body.	 Prick	 the
skin	 around	 the	 thighs,	 back,	 and	 lower	 breast.	 Dry	 the	 duck
thoroughly.

A	shallow	roasting	pan	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	duck	easily
1	medium	sliced	carrot
1	medium	sliced	onion
Place	 the	 duck	 breast	 up	 in	 the	 roasting	 pan,	 strew	 the	 vegetables
around	it,	and	set	it	in	the	middle	level	of	the	oven	for	15	minutes	to
brown	lightly.

A	bulb	baster
Reduce	oven	to	350	degrees,	and	turn	 the	duck	on	 its	 side.	Regulate
heat	so	duck	is	always	making	cooking	noises	but	 fat	 is	not	burning.



Remove	 accumulated	 fat	 occasionally	 (a	 bulb	 baster	 will	 suck	 it	 up
easily).	Basting	is	not	necessary.

About	30	minutes	later,	or	about	halfway	through,	turn	the	duck	on	its
other	side.

½	tsp	salt
Fifteen	minutes	before	the	end	of	the	estimated	roasting	time,	salt	the
duck	and	turn	it	breast	up.

The	duck	is	done	to	a	medium	rare	if	the	juices	from	the	fattest	part	of
the	thigh	or	drumstick	run	faintly	rosy	when	the	meat	is	pricked,	and
when	 the	duck	 is	 lifted	and	drained,	 the	 last	drops	of	 juice	 from	the
vent	are	a	pale	rose.	The	duck	is	well	done	when	the	juices	run	pale
yellow.

When	done,	discard	trussing	strings,	and	place	the	duck	on	a	serving
platter.	 Set	 in	 turned-off	 oven	 and	 leave	 the	 door	 open	 while
preparing	the	sauce,	which	will	take	3	to	4	minutes.

1½	to	2	cups	brown	duck	stock,	beef	stock,	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Optional:	3	or	4	Tb	port
Tilt	the	roasting	pan	and	spoon	out	all	but	1	tablespoon	of	fat.	Add	the
stock	 or	 bouillon	 and	 boil	 rapidly,	 scraping	 up	 coagulated	 roasting
juices,	and	crushing	the	vegetables,	until	liquid	is	reduced	at	least	by
half.	 Correct	 seasoning.	 Add	 optional	 wine	 and	 simmer	 a	minute	 to
evaporate	its	alcohol.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 swirl	 the	 butter	 into	 the	 sauce	 and
strain	it	into	a	sauceboat.	Pour	a	bit	of	sauce	over	the	duck,	and	serve.

(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE

Roast	 duck	may	wait	 in	 the	 turned-off	 hot	 oven,	 its	 door	 ajar,	 for
about	30	minutes	before	serving.



SPIT	ROASTING

Duck	does	very	well	 indeed	on	a	rotary	spit.	Follow	the	directions
for	 spit-roasted	 chicken	 but	 omit	 the	 bacon	 wrapping.	 No	 basting	 is
necessary.	Roasting	time	is	the	same	as	for	oven	roasting	on	the	chart.

VARIATIONS
Caneton	Rôti	à	l’Alsacienne
[Roast	Duck	with	Sausage	and	Apple	Stuffing]

Apples	 and	duck	 are	 a	 fine	 combination,	 and	 sausages	make	 it	 an
even	 better	 one.	 The	 platter	 may	 be	 garnished	 with	 more	 apples	 and
sausages	 if	 you	 wish,	 braised	 onions,	 and	 sautéed	 potatoes	 or	 potato
crêpes.	A	chilled	Alsatian	Traminer	would	go	well	with	it,	or	hard	cider.
For	5	or	6	people

Estimated	roasting	time:	1	hour	and	45	to	60	minutes

Sausage	and	apple	stuffing

½	lb.	pork	link	sausages
Sauté	 the	 sausages	 in	 a	 skillet	 until	 they	 are	 lightly	 browned.	Drain
them.	Mash	them	roughly	with	a	fork	in	a	mixing	bowl.

4	or	5	crisp	eating	apples
Peel,	 quarter,	 and	 core	 the	 apples.	 Cut	 the	 quarters	 into	 2	 or	 3
lengthwise	segments.	Sauté	them,	a	few	at	a	time,	in	the	hot	sausage
fat	 in	 the	 skillet.	 They	 should	 be	 very	 lightly	 browned,	 and	 almost
tender,	but	still	retain	their	shape.

1	Tb	sugar
¼	tsp	cinnamon
¼	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	sage
2	Tb	cognac



Place	them	on	a	platter	and	sprinkle	with	the	seasonings	and	cognac.

¼	cup	port
¼	cup	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Pour	the	fat	out	of	the	skillet.	Add	the	wine	and	stock	or	bouillon	and
boil	rapidly	until	liquid	has	reduced	to	2	or	3	tablespoons.	Pour	it	over
the	cooked	sausages.

When	 both	 apples	 and	 sausages	 have	 cooled,	 mix	 them	 delicately
together.	Stuff	loosely	into	the	duck.	Sew	or	skewer	the	vent,	truss	the
duck,	and	roast	it	according	to	the	preceding	master	recipe.

		Caneton	à	l’Orange
[Roast	Duck	with	Orange	Sauce]

One	 of	 the	 most	 well	 known	 of	 all	 the	 duck	 dishes,	 caneton	 à
l’orange,	 is	 roast	 duck	 decorated	 with	 fresh	 orange	 segments	 and
accompanied	 by	 an	 orange-flavored	 brown	 sauce.	 Its	 most	 important
element	is	its	sauce—a	rich,	strong,	meaty,	duck	essence	darkened	with
caramel,	flavored	with	wine	and	orange	peel,	and	given	a	light	liaison	of
arrowroot.	You	can	and	should	prepare	the	sauce	well	ahead	of	time	so
that	when	the	duck	is	roasted,	the	dish	is	within	2	to	3	minutes	of	being
done.

VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Nothing	should	interfere	with	the	flavors	of	the	duck,	the	sauce,	and
the	oranges.	Sautéed	or	shoestring	potatoes,	or	homemade	potato	chips
are	 your	 best	 choice.	 Serve	 a	 good	 red	 Bordeaux-Médoc,	 or	 a	 chilled
white	Burgundy—Meursault,	Montrachet,	or	Corton-Charlemagne.

For	5	or	6	people
Note:	 Under	 the	 ingredients	 needed	 for	 the	 sauce	 are	 2	 cups	 of

excellent	duck	stock.	This	should	be	prepared	ahead	of	time,	as	it	must
simmer	about	2	hours.
Blanching	the	orange	peel



4	brightly	colored	navel	oranges
Remove	the	orange	part	of	the	skin	in	strips	with	a	vegetable	peeler.
Cut	 into	 julienne	 (small	 strips	 1/ 	 inch	 wide	 and	 1½	 inches	 long).

16

Simmer	 for	 15	minutes	 in	 a	 quart	 of	water.	Drain.	 Pat	 dry	 in	 paper
towels.
Roasting	the	duck

A	5	½-lb.	ready-to-cook	duckling
½	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Season	 the	 duck	 cavity	 with	 salt	 and	 pepper,	 add	 a	 third	 of	 the
prepared	 orange	 peel,	 and	 truss	 the	 duck.	 Roast	 it	 according	 to	 the
master	recipe.
The	sauce	base

A	4-cup	saucepan
3	Tb	granulated	sugar
¼	cup	red	wine	vinegar
2	cups	strong,	brown	duck	stock	(follow	directions	for	brown	chicken
stock,	using	duck	giblets	instead	of	chicken	giblets)

2	Tb	arrowroot	blended	with	3	Tb	port	or	Madeira
The	rest	of	the	blanched	orange	peel
While	the	duck	is	roasting,	make	a	sweet-and-sour	caramel	coloring	as
follows:	 Boil	 the	 sugar	 and	 vinegar	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 for
several	minutes	until	 the	mixture	has	turned	into	a	mahogany-brown
syrup.	Immediately	remove	from	heat	and	pour	in	½	cup	of	the	duck
stock.	Simmer	for	a	minute,	stirring,	to	dissolve	the	caramel.	Then	add
the	 rest	 of	 the	 stock,	 beat	 in	 the	 arrowroot	mixture,	 and	 stir	 in	 the
orange	 peel.	 Simmer	 for	 3	 to	 4	minutes	 or	 until	 the	 sauce	 is	 clear,
limpid,	and	lightly	thickened.	Correct	seasoning,	and	set	aside.
The	orange	segments

The	4	oranges,	skinned



Cut	the	4	oranges	into	neat,	skinless	segments	and	place	in	a	covered
dish.
Final	assembly

When	the	duck	is	done,	discard	trussing	strings,	and	set	it	on	a	platter.
Place	it	in	the	turned-off	hot	oven,	leaving	the	door	ajar.

½	cup	port	or	Madeira
Remove	as	much	fat	as	you	can	from	the	roasting	pan.	Add	the	wine
and	boil	 it	 down	 rapidly,	 scraping	up	 coagulated	 roasting	 juices	 and
reducing	the	liquid	to	2	or	3	tablespoons.

The	prepared	sauce	base
2	or	3	Tb	good	orange	liqueur
Drops	of	orange	bitters	or	lemon	juice
Strain	the	wine	reduction	into	the	sauce	base	and	bring	to	the	simmer.
Stir	in	the	orange	liqueur	by	spoonfuls,	tasting.	The	sauce	should	have
a	 pleasant	 orange	 flavor	 but	 not	 be	 too	 sweet.	 Add	 drops	 of	 orange
bitters	or	lemon	juice	as	a	corrective.

2	Tb	softened	butter
Just	before	serving,	and	off	heat,	swirl	 in	the	butter	enrichment,	and
pour	the	sauce	into	a	warmed	sauceboat.

Place	a	line	of	orange	segments	over	the	length	of	the	duck	and	heap
the	rest	at	the	two	ends	of	the	platter.	Spoon	a	bit	of	sauce	with	peel
over	the	duck,	and	serve.

VARIATIONS
Caneton	aux	Cerises
Caneton	Montmorency
[Roast	Duck	with	Cherries]



Cherries	or	peaches	are	also	good	as	a	garnish	for	roast	duck.	Roast
the	bird	as	directed	in	the	master	recipe.	Make	the	caramel-colored	and
arrowroot-thickened	sauce	described	for	the	preceding	caneton	à	l’orange,
omitting	the	orange	peel	and	orange	 liqueur.	The	 fruit	 is	heated	 in	 the
sauce	as	follows:

36	to	48	red	or	black	pitted	cherries	(if	frozen,	thaw	and	drain)
A	4-cup	enameled	saucepan
1	Tb	lemon	juice
3	Tb	port	or	cognac
2	to	3	Tb	granulated	sugar
Toss	the	cherries	in	the	saucepan	with	the	lemon	juice,	port	or	cognac,
and	sugar.	Let	them	soak	for	at	least	20	to	30	minutes.

After	 the	 duck	 has	 roasted,	 and	 the	 pan	 juices	 have	 been	 deglazed
with	wine	 and	 added	 to	 the	 sauce,	 pour	 the	 sauce	 into	 the	 cherries.
Heat	to	below	the	simmer	for	3	to	4	minutes	to	poach	the	cherries	(if
liquid	 simmers,	 the	 fruit	 may	 shrivel).	 Remove	 the	 cherries	 with	 a
slotted	spoon	and	distribute	them	over	and	around	the	duck.

2	Tb	softened	butter
Boil	 the	 sauce	 rapidly	 to	 reduce	 and	 thicken	 it	 slightly.	 Correct
seasoning.	Off	heat,	swirl	in	the	enrichment	butter.	Pour	the	sauce	into
a	warmed	bowl,	spoon	a	bit	over	the	duck,	and	serve.

Caneton	aux	Pêches
[Roast	Duck	with	Peaches]

3	large	or	6	small,	firm,	ripe,	freestone	peaches	(or	drained	canned
peaches,	minus	the	sugar	below)

2	Tb	lemon	juice
2	to	3	Tb	port	or	cognac
If	using	fresh	peaches,	peel	and	halve	them	not	more	than	30	minutes



before	 serving	 so	 they	 will	 not	 discolor.	 Arrange	 the	 peaches	 in	 a
fireproof	dish	and	baste	them	with	the	liquids	and	sugar.	Baste	several
times	more	before	using.

2	to	3	Tb	granulated	sugar
After	the	duck	has	roasted	and	the	pan	juices	have	been	deglazed	with
wine	 and	 added	 to	 the	 sauce,	 pour	 the	 sauce	 over	 the	 peaches.
Proceed	as	for	the	preceding	duck	with	cherries	recipe.

		CANETON	POÊLÉ	AUX	NAVETS
[Casserole-roasted	Duck	with	Turnips]

In	casserole	 roasting,	 the	duck	 is	browned	on	all	 sides,	 then	set	 to
roast	 in	a	covered	casserole.	Cooked	 in	 its	own	steam,	 the	duck’s	 flesh
becomes	wonderfully	 tender,	 and	 the	 layer	of	 subcutaneous	 fat	 is	 even
more	 effectively	 dissolved	 than	 by	 roasting.	 The	 turnips,	 which	 finish
their	 cooking	with	 the	 duck	 absorbing	 cooking	 juices,	 are	 particularly
succulent.	 No	 other	 vegetable	 is	 necessary,	 but	 you	 could	 serve	 green
peas	or	broccoli.	A	red	Bordeaux,	Beaujolais,	or	Côtes	du	Rhône	would
be	the	choice	of	wines.

For	5	to	6	people.

Estimated	roasting	time:	1	hour	and	20	to	40	minutes

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	5½-lb.	ready-to-cook	duckling
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
A	heavy,	oval	casserole	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	duck	easily
3	Tb	rendered	fresh	pork	fat	or	cooking	oil
Season	the	inside	of	the	duck	with	salt	and	pepper,	truss	it,	prick	the
skin	 around	 the	 thighs,	 back,	 and	 lower	 part	 of	 the	 breast.	 Dry	 it



thoroughly.	Brown	it	slowly	on	all	sides	in	hot	fat	in	the	casserole—as
for	browning	a	chicken.

½	tsp	salt
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp
thyme	tied	in	washed	cheesecloth
Pour	out	the	browning	fat.	Salt	the	duck	and	place	it	breast	up	in	the
casserole.	Add	the	herb	bouquet,	cover	the	hot	casserole,	and	place	it
in	the	middle	level	of	the	preheated	oven.	Roast	for	50	to	60	minutes,
regulating	 heat	 so	 the	 duck	 is	 always	 making	 quiet	 cooking	 noises.
Basting	is	not	necessary.

2	lbs.	firm,	crisp,	white	or	yellow	turnips
While	the	duck	is	cooking,	prepare	the	turnips:	Peel	them	and	cut	into
large	 olive	 shapes	 about	 1¾	 inches	 long,	 or	 into	¾-inch	 dice.	 Drop
into	boiling,	salted	water,	and	boil	slowly	for	5	minutes.	Drain.

A	bulb	baster
After	the	duck	has	roasted	for	50	to	60	minutes,	or	30	to	40	minutes
before	the	end	of	 its	estimated	cooking	time,	degrease	casserole	with
bulb	baster.	Arrange	the	turnips	around	the	duck,	cover	the	casserole,
and	return	it	to	the	oven.	Baste	turnips	occasionally	with	the	juices	in
the	casserole.

The	duck	is	done	when	its	juices	run	a	pale	rose	for	medium	rare,	or	a
clear	yellow	for	well	done.

2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley
Drain	the	duck,	discard	trussing	strings,	and	place	it	on	a	hot	platter.
Remove	 the	 turnips	 with	 a	 slotted	 spoon,	 arrange	 them	 around	 the
duck,	and	decorate	with	parsley.	Degrease	the	cooking	juices,	correct
seasoning,	pour	into	a	warmed	sauceboat,	and	serve.

(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE



The	duck,	turnips,	and	degreased	cooking	juices	can	be	returned	to
the	hot	casserole.	Set	the	cover	askew,	and	keep	it	warm	for	30	minutes
in	the	turned-off	hot	oven,	or	over	barely	simmering	water.

VARIATIONS
Canard	Braisé	avec	Choucroute	—	à	la	Badoise
[Duck	Braised	in	Sauerkraut]

Canard	Braisé	aux	Choux	Rouges
[Duck	Braised	in	Red	Cabbage]

These	two	classic	combinations	are	both	done	in	the	same	way:	after
the	sauerkraut	or	cabbage	is	about	two	thirds	braised,	the	browned	duck
is	added	to	cook	in	the	casserole,	and	all	 ingredients	benefit	from	their
mutual	exchange	of	flavors.	Parsley	potatoes	or	braised	chestnuts	and	a
chilled	Alsatian	Traminer	go	well	with	this.
For	5	or	6	people

Ingredients	for	2	lbs.	of	braised	sauerkraut,	or	braised	red	cabbage
A	casserole	large	enough	to	include	the	duck	as	well
Follow	the	 recipe	 for	braised	 sauerkraut	or	braised	 red	cabbage,	and
cook	for	3½	hours.

A	5½-lb.	ready-to-cook	duckling
Season,	truss,	prick,	and	dry	the	duck.	Brown	it	in	hot	fat	as	described
in	 the	preceding	 recipe.	 Salt	 it	 and	bury	 it	 in	 the	 casserole	with	 the
sauerkraut	or	cabbage.	Cover,	and	braise	for	about	1½	hours	more,	or
until	the	duck	is	done.

Parsley	sprigs
When	 done,	 remove	 the	 duck	 to	 a	 hot	 platter	 and	 discard	 trussing
strings.	Lift	out	the	sauerkraut	or	cabbage,	draining	its	juices	back	into
the	casserole,	and	arrange	it	about	the	duck.	Decorate	with	parsley.



Degrease	 the	 cooking	 juices.	 Set	 casserole	 over	 high	 heat	 and	 boil
rapidly	 until	 the	 liquid	 has	 reduced	 and	 its	 flavor	 is	 concentrated.
Strain	into	a	sauceboat,	pour	a	spoonful	over	the	duck,	and	serve.

CANETON	BRAISÉ	AUX	MARRONS
[Braised	Duck	with	Chestnut	and	Sausage	Stuffing]

Follow	 the	 recipe	 for	 braised	 goose	 with	 chestnut	 and	 sausage
stuffing.	 Use	 the	 timetable	 for	 roast	 duck	 adding	 30	 minutes	 more
because	of	the	stuffing.

CANARD	EN	CROÛTE
[Boned,	Stuffed	Duck	Baked	in	a	Crust]

This	recipe	is	on	this	page

GOOSE

Oie

Goose,	like	duck,	can	only	be	considered	gastronomically	interesting
when	 it	 is	under	6	months	old,	and	that	 is	probably	 the	only	kind	you
will	 find	 in	American	markets.	 It	 usually	 comes	 frozen,	 and	 should	 be
defrosted	either	in	the	refrigerator	or	in	a	pan	with	cold,	running	water.
It	is	prepared	for	cooking	like	duck.

GOOSE	FAT

Goose	 fat	 is	extremely	good	as	a	sauté	or	basting	medium,	or	as	a
flavoring	for	braised	cabbage	or	sauerkraut.	Once	rendered,	it	will	keep
for	weeks	in	the	refrigerator.	To	render	the	fat,	pull	out	all	the	loose	fat
from	 inside	 the	 goose.	 Chop	 it	 up	 into	½-inch	 pieces.	 Simmer	 it	 in	 a
covered	saucepan	with	1	cup	of	water	for	20	minutes	to	draw	the	fat	out
of	 the	 tissues.	 Then	 uncover	 the	 pan	 and	 boil	 the	 liquid	 slowly	 to
evaporate	 the	 water.	 As	 the	 moisture	 evaporates,	 the	 fat	 will	 make
spluttering	noises.	As	soon	as	these	have	stopped,	the	fat	is	rendered,	the
liquid	will	be	a	pale	yellow,	and	the	fat	particles	will	have	browned	very
lightly.	Strain	the	liquid	into	a	jar.



Frittons
Grattons
[Goose	Cracklings]

The	browned	fat	particles	may	be	turned	into	a	spread	for	croûtons,
toast,	or	crackers.	Pound	them	in	a	mortar	or	put	them	through	the	meat
grinder.	 Warm	 them	 briefly	 in	 a	 skillet	 and	 stir	 in	 salt,	 pepper,	 and
allspice	to	taste.	Pack	them	into	a	jar.	When	cold,	pour	a	⅛-inch	layer	of
hot	goose	fat	over	them	to	seal	them.	They	will	keep	for	several	weeks	in
the	refrigerator.

GOOSE	STOCK

A	good	goose	 stock	 is	 easy	 to	make	with	 the	 gizzard,	 neck,	heart,
and	wing	tips	of	the	goose.	The	liver	may	be	included,	unless	you	wish
to	treat	it	like	chicken	liver,	or	add	it	to	your	stuffing.	Follow	the	general
procedure	for	chicken	stock.	It	should	simmer	for	2	hours	or	so.

STUFFINGS	FOR	GOOSE

Goose	may	be	cooked	with	or	without	a	stuffing.	Besides	the	prune
and	 foie	gras,	and	 the	chestnut	stuffing,	both	of	which	are	described	 in
the	pages	following,	another	good	one	for	goose	is	the	apple	and	sausage
mixture	 in	 the	Duck	 section.	Count	on	¾	 to	1	 cup	of	 stuffing	 for	 each
ready-to-cook	pound	of	goose.	An	8-lb.	bird,	for	instance,	will	take	6	to	8
cups	 of	 stuffing.	 Although	 you	 may	 prepare	 a	 stuffing	 ahead	 of	 time,
never	 stuff	 the	 goose	 until	 just	 before	 cooking,	 or	 both	 goose	 and
stuffing	may	spoil.

TIMETABLE	FOR	ROAST	OR	BRAISED	GOOSE

The	following	table	is	based	on	unstuffed,	unchilled	goose	cooked	to
the	 well-done	 stage—when	 its	 juices	 run	 pale	 yellow.	 Be	 sure	 not	 to
overcook	 your	 goose,	 or	 the	 breast	 meat	 especially	 will	 be	 dry	 and
disappointing.	You	will	see	in	the	table	that	the	larger	the	goose,	the	less
time	per	pound	 it	 takes	 to	 cook.	A	9-lb.	 goose	 requires	 about	2	hours,
and	a	12½-lb.	bird,	only	about	30	minutes	longer.	The	best	sizes	to	buy
are	from	9	to	11	lbs.;	larger	geese	may	be	a	bit	older	and	tougher.	Oven
temperature	 for	 roasting	 is	 350	 degrees;	 for	 braising,	 325	 degrees.	 A
meat	thermometer	should	register	180	degrees.



READY-TO- NUMBER	OF APPROXIMATE	TOTAL
COOK PEOPLE COOKING	TIME	(UNSTUFFED
WEIGHT SERVED GOOSE)*
8	lbs. 6 1	hour	and	50	to	55	minutes
9	lbs. 6	to	8 About	2	hours
9½	lbs. 8	to	9 2	hours	and	10	to	15	minutes
10½	lbs. 9	to	10 2	hours	and	15	to	20	minutes
11½	lbs. 10	to	12 2	hours	and	20	to	30	minutes
12½	lbs. 12	to	14 2	hours	and	30	to	40	minutes

*	For	a	stuffed	goose,	add	from	20	to	40	minutes	to	the	times	given.

OIE	RÔTIE	AUX	PRUNEAUX
[Roast	Goose	with	Prune	and	Foie	Gras	Stuffing]

Goose	is	roasted	exactly	like	duck,	the	only	exception	being	that	the
goose	is	basted	every	15	to	20	minutes	with	boiling	water	to	help	in	the
dissolution	of	its	subcutaneous	fat,	which	is	more	copious	for	goose	than
for	duck.	Prunes	and	goose	are	an	exceptionally	fine	combination.	With
the	 goose	 you	 can	 serve	 braised	 onions	 and	 chestnuts,	 and	 a	 full	 red
wine	such	as	a	Burgundy	or	Châteauneuf-du-Pape.
For	6	to	8	people.

Estimated	roasting	time:	About	2½	hours
Note:	 A	 good	 brown	 goose	 stock	will	 give	 you	 an	 excellent	 sauce,

but	it	must	be	prepared	in	advance;	see	preceding	remarks.

Prune	and	foie	gras	stuffing

40–50	“tenderized”	prunes



Soak	 the	 prunes	 in	 hot	 water	 for	 5	 minutes.	 Pit	 them	 as	 neatly	 as
possible.

1	cup	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
2	cups	brown	goose	stock,	brown	stock,	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Simmer	them	slowly	in	a	covered	saucepan	with	the	wine	and	stock	or
bouillon	 for	 about	 10	 minutes,	 or	 until	 they	 are	 just	 tender.	 Drain
them	and	reserve	the	cooking	liquid.

The	goose	liver,	minced
2	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	Tb	butter
Sauté	 the	 goose	 liver	 and	 shallots	 or	 onions	 in	 butter,	 using	 a	 small
skillet,	for	2	minutes.	Scrape	into	a	mixing	bowl.

⅓	cup	port
Boil	 the	wine	in	the	same	skillet	until	 it	 is	reduced	to	2	tablespoons.
Scrape	it	into	the	mixing	bowl	with	the	liver.

½	cup	or	4	ounces	of	foie	gras	(goose	liver),	or	very	good	liver	paste
Pinch:	allspice	and	thyme
2	to	3	Tb	bread	crumbs
Salt	and	pepper
Blend	the	foie	gras	or	 liver	paste	and	flavorings	into	the	mixing	bowl
with	the	sautéed	liver.	If	mixture	seems	too	soft	for	easy	stuffing,	beat
in	bread	crumbs.	Taste	carefully	for	seasoning.	Fill	each	prune	with	a
teaspoon	of	the	stuffing.

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

A	9-lb.	ready-to-cook	young	roasting	goose
1	tsp	salt
A	shallow	roasting	pan



Salt	 the	 cavity	of	 the	goose.	 Stuff	 it	 loosely	with	 the	prunes.	 Sew	or
skewer	 the	 vent.	 Secure	 the	 legs,	wings,	 and	 neck	 skin	 to	 the	 body.
Prick	the	skin	over	the	thighs,	back,	and	lower	breast.	Dry	thoroughly,
and	set	it	breast	up	in	the	roasting	pan.

Boiling	water
A	bulb	baster
Following	directions	for	roast	duck,	brown	the	goose	for	15	minutes	in
the	hot	oven.	Turn	goose	on	its	side,	 lower	heat	 to	350	degrees,	and
continue	 roasting.	 Baste	 every	 15	 to	 20	 minutes	 with	 2	 or	 3
tablespoons	 of	 boiling	water,	 and	 remove	 excess	 accumulated	 fat.	 A
bulb	baster	 is	useful	 for	 this;	 tilt	 the	pan	and	 suck	 the	 fat	 out.	Turn
goose	 on	 its	 other	 side	 at	 the	 halfway	 mark,	 and	 on	 its	 back	 15
minutes	before	the	end.	The	goose	should	be	done	in	2	hours	and	20
to	 30	 minutes,	 when	 the	 drumsticks	 move	 slightly	 in	 their	 sockets,
and,	when	 the	 fleshiest	 part	 of	 one	 is	 pricked,	 the	 juices	 run	 a	 pale
yellow.	Do	not	allow	the	goose	to	overcook	or	the	meat	will	dry	out.

When	done,	discard	trussing	strings	and	set	the	goose	on	a	platter.

The	prune	cooking	juices
Optional:	⅓	to	½	cup	port
Salt	and	pepper
2	Tb	softened	butter
Tilt	the	pan	and	spoon	out	the	fat,	but	leave	the	brown	roasting	juices.
Pour	in	the	prune	cooking	juices	and	optional	port.	Boil	down	rapidly,
scraping	up	coagulated	roasting	juices,	until	liquid	has	reduced	and	is
full	of	flavor.	Correct	seasoning.	Off	heat	and	just	before	serving,	swirl
in	the	enrichment	butter	by	bits.	Pour	into	a	warmed	sauceboat,	spoon
a	bit	of	sauce	over	the	goose,	and	serve.

(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE
Roast	 goose	may	wait	 for	 30	 to	 40	minutes	 in	 the	 turned-off	 hot

oven	with	its	door	ajar.



OIE	BRAISÉE	AUX	MARRONS
[Braised	Goose	with	Chestnut	and	Sausage	Stuffing]

There	are	many	who	prefer	braised	goose	to	roast	goose	because	the
meat	is	more	tender	and	more	flavorful,	and	the	closed,	moist	cooking	of
a	 braise	 renders	 out	 more	 fat	 than	 open-pan	 roasting.	 A	 good
combination	to	go	with	this	would	be	more	chestnuts,	either	braised	or
pureéd,	and	braised	lettuce,	onions	or	leeks.	Brussels	sprouts,	or	braised
green	or	red	cabbage	are	other	choices.	Serve	a	red	Burgundy,	Côtes	du
Rhône,	Châteauneuf-du-Pape,	or	chilled	Alsatian	Traminer.

For	 a	 9-lb.	 bird,	 serving	 8	 to	 10	 people—because	 of	 the	 meat
stuffing	the	goose	will	go	further.

Estimated	roasting	time:	2½	hours

Sausage	and	chestnut	stuffing	(8	cups)

1½	pounds	of	fresh	chestnuts,	or	4	cups	of	drained,	canned,	and
unsweetened	chestnuts
If	 using	 fresh	 chestnuts,	 peel	 them,	 and	 simmer	 them	 in	 stock	 and
seasonings	as	described.	Drain,	and	allow	them	to	cool.

4	cups	of	the	fresh	ground	veal	and	pork	stuffing	described
The	goose	liver,	chopped,	and	sautéed	in	butter
Prepare	the	stuffing	and	beat	the	sautéed	liver	into	it.	Sauté	a	spoonful
to	check	seasoning.

Preheat	oven	to	450	degrees.

A	9-lb.	ready-to-cook	young	roasting	goose
½	tsp	salt
A	shallow	roasting	pan
Season	 the	 cavity	 of	 the	 goose	 with	 salt.	 Starting	 with	 the	 meat
stuffing,	loosely	pack	alternate	layers	of	stuffing	and	of	chestnuts	into



the	 goose,	 leaving	 a	 good	 inch	of	 unfilled	 space	 at	 the	 vent.	 Sew	or
skewer	the	vent,	truss	the	goose,	and	prick	its	skin.	Dry	it	thoroughly,
and	set	it	breast	up	in	the	roasting	pan.

Brown	the	goose	lightly	in	the	hot	oven	for	15	to	20	minutes,	turning
it	several	times	so	it	will	color	evenly.

1	tsp	salt
A	covered	roaster	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	goose	easily
Salt	the	goose	and	place	it	breast	up	in	the	roaster.	Turn	oven	down	to
325	degrees.

The	goose	neck,	wing	tips,	gizzard,	and	heart
1½	cup	sliced	onions
½	cup	sliced	carrots
4	Tb	rendered	goose	fat,	rendered	fresh	pork	fat,	or	cooking	oil
A	skillet
Brown	the	goose	bits	and	vegetables	in	hot	fat	in	the	skillet.

6	Tb	flour
Stir	the	flour	into	the	skillet	and	brown	slowly	for	several	minutes.

4	cups	boiling	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
3	cups	dry	white	wine	or	2	cups	dry	white	vermouth
Off	 heat,	 blend	 in	 the	 boiling	 stock	 or	 bouillon,	 and	 then	 the	wine.
Simmer	 for	a	moment.	Then	pour	 the	contents	of	 the	skillet	 into	 the
roaster	around	the	goose.	Add	additional	stock	if	necessary,	so	liquid
reaches	about	one	third	the	way	up	the	goose.

Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Cover,	and	set	in	the	middle
level	of	the	preheated	325-degree	oven.

A	bulb	baster



Braise	for	about	2	hours	and	20	to	30	minutes,	regulating	oven	heat	so
liquid	simmers	very	quietly.	Basting	is	not	necessary.	Accumulated	fat
may	be	removed	occasionally	with	the	bulb	baster.	The	goose	is	done
when	 its	 drumsticks	move	 slightly	 in	 their	 sockets,	 and,	 when	 their
fleshiest	part	is	pricked,	the	juices	run	pale	yellow.

Remove	the	goose	to	a	serving	platter	and	discard	trussing	strings.

Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
⅓	to	½	cup	port
Skim	 the	 fat	 out	 of	 the	 roaster	 (degreasing	 directions),	 boil	 the
cooking	 liquid	down	 rapidly	 until	 it	 has	 thickened	 enough	 to	 coat	 a
spoon	lightly.	Correct	seasoning.	Stir	in	the	port	and	simmer	a	minute
or	 two	 to	 evaporate	 its	 alcohol.	 Strain	 the	 sauce	 into	 a	 bowl	 or	 a
saucepan,	pressing	juice	out	of	the	ingredients.	You	should	have	about
5	to	6	cups	of	sauce.	Pour	a	spoonful	over	the	goose,	and	serve.
(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE
For	a	30-to	40-minute	wait,	return	the	goose	to	the	roaster,	and	set

the	cover	askew.	Place	in	turned-off	hot	oven	with	its	door	ajar,	or	over
barely	simmering	water.



CHAPTER	SEVEN

MEAT
Viandes

FACED	 the	 awesome	 problem	 of	 what	 to	 choose	 from	 among	 the
wonderful	 store	 of	 French	 recipes	 for	 beef,	 lamb,	 pork,	 ham,
sweetbreads,	 kidneys,	 liver,	 and	 brains,	 we	 have	 picked	 those	 which
seemed	 to	 us	 especially	 French,	 or	 of	 particular	 interest	 to	 American
cooks.	We	 have	 not	 gone	 into	 roast	 beef	 or	 broiled	 chops	 as	 they	 are
practically	 the	 same	 everywhere.	 Besides	 numerous	 traditional	 dishes,
we	have	included	a	number	of	French	regional	recipes	for	ragoûts,	stews,
and	 daubes;	 their	 comparative	 economy	 and	 ease	 of	 execution,	 in
addition	to	their	robust	flavors,	make	them	most	appealing.

For	 those	who	have	 collections	 of	 original	 French	 recipes,	 or	who
are	 living	 in	 France,	 we	 have	 in	 most	 instances	 given	 translations,
approximations,	 or	 explanations	 of	 French	 meat	 cuts.	 Cross-cultural
comparisons	 are	 a	 maze	 of	 complication	 as	 the	 systems	 of	 the	 two
countries	 are	 entirely	 different:	 the	 French	 cut	 meat	 following	muscle
separations,	 while	 American	 butchers	 usually	 cut	 across	 the	 grain.
Identification	 is	 made	 more	 confusing	 as	 different	 regions	 in	 each
country	use	different	names	for	the	same	cuts.	We	have	used	the	Chicago
terminology	 for	 American	 cuts,	 and	 the	 Paris	 terminology	 for	 French
cuts.

BEEF



Boeuf

Any	cook	or	housewife	is	well	advised	to	learn	as	much	as	possible
about	grades	and	cuts	of	beef,	as	a	vague	beef-buyer	is	open	to	countless
unnecessary	disappointments	and	expenses.	Both	 the	grade	of	beef	and
the	 cut	 determine	 the	 cooking	method.	Beef	 carcasses	 are	divided	 into
five	 grades	 which	 are	 rated	 according	 to	 the	 form	 and	 shape	 of	 the
carcass,	the	amount	and	distribution	of	fat,	and	the	color	and	quality	of
the	 flesh,	 fat,	 and	bone.	 Some	packers	 use	 their	 own	wording.	 Federal
meat	 inspectors	 use	 Prime,	 Choice,	 Good,	 Commercial,	 and	 Utility	 in
descending	 order,	 and	 stamp	 the	 grade	 on	 the	 beef	 so	 it	 is	 visible	 for
each	retail	cut.	Grade	is	an	indication	of	flavor	and	tenderness	especially
for	 roasting	and	broiling	 cuts.	A	Choice	or	Prime	 sirloin	 steak	or	 roast
will	be	more	tender	and	juicy	than	one	graded	Good	because	the	flesh	of
the	 latter	 is	 less	marbled	with	fat.	Chuck	or	rump	from	a	Good	carcass
will	 be	 quite	 tough	 when	 roasted,	 while	 the	 same	 cut	 from	 a	 Choice
carcass	should	be	reasonably	tender.	However,	both	cuts	are	suitable	for
braising,	so	there	is	no	reason	to	buy	Prime	beef	when	Good	will	do.	At
most	retail	markets,	the	higher	grades	used	for	roasting	and	broiling	are
aged	from	three	to	six	weeks	to	improve	their	flavor	and	tenderness.
The	best	way	to	 learn	beef	cuts	 is	 step	by	step,	or	cut	by	cut.	You

could	begin	by	peering	closely	at	sirloin	steaks	every	time	you	go	into	a
market.	Is	the	flesh	cherry	red	and	marbled	with	little	veins	of	fat,	and	is
the	surrounding	fat	creamy	white	and	firm?	If	so,	it	is	a	Choice	or	Prime
steak.	Is	it	a	double-bone	or	round-bone	sirloin—the	two	best	cuts,	or	is
it	 from	 the	 wedge-bone	 or	 pinbone	 end?	 When	 you	 feel	 you	 have
mastered	 the	 sirloin,	 you	might	move	 to	 the	 leg,	 familiarizing	yourself
with	 top	 round,	 bottom	 round,	 and	 sirloin	 tip.	 Then	 proceed	 to	 other
cuts.	 Ask	 questions.	 Your	 butcher	 will	 be	 much	 more	 interested	 in
serving	you	well	if	you	show	interest	in	learning	about	his	meat.

STEAKS

Biftecks

French	and	American	methods	 for	cutting	up	a	beef	carcass	are	 so



dissimilar	that	it	is	rarely	possible	to	find	in	America	the	same	steak	cut
you	could	find	in	France.	But	this	is	a	point	of	small	significance	as	the
various	 steak	 recipes	 differ	 from	 one	 another	 only	 in	 their	 sauces,
butters,	or	garnitures.
In	France	the	tenderloin	or	filet,	which	runs	from	the	thirteenth	rib

to	the	rump,	is	usually	removed	in	one	piece.	Then	the	loin	strip,	under
which	the	filet	was	cut,	is	boned	and	used	for	steaks	or	roasts.	Thus	there
is	neither	short	loin	nor	sirloin	left	intact,	and	consequently	no	T-bone,
porterhouse,	 or	 sirloin	 steak.	 The	 best	 part	 of	 the	 rib-roast	 section	 is
usually	boned	and	cut	into	rib	steaks	called	entrecôtes.

CUTS	FOR	STEAK

Since	you	often	 find	French	 steak	names	on	a	menu,	here	 is	 a	 list
explaining	them.
Entrecôte.	Rib	steak,	or	rib	eye	steak,	from	the	rib-roast	section,	ribs

9	to	11.	Delmonico	or	club	steak,	cut	from	the	rib	end	of	the	short	loin,
is	a	near	equivalent.
Romsteck,	 or	 Rumsteck.	 Rump	 steak,	 cut	 from	 the	 end	 of	 a	 rump

which	faces	the	sirloin.	Rump	steaks	must	be	from	a	well	aged	Prime	or
Choice	carcass	to	be	tender.
Faux	Filet,	or	Contre	Filet.	Loin	strip	steak,	or	strip	steak,	corresponds

to	 the	 loin	 part	 of	 a	 porterhouse	 or	 T-bone	 steak	 rather	 than	 to	 the
tenderloin	part.	Top-quality	strip	steaks	are	rarely	available	in	American
retail	 markets	 because	 of	 the	 heavy	 call	 for	 porterhouse	 and	 T-bone
steaks.	Delmonico	or	club	steak	is	practically	equivalent.
Bifteck.	Tenderloin	butt,	or	New	York	butt,	cut	from	the	larger	and

less	tender	end	of	the	filet,	which	also	makes	up	the	best	part	of	a	sirloin
steak.	In	France	the	term	bifteck	can	also	include	any	lean,	boneless	steak
such	 as	 a	 trimmed	 Delmonico,	 club,	 strip,	 or	 rump	 steak,	 or	 a	 tender
steak	 from	 the	 round	 or	 chuck.	 We	 shall	 also	 include	 T-bone,
porterhouse,	and	sirloin	as	biftecks.

FILET	OF	BEEF

If	 the	 filet	 is	 taken	 from	a	 large	Choice	or	Prime	carcass,	 the	meat
should	 be	 3½	 to	 4	 inches	 in	 diameter	 at	 the	 heart,	 and	 the	 slices
delicately	 marbled	 with	 fat.	 Because	 most	 butchers	 reserve	 their	 best
beef	 carcasses	 for	 T-bone	 and	 porterhouse	 steaks,	 it	 is	 not	 always



possible	to	find	a	filet	of	this	size	and	quality.

Whole	Filet	of	Beef

Untrimmed	Center	Cut	of	Filet,	the	Châteaubriand	Section

Bifteck,	or	tenderloin	butt,	is	considered	to	be	the	less	tender	part	of
the	filet	and	is	classified	in	the	preceding	list	of	steaks.



Tournedos	Wrapped	in	a	Strip	of	Pork	Fat

Châteaubriand	(which	can	also	be	spelled	with	a	final	“t”	rather	than
“d”)	 corresponds	 to	 the	 tenderloin	 portion	 of	 a	 Choice	 or	 Prime
porterhouse	steak.	It	is	cut	2	inches	thick,	should	weigh	a	pound	or	more
before	 trimming,	 and	 is	 always	 broiled	 or	 grilled.	 A	 thinner	 steak	 cut
from	this	portion	of	the	tenderloin	is	called	a	filet.
Tournedos	 and	 filet	 mignons,	 which	 become	 progressively	 smaller

near	the	tail	of	the	filet,	correspond	to	the	tenderloin	of	T-bone	steaks.

WINE	SUGGESTIONS

With	all	but	the	filet	steaks,	which	are	discussed	separately,	serve	a
good,	 rather	young	red	wine	with	a	certain	amount	of	body,	 such	as	a
Côtes	du	Rhône,	Bordeaux-St.	Émilion,	or	Beaujolais.

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Bifteck	 et	 pommes	 frites	 are	 just	 as	 popular	 in	 France	 as	 steak	 and
baked	 potatoes	 are	 in	 America.	 A	 good	 change	 from	 the	 old	 rhythm
would	 be	 the	 garlic	 mashed	 potatoes	 or	 one	 of	 the	 scalloped	 potato
casseroles	or	potatoes	sautéed	in	butter.	Vegetables	which	would	go	well
include	the	following:
Buttered	green	peas,	or	beans,	or	Brussels	sprouts
Baked	or	stuffed	tomatoes
Broiled	or	stuffed	mushrooms



Ratatouille,	egg	plant	casserole
Turnips,	including	the	excellent	casserole
Braised	celery,	leeks,	or	lettuce
Here	 are	 some	 of	 the	 classical	 French	 vegetable	 garnitures	 for	 a

steak	platter:
Beauharnais,	stuffed	mushrooms,	artichoke	hearts	cooked	in	butter
Brabançonne,	 Brussels	 sprouts	 with	 cheese	 sauce,	 potato	 balls

sautéed	in	butter
Catalane,	stuffed	tomatoes,	artichoke	hearts	cooked	in	butter
Chartres,	stuffed	mushrooms,	braised	lettuce
Choron,	 artichoke	 hearts	 filled	 with	 buttered	 peas,	 potato	 balls

sautéed	in	butter
Maillot,	glazed	turnips,	carrots,	and	onions,	with	braised	lettuce	and

buttered	 green	 peas	 and	 beans	 Sévigné,	 braised	 lettuce	 broiled
mushrooms,	potatoes	sautéed	in	butter

		BIFTECK	SAUTÉ	AU	BEURRE
[Pan-broiled	Steak]

Pan-broiled	 steak	 is	 very	 French	 and	 also	 a	 very	 nice	method	 for
cooking	small	steaks.	None	of	the	juice	essences	are	lost,	and	it	is	easy	to
tell	when	the	steak	is	done.

A	1-inch	steak	takes	8	to	10	minutes	to	cook,	and	the	sauce,	or	pan
gravy,	 1	 to	 2	minutes	 to	 prepare	 after	 the	 steak	 is	 on	 its	 platter.	 The
sauce,	 you	will	 observe,	 is	 a	deglazing	of	 the	pan	with	 stock,	wine,	or
water,	and	a	swish	of	butter	at	the	end.	It	is	purely	an	extension	of	the
pan	 juices,	 and	 amounts	 to	 only	 1	 or	 2	 tablespoons	 of	 buttery,
concentrated	essence	per	serving.

KIND	OF	STEAK	TO	BUY

In	 France	 you	 would	 select	 an	 entrecôte,	 romsteck,	 faux-filet,	 or
bifteck.	In	America	buy	any	tender,	well-aged	¾-to	1-inch	steak	or	steaks
which	will	fit	easily	into	a	skillet	such	as:
Club	or	Delmonico Small	Sirloin Tenderloin	Butt
T-Bone Loin	Strip	Steak Rump	Steak
Porterhouse Rib	Steak Chuck	Steak



Porterhouse Rib	Steak Chuck	Steak

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	pound	of	boneless	steak	will	serve	2	people,	3	if	the	rest	of	the
menu	 is	 copious.	 For	 large	 sirloins,	 T-bones,	 and	 porterhouse	 steaks,
count	on	about	¾	pound	per	person.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Trim	off	excess	fat.	Cut	small	incisions	around	the	circumference	of
the	steak	wherever	there	is	a	layer	of	gristle,	usually	between	the	fat	and
the	meat.	This	will	prevent	 the	 steak	 from	curling	as	 it	 cooks.	Dry	 the
steak	thoroughly	on	paper	towels.	It	will	not	brown	if	it	is	moist.

For	4	to	6	people,	depending	on	your	menu

One	or	two	heavy	skillets	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	meat	easily	in
one	layer
1½	Tb	butter	and	1½	Tb	oil,	or	rendered	fresh	beef	suet,	more	if
needed
2	to	2½	lbs.	steak	¾	to	1	inch	thick

Put	 the	 butter	 and	 oil,	 or	 beef	 suet,	 in	 the	 skillet	 and	 place	 over
moderately	high	heat	until	you	see	the	butter	foam	begin	to	subside,
or	the	beef	fat	almost	smoking;	this	indicates	the	fat	is	hot	enough	to
sear	 the	meat.	 Sauté	 the	 steak	 on	 one	 side	 for	 3	 to	 4	minutes,	 and
regulate	the	heat	so	the	fat	is	always	very	hot	but	is	not	burning.	Turn
the	steak	and	sauté	the	other	side	for	3	to	4	minutes.	The	steak	is	done
to	a	medium	rare	(à	point)	the	moment	you	observe	a	little	pearling	of
red	juice	beginning	to	ooze	at	the	surface	of	the	steak.	Another	test	is
to	 press	 the	 steak	 with	 your	 finger;	 it	 is	 medium	 rare	 when	 it	 just
begins	to	take	on	a	suggestion	of	resistance	and	spring	in	contrast	to
its	soft	raw	state.	If	you	have	any	doubts	at	all,	cut	a	small	incision	in
the	steak.

A	hot	platter
Salt	and	pepper



Remove	the	steak	to	a	hot	platter	and	season	it	quickly	with	salt	and
pepper.	Keep	warm	for	a	moment	while	completing	the	sauce.

½	cup	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	red	wine,	dry	white	wine,	dry
white	vermouth,	or	water

2	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
Pour	the	fat	out	of	the	skillet.	Add	the	liquid,	and	set	the	skillet	over
high	 heat.	 Scrape	 up	 coagulated	 juices	 with	 a	 wooden	 spoon	 while
rapidly	boiling	down	the	 liquid	until	 it	 is	 reduced	almost	 to	a	syrup.
Off	heat,	swirl	the	butter	into	the	liquid	until	it	is	absorbed;	the	butter
will	thicken	the	liquid	into	a	light	sauce.	Pour	the	sauce	over	the	steak
and	serve.

VARIATIONS:	FLAVORED	BUTTERS
Any	of	 the	 following	are	delicious	when	beaten	 into	your	 sauce	 in

place	of	plain	butter.	They	are	simply	butters	creamed	with	flavorings.	If
you	 are	 serving	 a	 broiled	 steak,	 spread	 one	 of	 the	 butters	 over	 it	 just
before	taking	it	to	the	table.

Parsley	Butter
Herb	Butter
Mustard	Butter
Shallot	Butter
Garlic	Butter
Snail	Butter	(with	shallot,	garlic,	and	herbs)

VARIATIONS
Bifteck	Sauté	Bercy
[Pan-broiled	Steak,	with	Shallot	and	White	Wine	Sauce]

For	 broiled	 steak,	 use	 a	 beurre	 Bercy,	 and	 spread	 it	 over	 the	 steak
just	before	serving.
For	4	to	6	people,	depending	on	your	menu



2	to	2½	lbs.	steak
1	Tb	butter
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions

Sauté	 the	 steak	as	described	 in	 the	master	 recipe	and	remove	 it	 to	a
hot	platter.	Pour	the	fat	out	of	the	skillet.	Add	the	butter.	Stir	 in	the
shallots	or	onions	and	cook	slowly	for	a	minute.

½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
Pour	the	wine	into	the	skillet	and	boil	it	down	rapidly,	scraping	up	the
coagulated	 juices	 from	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 pan	 until	 the	 liquid	 has
reduced	almost	to	a	syrup.

4	to	6	Tb	softened	butter
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley
Optional:	2	to	3	Tb	diced,	poached	beef	marrow

Off	heat,	 beat	 in	 the	butter	 a	 spoonful	 at	 a	 time	until	 it	 is	 absorbed
and	has	thickened	the	sauce.	Beat	in	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	then	the
parsley.	Fold	in	the	optional	beef	marrow.	Spread	sauce	over	the	steak
and	serve.

Bifteck	Sauté	Marchand	de	Vins
Bifteck	Sauté	à	la	Bordelaise
[Pan-broiled	Steak	with	Red	Wine	Sauce]

Use	the	same	procedure	described	for	the	preceding	Bercy	sauce,	but
substitute	red	wine	for	white.	If	you	add	the	optional	beef	marrow,	the
sauce	becomes	a	bordelaise.

Bifteck	Sauté	Béarnaise
[Pan-broiled	Steak	with	Béarnaise	Sauce]



For	4	to	6	people,	depending	on	your	menu

2	to	2½	lbs.	steak
½	cup	brown	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	dry	white	wine,	or	dry
white	vermouth.
¾	cup	sauce	béarnaise

Sauté	the	steak	as	described	in	the	master	recipe,	preceding.	Deglaze
skillet	with	stock,	bouillon,	or	wine,	boiling	it	down	rapidly	to	reduce
it	to	1½	spoonfuls.	Beat	the	liquid	by	droplets	into	the	sauce	béarnaise.

Sautéed	or	fried	potatoes
Fresh	water	cress
A	warmed	sauceboat

Decorate	 the	 steak	 platter	 with	 sautéed	 or	 fried	 potatoes	 and	 fresh
water	cress.	Serve	the	sauce	in	a	warmed	sauceboat.

Steak	au	Poivre
[Pepper	Steak	with	Brandy	Sauce]

Steak	au	poivre	can	be	very	good	when	it	is	not	so	buried	in	pepper
and	 doused	with	 flaming	 brandy	 that	 the	 flavor	 of	 the	meat	 is	 utterly
disguised.	In	fact,	we	do	not	care	at	all	for	flaming	brandy	with	this	dish;
it	is	too	reminiscent	of	restaurant	show-off	cooking	for	tourists.	And	the
alcohol	 taste,	as	 it	 is	not	boiled	off	 completely,	 remains	 in	 the	brandy,
spoiling	the	taste	of	the	meat.

For	4	to	6	people,	depending	on	your	menu

2	Tb	of	a	mixture	of	several	kinds	of	peppercorns,	or	white
peppercorns
Place	 the	peppercorns	 in	a	big	mixing	bowl	and	crush	 them	roughly
with	a	pestle	or	the	bottom	of	a	bottle.

2	to	2½	lbs.	steak	¾	to	1	inch	thick



Dry	 the	 steaks	 on	 paper	 towels.	 Rub	 and	 press	 the	 crushed
peppercorns	 into	 both	 sides	 of	 the	 meat	 with	 your	 fingers	 and	 the
palms	of	your	hands.	Cover	with	waxed	paper.	Let	 stand	 for	at	 least
half	 an	 hour;	 two	 or	 3	 hours	 are	 even	 better,	 so	 the	 flavor	 of	 the
pepper	will	penetrate	the	meat.

A	hot	platter
Salt

Sauté	 the	 steak	 in	 hot	 oil	 and	 butter	 as	 described	 in	 the	 preceding
master	 recipe.	 Remove	 to	 a	 hot	 platter,	 season	 with	 salt,	 and	 keep
warm	for	a	moment	while	completing	the	sauce.

1	Tb	butter
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	cup	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
⅓	cup	cognac
3	to	4	Tb	softened	butter
Sautéed	or	fried	potatoes
Fresh	water	cress

Pour	 the	 fat	 out	 of	 the	 skillet.	 Add	 the	 butter	 and	 shallots	 or	 green
onions	and	cook	slowly	for	a	minute.	Pour	in	the	stock	or	bouillon	and
boil	 down	 rapidly	 over	 high	 heat	 while	 scraping	 up	 the	 coagulated
cooking	juices.	Then	add	the	cognac	and	boil	rapidly	for	a	minute	or
two	more	to	evaporate	its	alcohol.	Off	heat,	swirl	in	the	butter	a	half-
tablespoon	at	a	time.	Decorate	the	platter	with	the	potatoes	and	water
cress.	Pour	the	sauce	over	the	steak,	and	serve.

FILET	STEAKS-TENDERLOIN	STEAKS

Filets,	Tournedos,	Filet	Mignons
Filets,	 tournedos,	 and	 filet	mignons	 are	 steaks	 1	 inch	 thick	 cut	 from

the	 filet	 of	 beef	 as	 illustrated.	The	 filet,	 the	 largest,	 should	be	3	 to	 3½
inches	 in	diameter,	 the	 tournedos	about	2½	inches,	and	the	 filet	mignon



can	be	as	small	as	1½	inches.	Since	they	are	all	cooked	and	served	in	the
same	way,	we	shall	refer	to	all	three	as	tournedos	in	French,	and	as	filet
steaks	 in	 English.	 Filet	 steaks	 are	 trimmed	 of	 all	 fat	 and	 surrounding
filament.	The	circumference	 is	usually	wrapped	 in	a	strip	of	 fresh	pork
fat	or	blanched	bacon,	and	tied	with	string	so	the	steaks	will	keep	their
neat	circular	shape	while	they	are	being	cooked.	The	string	is	removed
before	serving	and	also,	if	you	wish,	the	strip	of	fat	or	bacon.	Although
filet	steaks	may	be	broiled,	they	are	usually	sautéed	quickly	in	hot	butter
to	a	nice	brown	on	the	outside	and	a	juicy	red	inside.

Filet	steaks	may	be	sauced	and	served	exactly	like	the	beefsteaks	in
the	 preceding	 recipes,	 but	 because	 of	 their	 expense	 they	 are	 usually
surrounded	with	fine	wines	and	truffles	or	other	elaborations.	They	cook
in	 8	 to	 10	minutes,	 and	 the	 sauce	 takes	 about	 2	minutes,	 so	 you	 can
afford	to	spend	a	bit	of	time	on	the	vegetables	and	garniture	you	wish	to
serve	 with	 them.	 Here	 are	 three	 classical	 combinations.	 See	 also	 the
vegetable	suggestions	for	steak.

		TOURNEDOS	SAUTÉS	AUX	CHAMPIGNONS
				TOURNEDOS	SAUTÉS	CHASSEUR

[Filet	Steaks	with	Mushroom	and	Madeira	Sauce]

A	 handsome	 presentation	 for	 these	 steaks	 would	 be	 a	 platter
decorated	with	whole	baked	tomatoes,	artichoke	hearts	cooked	in	butter,
and	potato	balls	sautéed	in	butter.	Serve	with	them	a	good	red	Bordeaux
from	the	Médoc	district.

For	6	steaks

6	crustless	rounds	of	white	bread,	2½	inches	in	diameter	and	3/ 	inch
16

thick
3	to	4	Tb	clarified	butter

Sauté	 bread	 rounds	 in	 hot	 clarified	 butter	 to	 brown	 very	 lightly	 on
each	side.	Reheat	them	for	a	minute	in	a	350-degree	oven	just	before
serving.



½	lb.	fresh	mushrooms,	whole	if	very	small,	quartered	if	large
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper

Sauté	mushrooms	 in	hot	butter	and	oil	 for	5	minutes	 to	brown	them
lightly.	Stir	in	the	shallots	or	onions	and	cook	slowly	for	a	minute	or	2
more.	Season,	and	set	aside.

filet	steaks	1	inch	thick	and	2½	inches	in	diameter,	each	wrapped	in
a	strip	of	fat	as	illustrated	on	this	page
2	Tb	butter,	more	if	needed
1	Tb	oil
1	or	2	heavy	skillets	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	steaks	easily

Dry	the	steaks	on	paper	towels.	Place	the	butter	and	oil	in	the	skillet
and	 set	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat.	 When	 you	 see	 the	 butter	 foam
begin	 to	 subside,	 indicating	 it	 is	 hot	 enough	 to	 sear	 and	 brown	 the
steaks,	sauté	them	for	3	to	4	minutes	on	each	side.	They	are	medium
rare	 if,	 when	 pressed	 with	 your	 finger,	 they	 offer	 a	 suggestion	 of
resistance	in	contrast	to	their	soft,	raw	state.

Salt	and	pepper
A	warm	serving	platter

Immediately	 remove	 from	heat.	Discard	 the	 strings	and,	 if	you	wish,
the	strip	of	fat.	Season	quickly	with	salt	and	pepper.	Place	each	steak
on	a	canapé,	and	keep	warm	for	several	minutes	while	preparing	the
sauce.

½	cup	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
1	Tb	tomato	paste

Pour	the	fat	out	of	the	skillet;	stir	in	the	stock	or	bouillon	and	tomato



paste.	 Boil	 rapidly,	 scraping	 up	 the	 coagulated	 cooking	 juices,	 until
liquid	is	reduced	to	2	or	3	tablespoons.

¼	cup	Madeira	mixed	with	½	Tb	of	arrowroot	or	cornstarch
2	Tb	minced	parsley,	tarragon	and	chervil,	or	parsley	only

Pour	 in	 the	 starch	 and	 wine	 mixture;	 boil	 rapidly	 for	 a	 minute	 to
evaporate	 the	alcohol	and	 to	 thicken	 the	sauce	 lightly.	Then	add	the
sautéed	 mushrooms	 and	 simmer	 a	 minute	 more	 to	 blend	 flavors.
Correct	 seasoning.	Spread	 the	 sauce	and	mushrooms	over	 the	 steaks,
sprinkle	with	herbs,	and	serve.

VARIATIONS
Tournedos	Henri	IV

[Filet	Steaks	with	Artichoke	Bottoms	and	Béarnaise	Sauce]

For	6	steaks

filet	steaks	sautéed	in	oil	and	butter
canapés	(rounds	of	white	bread	sautéed	in	clarified	butter)
¼	cup	Madeira,	dry	white	wine,	or	dry	white	vermouth
¼	cup	beef	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
fresh	artichoke	bottoms	cooked	in	butter
¾	to	1	cup	sauce	béarnaise
Potato	balls	sautéed	in	butter,	and	rolled	in	2	Tb	minced	parsley
Asparagus	tips	cooked	in	butter

Sauté	the	steaks	as	described	in	the	master	recipe.	Season	and	place	on
canapés	on	a	hot	platter.	Keep	warm	for	a	few	minutes.	Pour	sauté	fat
out	of	skillet,	add	wine	and	stock	or	bouillon,	and	boil	down	rapidly
reducing	 liquid	 to	 3	 tablespoons	 while	 scraping	 coagulated	 sauté
juices	 into	 it.	 Spoon	 liquid	 over	 steaks.	 Top	 each	 steak	 with	 a	 hot
artichoke	 bottom	 filled	with	 béarnaise.	 Decorate	 platter	with	 the	 hot
potatoes	and	asparagus.	Serve	immediately.



Tournedos	Rossini
[Filet	Steaks	with	Foie	Gras,	Truffles,	and	Madeira	Sauce]

A	platter	of	 tournedos	Rossini	 takes	 the	 filet	 steak	about	as	 far	as	 it
can	go.	Were	you	 living	 in	France	during	 the	midwinter,	your	 foie	gras
and	truffles	would,	of	course,	be	fresh.	Most	recipes	use	canapés	(rounds
of	white	bread	sautéed	in	butter)	as	a	bed	for	the	steaks;	we	have	chosen
artichoke	 bottoms	 as	 a	 further	 improvement	 to	 an	 already	 elegant
presentation.
Fitting	 accompaniments	 would	 be	 potato	 balls	 sautéed	 in	 butter,

buttered	 peas,	 asparagus	 tips,	 or	 braised	 lettuce,	 and	 an	 excellent,
château-bottled	red	Bordeaux	from	the	Médoc	district.
For	6	steaks

3	large,	fresh	artichoke	bottoms	cooked	in	a	blanc
Salt	and	pepper
3	Tb	melted	butter

Slice	each	cooked	artichoke	bottom	in	two,	horizontally.	Season	with
salt,	 pepper,	 and	 melted	 butter.	 Place	 in	 a	 covered	 dish.	 Fifteen
minutes	before	serving,	heat	them	in	a	350-degree	oven.

6	slices	canned	“block”	foie	gras,	¼	inch	thick	and	about	1½	inches	in
diameter

2	Tb	Madeira
3	Tb	rich	stock,	mushroom	essence,	or	canned	beef	bouillon

Place	the	foie	gras	slices	in	a	covered	dish	and	baste	with	the	Madeira
and	 stock,	 essence,	or	bouillon.	Ten	minutes	before	 serving,	 set	over
barely	simmering	water	to	heat	through	gently.

18	to	24	slices	of	canned	truffle,	1/ 	inch	thick
16

2	Tb	Madeira
Pinch	of	pepper



1	Tb	butter
Place	 the	 truffle	 slices	 and	 their	 juices	 in	 a	 small	 saucepan	with	 the
Madeira,	pepper,	and	butter.	Five	minutes	before	serving,	warm	over
gentle	heat.

filet	steaks	1	inch	thick	and	2½	inches	in	diameter
Salt	and	pepper

Sauté	the	steaks	as	directed	in	the	master	recipe.	Season	with	salt	and
pepper.

A	warm	serving	platter
Arrange	the	hot	artichoke	bottoms	on	the	serving	platter	and	place	a
steak	on	each.	Over	each	steak	 lay	a	warm	slice	of	 foie	gras,	and	top
with	 slices	 of	 truffle.	 Decorate	 the	 platter	 with	 whatever	 vegetables
you	have	 chosen,	 and	keep	warm	 for	2	 to	3	minutes	while	 finishing
the	sauce.

½	cup	stock	or	canned	bouillon
Juice	from	the	foie	gras	and	truffles
1	tsp	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	blended	with	2	Tb	Madeira
Salt	and	pepper
3	to	4	Tb	softened	butter

Pour	the	fat	out	of	the	steak	skillet.	Pour	in	the	stock	or	bouillon,	and
the	 juices	 from	the	 foie	gras	and	truffles.	Boil	down	rapidly,	 scraping
up	all	coagulated	juices,	until	liquid	has	reduced	by	half.	Pour	in	the
starch	and	wine	mixture	and	simmer	for	a	minute.	Correct	seasoning.
Off	heat,	swirl	in	the	butter.	Pour	the	sauce	over	the	steaks	and	serve.

GROUND	BEEF-HAMBURGERS

Bifteck	Haché

Shock	is	the	reaction	of	some	Americans	we	have	encountered	who



learn	that	real	French	people	living	in	France	eat	hamburgers.	They	do
eat	them,	and	when	sauced	with	any	of	the	suggestions	in	the	following
recipes,	the	French	hamburger	is	an	excellent	and	relatively	economical
main	 course	 for	 an	 informal	party.	 Serve	with	 them	 the	 same	 types	 of
red	wines	and	vegetables	listed	for	steaks.
The	best	hamburgers	are	made	from	the	leanest	beef.	Actually	some

of	the	least	expensive	cuts,	chuck	and	neck,	are	the	most	flavorful.	Top
sirloin,	 rump,	 and	 round	 are	 really	 second	 choice	 for	 hamburgers
although	they	are	more	expensive.	Be	fussy	in	choosing	your	meat;	have
all	the	fat	and	sinews	removed,	and	have	it	ground	before	your	eyes	or
better,	grind	it	yourself.	The	fat	content	of	hamburger	should	be	only	8
to	10	per	cent,	or	1¼	to	1½	ounces	per	pound.	This	may	be	in	the	form
of	butter,	ground	beef	suet,	beef	marrow,	or	ground	fresh	pork	fat.

		BIFTECK	HACHÉ	À	LA	LYONNAISE
[Ground	Beef	with	Onions	and	Herbs]

For	6	hamburgers

¾	cup	finely	minced	yellow	onions
2	Tb	butter

Cook	the	onions	slowly	in	the	butter	for	about	10	minutes	until	very
tender	but	not	browned.	Place	in	a	mixing	bowl.

1½	lbs.	lean,	ground	beef
2	Tb	softened	butter,	ground	beef	suet,	beef	marrow,	or	fresh	pork	fat
1½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
⅛	tsp	thyme
1	egg

Add	 the	beef,	butter	or	 fat,	 seasonings,	and	egg	 to	 the	onions	 in	 the
mixing	 bowl	 and	 beat	 vigorously	 with	 a	 wooden	 spoon	 to	 blend
thoroughly.	Correct	seasoning.	Form	into	patties	¾	inch	thick.	Cover



with	waxed	paper	and	refrigerate	until	ready	to	use.

½	cup	flour	spread	on	a	plate
Just	 before	 sautéing,	 roll	 the	 patties	 lightly	 in	 the	 flour.	 Shake	 off
excess	flour.

1	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil,	or	sufficient	to	film	the	bottom	of	the	skillet
1	or	2	heavy	skillets	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	patties	easily	in
one	layer
Place	 the	 butter	 and	 oil	 in	 the	 skillet	 and	 set	 over	moderately	 high
heat.	When	you	see	the	butter	 foam	begin	to	subside,	 indicating	it	 is
hot	enough	 to	 sear	 the	meat,	 sauté	 the	patties	 for	2	 to	3	minutes	or
more	on	each	side,	depending	on	whether	you	 like	your	hamburgers
rare,	medium,	or	well	done.

A	warm	serving	platter
Arrange	 the	hamburgers	on	 the	 serving	platter	 and	keep	warm	 for	a
moment	while	finishing	the	sauce.

½	cup	beef	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	dry	white	wine,	dry	white
vermouth,	red	wine,	or	¼	cup	water

2	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
Pour	the	fat	out	of	the	skillet.	Add	the	liquid	and	boil	it	down	rapidly,
scraping	up	the	coagulated	pan	juices,	until	it	has	reduced	almost	to	a
syrup.	 Off	 heat,	 swirl	 the	 butter	 by	 half-tablespoons	 into	 the	 sauce
until	it	is	absorbed.	Pour	the	sauce	over	the	hamburgers	and	serve.

VARIATION
Bitokes	à	la	Russe
[Hamburgers	with	Cream	Sauce]

Ingredients	for	6	plain	beef	hamburgers	or	the	preceding	flavored
hamburgers



Sauté	the	hamburgers	 in	oil	and	butter	as	described	in	the	preceding
master	recipe.	Remove	them	to	a	hot	serving	platter.

¼	cup	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
⅔	cup	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Drops	of	lemon	juice
Pour	 the	 fat	 out	 of	 the	 skillet.	Add	 the	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 and	boil	 it
down	 rapidly,	 scraping	 up	 coagulated	 cooking	 juices,	 until	 reduced
almost	 to	 a	 syrup.	Pour	 in	 the	 cream	and	boil	 it	 down	 rapidly	 for	 a
minute	or	two	until	 it	has	reduced,	and	thickened	slightly.	Season	to
taste	with	salt,	pepper,	nutmeg,	and	drops	of	lemon	juice.

2	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
2	Tb	minced	green	herbs	such	as	parsley,	chives,	tarragon,	chervil,	or
parsley	only
Off	 heat,	 swirl	 in	 the	 butter	 by	half-tablespoons	 until	 it	 is	 absorbed.
Stir	in	the	herbs,	spoon	the	sauce	over	the	hamburgers,	and	serve.

VARIATION:	FLAVORED	BUTTERS
Any	of	the	butters	listed	here	may	be	swirled	into	the	skillet	after	it

has	been	deglazed	with	stock,	wine,	or	water.

Parsley	Butter
Herb	Butter
Mustard	Butter
Shallot	Butter
Garlic	Butter
Snail	Butter	(shallots,	garlic,	and	herbs)



VARIATION:	OTHER	SAUCES
Any	 of	 the	 following	 sauces	 are	 made	 separately.	 After	 the

hamburgers	have	been	sautéed	and	removed	from	the	skillet,	 the	sauce
is	poured	in	and	boiled	for	a	moment	while	the	coagulated	sauté	juices
are	scraped	into	it.	The	sauce	is	then	poured	over	the	hamburgers.

Sauce	Tomate,	or	Coulis	de	Tomates,	tomato	sauce
Sauce	Poivrade,	brown	sauce	with	strong	pepper	flavoring
Sauce	Robert,	brown	sauce	with	mustard
Sauce	Brune	aux	Fines	Herbes,	brown	sauce	with	herbs	or	tarragon
Sauce	Madère,	brown	sauce	with	Madeira	wine
Sauce	au	Cari,	brown	sauce	with	curry	and	onions
See	also	 the	 red	wine	and	 the	white	wine	 sauce	 for	 steaks	on	 this

page,	and	the	mushroom	sauce	for	filet	steak	on	this	page.

FILET	OF	BEEF

Filet	de	Boeuf

		FILET	DE	BOEUF	BRAISÉ	PRINCE	ALBERT
[Braised	Filet	of	Beef	Stuffed	with	Foie	Gras	and	Truffles]

Here	is	a	magnificent	recipe	for	an	important	dinner,	and	it	is	not	a
difficult	one	in	spite	of	the	luxury	of	its	details.	We	have	chosen	braised
filet	 because	 it	 is	 more	 unusual	 than	 roast	 filet.	 Everything	 except	 the
actual	cooking	of	the	meat	may	be	done	in	advance	as	indicated	by	the
asterisk	in	the	recipe.

Braised	 lettuce	 and	 potato	 balls	 sautéed	 in	 butter	 would	 go
beautifully	with	this,	and	you	should	accompany	it	with	a	fine	chateau-
bottled	 red	 Bordeaux	 from	 the	 Médoc	 district.	 See	 also	 the	 other
vegetables	suggested	for	steaks.

For	8	people

4	to	6	canned	truffles	about	1	inch	in	diameter
3	Tb	Madeira



Cut	the	truffles	in	quarters.	Place	in	a	small	bowl	with	juice	from	the
can	and	the	Madeira.	Cover	and	marinate	while	preparing	the	rest	of
the	ingredients.
The	braising	vegetables	(matignon)

¾	cup	each:	finely	diced	carrots	and	onions
½	cup	finely	diced	celery
3	Tb	diced	boiled	ham
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
A	small	herb	bouquet:	2	parsley	sprigs,	⅓	bay	leaf,	⅛	tsp	thyme	tied
in	cheesecloth
3	Tb	butter
⅓	cup	Madeira
Cook	 the	 vegetables,	 ham,	 seasonings,	 herbs,	 and	 butter	 slowly
together	 in	a	small	covered	saucepan	 for	10	 to	15	minutes,	until	 the
vegetables	are	tender	but	not	browned.	Then	pour	in	the	wine	and	boil
it	down	rapidly	until	it	has	almost	entirely	evaporated.	Set	aside.
The	foie	gras	stuffing

2	Tb	very	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	Tb	butter
4	ounces	or	½	cup	mousse	de	foie	d’oie	(or	“block”	foie	gras,	which	is
much	more	expensive	but	also	much	better)
1	Tb	Madeira
1	Tb	cognac
Pinch	of	allspice
Pinch	of	thyme
⅛	tsp	pepper
Cook	the	shallots	or	onions	slowly	 in	butter	 for	3	minutes	 in	a	small
saucepan	without	browning	them.	Scrape	into	a	mixing	bowl.	Beat	in
the	foie	gras	and	other	ingredients.	Correct	seasoning.



A	3-lb.	trimmed	filet	of	beef,	at	least	3	inches	in	diameter
Salt	and	pepper
Cut	 a	 deep	 slit	 down	 the	 length	 of	 the	 least	 presentable	 side	 of	 the
filet,	going	to	within	¼	inch	of	the	two	ends	and	to	within	¼	inch	of
the	other	side,	or	 top.	Season	 the	 interior	of	 the	slit	 lightly	with	salt
and	pepper,	and	spread	it	with	the	foie	gras	mixture.	Insert	the	truffles
in	a	line	down	the	center	of	the	filled	slit—reserve	their	marinade	for
later.	Do	not	stuff	the	filet	so	full	that	the	slit	cannot	be	closed.

A	2½-inch	strip	of	fresh	pork	fat	as	long	as	the	filet	(or	strips	of
blanched	bacon)
White	string
Lay	 the	 pork	 fat	 or	 bacon	 strips	 the	 length	 of	 the	 closed	 slit.	 Tie
securely	 but	 not	 too	 tightly	 with	 loops	 of	 white	 string	 at	 1-inch
intervals.
Braising	the	filet

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	heavy,	oval,	fireproof	casserole	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	filet
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
Salt	and	pepper
A	meat	thermometer
Brown	 the	 filet	 lightly	on	all	 sides	 in	 the	 casserole	 in	hot	butter	and
oil.	 Discard	 the	 browning	 fat.	 Season	 the	meat	 lightly	with	 salt	 and
pepper.	 (Insert	meat	 thermometer,	unless	you	are	using	the	“instant”
kind.)	Spread	the	cooked	vegetables	over	the	filet.
(*)	May	be	prepared	in	advance	to	this	point.

2	to	3	cups	good	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon	(or	a	very	good
brown	sauce,	in	which	case	the	starch	liaison	at	the	end	of	the
recipe	is	omitted)



An	oval	of	aluminum	foil
A	bulb	baster
Pour	in	enough	stock,	bouillon,	or	sauce	to	come	half	way	up	the	sides
of	 the	 filet.	 Bring	 to	 a	 simmer	on	 top	of	 the	 stove.	 Lay	 foil	 over	 the
meat.	Cover	the	casserole	and	set	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven	for
45	to	55	minutes.	Regulate	heat	so	liquid	remains	at	a	very	slow	boil.
Baste	the	meat	with	the	braising	stock	3	or	4	times	during	its	cooking.
The	 filet	 is	 done	 at	 a	 meat-thermometer	 reading	 of	 125	 degrees	 for
rare	beef,	or	135	for	medium	rare,	and	if,	when	you	press	the	filet	with
your	finger,	it	offers	a	slight	resistance	in	contrast	to	its	soft,	raw	state.

A	hot	serving	platter
Place	 the	 filet	 slit-side	 down	on	 a	 hot	 serving	 platter	 after	 removing
the	trussing	strings	and	pork	fat	or	bacon.	The	meat	should	cool	for	10
minutes	or	more	before	carving,	so	that	its	juices	will	retreat	back	into
the	tissues.

Sauce	and	serving
Wine	marinade	from	the	truffles
Skim	 the	 fat	 off	 the	 braising	 juices.	 Pour	 the	 truffle	 marinade	 into
them,	and	rapidly	boil	down	this	liquid	until	it	has	reduced	to	about	2
cups	and	its	flavor	is	rich	and	concentrated.

1	Tb	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	mixed	with	2	Tb	Madeira
Optional:	2	or	3	Tb	diced	truffles
Beat	in	the	starch	mixture	(unless	you	have	used	the	brown	sauce)	and
the	 optional	 truffles.	 Simmer	 for	 2	 to	 3	 minutes,	 then	 correct
seasoning.	The	diced	matignon	vegetables	remain	in	the	sauce.

Decorate	the	platter	with	whatever	vegetables	you	have	chosen.	Pour
a	 spoonful	 or	 two	 of	 the	 sauce	 and	 diced	 vegetables	 over	 the	meat,
and	 pass	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 sauce	 in	 a	 bowl.	 The	 filet	 is	 carved	 into
crosswise	slices	about	⅜	inch	thick.



VARIATION
If	you	do	not	wish	to	stuff	the	filet,	cook	it	exactly	the	same	way	but

without	 slitting	 and	 filling	 it.	 When	 you	 have	 placed	 it	 on	 a	 serving
platter,	you	may	garnish	the	top	with	broiled	mushroom	caps	alternating
with	sliced	truffles.

VARIATION
Marinade,	for	Filet	of	Beef

The	following	marinade	is	particularly	good	if	you	do	not	have	top-
quality	filet.

½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
¼	cup	Madeira
2	Tb	cognac
1	tsp	salt
6	peppercorns
¼	tsp	thyme
¼	tsp	basil
3	parsley	sprigs
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	or	more	canned	truffles	and	their	juice
Place	the	raw,	trimmed	filet	in	an	enameled	or	pyrex	dish	or	casserole.
Pour	on	the	wines	and	mix	in	the	seasonings,	herbs,	shallots	or	onions,
and	truffles.	Cover	and	marinate	for	6	hours	or	overnight,	turning	the
meat	and	basting	it	several	times.	Drain	and	dry	the	meat	thoroughly
before	 browning	 it.	 Include	 the	marinade,	 but	 not	 the	 truffles,	 with
your	braising	liquid.	Reserve	the	truffles	for	your	sauce.

BOILED	BEEF

Pot-au-feu



		POTÉE	NORMANDE
				POT-AU-FEU
[Boiled	Beef	with	Pork,	Chicken,	Sausage,	and	Vegetables]

Here	is	a	sumptuous	family-style	boiled	dinner	which	will	serve	12
or	more,	and	always	makes	a	great	hit	with	guests.	It	 is	brought	to	the
table	in	its	kettle	or	a	reasonable	facsimile,	looking	for	all	the	world	like
a	plain	pot-au-feu.	The	host	 starts	 the	proceedings	as	usual	by	 spearing
out	 the	 beef	 and	 placing	 it	 on	 a	 platter.	 Then	 he	 finds	 a	 sausage,	 and
after	 that	a	big	piece	of	pork.	Finally,	 to	wild	acclaim,	he	brings	out	a
chicken.	Two	or	three	sauces	may	be	served,	such	as	a	cream	sauce	with
mustard	 and	 tomato,	 an	 herbal	 mayonnaise,	 and	 a	 big	 bowl	 of	 the
cooking	 stock.	 The	 potée,	 like	 all	 boiled	 dinners,	 is	 easy	 on	 the	 cook
because	it	can	simmer	quietly	by	itself	for	4	to	5	hours	and	if	it	is	done
before	serving	time,	it	can	remain	in	its	kettle	where	it	will	keep	warm
for	a	good	hour.

VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Carrots,	turnips,	onions,	and	leeks	cook	along	with	the	meats.	Boiled
potatoes,	risotto,	or	buttered	noodles	are	prepared	and	served	separately.
A	nice,	simple	red	wine	goes	well:	Beaujolais,	Bordeaux,	or	Chianti,	or	a
chilled	rosé.

BEEF	CUTS	FOR	BOILING—POT-AU-FEU

First	 Choice:	 Rump	 Pot	 Roast—Pointe	 de	 Culotte	 or	 Aiguillette	 de
Rumsteck

Other	Choices:	Sirloin	Tip,	Knuckle—Tranche	Grasse

Bottom	Round—Gîte	à	la	Noix
Chuck	Pot	Roast—Paleron	or	Macreuse	à	Pot-au-feu
Brisket—Milieu	de	Poitrine

For	12	to	16	people

A	kettle	large	enough	to	hold	all	the	ingredients	listed
Beef	(cooking	time	2½	to	3	hours):	a	4-lb.	boneless	piece	of	rump	pot
roast,	sirloin	tip,	bottom	round,	chuck	pot	roast,	or	brisket



Pork	(cooking	time	about	3	hours):	a	4-lb.	piece	from	the	butt,	picnic,
rolled	shoulder,	or	fresh	ham
Chicken	(cooking	time	2½	to	3	hours):	a	4-lb.	ready-to-cook	stewing
hen	of	good	quality
Sausage	(cooking	time	30	minutes):	2	lbs.	lightly	smoked	country	or
Polish	sausage
All	the	meats	and	vegetables	listed	at	the	left	are	simmered	together	in
the	kettle,	but	are	added	at	various	times,	depending	on	how	long	they
take	to	cook.	Start	the	cooking	5	hours	before	you	expect	to	serve,	to
be	sure	the	meats	will	be	done.	Trim	excess	fat	off	the	beef	and	pork.
Tie	 each	 piece	 so	 it	 will	 hold	 its	 shape	 during	 cooking.	 Truss	 the
chicken.	To	 each	piece	of	meat	 and	 to	 the	 chicken,	 tie	 a	 string	 long
enough	to	fasten	to	the	handle	of	the	kettle,	so	that	the	meats	may	be
removed	easily	for	testing.
NOTE:	 You	 could	 do	with	 this	 chicken	 only,	 and	 it	would	 be	 called	 a
poule	au	pot.

Vegetable	Garnish	(cooking	time	1½	hours):	carrots,	onions,	turnips,
and,	if	available,	leeks;	1	to	2	of	each	vegetable	per	person
Prepare	the	vegetable	garnish:	Peel	the	carrots	and	turnips	and	quarter
them	 lengthwise;	 peel	 the	 onions;	 trim	 and	 wash	 the	 leeks.	 Tie	 the
vegetables	 in	 one	 or	 several	 bundles	 of	 washed	 cheesecloth	 so	 they
may	be	removed	easily	from	the	kettle.

Soup	Vegetables	and	Herbs:

3	scraped	carrots
3	peeled	onions,	each	stuck	with	a	whole	clove
2	scraped	parsnips
2	celery	stalks
2	leeks,	if	available
A	 large	herb	bouquet	 as	 follows:	6	parsley	 sprigs,	 1	bay	 leaf,	½	 tsp
thyme,	4	garlic	cloves,	8	peppercorns	tied	in	cheesecloth



Cooking	Stock:	sufficient	meat	stock	to	cover	ingredients	by	6	inches;
OR	3	cans	of	beef	bouillon,	3	cans	of	chicken	broth,	and	water
Optional:	raw	or	cooked	beef	or	veal	bones,	meat	scraps,	poultry
carcasses,	necks,	gizzards
Place	 the	 beef	 in	 the	 kettle	with	 the	 soup	 vegetables,	 herb	 bouquet,
and	optional	bones	and	scraps.	Cover	with	cooking	stock	by	6	inches.
More	liquid	may	be	added	later	if	necessary.	Set	kettle	over	moderate
heat,	bring	to	the	simmer,	skim.	Partially	cover	the	kettle	and	simmer
slowly	for	1	hour,	skimming	occasionally.

Add	 the	 pork	 and	 chicken.	 Bring	 kettle	 quickly	 back	 to	 the	 simmer.
Skim.	Simmer	1½	hours	more	and	skim	from	time	to	time.

Then	add	 the	vegetable	garnish	and	bring	kettle	quickly	back	 to	 the
simmer.	Taste	cooking	stock	for	seasoning	and	salt	lightly	if	necessary.
Simmer	1½	 to	2	hours	more,	 adding	 the	 sausage	½	hour	 before	 the
end.	The	meats	and	chicken	are	done	when	they	are	tender	if	pierced
with	a	sharp-pronged	fork	or	skewer.	If	any	piece	is	tender	before	the
others	 are	 done,	 remove	 to	 a	 bowl	 and	 keep	 moist	 with	 several
ladlefuls	of	cooking	stock.	Return	to	kettle	to	reheat	before	serving.
(*)	If	the	potée	is	ready	before	you	are,	it	will	stay	warm	for	at	least	45
minutes	in	the	kettle,	or	may	be	reheated.

While	 the	 kettle	 is	 simmering,	 prepare	 one	 or	 two	 of	 the	 sauces
suggested	at	the	end	of	the	recipe,	using	some	of	the	liquid	from	the
kettle	if	you	need	stock.

Serving
Drain	the	meats	and	the	vegetable	garnish.	Discard	trussing	strings.

Arrange	 vegetables	 on	 a	 large,	 hot	 platter	 and	 moisten	 them	 with	 a
ladleful	of	cooking	stock.	Decorate	with	parsley.	Either	place	the	meats
in	a	large	casserole	for	presentation	and	carving	at	the	table,	or	carve	in
the	 kitchen	 and	 arrange	 on	 a	 platter.	 Strain,	 degrease,	 and	 season
enough	cooking	stock	to	fill	a	large	serving	bowl,	and	pass	it	along	with
whatever	 sauce	 or	 sauces	 you	 have	 chosen	 from	 the	 following



suggestions.

Sauce	suggestions
Make	6	 to	8	cups	 if	only	one	sauce	 is	 to	be	served;	4	cups	each	 if

two	sauces	are	served.
Sauce	 Alsacienne,	 hard-boiled	 egg	 mayonnaise	 with	 herbs,	 capers,

and	 cooking	 stock	 Sauce	 Nénette,	 heavy	 cream	 simmered	 until	 it	 has
reduced	 and	 thickened,	 then	 flavored	 with	mustard	 and	 tomato	 Sauce
Tomate	or	Coulis	de	Tomates,	a	good	tomato	sauce
Sauce	 Suprême,	 a	 velouté	 sauce	 made	 with	 the	 cooking	 stock,	 and

enriched	 with	 cream	

BRAISED	BEEF-POT	ROAST

Pièce	de	Boeuf	Braisée

		BOEUF	À	LA	MODE
[Beef	Braised	in	Red	Wine]

Braised	 beef	 is	 a	 wonderful	 party	 dish;	 it	 is	 not	 only	 delicious	 to
smell,	 look	at,	and	eat,	but	you	have	no	worries	about	overdone	meat,
and	you	can	cook	it	ahead	of	time	if	you	need	to.	The	following	recipe
calls	for	a	6-to	24-hour	marination	of	the	beef	in	red	wine	and	aromatic
vegetables	 before	 cooking.	 If	 you	 prefer	 to	 omit	 this	 step,	 pour	 the
marinade	ingredients	into	the	casserole	after	browning	the	meat.

VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Boeuf	à	 la	mode	 is	 traditionally	garnished	with	braised	carrots	and
onions,	 and	 is	 usually	 accompanied	 by	 buttered	 noodles,	 parsley
potatoes,	 or	 steamed	 rice.	 Other	 vegetables	 could	 be	 braised	 lettuce,
celery,	 or	 leeks,	 or	 buttered	 green	 peas.	 Serve	 with	 it	 a	 good,
characterful	 red	 wine,	 such	 as	 a	 Burgundy,	 Hermitage,	 Côte	 Rôtie,	 or
Châteauneuf-du-Pape.

BEEF	CUTS	FOR	BRAISING

Although	it	is	not	essential,	beef	for	braising	is	usually	larded.	That



is,	 strips	of	 fresh	pork	 fat	are	 inserted	 into	 it,	going	 in	 the	direction	of
the	grain.	They	baste	the	interior	of	the	meat	as	it	cooks,	and	make	an
attractive	 design	when	 the	meat	 is	 sliced.	Most	 butchers	 will	 lard	 the
meat	for	you.
Choose	a	piece	of	beef	of	at	least	3	pounds,	and,	however	long	it	is,

its	 width	 should	 be	 at	 least	 4	 inches.	 It	 shrinks	 quite	 a	 bit	 during
cooking.	Count	on	1	pound	of	boneless	beef	for	2	or	3	people.
First	 Choice:	 Rump	 Pot	 Roast—Pointe	 de	 Culotte,	 or	 Aiguillette	 de

Rumsteck
Other	Choices:	Sirloin	Tip,	Knuckle—Tranche	Grasse

Chuck	Pot	Roast—Paleron	or	Macreuse	à	Pot-au-feu
Top	Round—Tende	de	Tranche
Bottom	Round—Gîte	à	la	Noix
Eye	of	Round—Rond	de	Gîte	à	la	Noix

For	10	to	12	people

Red	wine	marinade
An	enameled,	pyrex,	or	porcelain	bowl	just	large	enough	to	hold	all
the	ingredients	listed

1	cup	each:	thinly	sliced	carrots,	onions,	and	celery	stalks
2	halved	cloves	unpeeled	garlic
1	Tb	thyme
2	bay	leaves
¼	cup	minced	parsley
2	whole	cloves	or	4	allspice	berries
A	5-lb.	piece	of	braising	beef	trimmed	and	tied	for	cooking
1	Tb	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
5	cups	young	red	wine	with	body—Burgundy,	Côtes	du	Rhône,
Mâcon,	or	Chianti

⅓	cup	brandy



½	cup	olive	oil
Place	half	the	vegetables,	herbs,	and	spices	in	the	bottom	of	the	bowl.
Rub	 the	meat	with	 salt	 and	pepper	and	place	 it	over	 the	vegetables.
Spread	the	rest	of	the	vegetables	and	herbs	over	the	meat.	Pour	on	the
wine,	brandy,	 and	olive	oil.	Cover	 and	marinate	 for	 at	 least	6	hours
(12	to	24	hours	if	 the	meat	is	refrigerated).	Turn	and	baste	the	meat
every	hour	or	so.

Half	 an	 hour	 before	 cooking,	 drain	 the	meat	 on	 a	 rack.	 Just	 before
browning,	dry	it	thoroughly	with	paper	towels.	It	will	not	brown	if	it
is	damp.
Browning	and	braising	the	beef

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	fireproof	casserole	or	heavy	roaster	just	large	enough	to	hold	the
meat	and	braising	ingredients

4	to	6	Tb	rendered	pork	fat	or	cooking	oil
Add	 the	 fat	 to	 the	 casserole	 and	 place	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat.
When	fat	is	on	the	point	of	smoking,	brown	the	meat	on	all	sides.	This
takes	about	15	minutes.	Pour	out	the	browning	fat.
(*)	Recipe	may	be	prepared	in	advance	up	to	this	point.

One	or	all	of	these	to	give	body	to	the	sauce:

1	or	2	cracked	veal	knuckles
1	or	2	split	calf’s	feet
4	to	8	ounces	fresh	pork	rind,	bacon	rind,	or	ham	rind	simmered	10
minutes	in	a	quart	of	water,	rinsed,	and	drained

4	to	6	cups	beef	stock,	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Pour	 in	 the	 wine	 marinade	 and	 boil	 it	 down	 rapidly	 until	 it	 has
reduced	by	half.	Then	add	the	veal	knuckles,	calf’s	feet,	and	rind,	and
pour	in	enough	stock	or	bouillon	to	come	two	thirds	of	the	way	up	the
beef.	Bring	 to	a	simmer	on	 top	of	 the	stove,	 skim,	cover	 tightly,	and



set	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	liquid	remains
at	a	gentle	simmer	for	2½	to	3	hours,	and	turn	the	meat	several	times
during	 its	braising.	The	beef	 is	done	when	a	 sharp-pronged	 fork	will
pierce	it	easily.

2	lbs.	quartered	carrots	braised	in	butter
24	to	36	small	white	onions,	brown-braised	in	stock
While	the	beef	is	being	braised,	cook	the	carrots	and	onions.	Set	them
aside	until	needed.

A	hot	serving	platter
When	 the	 meat	 is	 tender,	 remove	 it	 to	 the	 platter.	 Discard	 trussing
strings.	 Trim	 off	 any	 loose	 fat,	 and	 keep	 the	 meat	 warm	 while
finishing	the	sauce	(5	to	10	minutes).

1	Tb	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	mixed	with	2	Tb	Madeira	or	port,	if
needed
Skim	 the	 fat	 off	 the	braising	 juices,	 and	 strain	 them	 through	a	 sieve
into	a	saucepan,	pressing	the	liquid	out	of	the	vegetables.	Simmer	for
a	minute	or	two,	skimming,	then	boil	rapidly	until	liquid	is	reduced	to
about	 3½	 cups	 and	 is	 full	 of	 flavor.	 Taste	 carefully	 for	 seasoning.
Sauce	should	be	 lightly	 thickened.	 If	 too	 thin,	beat	 in	 the	starch	and
wine	mixture	and	simmer	for	3	minutes.	Then	add	the	cooked	carrots
and	onions	and	simmer	for	2	minutes	to	blend	flavors.

A	slotted	spoon
Parsley	sprigs
A	warmed	sauceboat
Remove	vegetables	with	a	slotted	spoon	and	arrange	them	around	the
meat.	 Decorate	with	 parsley.	 Pour	 a	 bit	 of	 sauce	 over	 the	meat	 and
send	the	rest	to	the	table	in	a	warmed	sauceboat.	(Or	carve	the	meat
and	arrange	on	the	platter	with	the	vegetables	and	parsley,	and	spoon
some	of	the	sauce	over	the	meat.)	(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTES



For	a	wait	of	up	to	one	hour,	return	meat,	vegetables	and	sauce
to	casserole,	cover	loosely,	and	set	over	barely	simmering	water.
For	a	 longer	wait,	slice	 the	meat	and	arrange	 it	on	a	 fireproof

platter.	 Place	 the	 vegetables	 around	 the	 meat.	 Baste	 with	 the
sauce.	 Half	 an	 hour	 before	 serving,	 cover	 and	 reheat	 in	 a	 350-
degree	oven.	 Leftover	braised	beef	will	 be	 just	 as	 good	 the	next
day,	heated	up	the	same	way.

VARIATIONS
Cold	Braised	Beef
This	recipe	for	beef	braised	in	red	wine	may	easily	be	turned	into	an

aspic	 by	 following	 the	 directions	 for	 boeuf	 à	 la	 mode	 en	 gelée.	 Cold
braised	beef	may	also	be	served	as	a	 salad,	by	 following	 the	directions
for	salade	de	boeuf	à	la	parisienne.

Pièce	de	Boeuf	à	la	Cuillère
[Minced	Braised	Beef	Served	in	a	Beef	Shell]

From	 la	 vieille	 cuisine	 française	 comes	 an	 unusual	 way	 to	 serve
braised	beef	for	a	dinner	party.	First	the	beef	is	braised;	then	meat	is	cut
out	from	its	top	and	center	to	leave	a	shell	of	beef	which	is	crumbed	and
browned	 in	 the	 oven.	 The	 removed	 beef	 is	 chopped,	 combined	 with
sautéed	mushrooms,	minced	ham,	and	sauce,	and	is	returned	to	the	shell
for	serving.	A	nice	thing	about	this	recipe	is	that	all	may	be	readied	in
advance	for	a	5-to	10-minute	heating	just	before	serving.

For	10	to	12	people

Braising	the	beef

Braise	 the	beef	 and	make	 the	 sauce	 following	 the	master	 recipe,	but
simmer	 the	meat	only	until	 it	 is	 almost	 tender,	 about	3	hours	 for	 a	5-
pound	piece.	 It	 should	 still	be	 firm	enough	 to	hold	 its	 shape	when	 the
shell	 is	made.	Choose	 a	 solid,	 lean	 piece	 of	 top	 round	with	 no	muscle
separations.	 It	 should	weigh	at	 least	5	pounds	and	be	cut	 into	an	even
rectangular	block	about	5	inches	wide	and	5	inches	deep.



Making	the	shell

When	 the	meat	 is	 done,	 remove	 it	 from	 the	 sauce.	 Place	 it	 under	 a
board	 and	 a	 2-pound	 weight	 to	 preserve	 its	 shape	 for	 about	 an	 hour
while	it	cools	to	tepid.	Then	trim	it,	 if	necessary,	into	a	neat	rectangle.
Hollow	 out	 the	 center,	 leaving	 an	 open-topped	 rectangular	 trough	 or
shell	 of	 meat	 with	 sides	 and	 bottom	 half	 an	 inch	 thick.	 Chop	 the
removed	meat,	including	any	trimmed-off	bits,	into	⅛-inch	pieces.	Place
them	 in	 a	 large,	 heavy-bottomed,	 enameled	 saucepan,	 skillet,	 or
casserole.

Preparing	the	filling

½	lb.	fresh	mushrooms,	quartered	and	sautéed	in	oil	and	butter	with
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions

¾	cup	(4	ounces)	lean,	minced,	boiled	ham
1½	cups	sauce	from	the	braised	beef
Stir	the	mushrooms	and	ham	into	the	chopped	beef,	and	blend	in	the
sauce.	 Simmer	 slowly,	 covered,	 for	 15	 to	 20	 minutes,	 stirring
frequently.	Add	a	little	more	sauce	if	the	mixture	becomes	too	thick.	It
should	 hold	 its	 shape	 fairly	 solidly	 in	 a	 spoon.	 Carefully	 correct
seasoning.	 Film	 top	 of	 mixture	 with	 a	 spoonful	 of	 stock	 or	 a	 bit	 of
melted	butter	and	set	aside,	uncovered,	or	refrigerate,	until	needed.

Finishing	the	shell

A	pastry	brush
2	eggs	beaten	in	a	small	bowl	with	1	tsp	water	and	a	pinch	of	salt
2	cups	fine,	dry,	white	bread	crumbs	tossed	with	½	cup	grated
Parmesan	cheese

½	cup	melted	butter
A	rack	set	on	a	roasting	pan
Using	a	pastry	brush,	paint	the	whole	beef	shell	with	beaten	egg.	Pat
on	a	 layer	of	 cheese	and	bread	crumbs.	Sprinkle	with	butter	and	 set
the	shell	on	the	rack.	Refrigerate	until	needed.



(*)	Recipe	may	be	completed	even	a	day	ahead	up	to	this	point.

Final	assembly
Preheat	oven	to	450	degrees.

A	vegetable	garnish	such	as	braised	onions	and	carrots,	and	sautéed
potatoes,	OR	baked	tomatoes,	and	green	beans	or	braised	lettuce

The	rest	of	the	sauce	from	the	braised	beef	poured	into	a	gravy	bowl
A	hot	serving	platter
¼	cup	minced	parsley
About	5	to	10	minutes	before	serving,	set	the	beef	shell	in	the	oven	to
brown	the	crumb	and	cheese	covering	lightly.	Reheat	the	filling	to	the
simmer.	Heat	 the	 vegetable	 garniture	 and	 the	 sauce.	 Then	 place	 the
browned	 shell	 on	 the	 platter,	 heap	with	meat	mixture,	 and	 sprinkle
parsley	 over	 it.	 Arrange	 the	 vegetables	 about	 the	 platter.	 Pass	 the
sauce	separately.	Each	guest	cuts	down	the	crusty,	tender	shell	with	a
serving	spoon	to	help	himself	to	part	of	it	and	its	filling.

BEEF	STEWS

Ragoûts	de	Boeuf

Of	the	several	types	of	beef	stew	in	which	the	meat	is	browned,	then
simmered	 in	 an	 aromatic	 liquid,	boeuf	 bourguignon	 is	 the	most	 famous.
The	daubes,	estouffades,	and	terrines	usually	require	no	browning,	and	are
much	 simpler	 to	 do.	 To	 be	 technically	 correct,	 any	 recipe	 describing
meat	 which	 is	 browned	 before	 it	 is	 simmered	 should	 be	 labeled	 a
fricassee;	we	shall	not	always	make	the	distinction	here	because	stew	has
become	current	usage.

CUTS	FOR	STEWING

The	better	the	meat,	the	better	the	stew.	While	cheaper	and	coarser
cuts	 may	 be	 used,	 the	 following	 are	 most	 recommended.	 Count	 on	 1
pound	of	boneless	meat,	trimmed	of	fat,	for	2	people;	3	if	the	rest	of	the



menu	is	large.
First	 Choice:	 Rump	 Pot	 Roast—Pointe	 de	 Culotte,	 or	 Aiguillette	 de

Rumsteck
Other	Choices:	Chuck	Pot	Roast—Paleron,	or	Macreuse	à	Pot-au-feu

Sirloin	Tip—Tranche	Grasse
Top	Round—Tende	de	Tranche
Bottom	Round—Gîte	à	la	Noix

COOKING	TIME

Beef	stews	take	2	to	3	hours	of	simmering	depending	on	the	quality
and	tenderness	of	 the	meat.	 If	 it	has	been	marinated	before	cooking,	 it
may	take	less	time.	Stews	may	be	cooked	either	in	the	oven	or	on	top	of
the	stove;	the	oven	is	preferable	because	its	heat	is	more	uniform.

BOEUF	BOURGUIGNON
BOEUF	À	LA	BOURGUIGNONNE
[Beef	Stew	in	Red	Wine,	with	Bacon,	Onions,	and	Mushrooms]

As	 is	 the	case	with	most	 famous	dishes,	 there	are	more	ways	 than
one	to	arrive	at	a	good	boeuf	bourguignon.	Carefully	done,	and	perfectly
flavored,	 it	 is	certainly	one	of	 the	most	delicious	beef	dishes	concocted
by	man,	and	can	well	be	the	main	course	for	a	buffet	dinner.	Fortunately
you	can	prepare	it	completely	ahead,	even	a	day	in	advance,	and	it	only
gains	in	flavor	when	reheated.

VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Boiled	 potatoes	 are	 traditionally	 served	 with	 this	 dish.	 Buttered
noodles	 or	 steamed	 rice	 may	 be	 substituted.	 If	 you	 also	 wish	 a	 green
vegetable,	buttered	peas	would	be	your	best	choice.	Serve	with	the	beef
a	fairly	full-bodied,	young	red	wine,	such	as	Beaujolais,	Côtes	du	Rhône,
Bordeaux-St.	Émilion,	or	Burgundy.
For	6	people

A	6-ounce	chunk	of	bacon



Remove	rind,	and	cut	bacon	into	lardons	(sticks,	¼	inch	thick	and	1½
inches	 long).	Simmer	rind	and	bacon	for	10	minutes	 in	1½	quarts	of
water.	Drain	and	dry.

Preheat	oven	to	450	degrees.

A	9-to	10-inch	fireproof	casserole	3	inches	deep
1	Tb	olive	oil	or	cooking	oil
A	slotted	spoon
Sauté	 the	bacon	 in	 the	oil	over	moderate	heat	 for	2	 to	3	minutes	 to
brown	 lightly.	 Remove	 to	 a	 side	 dish	 with	 a	 slotted	 spoon.	 Set
casserole	 aside.	 Reheat	 until	 fat	 is	 almost	 smoking	 before	 you	 sauté
the	beef.

3	lbs.	lean	stewing	beef	cut	into	2-inch	cubes	(see	preceding	list	of
cuts)
Dry	the	beef	in	paper	towels;	it	will	not	brown	if	it	is	damp.	Sauté	it,	a
few	pieces	at	a	time,	in	the	hot	oil	and	bacon	fat	until	nicely	browned
on	all	sides.	Add	it	to	the	bacon.

1	sliced	carrot
1	sliced	onion
In	the	same	fat,	brown	the	sliced	vegetables.	Pour	out	the	sautéing	fat.

1	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
2	Tb	flour
Return	the	beef	and	bacon	to	the	casserole	and	toss	with	the	salt	and
pepper.	 Then	 sprinkle	 on	 the	 flour	 and	 toss	 again	 to	 coat	 the	 beef
lightly	with	 the	 flour.	 Set	 casserole	 uncovered	 in	middle	 position	 of
preheated	oven	for	4	minutes.	Toss	the	meat	and	return	to	oven	for	4
minutes	more.	(This	browns	the	flour	and	covers	the	meat	with	a	light
crust.)	Remove	casserole,	and	turn	oven	down	to	325	degrees.



3	cups	of	a	full-bodied,	young	red	wine	such	as	one	of	those	suggested
for	serving,	or	a	Chianti
2	to	3	cups	brown	beef	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
1	Tb	tomato	paste
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
½	tsp	thyme
A	crumbled	bay	leaf
The	blanched	bacon	rind
Stir	 in	 the	 wine,	 and	 enough	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 so	 that	 the	 meat	 is
barely	 covered.	Add	 the	 tomato	paste,	 garlic,	herbs,	 and	bacon	 rind.
Bring	to	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Then	cover	the	casserole	and	set
in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	liquid	simmers	very
slowly	 for	 2½	 to	 3	 hours.	 The	meat	 is	 done	when	 a	 fork	 pierces	 it
easily.

18	to	24	small	white	onions,	brown-braised	in	stock
1	lb.	quartered	fresh	mushrooms	sautéed	in	butter
While	 the	 beef	 is	 cooking,	 prepare	 the	 onions	 and	 mushrooms.	 Set
them	aside	until	needed.

When	 the	 meat	 is	 tender,	 pour	 the	 contents	 of	 the	 casserole	 into	 a
sieve	set	over	a	saucepan.	Wash	out	the	casserole	and	return	the	beef
and	bacon	to	it.	Distribute	the	cooked	onions	and	mushrooms	over	the
meat.

Skim	fat	off	 the	sauce.	Simmer	sauce	 for	a	minute	or	 two,	 skimming
off	additional	fat	as	it	rises.	You	should	have	about	2½	cups	of	sauce
thick	enough	to	coat	a	spoon	lightly.	If	too	thin,	boil	it	down	rapidly.
If	 too	 thick,	 mix	 in	 a	 few	 tablespoons	 of	 stock	 or	 canned	 bouillon.
Taste	 carefully	 for	 seasoning.	 Pour	 the	 sauce	 over	 the	 meat	 and
vegetables.
(*)	Recipe	may	be	completed	in	advance	to	this	point.

Parsley	sprigs



FOR	 IMMEDIATE	 SERVING:	Cover	the	casserole	and	simmer	for	2	to	3	minutes,
basting	the	meat	and	vegetables	with	the	sauce	several	times.	Serve	in
its	 casserole,	 or	 arrange	 the	 stew	 on	 a	 platter	 surrounded	 with
potatoes,	noodles,	or	rice,	and	decorated	with	parsley.

FOR	 LATER	 SERVING:	 When	 cold,	 cover	 and	 refrigerate.	 About	 15	 to	 20
minutes	before	serving,	bring	to	the	simmer,	cover,	and	simmer	very
slowly	 for	 10	minutes,	 occasionally	 basting	 the	meat	 and	 vegetables
with	the	sauce.

CARBONNADES	À	LA	FLAMANDE
[Beef	and	Onions	Braised	in	Beer]

Beer	 is	 typical	 for	 the	 Belgian	 braise,	 and	 gives	 a	 quite	 different
character	 to	beef	 than	 the	 red	wine	of	 the	bourguignon.	A	bit	of	brown
sugar	masks	the	beer’s	slightly	bitter	quality,	and	a	little	vinegar	at	the
end	gives	character.	Serve	this	with	parsley	potatoes	or	buttered	noodles,
a	green	salad,	and	beer.
For	6	people

A	3-lb.	piece	of	lean	beef	from	the	chuck	roast	or	rump
2	to	3	Tb	rendered	fresh	pork	fat	or	good	cooking	oil
A	heavy	skillet
Preheat	 oven	 to	 325	 degrees.	 Cut	 the	 beef	 into	 slices	 about	 2	 by	 4
inches	 across	 and	½	 inch	 thick.	Dry	 on	 paper	 towels.	 Put	 a	 1/ -inch

16

layer	of	fat	or	oil	in	the	skillet	and	heat	until	almost	smoking.	Brown
the	beef	slices	quickly,	a	few	at	a	time,	and	set	them	aside.

1½	lbs.	or	6	cups	of	sliced	onions
Salt	and	pepper
4	cloves	mashed	garlic
Reduce	 heat	 to	moderate.	 Stir	 the	 onions	 into	 the	 fat	 in	 the	 skillet,
adding	more	 fat	 if	necessary,	and	brown	the	onions	 lightly	 for	about



10	minutes,	 stirring	 frequently.	 Remove	 from	 heat,	 season	with	 salt
and	pepper,	and	stir	in	the	garlic.

A	9-to	10-inch	fireproof	casserole	about	3½	inches	deep
Salt	and	pepper
Arrange	half	the	browned	beef	in	the	casserole	and	season	lightly	with
salt	and	pepper.	Spread	half	the	onions	over	the	beef.	Repeat	with	the
rest	of	the	beef	and	onions.

1	cup	strong	beef	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
2	to	3	cups	light	beer,	Pilsner	type
2	Tb	light	brown	sugar
1	large	herb	bouquet:	6	parsley	sprigs,	1	bay	leaf,	and	½	tsp	thyme
tied	in	cheesecloth
Heat	 the	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 in	 the	 browning	 skillet,	 scraping	 up
coagulated	cooking	juices.	Pour	it	over	the	meat.	Add	enough	beer	so
the	 meat	 is	 barely	 covered.	 Stir	 in	 the	 brown	 sugar.	 Bury	 the	 herb
bouquet	among	the	meat	slices.	Bring	casserole	to	the	simmer	on	top
of	 the	 stove.	 Then	 cover	 the	 casserole	 and	 place	 in	 lower	 third	 of
preheated	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	liquid	remains	at	a	very	slow	simmer
for	2½	hours	at	the	end	of	which	time	the	meat	should	be	fork-tender.

1½	Tb	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	blended	with	2	Tb	wine	vinegar
Remove	herb	 bouquet.	Drain	 the	 cooking	 liquid	 out	 of	 the	 casserole
into	 a	 saucepan,	 and	 skim	 off	 fat.	 Beat	 the	 starch	 and	wine	 vinegar
mixture	 into	 the	 cooking	 liquid	 and	 simmer	 for	 3	 to	 4	 minutes.
Carefully	 correct	 seasoning.	You	 should	have	 about	 2	 cups	 of	 sauce.
Pour	the	sauce	back	over	the	meat.
(*)	May	be	prepared	in	advance	to	this	point.

Parsley	potatoes	or	buttered	noodles
Parsley	sprigs
When	ready	to	serve,	cover	the	casserole	and	simmer	slowly	for	4	to	5



minutes	until	the	meat	is	thoroughly	heated	through.	Either	bring	the
casserole	 to	 the	 table,	 or	 arrange	 the	meat	 on	 a	 hot	 serving	 platter,
spoon	 the	 sauce	 over	 it,	 surround	 with	 potatoes	 or	 noodles,	 and
decorate	with	parsley.

		PAUPIETTES	DE	BOEUF
				ROULADES	DE	BOEUF
				PETITES	BALLOTINES	DE	BOEUF
			[Braised	Stuffed	Beef	Rolls]

Paupiettes	 are	 thin	 slices	 of	 beef	 wrapped	 around	 a	 filling,	 and
braised	in	wine	and	stock	with	herbs	and	aromatic	vegetables.	Although
they	 follow	 the	 same	 general	 pattern	 as	 other	 fricassees	 of	 beef,	 their
pork	and	veal	stuffing	gives	 them	a	special	character.	Paupiettes	can	be
cooked	in	advance,	and	any	leftovers	may	be	reheated	or	may	be	served
cold.	 Accompany	 hot	 paupiettes	 with	 rice,	 risotto,	 or	 noodles,	 and	 a
garniture	 of	 sautéed	 mushrooms,	 braised	 onions,	 and	 carrots,	 or	 with
buttered	green	peas	or	green	beans,	broiled	tomatoes,	and	French	bread.
Serve	 a	 good	 simple	 red	 wine	 such	 as	 Beaujolais,	 Côtes	 du	 Rhône,
Chianti,	or	a	rosé.

For	about	18	paupiettes	serving	6	people

½	cup	finely	minced	onions
1	Tb	butter
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	 in	 butter	 for	 7	 to	 8	 minutes	 until	 they	 are
tender	but	not	browned.	Scrape	them	into	the	mixing	bowl.

6	ounces	lean	pork	ground	with	6	ounces	lean	veal	and	3	ounces
fresh	pork	fat,	making	about	1½	cups	ground	meat
A	wooden	spoon
1	clove	mashed	garlic
⅛	tsp	thyme
Pinch	of	allspice



Big	pinch	of	pepper
¼	tsp	salt
¼	cup	chopped	parsley
1	egg
Add	all	ingredients	at	the	left	to	the	mixing	bowl	and	beat	vigorously
with	a	wooden	spoon	until	thoroughly	blended.

2½	lbs.	lean	beef	(top	round	or	chuck)	cut	into	18	cross-grain	slices	¼
inch	thick	and	about	3	inches	in	diameter
Salt	and	pepper
White	string
Flatten	 each	 slice	 of	 beef	 to	 a	 thickness	 of	 ⅛	 inch	 by	 pounding	 it
between	2	sheets	of	waxed	paper	with	a	wooden	mallet	or	rolling	pin.
Lay	the	meat	flat	on	a	board	and	sprinkle	lightly	with	salt	and	pepper.
Divide	the	stuffing	into	18	portions	and	place	one	on	the	lower	third
of	each	slice.	Roll	the	meat	around	the	stuffing	to	form	cylinders	about
4	inches	long	and	1½	inches	thick.	Secure	each	with	2	ties	of	string.
Dry	in	paper	towels.

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

2	to	3	Tb	rendered	pork	fat	or	good	cooking	oil
A	heavy	fireproof	casserole	about	10	inches	in	diameter	and	2½	to	3
inches	deep
½	cup	sliced	carrots
½	cup	sliced	onions
3	Tb	flour
1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
1½	cups	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Heat	 the	 fat	 or	 oil	 in	 the	 casserole	 until	 almost	 smoking.	Brown	 the
paupiettes	 lightly,	 a	 few	at	 a	 time,	 and	 remove	 to	 a	 side	dish.	 Lower
heat	to	moderate	and	brown	the	vegetables	slowly	for	4	to	5	minutes,
stirring.	Then	add	 the	 flour	 and	brown	 it	 slowly	 for	2	 to	3	minutes.



Remove	casserole	 from	heat	and	 immediately	beat	 in	 the	wine,	 then
the	stock	or	bouillon.

A	4-inch	square	of	fresh	pork	rind,	bacon	rind	or	salt-pork	rind,
simmered	10	minutes	in	a	quart	of	water,	then	drained
1	large	herb	bouquet	plus	2	cloves	of	garlic:	6	parsley	sprigs,	1	bay
leaf,	½	tsp	thyme,	and	the	garlic	tied	together	in	cheesecloth
Lay	 rind	 in	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 casserole.	 Place	 the	 paupiettes	 over	 it,
and	add	more	stock	or	bouillon,	or	water,	if	necessary,	to	the	liquid	in
the	casserole	so	paupiettes	are	barely	covered.	Add	the	herb	bouquet.

Bulb	baster
Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Cover	the	casserole	and	set	in
lower	third	of	preheated	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	the	paupiettes	simmer
very	 slowly	 for	 1½	 hours.	 Baste	 them	 two	 or	 three	 times	 with	 the
liquid	in	the	casserole.

Remove	the	paupiettes	to	a	side	dish	and	cut	off	trussing	strings.	Strain
the	 cooking	 liquid	 into	 a	 saucepan	 and	 degrease	 thoroughly.	 Boil
down	the	sauce	if	necessary,	to	concentrate	its	flavor.	You	should	have
1½	to	2	cups	thick	enough	to	coat	a	spoon	lightly.	Correct	seasoning.

1	Tb	prepared	mustard	of	the	strong	Dijon	type	blended	with	⅓	cup
whipping	cream
A	wire	whip
Off	 heat,	 beat	 the	mustard	 and	 cream	 into	 the	 sauce.	 Simmer	 for	 1
minute.	Rearrange	the	paupiettes	in	the	casserole	or	a	fireproof	serving
dish,	and	pour	the	sauce	over	them.
(*)	Recipe	may	be	prepared	in	advance	to	this	point.	Film	top	of	sauce
with	 a	 spoonful	 of	 stock	 or	 melted	 butter.	 When	 cold,	 cover	 and
refrigerate.

Parsley	sprigs
About	10	minutes	before	serving,	reheat	barely	to	the	simmer	on	top



of	the	stove.	Cover	and	simmer	slowly	for	5	minutes	or	so,	basting	the
paupiettes	 frequently	 with	 the	 sauce.	 Serve	 from	 the	 casserole,	 or
arrange	 the	 paupiettes	 on	 a	 platter,	 spoon	 the	 sauce	 over	 them,	 and
surround	with	rice	or	noodles.	Decorate	with	parsley.

VARIATIONS
Prepare,	brown,	and	braise	the	paupiettes	as	in	the	preceding	recipe

but	use	the	sauce	ingredients	and	techniques	outlined	either	for	the	boeuf
bourguignon	or	for	the	carbonnades	à	la	flamande.

BOEUF	À	LA	CATALANE
[Beef	Stew	with	Rice,	Onions,	and	Tomatoes]

Here	 is	 a	 hearty	 dish	 from	 the	 Spanish-Mediterranean	 corner	 of
France.	Serve	 it	with	a	green	salad,	French	bread,	and	a	 strong,	young
red	wine.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	¼-lb.	chunk	of	bacon
2	Tb	olive	oil
A	heavy,	10-inch	skillet
A	slotted	spoon
A	3-quart	fireproof	casserole	about	3	inches	deep
Remove	rind	and	cut	bacon	into	lardons	(1½-inch	strips,	⅜	of	an	inch
thick.)	 Simmer	 in	 1	 quart	 of	 water	 for	 10	minutes.	 Drain,	 dry,	 and
brown	lightly	in	oil	in	the	skillet.	Remove	with	a	slotted	spoon	to	the
casserole.

3	lbs.	lean	stewing	beef	cut	into	squares	2½	inches	across	and	1	inch
thick	(see	cuts	listed)
Dry	the	meat	on	paper	towels.	Heat	fat	in	skillet	until	almost	smoking



then	brown	the	meat	a	few	pieces	at	a	time.	Place	it	when	browned	in
the	casserole.

1½	cups	sliced	onions
Lower	heat	to	moderate,	and	brown	the	onions	lightly.	Remove	them
with	a	slotted	spoon	and	add	to	the	casserole.

1	cup	clean,	unwashed,	raw	white	rice
Still	in	the	same	fat,	stir	the	rice	over	moderate	heat	for	2	to	3	minutes
until	 it	 turns	 a	 milky	 color.	 Scrape	 into	 a	 bowl	 and	 set	 aside	 until
later.

1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
Pour	any	remaining	fat	out	of	the	skillet,	add	the	wine	and	stir	for	a
moment	over	heat	to	dissolve	coagulated	cooking	juices.	Pour	into	the
casserole.

2	to	3	cups	beef	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Salt	to	taste
¼	tsp	pepper
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
½	tsp	thyme
Pinch	of	saffron
1	crumbled	bay	leaf
Add	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 almost	 to	 the	height	 of	 the	meat.	 Salt	 lightly.
Stir	 in	 the	 pepper,	 garlic,	 and	 herbs.	 Bring	 to	 simmer	 on	 top	 of	 the
stove,	 cover	 tightly,	 and	 set	 in	 lower	 position	 of	 preheated	 oven	 to
simmer	slowly	for	1	hour.

1	lb.	ripe,	red	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	chopped	(this
will	make	about	1½	cups	tomato	pulp)
Remove	casserole	from	oven.	Stir	in	the	tomatoes,	bring	to	simmer	on
top	of	the	stove,	cover,	and	return	to	the	oven	for	an	additional	hour



or	 so	 of	 very	 slow	 simmering.	When	 the	meat	 is	 almost	 fork-tender,
remove	casserole	from	oven.	Raise	oven	heat	to	375	degrees.

Sautéed	rice	from	above
Stock	or	canned	bouillon	if	necessary
Tilt	casserole	and	skim	off	fat.	You	should	have	2	to	2½	cups	of	liquid;
add	more	 stock	 or	 bouillon,	 or	waiter,	 if	 necessary.	 Stir	 in	 the	 rice.
Bring	to	simmer	on	top	of	stove,	cover,	and	set	again	in	lower	third	of
oven.	Regulate	heat	to	keep	liquid	at	a	full	simmer	for	20	minutes	so
the	rice	will	cook.	Do	not	stir	the	rice.	At	the	end	of	this	time	it	should
be	tender	and	have	absorbed	almost	all	the	liquid.	Remove	from	oven
and	correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	prepared	in	advance	to	this	point.	Set	aside,	cover	askew.
To	 reheat,	 cover	 casserole	 and	 place	 in	 a	 pan	 of	 boiling	 water	 for
about	half	an	hour.

1	cup	(4	ounces)	grated	Swiss	or	Parmesan	cheese
Just	before	serving,	delicately	fold	the	cheese	with	a	fork	into	the	hot
beef	and	rice.	Serve	from	the	casserole	or	on	a	hot	platter.

		DAUBE	DE	BOEUF
				ESTOUFFADE	DE	BOEUF
				TERRINE	DE	BOEUF
[Casserole	of	Beef	with	Wine	and	Vegetables	—	Hot	or	Cold]

Daube	 comes	 from	 daubière,	 a	 covered	 casserole.	 Estouffade	 is	 a
stifling	 or	 smothering,	 in	 a	 covered	 casserole.	 Almost	 every	 region	 of
France	has	its	own	daubes,	estouffades,	and	terrines.	Some	of	them	are	for
a	 whole	 piece	 of	 braised	 beef;	 others	 are	 like	 a	 boeuf	 bourguignon.	 In
many	 the	 meat	 is	 larded,	 and	 in	 most	 it	 is	 marinated	 in	 wine	 with
vegetables	 before	 the	 cooking	 begins.	 Here	 is	 a	 savory,	 country-style
daube,	 an	 informal	main	 dish	 to	 serve	with	 boiled	 potatoes,	 risotto,	 or
noodles,	a	green	salad,	and	a	simple	red	wine	or	a	chilled	rosé.

Note:	We	have	not	directed	that	the	meat	be	larded,	but	you	may	do



so	if	you	wish,	by	inserting	two	¼-inch	strips	of	larding	pork	or	blanched
bacon	through	each	piece	of	meat.	You	may	also	omit	the	marination	of
the	meat,	and	add	all	the	marinade	ingredients	to	the	casserole	with	the
beef.

For	6	people

3	lbs.	lean	stewing	beef	cut	into	2½-inch	squares,	1	inch	thick	(beef
cuts	are	listed)
A	large	glazed	earthenware	bowl
1½	cups	dry	white	wine,	dry	white	vermouth,	or	red	wine
Optional:	¼	cup	brandy,	eau	de	vie,	or	gin
2	Tb	olive	oil
2	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
½	tsp	thyme	or	sage
1	crumbled	bay	leaf
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
2	cups	thinly	sliced	onions
2	cups	thinly	sliced	carrots
Place	 the	 beef	 in	 the	 bowl	 and	mix	 with	 the	 wine,	 optional	 spirits,
olive	 oil,	 seasonings,	 herbs,	 and	 vegetables.	 Cover	 and	 marinate	 at
least	3	hours	(6	if	refrigerated),	stirring	up	frequently.

½	lb.	lean	bacon	cut	into	1-inch	slices	¼	inch	thick	and	2	inches	long
approximately
1½	cups	(6	ounces)	sliced	fresh	mushrooms
1½	lbs.	ripe,	red	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	chopped	(this
will	make	about	2¼	cups	tomato	pulp)
Simmer	the	bacon	for	10	minutes	in	2	quarts	of	water.	Drain	and	dry.
Prepare	the	mushrooms	and	tomatoes.

Remove	the	beef	from	the	marinade	and	drain	in	a	sieve.



Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	5-to	6-quart	fireproof	casserole	3½	inches	deep
1	cup	sifted	flour	on	a	plate
Line	the	bottom	of	the	casserole	with	3	or	4	strips	of	bacon.	Strew	a
handful	 of	 the	marinade	 vegetables,	mushrooms,	 and	 tomatoes	 over
them.	Piece	by	piece,	 roll	 the	beef	 in	 the	 flour	and	 shake	off	 excess.
Place	closely	together	in	a	layer	over	the	vegetables.	Cover	with	a	few
strips	 of	 bacon,	 and	 continue	 with	 layers	 of	 vegetables,	 beef,	 and
bacon.	End	with	a	layer	of	vegetables	and	2	or	3	strips	of	bacon.

1	to	2	cups	beef	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Pour	 in	 the	 wine	 from	 the	 marinade	 and	 enough	 stock	 or	 bouillon
almost	to	cover	the	contents	of	the	casserole.	Bring	to	simmer	on	top
of	 the	stove,	cover	closely,	and	set	 in	 lower	 third	of	preheated	oven.
Regulate	heat	so	liquid	simmers	slowly	for	2½	to	3	hours.	The	meat	is
done	when	a	fork	pierces	it	easily.

Tip	casserole	and	skim	out	fat.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	 be	 prepared	 ahead	 and	 reheated,	 and	 is	 good	 either	 hot	 or
cold.

VARIATION
Daube	de	Boeuf	à	la	Provençale
[Casserole	of	Beef	with	Garlic	and	Anchovy	Sauce]

This	is	the	same	daube	given	a	Provençal	flavoring	at	the	end.	Any
cold	leftovers	are	delicious,	served	with	a	green	salad	and	French	bread.
Follow	the	master	recipe	with	these	additions:
10	flat	anchovy	filets	packed	in	olive	oil
2	Tb	capers
A	table	fork
3	Tb	wine	vinegar



3	Tb	olive	oil	from	the	anchovy	can	and/or	plain	olive	oil
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
¼	cup	minced	parsley
Bulb	baster
Using	a	fork,	mash	the	anchovies	and	capers	to	a	paste	in	a	bowl.	Beat
in	 the	 other	 ingredients.	 After	 the	 daube	 has	 cooked	 for	 2½	 hours
remove	 it	 from	 the	 oven	 and	 skim	 off	 the	 fat.	 Pour	 on	 the	 anchovy
mixture	 and	 baste	 the	 beef	with	 the	 cooking	 juices	 in	 the	 casserole.
Cover	and	return	to	oven	until	the	meat	is	tender.

BEEF	SAUTÉS

Sauté	de	Boeuf

		SAUTÉ	DE	BOEUF	À	LA	PARISIENNE
[Beef	Sauté	with	Cream	and	Mushroom	Sauce]

This	 sauté	 of	 beef	 is	 good	 to	 know	about	 if	 you	have	 to	 entertain
important	 guests	 in	 a	 hurry.	 It	 consists	 of	 small	 pieces	 of	 filet	 sautéed
quickly	to	a	nice	brown	outside	and	a	rosy	center,	and	served	in	a	sauce.
The	 following	 recipe	 can	 easily	 be	 prepared	 in	 30	minutes,	 or	 in	 less
than	 half	 the	 time	 if	 the	 meat	 has	 been	 sliced	 and	 the	 mushrooms
sautéed	ahead.	 In	 the	variations	at	 the	end	of	 the	 recipe,	 all	 the	 sauce
ingredients	 may	 be	 prepared	 in	 advance.	 If	 the	 whole	 dish	 is	 cooked
ahead	of	time,	be	very	careful	indeed	in	its	reheating	that	the	beef	does
not	overcook.	The	cream	and	mushroom	sauce	here	is	a	French	version
of	beef	Stroganoff,	but	less	tricky	as	it	uses	fresh	rather	than	sour	cream,
so	you	will	not	run	into	the	problem	of	curdled	sauce.

Serve	 the	 beef	 in	 a	 casserole,	 or	 on	 a	 platter	 surrounded	 with
steamed	 rice,	 risotto,	 or	 potato	 balls	 sautéed	 in	 butter.	 Buttered	 green
peas	or	beans	could	accompany	it,	and	a	good	red	Bordeaux	wine.
For	6	people

½	lb.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms



A	heavy,	9-to	10-inch	enameled	skillet
2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	good	cooking	oil
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
¼	tsp	salt	and	a	pinch	of	pepper
Following	directions	sauté	the	mushrooms	in	the	skillet	 in	hot	butter
and	oil	for	4	to	5	minutes	to	brown	them	lightly.	Stir	in	the	shallots	or
onions,	 and	 cook	 for	 a	 minute	 longer.	 Season	 the	 mushrooms,	 and
scrape	them	into	a	side	dish.

2½	lbs.	filet	of	beef;	the	tenderloin	butt	and	the	tail	of	the	filet	are
usually	used	(see	illustrations)
Remove	all	surrounding	fat	and	filament,	and	cut	the	filet	into	2-ounce
pieces,	 about	 2	 inches	 across	 and	 ½	 inch	 thick.	 Dry	 thoroughly	 on
paper	towels.

2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	cooking	oil,	more	if	needed
Place	 the	 butter	 and	 oil	 in	 the	 skillet	 and	 set	 over	moderately	 high
heat.	When	 the	butter	 foam	begins	 to	 subside,	 sauté	 the	beef,	 a	 few
pieces	at	a	time,	for	2	to	3	minutes	on	each	side	to	brown	the	exterior
but	keep	the	interior	rosy	red.	Set	the	beef	on	a	side	dish,	and	discard
sautéing	fat.

¼	cup	Madeira	(best	choice),	or	dry	white	vermouth
¾	cup	good	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
1	cup	whipping	cream
2	tsp	cornstarch	blended	with	1	tablespoon	of	the	cream
Pour	the	wine	and	stock	or	bouillon	into	the	skillet	and	boil	 it	down
rapidly,	scraping	up	coagulated	cooking	juices,	until	liquid	is	reduced
to	 about	 ⅓	 cup.	 Beat	 in	 the	 cream,	 then	 the	 cornstarch	 mixture.
Simmer	a	minute.	Add	the	sautéed	mushrooms	and	simmer	a	minute
more.	 The	 sauce	 should	 have	 a	 slight	 liaison	 (be	 lightly	 thickened).
Taste	carefully	for	seasoning.



Salt	and	pepper
Season	the	beef	lightly	with	salt	and	pepper	and	return	it	to	the	skillet
along	with	 any	 juices	which	may	 have	 escaped.	 Baste	 the	 beef	with
the	 sauce	 and	 mushrooms;	 or	 transfer	 everything	 to	 a	 serving
casserole.

2	Tb	softened	butter
Parsley	sprigs
When	you	are	ready	to	serve,	cover	the	skillet	or	casserole	and	heat	to
below	the	simmer	for	3	to	4	minutes,	being	very	careful	not	to	overdo
it	or	the	pieces	of	filet	will	be	well	done	rather	than	rare.	Off	heat	and
just	before	 serving,	 tilt	 casserole,	add	butter	 to	 sauce	a	bit	at	a	 time
while	 basting	 the	meat	 until	 the	 butter	 has	 absorbed.	Decorate	with
parsley,	and	serve	at	once.

VARIATIONS
Sauté	de	Boeuf	à	la	Bourguignonne
[Beef	Sauté	with	Red	Wine,	Mushrooms,	Bacon,	and	Onions]

For	6	people

2½	lbs.	filet	of	beef	prepared	and	sautéed	as	in	preceding	master
recipe
A	3-ounce	chunk	blanched	bacon
1½	cups	red	wine
1½	cups	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
1	clove	mashed	garlic
1	Tb	tomato	paste
¼	tsp	thyme
Sauté	 the	 beef	 and	 set	 it	 aside.	 Cut	 the	 blanched	 bacon	 into	 1-inch
strips	¼	of	an	 inch	thick.	Brown	lightly	 in	 the	sauté	skillet	and	pour
out	fat.	Add	rest	of	ingredients	at	left	and	slowly	boil	down	by	half.



1	Tb	flour	mashed	to	a	paste	with	1	Tb	butter—beurre	manié
A	wire	whip
Remove	 from	 heat	 and	 beat	 in	 the	 flour-butter	 paste.	 Simmer	 for	 1
minute,	beating	with	wire	whip.

18	small	braised	onions
½	lb.	sliced	mushrooms	sautéed	in	butter
Salt	and	pepper
A	fireproof	serving	casserole
Add	onions	and	mushrooms	and	simmer	2	minutes.	Correct	seasoning.
Season	 the	 sautéed	 beef,	 and	 arrange	 it	 and	 the	 sauce,	 bacon,	 and
vegetables	in	the	serving	casserole.
(*)	 Recipe	may	 be	 prepared	 ahead	 to	 this	 point.	 Set	 casserole	 aside
uncovered.

2	Tb	softened	butter
Parsley	sprigs
When	 ready	 to	 serve,	 cover	 and	 reheat	 at	 below	 simmer	 for	 3	 to	 4
minutes.	 Off	 heat,	 add	 the	 butter	 by	 bits,	 basting	 the	 meat	 and
vegetables	with	the	sauce	until	the	butter	has	absorbed.	Decorate	with
parsley	and	serve	immediately.

Sauté	de	Boeuf	à	la	Provençale
[Beef	Sauté	with	Fresh	Tomato	Sauce,	Olives,	and	Herbs]

For	6	people

2½	lbs.	filet	of	beef
Cut	 and	 sauté	 the	 beef	 as	 described	 in	 the	 preceding	master	 recipe.
Remove	to	a	side	dish.

⅓	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
2	cups	fresh	tomato	purée	with	garlic	and	herbs



⅓	cup	pitted	black	olives,	preferably	the	dryish	Mediterranean	type
2	Tb	mixed	fresh	green	herbs,	or	parsley
Pour	the	fat	out	of	the	sauté	skillet	and	pour	in	the	wine.	Boil	it	down
rapidly	until	 reduced	 to	2	 tablespoons,	 scraping	up	 coagulated	 sauté
juices.	 Add	 the	 tomato	 purée	 and	 simmer	 a	 moment.	 Then	 add	 the
sauteed	beef	and	reheat	without	simmering.	Decorate	with	olives	and
herbs	or	parsley,	and	serve	immediately.

LAMB	AND	MUTTON

Agneau	et	Mouton

American	 scientific	 methods	 have	 achieved	 the	 miracle	 of	 our
growing	 some	of	 the	world’s	 finest	wines,	 and	 this	 same	approach	has
worked	 tremendous	 improvements	 in	 chicken	 raising,	as	well	 as	 in	 the
cross-breeding,	 feeding,	 and	 raising	 of	 lamb.	 We	 can	 now	 buy	 large
young	lamb,	5	to	7	months	old,	all	through	the	year.	From	mid-February
through	April	we	 get	 lamb	grown	 in	 the	 Imperial	Valley	 of	California,
from	May	through	July	it	comes	from	Nevada	and	Idaho,	mountain	lamb
from	Colorado	comes	to	us	in	the	fall,	and	winter	lamb	is	raised	in	Ohio
and	 Iowa.	Furthermore,	over	90	percent	of	 the	 lamb	we	see	 in	our	big
supermarkets	 has	 the	 purple	USDA	 inspection	 stamps	 that	 guarantee	 a
healthy	animal,	as	well	as	 the	official	grading	stamp	CHOICE.	A	whole
leg	averages	8	 to	9	pounds—2	or	more	pounds	over	 the	old	average—
and	makes	wonderful	eating.

The	 old	 labels	 of	 spring	 lamb,	milk-fed	 lamb,	 and	mutton	 do	 not
apply	at	all	anymore	to	commercially	raised	American	lamb,	but	because
this	is	a	book	of	classic	French	cooking,	it	is	good	to	know	the	traditional
terminology,	 and	 you	 may	 still	 find	 that	 these	 labels	 apply	 among
private	 meat	 purveyors	 and	 individual	 raisers.	 (Imported	 lamb	 from
Australia	and	New	Zealand	is	raised	from	a	smaller	breed	of	animal,	and
always	comes	to	us	frozen.)	TRADITIONAL	TERMS	FOR	LAMB	AND	MUTTON

Hothouse	Lamb,	Milk-fed	Lamb—Agneau	de	Lait,	Agneau	de	Pauillac.
Very	 young	 lamb	 raised,	 like	 veal,	 on	 milk,	 and	 considered	 a	 prime
delicacy.	Roast	it	whole	with	one	of	the	stuffings	or	cut	it	up	and	brown



with	a	mustard	coating,	 like	that	on	the	broiled	chicken.	You	may	find
this	in	ethnic	Greek	or	Italian	markets	around	Easter	time.

Genuine	 Spring	 Lamb,	 Milk-finished	 Lamb—Agneau	 Pascal.	 Lamb
that	 is	 3	 to	 4	months	 old	with	 delicate,	 pale	 red	 flesh.	 You’d	 have	 to
order	 this	 from	 a	 private	 breeder	 or	 purveyor.	 Roast,	 broil,	 or	 grill	 it,
stew	it	en	blanquette	like	veal,	or	poach	it.

Lamb—Agneau.	 Young	 lamb,	 ideally	 from	 5	 to	 7	 months	 old,	 the
kind	we	buy	 today	 in	our	 large	markets.	The	best	French	 lamb,	by	 the
way,	 has	 always	 been	 considered	 to	 be	 from	 those	 fed	 on	 the	 salty
grasses	of	the	northern	coastal	areas,	les	près	salés.

Mutton—Mouton.	No	 longer	 lamb,	 from	between	12	months	and	2
years	old,	it	is	mutton.	Full-flavored	and	in	need	of	proper	aging,	mutton
is	roasted	like	lamb,	or	the	chops	are	broiled,	and	the	rest	makes	mutton
stew.	 Unfortunately	 it	 is	 rare	 to	 find	mutton	 anywhere	 today,	 even	 in
France.

LEG	OR	SHOULDER	OF	LAMB

Gigot	ou	Épaule	de	Pré-salé

PREPARING	A	LEG	OF	LAMB	FOR	COOKING

Trim	off	all	but	a	thin	layer	of	fat,	and	remove	any	loose	fat.	Shave
off	the	purple	inspection	stamps.



Leg	of	Lamb	Bone	Structure	and	Cutting	Methods

In	 the	 following	 recipes,	 a	 6-pound	 leg	 of	 lamb	means	 the	 French
leg,	without	 the	 sirloin,	 since	 the	whole	 9-pound	 leg	 is	more	 than	 the
average	oven	wants;	however,	 the	whole	 leg	 roasts	 in	almost	 the	 same
amount	of	time.	Although	some	meat	fanciers	object	to	any	tampering	at
all	with	a	 leg	of	 lamb,	carving	 is	much	easier	 if	 some	of	 the	bones	are
removed.	 The	 tail	 and	 the	 pelvic	 bone	may	 be	 cut	 out,	 and	 the	meat
sewn	 or	 skewered	 together	 to	 cover	 the	 rump	 knucklebone.	 Or	 if	 you
wish	only	the	shank	to	remain	after	the	pelvic	bone	has	been	removed,
the	 leg	 bone	 may	 be	 taken	 from	 inside	 the	 meat	 without	 making	 an
outside	incision;	the	meat	is	then	sewn	or	skewered	at	the	large	end.	If
the	leg	is	boned	entirely,	then	rolled	and	tied,	it	makes	a	compact	roast
which	may	be	cooked	on	a	spit.	Most	butchers	will	perform	any	of	these
operations	for	you,	but	they	are	not	too	difficult	to	manage	by	yourself.
The	 bones	 and	 trimmings	 may	 be	 turned	 into	 a	 good	 sauce	 for	 your
roast,	see	sauce	ragoût.

FLAVORINGS	AND	STUFFINGS

For	a	mild	garlic	flavor,	insert	3	or	4	slivers	of	garlic	in	the	meat	at
the	shank	end.	For	a	more	pronounced	flavor,	make	several	incisions	in
the	 meat	 and	 insert	 more	 garlic	 slivers.	 See	 also	 the	 garlic	 and	 herb



stuffing	 and	other	 suggestions	 for	boned	 lamb,	 and	 the	herbal-mustard
coating.

SHOULDER	OF	LAMB

Shoulder	 of	 lamb	 in	 America	 is	 one	 half	 the	 forequarter	 of	 lamb,
minus	 the	 lower	part	of	 the	 ribs	and	 the	 shank.	 It	 thus	 forms	a	 square
shape,	and	consists	of	the	upper	leg,	all	or	part	of	the	shoulder	blade,	3
to	5	shoulder	chops,	and	2	or	3	vertebrae	in	the	neck.	Whole,	it	weighs	4
to	6	pounds;	boned,	a	third	less,	or	2½	to	4	pounds.	In	France	the	shank
is	considered	to	be	part	of	the	shoulder,	but	not	the	chops.	So	if	you	are
living	there	and	want	to	stuff	a	shoulder	of	 lamb,	ask	that	some	of	 the
shoulder	 chops,	 côtes	 découvertes,	 be	 included.	Otherwise	 there	will	 be
little	room	for	your	stuffing.	When	the	shoulder	is	boned,	the	fell	or	top
filament,	is	left	intact	to	form	a	covering	for	the	roast.	After	boning,	the
shoulder	may	be	rolled,	tied,	and	roasted	as	is.	Or	it	may	be	stuffed	and
either	 rolled	 and	 tied	 into	 a	 fat	 cylindrical	 shape,	 or	 formed	 into	 a
square	cushion	roast.	Boned	shoulder	may	be	substituted	for	leg	of	lamb
in	any	of	the	recipes	in	this	section.

TIMING	FOR	ROAST	LAMB	AND	MUTTON

Lamb	and	mutton	 cooked	 in	 the	 French	manner	 are	 seared	 for	 15
minutes	 in	a	450-degree	oven,	 then	the	roasting	 is	continued	in	a	350-
degree	oven	until	the	meat	is	frankly	rare,	rosy,	and	juicy.	If	you	prefer
lamb	 well	 done,	 do	 not	 go	 over	 a	 meat-thermometer	 reading	 of	 160
degrees	or	the	meat	will	lose	much	of	its	juice	and	flavor.	Medium,	from
bright	to	pale	pink,	would	be	140	to	150.	A	boned	leg	or	shoulder	will
weigh	 approximately	 30	 per	 cent	 less	 than	 a	 bone-in	 piece,	 but	 its
cooking	 time	 per	 pound	 usually	more	 than	 doubles,	 depending	 on	 the
thickness	of	 the	meat.	The	estimates	 in	 the	 following	 list	 are	based	on
unchilled	meat,	and	the	recipes	refer	to	unboned	meat	unless	otherwise
specified.

A	6-pound	leg	or	shoulder,	bone	in
Rare—1	to	1¼	hours	(10	to	12	minutes	per	pound)
Meat	Thermometer	Reading—125	to	130	degrees

Medium	to	Well	Done—1¼	to	1½	hours	(13	to	15	minutes	per	pound)



Meat	Thermometer	Reading—145	to	160	degrees
A	4-pound	piece	of	boned	and	rolled	leg	or	shoulder
Rare—1¾	to	2	hours	(25	to	30	minutes	per	pound)
Meat	Thermometer	Reading—125	to	130	degrees

Medium	to	Well	Done—2	to	2¼	hours	(30	to	35	minutes	per	pound)
Meat	Thermometer	Reading—145	to	160	degrees

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS	FOR	ROAST	LAMB

Beans
Gigot,	 haricots—lamb	 and	 beans—are	 a	 favorite	 combination.	 The

beans	may	be	plain	buttered	green	beans,	or	green	beans	and	fresh	shell
beans	 (otherwise	 known	 as	 white	 or	 cranberry	 beans),	 or	 the	 dried
beans.	 A	 mixture	 of	 the	 two	 is	 called	 haricots	 panachés.	 Another
suggestion	is	green	beans	with	tomatoes.	Additional	bean	recipes	are	in
the	Bean	section.

Potatoes

With	 plain	 buttered	 green	 vegetables	 you	 could	 serve	 one	 of	 the
potato	 casseroles,	 or	 the	 garlic	 mashed	 potatoes.	 Potatoes	 sautéed	 in
butter,	go	with	either	plain	or	sauced	vegetables.

Other	vegetables

Rice	with	mushrooms,	could	be	accompanied	by	one	of	the	recipes	for
peas,	and	baked	tomatoes.
Tomatoes	 stuffed	 with	 herbs	 or	 mushrooms	 green	 beans,	 and

sautéed	potatoes	are	always	good	with	roast	lamb.
Eggplant	 and	 lamb	 are	 an	 excellent	 flavor	 combination.	 See	 the

eggplant	casserole,	ratatouille,	and	the	eggplant	stuffed	with	mushrooms
on	this	page.
Brussels	 sprouts	 or	 broccoli,	 or	 cauliflower,	 are	 other	 ideas.	 If	 the

vegetables	are	served	plain,	you	could	accompany	them	with	one	of	the
potato	casseroles.

TRADITIONAL	GARNITURES



Here	are	some	of	the	traditional	French	vegetable	combinations	for
garnishing	a	roast	of	lamb.
Bruxelloise,	 braised	 endive,	 Brussels	 sprouts	 braised	 in	 butter,

potatoes	sautéed	in	butter.
Châtelaine,	 quartered	 artichoke	 hearts	 braised	 in	 butter,	 whole

baked	tomatoes,	braised	celery,	potatoes	sautéed	in	butter.
Clamart,	cooked	artichoke	hearts,	filled	with	buttered	peas,	potatoes

sautéed	in	butter
Florian,	 braised	 lettuce,	 brown-braised	 onions,	 carrots	 braised	 in

butter,	potatoes	sautéed	in	butter
Judic,	 tomatoes	 stuffed	 with	 herbs	 or	mushrooms,	 braised	 lettuce,

potatoes	sautéed	in	butter
Provençale,	whole	baked	tomatoes,	baked	stuffed	mushrooms
Viroflay,	 spinach	 braised	with	 stock	 or	 cream,	 quartered	 artichoke

hearts	braised	in	butter,	potatoes	sautéed	in	butter

WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Red	wine	goes	with	lamb	and	mutton.	A	light	red,	such	as	Bordeaux-
Médoc,	 is	 best	 with	 the	 delicate	 flavor	 of	 young	 spring	 lamb.	 Serve	 a
stronger	 red,	 such	 as	 Bordeaux-St.	 Émilion,	 with	 more	 mature	 lamb.
Mutton,	 or	 lamb	 roasted	 with	 a	 strong,	 herbal	 stuffing	 or	 mustard
coating,	calls	for	a	sturdier	wine,	Côtes	du	Rhône	or	Burgundy.

		GIGOT	DE	PRÉ-SALÉ	RÔTI
[Roast	Leg	of	Lamb]

For	8	to	10	people

Preheat	oven	to	450	degrees.

A	6-lb.	leg	of	lamb
Prepare	 the	 lamb	 for	 cooking	 as	 described	 in	 the	 preceding
paragraphs,	and	wipe	it	dry	with	paper	towels.

4	Tb	rendered	fresh	pork	or	beef	fat,	or	a	mixture	of	melted	butter



and	cooking	oil
A	roasting	pan	1½	inches	deep	and	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	meat
A	rack	to	fit	the	pan
A	bulb	baster	or	long-handled	spoon
Brush	the	lamb	with	melted	fat	or	butter	and	oil.	Place	it	on	the	rack
in	the	roasting	pan	and	set	in	the	upper	third	of	the	preheated	oven.
Turn	and	baste	it	every	4	to	5	minutes	for	15	to	20	minutes,	or	until	it
has	browned	lightly	on	all	sides.	This	sears	the	outside	of	the	meat	and
prevents	its	juices	from	bursting	out.

A	meat	thermometer
1	large	carrot,	roughly	sliced
1	large	onion,	roughly	sliced
Optional:	3	to	6	cloves	unpeeled	garlic,	added	to	pan	½	hour	before
end	of	cooking
Reset	 oven	 for	 350	 degrees.	 Insert	 a	 meat	 thermometer	 into	 the
fleshiest	part	of	 the	 lamb.	Strew	 the	vegetables	 in	 the	bottom	of	 the
pan.	Set	lamb	in	middle	level	of	oven	and	roast	until	done.	Basting	is
not	necessary.

Total	Cooking	Time

Rare,	1	 to	1¼	hours,	125	 to	130	degrees.	Meat	 is	 slightly	 resistant	when
pressed,	and	if	the	meat	is	pricked	deeply	with	a	fork,	the	juices	run	rosy
red.

Medium,	 1¼	 to	 1½	 hours,	 145	 to	 150	 degrees.	 Meat	 is	 firmer	 when
pressed,	juices	run	a	pale	rose	when	meat	is	pricked.

1	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
A	hot	platter
Discard	any	trussing	strings	or	skewers.	Season	the	lamb,	and	place	it
on	a	platter.	It	should	rest	at	room	temperature	for	20	to	30	minutes



before	being	carved,	to	let	its	juices	retreat	back	into	the	tissues.

1	cup	stock,	brown	lamb	stock,	or	canned	beef	bouillon
A	hot	sauceboat
Remove	 the	 rack,	and	 spoon	 the	cooking	 fat	out	of	 the	pan.	Pour	 in
the	stock	or	bouillon	and	boil	rapidly,	scraping	up	coagulated	roasting
juices	and	mashing	the	vegetables	into	the	stock.	Taste	for	seasoning.
Just	before	serving,	strain	into	a	hot	sauceboat,	pressing	the	juices	out
of	the	vegetables.	Stir	in	any	juices	which	may	have	escaped	from	the
roast.

Water	cress	or	parsley
Hot	plates
Decorate	the	roast	with	water	cress	or	parsley,	and	be	sure	to	serve	the
lamb	on	hot	plates	as	lamb	fat	congeals	when	cold.

VARIATION:	OTHER	SAUCES
The	preceding	directions	are	for	a	deglazing	sauce	which	furnishes

about	a	spoonful	per	serving.	If	you	wish	more	sauce,	prepare	in	advance
2	to	3	cups	of	sauce	ragoût	with	the	lamb	bones	and	trimmings.	Omit	the
stock	in	the	master	recipe	and	stir	the	sauce	into	the	degreased	roasting
juices;	simmer	a	moment,	and	pour	into	a	sauceboat.

Sauce	Spéciale	à	l’Ail	pour	Gigot
[Garlic	Sauce	for	Roast	Lamb]

This	very	good	sauce	uses	a	whole	head	of	garlic	which,	after	 two
blanch-ings	 and	 a	 long	 simmering,	 becomes	 tamed	 and	 develops	 a
delicious	flavor.
For	1½	to	2	cups	of	sauce

1	large	head	of	garlic



A	saucepan	containing	1	quart	of	cold	water
Separate	the	garlic	cloves.	Bring	them	to	the	boil	in	the	saucepan	and
boil	30	seconds.	Drain	and	peel.	Set	again	in	cold	water,	bring	to	the
boil,	and	drain.

A	1-quart	heavy-bottomed	saucepan
¾	cup	milk,	more	if	needed
⅛	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	rosemary	or	thyme
1½	Tb	raw	white	rice
In	 the	 saucepan	 bring	 the	milk,	 salt,	 herbs,	 and	 rice	 to	 the	 simmer.
Add	 the	 garlic,	 and	 simmer	 very	 slowly	 for	 45	 minutes,	 putting	 in
more	milk	by	spoonfuls	if	the	rice	is	in	danger	of	scorching.

1	cup	brown	lamb	stock,	beef	stock,	or	canned	beef	bouillon
A	sieve,	a	bowl,	and	a	wooden	spoon,	or	an	electric	blender
Salt	and	pepper
Pour	 in	 the	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 and	 simmer	 1	 minute.	 Then	 force
through	a	sieve,	or	purée	in	the	electric	blender.	Correct	seasoning.	Set
sauce	aside	and	reheat	when	needed.

A	hot	gravy	boat
After	the	lamb	has	been	roasted	as	described	in	the	master	recipe	and
the	roasting	pan	degreased,	deglaze	the	pan	with	2	to	3	tablespoons	of
stock	or	water,	scraping	up	coagulated	juices.	Strain	into	the	hot	garlic
sauce.	Pass	the	sauce	in	a	hot	gravy	boat.

VARIATION
Gigot	à	la	Moutarde
[Herbal	Mustard	Coating	for	Roast	Lamb]

When	 lamb	 is	 brushed	with	 this	mixture,	 garlic	 slivers	 and	herbal



stuffings	are	not	necessary,	and	the	lamb	becomes	a	beautiful	brown	as
it	roasts.
For	a	6-lb.	leg	of	lamb

½	cup	Dijon-type	prepared	mustard
2	Tb	soy	sauce
1	clove	mashed	garlic
1	tsp	ground	rosemary	or	thyme
¼	tsp	powdered	ginger
2	Tb	olive	oil
Blend	 the	mustard,	 soy	 sauce,	garlic,	herbs,	and	ginger	 together	 in	a
bowl.	 Beat	 in	 the	 olive	 oil	 by	 droplets	 to	 make	 a	 mayonnaise-like
cream.

A	rubber	spatula	or	brush
Paint	the	lamb	with	the	mixture	and	set	it	on	the	rack	of	the	roasting
pan.	 The	meat	will	 pick	 up	more	 flavor	 if	 it	 is	 coated	 several	 hours
before	roasting.

Roast	in	a	350-degree	oven,	1	to	1¼	hours,	for	medium	rare;	or	1¼	to
1½	 hours	 for	 well	 done.	 The	 searing	 step	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the
master	recipe	is	omitted.

		GIGOT	OU	ÉPAULE	DE	PRÉ-SALÉ,	FARCI
[Stuffed	Leg	or	Shoulder	of	Lamb]

Boned	leg	and	shoulder	of	lamb	lend	themselves	nicely	to	any	of	the
following	 stuffings,	 and	 cold	 leftovers	 are	 particularly	 good.	 Lay	 the
boned	meat	skin	side	down	on	a	flat	surface.	Season	lightly	with	salt	and
pepper.	 Spread	 the	 stuffing	over	 the	meat	 and	 into	 the	pockets	 left	 by
the	 bones.	 Then	 roll	 the	 meat	 into	 a	 cylindrical	 shape	 to	 enclose	 the
stuffing	completely.	Sew	or	skewer	if	necessary,	then	tie	loops	of	string
around	 its	 circumference	 at	 1-inch	 intervals	 so	 the	 meat	 will	 hold	 its
shape.	Roast	either	in	the	oven	or	on	a	spit,	or	braise	it	as	described.	The



following	are	for	3	to	4	pounds	of	boned	meat.

Farce	aux	Herbes
[Garlic	and	Herb	Stuffing]

½	cup	chopped	parsley
½	tsp	ground	rosemary	or	thyme
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	to	1	clove	mashed	garlic
¼	tsp	powdered	ginger
1	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
Mix	all	the	ingredients	together	in	a	bowl.	Spread	the	mixture	on	the
lamb.	Roll	and	tie	as	described	in	the	preceding	instructions.

Farce	de	Porc
[Pork	and	Herb	Stuffing]

¾	cup	finely	minced	onions
2	Tb	butter
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Cook	the	onions	and	butter	slowly	together	in	a	small	saucepan	until
tender	but	not	browned.	Scrape	into	a	mixing	bowl.

1	cup	fresh	white	bread	crumbs	(French	or	homemade-type	bread)
½	cup	lukewarm	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Soak	the	bread	crumbs	in	stock	or	bouillon	for	5	minutes.	Drain	in	a
sieve	and	press	out	as	much	liquid	as	you	can.	Save	the	liquid	for	your
sauce,	and	place	the	bread	crumbs	in	the	mixing	bowl.



½	lb.	(1	cup)	lean,	fresh	pork	ground	with	4	ounces	(½	cup)	fresh
pork	fat

1	clove	mashed	garlic
¼	tsp	ground	rosemary,	sage,	or	thyme
¼	cup	minced	parsley
Pinch	of	allspice
½	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
1	egg
A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon
Add	the	rest	of	the	ingredients	to	the	mixing	bowl	and	beat	vigorously
with	 a	 wooden	 spoon	 until	 well	 mixed.	 Sauté	 a	 teaspoonful	 until
cooked	through,	and	taste	for	seasoning.	Add	more	seasonings	to	the
stuffing	if	you	feel	it	necessary.
Spread	 the	 stuffing	 on	 the	 lamb.	 Roll	 and	 tie	 as	 described	 at	 the
beginning	of	this	section.

Farce	aux	Rognons
[Rice	and	Kidney	Stuffing]

¼	cup	finely	minced	onions
1	Tb	butter
⅓	cup	raw	white	rice
⅔	cup	white	stock	or	canned	chicken	bouillon
In	a	small,	heavy-bottomed	saucepan,	cook	the	onions	in	butter	for	4
to	5	minutes	until	tender	but	not	browned.	Add	the	rice	and	stir	over
low	heat	 for	2	 to	3	minutes	until	 it	 turns	a	milky	color.	Pour	 in	 the
stock	or	chicken	bouillon,	bring	to	a	boil,	cover,	and	simmer	not	too
slowly	 for	 15	 minutes	 without	 stirring,	 at	 which	 point	 the	 liquid
should	be	absorbed	and	the	rice	almost	tender.	It	will	finish	cooking	in
the	lamb.



½	tsp	ground	rosemary,	sage,	or	thyme
Pinch	of	allspice
¼	tsp	pepper
½	clove	mashed	garlic
Salt	to	taste
Fluff	 in	 the	 herbs,	 spice,	 pepper,	 and	 garlic	with	 a	 fork.	Add	 salt	 to
taste.

4	lamb	kidneys,	or	a	mixture	of	lamb	kidneys,	heart,	and	liver
making	about	1	cup	in	all

1	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil
Salt	and	pepper
Dry	 the	 meat	 in	 paper	 towels,	 and	 leave	 the	 pieces	 whole.	 Sauté
quickly	in	hot	butter	and	oil	to	brown	very	lightly,	leaving	the	interior
of	 the	meat	rosy.	Cut	 into	⅛-inch	slices.	Season	 lightly	with	salt	and
pepper,	and	fold	into	the	rice.

When	the	stuffing	is	cool,	spread	it	on	the	lamb.	Roll	and	tie	the	meat
as	described	at	the	beginning	of	this	section.

VARIATIONS:	Other	Stuffings	Following	the	General	Procedures	Outlined
Farce	Duxelles
[Ham	and	Mushroom	Stuffing]

½	cup	minced	onions,	cooked	in	butter
¼	lb.	minced	fresh	mushrooms,	cooked	in	butter
¾	cup	minced,	lean	boiled	ham
¼	cup	finely	minced	fresh	pork	fat	(or	ham	fat)
Salt,	pepper,	herbs

Farce	aux	Olives



[Olive	and	Ground	Lamb	Stuffing]

½	cup	ground	lean	lamb
½	cup	minced	onions,	cooked	in	butter
1	cup	stale	white	bread	crumbs	soaked	in	stock	or	bouillon	and
squeezed	dry

12	pitted	black	Greek	olives,	simmered	10	minutes	in	1	quart	of
water,	drained,	and	chopped

1	egg
Salt,	pepper,	herbs,	allspice,	and	garlic

Farce	Mentonnaise
[Salmon	and	Anchovy	Stuffing]

An	unlikely	combination,	but	a	good	one

½	cup	drained,	canned	salmon
6	drained,	mashed	anchovies	(packed	in	olive	oil)
½	cup	ground	lean	lamb
¾	cup	minced	onions,	sautéed	in	butter
Salt,	pepper,	herbs,	garlic

GIGOT	OU	ÉPAULE	DE	PRÉ-SALÉ	BRAISÉ	(aux	Haricots)
[Braised	Leg	or	Shoulder	of	Lamb—with	Beans]

Braising	 is	 a	 succulent	 way	 to	 do	 almost	 mature	 lamb	 or	 young
mutton,	 particularly	 if	 it	 has	 been	 stuffed	 with	 any	 of	 the	 preceding
suggestions.	 Beans	 may	 finish	 their	 cooking	 with	 the	 lamb,	 and	 will
absorb	 a	 fine	 flavor	 from	 the	 braising	 liquid.	 If	 you	 do	 not	 wish	 to
include	 them,	 serve	 with	 the	 lamb	 a	 purée	 of	 lentils	 or	 chestnuts,
mashed	potatoes,	rice,	or	risotto.	Other	vegetables	to	serve	with	braised
lamb	 are	 green	 beans,	 peas,	 Brussels	 sprouts,	 baked	 tomatoes,	 or	 a
garniture	of	glazed	carrots,	 turnips,	onions,	and	sautéed	mushrooms.	A



fairly	full	red	wine	goes	well—Beaujolais,	Bordeaux—St.	Émilion,	Côtes
du	Rhône,	or	Burgundy.

A	NOTE	ON	TIMING

Almost	mature	 lamb	 or	 young	mutton	 is	 usually	 braised	 40	 to	 50
minutes	 per	 pound,	 long	 enough	 for	 the	 meat,	 its	 stuffing,	 and	 the
braising	liquid	to	exchange	flavors.	This	makes	3½	to	4	hours	for	a	leg,
and	 around	 2½	 hours	 for	 a	 shoulder.	 Boned	 and	 stuffed	 lamb	 will
usually	 take	 an	 hour	 longer.	 The	meat	 is	 done	when	 a	 fork	 pierces	 it
easily.	 You	may,	 if	 you	wish,	 cut	 the	 time	 in	 half,	 and	 cook	 the	meat
only	 until	 the	 thermometer	 indicates	 150	 degrees	 for	medium	 rare,	 or
160	 to	 165	 degrees	 for	 well	 done;	 in	 this	 case,	 there	 will	 be	 little
exchange	of	flavor	between	the	various	elements.
Beans.	 If	 you	 are	 to	 use	 dry	 white	 beans,	 their	 soaking	 and

precooking	will	 take	a	good	 two	hours.	This	 is	done	while	 the	 lamb	 is
braising.
For	8	to	10	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	6-to	7-lb.	leg	or	4-to	5-lb.	shoulder	of	lamb,	boned,	and	stuffed,	if
you	wish,	with	one	of	the	preceding	fillings

The	lamb	bones,	sawed	or	chopped
3	to	4	Tb	rendered	fresh	pork	fat	or	cooking	oil
A	heavy	fireproof	casserole	or	covered	roaster	just	large	enough	to
hold	all	ingredients

2	large	sliced	carrots
2	large	sliced	onions
2	cups	of	dry	white	wine,	or	red	wine,	or	1½	cups	dry	white
vermouth

½	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
3	to	4	cups	beef	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
4	parsley	sprigs



1	bay	leaf
1	tsp	rosemary,	thyme,	or	sage
3	unpeeled	cloves	garlic
Optional:	3	Tb	tomato	paste
Aluminum	foil
Brown	the	lamb	on	all	sides,	and	then	the	bones	in	hot	fat	or	oil	in	the
casserole	or	roaster.	This	will	take	15	to	20	minutes.	Remove	to	a	side
platter.	Then	brown	the	vegetables	for	2	to	3	minutes.	Remove	them
with	a	slotted	spoon	to	the	platter.	Pour	out	the	browning	fat.	Add	the
wine	 or	 vermouth	 and	 boil	 it	 down	 rapidly,	 scraping	 up	 coagulated
browning	juices,	until	reduced	by	half.	Season	the	lamb	and	place	it,
its	 fattiest	 side	 up,	 in	 the	 casserole	 or	 roaster.	 Surround	 it	 with	 the
browned	 bones	 and	 vegetables.	 Pour	 in	 enough	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 to
come	two	thirds	of	the	way	up	the	meat.	Stir	in	the	herbs,	garlic,	and
optional	 tomato	paste.	 Bring	 to	 the	 simmer	on	 top	of	 the	 stove.	 Lay
aluminum	foil	over	the	top	of	the	casserole,	then	the	casserole	cover.
Place	 in	 lower	 third	 of	 preheated	 oven	 and	 regulate	 so	 liquid	 is
maintained	 at	 a	 slow	 simmer.	 Turn	 and	 baste	 the	 meat	 every	 half
hour.

Remove	the	lamb	from	the	casserole	when	it	is	to	within	half	an	hour
of	being	done.	(See	A	Note	on	Timing,	at	beginning	of	recipe.)	Strain
and	degrease	the	cooking	stock,	and	correct	its	seasoning.	Return	meat
and	 stock	 to	 the	 casserole	 and	 surround	with	 the	 beans	which	 have
been	precooked	as	follows:

2½	cups	dry	white	Great	Northern	beans
6½	cups	boiling	water
A	4-quart	kettle
1½	Tb	salt
Drop	the	beans	into	the	boiling	water.	Bring	quickly	to	the	boil	again
and	 boil	 exactly	 2	 minutes.	 Set	 aside	 for	 1	 hour.	 Immediately	 the
soaking	time	is	up,	add	the	salt	to	the	kettle,	bring	to	the	simmer,	and
simmer	 1	 hour.	 Set	 aside.	 The	 beans	 will	 finish	 their	 cooking	 later
with	the	 lamb.	After	the	 lamb	stock	has	been	degreased	as	described



in	 the	 preceding	 paragraph,	 drain	 the	 beans	 and	 add	 them	 to	 the
casserole	with	the	lamb.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.	See	note	at	end	of	recipe.

Bring	the	casserole	again	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Cover,	and
return	to	the	oven	until	the	meat	is	tender	when	pierced	with	a	fork,
about	30	minutes.

A	hot	platter
Parsley	sprigs
A	hot	sauceboat
Drain	the	lamb,	remove	trussing	strings,	and	place	it	on	a	hot	platter.
Strain	 the	 beans	 and	 place	 them	 around	 the	 meat.	 Decorate	 with
parsley	sprigs.	Degrease	the	cooking	stock,	correct	seasoning,	and	pour
it	into	a	hot	sauceboat.

(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTES
If	you	wish	to	cook	the	meat	in	advance,	braise	it	until	tender.	Then

strain	and	degrease	 the	cooking	 stock	and	place	meat	and	 stock	 in	 the
casserole.	An	hour	before	serving,	reheat	on	top	of	the	stove,	then	cover
and	 place	 in	 a	 350-degree	 oven.	 In	 20	 minutes,	 add	 the	 beans	 and
continue	cooking	for	about	30	minutes	more.	The	meat	should	reach	an
internal	temperature	of	about	130	degrees.
Or	follow	the	recipe	but	carve	the	meat	when	it	is	done.	Arrange	it

in	a	fireproof	serving	dish	or	casserole	with	the	beans,	and	spoon	part	of
the	sauce	over	it.	Cover	and	reheat	slowly	for	10	minutes	before	serving.

GIGOT	EN	CHEVREUIL
[Leg	of	Lamb	or	Mutton	Marinated	in	Red	Wine]

A	 large	well-aged	 leg	of	 lamb	or	a	 leg	of	young	mutton	marinated
for	 several	 days	 in	 wine	 will	 taste	 very	much	 like	 a	marinated	 leg	 of
venison.	 It	 is	 roasted	and	served,	 like	venison,	with	a	sauce	poivrade	or
chevreuil.	Braised	red	cabbage	with	chestnuts,	and	a	purée	of	celery	root



and	potatoes	go	well	with	it,	plus	a	good	red	Burgundy	wine.	Any	cold
sliced	leftovers	will	be	delicious.
Since	 the	meat	 is	marinated	 for	a	relatively	 long	period	of	 time,	 it

takes	 on	 a	 definitely	 gamy	 taste—which	 is	 the	 whole	 reason	 for	 the
recipe.	The	first	marinade	vegetables	are	cooked,	therefore,	so	they	will
not	turn	sour.

Marinade	Cuite
[Cooked	Wine	Marinade]

1	cup	thinly	sliced	onions
1	cup	thinly	sliced	carrots
⅓	cup	thinly	sliced	celery
2	halved	cloves	garlic
½	cup	olive	oil
A	3-quart	enameled	saucepan	with	cover
Cook	the	vegetables	slowly	in	the	olive	oil	in	the	covered	saucepan	for
5	minutes	without	allowing	them	to	brown.

6	cups	full-bodied,	young	red	wine:	Mâcon,	Côtes	du	Rhône,
Beaujolais,	Burgundy,	Chianti

1½	cups	red	wine	vinegar
1	Tb	salt
1	tsp	peppercorns
2	cloves
5	parsley	sprigs
2	bay	leaves
1	Tb	rosemary
½	tsp	juniper	berries,	if	available,	or	¼	cup	gin
Add	the	wine,	the	vinegar,	and	all	the	rest	of	the	ingredients.	Simmer,
partially	 covered,	 for	 20	 minutes.	 Allow	 the	 marinade	 to	 cool



completely	before	using	it.

Marinade	au	Laurier
[Uncooked	Wine	Marinade	with	Bay	Leaves]

6	cups	red	wine
1½	cups	wine	vinegar
½	cup	olive	oil
35	bay	leaves
1	Tb	salt
½	tsp	peppercorns
This	 alternative	marinade	needs	no	 cooking,	 and	 is	 just	 poured	over
the	lamb.

Marinating	and	Roasting	the	Lamb

A	7-to	8-pound	leg	of	well	aged	lamb	or	young	mutton
Prepare	the	lamb	for	cooking	as	described	earlier.	It	may	be	boned	if
you	wish.

Place	 it	 in	 an	 enameled,	 pyrex,	 porcelain,	 or	 stainless	 steel	 bowl,
roaster,	or	tub	just	large	enough	to	hold	it.	Pour	the	marinade	over	it.
Turn	and	baste	 the	 lamb	3	or	4	 times	a	day	 for	4	 to	5	days	at	room
temperature,	for	6	to	8	days	if	it	is	refrigerated.

Drain	 the	 lamb	 for	 half	 an	 hour	 or	 more	 on	 a	 rack.	 Just	 before
roasting,	dry	it	thoroughly	with	paper	towels.	Following	directions	in
the	master	recipe	for	roast	lamb	on	this	page,	baste	it	with	fat	and	sear
it	 for	 15	 to	 20	 minutes	 in	 a	 450-degree	 oven,	 then	 roast	 it	 at	 350
degrees	 to	 a	 medium	 rare,	 147	 to	 150	 degrees	 on	 the	 meat
thermometer.



If	you	are	serving	with	it	a	sauce	poivrade,	or	sauce	venaison,	include	½
cup	of	the	marinade	liquid	as	part	of	the	ingredients.

GIGOT	À	L’ANGLAISE
[Boiled	Leg	of	Lamb	with	Onion,	Caper,	or	Tomato	Sauce]

The	English,	according	to	the	French,	boil	everything,	thus	anything
boiled	 (or	poached)	and	 served	 simply	 is	à	 l’anglaise	 in	French	cuisine.
This	method	is	truly	a	delicious	and	utterly	simple	way	to	cook	a	leg	of
lamb;	simmer	it	in	salted	water	until	it	is	done,	and	it	can	stay	quietly	in
that	hot	water	 for	 an	hour	or	more	before	 serving.	But	 you	do	need	a
young	 tender	 “genuine	 spring	 leg	 of	 lamb”	 for	 this	 because	 the	 fat	 of
older	 lamb	 penetrates	 the	 meat,	 giving	 it	 a	 strong	 taste.	 (See	 lamb
discussion.)	VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS
For	a	family-style	vegetable	garnish,	carrots,	 turnips,	onions,	 leeks,

and	 potatoes	 may	 be	 cooked	 for	 an	 hour	 with	 the	 lamb;	 tie	 them	 in
cheesecloth	bundles	for	easy	removal.	For	a	more	formal	array,	here	are
some	 other	 suggestions	 to	 be	 cooked	 separately	 and	 combined	 as	 you
wish:	Purée	of	turnips	and	potatoes
Garlic	mashed	potatoes
Soubise	(rice	and	onions)
Brussels	sprouts
String	beans
Ratatouille	(eggplant	casserole)
If	you	choose	onion	sauce	for	the	lamb,	serve	a	red	Bordeaux	from

the	Médoc	district.	With	caper	or	tomato	sauce,	serve	a	chilled	rosé.

For	6	to	8	people

A	4-to	5-lb.	whole	leg	of	genuine	spring	lamb
Prepare	 the	 lamb	 for	 cooking	 as	 described	 earlier;	 if	 a	 whole	 leg,
remove	pelvic	bone.

A	meat	thermometer
A	kettle	of	rapidly	boiling	water,	large	enough	to	hold	the	lamb



completely	submerged
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water

Insert	a	meat	thermometer	into	the	fleshiest	part	of	the	lamb.	Plunge
the	lamb	into	the	boiling,	salted	water.	When	the	water	comes	back	to
the	simmer,	begin	timing	10	to	12	minutes	per	pound,	or	about	1	hour
(125	 to	 130	 degrees	 on	 the	 thermometer	 for	 rare;	 140	 to	 150	 for
medium).	The	water	must	 remain	at	 a	very	 slow	 simmer	 throughout
the	cooking.
(*)	After	the	lamb	has	been	removed	from	the	kettle,	it	should	cool	at
room	temperature	for	about	20	minutes	before	it	is	carved.	But	if	it	is
to	be	served	later	than	that,	pour	cold	water	into	the	kettle	to	cool	it
to	just	below	120	degrees,	so	the	lamb	will	not	continue	to	cook.	(Add
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water	poured	into	the	kettle.)	The	lamb	may
rest	thus	for	an	hour	or	more,	and	the	kettle	may	be	gently	reheated	if
necessary.

3	cups	of	one	of	the	following	sauces:

Sauce	 aux	 Câpres	 (mock	 hollandaise	with	 egg	 yolks,	 cream,	 capers,
and	butter)
Sauce	Soubise	(béchamel	with	onion	purée)
Coulis	de	Tomates	(fresh	tomato	sauce	with	herbs)

While	the	lamb	is	simmering,	prepare	the	sauce:	5	minutes	or	less	for
caper	 sauce,	 about	 30	 for	 onion	 sauce,	 1½	 hours	 of	 simmering	 for
tomato	sauce.

3	Tb	melted	butter
¼	cup	minced	parsley
A	hot	platter
A	warmed	sauceboat

Drain	 the	 lamb	when	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 serve,	 and	 place	 it	 on	 a	 hot
platter.	 Baste	 it	with	 the	melted	 butter	 and	 sprinkle	 it	with	 parsley.
Pass	the	sauce	in	a	warmed	sauceboat.



LAMB	STEW

Ragoûts,	Navarins,	et	Haricots	de	Mouton

In	 France,	mutton	 rather	 than	 lamb	 is	 preferred	 for	 stews	because
the	flesh	of	the	more	mature	animal	has	more	character.	But,	except	for
the	tender-fleshed	stewing	cuts	of	“genuine	spring	lamb”	which	are	best
in	 a	 blanquette,	 lamb	 or	mutton	may	 be	 used	 interchangeably.	Ragoût,
navarin,	and	haricot	all	mean	stew.	Haricot	according	to	most	linguists	is
a	 corruption	of	halicoter,	 to	 cut	up.	 It	 does	not	 therefore	mean	a	 lamb
stew	with	 beans.	 Stew	meat	 is	 very	 inexpensive;	 one	 can	 only	wonder
why,	 but	 be	 grateful	when	 a	 dish	 like	 a	 navarin	 is	 so	 delicious.	 Other
lamb	stews	may	be	made	like	beef	stew,	and	suggestions	are	listed	at	the
end	of	the	navarin	recipe.

CUTS	FOR	STEWING

All	of	 the	 lamb	 for	 a	 stew	may	be	 from	 the	 same	cut,	 but	 a	more
interesting	texture	and	sauce	will	be	obtained	if	you	use	a	mixture	from
the	 following	suggestions.	Chop	and	 leg	meat	are	not	 recommended	as
they	become	dry	and	stringy.	Count	on	1	pound	of	boneless	meat	for	2
people	if	your	menu	is	small;	for	3,	if	large.

Shoulder—Épaule	and	Basses	Côtes.	Lean	and	meaty,	a	bit	dry
Breast—Poitrine.	Provides	fat	and	texture
Short	 Ribs—Haut	 de	 Côtelettes.	 Provide	 fat	 and	 texture,	 and	 the

bones	give	flavor
Neck—Collet.	 Has	 a	 gelatinous	 quality	 which	 gives	 body	 to	 the

sauce.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Have	excess	fat	and	the	fell	or	covering	filament	removed,	and	the
meat	cut	into	2-inch	cubes	weighing	2	to	2½	ounces.	Any	bones	left	in
the	 meat	 will	 give	 added	 flavor	 to	 the	 sauce.	 Most	 of	 them	 may	 be
removed	before	serving.

TIMING

Allow	about	2	hours	for	the	cooking.	Stews	may	be	simmered	on	top
of	 the	stove	but	 the	more	uniform	and	surrounding	heat	of	 the	oven	 is



preferable.

		NAVARIN	PRINTANIER
[Lamb	Stew	with	Spring	Vegetables]

Navarin	 printanier,	 a	 most	 delectable	 lamb	 stew	 with	 its	 carrots,
onions,	turnips,	potatoes,	peas,	and	green	beans,	is	presumably	done	in
the	spring	when	all	the	vegetables	are	young	and	tender.	But	as	it	can	be
made	any	time	of	the	year,	it	is	not	a	seasonal	dish	any	more	thanks	to
deep	 freezing.	 Frozen	 peas	 and	 beans	 are	 discussed	 here.	 The	 written
recipe	is	long	as	each	detail	is	important	if	the	navarin	is	to	taste	like	a
French	 masterpiece.	 But	 none	 of	 the	 steps	 is	 difficult	 and	 everything
except	the	addition	of	the	green	vegetables	at	the	very	end	may	be	made
ready	in	the	morning.	The	stew	can	then	be	finished	in	10	to	15	minutes
just	before	dinner	time.

With	 the	 stew	 serve	 hot	 French	 bread,	 and	 a	 red	 Beaujolais	 or
Bordeaux	wine,	a	chilled	rosé,	or	a	fairly	full-bodied,	dry,	chilled	white
wine	such	as	a	Mâcon,	Hermitage,	or	one	of	the	lesser	Burgundies.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	450	degrees.

3	lbs.	lamb	stew	meat	(see	list	preceding	recipe)
2	to	4	Tb	rendered	fresh	pork	fat	or	cooking	oil
A	10-to	12-inch	skillet
A	fireproof	covered	casserole	large	enough	to	hold	the	meat,	and	all
the	vegetables	to	come
Cut	the	lamb	into	2-inch	cubes	and	dry	with	paper	towels.	The	meat
will	not	brown	if	it	is	damp.	Brown	a	few	pieces	at	a	time	in	hot	fat	or
oil	in	the	skillet.	As	they	are	browned,	place	them	in	the	casserole.

1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Sprinkle	the	lamb	in	the	casserole	with	sugar	and	toss	over	moderately
high	heat	for	3	to	4	minutes	until	the	sugar	has	caramelized.	This	will



give	a	fine	amber	color	to	the	sauce.

1	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
3	Tb	flour

Toss	 the	 meat	 with	 the	 salt	 and	 pepper,	 then	 with	 the	 flour.	 Set
casserole	 uncovered	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 preheated	 oven	 for	 4	 to	 5
minutes.	Toss	 the	meat	 and	 return	 it	 to	 the	oven	 for	4	 to	5	minutes
more.	 This	 browns	 the	 flour	 evenly	 and	 coats	 the	 lamb	with	 a	 light
crust.	Remove	casserole	and	turn	oven	down	to	350	degrees.

2	to	3	cups	brown	lamb-or	beef-stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
¾	lb.	ripe,	red	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	chopped	(1	cup
of	pulp);	or	3	Tb	tomato	paste
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
¼	tsp	thyme	or	rosemary
1	bay	leaf

Pour	out	 the	 fat;	add	2	cups	of	stock	or	bouillon	to	 the	sauté	skillet.
Bring	to	the	boil	and	scrape	up	coagulated	sauté	juices.	Then	pour	the
liquid	 into	 the	 casserole.	 Bring	 to	 the	 simmer	 for	 a	 few	 seconds
shaking	 and	 stirring	 to	 mix	 liquid	 and	 flour.	 Add	 the	 tomatoes	 or
tomato	 paste	 and	 the	 other	 ingredients.	 Bring	 to	 the	 simmer	 for	 1
minute,	 then	 add	 more	 stock	 if	 necessary;	 meat	 should	 be	 almost
covered	by	liquid.

Put	the	lid	on	the	casserole	and	set	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven;
regulate	 heat	 so	 casserole	 simmers	 slowly	 and	 regularly	 for	 1	 hour.
Then	pour	 the	contents	of	 the	casserole	 into	a	sieve	set	over	a	bowl.
Rinse	out	the	casserole.	Remove	any	loose	bones	and	return	the	lamb
to	 the	 casserole.	 Skim	 the	 fat	 off	 the	 sauce	 in	 the	 bowl,	 correct
seasoning,	 and	 pour	 sauce	 back	 into	 casserole.	 Then	 add	 the
vegetables	which	have	been	prepared	as	follows:

6	to	12	peeled	“boiling”	potatoes
6	peeled	carrots



6	peeled	turnips
12	to	18	peeled	white	onions	about	1	inch	in	diameter

While	the	 lamb	is	simmering,	 trim	the	potatoes	 into	ovals	1½	inches
long,	and	cover	with	cold	water	until	ready	to	use.	Quarter	the	carrots
and	 turnips,	 cut	 them	 into	 1½	 inch	 lengths,	 and,	 if	 you	 have	 the
patience,	 trim	the	edges	to	round	them	slightly.	Pierce	a	cross	 in	the
root	ends	of	the	onions	so	they	will	cook	evenly.

Press	the	vegetables	into	the	casserole	around	and	between	the	pieces
of	lamb.	Baste	with	the	sauce.	Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove,
cover	and	return	to	the	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	liquid	simmers	slowly
and	steadily	for	about	an	hour	longer	or	until	the	meat	and	vegetables
are	tender	when	pierced	with	a	fork.	Remove	from	oven,	tilt	casserole,
and	skim	off	fat.	Taste	sauce	again,	and	correct	seasoning.

1	cup	shelled	green	peas
¼	lb.	or	about	1	cup	green	beans	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
3	quarts	boiling	water
1½	Tb	salt

While	 the	casserole	 is	 in	 the	oven,	drop	 the	peas	and	beans	 into	 the
boiling	salted	water	and	boil	rapidly,	uncovered,	for	5	minutes	or	until
the	 vegetables	 are	 almost	 tender.	 Immediately	 drain	 in	 a	 colander.
Run	cold	water	over	them	for	2	to	3	minutes	to	stop	the	cooking	and
to	set	the	color.	Put	aside	until	ready	to	use.
(*)	 May	 be	 prepared	 ahead	 to	 this	 point.	 Set	 casserole	 aside,	 cover
askew.	Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove	before	proceeding	with
recipe.

Shortly	 before	 serving,	 place	 the	 peas	 and	 beans	 in	 the	 casserole	 on
top	of	the	other	ingredients	and	baste	with	the	bubbling	sauce.	Cover
and	simmer	about	5	minutes	or	until	the	green	vegetables	are	tender.

Serve	the	navarin	from	its	casserole	or	arrange	it	on	a	very	hot	platter.



VARIATIONS
The	 preceding	 navarin	 is	 a	 model	 for	 other	 stews.	 You	 may,	 for

instance,	omit	the	green	beans,	peas,	and	potatoes,	and	add	navy	beans
or	lentils	simmered	in	salted	water	until	almost	tender,	or	canned	kidney
beans,	then	finish	them	off	for	half	an	hour	with	the	lamb.	The	following
are	prepared	exactly	like	beef	stews.

Civet	de	Mouton
[Lamb	or	Mutton	Stew	with	Red	Wine,	Onions,	Mushrooms,	 and
Bacon]

Follow	 the	 recipe	 for	boeuf	 bourguignon,	 braising	 the	 lamb	2	hours
rather	than	the	3½	to	4	hours	required	for	beef.

Pilaf	de	Mouton	à	la	Catalane
[Lamb	or	Mutton	Stew	with	Rice,	Onions,	and	Tomatoes]

Follow	 the	 recipe	 for	 boeuf	 à	 la	 catalane,	 using	 boned	 shoulder	 or
shank.	 Time	 the	 cooking	 for	 about	 2	 hours	 rather	 than	 the	 3	 or	 4
required	for	beef.

Daube	de	Mouton
[Casserole	 of	 Lamb	 or	 Mutton	 with	 Wine,	 Mushrooms,	 Carrots,
Onions,	and	Herbs]

Follow	the	recipe	for	daube	de	boeuf,	using	boned	shoulder	or	shank.
Cook	the	lamb	for	2	hours	rather	than	the	3	or	4	in	the	recipe.

Blanquette	d’Agneau
[Spring	Lamb	Stew	with	Onions	and	Mushrooms]

This	 is	 a	 delicious	 stew	 for	 “genuine	 spring	 lamb,”	 and	 is	 cooked
exactly	like	the	blanquette	de	veau	in	the	Veal	section.



Lamb	Shanks
Lamb	shanks,	 jarrets	de	devant,	are	considered	part	of	 the	shoulder

in	France,	so	no	special	recipes	are	given	for	them.	They	may	be	boned
or	left	whole,	and	you	should	allow	one	shank	per	person.	Use	any	of	the
preceding	lamb	stew	recipes.	(Braised	lamb	shanks	means	that	the	meat
is	browned,	then	simmered	in	a	liquid,	and	is	just	another	name	for	stew
or	fricassee.)	

LAMB	PATTIES

Fricadelles	d’Agneau
Delicious	“lamburgers”	may	be	made	using	 freshly	ground	neck	or

other	 lean	meat	 and	mixing	 it	with	 any	 of	 the	 stuffing	 suggestions	 for
boned	lamb–8.

Except	for	the	garlic	and	herb	stuffing,	which	is	a	flavoring	only,	use
1	part	of	stuffing	for	3	to	4	parts	of	ground	lamb.	Sauté	and	sauce	them
according	to	directions	in	the	hamburger	recipes	which	begin.

MOUSSAKA

MOUSSAKA

[Lamb	and	Eggplant	Mold]

Lamb	 can	 hardly	 be	 considered	 a	 leftover	 when	 it	 receives	 this
elaborate	treatment.	A	mold	is	lined	with	the	skins	of	cooked	eggplant,
and	 filled	with	a	 carefully	 seasoned	mixture	of	 cooked	 lamb,	eggplant,
and	mushrooms.	It	presents	itself	after	baking	and	unmolding	as	a	shiny,
dark	 purple	 cylinder	 surrounded	 with	 a	 deep	 red	 tomato	 sauce.	 It	 is
delicious	either	hot	or	cold.

Serve	the	moussaka	with	steamed	rice	or	risotto,	and	buttered	green
beans	or	a	green	salad.	A	fairly	full-bodied,	dry,	chilled	white	wine	such
as	 a	 Mâcon	 or	 Hermitage	 goes	 well	 with	 it.	Moussaka	 also	 makes	 a
handsome	cold	dish	served	with	tomato	salad	and	French	bread.

For	8	people



Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees,	in	time	to	bake	the	eggplant.

Ingredients	for	3	cups	of	tomato	sauce
Set	tomato	sauce	to	simmer.

5	lbs.	of	eggplant	(five	1-lb.	eggplants	if	possible,	each	7	to	8	inches
long)
1	Tb	salt
2	Tb	olive	oil
A	shallow	roasting	pan

Remove	 green	 caps	 and	 slice	 eggplants	 in	 half	 lengthwise.	 Cut	 deep
gashes	 in	 the	 flesh	of	 each	half,	 but	do	not	pierce	 the	 skin.	 Sprinkle
flesh	with	salt	and	 let	 stand	 for	30	minutes.	Wash	under	cold	water,
squeeze	out	juice,	and	dry	on	paper	towels.	Rub	with	olive	oil	and	set
eggplants	skin	side	down	in	a	roasting	pan.	Pour	in	½	inch	of	water.
Bake	in	upper	third	of	preheated	oven	for	about	half	an	hour,	or	until
just	tender.

A	9-to	10-inch	skillet
⅔	cup	(3	ounces)	finely	minced	onions
1	Tb	olive	oil	A	3-quart	mixing	bowl

While	eggplants	are	baking,	cook	the	onions	slowly	in	olive	oil	for	10
to	15	minutes,	until	tender	but	not	browned.	Scrape	into	mixing	bowl.

½	lb.	finely	minced	mushrooms
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1½	Tb	olive	oil

A	handful	 at	 a	 time,	 twist	mushrooms	 into	 a	 ball	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 a
towel	to	extract	 their	 juice.	Add	the	 juice	to	the	tomato	sauce.	Sauté
the	mushrooms	and	shallots	or	onions	in	olive	oil	for	5	minutes	or	so,
until	pieces	separate	from	each	other.	Add	to	mixing	bowl.

3	Tb	olive	oil



When	eggplants	are	tender,	carefully	scoop	out	the	flesh	with	a	spoon,
leaving	 the	 skin	 intact.	 Chop	 half	 the	 flesh	 and	 place	 in	 the	mixing
bowl.	Dice	or	slice	the	rest	and	toss	 it	briefly	in	very	hot	olive	oil	 to
brown	lightly.	Set	aside	until	later.

½	tsp	olive	oil
A	2-quart	cylindrical	mold	(preferably	a	charlotte)	4	inches	high	and	7
inches	in	diameter
Oil	the	mold.	Line	it	with	the	eggplant	skins,	their	purple	sides	against
the	mold;	 place	 each	 lengthwise,	 a	 pointed	 end	 at	 the	 center	 of	 the
bottom	of	the	mold,	the	other	end	falling	down	outside	the	mold.

2¼	cups	ground	cooked	lamb
1	tsp	salt
½	tsp	thyme
½	tsp	pepper
½	tsp	rosemary
1	medium	clove	crushed	garlic
⅔	cup	thick	brown	sauce	(preferably	Numbers	I	or	II;	but	the	quick
sauce,	Number	III,	can	be	used)
3	Tb	tomato	paste
3	eggs	Aluminum	foil

Reset	oven	to	375	degrees.	Add	all	ingredients	at	the	left	to	the	mixing
bowl	containing	the	onions,	mushrooms,	and	chopped	eggplant.	Beat
vigorously	with	a	wooden	spoon	to	blend	thoroughly.	Taste	carefully
for	 seasoning.	 Spread	 an	 inch	 of	 the	 mixture	 in	 the	 bottom	 of	 the
mold.	 Arrange	 over	 that	 a	 layer	 of	 the	 previously	 sautéed	 eggplant.
Continue	 thus,	 ending	 with	 a	 layer	 of	 the	 lamb	 mixture.	 Fold	 the
dangling	 ends	 of	 eggplant	 skin	 up	 over	 the	 surface.	 Cover	 the	mold
with	foil	and	a	lid	or	plate.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.

A	pan	of	boiling	water



A	hot	serving	platter
The	tomato	sauce
A	sauceboat

Set	mold	in	a	pan	of	boiling	water.	Bake	in	bottom	third	of	oven	for
1½	 hours.	 Remove	 and	 let	 cool	 for	 10	 minutes.	 Reverse	 on	 a	 hot
serving	platter	and	surround	with	½	cup	of	the	tomato	sauce.	Pass	the
rest	of	the	sauce	separately.

VEAL

Veau

Veal	is	an	interesting	and	delicious	meat	when	it	is	cooked	well,	and
like	chicken	it	lends	itself	to	a	variety	of	flavorings	and	sauces.	The	best
quality	of	veal	is	milk-fed	and	is	between	5	and	12	weeks	old.	The	flesh
is	 firm,	 smooth,	 fine-grained,	 and	 of	 a	 very	 pale	 pink	 color.	 The	 fat,
which	 is	 white	 and	 satiny,	 is	 concentrated	 almost	 entirely	 inside	 the
carcass	 around	 the	 kidneys.	 The	 bones	 are	 soft	 and	 reddish	 and	 can
easily	 be	 sawed	without	 splintering.	 After	 12	weeks	 veal	 becomes	 calf
and	 is	 of	 no	 further	 culinary	 interest	 until	 it	 develops	 into	 beef.	 At
whatever	age	the	veal	animal	leaves	its	milk	diet	and	starts	in	on	grain
or	grass,	 its	 flesh	becomes	 increasingly	 rosy	until,	when	 it	 is	 almost	of
calf	age,	it	is	frankly	reddish.	A	considerable	amount	of	the	veal	found	in
American	 markets	 is	 partially	 grass	 or	 grain	 fed,	 and	 its	 flesh	 color
ranges	from	dark	pink	to	light	red.	It	can	make	reasonably	good	eating,
but	never	has	the	delicacy,	flavor,	and	tenderness	of	milk-fed	veal.	Train
yourself	when	shopping	for	veal	to	look	carefully	at	its	color.	Once	you
are	 aware	 of	 what	 good	 quality	 should	 look	 like,	 you	 can	 avoid	 the
reddish	pieces.	You	will	be	more	likely	to	find	the	better	qualities	of	veal
in	markets	catering	to	a	European	clientele.

CASSEROLE-ROASTED	VEAL
Veau	Poêlé



With	 no	 natural	 fat	 covering	 and	 no	 marblings	 of	 fat	 inside	 the
meat,	a	roast	of	veal	will	always	be	juicier	and	have	more	flavor	if	it	is
cooked	 in	 a	 covered	 casserole	 with	 aromatic	 vegetables.	 This	 is	 a
particularly	good	method	for	 the	rather	dark	pink	veal	most	 frequently
found	in	American	markets.

CUTS	FOR	ROASTING

Count	on	1	pound	of	boneless	meat	for	2	or	3	people.

Round	Roast—Cuisseau	Raccourci.	An	American	duplication	of	French
cuts	of	the	hind	leg	of	veal	is	not	possible	as	the	two	cutting	methods	are
entirely	 different.	 Because	 the	 French	 animal	 is	 larger	 and	 older,
between	5	and	12	weeks	rather	than	the	usual	3	to	6	of	American	veal,
the	French	 round	 is	 separated	 into	 lengthwise	muscles	 like	beef.	These
are	top	round	or	noix,	bottom	round	or	sous	noix,	and	sirloin	tip	or	noix
pâtissière;	 they	make	 compact,	 boneless,	 cylindrical	 roasts	 which	 carve
into	neat	slices.	Top	round	and	sirloin	tip	are	the	choice	morsels,	and	top
round	 is	 also	 used	 for	 scallops.	 The	 American	 round	 is	 formed	 into
roasts,	 steaks,	 or	 scallops	 by	 cutting	 directly	 across	 the	 grain,	 so	 one
piece	contains	the	top	and	bottom	rounds	and	the	sirloin	tip.

Rump—Culotte.	This	should	be	boned	and	rolled.
Sirloin—Quasi.	This	should	be	boned	and	rolled.
Loin	 or	 Saddle—Longe,	 or	 Selle,	 or	 if	 the	 kidneys	 are	 included,

Rognonnade.	 This	 is	 the	 loin-chop	 section.	 When	 used	 for	 roasts,	 it	 is
usually	boned	and	rolled,	and	is	an	expensive	cut.

Shoulder—Épaule.	 This	 is	 boned	 and	 rolled,	 and	 is	 less	 expensive
than	 the	 previously	 listed	 roasts.	 It	 is	 not	 always	 available	 as	 some
markets	do	not	buy	the	forequarters	of	veal.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Select	a	boneless	roast	from	any	of	the	veal	cuts	in	the	list.	It	should
weigh	 at	 least	 3	 pounds.	 Have	 it	 tied	 to	make,	 if	 possible,	 a	 compact
cylindrical	 shape	 4	 to	 5½	 inches	 in	 diameter.	 As	 it	 is	 usually	 not	 the
custom	of	American	butchers	to	place	thin	strips	of	fresh	pork	fat	along
the	 top,	 bottom,	 and	 sides	 of	 a	 roast,	 we	 have	 suggested	 strips	 of
blanched	bacon	in	the	recipes	to	follow;	the	bacon	bastes	the	veal	as	it
cooks.



TIMING	AND	TEMPERATURES

Veal	 is	 always	 cooked	 to	 well	 done;	 that	 is,	 until	 its	 juices	 run	 a
clear	yellow	with	no	trace	of	rosy	color—about	175	degrees	on	a	meat
thermometer.	 If	 the	meat	 is	at	room	temperature	when	it	goes	 into	the
oven,	estimate	30	to	40	minutes	per	pound	depending	on	the	thickness
of	the	meat.

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Starchy	vegetables

Risotto,	 or	 soubise	 (rice	 and	 onions)	 Potatoes	 scalloped	 in	 cream,	 or
sautéed	in	butter

Buttered	noodles

Other	vegetables

Braised	lettuce,	endive,	or	celery,	or	baked	cucumbers
Spinach	braised	in	cream	or	in	stock
Brussels	sprouts	with	cream,	or	with	cheese	sauce
Creamed,	stuffed,	or	sautéed	mushrooms
Buttered	peas,	and	tomatoes	stuffed	with	herbs
A	 garniture	 of	 glazed	 carrots,	 onions,	 turnips	 and	 sautéed

mushrooms

WINE	SUGGESTION

A	 good,	 red	 Bordeaux	 from	 the	Médoc	 district	 is	 usually	 the	 best
choice.

		VEAU	POÊLÉ
[Casserole-roasted	Veal]

This	is	a	very	simple	and	savory	recipe	for	veal.	The	meat	renders	a
certain	 amount	of	 juice	 as	 it	 roasts,	 so	no	 special	 sauce	 is	 necessary	 if
you	 are	 content	 with	 the	 French	 system	 of	 a	 spoonful	 per	 serving	 to
moisten	the	meat.	For	more	sauce,	see	the	suggestion	at	the	end	of	the
recipe.



For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	3-lb.	roast	of	veal,	boned	and	tied
Dry	the	veal	on	paper	towels.

A	heavy	fireproof	casserole	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	veal	easily
2	Tb	butter
2	Tb	oil

Place	the	casserole	over	moderately	high	heat	with	the	butter	and	oil.
When	you	see	the	butter	foam	begin	to	subside,	brown	the	veal	lightly
on	all	sides;	this	takes	10	to	15	minutes.	Remove	the	veal.

3	Tb	butter,	if	needed
2	sliced	carrots
2	sliced	onions
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp
thyme	tied	in	cheesecloth
If	the	browning	fat	has	burned,	pour	it	out	and	add	butter.	Stir	in	the
vegetables	 and	 herb	 bouquet,	 cover,	 and	 cook	 over	 low	 heat	 for	 5
minutes	without	browning.

½	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
A	meat	thermometer
2	strips	of	fat	bacon,	simmered	for	10	minutes	in	1	quart	of	water,
rinsed,	drained,	and	dried
Aluminum	foil
Bulb	baster

Sprinkle	salt	and	pepper	over	the	veal.	Return	it	to	the	casserole	and
baste	with	 the	butter	 in	 the	 casserole.	 Insert	meat	 thermometer.	 Lay



the	blanched	bacon	over	 the	meat,	 then	 the	 foil.	Cover	 the	casserole
and	set	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	meat	cooks
slowly	and	steadily	for	about	1⅔	hours.	Baste	it	2	or	3	times	with	the
juices	in	the	casserole.	The	roast	is	done	at	a	thermometer	reading	of
175	degrees,	or	as	soon	as	its	juices	run	clear	yellow	when	the	meat	is
pricked	deeply	with	a	fork.

A	hot	platter
Salt	and	pepper
A	hot	gravy	boat

Place	 the	veal	on	a	hot	platter	and	discard	 trussing	strings.	The	veal
and	 vegetables	 will	 have	 produced	 a	 cup	 or	 more	 of	 juice	 in	 the
casserole.	Remove	all	but	2	tablespoons	of	fat	from	them.	Set	casserole
over	moderate	heat	while	 scraping	up	any	coagulated	cooking	 juices
from	 the	 bottom	 and	 sides	 with	 a	 wooden	 spoon,	 and	 mashing	 the
vegetables	into	the	liquid.	Boil	down	rapidly	if	necessary;	you	should
have	¾	to	1	cup.	Correct	seasoning,	and	strain	into	a	hot	gravy	boat.
Garnish	 the	meat	platter	with	whatever	vegetables	you	have	chosen,
and	serve.
(*)	 If	 you	 are	not	 serving	 immediately,	 return	 the	 veal	 and	 sauce	 to
the	casserole,	cover	partially,	and	set	in	turned-off	hot	oven	where	it
will	stay	warm	for	half	an	hour	at	least.

VARIATION
Veau	Poêlé	à	la	Matignon
[Casserole-roasted	Veal	with	Diced	Vegetables]

⅓	cup	Madeira
Follow	 the	 master	 recipe	 for	 roast	 veal,	 but	 instead	 of	 slicing	 the
carrots	 and	 onions,	 cut	 them	 into	 ⅛-inch	 dice.	 After	 browning	 the
veal,	 remove	 it	 and	 cook	 the	 vegetables	 slowly	 in	 butter	 for	 10
minutes.	Then	add	 the	Madeira	and	boil	 it	down	rapidly	until	 it	has
almost	 completely	 evaporated.	 Return	 the	meat	 to	 the	 casserole	 and
spread	half	the	vegetables	over	it,	leaving	the	rest	in	the	bottom	of	the



casserole.	Proceed	with	the	recipe.

1	cup	good	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
1	Tb	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	blended	with	2	Tb	Madeira
Optional:	1	diced	canned	truffle	and	juice	from	the	can

When	the	veal	is	done	and	has	been	removed	from	the	casserole,	add
the	stock	or	bouillon	and	simmer	for	5	minutes.	Then	remove	the	herb
bouquet	and	bacon,	and	degrease	the	sauce.	Pour	in	the	starch	mixture
and	optional	 truffles	and	truffle	 juice.	Simmer	 for	5	minutes.	Correct
seasoning.	Sauce	should	be	lightly	thickened.

2	Tb	softened	butter
A	warmed	sauceboat

Off	heat,	and	just	before	serving,	add	the	butter	by	bits,	swirling	the
sauce	in	the	casserole	until	each	addition	has	been	absorbed.	Ladle	a
spoonful	of	sauce	and	vegetables	over	the	meat.	Pour	the	rest	into	the
warmed	sauceboat.

VEAU	PRINCE	ORLOFF
[Veal	Gratinéed	with	Onions	and	Mushrooms]

This	delicious	creation	 is	 fine	 for	a	party	as	 it	may	be	prepared	 in
the	morning	and	reheated	in	the	evening.	The	veal	is	cooked	and	sliced,
re-formed	 with	 a	 spreading	 of	 onions	 and	 mushrooms	 between	 each
slice,	and	covered	with	a	light	cheese	sauce.	It	is	reheated	and	browned
before	 serving.	 Braised	 lettuce	 or	 endive	 go	 particularly	well	with	 this
roast,	 and	 either	 a	 red	 Bordeaux	 wine	 from	 the	 Médoc	 district	 or	 a
chilled	white	Burgundy.

For	10	to	12	people
Roasting	the	veal

A	5-lb.	boned	and	tied	roast	of	veal
Brown	the	veal,	and	roast	it	for	about	2½	hours	(to	175	degrees	on	a



meat	thermometer)	 in	a	covered	casserole	as	described	in	the	master
recipe,	this	page.	Then	allow	the	meat	to	rest	for	30	minutes	at	room
temperature;	it	will	be	carved	when	the	preparations	which	follow	are
ready.

A	1-quart	saucepan
Strain	the	roasting	juices	into	the	saucepan	and	skim	off	fat.	Boil	juices
down	rapidly	to	reduce	to	1	cup.	They	will	go	into	your	velouté	sauce
later.

While	 the	 veal	 is	 roasting,	 prepare	 the	 onions	 and	 mushrooms	 as
follows:
Soubise	(rice	and	onions)

¼	cup	raw	white	rice
2	quarts	boiling	water
1	Tb	salt

Drop	the	rice	into	boiling	salted	water.	Boil	5	minutes.	Drain.

3	Tb	butter
A	6-to	8-cup,	heavy,	fireproof	casserole	with	cover
1	lb.	(3½	cups)	sliced	yellow	onions
½	tsp	salt

Melt	 the	butter	 in	 the	casserole,	 stir	 in	 the	onions	and	salt,	and	coat
well	 with	 butter;	 stir	 in	 the	 rice.	 (No	 liquid	 is	 added;	 the	 onions
provide	enough	for	the	rice.)	Cover	and	cook	over	very	low	heat	or	in
the	oven	next	to	the	veal	for	45	minutes	to	1	hour,	until	the	rice	and
onions	are	very	tender	but	not	browned.
Mushroom	duxelles

½	lb.	finely	minced	fresh	mushrooms	(makes	2	cups)
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	Tb	butter



1	Tb	oil
An	8-inch	enameled	skillet	or	heavy-bottomed	enameled	saucepan
Salt	and	pepper

A	handful	at	a	time,	squeeze	the	mushrooms	in	the	corner	of	a	towel
to	extract	 their	 juice.	Then	sauté	 them	with	the	shallots	or	onions	 in
hot	 butter	 and	 oil	 for	 5	 to	 6	 minutes,	 or	 until	 the	 pieces	 begin	 to
separate	from	each	other.	Season	to	taste	and	set	aside.

When	the	roast	is	done,	prepare	the	following	sauce	and	the	filling:
Thick	velouté	sauce

6	Tb	butter
A	2-quart,	heavy-bottomed	enameled	saucepan
8	Tb	flour
A	wooden	spoon
3	cups	boiling	liquid:	the	veal-roasting	juices	plus	milk
A	wire	whip
Pinch	of	nutmeg
¼	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper

Melt	 the	 butter	 in	 the	 saucepan.	 Stir	 in	 the	 flour	 and	 cook	 slowly
together,	 stirring,	 until	 they	 foam	 for	 2	 minutes	 without	 coloring.
Remove	 from	 heat,	 pour	 in	 all	 the	 boiling	 liquid	 at	 once	 and	 beat
vigorously	with	wire	whip.	Beat	 in	 the	 seasonings.	Bring	 to	 the	boil,
stirring,	and	boil	 for	1	minute.	Correct	seasoning.	Sauce	will	be	very
thick.

½	cup	whipping	cream
Pour	1	cup	of	sauce	into	the	cooked	rice	and	onions.	Beat	the	cream
into	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 sauce	 and	 set	 it	 in	 a	 pan	 of	 simmering	water	 to
continue	cooking	slowly.
Rice,	onion,	and	mushroom	filling



The	cooked	rice	and	onions
The	mushroom	duxelles
¼	cup	whipping	cream,	more	if	needed
Salt	and	pepper

Purée	 the	 rice	 and	 onions	 through	 a	 sieve	 or	 in	 an	 electric	 blender.
Add	the	purée	to	 the	mushrooms,	pour	 in	¼	cup	cream,	and	simmer
for	5	minutes,	stirring.	The	filling	should	be	thick	enough	to	hold	its
shape	quite	solidly	in	a	spoon.	Boil	down	if	not	thick	enough;	thin	out
with	spoonfuls	of	cream	if	too	thick.	Correct	seasoning.
Final	assembly

A	lightly	buttered,	fireproof	serving	platter	1½	inches	deep	and	about
14	inches	long
Salt	and	pepper
The	filling



Carve	the	veal	into	neat	serving	slices	about	3/ 	of	an	inch	thick,	piling
16

them	to	one	side	 in	the	order	 in	which	you	sliced	them.	The	roast	 is
now	to	be	returned	in	slices	to	the	serving	platter:	Place	the	last	slice
you	carved	 in	 the	platter,	 sprinkle	 lightly	with	 salt	and	pepper,	 then
spread	with	a	spoonful	of	the	filling.	Overlap	the	next	slice	of	veal	on
the	 first,	 sprinkle	 with	 salt	 and	 pepper,	 spread	 with	 filling,	 and
continue	thus	down	the	length	of	the	platter.	Spread	any	extra	filling
around	and	over	the	meat.
The	remaining	velouté	sauce

2	to	3	Tb	cream,	if	needed
⅓	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese

Bring	the	sauce	to	the	simmer	and	correct	seasoning.	It	should	be	thick
enough	to	coat	a	spoon	fairly	heavily;	thin	out	with	more	spoonfuls	of
cream,	if	necessary.	Off	heat,	beat	in	the	cheese.

3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
3	Tb	melted	butter

Spoon	 the	 sauce	 over	 the	 roast.	 Sprinkle	 the	 cheese	 over	 it,	 and
dribble	on	the	melted	butter.
(*)	 May	 be	 prepared	 ahead	 to	 this	 point.	 Set	 aside	 uncovered	 until
ready	to	reheat.

About	30	to	40	minutes	before	serving,	set	in	the	upper	position	of	a
preheated,	375-degree	oven	until	the	sauce	is	bubbling	and	the	top	has
browned	 lightly.	Do	not	overcook,	or	 the	meat	will	dry	out	and	 lose
character.

Once	 ready,	 the	 dish	 will	 stay	 warm	 for	 20	 to	 30	 minutes	 in	 the
turned-off	hot	oven,	its	door	ajar.

VEAU	SYLVIE
[Veal	Roasted	with	Ham	and	Cheese]



In	this	recipe,	deep	slits	are	cut	in	the	roast	of	veal	from	one	end	to
the	other,	and	the	meat	is	marinated	in	brandy,	Madeira,	and	aromatic
vegetables,	then	stuffed	with	slices	of	ham	and	cheese.	It	is	roasted	in	a
covered	casserole	and,	when	sliced,	the	ham	and	cheese	appear	to	have
melted	into	the	veal.	Serve	with	the	roast	any	of	the	wine	and	vegetable
suggestions.	 Veau	 Sylvie	 also	 makes	 a	 good	 cold	 roast	 just	 as	 it	 is	 or
glazed	with	aspic.
The	French	cut	for	this	would	be	a	noix	or	top	round	of	veal,	as	it	is

a	long,	cylindrical	piece	with	no	muscle	separations.	Rump,	round,	and
sirloin	are	more	difficult	to	handle	but	can	be	managed	perfectly	well;	a
boned	 section	 from	 the	 rib	 roast	would	be	 the	best	alternative,	 though
more	expensive.
For	10	to	12	people

A	5-lb.	boneless	roast	of	veal,	as	solid	as	possible	and	in	a	loaf	shape
So	that	the	roast	may	be	stuffed,	deep	slits	are	cut	from	one	end	to	the
other	to	make	it	open	like	the	leaves	of	a	book:	make	a	series	of	deep,
parallel	cuts	1	 to	1½	inches	apart	starting	at	 the	 top	and	going	with
the	grain	the	length	of	the	meat	from	one	end	of	the	roast	to	the	other,
and	to	within	½	inch	of	the	bottom	of	the	roast.	You	will	thus	have	3
or	 4	 thick	 pieces	 of	 meat	 which	 are	 free	 at	 the	 top	 and	 sides,	 but
which	 are	 all	 attached	 together	 at	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 roast.	 If	 your
meat	 contains	many	muscle	 separations	 it	 will	 look	 very	messy	 and
uneven	at	this	point,	but	the	roast	is	tied	into	shape	later.

½	cup	cognac
½	cup	Madeira
2	Tb	olive	oil
¾	cup	sliced	carrots
¾	cup	sliced	onions
1	Tb	salt
A	large	herb	bouquet	with	peppercorns:	6	parsley	sprigs,	1	bay	leaf,
½	tsp	thyme,	and	6	peppercorns	tied	in	cheesecloth

6	or	more	large	slices	of	boiled	ham	1/ 	inch	thick
16



12	or	more	large	slices	of	Swiss	cheese	1/ 	inch	thick
16

White	string
Choose	a	glazed	bowl	 large	enough	 to	hold	 the	meat	easily.	Mix	 the
marinade	ingredients	at	the	left	in	the	bowl.	Add	the	meat	and	baste	it
with	 the	marinade.	 Turn	 and	 baste	 the	meat	 every	 hour	 or	 so,	 and
marinate	 for	 6	 hours	 or	 overnight.	 Then	 scrape	 off	 the	 marinade
ingredients	and	dry	 the	meat	 in	paper	 towels.	Reserve	 the	marinade.
Lay	 the	 roast	 so	 its	 bottom	 rests	 on	 your	 cutting	 board.	 Completely
cover	 each	 leaf	 of	meat	with	 a	 layer	 of	 ham	 between	 two	 layers	 of
cheese.	 The	 exterior	 of	 the	 two	 outside	 leaves	 is	 not	 covered.	 Then
close	 the	 leaves	 of	 meat	 together	 to	 re-form	 the	 roast.	 Tie	 loops	 of
white	string	around	the	circumference	of	the	meat	to	hold	it	in	shape.
If	 the	 roast	 is	 not	neat	 looking,	 no	matter;	 it	will	 firm	up	during	 its
cooking.	Dry	the	roast	again	with	paper	towels	so	it	will	brown	nicely.

Preheat	oven	to	450	degrees.

4	Tb	butter
2	Tb	oil
A	covered	fireproof	casserole	large	enough	to	hold	the	meat
A	bulb	baster
Strain	 the	 marinade,	 reserving	 the	 liquid.	 Cook	 the	 marinade
vegetables	slowly	in	the	butter	and	oil	in	the	casserole	for	5	minutes.
Push	them	to	the	sides	of	the	casserole.	Raise	heat	to	moderately	high,
put	 the	 veal	 in,	 uncut	 side	 down,	 and	 let	 the	 bottom	 brown	 for	 5
minutes.	Then	baste	with	the	butter	and	oil	in	the	casserole.	Place	the
casserole	uncovered	 in	 the	upper	 third	of	 the	oven	 to	brown	the	 top
and	sides	of	the	meat	for	about	15	minutes.	Baste	every	4	to	5	minutes
with	the	butter	in	the	casserole.

½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
2	strips	of	fat	bacon	simmered	for	10	minutes	in	1	quart	of	water,
rinsed,	drained,	and	dried



A	meat	thermometer
Aluminum	foil
Turn	 oven	 down	 to	 325	 degrees.	 Remove	 the	 casserole,	 pour	 in	 the
marinade	liquid	and	boil	it	down	rapidly	on	top	of	the	stove	until	it	is
reduced	 to	 one	 third	 of	 its	 volume.	 Season	 the	 meat	 with	 salt	 and
pepper.	 Place	 the	 bacon	 over	 it.	 Insert	 a	meat	 thermometer,	 lay	 the
foil	over	the	meat,	cover	the	casserole	and	place	it	in	the	lower	third
of	the	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	meat	cooks	slowly	and	steadily	for	about
2½	hours,	or	 to	a	 thermometer	 reading	of	175	degrees.	Baste	3	or	4
times	with	the	juices	in	the	casserole	during	this	period.

Serve	the	veal	and	prepare	the	sauce	as	described	in	the	master	recipe,
veau	poêlé.

The	meat	should	rest	at	room	temperature	for	about	20	minutes	before
being	 carved,	 and	 it	 is	 carved	 in	 crosswise	 slices	 so	 each	 piece	 has
lardings	of	cheese	and	ham.

VEAL	STEW

Sauté	de	Veau	—	Blanquette	de	Veau
In	France	the	favorite	cut	of	veal	for	stews	is	tendron,	the	part	of	the

breast	 which	 contains	 the	 cartilaginous	 false	 ribs.	 Its	 combination	 of
meat	and	gelatin	gives	the	sauce	a	fine	body,	and	the	cooked	tendron	has
a	 special	and	 slightly	 crunchy	eating-quality	all	 its	own.	However,	 this
particular	morsel	does	not	charm	all	American	palates.	Time	and	again
we	have	 noticed	 a	 guest	 push	 it	 off	 to	 the	 side	 of	 his	 plate,	 obviously
indicating	he	has	no	intention	of	eating	that	inferior	bit	of	budget	meat.
Therefore,	unless	 you	know	or	 can	 train	your	American	audience,	 it	 is
probably	wiser	to	choose	other	parts	of	the	veal.	A	combination	of	cuts	is
the	 best	 alternative,	 some	 with	 bones,	 some	 with	 cartilage,	 and	 some
lean	meat.	Rump,	sirloin,	and	round	tend	to	be	dry,	but	there	are	those
who	 prefer	 them	 anyway.	 If	 you	 are	 using	 boneless	 meat,	 inelude	 a
cupful	 or	 so	 of	 cracked	 veal	 bones	 with	 the	 stew	 so	 your	 sauce	 will
develop	more	flavor	and	body.



RECOMMENDED	STEWING	CUTS

Allow	1	pound	of	boneless	meat	for	2	or	3	people,	depending	on	the
rest	of	your	menu;	about	¾	pound	per	person	for	bone-in	meat	such	as
breast	and	ribs.
Breast—Poitrine,	Tendron
Short	Ribs—Haut	de	Côtes
Shoulder	and	Shoulder	Chops—Épaule	and	Côtes	Découvertes
Neck—Collet
Heel	of	Round	or	Shank—Nerveux	Gîte	à	la	Noix	or	Jarret
(Rump,	Round,	and	Sirloin	are	less	recommended	but	may	be	used

if	you	wish)

STEWING	TIME

Allow	1½	to	1¾	hours.

SAUTÉ	DE	VEAU	MARENGO
[Brown	Veal	Stew	with	Tomatoes	and	Mushrooms]

The	flavors	of	Provence	go	into	this	uncomplicated	and	hearty	dish.
Steamed	rice	or	noodles	go	well	with	it,	and	green	peas	or	beans.	Serve	a
chilled	rosé	wine,	or	a	strong,	young,	white	wine.	As	with	all	stews,	this
one	may	be	cooked	in	advance	and	reheated	just	before	serving.
For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

3	lbs.	veal	stew	meat	from	the	preceding	list,	cut	into	2-ounce,	2-inch
pieces

2	to	3	Tb	olive	oil,	more	if	needed
A	10-to	12-inch	skillet
A	4-quart	fireproof	casserole
Dry	 the	veal	on	paper	 towels.	Heat	 the	oil	 in	 the	skillet	until	almost
smoking.	Then	brown	 the	meat,	 a	 few	pieces	 at	 a	 time,	 and	arrange
the	browned	pieces	in	the	casserole.



1	cup	minced	yellow	onions
Lower	 heat	 to	moderate.	 Pour	 all	 but	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 oil	 out	 of	 the
skillet,	and	brown	the	onions	lightly	for	5	to	6	minutes.

1	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
2	Tb	flour

While	the	onions	are	browning,	toss	the	meat	in	the	casserole	with	salt
and	pepper,	then	with	the	flour.	Toss	and	stir	over	moderate	heat	for	3
to	4	minutes	to	brown	the	flour	lightly.	Remove	from	heat.

2	cups	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
Add	 the	 wine	 to	 the	 skillet	 with	 the	 browned	 onions.	 Boil	 for	 1
minute,	scraping	up	coagulated	sauté	juices.	Pour	the	wine	and	onions
into	the	casserole	and	bring	to	the	simmer,	shaking	and	stirring	to	mix
the	liquid	and	flour.

1	lb.	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	roughly
chopped	(1½	cups)

OR,	1	cup	drained	and	strained	canned	tomatoes	or	tomato	purée
½	tsp	basil	or	tarragon
½	tsp	thyme
A	3-inch	strip	of	orange	peel	½	inch	wide	or	½	tsp	bottled	ground
orange	peel
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste

Stir	 the	 tomatoes	 into	 the	casserole.	Add	the	herbs,	orange	peel,	and
garlic.	 Bring	 again	 to	 the	 simmer	 and	 season	 lightly	 to	 taste.	 Cover
and	set	in	lower	third	of	oven	to	simmer	slowly	for	1¼	to	1½	hours	or
until	the	meat	is	almost	tender	when	pierced	with	a	fork.

½	lb.	fresh	button	mushrooms	or	quartered	larger	mushrooms



Add	 the	mushrooms	 to	 the	casserole	and	baste	 them	with	 the	 sauce.
Bring	again	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Then	cover	and	return
the	casserole	to	the	oven	for	15	minutes	more.

½	Tb	cornstarch	mixed	with	1	Tb	water,	if	needed
Remove	casserole	from	oven.	Pour	contents	into	a	sieve	placed	over	a
saucepan.	Remove	 the	 strip	 of	 orange	 peel	 and	 return	 the	meat	 and
vegetables	to	the	casserole.	Skim	the	fat	off	the	sauce	in	the	saucepan
and	boil	the	sauce	down	rapidly	until	it	has	reduced	to	about	2½	cups.
It	 should	be	 lightly	 thickened,	and	a	 rich	 reddish	brown.	 If	 too	 thin,
blend	 in	 the	 starch	 and	 water	 and	 simmer	 for	 2	 minutes.	 Correct
seasoning,	and	pour	the	sauce	back	into	the	casserole	over	the	veal.
(*)	May	be	done	ahead	to	this	point.	Set	aside,	cover	askew.

2	to	3	Tb	minced	fresh	tarragon,	basil,	or	parsley
Shortly	 before	 serving,	 cover	 and	 bring	 to	 the	 simmer	 for	 5	 to	 10
minutes.	Present	the	stew	in	its	casserole,	or	on	a	platter	surrounded
by	rice	or	noodles.	Decorate	with	fresh	herbs.

BLANQUETTE	DE	VEAU	À	L’ANCIENNE
[Veal	Stew	with	Onions	and	Mushrooms]

Blanquette	de	veau,	a	much-loved	stew	in	France,	is	veal	simmered	in
a	lightly	seasoned	white	stock.	It	is	served	in	a	sauce	velouté	made	from
the	 veal	 cooking	 stock	 and	 enriched	 with	 cream	 and	 egg	 yolks.	 A
blanquette	is	certainly	not	difficult	to	make,	and	except	for	the	cream	and
egg	yolk	 liaison	at	 the	end,	which	 takes	 less	 than	10	minutes,	 all	 of	 it
may	be	cooked	in	advance.	However,	as	it	is	supposed	to	be	a	lovely	and
delicate	dish,	it	should	really	not	be	attempted	unless	you	can	find	veal
of	good	quality	and	of	the	palest	pink	color.

Serve	it	with	noodles	or	rice,	or	boiled	or	mashed	potatoes.	No	other
vegetables	 are	 needed	with	 the	mushrooms	 and	 onions,	 but	 you	 could
include	 green	 peas,	 artichoke	 hearts,	 or	 baked	 cucumbers.	 A	 red
Bordeaux-Médoc	or	chilled	rosé	wine	would	go	well.



TECHNICAL	NOTE	ON	SCUM	REMOVAL

As	 veal	 comes	 to	 the	 simmer	 it	 releases	 a	 tremendous	 amount	 of
gray-brown	 scum	 which	 must	 be	 removed	 by	 one	 means	 or	 another.
American	 veal,	 probably	 because	 it	 is	 younger	 than	most	 French	 veal,
seems	particularly	scum-productive.	You	can	skim	continually	while	the
veal	simmers	for	the	first	30	to	40	minutes.	You	can	let	it	simmer	for	10
minutes,	 then	remove	the	veal	and	wash	it	rapidly	in	cold	water,	wash
out	 the	 casserole,	 strain	 the	 stock	 through	 several	 thicknesses	of	damp
cheesecloth,	 and	 continue	 with	 the	 recipe.	 Or	 you	 can	 adopt	 the
following	 blanching	 process,	 which	 is	 the	 simplest.	 As	 long	 as	 all	 the
scum	is	removed,	it	makes	no	difference	which	method	you	use;	pick	the
one	which	best	suits	your	predilections	and	prejudices.

For	6	people
Cooking	the	veal

3	lbs.	veal	stew	meat	cut	into	2-ounce,	2-inch	pieces	(cuts	are	listed)
A	3-to	4-quart,	fireproof,	enameled	casserole

Place	the	veal	in	the	casserole	and	cover	with	cold	water	by	2	inches.
Bring	to	the	simmer	and	simmer	2	minutes.	Drain	the	veal	and	wash	it
rapidly	under	cold	water	 to	remove	all	 traces	of	scum.	Wash	out	 the
casserole.	Return	the	meat	to	the	casserole.

5	to	6	cups	cold	white	stock	or	good	canned	chicken	broth.
1	large	onion	studded	with	1	clove
1	large	carrot,	peeled	and	quartered
A	medium	herb	bouquet	and	2	celery	stalks:	8	parsley	stems	(not	the
leaves),	½	bay	leaf,	½	tsp	thyme,	and	2	medium	celery	stalks	tied
in	cheesecloth

Salt
Pour	on	stock	or	broth	to	cover	the	veal	by	½	inch.	Bring	slowly	to	the
simmer,	and	skim	as	necessary	for	several	minutes.	Add	the	vegetables
and	 herb	 bouquet.	 Taste	 for	 seasoning	 and	 salt	 lightly	 if	 necessary.
Cover	partially	and	simmer	very	slowly	for	1¼	to	1½	hours,	or	until



the	 veal	 is	 tender	 when	 pierced	 with	 a	 fork.	 It	 should	 not	 be
overcooked.
The	onions

18	to	24	peeled	white	onions	about	1	inch	in	diameter
½	cup	of	stock	dipped	from	the	simmering	veal	casserole
¼	tsp	salt
1	Tb	butter

While	 the	 blanquette	 is	 simmering,	 prepare	 the	 onions:	 Following
directions	for	white-braised	onions	on	this	page,	pierce	a	cross	in	the
root	 ends	 and	 simmer	 for	 30	 to	 40	 minutes	 in	 a	 small,	 covered
saucepan	with	the	veal	stock,	salt,	and	butter.	Set	them	aside.

When	 the	 veal	 is	 tender,	 pour	 the	 contents	 of	 the	 casserole	 into	 a
colander	set	over	a	bowl.	Rinse	out	the	casserole	and	return	the	meat
to	the	casserole,	removing	any	loose	bones.	Arrange	the	cooked	onions
over	the	meat.
Sauce	velouté	(3½	cups),	and	mushrooms

An	8-cup,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan
4	Tb	butter
5	Tb	flour
A	wooden	spoon
3¼	cups	of	veal	cooking	stock
A	wire	whip
18	to	24	fresh	mushroom	caps	about	1	inch	in	diameter,	tossed	with	1
Tb	lemon	juice

Salt	and	white	pepper
1	to	2	Tb	lemon	juice

In	the	saucepan,	melt	the	butter,	add	the	flour,	and	stir	over	low	heat
until	 they	 foam	 together	 for	 2	 minutes.	 Off	 heat,	 pour	 in	 the	 veal
stock,	beating	vigorously	with	a	wire	whip.	Bring	the	sauce	to	the	boil,
stirring.	 Simmer	 for	 10	 minutes,	 frequently	 skimming	 off	 the	 film



which	rises	to	the	surface.	Fold	in	the	mushroom	caps	and	simmer	10
minutes	more,	skimming.	Taste	the	sauce	very	carefully	for	seasoning,
adding	salt,	pepper,	and	lemon	juice	to	taste.

2	Tb	cream	or	stock
Pour	the	sauce	and	mushrooms	over	the	veal.	Film	the	top	of	the	sauce
with	2	spoonfuls	of	cream	or	stock	to	prevent	a	skin	from	forming.	Set
aside,	partially	covered.
(*)	May	be	done	ahead	to	this	point.

Cream	and	egg	yolk	enrichment

About	10	to	15	minutes	before	serving,	reheat	slowly	to	 the	simmer,
basting	 the	 veal	 with	 the	 sauce.	 Cover	 and	 simmer	 for	 5	 minutes.
Remove	from	heat.

3	egg	yolks
½	cup	whipping	cream
A	6-cup	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip

Blend	the	egg	yolks	and	cream	in	the	bowl	with	wire	whip.	Beat	in	by
spoonfuls	 1	 cup	 of	 the	 hot	 sauce.	 Then	 pour	 the	 mixture	 into	 the
casserole,	 tilting	 it	 and	 basting	 the	 veal	 and	 vegetables	 to	 blend	 the
rest	of	the	sauce	with	the	egg	yolk	mixture.

Set	 over	moderate	heat,	 gently	 shaking	 the	 casserole	until	 sauce	has
thickened	lightly,	but	do	not	let	it	come	to	the	simmer.	(If	not	served
at	 once,	 film	 the	 top	 of	 the	 sauce	 with	 a	 spoonful	 or	 two	 of	 stock,
partially	 cover	 the	 casserole,	 and	 keep	 warm	 over	 hot	 but	 not
simmering	water	for	10	to	15	minutes.)

2	Tb	minced	parsley
Serve	from	the	casserole	or	on	a	platter	surrounded	with	rice,	noodles,
or	potatoes.	Decorate	with	parsley.



VEAL	SCALLOPS

Escalopes	de	Veau

French	 veal	 scallops	 are	 boneless	 slices	 of	 meat	 cut	 ⅜	 inch	 thick
which	are	 flattened	 to	a	 thickness	of	¼	 inch.	So	 that	 each	 scallop	will
constitute	a	neat,	flat	serving	piece,	it	is	cut	across	the	grain	from	a	solid
piece	of	veal	which	contains	no	muscle	separations.	Scallops	take	from	8
to	 10	 minutes	 to	 cook,	 may	 be	 elegantly	 or	 simply	 sauced,	 and	 are
always	an	expensive	delicacy.	They	may	be	breaded	or	 floured	but	are
best,	in	our	opinion,	when	sautéed	au	naturel.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

Allow	2	or	3	scallops	per	person,	depending	on	the	size	of	the	pieces
of	meat.

QUALITY

Because	it	is	cooked	so	quickly,	the	veal	should	be	of	good	quality,
tender,	and	of	the	palest	pink	you	can	find.	Dark	pink	and	reddish	veal
tends	to	be	tough	when	cooked	this	way.

SCALLOPS	CUT	FROM	THE	ROUND	ROAST

In	 France,	 because	 of	 the	 French	 method	 of	 cutting	 the	 leg	 into
lengthwise	 muscles,	 scallops	 are	 usually	 taken	 from	 the	 top	 round	 or
noix.	 This	 cut	 gives	 solid	 slices	 of	 meat,	 with	 no	 muscle	 separations,
which	cook	without	curling.	You	may	obtain	the	same	effect	if	you	buy
slices	 of	 round	 roast	 ⅜	 inch	 thick,	 and	 then	 separate	 them	 into	 their
natural	muscle	divisions.	The	largest	piece	is	the	top	round,	which	may
be	cut	in	half.	The	bottom	round	with	its	eye	insert	will	furnish	one	or
two	more	 scallops.	 Usually	 one	more	 of	 reasonable	 size	 can	 be	 found
among	the	muscle	divisions	which	make	up	the	sirloin	tip	at	the	side	of
the	 meat	 nearest	 the	 bone.	 Smaller	 pieces	 may	 be	 saved	 for	 second
helpings	or	reserved	for	stew	or	for	ground	meat.

SCALLOPS	CUT	FROM	RIB	CHOPS

Rib	chops	are	more	expensive	but	easier	to	use	and	furnish	scallops
all	of	the	same	size.	Have	your	butcher	bone	a	length	of	the	rib	section



(rack)	 and	 cut	 the	meat	 into	⅜-inch	 slices	 across	 the	grain.	Bones	 and
trimming	may	be	saved	for	veal	stock.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Remove	 the	 transparent	 filaments,	 or	 the	 skin	 and	 any	 fat
surrounding	 the	 scallops.	 If	 left	 on,	 the	meat	will	 curl	 up	 as	 it	 cooks.
Place	each	scallop	between	sheets	of	waxed	paper	and	pound	briefly	and
not	 too	 roughly;	 use	 a	mallet,	 the	 flat	 of	 a	 cleaver,	 or	 a	 rolling	pin	 to
reduce	the	scallop	to	a	thickness	of	¼	inch.	If	they	are	not	to	be	cooked
immediately,	wrap	the	scallops	in	waxed	paper	and	refrigerate	them.

		ESCALOPES	DE	VEAU	À	LA	CRÈME
[Sautéed	Veal	Scallops	with	Mushrooms	and	Cream]

This	recipe	for	veal	scallops	makes	a	perfect	main	course	for	a	chic
little	 luncheon.	 If	 you	 are	 reasonably	 quick	 you	 can	 complete	 it	 in	 30
minutes	or	 less,	and	you	may	prepare	 it	 in	advance;	 it	only	needs	a	5-
minute	heating	before	 it	 is	 ready	 to	 eat.	 Serve	with	 it	 buttered	 rice	or
risotto,	 green	 beans,	 peas,	 or	 braised	 endive,	 and	 a	 chilled	 white
Burgundy	wine.

For	6	people

12	veal	scallops	prepared	according	to	the	preceding	directions
Dry	the	scallops	thoroughly	on	paper	towels.	The	meat	will	not	brown
if	it	is	damp.

2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil,	more	as	necessary
A	10-to	12-inch	enameled	skillet

Place	the	butter	and	oil	in	the	skillet	over	moderately	high	heat.	When
you	 see	 that	 the	 butter	 foam	 has	 almost	 subsided,	 arrange	 3	 or	 4
pieces	of	veal	in	the	skillet.	Do	not	crowd	them	together.	Sauté	on	one
side	 for	 a	minute	 or	 so	 regulating	 heat	 so	 fat	 is	 very	 hot	 but	 is	 not
burning.	 Turn,	 and	 sauté	 the	 meat	 on	 its	 other	 side.	 (Each	 scallop
should	be	 lightly	browned	and	 cooked	 to	 the	point	where	 the	 juices



have	 turned	 from	rose	 to	yellow.	 It	 is	done	when	 it	has	 just	become
springy	 rather	 than	 squashy	 to	 the	pressure	 of	 your	 finger.)	Remove
the	scallops	to	a	dish,	and	continue	with	the	rest	in	the	same	manner,
adding	more	butter	and	oil	as	needed.

3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	Tb	butter	if	needed

Pour	all	but	2	 tablespoons	of	 fat	out	of	 the	skillet.	 If	 fat	has	burned,
discard	it	and	add	2	Tb	butter.	Stir	in	the	shallots	or	onions	and	cook
slowly	for	1	minute.

½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth	or	Madeira
⅔	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
A	wooden	spoon

Pour	the	wine	and	stock	or	bouillon	into	the	skillet	and	scrape	up	all
the	 coagulated	 cooking	 juices	with	wooden	 spoon.	 Boil	 rapidly	 until
liquid	has	reduced	to	about	¼	cup.

1½	cups	whipping	cream	½	Tb	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	blended	with
1	Tb	water
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste

Pour	 the	 cream	 and	 the	 starch	mixture	 into	 the	 skillet	 and	 boil	 for
several	 minutes	 until	 cream	 has	 reduced	 and	 thickened	 slightly.
Remove	from	heat	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.

½	lb.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
Salt	and	pepper

In	a	 separate	 skillet,	 sauté	 the	mushrooms	 in	very	hot	butter	and	oil
for	4	to	5	minutes	to	brown	them	lightly.	Season	to	taste	with	salt	and
pepper,	and	scrape	them	into	the	cream	sauce.	Simmer	for	1	minute.
Remove	from	heat	and	correct	seasoning.



Salt	and	pepper
Sprinkle	salt	and	pepper	over	the	sautéed	scallops	and	arrange	in	the
skillet,	basting	with	the	cream	and	mushrooms.
(*)	 May	 be	 done	 ahead	 to	 this	 point.	 Set	 skillet	 aside,	 partially
covered.

Several	minutes	before	 serving,	 cover	 the	 skillet	 and	bring	almost	 to
the	simmer	for	4	to	5	minutes,	to	warm	the	veal	thoroughly	but	not	to
overcook	it.

A	hot	platter	Parsley	sprigs
Arrange	 the	 scallops	 on	 a	 hot	 platter.	 Spoon	 the	 cream	 and
mushrooms	 over	 them	 and	 surround,	 if	 you	 wish,	 with	 the	 rice	 or
risotto.	Decorate	with	parsley,	and	serve.

VARIATIONS
Escalopes	de	Veau	à	l’Estragon
[Sautéed	Veal	Scallops	with	Brown	Tarragon	Sauce]

Rice,	noodles,	or	sautéed	potatoes	go	well	with	this,	and	green	peas
or	beans.	Accompany	with	a	red	Bordeaux	wine.

For	6	people

12	veal	scallops
Prepare	 and	 sauté	 the	 veal	 as	 described	 in	 the	 preceding	 master
recipe.	Place	on	a	plate	while	completing	the	following	sauce.

3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth
1	Tb	fragrant	tarragon,	fresh	or	dried
1	cup	brown	sauce,	or	1	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
plus	1	Tb	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	blended	with	1	Tb	water



Cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 for	 a	 minute	 in	 the	 sauté	 skillet,	 then
deglaze	the	skillet	with	the	wine	and	tarragon,	reducing	the	liquid	to	2
or	3	spoonfuls.	Add	the	brown	sauce,	or	the	stock	and	starch	mixture,
and	boil	for	2	to	3	minutes	until	the	sauce	has	reduced	and	thickened
lightly.	Correct	seasoning.

Salt	and	pepper
A	hot	platter
2	Tb	softened	butter
1	Tb	fresh	minced	tarragon	or	minced	parsley

Season	the	veal	with	salt	and	pepper.	Return	it	to	the	skillet,	and	baste
with	the	sauce.	Cover	the	skillet	and	heat	for	4	to	5	minutes	without
boiling.	Arrange	 the	meat	on	a	hot	platter.	Off	heat,	 swirl	 the	butter
into	the	sauce	by	small	spoonfuls.	Swirl	in	the	herbs.	Spoon	the	sauce
over	the	veal	and	serve.

Escalopes	de	Veau	Chasseur
[Sautéed	Veal	Scallops	with	Mushrooms	and	Tomatoes]

Serve	 rice,	 noodles,	 or	 sautéed	 potatoes	 with	 this,	 green	 peas	 or
beans,	or	sautéed	eggplant,	and	a	Beaujolais	or	chilled	rosé	wine.
For	6	people

12	veal	scallops

Prepare	 and	 sauté	 the	 veal	 as	 described	 in	 the	 preceding	 master
recipe.	 Place	 the	 meat	 on	 a	 plate	 while	 completing	 the	 following
sauce.

¼	cup	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
¾	lb.	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	chopped
(makes	1	cup	of	pulp)

½	clove	mashed	garlic



¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
½	tsp	basil	or	tarragon
½	cup	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth
½	cup	brown	sauce,	or	½	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
plus	1	Tb	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	blended	with	1	Tb	water
Cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 for	 1	 minute	 in	 the	 skillet.	 Stir	 in	 the
tomatoes,	garlic,	seasonings,	and	herbs.	Cover	the	skillet	and	simmer
for	5	minutes.	Pour	in	the	wine,	and	the	brown	sauce	or	the	stock	and
starch.	Boil	rapidly	for	4	to	5	minutes	until	the	sauce	has	reduced	and
thickened.	Correct	seasoning	and	remove	from	heat.

½	lb.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
Salt	and	pepper

In	a	separate	skillet,	sauté	the	mushrooms	in	very	hot	butter	and	oil	to
brown	lightly.	Season	to	taste	and	scrape	them	into	the	tomato	sauce.
Simmer	for	1	minute	and	correct	seasoning	again.

A	hot	platter
2	Tb	fresh	minced	tarragon,	basil,	or	parsley

Sprinkle	the	veal	scallops	with	salt	and	pepper	and	return	them	to	the
skillet.	 Baste	 with	 the	 sauce.	 Cover	 and	 heat	 for	 4	 to	 5	 minutes
without	boiling.	Serve	on	a	hot	platter	and	decorate	with	the	herbs.

VEAL	CHOPS	OR	CUTLETS

Côtes	de	Veau

The	best	treatment	for	veal	chops,	in	our	opinion,	is	the	simple	one
of	 browning	 them,	 then	 cooking	 them	 slowly	 in	 a	 covered	 skillet	 or
casserole	for	15	to	20	minutes	until	their	juices	have	turned	from	rose	to



yellow.	They	are	particularly	good	if	aromatic	herbs	and	vegetables	are
braised	with	 them	as	veal	usually	needs	other	 flavors	 to	make	 it	more
interesting.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Buy	 loin,	 rib,	 or	 shoulder	 chops	 1	 to	 1¼	 inches	 thick.	 Have	 the
corner	of	the	backbone	at	the	top	of	the	chop	cut	off	so	the	meat	will	lie
as	flat	as	possible	on	either	side.

		CÔTES	DE	VEAU	AUX	HERBES
[Veal	Chops	Braised	with	Herbs]

This	is	an	excellent	basic	recipe	for	all	veal	chops,	whether	they	are
served	with	a	plain	deglazing	sauce	made	 from	the	pan	 juices,	or	with
any	of	the	suggestions	listed	at	the	end	of	the	recipe.	Sautéed	potatoes,
broiled	 tomatoes,	 string	 beans,	 and	 a	 chilled	 rosé	 wine	would	 go	well
with	chops	prepared	in	the	following	manner.
Cooking	Note:	 For	2	or	3	chops,	 the	 final	 cooking	may	be	done	on

top	 of	 the	 stove	 in	 a	 covered	 skillet.	 For	 6	 chops,	 it	 is	 easier	 to	 finish
cooking	them	in	the	oven.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	heavy,	10-to	12-inch	fireproof	casserole	with	cover6	large	veal
chops	cut	1	inch	thick

A	10-to	12-inch	skillet
2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil,	more	if	needed
Salt	and	pepper

Dry	 the	chops	on	paper	 towels.	Heat	 the	butter	and	oil	 in	 the	skillet
until	you	see	that	the	butter	foam	has	almost	subsided,	then	brown	the
chops,	two	or	three	at	a	time,	for	3	to	4	minutes	on	each	side.	As	they
are	 done,	 season	with	 salt	 and	 pepper	 and	 arrange	 in	 the	 casserole,
overlapping	them	slightly.



3	Tb	butter,	if	needed
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Optional:	1	clove	mashed	garlic
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
1	tsp	mixed	basil	and	thyme,	or	tarragon

Pour	all	but	3	 tablespoons	of	 fat	out	of	 the	skillet.	 If	 fat	has	burned,
pour	 it	 all	 out	 and	 add	 butter.	 Stir	 in	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 and
optional	garlic,	and	cook	slowly	for	1	minute.	Then	pour	in	the	wine,
add	 the	 herbs,	 and	 simmer	 for	 a	 few	 minutes,	 scraping	 up	 the
coagulated	sautéing	juices.	Scrape	the	mixture	into	the	casserole	over
the	chops.

Heat	 the	 casserole	 on	 top	of	 the	 stove	until	 the	 liquid	 is	 simmering.
Cover	and	set	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven	for	15	to	20	minutes.
Turn	the	chops	and	baste	them	with	the	liquid	in	the	casserole	2	or	3
times	 during	 this	 period.	 The	 chops	 are	 done	 as	 soon	 as	 their	 juices
run	yellow	when	the	meat	is	pierced	with	a	fork.

A	hot	platter
¼	cup	stock,	canned	bouillon,	or	cream
Salt	and	pepper
1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter

Remove	the	chops	to	a	hot	platter.	Add	the	stock,	bouillon,	or	cream
to	the	casserole	and	boil	rapidly	for	a	few	minutes	until	the	liquid	has
reduced	 and	 thickened	 slightly.	 Correct	 seasoning.	Off	 heat,	 swirl	 in
the	butter	by	bits.	Pour	the	sauce	over	the	chops	and	serve.

(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE
Veal	chops	may	be	browned	well	in	advance	of	their	final	cooking.

Once	 cooked,	 they	may	 be	 kept	 in	 the	 hot,	 turned-off	 oven,	 casserole
cover	askew,	for	about	20	minutes.	But	do	not	allow	them	to	overcook
or	overheat	for	they	will	dry	out.



VARIATIONS:	SAUCES
In	 addition	 to	 the	 following	 sauces,	 you	 may	 use	 the	 mushrooms

and	cream,	mushrooms	and	tomato,	or	brown	tarragon	sauces	described
in	the	recipes	for	veal	scallops.

Sauce	Tomate	or	Coulis	de	Tomates,	tomato	sauce
Sauce	Madère,	brown	sauce	with	Madeira	wine
Sauce	Robert,	brown	sauce	with	mustard	and	onions
Sauce	Duxelles,	brown	sauce	with	diced	mushrooms	and	herbs
Before	cooking	the	chops,	prepare	2	cups	of	one	of	the	sauces	listed	at
the	left.	When	the	chops	are	done,	pour	the	sauce	into	the	casserole,
basting	the	chops.	 If	not	 to	be	served	 immediately,	 set	aside.	Shortly
before	 serving,	 cover	 the	 casserole	 and	 reheat	 for	 4	 to	 5	 minutes
without	simmering.	Arrange	the	chops	on	a	platter.	Off	heat,	swish	1
or	2	tablespoons	of	butter	into	the	casserole,	then	pour	the	sauce	over
the	chops.

OTHER	VARIATIONS
The	recipe	for	sautéed	chicken	aux	herbes	de	Provence,	has	an	herb-

and-garlic	 type	 of	 hollandaise	 sauce	 which	 can	 be	 adapted	 for	 veal
chops.	Another	idea	is	to	add	almost	cooked	small	potatoes	and	onions,
and	browned	lardons	of	blanched	bacon,	all	of	which	will	finish	cooking
with	 the	 chops;	 follow	 the	 directions	 for	 them	 in	 poulet	 en	 cocotte	 but
boil	 the	 vegetables	 long	 enough	 so	 they	 are	 almost	 tender	 before
arranging	 them	 in	 the	 casserole	 to	bake	with	 the	 chops.	 Following	 the
same	 system	 with	 other	 vegetables,	 you	 could	 use	 a	 combination	 of
butter-braised	carrots	and	artichoke	hearts	with	sautéed	mushrooms.

VEAL	STEAKS
Veal	 steaks	 1	 to	 1¼	 inches	 thick	 cut	 from	 the	 round	 roast	 or	 the

sirloin	may	be	cooked	exactly	the	same	way	as	veal	chops.



GROUND	VEAL	PATTIES

Fricadelles	de	Veau

Here	is	a	fine	recipe	for	ground	veal	patties.	Arranged	on	a	bed	of
braised	spinach,	surrounded	with	baked	or	stuffed	tomatoes,	and	served
with	 a	 chilled	 rosé	 wine,	 they	 make	 a	 most	 attractive	 informal	 main
course.	Other	vegetables	are	suggested	in	the	list	under	roast	veal.	Neck,
shoulder,	 shank,	 or	 breast	meat	may	be	used	 for	 grinding;	 be	 sure	 the
meat	 has	 first	 been	 pared	 of	 gristle,	 tendons,	 filaments	 and	 other
miscellaneous	matter.	Always	include	a	proportion	of	ham	fat,	pork	fat,
or	sausage	meat;	otherwise	the	patties	will	be	too	dry.

		FRICADELLES	DE	VEAU	À	LA	NIÇOISE
[Veal	Patties	with	Tomatoes,	Onions,	and	Herbs]

Onions,	 garlic,	 and	 tomatoes	 are	 particularly	 good	 mixed	 with
ground	 veal.	 If	 you	 happened	 to	 have	 the	 remains	 of	 a	 ratatouille
(eggplant	 and	 tomato	 casserole),	 half	 a	 cup	 of	 it	 could	 replace	 the
tomatoes	and	onions	in	the	following	recipe.

For	6	people

½	cup	finely	minced	onions
2	Tb	butter
Cook	 the	onions	 slowly	with	 the	butter	 in	a	 small	 skillet	 for	8	 to	10
minutes,	until	they	are	tender	but	not	browned.

medium	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	chopped
1	clove	mashed	garlic
¼	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	basil	or	thyme
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Add	the	tomatoes,	and	other	ingredients.	Cover	and	cook	slowly	for	5



minutes.	Uncover,	raise	heat,	and	boil	rapidly	until	the	tomato	juices
have	almost	entirely	evaporated.	Scrape	into	the	mixing	bowl.

1	cup	stale	white	bread	crumbs	and	½	cup	milk
OR,	grind	½	cup	of	cooked	rice	with	the	veal
While	the	tomatoes	are	cooking,	soak	the	bread	crumbs	in	the	milk	for
5	minutes.	Pour	 into	a	strainer	and	press	out	as	much	of	 the	milk	as
you	can.	Add	bread	crumbs	to	mixing	bowl.

1	lb.	or	2	cups	lean	raw	veal,	ground	with	2	ounces	(½	cup)	of	boiled
ham	and	2	ounces	(½	cup)	of	ham	fat	or	fresh	pork	fat
1	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	pepper
3	Tb	minced	parsley
1	egg
A	wooden	spoon
Add	 the	meat,	 seasonings,	 parsley,	 and	 egg	 to	 the	mixing	 bowl	 and
beat	 vigorously	 with	 wooden	 spoon	 to	 blend	 thoroughly.	 Taste
carefully	for	seasoning,	adding	more	if	you	feel	it	necessary.	Form	the
mixture	into	6	or	12	balls.	Flatten	them	into	patties	½	inch	thick	with
the	palm	of	your	hand.	 If	not	 to	be	 cooked	 immediately,	 cover	with
waxed	paper	and	refrigerate.

½	cup	sifted	flour	spread	on	a	dish
Just	 before	 sautéing,	 dredge	 the	 patties	 in	 the	 flour	 and	 shake	 off
excess	flour.

1	to	2	skillets	each	containing	2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil
Set	the	skillet	or	skillets	over	moderately	high	heat.	When	you	see	that
the	 butter	 foam	 has	 almost	 subsided,	 brown	 the	 patties	 for	 2	 to	 3
minutes	on	each	side.	Pour	out	excess	fat,	cover	and	cook	very	slowly
for	15	minutes,	turning	the	patties	once.



A	hot	platter
Arrange	the	meat	on	a	hot	platter	with	whatever	vegetables	you	have
chosen,	and	keep	warm	for	a	moment	while	finishing	the	sauce.

⅔	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
Pour	 the	 fat	 out	 of	 the	 skillet.	 Add	 the	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 and	 boil
rapidly,	scraping	up	coagulated	cooking	juices	and	reducing	liquid	to
3	or	4	spoonfuls.	Off	heat,	swirl	in	the	butter	by	small	spoonfuls.	Pour
the	sauce	over	the	patties,	and	serve.
(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE
After	 the	patties	have	been	browned,	 arrange	 them	 in	 a	 casserole.

Deglaze	 the	 skillet	 with	 stock	 and	 set	 aside.	 About	 20	 to	 30	 minutes
before	 serving,	 heat	 the	 casserole	 until	 the	meat	 is	 sizzling,	 cover	 and
finish	 cooking	 in	 a	 325-degree	 oven.	 Reheat	 and	 butter	 the	 sauce	 just
before	pouring	it	over	the	patties.

VARIATION
Fricadelles	de	Veau	à	la	Crème
[Veal	Patties	with	Cream	and	Herb	Sauce]

½	Tb	tarragon	or	basil
½	cup	dry	white	wine,	dry	white	vermouth,	or	stock
½	to	¾	cup	whipping	cream
2	Tb	softened	butter
½	Tb	fresh	minced	tarragon,	basil,	or	parsley
Cook	the	patties	and	remove	them	to	a	hot	platter	as	directed	in	the
master	 recipe.	 Add	 the	 tarragon	 or	 basil	 and	 wine	 or	 stock	 to	 the
degreased	 skillet.	 Boil	 down	 liquid	 to	 3	 tablespoons,	 scraping	 up
coagulated	 cooking	 juices.	Then	pour	 in	 the	 cream	and	boil	 it	 down
rapidly	to	reduce	and	thicken	it	lightly.	Off	heat,	swirl	in	the	butter	by
bits,	then	swirl	in	the	herbs.	Pour	over	the	patties.



VARIATIONS:	SAUCES

Coulis	de	Tomates	à	la	Provençale,	fresh	tomato	sauce	with	herbs
Sauce	Brune	aux	Fines	Herbes	or	à	l’Estragon,	brown	sauce	with	mixed
green	herbs	or	tarragons
Sauce	Madère,	brown	sauce	with	Madeira	wine
Sauce	Robert,	brown	sauce	with	mustard	and	onions
Sauce	Duxelles,	brown	sauce	with	diced	mushrooms	and	herbs
After	cooking	the	patties,	deglaze	the	skillet	with	half	a	cup	of	white
wine	or	white	vermouth,	then	add	1½	to	2	cups	of	any	of	the	sauces
listed	at	the	left.	Simmer	for	a	minute	or	two.	Off	heat,	swirl	in	1	to	2
tablespoons	of	softened	butter	and	pour	the	sauce	over	the	meat.

VARIATIONS
Use	 the	 same	 mixture	 of	 ground	 veal,	 onions,	 and	 tomatoes	 as

described	in	the	master	recipe.

Fricadelles	de	Veau	Duxelles
[Veal	Patties	with	Mushrooms]

¼	lb.	finely	minced	fresh	mushrooms
Squeeze	the	mushrooms,	a	handful	at	a	time,	in	the	corner	of	a	towel
to	extract	their	juice.	When	the	minced	onions	in	the	master	recipe	are
tender,	add	the	mushrooms.	Raise	heat	and	sauté	for	4	to	5	minutes.
Then	add	the	tomatoes	and	proceed	with	the	recipe.

Fricadelles	de	Veau	Mentonnaise
[Veal	Patties	with	Tuna	and	Anchovies]

This	 Italian	 and	 Mediterranean	 combination	 is	 especially	 good
accompanied	by	braised	spinach	and	grilled	or	baked	tomatoes,	or	fried
or	sautéed	potatoes	and	a	salad	of	fresh	tomatoes.



½	cup	drained	and	mashed	canned	tuna	fish
6	canned	anchovy	filets	drained	and	mashed,	or	1	Tb	anchovy	paste
Prepare	the	ground	veal	mixture	as	described	in	the	master	recipe	and
beat	into	it	the	tuna	and	anchovies.	Then	proceed	with	the	recipe.

Patties	Using	Cooked	Ground	Veal
Follow	 any	 of	 the	 preceding	 combinations,	 substituting	 cooked	 veal
for	 raw	 veal.	 To	 prevent	 the	 meat	 from	 being	 too	 dry,	 add	 to	 the
mixture	½	cup	of	sausage	meat	or	an	additional	¼	cup	of	ground	ham
fat	or	pork	fat.

Pain	de	Veau
[Veal	Loaf]

Use	 any	 of	 the	 preceding	 ground	 veal	 combinations	 and	 pack	 the
meat	in	a	loaf	pan	or	a	soufflé	mold.	Over	the	top	of	the	meat	lay	2	or	3
strips	of	blanched	bacon.	Bake	in	a	350-degree	oven	for	1	to	1½	hours.

The	loaf	is	done	when	the	meat	has	shrunk	slightly	from	the	sides	of
the	mold	 and	 the	 surrounding	 juices	 are	 clear	 yellow	with	 no	 trace	 of
rosy	 color,	 or	 at	 a	 meat-thermometer	 reading	 of	 175	 to	 180	 degrees.
Unmold	 the	 loaf	 and	 serve	 it	with	 a	 tomato	 sauce.	 If	 the	 loaf	 is	 to	 be
served	 cold,	 place	 a	weight	 on	 top	 of	 it	 after	 cooking	 to	 compress	 the
meat	as	it	cools.

PORK

Porc

MARINADES

Fresh	pork,	whether	 it	 is	a	 large	piece	for	roasting,	or	a	thin	piece
for	 sautéing,	 will	 be	 tenderer	 and	 have	 a	 more	 interesting	 flavor	 if	 it



receives	a	marination	before	cooking.	This	 is	not	an	essential	 step,	but
you	will	find	it	most	effective,	and	cold	leftovers	will	be	even	better	than
usual.	You	may	use	a	simple	dry	mixture	of	salt,	herbs,	and	spices,	or	a
liquid	marinade	 of	 either	 lemon	 juice	 or	wine	 and	 vinegar	with	 herbs
and	aromatic	vegetables.
Always	 marinate	 the	 meat	 in	 a	 noncorroding	 container:	 porcelain,
pyrex,	enamelware,	or	stainless	steel.

TIME	REQUIRED

(If	the	meat	is	refrigerated,	 increase	the	minimum	marination	time
by	at	least	one	third.)

Chops	and	steaks—a	minimum	of	2	hours;	6	to	12	are	even	better.
Loin	roasts—a	minimum	of	6	hours,	but	24	are	recommended.
Fresh	hams	and	picnic	shoulders—a	minimum	of	2	days,	but	4	to	5

are	more	effective.

MARINADE	SÈCHE
[Salt	Marinade	with	Herbs	and	Spices]

Fine	for	all	types	of	fresh	pork.	This	is	our	favorite,	as	it	tenderizes
the	pork	and	accentuates	its	natural	flavor.

Per	pound	of	pork

1	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	freshly	ground	pepper
¼	tsp	ground	thyme	or	sage
⅛	tsp	ground	bay	leaf
Pinch	of	allspice
Optional:	½	clove	mashed	garlic
Mix	all	the	ingredients	together	and	rub	them	into	the	surface	of	the
pork.	 Place	 in	 a	 covered	 bowl.	 Turn	 the	 meat	 2	 or	 3	 times	 if	 the
marinade	is	a	short	one;	several	times	a	day	if	it	is	of	long	duration.

Before	cooking,	scrape	off	the	marinade,	and	dry	the	meat	thoroughly



with	paper	towels.

MARINADE	SIMPLE
[Lemon	Juice	and	Herb	Marinade]

For	chops,	steaks,	and	small,	boned	roasts.	This	is	also	an	effective
marinade	giving	the	pork	a	slightly	different	flavor	than	the	dry	one.

Per	pound	of	pork

1	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
3	Tb	lemon	juice
3	Tb	olive	oil
3	parsley	sprigs
¼	tsp	thyme	or	sage
1	bay	leaf
1	clove	mashed	garlic
Rub	 salt	 and	 pepper	 into	 the	 meat.	 Mix	 the	 other	 ingredients	 in	 a
bowl,	add	the	pork	and	baste	 it.	Place	a	 lid	over	the	bowl.	Turn	and
baste	the	meat	3	or	4	times	during	its	marination	period.

Before	cooking,	scrape	off	the	marinade,	and	dry	the	meat	thoroughly
with	paper	towels.

MARINADE	AU	VIN
[Wine	Marinade]

May	 be	 used	 for	 chops,	 steaks,	 and	 small	 roasts,	 but	 is	 usually
reserved	for	fresh	hams	and	picnic	shoulders.	This	is	a	special	2-to	4-day
marinade	which	gives	pork	a	taste	akin	to	that	of	wild	boar,	marcassin.

[NOTE:	 If	 the	 pork	 is	 to	 be	marinated	 for	more	 than	 3	 days,	 cook	 the
carrots,	onions,	and	garlic	very	slowly	in	the	olive	oil	before	proceeding



with	the	recipe.]
Per	each	3	pounds	of	pork

1	Tb	salt
1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
½	cup	wine	vinegar
4	Tb	olive	oil
3	halved	cloves	garlic
½	cup	thinly	sliced	carrots
½	cup	thinly	sliced	onions
½	tsp	peppercorns
2	bay	leaves
1	tsp	thyme
Optional:	¼	tsp	each	of	basil,	tarragon,	sage,	and	mint;	5	coriander
seeds;	5	juniper	berries
Rub	 salt	 into	 the	pork.	Mix	 the	other	 ingredients	 in	a	bowl,	 add	 the
meat	and	baste	it.	Place	a	lid	over	the	bowl.	Turn	and	baste	the	meat	3
or	4	 times	a	day.	Before	 cooking,	 scrape	off	 the	marinade	and	drain
the	meat	 for	 half	 an	 hour	 or	 so.	 Then	 dry	 it	 thoroughly	with	 paper
towels.

ROAST	PORK

Rôti	de	Porc

Pork	may	be	 roasted	 slowly	 in	an	open	pan	 in	a	325-degree	oven,
and	basted	occasionally	with	a	spoonful	or	two	of	wine,	stock,	or	water
to	aid	in	the	dissolution	of	its	fat.	But	we	think	pork	is	more	tender	and
juicy	 if	 it	 is	 browned	 in	 hot	 fat,	 then	 roasted	 like	 veal	 in	 a	 covered
casserole.	This	slow,	steamy	cooking	tenderizes	the	meat	and	renders	out
the	fat	very	effectively.

PREPARATION	OF	ROASTS	FOR	COOKING



The	 flavors	 of	 a	marinade	will	 penetrate	 pork	more	 thoroughly	 if
the	meat	is	boned;	it	is	rolled	and	tied	after	marination.	All	but	a	⅛-inch
layer	of	outside	fat	should	be	cut	off,	as	well	as	any	loose	interior	fat	or
heavy	layers	of	fat.	If	you	are	using	a	fresh	ham	or	shoulder,	remove	the
rind;	it	may	be	frozen	and	used	whenever	you	are	cooking	braised	meat
to	give	body	to	the	sauce.

CUTS	FOR	ROASTING	OR	BRAISING

One	pound	of	 boneless	 pork	will	 serve	2	 or	 3	 people.	 For	 bone-in
roasts,	particularly	the	loin,	allow	¾	pound	per	person.
Loin	of	Pork—Longe.	The	loin	is	divided	into	the	following	cuts:

Center	Cut—Milieu	de	Filet.	This	is	lean	meat,	and	corresponds	to
the	porterhouse	and	T-bone	 steak	 section	of	beef	with	both	 loin
and	 tenderloin.	 If	 it	 is	not	boned	and	 rolled,	have	 the	backbone
part	removed	for	easier	carving.

Rib	 Cut—Carré.	 This	 is	 lean	 meat,	 and	 corresponds	 to	 the	 rib
section	of	beef	with	loin	but	no	tenderloin.	If	it	is	not	boned	and
rolled,	have	the	backbone	section	removed.

Loin	 End—Pointe	 de	 Filet.	 This	 corresponds	 to	 the	 rump	 of	 beef
and	should	be	boned.	It	makes	a	juicy	roast	with	a	combination	of
fat	and	lean.

Shoulder	or	Blade	End—Échine.	This	combination	of	fat	and	lean
is	a	favorite	roasting	cut	in	France;	it	is	the	shoulder-chop	end	of
the	loin	and	should	be	boned.

Shoulder	 Butt	 or	 Boston	 Butt—Palette.	 The	 shoulder	 butt	 is	 a
combination	of	fat	and	lean	and	should	be	boned.
Picnic	Shoulder	or	Shoulder	Arm—No	French	equivalent:	part	of

it	is	palette;	part	is	jambonneau.	This	is	lean	meat,	and	should	be	boned.
Fresh	 Ham—Jambon	 Frais.	 Fresh	 ham	 is	 lean	 meat.	 It	 may	 be

bought	whole,	or	in	part,	and	may	be	boned	or	not,	as	you	wish.

TEMPERATURE	AND	TIMING	FOR	ROAST	PORK



Pork,	in	our	opinion,	develops	its	best	flavor	and	texture	when	it	is
cooked	 to	 an	 interior	 temperature	 of	 180	 to	 185	 degrees	 on	 a	 meat
thermometer.	At	this	point	all	its	juices	have	turned	clear	yellow	with	no
trace	 of	 rosy	 color,	 and	 the	 meat	 is	 somewhat	 gray	 with	 only	 a
suggestion	 of	 pink	 overtone.	 It	 was	 authoritatively	 established	 as	 far
back	as	the	year	1919	that	trichinae	are	killed	at	a	meat	temperature	of
131	degrees	(137	degrees	for	official	purposes)	or	when	the	pork	is	still
rare.	In	view	of	this	fact	there	is	no	reason	whatsoever	for	overcooking
pork	until	it	is	dry	and	lifeless.
From	 30	 to	 45	minutes	 per	 pound	 are	 required	 to	 roast	 a	 3-to	 8-

pound	piece	of	unchilled	fresh	pork	to	an	internal	temperature	of	180	to
185	degrees.	A	long,	thin,	pork	loin	takes	less	time	to	roast	than	a	thick
fresh	ham	or	shoulder	of	the	same	weight.	Boned	roasts	usually	require	5
to	10	minutes	 per	pound	more	 than	bone-in	 roasts.	As	 it	 takes	 a	 good
hour	 for	 a	 large	 roast	 to	 cool	 off	when	 it	 is	 out	 of	 the	 oven,	 you	 can
afford	 to	 allow	 yourself	 plenty	 of	 time.	 Here	 are	 some	 examples	 for
covered	roasting	in	a	325-degree	oven:	A	3-pound	loin
Bone	In—1½	to	1¾	hours
Boned	and	Rolled—1¾	to	2	hours
A	5-pound	loin
Bone	In—2½	to	3	hours
Boned	and	Rolled—3	to	3½	hours
A	5-pound	fresh	ham	or	picnic
Bone	In—About	3½	hours
Boned	and	Rolled—About	4	hours

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Potatoes
Roast	potatoes,	which	may	cook	with	the	pork
Sautéed	potatoes,	which	may	be	done	in	pork	fat	rather	than	butter
Boiled	 potatoes,	 plain,	 mashed	 potatoes,	 or	 the	 garlic	 mashed

potatoes
Scalloped	 potatoes	 with	 stock	 and	 cheese,	 or	 with	 tomatoes	 and

onions

Other	vegetables
Braised	white	cabbage,	red	cabbage,	or	sauerkraut,	which	may	cook



with	the	pork	Brussels	sprouts	braised	in	butter,	or	with	cheese
Braised	leeks,	or	braised	celery	root
Stuffed	tomatoes;	ratatouille	(eggplant	and	tomato	casserole)
Glazed	onions,	or	 turnips,	which	may	cook	with	 the	pork	See	also

the	fruit	suggestions	(apples,	peaches,	and	cherries)	in	the	Duck	section;
and	the	prunes	in	the	Goose	section

WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Serve	a	dry	white	wine,	Riesling,	Traminer,	white	Côtes	du	Rhône,
or	a	rosé.

		RÔTI	DE	PORC	POÊLÉ
[Casserole-roasted	Pork]

As	most	French	recipes	call	for	a	boneless	roast,	we	shall	so	specify
in	this	recipe	and	its	variations.	The	loin	is	the	most	expensive	cut	and
also	 the	most	 attractive	 looking.	 But	 any	 other	 cut	 among	 those	 listed
may	be	substituted,	and	may	be	boned	or	not.

For	6	people

A	3-lb.	boneless	roast	of	pork,	previously	marinated,	if	you	wish,
according	to	one	of	the	suggestions

4	Tb	rendered	pork	fat,	lard,	or	cooking	oil
A	heavy	fireproof	casserole	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	meat
Preheat	 oven	 to	 325	 degrees.	 Dry	 the	 meat	 thoroughly	 on	 paper
towels.	 Place	 the	 fat	 in	 the	 casserole	 and	 set	 over	 moderately	 high
heat.	When	 fat	 is	 almost	 smoking,	 brown	 the	pork	on	all	 sides.	This
will	take	about	10	minutes.	Remove	pork	to	a	side	dish.

2	Tb	butter,	if	needed
1	sliced	yellow	onion
1	sliced	carrot
Optional:	2	cloves	unpeeled	garlic



A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp
thyme	tied	in	cheesecloth
Pour	all	but	2	spoonfuls	of	fat	out	of	the	casserole.	If	fat	has	burned,
throw	it	all	out	and	add	more	butter.	Stir	 in	the	vegetables,	optional
garlic,	and	herb	bouquet.	Cover	and	cook	slowly	for	5	minutes.

A	bulb	baster
Place	 the	meat	 in	 the	 casserole,	 its	 fattiest	 side	up.	 (If	 pork	was	not
marinated,	season	it	with	salt	and	pepper,	and	half	a	teaspoon	of	sage
or	 thyme.)	Cover	 the	casserole	and	heat	 it	until	 the	meat	 is	 sizzling,
then	place	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven	for	about	2	hours	or	to	a
meat-thermometer	reading	of	180	to	185	degrees.	Baste	the	roast	2	or
3	 times	 during	 this	 period	 with	 the	 juices	 in	 the	 casserole,	 and
regulate	oven	heat	so	the	pork	is	cooking	slowly	and	evenly.	The	pork
and	vegetables	will	render	about	1	cup	of	juices	as	they	roast.

A	hot	platter
When	 it	 is	done,	place	 the	pork	on	a	hot	 serving	platter	and	discard
trussing	strings.

½	cup	dry	white	wine,	stock,	canned	bouillon,	or	water
A	hot	gravy	boat
Pour	 the	 liquid	 into	 the	 casserole	 and	 simmer	 slowly	 for	 2	 to	 3
minutes.	Then	tilt	 the	casserole	and	skim	out	all	but	a	 tablespoon	or
two	of	fat.	Mash	the	vegetables	into	the	juices;	boil	rapidly	until	you
have	 about	 1	 cup.	 Strain	 into	 a	 hot	 gravy	 boat.	 Surround	 the	 pork
roast	with	whatever	vegetable	garnish	you	have	chosen,	and	serve.

(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME	NOTE
If	 you	 are	 not	 serving	 immediately,	 return	 pork	 and	 sauce	 to

casserole.	Cover	 loosely	 and	 set	 in	 turned-off	 hot	 oven	with	door	 ajar.
The	meat	will	stay	warm	for	a	good	half	hour.



VARIATIONS:	SAUCES
Any	 of	 the	 following	 sauces	 may	 be	 prepared	 while	 the	 pork	 is

roasting,	then	simmered	for	a	moment	to	blend	with	the	degreased	juices
in	the	casserole.
Sauce	Diable,	peppery	brown	sauce
Sauce	Piquante,	spicy	brown	sauce	with	pickles	and	capers
Sauce	Robert,	brown	mustard	sauce
Sauce	Poivrade,	peppery	brown	sauce	with	vinegar	and	wine	for	use

especially	if	the	pork	has	been	marinated	in	wine,	this	page
Sauce	Tomate,	a	good	tomato	sauce

Sauce	Moutarde	à	la	Normande
[Mustard	Sauce	with	Cream]

For	about	2	cups

After	the	pork	has	been	cooked	and	placed	on	a	platter,	keep	it	warm
for	10	to	15	minutes	while	preparing	the	sauce.

Strain	the	meat	juices	into	a	bowl	and	degrease	them.

⅓	cup	cider	vinegar
10	crushed	peppercorns
Pour	the	vinegar	and	peppercorns	into	the	casserole	and	boil	until	the
vinegar	 has	 reduced	 to	 about	 a	 tablespoon.	 Pour	 in	 the	meat	 juices
and	boil	them	down	rapidly	until	they	have	reduced	to	about	⅔	cup.

1½	cups	whipping	cream
Salt
2	tsp	dry	mustard	mixed	with	2	tsp	water
Add	the	cream	and	simmer	for	5	minutes,	stirring	in	salt	to	taste.	Beat
in	the	mustard	mixture	and	simmer	2	or	3	minutes	more.	Sauce	should
be	thick	enough	to	coat	a	spoon	lightly.	Correct	seasoning.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter



A	warm	gravy	boat
Off	heat	and	just	before	serving,	swirl	in	the	butter	by	bits,	then	pour
the	sauce	into	a	warm	gravy	boat.

VARIATIONS
Rôti	de	Porc	Grand’	Mère
[Casserole-roasted	Pork	with	Potatoes	and	Onions]

Onions	and	potatoes	absorb	a	distinctive	flavor	when	they	cook	with
pork	in	this	manner.
For	6	people

A	3-lb.	boneless	roast	of	pork	previously	marinated	in	salt	for	several
hours,	if	you	wish
Roast	the	pork	in	a	covered	casserole	with	seasonings	as	described	in
the	master	recipe,	but	omit	the	vegetables.	After	1	hour,	add	potatoes
and	onions	which	have	been	prepared	as	follows:

12	to	18	peeled	white	onions	1	to	1½	inches	in	diameter
Pierce	 a	 cross	 in	 the	 root	 end	 of	 the	 onions,	 and	 boil	 them	 for	 5
minutes	in	salted	water.	Drain.

12	to	18	small	new	potatoes	or	“boiling”	potatoes,	peeled	and	cut
into	1½	inch	ovals

A	skillet
2	Tb	rendered	pork	fat	or	cooking	oil
Salt	and	pepper
Drop	the	potatoes	into	a	pan	of	boiling	salted	water.	Bring	to	the	boil
and	 boil	 ½	 minute.	 Drain.	 Just	 before	 adding	 the	 potatoes	 to	 the
casserole,	 roll	 them	 for	1	 to	2	minutes	 in	hot	 fat	 in	 skillet	 to	brown
very	lightly.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper.

After	 the	 pork	 has	 cooked	 for	 an	 hour,	 arrange	 the	 potatoes	 and
onions	around	it	and	baste	them	with	the	juices	in	the	casserole.	Cover



the	casserole	and	return	it	to	the	oven	until	the	meat	is	done,	basting
the	vegetables	once	or	twice.

A	hot	platter
1	to	2	Tb	chopped	parsley
Remove	the	pork	to	a	hot	platter	and	arrange	the	vegetables	around	it.
Decorate	with	 chopped	 parsley.	 Degrease	 the	meat	 juices	 and	 either
pour	them	over	the	vegetables,	or	into	a	hot	gravy	boat.

Rôti	de	Porc	aux	Navets
[Casserole-roasted	Pork	with	Turnips]

Turnips	 are	 wonderful	 when	 cooked	 in	 pork	 juices.	 Use	 the	 same
general	 system	described	 for	 the	 onions	 and	 potatoes	 in	 the	 preceding
recipe.	Peel	and	quarter	the	turnips;	allow	4	to	6	pieces	per	person.	Drop
them	 in	 boiling	 water	 and	 boil	 2	 minutes.	 Drain.	 Add	 them	 to	 the
casserole	for	the	last	hour	of	cooking.

Rôti	de	Porc	aux	Choux
[Casserole-roasted	Pork	with	Cabbage]

This	 is	 a	 great	 dish	 for	 lovers	 of	 cabbage.	 Serve	 it	 with	 boiled
potatoes	and	a	dry	Alsatian	wine,	or	beer.
For	6	people

A	3-lb.	boneless	roast	of	pork	previously	marinated	for	several	hours
in	salt,	if	you	wish
Roast	 the	 pork	 in	 a	 covered	 casserole	 with	 carrots,	 onions,	 and
seasonings	 as	 described	 in	 the	master	 recipe.	After	 an	hour,	 add	 the
cabbage	which	has	been	prepared	as	follows:

1	lb.	(about	6	cups)	green	or	white	cabbage	cut	into	½-inch	slices
A	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling	water	with	1½	tsp



salt	per	quart	of	water
Drop	the	cabbage	into	the	boiling	water.	Bring	rapidly	to	the	boil	and
boil	 uncovered	 for	 2	minutes.	 Immediately	 drain	 in	 a	 colander,	 and
run	 cold	 water	 over	 the	 cabbage	 for	 a	 minute	 or	 two.	 Drain
thoroughly	and	set	aside.

½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Optional:	½	tsp	caraway	seeds
After	the	pork	has	cooked	for	an	hour,	arrange	the	cabbage	around	it.
Fluff	 salt,	 pepper,	 and	 the	 optional	 caraway	 seeds	 into	 the	 cabbage,
and	baste	it	with	the	juices	in	the	casserole.	Cover	the	casserole,	bring
to	the	simmer,	and	return	it	to	the	oven	until	the	pork	is	done.	Baste
the	cabbage	several	times	with	the	meat	juices	during	this	period.

A	hot	platter
Salt	and	pepper
Parsley	sprigs
Then	 remove	 the	 pork	 to	 a	 hot	 platter.	 Lift	 the	 cabbage	 out	 of	 the
casserole	with	a	fork	and	spoon	so	it	will	drain,	and	arrange	it	around
the	meat.	 Season	 it	 with	 salt	 and	 pepper	 if	 necessary.	 Degrease	 the
juices	in	the	casserole	and	pour	them	over	the	cabbage.	Decorate	with
sprigs	of	fresh	parsley.

		PORC	BRAISÉ	AUX	CHOUX	ROUGES
[Pork	Braised	with	Red	Cabbage]

A	good	dish	of	 red	cabbage	 is	even	better	when	a	 roast	of	pork	 is
cooked	with	 it.	 The	 casserole	 of	 cabbage	 cooks	 for	 3	 hours	 before	 the
pork	goes	into	it,	and	needs	2	hours	more	in	the	oven	until	the	pork	is
done.
For	6	people



Ingredients	for	the	braised	red	cabbage	(omit	the	chestnuts	if	you
wish,	but	they	are	a	good	accompaniment)
Braise	 the	 cabbage	 for	 3	 hours	 in	 a	 325-degree	 oven,	 following	 the
directions	in	the	recipe.

A	3-lb.	boneless	roast	of	pork,	previously	marinated	for	several	hours
in	salt,	if	possible
Brown	the	pork	in	hot	fat	in	a	skillet.	After	the	cabbage	has	cooked	for
3	hours,	place	 the	pork	 in	 the	casserole	with	 the	cabbage.	Cover	 the
casserole	 and	 return	 it	 to	 the	 oven	 to	 braise	 for	 two	 hours	more	 or
until	the	pork	is	done.

A	hot	platter	Salt	and	pepper
Then	 place	 the	 pork	 on	 a	 platter,	 drain	 the	 cabbage	 and	 arrange	 it
around	the	pork.	Correct	seasoning.	Degrease	and	season	the	cooking
juices,	and	pour	them	over	the	cabbage.

VARIATION
Porc	Braisé	avec	Choucroute
[Pork	Braised	with	Sauerkraut]

Use	 exactly	 the	 same	 method	 as	 for	 red	 cabbage	 but	 substitute
sauerkraut.	 After	 the	 sauerkraut	 has	 braised	 for	 3	 hours,	 brown	 the
pork,	add	it	to	the	casserole,	and	cook	for	another	2	hours	or	until	the
pork	is	done.

PORC	SYLVIE
[Pork	Stuffed	with	Cheese]

A	loin	of	pork	is	cut	lengthwise	from	the	top	almost	to	the	bottom	to
make	3	or	4	long	leaves	or	slices	so	the	roast	may	be	opened	up	like	a
book.	It	is	marinated	for	several	hours,	then	stuffed	with	slices	of	Swiss
cheese	 and	 cooked	 in	 a	 covered	 casserole.	 Follow	 the	 recipe	 for	 veau
Sylvie,	but	use	one	of	the	pork	marinades	and	omit	the	slices	of	ham.



PORK	CHOPS	AND	STEAKS

Côtes	de	Porc

Pork	chops	and	steaks	are	best,	we	think,	when	they	are	cut	thick,
browned	on	each	side,	then	cooked	in	a	covered	casserole	or	skillet	like
the	preceding	casserole	roasts	of	pork.

Have	the	chops	or	steak	cut	between	1	to	1¼	inches	thick,	and	ask
that	 the	backbone	corners	of	chops	be	 leveled	or	 removed	so	 the	meat
will	lie	perfectly	flat	on	either	side.	All	but	a	thin	layer	of	fat	should	be
trimmed	 off.	 The	 best	 chops	 are	 from	 the	 center	 loin	 or	 the	 rib	 loin.
Second	choices	are	the	loin	end	or	rump,	shoulder	loin	chops,	and	blade
and	round-bone	chops	from	the	shoulder.	Steaks	are	usually	cut	from	the
picnic	shoulder	or	shoulder	arm,	or	from	the	fresh	ham.

Usually	1	thick	chop	per	person	is	sufficient.	For	steaks,	count	on	1
pound	for	2	or	3	people.	As	steaks	or	chops	are	interchangeable	in	these
recipes,	we	will	call	everything	chops.

VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS

These	are	the	same	as	the	suggestions	for	roast	pork.

		CÔTES	DE	PORC	POÊLÉES
[Casserole-sautéed	Pork	Chops]

Three	 or	 four	 chops	 or	 one	 or	 two	 steaks	 may	 be	 cooked	 in	 a
covered	skillet	on	top	of	the	stove.	For	a	larger	quantity	oven-cooking	in
a	covered	casserole	is	easier.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

pork	chops	cut	1	inch	thick	and	previously	marinated	for	several
hours,	if	you	wish,	in	salt,	lemon	juice,	or	wine
3	to	4	Tb	rendered	pork	fat,	lard,	or	cooking	oil



A	heavy,	10-to	12-inch	fireproof	casserole
Dry	the	pork	chops	on	paper	towels.	Heat	the	fat	or	oil	in	the	casserole
until	it	is	moderately	hot,	then	brown	the	chops,	2	or	3	at	a	time,	on
each	side	for	3	to	4	minutes.	As	they	are	browned,	transfer	them	to	a
side	dish.

If	the	chops	have	not	been	marinated,	season	them	with	salt,	pepper,
and	¼	teaspoon	of	thyme	or	sage.

2	Tb	butter
Optional:	2	halved	cloves	garlic
Pour	 the	 fat	 out	 of	 the	 casserole	 and	 add	 the	 butter	 and	 optional
garlic.	Return	 the	 chops,	 overlapping	 them	 slightly.	Baste	 them	with
the	butter.	Cover	and	heat	the	casserole	until	the	meat	is	sizzling,	then
set	 in	 lower	 third	of	preheated	oven	 for	25	 to	30	minutes.	Turn	and
baste	the	chops	once	or	twice.	They	are	done	when	the	meat	juices	run
a	clear	yellow	with	no	trace	of	rose.	Make	a	deep	cut	next	to	the	bone
if	you	have	any	doubts.

A	hot	platter
½	cup	dry	white	wine,	dry	white	vermouth,	brown	stock,	canned	beef
bouillon,	or	marinade	liquid
Arrange	 the	 chops	 on	 a	 hot	 platter	with	whatever	 vegetable	 garnish
you	have	chosen.	The	chops	will	have	rendered	about	½	cup	of	juices
during	their	cooking;	remove	all	but	2	 tablespoons	of	 fat	 from	them.
Pour	 in	 the	 ½	 cup	 of	 liquid	 and	 boil	 rapidly,	 scraping	 up	 all
coagulated	cooking	juices,	until	you	have	about	½	cup	of	concentrated
sauce.	Taste	for	seasoning,	and	pour	it	over	the	chops.
(*)	AHEAD-OF-TIME-NOTE
If	 the	 chops	 are	not	 to	be	 served	 immediately,	 return	 them	 to	 the

casserole,	baste	 them	with	 the	 sauce,	 cover	 loosely,	 and	keep	warm	 in
turned-off	oven	for	20	minutes	or	so.



VARIATIONS:	SAUCES
Any	of	the	sauces	suggested	for	roast	pork	may	also	be	used	for	pork

chops.	 Here	 is	 another	 suggestion:	

Côtes	de	Porc	Sauce	Nénette
[Pork	Chops	with	Mustard,	Cream,	and	Tomato	Sauce]

While	the	pork	chops	are	cooking	according	to	directions	in	the	master
recipe,	prepare	the	following:

1½	cups	whipping	cream
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Simmer	 the	 cream,	 salt,	 and	pepper	 in	 a	 small	 saucepan	 for	8	 to	10
minutes,	or	until	it	has	reduced	to	1	cup.

1	Tb	dry	English	mustard
2	Tb	tomato	paste
Beat	the	mustard	and	tomato	paste	together	in	a	small	bowl,	then	beat
in	the	hot	cream.	Set	aside.

2	Tb	fresh	chopped	basil,	chervil,	or	parsley
After	removing	the	chops	from	the	casserole	and	degreasing	the	meat
juices,	 pour	 in	 the	 cream	 mixture	 and	 simmer	 for	 3	 or	 4	 minutes.
Correct	seasoning,	stir	in	the	herbs,	and	pour	the	sauce	over	the	chops.

VARIATIONS
Côtes	de	Porc	Robert
Côtes	de	Porc	Charcutière
[Pork	Chops	Braised	in	Fresh	Tomato	Sauce]

Include	sautéed	potatoes	and	a	chilled	rosé	wine	on	the	menu	with
this	good	dish	of	pork	chops.	If	you	stir	chopped	pickles	and	capers	into



the	 sauce	 just	 before	 serving	 the	 chops,	 they	 become	 côtes	 de	 porc
charcutière.

For	6	people

6	pork	chops	cut	1	inch	thick	and	previously	marinated	for	several
hours,	if	you	wish,	according	to	one	of	the	formulas	on	this	page
A	heavy,	10-to	12-inch	fireproof	casserole
Preheat	 oven	 to	 325	 degrees.	 Brown	 the	 chops	 in	 hot	 fat	 in	 the
casserole	as	described	in	the	master	recipe,	and	set	them	aside.

2	Tb	butter
1	cup	minced	yellow	onions
1	Tb	flour
11	lb.	ripe	tomatoes	peeled,	seeded,	and	chopped	(1½	cups)
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
¼	tsp	sage	or	thyme
1	large	clove	mashed	garlic
Pour	out	the	browning	fat,	add	the	butter	and	onions,	cover	and	cook
slowly	 for	10	minutes.	Mix	 in	 the	 flour	 and	 stir	 over	 low	heat	 for	2
minutes	more.	 Stir	 in	 the	 tomatoes	 and	 other	 flavorings.	 Cover	 and
cook	slowly	for	5	minutes.

1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	vermouth	(include	marinade
liquid,	if	any)
½	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
1	to	2	Tb	tomato	paste
Stir	 in	 the	 wine	 and	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 and	 simmer	 for	 10	 minutes.
Correct	seasoning	and	stir	in	enough	tomato	paste	to	deepen	the	flavor
and	color	of	the	sauce.

If	 the	 chops	 have	 not	 been	 marinated,	 season	 them	 with	 salt	 and



pepper.	Arrange	them,	slightly	overlapping,	in	the	casserole	and	baste
them	with	the	tomato	sauce.
(*)	May	be	done	in	advance	to	this	point.

Cover	the	casserole	and	bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove,	then
set	 it	 in	 the	 lower	 third	 of	 the	 preheated	 oven.	 Regulate	 oven
temperature	 so	 casserole	 simmers	 slowly	 and	 regularly	 for	 25	 to	 30
minutes	or	until	the	chops	are	done.

A	hot	platter
1	to	2	Tb	fresh	chopped	basil	or	parsley
Arrange	 the	 chops	 on	 a	 serving	 platter.	 Degrease	 the	 sauce	 and	 if
necessary	 boil	 it	 down	 rapidly	 until	 it	 is	 lightly	 thickened.	 Correct
seasoning	and	pour	it	over	the	chops.	Sprinkle	with	herbs	and	serve.

VARIATIONS:	VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS
Browned	pork	chops	may	also	finish	their	cooking	for	half	an	hour

or	so	in	a	casserole	of	braised	red	cabbage,	or	braised	sauerkraut.	Or	you
can	 add	 blanched	 onions,	 carrots,	 new	 potatoes,	 or	 turnips	 to	 the
casserole	with	the	browned	chops	so	the	meat	and	vegetables	finish	their
cooking	in	the	oven	together.

PORK	STEWS

Ragoûts	de	Porc

The	 following	 recipes	 for	 beef	 stew	 are	 also	 very	 good	with	 pork
rather	than	beef.	Use	boneless	pork	cuts	which	contain	a	mixture	of	fat
and	 lean,	 such	 as	 shoulder	 loin	 chops,	 loin-end	 chops,	 or	 shoulder
(Boston)	butt.	Cooking	time	is	2	to	2½	hours	rather	than	the	3½	hours
required	for	beef.

Boeuf	à	la	Catalane,	stew	with	rice,	onions,	and	tomatoes
Daube	de	Boeuf,	casserole	with	wine	and	vegetables
Daube	 de	 Boeuf	 à	 la	 Provençale,	 casserole	 with	 wine,	 vegetables,



anchovies,	 and	 garlic	

HAM

Jambon

Ham	is	a	fine	dish	for	large	parties,	but	a	parade	of	plain	boiled	or
baked	 hams	 can	 become	 woefully	 monotonous	 especially	 around
Christmas	and	Easter.	Here	 are	 a	handful	 of	 French	 recipes	which	will
lift	any	ham	into	la	grande	classe.

VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Classic	accompaniment

Spinach	braised	with	cream	or	with	stock

Other	vegetables

Braised	celery,	celeriac,	or	lettuce
Braised	chestnuts,	pureéd	chestnuts
Braised	onions,	or	leeks
Mashed	potatoes

Fruits

The	French	do	not	go	in	much	for	fruits	and	ham,	but	if	you	like	them,
see	the	prunes	in	wine	in	the	Goose	section,	and	the	fruits	suggested	for
duck	on	this	page.

WINE	SUGGESTIONS

The	 best	 choice	 is	 a	 not-too-heavy	 red	 wine	 such	 as	 Bordeaux-
Médoc,	or	a	Beaujolais,	Mâcon,	or	Chinon.

TYPE	OF	HAM	TO	BUY

All	of	the	recipes	in	this	section	call	for	cooked,	mild-cured	ham.	In
the	recipes	for	whole	braised	ham,	we	have	specified	8	to	10	pounds;	a
pound	 or	 two	 more	 will	 make	 little	 difference	 except	 in	 the	 braising



time.	You	may	buy	whole	ham,	which	always	looks	more	festive,	or	half
a	 ham,	 or	 a	 picnic	 or	 boned	 shoulder	 butt.	We	 have	 allowed	 about	 1
pound	of	bone-in	ham	for	2	people.	If	the	ham	has	been	boned,	1	pound
should	serve	3	and	possibly	4	people.	When	you	buy	ham,	have	the	skin
or	rind	removed,	and	cut	off	all	but	a	⅛-inch	layer	of	covering	fat.	Hams
labeled	 “fully	 cooked”	 usually	 require	 reheating	 to	 an	 internal
temperature	 of	 between	130	 and	140	degrees.	 But	 you	 should	 test	 the
meat	anyway,	to	see	if	a	fork	will	pierce	it	fairly	easily;	if	not,	continue
cooking	until	the	ham	is	tender.

		JAMBON	BRAISÉ	MORVANDELLE
[Ham	Braised	in	Wine—Cream	and	Mushroom	Sauce]

Ham	heated	 in	 a	 covered	 roaster	with	 aromatic	 vegetables,	 herbs,
stock,	and	wine	absorbs	these	different	flavors,	and	the	braising	liquid	is
easily	transformed	into	a	good	sauce.
For	16	to	20	people

¼	lb.	(about	1	cup)	sliced	carrots
¼	lb.	(about	1	cup)	sliced	onions
2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil,	or	3	Tb	rendered	ham	fat
A	heavy	covered	roaster	or	fireproof	casserole	just	large	enough	to
hold	the	ham
Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Sauté	the	vegetables	in	butter	and	oil	or
ham	fat	for	about	10	minutes	in	the	roaster	or	casserole	until	they	are
tender	and	very	lightly	browned.

An	8-to	10-lb.	cooked	ham	or	picnic	shoulder,	skinned,	and	trimmed
of	excess	fat
6	parsley	sprigs
1	bay	leaf
6	peppercorns
½	tsp	thyme



3	whole	cloves
4	cups	white	Burgundy	wine	(Chablis	or	Pouilly-Fuissé)	or	3	cups	dry
white	vermouth
4	to	6	cups	white	or	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Place	the	ham	over	the	vegetables,	its	fattiest	side	up,	and	add	the	rest
of	the	ingredients	at	the	left.	Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove,
cover,	 and	 place	 the	 roaster	 or	 casserole	 in	 the	 middle	 level	 of	 the
preheated	 oven.	 Regulate	 heat	 so	 liquid	 barely	 simmers	 for	 about	 2
hours.	 Baste	 every	 20	 minutes.	 The	 ham	 is	 done	 when	 a	 trussing
needle	or	 sharp-pronged	 fork	will	pierce	 the	 thickest	part	of	 it	 fairly
easily.
Optional	glazing

Powdered	sugar	in	a	shaker
A	shallow	roasting	pan	containing	a	rack
When	the	ham	is	done,	drain	 it.	 If	you	wish	to	glaze	 it,	dust	 the	 top
and	 sides	 with	 powdered	 sugar,	 and	 place	 it	 on	 the	 rack	 in	 the
roasting	pan.	Heat	oven	 to	450	degrees.	Place	 the	ham	 in	 the	upper
third	of	the	oven	and	let	it	brown	lightly	for	10	to	15	minutes.	Basting
is	not	necessary.

Let	 the	 ham	 sit	 at	 room	 temperature	 for	 20	 to	 30	 minutes	 before
carving.	 If	 it	 is	 to	wait	 longer,	put	 it	 in	 the	turned-off	hot	oven	with
door	ajar	where	it	can	stay	for	an	hour.	The	braising	liquid	is	turned
into	 a	 sauce	 as	 follows:	

Cream	and	Mushroom	Sauce
Version	I

2	lbs.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms
3	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions



A	large	enameled	skillet
Salt	and	pepper
Dry	the	mushrooms	in	a	towel.	Sauté	them	for	5	to	6	minutes	in	hot
butter	and	oil	until	they	are	very	lightly	browned.	Stir	in	the	shallots
or	onions	and	sauté	for	a	minute	more.	Season	to	taste	and	set	aside.

The	ham	braising	liquid
¼	cup	Marc	de	Bourgogne,	Madeira,	or	port
A	2½-quart	enameled	saucepan
4	Tb	flour	mixed	to	a	paste	with	4	Tb	softened	butter
2	to	3	cups	whipping	cream
Degrease	the	braising	liquid	in	the	roaster.	Set	roaster	over	high	heat
and	boil	rapidly	until	liquid	has	reduced	to	about	3	cups	and	is	full	of
flavor.	 Add	 the	 marc	 or	 wine	 and	 simmer	 for	 a	 minute	 or	 two	 to
evaporate	the	alcohol.	Strain	into	a	saucepan	and	beat	in	the	flour	and
butter	 paste.	 Beat	 in	 2	 cups	 of	 cream,	 then	 stir	 in	 the	 sautéed
mushrooms.	 Simmer	 for	 5	 minutes.	 The	 sauce	 should	 be	 just	 thick
enough	to	coat	a	spoon	very	lightly.	Stir	in	more	cream	if	sauce	seems
too	thick.	Taste	carefully	for	seasoning.
(*)	If	not	to	be	served	immediately,	set	aside	uncovered,	top	of	sauce
filmed	with	a	spoonful	of	cream	to	keep	a	skin	from	forming.	Reheat
when	ready	to	serve.
Version	II,	with	egg	yolks

2	lbs.	fresh	sliced	mushrooms
3	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
The	ham	braising	liquid
¼	cup	Marc	de	Bourgogne,	Madeira,	or	port
A	2½-quart	enameled	saucepan
Following	Version	I	of	 the	sauce,	sauté	 the	mushrooms	 in	butter	and



oil,	 adding	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 at	 the	 end.	 Degrease	 the	 ham
braising	 liquid,	 reduce	 it	 to	about	3	cups,	add	 the	marc	or	wine	and
simmer	 for	 a	 moment.	 Strain	 into	 the	 saucepan,	 add	 the	 sautéed
mushrooms	and	simmer	for	5	minutes.

5	egg	yolks
1	tsp	cornstarch	(anticurdling	insurance)
A	2-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
2	cups	whipping	cream
Blend	 the	 egg	 yolks	 and	 cornstarch	 in	 the	 mixing	 bowl	 with	 wire
whip.	Beat	in	the	cream.	Then	gradually	beat	in	about	1½	cups	of	the
ham	braising	liquid	from	the	saucepan.	Pour	the	mixture	back	into	the
saucepan	with	the	rest	of	the	braising	liquid	and	mushrooms.
(*)	May	be	done	in	advance	to	this	point.

A	wooden	spoon
½	to	1	cup	whipping	cream
A	warmed	sauce	bowl
Shortly	before	serving,	set	saucepan	over	moderate	heat	and	stir	with
a	wooden	spoon	until	the	sauce	thickens	lightly,	but	do	not	let	it	come
near	 the	 simmer	 (maximum	 temperature,	 165	 degrees)	 or	 the	 egg
yolks	will	curdle.	Stir	 in	more	cream	by	spoonfuls	 if	 the	sauce	seems
too	thick.	It	should	coat	a	spoon	lightly.	Taste	carefully	for	seasoning,
pour	into	a	warmed	sauce	bowl,	and	serve.

VARIATION
Jambon	Braisé	au	Madère
[Ham	Braised	in	Madeira	Wine]

The	combined	flavors	of	Madeira	and	ham	have	always	been	a	favorite
in	France.	Spinach	braised	in	stock,	broiled	or	stuffed	mushrooms,	and
a	red	Bordeaux-Médoc	wine	are	good	accompaniments	for	this	dish.



For	16	to	20	people

1	cup	sliced	onions
1	cup	sliced	carrots
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
A	covered	roaster
An	8-to	10-lb.	cooked	ham	or	picnic	shoulder,	skinned	and	trimmed
of	excess	fat
2	cups	Madeira
3	cups	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
6	parsley	sprigs
1	bay	leaf
½	tsp	thyme
Powdered	sugar	in	a	shaker
Following	 the	 general	 directions	 in	 the	 preceding	 master	 recipe,
preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Cook	the	vegetables	in	butter	and	oil	in
the	roaster	until	lightly	browned.	Place	the	ham	in	the	roaster,	pour	in
the	 wine,	 the	 stock	 or	 bouillon,	 and	 add	 the	 herbs.	 Bring	 to	 the
simmer	on	top	of	the	stove,	cover,	and	bake	very	slowly	for	2	to	2½
hours,	basting	every	20	minutes.	When	the	ham	is	tender,	glaze	it	with
powdered	sugar	as	described	in	the	master	recipe.

Degrease	the	braising	liquid	and	boil	it	down	rapidly	to	3	cups.	Strain
it	into	a	saucepan.

3	Tb	arrowroot	(preferable	to	cornstarch	as	it	does	not	cloud	the
sauce)
2	Tb	cold	stock,	wine,	or	truffle	juice
2	or	3	chopped,	canned	truffles	and	their	juice	OR,	½	cup	mushroom
duxelles	(finely	diced,	sautéed	mushrooms)
Blend	 the	 arrowroot	 with	 the	 cold	 liquid	 and	 beat	 it	 into	 the	 hot
braising	 liquid.	 Stir	 in	 the	 truffles	 or	 mushrooms.	 Simmer	 for	 5



minutes.	 Correct	 seasoning.	 Sauce	will	 have	 a	 very	 light	 thickening;
the	butter	enrichment	will	give	it	more	body	and	character.

3	Tb	softened	butter
A	warmed	sauceboat
Reheat	when	ready	to	serve.	Off	heat,	beat	in	the	butter	by	bits,	and
pour	the	sauce	into	a	warmed	sauceboat.

		JAMBON	FARCI	ET	BRAISÉ
[Braised	Ham	with	Mushroom	Stuffing]

A	fine	dish	for	an	important	dinner	is	ham	sliced	into	serving	pieces,
reconstructed	 with	 a	 stuffing	 between	 each	 slice,	 then	 braised	 in
Madeira.

For	12	to	14	people

2	lbs.	fresh	mushrooms
3	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
½	cup	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Trim,	 wash,	 and	 mince	 the	 mushrooms.	 A	 handful	 at	 a	 time,	 twist
them	into	a	ball	in	the	corner	of	a	towel	to	extract	their	juice.	Sauté	in
the	butter	and	oil	with	the	shallots	or	onions	for	8	to	10	minutes	until
the	mushroom	pieces	begin	to	separate	from	each	other.

¼	cup	Madeira	or	port
Add	the	wine	to	the	mushrooms	and	boil	rapidly	until	 the	liquid	has
almost	completely	evaporated.

Salt	and	pepper
6	to	7	ounces	or	¾	cup	mousse	de	foie	gras,	or	mousse	de	foie	d’oie	(the
latter	is	puréed	liver	from	a	plain	goose	and	is	much	less	expensive)
½	tsp	sage	or	thyme



Pinch	of	allspice
Optional:	1	or	2	diced,	canned	truffles	(reserve	their	juice	for	your
sauce)
Scrape	 the	mushrooms	 into	 a	mixing	 bowl	 and	 season	with	 salt	 and
pepper.	 Blend	 in	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 ingredients.	 Taste	 carefully	 for
seasoning,	but	do	not	salt	too	heavily	because	the	ham	is	salted.

A	10-lb.	cooked	ham,	skinned,	and	trimmed	of	excess	fat
A	large	square	of	well	washed	cheesecloth,	if	needed
Cut	the	upper	two	thirds	of	the	ham	into	neat,	thin,	horizontal	serving
slices,	piling	 them	 to	one	 side	 in	 the	order	 in	which	you	 slice	 them.
Leave	the	lower	third	of	the	ham	intact	to	act	as	a	cradle	to	hold	the
slices	when	you	put	 them	back.	 Spread	a	 spoonful	 of	 the	mushroom
stuffing	 in	 the	 center	 of	 each	 slice	 and	 pile	 the	 slices	 back	 onto	 the
ham,	 reconstructing	 it	 into	 approximately	 its	 original	 shape.	 If	 the
slices	have	been	arranged	neatly	and	solidly	on	 the	ham,	no	 tying	 is
necessary	to	keep	them	in	place	while	the	ham	braises.	But	if	you	are
doubtful,	wrap	the	ham	in	cheesecloth.

Then	 braise	 the	 ham	 for	 about	 2½	 hours	 with	 cooked	 vegetables,
herbs,	 stock,	 and	 Madeira	 as	 described	 in	 the	 braising	 recipe,	 this
page.	Serve	it	with	the	same	Madeira	sauce,	and	braised	spinach.

VARIATION
Jambon	Farci	en	Croûte
[Stuffed	Ham	Baked	in	a	Pastry	Crust]

A	splendid	way	to	serve	the	preceding	sliced	and	stuffed	ham	is	to
bake	it	in	a	pastry	crust.	To	do	so,	after	stuffing	and	braising	it,	allow	it
to	cool	 for	about	an	hour.	Then,	 following	 the	directions	 for	duck	 in	a
crust,	 surround	 it	with	a	decorated	pastry	dough	and	bake	 it	 in	a	375-
degree	 oven	 for	 30	 to	 40	minutes	 until	 the	 crust	 is	 cooked	 and	 nicely
browned.



HAM	SLICES

Tranches	de	Jambon

Sliced	ham	responds	to	a	number	of	interesting	preparations	which
are	relatively	quick	and	simple	to	do.

TRANCHES	DE	JAMBON	EN	PIPÉRADE
[Ham	Slices	Baked	with	Tomatoes,	Onions,	and	Peppers]

This	savory	recipe	for	thick	slices	of	smoked	ham	may	be	prepared
for	baking	 several	hours	before	 it	 is	 set	 in	 the	oven.	 Sautéed	potatoes,
green	beans,	and	a	light	red	wine	or	a	rosé	go	well	with	it.

For	6	people

2½	to	3	lbs.	of	cooked	ham,	sliced	½	inch	thick,	and	cut	into	serving
pieces	if	you	wish
3	Tb	rendered	ham	fat	or	olive	oil
A	large	skillet
A	shallow	baking	dish	large	enough	to	hold	ham	in	one	layer
Trim	off	 excess	 fat,	 and	dry	 the	ham	slice	or	 slices	on	paper	 towels.
Heat	the	fat	or	olive	oil	in	the	skillet	until	it	is	almost	smoking,	then
brown	 the	 ham	 lightly	 for	 a	 minute	 or	 two	 on	 each	 side.	 Remove
skillet	from	heat	and	place	the	ham	in	the	baking	dish.

1	cup	sliced	yellow	onions
1	cup	sliced	green	bell	peppers
Lower	heat,	and	 stir	 the	onions	 into	 the	 fat	 in	 the	 skillet.	Cover	and
cook	 slowly	 for	 5	 minutes.	 Stir	 in	 the	 peppers	 and	 cook	 5	 minutes
more	or	until	the	vegetables	are	tender	but	not	browned.

2	lbs.	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and	sliced
(makes	3	cups	of	pulp)



2	cloves	mashed	garlic
⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	cayenne	pepper
¼	tsp	sage	or	thyme
Spread	 the	 tomato	pulp	 over	 the	 onions	 and	peppers,	 add	 the	 garlic
and	seasonings.	Cover	and	cook	slowly	for	5	minutes	so	the	tomatoes
will	 render	 their	 remaining	 juice.	 Then	 uncover	 and	 boil	 for	 several
minutes,	shaking	the	skillet,	until	the	tomato	juice	has	almost	entirely
evaporated.

Cover	the	browned	ham	with	the	vegetables.
(*)	May	be	done	in	advance	to	this	point.

2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley
Preheat	oven	 to	350	degrees.	About	20	 to	30	minutes	before	serving
time,	cover	the	baking	dish	and	place	it	in	the	middle	level	of	the	oven
and	 bake	 until	 the	 ham	 is	 heated	 through	 and	 tender	when	 pierced
with	 a	 fork.	 Baste	with	 the	 juices	 in	 the	 dish	 and	 correct	 seasoning,
adding	salt	if	necessary.	Decorate	with	parsley	and	serve.

TRANCHES	DE	JAMBON	MORVANDELLE
[Sautéed	Ham	Slices—Cream	and	Madeira	Sauce]

Placed	on	a	bed	of	spinach	braised	in	stock,	surrounded	with	broiled
mushrooms	or	sautéed	potatoes,	this	is	a	delectable	ham	dish.	Serve	with
it	a	light	red	wine,	or	a	Chablis	or	Pouilly-Fuissé.

For	6	people

2½	to	3	lbs.	of	cooked	ham,	sliced	¼	inch	thick
Trim	off	excess	fat,	and	cut	the	ham	into	serving	pieces.	Dry	on	paper
towels.

2	Tb	butter



1	Tb	oil
An	enameled	skillet
A	 few	pieces	at	a	 time,	brown	 the	ham	 lightly	 for	a	minute	on	each
side	in	hot	butter	and	oil.	Set	the	ham	aside.

3	Tb	flour
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
A	wooden	spoon
Pour	all	but	2½	tablespoons	of	 fat	out	of	 the	skillet.	Stir	 in	the	flour
with	a	wooden	spoon,	then	the	shallots	or	onions,	and	cook	slowly	for
2	or	3	minutes	without	browning.	Remove	from	heat.

1	cup	very	good	ham	stock,	white	or	brown	stock,	or	canned	beef
bouillon
½	cup	Madeira	or	port
A	wire	whip
1	Tb	tomato	paste
Big	pinch	of	pepper
Bring	 the	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 and	 wine	 to	 the	 simmer	 in	 a	 small
saucepan.	Blend	it	into	the	flour	in	the	skillet	with	a	wire	whip.	Beat
in	the	tomato	paste	and	pepper.

1½	cups	whipping	cream
3	Tb	cognac
Bring	 the	 sauce	 to	 the	 simmer,	 stirring,	 then	 beat	 in	 the	 cream.
Simmer	for	4	or	5	minutes,	allowing	the	sauce	to	reduce	until	it	coats
the	spoon	lightly.	Taste	carefully	for	seasoning	but	do	not	oversalt.	Stir
in	 the	 cognac.	 Then	 add	 the	 ham	 slices	 and	 spoon	 the	 sauce	 over
them.
(*)	May	be	done	in	advance	to	this	point.	Film	surface	with	a	spoonful
of	cream	and	set	aside.



A	hot	platter	on	which,	if	you	wish,	is	a	mound	of	spinach	braised	in
stock
Shortly	before	serving,	bring	to	the	simmer,	cover,	and	simmer	slowly
for	a	minute	or	two	until	the	ham	is	tender	when	pierced	with	a	fork.
Taste	 again	 for	 seasoning.	 Transfer	 the	 ham	 to	 a	 platter,	 or	 place	 it
over	 a	 bed	 of	 braised	 spinach.	 Spoon	 the	 sauce	 over	 the	 ham	 and
serve.

VARIATION
Mix	 sliced,	 sautéed	mushrooms	 into	 the	 sauce	 to	 simmer	with	 the

ham.

TRANCHES	DE	JAMBON	À	LA	CRÈME
[Sautéed	Ham	Slices—Fresh	Cream	Sauce]

This	 famous	 recipe	 is	 the	 same	 idea	 as	 the	 preceding	 one,	 but	 is
made	with	a	richer	and	more	delicate	sauce.

For	6	people

2½	to	3	lbs.	cooked	ham,	sliced	¼	inch	thick
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
A	9-to	10-inch	skillet
2	Tb	shallots	or	green	onions
⅔	cup	Madeira	or	port	and	3	Tb	cognac
A	wooden	spoon
Trim	off	excess	fat,	cut	the	ham	into	serving	pieces,	and	dry	on	paper
towels.	Brown	the	slices	lightly	on	each	side	in	hot	butter	and	oil	and
set	 them	 aside.	 Pour	 all	 but	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 sautéing	 fat	 out	 of	 the
skillet,	 stir	 in	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions,	 and	 cook	 slowly	 for	 2	minutes.
Pour	 in	 the	wine	 and	 cognac	 and,	 scraping	 up	 the	 coagulated	 sauté



juices	with	a	wooden	spoon,	boil	rapidly	until	the	liquid	has	reduced
to	3	or	4	tablespoons.

2	cups	whipping	cream
2	Tb	Dijon-type	prepared	mustard	mixed	with	1	Tb	tomato	paste	and
2	Tb	whipping	cream

Big	pinch	of	pepper
Add	 the	 cream	 to	 the	 skillet,	 beat	 in	 the	 mustard	 mixture,	 and	 the
pepper.	 Simmer	 slowly	 for	 10	 to	 15	 minutes,	 until	 the	 cream	 has
reduced	 to	 about	 1½	 cups	 and	 has	 thickened	 lightly.	 Correct
seasoning,	but	do	not	oversalt.

Return	the	ham	slices	to	the	skillet	and	baste	them	with	the	sauce.
(*)	May	be	done	ahead	to	this	point.

A	hot	platter	on	which,	if	you	wish,	is	a	mound	of	spinach	braised	in
stock
Shortly	 before	 serving,	 bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 cover	 and	 simmer	 for
several	minutes	until	the	ham	is	reheated	and	tender.	Arrange	the	ham
on	a	hot	platter	 or	 on	 the	bed	of	 spinach.	 Spoon	 the	 sauce	over	 the
ham	and	serve.

FRENCH	BAKED	BEANS

Cassoulet

Cassoulet	is	a	rich	combination	of	beans	baked	with	meats,	as	much
a	 part	 of	 southwestern	 France	 as	 Boston	 baked	 beans	 are	 of	 New
England.	The	composition	of	a	cassoulet	is,	in	typical	French	fashion,	the
subject	 of	 infinite	 dispute,	 so	much	 so	 that	 if	 you	 have	 read	 or	 heard
about	 cassoulet	 and	 never	 tasted	 it,	 you	 come	 to	 expect	 a	 kind	 of	 rare
ambrosia	 rather	 than	 the	 nourishing	 country	 fare	 it	 actually	 is.	 As
cassoulet	 is	 native	 to	 a	 relatively	 large	 region	 of	 France,	 each	 part	 of
which	has	its	own	specialties,	arguments	about	what	should	go	into	this



famous	 dish	 seem	 based	 on	 local	 traditions.	 Toulousains	 insist	 that	 it
must	include	among	its	meats	preserved	goose,	confit	d’oie,	or	it	is	not	a
real	cassoulet.	After	all,	something	must	be	done	with	all	the	geese	which
housed	the	 foie	gras,	and	cassoulet	 is	a	natural	 solution	 in	 the	Toulouse
area.	 Then	 there	 are	 those	 who	 declare	 the	 cassoulet	 was	 born	 in
Castelnaudary,	and	originally	contained	only	beans,	pork,	and	sausages.
A	heretical	 few	suggest	 the	cassoulet	was	not	a	French	 invention	at	all,
but	an	adaption	from	the	Arab	 fava	bean	and	mutton	stew.	And	so	on,
with	variations	and	dogmatisms	rampant.	Fortunately	all	the	talk	can	be
regarded	 as	 so	 much	 historical	 background,	 for	 an	 extremely	 good
cassoulet	 can	 be	 made	 anywhere	 out	 of	 beans	 and	 whatever	 of	 its
traditional	 meats	 are	 available:	 goose,	 game,	 pork,	 sausages,	 lamb,
mutton.	 The	 important	 item	 is	 flavor,	 which	 comes	 largely	 from	 the
liquid	 the	beans	and	meats	are	cooked	 in.	And	truth	 to	 tell,	despite	all
the	 to-do	about	preserved	goose,	once	 it	 is	 cooked	with	 the	beans	you
may	find	difficulty	in	distinguishing	goose	from	pork.
The	 following	 recipe	 makes	 no	 attempt	 to	 cut	 corners,	 for	 the

concoction	of	a	good	cassoulet	is	a	fairly	long	process.	You	can	prepare	it
in	one	day,	but	 two	or	even	 three	days	of	 leisurely	on-and-off	 cooking
are	much	easier.	It	calls	for	a	roast	loin	of	pork,	shoulder	of	lamb	braised
in	 wine,	 homemade	 sausage	 cakes,	 and	 beans	 cooked	 with	 pork	 rind,
fresh	bacon	or	salt	pork,	and	aromatic	vegetables.	The	meats	are	cut	into
serving	 pieces	 and	 arranged	 in	 a	 casserole	with	 the	 beans	 and	 various
cooking	juices.	Then	the	dish	is	baked	in	the	oven	for	an	hour	to	blend
flavors.	 Time	 could	 be	 saved	 if	 the	 lamb	 were	 roasted	 whole	 or	 if
leftover	roast	were	used,	but	flavor	would	be	lost,	and	there	would	be	no
splendid	braising	liquid	to	give	character	to	the	cassoulet.	Polish	sausage
could	cook	with	the	beans,	replacing	the	homemade	sausage	cakes.	But
after	you	have	made	 the	dish	once	or	 twice,	you	will	 see	 that	you	can
pretty	 well	 invent	 your	 own	 formula	 as	 long	 as	 you	 supply	 excellent
flavor	through	one	means	or	another.	Suggestions	for	other	meats	are	at
the	end	of	the	recipe.

MENU	SUGGESTIONS

Any	cassoulet	worthy	of	the	name	is	not	a	light	dish,	and	is	probably
best	served	as	a	noontime	dinner.	The	rest	of	the	menu	should	consist	of
a	simple	first	course	if	any—a	clear	soup,	jellied	soup,	or	oysters—then	a



green	salad	and	fruits.	For	wine,	choose	a	strong,	dry	rosé	or	white,	or	a
young,	full-bodied	red.

THE	BEANS

Most	French	recipes	specify	simply	“dry	white	beans.”	A	few	call	for
white	beans	from	certain	localities	in	France	such	as	Cayence,	Pamiers,
Mazères,	 Lavelanet.	We	have	 found	American	Great	Northern	beans	 to
be	entirely	satisfactory,	but	they	should	not	be	old	and	stale.	If	you	wish
to	pressure-cook	them	instead	of	using	the	open-pot	method,	soak	them
as	 directed	 in	 the	 recipe,	 then	 add	 all	 the	 ingredients	 listed	 and,
following	 the	 directions	 for	 your	 cooker,	 bring	 them	 quickly	 to	 15
pounds	pressure.	Cook	for	exactly	3	minutes,	then	allow	the	pressure	to
go	 down	 slowly	 by	 itself,	 15	 to	 20	 minutes.	 Let	 the	 beans	 stand
uncovered	 in	 the	 cooking	 liquid	 for	 at	 least	 30	 minutes	 so	 they	 will
absorb	its	flavor.

A	NOTE	ON	THE	ORDER	OF	BATTLE

All	of	the	various	steps	leading	up	to	the	final	assembly	in	the	recipe
below	 may	 be	 carried	 on	 at	 various	 times	 or	 almost	 simultaneously.
Once	 the	 cas	 soulet	 is	made	 ready	 for	 the	 oven,	 it	may	be	 refrigerated
and	baked	a	day	or	two	later.

		CASSOULET	DE	PORC	ET	DE	MOUTON
[Beans	Baked	with	 Pork	 Loin,	 Shoulder	 of	Mutton	 or	 Lamb,	 and
Sausage]

For	10	to	12	people
The	pork	loin

2½	lbs.	of	boned	pork	loin,	excess	fat	removed	(It	will	taste	even
better	if	marinated	overnight	in	salt	and	spices.)
Following	directions	roast	the	pork	to	an	internal	temperature	of	175
to	180	degrees.	Set	it	aside	to	cool.	Reserve	cooking	juices.
The	beans



2	lbs.	or	5	cups	dry	white	beans	(Great	Northern,	preferably)
An	8-quart	kettle	containing	5	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling	water
Drop	the	beans	 into	the	boiling	water.	Bring	rapidly	back	to	the	boil
and	boil	 for	2	minutes.	Remove	 from	heat	and	 let	 the	beans	 soak	 in
the	 water	 for	 1	 hour;	 they	 will	 cook	 in	 the	 soaking	 water,	 and	 the
cooking	should	proceed	as	soon	as	possible	after	the	soaking	process	is
completed.

½	lb.	fresh	pork	rind	or	salt	pork	rind
A	heavy	saucepan
Heavy	shears
While	the	beans	are	soaking,	place	the	rind	in	the	saucepan	and	cover
with	1	quart	of	cold	water.	Bring	to	the	boil	and	boil	1	minute.	Drain,
rinse	in	cold	water,	and	repeat	the	process.	Then,	with	shears,	cut	the
rind	into	strips	¼	inch	wide;	cut	the	strips	into	small	triangles.	Cover
the	 rind	 again	with	 a	 quart	 of	 cold	water,	 bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 and
simmer	very	 slowly	 for	30	minutes.	Set	 saucepan	aside.	This	process
freshens	the	rind,	and	softens	it	so	it	will	lose	itself	as	it	cooks	with	the
beans.

A	1-lb.	chunk	of	fresh,	unsalted,	unsmoked	lean	bacon	(or	very	good
quality	lean	salt	pork	simmered	for	10	minutes	in	2	quarts	of	water
and	drained)

1	cup	(4	ounces)	sliced	onions
The	pork	rind	and	its	cooking	liquid
A	large	herb	bouquet,	with	garlic	and	cloves:	6	to	8	parsley	sprigs,	4
unpeeled	cloves	garlic,	2	cloves,	½	tsp	thyme,	and	2	bay	leaves	tied
in	cheesecloth

No	salt	until	later	if	you	have	used	salt	pork;	otherwise	1	Tb	salt
Place	all	the	ingredients	at	the	left	in	the	kettle	with	the	soaked	beans.
Bring	 to	 the	 simmer.	 Skim	 off	 any	 skum	 which	 may	 rise.	 Simmer
slowly,	 uncovered,	 for	 about	 1½	 hours	 or	 until	 the	 beans	 are	 just
tender.	Add	boiling	water	 if	necessary	during	cooking,	 to	keep	beans
covered	with	liquid.	Season	to	taste	near	end	of	cooking.	Leave	beans



in	their	cooking	liquid	until	ready	to	use,	then	drain.	Reserve	cooking
liquid.	Remove	the	bacon	or	salt	pork	and	set	aside.	Discard	the	herb
packet.
The	lamb	or	mutton

2	to	2½	lbs.	boned	shoulder	or	breast	of	mutton	or	almost	mature
lamb,	fell	(skin	covering	meat)	and	excess	fat	removed

4	to	6	Tb	rendered	fresh	pork	fat,	pork-roast	drippings,	goose	fat,	or
cooking	oil;	more	if	needed

A	heavy,	8-quart	fireproof	casserole
About	1	lb.	cracked	mutton	or	lamb	bones;	some	pork	bones	may	be
included

2	cups	(½	lb.)	minced	onions
Cut	the	lamb	or	mutton	into	chunks	roughly	2	inches	square.	Dry	each
piece	 in	 paper	 towels.	 Pour	 a	 1/ -inch	 layer	 of	 fat	 into	 the	 casserole

16

and	heat	until	the	fat	is	almost	smoking.	Brown	the	meat,	a	few	pieces
at	a	time,	on	all	sides.	Set	 the	meat	on	a	side	dish.	Brown	the	bones
and	 add	 them	 to	 the	 meat.	 If	 fat	 has	 burned,	 discard	 it	 and	 add	 3
tablespoons	of	fresh	fat.	Lower	heat,	and	brown	the	onions	lightly	for
about	5	minutes.

4	cloves	mashed	garlic
6	Tb	fresh	tomato	purée,	tomato	paste,	or	4	large	tomatoes	peeled,
seeded,	and	juiced

½	tsp	thyme
2	bay	leaves
3	cups	dry	white	wine	or	2	cups	dry	white	vermouth
1	quart	brown	stock	or	3	cups	canned	beef	bouillon	and	1	cup	water
Salt	and	pepper
Return	the	bones	and	 lamb	or	mutton	to	 the	casserole	and	stir	 in	all
ingredients	on	the	left.	Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove,	season
lightly	with	salt.	Cover	and	simmer	slowly	on	top	of	the	stove	or	in	a
325-degree	 oven	 for	 1½	 hours.	 Then	 remove	 the	 meat	 to	 a	 dish;



discard	 the	 bones	 and	 bay	 leaves.	 Remove	 all	 but	 2	 tablespoons	 fat
and	carefully	correct	seasoning	of	cooking	liquid.
Final	flavoring	of	beans

Pour	the	cooked	and	drained	beans	into	the	lamb	cooking	juices.	Stir
in	 any	 juices	 you	may	 have	 from	 the	 roast	 pork.	 Add	 bean	 cooking
liquid,	 if	 necessary,	 so	 beans	 are	 covered.	 Bring	 to	 the	 simmer	 and
simmer	 5	 minutes,	 then	 let	 the	 beans	 stand	 in	 the	 liquid	 for	 10
minutes	to	absorb	flavor.	Drain	the	beans	when	you	are	ready	for	the
final	assembly	farther	on.
Homemade	sausage	cakes—a	substitute	for	Saucisse	de	Toulouse

1	lb.	(2	cups)	lean	fresh	pork
⅓	lb.	(⅔	cup)	fresh	pork	fat
A	meat	grinder
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wooden	spoon
2	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Big	pinch	allspice
⅛	tsp	crumbled	bay	leaf
¼	cup	armagnac	or	cognac
A	small	clove	mashed	garlic
Optional:	1	chopped	truffle	and	the	juice	from	the	can
Put	 the	pork	and	fat	 through	the	medium	blade	of	 the	meat	grinder.
Place	in	bowl	and	beat	in	the	rest	of	the	ingredients	on	the	left.	Sauté
a	small	spoonful	and	taste	for	seasoning,	adding	more	to	the	mixture	if
you	feel	it	necessary.	Form	into	cakes	2	inches	in	diameter	and	½	inch
thick.	 Brown	 lightly	 over	moderate	 heat	 in	 a	 skillet.	Drain	 on	 paper
towels.
Final	assembly

An	8-quart	fireproof	casserole	5	to	6	inches	high:	brown	earthenware



glazed	inside	is	typical,	but	other	types	of	glazed	pottery	or
enameled	iron	will	do	nicely

2	cups	dry	white	bread	crumbs	mixed	with	½	cup	chopped	parsley
3	to	4	Tb	pork	roasting	fat	or	goose	fat
Cut	the	roast	pork	into	1½	to	2	inch	serving	chunks.	Slice	the	bacon	or
salt	pork	into	serving	pieces	¼	inch	thick.	Arrange	a	layer	of	beans	in
the	 bottom	 of	 the	 casserole,	 then	 continue	 with	 layers	 of	 lamb	 or
mutton,	 roast	 pork,	 bacon	 slices,	 sausage	 cakes,	 and	 beans,	 ending
with	 a	 layer	 of	 beans	 and	 sausage	 cakes.	 Pour	 on	 the	meat	 cooking
juices,	and	enough	bean	cooking	juice	so	liquid	comes	just	to	the	top
layer	of	beans.	Spread	on	the	crumbs	and	parsley,	and	dribble	the	fat
on	top.
(*)	 Set	 aside	 or	 refrigerate	 until	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 take	 up	 the	 final
cooking	of	about	an	hour.	The	cassoulet	should	be	served	soon	after	its
baking,	so	it	will	not	dry	out	or	overcook.
Baking

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.	Bring	the	casserole	to	the	simmer	on	top	of
the	stove.	Then	set	it	in	the	upper	third	of	the	preheated	oven.	When	the
top	has	crusted	lightly,	in	about	20	minutes,	turn	the	oven	down	to	350
degrees.	Break	the	crust	into	the	beans	with	the	back	of	a	spoon,	and
baste	with	the	liquid	in	the	casserole.	Repeat	several	times,	as	the	crust
forms	again,	but	leave	a	final	crust	intact	for	serving.	If	the	liquid	in	the
casserole	becomes	too	thick	during	the	baking	period,	add	a	spoonful	or
two	of	bean	cooking	liquid.	The	cassoulet	should	bake	for	about	an	hour;
serve	it	from	its	casserole.

VARIATIONS
Here	 are	 some	 additions	 or	 substitutions	 for	 the	 meats	 in	 the

preceding	recipe.
Preserved	 Goose,	 Confit	 d’Oie.	 This	 is	 goose,	 usually	 from	 the	 foie

gras	 regions	 of	 France,	 which	 has	 been	 cut	 into	 wing,	 leg,	 and	 breast
sections,	poached	in	goose	fat,	and	preserved	in	goose	fat.	It	can	usually
be	bought	in	cans	from	one	of	the	food-importing	stores.	Use	it	 instead



of,	or	even	in	addition	to,	the	roast	pork	in	the	recipe.	Scrape	the	fat	off
the	pieces	of	goose,	and	cut	the	goose	into	serving	portions.	Brown	them
lightly	 in	 some	 of	 the	 fat	 from	 the	 can.	 Arrange	 the	 goose	 in	 the
casserole	with	the	beans	and	meats	for	the	final	baking.
Fresh	Goose,	Duck,	Turkey,	or	Partridge.	Roast	or	braise	any	of	these,

and	carve	into	serving	pieces.	Use	along	with	or	instead	of	the	roast	pork
in	 the	 recipe,	 arranging	 the	 pieces	 with	 the	 beans	 and	 meats	 in	 the
casserole	for	the	final	baking.
Ham	Hock	or	Veal	Shank.	Simmer	either	of	these	with	the	beans.	Cut

into	serving	pieces	before	arranging	in	the	casserole	for	the	final	baking.
Polish	Sausage.	This	sausage	can	usually	be	bought	in	any	American

market,	 and	 is	 a	 good	 substitute	 for	 such	 French	 sausages	 as	 de
campagne,	 de	 ménage,	 à	 cuire,	 à	 l’ail,	 or	 de	 Morteau.	 First	 simmer	 the
whole	sausage	for	½	hour	with	the	beans.	Then	cut	it	into	½-inch	slices
and	arrange	in	the	casserole	with	the	beans	and	the	other	meats	for	the
final	baking.	Polish	sausage	may	be	used	instead	of	or	in	addition	to	the
sausage	cakes	in	the	recipe.

SAUTÉED	CALF’S	LIVER

Foie	de	Veau	Sauté

It	is	most	important	that	calf’s	liver	be	sautéed	in	very	hot	butter	and
oil,	so	a	crust	will	form	on	the	outside	which	will	keep	the	juices	in.
Do	not	crowd	the	skillet,	use	two	skillets	if	necessary,	and	do	not	use	a
skillet	too	large	for	your	source	of	heat.	Sautéed	liver	should	be	pink
inside,	 its	 juices	will	 run	 a	 very	 pale	 rose	when	 the	meat	 is	 pricked
with	a	fork.	Have	the	liver	cut	into	even	slices	⅜	inch	thick,	and	ask
that	the	surrounding	filament	be	peeled	off	each	slice;	if	this	is	left	on,
the	liver	will	curl	as	it	cooks.

WINE	AND	VEGETABLE	SUGGESTIONS

Broiled	 tomatoes,	 braised	 spinach,	 or	 ratatouille	 (eggplant	 and
tomato	casserole),	and	sautéed	potatoes	go	well	with	liver.	Wine	choices
would	be	chilled	rosé,	or	a	light	red	such	as	Bordeaux	or	Beaujolais.



		FOIE	DE	VEAU	SAUTÉ
[Sautéed	Calf’s	Liver]

For	6	people

6	to	12	slices	of	calf’s	liver	⅜	inch	thick,	with	surrounding	filament
removed

Salt	and	pepper
½	cup	of	sifted	flour	on	a	large	plate
Just	 before	 sautéing,	 season	 the	 slices	 with	 salt	 and	 pepper,	 roll	 in
flour,	and	shake	off	excess	flour.

1	or	2	heavy	skillets
2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil	for	each	skillet
A	hot	platter
A	vegetable	garniture,	water	cress,	or	parsley
Place	the	butter	and	oil	in	the	skillet	or	skillets	and	set	over	high	heat
until	you	see	that	the	butter	foam	has	almost	subsided,	indicating	it	is
hot	 enough.	 Then	 arrange	 the	 liver	 in	 the	 skillet,	 leaving	 a	 ¼-inch
space	between	each	slice.	Sauté	for	2	to	3	minutes,	regulating	heat	so
butter	 is	 always	 very	 hot	 but	 not	 burning.	 Turn	 the	 liver	 with	 a
spatula	 and	 sauté	 for	 a	minute	 or	 so	 on	 the	 other	 side.	 The	 liver	 is
done	when	its	 juices	run	a	very	pale	pink	 if	a	slice	 is	pricked	with	a
fork.	 Remove	 the	 liver	 to	 a	 hot	 platter	 and	 serve,	 surrounded	 by
whatever	garniture	you	have	chosen,	or	decorated	with	water	cress	or
sprigs	of	parsley.

SAUCES	TO	SERVE	WITH	SAUTÉED	LIVER
Sauce	Crème	à	la	Moutarde
[Cream	and	Mustard	Sauce]

For	about	1	cup

½	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon



¾	cup	whipping	cream
As	soon	as	the	liver	has	been	removed	to	a	platter,	pour	the	stock	or
bouillon	into	the	skillet	and	boil	down	rapidly	until	it	has	reduced	by
half.	Then	add	the	cream	and	boil	for	a	moment	to	reduce	and	thicken
it	slightly.

1	Tb	prepared	mustard,	mashed	with	2	Tb	softened	butter
Parsley	sprigs
Off	 heat,	 swirl	 the	 mustard-butter	 into	 the	 skillet.	 Pour	 the	 sauce
around	the	liver,	decorate	with	parsley,	and	serve.

Other	Sauces
The	sauces	in	the	following	list	can	be	prepared	in	advance;	either

serve	them	separately,	or	pour	them	around	the	sautéed	liver.	About	1½
cups	should	be	sufficient.
Coulis	de	Tomates,	fresh	tomato	purée	with	herbs
Sauce	Robert,	brown	sauce	with	mustard	and	onions
Sauce	Brune	aux	Fines	Herbes,	brown	herb	sauce
Sauce	 à	 l’Italienne,	 tomato-flavored	 brown	 sauce	 with	 diced

mushrooms,	 diced	 ham,	 and	 herbs	 Beurres	 Composés,	 flavored	 butters.
These	include	butter	creamed	with	mustard,	with	herbs,	with	garlic,	and
with	wine	and	herbs.	Spread	a	spoonful	over	each	slice	of	sautéed	liver,
or	cut	chilled,	flavored	butter	into	pieces	and	pass	separately.

FOIE	DE	VEAU	À	LA	MOUTARDE
[Liver	with	Mustard,	Herbs,	and	Bread	Crumbs]

This	is	an	appealing	way	to	prepare	liver.	It	is	sautéed	very	briefly
to	brown	 lightly,	 then	painted	with	mustard	 and	herbs,	 rolled	 in	 fresh
bread	crumbs,	basted	with	melted	butter,	and	set	under	a	hot	broiler	to
brown	the	crumbs.	The	preliminary	sautéing	and	crumbing	may	be	done
several	 hours	 in	 advance	 of	 the	 final	 cooking,	 which	 takes	 about	 5
minutes.	For	this	recipe,	the	liver	is	sliced	thicker,	so	it	will	not	cook	too



quickly.

For	6	servings

6	slices	of	calf’s	liver	cut	½	inch	thick,	outside	filament	removed
Salt	and	pepper
½	cup	sifted	flour	on	a	large	plate
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
A	heavy	skillet
Season	the	liver	with	salt	and	pepper,	dredge	in	flour,	and	sauté	for	1
minute	on	each	 side	 in	very	hot	butter	and	oil.	The	 slices	 should	be
very	 lightly	 browned	 and	 slightly	 stiffened,	 but	 not	 cooked	 through.
Remove	to	a	dish.

3	Tb	prepared	mustard	of	the	strong,	Dijon	type
1	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
3	Tb	minced	parsley
½	clove	mashed	garlic
Pinch	of	pepper
3	cups	fine,	white,	fresh	bread	crumbs	spread	on	a	large	plate
A	greased	broiling	pan
Beat	 the	 mustard	 in	 a	 small	 bowl	 with	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 and
seasonings.	 Drop	 by	 drop,	 beat	 in	 the	 liver	 sautéing	 fat	 to	 make	 a
mayonnaiselike	cream.	Paint	the	liver	slices	with	the	mixture.	One	by
one,	lay	the	slices	in	the	bread	crumbs	and	heap	bread	crumbs	on	top,
gently	shake	off	excess,	and	pat	the	adhering	crumbs	in	place	with	the
flat	of	a	knife.	Arrange	the	liver	on	the	broiling	pan.
(*)	 If	 not	 to	 be	 broiled	 immediately,	 cover	 with	 waxed	 paper	 and
refrigerate.

Shortly	before	serving,	heat	broiler	to	very	hot.



6	Tb	melted	butter
A	hot	platter
Baste	the	liver	with	half	the	melted	butter.	Place	so	its	surface	is	about
2	 inches	 from	 the	 broiler	 heat	 to	 brown	 for	 a	minute	 or	 two.	 Turn,
baste	 with	 the	 remaining	 butter,	 and	 brown	 the	 other	 side	 quickly.
Arrange	on	a	hot	platter	and	serve.

SWEETBREADS	AND	BRAINS

Ris	de	Veau	et	Cervelles

Sweetbreads	and	brains	have	much	the	same	texture	and	flavor,	but
brains	are	more	delicate.	They	both	receive	almost	the	same	treatments.
Both	 must	 be	 soaked	 for	 several	 hours	 in	 cold	 water	 before	 they	 are
cooked,	 to	 soften	 the	 filament	 which	 covers	 them	 so	 that	 it	 may	 be
removed,	 to	 dissolve	 their	 bloody	 patches,	 and	 to	 whiten	 them.	 Some
authorities	direct	that	they	always	be	blanched	before	cooking—that	is,
poached	in	salted	and	acidulated	water	or	a	court	bouillon;	others	do	not
agree.	 If	 the	 sweetbreads	 or	 brains	 are	 to	 be	 braised,	 blanching	 is	 a
useless	 and	 flavor-losing	 step.	 If	 they	 are	 to	 be	 sliced	 and	 sautéed,
blanching	firms	them	up	so	they	are	easier	to	cut,	but	removes	some	of
their	 delicacy	 and	 tenderness.	 Both	 brains	 and	 sweetbreads	 are
perishable,	and	if	they	are	not	to	be	cooked	within	24	hours,	they	should
be	soaked	and	blanched	which	will	help	to	preserve	them.

SOAKING	SWEETBREADS	AND	BRAINS

Wash	in	cold	water,	then	place	in	a	bowl	and	soak	in	several	changes
of	 cold	water	 or	 under	 a	 dripping	 tap	 for	 1½	 to	 2	 hours.	Delicately
pull	 off	 as	 much	 as	 you	 easily	 can	 of	 the	 filament	 which	 encloses
them,	 without	 tearing	 the	 flesh.	 This	 is	 a	 rather	 slow	 process.	 Soak
them	 again	 for	 1½	 to	 2	 hours,	 this	 time	 in	 several	 changes	 of	 cold
water	containing	1	tablespoon	of	vinegar	per	quart.	Peel	off	as	much
more	 filament	 as	 you	 can,	 and	 they	 are	 ready	 for	 trimming	 and
cooking.



TRIMMING

A	whole	sweetbread,	which	is	the	thymus	gland	of	a	calf	and	usually
weighs	about	1	pound,	consists	of	2	lobes	connected	by	a	soft,	white
tube,	 the	 cornet.	 The	 smoother,	 rounder,	 and	more	 solid	 of	 the	 two
lobes	is	the	kernel,	heart,	or	noix,	and	choicest	piece.	The	second	lobe,
called	throat	sweetbread	or	gorge,	is	more	uneven	in	shape,	broken	by
veins,	 and	 is	 often	 slit.	 Separate	 the	 two	 lobes	 from	 the	 tube	with	 a
knife.	The	tube	may	be	added	to	the	stock	pot.
For	brains,	cut	off	white,	opaque	bits	at	the	base.

BLANCHING	SWEETBREADS

Sweetbreads,	trimmed	and	soaked	as	in	preceding	directions
An	enameled	saucepan	just	large	enough	to	hold	them
Cold	water
Per	quart	of	water:	1	tsp	salt	and	1	Tb	lemon	juice
Place	sweetbreads	in	saucepan	and	cover	by	2	inches	with	cold	water;
add	 salt	 and	 lemon	 juice.	 Bring	 to	 simmer	 and	 cook,	 uncovered,	 at
barest	simmer	for	15	minutes.	Drain	and	plunge	into	cold	water	for	5
minutes.	Drain.	The	sweetbreads	are	now	ready	for	sautéing.

BLANCHING	BRAINS

Brains,	trimmed	and	soaked	as	in	preceding	directions
An	enameled	saucepan	just	large	enough	to	hold	them
Boiling	water
Per	quart	of	water:	1	tsp	salt	and	1	Tb	lemon	juice
Place	 brains	 in	 saucepan	 and	 cover	 by	 2	 inches	with	 boiling	water;
add	 salt	 and	 lemon	 juice	or	 vinegar.	Heat	 to	 just	 below	 simmer	 and
maintain	 water	 at	 a	 not-quite-simmering	 temperature,	 timing	 as
follows:
Lamb	brains,	15	minutes
Calf	or	pork	brains,	20	minutes



Beef	brains,	30	minutes

Then	set	saucepan	aside	and	let	the	brains	cool	for	20	minutes	in	the
cooking	 liquid;	 if	 they	are	not	 to	be	used	until	 later,	 set	 saucepan	 in
refrigerator.	Drain	the	brains,	and	they	are	ready	for	sautéing.

PRESSING	BLANCHED	BRAINS	OR	SWEETBREADS	UNDER	A	WEIGHT

Some	cooks	like	to	weight	blanched	sweetbreads	or	brains	for	2	to	3
hours	under	a	heavy	dinnerplate.	This	forces	the	water	out	of	them,	and
flattens	 them	 so	 they	 are	 easy	 to	 cut	 into	 narrow	 slices.	 Follow	 this
system	or	not,	as	you	wish.

SWEETBREADS

		RIS	DE	VEAU	BRAISÉS
[Braised	Sweetbreads]

Braising	is	a	preliminary	cooking	for	sweetbreads,	and	you	will	note
that	 no	 blanching	 is	 required.	 The	 soaked	 and	 peeled	 sweetbreads	 are
first	cooked	slowly	in	butter	to	firm	them	a	little	and	to	render	some	of
their	 juices;	 they	are	 then	baked	with	wine	and	other	 flavorings.	After
this	cooking,	or	braising,	which	may	take	place	as	long	as	the	day	before
you	are	to	use	them,	the	sweetbreads	are	ready	for	saucing	and	serving.
Sauced	sweetbreads	may	be	arranged	in	a	ring	of	rice	or	risotto,	in	a	vol-
au-vent	or	pastry	shell,	on	a	platter,	or	they	may	be	gratinéed.	Drained,
braised	sweetbreads	are	also	good	cold,	in	a	salad.

VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS

Rice	or	risotto,	and	buttered	peas	or	creamed	or	braised	spinach	go
well	with	sweetbreads.	Serve	a	light	red	wine	such	a	Bordeaux-Médoc,	or
a	 rosé	with	 sweetbreads	 in	 brown	 sauce;	 a	white	Burgundy	or	 a	white
Graves	with	sweetbreads	in	cream	sauce.

For	6	people



¼	cup	each:	finely	diced	carrots,	onions,	celery,	and	diced	ham
4	Tb	butter
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	¼	tsp	thyme,	and	½	bay
leaf	tied	in	cheesecloth

⅛	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
A	10-inch	enameled	skillet
Cook	the	diced	vegetables	and	ham	slowly	in	the	butter	with	the	herb
bouquet	 and	 seasonings	 for	 10	 to	 15	 minutes,	 until	 tender	 but	 not
browned.

½	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
1½	to	2	lbs.	sweetbreads	previously	soaked,	peeled,	and	trimmed	as
directed
Season	 the	 sweetbreads.	 Arrange	 them	 in	 the	 skillet	 and	 baste	 them
with	the	butter	and	vegetables.	Cover	and	cook	slowly	for	5	minutes.
Turn,	baste,	and	cook	5	minutes	more.	They	will	render	quite	a	bit	of
juice.

A	buttered	fireproof	casserole	or	baking	dish	about	7	inches	in
diameter,	or	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	sweetbreads	in	one	layer
Transfer	the	sweetbreads	to	the	casserole.

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

¾	cup	dry	white	wine	or	½	cup	dry	white	vermouth
1	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon	if	you	are	serving	a	brown
sauce;	1	cup	white	stock	or	canned	chicken	broth	if	you	are	serving
a	white	sauce
Pour	 the	 wine	 into	 the	 skillet	 with	 the	 sweetbread	 juices	 and
vegetables,	and	boil	down	rapidly	until	the	liquids	have	reduced	to	½
cup.	 Then	 pour	 the	 liquids,	 vegetables,	 and	 herb	 bouquet	 over	 the



sweetbreads;	 add	 sufficient	 stock,	 bouillon,	 or	 broth	 barely	 to	 cover
them.

Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Cover	the	casserole	and	place
in	 lower	third	of	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	 the	sweetbreads	cook	at	 the
barest	simmer	for	45	minutes.
(*)	Let	the	sweetbreads	cool	in	their	cooking	stock	until	you	are	ready
to	use	them.

VARIATIONS
Ris	de	Veau	Braisés	à	l’Italienne
[Braised	Sweetbreads	with	Brown	Mushroom	Sauce]

For	6	people

The	braised	sweetbreads	in	the	preceding	recipe
Remove	 the	 sweetbreads	 from	 the	 braising	 casserole.	Drain,	 cut	 into
½-inch	slices,	and	set	aside.

1	Tb	cornstarch	blended	with	1	Tb	dry	white	wine	or	vermouth
1	Tb	tomato	paste
½	lb.	finely	diced	fresh	mushrooms	sautéed	in	butter
¼	cup	diced,	boiled	ham
Salt	and	pepper
Rapidly	 boil	 down	 the	 cooking	 stock	 in	 the	 casserole	 to	 1½	 cups.
Remove	from	heat	and	discard	herb	bouquet.	(The	braising	vegetables
and	ham	remain,	and	become	a	part	of	the	sauce.)	Beat	in	the	starch
mixture	and	 the	 tomato	paste.	 Stir	 in	 the	mushrooms	and	additional
ham;	simmer	for	3	minutes,	stirring.	Correct	seasoning	and	fold	in	the
sliced	sweetbreads.
(*)	 If	 not	 to	 be	 served	 immediately,	 film	 sauce	 with	 a	 spoonful	 of
stock.



2	Tb	minced	green	herbs	such	as	parsley,	chervil,	and	tarragon,	or
parsley	only
Reheat	 for	 2	 to	 3	minutes	 at	 below	 the	 simmer	 just	 before	 serving.
Arrange	on	a	serving	dish,	or	in	a	patty	shell	or	ring	of	rice.	Sprinkle
with	herbs,	and	serve.

Ris	de	Veau	à	la	Crème
Ris	de	Veau	à	la	Maréchale
[Creamed	Sweetbreads]

1½	to	2	lbs.	braised	sweetbreads,	master	recipe
Cut	 the	 braised	 sweetbreads	 into	 slices	 ½	 inch	 thick	 and	 set	 aside.
Rapidly	boil	down	their	cooking	stock	until	it	has	reduced	to	1¼	cups.

A	6-cup	enameled	saucepan
2½	Tb	butter
3	Tb	flour
In	a	separate	pan,	cook	the	butter	and	flour	slowly	together	until	they
foam	 for	 2	 minutes	 without	 browning.	 Off	 heat,	 strain	 in	 the	 hot
cooking	 stock	 and	 beat	 vigorously	 to	 blend.	 Bring	 to	 the	 simmer,
stirring,	for	1	minute.	Sauce	will	be	very	thick.

⅔	to	1	cup	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Drops	of	lemon	juice
Beat	 in	½	cup	of	 cream,	 simmering,	 then	beat	 in	more	by	 spoonfuls
until	the	sauce	thins	out	and	coats	the	spoon	nicely.	Correct	seasoning,
adding	drops	of	lemon	juice	if	you	feel	it	necessary.

Replace	 the	 sweetbreads	 in	 their	 original	 casserole,	 or	 in	 a	 fireproof
serving	dish,	and	pour	the	sauce	over	them.
(*)	If	not	to	be	served	immediately,	film	top	with	a	spoonful	of	cream.



2	Tb	minced,	mixed	green	herbs	or	parsley
Reheat	 for	 3	 to	 4	minutes	 at	 below	 the	 simmer	before	 serving,	 then
decorate	with	the	herbs.

Ris	de	Veau	à	la	Crème	et	aux	Champignons
[Creamed	Sweetbreads	with	Mushrooms]

Ingredients	for	the	preceding	creamed	sweetbreads
½	lb.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms

After	 making	 the	 sauce,	 stir	 in	 the	 mushrooms	 and	 simmer	 for	 10
minutes,	allowing	the	sauce	to	reduce	slightly	as	the	mushrooms	will
thin	it	out.	Then	proceed	with	the	recipe.

Ris	de	Veau	au	Gratin
[Sweetbreads	au	Gratin]

Ingredients	for	the	braised	sweetbreads	and	any	of	the	preceding
sauces

¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter,	cut	into	bits

Arrange	the	sliced	sweetbreads	in	a	buttered	baking	dish	or	individual
shells	or	dishes.	Pour	sauce	over	them.	Sprinkle	on	the	cheese,	and	dot
with	the	butter.	Set	aside	until	ready	to	serve.

About	 10	 minutes	 before	 serving,	 place	 7	 to	 8	 inches	 under	 a
moderately	hot	broiler	to	heat	the	sweetbreads	through	and	to	brown
the	top	of	the	sauce	lightly.

ESCALOPES	DE	RIS	DE	VEAU	SAUTÉS
[Sweetbreads	Sautéed	in	Butter]

These	 are	 done	 exactly	 like	 brains	 sautéed	 in	 butter,	 and	 are



accompanied	by	any	of	the	sauces	suggested	at	the	end	of	that	recipe.

BRAINS

Although	calf’s	brains	are	those	most	universally	known	in	America,
lamb	 brains	 are	 equally	 good.	 Mutton,	 pork,	 and	 beef	 brains	 are	 less
delicate	 in	 texture	 than	calf	brains	and	are	best	when	braised,	but	you
may	 sauté	 them	 if	 you	wish.	 Soaking	 and	peeling	directions	 for	 brains
are	at	the	beginning	of	this	section	on	this	page.	We	shall	call	everything
in	 the	 following	 recipes	 calf’s	 brains	with	 the	 understanding	 that	 calf,
lamb,	 mutton,	 pork,	 and	 beef	 brains	 are	 interchangeable	 though	 their
cooking	times	differ	slightly	as	indicated	in	the	blanching	directions.

		CERVELLES	AU	BEURRE	NOIR
[Calf’s	Brains	in	Brown	Butter	Sauce]

Brown	butter	sauce	and	calf’s	brains	are	almost	synonyms,	they	go
so	 well	 together.	 To	 be	 at	 its	 best,	 the	 sauce	 should	 always	 be	 made
separately,	 not	 in	 the	 pan	 in	 which	 you	 sautéed	 the	 brains.	 It	 is	 thus
clear	and	unspeckled,	and	also	much	more	digestible.	In	addition,	as	the
brains	can	be	sautéed	only	at	the	last	minute,	the	dish	will	then	be	ready
to	serve	almost	at	once.

Of	 the	several	methods	 for	cervelles	au	beurre	noir,	we	have	chosen
that	 of	 pre-cooking	 the	 brains,	 slicing	 them,	 marinating	 them	 in	 a
vinaigrette,	 then	 sautéing	 and	 saucing	 them.	 As	 alternatives,	 you	may
simply	pour	a	brown	butter	sauce	over	hot,	blanched	brains,	or	you	may
omit	the	pre-cooking	and	marination	altogether.	 In	this	case,	slice	raw,
soaked,	 and	 trimmed	 brains,	 season,	 dredge	 in	 flour,	 and	 sauté	 them;
then	pour	the	sauce	over	them.

VEGETABLE	AND	WINE	SUGGESTIONS

This	 dish	 often	 constitutes	 a	 separate	 course,	 but	 if	 you	 wish	 to
serve	 the	 brains	 as	 a	 main	 course,	 accompany	 them	 with	 mashed	 or
parsley	potatoes	and	either	buttered	green	peas	or	the	spinach	braised	in
stock.	Wine	choices	would	be	a	light	red,	such	as	Bordeaux-Medoc,	or	a



rosé;	good	but	less	usual	would	be	a	white	Burgundy.
For	6	people	as	a	main	course

1½	lbs.	calf’s	brains,	previously	soaked,	trimmed,	and	blanched
according	to	directions
Cut	the	blanched	brains	into	slices	½	inch	thick.

3	Tb	lemon	juice
⅛	tsp	salt
A	2½	quart	mixing	bowl
Pinch	of	pepper
1	Tb	olive	oil
2	Tb	minced	parsley

Beat	the	lemon	juice	and	salt	in	the	bowl	until	the	salt	has	dissolved.
Then	beat	 in	 the	pepper,	oil,	and	parsley.	Fold	 the	 sliced	brains	 into
the	 sauce.	Marinate	 for	 30	minutes,	 or	 until	 you	 are	 ready	 to	 sauté
them.

1	cup	brown	butter	sauce,	with	or	without	capers
While	the	brains	are	marinating,	prepare	the	sauce	and	keep	hot	over
simmering	water.

1	cup	flour	sifted	into	a	dish
Just	before	sautéing,	drain	the	brains.	Roll	 in	the	flour	and	shake	off
excess	flour.

1	or	2	heavy	skillets
2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil	for	each	skillet

Set	the	skillet	or	skillets	over	moderately	high	heat	with	the	butter	and
oil.	 As	 soon	 as	 you	 see	 that	 the	 butter	 foam	 has	 almost	 subsided,
brown	the	brains	lightly	for	3	to	4	minutes	on	each	side.



A	hot	platter
Arrange	 on	 a	 hot	 platter,	 pour	 the	 hot	 butter	 sauce	 over	 them,	 and
serve.

VARIATIONS:	SAUCES
Sauce	 à	 l’Italienne,	 tomato-flavored	 brown	 sauce	 with	 diced

mushrooms,	diced	ham,	and	herbs	Coulis	de	Tomates,	fresh	tomato	sauce
with	herbs

CERVELLES	BRAISÉES
[Braised	Calf’s	Brains]

The	brains	are	cooked	in	butter	with	aromatic	vegetables,	herbs,	wine,
and	stock.	Follow	the	recipe	for	braised	sweetbreads,	and	use	the	same
sauces,	but	the	oven-simmering	times	are:	20	minutes	for	lamb	brains
30	minutes	for	calf	and	pork	brains
45	minutes	for	beef	brains

CERVELLES	EN	MATELOTE
[Calf’s	Brains	in	Red	Wine	with	Mushrooms	and	Onions]

This	 dish	 makes	 a	 complete	 course	 in	 itself.	 Serve	 a	 light	 red
Burgundy	or	Mâcon	wine.

For	6	people

2	cups	good,	young,	red	wine	(Mâcon	or	Burgundy)
1	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
An	enameled	saucepan	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	brains	in	one
layer
¼	tsp	thyme
4	sprigs	of	parsley
½	bay	leaf



1	clove	mashed	garlic
1½	lbs.	calf’s	brains,	previously	soaked	and	peeled
A	buttered,	fireproof	serving	dish

Bring	 the	wine	and	 stock	or	bouillon	 to	 the	 simmer	 in	 the	 saucepan
with	 the	 herbs	 and	 garlic.	Add	 the	 brains,	 bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 and
cook	uncovered	 at	 just	 below	 the	 simmer	 for	 20	minutes.	Allow	 the
brains	to	cool	in	the	cooking	liquid	for	20	minutes,	so	they	will	absorb
flavor,	 and	 firm	 up.	 Then	 drain	 them,	 slice	 into	½-inch	 pieces,	 and
arrange	in	the	buttered	serving	dish.

½	Tb	tomato	paste
2	Tb	flour	mashed	to	a	paste	with	2	Tb	softened	butter
Salt	and	pepper

Beat	 the	 tomato	paste	 into	 the	cooking	 stock,	and	boil	down	rapidly
until	 the	 liquid	has	 reduced	 to	 1½	cups.	Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 flour-
butter	paste.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Correct	seasoning.

24	small,	brown-braised	onions
½	lb.	fresh	mushrooms	sautéed	in	butter

Arrange	the	onions	and	mushrooms	around	the	brains,	and	strain	the
sauce	over	the	brains	and	vegetables.
(*)	If	not	to	be	served	immediately,	film	the	sauce	with	a	spoonful	of
stock	or	melted	butter.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
Just	 before	 serving,	 set	 over	 low	 heat	 to	 warm	 through	 for	 3	 to	 4
minutes	 without	 simmering.	 Off	 heat,	 tip	 dish,	 add	 butter,	 a	 half-
tablespoon	at	a	time,	and	baste	brains	and	vegetables	with	the	sauce
until	the	butter	has	absorbed.

12	heart-shaped	croûtons	(white	bread	sautéed	in	clarified	butter)
2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley



Decorate	with	croûtons	and	parsley,	and	serve.

VEAL	AND	LAMB	KIDNEYS

Rognons	de	Veau	et	de	Mouton

Cooked	kidneys	should	be	tender	and	slightly	pink	near	the	center.
The	bursting-out	of	juices	is	always	a	problem	when	they	are	sautéed	in
slices.	 Unless	 your	 source	 of	 heat	 is	 a	 very	 strong	 one,	 within	 a	 few
seconds	after	the	slices	hit	the	pan	their	juices	pour	out	and	the	kidneys
boil	and	toughen	rather	than	sauté.	An	excellent	solution—and,	in	fact,
the	 best	 method	 for	 kidneys	 in	 our	 experience—is	 to	 cook	 the	 whole
kidney	 in	 butter,	 then	 slice	 it,	 and	warm	 the	 slices	 briefly	 in	 a	 sauce.
However,	 if	 you	 prefer	 to	 sauté	 raw	 sliced	 kidneys,	 do	 so	 in	 very	 hot
butter	and	oil	for	only	2	to	3	minutes.	They	do	not	brown;	they	just	cook
through,	 turning	a	uniform	gray	outside	but	 remaining	 somewhat	pink
inside.	Then	remove	the	kidneys	 to	a	hot	dish,	make	one	of	 the	sauces
described	in	the	following	recipes,	and	return	the	kidneys	to	warm	in	the
sauce	without	boiling.

Any	of	the	following	recipes	may	be	done	at	the	table	in	a	chafing
dish.

LAMB	KIDNEYS

All	 of	 the	 following	 recipes	 are	 for	 veal	 kidneys,	 but	 are	 equally
applicable	to	lamb	kidneys.	Allow	2	or	3	lamb	kidneys	per	person.	Cook
them	whole	in	butter	as	described	in	the	master	recipe,	but	only	for	4	to
5	minutes	 rather	 than	 the	 10	 for	 veal	 kidneys.	 Then	 proceed	with	 the
recipe.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Both	lamb	and	veal	kidneys	are	encased	in	a	layer	of	fat	which	has
usually	 been	 peeled	 off,	 presumably	 without	 breaking	 the	 kidneys,
before	 you	 buy	 them.	 Under	 this	 is	 a	 thin	 filament	 surrounding	 the
kidney;	it	should	also	be	peeled	off.	Cut	out	most	of	the	button	of	fat	on
the	underside	of	lamb	kidneys,	and	most	of	the	knob	of	fat	under	a	veal
kidney.	A	trimmed	veal	kidney	will	weigh	6	to	8	ounces;	a	lamb	kidney,



1½	 to	2	ounces.	Kidneys	 should	have	 a	 good,	 fresh	odor	 and	only	 the
faintest	suggestion,	if	any,	of	an	ammonia	smell.	Veal	and	lamb	kidneys
should	never	be	washed	or	soaked	in	water,	as	they	absorb	too	much	of
it.

		ROGNONS	DE	VEAU	EN	CASSEROLE
[Kidneys	Cooked	in	Butter—Mustard	and	Parsley	Sauce]

If	you	want	to	serve	this	as	a	main	course	rather	than	as	a	hot	hors
d’oeuvre,	 potatoes	 sautéed	 in	 butter	 and	 braised	 onions	 make	 good
accompaniments.	Red	Burgundy	goes	especially	well	with	kidneys.

For	4	to	6	people

4	Tb	butter
A	fireproof	casserole	or	chafing	dish	which	will	just	hold	the	kidneys
easily	side	by	side
3	veal	kidneys,	peeled	and	trimmed	of	fat
A	hot	plate	and	cover

Heat	the	butter	in	the	casserole	or	chafing	dish	until	you	see	the	foam
begin	 to	 subside.	 Roll	 the	 kidneys	 in	 the	 butter,	 then	 cook	 them
uncovered	 for	 about	 10	 minutes;	 turn	 them	 every	 minute	 or	 two.
Regulate	 heat	 so	 butter	 is	 always	 very	 hot	 but	 is	 not	 discoloring.	 A
little	juice	from	the	kidneys	will	exude	and	coagulate	in	the	bottom	of
the	casserole.	The	kidneys	should	stiffen	but	not	become	hard,	brown
very	lightly,	and	be	pink	at	the	center	when	sliced.	Remove	them	to	a
hot	plate	and	cover	to	keep	warm	for	a	few	minutes.

1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	vermouth
1	Tb	lemon	juice

Stir	the	shallots	or	onions	into	the	butter	in	the	casserole	and	cook	for
1	 minute.	 Then	 add	 the	 wine	 or	 vermouth	 and	 lemon	 juice.	 Boil,
scraping	up	coagulated	cooking	juices,	until	the	liquids	have	reduced



to	about	4	tablespoons.

1½	Tb	prepared	mustard	of	the	strong	Dijon	type,	mashed	with	3	Tb
softened	butter
Salt	and	pepper

Off	heat,	swirl	the	mustard-butter	by	spoonfuls	into	the	casserole,	and
a	sprinkling	of	salt	and	pepper.

Salt	and	pepper
3	Tb	minced	parsley

Rapidly	 cut	 the	 kidneys	 into	 crosswise	 slices	⅛	 inch	 thick.	 Sprinkle
with	salt	and	pepper	and	put	them	and	their	juices	into	the	casserole.
Sprinkle	 on	 the	 parsley.	 Shake	 and	 toss	 them	 over	 low	 heat	 for	 a
minute	or	 two	 to	warm	 them	 through	without	allowing	 the	 sauce	 to
come	near	the	simmer.

Hot	plates
Serve	immediately	on	very	hot	plates.

VARIATIONS
Rognons	de	Veau	Flambés
[Veal	Kidneys	Flamed	in	Brandy—Cream	and	Mushroom	Sauce]

This	 extremely	 good	 combination	 is	 one	 which	 is	 often	 prepared
beside	your	table	in	a	good	restaurant.	If	you	are	making	it	at	home	in	a
chafing	 dish,	 have	 all	 the	 sauce	 ingredients,	 including	 the	 sautéed
mushrooms,	at	hand	in	separate	containers.	Kidneys	cooked	this	way	are
best	as	a	separate	course,	served	with	hot	French	bread,	and	a	full,	red
Burgundy	wine.

For	4	to	6	people

3	veal	kidneys,	peeled	and	trimmed	of	fat
4	Tb	butter



A	fireproof	casserole	or	chafing	dish
Cook	 the	kidneys	 for	about	10	minutes	 in	hot	butter	as	described	 in
the	master	recipe.

⅓	cup	cognac
A	hot	plate	and	cover

Pour	 the	 cognac	 over	 the	 kidneys.	 Avert	 your	 face	 and	 ignite	 the
cognac	with	a	lighted	match.	Shake	the	casserole	or	chafing	dish	and
baste	 the	 kidneys	 for	 a	 few	 seconds	 until	 the	 flames	 have	 subsided.
Remove	the	kidneys	to	a	hot	plate,	and	cover	them.

½	cup	brown	sauce,	or	½	cup	canned	beef	bouillon	mixed	with	1	tsp
cornstarch
⅓	cup	Madeira

Pour	 the	brown	 sauce	 or	 bouillon	 and	 starch,	 and	 the	wine	 into	 the
casserole.	Boil	for	a	few	minutes	until	reduced	and	thickened.

1	cup	whipping	cream
½	lb.	sliced	fresh	mushrooms	sautéed	in	butter	with	1	Tb	minced
shallots	or	green	onions
Salt	and	pepper

Stir	in	the	cream	and	mushrooms	and	boil	a	few	minutes	more.	Sauce
should	be	thick	enough	to	coat	the	spoon	lightly.	Season	to	taste	with
salt	and	pepper.

½	Tb	prepared	mustard	of	the	strong	Dijon	type,	blended	with	2	Tb
softened	butter	and	½	tsp	Worcestershire
Off	heat,	swirl	in	the	mustard-butter.

Salt	and	pepper
Hot	plates

Rapidly	cut	the	kidneys	into	crosswise	slices	⅛	inch	thick.	Season	with
salt	and	pepper,	and	put	 them	and	 their	 juices	 into	 the	sauce.	Shake



and	 toss	 the	 kidneys	 over	 low	 heat	 for	 a	 moment	 to	 reheat	 them
without	bringing	the	sauce	near	the	simmer.	Serve	immediately	on	hot
plates.

Rognons	de	Veau	à	la	Bordelaise
[Veal	Kidneys	in	Red	Wine	Sauce	with	Marrow]

Sauce	 à	 la	 bordelaise	 is	 a	 reduction	 of	 red	 wine,	 brown	 sauce,
shallots,	 and	 herbs	 into	 which	 poached	 marrow	 is	 folded	 just	 before
serving.	 It	 goes	 very	 well	 with	 kidneys.	 With	 sautéed	 potatoes	 and
braised	 onions	 or	 buttered	 peas,	 this	 would	 make	 a	 fine	 main	 course
served	with	a	red	Burgundy	wine.

For	4	to	6	people

3	veal	kidneys,	peeled	and	trimmed	of	fat
4	Tb	butter
A	fireproof	casserole	or	chafing	dish
A	hot	plate	and	cover

Cook	the	kidneys	for	about	10	minutes	in	hot	butter	in	a	casserole	or
chafing	dish	as	described	in	the	master	recipe.	Remove	them	to	a	hot
plate	and	cover	them.

2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
½	cup	good,	young,	red	wine	such	as	a	Burgundy	or	Mâcon
Big	pinch	each	of	thyme,	pepper,	and	powdered	bay	leaf

Stir	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 into	 the	 casserole	 and	 cook	 for	 1	minute.
Pour	in	the	wine,	add	seasonings,	and	boil	until	reduced	by	half.

1	cup	brown	sauce	or	1	cup	canned	beef	bouillon,	mixed	with	1	Tb
arrowroot	or	cornstarch
Salt	and	pepper

Then	pour	in	the	brown	sauce	or	bouillon	and	starch.	Simmer	for	3	to
4	minutes	until	lightly	thickened.	Correct	seasoning.



Salt	and	pepper
⅓	cup	diced	beef	marrow	softened	for	2	to	3	minutes	in	hot	water
2	to	3	Tb	fresh	parsley
Hot	plates

Rapidly	cut	the	kidneys	into	crosswise	slices	⅛	inch	thick,	and	season
with	salt	and	pepper.	Mix	them	and	their	juices	in	with	the	sauce.	Fold
in	the	marrow.	Shake	and	toss	for	a	moment	over	low	heat	to	reheat
the	kidneys	without	bringing	the	sauce	near	the	simmer.	Sprinkle	with
parsley	and	serve	on	very	hot	plates.



CHAPTER	EIGHT

VEGETABLES
Légumes

ANYONE	 WHO	 HAS	 been	 fortunate	 enough	 to	 eat	 fresh,	 home-cooked
vegetables	in	France	remembers	them	with	pleasure.	Returning	voyagers
speak	 of	 them	 with	 trembling	 nostalgia:	 “Those	 delicious	 little	 green
beans!	They	even	serve	them	as	a	separate	course.	Why	I’ll	never	forget
the	meal	I	had	…,”	and	so	forth.	Some	people	are	even	convinced	that	it
is	 only	 in	 France	 that	 you	 can	 enjoy	 such	 experiences	 because	 French
vegetables	are	somehow	different.	Fortunately	 this	 is	not	 the	case.	Any
fine,	 fresh	 vegetable	 in	 season	 will	 taste	 just	 as	 good	 in	 America	 or
anywhere	else	if	the	French	vegetable-cooking	techniques	are	used.

The	French	are	interested	in	vegetables	as	food	rather	than	as	purely
nutrient	objects	valuable	for	their	vitamins	and	minerals.	And	it	is	in	the
realm	of	 the	green	vegetable	 that	French	methods	differ	most	 radically
from	 American.	 The	 French	 objective	 is	 to	 produce	 a	 cooked	 green
vegetable	so	green,	 fresh-tasting,	and	full	of	 flavor	that	 it	really	can	be
served	as	a	separate	course.	They	do	not	hesitate	to	peel,	boil,	squeeze,
drain,	 or	 refresh	 a	 vegetable,	 which	 is	 often	 upsetting	 to	 those	 very
Americans	who	weep	in	delighted	remembrance	of	vegetables	in	France.
For	many	Americans	have	been	taught	that	by	performing	any	of	these
acts	one	is	wickedly	“throwing	away	the	best	part.”

BLANCHING

You	will	 note	 that	 before	 anything	 else	 in	 the	way	 of	 cooking	 or
flavoring	 takes	 place,	 all	 the	 green	 vegetables	 in	 this	 chapter	 are



blanched—dropped	 into	 a	 very	 large	 kettle	 of	 rapidly	 boiling	 salted
water.	 This	 is	 the	 great	 secret	 of	 French	 green-vegetable	 cookery,	 and
also	happens	 to	be	 the	 same	process	used	 in	America	 to	prepare	green
vegetables	 for	 the	 freezer.	 Success	 is	 entirely	 dependent	 on	 having	 a
great	 quantity	 of	 boiling	 water:	 7	 to	 8	 quarts	 for	 2	 to	 3	 pounds	 of
vegetables.	The	more	water	you	use	in	proportion	to	your	vegetables,	the
quicker	the	water	will	return	to	the	boil	after	the	vegetables	have	gone
in,	and	the	greener,	fresher,	and	more	full	of	flavor	they	will	be.	Baking
soda	is	never	necessary	when	you	cook	green	vegetables	this	way.

REFRESHING

A	second	important	French	technique	is	that	of	refreshing.	As	soon
as	green	vegetables	have	been	blanched,	and	if	they	are	not	to	be	served
immediately	 or	 are	 to	 be	 served	 cold,	 they	 are	 plunged	 for	 several
minutes	 into	 a	 large	 quantity	 of	 cold	 water.	 This	 stops	 the	 cooking
immediately,	sets	the	color,	and	preserves	the	texture	and	flavor.	If	the
vegetables	 are	 not	 refreshed	 in	 this	 manner	 and	 sit	 steaming	 in	 a
saucepan	 or	 colander,	 their	 collective	 warmth	 softens	 and	 discolors
them,	and	they	lose	their	fresh	taste.	Following	the	refreshing	technique,
then,	you	can	cook	all	your	green	vegetables	well	in	advance	of	a	party,
and	have	only	the	final	touches	left	to	do	at	the	last	minute.

OVERCOOKING

A	 cardinal	 point	 in	 the	 French	 technique	 is:	 Do	 not	 overcook.	 An
equally	 important	 admonition	 is:	Do	 not	 attempt	 to	 keep	 a	 cooked	 green
vegetable	warm	for	more	than	a	very	few	moments.	If	you	cannot	serve	it	at
once,	 it	 is	better	 to	 set	 it	aside	and	 then	 to	 reheat	 it.	Overcooking	and
keeping	 hot	 ruin	 the	 color,	 texture,	 and	 taste	 of	 green	 vegetables—as
well	as	most	of	the	nutritive	qualities.

SCOPE	OF	VEGETABLE	CHAPTER

This	 chapter	 does	 not	 pretend	 to	 offer	 a	 complete	 treatise	 on
vegetables.	The	French	repertoire	is	so	large	that	we	have	felt	 it	best
to	go	into	more	detail	on	a	selection	than	to	give	tidbits	on	all.	Most	of
our	emphasis	is	on	green	vegetables.	There	is	a	modest	but	out-of-the-
ordinary	 section	 on	 potatoes.	Other	 vegetables	 rate	 only	 one	 or	 two



recipes—but	good	ones—and	some	we	have	not	mentioned	at	all.

GREEN	VEGETABLES
ARTICHOKES

Artichauts

French	or	globe	artichokes	are	in	season	from	October	to	June.	April
and	May	are	 the	peak	months	when	 their	prices	are	most	attractive.	A
fresh,	 desirable	 artichoke	 is	 heavy	 and	 compact,	 with	 fleshy,	 closely
clinging	leaves	of	a	good,	green	color	all	the	way	to	the	tips.	The	stem	is
also	fresh	and	green.

Cooked	Artichoke	Filled	with	Hollandaise	Sauce

As	 baby	 artichokes	 are	 not	 generally	 available	 in	 this	 country,	 all
the	 following	 recipes	 are	 based	on	 the	 large,	 10-to	 12-ounce	 artichoke
which	 is	 about	 4½	 inches	 high	 and	 4	 to	 4½	 inches	 at	 its	 largest
diameter.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Hot	or	cold	boiled	artichokes	are	served	as	a	separate	course,	either
at	the	beginning	of	the	meal	or	in	place	of	a	salad.	Most	wine	authorities
agree	that	water	should	be	served	with	them	rather	than	wine,	for	wine
changes	its	character	when	drunk	with	this	vegetable.	But,	if	you	insist,
serve	a	strong,	dry,	chilled	white	wine	such	as	a	Mâcon,	or	a	chilled	and
characterful	rosé	such	as	a	Tavel.



PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

One	at	a	time,	prepare	the	artichokes	as	follows:
Remove	the	stem	by	bending	it	at	the	base	of	the	artichoke	until	it

snaps	off,	thus	detaching	with	the	stem	any	tough	filaments	which	may
have	pushed	up	into	the	heart.

Sectional	View	of	Artichoke

Break	off	the	small	leaves	at	the	base	of	the	artichoke.	Trim	the	base
with	a	knife	so	the	artichoke	will	stand	solidly	upright.

Lay	the	artichoke	on	its	side	and	slice	three	quarters	of	an	inch	off
the	top	of	the	center	cone	of	leaves.	Trim	off	the	points	of	the	rest	of	the
leaves	with	scissors.	Wash	under	cold	running	water.

Trim	off	ends	of	leaves	with	scissors



Rub	the	cut	portions	of	the	artichoke	with	lemon	juice.	Drop	it	into
a	 basin	 of	 cold	water	 containing	 1	 tablespoon	 of	 vinegar	 per	 quart	 of
water.	The	acid	prevents	the	artichoke	from	discoloring.

		ARTICHAUTS	AU	NATUREL
[Whole	Boiled	Artichokes—Hot	or	Cold]

Artichokes	should	be	boiled	in	a	large	kettle	so	that	they	have	plenty
of	 room.	 It	 is	 not	 necessary	 to	 tie	 the	 leaves	 in	 place.	 Because	 they
must	cook	a	comparatively	long	time,	artichokes	turn	an	olive	green.
Any	 Frenchman	 would	 look	 with	 disfavor	 on	 a	 bright	 green	 boiled
artichoke,	knowing	that	baking	soda	had	been	added	to	the	water.

6	artichokes	prepared	for	cooking	as	in	the	preceding	directions
A	large	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water
Washed	cheesecloth
Drop	 the	 prepared	 artichokes	 in	 the	 boiling	 salted	 water.	 To	 help
prevent	 discoloration,	 lay	 over	 the	 artichokes	 a	 double	 thickness	 of
cheesecloth;	 this	will	 keep	 their	 exposed	 tops	moist.	Bring	 the	water
back	to	the	boil	as	rapidly	as	possible	and	boil	slowly,	uncovered,	for
35	 to	45	minutes.	The	artichokes	 are	done	when	 the	 leaves	pull	 out
easily	and	the	bottoms	are	tender	when	pierced	with	a	knife.

A	skimmer	or	slotted	spoon
A	colander
Immediately	remove	them	from	the	kettle	with	skimmer	or	spoon	and
drain	them	upside	down	in	a	colander.

Boiled	artichokes	may	be	served	hot,	warm,	or	cold.

HOW	TO	EAT	AN	ARTICHOKE

If	 you	 have	 never	 eaten	 an	 artichoke	 before,	 here	 is	 how	 you	 go



about	it.	Pull	off	a	leaf	and	hold	its	tip	in	your	fingers.	Dip	the	bottom	of
the	leaf	in	melted	butter	or	one	of	the	sauces	suggested	farther	on.	Then
scrape	 off	 its	 tender	 flesh	 between	 your	 teeth.	 When	 you	 have	 gone
through	all	the	leaves,	you	will	come	to	the	heart,	which	you	eat	with	a
knife	 and	 fork	 after	 you	 have	 scraped	 off	 and	 discarded	 the	 choke	 or
hairy	center	growth.

TO	REMOVE	THE	CHOKE	BEFORE	SERVING

It	 is	 not	 necessary	 to	 remove	 the	 choke,	 but	 it	 makes	 a	 nicer
presentation	 if	 you	wish	 to	 take	 the	 time.	 To	 do	 so,	 gently	 spread	 the
leaves	apart	enough	so	you	can	reach	into	the	interior	of	the	artichoke.
Pull	 out	 the	 tender	 center	 cone	 of	 leaves	 in	 one	 piece.	 Down	 in	 the
center	 of	 the	 artichoke,	 at	 the	 point	 where	 you	 removed	 the	 cone	 of
leaves,	 is	 the	choke	or	hairy	growth	which	covers	 the	top	of	 the	heart.
Scrape	off	and	remove	the	choke	with	a	spoon	to	expose	the	tender	flesh
of	the	artichoke	heart.	Sprinkle	salt	and	pepper	over	the	heart.	Turn	the
cone	of	leaves	upside	down	and	set	it	in	the	hollow	formed	by	the	top	of
the	artichoke.

Sauces	for	Hot	or	Warm	Artichokes
Beurre	Fondu,	melted	butter
Beurre	au	Citron,	lemon	butter	sauce
sauce	hollandaise.	If	you	have	removed	the	choke,	you	may	wish	to

spread	 the	 leaves	 apart	 enough	 to	 expose	 the	 heart,	 then	 heap	 3	 or	 4
spoonfuls	of	the	hollandaise	into	it,	and	top	with	a	sprig	of	parsley.

Sauces	for	Cold	Artichokes
Vinaigrette,	French	dressing
Sauce	Ravigote,	vinaigrette	with	herbs,	capers,	and	onions
Sauce	 Moutarde,	 mustard	 sauce	 with	 olive	 oil,	 lemon	 juice,	 and

herbs	 Sauce	 Alsacienne,	 soft-boiled	 egg	 mayonnaise	 with	 herbs
Mayonnaise



		ARTICHAUTS	BRAISÉS	À	LA	PROVENÇALE
[Artichokes	Braised	with	Wine,	Garlic,	and	Herbs]

Most	 of	 the	 many	 recipes	 for	 braised	 artichokes	 follow	 the	 general
lines	of	this	one.	You	may,	if	you	wish,	add	to	the	casserole	a	cup	of
diced	tomato	pulp,	or	½	cup	of	diced	ham,	and,	10	minutes	before	the
end	 of	 the	 cooking,	 ½	 pound	 of	 sautéed	 mushrooms.	 Another
suggestion	 with	 different	 vegetables	 follows	 this	 recipe.	 Braised
artichokes	go	well	with	roast	or	braised	meats,	or	they	can	constitute	a
first	 course.	As	 they	 are	 rather	messy	 to	 eat	with	 the	 fingers,	 guests
should	be	 furnished	with	a	 spoon	as	well	as	a	knife	and	 fork,	 so	 the
flesh	may	be	scraped	off	the	artichoke	leaves.
For	6	to	8	people

6	large	artichokes
A	large	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water

Prepare	the	artichokes	for	cooking	as	directed	at	the	beginning	of	this
section,	but	cut	off	the	leaves	so	that	the	artichokes	are	only	about	1½
inches	long.	Then	slice	the	artichokes	into	lengthwise	quarters	and	cut
out	 the	 chokes.	 Drop	 the	 quarters	 in	 boiling	 water	 and	 boil	 for	 10
minutes	only.	Drain.
Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

1	cup	(4	ounces)	diced	onions
6	Tb	olive	oil
A	10-to	11-inch	covered	fireproof	casserole	large	enough	to	hold	the
artichokes	in	one	layer
2	large	cloves	minced	garlic
Salt	and	pepper

Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	 in	 olive	 oil	 in	 the	 casserole	 for	 5	 minutes
without	 letting	 the	 onions	 color.	 Stir	 in	 the	 garlic.	 Arrange	 the
artichoke	quarters	in	the	casserole.	Baste	with	the	olive	oil	and	onions.
Sprinkle	on	salt	and	pepper.	Cover	casserole	and	cook	slowly	over	low



heat	for	10	minutes,	not	allowing	artichokes	to	brown.

¼	cup	wine	vinegar
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
1½	cups	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	or	water
An	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp	thyme	tied
in	cheesecloth

A	round	of	waxed	paper
Pour	 in	 the	 vinegar	 and	 wine.	 Raise	 heat	 and	 boil	 until	 liquid	 is
reduced	by	half.	Then	pour	 in	 the	stock,	bouillon,	or	water.	Add	 the
herb	bouquet.	Bring	to	the	simmer,	then	lay	the	waxed	paper	over	the
artichokes.	 Cover	 casserole	 and	 place	 it	 in	 the	 middle	 level	 of	 the
preheated	oven.	Casserole	should	simmer	slowly	for	1¼	to	1½	hours,
or	until	liquid	has	almost	entirely	evaporated.
(*)	 If	 not	 to	 be	 served	 immediately,	 set	 casserole	 aside,	 its	 cover
askew.	Reheat	when	needed.

2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley
Discard	herb	bouquet.	Serve	from	casserole	or	on	a	warm	serving	dish.
(The	artichokes	may	be	surrounded	with	baked	tomatoes	and	sautéed
potatoes.)	Sprinkle	with	parsley	before	bringing	to	the	table.

VARIATION
Artichauts	Printaniers
[Artichokes	 Braised	 with	 Carrots,	 Onions,	 Turnips,	 and
Mushrooms]

Except	for	the	addition	of	other	vegetables,	this	recipe	is	the	same	as
the	master	 recipe.	You	may	wish	 to	use	butter	 instead	of	olive	oil,	 cut
down	on	 the	garlic,	 and	omit	all	or	part	of	 the	vinegar,	 increasing	 the
wine	accordingly.

Ingredients	for	the	preceding	braised	artichokes,	including	diced



onions,	oil	(or	butter),	wine,	stock,	and	seasonings
12	small	white	onions,	about	1	inch	in	diameter,	peeled
3	or	4	carrots,	peeled,	quartered	and	cut	into	1½-inch	lengths
3	or	4	white	turnips,	peeled	and	quartered

Following	the	preceding	recipe,	quarter	and	blanch	the	artichokes,	and
cook	 the	 diced	 onions	 in	 the	 olive	 oil	 (or	 butter).	 Then	 add	 the
artichokes	 and	 place	 the	 whole	 onions	 and	 the	 other	 vegetables
around	the	edge	of	the	casserole.	Baste	with	the	diced	onions	and	oil
(or	butter),	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Proceed	with	the	recipe.

12	to	18	mushroom	caps	lightly	sautéed	in	olive	oil	or	butter
About	10	minutes	before	 the	end	of	 the	cooking,	add	 the	mushroom
caps.	 Finish	 the	 sauce	 and	 serve	 the	 casserole	 as	 in	 the	 preceding
recipe.

ARTICHOKE	HEARTS	OR	BOTTOMS

Fonds	d’Artichauts

Although	there	is	a	tendency	to	lump	artichoke	hearts	and	bottoms
together,	 they	 are	 technically	 different.	 The	heart	 is	 the	 tender	 central
part	of	baby	artichokes;	it	 includes	the	inner	cone	of	leaves,	the	choke,
and	 the	 bottom.	 The	 bottom	 is	 just	 the	meaty	 bottom	 part,	 usually	 of
larger	artichokes,	minus	leaves	and	choke.	Unless	you	live	near	a	market
catering	 to	 the	 baby	 artichoke	 desires	 of	 a	 foreign	 clientele,	 you	 will
probably	only	see	artichoke	hearts	 in	a	can,	a	 jar,	or	a	frozen	package.
Bottoms,	however,	you	can	prepare	yourself,	and	they	are	even	more	of
a	delicacy	in	this	country,	owing	to	the	price	of	artichokes,	than	they	are
in	France.	Sliced,	and	braised	in	butter,	they	make	a	delicious	vegetable
garnish;	 quartered	 and	 served	 in	 a	 vinaigrette	 sauce,	 they	 are	 a
delightful	first	course.	Or	you	may	top	the	whole	bottom	with	poached
eggs	and	a	sauce	 for	an	elegant	hot	 first	course,	or	 fill	 it	with	shellfish
mayonnaise	for	a	cold	luncheon	dish.	Whatever	your	plans	for	them,	you
must	first	trim	the	leaves	off	your	artichokes	to	expose	the	bottoms,	and



then	poach	them	in	a	blanc	to	preserve	their	whiteness.

HOW	TO	PREPARE	ARTICHOKE	BOTTOMS

Choose	 the	 largest	 artichokes	you	 can	 find.	 Ideally	 they	 should	be
4½	inches	in	diameter,	which	will	do	for	one	serving.	Otherwise,	allow
two	per	person.	Prepare	them	as	illustrated	on	the	opposite	page.

Break	the	stem	off	close	to	the	base	of	the	artichoke.	Holding	the	artichoke	bottom	up,	bend	a	lower	leaf
back	on	itself	until	it	snaps.	Then	pull	it	off.	Continue	all	around	the	artichoke	until	you	have	gone

beyond	the	curve	of	the	artichoke	bottom,	where	the	cone	of	leaves	folds	inward.



Cut	off	remaining	cone	of	leaves	close	above	top	of	artichoke	bottom.	Immediately	rub	cut	parts	with
lemon	juice	to	prevent	discoloration.

Trim	bottom	part,	rotating	it	slowly	with	your	left	hand	against	the	blade	of	a	knife	held	firmly	in	your
right	hand.	Remove	all	bits	of	green	to	expose	the	whitish	tender	surface.	Frequently	rub	cut	portions
with	lemon	juice.	Drop	each	as	it	is	finished	into	a	bowl	of	acidulated	water	(2	Tb	lemon	juice	per	quart

of	water).

Trimmed	bottom	ready	to	cook;	choke	is	removed	after	cooking

FONDS	D’ARTICHAUTS	À	BLANC
[Cooked	Artichoke	Bottoms—Preliminary	Cooking]

A	blanc	is	a	solution	of	salted	water	with	lemon	juice	and	flour.	It	is
used	for	the	preliminary	cooking	of	any	food	which	discolors	easily,	such
as	artichoke	bottoms,	 salsify,	calf’s	head.	Flour	and	 lemon	 juice	blanch
the	food	and	keep	its	whiteness.

Never	 cook	 artichoke	 bottoms	 in	 anything	 but	 enamel,	 pyrex,



stainless	steel,	or	earthenware.	Aluminum	or	iron	pans	will	give	them	a
grayish	color.

For	6	to	8	large	artichoke	bottoms

¼	cup	flour
An	enameled	saucepan
A	wire	whip
1	quart	cold	water
2	Tb	lemon	juice
1½	tsp	salt

Put	the	flour	in	the	saucepan	and	beat	in	a	bit	of	cold	water	to	make	a
smooth	paste.	Then	beat	in	the	rest	of	the	water,	the	lemon	juice,	and
the	salt.	Bring	to	the	boil	and	simmer	5	minutes.
Add	the	artichokes.	Bring	liquid	again	to	the	boil,	then	simmer	30	to
40	minutes	or	so	until	tender	when	pierced	with	a	knife.	Be	sure	they
are	 completely	 covered	 with	 liquid	 at	 all	 times.	 Add	 more	 water	 if
necessary.

Allow	them	to	cool	in	their	liquid.	If	they	are	to	be	refrigerated	for	a
day	 or	 two,	 film	 the	 top	 of	 the	 liquid	 with	 oil.	 Just	 before	 using,
remove	 from	the	 liquid	and	wash	under	cold	water.	Delicately	scoop
out	the	choke	with	a	spoon,	and	trim	off	the	remaining	leaf	ends.

Cooked	Artichoke	Bottom,	Choke	Removed

		FONDS	D’ARTICHAUTS	AU	BEURRE
[Buttered	Artichoke	Bottoms,	Whole]

This	is	the	method	for	heating	cooked	artichoke	bottoms	which	are
to	be	filled	with	hot	vegetables,	poached	eggs,	béarnaise	sauce,	 truffles,



or	whatever	is	called	for.

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

6	cooked	artichoke	bottoms	(see	preceding	recipe)
Salt	and	white	pepper
4	Tb	butter
A	covered	fireproof	casserole	(enameled,	pyrex,	or	stainless	steel)	just
large	enough	to	hold	the	artichokes	in	one	layer
A	round	of	buttered	waxed	paper

Season	 the	 artichokes	 with	 salt	 and	 pepper.	 Heat	 the	 butter	 in	 the
casserole	until	it	is	bubbling.	Remove	from	heat.	Baste	each	artichoke
bottom	with	butter	as	you	place	it	upside	down	(to	keep	center	moist)
in	 the	 casserole.	 Lay	 the	 buttered	 paper	 over	 them.	 Reheat	 the
casserole,	 then	place	 it	 in	 the	middle	 level	of	 the	preheated	oven	for
about	 20	 minutes,	 or	 until	 they	 are	 well	 heated	 through.	 Do	 not
overcook.
The	 artichokes	 are	 now	 ready	 to	 receive	 any	 filling	 your	 recipe

directs.

VARIATIONS
Quartiers	de	Fonds	d’Artichauts	au	Beurre
[Buttered	Artichoke	Bottoms,	Quartered]

This	 is	 basically	 the	 same	as	 the	preceding	 recipe,	 except	 that	 the
artichoke	 bottoms	 are	 cut	 into	 quarters,	 and	 shallots	 or	 onions	 are
included	with	the	butter.	Use	quartered	artichokes	as	a	vegetable	garnish
or	 combine	 them	 with	 other	 vegetables	 such	 as	 braised	 carrots	 and
onions,	or	sautéed	mushrooms.	They	go	well	with	veal,	chicken,	and	egg
dishes.

cooked	artichoke	bottoms
Cut	 the	 artichoke	 bottoms	 in	 quarters,	 and	 preheat	 oven	 to	 325



degrees.

4	Tb	butter
A	6-cup,	enameled	casserole
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Salt	and	pepper
A	round	of	waxed	paper,	buttered
2	Tb	minced	parsley

Melt	the	butter	in	the	casserole.	Stir	in	the	shallots	or	onions,	then	fold
in	the	artichokes.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper,	and	lay	over	them	the
round	of	buttered	paper.	Cover	the	casserole	and	bake	in	middle	level
of	 preheated	 oven	 for	 about	 20	minutes,	 or	 until	 the	 vegetables	 are
well	 steeped	 in	 the	 butter.	 Do	 not	 overcook.	 Sprinkle	 with	 parsley
before	serving.
(*)	May	be	cooked	in	advance.

Fonds	d’Artichauts	Mirepoix
[Buttered	Artichoke	Bottoms	with	Diced	Vegetables]

This	is	particularly	good	if	the	artichoke	bottoms	are	to	be	served	as
a	separate	vegetable.

3	Tb	each:	finely	diced	carrots,	onions,	and	celery
2	Tb	finely	diced,	lean,	boiled	ham
Ingredients	for	the	preceding	buttered	artichoke	bottoms

Cook	the	carrots,	onions,	celery,	and	ham	for	8	to	10	minutes	 in	 the
butter	 called	 for	 in	 the	 preceding	 recipe.	 When	 the	 vegetables	 are
tender	 but	 not	 browned,	 add	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 ingredients	 listed,	 and
proceed	with	the	recipe.

Fonds	d’Artichauts	à	la	Crème



[Creamed	Artichoke	Bottoms]

Serve	 creamed	 artichoke	 bottoms	 with	 roast	 veal	 or	 chicken,	 or
sautéed	brains	or	sweetbreads.	They	also	go	with	omelettes.

Ingredients	for	6	quartered	artichoke	bottoms	cooked	as	in	either	of
the	two	preceding	variations

1½	cups	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
1	tsp	lemon	juice,	more	if	needed
A	hot	vegetable	dish
2	Tb	minced	parsley

While	 the	artichoke	bottoms	are	 cooking	as	directed	 in	 either	of	 the
two	preceding	recipes,	boil	the	cream	in	a	small	saucepan	until	it	has
reduced	 by	 half.	 Season	 to	 taste	with	 salt,	 pepper,	 and	 lemon	 juice.
When	the	artichokes	are	done,	fold	the	hot	cream	into	them.	Simmer
for	 a	moment	 on	 top	 of	 the	 stove	 to	 blend	 flavors.	 Turn	 into	 a	 hot
vegetable	dish	and	sprinkle	with	parsley.

Fonds	d’Artichauts	Mornay
[Artichoke	Bottoms	Gratinéed	with	Cheese	Sauce]

Serve	 gratinéed	 artichoke	 bottoms	 with	 roast	 chicken	 or	 veal,
sautéed	chicken,	veal	scallops,	or	liver.	Or	you	could	use	them	as	a	hot
first	 course	 or	 luncheon	 dish;	 in	 this	 case,	 you	 might	 fold	 into	 the
artichoke	 bottoms	 before	 saucing	 them	 1	 cup	 of	 sautéed	 mushrooms,
diced	boiled	ham,	or	diced	cooked	chicken.

Ingredients	for	6	buttered	artichoke	bottoms,	quartered
1½	cups	sauce	mornay	(béchamel	with	cheese)
A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	about	8	inches	in	diameter	and	2
inches	deep

3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese



1	Tb	butter
While	 the	 artichoke	 bottoms	 are	 cooking,	 make	 the	 sauce	 mornay.
When	 they	 are	 done,	 spread	 one	 third	 of	 the	 sauce	 in	 the	 dish	 and
arrange	the	artichokes	over	it.	Pour	on	the	rest	of	the	sauce,	sprinkle
on	the	cheese,	and	dot	with	butter.

About	30	minutes	before	serving,	place	in	upper	third	of	a	preheated,
375-degree	oven	to	heat	through	thoroughly	and	brown	the	top	of	the
sauce	lightly.	Serve	as	soon	as	possible.

FONDS	D’ARTICHAUTS	AU	GRATIN
[Stuffed	Artichoke	Bottoms	au	Gratin]

Stuffed	 artichoke	 bottoms	 make	 an	 attractive	 hot	 first	 course	 or
luncheon	dish.
For	6	people

large	artichoke	bottoms	cooked	in	a	blanc
A	buttered	baking	dish
1	to	1½	cups	of	one	of	the	creamed	fillings,	such	as	ham,	chicken,
mushrooms	or	shellfish

⅓	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1½	Tb	butter

Arrange	 the	 cooked	 artichoke	 bottoms	 in	 the	 baking	 dish.	 Place
several	spoonsful	of	the	filling	in	each,	heaping	it	into	a	slight	dome.
Sprinkle	 with	 cheese	 and	 dot	 with	 butter.	 About	 20	minutes	 before
serving,	 bake	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 a	 preheated	 375-degree	 oven	 until
thoroughly	warmed	through	and	the	cheese	has	browned	lightly.

FROZEN	ARTICHOKE	HEARTS
These	 usually	 come	 in	 10-ounce	 packages	 and	 are	 baby,	 halved

hearts	with	the	tender	center	leaves	still	attached.	We	find	it	to	be	more
satisfactory	 if	you	allow	the	vegetables	 to	 thaw	enough	so	 they	can	be



detached	from	each	other.	They	will	then	cook	more	evenly.
For	6	servings

1	cup	chicken	stock,	canned	chicken	broth,	half	mushroom	broth	and
half	water,	or	water	only

2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions	(or	2	Tb	each:	finely	diced
onions,	celery,	carrots,	and	ham,	previously	cooked	until	tender	in
the	butter)

2	Tb	butter
¼	tsp	salt
An	8-inch	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet
2	packages	frozen	artichoke	hearts,	partially	thawed	(10	ounces	each)

Bring	 the	 liquid,	 shallots	or	onions,	butter,	and	salt	 to	 the	boil	 in	an
enameled	saucepan.	Add	the	partially	thawed	artichoke	hearts.	Cover
saucepan	 and	 bring	 to	 the	 boil.	 Boil	 slowly	 for	 7	 to	 10	minutes,	 or
until	artichoke	hearts	are	tender.	Uncover,	raise	heat,	and	boil	off	any
remaining	liquid.

Serve	 them	 sprinkled	with	 parsley,	 or	 in	 the	 cream	 sauce	 or	 cheese
sauce	 described	 in	 the	 previous	 recipes.	 Or	 you	may	 combine	 them
with	 other	 cooked	 vegetables	 such	 as	 sautéed	mushrooms	 or	 glazed
carrots	and	onions.

ASPARAGUS

Asperges

Cooked	green	asparagus	should	be	tender	yet	not	limp,	and	a	fresh,
beautiful	green.	Fresh	white	asparagus,	so	prevalent	in	Europe,	is	rarely
seen	 in	 this	country,	but	 it	 is	prepared	and	cooked	 in	the	same	way	as
green	asparagus.	The	French	method	of	cooking	asparagus	is	to	peel	 it,
tie	 it	 in	 bundles,	 plunge	 it	 into	 a	 very	 large	 kettle	 of	 rapidly	 boiling,
salted	 water,	 boil	 it	 slowly	 until	 it	 is	 just	 tender;	 and	 to	 drain	 it
immediately.	 Peeled	 asparagus	 cooks	 more	 quickly	 than	 unpeeled



asparagus,	retains	its	color	and	texture,	and	can	be	eaten	usually	all	the
way	down	to	the	butt.	We	have	tested	every	asparagus	cooking	method
we	 have	 heard	 of—peeled,	 unpeeled,	 boiled	 butts,	 steamed	 tips—and
can	 say	 categorically	 that	 the	 freshest,	 greenest,	 and	 most	 appetizing
asparagus	is	cooked	by	the	French	method.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Whole	 boiled	 asparagus,	 hot	 or	 cold,	 is	 served	 as	 a	 separate
vegetable	 course	 either	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	meal,	 or	 in	 place	 of	 a
salad.	With	hot	asparagus	serve	a	not	too	dry,	chilled	white	wine	such	as
a	Graves,	Barsac,	Pouilly-Fumé,	or	Vouvray.	No	wine	should	accompany
cold	asparagus	with	a	vinegar-based	sauce,	as	the	vinegar	will	spoil	the
taste	of	the	wine.

CHOOSING	ASPARAGUS

Select	firm,	crisp,	stalks,	moist	at	the	cut	end,	and	with	tips	which
are	compact	and	closed.	Fat	spears	are	 just	as	 tender	as	 thin	spears;	as
long	as	the	asparagus	must	be	peeled,	the	fat	ones	are	easier	to	handle
and	less	wasteful.	Loose	asparagus	is	preferable	to	asparagus	in	bundles,
since	you	may	examine	each	spear	and	choose	ones	all	of	a	size.	Plan	on
6	to	10	fat	spears	per	person,	depending	on	your	menu.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

You	will	find	that	a	vegetable	peeler	is	not	useful	for	this	operation
because	 it	 does	 not	 go	 deep	 enough.	 Asparagus	 is	 peeled	 not	 just	 to
remove	 the	 skin,	 but	 to	 shave	 off	 enough	 of	 the	 tough	 outer	 flesh
(particularly	around	the	lower	part	of	the	spear)	to	make	just	about	the
whole	cooked	spear	edible.	Peeling	is	therefore	economical.
Hold	an	asparagus	spear	with	its	butt	end	up.	Peel	off	the	outer	skin

with	a	sharp,	small	knife,	going	as	deep	as	 1/ 	of	an	inch	at	the	butt	in
16

order	 to	 expose	 the	 tender,	 moist	 flesh.	 Gradually	 make	 the	 cut
shallower	 until	 you	 come	 up	 to	 the	 tender	 green	 portion	 near	 the	 tip.
Shave	 off	 any	 scales	which	 cling	 to	 the	 spear	 below	 the	 tip.	Wash	 the
peeled	asparagus	spears	in	a	large	basin	of	cold	water.	Drain.
Line	up	the	tips	evenly	and	tie	 the	asparagus	 in	bundles	about	3½

inches	in	diameter,	one	string	near	the	tip,	one	near	the	butt.	Leave	one



spear	 loose	 to	be	used	as	a	cooking	 test	 later.	Cut	a	bit	off	 the	butts	 if
necessary,	to	make	the	spears	all	the	same	length.

Peel	asparagus	with	a	small,	sharp	knife

Make	two	ties	to	secure	each	bundle

If	not	cooked	immediately,	set	bunches	upright	in	½	inches	of	cold
water.	Cover	the	asparagus	with	a	plastic	bag	and	refrigerate.



		ASPERGES	AU	NATUREL
[Boiled	Asparagus—Hot	or	Cold]

A	large	kettle	or	oval	casserole	containing	7	to	8	quarts	rapidly
boiling	water	(for	4	to	6	bundles	of	prepared	asparagus	spears)
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water
Kettle	 must	 be	 wide	 enough	 to	 hold	 the	 asparagus	 bunches
horizontally.	 Lay	 the	 asparagus	 bundles	 in	 the	 rapidly	 boiling	 salted
water.	Bring	water	 to	boil	again	as	quickly	as	possible.	When	boil	 is
reached,	reduce	heat	and	boil	slowly,	uncovered,	for	12	to	15	minutes.
The	 asparagus	 is	 done	when	 a	 knife	 pierces	 the	butt-end	 easily.	 The
spears	should	bend	a	little,	but	should	not	be	limp	and	droopy.	Eat	the
loose	spear	as	a	test	for	doneness.

A	serving	platter	covered	with	a	folded	white	napkin	(to	absorb	the
asparagus	liquid)
As	soon	as	 the	asparagus	 is	 tender,	 lift	 it	out	of	 the	water	bundle	by
bundle	with	2	forks,	one	slipped	under	each	round	of	string.	Hold	up
for	 a	 few	 seconds	 to	 drain,	 then	 place	 the	 bundle	 carefully	 on	 the
napkin.	 Cut	 and	 remove	 the	 strings.	 Proceed	 quickly	 to	 the	 next
bundle.

If	the	asparagus	is	not	to	be	served	immediately,	it	will	keep	warm	for
20	to	30	minutes	covered	with	a	napkin.	Set	the	platter	on	top	of	the
kettle	of	hot	asparagus	cooking	water.	The	asparagus	will	lose	a	bit	of
its	texture	as	it	waits	because	it	will	continue	to	exude	moisture,	but	it
will	retain	its	taste	and	color.

Sauces	to	Serve	with	Hot	Asparagus
Allow	3	to	4	tablespoons	of	sauce	per	person.
Sauce	 hollandaise.	 You	 may	 beat	 3	 or	 4	 tablespoons	 of	 puréed

cooked	asparagus	spears	into	the	hollandaise	if	you	wish.
Sauce	Mousseline,	hollandaise	with	cream
Sauce	 Maltaise,	 hollandaise	 with	 orange	 flavoring,	 delicious	 with



asparagus,	and	makes	a	nice	change	Sauce	Crème,	béchamel	with	cream
and	lemon	juice

Beurre	au	Citron,	lemon	butter	sauce

COLD	ASPARAGUS
To	serve	cold	asparagus,	spread	the	cooked	spears	in	one	layer	on	a

double	 thickness	 of	 clean	 toweling	 so	 the	 asparagus	 will	 cool	 rapidly.
When	thoroughly	cold,	arrange	on	a	serving	dish.

Sauces	to	Serve	with	Cold	Asparagus
Allow	2	to	4	tablespoons	of	sauce	per	person.
Sauce	 Vinaigrette,	 French	 dressing,	 with	 herbs	 and	 mustard	 Sauce

Vinaigrette	à	 la	Crème,	vinaigrette	with	cream	and	herbs	Sauce	Ravigote,
vinaigrette	with	herbs,	shallots,	and	capers

Sauce	Moutarde,	mustard	sauce	with	herbs
Sauce	Alsacienne,	soft-boiled	egg	mayonnaise	with	herbs	Mayonnaise.

2	 to	 3	 tablespoons	 of	 green	 herbs,	 or	 4	 to	 6	 tablespoons	 of	 puréed
cooked	asparagus	spears	may	be	stirred	into	the	mayonnaise	if	you	wish.

ASPARAGUS	TIPS

Pointes	d’	Asperges

Asparagus	tips	are	the	part	of	the	spear	from	the	tip	as	far	down	as
the	 asparagus	 is	 green	 and	 still	 tender.	 Asparagus	 tips	 are	 served	 as	 a
separate	 vegetable	 or	 as	 part	 of	 a	 vegetable	 garnish	 and	 go	well	 with
chicken	breasts,	veal	scallops,	brains,	sweetbreads,	scrambled	eggs,	and
omelettes.	They	are	also	used	in	a	sauce	to	fill	tarts,	tartlets,	or	artichoke
hearts,	 or	 can	 be	 served	 as	 a	 cold	 vegetable	 or	 as	 part	 of	 a	 vegetable
salad.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Choose	thin	asparagus	spears	¼	to	⅜	of	an	inch	in	diameter.	Hold
each	by	 its	butt	end	and,	moving	your	 fingers	up	 toward	 the	 tip,	bend
the	spear	until	it	snaps	in	two,	usually	at	about	the	halfway	point.	(Set



the	butt	 ends	aside;	 they	may	be	peeled	and	cooked,	and	are	good	 for
soups	 or	 purées.)	 Scrape	 off	 all	 the	 scales	 below	 the	 tip	 and	wash	 the
asparagus.	Cut	the	tips	off	so	each	is	1½	inches	long	and	tie	in	bundles
about	2	inches	in	diameter.	Dice	the	remaining	stalks.

		POINTES	D’ASPERGES	AU	BEURRE
[Buttered	Asparagus	Tips]

For	4	to	6	people	as	a	vegetable	garnish
Blanching

2	lbs.	asparagus	tips	prepared	as	directed	in	preceding	paragraph
6	quarts	rapidly	boiling	water
3	Tb	salt
Drop	the	diced	asparagus	stalks	in	the	boiling	salted	water	and	boil	5
minutes.	Then	 add	 the	 asparagus	bundles	 and	boil	 slowly	 for	 5	 to	8
minutes	 more,	 or	 until	 just	 tender.	 Remove	 bundles	 carefully	 and
drain;	drain	the	diced	stalks.
(*)	 If	 you	 are	 cooking	 the	 asparagus	 in	 advance	 or	wish	 to	 serve	 it
cold,	plunge	for	a	minute	or	two	in	cold	water	to	stop	the	cooking	and
set	the	color.	Drain.
Braising	in	butter

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	covered	baking	dish	or	fireproof	baking	and	serving	dish
1	Tb	softened	butter
Salt	and	pepper
4	Tb	melted	butter
A	round	of	waxed	paper
Smear	 the	 baking	 dish	 with	 softened	 butter.	 Arrange	 the	 diced
asparagus	 stalks	 in	 the	bottom;	 season	with	 salt,	pepper,	and	part	of
the	melted	butter.	Remove	strings	and	arrange	the	asparagus	tips	over



the	 stalks.	 Season	 with	 salt,	 pepper,	 and	 butter,	 and	 lay	 the	 waxed
paper	 on	 top.	 Heat	 for	 a	 moment	 on	 top	 of	 the	 stove;	 cover	 the
casserole	 and	place	 in	middle	 level	 of	 oven	 for	 10	 to	 15	minutes	 or
until	asparagus	is	hot	through.	Serve	immediately.

VARIATION:	SAUCES
Sauces	for	hot	and	cold	asparagus	are	listed.	If	you	are	serving	a	hot

sauce,	 you	 may	 wish	 only	 to	 blanch	 the	 asparagus	 tips	 and	 omit	 the
braising-in-butter	step	in	the	preceding	recipe.

FROZEN	ASPARAGUS
Frozen	 asparagus	 will	 always	 be	 limp	 however	 you	 cook	 it;	 the

following	method	is	as	good	as	any	we	have	found.	Allow	the	asparagus
to	thaw	partially	before	cooking	so	the	spears	can	be	separated	and	will
cook	more	evenly.	If	you	are	doing	more	than	two	boxes	at	a	time,	use
two	wide	 saucepans	 in	order	 that	 the	cooking	water	will	boil	 away	by
the	time	the	asparagus	is	done.

For	each	10-ounce	box	of	frozen	asparagus,	partially	thawed:
½	cup	water
⅛	tsp	salt
1	Tb	butter
A	wide	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet
A	cover	Pinch	of	pepper
More	salt,	if	needed
A	hot	vegetable	dish
Melted	butter	or	one	of	the	sauces	listed
Bring	the	water,	salt,	and	butter	to	the	boil	in	the	saucepan	or	skillet.
Add	the	asparagus,	cover,	and	boil	slowly	for	5	to	8	minutes	or	until
asparagus	is	tender.	Remove	cover,	raise	heat,	and	quickly	boil	off	any
remaining	 liquid.	Correct	 seasoning.	Arrange	 in	 vegetable	 dish,	 pour
on	sauce	or	pass	it	separately,	and	serve	as	soon	as	possible.



TIMBALE	D’ASPERGES
[Asparagus	Mold]

This	 asparagus	 custard	 is	 served	 unmolded	 as	 a	 first	 course	 or
luncheon	dish,	or	may	be	served	with	roast	or	sautéed	veal	or	chicken.
The	custard	mixture	may	be	prepared	hours	in	advance	of	cooking,	and
the	cooked	mold	may	be	kept	warm	for	a	considerable	time	or	reheated.
You	can	mold	the	custard	in	individual	cups	if	you	wish.

NOTE:	 Chopped,	 cooked	 Brussels	 sprouts,	 broccoli,	 cauliflower,
spinach,	 or	 puréed	 green	 peas	 may	 be	 cooked	 in	 the	 same	 way;
substitute	2½	to	3	cups	of	any	of	these	vegetables	for	the	asparagus.

For	6	people

Flavorless	salad	oil
A	6-cup	soufflé	mold
¼	cup	stale,	white	bread	crumbs
Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Oil	the	mold.	Roll	bread	crumbs	in	it	to
cover	the	entire	inner	surface.	Knock	out	excess	crumbs.

½	cup	finely	minced	onions
1	Tb	butter
Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	 in	 butter	 for	 about	 10	minutes	 in	 a	 covered
saucepan,	not	allowing	them	to	color.

A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Big	pinch	of	white	pepper
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	nutmeg
½	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
⅔	cup	stale,	white	bread	crumbs
5	eggs
1	cup	milk	brought	to	the	boil	with	4	Tb	butter
Scrape	the	onions	into	the	mixing	bowl.	Stir	in	the	seasonings,	cheese,



and	bread	crumbs.	Beat	in	the	eggs.	In	a	thin	stream	of	droplets,	beat
in	the	hot	milk	and	butter.

3	lbs.	boiled,	fresh	asparagus,	or	3	cups	cooked	frozen	asparagus,	or
canned	asparagus
Salt	and	pepper
Cut	the	tender	portion	of	the	asparagus	spears	into	½-inch	pieces.	Fold
the	asparagus	into	the	custard	mixture.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.

A	pan	of	boiling	water	large	enough	to	hold	the	mold	easily
Turn	 the	 custard	 into	 the	 prepared	 mold	 and	 set	 mold	 in	 a	 pan	 of
boiling	water.	Place	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven	and	bake	for	35
to	 40	 minutes,	 regulating	 heat	 so	 water	 remains	 just	 below	 the
simmer.	 Custard	 is	 done	 when	 a	 knife,	 plunged	 through	 the	 center,
comes	out	clean.

A	warm	serving	platter
Remove	 mold	 from	 water	 and	 allow	 to	 settle	 for	 5	 minutes.	 Run	 a
knife	around	 the	edge	of	 the	custard	and	 reverse	on	a	warm	serving
platter.	Surround	with	one	of	the	sauces	listed,	and	serve.
(*)	If	custard	is	not	served	immediately,	do	not	unmold	it,	but	leave	in
its	 pan	 of	 hot	 water,	 reheating	 the	 water	 from	 time	 to	 time,	 if
necessary.	Unmold	when	you	are	ready	to	serve.

Sauces	for	Asparagus	Mold
Prepare	2½	to	3	cups	of	one	of	the	following:
Sauce	Chivvy,	béchamel	with	cream	and	green	herbs
Sauce	Mornay,	béchamel	with	cheese
Sauce	Mousseline,	hollandaise	with	cream

GREEN	BEANS



Haricots	Verts

Green	beans,	snap	beans,	string	beans,	or	whatever	you	wish	to	call
them,	are	of	many	varieties:	some	are	flat,	others	are	round,	still	others
are	 a	mottled	green	 rather	 than	a	uniform	color.	Most	 of	 those	on	 the
market	 today	are	 string-less.	Whichever	you	buy,	 look	 for	beans	which
are	 clean,	 fresh-looking,	 firm,	 and	 which	 snap	 crisply	 and	 contain
immature	seeds.	If	possible,	select	beans	all	of	the	same	circumference	so
they	will	cook	evenly.	The	smaller	around	they	are,	the	more	they	will
approach	tiny	French	beans;	a	diameter	of	not	more	than	¼	inch	is	most
desirable.

Fresh	 beans	 take	 time	 to	 prepare	 for	 cooking,	 but	 have	 so	 much
more	flavor	than	frozen	beans	that	they	are	well	worth	the	trouble.	The
cooking	itself	is	easy;	however,	beans	demand	attention	if	they	are	to	be
fresh-tasting,	 full	 of	 flavor,	 and	 green.	 Although	 their	 preliminary
blanching	 may	 be	 taken	 care	 of	 hours	 in	 advance,	 the	 final	 touches
should	be	done	only	at	the	last	minute.	It	is	fatal	to	their	color,	texture,
and	 taste	 if	 they	 are	 overcooked,	 or	 if	 they	 are	 allowed	 to	 sit	 around
over	heat	for	more	than	a	few	minutes	after	they	are	ready	to	be	eaten.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Green	 beans	 will	 go	 with	 just	 about	 any	 meat	 dish,	 or	 may
constitute	a	separate	vegetable	course.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	 pound	 of	 beans	 will	 serve	 2	 or	 3	 people	 depending	 on	 your
menu.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Snap	 the	 tip	 of	 one	 end	 of	 a	 bean	with	 your	 fingers	 and	 draw	 it
down	the	length	of	one	side	of	the	bean	to	remove	any	possible	string.
Do	the	same	thing	with	the	other	end,	pulling	it	down	the	other	side	of
the	bean.

Beans	of	not	much	more	than	¼	inch	in	diameter	are	cooked	whole,
and	retain	their	maximum	flavor.	If	they	are	large	in	circumference,	you
may	 slice	 them	on	 the	bias	 to	make	 several	2½-inch	 lengths	per	bean;
this	 or	 machine	 slicing	 is	 usually	 called	 Frenched	 beans	 though	 it	 is



rarely	done	in	France	as	it	is	seldom	necessary.	Sliced	beans	never	have
the	flavor	of	whole	beans.

Wash	 the	 beans	 rapidly	 in	 very	 hot	 water	 the	 moment	 before
cooking.

HARICOTS	VERTS	BLANCHIS
[Blanched	Green	Beans—Preliminary	Cooking]

Whatever	 recipe	 you	 choose	 for	 your	 beans,	 always	 give	 them	 a
preliminary	 blanching	 in	 a	 very	 large	 kettle	 of	 rapidly	 boiling	 salted
water.	Depending	on	what	you	plan	to	do	to	them	later,	boil	them	either
until	tender	or	until	almost	tender,	and	drain	immediately.	This	essential
step	 in	 the	 French	 art	 of	 bean	 cookery	 always	 produces	 a	 fine,	 fresh,
green	bean	of	perfect	texture	and	flavor.

For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	green	beans,	trimmed	and	washed
A	large	kettle	containing	at	least	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling
water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water
A	 handful	 at	 a	 time,	 drop	 the	 beans	 into	 the	 rapidly	 boiling	 salted
water.	Bring	the	water	back	to	the	boil	as	quickly	as	possible,	and	boil
the	 beans	 slowly,	 uncovered,	 for	 10	 to	 15	 minutes;	 test	 the	 beans
frequently	after	8	minutes	by	eating	one.	A	well	cooked	bean	should
be	tender,	but	still	retain	the	slightest	suggestion	of	crunchiness.	Drain
the	beans	as	soon	as	they	are	done.

For	Immediate	Serving
Turn	 the	 beans	 into	 a	 large,	 heavy-bottomed	 saucepan	 and	 toss

them	 gently	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 by	 flipping	 the	 pan,	 not	 by
stirring	them.	This	will	evaporate	their	moisture	in	2	to	3	minutes.	Then
proceed	with	one	of	the	following	recipes.



For	hater	Serving	or	to	Serve	Cold
Run	cold	water	over	the	beans	for	3	to	4	minutes.	This	will	stop	the

cooking	immediately	and	the	beans	will	retain	color,	taste,	and	texture.
Drain,	 spread	 them	out	 on	 a	 clean	 towel,	 and	pat	dry.	The	beans	may
then	 be	 set	 aside	 in	 a	 colander,	 or	 put	 in	 a	 covered	 bowl	 in	 the
refrigerator	where	they	will	keep	perfectly	for	24	hours.
To	 Reheat:	 Depending	 on	 your	 recipe,	 either	 drop	 the	 beans	 in	 a

large	kettle	 of	 rapidly	boiling,	 salted	water,	 bring	quickly	 again	 to	 the
boil,	then	drain	immediately.	Or	toss	the	beans	in	a	tablespoon	or	two	of
hot	 butter	 or	 oil,	 season	 them,	 cover	 the	 pan,	 and	 let	 them	 warm
thoroughly	 for	 3	 to	 4	minutes	 over	moderate	heat.	 Then	proceed	with
your	recipe.

TWO	RECIPES	FOR	BUTTERED	GREEN	BEANS
Buttered	 green	 beans	 go	 with	 almost	 anything,	 and	 particularly

roast	or	broiled	 lamb,	beef,	 chicken,	veal,	 and	 liver.	They	may	also	be
served	as	a	separate	course.

Haricots	Verts	à	l’Anglaise
[Buttered	Green	Beans	I]

For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	hot,	blanched	green	beans
A	wide,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet
Salt	and	pepper
A	hot	serving	dish
4	to	8	Tb	butter,	cut	into	pieces	or	formed	into	shells
Toss	 the	 hot	 beans	 in	 the	 saucepan	 or	 skillet	 over	 moderately	 high
heat	 to	 evaporate	 their	 moisture.	 Toss	 briefly	 again	 with	 salt	 and
pepper	to	taste.	Turn	them	into	the	serving	dish,	distribute	the	butter
over	them,	and	serve	at	once.



Haricots	Verts	à	la	Maître	d’Hôtel
[Buttered	Green	Beans	II	—	with	Lemon	Juice	and	Parsley]

For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	hot,	blanched	green	beans	(preceding	master	recipe)
A	wide,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet
Salt	and	pepper
6	to	8	Tb	softened	butter	cut	into	4	pieces
2	to	3	tsp	lemon	juice
A	hot	vegetable	dish
3	Tb	minced	parsley
Toss	 the	 hot	 beans	 in	 the	 saucepan	 or	 skillet	 over	 moderately	 high
heat	to	evaporate	their	moisture.	Toss	briefly	again	with	salt,	pepper
and	 a	 piece	 of	 butter.	 Add	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 butter	 gradually	 while
tossing	 the	 beans;	 alternate	 with	 drops	 of	 lemon	 juice.	 Taste	 for
seasoning.	 Turn	 into	 the	 vegetable	 dish,	 sprinkle	 with	 parsley,	 and
serve	immediately.

TWO	RECIPES	FOR	GREEN	BEANS	IN	CREAM
Serve	creamed	green	beans	with	plain	roast	lamb,	veal,	or	chicken,

broiled	or	 sautéed	chicken,	 lamb	chops,	 sautéed	 liver,	or	veal	chops	or
scallops.

Haricots	Verts	à	la	Crème
[Creamed	Green	Beans	I]

For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	green	beans,	trimmed	and	washed
A	wide,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
3	Tb	softened	butter



2	cups	whipping	cream
A	lid	for	the	pan
Blanch	 the	 beans	 in	 7	 to	 8	 quarts	 of	 rapidly	 boiling	 salted	water	 as
described	on	this	page,	but	drain	them	3	to	4	minutes	before	they	are
tender.	 Toss	 the	 beans	 in	 the	 pan	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 to
evaporate	their	moisture.	Then	toss	with	the	salt,	pepper,	and	butter.
Pour	in	the	cream,	cover	the	pan,	and	boil	slowly	for	5	minutes	or	so,
until	 beans	 are	 tender	 and	 cream	 has	 reduced	 by	 half.	 Correct
seasoning.

A	hot	vegetable	dish
3	Tb	fresh	minced	savory,	tarragon,	or	parsley
Turn	into	hot	vegetable	dish,	sprinkle	with	herbs,	and	serve	at	once.

Haricots	Verts,	Sauce	Crème
[Creamed	Green	Beans	II]

This	 is	 less	 rich	 than	 the	 pure	 cream	 treatment	 in	 the	 preceding
recipe.
For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	green	beans,	trimmed	and	washed
A	wide,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet
Blanch	the	beans	in	7	to	8	quarts	of	boiling	salted	water	as	described
on	 this	 page,	 but	drain	 them	3	 to	4	minutes	 before	 they	 are	 tender.
Toss	the	beans	in	the	pan	over	moderately	high	heat	to	evaporate	their
moisture.

Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
3	Tb	softened	butter
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
A	lid	for	the	pan



Then	 toss	 them	 with	 the	 seasonings,	 butter,	 and	 minced	 shallots	 or
onions.	Cover	the	pan	and	let	them	cook	slowly	for	3	to	4	minutes.

3	cups	boiling	sauce	crème	(béchamel	with	cream)
Salt	and	pepper
A	hot	vegetable	dish
3	Tb	fresh	minced	savory,	tarragon,	or	parsley
Delicately	 fold	 the	 hot	 sauce	 into	 the	 beans.	 Cover	 pan	 and	 simmer
slowly	 again	 for	 3	 to	 4	 minutes,	 or	 until	 beans	 are	 tender.	 Correct
seasoning.	 Turn	 into	 a	 hot	 vegetable	 dish,	 sprinkle	 with	 herbs,	 and
serve	at	once.

A	GOOD	ADDITION

½	to	1	lb.	sliced	mushrooms	sautéed	in	butter
Fold	the	sautéed	mushrooms	into	the	beans	with	the	sauce.

HARICOTS	VERTS	GRATINÉS,	À	LA	MORNAY
[Green	Beans	Gratinéed	with	Cheese	Sauce]

This	is	a	good	method	for	ahead-of-time	preparation.	Serve	with	the
same	meats	suggested	in	the	preceding	recipes	for	green	beans	in	cream.
For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	green	beans,	trimmed	and	washed
Blanch	the	beans	as	described	until	they	are	just	tender.	Drain,	refresh
in	cold	water,	and	dry	in	a	towel.

3	cups	sauce	mornay	(béchamel	with	cheese)
A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
⅓	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese



1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Spread	a	third	of	the	sauce	in	the	baking	dish.	Season	the	beans	and
arrange	 them	over	 the	 sauce.	Pour	on	 the	 rest	of	 the	 sauce.	Sprinkle
with	cheese,	dot	with	butter,	and	set	aside	uncovered.

Half	an	hour	before	serving	time,	bake	in	upper	third	of	a	preheated
375-degree	 oven	 until	 beans	 are	well	 heated	 through	 and	 the	 sauce
has	browned	lightly	on	top.

HARICOTS	VERTS	À	LA	PROVENÇALE
[Green	Beans	with	Tomatoes,	Garlic,	and	Herbs]

These	 full-flavored	 beans	 go	wonderfully	with	 roast	 lamb	 or	 beef,
steaks,	chops,	or	broiled	chicken.	Tossed	with	diced,	sautéed	ham,	they
can	serve	as	a	main-course	luncheon	or	supper	dish.	Frozen	beans	react
nicely	to	this	treatment.
For	6	to	8	servings

2	cups	thinly	sliced	onions
½	cup	olive	oil	An	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet	large	enough	to	hold
the	beans
Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	 in	 the	 olive	 oil	 until	 they	 are	 tender	 and
translucent	but	not	browned,	about	10	minutes.

4	to	6	large,	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes	peeled,	seeded,	juiced,	and
chopped

2	to	4	cloves	mashed	garlic
A	medium	herb	bouquet	with	cloves:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	½
tsp	thyme,	and	2	cloves	tied	in	cheesecloth

¾	cup	liquid:	juice	from	the	tomatoes	plus	water	or	water	only
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
Add	 the	 ingredients	 at	 the	 left,	 and	 simmer	 for	 30	 minutes.	 Then
remove	the	herb	bouquet.



3	lbs.	green	beans	OR	3	boxes	partially	defrosted	cut	green	beans
added	directly	to	the	cooked	tomato	mixture

Salt	and	pepper
¼	cup	chopped	parsley,	or	a	mixture	of	green	herbs	such	as	basil,
savory,	and	tarragon	plus	parsley
While	the	tomatoes	are	cooking,	blanch	the	beans	in	7	to	8	quarts	of
boiling	salted	water	as	described	on	this	page,	but	drain	them	3	to	4
minutes	before	they	are	tender.	Toss	them	in	the	pan	with	the	onions
and	 tomatoes.	Cover	and	simmer	slowly	 for	8	 to	10	minutes,	 tossing
occasionally,	 until	 they	 are	 tender.	 Most	 of	 the	 liquid	 should	 have
evaporated	 by	 this	 time;	 if	 not,	 uncover,	 raise	 heat,	 and	 boil	 it	 off
rapidly,	 tossing	 the	 beans.	 Correct	 seasoning,	 toss	 in	 the	 herbs,	 and
serve.

WAX	OR	YELLOW	POD	BEANS

Haricots	Mange-tout	—	Haricots	Beurre

Wax	beans	are	trimmed	and	blanched	in	the	same	manner	as	green
beans,	and	may	be	substituted	 for	green	beans	 in	any	of	 the	preceding
recipes.	Here	is	a	special	recipe	for	large	wax	beans.

HARICOTS	MANGE-TOUT	À	L’ÉTUVÉE
[Wax	Beans	Braised	with	Onions,	Lettuce,	and	Cream]

For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	large	but	tender	wax	beans
Trim	and	wash	the	beans	according	to	directions	being	sure	all	strings
have	been	removed.	Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

2	Tb	softened	butter
A	covered	fireproof	casserole	or	baking	dish



1½	cups	diced	onions
1	tsp	salt	Big	pinch	of	pepper
1	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp
thyme	tied	in	cheesecloth

2	heads	of	Boston	lettuce,	shredded
8	Tb	(¼	lb.)	butter
1½	cups	chicken	stock	or	canned	chicken	broth
A	round	of	waxed	paper
Butter	 the	casserole	or	baking	dish	heavily.	Spread	 the	onions	 in	 the
bottom,	 arrange	 the	 beans	 over	 them,	 and	 season	 with	 salt	 and
pepper.	 Bury	 the	 herb	 bouquet	 in	 their	midst.	 Distribute	 the	 lettuce
over	 the	beans.	Sliver	 the	rest	of	 the	butter	over	 the	 lettuce.	Pour	 in
the	 stock	 or	 broth.	 Set	 casserole	 over	 heat	 and	 bring	 liquid	 to	 the
simmer.	 Place	 the	 round	 of	 paper	 over	 the	 vegetables,	 cover	 the
casserole	 and	 set	 in	 lower	 third	 of	 oven.	 Regulate	 heat	 so	 liquid
simmers	regularly	and	has	almost	evaporated	in	45	minutes.	Remove
herb	bouquet.

2	cups	light	cream	Salt	and	pepper
Bring	 the	 cream	 to	 the	 boil	 and	 pour	 it	 into	 the	 casserole.	 Bake	 30
minutes	more.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	set	aside,	partially	covered,	and	reheated	at	serving	time.

3	Tb	minced	fresh	savory,	basil,	tarragon,	or	parsley
Sprinkle	with	herbs	just	before	bringing	casserole	to	table.

FROZEN	GREEN	OR	WAX	BEANS
Frozen	beans	cook	more	evenly	if	they	are	partially	thawed	and	not

stuck	all	 together	 in	a	solid	block.	When	you	are	doing	more	than	two
packages,	use	two	saucepans;	if	too	many	beans	are	cooked	in	one	pan,
the	liquid	will	not	evaporate	by	the	time	the	beans	are	tender.	Cut	beans
have	more	flavor	than	Frenched	beans.



For	each	10-ounce	package	of	beans:
½	cup	chicken	stock,	canned	chicken	broth,	canned	mushroom	broth,
or	water

1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
¼	tsp	salt
1	Tb	butter
A	heavy	bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet	with	cover
Bring	the	liquid,	shallots	or	onions,	salt,	and	butter	to	the	boil	in	the
saucepan.	Add	the	partially	thawed	beans.	Cover	and	boil	slowly	for	5
to	 6	 minutes,	 tossing	 occasionally,	 until	 the	 beans	 are	 just	 tender.
Remove	 cover	 and	 rapidly	 boil	 off	 any	 remaining	 liquid.	 Correct
seasoning.

The	 beans	 may	 now	 be	 used	 in	 any	 of	 the	 preceding	 green	 bean
recipes.	If	they	are	to	be	simmered	in	cream	or	in	a	sauce,	use	half	the
amount	 of	 liquid	 for	 their	 preliminary	 cooking,	 and	 cook	 only	 until
partially	tender.	They	will	finish	cooking	in	the	sauce.
If	 you	wish	 to	 do	 the	 preliminary	 cooking	 in	 advance,	 spread	 the

cooked	beans	out	in	one	layer	in	a	big	cold	saucepan	or	dish	so	they	will
cool	rapidly.
If	the	beans	are	to	be	served	cold,	use	olive	oil	rather	than	butter	in

the	preceding	recipe,	and	spread	the	beans	out	afterward	in	one	layer	to
cool	rapidly.

BRUSSELS	SPROUTS

Choux	de	Bruxelles

Cooked	 Brussels	 sprouts	 should	 be	 bright	 green,	 fresh-tasting,	 and
have	the	slightest	suggestion	of	crunch	at	the	core.	Overcooked	sprouts
become	yellowish,	mushy,	and	develop	the	flavor	of	stale	cabbage.
Choose	firm,	healthy,	fresh,	rounded	heads	all	of	the	same	size	with

bright	 green	 leaves.	 Soft-headed	 sprouts	 are	 overmature,	 tasteless,	 or
unhealthy,	and	will	cook	into	a	pulp.



AMOUNT	TO	BUY

A	 1-quart	 basket	 weighting	 about	 1¼	 pounds	 will	 serve	 4	 or	 5
people	as	a	vegetable	garnish.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Buttered	 Brussels	 sprouts	 go	 well	 with	 roast	 duck,	 goose,	 turkey,
beef,	 pork,	 liver,	ham,	and	 sausages.	Creamed	Brussels	 sprouts	may	be
served	with	any	of	these,	and	also	with	roast	chicken	or	veal.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Trim	the	base	of	each	Brussels	sprout	with	a	small	knife	and	pierce	a
cross	 in	 it	 for	 quick	 cooking.	 Remove	 any	 wilted	 or	 yellowish	 leaves.
Discard	 any	 sprouts	 which	 are	 soft-headed,	 yellowish,	 or	 worm-eaten.
Wash	the	trimmed	vegetables	quickly	in	a	large	basin	of	cold	water	and
drain.	 Modern	 growing	 methods	 seem	 to	 have	 eliminated	 burrowing
insects,	so	it	 is	nowadays	rarely	necessary,	as	it	used	to	be,	to	soak	the
vegetables	for	10	to	15	minutes	in	salted	water.

CHOUX	DE	BRUXELLES	BLANCHIS
[Blanched	Brussels	Sprouts—Preliminary	Cooking]

Brussels	sprouts,	whether	 they	are	 to	be	served	with	melted	butter
and	 seasonings	 or	 are	 to	 be	 simmered	 or	 braised,	 always	 receive	 a
blanching	in	a	large	kettle	of	boiling	salted	water.	This	preliminary	may
be	accomplished	hours	before	the	final	cooking	is	to	take	place.

1	to	2	quarts	Brussels	sprouts,	trimmed	and	washed
A	large	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water
Drop	the	Brussels	sprouts	 into	the	rapidly	boiling	salted	water.	Bring
to	the	boil	again	as	rapidly	as	possible.

Partially	cooked

A	skimmer



A	colander
If	 the	 vegetables	 are	 to	 be	 partially	 cooked	 and	 finished	 off	 later	 as
directed	in	most	of	the	following	recipes,	boil	them	slowly,	uncovered,
for	6	to	8	minutes,	or	until	almost	tender.	Immediately	remove	with	a
skimmer	and	drain	in	a	colander.

Fully	cooked
If	they	are	to	be	fully	cooked,	and	served	at	once	with	melted	butter	à
l’anglaise,	boil	them	slowly,	uncovered,	for	a	total	of	10	to	12	minutes.
They	 are	 done	when	 a	 knife	 pierces	 the	 stem	of	 a	 sprout	 easily;	 cut
one	in	half	and	eat	it,	to	be	sure.	Drain	immediately.

AHEAD-OF-TIME	BLANCHING

If	 the	Brussels	 sprouts	 are	not	 to	be	used	at	once,	 as	 soon	as	 they
have	 been	 drained	 spread	 them	 out	 in	 one	 layer,	 not	 touching	 one
another,	 on	 a	 double	 thickness	 of	 clean	 toweling.	 This	 lets	 the	 air
circulate	around	 them	and	cool	 them	quickly,	 so	 that	 they	 retain	 their
color	and	texture.	(You	may	plunge	them	into	cold	water	instead,	if	you
wish,	but	we	 think	 the	one-layer	 cooling	gives	a	better	 texture.)	When
the	Brussels	 sprouts	are	 thoroughly	 cold,	 they	may	be	 refrigerated	and
will	keep	perfectly	for	24	hours.	Complete	the	cooking	as	directed	in	any
of	the	following	recipes.

		CHOUX	DE	BRUXELLES	ÉTUVÉS	AU	BEURRE
[Brussels	Sprouts	Braised	in	Butter]

Serve	 braised	 Brussels	 sprouts	 with	 roast	 turkey,	 pork,	 duck,	 or
goose,	 steaks,	 chops,	 hamburgers,	 or	 sautéed	 liver.	 You	 may	 dress	 up
braised	Brussels	sprouts	with	cream,	cheese,	or	chestnuts,	as	suggested	in
the	variations	at	the	end	of	the	recipe.

For	6	people

1½	Tb	softened	butter
A	2½-quart,	fireproof,	covered	casserole	or	baking	dish	large	enough



to	hold	the	Brussels	sprouts	in	1	or	2	layers
Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees,	and	smear	the	butter	inside	the	casserole
or	baking	dish.

1½	quarts	blanched	Brussels	sprouts	(partially	cooked)
Salt	and	pepper
2	to	4	Tb	melted	butter
Arrange	 the	 blanched	 Brussels	 sprouts	 heads	 up	 in	 the	 casserole	 or
baking	dish.	Sprinkle	lightly	with	salt	and	pepper,	and	with	the	melted
butter.

A	round	of	lightly	buttered	waxed	paper
Lay	the	paper	over	the	Brussels	sprouts.	Cover	and	heat	on	top	of	the
stove	 until	 vegetables	 begin	 to	 sizzle,	 then	 place	 in	 middle	 level	 of
preheated	 oven.	 Bake	 for	 about	 20	minutes,	 or	 until	 the	 sprouts	 are
tender	and	well	impregnated	with	butter.	Serve	as	soon	as	possible.

VARIATIONS
Choux	de	Bruxelles	Étuvés	à	la	Crème
[Creamed	Brussels	Sprouts]

Serve	these	with	veal,	chicken,	or	turkey.
For	6	people

1½	quarts	Brussels	sprouts
½	to	¾	cup	boiling	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
1	to	2	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Braise	the	Brussels	sprouts	as	 in	the	preceding	recipe,	but	use	only	2
tablespoons	of	butter.	After	the	casserole	has	been	in	the	oven	for	10
minutes,	pour	on	the	boiling	cream	and	continue	baking	for	10	more
minutes	 or	 until	 the	 vegetables	 are	 tender.	 They	will	 have	 absorbed



most	 of	 the	 cream.	 Correct	 seasoning,	 dot	with	 butter,	 and	 serve	 as
soon	as	possible.

Choux	de	Bruxelles	aux	Marrons
[Brussels	Sprouts	Braised	with	Chestnuts]

This	recipe	is	particularly	good	with	roast	turkey,	duck,	or	goose.
For	6	people

1½	quarts	Brussels	sprouts	braised	in	butter
2	cups	braised	chestnuts
Follow	 the	preceding	master	 recipe	 for	braising	 the	Brussels	 sprouts,
but	add	the	braised	chestnuts	to	the	casserole	to	cook	with	them.

Choux	de	Bruxelles	à	la	Mornay,	Gratinés
[Brussels	Sprouts	Gratinéed	with	Cheese	Sauce]

Serve	 these	with	roast	chicken	or	veal,	or	as	a	 luncheon	or	supper
dish.

For	6	people

1½	quarts	Brussels	sprouts	braised	in	butter
2	cups	hot	sauce	mornay	(béchamel	with	cheese)
A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	about	9	inches	in	diameter	and	2
inches	deep
¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Follow	 the	 preceding	master	 recipe	 for	 braising	 the	 Brussel	 sprouts;
you	 may	 use	 only	 2	 tablespoons	 of	 butter	 if	 you	 wish.	 Prepare	 the
sauce,	and	spread	one	third	of	it	in	the	baking	dish	when	the	sprouts
are	done.	Arrange	the	Brussels	sprouts	over	the	sauce,	spoon	the	rest
of	 the	sauce	over	 them,	and	sprinkle	with	cheese	and	dots	of	butter.



Set	under	a	moderately	hot	broiler	for	2	to	3	minutes	to	brown	lightly,
and	serve	at	once.

Choux	de	Bruxelles	à	la	Milanaise
[Brussels	Sprouts	Browned	with	Cheese]

These	 cheese-coated	 Brussels	 sprouts	 are	 good	 with	 steaks	 and
chops.

For	6	people

1½	quarts	Brussels	sprouts	braised	in	butter
½	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese	mixed	with	½	cup	grated	Parmesan	cheese
2	Tb	melted	butter
Follow	 the	preceding	master	 recipe	 for	braising	 the	Brussels	 sprouts,
but	when	 they	 have	 been	 in	 the	 oven	 10	minutes,	 turn	 them	 into	 a
bowl.	Reset	oven	to	425	degrees.	Sprinkle	2	to	3	tablespoons	of	cheese
in	 the	 casserole	or	baking	dish	 to	 coat	 the	bottom	and	 sides.	Return
the	Brussels	sprouts,	spreading	the	rest	of	the	cheese	over	each	layer.
Pour	on	the	melted	butter.	Place	uncovered	in	upper	third	of	oven	for
10	to	15	minutes,	to	brown	the	cheese	nicely.

CHOUX	DE	BRUXELLES	À	LA	CRÈME
[Brussels	Sprouts	Chopped	and	Simmered	in	Cream]

Serve	this	dish	with	steaks	or	chops,	roast	beef	or	lamb,	pork,	duck,
or	goose.

For	6	people

1½	quarts	Brussels	sprouts,	trimmed	and	washed
Follow	 the	 recipe	 for	 blanched	Brussels	 sprouts,	 but	 boil	 them	 for	 5
minutes	only.	Drain.	If	you	are	not	proceeding	at	once	with	the	rest	of
this	recipe,	let	them	cool	in	one	layer.	Chop	them	roughly.



3	Tb	butter
A	10-inch	enameled	skillet
¼	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
Heat	 the	 butter	 to	 bubbling	 in	 the	 skillet.	Add	 the	 chopped	Brussels
sprouts	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Shake	them	over	moderately
high	heat	 for	 several	minutes	 to	 evaporate	 their	moisture	but	not	 to
brown	them.

¾	cup	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Pour	in	the	cream.	Bring	to	the	simmer.	Cover	the	skillet	and	cook	at	a
slow	simmer	for	8	to	10	minutes	or	until	 the	vegetables	have	almost
entirely	absorbed	the	cream	and	are	tender.	Correct	seasoning.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
A	hot	vegetable	dish
2	Tb	minced	parsley
Reheat	to	the	simmer	just	before	serving.	Off	heat,	fold	in	the	butter.
Turn	into	a	hot	vegetable	dish,	sprinkle	with	parsley,	and	serve.

TIMBALE	DE	CHOUX	DE	BRUXELLES
[Brussels	Sprouts	Mold]

This	 is	 a	 purée	 of	 Brussels	 sprouts	mixed	with	 eggs,	milk,	 cheese,
and	bread	crumbs,	cooked	in	a	mold,	then	unmolded	and	served	with	a
cream	 sauce.	 It	 makes	 an	 unusual	 luncheon	 dish,	 or	 a	 fine
accompaniment	 to	 roast	 veal	 or	 chicken.	 Use	 the	 same	 method	 and
ingredients	as	 for	 the	asparagus	mold,	 this	page,	substituting	blanched,
chopped	Brussels	sprouts	for	asparagus.

FROZEN	BRUSSELS	SPROUTS
This	 recipe	 is	 for	 fully-cooked	 Brussels	 sprouts.	 If	 you	 wish	 to



substitute	 partially	 cooked	 frozen	 sprouts	 for	 fresh	 ones	 in	 any	 of	 the
preceding	recipes,	use	half	the	amount	of	water	indicated	here,	and	cook
the	 sprouts	until	 they	are	almost	but	not	quite	 tender,	3	 to	4	minutes.
(When	you	are	cooking	more	than	two	packages,	use	two	saucepans;	 if
too	many	vegetables	are	cooked	in	one	pan,	the	liquid	will	not	evaporate
by	the	time	they	are	tender.)
For	each	10-ounce	package	frozen	Brussels	sprouts:
½	cup	water
¼	tsp	salt
1	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper
Allow	the	frozen	Brussels	sprouts	to	thaw	just	enough	so	that	you	can
separate	them.	Boil	the	water	with	the	salt	and	butter	in	a	saucepan.
Add	the	vegetables,	cover,	and	boil	slowly	for	6	to	8	minutes	or	until
the	 sprouts	 are	 tender.	 Uncover	 saucepan	 and	 rapidly	 boil	 off	 any
remaining	liquid.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	 If	not	 to	be	used	 immediately,	 spread	 them	out	 in	one	 layer	 in	a
large,	cold	saucepan	or	dish.

BROCCOLI

Choux	Broccoli—Choux	Asperges

Broccoli,	for	some	reason,	is	rarely	seen	in	France	though	it	abounds
next	 door	 in	 Italy.	We	 shall	 therefore	 not	 give	 it	 full-dress	 treatment,
though	we	think	it	a	delicious	and	useful	vegetable.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Fresh	broccoli	will	cook	much	more	rapidly	and	stay	greener	if	you
divide	it	into	flowerets	about	3	inches	long	and	then	peel	the	thin,	green
skin	off	the	stalks.	Peel	the	cut-off	butt	ends	deeply	enough	to	expose	the
whitish,	tender	flesh,	and	cut	into	bias	lengths.

BLANCHING



Blanch	 the	 prepared	 broccoli	 in	 a	 large	 kettle	 of	 boiling,	 salted
water;	 first	put	 in	 the	pieces	of	 stem	and	boil	5	minutes,	 then	add	 the
flowerets.	Because	it	is	a	fragile	vegetable,	broccoli	is	easier	to	handle	if
you	 place	 it	 in	 a	 vegetable	 rack	 which	 you	 may	 set	 into	 the	 boiling
water,	and	lift	out	with	the	broccoli	when	it	is	done.	If	the	broccoli	is	to
be	 partially	 cooked	 then	 braised,	 or	 simmered	 in	 a	 sauce,	 boil	 the
flowerets	 for	 about	 5	 minutes	 or	 until	 almost	 tender.	 Fully	 cooked
broccoli	 that	 is	 to	 be	 served	 with	 melted	 butter	 or	 a	 sauce	 such	 as
hollandaise	requires	8	to	10	minutes	of	cooking,	or	until	a	knife	pierces
the	stems	easily.	Drain	immediately.

FROZEN	BROCCOLI

Cook	frozen	broccoli	in	the	same	manner	as	frozen	Brussels	sprouts

SAUCES	FOR	PLAIN,	BOILED	BROCCOLI

Sauces	for	hot	or	cold	broccoli	are	the	same	as	those	suggested	for
asparagus

OTHER	COOKING	METHODS

Broccoli	 may	 be	 substituted	 for	 Brussels	 sprouts	 in	 any	 of	 the
following	recipes	in	the	Brussels	sprouts	section:

Braised	in	Butter
Creamed
Gratinéed	with	Cheese	Sauce
Browned	with	Swiss	and	Parmesan	Cheese
Chopped	and	Simmered	in	Cream
Baked	 in	a	mold	with	 eggs,	milk,	 and	 cheese,	 then	unmolded.	 See

the	master	recipe	for	asparagus	molds	on	this	page.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Hot	or	cold	broccoli	with	a	sauce	such	as	hollandaise	or	vinaigrette
may	be	served,	like	asparagus,	as	a	separate	vegetable	course.	Creamed
broccoli	 goes	with	 roast	or	broiled	 chicken,	 roast	veal,	 or	 sautéed	veal
scallops.	Broccoli	with	melted	butter	or	browned	with	cheese	goes	with
sautéed	liver,	steaks,	chops,	and	broiled	chicken.

CAULIFLOWER



CAULIFLOWER

Chou-fleur

Choose	cauliflowers	with	hard,	clean,	white	heads	containing	firm,
compact,	 flower	 clusters.	 The	 leaves	 surrounding	 the	 head	 should	 be
fresh,	healthy,	and	green.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

A	trimmed	cauliflower	head	about	8	inches	across	will	serve	4	to	6
people	as	a	vegetable	garnish.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Cauliflower	 gratinéed	 or	 served	 with	 a	 sauce	 may	 constitute	 a
separate	vegetable	course.	All	 types	of	cauliflower	dishes	go	with	roast
turkey,	chicken,	lamb,	beef,	pork,	and	with	steaks	or	chops.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Cauliflower	 cooks	more	 evenly	 if	 you	 divide	 it	 into	 flowerets;	 we
therefore	 always	 advise	 that	 you	do	 so.	 Pull	 the	 outside	 leaves	 off	 the
cauliflower	and	cut	the	stem	off	close	under	the	head.	The	smaller	leaves
and	 the	 peeled	 stem	may	 be	 used	 for	 soup.	 Cut	 the	 flowerets	 off	 the
central	stalk,	and	peel	the	thin	skin	off	their	stems	with	a	knife.	Cut	a	slit
in	any	stems	larger	than	¼	inch	in	diameter,	so	they	will	cook	quickly.
Peel	the	central	stalk	deeply	enough	to	expose	its	tender	flesh,	and	cut	it
in	 bias	 pieces.	 Wash	 the	 cauliflower	 rapidly	 in	 a	 large	 basin	 of	 cold
water.	Drain.

		CHOU-FLEUR	BLANCHI
[Blanched	Cauliflower—Preliminary	Cooking]

1	or	2	heads	of	cauliflower,	cut	into	flowerets
A	large	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water
A	vegetable	rack	set	in	the	kettle	is	useful



Optional:	add	1	cup	of	milk	to	kettle	for	each	3	quarts	of	boiling
water,	to	keep	cauliflower	white
Drop	 the	 washed	 cauliflower	 into	 the	 rapidly	 boiling	 water;	 use	 a
vegetable	 rack	 if	 you	have	one.	Bring	back	 to	 the	boil	 as	 quickly	 as
possible.	Boil	slowly,	uncovered,	for	9	to	12	minutes.	The	cauliflower
is	done	when	a	knife	pierces	the	stems	easily.	Eat	a	piece	to	be	sure.	It
should	be	tender	but	retain	the	merest	suggestion	of	crunchiness	at	the
core.

As	soon	as	it	is	done,	carefully	remove	the	cauliflower	with	a	skimmer
or	spoon	and	drain	in	a	colander,	or	remove	the	rack	with	cauliflower
in	it.

Refreshing	Blanched	Cauliflower
When	cooked	cauliflower	is	not	to	be	served	immediately	or	is	to	be

served	 cold,	 it	 should	 be	 refreshed	 in	 cold	 water	 as	 soon	 as	 it	 is
blanched.	This	stops	the	cooking	so	that	the	cauliflower	retains	its	fresh
taste	and	texture.	Plunge	the	colander	or	vegetable	rack	holding	the	hot
cauliflower	into	a	large	basin	of	cold	water	for	2	to	3	minutes.	Drain.

Reheating
If	the	refreshed	cauliflower	is	to	be	served	hot	with	melted	butter	or

sauce,	 steam	 it	 in	 a	 covered	 colander	 over	 boiling	 water	 for	 4	 to	 5
minutes	until	hot	 through.	Then	 season	with	 salt	 and	pepper,	 and	 it	 is
ready	for	saucing	and	serving.

How	to	Mold	Cooked	Cauliflower	into	its	Original	Shape
It	is	not	necessary,	of	course,	to	mold	the	cooked	flowerets	back	into

the	shape	of	a	whole	head,	but	it	makes	an	attractive	presentation.
Select	 a	 bowl	 slightly	 smaller	 than	 the	 width	 and	 depth	 of	 the

cauliflower	 head	 before	 it	 was	 cut	 into	 flowerets.	 Set	 the	 bowl	 over
simmering	 water	 to	 warm	 it.	 When	 the	 cauliflower	 heads	 have	 been
blanched	 and	 drained,	 one	 by	 one	 place	 the	 longest	 flowerets	 in	 the
bottom	of	the	bowl,	heads	down	and	stems	converging	at	the	center	of



the	bowl.	Continue	with	the	rest	of	the	flowerets,	arranging	their	heads
around	the	sides	of	the	bowl	until	it	is	filled.	Place	the	cooked	pieces	of
stem	on	 top.	Then	 turn	a	warm,	 round,	 serving	dish	upside	down	over
the	 bowl.	 Reverse	 the	 bowl	 onto	 the	 dish	 and	 remove	 the	 bowl;	 the
cauliflower	will	stand	molded	in	approximately	its	original	shape.

SAUCES	FOR	HOT	CAULIFLOWER
Here	is	a	list	of	sauces	to	serve	with	hot	cauliflower;	about	1	to	1½

cups	 are	 sufficient	 for	 an	 8-inch	 head.	 If	 the	 cauliflower	 has	 been
molded,	spoon	⅓	of	the	sauce	over	the	stems	before	reversing	the	bowl.

Beurre	au	Citron,	lemon	butter	sauce
Beurre	 Noir,	 brown	 butter	 sauce.	 You	may	 brown	¾	 cup	 of	 fresh,

white	 bread	 crumbs	with	 the	 butter.	 Sieved	 hard-boiled	 egg	 yolks	 and
chopped	 parsley	 mixed	 into	 the	 butter	 and	 breadcrumbs	 turn	 the
cauliflower	into	chou-fleur	à	la	polonaise.

Sauce	Crème,	béchamel	with	cream	Sauce	Bâtarde,	mock	hollandaise
sauce	hollandaise
Sauce	Mousseline,	hollandaise	with	cream

Sauce	à	la	Crème
[Fresh	Cream	Sauce]

For	an	8-inch	cauliflower

2	cups	whipping	cream
A	small	saucepan
Salt	and	white	pepper
Lemon	juice
2	Tb	softened	butter
A	wire	whip
Parsley	sprigs

Simmer	the	cream	in	the	saucepan	until	reduced	by	half.	Season	to



taste	with	salt,	pepper,	and	drops	of	lemon	juice.	Set	aside	until	ready	to
use,	 then	 reheat.	 Remove	 from	 heat	 and	 beat	 in	 the	 butter	 half	 a
tablespoon	 at	 a	 time	 and	 pour	 the	 sauce	 over	 the	 hot	 cauliflower.
Decorate	with	parsley	and	serve.

CHOU-FLEUR	À	LA	MORN	AY,	GRATINÉ
[Cauliflower	au	gratin	with	Cheese]

Cauliflower	au	gratin	may	be	prepared	for	the	oven	well	in	advance
of	serving,	and	goes	with	all	kinds	of	roasts,	chops,	and	steaks.	You	may,
if	you	wish,	mold	the	cauliflower	in	a	bowl	before	saucing	it,	this	page,
so	it	will	preserve	its	round	shape.

For	4	to	6	people

An	8-inch	cauliflower	cut	into	flowerets
Following	 directions	 on	 this	 page,	 blanch	 the	 cauliflower	 in	 7	 to	 8
quarts	 of	 boiling,	 salted	 water	 for	 9	 to	 12	 minutes,	 refresh	 in	 cold
water,	and	drain.

2½	cups	sauce	mornay	(béchamel	with	cheese)
A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	about	8	inches	in	diameter	and	2
inches	deep
Salt	and	pepper
2	Tb	fine,	dry,	white	bread	crumbs	mixed	with	2	Tb	grated	Swiss
cheese
2	Tb	melted	butter
Spread	⅓	of	the	sauce	in	the	baking	dish.	Arrange	the	cauliflower	over
it	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Pour	on	the	rest	of	the	sauce	and
sprinkle	the	top	with	bread	crumbs	and	cheese.	Dribble	on	the	melted
butter.
(*)	Set	aside,	covered	loosely	with	waxed	paper,	until	ready	to	bake.

About	 30	 minutes	 before	 serving	 time,	 place	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 a



preheated	375-degree	oven	to	warm	through	thoroughly	and	to	brown
lightly.	Serve	as	soon	as	possible.

CHOU-FLEUR	AUX	TOMATES	FRAÎCHES
[Cauliflower	Gratinéed	with	Cheese	and	Tomatoes]

This	dish	is	particularly	good	with	steaks,	chops,	and	hamburgers.
For	4	to	6	people

An	8-inch	head	of	cauliflower,	cut	into	flowerets
Following	directions	blanch	the	cauliflower	in	boiling	salted	water	for
9	to	12	minutes,	refresh	in	cold	water,	and	drain.

1	lb.	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	and	juiced	(makes	1½
cups	of	pulp)
Cut	the	tomato	pulp	into	strips	½	inch	wide.

A	shallow	10-inch	buttered	baking	dish
¼	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
½	cup	melted	butter
¼	cup	fine,	dry,	white	bread	crumbs	mixed	with	½	cup	grated	Swiss
and	Parmesan	cheese
Arrange	the	cauliflower	 in	 the	center	of	 the	dish.	Place	 the	tomatoes
around	the	edge	of	the	dish.	Season	the	vegetables	with	salt,	pepper,
and	half	the	melted	butter.	Spread	the	cheese	and	bread	crumbs	over
the	vegetables,	and	pour	on	the	rest	of	the	melted	butter.
(*)	Set	aside	until	ready	to	bake.

About	 30	 minutes	 before	 serving	 time,	 place	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 a
preheated	 375-degree	 oven	 to	warm	 through	 thoroughly	 and	 brown
the	cheese	nicely.	Serve	as	soon	as	possible.



CHOU-FLEUR	EN	VERDURE
[Purée	of	Cauliflower	and	Water	Cress	with	Cream]

Serve	 this	 delectable	 purée	 with	 roast	 veal,	 chicken,	 or	 turkey,
broiled	or	sautéed	chicken,	chicken	breasts,	or	veal	scallops.

For	4	to	6	people

An	8-inch	head	of	cauliflower
A	bunch	of	fresh	water	cress	about	3	inches	in	diameter	across	the
stems
A	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water
Separate	the	cauliflower	head	into	flowerets;	peel	off	and	discard	the
tough	skin	of	the	central	stalk	and	chop	the	stalk.	Cut	off	the	bunch	of
water	cress	just	above	the	point	where	the	stems	join	the	leaves	(stems
may	 be	 used	 for	 soup).	 Wash	 and	 drain	 the	 vegetables.	 Drop	 the
cauliflower	 into	 the	 boiling,	 salted	 water	 and	 boil	 slowly	 for	 6
minutes.	Then	add	the	watercress	leaves	and	boil	4	to	5	minutes	more,
or	until	cauliflower	is	just	tender.	Drain.

A	food	mill
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	rubber	scraper
2	cups	thick	béchamel	sauce	(3½	Tb	butter,	5	Tb	flour,	2	cups	boiling
milk,	salt,	and	pepper)
½	cup	whipping	cream
½	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
Salt	and	pepper
Purée	the	cauliflower	and	water	cress	through	the	food	mill	and	place
purée	in	mixing	bowl.	Fold	in	the	béchamel	sauce.	By	spoonfuls,	fold
in	 the	 cream	but	do	not	 thin	out	 the	purée	 too	much;	 it	 should	 just
hold	its	shape	when	a	bit	is	 lifted	on	the	scraper.	Fold	in	the	cheese,
and	season	to	taste	with	salt	and	pepper.



A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	8	to	9	inches	in	diameter	and	2	inches
deep
2	Tb	fine,	dry,	white	bread	crumbs	mixed	with	2	Tb	grated	Swiss
cheese
2	Tb	melted	butter
Heap	the	purée	in	the	baking	dish.	Sprinkle	on	the	cheese	and	bread
crumbs,	then	the	melted	butter.
(*)	Set	aside	until	ready	to	bake.

About	30	minutes	before	serving,	place	in	upper	third	of	a	preheated
375-degree	 oven	 to	 heat	 through	 thoroughly	 and	 brown	 the	 cheese
and	bread	crumbs.	Serve	as	soon	as	possible.

TIMBALE	DE	CHOU-FLEUR
[Cauliflower	Mold]

This	 is	 a	 purée	 of	 cooked	 cauliflower	 mixed	 with	 eggs,	 bread
crumbs,	cheese,	and	milk.	It	 is	baked	in	a	soufflé	mold,	unmolded,	and
surrounded	with	a	sauce.	Use	the	recipe	for	asparagus	mold	on	this	page,
substituting	cauliflower	for	the	asparagus.	Other	sauces	to	serve	besides
those	suggested	in	the	recipe	are:	Coulis	de	Tomates,	fresh	tomato	sauce
with	herbs

Sauce	au	Cari,	béchamel	with	curry	and	onions

GREEN	PEAS

Petits	Pois

The	 tenderest,	 freshest,	 and	 sweetest	 peas	 have	 bright	 green	 pods
that	are	rather	velvety	to	the	touch.	The	pods	should	be	fairly	well	filled.
A	 perfect	 raw	 pea	 will	 taste	 tender	 and	 sweet.	 As	 peas	 mature	 they
become	 larger,	harder,	and	 less	 sweet;	but	even	a	quite	 tough	pea	will
make	 good	 eating	 if	 it	 is	 cooked	 in	 the	 right	way.	Choose,	 if	 possible,
pods	of	equal	size	with	peas	all	at	the	same	stage	of	development	so	they



will	cook	evenly.
As	we	have	not	the	space	in	this	book	to	cover	every	aspect	of	pea

cookery,	 we	 have	 felt	 it	 would	 be	 most	 useful	 to	 present	 one
fundamental	recipe	each	for	the	small	tender	pea,	the	large	tender	pea,
the	tough	pea,	peas	à	la	française,	and	frozen	and	canned	peas.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	pound	of	small,	tender	peas	will	usually	furnish	about	1	cup	of
shelled	peas.

One	 pound	 of	 large	 peas	 will	 usually	 furnish	 about	 1½	 cups	 of
shelled	peas.

One	cup	of	shelled	peas	will	serve	from	1	to	3	people	depending	on
your	menu.	We	have	based	our	recipes	on	2	people	per	cup.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Beautifully	cooked	peas	make	a	delicious	separate	vegetable	course,
and	they	may	accompany	almost	anything	from	eggs	and	roasts	to	stews.

THREE	RECIPES	FOR	BUTTERED	PEAS
Each	of	 the	 three	 recipes	 here	 is	 designed	 for	 peas	 of	 a	 particular

quality,	 from	 sweet	 and	 tender	 to	 rather	 tough.	 Pick	 the	 recipe	which
corresponds	to	the	type	of	peas	you	are	to	cook.

Petits	Pois	Frais	à	l’Anglaise
[Battered	Peas	I—for	very	tender,	sweet,	fresh,	green	peas]

Anyone	who	has	eaten	a	plateful	of	small,	tender,	fresh,	green	peas
in	Italy	or	France	in	the	springtime	is	not	likely	to	forget	the	experience.
These	 best-of-all	 peas	 are	 always	 cooked	 by	 blanching	 in	 a	 very	 large
kettle	 of	 boiling	 salted	 water.	 They	 are	 served	 at	 once	 à	 l’anglaise,
meaning	 they	 are	 merely	 seasoned,	 turned	 into	 a	 vegetable	 dish,	 and
topped	 with	 pieces	 of	 butter.	 This	 simple	 and	 fundamental	 treatment
preserves,	unadulterated,	their	color,	texture,	and	taste.

For	6	people



3	lbs.	of	very	tender,	sweet,	young,	fresh	green	peas	(3	cups,	shelled)
A	large	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water
Drop	the	shelled	peas	into	the	rapidly	boiling	salted	water.	Bring	the
water	to	the	boil	again	as	quickly	as	possible.	Boil	slowly,	uncovered,
for	4	to	8	minutes,	testing	the	peas	frequently	by	eating	one.	They	will
have	more	taste	and	be	greener	if	they	are	drained	at	the	point	where
they	 are	 tender	 but	 still	 retain	 a	 suggestion	 of	 texture.	 But	 this	 is	 a
matter	of	personal	taste,	and	they	may	be	boiled	a	few	more	minutes	if
you	wish.

A	colander
A	heavy-bottomed	saucepan
Salt	and	pepper
½	to	1	Tb	granulated	sugar	(depending	on	sweetness	of	peas)
A	hot	vegetable	dish
6	Tb	butter,	formed	into	little	shells	or	cut	into	pieces
Drain	the	peas	immediately.	Place	in	the	saucepan	with	the	seasonings
and	 roll	 them	 gently	 over	 moderate	 heat	 for	 a	 moment	 or	 two	 to
evaporate	all	 their	humidity.	Correct	 seasoning.	Turn	 the	peas	 into	a
hot	vegetable	dish,	arrange	the	butter	over	them,	and	serve	at	once.

Petits	Pois	Étuvés	au	Beurre
[Buttered	Peas	II—for	large	but	tender	fresh	green	peas]

This	is	for	the	larger	pea,	the	kind	you	usually	find	at	your	market.
For	6	people

2	lbs.	large	but	tender	fresh	green	peas	(3	cups,	shelled)
A	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water



A	colander
Drop	the	peas	in	the	boiling	salted	water	and	boil	uncovered	for	5	to
10	minutes	or	until	the	peas	are	almost	but	not	quite	tender.	They	will
finish	cooking	later.	Drain.
(*)	If	the	peas	are	not	to	be	served	immediately,	refresh	them	in	cold
water	for	3	to	4	minutes	to	stop	the	cooking	and	to	retain	their	color
and	texture.	Drain.

A	heavy-bottomed,	6-to	8-cup	enameled	saucepan
1	to	2	Tb	granulated	sugar	(depending	on	the	sweetness	of	the	peas)
¼	tsp	salt
Big	pinch	of	pepper
6	Tb	softened	butter
Optional	English	touch:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	fresh	mint	leaves
Salt	and	pepper
A	hot	vegetable	dish
Roll	the	peas	in	the	saucepan	over	moderate	heat	for	a	moment	or	two
to	 evaporate	 their	 moisture.	 Then	 roll	 them	 with	 the	 sugar,	 salt,
pepper,	butter,	and	optional	mint.	When	the	peas	are	well	coated	with
butter,	 cover	 and	 cook	 over	 very	 low	 heat	 for	 about	 10	 minutes,
tossing	occasionally,	until	they	are	tender.	Correct	seasoning,	turn	into
a	hot	vegetable	dish,	and	serve	as	soon	as	possible.

Petits	Pois	aux	Oignons
[Buttered	Peas	with	Onions]

12	to	18	small,	white,	peeled	onions	boiled	in	salted	water	until
almost	tender,	OR	3	to	5	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Prepare	the	peas	as	in	the	preceding	recipe,	but	add	boiled	onions	or
diced	 shallots	 or	 green	 onions	 to	 the	 saucepan	 with	 the	 peas	 and
seasonings	for	the	final,	10-minute	cooking	period.



Pois	Frais	en	Braisage
[Buttered	Peas	III—for	large,	rather	tough,	fresh	green	peas]

This	 is	 for	 large,	 mature,	 end-of-season	 peas.	 They	 remain	 green
after	 cooking,	 become	 tender,	 and	 have	 a	 fine	 flavor	 though	 they	will
look	a	bit	wrinkled.
For	6	people

A	heavy-bottomed,	2½-quart	enameled	saucepan
2	lbs.	of	large,	mature,	fresh	peas	(3	cups,	shelled)
1	large	head	of	Boston	lettuce,	shredded
½	tsp	salt
2	Tb	granulated	sugar
4	Tb	minced	green	onions
6	Tb	softened	butter
Place	 in	 the	 saucepan	 the	 peas	 and	 all	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 ingredients.
Squeeze	 the	 peas	 with	 your	 hands	 rather	 roughly	 to	 bruise	 them
slightly,	and	to	mix	them	thoroughly	with	the	butter,	lettuce,	onions,
and	seasonings.	Add	enough	cold	water	to	cover	the	peas	by	¼	inch.

A	hot	vegetable	dish
Cover	the	saucepan	and	set	over	moderately	high	heat.	Boil	rapidly	for
20	 to	 30	 minutes;	 test	 the	 peas	 frequently	 by	 eating	 one	 after	 20
minutes,	to	see	if	they	are	tender.	Add	2	to	3	tablespoons	more	water
if	 it	 evaporates	 before	 the	 peas	 are	 done.	 When	 they	 are	 tender,
uncover	and	quickly	boil	off	any	remaining	liquid.	Taste	for	seasoning.
Turn	into	a	hot	vegetable	dish,	and	serve.
(*)	 If	 not	 served	 immediately,	 set	 aside	 uncovered.	 Shortly	 before
serving,	add	2	to	3	tablespoons	of	water,	cover,	and	boil	slowly	until
the	peas	are	well	warmed	through	and	the	water	has	evaporated.

PETITS	POIS	FRAIS	À	LA	FRANÇAISE
[Peas	Braised	with	Lettuce	and	Onions—for	medium	sized,	tender,



fresh	peas]

This	dish	is	considered	the	glory	of	pea	cookery;	it	should	really	be
served	as	a	separate	course	and	eaten	with	a	spoon.	If	you	wish	to	have	a
wine	with	 the	 peas,	 serve	 a	 chilled	white	 that	 is	 not	 too	 dry,	 such	 as
Traminer	or	Graves,	or	a	chilled	rosé.
For	4	to	6	people

1½	firm,	fresh	heads	of	Boston	lettuce	7	to	8	inches	in	diameter
White	string
Remove	 wilted	 leaves,	 trim	 the	 stems,	 and	 wash	 the	 lettuce	 heads
carefully	so	they	will	not	break	apart.	Cut	into	quarters.	Wind	several
loops	 of	 string	 about	 each	 quarter	 to	 keep	 it	 in	 shape	 as	 much	 as
possible	during	the	cooking.

6	Tb	butter
½	cup	water
1½	Tb	granulated	sugar
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
A	heavy-bottomed,	3-quart,	enameled	saucepan
3	lbs.	medium	sized,	tender,	fresh	green	peas	(3	cups,	shelled)
8	parsley	stems	tied	together	with	white	string
12	green	onion	bulbs	about	1	inch	in	diameter	OR	small	white	onions
boiled	for	5	minutes	in	salted	water
Bring	 the	 butter,	water,	 and	 seasonings	 to	 the	 boil	 in	 the	 saucepan.
Then	 add	 the	peas	 and	 toss	 to	 cover	 them	with	 the	 liquid.	Bury	 the
parsley	 in	 their	 midst.	 Arrange	 the	 lettuce	 quarters	 over	 them	 and
baste	with	the	liquid.	Pierce	a	cross	in	the	root	ends	of	the	onions	(for
even	cooking)	and	disperse	them	among	the	lettuce	quarters.

A	domed	lid	or	a	soup	plate
So	that	the	cooking	steam	will	condense	and	fall	back	onto	the	peas,



invert	a	lid	over	the	saucepan	and	fill	it	with	cold	water	or	ice	cubes;
or	use	a	soup	plate.	Bring	the	peas	to	the	boil	and	boil	slowly	for	20	to
30	minutes	or	until	 tender.	Several	 times	during	 this	period,	 remove
the	cover	and	toss	the	peas	and	vegetables	to	insure	even	cooking.	As
the	water	warms	up	and	evaporates	 in	 the	cover	or	soup	plate,	 refill
with	ice	cubes	or	cold	water.

Salt	and	pepper
When	 the	 peas	 are	 tender	 their	 cooking	 liquid	 should	 have	 almost
entirely	evaporated.	Correct	seasoning.

2	Tb	softened	butter
A	hot	vegetable	dish
Discard	 the	 parsley	 and	 the	 lettuce	 strings.	 Just	 before	 serving,	 toss
the	 peas	 and	 onions	 with	 the	 butter.	 Turn	 them	 into	 the	 vegetable
dish,	place	the	lettuce	around	the	edge	of	the	dish,	and	serve	at	once.

FROZEN	PEAS
This	method	of	 cooking	 frozen	peas	gives	 them	 the	character	 they

often	lack.	Use	two	saucepans	when	you	are	cooking	more	than	two	10-
ounce	boxes;	if	too	many	peas	are	cooked	in	one	pan,	the	cooking	liquid
will	not	evaporate	by	the	time	the	peas	are	done.

For	each	10-ounce	package	of	frozen	peas:
1	Tb	butter
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
½	cup	chicken	stock	or	canned	chicken	or	mushroom	broth,	or	water
Allow	 the	 peas	 to	 thaw	 enough	 so	 they	 can	 be	 separated.	 Bring	 the
butter,	shallots	or	green	onions,	seasonings,	and	liquid	to	the	boil	in	a
saucepan.	Add	the	peas,	cover,	and	boil	slowly	for	5	to	6	minutes	or
until	the	peas	are	tender.	Uncover	and	rapidly	boil	off	any	remaining



liquid.	Correct	seasoning.

CANNED	PEAS
Here	is	a	way	to	improve	the	flavor	of	canned	peas.

For	each	No.	2	can	of	peas	(1¼	lbs.	or	2½	cups):
Turn	the	peas	into	a	sieve	and	run	cold	water	over	them.	Drain.

1½	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
3	Tb	stock	or	mushroom	broth
Cook	the	shallots	or	onions	in	the	butter	for	a	moment.	Add	the	peas
and	 seasonings	 and	 toss	 them	 in	 the	 butter.	 Then	 add	 the	 stock	 or
broth,	 cover	 the	 peas,	 and	 boil	 slowly	 for	 a	 few	moments	 until	 the
peas	are	warmed	through.	Uncover,	raise	heat,	and	rapidly	boil	off	any
remaining	liquid.

SPINACH

Épinards

Spinach	is	an	excellent	vegetable	when	it	is	cooked	properly.	Except
for	 the	 tenderest	 and	 freshest	 garden	 variety	which	may	 be	 simmered
slowly	in	seasonings,	butter,	and	its	own	juices,	spinach	is	first	blanched
in	a	large	kettle	of	boiling	salted	water;	then	all	the	water	is	pressed	out
of	it,	and	it	is	simmered	in	butter	and	meat	stock	or	cream.	In	addition
to	its	role	as	a	vegetable,	it	can	serve	as	a	bed	for	poached	eggs,	fish,	or
breasts	 of	 chicken.	 It	 is	 also	 used	 in	 various	 stuffings,	 and	 makes	 an
excellent	soufflé,	tart,	or	mold.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Spinach	 goes	 with	 just	 about	 everything,	 eggs,	 fish,	 chicken,



sweetbreads,	ham,	 roasts’,	 steaks,	 chops,	 sautés.	Or	 it	may	constitute	a
separate	 vegetable	 course.	 The	 gratins	 may	 also	 serve	 as	 entrées,
luncheon,	or	 supper	dishes.	 If	 it	 is	a	 separate	course,	a	dry	white	wine
such	as	a	Riesling	goes	with	spinach	braised	in	butter	or	in	stock.	Serve	a
less	dry	white	wine,	such	as	a	Graves,	with	spinach	braised	in	cream.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	pound	of	 fresh	 spinach	yields	about	1	cup	of	 cooked	 spinach,
and	we	shall	consider	that	enough	for	2	people.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

If	the	spinach	is	young	and	tender,	the	stems	are	usually	removed	at
the	base	of	the	leaf.	For	more	mature	spinach,	fold	the	leaf	vertically,	its
underside	 up,	 in	 the	 fingers	 of	 one	 hand;	 grasp	 the	 stem	 in	 the	 other
hand	 and	 rip	 it	 off	 toward	 the	 tip	 of	 the	 leaf,	 thus	 removing	with	 the
stem	the	tough	tendrils	which	are	attached	to	the	underside	of	the	leaf.
Discard	 any	wilted	or	 yellow	 leaves.	Whether	 or	not	 it	 is	 claimed	 that
the	 spinach	 is	 washed,	 plunge	 it	 into	 a	 large	 basin	 of	 cold	water	 and
pump	 it	 up	 and	down	 for	 several	minutes	with	 your	 hands.	 Lift	 it	 out
into	a	colander,	 leaving	any	sand	in	the	bottom	of	the	basin.	Wash	the
spinach	several	times	more,	if	necessary,	until	there	is	no	sand	to	be	seen
in	the	bottom	of	the	basin.	Drain,	and	the	spinach	is	ready	for	cooking.

ÉPINARDS	BLANCHIS
[Blanched,	Chopped	Spinach—Preliminary	Cooking]

For	3	cups	of	blanched,	chopped	spinach

3	lbs.	fresh	spinach
Prepare	 and	 wash	 the	 spinach	 as	 described	 in	 the	 preceding
paragraph.

A	large	kettle	containing	at	least	7	to	8	quarts	of	rapidly	boiling
water

1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water



A	handful	 at	 a	 time,	 drop	 the	 spinach	 into	 the	 boiling	 salted	water.
Bring	 back	 to	 the	 boil	 as	 rapidly	 as	 possible	 and	 boil	 slowly,
uncovered,	for	about	2	minutes,	or	until	the	spinach	is	almost	tender.
Test	it	by	eating	a	piece.

A	large	colander
At	once,	set	the	colander,	curved	side	down,	into	the	kettle.	Protecting
your	hands	with	a	towel,	hold	the	colander	firmly	clamped	to	the	sides
of	the	kettle	as	you	tilt	the	kettle	and	pour	out	the	water.	Still	with	the
colander	in	place,	run	cold	water	into	the	kettle	for	several	minutes	to
refresh	 the	 spinach.	This	will	preserve	 its	 color	and	 texture.	Remove
colander	and	lift	the	spinach	out	of	the	water	into	the	colander,	thus
leaving	any	possible	bits	of	sand	in	the	bottom	of	the	kettle.

A	small	amount	at	a	time,	squeeze	the	spinach	in	your	hands	to	extract
as	much	water	as	possible—last	drops	of	water	from	each	squeeze	may
be	saved	for	soup.

A	stainless	steel	chopping	knife	or	a	food	mill
Chop	 the	 spinach	 with	 a	 big	 knife	 on	 a	 chopping	 board,	 or,	 if	 you
want	 a	 fine	 purée,	 put	 it	 through	 a	 food	 mill.	 The	 spinach	 is	 now
ready	for	further	cooking	and	flavoring.
(*)	 May	 be	 done	 several	 hours	 or	 a	 day	 in	 advance.	 Cover	 and
refrigerate.

WARNING
Spinach	quickly	picks	up	an	astringent	and	metallic	taste	if	its	final

cooking	 is	 in	 iron	 or	 aluminum.	 For	 the	 following	 recipes,	 use	 only
enamel,	 pyrex,	 earthenware,	 or	 stainless	 steel	 saucepans	 or	 baking
dishes,	and	serve	the	spinach	in	enamel	or	porcelain,	not	silver.

		PURÉE	D’ÉPINARDS	SIMPLE
[Cooked	Chopped	Spinach—Purée	of	Spinach]



This	is	the	last	step	in	preparing	spinach	for	use	in	soufflés,	quiches,
custards,	 crêpes,	 stuffings,	 or	 for	 final	 cooking	 in	 any	 of	 the	 following
recipes.	 The	 directions	 on	 this	 page	 also	 bring	 frozen	 spinach	 to	 this
point.
For	3	cups,	or	for	6	people

2	Tb	butter
A	2½-quart	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan
3	cups	blanched	spinach,	chopped	or	puréed	(directions	in	preceding
recipe)

Salt	and	pepper
Pinch	of	nutmeg
When	 the	 butter	 is	 bubbling	 in	 the	 saucepan	 over	 moderately	 high
heat,	stir	in	the	spinach.	Continue	stirring	for	2	to	3	minutes	until	all
the	moisture	 from	the	spinach	has	boiled	off—the	spinach	will	begin
to	adhere	to	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	Season	to	taste,	and	the	spinach	is
ready	to	use.

RECIPES	FOR	COOKED	CHOPPED	SPINACH
Épinards	Étuvés	au	Beurre
[Spinach	Braised	in	Butter—Buttered	Spinach]

Serve	 this	 deliciously	 buttery	 spinach	 with	 steaks,	 chops,	 roasts,
ham,	 or	 sautéed	 liver.	 Use	 it	 also	 in	 any	 recipe	 calling	 for	 a	 bed	 of
buttered	spinach.
For	6	people

3	cups	cooked	chopped	spinach	(the	preceding	recipe),	in	a	heavy-
bottomed	enameled	saucepan

4	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
After	you	have	followed	the	directions	in	the	preceding	recipe	(stirring
the	 spinach	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 with	 butter	 and	 seasonings



until	its	moisture	has	evaporated),	stir	in	the	4	additional	tablespoons
of	butter	listed	here.	Cover	the	saucepan	and	cook	very	slowly	for	10
to	15	minutes,	stirring	frequently,	until	 the	spinach	has	absorbed	the
butter	and	is	very	tender.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	 If	 not	 served	 immediately,	 set	 aside	 uncovered.	 Reheat	 when
needed.

2	Tb	softened	butter
A	hot	porcelain	serving	dish
Remove	from	heat,	fold	in	the	additional	butter,	and	turn	the	spinach
into	the	hot	serving	dish.

Épinards	au	Jambon
[Spinach	with	Ham]

½	cup	finely	diced	ham,	sautéed	briefly	in	butter
The	preceding	spinach	braised	in	butter
12	croûtons	(triangles	of	white	bread	sautéed	in	clarified	butter)
Stir	 the	 ham	 into	 the	 spinach	 2	 to	 3	minutes	 before	 the	 end	 of	 the
cooking.	 After	 arranging	 the	 spinach	 on	 its	 serving	 dish,	 place	 the
croûtons	around	the	edge	of	the	dish.

		Épinards	au	Jus
				[Spinach	Braised	in	Stock]

		Épinards	à	la	Crème
				[Spinach	Braised	in	Cream—Creamed	Spinach]

This	 is	an	alternative	 to	 the	preceding	recipe	 for	buttered	spinach.
Whether	 to	 use	 cream	 or	 stock	 for	 the	 braising	 depends	 on	 your
judgment	 of	 which	 goes	 best	 with	 the	 rest	 of	 your	 menu.	 Creamed



spinach	 would	 contrast	 well	 with	 sautéed	 ham,	 liver,	 brains,
sweetbreads,	 chicken,	 or	 veal;	 spinach	 braised	 in	 stock	 would	 be
preferable	 if	 you	 served	 any	 of	 these	meats	 in	 a	 cream	 sauce.	 Spinach
braised	in	stock	or	cream	may	also	be	gratinéed	with	cheese	or	be	used
as	a	filling	for	crêpes	as	suggested	in	the	variations	following	the	recipe.
For	6	people

3	cups	cooked	chopped	spinach,	in	a	heavy-bottomed	enameled
saucepan

1½	Tb	flour,	sifted	to	remove	any	lumps
After	 you	 have	 stirred	 the	 spinach	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat	 with
butter	 and	 seasonings	 to	 evaporate	 its	 humidity,	 as	 directed	 in	 the
recipe	for	cooked	chopped	spinach,	 lower	heat	 to	moderate.	Sprinkle
on	the	flour	and	stir	for	2	minutes	more	to	cook	the	flour.

1	cup	brown	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	or	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Remove	 from	 heat	 and	 stir	 in	 two	 thirds	 of	 the	 stock,	 bouillon,	 or
cream	by	spoonfuls.	Bring	to	the	simmer,	cover,	and	cook	very	slowly
for	about	15	minutes.	Stir	frequently	to	prevent	spinach	from	sticking
to	 bottom	 of	 pan,	 and	 add	 more	 liquid	 by	 spoonfuls	 if	 spinach
becomes	too	dry.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	If	not	to	be	served	immediately,	set	aside	uncovered,	and	film	top
with	a	tablespoon	of	stock	or	cream.	Reheat	when	needed.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
A	hot	porcelain	serving	dish
Optional:	1	or	2	sieved	or	sliced	hard-boiled	eggs
Remove	 spinach	 from	 heat,	 fold	 in	 the	 butter,	 and	 turn	 into	 the
serving	dish.	Decorate	with	optional	egg.

VARIATIONS



Épinards	Gratinés	au	Fromage
[Spinach	Gratinéed	with	Cheese]

Serve	 this	 gratinéed	 spinach	 with	 steaks	 or	 chops,	 roast	 veal	 or
chicken,	or	sautéed	liver.	It	also	goes	well	with	broiled	fish.
For	6	people

¾	cups	grated	Swiss	cheese
3	cups	spinach	braised	in	stock	(the	preceding	recipe)
A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	8	inches	in	diameter	and	1½	inches
deep

2	Tb	fine,	dry,	white	bread	crumbs
1½	Tb	melted	butter
Stir	 two	 thirds	 of	 the	 cheese	 into	 the	 spinach	 and	 turn	 it	 into	 the
baking	dish,	heaping	it	into	a	slight	dome.	Mix	the	rest	of	the	cheese
with	 the	bread	crumbs	and	 spread	over	 the	 spinach.	Sprinkle	on	 the
melted	butter.

About	30	minutes	before	serving,	place	in	upper	third	of	a	preheated,
375-degree	 oven	 to	 heat	 through	 thoroughly	 and	 brown	 the	 top
lightly.

Canapés	aux	Épinards
[Spinach	and	Cheese	Canapés]

Serve	these	canapés	as	a	hot	first	course	or	luncheon	dish,	or	make
them	smaller	than	directed	here	and	serve	as	cocktail	appetizers.
For	6	people

12	slices	of	white	bread,	3½	by	2½	inches	and	⅜	inch	thick
¾	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
3	cups	spinach	braised	in	stock	(the	preceding	master	recipe)
2	Tb	fine,	dry,	white	bread	crumbs



2	to	3	Tb	melted	butter
Cut	off	the	crusts	and	sauté	the	bread	in	hot	butter	and	oil	in	a	skillet
until	 lightly	browned	on	each	side.	Stir	 two	thirds	of	 the	cheese	 into
the	 braised	 spinach	 and	 heap	 2	 or	 3	 tablespoons	 on	 each	 piece	 of
sautéed	bread.	 Sprinkle	with	 the	 remaining	grated	 cheese,	 the	bread
crumbs,	and	the	melted	butter.

Just	 before	 serving,	 run	 under	 a	 moderately	 hot	 broiler	 to	 heat
through	and	brown	lightly.

Épinards	à	la	Mornay,	Gratinés
[Spinach	Gratinéed	with	Cheese	Sauce]

Serve	this	gratinéed	spinach	with	roasts,	steaks,	or	chops,	or	as	a	hot
first	course	or	luncheon	dish.
For	6	people

1½	cups	sauce	mornay	(béchamel	with	cheese)
A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	8	inches	in	diameter	and	1½	inches
deep

3	cups	spinach	braised	in	stock	or	in	cream–1
Optional:	½	lb.	sliced	mushrooms	sautéed	in	butter
3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
1½	Tb	melted	butter
Spread	a	third	of	the	sauce	in	the	bottom	of	the	baking	dish.	If	you	are
using	 the	optional	mushrooms,	 fold	 them	 into	 the	 spinach.	Heap	 the
spinach	 in	 the	 dish	 over	 the	 sauce,	 and	 spoon	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 sauce
over	it.	Sprinkle	with	the	grated	cheese	and	melted	butter.

About	30	minutes	before	serving,	place	in	upper	third	of	a	preheated,
375-degree	oven	to	heat	through	thoroughly	and	brown	lightly	on	top.



Épinards	en	Surprise
[Spinach	Hidden	under	a	Giant	Crêpe]

This	is	an	amusing	presentation;	the	spinach	is	heaped	in	a	serving
dish	and	a	large	French	pancake	is	spread	over	it,	hiding	it	completely.
Serve	it	as	a	main	course	luncheon	or	supper	dish	and,	if	you	wish,	mix	a
cup	of	sautéed,	diced	ham	or	mushrooms	into	the	spinach.
For	6	people

½	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
3	cups	spinach	braised	in	stock	or	in	cream–1
A	hot,	lightly	buttered	porcelain	serving	dish	about	8	inches	in
diameter

A	French	pancake,	crêpe,	large	enough	to	cover	the	spinach
completely
Just	before	 serving,	 stir	 the	cheese	 into	 the	hot,	braised	 spinach	and
heap	it	in	the	serving	dish.	Then	cover	with	the	crêpe.

PETITES	CRÊPES	D’ÉPINARDS
[Spinach	Pancakes]

Spinach	 pancakes	 may	 be	 folded	 in	 quarters	 to	 garnish	 a	 roast,
steaks,	 or	 chops.	 Filled	 as	 suggested	 in	 the	Crêpe	 section,	 they	may	be
served	as	a	hot	first	course,	or	luncheon	or	supper	dish.
For	about	12	crêpes	6	inches	in	diameter

Ingredients	for	½	the	recipe	for	crêpes
1	cup	blanched	spinach
If	 you	 are	 making	 the	 crêpe	 batter	 in	 an	 electric	 blender,	 you	 may
purée	 the	 blanched	 spinach	 at	 the	 same	 time.	 Otherwise,	 purée	 the
spinach	 in	 a	 food	mill	 and	 combine	with	 the	 crêpe	 batter.	 Let	 batter
rest	for	2	hours	before	using.	Cook	spinach	crêpes	like	ordinary	crêpes,
according	to	directions	following	those	for	the	batter.



TIMBALE	D’ÉPINARDS
[Spinach	Mold]

This	 is	 a	 purée	 of	 spinach	 mixed	 with	 eggs,	 milk,	 cheese,	 and
breadcrumbs,	baked	in	a	soufflé	dish,	unmolded,	and	surrounded	with	a
sauce.	Use	the	recipe	for	asparagus	mold	substituting	spinach	purée,	for
asparagus.	 Other	 sauces	 besides	 those	 with	 the	 asparagus	mold	 recipe
are:	Sauce	Tomate	or	Coulis	de	Tomates,	tomato	sauce
Sauce	 Aurore,	 velouté	 or	 béchamel	 sauce	 with	 tomato	 flavoring	

ÉPINARDS	À	LA	BASQUAISE
[Gratin	of	Spinach	and	Sliced	Potatoes	with	Anchovies]

Serve	 this	with	 steaks,	 roast	 beef,	 roast	 lamb,	 or	with	 broiled	 fish
such	as	mackerel,	fresh	tuna,	herring,	or	sardines.
For	6	people

½	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
3	cups	spinach	braised	in	stock
Stir	the	cheese	into	the	braised	spinach.

1	lb.	“boiling”	potatoes
Peel	the	potatoes	and	cut	them	into	slices	⅛	inch	thick.	Boil	them	in
salted	water	for	5	to	6	minutes,	or	until	tender.	Drain.

A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	2	inches	deep	and	9	inches	in	diameter
2	Tb	mashed	anchovies	(or	1	Tb	anchovy	paste)	blended	with	4	Tb
softened	butter	and	⅛	tsp	pepper
Spread	 half	 of	 the	 potatoes	 in	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 baking	 dish.	 Cover
with	half	of	the	anchovy	mixture.	Spread	half	of	the	spinach	over	the
potatoes.	Repeat	with	 the	 remaining	potatoes,	 anchovy	mixture,	 and
spinach.

⅓	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese	mixed	with	3	Tb	dry	white	bread	crumbs
2	Tb	melted	butter



Spread	the	cheese	and	bread	crumbs	over	the	top	of	the	spinach	and
pour	on	the	melted	butter.

About	30	minutes	before	serving,	place	in	upper	third	of	a	preheated,
375-degree	oven	to	heat	through	thoroughly	and	brown	the	top	nicely.

FROZEN	SPINACH
Although	it	cannot	have	the	lovely	taste	of	fresh	spinach,	and	there

is	almost	more	stem	than	 leaf	 to	 it,	 frozen	spinach	does	have	 its	place.
When	it’s	given	this	preliminary	treatment,	you	may	use	it	in	any	of	the
preceding	recipes.	 If	you	are	cooking	more	 than	 two	packages	at	once,
use	 two	 saucepans;	when	 too	much	 is	 in	one	 saucepan,	 the	 liquid	will
not	evaporate	quickly	enough	and	the	spinach	will	overcook.

For	each	10-ounce	package	of	frozen	spinach:
A	heavy,	stainless	steel	chopping	knife
Whether	the	frozen	spinach	is	whole,	chopped,	or	puréed,	it	will	cook
most	successfully	if	you	unwrap	and	defrost	it	just	enough	so	you	can
slice	 it	 by	 bearing	 down	 on	 the	 block	 with	 a	 heavy	 knife.	 If	 the
spinach	is	already	chopped	or	puréed,	cut	the	slices	roughly	into	half-
inch	pieces.	If	the	spinach	is	whole,	chop	the	slices	into	small	bits.

1½	Tb	butter
A	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Small	pinch	of	nutmeg
Melt	 the	 butter	 in	 the	 saucepan	 or	 skillet,	 then	 stir	 in	 the	 chopped
spinach	and	 seasonings.	Cover	and	cook	very	 slowly	 for	a	minute	or
two,	 until	 the	 spinach	 has	 thawed	 and	 released	 its	 juices.	 Uncover,
raise	 heat,	 and	 stir	 for	 2	 to	 3	 minutes	 until	 all	 moisture	 has
evaporated.

This	may	now	be	substituted	for	the	cooked	chopped	spinach	and	used



in	any	of	the	recipes	calling	for	it	or	blanched	spinach.

CARROTS,	ONIONS,	AND	TURNIPS

Carottes,	Oignons,	et	Navets

Carrots,	 onions,	 and	 turnips	 à	 la	 française	 are	 all	 cooked	 in
substantially	the	same	manner,	so	we	have	grouped	them	together.

CARROTS

Carottes
Carrots	 develop	 their	 maximum	 flavor	 if	 they	 are	 cooked	 in	 a

covered	saucepan	with	a	small	amount	of	liquid,	butter,	and	seasonings
until	the	liquid	has	evaporated	and	the	carrots	are	beginning	to	sauté	in
the	butter.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Buttered	 or	 glazed	 carrots	 go	 well	 with	 all	 kinds	 of	 roasts,	 and
combine	with	 other	 vegetables	 to	make	many	 of	 the	 classic	 garnitures
which	may	surround	a	meat	platter.	One	of	the	more	elaborate	of	these
is	à	la	bouquetière	which	includes	glazed	carrots	and	turnips,	diced	green
beans,	 peas,	 cauliflower	 bouquets,	 and	 potato	 balls	 sautéed	 in	 butter.
Creamed	carrots	are	particularly	good	with	veal	and	chicken.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	pound	of	 carrots	minus	 their	 tops	will	 serve	3	or	4	people.	A
pound	of	raw	carrots,	sliced,	diced,	or	quartered,	makes	about	3½	cups.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Trim	 off	 the	 stems	 and	 peel	 the	 carrots	 with	 a	 vegetable	 peeler.
Depending	on	their	size	and	the	effect	you	wish,	slice	them	horizontally,
or	 halve	 or	 quarter	 them	 lengthwise,	 then	 cut	 the	 lengths	 into	 2-inch
pieces.	These	pieces	may,	if	you	wish,	be	trimmed	into	the	form	of	long
garlic	cloves;	in	French	this	is	termed	tourner	en	gousses	or	en	olives.
(For	 tough	 old	 carrots	 only:	 If	 you	 happen	 to	 have	 end-of-season



carrots,	 quarter	 them	 lengthwise,	 then	 cut	 out	 and	 remove	 the	woody
central	 section,	 and	 use	 only	 the	 reddish	 outer	 portion	 which	 French
recipes	 call	 rouge	 de	 carotte.	 Then	 before	 proceeding	 with	 any	 of	 the
following	 recipes,	 blanch	 the	 carrots	 by	 boiling	 for	 5	 to	 8	minutes	 in
salted	 water.)	



		CAROTTES	ÉTUVÉES	AU	BEURRE
[Carrots	Braised	in	Butter]

This	is	the	basic	recipe	for	cooked	carrots;	they	may	be	served	with
a	sprinkling	of	parsley,	simmered	in	cream,	mixed	with	other	vegetables,
or	puréed.

For	6	people

A	heavy-bottomed,	2-quart,	enameled	saucepan
1½	lbs.	carrots,	peeled,	and	sliced	or	quartered	(about	5½	cups)
1	Tb	granulated	sugar	(to	develop	their	flavor)
1½	cups	water
1½	Tb	butter
½	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper

In	 the	 saucepan,	 bring	 the	 carrots	 to	 the	 boil	with	 the	 sugar,	water,
butter,	and	 salt.	Cover	and	boil	 slowly	 for	30	 to	40	minutes	or	until
the	 carrots	 are	 tender	 and	 the	 liquid	 has	 evaporated.	 Correct
seasoning.
(*)	If	they	are	not	to	be	served	at	once,	set	aside	uncovered	and	reheat
when	needed.

VARIATIONS
Carottes	aux	Fines	Herbes
[Braised	Carrots	with	Herbs]

1½	lbs.	carrots	braised	in	butter
2	Tb	softened	butter
2	Tb	minced	parsley,	chervil	and	chives,	or	parsley	only
A	hot	vegetable	dish



Just	before	serving	and	off	heat,	 toss	 the	carrots	with	 the	butter	and
herbs.	Turn	into	a	hot	vegetable	dish.

Carottes	à	la	Crème
[Creamed	Carrots]

1	to	1½	cups	whipping	cream
1½	lbs.	carrots	braised	in	butter
Salt	and	pepper

Bring	the	cream	to	a	boil	in	a	saucepan	and	pour	in	enough	to	cover
the	carrots.	Boil	slowly,	uncovered,	for	15	to	20	minutes	or	until	the
cream	 has	 been	 almost	 entirely	 absorbed	 by	 the	 carrots.	 Correct
seasoning.

2	Tb	softened	butter
2	Tb	minced	parsley,	chervil	and	chives,	or	parsley	only
A	hot	vegetable	dish

Just	before	serving	and	off	heat,	gently	toss	the	butter	and	herbs	into
the	carrots.	Turn	into	a	hot	vegetable	dish.

Carottes	à	la	Forestière
[Braised	Carrots	with	Artichoke	Bottoms	and	Mushrooms]

½	lb.	quartered	fresh	mushrooms
1	Tb	oil
1½	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper

In	 a	 skillet,	 sauté	 the	 mushrooms	 in	 hot	 oil	 and	 butter	 for	 4	 to	 5
minutes	until	very	lightly	browned.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper.

2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions



3	or	4	cooked	fresh	artichoke	bottoms	cut	into	quarters	(or	cooked
frozen	artichoke	hearts)

1½	lbs.	carrots	braised	in	butter
Stir	the	shallots	or	onions	and	the	cooked	fresh	artichoke	bottoms	into
the	mushrooms	and	toss	for	2	to	3	minutes	over	moderately	high	heat.
(If	you	are	using	 frozen	artichoke	hearts,	cook	 them	separately,	 then
add	them	directly	to	the	carrots.)	Fold	or	toss	the	artichoke	hearts	and
mushrooms	into	the	carrots.

⅓	cup	good	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Salt	and	pepper
A	hot	vegetable	dish
2	Tb	minced	parsley,	chervil,	and	chives,	or	parsley	only
Pour	the	stock	or	bouillon	into	the	vegetables.	Cover	and	boil	slowly
for	4	 to	5	minutes	until	 the	stock	has	almost	completely	evaporated.
Correct	seasoning.

Turn	into	a	hot	vegetable	dish	and	sprinkle	with	the	herbs.

CAROTTES	GLACÉES
[Glazed	Carrots]

Glazed	carrots	receive	 the	same	type	of	cooking	process	as	braised
carrots;	 the	 only	 difference	 is	 that	 they	 are	 cooked	 in	 stock	 instead	 of
water,	and	more	butter	and	sugar	are	used	so	that	the	liquid	reduces	to	a
syrupy	glaze	 in	 the	bottom	of	 the	pan.	 Just	before	 serving,	 the	 carrots
are	rolled	about	in	the	syrup	so	each	piece	is	shiny	with	glaze.
For	6	people

1½	lbs.	carrots,	peeled,	quartered	and	cut	into	2-inch	lengths	(5½
cups)

A	2½-quart,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	with	cover
1½	cups	good	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon



2	Tb	granulated	sugar
Pinch	of	pepper
6	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper
Boil	 the	 carrots	 slowly	 in	 the	 covered	 saucepan	 with	 the	 stock	 or
bouillon,	 sugar,	 pepper,	 and	 butter	 for	 30	 to	 40	 minutes	 until	 the
carrots	 are	 tender	 and	 the	 liquid	 has	 reduced	 to	 a	 syrupy	 glaze.
Correct	seasoning.

A	hot	vegetable	dish
2	Tb	very	finely	minced	parsley
Reheat	just	before	serving	and	roll	the	carrots	gently	in	the	pan	to	coat
them	 with	 syrup.	 Turn	 into	 a	 hot	 vegetable	 dish	 or	 arrange	 them
around	your	roast,	and	sprinkle	with	parsley.

CAROTTES	VICHY
[Carrots	Vichy]

The	 recipe	 for	 carrots	 Vichy	 is	 exactly	 the	 same	 as	 that	 for	 the
preceding	 glazed	 carrots	 except	 that	 in	 place	 of	 stock	 you	 would	 use
bottled	Vichy	water	 (or	plain	bottled	water	with	a	pinch	of	 soda).	The
assumption	 is	 that	 pure	 noncalcareous	 bottled	 water	 produces	 a	 more
delicate	carrot.

CAROTTES	À	LA	CONCIERGE
[Casserole	of	Creamed	Carrots	with	Onions	and	Garlic]

This	 hearty	 dish	 of	 carrots	 goes	 nicely	 with	 red	 meats,	 pork,
sausages,	or	plain	roast	chicken.	It	can	also	constitute	a	meatless	main-
course	dish.

For	6	people

1½	lbs.	carrots,	peeled	and	cut	into	¼-inch	slices	(5½	cups)



½	lb.	(1½	cups)	sliced	onions
4	Tb	olive	oil
A	2½-quart,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	with	cover
Cook	the	carrots,	onions,	and	olive	oil	slowly	in	the	covered	saucepan,
tossing	occasionally,	 for	about	30	minutes.	The	vegetables	 should	be
tender	but	not	browned.

A	large	clove	mashed	garlic
Add	the	garlic	for	the	last	5	minutes	of	cooking.

1	Tb	flour
Toss	the	vegetables	with	the	flour	and	cook	3	minutes	more.

¾	cup	boiling	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
¾	cup	boiling	milk
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
1	tsp	granulated	sugar
Pinch	of	nutmeg
Off	 heat,	 fold	 in	 the	 boiling	 stock	 or	 bouillon,	 then	 the	 milk,	 and
finally	 the	 seasonings.	 Simmer	 uncovered	 for	 about	 20	 minutes	 or
until	 the	 liquid	 has	 reduced	 to	 about	 a	 third	 of	 its	 volume	 and	 has
thickened	into	a	light	cream.	Correct	seasoning.

2	egg	yolks	blended	with	4	Tb	whipping	cream
A	rubber	spatula
A	hot	vegetable	dish
2	Tb	minced	parsley
Off	 heat	 and	 just	 before	 serving,	 use	 the	 spatula	 to	 fold	 in	 the	 egg
yolks	and	cream.	Shake	and	swirl	saucepan	over	low	heat	until	the	egg
yolks	have	thickened	but	be	careful	not	to	bring	them	near	the	simmer
or	 they	may	 coagulate.	 Turn	 into	 a	 hot	 vegetable	 dish	 and	 sprinkle
with	parsley.



ONIONS

Oignons

It	 is	hard	 to	 imagine	a	 civilization	without	onions;	 in	one	 form	or
another	their	flavor	blends	into	almost	everything	in	the	meal	except	the
dessert.	We	 shall	 concentrate	 here	 on	 the	 small,	whole,	 cooked,	white
onions	which	are	so	often	called	for	as	a	vegetable	garnish.	When	they
are	 used	 in	 stews	 and	 fricassees	 it	 is	 generally	 advisable	 that	 they	 be
cooked	 separately	 so	 you	 are	 sure	 they	will	 be	 tender	 and	 retain	 their
shape.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	pound	of	small	onions	will	serve	3	or	4	people	if	they	constitute
a	principal	vegetable	dish.	If	they	are	used	as	a	garnish	or	in	a	mixture
with	other	vegetables,	count	on	3	or	4	small	onions	per	person.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

The	 quickest,	 neatest,	 and	 least	 tearful	 way	 to	 peel	 small	 white
onions	 is	 to	 drop	 them	 into	 a	 saucepan	 of	 rapidly	 boiling	 water	 and
leave	 them	 for	 5	 to	 10	 seconds,	 just	 long	 enough	 for	 their	 skins	 to
loosen.	Drain.	Run	cold	water	over	 them.	Trim	off	 the	 top	and	bottom
portions,	removing	only	a	little	bit	so	as	not	to	disturb	the	onion	layers.
Then	slip	off	the	outside	skin	and	the	first	onion	layer	with	your	fingers.
Pierce	 a	 cross	 in	 the	 root	 ends	 so	 that	 the	 onions	 will	 cook	 evenly
without	bursting.

If	 the	onions	are	old	and	very	strongly	 flavored,	or	 if	 for	digestive
reasons	 you	wish	 to	make	 them	milder,	 drop	 them	 into	 boiling,	 salted
water	and	boil	slowly	for	5	minutes	before	proceeding	with	a	recipe.

To	remove	onion	flavor	from	your	hands,	wash	them	in	cold	water,
rub	 them	with	 salt,	 rinse	 again	 in	 cold	water,	 then	wash	 in	 soap	 and
warm	water.

		OIGNONS	GLACÉS	À	BLANC
[White-braised	Onions—Glazed	Onions]



White-braised	 onions	 may	 be	 served	 as	 they	 are,	 or	 they	 may	 be
simmered	 for	 a	 moment	 in	 a	 good	 cream	 sauce.	 Use	 them	 also	 as	 a
garnish	for	fricassees	or	blanquettes.

For	18	to	24	peeled	white	onions	about	1	inch	in	diameter:
A	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	or	skillet	which	will	just	hold
the	onions	in	one	layer
½	cup	white	stock,	canned	chicken	broth,	dry	white	wine,	or	water
2	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
A	small	herb	bouquet:	2	parsley	sprigs,	⅛	tsp	thyme,	and	⅓	bay	leaf
tied	in	cheesecloth
Place	 the	 onions	 in	 the	 saucepan	 or	 skillet	 with	 the	 liquid,	 butter,
seasonings,	and	herb	bouquet.	Cover	and	simmer	very	slowly,	rolling
the	onions	 in	 the	 saucepan	 from	 time	 to	 time,	 for	40	 to	50	minutes.
The	onions	should	not	color,	and	should	be	perfectly	tender	yet	retain
their	shape.	If	all	the	liquid	evaporates	during	the	cooking,	add	more
by	spoonfuls	as	necessary.	Remove	herb	bouquet.
(*)	May	be	cooked	several	hours	in	advance,	reheated,	and	served	as
in	the	following	suggestions.

TO	SERVE
Petits	Oignons	Persillés
[Parslied	Onions]

These	go	particularly	well	with	chicken,	veal,	or	fish	in	cream	sauce.

2	Tb	softened	butter
A	warm	vegetable	dish
2	Tb	minced	parsley

Just	before	 serving	 the	onions,	correct	 seasoning.	Off	heat,	 roll	 them
with	the	softened	butter.	Turn	into	a	warm	vegetable	dish	and	sprinkle
with	parsley.



Petits	Oignons	à	la	Crème
[Creamed	Onions]

Serve	 creamed	 onions	 with	 roast	 veal,	 chicken,	 or	 turkey,	 chops,
steaks,	or	hamburgers,	sautéed	veal,	chicken,	or	liver.
(For	2	lbs.	of	white-braised	onions,	serving	6	people.)

2	cups	sauce	crème	(béchamel	with	cream)
Salt	and	pepper
1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
2	Tb	minced	parsley
A	hot	vegetable	dish

Fold	 the	 cream	 sauce	 into	 the	 braised	 onions	 and	 simmer	 for	 5
minutes.	 Correct	 seasoning.	Off	 heat,	 fold	 in	 the	 butter.	 Turn	 into	 a
hot	vegetable	dish	and	sprinkle	with	parsley.

		OIGNONS	GLACÉS	À	BRUN
[Brown-braised	Onions]

Brown-braised	onions	are	used	whenever	you	wish	a	brown	effect,
such	as	in	brown	fricassees	like	coq	au	vin	and	boeuf	bourguignon,	or	in	a
mixture	with	other	vegetables.

For	18	to	24	peeled	white	onions	about	1	inch	in	diameter:
1½	Tb	butter
1½	Tb	oil
A	9-to	10-inch	enameled	skillet

When	the	butter	and	oil	are	bubbling	in	the	skillet,	add	the	onions	and
sauté	 over	 moderate	 heat	 for	 about	 10	 minutes,	 rolling	 the	 onions
about	so	they	will	brown	as	evenly	as	possible.	Be	careful	not	to	break
their	skins.	You	cannot	expect	to	brown	them	uniformly.



½	cup	of	brown	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	dry	white	wine,	red
wine,	or	water

Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp
thyme	tied	in	cheesecloth
Then	either	braise	them	as	follows:
Pour	 in	 the	 liquid,	 season	 to	 taste,	and	add	 the	herb	bouquet.	Cover
and	simmer	slowly	for	40	to	50	minutes	until	the	onions	are	perfectly
tender	but	retain	their	shape,	and	the	liquid	has	evaporated.	Remove
herb	bouquet.	Serve	them	as	they	are,	or	follow	one	of	the	suggestions
at	the	end	of	the	recipe.

Or	bake	them	as	follows:
Transfer	the	onions	and	their	sautéing	fat	to	a	shallow	baking	dish	or
casserole	just	large	enough	to	hold	them	in	one	layer.	Set	uncovered	in
upper	 third	 of	 a	 preheated	 350-degree	 oven	 for	 40	 to	 50	 minutes,
turning	 them	over	once	or	 twice.	They	should	be	very	 tender,	 retain
their	shape,	and	be	a	nice	golden	brown.	Remove	herb	bouquet.	Serve
them	as	they	are	or	according	to	one	of	the	following	suggestions.

(*)	The	onions	may	be	cooked	hours	in	advance,	and	reheated	before
serving.

TO	SERVE
Petits	Oignons	Persillés
[Parslied	Onions]

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter
A	hot	vegetable	dish
1	Tb	minced	parsley

Roll	the	hot	onions	gently	in	the	butter.	Turn	into	a	hot	vegetable	dish
or	place	them	around	your	roast,	and	sprinkle	with	parsley.



Petits	Oignons	en	Garniture
[Vegetable	Mixtures]

Braised	onions	go	nicely	mixed	with	other	vegetables	 such	as	glazed
carrots,	sautéed	mushrooms,	artichoke	hearts,	and	sautéed	potatoes.

CANNED	ONIONS
All	the	brands	of	canned	“small	boiled	onions”	we	have	tried	have

tasted,	to	us,	rather	unpleasantly	sweetish	and	overacidulated;	they	also
need	more	cooking	to	make	them	tender.	However	they	are	so	useful	in
an	 emergency	 that	 we	 offer	 the	 following	 treatment	 which	 improves
them	considerably.

For	each	No.	2	can	of	small	boiled	onions	(¼	lbs.	or	2½	cups):
2	Tb	butter
¼	cup	stock,	canned	beef	bouillon,	or	mushroom	broth
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
A	small	herb	bouquet:	2	parsley	sprigs,	⅓	bay	leaf,	and	¼	tsp	thyme
tied	in	cheesecloth
Drain	the	onions.	Drop	them	into	boiling	water,	bring	back	to	the	boil
and	boil	1	minute.	Drain.	This	removes	some	of	the	canned	taste.	Then
simmer	them	slowly	in	a	covered	saucepan	for	10	to	15	minutes	with
the	 butter,	 stock,	 seasonings,	 and	 herb	 bouquet	 until	 they	 are	 very
tender	and	the	liquid	has	evaporated.

SOUBISE
[Braised	Rice	and	Onions]

This	 is	 a	 savory	mixture	 of	 sliced	 onions,	 rice,	 and	 butter	 cooked
slowly	together	until	they	melt	into	a	purée.	The	natural	moisture	of	the
onions	is	sufficient	to	cook	the	rice;	no	other	liquid	is	needed.	Soubise	is
particularly	good	with	veal	or	chicken,	or	boiled	leg	of	lamb	à	l’anglaise.
It	may	be	turned	into	a	sauce	soubise	by	puréeing	it	with	a	sauce	béchamel



or	velouté	and	enriching	it	with	cream.
For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	300	degrees.

½	cup	rice
4	quarts	rapidly	boiling	water
1½	Tb	salt

Drop	 the	 rice	 into	 the	 boiling	 salted	 water	 and	 boil	 for	 5	 minutes
exactly.	Drain	immediately.

4	Tb	butter
A	3-quart,	fireproof	casserole
2	lbs.	(6	to	7	cups)	thinly	sliced	yellow	onions
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Salt	and	pepper

When	the	butter	is	foaming	in	the	casserole,	stir	in	the	onions.	As	soon
as	 they	 are	well	 coated	with	 butter,	 stir	 in	 the	 rice	 and	 seasonings.
Cover	and	cook	very	slowly	in	the	300-degree	oven	for	about	1	hour,
stirring	occasionally.	The	rice	and	onions	should	become	very	tender
and	will	usually	turn	a	light	golden	yellow.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	cooked	several	hours	in	advance	and	reheated	later.

¼	cup	whipping	cream
¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
2	Tb	softened	butter
A	hot	vegetable	dish
1	Tb	minced	parsley

Just	before	serving,	stir	in	the	cream	and	cheese,	and	then	the	butter.
Taste	again	for	seasoning.	Turn	into	a	hot	vegetable	dish	and	sprinkle
with	parsley.



TURNIPS

Navets
The	 turnip	 is	 a	 wonderful	 vegetable	 when	 given	 the	 treatment

required	to	bring	out	its	delicious	qualities.	It	wants	and	needs	to	absorb
butter	or	meat	fats,	which	is	why	turnips	are	particularly	succulent	when
finished	off	in	a	stew	or	a	braised	dish,	or	in	the	juices	of	roasting	meat.
In	France	rutabagas,	or	yellow	turnips,	are	practically	unheard	of	as	food
for	humans,	but	they	may	be	used	interchangeably	with	white	turnips.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

The	full	flavor	of	turnips	goes	well	with	pork,	sausages,	ham,	goose,
and	duck.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	pound	of	turnips	without	tops	will	serve	3	or	4	people.	A	pound
of	raw	sliced	or	quartered	turnips	measures	about	3½	cups.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Small,	tender,	early-crop	turnips,	usually	sold	in	bunches	with	their
tops	attached,	are	trimmed,	peeled,	and	set	to	cook	with	no	preliminary
blanching.	The	older	and	stronger	winter	turnips	and	rutabagas,	always
sold	without	tops,	are	peeled	fairly	deeply	with	a	knife,	and	are	cut	into
slices	or	quarters.	Quarters	may	be	trimmed	into	neat	ovals	the	shape	of
large	garlic	 cloves,	 called	 in	French	 tourner	 en	 gousses	or	en	olives.	Any
turnips	which	are	woody	or	fibrous	should	be	discarded.

PRELIMINARY	BLANCHING

After	peeling	and	cutting	winter	turnips	or	rutabagas,	place	them	in
a	saucepan	with	salted	water	to	cover	them	by	2	inches,	bring	to	the	boil
and	boil	for	3	to	5	minutes	or	until	they	are	partially	tender.	Drain	them.
This	removes	some	of	their	overly	strong	taste.	The	following	recipes	are
based	 on	 winter	 turnips;	 omit	 the	 blanching	 step	 if	 your	 turnips	 are
young	and	tender.



		NAVETS	À	L’ÉTUVÉE
[Turnips	Braised	in	Butter]

Braised	 turnips	 may	 be	 served	 by	 themselves	 or	 combined	 with
other	vegetables.	Their	final	cooking	may	be	done	around	a	roast	or	in	a
braised	dish	or	a	fricassee.

For	6	people

2	lbs.	turnips,	peeled	and	quartered	(7	to	8	cups)
A	heavy-bottomed,	3-quart,	enameled	saucepan
2	Tb	butter
1	to	1½	cups	stock,	canned	beef	or	chicken	bouillon,	or	water
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste

Blanch	the	turnips	for	3	to	5	minutes	in	boiling	salted	water	to	cover.
Drain,	 and	 place	 them	 in	 the	 saucepan	 with	 the	 butter	 and	 enough
liquid	barely	to	cover	them.	Season	lightly.	Cover	and	boil	slowly	for
20	to	30	minutes	or	until	they	are	tender	but	retain	their	shape.	If	the
liquid	has	not	evaporated,	uncover	and	boil	it	off.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	cooked	several	hours	in	advance	of	serving.

TO	SERVE
Navets	Persillés
[Parslied	Turnips]

2	Tb	softened	butter
Optional:	Drops	of	lemon	juice	to	taste
2	Tb	minced	parsley
A	hot	vegetable	dish

Just	 before	 serving,	 toss	 the	 hot	 turnips	 gently	 with	 the	 butter,
optional	lemon	juice,	and	parsley.	Turn	into	the	vegetable	dish.



VARIATION
Purée	de	Navets	Parmentier
[Turnip	and	Potato	Purée]

Serve	this	purée	with	roast	turkey,	duck,	goose,	ham,	pork,	or	pork
chops	or	sausages.

For	6	people

7	to	8	cups	turnips	braised	in	butter	(the	preceding	master	recipe)
2	cups	warm	mashed	potatoes
4	Tb	softened	butter
Salt	and	pepper
A	hot	vegetable	dish
2	Tb	minced	parsley

Purée	 the	 turnips	 and	beat	 them	 into	 the	mashed	potatoes.	 Beat	 the
purée	in	a	saucepan	over	moderate	heat	to	evaporate	moisture	and	to
heat	 thoroughly.	Off	heat	and	 just	before	serving,	beat	 in	 the	butter.
Season	 to	 taste	with	 salt	 and	pepper.	Turn	 into	a	hot	vegetable	dish
and	sprinkle	with	parsley.

		NAVETS	GLACÉS	À	BRUN
[Glazed	Turnips]

Glazed	 turnips	 are	 used	 to	 garnish	 a	 roast,	 or	may	be	 served	 as	 a
separate	 vegetable.	 It	 is	 essentially	 the	 same	 procedure	 as	 that	 for
braised	turnips,	except	they	are	browned	before	being	simmered,	and	are
cooked	with	sugar	and	more	butter	to	reduce	the	liquid	to	a	glaze.

For	6	people

2	lbs.	turnips,	peeled	and	quartered	(7	to	8	cups)
Blanch	the	turnips	for	3	to	5	minutes	in	boiling	salted	water	to	cover.
Drain,	and	dry	them	in	a	towel.



A	10-to	12-inch	enameled	skillet
2	Tb	butter	and	2	Tb	oil,	or	4	Tb	rendered	fresh	pork	or	goose	fat
1	to	1½	cups	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon

Sauté	the	turnips	in	hot	butter	and	oil,	or	in	fat,	for	3	to	4	minutes	to
brown	them	lightly.	Pour	in	enough	stock	or	bouillon	barely	to	cover
them.	Add	 the	butter	 and	 sugar.	Cover	 and	boil	 slowly	 for	 20	 to	30
minutes	or	until	the	turnips	are	tender	but	retain	their	shape.	Correct
seasoning.

2	Tb	butter
3	Tb	granulated	sugar

(*)	When	cooked	in	advance,	set	aside	uncovered.	Before	serving,	add
a	tablespoon	of	water,	if	necessary,	and	reheat	in	covered	saucepan.

A	hot	vegetable	dish
2	Tb	very	finely	minced	parsley

If	 the	 liquid	 has	 not	 reduced	 to	 a	 syrupy	 glaze,	 uncover	 and	 boil	 it
down	 rapidly.	 Gently	 toss	 the	 turnips	 to	 coat	 them	 with	 the	 glaze.
Turn	them	into	a	hot	vegetable	dish	or	heap	them	around	your	roast,
and	sprinkle	with	parsley.

NAVETS	À	LA	CHAMPENOISE
[Turnip	Casserole]

People	who	disdain	the	turnip	almost	invariably	revise	their	opinion
after	 tasting	 this	 dish.	 It	 goes	 admirably	 with	 roast	 pork,	 beef,	 duck,
goose,	turkey,	ham,	or	grilled	sausages.	(Yellow	turnips	or	rutabagas	do
well	here.)	For	6	to	8	people

2½	lbs.	turnips,	peeled	and	cut	into	quarters	(8	to	9	cups)
Blanch	the	turnips	for	3	to	5	minutes	in	boiling	salted	water	to	cover.
Drain.



A	¼-lb.	chunk	of	bacon
Remove	the	rind	and	cut	the	bacon	into	¼-inch	dice,	making	about	⅔
cup.	Simmer	for	10	minutes	in	a	quart	of	water.	Drain.

A	3-quart,	fireproof	casserole	about	2	inches	deep
1	Tb	butter
⅔	cup	finely	diced	onions

Sauté	 the	 bacon	 in	 the	 butter	 for	 several	 minutes	 until	 very	 lightly
browned.	 Stir	 in	 the	 onions,	 cover,	 and	 cook	 slowly	 for	 5	 minutes
without	browning	the	onions.

1	Tb	flour
Blend	in	the	flour	and	cook	slowly	for	2	minutes.

¾	cup	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
¼	tsp	sugar
Salt	and	pepper
¼	tsp	sage

Off	heat,	blend	 in	 the	 stock	or	bouillon,	 seasonings	 to	 taste,	 and	 the
sage.	 Simmer	 for	 a	 moment,	 then	 fold	 in	 the	 turnips.	 Cover	 and
simmer	slowly	for	20	to	30	minutes	or	until	the	turnips	are	tender.	If
sauce	is	too	liquid,	uncover	and	boil	slowly	for	several	minutes	until	it
has	reduced	and	thickened.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	cooked	several	hours	in	advance	and	reheated	later.

2	Tb	minced	parsley
Sprinkle	with	parsley	and	serve.

BRAISED	VEGETABLES

Légumes	Braisées



LETTUCE,	CELERY,	ENDIVE,	AND	LEEKS

Laitues,	Céleris,	Endives,	et	Poireaux

The	braising	of	lettuce,	celery,	endive,	or	leeks	requires	a	relatively
long,	 slow	 cooking,	 usually	 of	 an	 hour	 and	 a	 half	 or	more,	 before	 the
desired	 interchange	 of	 flavors	 between	 the	 vegetable	 and	 its	 braising
medium	can	take	place.	It	is	this	culinary	osmosis	which	gives	them	the
delicious	 flavor	 they	 should	 always	 have.	 Any	 one	 of	 these	 vegetables
may	be	braised,	set	aside	uncovered	to	cool,	then	covered	and	reheated
several	hours	or	even	a	day	later.

LAITUES	BRAISÉES
[Braised	Lettuce]

Plain	 boiled	 lettuce	 is	 dreadfully	 uninteresting,	 but	 lettuce	 braised
slowly	 in	 stock	 and	 herbs	 is	 a	marvelous	 dish.	 It	 goes	well	with	 roast
veal,	 roast	beef,	and	roast	chicken.	 It	can	also	be	combined	with	other
vegetables	 such	 as	 grilled	 tomatoes	 and	 sautéed	 potatoes	 to	 garnish	 a
meat	platter.
Boston	 lettuce,	 chicory,	 and	 escarole	 are	 all	 equally	 good	 for

braising.	Count	on	one	6-to	8-inch	head	per	person.
For	6	people

6	heads	of	lettuce,	6	to	8	inches	in	diameter
Trim	the	stems	of	the	lettuce	and	remove	wilted	leaves.	Two	at	a	time,
hold	 each	 head	 by	 its	 stem	 and	 plunge	 up	 and	 down	 gently	 in	 cold
water	to	remove	all	traces	of	sand.

A	large	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	of	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of	water
Salt	and	pepper

Plunge	 three	 of	 the	 heads	 in	 the	 boiling	 salted	water.	 Bring	 rapidly
back	to	 the	boil	and	boil	 slowly,	uncovered,	 for	3	 to	5	minutes	until
the	 heads	 have	wilted.	 Remove	 and	 plunge	 for	 2	 to	 3	minutes	 in	 a



large	basin	of	cold	water.	Repeat	with	the	remaining	lettuce.	A	head	at
a	time,	squeeze	gently	but	firmly	in	both	hands	to	eliminate	as	much
water	as	you	can.	Slice	each	head	in	half	lengthwise.	Sprinkle	with	salt
and	pepper.	Fold	in	half	crosswise	and	shape	with	your	hands	to	make
fat	triangles.

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

6	thick	slices	of	bacon
A	4-inch	square	of	bacon	rind

Simmer	the	bacon	and	rind	in	a	quart	of	water	for	10	minutes.	Drain,
rinse	in	cold	water,	and	dry.

A	12-inch,	fireproof,	covered	casserole
½	cup	sliced	onions
½	cup	sliced	carrots
3	Tb	butter

In	 the	 casserole	 cook	 the	 onions	 and	 carrots	 slowly	 with	 the	 butter
until	tender	but	not	browned.	Push	them	to	the	sides	of	the	casserole
and	arrange	the	lettuce	triangles	in	the	bottom,	closely	pressed	against
each	 other.	 Spread	 part	 of	 the	 vegetables	 over	 the	 lettuce,	 then	 the
bacon	and	bacon	rind.

About	2	cups	good	beef	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon,	plus,	if	you
wish,	½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth

A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	¼	tsp	thyme,	and	½	bay
leaf	tied	in	cheesecloth

A	round	of	buttered	paper
Pour	 in	 enough	 liquid	 barely	 to	 cover	 the	 lettuce.	 Add	 the	 herb
bouquet.	Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	 the	stove.	Place	the	buttered
paper	over	 the	 lettuce,	 cover	 the	casserole,	and	 set	 in	 lower	 third	of
preheated	oven.	Regulate	heat	so	lettuce	simmers	slowly	for	1½	hours.

A	lightly	buttered	serving	dish



Remove	the	lettuce	to	the	serving	dish	and	keep	it	warm.	Quickly	boil
down	the	braising	liquid	until	it	has	reduced	to	a	syrup	(about	½	cup).

2	Tb	butter
2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley
Off	heat,	swirl	the	butter	into	the	sauce,	then	strain	it	over	the	lettuce,
sprinkle	with	parsley	and	serve.
(*)	If	done	in	advance,	do	not	sauce	the	lettuce	until	the	last	moment.
Boil	down	the	braising	liquid	and	strain	it	into	a	saucepan.	Reheat	the
lettuce	 by	 covering	 with	 buttered	 foil	 and	 setting	 it	 for	 about	 15
minutes	 in	 a	 350-degree	 oven.	 Just	 before	 serving,	 butter	 the	 sauce
and	pour	it	over	the	lettuce.

CÉLERIS	BRAISÉS
[Braised	Celery]

Except	for	slight	differences	at	the	beginning	and	at	the	end,	celery
is	braised	in	the	same	way	as	lettuce,	so	we	shall	not	give	it	a	full	recipe.
Serve	braised	celery	with	chops,	steaks,	roast	beef,	turkey,	goose,	duck,
pork,	or	lamb.

For	6	people

6	bunches	of	tender,	practically	stringless	celery	about	2	inches	in
diameter
A	kettle	containing	7	to	8	quarts	boiling	water
1½	tsp	salt	per	quart	of
water	White	string
Trim	the	roots,	and	cut	off	the	tops	to	make	each	celery	bunch	6	to	7
inches	long.	Wash	thoroughly,	using	warm	water	if	necessary:	spread
the	 stalks	apart	gently	while	 running	water	all	 the	way	down	 to	 the
root	 to	 remove	 all	 grit.	 Drop	 into	 the	 boiling,	 salted	water	 and	 boil
slowly	for	15	minutes.	Drain.	Plunge	for	2	to	3	minutes	in	a	basin	of
cold	 water.	 Drain,	 and	 gently	 extract	 as	 much	 water	 as	 possible	 by



pressing	each	bunch	 in	a	 towel.	Tie	each	with	2	or	3	 loops	of	white
string	to	keep	the	stalks	in	place	while	braising.

The	same	ingredients	as	for	braised	lettuce	(preceding	recipe)
A	lightly	buttered	baking	or	serving	dish
Following	 the	method	 for	 the	 preceding	 braised	 lettuce,	 arrange	 the
celery	 in	 a	 casserole	 or	 baking	 dish	 large	 enough	 to	 hold	 it	 in	 one
layer.	Cover	with	blanched	bacon	 strips	 and	 cooked	vegetables.	Add
the	wine	and	enough	stock	just	to	cover	the	celery.	Season	lightly	and
add	 the	herb	bouquet.	Cover,	bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 and	bake	 for	1½
hours	 in	 a	 350-degree	 oven.	 Then	 uncover	 the	 casserole,	 raise	 oven
heat	to	400	degrees,	and	bake	30	minutes	more,	basting	2	or	3	times,
until	the	celery	has	browned	lightly.	Drain	the	celery,	remove	strings,
cut	bunches	 in	half	 lengthwise,	and	arrange	 in	dish.	Cover	and	keep
warm	if	to	be	served	immediately.

1	Tb	arrowroot	(or	potato	starch	or	cornstarch)	blended	with	2	Tb
Madeira,	port,	stock,	or	bouillon
Strain	 the	 braising	 liquid	 into	 a	 saucepan	 and	 boil	 it	 down	 rapidly
until	 it	 has	 reduced	 to	 1	 cup.	 Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 starch	 mixture.
Simmer	for	3	to	4	minutes.	Correct	seasoning.

2	Tb	softened	butter
2	Tb	minced	parsley
Off	heat	and	just	before	serving,	beat	the	butter	into	the	sauce.	Pour	it
over	the	hot	celery	and	sprinkle	with	parsley.
(*)	May	be	cooked	ahead;	see	preceding	recipe	for	braised	lettuce.

VARIATION
Cold	Braised	Celery
Degrease	the	braising	liquid	thoroughly	before	you	reduce	it.	Omit

the	starch	and	the	enrichment	butter.



CÉLERI-RAVE	BRAISÉ
[Braised	Celeriac—Celery	Root]

Celeriac,	 a	delicious	winter	 vegetable,	 is	 not	nearly	 as	 common	 in
American	markets	as	 it	should	be.	Besides	braising	it	 in	stock	as	 in	the
following	recipe,	you	may	treat	 it	exactly	 like	the	turnips	on	this	page,
cooking	 it	 slowly	 in	 a	 small	 amount	 of	 liquid,	 butter,	 and	 seasonings,
and	serving	it	with	butter	and	parsley,	or	puréed	with	mashed	potatoes.
Celeriac	may	accompany	roast	goose,	duck,	pork,	ham,	or	turkey.

For	6	people

2	lbs.	celeriac
Peel	the	celeriac	and	cut	it	into	slices	½	inch	thick;	you	will	have	7	to
8	cups.	Drop	it	into	a	saucepan	with	boiling	salted	water	to	cover,	and
boil	slowly	for	5	minutes.	Drain.

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	¼-lb	chunk	of	bacon,	rind	removed
Cut	 the	bacon	 into	¼-inch	dice;	you	will	have	about	⅔	cup.	Simmer
10	minutes	in	a	quart	of	water.	Drain.

⅔	cup	minced	onions
1	Tb	butter
A	3-quart,	fireproof	casserole
1	to	1½	cups	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Optional:	½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth	in	place	of	½
cup	stock
Salt	and	pepper
Cook	 the	 onions,	 and	 bacon	 in	 butter	 slowly	 in	 the	 casserole	 for	 10
minutes	without	browning.	Arrange	 the	celeriac	 in	 the	casserole	and
spread	the	onions	and	bacon	over	it.	Pour	in	enough	liquid	barely	to
cover	the	celeriac.	Season	lightly.



A	round	of	buttered	aluminum	foil
A	bulb	baster
2	Tb	minced	parsley
Bring	 to	 the	simmer	on	 top	of	 the	stove.	Cover	 loosely	with	 the	 foil.
Set	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 preheated	 oven	 and	 bake	 for	 about	 1	 hour,
basting	2	or	3	times	with	a	bulb	baster.	The	celeriac	is	done	when	it	is
very	 tender,	 has	 browned	 lightly,	 and	 the	 liquid	 has	 almost
evaporated.	Serve	sprinkled	with	parsley.

		ENDIVES	À	LA	FLAMANDE
[Braised	Belgian	Endive]

It	 is	too	bad	Belgian	endive	is	so	expensive	in	this	country,	as	it	 is
one	 of	 the	 better	 winter	 vegetables.	 The	 plain	 butter-braise	 is,	 in	 our
opinion,	 the	 most	 delicious	 way	 of	 cooking	 endive.	 It	 emerges	 a
beautiful	 light	golden	color	and	 its	characteristic	 flavor	 is	enhanced	by
its	slow	absorption	of	the	butter.	Endive	goes	particularly	well	with	veal.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

12	firm,	medium-sized	endives	with	tightly	closed	leaves
Trim	the	base	of	the	endives.	Discard	any	withered	leaves.	Wash	one
by	one	rapidly	under	running	cold	water.	Drain.

5	Tb	butter
A	2½-to	3-quart	enameled	casserole
¼	tsp	salt
1	Tb	lemon	juice
¼	cup	water
Smear	1½	tablespoons	butter	in	the	casserole.	Lay	the	endives	in	it	in
two	layers.	Sprinkle	each	layer	with	salt	and	lemon	juice,	and	dot	with
butter.	 Pour	 in	 the	 water.	 Cover	 and	 boil	 slowly	 for	 10	 minutes.



Uncover	 and	 boil	 rapidly	 for	 about	 10	 minutes	 or	 until	 liquid	 is
reduced	to	2	or	3	tablespoons.

A	round	of	buttered	paper
EITHER:

2	Tb	minced	parsley
A	hot	vegetable	dish

OR:

A	shallow	baking	dish
2	Tb	melted	butter
2	Tb	minced	parsley
Lay	 the	 paper	 over	 the	 endives,	 cover	 the	 casserole,	 and	 bake	 in
middle	level	of	preheated	oven	for	1	hour.	Remove	casserole	cover	but
leave	paper	in	place,	and	bake	30	minutes	more	or	until	endives	are	a
nice	golden	yellow.	Either	arrange	the	endives	in	a	hot	vegetable	dish
or	around	your	roast,	and	sprinkle	with	parsley,	or,	for	a	more	golden
effect,	 arrange	 them	 in	 a	baking	dish,	 baste	with	melted	butter,	 and
brown	 briefly	 under	 the	 broiler.	 Sprinkle	 with	 parsley	 just	 before
serving.

VARIATION
Endives	Gratinées
[Endives	Gratinéed	with	Cheese]

Butter-braised	 endives	 are	 also	 good	 when	 sauced	 and	 browned
under	 the	 broiler.	 For	 a	main-course	 dish,	wrap	 each	 endive	 in	 a	 thin
slice	of	boiled	ham	before	 saucing.	See	also	 the	quiche	aux	endives	 and
the	gratin	d’endives.

For	6	people

2	cups	sauce	crème	or	Sauce	Mornay	(béchamel	with	cream,	or	with
cheese)



A	shallow,	lightly	buttered	baking	dish
12	endives	butter-braised	as	in	the	preceding	recipe
2	to	3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Spread	 a	 third	 of	 the	 sauce	 in	 the	 baking	 dish.	 Arrange	 the	 braised
endives	 over	 it,	 and	 pour	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 sauce	 over	 them.	 Sprinkle
with	cheese	and	dot	with	butter.

Shortly	 before	 serving,	 set	 under	 a	moderately	 hot	 broiler	 to	 reheat
thoroughly	and	brown	the	cheese	lightly.

		POIREAUX	BRAISÉS	AU	BEURRE
[Braised	Leeks]
Braised	 leeks	 are	 a	 fine	 accompaniment	 to	 roast	 beef,	 steaks,	 or
turkey.
For	6	people

12	fine	fresh	leeks	about	1½	inches	in	diameter
A	covered,	fireproof	casserole	or	baking	dish,	square	or	oval,	and
long	enough	to	hold	the	trimmed	leeks
3	to	4	cups	water	6	Tb	butter
½	Tb	salt
Trim	off	the	roots,	remove	any	withered	leaves,	and	slit	the	green	part
of	 the	 leeks	 lengthwise	 two	 ways.	 Wash	 thoroughly	 under	 running
water,	 spreading	 leaves	 apart.	Cut	 off	 a	 portion	of	 the	 green	 tops	 to
leave	 the	 leeks	 about	 7	 inches	 long.	 Lay	 the	 leeks	 in	 the	 casserole,
making	2	 or	 3	 layers.	 Pour	 in	 enough	water	 to	 come	 two	 thirds	 the
way	up	the	layers	of	leeks.	Add	the	butter	and	salt.

Set	over	high	heat	and	bring	to	the	boil.	Partially	cover,	leaving	a	1/ -
16

inch	 space	 to	 allow	 steam	 to	 escape,	 and	maintain	 liquid	 at	 a	 fairly
fast	 boil.	 As	 leeks	 soften,	 water	 will	 just	 cover	 them.	 In	 30	 to	 40
minutes,	 the	white	 part	 of	 the	 leeks	 should	 be	 tender	when	 pierced



with	a	knife,	and	the	liquid	should	have	almost	evaporated.

A	shallow,	fireproof	baking	and	serving	dish
Transfer	the	leeks	to	the	baking	dish,	and	pour	the	remaining	cooking
juices	over	them.

Aluminum	foil	2	to	3	Tb	chopped	parsley
Half	an	hour	before	serving,	cover	loosely	with	aluminum	foil	and	set
in	 the	 middle	 level	 of	 a	 preheated,	 325-degree	 oven	 for	 20	 to	 30
minutes	or	until	the	leeks	have	taken	on	a	light	golden	color.	Sprinkle
with	parsley	and	serve.
(*)	 After	 their	 baking,	 the	 leeks	 may	 be	 set	 aside	 uncovered,	 and
reheated	later.

VARIATIONS
Poireaux	Gratinés	au	Fromage
[Leeks	Browned	with	Cheese]

The	preceding	braised	leeks	½	cup	grated	Swiss,	or	Swiss	and
Parmesan	cheese,	or	mixture	of	cheese	and	bread	crumbs
3	Tb	melted	butter
After	 the	 braised	 leeks	 have	 browned	 lightly	 in	 the	 oven,	 sprinkle
them	with	 the	 cheese	 or	 cheese	 and	 bread	 crumbs.	 Pour	 the	 butter
over	them.	Run	for	2	to	3	minutes	under	a	moderately	hot	broiler	to
brown	the	cheese	lightly.

Poireaux	à	la	Mornay,	Gratinés
[Leeks	Browned	with	Cheese	Sauce]

The	braised	leeks	in	the	preceding	master	recipe
2½	cups	sauce	mornay	béchamel	with	cheese)



¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots

After	the	braised	leeks	have	browned	very	lightly	in	the	oven,	pour	the
sauce	mornay	over	 them,	sprinkle	on	 the	cheese,	dot	with	 the	butter.
Run	under	a	moderately	hot	broiler	 for	2	 to	3	minutes	 to	brown	the
top	of	the	sauce	lightly.

RED	CABBAGE	AND	SAUERKRAUT

Chou	Rouge	et	Choucroute

Both	braised	red	cabbage	and	braised	sauerkraut	need	4	to	5	hours
of	 slow	 cooking	 for	 them	 to	 develop	 their	 full	 flavor.	 Once	 they	 have
been	set	in	the	oven	they	need	little	or	no	attention,	and	are	even	better
when	cooked	in	advance	and	reheated	the	next	day.

CHOU	ROUGE	À	LA	LIMOUSINE
[Braised	Red	Cabbage	with	Red	Wine	and	Chestnuts]

Red	cabbage	braised	in	this	fashion	is	a	fine	dish	to	serve	with	roast
goose,	duck,	pork,	venison,	or	wild	boar.	Or	you	may	cook	the	meat	in
the	 casserole	 with	 the	 cabbage,	 see	 the	 recipe	 for	 duck.	 All	 red
vegetables	must	cook	with	something	acid	to	retain	their	color;	thus	the
tart	apples	and	red	wine	in	the	following	recipe.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	¼-lb.	chunk	of	bacon
Remove	the	rind	and	cut	the	bacon	into	lardons,	strips	1½	inches	long
and	¼	inch	across.	You	will	have	about	⅔	cup.	Simmer	for	10	minutes
in	1	quart	of	water.	Drain.



½	cup	thinly	sliced	carrots
1	cup	sliced	onions
3	Tb	rendered	fresh	goose	or	pork	fat,	or	butter
A	5-to	6-quart,	covered,	fireproof	casserole
Cook	 the	 bacon,	 carrots,	 and	 onions,	 in	 fat	 or	 butter	 slowly	 in	 the
covered	casserole	for	10	minutes	without	browning.

2	lbs.	(6	to	7	cups)	red	cabbage	leaves	cut	into	½-inch	slices
Stir	 in	 the	 cabbage	 leaves	 and	 when	 well	 covered	 with	 the	 fat	 and
vegetables,	cover	and	cook	slowly	for	10	minutes.

2	cups	diced	tart	apples
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
¼	tsp	ground	bay	leaf
⅛	tsp	clove
⅛	tsp	nutmeg
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
2	cups	good,	young	red	wine	(Bordeaux,	Mâcon,	or	Chianti)
2	cups	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
Stir	in	all	the	ingredients	listed	at	the	left.	Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top
of	 the	 stove.	 Cover	 and	 place	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 preheated	 oven.
Regulate	heat	so	cabbage	bubbles	slowly	for	3	to	3½	hours.

24	peeled	chestnuts
Salt	and	pepper
Add	the	chestnuts	to	the	cabbage,	cover	and	return	casserole	to	oven
for	1	to	1½	hours	more,	or	until	the	chestnuts	are	tender	and	all	the
liquid	 in	 the	 casserole	 has	 been	 absorbed	 by	 the	 cabbage.	 Taste
carefully	 for	 seasoning,	 and	 serve	 as	 follows:	 (*)	 If	 not	 served
immediately,	set	aside	uncovered.	Reheat	slowly	before	serving.



4	or	5	sprigs	of	parsley
A	hot	vegetable	dish
Turn	 into	 a	 vegetable	 dish	 or	 heap	 around	 your	meat,	 and	 decorate
with	parsley.

CHOUCROUTE	BRAISÉE	À	L’ALSACIENNE
[Braised	Sauerkraut]

In	 France	 before	 sauerkraut	 is	 braised	 with	 wine,	 stock,	 aromatic
vegetables,	and	spices,	it	is	always	drained	and	soaked	in	cold	water	for
15	to	20	minutes	to	remove	all	but	a	suggestion	of	its	preserving	brine.	If
you	have	never	cared	much	for	the	sour	flavor	of	most	sauerkraut	dishes,
this	recipe	may	well	change	you	into	an	enthusiast.	Sauerkraut	makes	a
most	 savory	 accompaniment	 to	 duck,	 goose,	 pheasant,	 pork,	 ham,	 or
sausages	 any	 of	 which	 may	 even	 cook	 along	 with	 the	 sauerkraut	 and
give	it	that	much	more	flavor.
For	6	people

2	lbs.	(about	5	cups)	fresh	sauerkraut	(canned	raw	sauerkraut	may	be
used,	but	it	is	never	as	good	as	the	fresh)
Drain	 the	 sauerkraut	 (either	 fresh	 or	 canned)	 and	 soak	 it	 in	 a	 large
basin	of	cold	water	for	15	to	20	minutes	or	more,	changing	the	water
three	 times.	 Taste	 the	 sauerkraut,	 and	 when	 as	 much	 of	 the	 briny
flavor	 as	 you	 wish	 has	 been	 removed,	 drain	 it.	 Taking	 it	 by	 small
handfuls,	 squeeze	 out	 as	 much	 water	 as	 you	 can.	 Pick	 it	 apart	 to
separate	the	strands.

A	½-lb.	chunk	of	bacon
Remove	the	rind	and	slice	the	bacon	into	½-inch	pieces	about	2	inches
long.	Simmer	it	in	2	quarts	of	water	for	10	minutes.	Drain.

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

½	cup	thinly	sliced	carrots



1	cup	sliced	onions
4	Tb	rendered	fresh	goose	or	pork	fat,	or	butter
A	2½-to	3-quart,	covered,	fireproof	casserole
Cook	 the	 bacon,	 carrots,	 and	 onions,	 in	 fat	 or	 butter	 slowly	 in	 the
covered	 casserole	 for	 10	 minutes	 without	 browning.	 Stir	 in	 the
sauerkraut	 and	when	 it	 is	well	 covered	with	 the	 fat	 and	 vegetables,
cover	and	cook	slowly	for	10	minutes	more.

The	following	tied	in	washed	cheesecloth:

4	sprigs	of	parsley
1	bay	leaf
6	peppercorns
10	Juniper	berries	(or	add	¼	cup	gin	to	the	casserole)
1	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅔	cup	dry	white	vermouth
2	to	3	cups	white	stock,	brown	stock,	or	canned	beef	or	chicken
bouillon

Salt
A	round	of	buttered	paper
Bury	 the	herb	 and	 spice	 packet	 in	 the	 sauerkraut.	 Pour	 in	 the	wine,
and	 enough	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 just	 to	 cover	 the	 sauerkraut.	 Season
lightly	with	salt.	Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Lay	on	the
round	of	 buttered	paper.	Cover	 and	 set	 in	middle	 level	 of	 preheated
oven.	Regulate	heat	 so	 sauerkraut	bubbles	 slowly	 for	4½	to	5	hours,
and	 until	 all	 the	 liquid	 has	 been	 absorbed	 by	 the	 sauerkraut.	 Taste
carefully	for	seasoning.
(*)	 If	 not	 served	 immediately,	 set	 aside	 uncovered.	 Reheat	 slowly
before	serving.

TO	SERVE
Choucroute	Garnie
[Sauerkraut	Garnished	with	Meat]



Braised	sauerkraut	may	be	used	as	a	bed	for	sliced	roast	pork,	pork
chops,	 ham,	 or	 browned	 sausages,	 or	 with	 roast	 goose,	 duck,	 or
pheasant.	 The	 dish	 is	 usually	 accompanied	 with	 boiled	 potatoes	 and
either	 a	 chilled	 Alsatian	 wine	 such	 as	 Riesling	 or	 Traminer,	 a	 white
domestic	wine	of	the	same	type,	or	beer.
If	you	wish	to	cook	your	meats	in	the	sauerkraut,	brown	them	first

in	 a	 skillet	 in	 hot	 fat;	 then	 bury	 them	 in	 the	 casserole	 while	 the
sauerkraut	is	braising,	timing	the	meats	so	they	and	the	sauerkraut	will
be	done	together.	See	 the	recipe	 for	duck	braised	 in	sauerkraut	on	this
page.

CUCUMBERS

Concombres

		CONCOMBRES	AU	BEURRE
[Baked	Cucumbers]

If	 the	 natural	 moisture	 content	 is	 not	 withdrawn	 beforehand,
cucumbers	exude	so	much	water	as	they	are	heated	that	you	usually	end
up	with	a	tasteless	mush	and	swear	never	to	attempt	cooked	cucumbers
again.	 Blanching	 for	 5	 minutes	 before	 cooking	 will	 remove	 unwanted
water,	 but	 also	most	 of	 the	 cucumber	 flavor.	A	 preliminary	 sojourn	 in
salt	draws	out	the	water	and	also	the	bitterness,	if	they	are	of	the	bitter
European	type,	yet	leaves	the	flavor,	which	a	little	vinegar	and	a	pinch
of	sugar	accentuates.	We	have	found	the	following	method	delicious,	and
suggest	 it	 for	 all	 cooked	 cucumber	 recipes.	 Baked	 cucumbers	 go	 with
roast,	broiled,	or	sautéed	chicken,	roast	veal,	veal	chops	or	scallops,	and
sautéed	brains	or	sweetbreads.
For	6	people

6	cucumbers	about	8	inches	long
Peel	the	cucumbers.	Cut	in	half	lengthwise;	scoop	out	the	seeds	with	a
spoon.	 Cut	 into	 lengthwise	 strips	 about	⅜	 inch	wide.	 Cut	 the	 strips
into	2-inch	pieces.



2	Tb	wine	vinegar
1½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	sugar
A	2½-quart	porcelain	or	stainless	steel	bowl
Toss	 the	 cucumbers	 in	 a	 bowl	with	 the	 vinegar,	 salt,	 and	 sugar.	 Let
stand	for	at	least	30	minutes	or	for	several	hours.	Drain.	Pat	dry	in	a
towel.

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

A	baking	dish	12	inches	in	diameter	and	1½	inches	deep
3	Tb	melted	butter
½	tsp	dill	or	basil
3	to	4	Tb	minced	green	onions
⅛	tsp	pepper
Toss	the	cucumbers	in	the	baking	dish	with	the	butter,	herbs,	onions,
and	pepper.	Set	uncovered	in	middle	level	of	preheated	oven	for	about
1	hour,	tossing	2	or	3	times,	until	cucumbers	are	tender	but	still	have
a	suggestion	of	crispness	and	texture.	They	will	barely	color	during	the
cooking.
(*)	 Set	 aside	 uncovered;	 reheat	 before	 serving	 as	 in	 the	 following
suggestions.

TO	SERVE
Concombres	Persillés
[Parslied	Cucumbers]

A	hot	vegetable	dish	2	Tb	minced	parsley
Turn	 the	 baked	 cucumbers	 into	 the	 vegetable	 dish,	 sprinkle	 with
minced	parsley,	and	serve.

Concombres	à	la	Crème



[Creamed	Cucumbers]

1	cup	whipping	cream	Salt	and	pepper	1	Tb	minced	parsley
Boil	the	cream	in	a	small	saucepan	until	it	has	reduced	by	half.	Season
with	 salt	 and	 pepper,	 fold	 into	 the	 hot,	 baked	 cucumbers,	 sprinkle
with	parsley,	and	serve.

Concombres	aux	Champignons	et	à	la	Crème
[Creamed	Cucumbers	with	Mushrooms]

½	lb.	fresh	mushrooms
An	enameled	skillet
1	cup	whipping	cream
1	tsp	cornstarch	mixed	with	1	tsp	water
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
2	Tb	minced	parsley
Trim,	wash,	and	quarter	the	mushrooms.	Dry	in	a	towel.	Set	them	in
the	dry	skillet	and	toss	over	moderately	low	heat	for	5	minutes.	Pour
in	the	cream	and	cornstarch	mixture;	boil	slowly	for	5	minutes	or	so,
until	cream	has	reduced	and	thickened.	Stir	in	salt	and	pepper,	simmer
a	moment	 and	 check	 seasoning.	 Fold	 into	 the	hot	 baked	 cucumbers,
sprinkle	with	parsley,	and	serve.

Concombres	à	la	Mornay
[Cucumbers	with	Cheese	Sauce]

1½	cups	sauce	mornay	(béchamel	with	grated	cheese)
2	to	3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
1	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots
Fold	 the	 cheese	 sauce	 into	 the	 hot,	 baked	 cucumbers.	 Sprinkle	with
cheese,	dot	with	butter,	and	run	under	a	hot	broiler	for	2	to	3	minutes
to	brown	top	delicately.



EGGPLANT

Aubergines

Eggplants,	 like	cucumbers,	contain	a	considerable	amount	of	water
which	must	be	removed	before	cooking;	in	their	raw	state	they	also	have
a	 bitter,	 puckery	 quality.	 The	 most	 satisfactory	 way	 to	 remove	 both
moisture	and	bitterness	yet	retain	flavor	 is	 to	 let	 them	stand	in	salt	 for
about	half	an	hour.

AUBERGINES	FARCIES	DUXELLES
[Eggplant	Stuffed	with	Mushrooms]

This	 excellent	 eggplant	 dish	 goes	with	 roast	 lamb,	 lamb	 chops,	 or
roast,	 sautéed,	 or	 broiled	 chicken.	 Or	 it	 may	 be	 a	 separate	 vegetable
course.	Preparation	is	somewhat	long,	as	it	is	for	many	good	things,	but
you	may	have	the	dish	ready	for	the	oven	several	hours	or	even	the	day
before	baking	it.
For	6	people—12,	if	the	eggplants	are	divided	as	they	are	served

3	eggplants	about	6	inches	long	and	3	inches	in	diameter
Remove	 the	 green	 stem	 covering	 and	 cut	 the	 eggplants	 in	 half
lengthwise.	 Cut	 striations	 an	 inch	 apart	 in	 the	 flesh,	 going	 down	 to
within	¼	inch	of	the	skin.	Preheat	broiler	in	time	for	paragraph	three.

1	Tb	salt
2	Tb	olive	oil
Sprinkle	 the	 flesh	 with	 salt	 and	 lay	 the	 eggplants	 flesh	 down	 on	 a
towel	for	half	an	hour.	Gently	squeeze	them	to	extract	as	much	water
as	possible.	Dry	them,	then	dribble	the	oil	over	them.

A	shallow	roasting	pan	large	large	enough	to	hold	eggplant	halves	in
one	layer



Place	them	flesh-side	up	in	a	roasting	pan	and	pour	⅛	inch	of	water
around	them.	Set	them	so	their	flesh	is	4	to	5	inches	from	preheated,
moderately	hot	broiler	for	10	to	15	minutes,	until	tender,	and	lightly
browned	on	top.

A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Leaving	 the	 skin	 intact,	 remove	all	 but	¼	 inch	of	 the	 eggplant	meat
with	a	spoon.	Chop	it	and	place	it	in	a	mixing	bowl.
NOTE:	 In	 the	 following	stuffing,	you	may,	 if	you	wish,	 substitute	 for
part	of	the	mushrooms	1	cup	of	rice	steamed	in	butter.

1	cup	finely	minced	yellow	onions
1½	Tb	olive	oil	or	butter
A	9-to	10-inch	enameled	skillet
Salt	and	pepper
Cook	 the	 onions	 slowly	 in	 the	 oil	 or	 butter	 in	 a	 skillet	 for	 about	 10
minutes	until	very	tender	but	not	browned.	Season	lightly	and	add	to
the	eggplant	in	the	mixing	bowl.

1	lb.	finely	minced	fresh	mushrooms
3	Tb	butter
1	Tb	olive	oil
Salt	and	pepper
Following	 the	 recipe	 for	mushroom	 duxelles	 twist	 the	mushrooms,	 a
handful	at	a	time,	in	the	corner	of	a	towel	to	extract	their	juice.	Sauté
them	 in	 butter	 and	 oil	 until	 very	 lightly	 browned	 (5	 to	 6	minutes).
Season	and	add	to	the	mixing	bowl.

1½	packages	(4½	ounces)	cream	cheese
4	Tb	minced	parsley
½	tsp	basil	or	¼	tsp	thyme
Mash	the	cheese	with	a	fork,	then	beat	it	into	the	mixing	bowl.	Beat	in



the	herbs,	and	taste	carefully	for	seasoning.

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese	mixed	with	3	Tb	fine,	dry,	white	bread
crumbs

2	to	3	Tb	melted	butter
Fill	 the	eggplant	 shells	with	 the	mixture.	Top	with	cheese	and	bread
crumbs,	and	baste	each	half	with	melted	butter.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.

About	 40	 minutes	 before	 serving,	 arrange	 in	 roasting	 pan	 and
surround	with	⅛	inch	of	water.	Bake	in	upper	third	of	preheated	oven
for	 25	 to	 30	minutes	 to	 heat	 thoroughly	 and	 brown	 the	 cheese	 and
bread	crumbs.

RATATOUILLE
[Eggplant	 Casserole—with	 tomatoes,	 onions,	 peppers,	 and
zucchini]

Ratatouille	perfumes	the	kitchen	with	the	essence	of	Provence	and	is
certainly	one	of	the	great	Mediterranean	dishes.	As	it	is	strongly	flavored
it	is	best	when	it	accompanies	plain	roast	or	broiled	beef	or	lamb,	pot-au-
feu	 (boiled	 beef),	 or	 plain	 roast,	 broiled,	 or	 sautéed	 chicken.	 Equally
good	hot	or	cold,	it	also	makes	a	fine	accompaniment	to	cold	meats,	or
may	be	served	as	a	cold	hors	d’oeuvre.
A	really	good	ratatouille	is	not	one	of	the	quicker	dishes	to	make,	as

each	element	is	cooked	separately	before	it	 is	arranged	in	the	casserole
to	partake	of	a	brief	communal	simmer.	This	recipe	is	 the	only	one	we
know	of	which	produces	a	ratatouille	in	which	each	vegetable	retains	its
own	 shape	 and	 character.	 Happily	 a	 ratatouille	 may	 be	 cooked
completely	 the	 day	 before	 it	 is	 to	 be	 served,	 and	 it	 seems	 to	 gain	 in
flavor	when	reheated.
For	6	to	8	people



1	lb.	eggplant
1	lb.	zucchini
A	3-quart,	porcelain	or	stainless	steel	mixing	bowl
1	tsp	salt
Peel	the	eggplant	and	cut	into	lengthwise	slices	⅜	inch	thick,	about	3
inches	 long,	 and	 1	 inch	 wide.	 Scrub	 the	 zucchini,	 slice	 off	 the	 two
ends,	 and	 cut	 the	 zucchini	 into	 slices	 about	 the	 same	 size	 as	 the
eggplant	slices.	Place	the	vegetables	in	a	bowl	and	toss	with	the	salt.
Let	stand	for	30	minutes.	Drain.	Dry	each	slice	in	a	towel.

A	10-to	12-inch	enameled	skillet
4	Tb	olive	oil,	more	if	needed
One	layer	at	a	time,	sauté	the	eggplant,	and	then	the	zucchini	in	hot
olive	 oil	 for	 about	 a	 minute	 on	 each	 side	 to	 brown	 very	 lightly.
Remove	to	a	side	dish.

½	lb.	(about	1½	cups)	thinly	sliced	yellow	onions
2	(about	1	cup)	sliced	green	bell	peppers
2	to	3	Tb	olive	oil,	if	necessary
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
In	the	same	skillet,	cook	the	onions	and	peppers	slowly	in	olive	oil	for
about	10	minutes,	or	until	 tender	but	not	browned.	Stir	 in	 the	garlic
and	season	to	taste.

1	lb.	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	and	juiced	(makes	1½
cups	pulp)

Salt	and	pepper
Slice	the	tomato	pulp	into	⅜-inch	strips.	Lay	them	over	the	onions	and
peppers.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Cover	the	skillet	and	cook	over
low	heat	for	5	minutes,	or	until	tomatoes	have	begun	to	render	their
juice.	Uncover,	baste	the	tomatoes	with	the	juices,	raise	heat	and	boil
for	several	minutes,	until	juice	has	almost	entirely	evaporated.



A	2½	quart	fireproof	casserole	about	2½	inches	deep
3	Tb	minced	parsley
Place	a	third	of	the	tomato	mixture	in	the	bottom	of	the	casserole	and
sprinkle	over	 it	1	tablespoon	of	parsley.	Arrange	half	of	 the	eggplant
and	 zucchini	 on	 top,	 then	 half	 the	 remaining	 tomatoes	 and	 parsley.
Put	 in	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 eggplant	 and	 zucchini,	 and	 finish	 with	 the
remaining	tomatoes	and	parsley.

Salt	and	pepper
Cover	 the	 casserole	 and	 simmer	 over	 low	 heat	 for	 10	 minutes.
Uncover,	 tip	 casserole	 and	 baste	 with	 the	 rendered	 juices.	 Correct
seasoning,	 if	 necessary.	 Raise	 heat	 slightly	 and	 cook	 uncovered	 for
about	 15	 minutes	 more,	 basting	 several	 times,	 until	 juices	 have
evaporated	leaving	a	spoonful	or	two	of	flavored	olive	oil.	Be	careful
of	 your	 heat;	 do	 not	 let	 the	 vegetables	 scorch	 in	 the	 bottom	 of	 the
casserole.
(*)	Set	aside	uncovered.	Reheat	slowly	at	serving	time,	or	serve	cold.

MOUSSAKA,	a	mold	of	eggplant	and	lamb,	is	in	the	Lamb	section.

TOMATOES

Tomates

Many	recipes	calling	for	tomatoes	direct	that	they	be	peeled,	seeded,
and	 juiced.	This	applies	 to	 tomato	sauces,	 to	 the	 tomato	 fondues	which
are	used	in	egg	dishes,	to	various	Basque	or	Provençal	recipes,	and	to	the
diced	 tomato	 pulp	 which	 may	 be	 poached	 in	 a	 soup	 or	 a	 sauce.	 One
pound	or	4	or	5	medium	tomatoes	will	yield	about	1½	cups	of	pulp.

TO	PEEL	TOMATOES

Use	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes.	Drop	the	tomatoes	one	or	two	at	a	time
in	boiling	water	to	cover,	and	boil	for	exactly	10	seconds.	Remove.	Cut
out	the	stem.	Peel	off	the	skin	starting	from	the	stem	hole.



After	a	10-second	blanching,	tomato	skin	is	loosened	and	peels	off	easily

TO	SEED	AND	JUICE	TOMATOES

(for	illustration,	see	next	page)
Cut	peeled	or	unpeeled	tomatoes	in	half	crosswise,	not	through	the

stem.	Squeeze	each	half	gently	to	extract	the	seeds	and	juices	from	the
center	of	the	tomato.	If	 they	are	to	receive	a	cold	stuffing,	sprinkle	the
interior	with	salt	which	will	draw	more	juices	out,	then	invert	them	in	a
colander.



Gently	press	the	juice	and	seeds	out	of	the	tomato	half

DICED,	SLICED,	OR	CHOPPED	TOMATO	PULP

Chop,	 dice,	 or	 slice	 the	 peeled,	 seeded,	 and	 juiced	 tomato	 halves.
Roughly	chopped	tomato	pulp	is	tomates	concassées.

TOMATES	GRILLÉES	AU	FOUR
[Whole	Baked	Tomatoes]

These	 make	 an	 attractive	 decoration	 around	 a	 meat	 platter,	 or
surrounding	a	dish	of	green	beans.	They	should	be	baked	only	at	the	last
minute	if	they	are	to	retain	their	shape.

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

Firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes,	all	of	the	same	size	and	not	more	than	2
inches	in	diameter
Salt	and	pepper
Olive	oil
An	oiled	roasting	pan	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	tomatoes	easily



Wash	and	dry	the	tomatoes.	Cut	out	the	stems,	leaving	as	small	a	hole
as	 possible.	 Sprinkle	 salt	 and	 pepper	 into	 the	 stem	 hole.	 Brush	 the
tomatoes	 with	 olive	 oil,	 then	 place	 them	 stem-end	 down	 in	 the
roasting	pan.	Do	not	crowd	them	together.

Bake	in	the	middle	level	of	the	preheated	oven	for	about	10	minutes.
Keep	an	eye	on	them;	they	are	done	when	the	skins	break	a	little,	but
they	should	not	be	baked	so	long	that	they	burst.

Salt	and	pepper
Minced,	mixed	green	herbs	or	parsley
Baste	 them	with	 the	pan	 juices.	 Season	 lightly	with	 salt	 and	pepper,
and	sprinkle	herbs	or	parsley	over	them.	Serve	as	soon	as	possible.

		TOMATES	À	LA	PROVENÇALE
[Tomatoes	Stuffed	with	Bread	Crumbs,	Herbs,	and	Garlic]

One	of	the	most	savory	ways	of	serving	tomatoes	is	à	la	provençale.
These	 tomatoes	 go	 well	 with	 many	 things—steaks,	 chops,	 roast	 beef,
lamb,	roast	or	broiled	chicken,	broiled	mackerel,	tuna,	sardines,	herring,
or	swordfish.	They	may	also	be	a	hot	hors	d’oeuvre,	or	accompany	egg
dishes.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

6	firm,	ripe,	red	tomatoes	about	3	inches	in	diameter
Salt	and	pepper
Remove	 the	 stems,	 and	 cut	 the	 tomatoes	 in	 half	 crosswise.	 Gently
press	out	the	juice	and	seeds.	Sprinkle	the	halves	lightly	with	salt	and
pepper.

1	to	2	cloves	mashed	garlic
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions



4	Tb	minced	fresh	basil	and	parsley,	or	parsley	only
⅛	tsp	thyme
¼	tsp	salt	Big	pinch	of	pepper
¼	cup	olive	oil
½	cup	crumbs	from	fresh	white	bread	with	body
A	shallow,	oiled	roasting	pan	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	tomatoes
easily	in	one	layer
Blend	 all	 the	 ingredients	 to	 the	 left	 in	 a	 mixing	 bowl.	 Correct
seasoning.	Fill	each	tomato	half	with	a	spoonful	or	two	of	the	mixture.
Sprinkle	with	 a	 few	 drops	 of	 olive	 oil.	 Arrange	 the	 tomatoes	 in	 the
roasting	pan;	do	not	crowd	them.
(*)	May	be	prepared	ahead	to	this	point.

Shortly	before	you	are	ready	to	serve,	place	them	in	the	upper	third	of
the	 preheated	 oven	 and	 bake	 for	 10	 to	 15	 minutes,	 or	 until	 the
tomatoes	are	tender	but	hold	their	shape,	and	the	bread	crumb	filling
has	browned	lightly.

VARIATION
Tomates	Farcies	Duxelles
[Tomatoes	Stuffed	with	Mushrooms]

Follow	the	preceding	recipe,	but	use	the	mushroom	filling	described
in	the	recipe	for	stuffed	mushrooms.

CULTIVATED	MUSHROOMS

Champignons	de	Couche	—	Champignons	de	Paris

Fresh,	 cultivated	 mushrooms	 are	 an	 essential	 element	 of	 French
cuisine	 and	 appear	 not	 only	 as	 a	 vegetable	 or	 in	 a	 garnish,	 but	 as	 an
important	 flavor	 factor	 in	 numerous	 dishes,	 sauces,	 and	 stuffings.
Mushrooms	should	never	be	submitted	to	prolonged	cooking	or	they	will



lose	most	 of	 their	 taste	 and	 texture.	 Therefore	 if	 they	 are	 to	 go	 into	 a
sauce	 they	 are	 usually	 cooked	 separately,	 then	 added	 to	 the	 sauce	 to
simmer	a	moment	and	blend	their	flavor	with	the	sauce.

CHOOSING	MUSHROOMS

It	 is	 always	 advisable	 to	 buy	mushrooms	 in	 bulk	 rather	 than	 in	 a
package,	 so	 you	 can	 hand-pick	 each	 one.	 Some	 varieties	 of	 cultivated
mushrooms	are	creamy	white,	others	have	brownish	caps.	The	 freshest
of	 fresh	mushrooms	are	closed	on	the	underside	of	 the	cap	so	that	you
cannot	 see	 the	 gills.	 Caps	 and	 stems	 should	 be	 smooth,	 unblemished,
fresh	looking,	and	fresh	smelling.	As	a	mushroom	ages	in	the	market,	the
cap	 expands	 to	 expose	 the	 gills,	 the	mushroom	darkens,	 and	begins	 to
dry	out.

If	 you	 are	 not	 going	 to	 use	 fresh	 mushrooms	 immediately,
refrigerate	them	in	a	plastic	bag	and	they	will	keep	perfectly	for	two	to
three	days.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

Trim	 the	base	of	 the	 stems.	 If	 the	gills	 are	 even	partially	 exposed,
break	 the	 stem	off	 inside	 the	 cap	 so	you	will	 be	 able	 to	wash	out	 any
sand	which	may	have	lodged	in	the	gills.

Just	before	using	them,	drop	the	mushrooms	in	a	large	basin	of	cold
water.	 Rapidly	 rub	 them	 between	 your	 hands	 for	 several	 seconds	 to
dislodge	dirt	particles.	Immediately	lift	them	out	into	a	colander.	If	there
are	more	than	a	few	grains	of	sand	left	in	the	bottom	of	the	basin,	wash
the	mushrooms	again.	Dry	them	in	a	towel.

HOW	TO	CUT	MUSHROOMS

After	they	have	been	washed	and	dried,	here	are	the	various	ways	in
which	mushrooms	may	be	cut.

To	mince	or	dice
Place	the	mushrooms	in	a	heap	on	the	chopping	board.	Chop	them

with	 a	big,	 sharp,	 straight-edged	knife,	 holding	 an	 end	of	 the	blade	 in
the	 fingers	 of	 each	 hand.	 Use	 rapid	 up	 and	 down	 movements,	 and
repeatedly	brush	mushrooms	back	into	a	heap	with	the	knife.	Chop	until
the	pieces	are	less	than	⅛	inch.



Mince	small	amounts	with	a	big	knife	held	between	thumb	and	forefinger	of	each	hand.	For	large
amounts,	chop	roughly	by	hand,	then	mince	by	cupfuls	with	on-off	flicks	in	the	processor

Sliced



Quartered

To	flute	mushroom	caps
Fluted	mushroom	caps	may	be	 stewed	or	 broiled,	 and	 are	used	 as

decorations.	 It	 takes	a	 little	practice	to	master	 the	technique	of	 fluting,
but	it	is	quite	a	nice	professional	touch	to	have	at	your	command.

Fluted	caps

Hold	 the	 mushroom,	 cap	 up,	 in	 the	 fingers	 of	 your	 left	 hand.	 Its
blade	pointing	away	from	you,	hold	a	very	sharp,	small	knife	rigidly	in
your	 right	 hand.	Rest	 the	 thumb	of	 your	 right	 hand	on	 the	mushroom
cap	to	act	as	a	guide.	Then	rotate	the	cap	toward	you	against	the	blade
of	the	knife	starting	at	the	crown,	thus	removing	a	very	shallow	strip,	or
flute,	down	one	half	of	the	cap.	Note	that	the	knife	remains	stationary;
the	mushroom	 cuts	 itself	 as	 it	 rotates	 against	 the	 blade.	 It	 is	 your	 left
hand,	 controlling	 the	 mushroom’s	 movement,	 which	 determines	 the
depth	and	direction	of	the	cut.	Continue	in	the	same	manner	all	around
the	cap.



Starting	at	crown,	rotate	mushroom	toward	you	against	rigidly	held	knife	blade

Left	hand	guides	mushroom	against	knife	blade	and	regulates	cut

CHAMPIGNONS	À	BLANC
[Stewed	Mushrooms]

When	 mushrooms	 are	 used	 in	 white	 sauces,	 or	 in	 a	 garniture	 in
which	they	must	remain	white,	they	are	cooked	this	way.

¼	lb.	fresh	mushrooms
⅓	cup	water
⅛	tsp	salt
½	Tb	lemon	juice	(which	helps	keep	mushrooms	white)
1	Tb	butter
A	4-to	6-cup	enameled	saucepan



Trim	and	wash	 the	mushrooms;	 cut	as	directed	 in	your	 recipe,	or	as
shown	 in	 the	 preceding	 illustrations.	 Bring	 the	 water,	 salt,	 lemon
juice,	and	butter	to	the	boil	in	the	saucepan.	Add	the	mushrooms	and
toss	 to	 cover	 them	with	 the	 liquid.	 Cover	 and	 boil	 moderately	 fast,
tossing	frequently,	for	5	minutes.	Set	aside	until	ready	to	use.

FUMET	DE	CHAMPIGNONS
[Mushroom	Essence]

Mushroom	essence	is	the	reduction	or	boiling	down	of	the	cooking
juice	 from	 stewed	 mushrooms	 or	 canned	 mushrooms.	 It	 is	 used	 as	 a
concentrated	mushroom	flavoring	for	sauces.

Drain	 the	 preceding	 stewed	 mushrooms.	 Rapidly	 boil	 down	 their
cooking	liquid	in	a	small	saucepan	until	it	has	reduced	almost	to	a	syrup.

(*)	If	not	used	immediately,	refrigerate	or	freeze	it.

CHAMPIGNONS	GRILLÉS
[Broiled	Mushroom	Caps]

Broiled	mushroom	caps	are	used	as	 a	garniture,	usually	on	 steaks.
They	 may	 also	 be	 served	 as	 a	 separate	 vegetable,	 or	 as	 a	 hot	 hors
d’oeuvre	on	toast.

Fresh	mushrooms	of	whatever	size	you	wish
Preheat	broiler	to	moderately	hot.	Separate	the	mushroom	caps	from
the	stems.	Wash	and	dry	 the	caps.	Stems	may	be	minced	and	turned
into	a	duxelles.

Melted	butter
A	shallow,	buttered	baking	dish
Salt	and	pepper
Paint	 the	mushroom	 caps	with	melted	 butter.	 Arrange	 them	hollow-
side	up	in	the	baking	dish.	Sprinkle	lightly	with	salt	and	pepper.	Place
4	 to	5	 inches	 from	heat,	and	broil	 rather	 slowly	 for	5	minutes.	Turn



the	 caps,	 and	broil	 5	minutes	more	or	until	 the	 caps	 are	 tender	 and
lightly	browned.

Optional:	Beurre	Maître	d’Hôtel	(butter	mixed	with	lemon	juice,
parsley,	and	seasonings)
OR:	Beurre	pour	Escargots	(butter	mixed	with	herbs,	shallots,	and
garlic)
The	 caps	 may	 then,	 if	 you	 wish,	 be	 filled	 with	 parsley	 butter	 into
which	you	may	also	incorporate	finely	minced	shallots	with	or	without
a	bit	of	mashed	garlic.	Spread	the	butter	 in	 the	caps,	 filling	them	by
about	a	third.

Just	before	serving,	heat	them	for	a	moment	or	two	under	the	broiler
until	the	butter	is	bubbling.

		CHAMPIGNONS	SAUTÉS	AU	BEURRE
[Sautéed	Mushrooms]

Use	 these	 mushrooms	 either	 as	 a	 vegetable	 alone	 or	 in	 a
combination	with	other	vegetables,	or	as	an	integral	part	of	such	dishes
as	 coq	 au	 vin,	 boeuf	 bourguignon,	 poulet	 en	 cocotte.	 Successfully	 sautéed
mushrooms	are	lightly	browned	and	exude	none	of	their	juice	while	they
are	being	cooked;	to	achieve	this	the	mushrooms	must	be	dry,	the	butter
very	 hot,	 and	 the	mushrooms	must	 not	 be	 crowded	 in	 the	 pan.	 If	 you
sauté	 too	many	at	 once	 they	 steam	 rather	 than	 fry;	 their	 juices	 escape
and	 they	 do	 not	 brown.	 So	 if	 you	 are	 preparing	 a	 large	 amount,	 or	 if
your	heat	source	is	feeble,	sauté	the	mushrooms	in	several	batches.

A	10-inch	enameled	skillet
2	Tb	butter	1	Tb	oil
½	lb.	fresh	mushrooms,	washed,	well	dried,	left	whole	if	small,	sliced
or	quartered	if	large
Place	the	skillet	over	high	heat	with	the	butter	and	oil.	As	soon	as	you
see	 that	 the	 butter	 foam	 has	 begun	 to	 subside,	 indicating	 it	 is	 hot



enough,	 add	 the	 mushrooms.	 Toss	 and	 shake	 the	 pan	 for	 4	 to	 5
minutes.	During	their	sauté	the	mushrooms	will	at	first	absorb	the	fat.
In	 2	 to	 3	 minutes	 the	 fat	 will	 reappear	 on	 their	 surface,	 and	 the
mushrooms	 will	 begin	 to	 brown.	 As	 soon	 as	 they	 have	 browned
lightly,	remove	from	heat.

Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Salt	and	pepper
Toss	 the	 shallots	 or	 green	 onions	 with	 the	 mushrooms.	 Sauté	 over
moderate	heat	for	2	minutes.
(*)	 Sautéed	 mushrooms	 may	 be	 cooked	 in	 advance,	 set	 aside,	 then
reheated	when	needed.	Season	to	taste	just	before	serving.

VARIATIONS
Champignons	Sautés	à	la	Bordelaise
[Mushrooms	Sautéed	with	Shallots,	Garlic,	and	Herbs]

These	may	garnish	a	meat	or	vegetable	platter.

½	lb.	fresh	mushrooms,	whole	if	small,	quartered	if	large
1	Tb	oil
2	Tb	butter
Sauté	the	mushrooms	in	oil	and	butter	until	lightly	browned.

3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Optional:	1	small	clove	minced	garlic
3	Tb	fine,	white,	dry	bread	crumbs
Stir	in	the	shallots	or	green	onions,	optional	garlic,	and	bread	crumbs,
and	toss	over	moderate	heat	for	2	to	3	minutes.

Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
3	Tb	minced	fresh	parsley,	chervil,	chives,	and	tarragon,	or	parsley



only
Just	before	serving,	season	to	taste,	and	toss	with	the	herbs.

Champignons	Sautés	à	la	Crème
[Creamed	Mushrooms]

Creamed	mushrooms	may	garnish	canapés,	little	vol-au-vents,	tartlet
shells,	 artichoke	 bottoms,	 or	may	 accompany	 such	 foods	 as	 omelettes,
poached	eggs,	sweetbreads,	or	chicken.

½	lb.	fresh	mushrooms,	whole	if	small,	sliced,	quartered,	or	minced	if
large
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Sauté	the	mushrooms	in	hot	butter	and	oil	for	4	to	5	minutes,	but	do
not	allow	them	to	brown	any	more	than	necessary.	Add	the	shallots	or
onions	and	toss	over	moderate	heat	for	2	minutes.

1	tsp	flour
Stir	in	the	flour	and	cook	slowly	for	2	minutes	more,	stirring.

⅔	to	1	cup	whipping	cream
⅛	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Optional:	2	to	3	Tb	Madeira
Off	heat,	blend	in	the	cream	and	seasonings.	Then	boil	down	rapidly
until	 the	 cream	 has	 reduced	 and	 thickened.	 Add	 the	 optional	 wine,
and	boil	for	a	moment	to	evaporate	its	alcohol.	Correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	set	aside	and	reheated	later.

1	to	2	Tb	softened	butter



Off	heat	and	just	before	serving,	fold	in	the	butter.

Champignons	Sautés,	Sauce	Madère
[Sautéed	Mushrooms	in	Brown	Madeira	Sauce]

Another	appetizing	way	of	using	mushrooms	is	in	a	brown	Madeira
sauce.	 You	 may	 smother	 a	 filet	 mignon	 with	 them,	 or	 fill	 tartlets,	 or
combine	 the	mushrooms	with	 sautéed	 chicken	 livers	 and	 ham	 to	 fill	 a
rice	ring.	If	you	do	not	have	on	hand	one	of	the	classic,	flour-thickened,
long	simmered	brown	sauces,	you	may	use	a	quick	brown	sauce	made	of
very	good	bouillon	thickened	with	arrowroot	or	cornstarch,	as	suggested
in	the	recipe.

½	lb.	mushrooms,	sliced,	quartered,	or	minced
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Sauté	 the	 mushrooms	 in	 butter	 and	 oil,	 adding	 minced	 shallots	 or
green	onions	at	the	end.	Remove	to	a	side	dish.

⅓	cup	Madeira
Pour	 the	Madeira	 into	 the	 sautéing	 skillet	 and	 boil	 it	 down	 rapidly
until	it	has	reduced	by	half.

1	cup	brown	sauce	(the	flour-thickened	sauces	Numbers	I	or	II,	or	the
quick	sauce,	Number	III)
Add	the	sauce	and	simmer	for	2	to	3	minutes.	Then	stir	in	the	sautéed
mushrooms	 and	 simmer	 a	 moment	 more	 to	 blend	 flavors.	 Correct
seasoning.
(*)	May	be	made	ahead	of	time.	Dot	top	of	sauce	with	butter	and	set
aside.

1	to	2	Tb	butter



Reheat	just	before	serving.	Off	heat,	stir	in	the	enrichment	butter.

DUXELLES
[Mushroom	Duxelles—Minced	Mushrooms	Sautéed	in	Butter]

Duxelles	 is	 a	 dry,	mushroom	 flavoring	 for	many	 kinds	 of	 stuffings
and	quick	mushroom	sauces;	 once	made	 it	will	 keep	 for	 several	weeks
under	 refrigeration	or	may	be	 frozen.	The	 juice	 is	 squeezed	out	 of	 the
raw	 minced	 mushroom	 so	 that	 the	 cooked	 duxelles	 will	 be	 as	 dry	 as
possible;	if	the	duxelles	were	wet	it	would	dilute	and	soften	a	stuffing.

For	about	1	cup

½	lb.	finely	minced	fresh	mushrooms,	whole	or	just	stems	(about	2
cups)
A	handful	at	a	time,	twist	the	mushrooms	into	a	ball	in	the	corner	of	a
towel	to	extract	as	much	juice	as	possible.	(Juice	may	be	saved	to	go
into	a	sauce	or	soup.)

An	8-inch	enameled	skillet
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
In	 the	 skillet,	 sauté	 the	mushrooms	 and	 shallots	 or	 onions	 in	 butter
and	 oil	 over	 moderately	 high	 heat,	 stirring	 frequently.	 After	 6	 to	 8
minutes	 the	 mushroom	 pieces	 should	 begin	 to	 separate	 from	 each
other	and	brown	lightly.

Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
Optional:	¼	cup	Madeira	and	¼	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef
bouillon
Season	to	taste	with	salt	and	pepper.	Add	the	optional	wine	and	stock,
and	boil	down	rapidly	until	liquid	has	reduced	to	nothing.
(*)	If	not	to	be	used	immediately,	allow	to	cool.	Pack	in	a	covered	jar,
and	refrigerate	or	freeze.



CHAMPIGNONS	FARCIS
[Stuffed	Mushrooms]

Stuffed	mushrooms	make	a	good	hot	hors	d’oeuvres	or	a	garnish	for
a	meat	platter.

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

12	fresh	mushroom	caps
2	to	3	inches	in	diameter,	stems	removed	2	to	3	Tb	melted	butter
A	shallow,	lightly	buttered	roasting	pan
Salt	and	pepper
Brush	the	mushroom	caps	with	melted	butter.	Place	them,	hollow-side
up,	in	the	roasting	pan.	Sprinkle	lightly	with	salt	and	pepper.

3	Tb	finely	minced	onions
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Stems	from	the	mushroom	caps,	finely	minced	and	squeezed	in	a
towel	to	extract	their	juice
Sauté	 the	 onions	 in	 butter	 and	 oil	 for	 3	 to	 4	 minutes	 without
browning.	Then	add	the	shallots	or	green	onions	and	mushroom	stems.
Sauté	as	in	the	preceding	duxelles	recipe.

Optional:	¼	cup	Madeira
Add	the	optional	Madeira	and	boil	it	down	rapidly	until	it	has	almost
entirely	evaporated.

3	Tb	fine,	white,	dry	bread	crumbs
¼	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
¼	cup	grated	Parmesan	cheese



4	Tb	minced	parsley
½	tsp	tarragon
Salt	and	pepper
2	to	3	Tb	whipping	cream
Off	 heat,	 mix	 in	 the	 bread	 crumbs,	 cheeses,	 parsley,	 tarragon,	 and
seasonings.	 A	 spoonful	 at	 a	 time,	 blend	 in	 just	 enough	 cream	 to
moisten	the	mixture	but	keep	it	sufficiently	stiff	to	hold	its	shape	in	a
spoon.	Correct	seasoning.

3	Tb	grated	Swiss	cheese
2	Tb	melted	butter
Fill	 the	mushroom	 caps	with	 the	 stuffing.	 Top	 each	with	 a	 pinch	 of
cheese	and	drops	of	melted	butter.
(*)	May	be	done	ahead	to	this	point.

Bake	 in	 upper	 third	 of	 a	 preheated,	 375-degree	 oven	 for	 15	 to	 20
minutes,	or	until	caps	are	tender	and	stuffing	has	browned	lightly	on
top.

CANNED	MUSHROOMS
Canned	mushrooms	will	have	more	flavor	in	sauces	or	garnitures	if

you	follow	the	procedure	outlined	here.	(If	they	are	to	be	browned,	drain
them,	dry	 in	 a	 towel,	 and	 sauté	 quickly	 in	butter	 and	oil	with	minced
shallots	or	onions.)
For	1	cup	drained,	canned	mushrooms:
1	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	Tb	butter
Salt	and	pepper
Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	port	or	Madeira
In	 a	 small	 enameled	 saucepan,	 cook	 the	 shallots	 or	 onions	 slowly	 in
the	butter	 for	2	minutes	without	browning.	Add	 the	mushrooms	and
seasonings,	and	toss	them	in	the	butter.	Add	the	optional	wine.	Cover



and	cook	slowly	for	2	minutes.
NOTE:	The	juice	from	the	can	may	be	boiled	down	in	a	saucepan	until
reduced	to	a	third	of	its	volume	or	less.	Use	as	a	sauce	flavoring.

CHESTNUTS

Marrons

Fresh	 raw	 chestnuts	 are	 in	 season	 in	 the	 winter	 months.	 Choose
heavy	nuts	with	 tight-fitting	shells—indications	 that	 they	are	 fresh	and
will	have	their	maximum	flavor.

SERVING	SUGGESTIONS

Chestnuts	have	a	traditional	affinity	for	roast	turkey,	goose,	venison,
boar,	wild	duck,	and	pheasant;	they	also	go	with	pork	and	with	sausages.
Chestnut	purée	is	used	as	a	starchy	vegetable	to	accompany	any	of	these
meats.	 Whole	 braised	 chestnuts	 are	 often	 combined	 with	 other
vegetables	such	as	red	cabbage,	Brussels	sprouts,	mushrooms,	onions,	or
carrots.	Whole	partially-cooked	 chestnuts	 go	 into	 stuffings,	 particularly
sausage	stuffings	for	goose	and	turkey.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	 pound	 or	 35	 to	 40	 whole	 raw	 chestnuts	 will	 yield
approximately	2½	cups	of	peeled	chestnuts.

HOW	TO	PEEL	CHESTNUTS

Chestnuts	 have	 an	 outside	 shell	 and	 a	 bitter	 inside	 skin,	 both	 of
which	must	be	removed	before	the	chestnuts	can	be	used.	Peeling	off	the
inside	skin	is	a	chore	whatever	method	you	adopt.	To	our	mind,	and	we
have	 tried	 them	all,	 the	 following	 is	 the	most	 satisfactory,	especially	 if
you	want	the	chestnuts	to	remain	whole.
With	a	small	sharp	knife,	peel	a	⅛-inch	strip	of	shell	off	one	side	of

each	 chestnut.	 Set	 chestnuts	 in	 a	 saucepan	 of	 cold	water,	 bring	 to	 the
boil	and	boil	1	minute;	remove	from	heat.	Then	three	at	a	time,	with	a
slotted	spoon,	dip	the	chestnuts	out	of	the	water	and	peel	off	the	shells



and	 inner	 skins.	 (Set	 aside	 until	 later	 any	 recalcitrant	 chestnuts.	 Drop
them	all	 later	 into	boiling	water	 for	a	moment,	 then	peel	 them	one	by
one.)	 The	 whole	 peeling	 process	 must	 be	 a	 continuous	 operation	 and
done	while	the	chestnuts	are	still	warm.

PURÉE	DE	MARRONS
[Chestnut	Purée]

For	6	to	8	people

A	3-quart,	heavy-bottomed	saucepan
8	cups	peeled	chestnuts
2	stalks	celery
A	medium	herb	bouquet:	4	parsley	sprigs,	½	bay	leaf,	and	⅛	tsp
thyme	tied	in	cheesecloth

3	cups	good	brown	stock	or	2	cups	canned	beef	bouillon	and	1	cup
water

A	food	mill
3	to	6	Tb	softened	butter,	or	butter	and	whipping	cream
Salt	and	pepper
Pinch	of	sugar,	if	needed
Place	 in	 the	saucepan	the	chestnuts,	celery	stalks,	and	herb	bouquet.
Pour	in	enough	stock,	or	bouillon	and	water	to	cover	the	chestnuts	by
1½	inches.	Simmer	very	slowly	and	uncovered	for	45	to	60	minutes,
or	until	the	chestnuts	are	cooked	through.	Do	not	overcook	and	allow
them	 to	become	mushy.	Drain	 immediately;	 remove	 celery	 and	herb
bouquet.	Purée	the	chestnuts	in	the	food	mill,	then	return	them	to	the
saucepan.

Beat	 in	the	butter,	or	butter	and	cream.	If	purée	is	 too	thick,	beat	 in
spoonfuls	of	the	cooking	liquid.	Season	to	taste	with	salt	and	pepper,
and	a	pinch	or	two	of	sugar	if	you	feel	it	necessary.
(*)	 If	 not	 to	 be	 used	 immediately,	 instead	 of	 beating	 in	 the	 butter,



spread	it	over	the	surface	of	the	purée.	To	reheat,	cover	and	set	over
boiling	water,	beating	occasionally.

MARRONS	BRAISÉS
[Whole	Braised	Chestnuts]

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

24	peeled	chestnuts
A	heavy,	fireproof	casserole	or	baking	dish	just	large	enough	to	hold
the	chestnuts	in	one	layer

1	Tb	arrowroot	or	cornstarch	mixed	to	a	paste	with
2	Tb	port,	Madeira,	or	water	2	cups	good	brown	stock	or	1½	cups
canned	beef	bouillon	and	½	cup	water

Water,	if	necessary
3	Tb	butter
Place	 the	 chestnuts	 in	 the	 casserole	 or	 baking	 dish.	 Beat	 the	 starch
mixture	into	the	stock	or	bouillon	and	pour	over	the	chestnuts.	There
should	 be	 enough	 liquid	 to	 cover	 them	 by	 ½	 inch;	 add	 water,	 if
necessary.	 Add	 the	 butter.	 Bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 cover,	 then	 set	 in
lower	 third	of	preheated	oven.	Regulate	heat	 so	 liquid	 simmers	very
slowly	for	45	to	60	minutes	or	until	chestnuts	are	tender.
(*)	 If	 not	 to	 be	 served	 immediately,	 set	 aside	 uncovered.	 Cover	 and
reheat	slowly	on	top	of	stove	before	proceeding.

If	liquid	has	not	reduced	to	a	syrupy	glaze	at	the	end	of	the	cooking,
drain	 it	 off	 and	 boil	 it	 down	 in	 a	 saucepan.	 Pour	 it	 back	 into	 the
casserole	and	roll	the	chestnuts	gently	around	in	it	to	cover	them	with
the	glaze.	Serve	as	follows:	
Serve	 sprinkled	 with	 parsley,	 or	 combined	 with	 other	 vegetables	 as
directed	in	whatever	recipe	you	are	using.

POTATOES



Pommes	de	Terre

Out	of	 the	vast	 store	of	French	potato	dishes,	we	have	selected	an
unusual	 version	 of	 mashed	 potatoes,	 some	 excellent	 grated	 potato
pancakes,	 a	 series	 of	 good	 regional	 recipes	 for	 scalloped	 potatoes,	 and
one	for	potatoes	sautéed	in	butter.

KIND	OF	POTATOES	TO	BUY

We	 shall	 not	 classify	 potato	 varieties	 by	 name.	 We	 shall	 merely
specify	baking	potatoes	when	we	mean	the	type	of	white	potato	such	as
Idaho	which	 turns	 floury	 after	 cooking,	 and	 boiling	 potatoes	when	we
are	 talking	 about	 the	 white	 potato	 which	 retains	 its	 shape.	 It	 is
particularly	 important	 that	 you	 use	 the	 right	 kind	 of	 potato	 for	 such
dishes	as	scalloped	potatoes,	for	the	potato	must	not	disintegrate	during
cooking;	 in	such	cases	we	have	used	quotation	marks	 in	order	 to	draw
your	attention	to	the	necessity	for	using	“boiling”	potatoes.

PURÉE	DE	POMMES	DE	TERRE	À	L’AIL
[Garlic	Mashed	Potatoes]

Two	whole	heads	of	garlic	will	seem	like	a	horrifying	amount	if	you
have	 not	made	 this	 type	 of	 recipe	 before.	 But	 if	 less	 is	 used,	 you	will
regret	 it,	 for	 the	 long	 cooking	 of	 the	 garlic	 removes	 all	 of	 its	 harsh
strength,	 leaving	just	a	pleasant	flavor.	Garlic	mashed	potatoes	go	with
roast	 lamb,	 pork,	 goose,	 or	 sausages.	 Although	 both	 garlic	 sauce	 and
potatoes	may	 be	 cooked	 in	 advance,	 they	 should	 be	 combined	 only	 at
the	 last	minute;	 the	completed	purée	 loses	 its	nice	consistency	 if	 it	 sits
too	long	over	heat,	or	if	it	is	cooked	and	then	reheated.
For	6	to	8	people

2	heads	garlic,	about	30	cloves
Separate	the	garlic	cloves.	Drop	into	boiling	water,	and	boil	2	minutes.
Drain.	Peel.

A	3-to	4-cup,	heavy-bottomed	saucepan	with	cover
4	Tb	butter



Cook	 the	 garlic	 slowly	 with	 the	 butter	 in	 the	 covered	 saucepan	 for
about	20	minutes	or	until	very	tender	but	not	browned.

2	Tb	flour
1	cup	boiling	milk
¼	tsp	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
A	sieve	and	wooden	spoon,	or	an	electric	blender
Blend	in	the	flour	and	stir	over	low	heat	until	it	froths	with	the	butter
for	2	minutes	without	browning.	Off	heat,	beat	in	the	boiling	milk	and
seasonings.	Boil,	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Rub	the	sauce	through	a	sieve
or	purée	it	in	the	electric	blender.	Simmer	for	2	minutes	more.
(*)	May	be	done	ahead	of	time.	Dot	top	of	sauce	with	bits	of	butter	to
keep	a	skin	from	forming.	Reheat	when	needed.

2½	lbs.	baking	potatoes
A	potato	ricer
A	2½	quart	enameled	saucepan
A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon
4	Tb	softened	butter
Salt	and	white	pepper
Peel	and	quarter	 the	potatoes.	Drop	 in	boiling	 salted	water	 to	cover,
and	 boil	 until	 tender.	 Drain	 immediately	 and	 put	 through	 a	 potato
ricer.	Place	the	hot	purée	in	the	saucepan	and	beat	with	the	spatula	or
spoon	for	several	minutes	over	moderate	heat	to	evaporate	moisture.
As	soon	as	the	purée	begins	to	form	a	film	in	the	bottom	of	the	pan,
remove	from	heat	and	beat	in	the	butter	a	tablespoon	at	a	time.	Beat
in	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.
(*)	If	not	used	immediately,	set	aside	uncovered.	To	reheat,	cover	and
set	over	boiling	water,	beating	frequently.

3	to	4	Tb	whipping	cream



4	Tb	minced	parsley
A	hot,	lightly	buttered	vegetable	dish
Shortly	 before	 serving,	 beat	 the	 hot	 garlic	 sauce	 vigorously	 into	 the
hot	potatoes.	Beat	 in	the	cream	by	spoonfuls	but	do	not	thin	out	 the
purée	too	much.	Beat	in	the	parsley.	Correct	seasoning.	Turn	into	hot
vegetable	dish.

CRÊPES	DE	POMMES	DE	TERRE
[Grated	Potato	Pancakes]

These	are	excellent	with	roasts,	steaks,	or	chops.	As	a	bed	for	fried
or	poached	eggs,	they	may	be	topped	with	a	cheese	or	tomato	sauce.	Or
roll	 them	 around	 a	 filling	 of	 mushrooms,	 chicken	 livers,	 or	 ham,	 top
with	a	sauce,	and	brown	under	the	broiler.
For	 18	 crêpes	 about	 3	 inches	 in	 diameter,	 or	 8	 crêpes	 made	 in

individual	6-inch	crêpe	pans

8	ounces	cream	cheese
3	Tb	flour
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Mash	the	cream	cheese	with	the	flour,	in	the	mixing	bowl.

2	eggs
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Mix	in	the	eggs	and	seasonings	and	beat	until	smooth.

6	ounces	(1¼	cups)	Swiss	cheese	cut	into	⅛-inch	dice
Stir	in	the	Swiss	cheese.

2½	lbs.	of	baking	potatoes	(4	cups	when	grated)
A	vegetable	grater



Peel	the	potatoes	and	rub	them	through	the	large	holes	of	the	grater.	A
small	handful	at	a	time,	twist	them	into	a	ball	in	the	corner	of	a	towel
to	squeeze	out	as	much	of	their	water	as	you	can.	Stir	the	grated	raw
potatoes	into	the	egg	and	cheese	mixture.

3	to	6	Tb	whipping	cream
Optional:	½	cup	diced	boiled	ham,	or	½	cup	sautéed	mushrooms,
chicken	livers,	or	onions	3	to	4	Tb	fresh	herbs,	such	as	parsley,
chives,	chervil
Stir	in	the	cream	by	spoonfuls	to	make	a	mixture	the	consistency	of	a
thick,	creamed	cole	slaw—not	runny.	Add	optional	ingredients.	Taste
carefully	for	seasoning.

A	10-inch	skillet
1½	Tb	butter,	more	as	needed
½	Tb	oil,	more	as	needed
A	large	spoon	or	ladle
A	hot	platter
Set	 skillet	 over	moderately	 high	 heat	with	 the	 butter	 and	 oil.	When
you	 see	 the	 foam	 begin	 to	 subside,	 ladle	 3	 piles	 of	 batter	 into	 the
skillet	to	form	3	crêpes	approximately	3	inches	in	diameter	and	⅜	inch
thick.	Regulate	heat	so	crêpes	are	lightly	browned	on	the	bottom	and
bubble	holes	have	appeared	on	the	surface	 in	about	3	minutes.	Then
turn	 and	 brown	 on	 the	 other	 sides	 for	 about	 3	minutes.	 Transfer	 to
platter	 and	 keep	 warm	 in	 one	 layer	 while	 making	 the	 remaining
crêpes.

(*)	If	not	served	immediately,	arrange	crêpes	in	one	layer	on	a	baking
sheet.	Set	aside	uncovered.	Reheat	for	4	to	5	minutes	in	a	400-degree
oven.

		GRATIN	DAUPHINOIS
[Scalloped	Potatoes	with	Milk,	Cheese,	and	a	Pinch	of	Garlic]



There	are	as	many	“authenic”	versions	of	gratin	dauphinois	as	there
are	 of	 bouillabaisse.	 Of	 them	 all,	 we	 prefer	 this	 one	 because	 it	 is	 fast,
simple,	 and	 savory.	 It	 goes	 with	 roast	 or	 broiled	 chicken,	 turkey,	 and
veal.	With	roast	beef,	pork,	lamb,	steaks,	and	chops	you	may	prefer	the
gratin	 savoyard	which	 follows,	 since	 it	 is	cooked	with	stock	rather	 than
milk.	 Although	 some	 authorities	 on	 le	 vrai	 gratin	 dauphinois	 would
violently	disagree,	you	may	omit	 the	cheese.	 If	you	do	 so,	add	2	more
tablespoons	of	butter.
For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

2	lbs.	“boiling”	potatoes	(6	to	7	cups	when	sliced)
Peel	the	potatoes	and	slice	them	⅛	inch	thick.	Place	in	a	basin	of	cold
water.	Drain	when	ready	to	use.

A	fireproof	baking-serving	dish	about	10	inches	in	diameter	and	2
inches	deep	(if	recipe	is	increased,	dish	must	be	wider	but	no
deeper)

½	clove	unpeeled	garlic
4	Tb	butter
1	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
1	cup	(4	ounces)	grated
Swiss	cheese
1	cup	boiling	milk
Rub	the	baking	dish	with	the	cut	garlic.	Smear	the	inside	of	the	dish
with	1	tablespoon	of	the	butter.	Drain	the	potatoes	and	dry	them	in	a
towel.	Spread	half	of	them	in	the	bottom	of	the	dish.	Divide	over	them
half	 the	 salt,	 pepper,	 cheese,	 and	 butter.	 Arrange	 the	 remaining
potatoes	over	 the	 first	 layer,	 and	 season	 them.	Spread	on	 the	 rest	of
the	cheese	and	divide	the	butter	over	it.	Pour	on	the	boiling	milk.	Set
baking	 dish	 over	 heat	 and	 when	 simmering,	 set	 in	 upper	 third	 of



preheated	 oven.	 Bake	 for	 20	 to	 30	 minutes	 or	 until	 potatoes	 are
tender,	milk	has	been	absorbed,	and	the	top	is	nicely	browned.	(As	the
oven	is	hot,	and	the	dish	shallow,	the	potatoes	cook	quickly.)	(*)	May
wait	 for	 half	 an	 hour,	 loosely	 covered,	 over	 simmering	water.	 For	 a
longer	wait,	 stop	 initial	 cooking	 just	 before	 all	milk	 has	 evaporated.
Set	 aside	 uncovered.	 Shortly	 before	 serving,	 dot	 with	 2	 Tb	 butter,
reheat	 on	 top	 of	 stove,	 and	 set	 in	 a	 425-degree	 oven	 for	 5	 to	 10
minutes	to	finish	cooking.

VARIATIONS
Gratin	Savoyard
[Scalloped	Potatoes	with	Meat	Stock	and	Cheese]

For	6	people

Ingredients	for	the	preceding	gratin	dauphinois	with	the	following
exceptions:

1	cup	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon	instead	of	milk
6	rather	than	4	Tb	butter
Follow	 the	 recipe	 for	 gratin	 dauphinois,	 but	 substitute	 stock	 for	milk,
and	increase	the	butter	proportions	as	indicated	at	the	left.

Gratin	Jurassien
[Scalloped	Potatoes	with	Heavy	Cream	and	Cheese]

Potatoes	baked	in	heavy	cream	are	mouth-watering	with	roast	lamb
or	 chicken,	 or	 turkey,	 veal,	 beef,	 or	 pork.	 An	 important	 point	 in	 this
recipe	 is	 that	 you	must	 never	 let	 the	 cream	 come	quite	 to	 the	 simmer
during	the	baking;	thus	it	will	not	curdle.
For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	300	degrees.

4	Tb	butter



A	10-inch,	fireproof	dish	2	inches	deep
2	lbs.	“boiling”	potatoes,	sliced	⅛	inch	thick	(6	to	7	cups)
1	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
1	cup	grated	Swiss	cheese
1¼	cups	whipping	cream
Smear	1	tablespoon	of	the	butter	in	the	baking	dish.	Arrange	layers	of
potatoes	in	it,	seasoning	each	layer	with	salt,	pepper,	cheese,	and	dots
of	butter.	End	with	a	sprinkling	of	cheese	and	butter	dots.	Pour	on	the
cream	and	bring	slowly	almost	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Then
place	in	middle	 level	of	preheated	oven	and	bake	for	1	to	1¼	hours,
regulating	 oven	 heat	 throughout	 baking	 so	 that	 cream	 never	 quite
bubbles.	 The	 gratin	 is	 done	 when	 the	 potatoes	 are	 tender	 and	 have
absorbed	the	cream,	and	the	top	is	lightly	browned.

Gratin	de	Pommes	de	Terre	Crécy
[Scalloped	Potatoes	and	Carrots	with	Cream]

This	mixture	of	potatoes,	carrots,	and	cream	is	delicious	with	veal	or
chicken.	It	is	the	same	as	the	preceding	gratin	jurassien	but	the	potatoes
are	interspersed	with	sliced,	braised	carrots	prepared	as	follows:

2	cups	carrots	sliced	⅛	inch	thick
½	Tb	butter
¼	tsp	salt
2	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
¾	cup	water
A	4-to	6-cup,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan	with	cover
Boil	 the	 carrots	 slowly	with	 the	 butter,	 salt,	 shallots	 or	 onions,	 and
water	in	the	covered	saucepan	for	20	to	30	minutes	or	until	the	liquid
has	 evaporated	 and	 the	 carrots	 are	 tender.	 Then	 continue	 as	 for	 the
preceding	 gratin	 jurassien,	 but	 alternate	 carrot	 slices	with	 the	 potato
slices.



Gratin	de	Pommes	de	Terre	Provençal
[Scalloped	 Potatoes	 with	 Onions,	 Tomatoes,	 Anchovies,	 Herbs,
and	Garlic]

This	 casserole	 with	 its	 full-bodied	Mediterranean	 flavor	 goes	 with
roast	lamb	or	beef,	steaks,	chops,	or	grilled	mackerel,	tuna,	or	swordfish.
It	is	also	good	served	cold.	The	potatoes	need	no	other	liquid	than	that
rendered	by	the	tomatoes	as	they	cook	together.
For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

2	cups	thinly	sliced	onions
2	Tb	olive	oil
A	small	saucepan
1½	lbs.	tomatoes,	peeled,	seeded,	and	juiced	(4	to	5	tomatoes,	2¼
cups	pulp)

¼	tsp	salt
Cook	the	onions	and	olive	oil	slowly	together	in	the	saucepan	until	the
onions	are	tender	but	not	browned.	Cut	the	tomato	pulp	into	strips	⅜
inch	wide.	Fold	the	tomatoes	and	salt	into	the	onions.	Set	aside.

6	canned	anchovies	packed	in	olive	oil,	drained
2	cloves	mashed	garlic
¼	tsp	basil
¼	tsp	thyme
⅛	tsp	pepper
2	Tb	olive	oil	(include	as	part	of	this	the	oil	from	the	anchovy	can)
In	 a	 small	 mixing	 bowl,	 mash	 the	 anchovies	 into	 a	 paste	 with	 the
garlic,	herbs,	pepper,	and	oil.

An	oiled	baking	dish	about	10	inches	in	diameter	and
2	inches	deep	2	lbs.	“boiling”	potatoes	sliced	⅛	inch	thick	(6	to	7



cups)
¼	cup	grated	Parmesan	or	Swiss	cheese
1	tsp	olive	oil
Spread	 one	 quarter	 of	 the	 tomatoes	 and	 onions	 in	 the	 baking	 dish.
Over	 them	 arrange	 half	 the	 potato	 slices,	 then	 half	 the	 anchovy
mixture,	 then	 half	 the	 remaining	 tomatoes	 and	 onions.	 Spread	 over
this	the	rest	of	the	potatoes	and	the	anchovy	mixture;	top	with	the	last
of	 the	 tomatoes	and	onions.	Spread	on	 the	cheese,	and	sprinkle	with
olive	oil.

Aluminum	foil,	if	necessary
Place	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 preheated	 oven	 and	 bake	 for	 about	 40
minutes,	 or	 until	 potatoes	 are	 tender	 and	 have	 absorbed	 all	 of	 the
juice	from	the	tomatoes.	If	the	top	browns	too	much	during	cooking,
cover	very	loosely	with	a	sheet	of	foil.
(*)	Keep	warm	or	reheat	as	for	the	gratin	dauphinois.

		POMMES	DE	TERRE	SAUTÉES
				POMMES	DE	TERRE	POUR	GARNITURE
				POMMES	DE	TERRE	CHÂTEAU
[Potatoes	Sautéed	in	Butter]

Although	we	rationed	ourselves	strictly	on	potato	recipes,	potatoes
sautéed	 in	 butter	 appear	 as	 a	 garnishing	 suggestion	 in	 so	many	 of	 the
main-course	dishes	that	we	are	including	directions	for	doing	them.	The
following	 recipe	 demands	 that	 the	 potatoes	 be	 sautéed	 raw,	 which
produces	a	delectable	 result.	But	 the	 cooking	 is	 rather	 exacting	as	 raw
potatoes	 will	 stick	 to	 the	 sautéing	 pan	 unless	 certain	 precautions	 are
taken.

PREPARATION	FOR	COOKING

If	you	were	living	in	France,	you	would	buy	smooth	oval	potatoes	2
to	2½	inches	long,	with	yellowish	flesh,	pommes	de	terre	de	Hollande.	You
would	peel	them	neatly,	and	sauté	them	whole.	Elsewhere,	choose	small



boiling	 potatoes	 or	 new	 potatoes.	 Peel	 them,	 and	 cut	 them	 into
elongated	olive	shapes	all	the	same	size,	2	to	½	inches	long	and	1	to	1¼
inches	 at	 their	 widest	 diameter.	 Cut	 them	 smoothly,	 so	 they	 will	 roll
around	easily	and	color	evenly	when	they	are	sautéed.	(You	might	save
the	 cuttings	 for	 the	 good	 leek	 and	 potato	 soup.)	 Do	 not	 wash	 the
potatoes;	 simply	pat	 them	 thoroughly	dry	 in	a	 towel.	 If	 you	peel	 them
some	time	in	advance	of	 their	cooking,	roll	 them	in	a	damp	towel;	dry
them	in	a	fresh	towel	just	before	sautéing.
For	4	to	6	people

2	lbs.	(5	to	6	cups)	“boiling”	potatoes	or	new	potatoes
Cut	 the	 potatoes	 according	 to	 the	 directions	 in	 the	 preceding
paragraph.	Remember	they	are	not	to	be	washed,	merely	well	dried	in
a	towel.

3	to	4	Tb	clarified	butter,	or	2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil,	more	if	needed
A	10-or	11-inch	heavy	skillet	large	enough	to	hold	all	the	potatoes
easily	in	one	layer
Add	enough	clarified	butter	or	the	butter	and	oil	to	the	skillet	to	film
it	by	 1/ 	 inch	and	 set	over	moderately	high	heat.	When	 the	 clarified

16

butter	 is	 very	 hot	 but	 not	 coloring,	 or	when	 the	 butter	 foam	 in	 the
butter	 and	 oil	 mixture	 begins	 to	 subside,	 put	 the	 potatoes	 into	 the
skillet.	Leave	them	for	2	minutes,	regulating	heat	so	butter	 is	always
very	hot	but	not	coloring.	Then	shake	the	skillet	back	and	forth	to	roll
the	potatoes	and	to	sear	them	on	another	side	for	2	minutes.	Continue
thus	for	4	to	5	minutes	more	until	the	potatoes	are	a	pale	golden	color
all	 over,	 indicating	 that	 a	 seared,	 protective	 film	 has	 formed	 over
them,	so	that	they	will	not	stick	to	the	pan.

¼	tsp	salt
Then	sprinkle	the	potatoes	with	salt	and	roll	them	again	in	the	skillet.

A	heavy,	close-fitting	lid	for	the	skillet
Lower	 heat,	 cover	 the	 skillet,	 and	 cook	 the	 potatoes	 for	 about	 15



minutes,	shaking	them	every	3	to	4	minutes	to	prevent	their	sticking
to	the	skillet,	and	to	insure	an	even	coloring.

They	are	done	when	they	yield	slightly	to	the	pressure	of	your	finger,
or	when	a	knife	pierces	them	easily;	they	should	be	a	nice,	fairly	even,
golden	brown	color.	Hold	the	cover	slightly	askew	over	the	skillet,	and
pour	out	the	sautéing	fat.
(*)	 If	 not	 to	 be	 used	 immediately,	 set	 cover	 askew	 to	 allow	 for	 air
circulation,	 and	place	 skillet	on	an	asbestos	mat	over	very	 low	heat.
The	potatoes	can	be	kept	 thus	 for	about	half	an	hour.	Reheat	 just	 to
sizzling	hot	before	serving.

2	to	3	Tb	softened	butter
2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley,	chives,	or	fresh	tarragon,	or	a	mixture	of
fresh	green	herbs

Big	pinch	of	pepper
A	hot	vegetable	dish
Then	off	heat,	add	the	butter	and	herbs,	 sprinkle	on	the	pepper,	and
roll	 the	potatoes	 in	 the	 skillet	 so	 they	glisten	with	herbs	 and	butter.
Arrange	 the	 potatoes	 around	 your	meat	 platter,	 or	 turn	 them	 into	 a
vegetable	dish.

VARIATIONS
Pommes	de	Terre	Parisiennes
[Potato	Balls	Sautéed	in	Butter]

Pommes	de	Terre	Sautées	en	Dés
[Diced	Potatoes	Sautéed	in	Butter]

Use	 exactly	 the	 same	 system	 as	 that	 in	 the	 preceding	 recipe,	 but
form	 the	 raw	potatoes	 into	balls	with	a	potato-ball	 cutter,	or	 cut	 them
into	¼-inch	dice.

RICE



RICE

Riz

Whatever	method	you	use	for	rice	the	grains	should	emerge	whole,
tender,	 and	 separate.	 Although	 raw	 rice	 is	 not	 difficult	 to	 cook,	many
people	 are	 so	 afraid	 of	 it	 they	 dare	 to	 attempt	 only	 the	 precooked	 or
parboiled	varieties,	thus	limiting	their	scope	of	rice	dishes	and	denying
their	 skill	 as	 good	 cooks.	 Two	 factors	 contribute	 to	 the	 gumminess	 of
badly	cooked	rice.	One	is	overcooking.	The	other	is	failure	to	deal	with
the	floury	coating	which	clings	to	raw	rice	and	becomes	sticky	and	gluey
unless	the	rice	is	washed	or	sautéed	in	butter	or	oil.

TYPES	OF	RICE

Although	 more	 than	 40,000	 varieties	 of	 rice	 exist,	 only	 a	 few	 of
them	are	available	commercially.	Long	grain	rice	is	the	one	that	cooks	up
the	fluffiest	for	plain	boiled	or	steamed	rice,	risottos,	and	salads.	Medium
grain	 rice	 is	 shorter	 and	 tenderer,	 good	 for	 puddings.	 Short	 grain	 and
glutinous	 rice,	which	 vary	 from	 rather	 sticky	 to	 very	 sticky	 indeed,	 are
used	mostly	by	Oriental	 cooks	and	commercial	gravy	makers.	Remarks
on	parboiled	and	precooked	as	well	as	wild	rice	are	on	this	page.

ENRICHED	RICE

This	means	that	certain	minerals	and	vitamins	have	been	added	to
replace	those	lost	during	milling.	Since	the	enrichment	is	on	the	surface
of	the	grains,	it	is	soluble,	and	that	means	(unless	you	do	not	want	the
enrichments!)	you	should	neither	wash	 rice	before	cooking	nor	 rinse	 it
afterward.	Most	states	now	have	laws	that	rice	must	be	enriched—your
box	or	package	will	so	indicate.	It	seems	to	us	that	enriched	rice	cooks
faster	by	2	to	3	minutes	than	un-enriched	rice.	In	other	words,	whereas
it	 used	 to	 take	18	minutes	 for	 the	 cooking	 of	 braised	 rice	 or	 risotto,	 it
now	takes	about	15	minutes.

AMOUNT	TO	BUY

One	cup	of	raw	rice	makes	about	3	cups	of	cooked	rice,	or	enough
for	4	to	6	people.

WARNING



Never	 stir	 cooked	 rice	 with	 anything	 but	 a	 wooden	 fork	 or
chopsticks;	lift	and	fluff	the	rice,	being	careful	not	to	mash	or	break	the
grains.

		RIZ	À	L’INDIENNE-RIZ	À	LA	VAPEUR
[Steamed	Rice]

There	are	many	ways	to	arrive	at	plain	boiled	or	steamed	rice,	and
most	cooks	choose	one	 that	best	 suits	 their	 temperaments.	We	 find	 the
following	to	be	a	foolproof	system	where	the	rice	may	be	cooked	hours
ahead	of	time	and	reheated	when	needed.
For	4½	cups	of	cooked	rice	serving	6	people

1½	cups	plain	or	enriched	raw	white	rice
A	heavy-bottomed	2-quart	saucepan
3	cups	water
1	tsp	salt
Place	the	rice	in	the	saucepan;	stir	in	the	water	and	salt.	Bring	to	the
boil	 over	 high	 heat,	 stir	 up	 once	 thoroughly,	 reduce	 heat	 to	 the
simmer—very	slight	heat	and	bubbling—cover	 the	pan	and	set	 timer
for	 12	minutes.	 Take	 a	 quick	 peek	 at	 the	 rice:	 the	 liquid	 should	 be
almost	absorbed.	Fork	up	a	few	grains	but	don’t	stir	it	because	stirring
at	this	point	could	turn	it	sticky.	Bite	into	it.	It	should	be	very	slightly
al	 dente—with	 the	 faintest	 crunch,	 but	 almost	 tender.	 Cover	 the	 pan
and	set	off	heat	to	let	the	rice	finish	cooking.	(If	not	tender,	sprinkle
on	droplets	of	water	and	cook	a	 few	minutes	more;	 if	 liquid	has	not
absorbed,	uncover	and	boil	it	off,	fluffing	with	a	fork.)	The	rice	is	now
ready	 to	 serve,	 but	 if	 you	 are	 not	 ready	 to	 serve	 it,	 here	 are	 the
alternatives:

Reheating	cooked	rice
Once	cooked,	rice	may	be	allowed	to	cool;	 then	cover	 it	airtight	and
refrigerate	it	for	a	day	or	two	before	reheating	it.	To	reheat,	first	fluff
it	lightly	and	steam	it	as	follows:



3	thicknesses	of	well-washed	cheesecloth
A	colander	set	over	a	pan	of	simmering	water
A	cover
Steaming—à	 la	 vapeur.	 Fold	 the	 rice	 into	 the	 cheesecloth,	 set	 in	 the
colander,	 cover	 it,	 and	place	over	 the	 simmering	water.	 Steam	 it	 for
several	minutes	until	well	heated	through.
ALTERNATE	METHODS:	Riz	à	l’anglaise	or	au	beurre

The	 frying	 pan:	 Sauté	 the	 cooked	 rice	 lightly	 in	 butter,	 tossing	 and
turning	and	fluffing	it	with	seasonings	as	it	warms.
Double	 boiler:	 Turn	 it	 into	 a	 covered	 pan	 and	 set	 in	 a	 larger	 pan	 of
simmering	water.	Fluff	it	with	butter,	salt,	and	pepper	as	it	heats.

VARIATIONS	AND	SERVING	SUGGESTIONS
You	 can	 do	 many	 things	 to	 vary	 the	 flavor	 of	 plain	 rice.	 For

instance,	use	half	chicken	broth	and	half	water	rather	than	water	alone
for	 its	 initial	 cooking.	 Or	 add	 some	 white	 wine	 or	 dry	 white	 French
vermouth	to	your	water	or	broth.	You	may	wish	an	herb	flavoring,	like	a
bay	leaf,	a	big	pinch	of	thyme	or	tarragon,	or	an	herb	bouquet;	add	the
herbs	 right	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 cooking.	 A	 big	 pinch	 of	 curry	 or
turmeric	or	saffron	flowers	gives	color	to	rice	served	with	lamb	stew	or
curried	dishes.	And	there	are	always	onions	and	garlic:	Simmer	⅓	cup	or
so	 of	 minced	 onions	 in	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 oil	 or	 butter	 or	 half	 a	 cup	 of
chicken	broth	or	wine;	when	tender,	proceed	 in	 the	usual	way.	Or	add
minced	 garlic	 to	 the	 rice	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 cooking,	 or	 whole
peeled	raw	garlic	cloves,	which	will	cook	along	with	the	rice.	Here	are
other	ideas:	

Riz	Duxelles
[Buttered	Rice	with	Mushrooms]

½	lb.	finely	diced	fresh	mushrooms
2	Tb	butter



1	Tb	oil
1	to	2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Salt	and	pepper	to	taste
1	to	2	Tb	more	butter
2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley

Following	 the	procedure	 for	duxelles	 twist	 the	mushrooms,	a	handful
at	 a	 time,	 in	 the	 corner	 of	 a	 towel	 to	 extract	 their	 juice.	 Sauté	 the
mushrooms	 in	 butter	 and	 oil	 for	 6	 to	 8	 minutes	 until	 very	 lightly
browned.	Stir	in	the	shallots	or	onions	and	cook	slowly	for	2	minutes
more.	Mix	 in	 the	 hot,	 steamed	 rice	with	 a	 fork	 and	 season	 to	 taste.
Fluff	in	the	rest	of	the	butter	and	the	parsley.
(*)	May	be	set	aside	and	reheated	later.

RIZ	A	L’ORIENTALE
[Vegetarian	Rice	Bowl]

For	4	servings

4	cups	hot	steamed	rice
1	cup	minced	onions	cooked	in	butter	and	mixed	herbs
1	cup	diced	eggplant	sautéed	in	oil	and	garlic
⅓	cup	chopped	walnut	meats
12	cherry	tomatoes,	halved
Salt	and	pepper
1	omelette,	cut	into	strips
Chopped	parsley

With	 the	 hot	 rice	 in	 a	 roomy	 saucepan,	 deftly	 fluff	 in	 the	 onions,
eggplant,	walnuts,	and	cherry	tomatoes.	Season	carefully	to	taste,	and
turn	into	warm	bowls.	Decorate	with	the	omelette	strips,	and	sprinkle
with	parsley.
Pass	chopsticks	to	your	guests.



SALADES	DE	RIZ
[Rice	Salads]

Cooked	rice	is	a	versatile	base	for	many	a	salad	combination,	and	it
is	always	useful	to	have	on	hand	for	quick	and	attractive	meals.	Save	up
such	treasures	to	combine	with	the	rice	as	cooked	peas	or	green	beans,
ham,	chicken	or	other	poultry	tidbits,	lamb,	pork	sausages,	shrimp,	crab,
lobster—anything	that	you	can	dice	up	and,	perhaps,	marinate	first	in	a
tossing	of	oil,	lemon,	minced	shallots	or	scallions,	herbs,	and	seasonings.
For	instance:	For	4	servings

2	to	3	cups	cooked	rice
Good	salad	oil
Lemon	juice	or	wine	vinegar
Salt	and	pepper
4	scallions,	thinly	sliced,	including	tender	green
A	handful	of	black	olives,	quartered	lengthwise
½	cup	ham,	diced
½	cup	each	cooked	carrots	and	beans,	diced
1	small	head	shredded	romaine
1	bunch	broccoli	spears,	cooked

Toss	the	rice	in	a	bowl	with	droplets	of	oil,	lemon	or	vinegar,	and	salt
and	pepper	to	taste.	(Be	sure	to	use	a	wooden	spoon	and	fork,	and	toss
gently	so	as	not	to	break	the	grains.)	Toss	in	the	rest	of	the	ingredients
except	 for	 the	 romaine	 and	 broccoli.	 Season	 carefully.	 Arrange	 the
shredded	romaine	on	plates	or	a	serving	dish,	mound	the	rice	salad	on
top,	and	decorate	with	the	cooked	broccoli,	which	you	have	seasoned
nicely	beforehand	with	salt,	pepper,	lemon,	and	oil.	(Fresh	herbs,	such
as	 basil,	 chives,	 chervil,	 and	 tarragon,	 are	 always	 welcome.)	

RISOTTO-PILAF-PILAU
[Risotto—Braised	Rice]

This	 is	 the	 standard	 French	method	 for	 braised	 rice,	meaning	 rice



sautéed	in	fat	and	onions,	then	cooked	in	seasoned	liquid.	Whether	the
final	 dish	 is	 labeled	 risotto,	 pilaf,	 or	 pilau	 it	 is	 usually	 done	 in	 this
manner	 regardless	 of	 the	 traditional	 techniques	 of	 other	 rice-eating
nations.	A	good	risotto	is	simple	to	make	if	you	bear	the	following	points
in	mind	 that	 apply	 to	 a	 plain	 risotto	 as	well	 as	 to	 one	which	 includes
vegetables,	chicken,	or	sea	foods.

SAUTÉING

The	 rice	must	 first	 be	 sautéed	 slowly	 in	 butter	 for	 2	 to	 3	minutes
until	 it	 turns	 a	 milky	 color.	 This	 cooks	 the	 rice-flour	 coating	 and
prevents	the	rice	from	becoming	sticky.

PROPORTIONS

Use	the	correct	amount	of	liquid:	2	cups	for	each	cup	of	raw	rice.

HEAT

Regulate	 your	 heat	 so	 the	 liquid	 is	 entirely	 absorbed	 in	 18	 to	 20
minutes.	If	the	liquid	is	absorbed	too	quickly,	the	rice	will	not	be	tender.
If	 it	 is	 absorbed	 too	 slowly,	 the	 rice	 becomes	 gummy,	 the	 grains
disintegrate,	and	the	flavor	of	the	rice	is	impaired.

STIRRING

Do	not	stir	the	rice	until	all	the	liquid	has	been	absorbed.
For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

¼	cup	finely	minced	onions
4	Tb	butter
A	6-cup	fireproof	casserole	about	8	inches	in	diameter	with	a	tight-
fitting	cover
Cook	the	onions	and	butter	slowly	in	the	casserole	for	about	5	minutes
until	tender	but	not	browned.

1½	cups	clean,	unwashed,	raw	rice



Blend	the	rice	into	the	onions	and	butter	and	stir	over	moderate	heat
for	several	minutes,	not	letting	the	rice	brown.	The	grains	will	at	first
become	translucent,	then	will	gradually	turn	a	milky	color.

3	cups	boiling	liquid,	depending	on	what	your	risotto	is	to	be	served
with:
Chicken	stock	or	canned	chicken	broth
Brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon	and	water
Mushroom	broth	and	water
White	wine	fish	stock
White	wine	or	white	vermouth,	and	water
OR,	water	only
Salt	and	pepper
A	small	herb	bouquet:	2	parsley	sprigs,	⅓	bay	leaf,	and	⅛	tsp	thyme
tied	in	cheesecloth
As	 soon	 as	 the	 rice	 looks	milky,	 pour	 in	 the	 boiling	 liquid.	 Add	 the
herb	bouquet,	and	salt	and	pepper	 to	 taste.	Bring	to	 the	simmer,	stir
once,	cover	the	casserole,	and	set	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven.	As
soon	 as	 the	 liquid	 maintains	 itself	 at	 a	 very	 slow	 boil,	 in	 4	 to	 5
minutes,	 reduce	heat	 to	350	degrees;	 the	boil	 should	be	regulated	so
the	liquid	has	been	absorbed	by	the	rice	in	14	to	15	minutes.	Do	not
touch	the	rice	during	this	time.	Then	uncover	the	casserole;	tilt	it	and
lift	 rice	 with	 a	 fork	 to	 see	 if	 all	 liquid	 at	 bottom	 of	 casserole	 has
evaporated.	 If	 not,	 return	 to	 oven	 for	 2	 to	 3	 minutes	 more.	 Then
remove	the	casserole	from	the	oven.	If	you	wish	the	rice	to	be	slightly
al	dente,	uncover	it.	If	you	wish	it	to	become	a	little	more	tender,	leave
it	covered	for	10	minutes.	Discard	herb	bouquet.	Fluff	the	rice	with	a
fork	and	correct	seasoning.
(*)	 If	not	 to	be	used	immediately,	keep	warm	over	barely	simmering
water.	 Or	 set	 aside,	 and	 reheat	 casserole	 over	 boiling	 water	 when
needed.

VARIATION



Riz	en	Couronne
[Rice	Ring]

This	is	how	to	make	a	ring	of	rice	which	is	to	be	filled	with	creamed
shellfish,	 sautéed	 chicken	 livers	 with	 ham	 and	 mushrooms,	 buttered
peas,	or	whatever	luscious	sauced	tidbits	you	wish.

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	6-cup	ring	mold,	smeared	with	½	Tb	butter
The	preceding	risotto
A	round	of	waxed	paper
A	lid	to	cover	the	mold
A	pan	of	boiling	water	to	hold	the	mold

Turn	the	risotto	into	the	buttered	mold,	patting	down	the	rice	lightly;
it	 should	 fill	 the	mold	exactly.	Lay	 the	waxed	paper	over	 the	 risotto.
Cover	with	the	lid,	and	set	the	mold	in	the	pan	of	boiling	water.	Place
in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven	for	10	minutes.

A	round	serving	platter,	heated	and	lightly	buttered
Just	before	 serving,	 turn	platter	upside	down	over	mold	 and	 reverse
the	two,	to	unmold	the	rice	ring	onto	the	platter.
(*)	 If	 risotto	 is	 not	 to	 be	 served	 immediately,	 leave	 it	 in	 its	 mold,
covered,	and	over	barely	simmering	water.

PATENTED	PARBOILED	RICE
This	 is	 treated	 by	 a	 special	 steam	 process	 designed	 to	 harden	 the

grains	 so	 that	 they	 will	 not	 stick	 together	 when	 cooked.	 Use	 it	 like
regular	rice,	but	it	may	call	for	a	little	more	liquid	and	the	timing	may
be	a	little	longer	than	for	regular	rice.	It	is	a	great	invention,	and	the	rice
has	excellent	flavor.

PACKAGED	PRECOOKED	RICE



This	 is	 the	 type	of	 rice	which,	according	 to	 the	printed	directions,
you	 mix	 with	 salt	 and	 boiling	 water,	 then	 cover	 and	 let	 stand	 for	 5
minutes.	It	can	be	made	much	more	interesting	if	you	add	to	it	onions	or
shallots	 cooked	 in	butter,	 and	use	a	well	 seasoned	boiling	 stock	 rather
than	boiling	salted	water.

WILD	RICE
Wild	 rice	has	hardly	been	heard	of	 in	France,	but	you	can	cook	 it

deliriously	in	the	French	manner	by	using	a	modified	risotto	technique.
For	6	to	8	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

1½	cups	wild	rice
3	quarts	boiling	water
1½	Tb	salt

Drop	 the	 rice	 in	 the	 boiling	 salted	 water	 and	 boil	 uncovered	 for	 5
minutes.	Drain	thoroughly.

3	Tb	each:	finely	minced	carrots,	onions,	and	celery
4	Tb	butter
A	2½-quart	fireproof	casserole	with	cover
1½	cups	brown	stock	or	canned	beef	bouillon
1	bay	leaf
¼	tsp	thyme
Salt	and	pepper

While	 the	 rice	 is	 boiling,	 cook	 the	 minced	 vegetables	 slowly	 in	 the
butter	 in	 the	 casserole	 for	 5	 to	 6	 minutes	 until	 tender	 but	 not
browned.	Then	add	the	drained	rice	and	stir	over	moderate	heat	for	2
minutes	 to	 impregnate	 it	with	 the	butter.	Add	 the	 stock	or	bouillon,
bay	leaf,	 thyme,	and	seasonings	to	taste.	Bring	to	the	boil.	Cover	the
casserole	 and	 set	 in	 lower	 third	 of	 preheated	 oven	 for	 30	 to	 35
minutes	or	until	the	rice	is	tender	and	has	absorbed	all	the	liquid.	Add
a	 few	 drops	 more	 liquid	 if	 all	 has	 been	 absorbed	 before	 the	 rice	 is



tender.	The	rice	grains	should	emerge	separate	and	lightly	filmed	with
butter.	Discard	bay	leaf.	Fluff	rice	with	a	fork	and	correct	seasoning.
(*)	May	be	cooked	in	advance	and	reheated	when	needed.



CHAPTER	NINE

COLD	BUFFET
Préparations	Froides

COLD	 VEGETABLES,	 composed	 salads,	 aspics,	 molded	 mousses,	 pâtés,	 and
terrines,	any	of	these	may	be	served	as	a	first	course	for	a	dinner,	or	be
the	mainstay	of	a	summer	meal.	And	a	collection	of	such	dishes	on	a
buffet	 table	can	be	most	 inviting.	Recipes	 for	various	 salad	dressings
are	in	the	Sauce	chapter	under	vinaigrettes	and	mayonnaise	starting.

COLD	VEGETABLES

Légumes	Servis	Froids

		LÉGUMES	À	LA	GRECQUE
[Vegetables	Cooked	in	Aromatic	Broth]

Vegetables	à	la	Grecque,	a	refreshing	idea	for	any	time	of	the	year,
are	 simmered	 in	 an	 aromatic	 court	 bouillon	 of	 water,	 oil,	 herbs,	 and
seasonings.	 After	 the	 vegetables	 have	 been	 removed	 to	 a	 serving	 dish,
the	court	bouillon	is	boiled	down	to	concentrate	its	flavor,	and	is	poured
over	 the	 vegetables.	 When	 the	 vegetables	 are	 cold,	 serve	 as	 hors
d’oeuvre,	or	combine	them	with	other	vegetables	for	a	composed	salad.



Court	Bouillon
[The	Aromatic	Broth]

For	1	pound	(about	4	cups)	of	vegetables

2	cups	water
6	Tb	olive	oil
⅓	cup	lemon	juice
½	tsp	salt
2	Tb	minced	shallot	or	green	onions
The	following	(tied	in	cheesecloth	if	you	wish):
6	sprigs	parsley	including	roots	if	available
1	small	celery	stalk	with	leaves	or	⅛	tsp	celery	seeds
1	sprig	fresh	fennel	or	⅛	tsp	fennel	seeds
1	sprig	fresh	thyme	or	⅛	tsp	dried	thyme
12	peppercorns
6	coriander	seeds
A	2½-quart	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan	with	cover

Place	 all	 the	 ingredients	 to	 the	 left	 in	 the	 covered	 saucepan	 and
simmer	for	10	minutes.

Champignons	à	la	Grecque
[Mushrooms	à	la	Grecque]

1	lb.	fresh	mushrooms,	button	size	if	possible
1	cup	of	the	preceding	court	bouillon,	strained	if	you	wish

Trim	and	wash	the	mushrooms.	Leave	whole	if	small,	quarter	if	large.
Add	them	to	the	simmering	court	bouillon,	tossing	them	to	cover	with
the	liquid.	Cover	and	simmer	for	10	minutes.

A	slotted	spoon



A	serving	dish
Salt	and	pepper
Remove	the	mushrooms	from	the	saucepan	with	the	slotted	spoon,	and
arrange	 them	 in	 a	 serving	dish.	Rapidly	boil	 down	 the	 court	 bouillon
until	it	has	reduced	almost	to	a	syrup.	Correct	seasoning;	strain	it	over
the	mushrooms.
(*)	When	cold,	the	mushrooms	may	be	covered	and	refrigerated,	and
will	keep	for	2	to	3	days.

2	to	3	Tb	minced	parsley	or	mixed	green	herbs
Sprinkle	with	herbs	just	before	serving.

VARIATIONS:	OTHER	VEGETABLES	À	LA	GRECQUE
Any	 of	 the	 following	 vegetables	may	 be	 prepared	à	 la	Grecque.	 In

each	 case,	 make	 a	 court	 bouillon	 as	 directed	 in	 the	 preceding	 recipe,
prepare	and	simmer	the	vegetables	as	indicated	for	each	kind	in	the	list,
then	drain	and	arrange	on	a	serving	dish.	Boil	down	court	bouillon	until	it
has	reduced	almost	to	a	syrup	(less	than	¼	cup	usually).	Pour	over	the
vegetables	 and	 chill.	 Sprinkle	on	minced,	 fresh	green	herbs	 just	 before
serving.

Fonds	d’Artichauts	à	la	Grecque
[Artichoke	Bottoms	à	la	Grecque]

Fresh	artichoke	bottoms
Before	 cooking,	 trim	 the	 artichoke	 bottoms	 as	 described	 on	 this

page.	The	choke	is	removed	after	cooking.	Simmering	time	is	from	30	to
40	minutes.
Frozen	artichoke	hearts
Before	cooking,	defrost	the	artichoke	hearts	enough	so	that	they	can

be	 separated	 from	 each	 other.	 As	 they	 have	 been	 acidulated	 before
freezing,	 use	 only	 1	 teaspoon	 of	 lemon	 juice	 in	 the	 court	 bouillon.
Simmering	time	is	about	10	minutes.



Céleri	à	la	Grecque
[Celery	à	la	Grecque]

Buy	 bunches	 labeled	 “celery	 hearts.”	 Remove	 any	 tough	 outside
stalks.	Cut	 off	 the	 tops	 of	 the	bunches	 to	 just	 below	 the	main	body	of
leaves.	Halve	or	quarter	the	bunches	lengthwise,	wash	thoroughly	under
running	 water,	 and	 arrange	 them	 in	 a	 baking	 dish.	 Pour	 on	 the
simmering	 court	 bouillon,	 adding	more	water	 if	 necessary	 to	 cover	 the
celery.	 Cover	 the	 dish,	 bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 and	 bake	 in	 a	 preheated
350-degree	oven	for	30	to	40	minutes	or	until	tender.

Concombres	à	la	Grecque
[Cucumbers	à	la	Grecque]

Peel,	cut	in	half	lengthwise,	and	scoop	out	the	seeds	with	a	spoon.
Cut	 the	halves	 into	½-inch	strips,	 then	 into	2-inch	pieces.	Toss	with	½
teaspoon	of	salt	 for	each	4	cups	of	cucumber	pieces,	and	let	stand	in	a
bowl	 for	 20	 minutes.	 Drain	 thoroughly,	 and	 proceed	 with	 the	 recipe.
Simmering	time	is	about	10	minutes.

Aubergines	à	la	Grecque
[Eggplant	à	la	Grecque]

Peel	 the	 eggplant,	 cut	 into	 serving	 pieces,	 and	 let	 stand	 for	 20
minutes	in	½	teaspoon	of	salt	and	1	teaspoon	of	lemon	juice	for	each	4
cups	of	eggplant	pieces.	Drain	thoroughly	and	proceed	with	the	recipe.
Simmering	time	is	about	10	minutes.

Endives	à	la	Grecque
[Endive	à	la	Grecque]

Fenouil	à	la	Grecque
[Fennel	à	la	Grecque]

Quarter	or	halve	the	endives	or	fennel	lengthwise,	wash	under	cold,



running	water,	then	proceed	with	the	recipe.	Simmering	time	is	30	to	40
minutes.

Poireaux	à	la	Grecque
[Leeks	à	la	Grecque]

Trim	off	the	roots,	make	two	lengthwise	cuts	in	green	part,	remove
a	portion	of	the	green	tops	to	leave	the	leeks	about	7	inches	long.	Wash
thoroughly	 under	 cold,	 running	 water,	 being	 sure	 you	 get	 off	 all	 grit
from	 each	 leaf.	 Arrange	 the	 leeks	 in	 a	 fireproof	 dish,	 pour	 on	 the
simmering	 court	 bouillon,	 and	 add	 boiling	water,	 if	 necessary,	 to	 cover
the	leeks.	Cover	the	baking	dish,	bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove,
then	bake	in	a	preheated,	350-degree	oven	for	30	to	40	minutes	or	until
the	leeks	are	tender.	Drain	off	court	bouillon,	boil	it	down	to	⅓	cup,	pour
over	the	leeks,	and	chill.

Oignons	à	la	Grecque
[Onions	à	la	Grecque]

Buy	 pearl	 onions,	 or	 small	 white	 onions	 about	 an	 inch	 in	 diameter.
Drop	 them	 for	 1	 minute	 in	 boiling	 water	 to	 cover,	 drain	 and	 peel
them,	 then	 pierce	 a	 cross	 in	 their	 root	 ends	 to	 insure	 even	 cooking.
Proceed	with	the	recipe.	Simmering	time	is	30	to	40	minutes.

Poivrons	à	la	Grecque
[Red	or	Green	Bell	Peppers	à	la	Grecque]

Halve	 the	 peppers	 lengthwise,	 remove	 seeds	 and	 ribs,	 and	 slice	 or
quarter	the	peppers.	Proceed	with	the	recipe.	Simmering	time	is	about
10	minutes.

CÉLERI-RAVE	RÉMOULADE
[Celery	Root	in	Mustard	Sauce]

Celeriac	 or	 celery	 root	 prepared	 in	 this	manner	makes	 a	 typically



French	 hors	 d’oeuvre.	 But	 raw	 celeriac	 can	 be	 tough,	 and	 we	 have
suggested	a	preliminary	steeping	in	salt	and	lemon	before	it	 is	dressed.
However,	if	you	grate	it	fine,	through	a	miniature	French	vegetable	mill
known	 as	 the	 julienne	 (available	 in	 many	 import	 shops,	 and
inexpensive),	you	can	dispense	with	 the	 steep	and	move	 straight	on	 to
the	dressing.
NOTE:	Céleri-rave	 rémoulade	 has	 nothing	 to	 do	with	 sauce	 rémoulade,	 a
mayonnaise	with	pickles,	capers,	and	other	ingredients.

1	lb.	celery	root	(3	to	3½	cups	when	cut)
A	2-quart	mixing	bowl
1½	tsp	salt
1½	tsp	lemon	juice

Peel	the	celery	root	and	cut	it	into	julienne	match-sticks	as	illustrated.
Toss	 in	 a	 bowl	 with	 the	 salt	 and	 lemon	 juice,	 and	 let	 steep	 for	 30
minutes.	 Rinse	 the	 pieces	 in	 cold	 water,	 drain,	 and	 dry	 them	 in	 a
towel.

4	Tb	strong	Dijon-type	prepared	mustard
3	Tb	boiling	water
A	wire	whip
⅓	to	½	cup	olive	oil	or	salad	oil
2	Tb	wine	vinegar	Salt	and	pepper

Warm	the	mixing	bowl	in	hot	water.	Dry	it.	Add	the	mustard	and	beat
in	the	boiling	water	by	droplets	with	a	wire	whip.	Then	beat	in	the	oil
by	 droplets	 to	 make	 a	 thick	 creamy	 sauce.	 Beat	 in	 the	 vinegar	 by
drops,	and	season	to	taste.

2	to	3	Tb	chopped	mixed	green	herbs	or	parsley
Fold	the	celery	root	into	the	sauce,	and	allow	it	to	marinate	for	2	to	3
hours	or	overnight.	Decorate	with	herbs	before	serving.



POMMES	DE	TERRE	À	L’HUILE
[French	Potato	Salad—sliced	potatoes	in	oil	and	vinegar	dressing]

French	potato	salad	is	prepared	while	the	boiled,	sliced	potatoes	are
still	 warm,	 so	 they	 will	 absorb	 the	 dressing.	 The	 salad	 may	 be	 eaten
warm	with	grilled	sausage,	or	cold.	Mayonnaise	may	be	folded	into	the
potatoes	 if	you	wish.	Be	sure	to	use	potatoes	which	may	be	boiled	and
sliced	without	crumbling.

For	about	6	cups

2	lbs.	“boiling”	potatoes	(8	to	10	medium	potatoes)
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl

Scrub	 the	 potatoes.	Drop	 them	 in	 boiling	 salted	water	 to	 cover,	 and
boil	until	the	potatoes	are	just	tender	when	pierced	with	a	small	knife.
Drain.	As	soon	as	they	are	cool	enough	to	handle,	peel,	and	cut	them
into	slices	about	⅛	inch	thick.	Place	them	in	the	mixing	bowl.

4	Tb	dry	white	wine,	or	2	Tb	dry	white	vermouth	and	2	Tb	stock	or
canned	bouillon
Pour	 the	 wine	 or	 vermouth	 and	 stock	 or	 bouillon	 over	 the	 warm
potato	slices	and	toss	very	gently.	Set	aside	for	a	few	minutes	until	the
potatoes	have	absorbed	the	liquids.

2	Tb	wine	vinegar,	or	1	Tb	vinegar	and	1	Tb	lemon	juice
1	tsp	prepared	mustard
¼	tsp	salt
A	small	bowl	and	wire	whip
6	Tb	olive	oil	or	salad	oil
Pepper
Optional:	1	to	2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions

Beat	the	vinegar	or	vinegar	and	lemon	juice,	mustard,	and	salt	in	the
small	 bowl	 until	 the	 salt	 has	 dissolved.	 Then	 beat	 in	 the	 oil	 by
droplets.	 Season	 to	 taste,	 and	 stir	 in	 the	 optional	 shallots	 or	 onions.



Pour	the	dressing	over	the	potatoes	and	toss	gently	to	blend.

2	to	3	Tb	chopped	mixed	green	herbs	or	parsley
Serve	 them	 while	 still	 warm,	 or	 chill.	 Decorate	 with	 herbs	 before
serving.

COMPOSED	SALADS

Salades	Composées
Here	 are	 three	 recipes	 and	 several	 suggestions	 for	 salad	mixtures.

Green	vegetables	will	lose	their	fresh	color	if	they	sit	in	a	vinaigrette	for
more	than	half	an	hour;	therefore	prepare	each	component	of	the	salad
in	 a	 separate	dish.	 Just	 before	 serving,	 season	 each	with	dressing,	 and
put	together	the	salad	in	its	serving	bowl.

SALADE	NIÇOISE
[Mediterranean	Combination	Salad]

Tuna,	anchovies,	tomatoes,	potatoes,	green	beans,	hard-boiled	eggs,
and	lettuce	are	the	usual	elements	for	this	appetizing	combination,	and
you	may	 arrange	 the	 salad	 in	 any	manner	 you	wish.	 Serve	 as	 an	 hors
d’oeuvre	or	as	a	main-course	summer	salad.
For	6	to	8	people

3	cups	cold,	blanched,	green	beans	(see	also	directions	for	frozen
beans)

3	or	4	quartered	tomatoes
1	cup	vinaigrette	(French	dressing)	with	herbs
1	head	Boston	lettuce,	separated,	washed,	drained,	and	dried
A	salad	bowl
3	cups	cold	French	potato	salad	(preceding	recipe)
1	cup	canned	tuna	chunks,	drained



½	cup	pitted	black	olives,	preferably	the	dry	Mediterranean	type
2	or	3	hard-boiled	eggs,	cold,	peeled,	and	quartered
6	to	12	canned	anchovy	filets,	drained
2	to	3	Tb	minced,	fresh	green	herbs

Just	 before	 serving,	 season	 the	 beans	 and	 tomatoes	 with	 several
spoonfuls	of	vinaigrette.	Toss	the	lettuce	leaves	in	the	salad	bowl	with
¼	 cup	 of	 vinaigrette,	 and	 place	 the	 leaves	 around	 the	 edge	 of	 the
bowl.	Arrange	the	potatoes	in	the	bottom	of	the	bowl.	Decorate	with
the	 beans	 and	 tomatoes,	 interspersing	 them	 with	 a	 design	 of	 tuna
chunks,	olives,	eggs,	and	anchovies.	Pour	the	remaining	dressing	over
the	salad,	sprinkle	with	herbs,	and	serve.

SALADE	DE	BOEUF	À	LA	PARISIENNE
[Cold	Beef	and	Potato	Salad]

This	 is	 an	 attractive	 way	 to	 use	 cold	 boiled	 or	 braised	 beef	 as	 a
main-course	 summer	 dish	 or	 on	 a	 cold	 buffet	 table.	We	 shall	 not	 give
proportions	because	they	depend	on	how	much	meat	you	have.

Thinly	sliced,	cold,	boiled	or	braised	beef
Vinaigrette	(French	dressing)	with	herbs
Thinly	sliced	rings	of	mild	onion
A	serving	platter
French	potato	salad
Boston	lettuce	or	water	cress
Quartered	hard-boiled	eggs
Quartered	tomatoes
Optional:	cold	cooked	green	beans,	broccoli	or	cauliflower;	canned
beets

Minced	fresh	green	herbs
In	 separate	 bowls,	 marinate	 the	 beef	 and	 the	 onion	 rings	 in

vinaigrette	 for	 half	 an	 hour	 or	 longer.	When	 ready	 to	 serve	 the	 salad,



arrange	 the	 beef	 on	 the	 platter	 alternating	 the	 slices	with	 onion	 rings.
Decorate	 the	 platter	 with	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 ingredients,	 spoon	 a	 bit	 of
vinaigrette	over	them,	and	sprinkle	with	herbs.

		SALADE	À	LA	D’ARGENSON
[Rice	or	Potato	and	Beet	Salad]

When	rice	or	potatoes	are	marinated	with	beets	in	a	vinaigrette	for	a
sufficient	amount	of	time,	the	whole	mass	becomes	beet-colored.	Then	it
can	 be	 tossed	 in	 an	 herbal	 mayonnaise,	 and	 all	 sorts	 of	 cooked
vegetables,	 meat,	 or	 fish	 leftovers	 can	 be	 mixed	 into	 it	 to	 make	 a
nourishing	hors	d’oeuvre,	 a	main-course	dish,	or	 an	attractive	addition
to	a	picnic.

For	1	quart	or	more

2	cups	boiled	rice	riz	au	blanc,	OR,	2	cups	of	warm	boiled	potatoes,
peeled	and	diced
2	cups	diced	cooked	or	canned	beets
4	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
A	2-quart	bowl
¾	cup	vinaigrette	(French	dressing)

Toss	the	rice	or	potatoes,	beets,	and	shallots	or	onions	in	a	bowl	with
the	vinaigrette.	Season	to	taste.	Cover,	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	12,
preferably	24,	hours.

1½	to	2	cups	mayonnaise	with	green	herbs,	or	the	recipe	following	it,
for	green	mayonnaise
Salt	and	pepper
1	cup,	one	or	a	mixture	of	the	following:	Cooked	green	peas,	or
cooked	and	diced	green	beans,	cauliflower,	broccoli,	carrots,
turnips,	or	asparagus;	diced	cooked	beef,	pork,	poultry,	or	fish;
flaked	canned	tuna	or	salmon;	diced	raw	apples;	grated	raw
carrots;	walnuts



A	salad	bowl
Decorate	with	any	or	all	of	the	following:	Green	or	black	olives,
anchovies,	sliced	hard-boiled	eggs,	water	cress	or	parsley	sprigs
Shortly	before	serving,	 fold	 in	the	mayonnaise	and	other	 ingredients.
Season	carefully.	Arrange	the	salad	in	the	bowl	and	decorate	with	the
suggestions	listed.

ASPICS

Préparations	Froides	en	Aspic
Cold	chicken	decorated	with	 tarragon	 leaves	and	 shimmering	with

jelly,	 a	molded	aspic	of	 chicken	 livers,	 or	 a	boeuf	mode	 en	 gelée—these
are	 lovely	 summer	 dishes,	 and	 fun	 to	 do	 if	 you	 enjoy	 decorating.	 You
may	 be	 frightfully	 elegant	with	 your	 designs,	 or	 amusing,	 and,	 after	 a
little	experience,	very	professional.

DEFINITIONS:	GELÉE,	JELLY,	ASPIC

Gelée	 is	 the	 French	 culinary	 term	 for	 beef,	 veal,	 chicken,	 or	 fish
stock	 which	 stiffens	 when	 cold	 because	 it	 contains	 natural	 gelatin,	 or
because	gelatin	has	been	added	to	it.	Liquid	or	jelled,	it	is	always	spoken
of	as	gelée.	We	shall	refer	to	gelée,	whether	hot	or	cold,	liquid	or	set,	as
jelly	or	jellied	stock.	Aspic,	in	French,	usually	refers	not	to	the	jelly,	but
to	the	whole	decorated	dish	of	various	elements	coated	with	or	molded
in	jelly.

RECIPES	FOR	JELLY

Directions	 for	 homemade	 jellied	 stock	 are	 in	 the	 Stocks	 and	Aspic
section.	These	stocks	are	almost	always	clarified,	meaning	that	they	are
rendered	 clear	 and	 sparkling	 through	 a	 simmering	 with	 egg	 whites;
directions	 for	 clarification	 are	 on	 this	 page.	 Canned	 bouillons	 and
consommés	are	turned	into	jelly	by	the	addition	of	powdered	gelatin,	as
described;	following	this	are	directions	for	wine	flavorings.

HOW	TO	WORK	WITH	JELLY

Never	fail	to	test	out	the	jelly	before	you	begin	to	work	with	it:	Pour



½	inch	of	jelly	into	a	small,	chilled	saucer,	and	refrigerate	for	about	10
minutes	or	until	set.	Then	break	it	up	with	a	fork	and	let	it	stand	at	room
temperature;	 the	 pieces	 should	 hold	 their	 shape	 but	 not	 be	 rubbery.
Further	information	and	gelatin	proportions	are	on	this	page.

Allow	yourself	plenty	of	time	and	cracked	ice,	for	the	jelly	must	be
given	 full	 opportunity	 to	 set;	 it	 cannot	 be	 hurried.	 A	 complicated
decoration	 need	 not	 be	 completed	 in	 one	 continuous	 operation.
Successive	 coats	 of	 jelly	may	 be	 spooned	 over	 the	 dish	whenever	 you
have	time,	and	the	process	may	go	on	in	spurts	all	one	day	and	on	into
the	next.

Coating	Foods	with	Aspic	Jellied	stocks	set	very	quickly	once	they
are	cold.	To	avoid	continual	warmings	of	 the	whole	amount	when	you
are	to	coat	foods	with	successive	layers	of	jelly,	heat	just	what	you	will
need	 at	 one	 time	 in	 a	 small	 saucepan.	 Stir	 over	 cracked	 ice	 until	 the
liquid	 turns	 syrupy,	 indicating	 it	 is	 about	 to	 congeal.	Then	 remove	 the
pan	immediately	from	its	bed	of	ice,	and	spoon	a	layer	of	jelly	over	the
chilled	food.	Refrigerate	the	platter	for	about	10	minutes	to	set	the	layer
of	jelly,	and	repeat	the	process	two	or	three	times	until	you	have	built	up
a	coating	of	jelly	almost	⅛	of	an	inch	thick.

DECORATIVE	ELEMENTS

CHOPPED	JELLY	When	you	spoon	jelly	over	foods	arranged	on	a	platter,
you	will	usually	need	 to	 fill	up	empty	 spaces	or	cover	dribbles	of	 jelly
that	have	run	off	the	edges	of	the	food.	Chopped	jelly	is	an	easy	solution,
and	is	made	as	follows:	Pour	a	½-inch	layer	of	jelly	into	a	plate	or	pan
and	 chill	 until	 set.	 Then	 make	 narrow	 crosshatches	 through	 the	 jelly
with	a	knife	to	cut	it	into	small	pieces	⅛	inch	or	less	in	size.	Either	force
the	jelly	through	a	pastry	bag	to	outline	the	food	or	to	fill	up	the	platter,
or	heap	it	into	place	with	a	spoon.

JELLY	 CUTOUTS	 These	 make	 nice	 decorations	 around	 the	 edge	 of	 a
platter.	Chill	 a	¼-inch	 layer	 of	 jelly	 in	 a	plate	or	pan,	 then	 cut	 it	 into
squares,	triangles,	or	diamonds,	and	it	is	ready	to	use.

DESIGNS	 AND	 COLORS	 You	 can	 make	 fanciful	 decorations	 of	 curlicues,
sprays,	 branches	 and	 flowers,	 or	 geometric	 patterns	 out	 of	 the
ingredients	 listed	below.	Use	 them	as	 follows:	First	 spoon	 two	or	 three
layers	of	jelly	over	the	chilled	food;	chill	your	decorative	materials	and



cut	 them	 into	 various	 shapes.	 Then,	 holding	 them	 with	 two	 trussing
needles	or	skewers,	dip	them	into	almost-set	jelly	and	arrange	them	over
the	 food.	Refrigerate	 the	platter	of	 food	 to	 set	 the	designs,	 then	give	a
final	coating	or	two	of	jelly	to	cover	the	decorations	with	a	transparent
film.

FOR	BLACK:	Use	thin	slices	of	truffle	or	black	olives.
FOR	 RED:	Use	 thin	 strips,	 dice,	 or	 dots	 of	 canned	 red	 pimiento.	 The

pulp	of	peeled,	 seeded,	and	 juiced	 tomatoes	may	be	diced	or	 sliced,	or
twisted	in	the	corner	of	a	towel	to	make	little	balls.

FOR	YELLOW:	Use	hard-boiled	egg	yolks,	mashed	with	softened	butter,
and	pushed	through	a	pastry	tube	to	make	dots	or	fluted	designs.

FOR	ORANGE:	Use	cooked	carrots	sliced,	diced,	or	cut	into	strips.
FOR	 GREEN:	 Use	 fresh	 or	 pickled	 tarragon	 leaves,	 dropped	 in	 boiling

water	 for	 30	 seconds,	 refreshed	 in	 cold	 water,	 and	 dried	 on	 a	 towel.
Cooked	green	peppers	cut	into	strips	or	dice.	The	green	tops	of	leeks	or
green	 onions	 simmered	 in	 water	 for	 several	 minutes	 until	 softened,
refreshed	in	cold	water,	and	dried;	cut	into	thin	strips,	these	can	then	be
formed	into	curlicues,	or	made	to	look	like	branches	of	mimosa	(use	dots
of	“yellow”	for	the	flowers).

FOR	 WHITE:	 Use	 hard-boiled	 egg	 white,	 thinly	 sliced	 and	 cut	 into
strips,	dice,	or	shapes.

OEUFS	EN	GELÉE
[Poached	Eggs	in	Aspic]

Serve	 eggs	 in	 aspic	 as	 a	 first	 course	 or	 luncheon	 dish,	 or	 arrange
them	around	a	platter	of	cold	meats,	fish,	or	vegetables.

For	6	eggs

3	cups	jelly	(jellied	stock,	or	canned	consommé	with	gelatin)
6	round	or	oval	molds	of	½	cup	capacity,	preferably	of	metal	as	they
are	easier	to	unmold
Pour	⅛	 inch	 of	 jelly	 in	 the	 bottom	of	 each	mold	 and	 refrigerate	 for
about	10	minutes	or	until	set.



12	tarragon	leaves,	fresh	or	preserved	in	vinegar
Drop	the	tarragon	leaves	into	boiling	water	for	30	seconds.	Refresh	in
cold	water,	drain,	dry,	and	chill.	Dip	them	in	a	bit	of	almost-set	jelly,
and	arrange	them	in	a	cross	over	the	jelly	in	the	bottom	of	each	mold.
Chill	for	a	few	minutes	to	set	the	tarragon.

6	chilled	poached	eggs
Place	an	egg	in	each	mold,	its	least	attractive	side	up.	Pour	in	almost-
set	jelly	to	cover	the	eggs.	Chill	for	an	hour	or	so,	until	the	jelly	is	well
set.

Chilled	plates	Lettuce	leaves
At	serving	time,	dip	each	mold	for	3	to	4	seconds	in	hot	water.	Run	a
knife	 around	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 jelly,	 turn	 the	mold	 upside	 down	 and,
giving	 it	 a	 sharp	 knock	 on	 the	 bottom,	 unmold	 on	 a	 chilled	 serving
plate	over	a	bed	of	lettuce	leaves.

OTHER	DECORATIONS

Lay	 a	 thin	 slice	 of	 ham	 over	 the	 cross	 of	 tarragon	 leaves.	 Or	 make
designs	of	truffle	in	the	bottom	of	the	mold,	top	with	a	slice	of	foie	gras,
then	add	the	poached	egg	and	the	rest	of	the	jelly.

		FOIES	DE	VOLAILLE	EN	ASPIC
[Chicken	Livers	in	Aspic]

Chicken	livers	sautéed	in	butter,	simmered	in	wine,	then	molded	in
aspic	make	a	delicious	hors	d’oeuvre,	and	are	most	simple	to	do.

For	six	½-cup	molds

2½	cups	jelly	(jellied	stock,	or	canned	consommé	with	gelatin)
6	round	or	oval	molds	of	½	cup	capacity,	preferably	of	metal

Pour	 a	⅛-inch	 layer	 of	 jelly	 into	 the	 bottom	of	 each	mold	 and	 chill



until	set.

6	large,	whole	chicken	livers
Look	 over	 the	 chicken	 livers,	 and	 cut	 out	 any	 blackish	 or	 greenish
spots.	Dry	the	livers	thoroughly	on	paper	towels.

An	8-inch	enameled	skillet
2	Tb	butter
1	Tb	oil
2	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions

Set	the	skillet	over	moderately	high	heat	with	the	butter	and	oil.	When
you	 see	 that	 the	 butter	 foam	 has	 almost	 subsided,	 add	 the	 chicken
livers.	Stir	and	toss	for	2	minutes	to	brown	the	livers	very	lightly.	Add
the	shallots	or	onions	and	toss	for	5	seconds	more.	Hold	a	cover	askew
over	the	skillet	and	drain	out	all	the	sautéing	fat.

Big	pinch	of	salt
Pinch	of	pepper
Pinch	of	allspice
½	cup	Madeira	or	port,	or	⅓	cup	cognac

Sprinkle	 the	 seasonings	 over	 the	 livers;	 pour	 in	 the	wine	 or	 cognac.
Cover	the	skillet	and	simmer	very	slowly	for	8	minutes,	then	remove
the	 livers	 to	 a	 side	 dish.	 Rapidly	 boil	 down	 the	 cooking	 juices	 until
reduced	to	a	syrupy	consistency.	Remove	from	heat,	roll	the	livers	in
the	skillet	to	cover	with	the	juices,	and	chill.

Optional:	6	slices	of	truffle
Chilled	plates	or	platter
Lettuce	leaves

Place	a	slice	of	optional	truffle	over	the	jelly	layer	in	each	mold,	and
arrange	a	chicken	liver	over	it.	Fill	the	molds	with	the	remaining	jelly,
which	 should	 be	 syrupy	 and	 almost	 set.	 Chill	 for	 an	 hour	 or	 so.
Unmold	on	chilled	serving	plates	or	a	platter,	over	lettuce	leaves.



VARIATION

Homard,	Crabe,	ou	Crevettes	en	Aspic
[Lobster,	Crab,	or	Shrimp	in	Aspic]

The	 preceding	 system	 may	 also	 be	 adapted	 for	 lobster,	 crab,	 or
shrimp	meat	in	aspic.

POULET	EN	GELÉE	À	L’ESTRAGON
[Chicken	Tarragon	in	Aspic]

Also	 for:	 turkey,	 game	 hens,	 squab	 pigeons,	 guinea	 hen,	 and
pheasant.
Chicken	in	tarragon	jelly	is	one	of	the	simplest	and	best	of	the	cold

poultry	dishes.	The	chicken	may	be	poached	by	complete	immersion	in
tarragon-flavored	stock	which	 is	 then	clarified	and	turned	 into	 jelly,	or
you	may	follow	the	simpler	version	here.
For	6	people
Cooking	the	chicken

A	3-lb.	ready-to-cook	roasting	chicken
⅛	tsp	salt,	½	Tb	butter,	and	3	sprigs	fresh	tarragon	or	½	tsp	dried
tarragon	for	inside	the	chicken

2	Tb	butter	and	1	Tb	oil	for	browning	the	chicken
A	heavy,	covered,	fireproof	casserole
¼	tsp	salt
3	sprigs	fresh	tarragon	or	½	tsp	dried	tarragon	for	the	casserole

Following	 the	procedure	 for	 casserole-roasted	 chicken	with	 tarragon,
season	the	cavity	with	salt,	butter,	and	tarragon.	Truss	and	butter	the
chicken,	then	brown	it	on	all	sides	in	hot	butter	and	oil	in	a	casserole.
Salt	the	chicken,	add	the	tarragon,	cover	the	casserole,	and	roast	in	a
preheated	325-degree	oven	for	1	hour	and	10	to	20	minutes.	Remove
the	chicken,	and	let	it	cool	to	room	temperature.	Then	chill	it.



The	tarragon	jelly

2	or	3	sprigs	fresh	tarragon	or	1	tsp	dried	tarragon
4	cups	jelly	(jellied	stock	made	from	brown	chicken	stock,	or	canned
consommé	with	gelatin

An	enameled	saucepan
Stir	 the	 tarragon	 into	 the	 jelly;	 bring	 to	 the	 simmer,	 cover,	 and	 let
steep	over	very	low	heat	for	10	minutes.

4	to	5	Tb	Madeira	or	port	A	chilled	saucer
Remove	from	heat,	and	stir	in	the	wine	by	spoonfuls,	tasting,	until	you
have	achieved	the	flavor	you	wish.	Strain	through	a	very	fine	sieve	or
several	thicknesses	of	washed	cheesecloth.	Test	a	bit	of	it	in	a	chilled
saucer	 in	 the	 refrigerator,	 to	 be	 sure	 it	 will	 jell	 to	 the	 right
consistency.
Decorating	the	chicken

An	oval	serving	platter	about	16	inches	long
Pour	 a	 ⅛-inch	 layer	 of	 jelly	 into	 the	 platter,	 and	 chill	 in	 the
refrigerator	until	set.

Carve	 the	 chicken	 and	 arrange	 it	 over	 the	 layer	 of	 jelly.	 Return	 the
platter	to	the	refrigerator.

A	small	saucepan
A	bowl	of	cracked	ice

Pour	a	cupful	of	 jelly	 into	 the	saucepan	and	stir	over	 ice	until	 it	has
become	 syrupy.	 Immediately	 remove	 from	 the	 ice,	 and	 spoon	 the
almost-set	 jelly	over	 the	chicken;	 this	 first	 layer	will	not	adhere	very
well.	 Chill	 the	 chicken	 for	 10	 minutes,	 and	 spoon	 another	 layer	 of
almost-set	jelly	over	it.	Repeat.

20	to	30	fresh	tarragon	leaves	or	tarragon	leaves	preserved	in	vinegar
2	trussing	needles	or	skewers,	or	a	small,	pointed	knife	(for	picking



up	tarragon	leaves)
A	saucer	of	almost-set	jelly

Drop	 the	 tarragon	 leaves	 in	boiling	water	 for	10	 seconds.	Refresh	 in
ice	water,	and	dry.	Dip	each	leaf	in	the	almost-set	jelly,	and	arrange	in
a	 decorative	 pattern	 over	 the	 chicken.	 Chill.	 Then	 spoon	 on	 a	 final
layer	of	almost-set	jelly.

A	pan	or	platter
Pour	 the	 remaining	 jelly	 into	 the	 pan	 or	 platter	 and	 chill	 until	 set.
Chop	the	jelly	into	⅛-inch	pieces	and	distribute	it	around	the	chicken.

Refrigerate.	 Unless	 the	 weather	 is	 very	 warm,	 remove	 the	 chicken
from	 the	 refrigerator	 half	 an	 hour	 before	 serving;	 it	 will	 have	more
flavor	if	it	is	not	too	cold.

		SUPRÊMES	DE	VOLAILLE	EN	CHAUD-FROID,	BLANCHE	NEIGE
[Breast	of	Chicken	in	Chaud-froid]

Here	is	a	decorative,	delicious,	and	easy-to-execute	aspic	which	lends
itself	to	numerous	variations	as	suggested	at	the	end	of	the	recipe.	The
cold	cream	sauce	for	this,	which	congeals	into	an	aspic	covering	over
the	 chicken	 breasts,	 looks	 like	 the	 classic	 sauce	 chaud-froid—flour-
based,	 jellied	velouté	with	 cream.	The	 sauce	 chaud-froid	 blanche	neige
used	here	 is	purely	a	reduction	of	 tarragon-flavored	stock	and	cream
in	which	 gelatin	 has	 been	 dissolved;	 it	 is	much	 lighter	 and	 nicer	 in
texture	 than	 the	 classic	 sauce,	 we	 think.	 Serve	 chicken	 breasts	 in
chaud-froid	as	a	luncheon	dish,	or	as	part	of	a	cold	buffet.
For	6	people

6	suprêmes	(the	skinless	and	boneless	breast-halves	from	3	frying
chickens)

A	serving	platter
Waxed	paper



Poach	 the	 chicken	breasts	 in	 butter	 as	 described	 at	 the	beginning	of
the	recipe,	suprêmes	de	volaille	à	blanc.	Drain	them,	and	let	them	cool
to	 room	 temperature.	 Arrange	 them	 in	 a	 serving	 platter,	 cover	with
waxed	paper,	and	chill.

1¼	cups	whipping	cream
1½	cups	excellent	white	chicken	stock,	OR,	canned	chicken	broth
simmered	for	20	minutes	with	¼	cup	thinly	sliced	carrots,	¼	cup
thinly	sliced	onions,	and	a	pinch	of	thyme
1	sprig	fresh	tarragon	or	¼	tsp	dried	tarragon
Salt	and	white	pepper
Simmer	the	cream,	chicken	stock	or	broth,	and	tarragon	slowly	in	the
saucepan	 for	 about	 10	 minutes,	 until	 the	 mixture	 has	 reduced	 to	 2
cups.	Correct	seasoning,	and	strain.

1	Tb	(1	envelope)	gelatin
3	Tb	dry	white	vermouth
Soften	the	gelatin	in	the	vermouth	for	a	few	minutes.	Then	beat	it	into
the	 cream	 mixture	 and	 stir	 over	 low	 heat	 until	 the	 gelatin	 has
dissolved	completely.	Cool,	or	stir	over	cracked	ice,	until	the	sauce	has
thickened	slightly	and	is	just	about	to	congeal.

Spoon	a	layer	of	sauce	over	the	chilled	chicken	breasts,	and	refrigerate
until	 the	 sauce	 has	 set.	 Repeat	 with	 successive	 coats	 of	 almost-set
sauce	until	all	but	enough	for	a	final	layer	has	been	used.

A	handful	of	fresh	tarragon	leaves	or	tarragon	leaves	preserved	in
vinegar;	OR,	thinly	sliced	or	finely	diced	truffle
Water	cress	or	parsley
Drop	the	tarragon	leaves	in	boiling	water	for	30	seconds,	refresh	in	ice
water,	 and	dry.	 Immediately	after	 coating	 the	 chicken	with	 the	 final
layer	of	sauce,	decorate	with	the	tarragon	leaves	or	truffles.	Surround
the	 edge	 of	 the	 platter	 with	 water	 cress,	 or	 sprigs	 of	 parsley,	 and
refrigerate	again	until	serving	time.



AN	ELABORATION
After	 the	 tarragon	 leaves	 or	 slices	 of	 truffle	 have	 set,	 the	 chicken

breasts	 may	 be	 given	 one	 or	 two	 coats	 of	 almost-set	 jelly,	 as	 in	 the
preceding	recipe	for	chicken	tarragon,	and	the	platter	may	be	decorated
with	chopped	jelly	or	jelly	cutouts.

VARIATIONS

Suprêmes	de	Volaille	en	Chaud-froid	à	l’Écossaise
[Breast	of	Chicken	in	Chaud-froid	with	Diced	Vegetables]

Ingredients	for	the	master	recipe
⅓	cup	each:	finely	diced	carrots,	celery,	and	onions	cooked	until
tender	in
1½	Tb	butter	1	or	2	finely	minced	truffles,	or	¼	cup	diced	mushrooms
cooked	in	butter
Proceed	 as	 for	 the	master	 recipe,	 but	 stir	 the	 cooked	 carrots,	 celery,
and	onions	into	the	chicken	stock	and	cream	mixture	as	it	is	reducing.
Mix	 in	 the	 truffles	 or	mushrooms,	 then	 the	 gelatin	 called	 for	 in	 the
recipe,	and	continue	as	directed.	With	this	sauce,	the	chicken	breasts
need	no	other	decoration.

Suprêmes	et	Mousse	de	Volaille	en	Chaud-froid
[Breasts	of	Chicken	and	Mousse	of	Chicken	in	Chaud-froid]

When	 you	 wish	 to	 make	 something	 wonderful	 for	 an	 elaborate
buffet,	 such	as	a	wedding	breakfast,	here	 is	a	good	 idea.	Directions	 for
chopped	 jelly,	 jelly	 cutouts,	 and	 other	 decorative	 elements	 are	 at	 the
beginning	 of	 this	 section	 on	 aspics.	 We	 shall	 not	 note	 the	 number	 of
servings	 for	 this	 recipe,	 as	 it	 is	 designed	 primarily	 to	 give	 you	 an
indication	of	how	to	go	about	such	a	dish.

Ingredients	for	chicken	breasts	in	chaud-froid	(the	master	recipe)



Cook	and	chill	 the	chicken	breasts	and	prepare	 the	chaud-froid	 sauce
as	 directed	 in	 the	master	 recipe.	 The	 chicken	 breasts	may	 be	 cut	 in
halves	or	in	thirds,	if	you	wish.

A	mousse	of	chicken,	or	of	chicken	livers
Sufficient	jelly	for	glazing	and	for	other	decorations	(jellied	stock,	or
consommé	with	gelatin)
A	chilled	serving	platter
Unmold	the	mousse	on	the	platter	and	pour	around	it	a	⅛-inch	layer
of	almost-set	jelly.	Chill.

Place	the	chilled	chicken	breasts	on	a	rack	set	over	a	tray,	and	coat	the
breasts	with	several	layers	of	chaud-froid	sauce,	chilling	between	each
layer.	 Decorate	 with	 truffles,	 tarragon	 leaves,	 or	 whatever	 else	 you
wish;	 then	 chill	 and	 glaze	 with	 coats	 of	 almost-set	 jelly.	 With	 two
knives	lift	each	breast	off	the	rack	and	arrange	on	the	platter	around
the	mousse.	Decorate	platter	with	chopped	jelly	or	jelly	cutouts.	Chill
until	shortly	before	serving	time.

Crabe	ou	Homard	en	Chaud-froid,	Blanche	Neige
[Crab	or	Lobster	in	Chaud-froid]

Crab	or	lobster	in	chaud-froid	follows	the	general	method	of	chicken
breasts	 in	 chaud-froid,	 and	 makes	 a	 decorative	 cold	 first	 course	 or
summer	luncheon	dish.	Directions	for	steaming	live	 lobster	(which	also
apply	to	crab)	are	at	the	beginning	of	the	lobster	Thermidor	recipe;	boil
down	the	steaming-liquid	afterward,	and	use	it	in	place	of	the	fish	stock
called	for	in	the	following	recipe.

For	an	hors	d’oeuvre	serving	6	people

2	cups	cooked	lobster	or	crab	meat
3	Tb	butter
An	enameled	skillet
2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions



⅛	tsp	dry	mustard
Pinch	Cayenne	pepper
Salt	and	pepper
3	Tb	cognac
Dice	 or	 flake	 the	 shellfish	meat.	 Heat	 the	 butter	 to	 bubbling	 in	 the
skillet,	then	stir	in	the	shallots	or	onions	and	shellfish	meat,	and	cook
slowly	 for	 2	minutes.	 Stir	 in	 the	mustard	 and	 Cayenne	 pepper,	 and
season	to	taste.	Then	pour	in	the	cognac,	and	boil	rapidly	for	a	minute
or	 two,	 shaking	 the	 skillet,	 until	 the	 cognac	 has	 reduced	 almost
completely.	Chill.

1	Tb	(1	envelope)	gelatin	softened	in	3	Tb	dry	white	vermouth1¼
cups	whipping	cream
1¼	cups	white-wine	fish	stock	(shellfish	steaming-liquid,	or	the
white-wine	stock	or	the	emergency	stock	following	it)
1	sprig	fresh	tarragon	or	¼	tsp	dried	tarragon
Following	 the	 recipe	 for	breast	of	chicken	 in	chaud-froid,	 simmer	 the
cream	and	 stock	 together	with	 the	 tarragon	until	 reduced	 to	2	 cups.
Dissolve	 the	 gelatin	 completely	 in	 the	 hot	 sauce,	 strain,	 correct
seasoning,	and	cool	until	the	sauce	is	almost	set.

Optional:	1	cup	almost-set	jellied	stock	crab,	lobster,	or	scallop	shells,
or	porcelain	or	glass	shells	of	about	½	cup	capacity
Crab	or	lobster	claws,	scalloped	shellfish	meat,	truffle	slices,	or
blanched	tarragon	leaves	(enough	to	decorate	the	shells)
Fold	1⅓	cups	of	 the	almost-set	 sauce	 into	 the	 chilled	 shellfish	meat.
Arrange	the	mixture	in	the	shells,	and	coat	with	the	remaining	sauce.
Decorate	with	shellfish	claws,	shellfish	meat,	truffle	slices,	or	tarragon
leaves.	Then,	if	you	wish,	chill,	and	coat	with	a	layer	of	jellied	stock.
Chill	until	shortly	before	serving	time.

VOLAILLES	EN	ESCABÈCHE
[Cold	Fowl	in	Lemon	Jelly]



For:	chicken,	pigeon,	mature	pheasant	and	partridge,	and	for	game
hens.

The	Paris	restaurateur	from	whom	we	borrowed	this	recipe	makes
a	 specialty	 of	 escabèche	 in	 the	 late	 fall	 when	 partridge	 are	 no
longer	young,	and	have	turned	from	perdreau	to	perdrix.	The	birds
are	 slowly	 simmered	 in	wine,	 stock,	 olive	 oil,	 vinegar,	 aromatic
vegetables,	herbs,	garlic,	and	slices	of	 lemon.	They	are	cooled	 in
this	 liquid	 which,	 because	 of	 the	 pectin	 in	 the	 lemon	 and	 the
gelatin	 in	 the	 poultry	 bones,	 turns	 into	 a	 very	 light	 jelly.	 If	 you
want	 a	 stiffer	 jelly,	 you	 can	 add	 powdered	 gelatin	 to	 the	 liquid
after	the	birds	are	cooked.	Escabéche,	which	is	Spanish	in	origin,	is
usually	associated	with	fish,	but	it	is	also	extremely	successful	for
elderly	 poultry	 as	 the	 lemon	 and	 vinegar	 help	 to	 tenderize	 the
flesh.	Simmering	times	for	various	birds	are	as	follows:
Cut-up	frying	chicken,	1	hour
Cut-up	roasting	chicken,	1½	hours
Cut-up	stewing	chicken,	2½	hours	or	more
Whole	 Cornish	 game	 hen	 or	 pigeon	weighing	 about	 1¼	pounds,
1½	hours
Mature,	whole	partridge,	2	to	2½	hours
Mature,	cut-up	pheasant,	2	to	2½	hours

For	1	cut-up,	4-lb.	stewing	chicken	(or	1	cut-up,	4-lb.	pheasant,	or	2
whole	 game	 hens	 or	 partridges,	 simmered	 according	 to	 the	 preceding
timetable)
½	cup	each:	thinly	sliced	onions,	carrots	and	celery
6	cloves	peeled	garlic
A	2-quart	saucepan
½	cup	olive	oil
Place	the	vegetables	and	garlic	in	the	saucepan	and	cook	slowly	with
the	olive	oil	for	10	minutes	without	browning.

½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	⅓	cup	dry	white	vermouth
⅓	cup	wine	vinegar



½	lemon	cut	into	⅛-inch	slices
½	cup	thinly	sliced	green	or	red	bell	peppers
¼	tsp	thyme
¼	tsp	rosemary
½	bay	leaf
2	parsley	sprigs
5	peppercorns
2	cups	white	stock	or	canned	chicken	broth
Salt
Stir	in	all	the	ingredients	at	the	left	and	simmer	for	10	minutes.	Taste
for	seasoning,	and	salt	lightly	if	necessary.

A	slotted	spoonA	cut-up	stewing	chicken,	plus	the	neck,	heart,	and
peeled	gizzard
A	heavy,	covered,	fireproof	casserole	just	large	enough	to	hold	the
chicken
Place	 the	 neck,	 heart,	 and	 gizzard	 in	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 casserole.
Arrange	the	dark	meat	over	them.	With	a	slotted	spoon,	distribute	half
the	cooked	vegetables	and	lemon	slices	over	the	dark	meat.	Then	put
in	the	white	meat,	cover	with	the	rest	of	the	vegetables,	and	pour	on
the	cooking	broth.	Add	water	 if	necessary,	so	chicken	is	 just	covered
with	liquid.

Bring	 to	 the	 simmer	 on	 top	 of	 the	 stove,	 cover,	 and	 simmer	 very
slowly	either	on	the	stove	or	 in	a	preheated	300-degree	oven	for	2½
hours,	 or	until	 the	 chicken	 is	 very	 tender	but	 the	meat	does	not	 fall
from	 the	bones.	Uncover,	 and	allow	 the	chicken	 to	cool	 in	 the	 stock
for	half	an	hour.	Remove	any	loose	bones.

A	serving	dish	deep	enough	to	hold	chicken	and	sauce
Salt	and	pepper
Arrange	the	chicken	in	a	deep	serving	dish.	Dip	out	the	vegetables	and
lemon	slices	and	distribute	them	on	and	around	the	chicken.	Skim	the



fat	 and	 oil	 off	 the	 cooking	 stock	 and	 boil	 the	 stock	 down	 rapidly	 if
necessary	until	it	has	reduced	to	2	cups.	Correct	seasoning,	and	strain
over	 the	 chicken.	 Allow	 the	 dish	 to	 cool	 to	 room	 temperature,	 then
cover	 and	 refrigerate.	When	 chilled,	 the	 sauce	 will	 thicken	 into	 the
consistency	of	a	jellied	soup.

BOEUF	MODE	EN	GELÉE
[Cold	Braised	Beef	in	Aspic]

The	braised	beef	can	be	turned	into	a	splendid	cold	dish	with	very
little	 trouble.	 If	 you	 are	 going	 to	 make	 the	 traditional	 recipe,	 the
proceedings	must	be	started	at	least	the	day	before	you	are	to	serve;	the
beef	needs	24	hours	of	marination,	5	hours	 for	browning	and	braising,
and	4	to	6	hours	for	chilling	in	jelly.	Once	made,	it	may	be	covered	and
kept	 under	 refrigeration	 for	 2	 to	 3	 days.	 A	 light	 red	wine	 and	 French
bread	would	go	very	well	with	it.

For	10	to	12	people

Ingredients	for	the	marination	and	braising	of	a	5-lb.	piece	of
boneless	beef,	including	the	braised	carrots	and	onions
Marinate	 and	 braise	 the	 beef,	 and	 braise	 the	 carrots	 and	 onions
according	 to	 the	 recipe,	 but	 omit	 the	 final	 sauce-thickening	 step.
Remove	the	meat	to	a	carving	board.

2	Tb	(2	envelopes)	gelatin
3	cups	cold	brown	stock	or	canned	consommé
Salt	and	pepper
¼	cup	port	or	brandy
A	chilled	saucer
Degrease	the	braising	liquid	thoroughly,	then	boil	it	down	until	it	has
reduced	 to	 3½	 to	 4	 cups.	 Soften	 the	 gelatin	 in	 the	 cold	 stock	 or
consommé,	pour	it	into	the	braising	liquid	and	stir	over	low	heat	until
the	gelatin	has	dissolved	completely.	Correct	seasoning	carefully.	Pour
in	the	port	or	brandy	and	strain.	The	 liquid	has	now	become	a	 jelly;



test	a	bit	of	it	in	a	chilled	saucer	as	described.

For	a	simple	arrangement	in	a	mold

A	rectangular	mold,	terrine,	or	baking	dish	large	enough	to	hold	the
sliced	meat	and	vegetables
Slice	 the	 beef	 into	 serving	 pieces	 and	 arrange	 in	 the	 mold,
interspersing	 the	 slices	with	 the	 braised	 carrots	 and	 onions.	 Pour	 in
the	jelly,	which	need	not	be	cold.	Chill	for	4	to	6	hours,	or	until	well
set.

A	chilled	serving	platter	Water	cress,	parsley,	or	leaves	of	Boston
lettuce
When	ready	 to	 serve,	dip	 the	mold	 in	hot	water	 for	 several	 seconds.
Run	 a	 knife	 around	 the	 edge	 of	 the	 aspic.	 Turn	 platter	 over	 mold,
reverse,	 and	 give	 a	 sharp	 jerk	 to	 unmold	 aspic	 on	 platter.	 Decorate
platter	with	water	cress,	parsley,	or	lettuce.
For	a	more	elaborate	arrangement	on	a	platter

Cut	the	beef	into	serving	pieces	and	chill.	Chill	the	braised	onions	and
carrots.

An	oval	serving	platter
Pour	⅛	 inch	 of	 the	 jelly	 into	 the	 serving	 platter	 and	 chill	 until	 set.
Then	arrange	the	chilled	meat	and	vegetables	on	the	layer	of	jelly.

A	small	saucepan	set	in	a	bowl	of	cracked	ice
Pour	2	cups	of	 jelly	into	the	saucepan	and	stir	over	cracked	ice	until
the	jelly	is	syrupy,	and	on	the	point	of	setting.	Spoon	a	layer	over	the
meat	 and	vegetables.	Chill	 for	10	minutes.	Repeat	with	2	or	3	more
layers	 of	 almost-set	 jelly,	 chilling	 the	 meat	 between	 each.	 Chill	 the
remaining	 jelly,	 chop	 into	⅛-inch	 pieces,	 and	 arrange	 it	 around	 the
platter.



MOLDED	MOUSSES

Mousses	Froides—Mousselines

A	 beautifully	 flavored	 and	 molded	 creation	 glittering	 in	 aspic	 is
always	 impressive	 as	 a	 first	 course,	 as	 a	 luncheon	 dish,	 or	 on	 a	 cold
buffet	 table.	 All	 of	 the	 following	 are	 purées	 of	 chicken	 liver,	 poultry,
ham,	or	fish	mixed	with	wine	and	seasonings	and,	in	all	but	one	recipe,
jellied	stock.	Softened	butter	or	lightly	whipped	cream	is	combined	with
them	 to	 give	 body	 and	 what	 the	 French	 call	 moelleux	 or	 a	 velvety
texture.	An	electric	blender	is	a	great	time-saver.	If	you	do	not	have	one,
pass	meat	twice	through	the	finest	blade	of	 the	meat	grinder	(fish	may
be	puréed	in	a	food	mill)	then	beat	in	the	liquids.

The	first	recipe	in	this	section	may	be	packed	into	a	decorative	bowl
and	 served	 just	 as	 it	 is;	 the	 rest	 must	 be	 molded.	 If	 they	 are	 molded
plain,	without	a	jelly	lining	in	the	mold,	they	should	be	glazed	with	jelly
after	they	are	unmolded,	or	with	a	type	of	chaud-froid	sauce	such	as	the
one	 described	 for	 the	 fish	 mousse.	 They	 may	 then	 be	 decorated	 with
truffles,	 tarragon	 leaves,	 jelly	 cutouts,	 or,	 if	 it	 is	 a	 fish	 mousse,	 with
designs	of	shellfish	meat.

HOW	TO	“CHEMISER	UN	MOULE”	OR	LINE	A	MOLD	WITH	JELLY

A	mold	lined	with	jelly	is	one	which	contains	a	fairly	stiff	coating	of
jellied	stock	about	⅛	inch	thick	all	over	its	inside	surface.	The	mousse
is	 packed	 into	 the	 lined	 mold,	 and	 chilled.	 When	 unmolded,	 the
mousse	 is	 encased	 in	a	 shell	 of	 jelly.	The	 jelly	 should	be	made	 from
clarified	stock	so	it	will	be	clear,	glistening,	and	transparent.	Recipes
for	stock,	clarification,	homemade	jellied	stock,	and	jellies	made	from
canned	consommé.
You	 can	 roll	 a	mold	 over	 cracked	 ice	with	 spoonfuls	 of	 jellied	 stock
until	an	adequate	layer	of	 jelly	has	been	built	up	inside	the	mold,	or
you	can	use	the	following	method	which	we	find	easier.

4	cups	clarified	jelly	(jellied	stock,	or	consommé	with	gelatin)
A	bowl	of	cracked	ice
The	 jelly	 should	 be	 fairly	 stiff;	 be	 sure	 to	 test	 it	 as	 directed	 in	 the



recipe	for	jellies	before	you	line	your	mold.	Chill	the	jelly	over	cracked
ice	until	syrupy	and	almost	set.

A	4-cup	mold,	preferably	of	metal	as	it	is	easier	to	un-mold
Then	 pour	 the	 almost-set	 jelly	 into	 the	mold	 and	 place	 the	mold	 in
cracked	ice.	Watch	it	carefully,	and	as	soon	as	a	⅛-inch	layer	of	jelly
has	set	around	the	edges	of	the	mold,	pour	out	the	unset	jelly.	If	there
is	too	thick	a	layer	of	jelly	in	the	bottom	of	the	mold,	scoop	it	out	with
a	spoon	dipped	in	hot	water.
Chill	the	mold	for	about	20	minutes	until	the	jelly	lining	is	stiff.	Then
pack	the	cold	mousse	into	the	mold	as	directed	in	whatever	recipe	you
are	following.

DECORATIONS

If	you	wish	to	decorate	the	bottom	of	a	mold,	begin	by	pouring	into
it	 a	 1/ -inch	 layer	 of	 jelly	 and	 chill	 until	 firm.	 Choose	 any	 of	 the

16

decorative	suggestions,	or	sliced	poultry	meat,	ham,	tongue,	shrimp,	or
lobster;	cut	 into	shapes	and	chill.	Dip	into	almost-set	 jelly,	and	arrange
on	 the	 jelly	 in	 the	bottom	of	 the	mold.	Chill	until	 set,	 then	proceed	 to
line	the	mold	with	jelly	as	described	in	the	preceding	directions.

HOW	TO	UNMOLD	AN	ASPIC

Dip	the	mold	in	very	hot	water	for	3	to	4	seconds	(a	nonmetal	mold
will	require	a	few	seconds	longer).	Quickly	wipe	it	dry.	Invert	a	chilled
serving	platter	over	it,	and	turn	upside	down.	Give	it	a	sharp	downward
jerk	to	dislodge	it	from	the	mold	to	the	platter.
Another	 method	 is	 to	 invert	 the	 mold	 on	 a	 chilled	 platter,	 and

surround	the	mold	with	a	towel	wrung	out	in	very	hot	water.	As	soon	as
the	aspic	drops,	remove	the	mold.

MOUSSE	DE	FOIES	DE	VOLAILLE
[Chicken	Liver	Mousse]

The	following	mousse	may	be	packed	into	a	decorative	jar	and	used



as	 a	 spread	 for	 cocktail	 appetizers,	 or	 molded	 in	 aspic	 for	 an	 hors
d’oeuvre.	 It	 is	 easy	 to	make	 in	 an	 electric	 blender;	 if	 you	do	not	 have
one,	purée	the	liver	in	a	meat	grinder	or	food	mill.
For	about	2	cups

1	lb.	or	about	2	cups	chicken	livers
Look	 the	 livers	over	 and	 remove	any	greenish	or	blackish	 spots.	Cut
the	livers	into	½-inch	pieces.

2	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
2	Tb	butter
A	skillet
An	electric	blender
Sauté	 with	 the	 shallots	 or	 green	 onions	 in	 hot	 butter	 for	 2	 to	 3
minutes,	until	the	livers	are	just	stiffened,	but	still	rosy	inside.	Scrape
into	the	blender	jar.

⅓	cup	Madeira	or	cognac
Pour	the	wine	or	cognac	 into	the	sauté	pan	and	boil	 it	down	rapidly
until	it	has	reduced	to	3	tablespoons.	Scrape	it	into	the	blender	jar.

¼	cup	whipping	cream
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	allspice
⅛	tsp	pepper
Pinch	of	thyme
Add	the	cream	and	seasonings	to	the	blender	jar.	Cover	and	blend	at
top	speed	for	several	seconds	until	the	liver	is	a	smooth	paste.

½	cup	(4	ounces)	melted	butter
Then	add	the	melted	butter	and	blend	several	seconds	more.



A	fairly	fine-meshed	sieve
A	wooden	spoon
Salt	and	pepper
Force	the	mixture	through	the	sieve	and	taste	carefully	for	seasoning.

A	decorative	bowl	or	jar	Waxed	paper
Pack	into	the	bowl	or	jar,	cover	with	waxed	paper,	and	chill	for	2	to	3
hours.	Or	chill	until	almost	set,	then	pack	into	a	mold	lined	with	jelly
as	described;	chill	for	several	hours	before	unmolding.

		MOUSSELINE	DE	VOLAILLE
[Mousse	of	Chicken,	Turkey,	Duck,	or	Game]

This	 is	 an	 excellent	 way	 to	 use	 up	 cold	 fowl,	 and	 you	 may	 mix
several	kinds	together	if	you	wish.	Foie	gras,	liver	pâté,	or	chicken	livers,
a	good	stock,	wine,	and	careful	seasoning	give	character	to	the	blandness
of	the	meat.	If	you	do	not	have	an	electric	blender,	purée	the	ingredients
with	a	meat	grinder.
For	about	6	cups	serving	8	to	10	people

3	Tb	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
1	Tb	butter
A	4-cup	saucepan
2	cups	well	flavored	poultry	stock	or	white	stock;
OR,	canned	chicken	broth	simmered	for	20	minutes	with	¼	cup	of
thinly	sliced	carrots,	celery,	and	onions,	and	an	herb	bouquet,	then
strained

2	Tb	(2	envelopes)	gelatin	softened	in	¼	cup	dry	white	wine	or
vermouth

An	electric	blender
Cook	the	shallots	or	onions	slowly	with	the	butter	in	the	saucepan	for
2	minutes	without	browning.	Add	 the	 stock	and	 the	gelatin	mixture,



and	simmer	for	1	minute.	Pour	into	the	blender	jar.

2	tightly	packed	cups	chopped,	cooked	chicken,	turkey,	duck,	or
game-bird	meat

⅓	cup	foie	gras	(goose	liver),	or	liver	paste;	OR	½	cup	chicken	livers
lightly	sautéed	in	butter

A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Add	the	poultry	meat	and	foie	gras,	liver	paste,	or	sautéed	livers	to	the
blender.	Cover	and	blend	at	 top	 speed	 for	a	minute	or	 two	until	 the
ingredients	are	puréed.	Pour	into	the	bowl.

2	to	3	Tb	cognac	or	Madeira	Salt	and	pepper	Pinch	of	nutmeg
Beat	 in	 the	 cognac	 or	 wine	 to	 taste,	 and	 overseason	 slightly	 as	 the
cream,	which	comes	later,	will	mask	the	flavor	a	bit.	Cover	and	chill
until	almost	set,	stirring	occasionally.

¾	cup	chilled	whipping	cream
A	chilled	bowl
A	chilled	wire	whip
Optional:	1	or	2	minced	truffles
A	6-cup	mold,	lightly	oiled	OR	an	8-cup	mold	lined	with	jelly
Following	 directions	 beat	 the	 cream	 until	 it	 has	 doubled	 in	 volume
and	holds	its	shape	softly.	Fold	the	cream	and	optional	truffles	into	the
cold	 chicken	mixture.	 Pack	 into	 the	mold.	 Cover	 with	 waxed	 paper
and	chill	for	several	hours	before	unmolding.

VARIATIONS
Mousse	de	Jambon
[Ham	Mousse]

Use	 the	 same	 recipe	 and	 ingredients	 as	 for	 the	 preceding	 chicken
mousse,	 but	 substitute	 2⅓	 cups	 of	 lean,	 chopped,	 boiled	 ham	 for	 the
chicken	 and	 foie	 gras;	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 tomato	 paste	may	 be	 added	 for



color.	Either	1	or	2	diced	truffles	or	½	cup	minced	mushrooms	sautéed
in	butter	may	be	folded	into	the	mousse	with	the	cream.
Mousse	de	Saumon
[Salmon	Mousse]

Use	 the	 same	 recipe	 and	 ingredients	 as	 for	 the	 master	 recipe,
chicken	mousse,	but	with	2⅓	cups	of	cooked	or	canned	salmon	instead
of	chicken	and	foie	gras,	and	use	a	white-wine	fish	stock,	instead	of	white
stock.

		MOUSSELINE	DE	POISSON,	BLANCHE	NEIGE
[Fish	Mousse—with	shellfish	and	chaud-froid	sauce]

This	 is	 a	 handsome	 cold	 dish	 for	 a	 first	 course	 or	 luncheon,	 and
looks	 well	 on	 a	 cold	 buffet	 table.	 It	 is	 important,	 however,	 that	 you
season	the	mixture	with	care,	and	use	an	excellent	stock	for	your	 jelly,
or	 the	 flavor	 of	 the	mousse	will	 not	 be	 interesting.	 Instead	of	molding
the	mousse,	 you	may	heap	 it	 into	 individual	 serving	 shells,	 then	 sauce
and	decorate	them	as	suggested	in	the	recipe.
If	 you	do	not	have	 an	 electric	 blender,	 purée	 the	 cooked	 fish	 in	 a

food	mill.
For	about	6	cups	serving	8	to	10	people

3¼	cups	very	good	white-wine	fish	stock	(note	that	1¼	cups	are	to	be
reserved	for	sauce	at	end	of	recipe)

¾	cup	skinless	and	boneless	sole	or	flounder	filets
A	small	herb	bouquet:	2	parsley	sprigs,	⅓	bay	leaf,	and	⅛	tsp	thyme
tied	in	cheesecloth

A	2½-quart	enameled	saucepan
Place	2	 cups	of	 the	 fish	 stock	with	 the	 fish	and	herb	bouquet	 in	 the
saucepan.	 Bring	 slowly	 almost	 to	 the	 simmer,	 cover,	 and	 poach	 the
fish	at	just	below	the	simmer	for	about	8	minutes,	or	until	just	tender
when	pierced	with	a	fork.



An	electric	blender
A	slotted	spoon
Remove	the	fish	to	the	blender	jar	with	a	slotted	spoon.	Discard	herb
bouquet.

½	lb.	diced	fresh	mushrooms
Add	the	mushrooms	to	the	fish	stock	in	the	saucepan.	Boil	slowly	for	8
minutes.	Strain,	set	mushrooms	aside,	and	return	liquid	to	saucepan.

2	Tb	(2	envelopes)	gelatin	softened	in	4	Tb	dry	white	vermouth
Salt	and	white	pepper
A	2½-quart	mixing	bowl
Stir	the	gelatin	mixture	into	the	liquid	in	the	saucepan	and	simmer	a
moment	 to	dissolve	 the	gelatin	completely.	Pour	 into	 the	blender	 jar
with	the	fish.	Cover	and	blend	at	top	speed	for	a	minute	or	two	until
puréed.	Taste	very	carefully	for	seasoning.	Pour	into	a	bowl,	stir	in	the
mushrooms,	and	chill.	Stir	occasionally	until	cold	and	almost	set.

¾	cup	chilled	whipping	cream,	lightly	beaten
A	6-cup,	lightly	oiled	ring	mold
A	chilled	serving	platter
Fold	the	whipped	cream	into	the	cold	fish	mixture,	and	turn	into	the
oiled	mold.	Cover	with	waxed	paper	and	chill	for	several	hours	to	set.
When	ready	to	decorate,	unmold	the	mousse	on	the	platter	and	cover
with	the	following	sauce.
Sauce	chaud-froid,	blanche	neige	(2	cups)

The	remaining	fish	stock	from	first	paragraph	(1¼	cups)
1¼	cups	whipping	cream
¼	tsp	tarragon
1	Tb	(1	envelope)	gelatin	softened	in	3	Tb	dry	white	vermouth
Salt	and	white	pepper



A	bowl	of	cracked	ice
Simmer	the	stock,	cream,	and	tarragon	in	a	saucepan	until	reduced	to
2	cups.	Stir	in	the	gelatin	mixture	and	simmer	a	moment	to	dissolve	it
completely.	Correct	 seasoning,	 and	 strain.	 Stir	 over	 cracked	 ice	until
the	sauce	thickens	lightly	and	is	about	to	set.

1½	cups	cooked	shrimp,	lobster,	or	crab	meat	warmed	in	¼	cup	dry
white	wine	or	vermouth,	seasoned	with	salt	and	pepper,	then
chilled

Thin	slices	of	truffle	or	any	of	the	decorative	suggestions
Fold	½	 cup	 of	 the	 sauce	 into	 the	 chilled	 shellfish,	 and	 place	 in	 the
center	 of	 the	 mousse.	 Coat	 the	 mousse	 and	 shellfish	 with	 several
spoonfuls	 of	 sauce.	 Chill	 for	 10	 minutes,	 and	 repeat	 with	 layers	 of
almost-set	 sauce.	 Immediately	 after	 the	 last	 application	 of	 sauce,
decorate	 the	mousse	with	 truffles	or	whatever	else	you	have	chosen.
Chill	until	serving	time.

VARIATION

Mousseline	de	Crustacés,	Blanche	Neige
[Shellfish	Mousse]

Substitute	 cooked	 shellfish	 meat	 for	 the	 sole	 or	 flounder	 in	 the
preceding	recipe,	but	omit	the	simmering	of	fish	in	stock,	paragraph	one.

PÂTÉS	AND	TERRINES

Pâtés	et	Terrines

The	 memory	 of	 a	 good	 French	 pâté	 can	 haunt	 you	 for	 years.
Fortunately	they	are	easy	to	make,	and	you	can	even	develop	your	own
special	pâté	maison.	Do	not	expect	a	top-notch	mixture	to	be	inexpensive,
however,	 for	 it	will	contain	ground	pork,	pork	fat,	and	usually	veal,	as
well	as	cognac,	port,	or	Madeira,	spices,	strips	or	cubes	of	other	meats,



game,	 or	 liver,	 and	 often	 truffles.	 If	 the	mixture	 is	 cooked	 and	 served
cold	in	its	baking	dish	it	is	called	either	a	terrine	or	a	pâté.	If	it	is	molded
in	a	pastry	crust,	it	is	a	pâté	en	croûte.	A	boned	chicken,	turkey,	or	duck
filled	with	the	same	type	of	mixture	is	a	galantine.	Pâtés	and	terrines	will
keep	 for	 about	 10	 days	 under	 refrigeration;	 they	 are	 fine	 to	 have	 on
hand	for	cold	 impromptu	meals,	 since	all	you	need	 to	serve	with	 them
are	a	salad	and	French	bread.
Wines	to	serve	with	pâtés	include	the	dry	whites	such	as	Chablis	or

Mâcon,	rosés,	or	one	of	the	light	regional	red	wines	such	as	Beaujolais	or
Chinon,	or	a	good	domestic	wine	of	the	same	general	types.

A	NOTE	ON	PORK	FAT

Fresh	pork	fat	is	an	essential	ingredient	for	the	type	of	meat	mixture
which	goes	 into	a	pâté.	Blended	with	 the	meats,	 it	prevents	 them	from
being	dry	and	gives	them	a	lighter	texture.	Cut	into	thin	sheets,	bardes	de
lard,	it	is	used	to	line	the	inside	of	the	baking	dish.	The	best	type	is	fat
back—lard	gras.	This	comes	from	the	back	of	the	pig	next	to	the	skin.	It
is	firm	and	does	not	disintegrate	as	easily	as	fat	from	other	parts	of	the
animal.	 Fresh	 fat	 back	 is	 unfortunately	 difficult	 to	 find	 in	 America
outside	 of	 areas	 catering	 to	 special	 clienteles.	 Alternatives	 are	 fat	 salt
pork	simmered	for	10	minutes	in	water	to	freshen	it	and	remove	the	salt,
or	fat	trimmed	from	fresh	ham,	or	from	around	a	fresh	pork	loin.	Thick
strips	 of	 fat	 bacon,	 simmered	 for	 10	 minutes	 in	 water	 to	 remove	 the
smoky	taste,	may	be	used	to	line	a	baking	dish.

BAKING	DISHES

Pâtés	may	 be	 cooked	 in	 almost	 any	 kind	 of	 a	 baking	 dish	 from	 a
special	 rectangular	 or	 oval	 mold	 called	 a	 terrine,	 to	 a	 soufflé	 dish,
casserole,	or	bread	pan.	The	best	materials	are	glazed	pottery,	porcelain,
enameled	 iron,	 or	 pyrex.	 Cover	 the	meat	mixture	with	 aluminum	 foil,
and	the	dish	with	a	heavy	lid;	old	recipes	call	for	a	cover	held	in	place
with	a	thick	band	of	flour	and	water	paste.

STORAGE

Pâtés,	 terrines,	 and	 galantines	 may	 be	 frozen,	 but	 they	 will	 never
again	have	their	original	texture.	Once	you	have	compared	the	two,	you
will	 always	 recognize	 the	 somewhat	 damp	quality	 of	 thawed	pâté.	 If	 a



pâté	 is	 to	be	kept	 for	10	days	or	more	under	refrigeration,	 it	should	be
unmolded	 after	 it	 has	 been	 chilled	 and	 the	 meat	 jelly	 wiped	 off	 its
surface.	 It	 then	 may	 be	 wrapped	 airtight	 in	 waxed	 paper	 and	 foil,	 or
returned	to	its	terrine	and	covered	with	melted	pork	fat.

ASPIC

(Recipes	 for	 aspics;	 instructions	 for	 lining	 and	 decorating	 molds
start	on	this	page.)	To	serve	a	pâté	in	aspic	unmold	the	pâté	after	it	has
been	chilled,	and	scrape	off	the	layer	of	pork	fat	surrounding	it.	Line	the
bottom	of	a	slightly	larger	mold	with	a	⅛-inch	layer	of	jellied	stock	and
chill	 until	 set.	 Place	 the	 pâté	 in	 the	 mold,	 and	 pour	 almost-set	 jellied
stock	around	and	over	it.	Chill.	Unmold	on	a	chilled	platter.
Another	 system	 is	 to	 slice	 the	 chilled	 pâté,	 arrange	 it	 on	 a	 platter

lined	with	 jellied	 stock,	 and	 then	 glaze	 the	 slices	with	 jelly	 as	 for	 the
boeuf	mode	en	gelée.

FARCE	POUR	PÂTÉS,	TERRINES,	ET	GALANTINES
[Pork	and	Veal	Stuffing]

This	 good	 general-purpose	 meat	 mixture	 we	 shall	 refer	 to	 as	 a
stuffing,	for	that	is	a	translation	of	the	French	generic	term	farce.	It	can
be	used	as	the	basis	for	any	type	of	pâté,	terrine,	or	galantine	you	wish.
Mixed	 with	 chestnuts,	 it	 can	 also	 serve	 as	 a	 filling	 for	 roast	 goose	 or
turkey.	The	pork	gives	 flavor,	 the	veal	gives	 lightness.	The	proportions
may	be	changed	according	to	your	own	ideas,	and	sautéed	liver,	ground
poultry,	 or	 game	may	 be	 beaten	 into	 it.	 Minced	 truffles	 are	 always	 a
good	addition,	and	you	can	include	such	things	as	pistachios,	or	strips	or
cubes	of	pork	fat,	tongue,	or	ham	to	give	a	pattern	to	the	meat	when	it	is
sliced.
For	about	4	cups

½	cup	very	finely	minced	onions
2	Tb	butter
A	large	mixing	bowl
Cook	 the	onions	 slowly	with	 the	butter	 in	a	 small	 skillet	 for	8	 to	10
minutes	until	they	are	tender	and	translucent	but	not	browned.	Scrape



them	into	the	mixing	bowl.

½	cup	port,	Madeira,	or	cognac
Pour	the	wine	into	the	skillet	and	boil	it	down	until	reduced	by	half.
Scrape	it	into	the	mixing	bowl.

¾	lb.	(about	1½	cups)	each,	lean	pork	and	lean	veal	and	½	lb.	(1	cup)
fresh	pork	fat,	all	finely	ground	together
2	lightly	beaten	eggs
1½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper
Big	pinch	of	allspice
½	tsp	thyme
Optional:	1	clove	mashed	garlic
A	wooden	spoon
Add	all	the	ingredients	to	the	left,	and	beat	vigorously	with	a	wooden
spoon	 until	 the	 mixture	 has	 lightened	 in	 texture	 and	 is	 thoroughly
blended.	 Sauté	 a	 small	 spoonful	 and	 taste.	 Then	 beat	 in	 whatever
additions	you	feel	are	necessary.	It	should	be	perfectly	flavored.	If	not
to	be	used	immediately,	cover	and	refrigerate.

		TERRINE	DE	PORC,	VEAU,	ET	JAMBON
[Pork	and	Veal	Pâté	with	Ham]

A	pork	and	veal	pâté	with	decorative	strips	of	veal	and	ham	buried
in	 its	 slices	 is	 the	most	 classic	 of	 all	 pâté	mixtures;	 the	 three	 elements
blend	themselves	in	a	very	savory	manner.

For	about	7	cups
Marinating	the	veal	strips

½	lb.	lean	veal	from	the	round	or	filet	cut	into	strips	¼	inch	thick
Optional:	2	or	3	canned	truffles	cut	into	¼-inch	dice,	and	juice	from
can



A	bowl
3	Tb	cognac
Big	pinch	of	salt	and	pepper
Pinch	of	thyme
Pinch	of	allspice
1	Tb	finely	minced	shallots	or	green	onions
Marinate	the	veal	and	optional	truffles	and	their	juice	in	a	bowl	with
the	 cognac	 and	 seasonings	 while	 preparing	 the	 other	 ingredients.
Before	using,	drain	the	strips,	and	reserve	the	marinade.
Molding	the	pâté

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

An	8-cup	rectangular	or	oval	terrine,	baking	dish,	casserole,	or	loaf
pan
Sheets	of	fresh	pork	fat	back	⅛	inch	thick,	or	blanched	fat	salt	pork,
or	blanched	fat	bacon,	this	page
4	cups	of	the	preceding	pork	and	veal	stuffing
½	lb.	lean	boiled	ham	cut	into	strips	¼	inch	thick
1	bay	leaf
A	sheet	of	pork	fat	or	strips	of	blanched	bacon	to	cover	the	pâté
Line	 the	 bottom	 and	 sides	 of	 the	 terrine	with	 the	 pork	 fat	 or	 bacon.
Beat	marinade	into	stuffing;	divide	stuffing	into	three	parts.	Dip	your
hands	in	cold	water,	and	arrange	the	first	 third	of	the	stuffing	in	the
bottom	 of	 the	 terrine.	 Cover	 with	 half	 the	 strips	 of	 marinated	 veal
alternating	with	half	the	strips	of	ham.	If	using	diced	truffles,	place	a
row	down	the	center.	Cover	with	the	second	third	of	the	stuffing,	and
a	 final	 layer	of	veal	and	ham	strips,	and	optional	 truffles.	Spread	on
the	last	of	the	meat	stuffing.	Lay	the	bay	leaf	on	top,	and	cover	with	a
sheet	of	pork	fat	or	bacon	strips.

Baking	the	pâté



Aluminum	foil
A	heavy	lid	for	the	terrine
A	pan	of	boiling	water
Enclose	the	top	of	the	terrine	with	aluminum	foil,	cover,	and	set	in	the
pan	 of	 boiling	water.	 The	water	 should	 come	 about	 halfway	 up	 the
outside	of	the	terrine;	add	boiling	water	during	cooking,	as	necessary.
Set	 in	 lower	 third	 of	 preheated	 oven	 and	 bake	 for	 about	 1½	 hours
depending	 on	 the	 shape	 of	 the	 terrine;	 a	 long	 loaf	 shape	 will	 cook
faster	than	a	round	or	oval	shape.	The	pâté	is	done	when	it	has	shrunk
slightly	from	the	sides	of	the	terrine,	and	the	surrounding	fat	and	juices
are	clear	yellow	with	no	traces	of	rosy	color.

Cooling	and	chilling
Take	the	terrine	from	the	water	and	set	it	on	a	plate.	Remove	lid,	and
on	top	of	 the	 foil	covering	 the	pâté	put	a	piece	of	wood,	a	pan,	or	a
casserole	which	will	just	fit	into	the	terrine.	On	or	in	it,	place	a	3-to	4-
lb.	weight	or	parts	of	a	meat	grinder;	this	will	pack	the	pâté	 into	the
terrine	so	there	will	be	no	air	spaces	in	the	meat.	Allow	the	pâté	to	cool
at	room	temperature	for	several	hours	or	overnight.	Then	chill	it,	still
weighted	down.

Serving
Serve	the	pâté	from	its	terrine,	slicing	down	through	it	with	a	knife.	Or
unmold	it	and	serve	on	a	platter,	or	decorate	in	aspic	as	suggested.

VARIATIONS
Pâté	de	Veau	et	Porc	avec	Gibier
[Game	Pâté]
For	rabbit,	hare,	partridge,	pheasant,	duck,	and	other	game

1	lb.	(about	2	cups)	boneless,	skinless,	raw	game
Ingredients	for	the	preceding	pork	and	veal	pâté,	minus	the	veal
strips	and	ham	strips



Following	the	preceding	recipe,	cut	the	game	meat	into	strips	¼	inch
wide,	and	marinate	them	in	cognac	and	seasonings.	Grind	the	smaller
pieces	and	beat	them	into	the	stuffing	mixture;	then	proceed	with	the
recipe.

Pâté	de	Veau	et	Porc	avec	Foie
[Pork	and	Veal	Pâté	with	Liver]

Ingredients	for	the	pork	and	veal	pâté	in	the	preceding	master	recipe,
minus	the	veal	strips	and	ham	strips
1	lb.	(about	2	cups)	liver:	chicken,	calf,	lamb,	pork,	or	beef
Follow	 the	master	 recipe,	 but	 after	 cooking	 the	 onions	 for	 the	meat
stuffing,	cut	the	liver	into	¼-inch	pieces	and	sauté	with	the	onions	for
2	to	3	minutes	until	the	liver	is	slightly	stiffened	but	still	rosy	inside.
Scrape	into	the	mixing	bowl,	and	proceed	with	the	recipe.	(The	cognac
and	other	ingredients	listed	in	the	recipe	as	a	marinade	may	be	beaten
into	 your	 meat	 stuffing,	 if	 you	 wish.)	

A	NOTE	ON	GALANTINES

The	 boned	 and	 stuffed	 duck	 in	 the	 following	 recipe	 would	 be	 a
galantine	de	canard	rather	than	a	canard	en	croûte	if	it	were	stuffed	then
wrapped	in	a	damp	towel,	poached	in	meat	stock,	cooled	with	a	weight
over	 it,	chilled,	and	glazed	with	jellied	stock.	The	same	system	may	be
used	also	for	large	roasting	chickens,	capons,	and	turkeys.

PÂTÉ	EN	CROÛTE

[Pâté	Baked	in	a	Crust]



Canard	en	Croûte

The	recipe	we	have	chosen	to	illustrate	pâté	en	croûte	is	boned	duck
stuffed,	 reformed,	 surrounded	 with	 decorated	 pastry,	 and	 baked.	 The
same	 method	 may	 be	 used	 for	 any	 of	 the	 pâté	 mixtures	 previously
described,	and	 they	do	not	have	 to	be	enclosed	 in	duck	skin.	You	may
simply	heap	the	mixture	into	a	loaf	on	an	oval	of	pastry	and	enclose	it
with	a	second	oval.	Or	you	may	line	a	spring	mold	with	pastry,	pack	the
mixture	into	it,	and	cover	with	more	pastry.	All	pâtés	en	croûte,	in	other
words,	follow	the	same	general	outline	for	forming	and	baking.

HOW	TO	BONE	A	DUCK,	TURKEY,	OR	CHICKEN

You	may	think	that	boning	a	fowl	is	an	impossible	feat	if	you	have
never	seen	it	done	or	thought	of	attempting	it.	Although	the	procedure
may	 take	 45	 minutes	 the	 first	 time	 because	 of	 fright,	 it	 can	 be
accomplished	in	not	much	more	than	20	on	your	second	or	third	try.	The
object	 is	 to	 remove	 the	 flesh	 with	 the	 skin	 from	 the	 carcass	 bones
without	piercing	the	skin	except	at	the	back	where	the	bird	is	slit	open,
and	at	the	natural	openings	at	the	vent	and	neck.	The	skin	is	to	serve	as
a	container	for	the	pâté.	Laid	flat	on	a	board,	the	pâté	mixture	is	heaped
onto	it,	then	the	skin	is	folded	over	the	pâté	mixture	and	sewed	in	place.
When	baked	in	a	terrine	and	unmolded,	or	baked	in	a	crust,	the	sutures
are	on	the	bottom,	and	the	pâté	appears	to	be	enclosed	in	an	unbroken,
browned	casing—which	is	the	skin.	It	is	always	an	impressive	sight.	The
important	thing	to	remember	is	that	the	cutting	edge	of	your	knife	must
always	face	the	bone,	never	the	flesh,	thus	you	cannot	pierce	the	skin.



To	begin	with,	 cut	a	deep	 slit	down	 the	back	of	 the	bird	 from	the
neck	 to	 the	 tail,	 to	expose	 the	backbone.	With	a	 small,	 sharp	knife,	 its
edge	always	cutting	against	the	bone,	scrape	and	cut	the	flesh	from	the
carcass	bones	down	one	side	of	the	bird,	pulling	the	flesh	away	from	the
carcass	with	your	 fingers	as	you	cut.	When	you	come	to	the	ball	 joints
connecting	 the	wings	and	 the	 second	 joints	 to	 the	 carcass,	 sever	 them,
and	 continue	 down	 the	 carcass	 until	 you	 reach	 just	 the	 ridge	 of	 the
breast	where	skin	and	bone	meet.	Then	stop.	You	must	be	careful	here,
as	the	skin	is	thin	and	easily	slit.	Repeat	the	same	operation	on	the	other
side	of	the	bird.	By	the	time	you	have	completed	half	of	this,	the	carcass
frame,	 dangling	 legs,	 wings,	 and	 skin	 will	 appear	 to	 be	 an
unrecognizable	mass	of	confusion	and	you	will	wonder	how	in	the	world
any	 sense	 can	 be	made	 of	 it	 all.	 But	 just	 continue	 cutting	 against	 the
bone,	and	not	slitting	any	skin,	and	all	will	come	out	as	it	should.	When
you	 finally	 arrive	 at	 the	 ridge	 of	 the	 breastbone	 on	 this	 opposite	 side,
stop	again.	Then	 lift	 the	carcass	 frame	and	cut	very	closely	against	 the
ridge	of	 the	breastbone	to	 free	the	carcass,	but	not	 to	slit	 the	thin	skin
covering	the	breastbone.	Chop	off	the	wings	at	the	elbows,	to	leave	just
the	upper	wing	bones	attached.

Then	arrange	this	mass	of	skin	and	flesh	on	a	board,	flesh	side	up.
You	will	now	see,	protruding	from	the	flesh,	the	pair	of	ball	joints	of	the
wings	and	of	the	two	second	joints.	Scrape	the	meat	from	the	bones	of
the	wings	and	pull	out	the	bones.	Repeat	for	the	second	joints,	severing
them	from	the	ball	joints	of	the	drumsticks;	the	drumstick	bones	may	be
left	in	place	if	you	wish.	Discard	any	bits	of	fat	adhering	to	the	flesh,	and
the	bird	is	ready	to	become	a	pâté	or	a	galantine.

PÂTÉ	DE	CANARD	EN	CROÛTE
[Boned	Stuffed	Duck	Baked	in	a	Pastry	Crust]
For	12	people

Stuffing	the	duck

A	5-lb.	ready-to-cook	roaster	duckling
½	tsp	salt
⅛	tsp	pepper



Pinch	of	allspice
2	Tb	cognac
2	Tb	port
Optional:	2	or	3	diced	canned	truffles	and	their	juice
Bone	the	duck	as	described	 in	 the	preceding	paragraphs,	and	 lay	 the
boned	bird	skin-side	down	on	a	board.	Slice	off	the	thickest	layers	of
breast	and	thigh	meat,	and	cut	into	cubes	about	⅜	inch	across.	Place
the	 cubes	 back	 on	 the	 duck,	 season,	 and	 sprinkle	 with	 cognac	 and
port.	Add	the	optional	truffles	and	their	juice.	Roll	up	the	duck,	place
it	in	a	bowl,	and	refrigerate.

4	cups	pork	and	veal	stuffing
Prepare	 the	 meat	 stuffing	 and	 mix	 into	 it	 the	 cubed	 duck	 meat,
optional	truffles,	and	marinade.

A	trussing	needle	White	string
Spread	the	boned	duck	on	a	board,	skin-side	down.	Heap	the	stuffing
in	the	center	and	shape	it	into	a	loaf.	Bring	the	duck	skin	up	over	the
loaf	 to	 enclose	 it	 completely.	 Sew	 it	 in	 place	with	 a	 trussing	 needle
and	white	 string.	Make	 3	 or	 4	 ties	 around	 the	 circumference	 of	 the
duck	to	give	it	a	cylindrical	shape.



Boned	duck	with	stuffing

NOTE:	In	this	and	following	drawings,	wings	bones	and	drumsticks	have	not	been
removed.

Duck	skin	folded	around	stuffing

Sewing	the	duck



Duck	ready	for	browning

3	Tb	cooking	oil	A	large	skillet
Heat	the	oil	 in	the	skillet	until	 it	 is	almost	smoking.	Then	brown	the
duck	 slowly	on	 all	 sides.	Remove,	 and	 allow	 it	 to	 cool.	 The	 trussing
strings	remain	on	the	duck	to	hold	its	shape	while	baking.

Forming	the	crust

About	⅔	cup	cold	water6	cups	(1¼	lbs.)	all-purpose	flour
¼	cup	(2	ounces)	vegetable	shortening
½	cup	(4	ounces)	butter
1½	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	sugar
2	eggs
Following	 directions,	 prepare	 a	 chilled	 pastry	 dough	 with	 the
ingredients	at	the	left.

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

A	greased	baking	sheet
A	pastry	brush
Roll	two	thirds	of	the	pastry	dough	into	an	oval	⅛	inch	thick.	Lay	it	on
the	baking	sheet.	Place	the	duck	on	the	oval,	breast	up.



Duck	in	bottom	pastry	oval

1	egg	beaten	with	1	tsp	cold	water	in	a	small	bowl
Bring	the	pastry	up	around	the	duck,	patting	it	into	place.	Roll	out	the
rest	of	the	dough	⅛	inch	thick	and	cut	it	 into	an	oval	to	fit	over	the
top	 of	 the	 duck.	 Paint	 the	 edges	 of	 the	 bottom	 pastry	 oval	 with	 a
pastry	 brush	 dipped	 in	 beaten	 egg,	 and	 press	 the	 top	 oval	 in	 place.
Flute	or	pinch	the	edges	together	to	seal	them.

Pressing	pastry	ovals	together



Make	circles	or	ovals	with	a	1½-inch	cooky	cutter	in	the	remaining
pastry,	and	press	fan-shaped	lines	into	them	with	the	back	of	a	knife.

Pastry	cutouts

Paint	 the	 top	 pastry	 oval	 with	 beaten	 egg,	 and	 press	 the	 pastry
cutouts	over	it	in	a	decorative	design.	Paint	with	beaten	egg.

Make	a	⅛g-inch	hole	 in	 the	 center	of	 the	pastry	 and	 insert	 a	brown
paper	or	foil	funnel;	this	will	allow	cooking	steam	to	escape.	Insert	a
meat	 thermometer	 into	 the	 hole	 through	 the	 funnel,	 and	 down
through	the	duck	skin	into	the	pâté.

The	duck	is	ready	for	the	oven



Baking	the	pâté
Place	the	duck	in	the	middle	position	of	the	preheated	oven,	and	turn
the	 heat	 down	 to	 350	 degrees.	 Bake	 for	 about	 2	 hours,	 or	 to	 a
thermometer	reading	of	180	degrees.

Remove	from	oven	and	allow	to	cool	for	several	hours;	the	crust	will
soften	if	the	pâté	is	refrigerated	too	soon.	Then	chill.

TO	SERVE
A	little	preliminary	work	 in	 the	kitchen	will	enable	you	to	present

your	duck	with	the	elegance	and	drama	it	deserves.	Before	bringing	it	to
the	 table,	 then,	 cut	 around	 the	 crust	 just	 under	 the	 seam	 of	 the	 top
pastry	oval;	lift	the	oval	off	carefully	so	as	not	to	break	it.	The	duck	will
have	shrunk	from	the	crust	during	its	baking,	so	you	can	lift	it	out	of	the
bottom	crust.	Remove	the	circular	trussing	strings	from	around	the	duck,
then	cut	and	pull	out	the	sewing	strings	underneath	the	duck.

If	 carving	 is	 to	 take	place	at	 the	 table,	put	 the	duck	back	 into	 the
bottom	crust	and	replace	the	top	pastry	oval.	The	carver	will	then	decide
whether	 to	 remove	 the	 duck	 from	 the	 crust	 and	 carve	 it	 as	 suggested
farther	on,	or	whether	to	cut	right	down	through	the	crust	and	through
the	duck,	making	crosswise	slices	of	duck	with	crust.

If	 the	duck	is	 to	be	carved	before	serving,	 follow	either	of	 the	two
methods	in	the	next	paragraph,	then	reconstruct	the	duck	in	its	bottom
crust,	and	replace	the	top	pastry	oval.

To	 carve	 the	 duck	 after	 removing	 it	 from	 the	 crust,	 either	 make
crosswise	 slices	as	 though	you	were	cutting	a	 sausage,	or	make	a	deep
incision	the	length	of	the	breast,	and	cut	lengthwise	slices	angled	toward
the	center	of	the	duck	on	each	side.

OTHER	COLD	DISHES

Here	is	a	list	of	cold	dishes	which	are	described	as	hot	elsewhere	in
the	book.



Eggs
Oeufs	 brouillés	 pipérade,	 scrambled	 eggs	 garnished	 with	 a	 pipérade

(the	 cooked	 green	 peppers,	 onions,	 and	 tomatoes	 used	 for	 omelette
pipérade).	 The	 pipérade	 is	 mixed	 into	 the	 eggs	 after	 they	 have	 been
scrambled;	the	eggs	are	chilled,	and	used	to	fill	tomato	cases.

Fish
Thon	à	la	provençale,	tuna	or	swordfish	baked	with	tomatoes,	wine,

and	herbs	Poultry
Poulet	 grillé	 à	 la	 diable,	 broiled	 chicken	 with	 herbs,	 mustard,	 and

bread	crumbs	Poulet	sauté	and	poulet	sauté	aux	herbes	de	Provence,	either
of	 these	 two	 recipes	 for	 sautéed	 chicken	 beginning	 without	 the	 sauce
Poulet	poêlé	à	l’estragon,	casserole-roasted	chicken	with	tarragon.	This	is
one	of	the	best	ways	to	cook	a	whole	chicken	that	is	to	be	served	cold.

Canard	 à	 l’orange,	 duck	 with	 orange,	 or	 with	 the	 other	 fruits
suggested	in	the	recipes	following	it.	The	sauce	is	made	according	to	the
directions	 in	 the	 recipe	 but,	 instead	 of	 thickening	 the	 sauce	 with
arrowroot,	dissolve	gelatin	in	it	(1	tablespoon	or	1	envelope	for	each	2
cups),	and	glaze	the	duck	as	in	the	recipe	for	poulet	en	gelée	à	l’estragon.

Beef
Daube	de	boeuf,	casserole	of	beef	with	wine,	herbs,	and	vegetables.

Lamb
Moussaka,	 lamb	and	eggplant	baked	 in	a	mold	 lined	with	eggplant

skins,	 then	 unmolded.	 This	 makes	 a	 handsome	 cold	 dish,	 and	 is	 an
excellent	way	to	use	up	cold	roast	lamb.

Pork	and	Veal
Veau	poêlé	or	rôti	de	porc	poêlé,	casserole-roasted	veal	with	herbs	or

pork.	Both	of	these	are	good	cold,	and	if	you	wish	to	dress	them	up,	slice
the	 meat	 and	 spread	 each	 slice	 with	 beurre	 Montpellier	 (green	 herb
mayonnaise	 with	 butter,	 anchovies,	 pickles,	 and	 capers),	 reform	 the
roast,	 and	 spread	 with	 a	 covering	 of	 the	 mayonnaise.	 Chill	 before
serving.

Veau	Sylvie	or	porc	Sylvie,	veal	marinated	in	wine	then	stuffed	with
ham	and	cheese	before	roasting,	or	pork	treated	in	the	same	manner.



Ham
Jambon	braisé	au	Madère,	ham	braised	in	Madeira	wine.	See	also	the

recipes	 following	it,	 for	ham	braised	with	mushroom	stuffing,	and	ham
in	a	pastry	crust.	All	of	these	are	good	cold,	and	a	pleasant	change	from
plain	cold,	baked	or	boiled	ham.

Sweetbreads	and	Brains
Ris	de	veau	braisés	or	cervelles	braisés,	braised	sweetbreads,	or	brains.

Either	 may	 be	 dressed	 with	 vinaigrette	 and	 herbs	 and	 used	 as	 a	 cold
meat	dish,	or	as	part	of	a	combination	salad.

Artichokes
Artichauts	 au	 naturel	 or	 fonds	 d’artichauts	 à	 blanc,	 cold	 boiled

artichokes,	or	cooked	artichoke	bottoms.	Either	of	 these	may	be	served
with	 vinaigrette	 or	 mayonnaise.	 You	 may	 fill	 cold,	 cooked	 artichoke
bottoms	with	vegetables,	meat,	poultry,	or	fish	in	mayonnaise;	you	could
also	fill	them	with	one	of	the	aspics	or	mousses	described	in	this	chapter.

Eggplant
Aubergines	 farcies	 duxelles,	 eggplant	 cases	 stuffed	with	mushrooms.

These	go	well	with	cold,	roast	lamb.
Ratatouille,	eggplant	casserole	with	tomatoes,	onions,	and	zucchini.

This	dish	is	just	as	good	cold	as	it	is	hot,	and	is	especially	recommended
with	 cold	 roast	 lamb,	 beef,	 pork,	 chicken,	 and	 fish.	 A	 bit	 of	 leftover
ratatouille	may	be	passed	through	a	food	mill	with	hard-boiled	egg	yolks
to	make	a	filling	for	stuffed	eggs	or	stuffed	tomatoes.

Celery	and	Leeks
Céleris	 braisés	 and	 poireaux	 braisés,	 braised	 celery,	 braised	 leeks.

Either	 of	 these	 may	 be	 part	 of	 a	 cold	 vegetable	 combination,	 or	 be
served	with	cold	meats.

Potatoes
Gratin	 de	 pommes	 de	 terre	 provençale,	 potato	 and	 tomato	 casserole

with	anchovies.	Serve	this	with	cold	meats	or	fish.

Rice	Salads
Cooked	rice	as	a	base	for	many	salads	and	impromptu	meals;	ideas



and	one	full	recipe,	this	page.



CHAPTER	TEN

DESSERTS	AND	CAKES
Entremets	et	Gâteaux

FUNDAMENTAL	TECHNIQUES
AND	INFORMATION

ONE	OR	SEVERAL	of	the	following	processes	will	be	a	part	of	almost	any
dessert	 or	 cake	 recipe	 you	 encounter.	 Some	 can	 be	 accomplished	 by
machine,	others	are	better	performed	by	hand.	None	is	difficult,	but	all
contribute	to	the	success	of	your	dish	and	must	be	done	precisely.

EGG	WHITES

Innumerable	 desserts,	 as	 well	 as	 soufflés	 and	 all	 the	 spongecakes,
call	 for	 stiffly	 beaten	 egg	 whites.	 Successful	 cooking	 of	 any	 of	 these
dishes	 is	 usually	 dependent	 on	 how	 voluminous	 and	 stiff	 you	 have
beaten	the	egg	whites,	and	how	carefully	you	have	folded	them	into	the
rest	of	the	ingredients.	As	they	are	so	important,	we	shall	continually	put
in	little	reminders	and	warnings	about	them.	Directions	and	illustrations
for	egg	whites	begin,	in	the	Entrée	chapter.	You	will	note	that	in	all	the
recipes	 for	 beaten	 egg	 whites	 in	 this	 chapter	 a	 tablespoon	 of	 sugar	 is
whipped	into	them	near	the	end	of	the	beating;	this	gives	them	an	added
bit	 of	 stiffness	 and	 body.	 You	 will	 also	 note	 that	 egg	 whites	 may	 be
folded	into	either	a	hot	or	a	cold	sauce	or	batter;	unlike	whipped	cream,
which	 liquefies	 when	 it	 comes	 in	 contact	 with	 hot	 ingredients,	 egg
whites	are	actually	given	a	boost.



BEATING	EGGS	AND	SUGAR	TO	FORM	THE	RIBBON

Whenever	 egg	 yolks	 and	 sugar	 are	 beaten	 together	 the	 recipe	will
say	to	continue	beating	“until	the	mixture	is	pale	yellow	and	forms	the
ribbon.”	This	prepares	the	egg	yolks	so	that	they	can	be	heated	without
turning	granular.	To	 accomplish	 it,	 add	 the	 sugar	 gradually	 to	 the	 egg
yolks	 in	 a	mixing	 bowl	while	 beating	with	 a	wire	whip	 or	 an	 electric
beater;	continue	beating	for	2	to	3	minutes.	The	mixture	will	turn	a	pale,
creamy	 yellow,	 and	 thicken	 enough	 so	 that	when	 a	 bit	 is	 lifted	 in	 the
beater,	it	will	fall	back	into	the	bowl	forming	a	slowly	dissolving	ribbon
on	the	surface	of	the	mixture.	Do	not	beat	beyond	this	point	or	the	egg
yolks	may	become	granular.

WHIPPED	CREAM

As	 used	 in	 French	 cooking,	 whipped	 cream	 should	 double	 in
volume,	 and	be	 light,	 smooth,	 and	 free	 from	granules.	Much	 the	 same
principles	apply	 to	 it	as	 to	 the	beating	of	egg	whites,	 in	 that	you	must
incorporate	as	much	air	as	possible.	The	stationary	electric	beater	never
produces	as	 smooth	and	 light	a	 cream	as	 could	be	wished;	 the	electric
blender	 is	 not	 recommended	 at	 all.	 For	 success	 every	 time,	 beat	 your
chilled	 heavy	 cream	 with	 a	 large	 balloon	 whip	 or	 hand-held	 electric
beater	in	a	large	metal	bowl	set	in	another,	larger	bowl	containing	a	tray
of	ice	cubes	and	water	to	cover	them.	It	will	take	you	4	to	5	minutes	to
whip	cream	until	the	beater	leaves	light	traces	on	the	surface,	and	worth
every	minute	to	achieve	an	unbelievably	beautiful	and	tender	texture.

Warning
If	whipped	cream	is	to	be	folded	into	other	ingredients,	be	sure	the

other	ingredients	are	cold;	otherwise	the	cream	will	lose	its	stiffness	and
thin	out.

A	note	on	French	cream
Although	French	crème	 fraîche	and	American	whipping	cream	both

contain	approximately	the	same	amount	of	butter	fat,	the	consistency	of
French	 cream	 is	 thicker	 because	 it	 is	 slightly	 fermented.	 It	 must	 be
thinned	 before	 whipping	 by	 the	 addition	 of	 1	 part	 of	 cold	 milk,	 iced
water,	or	shaved	ice	for	every	3	parts	of	cream.



Crème	Chantilly
[Lightly	Beaten	Cream]

This	 is	 lightly	 beaten	 cream,	 which	 is	 usually	 specified	 for	 such
desserts	as	Bavarian	cream,	and	for	dessert	sauces.
For	about	2	cups

½	pint	(1	cup)	chilled	whipping	cream
A	3-quart	metal	bowl	set	over	a	bowl	with	ice	cubes	and	water	to
cover	them

A	large	balloon	whip	or	a	portable	electric	beater
Pour	the	cream	into	the	bowl	set	over	 ice,	and	beat	 it	slowly	until	 it
begins	 to	 foam,	while	circulating	 the	beater	all	around	the	bowl	and
lifting	the	cream	as	you	whip	it.	Gradually	increase	the	beating	speed
to	moderate	 and	 continue	 until	 the	 beater	 leaves	 light	 traces	 on	 the
surface	of	the	cream.	A	bit	of	cream	lifted	and	dropped	on	the	surface
will	softly	retain	its	shape.

Stiffly	beaten	cream
For	 desserts	 which	 require	 more	 body,	 continue	 beating	 a	 few

seconds	more	until	the	cream	is	a	little	bit	stiffer	and	forms	soft	peaks.
Do	not	beat	beyond	 this	 stage	or	 the	cream	will	become	granular,	and
then	begin	to	turn	into	butter.

Storing	whipped	cream
Once	 cream	 is	 whipped,	 it	 will	 keep	 for	 several	 hours	 under

refrigeration.	As	it	usually	exudes	a	bit	of	liquid,	it	is	a	good	idea	to	turn
it	into	a	fine-meshed	sieve	and	place	the	sieve	over	a	bowl.	This	allows
any	seeping	liquid	to	drop	out	of	the	cream.

Flavored	whipped	cream
Before	serving,	fold	in	2	tablespoons	of	sifted	powdered	sugar	and	a

tablespoon	or	two	of	brandy,	rum,	or	sweet	liqueur,	or	a	teaspoon	or	two
of	vanilla	extract.

CREAMING	BUTTER	AND	SUGAR



Numerous	dessert	and	cake	recipes	direct	 that	butter	and	sugar	be
creamed	 together;	 this	 may	 be	 accomplished	 either	 by	machine	 or	 by
hand.

Electric	Beater	Use	the	pastry-blender	attachment	if	you	have	one;
you	may	use	the	regular	beater,	but	the	blades	will	become	clogged.	Cut
the	butter	into	½-inch	pieces.	Warm	the	large	mixing	bowl	in	hot	water.
Dry	 it,	 add	 the	 butter	 and	 sugar,	 and	 beat	 at	 a	 moderate	 speed	 for
several	minutes.	The	mixture	is	ready	to	be	used	when	it	is	light,	fluffy,
and	a	pale	ivory	color.

Hand	Beating	If	the	butter	has	been	left	at	room	temperature	for	an
hour	to	soften,	simply	beat	the	butter	and	sugar	together	 in	a	bowl	for
several	 minutes	 until	 they	 form	 a	 light,	 fluffy	 mass.	 For	 cold,	 hard
butter,	use	the	following	system:	Cut	 the	butter	 into	½-inch	pieces	and
place	 it	 with	 the	 sugar	 in	 a	 mixing	 bowl	 set	 over	 barely	 simmering
water.	 Beat	 with	 a	 wooden	 spoon	 for	 several	 seconds	 until	 the	 butter
softens.	Then	set	the	bowl	in	a	basin	of	cold	water	and	beat	for	a	minute
or	two	until	the	mixture	is	light,	fluffy,	and	a	pale	ivory	color.

MELTED	CHOCOLATE

Because	 baking	 chocolate	 burns	 easily,	 it	 needs	 special	 treatment.
We	find	it	best	to	break	the	chocolate	into	small	pieces	(or	use	chocolate
drops:	 2	 ounces	make	⅓	 cup).	 Place	 the	 chocolate	 in	 a	 small	 covered
saucepan	by	itself,	or	with	the	liquid	specified	in	your	recipe;	set	the	pan
in	another,	larger	pan	of	simmering	water,	and	at	once	remove	the	larger
pan	from	heat.	In	4	to	5	minutes	your	chocolate	will	be	perfectly	melted
and	smooth.	Keep	it	in	the	warm	water	until	ready	to	use.

ALMONDS

Whole,	slivered,	and	powdered	almonds	have	many	uses	 in	French
pastries	and	desserts.	Luckily	you	can	buy	blanched	almonds	in	airtight
cans	at	almost	any	American	market,	and	although	you	do	not	often	see
powdered	 almonds,	 they	 pulverize	 easily	 in	 the	 blender	 or	 processor.
You	will	note	that	all	the	recipes	which	use	almonds	also	call	for	a	bit	of
almond	 extract	 to	 bring	 out	 the	 almond	 taste.	 This	 is	 not	 necessary	 in
France,	as	one	or	two	bitter	almonds	are	always	included.	But	as	the	oil
of	bitter	almonds	is	poisonous	when	taken	in	too	large	a	quantity,	it	can
only	 be	 bought	 with	 a	 doctor’s	 prescription	 in	 this	 country.	 But	 be



careful	 with	 almond	 extract.	 It	 is	 strong;	 a	 few	 drops	 or	 a	 quarter
teaspoon	are	usually	sufficient.
Measurements	 Four	 ounces	 of	 whole,	 broken,	 or	 powdered

almonds	are	equivalent	to	about	¾	cup	or	125	grams.
Blanched	 Almonds	 Drop	 shelled	 almonds	 into	 boiling	 water	 and

boil	 1	 minute.	 Drain.	 Squeeze	 each	 almond	 between	 the	 thumb	 and
forefinger,	and	the	almond	will	slip	out	of	its	skin.	Spread	the	blanched
almonds	 in	 a	 roasting	 pan	 and	 dry	 them	 out	 for	 5	minutes	 in	 a	 350-
degree	oven.
Pulverized	Almonds	These	are	most	easily	done	in	the	blender	or

processor,	and	should	always	be	ground	½	cup	at	a	time	for	the	blender
(1	 cup	 for	 the	 processor)	with	 several	 tablespoons	 of	 sugar	 to	 prevent
them	 from	 becoming	 oily	 and	 lumpy,	 which	 would	 make	 them
impossible	to	combine	with	other	dry	ingredients.
Toasted	or	Grilled	Almonds	Spread	whole,	 slivered,	or	powdered

almonds	 in	 a	 roasting	 pan	 and	 set	 in	 a	 350-degree	 oven	 for	 about	 10
minutes.	Stir	them	up	frequently	and	keep	an	eye	on	them	so	they	do	not
burn.	They	should	emerge	an	even,	light,	toasty	brown.

Pralin
[Caramelized	Almonds]

This	 delicious	 ingredient	 is	 quickly	 made	 and	 can	 be	 stored	 for
weeks	 in	 a	 screw-topped	 jar.	 It	 is	 used	 in	 desserts	 and	 sauces,	 as	 a
sprinkling	for	ice	cream,	and	as	a	flavoring	for	cake	icings	and	fillings.	In
France,	pralin	is	also	made	with	hazel	nuts	or	a	mixture	of	hazel	nuts	and
almonds.
For	about	1	cup

½	cup	slivered	or	powdered	almonds
Toast	the	almonds	in	a	350-degree	oven	as	previously	described.

½	cup	granulated	sugar
2	Tb	water
An	oiled	marble	slab	or	large	baking	sheet



Boil	 the	 sugar	 and	 water	 in	 a	 small	 saucepan	 until	 the	 sugar
caramelizes	(see	directions	for	caramel	farther	on).	Immediately	stir	in
the	toasted	almonds.	Bring	just	to	the	boil,	then	pour	onto	the	marble
or	baking	sheet.	When	cold,	in	about	10	minutes,	break	the	hardened
mass	 into	pieces.	Pulverize	 in	the	electric	blender,	pound	to	a	coarse
powder	in	a	mortar,	or	put	it	through	a	meat	grinder.

Pulverized	Macaroons
Pulverized	 stale	 macaroons	 may	 be	 substituted	 for	 pralin.	 Break

macaroons	into	small	pieces,	spread	them	in	a	roasting	pan,	and	set	in	a
200-degree	 oven	 for	 about	 an	 hour.	 Remove	when	 they	 are	 fairly	 dry
and	 lightly	 browned;	 they	 will	 crisp	 up	 as	 they	 cool.	 When	 crisped,
pulverize	 them	in	 the	electric	blender,	pound	 in	a	mortar,	or	put	 them
through	a	meat	grinder.	Store	in	a	screw-topped	jar	where	they	will	keep
for	weeks.

Caramel
[Caramel]

Caramel	is	sugar	syrup	cooked	until	it	turns	a	light,	nut	brown.	It	is
used	as	a	flavoring	or	coloring,	or	for	coating	a	mold.

For	about	½	cup

1	cup	granulated	sugar	or	crushed	sugar	lumps
⅓	cup	water
A	small,	heavy	saucepan	(with	cover)

Blend	the	sugar	and	water	 in	 the	saucepan	and	bring	 to	 the	simmer.
Remove	from	heat,	and	swirl	the	pan	by	its	handle	to	be	sure	that	the
sugar	has	dissolved	 completely	 and	 that	 the	 liquid	 is	 perfectly	 clear.
Cover	 the	 pan	 tightly	 and	 boil	 the	 syrup	 for	 several	 minutes	 over
moderately	 high	 heat—keep	 peeking,	 after	 a	minute	 or	 so,	 and	 boil
until	 the	 bubbles	 are	 thick.	 Uncover	 the	 pan	 and	 continue	 boiling,
swirling	 the	 pan	 slowly	 by	 its	 handle.	 In	 a	 number	 of	 seconds	 the
syrup	will	begin	to	color.	Continue	boiling	and	swirling	a	few	seconds
more,	 until	 it	 is	 a	 light	 caramel	 brown,	 then	 remove	 from	 heat	 and
continue	swirling—it	will	darken	more.	Set	 the	bottom	of	 the	pan	 in



cold	water	to	cool	it	and	stop	the	cooking.

Caramel	Syrup
Pour	 ⅓	 cup	 of	 water	 into	 the	 preceding	 caramel	 and	 simmer,

stirring,	until	the	caramel	has	dissolved.

HOW	TO	LINE	A	MOLD	WITH	CARAMEL

Un	Moule	Caramelisé
[A	Caramel-lined	Mold]

Custard	 desserts	 are	 often	 baked	 in	 a	mold	 lined	with	 caramel	 so
that	the	dessert	will	be	covered	with	a	brown	glaze	when	unmolded.	You
may	make	the	caramel	directly	in	the	mold	when	you	are	using	a	metal
one	 such	 as	 the	 charlotte	 illustrated	 for	 soufflés.	 If	 you	 are	 using
porcelain,	 make	 the	 caramel	 separately.	 Metal	 takes	 a	 caramel	 lining
more	evenly	than	porcelain,	and	the	dessert	is	usually	easier	to	unmold.
We	 therefore	 suggest	 you	 buy	 metal	 molds	 if	 you	 plan	 to	 do	 many
desserts	of	this	type.

For	a	6-cup	metal	mold

A	plate½	cup	granulated	sugar	or	crushed	sugar	lumps
2	Tb	water
A	pan	of	cold	water

Boil	the	sugar	and	water	in	the	mold	over	moderate	heat,	swirling	the
mold	frequently,	until	the	syrup	caramelizes.	At	once,	dip	the	mold	in
the	cold	water	for	2	to	3	seconds	to	cool	it	very	slightly.	Then	tilt	the
mold	in	all	directions	to	film	the	bottom	and	sides	with	caramel.	When
the	 caramel	 has	 ceased	 to	 run,	 turn	 the	 mold	 upside	 down	 over	 a
plate.	This	is	now	a	caramelized	mold.

For	a	fireproof	porcelain	mold	(or	cup-custard	molds	or	ramekins)
Make	 the	 caramel	 in	 a	 saucepan.	 While	 it	 is	 cooking,	 warm	 the

porcelain	mold	in	a	pan	of	hot	water;	remove	it	as	soon	as	the	caramel	is



done.	Pour	 in	the	caramel	and	tilt	 the	mold	 in	all	directions	to	 film	its
bottom	and	sides.	When	the	caramel	has	ceased	to	run,	reverse	the	mold
on	a	plate.

Charlotte	Malakoff

HOW	TO	LINE	A	MOLD	WITH	LADYFINGERS

Some	 of	 the	 grand	 desserts	 such	 as	 the	 charlotte	 Malakoff,	 the
diplomate,	 and	 the	 charlotte	 Chantilly,	 call	 for	 a	 mold	 lined	 with
ladyfingers.	 Any	 kind	 of	 a	 cylindrical	 mold	 or	 dish	 will	 do	 for	 the
operation,	but	 the	dessert	will	be	more	 spectacular	 if	 your	mold	 is	 the
charlotte	 type	 3½	 to	 4	 inches	 deep,	 like	 that	 illustrated	 in	 the	 Soufflé
section.	 Some	 recipes	 direct	 that	 the	 ladyfingers	 be	 dipped	 first	 in
diluted	liqueur;	others	do	not.	The	procedure	for	lining	the	mold	is	the
same	in	either	case.
Warning
Do	not	attempt	any	dessert	calling	for	a	mold	lined	with	ladyfingers

unless	 you	 have	 ladyfingers	 of	 premium	 quality—dry	 and	 tender,	 not
spongy	 and	 limp.	 Inferior	 ladyfingers,	 unfortunately	 the	 only	 kind
usually	 available	 in	 bakeries,	 will	 debase	 an	 otherwise	 remarkable
dessert.	The	recipe	for	homemade	ladyfingers	is	here.



Lining	the	bottom	of	the	mold

Cut	the	ladyfingers	into	a	design	of	wedges	to	fit	the	bottom	of	the
mold	exactly.	Lay	them	in	the	mold,	their	curved	sides	down.

Lining	the	sides	of	the	mold

Place	 a	 row	 of	 ladyfingers	 upright	 and	 pressed	 together,	 their
curved	sides	against	the	sides	of	the	mold.	If	your	mold	slants	outward,
you	may	have	to	trim	the	edges	of	the	ladyfingers	to	make	them	slightly
wedge-shaped.
The	mold	is	now	ready	for	filling,	as	directed	in	your	recipe.



HOW	TO	UNMOLD	A	DESSERT

Many	other	desserts	 in	 this	chapter,	besides	 those	with	 ladyfingers
in	 the	 preceding	 paragraphs,	 are	 formed	 or	 baked	 in	 a	mold,	 and	 are
unmolded	 for	 serving.	 The	 easiest	 way	 to	 unmold	 them	 is:	 place	 a
serving	dish	upside	down	over	the	mold	and	reverse	the	two	quickly	so
the	dish	rests	over	a	flat	surface,	give	a	sharp,	downward	jerk	to	dislodge
the	dessert,	then	remove	the	mold.

Vanilla
We	 have	 specified	 vanilla	 extract	 in	 all	 of	 the	 dessert	 and	 cake

recipes.	If	you	prefer	to	use	the	bean,	steep	it	for	20	minutes	in	whatever
hot	 liquid	 you	 are	 using.	 Sugar	with	 a	mild	 vanilla	 flavor	 is	made	 by
burying	 a	 vanilla	 bean	 for	 a	week	 or	 so	 in	 a	 screw-topped	 jar	with	 1
pound	of	granulated	sugar.	For	a	strong	flavor,	pulverize	½	ounce	or	2
whole	vanilla	beans	in	a	mortar	with	¼	pound	or	about	¾	cup	of	sugar
lumps,	then	pass	through	a	very	fine-meshed	sieve.	If	you	use	an	electric
blender	for	this,	allow	the	pulverized	mixture	to	stand	in	a	closed	jar	for
a	week	or	so	before	sieving	it.

Glazed	Orange	or	Lemon	Peel
This	provides	a	nice	decoration	and	is	easy	to	make.
For	about	½	cup

5	lemons	or	3	bright-skinned	oranges
A	vegetable	peeler
1	quart	of	simmering	water

Remove	the	colored	part	of	the	lemon	or	orange	skin	with	a	vegetable
peeler.	 Cut	 into	 julienne	 strips	 1½	 inches	 long	 and	 1/ 	 inch	 wide.

16

Simmer	in	water	for	10	to	12	minutes	or	until	just	tender	when	bitten.
Drain.	Refresh	in	cold	water.	Dry	on	paper	towels.

1	cup	granulated	sugar



⅓	cup	water
A	candy	thermometer,	if	possible
1	tsp	vanilla	extract

Boil	the	sugar	and	water	in	a	small	saucepan	to	the	thread	stage	(230
degrees).	Remove	from	heat.	Stir	 in	the	drained	peel	and	the	vanilla.
Let	 the	 peel	 stand	 in	 the	 syrup	 for	 at	 least	 30	minutes.	 Drain	when
ready	to	use.	Under	refrigeration,	 the	peel	will	keep	 in	 the	syrup	 for
several	weeks.

Flour
Be	sure	to	measure	your	flour	correctly.	This	is	especially	important

for	cakes.	All	recipes	are	based	on	the	flour-measuring	method	described
on	this	page.

SWEET	SAUCES	AND	FILLINGS

Sauces	Sucrées	et	Crèmes

Crème	 anglaise,	 a	 light	 custard	 sauce,	 and	 crème	 pâtissière,	 a	 thick
custard	filling,	are	fundamental	to	French	desserts	and	pastries.	Both	are
quick	to	do,	and	should	definitely	be	in	anyone’s	repertoire.

CRÈME	ANGLAISE
[Light	Custard	Sauce]

This	sauce	is	a	blend	of	egg	yolks,	sugar,	and	milk	stirred	over	heat
until	it	thickens	into	a	light	cream.	If	it	comes	near	the	simmer,	the	yolks
will	scramble.	Although	it	can	be	omitted,	a	very	small	amount	of	starch
in	the	sauce	acts	as	a	safeguard	just	in	case	the	heat	becomes	too	much
for	 the	 egg	 yolks.	 Some	 recipes	 direct	 that	 the	 sauce	 be	 cooked	 in	 a
double	boiler;	this	is	slow	work	and	quite	unnecessary	if	you	concentrate
on	what	 you	 are	 doing,	 and	 use	 a	 heavy-bottomed	 saucepan.	 A	 candy



thermometer	is	a	useful	guide.
Vanilla	is	the	basic	flavoring	for	crème	anglaise;	others	are	added	to

the	vanilla	if	you	wish,	such	as	coffee,	liqueurs,	or	chocolate.	The	sauce
is	 served	 either	warm	 or	 chilled,	 depending	 on	 your	 dessert.	 Less	 rich
than	 cream,	 crème	 anglaise	 is	 used	 on	 fruit	 desserts,	 molded	 creams,
puddings,	 ice	 cream,	 or	 accompanies	 any	 dessert	 where	 it	 could	 be
substituted	for	cream.	With	additional	egg	yolks	and	with	heavy	cream,
it	 becomes	 the	 custard	used	 for	 ice	 creams.	Also	with	more	 egg	 yolks,
plus	gelatin,	whipped	cream,	and	flavoring,	it	is	ready	to	be	a	Bavarian
cream.

For	about	2	cups

½	cup	granulated	sugar
4	egg	yolks
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater

Gradually	beat	the	sugar	into	the	egg	yolks	and	continue	beating	for	2
to	 3	minutes	 until	 the	mixture	 is	 pale	 yellow	 and	 forms	 the	 ribbon,
this	page.

Optional:	1	tsp	cornstarch	or	potato	starch
Beat	in	the	optional	starch.

1¾	cup	boiling	milk
While	 beating	 the	 yolk	 mixture,	 very	 gradually	 pour	 on	 the	 boiling
milk	in	a	thin	stream	of	droplets	so	that	the	yolks	are	slowly	warmed.

A	clean,	heavy-bottomed	enameled	or	stainless	steel	saucepan
A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon
Optional	but	recommended:	a	candy	thermometer

Pour	 the	 mixture	 into	 the	 saucepan	 and	 set	 over	 moderate	 heat,
stirring	slowly	and	continuously	with	a	wooden	spatula	or	spoon,	and
reaching	 all	 over	 the	 bottom	 and	 sides	 of	 the	 pan,	 until	 the	 sauce
thickens	just	enough	to	coat	the	spoon	with	a	light,	creamy	layer.	Do



not	 let	 the	 custard	 come	 anywhere	 near	 the	 simmer.	 Maximum
temperature	 is	 165	 degrees	 on	 the	 candy	 thermometer	 (170	 if	 you
have	used	starch).	Then	beat	the	sauce	off	heat	for	a	minute	or	two	to
cool	it.	Strain	it	through	a	fine	sieve,	and	beat	in	one	of	the	flavorings
at	the	left.

Flavorings
1	Tb	vanilla	extract
OR,	1	tsp	vanilla	extract	and	1	Tb	rum,	kirsch,	cognac,	orange
liqueur,	or	instant	coffee
OR,	2	or	3	ounces	or	squares	of	semisweet	baking	chocolate	melted	in
the	boiling	milk,	and	1	tsp	vanilla	extract	stirred	into	the	finished
sauce
To	serve	hot:	Keep	the	sauce	over	warm	but	not	hot	water.	If	you	wish,
beat	in	1	to	2	tablespoons	of	unsalted	butter	just	before	serving.

To	 serve	 cold:	 Set	 the	 saucepan	 in	 a	 pan	 of	 cold	 water,	 and	 stir
frequently	until	cool.	Then	cover	and	chill.

Crème	Brûlée
Crème	brûlée	originated	in	England,	it	appears,	at	Christ’s	College	in

Cambridge.	 Make	 the	 basic	 cream	 exactly	 like	 the	 preceding	 crème
anglaise,	but	use	half	the	amount	of	sugar,	and	whipping	cream	instead
of	milk.	Chill	in	a	serving	dish.	Rather	than	glazing	the	top	of	the	cream
with	brown	sugar,	try	spreading	a	⅛-inch	layer	of	pralin,	over	the	cream.
This	would	 then	 be	 a	 crème	 anglaise	 pralinée,	 and	 is	 good	 as	 a	 dessert
either	by	itself	or	served	with	strawberries.

CRÈME	PÂTISSIÈRE
[Custard	Filling]

This	custard	is	also	made	of	egg	yolks,	sugar,	and	milk,	but	unlike
crème	anglaise,	 it	contains	flour	so	it	may	be	brought	to	the	boil,	and	is



much	thicker.	The	proportions	of	flour	vary	according	to	the	use	of	the
filling;	the	following	recipe	is	designed	as	a	base	for	fruit	tarts.	With	the
addition	of	beaten	egg	whites	it	becomes	a	crème	Saint-Honoré	and	may
be	used	as	a	filling	for	cream	puffs,	or	may	be	mixed	with	fruit	to	make	a
quick	dessert	like	the	plombières.

For	about	2½	cups

1	cup	granulated	sugar
5	egg	yolks
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater

Gradually	beat	the	sugar	into	the	egg	yolks	and	continue	beating	for	2
to	3	minutes	until	the	mixture	is	pale	yellow	and	forms	the	ribbon.

½	cup	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
Beat	in	the	flour.

2	cups	boiling	milk
Beating	the	yolk	mixture,	gradually	pour	on	the	boiling	milk	in	a	thin
stream	of	droplets.

A	clean,	heavy-bottomed	2½-quart,	enameled	saucepan
A	wire	whip

Pour	into	saucepan	and	set	over	moderately	high	heat.	Stir	with	wire
whip,	 reaching	all	over	bottom	of	pan.	As	sauce	comes	 to	 the	boil	 it
will	 get	 lumpy,	 but	 will	 smooth	 out	 as	 you	 beat	 it.	 When	 boil	 is
reached,	beat	over	moderately	low	heat	for	2	to	3	minutes	to	cook	the
flour.	Be	careful	custard	does	not	scorch	in	bottom	of	pan.

Flavorings
1	Tb	butter
1½	Tb	vanilla	extract
OR,	2	tsp	vanilla	extract	and	2	to	3	Tb	rum,	kirsch,	cognac,	orange



liqueur,	or	instant	coffee
OR,	3	ounces	or	squares	of	semisweet	baking	chocolate	melted	with	2
Tb	rum	or	coffee	and	2	tsp	vanilla	extract

OR,	½	cup	pulverized	almonds,	or	pulverized	macaroons,	¼	tsp
almond	extract,	and	2	tsp	vanilla	extract
Remove	from	heat	and	beat	in	the	butter,	then	one	of	the	flavorings	at
the	left.	If	the	custard	is	not	used	immediately,	clean	it	off	the	sides	of
the	pan,	and	dot	top	of	custard	with	softened	butter	to	prevent	a	skin
from	 forming	 over	 the	 surface.	Crème	 pâtissière	will	 keep	 for	 a	week
under	refrigeration,	or	may	be	frozen.

CRÈME	SAINT-HONORÉ
[Custard	Filling	with	Beaten	Egg	Whites]

A	 crème	 pâtissière	with	 the	 addition	 of	 stiffly	 beaten	 egg	whites	 is
used	as	a	filling	for	tarts	and	cream	puffs,	and	as	a	dessert	cream.	It	 is
flavored	with	chocolate,	liqueurs,	grated	orange	peel,	pralin,	or	whatever
your	recipe	calls	for.
For	5	to	6	cups

2½	cups	crème	pâtissière
8	egg	whites
Big	pinch	of	salt
2	Tb	granulated	sugar

Make	 the	crème	pâtissière	as	directed	 in	 the	preceding	recipe.	Beat	 in
the	flavorings	you	have	chosen.	Beat	the	egg	whites	and	salt	together
until	soft	peaks	are	formed;	sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	continue	beating
until	stiff	peaks	are	formed.	Stir	one	quarter	of	the	egg	whites	into	the
hot	custard,	fold	in	the	rest.	If	the	cream	is	to	be	served	cold,	chill	it	in
the	refrigerator.

FRANGIPANE



[Almond	Custard	Filling]

This	is	a	very	thick	type	of	crème	pâtissière	with	crushed	macaroons
or	powdered	almonds.	Use	it	as	a	filling	for	crêpes	or	tarts.	Any	leftover
frangipane	may	be	mixed	with	 an	 equal	 amount	 of	 crème	 pâtissière	 and
used	as	a	filling.
For	about	2	cups

A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
1	egg
1	egg	yolk
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
¾	cup	granulated	sugar
⅓	cup	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
1	cup	boiling	milk

Beat	 the	 egg	and	egg	yolk	 in	 the	mixing	bowl,	 gradually	 adding	 the
sugar,	until	mixture	 is	pale	yellow	and	 forms	the	ribbon.	Beat	 in	 the
flour.	Then	beat	in	the	boiling	milk	in	a	thin	stream	of	droplets.

A	clean,	heavy-bottomed,	2½-quart,	enameled	saucepan
A	wire	whip
A	wooden	spoon

Pour	 into	 saucepan	and	 set	over	moderate	heat.	Stir	 slowly	with	 the
whip,	reaching	all	over	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	When	mixture	begins	to
coagulate	into	lumps,	beat	it	vigorously	until	it	smooths	and	thickens
into	 a	 stiff	 paste.	 Then	 over	 moderately	 low	 heat,	 beat	 it	 with	 a
wooden	 spoon	 for	 2	 to	 3	 minutes	 to	 cook	 the	 flour	 thoroughly.	 Be
careful	the	custard	does	not	scorch	on	the	bottom	of	the	pan.

3	Tb	butter
2	tsp	vanilla	extract
¼	tsp	almond	extract
½	cup	pulverized	macaroons,	or	pulverized	almonds



Optional:	2	to	3	Tb	kirsch
Off	 heat,	 beat	 in	 the	 butter,	 then	 the	 flavorings,	 macaroons	 or
almonds,	and	optional	kirsch.	 If	not	used	 immediately,	 clean	custard
off	 sides	 of	 pan	 and	 dot	 top	 with	 softened	 butter	 to	 prevent	 a	 skin
from	 forming	 on	 the	 surface.	 Frangipane	will	 keep	 for	 a	week	 under
refrigeration,	or	may	be	frozen.

FRUIT	SAUCES
Fruit	sauces	are	made	from	purées	of	fresh	or	frozen	fruits,	or	from

fruit	 jams	 and	 jellies.	 They	 are	 used	with	 ice	 creams,	 custard	 desserts,
and	various	puddings.
Sauce	aux	Fraises
[Fresh	Strawberry	Sauce]

Sauce	aux	Framboises
[Fresh	Raspberry	Sauce]
For	about	2	cups

1	quart	fresh	strawberries	or	raspberries
A	sieve	and	wooden	spoon	¾	to	1¼	cups	sugar	(instant	or	very	finely
granulated	if	possible)

An	electric	blender	or	an	electric	beater
2	to	3	Tb	kirsch,	cognac,	or	lemon	juice

Hull,	wash,	drain,	and	sieve	the	fruit.	Add	sugar	to	taste.	Either	whip
for	2	to	3	minutes	in	a	blender,	or	beat	for	10	minutes	with	an	electric
beater.	The	sugar	should	dissolve	completely;	the	purée	will	be	quite
thick.	Beat	in	kirsch,	cognac,	or	lemon	juice	to	taste.
Made	with	frozen	berries
Thaw	the	berries	and	drain	them	thoroughly.	Force	them	through	a

sieve,	and	beat	in	some	of	their	syrup	to	thin	out	the	purée.	Flavor	with
kirsch,	cognac,	or	lemon	juice.
Made	with	jam,	preserves,	or	jelly	(about	1	cup)

½	cup	orange	marmalade	and	½	cup	apricot	preserves



OR,	½	cup	strawberry	or	raspberry	jam	and	½	cup	red	currant	jelly
2	to	3	Tb	kirsch	or	cognac
A	sieve	and	wooden	spoon

Stir	 the	 mixture	 in	 a	 saucepan	 over	 moderate	 heat	 until	 melted.
Simmer	for	a	moment	with	the	liqueur,	then	force	through	a	sieve.

STRAINED	APRICOT	PRESERVES
Before	using	apricot	preserves	(or	jam.)	in	a	recipe,	stir	it	over	heat,

if	necessary,	until	it	has	melted,	then	rub	it	through	a	sieve	to	leave	the
bits	 of	 skin	 behind.	 If	 not	 used	 immediately,	 it	 will	 keep	 almost
indefinitely	in	its	original	container.

GLAZES
Either	apricot	preserves	or	red	currant	jelly	contains	enough	pectin

so	 that	 when	 boiled	 to	 between	 225	 and	 228	 degrees	 it	 will	 stiffen
slightly	as	it	cools	and	not	be	sticky	to	the	touch.	You	may	then	use	it	as
a	 glaze,	 paint	 it	 over	 the	 top	 of	 a	 tart	 to	 give	 brilliance	 and	 glitter,
spread	it	over	a	cake	to	act	as	a	simple	icing,	or	paint	it	inside	a	baked
pastry	shell	to	provide	a	light	waterproofing	before	the	filling	goes	in.

Abricot
[For	Apricot	Glaze]

Gelée	de	Groseilles
[For	Red	Currant	Glaze]
For	about	½	cup	red	currant	or	apricot	glaze

½	cup	apricot	preserves,	forced	through	a	sieve	OR,	½	cup	red
currant	jelly

2	Tb	granulated	sugar
A	small	saucepan



A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
Stir	the	strained	apricot	preserves	or	currant	jelly	with	the	sugar	over
moderately	high	heat	for	2	to	3	minutes	until	thick	enough	to	coat	the
spoon	with	a	light	film,	and	the	last	drops	are	sticky	as	they	fall	from
the	spoon	(225	to	228	degrees	on	a	candy	thermometer).	Do	not	boil
beyond	this	point	or	the	glaze	will	become	brittle	when	it	cools.

Apply	 the	 glaze	 while	 it	 is	 still	 warm.	 Unused	 glaze	 will	 keep
indefinitely	in	a	screw-topped	jar;	reheat	again	before	using.

CUSTARDS,	MOUSSES,	AND	MOLDS

Crèmes	et	Mousses

		CRÈME	PLOMBIÈRES	PRALINÉE
[Caramel	Almond	Cream—a	cold	dessert]

A	crème	plombières	is	a	custard	filling	into	which	beaten	egg	whites
and	a	flavoring	or	fresh	fruits	are	folded.	It	is	spooned	over	ladyfingers
or	 spongecake,	 then	 chilled.	 For	 the	 few	minutes	 it	 takes	 to	 assemble,
crème	plombières	makes	a	surprisingly	attractive	dessert.

For	6	servings

6	squares	of	stale	spongecake	or	ladyfingers,	about	1½	inches	across
and	½	inch	thick
A	2-quart	serving	bowl	about	4	inches	deep	or	6	dessert	cups
2	Tb	rum	mixed	with	2	Tb	coffee
If	 the	 squares	 of	 cake	 or	 ladyfingers	 are	 not	 stale,	 dry	 them	 out	 for
about	an	hour	in	a	200-degree	oven.	Arrange	the	pieces	in	the	serving
bowl,	 or	 place	 one	 in	 each	 dessert	 cup.	 Sprinkle	 with	 the	 rum	 and
coffee.

4	egg	yolks



⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
3	Tb	flour
2½	cups	boiling	milk
1	Tb	vanilla	extract,	or	2	tsp	vanilla	and	3	Tb	rum
1	Tb	butter
Following	 the	 procedure	 for	 crème	 pâtissière,	 beat	 the	 egg	 yolks	 and
sugar	in	a	mixing	bowl	until	they	are	pale	yellow	and	form	the	ribbon.
Beat	in	the	flour.	Then	beat	in	the	boiling	milk	by	droplets.	Pour	into	a
clean	 saucepan	 and,	 stirring	 with	 a	 wire	 whip,	 boil	 slowly	 for	 2
minutes.	Remove	 from	heat	and	beat	 in	 the	vanilla	or	 rum,	 then	 the
butter.

4	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
3	Tb	pralin	(caramelized	almonds),	or	the	pulverized	macaroons
Beat	 the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	 soft	peaks	are	 formed;	 sprinkle	on
the	 sugar	 and	 beat	 until	 stiff	 peaks	 are	 formed	 into	 the	 hot	 crème
pâtissière.

2	Tb	pralin	or	pulverized	macaroons
Spoon	the	cream	into	the	serving	bowl	or	dessert	cups	and	chill	for	2
to	3	hours,	or	until	serving	time.	Just	before	serving,	sprinkle	with	the
rest	of	the	pralin	or	macaroons.

VARIATIONS
Crème	Plombières	au	Chocolat
[Chocolate	Cream]

Use	the	ingredients	and	method	in	the	master	recipe,	but	substitute
chocolate	for	all	or	part	of	the	pralin	as	follows:
3	ounces	or	squares	of	semisweet	baking	chocolate	melted	with	3	Tb



rum	or	strong	coffee,	and	2	tsp	vanilla	extract
Beat	the	smooth	melted	chocolate	into	2½	cups	of	hot	crème	pâtissière.
Then	fold	in	the	beaten	egg	whites.

1	ounce	grated	or	shaved	semisweet	baking	chocolate
Just	before	serving,	sprinkle	chocolate	over	the	cream.

Crème	Plombières	aux	Fruits
[Plombières	with	Fresh	Strawberries	or	Raspberries]

Use	the	ingredients	and	method	in	the	master	recipe,	but	substitute
fresh	 strawberries	 or	 raspberries	 for	 the	 pralin.	 Instead	 of	 soaking	 the
cake	in	rum,	use	kirsch	or	cognac	diluted	with	water;	and	use	kirsch	or
cognac	plus	vanilla	for	flavoring	the	cream.

You	may	substitute	defrosted	frozen	fruits	for	fresh	fruits	here,	but
they	look	rather	limp,	especially	when	used	for	a	decoration	on	top.

1	cup	sliced	fresh	strawberries	or	whole	raspberries
2	Tb	instant	sugar	(very	finely	granulated)
Sprinkle	fruit	with	sugar	and	let	stand	for	10	minutes,	or	until	ready	to
use.	Fold	into	the	cream	with	the	egg	whites.

12	to	18	whole	strawberries	or	1	cup	raspberries
2	Tb	instant	sugar
Sprinkle	the	berries	with	sugar,	let	stand	for	10	minutes.	Arrange	over
dessert	just	before	serving.

Crème	Plombières	à	l’Ananas
[Plombières	with	Pineapple]

Follow	 the	 ingredients	 and	 method	 in	 the	 master	 recipe,	 but
substitute	 pineapple	 for	 the	 pralin.	 And	 instead	 of	 soaking	 the	 cake	 in



rum,	use	kirsch	or	cognac	diluted	with	water;	use	kirsch	or	cognac,	plus
vanilla	for	flavoring	the	cream.

1	cup	(1	No.	8Z	can)	crushed	pineapple	in	heavy	syrup
Drain	the	pineapple.	Boil	⅓	cup	of	the	syrup	in	a	small	saucepan	for	5
minutes.	Add	the	crushed	pineapple	and	boil	for	5	minutes.	Drain.	Stir
2	 tablespoons	 of	 the	 syrup	 into	 the	 crème	 pâtissière.	 Fold	 in	 the	 egg
whites	 and	 all	 but	 ¼	 cup	 of	 the	 pineapple.	 Reserve	 remaining
pineapple	to	decorate	dessert	just	before	serving.

		BAVAROIS	À	L’ORANGE
[Orange	Bavarian	Cream—a	cold	desert]

Bavarian	 cream	 is	 a	 mold	 of	 crème	 anglaise	 (custard	 sauce)	 with
gelatin,	 beaten	 egg	whites,	 lightly	 beaten	 cream,	 and	 a	 flavoring.	 It	 is
unmolded	after	 it	has	been	chilled,	and	makes	a	dessert	as	beautiful	 to
see	 as	 it	 is	 to	 eat.	 When	 properly	 made,	 it	 has	 a	 most	 lovely,	 light,
creamy,	 velvety	 quality	 and	 ranks	 as	 one	 of	 the	 best	 of	 the	 molded
desserts.

We	were	curious	to	try	out	some	recipes	for	Bavarian	cream	which
claimed	 to	 produce	masterpieces	 in	 seconds,	 so	we	 experimented	with
the	 electric	 blender,	 raw	 egg	 yolks,	 cracked	 ice,	 and	 so	 forth.	We	 also
ran	various	changes	of	our	own,	such	as	substituting	frozen	fruits	or	ice
cream	 for	 cracked	 ice.	 Though	 the	 molded	 results	 looked	 handsome,
their	flavor	and	consistency	were	disappointing.	We	have	concluded	that
this	 particular	 masterpiece	 cannot	 be	 achieved	 in	 seconds;	 a	 cooked
custard,	 well-dissolved	 gelatin,	 stiffly	 beaten	 egg	 whites,	 properly
whipped	 cream,	 perfect	 flavoring,	 and	 then	 the	 right	 blending	 of	 one
element	 into	 another	 at	 the	 right	 time	 seem	 to	 be	 the	 requisites	 for	 a
true	 Bavarian	 cream.	 The	 classical	method	 below	 is	 certainly	 far	 from
difficult,	 and	 the	whole	dessert	may	be	prepared	 the	day,	or	 even	 two
days,	before	serving.

Orange	 Bavarian	 cream	 is	 our	 favorite.	 Other	 flavorings	 are
suggested	at	the	end	of	the	recipe.

For	8	to	10	people



The	orange	flavoring
2	large,	fine,	bright-skinned	oranges
2	large	sugar	lumps
A	4-quart	mixing	bowl
Wash	and	dry	 the	oranges.	One	at	 a	 time,	 rub	 the	 sugar	 lumps	over
them	 until	 all	 sides	 of	 each	 lump	 are	 impregnated	 with	 orange	 oil.
Mash	the	sugar	lumps	in	the	mixing	bowl.	Grate	the	orange	part	of	the
skins	into	the	bowl.

A	measuring	cup
A	strainer
1½	Tb	(1½	packages)	gelatin
Squeeze	the	juice	of	the	oranges	into	the	cup,	to	make	½	to	¾	cup	of
strained	juice.	Sprinkle	the	gelatin	over	the	orange	juice	and	set	aside
to	soften.

The	custard	sauce
7	egg	yolks
A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
1	cup	granulated	sugar
2	tsp	cornstarch
Following	 the	procedure	 for	 crème	anglaise,	 add	 the	 egg	yolks	 to	 the
orange	 sugar	 in	 the	 mixing	 bowl.	 Gradually	 beat	 in	 the	 granulated
sugar	 and	 continue	 beating	 for	 2	 to	 3	minutes	 until	mixture	 is	 pale
yellow	and	forms	the	ribbon.	Beat	in	the	cornstarch.

1½	cups	boiling	milk
A	2-quart	enameled	saucepan
A	wooden	spoon
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
Beat	 the	milk	 in	a	 thin	stream	of	droplets	 into	 the	egg	yolk	mixture.



Pour	 into	 saucepan	 and	 set	 over	 moderate	 heat.	 Stir	 with	 wooden
spoon	 until	 mixture	 thickens	 enough	 to	 coat	 the	 spoon	 lightly	 (170
degrees).	 Do	 not	 overheat	 or	 egg	 yolks	will	 scramble.	 Remove	 from
heat	 and	 immediately	 add	 the	 orange	 juice	 and	 gelatin	 mixture,
beating	 for	 a	moment	 or	 two	until	 gelatin	 has	 dissolved	 completely.
Rinse	out	the	mixing	bowl	and	pour	in	the	custard.

The	egg	whites
5	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
A	rubber	spatula
A	bowl	with	a	tray	of	ice	cubes	and	water	to	cover	them
Beat	 the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	 soft	peaks	are	 formed;	 sprinkle	on
the	 sugar	 and	 beat	 until	 stiff	 peaks	 are	 formed.	 Using	 the	 rubber
spatula,	fold	the	egg	whites	into	the	hot	custard.	Set	over	the	ice.	Fold
delicately	with	spatula	frequently	while	mixture	is	cooling,	to	keep	it
from	separating.	When	cold	and	almost	but	not	quite	set,	proceed	with
recipe.

The	whipped	cream	and	final	flavoring
½	cup	chilled	whipping	cream
A	3-quart	metal	bowl
A	balloon	whip
2	Tb	orange	liqueur
An	8-cup	cylindrical	mold	or	ring	mold,	preferably	of	metal	as
unmolding	is	easier
Beat	cream	over	the	preceding	bowl	of	ice	until	cream	has	doubled	in
volume	and	beater	leaves	faint	traces	on	the	surface.	Fold	the	whipped
cream	and	orange	liqueur	into	the	custard.

Lightly	oiled	waxed	paper



Rinse	 mold	 in	 cold	 water	 and	 shake	 out	 excess.	 Turn	 the	 Bavarian
cream	 into	 the	mold.	 Cover	 with	 the	 waxed	 paper.	 Chill	 for	 3	 to	 4
hours	or	overnight.

Unmolding	and	serving
A	long,	thin	knife
A	chilled	serving	platter
Remove	 waxed	 paper.	 Dip	 mold	 in	 very	 hot	 water	 for	 1	 second	 (a
second	or	two	longer	for	a	porcelain	mold)	run	knife	around	the	edge
of	 the	 cream,	 and	 reverse	 on	 a	 chilled	 serving	 platter.	 (May	 be
unmolded	and	refrigerated	several	hours	before	serving.)

Peeled	orange	segments	sprinkled	with	orange	liqueur	and	sugar
Serve	surrounded	with	the	orange	segments.

VARIATIONS
Bavarois	au	Chocolat
[Chocolate	Bavarian	Cream]

Use	 the	 same	method	 and	 ingredients	 as	 for	 the	master	 recipe	 for
Bavarian	cream,	but	omit	 the	orange	 flavoring	and	make	 the	 following
changes.

5	egg	yolks	instead	of	7
Fewer	egg	yolks	are	needed	for	the	custard	when	chocolate	is	used.

½	cup	strong	coffee
2	tsp	vanilla	extract
Soften	the	gelatin	in	coffee	and	vanilla	rather	than	in	orange	juice.

3	ounces	or	squares	semisweet	baking	chocolate
Grate	the	chocolate	into	the	1½	cups	of	milk	destined	for	the	custard
sauce.	Heat	slowly	to	the	simmer,	beating	with	a	wire	whip	to	blend



the	chocolate	smoothly.	Proceed	with	the	custard	sauce,	beating	in	the
coffee	 and	 gelatin	 at	 the	 end.	 Fold	 in	 the	 beaten	 egg	 whites	 and
refrigerate,	folding	occasionally,	until	cool	but	not	set.

2	Tb	dark	rum	or	orange	liqueur
Rum	is	a	more	usual	flavoring	with	chocolate,	but	orange	liqueur	may
be	used	 if	 you	wish.	Fold	 it	 in	with	 the	whipped	cream,	and	 fill	 the
mold.

2	to	3	cups	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce),	or	crème	Chantilly	(lightly
whipped	cream)
Serve	 chocolate	 Bavarian	 cream	 with	 crème	 anglaise	 or	 with	 crème
Chantilly.

Bavarois	Praliné
[Almond	Bavarian	Cream]

Use	 the	 same	 ingredients	 and	method	 as	 for	 the	master	 recipe	 for
Bavarian	 cream,	 but	 omit	 the	 orange	 flavoring	 and	 substitute	 the
following.

½	cup	cold	strong	coffee
Soften	the	gelatin	in	coffee	rather	than	in	orange	juice.

½	cup	pralin	(caramelized	almonds),	or	pulverized	macaroons
Fold	 the	 pralin	 or	 macaroons	 into	 the	 custard	 with	 the	 beaten	 egg
whites.	Chill,	folding	occasionally,	until	cool	but	not	set.

1	Tb	vanilla	extract	and	¼	tsp	almond	extract	OR	1	tsp	vanilla
extract,	¼	tsp	almond	extract,	and	2	Tb	dark	rum
Fold	the	flavoring	into	the	custard	with	the	whipped	cream.

2	Tb	pralin	or	pulverized	macaroons



2	to	3	cups	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce),	or	crème	Chantilly	(lightly
whipped	cream)
Sprinkle	the	top	of	the	Bavarian	cream	with	pralin	or	macaroons	 just
before	serving.	No	sauce	is	necessary,	but	you	may	serve	with	it	crème
anglaise	or	crème	Chantilly.

Bavarois	aux	Fruits
[Strawberry	or	Raspberry	Bavarian	Cream—and	other	fruits]

This	 recipe	 calls	 for	 raspberries	or	 strawberries.	Other	 fruit	 purées
may	be	substituted,	such	as	apricot,	peach,	or	caramelized	pears.	Use	the
method	 and	 ingredients	 in	 the	 master	 recipe	 for	 Bavarian	 cream,	 but
omit	the	orange	flavoring	and	make	the	following	changes.

5	egg	yolks	instead	of	7
The	 fruit	 purée	 gives	 body	 to	 the	 custard,	 so	 fewer	 egg	 yolks	 are
needed.

½	cup	strawberry	or	raspberry	juice,	or	orange	juice
If	 you	 are	 using	 frozen	 berries,	 dissolve	 the	 gelatin	 in	½	 cup	 of	 the
juice.	Otherwise	use	orange	juice.

1	pint	fresh	strawberries	or	raspberries	OR,	1	lb.	frozen	berries,
thawed	and	well	drained
Force	the	fruit	through	a	sieve	and	measure	out	¾	to	1	cup	of	purée.
(Any	 leftover	 purée	 may	 go	 into	 your	 sauce.)	 Fold	 measured	 purée
into	the	custard	along	with	the	whipped	cream.

2	to	3	cups	strawberry	or	raspberry	sauce	OR,	1	pint	fresh
strawberries	or	raspberries,	hulled	and	sprinkled	with	sugar
Serve	 this	 Bavarian	 cream	 with	 strawberry	 or	 raspberry	 sauce,	 or
surround	the	dessert	with	fresh	berries.



Cold	Soufflés
Many	 of	 the	 recipes	 you	 will	 see	 for	 cold	 soufflés	 are	 not	 cold

soufflés	at	all,	but	Bavarian	creams.	They	look	like	soufflés	because	they
appear	to	have	risen	several	inches	up	beyond	the	rim	of	the	mold.	This
effect	 is	 achieved	 by	 surrounding	 the	mold	with	 a	 paper	 collar	 which
holds	 the	 cream	 in	 place	 until	 set;	 the	 paper	 is	 removed	 just	 before
serving	time.	You	may	mold	any	of	the	preceding	Bavarian	creams	this
way,	as	well	as	the	chocolate	mousse,	or	the	almond-cream	filling	for	the
charlottes	Malakoff	 starting.	Two	recipes	 for	actual	cold	soufflés	are	 the
rum	and	macaroon	soufflé,	and	the	caramel	and	almond	soufflé.

RIZ	À	L’IMPÉRATRICE
[Bavarian	Cream	with	Rice	and	Fruits—a	cold	dessert]

Riz	 à	 l’Impératrice	 is	 one	 of	 the	 grand	 old	 standbys	 of	 the	 classic
French	 cuisine,	 and	 has	 no	 relation,	 fortunately,	 to	 the	 dreadful	 rice
puddings	 of	 one’s	 youth.	 It	 is	 velvet	 to	 the	 tongue,	 and	 is	 always
accompanied	by	a	decorative	fruit	sauce.
For	8	to	10	people

Preheat	oven	to	300	degrees.

¾	cup	(4	ounces)	finely	diced	glacéed	fruits	of	various	colors,	such	as
cherries,	angelica,	orange	peel

4	Tb	kirsch	or	cognac
1⅓	Tb	(1⅓	packages)	gelatin
Mix	the	fruits	in	a	small	bowl	with	the	kirsch	or	cognac.	Sprinkle	on
the	gelatin	and	set	aside	until	needed.

½	cup	(4	ounces)	white	rice
4	quarts	boiling	water
Sprinkle	 the	 rice	 into	 the	 boiling	 water	 and	 boil	 5	 minutes.	 Drain
thoroughly.



1⅔	cups	boiling	milk
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
2	Tb	butter
A	1-quart	covered,	fireproof	casserole
1	tsp	vanilla	extract
A	round	of	buttered	waxed	paper
Bring	milk,	 sugar,	and	butter	 to	boil	 in	 the	casserole.	Stir	 in	 the	rice
and	vanilla.	Bring	to	simmer	on	top	of	 the	stove.	Lay	paper	over	 the
rice,	cover	casserole,	and	set	in	preheated	oven	to	cook	very	slowly	for
35	to	40	minutes,	until	the	milk	has	been	absorbed	and	the	rice	is	very
tender.

5	egg	yolks
A	3-to	4-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip	or	an	electric	beater
¾	cup	granulated	sugar
1	tsp	cornstarch
1½	cups	boiling	milk
A	heavy-bottomed	enameled	saucepan
A	wooden	spoon
1	tsp	vanilla	extract
3	Tb	apricot	preserves	forced	through	a	sieve
A	bowl	with	a	tray	of	ice	cubes	and	water	to	cover	them
Meanwhile,	following	the	procedure	for	crème	anglaise,	place	egg	yolks
in	mixing	bowl.	Gradually	beat	in	the	sugar	and	continue	beating	until
mixture	 is	pale	yellow	and	 forms	 the	 ribbon.	Beat	 in	 the	 cornstarch,
then	 the	 boiling	milk	 by	 droplets.	 Pour	 into	 saucepan	 and	 stir	 over
moderate	heat	until	custard	coats	the	spoon	lightly	(170	degrees).	Do
not	bring	near	the	simmer	or	egg	yolks	will	curdle.	Remove	from	heat
and	immediately	stir	in	the	glacéed	fruits	and	gelatin	mixture,	stirring
until	 gelatin	 has	 thoroughly	 dissolved.	 Add	 the	 vanilla	 and	 apricot
preserves.	Stir	the	rice	into	the	custard,	a	spoonful	at	a	time	if	rice	is



hot.	Fold	delicately	over	the	bowl	of	ice	cubes	and	water	until	cold	but
not	set.

Flavorless	cooking	oil
A	6-cup	cylindrical	mold	about	3½	inches	deep,	or	a	ring	mold
A	round	of	oiled	waxed	paper
Lightly	 oil	 the	 inside	 of	 the	 mold	 and	 line	 the	 bottom	 with	 oiled
waxed	paper.

1	cup	chilled	whipping	cream
A	3-quart	metal	bowl
A	balloon	whip
A	round	of	oiled	waxed	paper
When	the	rice	custard	has	cooled,	beat	the	cream	over	the	bowl	of	ice
cubes	and	water	until	doubled	in	volume	and	beater	leaves	light	traces
on	 the	 surface.	 Fold	 into	 the	 rice	 custard,	 turn	 into	 the	 mold,	 and
cover	with	oiled	waxed	paper.	Refrigerate	for	4	hours	or	overnight.

2	cups	strawberry	or	raspberry	sauce
A	chilled	serving	platter
Optional:	⅓	cup	glacéed	fruits,	diced	or	cut	into	fancy	shapes,	and
steeped	in	1	Tb	kirsch	or	cognac
Remove	waxed	paper.	Dip	mold	in	very	hot	water	for	1	second	(a	few
seconds	more	if	mold	is	not	of	metal).	Run	a	knife	around	the	custard,
and	 unmold	 on	 chilled	 serving	 platter.	 Surround	 with	 the	 sauce.
(NOTE:	 After	 dessert	 has	 been	 unmolded,	 you	may	 decorate	 it	 with
glacéed	 fruits.)	

MOUSSE	À	L’ORANGE
[Orange	Mousse—a	frozen	dessert]

A	becoming	way	to	serve	this	delicate	mousse	is	in	the	scooped-out
halves	of	oranges.



For	6	people

3	Tb	orange	liqueur
A	1-quart	measuring	cup
3	or	4	bright-skinned	oranges
½	lemon
Orange	juice
Pour	the	liqueur	into	the	measuring	cup.	Grate	the	colored	part	of	the
skins	 of	 3	 oranges	 and	 the	½	 lemon	 into	 the	 cup.	 Strain	 in	 enough
orange	juice	so	liquid	measures	2	cups.

6	egg	yolks
½	cup	granulated	sugar
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl	A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
2	tsp	cornstarch
A	2½-quart,	heavy-bottomed	enameled	saucepan
A	wooden	spoon
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
Beat	 the	 egg	yolks	 and	 sugar	 in	 a	mixing	bowl	until	mixture	 is	 pale
yellow	 and	 forms	 the	 ribbon.	 Beat	 in	 the	 cornstarch	 and	 the	 orange
juice	mixture.	Pour	into	the	saucepan	and	stir	over	moderate	heat	with
wooden	spoon	until	mixture	heats	through	and	thickens,	but	does	not
come	 to	 the	 simmer,	 or	 a	 temperature	 of	more	 than	 170	 degrees.	 It
should	coat	the	spoon	lightly.	Remove	from	heat	and	beat	a	moment
to	stop	the	cooking.

6	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
A	bowl	with	a	tray	of	ice	cubes	and	water	to	cover	them
Beat	 the	 egg	whites	 and	 salt	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft	 peaks	 are
formed;	 sprinkle	 in	 the	 sugar	 and	 beat	 until	 stiff	 peaks	 are	 formed.



Fold	 the	 egg	whites	 into	 the	 hot	 orange	mixture,	 and	 fold	 over	 the
bowl	of	ice	until	thoroughly	chilled	so	the	custard	will	not	separate.

½	cup	chilled	whipping	cream
6	orange-shell	cups,	or	dessert	cups,	or	a	serving	bowl
Glazed	orange	peel,	angelica	cut	into	leaf	shapes,	mint	leaves,	or
whipped	cream
Beat	the	cream	until	stiff,	and	fold	into	the	chilled	mousse.	Turn	into
orange-shell	cups,	dessert	cups,	or	bowl.	Cover	and	freeze	for	several
hours	or	overnight.
Decorations:
Decorate	the	desert	just	before	serving.

MOUSSELINE	AU	CHOCOLAT
MAYONNAISE	AU	CHOCOLAT
FONDANT	AU	CHOCOLAT
[Chocolate	Mousse—a	cold	dessert]

Among	all	 the	recipes	for	chocolate	mousse	this	 is	one	of	 the	best,
we	 think;	 it	 uses	 egg	 yolks,	 sugar,	 and	 butter,	 and	 instead	 of	 cream,
beaten	egg	whites.	The	orange	flavoring	suggested	here	is	delicious	with
chocolate.	 An	 interchangeable	 version	 is	 charlotte	 Malakoff,	 made	 of
butter,	chocolate,	and	powdered	almonds.	Either	may	be	unmolded	after
chilling,	or	served	in	a	bowl,	or	in	dessert	cups,	or	in	little	covered	pots.
(Note:	When	served	in	pots,	this	dessert	is	sometimes	erroneously	called
pots	 de	 crème	 au	 chocolat.	 French	 dessert	 crèmes	 are	 custards,	 such	 as
those	here.)	For	about	5	cups	serving	6	to	8	people

A	3-quart	porcelain	or	stainless	steel	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
4	egg	yolks
¾	cup	instant	sugar	(very	finely	granulated)



¼	cup	orange	liqueur
A	pan	of	not-quite-simmering	water
A	basin	of	cold	water
Beat	 the	 egg	 yolks	 and	 sugar	 together	 until	 mixture	 is	 thick,	 pale
yellow,	and	falls	back	upon	itself	forming	a	slowly	dissolving	ribbon.
Beat	 in	 the	orange	 liqueur.	Then	set	mixing	bowl	over	 the	not-quite-
simmering	 water	 and	 continue	 beating	 for	 3	 to	 4	 minutes	 until	 the
mixture	 is	 foamy	 and	 too	 hot	 for	 your	 finger.	 Then	 beat	 over	 cold
water	for	3	to	4	minutes	until	the	mixture	is	cool	and	again	forms	the
ribbon.	It	will	have	the	consistency	of	mayonnaise.

6	ounces	or	squares	semisweet	baking	chocolate
4	Tb	strong	coffee
A	small	saucepan
6	ounces	or	1½	sticks	softened	unsalted	butter
Optional:	¼	cup	finely	diced,	glazed	orange	peel
Melt	chocolate	with	coffee	over	hot	water.	Remove	from	heat	and	beat
in	 the	 butter	 a	 bit	 at	 a	 time,	 to	 make	 a	 smooth	 cream.	 Beat	 the
chocolate	 into	 the	 egg	 yolks	 and	 sugar,	 then	 beat	 in	 the	 optional
orange	peel.

4	egg	whites	Pinch	of	salt	1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	 soft	peaks	are	 formed;	 sprinkle	on
the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are	formed.	Stir	one	fourth	of	the
egg	whites	into	the	chocolate	mixture.	Fold	in	the	rest.

Turn	 into	 serving	 dish,	 dessert	 cups,	 or	 petits	 pots.	 Refrigerate	 for	 at
least	2	hours	or	overnight.

2	cups	vanilla-flavored	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce),	or	lightly
whipped	cream	sweetened	with	powdered	sugar
Pass	the	sauce	or	whipped	cream	separately.



Molded	Mousse
Turn	 the	 preceding	 mousse	 into	 a	 lightly	 oiled,	 6-cup	 ring	 mold.

Cover	 with	 oiled,	 waxed	 paper.	 Chill	 for	 3	 to	 4	 hours	 until	 well	 set.
Remove	paper,	dip	mold	for	1	second	in	very	hot	water,	and	unmold	on
a	chilled	serving	dish.	Fill	center	of	mousse	with	crème	anglaise	or	lightly
whipped	cream.
Or	 use	 the	 following	 charlotte	Malakoff	 system,	 lining	 a	 cylindrical

mold	with	ladyfingers	dipped	in	orange	liqueur.

		CHARLOTTE	MALAKOFF	AUX	FRAISES
[Almond	Cream	with	Fresh	Strawberries—a	cold	dessert]

This	delectable	almond	cream	is	relatively	quick	to	assemble	if	you
have	ladyfingers	on	hand—but	they	must	be	of	excellent	quality,	not	the
soggy,	baking-powder	variety.	 If	you	cannot	buy	them,	or	have	not	the
time	to	make	them,	omit	the	ladyfingers	altogether	and	turn	the	almond
cream	into	a	ring	mold	as	described	in	the	preceding	paragraph,	or	into
a	 serving	 dish,	 or	 into	 individual	 dessert	 cups.	 Although	 the	 dessert
cannot	then	be	called	a	charlotte	Malakoff,	 it	will	still	be	delicious,	and
can	be	nicely	decorated	with	fresh	strawberries.
For	8	to	10	people

Preparing	strawberries	and	lining	mold
1	quart	fresh	strawberries
A	cake	rack
Hull	the	strawberries.	Wash	them	quickly	if	necessary,	and	set	on	cake
rack	to	drain	thoroughly.

A	2-quart	cylindrical	mold,	about	4	inches	high	and	7	inches	in
diameter

A	round	of	waxed	paper
Line	the	bottom	of	the	unbuttered	mold	with	the	round	of	unbuttered
waxed	paper.



⅓	cup	orange	liqueur
⅔	cup	water
A	soup	plate
24	single	ladyfingers,	4	inches	long	and	about	2	inches	wide
A	cake	rack
Pour	orange	liqueur	and	water	into	soup	plate.	Dip	in	the	ladyfingers,
one	by	one,	and	drain	on	rack.	Line	sides	of	mold	with	ladyfingers	as
described.	Reserve	the	remaining	dipped	ladyfingers.

The	almond	cream
A	4-quart	mixing	bowl
An	electric	beater	or	wire	whip
½	lb.	softened	unsalted	butter
1	cup	sugar	(preferably	the	very	finely	granulated	“instant”	type)
½	cup	orange	liqueur
¼	tsp	almond	extract
1⅓	cups	pulverized	almonds
Cream	 butter	 and	 sugar	 together	 for	 3	 to	 4	minutes,	 until	 pale	 and
fluffy.	Beat	in	orange	liqueur	and	almond	extract.	Continue	beating	for
several	 minutes	 until	 sugar	 is	 completely	 dissolved.	 Beat	 in	 the
almonds.

2	cups	chilled	whipping	cream
A	chilled	bowl
A	chilled	beater
Whip	the	cream	until	 the	beater,	drawn	across	 the	 top	of	 the	cream,
leaves	light	traces.	Fold	the	cream	into	the	almond	and	butter	mixture.

Molding	and	serving
A	round	of	buttered	waxed	paper



A	saucer	which	will	just	fit	into	the	mold
A	1-lb.	weight,	or	pieces	of	a	meat	grinder
Turn	a	third	of	the	almond	cream	into	the	lined	mold.	Arrange	over	it
a	 layer	 of	 strawberries,	 heads	 down.	 Cover	 them	 with	 a	 layer	 of
ladyfingers.	 Repeat	 with	 another	 layer	 each	 of	 almond	 cream,
strawberries,	and	ladyfingers.	Fill	the	mold	with	the	rest	of	the	almond
cream	 and	 a	 layer	 of	 ladyfingers	 if	 there	 are	 any	 left.	 Trim	 off
ladyfingers	around	edge	of	mold,	and	press	 the	 trimmed-off	bits	 into
the	 top	 of	 the	 cream.	 Cover	mold	with	 the	waxed	 paper,	 set	 saucer
over	the	paper,	and	place	the	weight	on	it.	Refrigerate	for	6	hours	or
overnight.	 The	 butter	 must	 be	 chilled	 firm,	 so	 the	 dessert	 will	 not
collapse	when	unmolded.

A	chilled	serving	platter	The	remaining	strawberries,	more	if	needed
2	cups	crème	Chantilly	(lightly	whipped	cream),	or	strawberry	sauce
Remove	waxed	paper.	Run	a	knife	around	the	inside	of	the	mold,	and
reverse	 dessert	 on	 a	 chilled	 serving	 platter.	 Peel	 waxed	 paper	 from
top,	 and	 refrigerate	 dessert	 until	 serving	 time.	 Decorate	 with
strawberries	and	accompany	with	whipped	cream	or	strawberry	sauce.

VARIATIONS
Use	 the	 same	method	 and	 proportions	 as	 in	 the	 preceding	master

recipe	 for	 charlotte	Malakoff,	 but	make	 the	 following	 changes	 for	 these
variations:

Charlotte	Malakoff	aux	Framboises
[Almond	Cream	with	Raspberries]

Substitute	fresh	raspberries	for	strawberries	in	the	preceding	recipe.

Charlotte	Malakoff	au	Chocolat
[Almond	Cream	with	Chocolate]



Ingredients	for	the	master	recipe	but	without	the	strawberries
4	ounces	or	squares	of	semisweet	chocolate	melted	in
¼	cup	strong	coffee	¼	rather	than	½	cup	orange	liqueur	for	the
almond	cream
2	cups	crème	Chantilly	(lightly	whipped	cream),	or	crème	anglaise
(custard	sauce)
Following	the	master	recipe,	line	the	mold	with	ladyfingers	dipped	in
diluted	orange	 liqueur.	Make	 the	almond	cream	as	directed,	but	 fold
the	melted	chocolate	 into	 it,	and	only	¼	cup	of	orange	 liqueur.	Cool
before	 folding	 in	 the	whipped	cream,	and	complete	 the	recipe.	Serve
with	whipped	cream	or	custard	sauce.

Charlotte	Basque
[Almond	Custard	with	Chocolate]

This	is	lighter	than	the	charlotte	Malakoff	because	the	base	is	a	custard
and	no	whipped	cream	is	folded	into	it.
For	8	to	10	people

4	cups	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce),	flavored	with	chocolate
Prepare	a	chocolate-flavored	custard	sauce	and	beat	over	cold	water,
or	refrigerate,	until	almost	cold.

½	lb.	unsalted	butter
1⅓	cups	pulverized	almonds
½	tsp	almond	extract
2	to	3	Tb	rum,	kirsch,	cognac,	or	orange	liqueur
A	2-quart	mold	lined	with	ladyfingers,	and	extra	ladyfingers	as
described	in	master	recipe
2	cups	crème	Chantilly	(lightly	whipped	cream)
Cream	 the	butter	 and	almonds	 together	 in	a	mixing	bowl.	Gradually
beat	in	the	cool	custard	sauce.	Beat	in	the	almond	extract,	and	rum	or



liqueur	 to	 taste.	 Turn	 into	 lined	 mold,	 alternating	 with	 layers	 of
ladyfingers,	and	chill	until	set.	Serve	with	lightly	whipped	cream.

CHARLOTTE	CHANTILLY,	AUX	FRAISES
CHARLOTTE	CHANTILLY,	AUX	FRAMBOISES
[Strawberry	or	Raspberry	Cream—a	cold	dessert]

Here	is	another	handsome	molded	dessert;	this	one	is	also	relatively
quick	to	execute.	But	unless	the	egg	yolks	are	well	thickened,	and	then
chilled	 before	 the	 cream	 is	 folded	 in,	 the	 dessert	 will	 collapse	 rather
quickly.	If	you	do	not	wish	to	serve	it	unmolded,	turn	the	cream	into	a
serving	 bowl	 or	 into	 dessert	 cups.	 You	may	use	 frozen	 fruit	 instead	 of
fresh,	but	be	sure	the	fruit	is	well	thawed	and	most	thoroughly	drained,
otherwise	the	purée	will	be	too	liquid.

For	8	to	10	people

A	round	of	waxed	paper
A	2-quart	cylindrical	mold	about	4	inches	high	and	7	inches	in
diameter,	lined	with	ladyfingers
Place	the	round	of	waxed	paper	in	the	bottom	of	the	unbuttered	mold.
Then	 line	 the	 sides	 of	 the	 mold	 (not	 the	 bottom)	 with	 upright
ladyfingers	as	described	in	the	directions.

1½	pints	fresh	strawberries	or	raspberries
Hull,	wash,	and	drain	the	berries.	Force	them	through	a	sieve	and	into
a	bowl.	Measure	out	1¼	cups	of	purée.	Chill.

A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
A	3-quart	stainless	steel	mixing	bowl
⅔	cup	instant	sugar	(very	finely	granulated)
8	egg	yolks
A	pan	of	not-quite-simmering	water
A	bowl	with	a	tray	of	ice	cubes	and	water	to	cover	them



Beat	the	sugar	into	the	egg	yolks	and	continue	beating	until	mixture	is
pale	yellow	and	falls	back	on	itself	forming	a	slowly	dissolving	ribbon.
Then	place	 the	mixing	bowl	over	 the	not-quite-simmering	water	and
beat	 until	 mixture	 has	 thickened	 into	 a	 cream	 and	 becomes
uncomfortably	hot	for	your	finger.	Set	bowl	in	ice	water	and	beat	until
mixture	is	cold	and	falls	back	upon	itself	forming	a	slowly	dissolving
ribbon	on	the	surface;	fold	with	a	spatula	until	chilled.

2½	cups	chilled	heavy	whipping	cream
A	4-quart	metal	bowl
A	chilled	beater
When	 the	 egg	 yolk	mixture	 has	 chilled,	 beat	 the	 cream	 until	 it	 has
doubled	in	volume	and	forms	stiff	(rather	than	soft)	peaks.

Extra	ladyfingers,	if	needed
A	round	of	waxed	paper
Fold	 the	 chilled	 strawberry	 or	 raspberry	 purée	 into	 the	 chilled	 egg
yolk	 mixture,	 then	 fold	 in	 the	 whipped	 cream.	 Turn	 into	 the	 mold.
Place	 ladyfingers	 over	 the	 cream	 to	 fill	 the	mold	 almost	 completely.
Trim	 off	 any	 protruding	 ladyfingers	 around	 the	 edges	 of	 the	 mold.
Cover	 with	 waxed	 paper	 and	 refrigerate	 for	 at	 least	 6	 hours	 or
overnight.

A	chilled	serving	dish
1	to	3	cups	fresh	strawberries	or	raspberries
Just	before	serving,	remove	waxed	paper,	run	a	knife	around	the	edge
of	 the	mold,	and	reverse	dessert	onto	a	chilled	serving	dish.	Remove
waxed	paper.	Decorate	the	top	of	the	dessert	with	fresh	berries	and,	if
you	wish,	place	more	berries	around	the	dessert.

		CRÈME	RENVERSÉE	AU	CARAMEL
[Caramel	Custard,	Unmolded—warm	or	cold]



French	custards	are	usually	unmolded,	and	 therefore	 call	 for	more
eggs	 and	 egg	 yolks	 than	 custards	 served	 directly	 from	 their	 baking
dishes.

For	a	1-quart	mold	serving	4	to	6	people

The	custard	mixture

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	1-quart,	fireproof,	cylindrical	mold	lined	with	caramel
2½	cups	milk
Optional:	1	vanilla	bean
Line	 the	 mold	 with	 caramel	 as	 directed.	 Bring	 the	 milk	 with	 the
optional	vanilla	bean	to	 just	below	the	simmer	 in	a	saucepan,	cover,
and	 let	 the	bean	 steep	 in	 the	milk	while	you	prepare	 the	 rest	of	 the
custard	ingredients.

½	cup	granulated	sugar
3	eggs
3	egg	yolks
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
1	tsp	vanilla	extract,	if	you	have	not	used	a	bean
A	fine-meshed	sieve
Gradually	beat	the	sugar	into	the	eggs	and	egg	yolks	in	the	bowl	until
well	mixed,	 light,	and	foamy.	Continue	beating	while	pouring	on	the
hot	milk	 in	 a	 thin	 stream	 of	 droplets.	 Stir	 in	 vanilla	 extract,	 if	 you
have	not	used	a	vanilla	bean.	Strain	the	mixture	through	a	sieve	into
the	caramel-lined	mold.

Baking	the	custard
Set	mold	 in	a	pan	and	pour	enough	boiling	water	around	mold	 to

come	halfway	up	its	sides.	Place	in	bottom	third	of	preheated	oven,	close
oven	door,	and	wait	for	temperature	to	return	to	350;	in	5	minutes,	turn



oven	down	to	325.	Water	in	pan	should	always	be	almost-but-not-quite
simmering—too	 much	 heat	 and	 the	 custard	 will	 be	 grainy.	 Bake	 for
about	 40	 minutes:	 a	 trussing	 needle	 or	 straw	 should	 come	 out	 clean
when	plunged	1	 inch	 from	edge	of	mold,	 but	 center	 of	 custard	 should
still	 tremble	 slightly—over-long	 cooking	 makes	 a	 tough	 rather	 than
tender	custard.

Unmolding	and	serving
If	 you	wish	 to	 serve	 the	 custard	warm,	 set	mold	 in	 a	 pan	 of	 cold

water	 for	 about	 10	 minutes	 to	 firm	 it	 up;	 otherwise	 chill	 in	 the
refrigerator.	To	unmold,	run	a	knife	between	custard	and	edge	of	mold,
place	a	serving	dish	upside	down	over	the	mold,	quickly	reverse	the	two,
and	 remove	 the	 mold	 from	 the	 custard.	 If	 you	 wish,	 simmer	 2	 to	 3
tablespoons	 of	 water	 in	 the	 mold	 to	 dissolve	 the	 remaining	 caramel;
strain	around	the	custard.

VARIATIONS
To	 serve	 individual	unmolded	custards,	use	 the	 custard	mixture	 in

the	preceding	master	recipe,	and	mold	the	custards	as	follows:

Petits	Pots	de	Crème
[Cup	Custards,	Unmolded]

1	quart	caramel	custard	mixture,	the	preceding	recipe
caramel-lined,	⅔	cup	ramekins
A	pan	to	hold	the	ramekins
Divide	 the	 custard	 mixture	 among	 the	 ramekins	 and	 pour	 boiling
water	 into	 the	pan	 to	come	halfway	up;	 set	 in	 lower	 third	 level	of	a
preheated	350-degree	oven.	In	5	minutes,	turn	oven	down	to	325	and
bake	 20	 to	 25	minutes	 longer	 or	 until	 a	 skewer	 or	 straw	 comes	 out
clean	 when	 plunged	 one-eighth	 inch	 from	 edge	 of	 molds;	 centers
should	 still	 tremble.	 Remove	 from	 oven,	 remove	molds	 from	water,
and	let	cool.	Unmold	when	ready	to	serve.



Crème	Sainte-Anne	au	Caramel
[Macaroon	Cup	Custards,	Unmolded]

1	Tb	butter
caramel-lined	ramekins,	⅔-cup	capacity
1	cup	pulverized	macaroons	1	quart	caramel	custard	mixture,	the
master	recipe
Butter	 the	 insides	 of	 the	 caramel-lined	 ramekins	 and	 sprinkle	 2
tablespoons	 of	 pulverized	 macaroons	 in	 each.	 Fill	 with	 the	 custard
mixture	and	bake	as	in	the	preceding	directions	for	cup	custards.	You
may	wish	to	garnish	them	when	unmolded	with	one	of	the	suggestions
at	the	left.

Optional	garnishings

crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce)
OR,	strawberry	or	raspberry	sauce
OR,	fresh	or	canned	peach	halves,	coated	with	caramel	syrup

DIPLOMATE
POUDING	DE	CABINET
[Custard	with	Glacéed	Fruits,	Unmolded—a	warm	or	cold	dessert]

This	 delicious	 and	most	 classical	 of	 French	 desserts	 does	 not	 take
too	long	to	prepare,	and	can	be	baked	the	day	before	your	dinner	party.
The	custard	is	baked	in	a	mold	lined	with	ladyfingers	which	must	be	of
best	quality,	tender	and	dry,	not	spongy.

For	8	people

⅓	cup	small,	seedless	raisins
A	saucepan	of	boiling	water
A	small	bowl
⅔	cup	finely	diced,	mixed,	glacéed	fruits,	such	as	cherries,	angelica,



apricots,	pineapple
3	Tb	dark	rum	or	kirsch
Drop	the	raisins	into	the	boiling	water	and	let	stand	for	five	minutes.
Drain,	 and	 place	 in	 the	 bowl.	 Stir	 in	 the	 glacéed	 fruits,	 the	 rum	 or
kirsch,	and	let	stand	until	ready	to	use.

A	round	of	buttered	waxed	paper
A	6-cup	cylindrical	mold	about	3½	inches	high
Place	the	buttered	paper	in	the	bottom	of	the	mold.

⅓	cup	dark	rum	or	kirsch
⅔	cup	water
A	soup	plate
About	40	single	ladyfingers,	3½	inches	long	and	2	inches	wide	(recipe
for	homemade	ladyfingers)
A	cake	rack
Pour	the	rum	or	kirsch	and	water	into	the	soup	plate.	One	by	one,	dip
20	to	25	ladyfingers	(or	enough	to	line	the	mold)	into	the	liquid.	Drain
on	 cake	 rack.	 Following	 directions,	 line	 the	 bottom	 and	 the	 sides	 of
the	mold	with	the	dipped	ladyfingers.

2	eggs
3	egg	yolks
½	cup	granulated	sugar
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
2	cups	milk,	brought	to	the	boil	with	the	grated	rind	of	1	orange
Beat	 the	eggs,	 egg	yolks,	 and	 sugar	 in	a	mixing	bowl	until	 light	and
foamy.	Gradually	beat	in	the	boiling	milk.	Strain	in	the	kirsch	or	rum
from	the	glacéed	fruits.

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.



½	cup	apricot	preserves	forced	through	a	sieve
Spoon	a	ladleful	of	custard	into	the	prepared	mold.	Over	it	sprinkle	a
small	handful	of	the	glacéed	fruits,	then	2	to	3	tablespoons	of	apricot
preserves.	Cover	with	2	 or	 3	 ladyfingers,	 and	 spoon	 a	 bit	 of	 custard
over	 them.	 Wait	 for	 a	 moment	 for	 the	 ladyfingers	 to	 absorb	 the
custard,	 then	 continue	 with	 layers	 of	 fruit,	 apricot	 preserve,
ladyfingers,	 and	 custard	 until	 the	mold	 is	 filled.	 Trim	off	 protruding
ladyfingers	around	edge	of	mold.

A	pan	of	boiling	water
Set	mold	in	a	pan	of	boiling	water,	and	place	in	bottom	third	of	oven.
Immediately	 reduce	heat	 to	325	degrees.	Bake	 for	50	 to	60	minutes,
making	sure	water	in	pan	never	comes	to	the	simmer.	When	center	of
custard	 has	 risen	 very	 slightly	 and	 a	 needle	 or	 knife	 plunged	 to	 the
bottom	 of	 the	mold	 comes	 out	 clean,	 custard	 is	 done.	 Remove	 from
pan	of	water	and	let	cool.	(May	be	served	slightly	warm,	or	chilled.)

A	serving	platter
2	cups	strawberry	sauce
Run	a	knife	around	the	edge	of	 the	custard	and	reverse	on	a	serving
platter.	 Remove	 round	 of	 paper,	 and	 surround	 the	 dessert	 with	 the
sauce.

SWEET	SOUFFLÉS

Soufflés	Sucrés

Many	 people	 consider	 the	 desert	 soufflé	 to	 be	 the	 epitome	 and
triumph	of	the	art	of	French	cookery,	a	glorious	and	exciting	finish	to	a
great	 meal.	 Although	 sweet	 soufflés	 are	 lighter	 and	 airier	 than	 entrée
soufflés,	 the	general	 idea	is	the	same:	a	flavored	sauce	base	into	which
stiffly	beaten	egg	whites	are	incorporated.	All	the	points	discussed	in	the
Entrée	 chapter	 regarding	 soufflés,	 apply	 also	 to	 sweet	 soufflés;	 these
include	soufflé	molds,	placement	 in	 the	oven,	 testing,	and	serving.	The
discussion	 in	 that	 section	 on	 how	 to	 beat	 egg	 whites	 is	 of	 particular



importance.	Though	you	will	get	a	soufflé	of	some	sort	no	matter	what
you	do,	you	will	achieve	magnificence	only	if	your	egg	whites	are	beaten
so	 they	mount	 smoothly	 and	 stiffly	 to	 about	 seven	 times	 their	 original
volume,	and	are	 then	 folded	carefully	 into	 the	 sauce	base	 so	 that	 their
maximum	volume	is	retained.

THE	SAUCE	BASE	OR	BOUILLIE

Of	 the	 three	 standard	 methods	 for	 making	 a	 soufflé	 base,	 the
béchamel	with	 its	cooked	 roux,	 the	crème	pâtissière	with	 its	cooked	egg
yolks,	and	the	bouillie	used	in	the	following	recipes,	we	prefer	the	bouillie
for	 lightness.	A	bouillie	 is	milk,	 sugar,	 and	 flour	or	 starch,	 boiled	 for	 a
few	 seconds	 until	 thickened.	 After	 it	 has	 cooled	 slightly,	 egg	 yolks,
butter,	 and	 flavoring	 are	 beaten	 in,	 then	 beaten	 egg	 whites	 are
incorporated.	Some	people	prefer	a	bouillie	with	flour;	others	use	potato
starch,	 rice	 starch,	or	 cornstarch.	You	may	 take	your	choice	except	 for
the	 chocolate	 soufflé	which	 requires	 starch.	 Although	 you	 can	make	 a
soufflé	without	starch	or	flour,	as	in	the	lemon	soufflé	tart	you	will	find
that	it	lacks	something	in	texture	and	tenderness.

SOUFFLÉ	MOLDS

Be	sure	to	read	the	illustrated	section	on	soufflé	molds	in	the	Entrée
chapter.

TIMING

The	 following	 recipes	 for	 hot	 soufflés	 are	 based	 on	 a	 6-cup	mold,
and,	 except	 for	 the	 chocolate	 soufflé,	 take	 30	 to	 35	 minutes	 to	 bake.
Since	you	may	 fill	your	mold,	cover	 it	with	an	empty	kettle,	and	 let	 it
wait	 about	 an	 hour	 before	 baking,	 you	 can	 time	 it	 quite	 accurately	 to
coincide	with	dessert	if	you	are	also	able	to	estimate	the	general	eating-
speed	for	the	rest	of	the	meal.	In	any	case,	no	guest	who	knows	a	soufflé
is	in	the	oven	should	mind	waiting	a	few	minutes	for	dessert.

Soufflés	made	in	a	3-cup	mold	take	15	to	20	minutes	to	bake;	those
in	 an	8-cup	mold,	 40	 to	45	minutes.	Molds	 larger	 than	8-cup	 capacity
are	 difficult	 to	 time,	 and	 the	 soufflé	 is	 so	 large	 it	 may	 not	 rise
satisfactorily.



		SOUFFLÉ	À	LA	VANILLE
[Vanilla	Soufflé]

All	 of	 the	 sweet	 soufflés	 with	 the	 exception	 of	 chocolate	 may	 be
made	according	 to	 the	 following	vanilla	 soufflé	 formula.	A	 fairly	quick
operator	can	make	any	of	them	ready	for	the	oven	in	20	minutes.

For	4	people

Preparing	the	soufflé	mold

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

½	Tb	softened	butter
A	6-cup	mold,	preferably	one	3½	inches	deep	like	the	charlotte.	See
illustrations
Granulated	sugar
Measure	 out	 your	 ingredients.	 Butter	 the	 entire	 inner	 surface	 of	 the
mold.	Roll	granulated	sugar	around	in	it	to	coat	the	sides	and	bottom
evenly.	Knock	out	excess	sugar.

The	bouillie	sauce	base
A	wire	whip
3	Tb	sifted	all-purpose	flour
A	2½-quart	enameled	saucepan
¾	cup	milk
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 flour	 in	 the	 saucepan	 with	 a	 bit	 of	 the	 milk	 until	 well
blended.	 Beat	 in	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 milk,	 and	 the	 sugar.	 Stir	 over
moderately	 high	 heat	 until	 mixture	 thickens	 and	 comes	 to	 the	 boil.
Boil,	 stirring,	 for	30	seconds.	Sauce	will	be	very	 thick.	Remove	 from
heat	and	beat	for	2	minutes	to	cool	slightly.

4	eggs
A	bowl	for	beating	egg	whites



A	wire	whip
Separate	one	egg,	dropping	the	white	into	the	bowl,	and	the	yolk	into
the	center	of	the	sauce.	At	once	beat	the	yolk	into	the	sauce	with	the
wire	whip.	Continue	with	the	rest	of	the	eggs,	one	by	one.

2	Tb	softened	butter
A	rubber	scraper
Beat	 in	 half	 the	 butter.	 Clean	 sauce	 off	 sides	 of	 pan	 with	 rubber
scraper.	Dot	top	of	sauce	with	the	rest	of	the	butter	to	prevent	a	skin
from	forming	on	the	surface.
( )	If	made	in	advance,	beat	over	gentle	heat	only	until	sauce	is	barely
warm	to	your	finger,	not	hot.	Then	proceed	with	recipe.

The	egg	whites
5	egg	whites	(4	left	over	from	the	yolks	and	1	extra	white)
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	 whites	 and	 salt	 together	 until	 soft	 peaks	 are	 formed.
Sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are	formed.	(Directions
for	beating	egg	whites.)

The	flavoring
2	Tb	vanilla	extract	(Or	see	Vanilla,	if	you	prefer	the	bean)
Beat	the	vanilla	into	the	sauce	base.	Stir	in	a	fourth	of	the	beaten	egg
whites.	Delicately	 fold	 in	 the	 rest.	 (Illustrated	directions	 for	 folding.)
Filling	the	mold
Turn	the	soufflé	mixture	into	the	prepared	mold,	leaving	a	space	of	at
least	 1¼	 inches	 between	 the	 top	 of	 the	 soufflé	 and	 the	 rim	 of	 the
mold.	If	the	mold	is	too	full,	the	soufflé	will	spill	over	as	it	rises.
( )	 If	 soufflé	 is	 not	 to	 be	 cooked	 immediately,	 set	 an	 empty	 kettle
upside	 down	 over	 the	mold.	 Filled	mold	 can	 now	wait	 for	 about	 an
hour	before	baking.



Baking	the	soufflé

Powdered	sugar	in	a	shaker
Place	 the	 mold	 in	 the	 middle	 level	 of	 the	 preheated	 oven,	 and
immediately	 turn	 down	 to	 375	 degrees.	 In	 20	 minutes,	 when	 the
soufflé	 has	 begun	 to	 puff	 and	 brown,	 quickly	 sprinkle	 the	 top	 with
powdered	sugar.	After	a	total	of	30	to	35	minutes	of	baking,	the	top	of
the	soufflé	should	be	nicely	browned,	and	a	trussing	needle,	straw,	or
long,	thin	knife,	plunged	into	the	soufflé	through	the	side	of	the	puff,
should	come	out	clean.

Serve	immediately.

VARIATIONS
All	 of	 the	 following	 variations	 are	 based	 on	 the	 preceding	master

recipe,	 using	 the	 same	 method	 and	 ingredients	 except	 for	 changes	 in
flavor.

Soufflé	à	l’Orange
[Orange	Soufflé	with	Cointreau,	Curaçao,	Grand	Marnier,	Etc.]

1	bright-skinned	orange
2	large	sugar	lumps
Use	the	master	soufflé	formula.	Before	making	the	bouillie	sauce	base,
rub	the	sugar	lumps	over	the	orange	to	extract	the	oil.	Mash	the	sugar
lumps,	grate	the	orange	part	of	the	peel,	add	to	the	saucepan	with	the
granulated	sugar,	and	proceed	with	the	sauce	base.

2	tsp	vanilla	extract	instead	of	2	Tb
3	to	4	Tb	orange	liqueur
Beat	the	vanilla	and	the	orange	liqueur	into	the	sauce	base	just	before
incorporating	the	beaten	egg	whites.	Complete	the	recipe.



Soufflé	Rothschild
[Soufflé	with	Glacéed	Fruits	and	Kirsch]

⅔	cup	diced,	mixed	glacéed	fruits
¼	cup	kirsch
Let	the	glacéed	fruits	stand	in	the	kirsch	for	half	an	hour.

2	tsp	vanilla	extract	instead	of	2	Tb
Using	the	master	soufflé	formula,	prepare	the	bouillie	sauce	base.	Just
before	 incorporating	 the	beaten	egg	whites,	drain	 the	 fruits	and	beat
their	kirsch	maceration	into	the	sauce	base	with	the	vanilla.

Turn	a	 third	of	 the	 soufflé	mixture	 into	 the	prepared	mold.	 Sprinkle
half	of	the	glacéed	fruits	on	top.	Cover	with	half	the	remaining	soufflé
mixture,	 then	 with	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 fruits,	 and	 finally	 the	 last	 of	 the
soufflé	mixture.

Soufflé	au	Café
[Coffee	Soufflé]

Use	 the	master	 soufflé	 formula,	 but	 before	making	 the	 bouillie	 sauce
base:

3	Tb	coffee	beans
OR,	1	Tb	instant	coffee
Either	bring	½	cup	of	the	milk	to	the	boil	with	coffee	beans,	cover	and
steep	for	5	minutes,	then	strain	into	the	milk	and	flour	paste,	beating
thoroughly;	or	beat	instant	coffee	into	½	cup	of	boiling	milk.

1	Tb	vanilla	extract	rather	than	2	Tb
Then	proceed	with	the	recipe,	beating	the	vanilla	into	the	sauce	base
before	incorporating	the	beaten	egg	whites.



Soufflé	Praliné
Soufflé	aux	Macarons
[Soufflé	with	Caramelized	Almonds	or	Macaroons]

Use	the	master	soufflé	formula.

1	Tb	vanilla	extract	rather	than	2	Tb
½	cup	pralin,	or	the	pulverized	macaroons
Stir	the	vanilla	and	the	pralin	or	macaroons	into	the	bouillie	sauce	base
just	before	incorporating	the	beaten	egg	whites.

Soufflé	aux	Amandes
[Almond	Soufflé]

Almonds	may	be	added	to	any	soufflé,	and	are	especially	good	with
coffee,	orange,	or	chocolate,	as	well	as	with	vanilla.
Use	the	master	soufflé	formula.

2	Tb	vanilla	extract
¼	tsp	almond	extract
½	cup	pulverized	toasted	almonds
Stir	 the	 vanilla	 and	 almond	 extracts	 and	 almonds	 into	 the	 bouillie
sauce	base	just	before	incorporating	the	beaten	egg	whites.

Soufflé	Panaché
[Half-and-half	Soufflé]

For	two	kinds	of	soufflé	cooked	in	the	same	mold,	use	vanilla,	and
coffee,	pralin,	or	orange.	Chocolate	will	not	do,	as	it	cooks	in	a	different
manner.

The	bouillie	sauce	base,	master	recipe



2	two-quart	bowls
Divide	the	sauce	base	into	the	two	bowls.

5	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	 whites	 and	 salt	 together	 until	 soft	 peaks	 are	 formed;
sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are	formed.

1	Tb	vanilla	extract
Beat	 the	vanilla	 flavoring	 into	one	bowl,	 and	 fold	 in	half	 the	beaten
egg	whites.

½	tsp	vanilla	extract
2	tsp	instant	coffee	mixed	with	1	Tb	boiling	water
Beat	the	vanilla	extract	and	coffee	into	the	other	bowl,	and	fold	in	the
remaining	egg	whites.

A	6-cup	soufflé	mold	prepared	as	in	the	master	recipe
½	cup	pulverized	macaroons,	moistened	with	2	Tb	orange	liqueur
Turn	half	the	vanilla	soufflé	mixture	into	the	prepared	mold.	Sprinkle
with	a	third	of	the	macaroons	and	liqueur	mixture.	Spread	half	of	the
coffee	 soufflé	 over	 this,	 then	 sprinkle	 on	more	macaroons.	 Continue
with	 the	 remaining	 vanilla	 soufflé,	 macaroons,	 and	 the	 last	 of	 the
coffee	soufflé.

Bake	for	30	to	35	minutes	in	a	preheated,	375-degree	oven	as	for	the
master	recipe.

SOUFFLÉ	AU	CHOCOLAT
[Chocolate	Soufflé]



Chocolate	 needs	 special	 treatment	 for	 soufflés	 because	 it	 is	 heavy.
Although	 the	 formula	 in	 our	 first	 edition	 produced	 a	 dramatic	 puff,	 it
was	far	too	fragile.	 In	this	new	version,	you	fold	the	chocolate	mixture
into	a	meringue—that	is,	rather	than	adding	the	sugar	to	the	sauce	base,
you	 whip	 it	 into	 the	 egg	 whites,	 thereby	 firming	 them	 up.	 Just	 this
simple	change	in	method	gives	the	soufflé	staying	power	so	that	instead
of	 collapsing	 rather	 rapidly	 into	 a	 pudding,	 it	 stays	 up	 and	 retains	 its
primal	soufflé	character.

For	6	to	8	people

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

7	ounces	or	squares	of	semisweet	or	sweet	baking	chocolate
⅓	cup	strong	coffee
A	small	saucepan	with	cover	set	in	a	larger	pan	of	almost	simmering
water
Place	the	chocolate	and	coffee	in	the	small	pan,	cover,	and	set	in	the
larger	pan	of	almost	simmering	water.	Remove	from	heat	and	let	the
chocolate	melt	while	you	proceed	with	the	recipe.

½	Tb	softened	butter
A	2-to	2½-quart	soufflé	dish	or	straight-sided	baking	dish	7	½	to	8
inches	in	diameter
Smear	the	inside	of	the	dish	with	the	butter.	Surround	with	a	collar	of
buttered	aluminum	foil	(double	thickness)	to	reach	3	inches	above	the
rim	of	the	dish.	Set	out	all	the	rest	of	the	ingredients	called	for.

⅓	cup	all-purpose	flour
A	2-quart	saucepan
A	wire	whip
2	cups	milk
3	Tb	butter
Measure	 the	 flour	 into	 the	 saucepan.	 Start	 whisking	 in	 the	 milk	 by



dribbles	 at	 first	 to	make	 a	 perfectly	 smooth	 cream;	 rapidly	whisk	 in
the	 rest.	 Add	 the	 butter,	 and	 stir	 over	 moderate	 heat	 until	 boiling;
boil,	stirring,	for	2	minutes.	Remove	from	heat	and	beat	1	minute	or
so	to	cool	slightly.

4	egg	yolks
1	Tb	pure	vanilla	extract
One	by	one,	whisk	the	egg	yolks	into	the	hot	sauce,	then	the	smoothly
melted	chocolate,	and	finally	the	vanilla.
( )	 If	 you	are	not	 continuing	within	5	 to	10	minutes,	 lay	a	 sheet	of
plastic	 wrap	 directly	 on	 top	 of	 the	 sauce	 to	 prevent	 a	 skin	 from
forming.

6	egg	whites	(¾	cup)
⅛	tsp	salt
½	cup	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	whites	 and	 salt	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft	 peaks	 are
formed.	Then,	by	sprinkles,	beat	 in	 the	sugar	and	continue	until	 stiff
shining	peaks	are	formed.

Scrape	 the	 chocolate	 mixture	 into	 the	 side	 of	 the	 egg	 white	 bowl;
delicately	 fold	 them	 together.	 Turn	 the	 soufflé	 mixture	 into	 the
prepared	mold	and	set	on	a	 rack	 in	 the	 lower	 level	of	 the	preheated
oven.	Turn	thermostat	down	to	375	degrees.

Powdered	sugar	in	a	sieve	or	shaker
Serving	suggestions:	2	cups	of	sweetened	whipped	cream,	crème
anglaise,	or	vanilla	ice	cream
In	 35	 to	 40	 minutes,	 when	 soufflé	 is	 well	 risen	 and	 the	 top	 has
cracked,	 rapidly	 sprinkle	 the	 surface	with	 powdered	 sugar;	 continue
baking	another	5	 to	10	minutes.	 Soufflé	 is	 still	 creamy	at	 the	 center
when	 a	 skewer	 plunged	 down	 through	 a	 surface	 crack	 comes	 out
slightly	coated.	It	 is	fully	done	and	will	stand	up	well	(if	that	is	how
you	like	it)	when	the	skewer	comes	out	clean.	Serve	at	once	with	one



of	the	suggestions	listed.
( )	 When	 turned	 into	 its	 baking	 dish,	 the	 soufflé	 may	 be	 covered
loosely	with	a	sheet	of	 foil	and	set	 in	a	draft-free	part	of	 the	kitchen
for	an	hour	or	more	before	being	baked.

SOUFFLÉ	DÉMOULÉ	AUX	MACARONS
[Rum	and	Macaroon	Soufflé,	Unmolded—a	cold	dessert]

For	6	to	8	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

1	tsp	butter
An	8-cup	fireproof,	cylindrical	mold	lined	with	caramel
Butter	the	inside	of	the	caramel-lined	mold.

A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
1½	cups	(8	ounces)	pulverized	macaroons
¼	cup	dark	rum
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
¾	cup	milk	brought	to	the	boil	with	¼	cup	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 macaroons	 and	 rum	 together	 in	 the	 mixing	 bowl	 while
pouring	on	the	hot	milk	and	sugar,	and	continue	beating	for	1	minute.

4	egg	yolks
One	by	one,	beat	in	the	egg	yolks	until	blended	with	the	macaroons.

4	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	whites	 and	 salt	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft	 peaks	 are



formed;	sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are	formed.

A	rubber	spatula
Fold	 the	 egg	 whites	 into	 the	 macaroon	 mixture,	 being	 sure	 the
mixture,	 which	 is	 very	 liquid,	 is	 thoroughly	 but	 delicately	 blended
with	the	egg	whites.	Turn	into	prepared	mold	which	will	be	filled	by
about	two	thirds.

A	pan	containing	enough	boiling	water	to	come	halfway	up	outside	of
mold
Place	mold	 in	 pan	 of	 boiling	water;	 set	 in	 lower	 third	 of	 preheated,
350-degree	oven	for	15	minutes.	Then	reduce	heat	to	325	degrees	and
continue	baking	about	35	minutes	more.	Soufflé	will	rise	about	to	the
top	of	the	mold.	It	is	done	when	it	shows	a	faint	line	of	shrinkage	from
the	sides	of	the	mold.

A	serving	dish
3	cups	chilled,	coffee-flavored	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce)
Refrigerate	for	3	to	4	hours.	The	soufflé	will	sink	down	as	it	cools,	and
shrink	more	from	the	mold.	When	chilled,	reverse	on	the	serving	dish.
Simmer	2	tablespoons	of	water	in	the	mold	to	dissolve	the	remaining
caramel;	allow	to	cool	for	a	moment,	then	pour	the	caramel	syrup	over
the	soufflé.	Surround	with	the	sauce,	and	serve.

ÎLE	FLOTTANTE
[Caramel	Almond	Soufflé,	Unmolded—a	cold	dessert]

French	 floating	 island	 can	 be	 either	 a	 layered	 cake	 covered	 with
whipped	 cream	 and	 surrounded	 by	 custard	 sauce,	 or	 a	 meringue.	 We
have	chosen	the	meringue	because	it	is	light,	delicious,	and	so	very	easy
to	do	in	the	electric	mixer.	The	addition	of	pralin	gives	texture	and	flavor
as	well	as	providing	a	ready-made	sauce,	allowing	you	to	dispense	with
the	 traditional	 crème	 anglaise	 if	 you	wish.	 (Those	 little	mounds	 of	 egg
white	floating	on	custard	may	be	English	floating	islands,	but	are	French



oeufs	à	la	neige.)	For	6	to	8	people

A	heavily	buttered,	2-quart	baking	dish	or	charlotte	mold	3½	to	4
inches	deep

2	to	3	Tb	sugar
Preheat	oven	to	250	degrees.	Roll	 sugar	 in	 the	buttered	mold,	knock
out	excess,	and	set	mold	aside.

An	electric	mixer	with	2½-to	3-quart	bowl
8	egg	whites	(1	cup)	at	room	temperature
⅛	tsp	salt
¼	tsp	cream	of	tartar
1	cup	instant	or	very	finely	granulated	sugar
1	tsp	vanilla	extract
1	cup	pralin	(caramelized	almonds)
A	rubber	spatula
Beat	egg	whites	at	moderate	speed	until	they	are	frothy,	then	beat	in
the	salt	and	cream	of	tartar.	Gradually	increase	speed	to	fast	and	when
egg	whites	form	soft	peaks	start	beating	in	the	sugar,	2	tablespoons	at
a	time.	Continue	beating	until	egg	whites	form	stiff	peaks.	Beat	in	the
vanilla.	 Remove	 bowl	 from	 stand	 and	 fold	 in	 the	 pralin	¼	 cup	 at	 a
time	with	the	rubber	spatula.

Spread	lightly	 in	dish,	which	it	will	overfill	by	¼	inch	or	so;	smooth
exposed	sides	and	top	with	spatula.	Bake	in	lower	third	of	preheated,
250-degree	 oven	 for	 about	 25	 minutes,	 until	 meringue	 has	 colored
slightly	and	risen	about	½	inch.	(It	should	be	cooked	enough	so	that
meringue	can	hold	its	shape	for	unmolding;	its	rise	indicates	this.)	Let
cool	for	30	minutes,	then	refrigerate	for	at	least	an	hour	so	that	it	will
settle.

A	serving	plate
2	Tb	pralin



Optional:	2	cups	chilled	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce)	in	a	sauce
bowl
Set	 cover	 or	 plate	 askew	 over	mold	 and	 drain	 accumulated	 caramel
liquid	into	a	small	bowl.	Unmold	dessert	onto	serving	plate.	Sprinkle
top	with	 pralin,	 and	 pour	 the	 caramel	 around.	 Pass	 optional	 custard
sauce	separately.

FRUIT	DESSERTS

Entremets	aux	Fruits

CHARLOTTE	AUX	POMMES
[Apple	Charlotte,	Unmolded—a	hot	or	cold	dessert]

This	 extremely	 good	 dessert	 is	 a	 thick,	 rum-and	 apricot-flavored
apple	 purée	 piled	 into	 a	 cylindrical	 mold	 which	 has	 been	 lined	 with
butter-soaked	strips	of	white	bread.	It	is	baked	in	a	very	hot	oven	until
the	bread	is	golden	brown,	and	is	then	unmolded.	For	the	sake	of	drama,
the	 mold	 should	 be	 3½	 to	 4	 inches	 high.	 Be	 sure	 to	 pick	 the	 right
cooking	apples	and	that	your	purée	 is	very	thick	indeed,	or	the	dessert
will	collapse	when	unmolded.
For	6	to	8	people

6	lbs.	firm	nonjuicy	cooking	apples	(Golden	Delicious	are	always
reliable)

A	heavy-bottomed	stainless	or	enameled	pan	12	inches	across
A	wooden	spoon
Quarter,	 peel,	 and	 core	 the	 apples.	 Slice	 them	 roughly	 into	 ⅛-inch
pieces.	You	should	have	about	4	quarts.	Place	in	pan,	cover,	and	cook
over	 very	 low	heat	 for	 about	 20	minutes,	 stirring	 occasionally,	 until
tender.

½	cup	apricot	preserves,	forced	through	a	sieve
1	cup	granulated	sugar



2	tsp	vanilla	extract
¼	cup	dark	rum
3	Tb	butter
Uncover	 and	 beat	 in	 the	 apricot	 preserves,	 sugar,	 vanilla,	 rum,	 and
butter.	 Raise	 heat	 and	 boil,	 stirring	 almost	 continuously	 until	 water
content	has	all	but	evaporated—20	minutes	or	more.	The	purée	should
be	a	very	thick	and	fairly	stiff	paste	which	holds	itself	in	a	solid	mass
in	the	spoon.

Preheat	oven	to	425	degrees.

10	to	12	slices	of	homemade-type	white	bread,	4	inches	square	and	¼
inch	thick

A	6-cup,	fireproof,	cylindrical	mold	about	3½	inches	high
1	cup	clarified	butter
Remove	 crusts.	 Cut	 a	 square	 and	 4	 semicircles	 of	 bread	 to	 fit	 the
bottom	of	the	mold	exactly.	Sauté	to	a	very	light	golden	color	in	3	or	4
tablespoons	 of	 the	 clarified	 butter.	 Fit	 them	 into	 the	 bottom	 of	 the
mold.	 Cut	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 bread	 into	 strips	 1¼	 inches	 wide.	 Dip	 in
clarified	butter	and	fit	them,	overlapping	each	other,	around	the	inner
circumference	of	the	mold.	Trim	off	protruding	ends.

Pack	the	apple	purée	into	the	mold,	allowing	it	to	form	a	dome	about
¾	inch	high	in	the	middle.	(It	will	sink	as	it	cools.)	Cover	with	4	or	5
butter-dipped	 bread	 strips.	 Pour	 any	 remaining	 clarified	 butter	 over
the	ends	of	the	bread	around	the	edges	of	the	mold.

A	pan
A	serving	platter
Set	 in	 a	 pan	 (to	 catch	butter	 drippings)	 and	bake	 in	middle	 level	 of
preheated	oven	for	about	30	minutes.	Slip	a	knife	between	bread	and
sides	of	mold;	if	bread	is	golden	brown,	the	charlotte	is	done.	Remove
from	 oven	 and	 cool	 for	 15	minutes.	 Reverse	 the	mold	 on	 a	 serving
platter	 and	 lift	 the	 mold	 up	 a	 few	 inches	 to	 see	 if	 the	 sides	 of	 the



dessert	will	hold.	If	there	is	any	suggestion	of	collapse,	lower	the	mold
over	the	dessert	again;	it	will	firm	up	as	it	cools.	Test	after	5	minutes
or	so,	until	the	mold	can	safely	be	removed.

½	cup	apricot	preserves,	forced	through	a	sieve
3	Tb	dark	rum
2	Tb	granulated	sugar
Optional:	2	cups	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce),	or	2	cups	lightly
whipped	cream	flavored	with	rum	and	powdered	sugar
Boil	the	apricot,	rum,	and	sugar	until	thick	and	sticky.	Spread	it	over
the	charlotte.	Serve	the	dessert	hot,	warm,	or	cold,	with	the	optional
sauce	or	cream.

POMMES	NORMANDE	EN	BELLE	VUE
[Applesauce	Caramel	Mold—a	warm	or	cold	dessert]

This	is	a	much	lighter	dessert	than	the	apple	charlotte,	and	also	much
easier	to	prepare.
For	6	people

4	lbs.	crisp	cooking	or	eating	apples
A	heavy-bottomed	enameled	pan	(saucepan,	casserole,	or	skillet)
about	10	inches	in	diameter
Peel	and	core	the	apples.	Slice	them	roughly	into	⅛-inch	pieces.	You
should	 have	 about	 10	 cups.	 Place	 them	 in	 the	 pan;	 cover	 and	 cook
over	 very	 low	heat	 for	 about	 20	minutes,	 stirring	 occasionally,	 until
tender.

A	wooden	spoon
Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

¼	tsp	cinnamon.
The	grated	peel	of	1	lemon



½	cup	granulated	sugar
Beat	the	cinnamon,	lemon	peel,	and	sugar	into	the	apples.	Raise	heat
and	boil,	stirring,	for	5	minutes	or	so,	until	the	apples	have	reduced	to
a	thick	purée	which	will	hold	its	shape	in	the	spoon.	You	should	have
about	4	cups	of	applesauce.

¼	cup	rum,	cognac,	or	excellent	apple	brandy
4	Tb	butter
4	eggs
1	egg	white
Remove	from	heat	and	stir	in	the	rum	or	brandy,	then	the	butter.	One
by	one,	beat	in	the	eggs,	then	the	egg	white.

A	6-cup,	fireproof,	cylindrical	mold	lined	with	caramel
A	lid	or	a	plate
A	deep	saucepan	or	kettle	Boiling	water
Turn	the	apple	mixture	into	the	caramel-lined	mold.	Cover	with	lid	or
plate,	and	set	in	the	saucepan	or	kettle.	Pour	boiling	water	around	the
outside	of	the	mold	to	come	up	to	the	level	of	the	apple	mixture.	Place
in	 lower	 third	 of	 preheated	 oven.	 Regulate	 oven	 heat	 to	 maintain
water	 almost	 at	 the	 simmer.	 The	 dessert	 is	 done	 in	 1	 to	 1½	 hours,
when	 it	begins	 to	 shrink	 from	 the	 sides	of	 the	mold	and	 the	 top,	 all
except	for	a	small	area	in	the	very	center,	is	set.

A	serving	dish
To	 serve	 warm,	 remove	 the	 mold	 from	 the	 saucepan	 or	 kettle	 and
allow	the	dessert	to	cool	for	20	minutes.	Then	reverse	it	on	a	serving
dish.	To	serve	cold,	chill	 the	dessert	4	 to	5	hours	or	overnight.	Then
run	 a	 knife	 around	 the	 edge	 of	 the	dessert	 and	 reverse	 on	 a	 serving
dish;	in	a	few	minutes	it	will	dislodge	itself	from	the	mold.

4	Tb	rum,	cognac,	or	apple	brandy
2	cups	lightly	whipped	cream	flavored	with	powdered	sugar	and	rum



or	brandy,	or	2	cups	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce)
Simmer	 the	 rum	 or	 brandy	 in	 the	 mold	 to	 dissolve	 any	 remaining
caramel,	 and	 strain	 over	 the	 dessert.	 Surround	 the	 dessert	 with	 the
whipped	cream	or	sauce.

POUDING	ALSACIEN
[Gratin	of	Sautéed	Apples—a	cold	dessert]

This	simple	apple	dessert	is	always	better	if	prepared	the	day	before
it	is	eaten,	as	a	good	24	hours	are	needed	for	a	slow	blending	of	flavors.
For	6	to	8	people

2½	lbs.	firm	cooking	apples	(Golden	Delicious)
Quarter,	core,	and	peel	the	apples.	Cut	into	¼-inch	lengthwise	slices.
You	should	have	about	7	cups.

4	to	5	Tb	butter
A	10-to	12-inch	skillet
A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish,	8	to	9	inches	in	diameter	and	2	inches
deep
Sauté	the	apples,	one	layer	at	a	time,	in	hot	butter	until	they	are	very
lightly	browned	on	both	 sides	 and	 tender,	but	 retain	 their	 shape.	As
they	are	done,	place	them	in	the	baking	dish.

¾	cup	plum	jam,	forced	through	a	sieve
2	Tb	rum
A	rubber	spatula



Melt	the	plum	jam	in	the	skillet	with	the	rum.	Delicately	fold	into	the
apples,	and	smooth	the	apples	in	the	dish.

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

4	Tb	butter
½	cup	granulated	sugar
3	egg	yolks
1	Tb	all-purpose	flour
½	tsp	cinnamon
1	cup	fresh	whole	wheat	or	rye	bread	crumbs

Cream	the	butter	and	sugar	together	in	a	mixing	bowl	until	light	and
fluffy.	Beat	in	the	egg	yolks,	then	the	flour	and	cinnamon,	and	finally
the	bread	crumbs.

2	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
½	Tb	granulated	sugar

Beat	 the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	 soft	peaks	are	 formed;	 sprinkle	on
the	 sugar	 and	 beat	 until	 stiff	 peaks	 are	 formed.	 Fold	 the	 egg	whites
into	the	bread-crumb	mixture	and	spread	evenly	over	the	apples.

Powdered	sugar	in	a	shaker
Bake	in	middle	level	of	preheated	oven	for	20	to	25	minutes,	or	until
top	has	puffed	slightly	and	has	 just	begun	to	color.	Sprinkle	 liberally
with	powdered	sugar	and	continue	baking	another	20	to	25	minutes;
the	top	should	be	a	nice	golden	brown	under	the	sugar.

Allow	to	cool,	then	chill,	preferably	for	24	hours.

ASPIC	DE	POMMES
[Rum-Flavored	Apple	Aspic,	Unmolded—a	cold	dessert]



Because	 the	 apples	 for	 this	 simple	 dessert	 are	 boiled	 in	 a	 heavy
sugar	 syrup,	 they	 jell	when	 chilled	 and	 can	be	unmolded	on	 a	 serving
dish.	It	makes	a	pretty	effect	with	its	decoration	of	glacéed	fruits.	Once
made,	the	aspic	may	be	kept	molded	or	unmolded	under	refrigeration	for
at	least	10	days.
For	6	to	8	people

3	lbs.	cooking	apples
Quarter,	core,	and	peel	 the	apples.	Cut	 into	 lengthwise	slices	⅜	inch
thick.	You	should	have	about	8	cups.

A	heavy	12-inch	enameled	skillet
¾	cup	water
3	cups	sugar
1	Tb	lemon	juice

Bring	water,	sugar,	and	lemon	juice	to	the	boil,	stirring	until	sugar	has
dissolved.	Add	the	apples	and	boil	over	moderately	high	heat,	stirring
frequently	 to	 keep	 them	 from	 sticking	 and	 burning,	 for	 about	 20
minutes.	They	should	become	an	almost	transparent	mass.

A	1-quart	cylindrical	mold
1	tsp	tasteless	salad	oil
A	round	of	waxed	paper

While	 the	 apples	 are	 cooking,	 rub	 inside	 of	 mold	 with	 oil;	 oil	 the
waxed	paper	and	set	in	the	bottom	of	the	mold.

4	ounces	(about	¾	cup)	glacéed	fruits,	such	as	red	and	green	cherries,
angelica,	orange	peel
Make	a	decorative	design	in	the	bottom	of	the	mold	with	half	the	fruit.
Dice	the	rest	and	add	it	to	boil	with	the	apples	for	2	to	3	minutes	at
the	end	of	the	cooking.

3	Tb	dark	rum



When	apples	are	done,	remove	from	heat	and	stir	 in	 the	rum.	Spoon
into	the	mold	and	chill	for	4	to	6	hours,	or	until	set.	Serve	as	follows:

A	chilled	serving	dish
2	cups	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce)
Surround	the	mold	with	a	hot	towel	for	10	to	15	seconds.	Run	a	knife
around	edge	of	mold,	and	reverse	the	aspic	onto	a	chilled	serving	dish.
Surround	with	the	sauce	and	serve.

POMMES	À	LA	SÉVILLANE
[Apples	Braised	in	Butter,	Orange	Sauce—a	hot	or	cold	dessert]

For	6	people

6	unblemished	Golden	Delicious	apples
A	mixing	bowl	containing	2	quarts	water	and	2	Tb	lemon	juice
One	 by	 one,	 peel	 and	 core	 the	 apples,	 and	 drop	 into	 the	 acidulated
water.

A	covered	fireproof	baking	dish	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	apples
easily	in	one	layer

4	Tb	butter
¾	cup	granulated	sugar
½	cup	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth
½	cup	water
2	Tb	cognac
A	round	of	buttered	waxed	paper
Smear	inside	of	baking	dish	with	half	the	butter.	Drain	the	apples	and
place	 them	 upright	 in	 the	 dish.	 Sprinkle	 with	 sugar	 and	 place	 a
teaspoon	of	butter	in	the	center	of	each	apple.	Pour	the	wine,	water,
and	cognac	around	the	apples.	Lay	the	round	of	buttered	paper	on	top.
Bring	just	to	the	simmer	on	top	of	the	stove.	Cover	and	bake	in	lower
third	of	preheated	oven	for	25	to	35	minutes;	it	is	important	that	you



maintain	 the	 liquid	at	 the	merest	 simmer	 to	prevent	 the	apples	 from
bursting.	When	a	knife	pierces	them	easily,	they	are	done.	Be	careful
not	to	overcook	them.

2	or	3	brightly	colored	oranges
A	vegetable	peeler
While	 apples	 are	 cooking,	 remove	 the	 orange	 part	 of	 the	 skin	 with
vegetable	 peeler.	 Cut	 into	 strips	 2	 inches	 long	 and	 ⅛	 inch	 wide.
Simmer	10	 to	 12	minutes	 in	water	 until	 tender.	Drain,	 rinse	 in	 cold
water,	and	dry.

canapés	(rounds	of	white	bread	sautéed	in	clarified	butter)
A	serving	dish
A	slotted	spoon
Also	while	the	apples	are	baking,	prepare	the	canapés,	and	arrange	on
serving	 dish.	When	 apples	 are	 done,	 place	 a	 drained	 apple	 on	 each
canapé.

½	cup	red	currant	jelly
3	Tb	cognac
Beat	the	jelly	into	the	apple	cooking	liquid	and	boil	down	quickly	over
high	heat	until	thick	enough	to	coat	a	spoon	lightly.	Stir	in	the	cognac
and	the	cooked	orange	peel,	and	simmer	a	moment.	Spoon	the	sauce
and	orange	peel	over	the	apples.

1½	to	2	cups	heavy	cream	or	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce)
Serve	 them	 hot,	 warm,	 or	 cold,	 and	 pass	 the	 cream	 or	 sauce
separately.

ORANGES	GLACÉES
[Glazed	Oranges—a	cold	dessert]



This	recipe	calls	 for	whole,	peeled	oranges,	placed	 in	a	bowl,	 then
glazed	with	syrup	and	decorated	with	glazed	orange	peel.	 If	you	prefer
sliced	oranges,	allow	one	to	a	serving,	slice	them	crosswise,	re-form	the
oranges	horizontally	in	the	serving	dish,	and	glaze	them.
For	6	people

6	large,	brightly	colored	navel	oranges
A	vegetable	peeler
Remove	the	orange	part	of	 the	skins	with	a	vegetable	peeler	and	cut
into	strips	⅛	inch	wide	and	2	inches	long.	Simmer	in	water	for	10	to
12	 minutes	 or	 until	 tender.	 Drain,	 rinse	 in	 cold	 water,	 and	 dry	 on
paper	towels.

A	serving	dish	2	inches	deep
Cut	 the	white	part	of	 the	peel	neatly	off	 the	oranges	 to	expose	 their
flesh.	 Cut	 a	 bit	 off	 one	 end	 of	 each,	 so	 it	 will	 stand	 up.	 Arrange
oranges	in	the	serving	dish,	with	the	flattened	ends	on	the	bottom.

2	cups	granulated	sugar
⅔	cup	water
A	small	saucepan
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer	Optional:	green-colored	glacéed	fruit
cut	into	leaf	shapes
Boil	 the	 sugar	and	water	 in	 the	saucepan	 to	 the	 firm	ball	 stage	 (244
degrees).	 Immediately	 drop	 the	 blanched	 orange	 peel	 into	 the	 syrup
and	boil	a	moment	or	two	until	syrup	has	thickened	again.	Spoon	peel
and	syrup	over	oranges	and	chill	until	serving	time.

PÊCHES	CARDINAL
[Compote	of	Fresh	Peaches	with	Raspberry	Purée—a	cold	dessert]

This	is	an	especially	nice	dessert	when	both	peaches	and	raspberries
are	in	season.	Though	the	taste	is	not	quite	as	good,	you	can	substitute



fresh	 apricots	 or	 pears	 for	 the	 peaches,	 or	 use	 canned	 fruit.	 Frozen
raspberries	 do	 not	 make	 as	 thick	 a	 sauce	 as	 fresh	 ones,	 but	 are	 good
anyway.

For	10	people

6	cups	water
2¼	cups	granulated	sugar
2	Tb	vanilla	extract	or	a	vanilla	bean
A	12-inch	saucepan

Simmer	the	water,	sugar,	and	vanilla	extract	or	bean	in	the	saucepan
and	stir	until	sugar	has	dissolved.

10	firm,	ripe,	unblemished,	fresh	peaches	about	2½	inches	in
diameter
A	slotted	spoon
A	cake	rack
A	serving	dish	2	inches	deep

Add	the	unpeeled	peaches	to	the	simmering	syrup.	Bring	again	to	the
simmer,	 then	 maintain	 at	 just	 below	 the	 simmer	 for	 8	 minutes.
Remove	pan	from	heat	and	let	peaches	cool	 in	syrup	for	20	minutes.
(Syrup	may	be	used	again	for	poaching	other	fruits.)	Drain	peaches	on
rack;	peel	while	still	warm,	and	arrange	in	serving	dish.	Chill.

1	quart	fresh	raspberries,	and	1½	cups	granulated	sugar
OR,	1½	lbs.	frozen	raspberries,	thawed	and	well	drained,	and	⅔	cup
sugar
An	electric	blender	(or	electric	beater)

Force	the	raspberries	through	a	sieve	and	place	the	purée	in	the	jar	of
an	electric	blender	along	with	the	sugar.	Cover	and	blend	at	top	speed
for	 2	 to	 3	 minutes,	 or	 until	 purée	 is	 thick	 and	 sugar	 has	 dissolved
completely.	Chill.	(Or	beat	purée	and	sugar	for	about	10	minutes	with
an	electric	beater.)

Optional:	fresh	mint	leaves



When	 both	 purée	 and	 peaches	 are	 chilled,	 pour	 the	 purée	 over	 the
peaches	 and	 return	 to	 refrigerator	 until	 serving	 time.	 Decorate	 with
optional	fresh	mint	leaves.

POIRES	AU	GRATIN
[Pears	Baked	with	Macaroons—a	hot	or	cold	dessert]

For	6	people

Preheat	oven	to	400	degrees.

2	lbs.	fresh	ripe	pears	or	drained	canned	pears
A	baking	dish	about	2	inches	high	and	8	inches	in	diameter,	smeared
with	2	Tb	butter
Peel,	quarter,	and	core	 the	pears.	Cut	 into	 lengthwise	slices	about	⅜
inch	thick.	Arrange	in	overlapping	layers	in	the	baking	dish.

4	Tb	dry	white	wine	or	dry	white	vermouth,	or	canned	pear	juice
¼	cup	apricot	preserves,	forced	through	a	sieve

Beat	 the	wine	or	pear	 juice	 and	apricot	 preserves	 together	 and	pour
over	the	pears.

½	cup	pulverized	macaroons
3	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots

Sprinkle	on	the	macaroons	and	distribute	the	butter	over	them.

Bake	 in	middle	 portion	 of	 preheated	 oven	 for	 20	 to	 30	minutes,	 or
until	top	has	browned	lightly.	Serve	hot,	warm,	or	cold.

FLAN	DES	ISLES
[Pineapple	Custard,	Unmolded—a	cold	dessert]



For	6	to	8	people

2½	cups	drained,	canned,	crushed	pineapple,	and	1⅔	cups	syrup
from	the	pineapple	(or	about	30	ounces:	a	No.	2½	and	a	No.	1	can)

A	6-to	8-cup	saucepan
Boil	 the	 pineapple	 syrup	 for	 5	 minutes	 in	 the	 saucepan.	 Add	 the
pineapple,	bring	again	to	the	boil,	and	boil	slowly	5	minutes	more.

A	wire	whip
1	Tb	flour
3	Tb	lemon	juice
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
¼	cup	kirsch	or	cognac
5	eggs

Beat	flour	and	lemon	juice	in	the	mixing	bowl	until	blended,	then	beat
in	 the	 kirsch	 or	 cognac,	 and	 the	 eggs.	 Gradually	 beat	 in	 the	 hot
pineapple	mixture	in	a	thin	stream	of	droplets.

A	6-cup,	fireproof,	cylindrical	mold	lined	with	caramel
A	deep	saucepan
Boiling	water

Pour	the	pineapple	custard	into	the	caramel-lined	mold,	and	set	mold
in	a	deep	saucepan.	Pour	boiling	water	around	the	outside	of	the	mold
to	come	up	to	the	level	of	the	custard.	Bring	to	the	simmer	on	top	of
the	stove,	and	maintain	water	barely	at	the	simmer,	always	on	top	of
the	 stove,	 for	 1¼	 to	 1½	 hours.	 Custard	 is	 done	 when	 it	 begins	 to
shrink	 from	 the	 sides	of	 the	mold.	A	 little	 circle	 in	 the	center	of	 the
custard	will	remain	creamy.

Remove	 mold	 from	 water,	 let	 cool,	 then	 chill	 for	 3	 to	 4	 hours	 or
overnight.

A	serving	platter



3	Tb	kirsch	or	cognac
2	cups	chilled	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce)

Reverse	 on	 a	 serving	 platter.	 Simmer	 kirsch	 or	 cognac	 in	 mold	 to
dissolve	 remaining	 caramel.	 Strain	 it	 into	 the	 chilled	 crème	 anglaise,
and	pour	the	sauce	around	the	custard.

DESSERT	TARTS

Tartes	Sucrées

French	dessert	 tarts,	 like	French	entrée	 tarts	 and	quiches,	 are	open
faced	 and	 stand	 supported	 only	 by	 their	 pastry	 shells.	 They	 should	 be
beautiful	 to	 look	at,	 especially	 the	 fruit	 tarts	which	 lend	 themselves	 to
glittering	arrangements	of	rosettes	and	overlapping	circles.

THE	PASTRY

The	pastry	for	dessert	tart	shells	is	molded	and	baked	in	a	flan	ring
or	 a	 false-bottomed	 cake	 pan	 so	 that	 the	 shell	may	 be	 unmolded.	 You
may	 use	 either	 sweet	 short	 paste,	 which	 is	 ordinary	 short	 paste	 with
sugar	added,	or	pâte	sablée,	sugar	crust,	which,	besides	flour	and	butter,
contains	eggs	and	usually	more	sugar.	We	give	proportions	for	both	here,
and	refer	you	to	the	illustrated	directions	in	the	Entrée	chapter	for	their
molding	and	baking.

FLOUR

Be	sure	 to	read	 the	 illustrated	directions	on	how	to	measure	 flour.
All	our	 recipes	are	based	on	 this	method;	other	measuring	systems	can
give	 different	 results.	 The	 small	 proportion	 of	 vegetable	 shortening
included	with	 the	butter	 in	each	pastry	 recipe	gives	a	 less	brittle	 crust
when	you	are	using	all-purpose	flour.	If	you	have	pastry	flour	or	French
flour,	you	may	use	all	butter,	 increasing	it	by	the	amount	indicated	for
vegetable	shortening.

Pâte	Brisée	Sucrée



[Sweet	Short	Paste]

Sweet	 short	 paste	 is	 made	 exactly	 like	 regular	 short	 paste	 except
that	sugar	is	mixed	into	the	flour	before	you	begin.

AMOUNTS	NEEDED

For	an	8-to	9-inch	shell,	proportions	for	1½	cups	flour
For	a	10-to	11-inch	shell,	proportions	for	2	cups	flour

Proportions	for	1	cup	flour
⅔	cup	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
A	mixing	bowl
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
⅛	tsp	salt
5½	Tb	fat:	4	Tb	chilled	butter	and	1½	Tb	chilled	vegetable	shortening
2½	to	3	Tb	cold	water

Place	the	flour	in	the	bowl,	mix	in	the	sugar	and	salt,	then	proceed	to
make	 the	 dough	 and	 mold	 the	 shell	 either	 by	 hand	 or	 in	 the	 food
processor	as	described.

Pâte	Sablée
[Sugar	Crust]

Sugar	 crusts	 are	 particularly	 good	 with	 fresh	 fruit	 tarts,	 like	 the
strawberry	 tart.	 They	 are	 more	 delicate	 than	 sweet	 short	 paste	 shells
because	of	their	eggs	and	additional	sugar.	The	more	sugar	you	mix	in,
the	more	difficult	it	is	to	roll	and	mold	the	pastry	because	it	is	sticky	and
breaks	easily;	the	larger	proportion	of	sugar,	however,	makes	a	delicious
crust,	actually	a	cooky	dough.

By	hand	or	by	food	processor.	The	following	directions	are	for	making
the	pastry	by	hand.	Food	processor	directions	are	the	same	as	for	regular
short	paste	dough.

For	a	9-to	10-inch	shell



1⅓	cups	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
3	to	7	Tb	granulated	sugar	(see	remarks	in	preceding	paragraph)
⅛	tsp	double-action	baking	powder
7	Tb	fat:	5	Tb	chilled	butter	and	2	Tb	chilled	vegetable	shortening
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
1	egg	beaten	with	1	tsp	water
½	tsp	vanilla	extract
A	pastry	board
Waxed	paper

Place	 the	 flour,	 sugar,	 butter,	 vegetable	 shortening,	 and	 baking
powder	in	the	mixing	bowl.	Rub	the	fat	and	dry	ingredients	together
rapidly	with	the	tips	of	your	fingers	until	the	fat	is	broken	into	bits	the
size	of	small	oatmeal	flakes.	Blend	in	the	egg	and	vanilla,	and	knead
the	dough	 rapidly	 into	 a	 ball.	 Place	 on	 a	 pastry	 board	 and	with	 the
heel	 of	 your	 hand,	 not	 the	 palm,	 rapidly	 press	 the	 pastry	 by	 two-
spoonful	bits	down	on	the	board	and	away	from	you	in	a	firm,	quick
smear	 of	 about	 6	 inches.	 (This	 final	 blending	 of	 fat	 and	 flour	 is
illustrated.)	The	dough	will	 be	quite	 sticky	 if	 you	have	used	 the	 full
amount	 of	 sugar.	 Form	again	 into	 a	 ball,	wrap	 in	waxed	paper,	 and
chill	for	several	hours	until	firm.

Mold	the	pastry	in	a	flan	ring	or	false-bottomed	cake	pan	as	described
and	 illustrated.	 Work	 rapidly	 if	 you	 have	 used	 the	 full	 amount	 of
sugar,	as	the	dough	softens	quickly.

FULLY	and	PARTIALLY	BAKED	PASTRY	SHELLS
Sweet	Short	Paste	Shells
Sweet	short	paste	shells,	made	 from	the	 formula	 in	 the	 first	of	 the

two	preceding	recipes,	are	baked	exactly	like	regular	short	paste	shells,
directions	 for	which	are	on	this	page.	You	will	note	 in	 these	directions
that	 shells	may	 be	 fully	 or	 partially	 baked.	 Partial	 baking	 is	 for	 shells
which	 are	 filled	 and	 baked	 again;	 this	 preliminary	 cooking	 sets	 the
dough,	 and	 is	 a	 safeguard	 against	 soggy	 bottom	 crusts.	 A	 fully	 baked



shell	may	be	used	 for	 fresh	 fruit	 tarts,	and	and	 is	an	alternative	 to	 the
sugar	crust	shell.

Sugar	Crust	Shells
Sugar	crusts	are	usually	fully	baked,	and	must	be	watched	while	in

the	oven	as	they	burn	easily	if	the	full	sugar	proportions	have	been	used.
Because	 the	 dough	 is	 collapsible	 until	 it	 has	 firmed	 in	 the	 oven,	 it	 is
essential	that	the	dough	be	held	in	place	against	the	sides	of	the	mold	by
a	 lining	 of	 foil	 and	 beans	 or	 a	 bean-filled	 mold,	 as	 illustrated	 in	 the
directions	for	molding.

Bake	the	sugar	crust	shell	 in	 the	middle	 level	of	a	preheated,	375-
degree	oven	for	5	to	6	minutes	until	the	dough	is	set.	Then	remove	the
lining,	prick	the	bottom	of	the	pastry	with	a	fork	in	several	places,	and
bake	 for	 8	 to	 10	minutes	more.	 The	 shell	 is	 done	when	 it	 has	 shrunk
slightly	 from	 the	mold	 and	 begins	 to	 brown	 very	 lightly.	 Immediately
remove	 the	mold	 from	 the	 shell	 and	 slip	 the	 shell	 onto	 a	 rack.	 It	will
become	crusty	as	it	cools.

LEFTOVER	PASTRY	DOUGH	and	SUGAR	COOKIES
Leftover	dough,	securely	wrapped,	will	keep	for	several	days	in	the

refrigerator	or	may	be	frozen.	Or	use	it	for	sugar	cookies	in	the	following
recipe:

Galettes	Sablées
[Sugar	Cookies]

Leftovers	from	either	or	both	of	the	2	preceding	pastries
A	1¼	inch	cooky	cutter
Granulated	sugar
A	baking	sheet
Optional:	cinnamon
1	egg	beaten	in	a	small	bowl	with	1	tsp	water
A	pastry	brush



A	cake	rack
Roll	out	the	dough	to	a	thickness	of	¼	inch,	and	cut	into	rounds	1¼
inches	in	diameter.	Spread	a	¼-inch	layer	of	granulated	sugar	on	your
pastry	board,	lay	a	round	of	dough	over	it,	and	heap	sugar	on	top.	Roll
the	round	into	a	sugar-coated	oval	about	2½	inches	long	and	place	on
the	ungreased	baking	sheet.	When	all	 the	cookies	have	been	 formed,
sprinkle	them	with	cinnamon	if	you	wish.	Paint	tops	with	beaten	egg.
Bake	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 a	 preheated,	 375-degree	 oven	 for	 10	 to	 15
minutes,	until	lightly	browned.	Cool	on	a	rack.

TARTE	AUX	POMMES
[Apple	Tart—warm	or	cold]

The	 classic	 French	 apple	 tart	 consists	 of	 a	 thick,	 well-flavored
applesauce	spread	in	a	partially	cooked	pastry	shell.	Over	it	thinly	sliced
apples	are	placed	in	an	overlapping	design	of	circles.	After	baking,	it	is
coated	with	apricot	glaze.

Apple	Tart

For	8	people

A	10-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	set	on	a	baking	sheet
Use	the	sweet	short	paste	for	your	pastry	shell.



4	lbs.	firm	cooking	apples	(Golden	Delicious)
1	tsp	lemon	juice
2	Tb	granulated	sugar
A	2-quart	mixing	bowl

Quarter,	 core,	 and	 peel	 the	 apples.	 Cut	 enough	 to	make	 3	 cups	 into
even	⅛-inch	lengthwise	slices	and	toss	them	in	a	bowl	with	the	lemon
juice	and	sugar.	Reserve	them	for	the	top	of	the	tart.

A	10-inch	heavy-bottomed	pan:	enameled	saucepan,	skillet,	or
casserole
A	wooden	spoon
⅓	cup	apricot	preserves,	forced	through	a	sieve
¼	cup	Calvados	(apple	brandy),	rum,	or	cognac;	or	1	Tb	vanilla
extract
⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
3	Tb	butter
Optional:	½	tsp	cinnamon,	and/or	the	grated	rind	of	1	lemon	or
orange
Cut	the	rest	of	the	apples	into	rough	slices.	You	should	have	about	8
cups.	Place	in	the	pan	and	cook,	covered,	over	low	heat	for	about	20
minutes,	 stirring	 occasionally,	 until	 tender.	 Then	 beat	 in	 the
ingredients	at	the	left.	Raise	heat	and	boil,	stirring,	until	applesauce	is
thick	enough	to	hold	in	a	mass	in	the	spoon.

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

Spread	 the	applesauce	 in	 the	pastry	 shell.	Cover	with	a	neat,	 closely
overlapping	 layer	 of	 sliced	 apples	 arranged	 in	 a	 spiral,	 concentric
circles,	or	as	illustrated	at	the	beginning	of	this	recipe.

A	cake	rack	or	serving	dish	½	cup	apricot	glaze
2	cups	heavy	cream,	or	crème	fraîche

Bake	in	upper	third	of	preheated	oven	for	about	30	minutes,	or	until



the	sliced	apples	have	browned	lightly	and	are	tender.	Slide	tart	onto
the	rack	or	serving	dish	and	spoon	or	paint	over	it	a	 light	coating	of
apricot	 glaze.	 Serve	 warm	 or	 cold,	 and	 pass	 with	 it,	 if	 you	 wish,	 a
bowl	of	cream.

		TARTE	NORMANDE	AUX	POMMES
[Custard	Apple	Tart—to	be	served	hot]

While	this	creamy	apple	tart	may	be	eaten	cold,	it	is	at	its	best	when
hot	or	warm.	It	can	be	reheated.
For	6	people

An	8-inch	partially	baked	pastry	shell	placed	on	a	baking	sheet
Use	 the	 sweet	 short	 paste	 for	 the	 pastry	 shell.	 Preheat	 oven	 to	 375
degrees.

1	lb.	firm	cooking	apples	(Golden	Delicious)
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
½	tsp	cinnamon

Quarter,	core,	and	peel	the	apples.	Cut	into	⅛-inch	lengthwise	slices.
You	should	have	about	3	cups.	Toss	them	in	a	bowl	with	the	sugar	and
cinnamon,	then	arrange	them	in	the	pastry	shell.	Bake	in	upper	third
of	 preheated	 oven	 for	 about	 20	minutes,	 or	 until	 they	 start	 to	 color
and	are	almost	tender.	Remove	from	oven	and	let	cool	while	preparing
the	custard.

1	egg
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
¼	cup	sifted	flour
½	cup	whipping	cream
3	Tb	Calvados	(apple	brandy)	or	cognac

Beat	 the	 egg	 and	 sugar	 together	 in	 a	 mixing	 bowl	 until	 mixture	 is
thick,	pale	yellow,	and	falls	back	on	itself	forming	a	slowly	dissolving



ribbon.	Beat	in	the	flour,	then	the	cream,	and	finally	the	brandy.	Pour
the	mixture	over	 the	apples.	 It	 should	come	almost	 to	 the	 top	of	 the
pastry	shell.

Powdered	sugar	in	a	shaker
Return	to	oven	for	10	minutes,	or	until	cream	begins	to	puff.	Sprinkle
heavily	with	powdered	sugar	and	return	to	oven	for	15	to	20	minutes
more.	 Tart	 is	 done	 when	 top	 has	 browned	 and	 a	 needle	 or	 knife
plunged	into	the	custard	comes	out	clean.

A	cake	rack	or	serving	dish
Slide	 tart	onto	a	 rack	or	 serving	dish,	and	keep	warm	until	 ready	 to
serve.

VARIATION
Tarte	aux	Poires
[Pear	Tart]

Using	the	same	method	and	proportions,	substitute	sliced	pears	for
the	apples.

LA	TARTE	DES	DEMOISELLES	TATIN
[Upside-down	Apple	Tart—hot	or	cold]

This	is	an	especially	good	tart	if	your	apples	are	full	of	flavor.	It	is
cooked	in	a	baking	dish	with	the	pastry	on	top	of	the	apples.	When	done,
it	 is	 reversed	 onto	 a	 serving	 dish	 and	 presents	 a	 lovely	 mass	 of
caramelized	apples.
For	8	people

4	lbs.	firm	cooking	apples	(Golden	Delicious)
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
Optional:	1	tsp	cinnamon



Quarter,	core,	and	peel	 the	apples.	Cut	 into	 lengthwise	slices	⅛	inch
thick.	 Toss	 in	 a	 bowl	 with	 the	 sugar	 and	 optional	 cinnamon.	 You
should	have	about	10	cups	of	apples.

2	Tb	softened	butter
A	baking	dish	9	to	10	inches	in	diameter	and	2	to	2½	inches	deep
(pyrex	is	practical,	as	you	can	see	when	the	tart	is	done)

½	cup	granulated	sugar
6	Tb	melted	butter

Butter	the	baking	dish	heavily	especially	on	the	bottom.	Sprinkle	half
the	sugar	in	the	bottom	of	the	dish	and	arrange	a	third	of	the	apples
over	it.	Sprinkle	with	a	third	of	the	melted	butter.	Repeat	with	a	layer
of	 half	 the	 remaining	 apples	 and	butter,	 then	 a	 final	 layer	 of	 apples
and	butter.	Sprinkle	the	rest	of	the	sugar	over	the	apples.

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

Chilled	sweet	short	paste	(proportions	for	1	cup	of	flour)
Roll	out	the	pastry	to	a	thickness	of	⅛	inch.	Cut	it	into	a	circle	the	size
of	 the	 top	 of	 the	 baking	 dish.	 Place	 it	 over	 the	 apples,	 allowing	 its
edges	to	fall	against	the	inside	edge	of	the	dish.	Cut	4	or	5	holes	about
⅛	inch	long	in	the	top	of	the	pastry	to	allow	cooking	steam	to	escape.

Aluminum	foil,	if	needed
Bake	in	lower	third	of	preheated	oven	for	45	to	60	minutes.	If	pastry
begins	 to	brown	 too	much,	 cover	 lightly	with	aluminum	 foil.	Tart	 is
done	when	you	tilt	 the	dish	and	see	 that	a	 thick	brown	syrup	rather
than	a	light	 liquid	exudes	from	the	apples	between	the	crust	and	the
edge	of	the	dish.

A	fireproof	serving	dish
Powdered	sugar,	if	needed

Immediately	unmold	the	tart	onto	serving	dish.	If	the	apples	are	not	a
light	caramel	brown,	which	 is	often	 the	case,	 sprinkle	 rather	heavily



with	 powdered	 sugar	 and	 run	 under	 a	 moderately	 hot	 broiler	 for
several	minutes	to	caramelize	the	surface	lightly.

2	cups	heavy	cream,	or	crème	fraîche
Keep	warm	until	serving	time,	and	accompany	with	a	bowl	of	cream.
(May	also	be	served	cold,	but	we	prefer	it	warm.)

		TARTE	AUX	ABRICOTS
				TARTE	AUX	PÈCHES
[Fresh	Apricot	or	Peach	Tart—warm	or	cold]

For	6	people

An	8-inch	partially	cooked	pastry	shell	placed	on	a	baking	sheet
For	the	shell	use	the	sweet	short	paste.

8	to	10	fresh	apricots	or	3	or	4	freestone	peaches
Boiling	water

Drop	the	fruit	in	boiling	water	for	10	to	15	seconds.	Peel,	halve,	and
remove	pits.	Slice	the	fruit	if	you	wish.

Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
2	Tb	butter	cut	into	pea-sized	dots

Sprinkle	3	tablespoons	of	sugar	in	the	bottom	of	the	pastry	shell.	If	the
fruit	is	sliced,	arrange	it	over	the	sugar	in	a	closely	overlapping	layer
of	concentric	circles.	 If	 it	 is	halved,	place	the	halves,	domed	side	up,
closely	together	in	the	shell.	Spread	on	the	rest	of	the	sugar.	Dot	with
the	butter.

Bake	in	middle	level	of	preheated	oven	for	30	to	40	minutes,	or	until
fruit	has	colored	lightly	and	the	juices	have	become	syrupy.



¼	cup	slivered	almonds
½	cup	apricot	glaze
Slip	 the	 tart	 onto	 a	 rack.	 Decorate	 with	 the	 slivered	 almonds,	 and
spread	on	the	apricot	glaze.

Serve	warm	or	cold.

VARIATIONS
Use	 the	 same	 system	 with	 plums,	 pears,	 or	 canned	 fruit.	 A	 nice

combination	 is	 slices	 of	 canned	 apricots	 alternating	 with	 slices	 of
banana.

Tartes	Flambées	Any	of	these	tarts	may	be	flamed	with	liqueurs	as
they	are	brought	to	the	table,	as	described	in	the	recipe	for	cherry	tart.

		TARTE	AUX	FRAISES
[Fresh	Strawberry	Tart—cold]

Fresh	fruit	tarts	are	easy	to	make,	pretty	to	look	at,	and	refreshing
to	 eat.	 They	 consist	 of	 a	 fully	 baked	 tart	 shell	 which	 is	 lined	 with
liqueur-flavored	 crème	 pâtissière	 (custard	 filling).	 The	 fresh	 fruit	 is
arranged	over	 the	 filling	and	 topped	with	apricot	or	 red	currant	glaze.
Other	suggestions	follow	this	recipe.

Fresh	Strawberry	Tart



For	8	people

A	10-inch	fully	baked	pastry	shell
Use	either	the	sweet	short	paste,	or	the	sugar	crust	for	your	tart	shell.

1	quart	large,	ripe,	handsome	strawberries
A	cake	rack
Hull	 the	strawberries.	 If	necessary	to	wash	them,	do	so	very	quickly,
and	drain	them	on	a	rack.

1	cup	red	currant	jelly
2	Tb	granulated	sugar
2	Tb	kirsch	or	cognac
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer	A	pastry	brush
Boil	the	currant	jelly,	sugar,	and	liqueur	in	a	small	saucepan	until	last
drops	 from	 spoon	 are	 sticky	 (228	 degrees).	 Paint	 the	 interior	 of	 the
shell	with	a	thin	coating	of	 the	glaze	and	allow	to	set	 for	5	minutes.
This	will	give	 the	shell	a	 light	waterproofing.	Reserve	the	rest	of	 the
glaze	for	the	strawberries.	Warm	it	briefly	if	it	has	hardened.

1½	to	2	cups	chilled	crème	pâtissière	(custard	filling)	with	2	to	3	Tb
kirsch	or	cognac
Spread	a	½-inch	 layer	of	crème	pâtissière	 in	 the	bottom	of	 the	pastry
shell.

Arrange	 a	 design	 of	 strawberries	 over	 the	 cream.	 Put	 the	 largest
strawberry	 in	 the	 center,	 and	 graduate	 down	 in	 size,	 placing	 the
berries	closely	together,	their	stem	ends	in	the	cream.	Spoon	or	paint
over	them	a	thin	coating	of	the	glaze,	and	the	tart	is	ready	to	serve.	(
)	Because	of	 the	glazed	waterproofing	in	the	bottom	of	the	shell,	 the
filled	tart	may	wait	an	hour	or	so.

VARIATIONS



Using	 the	 same	 method	 as	 that	 for	 the	 preceding	 strawberry	 tart,
substitute	 a	 layer	 of	 peeled	 and	 seeded	 grapes,	 sliced	 bananas,
raspberries,	or	poached	or	canned	peaches,	apricots,	plums,	or	pears.
Follow	the	above	illustration	for	design.

Mixed	Fruit	Tart

TARTE	AUX	POIRES	À	LA	BOURDALOUE
[Pear	and	Almond	Tart—tepid	or	cold]

For	6	people

1½	to	2	lbs.	firm,	ripe,	unblemished	pears
2	cups	cold	water	and	1	Tb	lemon	juice	in	a	mixing	bowl
Peel	and	halve	the	pears.	Neatly	stem	and	core	them	with	a	grapefruit
knife.	 Drop	 each	 half,	 as	 it	 is	 prepared,	 pared,	 into	 the	 acidulated
water	to	keep	it	from	discoloring.



Pear	Tart

2	cups	red	Bordeaux	wine
2	Tb	lemon	juice
¾	cup	granulated	sugar
1	stick	or	½	tsp	cinnamon
A	3-quart	enameled	saucepan
A	slotted	spoon
A	rack
Bring	 the	wine,	 lemon	 juice,	 sugar,	 and	 cinnamon	 to	 the	boil	 in	 the
saucepan.	 Drain	 the	 pears,	 and	 drop	 into	 the	 boiling	 syrup;	 bring
liquid	to	just	below	the	simmer	for	8	to	10	minutes	or	until	pears	are
tender	when	 pierced	with	 a	 knife.	 Do	 not	 overcook;	 they	must	 hold
their	 shape.	 Remove	 saucepan	 from	 heat	 and	 let	 pears	 cool	 in	 the
syrup	for	20	minutes.	Drain	the	pears	on	a	rack.

Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
¼	cup	red	currant	jelly	in	a	small	saucepan
A	wooden	spoon
Rapidly	 boil	 down	 the	 syrup	 to	 the	 thread	 stage	 (230	 degrees).
Measure	out	¼	cup	of	syrup	and	simmer	it	with	the	red	currant	jelly
until	 jelly	 has	 dissolved	 and	 the	 syrup	 coats	 the	 spoon	with	 a	 light
glaze.



A	10-inch	fully	cooked	sugar-crust	shell
Paint	 the	 inside	 of	 the	 shell	 with	 a	 thin	 layer	 of	 the	 pear	 and	 jelly
glaze.

2½	cups	chilled	frangipane	(almond	custard),	with	2	Tb	kirsch
Spread	the	frangipane	in	the	pastry	shell.	Cut	the	pears	into	crosswise
or	lengthwise	slices	and	arrange	them	over	the	custard.

Optional:	¼	cup	slivered	almonds
Decorate	with	the	optional	almonds.	Spoon	a	light	coating	of	the	glaze
over	the	top	of	the	tart.

TARTE	AUX	CERISES,	FLAMBÉE
[Cherry	Tart	Flambée]

For	a	 spectacular	entrance,	 sprinkle	 sugar	over	a	cooked	 fruit	 tart,
caramelize	it	briefly	under	the	broiler,	pour	on	liqueur,	and	ignite	it	as
you	enter	the	dining	room.	The	following	recipe	is	for	cherries;	you	may
use	 the	 same	 technique	 for	 the	 apricot	 or	 peach	 tart,	 and	 for	 the
variations	following	it.

The	cherries
You	may	use	canned	Bing	cherries	or	defrosted	frozen	cherries	instead
of	 fresh	 for	 this	 recipe.	 In	 this	 case,	 omit	 the	 first	 step	 in	 the
directions,	 drain	 the	 cherries	 thoroughly,	 and	 let	 them	 stand	 for	 at
least	half	an	hour	with	3	tablespoons	of	kirsch	or	cognac	and	as	much
sugar	as	you	feel	 they	need.	Drain	 them	again	 just	before	using,	and
beat	their	kirsch	or	cognac	into	the	cream	filling.
For	6	people

3	cups	fresh	black	cherries
1	cup	red	Bordeaux	wine
2	Tb	lemon	juice



6	Tb	granulated	sugar
A	2-quart	enameled	saucepan
Wash	and	pit	 the	cherries.	Bring	the	wine,	 lemon	juice,	and	sugar	 to
the	boil.	Drop	 in	 the	cherries,	and	bring	 the	 liquid	 to	 just	below	the
simmer	for	5	to	6	minutes	or	until	cherries	are	tender,	but	retain	their
shape.	Allow	cherries	to	cool	in	the	syrup	for	20	to	30	minutes.	Drain.

An	8-inch,	fully	cooked	pastry	shell,	set	in	a	fireproof	serving	dish
Use	either	of	the	sweet	pastry	recipes.	If	you	wish	to	fill	the	tart	shell
some	time	before	serving,	paint	the	interior	with	a	thin	coating	of	red
currant	glaze.

1½	cups	cold	crème	pâtissière	(custard	filling),	or	frangipane	(almond
custard),	with	2	Tb	kirsch	or	cognac
Fold	the	drained	cherries	 into	the	custard,	and	spread	the	mixture	in
the	tart	shell.

Preheat	broiler	to	moderately	hot.

3	Tb	granulated	sugar
¼	cup	kirsch	or	cognac,	warmed	in	a	small	saucepan
Immediately	before	serving,	sprinkle	the	sugar	over	the	surface	of	the
tart	and	run	it	under	the	broiler	for	2	to	3	minutes	to	caramelize	the
sugar	 lightly;	 be	 careful	 it	 does	 not	 burn.	 Just	 before	 entering	 the
dining	room,	pour	the	warm	liqueur	over	the	hot	caramelized	surface.
Avert	your	face	and	ignite	the	liqueur	with	a	lighted	match;	bring	the
flaming	tart	to	the	table.

TARTE	À	L’ANANAS
[Pineapple	Tart]

For	6	people



1	No.	2	can	of	sliced	pineapple,	pineapple	wedges,	or	crushed
pineapple	(1½	cups	fruit	and	about	¾	cup	syrup)
Drain	the	pineapple.	Boil	the	canned	pineapple	syrup	for	5	minutes	in
a	saucepan.	Add	the	pineapple	and	boil	for	5	minutes	more.	Drain	the
pineapple,	and	allow	it	to	cool.

½	cup	red	currant	jelly
2	Tb	kirsch	or	cognac
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
Boil	the	pineapple	syrup	with	the	jelly	and	liqueur	until	it	reduces	to	a
glaze	(last	drops	are	sticky	when	dropped	from	a	spoon,	228	degrees).

A	pastry	brush
An	8-inch,	fully	cooked,	sugar-crust	shell
1½	to	2	cups	chilled	crème	pâtissière	(custard	filling)	with	2	to	3	Tb
kirsch	or	cognac
Paint	 the	 interior	 of	 the	 shell	with	 a	 coating	 of	 the	 pineapple	 glaze.
Spread	the	crème	pâtissière	in	the	pastry	shell.

Optional:	¼	cup	diced	red	and	green	glacéed	fruit	and	¼	cup	slivered
almonds
When	the	pineapple	is	cold,	arrange	it	over	the	filling.	Decorate	with
the	 optional	 glacéed	 fruits	 and	 almonds.	 Spoon	 a	 light	 coating	 of
pineapple	glaze	over	the	top.

TARTE	AU	CITRON
TARTE	AUX	LIMETTES
[Lemon	or	Lime	Soufflé	Tart—hot]

This	delicious,	 light	 tart	 is	 really	a	soufflé.	The	same	filling	 is	also
attractive	in	little	tart	shells	served	for	afternoon	tea.	Speaking	of	these,
see	also	the	lemon	butter	filling.



For	8	people

A	10-inch,	cooked,	sugar-crust	shell	placed	on	a	baking	sheet	(use
only	3	Tb	sugar	in	the	pastry)
When	you	bake	 the	 shell	 let	 it	 barely	 color	 so	 it	will	 not	brown	 too
much	when	it	goes	again	into	the	oven.

Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
A	3-to	4-quart	stainless	steel	bowl
½	cup	granulated	sugar
4	egg	yolks
The	grated	rind	of	1	lemon	or	2	limes
3	Tb	lemon	juice	or	lime	juice
A	pan	of	not-quite-simmering	water
A	wooden	spoon
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
Gradually	beat	the	sugar	into	the	egg	yolks	and	continue	beating	until
mixture	is	thick,	pale	yellow,	and	falls	back	on	itself	forming	a	slowly
dissolving	ribbon.	Beat	in	the	rind	and	juice.	Set	bowl	over	not-quite-
simmering	water	and	stir	with	wooden	spoon	until	mixture	is	too	hot
for	your	finger	(165	degrees),	and	thickens	enough	to	coat	the	spoon
lightly.	Be	careful	not	to	overheat	it	and	scramble	the	egg	yolks.

4	egg	whites
A	pinch	of	salt
¼	cup	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	 soft	peaks	are	 formed;	 sprinkle	on
the	sugar	and	continue	beating	until	 stiff	peaks	are	 formed.	Fold	 the
egg	whites	delicately	 into	 the	warm	 lemon	or	 lime	mixture	and	 turn
into	the	tart	shell.



Powdered	sugar	in	shaker
Bake	 for	 about	30	minutes	 in	middle	 level	of	preheated	oven.	When
tart	has	begun	 to	puff	and	color,	 sprinkle	with	powdered	sugar.	 It	 is
done	when	top	is	lightly	brown,	and	a	needle	or	knife	plunged	into	the
center	comes	out	clean.

If	you	cannot	serve	it	 immediately,	 leave	in	turned-off	hot	oven	with
the	 door	 ajar.	 It	 will	 sink	 slightly	 as	 it	 cools.	 (May	 be	 served	 hot,
warm,	 or	 cold	 but	 we	 think	 it	 is	 best	 hot.)	

TARTE	AU	CITRON	ET	AUX	AMANDES
[Lemon	and	Almond	Tart—cold]

For	6	people

An	8-inch,	cooked,	sugar-crust	shell	placed	on	a	baking	sheet	(use
only	3	Tb	sugar	in	the	pastry)
When	you	bake	 the	shell,	 let	 it	barely	color	 so	 it	will	not	brown	too
much	when	it	goes	again	into	the	oven.

3	lemons
A	vegetable	peeler
Remove	the	yellow	part	of	the	lemon	skin	with	a	vegetable	peeler;	cut
into	julienne	strips	1/ 	inch	wide	and	2½	inches	long.	Simmer	10	to	12

16

minutes	in	water.	Drain	thoroughly.

2	cups	granulated	sugar
⅔	cup	water
1	tsp	vanilla	extract
A	small	saucepan
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
Boil	the	sugar	and	⅔	cup	of	water	to	the	thread	stage	(230	degrees);
add	the	vanilla	and	lemon	peel.	Let	stand	for	30	minutes.



Preheat	oven	to	325	degrees.

An	electric	beater	or	wire	whip
2	eggs
½	cup	granulated	sugar
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Beat	the	eggs	and	sugar	in	a	mixing	bowl	for	4	to	5	minutes,	or	until
mixture	is	thick,	pale	yellow	and	falls	back	on	itself	forming	a	slowly
dissolving	ribbon.

¾	cup	(4	ounces)	pulverized	almonds
¼	tsp	almond	extract
The	grated	rind	and	strained	juice	of	1½	lemons
A	rack
Beat	 in	 the	 almonds,	 almond	 extract,	 lemon	 rind,	 and	 lemon	 juice.
Pour	this	almond	cream	into	the	pastry	shell	and	bake	in	middle	level
of	preheated	oven	for	about	25	minutes.	Tart	is	done	when	cream	has
puffed,	browned	very	 lightly,	and	a	needle	or	knife	plunged	 into	 the
cream	comes	out	clean.	Slide	tart	onto	rack.

Drain	the	strips	of	lemon	peel	and	strew	them	over	the	tart.	Boil	their
syrup	 down	 until	 it	 is	 a	 glaze	 (last	 drops	 are	 sticky	when	 fall	 from
spoon,	228	degrees),	and	spoon	a	thin	coating	over	the	top	of	the	tart.
This	tart	is	usually	served	cold,	but	may	be	eaten	warm	if	you	wish.

		TARTE	AU	FROMAGE	FRAIS
[Cream	Cheese	Tart—hot	or	cold]

This	is	really	a	quiche,	and	very	simple	indeed	to	make.
For	6	people

An	8-inch	partially	baked	pastry	shell	placed	on	a	baking	sheet
Use	the	recipe	for	sweet	short	paste.



Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees.

½	lb.	(1	cup)	cream	cheese
4	ounces	(1	stick)	softened	unsalted	butter
⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wooden	spoon	or	electric	beater
2	eggs
Big	pinch	of	nutmeg
Cream	the	cheese,	butter,	and	sugar	together	in	a	mixing	bowl.	Beat	in
the	eggs	and	nutmeg.	Turn	into	pastry	shell	and	bake	in	upper	third	of
preheated	oven	for	25	to	30	minutes.	Tart	is	done	when	it	has	puffed
and	browned,	and	a	needle	or	knife	plunged	into	the	center	comes	out
clean.

Tart	will	sink	slightly	as	it	cools.	It	may	be	served	hot	and	puffed,	or
warm,	or	cold.	It	may	also	be	reheated,	but	will	not	puff	again.

VARIATION
Tarte	au	Fromage	Frais	et	aux	Pruneaux
[Cream	Cheese	and	Prune	Tart]

½	cup	“tenderized”	prunes
½	cup	(about	3	ounces)	pulverized	almonds
¼	tsp	almond	extract
Soften	prunes	for	5	minutes	in	hot	water.	Drain,	remove	pits,	and	dice
the	prunes.	Stir	prunes,	almonds,	and	almond	extract	into	tart	mixture
after	the	eggs	have	been	beaten	in.

DESSERT	CRÊPES

Crêpes	Sucrées



Dessert	 crêpes,	 especially	 if	 they	 are	 for	 crêpes	 Suzette,	 should	 be	 as
thin	and	delicate	as	possible.	There	are	numerous	varying	recipes	for
making	 them;	 some	 use	 egg	 yolks,	 others	 use	 whole	 eggs,	 and	 still
others	 specify	 cream	 rather	 than	milk.	 The	 lightness	 of	 crêpes	 made
from	the	following	recipe	can	be	attributed	to	the	use	of	milk	diluted
with	water.	 If	you	wish	a	heavier	crêpe,	use	all	milk,	or	 light	cream.
The	batter	 for	 dessert	 crêpes,	 like	 that	 for	 entrée	 crêpes,	must	 rest	 at
least	2	hours	before	using.

METHOD	FOR	COOKING	CRÊPES

The	procedure	for	cooking	crêpes	is	described	and	illustrated	in	the
Entrée	 chapter	 on	 this	 page.	 You	may	wish	 to	 sauté	 them	 in	 clarified
butter,	 rather	 than	 in	 oil	 and	 butter.	 As	 dessert	 crêpes	 are	 fragile,	 you
will	probably	find	it	best	to	lift	them	with	your	fingers	to	turn	and	cook
them	on	the	other	side.
Crêpes	may	be	made	several	hours	before	serving	time.	Pile	them	in

a	dish,	 cover	with	waxed	paper	 and	a	plate	 to	keep	 them	 from	drying
out.

CRÊPES	FINES	SUCRÉES
[Light	Batter—for	crêpes	Suzette]

(If	you	do	not	have	an	electric	blender	proceed	as	follows:	Gradually
work	 the	 egg	 yolks	 into	 the	 flour	 with	 a	 wooden	 spoon,	 beat	 in	 the
liquids	by	droplets,	then	strain	the	batter	through	a	fine	sieve.)	For	10	to
12	 crêpes	6	 inches	 in	 diameter,	 or	16	 to	18	 crêpes	4	 to	5	 inches	 in
diameter

¾	cup	milk
¾	cup	cold	water
3	egg	yolks
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
3	Tb	orange	liqueur,	rum,	or	brandy



1	cup	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
5	Tb	melted	butter
An	electric	blender
A	rubber	scraper
Place	the	ingredients	in	the	blender	jar	in	the	order	in	which	they	are
listed.	 Cover	 and	 blend	 at	 top	 speed	 for	 1	 minute.	 If	 bits	 of	 flour
adhere	 to	 sides	 of	 jar,	 dislodge	 with	 a	 rubber	 scraper	 and	 blend	 3
seconds	more.	Cover	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	2	hours	or	overnight.

CRÊPES	À	LA	LEVURE
[Yeast	Batter—for	stuffed	crêpes]

The	 addition	 of	 yeast	 makes	 a	 more	 tender	 and	 slightly	 thicker
crêpe.

Ingredients	for	the	preceding	crêpe	batter
1½	tsp	fresh	or	dry	yeast
Warm	¼	cup	of	the	milk	to	blood	temperature	(about	90	degrees)	and
allow	the	yeast	to	dissolve	in	it.	Add	it	to	the	rest	of	the	ingredients	in
the	blender	and	proceed	with	the	recipe.

Cover	the	batter	with	a	towel	and	let	it	stand	at	room	temperature	for
about	 2	 hours,	 or	 until	 the	 yeast	 has	 worked	 and	 the	 batter	 looks
bubbly	on	top.	Use	immediately,	or	the	yeast	will	overferment.

CRÊPES	SOUFFLÉES
[Raised	Batter—for	stuffed	crêpes]

Beaten	 egg	 whites	 folded	 into	 the	 batter	 makes	 the	 crêpes	 puff
slightly.

Ingredients	for	one	of	the	preceding	crêpe	batters,	either	plain	or	with



yeast
3	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
After	 the	 batter	 has	 rested	 for	 2	 hours,	 and	 just	 before	 you	wish	 to
make	your	crêpes,	beat	the	egg	whites	and	salt	until	stiff.	Fold	half	into
the	batter,	fold	in	the	other	half,	then	make	the	crêpes.

CRÊPES	SUZETTE
[Crêpes	with	Orange	Butter,	Flambées]

Every	 chef	 has	 his	 own	 recipe	 for	 crêpes	 Suzette;	 of	 the	 many	 we
have	 tried,	we	 find	 this	 one	 especially	 good.	Obviously	 if	 you	 plan	 to
perform	 in	public	with	 a	 chafing	dish,	 it	 is	 a	 good	 idea	 to	practice	 on
your	family	until	you	become	adept	at	folding	and	flaming.	Crêpes	4	to	5
inches	in	diameter	are	a	convenient	size,	and	three	of	these	per	person	is
the	usual	serving.
For	6	people

The	orange	butter	(in	a	food	processor,	or	by	hand	and	electric	mixer)

For	the	processor:	½	cup	granulated	sugar
By	hand:	4	large	sugar	lumps	and	¼	cup	sugar
2	bright-skinned	oranges
A	vegetable	peeler
A	rubber	spatula
½	lb.	unsalted	butter
½	to	⅔	cup	strained	orange	juice
3	Tb	orange	liqueur
For	 the	 processor	 (steel	 blade),	 place	 the	 ½	 cup	 of	 sugar	 in	 the
container	 along	with	 the	 orange	 part	 of	 the	 peel	 (stripped	 from	 the
fruit).	Process	for	a	minute	or	so,	scraping	down	sides	of	bowl	with	a
rubber	 spatula	 as	necessary,	 until	 peel	 and	 sugar	 are	 finely	blended.



Cut	the	butter	into	pieces,	and	process	until	smooth	and	almost	fluffy.
By	 droplets,	 cream	 in	 ½	 cup	 of	 the	 orange	 juice,	 then	 the	 orange
liqueur,	plus	droplets	more	of	the	juice	if	the	mixture	will	take	it	and
still	remain	creamy.	Cover	and	refrigerate.
By	hand	and	electric	mixer,	first	rub	the	sugar	lumps	over	the	oranges

until	all	sides	have	absorbed	the	oil	from	the	skin.	Mash	the	lumps	on	a
board,	add	the	orange	part	of	the	peel	from	the	fruit,	and	the	¼	cup	of
sugar.	Chop	until	very	 finely	minced.	Scrape	 into	a	bowl	and	cream	in
the	 butter	 with	 an	 electric	 mixer,	 then	 ½	 cup	 of	 orange	 juice,	 the
liqueur,	and	more	juice	if	possible.	Cover	and	refrigerate.

The	chafing	dish	finish

18	cooked	crêpes	4	to	5	inches	in	diameter
Use	the	recipe	for	crêpes	fines	sucrées.

A	chafing	dish	set	over	an	alcohol	flame
Place	 the	 orange	 butter	 in	 the	 chafing	 dish	 and	 heat	 until	 it	 is
bubbling.

A	spoon	and	fork
Dip	both	sides	of	a	crêpe	in	the	butter.	Its	best-looking	side	out,	fold	it
in	half	and	in	half	again,	to	form	a	wedge.	Place	it	at	the	edge	of	the
chafing	dish.	Rapidly	continue	with	the	rest	of	the	crêpes	until	all	have
been	dipped,	folded,	and	arranged.

2	Tb	granulated	sugar
⅓	cup	orange	liqueur
⅓	cup	cognac
Sprinkle	the	crêpes	with	the	sugar.	Pour	over	them	the	orange	liqueur
and	 cognac.	 Avert	 your	 face	 and	 ignite	 the	 liqueur	 with	 a	 lighted
match.	 Shake	 the	 chafing	dish	gently	back	and	 forth	while	 spooning
the	flaming	liqueur	over	the	crêpes	until	the	fire	dies	down.	Serve.



CRÊPES	FOURRÉES	ET	FLAMBÉES
[Crêpes	with	Orange-almond	Butter,	Flambées]

These	 crêpes	 are	 stuffed	 with	 orange-flavored	 almond	 butter,	 and
may	 be	 flamed	 in	 a	 chafing	 dish,	 or	 brought	 flaming	 to	 the	 table	 as
suggested	here.
For	6	to	8	people
The	orange-almond	butter

½	cup	pulverized	almonds,	or	pulverized	macaroons
¼	tsp	almond	extract
The	orange	butter	in	the	preceding	recipe
Beat	 the	 almonds	 or	macaroons	 and	 almond	 extract	 into	 the	 orange
butter.

Filling	the	crêpes
18	cooked	crêpes	4	to	5	inches	in	diameter
A	lightly	buttered	baking	dish	suitable	for	serving
Use	any	of	the	3	crêpe.	Spread	the	butter	on	the	less	good	side	of	each
cooked	crêpe,	and	fold	into	wedge	shapes,	or	roll	them,	to	enclose	the
butter	filling.	Arrange	in	the	baking	dish.
( )	 If	 not	 to	 be	 heated	 immediately,	 cover	 with	 waxed	 paper	 and
refrigerate.

Flaming	the	crêpes
3	Tb	granulated	sugar
Shortly	 before	 serving	 time,	 sprinkle	 with	 sugar	 and	 set	 in	 a
preheated,	375-degree	oven	for	10	to	15	minutes	until	dish	is	very	hot
and	crêpes	are	beginning	to	caramelize	on	top.

⅓	cup	orange	liqueur	and	⅓	cup	cognac	warmed	in	a	small	saucepan
A	long-handled	serving	spoon
Just	before	entering	 the	dining	 room,	pour	 the	warm	orange	 liqueur



and	cognac	over	 the	hot	crêpes.	Avert	your	 face,	 ignite	crêpes	with	a
lighted	match,	and	bring	them	blazing	to	the	table.	The	server	tilts	the
dish	and	spoons	the	flaming	liqueur	over	the	crêpes	until	the	fire	dies
down.

CRÊPES	FOURRÉES,	FRANGIPANE
[Crêpes	with	Almond	Cream]

This	 is	 a	 much	 lighter	 filling	 than	 the	 preceding	 orange-almond
butter.	 It	 may	 be	 set	 aflame	 if	 you	 wish,	 or	 served	 with	 chocolate	 as
suggested	in	the	recipe.
For	6	people

12	cooked	crêpes	6	inches	in	diameter
Use	any	of	the	three	recipes	for	crêpes.

1½	cups	frangipane	(almond	custard)
A	lightly	buttered	baking-serving	dish
2	ounces	or	squares	of	semisweet	baking	chocolate
2	Tb	melted	butter
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Spread	2	tablespoons	of	frangipane	on	the	less-good	side	of	each	crêpe.
Fold	the	crêpes	into	wedge	shapes,	or	roll	them,	to	enclose	the	filling,
and	 arrange	 in	 the	 baking	 dish.	Grate	 the	 chocolate	 over	 the	 crêpes,
sprinkle	on	the	melted	butter,	then	the	sugar.

About	20	minutes	before	serving,	set	in	a	preheated	350-degree	oven
until	the	chocolate	has	melted.	Serve	hot	or	warm.

GÂTEAU	DE	CRÊPES	À	LA	NORMANDE
[Mound	of	Crêpes	with	Apples,	Flambé]



Instead	 of	 stuffing	 each	 crêpe	 separately,	 you	 can	 pile	 them	 one
upon	the	other	with	a	layer	of	filling	between	each,	as	in	this	recipe.
For	6	to	8	people

2	lbs.	crisp	cooking	or	eating	apples
A	heavy-bottomed,	3-quart	pan:	saucepan,	casserole,	or	skillet
A	wooden	spoon
½	cup	granulated	sugar,	more	if	needed
Quarter,	 core,	 and	 peel	 the	 apples.	 Chop	 them	 roughly.	 You	 should
have	about	5	cups.	Cook	in	a	covered	pan	over	low	heat	for	about	20
minutes,	 stirring	 occasionally,	 until	 apples	 are	 tender.	 Uncover,	 add
sugar,	raise	heat	and	boil,	stirring,	for	5	minutes	or	more.	Applesauce
should	reduce	and	be	thick	enough	to	hold	itself	in	a	fairly	solid	mass
in	the	spoon.	Add	more	sugar	while	the	apples	are	cooking	if	you	feel
it	necessary.

2	Tb	whipping	cream
¼	tsp	almond	extract
2	Tb	Calvados	(apple	brandy),	cognac,	or	dark	rum
Stir	 the	 cream,	 almond	 extract,	 and	 brandy	 or	 rum	 into	 the
applesauce.

10	to	12	cooked	crêpes	6	inches	in	diameter
Use	the	raised	batter	recipe	for	crêpes	soufflées.

A	lightly	buttered	baking-serving	dish
½	cup	(3	ounces)	pulverized	almonds,	or	pulverized	macaroons
2	Tb	slivered	almonds	or	pulverized	macaroons
2	Tb	melted	butter
2	Tb	granulated	sugar
Center	a	crêpe	in	the	bottom	of	the	dish.	Spread	a	layer	of	apples	over
it	 and	 sprinkle	 with	 a	 scant	 tablespoon	 of	 almonds	 or	 macaroons.
Continue	 with	 layers	 of	 crêpe,	 apples,	 and	 almonds,	 ending	 with	 a



crêpe.	This	will	look	like	a	many-layered	cake.	Sprinkle	the	almonds	or
macaroons	over	the	last	crêpe.	Pour	on	the	butter	and	sprinkle	with	the
sugar.

About	 30	 minutes	 before	 serving,	 place	 in	 the	 upper	 third	 of	 a
preheated,	375-degree	oven	to	heat	through	thoroughly.	The	sugar	on
top	of	the	mound	should	almost	begin	to	caramelize.	Serve	as	follows:

½	cup	Calvados	(apple	brandy),	cognac,	or	dark	rum,	warmed	in	a
small	saucepan
A	long-handled	serving	spoon
Just	before	entering	 the	dining	 room,	pour	 the	warm	brandy	or	 rum
over	the	hot	mound	of	crêpes.	Avert	your	face,	set	liqueur	aflame	with
a	lighted	match,	and	bring	the	blazing	dessert	to	the	table.	The	server
should	 spoon	 the	 flaming	 liqueur	 over	 the	 dessert	 until	 the	 fire
subsides,	then	cut	portions	from	the	mound	as	from	a	cake.

OTHER	FILLINGS	FOR	CRÊPES
Here	are	 some	other	 ideas	 following	 the	general	method	 in	any	of

the	preceding	recipes.	Flame	the	crêpes	or	not,	as	you	wish.

Fresh	Fruits
Let	strawberries,	raspberries,	or	sliced	bananas	stand	in	a	bowl	with

a	sprinkling	of	sugar	and	kirsch,	orange	liqueur,	or	cognac	for	an	hour,
then	use	as	a	filling.

Stewed	Fruits
Any	of	the	following	may	be	folded	into	an	equal	amount	of	crème

pâtissière	(custard	filling),	and	then	used	for	stuffed	crêpes	or	a	mound	of
crêpes:

Apples,	peeled,	sliced,	sautéed	 in	butter,	 then	sprinkled	with	sugar
and	cinnamon

Pears,	peeled,	poached	in	red-wine	syrup,	as	in	tarte	aux	poires	à	la
Bourdaloue,	then	diced	and	sprinkled	with	crumbled	macaroons	Peaches,
apricots,	 or	 plums	 poached	 in	 syrup,	 using	 the	 system	 for	 poaching
peaches	 in	 pêches	 cardinal,	 then	 drained,	 peeled,	 and	 diced	 Pineapple



(crushed,	 canned	 pineapple),	 drained,	 the	 syrup	 boiled	 for	 5	 minutes,
then	the	pineapple	boiled	in	the	syrup	for	5	minutes	more	and	drained
Jams,	Preserves,	and	Jellies

These	 simple	 fillings	make	 a	 delicious	 dessert	when	 the	 crêpes	 are
flamed	 with	 liqueur.	 To	 prepare	 them,	 mix	 a	 little	 kirsch,	 cognac,	 or
orange	 liqueur	 into	 red	 currant	 jelly,	 or	 raspberry,	 strawberry,	 apricot,
or	 cherry	 jam	 or	 preserves.	 Stir	 in	 also,	 if	 you	 wish,	 some	 crumbled
macaroons.	Spread	the	filling	on	the	crêpes,	roll,	fold	them,	or	pile	them
into	 a	 mound	 in	 a	 fireproof	 dish.	 Sprinkle	 with	 melted	 butter	 and
granulated	 sugar,	 and	 set	 in	 a	 preheated,	 375-degree	 oven	 until
thoroughly	heated.	Flame	with	warmed	liqueur	just	as	you	bring	them	to
the	table.

FRUIT	FLANS

Clafoutis

		CLAFOUTI
[Cherry	Flan]

The	clafouti	(also	spelled	with	a	final	“s”	in	both	singular	and	plural)
which	is	traditional	in	the	Limousin	during	the	cherry	season	is	peasant
cooking	for	family	meals,	and	about	as	simple	a	dessert	to	make	as	you
can	imagine:	a	pancake	batter	poured	over	fruit	in	a	fireproof	dish,	then
baked	in	the	oven.	It	looks	like	a	tart,	and	is	usually	eaten	warm.

(If	you	have	no	electric	blender,	work	the	eggs	into	the	flour	with	a
wooden	 spoon,	 gradually	 beat	 in	 the	 liquids,	 then	 strain	 the	 batter
through	a	fine	sieve.)	For	6	to	8	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

3	cups	pitted	black	cherries
Use	 fresh,	 black,	 sweet	 cherries	 in	 season.	 Otherwise	 use	 drained,
canned,	 pitted	 Bing	 cherries,	 or	 frozen	 sweet	 cherries,	 thawed	 and
drained.



1¼	cups	milk
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
3	eggs
1	Tb	vanilla	extract
⅛	tsp	salt	½	cup	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
An	electric	blender
Place	the	ingredients	at	left	in	your	blender	jar	in	the	order	in	which
they	are	listed.	Cover	and	blend	at	top	speed	for	1	minute.

A	7-to	8-cup	lightly	buttered,	fireproof	baking	dish	or	pyrex	pie	plate
about	1½	inches	deep
An	asbestos	mat,	if	necessary
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
Pour	a	¼-inch	layer	of	batter	in	the	baking	dish	or	pie	plate.	Set	over
moderate	heat	for	a	minute	or	two	until	a	film	of	batter	has	set	in	the
bottom	of	 the	dish.	Remove	 from	heat.	 Spread	 the	 cherries	 over	 the
batter	 and	 sprinkle	 on	 the	 sugar.	 Pour	 on	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 batter	 and
smooth	the	surface	with	the	back	of	a	spoon.

Powdered	sugar	in	a	shaker
Place	 in	 middle	 position	 of	 preheated	 oven	 and	 bake	 for	 about	 an
hour.	 The	 clafouti	 is	 done	 when	 it	 has	 puffed	 and	 browned,	 and	 a
needle	or	knife	plunged	into	its	center	comes	out	clean.	Sprinkle	top	of
clafouti	with	powdered	sugar	just	before	bringing	it	to	the	table.	(The
clafouti	need	not	be	served	hot,	but	should	still	be	warm.	It	will	sink
down	 slightly	 as	 it	 cools.)	

VARIATIONS
The	clafouti	in	the	preceding	master	recipe	is	the	simple	and	classic

version.	Here	are	some	variations:

Clafouti	à	la	Liqueur
[Cherry	Flan	with	Liqueur]



Ingredients	for	the	preceding	clafouti
¼	cup	kirsch	or	cognac
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
Follow	the	master	recipe	but	first	let	the	cherries	stand	for	1	hour	in
the	kirsch	or	 cognac	 and	 sugar.	 Substitute	 this	 liquid	 for	part	 of	 the
milk	 called	 for	 in	 the	 batter;	 omit	 the	⅓	 sugar	 near	 the	 end	 of	 the
recipe.

Clafouti	aux	Poires
[Pear	Flan]

Ingredients	for	the	master	clafouti	with	changes	as	indicated
3	cups	peeled,	cored,	and	sliced	ripe	pears	(1¼	to	1½	lbs.	pears)
¼	cup	sweet	white	wine,	kirsch,	or	cognac
⅓	cup	granulated	sugar
Follow	 the	 master	 recipe	 with	 these	 changes:	 Substitute	 pears	 for
cherries,	and	let	stand	for	1	hour	in	wine,	kirsch,	or	cognac	and	sugar.
Substitute	this	liquid	for	part	of	the	milk	called	for	in	the	batter;	omit
the	⅓	cup	of	sugar	near	the	end	of	the	recipe.

Clafouti	aux	Pruneaux
[Plum	Flan]

Ingredients	for	the	master	clafouti	with	changes	as	indicated
1	lb.	firm,	ripe	plums
Boiling	water
¼	cup	orange	liqueur,	kirsch,	or	cognac
⅓	cup	sugar
Follow	 the	 master	 recipe	 with	 these	 changes:	 Substitute	 plums	 for
cherries,	and	drop	in	boiling	water	for	exactly	10	seconds.	Peel.	Slice



them	 or	 leave	 whole.	 Let	 stand	 with	 liqueur,	 kirsch,	 or	 cognac	 and
sugar	for	1	hour.	Substitute	this	liquid	for	part	of	the	milk	called	for	in
the	batter;	omit	the	⅓	cup	sugar	near	the	end	of	the	recipe.

Clafouti	aux	Pommes
[Apple	Flan]

Ingredients	for	the	master	clafouti	with	changes	as	indicated
About	1¼	lbs.	crisp	eating	or	cooking	apples
3	to	4	Tb	butter
An	enameled	skillet
¼	cup	Calvados	(apple	brandy),	dark	rum,	or	cognac
⅛	tsp	cinnamon
⅓	cup	sugar
Follow	 the	 master	 recipe	 with	 these	 changes:	 Substitute	 apples	 for
cherries;	peel,	core,	and	cut	them	into	lengthwise	slices	¼	inch	thick.
You	 should	 have	 about	 3	 cups.	 Sauté	 to	 brown	 very	 lightly	 in	 hot
butter,	then	let	stand	in	the	skillet	for	½	hour	with	the	brandy	or	rum,
cinnamon,	and	sugar.	Substitute	this	liquid	for	part	of	the	milk	called
for	in	the	batter;	omit	the	⅓	cup	sugar	near	the	end	of	the	recipe.

Clafouti	aux	Mûres
Clafouti	aux	Myrtilles
[Blackberry	or	Blueberry	Flan]

Ingredients	for	the	master	clafouti	or	the	variation	following	it	with
changes	as	indicated
3	cups	(about	1¼	lbs.)	stemmed	and	washed	blackberries	or
blueberries
Follow	the	master	recipe	or	the	variation	after	it	with	these	changes:
Substitute	 berries	 for	 cherries	 and,	 because	 berries	 are	 very	 juicy,



increase	the	flour	for	your	batter	from	⅔	to	1¼	cups.

Clafouti	à	la	Bourdaloue
[Cherry	or	Pear	Flan	with	Almonds]

Ingredients	for	either	of	the	2	cherry	flans,	or	for	the	pear	flan
½	cup	blanched	almonds	(can	be	bought	in	a	can)
1	tsp	almond	extract
Follow	 the	master	 recipe	 for	 cherry	 flan,	 or	 the	variation	 after	 it,	 or
the	recipe	for	pear	flan,	but	purée	the	almonds	in	the	blender	with	the
milk	 called	 for	 in	 your	 batter.	Add	 the	 almond	 extract,	 and	 proceed
with	the	recipe.

BABAS	AND	SAVARINS

Babas	et	Savarins

Babas	and	savarins	always	seem	to	delight	guests,	and	they	are	not
difficult	 to	make	 if	 you	have	any	 feeling	at	 all	 for	doughs	and	baking.
They	may	be	cooked	a	day	or	two	ahead.	They	freeze	perfectly;	all	you
need	 to	 do	 to	make	 them	 ready	 to	 imbibe	 their	 syrup	 is	 to	 pop	 them
from	 the	 freezer	 into	a	300-degree	oven,	 to	warm	 through	 for	about	5
minutes.

Whenever	 you	 are	 working	 with	 yeast	 doughs,	 do	 so	 in	 a	 warm
place	free	from	drafts;	a	sudden	chill	can	cause	the	dough	to	fall.	So	that
the	dough	will	rise	in	one	to	two	hours,	cover	it	with	a	damp	towel	and
set	 it	 where	 the	 temperature	 remains	 between	 80	 and	 100	 degrees.	 If
you	 can	 control	 the	 heat	 and	 have	 a	 thermometer,	 put	 it	 in	 a	 plate-
warming	oven,	or	in	a	baking	oven,	heating	briefly	every	once	in	a	while
to	 maintain	 the	 correct	 temperature.	 Or	 place	 the	 covered	 bowl	 on	 a
pillow	over	the	radiator.	If	you	allow	the	dough	to	rise	too	much,	or	too
long,	 or	 at	 too	 warm	 a	 temperature,	 it	 will	 develop	 a	 taste	 of
overfermented	yeast.



		PÂTE	À	BABA	ET	BABAS
[Baba	Paste	and	Babas]

For	about	12	babas

Mixing	the	paste
4	Tb	butter
Melt	 the	butter,	 and	 let	 it	 cool	 to	 tepid	while	 you	are	preparing	 the
other	ingredients.

1	Tb	dry	active	yeast
3	Tb	tepid	water
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip
2	Tb	granulated	sugar
⅛	tsp	salt
2“large”	eggs
Blend	the	yeast	and	water	in	the	bowl	with	a	wire	whip	and	let	stand
until	yeast	has	dissolved	completely.	Beat	in	the	sugar,	salt,	and	eggs.

1⅓	cups	flour	(scooped	and	leveled)
A	wooden	spoon
(Be	sure	to	measure	your	flour	correctly	to	get	a	soft	pliable	dough.)
Mix	the	flour	and	the	cool	melted	butter	into	the	yeast	with	a	wooden
spoon.

Kneading	the	paste
Then	with	the	fingers	of	one	hand	held	together	and	slightly	cupped,
knead	 the	 dough	 by	 lifting	 it,	 slapping	 it,	 and	 pulling	 it	 vigorously
against	the	sides	of	the	bowl	for	about	5	minutes.	It	will	be	very	sticky
at	first,	but	will	gradually	detach	itself	 from	the	bowl	and	from	your
hand.	 It	has	been	worked	 to	 sufficient	 elasticity	and	body	when	you
can	grasp	it	in	both	hands,	pull	it	to	a	length	of	10	to	12	inches,	and



give	 it	a	 full	 twist	without	breaking	 it.	 (NOTE:	 If	you	are	doubling	 the
recipe,	you	will	have	to	remove	the	dough	from	the	bowl	and	knead	it
by	pulling	and	slapping	it	between	your	hands,	like	taffy.)	Preliminary
rising	in	a	bowl

1	tsp	flour
Form	it	into	a	ball	in	the	bottom	of	the	bowl.	Cut	a	cross	an	inch	deep
on	 top	 and	 sprinkle	 the	 ball	 with	 the	 flour.	 Cover	 the	 bowl	 with
several	thicknesses	of	damp	towel	and	let	it	rise	in	a	warm	place,	80	to
100	 degrees,	 for	 1½	 to	 2	 hours,	 or	 until	 the	 dough	 has	 doubled	 in
bulk.

Again	with	the	cupped	fingers	of	one	hand,	gently	deflate	 the	dough
by	gathering	it	from	the	sides	of	the	bowl	to	the	center.

Final	rising	in	molds
1	Tb	softened	butter
12	baba,	popover,	or	muffin	cups	or	muffin	tins,	about
2	inches	deep	and	2	inches	in	diameter
Butter	 inside	of	cups.	Lightly	break	off	about	a	 tablespoon	of	dough,
enough	to	fill	a	third	of	a	cup,	and	press	it	lightly	into	the	bottom	of
the	cup.	Do	not	bother	to	even	the	top	of	the	dough	as	it	will	smooth
out	as	it	rises.

Cylindrical	Baba	Mold,	2	Inches	Deep	and	2	Inches	in	Diameter

Place	the	cups,	uncovered,	again	in	a	warm	place	and	allow	to	rise	1



to	2	hours	more,	or	until	the	dough	is	¼	inch	over	the	rim	of	the	cups.

Baking
As	soon	as	the	dough	has	risen	this	second	time—and	do	not	delay	or
it	may	 collapse—bake	 in	 the	upper	 third	of	 a	preheated,	 375-degree
oven	for	about	15	minutes.	The	babas	should	be	nicely	browned,	and
slightly	shrunk	from	the	sides	of	the	cups.	Unmold	them	onto	a	cake
rack.

Babas	au	Rhum
[Rum	Babas]

Both	the	babas	and	the	rum	syrup	should	be	lukewarm	but	not	hot
before	 this	operation	begins.	 If	 the	babas	are	cold,	heat	 them	briefly	 in
the	 oven;	 warm	 the	 syrup	 if	 necessary,	 (NOTE:	 Some	 authorities	 use	 a
stronger	 sugar	 syrup,	 1½	 cups	 of	 sugar	 to	 2	 of	 water.	 We	 prefer	 the
lighter	syrup	given	here.)	For	12	babas

The	sugar	syrup

2	cups	water
1	cup	granulated	sugar
A	1-quart	saucepan
½	cup	dark	rum,	more	if	needed	(Jamaican	rum	is	recommended)
Bring	the	water	and	sugar	to	a	boil.	Remove	from	heat	and	stir	until
sugar	 has	 dissolved.	When	 the	 sugar	 syrup	 has	 cooled	 to	 lukewarm,
stir	 in	 the	 rum;	 you	may	 add	 a	 few	 tablespoons	more	 if	 you	 feel	 it
necessary.

The	babas	imbibe	the	syrup

12	barely	warm	cooked	babas,	the	preceding	recipe
A	dish	2	inches	deep	and	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	babas	easily



A	skewer,	trussing	needle	or	sharp-pronged	fork
Optional:	a	bulb	baster
A	cake	rack	set	over	a	tray
Arrange	the	barely	warm	babas	in	the	dish,	their	puffed	tops	up.	Prick
tops	 in	 several	 places,	 pour	 the	 lukewarm	 syrup	 over	 them,	 and	 let
stand	for	½	hour,	basting	frequently	with	syrup.	They	should	imbibe
enough	syrup	so	they	are	moist	and	spongy	but	still	hold	their	shape.
Drain	on	rack	for	½	hour.

TO	SERVE
Babas	au	Rhum,	Classique
[Rum	Babas]

2	Tb	dark	rum
A	pastry	brush
½	cup	apricot	glaze
12	glacéed	cherries
A	serving	dish	or	frilled	paper	cups
After	the	babas	have	drained,	sprinkle	the	top	of	each	with	a	few	drops
of	rum.	Paint	them	with	the	apricot	glaze,	and	place	a	cherry	on	top	of
each.	Arrange	in	a	serving	dish	or	in	paper	cups.

Babas	aux	Fruits
[Rum	Babas	with	Fruit]

A	serving	dish
3	to	4	cups	blueberries	or	fresh	strawberries
Leftover	baba	syrup
2	to	3	cups	crème	Chantilly,	(lightly	whipped	cream)	flavored	with
rum	and	powdered	sugar



Arrange	the	babas	in	the	serving	dish.	Surround	them	with	the	berries
which	have	stood	for	10	to	15	minutes	in	leftover	baba	syrup.	Pass	the
cream	separately.

		SAVARIN
[Savarin]

Large	Savarin	or	Ring	Mold,	7	to	9	Inches	in	Diameter.	Small	Savarin	Mold,	2¼	to	4	Inches	in
Diameter

The	savarin	uses	the	same	paste	or	dough	as	the	baba,	but	is	baked
in	 a	 ring	mold,	 and	 its	 sugar	 syrup	 is	 flavored	with	kirsch	 rather	 than
rum.	The	center	 is	then	filled	with	a	cream	or	with	fruits	macerated	in
liqueur.

For	6	people

Filling	the	mold
1	Tb	softened	butter
A	4-to	5-cup	ring	mold	2	inches	deep
The	master	recipe	for	baba	paste
Butter	the	ring	mold.	Make	the	baba	paste	as	directed	and	let	it	rise	in
its	 bowl	 until	 doubled	 in	 bulk.	 Deflate	 it	 by	 pressing	 it	 rapidly	 in
several	places	with	the	cupped	fingers	of	one	hand.	Then	break	off	a	2-
tablespoon	 bit	 of	 the	 paste	 and	 press	 lightly	 into	 the	 bottom	 of	 the
mold.	 Continue	 rapidly	with	 the	 rest	 of	 the	 paste.	 The	mold	will	 be
from	a	third	to	a	half	filled.	Do	not	bother	to	smooth	the	surface	of	the



paste;	it	will	even	out	as	it	rises.	Place	uncovered	in	a	warm	place,	80
to	100	degrees,	for	1	to	2	hours	or	until	the	paste	has	risen	to	fill	the
mold.	Proceed	at	once	to	the	following	step.
Preheat	oven	to	375	degrees	in	time	for	this	step.

Baking	the	savarin
Aluminum	foil
A	cake	rack
Insert	a	cylinder	of	aluminum	foil	through	the	hole	in	the	center	of	the
mold;	 this	will	help	 the	 savarin	 rise	 evenly	 in	 the	oven.	Place	 in	 the
middle	 level	 of	 the	 oven	 and	 bake	 for	 about	 30	 minutes.	 If	 top	 of
savarin	browns	too	much	during	baking,	cover	lightly	with	aluminum
foil.	 The	 savarin	 is	 done	 when	 it	 is	 toasty	 brown	 and	 has	 begun	 to
shrink	a	 little	 from	the	sides	of	 the	mold.	Remove	from	oven	and	let
cool	 for	5	minutes.	Reverse	rack	over	mold,	reverse	the	two,	remove
the	mold.	When	savarin	has	cooled	to	tepid,	proceed	to	the	following
step.
( )	 It	may	be	baked	a	day	or	 two	in	advance,	 then	heated	briefly	 to
tepid	in	a	300-degree	oven.
The	savarin	imbibes	the	syrup

2	cups	sugar	syrup	(rum	baba	recipe),	but	flavored	with	½	cup	kirsch
rather	than	rum
A	skewer,	trussing	needle,	or	sharp-pronged	fork
A	dish	2	inches	deep	and	just	large	enough	to	hold	the	savarin	easily
A	bulb	baster
A	cake	rack
A	tray
While	the	savarin	is	baking,	make	the	same	sugar	syrup	as	that	for	the
babas,	but	perfume	it	with	kirsch	rather	than	rum.	Let	it	cool	to	tepid.
Prick	 the	puffed	side	of	 the	barely	warm	 savarin	and	place	 it	puffed-
side	down	in	the	dish.	Pour	the	tepid	syrup	over	it	and	allow	to	stand
for	½	hour,	basting	 frequently	with	 the	syrup.	The	savarin	 should	be



moist	and	spongy,	but	still	hold	its	shape.	Then	tilt	the	dish	and	pour
out	the	remaining	syrup	(which	may	be	reserved	for	flavoring	fruits).
Turn	the	rack	upside	down	over	the	dish	and	reverse	the	dish	onto	the
rack	to	unmold	the	savarin.	Set	rack	on	tray	and	let	the	savarin	drain
for	about	½	hour.

A	serving	dish
The	 savarin	 is	 now	 resting	 puffed-side	 up	 on	 the	 rack;	 it	 is	 usually
served	puffed-side	down.	The	safest	way	to	get	it	from	the	rack	to	the
serving	dish	 is	 to	 turn	 the	dish	upside	down	over	 the	 savarin	 on	 the
rack;	then	reverse	the	rack	onto	the	dish.

1	Tb	kirsch
Sprinkle	the	savarin	with	drops	of	kirsch	before	decorating	and	filling
as	directed	in	one	of	the	following	suggestions:

TO	SERVE
Savarins	 are	 usually	 painted	 with	 a	 glaze	 into	 which	 are	 pressed

designs	 of	 almonds	 and	 glacéed	 fruits,	 or	 fresh	 strawberries	 or
raspberries.	The	center	 is	 filled	with	whipped	cream,	custard	 filling,	or
fruits.	 The	 following	 recipe	 gives	 the	 general	 procedure	 for	 glazing,
decorating,	and	filling;	other	suggestions	are	listed	after	it.

Savarin	Chantilly
[Savarin	with	Whipped	Cream]

The	preceding	savarin
¾	cup	apricot	glaze
A	pastry	brush
6	to	8	glacéed	cherries
A	piece	of	angelica
8	to	12	blanched	almonds



2	cups	crème	Chantilly	(lightly	whipped	cream),	flavored	with
powdered	sugar	and	kirsch
Paint	the	savarin	with	a	light	coating	of	apricot	glaze.	Cut	the	cherries
in	half,	 and	 the	 angelica	 into	 small	 diamond	 shapes.	 Press	 the	 fruits
and	almonds	over	the	savarin	in	a	decorative	design	and	paint	a	bit	of
glaze	 over	 them.	 Fill	 the	 center	 of	 the	 savarin	 with	 the	 cream	 just
before	serving.

OTHER	FILLINGS
Instead	of	whipped	cream,	you	may	use	a	custard	or	fruit	filling.	In

the	case	of	fruit	 fillings,	decorate	glazed	savarin	with	the	fruits	you	are
using	 rather	 than	with	 almonds	 and	glacéed	 fruits.	 Between	1½	and	2
cups	 of	 custard	 filling	 are	 sufficient.	 If	 you	 are	 using	 fruits,	 you	 will
probably	want	more;	 fill	 the	center	of	 the	savarin	with	them,	and	heap
the	rest	around	the	outside.	The	 fruits	are	usually	 flavored	with	3	 to	4
Tb	 kirsch	 for	 3	 to	 4	 cups	 fruit,	 and	 several	 tablespoons	 of	 sugar,	 if
necessary	(or	use	leftover	imbibing	syrup).

Frangipane,	custard	filling	with	almonds	or	macaroons,	flavored	with
vanilla	 and	 kirsch	Crème	 Saint-Honoré,	 crème	 pâtissière	with	 beaten	 egg
whites,	flavored	with	vanilla	and	kirsch	Macédoine	de	Fruits,	a	mixture	of
cut-up	 fruits,	 such	 as	 cherries,	 pears,	 apricots,	 pineapple,	 either	 fresh,
poached	 in	syrup	as	 for	 the	pèches	cardinal,	or	canned.	Let	stand	 for	½
hour	in	kirsch,	and	sugar	if	necessary,	before	using.

Fresh	strawberries	or	raspberries,	which	have	stood	for	½	hour	with
sugar	and	kirsch

Cherries,	poached	in	red	wine	syrup,	as	for	the	cherry	tart

VARIATION
Petits	Savarins
[Small	Savarins]

Small	 savarins	 are	 baked	 in	 the	 small	 molds	 illustrated	 at	 the
beginning	of	the	savarin	recipe;	they	range	in	diameter	from	2¼	inches
for	tea	parties	to	3	or	4	inches	for	individual	dessert	servings.



MOLDING,	BAKING,	AND	SYRUPING

Proceed	exactly	as	for	the	large	savarin	but	omit	the	aluminum-foil
funnel,	and	bake	for	only	10	to	15	minutes.	Saturate	them	with	kirsch-
flavored	 syrup	as	directed	 for	 the	 large	 savarin.	The	proportions	 in	 the
recipe	 will	 furnish	 about	 12	 small	 savarins	 2¼	 inches	 in	 diameter	 or
about	6	savarins	3	inches	in	diameter.

TO	SERVE

You	 may	 paint	 small	 savarins	 with	 apricot	 glaze,	 decorate	 with
glacéed	 fruits	 cut	 into	diamond	shapes,	and	serve	 them	as	 they	are,	or
you	may	fill	 them.	If	you	fill	 them	and	do	not	intend	to	serve	them	on
dessert	plates,	it	is	best	to	set	them	on	small	rounds	of	baked	sugar-crust
dough.	 Paint	 the	 rounds	 first	 with	 the	 apricot	 glaze,	 then	 glaze	 and
decorate	 the	 savarins.	 Use	 any	 of	 the	 fillings	 suggested	 for	 the	 large
savarin	in	the	preceding	list.

LADYFINGERS

Biscuits	à	la	Cuiller

Biscuits	à	la	cuiller	are	among	the	oldest	of	the	French	petits	gâteaux
secs.	 Before	 pastry	 tubes	were	 invented,	 the	 batter	 for	 ladyfingers	was
dropped	onto	baking	sheets	with	a	spoon,	and	this	is	how	they	acquired
their	French	name.

Because	store-bought	ladyfingers	are	usually	so	dreadful	in	taste	and
texture	 that	 they	 cannot	be	used	 in	good	cooking,	 it	 is	useful	 to	know
how	 to	make	 your	 own.	They	 can	be	made	 quickly	when	 you	become
familiar	with	 the	 process	 and	will	 keep	 at	 least	 10	 days	 in	 an	 airtight
container	or	freeze	perfectly.	With	homemade	ladyfingers	on	hand,	you
will	find	many	of	the	spectacular	desserts	in	the	preceding	pages	not	at
all	 formidable.	 These	 include	 the	 charlotte	 Chantilly	 the	 charlotte
Malakoff,	 and	 the	 diplomate.	 Then	 there	 are	 the	 easily	 assembled
plombières	 which	 consist	 of	 custard	 filling,	 beaten	 egg	 whites,	 and
ladyfingers	 dipped	 in	 liqueur.	 To	 serve	 ladyfingers	with	 afternoon	 tea,
you	may	hold	them	together	back	to	back	with	a	bit	of	butter	cream.

Batter	for	ladyfingers	is	of	the	spongecake	type,	with	egg	yolks	and



sugar	beaten	 to	a	 thick	cream,	 then	 flour	and	stiffly	beaten	egg	whites
are	folded	in.	You	must	be	particularly	careful	to	obtain	a	batter	which
will	hold	its	shape;	this	means	expert	beating	and	folding.	A	batter	that
is	 too	 liquid	will	 form	 flat	 rather	 than	 rounded	 ladyfingers.	Be	 sure	 to
read	the	illustrated	directions	on	beating	egg	whites	and	folding.

BISCUITS	À	LA	CUILLER
[Ladyfingers]

For	24	to	30	ladyfingers

Preheat	oven	to	300	degrees.

Two	12-by	24-inch	baking	sheets
1	Tb	softened	butter
Flour
A	pastry	bag	with	a	round	tube	opening
½	inch	in	diameter	1½	cups	powdered	sugar	in	a	sieve	or	a	shaker
Prepare	 the	 baking	 sheets:	 butter	 lightly,	 dust	with	 flour,	 and	knock
off	excess	flour.	Assemble	the	pastry	bag.	Prepare	the	powdered	sugar.
Measure	out	all	the	rest	of	the	ingredients	listed	in	the	recipe.

The	batter
An	electric	beater	or	a	wire	whip
½	cup	granulated	sugar
3	egg	yolks
1	tsp	vanilla	extract
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
Gradually	 beat	 the	 sugar	 into	 the	 egg	 yolks,	 add	 the	 vanilla,	 and
continue	 beating	 for	 several	minutes	 until	 the	mixture	 is	 thick,	 pale
yellow,	and	forms	the	ribbon.

3	egg	whites



Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	 whites	 and	 salt	 together	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft
peaks	are	formed.	Sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are
formed.	(Directions	are	here.)

A	rubber	spatula
½	cup	all-purpose	flour	(scooped	and	leveled),	turned	into	a	flour
sifter
Scoop	one	fourth	of	the	egg	whites	over	the	top	of	the	egg	yolks	and
sugar	mixture.	 Sift	 on	 one	 fourth	 of	 the	 flour,	 and	delicately	 fold	 in
until	 partially	 blended.	 Then	 add	 one	 third	 of	 the	 remaining	 egg
whites,	 sift	 on	 one	 third	 of	 the	 remaining	 flour,	 fold	 until	 partially
blended,	 and	 repeat	with	half	 of	 each,	 then	 the	 last	 of	 each.	Do	not
attempt	 to	 blend	 the	mixture	 too	 thoroughly	 or	 you	will	 deflate	 the
batter;	it	must	remain	light	and	puffy.

Forming	the	ladyfingers
Scoop	 batter	 into	 pastry	 bag.	 Squeeze	 out	 even	 lines	 onto	 the

prepared	 baking	 sheets,	 making	 finger	 shapes	 4	 inches	 long	 and	 1½
inches	 wide,	 spaced	 1	 inch	 apart.	 Sprinkle	 with	 a	 1/ -inch	 layer	 of

16

powdered	sugar.	To	dislodge	some	of	the	excess	sugar,	hold	baking	sheet
upside	down	and	tap	the	back	of	it	gently;	the	ladyfingers	will	not	budge
unless	you	are	rough	with	them.

Baking	the	ladyfingers
Bake	in	middle	and	upper	third	 levels	of	preheated	oven	for	about

20	minutes.	The	ladyfingers	are	done	when	they	are	a	very	pale	brown
underneath	 their	 sugar	 coating.	They	 should	be	 slightly	 crusty	outside,
and	 tender	 but	 dry	 inside.	 If	 they	 are	 not	 baked	 enough,	 they	 will
become	soggy	when	they	cool;	overbaking	makes	them	dry.	As	soon	as
they	 are	 done,	 remove	 from	 baking	 sheets	with	 a	 spatula	 and	 cool	 on
cake	racks.

To	serve
Ladyfingers	may	be	served	as	they	are,	with	tea	or	fruit	desserts.	Or



you	may	make	double	ladyfingers	by	sticking	the	two	flat	sides	together
with	apricot	glaze,	or	one	of	the	butter	creams.

FIVE	FRENCH	CAKES

Cinq	Gâteaux

Here	are	 five	unusually	good	and	 typically	French	cakes.	They	are
all	made	in	very	much	the	same	way,	but	as	there	are	slight	differences
in	mixing	and	in	how	each	should	look	in	the	oven,	we	give	full	recipes
for	all	five.	After	you	have	practiced	with	one	or	two,	you	will	find	that
they	all	can	be	made	very	quickly;	any	one	of	them	may	be	prepared	for
the	oven	in	about	20	minutes.	An	electric	beater	is	a	help	in	mixing	the
batters	but	is	far	from	essential,	because	a	large	wire	whip	does	the	work
almost	as	quickly.

PRELIMINARY	REMARKS

Before	you	begin	the	cake
Preheat	 the	 oven,	 prepare	 the	 cake	 pan	 as	 in	 the	 following

directions,	and	measure	out	all	your	ingredients.	Then	your	batter	may
be	prepared	and	baked	in	one,	continuous	operation.
Preparing	the	cake	pan
To	prepare	the	pan	for	the	cake	batter,	rub	the	entire	inner	surface

with	a	thin	film	of	softened	butter.	Then	roll	flour	around	in	the	pan	to
cover	the	sides	and	bottom;	knock	out	excess	flour	by	banging	the	pan,
upside	down,	on	a	hard	surface.	A	 light	dusting	of	 flour	should	adhere
all	 over	 the	 inner	 surface	 of	 the	 pan;	 this	 will	make	 the	 cake	 easy	 to
unmold	(remove)	after	baking.
Flour
Measure	 flour	 as	 accurately	 as	 possible;	 this	 is	 essential	 in

cakemaking.	 Be	 sure	 to	 read	 the	 illustrated	 directions	 for	 measuring
flour.
Egg	yolks,	sugar,	and	butter
Directions	 for	 beating	 egg	 yolks	 and	 sugar	 until	 they	 “form	 the

ribbon”.	Directions	for	creaming	butter	and	sugar	are	on	are	here.
Egg	whites



You	will	 note	 that	 no	 baking	 powder	 is	 used	 in	 any	 of	 the	 cakes;
their	lightness	is	due	to	the	careful	folding	of	perfectly	beaten	egg	whites
into	the	batter.	As	this	is	one	of	the	most	important	aspects	of	successful
cakemaking,	be	 sure	 to	 read	 the	 illustrated	directions	on	egg	whites	 in
the	Entrée	chapter.
Temperature
Oven	temperature	must	be	correct	if	the	cake	is	to	bake	and	rise	as

it	should.	Check	your	thermostat	with	an	oven	thermometer.
Unmolding
After	the	cake	is	done,	your	recipe	will	usually	direct	you	to	let	it	sit

in	 its	pan	 for	a	 few	minutes;	 it	will	 settle,	and	shrink	slightly	 from	the
sides	of	the	pan.	Unmold	the	cake	as	follows:	Run	a	thin	knife	between
the	cake	and	the	edge	of	the	pan.	Then,	if	you	are	using	a	one-piece	pan,
turn	a	cake	rack	upside	down	over	the	pan,	reverse	the	two,	and	give	a
short,	 sharp,	 downward	 jerk	 to	 dislodge	 the	 cake	 onto	 the	 rack.	 For	 a
false-bottomed	pan,	either	use	 the	 same	general	 system,	or	 set	 the	pan
over	a	jar	to	release	the	rim	from	the	false	bottom;	remove	the	cake	from
the	false	bottom	to	a	rack	with	a	spatula,	or	reverse	the	cake	onto	a	rack.
[Directions	in	recipes	refer	to	a	one-piece	pan.]
Icings
A	cake	must	be	thoroughly	cold	before	it	is	iced;	if	you	ice	a	warm

or	even	a	tepid	cake	with	butter	cream,	the	icing	will	soften	and	usually
dribble	down	the	sides	of	 the	cake.	 Illustrated	directions	 for	 filling	and
icing	cakes	are	in	the	pair	of	recipes.
Storage
After	 any	 of	 the	 following	 cakes	 has	 been	 baked	 and	 thoroughly

cooled,	but	before	 it	has	been	covered	with	 icing,	 it	may	be	 stored	 for
several	 days	 in	 an	 airtight	 container,	 or	may	be	 securely	wrapped	and
frozen.	 Cakes	 iced	 with	 butter	 creams	 should	 be	 stored	 in	 the
refrigerator.

BISCUIT	AU	BEURRE
[Butter	Spongecake]

This	 fine,	 light	 spongecake	 may	 be	 served	 with	 a	 sprinkling	 of
powdered	 sugar,	 and	 goes	 well	 with	 tea,	 or	 with	 fruits.	 It	 is	 also



delicious	as	a	 strawberry	 shortcake.	Or	you	may	 fill	 and	decorate	 it	 as
suggested	at	the	end	of	the	recipe.
For	a	10-inch	cake	serving	10	to	12	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	round	cake	pan,	10	inches	in	diameter	and	2	inches	deep
Butter	and	flour	the	cake	pan.	Measure	out	the	ingredients.

4	Tb	butter
Melt	the	butter	and	set	aside	to	cool.

A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
An	electric	beater	or	large	wire	whip
⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
4	egg	yolks
2	tsp	vanilla	extract
Gradually	 beat	 the	 sugar	 into	 the	 egg	 yolks,	 add	 the	 vanilla,	 and
continue	 beating	 for	 several	 minutes	 until	 mixture	 is	 thick,	 pale
yellow,	and	forms	the	ribbon.

4	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
2	Tb	granulated	sugar
A	rubber	spatula
¾	cup	cake	flour	(scooped	and	leveled),	turned	into	a	flour	sifter
Beat	 the	 egg	 whites	 and	 salt	 together	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft
peaks	are	formed;	sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are
formed.	(Directions.)	Scoop	one	fourth	of	the	egg	whites	over	the	top
of	the	egg	yolks	and	sugar	mixture.	Sift	on	one	fourth	of	the	flour,	and
delicately	 fold	 in	 until	 partially	 blended.	 Then	 add	 one	 third	 of	 the
remaining	 egg	whites,	 sift	 on	 one	 third	 of	 the	 remaining	 flour,	 fold
until	partially	blended,	and	repeat	with	half	of	each,	 then	the	 last	of



each	and	half	of	the	tepid,	melted	butter.	When	partially	blended,	fold
in	 the	 rest	of	 the	butter	but	omit	 the	milky	residue	at	 the	bottom	of
the	pan.	Do	not	overmix;	the	egg	whites	must	retain	as	much	volume
as	possible.

Turn	 into	prepared	cake	pan,	 tilting	pan	 to	 run	batter	 to	 the	 rim	all
around.	Set	 in	middle	 level	of	preheated	oven	and	bake	for	30	to	35
minutes.	 Cake	 is	 done	when	 it	 has	 puffed,	 is	 lightly	 brown,	 and	has
just	begun	to	show	a	faint	line	of	shrinkage	from	the	edges	of	the	pan.

A	cake	rack
Remove	from	oven	and	let	stand	in	the	pan	for	6	to	8	minutes.	It	will
sink	slightly	and	shrink	more	from	the	edges	of	the	pan.	Run	a	knife
around	the	edge	of	the	pan,	and	reverse	on	cake	rack,	giving	the	pan	a
sharp	 little	 jerk	 to	 dislodge	 the	 cake.	 If	 cake	 is	 not	 to	 be	 iced,
immediately	 reverse	 it	 so	 its	puffed	 side	 is	uppermost.	Allow	 to	cool
for	an	hour	or	so.

TO	SERVE
Sucre	Glace
[Powdered	Sugar]

Shake	powdered	sugar	over	the	cake.

Glaçage	à	l’Abricot
[Apricot	Glaze	with	Almonds	or	Glacéed	Fruits]

A	pastry	brush
½	cup	apricot	glaze
1	cup	pulverized	almonds
¼	cup	slivered	almonds	or	glacéed	fruits

Follow	 the	 general	 procedure	 for	 icing	 a	 cake	 illustrated:	 Brush
crumbs	off	 top	 and	 sides	 of	 cake,	 paint	 cake	with	 apricot	 glaze.	 Brush



almonds	 against	 the	 sides	 and	 decorate	 top	 with	 slivered	 almonds	 or
with	glacéed	fruits	cut	into	dice	or	fancy	shapes.

Glaçage	à	la	Crème	ou	au	Chocolat
[Butter-cream	or	Chocolate	Icing]

The	 spongecake	may	be	 iced,	or	 filled	and	 iced.	Follow	 the	 recipe
for	 orange-butter	 filling	 or	 that	 for	 the	 orange	 butter-cream.	Or,	 using
the	same	procedure,	follow	one	of	the	recipes	for	butter	cream,	or	for	the
chocolate-butter	icing.

GÂTEAU	À	L’ORANGE
[Orange	Spongecake]

For	a	9-inch	cake	serving	8	people
Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	round	cake	pan	9	by	1½	inches
Butter	and	flour	the	cake	pan.	Measure	out	the	ingredients.

A	whip	or	electric	beater
⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
4	egg	yolks
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
The	grated	rind	of	1	orange
⅓	cup	strained	orange	juice
Pinch	of	salt
¾	cup	cake	flour	(scooped	and	leveled),	turned	into	a	sifter
Gradually	beat	the	sugar	into	the	egg	yolks	and	continue	beating	until
the	mixture	thickens	to	form	the	ribbon.	Add	the	grated	orange	peel,
orange	juice,	and	salt.	Beat	for	a	moment	or	two	until	mixture	is	light
and	foamy.	Then	beat	in	the	flour.



4	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	 whites	 and	 salt	 together	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft
peaks	are	formed.	Sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are
formed.	 (Directions	 are	 here.)	 Stir	 one	 fourth	 of	 the	 egg	whites	 into
the	batter,	delicately	fold	in	the	rest.

Immediately	turn	into	prepared	cake	pan	and	run	the	batter	up	to	the
rim	all	around.	Bake	in	middle	position	of	preheated	oven	for	30	to	35
minutes.	Cake	is	done	when	it	has	puffed	and	browned,	and	shows	a
faint	line	of	shrinkage	from	the	edge	of	the	mold.

A	cake	rack
Let	cool	 for	6	 to	8	minutes.	Run	a	knife	around	 the	edge	of	 the	pan
and	 reverse	 cake	 on	 a	 rack.	 If	 not	 to	 be	 iced,	 immediately	 reverse
again,	puffed	side	up.	Allow	to	cool	for	an	hour	or	two.	When	cake	is
cold,	 sprinkle	 it	 with	 powdered	 sugar,	 or	 fill	 and	 ice	 the	 cake
according	 to	 one	 of	 the	 two	 following	 recipes:	

DIRECTIONS	FOR	FILLING	AND	ICING	A	CAKE
Gâteau	Fourré	à	la	Crème	d’Orange
[Spongecake	with	Orange-butter	Filling]

This	orange-butter	 filling	may	be	used	 for	cakes,	or	as	a	 filling	 for
tartlets	or	cookies.	When	softened	butter	is	beaten	into	it,	as	described	in
the	variation	at	the	end	of	the	recipe,	it	may	also	serve	as	an	icing.
For	about	2	cups,	enough	to	fill	a	9-to	10-inch	cake
The	orange-butter	filling

6	Tb	unsalted	butter
1⅔	cups	granulated	sugar
2	eggs
2	egg	yolks



The	grated	rind	of	1	orange
¼	cup	strained	orange	juice
1	Tb	orange	liqueur
A	6-cup	enameled	saucepan
A	wire	whip
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
Place	all	the	ingredients	at	the	left	in	the	saucepan	and	beat	with	wire
whip	 over	 low	 heat	 or	 not-quite-simmering	 water	 until	 mixture
thickens	like	honey.	When	it	is	cooking	properly,	the	bubbles	that	first
appeared	on	its	surface	as	it	is	heated	will	begin	to	subside,	and	if	you
look	closely	you	will	see	a	little	whiff	of	steam	rise;	it	will	be	too	hot
for	your	 finger.	You	must	heat	 it	enough	to	 thicken,	but	overheating
will	(of	course)	scramble	the	egg	yolks.

A	pan	of	cold	water
Then	 set	 saucepan	 in	 cold	 water	 and	 beat	 for	 3	 to	 4	 minutes	 until
filling	is	cool.
( )	May	be	refrigerated	for	10	days,	or	may	be	frozen.

Filling	the	cake
A	9-to	10-inch	cake:	the	preceding	orange	spongecake	or	the	butter
spongecake

A	long,	sharp,	thin	knife
Cut	a	tiny	vertical	wedge	up	the	edge	of	the	cake;	this	will	guide	you
in	re-forming	it	later.	Slice	the	cake	in	half	horizontally.



Splitting	the	cake	in	half

A	flexible	blade-spatula
Using	a	spatula,	spread	enough	orange-butter	filling	on	the	lower	layer
of	the	cake	to	make	a	⅛-inch	coating.

Icing	the	bottom	layer



Replace	top	layer,	lining	up	with	wedge

Decorating	the	cake	with	apricot	glaze	and	almonds

A	pastry	brush
⅔	cup	apricot	glaze
1	cup	pulverized	almonds,	plain	or	toasted
A	dish	for	the	almonds
A	cake	platter
Optional:	¼	cup	glazed	orange	peel
Brush	 off	 any	 crumbs,	 and	 paint	 the	 cake	with	 a	 coating	 of	 apricot
glaze.	When	the	glaze	has	set	slightly,	brush	the	almonds	against	the
sides	of	 the	cake;	not	more	than	one	fourth	of	 them	will	adhere,	but
you	need	a	 large	amount	 for	easy	manipulation.	Set	 the	cake	on	 the
platter;	decorate	top	with	optional	orange	peel.



Hold	cake	over	almonds	and	brush	them	against	sides	with	free	hand

VARIATIONS
Crème	au	Beurre	à	l’Orange
[Orange	Butter-cream	Icing]

For	 a	 richer	 filling,	 or	 for	 an	 icing,	 you	 may	 turn	 the	 preceding
filling	 into	a	crème	au	beurre,	which	resembles	 the	butter	cream.	In	the
following	 recipe,	 we	 have	 suggested	 that	 you	 use	 half	 the	 original
orange-butter	filling	for	inside	the	cake,	and	beat	butter	into	the	rest	to
make	a	butter-cream	icing.
For	1	cup	filling	and	2	cups	icing,	enough	for	a	9-to	10-inch	cake

2	cups	orange-butter	filling,	the	preceding	recipe
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wire	whip	or	an	electric	beater
¼	lb.	(1	stick)	softened,	unsalted	butter,	2	to	3	Tb	more	if	necessary
Use	1	cup	of	the	filling	to	spread	inside	your	cake	as	described	in	the
preceding	recipe.	Re-form	the	cake.	Place	the	rest	of	the	filling	in	the
mixing	 bowl	 and	 gradually	 beat	 in	 the	 softened	 butter.	 The	mixture
should	thicken	into	a	smooth,	mayonnaiselike	cream;	if	it	looks	grainy,
beat	in	more	butter	a	tablespoon	at	a	time.	Chill	until	firm	but	still	of
spreading	consistency.

(NOTE:	Be	sure	cake	is	thoroughly	cold	before	you	begin	this	operation.)

Icing	the	cake
A	flexible	blade-spatula
A	cake	platter
Optional:	¼	cup	glazed	orange	peel
Brush	 crumbs	 off	 cake.	 Hold	 the	 cake	 in	 the	 palm	 of	 your	 hand	 as
illustrated	 (or	 ice	 it	 on	 its	 serving	platter).	 Spread	on	 the	 icing	with
the	 spatula,	 starting	 at	 the	 top	 of	 the	 cake,	 and	 finishing	 with	 the



sides.	Set	the	cake	on	the	platter.	Decorate,	if	you	wish,	with	pieces	of
glazed	orange	peel.	Refrigerate	the	cake	until	ready	to	serve.
( )	 Leftover	 butter	 cream	may	 be	 refrigerated	 for	 about	 a	week,	 or
may	 be	 frozen.	 Before	 using,	 let	warm	 at	 room	 temperature	 until	 it
can	be	beaten	into	spreading	consistency.

Spread	icing	on	top	of	cake	first,	then	smooth	it	around	sides

Crème	au	Citron
[Lemon-butter	Filling]

Crème	au	Beurre	au	Citron
[Lemon	Butter-cream	Icing]

Use	 the	 same	 method	 and	 proportions	 as	 in	 either	 of	 the	 two
preceding	recipes,	but	substitute	grated	lemon	rind	and	lemon	juice	for
orange.

GÂTEAU	À	L’ORANGE	ET	AUX	AMANDES
[Orange	and	Almond	Spongecake]

This	 delicious	 cake	may	 be	 served	with	 a	 sprinkling	 of	 powdered
sugar,	with	a	glazing	of	apricot,	or	with	a	filling	and	icing.
For	a	9-inch	cake	serving	8	people



Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	round	cake	pan,	9	by	1½	inches
Butter	and	flour	the	cake	pan.	Measure	out	all	the	ingredients.

¼	lb.	butter
Melt	the	butter	and	set	aside.

A	whip	or	electric	beater
⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
3	egg	yolks
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
The	grated	rind	of	1	orange
⅓	cup	strained	orange	juice
¼	tsp	almond	extract
¾	cup	(4	ounces)	pulverized	almonds
½	cup	cake	flour	(scooped	and	leveled),	turned	into	a	sifter
Gradually	beat	the	sugar	into	the	egg	yolks	and	continue	beating	until
mixture	 is	 thick,	 pale	 yellow	 and	 forms	 the	 ribbon.	 Add	 the	 grated
orange	rind,	orange	 juice,	and	almond	extract.	Beat	 for	a	moment	or
two	until	mixture	 is	 light	and	 foamy.	Then	beat	 in	 the	almonds,	and
finally	the	flour.

3	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	 whites	 and	 salt	 together	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft
peaks	are	formed;	sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are
formed,	(Directions	are	here.)

A	rubber	spatula
Using	 a	 rubber	 spatula,	 fold	 the	 cool,	 melted	 butter	 into	 the	 cake
batter,	omitting	milky	residue	at	bottom	of	butter	pan.	Stir	one	fourth



of	the	egg	whites	into	the	batter,	delicately	fold	in	the	rest.

Immediately	turn	into	prepared	cake	pan	and	run	the	batter	up	to	the
rim	all	 around.	Bake	 in	middle	 level	of	preheated	oven	 for	30	 to	35
minutes.	 Cake	 is	 done	 when	 it	 has	 puffed,	 browned	 lightly,	 top	 is
springy	 when	 pressed,	 and	 a	 needle	 plunged	 into	 the	 center	 of	 the
cake	comes	out	clean.

A	cake	rack
Remove	 from	 oven	 and	 let	 stand	 for	 about	 10	 minutes,	 until	 cake
begins	to	shrink	from	sides	of	pan.	Run	a	knife	around	the	edge	of	the
pan	 and	 reverse	 the	 cake	 onto	 the	 rack,	 giving	 it	 a	 small,	 sharp,
downward	 jerk	 to	 dislodge	 it	 from	 the	 pan.	 If	 it	 is	 not	 to	 be	 iced,
reverse	 the	cake	 immediately	 so	 it	will	cool	puffed-side	up.	Allow	to
cool	for	an	hour	or	two.

TO	SERVE
Serve	with	a	sprinkling	of	powdered	sugar,	or	with	apricot	glaze	and

almonds,	 or	 with	 the	 orange-butter	 filling	 or	 butter-cream	 icing
described	for	the	orange	sponge	cake.

REINE	DE	SABA
[Chocolate	and	Almond	Cake]

This	extremely	good	chocolate	cake	is	baked	so	that	its	center	remains
slightly	 underdone;	 overcooked,	 the	 cake	 loses	 its	 special	 creamy
quality.	It	is	covered	with	a	chocolate-butter	icing,	and	decorated	with
almonds.	 Because	 of	 its	 creamy	 center	 it	 needs	 no	 filling.	 It	 can	 be
made	in	the	same	manner	as	the	preceding	cakes,	starting	out	with	a
beating	of	 egg	yolks	and	 sugar,	 then	proceeding	with	 the	 rest	of	 the
ingredients.	But	because	the	chocolate	and	the	almonds	make	a	batter
so	stiff	it	is	difficult	to	fold	in	the	egg	whites,	we	have	chosen	another
method,	 that	 of	 creaming	 together	 the	 butter	 and	 sugar,	 and	 then
incorporating	the	remaining	items.
For	an	8-inch	cake	serving	6	to	8	people



Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	round	cake	pan	8	inches	in	diameter	and	1½	inches	deep
4	ounces	or	squares	semisweet	chocolate	melted	with	2	Tb	rum	or
coffee
Butter	and	flour	the	cake	pan.	Set	the	chocolate	and	rum	or	coffee	in	a
small	 pan,	 cover,	 and	 place	 (off	 heat)	 in	 a	 larger	 pan	 of	 almost
simmering	water;	let	melt	while	you	proceed	with	the	recipe.	Measure
out	the	rest	of	the	ingredients.

A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
A	wooden	spoon	or	an	electric	beater
¼	lb.	or	1	stick	softened	butter
⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
Cream	 the	 butter	 and	 sugar	 together	 for	 several	 minutes	 until	 they
form	a	pale	yellow,	fluffy	mixture.

3	egg	yolks
Beat	in	the	egg	yolks	until	well	blended.

3	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	whites	 and	 salt	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft	 peaks	 are
formed;	 sprinkle	 on	 the	 sugar	 and	 beat	 until	 stiff	 peaks	 are	 formed.
(Directions	are	here.)

A	rubber	spatula
⅓	cup	pulverized	almonds
¼	tsp	almond	extract
½	cup	cake	flour	(scooped	and	leveled),	turned	into	a	sifter
With	a	rubber	spatula,	blend	the	melted	chocolate	into	the	butter	and
sugar	 mixture,	 then	 stir	 in	 the	 almonds,	 and	 almond	 extract.



Immediately	stir	in	one	fourth	of	the	beaten	egg	whites	to	lighten	the
batter.	 Delicately	 fold	 in	 a	 third	 of	 the	 remaining	 whites	 and	when
partially	blended,	sift	on	one	third	of	 the	 flour	and	continue	 folding.
Alternate	 rapidly	with	more	 egg	whites	 and	more	 flour	 until	 all	 egg
whites	and	flour	are	incorporated.

Turn	the	batter	into	the	cake	pan,	pushing	the	batter	up	to	its	rim	with
a	rubber	spatula.	Bake	in	middle	level	of	preheated	oven	for	about	25
minutes.	Cake	is	done	when	it	has	puffed,	and	2½	to	3	inches	around
the	 circumference	 are	 set	 so	 that	 a	 needle	 plunged	 into	 that	 area
comes	out	clean;	the	center	should	move	slightly	if	the	pan	is	shaken,
and	a	needle	comes	out	oily.

A	cake	rack
Allow	cake	to	cool	in	the	pan	for	10	minutes.	Run	a	knife	around	the
edge	of	the	pan,	and	reverse	cake	on	the	rack.	Allow	it	to	cool	for	an
hour	or	two;	it	must	be	thoroughly	cold	if	it	is	to	be	iced.

TO	SERVE
Use	the	chocolate-butter	 icing,	and	press	a	design	of	almonds	over

the	icing.

LE	MARQUIS
[Chocolate	Spongecake]

For	an	8-inch	cake	serving	6	to	8	people

Preheat	oven	to	350	degrees.

A	round	cake	pan	8	inches	in	diameter	and	1½	inches	deep
Butter	and	flour	the	cake	pan.	Measure	out	the	ingredients.

3½	ounces	of	semisweet	baking	chocolate
2	Tb	strong	coffee
A	small	covered	pan



A	pan	of	simmering	water	A	wooden	spoon
3½	Tb	softened	butter
Place	the	chocolate	and	coffee	in	the	small	pan,	cover,	and	set	in	the
larger	 pan	 of	 simmering	 water.	 Remove	 pans	 from	 heat	 and	 let
chocolate	melt	for	5	minutes	or	so	while	you	proceed	with	the	recipe.
Then	beat	in	the	butter.

A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
3	egg	yolks
A	3-quart	mixing	bowl
½	cup	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	 yolks	 in	 the	mixing	 bowl,	 gradually	 adding	 the	 sugar,
until	mixture	is	thick,	pale	yellow	and	forms	the	ribbon.

3	egg	whites
Pinch	of	salt
1	Tb	granulated	sugar
Beat	 the	 egg	 whites	 and	 salt	 together	 in	 a	 separate	 bowl	 until	 soft
peaks	are	formed;	sprinkle	on	the	sugar	and	beat	until	stiff	peaks	are
formed.	(Directions	are	here.)

A	rubber	spatula
⅓	cup	cake	flour	(scooped	and	leveled),	turned	into	a	sifter
Fold	 the	 tepid	 chocolate	 and	butter	 into	 the	batter,	 then	 fold	 in	one
fourth	of	the	egg	whites.	When	partially	blended,	sift	on	one	fourth	of
the	 flour	 and	 continue	 folding,	 alternating	 rapidly	 with	 more	 egg
whites	and	more	flour	until	all	egg	whites	and	flour	are	incorporated.

Immediately	turn	batter	into	prepared	pan	and	run	it	up	to	the	rim	all
around.	 Bake	 in	 middle	 level	 of	 preheated	 oven	 for	 25	 minutes,	 or
until	cake	has	puffed	¼	inch	above	rim	and	top	has	cracked.	A	skewer
or	straw	should	come	out	clean	when	plunged	1½	inches	 from	edge,
but	 should	 be	 slightly	 oily	 with	 a	 few	 specks	 of	 chocolate	 clinging
when	plunged	into	the	middle	area.



A	cake	rack
Let	cool	10	minutes;	cake	will	sink	slightly.	Run	a	knife	around	inside
of	pan,	and	reverse	onto	a	rack.	Let	cool	2	hours	before	icing.
To	serve
You	may	 serve	 the	 cake	with	 a	 sprinkling	 of	 powdered	 sugar,	 fill

and	 ice	 it	 with	 one	 of	 the	 following	 butter	 creams,	 or	 fill	 with	 butter
cream	 and	 cover	 with	 the	 chocolate-butter	 icing.	 Illustrated	 directions
for	filling	and	icing	a	cake	begin	on	this	page.

THREE	BUTTER	CREAMS

Trois	Crèmes	au	Beurre
Butter	 creams	 consist	 of	 egg	 yolks,	 sugar,	 butter,	 and	 flavoring

which	are	beaten	together	into	a	creamy	mass	of	spreading	consistency.
There	 are	 half	 a	 dozen	 ways	 of	 arriving	 at	 them;	 one	 is	 the	 orange
butter-cream.	Here	are	three	more	recipes.	The	first	of	these	is	quick	and
easy	 but	 always	 slightly	 grainy,	 because	 the	 sugar	 never	 completely
dissolves.	The	second	 is	made	with	sugar	syrup	 in	which	egg	yolks	are
poached	before	the	butter	is	beaten	in;	it	makes	a	fairly	firm	cream	good
in	 hot	 weather.	 Custard	 sauce	 and	 butter	 make	 up	 the	 third	 cream,
which	is	lighter	in	texture	than	the	other	two	and	better	in	cold	weather
than	in	hot.	Any	of	these	butter	creams	may	be	used	both	as	fillings	and
as	icings.

AMOUNTS	NEEDED

For	both	 filling	and	 icing	a	cake,	you	will	need	approximately	 the
following	amounts:
For	an	8-inch	cake,	1½	cups
For	a	9-inch	cake,	2	cups
For	a	10-inch	cake,	2½	cups

STORAGE	AND	LEFTOVERS

Butter	 creams	 may	 be	 refrigerated	 for	 several	 days,	 or	 frozen	 for
several	 weeks.	 To	 use	 again,	 allow	 the	 cream	 to	 warm	 at	 room
temperature	until	it	can	be	beaten	into	spreading	consistency.	If	it	begins



to	separate	or	turn	grainy,	beat	in	a	tablespoon	or	two	of	tepid,	unsalted,
melted	butter.

FILLING	AND	ICING

Illustrated	 directions	 for	 filling	 and	 icing	 cakes	 are	 in	 the	 pair	 of
recipes	starting.

CRÈME	AU	BEURRE,	MÉNAGÈRE
[Butter	Cream	I—with	powdered	sugar]

This	 should	 be	made	with	 an	 electric	 beater;	 it	 is	 heavy	work	 by
hand.
For	about	1½	cups

A	2½-quart	mixing	bowl
2	egg	yolks
⅔	cup	sifted	powdered	sugar
2	Tb	kirsch,	rum,	orange	liqueur,	or	strong	coffee,	OR,	1	Tb	vanilla
extract,	OR,	2	ounces	(2	squares)	melted,	semisweet,	baking
chocolate

6	ounces	(1½	sticks)	softened,	unsalted	butter
An	electric	beater	(or	a	wire	whip)

Rinse	the	bowl	in	hot	water,	dry	it,	and	place	in	it	all	the	ingredients
listed.	 Beat	 at	 a	 moderate	 speed	 for	 about	 5	 minutes	 to	 obtain	 a
smooth	cream.	Chill	until	the	cream	is	cold	but	still	malleable,	then	fill
and	ice	your	cake.

CRÈME	AU	BEURRE,	AU	SUCRE	CUIT
[Butter	Cream	II—with	sugar	syrup]

You	may	use	either	a	wire	whip	or	an	electric	beater	for	most	of	the
steps	in	this	recipe.	We	find,	however,	that	a	large	balloon	whip,	such	as
that	illustrated	for	beating	egg	whites	is	the	quickest	and	most	effective
instrument	for	the	beating	of	egg	yolks	and	sugar	syrup	step.



For	about	2	cups

Preliminaries
A	wooden	spoon	or	an	electric	beater
A	2½-quart	mixing	bowl
½	lb.	(2	sticks)	unsalted	butter

Cream	the	butter	until	it	is	light	and	fluffy.	(Directions	are	here.)	Set
aside.

5	egg	yolks,	OR,	1	egg	and	3	yolks
A	2½-quart	mixing	bowl
A	large	wire	whip	(or	an	electric	beater)

Place	 the	 egg	 yolks	 (or	 egg	 and	 yolks)	 in	 the	 bowl	 and	 beat	 a	 few
seconds	to	blend	thoroughly.	Set	aside.

The	sugar	syrup
⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
3	Tb	water
A	small,	heavy	saucepan
Optional:	a	candy	thermometer

Boil	the	sugar	and	water	in	the	saucepan,	shaking	pan	frequently,	until
the	sugar	has	reached	the	soft	ball	stage	(236	to	238	degrees	on	candy
thermometer).
Beating	the	egg	yolks	with	the	syrup
At	 once	 beat	 the	 boiling	 syrup	 in	 a	 stream	 of	 droplets	 into	 the	 egg
yolks,	using	your	wire	whip	(or	electric	beater).

A	pan	of	not-quite-simmering	water,	large	enough	to	hold	the	bowl
A	basin	of	cold	water

Set	 the	mixing	bowl	 in	 the	pan	of	not-quite-simmering	water,	on	the
stove,	and	continue	beating	the	yolk	and	sugar	mixture	at	a	moderate
speed,	lifting	in	as	much	air	as	possible.	In	4	to	5	minutes	the	mixture



will	be	light,	foamy,	doubled	in	bulk,	and	feel	very	hot	to	your	finger.
When	 this	 stage	 is	 reached,	 set	 the	bowl	 in	 cold	water	and	continue
beating	 for	 several	 minutes	 until	 mixture	 has	 cooled	 to	 tepid,	 and
when	a	bit	is	lifted,	it	falls	back	forming	a	slowly	dissolving	ribbon	on
the	surface	of	the	mixture.
Combining	with	the	butter

A	wooden	spatula	or	spoon,	or	an	electric	beater
2	to	3	Tb	kirsch,	rum,	orange	liqueur,	or	strong	coffee,	OR,	1	Tb
vanilla	extract,	OR,	2	ounces	(2	squares)	melted,	semisweet,	baking
chocolate
2	to	4	Tb	softened,	unsalted	butter,	if	needed

Then	 beat	 the	 egg	 mixture	 by	 spoonfuls	 into	 the	 bowl	 of	 creamed
butter.	Beat	in	the	flavoring.	The	crème	au	beurre	should	be	a	smooth,
homogeneous,	 creamy	mass.	 If	 it	 looks	 grainy	 or	 has	 a	 tendency	 to
separate,	 beat	 in	 softened	butter	 by	 tablespoons.	Chill	 until	 cold	but
still	malleable,	then	fill	and	frost	your	cake.

CRÈME	AU	BEURRE,	À	L’ANGLAISE
[Butter	Cream	III—with	custard	base]

This	final	recipe	is	simpler	to	make	than	the	preceding	one	with	its
sugar	syrup	and	its	poaching	of	egg	yolks.	The	custard	base	here	is	that
most	 familiar	 of	 custard	 sauces,	 crème	 anglaise	 which,	 when	 cooled,
receives	the	butter.

For	about	2½	cups
The	crème	anglaise	(custard	sauce)

A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
⅔	cup	granulated	sugar
4	egg	yolks
A	2½-quart	mixing	bowl	½	cup	boiling	milk
A	1-quart,	heavy-bottomed,	enameled	saucepan
A	wooden	spoon



Optional:	a	candy	thermometer
A	basin	of	cold	water
A	sieve

Following	the	general	procedure	in	the	master	recipe	for	crème	anglaise
gradually	beat	the	sugar	into	the	egg	yolks	in	the	bowl	until	mixture	is
thick,	pale	yellow,	and	forms	the	ribbon.	Then	beat	in	the	boiling	milk
by	 droplets.	 Pour	 into	 saucepan	 and	 stir	 with	 wooden	 spoon	 over
moderately	low	heat	until	mixture	thickens	enough	to	coat	spoon	with
a	 light	 cream	 (165	 degrees	 on	 candy	 thermometer).	 At	 once	 set
saucepan	 in	 cold	 water	 and	 beat	 until	 custard	 has	 cooled	 to	 barely
tepid.	Rinse	out	mixing	bowl	and	strain	custard	back	into	it.
Beating	in	the	butter

A	wire	whip	or	electric	beater
½	lb.	(2	sticks)	softened,	unsalted	butter,	more	if	needed
2	to	3	Tb	kirsch,	rum,	orange	liqueur,	or	strong	coffee,	OR,	1	Tb
vanilla	extract	OR,	2	ounces	(2	squares)	melted,	semisweet,	baking
chocolate
Beat	 the	 softened	 butter	 into	 the	 barely	 tepid	 custard	 by	 spoonfuls,
using	whip	or	beater.	Beat	 in	 the	 flavoring.	 If	 cream	 looks	grainy	or
has	a	tendency	to	curdle,	beat	in	more	softened	butter	by	tablespoons.
Cream	should	be	smooth,	thick,	and	homogeneous.	Chill	until	cold	but
still	malleable,	then	fill	and	ice	your	cake.

CHOCOLATE	ICING

Glaçage	au	Chocolat

This	 simple	chocolate	 icing	 is	butter	beaten	 into	melted	chocolate,
and	 forms	 a	 tender	 coating	 over	 a	white	 or	 chocolate	 cake,	 or	 over	 a
thoroughly	chilled	butter-cream	icing.

GLAÇAGE	AU	CHOCOLAT



[Chocolate-butter	Icing]

For	an	8-inch	cake

2	ounces	(2	squares)	semisweet	baking	chocolate
2	Tb	rum	or	coffee
A	small	covered	pan	A	larger	pan	of	almost	simmering	water
5	to	6	Tb	unsalted	butter
A	wooden	spoon
A	bowl	with	a	tray	of	ice	cubes	and	water	to	cover	them
A	small	flexible-blade	metal	spatula	or	a	table	knife

Place	the	chocolate	and	rum	or	coffee	in	the	small	pan,	cover,	and	set
in	the	larger	pan	of	almost	simmering	water.	Remove	pans	from	heat
and	let	chocolate	melt	for	5	minutes	or	so,	until	perfectly	smooth.	Lift
chocolate	pan	out	of	the	hot	water,	and	beat	in	the	butter	a	tablespoon
at	 a	 time.	 Then	beat	 over	 the	 ice	 and	water	 until	 chocolate	mixture
has	cooled	to	spreading	consistency.	At	once	spread	it	over	your	cake
with	spatula	or	knife.



INDEX

A
ABRICOT,	10.1
Glaçage	à	l’

AGNEAU	ET	MOUTON,	7.1
Blanquette
Civet
Daube
Fricadelles
Gigot	ou	Epaule	d’
à	l’Anglaise,	7.1
Braisé	aux	Haricots,	7.1
en	Chevreuil,	7.1
Farci,	7.1
à	la	Moutarde,	7.1
Rôti,	7.1
Moussaka
Navarin	Printanier
Pilaf	à	la	Catalane

AHEAD-OF-TIME	COOKING:	Symbol	(*)	in	Recipes	AÏGO	BOUÏDO,	1.1
ALMOND	(s)
General	Information
to	Blanch,	10.1
to	Caramelize,	10.1
Extract	of,	10.1
to	Pulverize,	10.1
to	Toast,	10.1
Weight	Equivalents,	10.1
Butter,	Orange	Flavoring



Cake
with	Chocolate	Flavoring,	10.1
with	Orange	Flavoring,	10.1
Caramelized	see	Index:
Pralin
Custard	Filling
with	Crêpes,	10.1
with	Pear	Tart,	10.1
with	Savarins,	10.1
Dessert	Creams
Bavarian,	10.1
Custard,	Chocolate	Flavor,	10.1
Malakoffs
with	Chocolate,	10.1
with	Raspberries,	10.1
with	Strawberries,	10.1
Plombières	(Custard)
in	Soufflé,	10.1,	10.2,	10.3
Tart,	Lemon	Flavoring
ALUMINUM	POTS,	PANS,	etc.,	fm2.1
AMUSE-GUEULE	AU	ROQUEFORT,	4.1
ANCHOVY(IES)
Butter
Gratin	with	Potatoes
and	Onions,	4.1
and	Spinach,	8.1
and	Tomatoes,	8.1
Quiche	with	Tomatoes
in	Salad	Niçoise
Sauce
for	Beef	Stew,	7.1
Stuffing	with	Salmon	(Lamb)
Tart	with	Onions
ANGELICA	see	Glacéed	Fruit,	fm4.1



ANGLAISE,	CRÈME,	10.1
APPETIZERS,	4.1
General	Information
Bread	Rounds	and	Cases,	4.1
Spreads	and	Fillings	for,	4.1
Tartlet	Shells	for,	4.1
Camembert	Biscuits
Cheese
Puffs,	4.1
Wafers,	4.1
Potato	Cheese	Sticks
Roquefort	Cheese
Balls,	4.1
Biscuits,	4.1
Spinach	and	Cheese	Canapés
Turnovers

APPLE(s)
General	Information
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
Aspic	of
Braised	with	Orange	Sauce
Charlotte
Filling	for	Crêpes
Flan
Gratin	of
Stuffing	with	Sausage	(Duck)
Tart
with	Custard,	10.1
Upside-down,	10.1

APPLESAUCE	CARAMEL	MOLD,	10.1
APRICOT(S)
General	Information
Glaze,	10.1
for	Cakes,	10.1



to	Poach,	10.1
Preserves	of,	Strained,	10.1
Bavarian	Cream
Tart,	10.1;	see	also	Variations,	10.2,	10.3

ARROSER	(to	Baste),	fm3.1
ARROWROOT	THICKENING
for	Brown	Sauce
for	Orange	Sauce	(Duck)

ARTICHAUTS,	8.1
Braisés	à	la	Provençale
au	Naturel
Printanier

ARTICHAUTS,	FONDS	DE,	8.1
à	Blanc
au	Beurre
à	la	Crème
au	Gratin
à	la	Grecque
Mirepoix
Mornay
Quartiers	de,	au	Beurre

ARTICHOKE(S),	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
to	Eat,	8.1
Preparation	of,	8.1
Sauces	for,	8.1
to	Serve,	8.1
Boiled
Braised

ARTICHOKE	HEARTS	OR	BOTTOMS,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Preparation	of,	8.1
Master	Recipes



Preliminary	Cooking,	8.1
Frozen,	8.1
Buttered
Quartered,	8.1
Whole,	8.1
with	Carrots	and	Mushrooms
Cold
à	la	Grecque,	9.1
Creamed
with	Diced	Vegetables
and	Eggs
Baked	see	Suggestions,	3.1
Poached,	3.1;	see	also	Other	Ideas,	3.2
with	Filet	Steaks
Gratinéed
Stuffed,	au	Gratin

ASPERGES,	8.1
Nature
Pointes	d’
Timbale	d’

ASPARAGUS,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Peeling	and	Tying	of,	8.1
Sauces	for,	8.1
Master	Recipes
Boiled,	8.1
Frozen,	8.1
Cold
Custard	Mold
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1
Tips
with	Eggs	see	Suggestions,	3.1

ASPICS	AND	MOLDS
General	Information,	9.1
Decorative	Elements	for,	9.1



Jellied	Stocks	for,	2.1
to	Line	a	Mold	with	Aspic,	9.1
for	Pâtés	and	Terrines,	9.1
Sauce	Chaudfroid	for,	9.1,	9.2
to	Unmold	an	Aspic,	9.1
Apple	Aspic
Aspic	de	Pommes
Boeuf	Mode	en	Gelée
Braised	Beef	in	Aspic
Chicken
Breasts	in	Chaudfroid,	9.1
Livers	in	Aspic,	9.1
in	Tarragon	Aspic,	9.1
Crab
in	Aspic,	9.1
in	Chaudfroid,	9.1
Crabe
en	Aspic,	9.1
en	Chaudfroid,	9.1
Crevettes	en	Aspic
Eggs	in	Aspic
Foies	de	Volaille	en	Aspic
Fowl	in	Lemon	Jelly
Homard
en	Aspic,	9.1
en	Chaudfroid,	9.1
Lobster
in	Aspic,	9.1
in	Chaudfroid,	9.1
Mousses
Oeufs	en	Gelée
Poulet	en	Gelée	a	l’Estragon
Shrimp	in	Aspic
Suprêmes	de	Volaille	en
Chaudfroid,	9.1
Volailles	en	Escabèche



AUBERGINES
Farcies	Duxelles
à	la	Grecque

B
BABAS,	10.1
General	Information,	10.1
Baking	of,	10.1
Mold	for,	10.1
Paste	for,	10.1
Syrup	for,	10.1
aux	Fruits
au	Rhum
Rum
with	Berries,	10.1
BACON
General	Information,	fm4.1
Blanching	of,	fm4.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
BAKING	DISHES,	fm2.1
BANANA	TART	see	Variations,	10.1
BARDE	DE	LARD	see	Pork	Fat,	9.1
BASTE,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
BATTER
for	Dessert	Crêpes
for	Entrée	Crêpes
BATTERIE	DE	CUISINE,	fm2.1
BAVARIAN	CREAMS,	10.1
Almond
Apricot
Chocolate



Orange
with	Rice	and	Fruits
Strawberry	or	Raspberry
BAVAROIS,	10.1
au	Chocolat
aux	Fruits
à	l’Orange
Praliné
BAY	LEAVES	(American,	French),	fm4.1
BEANS
Dry	White
General	Information
to	Boil,	7.1
to	Pressure	Cook,	7.1
Baked	(Cassoulet),	7.1
with	Lamb,	7.1;	see	also	Variations,	7.2
Green	or	String
General	Information,	8.1
Master	Recipes
Blanching	(Precooking),	8.1
Frozen,	8.1
Buttered,	8.1
Cold,	8.1
in	Salad	Niçoise,	9.1
Creamed,	8.1
Gratinéed	with	Cheese,	8.1
with	Tomatoes,	8.1
Wax	or	Yellow	Pod
Braised,	8.1
Frozen,	8.1
BÉARNAISE	SAUCE,	2.1;	see	also	Index:	Sauce	Béarnaise	BEATING
Definition	of
of	Egg	Whites
of	Egg	Yolks	and	Sugar



of	Sugar	and	Butter
BEATER	see	Index:	Electric	Beater
BÉCHAMEL	SAUCE,	2.1
BEEF,	7.1
General	Information,	7.1
Cuts	for
Boiling,	7.1
Braising,	7.1
Filet	Steaks,	7.1
Hamburger,	7.1
Steaks,	7.1,	7.2
Stews,	7.1
Grades	of,	7.1
Marinades	for
Braised	Beef,	7.1
Filet,	7.1
Stews,	7.1
Vegetables	and	Wines	for
Boiled	Beef,	7.1
Braised	Beef,	7.1
Steaks,	7.1
Boiled	Beef
Bottom	Round
Boiled,	7.1
Braised,	7.1
in	Stews,	7.1
Brains,	7.1,	7.2;	see	also	Index:	Brains
Braised	Beef
General	Information,	7.1
Master	Recipe,	7.1
Cold,	in	Aspic,	9.1
Minced,	in	Beef	Shell,	7.1
in	Salad,	9.1
see	also	Index:	Beef,	Filet	of;	Beef,	Stews
Brisket,	Boiled



Casseroles	see	Index:
Beef,	Stews
Chuck	Pot	Roast
Boiled,	7.1
Braised,	7.1
in	Stews,	7.1
Cold
in	Aspic	(Boeuf	Mode),	9.1
Casserole,	7.1,	7.2
in	Salad,	9.1
Eye	of	Round,	Braised
Filet	of,	7.1;	illus.,	7.2
General	Information,	7.1
Braised	and	Stuffed,	7.1
Sautés	of,	7.1
Filet	Steaks	(Tournedos),	7.1;	illus.,	7.2
General	Information,	7.1
Preparation	of,	7.1
Master	Recipe,	7.1
with	Artichoke	Hearts	and	Béarnaise	Sauce,	7.1
and	Foie	Gras,	7.1
Fricassees	see	Index:
Beef,	Stews
Ground	(Hamburgers)
General	Information,	7.1
Master	Recipe,	7.1
Sauces	and	Variations,	7.1
Knuckle	see	Index:	Beef,	Sirloin	Tip
Marrow
Preparation	of,	fm4.1
Sauces	with,	7.1,	7.2
Pot	Roast	(Braised	Beef)
Rolls	of,	Stuffed
Rump	Pot	Roast
Boiled,	7.1
Braised,	7.1
in	Stews,	7.1



Sautés	(Beef	Filet)
with	Cream	and	Mushrooms,	7.1
with	Red	Wine	Sauce,	7.1
with	Tomatoes	and	Herbs	7.1
Shell	of	Braised	Beef
Sirloin	Tip	or	Knuckle
Boiled,	7.1
Braised,	7.1
in	Stews,	7.1
Steaks	(Pan-broiled)
General	Information,	7.1
Amount	to	Buy,	7.1
Preparation	of,	7.1
Master	Recipe,	7.1
Pepper	Steak,	7.1
Sauces	and	Butters	for,	7.1
see	also	Index:	Beef,	Filet	Steaks
Stews
General	Information,	7.1
Timing	of,	7.1
with	Onions	and	Beer,	7.1
in	Red	Wine	(Bourguignon),	7.1
with	Rice	and	Tomatoes,	7.1
Stuffed	Beef	Rolls,	7.1
with	Vegetables	(Daubes),	7.1,	7.2
see	also	Index:	Beef,	Sautés
Stock
Stroganoff	(Beef	Sauté)
Top	Round
Braised,	7.1
in	Stews,	7.1
BEER	IN	BEEF	AND	ONION	STEW,	7.1
BEET	AND	RICE	SALAD,	9.1
BEURRE(S)
d’Ail



d’Anchois
Bercy
Blanc
au	Citron
Colbert
Composés
de	Crustacés
pour	Escargots
d’Estragon
de	Fines	Herbes
Maître	d’Hôtel
Manié,	2.1,	2.2,	6.1
Marchand	de	Vins
Montpellier
de	Moutarde
Nantais
Noir	(Noisette)
à	l’Oeuf
en	Pommade
BIFTECK,	7.1,	7.2
BISCUIT
au	Beurre
à	la	Cuiller
BISCUITS,	CHEESE,	4.1
BITOKES	À	LA	RUSSE,	7.1
BLACK	BUTTER	SAUCE,	2.1
BLACKBERRY	FLAN,	10.1
BLANC,	for	Artichoke	Bottoms,	8.1
BLANCH,	TO
General	Information,	fm3.1
Bacon
Brains	and	Sweetbreads



Green	Vegetables
General	Information,	8.1
Brussels	Sprouts,	8.1
Green	Beans,	8.1
Spinach,	8.1
Turnips
BLANCHIR	(to	Blanch),	fm3.1
BLANQUETTE
d’Agneau
de	Veau
BLEND,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
BLENDER	see	Index:	Electric	Blender
BLUEBERRY(IES)
Flan
and	Rum	Babas
BOEUF,	7.1
Ballotines	de
Bifteck	Haché
Bitoks	à	la	Russe,	7.1
à	la	Lyonnaise,	7.1
Bifteck	Sauté
Béarnaise,	7.1
Bercy,	7.1
au	Beurre,	7.1
à	la	Bordelaise,	7.1
Marchand	de	Vins,	7.1
Steak	au	Poivre,	7.1
Bouilli
Pot	au	Feu,	7.1
Potée	Normande,	7.1
Bourguignon
Braisé
à	la	Cuillère,	7.1



Carbonnades	à	la	Flamande
à	la	Catalane
Daube	de
à	la	Provençale,	7.1
Estouffade	de
Filet	de,	Prince	Albert
à	la	Mode
en	Gelée,	9.1
Paupiettes	de
Ragoûts	de
Roulades	de
Salade	de,	à	la	Parisienne
Sauté	de
à	la	Bourguignonne,	7.1
à	la	Parisienne,	7.1
à	la	Provençale,	7.1
Terrine	de
Tournedos	de
aux	Champignons,	7.1
Chasseur,	7.1
Henri	IV,	7.1
Rossini,	7.1
BOIL,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
BONING	OF
Chicken	Breasts
Duck	or	Fowl
Leg	of	Lamb
BOUCHÉES	PARMENTIER	AU	FROMAGE,	4.1
BOUILLABAISSE,	1.1
Fish	for
BOUILLI	(for	Soufflés),	10.1,	10.2
BOUILLIR	(to	Boil),	fm3.1
BOUILLON	see	Index:	Stocks



BOUQUET	GARNI,	fm4.1
BRAINS	(Calf,	Lamb,	etc.),	7.1,	7.2
General	Information,	7.1,	7.2
Blanching	of,	7.1
Soaking	and	Peeling,	7.1
Braised
Cold
Gratin	of
in	Red	Wine
Sautéed
Brown	Butter	Sauce,	7.1
Other	Sauces	for,	7.1
Soufflé,	4.1;	see	also	Variations,	4.2
BRAISE,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
BRAISER	(to	Braise),	fm3.1
BRANDY
for	Cooking
Sauce	for	Pepper	Steak
BREAD
Cases,	Preparation	of
Crumb(s)
Electric	Blender	for	Making	of	see	Chicken,	6.1
and	Mustard	Coating	for
Chicken,	6.1
Hot-house	Lamb,	7.1
Liver,	7.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
Hard-toasted	(Croûtes)
Rounds	(Canapés)
BREASTS	OF	CHICKEN	see	Index:	Chicken,	Breasts	BRITISH
Measures
Oven	Temperatures
BROCCOLI,	8.1



BROWN
Butter	 Sauce;	 see	 also	 Index:	 Sauce,	 Butter	 Sauce;	 see	 also	 Index:

Sauce,	Brown	Stock
BRUSSELS	SPROUTS,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Master	Recipes
Blanching	of	(Precooking),	8.1
Frozen,	8.1
Braised
in	Butter,	8.1
with	Chestnuts,	8.1
Browned	with	Cheese
Chopped,	with	Cream
Creamed
Custard	Mold
Gratinéed	with	Cheese	Sauce
BUTTER
General	Information
American	and	French,	fm4.1
Clarified,	fm4.1
Creaming	of,	2.1
Heating	of	(Foam),	fm4.1
for	Sauce	Enrichments,	2.1
and	Sugar	(Creaming	of),	10.1
Unsalted	or	Sweet,	fm4.1
Weights	and	Measures,	fm5.1
Creams	(Cake	Filling)
and	Flour
Paste	(Sauce	Thickener),	2.1,	2.2,	6.1
Roux	(Sauce	Thickener)
for	Brown	Sauces,	2.1
for	White	Sauces,	2.1
Sauces	see	Index:	Sauce,	Butter
BUTTER(S)	(Cold	Flavored),	2.1
General	Information,	2.1



Anchovy
Egg	Yolk
Garlic
and	Herbs	(Snail	Butter),	2.1
on	Broiled	Mushrooms,	8.1
on	Mussels,	5.1
for	Hamburgers
Herb	(Tarragon,	etc.)
on	Shirred	Eggs,	3.1
for	Liver
Mustard
Orange	(for	Crêpes)
and	Almond,	10.1
Shallot
and	Red	Wine,	2.1
and	White	Wine,	2.1
Shellfish
for	Steaks

C
CABBAGE
with	Roast	Pork
Soup
Weight	Equivalents
CABBAGE,	RED
Master	Recipe	(Braised),	8.1
with	Chestnuts,	8.1
with	Duck,	6.1
with	Pork,	7.1
Chops	see	Variations,	7.1
CABINET	PUDDING,	10.1
CAKE	FILLINGS	AND	FROSTINGS
General	Information,	10.1



Amounts	Needed,	10.1
Illustrated	Directions,	10.1
Storage	and	Leftovers,	10.1
Apricot	Glaze
to	Use,	10.1
Butter	Creams	(Chocolate,	Kirsch,	Rum,	etc.)
Chocolate	Icing
Lemon
Butter-cream	Icing,	10.1
Butter	Filling,	10.1
Orange
Butter-cream	Icing,	10.1
Butter	Filling,	10.1
CAKE	PAN	for	Tart	Shells,	4.1
CAKE(S),	10.1
General	Information,	10.1
Pans,	Preparation	of,	10.1
Storage	of,	10.1
Unmolding	of,	10.1
Butter	Spongecake
Chocolate
and	Almond	Cake,	10.1
Spongecake,	10.1
Orange
and	Almond	Spongecake,	10.1
Spongecake,	10.1
CALF’S
Brains,	7.1,	7.2;	see	also	Index:	Brains	Feet	for	Jellied	Stocks
Liver
CAMEMBERT	see	Index:
Cheese
CANAPÉS
Liver,	for	Roast	Birds
Preparation	of



Spinach	and	Cheese
CANARD	ET	CANETON,	6.1
à	la	Badoise
Braisé
avec	Choucroute,	6.1
aux	Choux	Rouges,	6.1
aux	Marrons,	6.1
aux	Cerises
en	Croûte
Montmorency
à	l’Orange
aux	Pêches
Poêlé	aux	Navets
Rôti
à	l’Alsacienne,	6.1

CANDIED	FRUITS,	fm4.1
CANETON	see	Index:	Canard
CANNED	GOODS	see	Index:	Peas,	Canned;	Stock,	Canned;	etc.
CAPER	SAUCE,	2.1;	see	also	Brown	Butter	Sauce,	2.2
CAPON,	CAPONETTE	(described),	6.1
Casserole	Roasted

CARAMEL,	10.1
Almond	Cream	(Plombières)
Coloring	for	Orange	Sauce
Custards
to	Line	a	Mold	with
Syrup

CARAMELIZED	ALMONDS,	10.1
CARBONNADES	À	LA	FLAMANDE,	7.1
CAROTTES,	8.1
à	la	Concierge



à	la	Crème
Etuvées	au	Beurre
aux	Fines	Herbes
à	la	Forestière
Glacées
Vichy

CARROTS,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Cutting	and	Slicing,	fm7.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
Master	Recipe	(Braised),	8.1
with	Artichoke	Hearts
Creamed
with	Onions	and	Garlic,	8.1
Glazed
with	Herbs
Vichy

CASSEROLE	DISHES,	Suggestions	for
Braised
Beef,	7.1
Lamb,	7.1
Red	Cabbage,	8.1
Sauerkraut,	8.1
Cassoulet
Chicken	Fricassees
Eggplant
and	Lamb	Mold,	7.1
and	Tomato	Casserole,	8.1
Gratins
Potato	and	Spinach,	8.1
Pipérade
Quiches
Scalloped	Potatoes
Stews
Beef,	7.1
Lamb,	7.1



Pork,	7.1
Veal,	7.1
Sweetbreads	au	Gratin
Turnip	and	Bacon	Casserole
Veal	Gratinéed

CASSEROLE	ROASTING	see	Index:	Chicken;	Veal	etc.
CASSEROLES	see	Pots	and	Pans,	fm2.1
CASSOULET,	7.1
CAULIFLOWER,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Molding	of	(Re-forming),	8.1
Preparation	of,	8.1
Sauces	for,	8.1
Master	Recipe	(Blanching:	Precooking),	8.1
Custard	Mold
au	Gratin	with	Cheese
and	Tomatoes,	8.1
Purée	with	Watercress

CÉLERI
Braisé
à	la	Grecque

CÉLERI-RAVE
Braisé
Rémoulade

CELERIAC	see	Index:	Celery	Root
CELERY
General	Information	(Weight	Equivalents),	fm5.1
Braised
Cold
à	la	Grecque,	9.1
Root
Braised,	8.1



Cold,	Mustard	Sauce,	9.1
CENTIGRADE	—	FAHRENHEIT	CONVERSIONS,	fm6.1
CERVELLES,	7.1,	7.2
au	Beurre	Noir
Braisées
en	Matelote

CHAFING	DISH	FOR
Crêpes	Suzette
Kidneys,	7.1,	7.2

CHAMPAGNES,	Types	to	Serve,	fm8.1
CHAMPIGNONS,	8.1
à	Blanc
Duxelles
Farcis
Fumet	de
à	la	Grecque
Grillés
Sautés
au	Beurre,	8.1
à	la	Bordelaise,	8.1
à	la	Crème,	8.1
Sauce	Madère,	8.1

CHANTILLY	(Whipped	Cream),	10.1
CHARLOTTE	MOLD,	illus.,	4.1
CHARLOTTE(S)
Basque
Chantilly
aux	Fraises,	10.1
aux	Framboises,	10.1
Malakoff
au	Chocolat,	10.1
aux	Fraises



aux	Framboises
aux	Pommes

CHÂTEAUBRIAND,	7.1
CHAUDFROID	see	Index:	Sauce	Chaudfroid
CHAUSSONS	AU	ROQUEFORT,	4.1
CHEESE
General	Information,	fm4.1
Graters	for,	fm2.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
Biscuits	or	Wafers
Camembert
Biscuits,	4.1
Quiche,	4.1
Cream	Cheese
and	Mushroom	Filling	(Crêpes),	4.1
Tart	for	Dessert,	10.1,	10.2
Fillings
for	Appetizers,	4.1
for	Crêpes,	4.1
Parmesan	Coating	for	Chicken	Breasts
Puffs
Quiches
Roquefort
Biscuits,	4.1
Cheese	Balls,	4.1
Quiche,	4.1
Turnovers,	4.1
Sauce
Mornay,	2.1
with	Wine	and	Garlic,	3.1
Soufflé
Classic,	4.1
Egg	Whites	(no	Yolks),	4.1
Unmolded,	4.1



Sticks
Swiss	(Gruyère,	etc.)
Filling	for	Appetizers,	4.1
Quiche,	4.1
Sauce,	2.1
Soufflé,	4.1,	4.2,	4.3
Wafers,	4.1

CHERRIES
with	Duck
Poached	in	Wine

CHERRY
Filling	for	Savarins
Flans,	10.1,	10.2,	10.3
Tart,	Flambée

CHESTNUT(S),	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Amount	to	buy,	8.1
Peeling	of,	8.1
Serving	Suggestions,	8.1
Braised
with	Brussels	Sprouts,	8.1
with	Red	Cabbage,	8.1
Purée	of
and	Sausage	Stuffing	(Goose)

CHICKEN,	6.1
General	Information,	6.1
to	Bone
Chicken	Breasts,	6.1
Whole	Chicken,	9.1
Defrosting	of,	6.1
Disjointing	of,	6.1
Preparation	of,	6.1
Stock
Brown,	6.1



White,	6.1
Stuffings	for
Herb	and	Giblet,	6.1
Mushroom,	6.1
Timetable	for	Roasting,	6.1
to	Truss,	6.1
Types	of	(American	and	French),	6.1
Vegetables	and	Wines	for,	6.1
Boiled	in	Pot	au	Feu
Breast	of	Chicken
General	Information,	6.1
Preparation	of,	6.1
Cold	in	Chaudfroid
Poached	in	Butter
with	Cream	Sauce,	6.1
with	Diced	Vegetables,	6.1
with	Mushrooms,	6.1
with	Paprika,	6.1
Sautéed	in	Butter,	6.1
Cheese	Coating	for,	6.1
Sauces	for
Brown	Butter,	6.1
Deglazing,	6.1
Truffle,	6.1
Broiled	with	Mustard
Casserole	Roast
with	Tarragon,	6.1
with	Vegetables,	6.1
Cold
in	Lemon	Jelly,	9.1
List	of,	9.1
in	Tarragon	Aspic,	9.1
Coq	au	Vin
Filling	for	Appetizers
Fricassees
General	Information,	6.1
Chicken	Types,	6.1



Timing,	6.1
Master	Recipe	(Wine	Sauce),	6.1
with	Curry,	6.1
Fondue	with	Cream,	6.1
with	Paprika,	6.1
in	Red	Wine,	6.1
with	Tarragon,	6.1
Leftover
in	Cream	Filling,	4.1
Gratin	of,	4.1
Liver	see	Index:	Liver,	Chicken
Mousse	of
Quenelles	of
Roast
Master	Recipes
Oven	Roasting,	6.1
Spit	Roasting,	6.1
Basted	with	Cream,	6.1
with	Port	Wine	and	Mushrooms,	6.1
with	Stuffings,	6.1,	6.2
Sautéed
General	Information,	6.1
Master	Recipe,	6.1
Sauces	for
Cream,	6.1
Deglazing,	6.1
Herbal	Garlic,	6.1
Tomato	and	Mushroom,	6.1
Soufflé	see	Variations,	4.1,	4.2
Squab	Chicken	(Roasted)
Stew	see	Fricassees,	6.1
Pot	au	Feu,	7.1
Tarragon
in	Aspic,	9.1
Casserole	Roast,	6.1
Fricassee,	6.1
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1



CHOCOLATE
General	Information
Drops,	10.1
to	Melt,	10.1
Cake
with	Almonds,	10.1
Filling	(Butter-cream),	10.1
Icing,	10.1
Creams	(Desserts)
Bavarian	(Custard),	10.1
Custard	with	Almonds,	10.1
Malakoff	(with	Almonds)
Plombières	(Custard),	10.1
Mousse
Soufflé

CHOPPING,	illus.,	fm7.1
CHOU	ROUGE	À	LA	LIMOUSINE,	8.1
CHOUCROUTE	BRAISÉE,	8.1
Garnie

CHOU-FLEUR,	8.1
Blanchi
à	la	Mornay
Timbale	de
aux	Tomates
en	Verdure

CHOUX
Asperges	(Broccoli)
de	Bruxelles
Blanchis,	8.1
à	la	Crème,	8.1
Etuvés
au	Beurre,	8.1
à	la	Crème,	8.1
aux	Marrons,	8.1



à	la	Milanaise,	8.1
à	la	Mornay,	8.1
Timbale	de,	8.1

CHOUX	(Puff	Shells),	4.1
CIVET	DE	MOUTON,	7.1
CLAFOUTI(S),	10.1
à	la	Bourdaloue
à	la	Liqueur
aux	Mûres
aux	Myrtilles
aux	Poires,	10.1,	10.2
aux	Pommes
aux	Pruneaux

CLAM
Filling	for	Appetizers
Juice	for	Fish	Soups
Juice	for	Fish	Stock

CLARIFIED	BUTTER,	fm4.1
CLARIFICATION	OF	MEAT	STOCKS,	2.1
COAT	A	SPOON	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
COCK,	6.1
COCKTAIL	APPETIZERS	see	Index:	Appetizers	COFFEE
Icing	(Butter	Creams)
Soufflé
COGNAC,	for	Cooking,	fm8.1
COLD
Buffet
Dishes,	List	of

COLIN	see	Index:	Fish,	Cod



COMPOTE	OF	PEACHES,	10.1
CONCOMBRES,	8.1
au	Beurre
aux	Champignons,	à	la	Crème
à	la	Crème
à	la	Grecque
à	la	Mornay
Persillés

CONFIT	D’OIE	see	Index:	Goose,	Preserved	CONGRE	see	Index:	Fish,	Eel
CONSOMMÉ
Clarification	of	Stock	for,	III;	see	also	Index:	Stock,	Canned

CONTRE	FILET,	7.1
CONVERSION	FORMULAS	see	Index:	Tables	of	Equivalents	COOKIES,	SUGAR,	10.1
COOKING	AHEAD	OF	TIME:	Symbol	(*)	in	Recipes	COPPER	POTS,	fm2.1
COQ	AU	VIN,	6.1
COQUELETS	SUR	CANAPÉS,	6.1
COQUILLES	ST.	JACQUES
à	la	Parisienne
à	la	Provençale

CORNISH	GAME	HEN,	6.1,	9.1
CORNSTARCH	THICKENING	FOR	BROWN	SAUCE,	2.1
COURT	BOUILLON	FOR	VEGETABLES,	9.1
COVERED	 ROASTING	 see	 Index:	 Veal,	 Casserole	 Roast;	 Chicken,	 Casserole
Roast;	etc.
CRAB
in	Aspic
in	Chaudfroid
Quenelles
Quiche



Soufflé,	4.1;	see	also	Variations,	4.2
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1

CRABE
en	Aspic
en	Chaudfroid

CRACKLINGS,	GOOSE,	6.1
CRAWFISH,	CRAYFISH	see	Index:	Ecrevisse	CREAM
General	Information,	fm4.1
Cheese
Enrichment	(White	Sauces)
Fillings	see	Index:	Fillings,	Cream
French
Discussion	of,	fm4.1
Duplication	of,	fm4.1
to	Whip,	10.1
Lightly	Beaten
Puff	Paste
Sauce;	see	also	Index:	Sauce,	Cream	Sour
Discussion	of,	fm4.1
to	Make,	fm4.1
to	Whip

CREAMING	BUTTER,	2.1
CREAMS	(Dessert)
Bavarian	Creams
Custards;	see	also	Index:	Custards	Malakoffs
Mousses
Plombières

CRÈME,	fm4.1
Anglaise
for	Cake	Fillings,	10.1
au	Beurre
à	l’Anglaise,	10.1
au	Citron,	10.1



Ménagère,	10.1
à	l’Orange,	10.1
au	Sucre	Cuit,	10.1
Brûlée
Chantilly
au	Citron
Fraîche
Pâtissière
with	Fruit	Tarts,	10.1
Plombières
à	l’Ananas,	10.1
au	Chocolat,	10.1
aux	Fruits,	10.1
Pralinée,	10.1
Renversée	au	Caramel
Saint-Honoré
Sainte-Anne	au	Caramel

CRÈMES
Frites
et	Mousses

CRÊPES	(Dessert),	10.1
General	Information
Batters	for,	10.1
Cooking	of,	10.1
Fillings	for,	10.1
with	Almond
Butter,	10.1
Cream,	10.1
Fines	Sucrées
Fourrées
et	Flambées
Frangipane
Gâteau	de,	à	la	Normande
à	la	Levure
Mound	of,	with	Apples
with	Orange	Butter



and	Almonds
Soufflées
Sucrées
Suzette

CRÊPES	(Entrée),	4.1
General	Information
Batter	for,	4.1
Cooking	of,	4.1
Pans	for,	4.1
d’Epinards
Farcies	et	Roulées
Gâteau	de
Mound	of
of	Spinach
over	Spinach
Stuffed	and	Rolled
Timbale	de

CREVETTES	EN	ASPIC,	9.1
CROMESQUIS,	4.1
CROQUETTES,	4.1
CROÛTES
Bread	Cases
for	Soup

CROÛTONS,	4.1
CRUSTACÉES,	MOUSSELINE	DE,	9.1
CUCUMBERS,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Baked
with	Cheese	Sauce
Cold	à	la	Grecque
Creamed
with	Mushrooms



Parslied
CUP	CUSTARDS,	10.1
CUP-DECILITER	EQUIVALENTS,	fm5.1
CURRANT	GLAZE,	10.1
CURRIED	CHICKEN,	6.1
CURRY	SAUCE,	2.1,	2.2;	see	also	Index:	Sauce,	Curry	CUSTARD(S)
Desserts
Almond	with	Chocolate,	10.1
Applesauce	Caramel	Mold,	10.1
Bavarian	Creams,	10.1
Caramel
and	Almond	Plombières,	10.1
Unmolded	Custard,	10.1
Chocolate	Plombières,	10.1
Fillings	for	Desserts
Almond	Cream,	10.1
Crème	Pâtissière,	10.1
with	Egg	Whites,	10.1
for	Savarins,	10.1
with	Glacéed	Fruit,	10.1
Pineapple
Mold,	10.1
Plombières,	10.1
Raspberry	Plombières,	10.1
Strawberry	Plombières,	10.1
Tart
with	Apples,	10.1
Fillings	for,	10.1
with	Pears,	10.1
Entrée	Molds
Asparagus,	8.1
Brussels	Sprouts,	8.1
Cauliflower,	8.1
Spinach,	8.1



Timbales,	4.1
Sauce,	Crème	Anglaise

CUTS,	MEAT
see	Index:	Beef	Cuts;	Veal	Cuts;	etc.

Booklet	on
French	see	Text	Listings	under	Beef	Stews;	Veal	Scallops;	etc.
CUTTING	METHODS
Vegetables
Mushrooms

D
DAUBE
de	Boeuf,	7.1,	7.2
de	Mouton

DECILITER-CUP	EQUIVALENTS,	fm5.1
DEFINITIONS,	LIST	OF,	fm3.1
DÉGLACER	(to	Deglaze),	fm3.1
DEGLAZE,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
DEGLAZING	 SAUCE	 see	 Index:	 Sauce,	 Brown	 Deglazing	 DÉGRAISSER	 (to
Degrease),	fm3.1
DEGREASE,	TO	(Directions	for),	fm3.1
DEMI-GLACE	SAUCE,	2.1
DÉS,	COUPER	EN	(to	Dice),	fm3.1
DESSERT(S),	10.1
Cold
Apple	(s)
Aspic,	10.1
Braised,	10.1



Charlotte,	10.1
Gratin,	10.1
Applesauce	Caramel	Mold,	10.1
Bavarian	Creams
Caramel
and	Almond	Soufflé,	10.1
Custards,	10.1
Charlotte(s)
Basque,	10.1
Chantilly,	10.1
Malakoff,	10.1
Mousses
Oranges,	Glazed
Peach	Compote
Pears,	Baked
Pineapple	Custard	Mold
Plombières
Rum-macaroon	Soufflé,	10.1
Tarts,	10.1
Custards	see	Index:	Custard	Desserts
Fillings	for
Hot
Apple	(s)
Braised,	10.1
Charlotte,	10.1
Applesauce	Caramel	Mold,	10.1
Caramel	Custards,	10.1
Pears,	Baked,	10.1
Soufflés,	10.1
Tarts,	10.1
Molded
General	Information
Lining	a	Mold
with	Caramel,	10.1
with	Ladyfingers,	10.1
Unmolding	of,	10.1
Apple



Aspic,	10.1
Charlotte,	10.1
Applesauce	Caramel,	10.1
Bavarian	Creams,	10.1
Caramel-almond	Soufflé,	10.1
Charlottes	Malakoff,	etc.,	10.1
Custards,	10.1
Mousses,	10.1
Pineapple	Mold,	10.1
Rum-macaroon	Soufflé,	10.1
Sauces,	10.1,	10.2;	see	also	Index:	Sauces,	Sweet	Tarts
Unmolding	of

DICE,	HOW	TO	CUT	INTO,	fm3.1
DILL	SAUCE,	2.1
DIPLOMATE,	10.1
DOUGH
for	Babas,	see	also	Index:	Pastry	Dough	DOVE,	ROAST,	6.1

DRESSING	FOR	SALADS
Mayonnaise
Vinaigrette

DUCK,	DUCKLING,	6.1
General	Information,	6.1
Boning	of,	9.1
Carving	of,	6.1
Description	of,	6.1
Preparation	for	cooking,	6.1
Stock,	6.1
Timetable	for	Roasting,	6.1
Wine	and	Vegetables	for,	6.1

Baked
with	Beans	in	Cassoulet,	7.1
in	Pastry	Crust,	9.1
Braised



with	Chestnuts,	6.1
with	Sauerkraut	or	Cabbage,	6.1
Casserole	Roast	with	Turnips
Cold,	with	Orange
Mousse	of
Pâté	of
in	Pastry	Crust,	9.1
Roast
Master	Recipe,	6.1
with	Apple	Stuffing,	6.1
with	Cherries,	6.1
with	Orange	Sauce,	6.1
with	Peaches,	6.1
Spit	Roasted

DUMPLINGS	see	Index:	Quenelles;	Gnocchi
DUXELLES,	8.1

E
ECHALOTES,	fm4.1
ECREVISSE(S),	5.1
Butter	see	Shellfish	Butter,	2.1
Garnish	for	Fish	Filets

EEL	(Conger	or	Sea),	1.1,	4.1
EGG(S),	3.1
General	Information
to	Beat	Eggs	and	Sugar,	10.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
in	Aspic
Baked	in	Ramekins
Boiled,	fm2.1-minute,	3.1
Dishes	see	also	Index:	Custards;	Gratins;	Quiches;	Soufflés
Omelettes	see	Index:	Omelettes



Poached
General	Information
Discussion	of,	3.1
Substitute	for,	3.1
Master	Recipe,	3.1
in	Aspic,	9.1
on	Canapés,	Cheese	Sauce,	3.1
in	Cheese	Soufflé,	4.1
in	Fish	Soup	see	Variation,	1.1
in	Garlic	Soup,	1.1
in	Pastry	Shells,	Béarnaise,	3.1
in	Red	Wine,	3.1
Scrambled
Master	Recipe,	3.1
Cold	with	Tomatoes,	9.1
Garnishings	for,	3.1
Shirred
Whites
Beating	of
Master	Recipe,	4.1
for	Desserts	and	Cakes,	10.1
in	Custard	Filling,	10.1
to	fold	into	Soufflés,	etc.,	4.1
Soufflés	(no	Egg	Yolks)
Cheese,	4.1
Dessert	Soufflés,	10.1
Yolk(s)
Added	 to	Hot	 Sauces,	 2.1;	 see	 also	 Index:	 Sauce	 Parisienne	Butter,

for	Decorations,	2.1
for	Butter	Creams,	10.1
for	Custard	Sauce,	10.1
for	Hollandaise	Sauce,	2.1
for	Mayonnaise,	2.1
and	Sugar,	Beating	of	to	Form	the	Ribbon,	10.1
Heated	see	Charlotte,	10.1

EGGPLANT,	8.1



Casserole,	8.1
Cold,	9.1
à	la	Grecque,	9.1
Mold,	with	Lamb	(Moussaka),	7.1
Stuffed,	8.1

ELECTRIC	BEATER	OR	MIXER,	illus.,	fm2.1
for	Beating	Butter	and	Sugar
for	Cake	Batters
for	Cake	Frostings
for	Creaming	Butter
for	Egg	Whites
for	Eggs	and	Sugar
for	Quenelles

ELECTRIC	BLENDER
for	Bread	Crumbs	see	Broiled	Chicken,	6.1
for	Hollandaise	Sauce
for	Mayonnaise
for	Mousses	(Chicken	Liver,	etc.)
for	Pancakes,	4.1,	10.1
for	Almonds
for	Shellfish	Butter
for	Soups

ELECTRIC	FOOD	PROCESSOR	illus.,	fm2.1
for	mayonnaise
for	orange	butter
for	pie	crusts,	4.1,	10.1
for	quenelles

ELECTRIC	SKILLET
for	Chicken	Fricassee
for	Sautéed	Chicken

EMMENTHAL	see	Cheese,	fm4.1
ENAMEL	WARE	see	Pots,	fm2.1
ENDIVES,	8.1



Braised
Cold	à	la	Grecque
à	la	Flamande
Gratin	with	Ham
Gratinéed	with	Cheese
Quiche

ENGLISH	see	Index:	British
ENTRECÔTE,	7.1
ENTRÉES	AND	LUNCHEON	DISHES,	4.1
ENTREMETS,	10.1
aux	Fruits

EPINARDS,	8.1
à	la	Basquaise
Blanchis
Canapés	aux
à	la	Crème
Etuvés	au	Beurre
Gratinés	au	Fromage
au	Jambon
au	Jus
à	la	Mornay,	Gratinés
Petites	Crêpes	d’
Purée	d’
en	Surprise
Timbale	d’

EQUIPMENT,	KITCHEN,	fm2.1
EQUIVALENTS	see	Index:	Tables	of	Equivalents
ESCABÈCHE,	9.1
ESCALOPES	DE	VEAU,	7.1
ESPAGNOLE	SAUCE,	2.1
ESTOUFFADE	DE	BOEUF,	7.1



ETUVER	(to	Braise),	fm3.1

F
FAHRENHEIT-CENTIGRADE	Conversions,	fm6.1
FARCE
Duxelles,	6.1,	7.1
aux	Herbes
Mentonnaise
aux	Olives
pour	Pâtés
de	Porc
aux	Rognons

FARINA	see	Semolina	Gnocchi,	4.1
FARINE	(Flour),	fm4.1
FAT
Fatback	see	Pork	Fat,	9.1
Goose
Pork	Fat	for	Pâtés
Removal	of	see	Degrease,	fm3.1

FAUX	FILET,	7.1
FENNEL,	COLD	À	LA	GRECQUE,	9.1
FENOUIL	À	LA	GRECQUE,	9.1
FILET
of	Beef	see	Index:	Beef,	Filet
de	Boeuf	see	Index:	Boeuf,	Filet
of	Fish	see	Index:	Fish,	Filets
Mignon,	7.1,	7.2
de	Poisson	see	Index:	Poisson,	Filet
Steaks,	7.1,	7.2

FILLINGS



for	Cake	see	Index:	Cake	Fillings
Cream	Fillings	(Entrée)
Cheese,	4.1
for	Crêpes,	4.1
for	Croquettes,	4.1
Ham,	etc.,	see	Variations,	4.1
Poultry,	4.1
Shellfish,	4.1
for	Desserts
for	Crêpes,	10.1
Custard
with	Almonds,	10.1
Crème	Patissière,	10.1
with	Egg	Whites,	10.1
for	Savarins,	10.1
see	also	Index:	Stuffings

FINES	HERBES	see	Herbs,	fm4.1
FISH,	5.1
General	Information,	5.1
Buying	Notes,	5.1
Sauces	for,	5.1
Serving	Suggestions,	5.1
Types	of
for	Bouillabaisse	and	Soup,	1.1
for	Filleting	and	Poaching,	5.1
for	Quenelles
Blue	Fish	see	Fish	Filets,	5.1
Brill	see	Fish	Filets,	5.1
Coalfish	Baked	with	Tomatoes	see	Other	Fish,	5.1
Cod
Baked	with	Tomatoes	see	Other	Fish,	5.1
for	Quenelles	see	Fish,	4.1
Dab	see	Fish	Filets,	5.1
Eel,	Conger	or	Sea	Eel,	1.1,	4.1
Filets	Poached	in	White
Wine,	5.1



Master	Recipe,	5.1
Sauces	and	Garnitures
Cream	and	Egg
Yolk	Sauce,	5.1
Ecrevisses,	5.1
Mushrooms,	5.1,	5.2
Mussels	and	Shrimp,	5.1
Vegetable	Julienne,	5.1
Soufflés	with,	4.1;	168–71
Stuffed	Filets,	5.1
Flounder	Filets
Poached	in	Wine,	5.1
for	Quenelles,	4.1
in	Soufflé,	4.1
Fluke	see	Fish	Filets,	5.1
Forcement	see	Quenelles,	4.1
Gratin
Hake
see	Fish	Filets,	5.1
Quenelles,	4.1
Halibut
Baked	with	Tomatoes	see	Other	Fish,	5.1
Quenelles,	4.1
Leftover,	Gratin	of
Mousse
Cold,	9.1
Hot,	4.1
Poached	Filets
Pollack
Baked	with	Tomatoes	see	Other	Fish,	5.1
Poached	see	Fish	Filets,	5.1
Quenelles
Salmon
Gratin,	4.1
Mousse,	9.1
Quenelles,	4.1
Soufflé,	4.1



Stuffing	for	Lamb,	7.1
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1
Sole	Filets	Poached	in	White	Wine
Soufflé
with	Egg	Whites	(no	Yolks),	4.1
with	Fish	Filets,	4.1
and	Shellfish,	4.1
on	a	Platter,	4.1
Sauces	for,	2.1,	2.2,	4.1
Soup	and	Bouillabaisse
Stock,	2.1,	2.2
Trout	see	Fish	Filets,	5.1
Tuna
Baked	with	Tomatoes,	5.1
in	Salade	Niçoise,	9.1
and	Veal	Patties,	7.1
Whiting	see	Fish	Filets,	5.1
see	also	Index:	Crab;	Ecrevisse;	Lobster;	Mussels;	Scallops;	Shellfish;

Shrimp
FLAMBÉES
for	Dessert	Crêpes,	10.1,	10.2
for	Fruit	Tarts
for	Veal	Kidneys

FLAMICHE,	4.1
FLAMING	see	Index:	Flambées
FLAN(S)
Fruit
des	Isles
Ring,	illus.,	4.1

FLEURETTE	see	Cream,	fm4.1
FLOATING	ISLAND	(mentioned),	10.1
FLOUR
General	Information,	fm4.1



French	and	American,	fm4.1
How	to	Measure,	fm4.1
and	Butter
Paste	(Sauce	Thickener),	2.1,	2.2,	6.1
Roux	(Sauce	Thickener)
for	Brown	Sauces,	2.1
for	White	Sauces,	2.1

FOIE
Gras
with	Eggs	see	Suggestions,	3.1
with	Steak	Rossini,	7.1
Stuffing
with	Prunes	for	Goose,	6.1
with	Truffles	for	Beef,	7.1
de	Veau
à	la	Moutarde,	7.1
Sauté,	7.1
de	Volaille
en	Aspic,	9.1
Mousse	de,	9.1

FOLD,	TO	(definition	of),	fm3.1;	illus.,	4.1
FONDANT	AU	CHOCOLAT,	10.1
FONDS
d’Artichauts	see	Index:	Artichauts,	Fonds	de
Blanc
de	Volaille,	2.1
Brun
de	Volaille,	2.1
de	Cuisine
Simple,	2.1

FONDUE
Croquettes
de	Crustacés
au	Gruyère



de	Poulet
de	Volaille

FOOD	MILL,	illus.,	fm2.1
FOOD	PROCESSOR,	illus.,	fm2.1
see	also	Electric	Food	Processor

FORCEMEAT	see	Quenelles,	4.1
FORM	THE	RIBBON,	10.1
FOUETTER	(to	Beat),	fm3.1
FOWL	see	Chicken,	6.1;	see	also	Index:	Duck;	Goose;	etc.
FRAISES,	SAUCE	AUX,	10.1
FRAMBOISES,	SAUCE	AUX,	2.1
FRANGIPANE,	10.1
with	Dessert	Crêpes
with	Pear	Tart
for	Savarins

FRÉMIR,	fm3.1
FRENCH	DRESSING,	2.1
FRICADELLES
d’Agneau
de	Veau

FRICASSEE
Definition	of
of	Chicken
see	also	Index:	Beef	Stew;	Veal	Stew;	etc.

FRITTONS,	6.1
FROSTINGS	see	Index:	Cake	Fillings
FROZEN	FOODS	see	Index:	Peas,	Frozen;	Chicken,	Frozen;	etc.
FRUIT(S)



Confits
Desserts
Fillings
for	Crêpes,	10.1
for	Savarins,	10.1
Flans
Glacéed;	see	also	Index:	Glacéed	Fruit	Sauces
to	Stew	or	Poach	in	Syrup
Tarts
see	also	Index:	Apples;	Pears;	etc.

FUMET
de	Champignons
de	Poisson

G
GALANTINES,	9.1
GALETTES
au	Camembert
au	Fromage
au	Roquefort
Sablées

GAME
Birds	Roasted	see	Coquelets,	6.1
Hens,	Cold	in	Escabèche
Roast	see	Coquelets,	6.1
Mousse	of
Sauce

GARBURE,	1.1
GARLIC
General	Information
Measurements	for,	fm5.1
Press,	fm2.1



Removal	of	Odor,	fm5.1
Butter,	2.1,	2.2
on	Mussels,	5.1
with	Carrots
with	Lamb
Coating	with	Mustard,	7.1
Inserted	in	Leg,	7.1
Sauce,	7.1
Stuffing	with	Herbs,	7.1
with	Mashed	Potatoes
Sauce	see	Index:	Sauce,	Garlic
with	Scalloped	Potatoes
Soup

GARNITURES	see	Vegetable	Suggestions	in	Recipe	Texts
GÂTEAU(X),	10.1
Biscuit	au	Beurre
de	Crêpes
Fourré	à	la	Crème	d’Orange
Marquis,	le
à	l’Orange
et	aux	Amandes,	10.1
Reine	de	Saba,	10.1

GELATIN
in	Bavarian	Creams
in	Cream	Sauce	(Chaudfroid)
French	(in	Sheets)
in	Mayonnaise
for	Stocks	and	Aspics

GELÉE,	2.1
de	Groseilles

GIBLET	STUFFING	FOR	CHICKEN,	6.1
GIGOT,	7.1
GLAÇAGE



à	l’Abricot
au	Chocolat

GLACE	DE	VIANDE,	2.1
GLACÉED	FRUITS,	fm4.1
in	Apple	Aspic
in	Bavarian	Cream
in	Custard
on	Savarins
in	Soufflé

GLAZES	FOR	DESSERTS	AND	CAKES,	10.1
GNOCCHI,	4.1
Master	Recipe	(Potato),	4.1
with	Cheese
with	Ham,	etc.
de	Pommes	de	Terre
de	Semoule
with	Semolina

GOOSE,	6.1
General	Information,	6.1
Fat,	6.1
Preparation	for	Cooking,	6.1
Stock,	6.1
Stuffings	for
Timetable	for	Roasting,	6.1
Baked	with	Beans	(Cassoulet)
Braised,	Chestnut	Stuffing
Cracklings
Liver;	see	also	Index:	Foie	Gras	Preserved
in	Cabbage	Soup,	1.1
in	Cassoulet,	7.1,	7.2
Roast,	Prune	and	Foie	Gras	Stuffing

GRAMS
Conversion	Formulas



Flour	Equivalents
Measures	and	Equivalents

GRAPE	TART	see	Variations,	10.1
GRATIN(S)	FOR	DESSERT
Apple
Pear

GRATIN(S)	FOR	ENTRÉE,	4.1
Brains
de	Cervelles
Chicken	or	Turkey
Endive	and	Ham
d’Endives
aux	Fruits	de	Mer
Leeks	and	Ham
de	Poireaux
de	Pommes	de	Terre
aux	Anchois,	4.1
Crécy,	8.1
Dauphinois,	8.1
Jurassien,	8.1
Provençal,	8.1
et	Saucisson,	4.1
Savoyard,	8.1
Potatoes
with	Onions
and	Anchovies,	4.1
and	Sausages,	4.1
Scalloped,	8.1
Shredded,	with	Ham,	4.1
with	Spinach,	8.1
de	Ris	de	Veau
Salmon	or	Other	Fish
Sweetbreads
de	Volaille

GRATINÉ,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1



GRATINÉED	DISHES,	4.1;	see	also	Fish,	5.1,	5.2
GRATTONS,	6.1
GRAVY	see	Index:	Sauce
GREASE	REMOVAL	see	Degrease,	fm3.1
GRECQUE,	LÉGUMES	À	LA,	9.1
GROSEILLES,	GELÉE	DE,	10.1
GRUYÈRE	see	Cheese,	fm4.1

H
HACHER	(to	Mince),	fm3.1
HAM,	7.1
General	Information,	7.1
Types	to	Buy,	7.1
Vegetables	and	Wines	for,	7.1
Braised
Master	Recipe,	7.1
Cream	and	Mushroom	Sauce,	7.1
in	Madeira,	7.1
with	Mushroom	Stuffing,	7.1
in	Pastry	Crust,	7.1
Cold
Mousse,	9.1
Filling	with	Cheese	for	Appetizers
Gnocchi	see	Additions,	4.1
Gratin	of
with	Endives,	4.1
with	Leeks,	4.1
with	Potatoes,	4.1
Hock	with	Beans
Omelette	see	Pipérade,	3.1;	Suggestions,	3.2
Pâté	with	Veal	and	Pork



Slices
Cream	Sauce,	7.1
and	Madeira,	7.1
with	Onions,	Tomatoes,	etc.,	7.1
Soufflé
see	Cheese	Soufflé,	4.1;	Variations,	4.2
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1

HAMBURGERS,	7.1
HARE	PÂTÉ,	9.1
HARICOT	DE	MOUTON,	7.1
HARICOTS
Beurre
Mange-tout	à	l’Etuvée
Verts
à	l’Anglaise,	8.1
Blanchis,	8.1
à	la	Crème,	8.1
Gratinés,	à	la	Mornay,	8.1
à	la	Maître	d’Hôtel,	8.1
à	la	Provençale,	8.1
Sauce	Crème,	8.1

HEN,	6.1
HERB(S)
General	Information,	fm4.1
Bouquet
Butter,	2.1,	2.2
see	also	Index:	Sauce,	Herb;	Tarragon

HOLLANDAISE	SAUCE,	2.1;	see	also	Index:	Sauce	Hollandaise
HOMARD
à	l’Américaine
aux	Aromates
en	Aspic



en	Chaudfroid
Thermidor

HONEY,	ORANGE	(Orange	Butter),	10.1
HORS	D’OEUVRES,	4.1;	see	also	Index:	Appetizers	HUILE,	fm4.1

I
ICING	see	Index:	Cake	Fillings
ILE	FLOTTANTE,	10.1
ILLUSTRATIONS,	LIST	OF,	xvii
INCORPORER	(to	Fold),	fm3.1
INGREDIENTS,	LIST	OF,	fm4.1
IRON	WARE	see	Pots,	Pans,	fm2.1

J

JAM	FILLINGS	FOR	CRÊPES,	10.1
JAMBON,	7.1
Braisé
et	Farci,	7.1
au	Madère,	7.1
Morvandelle,	7.1
Farci	en	Croûte
Mousse	de

Tranches	de
à	la	Crème,	7.1
Morvandelle,	7.1
en	Pipérade,	7.1

JELLIED	STOCK,	2.1
with	Gelatin



Homemade
Lining	a	Mold	with
for	Pâtés	in	Aspic
Testing	of
Use	of	in	Aspics
Wine	Flavoring	for

JELLY:	Fillings	for	Crêpes,	10.1;	see	also	 Index:	Jellied	Stock	JULIENNE,	 to
Cut	into,	fm7.1
JUS	LIÉ,	2.1

K
KIDNEY(S),	7.1
General	Information,	7.1
Master	Recipe,	7.1
Flambéed
Sauces	for
Cream	and	Mushrooms,	7.1
Mustard	and	Parsley,	7.1
Red	Wine	and	Marrow,	7.1
Served	with	Eggs
Scrambled	see	Garnishings,	3.1
Shirred	see	Suggestions,	3.1
Stuffing	with	Rice	for	Lamb

KIRSCH
Icing	see	Butter	Creams,	10.1
Soufflé
Syrup	for	Savarins

KITCHEN	EQUIPMENT,	fm2.1
KNIVES,	fm2.1
How	to	Chop,	Dice,	etc.

L



LADYFINGERS
Master	Recipe,	10.1
Desserts	Molded	in,	10.1,	10.2
to	Line	a	Mold	with

LAITUES	BRAISÉES,	8.1
LAMB	AND	MUTTON,	7.1
General	Information,	7.1
to	Bone	a	Leg,	7.1
Cuts	for	Stew,	7.1
Discussion	of,	7.1
Marinades	for,	7.1
Stuffings	for,	7.1
Timetable	for	Roasting,	7.1
Types	of,	7.1
Wine	and	Vegetables	for,	7.1
with	Beans
in	Cassoulet,	7.1
Boiled,	7.1	Brains,	7.2,	7.3;	see	also	Index:	Brains
Braised
Kidneys	see	Index:	Kidneys
Leftover,	with	Eggplant
Leg	or	Shoulder	of
Master	Recipes
Braised,	7.1
Roast,	7.1
Garlic	Flavoring,	7.1,	7.2
Marinated,	7.1
Mustard	Coating,	7.1
Sauces	for,	7.1
Stuffed,	7.1
Mold	with	Eggplant,	7.1

Patties
Roast

Shanks
Shoulder



General	Information,	7.1
LAMB	AND	MUTTON	(continued)
Shoulder	(continued)
Recipes	for	see	Index:	Lamb,	Leg;	see	also	Cassoulet,	7.1
Stew
General	Information,	7.1
Master	Recipe	(Navarin),	7.1
Braised	Shanks,	7.1
with	Mushrooms	and	Onions,	7.1
with	Red	Wine,	7.1
with	Rice,	7.1
with	Vegetables	(Daube),	7.1

LARD
Gras	see	Pork	Fat,	9.1
de	Poitrine	see	Bacon,	fm4.1

LEEK(S),	8.1
Braised
Browned	with	Cheese
with	Cheese	Sauce,	8.1
Cold
à	la	Grecque,	9.1
Gratin	with	Ham
and	Potato	Soup
Quiche

LEFTOVERS	see	Index:	Lamb,	Leftover;	Vegetables,	Leftover;	etc.
LÉGUMES,	8.1
LEMON
Butter
Cake	Filling,	10.1
-cream	Cake	Icing,	10.1
Sauce,	2.1
Peel,	Glazed
Tart



with	Almonds,	10.1
Soufflé,	10.1

LENTILS	WITH	LAMB	see	Variations,	7.1
LETTUCE,	BRAISED,	8.1
LIME	SOUFFLÉ	TART,	10.1
LIMETTES,	TARTE	AUX,	10.1
LIQUEURS	FOR	COOKING,	fm8.1
LITER-QUART	EQUIVALENTS,	fm5.1
LIVER
Calf
Master	Recipe,	Sautéed,	7.1
Mustard	Coating	for,	7.1
Sauces	for,	7.1
Canapés	for	Roast	Birds
Chicken
in	Aspic,	9.1
Canapés	for	Roast	Birds,	6.1
with	Eggs	see	Garnishings,	3.1;	Suggestions,	3.2
Filling	with	Cheese	for	Appetizers,	4.1
Gnocchi	see	Additions,	4.1
Mousse	of,	9.1
Timbales	of,	4.1
Goose;	see	also	Index:	Foie	Gras	Pâté	with	Pork	and	Veal

LOBSTER
General	Information
to	Deal	with	Live,	5.1
to	Steam	in	Wine
à	l’Américaine
in	Aspic
Butter	see	Shellfish	Butter,	2.1
in	Chaudfroid
Garnish	for	Fish	Filets



with	Herbal	Sauce
Quenelles
Quiche
Soufflé,	4.1;	see	also	Variations,	4.2
Tails	à	l’Américaine
Thermidor
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1

LUNCHEON	DISHES,	4.1



M
MACAROON(S)
Baked	with	Pears
Cup	Custards
to	Pulverize

MACAROON(S)	(continued)
Soufflé
Unmolded,	10.1
Substitute	for	Almonds	in
Bavarian	Cream,	10.1
Caramel	Cream,	10.1

MACERATE	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
MACÉRER	(to	Macerate),	fm3.1
MADEIRA	WINE
for	Cooking
for	Jellied	Stocks	and	Aspics
Sauce;	see	also	Index:	Sauce,	Madeira	MAKE	THE	RIBBON,	10.1

MALAKOFF,	CHARLOTTES,	10.1
MARINADE(S)
for	Beef
Red	Wine
for	Braised	Beef,	7.1
for	Stews	(Daubes),	7.1
Wine	and	Truffle	for	Filet,	7.1
for	Lamb
Cooked	Red	Wine,	7.1
Red	Wine	and	Bay	Leaves,	7.1
for	Pork
Lemon	Juice,	7.1
Salt	and	Spices,	7.1
Wine,	7.1



for	Veal
Cognac	and	Madeira,	7.1
for	Pâtés,	9.1
MARINATE	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
MARINER	(to	Marinate),	fm3.1
MARQUIS,	LE,	10.1
MARRONS
Braisés
Purée	de
MARROW
to	Prepare
Sauce,	7.1,	7.2,	7.3
MARSALA	FOR	COOKING,	fm8.1
MATIGNON	BRAISINGVEGETABLES
for	Beef
for	Veal
MAYONNAISE
au	Chocolat	(Dessert)
Sauce;	see	also	Index:	Sauce	Mayonnaise	MEASURES
Flour
Miscellaneous	Equivalents
Tables	of	Equivalents
MEAT,	7.1
Cuts
American	and	French	see	specific	Meat	Sections	in	Text	Booklet	on,

7.1
Glaze
in	Flavored	Butter	(Colbert),	2.1
in	Béarnaise	Sauce,	2.1
Loaf,	Veal,	7.1;	see	also	Pâtés,	9.1
Stock



MÉLANGER	(to	Blend),	fm3.1
METRIC	SYSTEM,	fm5.1
MIJOTER	(to	Simmer)	see	Boil,	fm3.1
MINCE,	TO,	fm3.1,	fm7.1
for	Mushrooms

MIREPOIX,	8.1
MOELLE,	fm4.1
MOLDS	(Containers)
for	Babas
to	Line	with
Caramel,	10.1
Ladyfingers,	10.1
for	Savarins
for	Soufflés

MOLDS	 (Food)	 see	 Index:	 Custard	 Molds;	 Desserts,	 Molded;	 Mousses;
Timbales	MORTAR	AND	PESTLE,	fm2.1
MOUCLADES,	5.1
MOULD	see	Index:	Mold
MOULE	CARAMELISÉ,	10.1
MOULES,	5.1
à	la	Béarnaise
au	Beurre	d’Escargot
à	la	Marinière,	5.1,	5.2

MOULES	(continued)
Mouclades
Pilaf	de
à	la	Poulette
à	la	Provençale
Salade	de
en	Sauce



Soupe	aux
MOUSSAKA,	7.1
MOUSSE	(Dessert)
General	Information	to	Unmold,	10.1
Chocolate
Orange
à	l’Orange

MOUSSE(S)	(Entrée—Cold),	9.1
General	Information
Jellied	Stocks	for,	2.1
to	Unmold,	9.1
Sauce	Chaud-froid	for,	9.1,	9.2
Chicken
Liver
Duck,	Game,	or	Turkey
de	Foies	de	Volaille
Ham
de	Jambon
Salmon
de	Saumon
Shellfish

MOUSSE	(Entrée—Hot)
Fish

MOUSSELINE
au	Chocolat
de	Crustacés,	Blanche
Neige,	9.1
de	Poisson
Sauce
de	Volaille

MOUTON,	7.1
MUSHROOM(S),	8.1
General	Information



Discussion	of,	8.1
to	Mince,	Slice,	Flute,	8.1
Preparation	of,	8.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
Broiled
Canned
Cold	à	la	Grecque
Creamed
Essence	of

MUSHROOM(S)	(continued)
Minced	(Duxelles)
Quiche
Sauce	see	Index:	Sauce,	Mushroom
Sautéed
with	Garlic,	Bread	Crumbs,	8.1
Soufflé	see	Variations,	4.1
Soup
Stewed
Stuffed
Stuffings	and	Fillings
for	Chicken,	6.1
with	Cream	Cheese,	4.1
for	Eggplant,	8.1
for	Ham,	7.1
for	Lamb,	7.1
with	Swiss	Cheese,	4.1
for	Tomatoes,	8.1
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1
Partial	List	of,	with	other	Foods
Artichokes	and	Carrots
Beef	Stew,	7.1,	7.2
Chicken,	6.1,	6.2,	6.3,	6.4
Eggs,	3.1,	3.2
Fish,	5.1,	5.2
Gnocchi	(Additions)
Green	Beans	(Addition)



Rice
Sweetbreads,	7.1,	7.2
Veal,	7.1,	7.2,	7.3,	7.4
MUSSELS,	5.1
General	Information
Canned
Scrubbing	and	Soaking
Garnish	for	Fish
on	Half	Shell,	Broiled
Marinated,	for	Salad
in	Sauce
Soup
Steamed	in	Wine,	5.1,	5.2
MUSTARD
Butter
Coating
for	Chicken,	6.1
for	Hothouse	Lamb,	7.1
for	Liver,	7.1
Sauce	see	Index:	Sauce,	Mustard
MUTTON,	7.1
Brains,	7.1,	7.2;	see	also	Index:	Brains	Leg	of
Stew

N
NAP,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
NAPPER	LA	CUILLÈRE,	fm3.1
NAVARIN,	7.1
NAVETS,	8.1
à	la	Champenoise
à	l’Etuvée
Glacés	à	Brun



Persillés
Purée	de,	Parmentier

O
OEUFS,	3.1
à	la	Béarnaise
à	la	Bourguignonne
Brouillés
sur	Canapés
en	Cocotte
en	Croustades
à	la	Fondue	de	Fromage
en	Gelée
Miroir
Mollets
sur	le	Plat
Pochés
OIE,	6.1
Braisée	aux	Marrons
Confit	d’,	1.1,	7.1,	7.2
Rôti	aux	Pruneaux
OIGNONS,	8.1
à	la	Crème
en	Garniture
Glacés
à	Blanc,	8.1
à	Brun,	8.1
OIGNONS	(continued)
à	la	Grecque
Persillés
Soubise
OIL,	TYPES	OF,	fm4.1



OMELETTE(S),	3.1
General	Information,	3.1
to	Beat	Eggs	for,	3.1
Pans	for,	3.1
to	Transfer	to	Plate,	3.1
Master	Recipes
Rolled,	3.1
Scrambled,	3.1
Gratinéed	with	Tomatoes
Gratinées	à	la	Tomate
with	Herbs,	Cheese,	etc.
Pipérade
ONION(S),	8.1
General	Information
to	Chop,	Dice,	etc.,	fm7.1,	fm7.2
Discussion	of,	8.1
Preparation	of,	8.1
Removal	of	Odor,	fm5.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
Braised
Brown-braised,	8.1
White-braised	(Glazed),	8.1
Canned
Cold	à	la	Grecque
Creamed
Garniture
Green	see	Shallots,	fm4.1
Quiche	or	Tart,	4.1,	4.2
and	Rice	Soubise
Sauce,	2.1,	7.1
Soup
with	Potatoes,	1.1
Partial	List	of,	with	Other	Foods
Braised	Onions
in	Beef	Stew,	7.1
and	Brains	in	Red	Wine,	7.1



in	Chicken	Fricassee,	6.1
Coq	au	Vin,	6.1
in	Veal	Stew,	7.1
ONION(S)	(continued)
Partial	List	of,	with	Other	Foods	(continued)
in	Chicken	Casserole	Roast
in	Gratin	of	Potatoes	and	Anchovies
and	Sausages,	4.1
with	Peas,	8.1,	8.2
with	Pork
Chops	see	Variations,	7.1
Roast,	7.1
ORANGE(S)
Bavarian	Cream
Butters	for	Dessert	Crêpes
Cake
with	Almonds,	10.1
Cake	Fillings	and	Frostings
Butter	Cream,	10.1
Butter	Filling,	10.1
with	Duck
Glacées
Glazed
Liqueur	for	Cooking
Mousse
Peel
with	Duck,	6.1
to	Glaze,	10.1
Sauce,	2.1,	2.2,	6.1
Soufflé
OUNCE-GRAM	EQUIVALENTS,	fm5.1
Flour
Other	Measures
OVEN



Temperature	Conversions
Types	of
OYSTERS
Garnish	for	Fish	Filets
with	Quenelles
to	Poach

P
PAIN	DE	VEAU,	7.1
PANCAKES
Grated	Potato
see	also	Index:	Crêpes
PANS
General	Information,	fm2.1
Illustrations,	fm2.1,	fm2.2,	3.1,	4.1
for	Crêpes
for	Omelettes
PAPRIKA
Chicken
Breasts,	6.1
Fricassee,	6.1
Sauce,	6.1,	6.2
PARMESAN	CHEESE
Coating	for	Chicken	Breasts
see	also	Index:	Cheese,	Parmesan
PARSLEY
Butter
in	Herb	Bouquets
PARTRIDGE
with	Beans	(Cassoulet)
Cold	in	Jelly	(Escabèche)



Pâté	of
Roast	see	Coquelets,	6.1
PASTE
for	Babas
for	Cream	Puffs
PASTRY
Crust
Duck	Baked	in,	9.1
Ham	Baked	in,	7.1
Dough
General	Information,	4.1,	10.1
Decorations	with,	9.1
Leftovers,	10.1
Master	Recipes
for	Dessert	Tarts,	10.1
for	Entrée	Tarts,	4.1
Shells
Baking	of
for	Dessert	Tarts,	10.1
for	Entrée	Tarts,	4.1
with	Poached	Eggs,	3.1
for	Tartlets,	4.1
Turnovers
PATALINA,	4.1
PÂTE
à	Babas
Brisée
Sucrée,	10.1
à	Choux
à	Crêpes,	4.1,	10.1
Sablée
PÂTÉS	AND	TERRINES,	9.1
General	Information,	9.1
Aspic	for,	9.1



Baking	Dishes	for,	9.1
Marinade	for,	9.1
Pork	Fat	for,	9.1
to	Serve,	9.1
Storage	or	Freezing	of,	9.1
Master	Recipes
Pork	and	Veal	Stuffing	for,	9.1
Pork,	Veal,	and	Ham	Pâté,	9.1
en	Croûte
de	Canard,	9.1
Duck
Boned,	in	Pastry	Crust
Game	Pâté
Porc	et	Veau
avec	Foie,	9.1
avec	Gibier,	9.1
avec	Jambon,	9.1
Pork	and	Veal	with	Liver
PEACH(ES)
Bavarian	Cream
Compote	with	Raspberry	Sauce
with	Cup	Custards
with	Duck
Poaching	of	(Compote)
Tart
with	Custard	see	Variations,	10.1
PEAR(S)
Baked	with	Macaroons
Flan,	10.1,	10.2
Poached	in	Red	Wine
Tart
with	Almond	Filling,	10.1
Tart	(continued)
with	Custard	Filling	see	Variations,	10.1
PEAS	(Fresh,	Green),	8.1



General	Information,	8.1
Braised	with	Lettuce,	etc.
Buttered	(I,	II,	III)
Canned
Frozen
with	Onions,	8.1,	8.2
PÊCHES	CARDINAL,	10.1
PEPPER	STEAK,	7.1
PEPPERS,	SWEET	GREEN	OR	RED
Cold	à	la	Grecque
in	Eggplant	Casserole
see	also	Index:	Pipérade
PESTLE
and	Mortar
and	Sieve
PETIT	SUISSE	see	Cheese,	fm4.1
PETITS	POIS	see	Index:	Pois	PHEASANT
Jellied	in	Escabèche
Pâté	of
PIE	see	Index:	Pastry;	Quiches;	Tarts
PIGEON
Jellied	in	Escabèche
Roast	see	Coquelets,	6.1
PILAF,	PILAU	(Risotto),	8.1
de	Moules
de	Mouton
PINEAPPLE
Boiled	in	Syrup
Cream	Plombières
Custard,	Unmolded
Tart



PIPÉRADE	(Tomatoes,	Peppers,	etc.)
Master	Recipe	(Omelette),	3.1
with	Ham	Slices
with	Scrambled	Eggs	Cold
Hot	see	Garnishings,	3.1
with	Shirred	Eggs
PISSALADIÈRE	NIÇOISE,	4.1
PISTOU	SOUP	AND	SAUCE,	1.1
PLOMBIÈRES,	10.1
PLUM(S)
Flan
Poached	in	Syrup
Tart	see	Variations,	10.1
POACH,	TO
Definition	of
see	also	Index:	Eggs;	Fish
POCHER	(to	Poach),	fm3.1
POÊLE	(Skillet),	fm2.1
POIREAUX,	8.1
Braisés	au	Beurre
Gratinés	au	Fromage
à	la	Grecque
à	la	Mornay,	Gratinés
POIRES	AU	GRATIN,	10.1
POIS	(Petits	Pois,	Pois	Verts,	Pois	Frais),	8.1
à	l’Anglaise
en	Braisage
Etuvés	au	Beurre
à	la	Francaise
aux	Oignons
POISSON,	5.1



Coquilles	St.	Jacques
à	la	Parisienne,	5.1
à	la	Provençale,	5.1
Homard
à	l’Americaine,	5.1
aux	Aromates,	5.1
Thermidor,	5.1
Moules
Mousses,	Mousselines
Sole,	Filets	de
Bercy,	5.1
Bonne	Femme,	5.1
à	la	Bretonne,	5.1
à	la	Dieppoise,	5.1
Farcis,	5.1
Gratinés,	à	la	Parisienne,	5.1
à	la	Nantua,	5.1
à	la	Normande,	5.1
Pochés	au	Vin	Blanc,	5.1
Walewska,	5.1
Soufflés	de
POIVRONS	À	LA	GRECQUE,	9.1
POMMES
Aspic	de
Charlotte	de
Gratin	de
Normande	en	Belle	Vue
à	la	Sevillane
Tartes	de,	10.1,	10.2,	10.3
POMMES	DE	TERRE,	8.1
Crêpes	de
Gratins	de
aux	Anchois,	4.1
Crécy,	8.1
Dauphinois,	8.1



Jurassien,	8.1
Provençal,	8.1
Rapée	Morvandelle,	4.1
et	Saucisson,	4.1
Savoyard,	8.1
à	l’Huile
Purée	de,	à	l’Ail
Sautées
Château,	8.1
en	Dés,	8.1
pour	Garniture,	8.1
Parisienne,	8.1
PORC,	7.1
Braisé
avec	Choucroute,	7.1
aux	Choux	Rouges,	7.1
Côtes	de
Charcutière,	7.1
Poêlées,	7.1
Robert,	7.1
Sauce	Nénette,	7.1
Ragoûts	de
Rôti	de,	Poêlé
aux	Choux,	7.1
Grand’	Mère,	7.1
aux	Navets,	7.1
Sylvie
PORK,	7.1
General	Information,	7.1
Cuts	for
Boiling,	7.1
Chops,	7.1
Roasting	and	Braising,	7.1
Stew,	7.1
Fat,	Discussion	of,	9.1



PORK	(continued)
General	Information	(continued)
Marinades	for,	7.1
Temperature	and	Timing,	7.1
Vegetables	and	Wines,	7.1
with	Beans	in	Cassoulet
Boiled	see	Potée	Normande,	7.1
Brains	see	Index:	Brains
Braised
with	Red	Cabbage,	7.1
with	Sauerkraut,	7.1
Chops
General	Information,	7.1
Master	Recipe,	7.1
Fresh	Tomato	Sauce,	7.1
Mustard	and	Cream	Sauce,	7.1
with	Vegetables,	7.1
Cold
Pâté	with	Veal	and	Ham
Roast
Master	Recipe,	7.1
with	Cabbage,	7.1
with	Potatoes	and	Onions,	7.1
Sauces	for,	7.1
with	Turnips,	7.1
Steaks
Stews
Stuffed	with	Cheese
Stuffings
with	Herbs	for	Lamb,	7.1
with	Veal	for	Pâtés,	9.1
PORT	WINE
for	Cooking
for	Jellied	Stocks	and	Aspics
Sauce
for	Roast	Chicken,	6.1



POT	AU	FEU,	7.1
POT	ROAST	see	Index:	Beef,	Braised	POTAGES	ET	SOUPES,	1.1
Potage	(s)
Crème
de	Cresson,	1.1
d’Epinards,	1.1
d’Oseille,	1.1
au	Cresson,	1.1
Germiny,	1.1
Parmentier,	1.1
Velouté	aux	Champignons,	1.1
Vichyssoise,	1.1
Soupe(s)
Aïgo	Bouïdo,	1.1
à	l’Ail	aux	Pommes	de	Terre,	1.1
aux	Choux,	1.1
aux	Moules,	5.1
à	l’Oeuf,	Provençale,	1.1
à	l’Oignon,	1.1
Gratinée,	1.1
des	Trois	Gourmandes,	1.1
au	Pistou,	1.1
de	Poisson,	1.1
POTATO(ES),	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
to	Slice,	fm7.1
Types	of,	8.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
Cold	Dishes	with
Gnocchi
Gratins
with	Anchovies	and	Onions,	4.1
with	Ham,	Eggs,	etc.,	4.1
with	Sausages	and	Onions,	4.1
with	Spinach,	8.1



see	also	Index:	Potatoes,	Scalloped
Mashed
with	Garlic,	8.1
with	Turnips,	8.1
Pancakes
Salad
Master	Recipe,	9.1
with	Beans,	etc.,	Niçoise,	9.1
with	Beef,	9.1

POTATO(ES)	(continued)
Salad	(continued)
with	Rice	and	Beets,	9.1
Sautéed	in	Butter
Master	Recipe,	8.1
Diced	Potatoes,	8.1
Potato	Balls,	8.1
Scalloped
Master	Recipe,	with	Milk	and	Cheese,	8.1
with	Carrots	and	Cream,	8.1
in	Cream,	8.1
with	Meat	Stock	and	Cheese,	8.1
with	Onions	and	Tomatoes,	8.1
see	also	Index:	Potato,	Gratins
Shredded
Gratin	of,	4.1
Pancakes	of,	8.1
Soup,	1.1,	1.2
Starch	or	Flour
for	Chocolate	Soufflé,	10.1
for	Sauce	Thickening,	2.1
Sticks	with	Cheese
Whole,	Cooked	with	Chicken
Pork	Chops	see	Variations,	7.1
Roast	Pork,	7.1

POTÉE	NORMANDE,	7.1



POTS	FOR	COOKING,	fm2.1
POTS	DE	CRÈME	au	Chocolat,	10.1
Petits

POUDING
Alsacien
de	Cabinet

POULARDE,	6.1
POULE	AU	POT,	Potée,	7.1
POULET(S),	6.1
à	la	Broche
en	Cocotte	Bonne	Femme
Coq	au	Vin
Coquelets
Fondue	de
Fricassée	de
à	l’Ancienne,	6.1
Fricassée	de	(continued)
à	l’Estragon,	6.1
à	l’Indienne,	6.1
au	Paprika,	6.1
en	Gelée	à	l’Estragon
Grillés	à	la	Diable
Poêlé	à	l’Estragon
au	Porto
Rôti
à	la	Normande,	6.1
Sauté
Chasseur,	6.1
à	la	Crème,	6.1
aux	Herbes	de	Provence,	6.1
Suprêmes	de	see	Index:	Suprêmes

POULTRY,	6.1
Shears



Stock,	2.1,	6.1,	6.2
see	also	Index:	Chicken;	Duck;	Goose;	etc.

PRALIN	(Caramelized	Almonds),	10.1
with	Almond	Cream
with	Bavarian	Cream
for	Crème	Brulée
in	Soufflés,	10.1,	10.2

PRÉ-SALÉ,	PRÉS	SALÉS	see	Terms,	7.1
PRECOOKING:	Symbol	(*)	in	Recipes
PRESERVED	GOOSE,	1.1,	7.1,	7.2
PRESERVES	FOR	CRÊPE	FILLINGS,	10.1
PRESSURE	COOKER
for	Dried	Beans
for	Soups
for	Stocks

PRUNE
Stuffing	for	Goose
Tart	with	Cream	Cheese

PUDDINGS	see	Index:	Custard	Desserts;	Charlottes;	etc.
PUFF	SHELLS	(Puffs),	4.1
General	Information,	4.1
Filling	of
Freezing	of

PUFF	SHELLS	(Puffs)	(continued)	General	Information	(continued)
Paste	for	(Pâte	à	Choux)
for	Dessert	Puffs,	4.1
Cheese

Large	Puffs
Small	Puffs
PURÉE,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1

Q



Q

QUAIL,	ROAST	see	Coquelets,	6.1
QUENELLE(S),	4.1
General	Information,	4.1
Fish	for,	4.1
Meats	for,	4.1
Master	Recipe,	4.1
de	Crustacés
of	Fish
Gratin	of,	4.1
with	Oysters,	4.1
of	Salmon,	4.1
Sauces	for,	4.1
of	Shellfish,	4.1
aux	Huîtres
de	Poisson
Gratin	de,	4.1
of	Poultry	or	Veal
de	Saumon
Stuffing	with	Fish	Filets
de	Veau
de	Volaille

QUICHE(S),	4.1
General	Information,	4.1
Pastry	Shells	for,	4.1
Master	Recipe,	4.1
Camembert
aux	Champignons
Cheese
Crab
Cream	and	Bacon
Endive
aux	Epinards
au	Fromage	de	Gruyère
aux	Fruits	de	Mer



QUICHE(S)	(continued)
Leek
Lobster
Lorraine
Mushroom
aux	Oignons
Onion,	4.1,	4.2
aux	Poireaux
Roquefort
Shrimp
Spinach
à	la	Tomate,	Niçoise
Tomato

R
RABBIT	PÂTÉ,	9.1
RAFRAÎCHIR	(to	Refresh),	fm3.1
RAGOÛT	see	Index:	Beef	Stew;	Lamb	Stew;	etc.
RAPÉE	MORVANDELLE,	4.1
RASPBERRY
Creams	(Desserts)
Bavarian	(Custard),	10.1
Chantilly	(Whipped	Cream),	10.1
Malakoff	(Almond),	10.1
Plombières	(Custard),	10.1
Filling	for	Savarins
Sauce
for	Fresh	Peaches,	10.1
Tart	see	Variations,	10.1

RATATOUILLE,	8.1
RED
Cabbage	see	Index:	Cabbage,	Red



Currant	Glaze
Wine
Butter,	2.1
Syrup	for	Pear	Poaching,	10.1
see	also	Index:	Sauce,	Red	Wine;	Wine

REDUCE,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
RÉDUIRE	(to	Reduce),	fm3.1
REFRESH,	TO	(Definition	of),	fm3.1
Discussion	of,	for	Green	Vegetables

REINE	DE	SABA,	10.1
RIBBON,	TO	FORM	THE,	10.1
RICE,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Weights	and	Amounts,	fm5.1,	8.1
Master	Recipes
Braised	(Risotto),	8.1
Packaged	Precooked,	8.1
Ring	of,	8.1
Steamed,	8.1
Wild,	8.1
with	Bavarian	Cream
and	Beef	Stew
and	Lamb	Stew
with	Mushrooms
with	Mussels
and	Onions	(Soubise)
as	Sauce,	7.1
as	Vegetable,	8.1
Parboiled	(converted)
Pudding	(Bavarian	Cream)
Salad,	9.1,	9.2
Starch
for	Chocolate	Soufflé,	10.1



for	Sauce	Thickening,	2.1
Vegetarian	Bowl

RING	MOLD	FOR	SAVARINS,	10.1
RIS	DE	VEAU,	7.1
Braisé
à	l’Italienne
à	la	Crème
et	aux	Champignons,	7.1
Escalopes	de,	Sautées
au	Gratin
à	la	Maréchale

RISOTTO,	8.1
RIZ,	8.1
à	l’Anglaise
au	Beurre
en	Couronne
Duxelles
à	l’Impératrice
à	l’Indienne

RIZ	(continued)
à	l’Orientale
Risotto,	Pilaf,	Pilau
Salades,	9.1,	9.2
à	la	Vapeur

ROASTING	see	Index:	Chicken,	Roast;	Veal,	Roast;	etc.
ROGNONS	DE	VEAU	ET	DE	MOUTON,	7.1
à	la	Bordelaise
en	Casserole
Flambés

ROMSTECK,	7.1
ROOSTER,	6.1



ROQUEFORT	see	Index:	Cheese,	Roquefort
ROTISSERIE
for	Chicken
for	Duck

ROUILLE,	1.1
ROUX
for	Brown	Sauce
for	White	Sauce

RUBBER	SCRAPER	OR	SPATULA,	fm2.1
RUM
Babas
for	Cooking
Icing	see	Butter	Creams,	10.1
Soufflé
Syrup	for	Babas

RUMSTECK,	7.1
RUTABAGAS	see	Turnips,	8.1

S
SALAD(S),	9.1
Beef	and	Potato
Combination	(Niçoise)
Dressings	and	Sauces	for
Mayonnaises
Vinaigrettes
Mussel

Potato
Master	Recipe,	9.1
with	Beans,	etc.	(Niçoise),	9.1
with	Beef,	9.1
with	Beets,	9.1



Rice	and	Beet
SALADE(S),	9.1
à	la	d’Argenson
de	Boeuf	à	la	Parisienne
de	Moules
Niçoise

SALMON	see	Index:	Fish,	Salmon
SALT
Amounts	to	Use
Removal	of	Excess

SAUCE(S),	2.1
NOTE:	Sauces	for	Dessert	Listed	Separately
General	Information,	2.1
Deglazing	for,	fm3.1
Enrichments	for
White	Sauces
Butter,	2.1
Cream,	2.1
Cream	and	Egg	Yolks,	2.1
Family	of,	2.1
Saucepans	for,	2.1
Stock	for
Brown	Sauces,	2.1
Fish,	2.1
White	Sauces	(Veloutés),	2.1
Thickenings	for:
Egg	Yolks
for	Hollandaise,	2.1
for	Mayonnaise,	2.1
for	White	Sauces,	2.1
Flour
and	Butter	Paste,	2.1
see	also:	Mock
Hollandaise,	2.1;	Coq	au	Vin,	6.1



and	Butter	Roux
Brown,	2.1
White,	2.1
Starch,	2.1
Sauces	for
Artichokes,	8.1
Asparagus,	8.1
Cauliflower,	8.1
Fish,	2.1,	4.1,	5.1
Hamburgers,	7.1
Lamb,	7.1
Liver,	7.1
Sauces	for	(continued)
Pork,	7.1,	7.2
Steaks,	7.1
Veal,	7.1,	7.2,	7.3
à	l’Ail	pour	Gigot
Aïoli
Allemande
Alsacienne
aux	Anchois
Anchovy
with	Garlic	for	Beef	Stew,	7.1
Aurore
Bâtarde
Béarnaise
for	Filet	Steaks,	7.1
with	Meat	Glaze	Flavoring,	2.1
for	Pan-broiled	Steaks,	7.1
on	Poached	Eggs,	3.1
with	Tomato	Flavoring,	2.1
Béchamel
General	Information,	2.1
Master	Recipe,	2.1
Enrichments	for,	2.1
Sauces	Made	with,	2.1
Bercy



with	Fish	Filets,	5.1
with	Steak,	7.1
Beurre
Blanc,	2.1
au	Citron,	2.1
Nantais,	2.1
Noir	(Noisette),	2.1
see	also	Index:	Beurre
au	Beurre
Bigarade	see	Index:	Sauce,	Orange
Blanches
Bordelaise
for	Kidneys,	7.1
for	Steak,	7.1
Bourguignonne
General	Information,	2.1
Recipes
with	Beef	Sauté,	7.1
with	Beef	Stew,	7.1

SAUCE(S)	(continued)
Bourguignonne	(continued)
Recipes	(continued)
with	Chicken	(Coq	au	Vin),	6.1
with	Poached	Eggs
Brandy	for	Steak	au	Poivre
Brown
General	Information,	2.1
Master	Recipes,	2.1
Sauces	Made	with,	2.1
Butter

Curry
Deglazing
General	Information,	2.1
Some	Recipes
with	Cream	for	Chicken	Breasts,	6.1
for	Sautéed



Chicken
with	Wine	for	Sautéed	Chicken,	6.1
and	Truffles,	6.1
Madeira,	2.1
for	Ham,	7.1
Mushroom	see	Index:	Sauce,	Mushroom
Mustard,	2.1
Peppery,	2.1
with	Pickles,	2.1
Port	Wine,	2.1
Tarragon,	2.1
Brune
au	Cari,	2.1
à	l’Estragon,	2.1
aux	Fines	Herbes,	2.1
Brunes,	2.1
Butter
Brown,	2.1
for	Calf’s	Brains,	7.1
with	Capers,	2.1

SAUCE(S)	(continued)
Butter	(continued)
Brown	(continued)
for	Chicken	Breasts,	6.1
for	Shirred	Eggs,	3.1
Lemon,	2.1
White,	2.1
see	also	Cold	Flavored
Butters,	2.1;	Hollandaise,	2.2
Caper
see	also	Beurre	Noir,	2.1
aux	Câpres
Cardinal	(mentioned)
au	Cari
Chantilly
Chasseur,	2.1,	7.1



Chaud-froid	Blanche
Neige
General	Information,	2.1
Recipes
with	Chicken	Breasts,	9.1
with	Crab	or	Lobster,	9.1
with	Fish	Mousse,	9.1
Cheese
with	Béchamel	(Mornay),	2.1
with	Wine	and	Garlic,	2.1,	3.1
Chivry
Choron
Colbert,	2.1	Coulis	de	Tomates,	Provençale,	2.2
Cream
Master	Recipe,	2.1
for	Chicken	Breasts,	6.1
Cold	see	Index:	Sauce,	Chaud-froid
with	Egg	Yolks,	2.1;	see	also	 Index:	Sauce	Parisienne	for	Ham,	7.1,

7.2,	7.3
for	Hamburgers,	7.1
with	Madeira	for	Ham,	7.1
with	Mushrooms
for	Beef,	7.1
for	Chicken	Breasts,	6.1
for	Chicken	Roast,	6.1
for	Ham,	7.1
for	Kidneys,	7.1
for	Veal	Scallops,	7.1
with	Mustard,	7.1
and	Tomato,	7.1
with	Port	Wine	for	Chicken,	6.1
for	Roast	Chicken,	6.1
for	Sautéed	Chicken,	6.1
Sour,	with	Dill,	2.1
for	Vegetables,	8.1
with	White	Wine	for	Chicken	Fricassee,	6.1
Crème



à	la	Crème
Curry
Brown,	2.1
White,	2.1
with	Baked	Eggs	see	Sauce,	3.1
with	Chicken	Fricassee,	6.1
Deglazing	see	Index:	Sauce,	Brown	Deglazing
Demi-glace	(mentioned)
Diable
Duxelles
Egg(s)
Hard-boiled	(Mayonnaise),	2.1

Soft-boiled	(Mayonnaise)
Yolk
and	Butter	(Hollandaise),	2.1
and	Cream	(Parisienne),	2.1
and	Oil	(Mayonnaise),	2.1

Espagnole	(mentioned)
SAUCE(S)	(continued)
à	l’Estragon
à	la	Fondue	de	Fromage,	2.1,	3.1
Game
Garlic
and	Anchovy	for	Beef	Stew,	7.1
and	Basil	for	Soup	or	Pasta,	1.1
and	Egg	Yolks	for	Chicken,	6.1
Mayonnaise,	2.1
and	Pepper	for	Fish	Soup,	1.1

and	Rice	for	Lamb
Herbal
Brown,	2.1
with	Garlic	for	Chicken,	6.1
Hollandaise,	2.1;	see	also	Béarnaise,	2.2
Mayonnaise,	2.1



Sour	Cream	Dressing,	2.1
White	Wine,	2.1
Hollandaise
General	Information,	2.1
Remedy	for	Turned	Sauce,	2.1
Master	Recipes
for	the	Electric	Blender,	2.1
for	Handmade	Sauce,	2.1
for	Mock	Hollandaise,	2.1
Variations
à	l’Italienne,	2.1,	7.1
Joinville	(mentioned)
Jus	Lié
Lemon	Butter
Madeira
for	Braised	Ham,	7.1
with	Foie	Gras	for	Steak,	7.1
for	Ham	Slices,	7.1
with	Mushrooms	for	Steak,	7.1
for	Sautéed	Mushrooms,	8.1
with	Truffles,	2.1

SAUCE(S)	(continued)
Madère
Maltaise
Marchand	de	Vins
Marrow
with	Red	Wine,	for	Kidneys,	7.1
for	Steak,	7.1
with	White	Wine	for	Steak,	7.1

Matelote
Mayonnaise
General	Information,	2.1
Remedy	for	Turned	Sauce,	2.1
Master	Recipes
for	the	Electric	Blender,	2.1
for	Handmade	Sauce,	2.1



Variations
Mornay
Mousseline
Sabayon,	4.1
Moutarde,	2.1
à	la	Normande,	7.1
à	la	Moutarde,	2.1
Mushroom
Master	Recipe	(Duxelles),	2.1
with	Cream
for	Chicken
Breasts,	6.1
Fricassee,	6.1
Roast,	6.1
for	Ham,	7.1
for	Kidneys,	7.1
for	Sautéed	Beef,	7.1
for	Veal	Scallops,	7.1
with	Ham,	Herbs,	etc.,	2.1,	7.1
with	Madeira	for	Steaks,	7.1
with	Tomatoes	for	Veal,	7.1
Mustard
Brown,	2.1
with	Cream
and	Egg	Yolks	for	Fish,	2.1
for	Ham,	7.1
for	Pork,	7.1,	7.2
with	Oil	for	Cold	Dishes,	2.1
with	Parsley	for	Kidneys,	7.1
with	Tomato,	7.1

Nantua
Nénette
Normande
Oil
Mayonnaises,	2.1
Vinaigrettes,	2.1



Onion	(Soubise)
and	Béchamel,	2.1
and	Rice,	7.1
Used	with
Boiled	Lamb,	7.1
Eggs	see	Sauce,	3.1
Veal,	7.1
Orange
Brown
with	Roast	Duck,	6.1
Uses	for,	2.1
Hollandaise	for	Vegetables,	2.1
à	l’Orange
Paprika
with	Chicken	Breasts,	6.1
with	Chicken	Fricassee,	6.1
Parisienne	(Cream	and	Egg	Yolks)
General	Information,	2.1
Buttering	of,	5.1
Master	Recipe,	2.1
for	Chicken	Fricassee,	6.1
for	Fish	Filets,	5.1,	5.2
for	Mussels,	5.1
for	Scallops,	5.1
for	Veal	Stew,	7.1
Périgueux
Piquante
Poivrade
Port	Wine
and	Cream	for	Chicken,	6.1
au	Porto
Poulette	(mentioned),	2.1,	5.1
Ragoût

SAUCE(S)	(continued)
Ravigote
Red	Wine



with	Bacon,	Onions,	etc.	see	Index:	Sauce	Bourguignonne
with	Beef	Marrow
for	Kidneys,	7.1
for	Steak,	7.1
Rémoulade
Riviera
Robert
Shallot
with	Red	Wine	for	Steak,	7.1
with	White	Wine	for	Steak,	7.1
de	Sorges
Soubise,	2.1,	7.1;	see	also	Index:	Sauce,	Onion	for	Soufflé	Base
Entrée	Soufflés,	4.1
Sweet	Soufflés,	10.1,	10.2
Suprême
de	Poisson,	4.1
Tarragon
Béarnaise,	2.1
Brown,	2.1
for	Roast	Chicken,	6.1
for	Veal	Scallops,	7.1
White
for	Fricasseed	Chicken,	6.1
Tartare
Thermidor	see	Lobster,	5.1
Tomato
Master	Recipe,	2.1
Fresh	Purée	with	Herbs,	2.1
with	Béchamel,	2.1
for	Lobster,	5.1
with	Mushrooms,	7.1
with	Olives	for	Beef	Sauté,	7.1
for	Pork,	7.1
for	Tuna	or	Swordfish,	5.1
Truffle
for	Chicken	Breasts,	6.1
Velouté



General	Information,	2.1
Master	Recipe,	2.1
Enrichments	for,	2.1
Sauces	Made	with,	2.1
Venaison
Venison
Vin	Blanc
Vinaigrette
with	Herbs
and	Capers,	2.1
and	Cream,	2.1
with	Mustard,	2.1

White
Béchamels	and	Veloutés,	2.1
Butter
Wine
for	Chicken	Fricassee,	6.1
for	Fish	Filets,	5.1,	5.2
with	Herbs,	2.1
Hollandaise	for	Fish,	2.1
for	Steak,	7.1

SAUCE(S)	for	Desserts,	10.1
Crème	Anglaise
Custard
aux	Fraises
aux	Framboises
Jam	or	Jelly
Raspberry
Strawberry

SAUCEPANS
General	Information,	fm2.1
for	White	Sauces

SAUERKRAUT
Master	Recipe	(braised),	8.1
with	Duck



with	Meat	Garnish
with	Pork
Chops	see	Variations,	7.1
Roast,	7.1

SAUMON,	MOUSSE	DE,	9.1
SAUSAGE(S)
French	type,	to	make
Gratin	with	Potatoes
Polish
with	Beans	(Cassoulet),	7.1
with	Boiled	Beef,	7.1
Stuffing
with	Apples	for	Duck,	6.1
with	Chestnuts	for	Goose,	6.1

SAUTÉ
General	Information,	fm3.1
Pans	for
see	also	Index:	Chicken,	Sauté;	Liver,	Sauté;	etc.

SAUTOIR	(Sauté	Pan),	fm2.1
SAVARINS,	10.1
General	Information,	10.1
Fillings	for,	10.1
Molds	for,	10.1
Syrup	for,	10.1
Master	Recipe,	10.1
Chantilly
Petits
Small,	for	Tea
with	Whipped	Cream

SCALLOPS
Bay	or	Sea
Gratinéed
with	Cream	and	Mushrooms,	5.1



with	Wine	and	Garlic,	5.1
Timbale	see	Variations,	4.1
Veal	see	Index:	Veal	Scallops

SEAFOOD	see	Index:	Crab;	Fish;	Lobster;	etc.
SEMOLINA	GNOCCHI,	4.1
SHALLOT(S)
General	Information,	fm4.1
to	Dice	or	Mince,	fm7.1
Substitutes	for,	fm4.1
Weights,	fm5.1
Butter
with	Red	Wine,	2.1
with	White	Wine,	2.1
Sauce
with	Red	Wine	for	Steak,	7.1
with	White	Wine	for	Steak,	7.1

SHELLFISH
Butter
Filling	for	Appetizers
Garnitures	for	Fish	Filets
Gratin	see	Salmon	Gratin,	4.1
Mousse
see	also	Index:	Crab;	Clam;	etc.

SHERRY	FOR	COOKING,	fm8.1
SHORT	PASTE,	4.1,	10.1;	see	also	Index:	Pastry	Dough	SHRIMP(S)
in	Aspic
Butter	see	Shellfish	Butter,	2.1
to	Cook
as	Garnish	for	Fish	Filets
Quenelles
Quiche
Soufflé,	4.1;	see	also	Variations,	4.2

SIEVE,	DRUM,	fm2.1



SIMMER,	DEFINITION	OF	see	Boil,	fm3.1
SKILLET,fm2.1
for	Crêpes
Electric,	Use	of,	6.1,	6.2
for	Omelettes

SLICE,	HOW	TO,	fm7.1
SNAIL	BUTTER,	2.1
SOLE,	FILETS	see	Index:	Poisson,	Sole	SORREL	SOUP,	1.1
SOUBISE
Sauce
with	Béchamel	and	Onions,	2.1
with	Rice	and	Onions,	7.1
Vegetable	(Rice	and	Onions)

SOUFFLÉ(S)
General	Information,	4.1
Ahead-of-time	Notes,	4.1
Baking	and	Serving,	4.1
Egg	Whites	for,	4.1
Molds	or	Dishes	for,	4.1
Proportions	for,	4.1
Timing	of,	4.1
Entrée
Master	Recipe	(Cheese),	4.1
aux	Blancs	d’Oeufs
Cheese
with	Egg	Whites	Only,	4.1
Unmolded,	4.1
Chicken	or	Turkey	see	Variations,	4.1
de	Crabe
aux	Crevettes
Démoulé,	Mousseline
Egg	Whites	(no	Yolks)
aux	Epinards



Fish
Baked	on	a	Platter,	4.1
Shellfish	see	Variations,	4.1
au	Fromage
de	Homard
Lobster,	Crab,	or	Shrimp
with	Poached	Eggs
de	Poisson,	4.1,	4.2
Salmon
de	Saumon
Spinach
with	Ham	or	Mushrooms,	4.1
Sweetbreads	or	Brains	see	Variations,	4.1
Tuna	see	Variations,	4.1
Unmolded
Vegetable
Vendôme
Sweet	or	Dessert
General	Information,	10.1
Sauce-base	for,	10.1
Timing	of,	10.1
Master	Recipe	(Vanilla),	10.1
Almond,	10.1
aux	Amandes,	10.1
au	Café,	10.1
Caramelized	Almonds,	10.1
au	Chocolat,	10.1
Chocolate,	10.1
Coffee,	10.1
and	Vanilla,	10.1
au	Cointreau,	Curaçao,	etc.,	10.1
Cold,	Unmolded
Caramel	Almond,	10.1
Rum	and	Macaroon,	10.1
see	also	Bavarian	Creams,	10.1
Démoulé	aux	Macarons,	10.1
Egg	Whites	(no	Yolks),	10.1



Glacéed	Fruits	and	Kirsch,	10.1
au	Grand	Marnier,	10.1
Half-and-half,	10.1
Macaroon,	10.1
and	Rum,	Unmolded,	10.1
Orange,	10.1
Panaché,	10.1
Praliné,	10.1
Rothschild,	10.1
Tart	with	Lemon,	10.1
Vanilla,	10.1
Half-and-half,	10.1
à	la	Vanille,	10.1

SOUP(S),	1.1
General	Information,	1.1
Electric	Blender	for,	1.1
Pressure	Cooker	for,	1.1
Bouillabaisse
Cabbage
Cold	Potato
and	Leek	(Vichyssoise),	1.1
and	Watercress,	1.1
see	also	Variations,	1.1
Fish
Garlic
with	Poached	Eggs,	1.1
with	Potatoes,	1.1
Garnishings
Bread	Rounds	(Croûtes),	1.1
Garlic	Sauce
with	Basil	(Pistou),	1.1
with	Peppers	(Rouille),	1.1
Leek	and	Potato
Mushroom
Mussel
Onion



and	Potato,	1.1
Potato(es)
with	Fish	Soup,	1.1
and	Garlic,	1.1
and	Leek	or	Onion,	1.1
with	Watercress,	1.1
Sorrel
Spinach
Vegetable	(Provençal)
Watercress
Cream	of,	1.1
and	Potato,	1.1

SOUPE	see	Index:	Potages	et	Soupes
SOUR	CREAM
General	Information,	fm4.1
Dressing
to	Make

SPATULA,	WOODEN,	fm2.1
SPINACH,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Preparation	of,	8.1
Saucepans	for	see	Warning,	8.1
Master	Recipes
Blanched,	Chopped	(Precooking),	8.1
Cooked,	Chopped	(Purée),	8.1
Frozen,	8.1
Braised
in	Butter	(Buttered),	8.1
in	Cream	(Creamed),	8.1
in	Stock,	8.1
Canapés,	8.1
Crêpes	(Pancakes)
under	Giant	Crêpe,	8.1
Custard	Mold
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1



Filling	for	Crêpes
Gratin	with	Potatoes
Gratinéed
with	Cheese,	8.1
with	Cheese	Sauce,	8.1
with	Ham
Omelette
with	Poached	Eggs	see	Other	Ideas,	3.1;	Soufflé,	4.1

Quiche
Soufflé
Soup
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1

SPIRITS	FOR	COOKING,	fm8.1
SPIT	ROASTING
for	Chicken
for	Duck

SPONGECAKE
Butter
Chocolate
Orange
and	Almond,	10.1

SPREADS	AND	FILLINGS	FOR	APPETIZERS,	4.1
SQUAB,	ROAST	see	Coquelets,	6.1
STAINLESS	STEEL	WARE	see	Pots,	fm2.1
STARCH	(Corn,	Potato,	Rice)
for	Soufflé	Sauce	Base,	10.1,	10.2
Thickening	for	Brown	Sauce

STEAK
au	Poivre
see	also	Index:	Beef	Steak;	Ham	Steak;	etc.

STEW	see	Index:	Beef	Stew;	Veal	Stew;	etc.



STOCKS	(and	Bouillons),	2.1
General	Information,	2.1
Clarification	of,	2.1
Degreasing	of,	2.1
Ingredients	for,	2.1
Jellied,	2.1
Pressure	Cooker	for,	2.1
Storage	of,	2.1
Substitutes	for,	2.1
Stocks	for
Brown	Sauces,	2.1
Fish
Sauces,	2.1
Soup,	2.1
White	Sauces,	2.1
Master	Recipe,	2.1
Brown
Chicken,	6.1
Poultry,	2.1
Canned
Beef,	2.1
Chicken,	2.1
Clam,	2.1
Consommé,	2.1
Chicken
Brown,	6.1
White,	6.1
Duck
Fish
Emergency	(Clam	Juice),	2.1
White	Wine,	2.1;	see	also	Fish	Filets,	5.1;	Lobster	Thermidor,	5.2
Goose
Meat
Veal
White
Chicken,	6.1
Poultry,	2.1



Veal,	2.1
STOVES,	fm2.1
STRAWBERRY(IES)
Creams	(Desserts)
Bavarian	(Custard),	10.1
Chantilly	(Whipped	Cream),	10.1
Malakoff	(Almond),	10.1
Plombières	(Custard),	10.1
Filling	for	Savarins
with	Rum	Babas
Sauce
Tart

STRAWS	(Potato	with	Cheese),	4.1
STUFFING(S)
for	Beef	Filet
Foie	Gras	and	Truffles,	7.1
for	Lamb
Garlic	and	Herbs,	7.1
Ham	and	Mushrooms,	7.1
Olive	and	Ground	Lamb,	7.1
Pork	and	Herbs,	7.1
Rice	and	Kidneys,	7.1
Salmon	and	Anchovy,	7.1
for	Mushrooms
Mushroom
for	Chicken,	6.1
for	Eggplant,	8.1
for	Ham,	7.1
for	Lamb,	7.1
for	Tomatoes,	8.1
Pork	and	Veal	for	Pâtés
for	Poultry
Herb	and	Giblet	(Chicken),	6.1
Mushroom	(Chicken),	6.1



Prune	and	Foie	Gras	(Goose),	6.1
Sausage	and	Apple	(Duck),	6.1
Sausage	and	Chestnut	(Goose),	6.1
for	Tomatoes,	8.1,	8.2	see	also	Eggs,	9.1
see	also	Index:	Fillings

SUGAR
and	Butter	(Creaming	of)
Caramelized
Cookies
Crust	for	Tarts
and	Eggs	(Beating	of)
Syrup	see	Index:	Syrup
Weight	Equivalents

SUPRÊMES	DE	VOLAILLE,	6.1
Archiduc
à	Blanc
à	Brun
aux	Champignons
en	Chaud-froid
à	l’Ecossaise
à	la	Milanaise

SUZETTE	(Crêpes),	10.1
SWEETBREAD(S),	7.1
General	Information,	7.1
Blanching	of,	7.1
Soaking	and	Peeling	of,	7.1
Master	Recipe	(Braised),	7.1
with	Brown	Mushroom	Sauce
Cold	in	Salad
Creamed
with	Mushrooms,	7.1
au	Gratin
Gratin	of
Sautéed	in	Butter



Soufflé	see	Variations,	4.1
with	Egg	Whites	(no	Yolks),	4.1
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1

SYRUP	(Sugar)
for	Butter-cream	Filling
for	Fruit	Poaching
Red	Wine	(Pears),	10.1
Vanilla	(Peaches),	10.1
Kirsch	for	Savarins
Rum	for	Babas

T
TABLES
of	Equivalents	(American,	French,	British)
Flour,	fm4.1
Metric	System,	fm5.1
Miscellaneous,	fm5.1
Temperatures,	fm6.1
Roasting	Times	see	Index:	Chicken;	Lamb;	Pork;	etc.

TAMIS	(Drum	Sieve)
TARRAGON
Butter
with	Meat	Glaze,	2.1
Chicken
in	Aspic,	9.1
Casserole	Roasted,	6.1
Fricasseed,	6.1
Sauce,	2.1,	2.2;	see	also	Index:	Sauce,	Tarragon	TART(S)	FOR	DESSERT,	10.1
General	Information,	10.1
Custard	Fillings	for
Flaming	of,	10.1
Pastry	Shells	for,	10.1
Apple



with	Custard,	10.1
Upside-down,	10.1
Apricot
see	also	Variations,	10.1,	10.2
Banana	see	Variations,	10.1,	10.2
Cherry,	Flambée
Cream	Cheese
and	Prune,	10.1
Custard
with	Apples,	10.1
with	Cherries,	10.1
with	Pears,	10.1,	10.2
with	Strawberries,	10.1
Grape	see	Variations,	10.1
Lemon
with	Almonds,	10.1
Soufflé,	10.1
Lime	Soufflé
Peach
and	Custard	see	Variations,	10.1
Pear
and	Almond,	10.1;	see	also	Variations,	10.2,	10.3
Pineapple
Plum	see	Variations,	10.1,	10.2
Raspberry	see	Variations,	10.1
Strawberry

TART(S)	FOR	ENTRÉE
Onion
see	also	Index:	Quiches;	Gratins

TARTE(S)	SUCRÉE(S),	10.1
aux	Abricots
à	l’Ananas
aux	Cerises,	Flambée
au	Citron
et	aux	Amandes,	10.1
des	Demoiselles	Tatin



aux	Fraises
au	Fromage	Frais
et	aux	Pruneaux,	10.1
aux	Limettes
Normande,	aux	Pommes
aux	Pêches
aux	Poires
à	la	Bourdaloue,	10.1
aux	Pommes
des	Demoiselles	Tatin,	10.1
Normande,	10.1

TARTELETTES,	4.1
TARTLETS,	SHELLS	FOR,	4.1
TEMPERATURE,	FAHREN-HEIT-CENTIGRADE	CONVERSIONS,	fm6.1
TENDERLOIN
see	also	Beef,	Filet	of
Butt
Steaks

TERRINE(S)
de	Boeuf
see	also	Pâtés	and	Terrines,	9.1

THICKENERS	see	Index:	Sauce,	General	Information
THON	PROVENÇALE,	5.1
TIMBALE(S)
d’Asperges
Chicken	Liver
de	Crêpes
de	Foies	de	Volaille
Sauces	for
see	Variations,	4.1:	for	Fish,	Ham,	Poultry,	Vegetables	see	also	Index:

Custard	Molds
TIMETABLES	FOR	ROASTING	see	Index:	Chicken,	General	Information;	etc.



TOMATES,	8.1
Concassées
Farcies	Duxelles
Grillées	au	Four
à	la	Provençale

TOMATO(ES),	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
to	Peel,	Seed,	Juice,	etc.,	8.1
Weight	Equivalents,	fm5.1
Baked	Whole
Casserole	with	Eggplant
Omelette
Gratinéed,	3.1
Open-faced	(Pipérade),	3.1
with	Onions	and	Peppers	see	Index:	Pipérade
Purée	with	Herbs
Quiche
in	Salad	Niçoise
Sauce;	see	also	Index:	Sauce,	Tomato	with	Scalloped	Potatoes
Stuffed
with	Scrambled	Eggs,	9.1

TOURNEDOS,	7.1
TRUFFLE(S)
General	Information,	fm4.1
with	Baked	Eggs	see	Suggestions,	3.1
with	Chicken	Breasts
with	Fish	Filets	(Walewska)
with	Omelettes	see	Suggestions,	3.1
Sauce
with	Scrambled	Eggs
in	Stuffings
with	Foie	Gras	for	Beef,	7.1
for	Pâtés,	9.1
with	Tournedos	(Steak)



TRUSSING	A	CHICKEN,	6.1
TUNA	see	Index:	Fish,	Tuna
TURKEY
with	Beans	in	Cassoulet
to	Bone	see	Duck,	9.1
Leftover
Filling	for	Appetizers,	4.1
Gratin	of,	4.1
Quenelles,	4.1
Soufflé	see	Variations,	4.1
Stuffing	for	see	Goose,	6.1
Timbales	see	Variations,	4.1
TURNIPS,	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
Preparation	of,	8.1
Blanching	of,	8.1
Braised	in	Butter,	8.1
Casserole	of,	8.1
with	Duck,	6.1
Glazed,	8.1
Parslied,	8.1
with	Pork
Chops	see	Variations,	7.1
Roast,	7.1
and	Potato	Purée,	8.1
TURNOVERS,	4.1

U
UNMOLDED	DESSERTS	see	Index:	Desserts,	Molded	UNMOLDING,	DIRECTIONS
FOR
Aspics
Cakes
Desserts

V



V

VANILLA
General	Information
(Extract,	Sugar,	Vanilla	Bean),	10.1
in	Custard
Desserts,	10.1
Sauce	or	Filling,	10.1
Icing	see	Butter	Creams,	10.1
Soufflé
Half-and-half,	10.1

VEAL,	7.1
General	Information,	7.1
Cuts	for
Chops,	7.1
Patties,	7.1
Roasting,	7.1
Scallops,	7.1
Steaks,	7.1
Stewing,	7.1
Marination	of
for	Pâtés,	9.1
for	Roast	(Sylvie),	7.1
Quality,	7.1
Timing	for	Roasts,	7.1
Vegetables	and	Wines	for,	7.1

Brains,	7.1,	7.2;	see	also	Index:	Brains	Chops	(Cutlets)
Braised	with	Herbs
Sauces	and	Variations,	7.1

Cold
Kidneys;	see	also	Index:	Kidneys	Leftover
Loaf
in	Patties

Pâté	with	Ham	and



Pork
Variations

Patties	(Ground	Veal)
Master	Recipe,	7.1
Sauces	for,	7.1
of	Leftover	Veal
with	Mushrooms
with	Tomatoes	and	Onions,	7.1
with	Tuna,	7.1
Quenelles
Roast	(Covered	Casserole)
Master	Recipe,	7.1
with	Diced	Vegetables,	7.1
Gratinéed	with	Onions,	7.1
Stuffed	(Ham	and	Cheese),	7.1
Scallops
General	Information,	7.1
Master	Recipe	(Sautéed),	7.1
Sauces	for
Cream	and	Mushroom,	7.1
Tarragon,	7.1
Tomato	and	Mushroom,	7.1
Shank	with	Beans	(Cassoulet)
Steaks
Stews,	Sautés,	Blanquettes
General	Information,	7.1
Blanquette,	7.1
with	Tomatoes,	7.1
Stock
Stuffing	with	Pork

VEAU,	7.1
Blanquette	de
Côtes	de
aux	Herbes,	7.1
Escalopes	de
Chasseur,	7.1



à	la	Crème,	7.1
à	l’Estragon,	7.1
Foie	de
à	la	Moutarde,	7.1,	7.2
Sauté,	7.1
Fricadelles	de
à	la	Crème,	7.1
Duxelles,	7.1
Mentonnaise,	7.1
à	la	Niçoise,	7.1
Pain	de
Poêlé
à	la	Matignon,	7.1
Prince	Orloff
Ris	de	see	Index:	Ris	de	Veau
Sauté	de,	Marengo
Sylvie

VEGETABLE(S),	8.1
General	Information,	8.1
to	Chop,	Dice,	Mince,	fm7.1
Green	(Discussion	of),	8.1
see	also	Index:	Peas;	Potatoes;	Spinach;	etc.
Cold,	9.1,	9.2
Mill,	illus.,	fm2.1
Serving	Suggestions	see	Vegetable	and	Main-course	Recipe	Texts
Soup
for	Leftovers	see	Variations,	1.1
Provençal,	1.1

VELOUTÉ	SAUCE,	2.1
VENISON,	SAUCE	FOR,	2.1
VERMOUTH	FOR	COOKING	see	White	Wine,	fm8.1
VIANDE,	7.1
VICHYSSOISE,	1.1



VINAIGRETTE	SAUCES,	2.1
VOLAILLE(S),	6.1
en	Escabèche
Foies	de	see	Index:	Foies	de	Volaille
Mousseline	de

Suprêmes	de	see	Index:	Suprêmes

W
WAFERS,	CHEESE,	4.1
WATER	CRESS
and	Cauliflower	Purée
Soup,	1.1,	1.2

WEIGHTS	AND	MEASURES,	fm5.1
Flour

WHITE
Sauces
Butter	Sauce,	2.1
Wine	see	Index:	Wine
Sauce	see	Index:	Sauce,	White	Wine

WINE(S)	(Red,	White,	etc.)
General	Information,	fm8.1
for	Cooking,	fm8.1
Flavoring	for	Aspics,	2.1
Marinades	see	Index:	Marinades
to	Serve	with	Food,	fm8.1
see	also	Suggestions	in	Main-course	Recipes
Sauces	see	Index:	Sauce,	Red	Wine;	Sauce,	Madeira;	etc.
Storage	and	Serving	of,	fm8.1
Temperatures	for	Serving,	fm8.1

WIRE	WHIP	OR	WHISK,	fm2.1

Y



Y

YEAST
Batter	for	Crêpes
Dough	for	Babas

Z

ZUCCHINI	IN	EGGPLANT
CASSEROLE,	8.1



A	NOTE	ABOUT	THE	AUTHORS

Julia	 Child,	 a	 native	 of	 California	 and	 a	 Smith	 College	 graduate;
Simone	Beck,	French-born	and	educated;	and	Louisette	Bertholle,	half
French	and	half	American,	educated	in	both	countries,	represented	an
even	blending	of	 the	 two	backgrounds	and	were	 singularly	equipped
to	 write	 about	 French	 cooking	 for	 Americans.	Mrs.	 Child	 studied	 at
Paris’s	 famous	 Cordon	 Bleu,	 and	 all	 three	 authors	 worked	 under
various	 distinguished	 French	 chefs.	 In	 1951	 they	 started	 their	 own
cooking	 school	 in	 Paris,	 L’Ecole	 des	 Trois	 Gourmandes,	 at	 the	 same
time	that	this	book	was	taking	shape.	Shortly	after	the	appearance	of
Mastering	 the	 Art	 of	 French	 Cooking	 in	 1961,	 Julia	 Child	 began
appearing	in	the	public	television	series	The	French	Chef,	which	made
her	a	national	celebrity,	earning	her	the	Peabody	Award	in	1965	and
an	Emmy	 in	1966.	Several	public	 television	programs	and	numerous
cookbooks	followed,	including	Julia	and	Jacques	Cooking	at	Home,	with
Jacques	 Pépin,	 in	 1999.	 The	 Way	 to	 Cook,	 her	 magnum	 opus,	 was
published	in	1989,	and	in	2000	she	gave	us	Julia’s	Kitchen	Wisdom,	a
distillation	 of	 her	 years	 of	 cooking	 experience.	 Julia	 Child	 died	 in
2004,	 and	 her	 memoir,	My	 Life	 in	 France,	 was	 completed	 by	 Alex
Prud’homme	and	published	two	years	later.
﻿BY JULIA CHILD, SIMONE BECK, AND LOUISETTE BERTHOLLE

Mastering the Art of French Cooking (1961)
VOLUME ONE

BY JULIA CHILD

The French Chef Cookbook (1968)
From Julia Child’s Kitchen (1975)

Julia Child & Company (1978)
Julia Child & More Company (1979)

The Way to Cook (1989)
Cooking with Master Chefs (1993)

In Julia’s Kitchen with Master Chefs (1995)
Julia’s Kitchen Wisdom (2000)

My Life in France, with Alex Prud’homme (2006)

BY JULIA CHILD AND JACQUES PÉPIN

Julia and Jacques Cooking at Home (1999)

BY SIMONE BECK

Simca’s Cuisine (1972)



These are Borzoi Books, published in New York by Alfred A. Knopf



Illustrations by
SIDONIE CORYN

BASED ON PHOTOGRAPHS BY PAUL CHILD
WHO ALSO CONTRIBUTED 36 DRAWINGS TO THE TEXT






VOL. 11
PUBLISHED OCTOBER 22, 1970

HARDCOVER EDITION REPRINTED THIRTY-SEVEN TIMES

THIRTY-NINTH PRINTING, JANUARY 2011

THIS IS A BORZOI BOOK

PUBLISHED BY ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC.

Copyright © 1970, 1983 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. Published in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random
House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Distributed by Random House, Inc., New York. Manufactured in the United States of

America

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Child, Julia.
Mastering the art of French cooking.

Rev. ed. of: Mastering the art of French cooking
by Simone Beck, Louisette Bertholle, Julia Child.

Vol. 2 by Julia Child and Simone Beck.
Includes index.

1. Cookery, French. I. Bertholle, Louisette.
II. Beck, Simone. III. Beck, Simone.

Mastering the art of French cooking. IV. Title.
TX719.C454 1983 641.5944 83–48113

ISBN 0-394-53628-2 (set)
ISBN 0-394-72114-4 (pbk.: set)

ISBN 0-394-53399-2 (v. 1)
ISBN 0-394-72178-0 (pbk.: v. 1)

ISBN 0-394-40152-2 (v. 2)
ISBN 0-394-72177-2 (pbk.: v. 2)

eISBN: 978-0-307-95818-1

rh_3.1_140224945_c0_r1

Jacket design by Jason Booher, based on an original design by Jay J. Smith Design Studio, Inc.



To

Alfred Knopf
who is as much an appreciator
of good writing, type faces,
layout, and paper as he is of
fresh foie gras, truite au bleu,
and Meursault Les Perrières. In
short, he is the ideal publisher
for this kind of book, just as he
is the ideal dinner guest for
those who have mastered the
art of French cooking.



Foreword

MASTERING ANY ART is a continuing process, and that explains
Mastering the Art of French Cooking, Volume II, which came about in
the following way. When the idea of our first book was forming in
the early 1950’s, we were so naïve as to propose not only to
ourselves but also to an indulgent publisher, who invested two
hundred and fifty dollars in the project, a complete one-volume
treatise covering the whole of la cuisine française. After laboring for
six years it was clear that our detailed method of approach called
for a multivolume study; we therefore sent our publisher eight
hundred pages of manuscript on French sauces and French poultry.
This early outpouring was quickly rejected as unpublishable,
although it covered every conceivable sauce and every imaginable
poultry detail, including such marginal esoterica as advice on what
to do if you have a bloodless canard for the duck press—we shall not
reveal the solution other than to say it involved a quick trip to the
slaughterhouse. That first publishing rebuff, cruel as it was, shook
us into a more rational and realistic approach. Meanwhile, we had
opened our cooking school in Paris, L’Ecole des Trois Gourmandes,
first located in a rooftop kitchen on the rue de l’Université and later
in the comfortable apartment of Louisette, the third member of our
team. Now married to Henri de Nalèche, and living in the beautiful
hunting country near Bourges, La Sologne, Louisette did not
collaborate with us on Volume II. It was through her inspiration,
however, that we three started both the first book and the school
together.

The cooking school catapulted us into almost all areas of French
cooking, because you cannot teach the subject and not include the
standard dishes that everyone has heard about—quiche lorraine,
onion soup, boeuf bourguignon, coq au vin, sole bonne femme, mousse



au chocolat, and soufflé Grand Marnier—to name a very familiar
handful. Thus Volume I in its final form was the natural result of
our teaching. It also goes into the fundamental techniques of la
cuisine bourgeoise, meaning expert French home-style cooking—how
to make the flour and butter roux for the sauce velouté, how to beat
egg whites and fold them into the soufflé to get the maximum puff,
how to sauté the meat so that it will brown, and the mushrooms so
they will not exude their juice, how to peel and seed the tomato,
boil the beans, peel the asparagus, and fold the omelette. Volume I
is, in fact, a long introduction to French cooking, and anyone who
has mastered it has covered most of the primary methods and
recipes.

Volume II is a continuation. But rather than continuing on every
front, we have selected seven subjects, and having so long ago
rejected complete treatises, we have pursued each only in the
directions that we felt were most useful or interesting. We wanted to
add to the repertoire of informal vegetable soups, for example, and
these take up a large part of the first chapter. We felt the need for a
fine lobster bisque; this gave rise to a study of lobster cutting, and in
turn led us to crabs, which are not adequately explored in most
recipes (the whole matter of crab tomalley is almost never
mentioned, yet it is every bit as precious as lobster tomalley). Then,
although we adore bouillabaisse (which is in Volume I), there are
other French fish stews that make marvelous one-dish meals, so we
have added a marmite, a matelote, and a bourride. Thus the soup
chapter is an enlargement in breadth.

Meat, poultry, and vegetables we have attacked in depth,
following the same system of theme and variations used in Volume
I, but taking it perhaps even further. Poulet poché au vin blanc, is a
prime example. Ordinary pieces of frying chicken are poached in
white wine and aromatic vegetables, making a deliciously non-
fattening dish that you can serve informally as is, with boiled rice
and a green vegetable. Nothing could be simpler, yet you can take
this same chicken out of the peasant kitchen, as it were, and serve it
at the château. You can transform it into an elegant aspic or chaud-
froid, or turn its poaching liquid into a creamy velouté and create a



gratin of chicken Mornay, a splendid dish for a buffet supper. With
egg yolks and cream the original chicken dish becomes a Belgian
waterzooi, with garlic mayonnaise it is a chicken bourride, and with
slightly different vegetable flavors but the same cooking methods it
is a bouillabaisse of chicken. Thus, starting with one master
technique, you are putting your cooking vocabulary to use the way
it should be used, and if you are just beginning to cook, this is an
exercise in recognition. You will begin to relate the sauce you used
for the casserole of chicken to the velouté you made for the coquilles
Saint-Jacques in another recipe, as well as to the velouté base you
made for a cream of crab soup; the flavors are different, the
proportions are not identical, especially for the soup, but the basic
method is the same. You will recognize that sauce when you run
into it again in some other guise. Again, if you are new to it, and
have finally conquered your fear of scrambling the egg yolks as you
stir them over the burner for that lovely custard sauce, crème
anglaise, you will be nonchalant about heating egg yolks in the sauce
for a bourride—or vice versa: you know what to expect, you have
been there before, and, in effect, you are beginning to feel like a
cook. For the experienced, we hope these ideas will start you off on
further ventures in other categories.

Beef stews, veal chops and steaks, and veal stews take the same
type of tour, our object being to show what you can do with
reasonably priced meats for family meals as well as for entertaining.
On the other hand, the luxurious tenderloin of beef also has its
series of transformations. It is roasted whole, baked in a cloak of
mushrooms duxelles and wine, as well as being, in another recipe,
cut into slices and stuffed before roasting. Finally, in an original
version of Beef Wellington, it is sliced, stuffed, and baked in a
special type of brioche crust. An expensive roast of veal undergoes a
group of variations, as does a whole roasting chicken, which finally
appears with a boned breast and a corseting of pastry.

We hope you will enjoy the vegetable chapter as much as we do,
because we have had fun with these recipes. Although there are a
few of the classics, like pommes Anna and pommes duchesse, most of
the recipes are originals that we have been working on for a number



of years until we felt they were ripe for you and this volume. The
chapter starts with broccoli, which we have treated freely à la
française although it is almost unknown in France; we love its color,
its flavor, and its year-round availability. We also love eggplant, not
only for its beauty as a vegetable object, but also for its adaptability
and versatility; we have broiled it, sautéed it in persillade, creamed
it, souffléed it, served it hot, cold, stuffed, and wished we had room
to do more. A lovely recipe for pumpkin-in-pumpkin introduces a
group of unusual zucchini dishes stemming from sautéed chunks of
it to an original clutch of grated zucchini treatments. Spinach,
chard, and turnips all have representation, as do several versions of
sautéed potatoes. There are stuffed onions, stuffed cabbage, stuffed
zucchini, and cold stuffed artichoke hearts. Again, most of the
vegetable chapter is built on themes and variations, and is designed
to engender the flow of your creative juices.

Two entirely new categories are the chapters on breads and
pastry doughs and on charcuterie. One is not really dining à la
française without proper French bread to mop up the sauce on one’s
plate, without a fine terrine or pâté to start the meal, without boudins
blancs for New Year’s Eve or for the turkey stuffing. One needs also
a symmetrically baked, beautifully textured sandwich bread for hors
d’oeuvre, and brioches and croissants for breakfast. These everyday
staples in France were once considered luxury items here and, in
fact, when you buy them now in gourmet shops they are luxuries.
But you can make them yourself with pride and pleasure and at a
fraction of the cost.

Until our editor, in her gentle but compelling way, suggested
that we really owed it to our readers to include a recipe for French
bread, we had no plans at all to tackle it. Two years and some 284
pounds of flour later, we had tried out all the home-style recipes for
French bread we could find, we had two professional French
textbooks on baking, we had learned many things about yeasts and
doughs, yet our best effort, which was a type of peasant sourdough
loaf, still had little to do with real French bread. Then we met
Professor Calvel of the Ecole Française de Meunerie in Paris, and it
was like the sun in all his glory suddenly breaking through the



shades of gloom. Fortunately those two years on the wrong road had
been useful, because as soon as Professor Calvel started in, we knew
what he was talking about, even though every step in the bread-
making process was entirely different from anything we had heard
of, read of, or seen. His dough was soft and sticky; he let it rise
slowly twice, to triple its original volume—the dough must ripen to
develop its natural flavor and proper texture. Forming the dough
into its long-loaf or round-loaf shapes was a fascinating process, and
so logical; slashing the top of the risen loaves before sliding them
into the oven was another special procedure.

This was a tremendously exciting day for us, as you can imagine.
We now knew we could succeed, because we had seen and felt with
our own hands so clearly where we had failed. We rushed home and
went to work again while Professor Calvel’s teaching was vividly
with us. There remained the problem of working out the formula
with American all-purpose bleached flour instead of the softer
French unbleached flour. There was also the matter of adapting the
home oven by some simple means into a simulated baker’s oven,
with a hot surface for the bread to bake on, and some kind of
effective steam contraption. Although you can produce a
presentable loaf without these two professional oven requirements,
you will not get quite the high rise or quite the crust. Paul Child and
his usual Yankee ingenuity solved the hot baking surface by lining
the oven rack with red quarry tiles, which he heated up with the
oven; he created a great burst of steam by placing a pan of water in
the bottom of the oven, and dropping a red-hot brick into it. The
flour problem solved itself; although our maître loathes bleached
flours, we found, thank heaven, that the familiar brands of all-
purpose bleached flour work remarkably well. We are thus delighted
to report that you can make marvelous French bread in your own
kitchen with ordinary American ingredients and equipment.

Pastry doughs, pâte brisée and pâte feuilletée, also go hand in hand
with cooking and eating traditions in France. While packaged dough
mixes and frozen adaptations can certainly serve in emergencies, it
is part of your training as a cook that you be able to turn out at least
the dough for a pastry shell as a matter of course. It is actually, we



think, when you have made the dough for your first quiche or tart,
and have been complimented enthusiastically and specifically on the
crust, that you begin to feel you are stepping out of the kindergarten
and into a more advanced class of cooking. If you have had troubles
or qualms, therefore, about handmade dough, try the recipe here;
the electric mixer or food processor works quickly and beautifully.
And if you have hesitated to tackle the traditional flan ring lined
with dough and weighted down with foil and beans, try the upside-
down cake-pan method, which is an easy way to make pastry shells.
Furthermore, the egg formula in the recipe makes a deliciously
crisp, tender, buttery crust.

As soon as you feel confident with pie-crust dough, we urge you
to take on the larger and more fascinating challenge of pâte
feuilletée. This is the French puffing dough, which consists of
hundreds of very thin layers of flour paste separated by hundreds of
layers of butter; it rises in the oven to several times its original
height, to form vol-au-vent and patty shells, puffed entrées like the
cheese tart, as well as the cookies, and the tarts and desserts.
Properly made, it is flakily tender, and a delight to both tongue and
palate. Although few French home cooks make puff pastry, since
they can buy freshly baked feuilletées at their local pâtisseries, it is
something that you, as a cook, will find tremendously useful all the
rest of your kitchen life. We have spent years on puff pastry
ourselves, wanting to make sure that the recipe in this book would
be as good with American flour as it is with French flour—the
trouble with American all-purpose flour being that it has a higher
gluten content than French flour, and that makes differences all
along the line. We worked out combinations of unbleached pastry
flour and all-purpose flour, we have tried instant-blending flour, and
we have finally settled on a mixture of regular all-purpose flour and
cake flour as being the most sensible. Although it takes a little
longer to work with, it produces a beautifully tender, high-rising
dough that is even more impressive, we think, than its French
counterpart. The illustrated recipe for simple puff pastry is easy to
follow, and we suggest your first creation be a handsome puff pastry



tart, the cheese, or the jam. Both of them are quick to form, yet give
a very handsome effect to start you off in a whirl of success.

Our forefathers did the kind of cooking in Chapter V, Charcuterie,
if they lived on a farm and made their own sausages and cured their
own pork. Few French householders, again, attempt any of this
today, because they can buy all kinds of sausages chez le charcutier,
as well as salted pork, preserved goose, sausage in brioche, molds of
parslied ham, fresh liver pâté, terrines, and all the other marvelous
concoctions that embellish French gastronomical life. The
particularly wonderful taste of these creations is derived from the
fact that they are freshly made, on the premises. We, who want to
partake of the same pleasures, must make our own. And for anyone
who enjoys cooking, producing charcuterie, like making bread and
pastry, is a deeply satisfying occupation. You will be amazed, if you
have never tried your own before, how rewarding just a homemade
sausage patty can be; it is only freshly ground pork mixed with salt
and spices, but it tastes the way one dreams sausage meat should
taste. The large saucissons à cuire, will make you think of France, as
will the jambon persillé. When you want a real cassoulet, you can
make the real confit d’oie, and have enough preserved goose left in
the crock for many more meals. The difficult Christmas present or
the gifts to hostesses need bother you no more—bring along one of
your own pâtés en croûte.

The final chapter contains favorite desserts and cakes that we
have been testing out on our guinea pigs—our students and families
—for a number of years. The frozen desserts, so useful for all of us
who need attractive finales that we may complete well in advance,
are made without benefit of the ice-cream freezer; they vary in
complexity from quickly made fruit sherbets to an elegant chocolate
mousse dressed in meringues, and a flaming French baked Alaska, la
surprise du Vésuve. We also give you a group of original fruit
desserts, custards, and a liqueur-soaked French shortcake, a number
of handsome desserts made with puff pastry, and a selection of petits
fours. Among the eight cakes at the end of the chapter are a fine
French honey bread, pain d’épices, a walnut cake, a beautiful
meringue-nut layer cake called variously Le Succès, Le Progrès, or La



Dacquoise, and two chocolate cakes. It will be for you to judge
whether we have achieved the ultimate in chocolate with La
Charlotte Africaine or with Le Glorieux, or whether that perennial
cake winner made of chocolate and almonds, La Reine de Saba, in
Volume I, still retains the title.

In all of our recipes, and especially in those for desserts and
cakes, we have taken full advantage of modern mechanical aids
wherever we have found them effective. While Volume I reflects
France in the 1950’s and the old traditions of French cooking,
Volume II, like France herself, has stepped into contemporary life.
We must admit, in Volume I, to a rather holy and Victorian feeling
about the virtues of sweat and elbow grease—that only paths of
thorns lead to glory, il faut souffrir pour être belle and all that.
However, we are teachers; we want people to learn. And if we make
it hard to cook through snobbish insistence on always beating egg
whites by hand in a copper bowl, for instance, or always mixing
pastries by hand (il faut mettre la main dans la pâte), when it is the
hot hand that makes all the trouble, we know we have already lost a
great part of our audience. We have therefore developed our own
methods for machine-beaten egg whites, for machine-made cakes,
and there are directions for doing all the pastries and doughs by
machine as well as by hand. Because machines make cooking so
much easier, and because recipes that take tedious effort by hand—
like quenelles, mousses, and meringues—can be done in minutes by
machine, we urge you to provide yourself with the best you can
afford, and refer you to the illustrated suggestions.

We have so far said hardly a word about the illustrations, which
are, to our mind, the glory of Volume II. We can speak of them
without a hint of modesty because they are the result of a
remarkable feat of teamwork between Paul Child, our action
photographer, and Sidonie Coryn, our illustrator. Because of their
tireless expertise we have been able to picture step-by-step
operations that to our knowledge have never been adequately
illustrated before; we now feel confident that this combined visual
and verbal presentation makes absolutely clear the most
complicated sounding process. For French bread alone there are 34



drawings, showing the procedure from the start: mixing the dough,
kneading it, how it looks when risen, how to deflate it, and the
intricacies of forming the dough into various loaf shapes. Tenderloin
of beef is pictured in such detail that you can buy a whole one and
trim it yourself. With an illustrated guide before you, you can bone
out the breast of a chicken, trim and tie a saddle of lamb, or cut up
a lobster. Puff pastry and croissants are illustrated every step of the
way, as are brioches and bouchées. You can see how to form upside-
down pastry shells, how to stuff a whole cabbage leaf by leaf, and if
you have never done or even seen a pâté en croûte in your life, you
can be assured of success, because you have 12 drawings to show
you every necessary move.

Without the team of Child and Coryn such coverage would have
been impossible. Paul Child, ready at a moment’s notice, was there
to make careful, detailed, perfect photographs of any step of any
recipe at any time during the day or night. Occasionally, when on-
the-spot drawings served better than photographs, he contributed
his talents to such techniques as the art of cutting up lobsters and
crabs, carving a saddle of lamb, or depicting the bone structure of a
breast of veal, and he was happy to draw the tricky arrangement of
an eggplant dish that our words alone had confused. The major load
of illustrating fell, of course, to Sidonie Coryn—her 458 drawings
for this book are an incredible achievement. From grapefruit knives
and cake pans to the step-by-step illustrations for a Pithiviers and
Dacquoise, from electric mixers and garlic presses to the intricacies
of a poularde en soutien-gorge, she has skillfully and stylishly drawn
the essence of Paul Child’s photographs, eliminating nonessentials
and putting the right emphasis on the points of crucial interest.

Words and pictures must be arranged carefully on a page if they
are to communicate all that they intend. Again we authors may
speak with gratitude of the loving attention that has gone into the
layout and typography of this book. Now, when you have a long
sequence of illustrated events to follow, like cutting and forming
croissants or stuffing sausages, the whole operation of one particular
step will be open before you, and you will not have to stop to turn
the pages with a sticky finger nearly so often. This is a tighter setup



than that for Volume I; although the type is the same size, the
illustrations are more closely integrated with the text so that words
and pictures can be absorbed more easily, and once you have
mastered a technique, a glance at the illustrations will serve as
sufficient reminder. The art work and production in this book
contribute greatly to the understanding of cookery, we think, and
we are pleased that our publisher has been willing to take the time
and space, as well as the expense, to present recipes with such
intelligent elegance.

We have little else to add to this leisurely meander. Words of
advice, such as “Do read the recipe before you start in to cook,” “Be
sure your oven thermostat is accurate,” and other sage admonitions
are in the foreword to Volume I. We shall therefore only repeat the
hope that you will keep your knives sharp and that, above all, you
will have a good time.

Best wishes and bon appétit!
S. B. and J. C.

Paris and Cambridge
June 1971

FOREWORD TO THE SECOND EDITION

Volume II has needed only a few changes in this new edition.
We’ve brought in the food processor for dough making, added a
little more butter to the croissants, a little more sugar on top of the
puff pastry cookies, and changed the weight of a leg of lamb to
conform with the modern mode. Otherwise it is as before, the classic
cuisine of France, continued.

S. B. and J. C.
Bramafam and Santa Barbara

February 1983



Acknowledgments

OUR FRIENDS, students, families, and husbands have continued to
act graciously and courageously as guinea pigs throughout the
accumulation of years since Volume I began and Volume II came to
its fruition; we owe them very special thanks. Again the U.S.
Department of Agriculture has been a wonderful source of
assistance, as has the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries, especially its Boston
Branch. We are also grateful to the National Livestock and Meat
Board for technical advice on many occasions, and we are deeply
indebted to R. A. Seelig of the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable
Association, whose bulletins and letters have taught us so many
things we never knew before. Gladys Christopherson has been our
faithful and cheerful manuscript typer, putting neatly onto paper the
scrawls and spots of working copy; we thank her every finger. Avis
DeVoto, still acting as foster mother, wet nurse, guide, and mentor,
has also taken on the copy editing for our side, as well as the
position of indexer-in-chief; our admiration and gratitude can only
be expressed by her weight in fresh truffles. Paul Child, tireless
photographer at a moment’s notice, pinch-hitting illustrator, clever
turner of phrases when the well is dry—we can only continue to
love him and to feed him well. We have also our peerless editor,
Judith Jones, to thank most sincerely and affectionately; her
conception of the book has produced what you now hold in your
hands.



Contents

Cover
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Foreword
Acknowledgments
Illustrations

   Chapter One   •  SOUPS FROM THE GARDEN—BISQUES
AND CHOWDERS FROM THE SEA

   Chapter Two   •  BAKING: BREADS, BRIOCHES,
CROISSANTS, AND PASTRIES

Chapter Three   •  MEATS: FROM COUNTRY KITCHEN TO
HAUTE CUISINE

  Chapter Four   •  CHICKENS, POACHED AND SAUCED—
AND A COQ EN PÂTE

   Chapter Five   •  CHARCUTERIE: SAUSAGES, SALTED
PORK AND GOOSE, PÂTÉS AND
TERRINES



    Chapter Six   •  A CHOICE OF VEGETABLES
Chapter Seven   •  DESSERTS: EXTENDING THE REPERTOIRE

APPENDICES

Stuffings
Kitchen Equipment
Cumulative Index for Volumes One and Two
About the Authors



Illustrations

Illustrations by Sidonie Coryn

Technical Drawings by Paul Child

CHAPTER I

Lobsters
dismembering

Crabs
dismembering

CHAPTER II

French bread
making dough and first rise
second rise
forming bâtards
forming round loaves

Special equipment
Pain de mie



equipment
making dough
forming loaves
baking

Brioches
making dough and first rise
molds
forming and baking
forming ring-shaped
Kougloff

Croissants
making dough and first rise
cutting and shaping crescents

Upside-down pastry shells
forming

Rolling pins
Making simple puff pastry (demi-feuilletée)
Making classic puff pastry
Vol-au-vent and bouchées

cutting and forming small
cutting and forming large
scraping out center
making cover
decorating

Cutting fleurons
Petites bouchées, cutting
Reconstructing leftover dough
Cornets

cutting and forming
filling with cheese

Rouleaux
Cheese Napoleons
Cheese feuilletée

filling and cutting



CHAPTER III

Beef case
making case
filling case

How to lard meat
Beef tenderloin cuts

trimming
tying

Filet en croûte
enclosing in dough
decorating
serving

Boning a leg of lamb
Stuffed leg of lamb in pastry

enclosing in dough
decorating

Saddle of lamb
preparing for roasting
carving

Breast of veal
Suckling pig roasting positions

carving

CHAPTER IV

Half-boning chicken
Half-boned chicken in pastry

CHAPTER V

Sausages
filling casings
forming in cheesecloth



Caul fat
Pâtés in brioche cases

enclosing in dough
Poultry anatomy

disjointing poultry
Pâté en croûte

lining and filling
baking and unmolding

CHAPTER VI

Cutting and arranging eggplant slices for a gratin
Trimming and coring onions
Stuffed whole cabbage

stuffing and molding
Stuffing individual cabbage leaves
Potatoes Anna

cooking pans
arranging and baking

Potatoes duchesse
forming borders

CHAPTER VII

Cookie serving cups
forming

Le Saint-Cyr (chocolate mousse molded in meringue)
Pastry shells for fruit tarts

cutting and forming
weighting

Jalousie
forming, stuffing, and cutting
decorating

Napoleons



cutting and forming
decorating
serving

Cornets and rouleaux
forming

Pithiviers
forming
decorating and glazing

Couques
forming

Palmiers
forming and cutting

Le Succès
forming meringue layers
assembling

Brésiliens
Making a paper decorating cone

APPENDIX TWO

Frying pans
Chicken fryers
Saucepans and covers
Colander, kettles, and marmites
Casseroles and braising pans
Gratin dishes and roasting pans
Knives and choppers
Bashers, bludgeons, and blunt instruments
Scissors and pitters
Spoons
Forks
Turnover tools
Retrievers
Wooden implements
Gadgets



for opening things
for peeling and molding
for grating
for grinding pepper and pressing garlic
for ricing potatoes
for milling food
for warming food at table
for drying salad
for grinding meat

Pastry bag and attachments
Electric mixer and attachments
Hand-held electric beater
Balloon whip and copper bowl
Thermometers
Measuring equipment
Baking pans
Rolling pins, croissant cutter, and pastry marble
Pastry brush, scrapers, and a blender
Small molds for pastry
Pastry cutters and a pastry pricker
Flan rings and vol-au-vent cutters
Soufflé dishes and baking dishes
Pâté molds
Miscellaneous small baking molds
Molds for baking, aspics, and frozen desserts
Wine glasses
Cork screws and bottle openers



   This symbol preceding a recipe title indicates that
variations follow.

(*)  Wherever you see this symbol in the body of recipe
texts you may prepare the dish ahead of time up to
that point, then complete the recipe later.






CHAPTER ONE
Soups from the Garden—Bisques and

Chowders from the Sea

THERE IS HARDLY A MAN ALIVE who does not adore soup, particularly
when it is homemade. Hot soup on a cold day, cold soup on a hot
day, and the smell of soup simmering in the kitchen are
fundamental, undoubtedly even atavistic, pleasures and solaces that
give a special kind of satisfaction.

Although many of us think immediately of French onion soup
when we put France and soups together in our minds, informal
vegetable combinations are far more typical of that best of all
cuisines—the cooking one finds in French homes and small family-
style restaurants. Leek and Potato Soup, the potage Parmentier, and
its numerous variations in Volume I, is the most typical of all, but
there are many other vegetable combinations, including spinach,
cucumbers, green peppers, celery, peas and pea pods, even eggplant,
that are interesting, unusual, easy to make, and delicious to serve. In
many of these soups the vegetables are simmered in water rather
than meat or poultry stock because water does not disguise the
natural taste of a subtle vegetable like asparagus, for example. We
shall begin with a group of these, follow with an opulent series of
bisques and other shellfish soups, and end with three hearty fish
stews, each one a meal in itself.

A NOTE ON PURÉEING

Most soups need puréeing at some point in the cooking, and we
think the best puréeing instrument is the imported vegetable mill



that has interchangeable disks illustrated in the appendix. It is very
efficient even with somewhat tough items like asparagus stems; it
also performs the important function of holding back stringy fibers
that you would otherwise have to sieve out. To use the vegetable
mill, set it over a large bowl and pour the soup from saucepan
through the mill, to strain liquid from solids; pour the liquid back
into the saucepan. Purée the solid ingredients, adding some of the
liquid now and then to ease their passage; scrape any adhering
purée off the bottom of the machine and into the bowl, then pour
contents of bowl into saucepan. (Some electric mixers come with
puréeing attachments that work very well.)

If you prefer an electric blender or processor, pour liquid off
solids and into a bowl; ladle a cup or so of the solids and a cup of
the liquid into the container. Purée by turning the machine on and
off every second or two to avoid that too-smooth effect of baby
food, since you will usually want the soup to have some texture.
Then, if you are doing a fibrous vegetable like asparagus butts or
pea pods, strain all of the soup through a sieve just fine enough to
hold back the fibers. A little experimentation and always an
analytical sampling of the soup yourself will tell you what you need
to do.

SOUP THICKENERS—LIAISONS

Puréed soups need a binder or liaison, which thickens the soup
liquid enough so that the puréed ingredients remain in suspension
rather than sinking to the bottom of the bowl. The simplest liaison is
a starch of some sort, like grated potatoes, puréed rice, farina, or
tapioca. Other soups, usually called veloutés, are thickened with a
flour-and-butter roux. A more elegant liaison is raw egg yolks,
which, when beaten into and heated with the soup, thicken it
lightly. All of these liaisons are more or less interchangeable, and
which one to use depends on what effect and taste you want to
achieve.



ENRICHMENTS

Butter, cream, and, again, egg yolks, alone or in combination,
are stirred into many soups just before serving. They give a final
smoothness and delicacy of taste. You can omit them if you wish, or
use just a small amount.

Sour cream, if you prefer less butter fat, may often be substituted
for heavy cream. But crème fraîche is the perfect soup enrichment:
mix 2 parts heavy cream with 1 part sour cream, let thicken at room
temperature (5–6 hours), and refrigerate (keeps 10 days).

LEFTOVERS, CANNED SOUPS, AND IMPROVISATIONS

When you are the cook in the family, plan your vegetables ahead
so that you will have leftovers for soup; it will save you a great deal
of time, and make you feel remarkably clever besides. Extra rice,
pasta, and creamed or mashed potatoes are always needed as
thickeners, while onions and mushrooms can always be added for
flavor. Leftover cauliflower, for instance, can be combined with
watercress to make a delicious soup; spinach is the main ingredient
for the velouté Florentine; white beans or eggplant go into the soupe à
la Victorine. Save also any extra bits of sauce or meat juices; these
often provide that extra depth of taste and personality you are
searching for. For example, a few tablespoons of leftover sauce from
a chicken fricassee would be delicious in the Cream of Celery Soup;
you could certainly stir hollandaise instead of butter into the potage
aux champignons; and some juices saved from the roast would
enhance any onion soup. Finally, save any leftover soup; you can
add it to a new one, or use it to give a homemade touch to canned
soups.

GREEN SOUPS FROM GREEN VEGETABLES
POTAGE, CRÉME D’ASPERGES VERTES



[Cream of Fresh Green Asparagus Soup]
At the peak of the asparagus season, when you can bear not to

eat it whole, here is a marvelous soup to catch all the essence of that
beautiful vegetable.

For 7 to 8 cups, serving 4 to 6

1) The onion flavoring
⅔ to ¾ cup sliced onions While you are preparing the
4 Tb butter asparagus, cook the onions slowly in
A 3-quart heavy- the butter for 8 to 10 minutes, until

bottomed stainless tender but not browned. Set aside.
saucepan with cover

2) Preparing the asparagus
About 2 lbs. fresh green Slice ¼ inch off the butt of each

asparagus (24 to 28 asparagus. Peel the skin from the butt
spears 8 by ¾ inches) ends up to where the green begins,

and remove scales. Wash thoroughly
in warm water. Cut the tops 3 inches
long and set aside. Cut the lower part
of the asparagus stalks into ¾-inch
crosswise pieces.

3) Blanching the asparagus
6 cups water Bring the water and salt to a rapid
2 tsp salt boil, add the asparagus stalks and



A 3-quart saucepan boil slowly, uncovered, for 5
A salad or vegetable minutes. Remove and drain,

basket or 2 slotted reserving the water, and stir the
spoons stalks into the cooked onions; cover

and cook slowly for 5 minutes.
Meanwhile bring the water back to
the boil, add the reserved asparagus
tops and boil slowly, uncovered, for 6
to 8 minutes or until just tender.
Remove immediately and drain. Set
aside, reserving water for the soup
base.

4) The soup base
4 Tb flour After the stalks and onions have
The asparagus blanching stewed together for 5 minutes,

water uncover the pan, stir in the flour to
1 cup or so of milk if mix thoroughly, and cook slowly,

needed stirring, for 1 minute. Remove from
heat and blend in half a cup of the
hot blanching water; gradually stir in
the rest, being sure not to add any
sand that may be at the bottom of the
pan. Simmer slowly, partially
covered, for about 25 minutes or
until the stalks are very tender. If
soup seems too thick, thin out with
milk.

5) Finishing the soup



The blanched asparagus Line up the blanched asparagus tops
tops and cut the tip ends into ¼-inch

A food mill with medium crosswise slices; reserve as a garnish.
disk (or an electric Purée the rest of the tops and the
blender and sieve) soup base into a bowl. (Pass soup

A 3-quart bowl through sieve to remove any fibers, if
½ to ⅔ cup heavy cream you have used a blender.) Pour the
2 to 3 egg yolks cream into the saucepan, blend in the

egg yolks with a wire whip; by
A wire whip driblets, beat in 2 cups of the hot
Salt and white pepper to soup. Pour in the rest of the soup,

taste and the sliced tip ends.
(*) May be cooked ahead to this
point; set aside uncovered until cool,
then cover and refrigerate.

2 to 4 Tb soft butter Shortly before serving, set over
moderate heat and stir slowly with a
wooden spoon, reaching all over the
bottom of the pan until soup comes
almost to the simmer. Remove from
heat, carefully correct seasoning, and
stir in the enrichment butter half a
tablespoon at a time. Serve
immediately.

Cold Asparagus Soup
Omit the final butter enrichment and oversalt slightly. Stir

several times as the soup cools, then cover and chill. Blend in more
cream, if you wish, just before serving.



Using frozen asparagus
Frozen asparagus can never achieve the magic of fresh

asparagus, but you can still turn out an excellent soup. Follow the
Master Recipe, making the changes in each step as indicated.

1) Increase the sliced
onions to 2¼ cups in
this step, or use a
combination of onions
and leeks.

2) A 10-ounce package Use the cut asparagus to replace the
frozen cut green stalks and the whole spears to
asparagus replace the tops.

A 10-ounce package
whole frozen green
asparagus spears

3) 2 cups chicken stock Substitute 2 cups of chicken stock for
Optional: big pinch of 2 cups of the water called for in this

monosodium step, and a little MSG will probably be
glutamate useful. Drop the cut asparagus into

the boiling liquid for a minute or
two, merely to defrost them, then
add to the onions. Boil the whole
spears until just tender.

4 and 5) Follow Master



Recipe

Fresh white European asparagus
European asparagus is either all white or tinged with mauve or

green near the tip, depending on the variety. Since the peel is often
slightly bitter as well as being much tougher than that of all-green
asparagus, peeling is essential. Peel each spear 1⁄16 of an inch deep
up to the tender part near the tip. After boiling the stalks, taste the
cooking liquid; if it is bitter, discard it and use fresh boiling water
for cooking the tops. Although the soup would normally be a pale
cream color, you may turn it green by puréeing into it a cup of
blanched chard or spinach leaves.

SOUPE BELLE POTAGÈRE
[Pea-pod Soup]
You can make an excellent green pea soup using both pods and

peas. Next time you are shelling them, and have crackling fresh
pods, keep out the greenest and best of the lot, wrap them in a
plastic bag, and refrigerate for a soup the next day. A cup of shelled
peas would be nice, too, but frozen ones will do for the garnish.

For 7 to 8 cups, serving 4 to 6

1) The onion flavoring
1 cup sliced leeks and Cook the leeks or onions slowly in

onions or onions only the butter for 8 to 10 minutes, until
3 Tb butter tender but not browned. Set aside.



A heavy-bottomed, 3-
quart stainless or
enameled saucepan
with cover

2) The pea-pod soup base
1 lb. fresh green peas Pulling off and discarding stems and

with very crisp pods tips from the pea pods, shell the peas
and set aside—you should have
about 1 cup. Wash pods and chop
roughly into 1-inch pieces, making
about 4 cups. Stir the chopped pods
into the leeks and onions, cover and
cook slowly for 10 minutes.

3 Tb flour Blend the flour into the pea pods and
4 cups hot water cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Remove
1½ tsp salt from heat, gradually blend in 1 cup
1 large potato, peeled of the hot water, then stir in the rest

and sliced (about 1 along with the salt and sliced
cup) potatoes. Simmer, partially covered,

for about 20 minutes or until
vegetables are tender.

3) The peas
1 cup fresh peas (or a 10- For fresh peas: Boil them in the

ounce package of covered saucepan with the water,
frozen peas) scallion, lettuce, and other



A heavy-bottomed 6- to ingredients for 10 to 15 minutes or
8-cup saucepan with until peas are just tender, adding 2 to
cover 3 tablespoons more water if liquid

1½ cups water for fresh evaporates entirely before peas are
peas; ½ cup for frozen done; uncover and set aside.
peas For frozen peas: Cook the same way

1 large sliced scallion or but with only ½ cup water, and boil
shallot only long enough for the peas to be

6 to 8 large outside tender.
leaves of Boston
lettuce, chopped

1 Tb butter
¼ tsp salt

4) Finishing the soup
A food mill set over a Purée the peas, then the soup base. If

bowl (or an electric you are using a blender, sieve the
blender and sieve) soup base after puréeing to remove

A cup or so of milk if pea-pod fibers. Return to saucepan,
needed bring to simmer, and thin out with

Salt, white pepper, and milk if soup seems too thick. Taste
sugar to taste carefully for seasoning, and add

¼ cup or more of heavy pinches of sugar to taste, which will
cream or sour cream help bring out the flavor. Stir in the

cream.
(*) Set aside uncovered until cool,
then cover and refrigerate.

1 to 4 Tb soft butter Reheat to simmer just before serving.
Check seasoning again, remove from



heat, and stir in the butter a half
tablespoon at a time. Serve
immediately.

Cold Pea-pod Soup
Omit the final butter enrichment, and oversalt slightly. Stir

several times as the soup cools, then cover and chill. Blend in more
cream, if you wish, just before serving.

  POTAGE À LA FLORENTINE
[Cream of Spinach Soup]
Fresh and frozen spinach do almost equally well in this elegant

soup of spinach simmered with rice and enriched with cream and
egg yolks. Since it is good hot or cold, you may use the same system
for a soup of green herbs, as you will see in the variations following.

For 7 to 8 cups, serving 4 to 6

1) The soup base
½ cup sliced onions Cook the onions slowly in the butter
2 Tb butter for 8 to 10 minutes, until tender but
A heavy-bottomed not browned.

stainless or enameled
pan with cover



1½ to 2 lbs. fresh For fresh spinach, trim, wash
spinach (or a 10 ounce thoroughly, and chop roughly. For
package frozen frozen spinach, thaw in a large bowl
spinach) of cold water, drain and squeeze dry.

Stir spinach into onions; cover and
cook over low heat for 5 minutes,
stirring occasionally to prevent
spinach from scorching.

5 cups liquid (light Add the liquid to the spinach, bring
chicken stock, or to the boil, and stir in the rice.
canned chicken broth Season with the nutmeg, salt, and
and water) pepper. Simmer partially covered for

⅓ cup plain raw white 20 minutes or until rice is tender.
rice Purée, bring again to the simmer and

Pinch nutmeg thin out, if too thick, with more
Salt and pepper to taste liquid. Remove from heat.
A food mill or electric

blender
Chicken stock or milk if

needed

2) Finishing the soup
A 2-quart bowl Blend the cream and egg yolks in the
A wire whip bowl with the wire whip; by driblets,
½ cup heavy cream beat in 2 cups of the hot soup. Pour
2 egg yolks back into the saucepan.



(*) May be cooked ahead to this
point. Set aside uncovered until cool,
then cover and refrigerate.

Salt, pepper, and lemon Shortly before serving, set over
juice moderate heat and stir slowly with a

2 to 4 Tb soft butter wooden spoon, reaching all over the
bottom of the pan until soup comes
almost to the simmer. Remove from
heat, carefully correct seasoning,
adding lemon juice if you wish; stir
in the enrichment butter a teaspoon
at a time. Serve immediately.

Cold Spinach Soup
Omit the final butter enrichment, and oversalt slightly. Stir

several times as the soup cools, then cover and chill. Blend in more
cream, if you wish, just before serving, or top each serving with a
spoonful of sour cream.

VARIATION
Potage aux Herbes Panachées
[Green Herb Soup]
For those green-thumbed wonders who grow their own herbs,

here is a way to show off your tarragon, chervil, flat-leaved,
pungent Italian parsley, shallots, spring onions or scallions, and
chives. For those of us who wish to simulate the possession of an



herb garden, the supermarket combination is leeks or onions,
watercress, parsley, and dried tarragon.

1) The soup base
About 1½ cups onion Following the system for the

flavoring (chopped preceding Spinach Soup, cook the
shallots, scallions, onion flavoring in butter until tender.
onions and/or leeks) Chop greens roughly, stir into onion

3 Tb butter flavoring and cook 1 to 2 minutes or
until wilted. Then add the flour and

for herb gardeners: cook 1 minute, stirring. Remove from
1 packed cup parsley heat, beat in the hot water, and bring

including tender to the boil. Sprinkle in the rice and
stems; a handful of the salt. Simmer 25 minutes, then
chervil; a branch of purée.
tarragon leaves; chives

for supermarket shoppers:
1½ packed cups of a

combination of parsley
and watercress,
including tender
stems, and ½ tsp dried
tarragon

1 Tb flour
3 cups hot water
⅓ cup plain raw white

rice
1 tsp salt



2) Finishing the soup
2 to 3 cups milk Bring soup base to the simmer; thin
More salt and tarragon if out to desired consistency with milk.

needed Season carefully. In a separate
White pepper to taste saucepan, stir the minced greens and
A small saucepan butter over moderate heat for several
1 packed cup minced minutes until herbs are wilted.

fresh greens (same Remove from heat and let cool a
combination as in Step moment, then stir in the cream;
1) blend in the egg yolks with a wire

whip, and gradually dribble in 2 cups
1 Tb butter of the hot soup base. Pour back into
½ cup heavy cream the saucepan. Just before serving, stir
2 egg yolks over moderate heat until soup comes
2 to 4 Tb soft butter almost to the simmer, correct

seasoning again, remove from heat
and stir in the butter.

Cold Green Herb Soup
See directions for the preceding Spinach Soup.

VEGETABLE VELOUTÉS

  POTAGE AUX CHAMPIGNONS, ÎLE DE FRANCE
[Cream of Mushroom Soup II]
Cream of Mushroom Soup appeals to almost everyone, even to

those who claim they hate mushrooms. This is a very simple version
compared with the full-dress recipe in Volume I, page 40. Here
puréed raw mushrooms simmer in an onion-flavored soup base, and



if you have only a handful of stems rather than the 2 to 4 cups of
fresh mushrooms specified, you will still have a delicious soup.

For 6 to 7 cups, serving 4 to 6

1) The velouté soup base
½ cup finely minced Cook the onions slowly in the butter

onions for 8 to 10 minutes, until tender but
4 Tb butter not browned. Add the flour and cook,
A 2½- to 3-quart heavy- stirring, for 1 minute. Remove from

bottomed stainless or heat, and blend in ½ cup of the hot
enameled saucepan water with a wire whip. Gradually
with cover beat in the rest of the hot water, then

A wooden spoon the milk, seasonings, and tarragon.
3 Tb flour Bring to the simmer, stirring with

wire whip; simmer very slowly for
2 cups hot water several minutes while preparing the
A wire whip mushrooms.
4 cups milk
2 tsp salt
Pinch white pepper
Big pinch tarragon

2) The mushrooms
2 to 4 cups (5 to 12 Trim and wash the mushrooms. If

ounces) fresh whole you are using a food mill with
mushrooms or just the grating disk, chop the mushrooms
mushroom stems roughly and grate directly into the

A food mill with grating soup base. If using a blender, chop
disk (large holes), an roughly, and blend ½ cup at a time



electric blender, or a with an equal amount of soup base,
large knife flicking switch on and off rapidly to

avoid too fine a purée. Otherwise
chop the mushrooms into ⅛-inch
pieces with a knife, and add to soup.

3) Finishing the soup
More milk if needed, or Simmer the soup, partially covered,

light chicken stock for 25 minutes. Add more liquid if
⅓ to ½ cup or more soup seems too thick, then stir in the

heavy cream cream. Carefully correct seasoning,
Salt, white pepper, and adding drops of lemon juice if you

drops of lemon juice feel they are needed.
(*) May be completed to this point.
Set aside uncovered until cool, then
cover and refrigerate.

2 to 4 Tb soft butter Bring soup to simmer again just
2 to 3 Tb minced fresh before serving. Remove from heat

tarragon and/or and stir in first the butter, a half
parsley tablespoon at a time, then the herbs.

Serve immediately.

A more elaborate garnish
Omit all or most of the cream and butter enrichments if you

wish. Ladle the hot soup into bowls, drop a spoonful of sour cream
in each and top with minced herbs, or with sliced or fluted



mushroom caps previously simmered in water, butter, and lemon
juice (Volume I, page 510).

Cold Mushroom Soup
Omit the final butter enrichment, and oversalt slightly. Stir

several times as the soup cools, then cover and chill. Blend in more
cream, if you wish, just before serving.

VARIATIONS
The following recipes are all for 6 to 7 cups of soup, serving 4 to

6. All may be served either hot or cold, as for the mushroom soup.

Potage de la Fontaine Dureau
[Cream of Cauliflower and Watercress Soup]
This is a delicious and unusual, as well as a pretty, soup.

1) The velouté base
1 cup sliced leeks and/or Following the Master Recipe for

onions mushroom soup, cook the onions in
4 Tb butter the butter until tender, stir in the
3 Tb flour flour and cook 1 minute, blend in the
6 cups liquid (hot water, liquid, then simmer slowly while

or part hot water and preparing the vegetables.
part milk)

2 tsp salt
Pinch white pepper



2) The vegetables—finishing the soup
A 6- to 7-inch head of Break cauliflower into flowerettes

cauliflower (1¼ to 1½ and peel central stem; retain any
lbs.) tender leaves. Drop flowerettes and

A large pan of boiling stem (not leaves) into the boiling
salted water water, bring rapidly back to the boil;

1 bunch watercress boil uncovered for 2 minutes. Drain,
(about 2 packed cups) add to soup base, and simmer 15

⅓ to ½ cup or more minutes. Meanwhile, discard any
heavy cream wilted leaves and stems from

2 to 4 Tb soft butter watercress, wash cress and chop
roughly. After cauliflower has
simmered 15 minutes, add the cress
and reserved cauliflower leaves.
Simmer 10 minutes more; purée. Add
the cream, and correct seasoning.
Reheat only just before serving, to
preserve the watercress green, then
remove from heat and stir in the
butter enrichment.

Potage Crème aux Oignons, Soubise
[Cream of Onion Soup]
This is a soup for onion lovers, and a pleasant change from the

usual brown onion soup. The little touch of curry and a bit of wine
give it special flavor, while the addition of rice turns it into a
soubise.

1) The onion-velouté soup base



3 to 4 cups sliced onions Following the Master Recipe for
4 Tb butter mushroom soup, cook the onions in
1 tsp curry powder the butter until tender but not
2 Tb flour browned. Add curry and cook 1
2 cups hot water minute more, then add flour and

cook 2 minutes without browning.
2 cups chicken stock or Remove from heat, beat in the hot

canned chicken broth water, then the chicken stock and the
½ cup dry white wine or wine. Bring to simmer and sprinkle in

⅓ cup dry white the rice; add bay leaf, and season to
French vermouth taste. Simmer 30 minutes. Purée.

⅓ cup plain white rice
1 bay leaf
Salt and white pepper to

taste

2) Finishing the soup
2 to 3 cups milk Bring soup to the simmer. Thin out to
⅓ to ½ cup or more desired consistency with milk, stir in

heavy cream the cream, and carefully correct
2 to 4 Tb soft butter seasoning. Reheat again to simmer
2 to 3 Tb fresh minced just before serving; remove from heat

chervil or parsley and stir in the butter, then the herbs.

A POTATO-BASED SOUP
POTAGE CÉLESTINE
[Celery Soup with Potatoes, Leeks, and Rice]
This is leek and potato soup with a celery twist, and is equally

good hot or cold.



For about 8 cups, serving 6 people

1) The leeks and celery
The white part of 2 Cook the vegetables slowly with the

medium leeks, sliced; salt and butter in the covered
or 1¼ cups sliced saucepan until tender but not
onions browned—about 10 minutes. Add the

3 cups sliced celery liquid, bring to the boil, stir in the
stalks rice, and simmer uncovered for 25

¼ tsp salt minutes.
3 Tb butter
A heavy-bottomed 3-

quart stainless or
enameled saucepan
with cover

4 cups light chicken
stock, or canned
chicken broth and
water

⅓ cup plain white rice

2) The potatoes
3 or 4 medium baking Meanwhile, boil the potatoes with

potatoes, peeled and the water and salt. When tender,
chopped (about 3 drain their cooking water into the
cups) leeks and celery. If you are using a

2 cups water food mill or ricer, purée the potatoes,
½ tsp salt return to saucepan, and beat in the

milk to make a smooth, white cream.



Another heavy 3-quart If you are using a blender, purée the
saucepan potatoes with a cup of the milk, pour

A food mill with medium into saucepan, and beat in the rest of
disk, a potato ricer, or the milk.
an electric blender

2 cups milk heated in a
small pan

A wire whip and a
wooden spoon

3) Finishing the soup—herb-butter and croûton garnish
⅛ teaspoon sugar (to Purée the leek and celery mixture

bring out the flavor) with its liquid into the potato cream.
Salt and white pepper Blend well with wire whip and bring

to the simmer; beat in sugar and
seasonings to taste.
(*) Set aside uncovered until shortly
before serving.

A heated soup tureen, or Bring the soup to the simmer. Mash
a bowl and soup cups the butter and herbs in the soup

4 to 6 Tb soft butter tureen (or in the bowl, and divide
3 Tb minced fresh chervil among your soup cups). Blend the

or tarragon; or minced hot soup into the herb butter,
fresh parsley and ¼ sprinkle the croûtons on top, and
tsp crumbled dried serve immediately.
tarragon



½ to ¾ cup croûtons (see
directions following
Cold Soup)

Cold Celery Soup
Omit the butter enrichment and the croûtons; oversalt soup

slightly. Mash the herbs with ¼ cup heavy cream or sour cream, stir
into the soup, and chill. Stir in more chilled cream, if you wish,
before serving, and decorate with fresh minced herbs or parsley.

Croûtons
[Small Cubes of Bread Sautéed in Butter]

Stale, homemade-type Preheat oven to 325 degrees. Remove
white bread crusts and, if unsliced, cut bread into

A baking sheet ¼-inch slices. Then cut into ¼-inch
Clarified butter (butter strips; cut strips crosswise to make

melted, skimmed, and ¼-inch cubes. Spread cubes on
poured off milky baking sheet and dry out in middle
residue in bottom of level of oven for 10 to 15 minutes,
pan) until outside is dry but not browning;

A frying pan, preferably this will prevent bread from
the no-stick kind absorbing too much butter when

sautéed. Film pan with a ⅛-inch
layer of clarified butter, set over
moderate heat until it bubbles; add
just enough bread cubes to make 1
layer. Sauté, shaking and tossing pan
by handle, until cubes are a light
golden brown, adding a little more
butter if necessary to keep bread



from burning. Let cool on paper
towels.
(*) May be cooked in advance. May
also be frozen, then thawed and
crisped for a few minutes in a 375-
degree oven.

SOUPS WITH A FARINA THICKENING
Rather than thickening soups with flour, rice, or potatoes, you

may use semoule de blé, semolina, also known as farina or cream of
wheat. This makes a pleasant change and also imparts its own subtle
taste and texture.

  POTAGE AUX CONCOMBRES
[Cream of Cucumber Soup]
The only thing to say about this soup is that it is perfectly

delicious; it is especially good cold, but then it is also especially
good hot.

For 6 to 7 cups, serving 4 to 6

1) The cucumbers
1½ lbs. cucumbers (3, Peel the cucumbers. Cut 18 to 24

about 8 inches long) paper-thin slices and reserve in a
bowl for later. Cut the rest of the
cucumbers into half-inch chunks: you
will have about 4½ cups.



2) The soup
½ cup minced shallots, Cook the shallots, scallions, or onions

or a combination of slowly in the butter for several
shallots, scallions, minutes until tender but not
and/or onions browned. Add the cucumber chunks,

3 Tb butter chicken broth, vinegar, and herbs.
A heavy-bottomed Bring to the boil, then stir in the

stainless or enameled farina. Simmer, partially covered, for
saucepan with cover 20 to 25 minutes. Purée, and return

6 cups liquid: light the soup to the pan. Thin out with
chicken stock, or more liquid if necessary; season
canned broth and carefully with salt and pepper.
water (*) May be prepared in advance to

1½ tsp wine vinegar this point.
¾ tsp dried dill weed or

tarragon
4 Tb quick-cooking

farina (cream of
wheat) breakfast
cereal

A food mill with medium
disk, or an electric
blender

More liquid if necessary

Salt and white pepper Bring to simmer just before serving,
Soup bowls and beat in ½ cup sour cream. Ladle
1 cup sour cream into soup bowls, place a dollop of

sour cream in each bowl, float slices



1 to 2 Tb minced fresh of cucumber on top of cream, and
dill, tarragon, or decorate with a sprinkling of herbs.
parsley

Cold Cucumber Soup
After stirring in the ½ cup sour cream, oversalt slightly and let

cool uncovered, stirring occasionally. Then cover and chill. Ladle
into chilled soup cups, adding a big spoonful of sour cream to each
cup; float cucumber slices on top of the cream and decorate with
herbs.

VARIATION
Potage aux Courgettes
[Cream of Zucchini Soup]
You may substitute zucchini for cucumbers in the preceding

soup, but do not peel them. Cut off stem and tip, scrub with a
vegetable brush, and proceed exactly as for the cucumber soup.
Decorate with herbs, however, rather than with zucchini slices.

POTAGE UNTEL
[Green Turnip Soup]
This is one of those soups with a marvelous and unusual flavor

that is difficult to decipher unless you are told the combination.
Then the tastes of turnip and greens disclose themselves. You may
not find any green leaves attached to your turnips unless they grow
nearby and it is turnip season, which is winter or early spring.
Spinach leaves do nicely, however.



1) The turnips
1½ lbs. fresh white Boil the turnips slowly with the

turnips, peeled and seasonings, butter, and water in a
quartered (about 5 covered saucepan for 15 to 20
cups) minutes, or until tender when pierced

3 Tb butter with a knife. Uncover, raise heat, and
1 tsp salt boil to evaporate liquid; toss turnips
1 tsp sugar in the butter, which remains, for 2
1½ cups water minutes.
A heavy-bottomed 3-

quart stainless or
enameled saucepan
with cover

2) The greens
Either 4 packed cups Meanwhile, discard any wilted leaves

tender fresh turnip from fresh greens and spinach, wash
greens and fresh thoroughly and drain well. Heat
spinach; butter in a skillet to bubbling over

Or a 10-ounce package of moderately high heat. Add greens
fresh spinach; and spinach, turn and toss with the 2

Or ½ package frozen wooden spoons; sprinkle with salt
spinach thawed in and sugar and continue tossing for 2
cold water and to 3 minutes until greens are limp
squeezed dry and fairly tender.

2 Tb butter
A 10-inch stainless or

enameled skillet
2 wooden spoons



½ tsp salt
¼ tsp sugar

3) The soup
A food mill with medium Purée the 2 vegetables together and

disk, or an electric bring to simmer in turnip-cooking
blender pan with the broth. Sprinkle in the

4 cups liquid: light farina and simmer 5 to 6 minutes
chicken stock, or until farina is tender. Thin out to
canned broth and desired consistency with milk; season
water carefully with salt, pepper, and

3 Tb quick-cooking lemon juice.
farina (cream of (*) May be prepared in advance to
wheat) breakfast this point.
cereal

1 to 2 cups milk
Salt and pepper
1 to 2 Tb lemon juice

2 to 4 Tb soft butter Bring again to simmer just before
serving; remove from heat and stir in
the butter a teaspoon at a time.

Alternate enrichments, cold soup
You may wish to enrich the soup with sour cream instead of

butter, as for the preceding Cucumber Soup, or with cream and egg
yolks as in the Spinach Soup. In any case, you may also serve it cold
as suggested in both recipes.



THREE PEASANT SOUPS
POTAGE MAGALI
[Mediterranean Tomato Soup with Rice]
Typically Mediterranean, with its onions, tomatoes, garlic,

saffron, and native herbs, this fragrant soup is even named after the
Provençal heroine of many an operetta. It is best when tomatoes are
at the season’s peak, but the hothouse type can be pepped up with a
bit of tomato paste.

For 7 to 8 cups, serving 4 to 6

1) The soup base
¾ cup combination of Cook the leeks and onions slowly in

thinly sliced leeks and the oil until tender but not browned.
onions, or onions only Meanwhile, peel and halve the

3 Tb olive oil tomatoes, squeeze out seeds and
A heavy-bottomed 3- reserve juice. Chop tomato pulp

quart stainless or roughly and stir into the cooked leeks
enameled saucepan and onions. Add the garlic and stir
with cover over moderate heat for 3 minutes.

1½ lbs. fresh, ripe, red Then add the tomato juice and liquid,
tomatoes bring to the boil, and sprinkle in the

4 large cloves garlic, rice. Add the herbs and saffron;
minced or mashed season to taste with salt and pepper.

Simmer, partially covered, for 30
4 to 5 cups liquid: light minutes.

chicken stock, or
canned broth and
water



¼ cup plain, raw, white
rice

The following tied in
washed cheesecloth: 6
parsley sprigs, 1 bay
leaf, ¼ tsp thyme, 4
fennel seeds, and, if
available, 6 large fresh
basil leaves

A large pinch of saffron
threads

Salt and pepper

2) Finishing the soup
If necessary: pinches of Carefully taste for seasoning, adding

sugar pinches of sugar to bring out flavor
1 tsp or more tomato and counteract acidity, and small

paste amounts of tomato paste if needed
Salt and pepper for color and taste. Remove herb

bouquet.
(*) May be prepared ahead to this
point.

2 or more Tb minced Serve either hot or chilled, sprinkled
fresh basil, chervil, or with fresh herbs.
parsley

SOUPE CATALANE AUX POIVRONS



[Catalonian Pepper and Leek Soup]
Another Mediterranean soup uses the same principles as the

preceding potage Magali, and the same general ingredients. Here the
character comes from sweet peppers rather than tomatoes, a touch
of ham or salt pork, and a typically regional final liaison of egg
yolks and olive oil.

For 7 to 8 cups, serving 4 to 6

1) The soup base
2½ to 3 ounces lightly Sauté the ham or salt pork in the oil

smoked ham or lean over moderate heat until it barely
salt pork, cut into ¼- begins to brown, then stir in the
inch dice (⅔ cup) onions and leeks. Cook slowly several

2 Tb olive oil minutes until fairly tender but not
A heavy-bottomed 3- browned; stir in the peppers and

quart stainless or garlic, and cook again for 3 to 4
enameled saucepan minutes without browning. Finally
with cover sprinkle in the flour, stirring for 1

2 cups diced onions minute, and remove from heat. Blend
2 cups thinly sliced leeks in the hot water gradually, stir in the

(or more onions) stock or broth, and bring to the
simmer; skim off any surface scum

1½ cups diced bell for a minute or two, then stir in the
peppers, red or green pasta or rice. Add the saffron and

4 large cloves garlic, savory, season to taste, and simmer
minced or mashed partially covered for 20 minutes.

1 Tb flour Carefully correct seasoning.
1 quart hot water (*)May be prepared ahead to this
3 to 4 cups light beef point; let cool uncovered. Bring again

stock, or canned to the simmer just before serving.
chicken broth You may also make the egg-yolk and



¼ cup pasta (rice- or oil enrichment in advance and store
pepper-corn shaped, it in a covered jar.
or broken vermicelli),
or plain white rice

A large pinch of saffron
threads

¼ tsp savory
Salt and pepper

2) Finishing the soup
2 egg yolks Beat the egg yolks in the bottom of
A wire whip the tureen or bowl until thick and
A soup tureen or large sticky; by droplets, beat in the olive

mixing bowl oil exactly as though you were
¼ cup olive oil making a thick mayonnaise. Stirring
A ladle it, dribble in the hot soup until you

have added 2 cups; gradually stir in
the rest. Serve immediately.

  SOUPE À LA VICTORINE
[Purée of White Bean Soup, Eggplant and Tomato Garnish]
This meal-in-itself will fill up the family on a cold day, especially

if you include pork or sausage with the beans. The eggplant and
tomato garnish makes a lively and unusual touch to an otherwise
traditional bean purée.

For about 8 cups, serving 4 to 6



1) Soaking the beans—1 hour
1 quart of water Bring the water to a rapid boil, drop
A 3-quart saucepan with in the beans, and bring water rapidly

cover back to the boil again; boil
⅓ cup dry white beans, uncovered for exactly 2 minutes.

such as Great Remove from heat, cover pan, and let
Northern or Small soak for exactly 1 hour. Meanwhile,
White you may prepare all the rest of the

ingredients for the soup.

2) The soup base—1½ hours of simmering
2 cups combination of Cook the leeks and onions slowly in

sliced leeks and the oil or butter until tender and
onions, or onions only translucent; raise heat slightly and

3 Tb olive oil or butter cook for a few minutes more until
An 8-inch enameled, very lightly browned. As soon as the

stainless, or no-stick beans have had their 1-hour soak,
frying pan scrape the vegetables into them, and

2 bay leaves add the rest of the ingredients for the
½ teaspoon thyme soup base (if using sausage rather

than pork, add only for last 30–40
½ teaspoon sage minutes of cooking). Bring to the
Optional: ½ lb. lean side simmer, partially cover the pan, and

pork (fresh unsmoked cook slowly for about 1½ hours or
bacon), or fresh fat- until beans are tender. Set pork or
and-lean pork butt sausage aside for final step, purée the
(shoulder), or Italian soup, and return to the pan.
or Polish sausage

1½ tsp salt (*) May be prepared ahead; set aside
uncovered until cool.

⅛ tsp peppercorns



A food mill or an electric
blender

3) The eggplant and tomato garnish
A firm, shiny, 1-lb. Peel the eggplant and cut into ½-inch

eggplant (about 8 dice. Toss in the bowl with the salt
inches long and 3½ and let stand at least 20 minutes.
inches at widest Meanwhile, prepare the tomatoes and
diameter) cut pulp into ½-inch squares; strain

A 2-quart glazed or and reserve juice. When eggplant has
stainless mixing bowl stood its 20 minutes, drain and dry

1½ tsp salt on paper towels. Heat the oil in the
1 lb. fresh, firm, ripe, red pan and sauté the eggplant, tossing

tomatoes (3 medium), it, to brown very lightly. Then toss
peeled, seeded, and with the tomato pulp and garlic, add
juiced the juice from the tomatoes, and

2–3 Tb olive oil cover the pan. Simmer slowly for 10
to 15 minutes until eggplant is tender

The 8-inch frying pan but still holds its shape. Set aside.
again

4 large cloves garlic, (*) May be prepared ahead; let cool
minced or mashed uncovered.

A cover for the frying
pan

4) Finishing the soup
2 to 3 cups chicken stock About 15 minutes before serving,

or canned broth bring the soup base to the simmer
3 Tb minced fresh green and thin out to desired consistency

herbs: basil, parsley, with chicken stock or broth. Cut the



and chives (or parsley pork or sausage into slices ⅜ inch
only and dried basil or thick and add to the soup along with
oregano to taste) the eggplant and tomato. Simmer 3

to 4 minutes to blend flavors.
Carefully correct seasoning, stir in
the herbs, and serve.

VARIATION
Fennel and Tomato Garnish
Sliced fresh fennel cooked until just tender and then simmered

for a moment with diced tomatoes and herbs makes an attractive
alternate to the eggplant. Soak the beans and simmer the soup base
as described in the preceding recipe; prepare the garnish as follows.

2 cups thinly sliced fresh Cook the fennel slowly in the oil or
fennel bulbs butter in a covered skillet for 8 to 10

2 Tb olive oil or butter minutes, or until just tender but not
¼ cup minced shallots or browned. Add the shallots or

scallions scallions, garlic, and tomatoes; toss
2 large cloves garlic, with fennel, cover skillet and cook

minced or mashed for a few minutes until tomatoes
1 lb. tomatoes, peeled, have rendered the rest of their juice.

seeded, juiced, and Uncover, raise heat slightly and cook
diced for a few minutes more to evaporate

the juice. Season to taste. Set aside
Salt and pepper until you are ready to serve, then add

to the soup as directed in the Master
Recipe, Step 4.



LE POTIRON TOUT ROND
[Pumpkin Soup Baked in a Pumpkin]
This amusing presentation may be prepared either as a soup or a

vegetable; the recipe is among the squashes in the Vegetables
Chapter.

SHELLFISH SOUPS
Bisques

A bisque is a rich, thick, highly seasoned soup of puréed
shellfish. Undoubtedly the bisque came into being because it is an
easy as well as elegant way to eat small crustaceans with
complicated constructions like crayfish and crabs, and it is a
wonderful solution for the chests and legs of lobsters.

This is the kind of recipe to pick for a group of friends who enjoy
cooking together, since a bisque is not tricky to make—it just takes
a long time. To get the true flavor, the raw shellfish are cut up and
sautéed in their shells before being simmered with wine and
aromatic ingredients. The meat is then removed from the shells;
some of it is saved for a garnish while the rest is puréed. Finally, to
extract every remaining bit of flavor and color from the shells, they
are puréed with butter, and everything is combined into a splendid
soup.

We shall begin with illustrated directions on how to cut up
lobsters and crabs, and follow with lobster bisque and its other
shellfish variations.



BUYING LOBSTERS

A live lobster should be lively: it spreads its claws, arches its
back, and flaps its tail noisily against the underside of its chest when
you pick it up. To do so you must grab it with your thumb and
index finger at its shoulder just behind the claw joints. You can keep
live lobsters in the refrigerator at around 37 degrees for a day or
two in a heavy paper bag pierced with air holes, but you should
cook them as soon as possible.

When you are picking store-bought boiled lobsters, look closely
at their tails, which should curl up against the underside of the
chests and spring back into place when straightened. A limp tail



indicates that the lobster was moribund before cooking. Be sure
also, in buying boiled lobster, that it smells absolutely sweet and
fresh. Freshly boiled, cooled, and wrapped lobsters will keep for 2 to
3 days in the refrigerator at around 37 degrees. You may even wrap
airtight and freeze a boiled lobster in its shell for several weeks.

To tell the sex of a lobster, look at
the last pair of swimmerets on the

underside, where chest meets tail. If
they are soft and hairy, the lobster
is female; if they are hard, pointed,

and hairless, the lobster is male.

ON DEALING WITH LIVE LOBSTERS

A number of the best French lobster recipes, including homard à
l’américaine and bisque de homard, call for the sautéing of cut-up raw
lobster. This means you must buy live lobster and either have it cut
up for you and cook it immediately, or do the cutting yourself. The
serious cook really must face up to the task personally. While
professionals simply cut up the lobsters with never a qualm nor a
preliminary, you may find this difficult. If so, we suggest that you
plunge them two at a time, head first and upside down, into boiling



water; leave for about a minute, until lobsters are limp, and
immediately remove them. Because the nervous and circulatory
systems of the lobster center in the head area, a head-first plunge
into boiling liquid not only kills the lobster almost instantly, but
also eliminates muscle spasms. There is a misguided notion that
lobsters suffer less if set to boil in cold water; far from being a
humane procedure, this is slow death by drowning!

HOW TO CUT UP RAW LOBSTER

Furnish yourself with sharp-pointed lobster scissors or kitchen
scissors, a large knife, a cutting board with groove to catch juices or
a board set on a tray, a bowl to pour juices into, and another bowl
for the lobster tomalley. You now want to split the lobster in two,
lengthwise, as follows. Turn the lobster top side up. With scissors,
cut through center of shell from end of tail up to but not through
eyes in center of head. Turn lobster over and again with scissors cut
through shell from end of tail to within ½ inch of tip of head. Then
with your knife cut completely through the under side of the lobster
lengthwise, following scissor cuts, from ½ inch below tip of head
down through tail, thus splitting lobster neatly in two except at the
head. Finally grasp lobster in both hands where claw joints meet
chest, and break the shell apart at the head to open it up.

Nestled in the head on one side of the lobster or the other is a pouch
an inch long and ¾ inch in diameter which is the stomach sack.
Locate the sack with your fingers, twist it out, and discard it. (If you
have cut sack in two while splitting the lobster, no harm is done;
remove the 2 halves.) Pull out and discard the intestinal vein, a thin,
flexible translucent or blackish tube that runs from the area of the
stomach sack down through the tail meat. The greenish, and
sometimes almost blackish, soft matter lying in the chest cavity is



the tomalley; scoop it out into a small
bowl. If your lobster is female, there
will usually be some orange-red roe as
well; add this to the tomalley.



With a knife or scissors, separate the two tail sections from the
chests. Cut the legs and the claw joints from the chests, and cut
claws from end of joints. Crack claws in one or two places with a
sharp whack of the knife. Drain juices into a bowl and reserve them,
along with the tomalley. The lobster is now ready for sautéing.

HOW TO REMOVE THE MEAT FROM COOKED LOBSTERS

Split and open boiled lobster exactly as described in the
preceding directions for raw lobster. Discard stomach sack and
intestinal vein. Scoop tomalley from inside the chest sections into a
bowl. After lifting meat out of tail sections, you want to remove
meat from claws, claw joints, chest sections, and legs. With scissors,
cut the claw joints from the chests, and separate each claw from its
joint. Cut through shell on each side of joints, lift off shell, and
remove meat.

The first step in removing the meat
from the claws is to bend the small,
hinged half rather slowly but firmly back
on itself, toward the bottom of the claw;
this will withdraw its cartilage from
inside the meat of the main half of the
claw. Dig the point of meat out of this
small shell with a nut pick or the point
of your scissors.

Again with scissors, cut a window
out of the main claw shell and



remove the whole piece of claw
meat with your fingers.

Pull chest section from its outside shell.
Note that there are spongy, hairy strips
attached to outside side of chest at leg
joints; these are gills. Pull off and discard
them. Scrape out and add to the tomalley
any coagulated white matter clinging to
the inside of the shell.



Cut or twist off legs where they join the chest. Dig out meat from
inside side of chest, going in between cartilaginous interstices with the
point of a knife. This is never a fast operation, but the small amount
of meat you extract is the sweetest and tenderest of all.

To remove the meat from the legs,
sever them at each of their joints.
Place on a board and squeeze the
meat out of each piece by rolling a pin
(pestle or broom handle) over it. You
will not get much, but again the meat is sweet, tender, and worth
the time spent on extraction.

CRABS

HOW TO CLEAN AND CUT UP RAW CRABS FOR CRAB BISQUE

Stone crabs, rock crabs, sand crabs, blue crabs, and their ilk and
size are especially good for bisques because they are otherwise



somewhat complicated to eat. If you are at the seashore you can
gather them yourself, or ask lobstermen please not to throw them
out, as they often do, but to save all crabs for you. However you
obtain them, they must be alive. Just before you are ready to clean
and cut them, place them upside down in a large bowl or stoppered
sink and cover with very hot water. As soon as air bubbles cease to
rise, in a minute or two, the crabs will be limp and ready to work
on. Your object in cleaning and cutting is to remove the main body,
or chest-leg-claw portions of each crab, from the hard shell, called
the carapace, and to collect the tomalley, which is the creamy
substance in the chest cavity and carapace.

Turn crabs upside down. Note that female crabs have a wider tail flap
than male crabs and the female’s is usually edged with hair.

Lift point of flap away from chest,
then grasp flap close to the body of

the crab and with a rather slow
twisting movement, pull it

horizontally free from the end of the
crab. The intestinal vein should



draw out of the body at the same
time.

Break off claw-joint sections where they
join the body. To remove the leg-chest
section, hold carapace firmly in your left
hand and grasp all the legs close to the body
in your right hand. Rock leg-chest portion
back and forth and it will come loose from
the carapace; pull it free. Both chest and
interior of carapace should smell fresh and appetizing; your nose is
the best judge.

On either side of the chest, where
it fitted into the shell, are

feathery, spongy strips, which are
the gills; pull off and discard

them. Scrape the creamy tomalley
out of the chest with your fingers

and a spoon handle; place in a
sieve set over a bowl.

With a vegetable brush, scrub
shell on underside of chest and around the legs under a stream of
cold water; scrub the claw-joint pieces also. Finally cut the chest in
half lengthwise as shown. (Trim off any mossy bits of shell with a
knife or scissors.)



You now have prepared for cooking
the chest-leg sections, which are cut
in two, and the claw-joint sections.
The other edible portion of the crab is
the rest of the tomalley, which is in
the carapace.

Crab tomalley
The greenish, brownish, and sometimes orange creamy matter

left in the carapace is also called tomalley. It, along with the juices
in the shell, constitutes some of the best parts of the crab.* Pour the
juices through the sieve containing the chest tomalley; scoop soft
matter out of the shell with your fingers, and into the sieve. When
all the crabs are done, pour accumulated liquid into a separate
container and reserve. Rub the tomalley through the sieve with a
wooden spoon, scrape it off bottom of sieve into a bowl; reserve for
Step 7, where it will simmer with the crab-meat garnish. (After
puréeing, the raw tomalley will become a rather dark green, which
then becomes dark red when cooked.)
* When a whole crab is boiled, the tomalley turns greenish and
orange while the liquid usually becomes white.

HOW TO REMOVE THE MEAT FROM COOKED CRABS

Provide yourself with a board and wooden mallet or wooden
object of some sort for cracking the shells, and a grapefruit knife for
extracting the meat. For a bisque made from small crabs, do not



bother to delve too thoroughly because it will take all day; remove
only what meat you easily can, and the shell debris will be
simmered again anyway to extract all remaining flavor. Begin by
twisting the legs from the chest sections, then break each leg off at
the knee by bending it back upon itself at the joint, thus drawing
the cartilage out of the upper leg meat. For a bisque, chop lower
legs into quarter-inch pieces, and reserve for shellfish butter;
otherwise discard them. To remove meat from upper legs, as well as
from claws and joints, crack shell sharply but lightly with mallet,
being careful not to shatter the shell into the meat. Then dig out
what meat you easily can with the point of your grapefruit knife. To
remove meat from chests, dig out what you can from the holes left
by the legs, then from the other side, being careful not to include
bits of shell or cartilage. You will get about 1 solid cup of meat from
6 to 8 crabs measuring 3 to 4 inches across the back of the shell.

  BISQUE DE HOMARD À L’AMÉRICAINE
[Lobster Bisque]
Considering the price of lobsters and the puréed nature of a

bisque, we think it is a waste to use whole lobster here. We
therefore suggest only the chests and the legs for the bisque, and the
tails, claws, and tomalley for a splendid main dish, such as the
homard à l’Américaine described in Volume I on page 223. In fact,
you could well combine the two, starting them out together, since
both follow much the same pattern. Serve the main dish one night,
and the bisque a day or two later. That is up to you, however, and
we shall content ourselves with the chests and legs from 3 or 4
lobsters for the following recipe. As in most dishes of this type, you
can expand or contract the ingredients to a certain extent without
upsetting the balance of tastes, and you need not be disturbed if you
have a little more or a little less of anything that is called for.



A NOTE ON TECHNIQUES AND EQUIPMENT

In the old days you would have needed an 8-quart marble
mortar, a large wooden pestle, a 12-inch tamis sieve, a tortoise-shell
scraper, and either a flock of kitchen minions or the strength of a
Japanese wrestler to produce a proper bisque. Today’s electric
blender eliminates these colorful requirements, but there are still
multiple simmerings, strainings, and puréeings, as well as numerous
bowls, sieves, and spoons that you will need. Do not wash anything
off until the soup is done because you will be using the same
utensils repeatedly and you don’t want any marvelous tidbits of
flavor losing themselves down the drain.

For about 2 quarts, serving 6 to 8

1) Preliminaries
1 cup mirepoix (equal Cook the mirepoix slowly in the

parts finely diced butter, in the saucepan, for 6 to 8
onions, carrots, and minutes, or until vegetables are
celery) tender but not browned. Meanwhile,

1½ Tb butter prepare the tomatoes. Cut lobster
A heavy, 3-quart chests in half lengthwise. (See

stainless or enameled illustrated directions for cutting
saucepan with cover lobster.)

1½ cups chopped, fresh
tomato pulp (3 to 4
medium tomatoes
peeled, seeded, and
juiced)

The chest parts with the
shells and the legs



from 3 or 4 fresh, raw,
1¼- to 1½-lb. lobsters

2) Sautéing the lobster
2 or more Tb olive oil or Film the bottom of the casserole with

cooking oil 1⁄16 inch of oil; set over moderately
A heavy, 10- to 12-inch

no-stick or enameled high heat until oil is very hot but not
casserole (or chicken smoking. Add the lobster chests cut
fryer or deep frying side down and the legs. Do not crowd
pan) pan: sauté in 2 batches if all will not

fit easily in one layer. Toss and turn
Cooking tongs frequently until shells are a deep red

(4 to 5 minutes in all). Color is
important here, as it is the shells that
tint the soup.

3) Simmering the lobster and removing the meat
Salt and pepper When the lobster is sautéed, lower
⅓ cup Cognac heat slightly, salt and pepper the
Either 1½ cups dry white lobster, and pour on the Cognac.

wine; Ignite by shaking pan vigorously or
Or 1 cup dry white tilting it into heat source, or use a

vermouth lighted match. When flames have
2 Tb fresh tarragon or 1 died down, pour on the wine, mix in

Tb dried tarragon the tarragon, and add the bay leaf
and other ingredients. Cover

1 bay leaf casserole, and simmer slowly for 20
The mirepoix and minutes.

tomatoes from Step 1
1 clove mashed garlic



Large pinch of cayenne (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
pepper simmered a day in advance; let cool

A cover for the casserole uncovered, then cover and refrigerate
(or freeze).

2 medium-sized bowls (Before proceeding, you may wish to
A food mill with medium start the rice in the next step, so that

disk, or a sieve and a it will be done by the time you are
wooden spoon through here.) Remove the pieces of

An electric blender lobster from their cooking sauce and
extract the meat from the shells
following illustrated directions. You
will have about 1 cup; place in one of
the bowls. Purée the cooking sauce
through food mill or sieve into the
other bowl, and scrape into jar of
blender; reserve for Step 5. Chop
shells into ½-inch pieces and reserve
in a bowl for Step 6.

4) Simmering the rice
3 cups fish stock or Bring the fish stock or clam juice and

canned clam juice the beef stock or bouillon to a boil in
2 cups beef stock or the saucepan; sprinkle in the rice.

canned beef bouillon Stir up once, and simmer for 20
The saucepan from Step minutes. Set aside for Step 5.

1, in which the
mirepoix cooked

¼ cup plain, raw, white
rice



5) Puréeing rice and lobster meat
The saucepan of boiled Drain rice through sieve, reserving its

rice cooking liquid in the bowl. Scrape
A large, fine-meshed rice and the half portion of lobster

sieve set over a 2½- to meat into the blender. Purée, adding
3-quart bowl a little of the rice-cooking liquid if

A rubber spatula mixture is too thick for easy blending
The blender jar in the machine. Scrape the purée out

containing the puréed of the blender and into the rice-
lobster-cooking sauce cooking saucepan.

Half the lobster meat

6) Shellfish butter for final enrichment—lobster butter
6 Tb butter Heat butter to bubbling in casserole,
The casserole in which stir in the chest and leg shells, and

the lobster cooked sauté for 2 to 3 minutes, tossing and
The bowl of chopped turning, to heat thoroughly.

lobster shells Immediately scrape into blender and
The electric blender purée, flicking switch on and off and
The sieve from Step 5 scraping shells down into blades as

necessary. Scrape purée into sieve,
A wooden spoon and mash vigorously with spoon to
A rubber spatula extract as much butter as possible.
A small bowl to hold the Scrape all butter off bottom of sieve

butter with rubber spatula and pack into
bowl. Set aside for Steps 7 and 8.



The bowl of rice-cooking To extract all remaining flavor from
liquid from Step 5 blender jar, shells, and sieve, pour

The saucepan containing rice-cooking liquid into the casserole
the puréed rice and in which you just sautéed the shells.
lobster from Step 5 Heat to the simmer and pour liquid

into blender to rinse it, then pour
liquid back into casserole. Scrape
shell debris from sieve into casserole,
and swish sieve about in the hot rice-
cooking liquid to dislodge all debris.
Simmer 3 to 4 minutes; strain liquid
through the sieve and into the
saucepan of puréed rice and lobster.

7) The lobster garnish
2 Tb of the lobster butter Heat the butter to bubbling in the

from Step 6 frying pan; stir in the lobster meat,
A small frying pan and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
The remaining lobster Sauté over moderate heat for 2

meat from Step 3 minutes, tossing and turning. Pour on
Salt and pepper the Cognac or vermouth, and cook
2 Tb Cognac or dry white for a moment until liquid has

vermouth evaporated. Scrape the lobster into
the saucepan containing the rest of
the soup mixture from Step 6, and
you are finally almost ready to serve.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be
completed to this point; let cool
uncovered, then cover and refrigerate
or freeze.



8) Final flavoring and serving
If needed: more fish Shortly before serving, bring the

stock, clam juice, or bisque to the simmer. It should be
bouillon quite thick, but if it needs thinning,

Salt, pepper, cayenne, stir in a little stock or bouillon.
and tarragon Carefully correct seasoning. Just

½ to 1 cup heavy cream before serving, stir in the cream, then
The lobster butter from remove from heat and stir in the

Step 6 lobster butter by tablespoonsful. Pour
2 to 3 Tb minced fresh the bisque into a hot tureen or soup

chervil, tarragon, or cups, and decorate with the fresh
parsley herbs. Pass the croûtons, Melba toast,

or bread separately.
Croûtons (diced bread

sautéed in butter); or
Melba toast; or your
own French bread

VARIATIONS
Because all of the other shellfish bisques follow almost the same

pattern as lobster bisque, you can really substitute shrimp, crab, or
crayfish for lobster in the Master Recipe every time you see the
word “lobster.” To account for the very slight differences in method,
here is a paragraph of special instructions for each.

Bisque de Crevettes
[Shrimp Bisque]
You must have shrimp in the shell for this recipe because the

shells give the bisque its characteristic color and flavor. It is of



prime importance, therefore, that you use only the freshest smelling
and finest quality of shrimp, whether they are live and whole or
frozen, raw, and headless. If the shrimp are whole, meaning with
head and shell, simply wash and drain before sautéing them; if
frozen, thaw in cold water until you can separate them, then sauté.
Since they need only 5 minutes of simmering, cook the tomatoes
and other ingredients called for in Step 3 for 10 minutes before
adding the shrimp; after their simmer, let them cool 10 minutes in
the cooking sauce before draining and peeling them. Use the shells
and several whole, cooked shrimp for the shellfish butter in Step 6,
and if the shrimp are very large, slice in half lengthwise those you
are reserving for the garnish in Step 7. You will need 1¼ to 1½
pounds of raw shrimp for 2 quarts of bisque.

Bisque de Crabes
[Crab Bisque]
Crab bisque is even more one of love’s labors than lobster

bisque, but it is so marvelously rich and deeply flavored that if you
pick the right guests your reward will be in watching their pleasure,
as well as relishing your own. Clean and cut the crabs as illustrated,
then substitute crab for lobster in the Master Recipe, with the
following slight modifications. Because crab pieces will bulk larger
than lobster chests, you will need 2 big casseroles for the sautéing in
Step 2, but may combine all together for the simmering in Step 3.
You will not have enough liquid to cover all of the crab pieces in
this step, and should toss the pieces several times during the 20
minutes of cooking; do not forget to add the liquid from the
carapaces and the tomalley to simmer here, along with everything
else. Note that it is only the chopped-up lower legs that go into the
shellfish butter in Step 6, but add as well all the debris from the
chests, claws, and upper legs to simmer at the end of the step,
allowing a good 10 minutes of cooking to extract every bit of flavor.



For 2 quarts of wonderful soup, you will need 6 to 8 live crabs
measuring 3 to 4 inches across the top of the shell.

Bisque d’Écrevisses
[Crayfish Bisque]
Fresh-water crayfish, crawfish, or écrevisses, as they are variously

called, are miniature lobsterlike crustaceans 4 to 5 inches long. They
are considered a supreme delicacy in Europe as well as in the
southern Atlantic, the Pacific, and the Midwestern states where they
are gathered. With the few minor differences noted here, substitute
the word “crayfish” for the word “lobster” in the Master Recipe. To
clean live crayfish, drop them headfirst in a basin of very hot water
and leave for 2 to 3 minutes or until bubbles cease to rise. After
draining them, pull out the central flap at the base of the tail to
draw out along with it the intestinal tube. (This action of removing
the intestine is called châtter in French recipes.) Sauté and simmer
the crayfish whole, as directed in the Master Recipe, but they need
only 10 minutes of cooking in Step 3. To shell them, remove the tail
meat only, and use all of it for the garnish in Step 7; the chests and
shell debris go into the butter, Step 6. If you wish to be very haute
cuisine, have a dozen extra crayfish and make a small amount of a
simple fish mousse, using the raw tail meat. Then remove chest-leg
sections (but not claws and feelers) from covering shell, and fill the
shells with the mousse. Poach 5 minutes in stock or bouillon before
floating them in the bisque at serving time. You should have 24 to
30 live crayfish for 2 quarts of soup, plus 12 or so extra if you are
doing the mousse.

TWO SCALLOP SOUPS WITH A CRAB OR LOBSTER
VARIATION



Scallops are so easy to come by, fresh or frozen, that we feel they
should have their place in the soup repertoire. Although scallops are
rarely so used in France, they are delicious as the unique fish in a
bouillabaisse or bourride, and they make a marvelous velouté or
cream soup.

LES SAINT-JACQUES EN BOUILLABAISSE
[Bouillabaisse of Scallops]
This heady Mediterranean brew of leeks, onions, garlic,

tomatoes, and herbs plus scallops can be a complete meal when
served with plenty of fresh French bread and followed by fruit and
cheese.

Serving 4 as a main course, 6 as a soup course

1) The soup base
1½ cups combination Cook the leeks and onions slowly

finely sliced leeks and with the oil in the covered saucepan
onions, or onions only for 5 to 6 minutes until tender but

¼ cup olive oil not browned. Add garlic and
A heavy-bottomed tomatoes, raise heat slightly, and

stainless or enameled cook 3 to 4 minutes more. Add the
3-quart saucepan with rest of the ingredients, bring to the
cover boil, and simmer partially covered

2 large cloves minced or for 30 minutes. Carefully taste for
mashed garlic seasoning, adding salt and pepper as

1¼ to 1½ cups chopped needed.
fresh tomato pulp (4
medium tomatoes



peeled, seeded, and
juiced)

4 cups liquid: white-wine
fish stock, or equal
parts clam juice,
water, and white wine
or vermouth

The juice from the
tomatoes

2 large pinches saffron
threads

The following tied in
washed cheesecloth: 6
parsley sprigs, 1 bay
leaf, ¼ tsp thyme, ½
tsp basil, 4 fennel
seeds, and a 2-inch
piece of dried orange
peel or ¼ tsp bottled
dried peel Salt and
pepper

2) Preparing the scallops
1 lb. (2 cups) bay or sea Soak the scallops in cold water for 2

scallops, fresh or or 3 minutes if fresh, until
frozen completely defrosted if frozen. Lift

A large bowl and sieve out and drain, looking over each for
sand; wash again if necessary. Leave
bay scallops whole. Cut sea scallops
into ⅜-inch chunks.



3) Finishing the soup
The soup base Bring the soup base to a rapid boil,
The scallops add the scallops, bring to the boil
2 to 3 Tb coarsely again and boil slowly uncovered for 3

chopped fresh parsley minutes. Check seasoning again.
French bread Serve either from a warm tureen or
Optional: a bowl of in soup cups or plates, and decorate

freshly grated with parsley. Pass the bread and
Parmesan cheese optional cheese separately.

(*) Soup may be cooked several
hours before serving. Let cool
uncovered, then cover and
refrigerate. Bring to a full boil for 2
or 3 seconds before serving. Note
that a full boil is necessary to
redistribute the olive oil into the
liquid.

Other ideas
For a more nourishing soup, you can add 2 cups of diced

“boiling” potatoes or a handful of pasta to the soup base 10 minutes
before the end of its simmering. You could enrich the soup with an
egg yolk and oil liaison, as for the soupe aux poivrons, or with a
rouille, as for the bouillabaisse in Volume I, page 52. See also the
recipe for bourride with its aïoli enrichment.

  VELOUTÉ DE SAINT-JACQUES
[Cream of Scallop Soup—hot or cold]



This deliciously creamy soup is a cousin of the Breton mouclades,
mussel soup, and you may serve it either hot or cold.

For 6 to 7 cups, serving 4 to 6

1) The court bouillon
4 cups liquid: 2 cups dry Simmer the ingredients for the court

white wine or 1½ cups bouillon in the partially covered
dry white vermouth saucepan for 20 minutes. Strain,
plus water pressing liquid out of ingredients,

1 cup thinly sliced and return the court bouillon liquid to
onions the pan.

¼ cup thinly sliced
carrots

¼ tsp each: fennel seeds,
thyme, and curry
powder

4 peppercorns
1 clove mashed garlic
1½ bay leaf
6 parsley sprigs
½ tsp salt
A heavy-bottomed

stainless or enameled
saucepan with cover

A sieve set over a bowl

2) Cooking the scallops



1 lb. (2 cups) scallops, Soak the scallops in cold water for 2
fresh or frozen or 3 minutes if fresh, until

completely defrosted if frozen. Lift
out and drain, looking over each for
sand; wash again if necessary. Cut
into ¼-inch dice. Bring the court
bouillon to a boil, add scallops, bring
again to just under the boiling point,
and simmer uncovered for 3 minutes.
Drain the liquid into the bowl,
leaving scallops in sieve. Rinse and
dry the saucepan.

3) The velouté soup base
3 Tb butter Melt the butter in the saucepan, stir
4 Tb flour in the flour, and cook slowly for 2
A wooden spatula or minutes without browning. Remove

spoon from heat and let cool a moment,
The court bouillon then pour in all the warm court
A wire whip bouillon at once, beating vigorously

with a wire whip to blend
1½ to 2 cups milk thoroughly. Bring to the boil for 2 to
½ to ¾ cup heavy cream 3 minutes, stirring to reach all over
2 egg yolks bottom of pan. Thin with milk as
The scallops necessary; soup should not be too
Salt and white pepper thick, since the egg yolks to come

will also thicken it. Remove from
heat. Pour ½ cup of the cream into
the bowl, blend in the egg yolks with
a wire whip, and gradually dribble in
about 2 cups of the hot soup, beating.
Return mixture to the pan and stir in



the scallops. Carefully correct
seasoning.
(*) Soup may be prepared to this
point several hours in advance. Clean
off sides of pan with a rubber spatula
and float a spoonful of cream on the
surface to prevent a skin from
forming. When cool, cover and
refrigerate.

4) Finishing the soup, and serving
3 to 4 Tb soft butter Shortly before serving, set soup over
2 to 3 Tb minced fresh moderate heat and stir continually

parsley, chervil, or with a wooden spoon until soup
chives comes to just below the simmer.

Remove from heat and stir in the
butter, a tablespoon at a time. Serve
in a warm tureen or soup cups, and
decorate with the minced herbs.

To serve cold
Omit the final butter enrichment, and oversalt slightly. Clean off

sides of pan with a rubber spatula and float a spoonful of cream on
the surface. When cool, cover and refrigerate. Blend in more cream,
if you wish, just before serving.

VARIATION



Velouté de Crustacés
[Cream of Shellfish Soup—for canned crab, and cooked or frozen
crab or lobster meat]
Although the best shellfish soups are made, like the bisques,

from fresh, raw shellfish in the shell, because every bit of the flavor
goes into the soup, you can produce an excellent result with the
cooked meat alone, plus either a fish stock or clam juice. This is a
useful type of recipe for those times when you want something
special on the spur of the moment. The technique here is almost the
same as for the preceding scallop soup, but there is no court bouillon.
(NOTE: this recipe works especially well with freshly cooked crab or
lobster meat, as well as with the frozen meat or with canned crab.
We have not found canned lobster to be at all successful.)

For about 6 cups, serving 4 people

1) Preparing and flavoring the shellfish meat
7 to 8 ounces (1 packed Commercially canned or frozen

cup) canned crab shellfish meat is usually packed with
meat, or cooked or a preservative, which should be
frozen crab or lobster washed off. Therefore soak the meat
meat in cold water for several minutes (or

A large sieve and bowl until completely thawed). Pick it
2 Tb butter over carefully to remove all bits of
An 8-inch enameled or tendon, particularly if you are using

stainless frying pan crab meat. Drain thoroughly. Melt
1 Tb minced shallots or butter in pan, stir in shallots or

scallions scallions, then the shellfish meat.
Season with the tarragon, salt, and

⅛ tsp tarragon pepper and sauté over moderate heat
Salt and pepper for 2 to 3 minutes so that butter and

flavorings will penetrate meat. Add



Either ¾ cup dry white wine or vermouth, boil rapidly to
wine; reduce liquid by half, and set aside.

Or ½ cup dry white
French vermouth

2) The velouté soup base
½ cup very finely minced Cook the onions slowly in the butter

onion until tender but not browned. Stir in
4 Tb butter the flour and cook for 2 minutes.
A 2½- to 3-quart heavy Remove from heat, and beat in the

bottomed stainless or hot liquid. Simmer partially covered
enameled saucepan for 20 minutes, thinning out as
with cover necessary with milk. Add the

3 Tb flour shellfish meat, simmer 2 to 3 minutes
3 cups fish stock or clam to blend flavors, thinning out again

juice brought to the with milk if necessary. Correct
simmer in a small seasoning. Pour ½ cup cream into
saucepan shellfish pan, blend in the egg yolks,

then about 2 cups of hot soup added
2 to 3 cups milk by driblets. Pour back into the soup.
Salt and pepper to taste
The shellfish meat (*) May be prepared ahead to this

point, as directed in preceding recipe.
½ to ¾ cup heavy cream
2 egg yolks

3) Finishing the soup and serving

Follow directions in preceding recipe.



FRENCH FISH STEWS AND CHOWDERS
Bouillabaisse is not the only French fish chowder. From that same

Mediterranean coast comes the bourride—thick, rich, and reeking of
garlic, while from the opposite corner of France comes the marmite
dieppoise, with its mussels, sole, cream, and eggs. Inland France has
its own special chowders too, called matelotes, meurettes, and
pauchouses, made from fresh-water fish. These are all hearty dishes
with big chunks of fish, and easily suffice as the main course of an
informal lunch or supper.

FISH TO USE

For this type of recipe the fish should be fairly firm-fleshed so
that it will keep its shape while it cooks. Whether fresh or frozen, it
must smell as fresh as a breeze from the open sea or the primeval
forest. You cannot, of course, duplicate a fresh-water chowder from
Burgundy with ocean fish from the New Jersey or Oregon coast, but
we do not think the fish itself is all that important: it is the rest of
the ingredients and the general method that give each dish its
special character. Here are some suggestions for both ocean fish and
fresh-water fish with their French translations or equivalents.

Ocean fish
Cod (cabillaud, morue fraîche)
Conger eel (congre, fiélas)
Cusk (brosme, rare in France)
Goosefish, monkfish (lotte de mer, baudroie)
Haddock (églefin)
Halibut (flétan, rare in France)
Ocean whitefish, wolf fish, catfish (loup anarrhique, rare in

France)
Pollack, green cod, coalfish (lieu jaune is a near equivalent)
Sea bass (bar, loup)
Whiting, silver hake (merlu or colin is the European cousin;

merlan is no relation but a good choice)



Various rockfish, if you are a fisherman (the American sculpin is
a cousin of the Mediterranean rascasse)

Fresh-water fish
Bass and perch (perche)
Carp (carpe)
Catfish (lotte de rivière)
Eel (anguille)
Pike (brochet)
Trout (truite)
Small carplike fishes (tanche, barbeau, barbillon are typical, and

frequently mentioned in French recipes)

Scallops
Though rarely used for soups and chowders in France, scallops

are delicious used in any of the following recipes, alone or in
combination with other fish.

PREPARING FISH FOR COOKING

Small fish (6 to 8 inches) for stews and chowders are cleaned
and scaled, and left whole. Larger fish, after cleaning and scaling,
are cut into slices ¾ to 1 inch thick. Very large fish are cut into
thick fillets or steaks, and then into serving pieces about 3 by 4
inches in diameter. Bones and skin are usually not removed, but you
may do so if you wish. As soon as you have prepared the fish, wrap
and refrigerate it until you are ready to cook. Make fish stock out of
scraps, heads, skin, and so forth (Volume I, page 114).

MATELOTES, MEURETTES, PAUCHOUSES
[Burgundy Fish Stew with Wine, Onions, Lardons, and
Mushrooms]



You might call this dish the fisherman’s coq au vin, fish simmered
in wine with onions, pork bits, and mushrooms, and the wine
becomes the sauce. Even those who are not enthusiastic fish eaters
usually love this recipe, and although it is supposed to be made with
fresh-water fish or eels alone, we have used ocean fish like halibut,
haddock, or scallops with complete success. As usual with French
regional recipes, you can have endless arguments as to whether a
matelote is cooked with red wine or white, or if it is only the
pauchouse (spelled pôchouse by some) that simmers in white wine,
and only the meurette that has lardons of pork, or vice versa,
including a garnish of poached eggs and truffles for some versions.
We shall not enter into the argument at all except to say that either
a fish-stock or clam-juice base to the sauce is essential, or your
matelote/meurette/pauchouse will lack the savor and character it
must have.

If this is a main course, you may wish to add a side dish of
boiled potatoes to eat with the stew, as well as plenty of French
bread. Serve either a strong dry white wine or a red, preferably
Burgundy, to match whichever wine cooked with the fish. A green
salad or cold vegetables vinaigrette could follow the stew, and then
cheese and fruit or a dessert.

For 4 to 6 people

1) The sauce base
¼ lb. (½ cup) fresh fat- Cut pork into lardons 1 inch long and

and-lean pork belly or ¼ inch thick. If you are using salt
butt, or a chunk of salt pork or bacon, drop into 2 quarts of
pork, or bacon water, simmer 10 minutes, drain,

A 4- to 5-quart rinse, and dry in paper towels. Cook
flameproof casserole with the pork fat or oil over
or saucepan moderately low heat for 4 to 5

minutes, stirring frequently, until



1 Tb pork fat or cooking pork is very lightly browned. Then
oil stir in the sliced onions, cover pan,

Either 2 cups sliced and cook slowly for about 5 minutes
onions; until onions are tender. Raise heat

Or ½ cup sliced onions and brown very lightly. Sprinkle on
and 24 to 30 braised the flour and stir over moderately
onions to be added at high heat to cook and brown the
end of cooking flour for 2 minutes. Remove from

2 Tb flour heat.

2 cups either red wine Gradually stir in the liquids to blend
such as Côtes-du- smoothly with the flour. Add the
Rhône or Mountain herbs and garlic and bring to the
Red; or dry white wine simmer. Salt lightly to taste. Simmer
such as Côtes-du- half an hour. Liquid should be lightly
Rhöne or Pinot Blanc; thickened; thin out with a little more
or 1½ cups dry white wine or stock if necessary. Carefully
French vermouth correct seasoning.

2 cups fish stock or clam
juice (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be cooked

in advance; when cool, cover and
Big pinch pepper refrigerate.
1 imported bay leaf
2 allspice berries
½ tsp thyme
1 clove garlic, mashed
Salt (none if using clam

juice)

2) Optional additions—to be prepared in advance of final
cooking



1 lb. fresh mushrooms, The mushrooms may be sautéed and
quartered and sautéed set aside in a covered dish; they will
in butter simmer in the sauce just before

8 to 12 canapés serving. Reheat the canapés in the
(triangles of crustless oven for several minutes before
homemade-type white serving.
bread sautéed in
clarified butter)

3) Finishing the stew and serving
Either 2 to 2½ lbs. fish Twenty minutes before you wish to

from the list, one or serve, bring the sauce base to the boil
several varieties and add the fish. Pour on more liquid
prepared as described; if necessary, so fish is just covered.

Or scallops only Rapidly bring back to the boil and
More stock or clam juice boil slowly 8 to 10 minutes (3 to 4

if needed minutes only for scallops) until fish is
done; flesh comes easily from bone,
or will just flake—do not overcook.

A hot serving dish Arrange fish on hot dish, cover, and
The optional braised keep warm. Skim off any surface fat

onions and sautéed and rapidly boil down sauce, if
mushrooms necessary, to concentrate its flavor or

Parsley sprigs or minced to thicken it. Add optional braised
fresh parsley onions and/or mushrooms and

The optional canapés simmer for a moment to blend
flavors. Carefully correct seasoning.
Spoon sauce and vegetables over fish,



decorate with parsley and optional
canapés, and serve immediately.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you find you
cannot serve immediately, return fish
to pan after sauce has been finished
and optional vegetables added.
Remove from heat, and just before
serving reheat to the simmer, basting
fish with sauce until hot through.

MARMITE AUX FRUITS DE MER—MARMITE
DIEPPOISE—CHAUDRÉE NORMANDE
[Normandy-style Fish Stew with Sole, Shellfish, and White-wine
Sauce]
When you order marmite dieppoise in Dieppe on the Normandy

coast or at Prunier’s in Paris, you are served an elegant combination
of channel sole, turbot, red mullet, mussels, shrimps, scallops, and
langoustines, those small, European, lobsterlike prawns, all steaming
together in an abundant, deliciously winey-smelling, ivory-colored
sauce. It will cost you quite a number of francs, since marmite
dieppoise is definitely in the luxury category. This is another dish we
cannot fully duplicate in America because channel soles, turbots,
mullets, and langoustines do not live here, but other soles, halibuts,
and lobsters do, as do shrimp, scallops, and mussels. The following
recipe, therefore, is an overseas version of the original. You may
serve the marmite as a first course, although we suggest it as the
main attraction of the meal. You could start with a pâté or a
saucisson en brioche, follow with asparagus or artichokes vinaigrette,
and it would be fully in the Normandy tradition to end with an
apple dessert such as the individual soufflés, or the tarte aux
pommes. With the marmite itself, serve a fine white Burgundy,
Graves, or Gewürtztraminer.



FISH TALK

Although you may use any of the fish listed, you will have a
combination more like the original with the equivalent of a fillet of
sole, two 2-inch pieces of halibut, 4 to 6 shrimp, scallops, and/or
mussels, and ⅓ of a lobster per person, for the first serving, and half
the amount for seconds. Whatever you have chosen, be sure each
piece of fish smells absolutely fresh; pay particular attention to the
shrimp if frozen, because they can overpower everything else unless
of unquestionable quality. A well-flavored fish stock is essential
here; if you cannot get bones and trimmings from fresh sole, buy an
extra pound or so of fish.

For 6 people as a main course, 10 to 12 as a soup course

1) Preliminaries—may be done several hours in advance
preparing the fish—see also preceding paragraph:

1½ lbs. skinless and Wash and drain all the fish. Trim sole
boneless sole or or flounder fillets if necessary; cut in
flounder fillets half crosswise. If scallops are large,

1 to 1½ lbs. scallops cut into ½-inch pieces. Peel and de-
1 to 1½ lbs. raw shrimp, vein the shrimp, reserving peel and

medium size, and in also heads if you have whole fresh
the shell if possible shrimp. Remove skin and bones from

1 to 1½ lbs. halibut halibut, cut meat into pieces roughly
steaks 1 inch thick 2 inches in diameter, and reserve

Waxed paper bones and trimmings. Place each type
of fish on waxed paper and pack into

A bowl large enough to bowl in the order listed; cover and
hold all the fish refrigerate. Refrigerate trimmings

and reserve for the fish stock.
DECORATION NOTE: You may wish to
save out some whole cooked shrimp,



lobster claws, or mussels to decorate
each serving; we leave this up to you.

optional fresh mussels:
2 quarts fresh mussels Scrub and soak the mussels, and
½ cup dry white wine or steam them open in the wine as

dry white French described in Volume I, pages 226–7.
vermouth Reserve 12 pairs of shells for garnish.

Place meat in a small bowl and
moisten with a little of the cooking
liquid; decant rest of liquid into
another bowl, being sure to include
no sand.

the lobsters:

You may use 8 to 12 ounces of
cooked lobster meat rather than fresh
lobsters; thaw if frozen, then warm in
butter, wine, and seasonings, here,
before adding to the marmite in the
next step.

2 live lobsters, 1¼ to 1½ Split the lobsters in half lengthwise,
lbs. each discard stomach sacks in head and

A sieve set over a 1-quart intestinal veins, scoop green matter
bowl or small and roe into sieve, and chop lobster
saucepan into pieces (see illustration). Film

marmite with ⅛ inch of oil, heat to



2 to 3 Tb olive oil or very hot but not smoking, and sauté
cooking oil lobster for 3 to 4 minutes, turning

The marmite (a heavy- frequently until lobster shells are
bottomed, 6- to 8- bright red. Remove to a side dish.
quart enameled or Lower heat, stir vegetables and herbs
stainless casserole or into pan, and sauté 8 to 10 minutes
kettle, with cover) until tender but not browned. Season

2 cups combined sliced lobster lightly with salt, return to
white of leek and marmite, add wine, cover, and
onions; or onions only simmer slowly for 20 minutes. Then

½ cup each of sliced lift out lobster pieces, remove the
carrots and celery meat and reserve it in a bowl; chop

shells and return to marmite. At some
2 imported bay leaves convenient time, add soft butter to
½ tsp thyme lobster green matter and rub butter
8 to 10 parsley stems with green matter through sieve into

and/or roots (not the bowl; beat in the egg yolks and
leaves) cream, and set aside or refrigerate.

Salt (none if using (Rinse sieve in lobster-cooking liquid
mussel or clam juice) to get all the flavor possible.)

2 cups dry white wine or
1½ cups dry white
French vermouth

4 Tb soft butter
3 egg yolks
⅔ cup heavy cream

the fish stock—for 6 to 8 cups:
Either 2 to 3 lbs. (2 or Add all ingredients to the lobster-

more quarts) bones, cooking marmite, bring to simmer,
heads, trimmings, and skim, and simmer partially covered

for 40 minutes. Strain liquid into a



shells from the fresh bowl and discard residue. Wash out
fish you are using; marmite and return liquid to it; you

Or an extra pound of should have 6 to 8 cups of deliciously
fish; flavored brew. Boil down to

Or 3 cups clam juice concentrate flavor and volume if
Either 2 more cups dry necessary; carefully correct

white wine; seasoning.
Or 1½ cups dry white

French vermouth (half
the amount of either if
you are using mussel-
cooking liquid)

The optional mussel-
cooking liquid and/or
necessary cold water

2 tsp salt (none if using
mussel liquid or clam
juice)

2) Final cooking and serving—about 30 minutes cooking the
fish:

The fish stock in its Bring the fish stock to the boil.
marmite During this time melt the butter in

4 Tb butter the saucepan, blend in the flour, and
A heavy-bottomed 3- cook slowly, stirring, until butter and

quart enameled or flour foam together for 2 minutes
stainless saucepan without browning at all. Set this roux

⅓ cup flour (scoop cup aside: it is for the sauce, next step.
into flour and level off When stock is boiling, add the
with a knife) halibut (or other firm-fleshed fish);

bring liquid rapidly to the simmer
and simmer 5 minutes. Then add the



A wooden spoon, a wire sole, scallops, and shrimp, pressing
whip, a perforated them down into the liquid. If really
skimmer, and a ladle necessary, add a little more liquid:

The bowl of prepared ingredients should be almost covered.
and refrigerated fish Bring again rapidly to the simmer for

The cooked lobster meat 2 minutes, then add the cooked
and optional mussels lobster meat and optional cooked

More fish stock, white mussels. Bring again to simmer for 1
wine, or boiling water minute and remove from heat. Lift
if needed fish out and arrange in tureen; cover

loosely. (Some of the fish, like sole,
A large soup tureen or may have flaked apart; lift only what

bowl-shaped platter you easily can into the tureen.)
set over a pan of
almost simmering
water

the sauce:
The flour-and-butter roux Reheat roux if necessary, remove

and cooking liquid from heat, and whisking it with a
from preceding step wire whip, gradually ladle into it by

More stock or cream if driblets 2 cups of hot cooking stock.
needed When perfectly smooth, set over

The lobster green-matter, moderately high heat and rapidly
cream, and yolk beat in 4 to 5 more cups of stock.
mixture Simmer, stirring, for 2 minutes: sauce

Salt, white pepper, should be a little thicker than a fairly
Cayenne pepper, and heavy cream soup. Boil down rapidly,
lemon juice stirring, if too thin; beat in a little

more stock if too thick. Then, and
again by driblets, beat 2 cups of hot
sauce into the lobster green-matter
mixture, heating it gradually to



prevent it from curdling. Gradually
beat it back into the hot sauce, and
set sauce over moderate heat. Stir
slowly with a wooden spoon,
reaching all over bottom of pan until
sauce thickens and comes almost to
the simmer. If sauce seems too thick,
stir in a little more cream or stock.
Taste very carefully for seasoning,
adding salt, pepper, drops of lemon
juice, and so forth if you feel them
necessary. Proceed immediately to
the next step.

serving:
The optional fish Gently fold the hot sauce into the

decorations, such as warm fish in the tureen. Float
whole shrimp, lobster optional fish decorations on top and
shells, mussels, etc. sprinkle the herbs over all. Serve as

2 to 3 Tb minced fresh soon as possible, ladling the stew into
parsley and or chervil hot plates and adding a canapé or

12 to 18 canapés two to each portion. This is eaten
(triangles of crustless with large soup spoon, knife, and
homemade-type white fork.
bread sautéed in (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
clarified butter) completed a day before, serving in

Warm soup plates the marmite instead of a tureen.
When cold, cover and refrigerate;
heat slowly to below the simmer
before serving. Like a good New
England chowder or lobster stew, it



gains in flavor when made in
advance.

BOURRIDE
[Provençal Fish Stew with Aïoli—Garlic Mayonnaise]
This marvelous fish dinner from Provence is for garlic lovers

only, as the big chunks of fish are cooked in a broth that is then
enriched with egg yolks and a mayonnaise into which at least 1
large clove of garlic per person has been puréed. Like bouillabaisse,
the fish is served on a platter and the enriched broth in a tureen, but
both are eaten together in soup plates. This is such a rich dish we
suggest you serve it for lunch, and you will want nothing else but
perhaps a bit of green salad and fresh fruit. You will need a strong,
dry white wine, such as a Côtes-du-Rhône or Pinot Blanc.

For 6 to 8 people as a main course

1) Preliminaries—may be done several hours before final
cooking the fish:

3 to 4 lbs. assorted lean, Prepare the fish as described, cutting
firm-fleshed white it into chunks or steaks about 3
fish, such as those inches in diameter and 1 to 1½
suggested here inches thick. Refrigerate until

cooking time.

the cooking broth:
1 cup each of sliced Cook the vegetables in oil over low

onions, carrots, and heat for 8 to 10 minutes, until tender



white of leek (or but not browned. Add the tomatoes
additional onion) and cook 2 minutes, then add all the

3 to 4 Tb olive oil rest of the ingredients. Bring to the
A heavy-bottomed 7- to simmer, skimming occasionally, and

8- quart flameproof simmer partially covered for 40
casserole or kettle minutes. Strain into a bowl, wash out

2 medium tomatoes, casserole, and return the stock to it.
chopped Correct seasoning, adding salt if

necessary.
2 to 3 quarts fish

trimmings, bones, (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If prepared in
heads; or 2 to 3 cups advance, cover when cool and
fish; or 1 quart clam refrigerate.
juice

3 quarts water (2 quarts
if you use clam juice)

2 cups dry white wine or
1½ cups dry white
French vermouth

2 imported bay leaves
¼ tsp each of thyme,

fennel, and dried
orange peel

2 large cloves of garlic,
unpeeled, halved

2 large pinches saffron
flowers

1½ Tb salt (none if you
use clam juice)

the aïoli mayonnaise:



⅓ cup stale crumbs from Moisten crumbs with a tablespoon or
homemade-type two of vinegar and pound to a paste
unsweetened white in the bowl. Purée garlic through
bread press into the paste and continue

Wine vinegar pounding several minutes until
A heavy 2½-quart mixing absolutely smooth. Add salt and 2 of

bowl or a mortar the egg yolks and pound until
A wooden pestle, mixture is very thick and sticky. Then

masher, or heavy ladle begin pounding and stirring in oil by
(for pounding) droplets until sauce is thick and

6 to 8 cloves garlic and heavy. Thin out with drops of
garlic press vinegar and begin beating in

teaspoons of oil with whip. Sauce
½ tsp salt should be heavy enough to hold its
6 egg yolks (2 now, the shape in a spoon. Season to taste.

rest later) (Note that a more detailed recipe on
1½ to 2 cups olive oil aïoli and on mayonnaise in general is
A large wire whip in Volume I, page 92.)
White or Cayenne pepper

A 2-cup serving bowl Scrape half the sauce into serving
Plastic wrap bowl, cover airtight, and set aside for
A covered jar if needed dining room. Beat the 4 remaining

egg yolks into the rest of the sauce;
cover airtight. (If doing in advance,
transfer to a smaller container and
cover.) This second half is to be
combined with the stew just before
serving.

2) Cooking and serving cooking the fish:



The cooking broth About 15 minutes before serving,
The prepared fish bring cooking broth to a rolling boil
A large perforated and add the fish, pushing it down

skimmer into the broth, which should barely
A serving platter set over cover it. (Add a little boiling water if

a pan of almost necessary.) Boil slowly, uncovered,
simmering water, and for 6 to 10 minutes, depending on
a cover thickness of fish (2 to 3 minutes only

2 to 3 Tb coarsely for scallops); it is done when springy
chopped parsley rather than squashy to the touch—do

not overcook. As soon as fish is done,
arrange on platter, moisten with a
little of the cooking broth, decorate
with parsley, and cover to keep it
warm.

combining cooking broth and aïoli:
The egg-yolk enriched Whisking aïoli with wire whip,

aïoli in a 3-quart bowl gradually dribble in several ladlesful
A large wire whip, a of hot cooking broth until 2 to 3 cups

ladle, and a wooden have gone in. (Ladle a cup or so of
spoon broth also into serving bowl and keep

A 3-cup serving bowl warm.) Pour aïoli mixture back into
Salt and white pepper casserole with rest of cooking stock
A warm soup tureen and set over moderate heat. Stir

continually and rather slowly with
wooden spoon until broth slowly
thickens enough to coat the spoon—4
to 5 minutes—being careful that
liquid does not come to simmer and
scramble the egg yolks. Carefully
correct seasoning; broth will be a



beautiful, smooth, richly aromatic
yellow-ivory color. Pour it into the
tureen and serve immediately.

serving:
12 or more slices of hot For each serving, place 2 slices of

French bread, ¾ inch bread in a soup plate and moisten
thick with a spoonful of plain broth.

Wide soup plates Arrange chunks of fish over the bread
The reserved plain broth and ladle over it the aïoli broth from
The hot fish on its the tureen. Each guest adds a

platter, and the tureen spoonful of aïoli mayonnaise, and
The reserved aïoli eats the bourride with soup spoon and

mayonnaise fork.






CHAPTER TWO
Baking: Breads, Brioches, Croissants,

and Pastries

YEAST DOUGHS
Les Pâtes Levées

THE AVERAGE FRENCH HOUSEHOLD does no yeast baking at all except for
babas, savarins, and an occasional brioche. It certainly does no bread
making, and there is no need to because every neighborhood has its
own boulangerie serving freshly baked bread every day of the week
but one, usually Monday, when the boulanger takes his day off. Thus
you cannot even find a bread pan in a French household supply
store, and there are no French recipes for homemade bread. All of
the recipes here, therefore, are those used by professionals whose
techniques we have worked out for the home baker, using standard
ingredients and household equipment.

Whether you are a home or a professional baker, you will find
that time is really the key to successful bread making. Just as it
takes time for cheese to ripen and wine to age, it takes time for
yeast to do its full work in a dough. The function of yeast is not only
to push the dough up but, equally important, to develop its flavor
and its texture. Yeast feeds and multiplies on the starch in the flour.
Flour also contains gluten, and it is the gluten that allows the dough
to rise and stay risen in the oven because gluten molecules become
gluey when moistened and join together in an elastic web
throughout the dough. Then, while the yeast cells are feeding and
multiplying on the starch, their voracious activity forms tiny pockets
of gas that push up the surrounding mesh of gluten, making the



dough rise. At the same time the gluten itself, if given time, goes
through a slow ripening process that gives the dough flavor,
cohesion, and elasticity. These important developments in the
gluten must take place if a very simple dough, such as that for plain
French bread, is to turn into something splendidly satisfying to eat.
Thus, rather than trying to speed things up by using lots of yeast
and a warm rising temperature, you want to provide time for
ripening by slowing everything down with a minimum of yeast, a
tepid temperature, and several risings.

Many reasons are given for the doleful state of much
contemporary bread both here and in France: it is not baked in
wood-fired ovens; both the flour and water are full of chemicals; it
is machine-kneaded; and so forth. The villain in the bread basket is
speed: the yeast has not been given the time it needs to accomplish
its triple function of developing flavor and texture as well as
volume.

YEAST

Yeast is a living organism, but it is inactive or dormant when
you buy it, either as a fresh cake wrapped in silver paper or as dry
yeast in a sealed envelope. Fresh cake yeast must be a uniformly
creamy gray with no spots of discoloration, and is perishable; it will
keep only about a week under refrigeration but for several weeks
when wrapped airtight and frozen. Dry-active yeast should be stored
in a cool, dry place, or in the refrigerator or freezer; use it before
the expiration date stamped on the envelope. Either type of yeast
may be used, but both must be completely liquefied before the yeast
is ready to become active. Although you can mix it, as is, into the
dry ingredients and blend in warm water, we prefer the almost as
rapid but visually positive method of liquefying it separately.

Proving yeast
When you know your yeast is fresh, you need have no doubts

about its capacities. If you think it may be stale do not hesitate to



make it prove itself by dissolving it in the warm water called for in
your recipe; stir in also a tablespoon of flour and a pinch of sugar. It
is active and ready to use if it begins to foam and to increase in
volume in about 8 minutes: the yeast cells, spurred on by the sugar,
are feeding on the flour.

DOUGH TEXTURE, VOLUME OF RISE, TEMPERATURE

Anyone used to American bread making will be surprised to find
that the doughs for all of the following recipes are light, soft, and
sticky when first made because the dough is to triple rather than
double in volume during its first and usually its second rise: this is
the period during which it develops its flavor and texture. Rather
than rising in a warm place of around 85 degrees, which would
cause it to ferment and acquire an unpleasant yeasty-sour taste, it
must rise in the low 70’s if you can possibly manage it, or at an even
lower temperature if you wish to delay the process.

THE WEATHER

We therefore suggest that you do not attempt your first bread-
making spree in a hot kitchen. When you are used to doughs and
know how they should look, smell, and feel, you can adjust your
procedures to the weather, letting the dough rise part of the time in
the refrigerator, for instance, or deflating it when partially risen and
letting it push itself up several times. Rainy or humid weather and
steamy rooms also have their adverse affect, making dough unduly
sticky, even sweaty; pick a dry day and a dry room, then, for your
first venture. In other words, make everything as easy as possible for
yourself.

TIMING AND DELAYED ACTION

Although it will take you a minimum of 7 hours from start to
finish for most of these recipes, that does not mean that you are
hovering over your dough for 7 straight hours. During almost all of



this time the dough is sitting quietly by itself, rising in one form or
another. Because you can slow down the rise by lowering the
temperature, you may set it in the refrigerator or the freezer when
you have to go out, and continue when you return. Thus, although
you cannot successfully speed things up, you can otherwise fit bread
making into almost any pattern that suits your schedule. Each of the
recipes indicates various stopping points, and there is a delayed-
action chart at the end of the French bread recipe.

MACHINE VERSUS HAND MIXING

A heavy-duty table-model electric beater with a dough hook
works very well for mixing and kneading dough, and can be adapted
nicely to the French processes. Notes are at the end of each Master
Recipe.

PLAIN FRENCH BREAD
Pain Français

A fine loaf of plain French bread, the long crackly kind a
Frenchman tucks under his arm as he hurries home to the family
lunch, has a very special quality. Its inside is patterned with holes
almost like Swiss cheese, and when you tear off a piece it wants to
come sideways; it has body, chewability, and tastes and smells of
the grain. Plain French bread contains only flour, water, salt, and
yeast, because that is the law in France. The method, however, is up
to each individual baker. Until the 1800’s and before commercial
yeast was known, all bread was made with a levain, meaning dough
left over from the previous batch; the procedure involved numerous
risings and mixings to develop sufficient yeast cells for the day’s
quota of bread. Later a brewer’s-yeast-and-flour batter was
developed that simplified the process, but it was not until the 1870’s
that the kind of yeast we use today was manufactured in France.
Since then the making of French bread has undergone many



changes, some of which, notably the accelerated mechanical
kneading and fast rising systems used by some bakers, have had a
disastrous affect on quality. Again, this is a question of trying to
save time at the expense of taste and texture, because excellent
bread may be made using modern ingredients, equipment, and
methods.

We have had the great good fortune of being able to work with
Professor R. Calvel, of the École Professionelle de Meunerie, a trade
school established in Paris to teach the profession of milling and
baking to students and bakers from all over France. The science of
bread making and the teaching of its art are the life work of
Professor Calvel, and thanks to his enthusiastic help, which set us on
the right track, we think we have developed as professional a system
for the home baker as anyone could hope for. You will be amazed at
how very different the process is from anything you have done
before, from the mixing and rising to the very special method of
forming the dough into loaves.

FLOUR

French bakers make plain French bread out of unbleached flour
that has a gluten strength of 8 to 9 per cent. Most American all-
purpose flour is bleached and has a slightly higher gluten content as
well as being slightly finer in texture. It is easier to make bread with
French flour than with American all-purpose flour, and the taste and
texture of the bread are naturally more authentic. (The so-called
bread flour available in some mail-order houses usually has an even
higher gluten content than all-purpose flour, so do not use it for
plain French bread.) You will undoubtedly wish to experiment with
flours if you become a serious bread maker, but because we find
that any of the familiar brands of all-purpose flour works very well,
we shall not complicate the recipe by suggesting an obscure or
special brand. If you do experiment, however, simply substitute
your other flour for the amount called for in the recipe; you may
need a little bit more water or a little bit less, but the other
ingredients and the method will not change.



BAKERS’ OVENS VERSUS HOME OVENS

Bakers’ ovens are so constructed that one slides the formed bread
dough from a wooden paddle right onto the hot, fire-brick oven
floor, and a steam-injection system humidifies the oven for the first
few minutes of baking. Steam allows the yeast to work a little longer
in the dough and this, combined with a hot baking surface, produces
an extra push of volume. In addition, steam coagulating the starch
on the surface of the dough gives the crust its characteristic brown
color. Although you can produce a good loaf of French bread
without steam or a hot baking surface, you will get a larger and
handsomer loaf when you simulate professional conditions. We give
both systems—the Master Recipe, which requires no special
equipment, and the simulated baker’s oven system.

SOUR DOUGH

Sour dough is an American invention, not French, and you will
not find anything like American sour dough in France. But you can
adapt your sour dough recipe to the method described here for plain
French bread. We think you will find that our recipe will give you
an excellent result.

EQUIPMENT NEEDED FOR MAKING FRENCH BREAD

Unless you plan to go into the more elaborate simulation of a
baker’s oven, you need no unusual equipment for the following
recipe. Here are the requirements, some of which may sound odd
but will explain themselves when you read the recipe.

A 4- to 5-quart mixing bowl with fairly vertical rather than
outward-slanting sides

A kneading surface of some sort, 1½ to 2 square feet
A rubber spatula and either a metal scraper or a stiff wide metal

spatula
1 or 2 unwrinkled canvas pastry cloths or stiff linen towels upon

which the dough may rise



A stiff piece of cardboard or plywood 18 to 20 inches long and 6
to 8 inches wide, for unmolding dough from canvas to baking sheet

Finely ground cornmeal, or pasta pulverized in an electric
blender, to sprinkle on unmolding board so as to prevent dough
from sticking

The largest baking sheet that will fit into your oven
A razor blade for slashing the top of the dough
A soft pastry brush or fine-spray atomizer for moistening dough

before and during baking
A room thermometer to verify rising-temperature

  PAIN FRANÇAIS
[Plain French Bread]
Count on a minimum of 6½ to 7 hours from the time you start

the dough to the time it is ready for the oven, and half an hour for
baking. While you cannot take less time, you may take as much
more time as you wish by using the delayed-action techniques
described at the end of the recipe.

For 1 pound of flour, making 3 cups of dough, producing:
3 long loaves, baguettes, 24 by 2 inches, or bâtards, 16 by 3 inches
Or 6 short loaves, ficelles, 12 to 16 by 2 inches
Or 3 round loaves, boules, 7 to 8 inches in diameter
Or 12 round or oval rolls, petits pains
Or 1 large round or oval loaf, pain de ménage or miche; pain boulot



1) The dough mixture—le fraisage (or frasage)

NOTE: List of equipment needed is in paragraph preceding this
recipe.

1 cake (0.6 ounce) fresh Stir the yeast in the warm water and
yeast or 1 package let liquefy completely while
dry-active yeast measuring flour into mixing bowl.

⅓ cup warm water (not When yeast has liquefied, pour it into
over 100 degrees) in a the flour along with the salt and the
measure rest of the water.

3½ cups (about 1 lb.) all- NOTE: We do not find the food
purpose flour, processor satisfactory here, since the
measured by scooping dough is so soft the machine clogs;
dry-measure cups into however, you can use a heavy-duty
flour and sweeping off mixer with dough hook, and finish it
excess up by hand.

2¼ tsp salt



1¼ cups tepid water (70
to 74 degrees)

Stir and cut the liquids into the flour
with a rubber spatula, pressing

firmly to form a dough, and making
sure that all bits of flour and

unmassed pieces are gathered in.
Turn dough out onto kneading
surface, scraping bowl clean.

Dough will be soft and sticky. Let
it rest for 2 to 3 minutes while

you wash and dry the bowl.

2) Kneading—pétrissage
The flour will have absorbed the liquid during this short rest,

and the dough will have a little more cohesion for the kneading that
is about to begin. Use one hand only for kneading and keep the
other clean to hold a pastry scraper, to dip out extra flour, to answer
the telephone, and so forth. Your object in kneading is to render the
dough perfectly smooth and to work it sufficiently so that all the
gluten molecules are moistened and joined together into an
interlocking web. You cannot see this happen, of course, but you
can feel it because the dough will become elastic and will retract
into shape when you push it out.

Start kneading by lifting the near edge of the dough, using a pastry
scraper or stiff wide spatula to help you if necessary, and flipping dough
over onto itself. Scrape the dough off the surface and slap it down;
lift edge and flip it over again, repeating the movement rapidly.



In 2 to 3 minutes the dough should have
enough body so that you can give it a quick
forward push with the heel of your hand as you
flip it over. Continue to knead rapidly and
vigorously in this way. If it remains too sticky,
knead in a sprinkling of flour. (Whole
kneading process will take 5 to 10 minutes,
depending on how vigorous and expert you
become.)

Shortly after this point, the dough should have developed
enough elasticity so that it draws back into shape when pushed,
indicating that the gluten molecules have united and are under
tension like a thin web of rubber; the dough should also begin to
clean itself off the kneading surface, although it will stick to your
fingers if you hold a pinch for more than a second or two. Let it rest
for 3 to 4 minutes. Knead again for a minute: the surface should
now look smooth; the dough will be less sticky but it will still
remain soft. It is now ready for its first rise.

3) First rising—pointage premier temps (3 to 5 hours at around
70 degrees)
You now have approximately 3 cups of dough that is to rise 3½

times its original volume, or to about 10½ cups. Fill the mixing
bowl with 10½ cups of tepid water and make a mark to indicate
that level on the outside of the bowl (note that the bowl should



have fairly upright sides; if they are too outward slanting, the dough
will have difficulty rising). Pour out the water, dry the bowl, and
place the dough in it; slip bowl into a large plastic bag or cover with
plastic, and top with a folded bath towel. Set on a wooden surface
(marble or stone are too cold) or on a folded towel or pillow, and let
rise free from drafts anyplace where the temperature is around 70
degrees; if the room is too hot, set bowl in water and keep renewing
water to maintain it at around 70 degrees. Dough should take at
least 3 hours to rise to 10½ cups; if the temperature is lower, it will
simply take longer.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: See chart at end of recipe.

When fully risen, the dough will be humped into a slight dome,
showing that the yeast is still active; it will be light and spongy
when pressed. There will usually be some big bubbly blisters on the
surface, and if you are using a glass bowl you will see bubbles
through the glass.

4) Deflating and second rising—rupture; pointage deuxième
temps (1½ to 2 hours at around 70 degrees)
The dough is now ready to be deflated, which will release the

yeast-engendered gases and redistribute the yeast cells so that the
dough will rise again and continue the fermentation process.



With a rubber spatula dislodge dough from inside of bowl and turn out
onto a lightly floured surface, scraping the bowl clean. If dough
seems damp and sweaty, sprinkle with a tablespoon of flour.

Lightly flour the palms of your hands and flatten the dough firmly but
not too roughly into a circle, deflating any gas bubbles by pinching
them.

Lift a corner of the near side and flip it down onto the far side. Do the
same with the left side, then the right side. Finally lift the near side
and tuck it just under the edge of the far side. The mass of dough
will look like a rounded cushion.



Slip the sides of your hands under the dough and return it to the
bowl. Cover and let rise again, this time to not quite triple, but
again until it is dome-shaped and light and spongy when touched.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: See chart at end of recipe.

5) Cutting and resting dough before forming loaves
Loosen dough all around inside of bowl and turn out onto a

lightly floured surface. Because of its two long rises, the dough will
have much more body. If it seems damp and sweaty, sprinkle lightly
with flour.

Making clean, sure cuts with a large knife or
a scraper, divide dough into 3 equal pieces for
long loaves, or whatever is specified for
other shapes and sizes.



After you have cut each piece, lift
one end and flip it over onto the
opposite end to fold the dough in
two; place dough at far side of

kneading surface. Cover loosely
with a sheet of plastic and let rest
for 5 minutes before forming. This

relaxes the gluten enough for
shaping, but not long enough for
the dough to begin rising again.

While the dough is resting, prepare the rising surface: smooth
the canvas or linen toweling on a large tray or baking sheet, and rub
flour thoroughly into the entire surface of the cloth to prevent the
dough from sticking.

6) Forming loaves—la tourne; la mise en forme des pâtons
Because French bread stands free in the oven and is not baked in

a pan, it has to be formed in such a way that the tension of the
coagulated gluten cloak on the surface will hold the dough in shape.
Following are illustrated directions for the familiar long loaf—the
bâtards (baked size 16 by 3 inches); other shapes are described and
illustrated at the end of the recipe. Baguettes are much too long for
home ovens.

After the 3 pieces of dough have rested 5 minutes, form one
piece at a time, keeping the remaining ones covered.



Working rapidly, turn the dough upside
down on a lightly floured kneading
surface and pat it firmly but not too roughly
into an 8- to 10-inch oval with the lightly
floured palms of your hands. Deflate any
gas bubbles in the dough by pinching them.

Fold the dough in half lengthwise by
bringing the far edge down over the

near edge.

Being sure that the working
surface is always very lightly
floured so the dough will not stick
and tear, which would break the
lightly coagulated gluten cloak
that is being formed, seal the edges
of the dough together, your hands
extended, thumbs out at right angles and touching.

Roll the dough a quarter turn
forward so the seal is on top.



Flatten the dough again into an oval with the
palms of your hands.

Press a trench along the central
length of the oval with the side of

one hand.

Fold in half again lengthwise.

This time seal the edges together
with the heel of one hand, and roll
the dough a quarter turn toward
you so the seal is on the bottom.



Now, by rolling the dough back and forth
with the palms of your hands, you will
lengthen it into a sausage shape. Start in
the middle, placing your right palm on the
dough, and your left palm on top of your
right hand.

Roll dough forward and backward
rapidly, gradually sliding your

hands toward the two ends as the
dough lengthens.

Deflate any gas blisters on the surface by pinching them. Repeat
the rolling movement rapidly several times until the dough is 16
inches long, or whatever length will fit on your baking sheet. During
the extension rolls, keep circumference of dough as even as possible
and try to start each roll with sealed side of dough down, twisting
the rope of dough to straighten the line of seal as necessary. If seal
disappears, as it sometimes does with all-purpose flour, do not
worry.

Place the shaped piece of dough,
sealed side up, at one side of the

flour-rubbed canvas, leaving a free



end of canvas 3 to 4 inches wide.
(The top will crust slightly as the
dough rises; it is turned over for

baking so the soft, smooth
underside will be uppermost.)

Pinch a ridge 2½ to 3 inches high in
the canvas to make a trough, and a

place for the next piece. Cover
dough with plastic while you are

forming the rest of the loaves.



After all the pieces of dough are in
place, brace the two sides of the
canvas with long rolling pins,
baking pans, or books, if the
dough seems very soft and wants
to spread out. Cover the dough
loosely with a flour-rubbed dish
towel or canvas, and a sheet of
plastic. Proceed immediately to
the final rising, next step.

7) Final rise—l’apprêt—1½ to 2½ hours at around 70 degrees
The covered dough is now to rise to almost triple in volume;

look carefully at its pre-risen size so that you will be able to judge
correctly. It will be light and swollen when risen, but will feel still a
little springy when pressed.

It is important that the final rise take place where it is dry; if
your kitchen is damp, hot, and steamy, let the bread rise in another
room or dough will stick to canvas and you will have difficulty
getting it off and onto the baking sheet. It will turn into bread in the
oven whatever happens, but you will have an easier time and a
better loaf if you aim for ideal conditions.

Preheat oven to 450 degrees 30 minutes before estimated baking
time.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: See chart at end of recipe.

8) Unmolding risen dough onto baking sheet—le démoulage
The 3 pieces of risen dough are now to be unmolded from the

canvas and arranged upside down on the baking sheet. The reason
for this reversal is that the present top of the dough has crusted over
during its rise; the smooth, soft underside should be uppermost in



the oven so that the dough can expand and allow the loaf its final
puff of volume. For the unmolding you will need a non-sticking
intermediate surface such as a stiff piece of cardboard or plywood
sprinkled with cornmeal or pulverized pasta.

Remove rolling pins or braces.
Place the long side of the board at
one side of the dough; pull the edge
of the canvas to flatten it; then raise

and flip the dough softly upside
down onto the board.

Dough is now lying along one edge of the unmolding board: rest
this edge on the right side of a lightly buttered baking sheet. Gently
dislodge dough onto baking sheet, keeping same side of dough
uppermost: this is the soft smooth side, which was underneath while
dough rose on canvas. If necessary, run sides of hands lightly down
the length of the dough to straighten it. Unmold the next piece of
dough the same way, placing it to the left of the first, leaving a 3-
inch space. Unmold the final piece near the left side of the sheet.

9) Slashing top of the dough—la coupe
The top of each piece of dough is now to be slashed in several

places. This opens the covering cloak of gluten and allows a bulge of
dough underneath to swell up through the cuts during the first 10
minutes of baking, making decorative patterns in the crust. These
are done with a blade that cuts almost horizontally into the dough
to a depth of less than half an inch. Start the cut at the middle of the



blade, drawing toward you in a swift, clean sweep. This is not quite
as easy as it sounds, and you will probably make ragged cuts at first;
never mind, you will improve with practice. Use an ordinary razor
blade and slide one side of it into a cork for safety; or buy a barber’s
straight razor at a cutlery store.

For a 16- to 18-inch loaf make 3
slashes. Note that those at the 2

ends go straight down the loaf but
are slightly off center, while the
middle slash is at a slight angle

between the two. Make the first cut
at the far end, then the middle cut,

and finally the third. Remember that
the blade should lie almost parallel

to the surface of the dough.

10) Baking—about 25 minutes; oven preheated to 450 degrees
As soon as the dough has been slashed, moisten the surface

either by painting with a soft brush dipped in cold water, or with a
fine-spray atomizer, and slide baking sheet onto rack in upper third



of preheated oven. Rapidly paint or spray dough with cold water
after 3 minutes, again in 3 minutes, and a final time 3 minutes later.
Moistening the dough at this point helps the crust to brown and
allows the yeast action to continue in the dough a little longer. The
bread should be done in about 25 minutes; the crust will be crisp,
and the bread will make a hollow sound when thumped.

If you want the crust to shine, paint lightly with a brush dipped
in cold water as soon as you slide baking sheet out of oven.

11) Cooling—2 to 3 hours
Cool the bread on a rack or set it upright in a basket or large

bowl so that air can circulate freely around each piece. Although
bread is always exciting to eat fresh from the oven, it will have a
much better taste when the inside is thoroughly cool and has
composed itself.

12) Storing French bread
Because it contains no fats or preservatives of any kind, French

bread is at its best when eaten the day it is baked. It will keep for a
day or two longer, wrapped airtight and refrigerated, but it will
keep best if you freeze it—let the loaves cool first, then wrap
airtight. To thaw, unwrap and place on a baking sheet in a cold
oven; heat the oven to 400 degrees. In about 20 minutes the crust
will be hot and crisp, and the bread thawed. The French, of course,
never heat French bread except possibly on Monday, the baker’s
holiday, when the bread is a day old.

13) Canvas housekeeping
After each bread session, if you have used canvas, brush it

thoroughly to remove all traces of flour and hang it out to dry
before putting away. Otherwise the canvas could become moldy and
ruin your next batch of dough.



DELAYED ACTION

Starting and stopping the dough process
As noted in the Master Recipe, there are numerous points at

which you can slow down the action or stop it altogether, by setting
the dough in a colder place, or refrigerating or freezing it. Exact
timings for any of these delaying procedures are impossible to give
because so much depends on what has taken place during the slow-
down, how cold the dough is when it starts to rise again, and so
forth. All you need to remember is that you are in complete control:
you can always push down a partially risen dough; you can slow the
action with cold; you can speed it with warmth. You will work out
your own systems and the following chart will help you:

TO DELAY THE FIRST RISING, SET DOUGH IN A COLDER PLACE
Approximate Hours of Rise at Degrees F.

5–6 65
7–8 55
9–10 Refrigerator

TO STOP ACTION ALTOGETHER AFTER FIRST OR SECOND RISE
Deflate, wrap airtight, and freeze. Limit: A week to 10 days,
probably more for plain French bread dough, and risky after 10
days for doughs with butter and eggs. (We shall not venture
farther upon this uncertain limb.)

TO DELAY SECOND RISING
a) Set dough in a colder place.
b) Set a plate on top of dough and a 5-lb. weight; refrigerate.

TO DELAY OR FREEZE AFTER DOUGH IS FORMED
a) Set dough in a colder place.
b) Form dough on lightly oiled sheet; cover airtight and
refrigerate or freeze, but note preceding time limit.



TO START ACTION AFTER THAWING
a) Thaw overnight in refrigerator; complete the rise at room
temperature.
b) Set at 80 degrees until thawed; complete the rise at room
temperature.

VARIATIONS

Other Forms for French Bread
Long thin loaves (ficelles, baked size: 12 to 16 by 1½ inches)
Cut the original dough, Step 5, into 5 or 6 pieces and form as

illustrated in the recipe, but making thinner sausage shapes about ½
inch in diameter. When they have risen, slash as illustrated, Step 9.

Oval rolls (petits pains, tire-bouchons)
Cut the dough into 10 or 12 pieces and form like bâtards, but

you will probably not have to lengthen them at all after the two
foldings and sealings. When they have risen, make either 2 parallel
slashes, or a single slash going from one end to the other.

Round loaves (pain de ménage, miches, boules)
When you want bread for big sandwiches or for toast, a big

round loaf is attractive. The object here is to force the cloak of
coagulated gluten to hold the ball of dough in shape: the first
movement will make a cushion; the second will seal and round the
ball, establishing surface tension. To begin the process, after the
risen dough has been cut and has rested 5 minutes, Step 5, place it
on a lightly floured surface.



Lift the left side of the dough with
the side of your left hand and bring

it down almost to the other side.

Scoop up that side and push it back
almost to the left side. Revolve dough a
quarter turn clockwise and repeat the
movement eight to ten times. This
movement gradually smooths the
bottom of the dough and establishes the
necessary surface tension; think of the
surface of the dough as if it were a fine
sheet of rubber you were stretching in
every direction.

Then turn the dough smooth side
up and begin rotating it between the
palms of your hands, tucking a bit
of the dough under the ball as you

rotate it. In a dozen turns you
should have a neatly shaped ball
with a little pucker of dough, la
clé, underneath where the edges

have all joined together.



Place the dough pucker side up on flour-rubbed canvas; seal the
pucker by pinching with your fingers. Flour lightly, cover loosely,
and let rise to almost triple its size. After unmolding upside down on
the baking sheet, slash it as follows:

Large loaves are usually slashed in a
cross: make one vertical slash and
complete the horizontal cuts as
illustrated. Medium loaves may
have a cross, a single central slash,
or a semicircular slash around half
the circumference.

Round rolls (petits pains, champignons)
Cut the original dough, Step 5, into 10 to 12 pieces. After they

have rested 5 minutes, form them one at a time, leaving the rest of
the dough covered. The principles are the same here as for the
preceding round loaves, but make the preliminary cushion shape
with your fingers rather than the palms of your hands.

For the second stage, during
which the ball of dough is rotated

smooth side up, roll it under the
palm of one hand, using your thumb
and little finger to push the edges of
the dough underneath and to form
the pucker, where the edges join

together.



Place the formed ball of dough pucker side up on the flour-
rubbed canvas and cover loosely while forming the rest. Space the
balls 2 inches apart. When risen to almost triple its size, lift gently
with lightly floured fingers and place pucker side down on baking
sheet. Rolls are usually too small for a cross; make either one central
slash or the semicircular cut.

THE SIMULATED BAKER’S OVEN

Baking in the ordinary way, as described in the preceding recipe,
produces an acceptable loaf of bread, but does not nearly approach
the glory you can achieve when you turn your home oven into a
baker’s oven. Merely providing yourself with the proper amount of
steam, if you do nothing else, will vastly improve the crust, the
color, the slash patterns, and the volume of your bread; steam is
only a matter of plopping a heated brick or stone into a pan of water
in the bottom of the oven. The second provision is a hot surface
upon which the naked dough can bake; this gives that added push of
volume that improves both the appearance and the slash patterns.
When you have the hot baking surface, you will then also need a
paddle or board upon which you can transfer dough from canvas to
hot baking surface. For the complete setup, here is what you should
have, and any building-supply store stocks these items.

For the hot baking surface



Metal will not do as a hot baking surface because it burns the
bottom of the dough. The most practical and easily obtainable
substance is ordinary red floor tiles ¼ inch thick. They come in
various sizes such as 6 by 6 inches, 6 by 3 inches, and you need only
enough to line the surface of an oven rack. Look them up under Tiles
in your directory, and ask for “quarry tiles,” their official name.

For unmolding the risen dough from its canvas
A piece of 3⁄16-inch plywood about 20 inches long and 8 inches

wide.

For sliding the dough onto the hot asbestos
When you are doing 3 long loaves, you must slide them together

onto the hot asbestos; to do so you unmold them one at a time from
the canvas with one board and arrange them side by side on the
second board, which takes the place of the baker’s wooden paddle,
la pelle. Buy a piece of 3⁄16-inch plywood slightly longer but 2 inches
narrower than your oven rack.

To prevent dough from sticking to unmolding and sliding boards
White cornmeal or small pasta pulverized in the electric blender

until it is the consistency of table salt. This is called fleurage.

The steam contraption
Something that you can heat to sizzling hot on top of the stove

and then slide into a pan of water in the oven to make a great burst
of steam: a brick, a solid 10-lb. rock, piece of cast iron or other
metal. A 9 × 12-inch roasting pan 2 inches deep to hold an inch of
water and the hot brick.

Nonessential professional equipment
Instead of letting the formed dough rise on canvas, sur couche,

many French bakers place each piece in a canvas-lined wicker or
plastic form called a banneton; from this you turn the risen dough



upside down directly onto a board and then slide it into the oven.
Various sizes and shapes are available in French bakery-supply
houses.

These are bakers’s blades, lames,
for slashing dough; they are about

4 inches long and ¼ inch wide,
with very sharp, curved ends.

USING THE SIMULATED BAKER’S OVEN
At least 30 to 40 minutes before the end of the final rise, Step 7

in the Master Recipe, line the rack of your oven with quarry tiles,
slide onto upper-third level, and preheat oven to 450 degrees. At the
same time set the brick or metal over very high heat on top of the
stove so that it will get sizzling hot, the hotter the better.

Provide yourself with 2 stiff spoons or spatulas, or with fire tongs for
lifting brick from stove top into pan of water in bottom of oven when
the time comes, and test lifting the brick to be sure you have the



instruments to do the job. NOTE:
You may use a spray bottle rather
than a brick; it works reasonably
well though less dramatically.

When the final rise is complete,
sprinkle pulverized cornmeal or

pasta on the long side of the
unmolding board and on the

surface of the sliding board. Your
object now is to unmold the
loaves one at a time from the

canvas to the sliding board, then
to slide the 3 of them together
onto the hot tiles in the oven.
Place the long side of board at

one side of the dough, then raise
and flip the dough softly upside

down onto board.

Slip the dough, still upside down, from the unmolding board
onto the right side of the sliding board. Line up the rest of the
dough side by side in the same manner.

Slash the dough as described in Step 9.
Place pan of cold water on the lowest rack of an electric oven, or

on the floor of a gas oven, add sizzling hot brick, and close oven
door.

The 3 pieces of dough are now to be slid together off the sliding
board onto the hot tiles in the oven: the movement is one quick,
smooth jerk like that old magician’s trick of pulling the cloth from



under a tableful of dishes. Open the oven and, holding the sliding
board at the two ends nearest you, rapidly extend your arms so the
far end of the board rests on the far end of the asbestos at the back
of the oven. Then with one quick jerk, pull the board toward you
and the three loaves will slide off onto the tiles. This must be a fast
and confident action because if you pause midway, the dough will
rumple off the board and once it touches the hot tiles you cannot
move or reshape it, although it will come loose after 5 to 6 minutes
of baking. You may muff this every once in a while, and produce
some queerly deformed shapes, but they will all bake into bread.

Remove the brick and pan of water after 5 to 8 minutes of
baking; the crust will have started to brown lightly. The oven should
be dry for the rest of the baking. Total baking time will be about 25
minutes for bâtards; the bread is done when it makes a hollow
thump if tapped, and when the crust is crisp and, hopefully, nicely
browned.

SELF-CRITICISM—OR HOW TO IMPROVE THE PRODUCT

Certainly one of the fascinating aspects of cooking is that you
can almost endlessly improve upon what you have done, and when
you realize that professional bakers have spent years learning their
trade it would be surprising indeed if your first loaves were perfect
in every respect. If they seem below standard in any of the following
points, here are some possible explanations.

Crust did not brown
If you have not used the hot brick and pan of water steam-

contraption, you will not get a very brown crust. Or if you have
used the brick, perhaps it was not really sizzling hot; heat it 15
minutes longer the next time, or use 2 bricks. On the other hand,
your oven thermostat might be inaccurate, and the oven was not
really at the required 450 degrees. A third possibility is that your



dough might have been under-salted; check your measurements
carefully in Step 1 the next time.

Crust was too brown or too red
If you were using the brick system, you might have had too

much steam in the oven; next time use a smaller brick, or heat it a
little less, or take it out several minutes sooner. Another possibility
is that the dough mixture in Step 1 got an overdose of salt, and salt
affects color; next time be sure your teaspoons are level.

Crust was tough
A tough crust is usually due to humidity: the day was damp and

sticky, or your kitchen was steamy, and the starch has coagulated
and hardened on the surface of the dough.

Slashes did not bulge open in the crust
Go over the instructions in Step 9 to check on whether you cut

them as directed. On the other hand, it might be that the bread had
over-risen in Step 7, just before baking, and the yeast had no
strength left for its final push in the oven. Conversely, you might not
have let it rise enough in this step and the dough was too heavy to
bulge out the way it should.

Bread seems heavy; no holes inside
This is always due to insufficient rising, particularly during the

pre-bake rise in Step 7. Next time be sure it feels light and springy,
and looks swollen, and that it has risen to almost triple its original
size before it goes into the oven.

Flavor is uninteresting
Again, the only reason for this is insufficient time taken for

rising: the yeast has not had an opportunity to produce the slow
aging and maturing that develops flavor. For your next batch, follow



the timing and temperature requirements particularly in Step 3, for
the first rise.

Flavor is unpleasantly yeasty or sour
A yeasty over-fermented smell and taste are due more often to

the dough having risen at too high a temperature than to its having
over-risen. Next time, watch the room temperature at which it is
rising, and if you are making bread in hot weather, you will have to
take a longer time and let it rise in the refrigerator.

MACHINE MIXING AND KNEADING OF FRENCH BREAD DOUGH

French bread dough is too soft to work in the electric food
processor, but the heavy-duty mixer with dough hook, illustrated in
the equipment section at the end of the book, works perfectly. The
dough-hook attachment that comes with some hand-held electric
mixers and the hand-cranking bread pails are slower and less
efficient, to our mind, than hand kneading. In any case, when you
are using electricity, follow the steps in the recipe as outlined,
including the rests; do not over-knead, and for the heavy-duty
mixer, do not go over a moderate speed of number 3 or 4, or you
risk breaking down the gluten in the dough. When the kneading is
finished, take the dough out of the bowl and give it a minute or so
of hand kneading, just to be sure it is smooth and elastic
throughout. Then proceed with the recipe as usual, from Step 3 on.

  PAIN DE MIE
[White Sandwich Bread—for sandwiches, canapés, toast, and
croûtons]



It is almost impossible in present-day America to find the firm,
close-grained, evenly rectangular, unsliced type of white bread that
is essential for professional-looking canapés, appetizers, and fancy
sandwiches. In French this is pain de mie, meaning that the mie, the
crumb or inside, is more important than the crust; in fact the crust
exists merely as a thin and easily sliced covering. French
boulangeries form and bake the bread in special covered molds; the
bread rises during baking so that it fills the mold completely and
emerges absolutely symmetrical. The form can be round or
cylindrical, but it is usually rectangular. You can easily achieve the
round or the rectangular shapes by baking in any straight-sided
bread pan or baking dish, covering the pan with foil and a baking
sheet, and topping that with some kind of weight to keep the bread
from pushing up out of shape while it is in the oven.

For about 1 pound of flour, making 3 cups of dough, to fill
one 8-cup covered pan or two 4-cup covered pans



1) The preliminary dough mixture—le fraisage. Either by hand:
1 cake (0.6 ounce) fresh Mix the yeast in the warm water and

yeast, or 1 package let it liquefy completely while
dry-active yeast measuring out the rest of the

3 Tb warm water (not ingredients. Dissolve the salt in the
over 100 degrees) in a tepid milk. Measure the flour into the
measure mixing bowl. Then stir in the

2 tsp salt liquefied yeast and salted milk with a
1⅓ cups tepid milk in a rubber spatula, cutting and pressing

measure the dough firmly together into a
3½ cups unbleached all- mass, being sure all bits of flour and

purpose flour (scooped unblended pieces are gathered in.
and leveled) Turn dough out onto a flat kneading

surface, scraping bowl clean. Dough
A 4- to 5-quart bowl with will be quite soft and sticky; let it

fairly straight sides rest for 2 to 3 minutes while you
A rubber spatula, and a wash and dry the bowl.

pastry scraper or stiff
metal blade

Start kneading by lifting the near side of the2) Kneading—pétrissage
dough, using a scraper or spatula to help you, and flipping it over onto
the other side. Scrape dough off surface and slap down again; lift, flip
over and slap down again, repeating the movement rapidly.



In 2 to 3 minutes dough should have
enough body so that you can give it a
quick forward push with the heel of your
hand as you flip it over. If it remains too
sticky for this, knead in a sprinkling of
flour. When it begins to clean itself off
the working surface and draw back into
shape, it is ready for the next step—
kneading in the butter.

3) Kneading in the butter
4 Tb (½ stick) chilled When butter is incorporated into a

butter dough in most French recipes, it is
added after kneading.

Soften the butter by beating it with a
rolling pin. Then smear it out with a
scraper, spatula, or the heel of your



hand until it is soft and malleable
but still cold.

By tablespoon bits, start rapidly folding and
smearing the butter into the dough with the heel
(not the palm) of your hand, then gather the
dough into a mass with your scraper and
smear again. Keep working in more bits of
butter as each previous addition is partially
absorbed.

Dough will be ropy, very messy,
and even stickier until it begins to

absorb the butter. Work fast to
prevent the butter from turning oily,
always using the heel of your hand,
and also cutting the dough with

scraper or spatula. In a few
minutes dough will again become

smooth and elastic. Proceed to
Step 4.

Or make the preliminary dough in the food processor (steel
blade):



Using the same proportions as for hand-made dough, dissolve the
yeast and add it to the salted milk. Place the 3½ cups of flour in the
container of the food processor (unless you have a small machine, in
which case divide all ingredients by half and do it in two batches).
Cut the butter into pieces, and add to the flour, along with the salt.
Process for several seconds until butter is broken into flour, then
with the processor going, pour in 1¼ cups of yeast-milk; continue
pouring by driblets, watching carefully, until dough balls up on top
of steel blade. Process, with dough riding on blade, for 15 seconds—
this constitutes the preliminary kneading. Turn the dough out onto
your work surface and proceed to Step 4, below.

NOTE: If you happen to add too much liquid and the machine
clogs, sprinkle in more flour and the machine will often start up
again. If not, remove dough and continue by hand.

4) Then let the dough rest 2 to 3 minutes. Knead again briefly
with the heel of your hand until dough begins to clean the butter off
the kneading surface and off your hand. It is now sufficiently
kneaded, although it will remain quite soft and somewhat sticky.

5) First rising—pointage premier temps—3 to 4 hours at around
70 degrees

The clean 4- to 5-quart You will have about 3 cups of
mixing bowl unrisen dough, and it is to rise 3½

A large plastic bag that times in volume or to 10½ cups. Fill
bowl will fit into, or a the bowl with 10½ cups of tepid
large sheet of plastic water and make a mark on the

A bath towel outside to guide you; pour out the
water, dry the bowl, and place the
dough in it. Slip bowl into plastic bag
or top with plastic and cover with the



towel. Set on a wooden or plastic
surface or on a folded towel or pillow
and place at a temperature of 68 to
72 degrees.

Dough should take a minimum of 3 hours to rise for the yeast to
do its best work. When dough has risen to the 10½-cup mark, or to
3½ times its original volume, it will feel light and springy when
pressed, and is ready for its second rise.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: See chart.

6) Deflating and second rising—rupture; pointage deuxième
temps—1½ to 2 hours at around 70 degrees

The dough is now to be thoroughly deflated and folded to expel
accumulated gas, and to redistribute the yeast into an even finer
network of gluten that will result in a close-grained texture when
the bread is baked.

With a rubber spatula or the slightly
cupped fingers of one hand, dislodge
dough from inside of bowl and turn
out onto a lightly floured surface,
scraping the bowl clean. If dough
seems damp and sweaty, sprinkle

with a tablespoon of flour.

With the lightly floured palms of your hands, pat and push the dough out
onto a roughly shaped rectangle 10 to 12 inches long.



With the help of a scraper or
spatula, fold the right side over

toward the center, then fold the left
side over to cover it, as though

folding a business letter. Pat the
dough out again into a rectangle,
fold again in three, and put the
dough back in the bowl. Cover

with plastic and towel and let rise
a second time, to not quite triple
in volume, or to slightly below
the 10½-cup mark on the bowl.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: See chart.
If you want to freeze the dough,
however, you can do it after the

next step.

6) Molding and final rising—la mise en forme; l’apprêt—40 to
60 minutes at 75 to 80 degrees

White vegetable Remember to preheat oven to 435
shortening degrees in time for next step. Grease

An 8-cup rectangular inside of bread pan (if pan is new,
breadpan with vertical grease heavily then roll flour around
or only slightly inside and knock out excess). With a
outward-slanting sides rubber spatula or the slightly cupped
(for example, 9½ by fingers of one hand, loosen dough
5½ inches, 2¾ inches from bowl and turn out onto a lightly



deep), or a round pan, floured surface. If you are making 2
or two 4-cup pans loaves, cut dough cleanly in half with

one chop of a long knife. Lift one end
of dough and flip it over on to its
opposite end. To relax the gluten and
make dough easier to form, let rest 7
to 8 minutes covered with plastic.

Following are illustrated directions for forming rectangular
loaves. For cylindrical and circular forms, use the French bread
system.

With the lightly floured palms of your
hands, pat and push the dough out into
a roughly shaped rectangle slightly
longer than your bread pan.

Fold the dough in half lengthwise.



Seal edges of dough together with your
thumbs as illustrated, or with the heel
of one hand. Roll dough a quarter
turn forward, so seal is on top.

Flatten the dough again into a
rectangle.

Press a trench along the central length of the
dough with the side of your hand.

Fold again in two lengthwise and
seal the edges together with the heel
of your hand. Roll dough a quarter

turn toward you, so seal is
underneath.



Place the dough smooth side up in the
prepared pan, pressing it down snugly
into the corners with your knuckles. Pan
should be no more than ⅓ to ⅖ full.

(*) You can freeze the dough at this point, wrapping pan
airtight. To continue with the recipe, let thaw for several hours in
the refrigerator or at room temperature.

For the final rising, set pan uncovered at a temperature of 75 to
80 degrees until dough has risen to slightly more than double, or to
fill the pan by no more than ¾. It is important when you are to bake
in a covered pan that you do not let the dough rise more than this,
as it must have room to finish swelling and to fill the pan while it is
in the oven. When dough has risen, bake at once.

(*) You can delay the rising action by setting the pan in the
refrigerator, or even by weighting it down under refrigeration. In
either case, the pan should be covered airtight, then set uncovered
at room temperature for 20 to 30 minutes before baking. If dough
has over-risen, bake it uncovered or deflate by pressing it down and
letting it rise again to the correct height.



7) Baking, cooling, and storing—oven at 435 degrees; baking
time 40 minutes

A perfectly smooth sheet Oven has been preheated to 435
of aluminum foil 1½ degrees. Cover bread pan with
inches larger all aluminum foil, greased side down.
around than bread Set pan on a rack in middle level of
pan, and greased on preheated oven, cover pan with
shiny side baking sheet or second pan, and

A baking sheet or a pan center the weight on top.
large enough to cover
entire top of bread pan

A 5-pound weight of
some sort, such as a
brick

A cake rack, for cooling
bread after baking

Bake undisturbed for 35 to 40 minutes (30 for small loaves),
then slide rack to front of oven. Standing well enough aside in case
bread should burst out of pan (which could occur only if you had let
it over-rise before baking), see if bread is done. The bread should
have shrunk slightly from sides of pan so it will unmold easily, and
the crust should be lightly browned. When thumped, the loaf should
make a hollow sound. If not quite done, return to pan, cover with



foil and baking sheet, and bake 5 to 10 minutes more. Unmold and
cool on a rack.

When thoroughly cool, in 1½ to 2 hours, wrap airtight and
refrigerate. Flavor and texture improve after 12 to 24 hours, and
you should probably wait 36 hours if you want very thin slices for
sandwiches or Melba toast.

This bread freezes perfectly; thaw it in its wrapper either in the
refrigerator or at room temperature.

VARIATIONS
Baking in an uncovered pan—the conventional loaf
If you want a loaf that swells up in the oven, bake the dough in

an open pan, one that holds twice the volume of the unrisen dough,
in this case a 6-cup pan. During its final rise, Step 6, let the dough
come up almost to the edge of the pan. Just before baking, glaze the
top of the dough by painting it with a tablespoon of milk in which
you have dissolved ⅛ teaspoon of sugar. Oven temperature and
timing are the same as in the preceding Master Recipe; if the top of
the bread seems to be coloring too much, cover loosely with heavy
brown paper or a sheet of aluminum foil.

Omitting the butter
You may omit the butter in the Master Recipe if you wish. This

will give you a lighter and whiter loaf; you may prefer it this way
for Melba toast.

Melba toast—to serve with consommé, foie gras, caviar
Use 2-day-old pain de mie. Cut off the crusts at the two ends.

With a very sharp long knife, such as a ham slicer, cut the bread
into even slices less than 1⁄16-inch thick. Arrange the slices,
overlapping them by no more than a third of their length, on 1 or 2



large baking sheets and set in upper- and lower-middle levels of a
275-degree oven for about an hour, turning bread over once or
twice and switching baking sheets from one rack to the other. Toast
is done when bread is crisp, slightly curly, and a very pale brown.
When cold and wrapped airtight, Melba toast freezes perfectly; thaw
and re-crisp for a few minutes in a 350-degree oven.

Pain de Mie aux Raisins
[Raisin Bread—to serve with tea, or for toast. See also Pain
Brioché aux Raisins]
For 4 cups of risen dough, filling two 5-cup covered pans or one
8-cup open pan

1 to 1½ cups (5 to 8 To soften the raisins, soak in 1 quart
ounces) small currant of very hot water for 10 to 15
raisins minutes. Drain, twist hard in the

Ingredients for pain de corner of a towel to squeeze out as
mie, preceding Master much accumulated water as possible.
Recipe Pat thoroughly dry in paper towels;

spread out on a dry towel until you
are ready to use them. Knead the
raisins into the dough near the end of
Step 3, when the butter has been
almost absorbed. Since the weight of
the raisins will hold the dough down,
the first rise, Step 5, will be only to
triple in the allotted time. Baking
time and oven temperature are the
same as for pain de mie.



Pain Brioché—Brioche Commune—Pain Louis XV
[Egg Bread—to serve with butter and jam, for fancy sandwiches
such as mousse of foie gras, for toast; an alternate to brioche
dough for Koulibiac, sausage in brioche, and their like]
This is a lovely light-textured yellow bread. With another egg

and three times the butter it would be a true brioche. Although you
will find this dough quite a bit stickier and softer to handle than
pain de mie, the technique for making it is the same.

For about 1 pound of flour, making 4 cups of unrisen dough, to
fill two 6-cup covered pans, two 4-cup open pans, or for 2
dozen individual rolls formed in small molds or muffin tins

1) Mixing and kneading the dough—either by hand or machine
1 package (0.6 ounce) Sprinkle yeast in warm water and let

fresh yeast or 1 liquefy completely. Then stir in the
package dry-active salt, sugar, and milk. Measure the
yeast flour into the mixing bowl, make a

¼ cup warm water in a well in the center, add the eggs and
measure the yeast mixture. Cut and mix

1 Tb salt everything together with a rubber
2 Tb sugar spatula to form a dough. Turn out
¼ cup tepid milk onto kneading surface and let dough

rest for 2 to 3 minutes. Following
3½ cups (about 1 lb.) all- illustrated directions for pain de mie,

purpose flour knead by lifting, folding, slapping,
(measure by scooping and pushing with the heel of your
dry-measure cups into hand. Dough will be stickier than
flour and sweeping off that for pain de mie; if it remains
excess) unusually so, knead in a tablespoon



A 4- to 5-quart mixing or so more flour. When dough begins
bowl with fairly to clean itself off kneading surface,
straight rather than start working in the butter by
outward-slanting sides tablespoon bits. When butter is

4 eggs (U.S. graded absorbed, let dough rest for 2 to 3
“large”; if chilled, set minutes. Knead again briefly until
for 5 minutes in warm dough cleans butter off kneading
water) surface and off your hands.

Sprinklings of flour as Or mix and knead the dough in a food
needed processor, following directions for pain

1 stick (4 ounces) chilled de mie.
butter

2) Completing the bread

Follow Steps 5, 6, and 7 in the Master Recipe for the first and
second risings in a covered bowl and the final rise in the bread pan.
Follow Step 8 for baking, except preheated oven should be at 400
degrees and baking time will be about 35 minutes. The surrounding
crust will be a little darker than for pain de mie. Pain brioché may be
eaten warm or cold, although it will slice more easily after 24 hours.
It freezes perfectly.

Pain Brioché aux Raisins
[Egg Bread with Raisins]
Pain brioché makes heavenly raisin bread, eaten plain with

butter, or toasted. Follow directions for pain de mie aux raisins.



BRIOCHES
Although the wonderfully buttery, light, and thoroughly

delectable texture of fresh brioches may persuade you they are
manna from another planet, brioche dough differs from pain de mie
dough only in that eggs are used rather than milk, and a very much
larger proportion of butter is incorporated. Actually, you can use
equal amounts of butter and flour, but we think the proportions of 3
parts butter to 4 parts flour make a much more manageable dough
with a delicious texture and taste.

In France, brioches are served for breakfast with butter and jam,
or for tea, or with the coffee break. Stale brioche may be sliced and
toasted, or hollowed out and used as a container for sauced foods or
appetizers.

NOTE: The following recipe is for the classic hand-made brioche
dough. For making it in the electric food processor, follow the
general directions for pain de mie, first dissolving the yeast, then
mixing it with the eggs, before blending the butter and flour in the
processor with the salt and sugar. Blend in ¾ of the liquid, then add
the rest by dribbles until the dough balls up on the blade. Finish
kneading briefly by hand, as described at the end of Step 4.

  PÂTE À BRIOCHE FINE
[Brioche Dough—for all sizes and shapes of brioches, and for
Koulibiac, sausage in brioche, and their like]



You must allow a minimum 8½ hours from the time you start
brioche dough to the time it is ready for the oven. Five hours are
needed for the first rise, 2 for the second, half an hour for chilling,
and 1 to 1½ hours for the final pre-bake rise. You may find it
convenient to start the first rise in the late afternoon and complete
the second one overnight in the refrigerator; you can then form and
bake the brioche in the morning. However, as you will see from the
delayed-action notes in the recipe, you can pretty well make it suit
whatever schedule you wish.

For about ½ pound of flour, making 2⅔ cups of unrisen dough,
enough to fill one 6-cup mold or nine to ten ½-cup molds

1) The preliminary dough mixture—le fraisage
3 eggs (U.S. graded Warm the eggs if chilled. Break them

“large”; if chilled, into the measure and blend with a
place in warm water
for 5 minutes)



A 2-cup measure fork. You should have ⅔ cup.
A fork

1 cake fresh yeast (0.6 Mix the yeast in the warm water, add
ounce) or 1 package the sugar, and let yeast liquefy
dry-active yeast completely.

3 Tb warm water (not
over 100 degrees) in a
measure

1 tsp sugar

1¾ cups (about 8 Measure the flour into the mixing
ounces) all-purpose bowl. Make a well in the center with
flour (measure by the rubber spatula and pour in the
scooping dry-measure eggs. Sprinkle on the additional sugar
cups into flour and and the salt; scrape in the liquefied
sweeping off excess) yeast mixture. Cut and stir liquids

A 3- to 4-quart mixing and flour together with a rubber
bowl spatula, then turn out onto kneading

A rubber spatula surface, scraping bowl clean. Dough
2 tsp sugar will be very soft and sticky. Work it
1¼ tsp salt with scraper or stiff spatula for a

moment to blend ingredients
A pastry scraper or stiff completely, then scrape to side of

spatula kneading surface and let dough rest
while you prepare the butter, next
step.

6 ounces (1½ sticks) chilled unsalted butter2) Preparing the butter
A rolling pin



Smear it out with a scraper, spatula, or the
heel of your hand until it is soft and
malleable but still cold. Place at one corner
of kneading surface until you are ready to
use it, Step 4 (refrigerate in hot weather).

3) Kneading—pétrissage

This will be a very soft and sticky dough that now contains the
minimum amount of flour; you will probably knead in more if
dough remains too soft. Knead with one hand, keeping the other
clean for emergencies.

Using scraper or spatula, start
flipping the near side of the dough
over onto the far side, the right



side onto the left, and so forth,
rapidly and vigorously a dozen

times or more until dough begins
to have body and elasticity.

When dough has enough body, lift and slap
it down roughly on the kneading surface
repeatedly, using scraper to help you.
Sprinkle on more flour by tablespoons (up
to 3 or 4 in all if necessary) if dough
remains too soft and sticky.

It should be a soft dough that will stick to your fingers if you hold a
pinch of it for more than 2 to 3 seconds. Knead until it has enough
elasticity to draw back into shape when pushed out, probably 4 to 5
minutes, then let it rest for 2 to 3 minutes. Knead again for a
moment and it is ready for the butter.

By 2-tablespoon bits, start folding, kneading,4) Kneading in the butter
and smearing the butter into the dough with the heel of your hand; then
gather the dough into a mass, chopping it into small pieces with
your scraper and smearing again. Keep working in more bits of
butter as each previous addition is partially absorbed.



Dough will be ropy, sticky, and very messy
indeed until it begins to absorb the butter.
Work rapidly, especially if the kitchen is
warm, and be sure you are using the heel,
not the palm, of your hand.

You may finish kneading with a scraper or spatula, which will
prevent the butter from becoming too warm and turning oily. Do
not hesitate to chill the dough for 20 minutes or so if this happens,
and then continue.

When all the butter is absorbed, the dough will look rather
fluffy. Let it rest for 2 to 3 minutes, and knead briefly again.
Kneading is finished when dough draws back into shape after being
pushed out.



5) First rising—pointage premier temps—5 to 6 hours at around
70 degrees

A clean 3- to 4-quart You have 2⅔ cups of dough that is to
mixing bowl rise to almost triple in volume, or to

A large plastic bag that about 7 cups. Fill bowl with 7 cups of
bowl will fit into, or a tepid water, make a mark on the
large sheet of plastic outside of the bowl to guide you,

A bath towel pour out water and dry the bowl.
Place dough in bowl, slip into plastic
bag or cover with plastic and arrange
bath towel on top. Set on a wooden
or plastic surface or on a towel or
pillow. For best texture and flavor,
dough should take 5 to 6 hours to
rise to the 7-cup mark, at which
point it will feel light and springy,
though somewhat sticky because of
the butter.

NOTE: In hot weather you will probably have to set bowl in
refrigerator from time to time to prevent butter from melting and
oozing out of dough.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: Set bowl in refrigerator for a short delay; for a
longer one, cover with waxed paper, a plate, and a 10-lb. weight to
slow or even prevent its rising.

With a rubber spatula or the slightly cupped6) Deflating—rupture
fingers of one hand, dislodge dough from inside of bowl and turn out
onto a lightly floured surface, scraping bowl clean. Sprinkle surface
of dough with a teaspoon or so of flour.



With the lightly floured palms of
your hands, pat and push dough out
into a roughly shaped rectangle
about 10 inches long.

With the help of a scraper or spatula, flip the right side of the dough over
toward the center, then flip the left side over to cover it, as though
folding a business letter. Pat the dough out again into a rectangle, fold
again in three, and replace the dough in the bowl. Cover again with
plastic and a towel.
(*) If you want to freeze brioche dough, this is the best time to do so,
but see notes on freezing.

7) Second rising—pointage deuxième temps—2 to 6 hours or
more, depending on temperature



Brioche dough is usually chilled before it is formed so that it can
be shaped easily; chilling may be done either during or after the
second rise, whichever works out best for your cooking schedule.

room temperature method:
Let dough rise to 2 times its original volume, or to about 5½

cups, at a temperature of around 70 degrees. This should take 1½ to
2 hours. Then dislodge from bowl with a rubber spatula or the
slightly cupped fingers of one hand, and refrigerate on a large plate
or platter covered with waxed paper, another plate, and a weight.
Dough should be ready to form in 30 to 40 minutes.

refrigerator method:
Let dough start to rise at around 70 degrees for an hour, then

refrigerate. Dough will continue to rise for an hour or more until the
butter congeals. If you wish to leave it overnight, cover with a plate
and a weight when you refrigerate it.

Forming and baking brioches



Brioches are usually baked in fluted molds with slightly outward-slanting
sides. However, you can use anything you have available, from a baking
dish or ovenproof bowl for large brioches to pyrex cups or muffin tins for
small ones.

Notes on final rise
The final rise before baking is to almost double in volume, until

the dough feels light and softly springy when touched. The ideal
rising temperature is around 75 degrees, and you have to watch the
dough carefully on a hot day because higher temperatures melt the
butter so that it oozes out of the dough. If this starts to happen,
refrigerate the dough from time to time. It is difficult to predict how
long the final rise will take; if the dough was thoroughly chilled
before forming, it will take longer to rise. You must usually count on
at least an hour, and it must really rise and soften or it will bake
into a rather firm and dense brioche. Following are directions for
forming and baking large, small, and ring brioches.

  GROSSE BRIOCHE À TÊTE
[Large Brioche with Ball-shaped Head]

1) Forming the brioche
1 tsp soft butter Butter the interior of the mold or
A 6-cup circular fluted dish. With lightly floured hands on a

mold or a cylindrical lightly floured board, form ¾ of the
baking dish dough into a smooth ball by

The preceding brioche kneading it lightly and rolling it
dough, chilled between the palms of your hands.



Place the ball in the bottom of the
mold.

Make a funnel-shaped hole in the
center of the dough 2½ inches wide
at the top diameter and about 2
inches deep, using your first 3
fingers. Roll the remaining dough
between the lightly floured palms of
your hands to make a ball, then a
tear-drop shape. Insert pointed end of
tear drop into hole.

2) Final rising—1 to 2 hours at 75 degrees
Set uncovered and free from drafts at a temperature of around

75 degrees until dough has almost doubled in volume, and feels
light and softly springy when touched. Be sure your oven has been
preheated to 475 degrees by the time the brioche is ready to bake.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: You can set mold in refrigerator, covering it
with a bowl to prevent dough from crusting; you can cover the
formed dough airtight and freeze, but see notes.

3) Glazing and clipping
1 egg beaten with 1 tsp Just before baking, paint surface with

water in a small bowl beaten egg, being sure not to glaze
A pastry brush where the head joins the main body
A pair of sharp-pointed of the brioche as this could glue the

scissors two together and prevent the head



from rising. In a moment, glaze with
a second coat.

To help head in shaping up
during baking, make 4 to 5 scissor
clips in the large ball close under the
head and slanting inward about half
the width of the head.

4) Baking, cooling, and storing—oven at 475 degrees, then
350; baking time: 40 to 50 minutes
Place the mold with the risen, glazed, and clipped brioche on a

baking sheet in the middle or lower-middle level of the preheated
475-degree oven. In 15 to 20 minutes, when the brioche has risen
and started to brown lightly, turn thermostat down to 350 degrees.
Total baking time will be 40 to 50 minutes; brioche is done when it
has begun to show a very faint line of shrinkage from the mold, or
when a knife or straw plunged down through the center comes out
clean. If, during baking, brioche seems to be browning too much,
cover loosely with heavy brown paper or foil.

Cool on a rack for 15 to 20 minutes before serving. Brioches may
be eaten slightly warm or cool; cold brioches may be warmed for 10
to 15 minutes in a 350-degree oven.

(*) Brioches dry out and become stale almost within 12 hours of
baking. To preserve their freshness, wrap airtight and freeze; large
frozen brioches take about half an hour to thaw in a 350-degree
oven.



VARIATIONS
Petites Brioches à Tête
[Small Individual Brioches with Ball-shaped Heads]
Choose either ½-cup, slant-sided fluted molds for small brioches,

or baking cups or muffin tins. Form in the same way as large
brioches, filling the molds half full and letting dough rise to almost
double. Paint twice with egg glaze and clip under the heads in
several places just before baking. Bake about 15 minutes at 475
degrees in middle level of oven.

Brioche en Couronne

[Ring-shaped Brioche]

The brioche dough, Knead the chilled dough into a ball
chilled and place on a lightly floured

A baking sheet surface.
Optional: an ovenproof

bowl or cup



Make a hole in the center with your finger, twirling dough around your
finger to enlarge the hole and inserting more fingers as the hole gets
bigger.

When hole is large enough to do so,
insert both hands and gently stretch
dough while twirling it on floured
surface. The object is to make a
doughnut shape 10 to 12 inches

in diameter.

Place shaped dough on a lightly buttered baking sheet and let rest
10 minutes to relax gluten, then widen the circle a little more.

To keep center of dough from closing
in during rising and baking, insert a
lightly buttered ovenproof bowl or cup
in hole.



Let dough rise, uncovered, to almost double at a temperature of
around 75 degrees, until dough is light and springy to the touch.
Paint with a double coating of egg glaze (1 egg beaten with 1 tsp of
water) just before baking.

Then clip top of dough at 1-inch
intervals, making cuts about 1 inch

deep, pointing scissors toward
outside of ring at a 45-degree angle.

Bake 20 to 30 minutes in the middle level of a preheated 475-
degree oven until nicely puffed and browned. A knife or straw
plunged into the center of one side should come out clean. If brioche
browns too much during baking, cover loosely with heavy brown
paper or aluminum foil.

Kougloff
[Brioche with Raisins]
Whether or not this molded ring-shaped raisin brioche originated

with Viennese bakers, it is usually considered by the French to be an
Alsatian raisin cake of uncertain orthography, as you will see it
spelled also Kugelhopf, Kougelhof, Gougelhop, and even Gugelhupf.
Bakers frequently make Kougloff out of leftover brioche dough,
softening it with a little milk or additional butter as they knead in
the raisins just before dropping the dough into its mold.



For a 6-cup Kougloff

Special requirements
¾ cup (4 ounces) small To soften raisins, soak 10 to 15

currant raisins minutes in very hot water; drain,
1 to 1½ tsp soft butter twist hard in the corner of kitchen
A 6-cup Kougloff mold, or towel to squeeze out accumulated

any fluted ring mold water, and spread out on a paper
3½ to 4 inches deep towel until needed. Butter the mold
and about 8½ inches heavily, then sprinkle a tablespoon of
at rim diameter that the almonds in the bottom, reserving
holds 6 cups the rest until later.

¼ cup shaved blanched
almonds (skinless
almonds sliced paper
thin, available in cans
or plastic)



1) Softening the dough
Brioche dough, Master So that it will mold smoothly, dough

Recipe for Kougloffs must be soft and sticky.
If needed, 3 to 4 Tb milk If you are making the dough

and/or butter specifically for a Kougloff, knead in
only 4 of the 6 ounces of butter
called for in Steps 2 and 4 of the
Master Recipe and complete the
recipe through Step 8. After the
second rise, knead in the remaining 2
ounces of butter and the raisins. If
you are using leftover brioche dough,
soften it by kneading in milk and/or
butter by half tablespoons, then
knead in the raisins.

2) Filling the mold and final rise
A pastry scraper or stiff Gather a 2-tablespoon gob of the soft

metal spatula dough on the end of your scraper or
A rubber spatula metal spatula and use the rubber
The remaining almonds spatula to dislodge it and place it on
A tablespoon or so of the bottom of the prepared mold.

flour Continue spreading it around the
mold to make a layer. Sprinkle or
press more almonds against inside of
mold, and add another layer of
dough; continue thus until all dough
is used. Sprinkle lightly with flour
and press dough gently against sides
and cone of mold with floured



fingers. Mold will be about ½ filled.
Let rise uncovered at around 75
degrees for an hour or more, until
mold is almost filled.

3) Baking—oven at 475 degrees, then at 350; 30 to 40 minutes
Bake at 475 degrees in middle or lower-middle level of

preheated oven for about 15 minutes, or until dough has risen and
started to color. Then lower thermostat to 350 degrees for rest of
baking. Kougloff is done when it shows a faint line of shrinkage from
sides of mold and when the sides are nicely browned. Serve slightly
warm or cool, with butter.

The processor can work
wonderfully with some doughs.
The trick is to process the dry

ingredients and butter first, then
—with the machine running—to
pour in ¾ of the liquid called for.
Never stop the machine; add the
rest of the liquid by dribbles until
the dough masses on top of the

blade and rolls around under the
cover for 15 to 20 seconds, for the
preliminary kneading. If dough is

too damp, it will not mass;
sprinkle in a little flour, which

Freezing brioche dough may help. If not, knead by hand.
The best time to freeze brioche By experimenting, you will find

dough is after the second rise, but the way that works best for you.
you may also do so after it has been formed and before the final



rise. However, and probably because of the high butter and egg
content, its life in the freezer is not long: a week to 10 days is all we
would suggest.

CROISSANTS
The most delicious of French croissants, to our mind, are those

called croissants de boulanger, which are made of risen yeast-milk-
and-flour dough that is flattened out, slathered with butter, folded
in three, and rolled and folded again three times as though you were
making French puff pastry. There are other formulas for croissants,
including some which are really puff pastry or brioche dough rolled
into crescent shapes. And in some of the quick methods the yeast
dough has only a short single rise, resulting in a semi-puff pastry.
None of these, to our mind, produces the tenderly layered, puffy,
deliciously buttery croissant one dreams of. The old classic method
does just this—and why go to all the trouble of making croissants
otherwise?



CROISSANTS
The minimum time required for making croissants is 11 to 12

hours. Included are 3 hours and 1½ hours for the rising of the initial
dough, two rest periods of 1½ to 2 hours each, and a final pre-
baking rise of about an hour. Therefore, if you want freshly baked
croissants for breakfast you will have to stay up all night as the
bakers do. However, they will taste just as fresh if you make them
ahead and freeze them either fully baked or ready to bake, as
indicated in the recipe.

For one dozen 5½-inch rolls

1) The basic dough
½ cake (0.3 ounce) fresh Mix the yeast in the warm water with

yeast or 1½ tsp dry- the sugar and let liquefy completely
active yeast while measuring out the rest of the

3 Tb warm water (not ingredients.
over 100 degrees) in a
measure

1 tsp sugar

1¾ cups (about ½ lb. all- Measure the flour into the mixing
purpose flour bowl. Dissolve the additional sugar
measured by scooping and the salt in the tepid milk. When
dry-measure cups into yeast has liquefied, pour it along
flour and leveling off with the milk mixture and oil into
with straight-edged the flour. Blend the elements into a
knife) dough by cutting and pressing with

A 3- to 4-quart mixing the rubber spatula, being sure all bits
bowl of flour are gathered in. Turn dough

2 tsp sugar out onto kneading surface, scraping



1½ tsp salt bowl clean. Let rest for 2 to 3
⅔ cup milk warmed to minutes while you wash and dry the

tepid in a small bowl. The short rest allows flour to
saucepan absorb liquid; dough will be quite

2 Tb tasteless salad oil soft and sticky.
A rubber spatula
A pastry scraper or stiff

metal spatula

Start kneading by lifting near edge, using scraper
or spatula to help you, and flipping it over onto
the other side. Rapidly repeat the movement
from one side to the other and end over end 8
to 10 times until dough feels smooth and
begins to draw back into shape when pushed
out. This is all the kneading it should have;
you want just enough body so dough will hold
together when eventually rolled, but you do
not want to over-activate the gluten and make
dough difficult to handle.

2) The two rises—first about 3 hours; second about 1½ hours—
at 70–72 degrees

The clean 3- to 4-quart You will have about 2 cups of dough
mixing bowl that is to rise to 3½ times its original

A large plastic bag or volume, or to 7 cups. Fill bowl with 7
sheet of plastic cups of tepid water, make a mark on

A bath towel the outside at the 7-cup mark to
guide you. Pour out the water, dry
the bowl, and put the dough into it.



Cover with plastic and bath towel, and place at a temperature of
between 70 and 72 degrees. In 3 or 4 hours dough should have risen
to the 7-cup mark, and will be light and springy when touched.

Deflate by loosening dough from edges of bowl with a rubber
spatula or the cupped fingers of one hand, and turn it out onto a
lightly floured surface. With the lightly floured palms of your hands,
pat and push the dough out into a rectangle about 8 by 12 inches.
Fold in three as though folding a business letter. Return dough to
bowl; cover again with plastic and bath towel.

Let rise a second time, but only to double the original volume.
Then loosen dough from edges of bowl and turn out onto a lightly
floured plate. Cover airtight and refrigerate for 20 minutes, which
will make the next step easier.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: Set dough in a colder place to rise, or let it
rise the second time overnight in the refrigerator. After second rise,
when dough has been turned out of bowl onto plate, you may freeze
it for a week.

3) Rolling in the butter; turns 1 and 2

4 to 7 ounces (1 to 1¾ Butter is now to be softened and
sticks) chilled rolled in layers with the dough. If
unsalted butter this is your first attempt, use the

A rolling pin (see minimum quantity. During all the
illustrated comments) following operations, roll rapidly and

Flour as needed keep the dough well chilled—warm,
A pastry scraper limp dough is impossible to work
Waxed paper or plastic with!
A plastic bag



Butter must now be worked into a
smooth but still cold paste that can
be spread evenly on the dough and
then rolled with it. Beat butter with
rolling pin to soften it.

Then smear it out with the heel of
your hand or a scraper or spatula
until it is of very easy spreading
consistency but still cold; it must

not become soft and oily—
refrigerate if necessary.

Place chilled dough on a lightly floured pastry
marble or board. With the lightly floured palms
of your hands push and pat it out into a
rectangle about 14 by 8 inches.

Spread butter as evenly as possible
over the upper two thirds of the



dough rectangle, leaving a ¼-inch
unbuttered border all around.

Dough is now to be folded into
three layers, just as though you
were folding a business letter.
Fold the bottom (unbuttered) third
up to the middle.

Fold the top (buttered third down to
cover it, making three even layers
of dough separated by 2 layers of

butter. This is called Turn
Number 1.

For Turn Number 2, lightly flour the top of the dough and your
rolling surface, turn the dough so the edge of the top flap is to your



right, as though it were a book
you were going to open. Roll the
dough into a rectangle about 14
inches by 6 inches. Roll rapidly,
starting an inch from the near end
and going to within an inch of the
far end.

Fold again in three. You now have 7 layers of dough separated by 6
layers of butter; at the end of the fourth roll there will be 55 layers
of dough.

Sprinkle dough lightly with flour, wrap in waxed paper or
plastic, place in a plastic bag and refrigerate. Dough must now rest
for 1 to 1½ hours to deactivate the gluten so that you can make the
two final rolls without difficulty.

4) Turns 3 and 4—after a rest of 1½ to 2 hours in the
refrigerator
Unwrap dough, sprinkle lightly with flour, and deflate by

tapping lightly several times with rolling pin. Cover and let rest for
8 to 10 minutes, again to relax gluten. Being sure that the top and
bottom of dough are always lightly floured, start rolling dough into
a rectangle 14 by 6 inches. If you notice that butter has congealed
into hard flakes, beat dough with light firm taps for a minute or so,
going from one side to the other until butter has softened: it must be
able to extend the length and width of the rectangle inside the
dough as you roll it out. Fold rectangle in three, roll again into a
rectangle, and fold in three to complete the final turn. Wrap and
chill for 2 hours before forming dough into croissants, or leave
overnight covered with a board and a 5-lb. weight.

5) Forming croissants—after dough has rested 2 hours in
refrigerator



The dough is now ready to be rolled out into the usual rectangle
and then cut into triangles that are rolled up and twisted into
crescent shapes. Professionals use either the ingenious triangle-
cutting roller illustrated, or do all the cutting by hand. To make
everything as easy as possible for yourself, refrigerate all pieces of
dough you are not actually working on.

PRELIMINARIES

A large sheet of plastic
A large, lightly buttered baking sheet (14 by 16 inches at least)

Unwrap chilled dough, place on a lightly floured surface, and
deflate by tapping several times gently with rolling pin. Cover with
plastic and let rest 10 minutes, to relax gluten.



Holding one of the triangles ofTURNING TRIANGLES INTO CRESCENTS OR
dough by its large end, roll it out CROISSANTS
toward the point to make the
triangle about 7 inches long.



Then, to extend the large end
slightly, stretch the 2 top angles of the
triangle lightly between your thumbs
and forefingers, enlarging end about
an inch in all.

Start rolling up the croissant first by
folding the large end forward onto

itself. Then, holding the point
with the fingers of your left hand,
finish the roll under the fingers
and palm of your right hand.



Bend the 2 ends down to form a crescent shape and place on a lightly
buttered baking sheet, with point resting inside curve and against surface
of baking sheet. Form the rest of the triangles into croissants in the
same manner.
(*) DELAYED ACTION: Formed croissants may be wrapped airtight and
frozen for a week, if dough was not frozen before.

6) Final rise—about 1½ hours at 75 degrees
Cover croissants loosely with a large sheet of plastic and set at a

temperature of around 75 degrees for their final pre-baking rise.
Dough should almost triple in size and feel light and springy when
touched; if it does not rise and feel light, the baked croissants will
be heavy and hard rather than tender, puffy, and light. In hot
weather you may have to set dough in refrigerator from time to
time to prevent butter from softening and oozing out.

(*) DELAYED ACTION: For a slower rise, set dough in a colder place
or refrigerate; if thoroughly chilled, leave at room temperature 20 to
30 minutes before baking. Risen croissants may be frozen for a few
days and baked in their frozen state.



7) Glazing, baking, and storing—oven preheated to 475 degrees

A pastry brush
1 egg beaten with 1 tsp water in a small bowl
A cake rack

Just before baking, paint the croissants with egg glaze, then set in
middle level of preheated oven for 12 to 15 minutes, until croissants
are nicely puffed and brown. Cool on a rack for 10 to 15 minutes
before serving.

Croissants are at their best when freshly baked; even refrigerated
in an airtight container, they are never as good the next day.
Freezing is the best preservation: wrap airtight when croissants are
thoroughly cool and freeze. To thaw and serve, set frozen croissants
on a lightly buttered baking sheet and place in a preheated 400-
degree oven for 5 minutes.

PASTRY DOUGHS
Pastry doughs, both tart and pie doughs and puff pastry, play an

immensely important part in every phase of French cooking from
little hot appetizers to quiches, and from pâtés en croûte to
strawberry tarts, mille-feuilles, and Pithiviers. If pie dough has always
been your culinary bugaboo, remember that no one is born a pastry
chef, everyone has had to learn, and that the first big step is to make
the decision that you are now, today, going to learn to make a
decent pie crust. Then make pie dough every day or two for a week
or more; serve everything you can think of in pastry. You will be
surprised how quickly you develop the technique, and you will then
be in the masterful position of having an endless number of



delicious concoctions at your fingertips. All the recipes here are for
at least 1 pound of flour. Our feeling is that if you are going to make
dough at all you might as well make a lot, because it keeps
beautifully in the freezer.



TART AND PIE DOUGHS
Pâtes Brisées—Pâtes à Croustades

DOUGH TALK

French pastry dough is flour and butter worked together and
then moistened with liquid. Liquid forces the gluten molecules in
the flour to join into a continuous web so that the dough will keep
its shape when rolled out; the dough must have its stated amount of
liquid for this effect to take place. Butter gives the pastry its flavor
and texture; as always, we suggest that about ¼ of the butter
proportions be given over to vegetable shortening, which has a
tenderizing effect that almost all American flours seem to need.

It is in the first step, working the butter and flour together, that
many people have difficulty. Trying to do everything just right, they
work too slowly and carefully, lingering over each squeeze of butter
and flour until their hot fingers melt the butter; thus the liquid
cannot mix in properly, and the dough is a wet, oily mess that, even
after chilling, bakes into a miserable piece of cardboard. An electric
food processor or mixer eliminates the problems.

ELECTRIC MIXER PIE DOUGH

PÂTE BRISÉE À L’OEUF—PÂTE À CROUSTADE
[Egg Pastry Dough for Free-standing Shells and Cases, and for
Turnovers]
The following dough formula is designed especially for pastry

shells formed on upside-down tins, an informal and wonderfully
easy way to make quiche and pie shells. Whatever your dough
formula, you can use exactly the same system outlined here.



For about 1 pound of flour, enough for three 10-inch shells

1) Preliminaries
¾ cup liquid (1 “large” Prepare the liquid and extra ice

egg plus necessary ice water. Measure the flour into the
water); ¼ to ⅓ cup machine. Rapidly cut the butter into
more ice water as 4 lengthwise strips, then into ¼-inch
needed pieces, and add to the flour along

3½ cups (1 lb.) all- with the chilled shortening, and the
purpose flour (scooped salt and sugar. Plan to work rapidly
and leveled) so ingredients remain chilled—if you

8 ounces (2 sticks) have to stop for any reason, place
chilled unsalted butter everything in the refrigerator until

3 ounces (6 Tb) chilled you can continue.
vegetable shortening

2 tsp salt
¼ tsp sugar
Either an electric mixer

or a food processor

2a) Making the dough in an electric mixer
(If your electric mixer Run the machine at moderate speed,

comes with a flat pushing fat and flour into the blades
beater, so much the with a rubber spatula (if you are
better; otherwise use using a home-model whisk-type
the whisk-whip mixer). The object here is to break
attachment) the butter into pieces less than 1⁄16

A pastry scraper or
rubber spatula inch in size, each piece coated with

flour. Then pour ¾ cup of liquid into



Plastic wrap the flour and beat a few seconds at
A little flour, as needed moderate speed, just until dough has
A plastic bag absorbed liquid and clogs in the

blades—add up to ¼ cup more ice
water by dribbles if needed. Turn the
massed dough out onto the plastic;
sprinkle droplets of ice water on any
unmassed bits in the bowl, and press
together as you add them to the rest
of the dough. With lightly floured
hands, press the dough into a roughly
shaped cushion, wrap in plastic, and
chill in the plastic bag. Proceed to
Step 3.

2b) Making the dough in an electric food processor
A pastry scraper or (If you have a small—under 2-quart

rubber spatula —container, divide ingredients in
Plastic wrap half and make the dough in 2
A plastic bag batches.) Flick the machine on and

off 4 to 5 times to blend dry
ingredients and butter. Turn the
machine on and pour in the ¾ cup of
liquid. Flick the machine on and off
several times and the dough should
begin to mass on the blade. If not,
dribble in a little more water and
repeat, repeating again if necessary.
Dough is done when it has begun to
mass; do not overmix it. Scrape the
dough out onto your work surface,
and with the heel of your hand smear
it out by 2-tablespoon bits—making a



6-inch sweep (this is the final
blending). Gather it into a rough
cushion shape, wrap in plastic, and
chill in a plastic bag. Proceed to Step
3.

3) Chilling the dough before forming—about 2 hours
Once dough has been mixed, it must be well rested and chilled

before you roll it out. The rest relaxes the gluten in the flour, so the
dough will roll easily; chilling firms the butter, giving the dough
enough body for rolling. In all of the following procedures, keep the
dough chilled—it is impossible to work with otherwise; refrigerate it
even in the midst of rolling.

(*) Dough may remain in refrigerator several days, or may be
frozen for several months.

UPSIDE-DOWN PASTRY SHELLS AND CASES

The classic free-standing French pastry shell is formed by rolling
out the dough and pressing it inside a flan ring or mold. The dough
is then braced in place with another mold or with buttered foil and
dried beans so that it will not collapse during baking. This method is
illustrated in Volume I, pages 141–6, and produces the most
professional result.



A more informal and simpler method is to bake the shell on an
upside-down cake pan, or on any upside-down fireproof object
whose shape appeals to you, such as a pie tin, bread pan, ring mold,
saucepan, baking dish, or even muffin tin. For this type of shell you
must have a pastry that is light and buttery but will hold its shape
when molded and baked upside down. The preceding egg pastry
dough was designed especially for upside-down shells.

UPSIDE-DOWN PASTRY SHELLS
For a 10- by 1-inch round shell, or any shell formed on any 6-
to 8-cup mold

1) Forming shells
1 tsp soft butter Butter the outside of the mold and
The mold: a round cake set upside down. Rapidly roll out the

pan or baking dish 9 dough into a circle ⅛ inch thick and
to 10 inches bottom at least 2½ to 3 inches wider in
diameter diameter than your mold. (Illustrated



½ the preceding egg directions for rolling dough are on
pastry dough, chilled pages 141–4 in Volume I.)

Roll dough up on pin and unroll over
upturned bottom of mold, then run pin
lightly over dough to smooth it in
place. With lightly floured fingers,
press dough snugly against sides of
mold, being very careful not to pull
or stretch dough; it must retain its
uniform thickness of ⅛ inch.

Even off the edges around the sides
of the mold with a ravioli wheel or
knife, making shell about 1 inch

deep.

To prevent shell from puffing out of shape during baking, prick all over
at ⅛-inch intervals with a table fork.



To even the sides all around press
flat of fork against pastry, being

careful not to reduce thickness. In
case any section of sides seems
too thin, paint lightly with cold

water and patch with raw dough.

So that dough will bake properly and not draw up or out of
shape, it should now be refrigerated for at least an hour before it
goes into the oven; this relaxes the gluten in the flour. Press raw
leftover dough into a ball, wrap and refrigerate; you may need a
little later on, after baking.

(*) Shell may be frozen at this point. Set as is in freezer for an
hour or so until hardened, then wrap airtight. Bake shell while still
frozen.

2) Baking shells—after a rest of 1 hour
Preheat oven to 425 degrees. You will need to weight down the

top of the dough after it has baked for 4 to 5 minutes, otherwise the
top will puff and draw the sides up: choose a saucepan or baking
dish weighing about 2 pounds, or a pie plate filled with dried beans,
and butter the bottom of the pan, dish, or plate.

Place chilled dough-covered mold, still upside down, on a baking
sheet and set in middle level of oven. In 4 to 5 minutes, place the
buttered weight on top, remove 2 to 3 minutes before shell is done.



A partially baked shell, the type used for quiches and oven-baked
tarts and pies, needs 6 to 10 minutes in all depending on the
thickness of the dough. It is sufficiently baked when it has started to
color and can be raised gently from the mold. Fully baked shells
usually need 10 to 15 minutes in all, until the shell is nicely
browned and crisp. When done, remove from oven and let cool on
mold for 8 to 10 minutes, then, being very careful not to crack shell,
unmold on a rack.

First aid for cracked shells
If a partially baked shell develops a small split or crack, paint the

area with beaten egg and patch with raw dough just before filling
and baking. If sides seem thin or weak, you may paint with beaten
egg and patch or strengthen them with a strip of raw dough, or you
may fill the shell by no more than ⅓ so sides will not be under any
strain during baking.

Freezing and leftovers
Baked shells may be wrapped airtight and frozen; it is wise to

put them in a protective container of some sort. Leftover dough may
be frozen and used again or combined with more of the same dough
when you make another batch.

REFERENCE CHART FOR PASTRY DOUGH FORMULAS

Flour: Measure by scooping dry-measure cups into flour and
sweeping off excess with straight edge of knife. Sift only after
measuring.

Butter: Regular unsalted butter (not whipped butter) usually has
a firmer texture and less water content than salted butter; we
recommend it.



Liquid: Always start with the minimum amount of liquid called
for, and add more by droplets as needed. The warmer and softer the
butter, the less water the mixture will absorb. Hand-made dough,
therefore, absorbs less liquid than machine-made.

DESCRIPTION USES FORMULA

ENTRÉE PASTRIES
   1) Pâte Brisée Ordinaire

3½ cups (1 lb.) flour
Regular pastry 9 ounces (2¼ sticks)
dough with less butter
butter than the For general pie crusts, 2½ ounces (5 Tb)
following, therefore plain quiches, turnovers, shortening
easier to roll and meat mixtures

2 tsp salt
form ¼ tsp sugar

¾–1 cup iced water
   2) Pâte Brisée Fine

3½ cups (1 lb.) flour
11 ounces (2¾ sticks)

Finest pastry dough For fancy appetizers butter
—delicate texture, and tartlets, rich 3 ounces (6 Tb)
fine flavor, fragile quiches, and the best shortening
(Volume I, page quality of pre-baked
139) shells 2 tsp salt

¼ tsp sugar
¾–1 cup iced water

   3) Pâte Brisée à l’Oeuf
A light, crisp dough Especially for shells and 3½ cups (1 lb.) flour

cases molded and baked
on upside-down forms, 9 ounces (2¼ sticks)
and for turnovers butter



2½ ounces (5 Tb)
shortening

2 tsp salt
¼ tsp sugar
¾–1 cup liquid (1 egg

plus necessary iced
water)

SWEET PASTRIES
   Pâtes Sucrées

Same formulas except
Any of the previous for salt and sugar
dough formulas For the same uses proportions, which

should be changed to:
⅛ tsp salt 5 Tb sugar

   4) Pâte Sucrée aux Jaunes d’Oeuf
3½ cups (1 lb.) flour
9 ounces (2½ sticks)

butter
2½ ounces (5 Tb)

Less rich than #2, For baked tarts and shortening
finer texture than tartlets, and pre-baked ⅛ tsp salt
#1 and #3 shells 5 Tb sugar

¾–1 cup liquid (2 egg
yolks plus
necessary iced
water)

   5) Pâte Sablée—Pâte Sèche
Sweet cookie For cookies, sweet tarts 4⅓ cups (20 ounces)
dough, crisp and and tartlets, and flour
buttery; the more especially for pre-baked
sugar you add the shells 9 ounces (2¼ sticks)

butter



more difficult the 2½ ounces (5 Tb)
dough is to handle shortening

8 to 18 Tb sugar
¼ tsp baking powder
3 eggs
1½ tsp vanilla extract
⅛ tsp salt

PÂTÉ DOUGHS
   6) Pâte à Croustade—Pâte à Pâté

3½ cups (1 lb.) flour
5½ ounces (11 Tb)

For pâtés and meat pies butter
An excellent pâté that are molded in raw 3 ounces (6 Tb) lard
dough that is also dough either in the 2 tsp salt
good to eat spring-form pâté mold,

or in a baking dish ¾–1 cup liquid (4 egg
yolks plus
necessary iced
water)

   7) Pâte à Croustade à l’Envers
4⅓ cups (20 ounces)

For pâté cases that are flour
partially baked on 7 ounces (1¾ sticks)

A pâté dough that
will hold its shape upside-down forms butter

and is also good to before being filled with 3½ ounces (7 Tb) lard
eat meat mixtures and 2½ tsp salt

baked; also for free-
form pâtés en croûte 1–1¼ cups liquid (2

eggs plus necessary
iced water)



FRENCH PUFF PASTRY
Pâte Feuilletée

French puff pastry, pâte feuilletée, is literally what the French title
implies: hundreds of leaves or layers of dough separated by
hundreds of layers of butter. A piece half an inch thick puffs up 4 to
5 inches in the oven and is unbelievably light and tender to bite
into. With almost as many uses as it has layers, puff pastry is the
dough for vol-au-vent and Napoleons, for coqs en pâte, gigots en
croûte, and all kinds of turnovers, tarts, pie toppings, first-course
pastries, and luxurious cocktail tidbits. It dresses up the simplest
store-bought cheese mixture, can add the final flourish to the
grandest platter, and since it freezes perfectly for several months,
puff pastry is tremendously useful to have available on those
occasions when you need something fast to assemble that looks
impressive.

If you enjoy working with your hands you will find it is the most
fascinating of doughs to make, and if you want to acquire a facility
in pastry, pâte feuilletée will teach you all the tricks. It most
definitely takes practice to perfect, but when you have mastered
puff pastry you will find it such a satisfying and splendid
accomplishment you will bless yourself for every moment you spent
learning its techniques.

THE TWO KINDS OF PUFF PASTRY

The classical, best-quality puff pastry, pâte feuilletée fine, contains
equal parts of butter and flour, is made in a rigidly traditional
manner, and you must count on 6 to 7 hours from the time you start
it to the time you can form and bake it. This is what you use for vol-
au-vent, patty shells, and fine desserts such as that most wonderful
of almond tarts called the Pithiviers. However, it is not at all
necessary to be so grand for cocktail appetizers, cheese-filled cases,
leg of lamb baked in a crust, Beef Wellington, and a host of other
delicious items. For these, and in fact for most of your puff pastry



needs, simple puff pastry, demi-feuilletée, is very good indeed and
can be made in half the time. Because it is so much easier to make,
we suggest that you start your career on demi-feuilletée, and when
you get around to the classic method it will then seem like only a
variation on a familiar theme.

EQUIPMENT

Although you can mix pastry on a wooden table and roll it out
with a broom handle, you will find it easier to make when you have
a pastry marble and a good rolling pin. This is particularly true for
puff pastry.

A pastry marble
The smooth, cool surface of marble is ideal to roll dough upon

and scrapes clean easily while you work. A piece that can slide in
and out of your refrigerator will be a miraculous help to pastry
making in hot weather. You can usually find ready-cut polished
marble in furniture stores; you can sometimes pick up an old marble
table- or bureau-top in a junk shop; or look up marble suppliers in
the telephone directory. The minimum size to consider is ¾ inch
thick and the size of your refrigerator shelf, which is around 14 by
28 inches for the standard home-size model.

Rolling pins



You should have a heavy pin with a rolling surface at least 14
inches long; 16 to 18 inches is preferable. You will probably have to
try a restaurant supply house to find a decent pin, because a broom
handle is certainly far more efficient than the ridiculous toy (A) that
passes for a rolling pin in many household supply departments. The
French pastry chef’s pin (B) is of polished boxwood, 18 inches long
and 2 inches in diameter; stores selling Italian cooking equipment
often have a similar model of lighter wood.

The French Tutove pin (C) is sometimes available in import
stores; its cannellated surface is designed especially for distributing
the butter evenly throughout the dough when you roll puff pastry or
croissants. The American-made pastry-chef’s pin (D) is of polished
hardwood and has ball-bearing handles; this fine, heavy pin is
usually available only in restaurant supply houses.

FLOUR NOTE

The following recipes call for a mixture of all-purpose and cake
flour, a combination always available and one that is used by many
pastry chefs in this country. The nearest American approximation of
French household pastry flour, “type 55,” that we have discovered is
a mixture of ⅔ unbleached pastry flour (not to be confused with
cake flour) and ⅓ unbleached all-purpose flour. This combination
has a lower gluten strength than the all-purpose and cake mixture,
and it is easier and faster to handle because it needs shorter rest
periods. However, unbleached flours, and especially unbleached
pastry flour, are not to be found in most retail markets. Actually the
cake and all-purpose combination, though slower to work with than
either French flour or its American approximation, produces the
lightest and puffiest pastry. (You may substitute French household
flour or the ⅓–⅔ pastry flour and all-purpose flour combination in
the following recipe.)



KEEPING COOL AND RELAXED

You will have very little trouble with puff pastry when you
remember that you must keep the dough cold and that you must let
it have the rest periods it needs.

Because of its high butter content, puff-pastry dough begins to
soften as soon as you remove it from the refrigerator, just as butter
softens. When you leave it too long at room temperature it becomes
limp, sticky, and utterly impossible to work with until you
refrigerate it again. Thus, if at any point your dough becomes limp
and soft, stop where you are, refrigerate the dough for 30 minutes,
then continue. Do the same if the dough retracts after rolling, or if it
turns rubbery and refuses to extend itself; this means that the gluten
in the dough is over-activated from having been rolled out, and the
way to calm it down is to stop rolling and let the dough relax in the
refrigerator for an hour or two. Most of the troubles most people
have with puff pastry spring from unchilled dough and over-
activated gluten.

  PÂTE DEMI-FEUILLETÉE
[Simple Puff Pastry—Flaky Pastry—Mock Puff Pastry]
For the many recipes like turnovers, toppings for meat pies,

meats baked in a crust, appetizers, and so forth where you want a
flaky, light dough, demi-feuilletée can be ready for baking in 3 to 4
hours. The pastry consists of an initial dough made of flour, water,
salt, and a little oil, which acts as a tenderizer; this is pushed out
into a 16-inch rectangle that is spread with softened butter. Then
the rectangle is folded into 3, making a sandwich that has 3 dough
layers and 2 butter layers. Rolled out and folded again 3 more
times, as sketched in the recipe, the layers build up in geometric
progression to make 72 layers of butter after the fourth fold. When
the pastry finally goes into the oven, each of the many layers of



dough puffs up between the layers of butter and the pastry bakes
into a light, airy delight to both eye and tongue.

For about 1 pound of flour, making 2½ pounds of dough,
enough for 2 of the 6- by 16-inch covered entrée pastries, or
about 3 dozen of the cornets, or horns

1) La détrempe—the dough mixture
2¾ cups all-purpose Blend the 2 flours together in the

flour and ¾ cup plain mixing bowl with the rubber spatula.
bleached cake flour, Remove ½ cup and reserve for Step
measured by scooping 2.
dry-measure cups into
flour and leveling off
with straight-edged
knife

A 3- to 4-quart mixing
bowl

A rubber spatula
A ½-cup measure to

reserve flour for Step 2
¼ cup tasteless salad oil Stir the oil into the flour and mix
2 tsp salt thoroughly with rubber spatula—you
1 cup iced water, plus a could use an electric mixer for this,

tablespoon or so more but it hardly seems worthwhile. Then
if needed stir in the salt and the water, cutting

A 2-foot sheet of waxed and pressing ingredients firmly into a
paper mass with spatula and then with the

A plastic bag cupped fingers of one hand. Lift
massed parts of dough out of bowl
and place on pastry marble or board.
Sprinkle unmassed bits of flour with



drops of water in bowl; press
together and add to dough.

Press dough firmly and rapidly into
a cushion shape. Do not try to
make a smooth surface; it will
smooth out later. Consistency

should be pliable, though not at
all damp or sticky.

If you are in a terrible rush you
can complete the next 2 steps
now, but the dough will be easier
to handle if you sprinkle it lightly
with flour, wrap in waxed paper,
slip it into a plastic bag, and
refrigerate it for 40 minutes to an
hour.

2) Turn 1—adding the butter, and the first fold—1er tour

A pastry scraper or stiff broad 12 ounces (3 sticks) chilled
spatula unsalted butter

The ½ cup flour reserved from Step 1



When you are ready to roll out the dough, beat the butter with a
rolling pin to soften it.

Smear out with scraper or the heel, not the
palm, of your hand. When partially
softened, work in the flour and continue
until butter is perfectly smooth and of
easy spreading consistency but still cold.
If butter is not supple enough, you cannot spread it over the dough;
if it is too soft it will ooze out as the dough is rolled. Chill briefly if
you have softened it too much.

Lightly flour the dough and your
hands. Push and pat the dough out,
in front of you, into a rectangle 16

to 18 inches long and about 8
inches wide. Dough is being

pushed rather than rolled so that
you will activate the gluten as
little as possible for this first

operation. (Dough will be very
soft and sticky if you have not

chilled it.)

Using a scraper or stiff spatula,
spread the softened butter over the
upper two thirds of the dough leaving
a ⅛-inch unbuttered border all
around. The lower third is
unbuttered.



Fold the dough into three as follows:
fold the bottom (unbuttered) third

up to the middle.

Fold the top (buttered) third down to cover
it, just as though you were folding a
business letter. You have made 2 layers
of butter and 3 of dough.

Rotate the dough a quarter turn
counter-clockwise so the top flap of
dough is to your right, as though it
were a book you were about to

open. Dough will still look rather
rough and the spotty damp

patches are oil; all will smooth
out by the final turn.

3) Turn 2—the four-layer fold—2me tour
In the second turn, you will roll out the dough and fold it so that

it makes 4 layers. During the roll, be sure top and bottom of dough
are always lightly floured and that your rolling surface is always
scraped clean, to prevent dough from sticking; lift dough and slide it
about between rolls to make sure.

Starting about an inch in from the near edge of the dough, roll your pin
rapidly to within an inch of the far end, extending the dough as you roll.
The rolling movement is a firm, even push away from you at a 45-



degree angle. You are aiming for as
even a rectangle of dough as possible;
after several rolls you wish it to be 16
to 18 inches long and about 8 inches
wide.

Even the sides of the rectangle with
the side of your pin when necessary
and occasionally roll across the
rectangle to widen it. Sprinkle any
breaks in the dough with flour. (If you
did not chill the initial dough it will look messy and soft at this
point; do not worry.)

Fold the top and the bottom edges of
the rectangle so that they meet at

the center of the dough.

Fold them together again, as though
you were closing a book. Now you
have completed the second turn,
and have 8 layers of butter
sandwiched in between 9 layers
of dough.

So that you will remember that
you have now made 2 turns—you
may decide to freeze the dough at
this point—press 2 depressions in



the top of the dough with the ball-
ends, not the nails, of your fingers.

Wrap the dough in waxed paper, slip it into a plastic bag and
refrigerate for 40 to 60 minutes (or overnight if you wish) until
dough is much firmer and the gluten has relaxed; it will then be
easy to roll out for the final 2 turns.

4) Finishing the dough: turns 3 and 4—after a 40- to 60-minute
rest

Unwrap the chilled dough and
flour it sparingly top and bottom.
If it is cold and hard, beat it evenly
and firmly but not too heavily with
your rolling pin to start it moving:
beat crosswise and lengthwise, and
keep the even rectangular shape.

Then roll dough rapidly out into a rectangle 16 to 18 inches
long. (Again, if dough is very cold and you have not beaten it
sufficiently to soften the butter, the sides may split when you roll
out the dough. Do not worry if this happens; remember to beat it a
little longer the next time.) Fold rectangle of dough into three, again
as though folding a business letter and as diagramed in Turn 1.
Rotate dough so top flap is to your right, book-opening fashion; roll
again into a rectangle and fold into three. You now have completed



the fourth turn, and have 72 layers of butter. With the ball-ends of
your fingers, make 4 depression marks in the surface of the dough.
Wrap and chill for at least 2 hours to firm the butter and to relax the
gluten. It is then ready for forming and baking in any way your
recipe directs. (You may, of course, give the dough 2 more turns
after it has chilled, tripling the layer count twice again to a total of
648; this is called for only rarely, however.)

Storage, ahead-of-time notes, and freezing
You may wrap and store puff pastry dough in the refrigerator at

any step during its manufacture; however, remember that if you
have not completed 4 turns the butter will be distributed in rather
thick layers. Thus if the pastry is very cold, the congealed butter
will break into lumps and flakes unless you give it a careful and
thorough beating with your rolling pin before you attempt to roll it
out. Puff-pastry dough may be frozen for as much as a year, when
wrapped airtight and kept at zero degrees or less; thaw at room
temperature or overnight in the refrigerator.

Forming and baking the dough—after a rest of 2 hours
A complete listing of recipes using puff pastry is in the index.

Use of leftover dough
See illustrated directions.

VARIATION
Pâte Feuilletée Fine
[Classic French Puff Pastry—for vol-au-vent, patty shells, fine
desserts, and petits fours]



Classic French puff pastry has equal amounts of butter and flour,
6 rollings out and foldings, and develops 729 layers of butter
sandwiched between 730 layers of dough. You may use it for any
recipe requiring puff pastry, but its particular role lies in the realm
of the patty shell, the fine dessert, and the elegant tea pastry. As you
will see, the dough mixture contains butter rather than oil, and is
made like pie dough; rather than being spread on, the main part of
the butter is enclosed in the dough. Otherwise the technique for
classic puff pastry does not differ too much from simple puff pastry.
You must allow, however, a minimum of 6 to 7 hours from the time
you start it to the time you can form and bake it. As usual, most of
this time is taken up with rest periods; the actual work involved is
probably not more than 30 minutes, and this can be spread over a
period of several days.

For about 1 pound of flour, making 2½ pounds of dough,
enough for one 8-inch vol-au-vent 5 inches high or 8 to 10
patty shells, plus leftovers which will make a 6- by 16-inch
covered pastry, or 2 dozen of the cheese appetizers

1) La détrempe—the dough mixture
A 4-quart mixing bowl, or the 2¾ cups all-purpose flour and

large bowl of an electric ¾ cup plain bleached cake
mixer flour, measured by scooping

A rubber spatula dry-measure cups into flour
A ½-cup dry-measure cup (to and leveling off with a straight-

reserve flour for Step 2) edged knife
3 ounces (¾ stick) chilled unsalted butter
A 2-foot length of waxed paper
Measure the 2 flours into the mixing bowl and stir thoroughly with
rubber spatula to blend. Scoop out ½ cup and reserve for Step 2.
Place chilled butter on waxed paper and cut into quarters
lengthwise; rapidly cut quarters into ¼-inch pieces and add to the



flour in the bowl. The butter is now to be cut into the flour and the
liquid then added, just as though you were making pie dough. You
may use an electric mixer as described in the pâte brisée recipe,

or rub the flour and butter rapidly together
between the tips of your fingers until the
butter is the size of small oatmeal
flakes, or chop with a pastry blender until
the mixture resembles coarse meal. OR
make the entire détrempe in the food
processor, including next step.

2 tsp salt Blend the salt into the iced water and
1⅛ cups iced water in a pour into the flour and butter

2-cup measure, plus a mixture. If you are using an electric
few droplets more if mixer, mix for just a few seconds,
needed stopping the machine as soon as

A plastic bag dough clogs in the blades. Otherwise
blend with a rubber spatula, pressing
dough firmly into a mass with
spatula and then with cupped fingers
of one hand. Lift massed dough out
onto marble or board; sprinkle
unmassed bits in bowl with droplets



of water, press together and add to
main body of dough.

Press dough firmly and rapidly into a rough cushion shape;
consistency should be pliable, though not at all damp and sticky.
Sprinkle lightly with flour, wrap in waxed paper, and slide into a
plastic bag. Refrigerate for 40 minutes to relax gluten and firm the
dough.

2) Preparing the butter—after dough has rested 40 minutes

12 ounces (3 sticks) Beat the butter with a rolling pin to
chilled unsalted butter soften it, smear it out with the heel, not

The ½ cup flour reserved the palm, of your hand, or a pastry
from Step 1 scraper or spatula. When partially

A pastry scraper or stiff softened, work in the flour. Butter
metal spatula must be absolutely smooth and

supple, yet still cold. Form into a 5-
inch square, place at the corner of
your working surface, and proceed to
the next step.



3) The dough package
Roll the chilled dough into a

circle 12 to 13 inches in diameter;
it will still look rough. Place the

butter in the center.

Bring the edges of the dough over
the butter to enclose it completely,
being very careful not to stretch
dough because you want it to
have a uniform thickness at the
sides of the square.

Press dough well together on top of
package and seal edges with your

fingers. Dough will still look rough
and uneven, which is as it should

be.

4) Turns 1 and 2



You now have a package with a layer of dough on the top and
the bottom, and a layer of butter in between. Your object is to roll
the package out into a rectangle, extending the butter the whole
length and width of the rectangle between the 2 layers of dough:
beat the package lightly but firmly its length and width with your
rolling pin to get the butter moving, dust flour on the bottom and
top of the dough, and rapidly roll it out into a rectangle 16 inches
long and 8 inches wide. It is now to be folded in three, as though
folding a business letter.

Fold the bottom third up over the
center of the dough.

Fold the top third down to cover it, making 3 even
layers. By folding the dough in 3, you have made
3 layers of butter but only 4 of dough, because
the middle layers, which touch, join to form a
single layer.



Place dough in front of you so that
top flap is to your right, as though it

were a book.

Roll again into a 16-inch rectangle
and again fold in three, making 9
layers of butter. Press 2 depressions
in the top of the dough with the
ball-ends, not the nails, of your
fingers so that you will remember
you have made 2 turns.

Wrap dough in waxed paper and slip it into a plastic bag.
Refrigerate for 40 to 60 minutes to relax the gluten and to firm
butter for next turns, which it is best to complete within an hour if
you can so that layers of butter do not become too firm and
congealed.

5) Turns 3 and 4—after a rest of 40 to 60 minutes
If dough is hard and cold, beat with firm even strokes to soften

butter. Complete Turns 3 and 4 in the same way as the previous
turns. You may find during the rolling out that the bottom layer of
dough does not stretch out to meet the top and middle layers at
each end: turn dough over and roll upside down to even the layers.
Make 4 depression marks in the dough to indicate the 4 turns; wrap
and chill again for at least an hour before starting Turns 5 and 6.

(*) DELAYED-ACTION NOTE: This is the best point to refrigerate the
dough for several days, or to freeze it for several months.



6) Turns 5 and 6—after a rest of at least 1 hour, and 2 hours
before you wish to form and bake the dough
Complete Turns 5 and 6 in the same manner. (It is here that if

you have given the dough only its minimum rest period you may
find it hard to roll out and inclined to retract rather severely when
extended. If this happens, stop immediately; forcing it will only
make the gluten more tenacious and the dough more balky. Wrap
and refrigerate the dough for an hour more before continuing.)
Make 3 pairs of depression marks in the top of the dough to indicate
the 6 turns. Wrap and refrigerate for 2 hours before forming and
baking.

(*) DELAYED-ACTION NOTES: When you are making the dough for a
vol-au-vent, you will usually get the highest rise when you form and
bake the dough about 2 hours after the final turn. For all other
purposes, dough may be refrigerated for several days, or frozen for
several months.

Forming and baking the dough—after a rest of 2 hours

Except for the vol-au-vent and patty shells, which follow here, all
other recipes using puff pastry will be found in their appropriate
chapters, and there is a complete listing of recipes under puff pastry
in the index.

Use of leftover dough

See illustrated directions.

Patty Shells
Bouchées et Vol-au-Vent



That beautifully sauced combination of sweetbreads, quenelles,
truffles, mushrooms, and olives known as ris de veau financière has
nowhere else to go but into a patty shell so light and airy it can fly
with the wind, as the French title, vol-au-vent, suggests. Our litany
ever seems to be “your own are so much better,” and how true it is
when your own puff pastry makes shells so light, buttery, and flaky
you can hardly believe they are real even while the pastry is melting
in your mouth. Whether you wish to serve individual shells or one
dramatic large one for the whole table, small and large shells are
constructed in similar fashion.

You are aiming for a hollow cylinder of pastry. To achieve it,
you make 2 layers: a ring of dough that is set on a disk of dough.
The ring forms the sides of the cylinder, and the disk, its bottom.
Both ring and disk puff up in the oven, and when the pastry is done,
you cut an opening in the top, as you will see, fork out the small
amount of uncooked pastry inside, and you have a case ready for
filling with creamed lobster, shrimp, mushrooms, or whatever
delectable mixture you may have concocted. We shall start with
individual pastry shells.



DOUGH TALK

Both large and small shells require an extravagant amount of
dough, and you will have as much left over as you have in the
shells. However, the leftover dough is converted into puff pastry
again as described and illustrated at the end of this section.

BOUCHÉES
[Patty Shells for Individual Servings]
For 9 shells 3½ inches in diameter

1) Forming the dough

The preceding recipe for Because puff pastry softens so quickly
2½ lbs. chilled classic out of the refrigerator, you will find
puff pastry it best to work on only part of the

A pastry-cutting wheel or dough at a time, keeping the rest
long knife chilled. Each piece will make 3 patty

A 3½-inch plain, round shells. Roll the dough into a
cutter rectangle 18 inches long and 8 inches

A 2-inch plain, round wide, cut into thirds crosswise using
cutter pastry wheel or long knife, and

A large baking sheet 12 refrigerate 2 of the pieces of dough.
by 16 inches at least Roll the remaining piece of dough

into a 10- by 14-inch rectangle ¼
1 or 2 trays or baking inch thick. Work rapidly from now

sheets in the on so that dough will not soften
refrigerator for storing before you are through; if it does,
pieces of dough stop immediately, refrigerate

everything for 15 to 20 minutes and



A sharp, thin skewer (or then continue. Soft, limp dough is
large darning needle) impossible to work with.

With the 3½-inch round cutter,
cut 6 disks in the pastry, spacing
them half an inch from the edges
of the pastry and from each other.

With the 2-inch cutter, cut circles
from the center of three of the disks
to make 3 rings. (Carefully arrange

all leftover dough in one layer
and refrigerate; see instructions.)

Rinse pastry sheet in cold water, shake
off excess water, and place the 3 disks
upside down on the sheet, spacing
them ½ inch from edge of sheet and
from each other. Paint tops of disks
lightly with cold water and press a ring
of dough on each disk.

Seal each ring to each disk by
making slanting indentations ⅛ inch
apart with the back of a knife, going
all around the circumference, and

pressing the 2 layers of dough
together with the balls of your

fingers as you go.



Prick all over exposed center of
bottom disks with the tines of a table
fork. Plunge a skewer down
through the pastry at 3 points in
the center of the pastry and 4
around the ring; this, hopefully,
will ensure a vertical, even rise in
the oven.

With a 2-inch round cutter or a
knife, press a circle outline 1⁄16 inch
deep in each disk, where the inside
edge of the ring meets it; this will
then be cut out after baking and

serve as a cover.

Pastry will probably have softened; refrigerate baking sheet for
10 minutes, or at least while you are rolling out and cutting the next
2 pieces of dough. When all 9 bouchées are assembled on the sheet,
cover with waxed paper and refrigerate for at least 40 minutes
before baking, so that dough can relax and bouchées will not shrink
or bake out of shape.

(*) DELAYED-ACTION NOTE: The formed pastry may be frozen at this
point, and taken right from freezer to oven.

2) Baking—20 to 25 minutes in a preheated 425-degree oven
Just before baking, paint top surfaces of bouchées, not the sides,

with a double coating of egg glaze (1 egg beaten with 1 tsp water),
and decorate with cross-hatch knife or fork marks. (See vol-au-vent,
step 2.) Bake in the middle level of preheated oven about 25



minutes. They are done when risen and brown, and when the sides
are brown and crisp. Remove to a rack.

With a sharp small knife held
vertically, cut out covers with an up-

and-down sawing motion.
Delicately scrape out any

uncooked pastry from inside with
the back of a teaspoon or the

tines of a small table fork. Cool on
a rack.

3) Storing and serving
The sooner you can fill and serve patty shells, the fresher,

lighter, and more delicious they will be. If you are serving the same
day, keep in a warming oven or the turned-off oven. Otherwise
arrange in a covered pan and freeze them. To reheat and crisp
shells, either frozen or not, preheat oven to 425 degrees, place shells
on a lightly buttered baking sheet and set in middle level of oven.
Turn oven off and shells will be crisp in 5 to 8 minutes.

VOL-AU-VENT
[Large Patty Shell]
A large patty shell is somewhat reminiscent of the oldtime haute

cuisine; it is wonderfully dramatic to serve and always greatly
enjoyed by your guests just because it is an unusual treat. The
decorative cover, which is formed and baked separately, is optional
and depends on how your table serving works out. If you have a
cover, the filled vol-au-vent with cover poised on top of the food is



presented for all to admire, then the cover must be removed to a
separate dish for cutting and serving.

For an 8-inch shell about 5 inches deep, serving 6 people

1) Forming the dough
The preceding recipe for Place chilled puff pastry on a lightly

2½ lbs. classic puff floured marble or pastry board and
pastry roll rapidly into a rectangle ⅜ inch

An 8-inch and a 5-inch thick, 12 inches wide, and 20 inches
round vol-au-vent long. (To insure that stresses and
cutter, pan cover, strains are equalized for even baking,
plate, or saucer for be sure to roll dough crosswise as
cutting circles of well as lengthwise.)
dough

A heavy rolling pin with
rolling surface at least
14 inches long

A baking sheet or round
pizza tray rinsed in
cold water and not
dried

1 or 2 baking sheets or
trays in the
refrigerator for
leftover dough

Work as rapidly as possible from now on so that dough will not
soften and become difficult to handle; if it does soften, immediately
stop whatever you are doing and refrigerate everything for 15 to 20
minutes, then continue.



Cut two 8-inch disks out of pastry, spacing them at least ½ inch from
edges of dough and from each other. Lift surrounding dough off the
disks and arrange in one layer on baking sheet or tray and
refrigerate; see directions for re-forming it into puff pastry.

Roll one of the disks up on the
pin and unroll upside down on
damp baking sheet. (Damp surface
makes pastry stick to sheet, giving
it a grip so it can rise in the
oven.) Paint a 1½-inch border
around the top of the circle with
cold water.

Using a round cutter or guide 5
inches in diameter, center it in the

second disk of dough and cut
around it to make the 8-inch ring



for the second layer of the vol-au-
vent.

So that you will not stretch the ring
of dough as you remove it from the
circle, brush lightly with flour and
fold it in half, then in quarters.
Unfold it on the dampened
circumference of the first disk, pressing
it in place with the balls of your
fingers. (Refrigerate disk of leftover dough.)

Seal the 2 layers of dough with the
back of a small knife, by pressing

slanting lines ⅛ inch deep and
about ¾ inch apart all around the

circumference, also pressing top of
circle with the balls of your

fingers as you go. (It is now wise
to cover and refrigerate vol-au-
vent for an hour before baking;
this will relax dough so that it

will bake evenly.)



(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Unbaked vol-au-vent may be refrigerated
for a day or so, or frozen, but you will usually get a higher rise if
you bake it within an hour of forming.

2) Final decoration and baking—about 1 hour; oven preheated
to 425 degrees

Egg glaze (1 egg beaten When oven has been preheated, paint
with 1 tsp water in a top of ring and exposed top of disk
bowl or cup) with egg glaze. (Do not paint sides,

A pastry brush because egg could prevent them from
A small knife rising.)
A thin, sharp skewer or

large darning needle

With a small knife, cut lines ⅛ inch
deep and 1½ inches apart (at

outside edge) in top of ring, pointing
knife always to center of vol-au-
vent so the marks will be evenly

spaced, like the spokes of a wheel.

Cut a line ¼ inch deep in the bottom disk, where inner edge of circle
meets it; this marks the cover, which is removed after baking so that



interior of vol-au-vent may be cleaned
out.

Make decorative, shallow cross-
hatch marks in the top of the dough
through the glaze with the point of a
knife or the tines of a table fork.

Finally, plunge skewer or needle down
through the top of the pastry sheet at 4 to 5
places around the circumference and 3
places in the center. The purpose of this
operation is presumably to hold the puff
pastry layers in place and help the vol-au-
vent rise evenly.

Immediately place vol-au-vent in lower middle level of preheated
oven and bake at 425 degrees for about 20 minutes, until the pastry
has tripled in height and is beginning to brown. Lower thermostat to
350 degrees and bake 30 to 40 minutes longer, until sides are brown
and crisp. If pastry is coloring too much, lay a sheet of aluminum
foil or heavy brown paper loosely over the top.



3) Final touches
As soon as you remove the vol-au-vent from the oven and while it

is still hot, cut around the inside edge of the ring to remove the
cover you marked in the bottom disk; this has now risen, along with
the rest of the dough. (Cover will probably break and should be
eaten by the cook, who must sample the pastry anyway.)

Being very careful not to pierce sides or bottom of crust, scrape uncooked
pastry out of vol-au-vent with the tines of a table fork or the handle of a
spoon. (You may turn this into a cheese ramequin, but you should
use it while still fresh; see following recipe.)

Set vol-au-vent again on its pastry sheet and put in the oven for 5
minutes, to dry out, then let cool on a rack. If bottom of pastry
burned or darkened unduly during baking, shave off the discolored
part with a sharp knife.

Storing and reheating
If you have a warming oven, set it at around 100 degrees where

pastry will keep for a day or two, drying and crisping to a delicious
texture. Otherwise, the sooner you can eat the vol-au-vent the better,
unless you are going to wrap it airtight and freeze, where it will
keep for several weeks. To reheat cold or frozen vol-au-vent, set on a



lightly buttered pastry sheet in a preheated 425-degree oven for 5
minutes, then turn oven off and leave a few minutes more, until
crisp.

FOR THE UNCOOKED INSIDES OF THE VOL-AU-VENT

Ramequin du Juste Milieu
[A Hot Puffed Cheese Dish to Serve as an Entrée or in Place of
Potatoes]
For 4 to 6 servings

The fresh, preferably still Purée the uncooked pastry and milk
warm uncooked for a minute or so in an electric
insides of a vol-au-vent blender until perfectly smooth. Add
(usually ⅓ to ½ cup, eggs, seasonings, and cheese and
pressed) purée 5 seconds. Pour into buttered

1 cup milk dish.
2 eggs (*) DELAYED-ACTION NOTE: May now be
Salt, pepper, and nutmeg covered and refrigerated until the

¼ cup grated next day.
Parmesan cheese

A 3- to 4-cup baking and
serving dish about 1½
inches deep, lightly
buttered

Half an hour before serving, bake in the middle level of a
preheated 375-degree oven until nicely puffed and browned. Serve



immediately.

MAKING A VOL-AU-VENT COVER
When you want a cover for the vol-au-vent, form it separately,

and bake the 2 together on the same pastry sheet.
Use the circle of leftover dough you cut from the second disk of

pastry that made the vol-au-vent ring. After it has rested in the
refrigerator while you were making the vol-au-vent itself, roll it out
into a disk about 9½ inches in diameter; loosen it from the rolling
surface to let it shrink if it will. Roll it up on your pin and unroll
upside down on a lightly buttered pastry sheet. Then trim it into a
neat circle using an 8½-inch cutter or plate as a guide.

Place a slightly smaller cutter,
cover, or other round object on top
and draw the back of a knife from
edge of pastry to edge of cutter at

¾-inch intervals all around to make
a scalloped edging.

To discourage dough from rising
more than a little in the oven,
prick all over (except on scalloped
edges) at ⅛-inch intervals with the
tines of a table fork, going right
down through the pastry to the
pastry sheet. Cover and chill the dough for about an hour, so that
gluten will relax and dough will bake evenly without shrinking.



Using scraps of dough left over
from the vol-au-vent, make

decorative cutouts ⅛-inch thick
and of any shape and design you
wish. After painting top of dough

with egg glaze, affix the designs and
paint them also. Then make

The design illustrated is a very shallow, all-over cross-hatch
simple one of circular cutouts, marks through the glaze and into
which puff up in an amusing the dough with a small knife or
manner; you may use ovals, the tines of a fork.
leaves, strips of dough, or
anything you wish, but remember that everything rises, and if you
cut your shapes too thick and narrow, they may topple off in the
oven.

Baking
Whether baked separately or along with the vol-au-vent, put the

cover in a preheated 425-degree oven for about 20 minutes, until
nicely browned, then turn thermostat down to 350. Pastry is done
when it feels crisp and light, which should be 30 minutes or so in
all. Let cool on a rack.

FLEURONS
[Puff-pastry Puffs, for Decorations and Garnitures]



When you are not making a cover for the vol-au-vent, you may
wish some extra bits of puff pastry to decorate the edge of the
platter around the shell. These are called fleurons, or flowered
shapes, because they are small and decorative, usually fluted ovals
or crescents. Classic French recipes often suggest fleurons as a
garnish to some of the beautiful filet of sole or scallop dishes, where
pastry elegantly takes the place of a mundane starchy vegetable.
You may make fleurons either out of the carefully preserved
trimmings from your vol-au-vent or bouchée cuttings, or from the re-
formed and reconstituted dough described after the next recipe.

Roll dough ¼ to ⅜ inch thick and
make disks with a round, 3-inch,

fluted cutter. With one stroke
through the center, cut each disk

into an oval and a crescent.

Place ½ inch apart on a dampened pastry sheet and chill for at
least half an hour to relax the dough—an hour or more would be
better. Glaze with beaten egg, decorate with cross-hatching, and



bake in middle level of a preheated 450-degree oven for 12 to 15
minutes, until nicely puffed, brown, and crisp.

PETITES BOUCHÉES
[Cocktail Shells of Puff Pastry]
Cocktail-size patty shells, petites bouchées or little mouthfuls 2

inches in diameter, are made in 1 layer. Use the leftover circles cut
from the second layer, or rings, of larger patty shells, or cut circles
from the leftover and reconstituted puff pastry dough in the
following recipe.

Roll the dough ¼ to ⅜ inch thick,
cut with a 2-inch fluted cutter,

and arrange on a dampened
baking sheet. With a 1-inch cutter

or a small knife, press a cover
outline in the top of the dough,

going ⅛ inch deep. Glaze and bake,
following the preceding directions
for fleurons. When baked and still
warm, delicately cut out the cover
and remove any uncooked pastry

from interiors.

These small shells may then be filled and reheated for serving, or
you may freeze them until needed.

UTILIZATION DES ROGNURES



[Reconstituting Leftover Dough into Puff Pastry Again]
You will have as much dough left
over from cutting a vol-au-vent as
you have in the vol-au-vent itself,

and almost as much from
bouchées. You can even make
another vol-au-vent from these

scraps, or half a dozen bouchées,
or anything else calling for puff

pastry. Demifeuilletée, the simpler
puff pastry, is treated the same
way. Puff pastry leftovers are

called rognures, meaning
trimmings or scraps.

Your object is to join the scraps into
one piece of dough in such a way
that the layers of butter and flour in
each scrap are horizontal, as they
were when the dough was first
made.
Cut the scraps as necessary.

Arrange them so that they will form
a rectangle. Then paint an edge of
each with cold water, overlap it
slightly upon its neighbor, and
seal the seam with the balls of

your fingers.



If you are very skillful, you can manage to make a few careful
rolls with your pastry pin and join the seams of dough so perfectly
that you can cut it out for patty shells or the 2 large disks needed
for a Pithiviers. The surest system, however, is to flour dough lightly,
roll into a rectangle, spread the top two thirds with a tablespoon of
softened butter and fold in three. Wrap, chill an hour or two, and
finish off with 2 more turns. Refrigerate for several hours or
overnight, or freeze, so that dough will relax thoroughly before you
use it again.

Re-use of leftovers
You can still get puffing and flakiness out of the leftover of

leftovers, using the preceding system. The pastry will not be as
tender when baked as it was at first, and it may well offer a bit of
resistance when you roll it out. However, it works very well for
most appetizers, as well as for cookies and for the fleurons and the
petites bouchées in the 2 preceding recipes.



Puff Pastry Entrées
Cornets, Rouleaux, Cheese Napoleons, and Cheese Tarts
Just a few of the many delicious pastries you can make with pâte

feuilletée are described and illustrated in the following pages; see
also dessert pastries and cookies. One could easily write a book on
puff pastry alone, and we find it hard to limit ourselves to a sensible
few. We hope, however, that these recipes will give you a feel for
how to use it so that you can go off on your own and be confident
with other recipes you find elsewhere.

CORNETS
[Puff Pastry Horns—Cream Horns]
Strips of puff pastry are rolled around cone-shaped forms, baked

until the pastry has browned and set, and baked again with a
creamy cheese filling to make a most attractive first-course fantasy.
(Encrusted with sugar, they come out of the oven with a caramel
coating for dessert creams.)

For 18 to 20 horns about 5 inches long, serving 8 to 10 people



1) Forming the dough
18 to 20 buttered cream- Stand the buttered molds within easy

horn molds (or bake reach, and have the pastry sheets
the pastry in several near you. Roll the chilled pastry out
batches) into a rectangle 14 inches long, cut in

2 large pastry sheets half crosswise, and refrigerate 1 piece
rinsed in cold water of dough. Roll remaining piece of
but not dried dough rapidly into a rectangle ⅛

½ the recipe for chilled inch thick and slightly more than 8
simple puff pastry by 13 or 14 inches in diameter. Trim

A tray lined with wax off ragged edges. (If kitchen is hot,
paper for refrigerating work very rapidly, and refrigerate all
pieces of dough you pieces or strips of dough you are not
are not actually actually working on in the following
working on steps.)

A ruler or cutting guide
A ravioli wheel
A pastry brush and cup

of cold water

Cut strips of pastry ¾ to 1 inch
wide and 13 to 14 inches long,
using cutting guide and pastry wheel
as shown.

Paint a half-inch band of cold water along top length of a strip of
dough. Hold mold by its large end; slip tip of mold under right end of



dough strip, then pinch dough all around
the tip of the mold to seal it.

Holding tip of mold with your left hand,
with your right hand rotate its large end
clockwise—to your right—winding the
dough onto the mold in a spiral from tip to
large end, and letting dough overlap ⅛
inch upon itself as you go. Be careful not to stretch the dough,
which should remain an even ⅛ inch thick. When dough is cold and
firm, you will find it easy to work with.

Seal end of dough at large end of mold, pressing
with your fingers. Place horn on baking sheet,
sealed-side of dough against sheet; press lightly
to hold the horn in place. Proceed with the rest
of the horns in the same manner.

2) Chilling, glazing, and baking
Chill at least 30 minutes, but an hour is preferable, to relax

dough before baking. When ready to bake, preheat oven to 425
degrees and set rack in middle level. Just before baking, paint tops
and sides of horns with egg glaze (1 egg beaten in a small bowl with
1 tsp water), and make cross-hatching on surface with the point of a
knife or the tines of a fork. Bake immediately; horns are done in 15
to 20 minutes, when molds slip easily out of them. For recipes
where you are to fill the horns and bake them again, remove from
oven when a pale brown so they will not darken too much during



their second baking; otherwise leave them in a few minutes longer,
to brown nicely.

(*) Pastries are at their best when eaten within a few hours of
baking; you may keep them, however, in a warming oven at around
100 degrees for a day or so; otherwise wrap airtight and freeze
them. To thaw, place on a lightly buttered baking sheet in a 400-
degree oven; turn oven off, and leave about 10 minutes.

FONDUE DE FROMAGE POUR CORNETS, ROULEAUX,
MILLE-FEUILLES, ET CROQUETTES
[Cheese Filling for Cream Horns, Mille-Feuilles, and Croquettes]
This is a very thick sauce that will not run or flow out of shape

when heated in pastries, or when coated with beaten eggs and bread
crumbs and deep-fried. Rather than cooking it in the usual way,
with a flour and butter roux that is moistened with hot milk, you
beat the milk into the flour and then add the butter, making what is
technically known as a bouilli.

For about 2½ cups

¾ to 1 cup milk Gradually beat driblets of milk into
½ cup all-purpose flour the flour, in saucepan, adding ¾ cup

(measure by scooping and beating to a smooth consistency.
dry-measure cup into Add butter, and set pan over
flour and sweeping off moderate heat, stirring. When
excess with knife) mixture comes near the boil and

A heavy 2-quart begins to be lumpy, remove from
saucepan heat and beat vigorously to smooth it

A wire whip and a out. One by one, beat in the eggs,
rubber spatula and bring to the boil, beating

2 Tb butter constantly. Sauce must be a thick
paste; if very stiff, thin out over heat,

2 “large” eggs beating in more milk by dribbles.



Salt, pepper, pinch of Remove from heat, season with salt,
nutmeg, and drops of pepper, a pinch of nutmeg, and
Tabasco or a pinch of rather strongly with Tabasco or
Cayenne pepper Cayenne pepper. Let cool for a few

4 ounces (about 1 cup) minutes, then fold in the cheese. Fold
coarsely grated Swiss in just enough cream to soften it
cheese slightly, but sauce must hold its

2 ounces (less than ½ shape when mounded in a spoon; it
cup) grated Parmesan should not spread out later, when
cheese cooked with pastries.

3 to 4 Tb heavy cream (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be made
several days in advance of using; may
be frozen. Clean off sides of pan, and
press a sheet of plastic wrap over the
surface of the sauce to prevent a skin
or crust from forming.

Additions
Use half the amount of cheese called for in the preceding filling,

and fold in ⅓ to ½ cup of either diced ham or mushroom duxelles
(diced fresh mushrooms sautéed in butter, Volume I, page 515).

CORNETS À LA FONDUE DE FROMAGE
[Cream Horns Baked with Cheese Filling]

A pastry bag with round tube The preceding cheese filling
opening

Puff pastry cream horns, baked but barely browned
Rather soft Swiss cheese
A grater (small holes)
A lightly buttered baking sheet



Preheat oven to 400 degrees. Pack the cheese filling into the pastry
bag and squeeze it into each pastry horn. Grate cheese so that you
have rather long whiskery wisps, and pack a large pinch into opening
of each horn.

Bake in upper third of preheated oven 10 to 12 minutes, to melt
cheese and heat filling to bubbling hot. Serve as soon as possible.

ROULEAUX
[Puff Pastry Cream Rolls]

If you cannot find molds for cream horns, you may find metal
molds suitable for pastry rolls; or use pieces of well-oiled
unvarnished wood 5 to 6 inches long, such as a cut-up broom
handle. Form, bake, and fill puff pastry rolls in the same general
manner described and illustrated for horns. When baked with the



preceding cheese filling, stuff whiskers of cheese into both ends to
prevent filling from oozing out.

MILLE-FEUILLES À LA FONDUE DE FROMAGE
[Cheese Napoleons]

You will probably find far more use for cheese Napoleons than
for pastry-cream dessert Napoleons. They make an elegant first
course or luncheon dish and are practically as easy to assemble as
the count of one-two-three—when you have ready-made puff pastry
on hand. A thin sheet of baked puff pastry is cut into squares or
rectangles that are sandwiched together with the cheese fondue
filling and baked until the filling is bubbling hot.

For 6 to 8 servings

1 sheet of baked puff Cut the baked puff pastry either into
pastry 12 by 16 inches three 4- by 16-inch strips, and cut
in diameter each strip into squares 4 inches to a
(Napoleons; Steps 1 side; or cut the pastry into four 3-
and 2) inch strips 16 inches long, and cut

A ruler or cutting guide



A pastry wheel or very each into 4 rectangles (making 12
sharp knife squares, or 16 rectangles).

The cheese fondue filling Preheat oven to 375 degrees about
3 to 4 Tb grated half an hour before you wish to

Parmesan cheese serve. Have the filling and grated
A lightly buttered baking cheese ready. Place half the puff

sheet pastry pieces on the baking sheet.
Spread a 3-tablespoon lump of the
filling on each, but leaving a ¼-inch
free border of pastry all around.
Lightly press a second piece of
pastry, best side uppermost, on top.
Sprinkle on a half teaspoon of grated
cheese.

Bake for about 15 minutes in preheated oven, upper-middle
level, until cheese topping has colored lightly and cheese filling is
bubbling hot—be careful not to bake too long and burn the pastry.
Serve immediately.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: You may form the mille-feuilles for baking
an hour or so in advance.

FEUILLETÉE AU FROMAGE—JALOUSIE AU FROMAGE
[Peekaboo Cheese Tart of French Puff Pastry]



Another delicious puff pastry for first courses, luncheons, or for
slicing and serving with cocktails is the feuilletée. Quick to assemble,
when you have puff pastry dough on hand, it is done exactly like the
jam tart.

For a 6- by 16-inch, tart, serving 6 people

1) Forming the tart
½ the recipe for simple Roll half the pastry into an 8- by 18-

puff pastry, or inch rectangle ⅛ inch thick. Roll up
reconstituted leftovers on pin, and unroll topside down onto

A dampened pastry sheet dampened pastry sheet. Prick all over
A table fork at ⅛-inch intervals with tines of fork,
Either ½ to ⅔ the cheese going right down through to pastry

fondue filling; sheet.
Or 4 to 6 ounces

Roquefort cheese or
blue cheese, and 1 egg
beaten with ½ cup
crème fraîche or heavy
cream, salt, pepper,
and Tabasco

Either spread the fondue filling on
the pastry, leaving a ¾-inch border



all around; or cut cheese into thin
slices and spread over pastry,

leaving border.

Turn borders of pastry up over filling at
sides; wet corners, and turn ends over,
sealing corners with fingers. If you
are using Roquefort or blue cheese,
spoon the egg and cream over it,
tilting pastry in all directions,
allowing liquid to flow all over
enclosed area.

Roll out second piece of pastry
into a 7- by 17-inch rectangle ⅛
inch thick. Flour surface lightly,

and fold in half lengthwise.
Measure opening of filled pastry
and mark folded pastry to guide
you. Cut slits in dough from folded
edge as shown, making them ⅜ inch
apart and half as long as width of

opening in tart.

Wet edges of filled bottom layer of pastry with cold water. Unfold
top layer over it; brush off accumulated flour, and press pastry in



place with fingers. Then with back tines
of a fork, press a decorative vertical
edging all around sides of tart. Cover
and chill for at least 30 minutes before
baking.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: When chilled
and firm, may be wrapped airtight and
frozen for several months. Remove
from freezer, glaze, and bake as in Step
2.

2) Baking and serving—about 1 hour at 450 and 400 degrees
Egg glaze (1 egg beaten When oven has been preheated to

in a small bowl with 1 450 degrees, set rack in lower-middle
tsp water) level. Paint surface of chilled tart

A pastry brush with egg glaze; wait a moment, and
A table fork or small give it a second coat. Make cross-

knife hatchings on top of sides and ends
A rack through glaze, and set in oven. In
A serving tray or board about 20 minutes, when pastry has

risen and started to brown, turn oven
down to 400 degrees. Cover loosely
with foil or brown paper if surface is
browning too much. Sides should be
firm and crusty. Slide onto a rack
when done. Serve warm or tepid,
cutting into crosswise slices.
(*) Tart is best when freshly made,
but you can store it for several hours
in a warming oven at about 100
degrees.



Garnitures for Bouchées and Vol-au-Vent
  RIS DE VEAU À LA FINANCIÈRE

[Braised Sweetbreads Garnished with Quenelles, Truffles,
Mushrooms, and Olives]
This is certainly one of the great classic fillings for bouchées and

large vol-au-vent, and delicious when properly done. Unfortunately,
like Beef Wellington in the hands of the profane and cynical,
gummy sauces, clumsy flavoring, and bad pastry have ruined its
reputation. We urge you to give it another try, and you will
understand why it has long been so popular with great chefs. You
may not want to add all of the items listed, but you will have a
delicious creamed sweetbread filling even if you do not do the full
financière, which could also include cockscombs and white kidneys
(crêtes et rognons de coq), although we have not listed them in the
ingredients.

MANUFACTURING NOTE

This is the kind of filling that you can prepare the day before
serving. We shall not give proportions of how much filling is to go
into each pastry, because there is no way of knowing what size and
how many you are to make; leftover filling will be just as good the
next day, with scrambled eggs or as the filling for an omelette.

For about 1½ quarts, serving 6 to 8

1) The sweetbreads and the sauce base
2 lbs. soaked and peeled Remove sweetbreads to a plate, and

sweetbreads braised in strain cooking stock into a bowl.
wine, stock, and Return stock to braising dish. Trim



aromatic vegetables, mushrooms, wash rapidly in cold
Volume I, page 410 water, and quarter if necessary. Add

2 cups fresh baby mushrooms to liquid in braising dish
mushrooms, or larger and simmer 5 minutes. Dip or strain
mushrooms quartered them out, and add to sweetbreads. In

2½ cups liquid as the heavy saucepan, melt the butter,
follows: the cooking blend in the flour, and stir over
stock from the moderate heat with wooden spoon
sweetbreads plus half until flour and butter foam together
veal or chicken stock for 2 minutes without browning.
and half milk to Remove from heat, and as soon as
complete the measure this roux stops bubbling, pour in all

A heavy-bottomed 3- the hot braising liquid at once,
quart saucepan, blending vigorously with wire whip
enameled or stainless until perfectly smooth.

4 Tb butter
5 Tb flour
A wooden spoon and a

wire whip
½ to ⅔ cup heavy cream

Return over moderately high heat, and stir with wire whip as
sauce thickens and comes to the boil. It will be quite thick. Thin out,
still simmering, with spoonfuls of cream; sauce should coat spoon
fairly heavily.

Salt and white pepper to Taste sauce very carefully for
taste seasoning and strength. It may need

If needed: More white simmering with more wine, or
wine, Sercial Madeira, strengthening with Madeira, veal
more stock, a pinch stock, a little beef stock, or herbs. If



more thyme or bay so, simmer it, stirring, and tasting
leaf until you are satisfied. The egg yolks,

butter, and the other ingredients will
give it more interest, but it should be
delicious at this point. (You will need
about equal quantities of sauce and
garniture.)

2) The rest of the garniture, and final flavorings and
enrichment

1 or more truffles and Cut the braised sweetbreads into ½-
the juices from the can inch slices or into ½-inch dice, and

Veal or chicken set aside. Fold the mushrooms into
quenelles, poached, the sauce. If you have several
and cut into ½-inch truffles, slice one and use for
pieces, Volume I, page decoration later; dice the rest into
189 (or canned small pieces and add to the sauce
imported quenelles of along with their juices. Fold in the
veal or chicken), 1 to diced quenelles and the olives. Bring
1½ cups, depending to the simmer for 3 to 4 minutes to
on how much you blend flavors, and taste very carefully
have or need for seasoning, adding salt, pepper,

⅔ cup small green pitted and lemon as needed. Remove from
olives simmered 5 heat, beat several spoonfuls of hot
minutes in 1 quart of sauce gradually into the cream and
water egg yolks, then fold the egg-yolk

Salt and white pepper to mixture back into the saucepan along
taste with the sweetbreads. Reheat, folding

Drops of lemon juice slowly, to below the simmer. Remove
from heat and fold in the butter, a

2 egg yolks blended with spoonful at a time. Spoon into the
¼ cup heavy cream in hot bouchées or vol-au-vent, and serve
a small bowl immediately, topped, if you wish,



2 to 4 Tb soft butter with truffle slices or fluted
Hot bouchées or vol-au- mushrooms.

vent
Optional: truffle slices or

a fluted cooked
mushroom cap
(Volume I, pages 510–
11) for each serving

VARIATIONS
Garniture Dieppoise—Garniture aux Fruits de Mer
[Creamed Seafood Filling]
Adapt the marmite dieppoise, with its sole, halibut, shrimp,

scallops, mussels, and lobsters, to the preceding recipe. Follow the
marmite recipe, Steps 1 and 2, then boil the cooking liquid down to
2½ to 3 cups, and proceed with the sauce in the preceding recipe,
Steps 1 and 2. Use sliced truffles or fluted mushrooms to garnish
each serving.

Garniture de Volaille, Financière
[Diced Chicken in White-wine Sauce with Quenelles, Truffles,
Mushrooms, and Olives]
Poach chicken pieces in white wine and aromatic vegetables,

following the recipe for poulet poché au vin blanc, Steps 1 and 2. Peel
and dice the chicken, and then proceed as for the sweetbreads,
simply substituting chicken and chicken stock for fish and fish stock.






CHAPTER THREE
Meats: From Country Kitchen to

Haute Cuisine

BRAISED BEEF
Boeuf Braisé, Paupiettes, and Daubes

WHETHER IT IS ONE LARGE PIECE or a dozen small ones, whether you
use red wine or white, whether or not you marinate it, lard it, flour
it, thicken its juices at the beginning or at the end, all beef that is
braised undergoes much the same process, and if you have done one
you can do all. This is comforting to remember when you run into a
new pot roast or stew: it is only the small differences in method,
garnishing, or flavor that distinguish one recipe from another. For
example, the fine boeuf en daube à la provençale sounds as though it
were quite a different dish from the boeuf à la mode in Volume I on
page 309, but you will see they are very much related: while the
beef for the daube is larded with ham, and is put into a thickened
sauce from the beginning of its braise, the sauce for the boeuf à la
mode is thickened at the end of the cooking. Again, in a comparison
of beef stews you find the boeuf bourguignon in Volume I braising in
a flour-thickened sauce, while the boeuf aux oignons follows the
simpler pattern of having its sauce thickened at the end with beurre
manié (flour-butter paste). The methods are actually
interchangeable, and you can conduct any braise exactly as you
wish; the more techniques you have absorbed, the more you are
master of la cuisine.



MARINATING THE BEEF BEFORE COOKING

An aromatic wine marinade adds its own special flavor to beef,
and is always an effective tenderizer for the tougher cuts. Marinate
or not, as you wish, for any of the following recipes, using the
formula for the daube, and dry white wine rather than red, if you
wish. For the marinade to be effective, stew meat or meat for
paupiettes needs at least 6 hours, and a roast, 12 hours. Several days
of marination in the refrigerator will be even more penetrating, and
the marinade will also preserve the meat a little longer. In other
words, rather than freezing it, if you are a once-a-week shopper,
marinate it. Drain and dry the beef thoroughly before proceeding
with any recipe. Substitute the marinade vegetables and wine for
whatever is called for in the recipe, and if carrots are not one of the
ingredients listed, for instance, add the marinade carrots anyway,
since such details are of small importance.

LARDONS, PORK FAT, BACON, AND SUET

Lardons, those stick-shaped bits of fat-and-lean pork 1½ inches
long and ¼ inch thick, are typical of French stews. Their rendered
fat browns the beef, and their flavor adds a subtle touch to its sauce.
Fresh, unsalted, and unsmoked pork belly is the cut to use if you can
find it, otherwise substitute chunk bacon, cut, and blanched
(simmered) 10 minutes in a quart of water to remove its salty,
smoky taste. (Fat-and-lean salt pork, if very fresh and fine, is
another alternative, but it must also be blanched.) Pork fat for
larding and for draping over the meat is discussed in the charcuterie
chapter. If you prefer suet, although it tends to shrink up, use fat
from the outside of a rib or a loin of beef.

BEEF CUTS FOR STEWS

Most markets have ready-cut stew meat all packaged by the
pound, and there is no telling what it is. If you want to order your
own, the following are some recommended cuts.



Cuts from the round (hind leg)—la cuisse
TOP ROUND, tende de tranche. This is rather expensive, but

furnishes solid pieces of meat with no muscle separations.
BOTTOM ROUND, gîte à la noix. This also furnishes solid pieces, but

the cooked meat will tend to be somewhat grainy; be sure not to
overcook it, to avoid an accentuation of this quality. The eye of the
round, part of this cut, rond de gîte à la noix, is not at all
recommended for stewing because of its excessive graininess.

SIRLOIN TIP (also called KNUCKLE), tranche grasse. Lower parts and
outside of this cut, when clear of gristle, can be used for stewing.

HEEL OF ROUND, nerveux gîte à la noix. The hind shank when boned
and de-gristled makes excellent, gelatinous stew meat, but benefits
from a marinade and longer cooking.

Cuts from the chuck (shoulder end)
SHOULDER BLADE, paleron; SHOULDER ARM, macreuse and jumeau;

CHUCK RIBS, basses côtes or côtes découvertes; NECK, collier. There are
numerous fine stewing cuts from this section, but usually only
Jewish or European butchers know them. Especially recommended
are the chuck tender, a conical muscle lying along one side of the
shoulder blade; flunken or flanken, the top of the chuck short ribs;
arm pot roast.

Cuts from the underside and short ribs—caparaçon et plat de
côtes
These include the brisket, poitrine, which is really too grainy for

stewing but fine for braising whole; the plate, tendron, with its
mixture of fat and lean and its cartilaginous bones, which make for
good sauce consistency; and the flank, flanchet, which is not for
stewing in pieces but may be stuffed and braised whole if it is not
scored and broiled for steak. The short ribs, plat de côtes couvert (ribs
7 to 9), are excellent in a stew but take up a lot of room in your
casserole because the bones are left in; however, they have excellent
flavor and the meat with bones makes a delicious sauce.



  BOEUF AUX OIGNONS
[Beef Stew with Onions and Red Wine]
This is the most elemental of beef stews, with its lardons of pork

that render the fat that browns the beef that simmers in wine, along
with onions, herbs, garlic, and a hint of tomato. Delicious just as it
is, the inclusion of other elements changes its character as well as its
name, making it, in fact, the perfect stew for our game of theme and
variations. Buttered noodles, buttered peas, and little tomatoes go
beautifully with this stew, but if you wish to branch into more
exotic preparations you might choose one of the eggplant recipes,
such as the sauté en persillade, or the broiled eggplant slices,
accompanied, perhaps, with individual servings of potatoes in the
form of pommes duchesse. A full and hearty red wine like Beaujolais,
Côtes-du-Rhône, or Mountain Red is called for here.

For 6 people

1) Browning the beef and other preliminaries
5 to 6 ounces (⅔ cup) Brown the lardons lightly with a

lardons (1½-inch sticks tablespoon of the oil in the frying
of blanched bacon ¼ pan; transfer with a slotted spoon to
inch thick) the casserole, leaving fat in frying

Olive oil or cooking oil pan.
A large (11-inch) frying

pan (no-stick
recommended)

A heavy, covered, 5- to 6-
quart casserole (such



as a round one, 10 by
4 inches)

3½ to 4 lbs. boned and While lardons are browning, dry meat
trimmed beef stew thoroughly in paper towels, and
meat cut into chunks when lardons are done, raise heat
about 2 by 3 by 1 under pan to moderately high. When
inches (see list of cuts) fat in pan is very hot but not

Paper towels smoking, add as many pieces of beef
1 tsp salt as will fit easily in one layer. Turn
⅛ tsp pepper every 2 to 3 minutes, browning meat

nicely on all sides. (Add a tablespoon
or so more oil if needed.) As some
pieces are browned, transfer to
casserole and brown additional ones
until all are done and transferred to
casserole. Toss and turn the meat
with the salt and pepper.

2) Assembling braising ingredients
2 cups sliced onions If fat in frying pan has burned and
2 large cloves garlic, blackened, discard it and pour ⅛

mashed inch of oil into pan. Add onions and
2 cups beef stock or cook over moderate heat, stirring

bouillon (more if occasionally, for 8 to 10 minutes or
needed) until fairly tender and beginning to

A medium herb bouquet brown lightly. Meanwhile add to the
tied in washed meat in the casserole the garlic,
cheesecloth (1 bouillon, herbs, tomato, and optional
imported bay leaf, 4 ingredients. When the onions are

done, stir them in. To deglaze frying



parsley sprigs, and ½ pan, pour in the wine, scraping
tsp thyme) around with a wooden spoon to

1 tomato, peeled, seeded, dislodge all cooking juices. Finally,
and roughly chopped pour wine into casserole, adding a

Optional, but desirable little more (or more stock), if
for sauce consistency: necessary, so ingredients are just
2 cups chopped or covered.
sawed veal knuckle (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be
bones or beef marrow done a day or two in advance to this
bones, and/or an 8- point. When cold, cover and
inch square of refrigerate.
blanched pork rind
(Volume I, page 401)

2 cups full-bodied,
young, red wine (such
as Mâcon or Mountain
Red)

3) Braising
Bring stew to simmer on top of stove, cover casserole, and either

maintain at slow simmer on top of stove or place in lower-middle
level of preheated 350-degree oven; regulate heat so that stew
simmers slowly throughout cooking. Turn and baste the meat
occasionally. Stew is done when you can pierce the beef quite easily
with a knife; slice into it and sample several pieces if you have any
doubts.

TIMING: Note that aged, prime beef will cook faster than other
grades, regardless of cut.

Sirloin tip, rump, top round, flunken—1½ to 2½ hours.
Bottom round, shoulder arm, chuck tender, short ribs—2 to 3

hours.
Heel of round, and other gelatinous cuts with muscle separation

and gristle—3 to 4 hours.



4) Sauce
A 2- to 3-quart saucepan Set cover askew and pour cooking
4 Tb flour liquid out of casserole into saucepan.
3 Tb soft butter in a 1- Discard herb bouquet and bones from

quart bowl casserole. With a large spoon, skim as
A rubber spatula much surface fat as you can from
A wire whip liquid, then bring to the simmer,

skimming, to remove more fat.

Taste carefully for strength and seasoning; if weak, boil down
rapidly to concentrate flavor, adding, if you think it necessary, a
little tomato paste, another clove of mashed garlic, more herbs, salt,
and pepper. When you are satisfied, remove from heat; you should
have about 3 cups of rich and delicious liquid that must now be
thickened into a sauce with beurre manié. To do so, blend flour and
butter to a smooth paste with rubber spatula; beat vigorously into
hot liquid with wire whip. When perfectly smooth, bring liquid to
the simmer, stirring with wire whip, and simmer 2 minutes. Sauce
should be thick enough to coat a spoon, meaning it will coat the
meat nicely. If too thin, add half again as much beurre manié; if too
thick, stir in stock or bouillon. Fold the sauce into the meat in the
casserole.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not serving immediately, set
cover askew and keep warm in a 120-degree oven, over simmering
water, or on a hot-tray. For serving several hours or several days
later, let cool; lay plastic wrap over surface, cover, and refrigerate
(or wrap airtight and freeze for several weeks).

5) Serving



If needed: a warm, If stew is warm, bring to the simmer
lightly buttered platter again before serving. If it has been

Parsley sprigs, chilled, it should simmer 5 to 10
watercress, or minutes after it has either warmed
whatever vegetables through slowly on top of the stove or
you wish to use as a been about 30 minutes in a 350-
garnish degree oven. Taste carefully again for

seasoning, and if sauce has thickened
too much, fold in a little stock or
bouillon. Serve either from casserole
or turn out onto platter; decorate
with greenery or vegetables.

VARIATIONS
Boeuf au Pistou
[Beef Stew with an Herb, Cheese, and Garlic Finish]
This delicious enrichment comes at the very end, after the sauce

has been thickened and just before you are ready to serve the beef.
The fresh garlic, herbs, cheese, and a bit of tomato will pep up any
stew, and is particularly useful for leftovers and canned or frozen
mixtures.

To be added just before serving the
stew, Step 5.

2 large cloves garlic Purée garlic through press into bowl.
A garlic press With pestle or wooden spoon, mash it



A small bowl or mortar to a paste, then mash with the herbs.
A pestle or wooden Stir in the cheese, tomato paste, and

spoon Tabasco. Cover and set aside until
A dozen large leaves of you are ready to serve. Stir the pistou

fresh minced basil, or into finished stew, basting meat with
1 tsp fragrant dried sauce to blend it thoroughly with the
basil or oregano pistou.

¼ cup freshly grated
imported Parmesan
cheese

3 Tb tomato paste
4 dashes Tabasco sauce

Boeuf à la Provençale
[Beef Stew with Garlic and Anchovy Finish]
The mixture of anchovies, capers, garlic, and parsley described

in Volume I, page 324, is an alternate enrichment. Add it as directed
for the pistou in the preceding recipe.

Boeuf en Pipérade
[Beef Stew with a Garnish of Peppers and Tomatoes]
Another enlivening finish to a stew is the pipérade, a fresh sauté

of green peppers, tomatoes, garlic, and herbs.

To be added just before serving the
boeuf aux oignons, Master Recipe,



Step 5.

2 medium-sized green Sauté the diced peppers in the oil
bell peppers, seeded over moderately low heat for 5 to 6
and diced minutes, or until almost tender. Fold

2 to 3 Tb olive oil or in the diced tomato pulp and garlic;
cooking oil in a frying cover pan and cook slowly for several
pan minutes until tomatoes have

3 or 4 firm, fresh, ripe rendered their juice. Raise heat and
tomatoes, peeled, toss vegetables for several minutes
seeded, juiced, and over high heat to evaporate almost
diced all liquid. Fold in salt and pepper to

2 large cloves of garlic, taste, and the herbs. Set aside until
mashed or minced stew is finished. When reheating stew

A cover for the pan for serving, fold the pipérade into the
stew, and simmer 5 minutes to blend

Salt and pepper to taste flavors.
8 large fresh basil leaves,

minced, or ½ tsp
fragrant dried basil or
oregano and 3 Tb fresh
minced parsley

Boeuf aux Olives
[Beef Stew with Olives and Potatoes]
Olives give a very Mediterranean touch and subtle flavor to

anything they cook with, and potatoes make the stew practically a
one-dish meal. Any of the three preceding garnishes—peppers,
anchovies, or pistou—may be included as well, if you wish.



To be added near the end of the
braising period, when beef has about
½ hour more to cook (Master Recipe
for boeuf aux oignons, Step 3).

1) Preparing the olives and potatoes
⅓ cup each: small, pitted To remove excess salt and too strong

green olives, and a taste, simmer the olives for 10
black, Mediterranean- minutes; drain. If black olives are still
type olives, pitted too strong for your taste, simmer

1 quart of water in a them separately 10 minutes more.
saucepan Leave olives whole if small (¾ inch

long), quarter lengthwise if larger.

2½ to 3 lbs. “boiling” Peel potatoes, halve lengthwise, and
potatoes all of a size, trim into the shape of large garlic
about 3 inches long cloves about 2½ inches long and 1½

A bowl of cold water inches at their thickest, making 3 or
4 pieces per person. Reserve in cold
water.

2) Adding olives and potatoes to stew
A saucepan of salted A few minutes before they are to be

water for the potatoes added to the stew, drain the potatoes
The boeuf aux oignons, and place in a saucepan of cold

braised until almost water; bring rapidly to the boil, and
tender, Step 3 boil 1 minute. Drain. Meanwhile,

skim accumulated fat off top of stew,



A round of waxed paper remove from casserole any bones,
or of aluminum foil rind, or other extraneous matter,

including herb bouquet, and carefully
correct seasoning of cooking liquid.
Stir in the olives. Spread the potatoes
over the top of the stew, press them
down into the cooking liquid, and
baste with the liquid. Bring stew
again to simmer on top of stove, lay
paper or foil over potatoes, cover
casserole again, and maintain at
simmer for about 30 minutes, or until
potatoes are tender, basting them
once or twice with the cooking
liquid.

3) Finishing the stew
Optional but attractive: You may find that the cooking liquid

one of the 3 garnishes is sufficiently degreased and
in the preceding sufficiently thickened so that you can
recipes (pistou serve the stew as is. Otherwise, set
especially) cover askew and drain cooking liquid

Beurre manié if needed: 2 into a saucepan; skim off fat, and
Tb flour blended to a correct seasoning. If liquid is lightly
paste with 1½ Tb soft thickened and you are using the
butter pistou, which will thicken it a little

If you wish: a hot, more, simply blend the pistou into the
buttered platter cooking liquid and pour back into the

Parsley sprigs or minced casserole. If liquid is thin, beat in the
fresh parsley beurre manié, bring to the boil, mix in

the pistou or other garnish if you are
using one, and pour back into
casserole. Reheat the stew just before



serving, and bring to the table either
in its casserole or arranged on a
platter and decorated with herbs.

Boeuf au Gingembre
[Beef Stew Flavored with Ginger, Capers, and Herbs]
Ginger gives an especially attractive and unusual flavor to beef,

and this dish has rather Chinese overtones of sweet and sour.
Because of the special flavors, including vinegar, the usual red wine
of the beef stew is omitted in this recipe.

Complete Master Recipe for boeuf aux
oignons, through Step 2, but omit the
2 cups of red wine; substitute 2 more
cups stock or bouillon and the
following.

⅓ cup pressed-down pain Purée the bread or gingersnaps,
d’épices, gingerbread, ginger, capers, vinegar, herbs, and 1
or ginger-snaps cup of the bouillon in the blender.

1½ Tb fresh ginger, Pour mixture into casserole of beef,
grated, or 2 tsp rinse out blender jar with more
powdered ginger bouillon, pour into casserole, and

2 Tb capers proceed with recipe.
¼ cup wine vinegar
2 Tb fresh tarragon or

basil, or 1 tsp dried
herbs



2 cups of the bouillon
called for in the
Master Recipe

An electric blender

NOTE: When beef is tender, at end of Step 3, and you have
drained out, skimmed, boiled down, and seasoned the cooking
liquid as directed in the next step, you will probably find that it has
thickened enough so that you need do nothing more to it.

STUFFED BEEF ROLLS
Paupiettes de Boeuf—Roulades

Thin slices of beef rolled around a stuffing and braised in wine is
only a more elaborate way of presenting the familiar beef stew.
Paupiettes with a pork and veal stuffing and mustard sauce appear in
Volume I on page 319, an excellent recipe. The first one here is a
giant paupiette de Gargantua, serving 6 people, while variations are
for individual rolls. Stuffings include a Provençal mixture of greens,
onions, pork, and ham, an olive mixture, a pepper mixture, and a
final combination of rice, garlic, and herbs.

BEEF CUTS FOR PAUPIETTES

Look for solid pieces of meat that will make large, thin, cross-
grain slices with no muscle separations. Avoid cuts like brisket,
which tend to fall into long, loose fibers after cooking. Top round
(tende de tranche, noix) is our first choice, and a cut from the upper-
middle portion will give perfect slices 10 to 12 inches across by 5 to
7 inches. Rump (rumsteck) works nicely, of course, but it is a waste
to spend the extra money for rump when round is equally good.
Bottom round (gîte à la noix) is a little grainier than top round, but a



satisfactory alternative. Shoulder-arm steak (macreuse) is fourth
choice only because of the gristle running through part of the slice,
but you can clip the gristle in several places so that it will not draw
the meat out of shape.

  LA PAUPIETTE DE GARGANTUA
[Giant Stuffed Beef Roll]
Rather than making a number of individual paupiettes, this recipe

rolls them all into one, and, because the stuffing is green, you need
no green vegetable garnish. You could accompany the paupiette with
broiled tomatoes, sautéed mushrooms, and glazed carrots, or with
braised lettuce or endives and sautéed potatoes. Another suggestion
is one of the unusual purées, squash and white beans, rice and
turnips with garlic, or rutabagas. A full red wine is called for, as in
all beef dishes: Burgundy, Moulin-à-Vent, Côtes-du-Rhône.

For 6 people

1) Preparing the meat
A 2- to 2½-lb. slice of top Trim outside fat and gristle off meat.

round of beef You are now to cut the slice of beef
approximately 12 by 6 so that you can open it up like a
inches and ¾ to 1 inch book, making 2 flaps of meat hinged
thick (see Beef Cuts for together at one side. To do so, lay it
Stews) flat on table and start at one of the

3 Tb strong Dijon-type long sides with a long, very sharp
prepared mustard knife; slice through center of meat,

½ tsp mixed herbs such parallel to table, ending ½ inch from
as thyme and bay leaf, other long side. Open up the meat,
or Italian Seasoning spread mustard and herbs on inside



surface, and set aside while preparing
stuffing, next step.

2) Green stuffing with pork, ham, and onions—for about 3 cups
1 cup minced onions Cook the onions with the fat or oil in
2 Tb rendered pork fat or the pan over moderately low heat

cooking oil until tender but not browned.
An 8-inch enameled or

no-stick frying pan

About ½ lb. greens If greens are fresh, pick them over to
(collard, kale, turnip, remove stems; drop leaves into a
or spinach, fresh or large kettle of boiling, salted water,
frozen) and boil until wilted and fairly tender

A large stainless-steel (2–3 minutes for spinach, more for
knife the others). If frozen, boil for

sufficient time in a covered pan with
½ cup salted water until defrosted
and fairly tender. Drain cooked
greens, refresh in cold water, squeeze
out as much water as possible, and
chop fine. Then add greens to onions,
and stir over moderate heat for
several minutes to evaporate
moisture and to finish cooking.

A 3-quart mixing bowl Scrape greens and onions into mixing
(or heavy-duty electric bowl and vigorously beat in the rest
mixer) of the ingredients listed. Sauté a



1 egg spoonful, taste, and correct
1 tsp salt seasoning.
½ tsp épices fines, or

mixture of all-spice,
thyme, and bay leaf

¼ tsp pepper
1 large clove garlic,

mashed
¼ cup dry crumbs from

nonsweetened,
homemade-type white
bread

1 cup diced boiled ham
½ cup fresh sausage

meat

3) Assembling the paupiette
Either a 14-inch square of (If using salt pork or bacon, blanch

caul fat; 10 minutes in 2 quarts of water, and
Or a 12- by 8-inch sheet pat dry.) Spread the stuffing over the

of pork fat ¼ inch meat, leaving an inch border of clear
thick; meat all around. Starting at one long

Or 6 to 8 strips of thick side, roll the meat rather loosely
bacon or salt pork, around the stuffing, making a
and a 12- by 6-inch sausage shape about 4 inches in
piece of beef suet ¼ diameter. Fold over the two ends. If
inch thick you have caul fat, roll the meat in a

White kitchen string double thickness of it; tie lengthwise
and in several places around the
circumference. Otherwise, place
strips of pork fat, bacon, or salt pork
over length, particularly the seam,



and the ends; tie in place, and
reserve remaining pieces of fat for
later.

4) Browning the paupiette—preheat oven to 450 degrees
Pork fat or cooking oil (The paupiette is soft and must be
A heavy casserole, handled carefully to prevent stuffing

preferably oval, and from bursting out; it will stiffen after
just large enough to browning.) Pat meat gently with
hold the meat paper towels to dry it. Film casserole

A medium onion roughly with ⅛ inch of fat or oil, and place
sliced meat seam-side up in casserole. Strew

A medium carrot roughly vegetables around meat. Brown over
sliced moderate heat, loosening bottom of

meat carefully with a spatula from
time to time to prevent sticking.
Baste top of meat with fat in pan and
set uncovered in upper-middle level
of oven to brown top and sides. Baste
every 3 to 4 minutes with fat or oil
for the 12 to 15 minutes it will take
to brown. Remove casserole from
oven.

5) Braising—1½ to 2 hours; oven at 325 degrees
Salt, pepper, and more of Turn down oven to 325 degrees.

the same herbs Season the meat with salt, pepper,
1½ cups dry white wine and herbs. Pour in the wine and

or dry white French enough stock or bouillon to come ½
vermouth to ⅔ the way up the meat. Bring to



1½ or more cups beef the simmer on top of the stove. If you
stock or bouillon are using it, drape suet over meat.

Aluminum foil and the Place foil on top, cover the casserole,
casserole cover and place in middle level of oven.

Baste meat several times during
cooking, and regulate oven heat so
that liquid is only slowly simmering
in casserole. Paupiette is done when a
knife will pierce the meat easily.

TIMING: 1½ to 2 hours for top-grade beef; as much as an hour
more for other cuts and qualities.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: Meat may be either stuffed or browned in
advance of braising. Braised meat may be kept warm in a 120-
degree oven for an hour or more. It may be cooled and reheated, but
will not have quite the same delicious texture.

6) Sauce and serving
A hot serving platter Remove paupiette to hot platter,
A sieve set over a discard strings and fat, replace foil

saucepan cover over meat, and keep warm in
If needed: 1 Tb of turned-off oven. Strain cooking liquid

cornstarch blended into saucepan, pressing juice out of
with 2 Tb white wine, braising ingredients. Skim off fat.
vermouth, or stock You should have 1½ to 2 cups liquid

2 Tb soft butter slightly thickened by the braising
A hot sauce bowl ingredients and the crumbs in the

stuffing. (If thin, remove from heat,
Watercress, parsley, or beat in cornstarch mixture, and

whatever vegetables simmer for 2 minutes.) Correct
seasoning. Just before serving, stir in
butter, a half spoonful at a time,



you wish, to garnish spoon a little sauce over meat, and
platter pour rest into sauce bowl. Garnish

platter with greenery or vegetables,
and serve immediately.

Other stuffings—other garnishings
In addition to the green-pepper stuffing and the garlic and rice

stuffing in the following variations, and the veal and pork stuffing
on page 319 in Volume I, other possibilities are listed. Rather than
the braising and sauce-making system described here, you may
follow that for the daube, or for the beef stews and their variations,
which include pistou, pipérade, and ginger flavorings.

VARIATION
The following recipe describes the procedure for making

individual paupiettes. We have suggested large and luxurious slices
of meat; the stuffing is spread over them, and the slice is rolled up
like a rug. When you wish to be more economical, make twice the
amount of stuffing, use beef slices half as large, and rather than
rolling like a rug, fold the meat around the stuffing to enclose it,
almost exactly as illustrated for the stuffed cabbage leaves.

Paupiettes de Boeuf à la Catalane
[Beef Rolls Stuffed with Peppers, Onions, and Mustard Bread]
For 4 paupiettes, 1 per person



1) Preparing the beef for stuffing
4 slices of top round of (If you cannot have the beef sliced to

beef 10 to 12 by 6 to 7 your order and have difficulty at
inches and ⅜ inch home, you can freeze the piece of
thick (see Beef Cuts for beef and slice when not quite
Stews) stiffened, or when partially thawed.

Waxed paper This will not harm the meat at all.)
A mallet or rolling pin Trim off all outside fat and gristle.
Salt and pepper One by one, pound each slice
½ tsp thyme or oregano between sheets of waxed paper with

a mallet or rolling pin, to break down
the fibers somewhat and to prevent
meat from cooking out of shape. Lay
out flat, season tops with salt,
pepper, and herbs.

2) Green-pepper, onion, and mustard-bread stuffing—for 3 cups
1½ cups minced onions Cook the onions and herbs with 3
1 tsp mixed, ground tablespoons of the oil in the frying

thyme, bay leaf, and pan for 8 to 10 minutes over
oregano, or mixed moderate heat, stirring occasionally,
herbs such as until tender and starting to brown.
Provençal or Italian Stir in the diced peppers and cook,
seasoning stirring, 4 to 5 minutes more, until

Olive oil or cooking oil peppers are almost tender. Scoop into
as needed mixing bowl. Spread both sides of the

A medium (10-inch) bread with mustard, film frying pan
frying pan (no-stick with ⅛ inch more oil, and brown
recommended) bread lightly on both sides. Dice the

1½ cups diced green bell bread and add to the bowl; stir in the
peppers (2 medium
peppers)



A mixing bowl garlic, egg, and salt and pepper to
3 slices light rye bread taste.
4 to 5 Tb strong, Dijon-

type prepared mustard
2 or 3 large cloves of

garlic, mashed or
minced

1 egg, lightly beaten
Salt and pepper

3) Stuffing the paupiettes
The seasoned beef slices Assuming that the beef slices are
The stuffing roughly rectangular in shape, choose
Toothpicks the neatest of the small sides to be
Strips of fresh pork fat, the exposed end of the roll. Divide

blanched bacon, or stuffing in four, spread one part over
suet each slice, leaving an inch of clear

meat for the exposed end and ½ inch
at the sides. Roll the meat up to
enclose the stuffing and secure with 2
or 3 toothpicks.

4) Browning, braising, and serving the paupiettes
Follow the ingredients and method in the Master Recipe, Steps 4

through 6.

OTHER STUFFINGS FOR PAUPIETTES



Farce Niçoise
[Olive and Pimento Stuffing with Garlic and Herbs]
For 4 paupiettes—2 cups

¼ cup stale, not-too-fine Stir the bread crumbs in a small bowl
crumbs from non- with enough vinegar barely to
sweetened, moisten them; let sit for a few
homemade-type white minutes. Stir the olives, pimentos,
bread garlic, sage, and cheese in a mixing

2 to 3 Tb wine vinegar bowl. Blend in the moistened crumbs,
⅔ to ¾ cup (two 2¼- and season strongly with salt, pepper,

ounce cans) chopped and Tabasco. Blend in the minced
ripe black olives pork fat or bacon. Just before you are

½ cup (about 3 ounces) ready to stuff the paupiettes, spread
canned red pimentos, topside of meat with mustard, then
diced with the stuffing.

2 large cloves of garlic,
mashed or minced

½ tsp sage
⅓ cup grated Parmesan

cheese
Salt and pepper to taste
Drops of Tabasco sauce
¼ cup (2 ounces) finely

minced fresh pork fat
or blanched bacon

4 Tb strong, Dijon-type
prepared mustard (to
spread on paupiettes)



La Farce à l’Ail de Mme. Cassiot
[Rice and Garlic Stuffing with Herbs]
This fine and very simple stuffing for garlic lovers may have

either rice or rather coarse stale bread crumbs for a base. If it is
bread crumbs, however, they must come from the type of bread that
has texture and body, like your own French bread. Because the
typical store-bought, white, squashy bread disintegrates into mush,
we have confined our recipe to rice. If you want crumbs and have
the right sort, stir ½ cup beef stock or bouillon into 1½ cups of stale
crumbs; let sit 5 minutes, then squeeze crumbs as dry as possible in
the corner of a towel.

For 4 paupiettes—2 cups

¾ cup cooked rice Either put the rice and pork fat or
¾ cup fresh pork fat or bacon through the coarse blade of a

blanched bacon (6 meat grinder, or put rice through a
ounces) food mill and finely mince the fat or

6 to 8 large cloves of bacon. Stir together in a bowl with
garlic, very finely the garlic, herbs, salt and pepper.
minced Just before you are ready to stuff

½ tsp thyme or oregano paupiettes, spread topside of each
¼ cup chopped fresh slice with mustard, then with the

parsley stuffing.
½ tsp salt
⅛ tsp pepper
4 Tb strong Dijon-type

prepared mustard



  BOEUF EN DAUBE À LA PROVENÇALE
[Braised Pot Roast of Beef with Wine, Tomatoes, and Provençal
Flavorings]
This is a large, whole piece of braising beef larded with strips of

ham, marinated in red wine and herbs, and slowly simmered in a
lightly thickened mixture of the marinade liquid, beef stock, and
tomatoes, which turns into a rich ready-made sauce at the end of
the cooking. It is a splendid braising method, and one you can adapt
to stews as well as pot roasts, and to duck, goose, lamb, livers, and
hearts as well as to beef. Rather than the usual potatoes or pasta and
buttered peas or beans, or glazed carrots and onions, and sautéed
mushrooms, you could serve the little white turnips sautéed in
butter, or the onions stuffed with rice, and either the broccoli
braised in butter or one of the sautéed zucchinis. A full-bodied red
wine is definitely called for here—a Burgundy, a Côtes-du-Rhône, or
a Châteauneuf-du-Pape.

TIMING NOTES

Braised beef may be made ready for cooking a day ahead or may
be fully cooked a day or two in advance, if need be. Allow yourself
enough leeway for the actual braising, however, if you wish to serve
soon after it has cooked. Unless you are sure of your meat quality,
allow 5 hours from the moment you put it into the oven to the
moment you wish to serve. This will give you extra time for tough
meat, and leisure for the details of trimming and sauce making.

BEEF CUTS FOR BRAISING WHOLE

TOP ROUND, tende de tranche. Sometimes called inside round, this
is a first-choice piece for braising whole because it is solid meat
with no separations, and is not fibrous when cooked.

UNDERCUT CHUCK, basses côtes découvertes. The continuation of the
roast rib of beef section into the shoulder end, usually ribs 2 to 5,
makes a choice and tender morsel. You will probably find this only



at Jewish or European markets, although a supermarket boneless
chuck pot roast can substitute for it.

SHOULDER-ARM POT ROAST, macreuse. Again, this may not be
available except at Jewish or foreign markets; it will usually take
longer cooking than the two preceding cuts, but has excellent flavor.

BOTTOM ROUND OR SILVERSIDE, and EYE OF ROUND, gîte à la noix and
rond de gîte à la noix. These two cuts always look attractive,
especially the eye of round, with its long, shapely form that
resembles a tenderloin. We prefer the bottom round to the eye
because it is less fibrous when cooked, but both are acceptable
choices.

SIRLION TIP or KNUCKLE, tranche grasse. This cut from the round has
numerous muscle separations, and is sometimes called knuckle
because it passes over the knee of the hind leg. It braises well, but
needs firm tying to give it an attractive shape.

MIDDLE OF BRISKET, milieu de poitrine. Although coarse-grained
when cooked, brisket has excellent flavor; slice it on the bias like
flank steak. A good butcher will bone and de-fat it for you; if it is a
long, flat piece, roll and tie it for braising.

For 8 to 10 people

1) Preparing the beef
A trimmed and boned 6- Trim meat, if necessary, to make a

lb. piece of braising fairly even cylinder or rectangle with
beef from preceding no loose fat or gristly pieces. To lard
list (preferably one the meat, follow illustrated
that can be tied into a directions, using ham rather than the
cylindrical shape 10 to pork fat called for in the larding
12 inches long) directions. Whether or not you have

For optional larding of larded it, tie the beef, also as
meat: a 4- by 6-inch
slice of prosciutto or



ready-to-cook ham illustrated, to keep it in shape during
slice about ¼ inch cooking.
thick

2) Marinating the meat—at least 12 hours or for several days

NOTE: You may omit this step and
proceed directly to Step 3.

1 bottle (almost 4 cups) Mix the marinade ingredients in the
full, strong, young, red bowl or casserole, add the beef and
wine (Mâcon, baste it. (Liquid should come at least
Beaujolais, California halfway up.) Marinate, turning and
Mountain Red) basting meat several times a day, for

½ cup red-wine vinegar at least 12 hours or for several days
¼ cup olive oil either at a temperature of 40 to 50
6 cloves unpeeled garlic, degrees or in the refrigerator. When

halved you are ready for the next step, drain
2 medium-sized onions beef, and wipe thoroughly dry with

and 2 carrots, sliced paper towels. Strain marinade,
reserving both liquid and vegetables

1 Tb coarse salt or table for Step 5.
salt

The following herb
bouquet, tied in
washed cheesecloth: 2
imported bay leaves, 4
cloves or allspice
berries, 6 peppercorns,
½ tsp each of dried
fennel seeds, oregano,
thyme, and marjoram



An enameled, glazed, or
stainless bowl or
casserole just large
enough to hold meat
comfortably

3) Browning the beef and the braising ingredients

NOTE: If you have not marinated the
beef, add all the ingredients from
Step 2, except the vinegar, to the
ingredients here.

Either 4 Tb rendered Cook the lardons slowly in the fat or
fresh pork fat or goose oil in the casserole (or frying pan)
fat; until very lightly browned. Remove

Or olive oil or cooking with a slotted spoon and reserve.
oil Pour 4 to 5 Tb of fat out of the

6 ounces (¾ cup) lardons casserole and reserve for the roux,
(1½-inch sticks of next step. Raise heat to moderately
blanched bacon ¼ high and brown the well-dried beef
inch thick) on all sides and ends, lifting and

A heavy, covered turning it with the help of its trussing
casserole or roaster strings. (This will take 10 minutes or
large enough to hold more; regulate heat so meat browns
meat comfortably (or nicely but fat does not burn. Add
brown meat in a large more fat or oil if needed.) Remove
frying pan and beef and brown the optional bones or
transfer to roaster calf’s foot and the marinade
afterwards) vegetables for 4 to 5 minutes, stirring

and tossing over high heat. Set cover
askew on casserole, drain out



For added flavor and cooking fat, and pour in marinade
body: 1 quart of sawed liquid. Stir with wooden spoon to
veal knuckle bones dislodge all coagulated bits of brown
and/or beef soup flavor into liquid. Tie strip of fat
bones; or a split and about beef (see illustrations), push
blanched calf’s foot bones aside, and lay the beef, fat-

The drained marinade covered side up, in casserole. Add the
vegetables bouquet of herbs, the lardons, and the

The marinade liquid optional pork rind to the casserole,
A strip of fresh pork fat and set aside until you are ready to

⅛ inch thick and long braise, Step 5.
and wide enough to
cover top and sides of
beef; or beef suet

White string
The marinade bouquet of

herbs
Optional but desirable

for the sauce: a 6-inch
square of blanched
pork rind (Volume I,
page 401)

4) The brown roux to thicken the braising sauce
A heavy-bottomed (NOTE: You will have a better roux if

saucepan in thick, cast you cook it separately rather than in
aluminum or a heavy the casserole after browning meat
cast-iron frying pan, and bones.)
about 6 inches bottom
diameter Be sure to pick a heavy pan; melt the

The 4 Tb reserved fat fat in it over moderate heat, blend in
from Step 3 the flour, and stir continuously for



⅓ cup flour (measure by about 15 minutes until flour slowly
scooping dry-measure turns a dark, nutty brown. (It must
cup into flour and not blacken, burn, and turn bitter,
sweeping off excess) but it must brown properly so as to

A wooden spoon give the right flavor and color to the
1½ cups beef stock (or sauce.) Remove from heat, and when

bouillon) heated in a roux has stopped bubbling, blend in
small saucepan all the hot stock at once with wire

A wire whip whip. When perfectly smooth, ladle
in some of the liquid from the

A ladle casserole to thin the sauce, mix well,
then stir all into the casserole,
blending liquids thoroughly together.

5) Braising the beef—3½ to 4 hours or longer at 350 degrees
1 lb. (4 to 5 medium) Stir the tomatoes, orange peel, and

tomatoes, not peeled, optional anchovies into the casserole,
but halved, seeded, and more stock, if needed, so that
juiced, and roughly liquid comes ⅔ to ¾ the way up the
chopped (or a mixture beef.
of fresh tomatoes and
strained canned (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME-NOTE: May be
tomatoes) prepared in advance to this point;

A 3- by 1-inch piece of when cool, cover and refrigerate.
dried orange peel, or 1
tsp dried pulverized
orange peel

Optional Provençal
flavoring: 6 to 7
anchovies packed in
olive oil, drained, and
mashed to a paste



More beef stock if
needed

Salt to taste Bring to simmer on top of the stove;
Aluminum foil salt lightly to taste if necessary. Lay

the foil over the beef, cover the
casserole, and set in lower third of
preheated, 350-degree oven.

In about half an hour, check to see that liquid is simmering
slowly, not bubbling fast: regulate oven throughout cooking so that
liquid remains at a slow but definite simmer. Baste and turn the beef
several times during cooking.

Beef is done when a fork pierces it easily, but it must not be
cooked so long that it begins to fall apart. Aged, top-quality
American beef usually takes 3½ hours; other grades or qualities may
take an hour or so longer.

6) Trimming the beef and finishing the sauce
Remove beef from casserole to a board or platter. Cut and

discard trussing string, discard fat covering beef (or trim off suet
adhering to beef and the gristle under it); trim off any loose bits of
meat.

Remove bones from casserole, then pour contents of casserole
through a sieve set over a large saucepan; press juices out of
ingredients and into saucepan with a wooden spoon. Discard
contents of sieve. Let liquid settle a few minutes in saucepan, then
skim off all surface fat with a spoon; bring liquid back to the
simmer, skimming off additional fat. Taste very carefully for
seasoning and strength. You should have 4 to 5 cups of richly
fragrant sauce, deep reddish brown, and the consistency of a lightly
thickened soup that would coat the meat nicely, and coats the



spoon. If you feel sauce should be thicker or lacks depth of flavor,
boil it down rapidly to concentrate it. If it seems necessary, add and
simmer a pinch of herbs, garlic, or tomato paste or a little
concentrated bouillon. (If sauce has reduced too much during
braising, thin out with more stock or water.)

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: You may complete recipe to this point;
return beef to casserole and pour the sauce over it. Cover and keep
warm, basting occasionally, in a 150-degree oven or upon 2 asbestos
mats over low heat on top of the stove. For serving several hours or
2 days later, let cool, then cover and refrigerate; reheat for half an
hour or so, basting and turning meat several times, in a 325-degree
oven.

7) Serving
CARVING AT THE TABLE. Place the meat on a warm platter, spoon a

little of the hot sauce over it to glaze its surface. Decorate platter
with sprigs of parsley or watercress. Pass separately the rest of the
sauce and whatever vegetables you are serving.

SERVING THE MEAT SLICED, ON A PLATTER. Carve the meat in the
kitchen and arrange in overlapping slices on a warm, slightly
buttered platter. Spoon some of the sauce around the meat, and
decorate platter with parsley or watercress, or with whatever
vegetable garnish you wish. Pass rest of sauce and other vegetables
separately.

Leftovers
Leftovers, whether sliced or not, may be reheated in the sauce, if

any is left over, or in another sauce with the same flavorings. See
also the tous nus, and the list of stuffings, both calling for ground
leftover braised beef.

To serve cold



A delicious salade de boeuf à la parisienne is made with cold
braised beef in Volume I, page 543, or an aspic, boeuf mode en gelée,
again in Volume I, on page 556.

VARIATIONS
Boeuf en Caisse, Surprise
[Stuffed, Braised Pot Roast of Beef—Beef Case]
Like that present for the man who has everything, this is an

enjoyable conceit for the cook who has cooked everything who
wants to surprise guests who have eaten everything. A splendid
piece of beef comes to the table looking like a typical boeuf mode.
But no, it is not. When the host begins to serve, it is revealed that
the beef was ingeniously hollowed out before braising, filled with a
fragrant garniture of onions, mushrooms, olives, and herbs, and
these slowly imparted their flavors to the meat while it cooked. You
might accompany this with the purée of yellow squash and white
beans, or the purée of rice and turnips with herbs and garlic. Either
a plainly cooked green vegetable or broiled tiny tomatoes might also
be included, and the red wine choices would again be Burgundy,
Côtes-du-Rhône, or Châteauneuf-du-Pape.

For 8 to 10 people

1) Forming the beef case
A solid, boneless 6- to 7- Trim all fat and gristle from outside

lb. piece of braising of meat and cut off any protruding
beef, preferably loaf pieces, to make a neat shape. (The
shaped (top round, loaf shape illustrated is easiest to



face rump, or bottom stuff and to carve, but a thick wedge
round) will do.)

White string Meat is now to be browned, because
Rendered pork fat, goose it is easier to do so now than later;

fat, or cooking oil dry thoroughly in paper towels, and
A heavy, 12-inch frying make several firm ties around its

pan (no-stick length and circumference, to hold its
recommended) shape. Heat fat or oil in pan to very

hot but not smoking, and brown
meat on all sides and the two ends.
Remove meat to a cutting board and
discard trussing string. (If browning
fat has burned, discard it, otherwise
leave in pan for Step 2.)

The first step is to make the cover: starting at one end of what
you have decided is the topside of the beef, cut an even slice ½ inch
thick to within ½ inch at the other end, where slice remains
attached like the cover of a book.

Bend the cover back. In the main
body of the meat, cut a rectangular

incision 1 inch deep and ½ inch
from outside edges.



Make lengthwise and crosswise cuts 1 inch
deep and about ¾ inch apart, to form cubes.

Cut out cubes of meat with scissors
or with a knife. You now have a

hinged case of beef with probably
2 inches of solid meat at the

bottom, ½ inch at the sides, and
an inch of hollow space
underneath the cover.

2) The mushroom and olive garniture or filling—for about 2
cups



The cubes of beef Cut the beef cubes so all are
removed from the case approximately ⅜ inch across; dry in

The frying pan from Step paper towels. Heat fat or oil in pan
1, and more fat or oil until very hot but not smoking;
as needed rapidly brown beef cubes, tossing and

A mixing bowl turning them for several minutes,
1½ cups (about 6 shaking and swirling the pan by its

ounces) quartered handle. When browned, scoop into
fresh mushrooms, bowl, leaving fat in pan. Add more
washed and dried fat or oil, if necessary, to film pan by

2 cups sliced onions 1⁄16 inch, and brown the mushrooms,
¼ cup mild-cured ham tossing and turning for several

(or supermarket ham minutes over high heat. Scoop into
slice) cut into ¼-inch bowl; add the onions to the pan with
dice a little more fat or oil if needed. Turn

1 to 2 large cloves heat to low, stir up onions, cover
mashed garlic pan, and cook slowly for 8 to 10

4 medium-sized black, minutes until tender; raise heat, and
oil-cured olives, pitted stir for 2 to 3 minutes until onions
and diced are very lightly browned. Scoop into

the mixing bowl, stirring in also the
½ tsp thyme ham, garlic, diced olives, herbs, and
1 egg egg. Season to taste, but be careful of
Pepper and salt salt because olives are salty.

3) Filling and tying the case
White string
Either a sheet of pork fat

¼ inch thick and large
enough to cover top
and sides of beef;

Or caul fat;



Or well-washed
cheesecloth

Sprinkle interior of beef
case with salt and pepper,
heap in the garniture, and
turn the hinged cover down
to enclose it.

Make 1 or 2 loops of string around length of
beef and enough around circumference to hold
cover securely in place over garniture.

Either drape the fat over the beef and tie in place with string, or
wrap and tie the entire case in caul fat or a double thickness of
damp cheesecloth.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be completed to this point as much
as a day in advance; wrap in plastic and refrigerate.

4) Braising the beef—3 to 4 hours
Because the beef has already been browned, you need only

follow the general method outlined for the preceding daube with its
brown roux, here, or the simpler braising method for the beef stew
here with its beurre-manié sauce thickening.



5) Serving
Unless the beef is carved and served at the table, there will be no

surprise. After removing strings and other extraneous matter, place
beef on a hot platter, spoon a little of the sauce over it, and decorate
platter with vegetables or parsley. To serve, pry cover loose and lift
it, so that the garniture may be admired, then replace and cut
straight through the meat as though it were a loaf of bread. Heap
the garniture of mushrooms, olives, and beef cubes over each
serving, and moisten with a big spoonful of sauce.

HOW TO LARD A PIECE OF MEAT

In the old days, when meat was tougher and far leaner than it is
today, and when venison and game were plentiful, strips of pork fat
were inserted through it to baste and moisten the interior of the
meat during cooking. Now meat is larded more often because it is
the stylish thing to do, and the bits of pork fat, ham, or whatever
has been inserted make attractive designs when the meat is sliced.

Larding fat—pork fat and beef suet
The best fat to use is fresh pork fatback because it is hard and

smooth. If you cannot find it, use blanched fat bacon or salt pork, or
fat from the outside of a fresh pork loin. (If you do not wish to use
pork fat, substitute suet from the outside of a rib or loin of beef.)
Cut the fat into whatever length and width will fit your larding
needle, making a test piece first to be sure you will have a snug fit;
chill the fat for easy handling.

The larding process



In order to lard meat you must have a larding needle, or lardoire, a
hollow tube or trough of steel shaped like a giant steel pen point
with a wooden handle. Starting just back from the point, press the strip
of fat down into the trough of the lardoire, being sure fat fits snugly so
that it will not slip out when the lardoire is pushed through the
meat.

Meat is larded with strips of fat
running parallel to the grain, so
that when the meat is sliced you
will cut across the strips of fat.
Insert point of lardoire into one

end of meat, and with a
continuous, slow, clockwise

rotation, push the instrument
gradually through until point of

lardoire and ½ inch of fat
protrude from the other end of

the meat.

With the point of a small knife, gently dig end of fat-strip out of trough
at protruding end of lardoire.



Then dig other end of fat-strip out of
trough at the other end of the

lardoire.

Hold the thumb of your left hand in the trough of the lardoire against the
fat-strip, thus preventing fat from slipping out of meat while you slowly,
with a slight rocking rotation left and right, withdraw the lardoire from
the meat leaving the fat in its place.



Insert as many other fat-strips as
you wish—a piece of meat 4½ to
5 inches in diameter will take 4 to

6. Tie the meat into shape with
strong white string.

BEEF TENDERLOIN
Filet de Boeuf

The central and the right-hand sections together, in this drawing,
constitute what is usually meant in American retail meat markets by
a whole tenderloin: to be technically correct, it should be called the



whole short-loin tenderloin. It weighs 4½ to 5 pounds untrimmed,
and contains 3½ to 4 pounds of usable meat. When you are serving
6 to 8 people, you may wish the central section only, le coeur du
filet, which will give you a roast of 2½ to 3 pounds that averages 8
to 10 inches in length. For 10 to 12 people you will need the whole
piece, and may fold the last 2 inches of the tail (right-hand side)
back upon itself as illustrated further on, to make a 12-inch roast
that is 3½ to 4 inches in diameter when tied.

If by chance your market does cut whole sides of beef, you may
be able to buy the whole tenderloin with butt end attached.
Depending on the cutting method, the butt alone contains only a
little over 1½ pounds of usable meat, although it weighs slightly
more than 3 pounds; to be deprived of it, therefore, is no great loss,
tenderloins costing what they do.

TRIMMING A TENDERLOIN

Most meat markets will usually trim, tie, and lard the tenderloin
for you, but you should be able to do it yourself so that you will
know how the meat is constructed.

When you have an untrimmed tenderloin in front of you, you
will note a definite difference in the 2 long, flat sides. On one there
is a series of thick ridges and depressions more or less marbled with
fat depending on the grade of the beef carcass; this side is where the
filet rested against the 6 vertebrae of the backbone in the small of
the back. We shall call this the underside. The other side, which we



shall call the top, will have some loose fat clinging to it, mostly at
the large end and at the edges; along the central length you will see
the main muscle of the tenderloin, covered with a shiny membrane.
Starting on this side, rather gingerly pull the loose fat from the top
of the membrane and along the edges, being very careful not to
detach the 2 long straps of meat lying against each side of the main
muscle. The smaller of the two straps is flattish, as though it were a
flaplike continuation of the underside; underneath the larger of the
straps, la chainette, is a line of fat that should not be disturbed
because it attaches the meat to the main muscle.

This is the whole short-loin tenderloin (central and right-hand
portions of diagram), showing the 2 chains of meat attached to the
length of the main muscle. Do not worry too much if you partially
detach them; you are going to tie the meat anyway before roasting,
and the ties will make the chains adhere. Although some people
advise removing these chains of meat, you will diminish your roast
by more than half its weight if you do so: you will end up with 2
thin strings of meat good only for sautéing or skewering, and your
filet proper will weigh only 2 pounds. This is entirely a matter of
your own preference, of course; we leave them on.



After pulling excess fat from the top of the meat, you must also
remove the shiny membrane that covers the main muscle on this
side, and as much of it on the large chain of meat as you easily can.
Remove the membrane in half-inch strips the length of the meat,
scraping under it with a small, sharp knife. (If you happen to have
an actual whole tenderloin with butt included, you will notice that
the main muscle with its membrane continues into the butt for
several inches before it loses itself. You may wish to separate this
main muscle from the rest, making it a continuation of your roast.
The surrounding meat will make excellent steaks or sautés. It is
rather a question of how it looks to you while you are trimming: as
long as all the membranes are removed, all of the meat is good
either for roasting or sautéing.)

Finally, inspect the underside of the meat and remove what you
consider to be obviously excess fat; a reasonable amount left on will
help to baste the meat as it roasts. Meat is now trimmed and ready
for cooking. The following directions are for roasting; directions for
steaks are in Volume I, pages 291 and 296–300. Do not forget the
sautés of beef, Volume I, pages 325–8, which are delicious for meat
from the butt, the chains, and the tail; you may also adapt sautés for
any leftover cooked tenderloin.

TYING AND LARDING THE TENDERLOIN

Whether it is roasted or braised, and whether you are using the
heart (central section) or the whole tenderloin, the circumference
must be tied to keep the meat together and to force it into
cylindrical rather than oval shape for even cooking. Use the rather
thick, soft, white butcher’s string, often called corned-beef twine, if
you can find it. The top of the meat is the side formerly covered by
a shiny membrane, as opposed to the ridged side, which rested
against the back bone.



When you are roasting the whole
tenderloin, turn the last 2 inches of
the tail back under its ridged side to
make the roast even in diameter

throughout its length.

When you wish to tie the meat without
larding it, tie or wind firm loops of string
around the circumference at 1¼-inch
intervals.

To lard and tie the meat, drape pork
fat or suet over the top of the meat
and down under the folded tail to

hold it in place. Tie a loop of string
around the length of the meat. (If

you do not have long strips of fat,
overlap short ones as shown in

the illustrations.)



Then arrange strips of fat over the
sides of the meat; tie loops of string
around the circumference.

If you can find or order caul fat,
that marvelous membrane

webbed with fat that comes from
inside the pig, it is perfect for
wrapping a tenderloin that is

roasted with a covering of
mushroom duxelles or mirepoix, or
for the sliced, stuffed tenderloin.
Here the tenderloin is laid on the
caul fat and the flavoring is being

spread over it.



Fold a double thickness of caul fat around
the meat to enclose it completely, and tie
in place. The caul fat browns and tends
to merge with the meat and stuffing.

  FILET DE BOEUF POÊLÉ
[Tenderloin of Beef, Casserole-roasted with Aromatic Vegetables]
A favorite roasting method that comes to us from the old classic

cuisine is poêlage, meaning to brown the meat and then roast it in a
covered casserole with les aromates. This is particularly successful
with beef tenderloin because the aromatic ingredients, even though
their contact with the meat is brief, subtly enhance its flavor and
aroma. In addition, you have a deliciously flavored base for the
sauce. Because internal meat temperature rises very quickly when
beef is done in a covered roaster, watch it carefully after your meat
thermometer reaches 110 degrees. (Make a guess if your
thermometer starts at 130 degrees.)

Suggested Accompaniments: A garnish of watercress and sautéed
mushrooms around the meat, and endives à la dauphinoise (gratin of
endives and sliced potatoes); red Bordeaux-Médoc wine.

For 10 to 12 people

1) Preliminaries to roasting

A tenderloin of beef, 3½ Dry the beef thoroughly on paper
to 4 lbs., trimmed and towels. Film the pan with ⅛ inch of
tied oil and set over moderately high

Olive oil or cooking oil heat. When very hot but not
A heavy 12-inch frying smoking, brown beef lightly on all

pan (an oval “fish sides, season with salt and pepper,



fryer” is ideal for this) and place in casserole. Brown the
A heavy, oval, vegetables lightly in the same fat,

flameproof casserole season, stir in the herbs, and strew
just large enough to the vegetables over, under, and
hold beef (such as 12 around the beef. Drape the fat over
by 9 inches) the meat. Spoon oil out of frying pan,

Salt and pepper pour in bouillon and boil for a
½ cup sliced onions moment, scraping up any coagulated

cooking juices. Pour liquid into a cup
½ cup sliced carrots and reserve for Step 3.
1 bay leaf, broken
½ tsp thyme
A piece of fresh pork fat

or suet 12 by 9 inches
and ¼ inch thick

2½ cups veal stock or
beef bouillon

A cover for the casserole

2) Roasting the beef—35 to 45 minutes in a preheated 375-
degree oven
At least an hour before serving, cover casserole and set over

moderately high heat until beef is sizzling, then place in middle
level of a preheated oven. Turn and baste beef once in 15 minutes,
and rearrange fat on top. Meat is done to very rare at 125 degrees
on a meat thermometer and to medium rare at 130; juices will run
rosy red when meat is pricked, and roast will feel slightly springy
rather than squashy (like raw beef) when pressed. Set beef on a
warm platter and leave at room temperature for 10 to 15 minutes
while finishing sauce.



3) Sauce
Optional: 1 medium Tip casserole and skim most of fat off

tomato cooking juices; bring to the boil.
The bouillon from Step 1 Chop optional tomato and add to
½ Tb cornstarch blended casserole along with the bouillon.

in a cup with ¼ cup Boil slowly for 4 to 5 minutes to
dry port wine or concentrate flavor. Remove from
vermouth heat, stir in cornstarch and wine

Salt and pepper to taste mixture, and bring to the simmer.
2 to 3 Tb soft butter Simmer 2 to 3 minutes until sauce

turns from cloudy to clear. Carefully
A hot sauce boat correct seasoning. Just before

serving, remove from heat and beat
in the butter, a tablespoon at a time.
Strain into sauce boat, pressing juices
out of vegetables.

4) Serving
Cut and discard trussing strings, and arrange beef on hot platter

with whatever vegetables or garnish you have chosen. Pour several
spoonsful of sauce over the beef to glaze it, and serve at once. (If
beef is to be carved in the kitchen, place on a carving board that
will collect juices; rapidly cut meat into slices ½ inch thick and
rearrange on warm platter with garnish around them. Pour carving
juices over meat, and pass sauce separately.)

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you cannot serve immediately, remove
strings but do not carve meat; after it has rested 10 to 15 minutes
and the sauce is made except for the final butter enrichment, return
meat to casserole and baste with the sauce. Set cover askew and
place either over barely simmering water or in an oven no hotter
than 120 degrees. Meat can stay thus for a good hour before
serving.



VARIATIONS
Tenderloin Baked in a Cloak of Mushrooms or of
Matignon
To give the meat more flavor, you may either slice it and re-form

with a stuffing between each slice as in the beef en feuilletons, or you
may use that same mushroom stuffing but spread it over the whole
filet as illustrated. In this second case, however, you must have caul
fat to hold the mushrooms in place. Rather than mushrooms, you
may wish to use the matignon of diced cooked carrots, onions,
celery, ham, and wine in Volume I, page 303. In any case, when the
meat is wrapped, brown it as described in the preceding recipe, and
casserole-roast it in exactly the same way.

Filet de Boeuf à la Bourgeoise
[Tenderloin of Beef with Onions, Mushrooms, and Olives]
Whether casserole-roasted, plain roasted, or braised, a filet of

beef surrounded with onions, mushrooms, and green olives is as
attractive to look at as it is to eat. The garniture is cooked in
advance, and simmers in the sauce to blend flavors before being
arranged around the beef; you may wish to add sautéed potatoes to
the platter, or the zucchini timbale. Cook the filet and prepare the
sauce as in the preceding Master Recipe, or braise it with or without
a stuffing as described in Volume I, page 303. Prepare the garniture
as follows:

1) Preparing the garniture



the small onions:
1 lb. (2 cups) small white Drop onions in boiling water, bring

onions about 1 inch in rapidly back to boil, and boil 1
diameter minute. Drain, and refresh in cold

A saucepan of boiling water. Shave off 2 ends and peel
water onions; pierce a cross ⅓ inch deep in

A 6- to 7-inch frying pan root ends. Heat butter and oil in pan;
or saucepan (no-stick when foam is subsiding add onions
recommended) and sauté over moderately high heat

2 Tb butter and 2 tsp to brown lightly. Reduce heat, add
olive oil rest of ingredients, cover, and simmer

Salt and pepper to taste very slowly for 20 to 30 minutes, or
until onions are tender when pierced

Pinch thyme with a knife. Set aside with cooking
½ cup bouillon juices.
A cover for the pan

the mushrooms:
½ lb. (1 quart) fresh Trim and wash the mushrooms; dry

mushrooms in a towel and cut into quarters. Heat
2 Tb butter and 2 tsp butter and oil in pan until foam is

olive oil subsiding, add mushrooms and sauté
An 8-inch frying pan (no- over high heat, tossing frequently,

stick recommended) until mushrooms begin to brown.
2 Tb minced shallots or Reduce heat, add shallots or

scallions scallions, and toss a moment more.
Salt and pepper to taste Season lightly, tossing, and add

mushrooms to onions.

the olives:



4 to 5 ounces (1 to 1¼ Drain and wash the olives; drop into
cups) pitted green simmering water. Simmer 10
olives, medium size, minutes, to remove excess saltiness.
about ¾ inch long Drain, rinse in cold water, and add to

2 quarts simmering onions and mushrooms.
water in a saucepan (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Garniture may

be prepared in advance.

2) Serving
The cooked filet of beef When the beef is done and the sauce

and its 2½ cups or so is made, add the onions, mushrooms,
of sauce and olives to the sauce and simmer 3

The onions, mushrooms, to 4 minutes to blend flavors. (If
and olives meat is being held in casserole,

2 to 3 Tb soft butter return sauce and garniture to it.) To
serve, place meat on platter, and dip
out the onions, mushrooms, and
olives with a slotted spoon, arranging
them around the beef. Beat the
enrichment butter into the sauce a
tablespoon at a time, spoon a little
over the beef to glaze it and pour the
rest of the sauce into a warm gravy
boat. Serve, along with whatever
other vegetables you may have
chosen.

Filet de Boeuf en Feuilletons, Duxelles



[Tenderloin of Beef Sliced, Stuffed with Mushrooms and
Roasted]
By slicing the raw tenderloin, seasoning each slice, and

spreading it with wine-flavored mushroom duxelles and then re-
forming the roast, you will have a deliciously flavored tenderloin
that practically serves itself. For this you should have as long a piece
of the main tenderloin muscle as possible with no under-turning tail,
so that you will have large slices. (Drawings and discussion of
tenderloin are at the beginning of this section.)

For 16 slices ½ inch thick, serving 8 to 10

1) The duxelles stuffing—for 1½ to 1⅔ cups
1 lb. (2 quarts) fresh Trim and wash mushrooms. Cut into

mushrooms 1⁄16-inch dice, using either a big knife
A heavy-bottomed 8-inch

frying pan (no-stick or the vegetable mincing attachment
recommended) of an electric mixer or a food mill if

you wish. Twist a handful at a time
3 Tb butter in the corner of a towel to extract as
¼ cup minced shallots or much juice as possible. Heat butter to

scallions foaming in frying pan, stir in
⅓ cup finely minced mushrooms, shallots or scallions, and

mild-cured ready- ham. Sauté over moderately high
cooked ham heat, stirring frequently, until

1½ Tb flour mushroom pieces begin to separate
⅓ cup dry Madeira and start to brown lightly (5 minutes

(Sercial) or so). Sprinkle in the flour and stir
⅓ cup block foie gras, over moderate heat for 2 minutes.

liver paste, or very Remove from heat, blend in the wine,
finely minced cooked and stir again over heat for 1 minute.
ham fat Remove from heat, beat in foie gras,

liver paste, or fat, the egg yolk,



1 egg yolk tarragon, and salt and pepper to
½ tsp dried tarragon taste. Set aside.
Salt and pepper to taste

2) Stuffing and tying the filet of beef
The heart of the With a very sharp knife, cut the meat

tenderloin, 8 to 10 into 16 even slices, each about ½
inches long and as inch thick, setting them aside in the
even in diameter as order in which you cut them. Lay the
possible (2½ lbs. or cheesecloth on the tray and paint
more) with fat or cooking oil. Salt and

A double thickness of pepper each slice, spread with a
well-washed damp tablespoon and a half of stuffing, and
cheesecloth large re-form the roast, arranging the slices
enough to envelop against each other on the
beef. (See also notes cheesecloth. Tie one loop of string
on caul fat.) around the length of the re-formed

Salt and pepper roast to hold the slices against each
A tray and a pastry brush other, then stretch the cheesecloth
Rendered goose fat, pork tightly over the meat to enclose it.

fat or cooking oil Twist each end of the cheesecloth
closely against each end of the meat;

The duxelles stuffing tie securely with string. Then twist a
White string tight spiral of string around the

circumference from one end to the
other and back again, so that meat
will keep its shape. It will look like a
fat sausage about 12 inches long and
4 inches in diameter.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: When stuffed,
tied, wrapped in plastic, and



refrigerated a day before roasting, it
will pick up added flavor.

3) Browning and cover-roasting the beef—at least 1 hour before
serving
Brown the beef and the aromatic vegetables that accompany it as

described in the Master Recipe, Step 1. (It will brown perfectly well
in its cheesecloth covering.) Roast, as directed in Step 2, counting
30 to 40 minutes and leaving the meat red-rare (125 degrees on a
meat thermometer). Remove from casserole as soon as it is done,
and leave at room temperature for 15 minutes while finishing the
sauce described in Step 3.

4) Serving
Set beef on hot serving platter and cut string and cheesecloth,

carefully pulling them out from around and under the meat (15
minutes rest will have drawn slices of meat together). Spoon enough
sauce over meat to glaze it nicely, arrange around it whatever
garnish you have chosen, and serve, passing rest of sauce separately.
Server need only spread top of meat apart with large fork and spoon
to show location of each slice, which is then served with its share of
duxelles stuffing.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Use the same system as in the Master
Recipe, but do not untie meat until just before serving.

Filet de Boeuf en Croûte
[Tenderloin of Beef Baked in Pastry—Beef Wellington Brioché]



We do not know whether the English, the Irish, or the French
baked the first filet of beef in a crust, but we can be certain that the
French would not have named it after Wellington. It is a remarkably
handsome, sumptuous dish when properly made. Most good recipes
specify a whole piece of tenderloin that is preroasted 25 minutes,
cooled, surrounded with a mushroom and foie gras stuffing, then
wrapped in French puff pastry and baked. We think it a great
improvement to substitute brioche dough for puff pastry: fully risen
brioche dough is deflated, thoroughly chilled, then rolled thin,
draped over the meat and baked immediately before the dough has
a chance to rise again. The resulting crust is beautiful to look at as
well as being light, thin, cooked all the way through and delicious
to eat; this is never the case with puff pastry, which cannot bake
properly under such circumstances and is always damply dumpling
under its handsome exterior. Another improvement is to bake the
tenderloin in slices with stuffing in between, as in the preceding
recipe: the serving is easy and the taste is vastly improved.

VEGETABLE AND WINE SUGGESTIONS

An important dish like this should be surrounded with few
distractions; we would suggest only something green and fresh like
buttered new peas or green beans, broccoli flowerettes, or, in
season, sliced, fresh, green asparagus spears tossed in butter. Again,
a fine red Bordeaux-Médoc would be an excellent choice of wine.



THE SAUCE

Anything as extravagant as this filet de boeuf demands an
unusually good sauce. We suggest 2 to 3 cups of the brown sauce or
the sauce ragoût in Volume I, pages 67 and 69, simmered several
hours for maximum flavor; it will then be further enriched with the
cooking juices and deglazing wine from the beef, Step 1 in the
following recipe.

For 16 slices of beef ½ inch thick, serving 8 to 10

1) Preliminaries—to do in the morning or the day before
serving

½ the recipe for pain Prepare the dough as described,
brioché dough (½ lb. letting it finish its second rise in the
flour) refrigerator. Then deflate it, cover

One of the brown sauces with plastic wrap, a plate, and a 5-
described in preceding pound weight (pieces of meat
paragraph grinder) so that it will not rise again;

2½ to 3 lbs. of the heart refrigerate. Make the brown-sauce
of the tenderloin, base and refrigerate. Prepare the
sliced, stuffed, stuffed filet as described, baste well
wrapped and tied (filet with fat or oil, and place in roasting
de boeuf en feuilletons, pan. Preheat oven to 425 degrees,
Steps 1 and 2) and set rack in upper-third level.

Rendered goose or pork Roast the beef for 25 minutes,
fat, or cooking oil basting and turning it several times.

A shallow roasting pan Transfer beef to a platter or tray
(reserve roasting pan) and let meat

½ cup dry port wine or cool to room temperature. (If you are
Sercial Madeira preroasting a day ahead, cover and

refrigerate the meat after it has
cooled, but set at room temperature



for 2 hours before final baking in
Step 3, for accurate timing.) Spoon
fat out of roasting pan, pour in wine
and boil down by half, scraping up
any roasting juices with a wooden
spoon; scrape liquid into the sauce
base.

2) Enclosing beef in brioche—1 to 1½ hours before serving, and
just before roasting

The cool, room- Preheat oven to 425 degrees and
temperature, slide rack onto lower-middle level.
preroasted beef Set out all the equipment and

Heavy shears ingredients listed. Cut wrapping and
The chilled brioche string from beef. Working rapidly

dough from now on so that brioche dough
Flour, a rolling surface, a softens as little as possible, roll ¼ of

rolling pin, a ravioli the dough into a rectangle ¼ inch
wheel, a small knife thick and the length and width of the

An oiled jelly-roll pan or beef. Roll it up on your pin and
pizza tray (raised unroll it onto the oiled pan.
edges needed to catch
roasting juices)

Egg glaze (1 egg beaten
with 1 tsp water in a
small bowl)

A pastry brush
Optional: a meat

thermometer



Its most attractive side up, place the beef
on the rectangle of dough. Trim off
excess dough from around the beef.

Roll the remaining dough into a
rectangle ¼ inch thick and large
enough to enclose beef (probably
18 by 8 inches), roll it up on your

pin and unroll over the beef.

Trim off any excess dough and reserve for decorations. Tuck the
covering dough against the bottom rectangle of dough and under
bottom of meat, sealing edges with your fingers. Paint dough
covering with egg glaze; in a moment paint with a second coat.

So that any decorations on the crust will show after baking, they
must be either deep cuts with raised edges, or dough paste-ons. For
instance, you may wish to lay on strips of leftover dough in a
design, and paint with egg glaze.



Decorate blank spaces by cutting into
surface of dough with scissors, a knife, or
the metal end of a pastry tube, making
definite edges that stick up. (Cuts are made
after glazing, so that the cut portion of
the dough will remain pale, accenting
the design when dough is baked.)

Immediately the decorations are complete, set beef in oven. The
object here is to make sure the dough remains a crust, a thin and
crisp covering; if it rises, it will be thick and bready.

3) Baking—30 to 40 minutes
Bake in lower-middle level of preheated 425-degree oven for 20

to 25 minutes, or until pastry has browned nicely. Lower thermostat
to 350 degrees for rest of baking, and cover crust loosely with a
sheet of foil or brown paper if it seems to be browning too much.
Indications that the meat is done are that you can begin to smell the
beef and the stuffing, and that juices begin to escape into the pan;
meat thermometer reading for rare beef is 125 degrees.

4) Serving and ahead-of-time notes
A hot platter or a board When beef is done, remove from

wide enough to hold oven and slide onto platter or board.
beef and removed top Beef will stay warm for 20 minutes; if
crust you still cannot serve it, set in a

A flexible-blade spatula warming oven no hotter than 120
A hot sauce in a warmed degrees.

bowl
The hot accompanying

vegetable



Serving implements: a
sharp knife for cutting
the crust, and a
serving spoon and fork

To serve, cut all around the crust and half an inch up from its
bottom. Lift the top crust off onto the platter, and cut into serving
portions. Separate the slices of meat with spoon and fork and cut
down through the bottom crust so that each slice is served with a
portion of stuffing and crust. Spoon a little sauce around the meat,
and add a piece of the top crust.

LAMB
Agneau et Mouton

The French take great pride in their lamb and the marvelous
quality of their mutton. While we do not easily find the little spring
lambs of France in this country, nor the mutton, we are fortunate to
have our own type of lamb, of the very finest quality and flavor,



throughout the year. Many Americans are so wedded to beef that
they forget about lamb, and this is a pity, because a fine leg of lamb
roasted red and juicy is a feast for any meat lover. Although we
thought we had covered a great deal in Volume I, with lamb stew,
roasts in mustard coatings, garlic sauces, and even a boiled leg of
lamb, there is more to tell. We now add full instructions on boning
the leg, step-by-step illustrated directions on how to carve the
saddle like a major-domo, a recipe for stuffed and braised shoulder,
and complete drawings on how to make a gigot farci en croûte.

HOW TO BONE A LEG OF LAMB

A fully or partially boned leg of lamb is easy to carve, and you
can stuff the cavities where the bones used to be. If only the tail and
hip assembly has been removed from the raw meat, that alone is a
great help to the carver, and when the main leg bone is also gone,
carving is no problem at all. To show that it really is a leg of lamb



you are serving, leave the shank bone in unless you want a rolled
leg for spit roasting. Although most butchers will cut out the tail
and hip for you, they may not want to take the time for a careful
boning of the main leg portion. If you enjoy working with your
hands, do all the boning yourself and you will learn more about
meat and carving, because you will become familiar with the bones,
their shapes, and their positions.

Furnish yourself with two stout-bladed, very sharp knives, one
small and one larger. Always keeping the knife blade against the
bone, scrape all around against the complicated structure of the tail-
hip assembly, disfiguring the meat as little as possible, until you are
able to cut the tendons that join the hip to the ball joint of the main
leg bone, thus releasing the hip.

To remove the main leg bone, cut around its exposed ball joint
buried in the thick end of the meat. Loosen flesh all around and



down the bone inside the meat until you come to its opposite ball
joint at the knee. You now have two choices, one easier and the
other longer but cleverer. The easiest way to remove the bone is to
slit the underside of the meat at the knee to expose the bones;
making as small a hole outside as possible, cut around knee joint,
sever tendons, and draw the bone out from the large end of the
meat. Close the meat neatly at the knee by sewing or skewering. The
longer maneuver is to get the bone without piercing the skin at the
knee. By persistent poking and cutting around the bone inside the
meat at the joint, by twisting the bone, by turning the meat inside
out around the bone as far down as you can for better visibility, you
will finally be able to free it from the tendons attaching it to the
knee and pull the bone out.

The flap of meat that contained the hip and tail, at the large end
of the leg, is called the sirloin. You may slice it off and use at
another meal for roasting, steaks, or shishkebob, or you may grind
part of it for stuffing back into the leg as suggested in the following
recipe. (If you wish to leave the flap on, skewer it against the main
body of the leg after stuffing.)

With the sirloin off, you have
what is known as a short (or

Frenched) leg of lamb. (For gigot
farci en croûte, this is what you

need.)



Either fill the pocket with stuffing, pushing it well down into all
spaces left by the bones, or sprinkle in a flavoring of salt, pepper,
minced parsley, a clove of minced garlic, and a big pinch of
rosemary or thyme.

Whether filled or not, close the pocket with skewers and string.



RECIPES FOR BONED LEG OF LAMB

You may proceed with the recipe for gigot farci en croûte, or you
may roast the boned, stuffed, and skewered leg of lamb just as it is,
following the Master Recipe in Volume I, page 332; it is also
delicious roasted with the herbal mustard coating also in Volume I,
on page 335. After the roast has rested 15 to 20 minutes out of the
oven, the meat will have settled into place and you can remove the
string and skewers. To carve, cut down in bias (diagonal) slices
across the grain, first from one side of the large end, then from the
other; if the first few slices contain no stuffing, set aside for second
helpings. When you come to the thinner portion of the meat nearer
the shank, you can cut straight across.

GIGOT FARCI, EN CROÛTE
[Boned, Stuffed Lamb Baked in Pastry]



At least one great French provincial restaurant has made its
reputation on gigot farci en croûte, and any home cook who has
mastered French puff pastry or brioche dough can make this
splendidly dramatic presentation every bit as well. The recipe
consists of the boned and stuffed leg of lamb, illustrated in the
preceding pages, which is first roasted in a very hot oven until
partially cooked, then draped in pastry, decorated with pastry
cutouts, glazed, and set back in the oven again to cook and brown
the crust. Although you have to watch your timing on this so as not
to overcook the lamb, it is reasonably amenable to delays as
indicated by the asterisks (*) at the end of most of the steps in the
recipe. Do go over it well before starting in, so that you will have a
good idea of timing and of stopping points. We suggest that you
make the pastry dough the day before serving. You might also bone
the lamb, prepare the stuffing, and simmer the sauce called for in
Step 7; the actual cooking will then be much simplified.

Even though you have the crust, there is not much of it per
serving and you may also wish a potato dish such as the scalloped
potatoes, gratin dauphinois, in Volume I on page 523, the gratin with
cheese and cream following it, or the unusual potato and endive
gratin. Brussels sprouts, broccoli, buttered spinach, or fresh green
peas might also be included. This gigot naturally calls for the best in
wines, giving you an opportunity to bring out your finest, château-
bottled, red Bordeaux-Saint-Émilion.

THE CRUST, AND PUFF PASTRY VERSUS BRIOCHE DOUGH

Although puff pastry is traditional, it never quite cooks through
when it covers rare-roasted meat, while brioche dough, if it is not
allowed its final rise before baking, will form a crisp, brown crust.
This question is discussed in the preamble to Beef Wellington, where
you have the same choice.

For 10 to 12 people



1) Boning the lamb
An 8- to 9-lb. leg of lamb Following illustrated directions

(5 to 6 lbs. boned and preceding this recipe, remove tail
minus sirloin) and hip bones, main leg bone, and

sirloin meat from leg of lamb. (If you
are going to make the brown sauce
suggested for Step 7, start it now,
using the bones and scraps from the
lamb.)

2) Mushroom and kidney stuffing—farce duxelles aux rognons
—2 cups

½ lb. (4 cups) fresh Trim, wash, and dry the mushrooms.
mushrooms Chop into a fine mince with a big

2 Tb butter and 1 Tb knife; a handful at a time, twist into
olive oil or cooking oil a tight ball in the corner of a towel to
(more of each if extract as much juice as possible.
needed) Heat butter and oil in pan, and when

A medium (10-inch) butter foam has begun to subside,
frying pan (no-stick add the mushrooms. Sauté over
recommended) moderately high heat, stirring, for

4 fine, fresh lamb several minutes, until mushroom
kidneys, peeled and pieces begin to separate from each
minced other. Stir in the kidneys and

3 Tb finely minced shallots, adding a little more butter if
shallots or scallions you feel it necessary. Sauté, stirring,

for 2 minutes, just to stiffen the
¼ cup port, Madeira, or kidneys. Pour in the wine or Cognac

Cognac and herbs; boil down rapidly for 1
minute. Remove from heat. Stir in



⅛ tsp each of ground the ground lamb. Mash foie gras or
thyme and rosemary mousse with a fork and stir in also,

½ cup ground raw lamb along with optional truffles and their
(from the removed juice. Season carefully to taste. (If by
piece of sirloin) any chance mixture seems too damp

¼ cup foie gras or mousse or loose, stir in a tablespoon or so of
de foie (canned goose bread crumbs to hold it together
liver or liver mousse) more.)

Optional but
recommended: 1 or 2
minced truffles and
their juice

Salt and pepper to taste
If needed: 2 or more Tb

stale, not-too-fine
crumbs from
nonsweetened,
homemade-type bread

3) Stuffing, tying, and skewering the lamb
Skewers and white string Following the illustrated directions,

pack the stuffing into the pockets left
in the meat by the bones, skewer the
large end of the meat, and lace closed
with string.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be
prepared to this point a day in
advance. Note also that you may
prepare the sauce, Step 7, in
advance.



4) Preliminary roasting—30 minutes at 425 degrees, and a 30-
minute rest

The stuffed and skewered Preheat oven to 425 degrees. Wipe
lamb lamb thoroughly dry with paper

A shallow roasting pan towels and brush with cooking oil,
with rack especially on exposed lean-meat

Cooking oil surfaces. Place on rack in roasting
Optional but pan and set in upper-middle level of

recommended: an preheated oven. Basting once or
accurate meat twice with oil and turning meat once,
thermometer roast 25 to 30 minutes, until lamb

has swelled slightly and feels a little
springy in contrast to its softer raw
state. Meat thermometer reading:
120 degrees. Remove lamb from oven
but leave string and skewers in place.

(*) RESTING AND AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: Lamb must rest for 30
minutes at least before final cooking, so that meat will draw
together and hold stuffing in place. It must also cool off a little bit
so that it will not overcook under its pastry, but it must not cool so
much that it loses its juicy, freshly cooked character. If you are not
ready to continue for some time, you may keep it perfectly for an
hour or more anywhere that you can maintain a temperature of
around 100 to 110 degrees, such as a warming oven, or the turned-
off oven, reheating it for a moment every now and then.

5) Enclosing the lamb in pastry—preheat oven to 450 degrees
for next step

Either the recipe for
simple puff pastry;



Or the recipe for pain Remove string and skewers, and set
brioché dough, fully lamb on pan or baking sheet. It is
risen and ready to now to be enclosed in pastry; do so
bake, but chilled rapidly to prevent dough from

The still warm leg of softening and, in the case of brioche
lamb dough, from rising.

A lightly greased jelly-
roll pan, or edged
baking sheet

Egg glaze (1 egg beaten
with 1 tsp water in a
small bowl)

A pastry brush
Optional but

recommended: the
meat thermometer

Rapidly roll pastry out into a flattened pear shape ¼ inch thick, 6
inches longer at the large end, and 6 inches wider than the leg of
lamb. Starting at large end, unroll or unfold the pastry over the lamb.



Leaving an inch of the shank bone exposed, allow enough pastry to
tuck in all around and enclose lamb completely; trim off excess.
Push the pastry against the undersides of the meat with your fingers: the
bottom of the lamb rests on the pan, and the pastry simply encloses
all visible meat.

Make pastry cutouts with leftover
dough, such as long strips ⅜ inch
wide cut with a pastry wheel, and 2-
inch ovals formed with a fluted cookie
cutter. Paint top of covering dough
with egg glaze, and press the
decorations into place.

When all decorations are in place,
brush surface of dough and

decorations with egg glaze. Draw
the tines of a table fork over glaze
and lightly into dough, to make

cross-hatch marks on entire surface.
Insert optional meat thermometer
where indicated, at a downward-



slanting angle from shank so that
point of thermometer lodges in

the thickest portion of solid meat
near large end. Immediately

proceed to next step. (Note that if
you are using brioche dough, you

are not to let it rise; it is to be
baked immediately.)

6) Final baking—25 to 30 minutes at 450 degrees and 400
degrees
Place in middle level of preheated oven and bake for 15 to 20

minutes, until pastry has started to brown nicely; reduce heat to 400
degrees for the final 5 to 10 minutes of baking. Lamb is done to rosy
rare at a thermometer reading of 130 degrees, or at the first sign of
juices exuding from underside of lamb onto baking sheet. (NOTE:
Some prefer lamb rarer, 125 degrees on the thermometer, while
others like it medium rare, or around 140 to 145 degrees. Roast the
lamb to the thermometer reading you prefer.)

Remove lamb from oven as soon as it is done; carefully lift it,
and slide a rack under it so that the juices will not moisten the crust.
Lamb should rest 15 to 20 minutes before carving. (When ready to
serve, place lamb on platter, and pour any accumulated juices into
whatever sauce you have prepared.)

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Lamb will stay warm enough in its crust
for 30 minutes; after that return to warming oven or anywhere that
you can maintain a temperature of 110 to 120 degrees, where it
may remain another half hour at least.

7) Serving
A hot, lightly buttered

serving platter or a



carving board Transfer lamb to platter or carving
Optional but desirable: 3 board, and pour any roasting juices

cups excellent brown into sauce. Make a presentation of
sauce made from the the gigot, for all to admire. To carve,
lamb bones and meat cut down in bias (diagonal) slices
scraps (Volume I, across the grain, first from one side
pages 69–70), in a hot of the large end, then from the other;
sauce bowl if the first few slices contain no

stuffing, set aside for second
helpings. When you come to the
thinner portion of the meat nearer
the shank, you can cut straight
across. Pass sauce separately, along
with whatever vegetables you have
chosen.

ÉPAULE D’AGNEAU FARCIE, VIROFLAY
[Braised, Stuffed Shoulder of Lamb]
Shoulder of lamb is far less expensive than leg of lamb, usually

by at least a third, and is an elegant roast when stuffed and braised.
The spinach and mushroom mixture suggested here makes attractive
slices, and if you serve the potatoes in basil and whole baked
tomatoes, you will have a colorful and fragrant main course. A red
Bordeaux-Saint-Émilion would be an excellent choice of wine.

A NOTE ON BONED SHOULDER OF LAMB

Most markets will bone a lamb shoulder for you, or you will find
them ready-boned, rolled, and tied; you untie and unroll them for
stuffing. Ask also for a pound or so of sawed lamb bones, or for veal
or beef bones, to give character to your braising liquid. (Full
information on lamb shoulders is in Volume 1, page 330).



For 8 people

1) The mushroom duxelles and spinach stuffing—farce Viroflay
½ lb. (1 quart) fresh Make a duxelles as follows: Trim,

mushrooms wash, and dry the mushrooms, and
1 Tb butter cut into 1⁄16-inch dice with a large
½ Tb cooking oil knife. A handful at a time, twist hard
A medium (10-inch) in the corner of a towel, to extract as

frying pan (no-stick much of their juice as possible. Heat
recommended) oil and butter to bubbling in pan, add

Salt and pepper mushrooms, and cook over
A 3-quart mixing bowl moderately high heat, stirring

frequently, until pieces begin to
separate from each other, and start to
brown very lightly. Stir in salt and
pepper to taste, and scrape into
mixing bowl.

1½ cups cooked spinach A handful at a time, squeeze as much
(or a 10-ounce water as possible out of the spinach;
package frozen chop fine with a large stainless-steel
spinach, thawed in a knife. Melt the additional butter in
pan of cold water and the frying pan over moderately high
drained) heat, stir in the shallots or scallions,

2 Tb butter and cook for 1 minute. Then stir in
3 Tb minced shallots or the spinach and garlic, and cook,

scallions stirring, for several minutes to
A large clove garlic, evaporate remaining liquid from

mashed spinach. When it begins sticking
lightly to bottom of pan, remove



Salt and pepper from heat; season to taste with salt
and pepper, and scrape into bowl
with mushrooms.

½ cup (1½ ounces) not- Soften the crumbs with the stock,
too-fine stale crumbs bouillon, or milk and let stand for a
from nonsweetened, few minutes. Beat the ham fat, egg,
homemade-type white and herbs into the mushrooms and
bread in a small bowl spinach. Squeeze excess liquid out of

2 to 3 Tb stock, bouillon, crumbs and beat them in too. Taste
or milk stuffing very carefully for seasoning.

⅔ cup (4 ounces) finely (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be done a
diced ham fat, fresh day in advance; cover and
pork fat, or blanched refrigerate.
bacon

1 egg
8 to 10 large fresh basil

leaves, minced, or ½
tsp fragrant dried
basil, thyme, or
rosemary

Salt and pepper

2) Stuffing the lamb
A 5- to 6-lb. shoulder of Spread boned shoulder on a board,

lamb, fell intact, all fell (skin) side down. Tuck stuffing
excess fat cut out; into pockets left by bones, and pile
bones removed, rest of stuffing in a loaf shape down
chopped, and reserved center of meat. Sew or skewer edges
(ready-to-stuff weight of meat together to enclose stuffing
about 3½ lbs.) completely. (Do not overfill lamb.)



A trussing needle or Tie into a sausage shape with loops
skewers of string at 1-inch intervals around

White string circumference. Dry thoroughly with
paper towels before browning, next
step.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: When both
lamb and stuffing are chilled, the
meat may be stuffed a day in
advance; wrap and refrigerate.

3) Browning the lamb
2 to 3 Tb rendered pork Preheat oven to 325 degrees in time

or goose fat, or for Step 4. Heat fat or oil in casserole
cooking oil; more if to very hot but not smoking, add
needed bones (including optional knuckle

A heavy, flameproof bones at end of list) and sliced
casserole just large vegetables; sauté over moderately
enough to hold lamb high heat for 5 to 6 minutes, until
comfortably lightly browned. Remove with a

The chopped lamb bones slotted spoon to a side dish. Film pan
A large, sliced onion with more fat or oil if necessary, set
A large, sliced carrot lamb in it, seam-side down, and

brown for several minutes, lifting
For sauce consistency: A occasionally with spoon to prevent

6-inch square of lamb from sticking. Turn and brown
blanched pork rind, on another side, and continue turning
Volume I, page 401, and browning until lamb is nicely
and/or 1 cup chopped colored on all sides and the two ends.
veal knuckle bones Strew the browned bones and

vegetables around the meat, and add
the optional pork rind.



4) Braising the lamb—2½ hours at 325 degrees
Salt Salt the lamb, add the wine and
1 cup dry white wine or enough stock or bouillon to come ⅔

dry white French the way up the lamb. Bury herb
vermouth packet in the liquid, and bring

2 or more cups brown casserole to simmer on top of stove.
stock or bouillon Lay paper or foil over meat, cover

The following tied in casserole, and set in middle level of
washed cheesecloth: 6 oven; regulate oven heat so that lamb
parsley sprigs, 1 bay simmers quietly for 2½ hours. Turn
leaf, ½ tsp thyme, 2 several times during cooking, and
cloves garlic baste with liquid in the casserole.

A piece of waxed paper Lamb is done when a fork will pierce
or foil it fairly easily.

Casserole cover

5) Sauce and serving
A hot serving platter Remove lamb to hot platter. Do not
A sieve set over a untie yet; cover with waxed paper or

saucepan foil and set in turned-off oven with
1 Tb cornstarch blended door ajar while finishing sauce as

to a paste with 2 Tb follows: Strain braising liquid into
wine or stock in a saucepan, pressing juices out of
small bowl ingredients. Skim surface fat off

A warm sauce bowl liquid, bring to simmer, skimming off
Parsley, watercress, or additional fat, and taste carefully for

whatever vegetable seasoning and strength. Boil down
garnish you wish rapidly, if necessary; you should have

about 2½ cups. Remove from heat,
and beat in starch mixture; return
over heat and simmer, stirring, for 2



minutes. Remove string and trussings
from lamb, pour a spoonful of sauce
over the meat to glaze it, and pour
rest of sauce into warm bowl.
Decorate platter with greenery or
vegetables, and serve.

To carve, cut down in bias (diagonal) slices across the grain, first
from one side of the short end, then from the other, and spoon a
little sauce around the edge of each serving. (If the stuffing does not
hold in place, carver should arrange meat attractively around it on
plate, for each slice.)

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: If you are not to serve the lamb at once,
replace it in the casserole, pour the sauce around, cover loosely, and
set in a 120-degree warming oven, or over barely simmering water,
where it will keep nicely for at least 30 minutes.

Other stuffings
Other stuffing possibilities are listed, and 6 stuffings specifically

for lamb are in Volume I, pages 336–8.



BREAST OF LAMB
Poitrine d’ Agneau

Breast of lamb (the bottom of the rib cage, similar to that of
veal) is the most reasonably priced of any cut of meat, and is
delicious when boned, stuffed, and braised. However, it must be
very carefully peeled, and all the fat from the plate must be cut out,
as well as other extraneous fat. If you do find a well-trimmed breast,
follow the general system outlined for stuffed breast of veal, using
either that stuffing or any of the preceding suggestions for shoulder
of lamb.

SADDLE OF LAMB
Selle d’ Agneau

A saddle of lamb is one of the most luxurious and attractive
roasts you could pick to serve at a small, elegant dinner party for 4
to 6 people. When you have prepared it for the oven, which is not
difficult as you will see from the illustrated directions, you will find
it far easier to roast and to carve than a leg of lamb, and absolutely
delicious to eat.

HOW TO ORDER A SADDLE OF LAMB

The saddle of lamb is the loin. On a beef carcass it would be the
whole porterhouse and T-bone steak section on both sides, and on
lamb it is the whole loin-chop area. It is, in fact, a giant butterfly
loin chop 8 to 10 inches thick, consisting of the 2 meaty loin strips
that run along either side of the backbone on top, and the 2 smaller
tenderloin strips that run its length underneath. What would



constitute the tail of the chop is the flank, or flap of meat attached
to each side.

Because names of meat cuts vary from one part of the country to
another, your butcher may understand the term “saddle” to mean
the whole loin-hip-leg section of lamb, and he may only know what
you mean when you ask him for the double kidney loin. Show him
this picture if you have trouble communicating, or point the saddle
out to him on yourself. It is equivalent to the small of your back on
both sides of the backbone, and includes the front part of you; in
other words, it is the whole area from the top of your hip bone to
where your ribs begin. Tell him to leave it whole; he is not to saw it
in two at the backbone. The choicest saddle will come from a
carcass of spring lamb that weighs not more than 45 pounds; the
saddle will weigh around 6½ pounds untrimmed, 3½ pounds ready
to roast.

FRENCH TERMINOLOGY

You may also have communication problems in France, because
the saddle can be called selle d’agneau, selle anglaise, or les deux filets
réunis. Again, point it out on yourself if there is any confusion. Their
saddle of lamb will be a little smaller than an American one, while a



selle de mouton from their excellent mutton will be a little larger and
should be well aged, bien rassie.

HOW TO PREPARE A SADDLE OF LAMB FOR ROASTING

This is the way the topside of the
saddle will look before the flanks
have been trimmed off. Ask that
the fell (skin) be removed, which
will leave a covering of fat over
the top of the meat. Have the
thirteenth rib removed also, if

attached.

Remove all excess fat from the underside;
this may include the kidneys. The strips of
tenderloin meat run parallel to the
backbone on either side, and parallel to
their outside edge is a partially hidden strip of fat.

Cut and pull fat out, being careful not to pierce the flanks and make
holes in outside covering of meat. Cut off all but about 3 inches of
flank, leaving enough on each side for flanks to cover the underside
of the backbone.

Shave off all but ⅛-inch layer of
covering fat on the topside, and
make a criss cross of bias cuts ½
inch apart in the surface, going

just down to the flesh. These will
help the meat to cook evenly, and



Sprinkle underside with salt, make attractive decorations on
pepper, and a big pinch of thymethe crisp, roasted surface later on.
or rosemary, fold flanks against backbone to cover tenderloin strips,
and tie circumference of saddle in 3 or more places with white
string. If you are not to cook the saddle now, wrap and refrigerate
it.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Saddle may be prepared to this point a day
before roasting.

  SELLE D’AGNEAU RÔTIE
[Roast Saddle of Lamb]
A plain roast saddle of lamb is so good in itself that you need go

into no elaborations, although one or two are suggested at the end
of this recipe. A classic accompaniment is that crusty, buttery
mound of sliced potatoes, pommes Anna, or one of the two variations
following it, and either braised lettuce or braised endives. Another
suggestion would be eggplant, such as the gratin provençal with its
tomatoes and cheese; you would then need only an excellent loaf of
homemade French bread. A fine, red Bordeaux-Médoc would be
your best choice of wine.

For 4 to 6 people

1) Preparations for roasting
A saddle of lamb Preheat oven to 475 degrees for Step

trimmed, seasoned, 2. Set saddle right side up in the
and tied according to roasting pan and paint exposed ends
the preceding of meat with melted butter, reserving
directions (4 to 5 lbs. rest for later. If you are using a meat
trimmed weight) thermometer, insert it at a long,



A heavy, shallow baking slanting angle into the thickest part
dish just large enough of one of the loin strips. Be sure point
to hold the saddle of thermometer reaches middle of
comfortably meat and does not touch bone.

4 Tb melted butter in a Prepare the vegetables and garlic,
pan and a basting and reserve in a bowl for Step 2.
brush

½ cup each, sliced
carrots and onions

2 large cloves garlic,
unpeeled

Optional but
recommended: a meat
thermometer

2) Roasting—about 45 minutes—oven preheated to 450 degrees
ROASTING START. Set lamb in upper-middle level of preheated oven

for 15 minutes.
15-MINUTE MARK. Turn thermostat down to 425 degrees. Working

quickly, baste 2 ends of saddle with melted butter, and strew the
vegetables and garlic around the meat. Baste vegetables with fat in
baking dish, or with butter.

22-MINUTE MARK. Rapidly baste meat and vegetables again, with
fat in dish.

30-MINUTE MARK. Baste again rapidly. If vegetables are blackening,
turn thermostat down to 400 degrees.

37-MINUTE MARK. Baste again. If you are using a meat
thermometer, it should be at 125 to 130 degrees for rare meat. Meat
should feel springy rather than squashy and raw, and the first juices
should be exuding from the meat into the pan. Roast a few minutes
longer if necessary; if you wish your meat medium rare and pink
rather than red, roast to 140 degrees. (Note that if meat was chilled



when it went into the oven, it may take a few minutes longer to
roast. A heavier saddle will take 50 to 55 minutes in all. Baste every
4 to 5 minutes when roasting longer.)

WHEN DONE. Turn off oven and set lamb on a platter near outside
end of open oven door; a rest of 10 to 15 minutes before carving
will permit juices to retreat back into meat tissues. Discard trussing
strings after the rest period. Meanwhile, make the sauce, next step.

3) The sauce
⅓ cup dry white wine or Spoon all but a tablespoon of fat out

dry white French of roasting dish, pour in wine and
vermouth stock, and add optional tomato. Set

1 cup beef stock or over high heat and boil, scraping up
bouillon coagulated roasting juices with a

Optional: 1 medium wooden spoon; mash cooking
tomato, chopped (not vegetables into liquid as it boils.
peeled) Reduce liquid by about half, correct

Salt and pepper seasoning, strain into saucepan, and
A sieve keep warm. You will have only

enough sauce to moisten each serving
A small saucepan of meat.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you can control the heat, you may leave
the finished lamb in a warming oven of no more than 120 degrees
for at least half an hour. With your sauce all made, you can then
serve immediately.

4) Carving and serving
CARVING AT THE TABLE. If you wish to carve at the table you may

follow the system of many maîtres d’hôtel, which is to make long,
thin slices on each side, parallel to the backbone. (The first slice,



which shaves off the fat, is not served.) Then turn the saddle upside
down, cut off the flanks, and reserve for second helpings; cut out the
tenderloin strips, and slice into crosswise pieces.

CARVING IN THE KITCHEN AND REASSEMBLING. This works out nicely,
and the carved pieces are replaced on the saddle bone. Although
you may cut the long thin slices described in the preceding
paragraph, we suggest cutting across the grain for better eating
texture. Provide yourself with a long, very sharp knife, a fork, and a
carving board; heat oven to 475 degrees for a brief warm-up after
the reassembly, and carve rapidly, as follows:

Turn saddle upside down and
slice off the flanks. Cutting down
parallel against the backbone and
then following its outward curve,
slice out first one whole tenderloin

strip, then the other.

Turn the saddle right side up, shave off outside fat on each side
if you wish, then cut down parallel against backbone and follow its
outward curve to slice off the whole loin strip on each side. Slanting
knife at a 45-degree angle parallel to board, rapidly slice each strip
into cross-grain pieces ¾ inch thick; season lightly with salt and
pepper but keep slices in order, so that you may replace them again
on the bone. Slice and season tenderloin strips.

Arrange the flanks lengthwise on a hot ovenproof serving
platter and settle the saddle bone on top.



Pile the tenderloin pieces at each
end of the saddle, and rearrange
the loin slices back in place on

each side of the backbone.

Pour the carving juices over the meat; set platter for 2 minutes in
oven to give a sizzling impression. Pour a spoonful or two of sauce
over the meat, rapidly decorate platter with parsley, watercress, or a
vegetable garnish, and serve immediately.

VARIATIONS
Selle d’Agneau, Persillade
[Saddle of Lamb Garnished with Parsley and Buttered Bread
Crumbs]
A garnish of bread crumbs sautéed in butter with shallots and

seasonings, tossed with parsley, and spread over the finished saddle
of lamb is fragrant, attractive, and especially called for when you
are carving in the kitchen and serving the reassembled lamb on the
saddle bone. Make the persillade at any convenient time as long as it
is ready to serve with the roast, as follows:

4 Tb clarified butter Melt butter to bubbling in pan, add
(melted butter, shallots and stir for 1 minute, then
skimmed; clear liquid add bread crumbs and stir over
butter poured off moderately high heat for several
milky residue) minutes until a nice, golden brown.

Remove from heat, stir in salt and



A medium (10-inch) pepper to taste, and set aside. When
frying pan the meat is on its platter, mix the

3 Tb finely minced parsley into the crumbs and spread
shallots or scallions the persillade over the lamb; reheat

1 cup (lightly pressed for a moment in hot oven, and serve.
down) moderately
fine, fresh crumbs
from non-sweetened
homemade-type white
bread

Salt and pepper
3 to 4 Tb minced fresh

parsley

Selle d’Agneau, Milanaise
[Saddle of Lamb Garnished with Parmesan Cheese and Bread
Crumbs]
Another attractive finish to a roast saddle of lamb is to spread on

a coating of cheese and bread crumbs, then set it into the oven for a
moment to brown. Make the mixture as follows:

4 Tb melted butter Preheat oven to 475 degrees in time
½ cup fairly fine, stale for serving. Blend the butter, crumbs,

bread crumbs and cheese together in the bowl;
⅓ cup grated Parmesan season to taste with pepper and set

cheese aside. When saddle is roasted, has
A small bowl rested, and is ready to serve, spread
Pepper to taste on the crumbs and cheese. Set in

upper third of pre-heated oven for 2



to 3 minutes to brown lightly; serve
immediately.

VEAL
Veau

Not too many years ago veal was appreciated only by Europeans
or sophisticated and traveled Americans. Now the delights of the
scallop quickly sautéed in butter and served in a cream and tarragon
sauce, or the roast stuffed with mushrooms, or a blanquette—that
deceptively simple and marvelous stew—are quite common dishes
on the American table wherever good veal is to be found. Happily
for us all, much better veal is now being raised in this country, due
to improved feeding methods and to the growing demand for top-
quality meat. If your market has not yet begun to carry the large,
pale, fine veal that is now available, you can perhaps urge them to
feature it in the hope that a demand will be created in your
shopping area.

Some 25 pages are devoted to veal, its quality, and its cuts, in
Volume I, starting on page 350. Recipes include casserole roasts
with herbs and aromatic vegetables, the sumptuous veau Orloff, veal
stuffed with ham and cheese, two fine stews, a detailed section on
how to fix your own scallops, another on chops, and some useful
suggestions for ground-veal patties, an excellent solution for the
quite reasonably priced little pieces of neck meat you sometimes
find packaged at the meat counter. Here we have three groups of
recipes for braising veal: shoulder chops, stews, and illustrated
directions on how to bone and stuff a breast of veal in the French
manner. We end with two dishes from the haute cuisine, veau en
feuilletons and noisettes de veau, Perigourdine, both requiring the
ultimate in fine wines, truffles, foie gras, and well-filled porte-feuilles.



BRAISED VEAL CHOPS AND STEAKS
Côtes de Veau Braisées

Both steaks cut from the leg of veal and shoulder chops benefit
deliciously from the slow, moist cooking of a braise, as do rib and
loin chops from veal that is not of the pale and tender quality one
had hoped to find. Because weights of veal carcasses and cutting
methods for veal vary so tremendously in this country, we shall
simply specify the weight and the thickness of the meat. For
shoulder chops, count on ¾ pound per person, and each chop
should be ¾ to 1 inch thick. Cross-grain slices from the leg (round)
should also be ¾ to 1 inch thick, and 1½ to 2 pounds will serve 4
people.

FRENCH VEAL

In France, shoulder chops are called either basses côtes or côtes
découvertes. Only small legs of veal are cut into steaks, rouelles.

  CÔTES DE VEAU DANS LEUR JUS
[Veal Chops or Steaks Braised in Wine]
This is a lovely, simple, basic method for braising veal chops or

steaks. Serve just as is, enriching the braising juices with a little
butter, or elaborating with cream and mushrooms or other
trimmings, as decribed in the variations following this recipe. You
might arrange the chops on a bed of creamed spinach or on the
potatoes simmered in cream and tarragon. Or you could accompany
them with the gratin of chard or of spinach and onions. The
delicious zucchini timbale would make the dinner much dressier, of
course, and if you did not wish a rice or potato dish, a fresh loaf of
your own French bread would very nicely take the place of a starchy
vegetable. For wine, we suggest a red Bordeaux-Médoc.



For 4 people

1) Browning the chops
4 veal shoulder chops ¾ If using chops, cut off extra backbone

to 1 inch thick and ¾ pieces and remove any loose ribs,
lb. each; or 1½ to 2 gristle, and excess fat; if tail is loose,
lbs. veal steak ¾ to 1 wind it around the body of the meat
inch thick and skewer in place. (Leave steaks

3 to 4 Tb butter whole or cut into serving pieces,
1 to 2 Tb olive oil or whichever you prefer.) Dry meat

cooking oil thoroughly on paper towels. Heat 2
An electric frying pan tablespoons butter and 1 of oil in

large enough to hold pan, and when butter foam begins to
all the meat in 1 layer; subside, arrange as much meat in pan
or a medium pan and as will easily fit in 1 layer. Brown 3
a baking dish or to 4 minutes on each side, regulating
casserole heat so butter is very hot but not

browning. Remove meat to a side
dish if you have not browned all at
once, and brown the rest of the veal
with more butter or oil if needed.

2) Braising the chops
Salt and pepper (You may braise the chops either on
3 Tb minced shallots or top of the stove or in a preheated

scallions 325-degree oven; if they will not fit
½ cup dry white wine or flat in one layer, overlap slightly and

dry white French plan to baste more frequently.)
vermouth Season meat on both sides with salt

and pepper, and arrange in the pan.



About 1 cup veal stock, Set over moderate heat, stir in the
chicken stock, or a shallots or scallions, and cook 2
combination of canned minutes, then pour in the wine or
chicken and beef vermouth, and enough stock or
bouillon bouillon to come half way up the

½ tsp tarragon, thyme, meat. Add the herbs. Bring to the
mixed Provençal simmer on top of the stove, cover
herbs, or Italian pan, and maintain at a slow, steady
seasoning simmer throughout cooking, basting

meat several times with liquid in
pan. Whether chops or steak, meat
should be done in 50 to 60 minutes,
and should be tender when pierced
with a knife; if not tender, cook 5 to
10 minutes longer.

3) Sauce and serving
A hot platter Arrange the veal on the platter; cover
Salt and pepper and keep warm in turned-off oven,
Drops of fresh lemon door ajar, for the few minutes it will

juice take to finish the sauce. Skim surface
2 to 3 Tb soft butter fat off cooking juices, bring to the
Minced fresh parsley and boil, skimming, and boil down

whatever vegetables rapidly until liquid is almost syrupy.
you wish Carefully correct seasoning, adding

lemon juice to taste. Remove from
heat and swish in the enrichment
butter, half a tablespoon at a time.
Spoon the sauce over the chops,
sprinkle with parsley, and serve
immediately.



(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: If you are not serving immediately,
prepare the sauce by boiling down the cooking juices to concentrate
them, but do not reduce the quantity quite so much. Return veal to
pan, baste with sauce, lay waxed paper over it and cover pan
loosely. The meat will keep nicely for at least half an hour on a hot-
tray or warming oven at 110 to 120 degrees; finish sauce just before
serving.

VARIATIONS
Côtes de Veau Gratinées au Fromage
[Braised Veal Chops or Steaks Gratinéed with Cheese]
This is a delicious variation with cheese.

Brown and braise the veal, Steps 1
and 2 in the preceding Master
Recipe, and make the sauce, Step 3.
Shortly before serving them, gratiné
as follows:

¾ cup lightly pressed Preheat broiler to moderately hot.
down, coarsely grated Arrange the braised veal in a shallow
Swiss cheese baking dish, if not already in one,

¼ cup dry white wine, or and spread the cheese over the meat.
dry white French Sprinkle the wine or vermouth on
vermouth top, and set under broiler for several

minutes, until cheese has melted and
browned nicely. Arrange the chops



on their platter, pour the sauce
around them, and serve.

Côtes de Veau Braisées aux Champignons
[Veal Chops or Steaks Braised with Mushrooms and Cream]
Mushrooms and veal, like mushrooms and chicken, always go

well together and one reason undoubtedly is that the natural MSG in
the mushrooms points up the delicate flavor of the meat.

Brown and braise the veal, Steps 1
and 2 in the Master Recipe, but about
10 minutes before veal is done add
the mushrooms as follows:

2 cups (¼ lb.) fresh Trim, wash, and dry the mushrooms;
mushrooms slice or quarter them. Heat butter to

2 Tb butter in a medium foaming, add mushrooms, and sauté,
(10-inch) frying pan tossing and turning for 2 to 3

Salt and pepper minutes; season lightly and set aside.
(A short sauté in butter gives them
added flavor.) When you estimate the
veal has around 10 minutes more in
the oven, add the mushrooms,
basting them with the juices in the
casserole.



Sauce and serving
½ to ⅔ cup crème fraîche When done, remove veal to hot

or heavy cream platter; cover and keep warm. Set
Salt and pepper mushrooms aside on a plate. Skim
Drops of lemon juice surface fat off cooking juices and boil
2 to 3 Tb soft butter liquid down, if necessary, until
2 to 3 Tb minced, fresh almost syrupy. Add the cream and

parsley, parsley sprigs, boil down again rapidly until sauce is
or whatever vegetable lightly thickened. Return mushrooms
you may have chosen to sauce and simmer a moment.

Correct seasoning, adding drops of
lemon juice as needed. Remove from
heat, swish in enrichment butter,
then pour sauce and mushrooms over
veal, decorate with parsley or
vegetables, and serve.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not to serve immediately,
complete sauce, except for enrichment butter; return veal to pan and
baste with sauce and mushrooms. Cover and keep warm (110–20
degrees). Thin out sauce before serving, if necessary, with more
cream or stock; swish in enrichment butter, basting meat with sauce
until butter is absorbed.

Côtes de Veau Champvallon, Gratinées
[Veal Chops or Steaks Braised with Potatoes]
This is almost a meal in a dish, and needs only a fresh green

accompaniment like broccoli, peas, beans, or spinach; or you may
prefer a combination salad in a separate course. Here the potatoes,
cooking with the veal and their juices, absorb marvelous flavor, and



the cheese and bread-crumb topping at the end not only thickens
the cooking juices but also makes attractive serving. Although the
general method is almost the same as the Master Recipe, we give a
shortened full account because of slight differences.

NOTE: Here you must trim the meat in some way so that it will all
fit in one layer in a casserole or baking dish; see Step 2.

For 4 people

1) Browning the veal
½ cup (4 ounces) lardons Cut the blanched lardons of bacon

(blanched bacon into ¼-inch dice, and brown slowly
sticks, 1½ inches long with the oil in a frying pan. Remove
and ¼ inch thick) with a slotted spoon and set aside,

3 Tb olive oil or cooking leaving fat in pan. Add the chops or
oil steaks; brown for 3 to 4 minutes on

4 veal shoulder chops or each side, being sure fat is very hot
steaks ¾ to 1 inch but not burning. Remove veal. Stir in
thick, dried in paper the onions and garlic, cover, and
towels cook slowly, stirring occasionally, for

1 cup minced onions 8 to 10 minutes, until tender. Scoop
2 large cloves garlic, onions and garlic into a side dish,

mashed or minced leaving fat in pan. Remove pan from
heat.

2) Braising the veal
Salt and pepper Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Season
½ tsp tarragon, thyme, veal with salt, pepper, and herbs, and

mixed Provençal arrange in one close layer in
herbs, or Italian casserole with the onions and garlic,
seasoning



A covered flameproof and half the browned, diced lardons.
casserole or baking Strew the potatoes over the veal,
dish that will just hold seasoning each layer with salt,
all the meat in one pepper, and a sprinkling of parsley.
layer (or use two (You should have no more than ¾
dishes) inch of potatoes in all.) Pour in the

4 to 5 cups “boiling” wine, and enough stock or bouillon
potatoes, peeled and to come ⅓ the way up the potatoes.
cut into ⅛-inch slices Spoon a tablespoon or 2 of the

½ cup fresh, rather cooking fat over the potatoes (unless
roughly minced it has browned, in which case use
parsley melted butter). Sprinkle the

½ cup dry white wine or remaining lardon bits over the
dry white French potatoes, and bring contents of
vermouth casserole to simmer on top of stove.

Drape buttered foil over potatoes,
About 1 cup veal stock, cover casserole, and set in middle

chicken stock, or a level of preheated oven. Bake for
combination of canned about an hour, or until both veal and
chicken and beef potatoes are tender, basting several
bouillon times with liquid in pan.

Buttered aluminum foil
A bulb baster

3) Gratinéeing and serving
½ cup not-too-fine Raise oven thermostat to 425

crumbs from degrees. Taste cooking liquid and
nonsweetened, correct seasoning if necessary. Mix
homemade-type white the crumbs and cheese together, and
bread spread over the potatoes. Baste with

⅓ cup finely grated Swiss juices in casserole and set in upper-
or Parmesan cheese third level of oven. Baste several

times while juices boil down and



thicken with the crumbs, and topping
browns nicely; this will take 10 to 15
minutes.

Either serve from casserole or baking dish, or remove each piece
of veal with its topping, and transfer to a hot platter; pour juices
around.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not to serve immediately, let
juices reduce and thicken a little less; keep warm, loosely covered
with foil, on a hot-tray or 120-degree warming oven. Baste with
more stock or with melted butter, if necessary, before serving.

Other ideas for veal chops and steaks
Starting out with the simple braise in the Master Recipe, you

might stir the reduced cooking juices, Step 3, into a pistou flavoring,
or into the Provençal mixture of anchovies, capers, garlic, and
parsley described in Volume I, page 324. Another idea would be to
spread a pipérade of sautéed green peppers, tomatoes, garlic, and
herbs over the braised veal; cover and let them warm together for a
few minutes, then spoon on the sauce and serve. You could use the
pistouille mixture, of sautéed eggplant, tomatoes, and peppers in the
same way. Finally, there is the always attractive garniture bonne
femme, a combination of bacon lardons, partially cooked small
onions, and blanched small potatoes, which you add to the veal the
last half hour of braising so all finish their cooking together; for this,
adapt the poulet en cocotte bonne femme recipe in Volume I, page
253.

VEAL STEWS
Ragoûts de Veau



Veal makes lovely stew, and it cooks in a little more than an
hour. Volume I contains the well-known blanquette de veau, with its
onions, mushrooms, and creamy sauce, as well as a hearty brown
stew with tomatoes. Here are several more stews, including
ossobuco.

VEAL CUTS FOR STEWING

The part of the veal breast called “plate” is a favorite French
stewing cut, but one that is not popular with all Americans because
of the crunchy cartilage of the breast bone and rib ends. The
shoulder-chop area, neck, and shoulder arm all give good stew
meat, as do both front and hind shanks. The hind shank is the
ossobuco, with the marrow bone, and the choicest; the front shank
has more bone and the meat more separations; it requires half an
hour longer cooking, but makes a good stew because of its
gelatinous quality. (If the veal you buy is not of the palest and
tenderest quality, the best way to cook it is by stewing or braising;
the leg [round] can be used for boneless stewing meat in this case.)

A pound of boneless meat will serve 2 to 3 people, but you will
need ¾ to 1 pound per person for bone-in meat. You may use a
combination of both in any of the recipes except for ossobuco, but
we shall usually specify boneless meat simply to eliminate
cumbersome either-or choices. Bones, however, will add texture and
flavor to the stew; if your meat is boneless it is a good idea to tie a
cupful or so of chopped veal marrow and knuckle bones in washed
cheesecloth, and simmer them with the meat.

  RAGOÛT DE VEAU AUX CHAMPIGNONS
[Veal Stew with Tomatoes, Mushrooms, and Cream]
There are endless way of flavoring and finishing off a veal stew,

because veal, like chicken, is amenable to infinite variety. Here is a
Master Recipe for starting out the veal, and a number of ways to



vary its presentation. Serve this with rice or pasta, and a fresh green
vegetable or a salad. For wine, chose a light, young red like
Beaujolais or Cabernet Sauvignon, or a rather strong, dry white of
the Côtes-du-Rhône type.

For 4 to 6 people

1) Browning the veal and the onions
2½ to 3 lbs. trimmed and Dry veal on paper towels, season

boneless lean stewing with salt and pepper, and just before
veal cut into 1½-inch browning, roll in flour and shake off
chunks (see notes excess. (Shaking in a sieve works
preceding recipe) nicely.) Film pan with ⅛ inch of oil,

Salt and pepper set over moderately high heat, and
½ cup flour on a plate when very hot but not smoking, add
2 or more Tb olive oil or as many pieces of veal as will fit

cooking oil easily in 1 layer. Brown nicely on all
A heavy frying pan, no- sides, which will take 4 to 5 minutes

stick recommended or more; remove veal, as it is
browned, to a side dish, and continue
with the rest.

2 cups sliced onions While veal is browning, cook onions
2 Tb oil in oil over moderate heat, stirring
A heavy 10- by 2-inch occasionally, for 8 to 10 minutes.

chicken fryer, electric When tender, raise heat and brown
skillet, or 3- to 4-quart very lightly. When the veal is done,
flameproof casserole add it to the onions.



2) Braising the veal
1 cup dry white wine, or Discard oil from veal sauté pan and

¾ cup dry white deglaze pan with the wine, scraping
French vermouth up coagulated browning juices. Pour

1 cup brown veal stock, the wine into the veal and onions;
or chicken stock, or a stir in the stock, herbs, garlic, and
combination of canned tomatoes. Bring to the simmer, cover
chicken broth and beef and simmer slowly, basting meat
bouillon occasionally with liquids in pan, for 1

1 tsp tarragon, basil, or to 1¼ hours, or until veal is tender
oregano when pierced with a knife. Do not

1 imported bay leaf overcook; meat should not fall apart.
1 or 2 large cloves garlic,

mashed or minced
1 or 2 tomatoes, peeled,

seeded, juiced, and
roughly chopped (¾
cup pulp)

3) The mushrooms
1½ to 2 cups (6 to 8 While veal is simmering, trim, wash,

ounces) fresh dry, and quarter the mushrooms.
mushrooms Film pan with ⅛ inch of oil, and set

More oil over moderately high heat; when oil
The frying pan that is hot but not smoking, sauté the

browned the veal mushrooms, tossing and turning, for
Salt and pepper 3 to 4 minutes, just until they are

starting to brown lightly. Season to
taste, and set aside.



4) Sauce and serving
If needed: beurre manié When veal is tender, scoop it out into

(1 Tb flour blended to a side dish with a slotted spoon. Skim
a paste with 1 Tb soft off surface fat, and boil down
butter), and a wire cooking liquid, if necessary, to
whip concentrate its flavor. If it seems too

½ to ⅔ cup crème fraîche thin (it must be thick enough to
or heavy cream cover the meat nicely), remove from

The mushrooms heat, beat in beurre manié with wire
Minced fresh parsley, or whip, and bring to the simmer. Stir

mixed fresh green in the cream and the mushrooms,
herbs (parsley, chives, bring to the boil, and boil slowly 2 to
and tarragon, basil, or 3 minutes to thicken the sauce again,
Oregano) and to blend flavors. Carefully

correct seasoning. Return veal to
casserole and simmer again for 2 to 3
minutes, basting the veal with the
sauce; correct seasoning again. Either
serve from pan or casserole, or
arrange on a hot platter surrounded
with whatever vegetables you have
chosen. Decorate with herbs, and
bring immediately to the table.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: May be kept warm for a good half hour
on a hot-tray or over simmering water. May be cooked a day before
serving; when cold, spread plastic wrap over surface, cover, and
refrigerate. When ready to serve, bring to simmer slowly, and
simmer about 10 minutes, basting frequently, until thoroughly re-
heated but not overcooked. If sauce seems too thick, thin out with
stock or cream.



VARIATIONS
Ragoût de Veau, Printanier
[Veal Stew Garnished with Carrots, Onions, New Potatoes, and
Green Peas]
When all the vegetables are fresh, this is delicious indeed and

very attractive to serve because of the various colors. If you are
cooking and serving with no delay, the vegetables may do all of
their simmering in the stew, and you add them at different times,
according to how long they take to cook. Otherwise do as suggested
here, giving them a separate start, and letting them finish off in the
stew just before serving; in this method, you may prepare
everything ahead except for the potatoes.

Follow method and ingredients for
preceding Master Recipe, Steps 1 and
2, using only ½ cup of onions in Step
1, and omitting the garlic in Step 2.
Meanwhile, prepare the following:

The carrots and onions
4 to 6 fine, fresh carrots Peel the carrots, halve or quarter
24 to 30 small, white, them depending on size, and cut into

fresh onions ¾ to 1 1½-inch lengths; trim edges to round
inch in diameter them, if you wish. Drop onions into

A heavy, covered boiling water, boil 1 minute, drain,
saucepan and slip off peel; pierce a cross ¼

1 cup water inch deep in root ends for even
1½ Tb butter cooking. Place carrots and onions in

pan with the water, butter, and salt;



½ tsp salt cover and simmer slowly about 25
minutes, until just tender. Set aside.

The peas
1 to 1½ lbs. fresh peas (1 Drop the peas into the rapidly boiling

to 1½ cups, shelled) water, bring quickly back to the boil
A saucepan containing 3 again, and boil uncovered 4 to 8

quarts of rapidly minutes or more, depending on
boiling, salted water tenderness. Test frequently by

tasting; they should be almost, but
not quite, done. Drain immediately,
run cold water over them to stop the
cooking and retain their fresh color;
drain again and set aside.

The potatoes
About 2 lbs. new Peel the potatoes and trim into ovals

potatoes (or “boiling” about 2¼ inches long and 1½ inches
potatoes) all of a size thick; drop into bowl of cold water
for easy cutting (2¾ to and set aside. (About ½ hour before
3 inches long, for you plan to serve the stew, drain the
instance) potatoes and drop into boiling water

A bowl of cold water to cover. Boil slowly, uncovered,
When needed: a until almost tender, drain and add to

saucepan of boiling, stew as indicated in last paragraph.)
salted water

Finishing the stew



If needed: more stock or When veal is tender, tip pan and
bouillon skim off surface fat. If sauce has

reduced too much, add a little more
stock or bouillon so that you will
have enough liquid to cook and baste
the vegetables.

About 10 minutes before serving, arrange the carrots, onions,
potatoes, and peas in the casserole, pushing them gently down into
the meat and cooking juices. Pour any cooking juices from carrots
and onions over meat, and baste both meat and vegetables with
juices in casserole. Bring to the simmer, cover closely, and simmer
about 10 minutes, basting several times, until vegetables are tender.
Correct seasoning. Either serve from casserole, or turn the stew out
onto a hot platter.

Ossobuco—Jarret de Veau à la Provençale
[Braised Veal Shanks with Wine, Tomatoes, Lemon, and Orange]
Osso is bone and buco is round, meaning the shank with the

round bone, which is the hind shank with the marrow bone. This
favorite Italian veal stew is also done in France, and here is the
Provençal version. Although you may use foreshanks, hind shanks
are so much more attractive to serve because the bone is small and
the meat holds around it nicely, that we counsel you to order hind
shanks, and do the recipe when you have the right meat. Veal
shanks, sawed into 1½-inch pieces and ready to cook, will freeze
perfectly for several weeks; therefore pick up whatever you can
whenever you can, and save all hind shanks for this really delicious
recipe.



For 4 people—4 veal hind shanks, sawed into crosswise pieces
1½ inches thick

Season, flour, and brown the veal
shanks; arrange in the braising liquid
with the onions, garlic, tomatoes, and
herbs as described in the Master
Recipe, Steps 1 and 2. Then proceed
as follows:

1 orange Cut the zests (colored parts of the
1 lemon peel) from the orange and lemon,
A vegetable peeler then cut zests into julienne strips 1⁄16

A saucepan containing a inch wide. To remove bitterness (but
quart or so of boiling none of the flavor), simmer 10
water minutes; drain, refresh in cold water,

drain again, and stir into the
casserole with the veal stew.

Bring stew to simmer, cover casserole, and simmer either in a
preheated 325-degree oven or on top of the stove for 1¼ hours, or
until meat is tender when pierced with a fork. Do not overcook:
meat must not come loose from bone. When tender, tip casserole
and skim surface fat from cooking liquid. Set casserole over high
heat, if necessary, and boil down sauce to concentrate flavor.
Correct seasoning. Serve either from casserole, or on a hot platter.
Decorate with parsley sprigs.



Other ideas
Use other veal stew meat, such as cuts from the shoulder or the

leg, and give it the ossobuco flavoring. Vary the ossobuco recipe with
olives: blanch a handful each of pitted green olives and pitted black
olives for 10 minutes in a quart of boiling water; drain, and add to
the stew the last 15 to 20 minutes of cooking. See also the variations
at the end of beef stews, which include an herb, cheese, and garlic
finish, another with anchovies and garlic, a pipérade with peppers
and tomatoes, and a final one with olives and potatoes; any of these
may be added to the cooked veal at the end of Step 2, Master
Recipe, instead of the mushrooms and cream. You thus have a wide
choice, and never need serve the same stew twice.

STUFFED BREAST OF VEAL
Poitrine de Veau, Farcie

Breast of veal boned, stuffed with a well-seasoned filling,
braised, and sauced makes a handsome as well as tasty main-course
party dish, and one that is far more reasonable in price than most.
French and American meat cutting methods differ, and as we find
the French version much the most attractive to serve, here is how to
buy and prepare it. If you cannot have the butchering done properly
for you, and if you enjoy working with meat yourself, you will find
the whole breast not at all difficult to handle, and you may even be
able to buy it at a far more interesting price than if it were boned
and trimmed at the market.

HOW TO BUY A BREAST OF VEAL



In America, a breast of veal (or of lamb) comprises the whole
brisket-plate section. From a large, pale, prime carcass of veal, such
as you can find in France and in some markets here, this will weigh
7 to 7½ pounds before boning and trimming. The boned brisket
weighs 2½ pounds; the breastbone, 1 pound; the plate and skirt
(flap of meat falling over ribs), with the ribs and cartilage, 3½
pounds. It is the boned brisket that is stuffed for French recipes; a
2½-pound brisket, stuffed, will be 12 inches long, 7 to 8 inches
across, and can easily serve 8 people.

Adapt whatever you find to the general idea of the recipe even if
your market does not carry breasts of the desired weight, or follows
different cutting methods. You might, for instance, sew or skewer 2
plates together for stuffing, or 2 briskets, if they are smaller than
you think they should be. If you have trouble making your wishes
known, show your butcher this picture; he might be willing to order
one for you, and to prepare it according to your specifications.

Actually, the whole brisket-plate combination is a good buy
because not only will you have the brisket to stuff, but you can also
save the thick part of the plate for stew, you can grind the rest of
the plate along with the skirt for your stuffing, and when you boil
up the breastbone and ribs, you will have a fine veal stock for
braising the poitrine farcie.

FRENCH TERMINOLOGY



Brisket is poitrine, and the poitrine also includes the skirt, hampe;
ask for a poitrine de veau désossée, avec poche. The plate is called
tendron, and is a favorite French cut for blanquette de veau,
particularly the thick part containing the breastbone cartilage.

DIRECTIONS FOR THE HOME BUTCHER

NOTE: In the drawing, the breast has been separated in two—the
right-hand piece, minus leg bones, is the brisket; the left-hand piece
the plate.

To bone the whole breast, start with the breastbone (right side in
drawing), which is attached to the ribs by cartilages: first, place the
meat rib-side up, with the breastbone hanging over the edge of the
table. Lean hard on the bone to break it from the cartilages at the
rib ends, then cut around its ridges and follow its cartilaginous
prolongation into the plate, to remove the entire bone from the
meat. The next step is to separate the brisket from the plate: slice
through the meat between ribs 5 and 6 to make 2 pieces, as in the
drawing. Slice off the skirt, a flap of meat on the rib side, attached
to the thick part of the plate. Remove the rib bones from both
brisket and plate by cutting first around them, then underneath each
bone to loosen it from the meat. The thick part of the plate that
contained the prolongation of the breastbone (bottom left in
drawing) can make an excellent stew for 2 people; cut it off from
the rest of the plate, and freeze it for another meal. Trim excess fat
off brisket with a long, sharp knife. Then carefully slice a pocket in
the brisket (right-hand piece), going in from the large or plate end;
the brisket will now be like a pouch, and you will close it by sewing
or skewering after you stuff it. Scrape usable meat from membranes
covering plate and skirt, and grind it. Chop up the breastbone, and
brown bones and scraps half an hour in a 450-degree oven with a
sliced carrot and onion; then simmer for 3 to 4 hours in water,
herbs, and seasonings to make a simple but delicious veal stock
(detailed directions are in Volume I, pages 107–11).



POITRINE DE VEAU, FARCIE
[Breast of Veal Stuffed and Braised—Hot or Cold]
Green stuffings provide attractive serving slices and should be

made of chard leaves, if you can find them; spinach, if you cannot.
The rest of the stuffing consists of boiled rice, ground veal, a little
ham, and a bit of onion. There is no pork here, no garlic, and the
delicate taste of the veal does seem to come through beautifully.
Accompany the dish with braised onions and carrots or baked
tomatoes. A not too heavy red wine would be the one to choose, like
a Bordeaux, a young Beaujolais, or a Cabernet Sauvignon; a rosé
would also go well. Serve cold breast of veal with sliced tomatoes,
the French potato salad, pommes a l’huile, Volume I, page 541, and
either a rosé or a dry white from the Rhône like Chante Alouette.

For 8 people

1) Chard or spinach stuffing with rice, veal, and ham—4 cups
¼ cup rendered fresh Melt the fat in the frying pan, stir in

pork fat, ham fat, or the onions, cover, and cook slowly,
chicken or goose fat stirring occasionally for 10 minutes,

½ cup finely minced until tender and just beginning to
onions brown lightly. Set aside. Meanwhile

A medium (10-inch) blanch the chard leaves in a large
frying pan, enameled kettle of boiling salted water for 3 to
or no-stick 4 minutes, until wilted; drain, refresh

4 or 5 large, green chard in cold water, squeeze hard to rid
leaves minus white leaves of water, and chop moderately
part of stalks (or 1 cup fine (¼-inch pieces). Blend chard (or
cooked, chopped spinach) into onions; stir over
spinach or ¾ package moderately high heat for a few
frozen spinach, moments to evaporate remaining

liquid; cover and cook slowly several



thawed and squeezed minutes more, until fairly tender.
dry) Season to taste and scrape into bowl.

The bowl of a heavy-duty Vigorously beat in the boiled rice,
mixer, or a large ground meat, cheese, egg, nutmeg,
mixing bowl and and pepper. Sauté a small spoonful in
wooden spoon frying pan until cooked through,

Salt taste carefully, and add more
¾ cup boiled rice (¼ cup seasonings if you feel them

plain, raw, white rice necessary.
boiled 12 minutes in 1
quart of salted water,
and drained)

1 to 1½ cups lean raw
veal finely ground
with ½ cup lean mild-
cured boiled ham
(supermarket ham
slice)

½ to ⅔ cup grated
Parmesan cheese

1 “large” egg
Large pinch grated

nutmeg
¼ tsp pepper

2) Stuffing the veal
A boned breast (brisket) Open the pocket in the meat and

of veal, weighing, if sprinkle lightly with salt and pepper.
possible, around 2½ Insert the stuffing, pushing it well
lbs. (See directions, down into the meat, but do not
description, and overfill. Close opening of meat by
alternates.) sewing with string, or with skewers



Salt and pepper and string. If by chance you have
A trussing needle or pierced a hole in the surface of the

small poultry-lacing meat, close it by sewing or
skewers skewering.

White string

The ridged side, where the ribs were, is the underside; turn small
end of the meat under and sew or skewer it in place, thus giving the
veal a rectangular cushion shape about 12 inches long and 8 inches
across. If meat seems solid and stuffing securely in place, tying is
not necessary; otherwise, with string, make 2 loops around length
and several around circumference, but do not tie too tightly. Dry the
meat thoroughly before proceeding to next step.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you wish to prepare and refrigerate the
veal the day before cooking, chill stuffing before inserting it into the
meat, just to be sure and safe.

3) Browning and braising the veal—2½ hours
Rendered pork fat, goose Preheat oven to 450 degrees. Film

fat, or cooking oil casserole with ⅛ inch of fat or oil;
A heavy casserole or when very hot but not smoking,

roaster just large brown the vegetables and optional
enough to hold veal bones. Remove to a side dish, add
comfortably (a 10- by more fat or oil if needed, and brown
12-inch oval, for bottom (former rib side) of veal,
example) lifting carefully from time to time

½ cup each, roughly with wooden spoon to be sure meat
sliced carrots and is not sticking. When browned, in 5
onions to 6 minutes, baste top with fat and

Optional but desirable, if set uncovered in upper-middle level
you have no of preheated oven for about 15

minutes, basting with fat in casserole



homemade veal stock: several times, until top and sides of
a cup or so of chopped meat have browned nicely. Remove
veal bones from oven; turn thermostat down to

Salt 350 degrees. Salt the meat lightly,
A bulb baster strew the browned bones and
1 cup dry white wine, or vegetables around, pour in the wine

¾ cup dry white and enough stock or bouillon to come
French vermouth ⅔ the way up the meat. Add the

thyme and bay leaf, and drape the fat
2 to 3 cups homemade or foil over the meat.

veal stock, or rich
chicken stock, or a
combination of canned
beef bouillon and
chicken broth

½ tsp thyme
1 imported bay leaf
A sheet of fresh pork fat

or suet, or aluminum
foil

Bring to the simmer on top of stove, cover the casserole, and
braise in lower-middle level of oven, regulating heat so that liquid
in casserole remains at a slow, even simmer. If meat is easy to turn,
do so several times during cooking, replacing fat or foil on top;
otherwise, baste every 20 minutes or so with the liquids in the
casserole. Meat should be done in about 2 hours, when it feels
tender if pierced with a fork. It should retain its shape perfectly; in
other words, do not let it overcook.

4) Sauce and serving
A hot platter



A sieve set over a Remove veal to hot platter. Do not
saucepan untie or unskewer it yet, but cover

Salt and pepper with its fat or foil, and set in turned-
If needed: 1 Tb off oven, door ajar. Strain braising

cornstarch mixed to a liquid into saucepan, pressing juices
paste with 2 Tb wine out of vegetables. Skim off surface
or vermouth fat, bring liquid to the simmer,

2 to 3 Tb soft butter skimming, and boil down rapidly, if
Parsley, watercress, or necessary, to around 2 cups.

whatever vegetable
garnish you have
chosen

A warm sauce bowl

If sauce needs thickening, remove from heat, beat in the
cornstarch mixture, and simmer 2 minutes. Carefully correct
seasoning. Just before serving, remove from heat and beat in the
enrichment butter a half a tablespoon at a time. Remove trussings
from veal, spoon a little sauce over to glaze it, and decorate the
platter as you wish. Pour remaining sauce into bowl. Serve
immediately.

To carve, cut crosswise slices ⅜ to ½ inch thick, as though meat
were a loaf of bread. Ring each slice with a spoonful or two of
sauce.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not serving for half an hour or
so, finish the sauce except for butter enrichment; return meat and
sauce to casserole. Set cover askew and keep anywhere that you can
maintain a temperature of 120 degrees. An occasional basting of the
meat will keep it moist; if sauce thickens during wait, thin with
stock before serving.

Other stuffings



Breast of veal takes kindly to many stuffings. Another
combination with chard includes the sausage meat, ham, and bread
crumbs used for paupiette of beef, and there is the mushroom
duxelles and spinach stuffing for shoulder of lamb Viroflay. Either
the mushroom and kidney stuffing for boned leg of lamb, or the
kidney and rice stuffing in Volume I, page 337, would be delicious
and unusual, as would be the boudin blanc and mushrooms mixture
in the chicken section. Or any of these stuffing possibilities.

  VEAU EN FEUILLETONS
[Sliced and Stuffed Roast of Veal]
Veal wants stuffing, as the British would say, and here is a

typically French grande cuisine farce fine of pork, veal, truffles, foie
gras, and Cognac. This is sliced veal marinated in wine and truffles,
then tied together in the form of a roast with the stuffing between
each slice. Braised with stock and aromatic vegetables, it produces a
most heavenly sauce combining all of the luxurious flavors. Very
definitely a dish for a select group of friends, it calls for your finest
in château-bottled Bordeaux-Médocs, and the best vegetables. You
might surround the meat platter with a fluted border of mashed
potatoes duchesse and pass separately something like braised
spinach, chopped broccoli simmered in cream, braised endives or
lettuce, or fresh, buttered peas.

THE VEAL

If you can get it, the top round from a large, pale, prime leg
would give you solid scallops with no muscle separations. Otherwise
settle either for cuts from the full round that you can separate and
regroup, or the thin scallopini available in some markets. These
latter you could regroup or spread separately with stuffing. Play it
by look and feel, aiming for a re-formed roast about 10 inches long
and 5 inches in diameter.



For 10 to 12 people

1) Marinating the veal in Cognac and truffles
2 to 2½ lbs. veal scallops Trim all filaments, fat, and

preferably from the extraneous matter from scallops.
top round, making 10 Place them one by one between
to 12 slices 6 by 4 sheets of waxed paper and pound not
inches in diameter and too heavily, to break down filaments
3⁄16 inch thick (or slightly, and to spread the meat out a
scallopini, 2 or 3 per little. (This will not be necessary with
person) scallopini.) Arrange the scallops in

Waxed paper and a layers interspersed with sprinklings
mallet or rolling pin of Cognac and minced truffles. Pour

A dish large enough to remaining Cognac and the truffle
hold scallops in juices over meat, cover with plastic
several layers wrap, and set aside while preparing

stuffing.
½ cup Cognac
1 or 2 canned truffles,

minced, and their
juice

Plastic wrap

2) Ground pork stuffing with ham, truffles, and foie gras—3½
cups

¼ cup finely minced Sauté the shallots or scallions slowly
shallots or scallions in the butter for 2 to 3 minutes until

1½ Tb butter tender but not browned. Scrape into
A small frying pan bowl.



Bowl of heavy-duty
mixer, or a large
mixing bowl

The following, finely Add all of the rest of the ingredients
ground together: listed, and beat vigorously by

12 ounces (1½ cups) lean machine or with a wooden spoon to
pork blend thoroughly. Just before starting

4 ounces (½ cup) fresh Step 3, drain marinade liquid into
pork fat stuffing, scrape truffles off veal, and

4 ounces (½ cup) lean beat vigorously into stuffing. To
veal check seasoning, sauté a spoonful

4 ounces (½ cup) until cooked through, taste, and add
mildcured ham, such more salt, pepper, or herbs if needed.
as a store-bought, (The foie gras comes in Step 3.)
ready-to-cook ham
slice

1 tsp salt
⅛ tsp white pepper
Big pinch ground allspice
½ tsp tarragon leaves,

finely chopped or
powdered

legg
The juices from the

marinated scallops,
and the truffles

3) Assembling the veal



Either a piece of caul fat (If your veal slices are smaller or
16 to 18 inches thinner than the ideal, group them
square; together, adapting meat to the

Or well-washed method outlined here.) Spread the
cheesecloth, melted caul fat or cheesecloth on a board or
butter, and a pastry tray. Season each scallop of veal
brush lightly with salt and pepper, and

Salt and pepper build the slices into a closely packed
4 to 6 ounces canned foie loaf shape, with stuffing and a slice

gras en bloc (imported of foie gras between each scallop.
goose liver; read the
label)

White string

If you are using caul fat, fold it securely around the meat; if
using cheesecloth, first paint it with melted butter, roll it tightly
around circumference, then twist each end tight and tie close
against meat with string. Tie a loop of string around length of meat,
and wind string back and forth around circumference to keep all in
place. You should have a fat sausage shape about 10 inches long.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be prepared a day in advance
to this point; wrap airtight and refrigerate.

4) Browning and braising the veal—about 2 hours
A heavy, covered, flame- Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Dry the

proof casserole just meat in paper towels. Set casserole
large enough to hold over moderately high heat with the
meat comfortably, fat or oil, and when very hot but not
such as a 10- by 12- smoking, brown the meat on all
inch oval 5 inches sides. (It will brown through
deep cheesecloth perfectly well.) Remove



Rendered goose fat, pork to a side dish and brown the bones
fat, or cooking oil and vegetables. Push them to sides

2 cups chopped veal and return meat to casserole; pour in
knuckle and marrow enough stock or bouillon to come
bones halfway up. Strew the herbs around

1 medium carrot, the meat. Bring liquid to the simmer,
roughly chopped cover casserole, and set in lower-

1 medium onion, roughly middle level of preheated oven.
chopped

1½ to 2 cups excellent
veal stock, beef stock,
or a mixture of
chicken broth and beef
bouillon

½ tsp thyme
1 imported bay leaf
Useful: a meat

thermometer

Check casserole in about 20 minutes, and when contents are
quietly simmering, reduce oven heat to 325 degrees. Turn the meat
twice during cooking and braise about 2 hours in all, or to a meat
thermometer reading of 165 to 170 degrees. When done, remove
veal to a side dish and let rest 20 minutes in turned-off oven, door
ajar; meat must settle before serving so pieces will hold in place.

5) Sauce and serving
A sieve set over a Strain braising liquid into saucepan.

saucepan Skim off as much surface fat as you
2 tsp cornstarch blended can, and bring liquid to the simmer,

with ¼ cup dry skimming off additional fat. Boil



Madeira (Sercial), dry down rapidly, if necessary, to about 2
port, or Cognac cups; carefully correct seasoning.

A wire whip Remove from heat, blend in the
Salt and pepper to taste cornstarch mixture, and simmer 2
2 to 3 Tb soft butter minutes. Sauce should be lightly

thickened.
A warm serving bowl
A hot platter
Watercress, parsley

sprigs, or whatever
vegetable garnish you
may have chosen

Disturbing meat as little as possible, untie it. If you have used
caul fat, it will have mostly disintegrated during cooking; remove
any bits that have not. If you have used cheesecloth, carefully cut it
off with shears. Using two spatulas, lift meat onto hot platter. (If by
chance the slices come apart, push them together.) Spoon a little
sauce over meat to glaze it, and decorate platter with whatever you
have chosen. Reheat sauce, remove from heat, and beat in the
enrichment butter a half tablespoon at a time, and pour into hot
sauce bowl. Serve immediately. For serving, spread scallops slightly
apart with spoon and fork, to display the meat. Be sure each slice
comes off with its share of stuffing, and surround with a spoonful of
sauce.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: You may complete the sauce except for
the final butter enrichment, and arrange the meat on its platter,
cover it, and keep warm for a good half hour at 120 degrees.

VARIATIONS
Feuilletons de Veau en Croûte



[Stuffed Roast of Veal Baked in a Pastry Crust]
The presentation of a roast baked in brown, decorated pastry is

always dramatic. For the stuffed veal, follow the preceding Master
Recipe exactly through Steps 1, 2, and 3, and braise the meat in
Step 4 for about 1½ hours, or to a thermometer reading of 150
degrees. Remove the meat, and let it rest 30 minutes. Then untie it,
remove covering, and drape the roast either in puff pastry as
described for the gigot en croûte, or in chilled brioche dough as for
the tenderloin of beef. Decorate the dough, glaze it with egg, and
return to a 425-degree oven for 25 to 30 minutes, to cook and
brown the crust, and to finish cooking the meat. Serve with the
same sauce described in Step 5 of the preceding recipe.

Noisettes de Veau, Périgourdine
[Individual Stuffed Loin Scallops with Foie Gras and Truffles]
Less dramatic but exquisite in taste are noisettes of veal, meaning

the boneless loin or rib-eye section of a veal chop, surrounded with
the stuffing, braised in wine, and served with a brown, truffled
sauce. You can do this dish, however, only if you have caul fat to
hold the stuffing in place; it disintegrates during cooking. You might
serve the noisettes on a platter garnished with very carefully sautéed
potatoes, glazed onions, glazed carrots, sautéed mushrooms, and a
decoration of fresh parsley sprigs. Another suggestion would be
pommes Anna, or the gratin Crécy of scalloped potatoes and carrots in
cream, Volume I, page 525, and the chopped, sautéed broccoli. A
very fine red Bordeaux-Médoc would again be indicated.

For 6 people

1) Preparing the noisettes for cooking



12 noisettes of veal Trim all fat, filaments, and gristle
(boneless large eye of from noisettes. Salt and pepper
meat in loin or rib lightly, and marinate in a covered
chops, ½ inch thick bowl with the Cognac, truffles, and
and 2½ inches in shallots for at least half an hour, or
diameter if possible; 3 overnight. Scrape marinade off meat,
per person if smaller) and beat it into the stuffing (next

½ the marinade step) along with the marinade liquid.
ingredients in Step 1, Dry noisettes thoroughly on paper
Master Recipe towels. Film pan with ⅛ inch of the

About ⅓ cup clarified clarified butter, heat to bubbling hot,
butter (melted butter, and sauté a few scallops at a time for
skimmed; clear liquid a minute or so on each side, just to
butter spooned off stiffen the meat slightly. Remove to a
milky residue) side dish, reserving butter in pan.

A medium (10-inch)
frying pan, no-stick
recommended

A piece of caul fat about Divide stuffing and foie gras into 12
24 inches square (or 18) portions. Spread a piece of

½ the stuffing caul fat (about 8 inches square) on a
ingredients in Step 2, board or tray. Center a half portion
Master Recipe of stuffing upon it, and a half portion

3 ounces canned foie gras of foie gras upon that. Place a noisette
en bloc of veal over the stuffing, top with its

remaining share of foie gras, and
spread with its final share of stuffing.
Fold caul fat around it, to enclose
meat and stuffing. Continue with the
rest of the noisettes in the same way.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be done a
day in advance to this point; cover



and refrigerate.

2) Cooking and serving
The frying pan and the Preheat oven to 375 degrees. Add

clarified butter more butter to pan, if necessary, to
The noisettes of veal film it by ⅛ inch. Heat to bubbling

wrapped in caul fat hot, and brown the meat again
A covered flameproof lightly on each side for a minute or

baking dish large so. Arrange in baking dish. Stir
enough to hold brunoise vegetables into pan, lower
scallops in one slightly heat, and cook rather slowly for 5 to
overlapping layer 6 minutes, until tender and barely

A brunoise (¼ cup each browned. Pour in the Madeira,
very finely diced—1⁄ scraping up coagulated sauté juices

16 with a wooden spoon. With a rubber
inch—carrots, onions, spatula, scrape wine and vegetables
and celery) over noisettes. Add the stock or

¼ cup dry Madeira bouillon, bring to the simmer, cover,
(Sercial) wine and braise in middle level of

½ cup veal stock, beef preheated oven for 25 minutes.
stock, or bouillon

A hot platter, and
whatever decorative
garnish you have
chosen

A small canned truffle,
minced, and its juices

2 to 3 Tb soft butter

Remove any bits of caul fat that have not disintegrated, and
arrange noisettes on hot platter, cover, and keep warm. Skim surface



fat off cooking juices, and boil down rapidly until almost syrupy and
reduced to around ½ cup. Add minced truffle and its juices; simmer
2 minutes. Remove from heat, and swirl in the enrichment butter by
half tablespoonfuls. Spoon sauce and brunoise vegetables over
noisettes. Serve immediately.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you cannot serve immediately, finish
sauce except for butter enrichment. Return meat to baking dish,
baste with sauce, cover partially, and keep warm on a hot-tray or in
a 120-degree warming oven.

SUCKLING PIG
Cochon de Lait

Roast suckling pig is wonderfully dramatic to serve, delicious to
eat, and is hardly more difficult to cook than a turkey. Your only
absolute requirement is an oven large enough to hold the roasting
pan that will be large enough for the pig; the pig will be around 20
inches long from end of rump to tip of snout, but it can be arranged
either in the traditional straight crouch, illustrated farther on, or in
a comfortable curl; a pan 12 by 18 inches and 2 inches deep would
be the minimum size. You must also have something upon which to
serve the pig, like a jumbo platter, a large tray, a carving board, or a
piece of plywood covered with foil. You will want leaves, flowers,
fruits, and vegetables for decoration; suggestions are in Step 7 of the
recipe. Your final decision will be whether or not to stuff the pig. If
you choose not to stuff, you should spread a flavoring of cooked
chopped celery and onions, herbs (thyme, bay, sage), salt, and
pepper in the cavity. Stuffing, however, not only flavors the meat,
but also allows you to serve more people; use anything suitable for
turkey or goose, such as sausages and apples, bread crumbs and
onions, one of the appropriate suggestions listed, or the unusual
farce Trébizonde suggested in the recipe here.



HOW TO ORDER A SUCKLING PIG

Be sure to order suckling pig well in advance, because this is not
an everyday item. Specify the genuine milk-fed suckling pig,
weighing 10 to 12 pounds and no more; heavier animals are too
fatty and the skin is tough. After 14 pounds a pig is no longer
suckling and would probably not fit into your oven anyway. It may
be that when the pig is available, you are not, but you can have it
wrapped airtight and frozen, where it will keep perfectly for several
weeks at zero degrees or less. (Fresh pork is perishable; plan to roast
the pig within a day or two of purchasing or defrosting it.) Ask that
it be thoroughly cleaned inside and out, and that the eyeballs be
removed because they burst during cooking. If the heart, liver, and
kidneys come along with the pig, save them for your stuffing or use
in the Provençal sausages, caillettes.

PREPARING THE PIG FOR ROASTING

To prepare the pig for roasting, soak for several hours in cold
water with ¼ cup of vinegar and 2 tablespoons of salt for each 4
quarts of water. If your pig is frozen, it will defrost at the same time.
Scrub inside the ears, nostrils, and mouth with a vegetable brush to
be sure all is clean; scrub the feet also. Go over the pig to remove
any hairs that might have been missed. Dry the pig thoroughly
inside and out, and it is ready to stuff and roast.

COCHON DE LAIT, FARCI À LA TRÉBIZONDE
[Roast Suckling Pig Stuffed with Rice, Sausages, Apricots, and
Raisins]
With this exotic mixture stuffed into your suckling pig you need

just a green vegetable accompaniment, like buttered brussels sprouts
or broccoli. A smooth and not too heavy red wine would be your
best choice, such as a Bordeaux from the Graves or Médoc districts.



For 12 to 14 people

1) Preparing the pig for stuffing—3 to 4 hours
A 10- to 12-pound Prepare the pig for roasting, soak it

suckling pig and dry it as described above.

2) The rice, sausage, and apricot stuffing—farce Trébizonde—
10 to 12 cups

NOTE: Many of the steps in this
stuffing may be carried on at once;
we have separated each process, and
leave the time sequences up to you.

1 lb. pure pork sausages Prick skin of sausages with a pin,
(preferably arrange in pan with water, cover, and
homemade) simmer 5 minutes. Uncover, drain off

A medium (10-inch) water, and sauté sausages slowly for
frying pan with cover several minutes, until lightly

¼ cup water browned. Remove, leaving fat in pan.
A 5- to 6-quart mixing Cut sausages into ½-inch lengths, and

bowl place in mixing bowl.
A slotted spoon

Either the pig’s liver, Heat fat in pan to very hot but not
heart, and kidneys cut smoking, and stir in the liver

mixture, shallots or scallions, and



into ⅜-inch dice (1¼ thyme. Toss and turn for 2 minutes,
to 1½ cups); just to stiffen liver. Season, and scoop

Or ¾ lb. liver, calf or out into mixing bowl, leaving fat in
chicken, diced pan.

¼ cup minced shallots or
scallions

¼ tsp thyme
Salt and pepper

2½ cups minced onions Stir the onions into the pan, cover
and cook slowly 8 to 10 minutes,
stirring occasionally, until tender and
translucent. Season lightly, scoop half
into mixing bowl, and leave the rest
in the pan.

1 whole head of garlic Separate garlic cloves, drop them
A pan of boiling water unpeeled into boiling water, and boil
Butter if needed 2 minutes. Drain, refresh in cold
1½ cups plain, raw, water, slip off peel, quarter garlic

white untreated rice lengthwise, and reserve. If fat in
⅓ cup dry, white wine or frying pan has darkened, drain

dry, white French onions and return them to pan with 3
vermouth tablespoons butter. Blend in rice, and

stir over moderate heat for several
1⅓ cups chicken broth, minutes until rice becomes

hot translucent, then milky in color. Stir
1⅓ cups hot water in the wine or vermouth, chicken
½ tsp salt broth, hot water, salt, herbs, and
½ imported bay leaf saffron. Bring to the slow boil, add
¼ tsp thyme the garlic, and stir once; cover, and



Big pinch saffron threads boil slowly for about 15 minutes, or
until all liquid has been absorbed and
rice is almost but not quite tender.
Set aside, uncovered.

3 to 4 ounces (½ cup) Drop raisins into hot water and let
seedless black raisins soften 10 to 15 minutes. Drain,
or currants squeeze dry in the corner of a towel,

A bowl of very hot water and add to mixing bowl.

½ lb. (1⅓ to 1½ cups) Soak apricots for 10 to 15 minutes
best-quality dried until somewhat softened. Drain, and
apricots simmer slowly in bouillon with

A bowl of very hot water allspice until just tender enough to
1 cup beef stock or eat (not mushy). Drain, reserving any

bouillon liquid for your final sauce. Cut
A heavy covered apricots into ¾-inch pieces and add

saucepan to mixing bowl.
Big pinch allspice

A rubber spatula Gradually blend the cooked rice into
¼ tsp each: ground the mixing bowl, turning gently with

fennel seeds, thyme, the rest of the ingredients and the
and oregano herbs and seasonings listed here.

⅛ tsp ground imported Taste very critically for seasoning,
bay leaf adding more salt, pepper, and herbs

⅛ tsp white pepper if you think them necessary.
Salt (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Stuffing may

be made a day in advance; cover and



refrigerate.

3) Stuffing the pig
2 tsp salt Turn the pig on its back, and season
⅛ tsp white pepper cavity with salt and pepper. Spread
6 to 8 skewers or in the stuffing, filling the cavity

finishing nails about 3 completely but not forcing it.
inches long (Reserve any extra stuffing; cook

White string separately, in a covered dish.) Close
Aluminum foil cavity with skewers and lace them in

place with string. If there is a slit
under the chin, season with salt and
pepper, but it need not be closed.
Crumple foil into a ball 2 to 2½
inches in diameter, force pig’s jaws
open, and insert ball to keep them
open.

4) Into the roasting pan
½ cup or more olive oil Dry surface of pig again with paper

or cooking oil in a towels, and paint pig all over with
small pan oil.

A basting brush
A shallow roasting pan at

least 20 inches long
with rack

More skewers and string
if needed

Aluminum foil



Optional but
recommended: a meat
thermometer

If pig will fit in a straight crouch in
pan, skewer and tie hindlegs and
forelegs in place to brace pig in
position; let head rest between
forelegs.

Or arrange pig in a less formal
position, hind legs extended
forward, and forelegs curled

under.

If chin sticks out over lip of pan in either position, put a double
thickness of foil under it so that roasting juices will drain back into
pan. Insert balls of foil into the eye sockets; make tents of foil to
cover the ears and protect them during roasting. To protect tail,
tuck into rear opening. Insert meat thermometer into thickest
portion of thigh, being sure its point is not touching any bone.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Although pig may be stuffed the day
before roasting if both stuffing and pig have been chilled separately
beforehand, you will have to leave the pig out at room temperature
for 2 to 3 hours before roasting or timing will be difficult and
roasting may be uneven.



5) Roasting—oven preheated to 450 degrees; 3 to 3½ hours
(2½ to 3 hours roasting plus a 30-minute rest)

The oil and the basting Set pan with pig in lower-middle
brush level of preheated 450-degree oven.

1 cup roughly sliced In 15 minutes, rapidly brush entire
onions surface of pig with oil. Roast 15

⅔ cup roughly sliced minutes more, baste again with oil,
carrots and turn thermostat down to 350

4 cloves of garlic, whole degrees.
and unpeeled

Baste in 20 minutes. Twenty minutes later, after pig has roasted
a little more than an hour in all, baste again, and strew the onions,
carrots, and garlic cloves in the pan. Continue basting every 20
minutes or so, using fat in pan when oil is used up; basting helps the
skin to crisp and brown nicely. In a total of 2½ to 3 hours, meat
thermometer should have reached 180 to 185 degrees, the thigh
meat should be tender when pressed, the legs should move in their
sockets, and the pig is done. (Note that a chilled, stuffed pig may
take up to 30 minutes longer to roast, as may a 14-pound pig.)

Pig must now rest 30 minutes before carving, so that meat juices
will retreat back into tissues. Turn oven off and leave door ajar,
letting pig remain warm.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Pig can wait a good hour before carving;
when oven has cooled for 20 minutes, reset thermostat to 140
degrees and close the door (or reheat oven briefly every 10
minutes).

6) The sauce



The serving platter, tray, Lift pig, and drain its juices back into
or board the roasting pan; set it on platter,

2 cups veal stock or beef remove foil, skewers, string, etc., and
stock, or beef bouillon pluck end of tail from its hiding

1 cup dry port, Sercial place. Remove rack, tilt pan, and
Madeira, dry white spoon fat off roasting juices. Pour the
wine, or dry white stock or bouillon into the pan, and
French vermouth the wine; beat in the mustard

1 Tb dry mustard mixture, and bring to the simmer,
blended with 2 Tb of scraping coagulated roasting juices
the stock or wine into liquid. Simmer slowly for 10 to

A strainer set over a 15 minutes while pig is being carved.
bowl or a saucepan (You may wish to scrape all of this

liquid into a saucepan rather than
Salt and pepper simmering in the roasting pan.)
A warm sauce bowl When you are ready to serve, pour

accumulated carving juices into
sauce, and strain sauce into bowl or
pan, pressing juices out of vegetables.
Skim off any surface fat, carefully
correct seasoning, and pour sauce
into warm bowl for serving.

7) Decorations and presentation
Decorate the platter with leaves, and flowers or fruit, placing a

garland of flowers around the pig’s neck, if you wish. Stick flowers
in the eyes, and replace the ball of foil in its mouth with a shining
red apple or a tangerine. (Orange blossoms, shiny green leaves, and
yellow zinnias, for instance, are very attractive; at Christmastime,
holly, cranberries, and white daisies would be appropriate.) Bring
the pig to the table or parade it around the room, so that everyone
may enjoy its splendor. Although you may carve at the table, we



suggest the seclusion of the kitchen unless an expert in suckling pigs
is among the party.

8) Carving and serving
Provide yourself with 1 or 2 very sharp carving knives, a carving

or kitchen fork, a big spoon, and a large pair of kitchen shears or
poultry shears; an electric carving knife can be helpful in making
the first cuts in the skin. We suggest you carve and serve one side,
and return to the kitchen to carve the second side of the pig.
Arrange it attractively again for the second serving at the table.

First, slit the skin the length of
the backbone, using an electric
carving knife if you have one.

Then cut around skin where you
feel the outline of the shoulder;

lift off shoulder and foreleg
portion. Do the same for the hind

leg. Divide both into serving
pieces, and set aside.

This drawing illustrates what you will find
when you take your knife and cut down
along the backbone and ribs to remove flesh
and skin. Most of the meat is against the
upper part of the ribs, and at the loin (from rump to ribs).



Between meat and skin will be a layer of fat, more or less of it
according to the age and size of the pig. Remove meat from fat, and
carve meat into serving portions. Scrape fat from skin, and cut skin
into serving strips about 1 inch wide and 3 to 4 inches long. (Shears
would be useful here.)

Pull out the exposed rib bones, which will come loose easily.
Spread part of stuffing out from cavity of pig, arrange the meat over
the stuffing, and cover with strips of skin. If you have chosen
brussels sprouts, broccoli, or other decorative vegetables, arrange
them attractively around the meat. Redecorate platter with leaves
and flowers as necessary, and serve the pig along with its sauce.
(The other side of the pig will stay warm for second servings
because the skin holds in the heat.)

BEEF, VEAL, PORK, AND LAMB TONGUES
Langues de Boeuf, de Veau, de Porc, et de Mouton

A beautiful beef tongue braising in aromatic sauce smells so
good while it is cooking, looks so splendid when you bring it to the
table, and makes such a welcome change from the usual fare in
main-course dishes that you need have no hesitation at all in serving
it for company. Half the price of beef, tongue is all solid meat and
therefore something well worth adding to your culinary repertoire.
Because beef tongue has the best flavor and texture, we shall
concentrate on that; pork, veal, and lamb tongues, which are treated
in the same general way, are taken up at the end of this section.

NOTES ON FRESH TONGUE

Fresh beef tongue is perishable: it has a total refrigerated life of
only about 8 days. Because it is already several days old when it



reaches your market, you should plan to soak and salt it, or boil it,
within a day of bringing it home. Because it is perishable, tongue is
often smoked or pickled (corned) to preserve it longer, or it may be
frozen. Although smoked and pickled tongue may be cooked like
fresh tongue, we prefer the taste of fresh tongue, and have so geared
our recipes.

HOW TO PREPARE A BEEF TONGUE FOR COOKING—FRESH OR FROZEN

To freshen the tongue, first scrub it with a vegetable brush under
warm running water, then let it soak for 2 to 3 hours in a sinkful of
cold water. Drain and dry it. (If tongue has been frozen, let it thaw
in the cold water, then scrub it, and soak it an hour more.)

Optional salting
To improve flavor and tenderness, as well as to preserve the

tongue for several days before cooking, you may salt it. To do so,
find an enameled bowl or casserole that will just hold the tongue
comfortably, spread a ¼-inch layer of coarse (Kosher) salt in the
bottom, and lay the soaked and dried tongue on top. Cover tongue
with a ¼-inch layer of salt, and place waxed paper on top. Weight
down with a plate and 5 pounds of canned food, for instance, or
parts of a meat grinder. Refrigerate at least overnight, but 2 days
will have more effect. When you are ready to cook the tongue, wash
off the salt. (If you salt the tongue longer than 2 days, soak for 2 to
3 hours in cold water to remove excess salt.)

A NOTE ON COOKING METHODS

Tongue may be either boiled—meaning, of course, simmered
slowly—or braised. When it is braised it receives a preliminary
boiling until it is ⅔ cooked (2 hours for a 4-pound tongue); it is then
peeled, and either braised whole or braised in slices. Whether the
tongue is boiled until tender or boiled until ready to peel, the
boiling method is the same and so is the peeling. We therefore give



directions for each, and follow with recipes, sauces, and serving
suggestions for both boiled and braised tongue.

BOILING THE TONGUE—A PRELIMINARY TO
BRAISING OR A COMPLETE COOKING
When you are boiling the tongue until tender, you will need

aromatic vegetables and herbs to flavor it. Even better would be
your decision to make the simple meat stock in Volume I, page 107,
or the pot au feu, and let the tongue simmer along in the same
kettle, where it will pick up even finer flavor. Tongue that will
finish its cooking in a braising stock needs only salted water for this
preliminary boiling.

A fully trimmed fresh Prepare the tongue for cooking as
beef tongue weighing described in the preceding pages.
3¼ to 4 lbs. Place in kettle, being sure that water

A kettle of cold water covers tongue by 5 inches. (If tongue
just large enough to was not salted, measure water in
hold tongue easily quarts, adding salt accordingly.)

If tongue was not Bring to the simmer; skim off grayish
macerated in salt: 1½ scum for 5 minutes or more, until it
tsp salt per quart of ceases to rise. Add vegetables and
water herb bouquet if you are using them.

If tongue is to be boiled Set cover askew over kettle, for slight
until tender: air circulation, and maintain liquid at

2 cups each of sliced a slow simmer. If tongue is to be
carrots and onions braised, simmer it for 2 hours only. If

tongue is to be cooked completely,
1 cup sliced celery simmer 3 to 3½ hours or until meat
A large herb bouquet: 8 is tender when pierced with a knife.

parsley sprigs, 1 tsp Remove tongue from kettle and



thyme, 2 imported bay proceed immediately to the peeling,
leaves, 4 allspice next paragraph.
berries, and 2
unpeeled cloves of
garlic, all tied in
washed cheesecloth

A cover for the kettle

Peeling the tongue
Remove tongue from kettle and plunge it into a basin or sinkful

of cold water. As soon as it is cool enough to handle (it should still
be warm), slit the nubbly skin-covering all around the top
circumference of the tongue. Using your fingers, and a knife if you
need one, peel the top surface of the tongue; skin should come off
quite easily. The skin on the underside will usually adhere to the
meat; make lengthwise slits and remove strips of skin with a knife.
Trim any fatty parts and loose bits off the thick underside of the
tongue, and pull out any bones that may be buried in the butt end.
The tongue is now ready either for braising, if it simmered only 2
hours, or for saucing and serving if it is fully cooked.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not ready to serve a fully cooked
tongue, return it to the kettle and remove kettle from heat; tongue
will stay warm and retain its juiciness. For tongue that is to be
braised, let it cool, then wrap airtight and refrigerate it; you may
finish the cooking a day or two later.

LANGUE DE BOEUF, À L’AIGRE-DOUCE
[Boiled Beef Tongue with Sweet-and-Sour Sauce, Pearl Onions,
and Raisins]



Because plain boiled tongue is so supremely easy to do, you owe
something rather special in the way of a sauce both to the tongue
and to those who are about to eat it. Brown sweet-and-sour sauce
with pearl onions and raisins is a delicious solution, and more than
a dozen other possibilities are listed at the end of the recipe.
Accompany the dish with buttered peas or asparagus tips, a purée of
chestnuts or mashed potatoes, or French bread, and a red Bordeaux
wine.

For 6 to 8 people

1) Boiling the tongue—2 hours of soaking; 3 to 3⅓ hours of
boiling

A fully trimmed fresh Scrub, soak, and, if you wish, salt the
beef tongue weighing tongue; simmer 3 to 3½ hours until
about 4 lbs. tender, and peel it, as described in

the preceding pages. While tongue is
cooking, or at any other convenient
time beforehand, prepare the
following sauce and garniture.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not
ready to serve the tongue, keep it
warm, reheating it if necessary, in its
cooking liquid.

2) Brown mustard sauce with pearl onions and raisins—for 2
cups mirepoix:
For ⅔ cup

3 Tb finely minced Cook the diced vegetables and ham
onions slowly in the butter for 10 to 12



3 Tb finely minced minutes, stirring frequently, until
carrots tender and just starting to brown.

2 Tb finely minced celery While mirepoix is cooking, drop
1 Tb finely minced boiled onions into boiling water, and boil 1

ham minute to loosen skins; drain, shave
2 Tb butter off 2 ends, slip off peel, and pierce a

cross in the root end of each; set
aside.

A heavy-bottomed 2-
quart saucepan with
cover

3 cups (10 ounces; 40 to
50) small white pearl
onions about ¾ inch
in diameter

A pan of boiling water

1 cup dry white wine or Pour the wine or vermouth into the
⅔ cup dry white mirepoix and boil down rapidly until
French vermouth reduced by ⅓ of its volume. Then

1 cup tongue-cooking add the cup of tongue stock, the beef
stock; more if needed stock or bouillon, currants, bay leaf,

1 cup rich beef stock or and peeled onions. Bring to simmer,
bouillon; more if cover pan, and simmer very slowly
needed for 40 to 60 minutes, or until onions

½ cup currants (small, are tender. (Add more liquid if
black, seedless raisins) needed; you should end up with

1 imported bay leaf about 2 cups.)
A cover for the pan



3 Tb strong Dijon-type When onions are tender, remove
prepared mustard from heat; gradually beat about ½
blended to a paste cup of their cooking liquid into the
with 1 Tb cornstarch mustard and cornstarch mixture. Fold
in a small bowl mixture into onions, and when

Salt and pepper smoothly blended, return over heat;
2 to 3 Tb soft butter simmer 2 minutes. Sauce should be

lightly thickened. Carefully correct
seasoning, and set aside. Reheat just
before serving; remove from heat,
and fold in the butter, a half
tablespoon at a time.

3) Slicing the tongue, and serving
When slicing the tongue, try for even pieces ⅜ inch thick and as

uniform in diameter as possible: place the hot tongue on a carving
board and cut several vertical slices off the thick end; then,
continuing at the thick end, start gradually slicing on the bias,
angling the back of your knife progressively down toward the board
as you come off the hump; your blade will be almost horizontal as
you reach the tip of the tongue.

Either arrange the slices of tongue down the center of a hot,
lightly buttered, oval platter, spoon a little sauce with raisins and
onions over the tongue, decorate sides with green vegetables, and
pass rest of sauce separately, or arrange the slices of tongue against
a mound of puréed chestnuts or mashed potatoes, spoon a little
sauce over each slice, surround with onions, raisins, and the rest of
the sauce, and pass the vegetables separately.

OTHER SAUCES TO SERVE WITH BOILED TONGUE



Tomato sauces, brown sauces, white sauces, and oil and vinegar
sauces all go well with boiled tongue. With one exception, these
come from Volume I. Use tongue-cooking broth boiled down or
fortified, if necessary, with chicken stock or beef bouillon for the
liquids called for in the various recipes.

Tomato Sauces
The classic tomato sauce in Volume I on page 76, the excellent

Provençal sauce with fresh tomatoes following it, or an alternate
using canned tomatoes here in Volume II.

Brown Sauces
Pick any of the brown sauces in Volume I, pages 71 to 76.

Particularly recommended are the sauce piquante with pickles and
capers, the sauce brune au cari, brown curry sauce, the sauce chasseur
with mushrooms, tomatoes, and herbs, and the sauce à l’Italienne
with ham and mushrooms.

White Sauces
Sauce au cari—a light curry sauce with onions, cream, and

lemon, Volume I, page 63.
Sauce soubise—an excellent onion sauce, to which you may add 2

to 3 tablespoons of chopped capers and minced parsley, if you wish,
Volume I, page 64.

Sauce aux câpres, sauce à la moutarde, sauce aux anchors—Caper,
Mustard, or Anchovy Sauce, easy to make, and all variations of the
mock hollandaise, sauce au beurre, Volume I, page 64.

Oil and Vinegar Sauces
Sauce de Sorges—a delicious and unusual herbal mayonnaise

made with shallots, capers, and soft-boiled eggs, Volume I, page 93,
for tongue served either hot or cold.

Sauce ravigote—vinaigrette with onions and capers, or the two
variations following it, one with sour cream and dill, the other with



mustard—all three good for tongue served hot or cold, Volume I,
page 95.

LANGUE DE BOEUF BRAISÉE, AU MADÈRE
[Beef Tongue Braised Whole, Madeira Sauce]
When you want a splendid presentation and have an able carver

at the table, braise the tongue whole and present it glazed in its
sauce and surrounded by a handsome display of vegetables. We
suggest a garniture of glazed carrots, onions, and turnips, and whole
baby mushrooms—all fresh vegetables, because of their fine taste
and texture. A red Bordeaux-Médoc would be your best choice of
wine.

For 6 to 8 people

1) Preliminaries to braising—2 hours of soaking; 2 hours of
boiling

A fully trimmed fresh Follow directions to scrub, soak, salt
beef tongue weighing if you wish, and simmer the tongue
about 4 lbs. for 2 hours; peel it.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: This may be
done the day before braising.

2) Braising the tongue—2 hours at 350 to 325 degrees
1 cup each of sliced Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Cook

carrots and onions vegetables and ham with butter for
about 10 minutes in covered



¼ cup diced mild-cured casserole over moderately low heat,
boiled ham (such as a stirring frequently, until vegetables
supermarket ham are tender and beginning to brown
slice) lightly.

3 Tb butter
A heavy, covered, flame-

proof casserole just
large enough to hold
tongue comfortably

Salt and pepper Salt and pepper the tongue and place
The peeled beef tongue in the casserole, turning and basting

it with the vegetables and butter.
Cover casserole and let tongue sweat
(suer) over moderately low heat for
10 minutes; turn the tongue, baste
again, cover casserole, and sweat it
10 minutes more. (If tongue was
refrigerated, double the number of
minutes.)

⅓ cup dry Madeira Pour the Madeira and the wine or
(Sercial) vermouth into the casserole; boil

½ cup dry white wine or down rapidly until liquid has almost
dry white French evaporated. Strew optional bones and
vermouth the pork rind around the tongue,

Optional, to improve along with the tomato, garlic, and
flavor and texture of herbs. Pour in enough stock or
sauce: bouillon to come ⅔ the way up the

A cup or so of chopped tongue. Cover tongue with fat or
or sawed veal knuckle cheesecloth, bring liquid in casserole



bones and/or beef to the simmer, cover casserole, and
marrow bones set in lower-middle level of

A piece of blanched pork preheated oven. In 20 minutes, check
rind 6 inches square to see that liquid in casserole is

1 whole washed tomato, simmering slowly and steadily; lift fat
unpeeled, roughly or cloth and baste tongue rapidly
chopped with liquid in casserole. Turn

1 large clove of garlic, thermostat down to 325 degrees.
unpeeled, halved Baste tongue several times again

during cooking, and when it has
1 imported bay leaf braised 1 hour, turn on its other side,
½ tsp thyme covering again with fat or
1 or more cups rich beef cheesecloth. Tongue should be done

stock or beef bouillon in 2 to 2½ hours, when a knife will
A sheet of pork rind or pierce the meat easily; do not

beef suet ¼ inch thick overcook. (While tongue is braising,
and large enough to prepare vegetable garnish; although
cover tongue; or the vegetables may braise with the
washed cheesecloth tongue, we find it easier to cook

them separately.)

3) The vegetable garnish
24 to 32 small fresh Drop onions into boiling water, bring

white onions 1 to 1¼ rapidly back to the boil for exactly 1
inches in diameter minute; drain. Shave off tops and

A saucepan of boiling bottoms, and peel the onions; pierce
water a cross ⅓ inch deep in the root ends

A wide (9- to 10-inch) for even cooking. Place in pan with
saucepan, chicken the water, salt, and butter; bring to
fryer, or electric the simmer, cover, and simmer
skillet, and a cover for slowly while preparing the carrots.
the pan Rapidly peel the carrots, quarter

1 to 1½ cups water them lengthwise, cut into 1½-inch



Salt lengths, trim off sharp edges, and add
3 Tb butter to the simmering onions. Then
10 to 12 fine, fresh rapidly peel the turnips, quarter

medium-sized carrots, them, trim off sharp edges, and add
all of a size to the pan after onions have cooked

10 to 12 firm fresh white 20 minutes. Continue to simmer
turnips all of a size, 2 slowly until vegetables are tender
to 2½ inches in (about 20 minutes longer), adding a
diameter little more water if all has

evaporated. Correct seasoning, and
set aside.

1 quart (about ¾ lb.) Trim the mushrooms, wash rapidly,
fresh button and dry in a towel. Set frying pan
mushrooms (or larger over moderately high heat with the
fresh mushrooms, butter and oil. When butter foam is
quartered) beginning to subside, add the

A large (11-inch) frying mushrooms; sauté 3 to 4 minutes,
pan tossing frequently, shaking and

2 Tb butter and ½ Tb swirling the pan by its handle until
cooking oil mushrooms are just beginning to

2 Tb minced shallots or brown lightly. Toss for a moment
scallions with the shallots or scallions, season

Salt and pepper to taste, scrape into a side dish, and
reserve.

4) Sauce and serving
A hot, lightly buttered When tongue is tender, remove to

platter platter, cover, and keep warm in
A sieve set over a turned-off oven (or warming oven at

saucepan 120 degrees) while finishing the



¼ cup dry Madeira sauce. Pour contents of casserole
(Sercial) through sieve, pressing juices out of

1 Tb arrowroot (buy at a braising ingredients. Skim surface fat
fancy food shop or in a off liquid in saucepan, and bring
pharmacy), or liquid to the simmer, skimming. You
cornstarch, in a small should have about 2 cups.
bowl

A wire whip and rubber
spatula

Salt and pepper
3 to 4 Tb soft butter
Parsley sprigs

Blend the Madeira into the arrowroot or cornstarch; remove
cooking liquid from heat and blend the wine mixture into it. When
smooth, return saucepan to heat and fold in the cooked onions,
carrots, turnips, and mushrooms along with any of their cooking
juices. Simmer, swirling pan by its handle and gently turning
vegetables in sauce for 4 to 5 minutes. Sauce should be thick
enough to coat the tongue nicely; carefully correct seasoning. Just
before serving, fold in the enrichment butter, half a tablespoon at a
time, gently basting vegetables with sauce until butter is absorbed.

Arrange the tongue humped side up on the platter, glaze it with
spoonfuls of the sauce, and arrange the vegetables around it, basting
both tongue and vegetables with remaining sauce. Decorate with
parsley sprigs, and serve immediately.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not ready to serve when tongue
is tender, complete the sauce but omit the final butter enrichment.
Return tongue, sauce, and vegetable garnish to casserole; cover
tongue again with its fat or cheesecloth, put on casserole cover
slightly askew, and set in a 120-degree oven, or over simmering
water. Tongue will stay warm safely for a good hour. If sauce has
thickened too much when you are ready to serve, thin it out with a
little stock or bouillon.



Other sauces, flavorings, garnitures
You may braise tongue with any of the flavorings and

garnishings you would use for beef; you might even slice it after its
preliminary 2-hour boiling and peeling, re-form it with a mushroom
stuffing between each slice, and then braise it, as for the sliced and
stuffed tenderloin of beef en feuilletons. The garniture à la bourgeoise,
of onions, mushrooms, and olives, would be attractive, as would
some of the variations following beef stew. Particularly
recommended among these are the pistou and the Provençal
flavorings, the pipérade with its peppers and tomatoes, and the final
suggestion here, for ginger, capers, and herbs. For any of these
suggestions, the general cooking procedure for the tongue follows
the same pattern and timing as the Master Recipe; you are simply
substituting other flavorings.

TONGUE BRAISED IN SLICES
Tongue is much easier to prepare and serve when you braise it in

slices after its preliminary 2-hour boil and its peeling. Sliced tongue
cooks in 30 to 40 minutes, the flavor of the sauce penetrates the
meat beautifully, and sliced tongue lends itself to prearrangements,
precooking, and numerous ahead-of-time maneuvers that are not
possible with whole tongue. Using the general method of the
following recipe, you can add sliced tongue to cook with the brown
mustard sauce, pearl onions, and raisins in the boiled tongue recipe,
or use one of the ideas either in the preceding paragraph or in those
suggested for boiled tongue.

LANGUE DE BOEUF BRAISÉE, CALCUTTA
[Sliced Fresh Beef Tongue Braised with Curry]



French curry sauce does not have the strong, mouth-searing
quality of Indian curry; the French version is more a flavor than an
experience, because if the curry were strong it would ruin the
accompanying wine. You might serve this tongue on a bed of
mashed potatoes, rice, or braised spinach, on a purée of peas or
lentils, or on the purée of squash and white beans. Your own fresh
French bread could take the place of a second vegetable. For wines,
a red Bordeaux would go nicely, or a rather strong dry white like a
Hermitage, from the Rhône valley.

For 6 to 8 people

1) Preliminaries to braising—2 hours of soaking; 2 hours of
boiling

A fully trimmed fresh Follow directions, to scrub, soak, salt
beef tongue weighing if you wish, and simmer the tongue
about 4 lbs. for 2 hours; peel it.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: This may be
done the day before braising.

2) The braising sauce
2 cups sliced onions Cook the onions slowly in the butter
2 Tb butter and ½ Tb and oil over low heat, stirring

cooking oil (more if occasionally, for 8 to 10 minutes
needed) until tender and translucent but not

A 10- to 12-inch browned. Blend in the curry powder
casserole, chicken and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes.
fryer, or electric skillet Blend in the flour, and a little more

About 2 Tb fragrant butter or oil if flour makes too stiff a
curry powder



(depending on its paste; cook, stirring, for 2 minutes
strength and your more. Remove from heat.
inclinations)

2 Tb flour

2 to 3 cups heated meat When casserole contents have
stock (a combination stopped bubbling, pour in 2 cups of
of beef stock or the hot stock and blend vigorously
bouillon and tongue- into the onions, curry, and flour with
cooking stock or wire whip. Pour in the wine or
chicken broth) vermouth; add the garlic, currants,

A wire whip diced apple, thyme, and bay leaf.
1 cup dry white wine or Bring to the simmer, stirring, and

⅔ cup dry white simmer 2 minutes. Sauce should be
French vermouth lightly thickened. Taste carefully, and

2 large cloves garlic, correct seasoning.
mashed

¼ cup currants (small
black seedless raisins)

1 peeled and diced sour
cooking apple (or an
eating apple and 1 Tb
lemon juice)

½ tsp thyme
1 imported bay leaf
Salt and pepper to taste

3) Braising the tongue—30 to 40 minutes
Cut the peeled tongue into even slices ⅜ inch thick. (Directions

for slicing are in Step 3, in the Master Recipe for boiled tongue.)



Arrange the slices in the casserole, overlapping as necessary, and
baste the tongue with the sauce.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be prepared in advance to this
point; when cool, cover surface with plastic wrap, a cover, and
refrigerate.

Bring to the simmer, cover, and simmer 30 to 40 minutes, tilting
casserole and basting tongue several times with the sauce. When
tender if pierced with a fork, meat is done, but do not overcook; eat
a piece if you have any doubts about its being done.

4) Serving
A hot, lightly buttered When tongue is done, arrange the hot

serving platter slices on the platter (or over a bed of
Optional: ⅓ to ½ cup vegetables if you wish); cover and

crème fraîche or heavy keep warm while you finish the
cream sauce. You should have 1½ to 2 cups

Salt, pepper, and drops of sauce thick enough to coat a spoon
of lemon juice nicely. Stir in optional cream; boil

1 to 3 Tb soft butter down if sauce is too thin or,
A hot gravy bowl conversely, add a little more stock if

it seems too thick. Taste carefully,
If needed: fresh minced stirring in more salt, pepper, and

parsley drops of lemon juice if you feel them
necessary. Just before serving,
remove sauce from heat, and swish in
the enrichment butter a half
tablespoon at a time. Spoon hot
sauce over the slices of tongue, and
pour rest of sauce into hot serving
bowl. (You may strain the sauce; the



onions and optional raisins, however,
give it an attractive informal look
and texture.) Decorate tongue with
parsley, if you wish, and serve
immediately.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: You may complete the sauce except for
the final butter enrichment; return tongue slices to sauce, and baste
them with it. Reheat to bubbling hot before serving, but be careful
not to overcook the tongue.

VEAL, PORK, AND LAMB TONGUES
Veal, pork, and lamb tongues have the same consistency as beef

tongue, and although they do not have quite the same fine flavor
you may substitute them for beef tongue in any of the preceding
recipes. Braising is particularly recommended, because the braising
stock adds the flavor that these tongues lack. Here are notes on
each.

VEAL TONGUES

Weights and measures. These will weigh 6 to 8 ounces on the
average, and will be 5 to 6 inches long, although tongues from large
carcasses can weigh up to 1¼ pounds. Count on one 6- to 8-ounce
tongue per person, or 2 tongues for 3 people.

Preparation for cooking. Scrub, soak, and, if you wish, salt the
tongues exactly as directed for beef tongue.

Preliminary boiling, and peeling. Simmer the tongues for 45
minutes (1 hour for large tongues) in salted water, refresh briefly in
cold water, and peel as described for beef tongue.

Cooking methods. Braise the tongues whole, or cut in half
lengthwise, following the beef-tongue recipes and variations.



Braising time will be about 1½ hours.

PORK TONGUES

Weights and measures. Pork tongues weigh ¾ to 1 pound, and are
8 to 9 inches long. Count on 1 tongue for each 2 people, or 2 large
tongues for 5 people.

Preparation, boiling, peeling, and cooking methods. Follow
preceding directions for veal tongues.

LAMB TONGUES

Weights and measures. 3 to 4 ounces each, and 3 to 4 inches long.
Count on 2 tongues per person, or 1½ to 2 if the tongues are cut in
two lengthwise.

Preparation, boiling, peeling, and cooking methods. Follow
directions for veal tongues, but the final braising will probably be
45 minutes to 1 hour only.

TRIPE
Tripes

Those who love tripe speak of it with passionate enjoyment and
will travel miles to dine upon it. Like scrapple and head cheese, it is
a rather old-fashioned taste—a fragrant, earthy reminder of the past
when every edible morsel of the beast was used. Many people today
who have heard of tripe have neither seen nor eaten it, but our
forefathers consumed it with relish. The Parker House in Boston
became famous throughout the nation for its fried tripe, and the fine
Parisian restaurant, Pharamond, in the heart of the old markets, Les
Halles, made its reputation serving steaming bowls of tripes à la
mode de Caen, a recipe you will find in so many cookbooks that we
shall not repeat it again here. Instead, we present a much simpler



dish from Provence, and one that we like immensely: the tripe first
cooks to a golden yellow with onions, then finishes off in an
aromatic mixture of tomatoes, wine, and herbs. If you are one of
those who has never tried tripe before, yet enjoys new foods and
new tastes, we think you will find this a happy introduction.

HOW TO BUY TRIPE

There are four kinds of beef tripe, and any or all may be used in
any recipe, but the only one usually available in American markets
today is honeycomb tripe (bonnet, in French). Although you can buy
it canned, frozen, and fully cooked, or pickled, we are interested
here only in ready-to-cook tripe. This means that it has been
scraped, washed, blanched, often bleached, and is, in fact, ready for
cooking. You will probably find it in a sealed plastic bag under
refrigeration in the meat section, and it will look like a soft, pale,
rubbery pouch with a honeycomb pattern on its surface. It will be
labeled “fresh honeycomb tripe”; do not mistake it for pickled tripe,
which will look the same but will be labeled “pickled tripe.” Some
markets do not carry tripe at all because there is no demand for it; it
depends on the eating habits in your shopping area. Fresh tripe is
perishable; plan to cook it within a day or two of buying it.

PRELIMINARIES TO PREPARING READY-TO-COOK AMERICAN TRIPE

Although some cooks do not blanch fresh ready-to-cook tripe, we
find that blanching freshens the flavor and we suggest the following
preliminaries to cooking. Wash the tripe thoroughly under cold,
running water. Then place it in a large saucepan or kettle, and cover
by 3 inches with cold water; bring to the boil, and boil slowly 5
minutes. Drain, run cold water into the pan, soak the tripe for
several minutes, drain, and blanch again for 5 minutes. Repeat the
process a third time, and the tripe is ready to cook.

A NOTE ON FRENCH TRIPE AND EUROPEAN-STYLE TRIPE



In France, tripe is bought chez le tripier, who sells cleaned and
blanched tripe of all four varieties. Gras double, a term you will run
into in French recipes and at la triperie itself, can mean either the
heaviest and meatiest of the four, la panse, or gras double can mean
the four varieties rolled together fully cooked, and needing only to
be reheated in whatever sauce you plan to use. Ready-to-cook
French tripe, on the other hand, should be soaked several hours or
overnight in several changes of cold water, then blanched as
directed in the preceding paragraph. Some European-style butchers
in this country prepare tripe as the French do, and you should treat
it in the same way.

Because you will occasionally run into them in French recipes,
the technical names for beef tripe are as follows: First stomach,
rumen, or paunch—panse or gras double. Second stomach, reticulum,
or honeycomb tripe—bonnet. Third stomach, omasum, psalterium,
or manyplies—feuillet or franche mule. Fourth stomach, abomasum,
or reed—caillette or millet.

TRIPES À LA NIÇOISE
[Tripe Baked with Onions, Tomatoes, Wine, and Provençal
Seasonings]
As an alternate to tripes à la mode de Caen, we find this a

wonderfully satisfying recipe. The tripe is cooked several hours just
with onions; then tomatoes, other flavorings, and wine go in for
another session of slow, penetrating simmer. You could, if you
wished, finish off the recipe in another way after the onion-cooking
session, or pick the tripe out of its tomato sauce at the end of the
recipe here, broil or deep-fry it, and serve the tomato sauce on the
side. We shall leave these possibilities up to you, and present the
recipe in its own straightforward way. Serve boiled rice or boiled
potatoes with the tripe. No green vegetable is needed, but a salad
could follow. For wines, we suggest a strong, dry white like a Mâcon



or Hermitage, or a young red like Beaujolais, or a strong, dry rosé
like Tavel.

For 6 people

1) Preliminary cooking of tripe and onions—2 to 2½ hours
Optional, for additional Preheat oven to 325 degrees. Cut

flavor: 4 or 5 slices, ¼ optional pork or bacon into 2-inch
inch thick, of fat-and- lengths. Cook slowly without
lean fresh pork belly browning in the oil for 5 minutes to
or blanched bacon render some of the fat. Then stir in

½ cup olive oil the onions, cover the casserole, and
A heavy, 4- to 5-quart cook onions slowly 10 minutes or

covered casserole more, stirring frequently, until tender
(earthenware but not at all browned.
preferred for looks,
and for heat-holding
properties)

4 cups sliced onions

2½ to 3 lbs. ready-to- While onions are cooking, cut tripe
cook tripe (see notes into strips 2 inches wide; cut the
preceding recipe) strips into triangles about 3 inches on

Heavy shears the long side. When onions are ready,
1 tsp salt fold the tripe into them, along with
A round of waxed paper the salt. Lay a round of waxed paper
A piece of aluminum foil over tripe to keep it from browning,

drape foil over top of casserole to
keep in the steam, and place
casserole cover on top of foil. Set in
middle level of preheated oven, and



bake slowly for 2½ hours, regulating
thermostat so that tripe cooks very
slowly and steadily but does not
brown. When time is up, tripe will be
a golden yellow.

2) Finishing the cooking, and serving—2 to 2½ hours
2 cups fresh tomato pulp Fold the tomatoes and garlic into the

(6 medium tomatoes, tripe; pour in the wine. Bury the pork
peeled, seeded, juiced, rind and bones in the tripe, and the
and chopped), or a packet of seasonings. (Remove these
combination of fresh later, when tripe is done.) Pour in
pulp and canned, enough stock just to cover
drained, sieved Italian ingredients. Bring to simmer on top
plum tomatoes of stove, and salt lightly to taste.

4 large cloves garlic, Cover tripe again with the waxed
mashed or minced paper, foil, and casserole cover, and

1 cup dry white wine, or return to oven for another 2 hours of
dry white French slow simmering. Test tripe by eating
vermouth a piece; it should be tender enough to

To thicken cooking chew easily, but should still have
liquid: an 8-inch some texture. Skim off surface fat;
square of blanched carefully correct seasoning. Bake half
pork rind (Volume I, an hour, an hour, or longer, until
page 401) and/or 1 to tripe is of the desired consistency.
2 cups chopped veal (Add a little more white wine or
knuckle bones tied in stock if liquid has evaporated too
washed cheesecloth much. Stir in optional olives about

The following tied in half an hour before estimated end of
washed cheesecloth: cooking.)

6 peppercorns
6 allspice berries



1 tsp fennel seeds Serve bubbling hot from casserole
A 3-inch piece of dried onto very hot plates.

orange peel, or 1 tsp
bottled peel

1 tsp thyme (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: Tripe may be
cooked several days in advance of

1 imported bay leaf serving, and reheats perfectly.
1 to 2 cups veal stock, or

beef stock or bouillon
Salt as needed
Optional, to be added

last ½ hour of
cooking: ½ cup black,
Mediterranean-type
olives, pitted, and
blanched 10 minutes

RABBIT
Lapin

Rabbit, if you have never tried it, is very much like chicken in
taste and texture, but the meat is firmer and therefore does very
well in a stew. Most rabbit stews are called sautés in French, and the
recipe you usually encounter is sauté de lapin au vin blanc, in which
the pieces of rabbit are browned in the pan, seasoned, floured, and
simmered in white wine with onions, mushrooms, and lardons of
bacon. Rather than repeating this too-familiar version, we give a red
wine stew.

BUYING RABBIT AND PREPARING IT FOR COOKING

In many parts of the country you can now buy an excellent
quality of frozen young rabbit “fryers,” cut up and all ready for



cooking as soon as you have defrosted the pieces. If fresh frying
rabbit is available, have it cut so that the forelegs are disjointed
from the body at the shoulder, the hind legs at the hip, and the rib
section separated from the loin. Then separate the hind legs at the
knee, to make 2 pieces; cut the loin (rable) and the rib sections in
two crosswise, and if you wish, trim off with scissors the lower part
of the ribs, which is mostly bone.

Cut up this way, you will have 10 pieces, the choicest of which
are the second joints and the 2 pieces of loin; the 1 front legs are
second best, and the rib sections have the least meat. (In Europe and
in some parts of this country, the head and neck also make part of
the stew.) Use the liver and heart like chicken liver, or you may
wish to add it to the stew.

Two and a half pounds of cut-up ready-to-cook rabbit will serve
4 to 5 people.

TO THAW FROZEN RABBIT

Let it defrost for 24 hours in the refrigerator, or defrost it in a
wine marinade as suggested in the following recipe.

LAPIN AU SAUPIQUET
[Rabbit Marinated in Vinegar and Herbs, and Stewed in Red
Wine]
This French recipe is very much like the German hasenpfeffer, in

that both use a wine-vinegar marinade before the stew begins; this
tenderizes the rabbit as well as giving it an excellent flavor. Serve
the rabbit with parslied potatoes, buttered noodles, or steamed and
buttered rice, and a simple green vegetable such as the sautéed
zucchini, buttered broccoli, or green beans. A full red wine is
definitely the type to choose—a Hermitage, Côtes-du-Rhône, or
Châteauneuf-du-Pape.



For 4 to 5 people

1) Marinating the rabbit—at least 24 hours
½ to ⅔ cup red wine If you are using imported French

vinegar (amount vinegar, ⅔ cup would be right; if
depending on domestic wine vinegar seems strong
strength) and harsh, use ½ cup. Mix the rest of

½ tsp cracked the ingredients with the vinegar in
peppercorns the bowl, add the rabbit, and baste

3 Tb olive oil or cooking with the marinade. (If rabbit is
oil frozen, let it defrost in the bowl at

½ cup sliced onions room temperature, basting
2 large cloves of garlic, frequently, and pulling pieces apart

unpeeled, halved from each other when possible, until
completely defrosted.) Cover bowl

4 juniper berries and refrigerate it, basting and turning
½ tsp Oregano the rabbit occasionally. Marinate at
1 imported bay leaf least 24 hours, although you can
12 tsp thyme leave the rabbit safely for 2 or 3 days
An enameled or stainless because the marinade also preserves

bowl or casserole large the meat.
enough to hold rabbit
comfortably

2½ lbs. cut-up ready-to-
cook frying rabbit,
fresh or frozen

A bulb baster

2) The braising sauce—sauce au Saupiquet



½ cup (4 ounces) lardons Preheat oven to 450 degrees. Brown
(1½-inch sticks ¼ inch the lardons lightly with oil in the pan
thick of bacon over moderate heat. Then stir in the
blanched 10 minutes onions, and cook for about 10
in 1 quart water) minutes, stirring frequently, until

2 Tb olive oil or cooking onions are tender and lightly
oil, more if needed browned. Transfer onions and lardons

A large (11-inch) frying to the casserole with a slotted spoon,
pan (no-stick leaving fat in pan.
recommended)

1 cup sliced onions
A heavy, covered,

flameproof casserole
large enough to hold
rabbit pieces easily

The rabbit and its While onions are cooking, remove
marinade rabbit from marinade, and dry

Paper towels thoroughly with paper towels;
Salt and pepper reserve the marinade. When onions
Optional: the rabbit’s are out of pan, add more oil if

liver, quartered, necessary, so that pan is filmed by ⅛
seasoned, and floured inch, raise heat to moderately high,

3 Tb flour and brown the rabbit pieces nicely on
all sides. Season with salt and
pepper, and add the rabbit to the
casserole. (Brown optional liver at
the same time, and set aside for
later.) Sprinkle on half the flour, toss
rabbit in casserole, sprinkle on rest of
flour, and toss again.



Heat casserole to sizzling on top of stove, then set uncovered in
upper third of preheated 450-degree oven for 5 minutes; toss again,
and return casserole to oven for 5 minutes more. (The oven is an
easier way to brown and cook the flour than sauteing on top of the
stove; but if you do not wish to use your oven, you may sauté.)

The marinade While casserole is in oven, pour the
1 bottle of full-bodied, browning fat out of the frying pan,

young, red wine pour in the marinade, and boil down
(Mâcon, Côtes-du- until liquid has almost evaporated.
Rhône, Mountain Red) Pour in the wine, boil down to half

2 cups beef or veal stock, its volume, then add the bouillon,
or beef bouillon bring to the boil, and set aside.

Remove casserole from oven and add the hot wine and bouillon
mixture, stirring rabbit pieces, onions, and lardons so that all is well
blended.

3) Stewing the rabbit—about 1 hour
Bring contents of casserole to the simmer on top of the stove,

cover and simmer slowly either on the stove or in a preheated 350-
degree oven; regulate heat in either case so that stew bubbles slowly
and regularly throughout the cooking, and baste rabbit pieces
several times with the sauce. Rabbit should be done in about 1 hour,
when the meat is tender if pierced with a knife. (While rabbit is
stewing, prepare prunes in Step 4.)

4) Sauce and serving



A hot, lightly buttered, When rabbit pieces are tender,
serving platter arrange them on the serving platter,

Stock or bouillon if cover, and keep warm while finishing
needed the sauce. Remove bay leaf, and skim

20 to 25 large, surface fat off braising sauce. Bring
tenderized prunes, to the simmer, skimming. You should
simmered 10 to 15 have 1½ to 2 cups of sauce thick
minutes in ¼ cup enough to coat a spoon nicely; thin
Cognac, ½ cup out with stock or bouillon if too
bouillon, and 2 Tb thick, or boil down rapidly if too
butter thin. Then add the prunes with their

The optional sautéed liquid, and the optional liver; simmer
liver pieces from Step 2 to 3 minutes, and carefully correct
2 seasoning. Spoon the sauce and

Optional: 8 to 10 prunes over the rabbit, decorate with
croûtons or fleurons croûtons or fleurons and parsley
(triangles of white sprigs, and serve.
bread sautéed in (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not
clarified butter; puff ready to serve, return rabbit to
pastry crescents) casserole, baste with sauce, and

Fresh parsley sprigs reheat later.






CHAPTER FOUR
Chickens, Poached and Sauced—and a

Coq en Pâte

WHEN BROILING AND FRYING CHICKENS are among our most
reasonably priced meats today, it is hard to realize that great-great-
grandmother’s, or even great-grandmother’s, Sunday chicken was a
luxurious treat, since chicken was expensive in those days. To have
it so accessible now is a great boon to the cook, because you can
prepare it in such a vast number of ways. Volume I takes up
roasting, casserole roasting, sautés, fricassees, coq au vin, and
chicken breasts, as well as details on chicken types and qualities,
trussing directions, and timing charts. There is not a word, however,
about one of the easiest and most delicious ways to cook chicken—
poaching in white wine. The chicken practically cooks itself,
produces its own sauce base, and can be served in numerous ways
from very plain to extremely elegant.

We start out with chicken in pieces, taking it from the simple
wine stew through a cheese casserole, an aspic, a chaud-froid, and
finally a bouillabaisse and a bourride. For more formal chickens, there
is a roaster or capon poached whole in white wine and aromatic
vegetables, plus various stuffings and white-wine sauces; an
illustrated guide to boning follows; and we conclude with a
glamorous coq en pâte with the whimsical title poularde en soutien-
gorge.

CHICKEN IN PIECES



How fortunate we are to have chicken in pieces—those who like
dark meat may feast upon thighs, white-meat-only people are
welcome to breasts, while wings at half price make lovely finger
food when the budget is low.

PREPARING READY-CUT CHICKEN FOR COOKING

Rather than being disjointed, meaning that thighs are removed
from backbones at the connecting ball joints and wings from
shoulders in the same fashion, most supermarket ready-cut chicken
is done with a meat saw which neatly halves or quarters the chicken
in a matter of seconds. This saving of man-hours is passed on to us,
of course, in reasonable prices for chicken but does leave us with
some unwanted bones and bits. If these do not bother you, simply
wash the chicken under cold running water, dry in paper towels,
and proceed to the cooking. If you have time for surgery, however,
you can make the chicken easier to cook, especially for sautés and
fricassees but also for poaching, because the pieces will lie flatter
and take up less room; in addition, they will be far easier to eat. You
will also have some useful scraps for chicken stock. The illustrated
goose will help you locate bones and joints because goose and
chicken have the same bone structure; see also the illustrated
semiboned chicken. Here, then, is how to trim the various pieces of
chicken.

Drumsticks and second joints (legs and thighs)
When drumsticks and second joints come joined together, the

thigh bone is usually attached to the hip, making a clumsy piece of
chicken—the hip should be off. On the hip, however, at either side
of its attachment to the ball joint of the thigh, are two nuggets of
meat, the oysters, which should remain part of the second joint:
scrape this meat from the hip bone up to and around the joint,
leaving meat attached to joint. Then bend and cut joint free from
the piece of hip: this is picky work because the hip bone is small,
but it is really worth the trouble. Then, to make the second joint



even more attractive, scrape meat away from this same ball joint,
and whack off its bulbous end with your chopping knife. In French
cooking, the drumstick is separated from the second joint: flex the
two pieces to locate ball joint at knee, and cut through it to separate
drumstick from second joint.

Breast-wing sections
The breast-wing sections (or wingless breasts) usually come

already split so that you have one whole side in one piece, and
another whole side as the other piece. On the bone-and-flesh side
you may see the long ridge of the breastbone, if it was left in that
half, running the length of the thick portion of the meat. Below it is
the rest of the breastbone and below that the cross-hatch of ribs;
attached to the ribs you may find a piece of the backbone. Again,
this is a clumsy piece to cook as is, but easy to trim.

If the wing has been left on, you will be able to make 2 full
servings out of the breast by cutting it in the French manner,
meaning that the lower third of the breast meat remains attached to
the wing as follows: Set the breast in front of you, skin-side up and
top of breast (long side with thickest meat) away from you. We shall
suppose that you have a left breast with the wing on the right. By
wiggling the wing, locate with your finger where the ball joint of its
upper arm attaches to the shoulder. Then make a semicircular cut
through the skin and breast meat, starting at the lower left side of
the long end facing you and ending at the shoulder joint. Scrape
meat from rib bones the length of the cut (scraping toward you, not
toward the thick side of the meat), separate wing at shoulder by
cutting through ball joint, and free the wing with its strip of breast
meat. With shears, cut the bony nubbin off the elbow of the wing;
trim off rib bones from main part of breast along with backbone if it
is attached. For a right-sided breast use the same system, but you
may find it is easier to set the breast in front of you lengthwise, the
wing end facing you and the thick part of the meat to your left.

Wingless breasts will be improved when you scrape the lower
third of the flesh from the ribs at the long thin side, and cut off ribs



at this point; the breast will then lie flatter.

Save all scraps for chicken stock
Even a small handful of scraps and bones are worth boiling up

with a bit of onion, celery, carrot, a bay leaf, pinch of salt, and
water to cover. Full directions for chicken stock are in Volume I,
pages 236–7.

HOW MUCH TO BUY

We shall arbitrarily call for 2½ pounds of ready-cut frying
chicken to serve 4 people in the following recipes, but you would
normally buy by eye—the equivalent of 1 whole breast half with
wing or 1 drumstick-second joint per serving is usually sufficient.
The total weight will probably be between 2 and 2½ pounds,
depending on the weight of the frying chicken and on what pieces
you buy.

  POULET POCHÉ AU VIN BLANC
[Chicken Pieces Poached in White Wine, Herbs, and Aromatic
Vegetables]
This very simple, basic poach can be even simpler if you are on a

fat-free diet: rather than cooking the vegetables in butter, simmer
them 15 minutes in chicken stock before you add the chicken and
the wine. Butter does seem to bring out more of their flavor,
however. Because the vegetables cook along with the chicken and
are served with it you could precede or follow the chicken with
fresh artichokes or asparagus. You then need nothing more for the
chicken course than steamed rice, a parsley garnish, and either more
of the same white wine that cooked with the chicken, or a red
Bordeaux, or a rosé.

For 4 people



1) Sautéing the vegetables
2 medium-sized carrots (This step is optional: see preceding
1 medium-sized onion paragraph.) Peel the carrots and

and the white part of 1 onion; quarter leek lengthwise and
leek (or 2 onions) wash; trim and wash celery.

3 medium-sized celery Depending on what effect you want,
stalks cut the vegetables either into thin

3 Tb butter slices or into julienne matchsticks 1½
A heavy 3-quart inches long. Cook slowly with the

flameproof casserole butter in the covered casserole over
with cover (such as a moderately low heat, stirring
round terra cotta one, frequently, until vegetables are
9 by 3 inches, set on tender but not browned—about 10
an asbestos mat) minutes. Meanwhile, prepare the

chicken, Step 2.

2) Poaching the chicken
2½ lbs. ready-cut frying Preheat oven to 325 degrees if you

chicken, washed, wish to use it. Prepare the chicken
dried, and trimmed, if for cooking, salt lightly, and arrange
you wish, according to in the casserole, spreading the
directions preceding cooked vegetables around and over
this recipe it. Cover casserole and let chicken

Salt sweat for 10 minutes over moderate
1½ cups dry white wine, heat, turning it once. (Omit this step

or 1 cup dry white if you are not sautéing vegetables in
French vermouth butter.) Then pour in the wine or

About 2 cups chicken vermouth and enough chicken stock
stock or canned or broth barely to cover the chicken.
chicken broth Bury the herb packet in the chicken,

The following herbs tied
in washed



cheesecloth: and bring casserole to the simmer.
Either ½ tsp tarragon; Taste, and salt lightly if necessary.
Or ½ imported bay
leaf, ¼ tsp thyme, and
4 parsley sprigs

Salt to taste

Cover the casserole and regulate heat to maintain liquid at a
slow, quiet simmer either on top of the stove or in a preheated 325-
degree oven. (NOTE: Poaching means slow cooking, so that chicken
pieces will retain their shape, and will be tender; boiling not only
toughens the meat, but also warps its contour.) Dark meat of
chicken will take 20 to 25 minutes; light meat, probably 5 minutes
less and should be removed when done, if you have mixed dark and
light together. Juices, when either dark or light meat is pricked
deeply, should run clear yellow, with no trace of rose, and meat
should feel tender when pierced. Do not overcook, however.

3) Serving
Tilt casserole and skim off surface fat; taste liquid and correct

seasoning. Discard herb bouquet. Either serve directly from
casserole, or arrange the chicken and vegetables on a bed of
steamed rice, decorate with parsley, and pass the cooking liquid
separately.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you aren’t ready to serve, chicken will
keep perfectly for a good hour. Skim off surface fat, and correct
seasoning, then set casserole cover slightly askew for air circulation;
keep warm in a 120-degree oven, on a hot-tray, or over barely
simmering water.

VARIATIONS



Stewing Chicken—Fowl
A fine stewing chicken 10 to 12 months old, as it is supposed to

be when you buy from a reputable market, does beautifully when
poached in white wine. Use the same general system as in the
preceding Master Recipe with the following slight changes.

If the chicken has not been cut up for you and you wish to do so
yourself, follow the directions for goose. Reserve neck, back,
gizzard, and heart as well as all scraps; place them in the bottom of
the casserole to cook along with the chicken and give additional
flavor to the broth. Mature chickens have much more flavor than
young fryers, and you need only wine and water for the cooking
stock. Stewing time will be about 2½ hours, or until the meat is
tender when pierced with a knife. Because the vegetables will have
cooked this length of time, they will not be of further use; if you
want vegetables to cook and serve with the chicken, add a fresh
batch before end of cooking time.

Serve the chicken on a bed of steamed rice or risotto, and you
may turn its cooking stock into a cream sauce as suggested for
whole poached chicken or one of its variations. You may gratiné the
chicken in cheese sauce, as in the recipe, or change the seasonings
altogether by simmering the chicken in bouillabaisse flavorings.

Poulet en Gelée
[Chicken in Aspic]
Chicken poached in white wine makes delicious chicken in aspic,

and you may be as elegant as the formal recipe in Volume I, page
549, where the chicken is arranged on an aspic-lined platter; each
piece is coated with aspic and tarragon leaves, chopped aspic fills in
the empty spaces, and aspic cutouts abound. On the other hand, you



may be much less formal and just as attractive but in a different
way, with either of the two following arrangements. (NOTE: In
neither of these is the cooking stock clarified—rendered clear and
sparkling with egg whites; if you wish to clarify it, however,
directions are in Volume I, page 111.)

A sieve set over a Set cover askew over casserole and
saucepan drain out cooking liquid into the

A quart measure saucepan. Skim off surface fat and
Chicken broth if needed pour liquid into quart measure; skim

1½ packages (1½ Tb) again, and pour in additional stock, if
plain, unflavored, necessary, to make 3 cups. Return
powdered gelatin liquid to saucepan, sprinkle on the

Salt and pepper gelatin, and let it soften for several
minutes. Then stir over moderate
heat until gelatin has completely
dissolved and liquid is free of gelatin
granules. Taste, and correct
seasoning.

Rearrange chicken attractively with vegetables, either in the
same casserole or in a serving bowl or dish that will just hold the
pieces. Pour on the cooking stock and chill several hours, or until
gelatin has set; scrape any congealed fat from surface, and chicken
is ready to serve.

Molded aspic
You may wish to unmold the chicken onto a platter rather than

serve it from a bowl or casserole. Use the same method as in the
preceding recipe, but you may need more jellied stock—proportions



are 1 envelope (1 tablespoon) gelatin for each 2 cups of stock. Use a
decorative metal mold, a metal cake pan, or even a bread pan; pour
in a ⅛-inch layer of jellied stock and chill until set. Then arrange
the chicken and vegetables attractively in the mold or pan, and chill
20 minutes, or until remaining stock is cold, almost syrupy, and on
the point of setting; immediately pour it over the chicken. Chill
several hours or overnight to set the gelatin completely. To unmold,
first scrape off any surface fat, then dip mold or pan for 4 to 5
seconds in very hot water, rapidly run a knife around edge of aspic,
turn a chilled platter upside down over mold, and reverse the two. If
aspic does not dislodge itself in a minute or two, repeat the process.
Keep chilled until serving time, then decorate platter with lettuce,
watercress, parsley, or appropriate vegetables.

NOTE: A more formal method for lining a mold with aspic is in
Volume I, page 558, but would only be necessary if you were using
clarified jellied stock.

Poulet Mornay, Gratiné
[Poached Chicken Pieces Gratinéed with Cheese Sauce]
When you want a casserole of chicken that you may prepare

ahead for a party, this is a useful dish. After the chicken has
poached, the cooking liquid is turned into a cheese sauce, which
then enrobes the chicken in a baking dish; reheat and brown in the
oven when the time comes. Serve this with steamed rice or buttered
pasta, and either a simply done green vegetable such as buttered
broccoli, peas, or asparagus tips, or a salad. White Burgundy wine
would be good here, or a red Bordeaux.

Follow method and ingredients for
chicken poached in white wine,



Master Recipe, Steps 1 and 2. When
chicken is done proceed as follows.

The cheese sauce—sauce Mornay—for 2½ cups
A sieve set over a Set cover askew and drain cooking

saucepan liquid out of casserole. Skim off
3½ Tb butter surface fat, and bring liquid to
A heavy-bottomed 2- simmer, skimming. You should have

quart enameled, no- about 2½ cups; boil down rapidly, if
stick, or stainless necessary. Meanwhile, make a white
saucepan roux and a velouté sauce as follows:

¼ cup flour (measure by melt butter in saucepan, blend in
scooping dry-measure flour, and stir over moderate heat
cup into flour and with a wooden spoon until flour and
sweeping off excess butter foam together for 2 minutes
with a knife) without browning. Remove from

A wooden spoon and a heat, and as soon as roux stops
wire whip bubbling, pour in all of the hot

chicken-cooking liquid at once,
blending vigorously with a wire
whip.

Return sauce over moderately high heat, and stir with wire whip
as sauce thickens and comes to the boil. Boil, stirring, for 2 minutes,
and remove from heat. Sauce should be thick enough to coat a
spoon nicely; if too thin, boil down rapidly and if too thick, thin
with milk, stock, or cream. Let cool for several minutes, stirring
occasionally to prevent top from crusting while you prepare for the
next step.



Final assembly
A buttered gratin dish When you have buttered the dish,

that will hold the and grated and measured the cheese,
chicken comfortably fold all but 3 to 4 tablespoons of the
(such as a 9- by 12- cheese into the sauce. Taste, and
inch oval 2 inches correct seasoning as necessary with
deep) salt, pepper, and a speck of nutmeg.

About 3 ounces (¾ cup Smooth a thin layer of sauce in the
loosely packed) bottom of the dish, and arrange the
coarsely grated Swiss chicken over it, including the
cheese vegetables, if you wish.

Salt and pepper
Speck of nutmeg
1 to 2 Tb melted butter

Spoon the rest of the sauce over the chicken, masking each piece
completely. Spread on the cheese, and sprinkle melted butter over
the cheese.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be prepared a day in advance to this
point; when cold, cover and refrigerate.

Reheating and serving
When both chicken and sauce are hot, and you are serving

almost immediately, set dish 3 or 4 inches from a moderately hot
broiler and let topping brown slowly while contents of dish come to
the bubble; you may then keep chicken warm for half an hour or so
at 120 degrees, but be very careful not to let it overcook and lose
the delicious quality of freshly cooked chicken.

When chicken has been refrigerated, set dish in upper third of a
preheated 375-degree oven for 25 to 30 minutes, or until top has
browned nicely and contents are bubbling hot. Again, be careful not
to overcook.



Chaud-froid de Poulet, Morvandelle
[Chicken in Chaud-froid—a Cold Dish]
A simple chicken poached in white wine with aromatic

vegetables can very easily be transformed into a dressy chaud-froid
when you enrich the poaching broth with cream and egg yolks,
which will thicken the broth just enough as it cools to enrobe the
chicken pieces with a yellow-ivory cloak. Light, creamy, with a
lovely texture and flavor, yet no trace of flour or gelatin, this is by
far the most attractive chaud-froid we know. Serve it with cold
vegetables or a tossed salad, French bread, and a chilled Chablis,
Riesling, or Gewürtztraminer.

Poach the chicken in wine and
aromatic vegetables using the
method and ingredients in the Master
Recipe, Steps 1 and 2. When chicken
is done, continue as follows.

The chaud-froid sauce—for 2 cups
A sieve set over a heavy- Set cover askew, and drain chicken-

bottomed 2-quart cooking stock out of casserole into
enameled or stainless saucepan. Skim off surface fat, bring
saucepan liquid to the simmer, skimming, then

6 egg yolks in a mixing boil down rapidly until reduced to
bowl 1½ cups. Beat the egg yolks and

A wire whip, a ladle, and cream to blend. Still beating,
a wooden spoon gradually ladle in driblets of the hot



1 cup crème fraîche or chicken-cooking liquid. When half
heavy cream has gone in, gradually beat the

Salt, white pepper, and creamy mixture into the remaining
drops of lemon juice chicken-cooking liquid in the

saucepan.

Set pan over moderate heat and stir slowly and continuously
with wooden spoon, reaching all over bottom of pan, for 5 to 6
minutes, or until sauce thickens enough to film spoon with a creamy
layer. (Be careful sauce does not come near the simmer and curdle
the egg yolks; however, you must heat it to the point where it
thickens.)

Immediately remove from heat, and stir vigorously for 1 minute
to cool slightly and stop the cooking. Taste very carefully, adding
salt, white pepper, and drops of lemon juice; sauce should be quite
highly seasoned because flavor becomes somewhat subdued in a
cold dish. Shortly before coating chicken, set saucepan in a large
bowl of cold water and ice cubes; stir frequently until sauce is cool
and has begun to thicken. Meanwhile, prepare the chicken for the
next step.

Final assembly and serving
A chilled shallow serving Peel the skin off each piece of

dish, just large enough chicken, removing as much as you
to hold chicken easily easily can without tearing the meat.

For decoration: Arrange chicken in dish. (If you are
Either minced fresh stirring truffles into sauce, do so

tarragon, parsley now.) Spoon a thin layer of sauce
sprigs, or watercress; over each piece, using about ⅓ of the

Or 1 or 2 truffles to sauce at this point. Cover chicken
mince and stir into the and chill for 15 to 20 minutes (or

longer). When sauce has set on



sauce with the juices chicken and you are ready to
from the can; continue, re-warm the remaining

Or a fluted mushroom sauce briefly, only enough to liquefy
cap to top each piece it. Beat with wire whip until perfectly
of chicken (Volume I, smooth, and spoon it over the
pages 510–11, for chicken to mask each piece
fluting and cooking) completely. Cover chicken with a

bowl and chill.

Remove chicken from refrigerator about half an hour before
serving (unless weather is too hot), to take off the chill; decorate as
you wish with any of the elements suggested.

Waterzooi de Poulet
[Chicken Poached in White Wine and a Julienne of Vegetables,
Cream, and Egg-yolk Sauce]
The preceding chaud-froid turns out to be an almost exact replica

of the famous Belgian bouillabaisse of chicken, waterzooi. The
Belgian dish is served hot, however, and the sauce is more like a
soup—a waterzooi is ladled into deep plates, and you eat it with a
knife, fork, and soup spoon. Although its general method is almost
identical to that of the chaud-froid, as well as the poulet en bourride,
the recipe will be easier for you to follow when you have the full
details for its sauce and serving even if it means repeating familiar
instructions. Accompany the waterzooi with boiled potatoes, French
bread, and a white Graves or Burgundy. It is a separate course, and
a rich one—precede with a cold vegetable or something like the
salade Niçoise in Volume I, page 542, and follow with fresh fruit, a
fruit tart, or a sherbet.

SHOWMANSHIP



In the fine Brussels restaurants where this dish is served, the
chicken is poached whole; the maître d’hôtel carves it in front of you,
and warms the pieces of chicken in the sauce while you savor its
delicious perfume. If you can carve like a master and enjoy the
drama of table-top cooking, by all means poach the chicken whole;
carve it at the table, and make the sauce as described here, but in a
chafing dish.

For 4 people

Follow the Master Recipe for chicken
pieces poached in white wine, Steps
1 and 2, but cut the aromatic
vegetables into julienne matchsticks
for Step 1. When chicken is done,
continue as follows.

Sauce and serving
If needed: more chicken (You should have 2½ to 3 cups of

broth cooking stock for the sauce; add extra
6 egg yolks in a mixing broth if necessary.) When you are

bowl ready to serve, beat the egg yolks and
A wire whip and a ladle cream to blend; continue beating,
1 cup crème fraîche or and ladle in driblets of the hot

heavy cream chicken-cooking liquid until about 1
Salt and white pepper cup has gone in. Remove casserole

from heat; swirling it with one hand,
2 Tb rather roughly gradually pour creamy mixture back

chopped fresh parsley over chicken. Taste carefully, and
If you wish, a serving correct seasoning.

casserole or a soup



tureen
Wide soup plates

Set casserole over moderate heat and continue to swirl it slowly
for 4 to 5 minutes, until sauce thickens into a light cream as the egg
yolks gradually poach in the mixture; you must be very careful here
not to heat the sauce too much or it will turn granular as the egg
yolks scramble, but you must heat it to the point where it thickens.
Serve immediately, either from casserole or turned into a tureen;
decorate with parsley.

The chicken and sauce, which is more like a cream soup, are
ladled into soup plates, along with a serving of potatoes, and eaten
with knife, fork, and soup spoon.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Although you may make the egg yolk and
cream liaison, pour it over the chicken, and reheat later, it is safer
to keep the poached chicken warm, and finish the dish just before
serving. Finished waterzooi risks curdling if you try to keep it warm;
in other words, this is not a dish adaptable to complete ahead-of-
time cookery.

Bouillabaisse de Poulet
[Chicken Poached in White Wine with Provençal Vegetables,
Herbs, and Flavorings]
Famous and successful recipes have a way of turning up in other

guises, chicken has a habit of wearing other costumes, and there
should be nothing surprising about chicken swimming in the robust
flavors of a bouillabaisse. Although the method here is almost the
same as that for the previous poachings, the ingredients differ; we
therefore outline all the steps. Serve this with steamed rice or boiled
potatoes, French bread, and a strong young white wine like a



Riesling or Pinot Blanc, a rather light red like Beaujolais or
Mountain Red, or a rosé.

For 4 people

1) Preliminary cooking of vegetables
½ cup sliced onions Cook the onions and leeks slowly
½ cup sliced white of with the oil in the covered casserole

leek (or more onion) for about 10 minutes, stirring fairly
¼ cup olive oil frequently, until tender but not
A heavy 3-quart browned.

flameproof casserole
with cover

About 1½ cups tomato While vegetables are cooking,
pulp (4 or 5 tomatoes, prepare the tomatoes; when
peeled, seeded, and vegetables are tender, stir tomatoes
juiced, or a in along with the garlic. Cover, and
combination of fresh cook 5 minutes so that tomatoes will
tomatoes and canned render their juices; then uncover,
Italian-type plum raise heat, and let juices almost
tomatoes, drained and entirely evaporate.
sieved)

2 cloves garlic, minced
or mashed

2) Poaching the chicken
2½ lbs. ready-cut

chicken, prepared as



described When tomatoes are done, salt
Salt chicken lightly, and arrange in

casserole, spreading vegetables
around and on top. Cover and cook
10 minutes over moderate heat,
turning once.

1½ cups dry white wine Pour the wine or vermouth over the
or 1 cup dry white chicken, and enough stock or broth
French vermouth barely to cover the meat. Add the

About 2 cups chicken herbs and seasonings, bring to the
stock or canned simmer, and salt lightly as necessary.
chicken broth Cover casserole and simmer slowly

1 bay leaf either on top of the stove or in a
½ tsp thyme preheated 325-degree oven for 20 to
¼ tsp fennel seeds, 25 minutes, or until chicken is

crushed tender.
2 pinches saffron threads
A 2-inch piece of dried

orange peel, or ½ tsp
bottled dried orange
peel

Big pinch pepper
Pinch Cayenne pepper or

drops Tabasco sauce
Salt as needed

3) Serving
Tip casserole and skim off surface fat; remove bay leaf and

orange peel, and carefully correct seasoning. Serve as is, from



casserole, or arrange chicken and vegetables on a bed of steamed
rice, decorate with parsley sprigs, and pass rest of cooking liquid
separately.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be kept warm for at least half an
hour; set cover askew for air circulation and place in a 120-degree
oven, on a hot-tray, or over barely simmering water. Do not
overheat and let chicken overcook.

To serve cold or in aspic
This is delicious as a cold dish. When chicken is done, skim off

surface fat, remove bay leaf and orange peel, and correct seasoning.
When cool, cover and refrigerate for several hours. Scrape off
congealed fat and serve the chicken as is; cooking stock will set
lightly, like jellied consommé. (If you want a firmer jellied effect,
strain cooking stock out of casserole when chicken is done, degrease
completely, and dissolve in it 1 package [1 tablespoon] of gelatin
for each 2 cups of liquid; pour back over the chicken and vegetables,
and chill.)

VARIATIONS
Final touches—Rouille and Pistou
You might pass a rouille with the chicken—the garlic, pimento,

and chili-pepper sauce given at the end of the bouillabaisse recipe in
Volume I, page 52. Another excellent sauce would be the pistou, a
fragrant combination of basil, tomato, garlic, and cheese that may
either be incorporated into the cooking liquid just before serving, or
be passed separately. Finally there is the marvelous garlic
mayonnaise, aïoli, in the next variation.



Poulet en Bourride
[Bouillabaisse of Chicken with Aïoli Sauce]
What the Belgians do to chicken in their waterzooi, their rivals on

the Mediterranean accomplish in a most Provençal manner. In fact,
the two recipes are almost exact parallels—egg yolks and cream
thicken the broth of the waterzooi, while it is egg yolks and olive oil
for the bourride. This is a very rich and splendid dish; we would
suggest only boiled potatoes to go with it, a very simple beginning
to the meal, such as asparagus vinaigrette, and a sherbet or fruits for
dessert. A strong, dry white wine like Burgundy or Côtes-du-Rhône
would be our suggestion for wine.

Poach the chicken exactly as
described for the bouillabaisse of
chicken, here, Steps 1 and 2; skim off
surface fat, and keep chicken warm.
While it simmers, prepare the aïoli as
follows.

The aïoli sauce
⅓ cup (lightly pressed) Following the procedure for aïoli

fresh crumbs from sauce in Volume I, page 92, moisten
nonsweetened, the crumbs with drops of vinegar and
homemade-type white pound to a paste in the bowl or
bread mortar. Add garlic and salt, and

Wine vinegar continue pounding until smooth.
A heavy bowl or mortar, Then add egg yolks and pound until

a pestle or wooden thick and sticky. Finally begin
masher, and wire whip beating in drops of olive oil; when



6 to 8 large cloves garlic, sauce is thick and heavy, thin with
mashed vinegar, and continue beating in oil

½ tsp salt with wire whip. Season to taste, and
6 egg yolks cover airtight until ready to use.
¾ to 1 cup olive oil

Combining chicken and aïoli
A ladle When chicken is done and just before
Optional: a warm soup you are ready to serve, remove from

tureen heat. Gradually ladle driblets of the
Wide soup plates hot chicken-cooking liquid into the
Rather roughly chopped aïoli sauce, beating sauce with wire

fresh parsley whip; when a cup of liquid has gone
in, pour mixture back into chicken
and vegetables, swirling casserole
with one hand as you do so, to blend.

Set casserole over moderate heat and continue to swirl it slowly
for 4 to 5 minutes, until sauce thickens into a light cream; be careful
not to heat sauce to the simmer or it will turn granular as the egg
yolks scramble, but you must heat it to the point where it thickens.
Serve immediately, either from casserole or turned into a tureen;
decorate with parsley.

Like waterzooi, the chicken and the souplike sauce are ladled into
soup plates, along with a serving of potatoes, and eaten with knife,
fork, and soup spoon.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: See remarks for waterzooi.

WHOLE CHICKEN



CASSEROLE-POACHED CHICKEN
Poularde Pochée à Court Mouillement

Roasting and stewing are not the only ways to cook a whole
chicken; there are also casserole roasting, which produces the
savory brown poulet poêlé à l’estragon and its variations in Volume I,
pages 249–53, and casserole poaching, for those times when you
wish to serve a whole chicken with one of the many white-wine
sauces. This is called pocher à court mouillement because the chicken
is set in a casserole that will just hold it, and the poaching liquid
comes only part way up—the dark meat of the legs and thighs
simmers and the white meat of the breast steams. This gives you not
only a beautifully tender and juicy chicken, but also a perfectly
flavored white-wine chicken broth for a sauce, or, if you are serving
the chicken cold, for your aspic or chaud-froid. You may cook the
chicken with or without stuffing, and serve it any number of ways.
We begin with chicken in a white-wine and tarragon sauce.

THE CHICKEN TO BUY—PREPARING IT FOR POACHING

Roasting chickens and capons are best for casserole poaching
because their flesh is mature enough to hold up under the steam and
moisture; however, if you are careful to maintain a slow and gentle
simmer, you may use a large fryer, 3½ pounds ready-to-cook.
Broilers are far too immature; their tender flesh falls apart in the
casserole.

To prepare the chicken for cooking, first remove the package of
giblets from inside the cavity. The giblets should include the liver,
heart, gizzard, and neck. If you are not stuffing the chicken, you
may season the liver and return it to the cavity to cook and serve
with the chicken, or save it for another purpose. Reserve the rest of
the giblets for the casserole; they will give added flavor to the broth.

Pull loose fat from around inside of vent opening; you may
render it, and use for general cooking or for rubbing over the
chicken instead of butter. Cut off nubbins attached to wing elbows



and, to make carving easier, remove the wishbone by cutting around
its forked outline from inside the neck end of the chicken, then
break its two ends loose from bottom of breast and pull it free. Run
cold water all around inside and outside of chicken, and dry
thoroughly with paper towels. (We were not enthusiastic about
washing chickens in Volume I; we now think it is a wise
precaution.) After you have inserted whatever flavoring or stuffing
is called for, truss the chicken as illustrated in Volume I, pages 237–
9 (or in less detail here).

  POULARDE POCHÉE À L’ESTRAGON
[Casserole-poached Chicken with White-wine and Tarragon
Sauce]
A fine roasting chicken is a poularde in French, and capon is

chapon; either one is recommended for this delicious recipe. Rather
than a stuffing, we have suggested an herbal flavoring inside the
chicken, which is typical of many French recipes; if you do wish a
stuffing, see the variations at the end of the recipe as well as the list
of stuffings.

Nothing that accompanies the chicken should mask the lovely
flavor of the tarragon, and with this in mind, we would suggest
steamed rice and the garniture of mushrooms and onions used for
chicken fricassee (Volume I, page 260); or either the unusual rice
and onion soubise in Volume I on page 485 or the stuffed onions,
with buttered peas or asparagus tips. This is definitely an occasion
for one of the great white Burgundy wines.

For 5 to 6 people

1) Preparations for poaching
½ cup each of sliced Preheat oven to 325 degrees in time

carrots and sliced for Step 2. Cook the onions and



onions carrots in the covered casserole,
2 Tb butter stirring occasionally, until vegetables
A heavy enameled are tender but not brown.

casserole or roaster Meanwhile, prepare the chicken as
just large enough to follows.
hold the chicken
comfortably breast-up

A 4½ lb. ready-to-cook Prepare chicken for roasting as
roasting chicken or described in paragraph preceding
capon recipe, but before trussing it, sprinkle

3 Tb soft butter (half for with half the salt, and add the
inside and half for tarragon; then truss the chicken.
outside of chicken) When vegetables are tender, massage

½ tsp salt (for inside and the rest of the butter into the chicken
outside of chicken) skin, sprinkle with remaining salt,

A medium-sized branch and arrange the chicken breast-up in
of fresh tarragon, or 1 the casserole.
tsp fragrant dried
tarragon

1⅓ cups dry white wine, Pour the wine into the casserole, and
or 1 cup dry white enough chicken stock or broth to
French vermouth reach about ⅓ the way up the

2 or more cups chicken chicken. Add the herbs, and giblets.
stock or canned Bring to simmer on top of the stove,
chicken broth taste liquid, and salt lightly, as

1 bay leaf needed. Drape the damp, washed
6 parsley sprigs cheesecloth over the breast and
A medium-sized branch thighs; it should be long enough to

of fresh tarragon, or ½ fall into the liquid all around so that



Tb fragrant dried it will draw the broth over the
tarragon chicken and baste it during the

The washed chicken cooking. Smear the butter over the
giblets (neck, gizzard, cheesecloth, top with waxed paper,
heart, wing nubbins, cover the casserole, and set in middle
wishbone) level of preheated oven.

Salt as needed (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: You may
A double thickness of arrange the chicken in the casserole

well-washed and with wine, broth, cloth, and
rinsed damp trimmings, then refrigerate, and
cheesecloth to cover poach it the next day.
chicken breast and
thighs

2 Tb soft butter
Waxed paper

2) Poaching the chicken—1 hour and 30 to 40 minutes at 325
degrees
After chicken has been in the oven about 20 minutes, check

casserole to be sure liquid is at the very slow simmer—if liquid
bubbles actively, flesh can break apart. Regulate thermostat
accordingly; except for making sure cooking is slow and gentle, you
have nothing more to do until chicken is done.

When chicken flesh is tender if pressed and drumsticks move in
their sockets, chicken should be ready. Test by lifting it carefully
(use trussing strings between thighs and elbows) and drain juices
onto a white plate; if last drops to come out are clear yellow with no
trace of rose, chicken is definitely done.

3) The sauce—sauce à l’estragon—for 2½ cups



A sieve set over a 2½- to When chicken is done and juices
3-quart stainless have been drained from vent, set it
saucepan on a platter or side dish. Strain

4 Tb butter cooking stock into saucepan, pressing
A second 2½- to 3-quart juices out of ingredients in sieve;

saucepan, heavy- skim surface fat off stock. Return
bottomed and chicken to casserole with a cup of the
enameled or stainless cooking stock, replace cheesecloth,

5 Tb flour set casserole cover askew, and keep
A wooden spoon and a chicken warm, either in turned-off

wire whip oven, on a hot-tray, or over barely
simmering water while you prepare a
sauce velouté.

Bring cooking stock to the simmer, skimming off additional fat,
and maintain at slow simmer while making the roux: melt butter in
saucepan, blend in flour with wooden spoon, and stir over moderate
heat until butter and flour foam together for 2 minutes without
browning. Remove from heat, and as soon as roux stops bubbling,
pour in 2 cups of the hot chicken stock, blending vigorously with
wire whip. When smooth, return over moderate heat and stir rather
slowly with wire whip as sauce thickens and comes to the boil. Boil,
stirring, for 2 minutes—sauce will be quite thick.

½ to ⅔ cup heavy cream Simmering the sauce, pour in ⅓ cup
Salt, white pepper, and of the cream, and add successive

drops of lemon juice spoonfuls until sauce thins out but is
2 to 4 Tb soft butter still thick enough to coat a spoon

nicely. Taste very carefully for
seasoning, adding salt, white pepper,
and lemon juice to taste. Just before
serving, remove from heat and beat



in the enrichment butter by
spoonfuls.

4) Serving
A hot, lightly buttered Remove trussing strings from

serving platter chicken, and set it on platter; wipe
Either 10 to 12 large up any juices. Spoon enough sauce

fresh tarragon leaves over chicken to mask it attractively,
dropped 30 seconds in and decorate with tarragon leaves or
boiling water and laid whatever you have chosen. Pour rest
on a plate; of sauce into bowl. Make a
Or slices of truffle or presentation of the chicken to your
fluted and cooked guests, who will want to admire it.
mushrooms, and Then, if it is not to be carved at the
parsley or watercress table, carve in the kitchen; arrange
if needed the pieces over a bed of rice, and

A warmed sauce bowl spoon a little of the sauce over each.
Decorate again with tarragon leaves
or whatever you have chosen, and
serve.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: You may keep the chicken warm for half
an hour at least as suggested at the end of the first part in Step 3.
Complete the sauce except for the final butter enrichment, clean
sauce off sides of pan with a rubber spatula, and dot a tablespoon of
soft butter on surface of sauce, spreading it lightly and evenly with
the back of a spoon; keep sauce warm, uncovered, over simmering
water.



TO SERVE COLD
Poularde en Chaud-froid—Poularde en Gelée
[Chicken in Chaud-froid—Chicken in Aspic]
The tender fragrant quality of chicken poached in white wine

and the excellence of its cooking broth made it ideal for chaud-froid
or simply chicken in aspic. For chaud-froid, you might use half the
broth for an initial creamy coating on the chicken pieces following
either the cream and egg-yolk sauce, or the recipe in Volume I, page
551, with cream and gelatin. You could then decorate the chicken
with tarragon leaves, and glaze with clear aspic made from the rest
of the broth. Full directions for chaud-froids are in this vo lume and
in Volume I as indicated; see aspics in this volume, and page 549 in
Volume I.

STUFFED CHICKEN—BONED CHICKEN

When you want to serve stuffed chicken, either roasted or
poached, it is easier to carve it if you bone the breast of the raw
chicken, meaning that you slit the skin and peel it back from the
breast, remove the meat, and cut out the breastbone and upper half
of the ribs. This gives you a boat-shaped trough; its bottom is
formed by the backbone, and its sides by the lower ribs, the wings,
and the legs. Pile the stuffing into the trough, top with breast meat
cut into strips, fold the skin back into place, and the chicken is
reconstituted again for cooking. To serve, cut right down the length
of the breast to reveal white meat and stuffing, while the legs and
wings come off in the usual way. Because white meat picks up
flavor when in direct contact with the stuffing, most of the dark-
meat-only people will shift over to “a little of both, please.” You will
also find this semiboning a successful way to treat the enormous
breasts of modern turkeys, and a turkey is boned exactly like
chicken (see illustration).



VOLAILLE DEMI-DÉSOSSÉE
[Half-boned Chicken—also for Turkey, Other Poultry, and Game
Birds]

Set chicken breast-up, and with a
sharp knife, slit the skin from
neck to tail, following ridge of
breastbone. With your fingers, peel
the skin back from the breast first
on one side, then on the other,
going down to the shoulders and
the second joints to expose the
whole expanse of breast.

Starting on one side of ridge of
breastbone, cut through flesh to
bone all along its length from neck
end to tail. Always angling the
cutting edge of knife against bone
and not against flesh, continue
cutting down against outward curve
of breastbone and then against ribs,
pulling flesh from bone with your
fingers as you cut. Be careful not to
slit skin at sides of breast as you
release meat from lower rib cage;
cut off the meat where it joins the ball joint of the wing at the
shoulder, and you have removed one side of the breast meat.
Remove the other side in the same manner.



With heavy shears and starting at the tail end, cut through the
upper half of the breastbone-rib structure midway on each side,
where the backward-slanting top ribs join the forward-slanting
bottom ribs. Continue the cut through the V-shaped bone at the
neck end, and the breastbone is freed.

With the breastbone removed, you now have a boat-shaped open
cavity to fill with stuffing. The 2 boneless pieces of meat, one
removed from each side of the breast, are called suprêmes, and each
is composed of 2 layers. The larger layer is the filet; the smaller
layer is the filet mignon. On the underside of each filet mignon is a
clearly visible white tendon. Grasp the end of it in a towel held in
one hand; slit flesh on either side with a small knife and, scraping it
against your knife as you gently pull, draw it out; repeat for the
second tendon.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not ready to stuff the chicken at
this point, place the suprêmes in the cavity, draw the chicken skin
over them, wrap the chicken, and refrigerate it. Chop up the
breastbone and add it to your chicken stock.



When you are ready to stuff the chicken, cut the breast meat into
strips ⅜ inch wide. (You may wish to marinate them in oil, herbs,
and wine or drops of lemon juice, or in Cognac as suggested in the
following recipe.)

Raise the legs upright, then flex them, pushing knees against
armpits (where wings join shoulders). Run a skewer or knitting
needle through the carcass at knees as shown; this will hold legs in
place for the rest of the operation. Mound whatever stuffing you
have chosen in the cavity, building it into a dome at the front to
simulate a full breast. Lay the strips of breast meat over the stuffing.

Fold the breast skin over the stuffing and breast meat, covering it
completely. One edge of skin should overlap the other by ⅜ to ½
inch; remove a little stuffing if necessary.

With white string and either an 8-inch trussing needle, a long
mattress needle, or a plastic knitting needle with a hole drilled in
the end, truss the chicken.



1) Sew the 2
flaps of breast
skin together
as follows:
start at the tail
end, and
leaving a 3-
inch piece of
string free at
that end,
stitch a straight line up to the neck. Turn the chicken over and sew
the neck skin to the back, completely enclosing the stuffing at the
neck end.
2) The second tie is to secure the lower part of the drumsticks and
to close the vent opening. Push needle through the lower part of the
carcass and the tail piece; come back through skin on top of one
drumstick, through lower end of breast, and top of second
drumstick. Pull string tight, and tie.
3) For the final tie, remove skewer, and go through carcass at the
knees; fold wings akimbo and come back through the underside of
one wing, through a bit of the backbone, then through the underside
of the second wing. Pull string tight and tie.

Chicken is now ready for roasting, casserole roasting, or for the
poularde poché, à la d’Albuféra, in the following recipe.

  POULARDE À LA D’ALBUFÉRA
[Half-boned Chicken Stuffed with Foie Gras, Truffles, Chicken
Livers, and Rice; Poached in White Wine; Sauce Suprême
Pimentée]



One of the more famous chickens boned, stuffed, and poached in
white wine is this one, created to honor Maréchal Suchet, who was
made Duc d’Albuféra by a grateful Napoleon after the General’s
victories in Spain. The dukedom, a large lagoon surrounded by rice
fields with an outlet to the bay of Valencia, was lost in another
battle the next year, 1813, but both duke and recipe retained their
titles. Curiously enough, as a gastronomical aside to history, the
grateful Spanish, in recognition of his role in returning the lost
territories to them, awarded the revenues from the Albufera to the
Duke of Wellington—perhaps at the very moment a famous filet of
beef was being named after him. Numerous versions, as is always
the way, exist for poularde à la d’Albuféra, and we have picked the
one we prefer. Not all of them include a small pinch of saffron in the
rice, but all do have a Spanish echo of pimento in the sauce.

The vegetable accompaniment should be fresh and simple, we
think. Something like the parslied baked cucumbers in Volume I,
page 500, or fresh new peas or asparagus tips, or the tender, peeled,
fresh broccoli in the Vegetable Chapter. We prefer one of the great
white Burgundies with this dish, or one of the lovely white Graves—
Haut-Brion or La Mission-Haut-Brion.

For 6 people

1) Preparing the chicken
A 4½-lb. roasting Following preceding directions, bone

chicken or capon out the breast of the chicken. Cut
A dish to hold the strips breast meat into strips ⅜ inch wide

of breast meat and turn about in the dish with the
1½ Tb each of dry port wine, shallots, pepper, herbs, and the

or dry (Sercial) uncut truffles and their juice. Dipping
Madeira, and Cognac your knife in hot water for each slice,

1 Tb very finely minced cut the foie gras into ¼-inch dice;
shallots or scallions place at side of dish, and baste with



Freshly ground white the marinade. Cover marinade dish
pepper with plastic wrap, and refrigerate

Pinches of tarragon or while making the stuffing; wrap and
thyme refrigerate the chicken.

1 or more 1-ounce cans
of truffles

2 or more ounces canned
foie gras en bloc (goose
liver: read label on
can), chilled for easy
cutting

2) The stuffing—farce à la d’Albuféra—for about 3½ cups
The chicken liver and Cut the chicken liver or livers and

heart (If you have the heart into ¼-inch dice, and sauté
minimum of foie gras, over moderate heat in 1 tablespoon
add an extra chicken of the butter, just to stiffen them
liver.) slightly; scrape into mixing bowl.

3 Tb butter Melt the rest of the butter in the pan,
A heavy-bottomed, 2- to add the onions, and cook slowly,

2½-quart enameled or stirring frequently, for 4 to 5 minutes
stainless saucepan until fairly tender but not browned.
with cover Stir in the rice, and cook, stirring, for

A large mixing bowl several minutes over moderate heat
¼ cup very finely minced until rice turns translucent, then

onion milky, indicating that the covering
starch has coagulated. Pour in the

1 cup plain, raw, white, wine and let cook for a moment to
untreated rice evaporate the alcohol.

¼ cup dry white wine or
dry white French
vermouth



1 ¾ cups chicken stock
or canned chicken
broth

A small pinch of saffron
threads

A bay leaf
Salt and pepper to taste
1 egg, lightly beaten

Then pour in the chicken stock or broth, add the small pinch of
saffron, the bay leaf, and bring to the simmer. Add salt and pepper
as needed, stir up once, cover pan, and let cook at a moderately fast
simmer, without touching it again, for 15 minutes. Rice should be
almost but not quite done, needing only 2 to 3 minutes more
cooking; liquid should have been entirely absorbed. Uncover pan,
discard bay leaf, turn rice into mixing bowl, and let it cool to tepid.
Stir in the egg.

Remove the truffles from their marinade, and cut into dice (or
mince if you have only a small amount). Fold with a rubber spatula
into the rice and chicken livers, and carefully correct seasoning.
(Reserve the foie gras until next step.)

3) Stuffing and trussing the chicken
Salt cavity of chicken lightly, spread a layer of rice stuffing in it,

and then a few pieces of the diced foie gras. Continue in layers,
molding rice into a dome at the breast end. Cover with the breast
strips, as illustrated, fold skin over breast, sew, and truss the chicken
also as illustrated. (Reserve marinade juices.)

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If both stuffing and chicken are cold, you
may stuff and truss the chicken a day in advance of cooking.

4) Poaching the chicken—1½ to 1¾ hours



Poach the chicken as directed in Steps 1 and 2, Master Recipe,
here, but use a big pinch of thyme and a bay leaf rather than
tarragon in the casserole.

5) The sauce

Make the sauce as described in Step 3
of the Master Recipe, but omit the
tarragon, and stir the marinade liquid
into it. Rather than enriching it with
plain butter, use pimento butter as
follows.

3 Tb canned red pimento Drain the pimento and gently press
3 Tb soft butter out liquid. Rub it with the butter
A fine-meshed sieve set through the sieve, scraping all

over a bowl residue off bottom of sieve as well as
A wooden spoon and a banging sieve on bowl to dislodge as

rubber spatula much as possible. Beat in Cayenne or
Pinch of Cayenne pepper, Tabasco. Just before serving, remove

or drops of Tabasco sauce from heat and beat in the
sauce pimento butter, a tablespoon at a

time.

6) Serving
When ready to serve, remove trussing strings and place chicken

on platter. Spoon a little of the sauce over the chicken, and decorate
as you wish, with truffle slices or fluted mushrooms. To carve, cut
straight down through top of breast from neck end to tail end, and
spread apart. Remove wings and legs. Remove breast meat with



stuffing, using a serving spoon and fork, and give each guest both
dark meat, light meat, and stuffing; spoon some of the sauce around
or over each serving.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: See directions at end of Master Recipe.

OTHER STUFFINGS, OTHER SAUCES

Farce Évocation d’Albuféra
[Rice, Mushrooms, and Chicken-liver Stuffing with Purée of
Garlic]
More Mediterranean in feeling than the original is the following

stuffing for those occasions when you do not wish to indulge in
truffles and foie gras.

For about 3½ cups, to fill a 4½-pound half-boned chicken

1 head of garlic Separate the garlic cloves and drop
¼ cup dry white wine or into a pan of boiling water, boil 1

dry white French minute, drain, and slip off the peel.
vermouth Then simmer the garlic cloves very

1 cup chicken stock or slowly for 30 minutes with the wine
canned chicken broth and stock. Meanwhile, continue with

A small covered the rest of the stuffing.
saucepan

¼ pound fresh Sauté the mushrooms and scallions in
mushrooms, trimmed, butter and oil over moderately high
washed, dried, and heat, tossing and turning, until fat



quartered (about 1 reappears on surface of mushrooms;
cup) then add diced livers and sauté a

2 Tb minced shallots or minute more, tossing. Pour in the
scallions Madeira or port and boil rapidly until

1 Tb butter and 1 tsp oil liquid is almost entirely evaporated.
3 chicken livers, cut into Scrape into mixing bowl.

⅜-inch pieces
A heavy-bottomed 2½- to

3-quart enameled or
stainless saucepan

¼ cup dry (Sercial)
Madeira or dry port

A mixing bowl

2¼ to 2½ cups plain Blend the rice, herbs, and egg into
boiled white rice (¾ the mixing bowl. Drain cooked garlic,
cup raw rice, boiled in and mash through sieve into mixing
salted water until bowl; blend in, along with 2
barely tender) tablespoons of the cooking liquid.

¼ tsp thyme or oregano (Reserve rest of liquid for sauce,
1 egg, lightly beaten including it as part of the chicken-
The cooked garlic in its cooking stock.) Taste stuffing, and

broth carefully correct seasoning.
A fine-meshed sieve
Salt and pepper to taste

Stuff, truss, and poach the chicken as directed in the preceding
recipe; either make the same sauce with pimento-butter enrichment,
or make a light curry sauce by stirring 2 teaspoons of fragrant curry
powder into the butter as you make the roux, beginning of Step 3,
Master Recipe.



Farce Normande, aux Boudins Blancs
[White Forcemeat Stuffing with Mushroom Duxelles]
Boudin blanc, with its ground chicken, veal, or pork and tenderly

cooked onions, is so good one is always happy to find other uses for
it. Use half the recipe here, but there is no need to encase the
mixture in sausage skins: roll it, instead, into one big sausage shape
in cheesecloth, as illustrated here; poach it in the wine and chicken
stock you will use for poaching the chicken, making the stock even
better than usual for your final sauce. Then proceed as follows.

The poached boudin Cut the boudin into ½-inch dice and
described in preceding set aside. Heat the duxelles with the
paragraph shallots or scallions, tossing and

About ½ cup cooked turning over moderately high heat
mushroom duxelles for 2 minutes to cook the shallots,
(finely diced then pour in the wine. Boil rapidly
mushrooms sautéed in for a minute or two, to evaporate
butter), still in their liquid almost completely. Taste, and
sauté pan carefully correct seasoning.

2 Tb minced shallots or
scallions

¼ cup dry (Sercial)
Madeira or dry port
wine

Salt and pepper to taste

Stuff the chicken with layers of diced boudin interspersed with
sprinklings of duxelles, and top with the slices of breast meat. Truss



the chicken as illustrated, and poach as directed in the Master
Recipe for chicken poached in white wine. Rather than flavoring the
sauce with tarragon, you might make an additional ¼ cup of wine-
flavored duxelles initially, and reserve it to simmer a moment in
your finished sauce before adding the final butter enrichment. A
sprinkling of minced fresh green herbs, such as parsley, tarragon, or
chives could go in too at the last minute.

POULARDE EN SOUTIEN-GORGE COQ EN PÂTE—
POULARDE EN CROÛTE
[Half-boned and Stuffed Chicken in a Pastry Crust]

Once you have boned, stuffed, and enrobed a coq en pâte, you
may put it away in the refrigerator and bake it the next day.
Amusing to prepare and always a success when served, it is a great
dish for a party. Not only are the chicken’s breastworks removed,
but its skin is also peeled off; thus the French title, soutien-gorge, is
as primly nondescriptive as would be our brassiere; the German
Bustenhalter would give a more exact explanation of what the pastry
must do to hold the breast and stuffing in place during baking. The
dough, pâte à croustades, is designed for something like a pâté or a



chicken that must bake for an hour or more: the pastry is crisp,
tender, and delicious to eat as well as being easy to handle; if you
make it in the electric mixer you will find it very easy to do.

CHICKEN NOTES

Rather than the 4½-pound roaster or capon for 6, suggested in
the recipe, you may use 3- to 3½-pound fryers, and 3 of them would
serve 12 to 16 people. You will need only ½ the pastry recipe per
frying chicken, and 2½ cups of stuffing. Roasting time for 1 frying
chicken would be 1 hour and 20 to 30 minutes; for 3 chickens in
one oven, probably 1¾ to 2 hours.

For 6 people

1) The pastry—made at least 2 hours before baking
Pastry formula 6, pâte à Make the pastry either by hand in the

croustades usual way, or by machine. Wrap and
chill the dough for at least 2 hours,
or overnight. (Any leftovers may be
frozen, and used for turnovers or
appetizer pastries.)

2) Preparing and stuffing the chicken
A 4½-lb. roasting Slit the skin of the chicken along the

chicken or capon breast bone from neck end to tail
end; turn chicken over and slit skin
from neck to tail ¼ inch from edge of
backbone on each side.



Cut off wings at elbows. Then, except for strip of skin at
backbone, peel the rest of the skin off the chicken. Being careful not
to detach the following pieces from the chicken, cut through ball
joints attaching wings to shoulders, second joints to hips, and
drumsticks to second joints; this is to prevent these appendages from
kicking through the pastry during cooking. Remove breast meat,
and cut out upper half of breastbone-rib structure as illustrated here.
Cut the breast meat in strips and marinate, if you wish, in wine and
herbs as described in the Master Recipe, Step 1. Make a brown
chicken stock with the giblets, skin, and scraps (Volume I, page
236).

3½ cups of any stuffing Following illustrated directions, stuff
for chicken, the the chicken and lay the breast strips
évocation d’Albuféra on top. Insert skewer as in the
being particularly illustration, to keep legs in place
recommended during baking; it will be drawn out

A skewer or knitting from the crust before serving.
needle just long
enough to go through
carcass at knees and to
protrude ¼ to ½ inch
on each side

3) Enclosing chicken in pastry
The chilled pastry from Preheat oven to 400 degrees in time

Step 1 for Step 4. Roll ⅔ of the pastry out
White wine, or on a lightly floured board, making an

vermouth, or chicken oval 3⁄16 inch thick and large enough
stock; or the garlic-
cooking liquid if you to cover top and sides of chicken.



are using farce Paint chicken with wine or stock, and
évocation d’Albuféra press the pastry in place over the

A pastry brush flesh. (Leave a small opening at one
A shallow buttered side or both for removal of skewer

roasting pan or edged after baking.) Trim off any extra
baking sheet large pastry, leaving only enough to cover
enough to hold sides of chicken completely. (Bare
chicken easily bottom of chicken rests on baking

Egg glaze (1 egg beaten surface.)
in a small bowl with 1
tsp water)

Roll out pastry scraps, cut into whatever designs you wish, paint
undersides with egg glaze, and affix to the pastry.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If both stuffing and chicken were cold
before being combined, chicken may be covered, refrigerated, and
baked the next day. Note, however, that roasting time may be 15 to
20 minutes longer than time indicated in Step 4.

4) Baking—1½ to 1¾ hours
The egg glaze and the When oven has been preheated to

pastry brush 400 degrees, paint surface of pastry
Aluminum foil or brown and decorations with egg glaze. Draw

paper the point of a knife over glaze into
pastry to make decorative cross-hatch
marks.

Immediately set chicken in middle level of preheated oven. In 20
to 25 minutes, when pastry has begun to brown nicely, turn
thermostat down to 350 degrees. Look again in another 30 minutes,



and if pastry is browning too much, cover loosely with foil or brown
paper. Chicken is close to being done when juices begin to exude in
pan, and is definitely done when pan is removed, tipped, and last
juices running from under crust are clear yellow with no trace of
rose. As soon as chicken is done, remove from oven.

5) Sauce and serving
A lightly buttered Remove chicken to serving platter,

serving platter and carefully extract skewer that has
2 Tb minced shallots or held legs in place. Stir the shallots or

scallions scallions and wine into the juices in
¼ cup dry (Sercial) the roasting pan, set over moderate

Madeira, dry port heat, and scrape up all coagulated
wine, or dry white bits of flavor into juices and wine
French vermouth with a wooden spoon. Scrape liquid

A saucepan containing 1 into saucepan with the stock, and
cup of brown chicken boil down rapidly to concentrate
stock (or a flavor. Add cream, and boil a few
combination of minutes to thicken lightly. (If it
chicken broth and beef seems necessary, remove from heat,
bouillon) beat in cornstarch mixture, and

½ cup crème fraîche or simmer 2 minutes more to thicken.)
heavy cream Carefully correct seasoning. Just

before serving, remove from heat and
If needed: 1 tsp swirl in butter a half spoonful at a

cornstarch blended time. (You will have only a cup, just
with 1 Tb stock or enough to moisten each serving.)
wine

2 to 3 Tb soft butter
A warm sauce boat



To serve, cut straight down through top of crust from neck to
tail, and spread crust to sides of chicken. Remove legs and wings,
and cut into serving pieces. Give each guest both white and dark
meat, stuffing, and a piece of the crust; spoon a bit of the sauce over
or around the meat.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: You may keep chicken warm for an hour,
if necessary; let it sit out at room temperature for 20 minutes, then
keep in a 120-degree oven (or in the turned-off oven, reheating
briefly from time to time if necessary).






CHAPTER FIVE
Charcuterie: Sausages, Salted Pork

and Goose, Pâtés and Terrines

THE FOUNDATION AND MAINSTAY of French charcuterie is pork in all
its forms, from sausages and stuffings to hams, pâtés, and terrines.
Chair cuite, meaning meat that is cooked, was obviously the
derivation of this marvelous keystone of French civilization, but
modern charcuterie shops, like American delicatessens, have
branched out and sell all manner of edibles, such as aspics and
ready-to-heat escargots, heat-and-serve lobster dishes, ready-made
salads, mayonnaise, relishes, canned goods, fine wines, and liqueurs.
In the best establishments, all the cooking is done on the premises;
they cure their own hams, make their own salt pork and fresh and
smoked sausages, have their own formulas for their beautiful
display of pâtés. Let us all pray that this delicious way of life will
long remain, because there are few things more satisfying to the
soul than the look and smell of a French charcuterie.

SAUSAGES
Saucisses et Saucissons

With the virtual disappearance of European-style neighborhood
charcuteries in this country, it behooves every serious cook to have a
few sausage formulas on hand for such delicious concoctions as
saucisson en croûte, saucisson en brioche, saucisson chaud et pommes à
l’huile—that wonderfully simple dish of hot, sliced sausages and



potato salad—little pork sausages for breakfast and garnitures, and
those lovely white-meat sausages with truffles, boudins blancs. A
sausage is only ground meat and seasonings, a mixture no more
complicated than a meat loaf, and for fresh unsmoked sausages you
need no special equipment at all. An electric meat grinder and a
heavy-duty mixer will make things easier, but a sausage-stuffing
mechanism and sausage casings are not necessary because you can
use other means to arrive at the sausage shape. In French
terminology a saucisse is primarily a small and thin sausage, usually
fresh, and a saucisson is a large sausage usually smoked or otherwise
cured; the one may be called the other, however, if it is a question
of size. Here are directions for forming them in casings and a
practical substitute for casings, as well as a short discussion on caul
fat.

SAUSAGE CASINGS

Natural sausage casings, the flexible, tubular membrane that
holds the sausage together and forms its skin, are made from the
thoroughly scraped and cleaned intestines of hogs, cattle, and sheep,
of the stomachs of hogs, and of the bladders of all three. Sheep



casings are the most valuable and expensive of all, and also the most
fragile; varying in diameter from ⅝ to 1 inch, they are used mostly
for fresh pork breakfast sausages and the small cocktail or
garnishing sausages called chipolatas. Beef casings are for large
sausages like bolognas, salamis, and blood sausages, and middle
sizes like cervelats and mettwursts. Hog casings come in various
lengths and widths: bungs (gros boyaux), or the large intestine; hog
middles (fuseaux), or the middle intestines; small casings (les menus),
which are the small intestine.

The most practical and easily obtainable for the home sausage
stuffer are small hog casings, the kind your butcher uses to make his
fresh pork sausages or fresh Italian sausages. If he cannot supply
you with a few pieces, he can order them for you; or look up in the
classified telephone directory under Sausage Casings or Butcher’s
Supplies. Ask for a set of small hog casings, medium width. You will
get a bundle of 16 to 18 casings, each 20 feet long, which are
twisted into a complicated swirl resembling wet spaghetti. To
disentangle the pieces, unwind the set on a very large table. Then
start with one piece from the middle and gently pull it through the
maze, first on one side, then on the other. Disentangle all the pieces,
winding each up on your fingers as you do so, like string. Pack the
pieces between layers of coarse salt in a large screw-top jar and
store in the refrigerator. They will keep safely for years as long as
they are well covered with salt.

Before using a piece of casing, wash it off in cold water, then
soak for one but not more than two hours in cold water. Any casing
you do not use may be thoroughly rinsed inside and out, wound up
again, and repacked with salt in your casing container.

How to use sausage casing
Casing is ideal for sausages because it holds the meat in perfect

symmetry; the problem is finding a way to get the meat into these
marvelous containers. Professionals use a stuffing machine, poussoir,
which is a large cylinder with a pushing plate at one end and a
nozzle at the other: the meat goes into the cylinder, the casing is slid



up the outside of the nozzle, and a crank operates the plate, pushing
the meat from the cylinder through the nozzle and into the casing,
which slowly and evenly fills with meat as it slides off the nozzle.
There are home models available from some butcher supply houses
and mail-order sources; anyone going into serious sausage making
should certainly have one, since alternatives can only be makeshift
and more or less successful depending on your sausage mixture.
Here are the alternatives, including hand stuffer, meat grinder, and
pastry bag. You will work out your own system.

Whichever of the three methods you choose, you will need a
nozzle of some sort onto the outside of which you slide the sausage
casing. This can be a funnel, the metal tube that fits a professional-
size pastry bag, or a regular sausage stuffing nozzle; whatever it is,
we shall call it by its official name, stuffing horn. After the sausage
casing has soaked for an hour in cold water, cut it into 2- to 3-foot
lengths so it will be easy to deal with.

Wet horn in cold water; fit one
end of a piece of casing onto the

small end.

Hold the large end of the horn under a slowly running faucet of cold
water, and push casing up outside with your fingers, being careful not to
tear casing with your fingernails. If you have cut casing into lengths,
string them all onto the horn, one after the other. To permit



freedom of action, always leave 3
to 4 inches of empty casing
dangling from end of horn and,
unless your sausage mixture is
very soft and liable to dribble out,
do not knot end of casing until
the whole length is filled.

With the casing in place, you are now ready to stuff it. Have in
mind how long you want your sausages to be, how many, if any,
you want linked together, and if they are to be linked, whether the
meat mixture is soft enough so that you can safely twist the filled
casing into lengths without bursting it. This is mostly a matter of
trial and error; if you want no errors and have plenty of casing, fill
and either link or cut and tie one sausage at a time. To minimize air
spaces and bubbles, watch casing carefully as you are filling it;
when air spaces develop, push filled casing against end of horn to
force air back into stuffer. In severe instances, when you are making
linked sausages, you will have to cut the casing, tie it, and start a
new series of links.

A pastry bag works surprisingly
well for either stiff or soft sausage

mixtures. You will need 2 metal
tubes 2 inches long with ½-inch
openings at the small end. One is

holding the casing around its
outside; the other is fitted inside a

12- to 14-inch bag.



This oversize hypodermic consists of
wooden plunger, cylinder, and
detachable horn. It works well for
soft mixtures like the boudin
blanc.

For stiffer blends, you have to brace the end of the tube against
the edge of a table. A pastry bag is easier in this case.

A stuffing horn of plastic or metal 4
inches long, ¾ inch in diameter at
the small end, and 2¼ at the large
end fits most grinders of the type
illustrated here. They often come as
extra equipment, or can be ordered
from butcher or mail-order houses.

Sometimes the grinder is operated with cutting knife (a) and disk (b) as
well as horn (c), and sometimes not; if you have no instructions, you
will have to try both ways. Some meat grinders work fairly well as
sausage stuffers; others are maddeningly unsatisfactory.

Operate meat grinder at slow speed
if it is electric, and hold casing

horizontal with horn as meat goes
in; this is to avoid air bubbles.

When sausage meat has gone into
casing, slip a free 3 or 4 inches of
empty casing from horn and cut

off with scissors.



Tie a knot in the casing close
against the meat at each end. For
linked sausages, twist slowly and
carefully to make the separations. Tie
a piece of white string at each
separation.

HOW TO FORM SAUSAGES IN CHEESECLOTH CASINGS

Cheesecloth works very well indeed as an alternative to
professional casing when it is of no aesthetic importance that the
sausage be perfectly symmetrical, such as those to be baked in
pastry, served in slices, or crumbed and broiled. The following
illustrations are for small sausages; large ones are formed in the
same way.

As an example, for 5-inch
sausages, provide yourself with
sufficient pieces of well-washed,

damp, double-thickness
cheesecloth about 8 inches

square, and sufficient 4-inch
pieces of white string to secure

the 2 ends of each. Form sausages
one at a time. Start by spreading

cheesecloth on a tray and painting it
with melted lard or shortening.



Form a neat rectangular loaf of sausage
meat 5 inches long on lower end of
cheesecloth.

Smooth meat into a cylindrical
shape; roll up tightly and neatly in

cheesecloth.

Tie one end securely with white
string. Twist other end of
cheesecloth to pack meat into place,
tie it with string, and the casing is
finished. These sausages are often
refrigerated for 2 hours or so to firm
them up before anything else is done
to them.

CAUL FAT



A marvelously useful product of the hog is its caul fat (crêpine,
toilette), the spider-web-like membrane laced with fat that lines the
visceral cavity. Caul fat makes a perfect and perfectly edible
container for the fresh sausage patties called saucisses plates or
crêpinettes. You can use caul fat instead of casing for boudins, for the
large sausages you bake in brioche dough, and it is marvelous for
wrapping up the stuffed tenderloin, meats roasted in a cloak of
mushroom duxelles, or the noisettes de veau. Although American
manufacturers use it for the occasionally made Devonshire sausages,
caul fat is so little known to the general public in this country that
unless you have a European butcher in your shopping area, you will
have to order it. As caul fat will keep 2 months or more in the
freezer, get several pieces while you are at it; each will average 30
inches square.

SALT AND SPICES

Seasoning is always an important part of sausage making and of
charcuterie in general, since this is what gives the meat character,
making your own brand different from any other. Furthermore, the
salt and spices that enter into the preparation retard oxidation in the
meat and are thus preservatives. French recipes often specify simply
épices, sel épicé, or quatre épices, meaning use your own spice
formula. The old standby, quatre épices, is a bottled mixture



available everywhere in France; the four spices are usually pepper,
clove, ginger or cinnamon, and nutmeg. Sel épicé is spiced salt that
is usually 2 parts white pepper and 2 parts mixed spices for every 10
parts of salt.

You will find it useful to have your own spice mixture that you
can keep at hand in a screw-top jar. Use it not only for sausages but
for pâtés, meat loaf, as a marinade before cooking pork chops, and
so forth. Here is a suggested formula: be sure all items are fresh-
tasting and fragrant.

For 1 cup épices fines

1 Tb each: bay, clove, If ingredients are not finely ground,
mace, nutmeg, either pulverize in an electric blender
paprika, thyme or a coffee grinder (finest grind),

1½ tsp each: basil, then pass through a fine-meshed
cinnamon, marjoram sieve, and repulverize any residue.
or oregano, sage,
savory

½ cup white peppercorns

For each 6 cups (3 lbs.) of meat mixture: Suggested proportions of
spice and salt

1 level tsp (2 grams)
épices fines

Plus other flavors such as
more pepper, garlic,
more of a specific
herb, and so forth,
depending on your
taste and recipe



For fresh sausages, pâté
mixtures, and
stuffings: 1 level Tb (½
ounce) table salt

For sausages that are to
be air-dried 2 or more
days: 1½ Tb table salt

NOTE: These proportions are what seem correct to us. Salts and
spices vary in strength, and you may find you prefer a little more or
a little less per pound.

PORK CUTS AND PORK FAT FOR SAUSAGES

Sausages, and charcuterie in general, are a byproduct of
butchering. If you raise your own hogs and do your own butchering,
you will have all the lean meat you need out of the trimmings from
hams, loins, necks, and other large pieces. You will have, as well,
the various types of fat, such as the hard fat from the back of the
hog between the meat of the loin and the skin; this is the fatback,
which is used not only for sausages and pâtés but also for larding
roasts. You will have the leaf lard, almost impossible to find
nowadays, which comes from inside the hog around the kidneys.
You will have fat from the jowl, the neck, the belly, the hams, and
the shoulders. Those of us not so fortunate have to buy retail cuts
from the butcher or the supermarkets; our sausages will be a little
more expensive to make, but they will be far better than anything
we can buy because we will be using fresh meat of the best quality.

Unless your market goes in for foreign or regional cuts or you
live in a pork-eating area, you may have only the loin to work with.
However, you can buy a large piece from the shoulder end, bone it
out, roast or sauté the lean pieces, and turn the rest into sausage.



Rather than the difficult-to-find fatback, you may use fat
trimmed from the outside of a loin roast; it works well because it is
neither too soft nor too hard. Fat trimmed from the outside of fresh
hams and shoulders is less desirable because a little soft, but it is
quite usable when you have no alternatives. If you have a fat-and-
lean cut like boneless shoulder butt, make a guess at the proportion
of fat to lean and add whichever is lacking according to your recipe
requirements. One cup of meat or of fat is approximately ½ pound.

CHAIR À SAUCISSE
[Plain Pork Sausage Meat—for Sausage Cakes, Breakfast
Sausages, Chipolatas, and as a Stuffing Ingredient for Pâtés,
Poultry, and So Forth]
It is so easy to make your own sausage meat and it is so good

that you will wonder, once you have made it, why you ever were so
foolish as to buy it. Usual French proportions of fat to lean are one
to one; you may cut it down to 1 part fat and 2 parts lean,
particularly when you are using the retail pork cuts suggested here
rather than trimmings; less fat than this will give you less tender
sausages.

For 6 cups (3 lbs.) sausage-meat mixture

1) The sausage mixture
2 lbs. (4 cups) lean fresh Put meat and fat through finest blade

pork meat such as of meat grinder; for a very smooth
fresh ham, shoulder, mixture, you may put it through the
or loin grinder again. If you have a heavy-

1 lb. (2 cups) fresh pork duty mixer, beat thoroughly with the
fat, such as fatback, seasonings until very well blended.



fat trimmed from loin Otherwise, blend thoroughly with a
roast, or fresh leaf fat wooden spoon and/or your hands,

A meat grinder first dipping them in cold water. To
A heavy-duty mixer with test for flavor, sauté a small spoonful

flat beater blade, or for several minutes until cooked
large bowl and through; taste, and add more
wooden spoon seasoning if you feel it necessary, but

1 Tb salt remember that the spice flavor will
not develop to its full in the meat for

1 tsp épices fines or ½ tsp 12 hours or more.
white pepper and ½
tsp pulverized mixed
herbs and spices to
your taste

2) Forming and cooking
Sausage Cakes or Sausage Roll. Either form into sausage cakes

with a wet spatula on waxed paper, or with your hands, dipping
them in cold water frequently; then, if you wish, wrap cakes in caul
fat. Or form into a cylinder 2 inches in diameter in cheesecloth as
illustrated at the beginning of this section and chill; then unwrap
and cut into cakes. Sauté slowly in a frying pan until nicely browned
and thoroughly cooked through.

Sausage Links and Chipolatas. For these you should have narrow
sheep casings ⅝ inch in diameter, if you can get them. Breakfast
links are usually 3 inches long; chipolatas, the tiny sausages used for
cocktails and garnitures, 1½ to 2 inches. Form as illustrated at the
beginning of this section. To cook, prick in several places with a pin
and place in a frying pan with ½ inch of water, cover and cook at
just below the simmer for 5 minutes or until sausages have stiffened
slightly. Pour off water and sauté, turning frequently, until nicely
browned.



BOUDIN BLANC
[White-meat Sausages—Chicken and Veal or Chicken and Pork
Forcemeat Stuffing]
White-meat sausages abound across the Atlantic, from the

German and Swiss bratwursts and weisswursts to England’s quaintly
titled white puddings. It has even been suggested that the French
boudin and the English pudding sprang from a single etymological
root. The boudin is more like a quenelle than a sausage, delicate in
flavor and texture. In France, where a truffled boudin is traditional
at the midnight Reveillon of Christmas and New Year, mashed
potatoes is the accompaniment. However, you may treat them like
roast chicken or roast veal, adding green vegetables to the platter,
such as creamed spinach, broccoli, peas, braised endive, or whatever
else you feel appropriate.

For about 6 cups, making 10 to 12 boudins, 5 by 1¼ inches

1) The sausage mixture

the pork fat:
½ cup (4 ounces) fresh Put the pork fat through the grinder.

pork leaf fat, outside Return half to top of grinder. Cook
loin fat, or fatback the rest in the frying pan over low

A meat grinder with heat for 4 to 5 minutes until it has
finest blade rendered 2 to 3 tablespoons of fat but

An 8-inch frying pan has not browned at all.
with cover

cooking the onions:



3 cups (¾ lb.) sliced (If you wish a mild onion flavor, drop
onions them into 2 quarts of boiling water

and boil 4 minutes; drain, rinse in
cold water, and thoroughly shake off
excess water.) Add onions to pork fat
and fat pieces in frying pan, cover
and cook very slowly, stirring
frequently, for 15 minutes or more;
they should be perfectly tender and
translucent, but no more than a pale
cream in color.

la panade:
½ cup (1½ ounces Meanwhile, bring the bread crumbs

pressed down) stale and milk to the boil and boil, stirring
white crumbs from constantly with wooden spoon to
unsweetened prevent scorching, for several
homemade-type bread minutes until mixture is thick enough

1 cup milk almost to hold its shape on the
A heavy-bottomed 2- spoon. (This is now a panade, in the

quart saucepan true and original sense of the word.)
A wooden spoon
The large bowl of your

electric mixer, or a 3-
quart bowl

the final mixture:
½ lb. (1 cup) skinless When onions are tender, pass them

and boneless raw with the remaining pork fat, the
breast of chicken



½ lb. (1 cup) lean fresh chicken, and the veal or pork through
veal or pork from grinder twice. Place in mixing bowl,
shoulder or loin add seasonings, and beat vigorously

2 tsp salt in the electric mixer or by hand until
⅛ tsp each: nutmeg, well blended. Beat in the egg and

allspice, and white continue beating for 1 minute, then
pepper beat in half the egg whites, and in

1 egg another minute the remainder of the
egg whites. Finally, beat in the cream

⅓ cup egg whites (2–3 2 tablespoons at a time, beating a
egg whites) minute between additions. If you are

½ cup heavy cream using a truffle, mince it into ⅛-inch
Optional: A 1-ounce pieces and beat it in along with juices

truffle and juices from from the can.
the can

To check seasoning, sauté a small spoonful until cooked through,
taste, and add more if you feel it is necessary, but remember that
the boudin is supposed to be rather delicate and mild in flavor.

2) Forming the boudins
Form either in small hog casings or in cheesecloth. Sausages will

improve in flavor if refrigerated at least 12 hours before cooking.
(*) STORAGE NOTES: May be refrigerated for 2 to 3 days, or may be

frozen for a month or so.

3) Preliminary cooking
(If you have formed the boudins in sausage casing, prick them in

several places with a pin.) Arrange boudins in a baking pan, roaster,
or large frying pan at least 3 inches deep, and on a rack or grill if
you have one that fits. Measure in enough quarts of boiling water or
half-and-half boiling water and milk to cover boudins by 1½ inches.
Add 1½ teaspoons salt for each quart of liquid, and lay 2 imported
bay leaves on top. Bring liquid barely to the simmer and poach



uncovered at just below the simmer for 25 minutes. Remove from
liquid and cool on several thicknesses of paper towels. If you have
used cheesecloth casings, cut off the two ends with scissors and peel
the sausages while still warm. (Sausage-casing boudins are peeled
just before final cooking.)

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If the boudins are not to have their final
cooking promptly, wrap and refrigerate when cool. They will keep 3
to 4 days in the refrigerator, a month or so in the freezer.

4) Final cooking and serving
Of the several cooking methods available, oven baking is not

recommended because it toughens the outside of the boudins before
they have had time to brown. Dredging in flour and browning
slowly in a frying pan in clarified butter or rendered pork fat is
preferable, but the best method, we think, is under the broiler as
follows: Roll the peeled boudins in fresh white bread crumbs,
pressing the crumbs in place with your fingers. Arrange in a
buttered baking dish and dribble on droplets of melted butter. Broil
slowly, turning and basting with fat in pan several times, for 10 to
12 minutes, until boudins are nicely browned. Arrange on a hot
platter, over a bed of hot mashed potatoes if you wish, and decorate
with sprigs of parsley or watercress. Serve as soon as possible.

  SAUCISSON À CUIRE—Saucisson de Ménage, Saucisson
de Toulouse, Saucisson à l’Ail, Saucisson Truffé,
Cervelas de Paris
[Large Fresh Sausages to Cook and Serve with Potatoes,
Sauerkraut, Cassoulet, or to Bake in Brioche or Pastry Dough]
The following formula produces a fine substitute for those

marvelous creations you read about but cannot find except in a
French charcuterie. This recipe is for the home sausage maker, and
requires no special equipment; for that reason you cannot call your



product a saucisson de Lyon, which is hung for 8 days in a drying
shed, or a saucisson de Morteau, which finishes in a smokehouse. Any
of the names in the title, however, will do, and any Frenchman you
invite for a meal will think you brought it back from the old
country.

The sausages will develop their best flavor when you are able to
hang them in a dry, airy part of the room at a temperature of 70 to
80 degrees for 2 to 3 days before cooking. If the weather is very
damp, or much over 80 degrees, however, omit the hanging; several
days in the refrigerator instead will help develop flavor. The
saltpeter (potassium nitrate), which you should be able to buy at
any prescription counter, is omitted if you are not hanging the
sausages; its role is to give the meat an appetizing, rosy color that
only develops after several days of hanging. Use the coarse or the
fine blade of your meat grinder, whichever you prefer, but the
coarse grind is more typical of a sausage that is to be hung.

French sausages of this type are not madly spiced and peppered,
like some of the Spanish and Italian varieties. We have suggested 3
special flavorings, and you will eventually develop the proportions
or other additions that will make your own sausage le saucisson de
chez nous.

For 6 cups (3 pounds) sausage-meat mixture, making 10 to 12
sausages 5 by 1¼ inches, or 2 sausages 12 by 2 inches

1) The sausage mixture
4 cups (2 lbs.) lean fresh Put meat and fat through grinder.

pork such as fresh With either a heavy-duty mixer and
ham, shoulder, or loin flat beater, or your hands and/or a

2 cups (1 lb.) fresh pork wooden spoon, mix in the rest of the
fat such as fatback, fat ingredients to blend vigorously and
trimmed from a loin completely. Sauté a small spoonful to
roast, fresh leaf fat



Either 1 tsp épices fines cook through thoroughly, taste, and
plus ¼ tsp white correct seasoning, if necessary.
pepper;

Or ¾ tsp white pepper
and ½ tsp pulverized
herbs and spices of
your choice

1 Tb salt
¼ cup Cognac

if you are to hang the sausage:
¼ tsp saltpeter, ¾ tsp

sugar, and
1½ tsp more salt

special flavorings:
Either 1) A 1- to 2-ounce

can of truffles and the
juice from the can;

Or 2) ¼ cup chopped
pistachios and 1 small
clove mashed garlic;

Or 3) 2 or 3 medium
cloves mashed garlic
and ½ tsp cracked
peppercorns

2) Forming and curing the sausages
Form the sausages either in casings or in cheesecloth as

illustrated at the beginning of this chapter. If you are forming a 12-



by 2-inch sausage in cheesecloth, wind a spiral of string around the
length to keep it in shape; if you are hanging cheesecloth-wrapped
sausages, paint again with melted lard after forming and tying.
Hang sausages up on a nail or hook, in the dry airy part of your
kitchen where the temperature is generally around 70 degrees and
rarely over 80. After 2 to 3 days, they are ready for cooking.

(*) STORAGE NOTE: After curing, sausages may be wrapped securely
and refrigerated for a week, or frozen for a month.

3) Cooking and serving suggestions
Saucissons à cuire need 30 to 40 minutes of slow cooking in

liquid, and if you have formed them in casings, prick them in
several places with a pin so that the fat will run out. When you are
braising sauerkraut or cabbage, doing a bean or lentil dish or a pot
au feu, add the sausages to the dish 30 to 40 minutes before the end
of the cooking period. When you wish to serve them separately, as
with French potato salad, or baked in brioche or pastry dough, poach
them at just below the simmer for 30 to 40 minutes in a wine-
flavored beef bouillon, selecting a container, such as a bread pan or
casserole, that will just hold them easily. There is no need to brown
them afterwards, but if you wish a more elegant presentation for
sausages formed in cheesecloth, roll them in fresh bread crumbs,
dribble on melted butter, and brown them under the broiler.

Other suggestions
You can make delicious fresh sausages out of the all-purpose

pork and veal pâté mixture in Volume I on page 565, plus, if you
wish, diced ham, diced marinated bits of veal or game, or diced and
briefly sautéed liver, as suggested in the pâté mixtures following it.
You may also adapt any of the pâté mixtures in the next section of
this chapter. Form and cook the sausages as described in the
preceding recipe; this type of sausage, and the chicken-liver sausage



in the next recipe, are particularly good when baked in brioche or
pastry dough.

SAUCISSON TRUFFÉ AU FOIE GRAS OU AUX FOIES
DE VOLAILLE
[Pork and Veal Sausages with Truffles and Foie Gras or with
Chicken Livers—Especially for Baking in Brioche or Pastry
Dough, or as a Stuffing for Pâtés, Poultry, Chaussons]
For about 4½ cups, making two 12 by 1½-inch sausages

2 Tb pork fat, chicken Heat the fat or butter in an 8-inch
fat, or butter frying pan, add the shallots or

¼ cup minced shallots or scallions and the chicken livers (not
scallions the foie gras); toss over moderately

Either ¾ lb. (1½ cups) high heat for several minutes until
chicken livers; liver has just stiffened to the touch; it

Or a mixture of chicken should feel springy, but remain rosy
livers and block inside. If you are using chicken liver
canned foie gras, half- only, cut half into ¼-inch dice and
and-half if you wish to place in a bowl.
pay the price (foie gras
is used in next step)

The diced liver or the If you are using foie gras, cut into ¼-
foie gras inch dice and place in a bowl. Fold

2 Tb Cognac foie gras or liver gently with the
Pinch épices fines, or

allspice



Salt and pepper Cognac and flavorings and let
marinate until needed.

¼ cup (¾ ounce pressed Simmer bread crumbs in milk,
down) stale white stirring constantly, for several
crumbs from minutes until thick enough to mass
unsweetened on a spoon. Scrape into large bowl of
homemade-type bread mixer, or a large mixing bowl. (This

½ cup milk is a panade.)

½ lb. (1 cup) lean veal Put meats, fat, and chicken livers
Either 1 lb. (2 cups) chair through finest blade of meat grinder

à saucisses; and add to mixing bowl.
Or ½ lb. lean pork loin,

shoulder, or fresh ham
and ½ lb. fresh pork
fatback or outside loin
fat

The sautéed undiced
chicken livers

The marinade from the Beat in the marinade, salt, flavorings,
diced foie gras or pistachios or truffles and juice, and
chicken livers egg. When well blended, gradually

2 tsp salt beat in the wine. Finally, fold in the
Either ¾ tsp épices fines diced foie gras or chicken livers,

and ¼ tsp white being careful not to break the diced
pepper; shapes. Mixture will be fairly soft.

Sauté a spoonful and taste; correct



Or ½ tsp white pepper seasoning as necessary. Form into
and big pinches each sausages using either casings or
allspice and nutmeg cheesecloth. (If you are using the

¼ tsp thyme mixture for a filling or stuffing that is
Either ¼ cup peeled to be baked later, pack into a covered

pistachio nuts, bowl.) Flavor will improve when
quartered lengthwise; refrigerated a day or two before

Or 1 or 2 diced truffles cooking.
and their canned
juices

1 egg
¼ cup dry port wine or

Sercial Madeira
The marinated foie gras

or diced chicken livers

Cook and serve sausages as suggested in preceding Master
Recipe, or bake in brioche dough as in the following recipe.

(*) STORAGE NOTE: Sausages may be frozen for a month or so.

SAUCISSON DE FOIES DE VOLAILLE—PÂTÉ DE FOIES
DE VOLAILLE—FARCE À GRATIN
[Chicken-liver Sausage for Baking in Brioche Dough—Chicken-
liver Pâté—Chicken-liver Spread or Filling]
This all-purpose liver mixture is so versatile it can serve as a

sausage, a pâté, a spread for sandwiches and hors d’oeuvre, a filling
for poultry or meat, and can generally be used anywhere you need
the depth and strength of a liver accent. Liver alone is such a



concentrated flavor that you must have something else with it to
temper the taste: the sausage uses cream cheese and bread crumbs,
while the pâté includes cheese and butter, and the filling, farce à
gratin, calls for the traditional pork fat. Two other liver pâtés or
spreads are the pork-liver pâté and the mousse of chicken livers in
Volume I, page 559.

For about 2 cups

The basic chicken-liver mixture
⅓ cup very finely minced Cook the onions slowly in the fat or

onions butter for 12 to 15 minutes, until
3 Tb chicken fat or butter very tender but not brown. Add livers
¾ lb. (1½ cups) chicken and seasonings, and toss over

livers moderately high heat just until
Either ¼ tsp épices fines; stiffened slightly, 2 to 3 minutes;
Or a big pinch each of livers should remain rosy inside. Pour

allspice, mace, and in the Cognac, heat to bubbling, and
white pepper flame with a lighted match; in 1

minute, extinguish flames with a
A big pinch thyme cover and remove pan from heat. Stir
¼ tsp salt in optional mushrooms. The liver
⅓ cup Cognac mixture is now ready to be used
Optional: ½ cup diced either in brioche dough or in another

fresh mushrooms, form as follows.
squeezed dry and
sautéed in 1 Tb butter

For sausage in brioche
½ cup (1 ounce pressed

down) dry white



crumbs from Stir the bread crumbs and cheese into
unsweetened the liver mixture, and purée through
homemade-type bread a food mill, meat grinder, or blender.

4 ounces (½ cup) cream Correct seasoning. Roll into a
cheese cylindrical shape in aluminum foil

The basic chicken-liver and chill until firm; however, bring
mixture to room temperature before encasing

it in the dough so that dough will rise
easily.

For liver spread or pâté
The basic chicken-liver Purée liver mixture through a food

mixture mill, meat grinder, or blender, then
4 ounces (½ cup) beat in softened butter and cream

softened butter cheese. Correct seasoning. If you plan
4 ounces (½ cup) cream to use this as a pâté, pack into a

cheese covered jar or mold, and chill.

For farce à gratin—to use as a spread, filling, or pâté
The basic chicken-liver Rather than using butter for cooking

mixture but substitute: the onions and chicken livers, use the
6 ounces (¾ cup) fresh ¾ cup pork fat as follows: grind or
pork fatback or mince it, and cook slowly for 8 to 10
outside loin fat for the minutes in the sauté pan until pieces
butter of fat are translucent but not

browned, and ⅓ cup or so of fat has
rendered. Then proceed with the
recipe. Purée in a blender, food mill,



or meat grinder, pack into a jar or
decorative bowl, and chill.

(*) STORAGE NOTE: Any of these will keep for 4 to 5 days in the
refrigerator, and they freeze successfully for several months.

SAUSAGES AND OTHER MEAT MIXTURES BAKED IN
BRIOCHE DOUGH

Saucissons et Pâtés en Brioche

When you want to be dramatic and dressy with sausage, bake it
in a brioche case. For cocktails, slice it warm and thin and serve on
little plates. When it is a hot first course or the mainstay for
luncheon or supper, include a succulent brown sauce to pour over
each serving. Although reminiscent of pâté en croûte, sausage in
brioche is usually served warm, and is lighter in general impression.
Unlike the real pâté, which goes raw into its covering of dough for
baking, the sausage or meat mixture that is enclosed in brioche



dough has already been cooked, and remains in the oven only long
enough to heat through as the brioche bakes.

FORMING NOTE

The rectangular loaf shape that encloses a large cylindrical
sausage is the most typical form, and the one we shall illustrate.
With your own sausage or cooked meat mixture, however, you may
make it round, square, heart-shaped, or whatever you wish.

CLOSING THE GAP

Because you are working with live dough, that is, yeast dough,
you may run into one problem that does not occur with pastry
dough: this is a sometimes ugly space between the meat and the
brioche that only reveals itself when you are slicing through the
structure to serve.

It is particularly true of home-cured or store-bought sausages,
less true of soft mixtures like chicken livers, and more liable to be
troublesome with sausages baked in a pan than with those formed
on a pastry sheet. One way to minimize the gap or eliminate it
completely is to be sure that the sausage is very hot at the moment
you enclose it in the dough. Heat kills the yeast in a thin layer of
dough, about ⅛ inch, all around the sausage, and this layer should
cling to the sausage while the rest of the dough rises around it.
Another way to close the gap is to bake the sausage in a closed pan,
as suggested in a variation at the end of the Master Recipe. We are
only giving prominence to this problem so that you will be aware of
it and pleased with yourself when you have avoided it but not
unduly disturbed when you have not. In such instances, however,
when you want to serve a cold liver pâté en brioche, you will
welcome the gap because you can siphon a deliciously flavored
aspic into that space between meat and brioche, which will add
immensely to the taste and appearance of the pâté slices when you
serve them.



TIMING NOTE

With your brioche dough made the day before, and your sausage
or meat mixture ready for pre-cooking, you should count on 2½ to
3½ hours from the time you start the process until the time you can
serve. You will need 40 minutes for poaching, if you are using a
sausage, an hour for the dough-with-sausage to rise before baking,
an hour for baking, and 20 to 30 minutes for meat and brioche to
settle before slicing. Remember that you can control the rising of
dough, and you can keep the baked result warm; thus you may
arrange your schedule as you wish.

  SAUCISSON EN BRIOCHE
[Sausage Baked in Brioche Dough]
This is for a large sausage about 12 inches long and 1½ to 2

inches in diameter, such as the saucisson à cuire and the liver or foie
gras sausage following it, or for a store-bought sausage that is to be
cooked and served hot, like a Polish sausage (kielbasa) or Italian
cotechino. You may also use the cooked chicken-liver sausage
mixture; in this case, omit Step 2 in the following recipe.

For a 12-inch case, serving 6 as a hot first course, 4 as a main
course, or 18 slices for a cocktail appetizer

1) The brioche dough—started the day before you plan to serve
Either the pain brioché Make the brioche dough, giving it one

dough; rise at room temperature and a
Or the richer pâte à second rise that finishes in the

brioche fine refrigerator. Dough must be well
chilled before you form it in Step 3.



(proportions for ½ lb.
flour in either case)

2) Poaching the sausage—about 40 minutes; omit this step if
you are using the already cooked chicken-liver sausage mixture

The sausage (see Prick the sausage in several places
introductory with a pin and place in pan. Pour in
paragraph) the wine and enough simmering

A loaf pan just large bouillon to cover sausage by 1 inch.
enough to hold the Add seasonings and bring liquid to
sausage (loaf shape just below the simmer (water is
recommended) shivering and almost bubbling).

½ cup dry white wine or Cover loosely and maintain liquid at
dry white French this state for 40 minutes. Remove
vermouth sausage, peel off casing, and return to

3 or more cups beef liquid until you are ready to proceed
bouillon simmering in to Step 3. Sausage should be hot
a saucepan (around 165 degrees) for next step;

1 imported bay leaf reheat if necessary.
Salt and pepper
Useful: a meat

thermometer

3) Achieving the free-form brioche shape
The chilled dough Rapidly roll the chilled brioche dough
The hot, cooked, and into a rectangle approximately 24 by

peeled sausage (or 10 inches. With a pastry wheel or
room-temperature knife, cut off a 4- by 10-inch strip
chicken-liver sausage) and refrigerate it. Roll remaining



A large pastry sheet or dough up on your pin and unroll it
tray 16 by 24 inches, onto the waxed-paper-covered sheet
covered with lightly or tray.
floured waxed paper

A lightly buttered pastry
sheet at least 12 by 16
inches in diameter

Center sausage on dough and
quickly fold the two sides up over it;

they should overlap by about 2
inches.

Working rapidly, fold over the 2 ends of
the dough to enclose the sausage
completely. Then to prevent sausage
from breaking through dough, turn
the buttered pastry sheet upside
down on top of it, and reverse the
two so that sausage will unmold itself
seam-side down on the buttered
sheet.

Brush off any flour on top of
dough. Roll out reserved and

refrigerated strip to about 15 by 4
inches in diameter; roll up on pin

and then unroll over sausage.



Trim off excess dough from 2 ends, and press dough cover in
place lightly with fingers. Set uncovered at a temperature of no
more than 75 to 80 degrees. Let dough rise until it feels light and
spongy-springy when touched—40 to 60 minutes. (Preheat oven in
time for next step.)

4) Baking—about 1 hour; oven preheated to 425 degrees
1 egg beaten with 1 tsp Just before baking, paint top of

water in a small bowl dough with egg glaze; let set a
A pastry brush moment, and paint again.
Scissors
A cooling rack

Clip top of dough with scissors,
going in at a slant about ⅜ inch

deep and 2 inches across.



Set in middle level of preheated 425-degree oven and bake for
20 minutes, or until brioche has risen about double its height and
begun to brown. Turn oven down to 350 degrees for 30–40 minutes
more. It is done when you can begin to smell the sausage cooking,
and when the brioche itself feels solid and makes a rather dry
thumping noise when tapped. (Cover lightly with foil or brown
paper if it is coloring too much before it is done.) Slide off pastry
sheet onto rack, and let cool 20 to 30 minutes before serving.

5) Serving suggestions
Serve the sausage hot, warm, tepid, or cold (although a sausage

is usually better warm or tepid than cold). When serving it hot as a
first or main course, you can make a delicious brown sauce with the
sausage-poaching liquid, using any of the suggestions in Volume I,
pages 73–6.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: You may keep the sausage warm for an
hour or more in a 120-degree oven. If for some reason you cannot
serve it when baked, let cool, then wrap airtight; reheat uncovered
on a lightly buttered pastry sheet in a 400-degree oven for 20
minutes or so.

VARIATIONS
Forming the sausage in a loaf pan
For a 12- by 2-inch sausage you will need the long, rectangular

2-quart pan called an angel loaf, about 12 by 3¼ inches bottom
diameter and 2½ inches deep. Follow Steps 1 and 2 in the Master
Recipe, butter the inside of the loaf pan, then wrap the hot sausage
in the dough on a paper-covered pastry sheet or tray as illustrated.



Turn a buttered 12-inch loaf pan
upside down over the sausage.

Reverse tray with sausage onto
pan, unmolding sausage seam-

side down into pan.

Brush off any flour from top of
dough, and unroll reserved dough
strip over sausage.

Press dough cover into place with
fingers, pushing it lightly down
against top, sides, and ends of

sausage.

Let rise at a temperature of no more than 75 to 80 degrees for 40
to 60 minutes, until dough is light and springy; it will fill the pan by
about three quarters. Glaze, clip top with scissors, and bake as
described in preceding Master Recipe.

Baking in a covered pan



When you want to be sure there is no gap between meat and
brioche, follow the preceding recipe, but rather than glazing and
clipping the top of the dough when it has risen, cover the pan as
described and illustrated for pain de mie. This works because the
risen dough fills the pan only by three fourths; then, while it bakes,
the dough will not only fill the covered pan completely, but will also
press itself against the sausage meat. You may use any shape of pan
you wish, including a fluted brioche tin. The imported hinged
cylindrical mold shown in the illustration can easily be adapted for
sausage in brioche.

Cold pâté en Brioche with Aspic
Sausages, to our mind, are at their best when served hot or warm

in brioche dough, while liver mixtures are delicious cold. We suggest
the chicken-liver mixture, or the cooked pork and liver pâté with
onions. Follow any of the preceding methods you wish; when the
meat is fully encased and ready to rise, make a hole in the top of the
dough and insert a well-oiled cone of foil or the tube from a pastry
bag, letting its end touch the meat. After rising and baking, and
when completely cold, pour in through the cone as much almost-set
wine-flavored meat-jelly aspic as the case will hold. (See illustrated
directions in the pâté en croûte section.) Then remove cone, wrap
pâté airtight, and chill several hours or overnight. Pâté should be
eaten within 4 to 5 days.

Saucisson en Croûte
[Sausage Baked in Plain Pastry or in Puff Pastry]
Equally delicious, though naturally different in texture, is any

one of the suggested sausages poached in bouillon, peeled, and
baked in plain pie crust dough or in that wonderfully high-rising
flaky dough known as French puff pastry. Use the pâte brisée à l’oeuf,
or the demi-feuilletée. Form the dough around the sausage as



described in the free-form system, Master Recipe. Paint top with
beaten egg, press on decorative pastry cutouts, and bake exactly as
described in the Master Recipe. (Illustrated directions for decorating
this type of pastry are in Volume I, pages 574–5.)

  CAILLETTES—GAYETTES
[Pork and Liver Sausages with Greens]
These hearty green and brown sausages are made in the

countryside where hogs are slaughtered, and the farmer uses every
edible morsel for some specialty. His recipe usually includes lungs
and spleen as well as the heart and liver we have specified, and, if
he lives in Provence, he puts in plenty of garlic. Swiss chard (blettes)
is the preferred green, but because it is not always to be had in this
country, we have suggested kale or collards (chou vert non-pommé)
and spinach as substitutes. Traditionally the sausages are formed
into cushion or dumpling shapes 2 to 3 inches in diameter, wrapped
in caul fat, and baked in a big pottery dish. You may also form them
like regular sausages, like sausage cakes, or turn the whole mixture
into a meat loaf. (NOTE: flavor will improve if you can make the
mixture a day before cooking.)

Serve with mashed or scalloped potatoes and broiled tomatoes,
or an eggplant and tomato casserole, or the ratatouille in Volume I,
page 503, or simply a green salad and French bread. A rosé wine or
a domestic red would go nicely.

For 6 cups of sausage mixture, making a dozen sausages

1) The greens
1 cup minced onions Cook onions and oil in covered pan
2 Tb pork fat or olive oil over moderate heat, stirring



A heavy-bottomed occasionally, for 10 minutes or so,
saucepan with cover until tender and translucent.

Either 1½ to 2 pounds Meanwhile, pick over fresh greens,
fresh Swiss chard, wash thoroughly, and if you have
kale, collards, or chard use both the green leaves and
spinach; the white stems; drop into boiling

Or 1½ packages frozen water and boil uncovered until wilted
greens defrosted in a and just edibly tender—1 minute for
basin of cold water spinach, 5 or more for other greens.

A large kettle of boiling Drain immediately, refresh in cold
salted water water, and drain again. (Fresh and

defrosted greens may now be treated
The large bowl of an alike.) A smallish handful at a time,

electric mixer, or 3- squeeze to extract as much water as
quart mixing bowl possible; chop roughly with a big

knife. You should have about 1½
cups. Stir into the onions, raise heat,
and stir for several minutes to
evaporate excess moisture. Scrape
into mixing bowl.

2) The sausage mixture
Either 1½ lbs. (3 cups) Put meat, fat, and liver once through

fat-and-lean fresh pork the coarsest blade of the meat
shoulder butt; grinder, or chop by hand into ¼-inch

Or ¾ lb. lean pork from pieces. Add to bowl along with the
fresh ham or loin, and seasonings, and mix thoroughly by
¾ lb. fresh pork electricity or by hand. Sauté a small
fatback or fat trimmed spoonful until thoroughly cooked,
from outside loin taste, and correct seasoning if

Either ½ lb. (1 cup) fresh necessary. (Whether you form the
liver (pork, lamb, or sausages now or later, their flavor
beef) and ¼ lb. (½



cup) heart (pork, will improve if you wait 24 hours
lamb, or calf); before cooking.)

Or liver only (*) STORAGE NOTE: May be refrigerated
1 Tb salt for 2 to 3 days; may be frozen for a
Either ¾ tsp épices fines, month or two.

¼ tsp pepper and ¼
tsp savory;

Or ⅛ tsp allspice, ⅛ tsp
mace, ⅛ tsp bay leaf,
¼ tsp savory, and ½
tsp pepper

Optional: 1 or more
cloves of garlic, finely
minced or mashed

3) Forming and cooking
Caul fat. Form sausage mixture into a dozen balls or cylindrical

shapes, wrap in caul fat, arrange in one layer in a greased baking
dish, and baste with melted lard or butter. Bake for 40 to 45
minutes in the upper third of a preheated 375-degree oven until
nicely browned.

Sausage casings. Form in sausage casings, prick in several places
with a pin, and either bake as described in preceding paragraph or
poach in almost simmering water for 5 minutes, then brown in a
frying pan.

Sausage cakes. Form into sausage cakes with dampened hands.
Just before cooking, dredge lightly in flour; sauté slowly in lard or
cooking oil for 6 to 8 minutes on each side until nicely browned.

Meat loaf. (This is particularly recommended when you want
something to serve cold.) Either grease a 6-cup loaf pan or baking
dish and pack the sausage mixture into it; or form the mixture into a
loaf shape, wrap in caul fat, and place on a greased baking dish.
Bake in upper third of a preheated 375-degree oven, basting several



times with melted fat for an hour or more, or until juices, when
meat is pricked deeply, run clear yellow with no trace of rosy color
(180 to 185 dgrees on a meat thermometer).

VARIATION
Les Tous Nus—Quenelles de Boeuf Provençales
[Provençal Sausages of Leftover Braised Beef and Greens]
The naked ones, les tous nus, are sausages without casings, and a

Provençal specialty. These are formed by hand, rolled in flour, and
dropped for a moment in boiling water before they are baked in a
shallow dish with a spicy tomato sauce. They are so fragrant and
appetizing that you will find yourself braising beef just as an excuse
for making les tous nus with the leftovers.

For about 4 cups, serving 4 to 6 people

1) The sausage mixture
1 cup blanched and (If you have chard, use green leaves

squeezed greens only.) Blanch, squeeze, and chop the
¼ cup minced onions greens as described in Step 1 of the

cooked with 2 Tb olive preceding recipe, and cook with the
oil onions 2 to 3 minutes until all liquid

2 cups ground cooked has evaporated; greens must be as
beef, preferably dry as possible. Blend them in a large
braised mixing bowl with the beef,

Optional, to flavor boiled seasonings, and cheese. Beat in 3
or roast beef: ¼ cup tablespoons of egg; beat in driblets
raw sausage meat and more egg, moistening only enough so
1 Tb Cognac that mixture will hold its shape for



1 tsp salt forming. Sauté a spoonful and taste;
Either ¼ tsp épices fines; correct seasoning as necessary.
Or allspice and mace
¼ tsp savory or oregano
¼ tsp pepper
Big pinch of Cayenne or

drops of Tabasco
2 large cloves of garlic,

minced or puréed
⅓ cup grated Parmesan

cheese
¼ to ⅓ cup beaten egg (1

to 2 eggs)

2) Forming the sausages
1 cup flour on a large Take up a 3-Tb gob of the mixture

tray and roll into a sausage shape ¾ inch
A large frying pan full of in diameter; roll in flour and set

boiling water aside. When all the sausages are
A skimmer formed, drop half into the boiling
A rack, or paper towels water, bring back to the simmer for

on a tray ½ minute. Dip out onto rack and
1 or 2 shallow, greased continue with the rest. Arrange

baking dishes closely together in baking dish or
dishes. Pour over the tomato sauce,

2 to 3 cups good tomato which should barely cover them.
sauce, or Volume I, Sprinkle on the cheese and dribble
pages 76 or 78 the oil over it.

¼ cup grated Parmesan
cheese

1 to 2 Tb olive oil



(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
completed a day in advance to this
point.

3) Cooking the sausages—oven preheated to 425 degrees
About 30 minutes before serving, bring to simmer on top of

stove, then set in upper third of oven until sauce has browned and
crusted lightly on upper part of sausages, and is bubbling
underneath.

Variations
Like the caillette mixture in the Master Recipe, Step 3, the tous

nus mixture may also be formed in caul fat or sausage casings, or
may become sausage cakes or meat loaf.

JAMBON PERSILLÉ AND HOME-CURED PORK

Jambon persillé is the traditional Easter ham of Burgundy.
Simmered in wine, then cut up or shredded and packed into a big
bowl between layers of chopped parsley, aspic, and seasonings, each
slice when served is beautifully patterned with wavy lines of bright
green. It is a marvelous dish for cold lunches, supper parties, and
receptions. The real Burgundian recipe is made with salt-cured ham,
known in France as jambon demi-sel; this is the same process used in
America for the dry-curing of salt pork. Although you may certainly
use regular ham for the dish, the salt cure is so easy—all you need is
2 weeks of refrigerator space for the large bowl that holds the meat
—we highly recommend that you try it. It is not only that you will
have the authentic meat for jambon persillé, but also that you can
cure a loin of pork for chops or roasting, since salted pork makes a



delicious change from ordinary pork and is broiled or roasted in
exactly the same way. At the same time, if you can find any hog
jowls or bellies, you can also make your own salt pork.

SALAISON À SEC
[Home Dry-curing of Pork]
The object of curing pork is not only to preserve it but to give it

that special maturity of taste that only comes through salting. For
our purposes here, we are more concerned with taste than with
preservation. There is no need for brines, vats, and smokehouses,
only for saltpeter, sugar, spices, and salt. Saltpeter imparts an
attractive rosy color to the meat, sugar develops its flavor and
counteracts the drying effects of saltpeter, spices play their habitual
role, and salt preserves the meat while it matures. The following 15-
day cure is for the boned fresh ham or shoulder that may be used
for jambon persillé, and for loin roasts and salt-pork cuts; these are
all pieces, in other words, that are no thicker than 4 to 5 inches.

TEMPERATURE FOR CURING

Curing should take place at around 38 degrees Fahrenheit, which
is the range of most refrigerators. At temperatures over 40 degrees,
the meat may spoil before the salt can penetrate, and at below 36
degrees the salt penetration is too much slowed down.

THE MEAT AND ITS PREPARATION FOR THE CURE

For jambon persillé you may use either fresh ham (leg of pork) or
fresh shoulder-arm; shoulder is usually cheaper and weighs around
6½ pounds, or half as much as a ham. Many markets do not carry
either of these fresh pork cuts, and you will have to order them.
Before curing, remove the rind, which is to be cured and cooked
along with the meat, and slice off as much fat from rind and outside



of meat as you easily can; bone the meat as neatly as possible so
that you do not end up with any more small pieces of meat than
necessary. Render the fat, if you wish, and use it for general
cooking. Simmer the bones with vegetables and herbs as for an
ordinary meat stock, and store in the freezer until it is finally time
to cook the meat. If you want to add a loin roast of pork to the cure,
bone it or not, as you choose, and slice off all but a ⅛-inch layer of
covering fat. Pork jowls, belly, and fatback are cut into whatever
sizes you find convenient, and are cured as is, with the rind left on.

Note on meat-to-bone ratios
The amount of usable meat you will get from a bone-in fresh

ham or shoulder-arm is roughly 60 per cent. In other words, a 6½-
pound shoulder-arm will yield approximately 4½ pounds of meat,
which, when cooked and trimmed, usually amounts to 6 cups.

Dry-salt cure for 10 pounds of pork

10 lbs. fresh pork Prepare the pork as described and be
prepared as described sure curing bowl is the right size. Stir
in preceding the salt and other ingredients
paragraph (include thoroughly in the small bowl and
rind if making jambon divide in two, reserving ½ for later
persillé) salting. Starting with the largest

A glazed or enameled pieces of meat, rub salt thoroughly
bowl or casserole large into all sides, corners, and crevices.
enough to hold meat Pat a 1⁄16-inch layer over meat and
closely packed pack into bowl. Continue with the

1½ cups salt (sea salt, smaller pieces and end with the rind,
coarse salt, or table if you are using it, placing it fat side
salt) down over the meat. Cover meat

¼ cup sugar with plastic wrap, plate, and weights.
Refrigerate (or place in cold room) at



1 tsp saltpeter 36 to 40 degrees for 5 days. Then
(potassium nitrate remove meat, leaving accumulated
from a pharmacy) brine in bowl, resalt with reserved

1½ tsp crushed juniper mixture, and return to bowl with
berries plastic, plate, and weight on top.

Either 1½ tsp épices fines; Refrigerate for 10 days more, turning
Or ¾ tsp white pepper, ¼ meat once or twice to be sure

tsp allspice, and ¼ tsp everything is well salted; meat is
each: pulverized then ready to use.
thyme and bay leaf (*) STORAGE NOTE: Meat may remain in

A bowl to mix salt and cure for 6 to 8 weeks in all, but be
spices in sure all pieces are well covered with

A large tray to salt meat salt.
on COOKING NOTE: Salted meat must be de-

Plastic wrap, a large salted before cooking—soak in
plate, and a 7- to 10- several changes of cold water
pound weight, meat overnight if cured 15 days, 24 hours
grinder, brick, stone, if cured several weeks.
or other heavy object

  JAMBON PERSILLÉ
[Mold of Parslied Ham in Aspic]
As described in the introduction to this section, jambon persillé is

a Burgundian creation. Inevitably when dealing with well-known
regional specialties, there are dozens of variations and minor
versions, and always hundreds of very definite opinions on how to
conduct each step. Among the considerable number of serious and
trustworthy formulas we have studied, this is the one we prefer.

A NOTE ON STORE-BOUGHT HAM



If you are not using home-cured ham, buy 6½ to 8 pounds of
bone-in, ready-to-bake, mild-cured smoked ham or picnic shoulder.
Omit Step 1, proceeding directly to the simmering in Step 2; skin
and bone the ham after cooking.

For 2½ to 3 quarts of ham, serving 12 to 16

1) Soaking the ham—12 to 24 hours
4 to 6 pounds of boned, Soak the ham and the rind in a large

home-salted fresh ham basin of cold water, changing water 2
or shoulder-arm, and to 3 times. Overnight is enough for
the salted ham rind ham cured about 15 days; soak for 18
(preceding recipe; or to 24 hours if ham has cured longer.
see preceding note) (Soaking removes the preserving salt,

not the flavor.)

2) Simmering the ham
A kettle just large Place soaked ham (and rind) in

enough to hold ham kettle, add wine, bouillon, and
comfortably enough water to cover by an inch.

Either 1 bottle best Add rest of ingredients listed, bring
quality, young, strong, to the simmer, and skim for several
dry white wine (Côtes minutes until scum ceases to rise.
du Rhône or Pinot Cover partially and maintain at the
Blanc); simmer until ham is tender when

Or 3 cups dry white pierced with a sharp knife (about 2
French vermouth hours for boned, home-cured ham).

3 cups bouillon (made Let ham cool in liquid an hour or
from fresh ham bones, two.



or a mixture of beef
and chicken bouillon)

Necessary water
1 tsp thyme, 2 Tb

tarragon, 4 allspice
berries, 2 imported
bay leaves, and 2 large
cloves of garlic tied in
washed cheesecloth

1 large onion, roughly
chopped

1 medium carrot,
roughly chopped

1 celery stalk

While still warm, remove rind from kettle (or from bone-in
ham), scrape off and discard as much fat as possible, and purée rind
through coarse disk of food mill or fine blade of meat grinder;
reserve in a 1-quart bowl. Tear ham apart with your fingers,
discarding fat and gristle. Cut ham into pieces about ½ inch thick
and 1½ to 2 inches square, and place in a 2-quart bowl along with
any meat scraps. Moisten with a tablespoon or so of cooking stock,
and set aside. Thoroughly degrease cooking stock, boil down rapidly
to concentrate flavor if necessary, and correct seasoning.

3) The aspic—for about 4 cups
5 cups thoroughly Following directions in Volume I,

degreased ham- pages 111–13, clarify the cooking
cooking stock in a stock with the egg whites, add
saucepan

2 to 3 egg whites (½ cup)



Optional for added optional greenery, strain, and then
flavor: ½ to 1 cup dissolve the gelatin in it.
minced green tops
from leeks or scallions

2 packages (2 Tb)
powdered unflavored
gelatin

4) The parsley and aspic flavoring
The bowl of puréed rind Mix all ingredients except the aspic
1 cup (lightly pressed) in the bowl, and just before

chopped fresh parsley assembling the ham in Step 5, stir in
1 clove of garlic, mashed the cup of aspic. (You will have 2 to
1 Tb dried tarragon or 3 2½ cups when all is blended.)

Tb fresh minced
tarragon leaves

1 Tb wine vinegar
Salt and pepper to taste
1 cup of the aspic, cool

but not set

5) Assembling and serving
The following assembly method is informal: the meat is packed

into a bowl, and slices are cut and served directly from it. If you
want a dressier presentation, line the bowl with aspic before filling
it, and unmold onto a platter for serving.
A 2½- to 3-quart serving Chill the bowl and spread a layer of

bowl, casserole, or parsley-aspic in the bottom. Then
crock (this can be of pack with layers of ham and of



clear glass through parsley-aspic. When filled, cover with
which you can see the rack and/or plate and weight, and
design of the ham and chill for an hour or so, until set. (If
parsley) you do not weight down the ham, it

The parsley and aspic will be difficult to cut into slices
mixture later.) Remove the rack and so forth,

The cooked and cut ham scumble the top a bit with a fork (to
A rack and/or plate that disguise plate or rack marks), and

will fit into the bowl pour on the cool aspic. Cover and
chill until serving time.

A weight of some sort
The remaining aspic,

cool but not set

To serve, cut into slices, like a large pie.

(*) STORAGE NOTE: Jambon persillé will keep nicely for a week
under refrigeration. It may be frozen, but will lose character after 2
to 3 weeks.

PRESERVED GOOSE
Confit d’Oie

(And the Disjointing of Fowl and the Rendering of Fat)
Like the salting of pork, the preserving of goose is an age-old

method for keeping meats during the winter months, and is typical
of the foie gras regions in France, where geese are raised to produce
those magnificent livers. The goose for confit is given a brief
preliminary salting, then is slowly simmered in its own fat, a process
that not only cooks it but also renders out most of the heavy layer of
fat under the skin, just as most of the fat is rendered out of bacon



when you cook it. Traditionally, the cooked pieces of goose are then
packed in crocks and sealed in the fat for storage. The taste of
preserved goose, like the taste of salted pork, has a very special
quality quite unlike fresh goose or pork, and it is an easy process as
well as an interesting one to do. Besides having goose to eat in the
numerous ways described at the end of the recipe, you will have its
big carcass for soup and, during the weeks to come, a goodly supply
of the best cooking fat imaginable, which is marvelous for browning
meats and sautéing potatoes, for basting roasts, frying eggs, and
broiling chickens, as well as for flavoring vegetables like cabbage
and sauerkraut.

HOW TO DISJOINT POULTRY, AS ILLUSTRATED WITH A GOOSE

In the following directions, the goose is cut so that each wing
makes a serving portion, the breast is halved lengthwise, and the
drumstick-second-joint pieces are left intact for separation before
serving.



Preliminaries
Pull all fat out of cavity; you will have about 2 cups from a

ready-to-cook store-bought goose, 4 or more from a farm goose. Cut
off wings at elbows and save for the stock pot, along with the neck
and gizzard; save the heart and liver for the sausage suggestion at
the end of the confit recipe. As a preliminary to disjointing the
goose, slit skin the length of the back, going down to the bone from
neck opening to beginning of tail piece. Then place goose in front of
you, its legs to your left.

Removing the wing section
So that the wing will make an adequate serving, you want to

include the lower third of the breast with it as follows. Starting an
inch to the right of where second joint is attached to hip, in the
drawing, cut through breast meat to bone in a shallow semicircle
reaching up to the joint where wing is attached to shoulder. Bend
wing at a right angle away from breast and then down toward back,
to break open the joint; cut through joint to free wing, and scrape
breast meat off carcass from initial cut down toward backbone to
free the entire section.

Removing drumstick-second-joint section
Follow end of drumstick with your finger to find knee. Holding

knee in your left hand, slit around it from vent to ribs (where wing
section was removed). Again with your finger, follow second joint
(thigh) from knee to hip, to locate ball joint attaching it to the hip
bone. At either side of this joint along the hip are two nuggets of
meat, the oysters, which should come off as part of the drumstick-
second-joint section: scrape this meat from hip bone up to and
around joint. Then bend knee away from carcass at a right angle
and down toward backbone to break open ball joint at hip. Cut
through joint to detach it, then cut drumstick-second-joint from



carcass. Remove wing-breast piece and drumstick-second-joint from
other side of goose.

The breast
You now have only the upper two thirds of the breast meat left

on the carcass. Cut through ribs just below breast meat on either
side. Then, grasping tail end (at left in drawing), lift breast structure
up at right angles and bend it toward neck end, to break it free at
shoulder. Chop off the 2 tusk-shaped shoulder-blade bones at neck
end and trim off excess skin.

Locate ridge of breastbone with your finger, then slit down
through skin to bone close along one side of ridge. With cleaver and
mallet, chop the breastbone in half along this slit. (You may then
wish to chop each piece in half, crosswise, if you are serving the
goose in a ragoût rather than a confit.)



Trim fatty edges of skin from each piece of goose; feel with your
fingers for any knobs of fat buried under the flesh at edges of breast,
wings, second joints, and remove them. You will have 3 or more
cups of fatty skin pieces to add to the fat from inside the goose. Cut
into ½-inch pieces with shears, and reserve all of this for rendering,
Step 2 in the recipe.

A NOTE ON COOKING-FAT

Ideally the goose is cooked in goose fat and fresh pork leaf fat
(also called fresh leaf lard), which comes from around the pork
kidneys. This is very difficult to find unless there is a pork-
slaughtering business in your area: substitute fresh pork fatback or
the fat from a loin roast. If you have no success in finding this,
render only the fresh fat and skin from the goose, and after you
have strained it, add store-bought leaf lard, which you can usually
buy in 1-pound packages. Failing this, use white vegetable
shortening.

CONFIT D’OIE
[Preserved Goose—Disjointed and Salted Goose Cooked in Its
Own Fat—Also for Pork, Small Game, Duck, and Turkey]
Modern refrigerators and freezers have made changes in the

confit traditions. In the old days you had to simmer the goose for at
least 2½ hours, until every bit of moisture had evaporated and a
straw would pierce the meat with ease; you then were sure it would
keep through the winter, packed in its jars of fat in your cold-room
or cellar. For our purposes, since we are more interested in taste
than tradition, the goose is cooked only until done, and is stored in
its fat in the refrigerator, or is wrapped and frozen.

NOTE: Pork, small game, duck, and turkey are done exactly the
same way after being cut into serving pieces. Use pork fat only for
the rendering and cooking.



For a 10- to 12-pound ready-to-cook roasting goose (thaw if
frozen, and disjoint as described and illustrated in preceding
directions; you will have 5 to 6 pounds of goose)

1) Salting the goose—24 hours
Half the ingredients for Follow directions for salt curing but

the dry-salt cure, or leave goose in the cure for 24 hours
add goose to the cure only. (If you have to leave it longer,
along with the pork you may desalt the meat by soaking
you are doing the goose pieces several hours in cold

water before cooking.)

2) Rendering fat—45 minutes
6 lbs., or about 12 cups, Pull papery filaments from pork leaf

fresh fat (goose fat and fat if you are using it, and chop all
fatty skin pieces, plus fat into ¼-inch pieces. Place in kettle
fresh pork leaf fat, with water, cover loosely, and set
other fresh pork fat, or over low heat so that fat liquefies
see notes preceding slowly. When it reaches 212 degrees
recipe) it will crackle and spit as water

A heavy 6-quart kettle or content evaporates. When it stops
casserole (which may spitting, in about 25 minutes, remove
also serve to cook the cover and raise heat slightly to 250
goose) degrees. (Do not ever allow fat to go

1¼ cups water over 325 degrees or it will lose its
A deep-fat-frying clear, pale-yellow color.) In 20 to 30

thermometer minutes more, the fat pieces will be
lightly golden brown, and the fat
may be considered rendered. Strain
through a fine sieve, pressing liquid



fat out of browned residue. (Save
residue for frittons, at end of recipe.)
Return fat to kettle. Cover when cool,
and set in a cool place or refrigerate.

3) Cooking the goose—1¼ to 1½ hours for a roaster goose
The kettle of rendered fat Set kettle over low heat to liquefy fat.
The salted goose Meanwhile, wipe off salt and dry the
More fat if needed goose with paper towels; place goose
The thermometer in kettle. (Fat should cover goose

pieces by at least an inch.) Start
timing when fat begins to bubble
quietly and temperature is between
200 and 205, where it should remain
throughout cooking.

Goose is done when meat is tender if pierced with a knife and
when juices run clear yellow; meat and skin should color no more
than a deep golden yellow and fat should remain pale yellow.
Remove goose. Raise heat slightly and cook fat for 5 to 6 minutes
(but not over 325 degrees) until it stops crackling, which indicates
all liquid has evaporated and fat has clarified. Strain through a fine
sieve, pressing fat out of residue. Save residue for frittons.

4) Storing of goose and of fat
You may serve the goose as is, hot or cold, and it is delicious

when freshly cooked. It will keep 4 to 5 days in a covered dish in
the refrigerator, or you may wrap it airtight and freeze for 6 to 8
weeks. However, it seems to retain its best flavor, if you wish to



preserve the meat for some time, when you pack it into a bowl and
cover completely with the liquid fat in which it cooked; when fat
has cooled and congealed, cover airtight with plastic wrap, and
refrigerate. It will keep 2 to 3 months at least. To remove pieces of
goose, set bowl at room temperature for several hours so that fat
will soften enough for you to remove as many pieces of goose as you
wish with a wooden spoon. Be sure the remaining pieces are
completely covered with fat when you cover and refrigerate them
again.

Any fat not being used to preserve the goose will keep for a
month or more in covered jars in the refrigerator.

Serving suggestions
Besides the cabbage soup of Béarn, garbure, and the baked beans

of Toulouse and Castelnaudary, cassoulet, you may add the goose to
warm up in a casserole of lentils or beans, or in the braised
sauerkraut or red cabbage in Volume I, pages 496 and 498. Another
idea is to warm the goose in a covered dish in a 350-degree oven for
10 to 15 minutes, until it is hot and tender, then roll it in bread
crumbs, sprinkle with goose fat and brown under a hot broiler; serve
with the purée of beans and squash, the turnip and rice purée, the
garlic mashed potatoes or rice and onion soubise in Volume I, pages
520 and 485, or with sliced potatoes sautéed in goose fat.
Accompany with Brussels sprouts or broccoli and a light red wine or
a rosé.

Arrange cold goose on a platter garnished with lettuce,
watercress, or parsley, and accompany with French potato salad,
cold mixed vegetables, or a tossed green salad, and beer or chilled
dry white wine.

Frittons—Grattons



[Cracklings]
All the residue from rendering the fat and cooking the goose

goes into this spread for toast or crackers, which you can serve with
cocktails or accompanying a green salad and cold meats.

The fat-rendering and Pound the cracklings in a mortar or
goose-cooking residue put through a meat grinder, then

Salt, pepper, and épices warm briefly in a frying pan. Season
fines or allspice to to taste and pack tightly into jar or
taste pot. Chill, and when cold, pour on a

An attractive jar or pot ¼-inch layer of melted goose fat.
Melted goose fat Cover and refrigerate. Will keep for a

month or so.

Cou d’Oie Farci
[Goose-Neck Sausage]
If you have a farm goose, you can ask that the whole neck from

head to backbone be saved for you intact and as is. Pluck and singe
skin thoroughly, then peel it off the neck in one piece, turning skin
inside out as you go. Sprinkle with salt and pepper, turn it skin side
out, and it is ready to be a sausage casing. Use the truffled pork,
veal, and liver formula, substituting goose liver and heart for
chicken liver. Tie or sew the two ends, and poach the sausage in fat
along with the goose.

PÂTÉS AND TERRINES



The French are famous for the splendor of their pâtés and
terrines, those glorious looking, intoxicating smelling, rich, and
unforgettable mixtures of pork, veal, chicken, duck, truffles, liver,
foie gras, wines, and spices that are packed into long earthen dishes
in the charcuterie, or in great round bowls, or are formed in
cunningly decorated brown crusts. No other cuisine has developed
the art quite like the French, and no other formulas are quite as
delicious and subtle. However, if you have done some of the recipes
in Volume I beginning on page 564, you will know how easy it is to
make a terrine: it is only a matter of grinding up meat, seasoning it,
slicing or dicing a garniture, and packing everything into a fat-lined
dish before setting it in the oven. You know also that your own is
almost invariably better than anything you can buy because you are
using the best ingredients rather than scraps, and that most pâtés
and terrines are expensive to buy and just as expensive to make.
They come in the category of necessary luxuries.

An excellent pork-liver pâté starts off this new series in a fairly
economical manner. This is followed by a pâté de campagne, then a
pâté baked in bread dough, and an unusual porkless terrine. The
section closes with fully illustrated directions on how to form and
bake pâtés en croûte.

A NOTE ON LIAISONS AND BINDERS

Almost all pâté mixtures have something in addition to meat to
bind them together, preventing the meat from crumbling when the
pâté is sliced. Eggs are usually present, sometimes bread crumbs,
and rice can also serve. The following panade is an alternative to the
bread-crumb type of panade used for the boudin sausages.

Panade au Riz
For about 1 cup



⅓ cup plain raw white Simmer the rice in the liquid and
rice butter for 25 to 30 minutes, or until

1 cup or more of meat it is very tender. Add a little more
stock or bouillon bouillon if necessary, to keep rice

3 Tb butter from sticking, but liquid should be
A heavy-bottomed 6-cup entirely absorbed when rice is done.

saucepan (no-stick
recommended)

To use the panade
Purée in an electric blender, food mill, or meat grinder along

with any liquids or egg you are using. (Your recipe will direct you.)
Any leftover panade may be frozen.

A NOTE ON PORK FAT, BAKING DISHES, AND OTHER MATTERS

Full notes on what to bake a pâté in, and so forth, are discussed
in Volume I, pages 564–5, and in the Master Recipe for terrine de
porc, veau, et jambon, also in Volume I, starting on page 566. Our
only additional comment here is on pork fat. Except in the case of
the porkless pâté, which uses suet or chicken fat, all of the following
recipes call for fresh pork as part of the meat mixture as well as a
liner for the baking dish. We realize how difficult it is to find fresh
pork fatback (lard gras). For the fat in the meat mixture itself, you
can use fat-and-lean pork from the fresh shoulder butt, or fat from
the outside of a loin roast; outside fresh ham- and shoulder-fat are
less satisfactory because softer, but perfectly possible. Although you
can line the mold with blanched salt pork or bacon, fresh pork fat is
very much better both in taste and appearance. Lacking fresh
fatback, you can pound strips of fresh outside loin fat between 2



sheets of waxed paper, to reduce them to ⅛ inch thickness and to
weld them together.

THREE LIVER PÂTÉS
Pâté de Foie—Pâté de Campagne

Down on the farm, you naturally use every bit of the hog for
something, and some of the very best pâtés contain pork liver, either
as the main ingredient or combined with other meat. These have far
more character than the chicken-liver pâtés so popular in this
country, and your own homemade mixture is always surprisingly
better than anything you seem to be able to buy, even in the best
French charcuterie.

LIVER NOTE

You may substitute beef liver for pork liver; we have not found
any significant difference in effect. Calf’s liver is lovely but insanely
expensive for this type of dish.

  TERRINE DE FOIE DE PORC
[Pork-liver Pâté]
To translate a terrine de foie de porc into familiar language, it is

like the very best liverwurst; you could easily mistake it for pâté de
foie gras. Simple to make, it consists only of liver, pork fat,
flavorings, plus an egg and either rice or bread crumbs to bind
everything together. Of all the mixtures, this necessarily contains
the most fat; if you used any less you would not achieve perfection.
Serve slices of pâté and French bread or toast as a first course; it is
also delicious as a spread for sandwiches or cocktail appetizers.



For a 6-cup baking dish (18 to 20 slices)

The pâté dish: a 6-cup Preheat oven to 350 degrees and
terrine or baking dish place rack in middle level. Set pâté
(rectangular, round, dish in pan to check water level: it
oval) or bread pan should come ⅔ up outside of dish.

A pan of water Remove dish and place pan of water
Sheets of pork fat to line in oven. Line bottom and sides of

pâté dish pâté dish with strips of pork fat ⅛
inch thick. (See notes preceding this
recipe as well as illustrations.)

1 lb. fresh pork fatback Put the pork fat, liver, and rice
or fat from outside a panade through the finest blade of
loin roast (2 cups) meat grinder and into the bowl. Beat

12 ounces liver (pork, in the rest of the ingredients. Sauté a
beef, or calf) (1½ spoonful and taste; correct seasoning
cups) as necessary. Turn mixture into pâté

1 cup rice panade dish.
A meat grinder
An electric mixer with

large bowl
2 eggs
2 Tb Cognac
2½ tsp salt
Either 1 tsp épices fines;
Or ½ tsp pepper and big

pinches of allspice,
nutmeg, and cayenne



Optional: A 1-ounce
truffle, minced, and its
juice

A piece of fresh pork fat Cover with the fat, lay the thyme and
to cover the meat bay leaf on top, and then the foil.

1 imported bay leaf Cover, and set in pan of water in
A branch of thyme, or ¼ oven. Bake for 1¼ to 1½ hours or

tsp dried thyme longer; pâté is done at a temperature
Sufficient aluminum foil of 160 degrees, or when juices and

to cover pâté with 1 fat surrounding pâté are clear yellow
inch extra all around with no trace of rosy color (press pâté

with a spatula to check on this).

A cover for the dish, or a When done, remove pâté dish from
pastry sheet and pan, discard water, and return dish to
weight pan. Cover with board, or pan and

Useful: a meat weight (to press meat together and
thermometer prevent air pockets) and let cool to

room temperature. Remove board
and weights and refrigerate.

Serving
Pâté will improve in flavor after 2 to 3 days. Cut slices ⅜ to ½

inch thick directly from dish; or heat bottom of dish gently, run a
knife around between pâté and dish, and unmold on a serving plate
or board.

Storage



Pâté will keep nicely for 8 to 10 days under refrigeration. It may
be frozen, and results are more successful for liver pâtés than for
meat pâtés.

VARIATIONS
Pâté de Campagne
[Pork and Liver Pâté with Veal or Chicken]
These pâtés vary in content and flavor throughout France, but

always contain pork liver, pork, and sometimes other meats, as well
as pork fat, a binder, and the usual seasonings. The following
formula is one we like; whether you serve it in its baking dish or
unmold it, the name is always pâté de campagne and never terrine.

For a 6-cup baking dish

8 ounces (1 cup) fat-and- Be sure all gristle, bones, skin, or
lean fresh pork (such other extraneous matter have been
as shoulder butt or trimmed from meat before weighing.
loin, or the chair à Pass meats, fat, and liver through
saucisse) finest blade of meat grinder along

8 ounces (1 cup) fresh with the panade. Beat in rest of
pork fatback or fat ingredients. Sauté a spoonful and
from outside a loin taste. Correct seasoning as necessary.
roast Pack into a fat-lined dish, and bake

8 ounces (1 cup) raw as in the Master Recipe.
lean veal, or raw
chicken meat

8 ounces (1 cup) liver
(pork, beef, or calf)

½ cup rice panade



⅓ cup minced onions
cooked until soft in 2
Tb pork fat or butter

1 egg
2 Tb Cognac
1 medium clove of garlic,

mashed
Either 1 tsp épices fines;
Or ½ tsp pepper and big

pinches of ground
allspice, thyme, bay
leaf

½ tsp additional pepper
1 Tb salt

Pâté de Foie et de Porc en Brioche
[Pork and Pork-liver Pâté Baked in Brioche Dough]
This is a pâté baked in brioche dough in a round pan. It is always

dramatic because the dough rises luxuriously and the whole effect is
one of effulgent gourmandise. The pâté is served cold, and it must be
baked at least a day ahead of serving so that the meat will settle,
which means that you will probably need to make the dough a day
before baking.

For a 9- by 1½- to 2-inch round mold, serving 12 to 16 people

1) The pâté ingredients
The pain brioché dough Prepare the dough the day before

mixture, chilled and baking. Put the pork fat through the



ready to form medium blade of the meat grinder.
8 ounces (1 cup) fresh Place half in bowl of electric mixer

pork fatback or fat and heat other half slowly in frying
from outside a loin pan until fat has rendered. Add
roast onions to pan and cook slowly about

A 12-inch frying pan 15 minutes until tender and
2 cups minced onions translucent. Meanwhile, grind the

pork and set aside, then the liver,
8 ounces (1 cup) fresh and set aside separately. When

pork shoulder or loin onions are done, add the pork and
1 lb. (2 cups) liver (pork, cook 4 to 5 minutes, stirring, until

beef, or calf) meat is gray rather than rosy. Add
1 medium clove of garlic, the liver and cook for several minutes

mashed until somewhat stiffened and puffed,
Either 1 tsp épices fines; and beginning to look grayish-ruddy-
Or ½ tsp pepper and big brown. Scrape into mixing bowl and

pinches of ground beat in all the rest of the ingredients.
allspice, thyme and Sauté a spoonful and taste; correct
bay leaf seasoning as necessary.

¼ tsp additional pepper
2 tsp salt
¼ cup (pressed down)

dry white crumbs from
homemade-type
unsweetened bread,
moistened in a small
bowl with 3 Tb heavy
cream and 1 Tb
Cognac

2) Forming the pâté en brioche



A buttered 9- by 1½-inch On a lightly floured board, roll ¼ of
(6-cup) false-bottomed the dough into a circle the diameter
cake pan or fluted of your pan or mold, set on floured
mold; or a flan ring set paper, and chill until needed. Rapidly
on a baking sheet roll out the rest of the dough into a

The chilled dough circle about ¼ inch thick and 12
A piece of floured waxed inches in diameter. Lightly press it

paper on a small into the pan or mold, letting edges
baking sheet overhang all around. Turn the hot

The hot meat mixture meat mixture into the dough-lined
A pastry brush pan; fold the edges of the dough over

onto the meat. Paint dough lightly
Cold water with cold water, and unroll reserved
A 2-inch chimney, such circle of dough on top, pressing edges

as a small, buttered lightly with your fingers to seal.
metal funnel or the Make a hole in the center top of the
metal tube from a dough and insert chimney. (You will
pastry bag probably have enough dough left

over for a small loaf of bread.)

3) Rising—about 1 hour
Set the pâté in a draft-free place at a temperature of no more

than 75 to 80 degrees until top of dough feels spongy-springy when
touched and the whole structure has risen half an inch or more up
from the rim of the mold. Preheat oven in time for next step.

4) Baking—about 1 hour in a preheated 425-degree oven
Egg glaze (1 egg beaten Just before baking, paint top (not

in a small bowl with 1 sides) of dough with egg glaze; in a
tsp water) moment, paint it again. Make scissor



Sharp-pointed scissors clips 1½ inches apart all around top
Useful: a meat circumference of dough, going in at a

thermometer slant ¾ inch deep and 2 inches wide.
Set pâté in middle level of preheated
425-degree oven and bake for 18 to
20 minutes, until brioche has risen
and begun to brown nicely. Reduce
heat to 350 degrees, baking about 40
minutes more. Pâté is done when fat
is bubbling up in funnel; temperature
on meat thermometer should be 160–
5 degrees.

5) Cooling
Remove from oven and let cool in mold for half an hour, then

unmold onto a rack. When thoroughly cold, cover airtight and
refrigerate for at least 12 hours before serving.

6) Serving suggestions
Serve as is, cutting it into wedges like a pie. When you wish an

even more attractive dish, pour almost-set aspic into chilled pâté
through chimney hole, and chill an hour or more before serving.
(This is described in the pâté en croûte section.)

A PORKLESS VARIATION
La Terrine Verte—Pâté Sans Porc
[A Porkless Pâté]
Slice into this unusual pâté, and it is a beautiful green with

decorations of white and brown. It has a meaty, hearty taste, yet is



made without a trace of pork meat or pork fat: it is veal, chicken,
and calf’s brains spiced with onions, garlic, herbs, and Cognac,
garnished with chicken breasts and livers, and turned green with
spinach. The fat is either veal- or beef-kidney fat, or goose or
chicken fat. Bake the pâté at least 2 and preferably 3 days before
serving, so that all the flavors may blend into perfect harmony.

For an 8-cup terrine, serving 12 to 16

1) The pâté mixture
The boned and skinned Cut the breast meat and the chicken

breast from 1 frying livers into strips ⅜ inch wide; place
chicken in a bowl with the Cognac and a

3 chicken livers sprinkling of salt and pepper. Let
¼ cup Cognac marinate while preparing rest of pâté
Salt and pepper mixture.

The terrine: an 8-cup Chill terrine in freezer. Trim off any
mold, baking dish, or filaments or extraneous matter, and
bread pan of any put fat through fine blade of meat
shape, although a grinder. Place half in large bowl of
rectangular one is easy mixer and render the rest of the fat.
for serving (See directions.) When strained,

1 lb. (2 cups) fresh veal- cooled, and almost congealed, spread
kidney fat, beef suet, ¾ of it inside the chilled terrine.
or goose fat or chicken Refrigerate terrine until you are ready
fat to fill it.

A meat grinder
An electric mixer with

large bowl



½ lb. (1 cup) boneless Grind the chicken, veal, and brains
raw light or dark meat into the mixing bowl along with the
from a frying chicken ground raw fat. In 2 Tb of the

½ lb. (1 cup) raw, lean rendered fat, cook the onions for 8 to
veal 10 minutes over low heat until

1 lb. (2 cups) brains tender and translucent, then blend in
(calf, beef, or lamb), the spinach and stir several minutes
blanched and peeled to evaporate excess moisture. Add
(they need not be spinach and onions to mixing bowl,
trimmed of tubes and along with the eggs, salt, seasonings,
extraneous matter) and bread crumbs. Beat vigorously to

1 cup minced onions blend all ingredients. Sauté a
Either 2 cups blanched, spoonful until cooked through, taste,

chopped fresh and correct seasoning.
spinach;

Or 1½ packages frozen
spinach, thawed
(squeezed dry)

1 medium clove garlic,
mashed

2 eggs
1 Tb salt
Either 1 tsp épices fines;
Or ½ tsp thyme, ¼ tsp

allspice, and ¼ tsp
nutmeg

¾ cup dry white crumbs
from homemade-type
unsweetened bread
moistened with ¼ cup
chicken broth or milk



2) Filling the terrine and baking—preheat oven to 350 degrees
The marinating strips of Beat the Cognac marinade into the

chicken breast and pâté mixture. Spread ⅓ of the pâté
chicken livers mixture in the terrine, cover with half

The pâté mixture of the chicken meat and livers in
The chilled, fat-lined alternating strips. Spread with half

terrine the remaining pâté mixture, then
The remaining rendered with the remaining strips of chicken

fat and liver, ending with the last of the
1 imported bay leaf pâté. Spread reserved and rendered

fat over the pâté, and top with the
1 branch thyme, or ¼ tsp bay leaf and thyme. Fold the foil

dried thyme closely over top of terrine to enclose
2 sheets of aluminum foil it completely; set on the cover, and
A cover for the terrine (or place in pan of boiling water in oven.

pastry sheet and Bake for about 1½ hours, or until
weight, such as a pâté starts to shrink from sides of
brick) mold, and when pressed with the

A pan of boiling water in back of a spoon no rose-colored
middle level of pre- juices exude. (Temperature on a meat
heated oven thermometer should be 160–5

degrees.)

3) Cooling and serving
Cool under a board or pan and weight, then refrigerate, covered,

for 2 to 3 days before serving as described in the Master Recipe.

PÂTÉS BAKED IN PASTRY CRUST
Pâtés en Croûte



When it appears in pastry dough, any pâté mixture becomes a
pâté en croûte, certainly one of the great visual delights of French
charcuterie. A hinged metal pâté mold provides the most professional
as well as the easiest system for pâté en croûte, and you can buy a
variety of shapes in most import stores. The mold, which sits on a
baking sheet when filled, has neither top nor bottom, only 2 sides
hinged at one end and closed by a removable pin at the other. It is a
kind of corset, which actually molds the pâté dough in its decorative
embrace, and holds it tight while it bakes and cools. If you have no
mold, the workable alternative described produces an equally
attractive result; it is a baked bottom case of dough, which you fill
as though it were a pâté mold and top with a decorated cover of
dough. A third alternative is the free-form shape, pâté pantin, baked
on a pastry sheet like the sausage in brioche. The first two methods
are outlined in the following directions.

TIMING

A pâté always develops more taste 2 to 3 days after baking.
Allowing 2 days for the maturing process, you will need at least 1½
days for baking, cooling, chilling: start the pâté, then, 4 to 5 days in



advance of any date you wish to serve it. The finished pâté will keep
7 to 10 days under refrigeration.

THE PÂTÉ MIXTURE

Although you may use any of the preceding pâtés for pâté en
croûte, the more traditional mixture is the all-purpose pork and veal
stuffing in Volume I, page 565, and a garniture of strips of veal and
ham, or of game such as rabbit, hare, partridge, or pheasant, or of
duck, turkey, or chicken. Follow one of the recipes in Volume I,
starting on page 566, and including the duck pâté on page 571. For
an 8-cup mold you will need approximately 4 cups of stuffing and 2
cups of garnishing strips. You will also need sheets of fresh pork fat
for lining the dough.

THE DOUGH FORMULA

For pâtés molded in a hinged form, use the pâté à croûstades,
Formula Number 6, which contains flour, butter, lard, and egg
yolks. When you are forming the dough on an upside down case, use
Formula Number 7, with whole eggs. These are both excellent
doughs for pâtés; they hold their shape through the long baking, and
are also good to eat. Either one is easy to make in an electric mixer
as described in “Electric Mixer Pie Dough”; it is best to prepare the
dough several hours ahead or the day before forming and baking, so
that it will be well chilled, rested, and easy to roll.

FORMING AND BAKING PÂTÉ EN CROÛTE IN A
HINGED PÂTÉ MOLD

1) Lining the mold with dough

Your first step is to line the bottom and sides of the mold with an
even ⅜ inch layer of dough. An ingenious professional method is to



form ¾ of the dough into a pouch, the bottom and sides of which fit
neatly against the mold with a minimum of wrinkles while the open
top falls around the outside leaving the mold open for filling. In
French this is a calotte, a skull cap. (The following illustrations are
for an oval mold; adapt the same system for rectangular and round
molds.)

A hinged 6- to 8-cup pâté Using pâté mold as a guide, cut a
mold pattern out of the paper to fit the

A piece of heavy paper to opening of the mold. Cut 2 pieces of
serve as a pattern pork fat, using pattern, and set aside;

Sheets of fresh pork fat ⅛ these will line bottom and top of pâté
inch thick, enough to later. Reserve pattern for dough
line bottom, sides, and cover, later.
top of mold

Chilled pâté à croustades Place ¾ of the chilled dough on a
dough made with 1 lb. lightly floured marble or board and
of flour roll into a circle about 1 inch thick

A pastry brush and cup and 2 inches larger in diameter than
of cold water the long side of the mold—dough

must be very thick at this point so
that when you are through rolling



and forming it you will still have a
⅜-inch layer lining the mold.

Paint a 1-inch strip down each side,
right and left, with water.

As the first step in making the pouch shape, dough is to be folded in
half and corners are to be bent down as follows. Except at the 2
sides, sprinkle circle of dough liberally with flour to prevent sticking
when folded in half.

Bring top down to bottom, making a
semicircle with its curved side facing

you. Gently press two sides, right
and left, together to seal them, then
pull the two corners (right and left
at top of fold) down toward you as

illustrated. Now, rather than a
semicircle, you have a pocket, or

the beginning of a pouch.

Starting with open side facing you, and making several passes with
your pin, roll dough away from you to deepen pouch, so that when
it is spread into the mold you will have an overhang of 2 inches: for
a mold 4 inches high and 5 inches across, the pouch should be 8½ to 9
inches deep.

Be very careful here that you roll the dough evenly and that the
final combined thickness of top and bottom layers is no less than ¾
inch; when the dough is thinner you risk breakage and leakage
problems later on. (If by any chance you muff this on your first try,



briefly knead dough into a ball,
chill an hour or more to relax it,
and start over again.)

2 to 3 Tb lard or Grease inside of mold and baking
shortening sheet, and set mold on sheet. Fold

A baking sheet with dough lightly in half lengthwise and
raised edges (to catch center in mold. Unfold and ease it
cooking juices) gently into place by lifting sides of

Scissors dough, being careful always that you
do not stretch the dough and make it
thinner at any point. Clip off a gob of
extra dough and use it as a tampon,
rather than your fingers, to press
dough against pastry sheet and sides
of mold.

Leaving a 1½- to 2-inch overhang,
trim off excess dough with scissors.



The sheets of fresh pork fat

Place an oval of pork fat on the bottom of the mold, and line the sides.
This fat is your insurance against crust-cracking.

2) Filling the mold
The pâté mixture and the strips of garniture (see notes

preceding recipe)
The lined pâté mold
A bowl of cold water

With your pâté mixture made, your garniture in strips, and your mold
ready, you can now assemble the pâté. Have a bowl of cold water handy
to dip your hands into when you spread in the meat mixture. Preheat
oven to 375 degrees.



Fill the mold, starting with a layer
of pâté, then a layer of garniture
strips, a layer of pâté, another of

garniture, and a final layer of pâté
mixture. Fill mold just to rim,
making only a slightly domed

shape in center: if mold is too full,
juices will bubble out over crust

during baking.

1 imported bay leaf Place bay leaf and thyme on top of
A sprig or 2 of thyme (or pâté; cover with the second oval of pork

¼ tsp dried thyme) fat.
The second oval of fresh

pork fat

The reserved dough (or Roll the reserved dough out ½ inch
chilled leftover dough) thick, cut into an oval following

The paper pattern (size pattern, and place on top of pork-fat
of mold opening) oval. Paint circumference with cold

A pastry brush and cold water and fold edges over, pressing first
water with fingers to seal, and then with the

back tines of a table fork.



A table fork (NOTE: Cover must be thick so that it
will rise only a little, otherwise you
will have too large a gap between
meat and top of crust after baking.
Another reason for making it thick is
that it will barely cook through and
thus will not crumble when you
eventually slice the pâté.)

Pastry cutouts made from leftover dough
Egg glaze (1 egg beaten with 1 tsp water)

Make pastry cutouts of any shape you wish. (Illustrations are in
Volume I, page 574.) One by one, paint bottoms of cutouts with egg
glaze and press in place on top of pâté, completely covering seam where
edges of pastry overlap.

2 greased chimneys 1½ inches high, such as metal funnels,
metal tubes from a pastry bag, or aluminum foil



With a sharp-pointed knife, make 2
holes ¼ inch in diameter in top of
pâté, going down through to touch the
meat; insert chimneys. They allow
cooking steam to escape rather than to
gather in the crust, possibly bursting
it. Just before baking, paint top of pâté
with egg glaze, being careful none
drips down into mold.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME-NOTES: Pâté mixture, garniture, and dough may
be made a day or two in advance of baking, or pâté may be
assembled (but not glazed), covered, and refrigerated for a day or
two if meat is fresh. Add 20–30 minutes more to baking time if pâté
has been chilled before going into oven.

3) Baking—1½ to 2 hours; oven preheated to 375 degrees
Useful: A meat Place in lower middle or middle level

thermometer of oven and bake for 20 to 25
A pan, spoon, and bulb minutes until crust begins to color,

baster for removing fat then lower thermostat to 350 degrees
from pan for rest of baking. Inspect pâté every

20–30 minutes: suck up fat from
baking sheet with bulb baster and
wipe off sheet with paper towels. An
accumulation of fat can burn bottom
of pâté, and it also smokes up the
kitchen.



Pâté is done when juices begin bubbling up into funnel; they
should be clear yellow. Check temperature by removing funnel and
inserting meat thermometer, which should read between 160 and
165 degrees.

3) Cooling the pâté—the aspic
Remove pâté from oven, but do not attempt to slide pâté off

baking sheet or to remove mold from pâté at this point, since you
might tear or crack the crust, which must remain intact. Let cool
completely for several hours or overnight, then chill in refrigerator
for at least 4 hours.

A funnel During baking, the meat shrinks
4 cups wine-flavored slightly from the top and sides of the

aspic (2 Tb gelatin crust, and you want to fill this space
dissolved in ¼ cup with aspic, which is delicious both
port or Cognac visually and gastronomically. When
combined with 3¾ pâté is thoroughly chilled, and with
cups beef bouillon) the mold still in place, insert funnel

A bowl of cracked ice in a chimney hole in top of pâté.
Being sure aspic has been well tested
for consistency so that it will hold its
shape when cold, stir over cracked
ice until almost syrupy and on the
point of setting; pour through funnel
into pâté, tilting pâté in all directions,
allowing aspic to run all over and
around it. Chill again for several
hours.

Finally, when aspic has chilled,
remove pin from mold and carefully



nudge sides of mold from sides of
pâté. Once mold is off, pâté will

hold its shape perfectly.

4) Serving
To serve, cut pie-shaped wedges going around circumference of

pâté. For a rectangular pâté, cut straight across, as though it were a
loaf of bread.

5) Storing
Pâté en croûte will keep a week to 10 days at 37 degrees. It is the

aspic that might go off first, and then the crust with the meat juices
in it. If you wish to keep leftovers a little longer, remove the crust,
scrape off the aspic and the fat-covering, and wrap the meat in
plastic or foil. A cooked pâté can be frozen, but will never have the
same fresh texture again.

FORMING AND BAKING THE PÂTÉ WITHOUT A MOLD
Although the hinged mold is easier to manage, baking a bottom

case of dough to act as a mold works very nicely and is not difficult
to do. The dough is formed on an upside-down casserole or bread
pan, upon which it is baked, just as upside-down pastry shells are
formed and baked. The baked case is then lined with fat, filled with
the pâté, draped with a close-fitting sheet of dough, decorated, and
baked as usual.



1) The bottom case of dough
The pâté à croustades à Roll ⅔ of the dough into a circle 2

l’envers, Formula 7, for inches more in diameter than the
20 ounces of flour length of your mold, and 1½ inches

A 6-cup mold, such as an thick. Form a pouch exactly as thick
oval casserole or bread and exactly as illustrated for the
pan, greased on the spring-form mold. Press lightly onto
outside with lard or mold and trim off excess dough with
shortening a knife or pastry wheel. Cover and

chill 2 hours or overnight (to relax
dough and prevent shrinkage during
baking). Set as is, mold still upside
down, on a baking sheet in a
preheated 425-degree oven for 12 to
15 minutes, until pastry is starting to
color. Turn thermostat down to 350
degrees and bake 10 minutes more,
or until pastry just loosens from mold
but is not cooked through: it holds its
shape but is not browned. Cool 15
minutes on mold, then unmold
carefully onto a rack and cool 30
minutes until pastry is firm and set.

2) Filling the case
Lard or shortening Grease just the area where pastry
A baking sheet case will sit on baking sheet, and set
Pâté ingredients listed in case on sheet. Following directions in

preceding recipe, preceding recipe, cut pork fat to fit
including sheets of bottom, sides, and top of pâté, line



pork fat and paper the case with the pork fat, and fill
pattern with pâté mixture, topping with a

sheet of pork fat.

3) The cover, and finishing the pâté
Chilled leftover dough To discourage a gap from developing

and remaining dough between top of meat and crust after
Egg glaze, pastry brush, baking, roll out a preliminary cover

pastry cutouts, of dough ¼ inch thick, to fit top of
chimneys, as pork fat. Set in place on pâté. Then
described in preceding roll remaining dough into a sheet ¼
recipe to ⅜ inch thick and large enough to

cover top of pastry case and to fall ⅔
the way down the case all around.
Paint sides of case with egg glaze and
arrange covering sheet of dough over
pâté. Trim edges all around with
scissors, then press dough in place
against sides of case. Decorate with
cutouts, insert chimneys, glaze, bake,
cool, chill, and fill with aspic as
described and illustrated in preceding
recipe.






CHAPTER SIX
A Choice of Vegetables

WHEN YOU BUY VEGETABLES FRESH and cook them lovingly, you may
find yourself more renowned for your remarkable zucchini stuffed
with almonds than for your spectacular crêpes Suzette. And why not,
when flaming desserts are becoming status symbols and hand-
whittled fresh vegetables more and more of a rarity? Recipes for
vegetables consume over 100 pages in Volume I, and describe some
of the ways to prepare rice and potatoes as well as almost
everything to do with artichokes, asparagus, green beans, and
spinach, plus how to braise endive, how to turn a mushroom, and
where to peel the chestnut. There are gaps, however, and while the
present chapter will fill some of them we are more interested in
giving you fresh ideas for old favorites than in completing the
vegetable roster. Although we have included a number of classics,
like pommes Anna, most of the recipes here are new ones that you
will not have seen before—the sautéed broccoli, for instance, the
unusual purées starting with gratin de potiron d’Arpajon, the spinach
with onions. While some dishes are as elaborate as the stuffed
artichoke bottoms, others are as fast and simple as the grated
zucchini. Seldom-honored notables like rutabagas, chard, and
pumpkin receive attention, and stuffed whole cabbage gets a
revolutionary, new, and fully illustrated treatment. Here, then, are
more recipes for fresh vegetables, beginning with broccoli and
ending with a splendid dish of cold artichokes.

BROCCOLI



Choux Brocoli–Choux Aspèrges

Although green sprouting broccoli, asparagus broccoli, Italian
broccoli, Brassica oleracea var. italica, or whatever you wish to call
just plain green broccoli has been around for centuries, it was not
widely known in this country until the early 1920's. It is now so
popular that an average of one pound a year is consumed by every
man, woman, and child in America; over sixty thousand tons of
fresh broccoli are sold in retail markets; and heaven knows how
much goes into frozen TV dinners. Despite its renown here it
continues to remain almost unknown in France (where it is spelled
with only one “c”); that is their loss, because fresh broccoli, properly
prepared, is certainly one of our most attractive vegetables, both
visually and gastronomically. With its delicate cabbage flavor, it is
more tender in taste and texture than cauliflower as well as being
far more colorful. It goes beautifully with such subtleties as fish in
fine white sauces, chicken breasts, brains, and sweetbreads; in fact,
anything that spinach does to dress up a dish, broccoli does equally
well, sometimes better. Thus, whether or not it ever becomes a
French vegetable, we shall give broccoli the full treatment à la
française.

BUYING BROCCOLI

Broccoli is in season all year round; although its low months are
July and August, its high season is winter, when we are most in
need of fresh green vegetables. California is by far the largest
producer, but considerable amounts come from other Western states
as well as from New York, New Jersey, and Virginia.

When buying broccoli, choose clean, firm, smooth, fresh-
smelling dark green or purplish-green bunches with fresh-looking,
closely bunched, all-green bud clusters. Over-mature broccoli will
have thick, woody stems that are often hollow; the buds will be
partially open, yellowish, and have a rather strong odor. Broccoli is
perishable, and will become limp and bruised-looking and develop
an unpleasant stale-cabbage smell if not properly handled. In



markets it should be kept in humidified refrigerator cases and/or
frequently iced. Bring it home from the market as soon as possible,
refrigerate in a plastic bag immediately, and plan to cook it within 2
to 3 days.

The usual bunch of broccoli, containing several stalks tied
together, weighs between 1½ and 2 pounds and will serve 4 to 6
people.

PREPARING BROCCOLI FOR COOKING

When we speak of the delights of fresh broccoli properly
prepared, we are talking about peeling the stems and stalks before
cooking the broccoli. If you have subsisted on unpeeled broccoli,
you will find that peeled broccoli is an entirely different vegetable
which cooks in 5 to 6 minutes, remains fresh and green, and is
tender from stalk to tip. In fact we have the same feeling about
unpeeled broccoli that we do about unpeeled asparagus—neither is
a gastronomical object.

To prepare broccoli for cooking, you may quarter the whole
stalks lengthwise from butt to head, and peel each stem of each
piece. We, however, prefer smaller pieces for easier handling and
more even cooking. We suggest that you begin by discarding the
tough leaves, retaining only such small ones that seem as tender as
the buds. Then cut off the top 2½ to 3 inches of each head, usually
at the point where the branches separate themselves from the
central stalk. Halve or quarter the branches lengthwise, depending
on their size, to make them all no more than ½ inch in diameter at
the base. Using a small knife and starting at the bottom of each
branch, peel off the skin in strips, coming almost up to the flower
buds. Cut off and discard the tough half inch at the butt of each
central stalk and strip off the skin, cutting deeply enough when
necessary to expose the tender whitish flesh. (Slightly off-season
broccoli that has fresh, tight bud clusters may have very thick
central stalks with hollow cores; quartering lengthwise and deep
peeling, however, will make the stalks tender and edible.) Cut stalks



lengthwise into pieces ½ inch in diameter, and then into bias
(diagonal) pieces about 1½ inches long.

Place the prepared broccoli in a covered bowl or plastic bag and
refrigerate until you are ready to cook it. Wash rapidly under cold,
running water just before cooking.

COOKING METHODS

Peeled broccoli cooks so fast, 5 to 6 minutes, that if you are
serving it simply, with melted butter or a sauce, you should cook it
only just before serving. If this works in with your schedule, it is
easily accomplished between courses, otherwise pick one of the
alternate methods, where the broccoli is sautéed or finishes in the
oven.

  CHOUX BROCOLI BLANCHIS
[Blanched Broccoli—Plain Boiled Broccoli]
When you have not peeled your broccoli, you must resort to all

sorts of subterfuges such as boiling the stalks while steaming the
heads, steaming the whole vegetable, or pressure cooking; by the
time the stalks are done the heads usually droop, the color has
darkened, and the broccoli has lost much of its fresh taste and
texture as well as those nutrients considered so important by the
very people who feel the peel is the best part. When you have
peeled your broccoli, you may use the French method of green-
vegetable cookery—blanching. Because peeled broccoli is so tender,
we recommend the wire salad basket for plunging it into its boiling
bath and snatching it out again.

For 4 to 6 servings



1 bunch (1½ to 2 lbs.) Cut, peel, and wash the broccoli as
fresh broccoli described in preceding directions,

A wire salad basket (or a and place in salad basket. Plunge into
vegetable rack, or a the rapidly boiling water over highest
large skimmer) heat. As soon as water returns to the

A kettle containing at boil again, boil slowly, uncovered,
least 4 quarts of for 4 to 6 minutes (depending on
rapidly boiling water freshness of broccoli). It is done
and 2 Tb salt (1½ tsp when a knife pierces the stalks easily.
per quart) Taste a piece as a test: it should be

just tender, with a slight crunch of
texture. Remove immediately from
the boiling water and serve as
directed in one of the following
suggestions.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If by some chance you plan to serve the
hot broccoli with a sauce, and cannot do so immediately when it is
done, let it cool, spreading out on a tray if necessary so it will cool
quickly. Keep the water boiling. Return broccoli to salad basket just
before you wish to serve and re-plunge it for a moment in the
rapidly boiling water so that it will just heat through.

Serving suggestions for plain boiled broccoli
Brocoli au Citron—Broccoli for Dieters. Broccoli, like asparagus,

is great for dieters because it has its own natural flavor, which a
little lemon juice will enhance. Arrange the hot broccoli on a hot
serving dish, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and decorate with
wedges of lemon.

Brocoli au Beurre Noir—Broccoli with Brown Butter Sauce. Before
cooking the broccoli, melt 5 to 6 tablespoons of butter, skim off
foam and pour the clear yellow butter off the milky residue and into
another saucepan. When broccoli is done, arrange it on a hot



serving dish; sprinkle with salt, pepper, and drops of lemon juice.
Heat butter until it turns a light, nutty brown and pour it bubbling
hot over the broccoli. Serve immediately.

  Brocoli à la Polonaise
[Broccoli with Sautéed Bread Crumbs and Chopped Egg]
This more elaborate presentation of the brown butter sauce

includes bread crumbs and sieved egg. You might serve it as a first
course or in place of a salad. It would also go with plain broiled or
roast chicken, chops, steak, hamburger, or broiled fish.

For 1 bunch (1½ to 2 lbs.) broccoli, serving 4 to 6

¼ lb. (1 stick) butter Before cooking the broccoli (Master
A saucepan Recipe) melt the butter in the
An 8-inch frying pan saucepan, skim off foam, and pour
½ cup (lightly pressed) clear butter off milky residue and

crumbs from fresh into frying pan. Stir in the bread
homemade-type white crumbs and sauté over moderately
bread high heat, stirring for several minutes

Salt and pepper until crumbs are lightly browned.
Season to taste with salt and pepper,

1 hard-boiled egg and set aside. Peel the hard-boiled
A sieve set over a bowl egg, rub through sieve into bowl, and

season with salt and pepper.

When broccoli is done, arrange on a hot serving dish and
sprinkle lightly with salt and pepper. Reheat the bread crumbs, mix
in the sieved egg, strew over the broccoli, and serve immediately.



Broccoli with poached eggs
Omit the hard-boiled egg in the preceding recipe, and substitute

one hot poached egg per person. When broccoli is cooked, arrange
on hot serving dish and place hot poached eggs on top. Sprinkle the
hot, browned bread crumbs over all and serve immediately.

Sauces to serve with plain boiled broccoli
Beurre au citron—A lemon-butter sauce, Volume I, page 98.
Sauce hollandaise, its variations with cream—sauce mousseline, or

the orange-flavored variation—sauce maltaise, all of which are in
Volume I, pages 79–83.

Cold boiled broccoli
Broccoli, peeled and blanched in the French manner, is delicious

in cold vegetable combinations, accompanied by a vinaigrette or
mayonnaise. So that it will retain all its fresh color and texture after
cooking, spread it out on a clean towel as soon as you have removed
it from the boiling water. When cold, refrigerate in a covered bowl.

BROCCOLI RECIPES THAT MAY BE PREPARED AHEAD

Brocoli Sautés à la Niçoise
[Broccoli Sautéed with Onions, Bacon, and Bread Crumbs]
Like the brocoli à la polonaise, this could well be a first course or

served in place of the salad, or it could accompany poached or
scrambled eggs, plain broiled chicken or fish, or pork or veal chops.
In this recipe you may blanch the broccoli in advance, and sauté it
just before serving.

For 1 bunch (1½ to 2 lbs.) broccoli



3 strips bacon Before blanching the broccoli (Master
An 8-inch frying pan, no- Recipe) prepare the following

stick recommended garniture. Cook the bacon until
⅓ cup (lightly pressed) lightly browned, and drain on paper

crumbs from fresh towels; crumble when crisped and
homemade-type white cool. Sauté the bread crumbs in the
bread bacon fat, stirring, and when light

½ cup finely minced brown scrape into a side dish. In the
onions same pan, cook the onions in the

3 Tb olive oil olive oil for 8 to 10 minutes or more,
until tender and translucent; stir in

1 large clove mashed the garlic, and set pan aside.
garlic

The blanched broccoli
Salt and pepper

Just before serving, reheat onions, add the cooked broccoli
pieces, season lightly with salt and pepper, and toss and turn gently
over moderately high heat, shaking and swirling the pan by its
handle. When heated through, add browned crumbs and crumbled
bacon, swirling and tossing for a moment more. Turn out onto a hot
dish and serve immediately.

  Brocoli Étuvés au Beurre
[Broccoli Braised in Butter]
When you cannot give broccoli last-minute attention you may

blanch it until al dente, meaning not quite completely cooked, pack
it into a casserole, and bake it with butter. It finishes cooking while



you are having the first course, but do not leave it in the oven too
long or it will lose its lovely fresh quality.

For 1 bunch (1½ to 2 lbs.) broccoli, serving 4 to 6

1 Tb soft butter Smear inside of dish with butter.
A 6-cup flameproof Arrange cooked broccoli stalks in

casserole or baking bottom of dish, season lightly and
dish dribble on ⅓ of the butter. Arrange

The broccoli, blanched broccoli heads attractively on top,
for 4 minutes only season, and dribble on the rest of the

Salt and pepper butter. Lay waxed paper on top and
4 to 5 Tb melted butter set aside until about 20 minutes

before you are ready to serve.
A round of waxed paper Preheat oven to 350 degrees in
A cover for the casserole plenty of time. If casserole is heavy,

heat on top of the stove. Cover, and
set in middle level of oven until
broccoli is bubbling hot. Serve as
soon as possible, to preserve fresh
taste and green color.

VARIATION
Brocoli Gratinés au Fromage or à la Milanaise
[Buttered Broccoli Gratinéed with Cheese]
Follow the preceding recipe but add ⅓ cup finely grated

Parmesan cheese to the ingredients. Sprinkle 2 tablespoons of
cheese inside the buttered dish before arranging the broccoli on it,
and sprinkle cheese over each layer of broccoli along with the



butter. Cover and heat until bubbling in the oven, then set under a
low broiler for a moment or two to brown cheese lightly.

Chopped Broccoli

Another solution for the chef-host-butler is to blanch the
broccoli, cool it quickly, then chop it and reheat at leisure in one of
the following ways.

  SAUTÉ DE BROCOLI
[Chopped Broccoli Sautéed in Butter]
This very simple way with broccoli is also one of the most

delicious, because the hot butter penetrates every surface. As well as
being an almost all-purpose vegetable accompaniment, chopped
sautéed broccoli may serve as a bed for poached fish fillets, poached
eggs, chicken breasts, veal scallops, brains, or sweetbreads; these
may then be sauced and, if called for, browned under the broiler.

For 1 bunch (1½ to 2 lbs.) fresh broccoli, serving 4 to 6

The broccoli, peeled, Spread the blanched broccoli on a
washed, and blanched towel to cool. Then chop on a board
as directed in the with a big knife to make pieces
Master Recipe, but for between ⅛ and ¼ inch in size. If not
4 minutes only to be cooked immediately, refrigerate

in a covered bowl. (Makes about 2½
cups.)



3 to 4 Tb butter (2 to 3 Several minutes before serving, melt
Tb more if you wish) the butter in the frying pan over

A 10- to 12-inch frying moderately high heat. When
pan, no-stick bubbling hot, pour in the chopped
recommended broccoli and immediately begin

Salt and pepper to taste shaking and swirling the pan by the
handle to toss the broccoli pieces in
the butter until well heated through.
Sprinkle with salt and pepper, toss a
moment more, and turn into a hot
dish. Serve immediately.

VARIATION
Brocoli Étuvés à la Crème
[Chopped Broccoli, Simmered in Cream]
Serve this tender, creamy broccoli dish with broiled or roast

chicken, sautéed chicken breasts, veal scallops, brains or
sweetbreads, or broiled or sautéed fish.

For 1 bunch (1½ to 2 lbs.) fresh broccoli, serving 4 to 6

The preceding recipe for After the broccoli has been warmed
blanched chopped in butter and seasoned, blend 2
broccoli sautéed in 3 tablespoons cream into the
Tb butter cornstarch. When smooth, blend in

1 cup heavy cream (a bit the rest and fold into the broccoli.
more if you wish) Simmer, folding gently for 2 to 3

2 tsp cornstarch in a 1 minutes, to cook starch and thicken
quart bowl cream. Taste for seasoning. Turn into



A wire whip a hot vegetable dish and serve
A rubber spatula immediately.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be set
aside and just heated through before
serving.

Gratin de Brocoli, Mornay
[Chopped Broccoli Gratinéed with Cheese Sauce]
This is an especially good recipe to accompany roast turkey or

chicken, and a boon for Thanksgiving because you may assemble
the whole dish the day before and set it in the oven half an hour
before serving. It also goes well with roast red meats, steaks, chops,
and broiled fish or could be the hot entree at an informal luncheon
where you were serving cold ham or poultry, or poached or shirred
eggs.

For 1 bunch (1½ to 2 lbs.) fresh broccoli, serving 4 to 6

1) The broccoli and the cheese sauce
The peeled, blanched, Prepare the broccoli and set aside.

and chopped broccoli Make a white sauce as follows,
sautéed in butter starting with a butter and flour roux:

4 Tb butter Melt the butter in the saucepan,
3 Tb flour blend in the flour, and stir over
1½ cups hot milk in a moderate heat until flour and butter

small saucepan (more foam together for 2 minutes without
if needed) browning at all. Remove from heat,

½ cup grated cheese, and when roux stops foaming,
Parmesan and Swiss vigorously blend in all of the hot

milk at once with wire whip, beating



mixed (save 3 Tb for until mixture is perfectly smooth.
later) Return over moderately high heat,

A heavy-bottomed 2½- stirring with whip as sauce thickens
quart saucepan and comes to the boil. Boil, stirring,

A wooden spoon, wire for 2 minutes, and remove from heat.
whip, and rubber Let cool for a moment. Fold in all but
spatula 3 tablespoons of the cheese, and salt

½ tsp salt or to taste and pepper to taste.
Big pinch white pepper

2) Assembling the dish
A 6-cup baking dish Smear ½ tablespoon of butter inside

about 2 inches deep the baking dish and spread 2 to 3
1½ Tb soft butter tablespoons of sauce in the bottom.

Spread half the broccoli in the dish,
and cover with half the sauce. (If
sauce seems too thick for spreading,
beat in a little more milk by
spoonfuls.) Cover with the remaining
broccoli and sauce; sprinkle the 3
tablespoons reserved cheese over the
sauce. Dot with remaining butter.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be
completed to this point a day in
advance. When cool, cover and
refrigerate.

3) Baking—about 30 minutes at 375 degrees
About 30 minutes before serving, place broccoli in upper-third

level of preheated oven and bake until bubbling hot and cheese has



browned nicely on top. Do not overcook, or broccoli will lose its
attractive flavor and texture. You may keep the dish warm for 15
minutes or so in turned-off oven or warming oven, but the sooner
you serve it the better the flavor.

TIMBALES DE BROCOLI
[Broccoli Molds]
These are deep-dish custards that are unmolded for serving as

first-course or luncheon dishes, or as an accompaniment to roast
chicken or veal, broiled chicken, veal chops, or broiled fish. Use
about 2½ cups peeled, blanched, and chopped broccoli in place of
the zucchini (timbale de courgettes), or in place of the asparagus in
Volume I, page 440.

EGGPLANT

Aubergines

Eggplant, like broccoli, is in season all year round, and is a
marvelously versatile vegetable. National indifference to the
eggplant, however, is so vast that our average per capita
consumption amounts to only one modest serving once a year. Yet
the eggplant has enormous potentialities besides French-frying,
certainly the least interesting way of cooking this handsome
vegetable. You may bake, broil, boil, sauté, stuff, soufflé, and
gratiné eggplant, as well as serve it hot, cold, alone, or together
with meat, fish, fowl, or other vegetables. Volume I contains a
splendid eggplant stuffed with mushrooms, and moussaka and
ratatouille, the first a marvelous mold of eggplant and lamb, and the
second a Provençal casserole of eggplant, zucchini, tomatoes, and
onions. Here you will find it broiled, cold à la grecque with tomatoes



and herbs, sautéed in various unusual forms, baked with meat, with
cheese, and souffléed. Eggplant will also turn up in other parts of
this book, as a filling, stuffing, or accompaniment to many a main
dish.

HOW TO BUY EGGPLANT

Although you will occasionally see locally grown baby eggplant
and small sizes, either round or egg-shaped, almost the entire large-
scale commercially raised crop in this country consists of the big,
dark-purple varieties weighing 1 to 2 pounds but going up even to 5
pounds. They are roundish, egg-shaped or bell-shaped, and half of
all the harvest comes from Florida, whose climate and long growing
season are ideal for eggplant.

Size is no signal of quality, because all eggplants are harvested
when the fruit is still immature—the seeds sparse and soft, the flesh
firm. When eggplants mature, the flesh softens, the seeds grow
larger and tougher, and both seeds and flesh turn bitter.

When you are buying eggplants, therefore, look at each one
carefully all over, which means that if they are packed in a plastic-
covered carton you must open it up. Make sure that the skin is sleek
and shiny, that it is taut over the flesh, that there are no pockmarks,
brown spots, or wrinkles anywhere. Press each fruit gently all over
to be sure the flesh is firm and resistant. Avoid any eggplant that is
dull, wrinkled, blemished, or even slightly soft, because the flesh
will have an off-flavor you can do nothing to correct.

STORING EGGPLANT

Unlike most other vegetables, eggplants store best at 45 to 50
degrees but even under these conditions the storage limit is only
about 10 days. Unless you have a cold-room, therefore, buy
eggplants only a day or two before you plan to cook them. In a cool
kitchen, keep them in a plastic bag with a damp paper towel for
humidity; in summer, you will have to refrigerate them. Under



refrigeration, however, they will develop surface pitting and brown
spots within 4 to 5 days, and begin to soften.

You may have wondered why a particular eggplant recipe
sometimes comes off perfectly and at other times does not have the
tender, delicious quality you remembered before. The answer is
probably either that the eggplant was not really firm, fresh, and
immature when you bought it, or that it had been kept too long
under refrigerated storage.

PRELIMINARIES TO COOKING

Peeling, salting, blanching
Eggplant skin is edible when cooked long enough, as in a

moussaka, gratinéed dish, or other recipe involving an hour in the
oven. For the rapidly done sautés and for eggplant simmered à la
grecque, cooking is so short that the skin remains rather tough and
stringy.

Most recipes for eggplant direct that it be either macerated in
salt or blanched in boiling salted water before the main cooking
begins. There are three reasons for this. The first is to eliminate the
slight bitterness usually present in even the youngest and freshest
specimens, the second is to remove excess vegetable water that
otherwise exudes during cooking, and the final one is to prevent the
eggplant from absorbing too much oil or fat. You will find, in a
comparison of sautés, that plain cubed eggplant will blot up 3 times
more sautéing oil than blanched eggplant, that salted eggplant will
use half as much as plain eggplant, and that blanched eggplant,
which requires the least oil, will be the most tender of the three but
have slightly less flavor. We therefore recommend salting in most
recipes, and blanching only when we have found it is the best
solution.

Salting, however, requires a wait of 30 minutes while the excess
vegetable water slowly works its way out of the flesh, and if you are
in a tearing hurry do not hesitate to blanch. To do so, drop the
eggplant into salted boiling water after you have peeled and cubed



or sliced it; boil slowly, uncovered, for 3 to 5 minutes or until it is
almost tender but still holds its shape, then proceed with the recipe.

AUBERGINES EN TRANCHES, GRATINÉES
[Broiled Eggplant Slices]
Broiling and sautéing are by far the easiest ways of cooking

eggplant, and thick slices of broiled eggplant are attractive to serve.
Actually, the following recipe is a combination of baking, to soften
the eggplant, then broiling, with a topping of tomatoes and bread
crumbs. Serve with steaks, chops, roast lamb, broiled fish or
chicken, or as a garnish with poached, scrambled, or fried eggs.

For 4 people

1) Salting the eggplant
2 to 2½ lbs. fresh, shiny, Cut off cap, shave nubbin off bottom,

firm, unblemished and wash the eggplant (or eggplants),
eggplant but do not peel. You are now to cut

A large tray the eggplant into slices all somewhat
1½ tsp salt the same dimension, 3 to 4 inches
Paper towels long, 2 inches wide, and ½ to ¾ inch

thick. If you have large ones, for
instance, cut the center slices into 4,
other sizes into 3 or 2. Arrange on
tray. Sprinkle salt on both sides and
let sit for 20 to 30 minutes. Drain
and press dry with paper towels.



2) Preliminary baking of the eggplant—oven preheated to 400
degrees

½ to ⅔ cup olive oil Blend the oil, the garlic or shallots or
Either 1 or 2 cloves scallions, and the herbs and pepper

mashed garlic; in the bowl, dip each slice into the
Or 3 Tb minced shallots mixture, drain, and arrange slices

or scallions slightly overlapping on pizza tray or
¼ to ½ tsp mixed herbs pan. Reserve remaining oil mixture

(herbes de Provence, for later. Cover eggplant and bake in
Italian seasoning, or middle level of preheated 400-degree
thyme, oregano, and oven for 10 to 15 minutes, until
rosemary) eggplant is almost but not quite

Big pinch pepper tender; do not let it overcook and
turn limp, but it must cook long

A 4-inch bowl enough to soften.
A 14-inch pizza tray or

jelly-roll pan
A cover, or aluminum

foil

3) Tomato and bread-crumb topping
5 to 6 medium tomatoes, When you have prepared the

peeled, seeded, juiced, tomatoes, toss gently in a bowl with
and chopped (2 cups salt and pepper; drain in a few
pulp) minutes and spread over the eggplant

⅛ tsp salt slices. Sprinkle lightly with bread
Big pinch pepper crumbs and drizzle on oil.
½ cup dry crumbs from (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be

nonsweetened, prepared an hour in advance to this
homemade-type white point. Cover loosely and set aside.
bread



More oil if needed

4) Broiling and serving
A hot serving platter, or About 5 minutes before serving, set

the meat platter eggplant 4 to 5 inches under a
A flexible-blade spatula moderately hot broiler and let brown

slowly to finish cooking. Arrange on
platter, again overlapping slices
slightly in an attractive design. Serve
as soon as possible because eggplant
will soften if kept warm.

Other topping suggestions
Sprinkle eggplant with a mixture of bread crumbs, cheese, and

parsley, and finish with drops of oil, or mask the slices with the
thick cheese sauce described for Broccoli Mornay, and top with a
sprinkling of cheese and melted butter. In either case, reheat and
brown under a moderate broiler as described in the preceding step.

  AUBERGINES EN PERSILLADE, SAUTÉES
[Sautéed Eggplant Garnished with Garlic, Bread Crumbs, and
Herbs]
Sautéed eggplant is easier to serve than the preceding broiled

eggplant, and certainly easier to finish off at the last moment. It also
lends itself to several variations, as you will see. Serve sautéed
eggplant with steaks, chops, roast lamb, broiled fish, or broiled
chicken. Whole, small baked tomatoes are probably the most
attractive additional accompaniment.



For 4 to 6 people

1) Preparing the eggplant
2 lbs. shiny, firm, Peel the eggplant. Cut into

unblemished eggplant lengthwise slices ¾ inch thick, cut
A 3-quart mixing bowl slices into ¾-inch strips, and the
1½ tsp salt strips into ¾-inch cubes. (You will
A colander have around 8 cups.) Toss in the
Paper towels bowl with the salt and let stand 20 to

30 minutes. Just before sautéing,
drain in colander and pat dry in
paper towels.

2) Sautéing the eggplant
Olive oil or cooking oil Pour a ⅛-inch layer of oil into the
A 12-inch frying pan, pan and heat until very hot but not

preferably no-stick (or smoking. Add enough eggplant to
an 8-inch pan for make 1 layer. Toss and turn the
sautéing in 2 batches) eggplant frequently, shaking and

The colander set over the swirling the pan by its handle; sauté
drained mixing bowl for 5 to 8 minutes until eggplant is

tender and very lightly browned.
(Eggplant burns easily, and you must
keep your eye on it. If it has browned
but is not tender, lower heat and
cover the pan for 2 to 3 minutes until
it is tender.) Drain in colander and
return any accumulated oil from
bowl to frying pan. Continue with the



rest of the eggplant if you are
sautéing in several batches.

3) The persillade
The oil Add more oil to pan to make about 2
⅓ cup coarse, dry tablespoons. Heat to very hot, add

crumbs from the bread crumbs, and toss for a
nonsweetened, minute or two to brown lightly. Then
homemade-type white add the shallots or scallions and
bread garlic, and toss a moment more.

2 Tb minced shallots or (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be
scallions completed in advance to this point.

1 to 2 large cloves of
garlic, mashed or
finely minced

3 Tb fresh chopped
parsley

Optional other herbs,
such as thyme, basil,
or oregano

A hot serving dish

Just before serving, reheat pan with bread-crumb mixture, add
eggplant, and toss over moderately high heat until eggplant is
sizzling. Toss with parsley and optional herbs, turn into hot dish,
and serve immediately.

VARIATIONS



Aubergines en Persillade, Gratinées
[Eggplant Baked with Parsley, Garlic, and Béchamel]
Sautéed eggplant tossed with garlic and parsley then folded into

a béchamel sauce and browned in the oven makes a fine
accompaniment to steaks, chops, hamburgers, broiled chicken, or
fish.

For 4 to 6 people

Ingredients for 2 lbs. Peel, cube, salt, and drain the
eggplant in the eggplant; then sauté in oil until
preceding Master lightly browned. Reserve the bread
Recipe, Steps 1, 2, and crumbs, tossing the eggplant with
3 only the shallots or scallions, garlic,

and herbs. Set aside.

For 2 cups béchamel
5 Tb flour For the béchamel sauce (which you
4 Tb butter can make while the eggplant
A heavy 2-quart macerates), melt the butter in the

saucepan saucepan, blend in the flour, and stir
A wooden spoon and a over moderate heat until flour and

wire whip butter foam together for 2 minutes
1¾ cups milk heated in a without browning at all. Remove this

small saucepan (a roux from heat, and when it stops
little more if needed) bubbling, vigorously blend in all of

the hot milk at once with wire whip,
Salt and pepper to taste beating until mixture is perfectly
A rubber spatula smooth. Return over moderately high

heat, stirring with whip as sauce



A lightly buttered 6-cup thickens and comes to the boil. Boil,
baking dish about 1½ stirring, for 2 minutes, season lightly
inches deep to taste, and remove from heat. Sauce

2 to 3 Tb of the reserved should be quite thick; if too thick for
bread crumbs easy spreading, beat in more milk by

1 Tb melted butter droplets. (If done ahead, clean off
sides of pan and press a sheet of
plastic wrap on surface of sauce to
prevent a skin from forming.)

Spread a ⅛-inch layer of sauce in the bottom of the baking dish
with spatula, spread half the eggplant on top, and cover with half
the sauce. Spread rest of eggplant over this and cover with the last
of the sauce. Sprinkle the crumbs on top and dribble melted butter
over the crumbs.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Recipe may be completed to this point
and set aside.

To gratiné, if sauce and eggplant are still warm, set 4 to 5 inches
under a moderately hot broiler for several minutes, until eggplant is
bubbling and crumbs have browned lightly. Otherwise bake in
upper third of a 425-degree oven for 15 to 20 minutes, but do not
overcook.

Soufflé d’Aubergines en Persillade
[Eggplant Soufflé]
Fold beaten egg whites into the preceding sautéed and sauced

eggplant, and you turn it into a soufflé—not the airy cheese type, of
course, but something that puffs dramatically in a wide baking dish
with removable collar. Serve it, along with a fine tomato sauce, to
accompany boiled beef, roast lamb, broiled or roast chicken, or let it
be the main course for an informal luncheon.



For 8 servings

The soufflé base
Ingredients for the Following the preceding recipe, peel,

preceding 2 lbs. of cube, salt, drain, and dry the
sautéed eggplant eggplant; sauté in oil until
baked in béchamel thoroughly tender and very lightly

browned. Toss with the shallots or
scallions and garlic.

Chop rather roughly with a big knife on a board. (You will have
about 2½ cups.) Fold into the pan of béchamel sauce, along with the
chopped parsley. Carefully correct seasoning.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: May be completed in advance to this
point; clean off sides of pan and lay a sheet of plastic wrap on top of
the sauce. You may also fill the mold (next step), cover with a bowl,
and bake an hour later.

Assembling and baking—25 to 30 minutes at 400 degrees
1 Tb soft butter Preheat oven in time for baking.
A 6- to 8-cup baking dish Smear butter inside baking dish,

about 2 inches deep sprinkle cheese inside to coat bottom
(such as a round one and sides. Shake or knock out excess
10 to 11 inches in cheese onto waxed paper and
diameter, or a reserve. Encircle circumference of
casserole) dish with a double thickness of well-

⅓ cup grated Parmesan buttered aluminum foil secured by
cheese pins; foil should rise 1½ inches above



Waxed paper rim of dish. Reheat soufflé base,
Heavy aluminum foil and folding over moderate heat. Stir in

2 straight pins the egg yolks. Beat the egg whites to
3 egg yolks stiff peaks; stir one fourth of them
5 egg whites into the soufflé base along with all

but 1 Tb of the reserved Parmesan
1½ to 2 cups tomato cheese. Scoop rest of egg whites on

sauce, or the fresh top of soufflé base and delicately fold
tomato coulis, Volume in with a rubber spatula.
I, page 78

Turn the mixture into the prepared dish. Sprinkle on the
remaining cheese and set soufflé immediately in lower third of
preheated oven. Bake for 25 to 30 minutes until soufflé has risen
about double and is nicely browned. (If served as soon as it has
risen, the inside will be soft and the soufflé will sink rapidly; if
baked 5 minutes more, the soufflé will be drier but will hold up
longer. Follow your own preference, but these additional minutes
give you some leeway.)

As soon as the soufflé is done, remove from oven, undo
aluminum collar, and serve immediately, accompanied by the
tomato sauce in a warm bowl.

Pistouille
[Sautéed Eggplant with Tomatoes, Peppers, Garlic, and Basil]
Pistou, a Provençal purée of fresh garlic and basil, is stirred into

sautéed eggplant that has simmered with tomatoes, peppers, and
onions, making a dish reminiscent of that famous Mediterranean
medley, ratatouille, but much easier to produce. Good hot or cold,
pistouille can be served with broiled fish, broiled chicken, roasts,
steaks, chops, cold roast pork, veal, or lamb, and any leftovers can
stuff eggs, tomatoes, or other vegetables.



NOTE: This dish is naturally at its best when fresh basil and local
tomatoes are in season. Out of season, use fresh tomatoes plus a
tablespoon or so of canned tomato sauce or purée, and if you cannot
find fragrant-smelling dried basil, use oregano.

For 4 to 6 people

Ingredients for salting Peel, salt, drain, dry, and then sauté
and sautéing 2 lbs. the eggplant in oil until lightly
eggplant, as in the browned as described in the Master
Master Recipe, Steps 1 Recipe.
and 2

The onion, pepper, and tomato garnish
⅔ cup minced onions While the eggplant is macerating in
⅔ cup diced green bell salt, cook the onions and peppers in

peppers oil in the pan for 10 to 15 minutes,
2 Tb olive oil until tender and translucent but not
2 cups fresh tomato pulp brown. Add the tomato pulp, cover

(2 lbs. tomatoes, pan, and simmer 5 minutes to render
peeled, seeded, juiced, its juice; uncover pan and simmer
and chopped) over moderate heat for 5 minutes or

A 2½-quart saucepan or more until juices have almost entirely
another frying pan evaporated. Set aside.

When eggplant has been sautéed and drained, return it to the
frying pan with the tomato mixture and simmer uncovered for about
10 minutes to blend flavors and evaporate more liquid. Mixture
should form a thick mass.



The pistou
2 large cloves of garlic Purée garlic through press, then
A garlic press mash with the basil or oregano in the
12 to 14 large, fresh basil bowl to make a smooth paste; fold

leaves, minced (or into the hot eggplant.
about ½ Tb fragrant (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
dried basil or oregano) completed to this point. Set aside.

A small bowl and a
pestle, or small
wooden spoon

3 Tb fresh minced Reheat just before serving, correct
parsley seasoning, and fold in the parsley.

To serve cold
2 to 3 tomatoes Whether the eggplant is cooked and
Salt and pepper cooled or left over, a little ripe
3 Tb fresh minced tomato will freshen the taste. Peel,

parsley seed, and juice the tomatoes; dice the
½ Tb olive oil pulp. Place in a bowl and fold with

the seasonings, parsley, and oil. Let
stand 10 minutes, drain, and fold
into the eggplant.

VARIATION



Aubergines en Pistouille, Froides
[Cold Eggplant à la Grecque with Tomatoes and Basil]
Much the same as cold pistouille, but with a more piquant flavor,

is eggplant simmered in a court bouillon, turned briefly in oil to
enhance its flavor, then folded into tomatoes that have also cooked
in the court bouillon. A final touch is the pistou of garlic and basil,
which makes this an especially good cold hors d’oeuvre with
sardines, tuna, hard-boiled eggs, anchovies, olives, or other
Provençal trimmings.

For the court bouillon
3 cups water in a 3-quart Combine the court bouillon

stainless saucepan ingredients in the saucepan and
1½ Tb lemon juice simmer at least 5 minutes, or while
3 Tb olive oil you are preparing the eggplant. Peel
1½ tsp salt eggplant and cut into ¾-inch cubes.
6 coriander seeds Place half (4 cups) in the simmering

court bouillon, bring to the boil, and
¼ tsp thyme simmer 5 minutes. Drain into bowl,
1 imported bay leaf return court bouillon to pan, and
2 large cloves mashed simmer the rest of the eggplant.

garlic Drain, return court bouillon again to
2 lbs. firm, fresh, shiny pan, boil down rapidly to 1 cup, and

eggplant reserve. Meanwhile, pour a 1⁄16-inch
A colander set over a layer of oil into frying pan and sauté

bowl drained eggplant (adding only half if
Olive oil pan is small), using moderately high
A heavy no-stick frying heat. Shake and swirl the pan

pan (10 to 12 inches in frequently by its handle to toss the
diameter if possible) eggplant, and sauté for several

minutes, until eggplant is tender but



A serving dish not browned. Turn into serving dish,
leaving oil in pan.

3 to 4 Tb minced shallots Stir the shallots or scallions into the
or scallions frying pan and cook for a moment,

1½ lbs. (6 medium) then add the tomatoes and the
tomatoes, peeled, reduced court bouillon. Boil slowly for
seeded, juiced, and cut 5 minutes, then raise heat and boil
into ½-inch dice rapidly until liquid has almost
(about 2 cups pulp) evaporated and tomatoes are quite

1 or 2 cloves garlic thick. Correct seasoning. Purée garlic
A garlic press through press into a small bowl;
¼ cup fresh basil, using a wooden spoon, mash with

minced (or about ½ Tb herbs to make a smooth paste; fold
fragrant dried basil or this pistou into the hot tomatoes.
oregano) Then fold the tomatoes into the

eggplant. When cold, cover and chill.
3 Tb fresh minced Sprinkle on the parsley before

parsley serving.

LA TENTATION DE BRAMAFAM
[Eggplant Caviar with Walnuts—A Cold Spread or Filling]
Recipes for eggplant caviar have been around for years, but this

is the only one we know that combines eggplant and walnuts.
Tremendously easy to do in the electric mixer, this is something you
can keep on hand in the refrigerator for a week or more, and use on
toast or crackers, or as a dip for cocktail tidbits, as a filling for hard-
boiled eggs or tomato shells, or to pass with cold meats or chicken.

For 4 to 5 cups



About 2 lbs. firm, shiny, Preheat oven to 425 degrees. Cut off
unblemished eggplant green cap and place eggplant (or

An electric mixer eggplants) in a shallow roasting dish
7 to 8 ounces (about 2 or pie plate. Bake 30 to 35 minutes

cups) ground walnut or until thoroughly soft to the touch.
meats (grind them in Cut in half lengthwise and scoop
an electric blender) flesh into bowl of mixer. Beat several

¾ tsp salt, and more as minutes at high speed to purée the
needed eggplant flesh, then beat in the

⅛ tsp pepper ground walnuts, salt, pepper, garlic
to taste, Tabasco, allspice, and

1 to 4 large cloves garlic ginger. By driblets, as though making
puréed in a press mayonnaise, beat in enough oil to

4 to 6 squirts Tabasco make a creamy mass, but not so
sauce much as to thin the mixture; it

¼ tsp ground allspice should hold its shape softly when
1 tsp freshly grated lifted with a spoon. Taste carefully;

ginger root or ¼ tsp correct seasoning, adding the MSG if
powdered ginger you wish, and the tentation is ready

5 to 8 Tb olive oil to use.
Optional, to bring out (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Will keep

flavor: ½ tsp several days under refrigeration; may
monosodium be frozen.
glutamate

  GRATIN D’AUBERGINES, PROVENÇAL
[Sliced Eggplant Baked with Cheese and Tomatoes]
When you have the time for it, this is a most attractive way to

serve eggplant: it is sliced but the peel is left on, and the slices are
arranged upright in the baking dish with tomatoes and cheese in
between. When baked, the purple-skinned slices form dark ripples
separated by hints of red and brown, and the same effect is carried



over onto the plates when you serve. This is a particularly good dish
to go with roast lamb or veal.

NOTE: Fresh tomato sauce, coulis de tomates, in Volume I, page 78,
is the most desirable one here, but the following sauce with canned
Italian tomatoes is an excellent alternative. We prefer canned
tomatoes to tomato purée because they are less concentrated and
the resulting sauce, we think, tastes more like the fresh.

For 4 to 6 servings

1) The tomato sauce (using canned tomatoes)—for about 1 cup
1 cup minced onions Stir the onions into the oil, cover
2 Tb olive oil or cooking pan, and cook over low heat, stirring

oil occasionally, for 8 to 10 minutes or
A heavy bottomed 2- until onions are tender and

quart saucepan with translucent but not browned.
cover Meanwhile drain the tomatoes,

A 1-lb. can of peeled collecting their juice in the bowl;
Italian-style plum pour juice back into the can and
(pear-shaped) reserve. Rub the tomatoes through
tomatoes the sieve to eliminate seeds. When

A sieve set over a bowl onions are tender, stir in the sieved
tomato pulp and the herbs, orange

1 bay leaf peel, saffron, garlic, and salt. Cover
¼ tsp thyme or oregano pan loosely and simmer, stirring
A 1-inch piece of dried occasionally, and adding a little of

orange peel or ¼ tsp the tomato juice if sauce becomes too
bottled dried peel thick. Let sauce simmer at least 30

A pinch of saffron minutes, although a total of 45 to 60
threads minutes will make it even better.

1 large clove mashed Taste carefully and correct seasoning.
garlic Sauce should be thick enough to hold

its shape softly in a spoon.



¼ tsp salt (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be made
several days in advance and
refrigerated; may be frozen.

2) Blanching and sautéing the eggplant
2 lbs. firm, fresh, shiny

eggplants (or
eggplant)

Cut off green caps, and
wash the eggplants but do
not peel them. Halve or
quarter the eggplants,
depending on size, and cut
into slices ⅜ inch thick and
about 2 inches from skin
side to bottom of slice.

A large saucepan of A dozen slices or so at a time, blanch
boiling salted water in the boiling water for 2 minutes—
(1½ tsp salt per quart) barely to soften, not to cook through;

A skimmer or slotted dip out with skimmer or spoon, and
spoon drain on paper towels.

A tray covered with
several thicknesses of
paper toweling, and
additional paper
towels

A large (11-inch) frying
pan, preferably no-
stick



Olive oil or cooking oil
A flexible-blade spatula
A second tray or a platter

to hold sautéed
eggplant

Pat tops of slices dry with towels. Pour a ⅛-inch layer of oil into
frying pan; heat to very hot but not smoking. Sauté for a minute as
many slices in pan as will fit in one layer, on each side, barely
browning them, and transfer to second tray. Continue with rest of
slices, adding more oil to pan as necessary. (Although all of this is
somewhat of a nuisance, it is this step that gives the final dish its
distinction.)

3) Assembling
An oiled 5- to 6-cup

flameproof gratin dish,
such as an oval one 10
to 11 inches long and
2 inches deep

About 4 ounces Swiss
cheese sliced 1⁄16 inch
thick

The reserved tomato Arrange the eggplant slices purple side
juice uppermost in overlapping rows, each

Aluminum foil row spread with tomato sauce and
covered with slices of cheese as shown.



If you need more room, push the rows more closely together as
you go; if you need less, let them lie flatter. Pour in about ½ cup of
the tomato juice, enough to come ½ to ⅔ the way up the eggplant.
Cover closely with the foil.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be prepared in advance to this point;
refrigerate if you are not going to bake within an hour or so.

4) Baking and serving—preheat oven to 375 degrees
Heat briefly on top of stove, just until contents start to bubble,

then bake for 45 minutes to an hour in the middle level of the
preheated oven. Eggplant is done when the slices are tender and
juices have thickened but are not quite absorbed. Uncover for last
10 minutes of baking so that cheese will brown and liquid will
thicken more. (Add more tomato juice if there is danger of eggplant
drying out before it is done.) Serve bubbling hot.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: This may be baked well in advance of
serving, and then reheated. If so, take it out of the oven before
liquid is quite absorbed, so there will be enough to moisten the
eggplant during its reheating. Any leftovers may be transferred to a
smaller dish and reheated under a slow broiler.

VARIATION
Gratin d’Aubergines Farcies
[Main-course Eggplant and Tomato Casserole for Leftover Meat]
Sautéed sliced eggplant, an excellent tomato sauce, and grated

cheese are just the elements for turning yesterday’s roast into a
splendid new main course. Turkey, veal, or pork respond especially
well to this treatment. The meat is ground and flavored, while the
other elements are the same as in the preceding recipe. You may



arrange the eggplant in upright slices if you wish to take the time,
or lay them flat as suggested here and build the casserole in layers.
Serve this hot with French bread and a chilled rosé wine, and follow
with a tossed green salad. It is also delicious served cold.

NOTE: As in most recipes of this type, exact proportions are not of
vital importance. If you have less or more meat, add fewer or more
onions and the other ingredients that flavor it.

For 6 to 8 people

The meat mixture
1 cup minced onions Stir the onions into the oil, cover the
2 Tb olive oil or cooking pan, and cook over low heat, stirring

oil occasionally, for 8 to 10 minutes or
An 8-inch frying pan until onions are tender. Raise heat

with cover and stir to brown onions lightly for 2
to 3 minutes.

About 2 cups ground Stir the ground meat into the onions,
cooked veal, pork, or along with the herbs, the gravy or
turkey (previously bouillon, and garlic. Simmer 2 to 3
trimmed of all fat, minutes to blend flavors. Season
skin, and gristle) carefully with salt and pepper to

About ½ cup ground taste, and a little more of the herb if
baked or boiled ham, you think it necessary. Let cool while
or ready-to-cook you are completing other parts of the
packaged ham slice recipe. When tepid or cold, blend in
(you may include the egg and the parsley.
some of the fat)

About ¼ tsp of whatever
herb you prefer and



are using in the
tomato sauce (thyme,
oregano, fresh basil,
rosemary)

½ cup thickened gravy
from the roast, or ½
cup stock or bouillon
blended with 1½ tsp
cornstarch

1 clove mashed garlic
Salt and pepper to taste
1 egg
3 to 4 Tb chopped fresh

parsley

Assembling the casserole
Ingredients for the 2 lbs. For a round casserole 10 by 3 inches,

sliced, blanched, and you will have 4 layers each of
sautéed eggplant in eggplant, meat, tomato sauce, and
preceding recipe, but cheese. Arrange them, then, in the
2 cups tomato sauce, casserole in that order, ending with a
and the tomato juice mixture of cheese and bread crumbs
and 1 cup coarsely tossed together. Dribble olive oil or
grated Swiss cheese melted butter over the top. Drawing
(or ⅔ cup Parmesan if edges of ingredients ¼ inch toward
you prefer) center of casserole in several places,

An oiled 3-quart baking pour in the cup of tomato juice.
dish or casserole such
as a round (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
earthenware one 10 assembled a day in advance of
inches in diameter at baking.



the top and 3 inches
deep

¼ cup coarse white
bread crumbs, fresh or
stale

2 Tb olive oil or melted
butter

A rubber spatula
1 cup tomato juice
A cover for the casserole,

or aluminum foil

Baking and serving—about 1¼ hours at 375 degrees
Cover, heat to simmer on top of stove, and bake as directed in

Step 4 of preceding Master Recipe.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be baked in advance and reheated.

TWO RECIPES FOR GREENS

BLETTES GRATINÉES
[Swiss Chard Gratinéed with Cheese Sauce]
This way of serving chard brings out its special flavor, and

makes it a most attractive accompaniment to roast beef or chicken.
Here both the long white stems and the large green leaves are used,
but they are cooked separately before being combined.

For 6 to 8 servings



1) Preparing the chard
About 10 stalks (2 Cut the green part of the leaves off

bunches) fresh chard the white of the stalk that runs up
the center of the leaves. Wash leaves
and set aside. Trim off any discolored
bits and ends, wash the long white
stalks thoroughly, and cut into ¼-
inch slices (makes about 8 cups).

2) Cooking the white stalks
¼ cup flour (instant- Place flour in saucepan. Beating with

blending works nicely wire whip, gradually blend in the
here) cold water to make a smooth

A heavy-bottomed 2½- mixture. Beat in the hot water, salt,
quart saucepan (no- and lemon juice, and bring to the
stick is useful) simmer, stirring. Add chard stalks

A wire whip and simmer about 30 minutes or
1 cup cold water and 2 until they are tender, stirring

cups hot water occasionally, and adding a little more
1 tsp salt water, if necessary, to prevent

scorching. Drain, reserving cooking
1 Tb lemon juice liquid. (You will note that the chard
The sliced stalks stalks acquire a subtle flavor when
A wooden spoon finally tender, and that they leave a
A sieve set over a bowl sticky film on the bottom of the pan.)

3) Cooking the green leaves
The green leaves While the stalks are simmering, drop

the leaves into the boiling water,



A large pan of boiling bring rapidly back to the boil, and
salted water boil uncovered for 5 to 6 minutes or

A colander until leaves are fairly tender. Drain,
refresh in cold water, squeeze dry a
handful at a time, and chop. You will
have almost 2 cups; mix them into
the cooked stalks.

4) Sauce and assembly
1 egg yolk Blend the egg yolk and cream in the
¼ cup heavy cream saucepan with a wire whip, then
A clean saucepan gradually blend in the stalk-cooking
The stalk-cooking liquid liquid. Bring to the simmer, stirring,

(plus milk if necessary and simmer 1 minute. Correct
to make 2 cups) seasoning. Spoon a layer onto the

Salt and pepper to taste bottom of the baking dish. Taste the
cooked stalks and leaves, and season

A buttered 5- to 6-cup if necessary. Spread half in the dish,
baking dish about 2 spread on half the sauce and half the
inches deep cheese. Repeat with the remaining

¼ cup grated Parmesan chard, sauce, and cheese and top
cheese with the butter, cut into dots.

1 Tb butter (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
completed a day before serving;
cover with plastic and refrigerate.

5) Serving
If chard is still warm, set under a slow broiler until just

beginning to bubble and top is nicely browned. If cold, set in upper



third of preheated 375-degree oven for about 30 minutes just until
bubbling hot and top has browned.

GRATIN D’ÉPINARDS AUX OIGNONS
[Spinach Braised with Onions—also for other greens]
This is creamed spinach with character, which will stand up to

steaks, chops, roasts, and broiled fish; you can also serve it with
poached eggs and croûtons. Although fresh is best, frozen spinach is
very successful done this way, as are other greens such as collards,
chard, and kale.

For 4 people

1 cup minced onions Cook the onions in the oil for 8 to 10
3 Tb olive oil minutes or more until tender and just
An 8-inch, heavy- beginning to brown lightly. Add

bottomed no-stick or optional garlic and cook for a few
enameled frying pan seconds, then stir in the spinach and

Optional: 1 to 2 large cook over moderate heat, stirring, for
cloves garlic, mashed 2 minutes. Blend in the flour and stir

2 cups blanched, over moderate heat for 2 minutes
chopped spinach (2 more. Remove pan from heat;
lbs. fresh spinach gradually blend in the milk. Set again
boiled 3 minutes, over heat, bring to the simmer,
drained, squeezed dry, stirring, and add seasonings to taste.
and chopped) Simmer slowly over low heat for 10

to 15 minutes, stirring occasionally
2 Tb flour to be sure spinach is not sticking to
1 cup hot milk, more if pan. Spinach is done when it is

needed tender and has absorbed the milk. (If
Salt and pepper to taste you are doing other greens you may



2 to 4 Tb heavy cream have to cook them longer, and add a
little more milk.) Just before serving,
taste carefully for seasoning and stir
in the cream, a tablespoon at a time.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Set spinach
aside after it has simmered in the
milk; smooth it with a rubber spatula
and spread 2 tablespoons of cream
over it. Reheat and finish seasoning
just before serving.

PUMPKINS AND SQUASHES

Courges et Courgettes
Before Columbus sailed back from his famous voyage of 1492

the squash family was unknown in Europe. The only written
accounts date from after his return, and this seems as good a reason
as any to trace the origin of squash from the Americas. Our word,
“squash,” is of Algonquin origin; the Latin generic is Cucurbita, and
the French, courge. Hard-shell, mature, yellow-fleshed varieties like
Hubbard, turban, acorn squash, and even pumpkin come under the
popular heading of winter squashes, courges, while the soft-shell,
tender-seeded types like zucchini, yellow crooknecks, and pattypans
are called summer squashes, courgettes. However, winter squash is
available in August, and summer squash can be found in December
as well as June. Our main emphasis here will be on summer squash,
particularly zucchini, but we shall start off with a prize pumpkin.

LE POTIRON TOUT ROND
[Stuffed Pumpkin or Pumpkin Soup Served in a Pumpkin]



In France a potiron is any member of the squash family including
the citrouille, which is a pumpkin-like yellow-fleshed squash tasting
like our Hubbard and acorn squashes. Thus you can never be quite
sure whether you are getting in France what we would call pumpkin
or what we would call squash; many’s the bride who has tried to
duplicate her French mother-in-law’s famous potage au potiron and
finds that the secret ingredient which gave that wonderful flavor
was squash rather than pumpkin. Use American pumpkin for this
recipe, which can be either a soup or the starchy vegetable to go
with turkey, goose, duck, pork, or game birds. Cooked and served in
the pumpkin itself, this always makes an amusing presentation.

As a vegetable serving 6 to 8

1½ cups (pressed down) Spread the bread crumbs in the
fresh white crumbs roasting pan and let them dry out in
from nonsweetened a 300-degree oven, stirring
homemade-type white occasionally; this will take about 15
bread minutes. Meanwhile, with a short,

A roasting pan stout knife, cut a cover 4 inches in
A fine, hard, diameter out of the top of the

unblemished 4-lb. pumpkin. Scrape all the stringy
pumpkin (about 6 material and seeds from cover and
inches in diameter) inside of pumpkin (an ice-cream
with 2-inch stem spoon and grapefruit knife are useful

1 Tb soft butter for this). Rub inside of pumpkin and
Salt the cover with the soft butter and

sprinkle lightly with salt.

⅔ cup finely minced While bread crumbs are drying, cook
onions the onions in the butter for 8 to 10

6 Tb butter minutes over low heat until tender



An 8-inch frying pan and translucent. Then stir in the
½ tsp salt crumbs and let them cook slowly for
Pinch of pepper and 2 minutes to absorb the butter. Stir in

nutmeg seasonings and sage. Remove from
½ tsp ground sage heat and stir in the cheese, then

spoon the mixture into the pumpkin.
½ cup finely diced or Pour in the cream, adding enough so

coarsely grated Swiss mixture comes to within ½ inch of
cheese pumpkin rim. Lay bay leaf on top

2 to 2¼ cups light cream and replace cover.
1 bay leaf (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
A shallow lightly prepared in advance to this point.

buttered
baking/serving dish to
hold the pumpkin

Baking and serving—baking time about 2 hours

Bake in a preheated 400-degree oven for about 1½ hours, until
pumpkin is beginning to soften on the outside and the inside is
beginning to bubble. Reduce oven thermostat to 350 and bake
another half hour until pumpkin is tender but still holds its shape
solidly. (If pumpkin is browning too much, cover loosely with foil or
brown paper.)

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be kept warm in a 200-degree oven
for half an hour at least.

To serve, remove cover and dip into pumpkin with a long-
handled spoon, scraping flesh off bottom and sides of pumpkin with
each serving of the filling.

Pumpkin Soup



Use a 6- to 7-pound pumpkin and the same ingredients, except
replace the cream with enough chicken stock to come within ½ inch
of rim. Stir half a cup or so of heavy cream and a handful of
chopped parsley into soup just before serving.

ZUCCHINI — AND OTHER SUMMER SQUASHES

Courgettes
Zucchini, the familiar almost cucumber-shaped green squash that

is on the market all year, is our main concern here, although you
may substitute yellow crooknecks or straightnecks, or the striped,
green, zucchini-like cocozelle in any of the recipes. Scallop or
pattypan squash (patisson) may also be adapted, particularly in the
recipes for stuffed zucchini.

HOW TO BUY AND STORE SUMMER SQUASHES

When you are buying summer squash, look for obviously fresh,
clean specimens that feel heavy, are firm to the touch all over, and
have skin so tender you can pierce it easily with a fingernail. Fully
edible summer squashes are immature: when you cut them open the
seeds are soft and the tissue surrounding the seeds is moist and
crisp. In all of these squashes, except for the giant crookneck, size
indicates quality. Beware of foot-long zucchini, crook- and
straightnecks over 10 inches, cocozelles more than 8 inches,
pattypans that exceed 4 inches in diameter. However, if you do find
yourself with slightly overage squashes, you can peel them if the
skin seems tough, quarter them lengthwise, and cut out the pulpy
core and tough seeds; use only the moist, crisp flesh between skin
and core. Store summer squashes in a plastic bag in the refrigerator,
where they will keep for a week to 10 days if very fresh.

PRELIMINARIES TO COOKING



Peeling, salting, blanching
Tender-skinned squashes need no peeling; their flavor is delicate

anyway, and to remove the peel makes them taste even milder. Both
yellow and green tender squashes contain a large amount of
vegetable water, and if you do not deal with it in some way before
the serious cooking begins, you will have watery casseroles and
overcooked sautés. There are two methods for eliminating the
water, both equally good because neither removes essential flavor.
The easiest method, when you are to sauté chunks of zucchini, for
instance, or hollow it out for a stuffing, is to drop the whole squash
into boiling salted water and boil about 10 minutes, just until the
flesh begins to yield to pressure. This is called blanching. The
second method, for cut or grated squash, is to salt it, let it stand for
20 minutes until the water oozes out of the tissues, then squeeze or
pat it dry. We shall use both systems here, starting out with a
number of unusual recipes for blanched, sautéed zucchini.

You will notice that only twice is any herb but parsley used in
the following recipes, in order that the delicate flavor of the
zucchini may be pointed up rather than masked. Preliminary
sautéing of the zucchini before saucing or simmering does much to
bring out its flavor, and shallots, onions, garlic, and cheese seem to
be its natural complements.

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

1 zucchini 8 inches long and 1¾ inches at its widest diameter
weighs 5 to 6 ounces; 3 zucchinis of this size weigh about 1 pound.

1 pound of plain, raw diced or sliced zucchini makes about 3½
cups.

1 pound of freshly grated zucchini, lightly pressed down, makes
about 2 cups; when salted and squeezed it makes 1 cup and renders
⅔ cup of juice.

1 pound of zucchini will provide 2 to 3 servings as a vegetable
garnish.



Recipes Using Whole Blanched Zucchini

Courgettes Blanchies

TO BLANCH WHOLE ZUCCHINI—OR OTHER SUMMER SQUASH

The object in blanching zucchini or other summer squashes is to
boil them just long enough to minimize the oozing out of their
vegetable water, but not long enough to cook them quite through. In
other words, they are not tender; they hold their shape.

Shave the stem and the tip off each zucchini (or other summer
squash), scrub thoroughly but not harshly with a vegetable brush
under cold, running water to remove any clinging sand or dirt.
Plunge zucchini into a large kettle or saucepan of boiling, salted
water; when water returns again to the boil, boil them slowly,
uncovered, for 10 to 12 minutes usually, until the flesh will just
yield slightly to pressure. Test each zucchini, and remove one by
one as they are done, plunging them into cold water. Drain, and the
zucchini are ready for sautéing, stuffing, creaming or whatever the
following recipes direct. If you are not continuing the recipe until
the next day, cover and refrigerate them.

  COURGETTES SAUTÉES, MAÎTRE D’HÔTEL
[Zucchini Sautéed in Butter with Lemon and Parsley]
One of the very easiest and most delicious ways to serve zucchini

is to blanch it whole, cut it into large dice, then toss in butter and
seasonings, finishing it off with lemon juice and parsley. Cooked this
way, zucchini goes with anything, and it is particularly
recommended when you want a simply done green vegetable to go
with something rather elaborate, such as escalopes de veau à la crème
or a chicken fricassee.



For 6 people

1) Sautéing the zucchini
2 to 2½ lbs. blanched After the zucchini have been

zucchini (6 to 7 scrubbed, blanched, and drained as
zucchini 8 by 1¾ in the preceding directions, cut them
inches, for example) in quarters or sixths lengthwise,

Paper towels depending on their diameter. Cut the
About 4 Tb butter lengths crosswise into 1-inch pieces,
1 to 2 Tb olive oil or and pat dry with paper towels. Melt 2

cooking oil tablespoons of butter with 1 of oil
A large (11-inch) no-stick over high heat. When butter foam

or enameled frying has begun to subside, toss in the
pan zucchini. Toss and turn frequently,

shaking and swirling the pan by its
A cover for the pan handle, for 5 minutes or more, until
Salt and pepper zucchini is beginning to brown very

lightly. By this time, it should be just
tender; if not, cover pan and cook
over low heat for several minutes. (If
you are using a smaller pan, sauté in
several batches and turn each batch
out onto a dish until all is done, then
return them all to the pan.) Toss with
salt and pepper to taste.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be done
in advance to this point. Set aside.
Reheat to sizzling before continuing.

2) The maître d’hôtel seasoning



Drops of fresh lemon Just before serving, toss with drops
juice of lemon juice; correct seasoning, and

Remaining butter from add a little more lemon juice if you
Step 1 feel it is necessary. Then toss with

2 to 3 Tb fresh minced another tablespoon or so of butter
parsley and the parsley. Turn out onto hot

A hot serving dish or the dish and serve immediately.
meat platter

VARIATIONS
Courgettes Sautées à la Provençale
[Zucchini Sautéed in Olive Oil with Garlic and Parsley]
Garlic and olive oil are especially good with zucchini, and this

dish goes well with steaks, chops, broiled chicken, and fish.

2 to 2½ lbs. blanched Dry the zucchini pieces with paper
zucchini quartered toweling and sauté, tossing
lengthwise and cut frequently, in hot olive oil until just
into 1-inch pieces tender and very lightly browned. The

3 to 4 Tb olive oil moment before serving, toss over
Salt and pepper to taste moderately high heat with the
2 to 3 cloves garlic, seasonings, garlic, and optional bread

mashed or finely crumbs, then with the parsley.
minced

Optional: ¼ cup dry,
fairly coarse crumbs
from non-sweetened
homemade-type white
bread



3 to 4 Tb fresh minced
parsley

Courgettes Gratinées à la Milanaise
[Zucchini Pieces Sautéed, then Baked with Cheese]
This is a convenient ahead-of-time preparation that goes nicely

with broiled chicken or fish and with steaks or chops.

2 to 2½ lbs. zucchini Prepare the zucchini as directed, but
prepared as in either leave it slightly undercooked.
of the 2 preceding Sprinkle baking dish with cheese, and
recipes fill with layers of zucchini and

A heavily buttered 6- to cheese, dribbling butter or oil over
8-cup baking and all. If zucchini is still warm, reheat
serving dish about 2½ and brown lightly for several minutes
inches deep under the broiler; otherwise, reheat

½ cup grated Parmesan to sizzling for about 15 minutes in
or Swiss and Parmesan upper third of a 425-degree oven.
cheese

2 Tb melted butter or
olive oil

Courgettes Étuvées à la Crème
[Zucchini Simmered in Cream and Tarragon]
The French word moelleux can probably best describe the tender,

melting, softly fragrant quality of zucchini warmed in butter and



shallots and then simmered in cream and tarragon. This lovely dish
goes particularly well with roast chicken and veal.

PRELIMINARY NOTE: Cut the zucchini into any shape you wish.
Although the 1-inch pieces used in the preceding recipes are easiest
to cook, round slices half an inch thick or lengthwise strips ⅜ inch
thick and 2½ to 3 inches long are attractive to serve. Choose for the
cooking an 11- to 12-inch no-stick or enameled frying pan, straight-
sided chicken fryer, electric skillet, or casserole. If you decide to cut
the zucchini into strips, you will have to do the preliminary sauté in
several batches.

For 6 people

2 to 2½ lbs. zucchini Cut the blanched zucchini as
blanched whole as discussed in preceding paragraph;
directed dry well on paper towels. Over

About 4 Tb butter moderate heat, melt enough butter in
One of the pans pan to film it by 1⁄16 inch. When

discussed in preceding butter foam begins to subside, sauté
paragraph the zucchini for 2 to 3 minutes,

Salt and white pepper tossing or turning, until it is well
2 Tb minced shallots or warmed through but is not browning.

scallions Season to taste with salt and pepper,
1 tsp fresh minced sprinkle on the shallots or scallions

tarragon or ¼ tsp and tarragon, and pour in the cream.
fragrant dried Simmer for about 10 minutes, basting
tarragon; more if frequently with the cream, until
needed zucchini is tender and cream has

About 1 cup crème reduced enough to enrobe the
fraîche or heavy zucchini pieces.
cream, more if needed (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be done

in advance to this point; set aside



uncovered. Reheat to simmer before
proceeding.

More cream if needed, Just before serving, taste carefully for
and the remaining seasoning, adding a little more
butter tarragon as well as salt and pepper if

2 Tb fresh minced needed. If sauce has reduced too
parsley plus 1 tsp much or if it looks slightly curdled,
fresh minced tarragon add 2 to 3 tablespoons more cream;
if available bring to simmer, remove from heat,

A hot serving dish and baste the zucchini to smooth out
the sauce. Add also another
tablespoon of butter, basting until it
has been absorbed. Arrange on hot
dish, sprinkle on the herbs, and serve
immediately.

A slightly less fattening variation
Rather than simmering the zucchini in pure cream, you may use

a thin cream sauce, such as that in which the sliced potatoes and
basil simmer (pommes de terre au basilic).

OTHER WAYS OF SERVING BLANCHED SAUTÉED
ZUCCHINI
Courgettes Gratinées, Mornay
[Zucchini Gratinéed with Cheese Sauce]
When you want a creamy vegetable dish to go with broiled

meats or roast chicken, and one that you can get ready for the oven
well ahead of time, prepare sautéed zucchini with lemon and



parsley as in the Master Recipe. Then turn to the Broccoli Mornay
recipe; fold the zucchini into the cheese sauce, arrange in a baking
dish, and finish it off with cheese and butter in the oven as
described for the broccoli.

Courgettes en Persillade, Gratinées
[Zucchini Baked with Garlic, Parsley, and Béchamel]
An alternative to the preceding cheese sauce is zucchini sautéed

in olive oil with garlic and parsley, as in the first variation, then
baked in a béchamel sauce topped with bread crumbs and butter,
following aubergines en persillade, grainées. The little hint of garlic
here is delicious, and the dish goes nicely with steaks, chops, and
roast lamb.

Courgettes en Pistouille
[Zucchini with Tomatoes, Peppers, Garlic, and Basil]
Here sautéed zucchini is simmered in a mixture of cooked

onions, peppers, and tomatoes, and given a final pistou flavoring of
garlic and basil. This goes hot with broiled fish, chicken, roasts,
steaks, and chops, and cold on picnics. Follow the pistouille recipe,
substituting blanched, sautéed zucchini pieces for eggplant.

Recipes Using Coarsely Grated and Salted Zucchini

Courgettes Rapées
An interesting and easy way to serve zucchini or other tender

summer squashes is to grate them, salt them so the vegetable water



runs out, squeeze gently dry, and sauté in butter or olive oil for a
few minutes until tender. You can then serve the zucchini as is,
simmer it with cream, bake it in a sauce, or turn it into a molded
custard. The preliminary sauté gives added flavor, as well as
removing extra vegetable water. Anyone eating grated zucchini for
the first time is almost certain to think it is a remarkable new
vegetable.

TO GRATE AND SALT ZUCCHINI—OR OTHER SUMMER SQUASHES

Shave the stem and the tip off each zucchini (or other summer
squash), scrub the vegetable thoroughly but not harshly with a
brush under cold running water to remove any clinging sand or dirt.
If vegetables are large, halve or quarter them. If seeds are large and
at all tough, and surrounding flesh is coarse rather than moist and
crisp, which is more often the case with yellow squashes and striped
green cocozelles than with zucchini, cut out and discard the cores.
Rub the squash against the coarse side of a grater, and place grated
flesh in a colander set over a bowl. For each 1 pound (2 cups) of
grated squash, toss with 1 teaspoon of salt, mixing thoroughly. Let
the squash drain 3 or 4 minutes, or until you are ready to proceed.
Just before cooking, squeeze a handful dry and taste. If by any
chance the squash is too salty, rinse in a large bowl of cold water,
taste again; rinse and drain again if necessary. Then squeeze gently
by handfuls, letting juices run back into bowl. Dry on paper towels.
Zucchini will not be fluffy; it is still dampish, but the excess liquid is
out.

The pale-green, slightly saline juice drained and squeezed out of
the zucchini has a certain faint flavor that can find its uses in
vegetable soups, canned soups, or vegetable sauces.

  COURGETTES RAPÉES, SAUTÉES
[Grated Zucchini Sautéed in Butter and Shallots]



This is the base recipe for sautéed grated zucchini. Serve it as is,
with the addition of a little more butter, or turn it into one of the
variations that follow. Like the blanched and sautéed zucchini
pieces, this recipe goes with anything and is particularly useful
when you want a rather neutral but attractive green accompaniment
to creamed dishes like sweetbreads and elaborate soles in white
wine sauces. You may also use it rather than spinach as a bed for
poached eggs in hollandaise sauce, creamed chicken, and their like.

For 4 to 6 servings

1) Preliminary sautéing
2 to 2½ lbs. zucchini (6 Trim, wash, grate, salt, squeeze, and

to 7 zucchini 8 by 1¾ dry the zucchini as directed in notes
inches, for example) preceding this recipe. (You will have

2 Tb butter 2 to 2½ cups.) Melt the butter with
1 Tb olive oil or cooking the olive oil over moderate heat, stir

oil in the shallots or scallions, and cook
A large (11-inch) no-stick for a moment, then raise heat to

or enameled frying moderately high. When butter foam
pan has begun to subside, add zucchini.

2 to 3 Tb minced shallots Toss and turn it frequently for 4 to 5
or scallions minutes, shaking and swirling the

pan by its handle. Zucchini is ready
A cover for the pan if to serve as soon as it is tender; taste

needed to check. (If you wish, you may cover
the pan and finish cooking for a few
more minutes over low heat.)
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Zucchini may
be completed to this point several
hours in advance of serving. Set aside



uncovered; cover when cool, and
reheat before proceeding.

2) Final flavoring and serving
More salt if needed, and Shortly before serving, reheat the

white pepper zucchini, tossing and turning it. Taste
2 to 3 Tb soft butter, carefully for seasoning. Remove from

more if you wish heat and fold in the butter, a
A rubber spatula tablespoon at a time, with rubber
A hot serving dish spatula. Turn into hot dish and serve

immediately.



VARIATIONS
Courgettes Rapées à la Crème
[Grated Zucchini Simmered in Cream]
After sautéing the zucchini, Step 1 in the preceding Master

Recipe, pour in about 1 cup of crème fraîche or heavy cream; simmer
the zucchini for several minutes until cream has been absorbed and
thickened. Reheat just before serving, and fold in a tablespoon or so
of soft butter.

Courgettes Rapées, Sautées à la Provençale
[Grated Zucchini Sautéed in Olive Oil with Garlic]
Rather than sautéing the grated zucchini in butter, use olive oil

for Step 1 in the Master Recipe. Retain the shallots or scallions if
you wish, and add to them 1 or 2 cloves of mashed or finely minced
garlic.

Courgettes aux Épinards
[Sauté of Grated Zucchini and Chopped Spinach]
The addition of spinach gives more character to a zucchini dish

or zucchini gives more tenderness to a spinach dish, whichever way
you want to look at it. Substitute this attractive combination for
plain zucchini in any of the preceding or following variations. We
have suggested olive oil and garlic here, but you may prefer the
butter and shallots of the Master Recipe. We have also directed that
the spinach receive a brief preliminary blanching in boiling water;



however, this may be dispensed with if your spinach is young,
tender, and fresh from the garden.

For 6 to 8 servings

2 to 2½ lbs. zucchini Following the directions, trim, wash,
About 2 lbs. fresh grate, salt, squeeze, and dry the

spinach zucchini. While it is draining with
A large kettle of boiling salt, trim and wash the spinach; drop

salted water it into the rapidly boiling water and
A colander boil for a minute or two, just until

limp. Drain, refresh in cold water,
squeeze dry, and chop.

2 to 3 Tb olive oil When zucchini has been squeezed
1 or 2 large cloves of and dried, sauté, tossing and turning

mashed garlic frequently, in the hot oil with the
Salt and pepper garlic. When almost tender, stir in
2 to 3 Tb soft butter the chopped spinach. About 10

minutes before serving, reheat,
tossing and stirring, then cover pan
and let cook several minutes over
low heat, until spinach is as tender as
you wish it to be. Season carefully to
taste. Remove from heat and fold in
the butter, a tablespoon at a time.
Turn into a hot dish and serve
immediately.

Tian de Courgettes au Riz



[Gratin of Zucchini, Rice, and Onions with Cheese]
The tian is, or was in the old days, a shallow, rectangular,

earthenware Provençal baking dish. Anything cooked in it becomes
a tian, just as something like chicken cooked in a casserole becomes
a casserole of chicken. The tian, as a name, has been in vogue lately,
but its shape and contents can vary considerably. Zucchini and rice
are typical, as are additions of Swiss chard and spinach; thus you
could use the preceding combination of zucchini and spinach, if you
wish, rather than zucchini alone as suggested here. Serve with
roasts, steaks, chops, calf’s liver, broiled fish or chicken, or as a first
course.

For 6 people

2 to 2½ lbs. zucchini Following the directions, trim, wash,
grate, salt, squeeze, and dry the

½ cup plain, raw, zucchini. While it is draining (reserve
untreated white rice the juices,) drop the rice into boiling

1 cup minced onions salted water, bring rapidly back to
3 to 4 Tb olive oil the boil, and boil exactly 5 minutes;
2 large cloves garlic, drain and set aside. In a large (11-

mashed or finely inch) frying pan, cook the onions
minced slowly in the oil for 8 to 10 minutes

2 Tb flour until tender and translucent. Raise
About 2½ cups hot heat slightly and stir several minutes

liquid: zucchini juices until very lightly browned. Then stir
plus milk, heated in a in the grated and dried zucchini and
pan the garlic. Toss and turn for 5 to 6

minutes until zucchini is almost
About ⅔ cup grated tender. Sprinkle in the flour, stir over

Parmesan cheese (save moderate heat for 2 minutes, and
2 Tb for later) remove from heat. Gradually stir in

Salt and pepper the hot liquid, being sure the flour is



A heavily buttered 6- to well blended and smooth. Return
8-cup, flameproof over moderately high heat and bring
baking and serving to the simmer, stirring. Remove from
dish about 1½ inches heat again, stir in the blanched rice
deep and all but 2 tablespoons of the

2 Tb olive oil cheese. Taste very carefully for
seasoning. Turn into buttered baking
dish, strew remaining cheese on top,
and dribble the olive oil over the
cheese. (Preheat oven in time for
baking.)
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
prepared several hours or a day in
advance of final cooking.

About half an hour before serving, bring to simmer on top of
stove, then set in upper third of a preheated 425-degree oven until
tian is bubbling and top has browned nicely. The rice should absorb
all the liquid.

Timbale de Courgettes
[Molded Custard of Zucchini, Onions, and Cheese]
Here is a delightful concoction that is elegant to serve either as a

first course, a luncheon dish, or to accompany roast or broiled
chicken, a saddle of lamb, or veal or lamb chops. It is a mixture of
grated and sautéed zucchini, cooked onions, cheese, cream, and
eggs that is unmolded after baking, and then sprinkled with
buttered bread crumbs and parsley. One of its most attractive
qualities, besides its flavor, is the rather moist texture given it by
the cheese, reminiscent of the soft center in a fine soufflé.



EGG PROPORTIONS FOR UNMOLDED CUSTARDS: For a custard of this type,
count on 2 “large” eggs for every cup of other ingredients; one quart
of ingredients, then, calls for 8 (1½ to 1⅔ cups) “large” eggs and a
6-cup baking dish.

For 6 people

1) The zucchini mixture
About 2 lbs. zucchini Following the directions, trim, wash,
2 cups minced onions grate, salt, squeeze, and dry the
3 Tb butter zucchini; you should have 2 to 2⅓
1 Tb olive oil or cooking cups approximately. While zucchini

oil is draining, cook the onions slowly
Salt and pepper for 12 to 15 minutes or longer, with

the butter and oil, in a large (11-
A 1-quart measure inch) frying pan until onions are very
A rubber spatula tender, translucent, and just

beginning to brown. Raise heat, stir
in the zucchini; toss and turn for 5 to
6 minutes. Cover pan and cook
zucchini several minutes longer over
low heat, until tender. Season to taste
and scrape into quart measure.

2) The custard mixture—for about 5½ cups
4 ounces (1 cup lightly Add the cheese to the vegetables in

pressed) mixed grated the quart measure, and pour in
Parmesan and Swiss enough cream, stirring, to reach the
cheese 4-cup mark. Turn the mixture into

1 cup all-purpose cream, the bowl, scraping measure clean.
more if needed



A 2½- to 3-quart mixing Break eggs into measure, being sure
bowl and a wire whip you have at least 1½ cups; beat to

8 “large” eggs (1½ to 1⅔ blend yolks and whites, and fold into
cups) the zucchini mixture. Taste carefully

Salt and pepper to taste for seasoning, and turn into baking
A heavily buttered 6-cup dish.

cylindrically shaped (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
baking dish about 3½ completed in advance to this point;
inches deep (such as a cover and refrigerate. Stir up gently
charlotte), bottom before proceeding. Chilled custard
lined with buttered will probably take 10 to 15 minutes
waxed paper longer to bake than unchilled

custard.

3) Baking—allow 1 hour; preheat oven to 375 degrees
A pan about 3 inches When you are ready to bake the

deep and large enough custard, set baking dish in pan; pour
to hold baking dish in enough boiling water to come
easily about ⅔ the way up outside of dish.

Boiling water Place in lower-middle level of
preheated oven. To assure yourself of
a smooth, bubble-free custard,
regulate oven heat so that water in
pan never quite simmers throughout
the cooking; lower thermostat to 350
degrees in 15 minutes, and you will
probably lower it to 325 or 300
degrees near end of baking. Custard
should be done in 35 to 40 minutes:
the top center will look set rather
than loosely liquid when you gently
shake the pan. A knife or skewer



plunged down through middle of
custard will emerge almost clean,
looking slightly oily with perhaps a
tiny curd of custard clinging here and
there. Remove baking dish from pan
and let custard settle for 20 minutes
before unmolding it.

4) Serving
3 to 4 Tb clarified butter While custard is baking or cooling, or

(melted butter, at any other convenient time, prepare
skimmed; clear liquid bread-crumb and parsley garnish as
butter spooned off follows: Heat clarified butter in pan,
milky residue) and when bubbling stir in bread

A small (7- to 8-inch) crumbs. Sauté for several minutes
frying pan over moderately high heat, stirring

½ cup dry, not-too-fine continuously until crumbs are lightly
crumbs from non- browned. Remove from heat, and
sweetened homemade- when cool, stir in the parsley and
type white bread seasonings.

3 to 4 Tb minced fresh
parsley

Salt and pepper to taste

A hot, lightly buttered After custard has settled 20 minutes,
serving plate run a thin knife around edge of

custard. Turn serving plate upside
down over baking dish, reverse the
two and unmold custard onto plate.
Sprinkle with the parsley and



crumbs, and serve as soon as
possible.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not
ready to serve, do not unmold
custard, but leave it in its dish in the
pan of hot water and in the turned-
off oven. It will stay warm for a good
half hour or longer, and may then be
unmolded immediately.

Stuffed Zucchini
Courgettes Farcies

Stuffed zucchini can well be a first course, especially when the
stuffing is rice or vegetables. The best sizes for stuffing are 6 to 8
inches, and one zucchini half is usually sufficient for a first course or
as a vegetable garnish to go with the meat course. Serve 2 or even 3
halves per person when the zucchini is the main course.

  COURGETTES FARCIES AUX AMANDES
[Zucchini Stuffed with Almonds and Cheese]
This is a particularly attractive stuffing, not only because

almonds are unusual, but also because the flavor of the zucchini
survives the stuffing. Serve as a separate course, or with veal chops
or scallops, or roast, broiled, or sautéed chicken.

For 6 servings

1) Preparing the zucchini for stuffing



3 zucchini all of a size, Trim and scrub the zucchini; blanch
about 8 by 2 inches about 10 minutes in boiling salted

A large kettle of boiling, water, just until flesh yields to
salted water pressure, as directed. Cut in half

A grapefruit knife lengthwise. Using grapefruit knife,
Salt hollow out the cores of each zucchini
Paper towels half, to make boat-shaped cases with

the sides and bottom about ⅜ inch
thick. Salt lightly and drain hollow
side down on towels. Chop the
removed zucchini flesh, squeeze out
vegetable water in paper towels, and
reserve flesh for stuffing.

2) The almond, cheese, and bread-crumb stuffing—for about 2
cups

¼ cup finely minced Stir the onions into the oil, cover
onions pan, and cook over low heat, stirring

1½ Tb olive oil or occasionally, for 8 to 10 minutes, or
cooking oil until onions are tender and

A 6- to 8-inch pan translucent. Uncover, raise heat and
The chopped zucchini let them just begin to brown, then

flesh stir in the chopped zucchini flesh and
A 2-quart mixing bowl sauté for several minutes, until

zucchini is tender. Scrape into bowl,
2½ ounces (½ cup and stir in the almonds and cream.

loosely packed) Stir in ⅓ cup of the bread crumbs,
ground blanched blending thoroughly, then all but 3
almonds (grind them tablespoons of the cheese, and finally
in an electric blender) the egg. Mixture should hold its

½ cup heavy cream shape softly when lifted in a spoon; if
½ to ⅔ cup dry, fairly too soft, beat in more crumbs by

fine crumbs from



nonsweetened small spoonfuls, mixing thoroughly.
homemade-type white Blend in salt and pepper to taste, and
bread the powdered clove.

2 ounces (½ cup lightly
pressed down) grated
Swiss cheese (save 3
Tb for later)

1 “large” egg
Salt and pepper to taste
2 to 3 big pinches

powdered clove

3) Stuffing and baking the zucchini—25 to 30 minutes at 400
degrees

A heavily buttered Arrange the zucchini halves skin side
rectangular or oval down in the baking dish and fill with
baking and serving the stuffing, heaping it into a dome
dish just large enough on each half. Sprinkle each with the
to hold the 6 zucchini cheese and bread crumbs, and
halves in 1 layer dribble on the melted butter.

3 Tb each of the
remaining bread (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
crumbs and cheese, prepared to this point a day in
mixed in a small bowl advance of baking; cover and

refrigerate.
3 Tb melted butter

Bake in upper third of preheated oven for 25 to 30 minutes, until
bubbling hot and browned on top. (Do not overcook, letting
zucchini shells become too soft for serving.) Serve from baking dish,
or arrange around meat platter.



(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be kept warm, but again, do not let
zucchini shells soften.

VARIATIONS
Courgettes Farcies au Riz et aux Poivrons
[Zucchini Stuffed with Rice and Peppers]
Another stuffing for zucchini, this one is equally good cold or

hot. Prepare, stuff, and bake the zucchini exactly as described in the
preceding recipe, but make the stuffing as follows.

Rice and pepper stuffing with tomato topping—2 cups for six 8-
by 2-inch zucchini halves

½ cup diced onions Stir the onions into the oil in a
4 Tb olive oil (save 2 Tb medium-sized (10-inch) frying pan,

for later) cover and cook over low heat,
½ cup diced green stirring occasionally, for 8 to 10

peppers minutes until tender. Uncover, raise
1 large clove mashed heat and brown very lightly, stirring,

garlic then add the green peppers, garlic,
The chopped zucchini and zucchini cores. Cover and cook

cores slowly for several minutes more until
peppers are tender. Turn into mixing

⅓ cup plain, raw, white, bowl. Meanwhile, in a pan of boiling
untreated, long-grain salted water, boil the rice for exactly
rice 10 minutes, drain, and add to mixing

1 egg bowl. Beat in the egg, then the
⅓ cup grated Parmesan cheese and parsley. Season carefully

cheese (save 3 Tb for with salt and pepper. Mound the
later) stuffing in the blanched and



3 Tb fresh minced hollowed-out zucchini halves. Season
parsley tomato pulp with salt and pepper,

Salt and pepper spread over the stuffing, cover with
3 medium-sized the remaining cheese, and sprinkle

tomatoes, peeled, on the remaining olive oil. Bake for
seeded, juiced, and 25 to 30 minutes in upper third of
chopped preheated 425-degree oven until

bubbling hot and cheese topping has
browned lightly.

Other stuffings
You may stuff zucchini, following the general method outlined in

the Master Recipe, with all kinds of mixtures, including other
vegetables, leftover meat combinations, sausage mixtures, and so
forth. See the complete list of possibilities.

STUFFED ONIONS—STUFFED CABBAGE

Oignons Farcis—Choux Farcis

OIGNONS FARCIS AU RIZ
[Onions Stuffed with Rice, Cheese, and Herbs]
Onions hollowed out and stuffed with rice and chopped, cooked

onion cores need only a little cheese, cream, and a pinch of herbs to
point up their flavor. Served hot, they add great distinction to a
platter of broiled chicken or fish, and are always attractive with
roasts, steaks, and chops. Serve them cold with cold meats or fish,
or as part of an hors d’oeuvre display. The following recipe is for
giant onions, but smaller ones are done the same way: whatever
their size, you hollow them out raw, blanch them until barely
tender, then stuff and bake them. If you do not blanch them first,



they will take hours to cook and might well burst out of shape in the
process. (See the list of other stuffing possibilities.)

For 6 large onions

1) Coring and
blanching the onions

6 very large, firm, fresh,
perfect onions at least
3½ inches in diameter
if possible, yellow or
white

A small, sharp knife and
a grapefruit knife

A large kettle of boiling One at a time, shave off pointed end
salted water and root end of onions and peel off

A slotted spoon and a skin along with one outside layer of
colander flesh. The whole onions are now to

be hollowed out to form onion cups.

With sharp knife, cut cone-shaped core out of the top side of the onion.
(Reserve all onion flesh for Step 2.)



Being careful not to make sides and
bottom too thin (they should be
almost ½ inch thick, or about 4 layers
for onions this size), use grapefruit knife
to dig circular sections out of body of
onion to make a cup shape.

Drop the onion cups into the boiling water. When it comes back
to the boil, boil slowly, uncovered, for 10 to 15 minutes until onions
are just tender when pierced but still very definitely hold their
shape. Remove carefully and drain upside down in a colander.
(Reserve boiling water for next step.)

2) The rice, onion, and cheese stuffing
The onion cores While onion cups are blanching,
3 to 4 Tb butter mince all usable onion leftovers.
A large frying pan with Cook slowly in butter in covered pan

cover 8 to 10 minutes, stirring occasionally,
A 3-quart mixing bowl until tender and translucent; uncover

pan, raise heat, and brown very
lightly, stirring. Measure 1 cup into
mixing bowl. (Remainder, if any,
may be refrigerated or frozen.)

⅓ cup plain, raw, white After onion cups have been blanched
untreated rice and removed, stir rice into boiling

water and boil slowly for 10 to 12
minutes, until rice is almost but not



The boiling onion- quite tender. Drain thoroughly, and
cooking water add to mixing bowl.

⅓ cup grated Parmesan Stir the cheese and cream into the
cheese rice and onions, then 2 tablespoons

¼ cup crème fraîche or of the bread crumbs. If mixture does
heavy cream not hold its shape softly, blend in a

½ cup dry, not-too-fine spoonful or so more crumbs to
crumbs from thicken and bind it. Stir in the herbs
nonsweetened and seasonings.
homemade-type white
bread (for now and for
Step 3)

¼ cup minced parsley
2 Tb fresh minced basil

or 1 tsp fresh minced
tarragon (or ¼ to ½ Tb
fragrant dried basil,
oregano, sage, or
tarragon)

Salt and pepper to taste

3) Stuffing and baking the onions—1 to 1¼ hours at 375
degrees

3 to 4 Tb melted butter Preheat oven to 375. Butter or oil the
A heavily buttered flame- outside of the onion cups and arrange

proof baking dish just in the baking dish. Sprinkle interiors
large enough to hold lightly with salt and pepper, and fill
onions easily, such as with the stuffing, heaping it into a
a 12-inch casserole 3 half-inch dome. Sprinkle with a
inches deep teaspoon of bread crumbs and of



½ cup dry white wine or melted butter. Pour the wine around
dry white French the onions, and enough stock or
vermouth bouillon to come ⅓ the way up the

½ to 1 cup beef stock or onions. Bring to simmer on top of
bouillon stove, then set in lower middle of

The bread crumbs preheated oven.
A bulb baster

Bake uncovered for 1 to 1¼ hours, regulating oven so that liquid
remains at the slow simmer, and basting outside of onions several
times with liquid in dish. Onions are done when a knife pierces
them easily, but they should not overcook and lose their shape.
Outside layer will toughen slightly, but insides will be tender. Top
of stuffing should brown attractively, but if it is browning too much,
cover loosely with foil or brown paper. Serve from baking dish, or
arrange around the meat or vegetable platter. Add any onion juices
to whatever sauce you are making.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be baked in advance and kept warm
or reheated.

  CHOU FARCI
[Stuffed Whole Cabbage]



Stuffed cabbage is the kind of dish that guests and family always
seem to love because it has the hearty, earthy look and the rich,
satisfying aroma that promise good eating. To stuff a whole cabbage
you first make a delicious mixture using something like the fresh
sausage and ham suggested here, or leftover meat as in the variation
following it. You then pull off the cabbage leaves, boiling them until
pliable, and re-form the cabbage into approximately its original
shape with your delicious mixture spread between layers of leaves.
Finally you braise, sauce, and serve it up, and it looks just like a
beautiful, decorated, whole cabbage sitting on the serving platter.
You must, of course, have some method for holding the cabbage
leaves in the shape of the whole while braising. If you have
struggled to mold cabbage with string, towels, cheesecloth, or even
the net shopping bag that is occasionally used in Provence, we think
you will welcome the ease of the following bowl-molding method.
Parslied boiled potatoes, French bread, and rosé wine would go well
with the cabbage.

NOTE: Braised stuffed cabbage is equally good cold, and could
well be baked specially for a cold lunch or a picnic. If so, drain and
unmold it as soon as it is done, so there will be no bits of congealed
fat on the leaves.

For 8 to 10 people



1) Fresh sausage, rice, and ham stuffing—about 6 cups
2 cups (1 lb.) fresh (Start the water boiling for Step 2.)

sausage meat, Break up the sausage meat and sauté
preferably homemade over moderate heat for 5 to 6

A medium sized (10- minutes, just until it is beginning to
inch) frying pan brown lightly. Remove to mixing

A 5- to 6-quart mixing bowl, leaving fat in pan. Brown the
bowl and large ham lightly in the fat; remove it to
wooden spoon the bowl, again leaving fat in pan.

1½ cups diced mild- Finally stir in the onions and cook
cured ham (such as a slowly for 8 to 10 minutes, until
store-bought ready-to- tender and beginning to brown very
cook ham slice) lightly. Scrape them into the bowl

2 cups minced onions and beat in all the rest of the
ingredients. Taste carefully for

2 cups boiled rice (⅔ cup seasoning, adding more salt and
raw rice, boiled) herbs if you feel them necessary.

½ tsp sage (Chopped, blanched leaves from the
½ tsp caraway seeds heart of the cabbage will be stirred in
¼ cup minced fresh later.)

parsley
2 cloves mashed garlic
1 egg
Salt and pepper

2) Preparing the cabbage for stuffing
A firm, fresh, crisp 2¼- With a small, stout knife, make a bias

to 2½-lb. cabbage cut all around the stem of the
(about 8 inches in cabbage, going 2 to 2½ inches deep,
diameter), either the and remove the tough core. Discard
crinkle-leafed Savoy or any outside leaves that seem tough or



the smooth-leafed wilted. If you have the crinkle-leafed
Danish or domestic Savoy cabbage, you usually need not

A large kettle of boiling blanch it to remove the leaves. Peel
salted water them off carefully so as not to tear

A large tray covered with them, until you come to the heart,
a towel where leaves are small and bend

inward. Drop as many cabbage leaves
as will easily fit into the boiling
water and boil, uncovered, for 3 to 4
minutes, until leaves are pliable
enough to bend without breaking.
(This is called blanching.) Drain on
towel and continue with the rest of
the leaves and the heart, boiling it 5
minutes.

If you have a smooth-leafed cabbage (or an unpeelable Savoy), drop
the whole cabbage core side down into the boiling water. In 5
minutes, start loosening leaves carefully, nudging them off the
cabbage with 2 long spoons as they free themselves from the core.
Remove these leaves to the tray. Continue loosening and removing
leaves to tray until you come to the heart, where leaves bend
inward. Leave heart to boil for 5 minutes, and add as many of the
removed leaves as will easily fit, boiling them 3 to 4 minutes or
until they are just pliable. Continue with the rest of the leaves. (Do
not discard boiling water yet.) Chop the heart of the cabbage, salt
and pepper lightly, and stir into the already prepared stuffing from
Step 1.

3) Other miscellaneous preliminaries
10 to 12 slices of lean Drop the slices of salt pork or bacon

salt pork or bacon into the boiling water and boil slowly



approximately 4 by for 10 minutes. Drain, rinse in cold
1½ inches and ⅜ inch water, and set aside on paper
thick toweling. Meanwhile, cook the

The boiling cabbage vegetables in the fat or oil until
water tender and just beginning to brown,

1 medium onion, sliced then remove to a side dish. (Note
1 medium carrot, sliced that there is also a sauce base in Step

6, which you may prepare now if you
2 Tb rendered goose or wish.)

pork fat, or cooking
oil

The frying pan

4) Stuffing the cabbage
A lightly buttered 2½- to Lay several strips of the blanched

3-quart stainless-steel pork or bacon in the bottom of the
bowl, flame-proof stainless steel bowl or flameproof
mold, baking dish, or mold and cover with the lightly
charlotte mold 3½ to 4 browned carrot and onion slices.
inches deep (with a
cover)

Salt and pepper
3 to 4 cups excellent

brown stock or
bouillon

Starting with the largest and
greenest of the blanched cabbage
leaves, lay them curved side down
and stem end up in the mold, to



cover bottom and sides. Sprinkle
lightly with salt and pepper.

Spread a layer of stuffing over the
lower third of the leaves. Cover the
stuffing with cabbage leaves. Salt
and pepper them lightly, and
spread on more stuffing.

As you build up layers, slip leaves
down side of mold to be sure sides

are well covered.



When you have used all the stuffing,
and mold is filled to within ½ inch
of top, cover filling with a final
layer of leaves and arrange the rest of
the blanched salt pork or bacon on
top.

Pour enough stock or bouillon between outside leaves and side of mold to
come about an inch from the top.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be prepared in advance to this point and
cooked the next day. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate. Add
20 to 30 minutes more to cooking time if cabbage has been chilled.

5) Braising—2½ to 3 hours at 400 degrees and 350 degrees
Waxed paper Preheat oven to 400 degrees. Bring
The cover for the mold filled mold slowly to the full simmer
A pan to hold the mold on top of the stove. Lay the waxed

and to catch drippings paper over the cabbage and cover the
A bulb baster mold. Set in pan and place in lower
Additional stock or middle of preheated, 400-degree

bouillon if needed oven. In 20 to 30 minutes, when



Optional: a meat liquid in mold is slowly and steadily
thermometer simmering, turn thermostat down to

350 degrees and regulate oven heat
so that liquid is always very slowly
simmering throughout the 2½ to 3
hours of cooking. Baste occasionally
with the cooking liquid, and add a
little more stock if liquid evaporates
below the halfway mark. (2½ to 3
hours are needed for heat to
penetrate into center of cabbage,
where a meat thermometer should
read 165 to 170 degrees.)
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES are at end of
Step 4.

6) Sauce and serving
½ cup finely minced While cabbage is braising, or at any

onions other convenient time, make the
1 Tb rendered goose or sauce base as follows: Stir the onions

pork fat, or cooking into the fat, cover pan, and cook over
oil low heat, stirring occasionally, for 8

A heavy-bottomed, 2- to 10 minutes or until onions are
quart, enameled or tender and translucent but not
stainless saucepan browned. Add the garlic, tomatoes,
with cover and sage; cover and simmer 10

1 clove mashed garlic minutes. Uncover, season to taste,
1 lb. (3 to 4 medium) and set aside.

tomatoes peeled,
seeded, juiced, and
chopped (1½ cups
pulp); or part fresh



tomatoes and part
sieved, canned Italian-
type plum tomatoes

½ tsp sage
Salt and pepper to taste

If needed: ½ Tb When cabbage is done, keep cover on
cornstarch blended mold and drain cooking liquid into
with 1 Tb tomato juice the tomato sauce base; let simmer
or bouillon while you are finishing the cabbage.

A frying pan Sauce should thicken lightly. If it
A hot serving dish does not, remove from heat, blend in
3 Tb minced fresh cornstarch, and simmer 2 minutes

parsley more. Carefully correct seasoning.

Remove pork or bacon pieces from top of cabbage and set aside.
Drain cabbage again, then turn serving dish upside down over mold
and reverse the two, unmolding cabbage onto the dish. Remove
vegetables and pork from top of cabbage. Pat pork or bacon strips
dry on paper towels, and brown very lightly in frying pan; arrange
them decoratively over the cabbage. Spoon the sauce around the
cabbage, decorate with the parsley, and serve as soon as possible.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: Sauce may be finished and pork or bacon
sautéed well in advance of serving, then reheated. Keep cabbage
warm, loosely covered, and unmold at last minute. (Omit sautéing
the pork strips at bottom of mold.) However, if you leave the
cabbage too long, or cool and reheat it, you risk losing its freshly
cooked quality.



VARIATIONS
Feuilles de Chou Farcies
[Stuffed Cabbage Leaves for Individual Servings]
When you wish a less elaborate presentation, a little quicker

cooking, have fewer people to serve, or want an attractive way to
use a bit of leftover meat, you may make as many or as few servings
as you wish by wrapping a stuffing in individual cabbage leaves.
Usually served hot, these are also delicious cold on a bed of lettuce
or watercress, and garnished with sliced tomatoes and cucumbers in
a vinaigrette sauce.

For 12 stuffed cabbage leaves, serving 4 to 6

12 large blanched
cabbage leaves 7 to 8
inches long (Step 2 in
preceding Master
Recipe)

One at a time, lay
blanched cabbage leaves
curved side down on
cutting board and cut a
wedge about 2 inches long
out of the tough bottom
stem.

About 2 cups of stuffing
(that in the preceding
recipe, the one at the



end of this section, or
one from the list)

Place a loaf-shaped mound
of stuffing on lower third of
leaf just above wedge cut.

Start rolling leaf toward tip. At the
halfway mark, fold each side over stuffing
to enclose it.

Finish rolling up the leaf, and complete the rest of the leaves in the
same manner.

1 each: medium-sized Strew the sliced cooked carrots and
carrot and onion onions in the bottom of the baking
sliced and lightly dish and spread the optional



browned (Step 3 in blanched and chopped cabbage over
preceding recipe) it. Season with salt, pepper, and

A lighdy buttered 2-quart rosemary or thyme. Lay the stuffed
flameproof baking and cabbage leaves on top, seam-side
serving dish 2 inches down and close together. Salt and
deep (such as a 9- by pepper them lightly, cover each with
12-inch oval) a strip of blanched salt pork or

Optional: the rest of the bacon, and pour around them enough
cabbage leaves, stock or bouillon almost to cover.
blanched and roughly Enclose top of dish tightly with
chopped aluminum foil.

Salt, pepper, and ¼ tsp (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
ground sage, completed in advance to this point.
rosemary, or thyme Refrigerate, and bake the next day if

12 slices of lean salt pork you wish.
or bacon, 4 by 1½
inches, ⅜ inch thick,
and blanched (Step 3
in preceding recipe)

About 2 cups of excellent
brown stock or
bouillon

Aluminum foil
A bulb baster
The tomato-sauce base,

Step 6 in preceding
Master Recipe

Bake for 1 to 1¼ hours in a preheated 350-degree oven, basting
occasionally with the liquid in the dish. Drain cooking liquid into
the tomato sauce base and boil down rapidly to thicken. Carefully
correct seasoning and pour back over the cabbage rolls. Brown the



pork or bacon strips lightly in a frying pan and arrange over the
cabbage, sprinkle with parsley, and serve.

Petits Choux Farcis
[Ball-shaped Stuffed Cabbage Leaves]
Rather than sausage shapes, you may form the leaves into round

shapes resembling individual cabbages. To do so, blanch the leaves
as directed and cut a wedge out of bottom of stem. Place leaf curved
side down on the corner of a towel. Heap 2 to 3 tablespoons of
stuffing in the center, fold rest of leaf over stuffing, then twist into a
ball in the towel to force a round shape. Arrange balls smooth side
up and close together in a dish, and bake as in preceding recipe, but
1 hour of cooking should be sufficient.

ANOTHER STUFFING
Braised Beef and Ham Stuffing
For about 6 cups

1½ cups minced onions Cook the onions in fat or oil in a
3 Tb rendered goose or covered saucepan over low heat for 8

pork fat, or cooking to 10 minutes until tender; raise heat
oil and cook a few minutes more until

½ cup dry crumbs from lightly browned. Meanwhile blend
nonsweetened, the bread crumbs and cream in a
homemade-type white small bowl and let stand while
bread assembling rest of ingredients.

⅔ cup light cream Finally beat the cooked onions,



3 cups ground cooked crumbs, meats, cheese, garlic, herbs,
lean beef, preferably eggs, and parsley vigorously together
braised, but any type to blend. Carefully season to taste,
of cooked beef will do adding more herbs if you feel them

1½ cups ground cooked necessary.
lean ham (mild-cured
boiled or baked ham,
or ready-to-cook ham
slice)

½ cup grated Parmesan
cheese

2 to 3 cloves mashed
garlic

¾ tsp ground rosemary
or thyme

2 eggs
½ cup minced fresh

parsley
Salt and pepper to taste

POTATO DISHES

Pommes de Terre
Ounce for ounce, potatoes have fewer calories than fresh peas,

lima beans, or sweet corn, yet potatoes come so near to being the
complete food that one can survive healthily on a diet of potatoes
only, plus a very small amount of fat, for as much as 5 months.
Nutrition aside, the potato is an endlessly fascinating gastronomical
object which, since its introduction by Parmentier into France
during the reign of Louis XVI, has received tremendous French
culinary attention. We shall not, in this short section, go into the
fundamental cooking methods because they are available in any
good basic cookbook. We offer instead a number of out-of-the-



ordinary simmers and sautés, a deliciously fattening potato pie, two
of the classics illustrated, pommes Anna and pommes duchesse, and
we begin with a group of useful potato facts.

NOTES ON BUYING AND STORING POTATOES

When you are buying potatoes, choose those that look clean and
healthy, that are firm to the touch, smooth, dry, free from cracks,
and with no suggestion of sprouting (greenish-white nubbins of
growth appearing at the small depressions called the eyes). Be sure,
also, that the potatoes are potato-colored, that is, uniformly
brownish or reddish with no hint of green. Green means that they
have been exposed to sun or light, either in the field or in storage,
and green potatoes develop a bitter taste. Potatoes are sometimes
waxed and sometimes colored reddish, a harmless cosmetic
treatment designed to enhance their customer appeal; if so, this fact
should be indicated clearly on the bin or package.

Unless you happen to have a proper root cellar where you can
store potatoes in the dark at a temperature of 55 degrees and at a
humidity of 85 to 90 per cent, buy only what you will use within a
week or so. Potatoes kept at 60 to 70 degrees have the best cooking
flavor, but they begin to sprout after a few weeks. Potatoes stored at
below 40 degrees, the temperature of your refrigerator, resist
sprouting and withering but gradually develop a sweet taste because
the potato starches transform themselves into sugar. Thus, keep
your small store of potatoes at normal room temperature in heavy
brown paper sacks so they will be protected from light. Separate
different types or you will run into cooking irregularities.

POTATO TYPES

Potatoes are a far more complicated vegetable to grow, harvest,
store, and classify than any of us who are not in the business would
ever dream. New varieties are constantly being tested out that will
survive in specific climates, that will resist the myriad viruses and
diseases which attack potato plants, and that will more perfectly



meet public tastes and the specific demands of dehydrators, chip
manufacturers, and other industrial users. Potatoes of one variety
can vary from one year to the next in a certain growing locality
because of weather, or the same variety will be mealy in one area
and not in another because of soil and climatic differences. The
tradition of choosing old potatoes for baking and mashing, and new
potatoes for boiling still holds true in part, but so much has
happened to the potato since grandmother’s day that a list of
varieties classified according to buying areas and uses would be out
of date almost as soon as it appeared in print. Thus we shall go no
further than specify “boiling” potatoes when we mean the type that
holds its shape in cooking, and “baking” potatoes when we want a
mealy, floury potato for baking or mashing. If your market does not
have its potatoes clearly labeled as to baking and mashing, frying,
boiling, or all-purpose, ask the head of the vegetable department to
help you.

POMMES DE TERRE AU BASILIC
[Sliced Potatoes Simmered in Cream and Basil]
This is a top-of-the-stove recipe in which sliced potatoes are

boiled briefly in water to neutralize any milk-curdling properties
they may possess, then simmered until tender in a cream sauce with
garlic and basil. You may set them aside and reheat again just
before turning them into a vegetable dish with more basil, parsley,
and butter. Serve with roast red meats, steaks, chops, or broiled
chicken.

For 4 to 6 people

2 lbs. “boiling” potatoes Peel the potatoes. Cut into slices
about ¼ inch thick and 1¼ inches in



A large saucepan of diameter. You should have around 7
boiling salted water cups. Drop them into the boiling

A colander water, bring rapidly back to the boil
again, and boil for 3 minutes. Drain
immediately.

3 Tb butter Make a white roux as follows: Melt
A heavy-bottomed 3- the butter in the saucepan, blend in

quart saucepan (no- the flour, and stir over moderate heat
stick recommended) for 2 minutes to cook the flour

1½ Tb flour without browning. Remove from
A wooden spoon and a heat, and when roux has stopped

wire whip bubbling, vigorously blend in all of
1½ cups milk heated in a the hot milk at once with your wire

small saucepan whip, beating until mixture is
perfectly smooth. Blend in the ¾ cup

¾ cup heavy cream; of cream, the herb, garlic, salt, and
more cream (or milk) pepper. Return over moderately high
if needed heat, stirring with whip as sauce

About 1 Tb fresh minced thickens very lightly and comes to
basil; or ½ tsp fragrant the boil. Simmer 2 minutes, then fold
dried basil (or in the potatoes. Sauce should just
oregano) cover potatoes; add a little more

1 to 2 large cloves of cream or milk if necessary. Bring to
mashed garlic simmer, correct seasoning, cover pan,

½ tsp salt and simmer very slowly for 10 to 15
Big pinch of white minutes, until potatoes are tender.

pepper Stir up gently from bottom once or
A cover for the pan twice to be sure potatoes are not

sticking; they will have absorbed half
of the liquid before they are done
and if sauce seems too thick you may
always add a little more milk.



(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
completed in advance to this point.
Spoon a little milk or cream over top
of potatoes and either set aside
uncovered or keep warm, partially
covered, in a pan of simmering
water.

2 to 4 Tb soft butter Reheat potatoes just before serving.
2 to 3 Tb fresh minced Carefully correct seasoning. Gently

basil and parsley, or fold in the butter and ⅔ of the herbs
parsley only with a rubber spatula. Turn into

A warm, lighdy buttered vegetable dish, decorate with the
vegetable dish remaining herbs, and serve at once.

A different herb—Tarragon
The preceding potatoes are delicious with tarragon rather than

basil, a good solution for wintertime, since dried tarragon is usually
far more fragrant than dried basil.

GRATIN DAUPHINOIS AUX ENDIVES
[Gratin of Sliced Potatoes and Endives]
Both endives and potatoes go beautifully with chicken or veal,

and here they are combined into one dish. For each cup of sliced
raw potatoes you will need 2 cups of sliced raw Belgian endives.
The natural moisture in the endives provides enough liquid for the
potatoes, while the butter, lemon juice, shallots, and cheese that
bake along with them contribute delicious additional flavors.



For 8 people—baking time about 1¼ hours

2½ lbs. very fresh, white, Preheat oven to 400 degrees. Trim
firm Belgian endive root ends, and wash endives rapidly
with leaves tightly under cold running water. Slice cross-
closed at the tips wise into pieces ¾ inch thick and set

1¼ lbs. “boiling” aside. You should have 8 cups. Wash
potatoes and peel potatoes, cut into slices ¼

2 Tb soft butter inch thick and about 1¼ inches in
A 3½- to 4-quart baking diameter. You should have 4 cups.

dish about 2½ inches Smear the butter in the baking dish
deep (such as a 12- and arrange in it half the sliced
inch round one, or an endives. Sprinkle with half the lemon
11- by 16-inch oval) juice, and 2 tablespoons of melted

1 Tb lemon juice butter. Season lightly with salt and
pepper, and spread on half the

½ cup melted butter cheese. Over this arrange the 4 cups
Salt and white pepper of potatoes in layers, sprinkling each
⅔ cup coarsely grated with salt and pepper, a little of the

Swiss cheese butter, and the minced shallots or
¼ cup finely minced scallions. Spread the rest of the

shallots or scallions endives over the potatoes, seasoning
Buttered waxed paper them with lemon juice, salt and
A cover for the dish pepper, and all but 1 tablespoon of

the remaining butter. Omit the
cheese, reserving for later.

Lay the buttered waxed paper over the endives, cover the dish,
and bake in middle level of 400-degree oven for 15 to 20 minutes,
or until you can hear the contents bubbling. Turn oven down to 350
or even 325 degrees for the rest of the baking, regulating heat so
that vegetables simmer slowly throughout the rest of the cooking,



which will be 1 to 1¼ hours. When potatoes are tender if pierced
with a fork, remove dish from oven, and reset thermostat to 425
degrees. Spread remaining ⅓ cup of cheese over the vegetables and
dribble on the remaining butter.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Dish may be completed an hour or so in
advance up to this point. Set partially uncovered in a 100- to 120-
degree warming oven, or over a pan of almost simmering water. As
long as potatoes are warm and have a little ventilation, they will not
lose their fresh-tasting quality.

About 15 minutes before serving, set dish uncovered in upper
third of preheated 425-degree oven until contents are bubbling hot
and cheese topping has browned lightly.

POMMES DE TERRE SAUTÉES, CALABRAISE
[Sliced Potatoes Sautéed with Lemon and Garlic]
This excellent, crusty sauté of potatoes needs to be done in a

large non-sticking pan where the potatoes have room to toss, turn,
and crust. Serve them with eggs, sausages, pork chops, broiled
chicken, steaks, or fish.

For 6 servings

2 lbs. “boiling” potatoes Peel the potatoes, cut into slices ¼
all of a size for even inch thick and 1¼ inches in diameter
slices (or cut into ½-inch dice, if you

A large saucepan with prefer); you should have 6 to 7 cups.
just enough boiling Drop into boiling, salted water, and
salted water to cover boil about 5 minutes, or until barely
potatoes tender. (Eat a piece to check; do not

Olive oil (or 3 Tb butter overcook.) Drain thoroughly. Film
and 2 or more Tb olive frying pan with a ⅛-inch layer of oil



oil or cooking oil) (or butter and oil), set over
A large (11-inch) frying moderately high heat, and when very

pan (no-stick hot but not smoking add enough
recommended potatoes to make 1 full layer. Toss
especially for this and turn frequently for several
recipe) minutes, shaking and swirling the

The grated peel of ½ pan by its handle, until potatoes are
lemon beginning to brown lightly. Add

2 large cloves of garlic, some more potatoes, and continue to
mashed toss them in the pan until the new

addition is beginning to brown. If
Big pinch of nutmeg necessary, add a little more oil and
Salt and pepper continue with more potatoes;

however, about ¾ inch of potatoes
will be the maximum you can handle
in the pan.

When all potatoes are lightly brown, toss with the lemon peel,
garlic, nutmeg, salt and pepper. Continue sautéing and tossing
several minutes more until potatoes are as brown as you wish them
to be.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be kept warm at this point, pan set
partially covered over 2 asbestos mats over low heat. As long as
they are warm and ventilated, potatoes will retain their fresh taste
for at least half an hour.

If available: 1 Tb minced Just before you are ready to serve,
fresh basil reheat to sizzling and toss with the

2 to 3 Tb minced fresh herbs and butter. Check seasoning
parsley again, and toss with lemon juice to

2 or more Tb butter taste. Turn out onto plate and serve
About 1 Tb lemon juice immediately.



A hot serving plate or the
meat platter

GALETTE DE POMMES DE TERRE AUX TOMATES
[Hashed Brown Potatoes with Tomatoes and Herbs]
Another recipe for sautéed potatoes, this time with pork bits,

onions, and tomatoes, calls for the potatoes to be mashed down with
a fork when soft so that they look like an omelette when turned out
onto their serving plate. Arrange sausages, sautéed chicken, chops,
hamburgers, or poached or fried eggs around the potatoes, and you
need only a green vegetable or salad for the perfect informal meal.

For 6 servings

1) The pork and onions
4 to 5 ounces (about ⅔ Simmer the diced bacon or pork in

cup) bacon chunk or the water for 10 minutes, drain and
lean salt pork cut into dry in paper towels. Cook for several
¼-inch dice minutes with the olive oil in the

A pan with 2 quarts frying pan until it begins to brown
water lightly. Stir in the onions, cover the

1 Tb olive oil or cooking pan, and cook over low heat, stirring
oil occasionally, for 8 to 10 minutes

A large (11-inch) frying until onions are tender. Raise heat
pan (no-stick and cook, stirring, to brown the
recommended onions very lightly. Scrape into sieve,
especially for this pressing fat out of ingredients into
recipe) bowl. Return fat to frying pan;

⅔ cup minced onions reserve pork and onions for Step 3.
A cover for the pan



A sieve set over a small
bowl

2) Sautéing the potatoes
About 2 lbs. “boiling” While onions are cooking, peel the

potatoes (7 cups, potatoes, cut into slices about ⅛ inch
sliced) thick and 1¼ inches in diameter. Dry

Paper towels thoroughly in paper towels. Add
More oil as needed more oil to pan if needed, to film it
A mixing fork or a by 1⁄16 inch. Raise heat to moderately

wooden spoon high, and when fat is very hot but
Salt and pepper not smoking, add the potatoes. Toss

and turn frequently for several
minutes, shaking and swirling the
pan by its handle, until potatoes
begin to brown. Lower heat slightly,
cover pan, and cook for 5 to 10
minutes, tossing frequently, until
potatoes are tender. Uncover, mash
roughly with mixing fork or wooden
spoon, and season to taste.

3) Finishing the recipe
1 lb. tomatoes, peeled, Raise heat to high. Fold in the

seeded, juiced, and tomatoes, garlic, and herbs along
chopped (1½ cups with the cooked pork bits and onions.
tomato pulp) Season again to taste, and sauté

1 to 2 large cloves uncovered for several minutes to
mashed garlic brown. Potatoes should slide around



¼ tsp mixed herbs such in a mass, and you may be able to
as herbes de Provence flip them over, to brown both sides.
or Italian seasoning (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not

The cooked pork bits and ready to serve, set partially
minced onion uncovered over low heat and 2

A hot serving dish asbestos mats, where potatoes will
keep warm without harm for half an
hour at least. Reheat to sizzling just
before serving.

If you have browned top and bottom of the potato mass, you
may serve it like a flat cake, sliding potatoes from pan onto plate.
Otherwise they will be most attractive in the form of an oval
omelette: flip the two sides over the middle, and reverse the pan
onto the serving plate so the potatoes land browned side up.

POMMES ANNA

Pommes Anna looks like a brown cake 6 to 8 inches in diameter
and 2 inches high, and it smells marvelously of potatoes and butter.
That, in effect, is all it is: thinly sliced potatoes packed in layers in a
heavy pan, bathed in clarified butter, and baked in a very hot oven
so that the outside crusts enough for the potatoes to be unmolded
without collapsing. The contrast of crusty exterior and tender,



buttery interior is quite unlike anything else in potato cookery, and
to many pommes Anna is the supreme potato recipe of all time. It
was created during the era of Napoleon III and named, as were
many culinary triumphs in those days, after one of the grandes
cocottes of the period. Whether it was an Anna Deslions, an Anna
Judic, or simply Anna Untel, she has also immortalized the special
double baking dish itself, la cocotte à pommes Anna, which is still
being made and which you can still buy at a fancy price. It is of
heavy copper.

A thick, flameproof baking dish of some sort is actually one of
the keys to pommes Anna, because it must be an excellent heat
conductor. Although the copper cocotte Anna is a beautiful object, its
absolutely vertical sides, 3-inch depth, and frequent tendency to
sticky-bottom troubles make it less easy to use than other
possibilities.

The familiar American cast-iron frying pan with its fairly vertical
sides and short, straight handle is actually the best of all for pommes
Anna. The potatoes are easier to unmold from this than from the
French type of iron frying pan with its sloping sides and long
handle. However, either will do, as will a thick, flameproof, ceramic
baking dish or a thick cast-aluminum one with no-stick interior. The
essential is to have a material that will get thoroughly hot all over,
to brown and crust the outside of the potatoes.



Having furnished yourself with the right pan, you then want to
make sure the potato slices will not stick to it, because you must be
able to unmold them at the end of the cooking. Therefore, use
clarified butter, dry the potatoes thoroughly before the cooking
begins, and finish the cooking once you have begun it, or else the
potatoes will exude moisture and stick to the pan. As you will note
in the recipe, cooking begins at once, on the top of the stove as you
are arranging the potatoes in the pan; this is to dry the bottom
layers and start the brown crust forming. In the classic recipe you
then finish the cooking in a hot oven, which usually gives a more
professional result, but you may complete the cooking on top of the
stove, as suggested in the cheese variation following the Master
Recipe.

Pommes Anna and its variations go especially well with roast
saddle of lamb, leg of lamb, roast beef, chops, sautéed chicken, plain
or fancy steaks, and roast game.

  POMMES ANNA
[Mold of Sliced Potatoes Baked in Butter]
Your object, in arranging the sliced potatoes in their dish for this

very special recipe, is not only to fill the dish but to make a
reasonably neat design in the bottom and around the sides so that
when the potatoes are unmolded they will present a handsome
exterior. For the sides you may either arrange an edging of
overlapping upright slices braced by horizontal interior layers, or
build up a wall of evenly spaced horizontal slices as you fill the pan.
We have suggested the latter, simpler, system here.

For about 8 cups of sliced potatoes, serving 6 people

1) Preliminaries



½ lb. (2 sticks) butter Preheat oven to 450 degrees. Set one
3 lbs. “boiling” potatoes rack in very bottom level, and

(more if needed) another just above it. Clarify the
Paper towels butter: melt it, skim off scum, and

spoon the clear liquid butter off the
milky residue. Peel the potatoes, trim
into cylinders about 1¼ inches in
diameter so that you will have
uniform slices, then slice cylinders
into even rounds ⅛ inch thick. You
should have about 8 cups. Dry
thoroughly in paper towels. (Do not
wash potatoes after peeling, because
you want the starch to remain in, so
potatoes will mass more easily into a
cake.)

2) Arranging the potatoes in the dish
A heavy cast-iron frying Pour ¼ inch of the clarified butter

pan about 8 inches top into the pan and set over moderate
diameter and 2 to 2½ heat. When hot, start rapidly
inches deep, or one of arranging the first layer of potatoes
the other possibilities in the bottom of the pan as follows.
in paragraphs
preceding recipe

Salt and pepper

Arrange one potato slice in the
center of the pan. Overlap a circle

of potato slices around it.
Overlapping in the opposite



(counter-clockwise) direction
rapidly arrange a second circle

around the first and continue with
another (clockwise) overlapping

circle if necessary, to rim the edge
of the pan. Pour on a spoonful of

the clarified butter.

Reversing direction again, rapidly
arrange an evenly overlapping layer
of potatoes around circumference of
pan, fill in the center with more
potatoes, and baste with another
spoonful of butter. Shake pan not
too roughly by handle to be sure
potatoes are not sticking, and
sprinkle on salt and pepper.

Continue filling the pan with layers of potatoes basted with
butter and seasoned with salt and pepper, always being sure that the



layer around the circumference of the pan is evenly spaced.
Remember, also, to shake the pan by its handle from time to time,
to be sure potatoes are not sticking. Fill the pan completely,
allowing potatoes to form a ¼- to ½-inch dome in the center; they
will sink during cooking. You should have added enough butter so
that you can see it bubbling up the sides of the pan; excess will be
poured out after cooking.

3) Baking
A heavy saucepan, 7

inches bottom
diameter, or whatever
will fit into the potato
pan

A heavy, close-fitting
cover for the potato
pan

A pizza tray or roasting
pan to catch drippings

Butter bottom of saucepan and press it down hard on the potatoes,
forcing the layers together. Butter underside of cover, place it on the
potato pan set on upper of the two oven racks. Set drip pan under
the potatoes, on rack below, to catch bubblings-up of butter (which
could otherwise set fire to your oven).

Bake for 20 minutes. Uncover, press potatoes down hard again
with bottom of saucepan, and continue baking 20 to 25 minutes
more, uncovered. (If baked all the time with cover on, potatoes tend
to pick up an off taste.) Press down potatoes again before end of
baking. Gently draw an edge of the potatoes away from side of dish:



potatoes are done if brown and crusty. Bake 5 minutes or so more if
necessary.

4) Unmolding and serving
A bowl for excess butter When potatoes are done, place cover
A flexible-blade spatula slightly askew on pan and drain out
If needed: a buttered excess butter, which may be used

baking sheet again in other cooking. Run spatula
A lightly buttered, hot around edge of pan. Shake pan, and

serving dish if potatoes have stuck to bottom, run
spatula carefully under potatoes to
loosen them, but disturb them as
little as possible. If you feel it will be
easier to unmold them first onto a
baking sheet and slide them onto the
serving dish, do so; otherwise invert
the dish over the potato pan, reverse
the two, and potatoes will drop onto
dish. They should look like a brown
cake.

Unmolding troubles: You should have no trouble, but if some
potatoes do stick to pan, scrape them off and put them in place on
the potato cake. If you have had trouble and potatoes look messy or
pale, simply push or mound them into a reasonable shape, sprinkle
with cheese or bread crumbs, drizzle on a little butter, and brown
briefly under the broiler.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: After unmolding the potatoes, cover
loosely with foil and set in a warming oven (120 degrees), or on an
electric hot-tray, or over simmering water. They will keep nicely for



half an hour at least as long as they are warm and have a little
circulation of air.

VARIATIONS

Pommes de Terre Sarladaise
[Truffled Sliced Potatoes Baked in Butter]
All you need for this variation is the wherewithal for a number

of sliced truffles, as many as you wish. Proceed as in the Master
Recipe, but intersperse truffles with the potato slices after the first
layer of potatoes has been arranged in the pan, and end with a layer
of potatoes.

Galette de Pommes de Terre au Fromage
[Mold of Sliced Potatoes and Cheese Cooked in Butter]
This is a more informal method of forming pommes Anna, and

you may omit the cheese if you wish. Here all the cooking is done
on top of the stove, which is a convenience when your oven is in
use.

For 6 people

4 to 5 Tb clarified butter Following illustrated directions in
A heavy, medium-sized preceding Master Recipe, pour ¼

(10-inch) frying pan, inch of butter into frying pan. Set
either cast iron or no- over moderate heat and rapidly
stick arrange an overlapping layer of



About 2½ lbs. “boiling” potato slices in the pan, shaking pan
potatoes in round, 1¼- gently from time to time to prevent
inch slices ⅛ inch sticking. Baste with a sprinkling of
thick, well dried butter, arrange a second layer over

About 4 ounces (1 cup) the first, and over this second layer
Swiss cheese cut into of potatoes arrange a layer of cheese
1-inch slices less than slices. Season the third layer of
⅛ inch thick (use potatoes with salt, pepper, and a
slicing slot of a grater) speck of nutmeg. Continue filling the

Salt and pepper pan with potatoes, cheese,
Small pinches of nutmeg seasonings, and end with a layer of

potatoes. When filled, shake pan
A cover for the frying gently again and let cook 3 to 5

pan minutes over moderately high heat to
A flexible-blade spatula be sure the bottom of potatoes is
A hot serving dish crusting. Then cover pan and set over

low heat for about 45 minutes, or
until potatoes are tender when
pierced with a small knife. (Be sure
heat is not too high, or bottom of
potatoes will brown too much.) Run
spatula all around edge of pan and
underneath to loosen potatoes, and
unmold upside down on serving dish.

TOURTE LIMOUSINE
[Potato Pie with Herbs and Cream]
Another attractive way to serve potatoes is to mold them in

pastry, and bake in a flan ring or false-bottomed cake pan, which
comes off when the potatoes are done; the pie then stands free on a
serving dish. In this excellent recipe, the sliced potatoes are
seasoned with melted butter and herbs, and when they are tender
inside their crust, a mixture of cream and beaten egg is poured into



them through the chimney hole. The tourte can well be the main
course for a lunch or supper, along with a mixed vegetable salad,
possibly some cold meat, and a Riesling, Sylvaner, or rosé wine. Or
serve it with steaks, hamburgers, broiled chicken, or fish. Any
leftovers may be reheated, but are also good cold.

For a 9-inch pie, 8 to 12 servings

1 tsp soft butter Preheat oven to 425 degrees. Butter
The mold: a 9-inch flan inside of flan ring and surface of

ring set on a baking baking sheet, or inside of cake pan.
sheet, or a round, 9- Roll ⅔ of the pastry into a circle 14
inch false-bottomed inches in diameter (so that you will
cake pan have a 1½-inch overhang), and line

Either ½ the recipe for the mold, letting overhang fall
pâte briseé ordinaire around outside rim. Stir the parsley
Formula 1; and herbs into the butter. Drain and

Or a ready mix dry the potatoes and spread ⅓ on the
¼ cup (not pressed bottom of the lined mold. Stirring

down) chopped fresh butter and herb mixture, pour ⅓ of it
parsley over the potatoes and sprinkle

potatoes with salt and pepper.
Either 2 Tb minced fresh Complete filling mold in same

green herbs (basil and manner. Fold overhanging pastry
chives); over potatoes, and moisten top of

Or 1½ Tb minced pastry with water. Roll out remaining
shallots or scallions pastry into a circle 9½ inches in
and ¼ tsp dried diameter, roll up on pin, and unroll
oregano or sage over mold. Roll pin over pastry to

4 Tb (½ stick) butter trim it the size of the mold, then
melted in a saucepan press it down with the balls of your

6 cups thinly sliced all- fingers over the moistened bottom
purpose potatoes in a layer to seal. Make a chimney hole in
bowl of cold water top of pastry and insert funnel. Paint



Salt and pepper top of pastry with beaten egg, and
A pastry brush and cup make cross-hatch marks over pastry

of cold water with the back of a knife or the tines
A chimney: the metal of a table fork. Blend cream into

tube end of a pastry remainder of beaten egg, and
bag or a small metal refrigerate for later.
funnel, buttered

1 egg beaten with 1 tsp
water in a 1-cup
measure

⅓ cup heavy cream

Baking—about 1 hour
Immediately set tourte in lower-middle level of preheated 425-

degree oven and bake for about 30 minutes, until pastry is nicely
but not too deeply browned. Then turn thermostat down to 350
degrees for rest of baking; cover tourte loosely with foil or brown
paper if it is browning too much. As soon as potatoes are tender
when you poke them through the chimney hole, tourte is done. By
spoonfuls, pour the egg and cream mixture into the pie through the
chimney, tilting pie in all directions so that cream will flow all over.
Bake another 5 minutes or so to set the mixture, and tourte is ready
to serve; unmold and slide onto a hot serving dish.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: If tourte is done before you are ready to
serve, keep it warm, uncovered, in a turned-off oven or 120-degree
warming oven. If wait is to be more than 15 minutes, do not add
egg and cream until a few minutes before serving, then reheat in a
350-degree oven.

  POMMES DUCHESSE



[Mashed Potato Mixture for Borders and Other Decorations]

Even hamburgers look dressy in a fluted border of pommes
duchesse, and fluted mounds of potatoes placed around a meat
platter are elegant indeed. Consisting only of mashed potatoes, egg
yolks, butter, and cream, pommes duchesse is a very simple mixture
and perfectly delicious when you use the best ingredients, meaning
live potatoes rather than dehydrated ones. Serve pommes duchesse
anywhere that mashed potatoes would naturally go, such as around
a platter that is to hold boeuf bourguignon or coq au vin, or piped
around the creamed eggs or fish that are to be gratinéed, or with
steaks, chops, or broiled fish.

TECHNICAL NOTES

You may prepare and form the potatoes in advance, and bake
them just before serving; once baked and browned, however, they
must be served fairly soon or they will lose their light, freshly
cooked quality. We prefer egg yolks to whole eggs in the mixture
because we think that egg whites have a drying-out effect, although
they do give the potatoes a slight puff. If you like a puff anyway, use
1 egg and 1 yolk for each 2 cups of potatoes rather than the 3 yolks
for 2 cups (6 for 4 cups) suggested here.

For 4 cups of mashed potatoes, serving 6 to 8



1) The potato mixture
2½ lbs. “baking” Scrub the potatoes under warm

potatoes all of a size water, drop into saucepan of cold
for even cooking (6 or water to cover, add salt, and set over
7 potatoes 4½ by 2 high heat. When water comes to the
inches, for instance) boil, boil slowly, partially covered,

A heavy-bottomed for about 25 minutes usually. Test for
saucepan doneness by cutting a potato in half,

Cold water taking a slice from inside the half and
1½ tsp salt per quart of eating it: potato should hold its

water shape, but should be cooked through,
A cover for the pan tender, mealy, and ready to eat.

Drain, and peel at once, holding
A colander or sieve potato on a fork. Immediately put
A potato ricer, or a food potatoes through a ricer or food mill,

mill with medium or beat with electric mixer, to make a
disk, or an electric smooth, lump-free purée. Measure 4
mixer cups into saucepan and stir over

A quart measure moderate heat for 2 to 3 minutes
A rubber spatula and a until potatoes film bottom of pan,

wooden spoon indicating that most of excess
6 egg yolks in a small moisture has evaporated. Remove

bowl from heat, beat in the egg yolks, then
6 Tb soft butter the butter and 4 tablespoons of the

cream. Beat in a little more cream by
4 to 6 Tb crème fraîche or dribbles if you think the potatoes will

heavy cream take it, but mixture must be fairly
¾ to 1 tsp salt firm so that it will hold its shape
⅛ tsp white pepper when formed. Beat in the salt,
Pinch of nutmeg pepper, and nutmeg; taste carefully
A pan of hot but not and correct seasoning as necessary.

simmering water large Set potato pan in pan of hot water.



enough to hold potato (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Potatoes must
pan be warm if you are to form them

smoothly and easily. If you are not
quite ready, cover pan partially and
beat rather frequently with a wooden
spoon. Note that warm potatoes are
never covered airtight; a slight
circulation of air prevents them from
developing an off taste.

2) Forming a fluted border of pommes duchesse
A wooden spoon
The warm pommes

duchesse mixture
A rubber spatula
A 12- to 14-inch canvas

pastry bag with ¾-
inch cannelated nozzle

A lightly buttered,
flameproof serving
platter, such as a 12- Vigorously beat the warm potato
by 14-inch oval mixture to be sure it is smooth and

pliable, then scoop into pastry bag.
Squeeze out into a decorative design
around the edge of the platter.

Use a winding ribbon design, for
instance, and add rosettes if you
wish. When you have a small

pastry bag and run out of



potatoes rather quickly, rosettes
hide breaks in the pattern.

2 to 3 Tb finely grated Sprinkle the potatoes with a dusting
Swiss or Parmesan of cheese and dribble on melted
cheese butter. (Although egg glaze may be

3 to 4 Tb melted butter used and gives better over-all color,
we do not like the taste and texture
of egg film when it has hardened
over the browned potatoes.)
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Set aside;
cover loosely when cool and
refrigerate.

3) Browning and serving
Either bake in upper third of a preheated 400-degree oven for 25

to 30 minutes until lightly browned, or brown slowly for 5 minutes
or so under a slow broiler. Browning under the broiler leaves a
moister texture but you must watch carefully that the potatoes do
not burn. Once browned, serve as soon as possible because the
potatoes will taste dry and stale if cooled and reheated.



VARIATIONS
Individual Nests or Mounds of Pommes Duchesse
Using the same general method as described in the Master

Recipe, flute individual nests of the potato mixture on buttered
heatproof serving dishes, shells, or plates; sprinkle the potatoes with
cheese and melted butter, and brown as described in Step 3. For
individual mounds squeeze the potatoes out on a buttered baking
sheet and proceed in the same manner, lifting them off with a
spatula for serving.

Pommes Duchesse au Fromage
[Cheese Flavored Pommes Duchesse]
For cheese-flavored pommes duchesse, which you may use in any

of the preceding or following suggestions, beat ⅓ cup finely grated
Parmesan cheese into the finished potato mixture in Step 1 of the
Master Recipe (1 tablespoon of cheese for every cup of the potato
mixture). In this case, because the cheese is strong, you may use
instant mashed potatoes, adding the minimum amount of liquid
suggested on the package, so that you may beat in enough cream to
give the potatoes flavor and interest without making them too soft
to form.

Galettes de Pommes Duchesse
[Mashed Potato Pancakes from the Leftovers]
Leftover pommes duchesse is delicious when formed into cakes

and sautéed in butter. This works for browned pommes duchesse but
is more successful with the uncooked mixture, and although you
may bake rather than sauté the potatoes, which is easier to do,
much the best flavor and texture comes from sautéing.



For a dozen 3-inch cakes, serving 4 to 6 people

About 2 cups of the If the potato mixture is freshly made,
pommes duchesse let it cool. Either rolling and patting
mixture, Step 1 in them in the lightly floured palms of
preceding Master your hands, or forming them on
Recipe waxed paper with a wet rubber

1 cup dry, not-too-fine spatula, make smooth cakes of the
crumbs from potato mixture 3 inches in diameter
nonsweetened, and ¾ inch thick. As each is formed,
homemade-type white place it on the bread crumbs, heap
bread crumbs on top, pat a thin layer in

A sheet of waxed paper place, and arrange the cakes in one
on a tray layer on waxed paper.

5 to 6 Tb clarified butter (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not
(melted butter, going to sauté them immediately,
skimmed; clear liquid cover and refrigerate; they will keep
butter spooned off perfectly well until the next day.
milky residue)

A large (11-inch) frying
pan, preferably no-
stick

A buttered baking sheet

Preheat oven to 200 degrees. Shortly before serving, film frying
pan with ⅛ inch of the clarified butter, heat to very hot but not
browning, and arrange as many potato cakes in pan as will easily fit
in one layer. Sauté for 3 to 4 minutes on one side, until nicely
browned and crusted, turn and sauté on the other side. Arrange on
baking sheet and keep warm in oven while sautéing the rest, adding
more butter to pan as necessary. The potato cakes may be kept



warm for 15 minutes or more, but are at their best and freshest the
sooner you serve them.

Galettes de Pommes de Terre Farcies
[Filled Potato Cakes]
With a stuffing of ham, mushrooms, and cheese, potato cakes

become a main course. Serve them with a green vegetable or a
salad. Rather than sautéing them, you may find baking easier.

For 8 cakes 3½ inches in diameter, serving 4 or more people

Ingredients for the Sauté the mushrooms and shallots or
preceding potato cakes scallions in a tablespoon of the butter
plus: in a small pan until mushroom pieces

¼ lb. (1 cup) finely diced begin to separate from each other
fresh mushrooms and to brown very lightly. Season

1 Tb minced shallots or with salt and pepper, add the minced
scallions ham, and sauté a minute more. Set

Salt and pepper aside. Form half of the potato
⅓ cup finely minced ham mixture into 8 disks 3½ inches in

diameter and about ¼ inch thick.
½ cup grated Swiss Spread the ham and mushrooms in

cheese the center of each, and top with
grated cheese. Cover with disks made
from the remaining potatoes.

To cook, either dredge in bread crumbs and sauté in clarified
butter as in preceding recipe, or arrange on a buttered baking sheet,
sprinkle with bread crumbs and melted butter, and bake in upper



third of a preheated 400-degree oven for 25 to 30 minutes until
lightly browned.

A BEAN PURÉE, THREE TURNIP RECIPES, AND A CRÊPE

Any change from routine is a happy event, particularly when it is
a substitute for the usual starchy vegetable choices. Here is a clever
purée of beans and pumpkin, two purées involving turnips, plus a
turnip sauté, and a new kind of crêpe made of green peppers and
tomatoes.

GRATIN DE POTIRON D’ARPAJON
[Purée of Pumpkin or Winter Squash and White Beans]
A combination of pumpkin or squash and beans goes especially

well with goose, duck, turkey, pork, or sausages. This is also one of
the few vegetable recipes where you may successfully substitute
canned or frozen ingredients for fresh, as noted near the end of the
directions in Step 1, and in the ingredients for Step 2.

For 4 to 6 people

1) The pumpkin or squash
1¼ cups mirepoix Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Cook

vegetables (½ cup the mirepoix vegetables in butter in
each of finely diced the covered dish over low heat,
onions and celery; ¼ stirring occasionally, for 8 to 10
cup diced carrots) minutes, until vegetables are tender

3 Tb butter but not browned. Stir in the squash
or pumpkin, optional garlic, herbs,



A covered 2½- to 3-quart salt, and water. Bring to a simmer on
flameproof baking and top of stove, lay waxed paper over
serving dish 2½ to 3 vegetables, cover, and bake in middle
inches deep level of preheated oven for 30 to 40

2 lbs. yellow-fleshed minutes, stirring up once or twice to
winter squash or be sure vegetables are not browning.
pumpkin (6 cups Add 2 to 3 tablespoons more liquid if
peeled and roughly all has evaporated before squash or
sliced) pumpkin is tender. (If using canned

Optional: 1 to 2 cloves or frozen squash or pumpkin, cook
mashed garlic mirepoix vegetables until tender, then

1 imported bay leaf add garlic, herbs, and ¼ cup water;
cover and boil slowly for about 10

⅛ tsp thyme minutes until liquid has evaporated.)
½ tsp salt Remove bay leaf.
½ cup water
Waxed paper cut to fit

top of dish

2) The beans; baking and serving
About 2½ cups cooked or Preheat oven to 425 degrees in time

canned white beans for baking. Purée the squash or
such as Great pumpkin mixture along with the
Northern, pea beans, beans through food mill into bowl.
or Italian cannellini Beat in the eggs, cream, all but 2
beans (for quick tablespoons of the cheese, and salt
soaking and pressure and pepper to taste. Smear 1
cooking of dried tablespoon of the butter in the baking
beans, see Volume I, dish, spoon in the purée, sprinkle
page 400) reserved cheese on top and dot with

A food mill with medium the remaining butter.
disk

A large mixing bowl



A rubber spatula and (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
wooden spoon completed a day ahead to this point.

2 “large” eggs When cold, cover and refrigerate.
½ cup heavy cream Allow 10 to 15 minutes longer in
2 ounces (½ cup) grated oven if mixture is chilled.

Swiss cheese
Salt and white pepper
3 Tb butter

About half an hour before serving, bake uncovered in upper
third of preheated 425-degree oven until bubbling hot and top has
browned nicely.

PURÉE FRENEUSE
[Purée of Rice and Turnips with Herbs and Garlic]
Unless your guests know that Freneuse is Turnipville, on one of

the serpentine twists of the Seine northwest of Paris, they will have
no other clue to identify this marvelous mixture. Serve it with red
meats, pork, sausages, chops, goose, and ducklings.

For 4 to 6 people

2 cups milk, more if Bring the milk to the simmer, add the
needed rice, salt, butter, garlic, and

A heavy-bottomed 2- seasonings. Simmer, stirring
quart saucepan (no- occasionally, for 10 minutes, until
stick would be useful) rice is partially tender. Stir in the

1 cup rice turnips, adding more milk, if
½ tsp salt necessary, to submerge the



2 Tb butter vegetables. Cover and simmer 10 to
2 to 3 large cloves of 15 minutes more, stirring

mashed garlic occasionally, until turnips are tender.
¼ tsp Italian seasoning, Liquid should be almost entirely

or thyme and bay leaf absorbed; if not, uncover and boil,
3 to 4 white turnips, stirring, to evaporate it. Purée

about 3 inches in through food mill and return to pan.
diameter, peeled and (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
roughly chopped (2 to completed to this point.
3 cups)

A food mill

Salt and white pepper to Shortly before serving, reheat,
taste stirring. Carefully correct seasoning.

2 to 3 Tb butter or heavy Stir in the butter or cream by
cream spoonfuls. Turn into a hot serving

A hot serving dish dish and decorate with the parsley.
Minced parsley

LA PURÉE, CHÂTEAUX EN SUÈDE
[Purée of Yellow Turnips—Rutabagas]
Firm, fresh rutabagas with their crisp, moist flesh and fine, sweet

flavor are every bit as good as the best white turnips, especially
when they are simmered with butter and turned into a fragrant,
yellow purée. Serve with a roast goose or duck, a loin of pork, a
dinner of homemade sausages, or a lamb or beef stew.

HISTORICAL NOTE



Because rutabagas appear to have originated in Scandinavia,
they are called swedes by the English and sometimes navets de Suède
by the French. The rutabaga is a distinct species of vegetable,
related to both the cabbage and the turnip, which accounts for one
of its other French names, chou-rave à chair jaune. A number of
varieties exist, some of which are animal fodder, and in France that
type was often all one had to eat during two long world wars.
Although modern improvements have created varieties to meet the
taste of the most discriminating châtelaine, rutabagas are still a
distasteful reminder of bitter days to many Frenchmen, which
accounts for this recipe’s charmingly evasive title.

For 4 to 6 people

1½ to 2 lbs. firm, crisp Place rutabaga chunks in saucepan
rutabaga, peeled and with enough water to come ⅔ the
cut into 1-inch pieces way up the vegetables. Add salt and
(6 to 7 cups) butter, bring to the boil, cover and

A heavy-bottomed 2- boil slowly, tossing occasionally, for
quart saucepan about 30 minutes or until tender.

About 2 cups water Drain, reserving cooking liquid, and
1½ tsp salt purée rutabaga through food mill
3 Tb butter into bowl.
A cover for the pan
A food mill set over a

mixing bowl

4 Tb rendered goose fat, Melt the fat or butter in the
pork fat, or butter saucepan, blend in the flour, and stir

⅓ cup all-purpose flour over moderate heat until flour and
(measure by scooping fat foam together for 2 minutes



dry-measure cup into without browning at all. Remove
flour and sweeping off from heat, and when it has stopped
excess with a knife) bubbling blend in 1 cup of the

A wooden spoon and cooking juices, beating vigorously
wire whip with wire whip until mixture is

The hot turnip-cooking perfectly smooth. Return over
juices moderately high heat, stirring with

¼ cup heavy cream whip as mixture thickens and comes
to the boil. Boil, stirring, for 2

Salt and pepper minutes. Sauce should be very thick,
A lightly buttered warm but not so thick that it will not

vegetable dish combine with the puréed turnips:
Fresh parsley beat in more cooking liquid (or milk)

by spoonfuls if you think it
necessary. Finally beat the turnip
purée and the cream into the sauce,
and season carefully to taste.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: May be
prepared even a day in advance;
cover and refrigerate when cool.

About 30 minutes before serving, cover and reheat over
simmering water, stirring occasionally. To serve, turn into a hot
vegetable dish and decorate with parsley.

PETITS NAVETS SAUTÉS, EN GARNITURE
[Fresh, Young White Turnips Sautéed in Butter]
Winter and early spring are the time for early crop turnips,

which are tender enough to need no blanching and are at their best
cooked simply in butter. Whether round, oval, or top-shaped and
with or without their green leaves, buy them smooth, firm, small,



clean, unblemished, and all of a size for even cutting and shaping.
Their flesh, when you cut into them raw, must be moist, crisp, and
sweetly turnipy. Serve sautéed turnips with duck, goose, turkey,
pork, roast beef or lamb, steaks or chops. They are also attractive as
part of a vegetable garnish in combination with such others as
glazed carrots and sautéed mushrooms, or buttered fresh peas. The
following recipe is for a small amount, but if you wish to cook more,
do the preliminary sauté in batches, and finish them off all together
in a covered casserole in a 325-degree oven.

For 4 to 6 servings

About 12 fresh, young With a small, sharp knife, peel the
white turnips 2 to 2½ turnips, removing outer skin and the
inches in diameter white underskin that covers the moist
(2½ lbs. without tops) flesh. You now want to cut them in

2 or more Tb butter the form of large garlic cloves, all
1 or more Tb olive oil or pieces approximately the same size: if

cooking oil you have round turnips, for example,
A large (11-inch) frying quarter them lengthwise, and round

pan (no-stick off the sharp edges, saving trimmings
recommended) for turnip soup or adding them to

¼ tsp salt, more as one of the preceding purées.
necessary

Big pinch pepper
A cover for the pan

Melt 2 tablespoons of butter with 1 of oil in frying pan over
moderately high heat. When butter foam is beginning to subside,
indicating fat is hot enough, add as many turnips as will fit in one
crowded layer. Toss and turn frequently, shaking and swirling the



pan by its handle, for 4 to 5 minutes, until turnips are beginning to
brown very lightly. (If you are sautéing in 2 batches, turn browned
turnips into a side dish, add more butter and oil if needed, brown
the second batch, then return all to the pan.) Toss turnips with the
salt and pepper, cover pan, and cook over very low heat, tossing
occasionally, for about 10 minutes more or until turnips are tender.
Be careful turnips do not brown too much. Be sure also not to
overcook them; they should be just tender but still hold their shape.

2 to 3 Tb more butter Just before serving, reheat to
Salt and pepper as sizzling, toss with more salt and

needed pepper as needed, then with the
3 to 4 Tb fresh minced additional butter, and finally with

parsley the parsley. Turn into hot vegetable
A hot vegetable dish or dish or onto platter and serve.

the meat platter

CRÊPES À LA PIPÉRADE
[Pepper, Onion, Tomato, and Cheese Pancakes]
Cooked bell peppers, onions, tomatoes, cheese, and herbs plus a

light batter to bind them all together are the basic ingredients for
this attractive vegetable combination, which is cooked like
pancakes. Serve them with roasts, chops, or broiled chicken, and
any leftovers are delicious with cold hors d’oeuvre or on a picnic.
They are, in addition, a splendid background for diced poultry, veal,
or pork leftovers, which you may include in the mixture; topped
with a poached or fried egg and a tomato or cheese sauce, they are
an ample main course for informal meals.

For 12 4-inch pancakes



1) The crêpe batter—for ¾ cup
⅓ cup flour, preferably Either whirl all ingredients in a

“instant blending” blender; or place flour in bowl, beat
(measure by scooping in rest of ingredients, and strain
dry-measure cup into through sieve. Batter should be like
flour and leveling off heavy cream; if too thick, thin out
with knife) with drops of milk. You may use it

1 “large” egg immediately if you have instant-
¼ tsp salt blending flour; otherwise let it rest
1½ tsp cooking oil for an hour at least.
⅓ cup milk, plus a little

more if needed
An electric blender, or a

bowl, whip, and sieve

2) The pipérade mixture—for 1½ cups
1½ cups sliced onions Cook the onions in the oil for 8 to 10
3 Tb olive oil or cooking minutes, or until tender and

oil translucent. Add the peppers and
An 8-inch frying pan cook another 3 to 4 minutes to soften

with cover slightly. Then add the sliced tomato
1½ cups sliced green bell pulp and garlic; cover pan for several

peppers minutes until tomatoes have
3 to 4 ripe, red tomatoes rendered their juice. Uncover, raise

peeled, seeded, juiced, heat, and boil for several minutes,
and sliced (1½ cups) tossing pan by handle to blend

ingredients, until liquid has almost
2 to 3 large cloves of completely evaporated. Season

garlic, mashed
Salt and pepper to taste



2 Tb fresh minced carefully to taste, and toss with the
parsley, plus 1 Tb herbs.
fresh minced basil or
½ tsp of dried oregano

3) Cooking the crêpes
(You may prefer several 8-inch crêpes cut into wedges; the following
is for 4-inch crêpes cooked 3 at a time in a 10-inch pan.)

5 ounces Swiss cheese Blend the cheese into the pipérade
cut into ⅜-inch dice along with ½ cup of the batter. Brush
(about ¾ cup) frying pan with oil and set over

The pipérade turned into moderately high heat. When hot but
a 2-quart bowl not quite smoking, ladle in ¼ cup of

A rubber spatula the crêpe mixture as a test. Cook
½ cup or more of the about 2 minutes on one side, until

crêpe batter little holes appear through the
Cooking oil surface, at which time bottom should

be nicely browned. Turn and cook
A heavy 10-inch frying about 1 minute on other side, then

pan (no-stick remove to a baking sheet. Crêpe
recommended) should just hold together, with only

A ¼-cup measure enough batter in the mixture to
1 or 2 oiled baking enrobe the ingredients. Add a little

sheets more batter to bowl if you feel it
A pancake turner necessary, but too much makes for

doughy crêpes. Cook the rest of the
crêpes and arrange on baking sheets.



Just before serving, reheat for 5 minutes or so in a preheated 425-
degree oven.

Including leftovers
For the same amount of batter, use:

1 cup each sliced onions, peppers, and tomatoes for the pipérade
⅓ cup diced cheese
1 cup diced cooked poultry, veal, pork, ham, sausages, or fish

THREE COLD VEGETABLES

PETITS OIGNONS AIGRE-DOUX
[Sweet and Sour Onions Braised with Raisins—Hot or Cold]
Serve these hot with roast pork, duck, goose, game, or cold along

with hors d’oeuvre, and cold meat and poultry. They should be
considered more as a garnish, relish, or condiment than a vegetable,
and if you are using tiny pearl onions, 6 per serving should be
sufficient.

For about 2 cups, serving 6 to 8

3 cups (10 ounces; 40 to Drop the onions into the boiling
50) small, white pearl water and boil 1 minute to loosen
onions skins. Drain. Shave off 2 ends, peel,

A saucepan of boiling and pierce a cross in the root end of
water each to help onions retain their shape

A heavy-bottomed 2- while cooking. Place onions in a
quart saucepan with saucepan with all the ingredients
cover listed except for the herbs and



½ cup beef or chicken pepper. Bring to the simmer, skim for
bouillon several minutes, then add the thyme,

½ cup water bay leaf, and pepper; cover and
1 tsp dry mustard simmer slowly about 1 hour, or until

blended with 1¼ Tb the onions are tender but still hold
wine vinegar their shape. Add a little more water if

2 Tb olive oil necessary during cooking; however,
liquid should be reduced to a syrup

1½ Tb sugar when onions are done; if not, boil
¼ tsp salt down at end of cooking. Transfer to
1 medium tomato, dish and serve hot or cold, decorated,

peeled, seeded, juiced, if you wish, with parsley.
and chopped

⅓ cup currants (small,
black, seedless raisins)

1 large clove garlic,
mashed

¼ tsp thyme
1 bay leaf
⅛ tsp pepper
A serving dish

SALADE DE POIVRONS, PROVENÇALE
[Peeled and Sliced Sweet Peppers in Garlic and Oil]
A typical informal first course in Provence might include the

local black olives, sliced hard-boiled eggs, anchovies, capers, and
slices of green or red sweet peppers turned in olive oil, salt, and
garlic. The only trick to this recipe is that you will have to peel the
peppers, which is quite a different matter from peeling eggs. A
number of pepper-peeling systems are on the books, including
spearing them on a long fork and turning then one-by-one over a
gas flame, baking in a hot oven, baking in a slow oven, boiling



them, steaming them in a covered dish, dropping in hot oil, broiling
them until the skin puffs and blackens. We like broiling because it is
the quickest, the surest, and it cooks the flesh just enough so that
the pepper is ready to cut and serve as soon as you have peeled it.

A NOTE ON SWEET PEPPERS

All sweet peppers both here and in France belong to the same
species, Capsicum annuum, native to the tropics and including a
large number of shapes and sizes. Most of those found in American
markets are 2½ to 4 inches in diameter, 4 to 5 inches long, and a
deep green color. (When peppers are fully mature they are yellow or
red, and perishable to ship long distances; probably the only red
peppers you will see are those grown locally.) Pick peppers that are
brightly colored, glossy, firm, and thick-fleshed, with no pockmarks,
brown patches, or soft spots anywhere on their surface. Like their
distant cousin, the eggplant, raw peppers prefer a temperature of 45
to 50 degrees and a humidity of 90 per cent. Unless you can
reproduce these conditions, buy only what you will use within a day
or two because they will deteriorate rapidly when stored where they
are either too hot or too cold.

For 4 medium-sized peppers

1) Peeling the peppers
4 medium-sized peppers, Preheat broiler to very hot. Arrange

green, red, yellow, or peppers in dish and place so surface
mixed of peppers is an inch from broiling

A shallow baking dish element. As soon as skin facing
big enough to hold broiler has puffed and blackened, in
peppers easily, such as 2 to 3 minutes, turn peppers on
a pie plate another face, and finally on each end,

A cutting board so that all of skin has puffed. Remove



A sharp knife and a table peppers to cutting board. One by one,
fork rapidly cut in half lengthwise,

remove stem and seeds, and scrape
off skin. (This should be done as soon
as possible and before peppers cool;
if blackened skin remains too long on
pepper, it can darken the flesh under
it.)

2) Dressing the peppers
1 medium clove of garlic, Mash garlic and salt until salt has

mashed dissolved completely, then beat in
¼ tsp salt olive oil. Cut peppers into lengthwise
A small bowl and a strips ⅜ inch wide and arrange layers

pestle or wooden in dish, spooning dressing over each
spoon layer. Cover and let steep, tilting dish

⅓ cup excellent olive oil and basting with the dressing
A serving dish occasionally, for 20 minutes before

serving.
Plastic wrap

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be made
several days in advance; cover
airtight and refrigerate. Remove half
an hour before serving to de-congeal
oil.

FONDS D’ARTICHAUTS FARCIS, FROIDS FONDS
D’ARTICHAUTS EN SURPRISE
[Artichoke Bottoms Stuffed with Mushroom Purée, Poached Eggs
Optional—a Cold Entrée]



Here is one of those perfect first-course dishes for special guests
and formal dinners. Whole artichokes are boiled and the leaves
carefully removed to preserve the bottoms; the bottoms are then
filled with a mixture of puréed and marinated raw mushrooms, the
scraped-off flesh from the leaves, mayonnaise, and herbs. A helping
hand is welcome here, because leaf scraping is rather slow work.
However, if you are alone and unhurried, you may boil the
artichokes one day, scrape them the next, and fill them on the
morning of the third day. When you want to serve this as a main-
course luncheon dish, add la surprise, poached eggs, which blend
perfectly with mushrooms, artichokes, and mayonnaise.

For 6 large artichokes

1) Preparing the artichokes
6 large, fresh, fine Following illustrated directions in

artichokes 4 to 4½ Volume I, pages 423–5, trim the
inches in diameter artichokes, being sure all the tough

A large kettle containing green part is cut off bottoms and
7 to 8 quarts boiling small leaves are broken from
salted water circumference. Boil slowly,

A food mill with middle- uncovered, for 35 to 45 minutes until
sized disk, or a sieve bottoms are tender when pierced

with a knife. (Prepare mushrooms
and mayonnaise, Steps 2 and 3, while
the artichokes boil.)

Drain upside down in a colander. When cool, carefully remove
the leaves, keeping bottoms intact. Scrape out and discard hairy
choke from center of each artichoke bottom. With a teaspoon,
scrape flesh from the inside of leaves and bottom of heart (soft cone
of leaves covering choke). Purée the scraped flesh through food mill



or sieve, then twist hard in the corner of a towel to extract as much
water as possible. Place puréed flesh in a bowl.

2) The purée of raw mushrooms
½ lb. (1 quart) very With a large, sharp knife, chop the

fresh, firm, mushrooms into a very fine mince,
unblemished almost a purée. Blend them in the
mushrooms bowl with the salt, pepper, shallots or

¼ tsp salt scallions, and lemon juice. Marinate
Big pinch of pepper for 15 to 20 minutes. Then, a handful
2 Tb very finely minced at a time, twist mushrooms in the

shallots or scallions corner of a towel to squeeze out as
1 Tb lemon juice much vegetable liquid as possible.

Add the mushrooms to the bowl
A 2-quart bowl containing the puréed artichoke

flesh.

3) Final assembly
About 1½ cups thick The artichoke and mushroom purées

homemade are now to be seasoned and piled
mayonnaise (the hard- into the artichoke bottoms: by
yolk tartare minus the spoonfuls stir mayonnaise into the
trimmings but plus the vegetables, adding probably 3 to 4
sieved egg white, tablespoons in all but not enough to
Volume I, page 90, is thin out purée, which must remain
particularly thick and hold its shape. Stir in the
recommended) herbs and taste carefully for

1 Tb fresh minced seasoning. Sprinkle artichoke
tarragon or ¼ tsp bottoms lightly with salt and pepper,
dried tarragon and mound the purée in them,



4 Tb fresh minced smoothing it into a dome. (If you are
parsley (reserve half using eggs, lay them in the artichokes
for decorations) between 2 layers of the purée.)

Salt and pepper to taste Arrange the artichokes in the dish or
The cooked artichoke plates. Just before serving, stir the

bottoms cream into the mayonnaise, then
Optional: 6 cold poached spoon a dollop over the top of each

eggs or 6-minute artichoke, and decorate with parsley.
peeled eggs (oeufs
mollets)

A serving dish or
individual plates lined
with lettuce leaves or
watercress

3 to 4 Tb heavy cream,
crème fraîche, or sour
cream

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: It is usually perfectly safe to complete the
recipe the day before serving, except for the final bit of mayonnaise,
and to cover and refrigerate the artichokes. To avoid all risks of
turned mayonnaise, however, we suggest that you complete the
final assembly only an hour or so before serving.






CHAPTER SEVEN
Desserts: Extending the Repertoire

FROZEN DESSERTS—SHERBETS, ICE CREAMS, AND
MOUSSES

Entremets Glacés

AS LONG AS YOUR FREEZER MAINTAINS a steady temperature of zero
degrees or less, you need no other ice cream contraption to produce
a marvelous parade of frozen fantasies. We start this delicious group
with a simple sherbet made from sieved canned apricots, proceed to
a mousse of fresh strawberries (pausing to make some sugar-cookie
cups to serve them in), and continue with chocolate-burnt-almond
ice cream, a walnut and caramel mousse, bombe glacée, and
directions for parfaits and frozen soufflés. Le Saint-Cyr, a handsome
mold of chocolate mousse and meringues, leads into a digression on
meringued whipped cream either as a filling for cream horns or as a
vanilla ice cream with chocolate sauce. La Surprise du Vésuve ends
the section in a dramatic burst of flames.

  MOUSSE À L’ABRICOT, GLACÉE
[Apricot Sherbet]
Easy, delicious, and available all year round is apricot sherbet

made from canned apricots. Timing is 4 to 5 hours, but it is easier to
be leisurely and start the mousse the day before serving.

For about 1 quart, serving 4 to 6 people



1) The sherbet mixture
A No. 2 can (1 lb. 14 Drain apricots, purée them, and put

ounces) or two 1-lb. into measure. Add enough of their
cans of apricot halves juice to make 2 cups, and turn purée

A food mill with fine disk into mixing bowl. Beat egg whites
A quart measure with mixer until they form soft
A 2½-quart mixing bowl peaks, and set aside. Then, with
2 egg whites in a small, mixer, beat the sugar and lemon juice

clean beating bowl into the apricot purée; continue
beating for several minutes to

An electric mixer, with dissolve sugar completely—until you
clean, dry blades can feel no granules on your tongue.

About ½ cup sugar If not sweet enough, beat in a little
(“instant” superfine if more sugar; be careful, however,
possible) because sugar proportions should be

2 Tb lemon juice no more than ¼ part of the mixture
2 to 3 drops of almond or sherbet will not freeze properly.

extract Whip in the beaten egg whites with
mixer; their purpose is to discourage
large ice crystals from forming. Add
the drops of almond extract, which
will bring out the apricot flavor.

2) Freezing the mousse—4 to 5 hours minimum at zero degrees
or less

A flat pan about 9 by 12 Sherbet mixture is now to be frozen,
inches in diameter, if and beaten up once or twice during
you are in a hurry; or the process to break up ice crystals
a mixing bowl; or ice and give a smooth, light texture.

Turn it into a flat pan or ice trays if



trays if you have little you are rushed; leave in mixing bowl
room if you are not. Cover with plastic

Plastic wrap wrap and freeze for 2 to 3 hours, or
An electric mixer or a until sherbet has begun to set.

large wire whip
Optional: a serving bowl

or ice cream mold
The apricot sauce

When partially set, scrape into mixing bowl if sherbet is in a pan
or trays. Beat vigorously with electric mixer or wire whip; sherbet
will increase in volume and begin to whiten. Cover and freeze again
for an hour or so, and again beat it up; then turn it into a serving
bowl or ice cream mold if you wish. Cover, and freeze for several
hours more before serving, (NOTE: If you are in no hurry and sherbet
has frozen hard before you have beaten it, leave at room
temperature until softened, and beat with an electric mixer; then
return to freezer and continue as usual.)

Let mousse soften for half an hour in the refrigerator before
serving, and accompany, if you wish, with the apricot sauce. (See
also the cookie cups, which you can use instead of sherbet dishes.)

VARIATIONS
Mousse à l’Abricot, Chantilly
To make a richer and softer sherbet, really an ice cream, you

may incorporate whipped cream as follows.
For 1½ quarts, serving 6 to 8 people



The preceding apricot At the end of the first freezing, after
sherbet mixture you have beaten the apricot sherbet

1 cup chilled whipping and it has increased in volume and
cream in a beating whitened, fold in the lightly whipped
bowl cream, crème Chantilly. (Cream

A large bowl with a tray should always be beaten separately;
of ice cubes and water if beaten with the sherbet you will
to cover them not get as much volume.) Set bowl of

A large wire whip or cream over ice cubes and water.
hand-held electric Circulating whip or beater about
mixer bowl to incorporate as much air as

A rubber spatula possible, beat until cream has
doubled in volume and beater leaves

Optional: a chilled light traces on surface.
serving bowl or ice
cream mold

Fold the cream into the sherbet, and it will need no further beating,
only freezing. If you are serving in a decorative bowl or mold, turn
the mixture into it now, cover, and freeze 3 to 4 hours at least
before serving.

Bombe Glacée à l’Abricot
[Apricot Mousse Molded with Another Sherbet or an Ice Cream]
When you want to be more elaborate, you may pack the apricot

sherbet into a bowl or mold lined with another sherbet or with ice
cream, as follows.

For 2 quarts, serving 8 to 10 people



1 quart of pineapple Let the sherbet or ice cream soften
sherbet, lemon just enough so that you can spread it
sherbet, or vanilla ice around the inside of the mold or
cream (homemade or bowl. Cover with plastic wrap and set
best quality store- in freezer to harden. When the
bought) apricot sherbet has been frozen and

A chilled 2 quart ice beaten several times, and is ready for
cream mold, or metal its final freezing, pack it into the
bowl or charlotte lined bowl. Cover again with plastic

Plastic wrap wrap and freeze several hours more.
The apricot sherbet

To unmold, run a knife around inside rim of mold, hold for
several seconds in a basin of cold water, and unmold onto a chilled
serving dish. If not to be served immediately, cover with an inverted
bowl and return to freezer.

Mousse aux Fraises ou aux Framboises, Glacée
[Fresh Strawberry or Raspberry Sherbet]
Your own fresh strawberry or raspberry sherbet is a delight, and

just as easy to make as the preceding apricot sherbet.
For about 1 quart, serving 4 to 6 people

1 quart fresh Hull the strawberries, and wash
strawberries or rapidly; if using raspberries, pick
raspberries them over and discard any spoiled

A food mill with fine ones. Purée berries into mixing bowl;
disk, set over a 2½- to you should have about 2 cups. Beat



3-quart mixing bowl the egg whites until they form soft
2 egg whites in a small, peaks, and set aside. Beat the sugar

clean beating bowl and lemon juice into the berry purée
An electric mixer or a and continue beating for several

large wire whip minutes to dissolve sugar completely
½ cup sugar, preferably —until you can feel no granules on

“instant” superfine your tongue. Whip in the beaten egg
whites. Cover and freeze, beating

¼ cup lemon juice several times as directed in Master
Recipe, Step 2.

Strawberry or Raspberry Ice Cream
For a softer and richer mixture, fold in a cup of heavy cream,

beaten over ice, after the mousse has begun to set, as directed for
the apricot ice cream.

Other fruits
You may substitute frozen raspberries or strawberries for fresh

ones in the preceding recipe; thaw, drain, and purée four 10-ounce
packages, add enough of the juices to make 2 cups, and you will
need no additional sugar. Fresh, ripe, raw peaches are delicious
either as a sherbet or with cream added, and you can decorate each
serving with sliced peaches macerated in sugar, lemon juice, and
kirsch. Use the same proportions and method for other fruit purées.

COUPELLES, LANGUES DE CHATS
[Cookie Serving Cups for Ices, Fruits, and Dessert Creams]



Simple to make and charming as containers are crisp little cookie
cups made from the French egg-white batter known as langues de
chats, because it is usually baked in flat cat’s-tongue shapes. Here
the batter is spread in thin disks on baking sheets; as soon as the
edges have browned in a hot oven, they are removed one by one
and pressed into a teacup, where they immediately crisp into shape.

For 8 cups 3½ inches in diameter

1) The cookie batter—pâte à langues de chats
2 baking sheets Preheat oven to 425 degrees and set

approximately 14 by rack in middle level. Prepare baking
18 inches, buttered sheets; then, with cutter and point of
and floured rubber spatula, mark 4 circles on

A vol-au-vent cutter, pot each. Lightly oil cups or bowls, and
lid, or saucer about set them at a convenient place near
5½ inches in diameter the oven.

A rubber spatula
Tasteless salad oil
2 large tea cups or small

bowls about 5 inches
in diameter at the top,
2 at the bottom, and
2½ inches deep



An electric mixer or a Beat the butter, sugar, and lemon or
wooden spoon orange rind in the bowl with electric

2 ounces (½ stick) soft mixer or wooden spoon until pale
butter and fluffy. Pour in the egg whites and

⅓ cup granulated sugar mix a few seconds, only just enough
The grated rind of 1 to blend. Place flour in sieve or sifter

lemon or orange and shake it over the batter, rapidly
A 2-quart mixing bowl folding it in with rubber spatula.
¼ cup egg whites (about

2 egg whites)
⅓ cup all-purpose flour

(measure by scooping
dry-measure cup into
flour; sweep off excess
with knife)

A sieve or sifter
A rubber spatula

2) Forming, baking, and shaping—oven preheated to 425
degrees

NOTE: If this is the first time you have
done this type of cookie, experiment
with one or two first so that you will
understand the system of baking,
removing, and molding; they are easy
to do as soon as you know what to
expect.



A rubber spatula and a Using rubber spatula to dislodge the
dessert spoon batter, place a 1½-tablespoon gob in

A kitchen timer the center of each of the 4 circles on
A flexible-blade spatula one of the baking sheets. Using back

(blade should be at of spoon, smear the batter out to fill
least 8 inches long) for the circles; it will be less than ⅛ inch
unmolding cookies thick. Place in middle level of

The oiled cups or bowls preheated oven, set timer for 5
for unmolding the minutes, and bake until cookies have
cookies browned lightly, either to within an

A cake rack or racks inch of the center, or in large
splotches. (Form cookies on second
sheet while these are baking.)

As soon as they are done, set baking sheet on open oven door so
that cookies will stay warm and pliable—they crisp immediately
they cool, and then cannot be molded. Working rapidly, slide long
side of spatula blade under one cookie to scrape and lift it off the
baking sheet; turn in upside down over one of the oiled cups or
bowls, and press into the cup with your fingers. Rapidly remove a
second cookie from the sheet and press into second cup.
Immediately take first cookie out of first cup—they crisp in seconds
—and place on rack. Rapidly mold the third cookie, and finally the
fourth. (They will be fragile, so handle with care.)



Close oven door and wait for a few minutes for temperature to
return to 425 degrees; bake and mold the second sheet of cookies.

3) Storing and serving
Cookies will stay crisp for several days in dry weather if stored

airtight; for longer storage, freeze them. Spoon sherbet, ice cream,
or fruits into the cookie cups just before serving. For fruit sherbets
or ice cream, such as strawberry, save some of the fruit to decorate
top of each serving.

LE KILIMANJARO—GLACE AU CHOCOLAT, PRALINÉE
[Chocolate-Burnt-Almond Ice Cream]
For lovers of chocolate and ice cream, we think this is the best

combination we know.
For 6 cups, serving 6 to 8 people

1) Toasted almond brittle—pralin aux amandes—for 1 cup
4 ounces (about 1 cup) Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Spread

blanched almonds almonds in tray or pan, set in middle
A pizza tray or roasting level, and roast 10 to 15 minutes,

pan stirring up several times, until they
are a walnut brown. Remove from
oven.

½ cup sugar



3 Tb water Combine sugar and water in
A small, heavy saucepan saucepan and set over moderately

with cover high heat. Swirl pan slowly by its
The almonds in a bowl handle, but do not stir sugar with a
The roasting pan, lightly spoon while liquid is coming to the

oiled boil. Continue swirling for a moment
An electric blender while liquid boils and changes from

cloudy to perfectly clear.

Cover pan, raise heat to high, and boil for several minutes until
bubbles are thick and heavy. Uncover, and continue boiling,
swirling gently, until syrup turns a nice caramel brown. Remove
from heat and stir in the almonds; immediately turn out into oiled
pan. When cold and hard, in 20 minutes or so, break up; grind a half
cupful at a time in electric blender.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Pralin freezes perfectly for several months
in an airtight jar.

2) The chocolate ice cream
½ cup sugar Combine sugar and water in
⅓ cup water saucepan; swirl over heat until sugar
A 6-cup saucepan with has dissolved completely, and liquid

cover is perfectly clear. Remove from heat;
2 Tb instant coffee stir in the coffee. Break up the
6 ounces semisweet chocolate, stir it in, cover, and set in

baking chocolate the pan of hot water. While chocolate
is melting, beat the cream into

2 ounces unsweetened Chantilly as follows.
baking chocolate

A larger saucepan of
simmering water
removed from heat



A wooden spoon

crème Chantilly:
2 cups chilled heavy

cream in a 2½-quart
bowl

A large bowl containing Set bowl of cream over ice cubes and
a trayful of ice cubes water. Circulating beater about bowl
and water to cover to incorporate as much air as
them possible, beat until cream has

A hand-held electric doubled in volume and beater leaves
beater light traces on surface.

A rubber spatula

The pralin from Step 1 With the electric beater, whip the
(save 2 to 3 Tb for chocolate until perfectly smooth and
final decoration, Step shiny. Beat the chocolate for a
3) moment over ice to cool it, then beat

in about half a cup of the crème
Chantilly. Finally, fold the chocolate
mixture into the Chantilly along with
the pralin.

3) Molding, freezing, and serving—freezing time 2 hours
minimum

If you are in a hurry: A 6- Immediately turn the ice cream
to 8-cup pan, or ice mixture into pan, pans, or mold.
trays 2 inches deep Cover with plastic wrap, and freeze.

Otherwise: A 6-cup If you have used a shallow pan, the
conical mold, or a cream should be ready to unmold in
narrow bowl or dish



with rounded bottom, about 2 hours; you will probably
to give the effect of a need 4 hours for a mold or a bowl.
mountain peak

A chilled serving dish Just before serving, dip pan or mold
1 cup heavy cream in tepid water to loosen the ice

beaten into Chantilly cream. Turn serving dish upside
(as in Step 2), down over mold, and reverse the two
sweetened to taste to unmold ice cream onto dish. Top
with confectioner’s with the crème Chantilly, sprinkle
sugar and flavored with the pralin, and announce the
with ½ tsp vanilla name of your snow-capped mountain
extract as you bring it to the table.

The reserved 2 to 3 Tb
pralin

MOUSSE GLACÉE, PRALINÉE AUX NOIX—APPAREIL À
BOMBE
[Walnut-caramel Ice Cream—or Filling for Bombes Glacées]
French frozen mousses are of two types, one with sugar syrup

and cream, and the other like this, with custard and cream. Using
this base, you may incorporate any flavoring you wish, from melted
chocolate to crushed pineapple, and from crumbled peppermint
sticks to walnut brittle. It makes a tender, smooth ice cream,
suitable for freezing in a serving bowl, in a soufflé dish, in parfait
glasses, or to be packed into a decorative mold lined with regular
ice cream.

For 1½ quarts, serving 8 to 10 people



1) Walnut brittle and caramelized walnuts—pralin aux noix—
2½ cups

1⅓ cups sugar Combine sugar and water in
½ cup water saucepan, and set over moderately
A heavy 2-quart high heat. Swirl pan slowly by its

saucepan with cover handle, but do not stir sugar with a
8 ounces (2 cups) shelled spoon while liquid is coming to the

walnuts (some may be boil. Continue swirling for a moment
walnut pieces; 8 as liquid boils and changes from
perfect halves needed) cloudy to perfectly clear. Cover pan,

A lightly oiled baking raise heat to high, and boil for
sheet several minutes until bubbles are

thick and heavy. Uncover, and
A fork, for taking continue boiling, swirling gently,

walnuts out of caramel until syrup turns a nice caramel
An electric blender brown.

Immediately remove from heat and add the 8 perfect walnut
halves; quickly take them out one by one with fork, drain off excess
caramel, and place right-side up at one end of baking sheet. If
caramel has thickened or begun to harden, set over heat again to
liquefy. Remove from heat and pour in the rest of the walnuts; stir
about with fork, and turn out onto baking sheet. (Do not wash out
caramel-cooking pan; reserve for next step.) When caramel-walnut
mixture has hardened, in about 20 minutes, break it up into 1-inch
pieces. Grind in electric blender, flicking switch on and off rapidly
so that some pieces will remain ⅛ inch in size, to give texture and
interest to the mousse.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Both pralin and caramelized walnuts
freeze perfectly for several months in an airtight container.



2) The ice cream mixture—appareil à bombe
½ cup milk heated in the Set milk over low heat, stirring

caramel-cooking pan occasionally, to melt the caramel.
4 egg yolks in a 2½- to 3- Meanwhile, beating the egg yolks,

quart stainless steel gradually incorporate 1 cup of the
bowl (metal is pralin and continue beating until
preferable because mixture is thick and sticky. By
easy to heat and cool) driblets, beat in the hot milk, then set

A hand-held electric bowl in the pan of almost simmering
mixer water. Stir rather slowly with spoon,

The ground pralin; some reaching all over bottom of bowl,
for now, some for later until custard gradually warms

A pan of almost through and thickens enough to coat
simmering water, spoon with a creamy layer. (Be
large enough to hold careful custard does not overheat and
bowl for egg yolks curdle the egg yolks; however, you

must warm it to the point where it
A wooden spoon thickens.)
A second bowl with 2

trays of ice cubes and
water to cover them,
to hold the first bowl

¼ cup kirsch or dark rum

Immediately remove from heat and beat in another cup of the
pralin to stop the cooking. Then, with electric mixer, beat over ice 5
minutes or so, until thoroughly chilled and mixture forms a thick
ribbon when a bit is dropped from beater back onto the surface.
Beat in the kirsch or rum, and all the rest of the pralin (unless you
wish to reserve 2 to 3 tablespoons for decorations); final addition of
pralin does not melt, because mousse is now cold.



1 cup chilled heavy Remove custard mixture from ice,
cream in a 2- to 2½- and replace with the cream bowl.
quart bowl Beat cream into Chantilly by

The electric beater circulating electric beater about bowl
(blades need not be to incorporate as much air as
washed) possible; continue beating until

A rubber spatula cream has doubled in volume and
beater leaves light traces on surface
of cream. Fold the cream into the
chilled custard, and mousse is ready
for freezing.

3) Freezing and serving suggestions
Freezing times at zero degrees or less: 3 hours for individual

servings or parfaits; 6 hours for bowls, molds, and bombe glacée.

MOUSSE GLACÉE OR PARFAIT
Pile the chilled mousse into a decorative serving bowl or into

individual serving dishes or parfait glasses. Cover with plastic wrap
and freeze. At serving time, decorate with caramelized walnuts
and/or pralin; parfaits are usually topped with a swirl of whipped
cream before the walnuts or pralin goes on. (See note on frozen
swirls at end of recipe.)

SOUFFLÉ GLACÉ
Surround a 4- to 5-cup soufflé dish with a strip of lightly oiled

(tasteless salad oil) foil or waxed paper tied or pinned in place, to
make a collar that sticks 1½ inches above rim of dish. Pile the
chilled mousse into the dish, letting it rise ½ to ¾ inch up the
collar; lay plastic wrap over top of collar and freeze the mousse at
least 6 hours. Remove collar just before serving, and decorate top of
soufflé with caramelized walnuts and/or pralin.



BOMBE GLACÉE
Follow directions for bombe glacée à l’abricot.

Frozen Whipped Cream Swirls
You may form whipped cream swirls, rosettes, or other designs

on a plate or baking sheet lined with waxed paper; cover the swirls
and freeze them. At serving time, peel them off the paper, and place
upon the dessert. For this, the cream must be a little stiffer than the
usual Chantilly so that it will hold its shape enough to be formed;
when stiff enough, fold in confectioner’s sugar and vanilla to taste,
pack the cream into a pastry bag or paper decorating cone, and
make the designs. (See directions for making paper decorating
cones.)

LE SAINT-CYR, GLACÉ
[Frozen Chocolate Mousse Molded in Meringues]

Here is a handsome dessert for those happy times when you can
indulge in whipped cream and chocolate. It is a mold of frozen
chocolate mousse in the form of a cylinder with ribbons of white
meringue marching around the circumference. It will remind you of
the tall képis, the decorative caps, worn by the officers of Saint-Cyr,



the famous French military academy. You can add a visor, edible or
not, if you want to complete the picture.

A NOTE ON MERINGUES AND MANUFACTURING METHODS

This dessert is easy to make when you have an electric beater on
a stand; if you don’t mind holding on for a while, however, a
portable beater is perfectly satisfactory. Rather than being the usual
meringue of egg whites beaten to stiff peaks and sugar then folded
in, this is the Italian meringue, where boiling sugar syrup is beaten
into the stiff egg whites, and the beating continues for 8 to 10
minutes, or until the meringue is cool and forms stiff peaks. It has a
double advantage: the meringue shapes bake in half the time of
ordinary meringues and the rest of the meringue mixture can be
used for the chocolate mousse. Thus you need not bother making a
custard base with its attendant beating of sugar and egg yolks over
heat; instead, you beat melted chocolate right into the meringue
mixture, fold in the whipped cream, and the mousse is made. A
further recommendation is that the mousse does not become hard
and stiff when frozen; it retains a tender, creamy quality.

For an 8-cup mold, serving 8 to 10 people

1) The meringue mixture—meringue italienne—1½ quarts

Measure out all the ingredients for
this step so that while the sugar is
boiling you can finish beating the egg
whites.

2 cups sugar Combine sugar and water in
⅔ cup water saucepan and set over moderately



A heavy 1½- to 2-quart high heat. Swirl pan slowly by its
saucepan with cover handle, but do not stir sugar with a

spoon while liquid is coming to the
boil. Continue swirling for a moment
as liquid boils and turns from cloudy
to perfectly clear. Cover pan, reduce
heat to low, and let simmer slowly
while you beat the egg whites.

¾ cup egg whites (6 egg Turn egg whites into mixer bowl, and
whites) at room start at slow speed for a minute or so,
temperature until egg whites begin to foam up.

An electric mixer with Beat in the salt and cream of tartar,
large (3-quart) clean, and gradually increase speed to fast,
dry bowl and blades until egg whites form stiff peaks. (See

Big pinch salt notes on beating egg whites.) Beat in
¼ tsp cream of tartar the vanilla.
½ tsp vanilla extract

Optional but useful: a Remove cover from sugar syrup, and
candy thermometer insert candy thermometer if you are

A quart glass measure using one. Boil rapidly, and when
with 2 cups cold water bubbles begin to thicken, watch
and 2 ice cubes temperature or start dropping

A metal spoon driblets into iced water. Boil to 238
degrees, the soft-ball stage—sugar
makes a sticky but definite shape
when worked in cold water with your
fingers.



Immediately start beating egg whites at moderate speed,
dribbling boiling syrup into them until all is used. Continue beating
egg whites at moderate speed until cool, and until mixture forms
stiff peaks when lifted—when you draw a spatula through it, the
walls of meringue on either side of the path remain erect and
unmoving. (If you are using a portable beater, you may set the
meringue bowl in a basin of cold water to speed the cooling.)
Beating time: 8 to 10 minutes using a beater on a stand.

2) Baking the meringue decorations—about 1 hour at 200
degrees

2 pastry sheets about 12 Preheat oven to 200 degrees. Draw
by 16 inches, no-stick guidelines on pastry sheets with
if possible, buttered point of rubber spatula to mark depth
and floured of mold, so that you will know how

A rubber spatula long to make the meringues: they are
The dessert mold: an 8- to stand upright around the sides of

cup cylindrical the mold. (Leftover meringues are to
charlotte mold, baking be layered into mold with the
dish, or even a flower chocolate mousse; you may wish to
pot, at least 4 inches decorate top of dessert, after
deep unmolding, with meringues either

½ the meringue mixture whole or crumbled.) A suggested
(3 cups) decoration, to resemble the braid on

A canvas pastry bag 12 to a military cap, would be a series of
14 inches long with ¾- straight ribbons alternating with
inch cannelated serpentine shapes.
ribbon-tube opening

A small knife (to cut off
meringue from tube
when necessary)



Whatever you decide upon, scoop the meringue mixture into the
pastry bag, and squeeze out shapes between the guidelines on the
pastry sheets, making the decorations ⅛ to 3⁄16 inch thick, and no
more than 1½ inches wide. You will need 12 to 16 perfect
specimens, therefore use up all the meringue in the bag; muffed
shapes can be layered with the mousse, and you will have some
breakage after baking because the meringues will be brittle.

Set baking sheets in upper- and lower-middle levels of oven for
about an hour, or until you can gently nudge a few loose from
baking surface. They will not puff up, they will not change shape,
and they should remain pure white; they simply dry out. While still
warm, they bend slightly; as soon as they are cool, they become
crisp and fragile. Remove baking sheets from oven, push all
meringues gently loose, but leave them on the baking sheets.

3) The chocolate mousse—mousse au chocolat meringuée—
about 8 cups

12 ounces semisweet Break up the chocolate, and place in
baking chocolate the saucepan with the rum; cover,

3 ounces unsweetened and set it in the pan of hot but not
baking chocolate simmering water. While chocolate is

A saucepan for the melting, fold an 18-inch piece of
chocolate, and cover waxed paper in half lengthwise, cut
for the pan in two along fold, and with the 2

⅓ cup dark rum pieces held together, cut into blunt-
A saucepan of simmering ended wedges 5 to 6 inches at the

water removed from wide end, 2½ inches at the blunt
heat, large enough to end, and ½ inch longer than depth of
hold chocolate pan mold. Cut a circle of waxed paper to

fit in bottom of mold exactly, and
The dessert mold from place it in the mold. One at a time,

Step 1



1 Tb soft butter dot soft butter on one side of waxed
Waxed paper paper wedge and insert against inside

edge of mold, small end of wedge at
bottom; butter holds paper in place.
Continue around inside of mold,
overlapping paper so that mold is
completely covered. Refrigerate in
order to set butter and keep paper
glued to mold.

The meringue mixture As soon as chocolate is melted, and
remaining from Step 2 you have beaten it to a soft, smooth

2 cups chilled whipping texture, whip it into the meringue
cream in a beating mixture. In its separate bowl, set
bowl cream over ice and beat, circulating

A larger bowl with a tray beater all around bowl to incorporate
of ice cubes and water air into cream, until doubled in
to cover them volume; continue beating a few

A large (balloon) wire minutes more, until beater leaves
whip, or a hand-held light traces on surface, and a bit of
electric beater with cream lifted and dropped back softly
clean, dry blades retains its shape. This is now crème

Chantilly.

Remove the cream from the ice, and set the chocolate-meringue
mixture over it, beating for a few minutes until cool but not stiff—if
chocolate is warm it will deflate the whipped cream. Then, with a
rubber spatula, turn the crème Chantilly out on top of the chocolate,
and fold the two together, cutting down from surface of cream to
bottom of bowl with rubber spatula, and turning spatula against
side of bowl as you draw it out; continue rapidly, rotating bowl as
you fold. If the meringues are not yet ready, refrigerate the mousse.



4) Filling the mold
Not allowing it to touch sides of mold if you can help it, turn a

1-inch layer of mousse into the bottom of the mold; this will give
support to the meringues you are to place against the sides.
Remembering they are fragile and break easily, arrange the
meringues best side out against mold and upright around its edges,
spacing them about ¼ inch apart. Turn in another layer of mousse
about ¾ inch thick, cover with extra meringues, and continue filling
the mold with mousse and meringue layers, ending with a layer of
meringues. (Do not trim off protruding ends of upright meringues at
this point.) Cover mold with plastic wrap, and freeze for 6 hours at
least.

5) Unmolding and serving
To unmold the dessert, bend waxed paper back from edges of

mold, bend protruding meringue ends down over dessert, and turn a
chilled serving dish upside down over mold. Reverse the two and
dessert should unmold immediately—if not, reverse mold, run a
knife between waxed paper and edge of mold, and reverse again.
Carefully peel off waxed paper from top and sides. You need no
decoration on top, unless you have baked meringue decorations for
it or you wish to crumble leftover baked meringues over it.

Optional: Serve the Saint-Cyr immediately,
Either more crème accompanied by the optional

Chantilly sweetened whipped cream or custard sauce.
with confectioner’s
sugar and flavored
with rum or vanilla;

Or crème anglaise
(custard sauce)



(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: Dessert may be unmolded onto serving
dish, covered with a bowl, and returned to freezer for an hour or so
before serving; in its mold, it may remain frozen for several weeks.
Leftover baked meringues should be kept either in a warming oven
at about 120 degrees to prevent them from softening, or wrapped
airtight and frozen; if frozen, you may need to re-crisp them in a
200-degree oven for 20 to 30 minutes.

Other flavorings and serving ideas for the Chocolate Mousse
Rather than molding the chocolate mousse in a meringue-lined

mold, you may wish to mold it as is, and decorate with crème
Chantilly for serving; or you may turn the mousse into individual
serving pots, chill rather than freeze them, and serve like the usual
chocolate mousse with sweetened whipped cream on the side.
Instead of using meringues, you may fold into the mousse a cup or
two of pralin (caramelized almonds, or walnuts), which always gives
an interesting texture and taste to chocolate mousse. There is also
the richer chocolate mousse in Volume I, on page 604, with its egg
yolks and butter rather than meringue and whipped cream; when
you use this formula, you need not freeze the mousse, because the
butter, which congeals when refrigerated, holds the mousse in form
when it is unmolded.

  CHANTILLY MERINGUÉE
[Whipped Cream with Italian Meringue—for cream fillings and
ice cream]
The Italian meringue of hot sugar syrup whipped into egg

whites, so successful with the preceding Saint-Cyr, Step 1, also
serves other purposes. You may use it as a base for butter-cream
frosting and fillings; you may also fold it into whipped cream to give



the cream more body and stability as a filling for cream puffs, cream
horns, and Napoleons or mille-feuilles. Or this same Chantilly
meringuée may be packed into a mold or bowl and frozen, thus
becoming what can truly be called an iced cream. (Although you
can fold plain beaten egg white into whipped cream and freeze it,
the meringue does a better job because it completely discourages
the formation of ice crystals, giving you a wonderfully soft and
smooth ice cream.)

For about 1 quart of meringue whipped cream—Chantilly
meringuée

½ the meringue italienne Prepare the meringue mixture, and
called for in Step 1 beat slowly until it is cold.

1 cup chilled heavy Meanwhile, prepare a crème Chantilly
cream in a 2½-quart as follows. Set bowl of cream over ice
bowl cubes and water. Circulate beater or

A large bowl with a tray whip about in cream to incorporate
of ice cubes and water as much air as possible as you beat;
to cover them continue beating until cream has

A hand-held electric doubled in volume and beater leaves
mixer or a large wire light traces on surface. Stir the
whip vanilla into the meringue mixture,

1 to 2 tsp vanilla extract then fold in ¼ of the whipped cream
to lighten the meringue. Scoop rest of

A rubber spatula whipped cream on top and fold it in
by rapidly cutting down through
center to bottom of bowl and then
out to side with rubber spatula,
rotating bowl as you do so; repeat
the movement rapidly until cream
and meringue are blended and
deflated as little as possible.



TO USE AS A FILLING
Use as is, or fold in pralin (caramelized almonds, walnuts), or

shaved chocolate, or fresh strawberries, raspberries, or sliced
peaches, or bits of glacéed chestnuts or glacéed fruits macerated in
rum or kirsch.

TO USE AS ICE CREAM
Chantilly Glacée, au Chocolat
[Vanilla Ice Cream with Chocolate Sauce]
It is hard to improve on this universal favorite, and wonderful to

have your own private brand.
For about 1 quart, serving 4 to 6 people

1) The vanilla ice cream—Chantilly glacée
The preceding meringue Prepare the meringue whipped

whipped cream cream, turn into bowl, cover with
A 1-quart mold or metal plastic wrap, and freeze 3 to 4 hours

bowl with rounded at least before unmolding and
bottom serving. (This will be a rather soft

Plastic wrap and tender ice cream.)

2) The chocolate sauce—for about 1½ cups
3 ounces semisweet Break up the chocolate and combine

baking chocolate with water and coffee in saucepan.
1 ounce unsweetened Stir slowly over moderate heat until

baking chocolate chocolate is melted and smooth, then



¾ cup water set in simmering water and cook for
1 Tb instant coffee 15 minutes, stirring occasionally.
A 6-cup saucepan Beat in the cream, butter, rum, and,
A larger saucepan of if needed, a pinch of salt. Set aside.

simmering water to Sauce should be tepid when it goes
hold chocolate pan over the ice cream; reheat to tepid,

beating it, if necessary, later.
A wire whip
1½ Tb heavy cream
1½ Tb butter
1½ Tb dark rum
Pinch of salt if needed

3) Unmolding the ice cream, and serving
A chilled serving dish At serving time, set frozen mold in
A basin of cold or tepid basin of water for several seconds to

water loosen the ice cream. Run a knife
around edge of dessert; turn serving
dish upside down over bowl, and
reverse the two to unmold the ice
cream.

Spoon the tepid chocolate sauce over the ice cream, letting it
drip down the sides so that some of the white shows through. Serve
immediately.

Other sauces and flavorings
Instead of chocolate sauce, serve the fresh raspberry or

strawberry purée in Volume I, pages 592–3, and surround the dish



with fresh berries, as well, if you wish. Or spoon over the ice cream
2 cups of chilled, fresh, sliced peaches macerated in sugar, lemon
juice, and light rum or kirsch; the apricot sauce (confit d’abricots en
sirop) in this volume is another possibility. Still another would be to
fold half a cup of walnut brittle into the cream after it has begun to
set; after pouring chocolate sauce over the ice cream, decorate it
either with a sprinkling of brittle or with the caramelized whole
walnuts (mousse glacée, pralinée aux noix, Step 1). Bits of glacéed
chestnuts or glacéed fruits macerated in rum or kirsch would also be
attractive.

Bombe Glacée
Frozen Chantilly is a perfect filling for bombe glacée, just as it is,

or with any of the preceding flavor suggestions. Mold in a bowl or
bombe lined with chocolate, coffee, or strawberry or raspberry ice
cream following the directions for the bombe glacée à l’abricot.

LA SURPRISE DU VÉSUVE
[French Baked Alaska Flambée]
Vesuvius erupting is the French version of our baked Alaska ice

cream dessert that is spread with meringue and browned quickly in
a hot oven. Here the meringue is sprinkled with powdered sugar;
the volcano is contained in half an egg shell thrust crater-like into
the center of the Vesuvius, and filled with flaming liqueur that
courses down the mountain slopes like molten lava. Use any ice
cream formula you wish, either from the preceding recipes or store-
bought; the cake, which forms the base, may be your own génoise,
the sponge cake or almond and orange cake from Volume I, pages
669 or 676, or a store-bought sponge cake.

For a 14- by 8-inch dessert, serving 8 people



1) Preliminaries—to be readied before dinner
1½ quarts sherbet or ice (All the ingredients listed must be

cream frozen in a measured out, laid in easy reach, and
melon-shaped mold ready for use when you are ready, at
about 12 inches long the last minute, to beat the meringue,

A génoise or sponge cake, unmold the ice cream, assemble the
such as a round one 8 structure, and brown it rapidly in the
by 1½ inches oven. Although you can beat the

A flameproof serving meringue an hour before serving, and
platter or tray 16 to 18 re-beat it at the last minute, the
inches long beating takes but a few minutes in an

⅔ cup Cognac, kirsch, or efficient mixer and your guests
rum (whatever flavor should not mind a short wait.)
will go with your Slice the cake into half-inch layers;
sherbet or ice cream) cut the cake layers in such a way that
in a small saucepan you can form a large oval ½ inch

10 egg whites (1⅓ cups) thick and 1 inch larger all around
at room temperature, than your ice cream mold. Arrange
and in an egg-beating the oval on the platter, sprinkle with
bowl in time for Step 2 2 to 3 Tb liqueur, cover airtight with

An electric mixer plastic wrap, and set aside. Be sure
2 pinches salt oven is preheated to 450 degrees in
½ tsp cream of tartar time for Step 2.
1½ cups sugar, “instant”

superfine if possible
1 tsp vanilla extract
An uncracked eggshell

half with saw-tooth
edge (cut with
scissors)

1 cup confectioner’s
sugar in a fine-meshed
sieve



Matches

2) Assembling, browning, flambéeing, and serving—about 10
minutes—oven has been preheated to 450 degrees

beating the meringue:
Start beating the egg whites at moderate speed until they are

foaming, beat in the salt and cream of tartar, then gradually
increase speed to fast until egg whites form soft peaks. Gradually
beat in the sugar, sprinkling in ¼ cup at a time, beating half a
minute between additions. After all has gone in, add vanilla, and
continue beating for several minutes at high speed until egg whites
form stiff, shiny peaks.

assembling Vesuvius:
Set ice cream mold in a basin of tepid water, run a knife around

edge, and unmold the sherbet or ice cream upon the cake in the
platter. Immediately spread the meringue over it with a spatula,
starting at bottom of cake and bringing it up to a peak at the top of
the dessert—meringue should be about 1 inch thick over the sherbet
or ice cream, in order to insulate it from the heat of the oven. With
spatula make vertical striations from bottom to top, which will
allow flaming liqueur to flow down the sides. Insert eggshell half in
peak of mountain. Sieve confectioner’s sugar all over surface of
meringue, making a layer about 1⁄16 inch thick.

browning:
Set in upper-middle level of preheated 450-degree oven for 3 to

4 minutes, to brown meringue lightly. Meanwhile, heat the liqueur.

flambéeing and serving:



As soon as meringue has browned remove from oven; ignite the
hot liqueur with a lighted match, pour into the eggshell, letting
excess drip down sides of meringue, and bring flaming to the table.

FRUITS, FLANS, AND CUSTARDS, A FRENCH
SHORTCAKE, AND A FLAMING CHARLOTTE

GRATIN DE POMMES, NORMANDE—CLAFOUTI AUX
POMMES
[Sliced Apples Baked with Rum, Raisins, Eggs, and Cream]
This is every bit as good as the finest apple tart, but not quite as

filling because the apples are baked in a dish rather than in a tart
shell.

For a 10-inch dish, serving 8 to 10 people

1) The rum and raisins
½ cup currants (small, Preheat oven to 375 degrees. Soak

black, seedless raisins) the raisins in the rum until you are
in a small bowl ready to use them.

¼ cup dark rum

2) Baking the apple slices
¼ lb. (1 stick) melted Spread half the butter in the pan and

butter sprinkle over it half the sugar. Wash
A baking pan with raised apples thoroughly but do not peel.

edges, such as a 10- by Quarter them, core them, and cut



16-inch jelly-roll pan into lengthwise slices about ⅜ inch
or a 14-inch pizza tray thick. Arrange in one overlapping

½ cup sugar layer in the pan, sprinkle on the
6 to 7 medium-sized remaining sugar, and dribble the

apples (about 2 lbs.) remaining butter over all. Bake about
that will keep their 25 minutes in upper-third level of
shape during cooking preheated oven until apples are
(Golden Delicious, tender but still hold their shape.
Rome Beauty, York Transfer apple slices to baking dish in
Imperial) one crowded, overlapping layer.

A flexible-blade spatula Scrape cooking juices over apples.
and a rubber spatula Taste, and sprinkle on a little more

sugar if you think it is needed.
A lightly buttered 6-cup

baking-and-serving (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be
dish, such as a round prepared to this point a day in
one 10 by 1½ inches advance. Cover when cool, and

More sugar if necessary refrigerate. Preheat oven in time for
Step 4.

3) The rum and egg topping
The raisins in their rum Drain the raisins, pressing rum out of
A sieve over a bowl them lightly. Sprinkle half the rum
3 “large” eggs over the apple slices. Beat the eggs
½ cup sugar and sugar for 3 to 4 minutes at high
An electric mixer speed with mixer until they are thick

and pale yellow. Beat in the flour,
¼ cup all-purpose flour liquids, and cinnamon. Fold in the

(measure by scooping raisins, then spread the topping over
dry-measure cup into the apples.
flour and sweeping off
excess with a knife)

½ cup liquid (2 to 3 Tb
rum maceration plus



light cream)
¼ tsp cinnamon

4) Baking and serving—about 25 minutes at 375 degrees
Bake in middle level of preheated 375-degree oven for about 25

minutes, or until topping has browned nicely and a skewer, plunged
through topping, comes out clean. Serve hot, warm, or cold. You
may wish to pass lightly whipped cream sweetened with powdered
sugar and flavored with rum, or homemade crème fraîche, although
no cream or sauce is really necessary.

FLAN AUX PRUNES—CLAFOUTI AUX PRUNES
[Fresh Prune Plums Baked in Custard]
Fresh prune plums are halved, baked with sugar and flavorings

until just tender, and then baked again under a blanket of eggs and
cream. Simple to do and delicious to eat, the same recipe can be
applied to other fruits, canned or fresh, as described at the end of
the recipe.

For 4 people

1) Preliminary baking of the fruit
1 pound, or about 1 Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Arrange

quart, fresh prune fruit skin-side down in dish, and
plums, washed, sprinkle with the flavorings. Bake in
halved, and seeded middle level of oven about 20

A lightly buttered baking minutes, or until fruit is just tender
dish, large enough to



hold them in 1 layer but still holds shape. Raise oven heat
⅛ tsp cinnamon to 375 degrees for next step.
½ cup sugar
The grated rind of 1

lemon
1 Tb lemon juice

2) Final baking with custard—20 to 25 minutes at 375 degrees
A lightly buttered 10- to Transfer fruit, still skin-side down, to

11-inch baking dish second baking dish; reserve juices.
1½ to 2 inches deep Beat eggs and sugar in bowl to blend

2 “large” eggs them, then beat in the flour, vanilla,
3 Tb sugar and cream. Pour over the fruit.
A mixing bowl and wire (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Refrigerate if

whip you are not baking immediately.
2 Tb flour
1 tsp vanilla extract
⅓ cup light or all-

purpose cream

Bake in upper third of preheated
oven for 20 to 25 minutes, until
custard has puffed and browned
lightly.

3) Sauce and serving



The cooking juices from While the dessert is baking, warm the
Step 1, in a small pan fruit juices and flavor them with the

Optional: 2 to 3 Tb liqueur if you wish; warm them again
Cognac, rum, or kirsch just before serving. Serve the flan

A serving bowl hot, warm, or tepid, accompanied by
Optional: crème Chantilly the fruit juices and optional crème

(lightly whipped Chantilly.
cream sweetened with
confectioner’s sugar
and flavored with
Cognac, rum, kirsch,
or vanilla)

Other ideas
Use the same system for canned and frozen fruits, like plums,

peaches, or apricots. Thaw, if frozen; drain thoroughly, and halve
and seed them if necessary. Give them a preliminary baking of 10
minutes or so with 2 or 3 tablespoons of melted butter, a pinch of
cinnamon, drops of lemon juice, and a sprinkling of sugar to
enhance their flavor. Then pour on the custard mixture and proceed
with the recipe.

POMMES SOUFFLÉES, CALVADOS
[Individual Apple Soufflés in Apples]
This is the attractive kind of recipe that looks much dressier than

it is—apples baked in wine, then filled with an apple soufflé mixture
and baked again on butter-drenched canapés. For an essentially
simple process, the recipe is purposely detailed because you will
want to use this way of baking apples with other fillings and
toppings, some of which are suggested at the end of the recipe.



Ahead-of-time notes follow each step in the process, so that you can
do parts of the dessert whenever you have time, and be ready for
the final baking several hours in advance of serving.

For 6 people

1) Preliminary cooking of the apples
6 firm, unblemished Preheat oven to 325 degrees. Wash

apples 3¼ to 3½ the apples, then prepare one at a
inches in diameter time: shave off bottom of apple so it
(such as Golden will stand solidly upright. Slanting
Delicious, Rome your knife down toward the core, cut
Beauty, York Imperial) a cap off top of apple about 2 inches

1 lemon, quartered in diameter. Peel, reserving peel and
A 10- to 12-inch all edible apple bits for Step 2. With

flameproof baking grapefruit knife, hollow out apple
dish 3½ inches deep centers and remove seeds, leaving a
and smeared with 1½ ½-inch shell of apple all around sides
Tb softened butter and bottom. Rub inside and out with

½ cup dry white wine or cut lemon and place in baking dish.
vermouth When all apples are done, squeeze

⅓ to ½ cup sugar (more remaining lemon juice over them and
if apples seem sour) add lemon pieces to the dish.

½ stick cinnamon
A 10- to 12-inch round of

heavily buttered
waxed paper

Pour the wine around the apples, sprinkle on the sugar, add
cinnamon, and bring to simmer on top of stove. Cover with the
waxed paper, and set in middle level of preheated oven for about 30



minutes, regulating heat so that liquid never quite simmers. Apples
should be tender when pierced with a knife, and ready to eat, but
they must keep their shape so that they will stand up to their final
cooking. Remove from oven and let cool for at least 10 minutes,
waxed paper in place over them.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be baked even a day in advance.
Remove from refrigerator at least half an hour before final baking,
Step 4.

2) The apple purée (soufflé base)
The peel and all edible While shells are cooking, simmer

bits from apple centers apple peel and trimmings with water
¼ cup water in the covered pan over moderately
A heavy-bottomed 2- low heat for about 15 minutes. When

quart saucepan with tender, purée with 3 tablespoons of
cover the apricot jam through food mill or

1 cup apricot jam pushed sieve. Add sugar, vanilla, and spirits;
through a sieve (3 Tb boil down rapidly, stirring constantly
for now, the rest for until mixture is almost thick enough
later) to hold its shape on a spoon. You

A food mill or sieve should have about ⅔ cup; gradually
stir it into bowl with cream and egg

3 or more Tb sugar yolk. Return to saucepan and stir
1 tsp vanilla extract over moderately high heat until
3 Tb Calvados, rum, or mixture comes almost to the boil and

Cognac thickens again. Taste, adding more
1 egg yolk blended with sugar if necessary and drops of red

3 Tb heavy cream in a coloring if you think they are needed.
small mixing bowl (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be

Optional: drops of red completed a day in advance; film
food coloring



surface with plastic wrap, and
refrigerate.

3) Preliminaries to baking the canapés:
About ½ cup clarified Film frying pan with ⅛ inch of

butter (melted butter, clarified butter, and set over
skimmed; clear liquid moderately high heat. When
spooned off milky bubbling, add as many bread rounds
residue) as will fit easily in one layer, and

A frying pan sauté for a minute or so on each side
6 rounds of bread 3 to brown very lightly, adding a little

inches in diameter and more butter if needed to keep bread
⅜ inch thick (use from burning. These are now called
homemade-type white canapés; paint one side of each with a
bread) coating of apricot jam and set them

The remaining sieved jam-side up on a platter. One by one,
apricot jam from Step drain the apples, pouring
2 accumulated juices back into baking

An unbuttered ovenproof dish. Paint inside and out with more
serving platter large of the strained apricot jam, and place
enough to hold apples one apple on each canapé. Dribble
easily over them any remaining butter.

The cooked apples
A pastry brush

the sauce:
A sieve (or the food mill) Discard lemon rind and cinnamon
A small saucepan stick; strain contents of apple-baking

dish into saucepan. Beat in arrowroot



1 tsp arrowroot blended mixture and apricot jam; bring to the
with 3 Tb Calvados, simmer. Simmer 2 to 3 minutes, until
rum, or Cognac sauce has turned from cloudy to

The remaining apricot clear, and has thickened lightly.
jam (about ¼ cup, Taste for flavor, adding more sugar
plus sugar if needed, and butter if you feel the need.
and a tablespoon or so (*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Canapés and
of butter) sauce may be made a day in advance,

but do not arrange apples on canapés
more than an hour or two before
baking.

4) Baking and serving—about 10 minutes at 375 degrees
2 egg whites at room About 20 minutes before serving (or

temperature as much as an hour in advance) beat
An egg-white beating egg whites at moderate speed for a

bowl and hand-held minute or two, until foamy; beat in
electric beater or the salt and cream of tartar, and
balloon whip gradually increase beating speed to

Pinches of salt and cream fast until egg whites form stiff peaks.
of tartar Stir a spoonful of them into the apple

The apple purée from purée to lighten it; delicately fold the
Step 2 rest of the egg whites into the purée

A rubber spatula with the rubber spatula. Spoon the
soufflé mixture into the apple shells,

The platter of apples heaping it into a dome. (Invert a
Confectioner’s sugar in a large bowl over the platter of apples

small fine-meshed if you are not baking immediately.)
sieve

The sauce, warmed
A warm sauce bowl



Bake in middle level of preheated oven for 12 to 15 minutes,
until soufflé filling has puffed slightly—it will not puff very much—
and begun to brown. Rapidly sprinkle confectioner’s sugar over the
apples and bake 2 to 3 minutes more. Serve immediately,
accompanied by the sauce, a spoonful of which may be poured over
part of each apple as it is served.

Other ideas
Rather than filling the apples with a soufflé mixture, you may

boil down and season the apple purée as directed in Step 2, and stir
in ⅓ cup dry bread crumbs sautéed in 3 to 4 tablespoons of butter;
fill the apples and proceed with the recipe. You may add a handful
of raisins soaked first in the rum or Cognac called for. Rather than
bread crumbs, you might stir in half a cup of crumbled stale
macaroons, which would give an attractive almond flavoring.
Finally, having filled the apples with any of these stuffings, you
could then cover them spectacularly with a meringue (beaten egg
whites and sugar), sprinkle with shaved almonds, and brown in a
hot oven, following the method for the poires meringuées, Step 4, in
the following recipe.

POIRES MERINGUÉES, AU SABAYON
[Wine-poached Pears Baked in Meringue, Wine-custard Sauce]
This is a simple fruit dessert that looks satisfyingly elegant and

complicated. Pears are poached in an aromatic red-wine syrup, the
syrup is turned into a sauce, and at serving time the pears are baked
in a cloak of meringue sprinkled with almond flakes. Pear-poaching,
sauce-making, and even the little toasts the pears sit upon while
baking may be done the day before serving.



For 8 pear halves, serving 4 to 8 people

1) Poaching the pears
1 cup sugar Stir the sugar into the wine and
1½ cups young red wine, water, bring to the simmer, and

such as Côtes-du- when dissolved add the cloves, zests,
Rhône or Mountain and vanilla. Simmer for 20 minutes,
Red then remove from heat. One at a

1½ cups water time, peel the pears, halve
An enameled skillet or lengthwise, retaining stems, and

saucepan 2½ or more neatly remove stem lines and cores.
inches deep and just Drop each, as done, into the wine
large enough to hold syrup. Syrup should barely cover
pear halves pears: add more liquid and sugar if

4 whole cloves necessary (⅓ cup sugar per cup of
liquid). Bring almost to the simmer,

The zests (colored part of and poach uncovered at just below
peel) of ½ orange and the simmer for 10 to 15 minutes,
½ lemon until pears are just tender when

1 tsp vanilla pierced with a knife. (Maintaining
4 firm, ripe, unblemished liquid at below the simmer prevents

pears fruit from disintegrating.) Let pears
A grapefruit knife cool in syrup for at least 20 minutes

so that they will firm up as well as
absorb the sugar and flavorings.
(They may remain for several days in
the syrup.)

2) The sauce sabayon



2 cups of the pear- Rapidly boil down the cooking syrup
poaching syrup in a small saucepan until reduced to

A small saucepan 1 cup. In the second saucepan beat
A 4- to 6-cup enameled egg yolks and cornstarch to blend

or stainless saucepan smoothly, then beat in the two
and a wire whip tablespoons of cool syrup. In a thin

3 egg yolks stream of driblets, beat in the hot,
2 tsp cornstarch reduced syrup. Set over moderate

heat; stir slowly and constantly with
2 Tb cool cooking syrup wooden spoon until mixture thickens
A wooden spoon enough to coat spoon—do not let it
2 Tb butter come to the simmer and scramble the
3 to 4 Tb orange liqueur egg yolks; however, sauce must

thicken. Remove from heat. Beat in
the butter, then the orange liqueur.
Set aside, or cover and refrigerate
when cool.

3) Preparations before cooking—an hour in advance
8 canapés (rectangles of Sauté the canapés (if done a day in

white bread sautéed in advance, pack airtight and freeze);
butter, Step 3) arrange in 1 layer in baking dish.

A lightly buttered baking
and serving dish, large
enough to hold
canapés easily in 1
layer

3 egg whites Beat egg whites until foaming, then
A clean beating bowl and beat in the salt and cream of tartar,

electric beater



Big pinch each of salt and continue beating until soft peaks
and cream of tartar are formed. Beat in the sugar by 2-

½ cup sugar (instant spoonful sprinkles, beating ½ minute
superfine if possible) between additions. Beat in the vanilla

¼ tsp vanilla extract and continue beating for several
minutes at high speed until egg
whites form stiff, shiny peaks. This is
the meringue mixture.

A rack set over a tray Drain pears hollow-side down on
rack.

4) Baking and serving—5 to 7 minutes—oven preheated to 425
degrees

3 Tb sugar (Although pears may be masked with
The canapés in their meringue or baked ahead, they are

baking dish best when assembled and baked at
The drained poached the last moment.) Sprinkle a

pear-halves teaspoon of sugar over each canapé,
The sauce sabayon and place a pear half, hollow-side up,
The meringue mixture on top. Fill hollow with a teaspoon of

sauce sabayon. If necessary, beat the
½ cup sliced almonds meringue mixture at high speed for a
⅓ cup confectioner’s moment until it again forms stiff

sugar in a fine-meshed peaks. Mask each pear half with a
sieve large spoonful of meringue. Strew

A warm bowl for the sliced almonds over each and sift on
sauce a light sprinkling of confectioner’s

sugar. Place in upper third of
preheated oven for about 5 minutes,
until meringue and almonds have



lightly browned. Meanwhile, gently
warm the sauce to tepid and turn
into warm bowl. Serve pears as soon
as possible, passing the sauce
separately.

MOUSSE D’ORANGES À L’ANANAS
[Molded Orange Mousse Garnished with Pineapple and Candied
Orange Peel]
When you want a beautiful dessert that is also light and as

delicious as it is refreshing, this orange Bavarian cream without
cream is a perfect answer.

For a 6-cup mold, serving 6 to 8

1) Preliminaries

glazed pineapple—ananas glacé:
A small (8½ ounces) can Lay pineapple slices flat on cutting

of pineapple slices, or board, and slice in half parallel with
4 slices and ½ cup board to make 2 rings rather than
juice one; divide each into 16 wedges.

⅓ cup sugar Bring sugar to boil in pineapple juice,
A small saucepan and when dissolved add the
A small bowl pineapple and boil 5 minutes, or
¼ cup kirsch until pineapple is beginning to turn a

golden, light-caramel color. Drain.
Place pineapple in bowl with kirsch,
and return juice to pan.



glazed orange peel—zestes d’oranges glacés:
6 or more large, bright, Wash and dry oranges. Break sugar

juicy oranges lumps in half. Over waxed paper, rub
6 large, rectangular sugar lumps one at a time vigorously

sugar lumps against the skin of 2 oranges, until all
Waxed paper sides of lumps have absorbed as
A wooden spoon much oil as possible from the orange
A 2½-quart stainless or skins. Mash the sugar with the spoon

enameled saucepan and scrape into saucepan.

A vegetable peeler and a Remove zests (orange part of peel)
sharp chopping knife from 2 of the other oranges, and cut

A small saucepan with 2 into julienne strips 1½ inches long
cups water and 1⁄16 inch wide. Drop into the pan

A small bowl of water and simmer 15 minutes;
⅔ cup sugar drain, rinse in cold water, and
½ cup water squeeze dry in paper towels. Place in
The pan of pineapple small bowl. Stir sugar and water into

juice pineapple juice, swirl over heat until
sugar dissolves, then boil rapidly to
the thread stage (230 degrees). Stir 2
tablespoons into the orange peel,
reserve rest of syrup for the custard.

A 4-cup measure Squeeze juice out of oranges and
1 lemon lemon and strain into measure, to
2 packages (2 Tb) make 2 cups. Pour ½ cup of juice

unfavored powdered into the gelatin, and stir a tablespoon



gelatin in a 1-cup of juice into the pineapple-sugar
measure syrup to liquefy it.

2) Making and molding the mousse
4 egg yolks Beat the egg yolks and cornstarch
1 Tb cornstarch with the crushed sugar for a minute
The 2½-quart pan with or two until yolks are thick and

the crushed sugar sticky. Gradually beat in the
lumps pineapple-sugar syrup, and continue

A wire whip or electric beating vigorously for 2 minutes.
beater Beat in the orange juice. Set over

The pineapple-sugar moderate heat and stir slowly (2
syrup strokes per second), reaching all over

bottom of pan. As custard warms, it
The orange and lemon will become foamy, and when a faint

juice breath of steam rises it is beginning
A wooden spoon to thicken. Continue stirring over

heat until it thickens enough to coat
spoon lightly; custard must not come
to the simmer and scramble the
yolks, but it must thicken.

The gelatin and orange Remove custard from heat and
juice mixture immediately scrape the gelatin

mixture into the hot custard, beating
vigorously to be sure gelatin
dissolves completely.



4 egg whites (at room Beat the egg whites until foaming,
temperature) beat in the salt and cream of tartar,

Pinch of salt and continue until egg whites form
¼ tsp cream of tartar stiff peaks. Then beat the egg whites
A clean, dry bowl and into the hot custard with your whip,

electric mixer or making a foamy mass—the mousse.
balloon whip

The pineapple wedges Arrange a handful of pineapple
A 6-cup metal mold, wedges in the bottom of the mold for

fluted or decorated if decoration. Drain the pineapple
you wish maceration liqueur into the mousse,

Half the orange peel then fold it in along with the orange
A large bowl with 2 peel. Set bowl with mousse in bowl

trayfuls of ice cubes of ice cubes and water; stir every few
and water to cover minutes with rubber spatula until
them mousse thickens and is about to set.

A rubber spatula (Beat with wire whip if necessary to
smooth it again.) Rapidly turn ⅓ of

Plastic wrap the mousse into the mold, spread half
the pineapple wedges over it, cover
with half the remaining mousse, then
the rest of the pineapple and finally
the last of the mousse. Cover with
plastic and refrigerate until serving
time.
(*) May be made a day of two ahead;
may be frozen and served either
frozen or thawed.

3) Serving



A large bowl of hot water Shortly before serving, dip mold for 5
A chilled serving dish seconds in hot water, turn serving
The rest of the orange dish upside down on top of mold and

peel reverse the two, unmolding dessert
Either crème Chantilly onto dish. Fold remaining orange

(lightly whipped peel into whatever sauce you have
cream with chosen, and pass separately.
confectioner’s sugar
and flavoring);

Or crème anglaise
(custard sauce), with a
little heavy cream
stirred in

RIZ DES HESPÉRIDES
[Mold of Orange-flavored Rice and Cherries]
In the long-ago European days before frozen strawberries and

canned apricots, the only fruits to be had during the winter were
dried or glacéed; when once in a while fresh oranges came in from
Italy or Spain, they would be combined into something very special,
like this unusual rice dessert. You will find it a delicious illustration
of what wonders can be wrought with simple and inexpensive
ingredients—the rice is simmered in milk and puréed orange peel,
then molded with glacéed orange and lemon peel, cherries, and
almonds; it is served with custard sauce or whipped cream.

For a 6-cup mold, serving 8 to 10

Make this the morning, or the day, or
several days before you wish to



serve.

1) The orange rice
¾ cup plain, raw, white Preheat oven to 300 degrees.

rice Sprinkle rice into boiling water and
3 quarts rapidly boiling boil rapidly for exactly 5 minutes;

water in a saucepan drain immediately. Wash oranges.
2 large, bright-skinned Remove the zests (orange part of

oranges peel) with vegetable peeler, and
A vegetable peeler place in blender with ½ cup of the
An electric blender milk. Purée zests and milk, and pour

into baking dish; add rest of milk,
2 cups milk blanched rice, butter, salt, and
A heavy 2-quart flame- nutmeg. Bring just to the simmer on

proof baking dish with top of the stove, then lay waxed
cover paper over surface of milk, cover

2 Tb butter dish, and place in middle level of
⅛ tsp salt preheated oven. Bake for 30 to 40
Pinch nutmeg minutes, until rice is tender and all
Waxed paper liquid has absorbed. While rice is

cooking, prepare ingredients in next
step.

2) The fruit garniture

⅓ cup glacéed cherries Slice cherries in half lengthwise
A pan of boiling water (through stem end) and drop into

and a sieve boiling water to wash off
A small bowl preservatives. Drain, and place ½ in
2 Tb Cognac the small bowl with the Cognac.

Then drop rest of glacéed fruit into



⅔ cup mixed, diced boiling water and leave for several
glacéed orange peel, minutes—to soften as well as wash
lemon peel, and citron them. Drain, and put into small

A small saucepan saucepan with the remaining
1 package (1 Tb) plain, cherries. Sprinkle on the gelatin, and

unflavored gelatin stir in the lemon juice, orange juice,
2 Tb strained lemon juice and orange liqueur. Let gelatin soften

for several minutes, then set the pan
3 Tb strained orange in hot water, stirring occasionally, so

juice gelatin will dissolve completely by
3 Tb orange liqueur the time you are ready to use it.
A pan of hot water to (Reheat water, as necessary.)

hold the pan of
glacéed fruits and
gelatin

3) Assembling the mold
A 6-cup charlotte mold As soon as you remove the rice from

or cylindrical dish 3 to the oven, make the sugar syrup:
3½ inches deep, blend sugar and water in saucepan
bottom lined with and bring to boil over moderately
waxed paper high heat, swishing pan by handle

1 cup sugar until sugar has dissolved completely
1 cup water and liquid is perfectly clear. Cover
A small, heavy saucepan pan and boil rapidly for 1 to 2

and cover minutes, until syrup is forming large,
A cup of iced water or a thick bubbles. Uncover and in a few

candy thermometer seconds test: syrup should form a soft
ball in the iced water, or be at a

1 tsp vanilla temperature of 238 degrees. By
½ cup sliced almonds spoonfuls, rapidly but gently fold the

with or without skins syrup into the rice. Fold in the diced
fruits and gelatin mixture, and the



vanilla; drain in the Cognac from the
cherries, and fold in along with the
sliced almonds. Mixture should cool
somewhat before being molded; set
in a pan of cold water or over
cracked ice and water, folding
occasionally until liquids and rice
form a homogeneous blend.

Arrange the reserved cherry halves in the bottom of the mold,
cut-side up. Spoon the rice into the mold, which will be almost
filled. Cover with waxed paper or plastic, and chill for several hours,
or until set.

4) Serving
A chilled serving plate Run a thin knife around edge of
Either 3 cups crème dessert, turn serving platter upside

anglaise (custard down over it, and reverse the two to
sauce) flavored with unmold dessert onto plate. Surround
orange liqueur; with a little of the custard sauce or

Or crème Chantilly crème Chantilly, and pass the rest
(lightly whipped separately.
cream) flavored with
orange liqueur and
sweetened with
confectioner’s sugar

LE PÉLERIN EN TIMBALE
[Molded Almond Cream]



This is a cross between the rich charlotte Malakoff and the classic
Bavarian cream: a custard sauce bound with gelatin and butter,
flavored with toasted almonds, kirsch, and apricot, and molded in a
cake-lined dish. It gets its name from the pilgrims who, in the days
before modern processing, stuffed their pockets with nonperishables
like dried fruits and nuts. We assume that this particular pélerin paid
his host for the night in almonds, which his hostess put to use in the
following manner. (Note that this dessert improves in flavor if made
a day or two in advance of serving.)

For a 6-cup mold, serving 8 to 10

1) Preliminaries
7 ounces (about 1½ Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Spread

cups) blanched whole almonds in pan and toast for 5
almonds minutes in middle level of oven; stir

A roasting pan or pizza them up and toast another 5 to 6
tray minutes, stirring every 2 to 3 minutes

A kitchen timer to be sure they do not burn. They
An electric blender should be deep golden brown. When

cool, pulverize ½ cup at a time in
electric blender; set aside.

A 6-cup cylindrical Meanwhile, line bottom of mold with
charlotte mold or the waxed paper. Then slice cake into
baking dish about 3½ horizontal layers each no more than
inches deep ⅓ inch thick. Cut a round out of the

A round of waxed paper top-of-cake layer to fit bottom of
A long, thin knife mold and place round inside-side up
A butter sponge cake, on a baking sheet. Cut rest of cake

génoise, “shortcake,” layers into strips 1¼ inches wide and



or other cake of that arrange on the baking sheets. Paint
type (can be store- with melted butter and sprinkle with
bought), such as a sugar. When almonds are done, raise
round one at least 8 by thermostat to 400 degrees. Set baking
1½ inches sheets in middle and upper-third

2 heavily buttered pastry levels of oven and bake the cake
sheets strips for about 10 minutes, until

3 Tb melted butter they are lightly golden brown.
2 to 3 Tb sugar Remove from oven, sprinkle with

drops of kirsch, and set aside.
1 Tb kirsch

2) The custard sauce—crème anglaise—and almond cream
1½ Tb (1½ packages) Sprinkle the gelatin over the kirsch

unflavored powdered and set aside. Beat the sugar
gelatin gradually into the egg yolks and

⅓ cup kirsch in a continue beating for several minutes
measure until mixture is thick, pale yellow,

¾ cup sugar and forms a ribbon for a few seconds
6 egg yolks in a heavy- when a bit falls back on the surface.

bottomed Gradually beat in the hot milk,
2-quart stainless or adding it in a thin stream. Set
enameled saucepan mixture over moderate heat and stir

A hand-held electric slowly with wooden spoon, reaching
beater or a wire whip all over bottom of pan, for 4 to 5

minutes until sauce thickens enough
2½ cups hot milk in a to film spoon with a creamy layer.

small saucepan (Be careful sauce does not come to
A wooden spoon the simmer and curdle the egg yolks,
8 ounces (2 sticks) butter but you must heat it to the point

cut into ¼-inch slices where it thickens.) Immediately
The toasted almonds remove from heat and stir vigorously
1 tsp vanilla extract for 1 minute to cool slightly, then



If needed: a pinch of salt; scrape the gelatin and kirsch mixture
a few drops of almond into the hot sauce, beating
extract thoroughly for 2 minutes, to be sure

gelatin dissolves completely. (A
hand-held electric beater is useful
here, and from now on.) Beat in the
butter, 4 pieces at a time, then the
almonds and vanilla. Taste carefully:
add a little salt and drops of almond
extract if you feel them necessary.
Set aside; you will have about 5 cups
of sauce, which should still be
slightly warm or at least tepid when
used in next step.

3) Filling the mold
Line the mold with the toasted cake, sugared sides against mold,

as follows. Place circle in the bottom; cut strips to fit upright and
close together side by side, trimming one or two into wedges if
necessary to fill in gaps.

A ladle Ladle ⅓ of the almond cream into the
The tepid almond cream mold. Paint several cake strips with
Leftover cake strips apricot jam and arrange in a layer
About ⅓ cup apricot jam over the cream. Ladle more cream
Plastic wrap into mold to fill to ⅔ and cover with

additional apricot-painted cake
strips. Finally fill the mold with the
remaining almond cream, pouring
some down between cake strips and
side of mold if necessary. Top with



additional cake strips if any remain;
cover with plastic wrap and chill
several hours until set.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Finished
dessert will keep 4 to 5 days under
refrigeration or may be frozen.

4) Serving
A chilled serving dish Carefully run a thin knife around
3 cups apricot sauce edge of mold several times to detach
Optional: 3 cups crème sides of dessert. Then turn dish

Chantilly (lightly upside down over mold, reverse the
whipped cream), two and give a sharp downward jerk
sweetened, and to unmold dessert onto dish. Spoon a
flavored with kirsch little of the apricot sauce over top of

dessert, and the rest around it on the
dish. Refrigerate if not to be served
immediately. Pass optional crème
Chantilly separately.

LE MARLY—LA RIPOSTE
[French Strawberry Shortcake Made with Rum-soaked Brioche]
Le Marly is the French retort—la riposte—to the American

shortcake. Rather than being biscuit dough, or a savarin—which it
closely resembles except in shape—the cake is brioche dough baked
in a cake pan, then split in two, hollowed out, and steeped in rum-
or kirsch-flavored syrup. The strawberry and whipped cream filling
is topped with pie-shaped wedges of brioche that rise to a peak in
the center, giving the impression of a Chinese coolie hat. Glazed



with apricot and decorated with strawberries, it is a pretty dessert,
and so easy to assemble that you might well make the whole dough
recipe rather than the half portion needed. You will thereby have
two brioche cakes; freeze the second one to have on hand for those
times when you need something special in a hurry. Other fruits
besides strawberries are delicious too, and are suggested at the end
of the recipe.

For a round brioche 8 by 2½ inches, serving 6 to 8

1) Making and baking the brioche—about 5 hours (may be
baked in advance and frozen)
NOTE: Because it will be soaked in rum or kirsch, the flavor of the

brioche itself is not of great importance, and there is no need to
make the buttery brioche fine; brioche commune, the pain brioché
recipe, is the dough to use here and it needs only the first rise—or 2
rises to double if you are working in a hot kitchen.

½ the pain brioché dough Follow the pain brioché recipe, but
A round cake pan 8 by you may make the dough in an

1½ inches, smeared electric mixer as described.
with 1 tsp soft butter

A cake rack

As soon as the first rise is complete, deflate the dough, form into
a ball (see directions for forming a round shape), and place seam-
side down in pan; pat dough out to edges all around. Pan will be
filled by about two thirds. Set uncovered at 75 to 80 degrees until
dough has risen to fill the pan—about 1 hour. (Preheat oven to 400
degrees before dough has completed its rise.)



Bake in middle level of preheated 400-degree oven for 20
minutes, or until dough has risen about an inch above rim of pan
and has begun to brown nicely, then turn thermostat down to 350
degrees and bake another 10 to 15 minutes. Brioche is done when it
comes easily out of the pan, is nicely browned, and makes a hollow
sound when thumped. Cool on a rack.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you want to keep the brioche for several
days or several weeks before using, wrap airtight when cool, and
refrigerate or freeze it. To defrost frozen brioche, let sit several hours
at room temperature, or place on a lightly buttered baking sheet for
about 45 minutes in a 300-degree oven.

2) Preliminaries to assembling the dessert

the fruit filling:
1 quart fresh Wash the strawberries if necessary;

strawberries hull them. Reserve 4 to 6 of the finest
A bowl to decorate top of dessert; halve or
Sugar if needed quarter the rest, depending on size.

Place in bowl, and toss lightly with
sugar to taste.

the sugar syrup:
1 cup water in a small Stir the water and sugar over heat

saucepan until sugar is completely dissolved;
¾ cup sugar remove from heat. When syrup has
½ cup kirsch or dark rum cooled to lukewarm, stir in the kirsch

or rum. (Syrup should be tepid when



it goes over the brioche; reheat if
necessary.)

apricot to glaze the brioche:
About ⅔ cup apricot jam Bring the strained apricot jam and

(preserves) forced sugar to the boil, stirring, for several
through a sieve into a minutes until last drops to fall from
small saucepan spoon are sticky. Set aside; reheat

2 Tb sugar before using.
A wooden spoon

for 2 cups crème Chantilly:
1 cup heavy cream in a Set bowl with cream over the ice

mixing bowl cubes and water. Circulating whip or
A large bowl with a tray beater about bowl to incorporate as

of ice cubes and water much air as possible, beat cream
to cover them until doubled in volume. Beater

A large wire whip or should leave light traces on surface of
hand-held electric cream. (If you wish to squeeze out
mixer whipped cream decorations later,

A rubber spatula reserve ½ cup in a bowl, and
1 tsp vanilla extract refrigerate.) Fold in the vanilla, and

sugar to taste. Keep over ice until
⅓ to ½ cup needed.

confectioner’s sugar in
a sieve

3) Assembling and serving



A long knife for splitting Slice off the top quarter of the
the brioche, a small brioche, making a cover about ¾ inch
knife and a grapefruit thick; cut into 6 to 8 pie-shaped
knife for hollowing it wedges, and place upside down on
out rack over tray. Hollow out remaining

A tray to hold syrup part of brioche, first outlining a circle
drippings in its top surface ¾ inch from edge

A serving dish all around the inside, and to within
Optional: A canvas ¾ inch of bottom. Then remove

pastry bag with round, interior by bits, with grapefruit knife,
cannelated tube to make the brioche into a container
opening, for making ¾ inch thick at sides and bottom.
decorative lines of
whipped cream on top
of cake

Set brioche container hollowed-side up on serving dish. Drain the
strawberries, adding their juices to the syrup. Pour successive
spoonfuls of tepid syrup gradually over briochè, letting it absorb as
much liquid as it will. At the same time, pour spoonfuls of syrup
over the upside-down cover wedges. Fold the berries into the crème
Chantilly. Paint outer sides of brioche container with warm apricot
glaze; turn the strawberries and cream into it, heaping the filling
into a dome.

Handling them carefully, set the brioche wedges in place on top
of the filling, letting their pointed ends rise to a peak at the center.
Paint tops of wedges with warm apricot glaze. If you have decided
to make whipped cream decorations, whip the reserved Chantilly
over ice until it is a little stiffer, so that it will hold its shape when
squeezed out; fold in 2 tablespoons of sifted confectioner’s sugar and
a few drops of vanilla. Fill in gaps between wedges with ribbons of
whipped cream. Just before serving, decorate top of Le Marly with
the reserved strawberries. To serve, cut right down between wedges,
from top to bottom of cake.



(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: May be assembled an hour or two before
serving; cover with a bowl, and refrigerate.

Other fruits
Instead of fresh strawberries, use raspberries, sliced fresh

peaches, blueberries, frozen strawberries (thawed), a mixture of
pineapple and bananas, or the apricot filling, which you could
combine with diced bananas and toasted, slivered almonds. You
may macerate the fruit in sugar, rum, or kirsch, if you wish, then
stir the maceration into the sugar syrup.

CHARLOTTE JAMAÏQUE EN FLAMMES
[Rum-cake Caramel Custard, Flambée]
This is another riposte to the Anglo-Saxons, a French plum

pudding of rum-soaked brioche or sponge cake, raisins, fruits, and
custard baked in a caramelized mold and brought flaming to the
table. A fine holiday dessert, it may be made ready for the oven
hours before baking, and that takes about an hour.

For a 6-cup mold, serving 6 to 8

1) Preparing the fruits
4 ounces (¾ cup, packed Drop the raisins into a pan of boiling

down) currants (small, water, and set aside to swell and
black, seedless raisins) soften while preparing rest of fruit. If

Either 4 ounces (¾ cup) using cherries and apricots, cut
each of glacéed cherries in half, and drop in boiling
cherries and apricots; water to wash off preservatives;



Or 8 ounces (1½ cups) drain, and set on a plate. Dice the
mixed diced glacéed apricots, drop in boiling water, drain,
fruits and set on another plate. (If using

1 cup dark Jamaica rum mixed fruits, drop in boiling water,
in a covered bowl and drain.) Then drain raisins,

squeeze out accumulated moisture,
and steep in the rum until you are
ready to use them.

2) Caramelizing the mold
½ cup sugar and 3 Tb Set sugar and water over moderately

water in a small, high heat, and swirl pan slowly by its
heavy saucepan handle (but do not stir sugar with a

A cover for the pan spoon) while liquid is coming to the
A 6-cup cylindrical mold, boil. Continue swirling for a moment

such as a charlotte or as liquid boils and turns from cloudy
ceramic baking dish at to perfectly clear. Cover pan, raise
least 3½ inches deep heat to high, and boil several

A plate upon which mold minutes, until bubbles are thick and
may be reversed heavy. Uncover and continue boiling,

swirling gently, until sugar turns a
nice caramel brown.

Immediately pour the caramel into the mold (reserve caramel
pan); turn mold in all directions to film bottom and sides, and
continue turning slowly for a minute or so, until caramel ceases to
run. Turn mold upside down over plate.

3) The custard sauce



1 cup milk Pour the milk into the caramel-
3 eggs cooking pan, and stir over heat to
⅔ cup sugar dissolve caramel. Then beat eggs and
A 3-quart mixing bowl sugar in mixing bowl for several

and electric beater or minutes until pale and foamy; beat in
large wire whip the vanilla. Finally, in a thin stream

2 tsp vanilla extract of droplets, beat in the hot milk. Pour
mixture into clean saucepan, and set

A clean 2½- to 3-quart over moderate heat; stir slowly with
enameled or stainless wooden spoon, reaching all over
saucepan bottom of pan, for 4 to 5 minutes, or

A wooden spoon until custard thickens enough to film
A fine-meshed sieve spoon with a creamy layer. (Be

careful sauce does not come to the
simmer and curdle the eggs, but you
must heat it to the point where it
thickens.)

Remove from heat, and stir vigorously a moment or two to cool
the sauce and stop the cooking. Rinse out mixing bowl, and strain
the sauce into it.

4) Filling the mold
A pan of boiling water (Preheat oven to 350 degrees for next

large enough to hold step.) Check water level of pan with
dessert mold easily mold set into it, and place pan

About 1 pound of (without mold) in lower-middle level
brioche, sponge cake, of oven. Slice brioche or cake into 3
or store-bought layers, each about ⅛ inch thick, and
sponge-type of cake trim so they will fit into the mold



exactly. (Each layer may consist of
several pieces neatly fitted together.)

Fit a layer of cake in the bottom of the caramelized mold. Drain
the raisins and sprinkle 3 tablespoons of their rum maceration over
the cake. Arrange a row of cherry halves (or mixed diced fruit)
around the edge of the cake, and spread a third of the raisins and
apricots (or more diced mixed fruit) over the rest of the cake. Pour
in a third of the custard. Put down a second layer of cake, sprinkle
with 3 tablespoons more rum, and continue filling the mold in
layers. Leave about ¼ inch of unfilled space at top of mold because
dessert will swell slightly during cooking. Cover remaining rum and
reserve for flambéeing.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Mold may be filled a day in advance of
baking; cover airtight and refrigerate. Chilled custard will probably
take at least 20 minutes more to bake than the 45 to 60 minutes
specified in Step 5.

5) Baking the dessert—45 to 60 minutes at 350 degrees, plus a
10-minute rest (longer if custard has been chilled)
Place the filled mold in the pan of hot water in the oven (water

should come ¾ the way up outside of mold). Bake for 45 minutes to
1 hour, regulating heat so that water in pan almost but never quite
bubbles—to ensure a smooth and velvety texture to the custard. Add
more boiling water, as necessary, if liquid drops below the halfway
mark. Dessert is done when it begins to show a faint line of
shrinkage from sides of mold.

If you wish to serve within 10 to 15 minutes, remove mold from
water and allow custard to settle for 10 minutes before unmolding,
Step 6; otherwise leave custard in its pan of water in turned-off
oven. Dessert must be hot for successful flambéeing.



6) Unmolding, flambéeing, and serving
A thin-bladed flexible The moment before serving, run

knife for help in knife around edge of mold, turn hot
unmolding platter upside down over it, and

A very hot, lightly reverse the two to unmold dessert
buttered serving onto platter. Stick the broken sugar
platter lumps into the dessert at various

3 or 4 broken sugar places, and sprinkle on the plain
lumps and 1 Tb sugar sugar. Heat the rum and pour it over

The remaining rum (at the dessert. Averting your face, ignite
least ½ cup) in a small the rum with a lighted match, and
saucepan bring the charlotte flaming to the

Matches table. Spoon flaming rum over the
dessert as you begin to serve.

A pair of long-handled
serving utensils

DESSERTS USING FRENCH PUFF PASTRY
French puff pastry, that unbelievably tender and buttery dough,

with its hundreds of thinner-than-paper layers, is ideal for desserts.
Because the pastry itself is so marvelous, the rest of the ingredients
are usually rather simple and easy to assemble. We give only a
sampling of the many, many recipes that use puff pastry, going into
enough illustrated detail, we hope, so that when you run into other
puff pastry recipes elsewhere, they will seem feasible and even
familiar.

Your sole problem—which need be no problem at all—is to keep
the dough cold while you are working on it. At the slightest
suggestion of limpness, stop where you are, refrigerate everything
for 15 to 20 minutes, then continue. If you are not yet used to
working with puff pastry, do not attempt anything complicated in a
hot kitchen; wait for cool weather or an air-conditioned atmosphere.



Chilled dough in a cool room is easy to manipulate; soft, limp dough
in a warm room is impossible.

ABAISSES EN FEUILLETAGE POUR TARTES AUX
FRUITS
[Forming Puff Pastry Shells for Fruit Tarts]

With French puff pastry you can make free-standing shells of any
size and shape you wish: the sides of the pastry rise automatically in
the oven while the bottom stays put, held down by the fruit or, if
you wish a precooked shell, by a pan. Use either the simple puff
pastry, or the reconstituted leftover puff pastry. We shall not give
proportions, except to say that one fourth of the recipe, or a piece of
dough 5¼ by 2 by 1¾ inches, will make a rectangular pastry 6
inches wide and 13 inches long, with a bottom layer ⅛ inch thick;
thus half the recipe would make a 12- to 13-inch square.

To make a square or rectangular shell



Sufficient chilled puff Roll out the chilled pastry 1½ inches
pastry dough larger than the size you want your

A ruler or light-weight tart to be. With cutting guide and
baking sheet to use as ravioli wheel or knife, trim off rough
a cutting guide edges all around.

A ravioli wheel or sharp
knife

A baking sheet rinsed in
cold water but not
dried

A cup of cold water and a
pastry brush

Again using your guide and ravioli wheel or knife, cut two strips ¾
inch wide from one side of pastry, and two from one end; these will
form the raised edges of the tart; set them aside. Roll up the
rectangle or square of pastry on your pin, and unroll it upside down
on the dampened baking sheet.



Paint top circumference of tart with a ¾-inch strip of cold water.
Lay a strip of pastry on top of each side, as shown. Paint corners
with cold water, and lay two final strips of pastry over each end.
Trim off excess. Seal the two layers together by pressing outside rim all
around pastry with the back tines of a table fork, and pressing top
strips of pastry lightly with thumb of other hand as you go. Prick
interior of pastry with fork at ⅛-inch intervals, going down to pastry
sheet. Cover with plastic wrap and chill for an hour before
proceeding; dough must be relaxed or it will not bake evenly.
(*) When chilled and firm, dough may be wrapped airtight and
frozen for several months; continue with whatever your recipe,
using dough in its frozen state.

Forming a round tart shell
Using vol-au-vent cutters, pot lids, or any convenient circular

objects, pick one for the size of your eventual tart and another ¾
inch larger all around for the raised rim of the tart. Roll out pastry
⅛ inch thick and ¼ inch larger all around than the larger of your
two cutting guides; lift pastry and let it shrink if it will, and extend
again if necessary. Center guide on pastry and cut off excess dough.



Center the smaller guide in the
pastry and cut all around it cleanly,

so that this center disk can easily
separate itself from the outside

circle. Divide outside circle into
quarters or sixths and slide out of
the way; these strips will form the
raised rim of the tart. Roll disk up
on pin and unroll upside down on

a dampened baking sheet,
pressing it out gently with fingers

if necessary.

Paint a ¾-inch strip around the
circumference of disk with cold
water. Lay one of the strips of
dough in place on the dampened
circumference of disk, and paint
one end of strip with cold water.
Overlap ⅜ inch of second strip on
the dampened end of the first, and
press lightly with fingers to seal;
continue around circumference with
the rest of the strips, trimming final one to fit. Seal edges all around



with back of a fork, prick the interior, and refrigerate as described
in preceding directions.

Baked shells for fresh fruit tarts, like strawberries

A shell that is to be fully baked and then filled with fresh fruits
must have something to weight down the center during baking. The
traditional solution is oiled paper and dried beans, but we think an
oiled pan of some sort is far easier. Provide yourself with 3 guides,
one for the outside circumference, one for cutting the inch-wide
strips, and one for the area of the pan. After cutting edges and
pressing them onto the dampened circumference of the pastry, prick
interior of pastry, oil outside of pan, and set it in place. Chill at least
an hour before baking.

To bake, preheat oven to 425 degrees. Then paint top of raised
edging with egg glaze (1 egg beaten in a small bowl with 1 tsp
water), and make cross-hatch markings in glaze with back of a small
knife. Set the pastry, with pan in place, in middle level of oven.
Bake 10 to 15 minutes, until edges of pastry have risen and begin to
brown nicely. Lift off pan, prick interior, and bake 5 minutes more;
look at tart, and if center is rising, prick again, and press down. If
center is browning too much, cover loosely with foil. Baking will be
20 to 25 minutes in all. Slide shell onto a rack.

(*) Shell is at its best if eaten within a few hours; cover airtight
when cold, or keep in warming oven, or freeze.



TARTE AUX POMMES—TARTE AUX POIRES
[Apple or Pear Tart Baked in French Puff Pastry]
This is a case where the most elementary method is by far the

best: the raw tart dough is painted with apricot, slices of raw apple
or pear are arranged closely on top, sprinkled with sugar, and the
tart is baked. It is glazed with apricot after baking, and that is all
there is to it. The combination of flaky, buttery pastry, fruit, sugar,
and apricot is quite heavenly.

A NOTE ON JUICY FRUITS

When you are baking raw fruits in a raw puff pastry shell you
must be sure that you are using the kind of fruit that will not burst
into juices before the edges of the pastry have puffed up enough to
hold them in. Thus if you find yourself with soft or juicy varieties,
slice them, sprinkle with sugar, and let stand in a bowl for 20
minutes so that excess juices will exude. Then drain the fruit,
arrange in the tart, and add the juices to boil down with the apricot
glaze.

For an 8- by 16-inch rectangular tart, serving 4 to 6 people

1) Filling the tart shell
Either 3 to 4 large, crisp Preheat oven to 450 degrees, and set

apples (Golden rack in lower-middle level. Peel,
Delicious, Rome quarter, and core the fruit; cut into
Beauty, or York lengthwise slices ¼ inch thick. Paint
Imperial); interior of chilled uncooked pastry

Or 5 to 6 firm, ripe pears shell with strained apricot. Arrange
(Anjou, Bosc, or the slices of fruit closely together and
Bartlett) almost upright in the shell, making

lengthwise or crosswise rows,



A chilled 8- by 16-inch whichever you find more attractive.
uncooked tart shell of Sprinkle the sugar over the fruit.
French puff pastry Paint top of pastry (not sides) with

About 1 cup strained egg glaze, and make cross-hatching
apricot preserves in a in its surface with point of knife or
small saucepan tines of fork.
(apricot preserves
pushed through a
sieve)

A pastry brush
¼ cup sugar
Egg glaze (1 egg beaten

in a small bowl with 1
tsp water)

A small knife, or table
fork

2) Baking—40 to 45 minutes at 450 and 400 degrees
Set tart immediately in lower middle of preheated 450-degree

oven, and bake for 20 minutes, or until sides of pastry have risen
and begun to brown. Lower heat to 400 degrees and continue
baking another 20 minutes, or until sides of tart feel crisp and rather
firm. High heat is needed to cook the layers of pastry through; cover
tart loosely with foil or brown paper if edges are browning too
much.

3) Glazing and serving
A rack Slide tart on a rack. Boil the apricot
The remaining strained and sugar, stirring, for several

apricot minutes until last drops to fall from



1 Tb sugar (or juices spoon are sticky. Spoon or brush the
from macerated fruits) apricot over the fruit to glaze it.

A wooden spoon Serve tart warm, tepid, or cold,
A kitchen spoon or sliding it first onto tray or board. Cut

pastry brush into crosswise pieces for each
A serving tray or board serving. Pass optional cream or sauce

separately.
Optional: crème fraîche,

sweetened crème (*) The tart is at its best eaten a few
Chantilly (lightly hours after baking; leftovers will be
whipped cream), or delicious, but never as wonderful as
crème anglaise (custard the freshly baked tart.
sauce)

Baking the fruit in a round pastry shell
Use the same general system, but arrange the slices of fruit in a

spiral, or in rows of diminishing width from circumference to
center, like the spokes of a wheel.

Other fruits to be baked in puff pastry shells
Fresh pitted cherries, fresh apricot or prune-plum halves placed

skin-side down, fresh sliced peaches, or well-drained canned
apricots or peach slices may be done this same way.

Fresh fruits in prebaked puff pastry shells
Use prebaked puff pastry shells, just as you would prebaked

shells made from pie-crust dough, as suggested in Volume I, pages
640–1, for strawberry tart and its variations. This has a pastry-
cream filling, but you may use simply a waterproofing of the red-
currant glaze, arrange the strawberries or other fresh fruits on top,
and paint with more glaze; pass whipped cream or custard sauce
separately.



JALOUSIE
[Peekaboo Jam or Fruit Tart of French Pastry]

Very quick to assemble and delicious, because puff pastry turns
anything into a treat, is this attractive tart with its jam or fruit
filling. Translated literally from the French, it would be called the
Venetian Blind Tart, since that is what jalousie means; peekaboo
seems more appealing.

For a 6- by 16-inch tart, serving 6 people

1) Forming the tart
½ the recipe for simple Roll half the pastry into an 8- by 18-

puff pastry; or inch rectangle ⅛ inch thick. Roll up
reconstituted leftovers on pin, and unroll topside down onto

A dampened pastry sheet dampened pastry sheet. Prick all over
A table fork at ⅛-inch intervals with tines of fork,
A cup or so of excellent going right down through to pastry

raspberry, strawberry, sheet.
or blackberry jam, or
other suggestions
listed at end of recipe



Spread a ¼-inch layer of jam over
pastry, leaving a ¾-inch border of

pastry all around.

Turn borders of pastry up over filling at
sides; wet corners, and turn ends over,
sealing corners with fingers.

Roll out second piece of pastry
into a 7- by 17-inch rectangle
(slightly larger than shape of

filled pastry), ⅛ inch thick. Flour
surface lightly; fold in half

lengthwise. Measure opening of
filled pastry and mark folded

pastry to guide you. Cut slits in the
dough from folded edge, as shown,
making them ⅜ inch apart and
half as long as width of opening

in tart.

Wet edges of filled bottom layer of pastry with cold water. Unfold
top layer of pastry over it; brush off accumulated flour, and press
pastry in place with fingers. Then, with back tines of a fork, press a



decorative vertical border all around sides.
Cover and chill for at least 30 minutes, or
until baking time.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: When chilled and
firm, may be wrapped airtight and frozen
for several months. Remove from freezer,
glaze, and bake as in Step 2.

2) Baking and serving—about 1 hour at 450 and 400 degrees
Egg glaze (1 egg beaten When oven has been preheated to

in a small bowl with 1 450 degrees, set rack in lower-middle
tsp water) level. Paint surface of chilled jalousie

A pastry brush with egg glaze; wait a moment, and
A table fork or small give it a second coat. Make cross-

knife hatchings on top of sides and ends
A rack through glaze with fork or knife, and
A serving tray or board set jalousie in the oven. In about 20

minutes, when pastry has risen and is
Optional: crème fraîche, browning nicely, turn heat down to

crème Chantilly, or 400. Bake 30 to 40 minutes more,
crème anglaise as covering loosely with foil or brown
suggested for paper if surface is browning too
preceding recipe, Step much.
3

Jalousie may seem done before it actually is; sides should be firm
and crusty, and object of long cooking is to dry out and crisp all
inner layers of the pastry. Slide onto a rack when done. Serve warm,



tepid, or cold, with optional cream or sauce passed separately. Cut
into crosswise slices for each serving.

(*) As with all puff pastries, this is best when freshly baked.

Other fillings
Cooked fruits rather than jams are also desirable fillings for the

jalousie. Among them we suggest the apricot filling. Another idea is
a filling of baked apple slices, such as those for the gratin de pommes,
Step 2; spread some apricot jam over the pastry before piling on the
baked apple slices, and more over the apples before you cover them
with the pastry. Pitted prunes stewed in wine, butter, and sugar, and
mixed with toasted almonds or chopped walnuts would be delicious.
Glazed canned pineapple and diced bananas is another idea; glaze
the pineapple following the directions for the orange mousse. These
are only a few possibilities, and you will think of many others
yourself.

MILLE-FEUILLES
[Napoleons—Layers of Puff Pastry Interspersed with Pastry
Cream or Whipped Cream; Iced with Fondant and Chocolate or
with Confectioner’s Sugar]

The mille-feuilles dessert, according to some authorities, was not
developed in France until the latter part of the nineteenth century.
The name “Napoleon,” at any event, is not associated with it at all



in any French recipes; the French icing, furthermore, is simply a
layer of confectioner’s sugar. The rest of the world has long
wondered, then, how the pastry came to be named “Napoleon”
outside of France, and who changed the icing from confectioner’s
sugar to white fondant and lines of chocolate. The Danes have been
told for generations that a Danish royal pastry chef invented the
dessert way back in the early 1800’s on the occasion of a state visit
between the Emperor Napoleon and the King of Denmark, in
Copenhagen. The Italians are sure it is a corruption of Napolitain,
because of the layered pastries made in Naples. Some sources
believe that the chocolate lines appear to form the letter N, for
Napoleon—which is far easier for foreigners to pronounce anyway
than mille-feuilles. A final story, with a certain air of mischievous
fumisterie about it, is that the dessert was really a French invention
after all, and Napoleon’s favorite pastry; he ate so many of them,
however, on the eve of Waterloo that he lost the battle. The pastry
then disappeared from view for half a century; when it finally
reappeared from banishment, it wore another icing and a new
name.

MANUFACTURING NOTES

Mille-feuilles and Napoleons are thin rectangles of crisply baked
puff pastry that are mounted in 3 layers with whipped cream or
pastry cream in between, and a topping of confectioner’s sugar for
mille-feuilles or of white frosting and lines of chocolate for
Napoleons.

The traditional method of forming and cutting them, illustrated
in the following recipe, is to bake the pastry in large sheets, and to
cut each sheet into 3 long strips 4 inches wide, as in Step 4. After
the 3 strips are glazed with apricot, the first is spread with filling,
the second is laid over the first and filled, then the third strip is laid
on top, and covered with sugar or fondant. This giant mille-feuilles is
finally cut crosswise into rectangular serving pieces 4 inches long
and 2 inches wide, as shown in the final drawing.

This is certainly the easiest and most practical method, and
works especially well for puff pastry made with the French



household flour or its American equivalent of ⅓ unbleached all-
purpose flour and ⅔ unbleached pastry flour. You may find,
however, that puff pastry made with the all-purpose and cake-flour
formula will flake or crumble a bit too much for that final cutting
into serving pieces. You will be able to judge this when you cut the
sheet of pastry into three strips; if it seems brittle, glaze the strips
with apricot, then cut each into its final rectangles, and build the
individual servings separately. It will take you a little longer, but
you will avoid trouble. As with many recipes of this sort, be ready to
adapt yourself to circumstances because the exact state of a baked
pastry is impossible to predict.

For 16 pieces

1) Forming the puff pastry
4 baking sheets all of a (Please read Manufacturing Notes

size, 12 by 18 inches, preceding this step.) Lightly butter
approximately (or topsides of 2 baking sheets, and
form and bake 1 bottom sides of the 2 others. Roll
pastry at a time, and chilled pastry into a 14-inch
use 2 baking sheets) rectangle, cut in half crosswise, and

About 1 Tb soft butter chill one half. Roll remaining piece
Chilled fresh puff pastry, rapidly into a 13- by 19-inch

either the simple rectangle ⅛ inch thick; roll up on
dough but with 6 pastry pin, and unroll over one of the
turns rather than 4, or buttered baking sheets. Trim off ⅓
the classic puff pastry inch of pastry all around, so that the

A large knife or a pastry horizontal layers of dough within the
wheel puff pastry will be even at the edges.

A rotary pastry pricker,
or 2 forks



Prick pastry all over at ⅛-inch intervals with pastry pricker or
forks. Chill for at least 30 minutes to relax dough before baking.
Roll and form second piece of dough in the same manner.

2) Baking the pastry—about 20 minutes at 450 degrees
Preheat oven to 450 degrees and set racks on upper- and lower-

middle levels. Cover each chilled sheet of pastry dough with a
buttered baking sheet, and set in the two levels of the oven. The
pastry is to rise as little as possible during baking; you are to prick it
again, and push down the covering sheets several times, as follows.
In 5 minutes, lift covering sheets and rapidly prick pastry all over to
deflate it; press covering sheets down on the pastry, and bake 5
minutes more. Rapidly prick the pastry again, and switch from one
level to the other, so both will bake evenly. Prick and press pastry
again in 5 minutes; it should be starting to brown. Remove covering
sheets if pastry has set, and let it brown and crisp 2 to 3 minutes
more, but cover again with the baking sheets if it starts to puff up—
watch carefully during these last few minutes that pastry does not
brown too much. At end of baking, pastry should be crisp and
golden, and between ¼ and ⅜ inch thick. Remove from oven and
cool 5 minutes, with the covering sheets in place to prevent pastry
from curling. The pastry is now ready for cutting, next step.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Pastry is at its best when freshly baked.
Use within a few hours, but you may keep it fresh in a warming
oven (100–150 degrees) for a day or so; otherwise, wrap airtight
and freeze.

3) Preliminaries to assembling mille-feuilles or Napoleons

apricot glaze:



1 cup apricot jam Bring strained apricot jam and sugar
(preserves) forced to the boil, stirring, for several
through a sieve into a minutes until last drops of jam to fall
small saucepan from spoon are sticky. Reheat to

2 Tb sugar liquefy again before using.
A wooden spoon
A pastry brush

the filling—3 to 4 cups needed:
Either one of the custard Prepare one of the fillings suggested,

fillings in Volume I, and chill. It must hold its shape
pages 590–2, including enough when spread over the pastry
crème pâtissière, crème so that you can make layers almost ½
Saint-Honoré, or the inch thick; if it seems too soft,
almond custard, strengthen it with gelatin just before
frangipane; using the filling as follows: sprinkle

Or crème Chantilly gelatin over liquid in a small
meringuée, the saucepan; when softened, heat until
whipped cream completely dissolved. Let cool (or stir
stiffened and over ice) until almost syrupy; then
sweetened with an fold into the filling.
Italian meringue
mixture

If needed: 1½ packages
(1½ Tb) plain
unfavored powdered
gelatin softened in ¼
cup liquid (diluted
kirsch or plain water)



icing for mille-feuilles:
About 1 cup This is all you will need for icing

confectioner’s sugar in mille-feuilles.
a fine-meshed sieve

icing for Napoleons:
1 cup white fondant Just before you are to ice the

frosting, in a small assembled Napoleons, Step 4, stir
saucepan with 2 Tb fondant and kirsch over simmering
kirsch water until perfectly smooth and just

A larger saucepan of enough liquefied to coat spoon fairly
simmering water heavily. Use at once.

A wooden spoon
A rubber spatula or

flexible-blade metal
spatula

1 Tb instant coffee Dissolve coffee in water over heat;
¼ cup water in a small remove from heat, break up the

saucepan with cover chocolate, and stir it in. Remove pan
8 ounces semisweet of simmering water from heat, set

baking chocolate chocolate pan in it, stir up, and cover
A larger saucepan of pan. Set aside to melt for several

simmering water to minutes, then stir vigorously until
hold chocolate pan perfectly smooth and creamy. Keep

A wooden spoon over warm (not hot or simmering)
water until ready to use. Prepare

A paper decorating cone paper cone as described and



illustrated, and cut opening about ⅛
inch in diameter.

4) Assembling
NOTE: If pastry seems flaky or crumbly, cut it with a serrated

knife rather than pastry wheel, using the knife like a saw. See also
Manufacturing Notes, on forming individual portions rather than
long strips.

Even sides and ends of pastry by trimming with pastry wheel or
serrated knife. With a guide of some sort, such as a pastry sheet or a
ruler, mark pastry with the point of a knife, dividing it into 3 even
strips; cut through with pastry wheel or with serrated knife. Cut
second pastry sheet in the same manner.

Paint top of each of the 6 strips with warm apricot glaze. Divide filling
into 4 parts; spread one part on one of the glazed strips. Mount a
second glazed strip upon the filled strip, and spread with its share of
filling; mount a third glazed strip upon it, and set aside. Repeat with
the second group of three strips. You now have two 3-layered strips



ready for icing. For mille-feuilles,
simply shake a heavy layer of
confectioner’s sugar over each of
them.

For Napoleons, rapidly spread as
even a layer as possible of white

fondant over each.

Stir up melted chocolate to be sure it is smooth and velvety, then
pour it into your paper cone. Squeeze out lines of chocolate about 1
inch apart down the length of the fondant on each strip. Proceed
immediately to next step, while chocolate is still soft.



Draw the back of a knife down
across the middle of the chocolate
lines, then draw another line in the
opposite direction on each side, thus

pulling the chocolate into a
decorative pattern.

As soon as chocolate has set, in 4
to 5 minutes, but before fondant
has hardened, cut the strips into
crosswise pieces about 2 inches
wide, using a very sharp (or saw-
edged) knife, and cutting very
carefully with an up-and-down
sawing motion. Cut mille-feuilles
in the same manner.

5) Serving
Arrange the mille-feuilles or Napoleons on a serving tray and chill

an hour. Remove Napoleons from refrigerator 20 minutes before
serving, so that both chocolate and fondant will regain their glossy
bloom.

(*) These pastries are at their best when freshly made, although
you may keep them for 2 to 3 days under refrigeration, and you
may freeze them.



CORNETS ET ROULEAUX
[Cream Horns—Cream Rolls]

The cream horns and rolls of puff pastry described and illustrated
are also useful for desserts. Rather than glazing them before baking,
press the top and sides (not the bottom where pastry is sealed) in plain
granulated or in coarse crystallized sugar.

Bake in the middle level of a preheated 425-degree oven for 15
to 20 minutes until nicely caramelized—but watch them; they burn
easily. Fill with crème Chantilly, lightly beaten cream, sweetened and
flavored with vanilla or liqueur, or with the meringue whipped
cream, Chantilly meringuée, or with the custard and egg-white filling,



crème Saint-Honoré, Volume I, page 591. A sprinkling of pralin,
caramelized almonds or walnuts, could nicely be folded into any of
these fillings.

PITHIVIERS
[Almond Cream Baked in French Puff Pastry]

The small town of Pithiviers, south of Paris halfway to Bourges,
may have other distinctions, but its world renown is certainly due to
the famous almond pastry that every local pâtissier prominently and
proudly displays. This is an exact illustration, drawn from our own
photograph of le veritable Pithiviers de Pithiviers, taken only moments
before we consumed it down to the last crumb in a warm and
flowering meadow just outside the town itself. This buttery, flaky,
tender, marvelous dessert is probably one of the most glorious uses
to which you can put puff pastry; it is also a persuasive reason for
you to learn how to make your own pâte feuilletée, because a
Pithiviers is so easy and fast to assemble. It is two disks of dough
enclosing a lump of rum-flavored almonds, sugar, and butter; the
top disk is glazed with egg just before baking, and the characteristic
design is cut into it with the point of a knife. Serve the Pithiviers as a
dessert, at a tea party, or on any occasion that calls for something
special in the way of a sweet. One of the great white Sauternes
would be lovely with it, or a sweet Champagne, or a sparkling
Vouvray.

For an 8-inch Pithiviers, serving 6 to 8 people



TIMING NOTE: Make the puff pastry the day before serving, as well
as the almond cream, since it must be cold and hard. The assembled
Pithiviers may be refrigerated or frozen, but once baked, it is at its
best when served within 2 to 3 hours (unless you have a warming
oven where it can remain safely at around 100 degrees for a number
of hours).

1) The almond cream—chilling time 30 to 40 minutes in freezer
⅓ cup sugar Beat sugar and butter together until
4 Tb soft butter light and fluffy, then beat in the egg,
An electric mixer, or a almonds, extracts, and rum. Cover

bowl and wooden bowl and set in freezer for 30 to 40
spoon minutes, or in refrigerator for an

1 “large” egg hour or two; it is essential that the
2½ ounces (½ cup cream be chilled and hard before you

loosely packed) assemble the Pithiviers.
ground blanched
almonds—may be
ground in an electric
blender

¼ tsp almond extract
¼ tsp vanilla extract
1½ Tb dark rum

2) Assembling the Pithiviers—about 1 hour, including 2 half-
hour rests

The recipe for chilled
classic French puff



pastry Preheat oven to 425 degrees in time
A round pastry cutter or for Step 3. Place chilled puff pastry

upside-down cake pan on a lightly floured marble or board,
8 inches in diameter and roll it rapidly into a rectangle ⅜

A small, sharp-pointed inch thick, 12 inches wide, and 20
knife for cutting inches long. (To equalize stresses and
dough strains within the dough for even

A piece of lightly floured baking, be sure to roll it crosswise as
waxed paper on a tray well as lengthwise.) Centering cutter

More flour and more or cake pan well on pastry for each of
waxed paper the disks you are to cut, and making

A dampened baking them at least ½ inch from edges of
sheet (a pizza tray is pastry and from each other, cut two
good for baking this 8-inch disks (rounds) in the dough.
pastry) Lift off surrounding dough, and

arrange it in one layer on tray; see
directions for its re-use as puff pastry.

Cover this leftover dough with waxed paper, and dust paper
lightly with flour; roll one of the disks up on your pin, unroll on the
waxed paper, cover with another sheet of waxed paper, and
refrigerate. Unroll second disk topside down on baking sheet, cover,
and refrigerate for 20 to 30 minutes, or until cold and firm. (Make
frequent use of the refrigerator, and you will have no troubles with
puff pastry.)

Remove disk formed on the baking sheet from the refrigerator.
Push dough out gently with your fingers to make it slightly more
than 8 inches in diameter all around. Soften almond cream, if
necessary, by kneading it; form it into a cake 4 inches in diameter
and center it on the disk of dough. It is important here that the
almond cream be cold and hard, and that there be a free
circumference of dough 1½ to 2 inches wide all around; this will
prevent it from leaking out of the pastry during baking.



Paint free circumference of dough
with cold water.

Remove remaining disk of dough from
refrigerator and roll it out rapidly, rotating
disk as you go, expanding it all around to
about 8½ inches. Unroll it over the almond
cream on the bottom disk of dough.

With lightly floured fingers as well as the side of your hand, firmly
press top disk to bottom disk all around the lump of almond cream; if air
pockets prevent a perfect seal, make a little hole for air to escape in
center top of dough, where chimney will be inserted later. Chill
dough again for 30 minutes.



Turn a cake pan or bowl upside down
over Pithiviers; about ⅜ to ½ inch of
dough should protrude all around from its
edge. With the back or the front of a small
knife, whichever works best for you, cut a
scalloped border all around circumference of
dough, spacing indentations evenly and
about 1¼ inches apart. Press pan or bowl rather firmly into dough as
a final seal, and remove it. Chill before proceeding, if dough has
softened.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Pithiviers may be refrigerated or frozen at this
point; chill to harden dough, then cover airtight. (Frozen pastry may
be taken directly from freezer, and glazed and decorated as soon as
top of dough is soft enough for a knife to penetrate it.)

When oven is preheated to 425 degrees, and just before baking,
paint entire top surface of Pithiviers with egg glaze (1 egg beaten in a
small bowl with 1 teaspoon water). In 2 minutes, after you have
made and inserted the buttered aluminum foil or brown paper
chimney in next illustration, paint with a second coat.



With the point of a sharp small knife,
cut decorative design into pastry as
shown, going ⅛ inch deep. (Cutting
through glaze and down into dough
will make the design stand out after
baking.) Proceed immediately to
the baking, next step.

3) Baking—about 50 minutes at 450 degrees and 400 degrees
As soon as Pithiviers has been glazed and decorated, set in middle

level of preheated 450-degree oven. In 20 minutes, or when pastry
has risen and browned nicely, reduce oven heat to 400 degrees and
continue baking 25 to 30 minutes more, until sides of pastry are
brown and crisp. If Pithiviers seems to be browning too much during
baking, lay a sheet of brown paper or foil loosely over the top.

4) Sugar glaze
About ⅓ cup Remove Pithiviers from oven, set

confectioner’s sugar in thermostat at 500 degrees, and slide
a fine-meshed sieve oven rack onto upper-third level.

A cake rack

Remove funnel. Sieve a 1⁄16-inch layer of the sugar over the top
of the Pithiviers. When oven is at 500 degrees, set pastry in upper
third for 4 to 5 minutes, peeking quickly every 30 seconds, until
sugar has melted to a glossy sheen. Remove the Pithiviers and slide it
onto the rack.

5) Serving and storing



A Pithiviers may be eaten tepid or cold, but is always at its best
when freshly made and served within 2 to 3 hours of baking. It will
keep successfully for a day in a warming oven at 100 degrees, or
you may freeze it when cold and wrapped airtight. If frozen, thaw
for about 30 minutes on a lightly buttered pastry sheet in a 350-
degree oven.

To serve, cut into wedges, like a pie.

A LITTLE SELECTION OF PETITS FOURS

LES TRUFFES AUX CHOCOLAT
[Chocolate Candies in the Form of Truffles]
Rough balls of melted chocolate, butter, and orange liqueur

rolled in cocoa look like freshly dug truffles. These homemade
candies are easy to make and, unfortunately for those who are
trying not to resemble Babar the elephant, they are quite irresistible.

For 1½ dozen

¼ cup strong coffee (1 Tb Dissolve the coffee in the saucepan
instant coffee in ¼ cup with the hot water; break up the
boiling water) chocolate, and stir it into the liquid.

A covered saucepan for Cover, and set in the pan of hot but
melting the chocolate not simmering water. When

7 ounces semisweet chocolate has softened, beat with
baking chocolate electric mixer until perfectly smooth

2 ounces unsweetened and creamy. Remove from hot water
chocolate and beat a moment to cool. Cut

A larger pan of chilled butter into ⅓-inch slices and
simmering water gradually beat into the chocolate

with mixer, adding a new piece as



removed from heat, to soon as a previous one is almost
hold chocolate pan absorbed. When smooth, beat in the

A hand-held electric orange liqueur by dribbles. Chill for
mixer an hour or two, until firm.

5 ounces (1¼ sticks)
chilled unsalted butter

¼ cup orange liqueur

A sturdy teaspoon When chocolate mixture has chilled
About ½ cup and set, remove by teaspoon gobs,

unsweetened cocoa on roll into rough circular shapes, then
a plate roll in the cocoa to enrobe them

Frilled paper bonbon completely. Place in paper cups.
cups (*) When packed in an airtight

container, truffes will keep perfectly
for several weeks in the refrigerator,
or for several months in the freezer.

LES CROQUETS DENISON
[Walnut and Almond Puffs]
These easy-to-make mouthfuls can take the place of after-dinner

mints, or go with tea, coffee, sweet liqueurs, and sweet wines.
Ideally they are baked directly in fluted paper candy cups, if you
can find any that are the no-stick kind. Otherwise bake them in tiny
buttered molds, preferably not fluted ones because the batter may
stick to them. Lacking proper containers, you may form the mixture
on a baking sheet, like cookies; they will not be as elegant to look at
but will be just as good to eat.

NOTE: A heavy-duty mixer with flat beater works beautifully here;
if you do not have one, beat everything together in a bowl with a



wooden spoon.
For 3½ to 4 dozen 1¼-inch puffs

1) The batter
2 ounces (½ cup) walnut Pulverize the nut meats in an electric

meats blender and turn into a bowl. Add
2 ounces (½ cup) the sugar, kirsch, grated lemon peel,

blanched almonds and 2 tablespoons of egg white.
4 ounces (1½ cups) Mixture is now to be beaten until it

confectioner’s sugar forms a mass stiff enough to hold its
(Sift sugar directly shape when bits are rolled into balls:
into dry-measure cups beat for 2 to 3 minutes, and if
and sweep off excess) ingredients remain sandy and

1½ tsp kirsch unmassed, add ½ tablespoon more
The grated peel of ½ egg white; continue beating, and if

lemon mixture still separates, beat in a little
more egg white. (If too soft, on the

2 to 3 Tb egg white other hand, beat in a tablespoon or
so more pulverized nuts or
confectioner’s sugar, or refrigerate
for half an hour until it becomes
firmer.)

2) Forming the petits fours
Waxed paper on a tray Preheat oven to 300 degrees. Puffs
A table fork will double in size when baked,
2 egg whites in a small therefore cups or molds should be

bowl filled only by half. Form mixture into
balls by rolling between the palms of
your hands; place each ball, as



½ cup confectioner’s formed, on the waxed paper. Beat
sugar on a plate; more egg whites with fork to break up
sugar as needed thoroughly. One by one, dip each

Fluted no-stick paper ball in egg white, then roll in sugar,
candy cups (or place in candy paper or mold and
buttered molds, 1 Tb arrange on baking sheet. (Or flatten
capacity) the balls into disk shapes, dip in egg

A baking sheet, clean white, then coat with sugar and
and dry if you are arrange on a buttered baking sheet.)
using paper cups

3) Baking and serving
Optional: paper candy Bake in middle level of preheated

cups 300-degree oven for 15 to 20
minutes, until puffs have about
doubled in size and are pale gold in
color. Let cool and crisp for 10 to 15
minutes. If you have baked them in
molds, dislodge delicately with the
point of a knife and, if you wish,
place each in a candy cup.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: Will keep
several days when covered airtight;
for longer storage, freeze them.

TUILES AUX AMANDES
[Lacy Curved Almond Wafers]
These delicate mouthfuls go nicely with fresh fruit desserts, ices,

and afternoon tea. Rapidly mixed and baked, the wafers crisp almost



immediately into the shape of old-fashioned roof tiles when they are
lifted from the baking sheet to a rolling pin or bottle to cool. The
only tour de main involved here is that you work out your own
system for removing the wafers as quickly as possible from baking
sheet to rolling pin; as they cool, they become too crisp to mold.
Bake one sheet at a time, even though you may prepare several
sheets in advance, or be baking one while you are preparing
another.

For about 45 wafers 3 inches in diameter

1) The cookie batter
3 or 4 baking sheets Preheat oven to 425 degrees, and set

about 12 by 16 inches rack in middle level. Prepare baking
1 to 2 Tb soft butter for sheets by smearing each with about 1

the baking sheets tsp of soft butter. Beat the rest of the
3½ Tb soft butter in a 2- butter and the sugar together until

to 3-quart mixing bowl soft and fluffy; add the egg whites,
½ cup sugar and beat a few seconds, only just
An electric mixer enough to blend.
¼ cup egg whites (about

2 egg whites)

5 Tb plain cake flour in a Sieve or sift the flour over the batter,
sieve or sifter folding it in with a rubber spatula.
(measure by scooping Fold in the ground almonds, almond
measuring spoon into extract, and vanilla.
flour and leveling off
with a knife)

A rubber spatula



⅓ cup ground blanched
almonds (grind them
in an electric blender)

¼ tsp almond extract
½ tsp vanilla extract

½ cup sliced, shaved, or Using rubber spatula to dislodge
slivered almonds batter, drop ½-teaspoon gobs onto
(either blanched or one of the buttered baking sheets,
with skin left on) spacing them 3 inches apart. With

back of spoon, smear out each blob
into a circle 2½ inches in diameter;
batter will be so thin you can see
baking sheet through it. Top each
circle with a pinch of sliced, shaved,
or slivered almonds.

2) Baking and shaping—oven has been preheated to 425
degrees

A flexible-blade spatula Place in middle level of preheated
(blade should be at oven, and set timer for 4 minutes.
least 8 inches long) (Meanwhile, make sure rolling pins

2 bottles or rolling pins are ready; then start forming batter
braced to lie still on another baking sheet.) Wafers are

A cake rack done when a ⅛-inch border around
A kitchen timer circumference has browned lightly.

Set baking sheet on open oven door
so that cookies will keep warm and
pliable.



Working rapidly, slide long side of spatula blade under one
cookie to scrape and lift it off the baking sheet, and place right side
up on rolling pin or bottle. Quickly continue with the rest; the
wafers crisp to shape so quickly that the first several may be
removed to rack to make room for remaining wafers. (If last wafers
have cooled too much for molding, return sheet to oven for several
seconds to soften them.)

Close oven door and wait a few minutes for temperature to
return to 425 degrees; bake and mold the rest of the wafers in the
same manner.

(*) Wafers will stay crisp for several days in dry weather when
stored airtight; otherwise, freeze them.

TWO RECIPES FOR LEFTOVER PASTRY DOUGH

Two more good reasons for you to master French puff pastry are
couques and palmiers—crisp, buttery, lightly caramelized cookies
that you can make with the leftovers. Like some of the wonderful
things you concoct with leftover braised beef, les tous nus and choux
farcis, to give examples from another part of the menu, it is well
worth making the original just to have the residue to play with.

THE DOUGH—PUFF PASTRY VERSUS PIE-CRUST DOUGH

Most cookies as well as many of the appetizer and entrée pastries
are made with scraps of raw puff pastry left over from bouchées, vol-
au-vent, mille-feuilles, or other recipes calling for fresh pâte feuilletée.
These scraps need not be fully reconstituted into puff pastry again,
as described: those for the couques should only be smooth enough to
roll out and be cut fairly evenly, and those for the palmiers will
reconstitute into smoothness as they are rolled in sugar, folded, and
rolled and folded again before their final forming. You can convert
butter pie-crust dough, pâte brisée, formulas 1 or 2 (or even
packaged mixes), into a reasonable substitute for puff pastry by



rolling and folding with softened butter, as described in the same
recipe for reconstituting puff pastry.

COUQUES
[Tongue-shaped Caramelized Cookies Made from Puff Pastry
Dough]

These were made famous in the 1920’s by Le Café de Paris, on
the Avenue de l’Opéra. Whenever you ordered ice cream, long
couques on embroidered napery accompanied each serving, and they
soon became the most fashionable cookies in Paris. Couque comes
from the Flemish koek, whose diminutive, koekje, produced our
“cookie.” We shall not give proportions because they are not
necessary, but a circle of dough 3 inches in diameter and ½ inch
thick will produce 6 to 8 couques 6 to 7 inches long.

1) Forming the cookies
Chilled leftover French Preheat oven to 450 degrees in time

puff pastry, pâte for Step 2, and set rack in upper-
feuilletée middle level. Roll pastry out about ⅛

An oval fluted cutter 3 to inch thick, and cut into ovals (or
3½ inches long (or a 2-



inch round cutter, rounds). Re-form leftovers, roll out
preferably fluted) again, and cut.

Sugar (ordinary Spread an oval-shaped layer of sugar
granulated sugar) ⅛ inch thick on your rolling surface.

A flexible-blade spatula Lay a pastry cutout on the sugar and
A clean dry baking sheet roll it out into a tongue shape 6 to 7
A rack or racks inches long and about 1⁄16 inch thick;

you will be encrusting sugar into the
bottom of the pastry as you roll. Turn
it upside down, sprinkle on more
sugar, and set on baking sheet.
Continue with the rest of the cutouts.
(Although you can bake the cookies
now, they usually cook more evenly
if you cover with plastic wrap and
chill them for half an hour at least;
this relaxes the dough and prevents it
from shrinking or pulling out of
shape during baking.)

2) Baking—oven has been preheated to 450 degrees
Bake in upper-middle level of preheated oven for 7 to 8 minutes,

until sugar coating has caramelized lightly; if some cookies are done



before others, remove them to rack because they burn easily.
Cookies crisp as they cool.

(*) Couques will stay crisp for several days in dry weather when
stored airtight; otherwise keep them in a warming oven or freeze
them.

PALMIERS
[Palm-leaf Caramelized Sugar Cookies Made from Puff Pastry
Dough]

This most popular of all puff-pastry cookies is often a
disappointment when store-bought, even in France, but always
delicious when you make it yourself from your own homemade
buttery puff pastry. Thus if you have not been impressed with them
before, try making your own; you will find them handsome to look
at, wonderfully crisp, and you may make them very large as well as
rather small. Size depends on the thickness of the pastry and the
width of the rectangle you roll it into. You will work out your own
system if you become an addicted pâtissier of palmiers, with your
own palm-leaf patterns and special tours de main; we suggest only
the basic techniques here. Again, we shall not give proportions, but
a piece of pastry dough 5½ by 2 by 1½ inches will produce 2 dozen
3-inch palmiers.



1) Forming the cookies
Chilled leftover French Spread a layer of sugar ⅛ inch thick

puff pastry, pâte on your rolling surface. Sprinkling
feuilletée dough with more sugar as you roll,

Sugar (ordinary extend it into a rectangle about 3⁄16
granulated sugar) inch thick. Fold bottom up to middle,

A flexible-blade spatula and top down to cover it, as though
A clean dry baking sheet folding a business letter. (Illustrations

(you will probably are in Puff Pastry.)
need 2 sheets at least)

A rack or racks

Turn pastry so top flap of dough is to your right, roll again in
sugar to make a rectangle ⅜ inch thick, and fold again in three. (If
pastry has softened and become difficult to handle, or if it has
stiffened and become balky, refrigerate for 30 minutes to an hour,
then continue.) Roll the dough out 8 inches long (for 3-inch
palmiers), then give it a quarter turn so the 8-inch length is facing
you. Extend it out in front of you now with your rolling pin, keeping
the dough 8 inches wide, and rolling it to whatever length it will go
to make a square or rectangle ¼ inch thick. Trim off rough edges.

Fold sides so they almost touch at
the center, as shown. Sprinkle top
of dough with sugar and encrust

it into the pastry with your rolling
pin, at the same time pressing the
top and bottom layers of dough

together with pin.



Fold pastry in two, as though closing a book. Press with your
rolling pin, to hold the 4 layers more closely together.

With a sharp knife, cut dough into
crosswise pieces ⅜ inch thick.

Depending on what effect you wish, either bend the
2 ends up at right angles; or roll them halfway up
the outside; or roll them up inside, so that they
form two connecting swirls. Place on pastry sheet,
each palmier 3 inches from neighbor in every
direction—they will spread out to more than
double in the oven.



Cover and chill 30 minutes at least; dough must relax or the
palmier designs will lose their shape during baking. Preheat oven to
450 degrees, and set rack in upper-middle level in time for next
step.

2) Baking—oven has been preheated to 450 degrees
(Bake one sheet at a time.) Set in upper-middle level of

preheated oven and bake for about 6 minutes, until when you lift a
cookie with your spatula, the bottom has begun to caramelize.
Remove from oven, close oven door, and rapidly turn the cookies
over. Sprinkle tops of each with a dusting of sugar, and return to
oven for 3 to 4 minutes more, or until sugar topping has
caramelized nicely—but keep an eye on them, because they burn
quickly. Remove one by one to a rack, where the palmiers will crisp
as they cool.

NOTE: The baking will take a little experimenting on your part,
and timing will differ if cookies are thinner one time, thicker
another. Your object is to have the pastry cook through, making a
crisp, attractively shaped cookie with a caramel sheen.

(*) Palmiers will stay crisp for several days in dry weather when
stored airtight; otherwise keep them in a warming oven or freeze
them.

EIGHT FRENCH CAKES

PAIN D’ÉPICES
[Spice Cake—Spice Bread—Honey Bread]
Pain d’épices is the French equivalent of gingerbread, but is made

with honey, rye flour, and mixed spices rather than from molasses,
white flour, and ginger. Every country in the Old World seems to



have a honey bread, and each region in France has its own special
formula. Dijon, for instance, cures the flour and honey mixture for
several months in wooden tubs before the final blending and baking.
Montbard stores the baked breads for a month before serving, and
Rheims mixes raw bread dough into the honey and rye. Some
recipes call for glacéed fruits, some for brown sugar, eggs, white
flour, or ground nuts. Potash was the original leavening agent, and
bakers often add carbonate of ammonia for a lighter loaf;
householders use bicarbonate of soda. Here is a delicious home
recipe that is easy to make by hand, and even easier in a heavy-duty
mixer with flat beater. Serve pain d’épices with butter for breakfast
or tea.

A NOTE ON THE RYE FLOUR

The rye flour called for here is ordinary supermarket rye flour
for general bread making. If you happen to have the so-called rye
meal, which is heavier and coarser, use half rye meal and half
regular all-purpose white flour; otherwise your pain d’épices will not
rise properly.

For about 5 cups of dough, to bake in one 8-cup bread pan or
two 4-cup pans

1) The batter
1¼ cups (1 lb.) honey Preheat oven to 325 degrees. Either
1 cup sugar with a large wooden spoon or in a
¾ cup boiling water heavy-duty mixer with flat beater,
A 3- to 4-quart mixing blend the honey, sugar, and boiling

bowl, or the bowl of a water until sugar has dissolved. Stir
heavy-duty electric in the salt, soda, and 3 cups of the
mixer flour. Beat in as much of the fourth

¼ tsp salt cup of flour as will go in, to make a
heavy, sticky dough but one you can

1 Tb bicarbonate of soda



3½ to 4 cups (about 1 still manipulate. Beat thoroughly and
lb.) rye flour measured vigorously (4 to 5 minutes of beating,
by scooping dry- if you are using a mixer, will improve
measure cups into texture).
flour and sweeping off
excess (see note on rye
flour preceding Step 1)

3 ounces (about ⅔ cup) Then add the rest of the ingredients
ground blanched listed. (If you are using a mixer, let
almonds (pulverize the machine run at slow speed while
them in an electric the additions go in.)
blender)

1 tsp almond extract
¼ cup dark rum
4 tsp ground anise seed

(pulverize in an
electric blender)

½ tsp ground cinnamon
½ tsp ground cloves
½ tsp ground mace
1 cup (8 ounces) glacéed

fruit rinsed in boiling
water, drained, and
cut into ⅛-inch pieces
(orange peel, lemon
peel, and citron; or
“fruit cake” mix)

2) Baking and storing—baking time 1 to 1¼ hours



An 8-cup bread pan or Turn the mixture into the pan or
two 4- to 5-cup pans, pans. Dip your fingers in cold water,
heavily buttered and and smooth top of batter. Pans
bottom lined with should be ½ to ⅔ filled. Bake in
buttered waxed paper middle level of preheated 325-degree

oven. Batter will rise to fill pan and
top will probably crack slightly; it is
best not to open oven door for 45
minutes or to touch anything, for fear
of releasing the soda-engendered
gases that are pushing the batter up.
Four- to 5-cup pans will take 50 to 60
minutes; the 8-cup pan, about 1¼
hours. The spice bread is done when
a skewer plunged to bottom of pan
comes out clean, and when bread
begins to show faint lines of
shrinkage from edges of pan.

Let cool in pan for 10 to 15 minutes, then unmold on a rack.
Immediately peel paper off bottom and gently turn the bread puffed-
side up. When cold, in about 2 hours, wrap airtight in plastic. Pain
d’épices improves in flavor when aged, so do not serve it for at least
a day; a wait of several days is actually preferable. It will keep for
several weeks under refrigeration, or may be frozen for several
months.

LE QUATRE QUARTS
[Pound Cake—Yellow Butter Cake]
The French name for this cake, Le Quatre Quarts, or “Four

Quarters,” comes from its original proportions, which are un quart



de livre, a quarter pound each, of its four ingredients—eggs, sugar,
flour, and butter. The English like the formula so much that they use
a pound of everything—hence, of course, pound cake. Of the several
methods for making pound cake, we find by far the best one results
from beating the eggs and sugar in an electric mixer until they
double in volume and have enough body so that they keep that
volume when the flour is rapidly blended in, followed by the softly
creamed butter; the batter should look like a rich mayonnaise as you
turn it into the pan. Besides beating the eggs, which presents no
problem when you do it electrically, your other important object is
to cream the butter so that it is soft enough to mix easily and
rapidly into the batter without deflating it, yet has enough body so
that it remains in suspension throughout the mixture rather than
sinking to the bottom of the pan like melted butter.

For a 4-cup pan, such as the standard, round, 8 by 1½-inch
American pan

1) Preliminaries
A 4-cup cake pan, Preheat oven to 350 degrees and set

buttered and floured rack in middle level. Prepare the cake
6 ounces (1½ sticks) pan. Either beat room-temperature

butter butter into a smooth cream, or cut
A small saucepan or chilled butter into ½-inch slices and

bowl beat over low heat until it begins to
A wire whip soften and continue beating until it is

a mayonnaise-like cream. If it softens
too much, beat over a bowl filled
with ice and water. Butter must be
like a heavy mayonnaise. Set aside.



2) The cake batter
3 “large” eggs (⅔ cup) Blend the eggs and sugar with the
1 cup sugar lemon or orange peel for a minute at
The grated rind of 1 low speed to mix, then increase

lemon or orange speed to high and beat for 4 to 5
An electric mixer and minutes or more, until mixture is

large (3-quart) bowl pale, fluffy, doubled in volume, and
looks like whipped cream. If you are
using a mixer on a stand, measure
the flour while the eggs are beating.

1¼ cups (6 ounces) cake Measure out the flour and sieve or
flour (measure by sift onto the paper. Beat the eggs and
scooping dry-measure sugar again for a moment if they
cup into flour and have lost their body or volume. Turn
sweeping off excess speed to low and gradually sprinkle
with a knife) in the flour as you mix. Do this

A sieve or sifter set on rapidly, and do not try for a perfect
waxed paper blending at this point; the operation

should not take more than 15 to 20
seconds (for a mixer on a stand—
longer for a hand-held model.)

The creamy mayonnaise- Still at low speed, and using 1
like butter spatula to remove the butter from its

2 rubber spatulas bowl, and a second to dislodge it
from the first, rapidly incorporate the
butter into the egg mixture, taking no
more than 15 to 20 seconds (with a



mixer on a stand), and, again, not
trying for a perfect blend.

Remove bowl from stand, if you have that kind of mixer, and
rapidly cut down through batter and out to side with rubber spatula,
rotating bowl and repeating the movement 2 or 3 times to complete
the blending. Turn batter into prepared pan; run it up to rim all
around with spatula, and bang pan lightly on table to deflate any
bubbles.

3) Baking—about 40 minutes at 350 degrees
Immediately set pan in middle level of preheated oven and bake

for about 40 minutes, until a skewer or toothpick plunged down into
top center of cake comes out clean. Cake will have risen slightly
over top of pan, top will have browned nicely, and cake will feel
lightly springy when pressed. Cool 10 minutes in pan, then unmold
onto a rack; if you wish to serve it plain, immediately reverse it onto
another rack so its puffed side will be uppermost.

4) Serving
The Quatre Quarts may be served as is, sprinkled with powdered

sugar. Or fill and ice it with anything you wish. Here is a quick and
simple filling.

Crème au Citron or Crème à l’Orange
[Lemon- or Orange-cream Filling]
For about 1 cup, enough for an 8- to 9-inch cake



1 cup confectioner’s Beat all ingredients together over
sugar moderately high heat until mixture

1 Tb lemon juice or thickens and comes to the boil.
concentrated frozen Continue beating over low heat for 2
orange juice minutes until starch cooks and cream

The grated rind of one looks translucent.
lemon or orange

1 Tb hot water
1 egg
2 Tb butter
1 Tb cornstarch
A small saucepan and a

wire whip

3 to 6 Tb unsalted butter Remove from heat and beat in butter,
Pinch of salt as much as you wish up to 6

tablespoons. Salt very lightly, to
taste. Filling will thicken as it cools.
May be refrigerated for several days,
or frozen for several months.

Split cake in half, and if you wish, sprinkle the inside of each
half with drops of rum or of orange liqueur. Spread filling on
bottom half and re-form the cake. You may paint the cake with
warm apricot glaze and brush chopped nuts around the
circumference, or simply sprinkle the top with confectioner’s sugar.

LE CAKE
[Rich Yellow Loaf Cake with Rum, Raisins, and Cherries]



A French cake is always baked in a moule à cake—meaning a loaf
pan—and a French cake always has fruits in it. It is not at all a fruit
cake in the American sense of solid fruit held together with batter; it
is, rather, a slightly modified pound-cake formula flavored with rum
and raisins, and baked with a layer of glacéed cherries in the center.
Serve it with tea or with fruit desserts; it keeps well for several days
under refrigeration, or it may be frozen.

A NOTE ON FRUITS FALLING TO BOTTOM OF CAKES DURING BAKING

We struggled for years trying to devise some system to prevent
fruits from sinking to the bottom of the cake during baking. Finally
we realized that we were using cake flour and our batter was too
light; the French recipe calls for farine, regular French household
flour. As soon as we switched to a combination of 4 parts all-
purpose flour and 1 part cake flour, our troubles were over. To
make doubly sure, we also suggest dusting the fruits with a
combination of flour and baking powder.

For a 6-cup loaf pan, approximately 10 inches long and 3½
inches deep

1) Preliminaries
A 6-cup loaf pan, bottom Preheat oven to 350 degrees and set

lined with waxed rack in middle level. Prepare the cake
paper, interior of pan pan. Cream the butter (over heat if
buttered and floured necessary, then over cold water) to a

6 ounces (1½ sticks) smooth mayonnaise-like consistency.
butter in a small Wash cherries in very hot water to
saucepan or bowl remove preservatives, dry on paper

A wire whip towels, and cut each in half. Measure
⅔ cup (4 ounces, or out the 2 flours, and blend together

about 30) glacéed in bowl with spatula. Mix the baking
cherries on a plate powder and a tablespoon of the flour



1 cup all-purpose flour on waxed paper, then sprinkle over
and ¼ cup cake flour the raisins, tossing and stirring to
in a bowl (measure by coat them. Because raisins and
scooping dry-measure cherries are to remain separate, turn
cups into flour and raisins into sieve placed over cherries
sweeping off excess and shake off the baking powder and
with a knife) flour onto cherries. Return raisins to

A rubber spatula their plate, coat cherries with
1 tsp double-action mixture, and sieve cherries over the

baking powder bowl of flour; return cherries to their
⅔ cup (4 ounces) plate.

currants (small, black,
seedless raisins) on a
plate

A square of waxed paper
A fine-meshed sieve

2) The cake batter
2 “large” eggs Beat the eggs, yolks, sugar, and rum
2 egg yolks at moderate speed to blend, then
1 cup sugar increase to high speed and beat 5 to
¼ cup dark Jamaican 6 minutes or more, until mixture is

rum thick, pale yellow, creamy, and the
An electric mixer, and consistency of lightly whipped

large bowl on stand, cream. You must beat long enough
or 3- to 4-quart mixing for it to thicken this way, or the
bowl batter will be too light to support the

fruit.

The bowl of mixed flours



The waxed paper Turn flour out onto waxed paper. At
slow mixing speed, gradually sprinkle
the flour into the egg mixture, taking
15 to 20 seconds but not trying for a
perfect blend at this point; eggs must
not be deflated by over-mixing.

The creamy mayonnaise- Still at low speed, and using 1
like butter spatula to remove the butter from its

2 rubber spatulas bowl and a second to dislodge it from
the first, rapidly incorporate the
butter into the egg mixture, taking no
more than 15 to 20 seconds and,
again, not trying for a perfect blend.

The floured raisins Remove bowl from stand, if using
that kind of mixer. Rapidly fold
raisins into batter with a rubber
spatula, as you complete the
blending.

The prepared cake pan Turn half of the batter immediately
The floured cherries into the pan. Rapidly spread the

cherries on top, and cover with the
rest of the batter, running it up to
rim of pan on all sides with rubber
spatula. Pan will be ⅔ to ¾ full.
Immediately proceed to the baking.



3) Baking—about 1 hour at 350 degrees
Set in the middle level of the preheated oven and bake for about

an hour. Cake is done when it has risen to fill the pan, is lightly
browned, and a skewer plunged through the cake comes out clean.
The top will crack, which is normal, and there will be very slight
lines of shrinkage from pan in several areas. Let cake cool in pan for
10 minutes, then run a sharp, thin knife between sides of pan and
cake; unmold onto a rack. Immediately peel paper off cake if it has
adhered, and turn cake right-side up.

4) Serving and storing
Serve as is with tea or with fresh fruit desserts, slicing cake

crosswise like a loaf of bread. To store, wrap airtight and refrigerate
or freeze, but bring to room temperature before serving for best
flavor and texture.

LE GÉNOISE ÉLECTRIQUE
[Light, Yellow, Whole-egg Cake, for Layered Cakes and Petits
Fours]
Génoise is one of the basic French cakes used for petits fours and

fancy filled cakes. The classic method is to beat whole eggs and
sugar over hot water until the mixture is warm and thick, then to
beat it at room temperature until it is cool and even thicker. An
electric mixer will accomplish almost the same thickness of batter,
and works perfectly well when you are adding only a small amount
of butter, as in the following recipe. Typical of the best French
cakes, there is no baking powder here, meaning that you must fold
the flour and butter into the cake batter with such speed and
delicacy that you do not deflate it, and the cake will rise as it should
in the oven. Typically again, this is a low-lying cake of 1½ inches



that is usually split in half for filling and frosting. If you like a high
layered cake, make two of them for 4 layers. Use any shape of pan
you wish; a square or rectangular pan is easiest for petits fours.

For a 4-cup pan, such as a round one 8 by 1½ inches

1) The cake batter
4 Tb (½ stick) butter in a Preheat oven to 350 degrees and set

small saucepan rack in middle level. Melt butter and
An 8- by 1½-inch round set aside. Prepare cake pan; measure

cake pan, bottom lined flour and sift or sieve onto waxed
with waxed paper, paper.
interior of pan
buttered and floured

⅔ cup cake flour
(measure by scooping
dry-measure cups into
flour and sweeping off
excess with a knife)

A sieve or sifter
A 12-inch square of

waxed paper

3 “large” eggs (⅔ cup) Beat eggs, sugar, vanilla, lemon rind,
½ cup sugar and salt for 5 to 10 minutes or more,
1½ tsp vanilla extract depending on efficiency of mixer,
The grated rind of 1 until very thick, pale yellow, and

lemon mixture forms a definite and slowly
A pinch of salt dissolving ribbon when a bit is lifted

and falls back on surface.



An electric mixer with
large (3- to 3½-quart)
bowl

A rubber spatula

Then remove bowl from stand, if you have that kind of mixer,
and with one hand, sift on ¼ of the flour and rapidly cut down
through batter and out to side with rubber spatula, rotating bowl
and repeating the movement quickly 6 to 8 times, until flour is
almost incorporated. Sprinkle on half the remaining flour, and when
almost incorporated, fold in ⅓ of the tepid melted butter; continue
alternating butter and flour until all (except milky residue at bottom
of butter pan) is incorporated. Do not overmix: batter must retain its
original volume.

Immediately turn batter into prepared pan, running it up to the
edge all around with spatula. Bang lightly on table, and place at
once in preheated oven.

2) Baking and cooling—baking time 25 to 30 minutes at 350
degrees
Bake for 25 to 30 minutes. Cake is done when top is spongy if

pressed, and when cake shows a hairline of shrinkage from pan at
one or two places around the edge.

When done, remove cake from oven and let cool 10 minutes in
pan. Then reverse onto a rack, and in a few minutes the cake will
drop out of the pan. Peel paper off bottom of cake if it has adhered.

When cool, in 1½ to 2 hours, fill and ice any way that you wish;
suggestions follow. If you are not going to fill and ice the cake when
cool, wrap airtight (it dries out easily), and refrigerate for several
days, or freeze for several months.

3) Filling and frosting suggestions
Fill and frost the génoise in any manner you wish; besides the

Mocha butter cream and chocolate fondant suggested here, see the



list of possibilities.

Crème au Beurre à la Meringue Italienne
[Meringue Butter-cream Filling and Frosting]
For about 2½ cups

½ the recipe for meringue When the meringue mixture has been
italienne (sugar syrup beaten until cool with the electric
whipped into beaten mixer, it is ready to receive the
egg whites), Step 1 butter. Cut up butter, if cold, and

An electric mixer beat over heat for a moment until it
8 to 10 ounces (2 to 2½ starts to melt; continue beating with

sticks) unsalted butter electric mixer or wooden spoon until
in a bowl butter is soft and fluffy. (If by chance

2 Tb rum or kirsch you have heated butter too much,
1 Tb instant coffee beat over cold water to reconstitute

dissolved in 2 Tb it.)
boiling water, and
cooled

By dollops, beat the equivalent of 2 sticks of the butter into the
meringue, then beat in the rum or kirsch and droplets of coffee until
butter cream is a light coffee color. If butter cream turns grainy after
addition of liquids, beat in more of the butter by spoonfuls to
smooth it out again. Cover and chill, until of easy spreading
consistency.

(*) Butter cream may be frozen; when thawed, beat in more
softened butter to smooth it, along with a little more liqueur if you



feel it necessary.

Frosting the cake
The cool génoise cake (Illustrated directions for splitting,
A long, sharp thin knife filling, and frosting cakes are in

for splitting the cake Volume I, pages 673–5.) Cake is to be
A cake rack set over a frosted upside down, meaning that

pizza tray or baking the part that was at the bottom of the
sheet pan is considered to be the top of the

2 Tb rum or kirsch cake; this is because sides must slant
The chilled butter cream slightly outward for fondant to cover

(beaten to a smooth them easily, later. Cut a tiny wedge
consistency) up side of cake to guide you in re-

forming it. Slice cake in half, making
A flexible-blade spatula 2 layers; turn them cut-side up and
A quart measure of hot sprinkle with rum or kirsch.

water

Spread about ⅓ the butter cream on bottom layer of cake, and
replace top layer, lining it up with wedge. Being sure butter cream
is smooth, spread all but ½ cup over top and sides of cake. Even
frosting with spatula dipped in hot water, making sides as smooth as
possible; retain or even exaggerate their outward slant toward
bottom of cake. Set in freezer or refrigerate for about half an hour,
until frosting is well set. (Smooth again with spatula dipped in hot
water if necessary.)

3 cups chocolate-flavored When frosting has set, and with cake
fondant on its rack set over a tray to catch



A flexible-blade spatula drippings, heat fondant just enough
The reserved ½ cup of for it to be liquefied and of easy

butter cream, chilled pouring consistency. Pour all of it at
A paper decorating cone once over the top of the cake, rapidly

spreading it, if necessary, with
spatula so that it falls evenly over the
sides. It sets very quickly, and can be
touched only when liquid.

When set, in a few minutes, pack chilled but smooth and
malleable butter cream into paper cone and squeeze out whatever
decorative motif your creative spirit suggests to you.

Store cake in refrigerator, but remove to room temperature for
20 to 30 minutes before serving so that fondant will regain its
bloom.

GÂTEAU AUX NOIX—LE SAINT-ANDRÉ
[Walnut Cake]
The Saint-André is a delicious walnut-filled creation that can be

either a dessert or a cake. If you are not shelling your own top-
quality walnuts, use the vacuum-packed nut meats that come in
cans to be sure of freshness.

For a 9- by 1½-inch cake

1) Preliminaries—preheat oven to 350 degrees
A 6-cup cake pan (9 by Prepare cake pan. Grind half the nuts

1½ inches if round), with half the sugar in the blender,
bottom lined with turn out onto the waxed paper; grind



waxed paper, pan the rest of the nuts and sugar, and
buttered and floured add to the first half. Sieve the flour

4 ounces (1 cup) walnut over the nuts and mix well with
meats, either whole or rubber spatula, smoothing out any
chopped lumps in the mixture. Soften the

3 Tb sugar butter in the bowl and beat to a
An electric blender creamy mayonnaise-like consistency.

Set aside.
A sheet of waxed paper
⅓ cup all-purpose flour

(measure by dipping
dry-measure cup into
flour and leveling off
with knife)

A sieve
A rubber spatula
4 Tb soft butter in a 1-

quart bowl
A wooden spoon

2) The cake batter
½ cup sugar Beat the sugar and eggs with the
3 “large” eggs kirsch and salt for a moment at low
An electric mixer and 3- speed to blend, then increase speed

to 4-quart bowl to high and beat several minutes (7
2 Tb kirsch to 8 with a handheld machine) until
Pinch of salt mixture is pale, fluffy, doubled in

volume, and holds in soft peaks.
The softened butter Remove bowl from stand. Scoop a 2-
A rubber spatula spoonful dollop of egg mixture into
The ground walnuts the softened butter and mix with

rubber spatula; set aside. Sprinkle ⅓



The prepared cake pan of the ground nuts over the egg
mixture and delicately fold them in
with a rubber spatula, being careful
to deflate the eggs as little as
possible. When almost incorporated,
add the same amount again, fold, and
sprinkle on the remainder. When that
is almost incorporated, add the
creamy butter and rapidly fold in.
Turn batter into cake pan, which will
be about ⅔ filled. Tilt pan to run
batter up to rim all around, bang
lightly on table, and set immediately
in middle level of preheated 350-
degree oven.

3) Baking—about 30 minutes at 350 degrees
In about 20 minutes the cake will have risen to the top of the

pan; in another 10 minutes it will have sunk slightly, and will show
a very faint line of shrinkage at points around edge of pan,
indicating that the cake is done. Remove from oven, and let cool 10
minutes. Run a knife around cake, and reverse onto a rack; in 5
minutes or so, cake will drop out of pan. Peel paper off bottom of
cake in a few minutes, when it has loosened.

(*) When cold, wrap airtight and refrigerate or freeze.

TO SERVE AS A DESSERT

2 cups crème Chantilly
(lightly whipped



cream flavored with Transfer cake to a serving dish,
vanilla or liqueur, and spread crème Chantilly over it,
sweetened with reserving some to pass in a bowl.
confectioner’s sugar) Decorate top of cake with walnuts or

Either chopped walnuts chocolate. Pass chocolate sauce
or caramelized separately.
walnuts;

Or grated or shaved
chocolate and the
chocolate sauce here

TO SERVE AS A CAKE
Le Saint-André aux Abricots
[Walnut Cake with Apricot Filling, Glazed with Fondant]
This is very attractive. The cake is split and filled with apricots,

re-formed and glazed with apricot; caramelized walnut brittle, pralin
aux noix, is brushed against the sides; white fondant is spread over
the top with incrustations of caramelized walnuts.

For the 9- by 1½-inch walnut cake, serving 6 to 8

½ package (½ Tb) Heat softened gelatin mixture until
unflavored powdered gelatin has completely dissolved,
gelatin softened in a then stir into apricot filling. Cut a
small saucepan with 2 tiny wedge in side of cake, then slice
Tb kirsch in half, making 2 layers. When

The 1½ cups apricot apricot filling is cold and has set
filling enough for spreading, spoon it over



bottom layer of cake; replace top
layer, lining it up with wedge.

⅔ cup apricot jam Bring strained apricot jam and sugar
(preserves) forced to the boil, stirring, for several
through a sieve into a minutes until last drops to fall from
small saucepan spoon are sticky. Paint top and sides

2 Tb sugar of cake with the glaze. When glaze
A wooden spoon has set slightly, brush brittle or
About 1 cup walnut chopped walnuts against sides of

brittle, or chopped cake all around.
walnut meats

About ½ cup kirsch- Heat fondant over hot water until
flavored white fondant smooth and of spreading consistency;

About 1 dozen rapidly spread as even a layer as
caramelized walnut possible over top of cake. While
halves (more if you fondant is still quite soft, press the
wish) walnuts into it, arranging them

around the edge of the cake or in any
manner you wish. (If fondant on top
of cake has hardened, melt a little
more and brush on bottom of walnuts
as you stick them on the cake.)
(*) Cake will keep several days when
covered airtight in the refrigerator,
or it may be frozen for several weeks,
at least.



LA CHARLOTTE AFRICAINE
[Chocolate Dessert or Layer-cake Made from Leftover Cake]
When you find yourself with leftover wedding cake, pound cake,

sponge cake, or even store-bought cake of a reasonably homemade
quality, use it again to make another cake. Pound cake is
particularly good for this; if you have sponge cake, you may wish to
enrich the mixture with a little butter. This recipe is easy to make
with the electric mixer when you follow the sequences outlined
here. The cake is baked in a dish or pan 4 to 5 inches deep, like a
French charlotte mold; treat it as a dessert with whipped cream and
chocolate sauce, or as a cake with filling and icing.

For a 6-inch cake 3 to 4 inches high, serving 8 to 10

1) The cake batter
The cake pan: a 2-quart Preheat oven to 350 degrees for Step

charlotte mold or 2. Prepare cake pan by smearing
cylindrical baking dish butter inside, fitting round of paper
4 to 5 inches deep in bottom, buttering that, rolling

½ Tb soft butter flour around interior and knocking
A round of waxed paper out excess. Break chocolate into
2 Tb flour saucepan, add the milk, and stir with
8 ounces semisweet a wooden spoon over moderate heat

baking chocolate until chocolate is melted and smooth.
Remove any icing or filling from

A 2-quart saucepan leftover cake, and shred cake into
¾ cup milk crumbs; stir into the chocolate
A wooden spoon mixture.
8 ounces pound cake,

wedding cake, sponge
cake, ladyfingers, or
other leftover white or



yellow cake (about 2½
cups moderately
pressed down)

An electric mixer with Being sure beaters and bowl are
small bowl clean and dry, beat egg whites at

4 egg whites at room moderate speed until foamy; beat in
temperature salt and cream of tartar. Gradually

Pinch of salt increase speed to fast, beating until
¼ tsp cream of tartar soft peaks are formed. A tablespoon
3 Tb sugar at a time, and beating 30 seconds

between spoonfuls, beat in the sugar,
and continue beating at high speed
until stiff peaks are formed. Proceed
immediately to next paragraph.

The mixer with large With the same electric mixer blades
bowl but in a different bowl, proceed at

4 egg yolks once to the egg yolks. Gradually beat
½ cup sugar the sugar into the yolks and continue
2 Tb dark rum or orange beating until mixture is thick and

liqueur pale yellow, and a bit lifted in the
The tepid chocolate beaters falls back on the surface in a

mixture from first slowly dissolving ribbon. Beat in the
paragraph rum or liqueur and the chocolate

mixture, continuing for 30 seconds or
Optional: 3 to 4 Tb soft so to make sure the batter is smooth

butter and free of lumps. Beat in optional
butter if you are using sponge cake or
ladyfingers, and proceed immediately
to next paragraph.



A rubber spatula With spatula, stir ¼ of the egg whites
The beaten egg whites into the batter to lighten it; scoop the
The prepared cake pan rest of the egg whites on top and

delicately fold in. Turn batter into
prepared pan, tilt pan in all
directions to run batter up to rim all
around. (Pan will be ⅔ to ¾ filled.)
Set at once in middle level of
preheated oven.

2) Baking—oven has been preheated to 350 degrees
Bake for about an hour. Cake is done when it has risen almost to

rim of pan; the top will crack, and a cake tester or skewer plunged
down through a crack in the center will come out dry, with a few
crumbs but no liquid adhering. Let cake cool for 20 minutes. To
unmold, run a thin flexible knife around cake; turn a serving plate
upside down over pan, reverse the two, and give a sharp downward
jerk to unmold cake onto plate.
(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If you are not serving or icing immediately,
let cake cool; wipe out cake pan and reverse over cake, then slip it
into a plastic bag and refrigerate. Cake will keep 3 or 4 days, or may
be frozen for a month or more.

To serve as a dessert
Slice into 2 or 3 layers, fill and ice with crème Chantilly (lightly

beaten and sweetened cream), or the Chantilly meringuée, and pass
chocolate sauce separately.

To serve as a cake



Slice into 2 or 3 layers, and follow any of the suggestions in the
list of frostings and fillings, such as butter-cream filling with
chocolate icing.

LE GLORIEUX
[A Very Rich, Very Light Chocolate Cake]
This dark and delicious cousin of the Quatre Quarts is made with

cornstarch instead of flour, but again the secret of a full, light cake
lies in how rapidly and delicately you fold the starch and finally the
chocolate and butter into the egg mixture. Here we have suggested a
two-layer cake: the batter is divided and cooked in two pans; one
still-warm cake goes upon the other with chocolate filling in
between. You may frost the cake with more chocolate, with white
meringue icing, or, if it is a dessert, with whipped cream.

For two 4-cup pans or one 8-cup pan, serving 12 to 16

1) Preliminaries
7 ounces semisweet Preheat oven to 350 degrees and

baking chocolate place rack in middle level. Break up
2 ounces unsweetened chocolate and melt with orange

baking chocolate liqueur and orange rind over hot
¼ cup orange liqueur water (see directions); it must be
The grated rind of 1 perfectly smooth and creamy. Cut the

orange butter into ¼-inch slices and beat
2 four-cup cake pans piece by piece into the chocolate,

(such as round ones 8 again making sure mixture is
by 1½ inches), bottom perfectly smooth and creamy. (A
lined with waxed hand-held electric mixer is useful

here.) If consistency is too liquid—it



paper, pans buttered should be like a heavy mayonnaise—
and floured beat over iced water. Set aside.

2 sticks butter

2) The cake batter
5 “large” eggs Beat the eggs and sugar for a moment
1 cup sugar at low speed to blend, then increase
1 tsp vanilla extract speed to high, add vanilla, and beat
An electric mixer and 3- several minutes (7 to 8 with a hand-

to 4-quart bowl (be held machine) until mixture is pale,
sure mixer blades and fluffy, doubled in volume, and holds
bowl are clean and in soft peaks.
dry)

1 cup (4 ounces) Just as you are ready to blend the
cornstarch measured various batter elements together, sift
by scooping dry- the cornstarch onto the paper, check
measure cup into on the chocolate-butter to be sure it
starch and leveling off is a smooth, thick cream, and give

A sieve or sifter set over the eggs and sugar a few turns of the
waxed paper beater if they have lost their body.

The chocolate-butter
mixture

A rubber spatula

At slow mixing speed, gradually sprinkle the cornstarch into the
egg mixture, taking 15 to 20 seconds to incorporate it but not trying
for a perfect blend; you must not deflate the beaten eggs. Remove



bowl from stand, if you have that kind of mixer. Fold a large gob of
egg mixture into chocolate-butter to lighten it. Then, a large gob at
a time, start folding chocolate-butter into eggs, rapidly cutting down
through batter and out to side with rubber spatula, rotating bowl,
and repeating movement 2 or 3 times. When almost incorporated,
add another gob, and continue until all is used. Immediately turn
the batter into the prepared pans. Rapidly push batter up sides of
pans all around, and bang lightly on table to deflate possible
bubbles. Pans should be about ⅔ filled. Place at once in middle level
of preheated oven, leaving at least 2 inches of space between pans
as well as walls and door of oven.

3) Baking, filling, and frosting
Bake for 25 to 30 minutes. Cakes should remain slightly moist, in

the French manner, and are done when a skewer or toothpick
plunged into center comes out looking oily, with a few speckles of
chocolate clinging to it. Cake will usually rise ¼ to ½ inch above
rim of pans. Cool for 10 minutes. Top of cakes will crack and flake
slightly, which is normal. Make the following filling while cakes are
cooling.

the chocolate filling:
3 ounces semisweet Melt the chocolate in the liqueur over

baking chocolate hot water. When perfectly smooth
½ ounce unsweetened and creamy, beat in the butter piece

baking chocolate by piece. If mixture is too soft for
3 Tb orange liqueur easy spreading, beat over iced water
4 to 5 Tb unsalted butter, until the consistency of mayonnaise.

cut into ¼-inch slices

filling the cake:



A cake rack When cakes have cooled for 10
A cookie sheet minutes, run a knife around edge of

one to loosen it from the pan and
unmold onto cake rack. Peel off
waxed paper.

Spread top with filling. Immediately unmold second cake onto
one end of cookie sheet. Line up cake on sheet exactly with cake on
rack, then slide the one upon the other. Peel paper off top of second
cake. If sides are uneven, trim with a knife.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTE: If not to be iced or served immediately,
cover airtight as soon as cake is cool or it will dry out. Cake may be
frozen at this point; thaw for several hours at room temperature.

4) Frosting and serving
WHIPPED CREAM. To serve the cake as a dessert or with tea, spread

lightly whipped cream, sweetened and flavored with vanilla or
orange liqueur, around and over the cake (crème Chantilly, or the
Chantilly meringuée). Decorate with shaved or grated chocolate.

MERINGUE ICING. Or use the plain Italian meringue (hot sugar syrup
whipped into stiffly beaten egg whites), or the meringue butter
cream.

CHOCOLATE ICING. Or while the cake is still warm, spread on the
same chocolate and butter mixture that you used for the filling, or
use one of the chocolate butter creams listed in Volume I, pages
680–4.

  LE SUCCÈS—LE PROGRÈS, LA DACQUOISE
[Meringue-nut Layer Cake with Butter-cream Frosting and
Filling]



This particularly delicious type of French cake rarely appears
among American recipes, yet it is far easier to make than a layer
cake, and infinitely more elegant. Light yet rich, every mouthful is a
poem. This is the kind of pastry you will see in the very best French
pastry shops, and it is one that you can duplicate or even improve
upon because you need not skimp on ingredients or quality.

To describe the cake, it is layers of baked meringue mounted one
upon the other, like a regular layer cake, with filling in between.
The meringue layers, fonds à Succès, are composed of egg whites and
sugar beaten in a machine like any meringue, but when it forms stiff
peaks ground almonds are folded in. The meringue is then spread
out in disk shapes, heart shapes like our illustrations, or whatever
other shapes you wish, and baked, like all meringues, in a very slow
oven. The taste and texture of this mixture is, of course, far more
interesting than plain meringue and just as easy to make.

HISTORICAL AND PHILOLOGICAL NOTES

While the cooked disks of meringue are called fonds, meaning
foundations or layers, and fonds à Succès when the cake is titled Le
Succès, you will see the terms fonds à Progrès, fonds parisiens,
Dacquoise, broyage suisse, and gâteau japonais in French recipe books
and elsewhere. Some authorities consider the Succès as containing
almonds, and the Progrès almonds and filberts (noisettes, hazelnuts),
while the Dacquoise is either formula plus starch and butter; other
recipes make no distinctions. Broyage obviously comes from broyer,
to grind, and refers to the ground nuts in the meringue; gâteau
japonais appears to be British for meringue-nut layer cake.



There are various opinions, also, on what should fill and what
should frost a Succès versus a Progrès or a Dacquoise. Since no one
agrees on anything, you are quite safe in doing whatever you wish.
In addition to the frosting and filling in the following recipe, other
suggestions are at the end of it.

MANUFACTURING NOTE

An electric mixer, even the small hand-held type, makes both the
meringue and the butter cream fast and simple to do. Form the
meringue disks with a spatula if you have no large canvas pastry
bag, but the bag usually makes neater shapes. No-stick baking sheets
are especially recommended for meringues, or no-stick baking
paper. If your baking sheets are not large enough to hold three 8-
inch disks, make 4 smaller disks and a 4- rather than a 3-layer cake.
(A discussion of beating egg whites is in the appendix, and
illustrated directions for beating and folding egg whites are in
Volume I, pages 159–61.) You will need toasted almonds and
almond pralin (caramelized almonds), and do read the recipe
through before you plan to make the cake so there will be no
surprise ingredients or timings.

A NOTE ON NUTS—FILBERTS

You may use either ground blanched almonds or half and half
ground almonds and ground filberts (hazelnuts, noisettes) in the
following recipe. Filberts are not as easily available here as in
France, and the ready-shelled packaged nuts turn rancid rapidly;
shelled or ground filberts should be stored in the freezer, as should
ground almonds.

To prepare shelled filberts for cooking, first eat a few to be sure
they are fresh and fine, then spread the nuts on a baking sheet and
dry them out in a 350-degree oven for about 15 minutes, until skins
begin to flake off and nut flesh has browned very lightly. Remove
from oven, rub nuts a small handful at a time between paper towels
to remove as much skin as will easily come off. Grind the nuts by ½-
cup batches in an electric blender.



If you use half ground filberts and half ground blanched almonds
rather than almonds alone for the meringues in the following recipe,
call your cake Le Progrès rather than Le Succès.

For an 8-inch cake, serving 8 to 10

1) Preliminaries
1 to 2 Tb soft butter Preheat oven to 250 degrees. Rub
2 large baking sheets 14 soft butter over top of baking sheets,

by 16 inches (no-stick covering surface completely. Roll
if possible) flour all over buttered surface and

¼ cup flour knock off excess. Make three 8-inch
A marker, such as an 8- rings or other shapes on baking

inch round pot lid, a sheets by drawing around marker
cake pan, a heart, or with point of rubber spatula. Measure
whatever shape you the almonds and sugar onto waxed
wish your cake to be paper, and work with fingers to

A rubber spatula remove any lumps. Sieve over this
the cornstarch, and mix in with

6 ounces (1½ cups rubber spatula; set aside. Assemble
loosely packed) the pastry bag. (Note that you will
ground blanched need pralin— caramelized almonds—
almonds (may be for the butter cream in Step 5, and
ground in an electric toasted almonds for the sides of the
blender) assembled cake, Step 6; toast the

1 cup sugar (extra-fine almonds for both after the meringues
granulated or have baked, and the pralin takes but
“instant” a few minutes.)
recommended)

A double thickness of
waxed paper about 10
by 12 inches



1 level Tb plus 1½ level
tsp unsifted cornstarch

A fine-meshed sieve
A canvas pastry bag 12 to

14 inches long with
round metal tube
opening ⅜ inch in
diameter

2) The meringue-almond mixture—pâte à Succès
¾ cup egg whites (6 egg Place egg whites in bowl and start

whites) at room beating at moderately slow speed for
temperature 1 to 2 minutes, until they are foamy.

A clean, dry bowl and Beat in the salt and cream of tartar;
clean, dry electric- gradually increase speed to fast,
mixer blades taking a minute or so, until egg

⅛ tsp salt whites form soft peaks. Continuing at
¼ tsp cream of tartar fast speed, gradually beat in the 3 Tb
3 Tb sugar sugar, and continue until egg whites

form stiff, upstanding peaks. Beat in
1½ tsp vanilla extract the vanilla and the almond extracts.
⅛ tsp almond extract
The almond-sugar-starch

mixture from Step 1
The assembled pastry

bag

If you are using a standing mixer, remove bowl from stand; the
rest of this operation continues rapidly by hand and your object
here is to deflate the egg whites as little as possible—they must
continue to hold their volume so that you can form the meringue



shapes for baking. Sprinkle about ¼ cup of the almond-sugar-starch
mixture over the beaten egg whites; cutting and folding with rubber
spatula, delicately blend the two together, rapidly rotating bowl
with one hand as you fold with the other. When almost blended,
sprinkle on more of the mixture, rapidly fold in, and continue with
the rest until all is used; reach all over bottom and sides of bowl
with the final addition. The whole blending process should take less
than a minute; scoop the meringue into the pastry bag, all of it or as
much as will fit in easily.

3) Forming the 3 meringue disks—les fonds à Succès

Squeeze out a line of meringue the width
of your thumb and ½ inch high all
around inner side of line marked on your
baking sheet.

Continue around and around until
you have filled the entire space with

meringue.



Smooth top of meringue lightly with a
spatula. Immediately make the 2 other
meringue shapes in the same manner,
using the other baking sheet for the
third meringue.

4) Baking—about 40 minutes at 250 degrees
Set baking sheets on the upper-middle and lower-middle levels

of preheated oven. The meringues are actually to dry out rather
than bake; they will not puff up, and they will not change shape, but
they will color lightly during baking. They are done as soon as you
can gently push them loose from the baking surface, in 30 to 40
minutes. As soon as they are done, slip them carefully with a spatula
onto cake racks to cool. They bend a little when still hot from the
oven, but rapidly crisp as they cool; they are fragile and break
easily, but a crack or break is not a disaster because the meringues
are to be covered with frosting and filling.

5) Butter cream for frosting and filling—crème au beurre à
l’anglaise

1 cup sugar Make a crème anglaise (custard sauce)
A wire whip or hand- as follows: gradually beat sugar into

held electric beater egg yolks and continue beating for
6 egg yolks several minutes until mixture is thick
A heavy-bottomed and pale yellow. In a thin stream of

enameled or stainless droplets beat in the hot milk, and set
saucepan 2- to 2½- mixture over moderate heat. Stir
quart size slowly with wooden spoon, reaching

¾ cup hot milk all over bottom of pan, for 4 to 5



A wooden spoon minutes or until sauce thickens
12 to 14 ounces (3 to 3½ enough to film spoon with a creamy

sticks) chilled layer—do not let it come to simmer,
unsalted butter but you must heat it to the point

1 tsp vanilla extract where it thickens. Immediately
3 Tb kirsch, dark rum, or remove from heat and beat

strong coffee vigorously for 1 minute to cool
slightly.

If you wish to continue with an
electric mixer on a stand, scrape the
custard into the mixer bowl;
otherwise proceed with hand-held
electric beater (or with a wire
whisk). Cut the 3 sticks of chilled
butter into ¼-inch slices and add a
piece or two at a time, beating
vigorously as butter melts and is
absorbed; when all the butter has
gone in, cream should be cool,
smooth, and glossy, like a thick
mayonnaise. Beat in the vanilla and
kirsch. (If mixture turns grainy,
soften rest of butter by beating it or
working with fingers, and beat in
successive tablespoons until butter
cream smooths out.)

for the frosting:
2 ounces unsweetened Remove ¼ of the butter cream to a

baking chocolate, small bowl, stir the smooth melted
chocolate into it, and reserve for



melted frosting top of cake, end of next step.
Stir the pralin into the remaining
butter cream; this will be the filling.

for the filling:
½ cup almond pralin Pralin butter cream must have

(ground caramelized enough body to hold its shape as a
almonds) filling; chill if necessary. Chocolate

butter cream must be perfectly
smooth and free of lumps when it
covers top of cake: beat well, if
necessary, before using.

6) Assembling the cake
A tray or baking sheet to One by one, place meringues on a

set cake rack on cutting surface, set the marker you
A flexible-blade steel used in Step 1 on top, and trim

spatula meringues with a small, sharp knife.
1 cup flaked, shaved, This is so that edges will line up

slivered, or chopped properly when circumference of cake
blanched almonds, is iced. Return 1 meringue to cake
toasted rack set over tray.

Spread ⅓ of the pralin butter cream
over the meringue on the cake rack.



Center second meringue on top of first, and
spread with ½ the remaining pralin butter
cream. Cover with the final meringue.

Spread remaining pralin butter
cream evenly around the edges of

the cake with a spatula.

NOTE: You may prefer to spread almonds around sides of cake
(following illustration) before icing the top; proceed in either order
you wish, whichever seems easier for you. Spread the chocolate-
flavored butter cream as evenly as possible on top of cake with a spatula.



Either balancing cake on the palm of one hand or leaving on rack,
whichever you prefer, brush almonds against sides of cake all around.

The cake is now finished unless you wish to make fancy rosettes,
swags, or other decorations on top with chocolate butter cream
pushed through a pastry bag; French pâtissiers often write the name
Le Succès on top of the cake in butter cream or white frosting.

7) Serving—after at least 2 hours of refrigeration
Transfer cake to a serving dish, and cover with a large bowl or a

plastic dome; refrigerate. Cake should be chilled at least 2 hours to
firm the butter cream. To serve, cut into serving slices as you would
any layer cake.

(*) AHEAD-OF-TIME NOTES: Le Succès will keep perfectly for several
days under refrigeration. It may be frozen, but the butter cream will
probably lose its creamy smoothness; it is best to freeze disks and



butter cream separately, then assemble before serving, beating more
softened butter into thawed cream, if necessary, to reconstitute it.

VARIATIONS
Other fillings
A complete list of frostings and fillings follows, including recipes

from both volumes. Other butter creams that are popular with this
cake are Mocha-flavored butter cream with pralin plus Mocha-
colored fondant, and chocolate butter cream with chocolate icing.
Other ideas are the mousse au chocolat used for the Saint-Cyr, which
stands up well enough when chilled and need not be frozen, and the
other and richer mousse with butter in Volume I, page 604, into
either one of which you could fold pralin. The almond and
strawberry mixture for charlotte Malakoff could be deliciously
adapted, as well as the chocolate variation following it (Volume I,
pages 605–7).

Brésiliens
[Individual Meringue-almond Cakes—Petits Fours]

Rather than a large cake, you may prefer individual servings; mark
whatever shapes you like on buttered and floured baking sheets, fill with



the meringue mixture, and bake as directed in Step 4.

Fill, frost, and decorate as described in the Master Recipe, Step
6, but you will need only two layers—one for the top, and one for
the bottom.

FROSTINGS, FILLINGS, AND A PAPER DECORATING
CONE

FONDANT
[Sugar Icing or Frosting for Cakes, Petits Fours, Napoleons,
Candied Fruits, and Candies]
White fondant, and how to make and use it, is well worth your

attention. It is ready in an instant to be warmed briefly over hot
water, flavored with a dash of vanilla, liqueur, or chocolate, and to
be poured over a cake. It makes a beautifully smooth covering that
hardens just enough to form a protective layer, but remains just the
right texture for eating. Commercial pastry chefs can buy it ready-
made in a can or jar, and so may French householders. It is easy to
make yourself, however, and really one of nature’s wonders,
because it consists only of sugar syrup boiled to the soft-ball stage,
cooled to tepid, then kneaded for several minutes until it
miraculously turns from clear and limpid to snowy white. It keeps
for months, even years, and is always ready to become an
immediate icing.

Although we have only called for fondant a few times in the
book, it is so useful to have on hand, and really so easy and such fun
to make, that we felt it should be in your repertoire.

For about 2 cups



1) The sugar syrup
A marble surface 18 by Syrup is to be poured onto marble, or

24 inches, or a jelly- into a pan or tray, which should be
roll pan or large metal ready before you begin. Dissolve the
tray corn syrup or cream of tartar (or

3 Tb white corn syrup or glucose) with a bit of the water in the
¼ tsp cream of tartar saucepan; pour in the rest of the
(or 3 Tb French water, and the sugar. Set over
glucose) moderately high heat. Swirl pan

1 cup water slowly by its handle, but do not stir
A heavy-bottomed 2- sugar with a spoon while liquid is

quart saucepan coming to the boil. Continue swirling
3 cups sugar (pure cane for a moment when liquid boils and

sugar, or, if you are in changes from cloudy to perfectly
Europe, 1¼ lbs.—550– clear. Cover pan, raise heat to high,
600 grams—crushed and boil for several minutes until
sugar lumps) bubbles have thickened slightly.

Uncover, insert candy thermometer if
A cover for the pan you are using one, and continue
Optional: a candy boiling for a few minutes to the soft-

thermometer ball stage, 238 degrees: drops of
A quart measure with 2 syrup hold their shape softly when

cups cold water and 2 formed into a ball in the cold water.
ice cubes

NOTE: If you do not boil the syrup to
A metal spoon (not for the soft-ball stage, your fondant will

stirring, only for be too soft; if you boil to the hard-
testing sugar) ball stage, your fondant will be hard

to knead and difficult to melt when
you want to use it.



2) Cooling the syrup—about 10 minutes
Immediately pour the syrup onto the marble or into the pan or

tray. Let cool about 10 minutes, until barely tepid but not quite cold
to the touch; when you press it lightly you can see the surface
wrinkle.

3) Kneading the syrup into fondant—5 to 10 minutes
A pastry scraper, a As soon as fondant is ready, start

painter’s spatula, or a kneading it vigorously with scraper,
short, stout metal spatula, or turner: push it up into a
pancake turner mass, spread it out again, and repeat

Useful but not essential: the movement for 5 minutes or more.
¼ cup ready-made After several minutes of kneading,
fondant the syrup will begin to whiten (if you

happen to have some ready-made
fondant, add it at this point, and the
syrup will quickly turn to fondant);
as you continue to knead, it will
gradually turn into a crumbly snow-
white mass, and finally stiffen so that
you can no longer knead it. It is now,
officially and actually, fondant. Do
not be discouraged, however, if it
takes longer than 5 to 8 minutes, or
even 10 minutes, to turn to fondant;
go off and leave it for 5 minutes;
come back and knead it again—it
will eventually turn (you might have
started to knead it before it was quite
ready for you).



4) Curing and storing fondant
A 3-cup screw-topped jar Although you may use the fondant

or a metal bowl with immediately, it will have better
cover texture and sheen—or bloom, as the

Several thicknesses of professionals say—if you let it rest at
well-washed least 12 hours. Pack it into the jar or
cheesecloth about 6 bowl, top with the dampened
inches square cheesecloth, cover airtight, and

refrigerate. As long as the top is
damp, fondant will keep for months
and months.

5) How to use fondant
2 cups fondant in a 2- Combine the fondant and liqueur,

quart pan coffee, or vanilla and water in the
1 to 2 Tb kirsch, rum, saucepan and set in larger pan of

orange liqueur, or simmering water. Stir thoroughly,
strong coffee; or 1 tsp reaching all over pan, as fondant
vanilla and a Tb or so slowly softens and turns into a
of water perfectly smooth, glossy cream that

A larger pan of coats the spoon fairly heavily.
simmering water

A wooden spoon

Use immediately, either pouring it directly over a cake set on a
rack over a tray, spreading it rapidly over whatever surface you are
icing, or dipping petits fours or candies into it. It sets rapidly, and
you must work quickly to obtain a smooth surface.



Colored fondant
Use strong coffee for Mocha or tan fondant, stirring it in by

droplets to get the shade you wish; stir ½ to 1 cup melted chocolate
into the melted fondant for brown or chocolate fondant; use drops
of food coloring for pastel shades.

Storing melted fondant
Store like fresh fondant. Unless you are turning it into chocolate

fondant, it will have more sheen and bloom if you mix it with fresh
fondant before using again.

CONFIT D’ABRICOTS EN SIROP
[Apricot Filling or Sauce Using Canned Apricots]
This deliciously simple filling or sauce is made with diced

canned apricots lightly caramelized in their own syrup and flavored
with kirsch or lemon. Serve it with custard desserts, such as the
Pélerin, or as a filling for tarts like the Jalousie, spoon it over the
apricot sherbet, or fold in a little gelatin and walnuts or sliced
almonds and use as a cake filling as suggested for the Saint-André.

For about 1½ cups

A 1-lb. can of peeled Drain the apricot syrup into the
apricots in heavy saucepan and bring to the simmer
syrup with the sugar. When sugar has

A small, heavy saucepan dissolved completely, boil the syrup
⅓ cup sugar rapidly until last drops to fall from
1 Tb lemon juice and the spoon are thick and sticky (230

grated rind of ½ degrees F.). Discard seeds from
lemon apricots and cut flesh into ⅜-inch



1 Tb kirsch or Cognac dice. Fold them into the syrup and
add the lemon juice and rind. Boil
slowly for 5 minutes. Remove from
heat and fold in the kirsch or Cognac.

LIST OF FROSTINGS AND FILLINGS

BUTTER CREAMS—FOR EITHER FROSTINGS OR FILLINGS

Simple butter cream with confectioner’s sugar
Crème au Beurre Ménagère, Volume I, page 681 (egg yolks beaten

with confectioner’s sugar, flavoring, and butter—uncooked).

Butter cream with custard base
Crème au Beurre à l’Anglaise (Le Succès), and Volume I, page 683

(cooked custard sauce with butter and flavoring beaten in).

Butter cream with egg-yolk and sugar-syrup base
Crème au Beurre au Sucre Cuit, Volume I, pages 681–3 (boiling

sugar syrup beaten into egg yolks, mixture poached over hot water,
beaten until cool, then butter and flavoring beaten in).

Butter cream with Italian meringue base
Crème au Beurre à la Meringue Italienne—génoise cake (boiling

sugar syrup beaten into egg whites, beaten until cool, then butter
and flavoring beaten in).

Orange or lemon butter-cream icing or filling
Crème au Beurre a l’Orange, or au Citron, Volume I, pages 674–6

(eggs, yolks, flavoring, and butter stirred together over heat to
thicken into a simple filling; more butter beaten in to turn it into a
butter cream). See also another version of the filling, Crème au
Citron; this may also be turned into a butter cream in the same way.



OTHER FROSTINGS AND FILLINGS

Soft chocolate icing
Glaçage au Chocolat (Le Glorieux, Step 3), and Volume I, page 684

(melted chocolate and butter, with or without liqueur flavoring).

White meringue frosting
Meringue Italienne—Le Saint-Cyr, Step 1 (boiling sugar syrup

whipped into beaten egg whites).

Meringued whipped cream frosting or filling
Chantilly Meringuée (the preceding meringue combined with

whipped cream).

Fondant
(Sugar syrup boiled to the soft-ball stage, cooled, then kneaded

until it turns snowy white; flavored with liqueur or chocolate.)

Apricot filling or sauce
Confit d’abricots en sirop (diced canned apricots boiled in their

own syrup, liqueur flavoring; with gelatin added as cake filling, Le
Saint-André).

MISCELLANEOUS

Walnut brittle and caramelized walnut halves
Pralin aux Noix—Pralinée aux Noix, Step 1 (walnuts stirred into

caramel syrup and ground when cold; or walnuts dipped into
caramel syrup and used for decorations).

Almond brittle
Pralin aux Amandes—Le Kilimanjaro, Step 1 (same as Pralin aux

Noix, but with almonds).



Baked meringue decorations
Meringue Italienne—Le Saint-Cyr, Steps 1, and 2 (boiling sugar

syrup whipped into beaten egg whites, formed into meringues, and
baked).

COMMENT FAIRE UN CORNET EN PAPIER
[How to Make a Paper Decorating Cone]

Cut heavy freezer paper or bond paper into a
right-angle triangle whose short sides (A and
B) are approximately 12 and 15 inches long.

Hold the hypotenuse side of the triangle (C) with your left hand,
thumb on top and opposite the point of the right angle (X). With
your right hand, curl the longer end of the hypotenuse (Z), around
toward your left, bringing its underside against the top of the right angle
(X). You now have formed a cone with the right side of the paper.



Curl the other end of the hypotenuse (Y)
toward your right, around the outside of the
first cone, bringing its point (Y) to the back of
the right angle (X). You have now completed
the cone; slide points back and forth at top,
to close tip of cone at other end.

Secure cone either by bending points
X, Y, and Z down inside, or by using
a straight pin. Cut tip of cone with

scissors to make any size of
opening you wish.



Appendices



LIST OF STUFFINGS FOR MEATS AND VEGETABLES

STUFFINGS WITH MUSHROOMS

Mushroom duxelles with onions, cream cheese, and parsley—for
stuffed vegetables—in the stuffed eggplant recipe, Volume I, page
502.

Mushroom duxelles and spinach, farce Viroflay—for stuffed lamb
and veal—in the stuffed shoulder of lamb recipe.

Mushrooms, onions, and ham—for stuffed lamb, veal, or chicken,
and for stuffed vegetables—in the lamb section, Volume I, page 337.

Mushroom, giblets, bread crumbs, and cream cheese—for chicken,
veal, and stuffed vegetables—in the roast chicken section, Volume I,
page 252.

Mushrooms and kidneys, Mushrooms and chicken livers, Mushrooms
and ground lamb, Mushrooms and forcemeat—see following section.

STUFFINGS WITH MEAT

Sausage, ham, chard, and bread crumbs—for meats and stuffed
vegetables—in the paupiettes of beef.

Sausage, ham, and rice—for meats and stuffed vegetables—in the
stuffed cabbage recipe.

Sausage and apple—for duck, goose, and pork—in the roast duck
recipe, Volume I, page 275.

Sausage and chestnuts—for duck, goose, turkey, and pork—in the
roast goose recipe, Volume I, page 286.



Sausage, rice, and apricots, farce Trébizonde—for duck, goose,
pork, and turkey—in the suckling pig recipe.

Ground pork, onions, herbs, and bread crumbs, farce de porc—for
stuffed meats and vegetables—in the stuffed lamb section, Volume I,
page 336.

Ground pork with ham, truffles, and foie gras—for stuffed veal and
chicken, or for use as a pâté mixture—in the veal section, veau en
feuilletons.

Ground braised beef, onions, and herbs—for stuffed vegetables, or
as a meat loaf—in the stuffed cabbage recipe.

Ground braised beef and chard—for stuffed vegetables, as a meat
loaf, or as sausages—in the sausage section, les tous nus.

Ground leftover veal, turkey, or pork with onions and herbs—for
stuffed vegetables or as a meat loaf—in the eggplant section.

Veal, ham, rice, and chard or spinach—for stuffed veal or lamb—
in the breast of veal recipe.

Forcemeat and mushrooms, boudin blanc, farce normande—for
chicken, turkey, or veal—in the poached chicken section.

Ground lamb, olives, and onions—for stuffed lamb and stuffed
vegetables—in the lamb section, Volume I, page 338.

Ground lamb, salmon, anchovies, and onions—for stuffed lamb and
stuffed vegetables—in the lamb section, Volume I, page 338.

Ground lamb, eggplant, mushrooms, rice, and herbs—for stuffed
lamb, stuffed vegetables, and as a meat loaf—the Moussaka recipe,
Volume I, page 349.



Kidneys, rice, and herbs—for lamb or veal—in the stuffed lamb
section, Volume I, page 337.

Kidneys and mushrooms—for stuffed lamb or veal—in the lamb
section.

Foie gras and prunes—for stuffed duck, goose, or turkey—in the
stuffed goose recipe, Volume I, page 284.

Foie gras and truffles—for filet of beef, veal, or chicken—in the
filet of beef recipe, Volume I, page 304.

Chicken livers, rice, foie gras, and truffles, farce à la d’Albuféra—for
chicken, turkey, and veal—in the poached chicken section.

Chicken livers, mushrooms, rice, and puréed cooked garlic, farce
évocation d’Albuféra—for chicken, turkey, veal, and stuffed
vegetables—in the poached chicken section.

Chicken-liver mixture for stuffings, sausages, and pâtés—in the pâté
section.

Chicken giblets, herbs, crumbs, and cream cheese—for veal,
chicken, turkey, and stuffed vegetables—in the roast chicken recipe,
Volume I, page 243. The same, with mushrooms, Volume I, page
252.

MEATLESS AND MUSHROOMLESS STUFFINGS

Rice, onions, and cheese—for stuffed vegetables—in the stuffed
onion recipe.

Rice and chopped peppers, tomato topping—for stuffed vegetables—
in the stuffed zucchini recipe.



Rice, garlic, and herbs—for stuffed meats and vegetables—in the
paupiette of beef recipe.

Chopped olives, pimentos, and herbs—for paupiettes of meat—in the
beef paupiettes.

Garlic and herbs—for paupiettes of meat, and as a flavoring for
boned red meats—in the lamb section, Volume I, page 336.

Chopped peppers, onions, and mustard bread crumbs—for paupiettes
of meat—in the beef paupiettes.

Almonds, cheese, and bread crumbs—for stuffed onions, or
zucchini—in the stuffed zucchini recipe.

Eggplant, peppers, onions, tomatoes, and herbs—for stuffing cold
vegetables—in the vegetable chapter.



The next pages contain an illustrated roundup of some kitchen
equipment we find useful, so that you will see it all in one place
rather than scattered throughout the two volumes.



Some of these implements are standard American, others are
professional American, still others can be found in import shops or
mail-order catalogues, and some are things to look out for if you go
abroad and are browsing around in restaurants or butcher supply
houses near the central markets. As always, we advise you to look
for solid, practical, professional equipment designed by people in
the chef business who sell to chefs. If you have trouble locating
good equipment in your area, ask your butcher or the owner and
chef of the best restaurant in town.



FRYING PANS

For browning meats and vegetables and for general sautéing, the
heavyduty professional frying pan with its long handle and sloping
2-inch sides is the best shape. American cast-aluminum models (A
and D) come either with plain or no-stick interiors. The French poêle
(B) is of tôle épaisse (very thick sheet metal); one with a bottom
diameter of 7 to 7½ inches is ideal for omelettes. The oval cast-iron
pan (E), poêle à poissons, is as useful for browning roasts as it is for
sautéing fish. The short-handled cast-iron American skillet (C) is
also good in the oven, and is the pan to use for pommes Anna; the
same shape can be found with an enameled surface, making it ideal
for cooking in white wine, or for storing and serving stews or sautés.

You should have at least three sizes of frying pans—a large one
11 inches across its top diameter, a medium, or 10-inch, pan, and a
smaller, 7- to 8-inch, pan for single servings and crêpes. You will
probably end up with many more, some of one material, some of
another, and each your pet for certain techniques.

CHICKEN FRYERS

The straight-sided frying pan known as a sautoir in French and as
a chicken fryer here, is useful, of course, for fried chicken, but it is
also good for chicken sautés and fricassees, beef stews, fish stews,
and numerous vegetable dishes. Because the cooking usually takes
place on top of the stove, it must be of heavy material. The
traditional shape (A and B) is typical of the French copper sautoir
and of the American professional cast aluminum; the sides are 2¼ to
2½ inches high. The deep chicken fryer (C) is of cast iron; this is a
fine cooking utensil, but remove foods from it as soon as they are
done to prevent discoloration.



SAUCEPANS, KETTLES, COVERS, AND COLANDERS

You will need saucepans (casseroles) for sauces and saucepans for
general boiling and simmering. When you are cooking with white
wine or egg yolks, use a non-staining material like lined copper,
stainless steel, flameproof ceramic or glass, or the familiar French
enameled cast iron with wooden handle (A).



For boiling potatoes, pasta, and their like, cast aluminum is fine
although you will have to scour it from time to time. The
professional shape (B-1) is well designed; 1½, 2½, 4½, and 7 quarts
(B-2) will give you a reasonable range of pan sizes.

Rather than having a special cover for each pot, a series of long-
handled covers allows one to fit several sizes of saucepans (C).

Soup kettles (marmites) are essential for pot-au-feu, soups,
bouillabaisse, lobsters, green beans à la française, and spinach. An 8-
quart kettle and another of 18- to 24-quart capacity would meet
most of your needs.



One of them might be the two-handled type (E or F), and another
the preserving-kettle type with bucket handle (H). A French
earthenware marmite (G) is attractive for soups and stews that are
cooked and served in the same pot.

A large sturdy colander is a must; buy one 10 to 11 inches across
the top diameter and 5 to 6 inches high, with feet (D).



Casseroles (cocottes) can double as saucepans or roasters, and are
essential for stews and braises. Enameled ironware is always good
because it will go on the stove or into the oven (A, B, C) and foods
will not discolor in it; the oval shape is the best if you are limited in
space or budget. The American heavy cast-aluminum (H) comes
with a removable rack, and in several sizes up to the large turkey
roaster. The French daubière (G) is in lined copper. Earthenware
casseroles (D, E, F) are wonderful for cooking and serving because
they spread and retain heat. The attractive copper cocotte (I) was
designed for the famous potato dish pommes Anna, but may be used
as a casserole or as two separate baking dishes.



WARNING: All casseroles, baking dishes, plates, pitchers, cups, and
other utensils of earthenware, terra cotta, and like materials must be
of the high-fired so-called stoneware type, or must otherwise by
clearly labeled and certified safe for the cooking and serving of
foods and drinks.



GRATIN DISHES AND ROASTING PANS

Flameproof dishes about 2 inches deep are used for baking,
gratinéeing, roasting, and serving, and you should have a reasonable
number of sizes. Enameled iron gratin dishes (plats à gratin) (A and
E) are either oval or round, and come from shirred-egg size up to 13
to 14 inches long and 9 inches wide. Earthenware gratin dishes (B)
are always attractive for serving. A nest of aluminum dishes (F) is
conveniently stored and long lasting. Rectangular enameled iron (C)
can be plain or with no-stick interior, and will double for roasting or
gratinéeing. Be sure to have a rack (G) that will fit into your large
roasting pan so that legs of lamb can be raised out of their juices. If
your oven does not come with a perforated rack for the broiling pan
(D), buy one separately; otherwise spluttering fat can catch fire
while you are doing a steak.






IMPLEMENTS—KNIVES

Very sharp knives are the mark of the serious cook, and
continual use of the butcher’s steel will keep them razor sharp.
Carbon steel knives are preferred by most chefs, but there are
stainless knives that will sharpen easily too.

The Central Hoard
The straight-edged, wedge-shaped cook’s knife (C,D,E,F,G,H) is

the all-purpose shape for chopping, slicing, paring, and general
cutting; you will need at least three, from the 2- to 3-inch blade for
paring and small minces to the 10- to 12-inch blade for chopping
and rapid slicing. Curved blades (A and B) are good for paring. A
professional butcher’s steel (J) with blade 10 to 12 inches long is the
best sharpening equipment. A larding needle (I) is indispensable for
larding meat.

Slicers, Carvers, and Boners



Slicing, carving, and boning knives have curved blades. Here is
the slicing scimitar (K), and two other slicing shapes (L and M). The
stubby knife (P) and its longer companion (O) are boning knives, as
is the very thin knife known as a chicken sticker (Q) with its short
blade; the longer-bladed version (N) is a Norwegian herring filleter,
which is also useful for slicing off pork rinds and for cutting thin
sheets out of pork fat.

Serrated Sawers
Serrated knives include the curved grapefruit knife (A), the

bread knife (B), the all-purpose slicer (C), the frozen-food cutter (D),
the ham slicer, which also does smoked salmon (E), and the vicious-
looking French meat slicer (F), which is, in addition, very good with
slab bacon.



Choppers and Rockers
The traditional chef’s knives (J and K) are for general chopping,

as illustrated in Volume I, page 27. The Japanese version (I) works
equally well. The two rockers (G and H) are marvelous for
mushrooms and parsley, particularly the 3-bladed professional
model.



BASHERS, BLUDGEONS, AND BLUNT INSTRUMENTS

For whacking up turkey carcasses, chopping bones, and
flattening cutlets, here is a choice of weapons. The meat tenderizer
with its cast-aluminum head has waffled sides for tenderizing (A)
and smooth sides for flattening cutlets; you can also use it as a
hammer, although the rubber-headed hammer that you can buy at
any good hardware store (F) is less noisy. The French cleaver, feuille
à fendre (D), or an ordinary hatchet (E) are for whacking carcasses
or bones, and a hammer helps. The French cleaver-tenderizer, batte
à côtelettes (B), is a useful instrument, and the wooden British basher
(C) is for flattening cutlets that are held between sheets of waxed
paper.



SCISSOR ACTION



Heavy shears for cutting fish fins, gristle, and rib cages are the
serrated French pair (A) and the heavy utility model (F), also
French. Poultry shears with their curved blades (B) are useful on
occasion, as are the sharp-pointed lobster shears (C). General
purpose stainless kitchen scissors with take-apart blades (E) can go
into the dishwasher. The scissor-action cherry or olive pitter (D) is
invaluable when you have those jobs to do.



FOUR PAIRS OF SPOONS

You can rarely have enough spoons, and all sizes are needed.
Large models of tough nonmetallic composition (A and B) are
essential for stirring in no-stick pans. Large stainless-steel spoons (E
and F) have hundreds of uses, as do those of serving-spoon and
soup-spoon size (C and D). The sturdy icecream spoon (H) does its
job well, as does the no-stick scoop (G).

NINE FORKS



For testing meat and artichokes, for lifting, carving, and
spearing, you need a number of sharp-pronged forks like the large
chef’s model (I) for enormous roasts and giant birds, and general-
purpose forks (E and G), as well as something like the slender
Danish three-pronged pickle fork (D). The mixing fork (H) with its
six flat-bladed prongs is a great American invention for blending
and mashing. A wooden fork (F) is useful for stirring braised rice,
and a salad fork (C), combined with spoon, does many a neat job of
tossing. The table fork (B) is constantly on call for beating eggs,
pricking pastry, general lifting, and stirring, while the small two-
pronged fork (A) comes in for pokings and turnings.

TURNOVER TOOLS—SPATULAS

Flexible-blade spatulas scrape fragile cookies off of baking
sheets, spread icings over cakes, and slide quiches onto plates; the
12-inch blade (C) and 8-inch (B) are useful sizes. The palette knife
(A) is marvelous for delicate liftings and spreadings. Pancake
turners of nonmetallic composition (D) are essential when you cook
in no-stick pans, and stainless all-purpose models (E,F,H) are
standard equipment. The very wide turner (G) does many a lifting
job, such as getting asparagus out of hot water.



WIRE WHIPS OR WHISKS

Wire whips or whisks which come in a variety of sizes from
minute to gigantic—are wonderful for beating and general mixing.



RETRIEVERS

Metal tongs (A and C) are for lifting and turning meats on a
barbeque or in a pan, as well as for retrieving items from boiling oil.
The Japanese wooden tongs (B) do many chores and are especially
great for turning bacon in the pan. Life would be hard without the
perforated spoon (E), and it is easy to become addicted to the great
Italian scoop (D).

WOODEN SPOONS, SPATULAS, AND CHOPSTICKS



Why stir it with a wooden spoon? Because it blends the flour and
butter roux without racket, and it scrapes the coagulated roasting
juices into the deglazing sauce with more quiet efficiency than
metal against metal. Actually, the French bowl-less wooden spatula
(I,G,F), or the Japanese wooden spatula (H), or the no-stick spatula
implements (C and D) are far more useful for every stirring,
scraping, mixing, and beating job than the wooden spoon (A and B).
Do not forget wooden chopsticks (E); they will beat the eggs for the
omelette, lift the green bean out of the boiling pot for testing, and
turn the bacon.

GADGETS AND MISCELLANY



Opening, prying, and poking operations will be easier on fingers
and tempers when you have something like A or C for screw-topped
jars, or the all-purpose-everything item, B. The French tool, G, is for
cans and general prying, while the box-opener-hammer-hatchet-etc.
instrument, D, is useful anywhere. Ice picks, both the single-pointed
F, and the 5-pronged E, are multi-purpose musts. Citrus zesters H



and J are good for bar as well as kitchen, and the potato ballers I
and K are useful for fruits and vegetables alike.

For grating, puréeing, and grinding, some hand-operated gadgets
do a better job than the electric blender or mixer. Use 4-sided
grater, L, when you want to grate orange rind or you need coarsely
grated Swiss cheese, or a few slices of carrot; look for one in
stainless steel. When grated cheese is to be spread over the sauce
Mornay, hold the little French rotary grater, M, right over the gratin
dish. The table model, N, is for great mounds of cheese if you do not
have a grating attachment for your electric mixer.

Again, in spite of the marvels of the electric blender, you do
need an efficient food mill for applesauce, puréeing soups, turnips,
artichoke hearts, and canned Italian plum tomatoes. The French
model, O, with removable disks and folding rubber-padded feet is
still the best, in our opinion. One with a top diameter of 9 inches is
the standard size; if you are having more than one, the 7-inch size is
handy for small jobs like sieving hard-boiled egg yolks.



The old-fashioned potato masher, P, is not to be ignored, nor is
the rectangular-headed garlic press, Q. Beware of faulty designs,
however, especially in garlic presses. These should take a quite
large, whole, unpeeled clove of garlic; the point is that you do not
have to peel the garlic. The rectangular head allows a reasonably
large clove to be puréed, and the holes should be just the right
diameter for the press to do its work easily; if the one you buy does
not perform as you think it should, take it back and demand a
refund. Get yourself a good peppermill for the kitchen; the French
Peugeot models (R and R-1), are always reliable.



Public performances are long when the flame lies low; chafing-
dish heat elements are for cooking, and must provide proper heat.
Unless you want the efficient gas-operated model, T, look for the
kind that will hold a whole can of solidified alcohol, S, and that has
an opening which will give you a large heat source.

The French salad basket, U, also comes with a rotary ratchet-
gadget that spins salad greens dry in a jiffy. The basket for the Swiss
model, V-1, fits into a container, V-2, which catches all the
splattering water as the lettuce leaves whirl inside it.






If you do not have a meat-grinder attachment for your electric
mixer, buy yourself a sturdy table model, W, always picking the
large size for quick and easy operation. Many grinders come with
the sausage-stuffing horn you will need for the charcuterie recipes
(see illustrations).

THE PASTRY BAG



From squeezing out cream puffs to making meringue cakes and
potato borders, nothing will do the work as easily nor with as
professional a look as the pastry bag (A) with its collection of
interchangeable metal tubes. Buy the big professional, washable,
canvas bags, 12, 14, and 16 inches long; in comparison with your
other kitchen equipment, these are inexpensive, and so are the
metal tubes. For a start, get 2 or 3 tubes with plain round openings
varying from ¼ to ¾ inch in diameter (B), and a cannelated group
of the same dimensions (C). Among the latter, the widely spaced
teeth (C-1) are for rough masses like potatoes duchesse, while the
fine teeth (C-2) are for icings. Ribbon tubes, both plain and
cannelated (D), are used particularly for such decorations as the
meringues for the Saint-Cyr; one of each, ¾ inch wide, should be
sufficient.

BEATING EGG WHITES



You are far more likely to welcome soufflés, meringues, cakes,
and baked Alaskas—or even to encourage them—when you have the
proper egg-white beating equipment. We urge you to consider the
type of heavy-duty electric mixer illustrated here (A). Its large
revolving whip (A-1) also rotates around the bowl, beating egg
whites so easily it will never again occur to you to think of them as
a problem. In fact, this is a replica of the large industrial machines
designed by professionals for professionals; to have a home model
available is a tremendous help to all of us.

While you are at it, buy an extra bowl and an extra whip, to save
you the chore of washing and drying in a single recipe like the Saint-
Cyr, which calls for a butter and chocolate mixture as well as for
beaten egg whites. The straight-sided bowl, in addition, is just the
right shape for raising yeast dough. The dough hook (A-2) works
very well for kneading French bread or brioche dough, while the flat
beater (A-3) will do the whole operation for a pastry dough from
working the butter into the flour to blending in the cold water;
when you are doubling or tripling pastry recipes, or blending large
batches of sausage meat, the heavy-duty action and ample bowl do
the work with ease and speed. The bowl or jack attachment that
holds either hot water or ice around the main mixing bowl (A-4)
quickly warms the eggs and sugar as you beat them into a foaming
mass, or chills the fish quenelle mixture so that you can beat in the
maximum amount of cream. The set of rotary graters, slicers, and
shredders (A-5) makes fast work of lots of cheese to grate, potatoes
or onions to slice, or even mushroom duxelles. The food processor
has made many of these attachments obsolete, but they still have
their uses, especially when you are doing large quantities.



Whether you beat egg whites by machine or by hand, the theory
and practice are the same. Have them at room temperature: they
tend to coagulate and fleck when chilled. Start beating rather slowly
until they begin to foam, add a pinch of salt and, if you are not
using unlined copper, a scant ¼ teaspoon of cream of tartar for each
4 egg whites. Gradually speed the beating action to fast as you
circulate the beater all around the bowl, keeping the whole mass in
motion, and beating in as much air as possible to increase the
volume of the egg whites by sevenfold at least, and until they form
the peak illustrated here (B).



The unlined copper bowl (C) is chic, expensive, and looks pretty
hanging by its ring on the kitchen wall; it works marvelously well.
Egg whites beaten in it retain their volume and satiny gleam, and no
one seems to know why. But a small stainless bowl (D) held in one
hand, an electric beater held in the other (E), and cream of tartar
work very well too. The important point for each is the beater-bowl
relationship. Use the largest whip that will fit into a copper bowl (F)
or the smallest stainless bowl that will function with your hand-held
electric beater; in each case, this is so that you can keep the whole
egg mass in continuous motion.

TEMPERATURE CHANGES



Great-grandmother used to calculate how hot her oven was by
the time it took to brown a piece of white paper; taffy was done
when the sugar syrup formed a hard ball in a glass of water; and if
she missed on the roast she claimed she had gotten out of the wrong
side of the bed that morning. Meat thermometers take the guess out
of roasting; standard types are the stainless model (G) and the dial
type (C). The vest-pocket thermometer (E), with its carrying case
(D), is used by professional testers, and has a dial that registers from
zero to 220 degrees F. (Weston Instruments, Inc., Newark, N.J.). A
thermometer for deep-fat frying (A) can double for candy making,
but if you do much sugar work you will want a candy thermometer
too. Accurate oven thermometers are essential for any serious
cooking. The stainless-steel type (B) is to be had in most stores; the
professional folding oven thermometer (F) is manufactured by the
Moeller Instrument Company, Richmond Hill, N.Y. When you are
warned not to let the crème anglaise come near the boil or you may
scramble the egg yolks, yet sternly reminded that you still must heat
them enough to thicken the sauce, this stainless-steel temperature
spoon (H) will tell you when 160 degrees and the danger point have
arrived; since its temperature dial registers from 50 to 400 degrees,
you can also use the spoon for sugar boiling and deep-fat frying.



MEASURING



Great-grandmother, our sacred example, measured by feel and
hearsay. Her recipes called for a piece of butter the size of a walnut
or an egg, a fistful of flour, as much milk as would fit into a teacup.
Little failures could be blamed on the weather, the wind, or the
vagaries of the coal-burning stove. We have no such excuses now,
praises be to Fannie Farmer, who pioneered the whole movement
away from the rounded soup spoon of unspecified dimensions and
the wine glass of infinite capacity; it was she who helped establish
the level tablespoon that holds exactly ½ liquid ounce, and the
strictly calibrated 8-ounce cup.

Glass measures with pouring lips are basic equipment; have the
three sizes that hold 1, 2, and 4 cups, respectively (A,B,C). Dry
measures register to capacity when the cups are filled to the brim;
these are the only accurate cup measurements for sugar, flour, and
salt. The easiest to use are the stainless-steel type with long handles



(E,F,G,H); have at least 2 sets so that some will be available while
others are being washed. At least 2 sets of measuring spoons (D) are
useful too, for the same reasons.

MEASURING FLOUR

For all flour measurements in this volume, scoop the dry-
measure cup directly into the flour sack or flour container, and fill
the cup to overflowing (A)—do not shake or pack down the flour;
sweep off excess flour even with the lip of the cup, using the
straight edge of a knife (B). Then sift the flour, if

your recipe calls for sifting; for many recipes, however, such as
pastry dough, the flour need not be sifted at all. Cups and spoons
can never measure flour with the accuracy of scales, but this scoop-
and-level system has proved itself out to our satisfaction, and is
much easier and faster than the sifting-into-cup method we used in
the first edition of Volume I. Here is a conversion and equivalency
table for measuring different flours, and for changing old Volume I
measurements into the scoop-and-level system.

FLOUR MEASURING CHART*



All-purpose and hard-wheat flour measured by the two methods

Cake flour, soft-wheat flour, French flour measured by the two
methods



PANS

ROUND CAKE PANS (A)
4-cup size, 8 inches (top) diameter, 1½ inches

deep
6-cup size, 9 by 1½ inches
FRENCH PANS—moules à biscuits, moule à manqué

6-cup size, 8½ inches (top) diameter, 1½ inches deep
8-cup size, 9 by 2 inches

SQUARE CAKE PANS (B)
6-cup size, 8 by 8 inches (top), 2 inches deep
8-cup size, 9 by 1½ inches
10-cup size, 9 by 2 inches
FRENCH PANS—moule à manqué carré

5-cup size, 7¾ by 7¾ inches (top), 1½ inches deep
7-cup size, 9 by 1½ inches

PIZZA PANS—ROUND COOKIE PANS (C)
12 to 14 inches inside diameter and ¾ inch deep
FRENCH PAN—tourtière, various sizes usually in black iron, tôle noire



JELLY-ROLL PAN—BAKING PAN (D)
15½ by 1½ inches (top), 1 inch deep
FRENCH PAN—caisse à biscuits, caisse à génoise, many sizes from 8 by

12 inches up to bakery dimensions

COOKIE SHEETS—BAKING SHEETS (E)
9 by 14 inches to 14 by 17 inches for home ovens
FRENCH BAKING SHEETS—plaques à pâtisserie, plaques à bords évasés,

plaques à pinces—in tôle noire or in aluminum, various sizes from
12 to 14 inches on up

PIE PANS—PIE PLATES (F)
4-cup size, 8 inches (top) diameter, 1¼ inches deep
5-cup size, 9 by 1½ inches
6-cup size, 11 by 1¼ inches
FRENCH PAN—no equivalent



BREAD PAN—MEAT-LOAF PAN—ANGEL-LOAF PAN (G)
4-, 6-, and 8-cup sizes, varying widely in measurements according to

individual manufacturers. For example, a pan 3½ inches deep,
with top dimensions of 10½ by 4 inches and bottom dimensions
of 9 by 2½ inches, holds 6 cups.

Angel-loaf pans are usually 13 inches long (top) for the 2-quart size,
and 16 inches for the large 4½-quart model.

FRENCH PANS—moules à cake, moules à biscottes, moules à pain de mie
(covered), in a variety of sizes

PASTRY—ROLLING, SCRAPING, AND GLAZING

If you are going into quiches, pâtés en croûte, and especially into
the fascinating realm of French puff pastry, get yourself a slab of
marble 2 feet square and ¾ to 1 inch thick; its coolness helps
prevent the dough from softening, and its smooth surface is easy to
scrape clean.

One or two professionally designed rolling pins with rolling
surfaces 16 to 18 inches long are essential for any pastry work—the
silly toy pin (A), still sold to debutante cooks, makes hard work of
any rolling operation. The French boxwood pin, rouleau à pâtisserie
en buis (B) or its Italian equivalent, both without handles, are as
useful for rolling as they are for beating chilled pastry into rolling
shape. The fine professional American ball-bearing pin (C) is heavy
enough to do half the work for you, and the cannelated pin (D), le
Tutove, is especially designed to spread out the layers of butter



inside the croissant dough as you roll. The rotary croissant cutter (E)
then finishes the operation.

For scraping pastry off the work surface, and also for cutting and
chopping dough, the hardware-store paint scraper (F) does almost as
good a job as the French pastry scraper, coupe-pâte (G). The pastry
blender (H), with its multiple chopping blades, cuts the butter into
the flour when you are making pie dough by hand—it prevents the
hot-finger syndrome that causes cardboard pastry.



Several pastry brushes (I) are needed, for glazing the tart with
beaten egg as well as for general basting; be sure to buy ones
designed for pastry or for basting, since cheap brushes leave bad
tastes and drop hairs.

SMALL MOLDS—PETITS MOULES—FOR TARTLETS, BRIOCHES, PETITS FOURS

These should be in tinned metal, fer-blanc which is less likely to
cause sticking problems than aluminum; if you have to scrub them
after baking, warm them briefly and rub lightly with oiled paper
toweling to keep the molds from rusting or sticking. Buy at least a
dozen of whatever models you chose, so that you can form and bake
as many at once as possible. Tartlet molds (A,C,I,J,E) are usually ½
inch deep and from 1½ to 3 inches in diameter or length. Individual
brioches are usually baked in the round fluted molds (B and D),
although these molds can serve for tartlets and entrée pastries too.
Baby savarins are formed and baked in the ring mold, F, while
cornets and rouleaux are formed around the metal cream horns (H
and K) and tubes (G and L).



CUTTERS—DÉCOUPOIRS; EMPORTE-PIÈCES



If you are going into serious pastry work, sets of round and oval
cutters neatly packed in tin boxes make storage and retrieval no
problem at all. Oval cutters come plain (unis), I, or fluted (cannelés),
D–H, with the smallest in the set being 1⅝ inches long and the
largest 4¾ inches. Sets of plain (J) and fluted round cutters (K–O)
go from ⅝ inch to 4 inches in diameter. The tiny cutters in the
foreground, découpoirs à truffes (P–X), make designs in truffle slices,
egg whites, and other small decorative elements for aspics and
pastries. Something like the ravioli wheel (B), the large Italian



wheel (A), or the pastry wheel (C) is always useful for pie doughs,
puff pastries, and general dough cutting.

When you must prick the sheet of dough for Napoleons, all over at
¼-inch intervals, a fork takes quite a number of minutes while the
roller pricker (Y), which doubles as a meat-tenderizer, covers the
area in a few passes; its cast-aluminum head is 2 inches in diameter
and its sturdy wooden handle is 4 inches long.

FLAN RINGS AND VOL-AU-VENT CUTTERS

Flan rings, formes sans fond (G,H,J,K, and I), come in all sizes
and many shapes; they are designed especially for making the free-
standing tart shells, pie shells, and quiches illustrated in Volume I,
pages 143–5. A set of graduated vol-au-vent cutters (A–F) comprises
12 disks slightly raised to provide a finger hold in the center; disks
range in size from 4 to 10½ inches in diameter. They are invaluable
not only for cutting the vol-au-vent, but also for making circles in
floured pastry sheets, like the cookie cups, or for any other circular
cutting or marking operations, like the free-standing tart shells.



SOUFFLÉ DISHES AND BAKING DISHES



When you are instructed to “bake the dessert in an 8-cup
cylindrical mold or dish, such as a charlotte, 4 inches deep,” A, D,
and E are the dishes to use. The French charlotte molds (A and D)
are the most useful baking dishes you can have in your kitchen,
because you can bake in them, mold in them, caramelize them, heat
them on top of the stove as well as in the oven, and you can serve
from a napkin-wrapped charlotte mold. Be sure you buy the all-
purpose type in tin-washed metal, tôle étamée; there are some
models in flimsy aluminum that are good only for cold desserts.
Useful sizes are the 6- and 8-cup models, although 3-cup, 4-cup, and
very large sizes may fill some occasional needs. The American
flameproof ceramic baking and soufflé dish (E) is excellent too, and
a little deeper than the charlottes. French ovenproof white soufflé
dishes (B and C) are attractive for baking and serving; for soufflés,
tie a paper collar around them to hold the puff, as illustrated in
Volume I, page 162.



PÂTÉ MOLDS

Although you can make do with other methods, the traditional
hinged mold for pâtés is comforting to own, decorative to look at,
and will produce the beautiful finished product illustrated. These
are of tôle étamée, tin-washed metal, and come in many sizes,
shapes, and patterns. A 2-quart (2-liter) size is the most useful when
you are buying only one. If you do not know how much a particular
mold will hold, set it on a large piece of heavy foil or brown paper,
fill with dried beans or rice, remove mold, and measure the beans or
rice.

MISCELLANEOUS SMALL MOLDS



Eggs form themselves most happily in aspic when the mold is
oval; the moules á dariole ovales, B and C, hold ½ cup and come with
plain or fancy bottoms. Babas are baked in tiny charlottes, E and F,
or the dariole ronde, A; these hold slightly over ⅓ cup, and are
useful also for individual servings of aspic, and for small soufflés
and custards. The miniature fluted mold, D, is for fancy aspics.

MOLDS FOR BAKING, FOR ASPICS, AND FOR FROZEN DESSERTS

Although the Kougloff and trois frères molds (A and D) are
designed for cakes, and the ice-cream mold (E and F) for bombes
glacées, all of the models pictured here are useful for aspics, and all,
with the obvious exception of the fish (B), would do for frozen
desserts and Bavarian creams. Use a simple pattern for frozen
desserts (C and G); beware of too complicated a design or you may
have terrible difficulties unmolding; the pattern in H is about as far
as you can go. Although more modern materials are available, we
like tôle étamée, tin-washed metal, for both baking and aspics
because it seasons well—meaning it seems to present few sticking
problems. Tin-lined copper for aspics is pretty to look at if you do
not mind the initial expense and subsequent cleaning.



WINE GLASSES



If space is a problem, you need only one type of wine glass for
Bordeaux, Burgundy, Rhine wine, Champagne, or Chianti—the
tulip-shaped glass (A) that holds ¾ to 1 cup; fill it slightly less than
half full to give room for swirling and sniffing. Equally serviceable is
the shorter glass (B). If you are going to serve both a red and a
white wine at a meal, use a larger glass (A) for the red wine in
proportion to the one for the white wine (B); the white wine glass is
usually placed on the outside. All of these are inexpensive and
should be available in any wine shop or department store, as well as
in all the restaurant and hotel supply stores. For prestigious red
Bordeaux and Burgundies, the large-bowled glass (F) is amusing; a
normal serving of 3 ounces looks small in it but develops its fullest
bouquet. If you like to see all the champagne bubbles, hollow-
stemmed crystal (E) is what to look for, although some connoisseurs



sniff at wide-mouthed glasses for that noble brew. Cut-crystal sherry
glasses (C) will start off any gathering in an elegant manner, and the
brandy snifter (D) will release after-dinner esters.

CORK SCREWS AND BOTTLE OPENERS

The reasonably priced barman’s corkscrew and bottle-cap opener
(A) is designed for professionals. The flange on the left rests on the
neck of the bottle to give you leverage, while the knife blade on the
right, extended for display here but folded into the body of the
opener when not in use, is for cutting the lead-foil cap off the wine
bottle. The familiar French zig-zag (B) does a good job of leverage
when corks are stubborn, and the heavy bottle-cap opener (C) is
highly efficient.



Index

All entries following a Roman numeral I refer to Volume I

A
agneau et mouton: see lamb and mutton
ahead-of-time cooking: symbol (*) in recipes
aïgo bouïdo (garlic soup), I: 46
aïoli (garlic mayonnaise), I: 92; 1.1, 4.1
almond (s) (amandes)

general information, I: 21, 582
brittle (pralin aux), I: 583, 617; 7.1
butter, orange, I: 651
in cakes, I: 676–7
cookies (tuiles)
cream mold (le Pélerin en timbale)
cream in puff pastry (Pithiviers)
custard filling (frangipane), I: 591, 642, 652
custard for mold (crème anglaise)
dessert creams, I: 594, 599, 605–8
ice cream, chocolate-burnt-almond (le Kilimanjaro)
meringue layers, for cake (le Succès)
soufflés, I: 617–18, 622
stuffing for zucchini
tart, lemon, I: 646
wafers, curled (tuiles aux)
and walnut puffs (croquets Denison)

ananas: see pineapple
anchovy(ies) (anchois)

butter, I: 101



potato gratins, I: 154, 474, 525
quiche, tomato, I: 148
salad Niçoise, I: 542
sauce, I: 66, 324
stuffing, with salmon, I: 338
tart, onion, I: 151
in veal patties, with tuna, I: 375

appetizers, I: 196–206
general information

bread rounds and cases, I: 199–200; 7.1
tartlet shells for

pie-crust dough, I: 200; 2.1
puff pastry (petites bouchées)

cheese
biscuits, wafers, etc., I: 197–8
puffs, I: 181
turnovers, I: 204

chipolatas (cocktail sausages)
croquettes, I: 203
spreads and fillings for

cheese filling for puff pastry
chicken-liver mousse (mousse de foies de volaille), I: 559
chicken-liver pâté (pâté de foies de volaille; farce à gratin)
cream filling

with chicken or turkey (fondue de volaille), I: 203
with shellfish or clams (fondue de crustacés), I: 202
with Swiss cheese (fondue au gruyère), I: 201–2

eggplant caviar (la Tentation de Bramafam)
flavored butters, I: 100–5
goose cracklings, I: 282; 5.1
marrow, I: 19
mayonnaise, I: 89–90
pork-liver pâté (terrine de foie de porc)

see also canapés; hors d’oeuvre
apple(s) (pommes), I: 21

aspic of, I: 627



braised, with orange sauce (à la sévillane), I: 628
charlotte, I: 623
filling for crêpes, I: 653
flan (clafouti), I: 657
gratin (pouding alsacien), I: 626
sliced, baked (gratin, normande; clafouti)
soufflés, individual, in apples (soufflées, Calvados)

other ideas
stuffing, with sausage, I: 275
tart (tarte aux; tarte normande aux), I: 635, 637–8

in puff pastry (tarte aux)
applesauce caramel mold (pommes normande en belle vue), I: 624
apricot(s) (abricots)

general information, I: 593, 654
glaze (glaçage à l’), I: 593, 670; 7.1
mousse

molded with sherbet or ice cream (bombe glacée)
with whipped cream (Chantilly)

sauce or filling (confit d’, en sirop), 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
sherbet and ice cream (mousse, glacée)
in stuffing (suckling pig)
tart (tarte aux), I: 639

arroser (to baste), I: 11
arrowroot thickening

for brown sauce, I: 70
for orange sauce, I: 276

artichoke(s) (artichauts), I: 423–34
general information, I: 423–6
boiled whole (au naturel), I: 424

cold, I: 577
braised, I: 426–7
sauces for, I: 426

artichoke hearts and bottoms, I: 298, 428–34, 478
general information, I: 428–30
cold, I: 577; 6.1
to cook, I: 430–4



gratinéed, I: 433
à la grecque, I: 538
stuffed, I: 433

en surprise (cold)
asparagus (asperges), I: 434–41

general information, I: 434–8
boiled (nature), I: 436
cold, I: 437
custard mold (timbale), I: 440
froze I: 439; 1.1
soup

cream of green (crème d’, vertes)
frozen, for
white European, for

tips (pointes), I: 438
aspics and molds (aspics), I: 544–57

general information, I: 544–6
decorative elements for, I: 546, 559
jellied stocks for, I: 112–14
to line a mold with aspic, I: 558

for pâtés and terrines, I: 565; 5.1
sauce chaud-froid for, I: 551, 563; 4.1
to unmold, I: 559

apple aspic (de pommes), I: 627
braised beef in aspic (boeuf mode en gelée), I: 556
chicken (volaille; poulet)

breasts in chaud-froid (suprêmes de), I: 551–3
fowl, I: 554; 4.1
livers in aspic (foies de), I: 548
poached in white wine, in aspic (en gelée), 4.1, 4.2
Provençal, cold in aspic (bouillabaisse de)
in tarragon aspic (en gelée à l’estragon), I: 549; 4.1

crab (crabe)
in aspic, I: 549
in chaud-froid, I: 553

eggs in aspic (oeufs en), I: 547



fowl, I: 554; 4.1
in lemon jelly (escabèche), I: 554
stewed in pieces

ham, parslied, mold of, in aspic (jambon persillé)
lobster (homard)

in aspic, I: 549
in chaud-froid, I: 553

mousses, I: 558–64
for pâté en brioche, cold
for pâté en croûte
shrimp in aspic (crevettes en), I: 549

aubergines: see eggplant

B
babas, I: 658–61
bacon, I: 15, 21

blanching, I: 15
with broccoli (brocoli sautées à la niçoise)
for larding beef, 3.1, 3.2
in quiche Lorraine, I: 147

baked Alaska flambée
baker’s oven, 2.1, 2.2
baking dishes: see kitchen equipment
bananas in brioche cake (le Marly; la Riposte)
barde de lard (pork fat), I: 564
baste, to (definition of), I: 11
batter

for cookies (pâté à langues de chats)
for dessert crêpes, I: 649–50
for entrée crêpes, I: 191
for ladyfingers, I: 666

batterie de cuisine, I: 3–10; app1.1
see also kitchen equipment

bavarian creams (bavarois), I: 596–603



almond (praliné), I: 599
chocolate (au chocolat), I: 599
orange (à l’orange), I: 596
with rice and fruits (riz à l’Impératrice), I: 601
strawberry, raspberry, and other fruits (aux fruits), I: 600

bay leaves (American, French), I: 18
beans

dry white, I: 399–404
baked (cassoulet), I: 401–4

variations, I: 404
to boil, I: 401
with lamb, I: 338
to pressure-cook, I: 400
with purée of pumpkin (gratin de potiron d’Arpajon)
soup, with eggplant (soupe à la Victorine)

green or string (haricots verts), I: 442–7
general information, I: 442–3, 449
buttered (à l’anglaise; à la maître d’hôtel), I: 444
cold in salade niçoise, I: 542
creamed (à la crème; sauce crème), I: 445
gratinéed with cheese (gratinés, à la mornay), I: 446
with tomatoes (à la provençale), I: 447

wax or yellow pod, I: 448–9
béarnaise sauce, I: 84, 85
beating

definition of, I: 11
of egg whites, I: 159–60; app1.1

hand-held electric beater
of egg yolks and sugar, I: 579
of eggs for omelettes, I: 127
of sugar and butter, I: 581

béchamel sauce, I: 55–64; 6.1
beef (boeuf), I: 288–328; 3.1

general information, I: 288–9
cuts for

boiling, I: 307



braising, I: 310; 3.1
filet steaks, I: 290–1; 3.1
hamburger, I: 301
paupiettes, roulades
steaks, I: 289–91, 293; 3.1
stews, I: 314; 3.1

grades of, I: 288–9
marinades

for braised beef, I: 310; 3.1, 3.2
discussion of
for filet, I: 306
for stews, I: 323; 3.1
wine marinades, I: 310; 3.1

arm and shoulder steak
for braising
for paupiettes

boiled (pot-au-feu; potée normande), I: 306
bottom round

boiled, I: 306
braised, I: 310; 3.1, 3.2
for braising and stewing
for paupiettes
in stews, I: 315

bourguignon, I: 315
brains: see brains
braised (pot roast)

general information, I: 309–10; 3.1, 3.2
cold, in aspic (mode en gelée), I: 556
hollowed out and stuffed (en caisse, surprise)
minced, in beef shell (pièce de, à la cuillère), I: 313
in red wine (à la mode), I: 309
in salad (salade de, à la parisienne), I: 543
with wine and tomatoes (en daube à la provençale)

brioché, Wellington (filet de, en croûte)
brisket

boiled, I: 307



braised
for braising

chuck
boiled, I: 307
braised, I: 310; 3.1
for braising and stewing
in stews, I: 315

cold, I: 322, 324, 543, 556, 576
daubes: see beef, braised; beef, stews
eye of round

braised, I: 310; 3.1
described

filet of (filet de), I: 290–1, 303–6, 325–8; 3.1; see also beef,
tenderloin

filet steaks (tournedos), I: 290–1, 296–300
with artichoke hearts

and béarnaise sauce (Henry IV), I: 298
and foie gras (Rossini), I: 299

with mushrooms and Madeira sauce (chasseur), I: 297
flank, for braising
fricassees, I: 314–25
ground (hamburgers), I: 300–3
heel of round, for stewing
knuckle: see beef, sirloin tip
larding of, 3.1, 3.2
leftover

braised
cold, in aspic (mode en gelée), I: 556
in Provençal sausages or meat loaf (tous nus)
in salad (en salade), I: 543

liver, in pâtés
marrow (moelle)

preparation of, I: 19
sauces with, I: 76, 294–5, 419

plate, for stewing and braising
ragoûts: see beef, stews



rolls, stuffed (paupiettes de; roulades de; petites ballotines de), I:
318; 3.1

cuts for
giant (la paupiette de Gargantua)
with peppers, onions, and mustard bread (paupiettes de, à la

catalane)
stuffings for, I: 319, 565; 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, app.1

round, for stewing and braising
rump

boiled, I: 307
braised, I: 310; 3.1
for paupiettes
in stews, I: 315

salad, with potatoes (salade de, à la parisienne), I: 543
sautés (filet), I: 325–8
short ribs, for stewing
shoulder: see beef, chuck
sirloin tip, or knuckle

boiled, I: 307
braised, I: 310; 3.1
for stewing
in stews, I: 315

steaks, I: 289–300
pan-broiled (bifteck sauté), I: 292–6
pepper (au poivre), I: 296
tenderloin (tournedos, etc.), I: 290–1, 296–300

stews (ragoûts de), I: 314–25
cuts for, I: 314; 3.1
daubes, I: 322–5; 3.1
with garlic and anchovy (à la provençale)
with ginger, capers, and herbs (au gingembre)
with herbs, cheese, and garlic (au pistou)
with olives and potatoes (aux olives)
with onions and beer (carbonnades à la flamande), I: 317
with onions and red wine (aux oignons)
with peppers and tomatoes (en pipérade)



in red wine (bourguignon), I: 315
with rice and tomatoes (à la catalane), I: 321
stuffed rolls (paupiettes de; roulades de; petites ballotines de), I:

318; 3.1
with vegetables (daubes), I: 322–5, 576

stocks, I: 107–10
Stroganoff (beef sauté), I: 325
stuffed, I: 313; 3.1

paupiettes, I: 318; 3.1
in stuffing with ham, for cabbage leaves
suet, for larding, 3.1, 3.2

tenderloin (filet)
general information, I: 290–1; 3.1

trimming, tying, and larding
baked in mushroom duxelles or matignon vegetables
baked in pastry, Wellington (en croûte)
casserole-roasted, with aromatic vegetables (poêlé)
with onions, mushrooms, and olives (à la bourgeoise)
sautés of, I: 325–8
sliced, roasted, with mushroom stuffing (en feuilletons,

duxelles)
steaks (châteaubriands; tournedos; filets), I: 290–1, 296–300
stuffed, foie gras, truffles (Prince Albert), I: 303

tongue: see tongues, beef
top roast: see beef, braised
top round

braised, I: 310; 3.1, 3.2
for braising and stewing
for paupiettes
in stews, I: 315

tournedos: see beef, tenderloin
tripe
Wellington, brioché (en croûte)

beet and rice salad (à la d’Argenson), I: 543
Bercy sauce, I: 210, 294
beurre: see butter, butters



biscuits, cheese (bouchées; galettes; baguettes), I: 196–8
bisque(s)

crab (de crabes)
crayfish (d’écrevisses)
lobster (de homard à l’américaine)
shrimp (de crevettes)

blackberry flan (clafouti aux mûres), I: 657
blanc, for artichoke bottoms, I: 430
blanch, to, I: 11

bacon, I: 15
brains and sweetbreads, I: 409
broccoli, I: 455; 6.1
cauliflower, I: 457
eggplant, 6.1, 6.2
green vegetables, I: 421, 443, 450, 468
rice, I: 529
turnips, I: 486
zucchini

blanchir (to blanch), I: 11
blend, to (definition of), I: 11
blender: see electric blender
blettes: see chard
blueberry(ies) (myrtilles)

in brioche cake (le Marly; la Riposte)
flan (clafouti aux myrtilles), I: 657
with rum babas, I: 661

boeuf: see beef
boil, to (definition of), I: 11
bombe glacée: see desserts, frozen
boning

of breast of whole chicken (half-boning or demi-désossée)
of chicken breasts, I: 267
of leg of lamb, I: 329; 3.1
of poultry, I: 570
of veal breast

bonne femme sauce, I: 216



bordelaise sauce, I: 76, 295, 419
bouchées

chicken garniture for (de volaille, financière)
potato cheese sticks (Parmentier au fromage), I: 198
puff pastry dough for
puff pastry shells for, 2.1, 2.2
seafood garniture for (dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)
sweetbread garniture for (ris de veau à la financière)

boudin blanc, 4.1, 5.1
bouillabaisse

chicken, poached in white wine
with aïoli sauce (poulet en bourride)
provençal (de poulet)
with vegetables and egg-yolk sauce (waterzooi de poulet)

fish (à la marseillaise), I: 52
scallops (Saint-Jacques)

bouilli
cheese filling for pastries
sauce base for soufflés, I: 614, 619

bouillir (to boil), I: 11
bouquet garni, I: 18
bourguignonne sauce, I: 76
bourride

of chicken
of fish

brains (calf, lamb, etc.) (cervelles), I: 408–9, 413–16
blanching of, I: 409
braised (braisées), I: 415
cold, I: 577
leftover, in gratin, I: 157
in pâté, with veal, chicken, spinach (terrine verte)
in red wine (en matelote), I: 415
sautéed, brown butter sauce (au beurre noir), I: 413
soufflé, I: 167

braise, to (definition of), I: 11
braiser (to braise), I: 11



braising: see beef; lamb; etc.
brandy

for cooking, I: 32
sauce for pepper steak, I: 296

bread(s) (pain)
general information, 2.1

dough texture, volume, temperature
equipment for making, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, app1.1, app1.2
kneading, hand vs. machine
timing
weather
yeast

brioches; see also brioches
cases (croûtes), preparation of, I: 200
croissants; see also croissants
croûtons
crumbs, I: 21, 266

in stuffings: see list of stuffings, app.1
dough(s) (pâtes)

general information, 2.1
delayed action, 2.1, 2.2
chart

to freeze
brioches
croissants, 2.1, 2.2
French
sandwich

egg (brioché; brioche commune; Louis XV)
with raisins (brioché aux raisins)

freezing: see directions in each recipe
French

general information, 2.1
baker’s oven, simulated
delayed action
dough for

sour dough



equipment needed
special equipment (baker’s oven), 2.1, 2.2

flour for
forming

long loaves (ficelles)
rolls (petits pains, tire-bouchons, champignons)
round loaves (pain de ménage, miches, boules)

kneading
hand-kneading, 2.1, 2.2
machine-kneading, 2.1, 2.2

self-criticism
shapes, illustrated
slashing

long loaves, 2.1, 2.2
rolls, 2.1, 2.2
round loaves

storing of
plain (pain français)

hard-toasted (croûtes), I: 44
honey (d’épices)
for Melba toast (de mie)
pans, sizes

for white sandwich (de mie), 2.1, 2.2
raisin

egg (brioché)
kougloff (brioche)
white (de mie)

rolls
brioches, small
croissants
of French bread dough, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3

rounds (canapés), I: 199; 7.1
spice (d’épices)
white sandwich (de mie)

pans for, 2.1, 2.2
breasts of chicken: see chicken, breasts of



brioche(s)
general information

dough for
pâte à, commune
pâte à, fine

kneading
by hand
by machine

pans and molds for, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, app1.1
crust (covering)

for beef Wellington
for boned lamb (gigot farci, en croûte)
for pâté
for sausage and pâté
for stuffed veal (feuilletons de veau)

large (grosse, à tête)
with raisins (kougloff)
ring-shaped (en couronne)
shortcake (le Marly; la Riposte)
small (petites, à tête)

British
measures, I: 20–1
oven temperatures, I: 25

brittle (pralin)
almond, I: 583; 7.1
walnut

broccoli (choux brocoli), I: 455–6; 6.1
general information, 6.1

buying
cooking methods
preparing
recipes to prepare ahead

blanched, plain boiled (blanchis)
braised in butter (étuvés au beurre)
with bread crumbs and chopped egg (à la polonaise)
in brown butter (au beurre noir)



with cheese (gratinés au fromage, à la milanaise)
chopped

with cheese sauce (gratin de, mornay)
in cream (étuvés à la crème)
sautéed (sauté de)

cold
custard molds (timbales de)
with lemon (au citron)
with poached eggs
sauces for
sautéed with onions, bacon, and bread crumbs (à la niçoise)

brown sauces, I: 66–76
broyage suisse: see Succès, le
Brussels sprouts (choux de Bruxelles), I: 449–55

blanched (blanchis), I: 450
braised

in butter (étuvés au beurre), I: 451
with chestnuts (aux marrons), I: 452

browned with cheese (à la milanaise), I: 453
chopped, with cream (à la crème), I: 453
creamed (étuvés à la crème), I: 452
custard mold (timbales de), I: 454
frozen, I: 454
gratinéed with cheese sauce (à la mornay, gratinés), I: 453

buffet, cold, I: 536–78
butter (beurre)

general information, I: 15–16, 22
American and French, I: 15
clarified, I: 15
creaming of, I: 100
foam, I: 16
for sauce enrichment, I: 58
and sugar (creaming of), I: 581
unsalted or sweet, I: 15

cake, yellow (le quatre quarts)
creams: see cake fillings and frostings



and flour
paste (sauce thickener), I: 58, 65, 265
roux (sauce thickener)

for brown sauces, I: 68
for white sauces, I: 56

sauces: see sauces, butter
butter(s), cold flavored (beurres), I: 99–105

anchovy (d’anchois), I: 101
crab (de crabe), I: 104; 1.1
crayfish (d’écrevisses), I: 104; 1.1
egg yolk (à l’oeuf), I: 101
garlic (d’ail), I: 101

and herbs (snail butter) (pour escargots), I: 103
herb (tarragon, etc.) (maître d’hôtel; de fines herbes; d’estragon),

I: 102
lobster (de homard), I: 104; 1.1
mustard (de moutarde), I: 100
orange, I: 650

and almond, I: 651
shallot

and red wine (marchand de vins), I: 103
and white wine (bercy), I: 103

shellfish (de crustacés), I: 104; 1.1
shrimp (de crevettes), I: 104; 1.1

C
cabbage (chou), I: 22

red (rouge)
braised with chestnuts (à la limousine), I: 496
with duck, I: 280

soup (garbure), I: 48
stuffed

leaves (feuilles de, farcies)
alternate stuffing of beef and ham



leaves, small ball-shaped (petits, farcis)
whole (farci)

cabinet pudding, I: 612
caillettes (pork and liver sausages)
cake(s) (gâteaux), I: 667–80

general information, I: 667–9
directions for filling and icing, I: 672–5

butter spongecake (biscuit au beurre), I: 669
chocolate

and almond (Reine de Saba), I: 677
made from leftover cake (la charlotte africaine)
rich, light (le Glorieux)
spongecake (le Marquis), I: 679

fruit in, to keep from sinking
fruitcake (le cake)
honey cake (pain d’épices)
for layer cakes (le Génoise électrique)
meringue-almond, individual brésiliens)
meringue-nut layer (le Succès; le Progrès; la Dacquoise)

variations
orange (à l’orange)

and almond spongecake (et aux amandes), I: 676
spongecake, I: 671

for petits fours (le Génoise électrique)
pound cake (le quatre quarts)
spice cake (pain d’épices)
spongecake with orange-butter filling, I: 672
walnut (aux noix; le Saint-André)

with apricot filling (le Saint-André aux abricots)
yellow butter (le quatre quarts)
yellow loaf, with rum, raisins, cherries (le cake)

cake fillings and frostings
general information, I: 672–5, 680–1

list and description
almond brittle, I: 583; 7.1
apricot (abricot)



filling (confit d’, en sirop), 7.1, 7.2
glaze (glaçage à l’), I: 593, 670; 7.1

butter creams (crème au beurre)
chocolate, kirsch, rum, etc., I: 680–4
custard-based (à l’anglaise)
lemon (au citron), I: 676
meringue-based
orange (à l’orange), I: 674
with pralin (nut brittle)

chocolate (melted chocolate and butter), I: 684; 7.1
custard, for rum cake
fondant, 7.1, 7.2
glazes, I: 593–4, 670; 7.1, 7.2
lemon-cream filling (crème au citron), I: 676; 7.1
meringue

butter-cream (crème au beurre à la meringue italienne)
decorations (meringue italienne)
with whipped cream (Chantilly meringuée)
white

orange-butter filling, I: 672
orange-cream filling (crème à l’orange)
red currant glaze (gelée de groseilles), I: 594
sugar icing (fondant)
walnut brittle (pralin aux noix)

cake pans
round (moules à biscuits), I: 143; app1.1
sizes
square (moules à manqué carré)

canapés
bread rounds, sautéed in butter, I: 199–200; 7.1
liver, for roast birds, I: 247
marrow for, I: 19
preparation of, I: 199
spinach and cheese, I: 472
see also appetizers; hors d’oeuvre

canard: see duck, duckling



candied fruits: see glacéed fruits
candy

chocolate truffles (les truffes aux chocolat)
walnut and almond puffs (les croquets Denison)

caneton: see duck, duckling
caper sauce (sauce au capres), I: 65
capers in brown butter sauce, I: 99
capon, caponette (chapon), I: 235; 4.1

casserole-roasted, I: 249
caramel, I: 583–5

almond cream (plombières), I: 594
almond soufflé (île flottante), I: 622
applesauce mold (pommes normande en belle vue), I: 624
custards, I: 610–11; 7.1
to line a mold with, I: 584; 7.1
to make (syrup), I: 584; 7.1
walnut ice cream

caramelized
almonds, I: 583, 617; 7.1
apples, in upside-down tart (la tarte des Demoiselles Tatin), I: 638
cookies
walnuts

carrots (carottes), I: 22, 28–9, 476–80
with artichoke hearts (à la forestière), I: 478
braised (étuvées au beurre), I: 477
creamed (à la crème), I: 478

with onions and garlic (à la concierge), I: 480
glazed (glacées), I: 479
with herbs (aux fines herbes), I: 477
with scalloped potatoes, I: 525
Vichy, I: 479

casings, for sausages
cassoulet, I: 399–404

variations, I: 404
caul fat

general information



for sausage casing, 5.1, 5.2
for wrapping beef tenderloin
for wrapping veal, 3.1, 3.2

cauliflower (chou-fleur), I: 456–61
blanched (blanchi), I: 457
custard mold (timbale de), I: 461
au gratin with cheese (à la mornay, gratiné), I: 459

and tomatoes (aux tomatoes fraîches), I: 459
purée with watercress (en verdure), I: 460
soup with watercress (potage de la Fontaine Dureau)

céleri: see celery
céleri-rave: see celery root
celeriac: see celery root
celery (céleri), I: 22

braised (braisés), I: 491
cold, I: 492, 578

à la grecque, I: 538
soup, with potatoes and leeks (potage Célestine)

celery root; celeriac (céleri-rave)
braised (braisé), I: 492
cold, mustard sauce (rémoulade), I: 540

Centigrade-Fahrenheit conversions, I: 24–5
cervelles: see brains
champagnes, types to serve, I: 34
champignons: see mushrooms
Chantilly (whipped cream), I: 580; 7.1, 7.2, 7.3

with meringue, for fillings and ice cream
charcuterie chez soi

general information
see also goose, preserved; pâtés and terrines; pork, dry-salt curing;

sausages
chard (blettes)

in beef sausages (tous nus)
braised with onions
with cheese sauce (gratinées)
in pork and liver sausages (caillettes)



in stuffings, 3.1, 3.2, 5.1
charlotte(s)

almond custard with chocolate (basque), I: 608
apple (aux pommes), I: 623
chocolate dessert or layer-cake from leftover cake (africaine)
malakoff

chocolate (au chocolat), I: 607
with raspberries (aux framboises), I: 607
with strawberries (aux fraises), I: 605

molds for, I: 161–2; app1.1
rum-cake caramel custard, flambée (Jamaïque en flammes)
strawberry or raspberry cream (Chantilly, aux fraises ou aux

framboises), I: 608
châteaubriand, I: 290–1
chaud-froid: see sauces, chaud-froid
cheese (fromage)

general information, I: 16, 22
biscuits or wafers (bouchées; galettes; baguettes), I: 196–8
fillings

for appetizers, I: 201–2; 2.1
for crêpes, I: 194
fondue, for cream horns, mille-feuilles, and croquets

Napoleons (mille-feuilles à la fondue de)
omelette, I: 135
puffed dish, from vol-au-vent insides (ramequin du juste milieu)
puffs (petits choux au), I: 181
quiches, I: 147–8
sauces: see sauces, cheese; sauces, mornay
soufflés, I: 163, 171, 173

variations, I: 173
sticks (bouchées Parmentier au), I: 198
to stuff roast pork, I: 385
in stuffings, I: 243, 251, 358, 502; 6.1, 6.2
tarts, I: 647–8

with puff pastry (feuilletée au; jalousie au)
turnovers (petits chaussons au roquefort), I: 204



cherry(ies) (cerises)
with duck, I: 278
flans (clafoutis), I: 655, 656, 658
tart (tarte aux, flambée), I: 643

chestnut(s) (marrons), I: 517–20
braised (braisés), I: 519

with Brussels sprouts, I: 452
with red cabbage, I: 496

purée, I: 518
and sausage stuffing, I: 286

chicken (poulet et poularde et volaille), I: 234–71; 4.1
general information, I: 234–40, 251–3; 4.1

to bone
breasts, I: 267
half-boned
whole, I: 570

to buy
cut up (ready-cut)
whole

defrosting, I: 235
disjointing of whole, I: 254
fryers (pans for) (sautoirs)
half-boning and stuffing
preparation for cooking

breasts, I: 267
cut up, I: 254; 4.1
whole

to bone and stuff
for poaching
to truss, I: 237–9; 271
washing, singeing, I: 236

stock, I: 109–10, 236–7
scraps for

stuffings for, I: 243, 251; 4.1, 4.2, 5.1, app.1
to truss, I: 237–9; 4.1
types of



chart, ages and sizes, I: 235
for poaching whole

boiled (pot au feu), I: 306
boudin blanc (sausage), 4.1, 5.1
bouillabaisse, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
breasts of (suprêmes de), I: 267–71

cold in chaud-froid, I: 551–3
poached in butter, I: 268–70

with cream sauce (à blanc), I: 268
with mushrooms (aux champignons), I: 269
with paprika (Archiduc), I: 268
with vegetables (à l’écossaise), I: 269

sautéed in butter (à brun), I: 270–1
broiled with mustard (grillés à la diable), I: 265
cold

in aspic (en gelée), 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
bouillabaisse of
chaud-froid

breasts, I: 551–3
pieces (morvandelle)
whole (poularde en)

in lemon jelly (en escabèche), I: 554
list of other dishes, I: 576
in tarragon aspic (en gelée à l’estragon), I: 549; 4.1

coq au vin, I: 263
cut up: see chicken, breasts; chicken, fricassees; chicken, poached;

chicken, sautéed
filling for

appetizers, I: 203
bouchées and vol-au-vent (garniture de volaille, financière)

fowl
boiled (pot au feu), I: 306
in lemon jelly (escabèche), I: 554
poached in wine

fricassees (fricassée de), I: 258–65
with curry (à l’indienne), I: 261



fondue with cream (fondue de, à la crème), I: 262
with paprika (au paprika), I: 262
in red wine (coq au vin), I: 263
with tarragon (à l’estragon), I: 262
with wine sauce (à l’ancienne), I: 258

giblets in stuffing, I: 243, 251
half-boned (demi-désossée)

poached (à la d’Albuféra)
stuffed, in pastry crust (en soutiengorge; en croûte)

leftover
in filling for appetizers, I: 203
in gratin, I: 157
mousse (mousseline de volaille), I: 560

liver: see liver, chicken
mousse of, I: 560
pâté

with pork and liver (de campagne)
with veal and spinach (terrine verte)

pieces: see chicken, breasts; chicken, fricassees; chicken, poached;
chicken, sautéed

poached (poché), pieces
with aïoli sauce (en bourride)
in aspic (en gelée), 4.1, 4.2
chaud-froid (morvandelle)
fowl
gratinéed with cheese (mornay)
in white wine (bouillabaisse)

with cream sauce (waterzooi)
and vegetables (au vin blanc)

poached (poché), whole
general information, 4.1
casserole-poached, in wine and tarragon (à l’estragon)
half-boned, stuffed (à la d’Albuféra)

quenelles of, I: 189
roast (rôti), I: 240–9

basted with cream (à la normande), I: 243



casserole-roasted (poêlé), I: 249–53
oven-roasted, I: 240
with port wine and mushrooms (au porto), I: 245
spit-roasted (à la broche), I: 242
with stuffings, I: 243, 251
timetable, for roasting, I: 240

sausage (boudin blanc), 4.1, 5.1
sautéed (sauté), I: 254

with cream, I: 256
with herbs and garlic, I: 257
with tomato and mushroom sauce, I: 256

squab, roasted (coquelets sur canapés), I: 246
stuffings

foie gras, truffles, livers, rice (d’Albuféra)
herb and giblet (à la normande), I: 243
mushroom (duxelles), I: 251
other stuffings, 4.1, 5.1
see also list, app.1

tarragon (estragon)
in aspic, I: 549; 4.1
casserole-roasted, I: 249
fricassee, I: 262
poached with white wine, whole

whole: see chicken, half-boned; chicken, poached; chicken, roast
chipolatas (definition)

to cook
chocolate (chocolat)

butter creams, I: 680–4
cake

and almond (Reine de Saba), I: 677
layer, from leftover cake (la charlotte africaine)
rich and light (le Glorieux)
spongecake (le Marquis), I: 679

dessert creams
almond (charlotte malakoff au), I: 607
bavarian (bavarois), I: 599



custard with almonds (charlotte basque), I: 608
plombières, I: 595

filling for cake
ice cream

burnt-almond (le Kilimanjaro)
frozen mousse molded in meringues (le Saint-Cyr)
vanilla ice cream with chocolate sauce (Chantilly glacée, au)

icing (glaçage), I: 684
to melt, I: 582; see also icing for Napoleons
mousse, I: 604

frozen (le Saint-Cyr)
sauce
soufflé, I: 619
truffles

chop, how to, I: 27
chou: see cabbage
chou rouge: see cabbage, red
choucroute: see sauerkraut
chou-fleur: see cauliflower
choux (puff shells), I: 177–81
choux aspèrges: see asparagus
choux brocoli: see broccoli
choux de Bruxelles: see Brussels sprouts
chowders, fish
citrouille: see pumpkin
clafouti(s), I: 655–8

apple (aux pommes), I: 657; 7.1
rum, and raisins (normande)

blackberry or blueberry (aux mûres; aux myrtilles), I: 657
cherry, I: 655

with liqueur (à la liqueur), I: 656
or pear, with almonds (à la Bourdaloue), I: 658

pear (aux poires), I: 656, 658
plum (aux pruneaux; aux prunes), I: 657; 7.1
see also suggestions for other fruits

clam



filling for appetizers, I: 202
juice for fish soups, I: 51
juice for fish stock, I: 115

clarification of meat stocks, I: 111
clarified butter, I: 15
coat a spoon (definition of), I: 11
cochon de lait: see pork, suckling pig
cocktail appetizers: see appetizers
cognac

for cooking, I: 32
for jellied stocks and aspics, I: 114

cold
buffet, I: 536–78
dishes, list of, I: 576–8
see also chicken, cold; soups, cold; etc.

collards
braised with onions
with pork and liver sausages (caillettes)
in stuffing for beef roll

compote of fruit
peaches, poached in syrup, I: 630
pears poached in red wine, I: 642; 7.1

concombres: see cucumbers
cone, paper decorating, to make
confit d’oie: see goose, preserved
cookie(s) (petits gâteaux sucrés)

almond wafers, curved (tuiles aux amandes)
doughs (pâtes sucrées; pâte sablée; pâte sèche)
pans and sheets (plaques à pâtisserie)
puff pastry

palm-leaf-shaped (palmiers)
tongue-shaped (couques)

serving cups for ices, fruits, and dessert creams (coupelles,
langues de chats)

sugar (galettes sablées), I: 635
coq au vin, I: 263



coq en pâte
coquilles Saint-Jacques, I: 216–18

bouillabaisse
see also scallops

cornet en papier, to make
cornets, puff pastry, 2.1, 7.1
Cornish game hen, I: 246, 549, 554
cornstarch

for soufflé sauce base, I: 614, 619
thickening for brown sauce, I: 70

couper en dès (to dice), I: 13
courges, courgettes: see pumpkin; squashes; zucchini
court bouillon

for eggplant (en pistouille)
for scallop soup
for vegetables, I: 536

crab(s) (crabes)
general information, 1.1

cleaning and cutting up raw
removing meat from cooked
tomalley

in aspic, I: 549
bisque
butter (beurre de), I: 104; 1.1
in chaud-froid, I: 553
quenelles, I: 189
quiche, I: 149
soufflé, I: 167, 170
soup

bisque
cream of (velouté de crustacés)

timbales, I: 175
cracklings, goose, I: 282; 5.1
crawfish (crayfish) (écrevisses)

bisque
butter (beurre d’, I: 104; 1.1



to cook, I: 213
cream (crème)

general information, I: 16–17
cheese, I: 16
enrichment (white sauces), I: 59
French, duplication of, I: 16
sauces: see sauces, cream
sour, to make, I: 16; 1.1
to whip, I: 580; 422, 430, 450
whipped (Chantilly), I: 580; 7.1, 7.2

frozen swirls
with Italian meringue, for fillings and ice cream (Chantilly

meringuée)
as bombe glacée
as ice cream (Chantilly glacée)

crème
anglaise, I: 588, 683; 7.1

butter, for icings (au beurre)
brûlée, I: 589
Chantilly: see cream, whipped
double, I: 16
fraîche, I: 16; 4
pâtissière, I: 590
plombières, I: 594–6
Saint-Honoré, I: 591
Sainte-Anne au caramel, I: 611

crêpes for dessert, I: 648–55
with almond cream (fourrées, frangipane), I: 652
batters, I: 649–50
fillings for, I: 654
mound of, with apples (gâteau de, à la normande), I: 653
with orange-almond butter (fourrées et flambées), I: 651
soufflées, I: 650
Suzette, I: 650

crêpes for entrée, I: 190–5
batter, I: 191



molded (timbale de), I: 195
mound of (gâteau de, à la florentine), I: 193
à la pipérade
potato (de pommes de terre), I: 521
spinach (petites, d’épinards), I: 474
over spinach (en surprise), I: 473
stuffed and rolled (farcies et roulées), I: 195

crépine, crépinette: see caul fat
crevettes: see shrimp
croissants

dough for
forming
freezing of, 2.1, 2.2
kneading

croquettes (crèmes frites; fondues; cromesquis), I: 203
croûte(s)

bread cases, I: 200
en croûte: see pastry(ies), crust
for soup, I: 44

croûtons, I: 199; 1.1
cucumbers (concombres), I: 499–501

baked (au beurre), I: 499
with cheese sauce (à la mornay), I: 501
cold, à la grecque, I: 538
creamed (à la crème), I: 500

with mushrooms (aux champignons), I: 501
parslied (persillés), I: 500
soup (potage aux)

cup custards, I: 611
cup-deciliter equivalents, I: 21
currant glaze, I: 594
curry sauce, I: 63, 73

for chicken fricassee, I: 261
for beef tongue

custard(s)
desserts



almond with chocolate (charlotte basque), I: 608
almond cream (le Pélerin en timbale)
applesauce caramel mold (pommes normande en belle vue), I:

624
bavarian creams (bavarois), I: 596–603
caramel (crème renversée au caramel), I: 610–11
caramel almond plombières, I: 594
chocolate plombières, I: 595
cup, I: 611
with glacéed fruit (diplomate; pouding de cabinet), I: 612
pineapple (flan des isles), I: 631

plombières, I: 596
raspberry plombières, I: 595
rum-cake caramel custard, flambée (charlotte Jamaïque en

flammes)
strawberry plombières, I: 595
tarts, fruit, I: 637, 640–5

fillings for, I: 590–2
entrée molds: see timbales for entrée
fillings for desserts

almond cream, I: 591, 652; 7.1
butter-cream for cake (crème au beurre à l’anglaise)
crème pâtissière, I: 590

with egg whites (crème Saint-Honoré), I: 591
for rum cake

sauce, I: 588, 683; 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
cutting methods

mushrooms, I: 509–11
vegetables, I: 26–30

D
Dacquoise, la
daubes: see beef, braised; beef, stews; lamb, stews
deciliter-cup equivalents, I: 21



decorating cone, paper, to make
definitions, list of, I: 11–14
déglacer (to deglaze), I: 11
deglaze, to (definition of), I: 11
deglazing sauce, I: 76, 255–6, 271
dégraisser (to degrease), I: 12
degrease, to (directions for), I:
desserts, I: 579–665; 7.1

cold
almond cream mold (le Pélerin en timbale)
almond puff pastry (Pithiviers)
apple(s) (pommes)

in aspic, I: 627
braised (à la Sevillane), I: 628
gratin (pouding alsacien), I: 626
sliced, baked (gratin de pommes, normande; clafouti aux

pommes)
applesauce caramel mold (pommes normande en belle vue), I:

624
bavarian creams, I: 596–603
charlottes, I: 605, 607, 608, 623; 7.1
chocolate (chocolat)

dessert made from leftover cake (la charlotte africaine)
mousse (mousseline au, mayonnaise au fondant au), I: 604

crème brûlée, I: 589
meringue-nut layer cake (la Dacquoise)

variations
orange mousse with pineapple (mousse d’oranges, à l’ananas)
oranges, glazed (oranges glacées), I: 629
peach compote (pêches cardinal), I: 630
pears, baked (poires au gratin), I: 630
plombières, I: 594–6
rice mold, orange-flavored, with cherries (riz des Hespérides)
strawberry brioche cake (le Marly; la Riposte)
walnut cake (gâteau aux noix; le Saint-André)
see also desserts, frozen; desserts, puff pastry; tarts for dessert



cookie serving cups (coupelles, langues de chats)
custards: see custards, desserts
fillings

almond cream, for puff pastry (Pithiviers)
for bombes glacées (pralin aux noix)
chocolate mousse (mousse au chocolat)
for crêpes, I: 650–4
custard: see custards, fillings for desserts
whipped cream with Italian meringue (Chantilly meringuée)

frozen (ice creams, mousses, sherbets)
baked Alaska flambée (la surprise du Vésuve)
bombe glacée

with apricot mousse and other sherbet
filling for, walnut-caramel ice cream
with vanilla ice cream (Chantilly glacée)

ice cream
apricot (mousse à l’abricot, Chantilly)
chocolate-burnt-almond (le Kilimanjaro; glace au chocolat,

pralinée)
peach (aux pêches)
raspberry (aux framboises)
strawberry (aux fraises)
vanilla, with chocolate sauce (Chantilly glacée, au chocolat)
other sauces and flavorings
walnut-caramel (mousse glacée, pralinée aux noix; appareil à

bombe)
whipped cream with Italian meringue for (Chantilly

meringuée)
mousse and sherbet

apricot sherbet (mousse à l’abricot)
with cream (Chantilly)
chocolate mousse molded in meringues (le Saint-Cyr)
glacée or parfait
orange mousse (mousse à l’orange), with pineapple and

candied orange peel (à l’ananas)
peach sherbet (aux pêches)



raspberry sherbet (mousse aux framboises, glacée)
strawberry sherbet (mousse aux fraises, glacée)
soufflé glacé
whipped cream swirls, frozen

fruit
clafoutis (fruit flans): see clafoutis
ice creams, mousses, sherbets: see desserts, frozen
shortcake, with berries and other fruits (le Marly; la Riposte)
tarts: see tarts for dessert
see also other desserts and specific fruits

hot
apple(s) (pommes)

braised (à la Sevillane), I: 628
charlotte, I: 623
sliced, baked (gratin de, normande)
soufflés, in apples (soufflées, Calvados)
other ideas

applesauce caramel mold (pommes normande en belle vue), I:
624

clafoutis (fruit flans): see clafoutis
crêpes: see crêpes for dessert
pears (poires)

baked (au gratin), I: 630
poached, baked in meringue, wine custard sauce

(meringuées, au sabayon)
rum-cake caramel custard, flambée (charlotte Jamaïque en

flammes)
soufflés: see soufflés, sweet or dessert

ice creams: see desserts, frozen
molded

caramel, to line mold, I: 584; 452
ladyfingers, to line mold, I: 585
unmolding, I: 586

mousses, frozen: see desserts, frozen
puff pastry

almond cream in (Pithiviers)



apple tart in (tarte aux pommes)
cookies, palm-leaf, caramelized sugar (palmiers)
cream horns (cornets), 2.1, 7.1
cream rolls (rouleaux), 2.1, 7.1
jalousie
mille-feuilles
Napoleons (mille-feuilles)
pear tart in (tarte aux poires)
peekaboo jam or fruit tart (jalousie)
Pithiviers
shells for fruit tarts (abaisses en feuilletage pour tartes aux

fruits)
sauces: see sauces for desserts
sherbets: see desserts, frozen
tarts: see tarts for dessert

dice, how to cut into, I: 13, 1.1
dill sauce, I: 95
dinde: see turkey
disjointing

chicken, I: 254
goose

dough: see breads; brioches; pastry; etc.
dove, roast, I: 246
duchesse potatoes
duck, duckling (canard et caneton), I: 272–81, 569–76

general information, I: 272–3
to bone, I: 570
stock, I: 272

baked
with beans in cassoulet, I: 404
in pastry crust (pâté de, en croûte), I: 571

braised (braisé), I: 280–1
with chestnut and sausage stuffing (aux marrons), I: 281
with sauerkraut or red cabbage (avec choucroute—à la badoise;

aux choux rouges), I: 280
cold, with orange (à l’orange), I: 576



mousse of leftover (mousseline de volaille), I: 560
pâté of, I: 568, 571
preserved (confit de)
roast (rôti), I: 274–9

with apple stuffing (à l’alsacienne), I: 275
casserole-roasted with turnips (poêlé aux navets), I: 279
with cherries (aux cerises; Montmorency), I: 278
with orange sauce (à l’orange), I: 276
with peaches (aux pêches), I: 279
spit-roasted, I: 275
timetable for roasting, I: 273

dumplings: see gnocchi; quenelles
duxelles: see mushrooms

E
échalotes: see shallots
écrevisse: see crawfish
egg(s) (oeufs), I: 22, 116–38

in aspic (en gelée), I: 547
baked in ramekins (en cocotte), I: 123–5
beating of, I: 127, 159–60, 579;
boiled

hard, in salad (salade niçoise), I: 542
six-minute (mollets), I: 118

bread (pain brioché)
see also brioches

with broccoli
gratin, with potatoes, ham, etc., I: 153
omelettes: see omelettes
pastry dough
poached (pochés), I: 116–22

on canapés, cheese sauce (sur canapés; à la fondue de fromage),
I: 118

in cheese or spinach soufflé (Vendôme; aux épinards), I: 165



in garlic soup (soupe à l’oeuf, provençale), I: 47
in pastry shells, béarnaise (en croustades à la béarnaise), I: 120
in red wine (à la bourguignonne), I: 121

proportions for unmolded custards
scrambled (brouillés), I: 125–6, 576
shirred (sur le plât, miroir), I: 122–3
whites

beating of, I: 159, 579
by hand
by machine

in custard filling (crème Saint-Honoré), I: 591
to fold into soufflés, etc., I: 160
in hollandaise sauce, I: 83
leftover, in cheese soufflé, I: 173
meringues: see meringue
in soufflés, I: 158

yolk(s)
added to hot sauces, I: 60
butter, I: 101
for hollandaise sauce, I: 79
for mayonnaise, I: 86

eggplant (aubergines), I: 501–5; 6.1
general information, 6.1

blanching
buying
peeling
preliminaries to cooking
salting
storing

baked, with cheese and tomatoes (gratin d’, provençal)
broiled slices (en tranches, gratinées)
casserole with meat (gratin d’, farcies)
casserole with tomatoes (ratatouille), I: 503
cold, I: 577

caviar with walnuts (la Tentation de Bramafam)
à la grecque, I: 539; 6.1



with tomatoes and basil (en pistouille, froides)
garnish for soup
gratin, with cheese and tomatoes
gratin, with leftover meat
grecque, à la, I: 539; 6.1
mold, with lamb (moussaka), I: 349, 577
moussaka, I: 349, 577
with parsley and béchamel (en persillade, gratinées)
persillade

gratinéed, with béchamel
sautéed
soufflé

pistouille
cold

sautéed
with garlic, crumbs, and herbs (en persillade, sautées)
with tomatoes and peppers (pistouille)

soufflé (en persillade)
stuffed

gratin, with leftover meat
with mushrooms (farcies duxelles), I: 501

toppings for
electric blender

for bread crumbs, I: 266
for chicken-liver timbales, I: 274
for fruit flans, I: 655
for hollandaise sauce, I: 81
for mayonnaise, I: 88
for mousses, I: 559
for pancake batter, I: 191, 649
for pulverized almonds, I: 582; 7.1
for pulverized macaroons, I: 583
for shellfish butter, I: 104; 1.1
for soups and bisques, I: 37; 1.1, 1.2

electric food processor
for brioche



for French bread
for pastry dough, I: 140; 2.1
for quenelles, I: 184–6
for sandwich bread

electric mixer(s)
for butter, I: 100

creams, I: 681–3
and sugar, I: 581

for cake batters: see all cakes, I: 669–80; 7.1
for doughs, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5
for egg whites, I: 160; app1.1
for eggs and sugar, I: 579
illustrated
for quenelles, I: 185
for whipped cream, I: 580
see also directions in dessert recipes

electric skillet
for chicken, fricasseed, I: 259
for chicken, sautéed, I: 254

endives (endives), I: 493–5
braised (à la flamande), I: 493
cold, à la grecque, I: 539
gratin with ham, I: 156
gratin of sliced potatoes and (dauphinois aux)
gratinéed with cheese, I: 494
quiche, I: 152

entrecôte, I: 290
entrées, I: 139–206

artichoke bottoms
buttered (au beurre), I: 431
with poached eggs
stuffed with mushrooms

artichokes, whole, boiled (au naturel), I: 424
beef casserole (daube), I: 322–5
beef rolls (paupiettes), I: 318
bouchées with fillings: see below, vol-au-vent



cheese dish (ramequin du juste milieu)
chicken (poulet et poularde)

in aspic
with tarragon

bouillabaisse, cold
breasts in chaud-froid, I: 551–2
in chaud-froid

crab or lobster in chaud-froid, I: 553
crêpes: see crêpes for entrée
eggs, poached (oeufs sur canapés, en croustades), I: 118–22

in aspic (oeufs en gelée), I: 547
fish stews

from Burgundy with wine, onions, lardons, mushrooms
(matelote; meurette; pauchouse)

from Normandy with sole and shellfish (marmite aux fruits de
mer; dieppoise; chaudrée normande)

from Provence with aïoli (bourride)
gnocchi: see gnocchi
goose, preserved (confit d’oie)
gratins: see gratins for entrée
green beans with tomatoes and garlic (haricots verts à la

provençale), I: 447
ham in aspic (jambon persillé)
moussaka, I: 349, 577
mousses: see mousses, entrée
pastry dough for
potatoes (pommes de terre)

filled cakes (galettes de, farcies)
hashed brown, with tomatoes (galette de, aux tomates)
pie (tourte limousine)

puff pastry
quenelles: see quenelles
quiches: see quiches
sausage dishes

baked in brioche
baked in plain or puff pastry



boudin blanc, broiled
large, fresh, with sauerkraut or potatoes
pork and liver with greens (caillettes; gayettes)
Provençal, of leftover braised beef and greens

soufflés: see soufflés, entrée
spinach and cheese canapés (canapés aux épinards), I: 472
stuffed vegetables

leaves of cabbage (feuilles de chou farcies)
whole cabbage, cold (chou farci)
zucchini (courgettes farcies)

tarts (tartes)
cheese in puff pastry (feuilletée au fromage; jalousie)
onion (pissaladiére niçoise), I: 151

timbales: see timbales for entrée
vol-au-vent

with chicken filling (garniture de volaille, financière)
with seafood filling (garniture dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)
with sweetbread filling (ris de veau à la financière)

entremets: see desserts
épices, pain d’
épices fines, for sausages
épinards: see spinach
equipment: see kitchen equipment
escabèche, I: 554
escalopes de veau: see veal, scallops
espagnole sauce base, I: 66
étuver (to braise), I: 11

F
Fahrenheit-Centigrade conversions, I: 24–5
faire sauter (to toss), I: 14
farces: see pâtés and terrines; sausages; stuffings
farina (semoule de blé)

semolina gnocchi, I: 183



for thickening soup
farine: see flour
fat

fatback, I: 564; 5.1
goose, I: 282; 5.1
pork, I: 564; 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
removal of, I: 12
to render
for sautéing, I: 13
see also larding; pork, fat

fennel (fenouil)
cold, à la grecque, I: 539
garnish for soup

feuilletée, pâte: see pastry, puff
filberts (noisettes)

meringue layer, for cake (le Progrès)
to prepare

filet
of beef: see beef, filet; beef, tenderloin
of fish: see fish, filets
mignon, I: 290, 296
steaks, I: 290–1, 296–300

fillings
for cake; see cake fillings; see also list
cheese, for appetizers, entrées, pastries, I: 201–2; 2.1
chicken

cream (fondue de volaille), I: 203
for vol-au-vent (garniture de volaille)

for crêpes, I: 193–5
for croquettes, I: 203

for desserts: see desserts, fillings
eggplant, for hard-boiled eggs or tomatoes
seafood

cream (fondue de crustacés), I: 202
for vol-au-vent (garniture aux fruits de mer)

stuffings: see stuffings and list, app.1



sweetbread, for vol-au-vent (ris de veau à la financière)
turkey (fondue de volaille), I: 203

financière, à la (garniture)
with chicken, quenelles, etc.
with sweetbreads, etc.

fines herbes, I: 18
fish (poisson), I: 207–33; 1.1

general information, I: 207; 1.1
buying, I: 207
fish for bouillabaisse, I: 50
fish for poached filets, I: 208
fish for quenelles, I: 185
fish for stews and chowders

baked with wine and tomatoes (Thon à la provençale), I: 219, 576
bouillabaisse, I: 52

fish for, I: 50
filets (filets)

poached in white wine (pochés au vin blanc), I: 208–16
stuffed (de sole farcis), I: 216
types of fish to filet, I: 208

gratin of creamed salmon or other fish (gratin aux fruits de mer),
I: 156

leftover, in gratin, I: 156
mousse

cold (mousseline de, blanche neige), I: 562
hot, I: 187

quenelles, I: 184–90
fish for, I: 185

in salade niçoise, I: 542
sauces for, I: 83–5, 169, 232–3
soufflé, I: 166–71, 173
soup and bouillabaisse, I: 49–53
stews and chowders

general information, 1.1
types of fish used

with garlic mayonnaise, Provençal-style (bourride)



with mushrooms, onions, and wine, Burgundy-style (matelote;
meurette; pauchouse)

with sole, shellfish, and wine sauce, Normandy-style (marmite
aux fruits de mer; marmite dieppoise; chaudrée normande)

stocks (fumets de), I: 114–15
for fish stew

stuffing for lamb (farce mentonnaise), I: 338
timbales, I: 175
see also crab; lobster; etc.

flans, fruit: see clafoutis
fleurons (puff-pastry puffs)
floating island, French, I: 622
flour (farine)

general information, I: 17–18; 56, 544
for bread
and butter paste, I: 58, 64, 265
and butter roux, I: 56, 68
for cake with fruit
French and American, I: 17–18; app1.1
to measure

new system, scooped
old system, sifted, I: 17–18
old-new equivalents

for puff pastry
rye, in spice cake

foie: see liver
foie gras

with pork and veal sausages (saucisson truffé au)
with steak Rossini, I: 299
stuffing

for beef tenderloin, I: 304; 3.1
for chicken, half-boned (poularde à la d’Albuféra)
for lamb, boned leg in pastry (gigot farci, en croûte)
with prunes for goose (oie rôtie aux pruneaux), I: 284
for veal, sliced and roasted (veau en feuilletons)
for veal scallops (noisettes de veau, périgourdine)



fold, to (definition of), I: 13, 161
fond(s)

d’artichaut: see artichoke, hearts
meringue-nut layers (le Succès, la Dacquoise, etc.)
see also stocks

fondant, 7.1, 7.2
food mill: see vegetable mill
food processor: see electric food processor
forcemeat

chicken and pork or veal (boudin blanc), 4.1, 5.1
quenelles, I: 184–90
see also stuffings

form the ribbon, I: 579
fouetter (to beat), I: 11
fowl: see chicken, fowl
fraises: see strawberries
framboises: see raspberries
frangipane (almond custard), I: 591
freezing

bread and bread dough: see text of each recipe
brioches and brioche dough, 2.1, 2.2
croissants and croissant dough, 2.1, 2.2
pastry: see text of each recipe

fremir (“to shiver”), I: 11
French

bread, 2.1; see also bread, French dressing (sauce vinaigrette), I:
94

measures, I: 20–1
flour equivalents, I: 17–18; app1.1

oven temperatures, I: 25
frittons (goose cracklings), I: 282; 5.1
fromage: see cheese
frostings: see list of, 7.1; see also cake fillings and frostings
frozen desserts: see desserts, frozen
fruit(s) (fruits)

cookie serving cups for (langues de chats)



fillings
for cakes: see cake fillings and frostings
for crêpes, I: 653–4
for savarins, I: 664

flans (clafoutis), I: 655–8; 7.1
glacéed or candied (confits), I: 17, 587, 629; 7.1
juice, to remove excess (tarts)
sauces and glazes, I: 592–4, 630; 7.1
soufflés, I: 616–18, 645; 7.1
tarts: see tarts for dessert
see also cakes; custards, desserts; desserts; apples; pears; etc.

G
galantines, I: 569

stuffing for, I: 565
game (gibier)

half-boning and trussing
hens

cold in escabèche, I: 554
roasted (coquelets), I: 246
in tarragon aspic, I: 549
mousse of leftover, I: 560
pâté, with veal and pork (pâté de veau et porc avec gibier), I:

568
sauce (sauce poivrade), I: 70
small, preserved
see also quail; partridge; etc.

garbure (cabbage soup), I: 48
garlic (ail), I: 22

butter, I: 101, 103
and cheese filling for appetizers, I: 202
mayonnaise (aïoli), I: 92; 51, 263
press, I: 9; app1.1
pureé with basil (pistou)



with beef stew (boeuf au pistou)
with eggplant (pistouille)
with vegetable soup (soupe au pistou), I: 45
with zucchini (courgettes en pistouille)

sauce: see sauces, garlic
soup, I: 46–8
in stuffings, I: 336; 3.1, 4.1

garnitures
for bouchées and vol-au-vent

chicken, with quenelles, etc., in wine sauce (de volaille,
financière)

seafood, creamed (dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)
sweetbreads, with quenelles, truffles, etc. (ris de veau à la

financière)
for fish filets, I: 212–16
see also vegetable suggestions in main-course recipe texts

gâteau japonais: see Succès, le
gâteaux: see cakes
gayettes (pork and liver sausages)
gelatin, I: 113

mayonnaise (mayonnaise collée), I: 91
see also aspics

Génoise électrique, le cake
gigot: see lamb and mutton
ginger, beef stew with
glacéed fruits, I: 17

lemon peel, I: 587
orange peel, I: 587; 7.1
oranges, I: 629
pineapple

glaze, meat, I: 110
glazes for desserts and cakes, I: 593–4; 7.1
Glorieux, le
gnocchi, I: 181–4

with cheese (gratinés au fromage), I: 182
potato (de pommes de terre), I: 181



variations, I: 183
semolina (de semoule), I: 183

goose (oie), I: 282–7; 5.1
baked with beans (cassoulet), I: 404
braised, chestnut stuffing (braisée aux marrons), I: 285
cracklings (grattons; frittons), I: 282; 5.1
disjointing of
fat, rendering, I: 282; 5.1
liver: see foie gras
preserved (confit d’), I: 48, 399, 404

to make
storing
uses

roast, prune and foie gras stuffing (rôtie aux pruneaux), I: 283
sausage, gooseneck (cou d’, farci)
stock, I: 282
stuffings for, I: 284, 286, 565
timetable for roasting, I: 283

gougelhop (kougloff)
grams

conversion formulas, I: 21
I: 17–18; app1.1

measures and equivalents, I: 20–1
gratin(s) for dessert

apples baked with rum, raisins, etc. (de pommes, normande)
apples, sautéed (pouding alsacien), I: 626
pears baked with macaroons (poires au gratin), I: 630

gratin(s) for entrée. I: 153–7
artichoke bottoms with cheese sauce (fonds d’artichauts mornay),

I: 433
artichoke bottoms, stuffed (fonds d’artichauts au gratin), I: 433
brains (de cervelles), I: 157
broccoli, chopped, with cheese sauce (de brocoli, mornay)
Brussels sprouts with cheese sauce (choux de Bruxelles à la

mornay), I: 453
chicken or turkey (de volaille), I: 157



dishes for (plats à gratin), I: 5; 524
eggplant (aubergines)

slices, broiled (en tranches)
stuffed with meat (farcies)

endive and ham (d’endives), I: 156
fish quenelles (de quenelles de poisson), I: 188
gnocchi baked with cheese (gnocchi, au fromage), I: 182
leeks and ham (de poireaux), I: 155
mussels on the half shell (moules au beurre d’escargot; à la

provençale), I: 228
omelettes with tomato filling (omelettes, à la tomate), I: 136
potatoes, I: 153–5
salmon or other fish (aux fruits de mer), I: 156
scallops and mushrooms (coquilles St. Jacques à la parisienne), I:

216
scallops with wine and garlic (coquilles St. Jacques à la

provençale), I: 218
spinach (épinards)

braised with onions (aux oignons)
with cheese sauce (à la mornay), I: 472

sweetbreads (de ris de veau), I: 157
zucchini with rice and onions (tian de courgettes au riz)

gratiné, to (definition of), I: 13
grattons (goose cracklings), I: 282; 317
greens: see chard; kale; spinach; etc.
gugelhupf (kougloff)
guinea hen in tarragon aspic, I: 549

H
hacher (to mince), I: 13
ham (jambon), I: 389–99

general information, I: 389–90
braised (braisé)

in cream and mushroom sauce (morvandelle), I: 392



in Madeira (au madère), I: 393
with mushroom stuffing (farci), I: 394
in pastry crust (en croûte), I: 395

cold, I: 577
mousse, I: 561

filling with cheese for appetizers, I: 202
fresh, home-salted

buying and preparation of meat
dry-salt cure
temperature for curing

in gnocchi, I: 183
gratin of

with endives (d’endives), I: 156
with leeks (de poireaux), I: 155
with potatoes (rapée morvandelle), I: 153

hock with beans (cassoulet), I: 404
mold, parslied (persillé)
omelette (pipérade), I: 137
pâté with veal and pork (terrine de porc et veau), I: 566
slices and steaks (tranches de)

in cream sauce (à la crème), I: 398
in cream and Madeira sauce (morvandelle), I: 397
with onions and tomatoes (en pipérade), I: 396

in soufflés, I: 166, 173
with spinach (épinards au), I: 470
in stuffing

for beef roll
for cabbage, with sausage and rice
for cabbage leaves, with beef
for lamb, I: 337
for veal, 3.1, 3.2

timbales, I: 175
hamburgers, I: 300–3
hare pâté, I: 568
haricots: see beans
hazelnuts, to prepare



hen: see chicken, fowl; game
herb(s) (herbes), I: 18

bouquet, I: 18
butter, I: 102
omelette (aux fines), I: 135
sauces: see sauces, herbal
soup (potage aux, panachées)
in stuffings, I: 243, 336, 358; 3.1, 3.2;

see also list of stuffings, app.1
hollandaise sauce, I: 79–85

mock (bâtarde), I: 64
homard: see lobster
honey bread (pain d’épices)
hors d’oeuvre and appetizers, I: 196–206

artichoke bottoms stuffed with mushroom purée (fonds
d’artichauts farcis)

bouchées
with chicken filling (garniture de volaille, financière)
with seafood filling (garniture dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)
with sweetbreads and quenelles, truffles, mushrooms, and

olives (ris de veau à la financière)
canapés of leftover pâté à choux, I: 177
celery root in mustard sauce (céleri-rave rémoulade), I: 540
cheese (fromage)

feuilletée or peekaboo tart (feuilletée au; jalousie)
Napoleons (mille-feuilles à la fondue de)
see also below puff pastry

chicken liver mousse (mousse de foies de volaille), I: 559
chicken livers in aspic (foies de volaille en aspic), I: 548
cracklings (frittons; grattons), I: 282; 5.1
eggplant (aubergines)

caviar (la Tentation de Bramafam)
cold, à la grecque

kidneys cooked in butter (rognons de veau en casserole), I: 417
mushroom caps, broiled (champignons grillés), I: 512
mushrooms, stuffed (champignons farcis), I: 516



onions, stuffed (oignons farcis au riz)
onions, sweet and sour, cold (petits oignons aigre-doux)
pancakes, vegetable (crêpes à la pipérade)
pâté (pâté et terrine)

in pastry crust (en croûte)
pork and liver with veal or chicken (de campagne)
pork liver (de foie de porc)
porkless (verte)

puff pastry
horns with cheese filling (cornets)
rolls with cheese filling (rouleaux)

rice for (riz au blanc), I: 532
ratatouille, I: 503
salads

combination (salade niçoise), I: 542
rice or potato and beet (salade à la d’Argenson), I: 543
sweet peppers (salade de poivrons, provençale)

sausage (saucisson)
baked in brioche dough (en brioche)
baked in plain or puff pastry (en croûte)

spreads; see appetizers, spreads for tarts, I: 151; 2.1
tomatoes, stuffed (tomatoes à la provençale), I: 507
see also appetizers; canapés; quiches

huile, I: 19

I, J
ice creams: see desserts, frozen
icings, list of; see also cake fillings and frostings
illustrations, list of, I: xvi; fm.1
incorporer (to fold), I: 13
ingredients, list and description of, I: 15–19
jalousie (peekaboo tart)

cheese (au fromage)
jam or fruit



jam or jelly
fillings for crêpes, I: 654
sauces and glazes, I: 593–4
tart (jalousie)

Jamaïque en flammes, charlotte
jambon: see ham
jellied stock, I: 112–14
julienne

to cut into, I: 28–9
cutter attachment

K
kale

braised with onions
with pork and liver sausages (caillettes)
in stuffing for beef roll

kidney(s), veal and lamb (rognons de veau et de mouton), I: 416–20
general information, I: 416–17
in butter (en casserole), I: 417
flambés, I: 418
with red wine and marrow sauce (à la bordelaise), I: 419
in stuffing with mushrooms for boned leg of lamb in pastry (gigot

farci, en croûte)
in stuffing with rice for lamb (farce aux), I: 337
in other stuffings

Kilimanjaro, le
kirsch, in syrup for savarins, I: 663
kitchen equipment, I: 3–10; app1.1

general information
best materials for pots, pans, casseroles, I: 3–4
copper pots, I: 4
ovens, I: 3; 2.1, 2.2
stoves, I: 3

baking dishes, I: 5; 2.1, app1.1, app.2



baking pans
bashers, bludgeons, blunt instruments
baster, bulb, I: 8
for bread-making, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, app1.1, app1.2

baker’s blades, for slashing (lames)
form to hold rising dough (banneton)

cake pans (moules à biscuits; à manqué carré), I: 143; app1.1
casseroles and braising pans (cocottes et daubières), I: 5; app1.1
chafing-dish heat elements
chicken fryers (sautoirs)
chopsticks
cleavers (feuilles à fendre)
colander
cookie pans and sheets (plaques à patisserie)
cork screws and bottle openers
crêpe pans, I: 192
croissant cutter, 2.1, app1.1
cutters (découpoirs)
for egg-white beating
electric beater
electric food processor
electric mixer
flan rings (formes sans fond), I: 143; app1.1
food mill (Mouli), I: 9; 3, app1.1
forks
frying pans (poêles), I: 6; 6.1, app1.1
gadgets
garlic press, I: 9; app1.1
graters, grinders, shredders, I: 9; app1.1, app.2, app.3
gratin dishes (plats à gratin), I: 5; app1.1
knives, choppers, rockers, I: 6–7; 3.1, 6.1, app1.1
larding needle (lardoire), 3.1, app1.1
for measuring
meat grinder
molds (moules)

for aspics



for babas, I: 660
for baking, app1.1, app1.2
for brioches, 2.1, 2.2, app1.1
charlotte, soufflé, I: 161–2; app1.1
for frozen desserts
for kougloff, 2.1, app1.1
miscellaneous, app1.1, app1.2
for pastry

horns, 2.1, app1.1
rolls, 2.1, app1.1
shells, I: 143; 2.1, app1.1
tartlets

for pâté (terrine), 5.1, app1.1
ring, I: 662; 2.1
savarin, I: 662
small, app1.1, app1.2

mortar and pestle, I: 10
muffin tins, 2.1, 2.2
omelette pans, I: 127, 192
openers, app1.1, app1.2
pastry bag
for pastry-making, app1.1, app1.2, app1.3
pepper mills
pie pans
pitter, cherry or olive
potato ricer
for potatoes Anna (cocottes à pommes Anna), 6.1, app1.1, app1.2
retrievers
roasting and broiling pans
roller pricker
rolling pins (rouleaux à pâtisserie), 2.1, app1.1
salad baskets
saucepans, covers, I: 5; app1.1
for sausage-making
sauté pan, I: 6
sharpening steel, I: 6



shears and scissors, I: 8;
sieve (tamis) and pestle, I: 8
skillets (poêles), I: 6, 192
soufflé dishes, I: 161–2: app1.1
soup kettles (marmites)
spatulas, I: 7; app1.1, app1.2
spoons, app1.1, app1.2
tenderizers, app1.1, app1.2
thermometers
tongs
turnover tools
vol-au-vent cutters
whips or whisks, I: 7–8; app1.1, app1.2
wine glasses, I: 36; app1.1
wooden fork, spoons, spatulas, chopsticks, I: 7; app1.1, app1.2

kneading: see bread, French; brioches; croissants
knives, I: 6–7; 3.1, 6.1, app1.1

cutting techniques, I: 26–30
kougloff, kugelhopf

molds for, 2.1, app1.1

L
ladyfingers (biscuits à la cuiller), I: 665–7

desserts with, I: 594, 605–9, 612
to line a mold with, I: 585

lamb and mutton (agneau et mouton), I: 328–50; 3.1
general information, I: 328–32; 3.1

to bone a leg, I: 329; 3.1
timing for roast, I: 330–1; 3.1
vegetables, garnitures, and wines for, I: 331–2

brains: see brains
breast of (poitrine d’)
kidneys: see kidneys, veal and lamb
leg or shoulder of (gigot ou épaule de), I: 329–44



with beans (cassoulet), I: 401
boiled (à l’anglaise), I: 342
braised (braisé), I: 338
with garlic sauce (sauce spéciale à l’ail pour), I: 334
marinated (en chevreuil), I: 341
mustard coating (à la moutarde), I: 335
roast (rôti), I: 332

mustard coating for, I: 335
sauces for, I: 334

garlic sauce, I: 334
stuffed

general information, I: 330, 335; 3.1
boned, in pastry (gigot farci, en croûte)
garlic and herb, I: 336
ham and mushroom, I: 337
mushroom and kidney
mushroom and spinach (Viroflay)
olive and ground lamb, I: 338
pork and herb, I: 336
rice and kidney, I: 337
salmon and anchovy, I: 338
see also list of stuffings, app.1

mold with eggplant (moussaka), I: 349, 577
patties (fricadelles d’), I: 348
saddle (selle d’)

general information, 3.1
buying
carving and serving

preparing
roasted (rôtie)

with Parmesan cheese and crumbs (milanaise)
with parsley and buttered bread crumbs (persillade)

shanks (jarrets de devant), I: 348
shoulder, braised, stuffed (épaule d’, farcie, Viroflay)
stew, I: 344–8

with mushrooms and onions (blanquette d’), I: 348



with red wine (civet de), I: 347
with rice (pilaf de, à la catalane), I: 348
with spring vegetables (navarin printanier), I: 345
variations, I: 347
with vegetables (daube de), I: 348

tongues (langues d’); see also tongues
in stuffing, with olives, I: 338

langues: see tongue(s)
langues de chats
lapin: see rabbit
lard gras: see pork, fat
lard de poitrine, I: 15; see also pork, fat
larding instructions, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3

needle, 3.1, app1.1
lardons, 1.1, 3.1, 3.2
leaf fat, leaf lard
leek(s) (poireaux), I: 495–6

braised (braisés au beurre), I: 495
browned with cheese (gratinés au fromage), I: 496
browned with cheese sauce (à la mornay, gratinés), I: 496
cold, I: 578

à la grecque, I: 539
gratin with ham (gratin de), I: 155
and potato soup

with celery (potage Célestine)
Parmentier, I: 37
vichyssoise, I: 39
with watercress (potage au cresson), I: 38–9

quiche, I: 151
and sweet pepper soup (soupe catalane aux poivrons)

leftovers
beef and ham stuffing for cabbage
beef in Provençal sausages or meat loaf (tous nus)
chocolate cake from letfover cake (charlotte africaine)
egg whites, in cheese soufflé, I: 173
lamb, with eggplant (moussaka), I: 349, 577



pastry dough, for cookies, I: 635; 7.1
pâte à choux, for hors d’oeuvre, I: 177
pork, veal, or turkey with eggplant and tomatoes
potato pancakes, from mashed potatoes
puff pastry dough

cocktail shells (petites bouchées)
cookies (coques; palmiers)
decorations and garnitures (fluerons)

for soups
for stocks: see stocks, I: 106–15
see also chicken, leftover; turkey, leftover, etc.

légumes: see vegetables
lemon (citron)

butter-cream icing, I: 676
butter sauce, I: 98
cream filling (crème au)
peel, glazed, I: 587
tarts, I: 645–6

lettuce, braised (laitues braisées), I: 489
lime soufflé tart, I: 645
liqueurs for cooking, I: 32
liter-quart equivalents, I: 21
liver (foie)

calf’s (de veau), I: 405–7
mustard coating (à la moutarde), I: 407
sauces for, I: 406
sautéed (sauté), I: 405

chicken (de volaille)
in aspic, I: 548
canapés for roast birds, I: 247
filling with cheese for appetizers (fondue de), I: 202
mousse of, I: 559
in pâté, 5.1, 5.2
in pork and veal sausages (saucisson truffé au)
sausage or spread (saucisson de; pâté de)
in stuffings



with foie gras, truffles, rice (à la d’Albuféra)
with herbs and giblets, I: 243
with mushrooms (farce duxelles), I: 251
with rice, mushrooms, garlic (d’Albuféra)

timbales, I: 174
variations, I: 175

goose (oie): see foie gras
pâté (pâté; terrine)

chicken (de volaille)
without pork (verte; sans porc)

pork (de porc)
with pork, in brioche (de porc en brioche)

with pork and chicken (de campagne)
with veal and pork (de veau et porc; de campagne), I: 568; 5.1

and pork sausages (caillettes; gayettes)
lobster (homard)

general information, 1.1
buying
cutting up raw
dealing with live, I: 220; 1.1
removing meat from cooked
sex of
tomalley and roe

à l’américaine, I: 223
in aspic, I: 549
bisque (bisque de, à l’américaine)
butter (beurre de), I: 104; 1.1
in chaud-froid, I: 553
in fish stew, Normandy-style (marmite aux fruits de mer;

dieppoise; chaudrée normande)
garnish for fish filets, I: 213
with herb sauce (aux aromates), I: 223
quenelles, I: 189
quiche, I: 149
soufflé, I: 167, 170
soups



bisque
cream of (velouté de crustacés)
marmite dieppoise

tails à l’américaine, I: 223
thermidor, I: 221
timbales, I: 175

luncheon dishes, I: 139–206; see also entrées and luncheon dishes



M
macaroon(s) (macarons)

cup custards (crème Sainte-Anne au caramel), I: 611
to pulverize, I: 583
soufflé, I: 617, 620

macerate (definition of), I: 13
macérer (to macerate), I: 13
Madeira wine

for cooking, I: 32
for jellied stocks and aspics, I: 114
sauce: see sauces, Madeira

make the ribbon, I: 579
malakoff, charlottes, I: 605–8
marinades

for beef, I: 306, 310, 323; 3.1, 3.2
French dressing (sauce vinaigrette), I: 94
for lamb, I: 341–2
for pork, I: 376–7
for rabbit
for veal, I: 358, 567; 3.1

marinate (definition of), I: 13
mariner (to marinate), I: 13
Marley, le
marmite: see fish, stews
Marquis, le, I: 679
marrons: see chestnuts
marrow (moelle)

to prepare, I: 19
sauce, I: 76, 294–5, 419

marsala for cooking, I: 32
matelote
mayonnaise sauce, I: 86; see also aïoli
measures and weights

flour, I: 17–18; app1.1



miscellaneous equivalents, I: 21–3
tables of equivalents, I: 20–1; app1.1

meat(s) 3.1(viandes), I: 288
glaze, I: 110
grinders
leftovers: see beef, leftover; etc,
loaf I: 375; 5.1, 5.2
stock, I: 107
see also beef; veal; etc.

mélanger (to blend), I: 11
Melba toast
meringue(s)

general information
italienne (with sugar syrup)

butter-cream frosting and filling
for frozen chocolate mousse (le Saint-Cyr, glacé)
with whipped cream (Chantilly meringuée)
as a filling
as ice cream (Chantilly glacée)

white (standard)
almond cakes (brésiliens)
for baked Alaska
with nuts, for cake (le Succès; le Progrès; la Dacquoise)
for wine-poached pears

metric system, I: 20–1
meurette
mijoter (to simmer), I: 11
mille-feuilles: see Napoleons
mince, to, I: 13, 27

for mushrooms, I: 509
mixer, electric: see electric mixers
moelle: see marrow
molds: see kitchen equipment
mornay: see sauces, mornay
moules: see mussels
Mouli food mill, I: 9; 1.1, app1.1



for puréeing soups
moussaka, I: 349, 577
mousse(s) (mousses)

dessert
chocolate (au chocolat), I: 604
see also desserts, frozen

entrée—cold, I: 558–64
chicken (de volaille), I: 560
chicken liver (de foies de volaille), I: 559
duck, game, or turkey (mousseline de volaille), I: 560
fish (mousseline de poisson, blanche neige), I: 562
ham (de jambon), I: 561
salmon (de saumon), I: 562
shellfish (mousseline de crustacés, blanche neige), I: 564

entrée—hot
fish, I: 187
see also quenelles

mousseline sauce, I: 83
sabayon, I: 84, 169

mouton: see lamb and mutton
mushroom(s) (champignons), I: 508–17

general information, I: 22
to mince, slice, flute, I: 509–11

broiled (grillés), I: 512
canned, I: 517
with cheese, for appetizers, I: 202
cold, à la grecque, I: 537
creamed (sautés à la crème), I: 514
duxelles, I: 515

in beef (filets de boeuf en feuilletons)
to cloak beef tenderloin
in lamb, boned leg of stuffed (gigot farci, en croûte)
with rice (riz duxelles), I: 531
in Viroflay stuffing
in other stuffings

essence of (fumet de), I: 512



minced: see above duxelles
purée, raw, to stuff artichoke bottoms
quiche, I: 152
sauce: see sauces, mushroom
sautéed (au beurre), I: 513

in brown Madeira sauce (sautés, sauce madère), I: 515
with garlic, bread crumbs (à la bordelaise), I: 513

soufflé, I: 166
soup (potage velouté aux; potage aux, Île de France), I: 40; 1.1
stewed (à blanc), I: 511
stock (fumet de), I: 512
stuffed (farcis), I: 516
timbales, I: 175
with veal chops or steaks (côtes de veau braisées aux)

mussels (moules), I: 226–32
garnish for fish, I: 213–16
on half shell, broiled (au beurre d’escargot; à la provençale), I:

228
marinated, for salad (salade de), I: 229
in rice ring (pilaf de), I: 231
in sauce (en sauce; mouclades; à la poulette; à la béarnaise), I:

230
soup (soupe aux), I: 231
steamed in wine (à la marinière), I: 227–8

mustard (moutarde)
butter, I: 100
to coat calf’s liver, I: 407
to coat roast lamb, I: 335
sauce: see sauces, mustard

mutton: see lamb and mutton

N, O
nap, to (definition of), I: 13
Napoleons (mille-feuilles)

general information, 7.1



cheese (à la fondue de fromage)
cheese filling for
dessert, with pastry cream or whipped cream
forming, baking, assembling
icing for

napper (to nap), I: 13
la cuillère (to coat a spoon), I: 11

navarin printanier, I: 345
navets: see turnips
noisettes (filberts)
oeufs: see eggs
oie: see goose
oignons: see onions
oil, types of, I: 19
olives (olives)

with beef stew
with beef tenderloin
in garniture, financière, 2.1, 2.2
in onion tart, I: 151
in stuffings

for lamb (farce aux), I: 338
for meat, with mushrooms
for paupiettes, with pimento

in tomato quiche (niçoise), I: 148
omelette(s) (omelettes), I: 126–38

general information, I: 126–8
to make, I: 128–35

garnishes for, I: 135–6
gratinéed with tomatoes (gratinées à la tomate), I: 136
with herbs, cheese, etc. (aux fines herbes, au fromage), I: 135–6
pipérade, I: 137
rolled (roulée), I: 132
scrambled (brouillée), I: 129

onion(s) (oignons), I: 22, 480–5; 6.1
general information, I: 480–1

to chop, dice, etc., I: 27, 30



with beef stew (boeuf aux oignons)
braised

brown (glacés à brun), I: 483
sweet and sour (aigre-doux)
white (glacés à blanc), I: 481

canned, I: 484
cold

à la grecque, I: 539
sweet and sour (aigre-doux)

creamed (à la crème), I: 482
in eggplant casserole (ratatouille), I: 503
garniture, I: 484
gratins, with potatoes, I: 153–5
parslied (persillés), I: 482, 484
with peas (petits pois aux), I: 464
quiche or tart, I: 150, 151
sauce (soubise), I: 64, 355, 485
soup, I: 43–5

cream of (crème aux, soubise)
and potato (potage parmentier), I: 37
with watercress (potage au cresson), I: 38

with spinach (gratin d’épinards aux)
stuffed with rice, onion, and cheese (farcis au riz)
in stuffings: see list of stuffings, app.1

orange(s) (oranges)
bavarian cream (bavarois à l’), I: 596
butter cream icing (au beurre à l’), I: 674
butter filling for spongecake, I: 672
butters for dessert crêpes, I: 650–1
cake, I: 671, 676
cream filling for cakes (crème à l’)
flavored hollandaise, I: 83
glazed (glacées), I: 629
liqueur for cooking, I: 32
mousse, I: 603; 7.1
peel, to glaze, I: 587; 7.1



sauce, with duck, I: 76; 4.1
soufflé, I: 616

ossobuco
ounce-gram equivalents, I: 18, 20, 21

for flour, I: 18; app1.1
oven

baker’s vs. house ovens
baker’s, simulated
temperature conversions, I: 24–5

French, British, American, I: 25
types of, I: 3

oysters (huîtres)
garnish for fish filets, I: 215–16
with quenelles, I: 188
to poach, I: 213

P
pain: see bread
palmiers
pan measurements

French and American
panade au riz, for pâtés and terrines
panade for sausage, 5.1, 5.2
pancakes (crêpes)

grated potato (de pommes de terre), I: 521
mashed potato (galettes)
with tomatoes, onions, etc. (à la pipérade)
see also crêpes

pans: see kitchen equipment
paper decorating cone, to make
paprika sauce, I: 262, 268
parfait
parisienne sauce (sauce allemande), I: 60, 212, 214–16
parsley butter, I: 102
partridge (perdreau; perdrix)



with beans (cassoulet), I: 404
cold in jelly (escabèche), I: 554
pâté, I: 568
roast (coquelets), I: 246

paste
for babas and savarins, I: 658
for cream puffs (pâte à choux), I: 175

pastry(ies) (les pâtes)
chart
cookies from leftover, I: 635; 7.1
crust (en croûte)

for beef Wellington (filet de boeuf)
for chicken (poularde en soutiengorge)
for chicken liver pâté (foies de volaille)
duck baked in (pâté de canard), I: 571
ham baked in (jambon farci), I: 395
lamb, boned leg, baked in (gigot farci)
for pâtés, I: 569–76; 5.1, 5.2
plain or puff, for sausage (saucisson)
puff pastry vs. brioche dough, 3.1, 3.2
veal baked in (feuilletons)

decorations
beef Wellington
duck en croûte, I: 574–5
lamb en croûte
pâté en croûte
puff pastry (fleurons)
vol-au-vent cover

doughs (pâtes), I: 139–46, 632–5; 2.1
decorations with, I: 574–5; 2.1, 3.1, 3.2, 5.1
for desserts and sweet tarts (sablées; sèches; sucrées), I: 633–4;

2.1
egg (brisée à l’oeuf), for upside-down shells and cases
electric mixer and processor for
for entrée tarts and quiches (brisée), I: 139–43; 2.1, 2.2
freezing of: see text of each recipe



hand-made, I: 139–43, 633–4
leftovers, I: 635; 2.1, 7.1
for pâtés (à croustade)
for petits fours
for pies, I: 139–43; 2.1, 2.2
puff
for shells, I: 139–43, 633–4; 2.1, 2.2, 2.3
for turnovers, I: 139–43; 2.1, 2.2, 2.3

equipment for making, app1.1, app1.2, app1.3
potato pie (tourte limousine)
puff (feuilletée)

general information, 2.1
bouchées

chicken garniture for (de volaille, financière)
seafood garniture for (dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)
shells for, 2.1, 2.2
sweetbread garniture for (ris de veau à la financière)

classic (fine)
cream horns (cornets)

baked with cheese filling
cheese filling for (fondue de fromage)
for desserts
to form and bake pastry for

cream rolls (rouleaux)
cheese filling for
for desserts
to form and bake pastry for

decorations and garnitures (fleurons)
desserts using
flour for
leftovers (rognures)

cocktail shells (petites bouchées)
cookies

palm-leaf (palmiers)
puff pastry vs. pie-crust dough
tongue-shaped (couques)



decorations and garnitures (fleurons)
to reconstitute dough

mille-feuilles: see below Napoleons
mock, or simple, puff pastry (demifeuilletée)
Napoleons (mille-feuilles)

cheese (à la fondue de fromage)
cheese filling for
dessert, with pastry cream or whipped cream
forming, baking, assembling
icing for

patty shells for bouchées and vol-au-vent
Pithiviers (almond dessert)
tart(s) (tartes)

cheese (jalousie)
fruit
shells for
jam or fruit (jalousie)

vol-au-vent
chicken garniture for (de volaille, financière)
seafood garniture for (dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)
shell for

cover
uncooked insides, use of (ramequin du juste milieu)

sweetbread garniture for (ris de veau à la financière)
quiches: see quiches
shells

for appetizer tartlets, I: 200
for bouchées and vol-au-vent
for dessert tarts, I: 634–5; 7.1
for quiches, I: 143–6; 2.1
upside-down

tarts: see tarts for dessert and for entrée
turnovers with Roquefort cheese (petits chaussons au Roquefort),

I: 204
pâte(s)

brisée, I: 139; 2.1



fine, I: 139; 2.1
à l’oeuf, 2.1, 2.2
ordinaire

à choux, I: 175, 181, 184
à croustade, 2.1, 2.2

à l’Envers
demi-feuilletée
feuilletée

fine
à pâté
sablée; sèche, I: 633; 2.1
à Succès
sucrée, I: 633; 2.1

aux jaunes d’oeuf
pâtés and terrines (pâtés et terrines), I: 564–76; 5.1

general information, I: 564–5; 5.1
aspic for, I: 565; 5.1
baking dishes for, I: 565
marinade for, I: 567
molds for, 5.1, app1.1
pork fat for, I: 564; 5.1
storage or freezing of, I: 565

to bake, in pastry crust
in brioche

pork and pork liver (de foie et de porc en brioche)
chicken liver (de foies de volaille)

with chicken, veal, spinach (verte; sans porc)
en croûte, I: 569–76

general information, 5.1
dough for
illustrated directions for hinge mold
meat mixture
molds for, 5.1, app1.1
timing
without mold

duck, boned, in pastry crust (canard en croûte), I: 571



duck (de canard), I: 568
boned, in pastry crust (en croûte), I: 571

game, with veal and pork (de veau et porc avec gibier), I: 568
liver, I: 568; 4.1, 5.1
panade for
pastry for (pâte à croustade)
pork

and chicken, with liver (de campagne)
liver (de foie de porc)
and pork liver in brioche (de foie et de porc en brioche)

pork and veal
with game (de veau et porc avec gibier), I: 568
with ham (de porc, veau, et jambon), I: 566
with liver (de veau et porc avec foie; de campagne), I: 568; 5.1
stuffing for (farce pour), I: 565

porkless (verte; sans porc)
spinach, with chicken, veal, etc, (verte; sans porc)
stuffings for, I: 565; 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
veal: see above chicken liver; pork and veal

patty shells, vol-au-vent, bouchées
pauchouse
paupiettes: see beef, rolls
peach(es) (pêches)

in brioche cake (le Marly; la Riposte)
compote with raspberry sauce (cardinal), I: 630
with duck (caneton aux), I: 279
sherbet and ice cream (mousse aux, glacée)
tart (tarte aux), I: 639, 641

pear(s) (poires)
baked with macaroons (au gratin), I: 630
flans (clafoutis), I: 656, 658
in meringue, wine custard sauce (meringuées, au sabayon)
poached in wine, I: 642; 7.1
tart(s) (tartes)

with almonds (à la Bourdaloue), I: 642
with custard, I: 638, 641



with puff pastry (tarte aux)
peas (fresh, green) (petits pois; pois verts; pois frais), I: 461–7

braised with lettuce (à la française), I: 465
buttered (I, II, III) (à l’anglaise; étuvés au beurre; en braisage), I:

462–5
canned, I: 467
frozen, I: 466
with onions (aux oignons: à la française), I: 464–5

pea-pod soup (soupe belle potagère)
peekaboo cheese tart, puff pastry (jalousie au fromage)
peekaboo jam or fruit tart (jalousie)
Pélerin, le, en timbale
peppers, sweet green or red (poivrons)

general information
buying and storage problem
peeling

cold, à la grecque (poivrons), I: 540
in eggplant casserole (ratatouille), I: 503
in garlic and oil (salade de poivrons, provençale)
and leek soup (soupe catalane aux)
pipérade: see pipérade
in stuffings, 3.1, 6.1, 6.2

persillade
for eggplant
for saddle of lamb
for zucchini

petits fours
almond wafers, lacy curled (tuiles aux amandes)
cake for
chocolate candy truffles (les truffes au chocolat)
meringue-almond (brésiliens)
puff pastry for
walnut and almond puffs (les croquets Denison)

petits pois: see peas
pheasant (faisan)

cold in jelly (escabèche), I: 554



pâté, I: 568
in tarragon aspic, I: 549

pie doughs, I: 139–43; 2.1, 2.2
pie pans, sizes
pig

caul: see caul fat
suckling
see also pork

pigeon (pigeonneau)
cold in jelly (escabèche), I: 554
roast (coquelets), I: 246
in tarragon aspic, I: 549

pilaf, pilau (risotto), I: 532
pimento (piment)

and olive stuffing for paupiettes
sauce for chicken (suprême pimentée)

pineapple (ananas)
boiled in syrup, I: 654
in brioche cake (le Marly; la Riposte)
cream plombières, I: 596
custard (flan des isles), I: 631
glazed (glacé)
with orange mousse (mousse d’orange à l’)
tart, I: 664

pipérade (tomatoes, peppers, etc.)
with beef stew
crêpes
with ham slices, I: 396
omelette, I: 137
with scrambled eggs, I: 126, 576
with shirred eggs, I: 123
see also variations in recipe texts

pistou (garlic and basil purée)
with beef stew
with eggplant
soup and sauce, I: 45



with zucchini
see also variations in recipe texts

pistouille
with eggplant
with zucchini

Pithiviers
plombières, I: 594–6
plum(s) (pruneaux; prunes)

baked in custard (flan aux; clafouti aux), I: 657; 7.1
poached in syrup, I: 654

poach, to (definition of), I: 13
pocher (to poach), I: 13
pôchouse: see pauchouse
poireaux: see leeks
poires: see pears
pois: see peas
poisson: see fish
poivrons: see peppers
pommes: see apples
pommes de terre: see potatoes
pork (porc), I: 375–89; 1.1, 5.1

general information, I: 375–80
curing of
cuts for

boiling, I: 307
chops, I: 386
curing
roasting and braising, I: 378
sausage making
stew, I: 389

fat
for beef braised and stewed
discussion of, I: 564; 5.1, 5.2
for larding beef
for sausage-making
for terrines and pâtés, 5.1, 5.2



marinades for, I: 375–7
with beans in cassoulet, I: 399
boiled (potée normande), I: 307
boudin blanc, 4.1, 5.1
brains: see brains
braised (braisé), I: 384–5

with red cabbage (aux choux rouges), I: 384
with sauerkraut (avec choucroute), I: 385

chops (côtes de), I: 385–9
casserole-sautéed (poêlées), I: 386
fresh tomato sauce (Robert; charcutière), I: 388
mustard and cream sauce (sauce Nénette), I: 387

cold (rôti de, poêlé), I: 577
dry-salt curing (salaison à sec)
fat, leaf fat, leaf lard; see also pork, general information
leftover, in eggplant and tomato casserole
liver, discussed
pâté, I: 568; 5.1
parslied ham mold in aspic (jambon persillé)
pâté: see pâtés and terrines
preserved
roast (rôti de), I: 378–84

with cabbage (aux choux), I: 383
casserole-roasted (poêlé), I: 380
mustard and other sauces, I: 382
with potatoes and onions (grand’mère), I: 382
sauces for, I: 381–2
temperature and timing, I: 379
with turnips (aux navets), I: 383

salt (lard rance) in cabbage soup, I: 48
sausage: see sausages
steaks, I: 385–9
stews (ragoûts de), I: 389
stuffed with cheese (Sylvie), I: 385
in stuffings

with ham for eggplant



with ham for veal
with herbs for lamb, I: 336
with veal for pâtés, I: 565

suckling pig (cochon de lait)
general information, 3.1

carving
fitting into pan
ordering
preparing for roasting
stuffings for, 3.1, 3.2, app1.1

roast, stuffed (farci à la Trébizonde)
tongues (langues de); see also tongues

port wine
for cooking, I: 32
for jellied stocks and aspics, I: 114
sauce, I: 75

pot au feu, I: 306
pot roast: see beef, braised
potages et soupes: see soups
potato(es) (pommes de terre), I: 520–8

general information, I: 22; 6.1
buying and storing
off-taste
to slice, I: 27
types
use of instant mashed (for duchesse du fromage)

Anna (Anna)
baking dishes for, 6.1, app1.1

baked, with endives (gratin dauphinois aux endives)
cakes, filled (galettes de, farcies)
cheese sticks (bouchées parmentier au fromage), I: 198
cold dish with, I: 578
in cream and basil (au basilic)
in cream and tarragon (à l’estragon)
duchesse
gnocchi, I: 181–3



gratins
with anchovies or sausages (aux anchois; et saucisson), I: 154–5
with endives (dauphinois aux endives)
with ham and eggs (râpée morvandelle), I: 153
with spinach (épinards à la basquaise), I: 474
see also potatoes, scalloped

hashed brown, with tomatoes (galette de, aux tomates)
mashed (purée de)

for borders (duchesse)
cheese flavored (duchesse au fromage)
in cheese sticks (bouchées parmentier au fromage), I: 198
with garlic (à l’ail), I: 520
leftover, in pancakes
for nests or mounds (duchesse)
with turnips (navets parmentier), I: 487

molded, with cheese (galette de, au fromage)
pancakes (crêpes de), I: 521

filled (galettes de, farcies)
made from leftover mashed (galettes de, duchesse)

pie with herbs and cream (tourte limousine)
salads (salade de)

with beans, etc. (niçoise), I: 542
with beef (boeuf à la parisienne), I: 543
with beets (à la d’Argenson), I: 543
French (à l’huile), I: 541

sautéed
balls (parisiennes), I: 528
in butter (sautées; pour garniture; château), I: 526–8
diced (en dés), I: 528
with lemon and garlic (sautées, calabraise)

scalloped
with carrots and cream (gratin de, Crécy), I: 525
in cream (gratin jurassien), I: 524
with meat stock and cheese (gratin savoyard), I: 524
with milk and cheese (gratin dauphinois), I: 523
with onions and tomatoes (gratin de, provençal), I: 525, 578



soups
garlic with (soupe à l’ail aux), I: 48
with leeks
and celery (potage Célestine)
or onion (potage Parmentier), I: 37
vichyssoise, I: 39
and watercress (potage au cresson), I: 38–9

with stews
beef with olives
veal (printanier)

with truffles (sarladaise)
with veal chops or steaks

potiron: see pumpkins and winter squashes
poularde: see chicken
poulet: see chicken
poultry, I: 234–87; 4.1

to disjoint
to half-bone
preserved
stock, I: 109, 236, 237
to truss, I: 237–9; 4.1
see also chicken; duck; goose; etc.

pound cake (le quatre quarts)
pralin (caramelized ground nuts)

almonds (aux amandes), I: 583; 7.1
walnuts (aux noix)

precooking: symbol (*) in recipes
preserved goose (confit d’oie): see goose, preserved
preserves

fillings for crêpes, I: 654
sauces and glazes, I: 593–4

pressure cooker
for dried beans, I: 400
for soups, I: 37, 40
for stocks, I: 107

Progrès, le



prune(s) (pruneaux)
and foie gras stuffing for goose, I: 284
tart with cream cheese, I: 648

puff pastry (feuilletée): see pastry, puff
puff shells; puffs (pâte à choux), I: 177–81
pumpkins and winter squashes (potiron)

general information, 6.1
purée with white beans (gratin de, d’Arpajon)
soup (potage au)
stuffed (tout rond)

purée, to (definition of), I: 13
purée(s) (purées)

apple (soufflé base)
cauliflower and watercress (choufleur en verdure), I: 460
chestnut (de marrons), I: 518
garlic and basil (pistou), 3.1, 6.1, 6.2
jam, preserves, or jelly, for sauce, I: 593
mushroom, to stuff artichoke bottoms
pumpkin with white beans (gratin de potiron d’Arpajon)
raspberry, for sauce, I: 592, 630
rice and turnip (Freneuse)
rutabagas (la, châteaux en Suède)
spinach (d’épinards simple), I: 469
strawberry, for sauce, I: 592
tomato with garlic and herbs (coulis de tomates à la provençale),

I: 78
turnip and potato (de navets Parmentier), I: 487
white bean soup with garnish (soupe à la Victorine)
see also potatoes, mashed

puréeing, I: 13
electric blender for soups, I: 37; 1.1
food mill, I: 9; 3, 535

Q
quail, roast (caille rôtie), I: 246



quatre épices, for charcuterie
quatre quarts, le (pound cake)
quenelle(s), I: 184–90

beef (de boeuf provençales)
in chicken filling for vol-au-vent (garniture de volaille, financière)
of fish (de poisson), I: 185

fish for, I: 185
gratin of, I: 188

with oysters (aux huîtres), I: 188
of salmon (de saumon), I: 189
of shellfish (de crustacés), I: 189

of poultry or veal (de volailles ou de veau), I: 189
stuffing for fish filets, I: 216
in sweetbread filling for vol-au-vent (ris de veau à la financière)
see also mousses, entrée

quiche(s), I: 146–53
Camembert, I: 148
cheese (au fromage), I: 147–8
cream and bacon (Lorraine), I: 147
endive (aux endives), I: 152
leek (aux poireaux; flamiche), I: 151
Lorraine, I: 147
mushroom (aux champignons), I: 152
onion (aux oignons), I: 150
pastry shells for

described, I: 143; 2.1
dough, I: 139–43; 2.1, 2.2
forming and baking, I: 143–6; 2.1

Roquefort, I: 148
seafood (aux fruits de mer), I: 149
spinach (aux épinards), I: 153
Swiss cheese), I: 147
tomato (à la tomate, niçoise), I: 148

R



rabbit (lapin)
general information, 3.1

buying and preparing for cooking
thawing frozen
pâté, I: 568
stewed in red wine (au Saupiquet)

rafraîchir (to refresh), I: 13
ragoûts: see beef, stew; veal, stew; etc.
raised batters and doughs (pâtes levées)

babas and savarins, I: 658
crêpes, I: 649, 650
French breads, brioches, croissants

raisin(s) (raisins)
with braised onions
bread, 2.1, 2.2
brioche with (kougloff)
in sauce for beef tongue

raspberry(ies) (framboises)
bavarian cream (bavarois), I: 600
in brioche cake (le Marly; la Riposte)
Chantilly, I: 608
cream plombières, I: 595
malakoff, I: 607
sauce, fresh, I: 592

on peaches, I: 630
sherbet and ice cream (mousse aux)

ratatouille, I: 503, 577
ravigote sauce, I: 95
reduce, to (definition of), I: 13
reduire (to reduce), I: 13

en purée (to purée), I: 13
refresh, to (definition of), I: 13
Reine de Saba, I: 677
rémoulade sauce, I: 91
ribbon, to form the, I: 579
rice (riz), I: 528–35



and beet salad (à la d’Argenson), I: 543
boiled, for salads (au blanc), I: 532
braised (risotto; pilaf, pilau), I: 532
buttered (I, II, III) (à l’anglaise; au beurre; étuvé au beurre), I:

530–1
mold, orange-flavored with cherries (des Hespérides)
with mushrooms (duxelles), I: 531
with mussels (pilaf de moules), I: 231
and onions (soubise), I: 355, 485
packaged precooked, I: 534–5
panade for pâtés
pudding (à l’Impératrice), I: 601
ring of (en couronne), I: 534
steamed (à l’indienne; à la vapeur), I: 529
in stuffings: see list of stuffings, app.1
and turnips, purée (purée Freneuse)
wild, I: 535
and zucchini, gratin of (tian)

Riposte, la
ris de veau: see sweetbreads
risotto, I: 532
riz: see rice
rognons: see kidneys
rognures (leftover puff pastry)
rolls

beef: see beef, rolls
brioches, small
cream (rouleaux), 2.1, 7.1
croissants
French bread, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3

rooster, I: 235
rouille, sauce for fish soup, I: 51–2
roulades: see beef, rolls
rouleaux (cream rolls)

as appetizer with cheese filling
as dessert with cream filling



roux
for braising sauce
for brown sauce, I: 68; 3.1
for cheese sauce
for white sauce, I: 56

rum (rhum)
in apple aspic, I: 627
babas, I: 660–1
in butter creams, I: 681–4
cake, caramel custard, flambée (charlotte Jamaïque en flammes)
for cooking, I: 32
soufflé, with macaroons (soufflé démoulé aux macaroons), I: 620
syrup for babas, I: 660

rutabagas, I: 485–6
purée (la purée, châteaux en Suède)

rye flour, in spice cake (pain d’épices)

S
sabayon sauce, for pears
Saint-André, le, 7.1, 7.2
Saint-Cyr, le, glacé
Saint-Jacques en bouillabaisse, les
Saint-Jacques, velouté de
salad(s) (salades), I: 541–4

combination (niçoise), I: 542
mussel (de moules), I: 229
potato (de pommes de terre), I: 541–4
rice for (riz au blanc), I: 532
rice and beet (à la d’Argenson), I: 543
sweet pepper (de poivrons, provençale)

salmon (saumon)
gratin (aux fruits de mer), I: 156
mousse, I: 562
quenelles, I: 189
soufflé, I: 166



variations, I: 167
in stuffing for lamb (farce mentonnaise), I: 338
timbales, I: 175

salt
general information, I: 23
cure of goose
cure of pork
to remove excess, I: 23
spiced, for charcuterie (sel épicé)

sauce(s), I: 54–105
note: sauces for desserts listed separately
general information, I: 54–5
aïoli, I: 92; 1.1

for chicken (bouillabaisse)
for fish stew (bourride)

alsacienne; de Sorges, I: 93
anchovy (aux anchois), I: 66

with garlic for beef stew (provençale), I: 324
aurore, I: 62
bâtarde, I: 64
béarnaise, I: 84

with meat-glaze flavoring (Colbert), I: 85
with tomato flavoring (Choron), I: 85

béchamel, I: 55–64
with eggplant

bercy
with fish filets, I: 210
with steak, I: 294

bonne femme, I: 216
bordelaise, I: 76, 295, 419
bourguignonne, I: 76
brandy, I: 296
brown (brunes), I: 66–76
butter (beurre)

brown (noir; noisette), I: 98–9
for calf’s brains, I: 413



for chicken breasts (noisette), I: 270
cold flavored, I: 99–105
lemon (au citron), I: 98
white (blanc; nantais), I: 96

caper (aux câpres), I: 65
Chantilly, I: 83
chasseur, I: 75, 368
chaud-froid

blanche neige, I: 105
for chicken

cheese with wine and garlic (fondue de fromage), I: 105, 118
chivry, I: 62
choron, I: 85
Colbert, I: 85
cream (crème; suprême), I: 59, 60, 268, 458

and mushroom, for ham, I: 392
and mustard, for liver, I: 406

sour (vinaigrette à la crème), with dill, I: 95
and white wine, for chicken fricassee, I: 260

curry
brown (brune au cari), I: 73
white (au cari), I: 63, 261; 3.1

deglazing, I: 76, 255–6, 271
diable, I: 71
dieppoise, I: 214
dill, I: 95
duxelles, I: 74
egg yolk

(parisienne; allemande), I: 60
see also below hollandaise; mayonnaise

espagnole (sauce base), I: 66
game (poivrade), I: 70
garlic (à l’ail)

and anchovy for beef stew, I: 324
and basil (pistou), I: 45; 3.1, 6.1, 6.2
and egg yolks for chicken, I: 257



for lamb, I: 334
mayonnaise (aïoli), I: 92; 1.1, 4.1
and pepper (rouille) for fish soup, I: 52

herbal
brown (aux fines herbes), I: 73
hollandaise, I: 82
mayonnaise, I: 89–90, 93
white wine (Chivry), I: 62

hollandaise, I: 79–85
electric blender, I: 81
handmade, I: 79
mock (bâtarde; au beurre), I: 64
variations, I: 82–5

italienne, I: 76, 411
jus lié, I: 70
Madeira (madère), I: 75, 298, 300

brown, with truffles (Périgueux), I: 75
with mushrooms, I: 515
for tongue

maltaise, I: 83
marchand de vins, I: 295
marrow (moelle), I: 76, 294–5, 419
matelote, I: 415
mayonnaise, I: 86–93

electric blender, I: 88
handmade, I: 87
remedy for turned, I: 88
variations, I: 89–93

mornay, I: 61, 193
for broccoli
for poached chicken

mousseline, I: 83
sabayon, I: 84, 169

mushroom (duxelles), I: 74
brown (à l’italienne), I: 76, 411
and cream, I: 392



with tomatoes (chasseur), I: 75, 368
mustard (moutarde), I: 66, 95

brown (Robert), I: 72
with cream (à la normande), I: 382
for liver, I: 406
with pearl onions and raisins, for tongue (à l’aigre—douce)
with tomatoes and cream (Nénette), I: 387

Nantua, I: 216
Nénette, I: 387
normande, I: 215
onion (soubise), I: 64, 355, 485
orange, I: 76, 276
paprika (au paprika), I: 262, 268
parisienne, I: 60, 212, 214–16
Périgueux, I: 75
pimento, for chicken (suprême pimentée)
piquante, I: 72
poivrade, I: 70
port wine (au porto), I: 75
ragoût, I: 69
ravigote, I: 95
rémoulade, I: 91
Riviera, I: 90
Robert, I: 72
roux

for brown sauce, I: 68; 3.1
for braising sauce
for cheese sauce
for white sauce, I: 56

Saupiquet, for braising rabbit
soubise, I: 64, 355, 485
suprême, I: 59, 188
tarragon (estragon)

béarnaise, I: 84
brown (brune à l’), I: 73, 251
for chicken, I: 262; 4.1



white (Chivry), I: 62
tartare, I: 90
thermidor, I: 221
tomato (tomate)

with canned tomatoes
classic, I: 76
fresh tomatoes (coulis), I: 78, 388

truffle (Périgueux), I: 75, 271
velouté, I: 55–64, 356–7, 363
venison (venaison), I: 70
vinaigrette, I: 94–5
Walewska, I: 215
white

béchamels and veloutés, I: 55–66
butter (beurre blanc; beurre nantais), I: 96

wine, I: 62, 84, 217, 294–5
sauce(s) for desserts, I: 588–93

apricot (confit d’abricots en sirop)
chocolate
custard

crème anglaise, I: 588, 683; 7.1, 7.2
sabayon

jam or jelly, I: 593
raspberry (aux framboises), I: 592, 630
sabayon, for pears
strawberry (aux fraises), I: 592

saucisse, saucisson: see sausage
sauerkraut (choucroute), I: 280, 385

braised (braisée à l’alsacienne), I: 498
with meat garnish (garnie), I: 499

sausage(s) (saucisses et saucissons)
general information, 5.1

casings
buying and preparing
filling
substitutes for



caul fat
cheesecloth

to cure, to hang (saucisson à cuire)
cuts for
fat for
making links
salt and spices (épices fines)

with beans (cassoulet), I: 401
with boiled beef (pot-au-feu), I: 306
boudin blanc, 4.1, 5.1
breakfast (chair à saucisse)
in brioche (en brioche)

with aspic
formed in a loaf pan
free-form

braised beef and greens (les tous nus; quenelles de boeuf
provençales)

cakes, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
French type, homemade, I: 403

casings: see above, general information, casings
chard or spinach

with beef (tous nus)
pork and liver (caillettes)

chicken liver in brioche (de foies de volaille)
chipolatas, 5.1, 5.2
goose-neck, stuffed (cou d’oie farcie)
gratin, with potatoes, I: 155
large, fresh, to cook (à cuire)

other suggestions
links
liver, chicken (de foies de volaille)
liver, pork, and greens (caillettes; gayettes)
meat loaf, 5.1, 5.2
panade for, 5.1, 5.2
plain pork (chair à)
in plain or puff pastry (en croûte)



Polish, I: 404
pork and liver with greens (caillettes; gayettes)
pork and veal with truffles and foie gras (truffé au foie gras)
Provençal, braised beef and greens (les tous nus; quenelles de

boeuf)
in stuffings, I: 275, 286; 3.1, 3.2, 5.1, 6.1

white-meat (boudin blanc), 4.1, 5.1
sauté, general information, I: 13
sauter (to sauté), I: 13
savarins, I: 662–5

fillings for, I: 664
mold for, I: 662
small (petits), I: 665
syrup for, I: 663
with whipped cream (Chantilly), I: 664

scallop(s) (coquilles Saint-Jacques)
bouillabaisse of (les Saint-Jacques en bouillabaisse)

variations
gratinéed

with cream and mushrooms (à la parisienne), I: 216
with wine and garlic (à la provençale), I: 218

soup (marmite dieppoise)
cream of (velouté de Saint-Jacques)

in stews and chowders
timbales, I: 175

seafood
filling for vol-au-vent (garniture dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)

see also crab; fish; lobster; etc.
sel épicé (spiced salt)
semolina gnocchi, I: 183
serving suggestions: see individual recipes
shallot(s) (échalotes)

general information, I: 19, 23
to dice or mince, I: 30

butter (beurre bercy; beurre marchand de vins), I: 103
shellfish (crustacés)



bisques
butter (beurre de), I: 104; 1.1

lobster
filling for appetizers (fondue de), I: 202
filling, creamed, for vol-au-vent and bouchées (garniture

dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)
garnitures for fish filets, I: 212–16
mousse, I: 564
soups (bisques)
see also clam; crab; lobster; etc.

shells
for appetizer tartlets, I: 200
for dessert tarts, I: 634–5; 7.1
for patties
for puffs, I: 177–80
for quiches, I: 143–6; 2.1
upside down

sherbets: see desserts, frozen
sherry for cooking, I: 32
short paste: see pastry, dough
shrimp(s) (crevettes)

in aspic, I: 549
bisque (bisque de)
butter (shellfish butter), I: 104; 1.1
to cook, I: 213
quenelles, I: 189
quiche, I: 149
soufflé, I: 167, 170
soup (marmite dieppoise)

simmer, to (definition of), I: 11
skillets, I: 6, 192

electric, I: 254, 259
for potatoes Anna, 6.1, app1.1, app1.2

slice, how to, I: 27–8
snail butter (beurre pour escargots), I: 103
sole, filets: see fish, filets



sorrel soup (potage crème d’oseille), I: 42
soubise

sauce, I: 64
with rice and onions, I: 355, 485

soufflé(s) (soufflés)
general information, I: 157–63

dishes for (charlotte molds), I: 161–2; app1.1
entrée, I: 157–74

cheese (au fromage), I: 163
with egg whites only (aux blancs d’oeufs), I: 173

variations, I: 173
eggplant (d’aubergines en persillade)
fish (de poisson), I: 166, 168, 170
lobster, crab, or shrimp (de homard, de crabe, ou aux

crevettes), I: 170
with poached eggs (Vendôme), I: 165
salmon (de saumon), I: 166

variations, I: 167
spinach (aux épinards), I: 165–6
unmolded (démoulé, mousseline), I: 171
vegetable variations, I: 166

sweet or dessert (sucrés), I: 613–22
general information, I: 613–14
almond (aux amandes), I: 618
apple in apples (pommes, Calvados)

other ideas
caramel almond (île flottante), I: 622
caramelized almonds (praliné), I: 617
chocolate (au chocolat), I: 619
coffee (au café), I: 617
Cointreau, curaçao (à l’orange), I: 616
glacée of fruits and kirsch (Rothschild), I: 617
half-and-half (panaché), I: 618
macaroon (aux macarons), I: 617

and rum, unmolded (démoulé), I: 620
orange (à l’orange), I: 616



soufflé glacé
tart with lemon or lime (tarte au citron ou aux limettes), I: 645
vanilla (à la vanille), I: 614

soup(s) (potages et soupes et bisques), I: 37–53; 1.1
general information, I: 37; 1.1

kettles (marmites)
asparagus

cream of green (crème d’asperges vertes)
frozen
white European

bean, white, with garnish (à la Victorine)
bisques
bouillabaisse, I: 52

fish for, I: 50
of scallops

cabbage (aux choux; garbure), I: 48
canned
cauliflower and watercress (de la Fontaine Dureau)
celery with potatoes and leeks (Célestine)
cold

asparagus
cauliflower and watercress
celery
cucumber
herb, green
leek and potato, I: 39
mushroom
onion
pea-pod
scallop
spinach
turnip
vichyssoise, I: 39
watercress, I: 39, 41; 1.1
zucchini
see also end of recipe texts



crab
bisque (de crabes)
cream of (velouté de crustacés)

crayfish bisque (d’écrevisses)
cucumber (aux concombres)
eggplant and tomato garnish, for bean
fennel and tomato garnish, for bean
fish (de poisson), I: 49–53

bisques
bouillabaisse, I: 52

fish for, I: 50
of scallops

bourride
matelotes, meurettes, pauchouses
shellfish
stews and chowders

fish for
with garlic mayonnaise, Provençal-style (bourride)
with sole, shellfish, Normandy-style (marmite aux fruits de

mer; marmite dieppoise; chaudrée normande)
with wine, onions, mushrooms, Burgundy-style (matelote;

meurette; pauchouse)
garlic (aïgo bouïdo), I: 46–8

with poached eggs (à l’oeuf, provençale), I: 47
with potatoes (à l’ail aux pommes de terre), I: 48

herb, green (aux herbes panachées)
leek and potato

with celery (Célestine)
Parmentier, I: 37
vichyssoise, I: 39
and watercress (au cresson), I: 38–9

leek and sweet pepper (catalane aux poivrons)
lobster

bisque (de homard à l’américaine)
cream of (velouté de crustacés)

mushroom, cream of



Île de France
velouté, I: 40

mussel (aux moules), I: 231
onion (à l’oignon), I: 43–5

cream of (crème aux oignons, soubise)
and potato (Parmentier), I: 37

pea-pod (belle potagère)
peasant types
pepper, sweet, and leek (catalane aux poivrons)
pistou, I: 45
potato (pomme de terre)

and garlic (à l’ail aux), I: 48
and leek with celery (Célestine)
and leek or onion (Parmentier), I: 37

with watercress (au cresson), I: 38–9
vichyssoise, I: 39

pumpkin (le potiron tout rond)
scallop (velouté de Saint-Jacques)

bouillabaisse (les Saint-Jacques en bouillabaisse)
variations

shellfish
cream of (velouté de crustacés)

shrimp bisque (de crevettes)
sorrel (crème d’oseille), I: 42
spinach (épinards)

cream of (crème d’), I: 43
Florentine (à la florentine)

sweet pepper and leek (catalane aux poivrons)
tomato with rice, Mediterranean (Magali)
turnip (Untel)
vegetable (Provençal) (au pistou)
veloutés, vegetable
vichyssoise, I: 39
watercress (au cresson)

and cauliflower (de la Fontaine Dureau)
cream of (crème de), I: 41



and potato, I: 38–9
white bean with garnish (à la Victorine)
zucchini (aux courgettes)

sour cream, I: 16; 1.1
dressing (vinaigrette à la crème), I: 95

sour dough
spice bread; spice cake (pain d’épices)
spiced salt for charcuterie (sel épicé)
spices for charcuterie (épices fine)
spinach (épinards), I: 467–76

general information, I: 467–8
blanched chopped (precooking) (blanchis), I: 468
braised, I: 470–1

in butter (étuvés au beurre), I: 470
in cream (à la crème), I: 471
with ham (au jambon), I: 470
with onions (gratin d’, aux oignons)
in stock (au jus), I: 470

canapés, I: 472
crêpes (pancakes), I: 473–4

under giant crêpe (en surprise), I: 473
custard mold (timbale d’), I: 175, 474
filling for crêpes, I: 194
frozen, I: 475
gratin with potatoes (à la basquaise), I: 474
gratinéed, I: 471–3

with cheese (au fromage), I: 471
with cheese sauce (à la mornay), I: 472

with ham (au jambon), I: 470
omelette, I: 136
pâté, with veal and chicken (terrine verte)
puréed (purée d’, simple), I: 469
quiche, I: 153
with sausage mixtures

with beef (tous nus)
with pork and liver (caillettes)



soufflé, I: 165
soup, I: 43

Florentine (potage à la florentine)
in stuffings, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3
timbales, I: 175, 474
with zucchini, sauté of (courgettes aux)

spirits for cooking, I: 32
spit-roasting

for chicken, I: 242
for duck, I: 275

spongecake
butter (biscuit au beurre), I: 669
chocolate (le Marquis), I: 679
orange (gâteau à l’orange), I: 671

and almond (et aux amandes), I: 676
with orange-butter filling, I: 672

spreads for appetizers: see appetizers, spreads for
squab, roast (coquelets sur canapés), I: 246
squash (courges, courgettes)

general information, 6.1
to blanch
grated and salted
summer squash

versus winter
see also pumpkins; zucchini

starch (corn, potato, rice)
for soufflé sauce base, I: 614, 619
thickening for brown sauce, I: 70

steak: see beef, steaks; pork, steaks; etc.
stew: see beef, stew; fish, stew; veal, stew; etc.
stocks (and bouillons) (fonds de cuisine), I: 106–15

general information, I: 106–7
brown (brun), I: 110
canned

beef, I: 67
chicken, I: 57



clam, I: 115
consommé, I: 67

chicken (volaille), I: 236–7
brown (brun de), I: 110, 236
white (blanc de), I: 109, 237

chicken scraps for
clarification of, I: 111
degreasing of, I: 108
duck, I: 272
fish (fumet de poisson)

emergency (clam juice), I: 115
for fish stew
white wine (au vin blanc), I: 114

goose, I: 282
jellied (gelée), I: 112–14
meat (simple), I: 107
mushroom (fumet de champignons), I: 512
veal (blanc), I: 109; 216
white (blanc), I: 109

strawberry(ies) (fraises)
bavarian cream (bavarois), I: 600
in brioche cake (le Marly; la Riposte)
Chantilly (whipped cream), I: 608
malakoff, I: 605
plombières (custard), I: 595
in puff pastry shells
with rum babas, I: 661
sauce, I: 592
sherbet and ice cream (mousse aux)
tart (tarte aux), I: 640

straws, potato with cheese (bouchées Parmentier au fromage), I: 198
stuffing(s) (farces)

list of, with suggestions for use
for beef

for case, mushrooms and olives (boeuf en caisse, surprise)



for filet, foie gras with truffles (filet de boeuf braisé Prince
Albert), I: 304

for rolls (paupiettes)
chard, sausage, ham, and onion (Gargantua)
olive and pimento (niçoise)
peppers, onions, and diced mustard bread (à la catalane)
pork and veal, I: 319, 565
rice and garlic with herbs (à l’ail de Mme. Cassiot)

for tenderloin, mushroom (duxelles)
boudin blanc, 4.1, 5.1
for ham (jambon farci et braisé), I: 394
for lamb

garlic and herb (aux herbes), I: 336
ham and mushroom (duxelles), I: 337
mushroom and kidney (duxelles aux rognons)
mushroom and spinach (Viroflay)
olive and ground lamb (aux olives), I: 338
pork and herb (de porc), I: 336
rice and kidney (aux rognons), I: 337
salmon and anchovy (mentonnaise), I: 338

for pâtés, I: 565; 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
for pork, for suckling pig, rice, sausage, and apricots (Trébizonde)
for poultry, 5.1, 5.2

for chicken
chicken livers, foie gras, and rice (à la d’Albuféra)
herb and giblet (poulet roti à la normande), I: 243
mushroom (duxelles), I: 251
rice, chicken livers, mushrooms, and garlic (évocation

d’Albuféra)
white forcemeat with mushrooms (normande, aux boudins

blancs)
for duck

sausage and apple (caneton rôti à l’alsacienne), I: 275
for goose

foie gras in prunes (oie rôtie aux pruneaux), I: 284
pork and veal, I: 565



sausage and chestnut (oie braisée aux marrons), I: 286
for turkey

chicken livers, foie gras, and rice (à la d’Albuféra)
pork and veal, I: 565
rice, chicken livers, mushrooms, and garlic (évocation

d’Albuféra)
white forcemeat with mushrooms (normande, aux boudins

blancs)
for puff-paste chaussons (saucisson truffé au foie gras)
for veal

chard or spinach (poitrine de veau, farcie)
foie gras and truffles for scallops (noisettes de veau,

périgourdine)
ground pork with ham, truffles, and foie gras (veau en

feuilletons)
ham and cheese, I: 358
rice, onion, and mushroom, I: 356
other suggestions

for vegetables
for any vegetable, I: 243, 252, 336, 337, 338, 349, 502; 3.1,

3.2, 4.1, 5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6
for artichoke hearts: mushroom purée (farcis, froids; en

surprise)
for cabbage

leaves: braised beef and ham
whole or leaves: sausage, ham, and rice

for eggplant
eggplant, peppers, onions, tomatoes, and herbs
ground veal, turkey, or pork with onions and herbs
mushroom (aubergines farcies duxelles), I: 502

for mushrooms, I: 516
for onions: rice, onion, and cheese
for potato cakes
for tomatoes, I: 507, 516, 576
for zucchini

almond, cheese, and bread crumbs (aux amandes)



rice and peppers (au riz et aux poivrons)
Succès, le
suckling pig: see pork, suckling pig
suet for larding, 3.1, 3.2
sugar (sucre)

to boil: see fondant
and butter (creaming of), I: 581
caramel: see caramel; caramelized
cookies (galettes sablées), I: 635
crust for tarts (pâte sablée), I: 633
and eggs (beating of), I: 579
icing (fondant), 7.1, 7.2
short paste for tarts (pâte brisée sucrée), I: 633
syrup: see syrup

summer squash: see zucchini
suprêmes de volaille: see chicken, breasts of
surprise du Vésuve, la
Suzette, crêpes, I: 650
swedes: see rutabagas
sweetbread(s) (ris de veau), I: 408–13

general information
blanching of, I: 409
soaking and peeling of, I: 408

braised (braisés), I: 409
with brown mushroom sauce (braisés à l’italienne), I: 411
with quenelles, truffles, etc. (à la financière)

cold in salad, I: 577
creamed (à la crème; à la maréchale), I: 412

with mushrooms (aux champignons), I: 412
au gratin, I: 413
gratin of leftover, I: 157
sautéed in butter (escalopes de, sautés), I: 413
soufflé, I: 167, 173
timbales, I: 175

Swiss chard: see chard
swordfish steaks (thon à la provençale), I: 219, 576



syrup (sugar)
for butter-cream filling, I: 681
caramel, I: 584; 7.1
for fondant
for fruit poaching, I: 630, 642
kirsch, for savarins, I: 663
rum, for babas, I: 660

T
tables

chicken types, I: 235
of equivalents (American, French, British)

flour, I: 18; app1.1
metric system, I: 20–1

flour, I: 18; app1.1
mayonnaise, ingredients proportions, I: 87
soufflés, ingredients proportions, I: 163
temperature conversion, I: 25
timetables for roasting: see chicken; duck; etc.

tarragon (estragon)
butter (beurre d’), I: 102

with meat glaze (Colbert), I: 102
chicken

in aspic, I: 549
casserole-poached
casserole-roasted, I: 249
fricasseed, I: 262

sauce: see sauces, tarragon
tart(s) for dessert (tartes sucrées), I: 632–48; 7.1

almond (Pithiviers)
apple (aux pommes), I: 635; 7.1

with custard (normande), I: 637
upside-down (des Demoiselles Tatin), I: 638

apricot (aux abricots), I: 639
variations, I: 640



cherry (aux cerises, flambée), I: 643
cream cheese (au fromage frais), I: 647

and prune (et aux pruneaux), I: 648
custard fillings for, I: 590–2
fruits, various, in puff pastry, 7.1, 7.2
jam (jalousie)
lemon (au citron), I: 645–7

with almonds (et aux amandes), I: 646
soufflé, I: 645

lime soufflé (aux limettes), I: 645
pastry dough for, I: 632–4; 2.1

puff pastry
pastry shells for, I: 634–5

puff pastry
peach (aux pêches), I: 639
pear (aux poires), I: 638; I: 632–48; 7.1

and almond (à la Bourdaloue), I: 642
pineapple (à l’ananas), I: 644
puff pastry (pâte feuilletée)

almond (Pithiviers)
apple or pear (aux pommes ou aux poires)
other fruits, 7.1, 7.2
peekaboo with jam or fruit (jalousie)
shells for fruit (abaisses en feuilletage pour, aux fruits)
strawberry (aux fraises), I: 640
variations, I: 641

tart(s) for entrée
molds for, I: 143; app1.1
onion, I: 151
pastry dough for, I: 139–43; 2.1, 2.2
pastry shells for, I: 143–6; 2.1
peekaboo with cheese, in puff pastry (jalousie au fromage)
see also quiches

tartare sauce, I: 90
tartlets, shells for, I: 200
temperature, Fahrenheit-Centigrade conversions, I: 24–5



tenderloin of beef: see beef, tenderloin
Tentation de Bramafam, la (eggplant caviar)
terrines: see pâtés and terrines
thermidor sauce, for lobster, I: 221
timbale(s) (timbales) for dessert almond cream (le Pélerin en)
timbale(s) (timbales) for entrée

asparagus (d’asperges), I: 440
broccoli (de choux brocoli)
Brussels sprouts (de chou de Bruxelles), I: 454
cauliflower (de chou-fleur), I: 461
chicken liver (de foies de volaille), I: 174

variations, I: 175
French pancakes (de crêpes), I: 195
spinach (d’épinards), I: 175, 474
unmolded, egg proportions for
zucchini (de courgettes)

toilette: see caul fat
tomalley

crab
lobster

tomato(es) (tomates), I: 505–8
general information, I: 23

to peel, seed, juice, etc., I: 505–6
baked whole (grillées au four), I: 506
casserole with eggplant (ratatouille), I: 503
garnish for soup
with hashed brown potatoes
omelette, I: 136–8

gratinéed, I: 136
open-faced (pipérade), I: 137

pipérade: see pipérade
purée with herbs (coulis de, à la provençale), I: 78
quiche, I: 148
in salad nicoise, I: 542
sauce, I: 76–8, 388; 6.1
with scalloped potatoes, I: 525



soup, Mediterranean (potage Magali)
stuffed (à la provençale; farcies duxelles); I: 507–8

with scrambled eggs, I: 576
in stuffings, 6.1, 6.2

tongue(s) (langues)
general information

cooking methods
fresh versus smoked and pickled
peeling
preparation, fresh or frozen
salting
types, 3.1, 3.2

beef (de boeuf)
general information, 3.1
boiled, with sweet-and-sour sauce (à l’aigre–douce)
braised, with Madeira sauce (braisée, au madère)
flavorings, etc.
sauces for
sliced, braised with curry (braisée, Calcutta)

lamb (d’agneau)
pork (de porc)
veal (de veau)

tools: see kitchen equipment
toss, to (definition of), I: 14
tournedos, I: 290–1, 296–300
tripe (tripes)

general information, 3.1
buying
French
names
preliminaries to cooking

with onions (à la niçoise)
truffes au chocolat
truffle(s) (truffes)

general information, I: 19
with chicken, chaud-froid (chaud-froid de poulet, morvandelle)



with chicken, in pastry (garniture de volaille, financière)
with chicken livers, in sausage (saucisson aux foies de volaille)
chocolate (au chocolat)
in deglazing sauce for chicken breasts, I: 271
with eggs, scrambled (oeufs brouillés aux), I: 126
with fish filets, I: 215
for pâtés, I: 564–9; 5.1
in pork and veal sausage (saucisson truffé au foie gras)
with potatoes (pommes de terre sarladaise)
sauce (Périgueux), I: 75
in sausage (saucisson à cuire)
with steak (tournedos), I: 299
in stuffings

for chicken, half-boned (poularde à la d’Albuféra)
with foie gras for beef, I: 304
for leg of lamb, in pastry (gigot farci, en croûte)
for veal roast, sliced (veau en feuilletons)
with veal scallops (noisettes de veau, périgourdine)
with sweetbreads in pastry (ris de veau à la financière)

trussing a bird, I: 237–9; 4.1
tuna

in combination salad (salade niçoise), I: 542
steaks (thon à la provençale), I: 219, 576
in veal patties and veal loaf, I: 375

turkey (dinde)
with beans (cassoulet), I: 404
to bone, I: 570
to half-bone and truss
leftover

in eggplant and tomato casserole
filling for appetizers, I: 203
gratin of, I: 157
mousse (mousseline de volaille), I: 560

preserved
quenelles, I: 189
soufflé, I: 167



in stuffing for eggplant
stuffings for, I: 565 272–6, 513–15
in tarragon aspic, I: 549
timbales, I: 175

turnip(s) (navets), I: 485–9
general information, I: 485–6
braised in butter (à l’étuvée), I: 486
casserole of (à la champenoise), I: 488
with duck (caneton poêlé aux), I: 279
glazed (glacés à brun), I: 488
greens, in stuffing for beef roll
parslied (persillés), I: 487
with pork (rôti de porc aux), I: 383
and potato purée (purée de, Parmentier), I: 487
purée, with rice (purée Freneuse)
purée of rutabagas (la purée, châteaux en Suède)
sautéed in butter (petits, sautés, en garniture)
soup, green (potage Untel)

turnovers
with Roquefort cheese (petits chaussons au Roquefort), I: 204
pastry dough for, I: 139–43; 2.1, 2.2, 2.3

U, V
unmolding, directions for

aspics, I: 559
cakes, I: 668
desserts, I: 586

utensils: see kitchen equipment
vanilla (vanille), I: 587

ice cream, with chocolate sauce (Chantilly glacée, au chocolat)
other sauces and flavorings

in sauce or filling (crème anglaise; crème pâtissière), I: 588–92
soufflé, I: 614, 618

variations follow recipe: symbol  before recipe title
veal (veau), I: 350–75; 203–25



general information, I: 350–2; 3.1, 3.2
cuts for

chops, I: 369; 3.1
ossobuco
patties, I: 372
roasting, I: 351
scallops, I: 365
steaks, I: 371; 3.1
stewing, I: 360; 3.1

quality, I: 350
timing for roasts, I: 352

blanquette, I: 362
boudin blanc (sausage), 4.1, 5.1
brains: see brains
braised

baked in pastry (feuilletons, en croûte)
sliced and stuffed (en feuilletons)

breast (poitrine de)
general information, 3.1

to bone
to buy

stuffed, braised (farcie)
stuffings for

chard or spinach
other stuffings, 3.1, app.1

chops and steaks (côtes de; rouelles), I: 369–71; 3.1
braised

gratinéed with cheese (au fromage)
with herbs (aux herbes), I: 369

variations, I: 371
with mushrooms and cream (braisées aux champignons)
with potatoes (Champvallon, gratinées)
in wine (dans leur jus)

variations (pistou, bonne femme, etc.)
cold, I: 577
kidneys: see kidneys, veal and lamb



leftover
in eggplant and tomato casserole
for patties, I: 375

loaf (pain de), I: 375
marinades, I: 358, 567; 3.1
pâtés: see pâtés and terrines
patties (ground veal) (fricadelles de), I: 372–5

with cream and herb sauce (à la crème), I: 373–4
of leftover veal, I: 375
with mushrooms (duxelles), I: 374
with tomatoes and onions (à la niçoise), I: 372
with tuna (mentonnaise), I: 375

quènelles, I: 189
roast (covered casserole) (poêlé), I: 351–9

with diced vegetables (à la matignon), I: 354
gratinéed with onions (Prince Orloff), I: 355
sliced and stuffed (en feuilletons)

in pastry crust (feuilletons, en croûte)
stuffed (ham and cheese) (Sylvie), I: 357
timing and temperature for roasting, I: 352

sausage (boudin blanc), 4.1, 5.1; see also sausages
scallops (escalopes de), I: 364–9

with cream and mushrooms (à la crème), I: 366
stuffed with foie gras and truffles (noisettes)
with tarragon sauce (à l’estragon), I: 367
with tomatoes and mushrooms (chasseur), I: 368

shank with beans (cassoulet), I: 404
shanks, braised (ossobuco; jarret de, à la provençale)
steaks, I: 371; see also veal, chops
stews, sautés, blanquettes, I: 359–64; 3.1

with onions (blanquette de, à l’ancienne), I: 362
ossobuco
with tomatoes (Marengo), I: 360
with tomatoes, mushrooms, and cream (ragoût de, aux

champignons)
variations (olives, pipérade, etc.)



with vegetables (ragoût de, printanier)
stock, I: 109; 3.1
stuffed

with chard or spinach
with ham and cheese (Sylvie), I: 357
with onions and mushrooms (Prince Orloff), I: 355
with pork, foie gras, etc. (en feuilletons)
scallops (noisettes, périgourdine)

in stuffing, 3.1, 6.1
stuffings for, I: 356, 358; 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, app.1
tongues (langues de); see also tongues

veau: see veal
vegetable mill, I: 9; 1.1, app.1

for puréeing soups
vegetables (légumes), I: 421–535; 6.1

general information, I: 421; see also information preceding each
vegetable section

to chop, dice, mince, etc., I: 26–30
green, discussion of, I: 421–2
serving suggestions: see suggestions in main-course recipes

cold, I: 536–41, 577–8; 6.1
in pot-au-feu, I: 306
soup (soupe au pistou), I: 45
stuffed: see stuffings, for vegetables
see also soups, and names of specific vegetables

velouté sauce, I: 55–64, 356–7, 363
venison, sauce for (sauce venaison), I: 70
vermouth for cooking, I: 31
viande: see meat; pork; veal; etc.
vichyssoise, I: 39
vinaigrette sauces, I: 94–5
volaille: see chicken
vol-au-vent, 2.1, 2.2

chicken garniture for (de volaille financière)
cutters for
puff pastry dough for



puff pastry shells for
cover
uncooked insides, use of (ramequin du juste milieu)

seafood garniture for (dieppoise; aux fruits de mer)
sweetbread garniture for (ris de veau à la financière)

W
wafers, cheese (galettes au fromage), I: 197
walnut(s) (noix)

and almond puffs (les croquets Denison)
brittle (pralin aux noix)
cake (gâteau aux noix; le Saint-André)

with apricot filling (le Saint-André aux abricots)
caramel ice cream (mousse glacée, pralinée aux noix; appareil à

bombe)
halves, caramelized (pralin aux noix)

watercress (cresson)
purée, with cauliflower (chou-fleur en verdure), I: 460
soup (potage au), I: 38–9, 41

with cauliflower (de la Fontaine Dureau)
waterzooi (bouillabaisse of chicken)
weights: see measures and weights
white sauces (sauces blanchis), I: 55–66

butter sauce (beurre blanc; beurre nantais), I: 96
wine(s) (vins), I: 31–6

baskets, decanters, I: 36
cooking with, I: 31–2
and food, I: 32–4
glasses, I: 36; 554
sauce, I: 62, 84, 217, 294–5
storage and serving, I: 33–6
see also serving suggestions with recipes

winter squash, purée, with white beans (gratin de potiron
d’Arpajon)



X,Y,Z
yeast

general information
batters and doughs (pâtes levées)

babas and savarins, I: 658
crêpes, I: 649, 650
French breads, brioches, croissants

zucchini (courgettes)
general information, 6.1

to blanch whole
to buy and store
to grate and salt
peeling, blanching, salting
weights and measures

baked: see below gratinéed
blanched, whole; recipes
in cream

grated (rapées à la crème)
pieces, with tarragon (étuvées à la crème)

in eggplant casserole (ratatouille), I: 503
with garlic, parsley, and béchamel (en persillade, gratinées)
grated

in cream (rapées à la crème)
molded custard of, with cheese (timbale)
in olive oil and garlic (rapées, sautées à la provençale)
sautéed (rapées, sautées)
with spinach (aux épinards)

gratinéed (baked)
with cheese (à la milanaise)
with cheese sauce (mornay)
with garlic, parsley, and béchamel (persillade)
with rice, onions, and cheese (tian)

molded custard with onions and cheese (timbale)
pistouille
with rice, onions, and cheese (tian de, au riz)



sautéed
in butter

grated (rapées)
pieces (maître d’hôtel)

in oil and garlic
grated (provençale)
pieces (provençale)

soup (potage aux)
with spinach (aux épinards)
stuffed

with almonds and cheese (farcies aux amandes)
with rice and peppers (farcies au riz et aux poivrons)
see also list of stuffings, app.1

with tomatoes, peppers, etc. (en pistouille)



A NOTE ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Julia Child was born in Pasadena, California, and grew up
there. She was graduated from Smith College, later joined the
OSS during the Second World War, and was sent to Asia,
where she met and married Paul Child. His work for the State
Department took them to Paris, where Mrs. Child developed her
growing interest in cooking, attended the Cordon Bleu, and in
1952 established a cooking school and a collaboration with
Simone Beck and Louisette Bertholle, which resulted in the first
volume of Mastering the Art of French Cooking.

Simone Beck spent her girlhood in Normandy, and started
cooking early in life. Originally a student of bookbinding, her
interest in cooking crystallized under the tutelage of private
chefs and of Henri Pellaprat at the Cordon Bleu. She lived most
of her life in Paris and Provence but became well known in
America through Mastering the Art of French Cooking and
two books published under her own name.

Mrs. Child made her home in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
and Santa Barbara, California. For years she taught Americans
the art of French cooking on her nationwide Public Television
programs. In 1968 recipes from her early programs were
published in The French Chef Cookbook. In 1975 From Julia
Child’s Kitchen was published, followed in 1978 and 1979 by
the two illustrated books Julia Child & Company and Julia
Child & More Company based on those programs. She was
also the author of The Way to Cook, Cooking with Master
Chefs, In Julia’s Kitchen with Master Chefs, Julia and
Jacques Cooking at Home (with Jacques Pépin), and, most
recently, of Julia’s Kitchen Wisdom.

Mrs. Child died in Santa Barbara in August 2004. Her
memoir, My Life in France, written with Alex Prud’homme,
was published posthumously in 2006.



What’s next on
your reading list?

Discover your next
great read!

 
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this

author.

Sign up now.