Praise	for	SALT	FAT	ACID	HEAT
“This	beautiful,	approachable	book	not	only	teaches	you	how	to	cook,	but
captures	how	it	should	feel	to	cook:	full	of	exploration,	spontaneity,	and	joy.
Samin	is	one	of	the	great	teachers	I	know,	and	wins	people	over	to	cooking
with	real	food—organic,	seasonal,	and	alive—with	her	irrepressible
enthusiasm	and	curiosity.”
—Alice	Waters,	New	York	Times	bestselling	author	of	The	Art	of	Simple	Food
“Everyone	was	impressed	when	Michael	Pollan	managed	to	summarise	the
huge	and	complex	subject	of	what	we	should	be	eating	in	just	seven	words:
‘Eat	food,	not	too	much,	mostly	plants.’	Samin	Nosrat	has	managed	to
summarise	the	huge	and	complex	subject	of	how	we	should	be	cooking	in
just	four	words:	‘salt,	fat,	acid,	heat.’	Everyone	will	be	hugely	impressed.”

—Yotam	Ottolenghi,	New	York	Times	bestselling	author	of	Jerusalem
“Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat	is	a	must	for	anyone	wanting	to	be	a	better	cook.	Samin
Nosrat,	along	with	Wendy	MacNaughton’s	fun	illustrations,	teaches	the
fundamentals	of	cooking	and	dives	into	the	four	elements	that	make	food
taste	great.	So	do	yourself	a	favour	and	buy	this	book.	I	promise	you	won’t
regret	it.”
—April	Bloomfield,	James	Beard	Award–winning	chef	and	author	of	A	Girl

and	Her	Pig
“Like	the	amazing	meals	that	come	out	of	Samin	Nosrat’s	kitchen,	Salt,	Fat,
Acid,	Heat	is	the	perfect	mixture	of	highest-quality	ingredients:	beautiful
storytelling,	clear	science,	an	infectious	love	of	food,	and	Wendy
MacNaughton’s	powerful	art.	Nosrat’s	prose	combined	with
MacNaughton’s	beautiful	illustrations	are	a	perfect	guide	to	employing	the
science	of	cooking	for	maximum	deliciousness.”
—Rebecca	Skloot,	New	York	Times	bestselling	author	of	The	Immortal	Life

of	Henrietta	Lacks
“Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat	is	a	very	important	book	not	because	it	contains	many
excellent	recipes,	although	it	does,	or	because	it	is	written	by	a	Chez	Panisse
alum,	although	it	is.	It	is	important	because	it	gives	home	cooks	a	compass
with	which	to	navigate	their	own	kitchens,	and	it	places	trust	in	them	that
they	will	be	able	to	use	that	compass.	Samin’s	easygoing,	cook-by-feel
approach	is	never	condescending	or	elitist.	It	is	a	step	towards	cooking
without	recipes	and	true	empowerment	(and	joy!)	in	the	kitchen.”



—John	Becker	and	Megan	Scott,	fourth-generation	stewards	of	the	New
York	Times	bestselling	Joy	of	Cooking

“Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat	is	a	wildly	informative,	new-generation	culinary
resource.	Samin	Nosrat’s	wealth	of	experience	comes	together	here	in	a
pitch-perfect	combination	of	charm,	narrative,	straight-talk,	illustration,	and
inspiration.	Ticking	all	the	boxes	for	new	and	seasoned	cooks	alike,	this
book	meets	you	wherever	you	are	in	the	kitchen,	in	all	the	right	ways.”

—Heidi	Swanson,	New	York	Times	bestselling	author	of	Super	Natural
Cooking






Published	in	Great	Britain	in	2017	by	Canongate	Books	Ltd,
14	High	Street,	Edinburgh	EH1	1TE
canongate.co.uk
This	digital	edition	first	published	in	2017	by	Canongate	Books
Copyright	©	Samin	Nosrat,	2017
Illustrations	©	Wendy	MacNaughton,	2017
The	moral	right	of	the	author	has	been	asserted
First	published	in	the	USA	by	Simon	&	Schuster,	1230	Avenue	of	the
Americas
New	York,	NY	10020
British	Library	Cataloguing-in-Publication	Data
A	catalogue	record	for	this	book	is	available	on
request	from	the	British	Library
9781782112303
eISBN	9781782112310
Interior	design	by	Alvaro	Villanueva



For	Alice	Waters,	who	gave	me	the	kitchen,	and	for	Maman,	who	gave	me	the
world



Anyone	who	likes	to	eat,	can	soon	learn
to	cook	well.

—Jane	Grigson



CONTENTS
Foreword
Introduction
How	to	Use	This	Book
PART	ONE
The	Four	Elements	of	Good	Cooking
SALT
FAT
ACID
HEAT
What	to	Cook
PART	TWO
Recipes	and	Recommendations
Kitchen	Basics
Recipes

Salads
Dressings
Vegetables
Stock	and	Soups
Beans,	Grains,	and	Pasta	280	Eggs
Fish
Thirteen	Ways	of	Looking	at	a	Chicken
Meat
Sauces
Butter-and-Flour	Doughs
Sweets

Cooking	Lessons
Suggested	Menus
Tips	for	Further	Reading



Acknowledgements
Bibliography
Index
About	the	Author	&	the	Illustrator



FOREWORD

As	I	write	these	words,	this	book	hasn’t	even	been	published	yet,	but
already	it	feels	indispensable.
That	must	sound	over-the-top,	I	know,	but	I	honestly	can’t	remember

the	last	time	I	read	a	book	on	cooking	that	was	this	useful	or	unusual.	I
suspect	that’s	because	reading	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat	feels	less	like	being	in	the
pages	of	a	cookbook	than	at	a	really	good	cooking	school,	standing	in	your
apron	around	the	butcher-block	island	listening	as	a	smart,	eloquent,	and
occasionally	hilarious	chef	demonstrates	how	to	repair	a	broken
mayonnaise.	(Add	a	few	drops	of	water	and	then	“whisk	with	the	urgency	of
a	swimmer	escaping	a	shark.”)	Now	she	passes	around	the	bowl	of	silky,	no-
longer-broken	emulsion	so	you	can	dip	a	tasting	spoon	and	feel	it	on	your
tongue.	I	get	it.

In	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat,	Samin	Nosrat	manages	to	take	us	so	much
deeper	and	farther	into	the	art	of	cooking	than	cookbooks	ordinarily	do.
That’s	because	her	book	offers	so	much	more	than	recipes,	a	literary	genre
that,	while	useful,	has	severe	limitations.	A	well-written	and	thoroughly
tested	recipe	might	tell	you	how	to	produce	the	dish	in	question,	but	it
won’t	teach	you	anything	about	how	to	cook,	not	really.	Truth	be	told,
recipes	are	infantilising:	Just	do	exactly	what	I	say,	they	say,	but	don’t	ask
questions	or	worry	your	little	head	about	why.	They	insist	on	fidelity	and	faith,
but	do	nothing	to	earn	or	explain	it.

Think	how	much	more	we	learn—and	retain!—when	a	teacher	doesn’t
just	enumerate	the	step-by-step	instructions	but	explains	the	principles
behind	them.	Armed	with	reasons,	we	no	longer	have	to	cling	to	a	recipe	like
a	lifeboat;	now	we	can	strike	out	on	our	own	and	begin	to	improvise.

Even	though	it	contains	plenty	of	excellent	recipes,	this	is	a	book
concerned	foremost	with	principles.	Samin	Nosrat	has	taken	the	sprawling,
daunting,	multicultural	subject	we	call	cooking	and	boldly	distilled	it	to	four
essential	elements—or	five,	if	you	count	the	core	principle	of	tasting	along
the	way.	Master	these	principles,	she	promises,	and	you	will	be	able	to	cook
delicious	food	of	any	kind,	in	any	tradition,	whether	a	salad	dressing	or	a
braise	or	a	galette.	Season	food	with	the	proper	amount	of	salt	at	the	proper
moment;	choose	the	optimal	medium	of	fat	to	convey	the	flavour	of	your
ingredients;	balance	and	animate	those	ingredients	with	acid;	apply	the	right
type	and	quantity	of	heat	for	the	proper	amount	of	time—do	all	this	and
you	will	turn	out	vibrant	and	beautiful	food,	with	or	without	a	recipe.	It’s	a



big	promise,	but	if	you	take	her	course—i.e.	read	this	book—you	will	find
that	Samin	delivers.	Whether	you	are	new	to	cooking	or	have	decades	of
experience	under	your	apron,	you	will	understand	how	to	build	striking	new
layers	of	flavour	in	whatever	you	cook.

Besides	being	a	gifted	and	deeply	experienced	cook	with	years	of
experience	in	some	of	the	best	kitchens	in	the	Bay	Area,	Samin	is	a	natural
teacher—exacting,	inspiring,	and	eloquent.	I	happen	to	know	this	firsthand,
because	Samin,	who	had	once	been	my	writing	student,	became	my
cooking	teacher	when	I	set	out	to	research	my	book	Cooked.

We	had	met	a	decade	earlier,	after	Samin	had	written	asking	if	she
could	audit	my	graduate	class	in	food	journalism	at	Berkeley.	Letting	her	in
was	one	of	the	best	decisions	I’ve	made,	not	only	as	a	professor	of	writing
but	as	an	eater	of	food.	Samin	more	than	held	her	own	with	the	journalists
in	the	class,	demonstrating	the	winning	voice	and	surefooted	prose	now	on
display	in	this	book,	but	she	really	put	the	rest	of	us	in	the	shade	when	it
came	to	snack.

This	being	a	class	about	food,	naturally	we	ate,	taking	turns	each	week
bringing	in	a	“storied	snack”—	some	food	item	or	dish	that	tells	a	little	story,
whether	about	the	student’s	background,	project,	or	passion.	We’ve
snacked	on	baguettes	salvaged	from	a	Dumpster;	on	foraged	mushrooms
and	weeds;	and	on	ethnic	foods	of	every	description,	but	we	seldom	got	to
consume	more	than	a	bite	or	two	plus	the	story.	Samin	served	us	a	whole
meal:	a	sumptuous	spinach	lasagna	made	completely	from	scratch	and
served	on	actual	plates	with	linens	and	silverware,	items	that	had	never
before	crossed	the	threshold	of	my	classroom.	While	we	ate	the	best
lasagna	any	of	us	had	ever	tasted,	Samin	told	us	the	story	of	how	she
learned	to	make	pasta,	mixing	the	flour	and	eggs	by	hand,	while	in	Florence,
apprenticed	to	Benedetta	Vitali,	one	of	her	most	influential	teachers.	We
were	all	captivated,	as	much	by	her	storytelling	as	her	cooking.

So	years	later,	when	I	decided	to	get	serious	about	cooking,	there	was
no	question	whom	I	would	ask	to	teach	me.	Samin	agreed	immediately,	and
so	once	a	month	for	more	than	a	year,	she	would	come	over,	usually	on	a
Sunday	afternoon,	and	together	we	would	cook	a	three-course	meal,	each
one	organised	around	a	different	theme.	Samin	would	burst	into	the	kitchen
with	her	market	bags,	apron,	and	roll	of	knives,	announcing	the	theme	of
that	day’s	lesson,	which	often	matched	the	principles	laid	out	in	this	book.
“Today	we’re	going	to	learn	all	about	emulsions.”	(Which	she	memorably



described	as	“a	temporary	peace	treaty	between	fat	and	water.”)	If	meat
were	on	the	syllabus,	Samin	would	often	stop	by	or	phone	the	night	before,
to	make	sure	the	roast	or	chicken	was	properly	seasoned,	which	is	to	say
early	and	amply:	at	least	twenty-four	hours	in	advance,	with	about	five
times	as	much	salt	as	your	cardiologist	would	recommend.

The	sessions	began	as	one-on-one	tutorials,	with	Samin	and	me
chopping	and	chatting	around	the	kitchen	island,	but	in	time,	my	wife,
Judith,	and	our	son,	Isaac,	found	themselves	drawn	into	the	kitchen	by	the
aromas	and	the	laughter	emanating	from	it.	It	seemed	a	shame	not	to	share
the	delicious	meals	we	began	turning	out	more	widely,	so	we	began	inviting
friends	to	join	us	for	dinner,	and	in	time,	our	friends	began	arriving	earlier
and	earlier	in	the	evening	and	then	in	the	afternoon,	so	that	they	might	help
roll	out	a	piecrust	on	the	kitchen	island	or	turn	the	crank	on	the	pasta
machine	as	Isaac	fed	it	amber	discs	of	eggy	dough.

There	is	something	infectious	about	Samin’s	teaching,	in	the
combination	of	her	passion,	humour,	and	patience,	but	especially	in	her
ability	to	break	the	most	complex	operation	down	into	steps	that
immediately	made	sense	because	she	never	failed	to	explain	the	principle
behind	them.	You	salted	meat	so	early	to	give	it	time	to	diffuse	into	the
muscle,	where	it	dissolves	strands	of	proteins	into	a	liquid-retaining	gel,
thus	making	for	moister	meat	at	the	same	time	it	builds	flavour	from	the
inside	out.	Every	such	step	has	a	little	story	behind	it;	and	as	soon	as	you
know	it,	the	step	makes	perfect	sense	and,	eventually,	it	becomes	second
nature,	part	of	your	culinary	muscle	memory.



Yet	as	logical	and	even	scientific	as	Samin	can	be	about	the	techniques
she’s	imparting,	in	the	end	she	believes	cooking	with	distinction	depends	on
tasting	and	smelling—on	educating	our	senses	and	then	learning	to	trust
them.	“Taste,	taste,	and	then	taste	again,”	she	would	tell	me,	even	as	I	did
something	as	simple	and	seemingly	boring	as	sautéing	an	onion.	Yet	there
was	an	intricate	evolution	unfolding	in	that	pan	as	the	rectangles	of	onion
went	from	crisply	acidic	to	clean	and	sweet	to	faintly	smoky	as	they
caramelised	and	then	bittered	slightly	as	they	browned.	She	showed	me
how	a	half	dozen	distinct	flavours	could	be	teased	from	that	single	humble
ingredient,	all	depending	on	how	you	managed	principle	number	four,	heat
—and	deployed	your	senses,	for	each	stage	in	the	onion’s	evolution	carried
its	own	distinct	and	learnable	aroma.	Now	what	recipe	ever	conveyed	all
that?	As	Samin	likes	to	say,	quoting	another	of	her	teachers,	“Recipes	don’t
make	food	taste	good.	People	do.”

What	I	love	most	about	this	book	is	that	Samin	has	somehow	found	a
way	(with	the	help	of	Wendy	MacNaughton’s	equally	inspired	and
informative	illustrations)	to	bring	both	her	passion	for,	and	intelligence
about,	cooking	to	the	page.	The	result	is	a	book	that	instructs	and	delights
in	equal	measure	(no	mean	feat	in	any	piece	of	writing)	and	one	that	I



predict	will	soon	find	its	place	on	the	short	shelf	of	books	on	cooking	that
you	can’t	imagine	living	without.	You	will	want	to	make	room	for	this	one.

—Michael	Pollan



INTRODUCTION

Anyone	can	cook	anything	and	make	it	delicious.
Whether	you’ve	never	picked	up	a	knife	or	you’re	an	accomplished

chef,	there	are	only	four	basic	factors	that	determine	how	good	your	food
will	taste:	salt,	which	enhances	flavour;	fat,	which	amplifies	flavour	and
makes	appealing	textures	possible;	acid,	which	brightens	and	balances;	and
heat,	which	ultimately	determines	the	texture	of	food.	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and
Heat	are	the	four	cardinal	directions	of	cooking,	and	this	book	shows	how
to	use	them	to	find	your	way	in	any	kitchen.

Have	you	ever	felt	lost	without	a	recipe,	or	envious	that	some	cooks	can
conjure	a	meal	out	of	thin	air	(or	an	empty	refrigerator)?	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and
Heat	will	guide	you	as	you	choose	which	ingredients	to	use,	how	to	cook
them,	and	why	last-minute	adjustments	will	ensure	that	food	tastes	exactly
as	it	should.	These	four	elements	are	what	allow	all	great	cooks—whether
award-winning	chefs	or	Moroccan	grandmothers	or	masters	of	molecular
gastronomy—to	cook	consistently	delicious	food.	Commit	to	mastering
them	and	you	will	too.

As	you	discover	the	secrets	of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat,	you’ll	find
yourself	improvising	more	and	more	in	the	kitchen.	Liberated	from	recipes
and	precise	shopping	lists,	you’ll	feel	comfortable	buying	what	looks	best	at
the	farmer’s	market	or	butcher’s	counter,	confident	in	your	ability	to
transform	it	into	a	balanced	meal.	You’ll	be	better	equipped	to	trust	your
own	palate,	to	make	substitutions	in	recipes,	and	cook	with	what’s	on	hand.
This	book	will	change	the	way	you	think	about	cooking	and	eating,	and	help
you	find	your	bearings	in	any	kitchen,	with	any	ingredients,	while	cooking
any	meal.	You’ll	start	using	recipes,	including	the	ones	in	this	book,	like
professional	cooks	do—for	the	inspiration,	context,	and	general	guidance
they	offer,	rather	than	by	following	them	to	the	letter.

I	promise	this	can	happen.	You	can	become	not	only	a	good	cook,	but	a
great	one.	I	know,	because	it	happened	to	me.

I	have	spent	my	entire	life	in	pursuit	of	flavour.
As	a	child,	I	found	myself	in	the	kitchen	only	when	Maman	enlisted	me

and	my	brothers	to	peel	raw	broad	beans	or	pick	fresh	herbs	for	the
traditional	Persian	meals	she	served	us	every	night.	My	parents	left	Tehran
for	San	Diego	on	the	eve	of	the	Iranian	Revolution,	shortly	before	I	was	born
in	1979.	I	grew	up	speaking	Farsi,	celebrating	No-Ruz,	the	Iranian	New	Year,



and	attending	Persian	school	to	learn	how	to	read	and	write,	but	the	most
delightful	aspect	of	our	culture	was	the	food—it	brought	us	together.	Rare
were	the	nights	when	our	aunts,	uncles,	or	grandparents	didn’t	join	us	at	the
dinner	table,	which	was	always	filled	with	plates	mounded	high	with	herbs,
platters	of	saffron	rice,	and	fragrant	pots	of	stew.	Invariably,	I	was	the	one
who	snagged	the	darkest,	crunchiest	pieces	of	tahdig,	the	golden	crust	that
formed	at	the	bottom	of	every	pot	of	Persian	rice	Maman	made.

Though	I	certainly	loved	to	eat,	I	never	imagined	I’d	become	a	chef.	I
graduated	from	high	school	with	literary	ambitions,	and	moved	north	to
study	English	literature	at	UC	Berkeley.	I	remember	someone	mentioning	a
famous	restaurant	in	town	during	my	freshman	orientation,	but	the	idea	of
dining	there	never	occurred	to	me.	The	only	restaurants	I’d	ever	eaten	at
were	the	Persian	kebab	places	in	Orange	County	my	family	trekked	to	each
weekend,	the	local	pizza	joint,	and	fish	taco	stands	at	the	beach.	There	were
no	famous	restaurants	in	San	Diego.

Then	I	fell	in	love	with	Johnny,	a	rosy-cheeked,	sparkly-eyed	poet	who
introduced	me	to	the	culinary	delights	of	his	native	San	Francisco.	He	took
me	to	his	favourite	taqueria,	where	he	taught	me	how	to	construct	an	order
for	the	perfect	Mission	burrito.	Together,	we	tasted	baby	coconut	and
mango	ice	creams	at	Mitchell’s.	We’d	sneak	up	the	stairs	of	Coit	Tower	late
at	night	to	eat	our	slices	of	Golden	Boy	Pizza,	watching	the	city	twinkle
below.	Johnny	had	always	wanted	to	dine	at	Chez	Panisse	but	had	never
had	the	chance.	It	turned	out	that	the	famous	restaurant	I’d	once	heard
about	was	an	American	institution.	We	saved	up	for	seven	months	and
navigated	a	labyrinthine	reservation	system	to	secure	a	table.

When	the	day	finally	arrived,	we	went	to	the	bank	and	exchanged	the
shoe	box	of	quarters	and	dollar	bills	for	two	crisp	hundred-dollar	bills	and
two	twenties,	dressed	up	in	our	nicest	outfits,	and	zoomed	over	in	his
classic	convertible	VW	Beetle,	ready	to	eat.

The	meal,	of	course,	was	spectacular.	We	ate	frisée	aux	lardons,	halibut
in	broth,	and	guinea	hen	with	tiny	chanterelle	mushrooms.	I’d	never	eaten
any	of	those	things	before.

Dessert	was	chocolate	soufflé.	When	the	server	brought	it	to	us,	she
showed	me	how	to	poke	a	hole	in	the	top	with	my	dessert	spoon	and	then
pour	in	the	accompanying	raspberry	sauce.	She	watched	me	take	my	first
bite,	and	I	ecstatically	told	her	it	tasted	like	a	warm	chocolate	cloud.	The
only	thing,	in	fact,	that	I	could	imagine	might	improve	the	experience	was	a
glass	of	cold	milk.



What	I	didn’t	know,	because	I	was	inexperienced	in	the	ways	of	fancy
food,	was	that	for	many	gourmands	the	thought	of	consuming	milk	after
breakfast	is	childish	at	best,	revolting	at	worst.

But	I	was	naïve—though	I	still	contend	that	there’s	nothing	like	a	glass
of	cold	milk	with	a	warm	brownie,	at	any	time	of	day	or	night—and	in	that
naïveté,	she	saw	sweetness.	The	server	returned	a	few	minutes	later	with	a
glass	of	cold	milk	and	two	glasses	of	dessert	wine,	the	refined
accompaniment	to	our	soufflé.

And	so	began	my	professional	culinary	education.
Shortly	afterwards,	I	wrote	a	letter	to	Alice	Waters,	Chez	Panisse’s

legendary	owner	and	chef,	detailing	our	dreamy	dinner.	Inspired,	I	asked	for
a	job	waiting	tables.	I’d	never	considered	restaurant	work	before,	but	I
wanted	to	be	a	part	of	the	magic	I’d	experienced	at	Chez	Panisse	that	night,
even	in	the	smallest	way.

When	I	took	the	letter	to	the	restaurant	along	with	my	résumé,	I	was	led
into	the	office	and	introduced	to	the	floor	manager.	We	instantly
recognised	each	other:	she	was	the	woman	who’d	brought	us	the	milk	and
dessert	wine.	After	reading	my	letter,	she	hired	me	on	the	spot.	She	asked	if
I	could	return	the	next	day	for	a	training	shift.

During	that	shift,	I	was	led	through	the	kitchen	into	the	downstairs
dining	room,	where	my	first	task	was	to	vacuum	the	floors.	The	sheer
beauty	of	the	kitchen,	filled	with	baskets	of	ripe	figs	and	lined	with	gleaming
copper	walls,	mesmerised	me.	Immediately	I	fell	under	the	spell	of	the
cooks	in	spotless	white	chef’s	coats,	moving	with	grace	and	efficiency	as
they	worked.

A	few	weeks	later	I	was	begging	the	chefs	to	let	me	volunteer	in	the
kitchen.

Once	I	convinced	the	chefs	that	my	interest	in	cooking	was	more	than
just	a	dalliance,	I	was	given	a	kitchen	internship	and	gave	up	my	job	as	a
waitress.	I	cooked	all	day	and	at	night	I	fell	asleep	reading	cookbooks,
dreaming	of	Marcella	Hazan’s	Bolognese	sauce	and	Paula	Wolfert’s	hand-
rolled	couscous.



Since	the	menu	at	Chez	Panisse	changes	daily,	each	kitchen	shift	begins
with	a	menu	meeting.	The	cooks	sit	down	with	the	chef,	who	details	his	or
her	vision	for	each	dish	while	everyone	shells	peas	or	peels	garlic.	He	might
talk	about	his	inspiration	for	the	meal—a	trip	to	the	coast	of	Spain,	or	a
story	he’d	read	in	the	New	Yorker	years	ago.	She	might	even	detail	a	few
specifics—a	particular	herb	to	use,	a	precise	way	to	slice	the	carrots,	a
sketch	of	the	final	plate	on	the	back	of	a	scrap	of	paper—before	assigning	a
dish	to	each	cook.

As	an	intern,	sitting	in	on	menu	meetings	was	inspiring	and	terror-
inducing	in	equal	measure.	Gourmet	magazine	had	just	named	Chez	Panisse
the	best	restaurant	in	the	country,	and	I	was	surrounded	by	some	of	the
best	cooks	in	the	world.	Just	hearing	them	talk	about	food	was	enormously
educational.	Daube	provençal,	Moroccan	tagine,	calçots	con	romesco,
cassoulet	toulousain,	abbacchio	alla	romana,	maiale	al	latte:	these	were	the
words	of	a	foreign	language.	The	names	of	the	dishes	were	enough	to	send
my	mind	reeling,	but	the	cooks	rarely	consulted	cookbooks.	How	did	they
all	seem	to	know	how	to	cook	anything	the	chef	could	imagine?

I	felt	like	I’d	never	catch	up.	I	could	hardly	imagine	the	day	would	come
when	I’d	be	able	to	recognise	all	of	the	spices	in	the	kitchen’s	unlabelled
jars.	I	could	barely	tell	cumin	and	fennel	seeds	apart,	so	the	thought	of



getting	to	a	point	where	I	could	ever	appreciate	the	nuanced	differences
between	Provençal	bouillabaisse	and	Tuscan	cacciucco	(two	Mediterranean
seafood	stews	that	appeared	to	be	identical)	seemed	downright	impossible.

I	asked	questions	of	everyone,	every	day.	I	read,	cooked,	tasted,	and
also	wrote	about	food,	all	in	an	effort	to	deepen	my	understanding.	I	visited
farms	and	farmers’	markets	and	learned	my	way	around	their	wares.
Gradually	the	chefs	gave	me	more	responsibility,	from	frying	tiny,	gleaming
anchovies	for	the	first	course	to	folding	perfect	little	ravioli	for	the	second
to	butchering	beef	for	the	third.	These	thrills	sustained	me	as	I	made
innumerable	mistakes—some	small,	such	as	being	sent	to	retrieve	coriander
and	returning	with	parsley	because	I	couldn’t	tell	the	difference,	and	some
large,	like	the	time	I	burned	the	rich	beef	sauce	for	a	dinner	we	hosted	for
the	First	Lady.

As	I	improved,	I	began	to	detect	the	nuances	that	distinguish	good	food
from	great.	I	started	to	discern	individual	components	in	a	dish,
understanding	when	the	pasta	water	and	not	the	sauce	needed	more	salt,
or	when	an	herb	salsa	needed	more	vinegar	to	balance	a	rich,	sweet	lamb
stew.	I	started	to	see	some	basic	patterns	in	the	seemingly	impenetrable
maze	of	daily-changing,	seasonal	menus.	Tough	cuts	of	meat	were	salted
the	night	before,	while	delicate	fish	fillets	were	seasoned	at	the	time	of
cooking.	Oil	for	frying	had	to	be	hot—otherwise	the	food	would	end	up
soggy—while	butter	for	tart	dough	had	to	remain	cold,	so	that	the	crust
would	crisp	up	and	become	flaky.	A	squeeze	of	lemon	or	splash	of	vinegar
could	improve	almost	every	salad,	soup,	and	braise.	Certain	cuts	of	meat
were	always	grilled,	while	others	were	always	braised.

Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat	were	the	four	elements	that	guided	basic
decision	making	in	every	single	dish,	no	matter	what.	The	rest	was	just	a
combination	of	cultural,	seasonal,	or	technical	details,	for	which	we	could
consult	cookbooks	and	experts,	histories,	and	maps.	It	was	a	revelation.

The	idea	of	making	consistently	great	food	had	seemed	like	some
inscrutable	mystery,	but	now	I	had	a	little	mental	checklist	to	think	about
every	time	I	set	foot	in	a	kitchen:	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat.	I	mentioned	the
theory	to	one	of	the	chefs.	He	smiled	at	me,	as	if	to	say,	“Duh.	Everyone
knows	that.”

But	everyone	didn’t	know	that.	I’d	never	heard	or	read	it	anywhere,	and
certainly	no	one	had	ever	explicitly	related	the	idea	to	me.	Once	I
understood	it,	and	once	it	had	been	confirmed	by	a	professional	chef,	it
seemed	inconceivable	that	no	one	had	ever	framed	things	in	this	way	for



people	interested	in	learning	how	to	cook.	I	decided	then	I’d	write	a	book
elucidating	the	revelation	for	other	amateur	cooks.

I	picked	up	a	legal	pad	and	started	writing.	That	was	seventeen	years
ago.	At	twenty	years	old,	I’d	been	cooking	for	only	a	year.	I	quickly	realised	I
still	had	a	lot	to	learn	about	both	food	and	writing	before	I	could	begin	to
instruct	anyone	else.	I	set	the	book	aside.	As	I	kept	reading,	writing,	and
cooking,	I	filtered	everything	I	learned	through	my	newfound	understanding
of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat	into	a	tidy	system	of	culinary	thinking.

Like	a	scholar	in	search	of	primary	sources,	a	desire	to	experience
authentic	versions	of	the	dishes	I	loved	so	much	at	Chez	Panisse	took	me	to
Italy.	In	Florence,	I	apprenticed	myself	to	the	groundbreaking	Tuscan	chef
Benedetta	Vitali	at	her	restaurant,	Zibibbo.	At	first	it	was	a	constant
challenge	to	work	in	an	unfamiliar	kitchen	where	I	barely	spoke	the
language,	where	temperatures	were	measured	in	Celsius,	and	where
measurements	were	metric.	But	my	understanding	of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and
Heat	quickly	gave	me	my	bearings.	I	might	not	have	known	all	of	the
specifics,	but	the	way	Benedetta	taught	me	to	brown	meat	for	ragù,	heat
olive	oil	for	sautéing,	season	the	pasta	water,	and	use	lemon	juice	as	a	foil
for	rich	flavours	echoed	what	I	had	learned	back	in	California.

I	spent	my	days	off	in	the	hills	of	Chianti	with	Dario	Cecchini,	an	eighth-
generation	butcher	with	a	huge	personality	and	an	even	bigger	heart.	Dario
took	me	under	his	wing,	teaching	me	about	whole-animal	butchery	and
Tuscan	food	heritage	with	equal	vigour.	He	took	me	all	over	the	region	to
meet	farmers,	vintners,	bakers,	and	cheese	makers.	From	them,	I	learned
how	geography,	the	seasons,	and	history	have	shaped	Tuscan	cooking
philosophy	over	the	course	of	centuries:	fresh,	if	modest,	ingredients,	when
treated	with	care,	can	deliver	the	deepest	flavours.

My	pursuit	of	flavour	has	continued	to	lead	me	around	the	world.
Fuelled	by	curiosity,	I’ve	sampled	my	way	through	the	oldest	pickle	shop	in
China,	observed	the	nuanced	regional	differences	of	lentil	dishes	in
Pakistan,	experienced	the	way	a	complicated	political	history	has	diluted
flavours	in	Cuban	kitchens	by	restricting	access	to	ingredients,	and
compared	varieties	of	heirloom	corn	in	Mexican	tortillas.	When	unable	to
travel,	I	have	read	extensively,	interviewed	immigrant	grandmothers,	and
tasted	their	traditional	cooking.	No	matter	my	circumstances	or
whereabouts,	as	reliably	as	the	points	on	a	compass,	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and
Heat	have	set	me	on	the	path	to	good	food	every	time	I	cook.



I	returned	to	Berkeley	and	went	to	work	for	Christopher	Lee,	my	mentor	at
Chez	Panisse,	who’d	recently	opened	his	own	Italian	restaurant,	Eccolo.	I
quickly	took	the	role	of	chef	de	cuisine.	I	made	it	my	job	to	develop	exquisite
familiarity	with	the	way	an	ingredient	or	a	food	behaved	and	then	follow	the
crumb	trail	of	kitchen	science	to	understand	why.	Instead	of	simply	telling
the	cooks	under	my	watch	to	“taste	everything,”	I	could	really	teach	them
how	to	make	better	decisions.	A	decade	after	I	first	discovered	my	theory	of
Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat,	I’d	gathered	enough	information	to	begin	teaching
the	system	to	my	own	young	cooks.

Seeing	how	useful	the	lessons	of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat	had	been	for
professional	cooks,	I	used	them	as	a	rubric	when	my	journalism	teacher,
Michael	Pollan,	hired	me	to	teach	him	how	to	cook	while	writing	Cooked,	his
book	about	the	natural	history	of	cooking.	Michael	quickly	noticed	my
obsession	with	the	four	elements	of	good	cooking	and	encouraged	me	to
formalise	the	curriculum	and	begin	teaching	it	to	others.	So	I	did.	I’ve	taught
the	system	in	cooking	schools,	senior	centres,	middle	schools,	and
community	centres.	Whether	the	foods	we	cooked	together	were	inspired
by	Mexican,	Italian,	French,	Persian,	Indian,	or	Japanese	traditions,	without
exception,	I’ve	seen	my	students	gain	confidence,	prioritise	flavour,	and
learn	to	make	better	decisions	in	the	kitchen,	improving	the	quality	of
everything	they	cook.

Fifteen	years	after	arriving	at	the	idea	for	this	book,	I	began	to	write	in
earnest.	After	first	immersing	myself	in	the	lessons	of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and
Heat,	and	then	spending	years	teaching	them	to	others,	I’ve	distilled	the
elements	of	good	cooking	into	its	essence.	Learn	to	navigate	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,
and	Heat,	and	you	can	make	anything	taste	good.	Keep	reading,	and	I’ll
teach	you	how.



HOW	TO	USE	THIS	BOOK
As	you	can	probably	tell,	this	isn’t	your	typical	cookbook.

I	recommend	that	you	start	by	reading	it	through	from	beginning	to
end.	Pay	attention	to	the	techniques,	the	science,	and	stories,	but	don’t
worry	too	much	about	committing	it	all	to	memory.	Come	back	again	later
to	revisit	the	concepts	that	are	relevant	to	you.	Readers	who	are	new	to	the
kitchen	will	quickly	catch	on	to	the	basics—each	element	is	organised	by	its
flavour	and	its	science,	guiding	you	through	both	the	whys	and	the	hows	of
good	cooking.	More	experienced	cooks	will	find	aha!	gems	buried
throughout	and	even	see	cooking	tricks	you	already	know	with	fresh	eyes.

Throughout	each	chapter,	I’ve	suggested	a	handful	of	kitchen
experiments—essentially,	recipes	that	will	illustrate	some	of	the	major
concepts	and	give	you	a	chance	to	put	theory	into	practice.

And	at	the	back	of	the	book,	I’ve	compiled	a	canon	of	recipes	to
illustrate	just	how	far	a	grasp	of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat	will	take	you.	Over
time,	you’ll	grow	comfortable	enough	to	cook	without	recipes	on	a	daily
basis.	But	when	learning	to	cook	intuitively,	recipes	can	be	necessary	and
comforting,	like	training	wheels.

To	underscore	the	patterns	that	guide	all	good	cooking,	I’ve	organised
the	recipe	section	by	type	of	dish,	rather	than	by	the	particular	course	in	the
meal.	With	the	help	of	the	brilliant	and	hilarious	illustrator,	Wendy
MacNaughton,	I’ve	created	a	variety	of	visual	guides	to	help	convey
concepts	where	words	aren’t	enough.	The	choice	to	embellish	this	book
with	illustrations	rather	than	photographs	was	deliberate.	Let	it	liberate	you
from	feeling	that	there’s	only	one	perfect	version	of	every	dish.	Let	it
encourage	you	to	improvise,	and	judge	what	good	food	looks	like	on	your
own	terms.

If	jumping	straight	into	the	recipes	after	reading	through	the	book
seems	overwhelming,	take	a	look	at	the	Cooking	Lessons,	which	will	steer
you	to	recipes	that	will	help	you	hone	particular	skills	and	master	specific
techniques.	If	you	feel	unsure	of	how	to	put	together	dishes	to	create	a
menu,	use	the	list	of	Suggested	Menus	as	a	guide.

Finally,	remember	to	have	fun!	Don’t	forget	to	enjoy	the	pleasures,	both
small	and	large,	implicit	to	cooking	and	eating	with	people	you	love!









Growing	up,	I	thought	salt	belonged	in	a	shaker	at	the	table,	and	nowhere
else.	I	never	added	it	to	food,	or	saw	Maman	add	it	to	food.	When	my

aunt	Ziba,	who	had	a	well-documented	taste	for	salt,	sprinkled	it	onto	her
saffron	rice	at	the	table	each	night,	my	brothers	and	I	giggled.	We	thought	it
was	the	strangest,	funniest	thing	in	the	world.	“What	on	earth,”	I	wondered,
“can	salt	do	for	food?”

I	associated	salt	with	the	beach,	where	I	spent	my	childhood	seasoned
with	it.	There	were	the	endless	hours	in	the	Pacific,	swallowing	mouthful
after	mouthful	of	ocean	water	when	I	misjudged	the	waves.	Tidepooling	at
twilight,	my	friends	and	I	often	fell	victim	to	the	saltwater	spray	while	we
poked	at	anemones.	And	my	brothers,	chasing	me	on	the	sand	with	giant
kelp,	would	tickle	and	taunt	me	with	its	salty,	otherworldly	tassels	whenever
they	caught	up	to	me.

Maman	always	kept	our	swimsuits	in	the	back	of	our	blue	Volvo	station
wagon,	because	the	beach	was	always	where	we	wanted	to	be.	She	was	deft
with	the	umbrella	and	blankets,	setting	them	up	while	she	shooed	the	three
of	us	into	the	sea.

We’d	stay	in	the	water	until	we	were	starving,	scanning	the	beach	for
the	sun-faded	coral-and-white	umbrella,	the	only	landmark	that	would	lead
us	back	to	Maman.	Wiping	saltwater	from	our	eyes,	we	beelined	to	her.

Somehow,	Maman	always	knew	exactly	what	would	taste	best	when	we
emerged:	Persian	cucumbers	topped	with	sheep’s	milk	feta	cheese	rolled
together	in	lavash	bread.	We	chased	the	sandwiches	with	handfuls	of	ice-
cold	grapes	or	wedges	of	watermelon	to	quench	our	thirst.

That	snack,	eaten	while	my	curls	dripped	with	seawater	and	salt	crust
formed	on	my	skin,	always	tasted	so	good.	Without	a	doubt,	the	pleasures	of
the	beach	added	to	the	magic	of	the	experience,	but	it	wasn’t	until	many
years	later,	working	at	Chez	Panisse,	that	I	understood	why	those	bites	had
been	so	perfect	from	a	culinary	point	of	view.

While	waiting	tables	during	the	first	year	I	worked	at	Chez	Panisse,	the
closest	I	usually	got	to	the	food	was	at	tasters,	when	the	cooks	made	each
dish	for	the	chef	to	critique	before	service.	With	a	menu	that	changed	daily,
the	chef	needed	tasters	to	ensure	that	his	or	her	vision	was	realised.
Everything	had	to	be	just	right.	The	cooks	would	tinker	and	adjust	until
satisfied;	then	they’d	hand	over	the	dishes	to	the	floor	staff	to	taste.	On	the
tiny	back	porch,	a	dozen	of	us	would	hover	over	the	plates,	passing	them
around	until	we’d	all	had	a	bite	of	everything.	It	was	there	that	I	first	tasted



crisp	deep-fried	quail,	tender	salmon	grilled	in	a	fig	leaf,	and	buttermilk
panna	cotta	with	fragrant	wild	strawberries.	Often,	the	powerful	flavours
would	haunt	me	throughout	my	shift.

Once	I	developed	culinary	aspirations,	Chris	Lee,	the	chef	who’d
eventually	take	me	under	his	wing,	suggested	that	I	pay	less	attention	to
what	was	happening	on	the	porch	during	tasters,	and	more	to	what	was
happening	in	the	kitchen.	The	language	the	chefs	used,	how	they	knew
when	something	was	right—these	were	clues	about	how	to	become	a
better	cook.	Most	often,	when	a	dish	fell	flat,	the	answer	lay	in	adjusting	the
salt.	Sometimes	it	was	in	the	form	of	salt	crystals,	but	other	times	it	meant	a
grating	of	cheese,	some	pounded	anchovies,	a	few	olives,	or	a	sprinkling	of
capers.	I	began	to	see	that	there	is	no	better	guide	in	the	kitchen	than
thoughtful	tasting,	and	that	nothing	is	more	important	to	taste	thoughtfully
for	than	salt.

One	day	the	following	year,	as	a	young	cook	in	the	prep	kitchen,	I	was
tasked	with	cooking	polenta.	I’d	tasted	polenta	only	once	before	coming	to
Chez	Panisse,	and	I	wasn’t	a	fan.	Precooked	and	wrapped	in	plastic	like	a	roll
of	cookie	dough,	it	was	flavourless.	But	I’d	promised	myself	that	I	would	try
everything	at	the	restaurant	at	least	once,	and	when	I	tasted	polenta	for	the
second	time,	I	couldn’t	believe	that	something	so	creamy	and	complex
could	share	a	name	with	that	flavourless	tube	of	astronaut	food.	Milled
from	an	heirloom	variety	of	corn,	each	bite	of	the	polenta	at	Chez	Panisse
tasted	of	sweetness	and	earth.	I	couldn’t	wait	to	cook	some	myself.

Once	the	chef,	Cal	Peternell,	talked	me	through	the	steps	of	making	the
polenta,	I	began	cooking.	Consumed	by	the	fear	of	scorching	and	ruining
the	entire	humongous	pot—a	mistake	I	had	seen	other	cooks	make—I
stirred	maniacally.

After	an	hour	and	a	half,	I’d	added	in	butter	and	Parmesan,	just	as	Cal
had	instructed	me.	I	brought	him	a	spoonful	of	the	creamy	porridge	to	taste.
At	six	foot	four,	Cal	is	a	gentle	giant	with	sandy-blond	hair	and	the	driest	of
wits.	I	looked	expectantly	up	at	him	with	equal	parts	respect	and	terror.	He
said,	in	his	signature	deadpan,	“It	needs	more	salt.”	Dutifully,	I	returned	to
the	pot	and	sprinkled	in	a	few	grains	of	salt,	treating	them	with	the
preciousness	I	might	afford,	say,	gold	leaf.	I	thought	it	tasted	pretty	good,	so
I	returned	to	Cal	with	a	spoonful	of	my	newly	adjusted	polenta.

Again,	a	moment’s	consideration	was	all	he	needed	to	know	the
seasoning	was	off.	But	now—to	save	himself	the	trouble	and	time,	I	imagine
—he	marched	me	back	to	the	pot	and	added	not	one	but	three	enormous



palmfuls	of	kosher	salt.
The	perfectionist	in	me	was	horrified.	I	had	wanted	so	badly	to	do	that

polenta	justice!	The	degree	to	which	I’d	been	off	was	exponential.	Three
palmfuls!

Cal	grabbed	spoons	and	together	we	tasted.	Some	indescribable
transformation	had	occurred.	The	corn	was	somehow	sweeter,	the	butter
richer.	All	of	the	flavours	were	more	pronounced.	I’d	been	certain	Cal	had
ruined	the	pot	and	turned	my	polenta	into	a	salt	lick,	but	no	matter	how	I
tried,	the	word	salty	did	not	apply	to	what	I	tasted.	All	I	felt	was	a	satisfying
zing!	with	each	mouthful.

It	was	as	if	I’d	been	struck	by	lightning.	It’d	never	occurred	to	me	that
salt	was	anything	more	than	pepper’s	sidekick.	But	now,	having	experienced
the	transformative	power	of	salt	for	myself,	I	wanted	to	learn	how	to	get
that	zing!	every	time	I	cooked.	I	thought	about	all	of	the	foods	I’d	loved	to
eat	growing	up—and	that	bite	of	seaside	cucumber	and	feta,	in	particular.	I
realised	then	why	it	had	tasted	so	good.	It	was	properly	seasoned,	with	salt.



WHAT	IS	SALT?
The	secret	behind	that	zing!	can	be	explained	by	some	basic	chemistry.	Salt
is	a	mineral:	sodium	chloride.	It’s	one	of	several	dozen	essential	nutrients
without	which	we	cannot	survive.	The	human	body	can’t	store	much	salt,	so
we	need	to	consume	it	regularly	in	order	to	be	able	to	carry	out	basic
biological	processes,	such	as	maintaining	proper	blood	pressure	and	water
distribution	in	the	body,	delivering	nutrients	to	and	from	cells,	nerve
transmission,	and	muscle	movement.	In	fact,	we’re	hardwired	to	crave	salt
to	ensure	we	get	enough	of	it.	The	lucky	consequence	of	this	is	that	salt
makes	almost	everything	taste	better	to	us,	so	it’s	hardly	a	chore	to	add	it	to
our	food.	In	fact,	by	enhancing	flavour,	salt	increases	the	pleasure	we
experience	as	we	eat.

All	salt	comes	from	the	ocean,	be	it	the	Atlantic	or	a	long-forgotten	sea
like	the	giant	prehistoric	Lake	Minchin	of	Bolivia,	home	of	the	earth’s	largest
salt	flat.	Salt	that	is	left	behind	when	seawater	evaporates	is	sea	salt,
whereas	rock	salt	is	mined	from	ancient	lakes	and	seas,	some	of	which	now
lie	far	underground.

The	primary	role	that	salt	plays	in	cooking	is	to	amplify	flavour.	Though
salt	also	affects	texture	and	helps	modify	other	flavours,	nearly	every
decision	you’ll	make	about	salt	will	involve	enhancing	and	deepening
flavour.

Does	this	mean	you	should	simply	use	more	salt?	No.	It	means	use	salt
better.	Add	it	in	the	right	amount,	at	the	right	time,	in	the	right	form.	A
smaller	amount	of	salt	applied	while	cooking	will	often	do	more	to	improve
flavour	than	a	larger	amount	added	at	the	table.	And	unless	you	have	been
specifically	told	by	your	doctor	to	limit	your	salt	consumption,	you	can	relax
about	your	sodium	intake	from	homecooked	food.	When	students	balk	at
the	palmfuls	of	salt	I	add	to	pots	of	water	for	boiling	vegetables,	I	gently
point	out	that	most	of	the	salt	will	end	up	going	down	the	drain	with	the
cooking	water.	In	almost	every	case,	anything	you	cook	for	yourself	at	home
is	more	nutritious,	and	lower	in	sodium,	than	processed,	prepared,	or
restaurant	food.



SALT	AND	FLAVOUR
James	Beard,	the	father	of	modern	American	cookery,	once	asked,	“Where
would	we	be	without	salt?”	I	know	the	answer:	adrift	in	a	sea	of	blandness.	If
only	one	lesson	from	this	book	stays	with	you,	let	it	be	this:	Salt	has	a	greater
impact	on	flavour	than	any	other	ingredient.	Learn	to	use	it	well,	and	your
food	will	taste	good.

Salt’s	relationship	to	flavour	is	multidimensional:	it	has	its	own	particular
taste,	and	it	enhances	the	flavour	of	other	ingredients.	Used	properly,	salt
minimises	bitterness,	balances	out	sweetness,	and	enhances	aromas,
heightening	our	experience	of	eating.	Imagine	taking	a	bite	of	a	rich
espresso	brownie	sprinkled	with	flaky	sea	salt.	Besides	providing	the
delightful	experience	of	its	delicate	flakes	crunching	on	the	tongue,	the	salt
minimises	the	espresso’s	bitterness,	intensifies	the	flavour	of	the	chocolate,
and	offers	a	welcome	savoury	contrast	to	the	sugar’s	sweetness.
The	Flavour	of	Salt
Salt	should	taste	clean,	free	of	any	unpleasant	flavours.	Start	by	tasting	it	all
on	its	own.	Dip	your	finger	into	your	salt	cellar	and	let	a	few	grains	dissolve
on	your	tongue.	What	do	they	taste	like?	Hopefully	like	the	summer	sea.
Types	of	Salt
Chefs	all	have	their	saline	allegiances	and	will	offer	lengthy,	impassioned
arguments	about	why	one	variety	of	salt	is	superior	to	another.	But
honestly,	what	matters	most	is	that	you’re	familiar	with	whichever	salt	you
use.	Is	it	coarse	or	fine?	How	long	does	it	take	to	dissolve	in	a	pot	of	boiling
water?	How	much	does	it	take	to	make	a	roast	chicken	taste	just	right?	If
you	add	your	salt	to	a	batch	of	cookie	dough,	will	it	melt	away	or	make	itself
known,	announcing	its	presence	with	a	pleasant	crunch?

Though	all	salt	crystals	are	produced	by	evaporating	water	from
saltwater	brine,	the	pace	of	evaporation	will	determine	the	shape	those
crystals	take.	Rock	salts	are	mined	by	flooding	salt	deposits	with	water	and
then	rapidly	evaporating	that	water	from	the	resulting	brine.	Refined	sea	salt
is	similarly	produced	through	the	rapid	evaporation	of	seawater.	When
formed	as	a	result	of	rapid	evaporation	in	a	closed	container,	salt	crystals
become	small,	dense	cubes—granular	salt.	On	the	other	hand,	salt
produced	slowly	through	solar	methods	at	the	surface	of	an	open	container
will	crystallise	into	light,	hollow	flakes.	If	water	splashes	into	the	hollow	of
the	flake	before	it’s	scooped	off	the	surface,	it	will	sink	into	the	brine	and
transform	into	a	large,	dense	crystal.	This	is	unrefined,	or	minimally



processed,	sea	salt.
These	varying	shapes	and	sizes	can	make	a	big	difference	in	your

cooking.	A	tablespoon	of	fine	salt	will	pack	more	tightly,	and	can	be	two	or
three	times	“saltier”	than	a	tablespoon	of	coarser	salt.	This	is	why	it	makes
sense	to	measure	salts	by	weight	rather	than	by	volume.	Better	yet,	learn	to
salt	to	taste.
Table	Salt
Common	table	salt,	or	granular	salt,	is	found	in	salt	shakers	everywhere.
Shake	some	out	into	your	palm	and	its	distinct	cubic	shape—the	result	of
crystallising	in	a	closed	vacuum	chamber—will	be	apparent.	Table	salt	is
small	and	dense,	making	it	very	salty.	Unless	otherwise	noted,	iodine	has
been	added	to	it.

I	don’t	recommend	using	iodised	salt	as	it	makes	everything	taste
slightly	metallic.	In	1924,	when	iodine	deficiency	was	a	common	health
problem,	Morton	Salt	began	iodising	salt	to	help	prevent	goitres,	leading	to
great	strides	in	public	health.	These	days,	we	can	get	sufficient	amounts	of
iodine	from	natural	sources.	As	long	as	your	diet	is	diverse	and	full	of
iodine-rich	foods	such	as	seafood	and	dairy,	there’s	no	need	to	suffer
through	metallic-tasting	food.

Table	salt	also	often	contains	anticaking	agents	to	prevent	clumps	from
forming,	or	dextrose,	a	form	of	sugar,	to	stabilise	the	iodine.	Though	neither
of	these	additives	is	harmful,	there’s	no	reason	to	add	them	to	your	food.
The	only	thing	you	should	be	adding	to	your	food	when	you’re	salting	it	is
salt!	This	is	one	of	the	few	times	I’ll	insist	on	anything	in	this	book:	if	you’ve
got	only	table	salt	at	home,	go	get	yourself	some	kosher	or	sea	salt	right
away.



Kosher	Salt
Kosher	salt	is	traditionally	used	in	koshering,	the	traditional	Jewish	process
by	which	blood	is	removed	from	meat.	Since	kosher	salt	contains	no
additives,	it	tastes	very	pure.	There	are	two	major	producers	of	kosher	salt:
Diamond	Crystal,	which	crystallises	in	an	open	container	of	brine,	yielding
light	and	hollow	flakes;	and	Morton’s,	which	is	made	by	rolling	cubic	crystals
of	vacuum-evaporated	salt	into	thin,	dense	flakes.	The	difference	in



production	methods	yields	two	vastly	different	salts.	While	Diamond
Crystal	readily	adheres	to	foods	and	crumbles	easily,	Morton’s	is	much
denser,	and	almost	twice	as	salty	by	volume.	When	following	recipes
requiring	kosher	salt,	make	sure	to	use	the	specified	brand	because	these
two	salts	are	not	interchangable!	For	this	book,	I	tested	all	the	recipes	with
Diamond	Crystal,	which	comes	in	a	red	box	and	is	widely	available	online
but	sea	salt	can	be	used	as	an	alternative.

Diamond	Crystal	dissolves	about	twice	as	quickly	as	denser	granulated
salt,	making	it	ideal	for	use	in	food	that	is	cooked	quickly.	The	more	quickly
salt	dissolves,	the	less	likely	you	are	to	overseason	a	dish,	thinking	it	needs
more	salt	when	actually	the	salt	just	needs	more	time	to	dissolve.	Because
of	its	increased	surface	area,	Diamond	Crystal	also	sticks	to	foods	better,
rather	than	rebounding	or	falling	off.

Inexpensive	and	rather	forgiving,	kosher	salt	is	fantastic	for	everyday
cooking.	I	prefer	Diamond	Crystal—even	when	I’ve	accidentally	salted
dishes	twice	with	this	salt	while	enjoying	a	little	too	much	my	conversation,
the	company,	or	a	glass	of	wine,	the	food	has	emerged	unscathed.
Sea	Salt
Sea	salt	is	what’s	left	behind	when	seawater	evaporates.	Natural	sea	salts
such	as	fleur	de	sel,	sel	gris,	and	Maldon	are	the	less-refined	result	of	gradual,
monitored	evaporation	that	can	take	up	to	five	years.	Taking	the	shape	of
delicate,	distinctly	aromatic	flakes,	fleur	de	sel—literally,	“flower	of	salt”—is
harvested	from	the	surface	of	special	sea	salt	beds	in	western	France.	When
it	falls	below	the	surface	of	the	water	and	attracts	various	sea	minerals,



including	magnesium	chloride	and	calcium	sulphate,	pure	white	fleur	de	sel
takes	on	a	greyish	hue	and	becomes	sel	gris,	or	grey	salt.	Maldon	salt	crystals,
formed	much	like	fleur	de	sel,	take	on	a	hollow	pyramid	shape,	and	are	often
referred	to	as	flaky	salt.

Because	natural	salts	are	harvested	using	low-yield,	labour-intensive
methods,	they	tend	to	be	more	expensive	than	refined	sea	salts.	Most	of
what	you’re	paying	for	when	you	buy	these	salts	is	their	delightful	texture,
so	use	them	in	ways	that	allow	them	to	stand	out.	It’s	a	waste	to	season
pasta	water	with	fleur	de	sel	or	make	tomato	sauce	with	Maldon	salt.
Instead,	sprinkle	these	salts	atop	delicate	garden	lettuces,	rich	caramel
sauces,	and	chocolate	chip	cookies	as	they	go	into	the	oven	so	you	can
enjoy	the	way	they	crunch	in	your	mouth.

The	refined	granular	sea	salt	you	might	find	at	the	grocery	store	is	a	bit
different:	it	was	produced	by	rapidly	boiling	down	ocean	water	in	a	closed
vacuum.	Fine	or	medium-size	crystals	of	this	type	are	ideal	for	everyday
cooking.	Use	this	type	of	sea	salt	to	season	foods	from	within—in	water	for
boiling	vegetables	or	pasta,	on	roasts	and	stew	meats,	tossed	with
vegetables,	and	in	doughs	or	batters.

Keep	two	kinds	of	salt	on	hand:	an	inexpensive	one	such	as	sea	salt	or
kosher	salt	for	everyday	cooking,	and	a	special	salt	with	a	pleasant	texture,
such	as	Maldon	salt	or	fleur	de	sel,	for	garnishing	food	at	the	last	moment.
Whichever	salts	you	use,	become	familiar	with	them—with	how	salty	they
are,	and	how	they	taste,	feel,	and	affect	the	flavour	of	the	foods	to	which
you	add	them.
Salt’s	Effect	on	Flavour
To	understand	how	salt	affects	flavour,	we	must	first	understand	what
flavour	is.	Our	taste	buds	can	perceive	five	tastes:	saltiness,	sourness,
bitterness,	sweetness,	and	umami,	or	savouriness.	On	the	other	hand,
aroma	involves	our	noses	sensing	any	of	thousands	of	various	chemical
compounds.	The	descriptive	words	often	used	to	characterise	the	way	a
wine	smells,	such	as	earthy,	fruity,	and	floral,	refer	to	aroma	compounds.

Flavour	lies	at	the	intersection	of	taste,	aroma,	and	sensory	elements
including	texture,	sound,	appearance,	and	temperature.	Since	aroma	is	a
crucial	element	of	flavour,	the	more	aromas	you	perceive,	the	more	vibrant
your	eating	experience	will	be.	This	is	why	you	take	less	pleasure	in	eating
while	you’re	congested	or	have	a	cold.

Remarkably,	salt	affects	both	taste	and	flavour.	Our	taste	buds	can



discern	whether	or	not	salt	is	present,	and	in	what	amount.	But	salt	also
unlocks	many	aromatic	compounds	in	foods,	making	them	more	readily
available	as	we	eat.	The	simplest	way	to	experience	this	is	to	taste	an
unsalted	soup	or	broth.	Try	it	next	time	you	make	Chicken	Stock.	The
unseasoned	broth	will	taste	flat,	but	as	you	add	salt,	you’ll	detect	new
aromas	that	were	previously	unavailable.	Keep	salting,	and	tasting,	and
you’ll	start	to	sense	the	salt	as	well	as	more	complex	and	delightful	flavours:
the	savouriness	of	the	chicken,	the	richness	of	the	chicken	fat,	the
earthiness	of	the	celery	and	the	thyme.	Keep	adding	salt,	and	tasting,	until
you	get	that	zing!	This	is	how	you’ll	learn	to	salt	“to	taste.”	When	a	recipe
says	“season	to	taste,”	add	enough	salt	until	it	tastes	right	to	you.

This	flavour	“unlocking”	is	also	one	reason	why	professional	cooks	like
to	season	sliced	tomatoes	a	few	minutes	before	serving	them—so	that,	as
salt	helps	the	flavour	molecules	that	are	bound	up	within	the	tomato
proteins,	each	bite	will	taste	more	intensely	of	tomato.

Salt	also	reduces	our	perception	of	bitterness,	with	the	secondary	effect
of	emphasising	other	flavours	present	in	bitter	dishes.	Salt	enhances
sweetness	while	reducing	bitterness	in	foods	that	are	both	bitter	and	sweet,
such	as	bittersweet	chocolate,	coffee	ice	cream,	or	burnt	caramels.

Though	we	typically	turn	to	sugar	to	balance	out	bitter	flavours	in	a
sauce	or	soup,	it	turns	out	that	salt	masks	bitterness	much	more	effectively
than	sugar.	See	for	yourself	with	a	little	tonic	water,	Campari,	or	grapefruit
juice,	all	of	which	are	both	bitter	and	sweet.	Taste	a	spoonful,	then	add	a
pinch	of	salt	and	taste	again.	You’ll	be	surprised	by	how	much	bitterness
subsides.
Seasoning
Anything	that	heightens	flavour	is	a	seasoning,	but	the	term	generally	refers
to	salt	since	it’s	the	most	powerful	flavour	enhancer	and	modifier.	If	food
isn’t	salted	properly,	no	amount	of	fancy	cooking	techniques	or	garnishes
will	make	up	for	it.	Without	salt,	unpleasant	tastes	are	more	perceptible	and
pleasant	ones	less	so.	Though	in	general	the	absence	of	salt	in	food	is
deeply	regrettable,	its	overt	presence	is	equally	unwelcome:	food	shouldn’t
be	salty,	it	should	be	salted.



Salting	isn’t	something	to	do	once	and	then	check	off	your	list;	be
constantly	aware	of	how	a	dish	tastes	as	it	cooks,	and	how	you	want	it	to
taste	at	the	table.	At	San	Francisco’s	legendary	Zuni	Café,	chef	Judy
Rodgers	often	told	her	cooks	that	a	dish	might	need	“seven	more	grains	of
salt.”	Sometimes	it	really	is	that	subtle;	just	seven	grains	can	mean	the
difference	between	satisfactory	and	sublime.	Other	times,	your	polenta
might	require	a	handful.	The	only	way	to	know	is	to	taste	and	adjust.

Tasting	and	adjusting—over	and	over	again	as	you	add	ingredients	and
they	transform	throughout	the	cooking	process—will	yield	the	most
flavourful	food.	Getting	the	seasoning	right	is	about	getting	it	right	at	every
level—bite,	component,	dish,	and	meal.	This	is	seasoning	food	from	within.

On	the	global	spectrum	of	salt	use,	there’s	a	range,	rather	than	a	single
point,	of	proper	seasoning.	Some	cultures	use	less	salt;	others	use	more.
Tuscans	don’t	add	salt	to	their	bread	but	more	than	make	up	for	it	with	the
copious	handfuls	they	add	to	everything	else.	The	French	salt	baguettes
and	pain	au	levain	perfectly,	in	turn	seasoning	everything	else	a	little	more
conservatively.

In	Japan,	steamed	rice	is	left	unseasoned	to	act	as	the	foil	for	the
flavourful	fishes,	meats,	curries,	and	pickles	served	alongside	it.	In	India,
biryani,	a	flavourful	rice	dish	layered	with	vegetables,	meat,	spices,	and	eggs,
is	never	left	unsalted.	There	is	no	universal	rule	other	than	that	salt	use
must	be	carefully	considered	at	every	point	in	the	cooking	process.	This	is
seasoning	to	taste.

When	food	tastes	flat,	the	most	common	culprit	is	underseasoning.	If
you’re	not	sure	salt	will	fix	the	problem,	take	a	spoonful	or	small	bite	and



sprinkle	it	with	a	little	salt,	then	taste	again.	If	something	shifts	and	you
sense	the	zing!,	then	go	ahead	and	add	salt	to	the	entire	batch.	Your	palate
will	become	more	discerning	with	this	sort	of	thoughtful	cooking	and
tasting.	Like	a	jazz	musician’s	ear,	with	use	it	will	grow	more	sensitive,	more
refined,	and	more	skilled	at	improvisation.



HOW	SALT	WORKS
Cooking	is	part	artistry,	part	chemistry.	Understanding	how	salt	works	will
allow	you	to	make	better	decisions	about	how	and	when	to	use	it	to	improve
texture	and	season	food	from	within.	Some	ingredients	and	cooking
methods	require	giving	salt	enough	time	to	penetrate	food	and	distribute
itself	within	it.	In	other	cases,	the	key	is	to	create	a	cooking	environment
salty	enough	to	allow	food	to	absorb	the	right	amount	of	salt	as	it	cooks.

The	distribution	of	salt	throughout	food	can	be	explained	by	osmosis
and	diffusion,	two	chemical	processes	powered	by	nature’s	tendency	to
seek	equilibrium,	or	the	balanced	concentration	of	solutes	such	as	minerals
and	sugars	on	either	side	of	a	semipermeable	membrane	(or	holey	cell	wall).
In	food,	the	movement	of	water	across	a	cell	wall	from	the	saltier	side	to	the
less	salty	side	is	called	osmosis.



Diffusion,	on	the	other	hand,	is	the	often	slower	process	of	salt	moving
from	a	saltier	environment	to	a	less	salty	one	until	it’s	evenly	distributed
throughout.	Sprinkle	salt	on	the	surface	of	a	piece	of	chicken	and	come
back	twenty	minutes	later.	The	distinct	grains	will	no	longer	be	visible:	they
will	have	started	to	dissolve,	and	the	salt	will	have	begun	to	move	inward	in
an	effort	to	create	a	chemical	balance	throughout	the	piece	of	meat.	We
can	taste	the	consequence	of	this	diffusion—though	we	sprinkle	salt	on	the
surface	of	the	meat,	with	the	distribution	that	occurs	over	time,	eventually
the	meat	will	taste	evenly	seasoned,	rather	than	being	salty	on	the	surface
and	bland	within.

Water	will	also	be	visible	on	the	surface	of	the	chicken,	the	result	of
osmosis.	While	the	salt	moves	in,	the	water	will	move	out	with	the	same
goal:	achieving	chemical	balance	throughout	the	entire	piece	of	meat.

Given	the	chance,	salt	will	always	distribute	itself	evenly	to	season	food
from	within,	but	it	affects	the	textures	of	different	foods	in	different	ways.
How	Salt	Affects	.	.	.
Meat
By	the	time	I	arrived	at	Chez	Panisse,	the	kitchen	had	already	been	running
like	a	well-oiled	machine	for	decades.	Its	success	relied	on	each	cook



thinking	ahead	to	the	following	day’s	menu	and	beyond.	Every	day,	without
fail,	we	butchered	and	seasoned	meat	for	the	following	day.	Since	this	task
was	a	classic	example	of	kitchen	efficiency,	it	didn’t	occur	to	me	that
seasoning	the	meat	in	advance	had	anything	to	do	with	flavour.	That	was
only	because	I	didn’t	yet	understand	the	important	work	salt	was	quietly
doing	overnight.

Since	diffusion	is	a	slow	process,	seasoning	in	advance	gives	salt	plenty
of	time	to	diffuse	evenly	throughout	meat.	This	is	how	to	season	meat	from
within.	A	small	amount	of	salt	applied	in	advance	will	make	a	much	bigger
difference	than	a	larger	amount	applied	just	before	serving.	In	other	words,
time,	not	amount,	is	the	crucial	variable.

Because	salt	also	initiates	osmosis,	and	visibly	draws	water	out	of	nearly
any	ingredient	it	touches,	many	people	believe	that	salt	dries	and	toughens
food.	But	with	time,	salt	will	dissolve	protein	strands	into	a	gel,	allowing
them	to	absorb	and	retain	water	better	as	they	cook.	Water	is	moisture:	its
presence	makes	meat	tender	and	juicy.

Think	of	a	protein	strand	as	a	loose	coil	with	water	molecules	bound	to
its	outside	surface.	When	an	unseasoned	protein	is	heated,	it	denatures:
the	coil	tightens,	squeezing	water	molecules	out	of	the	protein	matrix,
leaving	the	meat	dry	and	tough	if	overcooked.	By	disrupting	protein
structure,	salt	prevents	the	coil	from	densely	coagulating,	or	clumping,
when	heated,	so	more	of	the	water	molecules	remain	bound.	The	piece	of
meat	remains	moister,	and	you	have	a	greater	margin	of	error	for
overcooking.

This	same	chemical	process	is	the	secret	to	brining,	the	method	in



which	a	piece	of	meat	is	submerged	in	a	bath	of	water	spiked	with	salt,
sugar,	and	spices.	The	salt	in	this	mixture,	or	brine,	dissolves	some	of	the
proteins,	while	the	sugar	and	spices	offer	plenty	of	aromatic	molecules	for
the	meat	to	absorb.	For	this	reason,	brining	can	be	a	great	strategy	for	lean
meats	and	poultry,	which	tend	to	be	dry	and	even	bland.	Make	Spicy	Brined
Turkey	Breast,	and	you’ll	see	how	a	night	spent	in	a	salty,	spicy	bath	will
transform	a	cut	of	meat	that’s	often	devastatingly	dry	and	flavourless.

I	can’t	remember	the	first	time	I	tasted—consciously,	anyway—meat
that	had	been	salted	in	advance.	But	now	I	can	tell	every	time	I	taste	meat
that	hasn’t.	I’ve	cooked	thousands	of	chickens—presalted	and	not—over
the	years,	and	while	science	has	yet	to	confirm	my	suspicions,	I’ll	speak	from
experience	here:	meat	that’s	been	salted	in	advance	is	not	only	more
flavourful,	it’s	also	more	tender,	than	meat	that	hasn’t.	The	best	way	to
experience	the	marvels	of	preseasoned	meat	for	yourself	is	with	a	little
experiment:	the	next	time	you	plan	to	roast	a	chicken,	cut	the	bird	in	half,	or
ask	your	butcher	to	do	so	for	you.	Season	one	half	with	salt	a	day	ahead.
Season	the	other	half	just	before	cooking.	The	effects	of	early	salting	will	be
apparent	long	before	the	first	bite	hits	your	tongue.	The	chicken	salted	in
advance	will	fall	off	the	bone	as	you	begin	to	butcher	it,	while	the	other	half,
though	moist,	won’t	begin	to	compare	in	tenderness.

When	salting	meat	for	cooking,	any	time	is	better	than	none,	and	more
is	better	than	some.	Aim	to	season	meat	the	day	before	cooking	when
possible.	Failing	that,	do	it	in	the	morning,	or	even	in	the	afternoon.	Or	make
it	the	first	thing	you	do	when	collecting	ingredients	for	dinner.	I	like	to	do	it
as	soon	as	I	get	home	from	the	grocery	store,	so	I	don’t	have	to	think	about
it	again.

The	larger,	denser,	or	more	sinewy	the	piece	of	meat,	the	earlier	you
should	salt	it.	Oxtails,	shanks,	and	short	ribs	can	be	seasoned	a	day	or	two	in
advance	to	allow	salt	time	to	do	its	work.	A	chicken	for	roasting	can	be
salted	the	day	before	cooking,	while	Thanksgiving	turkey	should	be
seasoned	two,	or	even	three,	days	in	advance.	The	colder	the	meat	and
surrounding	environment	are,	the	longer	it	will	take	the	salt	to	do	its	work,
so	when	time	is	limited,	leave	meat	on	the	worktop	once	you	season	it	(but
for	no	longer	than	two	hours),	rather	than	returning	it	to	the	fridge.

Though	salting	early	is	a	great	boon	to	flavour	and	texture	in	meat,
there	is	such	a	thing	as	salting	too	early.	For	thousands	of	years,	salt	has
been	used	to	preserve	meat.	In	large	enough	quantities,	for	long	enough
periods	of	time,	salt	will	dehydrate	meat	and	cure	it.	If	dinner	plans	change



at	the	last	minute,	a	salted	chicken	or	a	few	pounds	of	short	ribs	will	happily
wait	a	day	or	two	to	be	roasted	or	braised.	But	wait	much	longer	than	that,
and	they	will	dry	out	and	develop	a	leathery	texture	and	a	cured,	rather	than
fresh,	flavour.	If	you’ve	salted	some	meat	but	realise	you	won’t	be	able	to
get	to	it	for	several	days,	freeze	it	until	you’re	ready	to	cook	it.	Tightly
wrapped,	it’ll	keep	for	up	to	two	months.	Simply	defrost	and	pick	up	cooking
where	you	left	off.
Seafood
Unlike	meat,	the	delicate	proteins	of	most	fish	and	shellfish	will	degrade
when	salted	too	early,	yielding	a	tough,	dry,	or	chewy	result.	A	brief	salting—
about	fifteen	minutes—is	plenty	to	enhance	flavour	and	maintain	moisture
in	flaky	fish.	2.5cm	-thick	steaks	of	meatier	fish,	such	as	tuna	and	swordfish,
can	be	salted	up	to	thirty	minutes	ahead.	Season	all	other	seafood	at	the
time	of	cooking	to	preserve	textural	integrity.
Fat
Salt	requires	water	to	dissolve,	so	it	won’t	dissolve	in	pure	fat.	Luckily,	most
of	the	fats	we	use	in	the	kitchen	contain	at	least	a	little	water—the	small
amounts	of	water	in	butter,	lemon	juice	in	a	mayonnaise,	or	vinegar	in	a
vinaigrette	allow	salt	to	slowly	dissolve.	Season	these	fats	early	and
carefully,	waiting	for	salt	to	dissolve	and	tasting	before	adding	more.	Or,
dissolve	salt	in	water,	vinegar,	or	lemon	juice	before	adding	it	to	fat	for	even,
immediate	distribution.	Lean	meat	has	a	slightly	higher	water	(and	protein)
content—and	thus,	greater	capacity	for	salt	absorption—than	fattier	cuts	of
meat,	so	cuts	with	a	big	fat	cap,	such	as	pork	loin	or	rib	eye,	will	not	absorb
salt	evenly.	This	is	illustrated	beautifully	in	a	slice	of	prosciutto:	the	lean
muscle	(rosy	pink	part)	has	a	higher	water	content,	and	thus	can	absorb	salt
readily	as	it	cures.	The	fat	(pure	white	part),	on	the	other	hand,	has	a	much
lower	water	content,	and	so	it	doesn’t	absorb	salt	at	the	same	rate.	Taste
the	two	parts	separately	and	you’ll	find	the	lean	muscle	unpleasantly	salty.
The	strip	of	fat	will	seem	almost	bland.	But	taste	them	together	and	the
synergy	of	fat	and	salt	will	be	revealed.	Don’t	let	this	absorption	imbalance
affect	how	you	season	a	fatty	cut.	Simply	taste	both	fat	and	lean	meat
before	adding	more	salt	at	the	table.
Eggs
Eggs	absorb	salt	easily.	As	they	do,	it	helps	their	proteins	come	together	at	a
lower	temperature,	which	decreases	cooking	time.	The	more	quickly	the
proteins	set,	the	less	of	a	chance	they	will	have	to	expel	water	they	contain.



The	more	water	the	eggs	retain	as	they	cook,	the	more	moist	and	tender
their	final	texture	will	be.	Add	a	pinch	of	salt	to	eggs	destined	for
scrambling,	omelettes,	custards,	or	frittatas	before	cooking.	Lightly	season
water	for	poaching	eggs.	Season	eggs	cooked	in	the	shell	or	fried	in	a	pan
just	before	serving.
Vegetables,	Fruits,	and	Fungi
Most	vegetables	and	fruit	cells	contain	an	undigestible	carbohydrate	called
pectin.	Soften	the	pectin	through	ripening	or	applying	heat,	and	you	will
soften	the	fruit	or	vegetable,	making	it	more	tender,	and	often	more
delicious,	to	eat.	Salt	assists	in	weakening	pectin.

When	in	doubt,	salt	vegetables	before	you	cook	them.	Toss	vegetables
with	salt	and	olive	oil	for	roasting.	Salt	blanching	water	generously	before
adding	vegetables.	Add	salt	into	the	pan	along	with	the	vegetables	for
sautéing.	Season	vegetables	with	large,	watery	cells—tomatoes,	courgettes,
and	aubergines,	for	example—in	advance	of	grilling	or	roasting	to	allow	salt
the	time	to	do	its	work.	During	this	time,	osmosis	will	also	cause	some	water
loss,	so	pat	the	vegetables	dry	before	cooking.	Because	salt	will	continue	to
draw	water	out	of	vegetables	and	fruits	and	eventually	make	them	rubbery,
be	wary	of	salting	them	too	early—usually	15	minutes	before	cooking	is
sufficient.

While	mushrooms	don’t	contain	pectin,	they	are	about	80	percent
water,	which	they	will	begin	to	release	when	salted.	In	order	to	preserve	the
texture	of	mushrooms,	wait	to	add	salt	until	they’ve	just	begun	to	brown	in
the	pan.
Legumes	and	Grains
Tough	beans:	a	kitchen	fiasco	so	common	it’s	become	an	idiom.	If	there’s
one	way	to	permanently	turn	people	off	of	legumes,	it’s	serving	them
undercooked,	bland	beans	that	are	hard	to	eat.	Contrary	to	popular	belief,
salt	does	not	toughen	dried	beans.	In	fact,	by	facilitating	the	weakening	of
pectins	contained	in	their	cell	walls,	salt	affects	beans	in	the	same	way	it
affects	vegetables:	it	softens	them.	In	order	to	flavour	dried	beans	from
within,	add	salt	when	you	soak	them	or	when	you	begin	to	cook	them,
whichever	comes	first.

Legumes	and	grains	are	dried	seeds—the	parts	of	a	plant	that	ensure
survival	from	one	season	to	the	next.	They’ve	evolved	tough	exterior	shells
for	protection,	and	require	long,	gentle	cooking	in	water	to	absorb	enough
water	to	become	tender.	The	most	common	reason	for	tough	beans	and



grains,	then,	is	undercooking.	The	solution	for	most:	keep	simmering!
(Other	variables	that	can	lead	to	tough	beans	include	using	old	or
improperly	stored	beans,	cooking	with	hard	water,	and	acidic	conditions.)
Since	a	long	cooking	time	gives	salt	a	chance	to	diffuse	evenly	throughout,
the	water	for	boiling	grains	such	as	rice,	farro,	or	quinoa	can	be	salted	less
aggressively	than	the	water	for	blanching	vegetables.	In	preparations	where
all	of	the	cooking	water	will	be	absorbed,	and	hence	all	of	the	salt,	be
particularly	careful	not	to	overseason.
Doughs	and	Batters
The	first	paid	job	I	had	in	the	kitchen	at	Chez	Panisse	was	called
Pasta/Lettuce.	I	spent	about	a	year	washing	lettuces	and	making	every	kind
of	pasta	dough	imaginable.	I’d	also	start	the	pizza	dough	every	morning,
adding	yeast,	water,	and	flour	into	the	bowl	of	the	gigantic	stand	mixer	and
tending	to	it	throughout	the	day.	Once	the	water	and	flour	brought	the
dormant	yeast	back	to	life,	I’d	add	more	flour	and	salt.	Then,	after	kneading
and	proofing,	I’d	finish	the	dough	by	adding	in	some	olive	oil.	One	day,	when
it	was	time	to	add	the	flour	and	salt,	I	realised	the	salt	bin	was	empty.	I	didn’t
have	the	time	right	then	to	go	down	to	the	storage	shed	to	get	another	bag
of	salt,	so	I	figured	I’d	just	wait	to	add	the	salt	at	the	end,	along	with	the	oil.
As	I	kneaded	the	dough,	I	noticed	that	it	came	together	much	more	quickly
than	usual,	but	I	didn’t	really	give	it	a	second	thought.	When	I	returned	a
couple	of	hours	later	to	finish	the	dough,	something	unbelievable
happened.	I	turned	on	the	machine	and	let	it	deflate	and	knead	the	dough,
like	I	always	did,	and	then	I	added	the	salt.	As	it	dissolved	into	the	dough,	I
could	actually	see	the	machine	begin	to	strain.	The	salt	was	making	the
dough	tougher—the	difference	was	remarkable!	I	had	no	idea	what	was
happening.	I	was	worried	that	I’d	done	something	terribly	wrong.

It	was	no	big	deal.	It	turns	out	that	the	dough	tightened	immediately
because	salt	aids	in	strengthening	gluten,	the	protein	that	makes	dough
chewy	and	elastic.	As	soon	as	I	allowed	the	dough	to	rest,	the	gluten
relaxed,	and	the	pizzas	that	night	emerged	from	the	oven	as	delicious	as
always.

Salt	can	take	a	while	to	dissolve	in	foods	that	are	low	in	water,	so	add	it
to	bread	dough	early.	Leave	it	out	of	Italian	pasta	dough	altogether,	allowing
the	salted	water	to	do	the	work	of	seasoning	as	it	cooks.	Add	it	early	to
ramen	and	udon	doughs	to	strengthen	their	gluten,	as	this	will	result	in	the
desired	chewiness.	Add	salt	later	to	batters	and	doughs	for	cakes,	pancakes,
and	delicate	pastries	to	keep	them	tender,	but	make	sure	to	whisk	these



mixes	thoroughly	so	that	the	salt	is	evenly	distributed	before	cooking.
Cooking	Foods	in	Salted	Water
Properly	seasoned	cooking	water	encourages	food	to	retain	its	nutrients.
Imagine	that	you’re	cooking	green	beans	in	a	pot	of	water.	If	the	water	is
unseasoned	or	only	lightly	seasoned,	then	its	concentration	of	salt—a
mineral—will	be	lower	than	the	innate	mineral	concentration	in	the	green
beans.	In	an	attempt	to	establish	equilibrium	between	the	internal
environment	of	the	green	beans	and	the	external	environment	of	the
cooking	water,	the	beans	will	relinquish	some	of	their	minerals	and	natural
sugars	during	the	cooking	process.	This	leads	to	bland,	grey,	less-nutritious
green	beans.

On	the	other	hand,	if	the	water	is	more	highly	seasoned—and	more
mineral	rich—	than	the	green	beans,	then	the	opposite	will	happen.	In	an
attempt	to	reach	equilibrium,	the	green	beans	will	absorb	some	salt	from
the	water	as	they	cook,	seasoning	themselves	from	the	inside	out.	They’ll
also	remain	more	vibrantly	coloured	because	the	salt	balance	will	keep
magnesium	in	the	beans’	chlorophyll	molecules	from	leaching	out.	The	salt
will	also	weaken	the	pectin	and	soften	the	beans’	cell	walls,	allowing	them	to
cook	more	quickly.	As	an	added	bonus,	there	will	be	less	of	an	opportunity
for	the	green	beans	to	lose	nutrients	because	they’ll	spend	less	total	time	in
the	pot.

I	can’t	prescribe	precise	amounts	of	salt	for	blanching	water	for	a	few
reasons:	I	don’t	know	what	size	your	pot	is,	how	much	water	you’re	using,
how	much	food	you’re	blanching,	or	what	type	of	salt	you’re	using.	All	of
these	variables	will	dictate	how	much	salt	to	use,	and	even	they	may	change



each	time	you	cook.	Instead,	season	your	cooking	water	until	it’s	as	salty	as
the	sea	(or	more	accurately,	your	memory	of	the	sea.	At	3.5	percent	salinity,
seawater	is	much,	much	saltier	than	anyone	would	ever	want	to	use	for
cooking).	You	might	flinch	upon	seeing	just	how	much	salt	this	takes,	but
remember,	most	of	the	salt	ends	up	going	down	the	drain.	The	goal	is	to
create	a	salty	enough	environment	to	allow	the	salt	to	diffuse	throughout
the	ingredient	during	the	time	it	spends	in	the	water.

It	doesn’t	matter	whether	you	add	the	salt	to	the	water	before	or	after
you	set	it	on	the	heat,	though	it’ll	dissolve,	and	hence	diffuse,	faster	in	hot
water.	Just	make	sure	to	give	the	salt	a	chance	to	dissolve,	and	taste	the
water	to	make	sure	it’s	highly	seasoned	before	you	add	any	food.	Keep	a	pot
boiling	on	the	stove	for	too	long,	though,	and	water	will	evaporate.	What’s
left	behind	will	be	far	too	salty	for	cooking.	The	cure	here	is	simple:	taste
your	water,	and	make	sure	it’s	right.	If	not,	add	some	water	or	salt	to	balance
it	out.

Cooking	food	in	salted	water	is	one	of	the	simplest	ways	to	season	from
within.	Taste	roasted	potatoes	that	were	seasoned	with	salt	as	they	went
into	the	oven,	and	you’ll	taste	salt	on	the	surface	but	not	much	farther	in.
But	taste	potatoes	that	were	simmered	in	salted	water	for	a	little	while
before	being	roasted,	and	you’ll	be	shocked	by	the	difference—salt	will	have
made	it	all	the	way	into	the	centre,	doing	its	powerful	work	of	seasoning
from	within	along	the	way.

Salt	pasta	water,	potato	cooking	water,	and	pots	of	grains	and	legumes
as	early	as	possible	to	allow	salt	to	dissolve	and	diffuse	evenly	into	the	food.
Season	the	water	for	vegetables	correctly	and	you	won’t	have	to	add	salt
again	before	serving.	Salads	made	with	boiled	vegetables—be	it	potatoes,



asparagus,	cauliflower,	green	beans,	or	anything	else—are	most	delicious
when	the	vegetables	are	seasoned	properly	while	they’re	cooking.	Salt
sprinkled	on	top	of	one	of	these	salads	at	the	time	of	serving	won’t	make	as
much	of	a	difference	in	flavour	as	it	will	in	texture,	by	adding	a	pleasant
crunch.

Salt	meats	that	are	going	to	be	cooked	in	water,	like	any	meats,	in
advance,	but	season	the	cooking	liquids	for	stews,	braises,	and	poached
meats	conservatively—keep	in	mind	that	you’ll	be	consuming	any	salt	you
add	here.	While	some	salt	may	leach	from	the	seasoned	meat	into	the	less
savoury	broth,	it	will	have	already	done	its	important	tenderising	work.
Anticipate	the	flavour	exchange	that	will	happen	between	the	seasoned
meat	and	its	cooking	liquid,	and	taste	and	adjust	the	liquid,	along	with	the
meat,	before	serving.

Read	on	to	learn	more	about	the	nuances	of	blanching,	braising,
simmering,	and	poaching,	in	Heat.






DIFFUSION	CALCULUS
The	three	most	valuable	tools	to	encourage	salt	diffusion	are	time,
temperature,	and	water.	Before	setting	out	to	cook—as	you	choose	an
ingredient,	or	a	cooking	method—	ask	yourself,	“How	can	I	season	this	from
within?”	Then,	use	these	variables	to	plot	out	how	far	in	advance—and	how
much—to	salt	your	food	or	cooking	water.
Time
Salt	is	very	slow	to	diffuse.	If	you	are	cooking	something	big	or	dense	and
want	to	get	salt	into	it,	season	the	ingredient	as	early	as	possible	to	give	salt
the	time	to	travel	to	the	centre.
Temperature
Heat	stimulates	salt	diffusion.	Salt	will	always	diffuse	more	quickly	at	room
temperature	than	in	the	fridge.	Use	this	fact	to	your	advantage	when	you’ve
forgotten	to	salt	your	chicken	or	steak	in	advance.	Pull	the	meat	out	of	the
fridge	when	you	get	home,	salt	it,	and	let	it	sit	out	while	the	oven	or	grill
preheats.
Water
Water	promotes	salt	diffusion.	Use	watery	cooking	methods	to	help	salt
penetrate	dense,	dry,	and	tough	ingredients,	especially	if	you	don’t	have
time	to	season	them	in	advance.






USING	SALT
The	British	food	writer	Elizabeth	David	once	said,	“I	do	not	even	bother
with	a	salt	spoon.	I	am	not	able	to	see	what	is	unmannerly	or	wrong	with
putting	one’s	fingers	into	the	salt.”	I	agree.	Get	rid	of	the	shaker,	dump	the
salt	in	a	bowl,	and	start	using	your	fingers	to	season	your	food.	You	should
be	able	to	fit	all	five	fingers	into	your	salt	bowl	and	easily	grab	a	palmful	of
salt.	This	important—but	often	unsaid—rule	of	good	cooking	is	so	routine
for	professional	cooks	that	when	working	in	an	unfamiliar	kitchen,	we
instinctively	hunt	for	containers	to	use	as	salt	bowls.	When	pressed,	I’ve
even	used	coconut	shells	to	hold	salt.	I	once	taught	a	class	at	the	national
cooking	school	in	Cuba:	the	state-run	kitchen	was	so	barren	that	I	ended	up
sawing	plastic	water	bottles	in	half	to	use	for	holding	salt	and	other
garnishes.	It	got	the	job	done.
Measuring	Salt
Abandoning	precise	measurements	when	using	salt	requires	an	initial	leap
of	faith.	When	I	was	first	learning	how	to	cook,	I	always	wondered	how	I’d
know	when	I’d	added	enough.	I	wondered	how	I’d	avoid	using	way	too
much.	It	was	discombobulating.	And	the	only	way	to	know	how	much	salt
to	use	was	to	add	it	incrementally	and	taste	with	each	addition.	I	had	to	get
to	know	my	salt.	With	time,	I	learned	that	a	huge	pot	of	pasta	water
required	three	handfuls	to	start.	I	figured	out	that	when	I	seasoned	chickens
for	the	spit,	it	should	look	like	a	light	snowstorm	had	fallen	over	the
butchering	table.	It	was	only	with	repetition	and	practice	that	I	found	these
landmarks.	I	also	found	a	few	exceptions:	certain	pastry,	brine,	and	sausage
recipes	where	all	of	the	ingredients	are	precisely	weighed	out	don’t	need
constant	adjusting.	But	I	still	salt	every	other	thing	I	cook	to	taste.

The	next	time	you’re	seasoning	a	pork	loin	for	roasting,	pay	attention	to
how	much	you	use,	and	then	take	a	moment	when	you	take	your	first	bite
to	consider	if	you	got	the	seasoning	right.	If	so,	commit	to	memory	the	way
the	salt	looked	on	the	surface	of	the	meat.	If	not,	make	a	mental	note	to
increase	or	decrease	the	amount	of	salt	next	time.	You	already	possess	the
very	best	tool	for	evaluating	how	much	salt	to	use—a	tongue.	Conditions	in
the	kitchen	are	rarely,	if	ever,	identical	twice.	Since	we	don’t	use	the	same
pot	every	time,	or	the	same	amount	of	water,	the	same	size	chicken	or
number	of	carrots,	measurements	can	be	tricky.	Instead,	rely	on	your
tongue,	and	taste	at	every	point	along	the	way.	With	time,	you’ll	learn	to	use
other	senses	to	gauge	how	much	salt	to	use—touch,	sight,	and	common
sense	can	be	just	as	important	as	taste.	The	late,	great	Marcella	Hazan,	who



authored	the	indispensable	Essentials	of	Classic	Italian	Cooking,	could	tell
when	a	dish	needed	more	salt	by	simply	smelling	it!

My	general	ratios	for	measuring	salt	are	simple:	1	percent	salt	by	weight
for	meats,	vegetables,	and	grains,	and	2	percent	salinity	for	water	for
blanching	vegetables	and	pasta.	To	see	what	these	numbers	translate	to	by
volume	for	various	salts,	take	a	look	at	the	chart	on	the	next	page.	If	using
the	amounts	of	salt	I	prescribe	terrifies	you,	try	a	little	experiment:	set	up
two	pots	of	water,	and	season	one	as	you	normally	would.	Season	the	other
to	2	percent	salinity,	and	note	what	it	feels	and	looks	like	to	use	that	much
salt.	Cook	half	of	your	green	beans,	broccoli,	asparagus,	or	pasta	in	each	pot
of	water,	and	compare	the	flavour	when	you	eat	them.	I	suspect	the	taste
test	will	be	enough	to	convince	you	to	trust	me.

Consider	these	ratios	a	starting	point.	Soon—maybe	just	after	one	or
two	pots	of	pasta—you’ll	be	able	to	judge	how	much	salt	is	enough	by
trusting	the	way	the	grains	feel	as	they	fall	from	your	palm	and	whether	or
not,	upon	tasting,	you’re	transported	to	the	sea.



How	to	Salt
Once	you	realise	how	much	salt	it	takes	to	season	something	properly,	you
might	start	to	believe	there’s	no	such	thing	as	too	much.	This	happened	to
me.	I	remember	when	a	chef	I	particularly	admired	walked	into	the
downstairs	butchery	room	where	I’d	been	sent	to	season	pork	roasts	for	the
following	night’s	dinner.	Having	recently	come	to	appreciate	the	power	of
salt,	I	decided	that	in	order	to	cover	the	roasts	evenly,	I’d	roll	them	in	a	huge



bowl	of	salt	to	ensure	that	every	surface	was	adequately	coated.	As	she
came	down	the	stairs,	her	eyebrows	shot	up.	I’d	been	using	enough	salt	to
cure	the	roasts	for	three	years!	They’d	be	completely	inedible	the	next
night.	I	spent	the	next	twenty	minutes	rinsing	the	salt	off	the	meat.	Later,
the	chef	showed	me	the	proper	hand	grasp	for	distributing	salt	evenly	on
large	surfaces.



I	didn’t	understand	the	nuances	of	the	act	of	salting	until	I	began	paying
attention	to	the	various	ways	cooks	used	salt	in	different	situations.	There
was	the	way	we	salted	pots	of	water	for	blanching	vegetables	or	pasta	with
near	abandon,	adding	palmful	after	palmful,	only	to	await	its	dissolution,
lightly	skimming	a	finger	across	the	rolling	boil,	tasting	thoughtfully,	and
more	often	than	not,	adding	even	more.

There	was	the	way	we	seasoned	trays	of	vegetables,	lined	up	duck	legs
butchered	for	confit,	even	larger	cuts	of	meat,	and	pans	of	focaccia	ready
for	the	oven.	This	was	done	by	lightly	grasping	the	salt	in	your	upturned
palm,	letting	it	shower	down	with	a	wag	of	the	wrist.	This	grasp—not	the
hovering	pinch	I	was	used	to—was	the	way	to	distribute	salt,	flour,	or
anything	else	granular,	evenly	and	efficiently	over	a	large	surface.

Practise	the	wrist	wag	in	your	own	kitchen	over	a	piece	of	parchment
paper	or	on	a	baking	sheet.	Get	used	to	the	way	the	salt	falls	from	your
hands;	experience	the	illicit	thrill	of	using	so	much	of	something	we’ve	all
been	taught	to	fear.



First,	dry	your	hands	so	the	salt	won’t	stick	to	your	skin.	Grab	a	palmful
of	salt	and	relax.	Jerky	or	robotic	hand	motions	make	for	uneven	salting.	See
how	the	salt	lands.	If	it	lands	unevenly,	then	it	means	you’re	seasoning	your
food	unevenly.	Pour	the	salt	back	into	the	bowl,	and	try	again.	The	more
your	wrist	flows,	the	more	evenly	the	salt	will	land.

This	isn’t	to	say	that	you	never	want	to	use	a	pinch	of	salt,	which	can	be
used	like	a	nail-polish-size	bottle	of	touch-up	car	paint	to	fix	a	scratch	on	a
fender.	It	might	not	have	much	potential	to	repair	major	damage,	but
applied	precisely	and	judiciously,	it	will	yield	flawless	results.	Use	a	pinch
when	you	want	to	make	sure	each	bite	is	salted	just	so:	slices	of	avocado
atop	a	piece	of	grilled	bread,	halved	hard-boiled	eggs,	or	tiny,	perfect
caramels.	But	try	to	attack	a	chicken	or	a	tray	of	butternut	squash	slices
with	the	pinch,	and	your	wrist	will	give	out	long	before	you’re	done.
Salt	and	Pepper
While	it’s	true	that	where	there’s	pepper	there	should	almost	always	be	salt,
the	inverse	isn’t	necessarily	so.	Remember,	salt	is	a	mineral	and	an	essential
nutrient.	When	salted,	food	undergoes	a	number	of	chemical	reactions	that
change	the	texture	and	flavour	of	meat	from	within.

Pepper,	on	the	other	hand,	is	a	spice,	and	proper	spice	usage	is	primarily



guided	by	geography	and	tradition.	Consider	whether	pepper	belongs	in	a
dish	before	you	add	it.	Though	French	and	Italian	cooks	make	abundant	use
of	black	pepper,	not	everyone	does.	In	Morocco,	shakers	of	cumin	are
commonly	set	on	the	table	along	with	salt.	In	Turkey,	it’s	usually	some	form
of	ground	chilli	powder.	In	many	Middle	Eastern	countries,	including
Lebanon	and	Syria,	it’s	the	blend	of	dried	thyme,	oregano,	and	sesame
seeds	known	as	za’atar.	In	Thailand,	sugar	can	be	found	alongside	chilli
paste,	while	in	Laos,	guests	are	often	brought	fresh	chillies	and	limes.	It
doesn’t	make	any	more	sense	to	automatically	season	everything	with
pepper	than	it	would	to	add	cumin	or	za’atar	to	every	dish	you	cook.	(To
learn	more	about	spices	used	around	the	world,	refer	to	The	World	of
Flavour	here.)

When	you	do	use	black	pepper,	look	for	Tellicherry	peppercorns,	which
ripen	on	the	vine	longer	than	other	varieties,	and	therefore	develop	more
flavour.	Grind	them	at	the	last	moment	onto	a	salad,	a	toast	smeared	with
creamy	burrata	and	drizzled	with	oil,	sliced	ripe	tomatoes,	Pasta	Cacio	e
Pepe,	or	slices	of	perfectly	cooked	steak.	Add	a	few	whole	peppercorns	to	a
brine,	braise,	sauce,	soup,	stock,	or	pot	of	beans	as	you	set	it	on	the	stove	or
slip	it	into	the	oven.	In	liquid,	an	early	addition	of	whole	spices	initiates	a
flavour	exchange:	as	the	spices	absorb	liquid,	they	relinquish	some	of	their
volatile	aromatic	compounds,	gently	flavouring	the	liquid	in	a	way	that	a
little	sprinkle	at	the	end	of	cooking	could	never	achieve.

Spices,	like	coffee,	always	taste	better	when	ground	just	before	use.
Flavour	is	locked	within	them	in	the	form	of	aromatic	oils,	which	are
released	upon	grinding,	and	again	upon	heating.	The	slow	leak	of	time
causes	preground	spices	to	relinquish	flavour.	Purchase	whole	spices
whenever	you	can,	and	grind	them	with	a	mortar	and	pestle	or	spice	grinder
as	you	use	them,	to	experience	the	powerful	release	of	aromatic	oils.	You’ll
be	astonished	by	what	a	huge	difference	it	makes	in	your	cooking.
Salt	and	Sugar



Don’t	abandon	everything	you	know	about	salt	when	you	turn	to	making
dessert.	We’re	taught	to	think	of	salt	and	sugar	existing	in	contrast	to,	rather
than	in	concert	with,	one	another:	food	is	either	sweet	or	savoury.	But
remember	that	the	primary	effect	salt	has	on	food	is	to	enhance	flavour,
and	even	sweets	benefit	from	this	boost.	Just	as	a	little	sweetness	can
amplify	flavours	in	a	savoury	dish—whether	in	the	form	of	caramelised
onions,	balsamic	vinaigrette,	or	a	spoonful	of	applesauce	served	with	pork
chops—salt	will	also	improve	a	sweet	dessert.	To	experience	what	salt	does
for	sweets,	divide	your	next	batch	of	cookie	dough	and	omit	salt	from	half.
Taste	cookies	from	both	batches	side	by	side.	Because	salt	will	have	done
its	aroma-	and	taste-enhancing	work,	you’ll	be	astounded	by	the	notes	of
nuttiness,	caramel,	and	butter	you	detect	in	the	salted	cookies.

The	foundational	ingredients	of	sweets	are	some	of	the	blandest	in	the
kitchen.	Just	as	you’d	never	leave	flour,	butter,	eggs,	or	cream	unseasoned
in	a	savoury	dish,	so	should	you	never	leave	them	unseasoned	in	a	dessert.
Usually	just	a	pinch	or	two	of	salt	whisked	into	a	dough,	batter,	or	base	is
enough	to	elevate	flavours	in	pie	and	cookie	doughs,	cake	batters,	tart
fillings,	and	custards	alike.

Considering	how	you	plan	to	eat	a	dessert	can	help	you	decide	which
type,	or	types,	of	salt	to	use.	For	example,	use	fine	salt	that	will	dissolve
evenly	in	chocolate	cookie	dough,	and	then	top	it	with	a	flakier	one	such	as
Maldon	for	a	pleasant	crunch.






Layering	Salt
From	capers	to	bacon	to	miso	paste	to	cheese,	there	are	many	sources	of
salt	beyond	the	crystals	we	add	directly	into	our	food.	Working	more	than
one	form	of	salt	into	a	dish	is	what	I	call	layering	salt,	and	it’s	a	terrific	way



to	build	flavour.
When	layering	salt,	think	about	the	dish	as	a	whole	and	consider	all	of

the	various	forms	of	salt	you	hope	to	add	before	you	begin.	Neglecting	to
account	for	the	later	addition	of	a	crucial	salty	ingredient	could	result	in
oversalting.	Think	of	layering	salt	the	next	time	you	make	Caesar	Dressing,
which	has	several	salty	ingredients—anchovies,	Parmesan,	Worcestershire
sauce,	and	salt.	Garlic,	which	I	like	to	pound	with	a	pinch	of	salt	in	a	mortar
and	pestle	into	a	smooth	paste,	is	a	fifth	source	of	salt.	Since	making	a
delicious,	balanced	dressing	depends	on	working	in	the	right	amounts	of
each	of	those—and	other,	unsalted—ingredients,	refrain	from	adding	salt
crystals	until	you’re	sure	that	you’ve	added	the	right	amount	of	everything
else.

First,	make	a	stiff,	unsalted	mayonnaise	by	whisking	oil	into	egg	yolks,
drop	by	drop	(find	more	specific	instructions	for	making	mayonnaise	by
hand	here–here).	Next,	work	in	initial	amounts	of	pounded	anchovies,
garlic,	grated	cheese,	and	Worcestershire.	Then,	add	vinegar	and	lemon.
Taste.	It	will	need	salt.	But	does	it	also	need	more	anchovy,	cheese,	garlic,	or
Worcestershire?	If	so,	add	salt	in	the	form	of	any	of	those	ingredients.	But
do	it	gradually,	stopping	to	taste	and	adjust	with	acid	as	needed.	It	may	take
several	rounds	of	tasting	and	adjusting	to	get	it	right.	As	with	any	dish	with
multiple	forms	of	salt,	add	crystals	only	after	you’re	satisfied	with	the
balance	of	all	other	flavours.	And	to	be	sure	you’ve	got	it	right,	dip	a	lettuce
leaf	or	two	into	the	finished	dressing	to	taste,	to	ensure	that	the
combination	delivers	the	zing!	you’re	after.

Even	when	following	a	recipe,	if	you	realise	that	a	dish	needs	more	salt,
take	a	moment	to	think	about	where	that	salt	should	come	from.



Balancing	Salt
No	matter	how	attentive	you	are	while	cooking,	there	will	be	times	you	sit
down	to	eat	only	to	discover	that	you’ve	underseasoned	your	dinner.	Some
foods	forgive	undersalting	more	readily	than	others.	You	can	easily	adjust	a
salad	at	the	table	with	a	pinch	of	salt.	Stir	a	shaving	of	salty	Parmesan	into	a
cup	of	soup	to	bump	up	its	seasoning.	Other	foods	don’t	respond	as	well:	no



amount	of	salty	sauce	or	cheese	or	meat	could	ever	make	up	for	bland
pasta—the	tongue	will	always	know	the	water	was	nowhere	nearly	as	salty
as	the	sea.	Roasted	and	braised	meats	cannot	pardon	the	transgression	of
underseasoning,	either.

Ever	since	witnessing	a	series	of	underseasoning	disasters	at	Chez
Panisse,	I’ve	been	obsessed	with	preventing	it.	There	was	the	day	a	cook
forgot	to	add	salt	to	the	pizza	dough	altogether,	an	accident	we	didn’t
notice	until	the	taster,	when	nothing	could	be	done	but	remove	pizza	from
the	menu.	There	was	the	time	I	braised	chicken	legs	that	had	been	marked
“salted”	but	clearly	were	not,	a	mistake	that	went	undiscovered	until	I
pulled	the	chicken	from	the	oven	and	tasted	it.	Since	sprinkling	the	surface
of	cooked	meat	will	do	little	to	make	up	for	the	lack	of	seasoning	within,	the
only	thing	we	could	do	was	shred	the	meat,	season	it,	and	turn	it	into	a	ragù
to	be	served	with	pasta.	The	instance	of	underseasoning	that	made	the
biggest	impression	on	me,	though,	was	the	time	a	very	senior	cook
undersalted	his	lasagna,	which	he	had	already	cut	into	one	hundred	pieces
for	that	night’s	service.	Since	salting	the	top	would	do	little	to	correct	a
mistake	that	had	been	made	from	within,	as	the	intern	I	was	given	the	task
of	gingerly	lifting	each	of	the	twelve	layers	on	each	of	the	one	hundred
pieces	of	lasagna	to	sneak	a	few	grains	of	salt	into	each	one.	After	that,	I’ve
never	underseasoned	a	lasagna.

You	will	also	inevitably	oversalt.	We	all	do.	It	might	happen	soon	after
you	become	a	member	of	the	newly	converted,	now	awakened	to	the
power	of	salt.	You	might	grow	cavalier,	like	I	did	as	a	young	cook	with	those
pork	roasts,	and	start	to	use	so	much	salt,	you	render	everything	inedible	for
a	while.	It	could	happen	when	you’re	simply	not	paying	attention.	It’s	not
that	big	a	deal.	We	all	make	mistakes	from	time	to	time.	I	certainly	still	do.

There	are	a	handful	of	fixes	for	oversalting.	But	none	involves	serving
something	terribly	salty	alongside	something	terribly	bland.	Intentional
blandness	won’t	ever	cancel	out	oversalting.
Dilute
Add	more	unseasoned	ingredients	to	increase	the	total	volume	of	the	dish.
More	of	anything	that’s	unsalted	will	work	to	balance	out	what’s	salted,	but
bland,	starchy,	and	rich	things	are	particularly	helpful	in	these
circumstances,	because	just	a	small	amount	of	them	can	help	balance	out	a
relatively	large	amount	of	food.	Add	bland	rice	or	potatoes	to	an
overseasoned	soup,	or	olive	oil	to	an	oversalted	mayonnaise.	While	water
evaporates	from	a	boiling	soup,	stock,	or	sauce,	salt	won’t,	and	what’s	left



behind	will	be	overly	salty.	The	solution	here	is	simple:	add	more	water	or
stock.	If	you	overseason	a	dish	made	with	many	ingredients	mixed	together,
add	more	of	the	main	ingredient	and	adjust	everything	else	until	it’s	all
balanced	again.
Halve
If	you’ve	already	put	the	dish	together	and	diluting	will	yield	more	food	than
you’ll	be	able	to	use,	then	divide	the	oversalted	amount	and	correct	only
half	of	it.	Depending	on	what	it	is,	you	may	be	able	to	refrigerate	or	freeze
the	rest	until	you	can	get	around	to	adjusting	and	using	it.	Or,	you	might
have	to	face	the	sad	reality	of	throwing	it	out.	But	that’s	better	than	using
thirty	dollars’	worth	of	olive	oil	to	correct	a	batch	of	mayonnaise,	and	then
only	using	a	quarter	of	it.
Balance
Sometimes,	food	that	seems	salty	isn’t	actually	oversalted;	it	just	needs	to
be	balanced	with	some	acid	or	fat.	Doctor	up	a	spoonful	of	the	dish	with	a
few	drops	of	lemon	juice	or	vinegar,	a	little	olive	oil,	or	some	of	each.	If	it
tastes	better,	then	apply	the	changes	to	the	whole	batch.
Select
Foods	cooked	in	liquid,	such	as	beans	or	braises,	can	often	be	salvaged	if
the	salty	cooking	liquid	is	discarded.	If	beans	are	too	salty,	change	out	the
water.	Make	refried	beans	or	turn	the	beans,	but	not	their	liquid,	into	soup,
adding	unseasoned	broth	and	vegetables.	If	braised	meat	is	just	a	little	too
salty,	serve	it	without	the	liquid	and	try	to	balance	it	with	a	rich,	acidic
condiment	such	as	crème	fraîche.	Serve	a	lightly	seasoned	starch	or	starchy
vegetable	alongside	it	to	act	as	a	foil.
Transform
Shred	an	oversalted	piece	of	meat	to	turn	it	into	a	new	dish	where	it’s	just
one	ingredient	of	many—a	stew,	chilli,	a	soup,	hash,	ravioli	filling.	Add	more
salt	to	oversalted	raw,	flaky,	white	fish	and	turn	it	into	baccalà,	or	salt	cod.
Admit	Defeat
Sometimes	the	best	thing	you	can	do	is	call	it	a	loss	and	start	over.	Or	order
some	pizza.	It’s	okay.	It’s	just	dinner—you’ll	get	another	chance	tomorrow.

Never	despair.	View	mistakes	of	under-	or	overseasoning	as
opportunities	for	learning.	Not	long	after	my	salt	epiphany	over	polenta
with	Cal,	I	was	tasked	with	making	some	corn	custards	for	the	vegetarian



guests	in	the	restaurant.	It	was	the	first	time	I	was	trusted	with	cooking	an
entire	dish	from	start	to	finish.	I	could	hardly	believe	that	paying	guests
would	be	eating	something	I	cooked!	It	was	thrilling	and	terrifying,	all	at
once.	I	made	the	custard	just	as	I’d	been	taught:	cooking	onions	until	soft,
adding	corn	I’d	stripped	from	the	ears,	steeping	the	cobs	in	cream	to	infuse
it	with	sweet	corn	flavour,	making	a	simple	custard	base	with	that	cream
and	eggs,	and	then	combining	everything	and	gently	baking	it	in	a	water
bath	until	barely	set.	I	was	thrilled	with	how	silky	the	custards	had	turned
out,	and	towards	the	end	of	the	night	the	chef	came	by	and	tasted	a
spoonful.	Seeing	the	hope	in	my	eyes,	he	graciously	told	me	I’d	done	a	good
job,	and	then	gingerly	added	that	next	time,	I	should	increase	the	seasoning.
Even	though	he’d	delivered	the	criticism	just	about	as	gently	as	any	chef
ever	could,	I	was	floored,	and	completely	embarrassed.	I’d	been	following	all
of	the	instructions	for	making	the	custards	so	intently	that	I’d	completely
forgotten	the	most	important	rule	in	our	kitchen—one	that	I	had	thought
I’d	already	internalised,	but	clearly	hadn’t:	taste	everything,	every	step	of	the
way.	I’d	never	tasted	the	onions,	the	corn,	or	the	custard	mixture.	Not	once.

After	that	experience,	tasting	became	reflexive	in	a	whole	new	way.
Within	a	few	months,	I	was	consistently	cooking	the	most	delicious	food	I’d
ever	made,	and	it	was	all	because	of	a	single	tweak	in	my	approach.	I’d
learned	how	to	salt.

Develop	a	sense	for	salt	by	tasting	everything	as	you	cook,	early	and
often.	Adopt	the	mantra	Stir,	taste,	adjust.	Make	salt	the	first	thing	you
notice	as	you	taste	and	the	last	thing	you	adjust	before	serving	a	dish.	When
constant	tasting	becomes	instinctive,	you	can	begin	to	improvise.
Improvising	with	Salt
Cooking	isn’t	so	different	from	jazz.	The	best	jazz	musicians	seem	to
improvise	effortlessly,	whether	by	embellishing	standards	or	by	stripping
them	down.	Louis	Armstrong	could	take	an	elaborate	melody	and	distil	it
down	to	a	single	note	on	his	horn,	while	Ella	Fitzgerald	could	take	an	utterly
simple	tune	and	endlessly	elaborate	upon	it	with	her	extraordinary	voice.
But	in	order	to	be	able	to	improvise	flawlessly,	they	had	to	learn	the	basic
language	of	music—the	notes—and	develop	an	intimate	relationship	with
the	standards.	The	same	is	true	for	cooking;	while	a	great	chef	can	make
improvisation	look	easy,	the	ability	to	do	so	depends	on	a	strong	foundation
of	the	basics.

Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat	are	the	building	blocks	of	that	foundation.	Use
them	to	develop	a	repertoire	of	basic	dishes	that	you	can	cook	any	time,



anywhere.	Eventually,	like	Louis	or	Ella,	you’ll	be	able	to	simplify	or
embellish	your	cooking	at	the	drop	of	a	porkpie	hat.	Begin	by	incorporating
everything	you’ve	learned	about	salt	into	all	of	your	cooking,	from	the
casual	frittata	to	the	holiday	roast.

The	three	basic	decisions	involving	salt	are:	When?	How	much?	In	what
form?	Ask	yourself	these	three	questions	every	time	you	set	out	to	cook.
Their	answers	will	begin	to	form	a	road	map	for	improvisation.	One	day
soon,	you’ll	surprise	yourself.	It	might	be	when,	shortly	after	standing	before
a	near-empty	fridge,	convinced	you	don’t	have	the	makings	for	anything
worth	eating,	you	discover	a	wedge	of	Parmesan.	Twenty	minutes	later,	you
could	be	tucking	into	the	most	perfectly	seasoned	bowl	of	Pasta	Cacio	e
Pepe	you’ve	ever	tasted.	Or,	it	might	be	after	an	unplanned	shopping	spree
at	the	farmers’	market	with	friends.	Returning	home	with	an	abundance	of
produce,	you’ll	lay	it	all	out	on	the	worktop,	pull	the	chicken	you	seasoned
the	night	before	out	from	the	fridge,	and	preheat	the	oven	without	skipping
a	beat.	Pouring	your	friends	a	glass	of	wine,	you’ll	offer	them	a	snack	of	a
few	sliced	cucumbers	and	radishes	sprinkled	with	flaky	salt.	Without	a
second	thought,	you’ll	add	a	palmful	of	salt	to	the	boiling	pot	of	water	on
the	stove,	then	taste	and	adjust	it	before	blanching	the	turnips	and	their
greens.	As	your	friends	take	their	first	bites,	they’ll	ask	you	to	share	your
culinary	secrets.	Tell	them	the	truth:	you’ve	mastered	using	the	most
important	element	of	good	cooking—salt.






Just	after	I	began	cooking	at	Chez	Panisse,	the	chefs	held	a	contest	to	see
which	employee	could	come	up	with	the	best	tomato	sauce	recipe.

There	was	only	one	rule:	we	had	to	use	ingredients	readily	available	in	the
restaurant’s	kitchen.	The	prize	was	five	hundred	dollars	in	cash	and	an
acknowledgement	on	the	menu	each	time	the	recipe	would	be	used	.	.	.
forever.

As	a	total	novice,	I	was	too	intimidated	to	enter,	but	it	seemed	like
everyone	else—	from	the	maître	d’	to	other	waiters,	porters,	and,	of	course,
the	cooks—wanted	to	try.

Dozens	of	entrants	brought	in	their	sauces	for	a	blind	tasting	by	a	team
of	“impartial	judges”	(i.e.,	the	chefs	and	Alice).	Some	sauces	were	seasoned
with	dried	oregano,	others	fresh	marjoram.	Some	entrants	crushed	their
canned	tomatoes	by	hand	while	others	painstakingly	seeded	and	diced
them.	Others	added	chilli	flakes	while	still	others	channelled	their	inner
nonnas	and	puréed	their	sauces,	pomarola-style.	It	was	tomato	mayhem	and
we	were	all	atwitter,	waiting	to	hear	who	would	be	the	winner.

At	one	point,	one	of	the	chefs	came	into	the	kitchen	to	get	a	glass	of
water.	We	asked	him	how	it	was	going.	I’ll	never	forget	what	he	said.

“There	are	a	lot	of	great	entries.	So	many,	in	fact,	that	it’s	hard	to	narrow
them	down.	But	Alice’s	palate	is	so	sensitive	she	can’t	ignore	that	some	of
the	best	versions	were	made	with	rancid	olive	oil.”

Alice	couldn’t	understand	why	everyone	hadn’t	used	the	high-quality
olive	oil	we	cooked	with	at	the	restaurant,	especially	when	it	was	always
available	to	employees	to	buy	at	cost.

I	was	shocked.	Never	before	had	it	occurred	to	me	that	olive	oil	would
have	much	effect	on	the	flavour	of	a	dish,	much	less	one	as	piquant	as
tomato	sauce.	This	was	my	first	glimpse	of	understanding	that	as	a
foundational	ingredient,	the	flavour	of	olive	oil,	and	indeed	any	fat	we
choose	to	cook	with,	dramatically	alters	our	perception	of	the	entire	dish.
Just	as	an	onion	cooked	in	butter	tastes	different	from	an	onion	cooked	in
olive	oil,	an	onion	cooked	in	good	olive	oil	tastes	different—and	in	this	case
better—than	one	cooked	in	a	poorer	quality	oil.

My	friend	Mike,	another	young	cook,	ended	up	winning	the	contest.	His
recipe	was	so	complicated	I	can	hardly	remember	it	all	these	years	later.	But
I’ll	never	forget	the	lesson	I	learned	that	day:	food	can	only	ever	be	as
delicious	as	the	fat	with	which	it’s	cooked.



While	I	was	taught	to	appreciate	the	flavours	of	various	olive	oils	at	Chez
Panisse,	it	wasn’t	until	I	worked	in	Italy	that	I	saw	fat	as	an	important	and
versatile	element	of	cooking	on	its	own,	rather	than	simply	a	cooking
medium.

During	the	olive	harvest,	or	raccolta,	I	made	a	pilgrimage	to	Tenuta	di
Capezzana,	the	producer	of	the	most	exquisite	olive	oil	I’d	ever	tasted.
Standing	in	the	frantoio,	I	watched	rapt	as	the	day’s	olive	harvest	was
transformed	into	a	yellow-green	elixir	so	bright	it	seemed	to	illuminate	the
dark	Tuscan	night.	The	oil’s	flavour	was	as	astonishing	as	its	colour—
peppery,	almost	acidic,	in	a	way	I	never	imagined	a	fat	could	be.

The	following	autumn	I	was	in	Liguria,	a	coastal	province,	during	the
raccolta.	Olio	nuovo	pressed	on	the	shores	of	the	Mediterranean	was	wholly
different:	this	oil	was	buttery,	low	in	acid,	and	so	rich	I	wanted	to	swallow
spoonfuls	of	it.	I	learned	that	where	olive	oil	comes	from	has	a	huge	effect
on	how	it	tastes—oil	from	hot,	dry	hilly	areas	is	spicy,	while	oil	from	coastal
climates	with	milder	weather	is	correspondingly	milder	in	flavour.	After
tasting	the	oils	I	could	see	how	a	peppery	oil	would	overwhelm	a	delicate
preparation	such	as	fish	tartare,	while	the	more	subtle	flavour	of	a	coastal
oil	might	not	be	able	to	stand	up	to	the	bold	flavours	of	a	Tuscan	bistecca
served	with	bitter	greens.

At	Zibibbo,	Benedetta	Vitali’s	Florentine	trattoria,	we	used	peppery
Tuscan	extra-virgin	olive	oil	more	liberally	than	any	other	ingredient.	We
used	it	to	make	salad	dressings.	We	used	it	to	drench	the	dough	for	the
focaccia	we	baked	each	morning.	We	used	it	to	brown	soffritto,	the	aromatic
base	of	onions,	carrots,	and	celery	at	the	foundation	of	all	of	our	long-
cooked	foods.	We	used	it	to	deep-fry	everything	from	squid	to	squash
blossoms	to	bomboloni,	the	cream-filled	doughnuts	I	ate	with	gusto	every
Saturday	morning.	Tuscan	olive	oil	defined	the	flavour	of	our	cooking;	our
food	tasted	delicious	because	our	olive	oil	was	delicious.

As	I	travelled	throughout	Italy,	I	saw	how	fat	determines	the	particular
flavours	of	regional	cooking.	In	the	North,	where	pastures	and	the	dairy
cattle	they	sustain	are	abundant,	cooks	use	butter,	cream,	and	rich	cheeses
readily	in	dishes	such	as	polenta,	tagliatelle	Bolognese,	and	risotto.	In	the



South	and	on	the	coasts,	where	olive	trees	flourish,	olive	oil	is	used	in
everything	from	seafood	dishes	to	pastas	and	even	desserts	such	as	olive	oil
gelato.	Because	pigs	can	be	raised	in	just	about	any	climate,	though,	one
thing	unites	the	diverse	regional	Italian	cuisines:	pork	fat.

As	I	immersed	myself	in	the	culture	and	cuisine	of	Italy,	one	thing
became	clear:	Italians’	remarkable	relationship	to	fat	is	essential	to	why
their	food	tastes	so	good.	Fat,	then,	I	realised,	is	the	second	element	of	good
cooking.



WHAT	IS	FAT?
The	best	way	to	appreciate	the	value	of	fat	in	the	kitchen	is	to	try	to	imagine
cooking	without	it.	What	would	vinaigrette	be	without	olive	oil,	sausage
without	pork	fat,	a	baked	potato	without	sour	cream,	a	croissant	without
butter?	Pointless,	that’s	what.	Without	the	flavours	and	textures	that	fat
makes	possible,	food	would	be	immeasurably	less	pleasurable	to	eat.	In
other	words,	fat	is	essential	for	achieving	the	full	spectrum	of	flavours	and
textures	of	good	cooking.

Besides	being	one	of	the	four	basic	elements	of	good	cooking,	fat	is	also
one	of	the	four	elemental	building	blocks	of	all	foods,	along	with	water,
protein,	and	carbohydrates.	While	it’s	commonly	believed	that	fat,	much
like	salt,	is	universally	unhealthy,	both	elements	are	essential	to	human
survival.	Fat	serves	as	a	crucial	backup	energy	source,	a	way	to	store	energy
for	future	use,	and	plays	a	role	in	nutrient	absorption	and	essential
metabolic	functions,	such	as	brain	growth.	Unless	you’ve	been	directed	by
your	doctor	to	strictly	reduce	your	fat	consumption,	you	don’t	need	to
worry—there’s	nothing	unhealthy	about	cooking	with	moderate	amounts	of
fat	(especially	if	you	favour	healthy	plant-	and	fish-based	fats).	As	with	salt,
my	aim	isn’t	so	much	to	get	you	to	use	more	fat	as	it	is	to	teach	you	how	to
make	better	use	of	it	in	your	cooking.

In	contrast	to	salt,	fat	takes	on	many	forms	and	is	derived	from	many
sources	(see	Sources	of	Fat,	here).	While	salt	is	a	mineral,	used	primarily	to
enhance	flavour,	fat	plays	three	distinct	roles	in	the	kitchen:	as	a	main
ingredient,	as	a	cooking	medium,	and,	like	salt,	as	seasoning.	The	same	type
of	fat	can	play	different	roles	in	your	cooking,	depending	on	how	it	is	used.
The	first	step	in	choosing	a	fat	to	use	is	to	identify	the	primary	role	it	will
play	in	a	dish.



Used	as	a	main	ingredient,	fat	will	significantly	affect	a	dish.	Often,	it’s
a	source	both	of	rich	flavour	and	of	a	particular	desired	texture.	For
example,	fat	ground	into	a	burger	will	render	as	it	cooks,	basting	the	meat
from	within	and	contributing	to	juciness.	Butter	inhibits	the	proteins	in	flour
from	developing,	yielding	tender	and	flaky	textures	in	a	pastry.	Olive	oil
contributes	both	a	light,	grassy	flavour	and	a	rich	texture	to	pesto.	The
amount	of	cream	and	egg	yolks	in	an	ice	cream	determines	just	how	smooth
and	decadent	it’ll	be	(hint:	the	more	cream	and	eggs,	the	creamier	the
result).

The	role	fat	plays	as	a	cooking	medium	is	perhaps	its	most	impressive
and	unique.	Cooking	fats	can	be	heated	to	extreme	temperatures,	allowing
the	surface	temperature	of	foods	cooked	in	them	to	climb	to	astonishing
heights	as	well.	In	the	process,	these	foods	become	golden	brown	and
develop	the	crisp	crusts	that	so	please	our	palates.	Any	fat	you	heat	to	cook
food	can	be	described	as	a	medium,	whether	it’s	the	peanut	oil	in	which	you
fry	chicken,	the	butter	you	use	to	sauté	spring	vegetables,	or	the	olive	oil	in
which	you	poach	tuna.

Certain	fats	can	also	be	used	as	seasoning	to	adjust	flavour	or	enrich
the	texture	of	a	dish	just	before	serving:	a	few	drops	of	toasted	sesame	oil
will	deepen	the	flavours	in	a	bowl	of	rice,	a	dollop	of	sour	cream	will	offer
silky	richness	to	a	cup	of	soup,	a	little	mayonnaise	spread	on	a	BLT	will
increase	its	succulence,	and	a	smear	of	cultured	butter	on	a	piece	of	crusty
bread	will	add	untold	richness.

To	determine	which	role	fat	is	playing	in	a	dish,	ask	yourself	these
questions:
• Will	this	fat	bind	various	ingredients	together?	If	so,	this	is	a	main



ingredient.
• Does	this	fat	play	a	textural	role?	For	flaky,	creamy,	and	light	textures,

fat	plays	the	role	of	main	ingredient,	while	for	crisp	textures,	it’s	a
cooking	medium.	For	tender	textures,	fat	can	play	either	role.

• Will	this	fat	be	heated	and	used	to	cook	the	food?	If	so,	this	is	a	cooking
medium.

• Does	this	fat	play	a	flavour	role?	If	it’s	added	at	the	outset,	it’s	a	main
ingredient.	If	it’s	used	to	adjust	flavour	or	texture	at	the	end	of	cooking
the	dish	as	a	garnish,	it’s	a	seasoning.
Once	you’ve	identified	which	role	fat	will	play	in	a	dish,	you’ll	be	better

equipped	to	choose	which	fat	to	use,	and	how	to	cook	food	that	will	result
in	the	taste	and	texture	you’re	after.






FAT	AND	FLAVOUR
Fat’s	Effect	on	Flavour
Put	simply,	fat	carries	flavour.	While	certain	fats	have	their	own	distinct
flavours,	any	fat	can	convey	aromas—and	enhance	flavours—to	our	palates
that	would	otherwise	go	unnoticed.	Fat	coats	the	tongue,	allowing	various
aromatic	compounds	to	stay	in	contact	with	our	taste	buds	for	longer
periods	of	time,	intensifying	and	prolonging	our	experience	of	various
flavours.	Peel	and	slice	two	cloves	of	garlic.	Gently	sizzle	one	clove	in	a
couple	of	tablespoons	of	water,	and	the	other	in	the	same	amount	of	olive
oil.	Taste	a	few	drops	of	each	liquid.	You’ll	have	a	much	more	powerful
impression	of	the	garlic	flavour	in	oil.	Take	advantage	of	this	capability	to
intensify	and	circulate	flavour	by	adding	aromatics	directly	into	the	cooking
fat.	When	baking,	add	vanilla	extract	and	other	flavourings	directly	into	the
butter	or	egg	yolks	for	the	same	result.

Fat	enhances	flavour	in	another	extraordinary	way.	Because	cooking
fats	can	withstand	temperatures	well	beyond	the	boiling	point	of	water
(100°C	at	sea	level),	they	perform	a	crucial	task	that	water	cannot—the
facilitation	of	surface	browning,	which	typically	does	not	begin	at
temperatures	below	110°C.	In	some	foods,	browning	will	introduce	entirely
new	flavours,	including	nuttiness,	sweetness,	meatiness,	earthiness,	and
savouriness	(umami).	Imagine	the	difference	in	flavour	between	a	poached
chicken	breast	and	one	browned	on	the	stove	in	a	little	olive	oil,	and	the
incalculable	value	of	this	attribute	will	be	clear.
The	Flavours	of	Fat
Different	fats	have	different	flavours.	To	select	the	right	fat,	get	to	know
how	each	fat	tastes,	and	in	which	cuisines	it’s	commonly	used.
Olive	Oil
Olive	oil	is	a	staple	in	Mediterranean	cooking,	so	make	it	your	default	fat
when	cooking	foods	inspired	by	Italian,	Spanish,	Greek,	Turkish,	North
African,	and	Middle	Eastern	cuisines.	It	shines	as	a	medium	for	everything
from	soups	and	pastas	to	braises,	roasted	meats,	and	vegetables.	Use	it	as	a
main	ingredient	in	mayonnaise,	vinaigrette,	and	all	manner	of	condiments
from	Herb	Salsa	to	chilli	oil.	Drizzle	it	over	beef	carpaccio	or	baked	ricotta
as	a	seasoning.

Your	food	will	taste	good	if	you	start	with	a	good	tasting	olive	oil,	but
choosing	the	right	one	can	be	daunting.	At	my	local	market	alone,	there	are



two	dozen	brands	of	extra-virgin	olive	oil	on	display.	Then	there	are	all	the
virgin,	pure,	and	flavoured	oils.	Early	in	my	cooking	career,	as	I	approached
these	aisles,	I	often	found	myself	overwhelmed	by	choices:	virgin	or	extra-
virgin?	Italy	or	France?	Organic	or	not?	Is	that	olive	oil	on	sale	any	good?
Why	is	one	brand	£25	for	750	millilitres	while	another	is	£7.50	for	a	litre?

As	with	wine,	taste,	not	price,	is	the	best	guide	to	choosing	an	olive	oil.
This	might	require	an	initial	leap	of	faith,	but	the	only	way	to	learn	the
vocabulary	of	olive	oil	is	to	taste,	and	pay	attention.	Descriptors	like	fruity,
pungent,	spicy,	and	bright	might	seem	confusing	at	first,	but	a	good	olive	oil,
like	a	good	wine,	is	multidimensional.	If	you	taste	something	expensive	but
don’t	like	it,	then	it’s	not	for	you.	If	you	find	a	ten-dollar	bottle	that’s
delicious,	then	you’ve	scored!

While	it’s	a	challenge	to	explain	what	good	olive	oil	tastes	like,	it’s	fairly
simple	to	describe	a	bad	one—bitter,	overwhelmingly	spicy,	dirty,	rancid—
all	deal-breakers.

Colour	has	little	to	do	with	the	quality	of	olive	oil,	and	it	offers	no	clues
to	whether	an	olive	oil	is	rancid.	Instead,	use	your	nose	and	palate:	does	the
olive	oil	smell	like	a	box	of	crayons,	candle	wax,	or	the	oil	floating	on	top	of
an	old	jar	of	peanut	butter?	If	so,	it’s	rancid.	The	sad	truth	is	that	most
Americans,	accustomed	to	the	taste	of	rancid	olive	oil,	actually	prefer	it.
And	so,	most	of	the	huge	olive	oil	producers	are	happy	to	sell	to	us	what
more	discerning	buyers	would	reject.

Olive	oil	is	produced	seasonally.	Look	for	a	production	date,	typically	in
November,	on	the	label	when	you	purchase	a	bottle	to	ensure	you	are
buying	a	current	pressing.	It	will	go	rancid	about	twelve	to	fourteen	months
after	it’s	been	pressed,	so	don’t	save	it	for	a	special	occasion,	thinking	it	will
improve	over	time	like	a	fine	wine!	(In	this	way,	olive	oil	is	nothing	like	wine.)

As	with	salt,	there	are	various	categories	of	olive	oils—everyday	oils,
finishing	oils,	and	flavoured	oils.	Use	everyday	olive	oils	for	general	cookery
and	finishing	olive	oils	for	applications	where	you	really	want	to	let	the
flavour	of	the	olive	oil	stand	out:	in	salad	dressings,	spooned	over	fish



tartare,	in	herb	salsas,	or	in	olive	oil	cakes.	Purchase	and	use	flavoured	olive
oils	with	caution.	Flavourings	are	often	added	to	mask	the	taste	of	low-
quality	olive	oils,	so	I	generally	recommend	staying	away	from	them.	But
there	is	an	exception:	olive	oils	marked	agrumato	are	made	using	a
traditional	technique	of	milling	whole	citrus	fruit	with	the	olives	at	the	time
of	the	first	press.	At	Bi-Rite	Creamery	in	San	Francisco,	one	of	the	most
popular	sundaes	features	bergamot	agrumato	drizzled	over	chocolate	ice
cream.	And	it	is	delicious!

It	can	be	difficult	to	find	a	good,	affordable	everyday	olive	oil.	My
standbys	include	the	extra-virgin	oils	from	Seka	Hills,	Katz,	and	California
Olive	Ranch.	Another	good	everyday	oil	is	the	Kirkland	Signature	Organic
Extra	Virgin	Oil	from	Costco,	which	regularly	scores	well	on	independently
administered	quality	analyses.	In	their	absence,	look	for	oils	that	are
produced	from	100	percent	Californian	or	Italian	olives	(as	opposed	to
those	with	labels	that	simply	read	“Made	in	Italy,”	“Packed	in	Italy,”	or
“Bottled	in	Italy,”	which	imply	that	the	oil	is	pressed	in	Italy	from	olives
whose	provenance	cannot	be	traced	or	guaranteed).	The	production	date
should	always	be	clearly	marked	on	the	label.

If	you	can’t	track	down	a	good,	affordable	everyday	olive	oil,	instead	of
using	a	lower-quality	one,	make	your	own	blend	of	good	olive	oil	and	a
neutral-tasting	cold-pressed	grapeseed	or	canola	oil.	Save	the	pure	stuff
and	use	it	as	a	finishing	olive	oil	for	salads	and	condiments.

Once	you	find	an	olive	oil	you	love,	take	good	care	of	it.	Constant
temperature	fluctuations	from	a	nearby	stove	or	daily	brushes	with	the
sun’s	rays	will	encourage	olive	oil	to	go	rancid,	so	store	it	somewhere	reliably
cool	and	dark.	If	you	can’t	keep	it	in	a	dark	place,	store	olive	oil	in	a	dark
glass	bottle	or	metal	can	to	keep	light	out.
Butter
Butter	is	a	common	cooking	fat	in	regions	with	climates	that	support
pasture	for	grazing	cows	throughout	the	US	and	Canada,	the	UK	and
Ireland,	Scandinavia,	Western	Europe	including	northern	Italy,	and	Russia,
Morocco,	and	India.

One	of	the	most	versatile	fats,	butter	can	be	manipulated	into	several
forms	and	used	as	either	a	cooking	medium,	main	ingredient,	or	seasoning.
In	its	natural	state,	butter	is	available	salted	and	unsalted,	and	cultured.
Salted	and	tangy	cultured	butters	are	best	as	is,	spread	on	warm	toast,	or
served	with	radishes	and	sea	salt	as	an	hors	d’oeuvre.	There	is	no	way	to



know	exactly	how	much	salt	is	in	any	one	particular	brand	of	salted	butter,
so	use	unsalted	butter	when	cooking	and	baking,	and	add	your	own	salt	to
taste.

Chilled	or	at	room	temperature,	unsalted	butter	can	be	worked	into
doughs	and	batters	as	a	main	ingredient	to	lend	its	rich	dairy	flavour	to
baked	goods	and	produce	a	variety	of	luxurious	textures,	from	flaky	to
tender	to	light.	Unlike	oil,	butter	is	not	pure	fat—it	also	contains	water,	milk
protein,	and	whey	solids,	which	provide	much	of	its	flavour.	Gently	heat
unsalted	butter	until	those	solids	brown	and	you	get	brown	butter,	which	is
nutty	and	sweet.	Brown	butter	is	a	classic	flavour	in	French	and	northern
Italian	cooking—particularly	apt	for	pairing	with	hazelnuts,	winter	squash
and	sage,	as	I	like	to	do	in	Autumn	Panzanella,	which	is	dressed	with	a
Brown	Butter	Vinaigrette.

Melt	unsalted	butter	gently	over	sustained	low	heat	to	clarify	it.	The
whey	proteins	will	rise	to	the	top	of	the	clear,	yellow	fat,	and	other	milk
proteins	will	fall	to	the	bottom.	The	water	will	evaporate,	leaving	behind	100
percent	fat.	Skim	the	whey	solids	and	save	them	to	toss	with	fettuccine—the
buttery	flavour	is	an	ideal	complement	to	the	eggy	noodles,	especially	if	you
top	the	dish	with	grated	Parmesan	and	freshly	ground	black	pepper.	Since
the	proteins	can	sneak	through	even	the	finest	cheesecloth,	take	care	to
leave	them	undisturbed	at	the	bottom	of	the	pot.	Carefully	strain	the	rest	of
the	butter	through	cheesecloth	to	yield	clarified	butter,	which	is	an
excellent	medium	for	high-heat	cooking.	I	love	using	clarified	butter	for
frying	potato	cakes—with	the	solids	removed,	the	butter	doesn’t	burn,	and
the	potatoes	take	on	all	of	that	buttery	goodness.	Indian	ghee	is	simply
clarified	butter	that’s	been	cooked	at	a	higher	temperature,	allowing	the
milk	solids	to	brown	and	lend	the	finished	fat	a	sweeter	flavour.	Smen,	used
to	fluff	Moroccan	couscous,	is	clarified	butter	that	has	been	buried
underground	for	up	to	seven	years	to	develop	a	cheesy	taste.
Seed	and	Nut	Oils
Almost	every	culture	relies	on	a	neutral-tasting	seed	or	nut	oil,	because
cooks	don’t	always	want	fat	to	flavour	a	dish.	Peanut	oil,	expeller-pressed
canola	oil,	and	grapeseed	oil	are	all	good	choices	as	cooking	fats	precisely
because	they	don’t	taste	like	anything.	Since	they	have	high	smoke	points,
these	oils	can	also	withstand	the	high	temperatures	required	to	crisp	and
brown	foods.

Spreading	a	rumour	of	tropical	flavour	to	any	dish	where	it’s	used,
coconut	oil	tastes	particularly	good	in	granola,	or	as	the	cooking	fat	for



roasted	root	vegetables.	Coconut	oil	is	also	the	rare	vegetable	oil	that’s	solid
at	room	temperature.	Read	on	to	learn	how	solid	fat	is	a	boon	for	making
flaky	pastries,	and	use	coconut	oil	to	make	a	pie	crust	the	next	time	your
lactose-intolerant	friend	comes	over	for	dinner.	(Cook’s	tip:	Both	skin	and
hair	readily	absorb	coconut	oil,	so	it	makes	for	a	fantastic	luxury	treatment
whenever	you’re	feeling	dry!)

Speciality	seed	and	nut	oils	with	vibrant	flavours	can	be	used	as
seasonings.	Fry	leftover	rice	in	toasted	sesame	oil	with	an	egg	and	kimchee
for	a	Korean-inspired	snack.	A	little	toasted	hazelnut	oil	in	a	vinaigrette	will
amplify	a	simple	rocket	and	hazelnut	salad	with	an	echo	of	nuttiness.
Garnish	pumpkin	soup	with	a	Herb	Salsa	pumped	up	with	toasted	pumpkin
seeds	and	a	drizzle	of	pumpkin	seed	oil	to	incorporate	multiple	dimensions
of	a	single	ingredient.

Animal	Fats
All	meat-eating	cultures	make	use	of	animal	fats,	which	can	be
incorporated	into	food	as	a	main	ingredient,	cooking	medium,	or	seasoning
depending	on	its	form.	Most	aromatic	molecules	are	repelled	by	water,	so	in
meat	they’re	predominantly	found	in	an	animal’s	fat.	As	a	result,	any
animal’s	fat	will	taste	much	more	distinctly	of	that	animal	than	its	lean	meat
—beef	fat	tastes	beefier	than	steak,	pork	fat	tastes	porkier	than	pork,
chicken	fat	tastes	more	chickeny	than	chicken,	and	so	on.
Beef
When	solid,	it’s	called	suet.	Liquid,	it’s	called	tallow.	Beef	fat	is	a	crucial
component	in	hamburgers	and	hot	dogs,	lending	beefy	flavour	and
enhancing	moistness.	Without	suet,	or	another	added	fat,	a	hamburger
would	be	dry,	crumbly,	and	tasteless.	Tallow	is	often	used	for	frying	french



fries	and	cooking	Yorkshire	pudding.
Pork
When	solid,	it’s	called	pork	fat.	Liquid,	it’s	called	lard.	Pork	fat	is	an
important	addition	to	sausages	and	terrines,	providing	both	flavour	and
richness.	Use	solid	pork	fat	for	barding	and	larding,	two	hilariously	named
terms	for	supplementing	lean	meats	with	solid	fat	to	keep	them	from	drying
out.	Barding	is	the	term	for	covering	lean	meat	with	slices	of	pork	belly—
either	smoked	and	called	bacon,	cured	and	called	pancetta,	or	left
unadulterated—	to	protect	it	from	the	dry	heat	of	roasting,	while	larding
refers	to	the	act	of	threading	pieces	of	fat	through	a	lean	piece	of	meat	with
a	long,	thick	needle.	Both	processes	add	richness	and	flavour.

Since	it	has	a	high	smoke	point,	lard	is	a	terrific	cooking	medium	and	is
commonly	used	in	Mexico,	the	American	South,	southern	Italy,	and	the
northern	Philippines.	It	can	also	be	used	as	an	ingredient	in	doughs,	though
it	should	be	used	with	care,	because	while	it	makes	for	a	perfectly	flaky
empanada	dough,	its	distinctly	porky	taste	may	not	always	be	desirable	in
your	blueberry	pie!
Chicken,	Duck,	and	Goose
These	fats	are	only	used	in	their	liquid	forms	as	cooking	media.	Schmaltz—
or	rendered	chicken	fat—is	a	traditional	ingredient	in	the	Jewish	kitchen.	I



love	sizzling	rice	in	it	to	lend	it	some	chickeny	flavour.	Save	duck	or	goose
fat	that	renders	when	roasting	a	bird,	strain	it,	and	use	it	to	fry	potatoes	or
root	vegetables.	Few	things	are	tastier	than	potatoes	fried	in	duck	fat.
Lamb
Also	called	suet,	it’s	generally	not	rendered,	but	it	is	an	important	ingredient
in	lamb	sausages	such	as	merguez	in	countries	where	pork	is	not	consumed.

In	general,	fat	makes	meat	taste	good.	We	prize—even	grade—steaks	based
on	how	marbled,	or	fatty,	they	are.	There’s	also	the	fat	that	we	don’t	love	to
eat—the	rubbery,	chewy	lump	at	the	top	of	a	chicken	breast,	or	the	bit	of
brisket	fat	that	always	ends	up	on	the	edge	of	the	plate.	Why	do	we	value
some	animal	fats	and	eschew	others?

When	four-legged	animals	are	fattened	up	with	lots	of	calories,	the	cuts
of	meat	from	the	centre	of	the	animal	receive	the	most	flavour	benefits.
Some	fat	ends	up	layered	between	groups	of	muscles,	or	directly	under
their	skin,	as	in	the	cap	of	fat	on	the	outside	of	a	pork	loin	or	prime	rib.	Some
fat	ends	up	within	a	muscle.	This	is	the	more	prized	kind	of	fat—what	we
call	marbling	when	we	look	at	a	steak.	As	a	well-marbled	steak	cooks,	the	fat
will	melt,	making	the	meat	juicier	from	within.	And	since	fat	carries	flavour,
many	of	the	chemical	compounds	that	make	any	one	kind	of	meat	taste	like
itself	(beef	like	beef,	pork	like	pork,	chicken	like	chicken)	are	more
concentrated	in	fat	than	in	lean	muscle.	That’s	why,	for	example,	chicken
thighs	taste	more	chickeny	than	the	leaner	breast	meat.

Though	lumps	of	fat	might	not	be	so	tasty	on	the	plate,	you	can	remove
them	from	the	meat	and	melt	them	down,	then	use	the	rendered	fat	as	a
cooking	medium.	The	distinct	flavours	of	animal	fats	lend	themselves	well
to	being	used	in	dishes	where	the	goal	is	to	evoke	a	certain	meatiness:
matzoh	balls	fortified	with	schmaltz	will	amplify	a	chicken	soup’s
chickeniness,	and	hash	browns	cooked	in	bacon	fat	will	lend	breakfast	a
smoky,	rich	flavour	even	if	no	meat	makes	it	onto	the	plate.	A	little	animal
fat	will	go	a	long	way	towards	enriching	and	flavouring	even	the	simplest
foods.
How	to	use	the	Flavour	Maps
Flip	this	page	open.	Inside	you’ll	find	one	of	the	three	flavour	maps	in	this
book.	Use	it	to	navigate	through	the	flavours	of	the	world.	Each	level	of	the
wheel	contains	a	layer	of	information:	use	the	two	inner	layers	to	guide	you
to	your	cuisine	of	choice,	and	then	refer	to	the	outermost	layer	to	choose



the	right	fat	for	cooking	foods	from	that	cuisine.

Fats	of	the	World
Just	as	I’d	discovered	in	Italy,	cuisines	are	distinguished	by	their	fats.	Since
fat	is	the	foundation	of	so	many	dishes,	choose	culturally	appropriate	fats	to
flavour	food	from	within.	Use	the	wrong	fat,	and	food	will	never	taste	right,
no	matter	how	carefully	you	use	other	seasonings.

Don’t	use	olive	oil	when	cooking	Vietnamese	food,	or	smoky	bacon	fat
when	making	Indian	food.	Instead,	refer	to	this	flavour	wheel	to	guide	your
decision	making	as	you	cook	foods	from	around	the	world.	Sauté	Garlicky
Green	Beans	in	butter	to	serve	with	a	French-inspired	meal,	in	ghee	to
serve	alongside	Indian	rice	and	lentils,	or	with	a	splash	of	sesame	oil	to	serve
with	Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken.



HOW	FAT	WORKS
Which	fats	we	use	primarily	affect	flavour,	but	how	we	use	them	will
determine	texture,	which	is	just	as	important	in	good	cooking.	Varied
textures	excite	our	palates.	By	transforming	foods	from	soft	and	moist	to
crisp	and	crunchy,	we	introduce	new	textures	and	make	the	experience	of
eating	more	amusing,	surprising,	and	delicious.	Depending	on	how	we	use
fats,	we	can	achieve	any	one	of	five	distinct	textures	in	our	food:	Crisp,
Creamy,	Flaky,	Tender,	and	Light.

Crisp
Humans	love	crisp	and	crunchy	foods.	According	to	chef	Mario	Batali,	the
word	crispy	sells	more	food	than	almost	any	other	adjective.	Crisp	foods
stoke	our	appetites	by	conjuring	up	past	experiences	of	foods	with	pleasing
aromas,	tastes,	and	sounds.	Just	think	of	fried	chicken,	a	version	of	which
you’ll	encounter	in	practically	any	country	around	the	world.	Few	moments
in	a	meal	can	rival	that	first	bite	of	chicken,	fried	so	expertly	that	the	skin
shatters	the	moment	your	teeth	sink	into	it.	Steam	ripe	with	the
mouthwatering	aromas	of	that	crisp	batter;	a	loud,	attention-grabbing
crunch;	and	the	comforting	flavours	of	fried	chicken	all	emerge
simultaneously	to	deliver	that	universal	experience	of	deliciousness.

For	food	to	become	crisp,	the	water	trapped	in	its	cells	must	evaporate.
Water	evaporates	as	it	boils,	so	the	surface	temperature	of	the	ingredient



must	climb	beyond	the	boiling	point	of	100°C.
To	achieve	this	effect	on	the	entire	surface	of	the	food,	it	needs	to	be	in

direct,	even	contact	with	a	heat	source,	such	as	a	pan	at	temperatures	well
beyond	water’s	boiling	point.	But	no	food	is	perfectly	smooth,	and	at	the
microscopic	level,	most	pans	aren’t	either.	In	order	to	get	even	contact
between	the	food	and	the	pan,	we	need	a	medium:	fat.	Cooking	fats	can	be
heated	to	176°C	and	beyond	before	beginning	to	smoke,	so	they	are	ideal
mediums	for	developing	the	crisp,	golden	crusts	that	delight	our	palates	so
much.	Cooking	methods	where	fat	is	heated	to	achieve	crispness	include
searing,	sautéing,	pan-,	shallow-,	and	deep-frying.	(A	bonus:	using	enough
fat	to	create	even	surface	contact	will	prevent	food	from	sticking	to	the
pan.)

As	with	salt,	I	encourage	you	to	abandon	any	fear	of	fat,	for	knowing
how	to	use	fat	properly	may	lead	you	to	use	less	of	it.	The	best	way	to	know
how	much	fat	to	use	is	to	pay	attention	to	certain	sensory	cues.	Some
ingredients,	such	as	aubergines	and	mushrooms,	act	like	sponges,	quickly
absorbing	fat	and	then	cooking	dry	against	the	hot	metal.	Using	too	little	fat
in	a	pan,	or	letting	the	fat	be	absorbed	and	neglecting	to	add	more,	will
result	in	dark,	bitter	blisters	on	the	surface	of	the	food.	Other	ingredients,
such	as	pork	chops	or	chicken	thighs,	will	release	their	own	fat	as	they	cook;
walk	away	from	a	pan	of	sizzling	bacon	for	a	few	minutes	and	you’ll	return	to
see	the	strips	practically	submerged	in	their	own	fat.

Let	your	eyes,	ears,	and	taste	buds	guide	you	in	how	much	fat	to	use.
Recipes	can	be	a	useful	starting	point,	but	conditions	vary	from	kitchen	to
kitchen,	depending	on	the	tools	available	to	you.	Say	a	recipe	asks	you	to
cook	two	diced	onions	in	two	tablespoons	of	olive	oil.	In	a	small	pan	that
might	be	enough	to	coat	the	bottom	but	in	a	larger	pan	with	greater	surface
area	it	probably	isn’t.	Instead	of	just	following	a	recipe,	use	your	common
sense,	too.	For	example,	make	sure	that	the	bottom	of	the	pan	is	coated
with	fat	when	sautéing,	or	that	oil	comes	halfway	up	the	sides	of	the	food
when	shallow-frying.

Food	cooked	in	too	much	fat	is	no	more	appetising	than	its	inverse.	Few
things	can	retroactively	ruin	a	meal	like	a	puddle	of	grease	left	on	an
otherwise	empty	plate.	Drain	fried	foods—even	pan-	or	shallow-fried	foods
—with	a	quick	dab	on	a	clean	dish	towel	or	paper	napkin	before	serving.
And	lift	sautéed	foods	out	of	the	pan	with	a	slotted	spoon	or	tongs,	rather
than	tilting	them	out	onto	a	plate,	to	leave	the	excess	fat	behind.

While	you’re	cooking,	if	you	notice	you’ve	used	more	fat	than	you’d



intended,	you	can	tip	the	excess	out	of	the	pan,	taking	care	to	wipe	its	outer
edge	where	fat	may	have	dripped,	to	prevent	a	flare-up.	Just	do	it	carefully
so	you	don’t	burn	yourself.	If	the	pan	is	too	heavy	or	hot,	then	be	smart:	take
the	food	out	and	use	tongs	to	place	it	on	a	plate,	then	tip	some	of	the	fat
out,	replace	the	food,	and	continue	cooking.	It’s	not	worth	a	burn	or	a
grease	spill	to	avoid	washing	an	extra	dish.
Heating	Oil	Properly
Preheat	the	pan	to	reduce	the	amount	of	time	fat	spends	in	direct	contact
with	the	hot	metal,	minimising	opportunity	for	it	to	deteriorate.	As	oil	is
heated,	it	breaks	down,	leading	to	flavour	degradation	and	the	release	of
toxic	chemicals.	Food	is	also	more	likely	to	stick	to	a	cold	pan—another
reason	to	preheat.	But	exceptions	to	the	preheating	rule	exist:	butter	and
garlic.	Both	will	burn	if	the	pan	is	too	hot,	so	you	must	heat	them	gently.	In
all	other	cooking,	preheat	the	pan	and	then	add	the	fat,	letting	it	too	heat	up
before	adding	any	other	ingredients.

The	pan	should	be	hot	enough	so	that	oil	immediately	ripples	and
shimmers	when	added.	Various	metals	conduct	heat	at	different	rates,	so
there’s	no	set	amount	of	time	to	recommend;	instead,	test	the	pan	with	a
drop	of	water.	If	it	crackles	a	little	bit	before	evaporating—it	doesn’t	have	to
be	a	violent	sound—then	the	pan	is	ready.	A	general	clue	that	both	the	pan
and	fat	are	hot	enough	is	the	sound	of	a	delicate	sizzle	upon	addition	of	the
food.	If	you	add	food	too	early	and	don’t	get	that	sizzle,	just	take	the	food
out,	let	the	pan	heat	up	sufficiently,	and	put	it	back	in	to	ensure	it	doesn’t
stick	or	overcook	before	it	browns.
Rendering
Intermuscular	and	subcutaneous	fats—the	lumpy	bits	between	the	muscles
and	the	layer	of	fat	just	beneath	the	skin—can	be	cut	into	small	pieces,
placed	in	a	pan	with	a	minimal	amount	of	water,	and	rendered,	or	cooked
over	gentle	heat	until	all	the	water	has	evaporated.	This	process	transforms
solid	fat	into	a	liquid	that	can	be	used	as	a	cooking	medium.	The	next	time
you	roast	a	duck,	trim	all	of	its	excess	fat	before	cooking	and	render	it.	Strain
it	into	a	glass	jar	and	store	it	in	the	fridge.	It’ll	keep	for	up	to	six	months.	Save
it	to	make	Chicken	Confit.

While	fat	in	meat	is	a	great	boon	to	flavour,	it	can	also	prevent	meat
from	crisping.	Even	when	the	aim	is	not	to	render	fat	to	use	as	a	cooking
medium,	this	technique	is	crucial	for	transforming	texture.	Crisp	bacon	is
the	happy	result	of	properly	rendered	fat.	Fry	at	too	high	a	temperature,	and



it’ll	burn	on	the	outside	while	remaining	flabby.	The	key	is	to	cook	it	slowly
enough	to	allow	the	fat	to	render	at	the	same	rate	the	bacon	browns.

Since	animal	fats	begin	to	burn	at	around	176°C,	try	arranging	sliced
bacon	in	a	single	layer	on	a	baking	sheet,	and	then	slipping	it	into	an	oven
set	to	that	temperature.	The	heat	of	the	oven	will	be	gentler	and	more	even
than	on	the	stove,	giving	the	fat	an	opportunity	to	render.	Or,	when	cooking
bits	of	bacon	or	pancetta	on	the	stove,	start	with	a	little	water	in	the	pan	to
help	moderate	the	temperature	and	give	the	fat	a	chance	to	render	before
browning	begins.

The	skin	of	a	roast	chicken	or	turkey	will	crisp	up	on	its	own	as	long	as
the	bird	cooks	long	enough	for	the	fat	to	render.	Duck	needs	a	little	more
help,	though,	since	it	has	a	thicker	layer	of	subcutaneous	fat	to	provide	the
bird	with	energy	for	flying	and	help	keep	it	warm	in	the	winter	months.
Using	a	very	sharp	needle	or	metal	skewer,	prick	the	skin	of	the	entire	bird,
focusing	particularly	on	the	fattiest	parts—the	breast	and	the	thighs.	The
holes	will	allow	the	rendering	fat	to	escape	and	coat	the	skin	as	it	melts,
leaving	you	with	glassy,	crisp	skin.	If	roasting	a	whole	duck	is	beyond	your
comfort	zone	right	now,	start	with	duck	breasts.	Before	cooking,	score	the
skin	on	both	diagonals	with	a	sharp	paring	knife,	leaving	behind	a	pattern	of
tiny	diamonds.	The	same	rendering	will	occur	on	a	smaller	scale,	leaving	the
breasts	with	perfectly	crisped	skin.

I’m	a	stickler	for	rendering	the	fat	cap	on	pork	chops	and	rib	steaks.	I
hate	getting	a	nicely	cooked	steak	with	a	strip	of	flabby,	barely	cooked	fat
running	down	the	side.	So	either	start	or	finish	the	cooking	process	by	laying
a	chop	or	steak	on	its	side	in	the	pan	or	on	the	grill,	allowing	the	fat	to
render.	This	might	require	a	little	bit	of	balancing	trickery	on	your	part—
hold	the	meat	in	place	with	your	tongs,	or	try	to	cleverly	lean	the	meat	up
against	a	carefully	placed	wooden	spoon,	or	the	edge	of	the	pan	itself.
Whatever	you	do,	don’t	skip	this	step!	You	won’t	regret	taking	the	time	to
turn	that	strip	of	fat	into	something	golden,	crisp,	and	delicious.
Smoke	Points
The	smoke	point	of	a	fat	is	the	temperature	at	which	it	decomposes	and
transforms	into	a	visible,	noxious	gas.	Have	you	ever	added	oil	into	a	hot
pan	for	sautéing	vegetables	and	then	been	distracted	by	a	ringing	phone?	If
you’ve	returned	to	an	offensive,	smoky	scene	at	the	stove,	then	the	oil	has
surpassed	its	smoke	point.	Once,	while	I	was	trying	to	demonstrate	the
importance	of	preheating	the	pan	to	an	intern,	another	cook	approached
me	with	an	urgent	question.	By	the	time	I	addressed	him	and	turned	back	to



the	pan,	it	was	so	aggressively	hot	that	the	second	I	added	olive	oil,	it	hit	the
smoke	point,	turning	the	pan	black	and	throwing	everyone	nearby	into	a
coughing	fit.	In	an	attempt	to	save	face,	I	tried	to	imply	that	I’d	made	the
mistake	on	purpose,	and	it	had	been	a	lesson	about	smoke	points	from	the
start.	But,	blushing	hard	before	the	other	cooks,	I	couldn’t	keep	a	straight
face,	and	we	soon	all	dissolved	into	laughter.

The	higher	a	fat’s	smoke	point,	the	further	it	can	be	heated	without
ruining	the	flavour	of	the	food	cooking	in	it.	Pure,	refined	vegetable	oils	such
as	grapeseed	and	peanut	begin	to	smoke	around	200°C,	making	them	an
ideal	choice	for	high-heat	applications	such	as	deep-	or	stir-frying.	Impure
fats	don’t	do	as	well	at	extreme	heats;	the	sediment	in	unfiltered	olive	oil
and	the	milk	solids	in	butter	will	begin	to	reach	their	smoke	point,	or	burn,	at
about	176°C,	making	them	well	suited	for	applications	where	a	very	high
temperature	isn’t	needed	and	their	flavours	can	shine,	such	as	oil-poaching,
simple	vegetable	sautés,	pan-frying	fish	or	meat.	Or,	use	them	for	dishes
that	don’t	involve	any	heating,	such	as	mayonnaise	and	vinaigrettes.
Achieving	Crispness
Crispness	results	from	food’s	contact	with	hot	fat	and	water	evaporating
from	the	surface	of	food.	So	do	everything	in	your	power	to	keep	the	pan
and	the	fat	hot	when	seeking	a	golden	crust.	Preheat	the	pan,	then	preheat
the	fat.	Avoid	putting	more	than	a	single	layer	of	food	into	the	pan,	which
will	cause	the	temperature	to	drop	drastically	and	steam	to	condense	and
make	food	soggy.

Delicate	foods	especially	suffer	in	these	instances.	Cooking	in	fat	that’s
insufficiently	hot	will	cause	food	to	absorb	the	oil,	resulting,	for	example,	in
unappetisingly	beige,	greasy	fish	fillets,	cooked	through	but	not	golden.
Steaks	and	pork	chops	placed	in	cold	fat	will	take	so	long	to	sear	that	by	the
time	they	appear	to	be	perfectly	cooked,	the	meat	within	will	be	well-done,
rather	than	medium-rare.

This	doesn’t	mean	you	should	categorically	crank	the	heat.	If	the	fat	is
too	hot,	the	outer	surface	of	the	food	will	brown	and	become	crisp	before
the	centre	has	a	chance	to	cook	through.	Crisp	onion	rings	with	crunchy
slivers	of	onion	that	slip	out	on	first	bite	and	chicken	breast	with	burnt	skin
and	a	raw,	flabby	centre	both	suffer	from	having	been	cooked	at
temperatures	that	were	too	high.

The	goal	with	all	cooking	is	to	achieve	your	desired	result	on	the	outside
and	inside	of	an	ingredient	at	the	same	time.	In	this	case,	it’s	a	crisp	surface



and	a	tender	centre.	Add	foods	that	take	time	to	cook	through,	such	as
aubergine	slices	or	chicken	thighs,	to	hot	fat,	allowing	a	crust	to	form.	Then,
reduce	the	heat	to	prevent	burning	and	allow	them	to	cook	all	the	way
through.	I’ll	explain	more	about	how	to	navigate	between	different	levels	of
heat	in	Using	Heat.

Once	you	have	achieved	crispness,	do	your	best	to	retain	it:	do	not
cover	or	pile	up	crisp	foods	while	they	are	still	hot.	They	will	continue	to
release	steam.	The	lid	will	entrap	steam,	which	will	condense	and	drip	back
onto	the	food,	making	it	soggy.	Allow	hot,	crisp	foods	to	cool	off	in	a	single
layer	to	prevent	this	from	happening.	If	you	want	to	keep	crisp	foods	such
as	fried	chicken	warm,	set	them	in	a	warm	spot	in	the	kitchen,	such	as	the
back	of	the	stove,	until	ready	to	serve.	Alternatively,	cool	the	chicken	on	a
baking	rack	and	then	pop	it	into	a	hot	oven	for	a	few	minutes	to	reheat	it
before	serving.
Creamy
One	of	the	great	alchemical	wonders	of	the	kitchen,	an	emulsion	happens
when	two	liquids	that	normally	don’t	like	to	mix	together	or	dissolve	give	up
and	join	together.	In	the	kitchen,	an	emulsion	is	like	a	temporary	peace
treaty	between	fat	and	water.	The	result	is	tiny	droplets	of	one	liquid
dispersed	in	another,	resulting	in	a	creamy	mixture	that’s	neither	one	nor
the	other.	Butter,	ice	cream,	mayonnaise,	and	even	chocolate—if	it’s
creamy	and	rich,	chances	are	it’s	an	emulsion.

Consider	a	vinaigrette:	oil	and	vinegar.	Pour	the	two	liquids	together
and	the	oil,	being	less	dense,	will	float	above	the	vinegar.	But	whisk	the	two
liquids	together—breaking	them	up	into	billions	of	tiny	droplets	of	water
and	oil—and	the	vinegar	will	disperse	into	the	oil,	creating	a	homogenous
liquid	with	a	new,	thicker	consistency.	This	is	an	emulsion.



Yet	little	more	than	momentary	bewilderment	will	hold	together	this
simple	vinaigrette.	Left	alone	for	a	few	minutes,	the	oil	and	vinegar	will
begin	to	separate,	or	break.	Use	this	broken	vinaigrette	to	dress	lettuce	and
the	oil	and	vinegar	will	unevenly	coat	leaves,	tasting	too	sour	in	one	bite	and
too	oily	in	the	next.	In	comparison,	a	well-emulsified	vinaigrette	will	offer
balanced	flavour	in	each	bite.

When	an	emulsion	breaks,	the	fat	and	water	molecules	begin	to
coalesce	back	into	their	own	troops.	In	order	make	an	emulsion	more
stable,	use	an	emulsifier	to	coat	the	oil	and	allow	it	to	exist	contentedly
among	the	vinegar	droplets.	An	emulsifier	is	like	a	third	link	in	the	chain,	a
mediator	attracting	and	uniting	two	formerly	hostile	parties.	Mustard	often
plays	the	role	of	emulsifier	in	a	vinaigrette,	while	in	a	mayonnaise,	the	egg
yolk	itself	has	some	emulsifying	qualities.
Using	Emulsions
Emulsions	are	efficient	tools	for	enriching	plain	foods:	a	knob	of	butter
swirled	into	a	pan	of	pasta	at	the	last	moment,	a	spoonful	of	mayonnaise
added	into	a	dry,	crumbly	egg	salad,	a	creamy	vinaigrette	drizzled	over
otherwise	unadorned	cucumbers	and	tomatoes	for	a	simple	summer	salad.

Some	cooking	requires	you	to	make	an	emulsion.	Other	times	you	will
be	handed	an	existing	emulsion	and	your	only	job	will	be	to	keep	it	from
breaking.	Become	familiar	with	common	kitchen	emulsions	so	you	can



protect	their	delicate	bonds	of	cooperation.
Some	familiar	emulsions:

• Mayonnaise	and	hollandaise
• Vinaigrettes	(though	some	are	very	temporary)
• Butter,	cream,	and	milk
• Peanut	butter	and	tahini	(once	you	stir	in	the	oil)
• Chocolate
• The	ephemeral	crema	on	top	of	an	espresso

Achieving	Creaminess:	Mayonnaise
Mayonnaise	is	an	oil-in-water	emulsion	made	by	slowly	whisking	tiny
droplets	of	oil	into	an	egg	yolk,	which	itself	is	a	natural	emulsion	of	fat	and
water.	Fortunately,	the	yolk	offers	us	a	little	insurance,	as	it	contains	lecithin,
an	emulsifier	with	one	end	that	likes	fat	and	another	that	likes	water.	With
vigorous	whisking,	lecithin	connects	the	minuscule	amount	of	water	innate
to	a	yolk	to	the	oil	droplets	and	surrounds	tiny	air	bubbles.	The	two	distinct
ingredients	integrate	into	a	rich,	unified	sauce.



But	mayonnaise—and	this	is	true	of	all	emulsions—is	always	looking	for
an	excuse	to	break,	or	separate	into	the	hostile	groups	of	oil	and	water	once
again.

For	a	basic	mayonnaise,	measure	out—or	at	least	eyeball—the	oil
before	you	start.	Choose	your	oil	depending	on	how	you	intend	to	use	the
mayo—for	spreading	on	a	BLT	or	a	Vietnamese	bánh	mì	sandwich,	use	a
neutral	oil	such	as	grapeseed	or	canola.	For	aïoli	to	serve	alongside	Tuna
Confit	in	a	Niçoise	salad,	use	olive	oil.	Each	egg	yolk	will	comfortably	hold
about	three-quarters	of	a	cup	of	oil	in	a	stable	emulsion.	Since	homemade
mayonnaise	is	best	when	it’s	fresh,	aim	to	make	the	smallest	amount
possible	at	a	time,	though	any	leftovers	will	keep	in	the	fridge	for	a	few	days.

Oil-in-water	emulsions	always	work	better	when	their	ingredients	are
neither	too	hot	nor	too	cold.	If	you’re	starting	with	an	egg	straight	from	the
fridge,	bring	it	up	to	room	temperature	before	you	start.	If	you’re	in	a	hurry,
submerge	the	egg	in	a	bowl	of	warm	tap	water	for	a	few	minutes	to	speed
things	up.

Lightly	dampen	a	kitchen	towel	and	lay	it	into	a	small	saucepan,	then
set	the	mayonnaise-making	bowl	in	it.	The	wet	towel	will	create	enough
friction	to	keep	the	bowl	steady	and	prevent	spillage.	Place	the	yolk(s)	in
the	bowl	and	start	whisking,	adding	in	the	oil	one	drop	at	a	time	using	a	ladle
or	a	spoon.	Once	you’ve	added	half	the	total	volume	of	oil	and	created	a
relatively	stable	base,	start	to	add	the	rest	of	the	oil	in	more	swiftly.	If	the
mayonnaise	grows	so	thick	it’s	hard	to	whisk,	add	a	few	drops	of	water	or
lemon	juice	to	thin	it	out	and	prevent	it	from	breaking.	Once	you’ve	added
all	the	oil,	turn	your	attention	to	seasoning	the	mayonnaise	to	taste.

Follow	these	rules,	and	you’ll	see	that	mayonnaise	is	difficult	(but	not
impossible)	to	ruin.	During	one	of	his	cooking	lessons	with	me,	Michael
Pollan	asked	me	to	explain	the	science	at	work	in	an	emulsion.	I	didn’t	really
know,	so	I	responded,	“Magic	keeps	it	together.”	Even	now	that	I
understand	the	science,	I	still	believe	there’s	some	magic	at	work.
Retaining	Creaminess:	Butter
One	of	my	favourite	poets,	Seamus	Heaney,	once	described	butter	as
“coagulated	sunlight,”	which	might	be	the	most	elegant	and	economical
way	to	describe	its	special	al	chemy.	To	begin	with,	it’s	the	only	animal	fat
made	without	killing	an	animal.	Cows,	goats,	and	sheep	eat	grass,	a	product
of	sunlight	and	photosynthesis,	and	deliver	us	milk.	We	skim	the	richest
cream	off	the	top,	and	churn	it	until	it	transforms	into	butter.	The	process	is



so	straightforward	that	kids	can	make	butter	by	shaking	a	glass	jar	filled	with
chilled	cream.

Remember	that	butter,	unlike	oil,	isn’t	pure	fat.	It’s	fat,	water,	and	milk
solids	all	held	together	in	a	state	of	emulsion.	While	most	emulsions	are
stable	in	a	narrow	range	of	temperatures	(just	a	few	degrees),	butter	retains
its	solid	form	from	freezing	temperatures	(0°C)	until	it	melts	(32°C).
Compare	this	to	what	happens	when	you	heat	or	freeze	mayonnaise—it’ll
break	quickly!—and	the	magic	of	butter	will	become	clear.

This	explains	why	butter	sweats	when	left	on	the	kitchen	worktop	on	a
hot	day—the	water	separates	from	the	fat	as	it	melts.	At	even	warmer
temperatures—in	a	pan	over	a	hot	burner,	or	in	the	microwave—butter’s	fat
and	water	will	immediately	separate.	Melted	butter,	then,	is	a	broken
emulsion,	hardening	as	it	cools,	never	to	return	to	its	former	miraculous
state.

Take	care	of	its	emulsion	and	butter	will	lend	creaminess	to	everything
from	jambon-beurre,	the	classic	Parisian	ham	and	butter	baguette,	to
chocolate	truffles.	The	precise	temperatures	prescribed	for	butter	in
recipes	are	not	arbitrary:	butter	at	room	temperature	is	more	pliable,
allowing	air	to	be	worked	into	it	to	lighten	cakes,	or	to	combine	more	readily
with	flour,	sugar,	and	eggs	for	tender	cakes	and	cookies,	or	spread	evenly
onto	a	baguette,	to	be	topped	with	ham.	As	I’ll	explain	later,	it’s	also
important	to	keep	butter	cold	in	order	to	preserve	its	emulsion	and	prevent
it	from	interacting	with	the	proteins	in	flour	when	making	doughs	for	flaky
pastries,	including	All-Butter	Pie	Dough.

Julia	Child	once	remarked,	“With	enough	butter,	anything	is	good.”	Put
her	advice	into	practice	by	using	butter	to	make	another	emulsion:	butter
sauce.	Temperature	is	crucial	with	butter-water	emulsions.	The	key	is	to
start	with	a	warm	pan	and	cold	butter.	For	a	simple	pan	sauce,	after
removing	a	steak,	fish	fillet,	or	pork	chop	from	the	pan,	tip	out	any	excess
fat.	Place	the	pan	back	over	the	heat	and	add	just	enough	liquid—water,
stock,	or	wine—to	coat	the	bottom.	Using	a	wooden	spoon,	scrape	any
delicious	crusty	bits	into	the	sauce	and	bring	it	to	a	boil.	Then,	for	each
serving,	add	2	tablespoons	of	very	cold	butter	into	the	pan	and	swirl	over
medium-high	heat,	letting	the	butter	melt	into	the	liquid.	Don’t	let	the	pan
get	so	hot	that	the	butter	sizzles;	as	long	as	there	is	enough	water	in	the
sauce,	you’ll	be	fine.	Once	you	see	the	sauce	begin	to	thicken,	turn	off	the
flame	and	let	the	butter	finish	melting	over	residual	heat,	but	don’t	stop
swirling.	Taste	for	salt	and,	if	needed,	add	a	squeeze	of	lemon	or	splash	of



wine.	Spoon	over	the	food	and	serve	immediately.
The	same	method	works	for	making	butter-water	sauces	to	coat

noodles	or	vegetables.	Do	it	directly	in	the	pasta	pan,	as	long	as	it’s	hot
enough	and	the	butter	is	cold.	Make	sure	there’s	enough	water	in	the	pan,
and	swirl,	toss,	swirl	to	make	the	sauce	and	coat	the	pasta	all	at	once.	Add
pecorino	cheese	and	black	pepper	and	you’ve	got	Pasta	Cacio	e	Pepe,	the
classic	Roman	dish	that’s	even	more	delicious	than	macaroni	and	cheese.
Breaking	and	Fixing	Emulsions
Some	emulsions	will	naturally	break	with	time,	and	others	will	break	if	fat
and	water	are	combined	too	quickly,	but	the	most	common	way	to	ruin	one
is	to	allow	its	temperature	to	swing.	Some	emulsions	must	remain	cold,	and
others	warm.	Yet	others	must	be	at	room	temperature.	Heat	a	vinaigrette,
and	it	will	break.	Chill	a	beurre	blanc,	and	it	will	break.	Each	persnickety
emulsion	has	its	comfort	zone.

Sometimes,	you	seek	to	break	an	emulsion,	as	when	you	melt	butter	to
clarify	it.	Other	times,	it’s	a	disaster.	Heat	a	chocolate	sauce	too	quickly	and
it	will	break	into	a	greasy,	undesirable	mess	that	even	I	wouldn’t	pour	over
ice	cream	after	the	longest	day.	But,	as	important	as	it	is	to	be	careful	with
emulsions,	ruining	one	isn’t	the	end	of	the	world,	and	you	almost	always
have	some	recourse.

If	the	magic	holding	together	your	mayonnaise	expires	and	your
emulsion	breaks,	don’t	worry!	The	best	way	to	learn	how	to	fix	a	broken
mayonnaise	is	to	break	it	once	deliberately	so	you	can	figure	out	how	to
salvage	it.

Here’s	the	mind-bogglingly	simple	solution:	get	out	a	new	bowl,	but
keep	the	same	whisk.	If	you	have	only	one	bowl,	scrape	out	the	broken
mayonnaise	into	a	measuring	cup	with	a	spout	or,	failing	that,	a	coffee	cup,
and	clean	the	bowl.

Bring	the	clean	bowl	to	the	sink	and	spoon	in	half	a	teaspoon	or	so	of
the	hottest	water	you	can	coax	from	your	tap.

Using	your	oily,	eggy	whisk,	start	whisking	the	hot	water	maniacally,
until	it	starts	to	foam.	Then,	treating	the	broken	mayonnaise	as	if	it	were	oil,
add	it	drop	by	drop,	continuing	to	whisk	with	the	urgency	of	a	swimmer
escaping	a	shark.	By	the	time	you’ve	added	half	of	it	back,	it	should	start	to
resemble	a	proper	mayonnaise	again,	perfect	for	slathering	on	a	lobster	roll.
If	this	fails	you,	then	begin	the	entire	process	over	with	the	insurance	a	new
egg	yolk	provides,	and	add	the	broken	mayonnaise	back	in,	a	drop	at	a	time.



In	the	future,	if,	while	whisking	together	any	emulsion,	you	notice	things
start	to	head	south,	keep	these	tips	in	mind.	First,	as	soon	as	you	suspect
that	you	are	on	shaky	ground,	stop	adding	fat.	If	the	emulsion	isn’t
thickening	and	the	tines	of	the	whisk	aren’t	leaving	visible	tracks,	then	for
heaven’s	sake	stop	adding	oil!	Sometimes,	all	that’s	called	for	at	this	point	is
a	good	strong	whisking	to	bring	things	back	together.

You	can	also	add	a	few	chips	of	ice	along	with	the	first	whiffs	of	doubt.
If	you	don’t	have	ice	on	hand,	a	tiny	splash	of	cold	water	from	the	tap	will
suffice	to	regulate	temperature	and	keep	the	peace.






Flaky	and	Tender
Two	proteins	in	wheat—glutenin	and	gliadin—comprise	gluten.	When	you
combine	wheat	flour	and	liquid	to	make	dough	or	batter,	these	proteins	link
up	with	one	another	into	long	chains.	As	dough	is	kneaded	or	batter	is
mixed,	the	chains	develop	into	strong,	extensive	webs	or	the	gluten



network.	The	expansion	of	these	webs	is	called	gluten	development,	and
it’s	what	makes	a	dough	chewy	and	elastic.

As	gluten	develops,	dough	becomes	chewier.	This	is	why	bread	bakers
use	flours	with	relatively	high	protein	content,	and	work	hard	to	knead
doughs	for	long	periods	of	time	to	create	crusty,	chewy	country	loaves.	Salt
also	preserves	the	strength	of	the	gluten	network.	(That’s	why	the	mixer
strained	with	effort	when	I	belatedly	added	the	salt	to	my	pizza	dough	as	a
young	cook	at	Chez	Panisse.)	But	pastry	chefs	generally	seek	tender,	flaky,
and	moist	textures,	so	they	do	everything	they	can	to	limit	or	control	gluten
development,	including	using	low	protein	flours	and	avoiding	overkneading.
Sugar	and	acids	such	as	buttermilk	or	yoghurt	also	discourage	gluten	from
developing,	so	adding	them	early	on	will	tenderise	pastries.

Too	much	fat	can	also	inhibit	gluten	networks	from	forming.	By	coating
individual	gluten	strands,	fat	prevents	them	from	sticking	to	one	another
and	lengthening.	This	is	where	the	term	shortening	comes	from,	because
the	gluten	strands	remain	short	instead	of	lengthening.

Four	main	variables	will	determine	the	texture	of	any	baked	good	(and
some	nonbaked	ones,	such	as	pasta):	fat,	water,	yeast,	and	how	much	the
dough	or	batter	is	kneaded	or	worked	(see	illustration	on	opposite	page).
The	particular	way	and	degree	to	which	fat	and	flour	are	blended	together,
along	with	the	type	of	flour	and	type	and	temperature	of	the	fat,	will	also
affect	a	pastry’s	texture:

Short	doughs	are	the	epitome	of	tenderness,	crumbling	and	melting	in
your	mouth.	Here,	flour	and	fat	are	blended	together	intimately,	resulting	in
a	smooth,	homogeneous	dough.	Many	of	the	shortest	recipes,	such	as
shortbread	cookies,	call	for	very	soft	or	even	melted	butter,	in	order	to
encourage	this	now	fluid	fat	to	quickly	coat	individual	flour	particles,
preventing	gluten	webs	from	forming.	These	doughs	are	often	soft	enough
to	press	into	the	pan.

Rather	than	crumbling,	flaky	doughs	break	apart	into	flakes	when	you
take	a	bite.	Think	of	classic	American	pies	and	French	galettes,	with	crusts
sturdy	enough	to	hold	up	to	a	mile-high	pile	of	apples	or	juicy	summer
fruits,	but	delicate	enough	to	produce	thin,	uneven	flakes	when	sliced.	To
create	that	strength,	some	of	the	fat	is	worked	into	the	flour,	and	a	minimal
amount	of	gluten	is	developed.	To	achieve	the	signature	flakes	of	a	perfect
pie	or	galette	crust,	the	fat	must	be	very	cold	so	that	some	of	it	can	remain	in
distinct	pieces.	Roll	out	a	properly	made	pie	dough	and	you’ll	see	the	chunks
of	butter.	When	you	slide	the	pie	into	a	hot	oven,	the	cold	pieces	of	butter,



entrapped	air,	and	steam	from	the	water	released	by	the	butter,	all	push
apart	the	layers	of	dough	to	create	flakes.

The	flakiest	pastries	are	made	with	laminated	doughs.	Picture	the
flakes	on	your	plate	(or	shirt)	after	you’ve	eaten	a	classic	puff	pastry,	such
as	a	cheese	straw,	palmier,	or	a	strudel.	It’s	a	mess!	A	pile	of	gorgeous,	glassy
shards!	To	achieve	this	texture,	a	flaky	dough	is	wrapped	around	a	large	slab



of	butter.	This	dough-and-butter	sandwich	is	rolled	out	and	then	folded
back	upon	itself	in	a	process	called	a	turn.	Classic	puff	pastry,	when	turned
six	times,	will	have	precisely	730	layers	of	dough	separated	by	729	layers	of
butter!	Upon	entering	a	hot	oven,	each	one	of	those	distinct	layers	of	butter
will	turn	to	steam,	creating	730	layers	of	flakes.	It’s	crucial,	when	making
laminated	doughs,	that	the	fat	and	workspace	remain	cold	so	the	butter
does	not	melt,	though	the	butter	must	be	soft	enough	to	roll	into	a	slab.

Yeasted	doughs,	kneaded	to	develop	gluten,	and	then	treated	in	this
way,	can	yield	laminated	breads	that	exist	at	that	precarious	intersection	of
chewiness	and	flakiness,	including	croissants,	Danishes,	and	the	Breton
speciality	called	kouign	amann.
Achieving	Tenderness:	Shortbread	Cookies	and	Cream	Biscuits
Shortbread	cookies	should	be	tender,	with	a	fine,	sandy	crumb.	This	texture
is	the	result	of	incorporating	fat	into	flour	early	in	the	dough-making
process.	My	favourite	shortbread	recipe	calls	for	butter	so	soft	it’s
“spreadable	like	mayonnaise”	so	that	the	fat	can	readily	coat	flour	particles
and	keep	gluten	strands	from	developing.

Use	any	soft	or	liquid	fat	including	cream,	crème	fraîche,	softened
cream	cheese,	or	oil	to	coat	flour	and	achieve	tender	textures.	In	classic
recipes	for	cream	biscuits,	cold	whipping	cream	functions	as	both	the	fat
and	the	liquid	binder,	quickly	coating	the	flour	and	obviating	the	need	for
additional	water	to	develop	the	gluten	network.
Achieving	Flakiness:	Pie	Dough
Guided	by	lore	almost	as	much	as	science,	the	rules	of	making	flaky	pastry
appeal	to	my	old-wives’-tale-loving	heart.	Stories	of	pastry	chefs	landing
jobs	due	to	their	cold	hands	are	commonplace	since	it’s	so	important	to
keep	the	fat	for	flaky	pastry	dough	chilled.	While	there’s	little	evidence	to
prove	that	rumour,	there’s	plenty	to	support	pastry	chefs’	compulsion	to
keep	everything	cold:	they	work	on	cool	marble	worktops	and	freeze	their
mixer	bowls	and	metal	tools.	One	pastry	chef	with	whom	I	worked	for	years
even	insisted	on	making	her	doughs	in	a	freezing-cold	kitchen.	With	a
sweater	and	puffy	vest	layered	over	her	chef’s	coat,	she’d	get	to	work	two
hours	before	anyone	else,	then	rush	to	mix	her	doughs	before	the	rest	of	us
arrived	and	lit	the	ovens,	stove,	and	grill.	She	made	every	decision	with
temperature	in	mind,	and	it	paid	off—her	pastries	were	ethereally	flaky.



Cold-handed	or	not,	consider	temperature	when	you	seek	flakiness	to
create	layers	of	developed	gluten	interspersed	by	pockets	of	fat.	The
warmer,	and	hence	softer,	your	butter,	the	more	readily	it	will	combine	with
the	flour.	Because	fat	inhibits	gluten	development,	the	more	intimately	the
two	ingredients	combine,	the	more	tender—not	flaky—a	dough	will	be.



To	prevent	gluten	from	developing,	keep	butter	cold.	This	will	protect
the	delicate	bonds	of	its	emulsion	while	you	mix	and	roll	dough.	Butter
contains	about	15	to	20	percent	water	by	weight.	If	butter	softens	and	melts
as	it’s	worked	into	the	dough,	its	emulsion	will	break,	releasing	that	water.
Water	droplets	will	bind	with	the	flour,	developing	into	long	gluten	strands
that	will	cause	the	dough’s	delicate	layers	to	stick	together.	If	they’re	stuck
together,	they	can’t	steam	apart	and	flake	as	they	bake.	The	pastry	will
emerge	from	the	oven	chewy	and	elastic.

Vegetable	shortening	(Trex,	for	example)	is	more	forgiving	of	rising
temperatures	than	butter	and	will	remain	in	solid	form	even	in	a	warm
kitchen,	but	it	just	doesn’t	taste	as	good.	By	the	time	it	reaches	body
temperature,	butter	melts	away,	leaving	behind	its	rich,	satisfying	flavour	as
the	tongue’s	lone	souvenir.	In	contrast,	the	same	chemical	qualities	that
make	shortening	more	stable	at	warm	temperatures	keep	it	from	melting
away	at	body	temperature,	leaving	an	unpleasant,	plasticky	residue	on	the
tongue.

I	prefer	not	to	sacrifice	flavour	for	the	forgiveness	that	shortening
offers.	There	is	a	trade-off:	certain	measures	must	be	taken	to	achieve	a
buttery	pie	crust	flaky	enough	to	shatter	at	the	lightest	touch	of	a	fork.	At
home,	chill	the	diced	butter,	flour,	and	tools	in	the	freezer	before	you	start,
in	order	to	encourage	the	butter	to	remain	in	distinct	chunks	even	as	you
work	it	into	the	dough.	Work	quickly	to	reduce	the	threat	of	its	softening.
Don’t	overmix.	And	finally,	ensure	that	the	dough	spends	plenty	of	time
chilling	in	the	fridge	between	the	steps	of	mixing,	rolling,	assembling,	and
baking.	I	find	it	easiest	to	make	pastry	dough	in	advance	and	keep	it	tightly
wrapped	in	the	freezer,	where	it	can	stay	for	up	to	2	months.	That	cuts	out
the	most	time-intensive	step,	freeing	me	to	make	and	bake	my	pie	when	the
fancy	strikes.

It’s	important	to	slide	the	chilled,	assembled	pie	directly	into	a
preheated	oven.	In	a	hot	oven,	the	water	contained	in	the	butter	will	quickly
evaporate.	The	steam	will	push	apart	layers	of	dough	as	it	expands	with
heat,	yielding	the	flakes	we	so	prize.	If	the	oven’s	not	sufficiently	hot,	the
water	won’t	evaporate	and	the	crust	won’t	set	before	the	filling	seeps	in,
and	the	pie	will	emerge	from	the	oven	disappointingly	soggy.
Achieving	Flakiness	and	Tenderness:	Tart	Dough
Prone	to	bouts	of	overindulgence	at	the	farmers’	market,	I	tend	to	find
myself	with	more	produce	at	any	given	moment	than	I	know	I	can	use	up.
(You	try	saying	no	to	ripe	Santa	Rosa	plums,	perfectly	sweet-tart



nectarines,	and	juicy	boysenberries,	which	always	come	into	season	on
exactly	the	same	day!)	With	an	understanding	of	the	science	of	fat,	my
friend	Aaron	Hyman	sought	to	develop	a	tart	dough	that’s	structured	yet
delicate.	His	ideal	dough	would	stand	up	to	mounds	of	juicy	summer	stone
fruit	but	still	yield	flaky	shards	when	bitten.	He	wanted	a	crust	that	would	be
both	flaky	and	tender.	And	I	wanted	a	crust	that	I	could	bake	any	time	I	had
extra	fruit	on	hand.

First,	he	thought	about	how	to	achieve	flakiness.	He	decided	to	keep
everything	cold,	use	large	chunks	of	butter,	and	mix	the	dough	just	enough
to	form	a	small	amount	of	gluten	for	the	flaky	layers.	Then,	to	achieve
tenderness,	he	selected	liquid	fats	to	bind	the	dough—cream	and	crème
fraîche—and	to	coat	the	remaining	loose	flour	with	fat	to	prevent	further
gluten	development.

Aaron’s	method	is	foolproof.	I’ve	always	struggled	with	pastry	dough,
but	his	recipe	leads	me	to	success	every	time.	With	Aaron’s	Tart	Dough	in
the	freezer,	a	regal	dinner	is	always	within	reach.	Stockpile	several	discs	of
dough	for	the	moment	when	you	want	to	invite	friends	over	and	have	little
more	in	the	pantry	than	a	basket	of	ageing	onions,	a	Parmesan	rind,	and	a
can	of	anchovies.	Or	when	you	realise	you’ve	committed	to	bringing	dessert
to	a	party	but	doubt	you	have	the	time	to	make	anything	special.	Or	when
you	go	a	little	overboard	at	the	farmers’	market.	Tart	dough	is	the	key	to
making	something	out	of	nothing.
Tender	Cakes
For	years	I	was	disappointed	by	almost	every	single	cake	I	tasted,	whether
I’d	baked	it	myself	or	ordered	it	in	a	restaurant	or	bakery.	I	dreamed	of	a
cake	that	was	moist	yet	flavourful.	So	many	cakes	were	one	or	the	other:
store-bought	cake	mixes	yielded	the	texture	I	was	after	but	were	relatively
flavourless,	and	cakes	from	fancy	patisseries	were	rich	in	flavour	but	often
dry	or	dense.	I	figured	it	was	an	either-or	situation.	And	I	resigned	myself	to
it.

Then	I	tasted	a	chocolate	birthday	cake	so	moist	and	rich	that	I	nearly
fainted	from	delight.	For	days,	that	slice	of	cake	haunted	me,	so	I	begged	my
friend	for	the	recipe.	She	called	it	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	for	how	darkly
rich	it	was,	and	when	she	shared	the	recipe,	I	noticed	it	was	made	with	oil
and	water	rather	than	butter.	When	I	tasted	the	Fresh	Ginger	and
Molasses	Cake	at	Chez	Panisse	for	the	first	time	a	few	months	later,	I	was
stunned	by	its	perfectly	moist	texture	and	deep,	spicy	flavour.	I	begged	for
its	recipe,	too,	and	noticed	that	it	was	eerily	similar	to	my	friend’s.



There	was	something	to	these	oil	cakes.	I	flipped	through	my	mental
recipe	box	and	realised	that	many	of	my	favourite	cakes,	including	classic
carrot	cake	and	olive	oil	cake,	are	made	with	oil	instead	of	butter.	Even	cake
mixes,	which	produce	the	ideal	texture	I’d	been	trying	to	emulate,	direct
you	to	add	oil.	What	is	it	about	oil	that	yields	such	moist	cakes?

Science	holds	the	answer.	Oil	efficiently	coats	flour	proteins	and
prevents	strong	gluten	networks	from	forming,	much	like	soft	butter	does	in
shortbread.	Gluten	development	requires	water,	so	this	oil	barrier
significantly	inhibits	gluten	formation,	leading	to	a	tender,	rather	than
chewy,	texture.	As	an	added	bonus,	less	gluten	means	more	water	in	the
batter,	and,	ultimately,	a	moister	cake.

Once	I	discovered	the	secrets	of	oil	cake,	I	could	anticipate	the	qualities
of	a	particular	cake	without	even	trying	the	recipe.	If	oil	was	listed	among	the
ingredients,	I	knew	the	recipe	would	yield	the	signature	moist	texture	I
loved	so	much.	But	there	were	times	I	craved	a	buttery	cake,	too.	Rich
flavour,	rather	than	a	moist	texture,	took	priority	in	cakes	I	wanted	to	enjoy
in	the	afternoon	with	a	cup	of	tea,	or	serve	to	friends	at	brunch.
Emboldened	by	my	discoveries	about	texture,	I	began	to	wonder	if	I	could
make	a	better	butter	cake.	The	answer	lay	not	in	treating	butter	like	oil	and
melting	it,	but	rather	in	capitalising	on	butter’s	incredible	capacity	for
lightness.



LIGHT
Lightness	might	not	be	the	first	quality	you	associate	with	fat,	but	its
remarkable	capacity	to	entrap	air	when	whipped	allows	it	to	act	as	a
leavening,	or	raising,	agent	in	cakes	and	transform	liquid	cream	into	billowy
clouds.

Some	classic	cakes	have	no	chemical	leavening—that	is,	bicarbonate	of
soda	or	baking	powder—and	rely	entirely	on	whipped	fat	for	their	cloudlike
structure.	In	pound	cake,	whipped	butter	and	eggs	do	all	the	work	of
leavening.	In	génoise,	a	type	of	sponge	cake,	whipped	eggs,	whose	fatty	yolks
entrap	the	air	and	protein-rich	whites	surround	air	pockets,	allow	the	cake
to	rise.	This	is	the	only	leavener.	There	is	no	baking	powder,	no	bicarbonate
of	soda,	no	yeast,	and	not	even	any	creamed	butter	to	help	this	cake	rise!	It
is	miraculous.
Achieving	Lightness:	Butter	Cakes	and	Whipped	Cream
When	seeking	rich	flavour	and	a	fine,	velvety	crumb,	make	a	butter	cake	(or
chocolate	chip	cookies)	but	take	care	to	aerate	this	fat	by	creaming,	or
whipping,	butter	with	sugar	to	trap	air	bubbles	for	leavening.	Typically,	cool
room-temperature	butter	is	beaten	together	with	sugar	for	4	to	7	minutes
until	the	mixture	is	light	and	fluffy.	When	done	correctly,	the	butter	will	act
as	a	net,	entrapping	millions	of	tiny	air	bubbles	throughout	the	mixture.

The	key	is	to	work	air	in	slowly,	so	that	many	consistently	tiny	bubbles
form	and	you	don’t	create	too	much	heat	through	friction.	It	might	be
tempting	to	crank	up	the	mixer	so	you	can	get	the	cake	into	the	oven
sooner,	but	trust	me—that’ll	take	you	nowhere	good,	fast.	I	speak	from
experience.	The	road	to	this	chapter	is	lined	with	dense,	fallen	cakes.

As	you	mix,	monitor	the	butter’s	temperature;	remember,	butter	is	an
emulsion	and	if	it	gets	too	warm,	it	will	melt	and	the	emulsion	will	break	or	it
simply	won’t	be	rigid	enough	to	continue	trapping	air.	You’ll	lose	all	the	air
you	worked	so	hard	to	entrap.	If	butter	is	too	cold,	air	won’t	be	able	to	get	in
—not	evenly	at	least—and	the	cake	won’t	rise	straight	up.

And	if	fat	isn’t	properly	aerated,	chemical	leavening	won’t	make	up	for
it.	Bicarbonate	of	soda	and	baking	powder	don’t	introduce	any	new	air
bubbles	into	a	batter.	They	simply	help	expand,	via	the	release	of	carbon
dioxide	gas,	air	bubbles	already	in	place.

Incorporating	ingredients	delicately	is	important	for	the	same	reason—
if	you	go	to	great	lengths	to	whip	air	into	your	fat,	then	carelessly	combine



the	cake’s	dry	and	wet	ingredients,	all	at	once,	you’ll	lose	all	of	the	air	you
whipped	up.	This	is	where	folding,	the	technique	of	gently	combining
aerated	ingredients	into	nonaerated	ingredients,	becomes	important.	Try	to
fold	using	light	movements	with	a	rubber	spatula	in	one	hand,	while
spinning	the	bowl	with	the	other	hand.

Though	the	chemistry	behind	whipped	cream	is	slightly	different	than
that	of	whipped	butter—it	must	be	very	cold,	to	begin	with—the	concept	at
work	here	is	the	same:	fat	surrounds	air	bubbles.	As	cream	is	whipped,	solid
fat	droplets	in	the	liquid	break	open	and	join	together	(remember	that
cream	is	a	natural	emulsion).	Overwhip	cream	and	the	fat	droplets	will
warm	up	and	continue	to	stick	to	one	another,	making	the	cream
unappetisingly	chunky.	Whip	it	further,	and	cream’s	emulsion	will	break,
yielding	a	watery	liquid—buttermilk—and	solid	fat—butter.



USING	FAT
Only	on	the	most	special	occasions	do	Persian	meals	end	with	dessert,	so
we	never	did	much	baking	at	our	house.	Plus,	Maman,	a	health	fiend,	denied
us	excess	sugar	at	every	turn	(though	that	did	little	more	than	encourage
my	brothers	and	me	to	develop	fervent	sweet	tooths).	If	we	wanted	cookies
or	cake,	then,	we	had	to	make	them	ourselves,	and	Maman	did	her	best	to
ensure	it’d	be	an	uphill	battle	the	whole	way.	She	didn’t	equip	the	kitchen
with	either	a	stand	mixer	or	a	microwave	for	softening	butter,	and	she
stored	all	the	extra	butter	in	the	freezer.

When	it	hit,	the	craving	for	cookies	or	cake	was	always	urgent.	I	was
never	patient	enough	to	wait	for	frozen	butter	to	come	up	to	room
temperature,	as	every	single	recipe	commanded.	And	even	if	I	did	somehow
summon	the	discipline	required	to	wait	for	butter	to	soften,	without	an
electric	mixer	to	help	cream	it,	my	cookie	dough	was	always	a	mess—
somehow	completely	overworked	and	undermixed	at	the	same	time,	with
huge	pieces	of	unincorporated	butter.	As	a	typical	teenage	know-it-all,	I
knew	I	was	way	more	clever	than	any	recipe	writer.	So	I	figured	I	could	just
melt	the	butter	for	my	baking	on	the	stove	and	forgo	the	softening	and
creaming	processes	completely.	Melted	butter	was	a	heck	of	a	lot	easier	to
stir	into	cookie	dough	with	a	wooden	spoon,	after	all,	and	it	sure	made	cake
batter	nice	and	pourable.

What	I	didn’t	know	then	was	that	by	melting	the	butter,	I	was
destroying	any	chance	I	had	at	working	air	into	it.	My	cookies	and	cakes
always	emerged	from	the	oven	disappointingly	flat	and	dense.	At	an	age
when	my	primary	goal	in	baking	was	to	eat	something—anything!—sweet,
this	was	a	minor	problem:	my	brothers	and	I	hungrily	gobbled	up	whatever
came	out	of	the	oven.	As	an	adult	with	a	slightly	more	discerning	palate,	I’m
going	for	more	than	just	a	hit	of	sugar.	I	want	my	desserts—and,	frankly,
everything	I	cook—to	be	uniformly	delicious,	with	the	ideal	texture	and
flavour.	You	probably	do,	too.	All	it	takes	is	a	little	forethought.
Layering	Fats
Since	fats	have	such	a	powerful	impact	on	flavour,	most	dishes	will	benefit
from	the	use	of	more	than	one	kind.	This	is	what	I	call	layering	fats.	In
addition	to	considering	the	cultural	appropriateness	of	a	particular	fat,	think
about	whether	it	will	harmonise	with	the	other	ingredients	in	a	dish.	For
example,	if	you’re	planning	to	finish	a	fish	dish	with	butter	sauce,	use
clarified	butter	to	cook	the	fish	so	that	the	two	fats	will	complement	each



other.	Pair	blood	oranges	with	creamy	avocado	in	a	salad,	then	drizzle
everything	with	agrumato	olive	oil	to	amplify	the	citrus	flavour.	For	perfectly
crisp	waffles,	melt	butter	to	add	to	the	batter,	but	brush	the	hot	iron	with	fat
that’s	rendered	out	of	the	breakfast	bacon.

Sometimes	you’ll	need	to	use	multiple	fats	to	achieve	different	textures
within	a	single	dish.	Deep-fry	crisp	pieces	of	fish	in	grapeseed	oil,	and	then
use	olive	oil	to	make	a	creamy	Aïoli	to	serve	alongside	it.	Use	oil	to	make	a
supremely	moist	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	then	slather	it	in	buttercream
frosting	or	softly	whipped	cream.
Balancing	Fat
As	with	salt,	the	best	way	to	correct	overly	fatty	food	is	to	rebalance	the
dish,	so	the	solutions	are	similar	to	when	you	oversalt:	add	more	food	to
increase	total	volume,	add	more	acid,	water	it	down,	or	add	starchy	or	dense
ingredients.	If	possible,	chill	the	dish,	let	the	fat	come	to	the	surface	and
solidify,	then	skim	it	off.	Alternatively,	lift	food	out	of	a	very	greasy	pan	and
dab	it	on	a	clean	towel,	leaving	the	fat	behind.

Foods	that	are	too	dry,	or	need	just	a	bump	of	richness,	can	always	be
corrected	with	a	little	olive	oil	(or	other	appropriate	oil),	or	another	creamy
ingredient	such	as	sour	cream,	crème	fraîche,	egg	yolk,	or	goat’s	cheese	to
improve	the	texture	and	get	the	flavour	right.	Use	vinaigrette,	mayonnaise,	a
soft,	spreadable	cheese,	or	creamy	avocado	to	balance	out	dryness	in	a
sandwich	piled	high	with	lean	ingredients	or	built	atop	thick,	crusty	bread.
Improvising	with	Salt	and	Fat
Follow	the	tenets	I	outline	in	How	Fat	Works	to	achieve	whichever	texture
you’re	after,	then	refer	to	The	World	of	Fat	(here)	to	guide	you	in	evoking
the	flavours	of	wildly	different	places.	Choose	to	pan-fry	Finger-Lickin’
Pan-Fried	Chicken,	for	instance,	in	clarified	butter	for	a	classic	French
flavour.	If	you’re	craving	an	Indian-inspired	meal	and	want	to	dig	into	that
jar	of	mango	chutney	in	the	refrigerator	door,	change	the	cooking	fat	to
ghee.	If	it’s	a	Japanese	chicken	cutlet	you’re	craving,	use	a	neutral	oil
studded	with	a	few	drops	of	toasted	sesame	oil.	In	all	of	these	cases,	the	fat
must	be	sufficiently	hot	to	swiftly	lead	to	browning	and	deliver	a	crisp
exterior.

Before	you	bake	a	birthday	cake	for	your	sweetie	pie,	do	a	little
reconnaissance.	Is	it	the	moist,	tender	crumb	of	an	oil	cake	she	prefers,	or
the	dense,	velvety	one	of	a	butter	cake?	Since	even	I	won’t	recommend
improvising	when	you	bake,	let	this	information	guide	you	to	a	recipe	using



the	right	fat	to	make	your	honey	happy.
With	what	you	know	about	fat	and	what	you	know	about	salt,	you’ll	find

that	you’re	closer	to	riffing	than	you	might	think.	Fat	has	a	remarkable
capacity	to	affect	texture,	while	salt	and	fat	can	both	enhance	flavour.
Practise	using	salt	and	fat	to	improve	flavour	and	texture	every	single	time
you	cook.	If	you	intend	to	finish	a	salad	with	a	shower	of	creamy	ricotta
salata,	hold	back	on	some	of	the	salt	until	after	you	taste	a	bite	of	it	with	its
salty	garnish.	Similarly,	when	you’re	dicing	pancetta	to	add	richness	to	Pasta
all’Amatriciana,	wait	to	season	the	sauce	until	after	it’s	absorbed	all	the	salt
from	the	pork.	And	if	a	recipe	for	pizza	dough	instructs	you	to	add	salt	after
kneading	in	olive	oil,	think	twice	about	following	it	word	for	word.	Start	to
use	what	you	know	to	be	true	to	guide	you	through	the	vast	forests	of	myth
and	misinformation	that	poorly	written	recipes	comprise.

Improvising	begins	with	notes,	and	now	you	have	two	with	which	to
compose	a	Salt-Fat	melody.	Master	a	third	note,	and	you’ll	experience	the
transcendent	harmony	of	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid.






In	contrast	to	the	revelations	I	experienced	with	Salt	and	Fat,	I’ve	learnedthe	value	of	Acid	gradually.	It	started	at	home,	with	the	food	my	mom,
grandmothers,	and	aunts	cooked	each	night.

Maman,	who’d	grown	up	eating	lemons	and	limes	as	an	afternoon
snack,	never	thought	a	dish	tasted	right	unless	it	made	her	pucker.	She
always	added	a	sour	element	to	the	plate,	to	balance	the	sweet,	the	salty,
the	starchy,	the	rich.	Sometimes	it	was	a	sprinkle	of	dried	sumac	berries
over	kebabs	and	rice.	With	Kuku	Sabzi,	a	frittata	packed	with	herbs	and
greens,	it	was	a	few	spoonfuls	of	my	grandmother	Parivash’s	torshi,	or	mixed
pickles.	For	No-Ruz,	the	Persian	New	Year,	my	dad	would	drive	down	to
Mexico	to	find	sour	oranges	for	us	to	squeeze	ceremoniously	over	fried	fish
and	herbed	rice.	Into	other	classic	dishes,	Maman	layered	ghooreh,	sour
green	grapes,	and	zereshk,	the	tiny	tart	fruits	known	as	barberries.	But	mostly
we	used	yoghurt	to	achieve	that	desired	tang,	spooning	it	over	everything
from	eggs	to	soups	to	stews	and	rice	and,	though	I	wince	to	think	of	it	now,
spaghetti	with	meat	sauce.

I	wasn’t	like	the	other	kids	at	school.	Looking	at	my	classmates’	peanut
butter	sandwiches	next	to	the	kuku	sabzi,	cucumbers,	and	feta	Maman
packed	in	my	lunch	box,	it	was	clear	that	my	home	life	was	dramatically
different	from	theirs.	I	grew	up	in	a	house	filled	with	the	language,	customs,
and	food	of	another	place	and	time.	Each	year,	I	eagerly	anticipated	my
grandmother	Parvin’s	visits	from	Iran.	I	loved	nothing	more	than	watching
her	unpack	while	the	room	flooded	with	exotic	aromas:	saffron,	cardamom,
and	rosewater	mingled	with	the	humid,	slightly	mouldy	Caspian	air	that	had
tucked	itself	into	the	fabric	lining	of	her	bags	over	the	years.	One	by	one,
she’d	pull	out	treats:	pistachios	roasted	with	saffron	and	lime	juice,	sour
cherry	preserves,	sheets	of	homemade	lavashak,	plum	leather	so	sour	it
made	my	cheeks	hurt.	Growing	up,	I	learned	from	my	family	to	delight	in
sour	foods	and	let	my	palate	become	the	most	Persian	part	of	me.	But	it
wasn’t	until	I	left	home	that	I	realised	that	there’s	so	much	more	to	acid
than	just	the	pucker.

As	part	of	my	parents’	ongoing	efforts	to	delay	our	assimilation	for	as	long
as	possible,	we	never	celebrated	Thanksgiving.	I	first	celebrated	the	holiday
in	college,	with	a	friend	and	her	family.	I	loved	the	hubbub	involved	in
preparing	and	gathering	for	the	meal,	but	the	actual	eating	part	of
Thanksgiving	was	kind	of	a	letdown.	We	sat	down	to	a	table	piled	high	with
food:	a	humongous	whole	turkey,	roasted	and	ceremoniously	carved;	brown



gravy	made	with	the	drippings;	mashed	potatoes	thick	with	butter	and
cream;	creamed	spinach	spiced	with	nutmeg;	Brussels	sprouts	boiled	so
long	that	my	friend’s	nearly	toothless	grandmother	could	easily	chew	them;
and	stuffing	packed	with	sausage,	bacon,	and	chestnuts.	I	really	love	to	eat,
but	these	soft,	rich,	bland	foods	bored	my	palate	after	just	a	few	bites.
Spooning	more	cranberry	sauce	onto	my	plate	each	time	the	bowl	passed
my	way,	I	kept	eating	in	hope	of	tasting	something	satisfying.	But	it	never
happened,	and	every	year	on	the	fourth	Thursday	of	November	I	ate	until	I
felt	mildly	ill,	like	everyone	else.

Once	I	started	cooking	at	Chez	Panisse,	I	began	to	spend	the	holiday
with	friends	from	the	restaurant.	At	my	first	Thanksgiving	with	other	cooks,
my	palate	never	became	bored.	I	never	felt	like	eating	was	a	chore.	I	never
felt	sick	afterwards.	This	certainly	wasn’t	because	the	foods	we’d	cooked
were	somehow	healthier	or	more	virtuous.	So	what	was	it?

It	hit	me	that	the	Thanksgiving	dinners	I’d	spent	with	other	cooks
mirrored	the	traditional	Persian	meals	I’d	grown	up	eating.	Acid	had	been
tucked	into	every	dish,	and	it	had	brought	the	meal	to	life.	Sour	cream	lent	a
tang	to	mashed	potatoes.	A	splash	of	white	wine	added	just	before	serving
lightened	the	gravy.	Hidden	in	the	big,	beautiful	mass	of	stuffing	among	torn
sourdough	croutons,	greens,	and	bites	of	sausage	were	prunes	soaked	in
white	wine—secret	caches	of	acid,	most	welcome.	Roasted	winter	squash
and	Brussels	sprouts	were	tossed	in	an	Italian	Agrodolce,	a	sauce	made	with
sugar,	chillies,	and	vinegar.	The	salsa	verde	featured	fried	sage,	a	welcome
partner	to	the	cranberry-quince	sauce	that	I’d	made	with	a	nod	to	the
Persian	quince	preserves	Maman	jarred	every	autumn.	Even	dessert,	with	a
drizzle	of	dark	caramel	for	the	pies	and	a	touch	of	crème	fraîche	folded	into
the	whipped	cream,	had	a	tang.	It	dawned	on	me	that	the	reason	why
everyone	spoons	so	much	cranberry	sauce	over	everything	at	Thanksgiving
is	that	on	most	tables,	it’s	just	about	the	only	form	of	acid	available.

I	began	to	see	that	the	true	value	of	acid	is	not	its	pucker,	but	rather,
balance.

Acid	grants	the	palate	relief,	and	makes	food	more	appealing	by	offering
contrast.

Soon	after,	I	learned	another	of	acid’s	secrets.	Late	one	morning	at
Chez	Panisse,	I	was	rushing	to	finish	a	batch	of	carrot	soup	in	time	for	lunch.
Like	most	of	the	soups	we	served	in	the	café,	it	was	pretty	simple.	I	sweated
onions	in	olive	oil	and	butter.	I	peeled	and	sliced	the	carrots	and	added
them	to	the	pot	once	the	onions	were	soft.	I	submerged	the	vegetables	in



stock,	seasoned	with	salt,	and	simmered	the	soup	until	everything	was
tender.	Then	I	blended	the	contents	of	the	pot	into	a	velvety	purée	and
adjusted	the	salt.	It	tasted	perfect.	I	brought	a	spoonful	to	Russ,	the
eternally	boyish	chef,	as	he	rushed	upstairs	for	the	menu	meeting	with	the
servers.	He	tasted	it,	and	without	pausing	to	turn	around,	said,	“Add	a
capful	of	vinegar	to	the	pot	before	you	bring	it	up!”

Vinegar?	Who’d	ever	heard	of	putting	vinegar	in	soup?	Was	Russ	crazy?
Did	I	hear	him	right?	I	didn’t	want	to	ruin	the	entire	pot,	so	I	took	a	spoonful
of	my	beautiful	soup	and	added	a	single	drop	of	red	wine	vinegar.	Tasting	it,
I	was	floored.	I’d	expected	the	vinegar	to	turn	the	soup	into	a	sweet-and-
sour	abomination.	Instead,	the	vinegar	acted	like	a	prism,	revealing	the
soup’s	nuanced	flavours—I	could	taste	the	butter	and	oil,	the	onions	and
stock,	even	the	sugar	and	minerals	within	the	carrots.	If	blindfolded	and
quizzed,	never	in	a	million	years	would	I	have	been	able	to	identify	vinegar
as	one	of	the	ingredients.	But	now,	if	something	I	cooked	and	seasoned	ever
tasted	so	dull	again,	I’d	know	exactly	what	was	missing.

Just	as	I’d	learned	to	constantly	evaluate	a	dish	for	salt,	now	I	knew	I
needed	to	always	taste	for	acid,	too.	It	was	finally	clear	to	me—acid	is	salt’s
alter	ego.	While	salt	enhances	flavours,	acid	balances	them.	By	acting	as	a	foil
to	salt,	fat,	sugar,	and	starch,	acid	makes	itself	indispensable	to	everything
we	cook.






WHAT	IS	ACID?
Technically,	any	substance	that	registers	below	7	on	the	pH	scale	is	an	acid.
I	don’t	have	a	working	pH	metre	in	my	kitchen—I	broke	mine	while	testing
everything	in	my	kitchen	for	the	chart	here—and	I’m	guessing	you	don’t,
either.	No	matter.	We’ve	all	got	a	much	handier	acid	sensor—a	tongue.
Anything	that	tastes	sour	is	a	source	of	acid.	In	cooking,	acid	usually	comes
in	the	form	of	lemon	juice,	vinegar,	or	wine.	But,	like	fat,	acid	has	myriad
sources.	Anything	fermented,	from	cheese	and	sourdough	bread	to	coffee
and	chocolate,	will	lend	a	pleasant	tang	to	your	food,	as	will	most	fruits,
including	that	vegetable-posing	chameleon,	the	tomato.



ACID	AND	FLAVOUR
Acid’s	Effect	on	Flavour
The	term	mouthwatering	has	long	been	a	synonym	for	delicious.	Foods	that
are	the	most	enjoyable	to	eat	cause	our	mouths	to	water—that	is,	to
produce	saliva.	Of	the	five	basic	tastes,	acid	makes	our	mouths	water	the
most.	When	we	eat	anything	sour,	our	mouths	flood	with	saliva	to	balance
out	the	acidity,	as	it’s	dangerous	for	our	teeth.	The	more	acidic	the	food,	the
more	saliva	rushes	in.	Acid,	then,	is	an	integral	part	of	many	of	our	most
pleasurable	eating	experiences.

Yet	on	its	own,	acid	isn’t	particularly	gratifying.	It’s	the	way	acid
contrasts	with	other	tastes	that	heightens	our	pleasure	in	foods.	Like	salt,
acid	heightens	other	flavours.	But	it	works	a	bit	differently:	while	the	salt
threshold	is	absolute,	acid	balance	is	relative.

Think	of	seasoning	a	simple	pot	of	broth	with	salt.	When	the	salt
concentration	passes	a	certain	point,	the	broth	will	become	inedible.	The
only	way	to	salvage	the	broth	is	to	add	more	unseasoned	liquid	to	reduce
the	salt	concentration,	increasing	the	total	volume	considerably.

Acid	balance	is	different.	Think	of	making	lemonade.	Measure	out	the
lemon	juice,	water,	and	sugar,	but	mix	together	only	the	lemon	juice	and
water.	Take	a	sip,	and	it	will	taste	unpalatably	sour.	Then	add	the	sugar,	and
taste	again.	It’ll	be	delicious.	Yet	the	lemonade	is	no	less	acidic:	the	pH,	or
measure	of	acidity,	remains	constant	after	the	sugar	is	added.	The	acidity	is
simply	balanced	by	sweetness.	And	sugar	isn’t	acid’s	only	counterpoint:	salt,
fat,	bitterness,	and	starch	also	invariably	benefit	from	the	welcome	contrast
of	acid.
The	Flavour	of	Acid
Pure	acid	tastes	sour—nothing	less,	nothing	more.	Sourness	isn’t
necessarily	pleasant	or	unpleasant.	Taste	a	drop	of	distilled	white	vinegar—
the	stuff	we	all	keep	around	for	household	tasks	like	unclogging	drains	and
cleaning	the	stove.	You’ll	see	it’s	more	or	less	flavourless.	It	just	tastes	sour.

Many	of	the	delicious	flavours	we	associate	with	acidic	ingredients—for
example,	the	distinctive,	fruity	tang	of	a	wine	or	the	funkiness	of	a	cheese—
result	from	how	these	ingredients	are	produced.	Everything	from	the	type	of
wine	used	to	make	a	vinegar	or	the	kind	of	milk	or	bacteria	used	to	make	a
cheese	will	affect	the	flavours	of	these	acidic	ingredients.	Even	the	same
cheese,	aged	for	different	lengths	of	time,	will	taste	more	acidic	and



complex	in	flavour,	which	is	why	we	call	a	young	cheddar	mild	and	an	aged
one	sharp.

Acids	from	different	sources	vary	not	only	in	flavour	but	also	in
concentration.	All	vinegars	are	not	equally	acidic.	Nor	is	the	acidity	of	citrus
juice	consistent.	In	John	McPhee’s	1966	book	Oranges,	the	literary	journalist
illustrates	how	natural	elements	affect	flavour.	First,	he	explains	how	the
acidity	of	oranges	diminishes	with	an	orchard’s	increasing	proximity	to	the
equator.	One	particular	Brazilian	variety	is	practically	acid-free!	He	goes	on
to	describe	in	characteristic	detail	how	not	only	the	location	of	a	tree,	but
the	location	of	an	orange	on	a	tree,	will	affect	flavour.

Ground	fruit—the	orange	that	one	can	reach	and	pick	from	the
ground—is	not	as	sweet	as	fruit	that	grows	high	on	the	tree.	Outside
fruit	is	sweeter	than	inside	fruit.	Oranges	grown	on	the	south	side	of
a	tree	are	sweeter	than	oranges	grown	on	the	east	or	west	sides,	and
oranges	grown	on	the	north	side	are	the	least	sweet	of	the	lot	.	.	.
Beyond	this,	there	are	differentiations	of	quality	inside	a	single
orange.	Individual	segments	vary	from	one	another	in	their	content
of	acid	and	sugar.	.	.	.	When	[orange	pickers]	eat	an	orange	.	.	.	they
eat	the	[sweeter]	blossom	half	and	throw	the	rest	of	the	orange
away.

These	kinds	of	natural	variations	mean	you	can’t	know	whether	your
orange	is	as	acidic,	ripe,	or	sweet	as	the	one	the	recipe	tester	used	in	some
distant	kitchen.	I	once	spent	an	entire	summer	making	and	canning	sauce
with	Early	Girl	tomatoes	from	a	friend’s	farm.	Every	single	batch	I	made	was
different	from	the	last—some	tomatoes	were	watery,	others	were	more
flavourful.	Some	were	sweet,	others	were	more	acidic.	Any	recipe	I	might
have	written	for	the	sauce	the	first	week	of	the	summer	would	have	been
completely	inaccurate	by	the	last	week.	And	these	were	all	the	same	variety
of	tomatoes	from	the	same	farm!	This	is	another	reason	why	you	can’t
always	rely	solely	on	recipes	in	the	kitchen.	Instead,	taste	as	you	go,	develop
a	sense	for	acid	balance,	and	trust	your	instincts.
Acids	of	the	World
Many	iconic	dishes	are	defined	by	their	particular	acids:	a	peanut	butter
sandwich,	for	example,	suffers	without	the	tang	jelly	provides.	No	proper
Brit	would	consider	eating	a	plate	of	fish	and	chips	without	malt	vinegar.
Imagine	carnitas	tacos	without	a	spoonful	of	salsa.	Or	xiao	long	bao,	the
classic	soup	dumplings	of	Shanghai,	served	with	anything	other	than
Chinese	black	vinegar.	Just	as	with	cooking	fats,	acid	can	change	the



direction	of	a	dish,	so	let	geography	and	tradition	guide	your	choice	of
which	one	to	use.
Vinegars
In	general,	a	region’s	vinegar	reflects	its	agriculture.	Italy,	France,	Germany,
and	Spain—	countries	known	for	wine	production—make	good	use	of	wine
vinegars	in	their	cooking.	Choose	sherry	vinegar	for	Romesco,	the
Catalonian	sauce	made	with	peppers	and	toasted	nuts,	champagne	vinegar
for	mignonette	sauce	to	serve	with	oysters,	and	red	wine	vinegar	to	dress
radicchio	and	to	make	blaukraut,	the	classic	German	braised	red	cabbage.
On	the	other	hand,	rice	vinegar	is	a	staple	in	many	Asian	countries—from
Thailand	and	Vietnam	cooks	in	the	American	South.	Southerners	also	have
an	affinity	for	cane	vinegar,	which	is	also	the	acid	of	choice	in	the
Philippines,	where	sugarcane	is	a	major	crop.

Citrus
When	it	comes	to	citrus,	lemon	trees	are	well	suited	to	the	coastal	climates
in	Mediterranean	countries,	so	choose	lemon	to	squeeze	into	tabbouleh	and
hummus,	and	over	grilled	octopus,	Niçoise	salad,	or	Sicilian	fennel	and
orange	salad.	Lime	trees,	on	the	other	hand,	grow	more	readily	in	tropical
climates,	so	limes	are	the	preferred	citrus	everywhere	from	Mexico	and
Cuba	to	India,	Vietnam,	and	Thailand.	Use	limes	in	guacamole,	pho	ga,
green	papaya	salad,	and	kachumbar,	the	Indian	answer	to	pico	de	gallo.	One
form	of	citrus	you	should	never	use,	though,	is	bottled	citrus	juice.	Made
from	concentrate	and	doctored	with	preservatives	and	citrus	oils,	it	tastes
bitter	and	doesn’t	offer	any	of	the	clean,	bright	flavour	of	fresh-squeezed
juice.
Pickles



From	Indian	achar	to	Iranian	torshi,	from	Korean	kimchee	to	Japanese
tsukemono,	from	German	sauerkraut	to	chow-chow	in	the	American	South,
every	culture	has	its	pickles.	A	few	slices	of	steak	can	easily	become	a	bowl
of	Korean	bibimbap	if	piled	high	with	kimchee,	or	they	can	become	a	taco
with	a	few	pickled	carrots	and	jalapeños	depending	on	what’s	in	the	fridge.
Dairy
Let	cultured	dairy	products	be	the	secret	weapon	in	your	quest	for	acid
balance.	Change	a	salad	by	topping	it	with	cheese,	be	it	Greek	feta,	Italian
gorgonzola,	or	Spanish	Manchego.	Spoon	sour	cream	over	latkes,	Mexican
crema	over	tacos,	crème	fraîche	onto	a	French	berry	tart,	and	yoghurt	over
the	little	lamb	kebabs	most	of	Eastern	Asia	calls	Kufte.

Look	at	a	lamb	shoulder	and	know	you	can	take	it	to	Morocco	by
braising	it	with	preserved	lemons,	to	the	south	of	France	with	some	white
wine	and	green	olives,	or	to	Greece	with	red	wine	and	tomatoes.	The	same
cabbage	slaw	can	evoke	the	American	South	when	made	with	mustard	and
cider	vinegar,	Mexico	when	made	with	lime	juice	and	coriander,	or	the
Chinese	kitchen	when	spiked	with	rice	wine	vinegar,	spring	onions,	and
toasted	peanuts.	Learn	to	not	only	consider,	but	also	take	advantage	of,	the
flavour	of	an	acid	to	guide	the	direction	a	dish	takes.






HOW	ACID	WORKS
Though	acid	primarily	affects	flavour,	it	also	can	trigger	chemical	reactions
that	change	the	colour	and	texture	of	food.	Learn	to	anticipate	these	effects
so	you	can	make	better	decisions	about	how,	and	when,	to	add	acid.
Acid	and	Colour
Acid	dulls	vibrant	greens,	so	wait	until	the	last	possible	moment	to	dress
salads,	mix	vinegar	into	herb	salsas,	and	squeeze	lemon	over	cooked	green
vegetables	such	as	spinach.

On	the	other	hand,	acid	keeps	reds	and	purples	vivid.	Cabbage,	red
chard	stems,	or	beetroots	will	best	retain	their	colour	when	cooked	with
anything	slightly	acidic,	such	as	apples,	lemon,	or	vinegar.

Raw	fruits	and	vegetables	that	are	susceptible	to	oxidation,	the
enzymatic	browning	that	results	from	exposure	to	oxygen—sliced	apples,
artichokes,	bananas,	and	avocados—will	retain	their	natural	colour	if	coated
with	a	little	acid	or	kept	in	water	mixed	with	a	few	drops	of	lemon	juice	or
vinegar	until	they	are	ready	to	cook	or	eat.



Acid	and	Texture
Acid	keeps	vegetables	and	legumes	tougher,	longer.	Anything	containing
cellulose	or	pectin,	including	legumes,	fruits,	and	vegetables,	will	cook	much
more	slowly	in	the	presence	of	acid.	While	ten	to	fifteen	minutes	of
simmering	in	water	is	enough	to	soften	carrots	into	baby	food,	they’ll	still	be
somewhat	firm	after	an	hour	of	stewing	in	red	wine.	The	acid	in	tomatoes
explains	why	those	pesky	onions	float	to	the	top	of	a	pot	of	sauce	or	soup
and	stay	there,	never	getting	soft,	even	after	hours	of	cooking.	To	prevent
this	crunchy	mishap,	cook	onions	until	they’re	tender	before	adding	any
tomatoes,	wine,	or	vinegar	to	the	pot.

When	cooking	beans	or	any	legumes,	including	the	chickpeas	for
hummus,	a	pinch	of	bicarbonate	of	soda	will	gently	nudge	the	bean	water
away	from	acidity	towards	alkalinity,	ensuring	tenderness.	And,	just	like
those	onions,	cook	legumes	until	they	are	completely	tender	before	adding
anything	acidic.	A	great	Mexican	chef	once	told	me	that	dousing	cooked
beans	with	vinegar	or	vinaigrette	sort	of	“uncooks”	them,	tightening	and
toughening	the	skins	a	bit.	Account	for	that	tightening	when	preparing
beans	for	a	salad,	and	cook	the	beans	just	a	touch	longer	than	you	might
otherwise.

Use	this	chemistry	to	your	advantage	when	deciding	how	to	cook
vegetables.	Boiling	dilutes	the	relatively	acidic	liquid	contained	in	vegetable
cells,	so	it	will	generally	yield	more	tender	vegetables	than	roasting	will.
Roast	big,	beautiful	slices	of	cauliflower	or	Romanesco	broccoli	to	ensure
they	retain	their	shape.	Boil	potatoes	or	parsnips	so	that	they	melt	into	a
puddle	of	tenderness,	perfect	for	puréeing	or	mashing.

Acid	also	encourages	bonds	between	pectin	groups—the	gelling	agent
in	fruit—	so	that	they	can	trap	water	to	help	set	jam	or	jelly.	Some	fruits,
such	as	apples	and	blueberries,	don’t	contain	enough	acid	to	bond	the
pectin	on	their	own,	so	we	help	them	along	by	squeezing	some	fresh	lemon
juice	into	the	jam	pot	and	into	fruit	fillings	for	pies	and	cobblers	to
encourage	them	to	set.

Acid	is	required	when	using	chemical	leavenings	such	as	bicarbonate
of	soda	or	baking	powder.	Visualise	the	bicarbonate	of	soda	and	vinegar
volcanoes	of	your	elementary	school	science	projects.	Just	like	that,	but	on
a	much	smaller	scale,	acid	reacts	with	bicarbonate	of	soda	to	release	carbon
dioxide	bubbles	to	leaven	baked	goods.	Doughs	and	batters	leavened	by
bicarbonate	of	soda	should	also	have	an	acidic	ingredient	such	as	natural
cocoa	powder,	brown	sugar,	honey,	or	buttermilk.	Baking	powder,	on	the



other	hand,	already	contains	powdered	tartaric	acid	and	doesn’t	need	an
external	source	of	acid	to	react.

Acid	encourages	the	proteins	in	an	egg	white	to	assemble,	or	coagulate,
more	quickly	but	less	densely	than	they	otherwise	would.	Under	normal
conditions,	strands	of	egg	proteins	unravel	and	tighten	when	heated.	As
they	do,	the	strands	squeeze	out	water,	causing	eggs	to	toughen	and	dry
out.	Acid	draws	egg	proteins	together	before	they	can	unravel,	which
inhibits	them	from	joining	too	closely.	A	few	secret	drops	of	lemon	juice	will
produce	creamier,	more	tender	scrambled	eggs.	For	perfect	poached	eggs,
add	a	capful	of	vinegar	into	boiling	water	to	help	speed	up	coagulation	of
the	white	and	strengthen	the	outer	texture,	while	preserving	the	runny	yolk.

Acid	aids	in	stabilising	whipped	egg	whites	by	encouraging	more,	finer
air	pockets,	helping	to	increase	the	volume	of	the	egg	white	foam.	Though
cream	of	tartar—a	by-product	of	wine-making—is	the	form	of	acid
traditionally	added	to	egg	whites	as	they’re	whipped	for	meringues,	cakes,
and	soufflés,	a	few	drops	of	vinegar	or	lemon	juice	per	egg	white	will	yield	a
similar	result.

Dairy	proteins	called	casein	will	coagulate,	or	curdle,	with	the	addition
of	acid.	With	the	exception	of	butter	and	double	cream,	which	are	very	low
in	protein,	dairy	should	only	be	added	to	acidic	dishes	at	the	last	minute.
While	curdled	fresh	dairy,	when	unintended,	is	usually	inedible,	this	same
reaction	makes	cultured	dairy—from	yoghurt	to	crème	fraîche	to	cheese—
possible,	offering	us	a	delicious,	entirely	new	category	of	acidic	ingredients
to	incorporate	into	food.	Try	making	your	own	crème	fraîche—it	couldn’t
be	easier.	Just	combine	2	tablespoons	of	crème	fraîche	or	cultured
buttermilk	with	450ml	of	double	cream.	Pour	into	a	clean	glass	jar,	cover
loosely	or	leave	uncovered,	and	leave	out	at	warm	room	temperature	for	2
days,	or	until	it	thickens.	That’s	it.	Use	it	in	Blue	Cheese	Dressing,	Chicken
with	Vinegar,	or	Tangy	Whipped	Cream.	Cover	and	store	it	in	the	fridge
for	up	to	two	weeks.	Use	the	last	few	spoonfuls	to	start	the	next	batch	in
the	same	way.

When	acid	is	incorporated	into	doughs	and	batters,	it	will	tenderise
them,	much	as	fat	does.	Whether	it	comes	in	the	form	of	cultured	dairy,
natural	(nonalkalised)	cocoa	powder,	or	vinegar,	acid	in	a	dough	or	a	batter
will	disrupt	the	gluten	network,	resulting	in	a	more	tender	product.	If	it’s
chewiness	you’re	after,	wait	as	long	as	possible	into	the	process	of	dough-
making	to	add	acidic	ingredients.

Acid	tenderises,	then	toughens,	meat	and	fish	proteins.	Imagine	protein



as	coiled	strands	folded	up	into	bundles.	When	acid	comes	into	contact
with	the	coils,	they	unfold	and	unwind.	This	process	is	called	denaturation.
These	denatured	proteins	then	begin	to	bump	into	each	other	and
coagulate,	reconnecting	into	an	intimate	network.	The	same	thing	happens
when	proteins	are	heated,	which	is	why	acid	is	sometimes	said	to	cook	meat
or	fish.

At	first,	the	intimate	network	traps	water	that	was	previously	bound	up
in	muscle	fibres,	leading	to	moist,	tender	food.	But	if	the	denaturation
conditions	persist—that	is,	if	food	continues	to	sit	in	acid—the	protein
network	will	continue	to	tighten,	squeezing	water	out	of	the	protein
altogether,	resulting	in	tough,	dry	food,	much	like	an	overcooked	steak.

To	understand	this	progression,	consider	the	way	the	texture	of	a	piece
of	sashimi	will	become	tender,	bright-tasting	fish	tartare	with	the	addition
of	acid,	and	then	turn	into	a	chewy	ceviche	over	time.	Fish	meant	for
cooking	shouldn’t	marinate	in	acid	for	more	than	a	few	minutes,	but	dip	any
flaky,	white-fleshed	fish	into	buttermilk	and	flour	before	frying,	or	toss	sea
bass	with	lemon	juice	and	curry	powder	just	before	skewering	and	grilling,
and	you’ll	get	the	benefit	of	moist	texture	along	with	the	pleasant	hit	of
tartness.

Acid	also	helps	break	down	collagen,	the	main	structural	protein	found
in	tough	cuts	of	meat.	Add	wine	or	tomatoes	as	you	begin	to	cook	braises
and	stews,	since	the	more	quickly	the	collagen	melts,	the	sooner	the	meat
will	grow	juicy	and	succulent.
Producing	Acid



While	we	introduce	salt	and	fat	into	our	food	in	the	form	of	distinct
ingredients,	there	are	two	easy	ways	to	produce	acid	in	food	as	we	cook.	One
process	is	rather	fast,	the	other	rather	slow.

The	fast	method?	Browning	foods.	In	Salt	and	Fat,	I	explained	that	food
begins	to	brown	once	its	surface	temperature	climbs	considerably	beyond
the	boiling	point.	This	can	happen	in	the	toaster	to	a	slice	of	bread,	in	the
oven	to	cookies	and	cake,	on	the	grill	to	meats,	fish	and	vegetables,	or	in	the
pan	to	caramel.	The	chemical	reaction	involved	in	browning	sugars	is	called
caramelisation.	The	chemical	reaction	involved	in	browning	meats,
seafood,	vegetables,	baked	goods,	or	just	about	anything	else	is	called	the
Maillard	reaction,	after	Louis-Camille	Maillard,	the	scientist	who
discovered	it.	There	will	be	more	details	about	these	delicious,	mysterious
chemical	reactions	in	Heat.

Though	they’re	entirely	different	processes,	caramelisation	and	the
Maillard	reaction	share	some	similarities.	Both	create	acidic	flavour
compounds,	in	addition	to	many	other	tasty	molecules,	as	by-products.	As
it	caramelises,	a	single	sugar	molecule	will	develop	into	hundreds	of	new
and	different	compounds,	including	some	acids.

In	other	words,	equal	amounts	of	sugar	and	burnt	caramel	by	weight	are
not	equally	sweet,	and	in	fact	caramel	is	acidic!	Similar	acidic	compounds
are	produced	in	carbohydrates	and	proteins	by	the	Maillard	reaction.

Though	producing	acidity	is	rarely	a	reason	to	brown	food,	knowing	that
the	process	will	develop	a	host	of	new	flavours,	including	some	sour	ones,
can	be	a	valuable	tool.	Imagine	tasting	two	batches	of	ice	cream,	both	made
with	the	same	amount	of	sugar.	In	one	batch,	the	sugar	was	added	directly
to	the	dairy.	In	the	other	batch,	some	of	the	sugar	was	cooked	into	dark
caramel	before	being	mixed	in.	The	ice	cream	made	with	caramelised	sugar
will	not	only	taste	less	sweet	but	will	also	be	far	more	complex,	because	it
has	the	vital	flavour	contrasts	that	acid	provides.

The	other,	much	slower,	method	for	producing	acid	in	the	kitchen	is
fermentation,	where,	in	addition	to	many	other	flavour-producing
processes,	carbohydrates	transform	into	carbon	dioxide	and	acids	or
alcohols	using	yeasts,	bacteria,	or	a	combination	thereof.	Wine,	beer,	and
cider	are	of	course	fermented,	but	so	are	naturally	leavened	breads,	all	sorts
of	pickles,	cured	meats,	cultured	dairy,	and	even	coffee	and	chocolate.

Some	of	the	most	delicious	bread	I’ve	tasted	is	naturally	leavened,	and
has	been	allowed	to	rise—which	is	to	say	ferment—slowly.	According	to



Chad	Robertson,	of	Tartine	Bakery	in	San	Francisco,	who	lets	his	dough	rise
for	more	than	thirty	hours,	slow	fermentation	“improves	the	flavour,	in	large
part	because	more	sugars	are	available	to	caramelise	during	the	baking.	The
loaves	brown	faster	and	the	crust	gets	darker.”	Subtly	sour,	Chad’s	bread	is
layered	with	complex	flavours;	every	time	I	taste	it,	I	enthusiastically	declare
it	the	best	loaf	of	bread	in	the	world!	Bake	a	naturally	leavened	loaf	of	bread
sometime	when	your	schedule	allows.	The	results	can	be	stellar,	especially	if
you	bake	it	Chad’s	way	and	let	the	elements	in	the	crust	undergo	both
caramelisation	and	the	Maillard	reaction,	yielding	layer	upon	layer	of	acidity
and	sweetness.



USING	ACID
As	with	all	good	cooking,	the	best	way	to	use	acid	well	is	to	taste,	over	and
over	again.	Using	acid	is	much	like	using	salt:	if	something	is	noticeably	sour,
it’s	probably	got	too	much	acid.	But	if	a	food	tastes	bright	and	clean,	then	its
acid	balance	is	spot-on.
Layering	Acid
When	considering	acid,	think	about	which	acid	or	combination	of	acids	to
use,	and	when	to	add	them.	Just	as	with	salt,	and	fat,	a	single	dish	can	often
benefit	from	several	forms	of	acid:	think	of	this	as	layering	acids	as	you
cook.
Cooking	Acids
Learn	to	use	acid	like	salt	to	season	food	from	within.	While	acid	presents
many	last-second	opportunities	to	adjust	dishes—with	a	final	squeeze	of
lemon,	crumble	of	goat’s	cheese,	or	pile	of	pickles—some	acids	should	be
worked	into	dishes	from	the	start.	These	are	what	I	call	cooking	acids.
Examples	include	tomatoes	in	pasta	sauce,	white	wine	in	Poultry	Ragù,
beer	in	a	pot	of	chilli,	vinegar	in	Chicken	with	Vinegar,	and	mirin	(rice	wine)
in	Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken.

Cooking	acids	tend	to	be	mellow,	transforming	the	foods	with	which



they	are	cooked	slowly,	over	time.	They	can	be	extraordinarily	subtle;	while
their	presence	may	go	undetected,	their	absence	is	sharply	felt.	I	learned
this	painful	lesson	when	at	the	request	of	a	distant	relative,	I	tried	to	make
beef	bourguignon	without	the	Bourgogne	in	Iran,	where	wine	isn’t	readily
available.	No	matter	what	I	did,	I	couldn’t	get	the	dish	to	taste	right	without
that	crucial	ingredient.

Give	acid	the	time	it	needs	to	do	its	silent	work	when	macerating
shallots	and	onions.	Macerate,	from	Latin,	“to	soften,”	refers	to	the	process
whereby	ingredients	soak	in	some	form	of	acid—usually	vinegar	or	citrus
juice—to	soften	their	harshness.	Simply	coat	the	shallots	or	onions	in	acid—
they	don’t	need	to	be	completely	submerged.	If	you	plan	on	using	a	couple
of	tablespoons	of	vinegar	for	a	dressing,	just	coat	the	shallots	with	it	first,
and	wait	15	or	20	minutes	before	adding	oil	to	build	the	dressing	in	the	same
cup	or	bowl.	It	will	be	enough	to	prevent	dragon	breath.

There’s	no	replacement	for	working	acid	early	into	braises	and	stews;
the	remarkable	alchemy	of	time	and	heat	will	soften	any	dish’s	sharp	edges.
Omit	the	tomatoes	and	beer	from	Pork	Braised	with	Chillies	and	the
sweetness	of	the	aromatic	base	of	onions	and	garlic	will	dominate.	The
sweetness	resulting	from	browning	needs	the	foil	of	acid,	too.	Deglazing	a
pan	with	wine,	whether	for	risotto,	pork	chops,	fish	fillets,	or	a	more
complex	reduction	sauce	will	keep	a	dish	from	skewing	too	sweet.
Garnishing	Acids
Garnishing	acids,	on	the	other	hand,	are	used	to	finish	a	dish.	While	no
amount	of	salt	at	the	table	will	make	up	for	underseasoning	food	from
within,	a	hit	of	acid	at	the	very	last	second	often	improves	food,	which	is
why	garnishing	acids	are	so	important.	As	the	volatile	aromatic	molecules
disperse	over	time,	the	flavour	of	fresh	citrus	juice	will	transform,	losing
some	of	its	brightness—so	freshly	squeezed	juice	is	best.	The	application	of
heat	will	change	the	flavours	of	both	citrus	juice	and	vinegar,	dulling	the
former	and	mellowing	the	latter,	so	add	them	just	before	serving	when	you
want	their	full	flavour	impact.

You	can	incorporate	different	garnishing	acids	into	a	single	dish	to
increase	flavour.	Balsamic	vinegar	isn’t	always	acidic	enough	to	dress	a	salad
on	its	own,	so	spike	it	with	red	wine	vinegar.	Or	layer	vinegar	with	citrus
juice,	which	is	brighter:	make	Citrus	Vinaigrette	with	white	wine	vinegar
and	blood	orange	juice	to	drizzle	over	an	Avocado	Salad.	The	strong	acidity
of	the	vinegar	will	balance	the	richness	of	the	avocado,	while	the	vivid
orange	juice	will	round	out	its	flavour.



When	you	can,	use	the	same	kind	of	acid	for	cooking	and	garnishing—
spoon	tomato	salsa,	for	example,	atop	pork	braised	with	tomatoes;	finish	a
risotto	with	a	fresh	splash	of	wine	from	the	same	bottle	used	earlier	to
deglaze	the	pan.	This	kind	of	layering	offers	multiple	tastes	of	the	same
ingredient.

And	then	there	are	times	when	a	single	form	of	acid	isn’t	enough	to
accomplish	its	task.	Feta	cheese,	tomato,	olives,	and	red	wine	vinegar	offer
four	distinct	forms	of	acid	in	a	Greek	salad.	To	bring	out	a	chorus	of	bright,
happy	notes,	serve	that	pork	I	mentioned	above	with	all	kinds	of	acidic
condiments,	including	queso	fresco,	sour	cream,	and	a	Bright	Cabbage	Slaw
tossed	with	vinegar	and	lime	juice.

And	think	back	to	that	Caesar	salad,	where	Parmesan	and
Worcestershire	sauce—sources	of	acid—both	lend	the	dressing	tang	as	well
as	salt	and	umami.	Balance	the	creamy,	salty	dressing	with	wine	vinegar	and
lemon	juice.	Tinker	with	all	four	sources	of	acid	as	you	taste	and	adjust,	little
by	little,	until	it’s	perfect.






Make	Pasta	alle	Vongole	to	practise	layering	acids.	I	like	to	make	clam
pasta	with	two	varieties	of	clams—littlenecks,	which	lend	an	intense
brininess	to	the	dish,	and	cherrystones	or	Manilas,	which	are	small	enough
to	toss	in	whole	and	eat	directly	out	of	the	shell	along	with	the	pasta.	First,
set	a	pot	of	water	to	boil	and	season	it	with	salt.	Rinse	the	clams	and	dice	an
onion,	saving	the	root	ends.	Heat	a	large	frying	pan	over	medium	heat	and



splash	in	some	olive	oil.	Add	the	root	ends	of	the	onion,	a	few	parsley	sprigs,
and	as	many	littlenecks	as	will	fit	in	a	single	layer,	then	pour	in	enough	wine
to	cover	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	Turn	the	heat	up	and	cover	the	pan.	Let	the
clams	steam	until	they	open,	which	should	take	two	or	three	minutes.	Use
tongs	to	pull	the	clams	from	the	pan	into	a	bowl	as	they	open.	Some	of	the
stragglers	might	need	a	little	encouragement,	so	tap	them	with	your	tongs	if
they’re	taking	too	long.

Cook	the	rest	of	the	littlenecks	in	this	way,	adding	more	wine	if	needed
to	cover	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	When	you’ve	removed	all	of	the	clams	from
the	pan,	strain	the	liquid	through	a	fine-mesh	strainer	or	cheesecloth;	this
clam-cooking	liquid	is	priceless.	Plus,	it’s	now	the	dish’s	main	source	of	acid.
When	the	clams	are	cool	enough	to	handle,	pluck	them	from	their	shells
and	run	a	knife	through	them,	then	return	them	to	the	clam-cooking	liquid.

Rinse	out	the	frying	pan,	then	set	it	over	medium	heat.	Add	just	enough
oil	to	coat	the	pan,	and	when	it	shimmers,	add	the	diced	onion	and	a	pinch
of	salt.	Stirring	from	time	to	time,	cook	the	onion	until	it’s	tender.	It’s	fine	if
it	picks	up	a	little	colour,	but	don’t	let	it	burn;	add	a	splash	of	water	if	you
need	to.	Then	taste	the	pasta	water,	make	sure	it’s	as	salty	as	the	sea,	and
cook	the	linguine	until	it’s	not	quite	al	dente,	about	6	or	7	minutes.



Add	a	sliced	clove	or	two	of	garlic	and	some	red	pepper	flakes	to	the
onion	and	allow	it	to	bloom,	or	sizzle	gently	without	taking	on	any	colour,
then	add	the	cherrystones	or	Manilas	and	crank	up	the	heat	to	high.	Add	a
healthy	splash	of	the	clam-cooking	liquid	and	cover	the	pan.	As	soon	as	the
little	clams	pop	open,	use	a	slotted	spoon	to	add	the	chopped	littlenecks
into	the	pan.	Cook	all	of	the	clams	together	for	about	a	minute,	and	then
taste	and	adjust	the	acid	with	more	white	wine	or	a	squeeze	of	fresh	lemon
juice.

When	the	pasta	is	not	yet	al	dente,	drain	it,	reserving	a	cup	of	the	pasta
water.	Add	the	noodles	directly	to	the	pan	with	the	clams.	Continue	to	cook
the	pasta,	swirling	the	pan,	until	the	noodles	are	cooked	al	dente.	This	way,
the	pasta	will	absorb	all	the	briny	flavour	of	the	clam	liquid	as	it	finishes
cooking.	Taste	again	and	adjust	for	salt,	acid,	and	spiciness.	If	the	noodles
seem	dry,	add	some	of	the	reserved	pasta	water.

Now	begins	the	magic	of	garnishing	(and	fat).	Intensify	the	creaminess
and	flavour	of	the	dish	by	tossing	in	a	knob	of	butter.	Next,	add	chopped
parsley	and	some	freshly	grated	Parmesan.	Some	might	balk	at	adding
cheese	to	a	seafood	pasta,	but	I	learned	this	trick	from	the	chef	at	a	beloved
seafood	restaurant	in	Tuscany,	where	this	pasta	was	so	delicious	it	helped
me	overcome	my	lifelong	aversion	to	clams.	The	salt,	fat,	acid,	and	umami
offered	by	the	cheese	makes	this	pasta	unforgettable.	For	a	final	touch	of
acid	and	crunch,	sprinkle	the	dish	with	toasted	sourdough	bread	crumbs.
They’ll	be	crisp	when	you	first	dig	in,	but	as	they	mingle	with	the	pasta,	the
bread	crumbs	will	absorb	the	clam	juice,	becoming	little	flavour	bombs
exploding	with	each	bite.



Condiments	and	Umami
Cervantes	may	have	thought	that	“hunger	is	the	best	sauce,”	but	I’d	argue
that	sauce	is	the	best	sauce—because	sauce	can	complete	a	dish.	Sauce,
and	in	fact	most	condiments,	are	sources	of	both	acid	and	salt;	they	offer	a
pretty	surefire	way	to	improve	flavour.	The	bonus	is	that	they	are	often
excellent	sources	of	umami,	which	is	the	word,	from	Japanese,	for	the	fifth
taste	we	can	sense,	the	other	four	being	sweet,	sour,	salty,	and	bitter.	The
closest	translation	into	English	is	something	like	“deliciousness,”	or
“savouriness.”

Umami	is,	in	fact,	the	result	of	flavour	compounds	called	glutamates.
The	most	familiar	glutamate	is	monosodium	glutamate,	or	MSG,	the	white
powder	often	generously	used	in	the	kitchens	of	Chinese	restaurants	to
enhance	flavour.	Though	MSG	is	chemically	manufactured,	there	are	also
many	natural	sources	of	glutamates.	Two	foods	most	abundant	in	naturally
occurring	glutamates	are	Parmesan	and	tomato	ketchup.	Sometimes	a
grating	of	Parmesan	can	make	the	difference	between	a	good	bowl	of	pasta
and	a	great	one	(even	Pasta	alle	Vongole).	And	then,	there	are	those	of	us
who	always	crave	ketchup	with	our	burgers	and	fries,	and	not	only	because
of	the	sweetness,	salt,	and	acid	that	it	provides.	A	little	ketchup—and	the
umami	it	offers—makes	things	taste	inexplicably	more	delicious.

Since	the	list	of	foods	rich	in	umami	dovetails	nicely	with	many	sources
of	salt	and	acid,	always	seek	the	opportunity	to	work	in	a	little	umami	along
with	salt	or	acid	to	heighten	flavour	without	having	to	do	any	extra	work.



However,	as	Cal	Peternell,	the	chef	who’d	shocked	me	with	his	palmfuls
of	salt	in	that	pot	of	polenta	so	many	years	ago,	likes	to	say,	there	is	such	a
thing	as	toomami,	so	don’t	be	tempted	to	pack	bacon	and	tomatoes	and	fish
sauce	and	cheese	and	mushrooms	into	a	single	meal.	A	little	bit	of	umami
can	go	a	long	way.

Balancing	Sweetness	with	Acid
Imagine	taking	a	bite	of	the	perfect	peach:	it’s	sweet,	juicy,	and	firm,	yet



giving.
But	is	that	all?	It’s	also	acidic.	Without	that	pucker,	it’d	be	all	sugar.
Pastry	chefs	know	that	the	best	thing	we	can	do	in	our	cooking	is	to

mimic	this	perfection—there’s	no	better	model	for	getting	that	sweet-sour
balance	just	right	than	nature	itself.	The	best	apples	for	pie	aren’t	the
sweetest,	but	tart	varieties	such	as	Fuji,	Honeycrisp,	and	Sierra	Beauty.	If	a
dessert’s	only	quality	is	sweetness,	it	stimulates	only	the	taste	buds	that
sense	sweetness.	Chocolate	and	coffee	are	the	perfect	bases	for	building
desserts	because	they	are	bitter,	sour,	and	rich	in	umami.	Once	sweetened,
they	trigger	more	types	of	taste	buds.	Caramel,	too.	Add	salt	and	suddenly
all	five	of	our	basic	tastes	are	activated	with	a	single	bite.	For	this	reason,
Salted	Caramel	Sauce	has	never	gone	out	of	fashion.	And	it	never	will.

Always	balance	sweetness	with	acid,	and	not	only	in	desserts.	Roasted
beetroots,	full	of	sugar,	benefit	from	a	splash	of	red	wine	vinegar,	which
offers	contrast	to	the	naturally	earthy	flavour	of	beetroots	that	is	so	off-
putting	to	some.	Season	them	with	olive	oil	and	salt,	and	all	of	a	sudden
even	the	staunchest	beet-phobe	will	be	converted.	Roasted	carrots,
cauliflower,	and	broccoli—or	anything	that’s	developed	sweetness	from
browning—will	always	appreciate	a	squeeze	of	lemon	or	touch	of	vinegar.	A
little	will	go	a	long	way.

Acid	Balance	in	a	Meal



From	time	to	time,	I	travel	with	Alice	Waters	to	help	cook	special	dinners.
During	one	particularly	rich,	wintry	meal	we	served	in	Washington,	DC,
while	the	snow	piled	up	outside,	I	had	an	epiphany	about	acid.	The	last
savoury	course	was	a	garden	lettuce	salad,	dressed	with	delicate	vinaigrette,
which	we	sent	out	in	big	bowls	to	be	eaten	family-style.	After	we	served	the
salad,	all	the	cooks	stood	in	the	kitchen,	exhausted,	absentmindedly	shoving
lettuce	into	our	mouths	with	our	fingers.	After	a	long	day	of	cooking	in	a	dry,
hot,	crowded	kitchen,	none	of	us	had	ever	tasted	anything	so	delicious.	We
were	all	marveling	about	how	refreshing	and	perfectly	dressed	the	salad	was
when	Alice	walked	into	the	kitchen	and	said	it	could’ve	used	some	more
acid.

We	were	confounded!	We	were	downright	besotted	with	this	salad,	and
yet	here	she	was	telling	us	that	the	balance	was	off?	We	all	protested,	trying
to	get	Alice	to	admit	she	was	wrong.

But	Alice	was	steadfast.	She	pointed	out	that	we	hadn’t	been	at	the
table	with	her,	piling	salad	onto	a	plate	laden	with	grilled	lamb	and	borlotti
beans,	garnished	with	a	decadent	sauce,	following	courses	of	creamy
lasagna	and	rich	shellfish	soup.	On	a	plate	with	all	of	that	other	stuff	it
wasn’t	doing	its	job—a	salad	should	relieve	your	palate	and	leave	it	clean
after	rich,	muddy	foods.	It	needed	more	acid	to	stand	up	to	the	other
intense	flavours.

Alice	was	right.	(That	happens	a	lot.)	In	order	to	make	the	best	salad,
you	have	to	consider	how	it	fits	into	the	meal.	Though	each	dish,	on	its	own,
should	always	be	balanced	in	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid,	there	is	also	the	larger
picture	to	consider—a	good	meal	should	also	be	balanced.	Make	a
caramelised	onion	tart,	with	all	that	butter	in	the	crust	and	onions,	and
serve	it	with	garden	lettuces	dressed	with	a	sharp	mustard	vinaigrette.	Make
long-cooked	pork	shoulder,	southern	barbecue–style,	and	pair	it	with	bright,
acidic	slaw.	Make	a	rich	Thai	curry,	thick	with	coconut	milk,	but	precede	it
with	a	crunchy,	light	shaved	cucumber	salad.	Begin	to	incorporate	this	sort
of	balance	with	every	meal	you	plan,	then	read	on	to	What	to	Cook?	for
more	tips	on	writing	a	balanced	menu.
Improvising	with	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid
Think	of	any	dish	you	absolutely	love	to	eat.	It	probably	has	an	ideal	balance
of	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid,	whether	it’s	a	bowl	of	tortilla	soup,	Caesar	salad,	a
bánh	mi	sandwich,	a	margherita	pizza,	or	a	bite	of	feta	cheese	tucked	with
cucumber	into	a	piece	of	lavash	bread.	Since	the	human	body	can’t	produce
certain	essential	forms	of	salt,	fat,	and	acid,	our	palates	have	evolved	to	seek



these	three	elements.	This	results	in	a	universal	appeal	to	food	with	Salt,
Fat,	and	Acid	all	in	balance,	no	matter	the	cuisine.

On	their	own,	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid	can	give	shape	to	the	idea	for	a	dish	or
even	a	meal.	When	deciding	upon	what	to	make,	first	answer	the	questions
of	which	form	(or	forms)	of	each	element	to	use,	and	how,	and	when.	You’ll
find	yourself	with	a	to-do	list	that	resembles—wait	for	it—a	kind	of	recipe.	If
you	want	to	turn	last	night’s	leftover	roast	chicken	into	chicken	salad
sandwiches,	for	instance,	think	first	about	whether	you’re	craving	Indian,
Sicilian,	or	classic	American	flavours.	Once	you	decide,	refer	to	The	World
of	Acid	(here)	to	help	you	choose	the	forms	of	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid	that	will
take	you	in	the	right	direction.	To	evoke	a	taste	of	India,	you	might	use
thick,	full-fat	yoghurt,	coriander,	onions	macerated	in	lime	juice,	salt,	and	a
hint	of	curry	powder.	To	conjure	up	a	night	on	the	shores	of	Palermo,	you
could	use	lemon	juice	and	zest,	onions	macerated	in	red	wine	vinegar,	aïoli,
fennel	seeds,	and	sea	salt.	Or	try	a	chicken	salad	sandwich	inspired	by	Cobb
salad,	with	huge	crumbles	of	bacon	and	blue	cheese	and	slices	of	hard-
boiled	egg	and	avocado.	Then	dress	everything	with	a	red	wine	vinaigrette
before	loading	it	onto	the	bread.

If	the	thought	of	improvisational	cooking	scares	you,	take	it	slowly.	Try
the	recipes	I’ve	included	in	this	book,	grow	comfortable	with	a	basic
repertoire	of	dishes,	and	then	start	to	play	with	one	component	at	a	time.
Make	Bright	Cabbage	Slaw	enough	times	to	memorise	its	ingredients	and
method,	then	adapt	it	as	you	like,	by	varying	the	Fat,	Acid,	or	both.	Use
mayonnaise	instead	of	olive	oil	to	make	a	Classic	Southern	variation,	and
rice	wine	vinegar	instead	of	red	wine	vinegar	to	make	an	Asian	one.

Play	to	each	element’s	strengths:	use	Salt	to	enhance,	Fat	to	carry,	and
Acid	to	balance	flavour.	Now,	with	the	knowledge	of	how	they	affect
various	foods,	add	each	to	a	dish	at	the	right	time	in	order	to	season	it	from
within.	Add	salt	early	to	a	pot	of	beans,	but	acid	late.	Season	meat	for	a
braise	in	advance,	then	start	it	off	on	the	heat	with	a	dose	of	cooking	acid.
When	it’s	done	and	rich	in	flavour,	lighten	it	with	a	garnishing	acid.

Let	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid	work	together	in	concert	to	improve	anything
you	eat,	whether	you	cooked	it	or	not.	Doctor	a	lacklustre	restaurant	taco
by	asking	for	sour	cream,	guacamole,	pickles,	or	salsa.	Eye	the	dressings,
cheeses,	and	pickles	at	the	local	salad	bar	with	renewed	interest.	Use
yoghurt,	tahini,	pepper	sauce,	and	pickled	onions	to	amend	a	dry,	bland
falafel	sandwich.

Harmonise	these	three	notes,	and	invariably	your	taste	buds	will	sing



with	delight.






When	aspiring	chefs	ask	me	for	career	advice,	I	offer	a	few	tips:	Cook
every	single	day.	Taste	everything	thoughtfully.	Go	to	the	farmers’

market	and	familiarise	yourself	with	each	season’s	produce.	Read
everything	Paula	Wolfert,	James	Beard,	Marcella	Hazan,	and	Jane	Grigson
have	written	about	food.	Write	a	letter	to	your	favourite	restaurant
professing	your	love	and	beg	for	an	apprenticeship.	Skip	culinary	school;
spend	a	fraction	of	the	cost	of	tuition	travelling	the	world	instead.

There	is	so	much	to	learn	from	travel,	especially	as	a	young	cook:	you
collect	taste	memories,	understand	the	flavours	of	a	place,	and	gain	a	sense
of	context.	Eat	cassoulet	in	Toulouse,	hummus	in	Jerusalem,	ramen	in
Kyoto,	and	ceviche	in	Lima.	Make	these	classics	your	beacons	so	that	when
you	return	to	your	own	kitchen	and	change	a	recipe,	you	know	precisely
how	it	diverges	from	the	original.

Travel	offers	another	extraordinary	value,	too:	watch	and	learn	from
cooks	around	the	world,	and	discover	the	universality	of	good	cooking.

For	the	first	four	years	of	my	cooking	career,	Chez	Panisse	was	my	only
point	of	reference.	Eventually,	I	couldn’t	contain	my	curiosity	any	longer.	I
had	to	go	to	Europe	and	cook	in	the	kitchens	that	inspired	the	chefs	who’d
taught	me.	Arriving	in	Tuscany,	I	was	surprised	by	how	familiar	it	felt	to
cook	alongside	Benedetta	and	Dario.	Some	habits	seemed	to	be	common
to	all	good	cooks.	Benedetta	doted	on	her	onions	as	they	browned	and
brought	roasts	to	room	temperature	before	cooking	them,	just	as	the	chefs
at	home	had	taught	me	to	do.	Heating	up	a	pot	of	oil	for	deep-frying,	she
tested	its	temperature	not	with	a	thermometer,	but	by	dropping	in	a	stale
crust	of	bread	to	see	how	quickly	it	turned	golden	brown,	just	as	I’d	learned
to	do	the	first	time	I’d	fried	glimmering	fresh	anchovies	at	Chez	Panisse.

Curious,	I	began	to	watch	others	who	cooked	the	foods	I	loved	to	eat.
Enzo,	my	favourite	pizzaiolo	in	Florence,	served	only	three	classic	pizzas:
Marinara,	Margherita,	and	Napoli.	He	worked	alone,	snapped	at	regulars
and	tourists	alike,	and	eschewed	all	luxuries,	cooking	all	night	in	a	kitchen
the	size	of	a	postage	stamp.	I	never	saw	Enzo	use	a	thermometer	to	gauge
the	temperature	of	his	wood-burning	oven.	Instead,	he	paid	attention	to	his
pizzas.	If	they	burned	before	the	toppings	cooked,	the	oven	was	too	hot.	If
they	emerged	pale,	he’d	throw	another	log	onto	the	fire.	And	his	method
worked:	with	its	crisp,	yet	chewy	crust	and	barely	melted	cheese,	I’d	never
tasted	a	better	pizza.

I	left	Italy	and	travelled	to	visit	friends	and	family	around	the	world.	Late



one	night	at	a	bustling	roadside	stand,	I	ate	flavourful	chapli	kebabs—
Pakistan’s	mouthwatering	answer	to	the	hamburger.	The	cook	flavoured	the
meat	with	chillies,	ginger,	and	coriander,	flattened	each	patty,	and	slid	it	into
hot	oil,	monitoring	the	gurgling	fat	to	decide	if	he	should	add	more	coal	to
the	fire	beneath	the	metre-wide	iron	pan.	When	the	bubbles	relented	and
the	meat	was	as	dark	as	the	tea	leaves	in	his	cup,	he	pulled	the	kebab	from
the	oil.	He	handed	me	one,	wrapping	it	with	a	warm	naan,	and	drizzling	it
with	yoghurt	sauce.	I	took	a	bite:	heaven.

I	thought	back	to	one	of	my	first	nights	in	the	kitchen	at	Chez	Panisse,
when	I’d	watched	Amy,	a	soft-spoken	chef,	grill	steaks	for	a	hundred	guests,
graceful	and	skilful	as	a	dancer.	She	showed	me	how	she	watched	the
surface	of	each	steak.	If	the	meat	didn’t	sizzle	as	it	hit	the	grill,	she’d	stoke
the	fire,	pulling	more	coals	beneath	the	metal	grates.	If	the	meat	browned
too	quickly,	she’d	spread	out	the	coals	and	wait	for	the	grill	to	cool	before
continuing.	Amy	showed	me	how	to	ensure	that	the	heat	was	just	right	so
that	the	steaks	browned	evenly	on	the	surface	as	the	interior	cooked,	so
that	by	the	time	they	reached	medium-rare,	the	outside	was
mouthwateringly	charred,	and	the	strip	of	fat	lining	the	edge	of	each	rib	eye
was	perfectly	rendered.	It	was	no	different	than	turning	up	or	down	the
flame	on	the	stove.



When	I	left	Pakistan,	I	visited	my	grandparents’	farm	on	the	coast	of	the
Caspian	Sea	in	Iran,	where	my	grandmother	spent	all	day	in	the	kitchen.
Though	she	loved	to	cook	for	her	family,	she	nevertheless	grumbled	about
how	ours	is	the	most	labour-intensive	cuisine	in	the	world.	She	chopped
mountains	of	herbs,	peeled	and	prepared	cases	of	vegetables,	and	tended
to	khoreshs,	complex	meat	and	vegetable	stews,	as	they	simmered	on	the
stove	for	hours.	My	grandmother	watched	and	stirred	the	bubbling	pots
constantly—never	still,	never	boiling—until	finally	the	stews	were	done.	My
uncles,	on	the	other	hand,	would	spend	all	day	smoking	filterless	cigarettes
and	telling	stories	before	they	lit	the	fire	shortly	before	dinner.	They’d
thread	chicken	and	lamb	onto	flat	metal	skewers	and	cook	the	kebabs
quickly	over	grills	so	hot	their	arm	hairs	regularly	caught	fire.	One	kind	of
cooking	took	all	day,	the	other,	minutes.	Both	kinds	were	delicious.	Our
meals	wouldn’t	have	been	complete	without	either	the	tender	khoreshs	or
the	juicy,	charred	kebabs.

As	I	travelled,	I	noticed	that	in	every	country,	whether	I	was	watching
home	cooks	or	professional	chefs,	and	whether	they	were	cooking	over	a
live	fire	or	on	a	camp	stove,	the	best	cooks	looked	at	the	food,	not	the	heat
source.

I	saw	how	good	cooks	obeyed	sensory	cues,	rather	than	timers	and
thermometers.	They	listened	to	the	changing	sounds	of	a	sizzling	sausage,
watched	the	way	a	simmer	becomes	a	boil,	felt	how	a	slow-cooked	pork
shoulder	tightens	and	then	relaxes	as	hours	pass,	and	tasted	a	noodle
plucked	from	boiling	water	to	determine	whether	it’s	al	dente.	In	order	to
cook	instinctually,	I	needed	to	learn	to	recognise	these	signals.	I	needed	to
learn	how	food	responds	to	the	fourth	element	of	good	cooking:	Heat.



WHAT	IS	HEAT?
Heat	is	the	element	of	transformation.	No	matter	its	source,	heat	triggers
the	changes	that	take	our	food	from	raw	to	cooked,	runny	to	set,	flabby	to
firm,	flat	to	risen,	and	pale	to	golden	brown.

Unlike	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid,	Heat	is	flavourless	and	intangible.	But	its
effects	are	quantifiable.	Heat’s	sensory	cues,	including	sizzles,	spatters,
crackles,	steam,	bubbles,	aromas,	and	browning,	are	often	more	important
than	a	thermometer.	All	of	your	senses—including	common	sense—will
help	you	gauge	heat’s	effects	on	food.

Exposure	to	heat	changes	foods	in	many	different,	but	predictable,
ways.	Once	familiar	with	how	different	foods	respond	to	heat,	you’ll	make
better	choices	about	how	to	shop	at	the	market,	plan	a	menu,	and	cook
every	dish.	Turn	your	attention	away	from	the	oven	dial	or	the	knob	of	the
stove	and	towards	the	food	you’re	cooking.	Heed	the	clues:	is	the	food
browning,	firming,	shrinking,	crisping,	burning,	falling	apart,	swelling,	or
cooking	unevenly?

These	cues	matter	considerably	more	than	whether	you’re	cooking	on
an	electric	rather	than	gas	stove,	on	a	makeshift	camping	grill	rather	than	in
a	grand	marble	hearth,	or	whether	your	oven	is	set	to	180°C	or	190°C.

Just	as	I	learned	from	watching	cooks	all	around	the	world,	no	matter
what	you’re	cooking,	or	what	heat	source	you’re	using,	the	aim	is	always	the
same:	apply	heat	at	the	right	level,	and	at	the	right	rate,	so	that	the	surface
of	a	food	and	its	interior	are	done	cooking	at	the	same	time.

Think	about	making	a	grilled	cheese	sandwich.	The	goal	is	to	use	the
right	level	of	heat	so	that	the	bread	turns	golden-brown-toasty-delicious	at
the	same	rate	that	the	cheese	melts.	Heat	it	too	quickly	and	you’ll	burn	the
outside	and	be	left	with	an	undercooked	centre—burnt	bread,	unmelted
cheese.	Heat	it	too	slowly,	and	you’ll	dry	the	whole	thing	out	before	the
surface	has	a	chance	to	brown.

View	everything	you	cook	like	that	grilled	cheese	sandwich:	Is	the	skin
of	the	roast	chicken	golden	brown	by	the	time	the	bird	is	cooked?	Is	the
asparagus	cooked	all	of	the	way	through	by	the	time	it’s	developed	the
perfect	char	from	the	grill?	Is	the	lamb	chop	evenly	browned,	all	of	its	fat
rendered	by	the	time	the	meat	is	perfectly	medium-rare?

Just	as	with	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid,	the	first	step	to	getting	the	results	you
want	from	Heat	is	to	know	what	you’re	after.	Know	what	results	you	seek,	so



that	you	can	take	the	steps	to	achieve	them.	Think	about	your	goals	in	the
kitchen	in	terms	of	flavours	and	textures.	Do	you	want	your	food	to	be
browned?	Crisp?	Tender?	Soft?	Chewy?	Caramelised?	Flaky?	Moist?

Next,	work	backward.	Make	a	clear	plan	for	yourself	using	sensory
landmarks	to	guide	you	back	to	your	goal.	For	example,	if	you	want	to	end
up	with	a	bowl	of	flavourful,	snowy	white	mashed	potatoes,	then	think
about	the	last	step:	mashing	potatoes	with	butter	and	sour	cream,	and
tasting	and	adjusting	for	salt.	To	get	there,	you’ll	need	to	simmer	the
potatoes	in	salted	water	until	they’re	tender.	To	get	there,	you’ll	need	to
peel	and	cut	the	potatoes.	There’s	your	recipe.	For	something	more
complicated—say,	crispy	pan-fried	potatoes—you’ll	want	to	end	with	a
golden-brown	crust	and	a	tender	interior.	So	the	last	step	will	be	frying	in
hot	fat	to	achieve	crispness.	To	get	there,	make	sure	the	potatoes	are
tender	inside—simmer	them	in	salted	water.	To	get	there,	peel	and	cut
them.	There’s	another	recipe.

This	is	good	cooking,	and	it’s	simpler	than	you	might	think.



HOW	HEAT	WORKS
The	Science	of	Heat
Simply	put,	heat	is	energy.

Food	is	primarily	made	up	of	four	basic	types	of	molecules:	water,	fat,
carbohydrates,	and	protein.	As	food	is	heated,	the	molecules	within	it	begin
to	speed	up,	colliding	with	each	other	as	they	go.

As	molecules	gain	speed,	they	also	gain	the	power	to	break	free	of	the
electrical	forces	uniting	their	atoms.	Some	atoms	can	split	off	and	join	up
with	other	atoms	to	create	new	molecules.	This	process	is	called	a	chemical
reaction.

And	the	chemical	reactions	initiated	by	heat	affect	the	flavour	and
texture	of	food.

Water,	fat,	carbohydrate,	and	protein	molecules	each	react	to	heat	in
different,	yet	predictable,	ways.	If	this	seems	overwhelming,	don’t	worry—
it’s	not.	The	science	of	heat,	luckily,	adheres	to	common	sense.

Water	and	Heat
Water	is	an	essential	element	of	practically	all	foods.	Cook	most	of	its	water
out,	and	food	will	become	crisp	or	dry.	Leave	its	water	in—or	add	water	as
you	cook—to	make	food	moist	and	tender.	Cook	water	out	of	scrambled
eggs,	and	they	will	be	dry.	Cook	the	right	amount	of	water	into	rice,
cornmeal,	potatoes,	or	any	other	starch,	and	they	will	be	tender.	Vegetables
that	lose	water	become	limp.	During	years	with	intense	rainy	seasons,	fruit
will	taste	watery.	Overwater	your	tomato	plants	and	the	flavour	of	the
tomatoes	will	be	diluted.	When	food	is	weak	in	flavour,	it’s	“watered	down.”
To	intensify	flavours	in	soups,	stocks,	and	sauces,	reduce	their	water
content.	Use	heat	to	control	food’s	water	content	to	get	the	texture	and



flavour	you	seek.
When	frozen,	water	expands.	This	is	why	you	must	always	leave

headroom	in	jars	of	soup	or	stock	you	plan	to	freeze.	Or	why	a	bottle	of
beer	or	wine	you	stick	in	the	freezer	to	chill	will	explode	if	forgotten.	On	a
much,	much	tinier	scale—at	the	cellular	level—a	similar	phenomenon
occurs	inside	foods:	as	food	freezes,	its	cell	walls,	much	like	your	storage
containers,	will	burst	when	the	water	they	contain	expands.	Freezer	burn
and	dehydration,	then,	are	the	result	of	water	escaping	from	the	inside	of	a
food’s	cells	and	then	crystallising	or	vaporising	on	the	surface	of	the	food.
Have	you	ever	opened	a	package	of	frozen	berries	or	meat	and	wondered
where	those	Antarctic	stalactites	came	from?	Now	you	know—from	inside
your	food.

This	dehydration	also	sadly	explains	that	leathery	steak	you	forgot
about	in	the	freezer	for	three	years,	and	is	helpful	to	remember	when
deciding	whether	or	not	freezing	will	damage	a	particular	food.	In	other
words,	choose	to	freeze	foods	that	can	withstand	a	little	dehydration,	and
even	be	successfully	rehydrated—raw	braising	cuts	of	meat,	stews,	soups,
sauces,	and	cooked	beans	in	their	liquid.

Water	can	also	be	a	medium	in	which	we	cook	other	foods.	At	low
temperatures,	water	is	particularly	gentle:	water	baths	are	ideal	for	cooking
custards;	and	simmering,	braising	and	poaching	provide	tough	foods	with
the	sustained	low	heat	they	need	to	develop	tenderness.

Heat	water	further,	to	100°C	at	sea	level,	and	it	boils,	giving	us	one	of
the	most	efficient—and	quickest—ways	to	cook	food.	Boiling	water	is	one
of	the	most	invaluable	tools	in	the	kitchen.	It’s	a	simple	way	to	gauge
temperature	without	a	thermometer.	If	you	see	bubbles	roiling	in	a	pot	of
water,	you	know	that	it’s	reached	100°C.	At	this	temperature,	water	can	kill
pathogenic	bacteria.	To	be	on	the	safe	side,	when	reheating	soupy	leftovers
or	your	freezer	stash	of	chicken	stock,	make	sure	to	bring	them	to	a	boil	to
kill	bacteria	that	may	have	grown	in	the	meantime.
The	Power	of	Steam
As	water	is	heated	beyond	100°C,	it	transforms	into	steam,	another	of	the
kitchen’s	most	valuable	visible	cues.	Let	the	sight	of	steam	help	you
approximate	temperature:	as	long	as	food	is	wet	and	giving	off	steam,	its
surface	temperature	probably	isn’t	hot	enough	to	allow	browning	to	begin.
Remember,	the	reactions	that	cause	food	to	brown—caramelisation	and
the	Maillard	reaction—don’t	begin	until	food	reaches	much	higher



temperatures.	So,	if	water	is	present	on	the	surface	of	a	food,	it	can’t	brown.
Learn	to	make	decisions	in	relationship	to	steam.	Encourage	steam	to

escape	if	you	want	temperatures	to	rise	and	food	to	brown.	Contain	and
recycle	steam	with	a	lid	to	allow	food	to	cook	in	a	moist	environment	if	you
want	to	prevent	or	delay	browning.

Food	piled	up	in	a	pan	can	affect	steam	levels	in	a	pan	by	acting	like	a
makeshift	lid:	both	entrap	steam.	Trapped	steam	condenses	and	drips	back
down,	keeping	food	moist	and	maintaining	the	temperature	right	around
100°C.	At	first,	entrapped	steam	gently	wilts	food,	and	then	it	leads	to
sweating,	which	is	a	way	to	cook	food	through	without	allowing	it	to	develop
any	colour.

Steam	replaces	some	of	the	air	contained	in	vegetables	with	water,
which	is	why	plants	initially	transform	from	opaque	to	translucent	in	colour
and	reduce	in	volume	as	they	cook.	They	also	begin	to	intensify	in	flavour—
a	mountain	of	just-washed	spinach	becomes	a	molehill	of	wilted	greens	and
a	pan	mounded	full	of	sliced	onions	cooks	down	into	a	stewy,	flavourful
base	for	Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup.

Pile	chard	leaves	high	above	the	sides	of	a	pan	and	let	steam	cook	the
greens.	Cover	with	a	lid	if	you	like,	but	stir	once	in	a	while	with	tongs	to
ensure	even	cooking,	because	even	steam	can’t	navigate	the	labyrinth	of
greens	as	evenly	as	you	might	hope.	The	temperature	at	the	bottom	of	the



pan,	closer	to	the	heat	source,	will	always	be	higher	than	the	temperature
above.	Control	steam	in	the	oven	when	roasting	or	toasting	foods	using	the
same	variables.	How	tightly	a	roasting	tray	of	vegetables	is	packed	is	as
much	of	a	factor	in	even	browning	as	the	oven	temperature.	Let	courgettes
and	peppers	develop	glorious	sweetness	and	flavour	by	spreading	them	out
so	steam	can	escape	and	browning	can	begin	sooner.	Protect	denser
vegetables	that	take	longer	to	cook,	such	as	artichokes	or	onions,	from
browning	too	much	before	they	can	cook	through	by	packing	them	tightly	in
a	pan	to	entrap	steam.

Choose	your	cooking	vessel	based	on	how	steam	will	move	within	and
out	of	it.	Pans	with	sloped	or	curved	sides	are	better	at	allowing	steam	to
escape	than	pans	with	straight	sides.	And	the	taller	the	sides	of	the	pan	or
pot,	the	longer	it	will	take	steam	to	escape.	Deep	pots	and	pans	are	great	for
sweating	onions	and	simmering	soups,	but	less	ideal	for	foods	you	aim	to
sear	and	brown	quickly,	such	as	scallops	and	steaks.

Recall	the	osmosis	that	salt	initiates,	and	weave	that	understanding	into
how	you	decide	to	use	steam.	Let	salt	do	its	work,	drawing	water	out	of	food
it	touches,	to	help	create	steam	when	you	want	it	in	the	pan.	When	the	goal
is	to	brown	swiftly,	wait	to	salt	food	until	after	it	begins	to	crisp	or	salt	far
enough	in	advance	to	let	osmosis	occur,	pat	food	dry,	and	then	place	into	a
hot	pan.	Use	the	former	method	for	onions	you	want	to	sweat	and	keep
translucent	for	cauliflower	soup,	and	the	latter	for	aubergines	and
courgettes	you	plan	to	grill	or	roast.
Fat	and	Heat
In	Fat,	I	explained	the	main	principles	that	will	help	you	understand	how
Heat	and	Fat	work	together	in	good	cooking.	Like	water,	fat	is	both	a	basic
component	of	food	and	a	cooking	medium.	But	fat	and	water	are	enemies:
they	don’t	mix,	and	they	respond	very	differently	to	heat.

Fats	are	flexible;	indeed,	the	broad	range	of	temperatures	fats	can
withstand	allows	us	to	achieve	many	different	textures—crisp,	flaky,	tender,
creamy,	and	light—that	simply	cannot	be	achieved	without	the	proper
relationship	between	Fat	and	Heat.

When	chilled,	fats	harden—and	transform	from	liquids	into	solids.	Solid
fats	such	as	butter	and	lard	are	a	boon	to	pastry	chefs,	who	can	work	them
into	doughs	to	achieve	flakiness	or	whip	air	into	them	to	achieve	lightness.
But	picture	the	way	greens	cooked	with	bacon	leave	a	trail	of	semisolid
grease	behind	on	the	platter	and	you’ll	see	how	this	quality	is	less	desirable



when	serving	food	containing	animal	fats	that	congeal	at	room	temperature.
Extended,	gentle	heat	will	transform,	or	render,	solid	animal	fats	into

pure	liquid	fats	such	as	pork	lard	or	beef	tallow.	In	slow-cooked	meats	such
as	Sage-	and	Honey-Smoked	Chicken,	rendering	fats	essentially	bastes
food	from	within,	and	this	self-basting	also	explains	the	exuberantly	moist
texture	of	Slow-Roasted	Salmon.	The	same	gentle	heat	will	cause	butter’s
emulsion	to	break	and	then	clarify.

At	moderate	temperatures,	fat	is	an	ideal	gentle	cooking	medium,
perfect	for	using	in	a	cooking	method	called	confit,	which	is	essentially
poaching	in	fat	instead	of	water.	Look	ahead	to	recipes	for	Tomato,	Tuna,
and	Chicken	Confit	to	put	this	technique	into	practice.

While	water	boils	and	vaporises	at	100°C,	fats	can	climb	to	staggering
temperatures	well	beyond	that	point	before	turning	to	smoke.	As	a	result,
since	water	and	fat	don’t	mix,	foods	containing	water	(which	is	practically	all
foods)	won’t	dissolve	in	fat;	instead	the	surfaces	of	foods	exposed	to	very
hot	fats	can	climb	to	high	enough	temperatures	to	develop	crisp	textures	as
water	evaporates.

Fats	are	slow	to	cool	and	heat—in	other	words,	it	takes	a	lot	of	energy
to	heat	or	cool	a	unit	of	fat	by	even	a	few	degrees.	This	is	a	boon	to	the
amateur	deep	fryer;	you	can	relax	when	frying	Beer-Battered	Fish,	knowing
you	don’t	have	to	act	with	lightning-quick	reflexes	when	the	temperature	of
the	oil	starts	to	rise	or	fall.	If	the	fat	gets	too	hot,	just	turn	off	the	heat	or
carefully	add	a	little	more	room-temperature	oil.	If	the	pot	gets	too	cold,
increase	the	heat	and	wait	before	adding	more	food.	The	same
phenomenon	will	cause	meats	with	large	quantities	of	fat	such	as	prime	rib
or	pork	loin	roasts	(or	those	sitting	in	fat,	such	as	any	of	the	confits
mentioned	above)	to	continue	cooking	slowly	even	when	pulled	from	the
heat.
Carbohydrates	and	Heat
Found	primarily	in	foods	made	from	plant	sources,	carbohydrates	provide
food	with	both	structure	and	flavour.	In	Acid,	I	described	three	types	of
carbohydrates—cellulose,	sugars,	and	pectin.	Along	with	a	fourth	type	of
carbohydrate—starches—cellulose	provides	much	of	the	bulk	and	texture
of	plant-derived	foods,	while	sugars	offer	flavour.	When	heated,
carbohydrates	generally	absorb	water	and	break	down.

Understanding	a	bit	of	basic	Plant	Anatomy	will	help	you	determine
how	to	cook	various	plant-derived	foods	(see	here).	If	fibrous	or	stringy	are



words	that	come	to	mind	when	you	think	of	a	particular	fruit	or	vegetable,
it’s	rich	in	cellulose,	a	type	of	carbohydrate	that	isn’t	broken	down	by	heat.
Cook	cellulose-rich	produce,	such	as	collard	greens,	asparagus,	or
artichokes,	until	it	absorbs	enough	water	to	become	tender.	Leaves	have
less	cellulose	fibres	than	stems	or	stalks,	which	is	why	kale	and	chard	stems
cook	at	a	different	rate	than	their	leaves	and	ought	to	be	stemmed	and
cooked	separately,	or	simply	staggered	into	the	pot.
Starches
Give	the	starchiest	parts	of	plants,	including	tubers	such	as	potatoes	and
seeds	such	as	dried	beans,	plenty	of	water	and	time	over	gentle	heat	to	coax
out	their	tenderness.	Starches	absorb	liquid	and	swell	or	break	down,	so
firm	potatoes	become	delightfully	creamy,	impossibly	hard	chickpeas
transform	into	buttery	bites,	and	rice	goes	from	indigestible	to	fluffy	and
tender.

Dry	seeds,	grains,	and	legumes,	including	rice,	beans,	barley,	chickpeas,
and	wheatberries,	generally	need	water	and	heat	to	make	them	edible.	To
protect	the	potential	for	life	that	they	contain,	seeds	have	evolved	with
tough	sheaths	that	make	them	nearly	impossible	for	us	to	digest	unless	we
transform	them	in	some	way.	Sometimes,	this	simply	means	removing	the
shell,	as	we	do	with	sunflower	and	pumpkin	seeds.	For	seeds	that	need	to	be
cooked	in	order	to	become	edible,	this	usually	means	adding	water	and
heating	them	until	they	grow	tender.	Some	starch-rich	seeds,	including
dried	beans,	chickpeas,	and	hearty	grains	like	barley	benefit	from	an
overnight	soak,	which	gives	them	a	head	start	at	absorbing	water.	Consider
it	a	sort	of	inactive	cooking.

Some	grains	are	processed	to	remove	some	or	all	of	this	outer	sheath—
hence	the	difference	between	whole	wheat	and	refined	flour	or	brown	and
white	rice.	Without	that	tough	exterior,	processed	grains	cook	much	more
quickly	and	have	a	longer	shelf-life	than	their	whole-grain	counterparts.
Ground,	or	milled,	grains	can	be	combined	with	water	to	make	doughs	and
batters,	which	firm	and	set	up	with	exposure	to	heat.

The	key	to	cooking	starches	properly	is	using	the	correct	amount	of
water	and	heat.	Use	too	little	water	or	undercook	starches	and	they	will	be
dry	and	unpleasantly	tough	in	the	centre.	Cakes	and	bread	baked	with	too
little	water	are	dry	and	crumbly.	Undercooked	pasta,	beans,	and	rice	are
unpleasantly	tough	in	the	centre.	But	use	too	much	water	or	heat,	or	simply
overcook	starches,	and	they	will	be	mushy	(think	limp	noodles	and	soggy
cakes	and	rice).	Starches	are	eager	to	undergo	browning	and	will	burn	easily



if	overcooked	or	exposed	to	too	much	heat.	I	kick	myself	when	this	happens
—scorched	grits	at	the	bottom	of	an	unwatched	pot,	or	bread	crumbs
blackened	after	just	90	seconds	of	neglect	in	a	hot	oven.

Sugars
Odourless	and	colourless,	sucrose,	or	sugar	is	the	pure	manifestation	of
sweetness.	When	exposed	to	heat,	it	melts.	Mix	granulated	sugar	with	water
and	heat	it	to	high	temperatures	to	yield	myriad	confectionery	delights	with
varied	textures:	marshmallows,	meringues,	fudge,	nougat,	butterscotch,
brittle,	toffee,	pralines,	and	caramel	candies.

Working	with	hot	sugar	is	one	of	the	few	temperature-specific
endeavours	in	the	kitchen,	but	it’s	not	a	particularly	difficult	one.	At	about
143°C,	a	melted	sugar	syrup	will	yield	a	firm	nougat,	but	just	a	ten-degree
increase	will	yield	toffee.	The	first	time	I	made	caramel	candies	I	was	too
stingy	to	buy	a	twelve-dollar	candy	thermometer.	I	figured	I	could	just
eyeball	the	temperature.	As	a	result,	my	caramels	were	so	sticky	that	I
ended	up	paying	hundreds	of	dollars	for	dental	work	instead.	Learn	from	my
stubbornness	and	invest	in	a	candy	thermometer	to	help	monitor
temperatures	when	working	with	sugar	(and	use	it	for	deep-frying,	too!).
Trust	me,	you’ll	save	money	in	the	long	run.

At	extremely	high	temperatures	(170°C),	sugar	molecules	begin	to
darken	in	colour,	in	a	process	that	isn’t	entirely	understood,	as	they
decompose	and	reorganise	into	hundreds	of	new	compounds,	generating
abundant	new	flavours.	This	is	caramelisation,	and	it’s	one	of	the	most
essential	ways	heat	affects	flavour.	In	addition	to	producing	acidic	flavour
compounds,	caramelised	sugars	introduce	a	slew	of	new	qualities	and
flavours,	including	bitter,	fruity,	caramel,	nutty,	sherry,	and	butterscotch.

In	addition	to	starches	that	can	be	broken	down	into	sugars,	fruits,



vegetables,	dairy,	and	some	grains	also	contain	natural	simple	sugars	that
can	participate	in	the	same	reactions	as	table	sugar	when	cooked.	They
grow	sweeter	with	heat,	and	can	even	caramelise.	As	heat	penetrates	a
boiling	carrot,	for	example,	its	starches	begin	to	break	down	into	simple
sugars.	The	cell	walls	enclosing	these	sugars	begin	to	disintegrate.	This	frees
the	sugars	to	reach	our	taste	buds	more	readily,	making	the	cooked	carrot
taste	far	sweeter	than	its	raw	counterpart.

The	small	amounts	of	sugars	that	most	vegetables	contain	begin	to
disappear	the	moment	they’re	picked,	which	is	why	just-picked	produce	is
so	much	more	sweet	and	flavourful	than	store-bought.	I’ve	heard	countless
stories	of	Midwestern	grandmothers	putting	the	pot	of	water	on	to	boil
before	sending	the	kids	out	to	the	garden	to	pick	corn.	Just	a	few	minutes,
they’d	tell	the	kids,	could	mean	a	noticeable	loss	in	sweetness.	As	it	turns
out,	the	grannies	were	right:	just	a	few	hours	at	room	temperature	can
deprive	starchy	vegetables	like	corn	and	peas	of	half	of	their	sugars.
Potatoes,	too,	are	at	their	sweetest	when	first	harvested—hence	the
indescribable	pleasure	of	boiled	new	potatoes	topped	with	butter.	As
potatoes	sit	in	storage	all	year,	though,	their	sugars	convert	to	starches.	Fry
newly	dug	potatoes,	full	of	sugar,	and	they’ll	burn	before	they	can	cook
through.	Instead,	when	making	potato	chips	or	fries,	use	starchy,	older
potatoes	and	rinse	them	of	excess	starches	after	slicing	until	the	water	runs
clear.	Only	then	will	your	fried	potatoes	emerge	from	the	hot	oil	of	the	fry
pot	crisp	but	not	burnt.






Pectin
Another	carbohydrate,	pectin,	is	a	kind	of	indigestible	fibre,	and	I	like	to
think	of	it	as	fruit-	and	vegetable-derived	gelatin.	Found	primarily	in	the
seeds	and	peels	of	citrus	fruits,	stone	fruits,	and	apples,	pectin	functions	as
a	gelling	agent	when	combined	with	sugar	and	acid	and	exposed	to	heat.	Its
setting	properties	make	possible	fruit	preserves	and	fruit	pastes	such	as
membrillo,	the	Spanish	quince	paste.	From	June	Taylor,	a	champion	of



traditional	British	preserve-making	methods,	I	learned	to	extract	pectin
from	citrus	into	my	marmalade.	She	taught	me	to	place	a	couple	of	handfuls
of	membranes	and	seeds	into	a	cheesecloth	pouch	and	cook	it	into	the
marmalade	along	with	the	fruit.	When	the	preserves	are	partially	cooked,	I
remove	the	bag,	let	it	cool,	and	then	massage	it	to	coax	out	the	pectin.	The
first	time	I	did	this,	I	was	shocked	to	find	that	I	could	actually	see	the	pectin
—a	milky	white	liquid.	When,	months	later,	I	opened	that	jar	of	marmalade,
the	pectin’s	effects	were	clear:	the	marmalade	was	set,	not	runny,	and
spread	smoothly	across	my	hot,	buttered	toast.

Proteins	and	Heat
It	helps	me	to	picture	proteins	as	coiled	threads	floating	around	in	water.
This	definition	proves	particularly	useful	when	visualising	how	temperature
affects	proteins.	As	with	acid,	when	exposed	to	heat,	the	threads	first
denature,	or	unwind,	and	then	clump	together	more	tightly,	or	coagulate,
entrapping	pockets	of	water,	to	create	structure	in	foods.

Think	of	how	heat	transforms	a	chicken	breast	from	flabby	and	watery
to	firm,	tender,	and	moist	when	perfectly	cooked.	But	apply	too	much	heat
and	the	protein	clumps	will	continue	to	tighten,	squeezing	out	the	pockets
of	water.	With	its	water	expelled,	the	chicken	becomes	dry,	stringy,	and
tough.

This	phenomenon	is	also	apparent	in	scrambled	eggs.	Cook	scrambled
eggs	too	long,	or	at	too	high	a	temperature,	and	they	will	dry	out.	Put	them
on	the	plate,	and	you’ll	see	their	poor,	oversqueezed	proteins	continue	to
wring	water	out,	leaving	a	puddle	behind.	Instead,	to	get	the	silkiest
scrambled	eggs,	follow	Alice	B.	Toklas’s	advice	and	cook	them	over	very	low
heat.	I	imagine	she	learned	a	thing	or	two	about	good	cooking	from	her
adopted	hometown—Paris—where	she	was	a	member	of	the	twentieth-



century	avant-garde.	Crack	4	eggs	into	a	bowl	and	season	them	with	salt
and	a	few	drops	of	lemon	juice,	whisking	thoroughly	to	break	them	up.
Gently	melt	a	little	butter	in	a	saucepan	over	the	lowest	possible	heat	and
pour	in	the	eggs.	Continue	to	stir	with	a	whisk	or	a	fork,	while	adding	4	or
more	tablespoons	of	butter	in	thumb-size	pieces,	letting	each	be	absorbed
before	you	add	the	next.	Never	stop	stirring,	and	be	patient.	It’ll	take	several
minutes	for	the	eggs	to	start	to	come	together.	When	they	do,	pull	them
from	the	stove	in	anticipation	of	the	cooking	that	will	continue	due	to
residual	heat.	Serve	with—what	else?—buttered	toast.

A	little	salt	can	help	keep	proteins	from	drying	out.	Recall	the	many
advantages	of	salting	meat	in	advance.	One	of	its	luckiest	consequences	is
that,	given	enough	time,	salt	will	tinker	with	the	structure	of	meat	proteins,
reducing	their	capacity	to	expel	water.	Consequently,	meat	that	has	been
salted	early	will	be	indescribably	moist	when	cooked	properly,	and	even
forgive	being	slightly	overcooked.

The	coiled	threads	in	each	type	of	protein	are	unique,	so	the	range	at
which	different	proteins	coagulate	is	vast.	Preserve	tender	cuts	of	meat	with
careful,	quick	cooking,	generally	over	the	intense	heat	of	a	grill,	preheated
frying	pan,	or	hot	oven.	If	cooked	to	an	internal	temperature	beyond	60°C,
the	proteins	within	tender	red	meats	will	coagulate	entirely,	expelling	water
and	yielding	tough,	chewy,	overcooked	steaks	and	lamb	chops.	Chicken	and
turkey	breasts,	on	the	other	hand,	don’t	dry	out	until	temperatures	surpass
70°C.

Tougher	cuts,	rich	in	sinewy	connective	tissue,	require	a	slightly	more
nuanced	cooking	approach	to	reveal	their	tenderness:	the	investment	of
gentle	heat,	time,	and	water	implicit	in	braising	or	stewing.	Heat
metamorphises	collagen,	the	main	structural	protein	found	in	animal
connective	tissue,	into	gelatin.	The	tough	and	chewy	proteins	that	make
undercooked	short	ribs	impossible	to	chew	and	unpleasant	to	eat	will



transform	into	gelatin	with	water,	time,	and	further	cooking,	yielding	the
rich,	tender	textures	we	associate	with	barbecued	brisket,	stewed	meats,
and	properly	cooked	short	ribs.	And	since	acid	will	further	amplify	collagen’s
transformation	into	gelatin,	add	an	acidic	ingredient	into	the	marinade,	dry
rub,	or	braise	to	encourage	the	process.

The	key	to	this	transformation	is	gentle	heat.	In	contrast	to	the	carefully
applied	quick	heat	required	to	cook	tender	cuts,	time	and	sustained	low
heat	are	essential	to	transforming	dark	meat’s	tough,	sinewy	connective
tissue	into	luxurious	gelatin	while	its	lumps	of	intermuscular	fat	render	and
baste	the	meat	from	within.

Browning	and	Flavour
Continue	heating	proteins	in	the	presence	of	carbohydrates,	and	a
remarkable	thing	happens:	the	Maillard	reaction,	heat’s	most	significant
contribution	to	flavour.	Compare	bread	to	toasted	bread,	raw	to	seared
tuna,	boiled	to	grilled	meat	or	vegetables.	In	each	case,	the	browned	version
is	much	richer	and	more	delightfully	complex	in	flavour,	a	result	of	the
Maillard	reaction.

This	transformation	reorganises	aromatic	compounds	into	entirely	new
flavours.	In	other	words,	in	browned	versions	of	a	food	we	can	experience
flavours	that	don’t	exist	in	the	pale	version!	In	Acid,	I	described	the	ways	in
which	the	Maillard	reaction	can	produce	sour	flavours	in	a	food.	Any	food
that	undergoes	the	Maillard	reaction—browned	meats,	vegetables,	breads
—can	also	develop	savoury	aromas	such	as	floral,	onion,	meaty,	vegetal,
chocolatey,	starchy,	and	earthy	flavours	in	addition	to	the	flavours	of
caramelisation.	Because	surface	browning	is	often	accompanied	by
dehydration	and	crispness,	it	can	also	leads	to	the	contrasts	in	texture,	as
well	as	flavour,	that	so	delight	our	palates.	My	very	favourite	French	pastry
of	all	time,	the	canelé,	is	the	pinnacle	of	this	sort	of	juxtaposition:	its	tender,
custardy	centre	is	enveloped	by	a	dark,	chewy	crust	altered	by
caramelisation	and	the	Maillard	reaction.



Browning	begins	at	around	110°C—well	past	the	boiling	temperature	of
water	and	the	coagulation	point	of	proteins.	Since	the	temperatures
required	to	achieve	this	kind	of	tasty	browning	will	dry	out	proteins,	beware.
Use	intense	heat	to	brown	the	surface	of	meats	and	quickly	cook	tender
cuts	such	as	steaks	and	chops	through.	After	browning	a	tougher	cut	such
as	brisket,	on	the	other	hand,	use	gentle	heat	to	keep	its	interior	from	drying
out.	Or	do	the	opposite	and	cook	it	through	with	gentle	heat.	Then,	once
the	meat	is	tender,	increase	temperatures	to	brown	the	surface.

Browning	is	an	invaluable	flavouring	technique,	but	it	must	be	done
with	care.	Heat	that’s	uneven	or	too	powerful	can	take	food	straight	past
golden	delicious	to	charred.	But	sear	a	steak	too	timidly,	and	you’ll	overcook
it	before	it	has	a	chance	to	brown.

Learn	to	take	browning	fearlessly	to	the	edge,	because	that’s	where	the
deepest	flavours	lie.	Try	another	little	experiment:	make	two	half-batches	of
Salted	Caramel	Sauce.	Stop	cooking	one	half	when	you	normally	would,
but	cook	the	other	a	few	shades	darker.	Drizzle	both,	side	by	side,	onto
vanilla	ice	cream	and	taste	to	understand	how	much	more	flavour	a	few
moments	on	the	stove	can	yield.	Or,	next	time	you	plan	to	braise	short	ribs
or	chicken	legs,	brown	half	of	the	meat	in	the	dry	heat	of	the	oven,	and	the
other	half	on	the	stove	to	see	how	the	different	forms	of	heat	in	each
method	yield	different	results	(for	a	hint,	read	on	to	Roasting).

As	with	all	good	things,	including	salt,	you	can	take	browning	too	far.
The	next	time	you	dare	to	call	burnt	bacon	or	nuts	“crisp,”	think	of	the	time
one	of	my	cooks	at	Eccolo	did	so,	only	to	spot	Alice	Waters	seated	at	the
bar,	gingerly	picking	the	too-dark	hazelnuts	out	of	her	salad.	Having	just
served	a	culinary	legend	a	dish	he’d	known	was	unsatisfactory,	he	went	into
the	walk-in	refrigerator,	lay	down	on	the	floor,	and	cried.	Though	I	felt
terrible	for	him	when	I	found	out,	all	I	could	do	was	laugh	and	encourage
him	to	learn	from	his	mistake.	Most	of	the	time,	you	don’t	need	anyone	else
to	tell	you	things	aren’t	right;	be	your	own	Alice	Waters.



Temperature’s	Effects	on	Flavour
It’s	tempting	to	think	that	cooking	begins	with	the	click	of	the	gas	burner	or
the	turn	of	the	oven	dial.	It	doesn’t.	Cooking	begins	much,	much	earlier,
with	the	temperature	of	your	ingredients.

To	begin	with,	the	temperature—that	is,	the	measure	of	heat,	or	of	its
absence—of	an	ingredient	will	affect	how	it	cooks.	Food	at	room
temperature	cooks	differently	than	food	straight	from	the	fridge.	The	same
food	will	cook	evenly	or	unevenly,	quickly	or	slowly,	depending	on	its
temperature	at	the	start	of	cooking.	This	is	particularly	true	for	meat,	eggs,
and	dairy,	whose	temperamental	proteins	and	fats	are	deeply	affected	by
temperature	swings.

Take,	for	example,	the	chicken	you’re	thinking	about	roasting	for	dinner.
Slide	the	chicken	directly	from	the	fridge	into	the	oven,	and	by	the	time
enough	heat	penetrates	to	cook	the	legs	through,	the	breast	meat	will	have
overcooked,	resulting	in	tough,	dry	meat.	But	let	the	bird	come	to	room
temperature	on	the	kitchen	worktop	before	roasting	and	the	bird	will	spend
a	shorter	time	in	the	oven,	limiting	the	opportunity	for	overcooking.

Because	the	chicken	is	so	much	more	dense	than	the	hot	oven	air,	the
fifteen	degree	difference	in	the	temperature	of	the	bird	when	you	start
cooking	it—the	approximate	difference	between	fridge	and	room
temperature—is	substantially	more	important	than	a	fifteen	degree
difference	in	oven	temperature.	You	could	cook	a	room-temperature	bird
at	200°C	or	215°C	and	not	see	much	of	a	change	in	cooking	time	or	result.	If
you	cook	a	cold	bird,	the	cooking	time	will	increase	dramatically	and	dry,
tough	breast	meat	will	be	apparent	from	your	first	bite.	Let	all	meats—
except	for	the	thinnest	cuts—come	to	room	temperature	before	you	cook
them.	The	larger	the	roast,	the	earlier	you	can	pull	it	out	of	the	fridge.	A	rib
roast	should	sit	out	for	several	hours,	while	a	chicken	needs	only	a	couple,
but	when	it	comes	to	tempering	meat,	any	time	is	better	than	none	at	all.
Get	in	the	habit	of	pulling	out	the	meat	you	plan	to	cook	for	dinner	right
when	you	get	home	from	work	(and	salting	it,	too,	if	you	haven’t	already),
and	you’ll	learn	that	time	can	do	some	of	the	work	of	good	cooking	even
better	than	the	oven	can.

And	just	as	cooking	doesn’t	begin	when	the	flame	is	lit,	nor	does	it	end
when	the	flame	dies	out.	The	chemical	reactions	generated	by	heat	develop
momentum,	and	they	don’t	stop	the	second	you	turn	off	the	flame.	Proteins
in	particular	are	susceptible	to	carryover—continued	cooking	that	results
from	residual	heat	trapped	within	a	food.	Use	this	knowledge	to	your



advantage,	knowing	that	roasts	carry	over	a	couple	of	degrees	Celsius	on
average	after	they	are	removed	from	heat,	and	that	some	vegetables,	such
as	asparagus,	do	too,	as	well	as	fish,	shellfish,	and	custards.

Apart	from	affecting	how	food	cooks,	temperature	also	affects	how	it
tastes.	For	example,	some	tastes,	when	warm,	trigger	pleasure	responses	in
our	brains.

Many	of	food’s	most	aromatic	molecules	are	volatile,	meaning	that
they	can	evaporate	into	the	surrounding	air.	The	more	of	a	food’s	aromatic
molecules	we	can	breathe	in,	the	more	powerful	our	experience	of	its
flavour	will	be.	Other	flavour	molecules	are	liberated	for	us	to	taste	as	heat
degrades	the	cell	walls	that	confine	them.	By	increasing	their	volatility,	heat
sets	a	greater	number	of	aromatic	molecules	free,	allowing	them	to
permeate	the	environment	more	fully.	The	smell	of	a	tray	of	warm
chocolate	chip	cookies	can	fill	a	room,	whereas	cookie	dough,	still	clinging
to	its	aromatic	compounds,	neither	smells	nor	tastes	as	compelling.

Sweet,	bitter,	and	umami	tastes	are	more	intense	and	send	stronger
signals	to	the	brain	when	food	is	warmer.	As	any	college	student	can	tell
you,	the	same	pint	of	beer,	while	delicious	chilled,	will	be	unpalatably	bitter
at	room	temperature.	Or	try	a	bite	of	cheese	straight	from	the	fridge.	It
won’t	taste	like	much.	Let	the	cheese	come	to	room	temperature.	As	it
warms,	its	fat	molecules	relax,	releasing	entrapped	flavour	compounds.
Taste	the	cheese	again,	and	you’ll	perceive	new	dimensions	of	flavour	that
weren’t	available	before.	Fruits	and	vegetables,	too,	taste	different	at
various	temperatures.	Volatile	compounds	in	some	fruits,	such	as	tomatoes,
are	so	delicate	that	the	cold	of	the	refrigerator	can	make	them	less	available
—making	a	good	case	for	storing	and	eating	them	at	room	temperature.

There’s	a	case	to	be	made	for	serving	food	warm	or	at	room
temperature	rather	than	blazing	hot.	Researchers	posit	that	excessive	heat
impairs	our	ability	to	enjoy	the	flavour	of	food.	Besides	burning	our	taste
buds,	hot	food	is	harder	to	taste.	The	perception	of	taste	decreases	when	a
food’s	temperature	rises	beyond	35°C.	While	some	foods,	such	as	many
pasta	dishes	and	fried	fish,	suffer	if	they’re	not	served	immediately	after
coming	out	of	the	pan,	most	others	are	more	forgiving.

Over	the	years,	I’ve	grown	to	prefer	serving	warm	and	room-
temperature	food	at	gatherings.	Try	throwing	a	dinner	party	where	you
don’t	serve	anything	hot.	Prepare	marinated	roasted	or	grilled	vegetables;
sliced	roasted	meats;	grain,	noodle,	or	bean	salads;	frittatas	and	hard-boiled
eggs.	Besides	tasting	better,	hosting	a	dinner	this	way	is	also	a	lot	less



stressful	than	trying	to	herd	guests	and	rush	a	soufflé	to	the	table!
The	Flavour	of	Smoke
Smoke,	that	wispy	consequence	of	heat,	conveys	a	powerful	flavour	to
food.	Most	of	smoke’s	flavour	is	in	its	aroma,	and	it’s	one	that	triggers
ancestral	memories	of	the	earliest	kind	of	cooking:	over	fire.

Made	up	of	gases,	water	vapour,	and	small	particles	resulting	from
combustion,	smoke	is	a	by-product	of	burning	wood,	which	is	why	I	always
choose	to	grill	over	a	live	fire	rather	than	gas,	even	though	it	takes	more
time	and	effort.	If	all	you’ve	got	is	a	gas	grill	and	you	want	to	impart	some
smokiness	to	your	grilled	meats	and	vegetables,	you	can	use	wood	chips.
Just	soak	and	drain	a	couple	of	handfuls—I	love	the	flavours	of	oak,	almond,
and	fruit	woods—in	a	disposable	aluminium	baking	pan	and	cover	with	foil.
Poke	several	holes	in	the	foil	to	allow	the	smoke	to	escape.	Turn	on	some,
but	not	all,	of	the	burners,	place	the	pan	over	an	unlit	spot,	and	close	the	lid.
Begin	cooking	once	you	catch	the	first	appetising	whiffs	of	smoke.	Close	the
lid	to	bathe	your	meat	and	vegetables	in	smoky	flavours,	which	result	from	a
series	of	chemical	reactions,	including	browning.	Heat	transforms	the
flavours	of	wood	into	the	marvellous	flavours	of	smoke,	which	include
aromatic	compounds	similar	to	those	found	in	vanilla	and	cloves.	When
food	is	exposed	to	smoke,	it	absorbs	the	sweet,	fruity,	caramel,	flowery,	and
bready	flavour	compounds.	You’ll	see—nothing	else	compares	to	the
flavour	of	true	wood	smoke.



USING	HEAT
At	the	heart	of	good	cooking	lies	good	decision	making,	and	the	primary
decision	regarding	Heat	is	whether	to	cook	food	slowly	over	gentle	heat,	or
quickly	over	intense	heat.	The	easiest	way	to	determine	which	level	of	heat	to
apply	is	to	consider	tenderness.	For	some	foods,	the	goal	is	creating
tenderness,	while	for	others,	it’s	preserving	innate	tenderness.	In	general,
foods	that	are	already	tender—some	meats,	eggs,	delicate	vegetables—
should	be	cooked	as	little	as	possible	to	maintain	their	tenderness.	Foods
that	start	out	tough	or	dry	and	need	to	be	hydrated	or	transformed	to
become	tender—grains	and	starches,	tough	meats,	dense	vegetables—will
benefit	from	longer,	more	gentle	cooking.	Browning,	whether	for	tender	or
tough	foods,	will	often	involve	some	form	of	intense	heat,	meaning	that
sometimes	you	have	to	combine	cooking	methods	to	get	the	different
results	you’re	after	on	the	surface	and	within.	For	example,	brown	and	then
simmer	meats	in	a	stew,	or	simmer	and	then	brown	potatoes	for	hash	to
ensure	browning	and	tenderness	in	both	cases.
A	Note	on	the	Oven
Baking,	the	most	precise	endeavour	in	the	kitchen,	is	powered	by	its	most
imprecise	source	of	heat:	the	oven.	Humans	have	never	had	much	control
over	exact	oven	temperatures,	whether	in	the	first	ovens,	which	were	little
more	than	pits	in	the	ground	heated	by	a	wood	fire,	or	in	today’s	luxe	gas-
powered	models.	The	only	difference	is	that	when	ovens	were	still	powered
by	a	live	fire,	no	one	believed	that	he	or	she	could	control	temperature	with
the	turn	of	a	dial.	Because	the	truth	is,	no	one	can.

Set	the	average	home	oven	to	175°C,	and	it’ll	heat	up	to	about	185°C
before	the	heating	element	shuts	off.	Depending	on	how	sensitive	the
thermostat	is,	the	temperature	might	drop	down	to	165°C	before	the
heating	element	switches	on	again.	Open	the	oven	door	to	check	on	the
cookies,	and	cool	air	will	rush	in	as	hot	air	escapes,	dropping	the
temperature	even	more.	Once	the	thermostat	is	triggered,	the	temperature
will	head	back	to	185°C,	with	the	cycle	continuing	until	the	cookies	are
done.	The	amount	of	time	the	oven	actually	spends	at	175°C	is	negligible.	If
your	oven	is	miscalibrated—and	most	are—then	175°C	could	mean
anywhere	from	150°C	to	200°C,	before	the	heating	cycle	even	begins.	It’s	all
mind-bogglingly	imprecise.

Don’t	let	the	oven’s	willy-nilly	nature	scare	you.	Instead,	be	bold:	don’t
rely	on	the	oven	dial.	Paying	attention	to	the	sensory	cues	that	indicate	how



food	is	cooking	is	far	more	valuable	than	minding	an	arbitrary	number.	I
internalised	this	lesson	the	first	time	I	worked	the	wood-fired	spit	at	Eccolo.
I	was	still	a	young	cook	when	I	arrived	back	in	California,	after	my	travels	to
Italy	and	beyond.	Constantly	doubting	myself,	I	made	it	easy	for	the	cooks
with	whom	I	shared	the	kitchen	to	doubt	me,	too.	None	of	them	ever
seemed	insecure	about	working	the	spit,	but	I	was	terrified.	What	did	they
know	that	I	didn’t?

Most	nights,	we	roasted	skewers	of	chickens	on	the	spit,	over	burning
oak	and	almond	wood.	I	had	so	many	questions:	How	would	I	know	where
to	build	the	fire?	How	would	I	know	how	much	wood	to	add,	and	when?
How	would	I	know	if	the	fire	was	too	hot,	or	cool,	and	when	the	chickens
were	done	cooking?	How	could	they	expect	me	to	cook	anything	properly
on	this	crazy	contraption	when	it	had	no	controls,	dials,	or	thermostat?

Sensing	my	impending	meltdown,	the	chef,	Christopher	Lee,	took	me
aside	and	patiently	explained	that	even	though	I’d	never	used	a	spit,	I	was
prepared.	Hadn’t	I	roasted	hundreds	of	chickens	over	the	years?	Didn’t	I
know	that	it	takes	about	70	minutes	for	a	chicken	to	roast	in	the	oven?
Didn’t	I	know	that	I	could	tell	when	a	chicken	was	cooked	when	the	juice	at
the	thigh	ran	clear	when	pricked?	I	had,	and	I	did.	He	showed	me	how	heat
reflected	off	the	walls	of	the	rotisserie	oven	just	like	it	did	in	a	gas	oven,	how
it	was	hotter	in	the	back	and	cooler	in	the	front	just	like	in	an	oven,	and	to
treat	the	birds	as	if	I	were	roasting	them	in	a	big,	black	box—something	I
could	do	with	ease.	Soon,	I	realised	that	spit-roasting	looked	a	lot	more
complicated	than	it	actually	was,	and	it	quickly	became	my	favourite	way	to
cook.



Relinquish	the	false	sense	of	control	an	oven	offers,	just	like	I	did	at	the
spit.	Instead	pay	attention	to	how	your	food	is	cooking.	Is	it	rising?
Browning?	Setting?	Smoking?	Bubbling?	Burning?	Jiggling?	When	you	read
recipes,	think	of	temperatures	and	cooking	times	as	strong	suggestions,
rather	than	fixed	rules.	Set	your	timer	for	a	few	minutes	less	than	a	recipe
might	suggest,	then	use	all	of	your	senses	to	check	for	doneness.	Always
remember	the	qualities	you	seek	in	your	food.	Adjust	course	constantly	and
accordingly	to	achieve	them.	This	is	what	good	cooking	looks	like.
Gentle	Heat	versus	Intense	Heat
The	aim	of	cooking	with	gentle	heat	is	always	the	same:	tenderness.	Use
gentle	cooking	methods	to	allow	delicate	foods—such	as	eggs,	dairy,	fish,
and	shellfish—to	retain	their	moisture	and	delicate	texture.	Let	gentle	heat
transform	the	dry	and	tough	into	the	moist	and	tender.	Choose	among
intense	heat	cooking	methods	(apart	from	boiling,	which	is	intense	in	its
own	way)	when	seeking	to	brown	food.	When	carefully	applied	to	tender
meats,	intense	cooking	methods	lead	to	brown	surfaces	and	moist,	juicy
interiors.	For	tough	meats	and	starchy	foods,	combine	these	methods	with
gentler	ones,	in	order	to	achieve	the	desired	browning	on	the	outside	and
allow	low	heat	to	do	its	gradual	work	within.
Gentle	Cooking	Methods
• Simmering,	Coddling,	and	Poaching
• Steaming
• Stewing	and	Braising
• Confit
• Sweating
• Bain-marie
• Low-heat	Baking	and	Dehydrating
• Slow-roasting,	Grilling,	and	Smoking
Intense	Cooking	Methods
• Blanching,	Boiling,	and	Reducing
• Sautéing,	Pan-frying,	and	Shallow-	and	Deep-frying
• Searing
• Grilling



• High-heat	Baking
• Toasting
• Roasting
Cooking	Methods	and	Techniques
Cooking	with	Water
Simmering
Since	the	boiling	point	of	water	is	such	an	important	kitchen	landmark,	I’d
always	assumed	boiling	to	be	the	most	straightforward	cooking	method:	just
drop	food	into	a	pot	of	bubbling	water	and	pull	it	out	when	it’s	done.	Then
one	day,	after	about	a	year	in	the	kitchen,	as	I	turned	my	hundredth	pot	of
boiling	chicken	stock	down	to	a	simmer,	a	light-bulb	went	off:	when	it
comes	to	cooking	food	in	liquid,	cooking	food	through	at	a	rolling	boil	is	the
exception	rather	than	the	rule.

I	realised	boiling	is	called	for	only	when	cooking	vegetables,	grains,	and
pasta;	reducing	sauces;	and	hard-boiling	eggs.	I	could	bring	everything	else
—and	I	mean	everything—	to	a	boil	and	then	swiftly	reduce	it	to	a	simmer	to
cook	through,	whether	I	was	cooking	over	a	live	fire,	on	the	stove,	or	in	an
oven.	Since	simmering	water	is	gentler	than	boiling	water,	it	won’t	jostle
delicate	foods	so	much	that	they	fall	apart	or	agitate	tougher	foods	so	much
that	they	overcook	on	the	surface	before	cooking	through	completely.

Beans.	Braises.	Paella.	Jasmine	Rice.	Chicken	Vindaloo.	Pozole.	Quinoa.
Stews.	Risotto.	Chilli.	Béchamel	sauce.	Potato	gratin.	Tomato	sauce.
Chicken	stock.	Polenta.	Oatmeal.	Thai	curry.	It	didn’t	matter—this	applied
to	everything	cooked	in	liquid.	It	was	a	life-changing	revelation!

Depending	on	whom	you	ask,	the	temperature	of	simmering	water	can
range	from	82°C	to	96°C.	Look	at	the	pot—is	it	barely	bubbling	like	a	just-
poured	glass	of	your	favourite	sparkling	water,	beer,	or	champagne?	If	so,
then	cheers—it’s	simmering.
Sauces
Bring	tomato	sauce,	curry,	milk	gravy,	and	mole	sauce	alike	to	a	boil,	then
turn	down	to	a	simmer	to	cook	them	through.	Some	sauces,	such	as	Ragù
Bolognese,	take	all	day.	Others,	such	as	pan	sauces	or	Indian	butter	chicken,
cook	far	more	quickly,	but	the	process	is	the	same.

In	general,	keep	sauces	containing	fresh	milk	at	a	simmer,	because
some	of	the	proteins	in	milk	can	coagulate	above	temperatures	of	82°C,



resulting	in	curdled,	grainy	sauces.	Sauces	made	from	cream	contain	little	to
no	protein	and	avoid	this	risk	of	coagulation.	And	milk	sauces	containing
flour,	such	as	béchamel	or	pastry	cream,	are	an	exception	to	this	rule,	as
flour	will	interfere	with	coagulation.	Still,	remember	that	the	natural	sugars
in	milk	and	cream	are	eager	to	scorch,	so	once	these	sauces	come	to	a	boil,
reduce	them	to	a	simmer	and	stir	often	to	prevent	burning.
Meats
I	used	to	turn	my	nose	up	at	boiled	meat,	which	really	ought	to	be	called
simmered	meat,	but	that	was	before	I	discovered	Nerbone,	a	sandwich
stand	in	Florence’s	Mercato	Centrale.	The	lunch	lines	at	Nerbone	were	the
longest	in	the	market,	so	I	decided	to	investigate.	While	I	stood	in	line,	I
eavesdropped	as	everyone	ahead	of	me	in	line	ordered,	trying	to	decipher
their	words.	Even	though	there	was	a	full	lunch	menu	replete	with	pastas
and	main	courses,	everyone	disregarded	it,	instead	ordering	panini	bolliti—
boiled	beef	sandwiches—garnished	with	chilli	oil	and	an	herby	salsa	verde.

When	I	got	to	the	front	of	the	line,	I	carefully	placed	my	order	in	Italian,
“Un	panino	bollito	con	tutte	due	le	salse.”	A	boiled	beef	sandwich	with	both
sauces.	Though	I’d	been	in	Italy	for	less	than	a	week,	I’d	studied	Italian
intensively	before	arriving.	I	may	have	overestimated	my	grasp	of	the
language.	When	the	man	at	the	counter	said	something	to	me	in	Tuscan
dialect,	I	froze.	I	refused	to	admit	that	I	had	absolutely	no	clue	what	he’d
just	said.	I	nodded	vehemently	and	paid	the	cashier.	He	handed	me	my
sandwich,	which	I	took	outside	to	eat	on	the	steps	of	the	market.	I	took	a
bite,	expecting	to	taste	the	tender,	flavourful	brisket	I’d	seen	him	slicing	for
the	others,	but	that	wasn’t	what	I	got.	I	was	totally	thrown	off	at	first.	I	had
no	idea	what	was	wrong	with	my	sandwich.	If	this	was	indeed	brisket,	it	was
definitely	the	weirdest	brisket	I’d	ever	had.	How	could	this	strange-textured,
off-tasting	thing	be	what	everyone	was	lining	up	for?	After	a	brief	panic,	I
forced	myself	to	continue	chewing	and	swallow.	I	went	back	and	hovered	at
the	sandwich	stand,	studying	the	signs,	until	I	finally	figured	out	that	the
man	at	the	counter	had	been	trying	to	tell	me	he’d	sold	out	of	brisket.	All	he
had	left	was	lampredotto,	a	Florentine	speciality.	With	my	vehement
nodding,	I’d	signalled	that	I’d	be	fine	with	tripe	instead	of	brisket.	I	forced
myself	to	eat	that	sandwich,	even	though	I’d	never	before—and	have	never
since—enjoyed	tripe.	It	may	not	have	been	suited	to	my	tastes,	exactly,	but
I	will	say—it	was	the	most	tender	meat	I’d	ever	had.	The	next	time	I
returned	to	Nerbone,	I	got	there	early	to	beat	the	lunch	rush.	The	brisket
sandwich	was	the	best	I’d	ever	had.	Eventually,	when	my	language	skills
improved,	I	asked	the	counter	guy	how	he	got	the	meat	so	tender	and



moist.	He	looked	at	me,	bewildered.	“È	semplice.	Arrivo	ogni	mattina	alle	sei	e
lo	cuoco	a	fuoco	lento—It’s	simple.	I	get	here	every	morning	at	six	and
simmer	it.”

And	then	he	added,	“L’acqua	non	dovrebbe	bollire	mai—The	water	must
never	boil.”

He	was	right—there’s	no	recipe	for	meat	more	straightforward	than
“Simmer	in	salted	water.”	Such	a	simple	preparation	leaves	lots	of	room	for
exotic	or	savoury	garnishes.	That	is	its	beauty.	Vietnam’s	chicken	noodle
soup	Pho	Gà,	a	model	of	clarity,	is	most	inviting	to	a	long	list	of	garnishes
including	spring	onions,	mint,	coriander,	chillies,	and	lime.

Cuts	of	meat	with	lots	of	connective	tissue,	such	as	chicken	thighs,
brisket,	and	pork	shoulder,	are	perfect	for	simmering,	as	the	water	and
gentle	heat	will	transform	collagen	into	gelatin	overtime	without	drying	out
the	exterior.	To	yield	the	most	flavourful	meat,	place	it	in	boiling,	salted
water,	then	turn	it	down	to	a	simmer.	For	tasty	meat	and	broth,	start	with
simmering	water.	Add	a	few	aromatics—half	an	onion,	a	few	cloves	of	garlic,
bay	leaves,	or	a	dried	chilli—and	leave	the	slate	otherwise	blank.	Over	the
course	of	the	week,	refer	to	The	World	of	Flavour	here	and	turn	the	meat
into	a	different	dish	each	night.	How	to	know	when	the	meat	is	done?	It’ll	be
falling	off	the	bone,	or	if	boneless,	it’ll	be	mouthwateringly	tender.
Starches



Starchy	carbohydrates	prosper	at	a	simmer,	which	rattles	their	tough	skins
and	encourages	water	to	flow	inside.	Simmer	potatoes,	beans,	rice,	and	all
manner	of	grains	until	they’ve	absorbed	enough	water	to	be	tender.

As	with	boiled	meat,	heighten	the	flavour	of	any	starch	by	simmering	it
in	a	savoury	cooking	liquid.	Cook	rice	in	unskimmed	chicken	stock,	as	Thai
cooks	do	for	khao	man	gai,	and	you’ll	give	a	modest	meal	of	rice,	greens,	and
an	egg	a	little	meaty	edge.	When	my	grandparents	took	me	on	a	trip	into	the
mountains	towering	above	their	village	in	northern	Iran,	each	morning	I
eagerly	looked	forward	to	a	breakfast	of	haleem:	the	hearty,	nutritious
porridge	of	wheat,	oats,	and	turkey	simmered	slowly	together	in	stock	or
milk	warmed	me	up	in	spite	of	the	crisp	mountain	air.

Porridges,	including	polenta,	grits,	and	oatmeal,	are	variations	on	this
theme—simmer	these	starches	in	water,	milk,	or	whey,	the	clear	liquid	that
gathers	atop	yoghurt,	until	they	grow	tender.	Because	they	are	so	starchy,
stir	these	dishes	often	to	prevent	scorching.

Risotto,	paella,	and	fideus	react	similarly.	Make	risotto	with	arborio	rice,
a	variety	with	a	remarkable	capacity	to	absorb	an	immense	amount	of	liquid
without	falling	apart.	After	toasting	the	onions	and	browning	the	rice	in	fat,
add	flavourful	liquids,	such	as	wine,	stock,	or	tomatoes.	As	the	pot	simmers,
the	rice	takes	on	liquid	and	gives	off	starch.	The	more	flavourful	the	liquid,
the	more	flavourful	the	finished	dish	will	be.	Fideus,	a	similar	dish	from
Spain,	is	made	with	toasted	noodles	instead	of	rice.	Paella,	too,	is	built	on
the	concept	of	a	thirsty	starch	drinking	up	a	flavourful	stock.	Traditionally,
paella	isn’t	stirred	but	left	untouched	as	it	cooks,	and	is	prized	for	the
soccorat,	or	crisp	crust	of	rice	that	forms	at	the	bottom	of	the	pan	as	a	result.



Pasta	will	also	absorb	flavourful	liquids.	As	I	described	in	the	step-by-
step	recipe	for	Pasta	alle	Vongole,	one	of	my	favourite	tricks	is	to	pull	the
noodles	from	the	boiling	water	a	minute	or	two	early	and	let	them	finish
cooking	in	a	pan	of	simmering	sauce.	This	allows	the	noodles	and	the	sauce
to	unify	into	a	single	entity—as	the	pasta	cooks,	it	gives	off	starch	and	takes
on	liquid.	As	a	result,	the	sauce	absorbs	its	starch	and	thickens.	And	the
pasta	takes	on	the	sauce’s	flavour.	There’s	nothing	else	like	it.

Vegetables
Simmer	fibrous	or	tough	vegetables—those	particularly	rich	in	cellulose—



that	require	extended	cooking	to	be	rendered	edible.	Spare	fennel	and
artichokes	(and	cardoons,	their	thistly	cousins)	from	the	tumult	of	boiling	to
keep	them	from	falling	apart.	Instead,	simmer	them	until	tender	with	equal
parts	water	and	wine	spiked	with	olive	oil,	vinegar,	and	aromatics	to	cook
them	à	la	grecque.

Coddling	and	Poaching
If	simmering	water	resembles	a	glass	of	champagne,	then	the	water	for
poaching	and	coddling	should	look	like	a	glass	of	champagne	you	poured
last	night	but	(somehow!)	forgot	to	drink.	The	extra-gentle	heat	of	water
used	for	coddling	and	poaching	is	perfect	for	delicate	proteins—eggs,	fish,
shellfish,	and	tender	meats.	Fish	poached	in	water,	wine,	olive	oil,	or	any
combination	of	the	three	will	emerge	with	an	exceptionally	tender	texture
and	clean	flavour.	A	poached	or	coddled	egg	can	turn	toast,	salad,	or	soup
into	a	meal.	Poach	eggs	in	spicy	tomato	sauce	and	you’ll	have	shakshuka,
the	popular	North	African	dish.	Use	leftover	marinara	sauce	for	the
endeavour	and	garnish	with	abundant	Parmesan	or	pecorino	Romano	for
uova	al	purgatorio,	the	Italian	version	with	a	slightly	sinister	name.	Either	will
make	a	fine	meal	at	any	time	of	day.
Bain-marie
A	bain-marie,	or	water	bath,	will	help	expand	the	narrow	margin	of	error	for
cooking	curds,	custards,	bread	puddings,	and	soufflés,	and	for	other	delicate
tasks	such	as	melting	chocolate.	For	these	temperamental	dishes,	where
just	a	few	moments	of	neglect	can	mean	the	difference	between	silky	and



lumpy	or	smooth	and	grainy,	welcome	the	assistance	a	water	bath	offers.

Bains-marie	are	generally	used	in	the	oven	to	regulate	heat;	though	the
oven	temperature	might	be	at	175°C,	the	temperature	of	the	bath	won’t
exceed	water’s	boiling	point	of	100°C.	But	overcook	a	custard,	or	misjudge
how	much	heat	will	carry	over,	and	you’ll	end	up	with	grainy	pot	de	crème,
stiff	crème	caramel,	or	cracked	cheesecake.	Pull	custards	from	the	oven	and
the	water	bath	in	anticipation	of	the	residual	heat	that	encourages
coagulation	to	continue	even	as	the	egg	proteins	cool.	I	once	pulled	a	still-
jiggling	cheesecake	from	the	oven.	Cooling	on	the	worktop,	it	looked	so
textbook-perfect	that	I	kept	making	excuses	to	walk	by	and	gaze	at	it.	When
I	passed	through	the	kitchen	for	the	twentieth	time—after	about	four	hours
—a	mighty	crack	had	suddenly	appeared,	signalling	that	I’d	overcooked	it.
I’d	underestimated	the	power	of	carryover;	the	jiggle	hadn’t	been	jiggly
enough!

To	bake	in	a	bain-marie,	put	a	kettle	on	to	boil	while	you	prepare	your
custard	base.	If	you	have	a	wire	rack,	place	it	into	an	empty	roasting	pan—
preferably	metal—and	lay	the	empty	ramekins	or	cake	tin	atop	it	and	fill
them	with	custard.	If	you	don’t	have	a	wire	rack,	it’s	fine—just	be	a	tad	more
vigilant	about	checking	your	custards	for	doneness.	Carefully	carry	the	pan
to	the	oven.	Working	quickly,	open	the	oven	door,	place	the	pan	partway	on
the	rack,	and	pour	in	enough	boiling	water	to	go	one-third	of	the	way	up	the
sides	of	the	custards.	Slide	the	pan	in,	shut	the	oven	door,	and	set	a	timer.	A
baked	custard	is	generally	done	when	a	tap	to	the	edge	of	the	dish	leaves
behind	a	faint	jiggle	in	its	wake,	but	the	centre	is	no	longer	liquid.	Upon
removing	them	from	the	oven,	carefully	pull	custards	from	the	water.

For	gentle	heat	on	the	stove,	use	a	slightly	different	kind	of	bain-marie,
heated	by	steam	rather	than	hot	water.	You	don’t	need	the	whole	setup
known	as	a	double	boiler;	you	can	simply	place	a	large	bowl	over	a	pot	of



barely	simmering	water,	in	order	to	gently	heat	eggs	and	dairy	to	room
temperature	for	use	in	baking,	to	melt	chocolate,	to	make	certain	sauces
that	contain	egg,	such	as	béarnaise	and	hollandaise,	or	sabayon,	a	classic
stovetop	custard.	Just	as	the	heat	of	a	bain-marie	protects	custards	from
overcooking	in	the	oven,	it	also	protects	them	on	the	stove.

The	gentle	heat	of	a	bain-marie	is	also	handy	for	keeping	starchy	or
temperamental	cooked	foods	such	as	mashed	potatoes,	creamy	soups,	hot
chocolate,	and	gravy	warm	until	serving,	without	the	risk	of	burning	them.
Stewing	and	Braising
Twentieth-century	poet	Mark	Strand	neatly	addressed	the	time-flavour
continuum	for	braised	meats	in	his	poem	“Pot	Roast.”	Upon	inspection	of
the	saucy	slices	of	braised	beef	on	his	plate,	with	mouthwatering
anticipation,	he	declared,	“And	for	once	I	do	not	regret	/	the	passage	of
time.”

Reading	the	poem,	I	know	exactly	how	he	must	have	felt,	impatiently
waiting	for	hours	for	the	tender	meat	to	emerge	from	the	oven.	Indeed,	the
key	to	any	good	stew	or	braise	is	the	passage	of	time.	Though	investing	time
in	cooking—or	in	anything—can	turn	some	of	us	off	from	the	endeavour,
with	braises	the	investment	requires	little	of	us	but	delivers	big	results.

As	my	grandmother	demonstrated	with	her	flavourful	khoreshs,	it’s	time
in	braising	and	stewing,	along	with	water	and	the	implicit	gentle	heat,	which
allows	for	the	connective	tissue	in	the	tough	cuts	of	meat	to	transform	into
gelatin,	leaving	meat	tender,	luscious,	and	moist.	The	difference	between
the	two	methods	is	minor:	braises	involve	larger	pieces	of	meat—often	on
the	bone—and	minimal	cooking	liquid,	while	stews	are	made	with	smaller
pieces	of	meat	cooked	with	chunky	vegetables,	typically	served	together	in
the	plentiful	cooking	liquid.	Greens,	dense	vegetables,	stone	fruits,	and	tofu
also	lend	themselves	well	to	braising.

At	Chez	Panisse,	I	watched	chefs	buy	whole	animals	and	devise
creative	ways	to	use	up	all	of	the	tough,	sinewy	cuts.	Some	we	cured,	others
we	ground	into	sausage,	and	the	rest	we	braised	and	stewed.	For	months	I
watched	with	awe	as	the	cooks	set	out	several	cast	iron	pans	to	heat	up
over	a	medium-high	flame,	then	added	a	splash	of	neutral	tasting	olive	oil
into	the	pan	and	laid	in	big	pieces	of	beef,	lamb,	or	pork	to	brown.	How	did
they	keep	tabs	on	all	of	the	different	pans,	all	of	the	different	pieces	of
meat?	How	could	they	turn	their	backs	on	six	pans	of	cooking	meat	in	order
to	peel	and	slice	the	onions,	garlic,	carrots,	and	celery	for	the	aromatic



flavour	base?	How	did	they	know	what	temperature	to	set	the	burner	or
oven	to,	and	how	long	to	cook	the	meat?	And	when	could	I	try?

With	the	long	lens	of	hindsight	at	my	disposal,	I’ve	learned	that	the	best
thing	about	braises	is	that	they’re	nearly	impossible	to	ruin.	If	I	could	go
back	and	tell	my	nineteen-year-old	self	to	relax,	I	would.	And	then	I’d	walk
her	through	the	few	important	landmarks	of	setting	up	and	cooking	a	braise
or	stew.

Every	cuisine	around	the	world	has	devised	ways	to	turn	cartilaginous,
bony,	and	sinewy	meats	into	delicious	braises	and	stews.	This	is	true	of
Italian	osso	buco,	Japanese	nikujaga,	Indian	lamb	curry,	French	boeuf
bourguignon,	Mexican	pork	adobo,	and	Mr.	Strand’s	pot	roast.	Use	the	chart
of	aromatic	flavour	bases	from	around	the	world	to	determine	what
vegetables	and	herbs	you’d	like	to	use,	and	refer	to	The	World	of	Flavour
to	choose	your	flavourings.

Think	of	these	long-cooked	dishes	as	opportunities	to	layer	in	flavour.
Every	step	of	the	way,	consider	how	to	infuse	the	most	flavour	into	the	dish
and	extract	the	deepest	flavour	out	of	every	individual	ingredient.	Apply	the
principles	of	braising	and	stewing	to	any	tough	cut	of	meat.	To	preserve
flavour,	leave	the	meat	in	large	pieces	and	on	the	bone	when	possible.	And
remember	to	season	the	meat	in	advance	to	let	salt	do	its	important	work	of
flavouring	from	within.

When	it’s	time	to	cook,	preheat	a	frying	pan	over	a	medium-high	flame,
pour	in	a	thin	layer	of	neutral-tasting	oil,	and	carefully	place	in	the	pieces	of
meat.	Make	sure	none	of	the	pieces	touch,	to	encourage	steam	to	escape
and	to	allow	for	even	browning.	Then	do	what	I	once	found	so	difficult,	and
step	away.	The	keys	to	beautiful,	even	browning	are	steady	heat	and
patience.	If	you	move	the	meat	around	too	often,	or	just	keep	picking	it	up
to	check	on	it,	it	will	take	an	absurdly	long	time	to	brown.	Resist	that	urge,
and	instead	work	on	the	aromatic	flavour	base.

In	a	separate	pan,	or	perhaps	the	same	casserole	you	plan	to	cook	the
braise,	build	flavour	by	cooking	down	and	slightly	browning	your	vegetables,
which	can	be	as	minimal	as	an	onion	and	a	couple	of	garlic	cloves	if	you’re
not	feeling	up	for	a	hunt	for	ginger	or	coriander.	As	the	vegetables	cook,
check	on	the	meat,	turning	the	pieces	and	rotating	the	pan	to	get	even
browning.	If	so	much	fat	renders	from	the	meat	that	instead	of	searing	the
meat	begins	to	fry,	remove	the	meat	from	the	pan	and	carefully	pour	some
of	the	hot	fat	into	a	metal	bowl	and	set	aside.	Return	the	meat	to	the	pan
and	continue	to	brown	on	all	sides.	It	can	take	upwards	of	fifteen	minutes	to



properly	brown	a	piece	of	beef	or	pork	on	all	its	sides.	Do	not	rush	this	step
—you	want	the	meat	to	reap	all	of	the	savoury	benefits	of	the	Maillard
reaction.

When	you’ve	finished	browning	the	meat,	dump	out	any	remaining	fat
and	deglaze	the	pan	with	your	liquid	of	choice,	be	it	stock	or	water.
Remember,	this	is	an	ideal	moment	to	work	in	a	cooking	acid,	so	consider
adding	some	wine	or	beer.	Use	a	wooden	spoon	and	some	elbow	grease	to
get	all	of	the	tasty	brown	bits	unstuck	so	you	can	add	them	into	the	braising
pan.	Build	the	braise	with	the	vegetables	and	herbs	on	the	bottom,	then
place	in	the	meat—here	it’s	all	right	if	pieces	touch	as	long	as	they	all	fit	in	a
single	layer,	since	browning	isn’t	a	concern	any	longer—and	then	add	the
deglazing	liquid.	Top	off	with	more	water	or	stock	to	come	up	about	a	third
or	halfway	up	the	meat—any	more	and	you’ll	be	poaching	rather	than
braising.	Seal	the	pan	with	a	lid,	or	parchment	paper	and	foil,	and	bring
everything	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a	gentle	simmer.	On	the	stove,	this	is
simple	enough,	but	in	the	oven,	that	means	cranking	the	temperature	up	to
high	(220°C	and	above),	and	then	turning	it	down	to	medium-low	(140°C	to
180°C).	The	lower	the	temperature,	the	longer	the	braise	will	take,	but	the
less	likely	the	meat	will	dry	out.	If	the	liquid	can’t	help	but	boil,	flip	the	lid
ajar	or	tear	open	the	edge	of	the	foil	to	encourage	the	temperature	inside
the	pan	to	drop.

Again,	patience	is	key,	but	the	boon	is	that	this	is	passive	cooking	time.
As	long	as	you	check	on	the	pan	from	time	to	time	to	make	sure	the	liquid
remains	at	a	slight	simmer	and	nothing	more,	you	can	go	about	your	day	as
you	like.	The	only	hustle	involved	in	braising	is	setting	everything	up	and
getting	it	into	the	oven.	(Or	any	source	of	steady	or	gentle	heat.)	Once	it’s
in,	you	can	breathe	easy.

How	to	know	when	it’s	done?	I	wondered	the	same	thing	at	nineteen,	in
the	kitchen	at	Chez	Panisse.	But	I	soon	learned	that	the	meat	should	fall	off
the	bone	at	the	gentlest	touch.	In	boneless	braises,	meat	should	be	fork-
tender.	Pull	the	pan	from	the	heat	and	let	it	cool	before	straining	the
cooking	liquid.	Pass	the	solids	through	a	food	mill	for	a	thicker	sauce,	and
taste	it	and	decide	if	you’d	like	to	reduce	it	to	intensify	flavour	before	adding
any	salt.

These	techniques	are	ideal	for	preparing	food	in	advance.	Time
performs	a	potent	alchemy	on	cooked	braises	and	stews,	improving	flavour
with	a	day	or	two	of	rest.	Because	it	liberates	the	cook	from	last-minute
demands,	this	kind	of	cooking	is	ideal	for	dinner	parties.	Braises	and	stews



make	for	excellent	leftovers	and	freeze	well,	too.	With	its	basic	technique,
braising	can	be	the	most	effortless	path	towards	deeply	flavourful	food.



Blanching	and	Boiling
Blanching	is	boiling	by	another	name,	and	the	key	to	both	is	to	keep	the
water	at	a	boil.	In	Salt,	I	described	how	foods	need	to	frolic	when	boiled	in
salty	waves	to	cook	evenly.

Add	too	much	food	to	too	little	water,	and	a	pot’s	temperature	will	drop
drastically.	A	rolling	boil	will	come	to	a	rocking	halt.	Pasta	will	clump.



Basmati	rice	for	Persian-ish	Rice	will	stick.	Pencil-thin	asparagus	spears	will
pile	up	on	the	bottom	of	the	pot	and	cook	unevenly.	Do	justice	to	any	food
you	blanch	and	keep	water	at	a	rolling	boil	by	using	twice	as	much	as	you
think	you	need.
Vegetables
Boiling	is	an	extraordinarily	efficient	cooking	method,	perfect	for	preserving
the	flavour	of	fresh	vegetables.	Boil	vegetables	long	enough	to	let	heat
degrade	their	internal	cell	walls	and	release	their	sugars,	and	so	that	their
starches	can	convert	to	sugars,	developing	sweetness.	But	be	careful	not	to
cook	them	so	long	that	their	vibrant	colours	begin	to	fade	or	their	cell	walls
break	down	entirely,	resulting	in	mushy	textures.	Choose	to	boil	vegetables
when	you’re	short	on	time,	or	when	you’re	seeking	clean	flavours.	Boil
everyday	vegetables	such	as	turnips,	potatoes,	carrots,	and	broccoli	and
dress	them	with	good	olive	oil	and	flaky	salt.	You’ll	be	pleasantly	surprised
by	their	pristine	simplicity.

While	some	chefs	insist	on	chilling	blanched	vegetables	in	ice	baths,	I
generally	disagree.	The	less	time	a	vegetable	spends	immersed	in	water,	the
less	chance	of	its	minerals	and	nutrients	leaching	out.	Instead	of	bothering
with	an	ice	bath,	simply	cook	your	vegetables	a	little	less,	knowing	that
they’ll	continue	to	cook	even	after	they’re	pulled	from	the	pot.

Over	the	years,	I’ve	found	that	vegetables	with	higher	water	content,
like	asparagus	and	perfect	little	haricots	verts,	carry	over	more	than	denser,
less	watery	ones,	so	pull	them	from	the	pot	just	before	they’re	done.	Root
vegetables,	such	as	carrots	and	beetroots,	won’t	carry	over	even	if	you	beg
them	to	so	always	boil	them	until	they	are	tender	throughout.	You	can
control	carryover	by	slipping	trays	of	vegetables	plucked	from	boiling	water
straight	into	the	fridge,	or	onto	an	icy	porch,	to	chill	quickly.

The	only	way	to	know	when	a	vegetable	should	be	pulled	from	its
blanching	water	is	to	taste	it,	and	quickly.	Before	you	add	anything	to	a	pot
of	boiling	water,	find	your	sieve	or	spider	and	prepare	a	landing	pad.	Instead
of	piling	hot	veggies	in	a	bowl,	spread	them	out	on	a	baking	sheet	lined	with
parchment	paper	to	prevent	overcooking.

To	save	time	in	the	kitchen,	combine	blanching	with	other	cooking
methods.	Blanch	tough	greens	like	kale	or	collards	until	they	are	tender,
then	squeeze	them	dry,	chop	them	up,	and	sauté.	In	Italy,	balls	of	blanched
greens	are	available	at	every	deli,	ready	for	any	mamma	to	take	home	and
sauté	with	garlic	and	hot	pepper.	Partially	blanch	denser	vegetables	such	as



cauliflower,	carrots,	and	fennel	on	Sunday	and	keep	them	on	hand	for	the
coming	week,	ready	to	reheat	and	brown	in	the	pan	or	oven	at	a	moment’s
notice.

Blanching	can	also	be	a	useful	way	to	facilitate	peeling	produce	with	a
clinging	skin,	such	as	fava	beans,	tomatoes,	peppers,	and	peaches.	Simply
blanch	them	for	about	thirty	seconds—or	just	long	enough	for	the	skin	to
loosen—and	then	plunge	them	into	an	ice	bath	to	stop	them	from	cooking
any	further.	The	skins	will	slip	right	off.
Noodles	and	Grains
Noodles	made	with	wheat	flour	must	be	cooked	in	water	at	a	vigorous	boil
in	order	to	cook	evenly,	regardless	of	whether	you	call	them	pasta,	ramen,
bakmi,	udon,	or	elbow	macaroni.

The	pandemonium	keeps	the	noodles	moving,	preventing	them	from
sticking	to	one	another	as	they	release	starch.	Take	the	guesswork	and
measuring	out	of	cooking	whole	grains	such	as	barley,	rice,	farro,	and	quinoa
by	boiling	them	as	you	would	pasta,	until	they	are	completely	tender.	Drain
and	serve	as	a	side	dish,	or	spread	them	out	to	let	them	cool,	then	drizzle
with	olive	oil	and	add	them	to	soups,	grain	salads,	or	store	them	in	the
freezer	for	up	to	two	months	for	future	use.

Once	you’ve	grown	familiar	with	the	cooking	times	of	various	foods,
you	can	stagger	multiple	ingredients	into	a	single	pot	of	water	to	save
yourself	time	and	a	pan.	When	pasta	still	has	a	few	minutes	of	boiling	left,
add	bite-size	florets	of	broccoli	or	cauliflower,	chopped	kale,	or	turnip
greens	to	the	water.	Delicate	spring	peas	or	tiny	slices	of	asparagus	or	green
beans	need	only	about	ninety	seconds	to	cook	through,	so	add	them	just
before	draining	the	pot,	and	taste	to	determine	their	doneness.
Reducing
Intensify	the	flavour	and	thicken	the	texture	of	sauces,	stocks,	and	soups	by
leaving	them	at	a	continuous	boil.	Recall	that	while	water	may	evaporate,
salt	and	other	seasonings	won’t,	so	take	care	to	avoid	oversalting
reductions.	Season	cautiously	as	you	go	to	give	yourself	a	greater	margin	of
error—you	can	always	adjust	the	salt	once	you’re	satisfied	with	the	texture
of	the	sauce.

Extended	vigorous	boiling	can	also	encourage	clear	sauces	and	soups	to
emulsify	if	they	aren’t	properly	skimmed,	so	take	care	to	remove	fat	from
sauces	or	stocks	before	you	set	them	on	the	stove.	Or	simply	pull	the	pan
askew	on	the	burner	for	a	moment—as	one	side	of	the	pan	calms	and	cools,



the	boiling	action	will	force	all	of	the	fat	and	scum	to	collect	on	the	side	of
the	pan	away	from	the	bubbles.	Skim	the	fat	with	a	spoon	or	ladle,	return
the	pan	to	the	centre	of	the	burner,	and	keep	boiling.

Finally,	remember	that	reducing	food	will	continue	to	cook	it,
deepening	and	changing	its	flavour.	Increased	surface	area—that	is,	using	a
wider,	shallower	pan—will	speed	up	reduction.	If	the	amount	of	liquid
you’re	reducing	is	beyond	8cm	deep,	divide	it	into	multiple	shallow	pans	to
allow	steam	to	escape	more	quickly	and	prevent	flavours	from	changing
considerably.	Using	a	second	pan	is	also	a	great	time-saving	trick,	and	one	I
recently	taught	to	a	friend’s	mom	as	she	struggled	to	get	Christmas	Eve
dinner	on	the	table	on	time.	Reducing	the	beef	stock	for	the	sauce	was
taking	such	a	long	time	that	all	of	the	rest	of	the	food	was	growing	cold.
When	she	realised	that	she’d	have	to	add	450ml	of	cream	to	the	sauce	and
reduce	it	all	by	half	a	second	time,	she	started	tearing	up.	Just	then,	I	poked
my	head	into	the	kitchen	to	see	if	I	could	help,	and	when	I	realised	what	the
problem	was,	I	told	her	not	to	worry.	I	just	pulled	out	two	more	shallow
pans,	poured	half	of	the	reducing	beef	sauce	into	one	and	the	cream	into
the	other,	and	let	everything	boil	at	full	blast.	Ten	minutes	later,	our	sauce
was	done	and	we	were	sitting	down	to	eat.
Steaming
Steam	trapped	in	a	pan,	pot,	or	packet	will	efficiently	cook	food	while
preserving	clarity	of	flavour.	Though	oven	steaming	requires	a	temperature
of	at	least	230°C,	the	temperature	within	the	vessel	will	remain	below	100°C
due	to	recycling	water	vapour.	Note	that	since	it’s	higher	in	energy	than
boiling	water,	steam	will	cook	the	surface	of	a	food	more	quickly.	But	I’ve
grouped	it	with	the	gentle	cooking	techniques	because	steaming	physically
protects	delicate	foods	from	the	jostling	of	boiling.

Steam	little	potatoes	in	the	oven	by	placing	them	in	a	single	layer	in	a
roasting	dish,	seasoning	with	salt,	and	adding	any	aromatics—a	sprig	of
rosemary	and	a	few	garlic	cloves	will	do.	Add	just	enough	water	to	cover	the
bottom	of	the	pan,	and	tightly	seal	it	up	with	aluminium	foil.	Cook	until	the
potatoes	present	no	resistance	when	pierced	with	a	knife,	and	then	serve
with	flaky	salt	and	butter	or	garlicky	aïoli	alongside	hard-boiled	eggs	or
grilled	fish.

My	favourite	steaming	technique	calls	for	a	parchment-paper	package
of	fish,	vegetables,	mushrooms	or	fruit.	Upon	opening	the	package
(cartoccio	in	Italian	or	papillote	in	French)	at	the	table,	each	guest
experiences	a	burst	of	aromatic	steam.



I	once	collaborated	with	a	group	of	talented	chefs	on	a	special	dinner.	I
was	assigned	to	the	dessert	course.	I	suspect	the	only	reason	they	asked
was	because	I	was	the	only	woman	in	the	group.	It	certainly	wasn’t	because
I’m	a	natural	at	pastry,	where	it’s	essential	to	follow	recipes	meticulously
(and	by	now,	you	know	how	I	feel	about	that).	While	the	other	chefs
focused	on	one-upping	each	other	with	complicated	techniques,	I	took	one
look	at	the	massive	oven	in	our	kitchen	and	decided	to	take	another	route.
The	Blenheim	apricots	from	my	favourite	farm	had	just	come	into	season.
With	blushing	orange	skin	and	velvety	flesh,	these	apricots	evoke	both	the
quiet	awakening	of	spring	and	the	vibrancy	of	summer,	perfectly	balanced
in	sweetness	and	acidity,	absolutely	delicious.	If	you	ever	see	them	at	the
farmers’	market,	buy	as	many	as	you	can	carry.

That	night,	I	halved	the	apricots,	removed	the	pits,	and	stuffed	each
half	with	a	filling	made	of	marzipan,	almonds,	and	the	little	Italian	cookies
called	amaretti.	Then	I	placed	the	apricots	on	a	piece	of	parchment	paper,
drizzled	them	with	a	few	drops	of	dessert	wine,	sprinkled	them	with	sugar,
and	wrapped	up	the	cartocci.	I	baked	the	parchment	packages	in	the
blazing-hot	oven	for	about	10	minutes,	until	they	puffed	up	with	steam,	and
then	rushed	them	to	the	table	with	bowls	of	whipped	crème	fraîche.	After	a
refined	multicourse	dinner,	the	simple	pleasure	of	tearing	open	the	packets,
smelling	the	apricots’	heady	perfume,	and	tasting	their	balanced	sweet-tart
flavour	delighted	our	guests	no	end.	Even	now,	years	later,	when	I	bump
into	folks	who	were	guests	at	that	meal,	they	dreamily	reminisce	about	the
apricot	cartoccio.	I	never	cease	to	be	amazed	at	how	good	a	simple
preparation	can	be.

To	steam	on	the	stove	instead	of	the	oven,	set	a	perforated	steamer
insert	or	sieve	filled	with	a	single	layer	of	food—anything	from	vegetables
and	eggs	to	rice,	tamales,	and	fish—over	a	pot	of	simmering	water.	Cover
with	a	lid	to	entrap	steam	and	cook	until	tender.	Traditional	Moroccan
couscous	is	cooked	in	this	way—over	a	water	bath	spiked	with	aromatic
vegetables,	herbs,	and	spices	to	lend	a	whisper	of	flavour.

Stovetop	steaming	is	also	an	ideal	method	for	cooking	shellfish,	such	as
clams	or	mussels,	in	the	way	I	described	in	the	step-by-step	recipe	for	Pasta
alle	Vongole.

Combine	steaming	with	the	browning	that	comes	from	intense	heat	in	a
method	I	like	to	call	steamy	sauté.	It’s	perfect	for	cooking	dense	vegetables
such	as	fennel	or	carrots:	add	a	centimetre	of	water,	salt,	a	generous	splash
of	olive	oil	or	knob	of	butter,	and	aromatics	into	a	pan	filled	with	a	single



layer	of	vegetables,	and	place	a	lid	on	ajar.	Simmer	until	the	vegetables	are
tender,	remove	the	lid,	pour	off	any	excess	water,	then	turn	up	the	heat	and
let	the	Maillard	reaction	commence.
Cooking	with	Fat
Confit
Confit	is	the	French	word	for	foods	cooked	slowly	in	fat	at	temperatures
low	enough	to	avoid	browning.	It’s	one	of	the	few	times	you’ll	use	fat	as	a
cooking	medium	without	the	goal	of	browning.

The	best-known,	and	perhaps	the	most	delicious,	confit	is	made	with
duck.	This	dish	from	Gascony,	in	the	hills	of	southwest	France,	evolved	as	a
way	to	preserve	duck	legs	for	later	consumption.	The	process	is	simple	and
the	results	couldn’t	be	tastier.	Season	the	legs,	immerse	them	in	rendered
duck	fat,	and	cook	them	gently	until	they	are	tender	at	the	bone.	You’ll
know	the	temperature	is	right	when	the	duck	fat	emits	a	bubble	or	two
every	few	seconds.	When	covered	with	fat	and	stored	in	the	fridge,	the	duck
will	last	for	months,	ready	to	be	turned	into	the	shredded	duck	pâté	called
rillettes,	or	cassoulet,	the	traditional	French	dish	of	duck,	beans,	and	sausage,
or	simply	heated	and	crisped	at	a	moment’s	notice	and	served	with	boiled
potatoes,	zesty	greens,	and	a	glass	of	wine.

If	you	don’t	have	duck	on	hand,	the	technique	works	beautifully	with
other	meats,	including	pork,	goose,	and	chicken.	For	a	holiday	indulgence,
remove	and	prepare	a	confit	from	the	legs	of	your	Thanksgiving	turkey	or
Christmas	goose.	Roast	the	breast	and	offer	your	guests	a	bird	prepared	two
ways.	In	the	summer,	try	confit	of	fresh	tuna	in	olive	oil	spiked	with	a	garlic
clove	or	two	and	make	Niçoise	salad.	Vegetables,	too,	are	ripe	for	confits:
toss	Artichoke	Confit	with	pasta	and	some	torn	basil	for	a	quick	supper,	or
pair	Cherry	Tomato	Confit	with	fresh	beans	or	poached	eggs.	Strain	and
refrigerate	the	olive	oil,	which	will	be	as	flavourful	and	valuable	as	what	was
cooked	in	it,	to	use	in	vinaigrette	or	cook	with	again	in	the	coming	days.
Sweating
Sweating	is	a	gentle	way	of	cooking	vegetables	in	minimal	fat	until	they	are
tender	and	translucent,	without	resulting	in	browning.	As	they	cook,	they
release	some	liquid,	hence	the	name.	Mirepoix,	the	aromatic	combination	of
onions,	carrots,	and	celery	at	the	root	of	all	French	cooking,	is	typically
sweated,	rather	than	sautéed	or	browned,	in	an	effort	to	prevent	colouring.
Sweat	onions	to	add	to	risotto	bianco,	cauliflower	purée,	or	any	other	ivory-
coloured	dish	where	flecks	of	browned	onions	would	offer	unwelcome



punctuation.
A	foundation	of	sweated	onions	is	the	secret	to	delicate-tasting	single-

vegetable	soups	such	as	English	pea,	carrot,	or	Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup,
whose	recipes	are	identical:	sweat	onions,	add	the	chosen	vegetable,	cover
with	water,	season	with	salt,	bring	to	a	boil,	reduce	to	a	simmer,	and	remove
from	the	heat	the	moment	the	vegetables	are	cooked,	or	even	just	before
that	moment	in	anticipation	of	the	carryover	that	will	occur.	Place	the
whole	pot	in	an	ice	bath	to	chill	immediately,	and	purée.	Stir,	taste,	adjust,
and	serve	with	a	tasty	garnish,	replete	with	acid	and	fat,	such	as	an	herb
salsa	or	crème	fraîche.

To	keep	temperatures	in	the	sweat	zone,	watch	the	pan	closely.	Add
salt	to	draw	water	out	of	the	vegetables.	Use	a	pan	or	pot	with	tall	sides	to
discourage	steam	from	escaping.	Parchment	paper	or	a	lid	will	help	entrap
and	recycle	steam,	if	needed.	And	don’t	hesitate	to	add	a	splash	of	water
from	time	to	time	if	you	sense	a	brown	spot	starting	to	form.

A	note	on	stirring:	it	tends	to	dissipate	heat.	So,	stir	regularly	when	you
want	to	keep	food	from	browning,	and	stir	less	often	to	let	browning	take	its
course.	Stir	with	a	wooden	spoon,	which	is	both	strong	and	soft,	to	prevent
sugars	or	starches	from	building	up	at	the	bottom	of	pots	of	caramelising
onions,	béchamel	sauce,	or	polenta.	You	don’t	have	to	get	too	crazy	about
stirring—just	add	it	to	the	toolbox	of	tricks	you	can	use	to	encourage	or
discourage	browning.
The	Frying	Continuum
In	Fat,	I	explained	that	the	various	names	for	frying	methods	generally	refer
to	the	amount	of	fat	used	in	each	preparation.	Whether	you’re	deep-,
shallow-,	pan-,	or	stir-frying	or	sautéing,	the	concept	is	the	same:	preheat
the	pan	and	the	fat	long	enough	so	that	food	immediately	begins	to	brown
once	it’s	added,	but	regulate	the	temperature	so	that	the	food	cooks
through	at	the	same	rate	its	surface	browns.	Always	resist	overcrowding	the
pan	and	moving	food	around	too	much,	too	soon.	Proteins	in	particular	will
stick	to	the	pan	as	they	begin	to	cook.	Leave	fish,	chicken,	and	meat	be	for	a
few	minutes,	and	once	they	begin	to	brown,	they	will	release	from	the	pan.

The	term	sauté	is	derived	from	the	French	word	for	“jump,”	and	it	refers
to	the	little	jag	of	the	wrist	used	to	flip	all	of	the	food	in	a	pan.	Use	minimal
fat	when	sautéing	to	avoid	burning	yourself	with	a	splash	of	hot	oil—just
enough	to	barely	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pan	(about	2mm)	will	do.	Sauté
small	foods	that	will	cook	through	at	the	same	rate	their	surfaces	will	brown,



such	as	prawns,	cooked	grains,	small	pieces	of	vegetables	or	meat,	and
greens.

Sautéing	saves	both	time	and	a	utensil,	and	also	ensures	even	browning
on	all	sides,	so	it’s	a	good	skill	to	cultivate.	Don’t	worry	if	you	don’t	have	the
flipping	action	down—it	took	me	years	to	master.	Just	lay	an	old	sheet	on
the	living	room	floor	and	practise:	place	a	handful	of	rice	or	dried	beans	in	a
frying	pan	with	curved	sides,	tilt	the	pan	down	and	your	elbow	up,	and	flip
fearlessly	until	you	get	the	action	right.	In	the	meantime,	use	metal	tongs	or
a	wooden	spoon	to	move	your	sautéing	food	around	the	pan.

To	pan-fry,	use	enough	fat	to	generously	cover	the	bottom	of	the	pan
(about	5mm).	Pan-fry	larger	foods—such	as	fish	fillets,	steaks,	pork	chops,
or	Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken—that	need	more	time	to	cook
through.	Let	the	pan	and	the	fat	preheat	long	enough	so	that	any	food	you
add	will	immediately	start	to	sizzle,	but	don’t	crank	the	heat:	the	food
should	brown	at	the	same	rate	it	cooks	through.	Since	chicken	breasts	and
fish	fillets	take	longer	to	cook	through	than	bite-size	pieces	of	meat	or
prawns,	the	temperature	here	should	be	slightly	lower	than	when	sautéing.

Shallow-	and	deep-frying	are	fraternal	twins,	both	ideal	for	cooking
starchy	vegetables,	or	battered	and	breaded	foods.	Appearances	aside,	the
two	methods	are	nearly	identical.	Submerge	foods	in	fat	a	little	more	than
halfway	to	shallow-fry.	Submerge	foods	completely	to	deep-fry.

Whichever	form	of	frying	you’re	undertaking,	the	temperature	of	the	oil
should	be	right	around	185°C.	(Just	think,	I	wish	I	were	eating	fried	food	365
days	a	year!	to	remember	the	right	temperature	for	frying.	Or	simply	mark
185°C	on	your	frying	thermometer	with	a	permanent	marker.)	Much	lower,
and	a	crust	won’t	form	quickly	enough,	resulting	in	soggy	food.	Much	higher,
and	the	batter	will	burn	before	the	food	it	encases	has	a	chance	to	cook.
The	only	exception	to	this	rule:	dense,	tough	foods	that	take	a	while	to	cook
through,	such	as	chicken	thighs,	which	can	fry	for	upward	of	15	minutes.
Add	chicken	thighs	to	oil	at	about	185°C	to	get	that	desired	crust,	but	let	the
temperature	drop	to	160°C,	where	they	can	cook	through	without	burning.



Like	that	roadside	cook	I	watched	making	chapli	kebabs	in	Pakistan,	pay
attention	to	the	signals	frying	foods	emit	as	they	cook,	and	eventually	you
won’t	need	to	get	your	thermometer	out	every	time	you	fry.	Steam,	bubbles,
food	rising	to	the	top	of	the	pot,	and	browning	are	all	clues	to	heed.	When
the	temperature	is	hot	enough,	food	sizzles	and	browns—but	not	too
violently	or	quickly—upon	entering	the	pot.	When	the	bubbling	ceases	and
steam	slows	down,	batter	is	done	cooking.	When	food	is	crisp	and	golden,
it’s	ready	to	pull	from	the	oil.

The	amount	of	food	you	add	into	a	pot	of	oil	will	affect	its	temperature.
The	more,	bigger,	colder,	and	denser	the	food	you	add,	the	farther	its
temperature	will	drop.	If	the	oil	takes	too	long	to	climb	back	to	185°C,	the
food	will	overcook	before	it	has	a	chance	to	brown	properly.	Preemptively
heat	oil	just	past	the	ideal	zone	or	add	less	food	at	once	in	anticipation	of	a
big	drop	in	temperature,	and	always	let	oil	temperature	return	to	the	ideal
point	in	between	batches.

Since	the	ideal	frying	temperature	is	so	far	beyond	100°C,	any	water	in
the	batter	or	on	the	surface	of	a	frying	food	will	immediately	vaporise—the
source	of	all	of	the	bubbling.	The	key	to	getting	a	crisp,	golden-brown	crust
is	to	encourage	that	vapour—steam—to	escape	as	quickly	as	possible.	In
other	words,	don’t	overpack	the	pot.	Battered	foods	must	never	touch	or	be
more	than	a	single	layer	deep	in	the	oil—otherwise	they’ll	cook	into	a	big,
soggy	mass.	While	foods	fried	sans	batter—such	as	potato,	kale,	or	beetroot
chips—can	and	will	touch,	stir	them	often	to	prevent	them	from	sticking
together,	and	to	encourage	them	to	brown	evenly	on	all	sides.

Choose	to	shallow-fry	delicate	foods	that	could	be	broken	apart	by	the
bubbling	tumult	of	deep-frying,	such	as	crab	or	fish	cakes,	little	chard
fritters,	or	breaded	green	tomatoes.	Deep-frying	is	a	better	choice	for	chips
of	all	kinds,	battered	foods,	and	more	substantial	foods	that	need	total
immersion	to	cook	evenly,	such	as	soft-shell	crabs.
Searing
It	doesn’t	matter	whether	you	use	a	grill,	a	cast	iron	pan,	or	a	baking	sheet
preheated	in	the	oven—the	main	requirement	for	searing	is	a	blazing-hot
cooking	surface.	Preheat	the	surface	over	high	heat,	then	add	the	fat	and	let
it	approach	its	smoke	point	before	adding	meat	to	sear.	Once	Eccolo
closed,	I	began	to	cook	more	and	more	in	my	home	kitchen.	It	was	hard	to
give	up	the	restaurant’s	turbo-charged	stove	and	get	used	to	my
apartment’s	no-frills	one	with	its	weak	burners.	At	first,	no	matter	how	long
I	preheated	my	cast	iron	pan	on	the	stove,	it	never	got	hot	enough	to



properly	sear	a	steak	without	overcooking	it.	After	a	few	tough	steaks,	I
started	preheating	the	pan	in	a	blasting	hot	oven	for	at	least	20	minutes
before	bringing	it	up	to	the	stovetop	to	begin	searing	over	high	heat.	It
works	like	a	charm.

When	browning,	frying,	or	searing,	the	first	side	of	a	food	to	be	browned
will	always	be	the	most	beautiful,	so	lay	food	in	a	pan	or	on	the	grill	with	its
presentation	side	down.	For	poultry,	that	means	skin	side	down,	for	fish	that
means	skin	side	up.	For	meat,	use	your	judgment	and	put	the	prettiest	side
down.

The	purpose	of	searing	isn’t	so	much	to	cook	as	it	is	to	brown	meat	or
seafood	in	order	to	get	the	flavour	benefits	of	the	Maillard	reaction.	The
penetrative	heat	of	searing	can	be	sufficient	to	cook	the	most	tender	cuts	of
meat	and	fish	that	are	best	served	rare	or	barely	cooked,	such	as	tuna,
scallops,	or	beef	tenderloin.	But	for	everything	else,	searing	is	for	browning
rather	than	cooking.	Sear	larger	cuts	of	meat	to	achieve	the	flavour	hits	of
Maillard	before	transferring	the	meat	to	braise	over	a	gentle	heat.	Sear	racks
of	lamb,	pork	loin	roasts,	or	thick	pork	chops	over	direct	heat	before
rendering	and	cooking	them	through	with	gentler	heat,	whether	on	the
stove	or	grill,	or	in	the	oven.
Cooking	with	Air
Grilling
The	number	one	rule	of	grilling:	never	cook	directly	over	the	flame.	Flames
leave	soot,	unpleasant	flavours,	and	carcinogens	on	food.	Instead,	let	the
flames	subside	and	cook	over	smouldering	coals	and	embers.	Picture
toasting	the	perfect	marshmallow	for	s’mores—you’ve	got	to	patiently
perch	the	coat	hanger	over	the	coals,	turning	the	marshmallow	for	even
browning.	Get	that	puppy	too	close	to	the	flames	and	it’ll	taste	gassy	and
burnt	on	the	outside,	while	remaining	untoasted	within.	The	same	thing	will
happen	to	any	food	you	grill	directly	over	flames.

Different	fuels—whether	fruit	woods,	hard	woods,	charcoal,	or	gas—
reach	different	temperatures	on	the	grill.	Hard	woods	such	as	oak	and
almond	catch	fire	quickly	and	burn	slowly,	so	they’re	ideal	when	you	need
sustained	heat.	Fruit	woods—including	grapevines	and	fig,	apple,	and	cherry
woods—tend	to	burn	hot	and	fast	and	are	great	for	quickly	reaching
browning	temperatures.	Never	grill	over	soft	woods	such	as	pine,	spruce,	or
fir,	which	can	lend	pungent,	and	not	altogether	pleasant,	flavours	to	food.

The	benefit	of	charcoal	is	that	it	burns	more	slowly	yet	hotter	than



wood.	Lump	charcoal	in	particular	lends	a	delicious	smoky	flavour	to	food.
Though	the	flavour	of	food	cooked	over	a	live	fire	will	always	be	superior,
the	convenience	of	a	gas	grill	can’t	be	beaten.	Use	gas	grills	with	an
understanding	of	their	limitations—because	they	do	not	burn	wood,	they
will	not	lend	smokiness	to	food.	(You	can,	however,	use	smoking	chips	to
make	up	for	this,	as	described	here.)	And	because	gas	doesn’t	burn	as	hot
as	wood	or	charcoal,	gas	grills	can’t	achieve	the	blazing-hot	temperatures	of
live	fires,	so	they	aren’t	able	to	brown	food	as	quickly	or	efficiently.

Leave	grilling	meat	unsupervised	and	as	fat	renders	and	drips	into	the
coals,	flare-ups	will	occur,	engulfing	food	in	flames	and	leaving	behind
unwelcome	flavours.	Prevent	flare-ups	by	moving	food	around	a	grill	and
keeping	very	fatty	cuts	away	from	the	hottest	coals.	Before	I	learned	to
cook,	I	always	assumed	that	perfect	crosshatched	grill	marks	were	the	sign
of	a	talented	cook.	Watching	Alice	grill	piles	of	quail	and	sausages	in	her
yard	one	afternoon,	a	few	years	after	I	started	at	Chez	Panisse,	I	suddenly
realised	why	the	cooks	I	worked	with	never	bothered	with	grill	marks.	As
diminutive	as	a	hummingbird,	and	just	as	restless,	Alice	hovered	over	the
grill,	moving	the	birds	and	sausages	as	soon	as	they	began	to	take	on	colour,
or	just	as	they	began	rendering	fat	and	threatening	to	cause	a	flare-up.	As
she	flipped	the	meat,	it	was	obvious	that	their	even	golden-brown	sheen
was	the	direct	consequence	of	her	feverish	tending.	This	way,	every	single
bite	would	be	bestowed	with	the	flavourful	molecules	resulting	from	the
Maillard	reaction,	instead	of	just	the	spots	lucky	enough	to	be	marked	by
crosshatching.

Whether	you’re	working	with	gas	or	a	live	fire,	create	different
temperature	zones	on	your	grill,	like	various	burners	on	a	stove.	Use	direct
heat	over	the	hottest	coal	beds	for	the	littlest,	most	tender	foods:	thin
steaks,	little	birds	such	as	quail,	sliced	vegetables	and	thin	toasts,	chicken
breasts,	and	burgers	you	might	want	to	leave	rare.	Use	the	suggestion	of
heat	from	nearby	coals	to	create	cooler	spots	for	cooking	meats	on	the
bone,	larger	cuts,	and	chickens	that	need	time	to	cook	through.	Cooler
zones	are	also	ideal	for	sausages	and	fatty	meats	that	will	cause	flare-ups
and	for	keeping	foods	warm.

Indirect	heat	is	at	work	in	the	kind	of	slow,	gentle	grilling	known	in	the
south	as	barbecue,	and	in	smoking	meats,	such	as	Sage-	and	Honey-
Smoked	Chicken.	In	both	of	these	methods,	the	grill	is	essentially	turned
into	an	oven	and	kept	at	temperatures	between	95°C	and	150°C.	The	key	to
gentle	grilling	and	smoking	is	slow,	constant	heat,	which	can	be	a	challenge
when	working	with	live	fire.	A	digital	meat	thermometer	can	be	helpful	here,



letting	you	know	when	the	temperature	of	the	grill	drops	or	rises	too	far.
A	digital	meat	thermometer	came	in	handy	one	summer	after	Eccolo

closed,	when	my	journalism	teacher	and	cooking	student	Michael	Pollan
accidentally	ordered	three	times	as	much	pork	shoulder	as	he’d	thought.
Panicked,	he	called	me	over.	He	taught	me	how	to	make	pork	shoulder
barbecue	and	we	had	an	emergency	slow-cooking	session	in	his	yard—a
contradiction	in	terms,	perhaps,	but	a	delicious	one	involving	a	lot	of
thumb-twiddling.	He	rubbed	the	meat	with	salt	and	sugar	in	advance,	and
then	cooked	it	on	a	gas	grill	fortified	with	wood	chips	for	six	hours	over
indirect	heat.	I	suspect	that	he	may	have	been	a	southern	pitmaster	in	a
past	life,	for	this	yielded	the	smokiest,	most	fork-tender	meat	I’d	ever
tasted.	Since	there	wasn’t	much	active	meat-cooking	to	do,	we	also	made
Simmered	Beans,	Bright	Cabbage	Slaw,	and	Bittersweet	Chocolate
Pudding	in	our	downtime	and	threw	a	pretty	sweet	Pork	911	Dinner	Party
that	night.

Don’t	own	a	grill?	Live	in	an	apartment?	Think	of	oven-grilling	as
upside-down,	indoor	grilling.	While	most	grilling	is	done	outdoors,	with	the
heat	source	below	the	food,	oven-grilling	happens	inside	the	oven,	with	the
heat	radiating	from	above.	Oven	grills	can	get	really,	really	hot—much
hotter	than	a	typical	grill,	since	the	food	is	usually	much	closer	to	the	heat
source.	Use	an	oven	grill	to	cook	very	thin	steaks	or	chops,	or	to	brown
foods	under	careful	supervision,	since	just	twenty	seconds	can	mean	the
difference	between	delicious	and	carbonised.	Use	an	oven	grill	to	melt
cheese	on	cheesy	toast,	to	brown	bread	crumbs	atop	mac	and	cheese,	and
crisp	the	skin	of	leftover	Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken.

Whether	grilled,	oven-grilled,	or	roasted,	allow	all	tender	meats	to	rest
after	cooking	and	before	carving.	In	addition	to	allowing	time	for	carryover
to	occur,	resting	gives	the	proteins	in	meat	a	chance	to	relax.	Rested	meat
retains	water	better	after	carving,	yielding	a	juicier	piece	of	meat.	For	large
cuts,	this	can	take	up	to	an	hour,	while	steaks	need	only	5	or	10	minutes.	For
the	most	tender	slices,	cut	meat	against	the	grain,	or	the	direction	in	which
the	muscle	fibres	run.	Let	your	knife	do	the	hard	work	of	shortening	the
fibres	by	cutting	right	through	them.	The	meat	will	be	much	more	tender,
and	chewing	it	will	be	a	lot	more	enjoyable.



Baking
Oven	temperatures	fall	into	four	general	categories:	low	(80°C	to	135°C),
medium-low	(135°C	to	180°C),	medium-high	(180°C	to	220°C),	and	high
(220°C	and	above).	Within	any	one	of	these	categories,	food	will	cook	in
more	or	less	the	same	way.	If	you	don’t	know	where	to	start,	start	at	180°C,
the	“middle	C”	note	of	baking.	Start	here	if	you	misplaced	your	recipe.
180°C	is	hot	enough	to	encourage	browning	but	gentle	enough	to	allow
most	food	to	cook	through.

Low	temperatures	(80°C	to	135°C)	offer	enough	heat	to	leaven	and	dry
out	Marshmallowy	Meringues	but	are	also	gentle	enough	to	prevent
browning.	One	superstitious	pastry	chef	I	know	will	only	ever	bake
meringues	in	her	antique	gas	oven	overnight.	Before	going	to	sleep,	she
preheats	the	oven	to	95°C	and	then	shuts	it	off	as	she	slips	in	the	cookies.
The	minimal	heat	generated	by	the	pilot	light	slows	the	cooling	of	the	oven,
and	by	morning,	her	meringues	are	always	snow-white	and	crisp,	without
being	overly	dry.	In	other	words,	they’re	perfect.

Most	baked	goods	prosper	with	the	delicate	heat	medium-low
temperatures	(135°	C	to	180°C)	offer.	Proteins	set,	doughs	and	batters	dry
out—but	not	too	much—and	gentle	browning	ensues.	Cakes,	cookies,	and
brownies	alike	do	well	at	these	temperatures,	as	well	as	many	pies	and
tender	doughs	including	shortbreads	and	biscuits.	Think	of	160°C	as	a	more
forgiving	version	of	180°C;	it’s	more	likely	to	yield	chewy	rather	than	crisp
cookies	and	golden	rather	than	golden-brown	cakes.

In	contrast,	higher	temperatures	swiftly	lead	to	browning.	Cook	savoury
dishes	through	at	medium-low	temperatures,	then	crank	them	up	to
medium-high	(180°C	to	220°C)	to	develop	the	golden-brown	tops	we	love
to	see	on	gratins,	lasagna,	pot	pies,	and	casseroles.



High	(220°C	and	above)	oven	temperatures	lead	to	rapid,	though
sometimes	uneven,	browning.	Using	high	temperatures	when	achieving
structure	quickly	is	important,	as	it	is	for	cream	puffs	and	flaky	crusts.	As
water	vaporises	into	steam	in	a	hot	oven,	it	leads	to	oven	spring,	which	is
the	initial	increase	in	the	volume	of	a	baking	dough.	This	burst	of	rising
steam	pushes	apart	layers	of	a	baking	dough,	yielding	a	flaky	crust,	like
Aaron’s	Tart	Dough.	Some	baked	goods,	such	as	soufflés	and	popovers,
rely	entirely	on	oven	spring	to	rise,	while	others,	such	as	Lori’s	Chocolate
Midnight	Cake,	also	depend	on	chemical	leaveners.	Either	way,	this	initial
rise	is	generally	the	most	substantial	in	the	baking	cycle.	To	achieve	the
most	powerful	oven	spring,	leave	the	oven	door	shut	for	the	first	15	to	20
minutes	of	high-heat	baking.	After	the	proteins	in	the	dough	have	set	and
the	basic	structure	has	formed,	you	can	turn	down	the	heat	to	prevent
burning	and	ensure	that	the	food	cooks	through.
Dehydrating	(less	than	95°C)
Think	of	dehydrating	as	baking	at	the	lowest	possible	temperatures.	As	its
name	suggests,	its	aim	is	to	remove	water	from	food,	often	to	preserve	it,
without	reaching	browning	temperatures.	Meat	and	fish	jerky,	dried
peppers,	fruit	leather,	and	tomato	paste,	dried	fruit	and	tomatoes	are	all
dehydrated	foods.	While	you	can	buy	special	dehydrators	to	heat	food
gently,	the	lowest	setting	on	the	oven,	or	even	just	leaving	food	in	there
overnight	with	the	pilot	light	on,	is	generally	just	right.	At	Eccolo,	during	the
hottest,	dryest	days	of	summer,	I’d	dry	fresh	peppers	and	fresh	haricot
beans	on	the	roof,	spreading	them	out	in	a	single	layer	on	a	wire	rack.	I
quickly	learned	to	move	the	trays	indoors	at	night	to	discourage	nighttime
critters	and	the	morning	dew	from	interfering	with	my	work.	Each	round
took	several	days	and	some	careful	tending,	but	I	was	always	grateful	for	my
summer	diligence,	come	winter.	To	make	juicy,	oven-dried	tomatoes,	cut
small,	flavourful	tomatoes	such	as	Early	Girls	in	half.	Pack	them	snugly	onto
a	parchment-lined	baking	sheet,	cut	side	up.	Season	them	with	salt	and	a
light	sprinkling	of	sugar,	then	slide	them	into	an	oven	set	to	95°C	(or	lower,
if	possible)	for	about	12	hours,	checking	on	them	once	or	twice	along	the
way.	You’ll	know	the	tomatoes	are	done	when	none	of	them	is	soupy	or	wet.
Pack	into	a	glass	jar	and	cover	with	olive	oil	and	refrigerate,	or	freeze	in	a
resealable	plastic	bag,	for	up	to	6	months.
Toasting	(180°C	to	230°C)
My	ideal	piece	of	toast	is	crisp	on	the	surface,	golden	brown	in	colour,	and
rich	with	all	of	the	flavours	produced	by	the	Maillard	reaction.	Aim	for	these



three	qualities	whether	you’re	toasting	a	bagel,	bread	crumbs,	or	shredded
coconut.	Nuts,	too,	will	only	improve	with	toasting.	To	avoid	doing	the	sort
of	euphemistic	overtoasting	carried	out	by	my	young	cook	at	Eccolo,	set	a
timer	to	remind	you	to	check	on	toasting	foods	from	time	to	time.	Always
toast	in	a	single	layer,	stir	often,	and	pull	bits	and	pieces	as	they	are	done.

Toast	thin	slices	of	bread,	to	be	smeared	with	chicken	liver	paste	or
broad	bean	purée	at	medium-low	heat	(about	180°C)	so	they	don’t	burn	or
dry	out,	which	will	result	in	mouth-damaging	shards.	Thicker	slices	of	bread,
to	be	topped	with	poached	eggs	and	greens	or	tomatoes	and	ricotta,	can	be
toasted	at	high	heat	(up	to	230°C),	or	on	a	hot	grill,	so	they	brown	quickly
on	the	surface	and	remain	chewy	in	the	centre.

At	230°C	and	above,	coconut	flakes,	pine	nuts,	and	bread	crumbs	will
go	from	perfect	to	burnt	in	the	time	it	takes	to	sneeze.	Knock	10	to	25°C	off
the	temperature,	and	you’ll	buy	yourself	the	luxury	of	time.	If	a	sneezing	fit
hits,	your	toasted	foods	will	be	safe.	And	when	you	deem	the	toastiness	of
these	delicate	foods	sufficient,	remove	them	from	their	hot	trays	(not	doing
so	may	lead	to	carryover	and	your	perfectly	toasted	food	will	blacken	while
your	back	is	turned).
Slow-Roasting,	Grilling,	and	Smoking	(95°C	to	150°C)
Meats	and	fish	that	are	rich	in	fat	can	be	cooked	slowly	in	the	oven	or	on
the	grill	at	very	low	temperatures	so	that	their	own	fats	render	and	moisten
them	from	within.	I	love	to	slow-roast	salmon,	a	method	that	works	equally
well	for	a	single	serving	or	a	whole	side.	Simply	season	the	fish	with	salt	on
both	sides	and	tuck	it,	skin	side	down,	into	a	bed	of	herbs.	Drizzle	a	tiny	bit
of	good	olive	oil	on	top	and	rub	it	in	evenly	with	your	hands,	then	place	the
fish	in	an	oven	preheated	to	110°C.	Depending	on	the	size	of	your	portion,	it
can	take	anywhere	from	10	to	50	minutes	to	cook,	but	you’ll	know	it’s	done
when	the	fish	begins	to	flake	in	the	thickest	part	of	the	fillet	when	poked
with	a	knife	or	your	finger.	Because	this	method	is	so	gentle	on	its	proteins,
the	fish	will	appear	translucent	even	when	it’s	cooked.	Slow-Roasted
Salmon	is	luscious	and	succulent—perfect	for	serving	warm,	at	room
temperature,	or	chilled	in	a	salad.	(For	a	more	detailed	recipe	and	serving
suggestions,	turn	to	here.)
Roasting	(180°C	to	230°C)
The	difference	between	roasting	and	toasting	is	simple:	toasting	implies
browning	the	surface	of	a	food,	while	roasting	also	cooks	food	through.
Originally,	roasting	referred	to	cooking	meat	on	a	spit	above	or	beside	a	fire.



What	we	think	of	as	roasting	today—cooking	meat	in	a	dry,	hot	oven—was
known	as	baking	until	about	two	hundred	years	ago.

While	the	chickens—and	everything	else	I	so	came	to	love	roasting	on
that	spit	at	Eccolo—invariably	emerged	with	evenly	cooked	meat	as	a	result
of	their	constant	rotation,	the	birds	I	roast	at	home	brown	differently	due	to
the	different	forms	of	heat	at	work	in	the	oven.	The	radiant	heat	emitted
from	the	heating	element	dries	out	exposed	foods	as	it	cooks	them,	leading
to	crisp,	dry	skin	on	a	chicken,	or	wrinkly,	leathery	skin	on	little	potatoes.	In	a
convection	oven,	one	or	two	fans	consistently	circulate	hot	air,	so	food
browns,	dries	out,	and	cooks	more	quickly	than	in	a	conventional	oven.
When	using	convection,	reduce	the	temperature	by	approximately	15°C	or
monitor	foods	with	extra	vigilance.

On	the	other	hand,	the	surface	of	any	food	touching	hot	metal	will
brown	via	conduction,	the	principle	at	work	in	stovetop	frying:	the	burner
heats	the	pan,	which	heats	the	fat	in	the	pan,	which	heats	the	food.	It’s	the
same	in	the	oven:	the	oven	heats	the	pan,	which	heats	the	fat,	which	heats
the	food.	Lay	oiled	slices	of	sweet	potatoes	on	a	pan	and	slide	it	into	a	hot
oven.	Though	both	sides	of	each	slice	will	brown,	they’ll	cook	differently
due	to	the	various	modes	of	heat	transfer	at	work.	The	tops	will	be	slightly
dry	and	leathery,	while	the	bottoms	will	be	golden	and	moist,	as	if	they’d
been	pan-fried.	Any	roasting	food	will	suffer	from	this	sort	of	uneven
browning—unless	it’s	cooking	on	a	wire	rack	and	air	can	circulate	beneath
it.	Flip,	rotate,	and	move	roasting	foods	around	in	the	oven	as	they	cook.
Oven	browning	gains	momentum,	so	start	food	that	must	brown	quickly	at
high	temperatures	and	then	turn	the	oven	down	as	browning	begins,	to
prevent	overcooking.

Thin	foods,	or	foods	that	can’t	risk	being	overcooked	before	they
brown,	can	benefit	from	a	head	start:	preheat	the	baking	sheet	in	the	oven
before	adding	oiled	and	salted	courgette	slices,	or	heat	up	a	cast	iron	pan	on
the	stove	before	tossing	in	prawns	dressed	in	Harissa	and	sliding	it	into	a
hot	oven.	Use	slightly	milder	temperatures	for	foods	you	expect	to	leave	in
the	oven	for	long	periods	of	time.	Taste	food	as	it	cooks.	Touch	it.	Smell	it.
Listen	to	it.

If	you	sense	browning	is	happening	too	quickly,	turn	down	the
temperature,	loosely	cover	the	dish	with	a	piece	of	parchment	paper	or	foil,
and	move	the	rack	away	from	the	heating	element.	If	you	sense	browning	is
happening	too	slowly,	crank	up	the	temperature,	push	food	back	into	your
oven’s	hot	spots,	which	are	typically	the	back	corners,	and	move	it	closer	to



the	heating	element.
To	further	encourage	steam	to	escape	and	browning	to	commence,	use

a	shallow	pan	for	roasting.	Most	of	the	time,	a	baking	sheet	with	a	lip	or	a
cast	iron	pan	is	the	way	to	go.	If	the	meat	you’re	roasting	has	lots	of	fat	to
render	(goose,	duck,	rib	roast,	or	pork	loin,	for	example),	consider	using	a
wire	rack	so	that	your	roast	doesn’t	end	up	frying	on	the	bottom	as	a	pool	of
fat	collects	in	the	pan.

Vegetables
Timely	salting,	combined	with	the	Maillard	reaction,	leads	to	perfect	roast
vegetables	that	are	brown	and	sweet	on	the	outside,	tender	and	delicious
on	the	inside	(refer	to	the	Salting	Calendar	here	for	a	refresher	on	when	to
salt).	Make	200°C	your	default	temperature	for	roasting	vegetables,	but
know	that	it	will	change	based	on	the	size	of	the	vegetables,	their	density
and	molecular	makeup,	as	well	as	the	depth	and	material	of	your	roasting
pan	and	the	amount	of	food	on	the	tray	or	in	the	oven.

I	once	horribly	miscalculated	how	many	courgettes	I	had	to	roast	at
Chez	Panisse.	There	was	only	enough	room	in	the	oven	for	two	trays,	and	I
was	running	short	on	time.	I	figured	I’d	just	squeeze	all	of	the	courgettes
onto	two	trays	to	get	the	task	done.	Like	puzzle	pieces,	I	packed	the	first
tray	so	tightly	that	each	piece	seemed	to	hold	all	the	others	in	place.	I
slipped	the	tray	into	the	oven	and	set	about	doing	the	same	with	the	rest	of
the	summer	squash.	It	never	occurred	to	me	to	wonder	why	I’d	never	seen
any	other	cooks	pack	so	many	vegetables	onto	a	single	tray—I	was	just
doing	what	I	needed	to	do	to	get	the	work	done!

When	I	piled	the	remaining	courgettes	onto	the	second	tray,	though,	it



was	clear	I’d	made	a	mistake.	There	was	barely	enough	squash	to	fill	a
second	tray,	leaving	ample	room	between	the	pieces.	With	the	first	tray
already	heating	up	in	the	oven	and	a	long	list	of	other	tasks	to	get	done,	I
couldn’t	bring	myself	to	take	the	extra	step	and	even	out	the	two	trays	of
courgettes,	so	I	just	slid	the	second	tray	into	the	hot	oven.

I	lived	to	regret	this	shortcut.	When	I	went	to	rotate	the	trays,	the
packed	courgettes	were	floating	in	a	lake	of	their	own	juices,	while	the
spread-out	courgettes	were	browning	nicely.	Between	the	weeping	brought
on	by	osmosis	and	the	lack	of	room	for	steam	to	escape,	the	first	tray	of
squash	emerged	from	the	oven	a	sopping,	soggy	mess.	I’d	unwittingly	made
steamed	courgette	soup.	The	only	positive	result	from	that	experiment	was
that	I’ve	never	again	overstuffed	a	tray	of	roasting	vegetables.

For	even	browning,	don’t	pack	too	many	vegetables	on	a	tray.	Leave
space	between	the	pieces	for	steam	to	escape	and	allow	temperatures	to
rise	high	enough	for	browning	to	begin.	Tend	to	your	vegetables	as	they
roast—stir	them,	turn	them,	rotate	trays,	and	change	the	oven	racks.

Resist	the	urge	to	combine	vegetables	with	vastly	different	sugar,
starch,	or	water	contents	on	a	single	tray	when	roasting.	They	will	not	cook
evenly—some	will	steam,	some	will	burn,	and	none	will	be	satisfying	to	eat.
Refer	to	Plants,	Above	and	Below	here	for	a	refresher	on	which	vegetables
will	cook	similarly.	If	you	only	have	one	baking	sheet	to	your	name,	get	thee
to	a	thrift	store!	And	in	the	meantime,	roast	your	potatoes	on	one	side	of
the	pan,	the	broccoli	on	the	other,	and	remove	each	as	it’s	finished	cooking.
Meats
Well-marbled,	tender	cuts	of	meat	such	as	prime	rib	and	pork	loin	are	ideal
for	roasting,	because	they’re	juicy	enough	to	stand	up	to	the	dry	heat	of	the
oven.	As	I	explained	earlier,	as	meat	cooks,	rendering	fat	bastes	it	from
within.	With	the	built-in	safeguard	of	copious	fat,	then,	tougher	cuts	of
meat	such	as	pork	shoulder	or	chuck	are	also	apt	for	roasting.

Take	preemptive	measures	if	you	plan	to	roast	very	lean	meats	such	as
turkey	breasts	by	brining	or	barding,	or	wrapping	them	with	a	layer	of	fat	to
ensure	moistness.

For	even	cooking,	remember	to	season	roasts	in	advance	to	give	salt	the
time	it	needs	to	penetrate	the	meat	and	impede	proteins	from	relinquishing
all	their	entrapped	water	as	they	cook.	Bring	meats	for	roasting	to	room
temperature	(this	can	take	several	hours	for	very	large	cuts).	Start	roasts	in
a	hot	oven	(about	200	to	220°C)	and	then	gradually	decrease	the



temperature	in	15°C	increments	after	browning	commences,	until	done.
And	any	time	you	think	of	cooking	bacon	or	browning	meat	in	an	oven

hotter	than	200°C	in	order	to	save	a	few	minutes,	remember	this	cautionary
tale.	A	few	years	ago,	I	was	running	behind	on	the	prep	for	a	dinner	party	I
was	catering	out	of	my	tiny	apartment	kitchen.	I	cranked	the	oven	up	and
threw	in	a	pan	of	short	ribs	to	brown.	Though	I	hadn’t	thought	much	of	it	at
the	time,	I’d	noticed	earlier	that	the	ribs	were	extraordinarily	fatty.	A	few
minutes	later,	smoke	started	billowing	out	of	the	stove	at	an	alarming	rate.	It
was	so	dramatic,	it	looked	staged!	I	realised	all	that	fat	was	rendering	from
the	short	ribs	and	immediately	turning	to	smoke.	Before	I	had	a	chance	to
do	anything,	some	of	the	rendering	fat	splattered	onto	the	oven	grill	and
caught	fire.	I	whipped	open	my	cupboards	and	grabbed	the	first	thing	I	saw
that	could	extinguish	the	flames:	a	five-pound	bag	of	flour.	Let’s	just	say	I
didn’t	serve	the	short	ribs	that	night.	(Another	kitchen	shortcut	that
backfired.	Sometimes	the	long	way	is	the	best—and	only—way.)

Learn	from	my	mistake.	Once	fat	begins	to	render,	cook	meat	at
temperatures	below	190°C—the	smoke	point	of	most	animal	fats—to
prevent	repeatedly	setting	off	the	smoke	alarm,	or	worse.

Invest	in	an	instant-read	meat	thermometer	for	roasting	meats	(and
use	it	for	smoking	meats,	too).	Check	large	roasts	in	multiple	spots,	because
one	part	can	appear	done	while	another	is	undercooked.	An	internal
temperature	variance	of	just	a	few	degrees	can	mean	the	difference
between	juicy	and	dry.	My	rule	of	thumb	for	cooking	a	large	roast	is	once	its
internal	temperature	hits	37°C,	it’ll	start	climbing	at	a	rate	of	about	two-
thirds	of	a	degree	a	minute,	if	not	faster.	So	if	you’re	aiming	for	medium-
rare,	around	48°C	to	49°C,	then	know	that	you’ve	got	about	15	minutes
before	it’s	time	to	pull.	Large	roasts	carry	over	about	8°C,	while	steaks	and
chops	will	carry	over	about	3°C,	so	account	for	this	any	time	you	pull	meat
off	the	heat.

If	you	prefer	the	kind	of	crust	searing	produces,	start	your	roast	on	the
stove.	This	can	also	be	a	handy	way	to	speed	up	a	weeknight	roast—I	do	it
all	the	time	with	my	Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken:	I	brown	it	breast	side
down	in	a	cast	iron	pan,	then	flip	and	slide	it	into	the	oven	to	halve	the	time
it	takes	to	roast	a	chicken.	This	technique	also	works	beautifully	for	pork,
lamb,	and	beef	loins	and	sirloins	and,	if	you’re	feeling	decadent,	fillet
mignon.
Layering	Heat



Just	as	with	Salt,	Fat,	or	Acid,	sometimes	you’ll	need	to	use	more	than	one
type	of	heat	to	get	the	results	you	need.	This	is	what	I	call	layering	heat.

Toasted	bread	is	a	great	example.	As	with	any	starch,	wheat	needs
water	and	heat	to	cook	through.	In	bread,	that’s	done	in	the	form	of
combining	milled	wheat	with	water	to	make	a	dough,	and	then	baking	that
dough	in	the	oven	until	it’s	cooked	through.	When	we	toast	bread,	we	cook
it	a	second	time.

Learn	to	break	down	the	cooking	process	into	chunks	so	that	you	can
finish	cooking	delicate	things	at	the	time	of	serving,	preventing	the
inevitable	overcooking	associated	with	reheating.	This	is	exactly	the	kind	of
thinking	restaurant	cooks	employ	to	cut	down	on	the	time	it	takes	to
prepare	a	dish	to	order	without	compromising	quality.	Foods	that	require
long	exposure	to	gentle	heat—tough	meats,	dense	vegetables,	and	hearty
grains—are	entirely	or	partially	cooked	in	advance	and	reheated	to	order.
Delicate	foods	that	will	cook	quickly	or	suffer	from	reheating—fried	foods,
tender	meats,	fish	and	shell-fish,	and	baby	vegetables—are	cooked	to	order.

Braise	pork	shoulder	overnight,	but	grill	it	up	for	tacos	for	a	party	the
next	day.	To	achieve	depth	of	flavour,	gently	roast	or	blanch	any	number	of
tough	vegetables—broccoli,	cauliflower,	turnips,	or	winter	squash—before
sautéing	them.	Simmer	chicken	thighs	until	they’re	falling	off	the	bone,	then
shred	the	meat	to	use	in	a	pot	pie.

Learn	to	combine	two	different	cooking	methods	to	get	the	flavour	and
texture	contrasts	that	so	please	our	palates—such	as	crisp,	brown	crusts
and	soft,	tender	insides.
Measuring	Heat:	Sensory	Cues
As	American	poet	Mary	Oliver	wrote,	“To	pay	attention,	this	is	our	endless
and	proper	work.”	She	must	be	a	great	cook.	Indeed,	the	best	cooks	I’ve
ever	met—whether	in	home	or	professional	kitchens—are	careful
observers.

With	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid,	your	tongue	can	guide	you	as	you	cook.	Other
senses	take	on	greater	importance	when	considering	Heat,	since	generally
you	can’t	taste	its	effects	until	its	work	is	done.	Use	these	sensory	cues	to
help	you	determine	when	various	foods	are	cooked,	or	nearly	there.
See
• Cakes	and	quick	breads	develop	a	golden-brown	colour	and	pull	away

from	the	sides	of	a	pan.	A	toothpick	inserted	into	the	centre	will	come



out	with	just	a	couple	of	crumbs,	or	totally	clean	when	inserted,
depending	on	the	type	of	cake.

• Fish	will	change	from	translucent	to	opaque.	Fish	on	the	bone	starts	to
peel	away	from	the	bone.	The	flesh	of	flaky	fish,	such	as	salmon	and
trout,	begins	to	break	apart	into	flakes.

• Shellfish,	such	as	clams	and	mussels,	open	up	as	they	are	cooked.
Lobster	and	crab	meat	won’t	cling	to	the	shells.	Scallops	should	remain
translucent	inside.	Prawns	change	colour	and	begin	to	curl.

• When	quinoa	is	cooked	through,	its	germ,	which	looks	like	a	little	tail,
will	stick	out.	Fully	cooked	whole	grains,	including	barley	and	wheat
berries,	will	just	begin	to	split.	Fresh	pasta	droops	when	it’s	cooked,	and
lightens	in	colour.	Dried	pasta	also	lightens	in	colour,	though	when
broken	open	or	bitten	into	it	should	still	be	white	in	the	centre,
indicating	it’s	al	dente.

• Gauge	deep-fried	foods	not	only	by	their	surface	colour	but	also	by	the
rate	of	bubbles	they’re	giving	off.	As	deep-fried	foods	cook	further,
they	emit	fewer	bubbles	because	there	is	less	moisture	left	to	escape
from	the	food.

• When	properly	cooked,	chicken	meat	turns	from	pink	to	opaque	but	is
still	juicy.	You	can	always	nick	and	peek	at	poultry,	meat,	or	fish.	Cut
into	the	thickest	part	of	the	piece	and	see	if	it’s	cooked.	Roast	chicken
is	done	when	pricked	at	the	thigh	and	the	juice	runs	clear.

• Custards	jiggle	at	the	centre,	but	not	around	the	edges,	when	cooked.
Egg	whites	no	longer	appear	slimy.



Smell
• The	aromas	of	cooking	are	among	the	most	rewarding	sensory	treats,

second	only,	perhaps,	to	its	flavours.	Familiarise	yourself	with	the
smells	of	cooking	onions	at	different	degrees	of	browning.	Do	the	same
for	caramelising	sugars.	This	will	help	when	you’re	in	the	other	room,
with	roasting	vegetables	in	the	oven—often	the	nose	is	the	first	to
know.

• Spices	toasting	in	a	hot	pan	will	often	emit	an	aroma	long	before	they
change	in	colour,	which	is	a	good	sign	to	take	them	off	and	let	residual
heat	continue	to	do	its	work.

• Always	heed	the	smell	of	burning	and	find	its	source.
Hear
• Food	should	almost	always	sizzle	when	it’s	added	to	a	pan,	signalling

that	the	pan	and	the	fat	are	both	preheated.
• But	there	are	different	qualities	of	sizzle	.	.	.	once	sizzling	slows	and

becomes	more	pronounced	and	aggressive,	it’s	a	sputter.	Sputtering	is
a	sign	that	there’s	a	lot	of	hot	fat	present,	and	can	often	mean	that	it’s
time	to	tip	some	fat	out	of	the	pan,	flip	the	chicken	breast	to	the	other
side,	or	pull	the	browning	short	ribs	out	of	the	oven.

• Listen	for	a	boil.	Especially	when	you	need	to	be	prepared	to	turn	it
down	to	a	simmer.	You’ll	find	that	you	can	hear	whether	foil-wrapped
pans	have	come	to	a	boil	in	the	oven	if	you	listen	carefully	enough.	It’ll
save	you	from	having	to	peel	back	the	foil	to	check.

Feel
• Tender	meats	firm	up	as	they	cook.
• Tough	meats	also	firm	up	as	they	cook,	but	they	won’t	be	done	until

they	relax	again,	and	fall	apart	at	the	touch	or	are	tender	at	the	bone.
• Cakes	spring	back	at	the	touch.
• Starches	sticking	together	at	the	bottom	of	the	pot,	difficult	to	stir,	or

creating	an	impenetrable	crust	at	the	bottom	of	the	pot	are	teetering
on	the	edge	of	burning.	Either	scratch	them	off,	or	switch	pots	to	avoid
scorching.

• Beans,	grains,	and	starches	of	all	kinds	are	tender	throughout	when
cooked.



• Pasta	is	chewy,	with	the	tiniest	bit	of	resistance	in	the	centre.
• Vegetables	are	done	when	they	are	tender	at	their	thickest	points.
Improvising	with	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat
Now	for	the	fun	part:	using	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat	to	compose	great
dishes	and	menus.	Answer	the	basic	questions	for	each	element	to	give
yourself	the	clearest	idea	of	how	to	proceed.	How	much	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid,
and	when,	and	in	what	forms?	Will	the	ingredients	benefit	most	from	gentle
or	intense	Heat?	Line	up	the	answers	to	these	questions	and	a	theme	will
emerge,	upon	which	you	can	begin	to	improvise.

For	example,	next	Thanksgiving,	use	what	you’ve	learned	about	Salt,
Fat,	and	Heat,	to	cook	the	juiciest,	tastiest	roast	turkey	you’ve	ever	had.	Salt
or	brine	it	well	in	advance	for	tender,	flavourful	meat.	Sneak	slices	of	herbed
butter	underneath	the	skin	to	baste	the	lean	breast	as	it	cooks.	Pat	its	skin
dry	before	you	stick	it	in	the	oven,	so	it	can	brown,	instead	of	steam.	Bring	it
to	room	temperature	before	cooking	and	remove	its	backbone	(this	is
called	spatchcocking,	see	here)	so	that	it	can	lie	flat,	absorbing	the	intense
heat	of	the	oven	evenly	and	quickly.	And,	of	course,	let	the	bird	rest	for	at
least	25	minutes	before	you	carve	it	to	allow	its	proteins	to	relax.	Then,
savour	every	single	bite	with	some	sweet,	bright	cranberry	sauce.

Or,	when	your	family	asks	you	to	make	short	ribs	for	dinner	tonight,
disappoint	them	at	first	by	saying	no.	Instead,	feed	them	Slow-Roasted
Salmon,	or	Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken	tonight,	knowing	you	can
season	and	cook	either	properly	on	short	notice.	Promise	to	reward	them
for	their	patience.	When	you’re	ready	to	make	them,	season	the	short	ribs
generously	with	salt	and	let	them	sit	overnight.	The	next	day,	get	the	braise
together,	softening	the	aromatic	vegetables	while	the	meat	browns.	Take
care	to	work	wine	and	tomatoes	into	the	base.	Slip	the	pan	into	the	oven
and	let	it	simmer,	growing	ever	richer,	more	tender,	and	more	flavourful.
Ponder	which	herb	salsa	you’ll	make	to	play	the	foil,	and	when	you	bring	it
all	to	the	table,	watch	as	their	eyes	grow	large	with	disbelief.	They	will	swoon
with	each	bite.	They’ll	ask	how	you	managed	such	a	feat.	And	you’ll	say,	“It’s
simple—Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat.”



WHAT	TO	COOK
Now	that	you	know	how	to	cook,	all	that	remains	is	to	decide	what	to	cook.
Menu	writing	is	one	of	my	favourite	parts	of	the	cooking	process,	and	I	think
of	it	as	a	simple	puzzle:	first,	figure	out	one	part,	and	then	fit	everything	else
in	around	that.
Anchoring
Choose	one	element	of	a	dish	and	make	it	the	foundation	upon	which	you
build	a	meal.	This	is	what	I	call	anchoring,	and	it’s	the	best	way	to	create	a
menu	unified	in	flavour	and	concept.

Sometimes	the	anchor	will	be	a	particular	ingredient,	such	as	the
chicken	you	salted	two	days	ago.	It	may	be	a	cooking	method;	perhaps	it’s
the	first	day	of	summer	and	you’re	eager	to	light	the	grill.	Maybe	there’s	a
specific	recipe	you’re	eager	to	try.	Sometimes	the	mere	thought	of	leaving
the	house	to	buy	groceries	is	overwhelming	and	the	anchor	becomes	the
scraps	you’ve	got	in	the	fridge,	freezer,	and	pantry.

At	times,	the	anchor	will	be	a	limitation—of	time,	space,	resources,	or
stove	or	oven	capacity.	At	Thanksgiving,	when	oven	space	is	at	a	premium,
make	the	oven	your	anchor.	Decide	which	of	your	menu	items	must	be
cooked	in	the	oven,	and	choose	to	make	other	dishes	that	can	be	cooked
on	the	stove	or	grill,	or	served	at	room	temperature.	On	a	weeknight,	your
anchor	may	be	the	lack	of	time	you	have	to	spend	on	dinner,	so	let	that
guide	you	in	the	choice	of	meat	to	build	a	dish	around.	On	a	leisurely
Sunday,	the	opposite	may	be	true,	and	you	can	build	not	only	your	menu
but	your	entire	day	around	slow	cooking.

When	you’re	craving	Mexican,	Indian,	Korean,	or	Thai	food,	let	the
flavours	of	those	places	be	your	anchor.	Think	about	the	ingredients	that
define	the	cuisine	that	inspires	you,	and	start	to	build	a	meal	around	that.
Consult	cookbooks,	memories	of	your	own	childhood	or	travel,	or	call	your
grandmother	or	auntie	for	counsel.	Decide	whether	you	want	to	go	the
traditional	route	and	follow	your	grandmother’s	advice,	or	whether	you’d
prefer	to	refer	to	The	World	of	Flavour	(here)	and	simply	infuse	the	spirit
of	the	place	into	a	dish	you	already	know	how	to	cook.

If	you’re	overenthusiastic	at	the	farmers’	market,	as	I	often	am,	and
come	home	with	more	food	than	you	could	possibly	use,	let	the	produce	be
your	anchor.	Sit	down	with	a	cup	of	coffee	at	the	kitchen	table	and	pull	your
favourite	cookbooks	down	from	the	shelf—or	flip	to	the	recipe	section	in
this	book—in	search	of	inspiration.



One	of	the	first	jobs	I	had	at	Chez	Panisse	was	called	garde-manger—
French	for	“eating	guard.”	I	started	every	morning	at	six	o’clock,	and	my	first
task	was	to	walk	through	each	of	the	four	walk-in	refrigerators	and
inventory	every	single	item	of	food.	I	quickly	learned	to	wear	a	sweatshirt
beneath	my	chef’s	coat,	because	the	walk-ins	are	quite	literally	bone-
chilling.	I	also	learned	how	this	task	affected	the	chefs’	menu	writing	each
morning.	Only	when	they	had	a	complete	picture	of	what	was	on	hand,	and
what	was	being	delivered	that	day	by	the	farmers,	ranchers,	and	fishermen
who	supplied	us,	could	they	set	about	creating	the	best	possible	menu.	If	I
didn’t	do	my	job	well,	they	couldn’t	do	theirs.

I	came	to	love	that	quiet	time	in	the	walk-ins	each	morning,	before	the
kitchen	sprang	to	life	with	the	busyness	of	the	other	cooks	and	the	din	of
the	dishwasher	filled	the	restaurant	with	noise.	Soon	I	realised	that	taking
note	of	everything	on	hand	was	just	the	first	step	in	deciding	what	to	cook,
whether	at	the	restaurant	or	at	home.	I	also	learned	that	implicit	in	this	style
of	cooking	is	an	emphasis	on	the	quality	of	the	ingredients.	If	something
doesn’t	taste	good	to	begin	with,	no	amount	of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat	trickery
will	change	that.	Try	to	buy	the	best	tasting	ingredients	available,	when	you
can.

As	a	rule,	the	fresher	the	produce,	meat,	dairy,	or	fish,	the	better	it	will
taste.	In	general,	foods	grown	locally	and	in	season	are	the	freshest,	and	so
they	taste	the	best.	By	shopping	before	deciding	on	a	specific	menu,	you’ll
ensure	that	your	meal	starts	with	the	most	flavourful	ingredients	instead	of
crossing	your	fingers	and	hoping	to	find	a	way	to	work	in	the	perfectly	ripe
figs	or	tender	baby	lettuces	you	unexpectedly	find	at	the	farmers’	market.

And	when	you	can’t	get	to	a	farmers’	market,	scour	the	produce	aisles
of	the	grocery	store	in	search	of	the	freshest-looking	stuff.	In	the	store,	as	in
the	kitchen,	let	all	your	senses	guide	you.	If	the	greens	look	wilted,	or	the
tomatoes	don’t	smell	like	much,	head	to	the	freezer	section	and	choose
from	the	produce	hidden	over	there.	Frozen	fruits	and	vegetables	are	easy
to	forget	about,	but	they	tend	to	be	harvested	and	flash-frozen	at	the	peak
of	freshness.	In	the	depths	of	winter—or	at	other	times	when	nothing	much
else	looks	very	good—frozen	peas	and	corn	can	offer	a	welcome	dose	of
spring	and	summer	flavour.






BALANCE,	LAYERING,	AND	RESTRAINT
Once	you’ve	chosen	your	anchor,	begin	to	balance	the	meal.	Precede	long-
cooked,	rich	dishes	with	light,	fresh-tasting	ones.	If	you	plan	to	serve	a
bready	appetiser—perhaps	Winter	Panzanella,	or	Tomato	and	Ricotta
Toasts—then	avoid	heavy	starches	throughout	the	rest	of	the	meal—no
pasta,	no	cake,	no	bread	pudding.	If	a	custardy	Chocolate	Pudding	Pie	will
conclude	the	meal,	don’t	serve	rich	Pasta	Alfredo,	or	steak	doused	in
creamy	béarnaise	sauce	before	it.

Incorporate	contrasting	textures	and	flavours,	as	well	as	ingredients,
and	avoid	repetition—unless	you’re	purposely	celebrating	the	height	of	a
season,	with	tomato	soup,	salad,	and	granita,	for	example.	Garnish	soft
comfort	foods	with	crunchy	crumbs,	toasted	nuts,	or	crisp	bits	of	bacon	to
make	things	interesting.	Serve	rich	meats	with	bright,	acidic	sauces	and
clean-tasting	blanched	or	raw	vegetables.	Serve	mouth-drying	starches	with
mouthwatering	sauces,	and	recognise	that	a	well-dressed,	juicy	salad	can
serve	as	both	a	side	dish	and	a	sauce.	On	the	other	hand,	pair	simply	cooked
meats,	such	as	grilled	steak	or	poached	chicken,	with	roasted,	sautéed,	or
fried	vegetables	glazed	with	Maillard’s	dark	lacquer.

Let	the	seasons	inspire	you;	foods	that	are	in	season	together	naturally
complement	one	another	on	the	plate.	For	example,	corn,	beans,	and
squash	grow	as	companions	in	the	field,	then	the	three	sisters	find	their	way
together	into	succotash.	Tomatoes,	aubergines,	courgettes,	and	basil
become	ratatouille,	tian,	or	caponata	depending	on	where	you	are	on	the
Mediterranean	coast.	Sage,	a	hardy	winter	herb,	is	a	natural	complement	to
winter	squash	because	its	leaves—and	its	flavour—stand	up	to	the	cold	of
winter.

Pair	delicate	ingredients	that	could	easily	be	overwhelmed	with	clean,
bright	flavours—light	broths,	tender	herbs,	a	squeeze	of	citrus	at	the	end,
no	browning.	Think	of	spring	peas	and	asparagus,	delicate	salmon	or	halibut,
or	a	salad	of	summer	fruits.	Other	times,	the	weather,	the	season,	or	the
occasion	demands	depth	of	flavour:	aggressive	browning	of	both	the
aromatics	and	the	meat	in	a	braise,	rich	stocks,	cheeses,	mushrooms,
anchovies,	and	savoury	other	ingredients	rich	in	umami.	Generally,	aim	to
strike	a	balance	of	cleanliness	and	depth.

Heavily	spice	one	part	of	a	dish	or	meal,	then	keep	the	rest	more	or	less
neutral,	echoing	a	few	of	the	same	spices	here	and	there	if	you	like,	to
prevent	overloading	your	taste	buds.	Garnish	a	simple	puréed	carrot	soup



with	a	yoghurt	raita	replete	with	spices	sizzled	in	ghee.	Add	just	a	few	cumin
seeds	to	beans	and	rice,	but	use	them	in	abundance	with	chillies	and	garlic
to	rub	all	over	skirt	steak	for	tacos.

If	food	doesn’t	taste	right—first	turn	to	the	lessons	of	Salt,	Fat,	and
Acid.	Make	sure	that	those	three	elements	are	in	balance.	Most	often,	that’ll
be	enough.	If	a	dish	still	needs	something,	turn	next	to	umami.	Is	it	falling	a
little	flat?	Perhaps	a	little	soy	sauce,	pounded	anchovy,	or	Parmesan	will
make	the	difference.	Finally,	texture.	Is	the	reason	for	the	dullness	its	one-
note	texture?	Perhaps	it	needs	the	crunch	of	bread	crumbs,	toasted	nuts,	or
a	pickle	to	add	contrast.

Scientists	have	found	that	we	all	prefer	to	eat	foods	that	engage	our
senses	with	these	kinds	of	contrasts—including	light	and	dark,	sweet	and
salty,	crunchy	and	silky,	hot	and	cold,	and,	of	course,	sweet	and	sour.

And	then	there	are	herbs	and	spices,	which	can	wake	up	the	plainest
foods.	Herb	salsas,	pepper	sauces,	a	sprinkle	of	chopped	parsley,	Lebanese
za’atar,	or	Japanese	shichimi	togarashi	can	enliven	any	dish.

Invest	in	the	flavours	of	a	dish	by	layering	each	upon	one	another	to
create	a	tightly	woven	matrix	of	tastes	and	aromas.	Use	a	single	ingredient
in	multiple	ways	to	add	dimension	to	a	dish:	a	lemon’s	zest	and	its	juice;
coriander	seeds	and	leaves;	fennel	seeds,	fronds,	and	bulbs;	fresh	peppers
and	dried	chillies;	toasted	hazelnuts	and	their	oil.

And	if	menu	writing	grows	overwhelming,	just	remember:	you	already
have	a	lifetime	of	balanced	menu	creation	under	your	belt.	Whenever



you’ve	ordered	multiple	courses	at	a	restaurant,	you	have	practised	this	kind
of	thinking.	Every	time	you	choose	to	order	a	salad,	then	split	a	pasta,	main
course,	and	dessert	with	your	dining	companion,	you’re	intuitively	creating	a
balanced	meal.	Though	it	can	be	tempting	to	order	Caesar	salad	and
meatballs	and	pasta	and	fried	chicken	and	ice	cream,	you	rarely	do,
instinctively	aware	of	the	price	you’ll	pay	for	that	kind	of	excess.

Every	choice	you	make	in	the	kitchen	should	have	a	clear	reason.	Rare	is
the	kitchen-sink	dish	or	meal	that	doesn’t	taste	like	a	kitchen-sink	dish	or
meal.	This	is	not	to	say	you	should	never	take	action	to	clear	out	the	pantry
or	the	fridge	with	a	meal—	quite	the	contrary!—but	that	you	should	decide
carefully	which	ingredients	belong	together,	and	which	will	bring	out	the
best	in	the	others.



USING	RECIPES
Chef	Judy	Rodgers	once	said,	“Recipes	do	not	make	food	taste	good;
people	do.”	I	couldn’t	agree	more.	Most	of	the	time,	the	path	to	good	food
is	simple:	get	the	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid	right,	and	apply	the	right	type	of	Heat,
for	the	right	amount	of	time.	At	other	times,	you’ll	need	to	consult	a	recipe.
Whether	for	general	inspiration	or	precise	step-by-step	instruction,	a	good
recipe	can	be	invaluable.

But	recipes	lead	us	to	believe	that	cooking	is	a	linear	process,	while
most	good	food	results	from	a	circular	one;	like	a	spiderweb,	touch	one	part
and	the	entire	thing	will	quiver.	Earlier	in	this	book,	I	described	the	alchemy
of	the	perfect	Caesar	dressing.	Here,	for	example,	the	amount	of	anchovies
you	add	will	affect	the	amount	of	salt,	which	will	affect	the	amount	of
cheese	you	add,	which	will	affect	how	much	vinegar	you	need,	which	may
need	to	be	lightened	by	lemon	juice.	Every	choice	is	part	of	a	greater	whole,
with	the	ultimate	goal	of	achieving	the	deepest	flavour	possible.

Think	of	a	recipe	as	a	snapshot	of	a	dish.	The	better	the	recipe,	the
more	detailed,	in	focus,	and	striking	the	photo.	But	even	the	most	beautiful
photos	can’t	replace	the	experience	of	being	in	a	place,	smelling	its	smells,
tasting	its	tastes,	hearing	its	sounds.	Just	as	photos	can’t	satisfy	all	of	our
senses,	nor	should	recipes	subvert	them.

A	great	recipe,	like	a	great	photo,	tells	a	story,	and	it	tells	it	well.	Lesser
recipes	may	not	connect	all	the	dots.	There	are	plenty	of	reasons	for	this,
and	while	some	of	them	may	have	to	do	with	the	skill	of	the	cook	or	the
accuracy	of	the	recipe	tester,	or	frankly,	whether	the	recipe	has	been	tested
at	all,	they’re	not	important.	Simply	put,	no	recipe	is	infallible.	You	are	the
one	cooking,	you	are	the	one	who	is	present,	you	are	the	one	who	must	use
all	your	senses—most	of	all,	common	sense—to	guide	you	to	the	result	you
hope	for.	Over	the	years	I’ve	constantly	been	amazed	by	the	way	good
cooks	give	up	thinking	critically	and	independently	when	they	begin
following	recipes.

Instead,	once	you’ve	chosen	a	recipe,	don’t	let	your	own	intimate
knowledge	of	your	own	ingredients	and	kitchen	and,	most	important,	your
own	taste	be	overridden	by	what	you’re	reading.	Be	present.	Stir,	taste,
adjust.

Certain	kinds	of	recipes—particularly	those	involving	desserts—must
be	followed	to	the	letter.	But	I	believe	that	most	savoury	recipes	are	little
more	than	guides,	and	some	guides	are	better	than	others.	Learn	to



decipher	the	secret	codes	within	recipes	to	see	where	they	are	leading	you.
Once	you	understand	that	braising,	stewing,	and	making	ragù	or	beef

chilli	all	follow	the	same	general	trajectory,	I	hope	you’ll	feel	liberated.	Use
your	judgment	to	help	decide	which	pan	to	use,	how	high	to	heat	it,	what	fat
to	use	for	browning,	and	how	to	judge	doneness,	no	matter	what	the	recipe
directs.

Sometimes,	you	can’t	go	wrong	when	you	begin	with	the	recipe	on	the
package.	The	best	pumpkin	pie	I’ve	ever	tasted	was	a	version	of	the	recipe
on	the	Libby’s	canned	pumpkin	label,	with	double	cream	substituted	for	the
prescribed	canned	evaporated	milk	(indeed,	this	is	the	inspiration	for	the
recipe	I’ve	included	in	Part	Two).	The	go-to	recipe	for	corn	bread	at	Chez
Panisse	is	a	slight	variation	on	the	recipe	from	the	back	of	the	Alber’s
cornmeal	box,	made	instead	with	freshly	milled	Antebellum	cornmeal	from
Anson	Mills	in	South	Carolina.	And	my	very	favourite	chocolate	chip	cookie
of	all	time	involves	a	tiny	riff	on	the	original	Toll	House	recipe:	a	50g
increase	in	the	amount	of	brown	sugar	and	a	corresponding	decrease	in	the
amount	of	white	sugar.

When	making	a	dish	for	the	first	time,	read	several	different	recipes	for
the	same	dish	and	compare	notes.	Notice	which	ingredients,	techniques,
and	flavourings	are	common	to	the	recipes,	and	which	are	different.	This
will	give	you	an	idea	of	which	aspects	of	the	dish	you	must	not	compromise
on,	and	where	a	little	improvisation	is	welcome.	Over	time,	as	you	get	to
know	which	chefs	and	writers	are	traditionalists,	and	which	take	more
liberties,	you’ll	grow	better	equipped	to	decide	between	recipes	and
cooking	styles.

When	making	foods	from	far-off	lands,	perhaps	no	ingredient	is	as
important	as	curiosity.	Cooking,	and	eating,	foods	from	places	we’ve	never
seen	is	as	good	a	way	as	any	(and	better	than	most!)	to	expand	your
horizons,	to	remember	that	the	world	is	a	big,	beautiful	place	of	endless
magic	and	surprise.	Let	curiosity	lead	you	to	new	books	and	magazines,
websites,	and	restaurants,	cooking	classes,	and	of	course,	cities,	countries,
and	continents.

The	nature	of	cooking	is	ever-changing.	Even	the	same	pile	of	peas	will
taste	different	when	cooked	on	two	different	days,	as	their	innate	sugars
transform	into	starches.	They’ll	have	to	be	treated	differently	in	order	to
extract	the	best	flavour	from	them,	and	that	means	you	need	to	pay
attention	and	ask	yourself	what	will	work	best	today,	here,	with	these
ingredients.



With	all	of	this—and	everything	I’ve	taught	you	in	Part	One—in	mind,
I’ve	compiled	my	most	essential	and	versatile	recipes	and
recommendations	in	Part	Two.	Organised	somewhat	differently	from	the
recipes	in	a	traditional	cookbook,	they	reflect	the	patterns	and	lessons	I’ve
uncovered	in	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat.	Refer	to	the	charts	and	infographics
to	set	your	course.	These	resources	are	kind	of	like	training	wheels:	use
them	until	you	feel	comfortable	cooking	without	them.	Then	abandon
them,	using	only	the	four	elements	of	good	cooking	as	a	guide.	They	are	all
you	will	need.

The	other	night,	as	I	was	watching	The	Sound	of	Music	for	the	umpteenth
time,	unabashedly	singing	along,	I	heard	a	line	from	“Do-Re-Mi”	in	a	whole
new	way.	It	goes:	“Once	you	know	the	notes	to	sing,	you	can	sing	most
anything.”	Feel	free	to	imagine	my	off-key	belting	as	you	let	this	idea	sink	in.
Once	you	know	the	basics	of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat,	you	can	cook	most
anything,	and	do	it	well.

These	are	the	four	notes	of	the	culinary	scale;	learn	your	way	around
them.	Verse	yourself	in	the	classics,	and	then	begin	to	improvise	like	a	jazz
musician,	putting	your	own	spin	on	the	standards.

Think	about	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat	every	single	time	you	set	out	to
cook.	Choose	the	right	type	of	Heat	for	the	particular	foods	you’re	cooking.
Taste	and	adjust	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid	as	you	go.	Be	thoughtful,	and	use	your
senses.	Consider	these	four	elements	when	making	dishes	you’ve	made
hundreds	of	times,	and	use	them	to	find	your	bearings	when	cooking	exotic
foods	for	the	first	time.	They’ll	never	let	you	down.












CHOOSING	TOOLS
Use	this	list	to	help	you	choose	the	right	tool	for	every	task.
Serrated	Knife	vs.	Chef’s	Knife	vs.	Paring	Knife
There	are	only	a	few	proper	uses	for	a	serrated	knife:	slicing	bread,
tomatoes,	and	layer	cakes.	For	everything	else,	use	a	chef’s	knife—the
sharper	the	better.	Use	a	paring	knife	whenever	a	task	requires	precision.
Wooden	Spoon	vs.	Metal	Spoon	vs.	Rubber	Spatula
Stir	cooking	foods	with	a	wooden	spoon,	which	is	soft	enough	to	avoid
damaging	the	pan	but	strong	enough	to	scrape	off	all	the	browned	bits	that
might	stick	to	the	bottom.	A	metal	spoon	is	ideal	for	browning	ground	meat
for	chilli	or	ragù—you	can	use	the	edge	to	break	up	the	pieces.	Use	a	rubber
spatula	any	time	you	need	to	scrape	every	last	drop	out	of	the	bowl	or	pan.
Frying	Pan	vs.	Cast	Iron	Casserole
Use	a	frying	pan	for	searing,	sautéing,	or	any	cooking	method	where	the	goal
is	to	brown	foods	quickly.	Use	a	cast	iron	casserole,	with	its	taller	sides,	to
entrap	steam	and	encourage	tough	foods	to	become	tender.	As	it’s	deep
enough	to	keep	oil	from	bubbling	over,	the	casserole	is	also	great	for	deep-
frying.
Baking	Sheet	vs.	Bowl
A	baking	sheet	lined	with	parchment	paper	is	the	ideal	landing	pad	for
blanched	vegetables,	browned	meats,	cooked	grains,	or	anything	else	that
needs	to	cool	off	quickly	without	overcooking.	When	roasting	vegetables,
croutons,	or	anything	else,	toss	them	together	with	oil	and	salt	in	a	bowl	to
ensure	even	coverage,	and	then	lay	them	out	on	a	baking	sheet.



CHOOSING	INGREDIENTS
A	Note	on	Salt
I’ve	got	a	lot	to	say	about	salt.	So	much,	in	fact,	that	I	wrote	an	entire
chapter	on	it.	While	I	recommend	reading	the	Salt	chapter	before	heading
into	the	kitchen	with	these	recipes,	I	certainly	understand	if	you	can’t	help
yourself.

If	you	get	to	a	recipe	that	doesn’t	specify	the	type	or	amount	of	salt	to
use,	use	what	you’ve	got	on	hand	(unless	it’s	iodised	table	salt,	in	which	case
you	should	throw	it	out	and	head	straight	to	the	store	to	buy	kosher	or	sea
salt).	Start	with	a	pinch	or	two	of	salt,	then	taste	early	and	often	in	the
cooking	process	to	get	where	you	want	to	go,	adjusting	the	seasoning	along
the	way.

Refer	to	the	Salting	Guidelines	here	to	see	just	how	much	the	weight
(and	saltiness!)	of	a	single	tablespoon	of	salt	will	vary	depending	on	the
type.	Hint:	it’s	a	lot.	For	this	reason,	I	encourage	you	to	start	with	my
guidelines	as	your	benchmarks	until	you	get	a	feel	of	how	much	salt	it	takes
to	properly	season	various	foods.	I’ve	tested	these	recipes	with	both
Diamond	Crystal	brand	kosher	salt	(the	red	box)	and	fine	sea	salt	from	the
grocery	store.	We	can	get	Diamond	Crystal	online	and	Morton’s	on
Amazon.	Morton	brand	kosher	salt	(the	blue	box)	is	almost	twice	as	salty	by
volume,	so	if	you’re	cooking	with	that,	use	half	as	much	kosher	salt	as	the
recipes	indicate.
Where	Not	to	Skimp
Most	of	the	recipes	that	follow	call	for	ingredients	that	can	be	found	in	any
grocery	store.	But	I	splurge	on	a	few	items,	and	I	suggest	you	do	too.	Good
cooking	starts	with	good	ingredients.	You’ll	thank	me	when	you’re	sitting
down	to	the	most	delicious	dinner	you’ve	ever	cooked.
Buy	the	best	you	can	afford
• Extra-virgin	Olive	Oil,	pressed	in	the	last	calendar	year
• Whole	chunks	of	Parmigiano-Reggiano	from	Italy
• Chocolate	and	Cocoa	Powder
Buy	whole	and	prepare	yourself
• Pick	and	chop	fresh	herbs	(and	always	use	Italian	or	flat-leaf	parsley).
• Juice	lemons	and	limes



• Peel,	chop,	and	pound	garlic
• Grind	spices
• Soak,	rinse,	fillet,	and	chop	salt-packed	anchovies
• Make	chicken	stock	when	you	can	(see	here	for	a	recipe).	Or	buy	fresh

or	frozen	stock	from	your	butcher,	rather	than	the	boxed	or	canned
stuff	(it	never	tastes	as	good).	Failing	that,	use	water.

For	more	details	about	selecting	ingredients,	flip	a	few	pages	back	to	What
to	Cook?



A	FEW	BASIC	HOW-TOS





















SALADS
My	maman	is	a	fantastic	cook.	Her	kitchen	boasts	a	broad	variety	of	foods
and	flavours,	from	tender	lamb	shanks	to	puddings	scented	with	rosewater.
But	she	only	ever	serves	one	of	two	salads	at	our	dinner	table:	Persian
cucumber,	tomato,	and	onion,	or	Shirazi	Salad	(here),	and	a	romaine-
pecorino–sun-dried	tomato	number.	As	a	child,	I	quickly	grew	bored	with
salad.	By	the	time	I	left	for	college,	I’d	disavowed	it	altogether.

Then	I	ended	up	at	Chez	Panisse,	which	may	as	well	be	called	Alice’s
House	of	Salads	because	if	there	were	ever	a	restaurant	built	on	the
supremacy	of	salad,	it’s	Chez	Panisse.	I	once	heard	Jacques	Pépin	say	he
could	judge	a	cook’s	skill	by	how	well	he	cooks	an	egg.	For	Alice—and	by
extension	all	of	us	who’ve	worked	for	her—salad	reveals	everything	she
needs	to	know	about	a	cook.

At	Chez	Panisse,	I	learned	to	build	a	salad—a	great	one—out	of
anything:	any	vegetable,	fruit,	or	herb,	beans,	grains,	fish,	meat,	eggs,	or	nuts.
As	with	all	good	cooking,	get	the	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid	in	a	salad	right,	and	it
will	be	delicious.	For	bonus	points,	add	crunchy	ingredients	for	textural
variety	and	umami-rich	ingredients	for	a	flavour	boost.	For	inspiration,	look
to	salads	such	as	Wedge,	Caesar,	and	Cobb,	which	remain	classics	precisely
because	they	achieve	this	ideal	balance	of	tastes	and	textures.

Familiarise	yourself	with	the	following	basic	salad	recipes,	then	begin	to
improvise	with	the	ideal	salad	checklist	in	mind.	Choose	a	flavour	direction,
and	use	the	fat,	acid,	and	herb	combinations	that	reflect	the	tastes	you
seek.

From	vibrant,	raw	seasonal	produce	to	fresh-tasting	herbs	and
vinaigrettes,	every	ingredient	in	a	salad	can	be	beautiful	and	delicious.	Learn
to	dress	salads	properly,	by	tossing	ingredients	in	a	bowl	with	your	hands,
which	will	do	an	immeasurably	better	job	than	tongs	or	a	wooden	spoon.
Let	your	fingers	feel	when	all	of	the	leaves	are	coated,	then	taste	and	adjust
the	seasoning	as	needed.

For	salads	with	multiple	components,	such	as	avocado	with	heirloom
tomato	and	cucumber	(here),	dress	the	less	delicate	cucumber	slices	in	a
bowl	with	salt	and	vinaigrette.	Alternate	various	colours	of	tomato	slices	on
the	platter,	then	top	with	spoonfuls	of	avocado	and	season	with	salt	and
vinaigrette,	then	spoon	the	cucumbers	around.	Finish	the	salad—and
indeed	any	salad—with	the	most	delicate	ingredients	of	all,	a	billowing	nest
of	herbs	or	tiny	rocket	leaves	tossed	with	a	whisper	of	dressing	and	a	little



more	salt.

Avocado	Salad	Matrix
Rich	and	creamy,	avocados	are	one	of	my	favourite	affordable	luxuries.	You
can	easily	build	an	elegant	salad	out	of	a	ripe	one.	And	since	avocados	pair
well	with	all	sorts	of	crunchy	and	acidic	fruits	and	vegetables,	instead	of
giving	you	a	single	recipe	for	avocado	salad,	I’ve	organised	a	bunch	of



possibilities	into	this	matrix.
An	avocado	salad	will	make	any	meal	more	special,	a	point	I	once

proved	by	bringing	avocados,	blood	oranges,	salt,	and	good	olive	oil	to	a
yoga	workshop.	During	our	lunch	break,	we	had	a	surprise	birthday	potluck
for	one	of	our	classmates.	I	made	a	simple	salad	by	slicing	the	citrus	and
laying	it	out	on	a	platter,	spooning	the	avocado	on	top,	and	then	seasoning
both	with	olive	oil	and	salt.	Served	in	the	back	of	the	gym,	the	salad	was	so
refreshing	and	unexpected	that	everyone	who	tasted	it	still	tells	me	it	was
the	best	salad	of	their	life,	even	a	decade	later!

To	make	enough	salad	for	about	4	people,	begin	with	one	ripe	avocado
(you	can	always	add	more	to	your	liking!),	and	refer	to	the	chart	to	see
which	other	ingredients	and	dressings	to	add	into	your	salad.	Let	the	rest	of
your	meal	dictate	the	direction	of	the	salad,	from	Morocco	to	Mexico	to
Thailand.	No	matter	how	you	proceed,	every	single	version	will	be	improved
by	the	counterpoint	of	a	big	pile	of	herbs,	some	shaved	fennel	bulb,	or	a
handful	of	rocket.
Avocado
Hass	avocados	are	the	most	widely	available	variety.	They’re	also	one	of	my
favourites,	with	their	silky	texture	and	rich,	nutty	flavour.	You	can	use	any
variety	you	like,	as	long	as	it’s	perfectly	ripe:	the	avocado	is	ready	when	it’s
tender	to	the	touch.

A	friend	who’s	been	a	hand	surgeon	for	nearly	forty	years	told	me	that
avocados	and	bagels	are	the	two	most	common	causes	of	hand	injuries.	So



please,	please,	please	put	the	avocado	down	on	the	board	when	you	whack
at	the	pit	with	your	knife	to	remove	it.

Use	one	avocado	for	this	salad,	and	wait	until	the	last	minute	to	cut	into
it,	because	it	will	oxidise	quickly,	changing	in	both	flavour	and	colour.	Once
you’ve	halved	the	avocado	and	removed	the	pit,	use	a	spoon	to	scoop	out
rustic	spoonfuls	and	place	them	directly	onto	the	platter.	Season	each	bite
of	avocado	with	flaky	salt	and	drizzle	with	vinaigrette.	If	you	have	any	mild
pepper	flakes,	such	as	Aleppo,	on	hand,	sprinkle	them	on	top	for	a	little	hint
of	spice	and	a	welcome	colour	contrast.
Beetroots
Use	2	to	3	small	beetroots,	tops	and	ends	trimmed	and	rinsed.	I’ve	found
that	red	beetroots	are	the	most	consistently	delicious,	but	gold	beetroots
and	the	candy	cane–striped	variety	called	Chioggia	lend	stunning	beauty	to
the	plate.	Even	someone	like	me,	who	is	obsessed	with	flavour,	can	make	an
exception	for	these	varieties	from	time	to	time.

Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C.	Place	the	beetroots	in	a	baking	dish	in	a
single	layer	and	fill	the	pan	with	5mm	water—just	enough	to	create	steam	in
the	pan	without	simmering	the	beetroots.	Lay	a	piece	of	parchment	paper
over	the	beetroots	and	cover	the	dish	tightly	with	foil.	Roast	for	an	hour,	or
until	completely	tender	when	pierced	with	a	paring	knife—there	are	few
things	less	appetising	than	undercooked	beetroots.	Pay	attention	to	the
aromas	emitted	from	the	oven—if	you	smell	sugars	caramelising,	it	means
all	the	water	has	evaporated,	and	you’ll	need	to	add	more	to	prevent	the
beetroots	from	burning.

Let	the	beetroots	cool	just	enough	so	you	can	handle	them,	and	then
peel	by	rubbing	with	a	paper	towel.	The	skins	will	slip	right	off.	Cut	into	bite-
size	wedges	and	toss	in	a	bowl	along	with	1½	teaspoons	wine	vinegar,	1
tablespoon	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	and	salt.	Let	sit	for	10	minutes,	then	taste
and	adjust	seasoning	as	needed—remember	that	the	right	amount	of	Acid
and	Salt	will	amplify	the	beetroots’	natural	sweetness.

To	serve,	arrange	the	wedges	on	the	platter—the	rule	when	plating
beetroots	is:	put	them	down	confidently,	and	do	not	move	them	or	they	will
stain,	leaving	a	messy	trail	in	their	wake.



Citrus
Use	2	to	3	citrus	fruits	of	any	variety,	including	grapefruits,	pomelos,
oranges,	blood	oranges,	even	mandarins.	Combine	a	couple	of	different
varieties	of	citrus	to	enhance	the	flavour	and	aesthetics	of	the	dish.

Cut	off	the	tops	and	bottoms	of	the	fruits.	Place	on	a	cutting	board,
then	remove	the	peel	and	the	pith	in	strips	with	a	sharp	knife.	Carefully	slice
oranges	and	mandarins	crosswise,	about	5mm	thick,	removing	seeds	as	you
encounter	them.	To	supreme—	or	segment—grapefruits	and	pomelos,	hold
the	peeled	fruit	over	a	bowl	in	one	hand.	Carefully	use	a	knife	with	a	sharp,



thin	blade	to	cut	along	the	membrane	down	to	the	centre	of	the	orange.
Continue	cutting	along	both	sides	of	each	membrane	to	release	every
segment.	When	you’re	done,	squeeze	all	of	the	remaining	juice	from	the
fruit	into	a	separate	bowl	and	use	it	to	make	Citrus	Vinaigrette	(here),
Granita	(here),	or	just	drink	it!	Season	the	slices	or	segments	lightly	with	salt
as	you	place	them	on	the	platter.

Tomatoes
Use	2	to	3	tomatoes	when	they’re	ripe	and	in	season	during	the	summer
months.	A	few	contrasting	slices	of	heirloom	tomatoes—try	Green	Zebra,
Great	White,	a	yellow	variety	such	as	Marvel	Stripe	or	Hawaiian	Pineapple,
a	pink	one	such	as	Brandywine,	or	a	dark	one	such	as	Cherokee	Purple—will
likewise	enhance	how	the	salad	looks	and	tastes.

Core	the	tomatoes	with	a	paring	knife,	then	carefully	slice	them
horizontally,	about	5mm	thick.	Season	the	slices	with	salt	as	you	place	them
on	the	platter.	As	with	the	beetroots	or	citrus,	arrange	with	an	eye	towards
beauty,	alternating	colours	of	tomatoes	with	the	other	elements	of	the
salad.
Cucumbers



While	almost	all	of	the	other	ingredients	in	this	matrix	are	soft	in	texture
and	rich	in	flavour,	cucumbers	are	crisp	and	light.	Use	about	225g	of	any
flavourful,	thin-skinned	variety.	This	works	out	to	about	two	Persian,
Japanese,	or	lemon	cucumbers,	or	one	small	Armenian	cucumber.	Remove
the	peel	in	alternating	strips.	This	is	what	I	call	a	stripey	peel,	and	I	use	it	for
all	sorts	of	produce	when	I	want	to	remove	some	but	not	all	of	the	skin
(leaving	some	peel	behind	is	both	a	handy	aesthetic	trick	and	a	technical
one,	since	it	provides	structure	and	prevents	delicate	vegetables	such	as
aubergines	and	asparagus	from	completely	disintegrating	as	they	cook).
Halve	the	cucumbers	lengthwise,	and	if	the	seeds	are	bigger	than	a
peppercorn,	use	a	teaspoon	to	scrape	them	out.	Slice	the	cucumbers	on	the
bias	for	a	longer,	more	elegant,	half-moon	shape.	Toss	with	salt	and
vinaigrette	before	spreading	out	onto	the	salad.

Macerated	Onion
Place	half	a	red	onion	down	on	the	cutting	board	and	cut	it	in	half,	parallel
to	the	root	end.	Holding	the	two	quarters	together,	slice	the	onion	thinly	to
yield	quarter	slices.	Place	the	slices	in	a	bowl	and	dress	with	2	tablespoons
wine	vinegar	or	citrus	juice.	Toss	to	coat.	Let	the	onions	sit	in	the	acid,	or
macerate	(see	here),	for	at	least	15	minutes	before	using.	This	process	tones
down	their	acrid	bite.	Keep	in	mind	that	as	onions	macerate,	they’ll	absorb
the	acid,	so	as	you	incorporate	them	into	the	salad	they’ll	add	both	tartness
and	a	pleasant	oniony	crunch.	If	you	like,	drain	the	macerating	acid	and	use
it	to	build	the	vinaigrette.



Optional	Additions
• Gently	tear	Slow-Roasted	Salmon	(here)	or	Tuna	Confit	(here)	into

two-bite-size	pieces,	then	arrange	atop	the	salad.	Drizzle	with
vinaigrette	and	sprinkle	with	flaky	salt.

• Halve	2	Eight-Minute	Eggs	(here)	and	sprinkle	them	with	flaky	salt	and
freshly	ground	black	pepper.	Drizzle	with	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	and	if
you	like,	lay	an	anchovy	fillet	over	each	half.	Arrange	atop	the	salad.









Bright	Cabbage	Slaw Serves	4	generously

I	know	that	some	people	hate	coleslaw.	But	I’ve	converted	even	the	most
fervent	among	them	with	this	version,	which	bears	no	resemblance	to	the
cloying	stuff	many	of	us	grew	up	eating.	Light	and	clean,	it’ll	lend	crunch	and
brightness	to	any	plate.	Serve	the	Mexican	variation	with	Beer-Battered
Fish	(here)	and	tortillas	for	delicious	fish	tacos.	Make	Classic	Southern
Slaw	to	serve	alongside	Spicy	Fried	Chicken	(here).	And	remember,	the
richer	the	food	you	plan	to	serve	with	it,	the	more	acidic	the	slaw	should	be.

½	medium	head	of	red	or	green	cabbage
½	small	red	onion,	thinly	sliced
55ml	lemon	juice
Salt
15g	coarsely	chopped	parsley	leaves
3	tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar
6	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil

Quarter	the	cabbage	through	the	core.	Use	a	sharp	knife	to	cut	the	core	out
at	an	angle.	Thinly	slice	the	cabbage	crosswise	and	place	in	a	colander	set
inside	a	large	salad	bowl.	Season	with	two	generous	pinches	of	salt	to	help
draw	out	water,	toss	the	slices,	and	set	aside.

In	a	small	bowl,	toss	the	sliced	onion	with	the	lemon	juice	and	let	it	sit
for	20	minutes	to	macerate	(see	here).	Set	aside.

After	20	minutes,	drain	any	water	the	cabbage	may	have	given	off	(it’s
fine	if	there’s	nothing	to	drain—sometimes	cabbage	isn’t	very	watery).	Place
the	cabbage	in	the	bowl	and	add	the	parsley	and	the	macerated	onions	(but
not	their	lemony	juices,	yet).	Dress	the	slaw	with	the	vinegar	and	olive	oil.
Toss	very	well	to	combine.

Taste	and	adjust,	adding	the	remaining	macerating	lemon	juice	and	salt
as	needed.	When	your	palate	zings	with	pleasure,	it’s	ready.	Serve	chilled	or
at	room	temperature.

Store	leftover	slaw	covered,	in	the	fridge,	for	up	to	two	days.



Variations
• If	you	don’t	have	cabbage	on	hand,	or	simply	want	to	try	something

new,	make	an	Alterna-slaw,	using	1	large	bunch	raw	kale,	675g	raw
Brussels	sprouts,	or	675g	raw	kohlrabi	instead.

• For	Mexi-Slaw,	substitute	a	neutral-tasting	oil	for	the	olive	oil,	lime
juice	for	the	lemon	juice,	and	coriander	for	the	parsley.	Add	1	sliced
jalapeño	pepper	to	the	cabbage	along	with	the	macerated	onions.
Taste	and	adjust	seasoning	with	the	macerating	lime	juice	and	salt.

• To	make	Asian	Slaw,	toss	the	cabbage	with	just	one	generous	pinch	of
salt	and	add	2	teaspoons	soy	sauce.	Substitute	lime	juice	for	the	lemon
juice.	Skip	the	parsley	and	add	1	small	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or
pounded;	2	thinly	sliced	spring	onions;	1	teaspoon	finely	grated	ginger;
and	25g	chopped,	toasted	peanuts	to	the	cabbage	along	with	the
macerated	onions.	Skip	the	red	wine	vinegar	and	olive	oil	and	dress
with	Rice	Wine	Vinaigrette	(here).	Taste	and	adjust	seasoning	with
the	macerating	lime	juice	and	salt.

• To	make	Classic	Southern	Slaw,	substitute	115g	stiff	Classic	Sandwich
Mayo	(here)	for	the	olive	oil	and	vinegar.	Add	1	teaspoon	sugar,	135g
julienned	or	grated	carrots,	and	1	julienned	or	grated	tart	apple,	such	as
Honeycrisp	or	Fuji,	to	the	cabbage	along	with	the	macerated	onions.

Three	Classic	Shaved	Salads
I	inherited	my	fondness	for	shaved	salads	from	my	friend	Cal	Peternell,	the
chef	who	taught	me	exactly	how	much	salt	it	takes	to	season	a	pot	of
polenta	(hint:	a	lot)	during	my	early	days	at	Chez	Panisse.	One	out	of	three
salads	I	eat	at	Cal’s	house	is	shaved.	While	I	can’t	speculate	on	why	he
seems	to	have	such	a	soft	spot	for	them,	my	own	reasons	are	clear:	they’re
easy	to	make	and	lend	crunch	and	brightness	to	any	meal.

Vietnamese	Cucumber	Salad Serves	4	to	6

900g	(about	8)	Persian	or	Japanese	cucumbers,	stripey	peeled
(see	here)

1	large	jalapeño,	seeds	and	veins	removed	if	desired,	thinly	sliced
3	spring	onions,	finely	sliced



1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
15g	coarsely	chopped	coriander	leaves
16	large	mint	leaves,	coarsely	chopped
50g	toasted	peanuts,	coarsely	chopped
55ml	neutral-tasting	oil
4	to	5	tablespoons	lime	juice
4	teaspoons	seasoned	rice	wine	vinegar
1	tablespoon	fish	sauce
1	teaspoon	sugar
Pinch	of	salt

Using	either	a	Japanese	mandoline	or	a	sharp	knife,	thinly	slice	the
cucumbers	into	coins,	discarding	the	ends.	In	a	large	bowl,	combine	the
cucumbers,	jalapeño,	spring	onions,	garlic,	coriander,	mint,	and	peanuts.	In
a	small	bowl,	whisk	together	the	oil,	4	tablespoons	lime	juice,	the	vinegar,
fish	sauce,	sugar,	and	a	small	pinch	of	salt.	Dress	the	salad	with	the
vinaigrette	and	toss	to	combine.	Taste	and	adjust	seasoning	with	salt	and
more	lime	juice	as	needed.	Serve	immediately.



Shaved	Carrot	Salad	with	Ginger	and
Lime Serves	6

210g	golden	or	black	raisins
1	tablespoon	cumin	seeds
900g	carrots
4	teaspoons	finely	grated	ginger
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
1	to	2	large	jalapeños,	seeds	and	veins	removed	if	desired,	minced
60g	coarsely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems,	plus	a

few	sprigs	for	garnish
Salt
Lime	Vinaigrette	(here)

In	a	small	bowl,	submerge	the	raisins	in	boiling	water.	Let	them	sit	for	15
minutes	to	rehydrate	and	plump	up.	Drain	and	set	aside.

Place	the	cumin	seeds	in	a	small,	dry	frying	pan	and	set	over	medium
heat.	Swirl	the	pan	constantly	to	ensure	even	toasting.	Toast	until	the	first
few	seeds	begin	to	pop	and	emit	a	savoury	aroma,	about	3	minutes.	Remove
from	the	heat.	Immediately	dump	the	seeds	into	the	bowl	of	a	mortar	or	a
spice	grinder.	Grind	finely	with	a	pinch	of	salt.	Set	aside.

Trim	and	peel	the	carrots.	Using	either	a	Japanese	mandoline	or	a	sharp
knife,	thinly	slice	the	carrots	lengthwise.	Use	a	sharp	knife	to	cut	the	slices
into	matchsticks.	If	that	seems	too	troublesome,	you	can	use	a	vegetable
peeler	to	make	thin	ribbons	or	just	slice	the	carrots	into	thin	coins.

Combine	carrots,	ginger,	garlic,	jalapeño,	coriander,	cumin,	and	raisins
in	a	large	bowl.	Season	with	three	generous	pinches	of	salt	and	dress	with
lime	vinaigrette.	Taste	and	adjust	seasoning	with	salt	and	more	lime	juice	as
needed.	Refrigerate	the	salad	for	30	minutes	to	allow	flavours	to	come
together.	To	serve,	toss	to	distribute	seasonings,	heap	onto	a	large	platter,
and	garnish	with	a	few	sprigs	of	coriander.



Shaved	Fennel	and	Radishes Serves	4	to	6

3	medium	fennel	bulbs	(about	675g)
1	bunch	radishes,	trimmed	and	washed	(about	8	radishes)
30g	parsley	leaves
Optional:	30g	chunk	of	Parmesan
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
About	75ml	Lemon	Vinaigrette	(here)

Trim	the	fennel	by	removing	any	stalks	and	the	very	tip	of	the	bottom	end,
leaving	the	bulb	intact.	Halve	the	bulbs	through	the	root	and	remove	any
fibrous	outer	layers.	Using	either	a	Japanese	mandoline	or	a	sharp	knife,	cut
the	fennel	bulbs	crosswise	into	paper-thin	slices,	discarding	the	cores.
Reserve	the	discarded	fennel	for	another	use,	or	sneak	it	into	Tuscan	Kale
and	Bean	Soup	(here).	Slice	the	radishes	just	a	hair	thicker,	about	3mm,
discarding	the	ends.

In	a	large	bowl,	combine	the	fennel,	radishes,	and	parsley	leaves.	If	using
Parmesan,	use	a	vegetable	peeler	to	shave	shards	directly	into	the	bowl.
Just	before	serving,	season	with	two	generous	pinches	of	salt	and	a	small
pinch	of	pepper.	Dress	with	vinaigrette.	Taste	and	adjust,	adding	more	salt
and	vinaigrette	as	needed,	then	arrange	on	a	serving	platter.	Serve
immediately.






Summer	Tomato	and	Herb	Salad Serves	4	to	6

Is	there	anything	more	refreshing	to	eat	than	a	perfect	tomato	salad
showered	with	herbs?	If	there	is,	I	can’t	think	of	it.	Add	this	salad	to	your
summer	repertoire,	changing	the	tomatoes	and	the	herbs	with	each	passing
week.	If	you	grow	tired	of	green	basil,	look	for	less	common	herbs	such	as
anise	hyssop,	also	known	as	liquorice	mint,	or	opal	or	Greek	basil	at	the
farmers’	market.	Indian,	Mexican,	and	Asian	grocery	stores	are	also	great
places	to	find	special	herbs	including	all	sorts	of	mint,	shiso,	Thai	basil,	and
Vietnamese	coriander,	any	one	of	which	will	work	nicely	in	this	salad.

2	to	3	mixed	heirloom	tomatoes,	such	as	Marvel	Stripe,	Cherokee
Purple,	or	Brandywine,	cored	and	sliced	into	5mm	slices

Flaky	salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
225ml	Tomato	Vinaigrette	(here).	Hint:	use	the	cores	and	end

slices	of	the	salad	tomatoes
400g	cherry	tomatoes,	rinsed,	stemmed,	and	halved
60g	any	combination	of	freshly	picked	leaves	of	basil,	parsley,

anise	hyssop,	chervil,	tarragon,	or	2.5cm	pieces	of	chives
Just	before	serving,	lay	out	the	heirloom	tomato	slices	on	a	serving	platter	in
a	single	layer	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Drizzle	lightly	with
vinaigrette.	In	a	separate	bowl,	combine	the	cherry	tomatoes	and	season
liberally	with	salt	and	pepper.	Dress	with	vinaigrette,	taste	and	adjust	salt	as
needed,	and	carefully	mound	the	cherry	tomatoes	over	the	tomato	slices.

Place	the	fresh	herbs	in	the	salad	bowl	and	dress	lightly	with	vinaigrette,
salt,	and	pepper	to	taste.	Pile	herb	salad	over	the	tomatoes	and	serve
immediately.
Variations
• To	make	Caprese	Salad,	alternate	heirloom	tomato	slices	with	1cm

slices	of	fresh	mozzarella	or	burrata	cheese	before	seasoning	and
dressing.	Skip	the	herb	salad.	Instead,	when	seasoning	the	cherry
tomatoes	in	a	separate	bowl,	add	12	torn	basil	leaves.	Mound	the	cherry
tomatoes	over	the	tomato	slices.	Serve	with	warm,	crusty	bread.



• To	make	Ricotta	and	Tomato	Salad	Toasts,	whip	together	325g	fresh
ricotta	cheese	with	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	flaky	salt,	and	freshly	ground
black	pepper.	Brush	4	2.5cm	slices	of	crusty	bread	with	extra-virgin
olive	oil	and	toast	until	golden	brown	in	a	200°C	oven	for	about	10
minutes.	Rub	each	toast	lightly	with	a	raw	garlic	clove	on	one	side.
Spread	5	tablespoons	ricotta	onto	the	garlic	side	of	each	toast.	Lay
slices	of	heirloom	tomatoes	over	the	ricotta	and	then	pile	sliced
heirloom	tomatoes	on	top.	Divide	30g	herb	salad	atop	the	toasts	and
serve	immediately.

• To	make	Persian	Shirazi	Salad,	toss	½	thinly	sliced	red	onion	in	3
tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar	in	a	small	bowl	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes.
Stripey	peel	4	Persian	cucumbers,	cut	into	1cm	slices,	and	place	in	a
large	bowl.	Add	cherry	tomatoes	and	1	pounded	or	finely	grated	garlic
clove	to	the	cucumbers.	Mix	in	the	onions	(but	not	their	vinegar,	yet).
Season	with	salt	and	pepper	and	dress	with	Lime	Vinaigrette	(here).
Taste	the	mixture	and	add	some	of	the	reserved	vinegar	if	needed,	then
continue	as	above,	mounding	the	mixture	atop	the	sliced	tomatoes.
Top	with	an	herb	salad	of	dill,	coriander,	parsley,	and	mint,	also	dressed
with	Lime	Vinaigrette.

• To	make	Greek	Salad,	toss	½	thinly	sliced	red	onion	in	3	tablespoons
red	wine	vinegar	in	a	small	bowl	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes.	Stripey	peel	4
Persian	cucumbers,	cut	into	1cm	slices,	and	place	in	a	large	bowl.	Add
cherry	tomatoes,	1	pounded	or	finely	grated	garlic	clove,	125g	rinsed,
pitted	black	olives,	and	115g	rinsed	and	crumbled	feta	cheese	to	the
cucumbers.	Mix	in	the	onions	(but	not	their	vinegar,	yet).	Season	with
salt	and	pepper	and	dress	with	Red	Wine	Vinaigrette	(here).	Taste	the
mixture	and	add	some	of	the	reserved	vinegar	if	needed,	then	continue
as	above,	mounding	the	mixture	atop	the	sliced	tomatoes.	Skip	the
herb	salad.



A	Panzanella	for	Every	Season
Panzanella	is	the	ultimate	proof	that	Tuscan	cooks	excel	at	making
something	out	of	nothing.	Traditionally	made	with	little	more	than	stale
bread,	tomatoes,	onions,	and	basil,	panzanella	is	as	much	about	texture	as	it
is	about	flavour.	If	the	croutons	aren’t	soaked	in	vinaigrette	long	enough,
they’ll	scrape	the	roof	of	your	mouth.	Let	the	bread	get	too	soggy,	though,
and	the	salad	will	bore	you.	Aim	for	a	broad	spectrum	of	crunchiness	by
staggering	the	addition	of	croutons.	Your	mouth	will	thank	you.

A	memorable	summer	panzanella	requires	good	bread	and	great
tomatoes,	so	vary	the	ingredient	combinations	as	the	seasons	shift	to
delight	in	bread	salad	year	round.

Summer:	Tomato,	Basil,	and	Cucumber Serves	4	generously

½	medium	red	onion,	sliced	thinly
1	tablespoon	red	wine	vinegar
225g	Torn	Croutons	(here)



Double	batch	of	Tomato	Vinaigrette	(here)
450g	cherry	tomatoes,	stemmed	and	halved
675g	Early	Girl	or	other	flavourful	small	tomatoes	(about	8

tomatoes),	cored	and	wedged	into	bite-size	pieces
4	Persian	cucumbers,	stripey	peeled	(here)	and	cut	into	1cm

slices
16	basil	leaves
Flaky	sea	salt

In	a	small	bowl,	toss	the	sliced	onion	with	the	vinegar	and	let	it	sit	for	20
minutes	to	macerate	(see	here).	Set	aside.

Place	half	the	croutons	in	a	large	salad	bowl	and	toss	with	125ml	of
vinaigrette.	Place	the	cherry	and	wedged	tomatoes	on	top	of	the	croutons
and	season	with	salt	to	encourage	them	to	release	some	of	their	juices.	Let
sit	for	about	10	minutes.

Continue	assembling	the	salad:	add	the	remaining	croutons,
cucumbers,	and	macerated	onions	(but	not	their	vinegar,	yet).	Tear	in	the
basil	leaves	in	large	pieces.	Dress	with	another	125ml	of	vinaigrette	and
taste.	Adjust	seasoning	as	needed,	adding	salt,	vinaigrette,	and/or	the
macerating	vinegar	to	taste.	Toss,	taste	again,	and	serve.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	one	night.
Variations
• To	make	Fattoush,	the	Middle	Eastern	tomato	and	bread	salad,

substitute	5	torn	and	toasted	pitta	breads	for	the	croutons,	10g	parsley
leaves	for	the	basil,	and	Red	Wine	Vinaigrette	(here)	for	the	Tomato
Vinaigrette.

• To	make	a	Grain	or	Bean	Salad,	substitute	about	400g	cooked,
drained	farro,	wheatberries,	barley,	or	beans	for	the	croutons	in	any	of
the	seasonal	variations.

Autumn:	Roasted	Squash,	Sage,	and
Hazelnut Serves	4	generously

1	bunch	kale,	preferably	Cavolo	Nero,	or	Tuscan	variety



1	large	butternut	squash	(900g),	peeled
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
½	medium	red	onion,	sliced	thinly
1	tablespoon	red	wine	vinegar
Double	batch	of	Brown	Butter	Vinaigrette	(here)
225g	Torn	Croutons	(here)
About	450ml	neutral-tasting	oil
16	sage	leaves
100g	hazelnuts,	toasted	and	coarsely	chopped

Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C.	Line	a	baking	sheet	with	paper	towels.
Strip	the	kale.	Gripping	at	the	base	of	each	stem	with	one	hand,	pinch

the	stem	with	the	other	hand	and	pull	upward	to	strip	the	leaf.	Discard	the
stems	or	save	for	another	use,	such	as	Tuscan	Bean	and	Kale	Soup	(here).
Cut	the	leaves	into	1cm	slices.	Set	aside.

Halve,	seed,	slice,	and	roast	the	butternut	squash	as	directed	here.	Set
aside.

Toss	the	sliced	onion	in	a	small	bowl	with	the	vinegar	and	let	it	sit	for	20
minutes	to	macerate.	Set	aside.

Place	half	the	croutons	and	the	kale	in	a	large	salad	bowl	and	toss	with
75ml	of	vinaigrette.	Let	sit	for	10	minutes.

In	the	meantime,	fry	the	sage.	Pour	2.5cm	of	neutral	oil	into	a	small,
heavy-bottomed	pot	and	heat	it	over	a	medium-high	flame	to	180°C.	If	you
don’t	have	a	thermometer,	just	test	the	oil	after	a	few	minutes	by	dropping
in	a	sage	leaf.	When	it	sizzles	immediately,	it’s	ready.

Add	the	sage	leaves	in	batches.	Be	aware	that	the	oil	will	bubble	up	a	lot
at	first,	so	let	it	die	down,	then	stir	in	the	sage.	After	about	30	seconds,	as
soon	as	the	bubbles	die	down,	pull	them	out	of	the	oil	with	a	slotted	spoon,
and	spread	the	sage	onto	the	prepared	baking	sheet.	Let	the	sage	dry	on	the
prepared	baking	sheet	in	a	single-ish	layer,	and	sprinkle	with	salt.	It’ll	get
crisp	as	it	cools.

Add	the	remaining	croutons,	squash,	hazelnuts,	and	macerated	onions
(but	not	their	vinegar,	yet)	into	the	salad	bowl.	Crumble	in	the	fried	sage.
Dress	with	the	remaining	vinaigrette,	toss	to	combine,	and	taste.	Adjust



seasoning	with	salt,	the	sage-frying	oil,	and	the	macerating	vinegar	as
needed.	Toss,	taste	again,	and	serve.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	one	night.



Winter:	Roasted	Radicchio	and	Roquefort Serves	4	generously

2	heads	radicchio
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt
2	medium	onions,	peeled
225g	Torn	Croutons	(here)
Double	batch	of	Brown	Butter	Vinaigrette	(here)
10g	parsley	leaves
140g	toasted	walnuts
Coarsely	ground	black	pepper
115g	Roquefort	cheese
Red	wine	vinegar,	as	needed	to	adjust	acid

Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C.
Halve	each	head	of	radicchio	through	the	root	end.	Cut	each	half	into

quarters.	Drizzle	generously	with	olive	oil	to	coat.	Handling	the	radicchio
pieces	carefully,	spread	them	out	in	a	single	layer	on	a	baking	sheet,	leaving
space	between	each	piece.	Drizzle	with	more	olive	oil	and	season	with	salt.

Halve	the	onions	through	the	root	end.	Wedge	each	half	into	quarters
for	a	total	of	8	pieces.	Drizzle	generously	with	olive	oil	to	coat.	Handling	the
onion	pieces	carefully,	spread	them	out	in	a	single	layer	on	a	baking	sheet,
leaving	space	between	each	piece.	Drizzle	with	more	olive	oil	and	season
with	salt.

Place	the	prepared	vegetables	into	the	preheated	oven	and	cook	until
tender	and	caramelised,	about	22	minutes	for	the	radicchio,	and	28	minutes
for	the	onions.	Check	on	the	vegetables	after	about	12	minutes.	Rotate	the
pans	and	switch	their	positions	to	make	sure	the	vegetables	are	browning
evenly.

Place	half	of	the	croutons	in	a	large	salad	bowl	and	toss	with	75ml	of
vinaigrette.	Let	sit	for	10	minutes.



Add	the	remaining	croutons,	radicchio,	onions,	parsley,	walnuts,	and
black	pepper.	Crumble	in	the	cheese	in	big	pieces.	Dress	with	remaining
vinaigrette	and	taste.	Adjust	seasoning	with	salt	and,	if	needed,	a	small
amount	of	red	wine	vinegar.	Toss,	taste	again,	and	serve	at	room
temperature.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	one	night.



Spring:	Asparagus	and	Feta	with	Mint Serves	4	generously

Salt
½	medium	red	onion,	sliced	thinly
1	tablespoon	red	wine	vinegar
675g	asparagus	(about	2	bunches),	woody	ends	removed
225g	Torn	Croutons	(here)
24	large	mint	leaves
85g	feta	cheese
Double	batch	of	Red	Wine	Vinaigrette	(here)

Set	a	large	pot	of	water	on	to	boil	over	high	heat.	Season	it	with	salt	until	it
tastes	like	the	summer	sea.	Line	two	baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.
Set	aside.

Toss	the	sliced	onion	in	a	small	bowl	with	the	vinegar	and	let	it	sit	for	20
minutes	to	macerate	(see	here).	Set	aside.

If	the	asparagus	is	thicker	than	a	pencil,	stripey	peel	it,	pressing	lightly
with	a	vegetable	peeler	to	remove	only	the	outermost	skin	from	about
2.5cm	below	the	blossom	to	the	base.	Slice	the	asparagus	into	4cm-long
pieces	on	a	bias.	Blanch	the	asparagus	in	boiling	water	until	it’s	just	tender,
about	3½	minutes	(less	for	thinner	stalks).	Taste	a	piece	to	determine
doneness—it	should	still	have	the	faintest	crunch	in	the	centre.	Drain	and
allow	to	cool	in	a	single	layer	on	the	prepared	baking	sheets.

Place	half	of	the	croutons	in	a	large	salad	bowl	and	toss	with	75ml	of
vinaigrette.	Let	sit	for	10	minutes.

Add	the	remaining	croutons,	asparagus,	and	macerated	onions	(but	not
their	vinegar,	yet).	Tear	in	the	mint	leaves	in	small	pieces.	Crumble	in	the
feta	in	large	pieces.	Dress	with	another	75ml	vinaigrette	and	season	with
salt,	then	taste.	Adjust	seasoning	with	salt,	vinaigrette,	and	the	macerating
vinegar	as	needed.	Toss,	taste	again,	and	serve	at	room	temperature.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	1	night.






Torn	Croutons Makes	450g

Store-bought	croutons	simply	can’t	compete	with	homemade	ones.	To
begin	with,	your	raw	ingredients	are	almost	certainly	of	a	higher	quality,	and
hence	more	delicious,	than	the	stuff	anyone	else	will	use.	What’s	more,	the
rustic,	uneven	shape	of	torn	croutons	lends	a	variety	of	textures	to	your
salads.	Dressing	clings	to	them	better,	and	they’re	also	just	more	lovely	to
look	at.	That,	and	they	are	less	likely	to	scratch	the	roof	of	your	mouth.	If
these	reasons	don’t	convince	you,	come	over	to	my	house	for	some	Caesar
salad.	I’ll	get	you	that	way.

450g	loaf	day-old	country	or	sourdough	bread
75ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil

Preheat	the	oven	to	200°C.	For	more	tooth-friendly	croutons,	remove	the
crusts	from	the	bread,	then	cut	the	loaf	into	2.5cm-thick	slices.	Cut	each
slice	into	2.5cm-wide	strips.	Working	over	a	large	bowl,	tear	each	strip	into
2.5cm-size	pieces.	Alternatively,	you	can	just	tear	croutons	directly	off	the
loaf,	as	long	as	you	get	somewhat	evenly	sized	pieces—	I	find	that	preslicing
speeds	up	the	whole	process	and	yields	even,	yet	rustic-looking	croutons,
so	it’s	my	preferred	method.

Toss	the	croutons	with	the	olive	oil	to	coat	them	evenly,	then	spread
them	out	in	a	single	layer	on	a	baking	sheet.	Use	a	second	sheet	as	needed
to	prevent	crowding,	which	will	entrap	steam	and	keep	the	croutons	from
browning.

Toast	the	croutons	for	about	18	to	22	minutes,	checking	them	after	8
minutes.	Rotate	the	pans,	switch	their	oven	positions,	and	use	a	metal
spatula	to	turn	and	rotate	the	croutons	so	that	they	brown	evenly.	Once
they	begin	to	brown,	check	them	every	few	minutes,	continuing	to	turn	and
rotate.	Some	croutons	might	be	done	when	others	still	need	a	few	more
minutes	of	baking,	so	remove	them	from	the	tray	and	let	the	rest	finish
cooking.	Bake	the	croutons	until	they’re	golden	brown	and	crunchy	on	the
outside,	with	just	a	tiny	bit	of	chew	on	the	inside.

Taste	a	crouton	and	adjust	the	seasoning	with	a	light	sprinkling	of	salt	if
needed.

When	done,	let	the	croutons	cool	in	a	single	layer	on	the	baking	sheet.



Use	immediately	or	keep	in	an	airtight	container	for	up	to	2	days.	To	refresh
stale	croutons,	bake	for	3	to	4	minutes	at	200°C.

Freeze	leftover	croutons	for	up	to	2	months	and	use	in	Ribollita	(here).
Variations
• To	make	Classic	Torn	Croutons,	stir	2	cloves	finely	grated	or	pounded

garlic	into	the	olive	oil	before	dressing	the	croutons.	Toss	with	1
tablespoon	dried	oregano	and	½	teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes	before
toasting.

• To	make	Cheesy	Torn	Croutons,	toss	the	torn	bread	with	the	olive	oil,
then	add	85g	very	finely	grated	Parmesan	and	lots	of	coarsely	ground
black	pepper	to	the	bowl,	and	toss	until	combined.	Toast	as	directed
above.

• To	make	about	450g	of	Sprinkling	Crumbs,	don’t	bother	tearing	the
bread.	Instead,	grind	5cm	pieces	of	bread	into	pea-size	crumbs	in	a
food	processor.	Increase	the	olive	oil	to	125ml	and	toast	in	a	single	layer
until	golden,	16	to	18	minutes.



DRESSINGS
The	most	important	thing	about	any	dressing	is	to	strike	a	proper	balance	of
Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid.	Get	that	right,	and	any	salad	will	taste	good.

To	rid	shallots	(and	onions)	of	their	harsh	bite,	give	them	ample	time	to
macerate	in	acid.	That’s	just	a	fancy	way	of	saying,	toss	shallots	with	vinegar
or	citrus	juice	and	let	them	steep	for	a	bit	before	adding	the	oil	and	other
ingredients.

Pairing	salads	with	the	right	dressings	is	as	important	as	pairing	a	meal
with	the	right	wine.	Some	foods	require	richness,	while	others	ask	for
brightness.	Use	this	chart	to	inspire	and	guide	you.

For	tossed	salads,	place	the	greens	in	a	large	bowl	and	season	lightly
with	salt.	Add	a	conservative	amount	of	dressing	and	toss	with	your	hands
to	coat	the	leaves.	Taste	a	leaf,	then	add	salt	and	more	dressing	as	needed.

For	composed	salads,	always	make	sure	that	every	element	is	seasoned
and	dressed.	Marinate	beetroots	before	setting	them	down	on	the	plate	and
drizzling	them	with	Green	Goddess.	Season	every	slice	of	tomato	and	fresh
mozzarella	before	spooning	Balsamic	Vinaigrette	over	them.	Dress	both
Slow-Roasted	Salmon	(here)	and	the	shaved	fennel	salad	you	serve
alongside	it	with	Any-Other-Citrus	Vinaigrette	made	with	blood	oranges.
Make	every	bite	of	every	salad	delicious.	You’ll	start	to	look	forward	to	salad
with	a	fervour	you	never	expected.



Light

Red	Wine	Vinaigrette Makes	about	125ml

1	tablespoon	finely	diced	shallot
2	tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar



6	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper

In	a	small	bowl	or	jar,	let	the	shallot	sit	in	the	vinegar	for	15	minutes	to
macerate	(see	here),	then	add	the	olive	oil,	a	generous	pinch	of	salt,	and	a
small	pinch	of	pepper.	Stir	or	shake	to	combine,	then	taste	with	a	leaf	of
lettuce	and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.	Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers
for	up	to	3	days.

Ideal	for	garden	lettuces,	rocket,	chicories,	Belgian	endive,	Little	Gem
and	romaine	lettuce,	beetroots,	tomatoes,	blanched,	grilled,	or	roasted
vegetables	of	any	kind,	and	for	Bright	Cabbage	Slaw,	Fattoush,	Grain	or
Bean	Salad,	Greek	Salad,	Spring	Panzanella.
Variation
• To	make	Honey-Mustard	Vinaigrette,	add	1	tablespoon	Dijon

mustard	and	1½	teaspoons	honey	and	continue	as	above.



Balsamic	Vinaigrette Makes	about	75ml

1	tablespoon	finely	diced	shallot
1	tablespoon	aged	balsamic	vinegar
1	tablespoon	red	wine	vinegar
4	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper

In	a	small	bowl	or	jar,	let	the	shallot	sit	in	the	vinegar	for	15	minutes	to
macerate	(see	here),	then	add	the	olive	oil,	a	generous	pinch	of	salt,	and	a
pinch	of	pepper.	Stir	or	shake	to	combine,	then	taste	with	a	leaf	of	lettuce
and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.	Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to
3	days.

Ideal	for	rocket,	garden	lettuces,	Belgian	endive,	chicories,	romaine	and
Little	Gem	lettuce,	blanched,	grilled,	or	roasted	vegetables	of	any	kind,	and
for	Grain	or	Bean	Salad,	Winter	Panzanella.
Variations
• To	make	Parmesan	Vinaigrette,	which	is	perfect	for	hearty	chicories

and	grain	salads,	add	40g	finely	grated	Parmesan	and	continue	as
above.

• To	make	Brown	Butter	Vinaigrette	for	dressing	bread	salads	or
roasted	vegetables,	substitute	4	tablespoons	brown	butter	for	the	olive
oil	and	continue	as	above.	Bring	refrigerated	leftovers	back	to	room
temperature	before	using.



Lemon	Vinaigrette Makes	about	125ml

½	teaspoon	finely	grated	lemon	zest	(about	½	lemon’s	worth)
2	tablespoons	freshly	squeezed	lemon	juice
1½	teaspoons	white	wine	vinegar
5	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	garlic	clove
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper

Pour	the	lemon	zest,	juice,	vinegar,	and	olive	oil	into	a	small	bowl	or	jar.
Smash	the	garlic	clove	against	the	worktop	with	the	palm	of	your	hand	and
add	to	the	vinaigrette.	Season	with	a	generous	pinch	of	salt	and	a	pinch	of
pepper.	Stir	or	shake	to	combine,	then	taste	with	a	leaf	of	lettuce	and	adjust
salt	and	acid	as	needed.	Let	sit	for	at	least	10	minutes,	and	remove	the	garlic
clove	before	using.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	2	days.
Ideal	for	herb	salad,	rocket,	garden	lettuces,	romaine	and	Little	Gem

lettuce,	cucumbers,	boiled	vegetables,	and	for	Avocado	Salad,	Shaved
Fennel	and	Radish	Salad,	Slow-Roasted	Salmon.
Variation
• To	make	Lemon-Anchovy	Vinaigrette,	coarsely	chop	2	soaked,

filleted	salt-packed	anchovies	(or	4	fillets),	then	pound	them	into	a	fine
paste	in	a	mortar	and	pestle.	The	more	you	break	them	down,	the
better	the	dressing	will	be.	Stir	the	anchovies	and	an	additional	½	clove
of	finely	grated	or	pounded	garlic	into	the	dressing	and	continue	as
above.	Serve	with	rocket,	Belgian	endive,	boiled	vegetables	of	any	kind,
chicories,	or	shaved	winter	vegetables	such	as	carrots,	turnips,	and
celeriac.



Lime	Vinaigrette Makes	about	125ml

2	tablespoons	freshly	squeezed	lime	juice	(from	about	2	small
limes)

5	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	garlic	clove
Salt

Pour	the	lime	juice	and	olive	oil	into	a	small	bowl	or	jar.	Smash	the	garlic
clove	and	add	to	the	vinaigrette,	along	with	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.	Stir	or
shake	to	combine,	then	taste	with	a	leaf	of	lettuce	and	adjust	salt	and	acid
as	needed.	Let	sit	for	at	least	10	minutes,	and	remove	the	garlic	before	using.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Ideal	for	garden	lettuces,	Little	Gem	and	romaine	lettuce,	sliced

cucumbers,	and	for	Avocado	Salad,	Shaved	Carrot	Salad,	Shirazi	Salad,
Slow-Roasted	Salmon.
Variation
• To	add	a	little	heat,	add	1	teaspoon	minced	jalapeño.



Any-Other-Citrus	Vinaigrette Makes	about	150ml

1	tablespoon	finely	diced	shallot
4	teaspoons	white	wine	vinegar
55ml	citrus	juice
55ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
½	teaspoon	finely	grated	zest
Salt

In	a	small	bowl	or	jar,	let	the	shallot	sit	in	the	vinegar	for	15	minutes	to
macerate	(see	here),	then	add	the	citrus	juice,	olive	oil,	zest,	and	a	generous
pinch	of	salt.	Stir	or	shake	to	combine,	then	taste	with	a	leaf	of	lettuce	and
adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Ideal	for	garden	lettuces,	romaine	and	Little	Gem	lettuce,	blanched

asparagus,	and	for	Avocado	Salad,	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Grilled
Artichokes.
Variation
• To	make	a	sweet-tart	Kumquat	Vinaigrette,	add	3	tablespoons	finely

diced	kumquats	to	the	shallots	and	continue	as	above.



Tomato	Vinaigrette Makes	about	225ml

Make	this	dressing	with	the	ripest	tomatoes,	or	better	yet,	with	the	cores
and	ends	from	the	tomatoes	you	plan	to	use	in	your	salad.	You’ll	know	a
tomato	is	ripe	when	it	smells	woody	and	sweet	at	the	stem,	and	feels	firm
when	pressed,	with	just	a	little	bit	of	give.

2	tablespoons	diced	shallots
2	tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar
1	tablespoon	aged	balsamic	vinegar
1	large	or	two	small	very	ripe	tomatoes	(about	225g)
4	basil	leaves,	torn	into	large	pieces
55ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	garlic	clove
Salt

In	a	small	bowl	or	jar,	let	the	shallot	sit	in	the	vinegars	for	15	minutes	to
macerate	(see	here).

Halve	the	tomato	crosswise.	Grate	on	the	largest	hole	of	a	box	grater
and	discard	the	skin.	You	should	be	left	with	100g	grated	tomato.	Add	it	to
the	shallot.	Add	the	basil	leaves,	olive	oil,	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.
Smash	the	garlic	against	the	worktop	with	the	palm	of	your	hand	and	add	to
the	dressing.	Shake	or	stir	to	combine.	Taste	with	a	crouton	or	slice	of
tomato	and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.	Let	sit	for	at	least	10	minutes,
and	remove	the	garlic	before	using.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	2	days.
Ideal	for	sliced	tomatoes,	and	for	Avocado	Salad,	Caprese	Salad,

Summer	Panzanella,	Ricotta	and	Tomato	Salad	Toasts,	Summer	Tomato
and	Herb	Salad.






Rice	Wine	Vinaigrette Makes	about	75ml

2	tablespoons	seasoned	rice	wine	vinegar
4	tablespoons	neutral-tasting	oil
1	garlic	clove
Salt

Pour	the	vinegar	and	olive	oil	into	a	small	bowl	or	jar.	Smash	the	garlic	clove
against	the	worktop	with	the	palm	of	your	hand	and	add	to	the	dressing.	Stir
or	shake	to	combine,	then	taste	with	a	leaf	of	lettuce	and	adjust	salt	and
acid	as	needed.	Let	sit	for	at	least	10	minutes,	then	remove	garlic	before
using	dressing.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Ideal	for	garden	lettuces,	romaine	and	Little	Gem	lettuce,	shaved

daikon	radish,	carrots,	or	cucumbers,	and	for	any	Avocado	Salad.
Variations
• To	add	a	little	heat,	add	1	teaspoon	minced	jalapeño.
• To	evoke	the	flavours	of	Korea	or	Japan,	add	a	few	drops	of	toasted

sesame	oil.



Creamy

Caesar	Dressing Makes	about	350ml

4	salt-packed	anchovies	(or	8	fillets),	soaked	and	filleted
175ml	stiff	Basic	Mayonnaise	(here)
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
3	to	4	tablespoons	lemon	juice
1	teaspoon	white	wine	vinegar
3-ounce	chunk	of	Parmesan,	finely	grated,	plus	more	for	serving
85g	Worcestershire	sauce
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
Salt

Coarsely	chop	the	anchovies	and	then	pound	them	into	a	fine	paste	in	a
mortar	and	pestle.	The	more	you	break	them	down,	the	better	the	dressing
will	be.

In	a	medium	bowl,	stir	together	the	anchovies,	mayonnaise,	garlic,
lemon	juice,	vinegar,	Parmesan,	Worcestershire	sauce,	and	pepper.	Taste
with	a	leaf	of	lettuce,	then	add	salt	and	adjust	acid	as	needed.	Or,	practising
what	you	learned	about	Layering	Salt,	add	a	little	bit	of	each	salty
ingredient	to	the	mayonnaise,	bit	by	bit.	Adjust	the	acid,	then	taste	and
adjust	the	salty	ingredients	until	you	reach	the	ideal	balance	of	Salt,	Fat,	and
Acid.	Has	putting	a	lesson	you	read	in	a	book	into	practice	ever	been	this
delicious?	I	doubt	it.

To	make	the	salad,	use	your	hands	to	toss	the	greens	and	Torn
Croutons	with	an	abundant	amount	of	dressing	in	a	large	bowl	to	coat
evenly.	Garnish	with	Parmesan	and	freshly	ground	black	pepper	and	serve
immediately.

Refrigerate	leftover	dressing,	covered,	for	up	to	3	days.
Ideal	for	romaine	and	Little	Gem	lettuce,	chicories,	raw	or	blanched

Kale,	shaved	Brussels	sprouts,	Belgian	endive.



Creamy	Herb	Dressing Makes	about	275ml

1	tablespoon	finely	diced	shallot
2	tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar
100ml	crème	fraîche	(here),	double	cream,	sour	cream,	or	plain

yoghurt
3	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	small	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
1	spring	onion,	white	and	green	part	finely	chopped
10g	finely	chopped	soft	herbs,	in	whatever	proportions	you	like.

Use	any	combination	of	parsley,	coriander,	dill,	chives,
chervil,	basil,	and	tarragon

½	teaspoon	sugar
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper

In	a	small	bowl,	let	the	shallot	sit	in	the	vinegar	for	15	minutes	to	macerate
(see	here).	In	a	large	bowl,	whisk	together	the	shallot	and	macerating
vinegar	with	the	crème	fraîche,	olive	oil,	garlic,	spring	onion,	herbs,	sugar,	a
generous	pinch	of	salt,	and	a	pinch	of	black	pepper.	Taste	with	a	leaf	of
lettuce,	then	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	3	days.
Ideal	for	romaine,	Iceberg	wedges,	Little	Gem	lettuce,	beetroots,

cucumbers,	Belgian	endive,	and	for	serving	with	grilled	fish	or	roast	chicken,
dipping	crudités,	serving	alongside	fried	foods.






Blue	Cheese	Dressing Makes	275ml

140g	creamy	blue	cheese,	such	as	Roquefort,	Bleu	d’Auvergne,	or
Maytag	Blue,	crumbled

100ml	crème	fraîche	(here),	sour	cream,	or	double	cream
55ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	tablespoon	red	wine	vinegar
1	small	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
Salt

In	a	medium	bowl,	use	a	whisk	to	thoroughly	combine	the	cheese,	crème
fraîche,	olive	oil,	vinegar,	and	garlic.	Alternatively,	place	everything	into	a	jar,
seal	the	lid,	and	shake	vigorously	to	combine.	Taste	with	a	leaf	of	lettuce,
then	add	salt	and	adjust	acid	as	needed.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	3	days.
Ideal	for	Belgian	endive,	chicories,	Iceberg	wedges,	Little	Gem	and

romaine	lettuce.	This	dressing	also	works	beautifully	as	sauce	for	steak	or
dip	for	carrots	and	cucumbers.



Green	Goddess	Dressing Makes	about	450ml

3	salt-packed	anchovies	(or	6	fillets),	soaked	and	filleted
1	ripe	medium	avocado,	halved	and	pitted
1	garlic	clove,	sliced
4	teaspoons	red	wine	vinegar
2	tablespoons	plus	2	teaspoons	lemon	juice
2	tablespoons	finely	chopped	parsley
2	tablespoons	finely	chopped	coriander
1	tablespoon	finely	chopped	chives
1	tablespoon	finely	chopped	chervil
1	teaspoon	finely	chopped	tarragon
125ml	stiff	Basic	Mayonnaise	(here)
Salt

Coarsely	chop	the	anchovies	and	then	pound	them	into	a	fine	paste	in	a
mortar	and	pestle.	The	more	you	break	them	down,	the	better	the	dressing
will	be.

Place	the	anchovies,	avocado,	garlic,	vinegar,	lemon	juice,	herbs,	and
mayonnaise	in	a	blender	or	food	processor	with	a	generous	pinch	of	salt	and
blend	until	creamy,	thick,	and	smooth.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as
needed.	Leave	the	Green	Goddess	thick	to	use	as	a	dip,	or	thin	with	water
to	desired	consistency	for	a	salad	dressing.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	3	days.
Ideal	for	romaine,	Iceberg	wedges,	Little	Gem	lettuce,	beetroots,

cucumbers,	Belgian	endive,	for	serving	with	grilled	fish	or	roast	chicken,
dipping	crudités,	and	for	Avocado	Salad.



Tahini	Dressing Makes	about	225ml

½	teaspoon	cumin	seeds,	or	½	teaspoon	ground	cumin
Salt
225g	tahini
55g	freshly	squeezed	lemon	juice
2	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
¼	teaspoon	ground	cayenne	pepper
2	to	4	tablespoons	ice	water

Place	the	cumin	seeds	in	a	small,	dry	frying	pan	and	set	over	medium	heat.
Swirl	the	pan	constantly	to	ensure	even	toasting.	Toast	until	the	first	few
seeds	begin	to	pop	and	emit	a	savoury	aroma,	about	3	minutes.	Remove
from	the	heat.	Immediately	dump	the	seeds	into	the	bowl	of	a	mortar	or	a
spice	grinder.	Grind	finely	with	a	pinch	of	salt.

Place	the	cumin,	tahini,	lemon	juice,	oil,	garlic,	cayenne,	2	tablespoons
ice	water,	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt	in	a	medium	bowl	and	whisk	to
combine.	Alternatively,	blend	everything	together	in	a	food	processor.	The
mixture	might	look	broken	at	first,	but	trust	that	it’ll	come	together	into	a
smooth,	creamy	emulsion	with	stirring.	Add	water	as	needed	to	thin	it	out
to	desired	consistency—leave	it	thick	to	use	as	a	dip,	and	thin	it	out	to	dress
salads,	vegetables,	or	meat.	Taste	with	a	leaf	of	lettuce,	then	adjust	salt	and
acid	as	needed.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	3	days.
Variation
• To	make	Goma-Ae	(Japanese	sesame	seed	dressing)	substitute	55ml

seasoned	rice	wine	vinegar	for	the	lemon	juice.	Omit	the	cumin,	salt,
olive	oil,	and	cayenne	and	add	2	teaspoons	of	soy	sauce,	a	few	drops	of
toasted	sesame	oil,	and	1	teaspoon	mirin	(rice	wine).	Whisk	together
with	garlic	as	directed	above.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.

Ideal	for	drizzling	over	roasted	vegetables,	grilled	fish,	or	chicken;	tossing



with	blanched	broccoli,	kale,	green	beans,	or	spinach;	or	serving	as	a	dipping
sauce	with	cucumbers	and	carrots.



Miso-Mustard	Dressing Makes	175ml

4	tablespoons	white	or	yellow	miso	paste
2	tablespoons	honey
2	tablespoons	Dijon	mustard
4	tablespoons	rice	wine	vinegar
1	teaspoon	finely	grated	ginger

In	a	medium	bowl,	use	a	whisk	to	thoroughly	combine	everything	until
smooth.	Alternatively,	place	all	the	ingredients	in	a	jar,	seal	the	lid,	and
shake	vigorously	to	combine.	Taste	with	a	leaf	of	lettuce,	then	adjust	acid	as
needed.

Ideal	for	tossing	with	sliced,	raw	cabbage	or	kale,	garden	lettuces,
romaine	and	Little	Gem	lettuce,	Belgian	endive,	and	drizzling	over	grilled
fish,	leftover	roast	chicken,	or	roasted	vegetables.



Peanut-Lime	Dressing Makes	about	400ml

55ml	freshly	squeezed	lime	juice
1	tablespoon	fish	sauce
1	tablespoon	rice	wine	vinegar
1	teaspoon	soy	sauce
1	tablespoon	finely	grated	ginger
55g	peanut	butter
½	jalapeño	pepper,	stemmed	and	sliced
3	tablespoons	neutral-tasting	oil
1	garlic	clove,	sliced
Optional:	10g	coarsely	chopped	coriander	leaves

Place	all	the	ingredients	in	a	blender	or	food	processor	and	blend	until
smooth.	Thin	with	water	to	desired	consistency—leave	it	thick	to	use	as	a
dip,	and	thin	it	out	to	dress	salads,	vegetables,	or	meat.	Taste	with	a	leaf	of
lettuce,	then	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.

Refrigerate	leftovers,	covered,	for	up	to	3	days.
Ideal	for	cucumbers,	rice	or	soba	noodles,	romaine,	and	serving

alongside	grilled	or	roasted	chicken,	steak,	or	pork.



VEGETABLES
Cooking	Onions
The	longer	you	cook	onions,	the	deeper	their	flavour	will	be.	But	you	don’t
need	to	caramelise	every	onion	you	cook.	In	general,	cook	all	onions,	no
matter	how	you	intend	to	use	them,	at	least	until	they’ve	lost	their	crunch.
Only	when	they’ve	reached	this	point	will	they	truly	deliver	sweetness	to	a
dish.

Blond	onions	are	cooked	until	they’re	soft,	remaining	translucent.	Cook
them	over	medium-low	heat	to	keep	them	from	taking	on	colour.	If	you
notice	them	starting	to	stick,	discourage	browning	by	splashing	a	little	water
into	the	pan.	Use	blond	onions	for	Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup	(here)	or	any
recipe	where	retaining	the	light	colour	of	a	dish	is	a	priority.

Browned	onions	are	cooked	until	they	take	on	some	colour,	and	begin
to	deepen	in	flavour	as	a	result.	They’re	ideal	for	pasta	sauces,	Chicken	with
Lentil	Rice	(here),	and	as	the	base	for	countless	braises	and	soups.

Caramelised	onions	are	taken	to	the	edge	of	browning	and	hence	boast
the	deepest	flavour.	Use	them	to	make	a	Caramelised	Onion	Tart	(here),
toss	them	with	blanched	broccoli	or	green	beans,	pile	them	atop	burgers
and	steak	sandwiches,	or	chop	them	finely	and	stir	into	crème	fraîche	for	an
unbelievable	onion	dip.

Though	their	name	may	be	a	misnomer	(Maillarded	onions	just	doesn’t
sound	right!),	there’s	nothing	wrong	about	caramelised	onions.	Since	they
take	so	long	to	make,	and	since	they	are	so	good,	make	more	caramelised
onions	than	you’ll	need	for	a	single	meal.	Use	them	over	the	course	of	four
or	five	days	as	the	base	of	any	of	the	many	dishes	that	benefit	from	deeply
flavoured	onions.

Start	with	at	least	8	thinly	sliced	onions.	Set	your	largest	frying	pan,	or	a
large	cast	iron	casserole,	over	medium-high	heat.	Add	enough	butter,	olive
oil,	or	some	of	each,	to	generously	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	Let	the	fat
heat	up	until	it	shimmers,	then	add	the	onions	and	season	lightly	with	salt.
Though	this	will	draw	water	out	and	delay	browning	initially,	it	will	also
soften	the	onions	and	lead	to	more	even	browning	in	the	long	run.	Reduce
the	heat	to	medium,	and	keep	an	eye	on	the	onions,	stirring	as	necessary	to
keep	from	burning,	or	from	browning	too	quickly	in	any	one	spot	of	the	pan.
It’ll	take	a	while	for	them	to	cook	all	the	way	through—at	least	45	minutes,
and	up	to	an	hour.



When	the	onions	are	done	cooking,	taste	and	adjust	seasoning	with	salt
and	a	rumour	of	red	wine	vinegar	to	balance	out	their	sweetness.



Cherry	Tomato	Confit Makes	about	1kg

At	the	height	of	summer,	make	cherry	tomato	confit	once	a	week	and	use	it
as	a	quick	pasta	sauce,	spoon	it	over	grilled	fish	or	chicken,	or	serve	it
alongside	fresh	ricotta	and	grilled	croutons	rubbed	with	garlic.	Use	the
sweetest,	most	flavourful	tomatoes	you	can	find—they’ll	explode	on	your
tongue.

Strain,	save,	and	reuse	the	confit	oil	for	a	second	batch,	or	use	it	to
make	Tomato	Vinaigrette	(here).

675g	cherry	tomatoes,	stemmed
Small	handful	basil	leaves	or	stems	(the	stems	are	packed	with

flavour!)
4	garlic	cloves,	peeled
Salt
450ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil

Preheat	the	oven	to	150°C.
Lay	the	cherry	tomatoes	in	a	single	layer	into	a	shallow	roasting	dish

over	a	bed	of	basil	leaves	and/or	stems	and	garlic	cloves.	Cover	with	about
450ml	of	olive	oil.	While	the	tomatoes	don’t	have	to	be	totally	submerged,
they	should	all	be	in	contact	with	the	oil.	Season	them	liberally	with	salt,
give	them	a	stir,	and	then	stick	them	in	the	oven	for	about	35	to	40	minutes.
At	no	time	should	the	dish	ever	boil—a	simmer,	at	most,	is	fine.

You’ll	know	they’re	done	when	they	are	tender	all	the	way	through
when	pierced	with	a	skewer	and	the	first	skins	start	to	split.	Pull	them	from
the	oven	and	let	them	cool	a	bit.	Discard	the	basil	before	using.

Serve	warm,	or	at	room	temperature.	Keep	tomatoes	refrigerated,	in
their	oil,	for	up	to	5	days.
Variations
• To	confit	large	tomatoes,	peel	them	first.	Use	the	tip	of	a	small,	sharp

knife	to	core	12	Early	Girls	or	tomatoes	of	similar	size,	then	turn	them
over	and	make	a	small	X	at	the	base.	Blanch	in	boiling	water	for	30
seconds,	or	just	until	the	skin	starts	to	loosen.	Drop	them	into	an	ice



bath	to	prevent	them	from	cooking	further,	then	remove	the	skins.
Cook	as	directed	above,	in	a	single	layer,	with	enough	oil	to	go	two-
thirds	of	the	way	up	the	sides.	Adjust	cooking	time	to	about	45
minutes,	or	until	the	tomatoes	are	soft	all	the	way	through.

• For	artichoke	confit,	remove	the	tough	outer	leaves	of	6	large	or	12
baby	artichokes.	Use	a	vegetable	peeler	or	sharp	paring	knife	to	peel
away	the	dark	green,	fibrous	skin	at	the	base	and	along	the	stem	of
each	artichoke.	Halve	the	artichokes	and	use	a	spoon	to	scoop	out	the
hairy	chokes	(refer	to	here	for	an	illustrated	guide	to	preparing
artichokes).	Cook	as	directed	above,	in	a	single	layer,	with	enough	oil	to
go	two-thirds	of	the	way	up	the	sides,	until	they	are	completely	tender
when	pricked	with	a	fork	or	paring	knife,	about	40	minutes.	Toss	with
pasta,	lemon	zest,	and	pecorino	cheese;	chop	up	with	a	few	mint
leaves,	a	clove	of	pounded	garlic,	and	a	squeeze	of	lemon	juice	to
spread	atop	crostini;	or	serve	room	temperature	as	an	antipasto
alongside	cured	meats	and	cheeses.



Six	Ways	to	Cook	Vegetables*
Every	time	I	sat	down	to	narrow	the	recipes	for	this	section,	the	cracks	in	my
heart	deepened	a	bit.	Vegetables	are	my	favourite	things	to	eat	and	cook.
For	example,	I	love	broccoli,	cima	di	rapa	(also	known	as	broccoli	raab	or
rapini),	and	Romanesco	broccoli	(that	fractal	wonder)	in	equal	measure.
But	with	room	for	only	a	handful	of	recipes	in	each	section,	there	was	no
way	I	could	include	one	for	each	variety.	And	choosing	between	them	felt
like	choosing	a	single	album	to	listen	to	for	the	rest	of	my	life:	impossible.

The	problem	persisted:	how	could	I	ever	convey	my	fervent	love	for
vegetables	and	demonstrate	their	endless	variety	in	just	a	few	pages?	As	I
compiled	list	after	list	of	my	favourite	vegetable	recipes,	I	realised	that
nearly	all	of	them	involved	one	of	six	cooking	methods.	These	are	the
simplest,	most	useful	methods	for	every	cook	to	master.	Once	you	do,	go
fearlessly	to	the	market,	knowing	you	can—and	will—turn	any	vegetable
you	find	into	something	delicious.

Use	Vegetables:	How	and	When	(here)	to	help	you	choose	which
vegetables	to	cook	each	season,	and	how	to	best	prepare	them.	Refer	to
The	Worlds	of	Fat,	Acid,	and	Flavour	(here,	here,	and	here)	to	vary	the
way	you	flavour	and	garnish	your	vegetables.	But	cook	your	vegetables
properly	to	make	them	universally	delicious,	no	matter	what	cuisine	inspires
you.

Blanch:	Greens 	

When	you’re	unsure	about	what	to	do	with	your	greens,	begin	by	setting	a
big	pot	of	water	over	high	heat.	While	the	water	comes	to	a	boil,	decide	if
you’d	rather	use	the	greens	for	Kuku	Sabzi	(here),	Pasta	alle	Vongole
(here),	Ribollita	(here),	or	something	entirely	different.	Line	a	baking	sheet
or	two	with	parchment	paper	and	set	aside.	(If	the	greens	have	tough	stems,
strip	the	leaves	as	directed	here.	Save	kale,	collard,	and	chard	stems	and
blanch	them	in	a	separate	batch	after	you	cook	the	leaves.)

Once	the	water’s	at	a	rolling	boil,	season	it	until	it	tastes	like	the
summer	sea,	then	add	your	greens,	whatever	kind	they	may	be.	Do	what	the
Italians	do:	first	cook	the	greens	just	until	they’re	tender.	Chard	will	take
about	3	minutes,	while	collards	can	take	upwards	of	15	minutes.	Pluck	a	leaf
from	the	pot	and	taste	it.	If	it’s	tender	to	the	bite,	it’s	ready.	Use	a	spider	or



sieve	to	pull	the	greens	from	the	water,	then	spread	them	onto	the	baking
sheet	in	a	single	layer.	Let	them	cool,	grab	handfuls	of	greens	and	squeeze
out	the	excess	water,	then	chop	them	coarsely.

Sauté	blanched	chard	leaves	and	stems	with	browned	onions,	saffron,
pine	nuts,	and	currants,	for	a	side	dish	inspired	by	the	Sicilian	seaside.	Toss
blanched	spinach,	chard,	kale	(or	green	beans,	or	asparagus)	with	Goma-Ae
Dressing	(here)	to	make	your	own	version	of	that	sushi	joint	staple	to	serve
with	Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken	(here).	Sauté	blanched	bok	choy	with	red
pepper	flakes	and	minced	garlic—a	preparation	so	simple	you	might
assume	it’ll	underwhelm	you.	Don’t.	Cook	blanched	collards	with	bacon	and
browned	onions	to	serve	with	Spicy	Fried	Chicken	(here).	Treat	blanched
beetroot	and	turnip	tops	like	you	would	Indian	Garlicky	Green	Beans
(here),	and	make	yourself	something	delicious	to	serve	alongside	Indian-
Spiced	Salmon	(here).

And	if	you	have	any	greens	left,	ball	them	up,	then	wrap	and	refrigerate
for	2	or	3	days,	until	you	decide	what	you’d	like	to	do	with	them.	You	can
also	freeze	balls	of	greens	in	a	single	layer	overnight,	then	transfer	into
resealable	zipper	bags.	Keep	frozen	for	up	to	2	months,	until	the	hankering
for	kuku	sabzi—or	any	other	verdant	dish—returns.	Just	defrost	and
continue	cooking	as	above.



*	and	MUSHROOMS



Sauté:	Snap	Peas	with	Chillies	and	Mint Serves	4	generously

You	might	remember	my	mentioning	that	the	word	sauté	refers	to	the	flip	of
the	wrist	that	makes	all	the	food	cooking	in	a	pan	jump.	If	you	haven’t	got
the	movement	down,	practise	(look	back	to	here	for	tips	on	learning	how	to
sauté).	And	in	the	meantime,	just	use	tongs!	Sauté	vegetables	that	will	cook
quickly,	in	just	a	few	minutes,	and	whose	texture,	colour,	or	flavour	will
suffer	from	overcooking.

About	2	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
675g	sugar	snap	peas,	trimmed
Salt
12	mint	leaves,	julienned
Finely	grated	zest	of	1	small	lemon	(about	1	teaspoon)
½	teaspoon	red	chilli	flakes

Set	a	large	frying	pan	over	high	heat.	When	it’s	nice	and	hot,	add	just
enough	olive	oil	to	barely	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	When	the	oil
shimmers,	add	the	snap	peas	and	season	with	salt.	Cook	over	high	heat,
sautéing	the	peas	as	they	start	to	brown,	until	they	are	sweet	but	still	crisp,
about	5	to	6	minutes.	Remove	the	pan	from	the	heat	and	stir	in	the	mint,
lemon	zest,	and	chilli	flakes.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	as	needed.	Serve
immediately.



Steamy	Sauté:	Garlicky	Green	Beans Serves	6	generously

Steamy	sautéing	is	a	method	for	vegetables	that	are	a	little	bit	too	dense	to
sauté	directly.	By	cooking	them	with	water	for	a	few	minutes	before	turning
up	the	heat	and	letting	them	brown,	you’ll	ensure	they’re	cooked	all	the	way
through.

900g	fresh	green	beans,	yellow	wax	beans,	Romano	beans,	or
haricots	verts,	trimmed

Salt
2	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
3	garlic	cloves,	minced

Set	your	largest	frying	pan	over	medium-high	heat	and	bring	125ml	of	water
to	a	simmer.	Add	the	green	beans,	season	with	a	couple	of	generous
pinches	of	salt,	and	cover,	removing	the	lid	every	minute	or	so	to	stir	the
beans.	When	they	are	almost	completely	tender,	about	4	minutes	for
haricots	verts	and	7	to	10	minutes	for	more	mature	beans,	tip	any	remaining
water	out	of	the	pan,	using	the	lid	to	keep	in	the	beans.	Return	the	pan	to
the	stove,	increase	the	flame	to	high,	and	dig	a	little	hole	in	the	centre	of	the
pan.	Pour	the	olive	oil	into	the	hole	and	add	the	garlic.	Let	the	garlic	sizzle
gently	for	about	30	seconds,	until	it	releases	an	aroma,	and	immediately
toss	it	with	the	beans	before	it	has	a	chance	to	take	on	any	colour.	Remove
from	the	heat.	Taste,	adjust	seasoning,	and	serve	immediately.
Variations
• For	classic	French	flavours,	replace	the	olive	oil	with	unsalted	butter,

omit	the	garlic,	and	toss	with	1	teaspoon	finely	chopped	tarragon
before	serving.

• For	Indian	flavours,	replace	the	olive	oil	with	ghee	or	unsalted	butter
and	add	1	tablespoon	minced	fresh	ginger	to	the	garlic.



Roast:	Butternut	Squash	and	Brussels
Sprouts	in	Agrodolce Serves	4	to	6

Roasted	vegetables	develop	unparalleled	sweetness	both	on	the	inside	and
on	the	surface	due	to	caramelisation,	the	Maillard	reaction,	and	the	release
of	their	internal	sugars.	In	other	words,	roasting	is	the	best	way	to	coax	out
sweetness.

With	this	in	mind,	I	always	aim	to	balance	that	sweetness	with	an	acidic
condiment,	whether	it’s	an	Herb	Salsa	(here),	a	Yoghurt	Sauce	(here),	or	a
vinegar-based	agrodolce.	This	dish	always	finds	its	way	onto	my	table	at
Thanksgiving,	a	meal	so	rich	and	starchy	that	extra	acid	is	always	welcome.

1	large	butternut	squash	(900g),	peeled,	halved	lengthwise,
seeds	discarded

Extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt
450g	Brussels	sprouts,	trimmed,	outer	leaves	removed
½	red	onion,	thinly	sliced
6	tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar
1	tablespoon	sugar
¾	teaspoon	red	chilli	flakes
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
16	fresh	mint	leaves



Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C.
Slice	each	half	of	the	squash	crosswise	into	1cm	thick	crescents	and

place	in	a	large	bowl.	Toss	with	enough	olive	oil	to	coat,	about	3
tablespoons.	Season	with	salt	and	place	in	a	single	layer	on	a	baking	sheet.

Halve	the	Brussels	sprouts	through	the	stems,	then	toss	in	the	same
large	bowl,	adding	more	olive	oil	as	needed	to	coat.	Season	with	salt	and
place	in	a	single	layer	on	a	second	baking	sheet.

Place	the	squash	and	sprouts	into	the	preheated	oven	and	cook	until
tender	and	caramelised,	about	26	to	30	minutes.	Check	on	the	vegetables
after	about	12	minutes.	Rotate	the	pans	and	switch	their	positions	to	ensure
even	browning.

Meanwhile,	in	a	small	bowl,	toss	the	sliced	onion	and	vinegar	and	allow
to	sit	for	20	minutes	to	macerate	(see	here).	In	another	small	bowl,	stir
together	another	6	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	sugar,	chilli	flakes,	and
garlic,	and	a	pinch	of	salt.

When	the	roasted	vegetables	are	brown	on	the	outside	and	completely
tender	when	pierced	with	a	knife,	remove	them	from	the	oven.	The	sprouts
might	cook	a	little	more	quickly	than	the	squash.	Combine	the	vegetables	in
a	big	bowl.	Stir	the	macerated	onions	and	their	vinegar	into	the	olive	oil
mixture,	then	pour	half	of	the	marinade	over	the	vegetables.	Toss	to
combine,	taste,	and	add	more	salt	and	marinade	as	needed.	Garnish	with
torn	mint	leaves	and	serve	warm	or	at	room	temperature.






Long-Cook:	Spicy	Cima	di	Rapa	with
Ricotta	Salata Serves	6

There’s	overcooking	and	then	there’s	long-cooking.	Overcooked	vegetables
are	the	ones	that	are	forgotten	in	the	blanching	water	or	sauté	pan	for	a	few
minutes,	emerging	wilted,	brown,	and	sad.	Long-cooked	vegetables,	on	the
other	hand,	are	carefully	tended	until	they	grow	tender	and	sweet—and
they’re	one	of	my	favourite	ways	to	use	up	the	overlooked	vegetables	in	the
produce	drawer.

2	bunches	(about	900g)	cima	di	rapa,	rinsed
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	medium	onion,	thinly	sliced
Salt
Big	pinch	red	pepper	flakes
3	garlic	cloves,	sliced
1	lemon
55g	ricotta	salata	cheese,	coarsely	grated

Cut	off	and	discard	the	woody	ends	of	the	cima	di	rapa.	Slice	the	stems	into
1cm	pieces,	and	the	leaves	into	2.5cm	pieces.

Set	a	large	cast-iron	casserole	or	similar	pot	over	medium	heat.	When
it’s	hot,	add	2	tablespoons	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pot.	When	the
oil	shimmers,	add	the	onion	and	a	pinch	of	salt.	Cook,	stirring	occasionally,
until	the	onion	is	soft	and	beginning	to	brown,	about	15	minutes.

Increase	the	heat	to	medium-high,	add	another	tablespoon	or	so	of	oil,
and	the	cima	di	rapa	to	the	pot,	and	stir	to	combine.	Season	with	salt	and
red	pepper	flakes.	You	might	need	to	mound	the	cima	di	rapa	to	make	it	fit,
or	wait	for	some	of	it	to	cook	down	before	you	add	the	rest.	Cover	the	pan
and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	the	cima	di	rapa	is	falling-apart	tender,
about	20	minutes.

Remove	the	lid	and	increase	the	heat	to	high.	Let	the	cima	di	rapa	begin
to	brown,	then	use	a	wooden	spoon	to	move	it	around	the	pan.	Continue
cooking	until	all	the	cima	di	rapa	has	evenly	browned,	about	10	minutes,



then	move	it	all	to	the	outer	edges	of	the	pan.	Add	a	tablespoon	of	olive	oil
into	the	centre,	then	add	the	garlic	into	the	oil	and	let	it	sizzle	gently	for
about	20	seconds,	until	it	starts	to	release	an	aroma.	Before	the	garlic	begins
to	brown,	stir	to	combine	it	with	the	cima	di	rapa.	Taste	and	adjust	the	salt
and	red	pepper	flakes	as	needed.	Remove	from	the	heat	and	squeeze	the
juice	of	half	a	lemon	over	the	cima	di	rapa.

Stir,	taste,	and	add	more	lemon	juice	if	needed.	Heap	onto	a	serving
platter	and	shower	with	coarsely	grated	ricotta	salata.	Serve	immediately.
Variations
• If	you	don’t	have	ricotta	salata	on	hand,	substitute	Parmesan,	pecorino

Romano,	Manchego,	Asiago,	or	dollops	of	fresh	ricotta.
• To	round	out	the	flavour	with	a	little	meatiness,	reduce	the	total

amount	of	olive	oil	to	1	tablespoon	and	add	115g	bacon	or	pancetta,
sliced	into	matchsticks,	in	with	the	onion.

• To	bump	up	the	umami,	add	4	minced	anchovy	fillets	in	with	the	onion.
Everyone	will	notice	that	the	greens	are	unusually	flavourful,	though
most	people	won’t	be	able	to	pinpoint	precisely	why.



Grill:	Artichokes Serves	6

Recall	the	miraculous	way	Heat	transforms	the	flavours	of	wood	into	the
extraordinary	flavours	of	smoke	and	you’ll	intuit	why	any	vegetable	will	be
improved	by	time	spent	on	the	grill.	But	only	a	handful	of	them	can	be
properly	grilled	from	a	raw	state.	Think	of	grilling	as	a	finishing	touch	for
most	starchy	or	dense	vegetables,	such	as	these	artichokes,	fennel	wedges,
or	baby	potatoes.	Treat	them	right,	by	parcooking	them	on	the	stove	or	in
the	oven	until	they	are	tender,	then	skewer	and	grill	them	for	a	dose	of
smoky	aroma.

6	artichokes	(or	18	baby	artichokes)
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	tablespoon	red	wine	vinegar
Salt

Set	a	large	pot	of	water	on	to	boil	over	high	heat.	Build	a	charcoal	fire,	or
preheat	a	gas	grill.	Line	a	baking	sheet	with	parchment	paper.

Remove	the	tough,	dark	outer	leaves	from	the	artichokes	until	the
remaining	leaves	are	half	yellow,	half	light	green.	Cut	away	the	woodiest
part	of	the	stem	end	and	the	top	4cm	of	every	artichoke.	If	there	are	any
purple	inner	leaves,	cut	them	out,	too.	You	may	need	to	remove	more	in
order	to	cut	away	everything	fibrous.	It	might	seem	like	you’re	trimming	a
lot,	but	remove	more	than	you	think	you	should,	because	the	last	thing	you
want	is	to	bite	into	a	fibrous	or	bitter	bite	at	the	table.	Use	a	sharp	paring
knife	or	a	vegetable	peeler	to	remove	the	tough	outer	peel	on	the	stem	and
at	the	base	of	the	heart,	until	you	reach	the	pale	yellow	inner	layers.	As	you
clean	them,	place	the	artichokes	in	a	bowl	of	water	with	the	vinegar,	which
will	help	keep	them	from	oxidising,	which	makes	them	turn	brown.

Cut	the	artichokes	in	half.	Use	a	teaspoon	to	carefully	scoop	out	the
choke,	or	fuzzy	centre,	then	return	the	artichokes	to	the	acidulated	water.

Once	the	water	has	come	to	a	boil,	season	it	generously	until	it’s	as	salty
as	the	sea.	Place	the	artichokes	in	the	water	and	reduce	the	heat	so	the
water	stays	at	a	rapid	simmer.	Cook	the	artichokes	until	they	are	just	tender
when	pierced	with	a	sharp	knife,	about	5	minutes	for	baby	artichokes	and	14



minutes	for	large	artichokes.	Use	a	spider	or	strainer	to	carefully	remove
them	from	the	water,	and	place	them	on	the	prepared	baking	sheet	in	a
single	layer.

Drizzle	the	artichokes	lightly	with	olive	oil	and	season	with	salt.	Place
the	artichokes	cut-side	down	on	the	grill	over	medium-high	heat.	Don’t
move	them	until	they	begin	to	brown,	then	rotate	the	skewers	until	the	cut
side	is	evenly	brown,	about	3	to	4	minutes	per	side.	Flip,	browning	the	other
side	in	the	same	way.

Remove	from	the	grill	and	drizzle	with	Mint	Salsa	Verde	(here),	if
desired,	or	serve	with	Aïoli	(here)	or	Honey-Mustard	Vinaigrette	(here).
Serve	hot,	or	at	room	temperature.












STOCK	AND	SOUPS
Stock
With	stock	on	hand,	dinner	is	always	within	reach.	A	tasty,	simple,	quick
dinner	that	can	take	one	of	countless	forms—soup,	yes	of	course,	but	also
stuffing	and	panade,	a	gratin	made	with	bread	and	abundant	stock.	Or
grains	cooked	in	stock,	which	deliver	flavour	and	protein	without	relying	on
meat.	Or	a	poached	egg	and	just-wilted	spinach	drowned	in	stock.	And
then,	of	course,	there	are	the	endless	braises,	soups,	and	stews	that	stock
will	enrich.

Every	time	you	roast	a	chicken,	cut	off	the	neck	or	head,	feet,	and
wingtips	(and	even	the	backbone,	when	spatchcocking)	before	salting,	and
throw	them	all	into	the	freezer	in	a	plastic	bag.	Then,	after	dinner,	add	the
carcass	into	the	plastic	bag.	One	chicken	carcass	isn’t	really	enough	to
warrant	a	pot	of	stock,	so	save	up	three	or	four	and	make	stock	every	month
or	two.	You	can	also	save	onion	ends,	the	last	stalk	of	celery	that’s	about	to
go	rubbery,	parsley	stems,	and	carrot	ends	and	store	these	in	a	bag	in	the
freezer.	When	your	freezer	can	no	longer	contain	the	mess,	empty	it	all	out
into	a	big	pot	and	prepare	to	make	stock.

If	all	you	have	on	hand	is	roasted	bones,	it’s	worth	making	a	trek	out	to
the	butcher	shop	to	buy	a	couple	of	kilos	of	chicken	heads	and	feet,	or
some	wingtips.	The	gelatin	the	raw	bones	contain	will	add	a	ton	of	body	and
richness	to	the	stock.



Chicken	Stock Makes	about	9	litres

3.2kg	chicken	bones	(at	least	half	should	be	raw)
8.5	litres	water
2	onions,	unpeeled,	quartered
2	carrots,	peeled	and	halved	crosswise
2	celery	stalks,	halved	crosswise
1	teaspoon	black	peppercorns
2	bay	leaves
4	thyme	sprigs
5	parsley	sprigs	or	10	stems
1	teaspoon	white	wine	vinegar

Put	everything	but	the	vinegar	in	a	large	stockpot.	Bring	the	stock	to	a	boil
over	high	heat,	then	turn	down	to	a	simmer.	Skim	any	foam	that	rises	to	the
surface.	Now	add	the	vinegar,	which	will	help	draw	out	nutrients	and
minerals	from	the	bones	into	the	stock.

Simmer	uncovered	for	6	to	8	hours.	Keep	an	eye	on	it	to	make	sure	it
stays	at	a	simmer.	If	stock	boils,	its	bubbles	will	recirculate	fat	that	rises	to
the	top	of	the	stock.	With	the	sustained	heat	and	agitation,	the	stock	will
emulsify.	This	is	one	of	the	times	you’re	not	looking	for	an	emulsion,
because	beyond	looking	cloudy,	emulsified	stock	also	tastes	cloudy	and
clings	to	the	tongue	in	an	unpleasant	way.	One	of	the	best	things	about
good	stock	is	that	though	its	flavour	is	rich,	it’s	also	clean.

Strain	through	a	fine-meshed	sieve	and	cool.	Scrape	the	fat	that	rises	to
the	top	and	save	it	in	the	fridge	or	freezer	for	Chicken	Confit	(here).

Refrigerate	for	up	to	5	days,	or	freeze	for	up	to	3	months.	I	like	to	freeze
stock	in	old	yoghurt	containers,	which	have	the	added	benefit	of
premeasurement.
Variations
• To	make	Beef	Stock,	follow	the	same	process,	but	replace	the	chicken

with	2.7kg	meaty	beef	bones	(such	as	knuckle	bones)	and	450g	beef



marrow	bones.	Brown	the	bones	on	a	rimmed	baking	sheet	in	a	single
layer	in	a	200°C	oven	for	about	45	minutes.	Brown	the	aromatics	in	the
recipe	above	in	the	stockpot	with	a	few	tablespoons	of	olive	oil	before
adding	the	bones,	3	tablespoons	tomato	paste,	and	water.	Set	the
baking	sheet	over	a	burner	set	to	low	heat,	and	pour	in	225ml	dry	red
wine.	Use	a	wooden	spoon	or	spatula	to	loosen	all	of	the	caramelised
bits	from	the	pan,	and	add	them,	along	with	the	wine,	into	the	stockpot.
Bring	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a	simmer	and	cook	for	at	least	5	hours
before	straining.	To	make	a	Super-Rich	Beef	Stock,	begin	with	chicken
stock	instead	of	water.

Soup
Beethoven	once	said,	“Only	the	pure	in	heart	can	make	a	good	soup.”

Oh,	that	guy—what	a	romantic!	But	clearly,	not	much	of	a	cook.	While	I
agree	that	a	pure	heart	is	an	ideal	attribute	for	any	cook,	it	certainly	isn’t
necessary	when	making	soup	(though	a	clear	mind	certainly	helps).

Soup	is	exceptionally	easy	to	make.	It’s	also	economical.	But	all	too
often,	it	becomes	an	easy	way	to	clear	out	the	fridge.	You	must	have	a
reason	for	every	ingredient	you	choose	to	add	into	a	soup	in	order	for	it	to
taste	good.	Get	into	the	habit	of	making	soup	with	the	fewest—and	most
flavourful—possible	ingredients,	and	you’ll	find	it’s	so	delicious	it	might
even	purify	your	heart.

Soups	fall	into	three	categories—brothy,	chunky,	and	smooth—and
each	will	satisfy	a	different	kind	of	hunger.	Though	each	type	calls	for
different	elements,	all	soups	start	with	a	flavourful	liquid,	whether	it’s	stock,
coconut	milk,	or	bean-cooking	broth.	Master	one	soup	from	each	category,
then	let	taste	and	whimsy	guide	your	clear	mind	and	your	pure	heart	in
making	delicious	soup.

Brothy	soups	are	clear	and	delicate,	perfect	for	serving	as	a	light	meal
or	appetiser,	or	to	an	ailing	friend	with	a	meagre	appetite.	With	only	three	or
four	ingredients,	there	isn’t	much	in	a	brothy	soup	to	distract	the	palate
from	an	inferior	broth,	so	wait	to	make	this	kind	of	soup	until	you	have
homemade	stock	on	hand.

Chunky	soups,	by	contrast,	are	robust	and	rich.	Make	a	pot	of	chilli	or
Tuscan	bean	soup	and	let	it	fill	and	warm	you	up	all	week	long.	With	longer
ingredient	lists	and	cooking	times,	there	are	more	ways	to	build	flavour	in	a
chunky	soup,	so	here	you	can	start	with	water	if	you	don’t	have	homemade
stock	on	hand.



Smooth	soups	will	lie	somewhere	between	brothy	and	chunky	on	the
spectrum	from	light	to	hearty,	depending	on	the	main	ingredient.	No	matter
what	vegetable	or	root	you	use,	though,	the	result	will	be	smooth	and
elegant.	Smooth,	puréed	soups	make	for	delightful	dinner	party	first
courses,	or	light	lunches	on	warm	summer	afternoons.

The	formula	for	any	puréed	soup	is	simple.	Start	with	fresh,	flavourful
ingredients.	Then	cook	a	few	onions	through,	add	the	chosen	ingredients,
and	stew	everything	together	for	a	few	minutes.	Add	enough	liquid	to	cover,
bring	it	up	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a	simmer	and	cook	until	everything	is
just	tender.	(Anticipate	the	way	the	greenest	vegetables	will	fade	and	brown
if	even	slightly	overcooked;	pull	English	pea,	asparagus,	or	spinach	soup	off
the	heat	a	minute	before	it’s	done,	knowing	the	residual	heat	will	continue
to	cook	it.	Add	a	few	ice	cubes	to	speed	up	the	chilling.)	Remove	from	the
heat,	purée,	and	adjust	the	salt	and	acid.	Then	choose	your	garnish.	As
paragons	of	simplicity,	puréed	soups	eagerly	welcome	crunchy,	creamy,
acidic,	and	rich	garnishes	alike.	Use	the	list	of	variations	here	for	inspiration.

Brothy:	Stracciatella	Roman	Egg	Drop
Soup Makes	2.25	litres	(serves	4	to	6)

2	litres	Chicken	Stock	(here)
Salt
6	large	eggs
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
20g	chunk	of	Parmesan,	finely	grated,	plus	more	for	serving
1	tablespoon	finely	chopped	parsley

Bring	the	stock	to	a	simmer	in	a	medium	pot	and	season	with	salt.	In	a
measuring	cup	with	a	spout	(you	can	also	use	a	medium	bowl),	whisk
together	the	eggs,	a	generous	pinch	of	salt,	pepper,	Parmesan,	and	parsley.

Pour	the	egg	mixture	into	the	simmering	stock	in	a	thin	stream	while
gently	stirring	the	soup	with	a	fork.	Avoid	overmixing,	which	will	cause	the
eggs	to	break	up	into	tiny,	unappetising	bits,	instead	of	the	stracci,	or	rags,
for	which	the	soup	is	named.	Let	the	egg	mixture	cook	for	about	30
seconds,	then	ladle	the	soup	into	bowls.	Garnish	with	more	Parmesan,	and



serve	immediately.
Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.	To	reheat,	gently	return

soup	to	a	simmer.
Variation
• To	make	a	Classic	Egg	Drop	Soup,	simmer	2	litres	of	stock	with	2

tablespoons	of	soy	sauce,	3	sliced	cloves	of	garlic,	a	thumb-size	piece
of	ginger,	a	few	sprigs	of	coriander,	and	1	teaspoon	peppercorns	for	20
minutes,	then	strain	into	another	pot.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	as	needed.
Return	the	broth	to	a	simmer.	Place	1	tablespoon	cornflour	in	a
medium	bowl	and	add	in	2	tablespoons	of	the	stock.	Whisk	to	combine,
then	whisk	in	6	eggs	and	a	pinch	of	salt.	Drizzle	into	simmering	broth	as
directed	above.	Garnish	with	sliced	spring	onions	and	serve
immediately.

Makes	about	2.25	litres	(serves
Chunky:	Tuscan	Bean	and	Kale	Soup 6	to	8)

Extra-virgin	olive	oil
Optional:	55g	pancetta	or	bacon,	diced
1	medium	onion,	diced
2	celery	stalks,	diced
3	medium	carrots,	peeled	and	diced
2	bay	leaves
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
2	garlic	cloves,	thinly	sliced
400g	crushed	canned	or	fresh	tomatoes	in	their	juice
400g	cooked	beans,	such	as	cannellini,	corona,	or	cranberry,

cooking	liquid	reserved	(from	about	175g	raw;	feel	free	to	use
canned	beans	in	a	pinch!)

25g	freshly	grated	Parmesan,	rind	reserved
675-900ml	Chicken	Stock	(here)	or	water



2	bunches	kale,	thinly	sliced
½	small	head	green	or	Savoy	cabbage,	core	removed	and	thinly

sliced
Set	a	large	cast-iron	casserole	or	stockpot	over	medium-high	heat	and	add	1
tablespoon	olive	oil.	When	the	oil	shimmers,	add	the	pancetta,	if	using,	and
cook,	stirring,	for	1	minute,	until	it	just	begins	to	brown.

Add	the	onion,	celery,	carrots,	and	bay	leaves.	Season	generously	with
salt	and	pepper.	Reduce	the	heat	to	medium	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,
until	the	vegetables	are	tender	and	just	starting	to	brown,	about	15	minutes.
Dig	a	little	hole	in	the	centre	of	the	pot,	then	add	another	tablespoon	of
olive	oil.	Add	the	garlic	and	let	it	sizzle	gently	until	it	gives	off	an	aroma,
about	30	seconds.	Before	the	garlic	has	a	chance	to	brown,	add	the
tomatoes.	Stir,	taste,	and	add	salt	as	needed.

Let	the	tomatoes	simmer	until	they	cook	down	to	a	jammy	consistency,
about	8	minutes,	then	add	the	beans	and	their	cooking	liquid,	half	the
grated	Parmesan	and	its	rind,	and	enough	stock	or	water	to	cover.	Add	two
immoderate	splashes	of	olive	oil,	about	55ml.	Stirring	occasionally,	bring	the
soup	back	to	a	simmer.	Add	the	kale	and	cabbage	and	bring	to	a	simmer
again,	adding	more	stock	or	water	as	needed	to	cover.

Cook	until	the	flavours	have	come	together	and	the	greens	are	tender,
about	20	minutes	more.	Taste	and	adjust	for	salt.	I	like	this	soup	to	be	very
thick,	but	add	more	liquid	if	you	like	a	lighter	soup.	Remove	the	Parmesan
rind	and	bay	leaves.

Serve	with	a	drizzle	of	the	best	olive	oil	you	have	on	hand,	and	grated
Parmesan.

Store	covered	in	the	refrigerator	for	up	to	5	days.	This	soup	also	freezes
exceptionally	well	for	up	to	2	months.	Return	the	soup	to	a	boil	before
using.
Variations
• To	make	Pasta	e	Fagioli	(Tuscan	Pasta	and	Bean	Soup),	add	about	75g

uncooked	ditalini,	tubetti,	or	other	small	pasta	shape	along	with	the
beans.	Stir	frequently,	as	the	starch	released	by	the	pasta	is	apt	to	form
a	crust	on	the	bottom	of	the	pot	and	burn.	Cook	until	the	pasta	is
tender,	about	20	minutes.	Thin	out	with	more	stock	or	water	as	needed
to	desired	consistency.	Serve	as	directed	above.

• To	make	Ribollita	(Tuscan	Bread,	Bean,	and	Kale	Soup),	add	225g



Torn	Croutons	(here)	when	the	soup	returns	to	a	simmer,	just	after
you	add	the	kale	and	cabbage.	Stir	frequently,	as	the	starch	released	by
the	bread	is	apt	to	form	a	crust	on	the	bottom	of	the	pot	and	burn.
Cook	until	the	bread	has	completely	absorbed	the	stock	and	fallen
apart,	about	25	minutes.	There	should	be	no	distinct	pieces	of	bread	at
the	end—instead,	it’s	all	just	one	delightfully	tender	mess.	Ribollita
should	be	very,	very	thick—at	Da	Delfina,	my	favourite	restaurant	in
the	Tuscan	hills,	it’s	served	on	a	plate!



Smooth:	Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup Makes	2.5	litres	(serves	6	to	8)

I’m	a	firm	believer	that	the	best	cooking	is	not	so	much	about	fancy
techniques	and	expensive	ingredients.	Sometimes	the	tiniest—and	most
inexpensive—thing	will	make	all	the	difference.	Nothing	demonstrates	that
idea	as	well	as	this	soup,	whose	secret	ingredient	is	a	quick	stock	made
using	nothing	more	than	cobs	and	water.	Use	the	freshest,	sweetest
summer	corn	you	can	find	and	you’ll	see	how	five	simple	ingredients	can
add	up	to	a	singularly	flavourful	soup.

8	to	10	ears	corn,	husks,	stalks,	and	silk	removed
115g	butter
2	medium	onions,	sliced
Salt

Fold	a	kitchen	towel	into	quarters	and	set	it	inside	a	large,	wide	metal	bowl.
Use	one	hand	to	hold	an	ear	of	corn	in	place	upright	atop	the	kitchen	towel
—it	helps	to	pinch	the	ear	at	the	top.	With	your	other	hand,	use	a	serrated
knife	or	sharp	chef’s	knife	to	cut	off	two	or	three	rows	of	kernels	at	a	time	by
sliding	the	knife	down	the	cob.	Get	as	close	to	the	cob	as	you	can,	and	resist
the	temptation	to	cut	off	more	rows	at	once—that’ll	leave	behind	lots	of
precious	corn.	Save	the	cobs.

In	a	soup	pot,	quickly	make	a	corn	cob	stock:	cover	the	cobs	with	2	litres
water	and	bring	to	a	boil.	Reduce	heat	and	simmer	for	10	minutes,	then
remove	the	cobs.	Set	stock	aside.

Return	the	pot	to	the	stove	and	heat	over	medium	heat.	Add	the	butter.
Once	it	has	melted,	add	the	onions	and	reduce	heat	to	medium-low.	Cook,
stirring	occasionally,	until	the	onions	are	completely	soft	and	translucent,	or
blond,	about	20	minutes.	If	you	notice	the	onions	starting	to	brown,	add	a
splash	of	water	and	keep	an	eye	on	things,	stirring	frequently,	to	prevent
further	browning.

As	soon	as	the	onions	are	tender,	add	the	corn.	Increase	the	heat	to
high	and	sauté	just	until	the	corn	turns	a	brighter	shade	of	yellow,	3	to	4
minutes.	Add	just	enough	stock	to	cover	everything,	and	crank	up	the	heat
to	high.	Save	the	rest	of	the	stock	in	case	you	need	to	thin	out	the	soup



later.	Season	with	salt,	taste,	and	adjust.	Bring	to	a	boil,	then	simmer	for	15
minutes.

If	you	have	an	immersion	blender,	use	it	to	carefully	blend	the	soup
until	it	is	puréed.	If	you	don’t	have	one,	work	carefully	and	quickly	to	purée
it	in	batches	in	a	blender	or	food	processor.	For	a	very	silky	texture,	strain
the	soup	one	last	time	through	a	fine-mesh	sieve.

Taste	the	soup	for	salt,	sweetness,	and	acid	balance.	If	the	soup	is	very
flatly	sweet,	a	tiny	bit	of	white	wine	vinegar	or	lime	juice	can	help	balance	it
out.

To	serve,	either	ladle	chilled	soup	into	bowls	and	spoon	salsa	over	it	to
garnish,	or	quickly	bring	the	soup	to	a	boil	and	serve	hot	with	an	acidic
garnish,	such	as	Mexican-ish	Herb	Salsa	(here)	or	Indian	Coconut-
Coriander	Chutney	(here).
Variations
Follow	this	method	and	the	basic	formula	I	described	above—about	1.2kg	of
vegetables	or	cooked	legumes,	2	onions,	and	enough	stock	or	water	to	cover
—to	turn	practically	any	other	vegetable	into	a	velvety	soup.	The	cob	stock
is	unique	to	corn	soup;	don’t	try	to	replicate	it	when	making	any	of	the
variations.	Carrot	peel	stock	won’t	do	much	for	a	soup!

And	there’s	no	cooking	whatsoever	required	to	make	Chilled
Cucumber	and	Yoghurt	soup!	Just	purée	seeded,	peeled	cucumbers	and
yoghurt,	then	thin	with	water	to	your	desired	consistency.

Turn	the	page	for	some	some	soup-and-garnish	combinations	to
inspire	your	soup-making.












BEANS,	GRAINS,	AND	PASTA
Cooking	beans,	whether	dried	or	freshly	shelled,	is	as	simple	as	can	be.	In
fact,	the	basic	recipe	for	Simmered	Beans	can	be	summed	up	in	one	short
sentence:	Cover	with	water	and	simmer	until	tender.

While	fresh	borlotti	beans	can	cook	in	about	30	minutes,	it	can	take
several	hours	for	dried	beans	to	transform	into	their	most	tender	selves.	To
reduce	the	cooking	time,	soak	them	overnight.

I’m	a	tireless	champion	of	soaking	beans	in	advance.	And	since	one
measure	of	any	properly	cooked	starch	is	whether	or	not	it’s	absorbed
enough	water	to	become	tender,	think	of	soaking	as	a	head	start.	It’s	the
easiest	kind	of	cooking	you’ll	ever	have	to	do.

When	soaking	beans,	keep	in	mind	that	175g	of	dried	beans	will	triple	in
size	when	cooked,	yielding	about	6	servings.	Add	a	palmful	of	salt,	and	a
generous	pinch	of	bicarbonate	of	soda,	which	will	tip	the	pH	of	the	pot
towards	alkalinity	and	help	coax	even	more	tenderness	from	the	beans.
Soak	beans	in	the	same	vessel	in	which	you	plan	to	cook	them,	to	save
yourself	a	dish,	and	either	refrigerate	or	keep	in	a	cool	spot	on	the	worktop
overnight	(or	over	2	nights,	for	chickpeas	or	big,	creamy	beans	such	as
gigantes).

Once	cooked,	consider	beans	a	blank	slate,	ready	to	be	transformed
into	whatever	you	like.	Properly	cooked	and	seasoned	dried	beans,
garnished	with	nothing	more	than	a	dousing	of	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	are	a
revelation	for	most	people,	including	those	who	consider	themselves	to	be
bean-haters.	And,	as	with	most	foods,	a	showering	of	chopped	fresh	herbs
or	a	spoonful	of	Herb	Salsa	(here)	never	hurts.



Beans	and	eggs	are	a	classic	pairing.	Crack	eggs	into	a	shallow	pan	of
beans	in	their	liquid	and	slide	it	into	a	hot	oven.	Bake	until	the	whites	are
just	set.	Garnish	with	feta	cheese	and	Harissa	(here)	and	serve	with	warm,
crusty	bread	for	any	meal.

Beans,	more	so	than	most	other	starches,	will	happily	share	the	plate
with	a	second	starch.	Rice	and	beans,	matched	together	in	almost	every
culture’s	cuisine,	are	especially	delicious	in	El	Salvadoran	cooking,	where
they	are	cooked	together	into	a	crispy	cake	known	as	casamiento;	in	Cuban
cooking,	where	they	are	called	Moros	y	Cristianos;	in	Persian	cooking,	where
they	come	together	in	Adas	Polo	(here);	and	of	course	inside	a	classic	rice
and	bean	burrito.	In	Italy,	beans	join	bread	in	the	soup	known	as	Ribollita
(here)	and	pasta	in	another	called	Pasta	e	Fagioli	(here).	And	in	any
kitchen,	anywhere	in	the	world,	creamy	beans	have	perhaps	no	better	foil
than	crunchy,	golden,	Sprinkling	Crumbs	(here).

I	once	brought	a	simple	salad	of	dried	borlotti	beans	tossed	with
macerated	onions,	toasted	cumin	seeds,	feta	cheese,	and	coriander	sprigs
to	a	lunch	honouring	the	groundbreaking	vegetarian	chef	Deborah
Madison.	Even	though	the	table	was	laden	with	impressive	dishes	made	by
all	of	the	other	accomplished	cooks	at	the	meal,	I	continued	to	receive
requests	for	the	recipe	for	that	“amazing	bean	salad”	for	nearly	a	year.

Any	beans,	not	just	chickpeas,	can	be	turned	into	a	delicious	hummus-
ish	spread	by	puréeing	them	with	abundant	amounts	of	olive	oil,	garlic,
herbs,	chilli	flakes,	lemon	juice,	and	also	tahini,	if	you	like.	Adjust	the	salt



and	acid,	and	serve	with	crackers,	bread,	or	just	sneak	spoonfuls,	like	I	do.
Mash	cooked	beans	together	with	softened	onions,	herbs,	an	egg,

grated	Parmesan,	and	enough	cooked	rice	or	quinoa	to	bind	the	mixture,
and	fry	little	patties	to	serve	with	a	Yoghurt	Sauce	(here),	Harissa	(here),
Charmoula	(here),	or	any	Herb	Salsa	(here).	Top	with	a	fried	egg	for	a
perfect	breakfast.

Freeze	extra	cooked	beans,	in	ample	water,	to	later	defrost	and	slip	into
soups.

And	finally,	while	canned	beans	cannot	compare	in	flavour	to	beans
you	cook	yourself,	the	convenience	they	offer	is	unparalleled.	I	always	keep
a	few	cans	of	chickpeas	and	black	beans	on	hand,	just	in	case	a	feverish
hunger	strikes.



Three	Ways	to	Cook	Grains	(and	Quinoa*)
Steam
Every	time	I	see	all	the	fancy	rice	makers	lined	up	on	the	shelf	at	an	Asian
grocery,	I	convince	myself	that	I	need	one.	After	all,	I	do	eat	a	lot	of	rice,	and
the	machines	are	all	so	cute!	Then	I	snap	out	of	it.	For	one	thing,	I	don’t
have	the	space	for	another	kitchen	machine.	And,	more	important,	I	already
know	how	to	cook	rice!

My	theory	is	that	marketing	geniuses	have	planted	false	seeds	of	rice-
making	despair	in	the	minds	of	home	cooks	around	the	world.	Think	about
it:	rice	is	one	of	the	oldest	cultivated	foods	on	the	planet.	If	cooks	hadn’t
figured	out	how	to	make	it	properly,	I’m	fairly	certain	the	human	race
wouldn’t	have	made	it.

It’s	really	not	so	hard.	Steaming	is	my	preferred	way	to	cook	rice	for
weeknight	dinners,	because	it’s	quick	and	simple,	yet	the	grains	have	the
chance	to	absorb	the	flavours	of	the	cooking	liquid.

Find	a	variety	of	rice	you	love	to	eat,	and	grow	comfortable	cooking	it,
over	and	over	again.	My	standbys	are	basmati,	jasmine,	and	a	Japanese
variety	called	haiga,	which	is	milled	to	preserve	its	nutritious	germ	yet	cook
quickly.	As	with	everything,	the	more	often	you	cook	rice,	the	more
proficient	you’ll	grow	to	be.	The	most	important	variable	when	cooking	rice
is	to	get	the	right	ratio	of	liquid	to	grain.

Basmati	and	jasmine	rices	are	traditionally	both	rinsed	multiple	times
until	the	water	runs	clear,	but	for	a	typical	weeknight	dinner,	I	don’t	usually
bother.	Save	the	rinsing	step	for	dinner	parties.

Refer	to	the	following	chart	for	liquid-to-grain	ratios	and	remember	the
rule	of	thumb,	200g	of	uncooked	rice	will	serve	2	to	3	people.	Simply	bring
your	chosen	liquid—water,	stock,	and	coconut	milk	all	work	well—to	a	boil,
season	it	generously	with	salt,	and	add	the	rice	(or	quinoa,	which	I	like	to
cook	the	same	way).

Reduce	to	a	very	gentle	simmer,	cover,	and	cook	until	the	liquid	has	all
been	absorbed	and	the	grains	are	tender.	Let	it	rest	covered	for	10	minutes
after	you	turn	off	the	heat.	And,	apart	from	risotto—which	is	an	entirely
different	story—never,	ever	stir	rice	while	it’s	cooking.	Just	fluff	it	with	a	fork
before	serving.
*	IT’S	A	PSEUDOGRAIN.**



**	NO	REALLY.	IT	IS!

Simmer	and	Stir	until	Tender
Steel-cut	and	rolled	oats:	Bring	very	lightly	seasoned	liquid	to	a	boil,	add
oats,	turn	down	to	a	simmer,	and	stir	continuously	until	tender.



Polenta	and	grits:	Add	polenta	or	grits	in	a	thin	stream	to	boiling,
seasoned	water	while	whisking.	Stir	continuously	and	cook	until	tender,
about	an	hour,	adding	more	water	as	needed.	Adjust	seasoning	and	stir	in
butter	and	grated	cheese	before	serving.

Arborio	rice	for	risotto:	First,	mince	and	cook	½	onion	per	cup	of	rice
in	butter	until	soft	and	translucent,	then	add	rice	and	toast	until	golden
brown,	then	deglaze	with	125ml	white	wine.	Stirring	continuously,	add	stock
gradually	in	125ml	increments,	waiting	until	it’s	been	absorbed	to	add	more.
Cook	until	rice	is	tender	but	still	al	dente.	The	consistency	should	be	that	of
thin	oatmeal,	so	thin	with	stock	or	a	splash	of	fresh	wine	if	needed.	Adjust
seasoning	and	finish	with	finely	grated	Parmesan.	Serve	immediately.
Boil
Cook	pasta,	farro,	spelt,	wheat	or	rye	berries,	barley,	amaranth,	or	wild
rice	in	ample	salted	water	until	tender.	This	method	also	works	well	for
quinoa,	brown,	or	basmati	rice.



Persian-ish	Rice Serves	4	to	6

Every	Persian	has	a	special	relationship	with	rice,	and	particularly	with
tahdig,	the	crispy	crust	by	which	every	Iranian	maman’s	culinary	prowess	is
measured.	Judged	on	its	even	browning,	perfect	crispness,	and	whether	it
emerges	from	the	pot	in	a	beautiful	cake,	as	well	as	its	taste,	a	good	tahdig	is
something	to	be	proud	of.	Since	traditional	Persian	rice	can	take	years	to
perfect	and	hours	to	make,	I’m	including	this	Persian-ish	variation,	which	I
accidentally	devised	one	night	when	I	found	myself	with	some	extra	just-
boiled	basmati	rice	on	my	hands.

400g	basmati	rice
Salt
3	tablespoons	plain	yoghurt
3	tablespoons	butter
3	tablespoons	neutral-tasting	oil

Fill	a	large	stockpot	with	4.8	litres	of	water	and	bring	it	to	a	boil	over	high
heat.

In	the	meantime,	place	the	rice	in	a	bowl	and	rinse	with	cold	water,
swirling	vigorously	with	your	fingers	and	changing	the	water	at	least	five
times,	until	the	starch	has	run	off	and	the	water	runs	clear.	Drain	the	rice.

Once	the	water	comes	to	a	boil,	salt	it	heavily.	The	precise	amount	will
vary	depending	on	what	kind	of	salt	you’re	using,	but	it’s	about	6
tablespoons	fine	sea	salt	or	a	generous	75g	kosher	salt.	The	water	should
taste	saltier	than	the	saltiest	seawater	you’ve	ever	tasted.	This	is	your	big
chance	to	get	the	rice	seasoned	from	within,	and	it’s	only	going	to	spend	a
few	minutes	in	the	salted	water,	so	don’t	panic	about	oversalting	your	food.
Add	the	rice,	and	stir.

Set	a	fine-mesh	sieve	or	colander	in	the	sink.	Cook	rice,	stirring	from
time	to	time,	until	it’s	al	dente,	about	6	to	8	minutes.	Drain	into	the	sieve
and	immediately	begin	rinsing	with	cold	water	to	stop	the	rice	from	cooking
further.	Drain.

Remove	125g	of	the	rice	and	combine	it	with	the	yoghurt.



Set	a	large,	very	well	seasoned	25cm	cast	iron	or	nonstick	frying	pan
over	medium	heat,	then	add	the	oil	and	butter.	When	the	butter	melts,	add
the	yoghurt-rice	mixture	into	the	pan	and	level	it	out.	Pile	the	remaining	rice
into	the	pan,	mounding	it	gently	towards	the	centre.	Using	the	handle	of	a
wooden	spoon,	gently	dig	five	or	six	holes	into	the	rice	down	to	the	bottom
of	the	pot,	which	will	be	gently	sizzling.	The	holes	will	allow	steam	to	escape
from	the	bottommost	layer	of	rice	so	that	a	crisp	crust	can	form.	There
should	be	enough	oil	in	the	pan	so	that	you	can	see	it	bubbling	up	the	sides.
Add	a	little	more	oil	if	needed	to	see	these	bubbles.

Continue	cooking	the	rice	over	medium	heat,	turning	the	pan	a	quarter
turn	every	3	or	4	minutes	to	ensure	even	browning,	until	you	start	to	see	a
golden	crust	begin	to	form	at	the	sides	of	the	pan,	about	15	to	20	minutes.
Once	you	see	the	crust	turn	from	pale	amber	to	gold,	reduce	the	heat	to
low	and	continue	cooking	for	another	15	to	20	minutes.	The	edges	of	the
crust	should	be	golden,	and	the	rice	should	be	cooked	completely	through.
There	isn’t	a	way	to	tell	what	tahdig	will	look	like	until	you	flip	it,	so	I	prefer
to	err	on	the	side	of	overbrowning,	but	if	that	makes	you	uncomfortable,
pull	the	rice	after	about	35	total	minutes	in	the	pan.

To	unmould	the	rice,	carefully	run	a	spatula	along	the	edges	of	the	pan
to	ensure	that	no	part	of	the	crust	is	sticking.	Tip	out	any	excess	fat	at	the
bottom	of	the	pan	into	a	bowl,	gather	your	courage,	and	then	carefully	flip	it
onto	a	platter	or	cutting	board.	It	should	look	like	a	beautiful	cake	of	fluffy
rice	with	a	golden	crust.

And	if	for	any	reason	your	rice	doesn’t	slip	out	in	one	piece,	do	what
every	Persian	grandmother	since	the	beginning	of	time	has	done:	scoop	out
the	rice,	chip	out	the	tahdig	in	pieces	with	a	spoon	or	metal	spatula,	and
pretend	you	meant	to	do	it	this	way.	No	one	will	be	the	wiser.

Serve	immediately	with	Slow-Roasted	Salmon	(here),	Kufte	Kebabs
(here),	Persian	Roast	Chicken	(here),	or	Kuku	Sabzi	(here).
Variations
• To	make	a	Bread	Tahdig,	cut	a	25cm	circle	out	of	a	piece	of	lavash

bread,	or	use	a	25cm	flour	tortilla.	Mix	the	yoghurt	into	the	entire
amount	of	parcooked	rice.	Preheat	the	pan	as	directed	above,	add	the
butter	and	oil,	and	then	lay	the	bread	circle	or	tortilla	into	the	pan.
Spoon	the	rice	in	and	continue	as	above.	A	Bread	Tahdig	will	brown
more	quickly	than	one	made	with	only	rice,	so	keep	a	vigilant	eye	on
the	pan	and	turn	the	heat	down	to	low	after	about	12	minutes,	rather



than	15	to	20.
• To	make	Saffron	Rice,	make	saffron	tea	by	grinding	a	generous	pinch

of	saffron	to	a	powder	with	a	pinch	of	salt	in	a	mortar	and	pestle.	Add	2
tablespoons	of	boiling	water	and	allow	it	to	steep	for	5	minutes.	Drizzle
over	drained,	parcooked	rice	and	continue	adding	the	rice	to	the	frying
pan	as	directed	above.	Serve	with	Kufte	Kebabs	(here).

• To	make	Herbed	Rice,	stir	6	tablespoons	of	finely	chopped	parsley,
coriander,	and	dill	in	any	combination	into	cooked,	drained	rice.	Cook
as	directed	above.	Serve	with	Slow-Roasted	Salmon	(here)	and
Herbed	Yoghurt	(here).

• To	make	Broad	Bean	and	Dill	Rice,	stir	10g	finely	chopped	dill	and
fresh	or	thawed	frozen,	peeled	broad	beans	into	drained,	cooked	rice.
Cook	as	directed	above.	Serve	with	Persian	Roast	Chicken	(here).



Five	Classic	Pastas
My	appreciation	for	pasta	is	profound.	After	all,	I	made	and	ate	it	nearly
every	day	for	over	ten	years,	two	of	which	were	spent	in	Italy.	When	the
time	came	for	me	to	decide	which	handful	of	pasta	recipes	to	include	here,	I
nearly	had	a	breakdown.	How	would	I	ever	be	able	to	reduce	everything	I
have	to	say	about	pasta	into	just	a	few	basic	recipes?

I	realised	that	before	I	could	narrow	anything	down,	I	needed	to	see	all
the	possibilities,	so	I	made	a	list	of	all	my	favourite	pasta	and	sauce
combinations.	As	the	list	grew	absurdly	long,	a	pattern	emerged.	Every
single	sauce	on	my	list	fell	into	one	of	five	families:	cheese,	tomato,
vegetable,	meat,	and	(shell)fish.

Master	one	sauce	from	each	family,	and	the	path	to	countless
variations	will	become	clear.	Eventually,	you’ll	be	able	to	improvise	as	you
wish.	Just	remember,	every	ingredient	should	have	a	role	in	the	dish—
kitchen	sink	pastas	are	generally	disastrous.	As	a	general	rule,	if	you’re
improvising	with	what	you’ve	got	on	hand,	stick	to	a	six-ingredient	limit,
beyond	the	pasta,	olive	oil,	and	salt.	And	remember	to	get	the	Salt,	Fat,	and
Acid	just	right	before	serving.

Two	last	things:	with	the	exception	of	Pesto	(here)—traditionally	made
of	crushed	garlic,	pine	nuts,	Parmesan,	and	basil,	salt,	and	olive	oil—which
will	take	any	excuse	to	turn	brown,	hot,	just	cooked	pasta	should	always	be
tossed	with	hot	sauce.	And,	pasta	is	about	the	pasta	just	as	much	as	it	is
about	the	sauce,	so	take	care	to	cook	the	noodles	properly	and	salt	the
water	just	right.	The	water	should	be	as	salty	as	the	summer	sea,	which
works	out	to	about	2	scant	tablespoons	of	kosher	salt	or	4	teaspoons	of	fine
sea	salt	per	quart.






Cheese:	Pasta	Cacio	e	Pepe Serves	4	to	6

Cacio	e	pepe	is	the	Roman	(and,	dare	I	say,	better)	answer	to	macaroni	and
cheese.	It’s	traditionally	made	with	pecorino	Romano,	a	salty	sheep’s	milk
cheese,	and	abundant	ground	black	pepper.	Take	a	few	measures	to
prevent	the	sauce	from	clumping:	first,	use	the	finest	grater	you	have	to
grate	the	cheese	so	it	can	melt	readily.	Next,	encourage	an	emulsion	in	the
pan	by	swirling	together	the	pepper,	oil,	and	starchy	pasta	water	until	it
comes	together.	And	finally,	if	your	pan	isn’t	roomy	enough	to	toss	the
pasta,	place	everything	in	a	big	bowl	and	toss	with	tongs,	adding	a	little
pasta	cooking	water	at	a	time,	until	the	sauce	comes	together.

Salt
450g	spaghetti,	bucatini,	or	tonnarelli	pasta
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	tablespoon	very	coarsely	ground	black	pepper
115g	pecorino	Romano,	very	finely	grated

Set	a	large	pot	of	water	over	high	heat	and	bring	to	a	boil.	Season	generously
with	salt	until	it	tastes	like	the	summer	sea.	Add	the	pasta	and	cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	al	dente.	Reserve	450ml	of	the	cooking	water	as	you	drain
the	pasta.

In	the	meantime,	heat	a	large	pan	over	medium	heat	and	add	enough
olive	oil	to	just	coat	the	bottom.	When	it	shimmers,	add	the	pepper	and
cook	until	fragrant,	about	20	seconds.	Add	175ml	of	the	pasta	cooking	water
into	the	pan	and	let	it	boil—this	will	encourage	an	emulsion	to	form.

Add	the	drained	pasta	to	the	hot	pan,	toss	to	coat	the	noodles,	then
sprinkle	in	all	but	a	handful	of	the	cheese.	Use	tongs	to	vigorously	toss	the
pasta,	adding	more	pasta	water	as	needed	to	create	a	creamy	sauce	that
clings	to	the	pasta	without	clumping.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	as	needed.
Garnish	with	remaining	cheese	and	more	coarsely	ground	pepper	and	serve
immediately.
Variations
• For	Pasta	Alfredo,	simmer	900ml	double	cream	until	reduced	to

450ml,	about	30	minutes.	Set	a	large	frying	pan	over	medium	heat	and



add	3	tablespoons	of	butter.	Once	the	butter	has	melted,	add	3	minced
garlic	cloves.	Cook	gently	until	the	garlic	starts	to	give	off	an	aroma,
about	20	seconds.	Before	the	garlic	begins	to	take	on	any	colour,	add
the	reduced	cream	and	bring	to	a	simmer.	Cook	450g	fettuccine	until	al
dente	and	drain,	reserving	225ml	pasta	water.	Add	hot	noodles	into	pan
and	toss	with	115g	finely	grated	Parmesan,	and	abundant	freshly	ground
black	pepper.	Add	more	pasta	water	as	needed	to	achieve	creamy
consistency.	Taste	and	adjust	for	salt.	Serve	immediately.

• To	make	Creamy	Asparagus	and	Mint	Pasta,	set	a	large	frying	pan
over	medium	heat	and	add	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	pan.	When	the
oil	shimmers,	add	1	finely	diced	onion	(or	two	spring	onions)	and	a
generous	pinch	of	salt.	Reduce	the	heat	to	medium-low	and	cook,
stirring	occasionally,	until	tender,	about	12	minutes.	Add	3	minced
garlic	cloves.	Cook	gently	until	the	garlic	starts	to	give	off	an	aroma,
about	20	seconds.	Before	the	garlic	begins	to	take	on	any	colour,	add
450ml	double	cream	and	simmer	until	reduced	by	half,	about	25
minutes.

In	the	meantime,	snap	the	woody	ends	off	675g	of	asparagus	and
discard.	Cut	the	asparagus	into	5mm	slices	on	the	bias	and	set	aside.
When	the	cream	is	almost	done	reducing,	cook	450g	of	fettuccine	or
penne	pasta	until	nearly	al	dente.	A	minute	before	the	pasta	is	done
cooking,	add	the	sliced	asparagus	into	the	pasta	water	and	cook.	When
pasta	is	al	dente	and	asparagus	is	barely	cooked,	drain,	reserving	225ml
of	the	pasta	cooking	water.	Add	the	noodles	and	asparagus	into	pan
and	toss	with	cream,	85g	finely	grated	Parmesan,	10g	chopped	mint
leaves,	and	freshly	ground	black	pepper.	Add	a	little	pasta	cooking
water	if	needed	to	loosen	the	sauce	and	achieve	a	creamy	consistency.
Taste	and	adjust	for	salt.	Serve	immediately.



Makes	about	1.8	litres	sauce;
Tomato:	Pasta	alla	Pomarola pasta	recipe	serves	4

Ever	since	that	sauce-making	competition	at	Chez	Panisse,	I’ve	learned
dozens	and	dozens	of	different	methods	for	making	basic	tomato	sauce,
but	the	truth	of	the	matter	is	that	all	of	the	variations—using	onion	or	not,
adding	basil	or	oregano,	puréeing	or	milling—offer	little	more	than	personal
flourish.	You	can	do	it	however	you	like;	most	important	is	to	use	the	best-
tasting	tomatoes	and	olive	oil	you	can	find,	and	to	get	the	salt	right.	Do	that,
and	you’ve	got	yourself	a	wonderful	blank	slate,	ready	to	use	in	pasta	and
pizza,	of	course,	but	also	in	dishes	as	diverse	as	shakshuka,	braised
Moroccan	lamb,	Mexican	rice,	or	Provençal	fish	stew.

Extra-virgin	olive	oil
2	medium	onions,	sliced	thinly
Salt
4	garlic	cloves
1.8kg	fresh,	ripe	tomatoes,	stemmed,	or	four	(400g)	cans	whole

San	Marzano	or	Roma	tomatoes	in	their	juice
16	fresh	basil	leaves	or	1	tablespoon	dried	oregano
350g	spaghetti,	bucatini,	penne,	or	rigatoni
Parmesan,	pecorino	Romano,	or	ricotta	salata	for	serving

Set	a	large,	heavy-bottomed,	nonreactive	pot	over	medium-high	heat.
When	the	pot	is	hot,	add	just	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom.	When	the
oil	shimmers,	add	the	onions.

Season	with	salt	and	reduce	the	heat	to	medium,	stirring	from	time	to
time	to	prevent	burning.	Cook	until	the	onions	are	soft	and	translucent,	or
blond,	about	15	minutes.	A	little	browning	is	fine,	but	don’t	let	the	onions
burn.	If	the	onions	begin	to	brown	too	quickly,	turn	down	the	heat	and	add
a	splash	of	water.

While	the	onions	cook,	slice	the	garlic,	then	quarter	the	tomatoes,	if
using	fresh.	If	using	canned,	pour	them	into	a	large,	deep	bowl	and	crush
with	your	hands.	Swirl	about	50ml	of	water	in	one	can,	then	pour	it	into	the



second	can	and	swirl,	then	add	into	the	tomatoes.	Set	aside.
Once	the	onions	are	soft,	push	them	to	the	outer	edges	of	the	pot	and

add	a	spoonful	of	oil	into	the	centre.	Add	the	garlic	to	the	oil.	Gently	sizzle
the	garlic	until	it	starts	to	give	off	an	aroma,	about	20	seconds,	and	before	it
begins	to	brown,	add	the	tomatoes.	If	using	fresh	tomatoes,	use	a	wooden
spoon	to	smash	them	a	bit	and	encourage	the	juice	to	come	out.	Bring	the
sauce	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a	simmer.	Season	with	salt	and	tear	in	basil
leaves	or	add	oregano,	if	using.

Cook	over	low	heat,	stirring	the	sauce	often	with	a	wooden	spoon.
Scrape	the	bottom	of	the	pot	to	ensure	that	nothing	sticks.	If	the	sauce
does	start	to	stick	and	scorch,	then	do	just	the	opposite.	Don’t	stir!	That’ll
just	mix	the	burnt	taste	into	the	rest	of	the	unaffected	sauce.	Instead,
immediately	transfer	the	sauce	to	a	new	pot	without	scraping	the	bottom,
and	leave	the	scorched	pot	to	soak	in	the	sink.	Take	extra	care	to	prevent
the	new	pot	from	burning	again.

Put	a	large	pot	of	water	on	to	boil	over	high	heat.	Cover	with	a	lid	to
prevent	too	much	evaporation.

The	sauce	will	be	done	when	its	flavour	shifts	from	raw	to	cooked,
about	25	minutes.	Dipping	your	spoon	into	the	sauce,	you’ll	be	reminded
less	of	the	garden	or	the	farmer’s	market	and	more	of	a	comforting	bowl	of
pasta.	If	you’re	using	canned	tomatoes,	the	shift	is	subtler:	wait	for	the
moment	when	the	tomatoes	lose	their	tinny	taste	from	the	can,	which	can
take	closer	to	40	minutes.	When	the	tomatoes	are	cooked,	bring	the	sauce
to	a	rapid	simmer	and	stir	in	175ml	of	olive	oil.	Let	it	simmer	together	for	a
couple	of	minutes;	the	pomarola	will	transform	into	a	rich	sauce	as	it
emulsifies.	Remove	it	from	the	heat.

Purée	the	sauce	with	a	stick	blender,	blender,	or	food	mill,	then	taste
and	adjust	seasoning.	Keep	covered	in	the	refrigerator	for	up	to	a	week,	or
freeze	for	up	to	3	months.	For	storing	pomarola,	process	jars	filled	with
sauce	in	a	water	bath	for	20	minutes,	and	use	within	a	year.

To	serve	4	people,	season	the	pot	of	water	with	salt	until	it	tastes	like
the	summer	sea.	Add	the	pasta,	give	it	a	stir,	and	cook	until	it’s	just	al	dente.
While	the	pasta	cooks,	bring	450ml	of	pomarola	sauce	to	a	simmer	in	a	large
sauté	pan.	Drain	the	pasta,	reserving	225ml	of	pasta	water.	Add	the	pasta	to
the	sauce	and	toss,	thinning	as	needed	with	pasta	water	and	olive	oil.	Taste
and	adjust	salt	as	needed.	Serve	immediately,	with	Parmesan,	pecorino
Romano,	or	ricotta	salata	cheese.



Variations
• To	add	some	creaminess	to	the	pasta,	add	125ml	crème	fraîche	(here)

to	450ml	pomarola	sauce	and	bring	to	a	simmer	just	before	adding
cooked	pasta,	or	add	115g	of	fresh	ricotta	cheese	in	large	dollops	into
the	pasta	after	tossing	with	tomato	sauce.

• To	make	Pasta	alla	Puttanesca,	set	a	large	frying	pan	over	medium
heat	and	add	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	When	the
oil	shimmers,	add	2	cloves	minced	garlic	and	10	minced	anchovy	fillets
and	cook	gently	until	the	garlic	starts	to	give	off	an	aroma,	about	20
seconds.	Before	the	garlic	begins	to	take	on	any	colour,	add	450ml
pomarola	sauce,	55g	rinsed	and	pitted	and	black	olives	(preferably	oil-
cured),	and	1	tablespoon	rinsed	salt-packed	capers.	Season	to	taste
with	red	pepper	flakes	and	salt	and	simmer	for	10	minutes,	stirring
occasionally.	In	the	meantime,	cook	350g	of	spaghetti	until	al	dente
and	drain,	reserving	225ml	of	the	pasta	cooking	water.	Toss	the	pasta
with	the	simmering	sauce	and	thin	as	needed	with	pasta	water.	Taste
and	adjust	salt	as	needed.	Garnish	with	chopped	parsley	and	serve
immediately.

• To	make	Pasta	all’Amatriciana,	set	a	large	frying	pan	over	medium
heat	and	add	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	When	the
oil	shimmers,	add	1	finely	diced	onion	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.
Stirring	occasionally,	cook	until	the	onion	is	soft	and	brown,	about	15



minutes.	Slice	175g	guanciale	(cured	pork	jowl),	pancetta,	or	bacon	into
matchsticks	and	add	to	the	onion.	Cook	over	medium	heat	until	the
meat	is	barely	crisp,	then	add	2	cloves	minced	garlic	and	cook	gently
until	the	garlic	starts	to	give	off	an	aroma,	about	20	seconds.	Before	the
garlic	begins	to	take	on	any	colour,	add	450ml	pomarola	sauce	and
season	to	taste	with	salt	and	crushed	red	pepper	flakes.	Simmer	for
about	10	minutes.	In	the	meantime,	cook	350g	of	spaghetti	or	bucatini
until	al	dente	and	drain,	reserving	225ml	of	the	pasta	cooking	water.
Toss	the	pasta	with	the	simmering	sauce	and	thin	as	needed	with	pasta
water.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	as	needed.	Garnish	with	abundant	grated
pecorino	Romano	or	Parmesan	and	serve	immediately.



Vegetable:	Pasta	with	Broccoli	and	Bread
Crumbs Serves	4	to	6

This	is	the	dish	I	cook	when	I’ve	got	no	juice	left	at	the	end	of	the	day.	I
pretend	to	choose	to	eat	a	bowl	of	noodles	dressed	with	broccoli	sauce
because	it’s	virtuous.	In	reality,	I	choose	it	out	of	pleasure;	the	depth	of	the
browned	onions,	the	umami	lent	by	the	extravagant	dose	of	Parmesan,	and
the	sweetness	of	the	softened	broccoli	add	up	to	an	unexpected	dose	of
luxury.	While	Tuscan	peasants	historically	used	bread	crumbs	as	an
economical	alternative	to	cheese	for	garnishing	pasta,	I	support	the	use	of
both,	for	crunch	and	flavour.	And	don’t	discard	the	broccoli	stems!	They’re
often	the	sweetest	parts	of	the	plant.	Just	remove	their	tough	skins	with	a
vegetable	peeler,	slice	them,	and	cook	them	alongside	the	florets.

Salt
900g	broccoli,	florets	and	peeled	stems
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	large	onion,	finely	diced
1	to	2	teaspoons	red	pepper	flakes
3	garlic	cloves,	minced
450g	orecchiette,	penne,	linguine,	bucatini,	or	spaghetti
40g	Sprinkling	Crumbs	(here)
Freshly	grated	Parmesan,	for	serving

Set	a	large	pot	of	water	over	high	heat.	When	it	comes	to	a	boil,	season	it
generously	with	salt	until	it	tastes	like	the	summer	sea.

Cut	the	broccoli	florets	into	1cm	pieces,	and	stems	into	5mm	slices.
Set	a	large	cast-iron	casserole	or	similar	pot	over	medium-high	heat.

Once	it’s	hot,	add	just	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pot.	When
the	oil	shimmers,	add	the	onions,	a	generous	pinch	of	salt,	and	1	teaspoon
pepper	flakes.	As	soon	as	the	onions	begin	to	brown,	give	them	a	stir	and
reduce	the	flame	to	medium.	Stirring	occasionally,	cook	the	onions	until
they	are	tender	and	golden	brown,	about	15	minutes.	Move	the	onions	to
the	edge	of	the	pot,	clearing	a	spot	in	the	centre.	Add	a	tablespoon	or	so	of



olive	oil,	and	then	the	garlic.	Cook	gently	until	the	garlic	starts	to	give	off	an
aroma,	about	20	seconds.	Before	the	garlic	begins	to	take	on	any	colour,	stir
it	into	the	onions	and	reduce	the	heat	to	low	to	keep	the	garlic	from
browning.

Drop	the	broccoli	into	the	boiling	water	and	cook	until	tender,	about	4
to	5	minutes.	Remove	the	pieces	from	the	pot	with	a	spider	or	slotted	spoon
and	add	them	directly	to	the	pan	of	onions.	Cover	the	pot	of	water	to
prevent	evaporation	and	leave	it	boiling	on	the	stove	for	cooking	the	pasta.
Increase	the	heat	to	medium,	and	continue	to	cook,	stirring	occasionally,
until	the	broccoli	begins	to	break	down	and	combines	with	the	onions	and
olive	oil	into	a	sauce,	about	20	minutes.	If	the	mixture	appears	dry,	rather
than	saucy,	add	a	spoonful	or	two	of	the	cooking	water	to	moisten	it.

Add	the	pasta	to	the	water	and	give	it	a	stir.	As	it	cooks,	continue
cooking	and	stirring	the	broccoli.	The	key	is	to	make	sure	there’s	enough
water	in	the	pan	so	the	broccoli,	oil,	and	water	emulsify	and	become	saucy
and	sweet.	Keep	cooking,	and	stirring,	and	add	water	as	needed.

When	the	pasta	is	al	dente,	drain	it,	reserving	450ml	of	the	cooking
water.	Toss	the	hot	noodles	into	the	pan	with	the	broccoli,	and	stir.	Add
another,	final	splash	of	olive	oil	and	the	salty	pasta	water	to	ensure	the
noodles	are	all	well	coated,	moist,	and	seasoned.	Taste	and	adjust	the	salt
and	pepper	flakes	as	needed.

Serve	immediately,	topped	with	bread	crumbs	and	generous	amounts
of	snowy	grated	Parmesan.
Variations
• To	add	an	umami	power	punch,	add	6	minced	anchovy	fillets	to	the

onions	alongside	the	garlic.
• To	make	Pasta	with	Beans	and	Broccoli,	add	150g	cooked	beans	(any

kind!)	to	the	broccoli	and	onions	while	the	pasta	is	cooking.
• To	make	Pasta	with	Sausage	and	Broccoli,	crumble	225g	mild	or	spicy

Italian	sausage	in	walnut-size	pieces	into	the	onions	once	they	are	soft,
increase	the	heat	to	high,	and	brown.

• To	add	a	little	acid	and	sweetness,	stir	225ml	pomarola	sauce	(here)
into	the	cooked	onions	before	adding	broccoli.

• To	add	a	little	briny	kick,	add	55g	coarsely	chopped,	pitted	black	or
green	olives	to	the	broccoli	and	onions.



• Substitute	kale,	cauliflower,	cima	di	rapa,	or	Romanesco	for	the	broccoli
and	cook	as	directed	above.	Or	skip	the	blanching	step	and	substitute
long-cooked	artichokes,	fennel,	or	summer	squash	(here).



Makes	about	1.5	litres	sauce;
Meat:	Pasta	al	Ragù pasta	recipe	serves	4

I	learned	to	make	meat	sauce,	or	ragù,	from	Benedetta	Vitali,	the	Florentine
chef	who	took	me	into	her	kitchen,	and	her	family,	when	I	was	twenty-two.
We	made	a	pot	of	ragù	at	her	restaurant,	Zibibbo,	every	few	days.	Like	most
dishes	at	the	restaurant,	it	starts	with	soffritto,	a	foundation	of	finely
chopped,	deeply	browned	aromatic	vegetables.	From	Benedetta	I	learned
to	dote	on	my	soffritto,	first	when	I	finely	minced	it	with	the	biggest	knife	I’d
ever	seen,	and	then	when	I	browned	it	using	an	inordinate	amount	of	olive
oil.	Nothing	is	as	important	to	the	flavour	of	a	ragù	as	browning,	so	take	your
time	with	the	soffritto	and	the	meat.	After	that,	it’s	just	a	matter	of	time
before	you	can	sit	down	to	a	bowl	of	pasta	that	tastes	as	magnificent	as
afternoon	sunlight	reflecting	off	a	Tuscan	hillside.

And	if	mincing	all	of	those	vegetables	by	hand	is	simply	out	of	the
question	for	you,	then	go	ahead	and	use	a	food	processor.	Just	pulse	each
vegetable	separately	in	the	machine,	stopping	to	push	everything	down	with
a	rubber	spatula	from	time	to	time	to	make	sure	you	get	even	pieces.
Because	the	blade	of	the	food	processor	will	burst	open	more	cells	than	a
knife,	vegetables	chopped	in	a	machine	will	turn	out	much	more	watery.	Put
the	celery	and	onion	in	a	fine	sieve	and	press	firmly	to	drain	as	much	liquid
out	as	you	can,	then	combine	with	the	carrots	and	proceed	as	if	you’d	done
it	all	by	hand.	No	one	will	be	the	wiser.

Extra-virgin	olive	oil
450g	coarsely	ground	beef	chuck
450g	coarsely	ground	pork	shoulder
2	medium	onions,	minced
1	large	carrot,	minced
2	large	celery	stalks,	minced
350ml	dry	red	wine
450ml	Chicken	or	Beef	Stock	(here)	or	water
450ml	whole	milk



2	bay	leaves
28cm	by	8cm	strip	of	lemon	zest
28cm	by	8cm	strip	of	orange	zest
1cm	piece	cinnamon	stick
5	tablespoons	tomato	paste
Optional:	Parmesan	rind
Whole	nutmeg
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
450g	tagliatelle,	penne,	or	rigatoni
4	tablespoons	butter
Freshly	grated	Parmesan,	for	serving

Set	a	large	cast-iron	casserole	or	similar	pot	over	high	heat	and	add	enough
olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom.	Crumble	the	beef	into	the	pot	in	walnut-size
pieces.	Cook,	stirring	and	breaking	up	the	meat	with	a	slotted	spoon	until	it
sizzles	and	turns	golden	brown,	6	to	7	minutes.	Do	not	season	the	meat	yet
—salt	will	draw	out	water	and	delay	browning.	Use	the	slotted	spoon	to
transfer	the	meat	to	a	large	bowl,	leaving	the	rendered	fat	in	the	pot.	Brown
the	pork	in	the	same	way.

Add	the	onions,	carrots,	and	celery—the	soffritto—to	the	same	pot	and
cook	over	medium-high	heat.	The	amount	of	fat	should	be	sufficient	to
nearly	cover	the	soffritto,	so	add	more	olive	oil	as	needed,	at	least	another
175ml.	Cook,	stirring	regularly,	until	the	vegetables	are	tender	and	the
soffritto	is	a	deep	brown,	25	to	30	minutes.	(You	can	cook	the	soffritto	in
olive	oil	a	day	or	two	in	advance,	if	you	like,	to	break	up	the	time-intensive
steps	in	the	recipe.	Soffritto	also	freezes	well	for	up	to	2	months!)

Return	the	meat	to	the	pot,	increase	the	heat	to	high,	and	add	the	wine.
Scrape	the	bottom	of	the	pot	with	a	wooden	spoon	to	release	any	browned
bits	into	the	sauce.	Add	stock	or	water,	milk,	the	bay	leaves,	zests,
cinnamon,	tomato	paste,	and	Parmesan	rind,	if	using.	Add	10	zips	of	fresh
nutmeg	by	grating	it	on	a	nutmeg	grinder	or	other	fine	grater.	Season	with
salt	and	freshly	ground	pepper	to	taste.	Bring	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a
simmer.

Let	the	sauce	continue	to	simmer,	stirring	occasionally.	Once	the	milk



breaks	down	and	the	sauce	starts	to	look	appetising,	between	30	to	40
minutes,	start	tasting	the	mixture	and	adjusting	salt,	acid,	sweetness,
richness,	and	body.	If	it	needs	some	acid,	add	a	secret	splash	of	wine.	If	it
seems	bland,	add	tomato	paste	to	bring	it	to	life	and	lend	sweetness.	If	it
needs	to	be	richer,	add	a	little	milk.	If	the	ragù	seems	thin,	add	a	generous
splash	of	stock.	It’ll	reduce	as	it	simmers,	leaving	behind	its	gelatin	to	help
thicken	the	sauce.

Simmer	over	the	lowest	possible	heat,	skimming	off	the	fat	from	time	to
time	and	stirring	often,	until	the	meat	is	tender	and	the	flavours	have
melded,	about	1½	to	2	hours.	When	you	are	satisfied	that	the	ragù	is	done,
use	a	spoon	or	ladle	to	skim	off	the	fat	that	has	risen	to	the	surface	and
remove	the	Parmesan	rinds,	bay	leaves,	citrus	peels,	and	cinnamon.	Taste
and	adjust	the	salt	and	pepper	again.

For	4	servings,	toss	450ml	of	hot	ragù	with	450g	of	pasta	cooked	al
dente	and	4	tablespoons	of	butter.	Serve	with	ample	freshly	grated
Parmesan.

Cover	and	store	the	remaining	ragù	in	the	refrigerator	for	up	to	1	week,
or	in	the	freezer	for	up	to	3	months.	Return	to	a	boil	before	using.
Variations
• For	Poultry	Ragù,	use	1.8kg	whole	legs.	If	using	whole	legs,	simply	shred

the	meat	and	skin	once	the	sauce	is	cooked,	discarding	bones	and
gristle.	This	works	equally	well	with	duck,	turkey,	or	chicken.	Brown	the
meat	in	batches—avoid	crowding	the	pan—and	prepare	soffritto	as
directed	above.	When	the	soffritto	is	brown,	add	4	sliced	garlic	cloves
into	the	pot	and	sizzle	gently	for	about	20	seconds	until	they	give	off	an
aroma,	but	do	not	let	them	brown.	Substitute	white	wine	for	red,	add
an	herb	sachet	with	1	fresh	rosemary	sprig	and	1	tablespoon	juniper
berries	to	the	sauce,	and	add	10g	dried	porcini	mushrooms.	Increase
stock	to	675ml.	Omit	milk,	nutmeg,	orange	zest,	and	cinnamon,	but
keep	the	bay	leaves,	lemon	zest,	tomato	paste,	salt,	pepper,	and
Parmesan	rind.	Simmer	until	tender,	about	90	minutes.	Skim	fat	and
remove	aromatics	as	directed	on	the	previous	page.	Taste	and	adjust
the	salt	and	pepper.	Serve	as	directed.

• For	Sausage	Ragù,	replace	the	beef	and	pork	with	900g	of	mild	or	spicy
Italian	sausage.	Brown	the	meat	and	prepare	soffritto	as	directed	above.
When	the	soffritto	is	brown,	add	4	sliced	garlic	cloves	into	the	pot	and
sizzle	gently	for	about	20	seconds	until	they	give	off	an	aroma,	but	do



not	let	them	brown.	Substitute	white	wine	for	red,	and	400g	of	diced
canned	tomatoes	and	their	juice	for	the	tomato	paste.	Omit	the	milk,
nutmeg,	orange	zest,	and	cinnamon,	but	keep	the	stock,	bay	leaves,
lemon	zest,	salt,	pepper,	and	Parmesan	rind.	Add	1	tablespoon	dried
oregano	and	1	teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes.	Simmer	until	tender,	about	1
hour.	Skim	fat	and	remove	aromatics	as	directed	above.	Taste	and
adjust	the	salt	and	pepper.	Serve	as	directed	on	the	previous	page.



(Shell)fish:	Pasta	alle	Vongole	Pasta	with
Clams Serves	4	to	6

I	didn’t	taste	a	clam	or	mussel	until	I	was	twenty.	Even	now,	I’ll	only	rarely
choose	to	eat	a	bowl	of	shellfish	when	given	another	option.	Clam	pasta,
though?	That’s	another	story.	Pasta	alle	Vongole	is	one	of	those	mystical
dishes	where	an	alchemy	so	delicious	occurs	that	a	list	of	ingredients	does
little	to	account	for	its	depth	of	flavour.	Pasta	with	clams	tastes	like	the
perfect	day	of	surfing—salty	and	rich,	fresh	and	bright,	entirely	satisfying.
For	an	illustrated	step-by-step	of	this	recipe,	turn	back	to	here.

I	like	to	use	two	kinds	of	clams	in	this	pasta:	larger	littlenecks,	which
have	a	deeper	clammy	flavour,	and	smaller	Manilas	or	cherrystones,	which
are	really	fun	to	pluck	out	of	the	shell	at	the	table.	If	you	can’t	find	both
kinds,	don’t	sweat	it,	just	use	1.8kg	of	whichever	variety	you	can	find,	and
treat	them	all	like	littlenecks.

Salt
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
1	medium	onion,	finely	diced,	root	ends	saved
2	or	3	parsley	sprigs,	plus	10g	finely	chopped	leaves
900g	littleneck	clams,	scrubbed	well
225ml	dry	white	wine
2	garlic	cloves,	minced
About	1	teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
450g	linguine	or	spaghetti
900g	Manila	or	cherrystone	clams,	scrubbed	well
Juice	of	1	lemon
4	tablespoons	butter
25g	Parmesan,	finely	grated

Bring	a	large	pot	of	generously	salted	water	to	a	boil.
Heat	a	large	frying	pan	over	medium-high	heat	and	add	a	tablespoon	of



oil.	Add	the	root	ends	of	the	onion,	the	parsley	sprigs,	and	as	many
littlenecks	as	will	fit	in	one	layer,	then	pour	in	175ml	wine.

Crank	the	heat	up	to	high,	cover	the	pan,	and	let	clams	steam	until	they
open,	3	to	4	minutes.	Remove	the	cover	and	use	tongs	to	transfer	clams	to	a
bowl	as	they	open.	If	there	are	any	stubborn	clams,	tap	them	gently	with
your	tongs	to	encourage	them	to	open.	Discard	any	clams	that	don’t	open
after	6	minutes	of	cooking.	Add	the	remaining	littlenecks	to	the	pan	and
cook	the	same	way	with	the	remaining	wine.

Strain	the	cooking	liquid	through	a	fine-mesh	strainer	and	set	aside.
Once	the	clams	are	cool	enough	to	handle,	pluck	them	from	their	shells	and
chop	coarsely.	Set	aside	in	a	small	bowl	with	just	enough	cooking	liquid	to
cover.	Discard	the	shells.

Rinse	the	pan,	then	set	over	medium	heat.	Add	just	enough	oil	to	coat
the	bottom	of	the	pan,	and	add	the	diced	onion	and	a	pinch	of	salt.	Cook
until	tender,	stirring	occasionally,	about	12	minutes.	It’s	fine	if	the	onion
picks	up	colour,	but	don’t	let	it	burn;	add	a	splash	of	water	if	you	need	to.

Meanwhile,	cook	the	pasta	until	not	quite	al	dente.
Add	the	garlic	and	½	teaspoon	pepper	flakes	to	the	onion	and	sizzle

gently.	Before	the	garlic	has	a	chance	to	brown,	add	the	Manila	or
cherrystone	clams	and	crank	up	the	heat	to	high.	Add	a	healthy	splash	of
the	clam	cooking	liquid	or	wine	and	cover	the	pan.	As	soon	as	the	clams
open,	add	the	chopped	littlenecks.	Cook	together	for	a	couple	of	minutes,
then	taste	and	adjust	acid	with	lemon	juice	or	more	white	wine	as	needed.

Drain	the	pasta,	reserving	225ml	of	cooking	liquid,	and	immediately	add
to	the	pan	with	the	clams.	Let	the	noodles	continue	cooking	until	al	dente	in
the	clam	liquid	so	that	they	can	absorb	all	the	briny	goodness.

Taste	and	adjust	for	salt,	spiciness,	and	acid.	Pasta	should	be	quite	juicy
—if	it	isn’t,	add	more	spoonfuls	of	clam	cooking	liquid,	wine,	or	pasta	water.
Add	the	butter	and	cheese	and	allow	them	to	melt,	then	toss	to	coat	the
pasta.	Sprinkle	with	the	chopped	parsley	leaves	and	spoon	into	bowls.

Serve	immediately	with	crusty	bread	for	sopping	up	the	sauce.
Variations
• To	make	Pasta	with	Mussels,	substitute	1.8kg	scrubbed,	bearded

mussels	for	the	clams,	but	steam	and	shell	them	all	like	the	littlenecks
on	the	previous	page.	Add	a	generous	pinch	of	saffron	threads	to	the
diced	onion	along	with	the	salt.	Omit	the	Parmesan,	but	otherwise



cook	and	serve	as	directed	above.
• To	make	Pasta	with	Clams	and	Sausage,	crumble	225g	spicy	or	mild

Italian	sausage	into	the	cooked	onions	in	walnut-size	pieces,	increase
the	heat	to	high,	and	brown.	Add	the	Manila	clams	and	continue
cooking	as	directed	above.	Serve	as	directed	above.

• To	make	White	Clam	Sauce,	add	225ml	cream	to	the	pan	of	onions
after	gently	sizzling	the	garlic	for	about	20	seconds.	Simmer	for	10
minutes	before	adding	the	clams.	Continue	cooking	as	directed	on	the
previous	page.

• To	make	Red	Clam	Sauce,	add	400g	chopped	fresh	or	canned
tomatoes	to	the	pan	of	onions	after	gently	sizzling	the	garlic.	Simmer
for	10	minutes	before	adding	clams.	Continue	as	in	the	recipe	on	the
previous	page.

• To	work	some	greens	into	the	dish,	add	200g	of	chopped,	balled-up
Blanched	Greens	(here)—kale	and	cima	di	rapa	work	especially	well—
to	the	cooked	onion	before	adding	the	garlic.

• For	a	textural	contrast,	top	any	of	the	above	pasta	dishes	with
Sprinkling	Crumbs	(here)	before	serving.



EGGS
Armed	with	an	egg	and	some	courage,	you	can	perform	any	one	of	a
hundred	kitchen	miracles.	Add	oil	infused	with	fearlessness,	to	an	egg	yolk,
drop	by	drop,	and	you’ll	get	Basic	Mayonnaise	(here)	and	all	the	sauces
and	dips—from	Aïoli	to	Tartar—it	makes	possible.	Use	the	classic	ratio	of	1
egg	to	1	yolk	and	225ml	of	cream	as	the	base	for	any	sweet	or	savoury	pots
de	crème	you	can	dream	up.	Season	the	cream	with	freshly	ground	black
pepper,	herbs,	and	Parmesan	for	a	classic	savoury	custard.	Steep	lavender	in
gently	warmed	cream,	then	sweeten	with	honey,	and	strain	before	mixing
with	eggs,	for	a	simple,	fragrant	dessert.	Bake	in	ramekins	set	in	a	water	bath
(see	here)	at	160°C	until	they’re	just	barely	set.

Whip	leftover	whites	with	sugar	and	top	with	cream	and	fruit	to	make
marshmallowy	pavlova	(here),	or,	when	you’re	feeling	extra-courageous,	try
your	hand	at	an	angel	food	cake.

Commit	another	classic	ratio	to	memory,	and	you	can	make	fresh	egg
pasta	anytime	you	like.	Slowly	mix	1	egg	and	1	yolk	into	135g	flour,	and	knead
until	it	all	comes	together,	before	resting,	rolling,	and	cutting	into	noodles	to
toss	with	Ragù	(here).

To	fry	the	perfect	egg,	heat	a	small	pan	over	high	heat,	further	than
you	normally	might,	add	enough	fat	to	coat	the	pan,	and	crack	in	the	egg.
Add	a	small	amount	of	butter	and,	tipping	the	pan	with	one	hand,	spoon	the
melting	butter	onto	the	egg	white	with	the	other	hand.	This	bastes	the	egg
so	the	top	and	the	bottom	of	the	white	cook	at	the	same	rate,	and	the	yolk
just	barely	sets.



Slip	an	uncracked	egg	into	boiling	water,	and	pull	it	out	9	minutes	later.
Drop	it	into	a	bowl	of	ice	water,	and	peel	it	once	it’s	cooled	to	find	The
Perfect	Boiled	Egg,	replete	with	a	creamy,	glossy	yolk.	The	freshest	eggs,
when	boiled,	can	be	difficult	to	peel,	so	roll	them	on	the	worktop	once
they’re	cooked,	and	leave	them	in	the	bowl	of	ice,	where	water	will	make	its
way	under	the	papery	layer	between	the	shell	and	the	white	and
uncomplicate	the	task	of	peeling.	To	make	an	egg	choppable,	and	suitable
for	egg	salad,	leave	it	in	boiling	water	for	10	minutes.	For	a	slightly	glossier
yolk,	remove	after	8	minutes.

Add	a	poached	egg	to	a	bowl	of	rice,	noodles,	or	broth	with	greens	to
transform	it	into	dinner.	Fill	a	large	saucepan	with	at	least	5cm	of	water,	and
add	a	light	splash	of	white	wine	vinegar,	which	will	gently	encourage	the	egg
white	to	coagulate.	Over	medium	heat,	bring	to	a	brisk	simmer.	Gently	crack
the	egg	into	a	coffee	cup	or	ramekin,	and	then	carefully	slip	the	egg	into	the
pan,	right	where	the	bubbles	are	originating.	If	the	temperature	of	the	pan
drops	and	bubbles	disappear,	turn	up	the	heat,	but	be	careful	not	to	let	the
water	boil	because	it	may	break	off	chunks	of	white	or	crack	open	a	yolk.
Repeat	with	1	egg	for	each	serving,	and	poach	until	just	set,	about	3	minutes.
Remove	cooked	eggs	from	the	water	with	a	slotted	spoon,	dab	on	a	clean
kitchen	towel,	and	slide	into	bowls.

If	poached	eggs	aren’t	your	miracle	of	choice,	then	whisk	one	together
with	a	little	bit	of	Parmesan	and	drizzle	into	simmering	stock	for	a
comforting	bowl	of	Stracciatella	(here).

For	creamy,	custardy	scrambled	eggs,	look	back	to	here	for	advice	from



Alice	B.	Toklas.	Whatever	you	do,	cook	the	eggs	over	the	gentlest	heat	and
turn	off	the	flame	30	seconds	before	you	think	you’re	done—let	your
courage	carry	you,	and	the	eggs,	to	the	finish	line.

And	of	course,	a	little	courage	won’t	hurt	when	it	comes	to	flipping
Kuku	Sabzi	(here),	the	Persian	answer	to	frittata.






Kuku	Sabzi	Persian	Herb	and	Greens
Frittata Serves	6	to	8

The	perfect	light	lunch	or	appetiser,	kuku	sabzi	differs	from	a	typical	frittata
in	two	important	ways.	To	begin	with,	the	ratio	of	greens	to	eggs	is	heavily
skewed	in	favour	of	greens—	in	fact,	I	use	just	enough	eggs	to	bind	the
greens	together.	And	kuku	isn’t	kuku	without	a	deeply	browned	crust	to
provide	a	textural	and	flavour	contrast	to	its	bright,	custardy	centre.	Eat
kuku	warm,	at	room	temperature,	or	cold,	with	feta	cheese,	yoghurt,	or
pickles	to	offer	the	balance	of	acidity.

Washing,	chopping,	and	cooking	down	all	the	greens	for	a	kuku	can	be
overwhelming	if	you’re	not	used	to	staring	down	a	mountain	of	produce,	so
feel	free	to	prep	the	greens	a	day	in	advance.

2	bunches	green	chard,	washed
1	large	leek
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt
6	tablespoons	unsalted	butter
150g	finely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems
55g	finely	chopped	dill	leaves	and	tender	stems
8	to	9	large	eggs

Preheat	the	oven	to	180°C	if	you	do	not	want	to	flip	your	kuku	partway
through	cooking.	(See	here	and	here	for	more	on	flipping.)

Strip	the	chard	leaves.	Gripping	at	the	base	of	each	stem	with	one	hand,
pinch	the	stem	with	the	other	hand	and	pull	upwards	to	strip	the	leaf.
Repeat	with	the	remaining	chard,	reserving	the	stems.

Remove	the	root	and	top	2.5cm	of	the	leek,	then	quarter	it	lengthwise.
Cut	each	quarter	into	5mm	slices,	place	in	a	large	bowl,	and	wash	vigorously
to	remove	dirt.	Drain	as	much	water	as	possible.	Thinly	slice	the	chard
stems,	discarding	any	tough	bits	at	the	base.	Add	to	the	washed	leek	and	set
aside.



Gently	heat	a	25	or	30cm	cast	iron	or	nonstick	frying	pan	over	medium
heat	and	add	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	Add	the	chard
leaves	and	season	with	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.	Cook,	stirring	occasionally,
until	the	leaves	are	wilted,	4	to	5	minutes.	Remove	the	chard	from	the	pan,
set	aside,	and	allow	to	cool.

Return	the	pan	to	the	stove	and	heat	over	a	medium	flame.	Add	3
tablespoons	of	butter.	When	the	butter	begins	to	foam,	add	the	sliced	leeks
and	chard	stems,	along	with	a	pinch	of	salt.	Cook	until	tender	and
translucent,	15	to	20	minutes.	Stir	from	time	to	time,	and	if	needed,	add	a
splash	of	water,	reduce	the	flame,	or	cover	with	a	lid	or	a	piece	of
parchment	paper	to	entrap	steam	and	keep	colour	from	developing.

In	the	meantime,	squeeze	the	cooked	chard	leaves	dry,	discard	the
liquid,	then	chop	them	coarsely.	Combine	in	a	large	bowl	with	the	coriander
and	dill.	When	the	leeks	and	chard	stems	are	cooked,	add	them	to	the
greens.	Let	the	mixture	cool	a	bit,	then	use	your	hands	to	mix	everything	up
evenly.	Taste	and	season	generously	with	salt,	knowing	you’re	about	to	add
a	bunch	of	eggs	to	the	mixture.

Add	the	eggs,	one	at	a	time,	until	the	mixture	is	just	barely	bound	with
egg—you	might	not	need	to	use	all	9	eggs,	depending	on	how	wet	your
greens	were	and	how	large	your	eggs	are,	but	it	should	seem	like	a	ridiculous
amount	of	greens!	I	usually	taste	and	adjust	the	mixture	for	salt	at	this	point,
but	if	you	don’t	want	to	taste	raw	egg,	you	can	cook	up	a	little	test	piece	of
kuku	and	adjust	the	salt	if	needed.

Wipe	out	and	reheat	your	pan	over	medium-high	heat—this	is	an
important	step	to	prevent	the	kuku	from	sticking—and	add	3	tablespoons
butter	and	2	tablespoons	olive	oil,	then	stir	to	combine.	When	the	butter
begins	to	foam,	carefully	pack	the	kuku	mixture	into	the	pan.

To	help	the	kuku	cook	evenly,	in	the	first	few	minutes	of	cooking,	use	a
rubber	spatula	to	gently	pull	the	edges	of	the	mixture	into	the	centre	as	they
set.	After	about	2	minutes	of	this,	reduce	the	heat	to	medium	and	let	the
kuku	continue	to	cook	without	touching	it.	You’ll	know	the	pan	is	hot
enough	as	long	as	the	oil	is	gently	bubbling	up	the	sides	of	the	kuku.

Because	this	kuku	is	so	thick,	it’ll	take	a	while	for	the	centre	to	set.	The
key	here	is	not	to	let	the	crust	burn	before	the	centre	sets.	Peek	at	the	crust
by	lifting	the	kuku	with	a	rubber	spatula,	and	if	it’s	getting	too	dark	too	soon,
reduce	the	heat.	Rotate	the	pan	a	quarter	turn	every	3	or	4	minutes	to
ensure	even	browning.



After	about	10	minutes,	when	the	mixture	is	set	to	the	point	of	no
longer	running	and	the	bottom	is	golden	brown,	gather	all	of	your	courage
and	prepare	to	flip	the	kuku.	First,	tip	out	as	much	of	the	cooking	fat	as	you
can	into	a	bowl	to	prevent	burning	yourself,	then	flip	the	kuku	onto	a	pizza
pan	or	the	back	of	a	baking	sheet,	or	into	another	large	frying	pan.	Add	2
tablespoons	olive	oil	into	the	hot	pan	and	slide	the	kuku	back	in	to	cook	the
second	side.	Cook	for	another	10	minutes,	rotating	the	pan	every	3	or	4
minutes.

If	something	goes	awry	when	you	try	to	flip,	don’t	freak	out!	It’s	only
lunch.	Just	do	your	best	to	flip	the	kuku,	add	a	little	more	oil	into	the	pan,
and	get	it	back	into	the	pan	in	one	piece.

If	you	prefer	not	to	flip,	then	slip	the	whole	pan	into	the	oven	and	bake
until	the	centre	is	fully	set,	about	10	to	12	minutes.	I	like	to	cook	it	until	it	is
just	set.	Check	for	doneness	using	a	toothpick,	or	just	shake	the	pan	back
and	forth,	looking	for	a	slight	jiggle	at	the	top	of	the	kuku.	When	it’s	done,
carefully	flip	it	out	of	the	pan	onto	a	plate.	Blot	away	the	excess	oil.	Eat
warm,	at	room	temperature,	or	cold.	Kuku	makes	for	amazing	leftovers!
Variations
• If	you	want	to	use	up	what’s	in	your	fridge,	substitute	675g	of	any

tender	cooking	greens	for	the	chard.	Wild	nettles	and	spinach	are	both
delicious,	though	you	could	also	use	escarole,	lettuce,	rocket,	beetroot
greens,	or	any	other	green	you	can	think	of.

• For	a	hint	of	garlic,	add	2	stalks	thinly	sliced	green	garlic	to	the	leeks.
• For	an	authentic	Persian	touch,	add	115g	lightly	toasted	walnuts,

coarsely	chopped,	or	30g	barberries	to	the	mixture	before	cooking.



• To	make	a	frittata,	as	opposed	to	kuku,	reverse	the	ratio	of	filling	to
eggs.	While	kuku	is	about	packing	in	as	much	green	as	possible,	a
frittata	is	about	its	delightful	eggy	texture.	Use	12	to	14	eggs	and	add
125ml	milk,	cream,	sour	cream,	or	crème	fraîche	(here)	to	the	egg	base
for	a	custardy	texture.	Stick	to	a	six-ingredient	limit:	eggs,	something
sweet,	something	creamy	or	rich,	something	green,	salt,	and	oil.	Classic
quiche	or	pizza	topping	combos	are	often	good	starting	points,
including	mushroom	and	sausage,	ham	and	cheese,	spinach	and
ricotta.	Or,	as	with	all	of	your	cooking,	find	frittata	inspiration	in
produce	at	the	peak	of	its	season:

Spring
Asparagus,	spring	onion,	and	mint
Artichoke	Confit	(here)	and	chives

Summer
Cherry	tomato,	crumbled	feta,	and	basil
Roasted	peppers,	cima	di	rapa,	and	crumbled,	cooked	sausage

Autumn
Wilted	chard,	dollops	of	fresh	ricotta
Brussels	sprouts	and	cubes	of	cooked	bacon



Winter
Roasted	potato,	caramelised	onion,	and	Parmesan
Roasted	radicchio,	fontina	cheese,	and	parsley



FISH

Slow-Roasted	Salmon Serves	6

This	is	my	favourite	way	to	cook	salmon,	mostly	because	the	gentle	heat
makes	it	almost	impossible	to	overcook	the	fish.	While	the	method	works
particularly	well	with	salmon	because	of	its	high	fat	content,	you	can
absolutely	try	it	with	other	types	of	fish,	including	steelhead	trout	and
Alaskan	halibut.	And	in	the	summer,	turn	your	grill	into	a	slow-cooking	oven
by	placing	the	baking	sheet	on	the	grill	grates	over	indirect	heat	and	closing
the	lid.	I	have	a	feeling	this’ll	become	your	favourite	way	to	cook	salmon
too.

1	generous	handful	of	fine	herbs,	such	as	parsley,	coriander,	dill,
or	fennel	fronds	or	3	fig	leaves

900g	salmon	fillet,	skin	removed
Salt
Extra-virgin	olive	oil

Preheat	the	oven	to	110°C.	Make	a	bed	of	herbs,	or	if	using	fig	leaves,	lay
them	out	in	the	centre	of	a	baking	sheet.	Set	aside.

Each	side	of	salmon	has	a	line	of	thin	pin	bones	that	reaches	about	two-
thirds	of	the	way	down	the	fillet.	Using	tweezers	or	needle-nosed	pliers,	lay
the	fillet	skin-side	down	on	a	cutting	board.	Run	your	fingers	lightly	over	the
fish	from	head	to	tail	to	locate	the	bones,	and	coax	their	ends	out	of	the
flesh.	Starting	at	the	head	end,	pull	out	the	bones	one	by	one,	tugging	at
them	with	your	tweezers	at	the	same	angle	at	which	they	are	lodged	in	the
fish.	Once	you	get	the	bone	out,	dip	your	tweezers	in	a	glass	of	cold	water	to
release	the	bone.	When	you’ve	finished,	run	your	fingers	over	the	fish	once
more	to	make	sure	you’ve	got	all	the	bones.	That’s	it!

Season	both	sides	of	the	fish	with	salt	and	tuck	it	into	the	bed	of	herbs.
Drizzle	a	tablespoon	of	olive	oil	onto	the	fish	and	rub	it	in	evenly	with	your
hands.	Slide	the	pan	into	the	oven.

Roast	for	40	to	50	minutes,	until	the	fish	begins	to	flake	in	the	thickest
part	of	the	fillet	when	you	poke	it	with	a	knife	or	your	finger.	Because	this
method	is	so	gentle	on	its	proteins,	the	fish	will	appear	translucent	even



when	it’s	cooked.
Once	the	salmon	is	cooked,	break	it	into	large,	rustic	pieces	and	spoon

Herb	Salsa	of	any	kind	on	top	in	generous	amounts.	Kumquat	Salsa	(here)
and	Meyer	Lemon	Salsa	(here)	work	particularly	well	here.	Serve	alongside
white	beans	or	potatoes	and	Shaved	Fennel	and	Radishes	(here).
Variations
• To	make	Soy-Glazed	Salmon,	reduce	225ml	soy	sauce,	2	tablespoons

toasted	sesame	seeds,	100g	brown	sugar,	and	a	pinch	of	cayenne
pepper	in	a	saucepan	over	high	heat	until	it’s	the	consistency	of	maple
syrup.	Add	1	clove	pounded	or	finely	grated	garlic	and	1	tablespoon
finely	grated	fresh	ginger.	Skip	the	bed	of	herbs,	line	the	baking	sheet
with	parchment	paper,	and	brush	the	glaze	onto	a	900g	fillet	of	salmon
immediately	before	cooking,	basting	every	15	minutes	or	so	as	it	roasts.

• For	a	bright	Citrus	Salmon,	season	the	fish	with	salt,	then	rub	the
surface	with	1	tablespoon	finely	grated	citrus	zest	mixed	with	2
tablespoons	olive	oil.	Skip	the	bed	of	herbs.	Instead,	line	a	baking	sheet
with	parchment	paper	and	arrange	the	fish	over	a	bed	of	thinly	sliced
blood	oranges	or	Meyer	lemons	and	roast	as	directed	above.	Serve	in
torn	chunks	atop	an	avocado	and	citrus	salad	(here).

• For	Indian-Spiced	Salmon,	toast	2	teaspoons	cumin	seeds,	2
teaspoons	coriander	seeds,	2	teaspoons	fennel	seeds,	and	3	cloves	in	a
dry	frying	pan	over	medium-high	heat	and	then	grind	finely	with	a
mortar	and	pestle	or	in	a	spice	grinder.	Transfer	to	a	small	bowl.	Add	½
teaspoon	cayenne	pepper,	1	tablespoon	turmeric,	and	a	generous	pinch
of	salt	to	the	spice	mixture,	then	add	2	tablespoons	melted	ghee	or
neutral-tasting	oil	and	combine.	Season	the	fish	with	salt,	then	rub	the
spice	paste	on	both	sides	of	the	fish,	and	refrigerate	covered,	for	1	to	2
hours.	Bring	to	room	temperature,	skip	the	bed	of	herbs,	and	bake	as
directed	above.



Beer-Battered	Fish Serves	4	to	6

I	clearly	remember	the	first	time	I	battered	and	fried	fish;	the	way	the	batter
puffed	up	when	it	hit	the	hot	oil	seemed	like	a	miracle.	Considering	how
frying	had	always	intimidated	me,	the	way	the	fish	turned	out—crisp	and
delicious—was	an	even	bigger	miracle.	By	the	time	I	had	frying	down,	about
a	decade	into	my	frying	career,	I	came	across	British	chef	Heston
Blumenthal’s	recipe	for	fried	fish.	By	replacing	some	of	the	water	in	the
batter	with	vodka,	which	is	only	about	60	percent	water,	he	reduced	the
amount	of	water	available	to	create	gluten.	As	a	result,	the	crust	is
unbelievably	tender.	By	adding	fizzy	beer	and	baking	powder	to	the	batter,
and	keeping	everything	ice-cold,	he	tipped	the	scales	even	further	in	favour
of	lightness.	As	a	result,	the	crust	is	even	more	unbelievably	tender.	Some
might	call	it,	you	know,	a	miracle.

325g	plain	flour
1	teaspoon	baking	powder
½	teaspoon	ground	cayenne	pepper
Salt
675g	flaky	white	fish,	such	as	halibut	or	sole,	boned	and	trimmed
1.3	litres	grapeseed	or	peanut	oil	for	frying
275ml	vodka,	ice-cold
About	350ml	lager	beer,	ice-cold
Optional:	For	extra	crispness,	substitute	rice	flour	for	half	of	the

plain	flour
In	a	medium	bowl,	mix	together	the	flour,	baking	powder,	cayenne	pepper,
and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.	Place	in	the	freezer.

Cut	the	fish	into	8	equal	pieces	on	the	diagonal,	each	about	2.5	by	8cm
long.	Season	generously	with	salt.	Keep	on	ice,	or	in	the	refrigerator,	until
ready	to	cook.

Place	a	wide,	deep	pan	over	medium	heat.	Add	enough	oil	to	reach	a
depth	of	4cm,	and	heat	to	185°C.



When	the	oil	is	hot,	make	the	batter:	add	the	vodka	to	the	bowl	of	flour
while	slowly	stirring	with	the	fingertips	of	one	hand.	Then,	gradually	add
enough	beer	to	thin	out	the	batter	to	about	the	same	consistency	as
pancake	batter—it	should	easily	drip	from	your	fingertips.	Don’t	overmix—
the	lumps	will	turn	into	a	light,	crisp	crust	when	fried.

Place	half	the	fish	in	the	bowl	of	batter.	One	at	a	time,	completely	coat
the	pieces	of	fish	and	then	carefully	lower	them	into	the	hot	oil.	Do	not
overpack	the	pot—at	no	time	should	there	be	more	than	a	single	layer	of
fish	in	the	oil.	As	the	pieces	fry,	use	tongs	to	gently	make	sure	they	don’t
stick	together.	After	about	2	minutes,	when	the	undersides	are	golden
brown,	flip	the	pieces	and	cook	the	second	side.	When	the	second	side	is
golden,	use	tongs	or	a	slotted	spoon	to	remove	the	fish	from	the	oil.	Season
with	salt	and	drain	on	a	baking	sheet	lined	with	paper	towels.

Fry	any	remaining	fish	in	the	same	way,	letting	the	oil	temperature
return	to	185°C	between	batches.

Serve	immediately	with	lemon	wedges	and	Tartar	Sauce	(here).
Variations
• To	make	a	Fritto	Misto,	use	this	batter	to	coat	and	fry	a	mixture	of	fish

and	shellfish,	such	as	prawns	halved	lengthwise,	sliced	squid,	and	soft-
shell	crab,	along	with	colourful	vegetables	such	as	asparagus	spears,
green	beans,	bite-size	pieces	of	broccoli	or	cauliflower,	wedges	of
spring	onion,	squash	blossoms,	and	raw	kale	leaves.	Serve	with	lemon
wedges	and	Aïoli	(here).

• For	a	crisp,	Gluten-Free	Batter,	use	200g	rice	flour,	3	tablespoons
potato	starch,	3	tablespoons	cornflour,	1	teaspoon	baking	powder,	¼
teaspoon	cayenne	pepper,	a	pinch	of	salt,	225ml	vodka,	225ml	chilled
soda	water.	Follow	the	method	as	directed	on	the	previous	page.






Tuna	Confit Serves	4	to	6

This	tuna	will	be	a	revelation	for	anyone	who	has	spent	her	entire	life	eating
tuna	from	a	can,	as	I	had	when	I	first	tasted	it.	Poached	gently	in	olive	oil,
the	tuna	remains	moist	for	days.	Eat	it	at	room	temperature	with	a	salad	of
white	beans,	parsley,	and	lemon,	as	the	Italians	do	in	their	classic	dish	tonno
e	fagioli.	Or	wait	for	the	peak	of	summer	and	make	a	juicy	pan	bagnat,	the
superlative	Provençal	tuna	sandwich.	Use	the	crustiest	bread	you	can	find
and	slather	one	side	with	Aïoli	(here),	then	layer	torn	pieces	of	tuna	confit,
a	sliced	Ten-Minute	Egg	(here),	ripe	tomatoes	and	cucumbers,	basil	leaves,
capers,	and	olives.	Dip	the	top	piece	of	bread	in	the	tuna	oil,	and	press	the
sandwich	together.	If	eating	this	sandwich	sounds	like	a	messy	endeavour,
imagine	making	700	of	them	for	the	summer	party	we	threw	every	year	at
Eccolo!

675g	fresh	albacore	or	yellowfin	tuna,	cut	into	4cm	thick	pieces
Salt
575ml	olive	oil
4	garlic	cloves,	peeled
1	dried	red	pepper
2	bay	leaves
2.5cm	strips	of	lemon	zest
1	teaspoon	black	peppercorns



Season	the	tuna	with	salt	about	30	minutes	before	you	plan	to	cook	it.
To	confit	the	tuna,	place	the	oil,	garlic,	red	pepper,	bay	leaves,	lemon

zest,	and	peppercorns	in	a	cast	iron	casserole	or	deep,	heavy	sauté	pan.
Heat	to	about	82°C—the	oil	should	be	warm	to	the	touch,	but	not	hot.
Cook	for	about	15	minutes	to	infuse	the	oil	with	the	aromatics	and	also	to
pasteurise	everything	to	allow	for	a	long	shelf	life.

Slip	the	tuna	into	the	warm	oil	in	a	single	layer.	The	tuna	must	be
covered	by	oil,	so	add	more	if	needed.	You	can	also	cook	the	fish	in	batches
if	necessary.	Return	the	oil	to	about	65°C,	or	just	until	you	see	the	fish
emitting	a	bubble	or	two	every	few	seconds.	The	precise	temperature	of	the
oil	isn’t	so	important,	and	it	will	fluctuate	as	you	turn	the	flame	up	and	down
and	add	and	remove	the	fish.	The	important	thing	is	to	cook	the	fish	slowly,
so	err	on	the	low	side	if	needed.	After	about	9	minutes,	remove	a	piece	from
the	oil	and	check	for	doneness.	The	fish	should	be	barely	medium-rare—
still	quite	pink	in	the	centre—as	heat	will	continue	to	carry	over.	If	it’s	too
rare,	return	the	fish	to	the	oil	and	cook	for	another	minute.

Pull	the	cooked	fish	from	the	oil	and	allow	to	cool	on	a	plate	in	a	single
layer,	then	place	in	a	glass	container	and	strain	the	cooled	oil	back	over	the
fish.	Serve	at	room	temperature	or	chilled.	The	fish	will	keep	in	the	fridge,
covered	in	oil,	for	about	2	weeks.



THIRTEEN	WAYS	OF	LOOKING	AT	A	CHICKEN
“I	DO	NOT	KNOW	WHICH	to	PREFER…”

–	WALLACE	STEVENS

Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken Serves	4

Two	tricks	make	this	simple	recipe	the	most	extraordinary	way	I	know	to
cook	a	whole	chicken.	First,	spatchcocking.	Spatchcocking	is	the	term	for
removing	a	bird’s	backbone	and	then	splaying	it	so	it	lies	flat,	but	I	like	to
think	of	it	as	a	way	to	increase	surface	area	for	browning	while	decreasing
cooking	time.	(It’s	also	my	favourite	way	to	cook	Thanksgiving	turkey,
cutting	down	cooking	time	by	nearly	half!)

The	second	trick	is	one	I	stumbled	on	by	mistake	at	Eccolo,	when	one
of	my	cooks	seasoned	a	few	chickens	and	left	them	uncovered	in	the	walk-
in	overnight.	When	I	came	in	the	next	day,	I	was	annoyed	by	his	negligence.
The	constantly	circulating	air	of	the	walk-in—like	that	of	any	refrigerator—
had	dried	out	the	chicken	skin,	and	the	birds	looked	scarily	fossilized.	But	I
had	no	choice,	so	I	cooked	them	anyway.	The	dried-out	skin	cooked	up
golden	and	glassy.	It	was	the	crispiest	roast	chicken	skin	I’d	ever	seen,	even
after	the	bird	had	rested.

If	you	don’t	have	a	chance	to	season	the	chicken	and	let	its	skin	dry	out
overnight,	season	it	as	early	as	possible,	then	pat	it	dry	with	a	paper	towel
before	you	begin	to	cook	it.	It’ll	help	achieve	a	similar	effect.

1.8kg	whole	chicken
Salt
Extra-virgin	olive	oil

The	day	before	you	plan	to	cook	the	chicken,	spatchcock	it	(or	ask	your
butcher	to	help!).	Use	heavy-duty	kitchen	shears	to	snip	down	along	both
sides	of	the	spine	(the	underside	of	the	bird)	and	remove	it.	You	can	start
from	the	tail	or	neck	end,	whichever	you	prefer.	Once	you’ve	removed	the
spine,	reserve	it	for	stock.	Remove	the	wingtips	and	reserve	them	for	stock,
too.

Lay	the	chicken	on	the	cutting	board,	breast	side	up.	Push	down	on	the
breastbone	until	you	hear	the	cartilage	pop	and	the	bird	lies	flat.	Generously



season	the	bird	with	salt	on	both	sides.	Place	it	breast	side	up	into	a	shallow
roasting	dish	and	refrigerate,	uncovered,	overnight.

Pull	the	bird	out	of	the	fridge	an	hour	before	you	plan	to	cook	it.
Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C,	with	a	rack	positioned	in	the	upper	third	of	the
oven.

Heat	a	25	or	30cm	cast	iron	pan	or	other	ovenproof	frying	pan	over
medium-high	heat.	Add	just	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pan.
As	soon	as	the	oil	shimmers,	place	the	chicken	in	the	pan,	breast	side	down,
and	brown	for	6	to	8	minutes,	until	golden.	It’s	fine	if	the	bird	doesn’t	lie
completely	flat	as	long	as	the	breast	is	in	contact	with	the	pan.	Flip	the	bird
over	(again,	it’s	fine	if	it	doesn’t	lie	entirely	flat)	and	slide	the	entire	cast	iron
pan	into	the	oven	on	the	prepared	rack.	Push	the	pan	all	the	way	to	the	very
back	of	the	oven,	with	the	handle	of	the	pan	facing	left.

After	about	20	minutes,	carefully	use	an	oven	mitt	to	rotate	the	pan	180
degrees	so	the	handle	faces	right	and	return	it	to	the	very	back	of	the	top
rack.

Cook	until	the	chicken	is	brown	all	over	and	the	juices	run	clear	when
you	cut	between	the	leg	and	the	thigh,	about	45	minutes.

Let	rest	10	minutes	before	carving.	Serve	warm	or	at	room	temperature.









Spicy	Fried	Chicken serves	4	to	6

Gus’s	in	Memphis	makes	the	best	fried	chicken	I’ve	ever	tasted.	Once,	on
my	way	through	town,	I	had	lunch	there	alongside	the	after-church	crowd.
Spicy,	crisp,	and	perfectly	seasoned,	this	fried	chicken	was	a	revelation.
Though	I	begged	the	cooks	for	any	hints	about	how	they	got	the	crust	so
crisp	and	the	chicken	so	tender,	they	didn’t	reveal	anything,	so	I	returned
home	and	started	to	experiment.	After	cooking	a	whole	lot	of	fried	chicken,
I	found	that	cracking	a	couple	of	eggs	into	the	buttermilk,	as	well	as	double-
dredging,	resulted	in	a	crust	that	held	up.	And	while	I’m	fairly	certain	the
folks	at	Gus’s	don’t	use	smoked	paprika,	I’m	now	addicted	to	brushing	this
sweet-and-smoky	spice	oil	all	over	the	chicken	before	serving	it,	so	I’m	not
sure	I’ll	ever	be	able	to	do	it	another	way.	Unless	Gus’s	finally	gives	up	their
recipe.

1.8kg	chicken,	cut	into	10	pieces,	or	1.3kg	bone-in,	skin-on
chicken	thighs

Salt
2	large	eggs
450ml	buttermilk
1	tablespoon	hot	sauce	(my	favourite	is	Valentina!)
385g	plain	flour
1.3	to	1.8	litres	grapeseed,	peanut,	or	canola	oil	for	frying,	plus

55ml	for	the	spicy	oil
2	tablespoons	cayenne	pepper
1	tablespoon	dark	brown	sugar
½	teaspoon	smoked	paprika
½	teaspoon	toasted	cumin,	finely	ground
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt

Prep	the	chicken	in	advance	of	cooking.	If	using	a	whole	chicken,	cut	it	into
10	pieces—	follow	the	instructions	on	the	previous	page	to	get	8	pieces	and
then	add	in	the	wings	for	a	total	of	10	pieces.	Save	the	carcass	for	your	next



batch	of	Chicken	Stock	(here).	If	using	thighs,	bone	them	out	(refer	to	here
for	instructions)	and	cut	them	in	half.	Season	generously	with	salt	on	all
sides.	I	prefer	to	season	chicken	the	night	before,	but	if	you	don’t	have	that
much	time,	try	to	give	the	salt	at	least	an	hour	to	diffuse	throughout	the
meat	before	cooking.	Refrigerate	the	chicken	if	seasoning	more	than	an
hour	in	advance;	otherwise,	leave	it	out	on	the	worktop.

Whisk	together	the	eggs,	buttermilk,	and	hot	sauce	in	a	large	bowl.	Set
aside.	Whisk	the	flour	and	2	generous	pinches	of	salt	together	in	another
bowl.	Set	aside.

Place	a	wide,	deep	pan	over	medium	heat.	Add	oil	to	a	depth	of	4cm,
and	heat	to	180°C.	Begin	dredging	the	chicken,	one	or	two	pieces	at	a	time.
First,	dredge	in	flour	and	shake	off	the	excess,	then	dip	into	buttermilk,
letting	the	excess	drip	back	into	the	bowl,	then	return	to	the	flour	mixture
and	dredge	a	final	time.	Shake	off	the	excess	and	place	on	a	baking	sheet.

Fry	chicken	in	two	or	three	rounds,	letting	the	temperature	of	the	oil
drop	to	and	hover	around	160°C	while	the	chicken	cooks.	Use	metal	tongs
to	turn	the	chicken	occasionally,	until	the	skin	is	a	deep	golden	brown,
about	12	minutes	(closer	to	16	minutes	for	large	pieces,	and	9	minutes	for
small	pieces).	If	you	are	unsure	that	the	meat	is	cooked	through,	poke
through	the	crust	with	a	paring	knife	and	peek	at	the	meat.	It	should	be
cooked	all	the	way	down	to	the	bone,	and	any	juice	the	meat	gives	off
should	run	clear.	If	the	meat	is	still	raw	or	the	juice	has	the	slightest	hint	of
pink,	return	the	chicken	to	the	oil	and	continue	cooking	until	it’s	done.

Let	cool	on	a	wire	rack	set	over	a	baking	sheet.
Combine	the	cayenne	pepper,	brown	sugar,	paprika,	cumin,	and	garlic

in	a	small	bowl,	and	add	the	55ml	oil.	Brush	the	chicken	with	the	spicy	oil
and	serve	immediately.
Variations
• For	even	more	tender	meat,	marinate	the	seasoned	chicken	in	the

buttermilk	overnight,	as	with	Buttermilk-Marinated	Roast	Chicken
(here).

• To	make	Classic	Fried	Chicken,	omit	the	hot	sauce	and	spicy	oil.	Add
½	teaspoon	cayenne	pepper	and	1	teaspoon	paprika	to	flour	and
prepare	as	above.

• To	make	Indian-Spiced	Fried	Chicken,	omit	the	hot	sauce	and	spicy
oil.	Season	the	chicken	in	advance	with	4	teaspoons	curry	powder,	2



teaspoons	ground	cumin,	and	½	teaspoon	cayenne	pepper	in	addition
to	salt.	Add	1	tablespoon	curry	powder	and	1	teaspoon	paprika	to	the
flour	mixture	and	prepare	as	above.	Make	a	glaze	by	heating	300g
mango	chutney	with	3	tablespoons	water,	¼	teaspoon	cayenne	pepper,
and	a	pinch	of	salt.	Brush	onto	the	cooked	chicken	and	serve
immediately.



Chicken	Pot	Pie Serves	6	to	8

I	didn’t	grow	up	eating	any	classic	American	comfort	foods.	I	think	that’s
precisely	why	I’ve	developed	an	obsession	with	pretty	much	all	of	them.
Especially	Chicken	Pot	Pie.	With	a	creamy	sauce,	tender	chicken,	and	flaky
pastry,	it’s	homey	and	sophisticated	all	at	once.	Early	on	in	my	cooking
career,	I	decided	I	wanted	to	master	all	the	nuances	of	Chicken	Pot	Pie.	This
recipe	is	the	result.
For	the	filling

1.8kg	chicken	or	1.3kg	bone-in,	skin-on	chicken	thighs
Salt
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
3	tablespoons	butter
2	medium	onions,	peeled	and	diced	into	1cm	pieces
2	large	carrots,	peeled	and	diced	into	1cm	pieces
2	large	celery	stalks,	diced	into	1cm	pieces
225g	fresh	chestnut,	button,	or	chanterelle	mushrooms,	trimmed

and	quartered
2	bay	leaves
4	sprigs	fresh	thyme
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
175ml	dry	white	wine	or	dry	sherry
125ml	cream
675ml	Chicken	Stock	(here)	or	water
65g	flour
150g	peas,	fresh	or	frozen
10g	finely	chopped	parsley	leaves

For	the	crust



1	recipe	All-Butter	Pie	Dough	(here),	but	chill	the	dough	in	a
single	piece,	or	½	recipe	Light	and	Flaky	Buttermilk	Biscuits
(here),	or	1	package	store-bought	puff	pastry

1	large	egg,	lightly	whisked
Prep	the	chicken	in	advance	of	cooking.	If	using	a	whole	chicken,	follow	the
instructions	here	to	quarter	it,	and	save	the	carcass	for	your	next	batch	of
Chicken	Stock	(here).	Season	generously	with	salt.	I	prefer	to	season
chicken	the	night	before,	but	if	you	don’t	have	that	much	time,	try	to	give
the	salt	at	least	an	hour	to	diffuse	throughout	the	meat	before	cooking.
Refrigerate	the	chicken	if	seasoning	more	than	an	hour	in	advance;
otherwise,	leave	it	out	on	the	worktop.

Set	a	large	cast	iron	casserole	or	similar	pot	over	medium-high	heat.
When	the	pan	is	hot,	add	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pot.
When	the	oil	shimmers,	place	half	of	the	chicken	pieces	in	the	pan,	skin	side
down,	and	brown	evenly	on	all	sides,	about	4	minutes	per	side.	Transfer	to	a
plate	and	repeat	with	the	remaining	chicken.

Carefully	discard	the	fat	and	return	the	pot	to	the	stove	over	medium
heat.	Melt	the	butter	and	add	the	onion,	carrots,	celery,	mushrooms,	bay
leaves,	and	thyme.	Season	lightly	with	salt	and	pepper.	Cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	the	vegetables	start	to	take	on	colour	and	soften,	about
12	minutes.	Pour	in	wine	or	sherry	and	deglaze	the	pan	using	a	wooden
spoon.

Nestle	the	browned	chicken	into	the	vegetables.	Add	the	cream	and
chicken	stock	or	water	and	increase	the	heat	to	high.	Cover	the	pot	and
bring	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a	simmer.	Remove	the	breasts,	if	using,	after
10	minutes	of	simmering,	but	cook	dark	meat	for	a	total	of	30	minutes.	Turn
off	the	heat,	then	transfer	cooked	chicken	to	a	plate	and	allow	the	sauce	to
cool.	Discard	the	bay	leaves	and	thyme.	After	the	sauce	sits	for	a	few
minutes	and	the	fat	rises	to	the	top,	use	a	ladle	or	wide	spoon	to	skim	it	into
a	liquid	measuring	cup	or	small	bowl.

In	a	separate	small	bowl,	use	a	fork	to	combine	125ml	of	the	skimmed
fat	with	the	flour	into	a	thick	paste.	When	all	the	flour	has	been	absorbed,
stir	in	a	ladleful	of	cooking	liquid	and	combine.	Return	this	thick	liquid	to	the
pot	and	bring	the	entire	sauce	back	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a	simmer	and
cook	until	the	sauce	no	longer	tastes	of	raw	flour,	about	5	minutes.	Taste
and	adjust	seasoning	with	salt	and	freshly	ground	black	pepper,	then
remove	from	heat.



Preheat	the	oven	to	200°C.	Set	the	oven	rack	to	a	centre-high	position.

When	the	chicken	is	cool	enough	to	handle,	shred	the	meat	and	chop
the	skin	finely.	Save	the	bones	for	stock.	Add	the	shredded	chicken	and
skin,	peas,	and	parsley	to	the	pot.	Stir	to	combine,	taste,	and	adjust
seasoning	as	needed.	Remove	from	the	heat.

If	using	pie	dough,	roll	out	into	a	38	by	28cm	rectangle,	about	3mm
thick,	and	cut	at	least	4	2.5cm	steam	holes	in	the	dough.	If	using	biscuits,	cut
out	8	biscuits.	If	using	puff	pastry,	gently	defrost	and	unroll	the	dough,	then
cut	at	least	4	2.5cm	steam	vents	in	the	dough.

Pour	the	filling	into	a	23	by	33cm	glass	or	ceramic	pan	or	shallow	baking
dish	of	similar	size.	Lay	the	prepared	dough	or	puff	pastry	over	the	filling
and	trim	the	dough	to	leave	a	1cm	border	around	the	lip	of	the	pan.	Tuck
the	dough	back	under	itself	and	seal.	If	the	dough	won’t	stick	to	the	pan	on
its	own,	use	a	little	bit	of	the	egg	wash	to	encourage	it	to	stick.	If	using
biscuits,	gently	nestle	them	into	the	filling	so	that	they’re	exposed	about
three-quarters	of	the	way.	Brush	dough,	puff	pastry,	or	biscuits	thoroughly
and	generously	with	egg	wash.

Place	on	a	baking	sheet	and	bake	for	30	to	35	minutes,	until	the	dough
or	pastry	is	golden	brown	and	the	filling	is	bubbly.	Serve	hot.
Variations
• If	you	have	a	surplus	of	roasted	or	poached	poultry	on	your	hands,	or

just	want	to	pick	up	a	rotisserie	chicken	on	the	way	home	after	work,
cook	the	vegetables	on	their	own.	Add	about	700g	shredded,	cooked
chicken	or	turkey	to	the	mixture	and	use	butter	to	make	the	flour	paste.

• For	Personal	Pot	Pies,	use	the	same	recipe	to	make	6	individual	pot
pies	in	450g	ovenproof	bowls	or	ramekins.	Bake	as	directed	above.



Conveyor	Belt	Chicken 2	thighs	per	serving

Though	I’ve	been	cooking	chicken	this	way	for	fifteen	years,	Conveyor	Belt
Chicken	got	its	name	one	recent	evening	after	I	went	surfing	with	my	friend
Tiffany.	We	were	consumed	with	the	unique	brand	of	hunger	that	hits	you
only	upon	emerging	from	the	ocean.	She	thought	she	had	chicken	thighs	in
the	fridge,	but	I	knew	we	didn’t	have	time	to	roast	or	braise	them—	we’d
gnaw	our	arms	off	before	that	could	happen.	We	needed	dinner,	and	quick.

As	she	drove	us	home,	I	told	her	we’d	bone	out	the	thighs	and	season
them	with	salt.	Then	we’d	cook	them	in	a	little	olive	oil,	in	a	preheated	cast
iron	pan	over	medium-low	heat,	skin	side	down,	with	another	cast	iron	pan
(or	foil-wrapped	can	of	tomatoes)	weighing	them	down.	Combining
moderate	heat	with	the	weight	encourages	the	fat	to	render,	leaving	behind
crisp	skin	and	tender	meat.	It’s	dark	meat	that	cooks	up	as	quickly	and	easily
as	white	meat.	After	ten	minutes	or	so,	we’d	flip	the	chicken,	remove	the
weight,	and	let	the	meat	cook	through	for	two	minutes	more.	Dinner	would
be	ready	in	twelve	minutes	flat.

When	we	got	home,	we	realised	she	had	chicken	breasts,	not	thighs,	so
we	grilled	them	and	made	a	salad	that	night.	By	the	time	we	were	eating
dinner	and	my	blood	sugar	levels	had	returned	to	normal,	I’d	completely
forgotten	about	the	thighs.

Tiffany	didn’t.	The	next	night,	she	sent	me	a	photo:	she’d	gone	to	the
store,	bought	thighs,	made	the	chicken	according	to	the	vague	description
I’d	given	in	our	hunger-addled	state.	With	their	brown,	crisp	skins	and
tender	meat,	they	looked	perfect,	and	apparently,	they	tasted	perfect,	too:
after	taking	a	bite,	Tiffany’s	husband,	Thomas,	had	declared	he	wanted	to
build	a	conveyor	belt	of	this	chicken	straight	to	his	mouth.

Thomas	is	one	of	my	favourite	people,	so	I	do	my	best	to	make	his
dreams	come	true.	When	we	eat	together,	I	make	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken
every	time,	with	cumin	and	hot	pepper	for	chicken	tacos,	or	with	saffron
and	yoghurt	for	Persian-ish	Rice	(here),	or	just	seasoned	simply	with	salt
and	pepper,	served	with	Herb	Salsa	(here)	and	whatever	vegetables	we	can
get	our	hands	on	to	roast.	I’m	not	so	handy,	so	I’ll	leave	the	construction	of
the	conveyor	belt	to	Thomas.






Chicken	Confit serves	4

Take	a	page	out	of	the	French	farmwife’s	handbook	and	keep	confit	on
hand	to	save	you	from	dinnertime	desperation.	Easy	enough	to	make	while
you	watch	a	movie	or	do	the	Sunday	crossword,	there’s	no	reason	not	to	try
this	recipe.	I	make	a	big	batch	once	or	twice	each	winter.	I	just	stick	it	in	the
fridge,	where	it	quickly	makes	its	way	to	the	back	of	the	bottom	shelf,	a	spot
I	rarely	think	to	look.	But	I	inevitably	find	it	just	when	I	need	it	most—when
an	unexpected	friend	shows	up	for	dinner,	or	I	just	can’t	muster	the	energy
to	cook.	And,	every	time,	I	give	silent	thanks	to	that	thoughtful,	industrious
earlier	version	of	myself.	You	will,	too.

If	you	can’t	find	or	make	duck	fat,	pure	olive	oil	will	work	just	fine.	But	if
you	do	make	the	effort	to	find	or	render	your	own	duck	fat,	you’ll	be
rewarded	in	flavour.	(There	aren’t	many	other	uses	for	duck	fat	in	the
kitchen,	but	for	roasting	or	frying	potatoes,	the	excess	fat	from	confit	is	an
unforgettable	one.)	Serve	the	chicken	and	potatoes	with	a	pile	of	rocket	or
chicories	dressed	in	a	bright,	Honey-Mustard	Vinaigrette	(here)	and
spoonfuls	of	Herb	Salsa	(here)	for	a	welcome	acidic	contrast.

4	chicken	legs,	with	thighs	attached
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
4	sprigs	fresh	thyme
4	cloves
2	bay	leaves
3	garlic	cloves,	halved
About	900ml	duck	or	chicken	fat	or	olive	oil

Prep	the	chicken	a	day	in	advance.	Use	a	sharp	knife	to	slit	the	skin	at	the
base	around	each	drumstick,	just	above	the	ankle	joint.	Cut	all	the	way
around,	down	to	the	bone,	making	sure	to	sever	the	tendons.	Season	with
salt	and	pepper.	Layer	in	a	dish	with	the	thyme,	cloves,	bay	leaves,	and
garlic.	Cover	and	refrigerate	overnight.

To	prepare,	remove	the	aromatics	and	lay	the	legs	into	a	large	cast	iron



casserole	or	pot	in	a	single	layer.	If	using	duck	or	chicken	fat,	warm	gently	in
a	medium	saucepan	just	until	it	liquefies.	Pour	enough	fat	into	the	casserole
or	pot	to	submerge	the	meat,	and	then	heat	over	a	medium	flame	until	the
first	bubbles	emerge	from	the	chicken.	Reduce	the	heat	so	that	the	fat
never	surpasses	the	slightest	simmer.	Cook	until	the	meat	is	tender	at	the
bone,	about	2	hours.

(Alternatively,	cook	the	whole	thing	in	the	oven,	at	about	95°C.	Use	the
same	cues	to	guide	you	as	in	stovetop	simmering.)

When	the	meat	is	cooked,	turn	off	the	heat	and	let	it	cool	in	the	fat	for	a
little	while.	Using	metal	tongs,	carefully	remove	the	chicken	from	the	fat.
Grab	the	bone	at	the	ankle	end	to	avoid	tearing	the	skin.

Let	the	meat	and	fat	cool,	then	place	the	chicken	into	a	glass	or	ceramic
dish,	and	strain	the	fat	over	it,	ensuring	it’s	completely	submerged.	Cover
with	a	lid.	Store	in	the	fridge	for	up	to	6	months.

To	serve,	remove	the	chicken	from	the	fat,	scraping	off	excess.	Heat	a
cast	iron	pan	over	a	medium	flame,	and	place	chicken,	skin-side	down,	into
the	pan.	As	with	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	use	the	weight	of	a	second,	foil-
wrapped	cast	iron	pan	to	help	render	the	fat	and	crisp	the	skin.	Place	the
pan	on	top	of	the	chicken	and	heat	gently	to	crisp	the	skin	at	the	same	rate
the	meat	reheats.	As	you	start	to	hear	crackles,	rather	than	sizzles,	pay
closer	attention	to	the	meat	so	it	doesn’t	burn.	Once	the	skin	is	browned,
flip	the	chicken	and	continue	reheating	the	leg	on	the	second	side	without	a
weight.	The	whole	process	will	take	about	15	minutes.

Serve	immediately.
Variations
• For	Duck	Confit,	cook	2½	to	3	hours,	until	the	meat	is	tender	and

falling	off	the	bone.
• For	Turkey	Confit,	increase	duck	fat	to	2	litres	and	cook	3	to	3½	hours,

until	the	meat	is	tender	and	falling	off	the	bone.
• For	Pork	Confit,	season	225g	pieces	of	pork	shoulder	as	above	and

replace	the	duck	fat	with	lard	or	olive	oil.



Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken Makes	6	breasts	and	6	tenders

I	grew	up	eating	pan-fried	chicken	schnitzel	at	least	once	a	week,	but
cooking	a	hundred	golden-brown,	finger-lickin’	chicken	breasts	one	night
downstairs	at	Chez	Panisse	really	solidified	my	love	for	this	classic	dish.
Cooking	something	a	hundred	times	in	a	single	night	with	total	focus	will
increase	your	understanding	of	it	a	thousandfold.	The	most	important	thing
I	learned	that	night?	Pan-fried	chicken	is	all	about	the	clarified	butter	in
which	it’s	cooked,	which	lends	a	well-rounded	richness	that	you	just	can’t
get	from	olive	oil.	Clarifying	butter	is	simple:	just	melt	unsalted	butter	gently
over	sustained	low	heat.	The	whey	solids	will	rise	to	the	top	of	the	clear,
yellow	fat,	and	the	milk	proteins	will	fall	to	the	bottom.	Skim	the	solids	off
the	top	with	a	fine	strainer	without	agitating	the	proteins	at	the	bottom.
Carefully	strain	the	remaining	butter	through	cheesecloth	or	a	tea	strainer.

Another	little	tip:	if	you	don’t	have	time	to	make	your	own	bread
crumbs,	use	panko,	the	Japanese-style	bread	crumbs,	and	pulse	them	a	few
times	in	a	food	processor	to	get	a	finer	texture.

6	boneless,	skinless	chicken	breasts
100g	fine	white	bread	crumbs,	preferably	homemade,	or	panko
20g	Parmesan,	finely	grated
130g,	seasoned	with	a	large	pinch	of	salt	and	a	pinch	of	cayenne
3	large	eggs,	beaten	with	a	pinch	of	salt
400ml	clarified	butter,	made	from	450g	butter	(see	here	for

complete	method)
Line	one	baking	sheet	with	parchment	paper,	and	another	with	paper
towels.

If	the	tenders	are	still	attached	to	the	breasts,	remove	them.	Use	a
sharp	knife	to	remove	the	bit	of	silver	skin,	or	connective	tissue,	at	the	top
of	the	underside	of	each	breast.

Place	one	chicken	breast	with	the	underside	facing	up	on	the	cutting
board.	Lightly	rub	one	side	of	a	plastic	bag	with	olive	oil	and	place	it,	oil	side
down,	on	top	of	the	breast.	Pound	the	underside	of	the	breast	with	a
kitchen	mallet	(or,	lacking	that,	use	an	empty	glass	jar)	until	it’s	evenly



about	1cm	thick.	Repeat	with	the	remaining	breasts.
Season	the	breasts	and	tenders	lightly	with	salt,	and	then	set	up	a

breading	station.	Set	up	three	large,	shallow	bowls	or	roasting	dishes,	one
each	with	the	seasoned	flour,	the	beaten	eggs,	and	the	bread	crumbs.	Mix
the	Parmesan	into	the	bread	crumbs.

Working	like	Henry	Ford,	coat	all	the	breasts	and	tenders	first	in	flour,
then	shake	off	the	excess.	Then	dip	and	coat	them	all	in	egg,	and	shake	off
the	excess.	Finally,	coat	the	pieces	in	bread	crumbs	and	set	them	on	the
parchment-lined	baking	sheet.

Set	a	25	or	30cm	cast	iron	pan	(or	other	frying	pan)	over	medium-high
heat	and	add	enough	clarified	butter	to	come	5mm	up	the	sides	of	the	pan.
When	the	fat	shimmers,	add	a	few	bread	crumbs	to	test	the	temperature	of
the	fat.	As	soon	as	they	sizzle	readily,	place	as	many	chicken	breasts	as	you
can	fit	into	the	pan	in	a	single	layer.	There	should	be	space	between	each
breast,	and	the	fat	should	come	at	least	halfway	up	the	sides	of	the	chicken
to	ensure	that	the	breading	cooks	evenly.

Cook	the	breasts	over	medium-high	heat	until	golden	brown,	3	to	4
minutes,	then	rotate	and	flip.	Cook	until	the	second	side	is	evenly	brown,
remove	from	the	pan,	and	drain	on	the	sheet	lined	with	paper	towels.	(If
you’re	unsure	that	the	meat	is	cooked	through,	poke	through	the	breading
with	a	paring	knife	and	check.	Return	to	the	pan	and	cook	longer	if	you	see
any	pink	flesh.)	Add	more	clarified	butter	to	the	pan	as	necessary	and	cook
the	remaining	breasts	and	tenders	in	the	same	way.	Sprinkle	lightly	with	salt,
and	serve	immediately.
Variations
• For	Pork	Schnitzel,	thinly	pound	pork	loin	cutlets,	bread	them,	and

continue	as	above.	Reduce	cooking	time	to	2	to	3	minutes	per	side	to
prevent	overcooking.

• For	Breaded	Fish	or	Prawns,	don’t	salt	either	in	advance.	Instead,
season	immediately	before	breading	and	omit	the	cheese	from	the
bread	crumbs.	Use	the	same	breading	method	for	prawns	or	any	white
flaky	fish,	including	halibut,	cod,	or	flounder.	Increase	heat	and	pan-fry
prawns	for	1	to	2	minutes	per	side	and	fish	for	2	to	3	minutes	per	side	to
avoid	overcooking.	Or	you	can	deep-fry	as	described	here.	Serve	with
an	acidic	slaw	or	salad	and	Tartar	Sauce	(here).

• For	a	Fritto	Misto,	omit	the	cheese	and	use	the	same	breading	method
for	olives	or	slices	of	Meyer	lemon,	blanched	fennel,	blanched



artichokes,	mushrooms,	aubergines,	or	courgettes.	Pan-fry	as	above,	or
deep-fry	as	described	here.



Sage-	and	Honey-Smoked	Chicken Serves	4

As	a	restaurant	cook,	I	managed	to	avoid	learning	how	to	smoke	meat.
Somehow,	I	was	never	in	the	kitchen	on	the	days	we	smoked	fish	or	duck	at
Chez	Panisse.	At	Eccolo,	we	asked	a	nearby	smokehouse	to	smoke	our
sausages	and	meats	for	us.	And	since	I	never	learned	the	skill,	it	remained	a
mystery.	But	when	I	started	cooking	with	Michael	Pollan,	I	was	moved	by	his
fascination	with	the	technique.	For	a	short,	flavourful	period	of	time,	every
time	I	had	dinner	with	Michael	and	his	family,	something	at	the	table	was
smoked.	Michael	still	doesn’t	know	it,	but	I	learned	to	smoke	by	watching
him.	While	he	prefers	smoking	pork,	I’ve	grown	to	love	using	the	technique
to	cook	chicken.	This	recipe	is	all	about	the	way	the	subtle	aromas	of	sage
and	garlic	mingle	with	the	delicate	applewood	smoke	and	the	sweetness	of
the	honey	glaze.

370g	honey
1	bunch	sage
1	head	garlic,	halved	crosswise
120g	kosher	salt	or	60g	fine	sea	salt
1	tablespoon	black	peppercorns
1.8kg	chicken
2–3	handfuls	applewood	chips

The	day	before	you	want	to	cook	the	chicken,	make	the	brine.	In	a	large	pot,
bring	1.2	litres	of	water	to	a	boil	with	275g	honey,	the	sage,	garlic,	salt,	and
peppercorns.	Add	1.2	litres	of	cold	water.	Allow	the	brine	to	cool	to	room
temperature.	Submerge	the	chicken	in	the	brine,	breast	side	down,	and
refrigerate	overnight.

To	cook	the	chicken,	remove	it	from	the	brine	and	pat	dry.	Strain	the
brine	through	a	sieve	and	stuff	the	cavity	of	the	chicken	with	the	brined
garlic	and	sage.	Fold	the	wingtips	up	and	over	the	back	of	the	bird.	Tie	the
chicken	legs	together.	Allow	the	bird	to	come	up	to	room	temperature.

Soak	the	wood	chips	in	water	for	1	hour,	then	drain.	Prepare	for	grilling
over	indirect	heat.	(To	learn	more	about	cooking	over	indirect	heat,	see
here.)



To	smoke	over	a	charcoal	grill,	light	the	charcoal	in	a	chimney	starter.
When	the	coals	glow	red	and	are	coated	with	grey	ash,	carefully	dump	them
in	two	piles	on	opposite	sides	of	the	grill.	Place	a	disposable	aluminium	pan
in	the	centre	of	the	grill.	Toss	about	50g	wood	chips	on	each	pile	of	coals	to
create	smoke.	Place	the	grate	on	the	grill	and	set	the	chicken,	breast	side	up,
over	the	drip	pan.

Cover	the	grill	with	the	air	vents	positioned	over	the	meat.	Open	the
vents	halfway.	Use	a	digital	thermometer	to	help	you	maintain	a
temperature	of	95°	to	110°C,	replenishing	charcoal	and	wood	as	needed.
When	an	instant-read	thermometer	inserted	into	the	centre	of	the	leg
registers	55°C,	brush	the	remaining	95g	of	honey	all	over	the	skin.	Replace
the	lid	of	the	grill	and	continue	cooking	until	the	thermometer	registers
70°C	when	inserted	into	the	centre	of	the	leg,	about	35	minutes	more.
Remove	the	chicken	from	the	grill	and	allow	to	rest	10	minutes	before
carving.

To	crisp	the	skin	before	serving,	stoke	the	coals	until	they	are	very	hot,
or	light	burners	on	one	side	of	grill	to	very	high.	Return	the	chicken	to	the
indirect	heat	zone	and	cover	the	grill.	Cook	for	5	to	10	minutes	until	crisp.

To	smoke	over	a	gas	grill,	fill	the	smoker	box	with	wood	chips	and	light
the	burner	closest	to	it	on	high	until	you	see	smoke.	If	your	grill	doesn’t	have
a	smoker	box,	place	the	chips	in	heavy-duty	foil	and	fold	into	a	pouch.	Poke
a	few	holes	into	the	pouch	and	place	under	the	grate	over	one	of	the
burners.	Heat	over	high	heat	until	you	see	smoke.	Once	the	chips	are
smoking,	reduce	the	flame,	lower	the	cover,	and	preheat	the	grill	to	120°C.
Maintain	this	temperature	throughout	cooking.

Place	the	chicken,	breast	side	up,	over	unlit	burners—this	is	the	indirect
heat	zone—	and	cook	2	to	2½	hours.	When	an	instant-read	thermometer
inserted	into	the	centre	of	the	leg	registers	55°C,	brush	the	remaining	95g	of
honey	all	over	the	skin.	Replace	the	lid	of	the	grill	and	continue	cooking	until
the	thermometer	registers	70°C	when	inserted	into	the	centre	of	the	leg,
about	35	minutes	more.	Remove	the	chicken	from	the	grill	and	allow	to	rest
10	minutes	before	carving.

To	crisp	the	skin	before	serving,	stoke	the	coals	until	they	are	very	hot,
or	light	burners	on	one	side	of	grill	to	very	high.	Return	the	chicken	to	the
indirect	heat	zone	and	cover	the	grill.	Cook	for	5	to	10	minutes	until	crisp.

To	serve,	cut	the	chicken	into	quarters—it	pairs	really	well	with	Fried
Sage	Salsa	Verde	(here)—or	shred	the	meat	to	make	pulled	chicken	for



sandwiches.



Chicken	and	Garlic	Soup Makes	3.4	litres	(serves	6	to	8)

This	soup	is	so	satisfying	that	I	had	to	include	it	with	the	chicken—and	not
the	soup—recipes.	Made	with	a	whole	chicken,	it	yields	a	satisfying	dinner
for	four	(or	two,	with	leftovers!).	Cooking	the	chicken	in	homemade	chicken
stock	gives	this	soup	an	extra	layer	of	flavour.	If	you	don’t	have	any	stock	on
hand,	get	some	from	the	butcher	instead	of	using	canned	or	boxed	stock—
it’ll	make	all	the	difference!

1.8kg	chicken,	quartered;	or	4	large	chicken	legs	and	thighs
Salt
Freshly	ground	pepper
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
2	medium	onions,	diced
3	large	carrots,	peeled	and	diced
3	large	celery	stalks,	diced
2	bay	leaves
2.25	litres	Chicken	Stock	(here)
20	garlic	cloves,	thinly	sliced
Optional:	Parmesan	rind

Prep	the	chicken	in	advance	of	cooking.	If	using	a	whole	bird,	follow	the
instructions	here	to	quarter	it,	and	save	the	carcass	for	your	next	batch	of
Chicken	Stock	(here).	Season	generously	with	salt	and	freshly	ground	black
pepper.	I	prefer	to	season	chicken	the	night	before,	but	if	you	don’t	have
that	much	time,	try	to	give	the	salt	at	least	an	hour	to	diffuse	throughout
the	meat	before	cooking.	Refrigerate	the	chicken	if	seasoning	more	than	an
hour	in	advance;	otherwise,	leave	it	out	on	the	worktop.

Preheat	a	9.5	litre	cast	iron	casserole	or	similar	pot	over	high	heat.	Add
enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pot.	When	the	oil	shimmers,	add
half	the	chicken	pieces	and	brown	thoroughly,	about	4	minutes	per	side.
Remove	and	set	aside.	Repeat	with	the	remaining	chicken.

Carefully	tip	most	of	the	fat	out	of	the	pan.	Return	the	pan	to	the	stove



and	reduce	the	heat	to	medium-low.	Add	the	onions,	carrots,	celery,	and
bay	leaves	and	cook	until	soft	and	golden	brown,	about	12	minutes.	Return
the	chicken	to	the	pot	and	add	2.25	litres	stock	or	water,	salt,	pepper,	and
Parmesan	rind,	if	using.	Bring	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a	simmer.

Heat	a	small	frying	pan	over	medium	heat	and	add	enough	olive	oil	to
coat	the	bottom,	then	add	the	garlic.	Gently	sizzle	the	garlic	for	about	20
seconds,	until	it	gives	off	an	aroma,	but	don’t	let	it	take	on	any	colour.	Add	it
to	the	soup	and	continue	to	simmer.

If	using	breasts,	remove	them	from	the	pot	after	12	minutes	and
continue	to	simmer	legs	and	thighs	until	they	are	tender,	about	50	minutes
total.	Turn	off	the	heat	and	skim	the	fat	from	the	surface	of	the	broth.
Remove	all	the	chicken	from	the	soup.	When	the	chicken	is	cool	enough	to
handle,	remove	the	meat	from	the	bone	and	shred.	Discard	the	skin	if	you
prefer	to	(though	I	love	to	chop	it	finely	and	use	it,	too),	and	return	the
meat	to	the	broth.	Taste	the	soup	and	adjust	the	salt	as	needed.	Serve	hot.

Refrigerate,	covered,	for	up	to	5	days,	or	freeze	for	up	to	2	months.
Variations
• For	a	delicate	Spring	Garlic	Soup,	omit	garlic	cloves.	Instead,	stew	6

stalks	thinly	sliced	green	garlic	with	the	onion,	carrot,	celery,	and	bay
leaves.

• To	add	some	heartiness,	add	cooked	rice,	pasta,	rice	noodles,	beans,
barley,	or	farro	to	the	soup.

• To	turn	the	soup	into	a	main	course,	ladle	it	into	bowls	over	coarsely
chopped	baby	spinach,	and	then	add	a	poached	egg	to	each	bowl
before	serving.

• To	make	Pho	Gà	(Vietnamese	chicken	soup),	omit	the	onion,	carrot,
celery,	bay	leaves,	black	pepper,	and	garlic.	Instead,	char	2	peeled
onions	and	a	10cm	piece	of	ginger	directly	over	a	gas	burner	for	about	5
minutes	or	under	the	grill	(the	charred	skins	are	full	of	flavour!)	and	add
to	the	broth	with	55ml	fish	sauce,	1	star	anise,	and	2	tablespoons	brown
sugar.	Cook	the	chicken	in	this	broth	as	directed	above,	for	50	minutes.
Discard	the	onion	and	ginger	and	continue	to	prepare	soup	as	above,
shredding	the	chicken	and	adding	it	back	to	the	pot.	Pour	over	rice
noodles,	and	top	with	fresh	basil	and	bean	sprouts.



Adas	Polo	o	Morgh	Chicken	with	Lentil
Rice Serves	6	generously

Growing	up,	whenever	Maman	asked	me	what	I	wanted	for	dinner,	I	asked
for	adas	polo.	Though	it	might	seem	virtuous	for	a	small	child	to	request	rice
with	lentils,	I	was	really	after	the	raisins	and	dates	that	Maman	would	sauté
in	butter	right	before	serving	the	dish.	I	always	looked	forward	to	their
sweetness,	combined	with	the	earthy	flavour	of	the	lentils.	When	served
with	some	spiced	chicken	and	topped	with	a	big	dollop	of	Persian	Herb
and	Cucumber	Yoghurt	(here),	the	dish	was	peerless	in	my	opinion.	I’ve
adapted	and	simplified	the	recipe	a	bit	to	turn	it	into	a	one-pot	meal,	a
Persian	version	of	Chicken	with	Rice,	that	universal	comfort	food.

1.8kg	chicken;	or	8	bone-in,	skin-on	thighs
Salt
1	teaspoon	plus	1	tablespoon	ground	cumin
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
3	tablespoons	unsalted	butter
2	medium	onions,	thinly	sliced
2	bay	leaves
Small	pinch	saffron	threads
500g	basmati	rice,	unrinsed
1	cup	black	or	golden	raisins
6	Medjool	dates,	pitted	and	quartered
1	litre	Chicken	Stock	(here)	or	water
200g	cooked,	drained	brown	or	green	lentils

Prep	the	chicken	in	advance	of	cooking.	If	using	a	whole	bird,	follow	the
instructions	here	to	quarter	it,	and	save	the	carcass	for	your	next	batch	of
Chicken	Stock	(here).	Season	generously	with	salt	and	1	teaspoon	cumin	on
all	sides.	I	prefer	to	season	chicken	the	night	before,	but	if	you	don’t	have
that	much	time,	try	to	give	the	salt	at	least	an	hour	to	diffuse	throughout
the	meat	before	cooking.	Refrigerate	the	chicken	if	seasoning	more	than	an



hour	in	advance;	otherwise,	leave	it	out	on	the	worktop.
Wrap	the	lid	of	a	large	cast	iron	casserole	or	similar	pot	with	a	tea	towel

secured	to	the	handle	with	a	rubber	band.	This	will	absorb	steam	and
prevent	it	from	condensing	and	dripping	back	onto	the	chicken,	which
would	make	the	skin	soggy.

Set	the	casserole	over	medium-high	heat,	and	add	olive	oil	to	coat	the
bottom	of	the	pan.	Brown	the	chicken	in	two	batches,	so	as	not	to	crowd
the	pan.	Begin	with	the	skin	side	down,	then	turn	and	rotate	the	chicken
around	the	pan	to	get	even	browning	on	both	sides,	about	4	minutes	per
side.	Remove	from	pan	and	set	aside.	Carefully	discard	the	fat.

Return	the	pan	to	medium-heat	and	melt	the	butter.	Add	the	onions,
cumin,	bay	leaves,	saffron,	and	a	pinch	of	salt	and	cook,	stirring,	until	brown
and	tender,	about	25	minutes.

Increase	the	heat	to	medium-high	and	add	the	rice	to	the	pan	and
toast,	stirring,	until	it	turns	a	light	golden	colour.	Add	the	raisins	and	dates
and	let	them	fry	for	a	minute	until	they	start	to	plump.

Pour	in	the	stock	and	lentils,	increase	the	heat	to	high,	and	bring	to	a
boil.	Season	generously	with	salt	and	taste.	In	order	to	get	the	rice	properly
seasoned,	make	the	liquid	salty	enough	to	make	you	slightly	uncomfortable
—it	should	be	saltier	than	the	saltiest	soup	you’ve	ever	tasted.	Reduce	the
heat	and	nestle	in	the	chicken,	skin	side	up.	Cover	the	pan	and	cook	for	40
minutes	over	low	heat.

After	40	minutes,	turn	off	the	heat	and	let	the	pan	sit,	covered,	for	10
minutes	to	continue	steaming.	Remove	lid	and	fluff	rice	with	a	fork.	Serve
immediately	with	Persian	Herb	and	Cucumber	Yoghurt	(here).



Chicken	with	Vinegar Serves	4	to	6

I	cooked	Poulet	au	Vinaigre,	or	Chicken	with	Vinegar,	at	the	first	dinner	party
I	held	after	beginning	my	internship	at	Chez	Panisse.	I	remember	everyone
—myself	included—initially	being	confounded	by	the	idea	of	cooking
chicken	with	vinegar.	We	thought	of	heating	the	stuff	for	making	pickles—
and	nearly	being	asphyxiated	by	the	sharp	fumes	produced	by	hot	vinegar.
It	hardly	seemed	appetising!	But	Chris	Lee,	my	mentor,	had	suggested	I
practise	cooking	one	of	the	classics,	and	being	the	ever-dutiful	student,	I	set
out	to	make	it,	and	followed	his	instructions,	word	for	word.	As	my	friends
sat	down	in	my	no-frills	college	apartment	to	a	dinner	of	poulet	au	vinaigre
and	steamed	white	rice,	we	were	rewarded	for	my	diligence.	The	vinegar
had	tamed	as	it	cooked,	and	was	beautifully	balanced	by	the	richness	of	the
crème	fraîche	and	butter	in	the	dish.	It	was	a	revelation,	and	it	heightened
my	appreciation	for	what	acid	can	do	for	a	rich	dish.

1.8kg	chicken
Salt
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
65g	plain	flour
Extra-virgin	olive	oil
3	tablespoons	unsalted	butter
2	medium	onions,	thinly	sliced
175ml	dry	white	wine
6	tablespoons	white	wine	vinegar
2	tablespoons	tarragon	leaves,	finely	chopped
125ml	double	cream	or	crème	fraîche	(here)

Prep	the	chicken	in	advance	of	cooking.	Follow	the	instructions	here	to	cut
the	bird	into	8	pieces,	and	save	the	carcass	for	your	next	batch	of	Chicken
Stock	(here).	Season	generously	with	salt	and	freshly	ground	black	pepper.	I
prefer	to	season	chicken	the	night	before,	but	if	you	don’t	have	that	much
time,	try	to	give	the	salt	at	least	an	hour	to	diffuse	throughout	the	meat
before	cooking.	Refrigerate	the	chicken	if	seasoning	more	than	an	hour	in



advance;	otherwise,	leave	it	out	on	the	worktop.
Place	the	flour	in	a	shallow	bowl	or	pie	plate	and	season	with	a	generous

pinch	of	salt.	Dredge	the	chicken	pieces	in	flour,	shake	off	the	excess,	and
lay	in	a	single	layer	on	a	wire	rack	or	parchment-lined	baking	sheet.

Place	a	large	frying	pan	or	cast	iron	casserole	over	medium-high	heat
and	add	just	enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	pan.	Brown	the	chicken	in	two
batches,	so	as	not	to	crowd	the	pan.	Begin	with	the	skin	side	down,	then
turn	and	rotate	the	chicken	around	the	pan	to	get	even	browning	on	both
sides,	about	4	minutes	per	side.	Place	the	browned	chicken	on	a	baking
sheet,	then	carefully	discard	the	fat	and	wipe	out	the	pan.

Return	the	pan	to	medium	heat	and	melt	the	butter.	Add	the	onions,
season	with	salt,	and	stir.	Cook	the	onions,	stirring	occasionally,	until	they
are	tender	and	brown,	about	25	minutes.

Increase	the	flame	to	high,	add	the	wine	and	vinegar,	and	scrape	the
pan	with	a	wooden	spoon	to	deglaze.	Add	half	of	the	tarragon	and	stir.
Return	the	chicken,	skin	side	up,	to	the	pan,	and	lower	the	heat	to	a	simmer.
Set	a	lid	ajar	on	the	pan	and	continue	to	simmer.	Remove	the	breasts	when
they	are	cooked,	after	about	12	minutes,	but	let	the	dark	meat	continue	to
cook	until	it’s	tender	at	the	bone,	35	to	40	minutes	total.

Transfer	the	chicken	to	a	platter,	increase	the	heat,	and	add	the	cream
or	crème	fraîche.	Let	the	sauce	come	to	a	simmer	and	thicken.	Taste	and
adjust	the	seasoning	with	salt,	pepper,	and	a	little	more	vinegar	if	needed	to
perk	up	the	sauce.	Add	remaining	tarragon	and	spoon	over	the	chicken	to
serve.



Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken Serves	4

David	Tanis	was	the	chef	the	first	night	I	helped	out	in	the	kitchen	at	Chez
Panisse.	When	I	feared	that	my	knife	skills	were	inadequate,	he	had	me	dice
cucumbers	into	minuscule	pieces	for	hours.	It	showed	me	that	with	enough
practice,	I	could	learn	to	do	anything	in	the	kitchen.	A	few	years	later,	David
left	Chez	Panisse	and	now	he	writes	one	of	my	favourite	columns,	“City
Kitchen”	for	The	New	York	Times	Food	section.	I	love	the	column	because
every	week	he	focuses	on	a	single	simple	dish,	to	which	he	lends	his	elegant
style.

One	of	my	favourite	recipes	from	“City	Kitchen”	described	spicy
lacquered	chicken	wings	with	Chinese	five-spice.	The	recipe	David	shares	is
so	simple	and	tasty	that	I’ve	made	it	dozens	of	times	over	the	years,
adapting	it	to	different	cuts	of	meat	and	fish.	I’ve	found	it	works	especially
well	with	thighs	served	over	Steamed	Jasmine	Rice	(here)	with
Vietnamese	Cucumber	Salad	(here);	the	leftovers	make	for	a	great	rice
bowl	at	lunch.

1.8kg	chicken	or	8	bone-in,	skin-on	chicken	thighs
Salt
55ml	soy	sauce
55g	dark	brown	sugar
55ml	mirin	(rice	wine)
1	teaspoon	toasted	sesame	oil
1	tablespoon	finely	grated	ginger
4	garlic	cloves,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
½	teaspoon	Chinese	five-spice	powder
¼	teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
10g	coarsely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems
4	spring	onions,	green	and	white	parts	slivered

Prep	the	chicken	the	day	before	you	want	to	cook.	If	using	a	whole	chicken,
follow	the	instructions	here	to	cut	the	bird	into	8	pieces,	and	save	the



carcass	for	your	next	batch	of	Chicken	Stock	(here).	Season	the	chicken
lightly	with	salt	and	let	it	sit	for	30	minutes.	Keep	in	mind	that	the	marinade
consists	mostly	of	soy	sauce,	which	is	salty,	so	use	only	about	half	as	much
salt	as	you	otherwise	would.

In	the	meantime,	whisk	together	the	soy	sauce,	brown	sugar,	mirin,
sesame	oil,	ginger,	garlic,	five-spice,	and	cayenne.	Place	the	chicken	in	a
resealable	plastic	bag	and	pour	in	the	marinade.	Seal	the	bag	and	squish	the
marinade	around	so	all	the	chicken	is	evenly	coated.	Refrigerate	overnight.

A	few	hours	before	you	want	to	cook	the	chicken,	pull	it	out	of	the
fridge	to	come	up	to	room	temperature.	Preheat	the	oven	to	200°C.

To	cook,	place	chicken	skin	side	up	in	a	shallow	20	by	33cm	roasting
dish,	then	pour	the	marinade	over	the	meat.	The	marinade	should
generously	cover	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	If	it	doesn’t,	add	2	tablespoons	of
water	to	ensure	even	coverage	and	prevent	burning.	Slide	into	the	oven	and
rotate	the	pan	every	10	to	12	minutes.

Remove	the	breasts,	if	using,	after	20	minutes	of	cooking,	to	prevent
overcooking.	Continue	cooking	dark	meat	for	another	20	to	25	minutes,
until	it’s	tender	at	the	bone,	or	a	total	of	45	minutes.

When	the	dark	meat	is	cooked,	return	the	breasts	to	the	pan	and	crank
the	oven	to	220°C	to	let	the	sauce	reduce	and	the	skin	to	get	dark	brown
and	crisp,	about	12	minutes.	Brush	the	chicken	with	the	marinade	from	the
pan	every	3	to	4	minutes	to	glaze	them.

Serve	warm,	garnished	with	coriander	and	slivered	spring	onions.
Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.



Buttermilk-Marinated	Roast	Chicken Serves	4

Once	I	grew	comfortable	working	the	spit	at	Eccolo,	I	never	tired	of	roasting
chicken	over	the	wood	fire	each	night.	Eventually,	I	came	up	with	the	idea
to	marinate	the	birds	in	buttermilk	overnight,	like	southern	grandmothers
do.	Years	later,	I	was	cooking	a	dozen	of	these	chickens	for	a	special	event
when	a	friend	who	was	hosting	Jacques	Pépin	that	very	same	day	called	in	a
panic	to	ask	if	I	could	prepare	a	picnic	basket	for	the	legendary	chef.	I
wrapped	up	a	bird,	a	green	salad,	and	some	crusty	bread	and	sent	it	on	its
way	before	I	could	overthink	it.	Later	that	night,	I	received	a	message	from
Mr.	Pépin	saying	that	everything	was	classically	perfect	and	entirely
delicious.	I	can’t	think	of	a	better	endorsement	for	this	recipe.

The	buttermilk	and	salt	work	like	a	brine,	tenderising	the	meat	on
multiple	levels:	the	water	it	contains	increases	moisture,	and	the	salt	and
acid	it	contains	disables	proteins,	preventing	them	from	squeezing	liquid
from	the	meat	as	the	bird	cooks	(see	here	and	here).	As	an	added	bonus,
the	sugars	in	the	buttermilk	will	caramelise,	contributing	to	an	exquisitely
browned	skin.	While	the	beauty	of	roast	chicken	is	that	you	can	serve	it
anytime,	anywhere,	my	favourite	thing	to	serve	alongside	it	is	Panzanella
(here),	which	plays	the	role	of	starch,	salad,	and	sauce!

1.6	to	1.8kg	chicken
Salt
450ml	buttermilk

The	day	before	you	want	to	cook	the	chicken,	remove	the	wingtips	by
cutting	through	the	first	wing	joint	with	poultry	shears	or	a	sharp	knife.
Reserve	for	stock.	Season	it	generously	with	salt	and	let	it	sit	for	30	minutes.

Stir	2	tablespoons	of	kosher	salt	or	4	teaspoons	fine	sea	salt	into	the
buttermilk	to	dissolve.	Place	the	chicken	in	a	gallon-size	resealable	plastic
bag	and	pour	in	the	buttermilk.	If	the	chicken	won’t	fit	in	a	gallon-size	bag,
double	up	two	plastic	produce	bags	to	prevent	leakage	and	tie	the	bag	with
a	piece	of	twine.

Seal	it,	squish	the	buttermilk	all	around	the	chicken,	place	on	a	rimmed
plate,	and	refrigerate.	If	you’re	so	inclined,	over	the	next	24	hours	you	can
turn	the	bag	so	every	part	of	the	chicken	gets	marinated,	but	that’s	not



essential.
Pull	the	chicken	from	the	fridge	an	hour	before	you	plan	to	cook	it.

Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C,	with	a	rack	set	in	the	centre	position.
Remove	the	chicken	from	the	plastic	bag	and	scrape	off	as	much

buttermilk	as	you	can	without	being	obsessive.	Tightly	tie	together	the	legs
of	the	chicken	with	a	piece	of	butcher’s	twine.	Place	the	chicken	in	a	25cm
cast	iron	ovenproof	frying	pan	or	shallow	roasting	pan.

Slide	the	pan	all	the	way	to	the	back	of	the	oven	on	the	centre	rack.
Rotate	the	pan	so	that	the	legs	are	pointing	towards	the	rear	left	corner	and
the	breast	is	pointing	towards	the	centre	of	the	oven	(the	back	corners	tend
to	be	the	hottest	spots	in	the	oven,	so	this	orientation	protects	the	breast
from	overcooking	before	the	legs	are	done).	Pretty	quickly	you	should	hear
the	chicken	sizzling.

After	about	20	minutes,	when	the	chicken	starts	to	brown,	reduce	the
heat	to	200°C	and	continue	roasting	for	10	minutes	and	then	move	the	pan
so	the	legs	are	facing	the	back	right	corner	of	the	oven.

Continue	cooking	for	another	30	minutes	or	so,	until	the	chicken	is
brown	all	over	and	the	juices	run	clear	when	you	insert	a	knife	down	to	the
bone	between	the	leg	and	the	thigh.

When	the	chicken’s	done,	remove	it	to	a	platter	and	let	it	rest	for	10
minutes	before	carving	and	serving.
Variations
• If	you	don’t	have	buttermilk	on	hand,	substitute	plain	yoghurt	or	crème

fraîche	(here).
• For	Persian	Roast	Chicken,	omit	the	buttermilk.	Make	saffron	tea	as

directed	here	and	add	to	300g	plain	yoghurt	along	with	1	tablespoon
kosher	salt	or	2	teaspoons	fine	sea	salt	and	2	teaspoons	finely	grated
lemon	zest.	Place	the	seasoned	chicken	in	a	resealable	plastic	bag	and
use	your	hands	to	coat	it	with	the	yoghurt	mixture,	inside	and	out.
Continue	as	above.



Sicilian	Chicken	Salad Makes	about	900g

As	we	served	spit-roasted	chicken	every	night	at	Eccolo,	we	had	to	get
creative	and	figure	out	all	sorts	of	ways	to	use	up	the	leftover	cooked	birds.
Chicken	pot	pie,	chicken	soup,	and	chicken	ragù	all	made	it	onto	the	menu
regularly,	but	this	salad	quickly	became	our	favourite	way	to	use	up	all	that
chicken.	Teeming	with	pine	nuts,	currants,	fennel,	and	celery,	it’s	a	lovely
Mediterranean	play	on	traditional	chicken	salad.	(And	if	you’re	short	on
time,	pick	up	a	rotisserie	chicken	from	the	store	and	use	a	good-quality
store-bought	mayonnaise	spiked	with	a	clove	or	two	of	pounded	or	finely
grated	garlic	to	speed	things	up.)

½	medium	red	onion,	diced
55ml	red	wine	vinegar
65g	currants
750g	shredded	roasted	or	poached	chicken	meat	(from	about	1

roast	chicken)
225ml	stiff	Aïoli	(here)
1	teaspoon	finely	grated	lemon	zest
2	tablespoons	lemon	juice
3	tablespoons	finely	chopped	parsley	leaves
65g	pine	nuts,	lightly	toasted
2	small	celery	stalks,	diced
½	medium	fennel	bulb,	diced
2	teaspoons	ground	fennel	seed
Salt

Combine	the	onion	and	vinegar	in	a	small	bowl	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes	to
macerate	(see	here).

In	a	separate	small	bowl,	submerge	the	currants	in	boiling	water.	Let
them	sit	for	15	minutes	to	rehydrate	and	plump	up.	Drain	and	place	in	a
large	bowl.



Add	the	chicken,	aïoli,	lemon	zest,	lemon	juice,	parsley,	pine	nuts,
celery,	fennel	bulb,	fennel	seed,	and	two	generous	pinches	of	salt	to	the
currants	and	stir	to	combine.	Stir	in	the	macerated	onions	(but	not	their
vinegar)	and	taste.	Adjust	salt	and	add	vinegar	as	needed.

Serve	on	toasted	slices	of	crusty	bread,	or	wrapped	in	leaves	of	romaine
or	Little	Gem	lettuces.
Variations
• For	Curried	Chicken	Salad,	omit	pine	nuts,	lemon	zest,	and	fennel	bulb

and	seed.	Substitute	coriander	for	the	parsley	and	season	the	mixture
with	3	tablespoons	yellow	curry	powder,	¼	teaspoon	ground	cayenne,
55g	lightly	toasted	sliced	almonds,	and	1	tart	apple,	diced.

• To	lend	a	little	smokiness	to	the	salad,	use	leftover	Sage-	and	Honey-
Smoked	Chicken	(here),	instead	of	roasted	or	poached	chicken.



MEAT
When	you’re	standing	at	the	butcher’s	counter	trying	to	decide	which	cut	to
get	for	dinner,	remember:	time	really	is	money,	at	least	when	it	comes	to
meat.	That	is	to	say,	more	expensive	cuts	of	meat—the	ones	that	are
already	tender—cook	quickly,	while	more	economical,	tougher	cuts,	will
need	to	be	tended	to	carefully	over	time.	More	expensive,	tender	cuts	will
benefit	from	intense	heat;	less	expensive,	tougher	cuts	appreciate	gentle
heat.	For	more	about	gentle	and	intense	heat	cooking	methods,	look	back
to	here.

Here’s	another	proverb	for	you.	Ever	heard	the	term	high	on	the	hog?
Used	to	denote	wealth,	it’s	derived	directly	from	butcher’s	terminology.
From	Dario	Cecchini,	the	butcher	who	took	me	under	his	wing	in	Italy,	I
learned	that	until	well	into	the	twentieth	century,	entire	Italian	families
would	live	off	just	a	handful	of	hogs	for	the	whole	year.	A	travelling	butcher
called	a	norcino	would	come	by	each	winter	to	slaughter	animals	and	break
them	down	into	prime	cuts.	Then	the	legs	would	be	turned	to	prosciutto,
the	bellies	into	pancetta,	the	scraps	into	salami.	The	lard	would	be
rendered,	and	the	loins—the	highest	cuts	off	a	hog’s	back—would	be	saved
for	special	occasions.

A	few	months	after	I	returned	to	California,	I	happened	upon	a	copy	of
The	Taste	of	Country	Cooking	by	the	great	southern	chef	Edna	Lewis,	where,
she	carefully	recalls	her	family’s	annual	hog	harvest.	She	and	her	siblings
looked	forward	to	the	visit	of	the	itinerant	butcher	who’d	help	process	the
hogs	on	their	family	farm	each	December.	The	kids	watched	as	the	men
carefully	smoked	the	hams,	bellies,	and	loins	to	preserve	them	for	the
coming	months.	They’d	help	the	women	render	the	leaf	lard	for	pie,	make
liver	pudding,	and	turn	the	scraps	into	sausages.	As	in	Italy,	so	in	the
American	South.	I	love	how	this	story	illustrates	the	universality	of
economical	cooking.

Every	time	I	make	a	decision	at	the	butcher’s	counter,	a	diagram	of	a
flying	pig	flashes	through	my	mind.	As	a	cut’s	distance	from	an	animal’s
hoof	or	horn	increases,	so	does	its	innate	tenderness—and	its	price.	Steaks
and	loins	are	cut	from	the	least	active	parts	of	the	animal,	and	they	are	the
most	tender.	On	the	other	hand,	meat	from	legs	and	shoulders—cuts	such
as	shanks,	brisket,	short	ribs,	or	chuck—will	always	be	tougher	and	less
expensive.	They	are	also	often	more	flavourful.

The	grand	exception	to	this	rule	is	minced	meat.	While	butchers



generally	mince	tougher	stewing	cuts,	the	mincing	process	gives	these	cuts
a	head	start	on	the	way	to	tenderness	by	breaking	down	their	long,	tough
fibres.	So	burgers,	meatballs,	sausages,	and	kebabs	exist	at	the	intersection
of	economy	and	speed,	making	them	ideal	for	weeknight	dinners.

Speaking	of	weeknight	dinners:	use	these	recipes	as	basic	guides.	First,
master	the	techniques,	and	then	start	experimenting	with	the	flavour
combinations	and	the	cuts	of	meat.	Except	where	noted,	season	your	meat
as	early	as	possible.	Remember,	overnight	is	best,	but	any	time	sitting	with
salt	is	better	than	none.	And	for	more	evenly	cooked	meat,	bring	it	up	to
room	temperature	before	cooking.



Serves	6,	with	plentiful
Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast leftovers	for	sandwiches

For	months	after	groundbreaking	American	rancher	Bill	Niman	started
raising	turkeys,	he’d	bring	a	couple	of	birds	to	us	each	week	at	Eccolo.	He
wanted	feedback	about	which	of	his	half	dozen	heritage	breeds	produced
the	most	flavourful	and	tender	meat.	While	it’s	got	great	flavour,	heritage
turkey	meat	can	be	really	tough	and	dry.	And	after	cooking	scores	of
turkeys,	I	figured	out	my	favourite	methods	for	cooking	them:	braising	the
legs	for	a	ragù,	and	brining	and	spit-roasting	the	breasts	to	slice	for
succulent	sandwiches.	After	ordering	a	sandwich,	one	customer	told	us	she
realised	she’d	never	before	associated	turkey	sandwiches	with	turkey
flavour!	Even	all	of	these	years	later,	I	often	brine	and	roast	a	turkey	breast
on	the	weekend,	and	my	lunch	sandwiches	are	the	envy	of	all	the	other
writers	in	my	office!

I	formulated	this	brine	for	turkey	meant	for	sandwiches,	but	if	you’d	like
to	use	it	for	turkey—or	any	meat—to	serve	warm	as	a	main	dish,	reduce	the
salt	to	90g	kosher	salt	or	7	tablespoons	fine	sea	salt.

110g	kosher	salt	or	125g	fine	sea	salt
65g	sugar
1	garlic	head,	halved	crosswise
1	teaspoon	black	peppercorns
2	tablespoons	red	pepper	flakes
½	teaspoon	ground	cayenne	pepper
1	lemon
6	bay	leaves
1	boneless	skin-on	turkey	half-breast,	about	1.6kg
Extra-virgin	olive	oil

Place	the	salt,	sugar,	garlic,	peppercorns,	pepper	flakes,	and	cayenne	in	a
large	pot	with	900ml	of	water.	Use	a	vegetable	peeler	to	remove	the	lemon
zest,	then	halve	the	lemon.	Squeeze	the	juice	into	the	pot,	then	add	the
lemon	halves	and	zest.	Bring	to	a	boil,	then	reduce	to	a	simmer,	stirring	from



time	to	time.	When	the	salt	and	sugar	have	dissolved,	remove	from	the	heat
and	add	1.8	litres	cold	water.	Allow	the	brine	to	cool	to	room	temperature.	If
the	turkey	tender—the	long	strip	of	white	meat	on	the	underside	of	the
breast—is	still	attached,	remove	it	by	pulling	it	off.	Submerge	the	turkey
breast	and	tender	in	the	brine	and	refrigerate	overnight,	or	up	to	24	hours.

Two	hours	before	cooking,	remove	the	breast	and	tender,	if	using,	from
the	brine	and	let	sit	at	room	temperature.

Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C.	Set	a	large	cast	iron	pan	or	other	ovenproof
pan	on	the	stove	over	high	heat.	Once	it’s	hot,	add	a	tablespoon	of	olive	oil,
then	place	the	breast	in	the	pan,	skin	side	down.	Reduce	the	flame	to
medium-high	and	brown	the	breast	for	4	to	5	minutes,	until	the	skin	starts
to	take	on	some	colour.	Use	tongs	to	flip	the	breast	so	it’s	skin	side	up,	place
the	tender	in	the	pan	beside	the	breast,	and	slip	the	pan	into	the	oven,
pushing	it	as	far	back	as	it	will	go.	This	is	the	hottest	spot	in	the	oven,	and
that	initial	blast	of	heat	will	ensure	the	turkey	browns	beautifully.

Remove	the	tender	from	the	pan	when	it	reads	65°C	on	an	instant-read
thermometer	at	its	thickest	point,	about	12	minutes.	Check	the	temperature
of	the	breast	in	a	few	different	spots	at	this	time,	too,	just	to	have	a	sense	of
where	it	is.	Continue	cooking	the	breast	another	12	to	18	minutes,	until	it
registers	65°C	at	its	thickest	point.	(The	internal	temperature	will	start
climbing	rapidly	once	it	hits	55°C,	so	don’t	wander	too	far	away	from	the
oven,	and	check	the	breast	every	few	minutes.)	Remove	it	from	the	oven
and	the	pan,	and	allow	to	rest	at	least	10	minutes	before	slicing.

To	serve,	slice	against	the	grain	(crosswise)	on	the	bias.
Variations
• For	a	little	extra	insurance	against	dryness,	bard,	or	wrap,	the	brined

turkey	breast	with	strips	of	bacon	or	pancetta	before	roasting.	If
necessary,	tie	a	few	pieces	of	butcher’s	twine	around	the	breast	to	keep
the	barding	from	falling	off.

• Use	the	same	brine	for	a	1.8	Kg	Boneless	Pork	Loin.	Brown	it	on	all
sides,	then	roast	for	30	to	35	minutes	to	55°C	(for	rare-medium-rare)
or	57°C	(for	true	medium-rare)—it’ll	rest	out	to	61-63°C.	Allow	to	rest
for	15	minutes	before	slicing.

• For	a	moist,	flavourful	Spatchcocked	Thanksgiving	Turkey,	use	the
full	110g	of	salt.	Add	2	sprigs	thyme,	1	large	sprig	rosemary,	and	12	sage
leaves	to	the	pot,	but	reduce	the	red	pepper	flakes	to	1	teaspoon	and
skip	the	cayenne.	Add	1	onion	and	carrot,	peeled	and	sliced,	and	1	stalk



of	celery,	sliced.	Bring	everything	to	a	boil.	Increase	amount	of	cold
water	added	to	7.2	litres.	Spatchcock	the	turkey	(see	here)	and	leave	it
in	chilled	brine	for	48	hours	for	fullest	flavour.	Roast	at	200°C	until	a
thermometer	inserted	into	the	hip	joint	of	the	turkey	registers	70°C.
Allow	to	rest	25	minutes	before	carving.



Pork	Braised	with	Chillies Serves	6	to	8

This	is	the	single	most	versatile	recipe	in	this	book.	I’ve	prepared	pork
according	to	this	method	for	diplomats	at	the	US	Embassy	in	Beijing	and	to
distinguished	guests	at	a	thousand-year-old	castle	in	northern	Italy.	But	I
especially	love	cooking	it	with	my	students	at	the	end	of	every	Heat	class.
We	shred	the	meat	and	make	tacos	that	we	pile	high	with	Simmered	Beans
(here),	Bright	Cabbage	Slaw	(here),	and	Mexican-ish	Herb	Salsa	(here).
The	best	part?	I	get	to	take	the	leftovers	home	and	enjoy	all	week	long.

1.8kg	boneless	pork	shoulder
Salt
1	garlic	head
Neutral-tasting	oil
2	medium	onions,	sliced
400g	crushed	tomatoes	in	their	juice,	fresh	or	canned
2	tablespoons	cumin	seed	(or	1	tablespoon	ground	cumin)
2	bay	leaves
8	dried	chillies,	such	as	Guajillo,	New	Mexico,	Anaheim,	or

ancho,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	rinsed
Optional:	For	a	touch	of	smokiness	add	1	tablespoon	smoked

paprika	or	2	smoked	peppers	such	as	chipotle	to	the	braise
450-675ml	lager	or	pilsner	beer
15g	coarsely	chopped	coriander	for	garnish

The	day	before	you	plan	to	cook,	season	the	pork	generously	with	salt.
Cover	and	refrigerate.

When	you’re	ready	to	cook,	preheat	the	oven	to	160°C.	Remove	any
roots	from	the	head	of	garlic,	then	slice	it	in	half	crosswise.	(Don’t	worry
about	adding	the	skins	to	the	braise—they’ll	get	strained	out	at	the	end.	If
you	don’t	trust	me,	go	ahead	and	peel	the	whole	head	of	garlic—I’m	just
trying	to	save	you	some	time	and	effort.)

Set	a	large,	cast	iron	casserole	or	similar	ovenproof	pot	over	medium-



high	heat.	When	it’s	warm,	add	1	tablespoon	oil.	When	the	oil	shimmers,
place	the	pork	in	the	pot.	Brown	it	evenly	on	all	sides,	about	3	to	4	minutes
per	side.

When	the	meat	is	brown,	remove	it	and	set	it	aside.	Carefully	tip	out	as
much	of	the	fat	from	the	pot	as	you	can,	then	return	it	to	the	stove.	Reduce
the	heat	to	medium,	and	add	1	tablespoon	neutral	oil.	Add	the	onions	and
garlic	and	cook,	stirring	from	time	to	time,	until	the	onions	are	tender	and
lightly	browned,	about	15	minutes.

Add	the	tomatoes	and	juice,	cumin,	bay	leaves,	dried	chillies,	and
smoked	paprika	or	peppers,	if	using,	into	the	pot	and	stir.	Nestle	pork	atop
the	aromatic	base,	and	add	enough	beer	to	come	4cm	up	the	sides	of	the
meat.	Make	sure	the	peppers	and	bay	leaves	are	mostly	immersed	in	the
juices	so	that	they	do	not	burn.

Increase	the	heat	and	bring	to	a	boil	on	the	stove,	then	slip	the	pot,
uncovered,	into	the	oven.	After	30	minutes,	check	to	make	sure	the	liquid	is
just	barely	simmering.	About	every	30	minutes,	turn	the	pork	over	and
check	the	level	of	the	liquid.	Add	more	beer	as	needed	to	maintain	the
liquid	at	a	depth	of	4cm.	Cook	until	the	meat	is	tender	and	falls	apart	at	the
touch	of	a	fork,	3½	to	4	hours.

Remove	the	cooked	pork	from	the	oven	and	carefully	remove	it	from
the	pan.	Discard	the	bay	leaves,	but	don’t	worry	about	fishing	out	the	garlic
since	the	sieve	will	catch	the	skins.	Using	a	food	mill,	blender,	or	food
processor,	purée	the	aromatics,	and	strain	them	through	a	sieve.	Discard
the	solids.

Skim	the	fat	from	the	sauce	and	then	taste,	adjusting	salt	as	needed.
At	this	point,	you	can	either	shred	the	meat	and	combine	it	with	the

sauce	to	make	pork	tacos,	or	slice	it	and	spoon	the	sauce	over	the	pork	to
serve	it	as	an	entrée.	Garnish	with	chopped	coriander	and	serve	with	an
acidic	condiment	such	as	Mexican	crema,	Mexican-ish	Herb	Salsa	(here),
or	a	simple	squeeze	of	lime.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	5	days.	Braised	meat	freezes
exceptionally	well.	Simply	submerge	in	cooking	liquid,	cover,	and	freeze	for
up	to	2	months.	To	serve,	return	the	braise	to	a	boil	on	the	stove	with	a
splash	of	water.
Variations
• Any	cut	of	meat	from	the	list	overleaf	will	make	a	fantastic	braise	or



stew.	Memorise	the	basics	of	the	recipe	above,	and	then	apply	the
steps	to	any	cut	of	dark,	sinewy	meat	you’d	like.	Refer	back	to	the	Heat
chapter,	here,	for	a	detailed	step-by-step	recipe	of	this	braise,	and	a
chart	of	average	cooking	times	for	various	cuts	of	meat.

• When	you’re	inspired	to	cook	any	of	the	classic	braises	and	stews	from
around	the	world,	do	a	little	research.	Compare	a	few	different	recipes
for	the	same	dish	to	see	what	ingredients	or	special	steps	are	common
to	them	all.	Use	the	aromatics	chart	and	the	fat,	acid,	and	spice	wheels
to	guide	you.	The	beauty	of	it	all	is,	once	you’ve	got	this	braise	in	your
pocket,	you’ve	got	a	hundred	others	in	there,	too.



Everything	You	Need	to	Know	to	Improvise	a	Braise
Best	Braising	Cuts
Pork

Spare	Ribs
Shoulder
Shank
Sausages
Belly

Chicken,	Duck,	and	Rabbit
Legs
Thighs
Wings	(poultry	only)

Beef
Oxtails
Short	Ribs
Shank	(Osso	buco)
Chuck
Brisket
Round

Lamb	and	Goat
Shoulder
Neck
Shank

Classic	Braises	and	Stews	from	Around	the	World
Adobo	(Philippines)
Beef	Bourguignon	(France)
Beef	Daube	(France)
Beer-Braised	Sausages	(Germany)



Bigots	(Poland)
Braised	Pork	Belly	(All	over!)
Cassoulet	(France)
Chicken	Alla	Cacciatora	(Italy)
Chilli	Con	Carne	(US)
Coq	au	Vin	(France)
Country-Style	Ribs	(US	South)
Doro	Wat	(Ethiopia)
Fesenjan	(Iran)
Ghormeh	Sabzi	(Iran)
Goat	Birria	(Mexico)
Goulash	(Poland)
Lamb	Tagine	(Morocco)
Locro	(Argentina)
Nikujaga	(Japan)
Osso	Buco	(Italy)
Pork	Cooked	in	Milk	(Italy)
Pot	au	Feu	(France)
Pot	Roast	(US)
Pozole	(Mexico)
Ragù	Bolognese	(Italy)
Rogan	Josh	(Kashmir)
Roman	Oxtail	Stew	(Italy)
Tas	Kebap	(Turkey)

Basic	Braising	Times
Chicken	Breasts:	5	to	8	minutes	if	boneless,	15	to	18	minutes	if	on	the

bone.	(If	braising	a	whole	chicken,	split	the	breasts	into	quarters,
cook	them	on	the	bone,	and	remove	them	from	the	pot	when
finished,	about	15	to	18	minutes,	allowing	the	legs	to	finish	on	their
own.)



Chicken	legs:	35	to	40	minutes
Duck	legs:	1½	to	2	hours
Turkey	legs:	2½	to	3	hours
Pork	shoulder:	2½	to	3½	hours,	longer	if	on	the	bone
Bony	beef	(short	ribs,	osso	buco,	oxtail):	3	to	3½	hours
Meaty	beef	(chuck,	brisket,	round):	3	to	3½	hours
Lamb	shoulder	on	the	bone:	2½	to	3	hours

Protein	Shopping	Guide
On	average,	450g	of	each	of	the	following	will	feed:

Fish	fillet:	3	people
Shell-on	shellfish	(except	for	prawns):	1	person
Shell-on	prawns:	3	people
Bone-in	roast:	1.5	people
Steak:	3	people
Whole	animals	and	meat	on	the	bone:	1	person
Ground	meat	for	burgers	or	sausages:	3	people
Ground	meat	for	ragù	or	chilli:	4	people






Steak
The	key	to	cooking	any	steak	perfectly	is	to	sear	the	surface	evenly	on	all
sides	while	cooking	the	meat	to	your	preferred	doneness.	But	not	all	steaks
are	created	equal:	different	cuts	will	cook	differently	depending	on	their	fat
content	and	the	structure	of	the	muscle	fibres.

When	cooking	steak,	a	few	rules	apply	no	matter	what	cut	you’re	using.



First	of	all,	trim	silver	skin,	sinew,	and	excessive	fat.	Secondly,	season	any
steak	in	advance	to	give	salt	the	time	it	needs	to	perform	its	tenderising	and
flavour-enhancing	feats.	Bring	any	steak	to	room	temperature	for	30	to	60
minutes	before	cooking,	whatever	the	method	may	be.

When	grilling,	always	create	various	heat	zones:	glowing	hot	coals	for
direct	heat,	and	a	cooler,	mostly	coal-free	spot	for	indirect	heat.	If	using	a
gas	grill,	mimic	the	same	effect	with	the	burners.	Don’t	leave	grilling	meat
unattended—as	it	cooks,	and	its	fat	renders,	it	will	drip	down	and	cause
flare-ups.	When	flames	brush	the	surface	of	cooking	meat,	they	leave
behind	awful,	gaseous-tasting	flavour	compounds.	So	never,	ever	cook
directly	over	flame.

If	you	don’t	have	a	grill,	or	the	weather	isn’t	conducive	to	grilling,
simulate	high-heat	grilling	by	cooking	steak	in	a	blazing-hot	cast	iron	frying
pan.	Preheat	the	pan	in	a	260°C	oven	for	20	minutes,	and	then	carefully
place	it	over	a	burner	set	to	high	heat.	Cook	as	directed	below,	ensuring	that
you	leave	plenty	of	space	between	each	steak	in	the	pan	to	allow	steam	to
escape.	You	might	also	want	to	open	a	window	and	disable	your	smoke
alarm	before	you	start.	You	can	simulate	indirect-heat	cooking	by	simply
preheating	your	cast	iron	pan	on	the	stove	and	then	cooking	over	a
moderate	flame.

My	two	favourite	steaks	are	skirt	and	rib	eye.	Both	are	deeply	flavourful.
Reasonably	priced,	and	simple	to	prepare,	I	think	of	skirt	as	a	“weeknight”
steak.	Juicy	and	beautifully	marbled,	rib	eye	can	get	pricey,	so	I	think	of	it	as
a	“special	occasion”	steak.

Grill	skirt	steak	over	hot	coals,	or	the	highest	heat,	2	to	3	minutes	per
side	for	rare/medium-rare.

Cook	a	2.5cm	thick	rib	eye,	about	225g,	over	high	heat,	about	4
minutes	per	side	for	rare,	and	about	5	minutes	per	side	for	medium.

In	contrast,	cook	a	6cm	thick	bone-in	rib	eye,	about	900g	12	to	15
minutes	per	side	for	medium-rare,	over	indirect	heat	in	order	to	allow	a
beautiful	dark-brown	crust	to	develop	on	every	inch	of	its	surface.

Press	on	any	steak	to	judge	its	doneness.	It’ll	be	soft	when	rare,	a	little
spongy	when	medium-rare,	and	firm	when	well-done.	You	can	also	always
just	cut	into	the	steak	and	take	a	peek.	Or	use	an	instant-read	meat
thermometer:	46°C	for	rare,	51°C	for	medium-rare,	57°C	for	medium,	63°C
for	medium-well,	and	68°C	for	well-done.	Pull	meat	from	the	heat	at	these
temperatures,	then	let	it	rest	5	to	10	minutes.	It’ll	carry	over	another	two	or



three	degrees,	to	the	perfect	level	of	doneness.
And,	however	you	cook	a	steak,	always	let	it	rest	for	5	to	10	minutes,	no

matter	how	hungry	you	are!	The	resting	time	will	give	the	proteins	a	chance
to	relax	and	allow	the	juices	to	distribute	evenly	throughout	the	meat.	Then
slice	it	against	the	grain,	which	will	ensure	tenderness	in	every	bite.



Makes	about	24	kebabs	(serves
Kufte	Kebabs 4	to	6)

Kufte,	kofte,	kefta—call	it	what	you	like.	It’s	essentially	a	torpedo-shaped
meatball,	and	every	country	in	the	Near	and	Middle	East,	as	well	as	the
Indian	subcontinent,	has	its	own	variation.	I	cook	this	dish	when	friends
request	a	Persian	meal	but	I	can’t	bear	the	thought	of	all	the	tinkering	and
chopping	involved	for	Kuku	Sabzi	(here)	or	any	of	our	other	endlessly
complicated	dishes.

1	large	pinch	saffron
1	large	onion,	coarsely	grated
675g	minced	lamb	(preferably	shoulder	meat)
3	garlic	cloves,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
1½	teaspoons	ground	turmeric
6	tablespoons	very	finely	chopped	parsley,	mint,	and/or

coriander	in	any	combination
Freshly	ground	black	pepper
Salt

Use	the	saffron	to	make	saffron	tea	as	directed	here.	Push	the	onion
through	a	sieve,	press	out	as	much	liquid	as	possible,	and	discard	the	liquid.

Place	the	saffron	tea,	onion,	lamb,	garlic,	turmeric,	herbs,	and	a	pinch	of
black	pepper	into	a	large	bowl.	Add	three	generous	pinches	of	salt	and	use
your	hands	to	knead	the	mixture	together.	Your	hands	are	valuable	tools
here;	your	body	heat	melts	the	fat	a	little	bit,	which	helps	the	mixture	stick
together	and	yields	less	crumbly	kebabs.	Cook	up	a	tiny	piece	of	the	mixture
in	a	frying	pan	and	taste	for	salt	and	other	seasonings.	Adjust	as	needed,
and	if	necessary,	cook	a	second	piece	and	taste	again.



Once	the	mixture	is	seasoned	to	your	taste,	moisten	your	hands	and
start	forming	oblong,	three-sided	meatballs	by	gently	curling	your	fingers
around	2	tablespoons	of	the	mixture.	Lay	the	little	torpedoes	onto	a
parchment-lined	baking	sheet.

To	cook,	grill	the	kebabs	over	hot	coals	until	delightfully	charred	on	the
outside	and	just	barely	cooked	through	within,	about	6	to	8	minutes.	Rotate
them	often	once	they	start	to	brown	to	give	them	an	even	crust.	When
done,	the	kebabs	should	be	firm	to	the	touch	but	give	a	little	in	the	centre
when	squeezed.	If	you’re	not	sure	whether	they’re	done,	cut	one	open	and
check—if	there’s	a	dime-size	diameter	of	pink	surrounded	by	a	ring	of
brown,	it’s	done!

To	cook	indoors,	set	a	cast	iron	frying	pan	over	high	heat,	add	just
enough	olive	oil	to	coat	the	bottom	of	the	pan,	and	cook	for	6	to	8	minutes,
flipping	just	once	on	each	side.

Serve	immediately	or	at	room	temperature,	with	Persian-ish	Rice
(here)	and	Persian	Herb	Yoghurt	(here),	or	Shaved	Carrot	Salad	with
Ginger	and	Lime	(here)	and	Charmoula	(here).
Variations
• To	make	Moroccan	Kofta,	omit	the	saffron	and	replace	the	mixed

herbs	with	10g	finely	chopped	coriander.	Reduce	the	turmeric	to	½
teaspoon.	Add	1	teaspoon	ground	cumin,	¾	teaspoon	hot	pepper



flakes,	½	teaspoon	finely	grated	ginger,	and	a	small	pinch	of	ground
cinnamon.	Continue	as	above.

• For	Turkish	Köfte,	use	beef	if	desired.	Omit	the	turmeric,	saffron,	and
herbs	and	instead	season	with	1	tablespoon	Turkish	Aleppo	pepper	(or
1	teaspoon	hot	pepper	flakes),	¼	cup	finely	chopped	parsley,	and	8
finely	chopped	mint	leaves.	Continue	as	above.



SAUCES
A	good	sauce	can	improve	a	delicious	dish	and	save	a	less	successful	one.
Learn	to	think	of	sauces	as	trusted	sources	of	Salt,	Fat,	and	Acid,	which	will
always	provide	bright	flavour.	To	get	the	best	sense	of	how	any	sauce	tastes,
try	it	along	with	a	bite	of	whatever	you	plan	on	serving	it	with	to	see	how	the
flavours	work	together.	Just	before	serving,	adjust	the	salt,	acid,	and	other
flavourings.

Herb	Salsa
Master	herb	salsa—it’ll	only	take	one	attempt,	that’s	how	easy	it	is—and
soon	you’ll	find	a	hundred	sauces	up	your	sleeve.	Get	into	the	habit	of
buying	a	bunch	of	parsley	or	coriander	every	time	you	go	to	the	store.	Turn
the	herbs	into	salsa	to	spoon	over	beans,	eggs,	rice,	meats,	fish,	or
vegetables—really,	anything	you	can	imagine.	It’s	a	simple	gesture	that	will
improve	almost	any	dish,	from	Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup	(here)	to	Tuna
Confit	(here)	to	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken	(here).

When	using	parsley,	pick	the	leaves	from	the	stems,	which	can	be
tough.	Save	the	stems	in	your	freezer	for	the	next	time	you	make	Chicken
Stock	(here).	Coriander	stems,	on	the	other	hand,	are	the	most	flavourful
part	of	the	herb.	They’re	also	a	lot	less	fibrous,	so	work	the	tender	stems
into	your	sauce.

I’m	a	salsa	purist	and	recommend	chopping	everything	by	hand,	but	if
that’s	simply	out	of	the	question	for	you,	these	recipes	will	absolutely	work



in	a	food	processor—they’ll	just	have	a	slightly	thicker	texture.	Since
different	ingredients	will	break	down	at	different	rates	in	the	machine,	use	it
to	chop	everything	individually	and	then	stir	it	all	together	by	hand	in	a
separate	bowl.



Basic	Salsa	Verde Makes	175ml

3	tablespoons	finely	diced	shallot	(about	1	medium	shallot)
3	tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar
10g	very	finely	chopped	parsley	leaves
55ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt

In	a	small	bowl,	combine	the	shallot	and	vinegar	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes	to
macerate	(see	here).

In	a	separate	small	bowl,	combine	parsley,	olive	oil,	and	a	generous
pinch	of	salt.

Just	before	serving,	use	a	slotted	spoon	to	add	the	shallot	(but	not	the
vinegar,	yet)	to	the	parsley	oil.	Stir,	taste,	and	add	vinegar	as	needed.	Taste
and	adjust	salt.	Serve	immediately.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	As	a	garnish	for	soup;	with	grilled,	poached,

roasted,	or	braised	fish	and	meat;	with	grilled,	roasted,	or	blanched
vegetables.	Try	with	English	Pea	Soup,	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Tuna
Confit,	Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken,	Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried
Chicken,	Chicken	Confit,	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	Spicy	Brined	Turkey
Breast,	or	Kufte	Kebabs.
Variations
• For	a	crunchy	Bread	Crumb	Salsa,	stir	in	3	tablespoons	Sprinkling

Crumbs	(here)	just	before	serving.
• To	add	some	texture	to	the	salsa,	add	3	tablespoons	finely	chopped

toasted	almonds,	walnuts,	or	hazelnuts	to	the	parsley	oil.
• For	a	spicy	kick,	add	1	teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes	or	1	teaspoon	minced

jalapeño	pepper	to	the	parsley	oil.
• For	an	extra	hint	of	freshness,	add	1	tablespoon	finely	chopped	celery

to	the	parsley	oil.
• For	a	little	citrus	touch,	add	¼	teaspoon	grated	lemon	zest	to	the



parsley	oil.
• For	a	little	garlic	fire,	add	1	clove	finely	grated	or	pounded	garlic.
• To	make	Classic	Italian	Salsa	Verde,	add	6	finely	chopped	anchovy

fillets	and	1	tablespoon	capers,	rinsed	and	coarsely	chopped,	to	the
parsley	oil.

• To	make	Mint	Salsa	Verde,	substitute	2	tablespoons	finely	chopped
mint	for	half	of	the	parsley.

Fried	Sage	Salsa	Verde Makes	about	225ml

Basic	Salsa	Verde	(here)
24	sage	leaves
About	450ml	neutral-tasting	oil	for	frying

Follow	the	instructions	here	for	frying	sage.
Just	before	serving,	crumble	the	sage	into	the	salsa.	Taste	and	adjust

the	salsa	for	salt	and	acid.
Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	With	Thanksgiving	dinner;	as	a	garnish	for	soup;

with	grilled,	poached,	roasted,	or	braised	fish	and	meat;	with	grilled,	roasted,
or	blanched	vegetables;	with	Simmered	Beans,	Crispiest	Spatchcocked
Chicken,	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast,	Grilled
Skirt	Steak,	or	Rib	Eye.



Classic	French	Herb	Salsa Makes	175ml

3	tablespoons	finely	diced	shallot	(about	1	medium	shallot)
3	tablespoons	white	wine	vinegar
2	tablespoons	very	finely	chopped	parsley	leaves
1	tablespoon	very	finely	chopped	chervil
1	tablespoon	very	finely	chopped	chives
1	tablespoon	very	finely	chopped	basil
1	teaspoon	very	finely	chopped	tarragon
5	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt

In	a	small	bowl,	combine	the	shallot	and	vinegar	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes	to
macerate	(see	here).

In	a	separate	small	bowl,	combine	parsley,	chervil,	chives,	basil,
tarragon,	olive	oil,	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.

Just	before	serving,	use	a	slotted	spoon	to	add	the	shallot	(but	not	the
vinegar,	yet)	to	the	herb	oil.	Stir,	taste,	and	add	vinegar	as	needed.	Taste	and
adjust	salt.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	As	a	garnish	for	soup;	with	grilled,	poached,

roasted,	or	braised	fish	and	meat;	with	grilled,	roasted,	or	blanched
vegetables;	with	Simmered	Beans,	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Tuna	Confit,
Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken,	Chicken	Confit.
Variations
• For	a	pickly	pucker,	add	1	tablespoon	finely	chopped	cornichons.
• To	lighten	and	brighten	the	salsa,	substitute	the	vinegar	for	lemon	juice

and	add	½	teaspoon	finely	grated	lemon	zest.






Mexican-ish	Herb	Salsa Makes	about	225ml

3	tablespoons	finely	diced	shallot	(about	1	medium	shallot)
3	tablespoons	lime	juice
10g	very	finely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems
1	tablespoon	minced	jalapeño	pepper
2	tablespoons	very	finely	chopped	spring	onions	(green	and

white	parts)
55ml	neutral-tasting	oil
Salt

In	a	small	bowl,	combine	the	shallot	and	lime	juice	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes
to	macerate	(see	here).

In	a	separate	small	bowl,	combine	the	coriander,	jalapeño,	spring
onions,	oil,	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.

Just	before	serving,	use	a	slotted	spoon	to	add	the	shallot	(but	not	the
lime	juice,	yet)	to	the	herb	oil.	Stir,	taste,	and	add	lime	juice	as	needed.
Taste	and	adjust	salt.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	As	a	garnish	for	soup;	with	grilled,	poached,

roasted,	or	braised	fish	and	meat;	with	grilled,	roasted,	or	blanched
vegetables;	with	Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup,	Simmered	Beans,	Slow-Roasted
Salmon,	fish	tacos	made	with	Beer	Battered	Fish,	Tuna	Confit,	Crispiest
Spatchcocked	Chicken,	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	Pork	Braised	with
Chillies.
Variations
• For	a	little	crunch,	add	3	tablespoons	pomegranate	seeds,	or	finely

diced	cucumber,	cabbage,	or	jicama.
• For	a	little	sweetness,	add	3	tablespoons	finely	diced	mango	or

kumquats.
• For	a	little	creaminess,	add	3	tablespoons	finely	diced	ripe	avocado.



• To	make	Pumpkin	Seed	Salsa,	add	3	tablespoons	chopped,	toasted
pumpkin	seeds.



Southeast	Asian-ish	Herb	Salsa Makes	about	275ml

3	tablespoons	finely	diced	shallot	(about	1	medium	shallot)
3	tablespoons	lime	juice
10g	very	finely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems
1	tablespoon	minced	jalapeño	pepper
2	tablespoons	very	finely	chopped	spring	onions	(green	and

white	parts)
2	teaspoons	finely	grated	ginger
5	tablespoons	neutral-tasting	oil
Salt

In	a	small	bowl,	combine	the	shallot	and	lime	juice	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes
to	macerate	(see	here).

In	a	separate	small	bowl,	combine	the	coriander,	jalapeño,	spring
onions,	ginger,	oil,	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.

Just	before	serving,	use	a	slotted	spoon	to	add	the	shallot	(but	not	the
lime	juice,	yet)	to	the	herb	oil.	Stir,	taste,	and	add	lime	juice	as	needed.
Taste	and	adjust	salt.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	As	a	garnish	for	soup	or	a	marinade	for	meats;	with

grilled,	poached,	roasted,	or	braised	fish	and	meat;	with	grilled,	roasted,	or
blanched	vegetables;	with	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Tuna	Confit,	Crispiest
Spatchcocked	Chicken,	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	Glazed	Five-Spice
Chicken,	Spicy	Brined	Pork	Loin,	Grilled	Skirt	or	Rib	Eye	Steak.



Japanese-ish	Herb	Salsa Makes	about	225ml

2	tablespoons	very	finely	chopped	parsley	leaves
2	tablespoons	very	finely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender

stems
2	tablespoons	very	finely	chopped	spring	onions	(green	and

white	parts)
1	teaspoon	finely	grated	ginger
55ml	neutral-tasting	oil
1	tablespoon	soy	sauce
3	tablespoons	seasoned	rice	wine	vinegar
Salt

In	a	small	bowl,	combine	the	parsley,	coriander,	spring	onions,	ginger,	oil,
and	soy	sauce.	Just	before	serving,	add	the	vinegar.	Stir,	taste,	and	adjust
salt	and	acid	as	needed.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	As	a	garnish	for	soup;	with	grilled,	poached,

roasted,	or	braised	fish	and	meat;	with	grilled,	roasted,	or	blanched
vegetables;	with	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Tuna	Confit,	Crispiest
Spatchcocked	Chicken,	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	Glazed	Five-Spice
Chicken,	Spicy	Brined	Pork	Loin,	Grilled	Skirt	or	Rib	Eye	Steak.



Meyer	Lemon	Salsa Makes	about	275ml

1	small	Meyer	lemon
3	tablespoons	finely	diced	shallot	(about	1	medium	shallot)
3	tablespoons	white	wine	vinegar
10g	very	finely	chopped	parsley	leaves
55ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt

Quarter	the	lemon	lengthwise,	then	remove	the	central	membrane	and	the
seeds.	Finely	dice	the	cleaned	lemon,	including	the	pith	and	peel.	In	a	small
bowl,	combine	the	lemon	bits	and	any	juice	you	can	manage	to	save	with
the	shallot	and	vinegar.	Let	sit	for	15	minutes	to	macerate	(see	here).

In	a	separate	small	bowl,	combine	the	parsley,	olive	oil,	and	a	generous
pinch	of	salt.

To	serve,	use	a	slotted	spoon	to	add	the	Meyer	lemon	and	shallot
mixture	(but	not	the	vinegar,	yet)	to	the	herb	oil.	Taste	and	adjust	for	salt
and	acid	as	needed.

Refrigerate,	covered,	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	As	a	garnish	for	soup;	with	grilled,	poached,

roasted,	or	braised	fish	and	meat;	with	grilled,	roasted,	or	blanched
vegetables.	With	Simmered	Beans,	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Tuna	Confit,
Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken,	Chicken	Confit,	or	Conveyor	Belt
Chicken.
Variations
• To	make	a	Meyer	Lemon	and	Olive	Relish,	reduce	the	salt	and	add	3

tablespoons	chopped,	pitted	green	olives.
• To	make	a	Meyer	Lemon	and	Feta	Relish,	reduce	the	salt	and	add	3

tablespoons	crumbled	sheep’s	milk	feta	cheese.



North	African	Charmoula Makes	about	225ml

½	teaspoon	cumin	seed
125ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
40g	coarsely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems
1	garlic	clove
2.5cm	knob	of	ginger,	peeled	and	sliced
½	small	jalapeño	pepper,	stemmed
4	teaspoons	lime	juice
Salt

Place	the	cumin	seeds	in	a	small,	dry	frying	pan	and	set	over	medium	heat.
Swirl	the	pan	constantly	to	ensure	even	toasting.	Toast	until	the	first	few
seeds	begin	to	pop	and	emit	a	savoury	aroma,	about	3	minutes.	Remove
from	the	heat.	Immediately	dump	the	seeds	into	the	bowl	of	a	mortar	or	a
spice	grinder.	Grind	finely	with	a	pinch	of	salt.

Place	the	oil,	toasted	cumin,	coriander,	garlic,	ginger,	jalapeño,	lime
juice,	and	2	generous	pinches	of	salt	in	a	blender	or	food	processor.	Blend
until	no	chunks	or	whole	leaves	remain.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	and	acid.	Add
water	as	needed	to	thin	to	desired	consistency.	Cover	and	refrigerate	until
serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	Stir	into	Basic	Mayonnaise	(here)	for	a	perfect

condiment	for	turkey	sandwiches;	reduce	the	oil	to	55ml	and	use	as	a
marinade	for	fish	or	chicken;	serve	with	rice,	chickpeas,	or	couscous,	braised
lamb	or	chicken,	grilled	meats	or	fish.	Drizzle	onto	an	Avocado	Salad	or
Carrot	Soup;	serve	with	Persian-ish	Rice,	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Tuna
Confit,	Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken,	Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	Kufte
Kebabs.



Indian	Coconut-Coriander	Chutney Makes	about	225ml

1	teaspoon	cumin	seed
2	tablespoons	lime	juice
35g	fresh	or	frozen	grated	coconut
1	to	2	garlic	cloves
40g	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems	(from	about	1	bunch)
12	fresh	mint	leaves
½	jalapeño	pepper,	stemmed
¾	teaspoon	sugar
Salt

Place	the	cumin	seeds	in	a	small,	dry	frying	pan	and	set	over	medium	heat.
Swirl	the	pan	constantly	to	ensure	even	toasting.	Toast	until	the	first	few
seeds	begin	to	pop	and	emit	a	savoury	aroma,	about	3	minutes.	Remove
from	the	heat.	Immediately	dump	the	seeds	into	the	bowl	of	a	mortar	or	a
spice	grinder.	Grind	finely	with	a	pinch	of	salt.

Pulse	the	lime	juice,	coconut,	and	garlic	together	in	a	blender	or	food
processor	for	2	minutes	until	no	large	chunks	remain.	Add	the	toasted
cumin,	coriander,	mint	leaves,	jalapeño,	sugar,	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt
and	continue	blending	for	another	2	to	3	minutes,	until	no	chunks	or	whole
leaves	remain.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	and	acid.	Add	water	if	needed	to	thin	to
a	drizzle-able	consistency.	Cover	and	refrigerate	until	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	Simmered	lentils,	or	as	a	marinade	for	fish	or

chicken.	With	Indian-Spiced	Salmon,	Tuna	Confit,	Crispiest
Spatchcocked	Chicken,	Indian-Spiced	Fried	Chicken,	Conveyor	Belt
Chicken,	Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast,	Kufte	Kebabs.
Variation
• If	you	can’t	find	fresh	or	frozen	coconut,	pour	225ml	of	boiling	water

over	30g	dried	coconut	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes	to	rehydrate.	Drain
and	continue	as	above.



Salmoriglio
Sicilian	Oregano	Sauce Makes	about	125ml

10g	very	finely	chopped	parsley
2	tablespoons	very	finely	chopped	fresh	oregano	or	marjoram	or

1	tablespoon	dried	oregano
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
55ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
2	tablespoons	lemon	juice
Salt

Combine	the	parsley,	oregano,	garlic,	and	olive	oil	in	a	small	bowl	with	a
generous	pinch	of	salt.	Just	before	serving,	add	the	lemon	juice.	Stir,	taste,
and	adjust	for	salt	and	acid.	Serve	immediately.	Refrigerate,	covered,	for	up
to	3	days.

Serving	suggestions:	With	grilled	or	roasted	fish	or	meat;	with	grilled,
roasted,	or	blanched	vegetables;	with	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Tuna	Confit,
Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken.
Variation
• To	make	Argentinian	Chimichurri	sauce	for	spooning	over	grilled

meats,	add	1	teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes	and	1	to	2	tablespoons	red
wine	vinegar	to	taste.

Yoghurt	Sauce



I	grew	up	spooning	yoghurt	on	everything—including,	embarrassingly,
pasta!—not	so	much	for	its	flavour,	but	because	it	was	a	handy	way	to	cool
down	the	steaming-hot	food	I	usually	couldn’t	wait	to	eat.	Eventually,	I	grew
to	love	yoghurt	for	its	creaminess	and	acidity,	and	the	way	it	complements
rich	and	dry	dishes	equally	well.

Serve	these	yoghurt	sauces	alongside	Indian-Spiced	Salmon,	Adas
Polo,	Grilled	Artichokes,	Persian	Roast	Chicken,	or	Persian-ish	Rice.	Or,
bring	them	to	the	table	as	dips	for	crunchy	raw	vegetables	or	warm
flatbread.	I	prefer	to	start	with	thick,	drained	yoghurt	such	as	lebne	or	Greek
yoghurt,	but	any	plain	yoghurt	will	work.

Herbed	Yoghurt Makes	about	325ml

295ml	plain	yoghurt
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
2	tablespoons	finely	chopped	parsley
2	tablespoons	finely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems
8	mint	leaves,	finely	chopped
2	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt

In	a	medium	bowl,	combine	the	yoghurt,	garlic,	parsley,	coriander,	mint
leaves,	and	olive	oil	with	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.	Stir,	taste,	and	adjust
seasoning	with	salt	as	needed.	Cover	and	chill	until	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Variations
• To	make	Indian	Carrot	Raita,	omit	the	olive	oil.	Add	65g	coarsely

grated	carrot	and	2	teaspoons	finely	grated	fresh	ginger	to	the	yoghurt.
Melt	2	tablespoons	ghee	or	neutral-tasting	oil	in	a	small	frying	pan	over
medium-high	heat.	Sizzle	1	teaspoon	cumin	seed,	1	teaspoon	black
mustard	seed,	and	1	teaspoon	coriander	seed	for	about	30	seconds,	or
until	the	first	seeds	begin	to	pop.	Pour	immediately	into	the	yoghurt
mixture	and	stir	to	combine.	Taste	and	adjust	for	salt.	Cover	and	chill
until	serving.



Persian	Herb	and	Cucumber	Yoghurt Makes	450ml

75g	black	or	golden	raisins
295ml	plain	yoghurt
1	Persian	cucumber,	peeled	and	finely	diced
10g	any	combination	finely	chopped	fresh	mint	leaves,	dill,

parsley,	and	coriander
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
35g	toasted	walnuts,	coarsely	chopped
2	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
A	generous	pinch	of	salt
Optional:	Dried	rose	petals	for	garnish

In	a	small	bowl,	submerge	the	raisins	in	boiling	water.	Let	them	sit	for	15
minutes	to	rehydrate	and	plump	up.	Drain	and	place	in	a	medium	bowl.	Add
the	yoghurt,	cucumber,	herbs,	garlic,	walnuts,	olive	oil,	and	salt.	Stir	to
combine,	taste,	and	adjust	salt	as	needed.	Chill	until	serving.	If	desired,
garnish	with	crumbled	rose	petals	before	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.



Borani	Esfenaj	Persian	Spinach	Yoghurt Makes	450ml

4	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
2	bunches	spinach,	trimmed	and	washed,	or	675g	baby	spinach,

washed
10g	finely	chopped	coriander	leaves	and	tender	stems
1	to	2	garlic	cloves,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
295ml	plain	yoghurt
Salt
½	teaspoon	lemon	juice

Heat	a	large	frying	pan	over	high	heat,	add	2	tablespoons	olive	oil,	and	when
shimmering,	add	the	spinach	and	sauté	until	just	wilted,	about	2	minutes.
Depending	on	the	size	of	the	pan,	you	may	have	to	do	it	in	two	batches.
Immediately	remove	the	cooked	spinach	from	pan	and	place	in	a	single
layer	on	a	baking	sheet	lined	with	parchment	paper.
This	prevents	the	spinach	from	overcooking	and	discolouring.

When	the	spinach	is	cool	enough	to	handle,	squeeze	all	the	water	out
with	your	hands,	then	chop	it	finely.

In	a	medium	bowl,	combine	the	spinach,	coriander,	garlic,	yoghurt,	and
the	remaining	2	tablespoons	olive	oil.	Season	with	salt	and	lemon	juice.	Stir,
taste,	and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.	Chill	until	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.






Mast-o-Laboo
Persian	Beetroot	Yoghurt Makes	450ml

3	to	4	medium	red	or	golden	beetroots,	trimmed
295ml	plain	yoghurt
2	tablespoons	finely	chopped	fresh	mint
Optional:	1	teaspoon	finely	chopped	fresh	tarragon
2	tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt
1	to	2	teaspoons	red	wine	vinegar
Optional:	Nigella	(black	cumin)	seeds	for	garnish

Roast	and	peel	the	beetroots	as	directed	here.	Allow	to	cool.
Coarsely	grate	the	beetroots	and	stir	into	the	yoghurt.	Add	the	mint,

tarragon,	if	using,	olive	oil,	salt,	and	1	teaspoon	red	wine	vinegar.	Stir	and
taste.	Adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.	Chill	until	serving.	If	desired,	garnish
with	nigella	seeds	before	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.



Mayonnaise
There	might	not	be	a	sauce	more	polarising	than	mayonnaise,	but	I	fall
firmly	in	the	camp	of	the	devoted.	And,	as	a	teacher,	I	don’t	think	there’s	a
better	way	to	illustrate	the	power	of	a	little	kitchen	science	than	by	making,
breaking,	and	fixing	a	mayonnaise	with	my	students.	It’s	like	a	little	miracle,
every	time.	Refer	back	to	the	step-by-step	recipe	here	for	a	refresher	on	all
of	the	nuances	of	making	and	fixing	a	mayonnaise.

When	making	mayonnaise	as	the	base	for	a	sauce,	such	as	Tartar	or
Caesar	Dressing,	leave	it	unsalted	and	make	it	as	stiff	as	possible	to
account	for	all	the	other	ingredients	you’ll	be	adding	that	will	season	and
thin	it	out.	On	the	other	hand,	to	season	a	plain	mayonnaise	for	spreading,
dissolve	the	salt	in	a	few	tablespoons	of	water	or	whatever	form	of	acid	you
plan	to	add,	whether	it’s	lemon	juice	or	vinegar.	If	you	add	salt	without
dissolving	it	first,	you’ll	have	to	wait	a	while	for	the	mayonnaise	to
completely	absorb	it	before	you	get	an	accurate	idea	of	how	it	tastes.	If	you
choose	this	route,	add	salt	gradually,	stopping	to	taste	and	adjust	along	the
way.

To	lend	a	Mediterranean	flavour	to	Aïoli,	Herb	Mayonnaise,	or	Rouille
you	plan	to	serve	with	Italian,	French,	or	Spanish	food,	use	olive	oil.	To
make	an	American-style	base	to	use	in	Classic	Sandwich	Mayo	or	Tartar
Sauce,	use	a	neutral-tasting	oil	such	as	grapeseed.



Basic	Mayonnaise Makes	about	175ml

1	egg	yolk	at	room	temperature
175ml	oil	(refer	to	here	to	help	you	decide	what	type	of	oil	to	use)

Place	the	egg	yolk	in	a	deep,	medium	metal	or	ceramic	bowl.	Dampen	a	tea
towel	and	roll	it	up	into	a	long	log,	then	form	it	into	a	ring	on	the	worktop.
Place	the	bowl	inside	the	ring—this	will	hold	the	bowl	in	place	while	you
whisk.	(And	if	whisking	by	hand	is	simply	out	of	the	question,	feel	free	to
use	a	blender,	stand	mixer,	or	food	processor.)

Use	a	ladle	or	bottle	with	a	nozzle	to	drip	in	the	oil	a	drop	at	a	time,
while	whisking	the	oil	into	the	yolk.	Go.	Really.	Slowly.	And	don’t	stop
whisking.	Once	you’ve	added	about	half	of	the	oil,	you	can	start	adding	a
little	more	oil	at	once.	If	the	mayonnaise	thickens	so	much	that	it’s
impossible	to	whisk,	add	a	teaspoon	or	so	water—or	whichever	acid	you’re
planning	on	adding	later	on—to	help	thin	it	out.

If	the	mayonnaise	breaks,	refer	to	here	for	tips	on	how	to	fix	it.
Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.

Classic	Sandwich	Mayo Makes	about	175ml

1½	teaspoons	apple	cider	vinegar
1	teaspoon	lemon	juice
¾	teaspoon	yellow	mustard	powder
½	teaspoon	sugar
Salt
175ml	stiff	Basic	Mayonnaise

In	a	small	bowl,	mix	the	vinegar	and	lemon	juice	and	stir	to	dissolve	the
mustard	powder,	sugar,	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt.	Stir	the	mixture	into
the	mayonnaise.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.	Cover	and	chill
until	serving.



Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	Suggestions:	On	a	BLT	or	club	sandwich,	or	in	Classic	Southern

Slaw	or	on	sandwiches	made	with	Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast.



Aïoli
Garlic	Mayonnaise Makes	about	175ml

Salt
4	teaspoons	lemon	juice
175ml	stiff	Basic	Mayonnaise
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt

Dissolve	a	generous	pinch	of	salt	in	the	lemon	juice.	Stir	into	the
mayonnaise,	and	add	garlic.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as	needed.	Cover
and	chill	until	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serving	suggestions:	With	boiled,	grilled,	or	roasted	vegetables,

especially	little	potatoes,	asparagus,	or	artichokes;	with	grilled	fish	or	meats;
with	Grilled	Artichokes,	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Beer-Battered	Fish,
Fritto	Misto,	Tuna	Confit,	Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken,	sandwiches
made	with	Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast,	Grilled	Skirt,	or	Rib	Eye	Steak.

Herb	Mayonnaise Makes	about	225ml

Salt
175ml	stiff	Basic	Mayonnaise
1	tablespoon	lemon	juice
4	tablespoons	any	combination	very	finely	chopped	parsley,

chives,	chervil,	basil,	and	tarragon
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt

Dissolve	a	generous	pinch	of	salt	in	the	lemon	juice.	Stir	into	the
mayonnaise,	and	add	herbs	and	garlic.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	and	acid	as
needed.	Cover	and	chill	until	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.



Serving	Suggestions:	With	boiled,	grilled,	or	roasted	vegetables,
especially	little	potatoes,	asparagus,	or	artichokes;	with	grilled	fish	or	meats.
With	Grilled	Artichokes,	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	Beer-Battered	Fish,
Fritto	Misto,	Tuna	Confit,	Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken,	sandwiches
made	with	Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast,	Grilled	Skirt,	or	Rib	Eye	Steak.



Rouille
Pepper	Mayonnaise Makes	about	225ml

Salt
3	to	4	teaspoons	red	wine	vinegar
175ml	stiff	Basic	Mayonnaise
65g	Basic	Pepper	Paste	(here)
1	garlic	clove,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt

Dissolve	a	generous	pinch	of	salt	in	the	vinegar.	Stir	into	the	mayonnaise,
along	with	the	pepper	paste	and	garlic.	The	pepper	paste	and	vinegar	will
seem	to	thin	out	the	mayonnaise	at	first,	but	the	sauce	will	thicken	with	a
few	hours	of	refrigeration.	Cover	and	chill	until	serving.
Variation
• To	make	Chipotle	Mayonnaise,	substitute	65g	puréed	canned	chipotle

peppers	for	the	pepper	paste.
Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.

Serve	with	boiled,	grilled,	or	roasted	vegetables,	especially	little
potatoes,	asparagus,	or	artichokes;	with	grilled	fish	or	meats;	with	Grilled
Artichokes,	fish	tacos	made	with	Beer-Battered	Fish,	Tuna	Confit,
sandwiches	made	with	Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast,	Grilled	Skirt,	or	Rib
Eye	Steak.



Tartar	Sauce Makes	275ml

2	teaspoons	finely	diced	shallot
1	tablespoon	lemon	juice
125ml	stiff	Basic	Mayonnaise	(here)
3	tablespoons	chopped	cornichons
1	tablespoon	salted	capers,	soaked,	rinsed,	and	chopped
2	teaspoons	finely	chopped	parsley
2	teaspoons	finely	chopped	chervil
1	teaspoon	finely	chopped	chives
1	teaspoon	finely	chopped	tarragon
1	Ten-Minute	Egg	(here),	coarsely	chopped	or	grated
½	teaspoon	white	wine	vinegar
Salt

In	a	small	bowl,	let	the	shallot	sit	in	the	lemon	juice	for	at	least	15	minutes	to
macerate.

In	a	medium	bowl,	combine	the	mayonnaise,	cornichons,	capers,
parsley,	chervil,	chives,	tarragon,	egg,	and	vinegar.	Season	with	salt.	Add	the
diced	shallot,	but	not	the	lemon	juice.	Stir	to	combine,	then	taste.	Add
lemon	juice	as	needed,	then	taste	and	adjust	for	salt	and	acid.	Cover	and
chill	until	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	3	days.
Serve	alongside	Beer-Battered	Fish	or	Prawns,	Fritto	Misto.



Pepper	Sauce
Pepper	sauces	make	for	great	condiments,	dips,	and	sandwich	spreads.
Many,	but	not	all,	cuisines	of	the	world,	feature	condiments	that	start	with	a
base	of	pepper	paste.	And	they	aren’t	always	unbearably	spicy.	Stir	pepper
paste	into	pots	of	beans,	rice,	soup,	or	stew	to	elevate	flavour.	Rub	it	onto
meat	before	roasting	or	grilling,	or	add	some	into	a	braise.	Add	some	pepper
paste	to	mayonnaise	and	you’ve	got	French	Rouille,	which	is	perfect	for	a
sandwich	made	with	Tuna	Confit	(here).	Serve	Harissa,	the	North	African
pepper	sauce,	alongside	Kufte	Kebabs	(here),	grilled	fish,	meat,	or
vegetables,	and	poached	eggs.	Thick	Romesco,	the	Catalan	pepper	and	nut
sauce,	makes	a	great	dip	for	vegetables	and	crackers.	Thin	it	out	with	a	little
water	for	an	ideal	condiment	for	roasted	or	grilled	vegetables,	fish,	and
meats.	Serve	Muhammara,	a	pomegranate-laced	walnut-and-pepper
spread	from	Lebanon,	with	warm	flatbreads	and	raw	vegetables.

Basic	Pepper	Paste Makes	about	225g

85g	dried	chillies,	such	as	Guajillo,	New	Mexico,	Anaheim,	or
ancho

900ml	boiling	water
200ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
Salt

If	you	have	very	sensitive	skin,	put	on	rubber	gloves	to	protect	your	fingers.
Stem	and	seed	the	chillies	by	removing	the	stem	and	then	tearing	open
each	pepper	lengthwise.	Shake	out	the	seeds	and	discard.	Rinse	the
peppers,	then	cover	them	with	boiling	water	in	a	heatproof	bowl,	and	set	a
plate	atop	the	peppers	to	submerge	them.	Let	sit	for	30	to	60	minutes	to
rehydrate,	then	drain	them,	reserving	55ml	of	the	water.

Place	the	peppers,	oil,	and	salt	in	a	blender	or	food	processor	and	blend
for	at	least	3	minutes,	until	completely	smooth.	If	the	mixture	is	too	thick	for
the	blender	to	process,	add	just	enough	of	the	reserved	water	to	thin	out
the	paste.	Taste	and	adjust	seasoning	as	needed.	If	your	paste	is	still	not
completely	smooth	after	5	minutes	of	blending,	pass	it	through	a	fine-mesh
sieve	with	a	rubber	spatula	to	remove	the	remaining	pepper	skins.



Cover	with	oil,	wrap	tightly,	and	refrigerate	for	up	to	10	days.	Freeze	for
up	to	3	months.



Harissa
North	African	Pepper	Sauce Makes	about	225g

1	teaspoon	cumin	seeds
½	teaspoon	coriander	seeds
½	teaspoon	caraway	seeds
225g	Basic	Pepper	Paste	(here)
30g	sun-dried	tomatoes,	coarsely	chopped
1	garlic	clove
Salt

Place	the	cumin,	coriander,	and	caraway	seeds	in	a	small,	dry	frying	pan	and
set	over	medium	heat.	Swirl	the	pan	constantly	to	ensure	even	toasting.
Toast	until	the	first	few	seeds	begin	to	pop	and	emit	a	savoury	aroma,	about
3	minutes.	Remove	from	the	heat.	Immediately	dump	the	seeds	into	the
bowl	of	a	mortar	or	a	spice	grinder.	Grind	finely	with	a	pinch	of	salt.

Blend	the	pepper	paste,	tomatoes,	and	garlic	together	in	a	food
processor	or	blender	until	smooth.	Add	the	toasted	cumin,	coriander,	and
caraway.	Season	with	salt.	Taste	and	adjust	as	needed.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	5	days.
Variation
• To	make	the	Catalan	pepper	sauce	called	Romesco,	omit	the	cumin,

coriander,	and	caraway.	Instead,	finely	grind	55g	toasted	almonds	and
55g	toasted	hazelnuts	in	a	food	processor,	or	pound	together	in	a
mortar	and	pestle.	Set	the	nut	paste	aside	in	a	medium	bowl	and	purée
the	pepper	paste,	tomatoes,	and	garlic	as	directed	above.	Add	to	the
nuts,	then	stir	in	2	tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar,	75g	toasted	Sprinkling
Crumbs	(here),	and	salt.	Stir	to	combine,	then	taste	and	adjust	salt	and
acid	as	needed.	The	sauce	will	be	thick,	so	thin	it	out	with	water	to	your
desired	consistency.



Muhammara
Lebanese	Pepper	and	Walnut	Spread Makes	about	600g

1	teaspoon	cumin
200g	walnuts
225g	Basic	Pepper	Paste	(here)
1	garlic	clove
75g	toasted	Sprinkling	Crumbs	(here)
2	tablespoons	plus	1	teaspoon	pomegranate	molasses
2	tablespoons	plus	1	teaspoon	lemon	juice
Salt

Preheat	the	oven	to	180°C.
Place	the	cumin	seeds	in	a	small,	dry	frying	pan	and	set	over	medium

heat.	Swirl	the	pan	constantly	to	ensure	even	toasting.	Toast	until	the	first
few	seeds	begin	to	pop	and	emit	a	savoury	aroma,	about	3	minutes.	Remove
from	the	heat.	Immediately	dump	the	seeds	into	the	bowl	of	a	mortar	or	a
spice	grinder.	Grind	finely	with	a	pinch	of	salt.

Spread	the	walnuts	out	in	a	single	layer	on	a	baking	sheet	and	place	in
the	oven.	Set	a	timer	for	4	minutes	and	check	on	the	nuts	when	it	goes	off,
stirring	them	around	to	ensure	even	browning.	Continue	toasting	another	2
to	4	minutes,	until	they	are	lightly	browned	on	the	outside	and	toasty	when
bitten	into.	Remove	from	the	oven	and	the	baking	sheet	and	allow	to	cool.

Place	the	pepper	paste,	cooled	walnuts,	and	garlic	in	a	food	processor
and	blend	until	smooth.

Add	the	pomegranate	molasses,	lemon	juice,	and	cumin	and	pulse	until
combined.	Taste	and	adjust	for	salt	and	acid.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	5	days.



Pesto
I	once	worked	for	a	chef	who	had	a	marble	mortar	and	pestle	the	size	(and
weight)	of	a	small	child.	Even	though	it	was	horribly	inconvenient	and
entirely	messy	to	use,	he	insisted	that	we	do	so	to	pound	all	of	the
ingredients	every	time	we	made	pesto,	“to	better	connect	with	our	culinary
ancestors.”	(And	in	Italian,	the	word	pesto	just	means	“pounded.”)	While	I’ll
let	you	imagine	the	countless	eye	rolls	that	comment	generated,	I	will	say
we	all	took	turns	distracting	him	so	we	could	just	get	the	job	done	in	a
blender.

But	as	much	as	I	hate	to	admit	it,	the	pounded	pestos	always	tasted
better	than	the	blended	ones.	Nowadays,	in	the	interest	of	time	and	sanity,	I
use	a	hybrid	method	and	pound	the	nuts	and	garlic	separately	to	fine	pastes
in	a	mortar	and	pestle,	then	blend	the	basil	in	a	blender	and	combine
everything	by	hand	in	a	big	bowl.

For	the	tastiest	pesto,	don’t	skimp	on	the	nuts	and	cheese.	To	use	as	a
pasta	sauce,	spoon	the	pesto	into	a	large	bowl	and	add	just	cooked,	drained
pasta.	Thin	out	with	pasta	water	as	needed,	and	garnish	with	(you	guessed
it)	more	Parmesan.	Pesto	is	the	rare	pasta	sauce	that	isn’t	heated,	all	for	the
sake	of	keeping	it	green.

In	Liguria,	where	basil	pesto	originates,	boiled	little	potatoes,	green
beans,	halved	cherry	tomatoes,	or	wedges	of	sweet	red	tomatoes	are	often
tossed	into	pasta	al	pesto	at	the	last	minute.	Balance	more	bitter	pesto
made	with	cima	di	rapa	or	kale	by	adding	a	few	dollops	of	fresh	ricotta
cheese	after	saucing	the	pasta.

Pesto	is	versatile,	which	is	why	I’ve	included	it	here,	among	the	sauces,
rather	than	confining	it	to	the	pasta	category.	Some	ideas	to	get	you	started:
stuff	pesto	under	the	skin	of	Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken	before
roasting,	thin	it	with	a	little	water	and	drizzle	it	over	grilled	or	roasted	fish	or
vegetables,	or	whip	it	into	the	ricotta	for	Ricotta	and	Tomato	Salad	Toasts.






Basil	Pesto Makes	400g

175ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
60g	(about	2	big	bunches)	fresh	basil	leaves
1	to	2	garlic	cloves,	finely	grated	or	pounded	with	a	pinch	of	salt
65g	pine	nuts,	lightly	toasted	and	pounded
100g	Parmesan,	finely	grated,	plus	more	for	serving
Salt

The	key	to	blending	basil	in	a	machine	is	to	avoid	overdoing	it,	because	the
heat	the	motor	generates,	along	with	oxidation	that	can	occur	from
overchopping,	will	cause	the	basil	to	turn	brown.	So,	give	yourself	a	head
start	here,	and	run	a	knife	through	the	basil	first.	Also	pour	half	of	the	olive
oil	into	the	bottom	of	the	blender	or	processor	bowl,	to	encourage	the	basil
to	break	down	into	a	liquid	as	quickly	as	possible.	Then	pulse,	stopping	to
push	down	the	leaves	with	a	rubber	spatula	a	couple	of	times	a	minute,	until
the	basil	oil	becomes	a	fragrant,	emerald-green	whirlpool.

To	prevent	overblending	the	basil,	finish	the	pesto	in	a	bowl.	Pour	the
basil	oil	out	into	a	medium	bowl,	and	add	some	of	the	garlic,	pine	nuts,	and
Parmesan.	Stir	to	combine,	then	taste.	Does	it	need	more	garlic?	More	salt?
More	cheese?	Is	it	too	thick?	If	so,	add	a	little	more	oil,	or	plan	to	add	some
pasta	water.	Tinker	and	taste	again,	keeping	in	mind	that	as	the	pesto	sits
for	a	little	while,	the	flavours	will	come	together,	the	garlic	will	become	more
pronounced,	and	the	salt	will	dissolve.

Let	it	sit	for	a	few	minutes,	then	taste	and	adjust	again.	Add	enough
olive	oil	to	cover	the	sauce	to	prevent	oxidation.

Refrigerate,	covered,	for	up	to	3	days,	or	freeze	for	up	to	3	months.
Variations
• Pesto	lends	itself	particularly	well	to	substitutions.	Stick	to	the	ratios	in

the	recipe	above,	but	change	the	greens,	nuts,	and	cheese	depending
on	what	you’d	like	to	eat	for	dinner,	and	what	you	have	on	hand:

Change	the	Greens



Cooked	greens:	cima	di	rapa,	kale,	wild	nettles,	chard
Raw,	tender	greens:	rocket,	pea	shoots,	spinach,	baby	chard
Herb	pesto:	parsley,	sage,	marjoram,	mint
Cruciferous	pesto:	broccoli,	cauliflower,	Romanesco

Change	the	Nuts
Nuts,	from	most	traditional	to	least.	Use	them	raw,	or	lightly	toasted:

Pine	nuts
Walnuts
Hazelnuts
Almonds
Pistachios
Pecans
Macadamia	nuts

Change	the	Cheese
Change	up	your	cheese,	which	is	a	great	source	of	salt,	fat,	and	acid	in
pesto.	In	the	most	traditional	basil	pestos,	it’s	actually	the	only	source	of
acid!	Pretty	much	any	hard	grating	cheese	will	work.	The	traditional	cheeses
are	Parmesan	and	pecorino	Romano,	though	Asiago,	grana	Padano,	or	even
an	aged	Manchego	will	work	fine.






BUTTER-AND-FLOUR	DOUGHS
Baking	is	one	kitchen	endeavour	where	precision	matters.	Everything	in	a
baking	recipe	is	there	for	a	reason,	from	the	temperatures	to	the	carefully
measured	amounts	to	the	chemical	reactions	set	off	by	particular
ingredients.	Instead	of	changing	the	crucial	particulars	of	a	baked	good,	put
your	own	spin	on	things	by	using	different	spices,	herbs,	or	flavours.

This	is	the	time	to	follow	directions	as	closely	as	possible.	And	while	I’m
not	generally	one	for	kitchen	gadgets,	I	urge	you	to	invest	in	a	digital	kitchen
scale	to	help	here.	Start	baking	with	weights	rather	than	volume,	and	you’ll
notice	an	immediate	change	in	the	quality	and	consistency	of	your	baking.

Measurements	matter	in	baking—and	so	do	temperatures.	If	you’re
wondering	why	it’s	so	important	to	keep	everything	chilled	when	making
these	butter-and-flour	doughs,	think	of	the	chilly-minded	pastry	chef	I
worked	with	who	made	the	most	ethereal	pastries	I’ve	ever	tasted	(or	flip
back	to	here	for	a	refresher).	She	knew	that	for	flaky	textures,	it’s	imperative
to	discourage	the	formation	of	excess	gluten,	and	that	if	butter	is	allowed	to
melt,	the	water	it	contains	will	combine	with	flour	to	make	gluten,	leading	to
tough,	chewy	pastries.	But	really,	the	proof	is	in	the	pudding	pie.



Makes	two	280g	balls	of	dough,
enough	for	two	single-crust
23cm	pies,	one	double-crust

All-Butter	Pie	Dough 23cm	pie,	or	1	Chicken	Pot	Pie

Use	this	dough	to	make	the	pie	of	your	dreams,	whether	it’s	Classic	Apple
Pie	or	chess	pie,	Chicken	Pot	Pie	or	Chocolate	Pudding	Pie.	Since	it’s
made	entirely	with	butter,	this	preparation	requires	a	little	forethought	and
care—chill	everything	thoroughly,	work	quickly,	be	extra	careful	not	to	add
too	much	of	it	and	extra	attentive	to	prevent	overworking	the	dough.	Butter
may	be	tricky	to	work	with,	but	the	result	is	a	crust	unparalleled	in	flavour.

One	note:	if	you	don’t	have	a	stand	mixer,	you	can	make	this	dough	in	a
food	processor	or	by	hand	with	a	pastry	blender.	Just	make	sure	to	freeze	all
of	your	tools,	no	matter	which	ones	you	use.

350g	plain	flour
1	generous	tablespoon	sugar
Large	pinch	of	salt
225g	chilled	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	1cm	cubes
About	125ml	ice	water
1	teaspoon	white	vinegar

Place	the	flour,	sugar,	and	salt	in	bowl	of	a	stand	mixer	with	the	paddle
attachment,	then	freeze	the	whole	thing	for	20	minutes	(if	you	can’t	fit	the
bowl	in	your	freezer,	then	just	freeze	the	ingredients).	Freeze	the	butter	and
ice	water	as	well.

Fit	the	bowl	on	the	mixer	and	turn	to	the	lowest	speed.	Add	the	cubed
butter,	a	few	pieces	at	a	time,	and	mix	until	the	butter	looks	like	broken
walnut	pieces.	Distinct	bits	of	butter	lead	to	beautiful	flakes	in	the	dough,	so
avoid	overmixing.

Add	the	vinegar	in	a	thin	stream.	Add	just	enough	water	and	mix	as	little
as	possible	until	the	dough	barely	holds	together—you’ll	probably	need
close	to	the	entire	125ml.	Some	shaggy	bits	are	fine.	If	you’re	not	sure
whether	or	not	the	dough	needs	more	water,	stop	the	mixer	and	take	a
handful	of	dough	in	your	palm.	Squeeze	it	hard,	then	gently	try	to	break	it



apart.	If	it	crumbles	apart	very	easily	and	feels	very	dry,	add	more	water.	If	it
holds	together	or	breaks	into	a	few	chunks,	you’re	done.

On	the	worktop,	pull	out	a	long	piece	of	cling	film	from	the	roll	but	do
not	cut	it.	In	a	quick,	fearless	motion,	flip	the	bowl	over	onto	the	cling	film.
Remove	the	bowl,	and	avoid	touching	the	dough.	Cut	the	film	from	the	roll
and,	lifting	both	ends,	use	it	to	encourage	all	the	dough	into	a	ball.	Don’t
worry	if	there	are	a	few	dry	bits—the	flour	will	evenly	absorb	the	moisture
with	time.	Twist	the	film	tightly	around	the	dough	to	form	a	ball.	Use	a	sharp
knife	to	cut	the	ball	in	half	through	the	film,	wrap	each	half	again	tightly	with
film,	and	press	each	half	into	a	disc.	Chill	for	at	least	2	hours	or	overnight.

To	freeze	unwrapped,	prepared	dough	for	up	to	2	months,	double-wrap
it	in	cling	film	and	then	wrap	it	in	aluminium	foil	to	prevent	freezer	burn.
Allow	the	dough	to	defrost	in	the	refrigerator	overnight	before	using.



Classic	Apple	Pie Makes	one	23cm	pie

1	recipe	(2	discs)	chilled	All-Butter	Pie	Dough	(here)
1.2kg	tart	apples,	such	as	Honeycrisp,	Fuji,	or	Sierra	Beauty

(about	5	large	apples)
½	teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
¼	teaspoon	ground	allspice	½	teaspoon	kosher	salt	or	¼

teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
125g	dark	brown	sugar
3	tablespoons	plain	flour,	plus	more	for	rolling
1	tablespoon	apple	cider	vinegar
2	tablespoons	double	cream
Granulated	or	demerara	sugar	for	sprinkling

Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C	and	set	a	rack	to	the	centre	position.
Roll	out	one	disc	of	chilled	dough	on	a	well-floured	board	until	it’s

about	3mm	thick	and	30cm	in	diameter.	Wind	it	around	a	lightly	floured
rolling	pin	and	pick	it	up.	Place	the	dough	over	a	23cm	pie	tin	and	unroll,
gently	pressing	it	into	the	corners	of	the	tin.	Trim	any	excess	dough	with	a
pair	of	scissors,	leaving	an	overhang	of	about	2.5cm,	and	freeze	for	10
minutes.	Save	and	chill	the	trimmed	bits	as	well.	Roll	out	the	second	disc	of
dough	to	the	same	dimensions,	cut	a	steam	hole	out	of	the	centre,	and	chill
in	the	fridge.

In	the	meantime,	peel,	core,	and	cut	the	apples	into	2cm	slices.	Place
the	apples,	cinnamon,	allspice,	salt,	sugar,	flour,	and	vinegar	in	a	large	bowl
and	toss	to	combine.	Place	the	filling	into	the	prepared	pie	tin.	Use	a	rolling
pin,	as	you	did	with	the	first	round	of	dough,	to	pick	up	and	gently	unroll	the
second	round	over	the	pie	filling.	Use	scissors	to	trim	both	crusts	at	the
same	time,	leaving	a	1cm	overhang.

Tuck	5mm	of	the	border	underneath	itself	so	you	have	a	rolled	cylinder
that	sits	on	the	rim	of	the	pie	tin.	Work	with	one	hand	inside	the	edge	of	the
crust	and	the	other	on	the	outside.	Use	the	index	finger	of	the	inside	hand
to	push	the	dough	between	the	thumb	and	forefinger	of	your	outside	hand,



forming	a	V	shape.	Continue	all	around	the	crust,	spacing	the	Vs	about
2.5cm	apart.	As	you	crimp,	pull	the	dough	out	just	past	the	edge	of	the	tin.
It’ll	shrink	back	as	it	bakes.	Patch	any	holes	with	dough	trimmings.

Freeze	the	entire	pie	for	20	minutes.	After	removing	it	from	the	freezer,
place	the	pie	on	a	baking	sheet	lined	with	parchment	paper.	Brush	the	top
crust	generously	with	double	cream,	then	sprinkle	with	sugar.	Bake	on	the
centre	rack	at	220°C	for	15	minutes,	then	reduce	heat	to	200°C	and	bake
another	15	to	20	minutes	until	lightly	golden.	Reduce	heat	to	180°C	and
bake	until	done,	another	45	minutes.	Allow	pie	to	cool	on	a	wire	rack	for	2
hours	before	slicing.	Serve	with	Vanilla,	Cinnamon,	or	Caramel	Cream	(here
to	here).



Classic	Pumpkin	Pie Makes	one	23cm	pie

½	recipe	(1	disc)	chilled	All-Butter	Pie	Dough	(here)
Flour	for	rolling
2	large	eggs
350ml	double	cream
425g	pumpkin	purée
145g	sugar
1	teaspoon	kosher	salt	or	½	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
1½	teaspoons	ground	cinnamon
1	teaspoon	ground	ginger
½	teaspoon	ground	cloves

Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C	and	set	a	rack	to	the	centre	position.
Roll	out	the	chilled	dough	on	a	well-floured	board	until	it’s	about	3mm

thick	and	30cm	in	diameter.	Wind	it	around	a	lightly	floured	rolling	pin	and
pick	it	up.	Place	the	dough	over	a	23cm	pie	tin	and	unroll,	gently	pressing	it
into	the	corners	of	the	tin.	Trim	any	excess	dough	with	a	pair	of	scissors,
leaving	an	overhang	of	about	2cm.	Save	the	trimmings.

Crimp	the	dough	by	rolling	under	itself	so	you	have	a	rolled	cylinder
that	sits	on	the	rim	of	the	pie	tin.	Work	with	one	hand	inside	the	edge	of	the
crust	and	the	other	on	the	outside.	Use	the	index	finger	of	the	inside	hand
to	push	the	dough	between	the	thumb	and	forefinger	of	your	outside	hand,
forming	a	V	shape.	Continue	all	around	the	crust,	spacing	the	Vs	about
2.5cm	apart.	As	you	crimp,	pull	the	dough	out	just	past	the	edge	of	the	tin.
It’ll	shrink	back	as	it	bakes.	Patch	any	holes	with	dough	trimmings.	Prick	the
dough	all	over	with	a	fork,	then	freeze	for	15	minutes.

Crack	the	eggs	into	a	medium	bowl	and	break	them	up	with	a	whisk.
Add	the	cream,	pumpkin	purée,	sugar,	salt,	and	spices	to	the	bowl	and	whisk
thoroughly	to	combine.	Pour	the	custard	mixture	into	the	frozen	shell.

Bake	at	220°C	for	15	minutes,	then	reduce	heat	to	160°C	and	bake	until
the	centre	is	just	barely	set,	about	40	minutes	more.	Allow	to	cool	on	a	wire



rack	for	an	hour	before	slicing.	Serve	with	Tangy	Whipped	Vanilla,
Cinnamon,	or	Caramel	Cream	(here	to	here).
Variation
• To	make	a	Chocolate	Pudding	Pie,	roll,	crimp,	and	freeze	a	23cm	pie

shell	as	directed	on	the	previous	page.	Blind	bake	the	shell:	line	the
dough	with	parchment	paper	and	fill	with	pie	weights	or	dried	beans.
Bake	at	220°C	for	15	minutes,	then	reduce	heat	to	200°C	and	bake	until
lightly	golden,	another	10	to	15	minutes.

Remove	the	crust	from	the	oven,	remove	the	pie	weights	or	beans
and	parchment	paper,	and	reduce	the	heat	to	190°C.	Return	the	crust
to	the	oven	and	continue	baking	until	the	bottom	of	the	crust	is	lightly
golden	and	the	outer	crust	is	just	starting	to	brown,	another	5	to	10
minutes.	Watch	the	crust	closely	on	this	final	bake,	as	baking	times	will
vary	depending	on	the	oven.

Let	the	crust	cool,	then	melt	55g	of	bittersweet	chocolate	and
brush	it	all	over	the	crust.	Let	it	harden.

Make	1	recipe	Bittersweet	Chocolate	Pudding	(here),	but
increase	the	cornflour	to	40g.	Press	cling	film	onto	the	top	of	the
pudding	to	prevent	a	skin	from	forming	and	cool	the	pudding	to	room
temperature.	Spoon	the	cooled	pudding	into	the	prepared	crust,	cover
with	cling	film,	and	chill	the	pie	overnight.	To	serve,	top	with	billowy
Vanilla,	Chocolate,	Coffee,	or	Caramel	Cream	(here	to	here).



Light	and	Flaky Makes	16	biscuits	(this	recipe
Buttermilk	Biscuits halves	beautifully)

I	learned	this	unconventional	method	from	Tom	Purtill,	a	young	baker	at
one	of	my	favourite	diners	in	Oakland.	The	first	time	I	tasted	one	of	his
biscuits,	I	begged	him	to	come	out	of	the	kitchen	and	talk	me	through	his
process.	And	I’m	so	glad	that	I	did,	because	every	word	he	said	was
completely	at	odds	with	everything	I	knew	about	making	biscuits.	I’d	always
thought	the	key	was	to	work	the	dough	as	little	as	possible,	but	he	told	me
how	he	completely	incorporated	half	of	the	butter	into	the	dough	to	make	it
tender,	and	then	rolled	and	folded	the	finished	dough	a	few	times	to	create
flaky	layers.	It	was	so	counterintuitive,	in	fact,	that	if	the	moistest,	flakiest
biscuit	I’d	ever	seen	weren’t	sitting	right	in	front	of	me,	I	wouldn’t	have
believed	him.

But	I	did,	and	went	straight	home	to	try	it	out.	I	treated	every	word	he’d
said	like	gospel,	and	it	worked!	The	key,	just	as	he	said,	is	to	keep	everything
ice-cold	so	that	the	butter	doesn’t	melt	and	combine	with	the	flour	to	form
gluten,	which	will	make	the	biscuits	tough.	If	you	don’t	have	a	stand	mixer,
you	can	use	a	food	processor.	Or	mix	everything	by	hand	using	a	metal
pastry	cutter—it’ll	just	take	a	little	while	longer.

520g	plain	flour
4	teaspoons	baking	powder
1	teaspoon	kosher	salt	or	½	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
225g	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	1cm	cubes	and	chilled
225ml	buttermilk,	chilled
225ml	double	cream,	chilled,	plus	55ml	more	for	brushing	biscuits

Preheat	the	oven	to	230°C.	Line	two	baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.
Freeze	the	cubed	butter	and	the	buttermilk	for	15	minutes.
Place	the	flour,	baking	powder,	and	salt	in	the	bowl	of	a	stand	mixer

fitted	with	the	paddle	attachment	and	mix	at	low	speed	until	combined,
about	30	seconds.

Add	in	half	of	the	butter,	a	few	pieces	at	a	time,	and	continue	mixing	at



low	speed	until	the	mixture	looks	sandy	and	no	distinct	pieces	of	butter	are
visible,	about	8	minutes.

Add	the	rest	of	the	butter	and	continue	mixing	until	the	butter	pieces
are	the	size	of	large	peas,	about	4	minutes.

Transfer	the	mixture	to	a	large,	wide	bowl	and	very	briefly	use	your
fingers	to	flatten	the	largest	butter	pieces:	get	some	flour	on	your	hands	and
run	your	thumb	from	the	tip	of	your	pinky	to	the	tip	of	your	index	finger
along	your	fingertips	like	you’re	making	the	“Cha-ching!	Cash	money!”
motion.

Create	a	well	in	the	centre	of	the	mixture.	Pour	the	buttermilk	and
225ml	cream	into	the	well.	Mix	with	a	rubber	spatula	with	broad,	circular
strokes	until	the	dough	comes	roughly	together.	The	dough	may	still	appear
shaggy,	which	is	fine.

Lightly	flour	the	worktop	and	turn	the	dough	out	of	the	bowl.	Gently	pat
the	dough	out	into	a	2cm	thick	rectangle,	about	23cm	by	33cm.	Fold	the
dough	in	half,	then	fold	it	again,	then	fold	it	a	third	time,	then	use	a	rolling
pin	to	gently	roll	the	dough	back	out	to	a	2cm	thick	rectangle,	about	23cm
by	33cm.	If	the	top	of	the	dough	isn’t	yet	smooth,	gently	repeat	this	rolling
and	folding	one	or	two	more	times	until	it	is.

Lightly	flour	the	worktop	and	roll	the	dough	to	a	height	of	about	3cm.
Cut	straight	down	with	a	6cm	biscuit	cutter,	wiping	and	flouring	the	cutter
between	each	cut.	This	will	ensure	the	biscuits	rise	straight	up,	instead	of
sloping	over.	Reroll	the	scraps	once	and	cut	remaining	dough	into	biscuits.

Place	the	biscuits	about	1cm	apart	on	the	prepared	baking	sheets	and
brush	the	tops	generously	with	cream.	Bake	at	230°C	for	8	minutes,	then
rotate	pans	and	switch	their	oven	positions.	Continue	baking	another	8	to
10	minutes,	until	the	biscuits	are	golden	brown	and	feel	light	when	picked
up.

Transfer	biscuits	to	a	wire	rack	and	cool	for	5	minutes.	Serve	warm.
To	freeze	the	biscuits	for	up	to	6	weeks,	freeze	cut	biscuits	in	a	single

layer	on	a	baking	sheet	until	solid,	then	transfer	to	plastic	freezer	bags	and
freeze.	To	bake,	do	not	defrost.	Brush	frozen	biscuits	with	cream	and	bake
for	10	minutes	at	230°C	and	10	to	12	minutes	at	190°C.
Variations
• For	Shortcakes,	add	100g	sugar	to	the	dry	ingredients.	After	cutting	the

biscuits,	brush	with	double	cream	and	sprinkle	with	sugar.	After	baking,



allow	to	cool	for	5	minutes,	then	place	each	shortcake	on	a	plate.	Split
in	half	and	spoon	in	Vanilla	Cream	(here)	and	Strawberry	Compote
(here).

• For	Fruit	Cobbler,	preheat	the	oven	to	200°C.	Prepare	a	half-recipe	of
shortcakes	and	chill	in	the	fridge	after	cutting.	Combine	1.2kg	of	fresh
pitted	cherries,	sliced	peaches	or	nectarines,	or	1.2kg	blackberries,
boysenberries,	or	raspberries,	with	150g	of	sugar,	25g	cornflour,	1
teaspoon	finely	grated	lemon	zest,	3	tablespoons	lemon	juice,	and	a	big
pinch	of	salt	in	a	large	bowl.	(For	frozen	fruit,	increase	cornflour	to
40g.)

Pour	fruit	mixture	into	a	23cm	by	23cm	baking	dish.	Arrange	the
chilled	shortcakes	on	top	of	the	fruit.	Place	the	baking	dish	on	a	baking
sheet	to	catch	any	juices	that	bubble	over.	Brush	shortcakes	with
double	cream	and	sprinkle	generously	with	sugar,	then	bake	for	40	to
45	minutes,	until	the	biscuits	are	cooked	through	and	turning	golden.
Allow	to	cool	slightly	before	serving,	with	vanilla	ice	cream	if	desired.



Makes	450g	tart	dough,	enough
Aaron’s	Tart	Dough for	a	30cm	tart

I	used	to	be	terrified	of	tart	making,	until	my	dear	friend	Aaron,	who’s	as
obsessive	about	flavour	as	I	am,	came	up	with	this	recipe	after	years	of
experimentation.	Both	versatile	and	forgiving,	it	works	for	any	fruit	or
savoury	tart.	Once	you	can	make	a	delicious	tart,	practise	making	a
beautiful	one.	Lay	out	toppings	with	an	eye	toward	aesthetics.	Alternate
different	coloured	plums,	apples,	tomatoes,	or	peppers	for	a	striped	pattern,
or	simply	dot	an	asparagus	tart	with	dollops	of	seasoned	ricotta	for	contrast.
The	more	senses	to	which	your	food	appeals,	the	more	delight	it’ll	bring
you.

One	note:	if	you	don’t	have	a	stand	mixer,	you	can	make	this	dough	in	a
food	processor	or	by	hand	with	a	pastry	blender.	Just	make	sure	to	freeze	all
your	tools,	no	matter	which	ones	you	use.

235g	plain	flour
25	sugar
¼	teaspoon	baking	powder
1	teaspoon	kosher	salt	or	½	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
115g	unsalted	butter	cut	into	1cm	cubes,	chilled
85ml	crème	fraîche	(here)	or	double	cream,	chilled
2	to	4	tablespoons	ice	water

Whisk	together	the	flour,	sugar,	baking	powder,	and	salt	in	the	bowl	of	a
stand	mixer.	Freeze,	along	with	the	butter	and	the	paddle	attachment,	for
20	minutes.	Chill	the	crème	fraîche	and	cream	in	the	fridge.

Put	the	bowl	of	dry	ingredients	on	the	stand	mixer	and	fit	with	the
paddle	attachment.	Turn	the	speed	to	low,	and	slowly	add	the	butter	cubes.
Once	the	butter	is	added,	you	can	increase	the	speed	to	medium-low.

Work	in	the	butter	until	it	looks	like	broken-walnut-size	pieces	(don’t
overmix—bits	of	butter	are	good!).	This	will	take	about	1	to	2	minutes	in	the
stand	mixer,	a	little	longer	by	hand.

Add	the	crème	fraîche.	In	some	cases,	this	will	be	enough	to	bind	the



dough	with	a	bit	of	mixing.	In	other	cases,	you	might	need	to	add	a	spoonful
or	two	of	ice	water.	Resist	the	urge	to	add	so	much	water,	or	mix	for	so	long,
that	the	dough	comes	completely	together.	Some	shaggy	bits	are	fine.	If
you’re	not	sure	whether	or	not	the	dough	needs	more	water,	stop	the	mixer
and	take	a	handful	of	dough	in	your	palm.	Squeeze	it	hard,	then	gently	try	to
break	it	apart.	If	it	crumbles	apart	very	easily	and	feels	very	dry,	add	more
water.	If	it	holds	together	or	breaks	into	a	few	chunks,	you’re	done.

On	the	worktop,	pull	out	a	long	piece	of	cling	film	from	the	roll	but	do
not	cut	it.	In	a	quick,	fearless	motion,	flip	the	bowl	over	onto	the	cling	film.
Remove	the	bowl,	and	avoid	touching	the	dough.	Cut	the	film	from	the	roll
and,	lifting	both	ends,	use	it	to	encourage	all	of	the	dough	into	a	ball.	Don’t
worry	if	there	are	some	dry	bits—the	flour	will	evenly	absorb	the	moisture
with	time.	Just	twist	the	film	tightly	around	the	dough,	press	the	ball	into	a
disc,	and	chill	for	at	least	2	hours	or	overnight.

To	freeze	the	dough	for	up	to	2	months,	double-wrap	it	in	cling	film	and
then	wrap	it	in	aluminium	foil	to	prevent	freezer	burn.	Allow	the	dough	to
defrost	in	the	refrigerator	overnight	before	using.



Apple	and	Frangipane	Tart Makes	one	35cm	tart

For	the	Frangipane
115g	almonds,	toasted
3	tablespoons	sugar
25g	marzipan
55g	unsalted	butter	at	room	temperature
1	large	egg
1	teaspoon	kosher	salt	or	½	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
½	teaspoon	vanilla	extract
½	teaspoon	almond	extract

For	the	Tart
1	recipe	Aaron’s	Tart	Dough	(here),	chilled
Flour	for	rolling
6	tart,	crunchy	apples	such	as	Honeycrisp,	Sierra	Beauty,	or	Pink

Lady
Double	cream
Sugar	for	sprinkling

To	make	the	frangipane,	place	the	almonds	and	sugar	in	a	food	processor
and	grind	until	very	fine.	Add	the	marzipan,	butter,	egg,	salt,	vanilla,	and
almond	extract	and	mix	until	you	have	a	smooth	paste.

Flip	a	rimmed	baking	sheet	upside	down	and	place	a	piece	of
parchment	paper	on	top	(it’ll	be	easier	to	shape	and	fold	the	tart	without
the	rim	of	the	tin	getting	in	the	way).	Set	aside.

Before	unwrapping	the	dough,	roll	the	disc	on	its	edge	on	the	worktop
to	form	it	into	a	uniform	circle.	Unwrap	the	dough	and	sprinkle	the	worktop,
the	rolling	pin,	and	the	dough	with	flour	to	prevent	sticking.	Working
quickly,	roll	the	dough	out	into	a	35cm	circle,	to	a	thickness	of	about	3mm.

To	roll	the	dough	into	a	circle	more	easily,	turn	the	dough	a	quarter	turn



with	every	roll.	If	the	dough	does	begin	to	stick,	lift	it	carefully	from	the
worktop	and	use	more	flour	as	needed.

Roll	the	dough	onto	the	rolling	pin,	and	gingerly	pick	it	up	off	the
worktop.	Carefully	unroll	it	onto	the	upside-down,	parchment-lined	baking
sheet.	Refrigerate	for	20	minutes.

In	the	meantime,	work	on	the	fruit.	Peel,	core,	and	cut	the	apples	into
5mm	slices.	Taste	a	slice.	If	the	apples	are	really	tart,	place	them	in	a	large
bowl,	sprinkle	them	with	1	to	2	tablespoons	of	sugar,	and	toss	to	coat.

Use	a	rubber	or	offset	spatula	to	spread	a	3mm	thick	layer	of	frangipane
all	over	the	surface	of	the	chilled	dough,	leaving	the	outer	5cm	uncovered.

Layer	the	apples	onto	the	frangipane,	making	sure	there	is	plenty	of
overlap.	As	the	fruit	cooks	it	will	shrink	and	you	don’t	want	to	end	up	with
any	naked	parts	on	your	tart.	To	make	a	herringbone	design,	lay	two	rows	of
apple	slices	at	a	45-degree	angle	(make	sure	they	are	all	pointing	the	same
way),	then	reverse	the	angle	of	the	next	two	rows	to	135	degrees.	Continue
the	pattern	until	the	dough	is	covered	in	fruit.	Use	two	different	colours	of
fruits	for	a	particularly	visually	striking	tart.	Green	and	purple	plums,
poached	quince,	or	pears	poached	in	red	or	white	wine	can	also	offer
beautiful	colours	for	you	to	work	with.	(If	using	more	than	one	colour,	the
pattern	becomes	45	degrees	colour	A,	45	degrees	colour	B,	135	degrees
colour	B,	135	degrees	colour	A	to	achieve	stripes.)

To	create	a	pleated	crust,	fold	the	outer	dough	up	and	over	itself	at
4cm-ish	intervals	while	rotating	the	tart.	With	each	pleat,	crimp	the	dough
tightly	and	push	it	up	against	the	outer	circle	of	fruit.	For	a	more	rustic	look,
simply	fold	the	dough	over	the	fruit	at	regular	intervals.	Leaving	it	on	the
parchment	paper,	return	the	tart	to	the	baking	sheet,	now	on	the	top	side,
and	refrigerate	for	20	minutes.

Preheat	the	oven	to	220°C,	and	set	a	rack	to	the	middle	position	of	the
oven.	Just	before	baking,	brush	the	crust	generously	with	double	cream	and
sprinkle	generously	with	sugar.	Sprinkle	some	sugar	onto	the	fruit	as	well.
(Brush	savoury	tarts	with	a	lightly	whisked	egg	and	omit	the	sugar.	When
working	with	very	juicy	fruits,	such	as	rhubarb	or	apricots,	bake	the	tart	for
15	minutes	before	sprinkling	the	fruit	with	sugar,	which	will	encourage
osmosis	and	cause	it	to	weep.	Give	the	crust	a	head	start	so	it	can	stand	up
to	the	fruit.)

Bake	on	the	middle	rack	of	the	oven	at	220°C	for	20	minutes.	Then
reduce	the	heat	to	200°C	for	another	15	to	20	minutes.	Then	reduce	the



heat	to	180	to	190°C	(based	on	how	dark	the	crust	is)	and	cook	until	done,
about	another	20	minutes.	Rotate	the	tart	as	it	bakes	to	ensure	even
browning.	If	the	crust	browns	too	quickly,	loosely	place	a	piece	of
parchment	paper	over	the	tart	and	continue	baking.

The	tart	will	be	done	when	the	fruit	is	tender,	the	crust	is	a	deep,	golden
brown,	and	you	can	stick	a	paring	knife	under	the	tart	and	lift	it	off	the	pan
with	ease.	The	underside	should	also	be	golden-hued.

Remove	from	the	oven	and	allow	to	cool	on	a	wire	rack	for	45	minutes
before	slicing.	Serve	warm	or	cooled,	with	ice	cream,	Scented	Cream
(here),	or	crème	fraîche	(here).

Cover	and	refrigerate	unused	frangipane	for	up	to	1	week.	Keep	any
uneaten	tart	wrapped	at	room	temperature,	for	up	to	1	day.
Variations
• When	working	with	really	juicy	fruits,	such	as	apricots,	rhubarb,	berries,

peaches,	or	plums,	sprinkle	a	little	Magic	Dust	over	the	frangipane	to
help	absorb	the	juices	and	prevent	a	soggy	crust.	To	make	the	Magic
Dust,	simply	combine	2	tablespoons	each	toasted	almonds,	sugar,	and
flour	in	a	food	processor	and	grind	into	a	fine	dust.	Use	4	to	6
tablespoons	Magic	Dust	per	juicy	tart.

• For	savoury	tarts,	sprinkle	about	2	tablespoons	flour	onto	the	rolled
dough,	and	then	spread	on	drained,	cooled	Caramelised	Onions
(here),	or	Parmesan,	or	both,	to	create	a	similar	protective	layer.

• For	tarts	made	with	precooked	ingredients,	such	as	roasted	potatoes,
radicchio,	or	butternut	squash,	adjust	the	baking	time	to	20	minutes	at
220°C,	plus	15	minutes	at	200°C.	Then	check	the	tart	for	doneness,	and
continue	baking	at	180°C	if	necessary	until	the	crust	is	golden	brown
and	you	can	stick	a	paring	knife	under	the	tart	and	lift	it	off	the	pan	with
ease.






SWEETS

Nekisia’s	Olive	Oil	and	Sea	Salt	Granola Makes	about	900g

Until	recently,	I’d	never	been	one	to	voluntarily	eat	granola	for	breakfast.
Too	honey	sweet,	too	bland,	or	simply	not	toasted	enough,	there	always
seemed	to	be	something	wrong	with	it.	But	then	a	friend	sent	me	a	bag	of
Nekisia	Davis’s	Early	Bird	Granola	and	told	me	it’d	change	my	life.	As	soon
as	I	tore	open	the	bag	and	tasted	this	nutty,	darkly	toasted,	perfectly	salted
cereal,	my	opinion	of	granola	changed	forever.

I	had	to	know	how	it	was	made,	so	I	tracked	down	Nekisia	and	begged
her	to	share	the	recipe.	The	answer:	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat,	of	course.
First,	salt.	She	didn’t	have	to	explain	to	me	what	a	generous	dose	of	flaky
salt	would	do	for	the	cereal.	Next,	by	replacing	the	neutral-tasting	oils	used
in	most	granola	with	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	Nekisia	worked	powerful	flavour
into	the	ingredient	list.	She	gave	the	granola’s	sweetness	a	nice	acid	balance
by	using	dark	and	robust	grade	A	maple	syrup,	which	is	usually	made	at	the
end	of	sugaring	season	and	is	imbued	with	a	light	acidity.	The	slow,	dark
toast	that	comes	with	careful	tending	at	low	heat	also	offers	another	acidic
counterpoint,	as	well	as	all	the	other	complex	flavours	of	caramelisation	and
the	Maillard	reaction.

Stir	in	a	little	dried	fruit	after	baking,	or	sprinkle	a	handful	of	this	granola
over	a	bowl	of	yoghurt,	for	an	extra	hit	of	acid.	Breakfast	will	never	be	the
same.



300g	old-fashioned	rolled	oats
125g	hulled	pumpkin	seeds
150g	hulled	sunflower	seeds
60g	unsweetened	coconut	chips
140g	halved	pecans
150ml	pure	maple	syrup,	preferably	dark	and	robust	Grade	A
125ml	extra-virgin	olive	oil
75g	brown	sugar
Sel	gris	or	Maldon	sea	salt
Optional:	150g	dried	sour	cherries	or	quartered	dried	apricots

Preheat	the	oven	to	150°C.	Line	a	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	parchment
paper.	Set	aside.

Place	the	oats,	pumpkin	seeds,	sunflower	seeds,	coconut,	pecans,
maple	syrup,	olive	oil,	brown	sugar,	and	1	teaspoon	salt	in	a	large	bowl	and
mix	until	well	combined.	Spread	granola	mixture	in	an	even	layer	on
prepared	baking	sheet.

Slide	into	the	oven	and	bake,	stirring	with	a	metal	spatula	every	10	to	15
minutes,	until	granola	is	toasted	and	very	crisp,	about	45	to	50	minutes.

Remove	granola	from	oven	and	season	with	more	salt	to	taste.
Let	cool	completely.	Stir	in	dried	cherries	or	apricots	if	desired.
Store	in	an	airtight	container	for	up	to	1	month.



Four	Things	to	Do	with	Fruit
Most	of	the	time,	the	best	thing	to	do	with	fruit	is	to	find	a	perfectly	ripe
piece	of	it	and	enjoy	it	out	of	hand.	The	copious	stains	running	down	the
front	of	practically	every	shirt	I	own	attest	to	the	fact	that	I	put	this	view
into	practice	all	summer	long	with	berries,	nectarines,	peaches,	plums,
melons,	and	anything	else	I	can	get	my	hands	on.	As	kitchen	scientist
Harold	McGee	says,	“all	cooked	food	aspires	to	the	condition	of	fruit.”	Since
I	don’t	think	there’s	much	you	can	do	to	improve	upon	fruit,	I	suggest	the
next	best	thing,	which	is	to	do	as	little	as	possible	to	it.	In	addition	to	tarts
and	pies,	these	are	my	four	go-to	methods	for	showing	off	the	glory	of	ripe
fruit.

Precisely	because	these	recipes	are	so	simple,	they	do	require	that	you
start	with	the	tastiest	fruit	you	can	get.	Use	ripe	fruit	at	the	height	of	its
season	(or,	for	the	Granita,	frozen	fruit,	which	is	frozen	at	its	peak).	You
won’t	regret	the	extra	effort.

Juice	It	and	Make	Granita 	

Granita	is	Sicilian	shaved	ice,	one	of	my	favourite	refreshing	desserts,	in	part
because	it’s	so	simple	to	make.	Since	it’s	frozen	with	intermittent	rather
than	constant	stirring,	the	ice	crystals	that	form	are	much	larger	and	flakier
than	those	you	find	in	ice	cream	or	gelato.	They	half	melt,	half	crunch	away
on	the	tongue.

Squeeze	your	own	citrus	juice	(or	for	a	shortcut,	buy	freshly	squeezed
juice).	Or	juice	any	ripe	or	frozen	fruit	(my	favourites	are	cherry,	strawberry,
raspberry,	and	melon)	by	blending	it	with	a	little	water	in	a	food	processor
or	blender,	and	then	straining	out	the	solids.	Make	sure	to	squeeze	every
last	bit	of	liquid	out	by	pressing	hard	with	a	rubber	spatula	or	the	back	of	a
ladle.	Almond	milk,	coconut	milk,	root	beer,	coffee,	espresso,	or	red	wine
will	also	make	delicious	Granita	when	you	don’t	have	fruit	on	hand.

Once	you’ve	got	the	juice,	sweeten	it	and	balance	the	acid	with	lemon
or	lime	juice—whichever	is	more	appropriate.	Keeping	in	mind	that
everything	tastes	less	sweet	when	it’s	frozen,	add	a	little	more	sugar	than
you	think	it	needs.

To	get	you	started,	here	are	a	couple	of	basic	recipes.	Both	make



enough	Granita	to	serve	4	people.
Orange	Granita

450ml	orange	juice
50g	sugar
6	tablespoons	lemon	juice
Pinch	of	salt

Coffee	Granita
450ml	strongly	brewed	coffee
100g	sugar
Pinch	of	salt

Pour	either	mixture	above—or	one	of	your	own	devising—into	a
nonreactive	(i.e.,	stainless	steel,	glass,	or	ceramic)	dish	or	bowl.	The	mixture
should	be	at	least	2.5cm	deep	in	the	dish.	Place	in	the	freezer.	After	about
an	hour,	begin	stirring	every	once	in	a	while	with	a	fork	as	time	allows.	When
you	stir,	make	sure	to	mix	up	the	more	frozen	edges	and	top	layer	really	well
with	the	slushier	centre.	The	more	diligently	you	stir,	the	finer	and	more
even	in	texture	(less	icy)	the	finished	Granita	will	be.	Freeze	the	Granita
until	frozen	throughout,	about	8	hours.	Stir	things	up	a	minimum	of	three
times	throughout	the	freezing	process,	then	give	the	Granita	a	thorough
final	scrape	right	before	serving	until	it’s	the	texture	of	shaved	ice.	Serve
with	ice	cream	or	a	dollop	of	Scented	Cream	(here),	if	desired.	Store,
covered,	in	the	freezer	for	up	to	a	week.



Poach	It	in	Wine 	

Peel,	halve,	seed	or	pit,	and	poach	peaches,	nectarines,	apricots,	plums,
apples,	pears,	or	quince	in	wine	until	tender	(resist	combining	different
fruits	in	a	single	pot,	as	they’ll	cook	at	different	rates).	Use	red	or	white	wine,
sweet	or	dry,	as	your	menu	and	tastes	guide	you.	For	every	900g	of	fruit,
combine	900ml	of	wine,	265g	sugar,	a	2.5	by	8cm	strip	of	lemon	zest,	half	a
scraped	vanilla	bean	and	its	seeds,	and	a	generous	pinch	of	salt	in	a	heavy,
nonreactive	pot.	Bring	to	a	boil,	then	turn	down	to	a	simmer.	Cover	the	fruit
with	a	round	piece	of	parchment	paper	with	a	5cm	hole	cut	in	the	centre.
Simmer	until	the	fruit	is	tender	when	pricked	with	a	paring	knife—this	can
take	as	little	as	3	minutes	for	apricots,	and	as	much	as	2½	hours	for	quince.
When	the	fruit	is	tender,	remove	it	from	the	liquid	and	let	it	cool	on	a	plate.
If	the	poaching	liquid	is	watery,	rather	than	syrupy,	reduce	it	over	high	heat
until	it’s	the	consistency	of	maple	syrup.	Cool	the	syrup	to	room
temperature	and	return	the	fruit	to	it.	Serve	the	fruit	warm	or	at	room
temperature,	drizzled	with	some	of	its	syrup,	alongside	mascarpone,	crème
fraîche	(here),	lightly	sweetened	ricotta,	Greek	yoghurt,	vanilla	ice	cream,



or	Scented	Cream	(here).
For	a	visually	striking	dessert,	poach	half	of	the	pears	or	quince	in	red

wine	and	the	other	half	in	white	wine,	and	alternate	slices	of	each	on	the
plate.	In	the	winter	months,	add	half	a	cinnamon	stick,	two	cloves,	and	a	few
zips	of	nutmeg	to	the	wine	for	a	kick	of	warm	spices.

For	more	poaching	cues,	refer	back	to	here.

Roast	It	on	a	Bed	of	Fig	Leaves 	

Line	a	small	ceramic	or	glass	roasting	dish	with	fig	leaves,	which	will	lend	a
heavenly	nutty	aroma	to	the	fruit	(alternatively,	use	a	few	bay	leaves	or
sprigs	of	thyme).	Fill	the	dish	with	a	single	layer	of	fist-size	bunches	of
grapes	on	the	stem,	or	halved	apricots,	nectarines,	peaches,	or	plums,	with
the	cut	side	up.	Sprinkle	generously	with	sugar.	Roast	in	a	220°C	oven	until
tender	within,	and	golden	brown	on	the	surface,	about	15	minutes	for
smaller	fruit	and	30	minutes	for	larger	fruit.	Serve	warm	or	at	room
temperature,	with	Scented	Cream	(here)	or	vanilla	ice	cream,	or	alongside
Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta	(here).



Make	Compote 	

Use	fresh,	ripe	fruit	to	make	compote,	which	is	simply	fruit	tossed	with	a
little	bit	of	sugar	and	allowed	to	sit,	or	macerate.	If	necessary,	balance	out
excess	sweetness	with	a	few	drops	of	lemon	juice,	wine,	or	vinegar.	If	you’re
unsure	of	what	adding	sugar	to	taste	might	look	like,	start	with	a	generous
sprinkle,	let	it	be	absorbed,	then	taste	and	add	more	as	needed.

For	a	simple	dessert,	serve	compote	with	cookies,	or	alongside	Scented
Cream	(here),	vanilla	ice	cream,	mascarpone,	sweetened	ricotta,	Greek
yoghurt	or	crème	fraîche	(here).	Or	use	it	as	a	garnish	for	other	desserts
such	as	Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta	(here),	Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake
(here),	Fresh	Ginger	and	Molasses	Cake	(here),	Almond	and	Cardamom
Tea	Cake	(here),	or	Pavlova	(here).

Use	any	of	the	fruits	from	the	list	below,	either	on	their	own	or	in
combination.	Add	sugar	and	fresh	lemon	juice	to	taste,	then	let	sit	for	about
30	minutes	to	macerate:

Sliced	strawberries
Apricot,	nectarine,	peach,	or	plum	slices
Blueberries,	raspberries,	blackberries,	or	boysenberries
Mango	slices
Pineapple	slices
Pitted,	halved	cherries
Segmented	oranges,	mandarins,	or	grapefruit
Thinly	sliced,	seeded	kumquats
Pomegranate	seeds

Variations
• For	Peach	and	Vanilla	Bean	Compote,	add	the	scraped	seeds	of	½	of

a	vanilla	bean	along	with	the	sugar	for	every	6	peaches.	Balance	with
lemon	juice.

• For	Apricot	and	Almond	Compote,	add	½	teaspoon	almond	extract
and	20g	toasted	sliced	almonds	along	with	the	sugar	to	every	900g	of



apricots.	Balance	with	lemon	juice.
• For	Rose-Scented	Berries,	add	2	teaspoons	rosewater	to	each	350g	of

berries	along	with	the	sugar.	Balance	with	lemon	juice.






Two	Favourite	Oil	Cakes

Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake Makes	two	20cm	cakes

Here’s	the	recipe	for	the	cake	I	mentioned	in	Fat—the	one	that	changed
everything	for	me.	By	age	twenty,	I’d	given	up	on	the	idea	that	I’d	ever
encounter	a	chocolate	cake	recipe	that	yielded	the	flavourful	bite	I’d	always
dreamed	of.	After	all,	I	came	of	age	in	the	1990s,	the	golden	age	of	flourless
chocolate	cake.	But	all	I’d	ever	wanted	was	a	recipe	for	a	cake	that	rivalled
the	moistness	of	cake	mix	cakes,	yet	offered	that	fancy-bakery	flavour.	A
few	months	after	I	began	waiting	tables	at	Chez	Panisse,	my	friend	Lori
Podraza	brought	in	a	Midnight	Cake,	topped	with	Vanilla	Cream,	to
celebrate	another	cook’s	birthday.	Though	I’d	given	up	on	ever	finding	my
ideal	cake,	I	still	took	a	slice.	Who	was	I	to	turn	down	chocolate	cake?	One
bite	and	I	was	sunk.	I	didn’t	know	why	it	was	so	much	better	than	any	cake
I’d	ever	tasted,	nor	did	I	care.	Only	months	later	did	I	realise	that	the	cake	is
so	moist	because	it’s	made	with	oil,	rather	than	butter—just	like	the	cake
mix	cakes	I’d	always	loved!

55g	Dutch-process	cocoa	powder,	preferably	Valrhona
300g	sugar
2	teaspoons	kosher	salt	or	1	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
255g	plain	flour
1	teaspoon	bicarbonate	of	soda
2	teaspoons	vanilla	extract
125ml	neutral-tasting	oil
350ml	boiling	water	or	freshly	brewed	strong	coffee
2	large	eggs	at	room	temperature,	lightly	whisked
450ml	Vanilla	Cream	(here)

Preheat	the	oven	to	180°C.	Set	a	rack	in	the	upper	third	of	the	oven.
Grease	two	20cm	cake	tins,	then	line	with	parchment	paper.	Grease

and	sprinkle	generously	with	flour,	tap	out	the	excess,	and	set	aside.
In	a	medium	bowl,	whisk	together	the	cocoa,	sugar,	salt,	flour,	and



bicarbonate	of	soda,	then	sift	into	a	large	bowl.
In	a	medium	bowl,	stir	the	vanilla	and	oil	together.	Bring	the	water	to	a

boil	or	brew	the	coffee.	Add	it	to	the	oil-vanilla	mixture.
Make	a	well	in	the	centre	of	the	dry	ingredients	and	gradually	whisk	in

the	water-oil	mixture	until	incorporated.	Gradually	whisk	in	the	eggs	and	stir
until	smooth.	The	batter	will	be	thin.

Divide	the	batter	evenly	between	the	prepared	tins.	Drop	the	tin	onto
the	worktop	from	a	height	of	8cm	a	couple	of	times	to	release	any	air
bubbles	that	may	have	formed.

Bake	in	the	upper	third	of	the	oven	for	25	to	30	minutes,	until	the	cakes
spring	back	from	the	touch	and	just	pull	away	from	the	edges	of	the	tin.	An
inserted	toothpick	should	come	out	clean.

Cool	the	cakes	completely	on	a	wire	rack	before	unmoulding	them	from
the	tin	and	peeling	off	the	parchment	paper.	To	serve,	place	one	layer	down
on	a	cake	plate.	Spread	225ml	Vanilla	Cream	in	the	centre	of	the	cake	and
gently	place	the	second	layer	atop	it.	Spread	the	remaining	cream	onto	the
centre	of	the	top	layer	and	chill	for	up	to	2	hours	before	serving.

Alternatively,	top	with	cream	cheese	frosting,	serve	with	ice	cream,	or
simply	dust	cakes	with	cocoa	powder	or	powdered	sugar.	The	batter	also
makes	for	fantastic	cupcakes!

Tightly	wrapped,	this	cake	will	keep	for	4	days	at	room	temperature,	or
for	2	months	in	the	freezer.



Fresh	Ginger	and	Molasses	Cake Makes	two	23cm	cakes

As	garde-manger	at	Chez	Panisse,	I	had	to	get	to	work	at	6:00	a.m.	I’ve	never
been	an	early	riser.	It	took	such	an	enormous	effort	for	me	to	get	myself	to
work	on	time	that	I	always	skipped	breakfast.	When	the	pastry	cooks	arrived
at	8:00,	they	set	out	day-old	cakes	and	cookies	for	everyone	to	snack	on.	By
8:15,	any	willpower	I	may	have	had	to	ignore	these	sweets	had	entirely
evaporated.	I’d	snag	a	piece	of	ginger	cake,	make	myself	a	huge	glass	of
milky	tea,	slip	on	my	wool	beanie,	and	head	back	into	the	walk-in
refrigerator.	Between	bites	of	the	moist,	spicy	cake	and	steamy	gulps	of	tea,
I’d	reorganise	the	meat	and	produce	and	prepare	for	the	day’s	deliveries.
Those	quiet	moments	amid	the	utter	busyness	of	the	restaurant	are	among
my	favourite	memories	of	working	at	Chez	Panisse.	I’ve	adapted	the	original
recipe	to	make	it	a	little	friendlier	for	home	bakers.	I	couldn’t	resist	making	it
a	little	saltier	and	spicier	along	the	way,	too.	Enjoy	it	as	I	did,	with	a	steamy
cup	of	tea,	at	any	time	of	day.

115g	peeled,	thinly	sliced	fresh	ginger	(about	150g	unpeeled)
200g	sugar
225ml	neutral-tasting	oil
225ml	molasses
350g	plain	flour
1	teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
1	teaspoon	ground	ginger
½	teaspoon	ground	cloves
¼	teaspoon	freshly	ground	black	pepper
2	teaspoons	kosher	salt	or	1	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
2	teaspoons	bicarbonate	of	soda
225ml	boiling	water
2	large	eggs	at	room	temperature
450ml	Vanilla	Cream	(here)

Preheat	the	oven	to	180°C.	Set	a	rack	in	the	upper	third	of	the	oven.	Grease



two	23cm	cake	tins,	then	line	with	parchment	paper.	Grease	and	sprinkle
generously	with	flour,	tap	out	the	excess,	and	set	aside.

Purée	the	fresh	ginger	and	sugar	together	in	a	food	processor	or	blender
until	completely	smooth,	about	4	minutes.	Pour	the	mixture	into	a	medium
bowl	and	add	the	oil	and	molasses.	Whisk	to	combine	and	set	aside.

In	a	medium	bowl,	whisk	together	the	flour,	cinnamon,	ginger,	cloves,
pepper,	salt,	and	bicarbonate	of	soda,	then	sift	into	a	large	bowl.	Set	aside.

Whisk	the	boiling	water	into	the	sugar-oil	mixture	until	evenly
combined.

Make	a	well	in	the	centre	of	the	dry	ingredients	and	gradually	whisk	in
the	water-oil	mixture	until	incorporated.	Gradually	whisk	in	the	eggs	and	stir
until	smooth.	The	batter	will	be	thin.

Divide	the	batter	evenly	between	the	prepared	tins.	Drop	the	tin	onto
the	worktop	from	a	height	of	8cm	a	couple	of	times	to	release	any	air
bubbles	that	may	have	formed.

Bake	in	the	upper	third	of	the	oven	for	38	to	40	minutes,	until	the	cakes
spring	back	from	the	touch	and	just	pull	away	from	the	edges	of	the	tin.	An
inserted	toothpick	should	come	out	clean.

Cool	the	cakes	completely	on	a	wire	rack	before	unmoulding	them	from
the	tin	and	peeling	off	the	parchment	paper.

To	serve,	place	one	layer	down	on	a	cake	plate.	Spread	225ml	Vanilla
Cream	in	the	centre	of	the	cake	and	gently	place	the	second	layer	atop	it.
Spread	the	remaining	cream	onto	the	centre	of	the	top	layer	and	chill	for	up
to	2	hours	before	serving.

Alternatively,	top	with	cream	cheese	frosting,	serve	with	ice	cream,	or
simply	dust	cakes	with	powdered	sugar.	The	batter	also	makes	for	fantastic
cupcakes!

Tightly	wrapped,	this	cake	will	keep	for	4	days	at	room	temperature,	or
for	2	months	in	the	freezer.



Almond	and	Cardamom	Tea	Cake Makes	one	23cm	cake

In	contrast	to	moist,	tender	oil	cakes,	cakes	made	with	butter	should	be	rich
in	flavour	and	velvety	in	texture.	The	marzipan	in	this	recipe	ensures	that
this	cake	is	both.	With	a	sweet	and	salty,	caramelised	almond	crust	and	a
dense,	flavourful	crumb,	this	cake	is	an	ideal	companion	for	a	steaming	cup
of	afternoon	tea.
For	the	almond	topping

55g	butter
3	tablespoons	sugar
85g	sliced	almonds
Pinch	of	flaky	salt,	such	as	Maldon

For	the	cake
145g	plain	flour
1	teaspoon	baking	powder
1	teaspoon	kosher	salt	or	½	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
1	teaspoon	vanilla	extract
2½	teaspoons	ground	cardamom
4	large	eggs	at	room	temperature
255g	marzipan	at	room	temperature
200g	sugar
225g	butter	at	room	temperature,	cubed

Preheat	the	oven	to	180°C.	Set	a	rack	in	the	upper	third	of	the	oven.	Butter
and	flour	a	23cm	by	5cm	round	cake	tin,	then	line	with	parchment	paper.

Make	the	almond	topping.	In	a	small	saucepan	set	over	medium-high
heat,	cook	the	butter	and	sugar	for	about	3	minutes,	until	the	sugar
dissolves	completely	and	the	butter	bubbles	and	froths.	Remove	from	heat
and	stir	in	the	sliced	almonds	and	flaky	salt.	Pour	this	mixture	into	the	cake
tin	and	use	a	rubber	spatula	to	distribute	it	evenly	across	the	bottom	of	the
tin.



For	the	cake,	sift	the	flour,	baking	powder,	and	salt	onto	a	piece	of
parchment	paper	to	evenly	combine	and	remove	any	lumps.	Set	aside.

In	a	small	bowl,	thoroughly	whisk	together	the	vanilla,	cardamom,	and
eggs.	Set	aside.

Place	the	marzipan	in	the	bowl	of	a	food	processor	and	pulse	a	few
times	to	break	it	up.	Add	200g	sugar	and	process	for	90	seconds,	or	until
the	mixture	is	as	fine	as	sand.	If	you	don’t	have	a	food	processor,	do	this	in
your	stand	mixer—it’ll	just	take	a	while	longer,	about	5	minutes.

Add	the	butter	and	continue	processing	until	the	mixture	is	very	light
and	fluffy,	at	least	2	minutes.	Stop	and	scrape	down	the	sides	of	the	bowl	to
ensure	that	everything	is	being	combined	evenly.

With	the	machine	on,	slowly	start	to	add	the	egg	mixture,	spoonful	by
spoonful,	as	if	making	a	mayonnaise	(this	is,	indeed,	an	emulsion!).	Let	each
addition	of	egg	be	absorbed,	and	the	mixture	regain	its	smooth,	silky	look,
before	adding	more	eggs.	When	all	the	eggs	have	been	added,	stop	and
scrape	the	sides	of	the	bowl	with	a	rubber	spatula,	then	continue	to	mix
until	well	combined.	Scrape	the	batter	into	a	large	bowl.

Pick	up	the	parchment	paper	and	use	it	to	sprinkle	the	flour	atop	the
batter	in	three	batches.	Gently	fold	in	the	flour	in	between	additions	until
just	incorporated.	Avoid	overmixing,	which	will	cause	the	cake	to	become
tough.

Pour	the	batter	into	the	prepared	tin	and	bake	on	the	prepared	rack	for
55	to	60	minutes,	or	until	an	inserted	toothpick	comes	out	clean.	The	cake
will	just	pull	away	from	the	sides	of	the	pan	as	it’s	done.	Let	the	cake	cool	on
a	wire	rack.	Run	a	knife	along	the	sides	of	the	tin,	then	warm	the	bottom	of
the	tin	directly	over	the	stovetop	for	a	few	seconds	to	encourage	the	cake
to	unmould.	Remove	the	paper	and	set	on	a	cake	plate	until	ready	to	serve.

Serve	this	cake	on	its	own,	or	with	a	berry	or	stone	fruit	Compote
(here)	and	Vanilla	or	Cardamom	Cream	(here).

Tightly	wrapped,	this	cake	will	keep	for	4	days	at	room	temperature,	or
for	2	months	in	the	freezer.






Bittersweet	Chocolate	Pudding Serves	6

For	years	now,	I’ve	cooked	a	regular	dinner	series	together	with	the	bakers
at	Tartine	Bakery	in	San	Francisco.	We	call	it	Tartine	Afterhours—after	the
bakery	closes,	we	push	all	of	the	tables	together	and	cook	all	of	our
favourite	foods	and	serve	them	to	folks	on	big,	beautiful	family-style
platters.	It’s	not	very	fancy,	but	we	pour	everything	we’ve	got	into	it.
Sometimes,	around	midnight,	when	we’re	in	the	middle	of	cleaning	up,	I’ll
realise	I	haven’t	eaten	properly	since	breakfast.	Looking	around,	I’m
surrounded	by	pastries.	As	I’m	invariably	hot	and	sweaty	after	a	long	day’s
work,	the	only	thing	that	ever	looks	good	is	a	little	bowl	of	chocolate
pudding,	calling	out	to	me	from	the	glass-doored	fridge.	I’ll	find	a	spoon,	pull
out	a	bowl	of	pudding,	and	taste	a	spoonful.	Creamy	and	cool,	it	always	hits
the	spot.	One	by	one,	the	others	will	spot	me	and	come	over	with	their	own
spoons.	Together,	we’ll	silently	finish	the	bowl	and	return	to	cleaning	up.
We	always	share	just	the	one	bowl.	Somehow,	this	is	one	of	my	favourite
parts	of	the	night.	Here	is	my	slightly	adapted	version	of	the	Tartine	recipe
—a	little	less	sweet,	and	a	little	more	salty.	Like	Tartine,	though,	I	use
Valrhona	cocoa	powder,	which	makes	all	the	difference.

115g	bittersweet	chocolate,	coarsely	chopped
3	large	eggs
675ml	single	cream
20g	cornflour
150g	sugar
15g	cocoa	powder
1¼	teaspoons	kosher	salt	or	heaped	½	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt

Place	the	chocolate	in	a	large,	heatproof	bowl	and	set	a	fine-mesh	sieve
over	it.	Set	aside.

Crack	the	eggs	into	a	medium	bowl	and	whisk	lightly.	Set	aside.
Pour	the	cream	into	a	medium	pan	and	set	over	low	heat.	Remove	from

the	heat	just	as	it	starts	to	emit	steam	and	come	to	a	simmer.	Don’t	let	it
boil—when	dairy	boils,	its	emulsion	breaks	and	its	proteins	coagulate.	The
texture	of	a	custard	made	with	boiled	dairy	will	never	be	completely



smooth.
In	a	mixing	bowl,	whisk	together	the	cornflour,	sugar,	cocoa	powder,

and	salt.	Whisk	in	the	warm	cream.	Return	the	mixture	to	the	pot	and	set
over	medium-low	heat.

Cook,	stirring	constantly	with	a	rubber	spatula,	for	about	6	minutes,
until	the	mixture	visibly	thickens.	Remove	from	the	heat.	To	test	whether
the	mixture	is	thick	enough,	use	your	finger	to	make	a	line	through	the
pudding	on	the	back	of	the	spoon.	It	should	hold	a	line.

Slowly	add	about	400ml	of	the	hot	pudding	mixture	into	the	eggs	while
whisking	continuously,	then	return	it	all	back	to	the	pot	and	set	over	low
heat.	Continue	to	stir	constantly,	cooking	another	minute	or	so	until	the
mixture	visibly	thickens	again	or	registers	97°C	on	a	thermometer.	Remove
from	the	heat	and	pour	through	the	sieve.	Use	a	small	ladle	or	rubber
spatula	to	guide	the	pudding	through	the	sieve.

Allow	the	residual	heat	to	melt	the	chocolate.	Use	a	blender	(or	stick
blender,	if	you	have	one)	to	blend	thoroughly	until	the	mixture	is	satiny	and
smooth.	Taste	and	adjust	salt	as	needed.

Immediately	pour	into	6	individual	cups.	Gently	tap	the	bottom	of	each
cup	on	the	worktop	to	pop	air	bubbles.	Allow	the	pudding	to	cool.	Serve	at
room	temperature,	garnished	with	Scented	Cream	(here).

Refrigerate,	covered,	for	up	to	4	days.
Variations
• To	make	Mexican	Chocolate	Pudding,	add	¾	teaspoon	ground

cinnamon	into	the	milk.	Continue	as	above.
• To	make	Chocolate-Cardamom	Pudding,	add	½	teaspoon	ground

cardamom	into	the	milk.	Continue	as	above.
• To	make	Chocolate	Pudding	Pie	(here),	increase	the	cornflour	to	35g

and	make	pudding	as	directed.	Refer	to	here	for	complete	instructions
for	assembling	the	pie.



Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta Serves	6

This	light	custard	has	been	an	important	part	of	the	repertoire	at	Chez
Panisse	for	decades.	And	I	always	assumed	it	was	an	original	recipe.	Years
after	I	left	the	restaurant,	a	friend	lent	me	his	precious	copy	of	The	Last
Course,	the	legendary,	yet	out-of-print,	cookbook	by	Claudia	Fleming,	the
legendary	pastry	chef.	Right	there	here	was	Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta!	The
dessert	had	clearly	migrated	west	from	Claudia’s	menu	at	Gramercy	Tavern
in	New	York.	Years	later,	I	read	a	charming	interview	with	Claudia	where	she
said	that	nothing	good	is	ever	original	and	revealed	that	she	had	torn	the
recipe	directly	out	of	an	issue	of	Australian	Vogue	Living!	This	recipe	is	such
a	classic,	it’s	made	its	way	around	the	world	(more	than	once,	I	suspect).

Neutral-tasting	oil
275ml	double	cream
85g	sugar
½	teaspoon	kosher	salt	or	¼	teaspoon	fine	sea	salt
1½	teaspoons	unflavoured	powdered	gelatin
½	vanilla	bean,	split	lengthwise
400ml	buttermilk

Using	a	pastry	brush	or	your	fingers,	lightly	coat	the	inside	of	six	175g
ramekins,	small	bowls,	or	cups	with	oil.

Place	the	cream,	sugar,	and	salt	in	a	small	saucepan.	Scrape	the	seeds
from	the	vanilla	bean	into	the	pan,	and	add	the	bean	as	well.

Place	1	tablespoon	cold	water	in	a	small	bowl,	then	gently	sprinkle	the
gelatin	atop.	Let	sit	for	5	minutes	to	dissolve.

Heat	the	cream	gently	over	a	medium	flame,	stirring	until	the	sugar
dissolves	and	steam	starts	to	rise	from	the	cream,	about	4	minutes	(don’t	let
the	cream	simmer—it’ll	deactivate	the	gelatin	if	it	gets	too	hot).	Reduce	the
heat	to	very	low,	add	the	gelatin,	and	stir	to	combine	until	all	the	gelatin
dissolves,	about	1	minute.	Remove	from	the	heat	and	add	the	buttermilk.
Strain	through	a	fine-mesh	sieve	into	a	measuring	cup	with	a	spout.

Pour	the	mixture	into	the	prepared	ramekins,	cover	with	cling	film,	and



refrigerate	until	set,	at	least	4	hours	or	overnight.
To	unmould,	dip	the	ramekins	into	a	dish	of	hot	water,	and	then	invert

the	custards	onto	plates.	Garnish	with	citrus,	berry,	or	stone	fruit	Compote
(here).

Can	be	prepared	up	to	2	days	in	advance.
Variations
• For	Cardamom	Panna	Cotta,	add	¾	teaspoon	ground	cardamom	to

the	cream	before	heating.	Continue	on	previous	page.
• For	a	delicate	Citrus	Panna	Cotta,	add	½	teaspoon	finely	grated	lemon

or	orange	zest	to	the	cream	before	heating.	Continue	on	previous	page.



Makes	about	30	small
Marshmallowy	Meringues meringues

My	friend	Siew-Chin	is	an	egg	white	whisperer.	From	her	I	learned	the
importance	of	whipping	egg	whites	for	meringues	slowly,	in	order	to
incorporate	even-size	bubbles,	so	that	they	will	gain	more	volume	and	be
more	stable	as	they	bake.	The	most	important	thing	is	to	keep	the	egg
whites	clean	and	free	of	contamination.	Any	fat—whether	from	the	yolks,
your	hands,	or	residue	inside	a	bowl	that’s	not	perfectly	clean—will	prevent
them	from	fulfilling	their	voluminous	potential.	I	love	this	recipe	because	it
yields	particularly	soft	and	chewy	meringues,	which	are	equally	nice	as	little
bites	or	when	baked	into	larger	cup	sizes	for	individual	Pavlovas	(see
variation	on	next	page).

15g	cornflour
300g	sugar
175g	(about	6	large)	egg	whites	at	room	temperature
½	teaspoon	cream	of	tartar
Pinch	of	salt
1½	teaspoons	vanilla	extract

Preheat	the	oven	to	120°C.	Line	two	baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.
In	a	small	bowl,	whisk	together	the	cornflour	and	sugar.
In	the	bowl	of	a	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk	attachment	(if	you	don’t

have	a	stand	mixer,	you	can	use	an	electric	hand	mixer	with	the	whisk
attachment),	whip	the	egg	whites,	cream	of	tartar,	and	salt.	Starting	on	low,
slowly	increase	to	medium	speed	until	trails	start	to	become	visible,	and	the
egg	white	bubbles	are	very	small	and	uniform,	approximately	2	to	3	minutes.
Take	your	time	here.



Increase	speed	to	medium-high,	slowly	and	gradually	sprinkling	in	the
sugar-cornflour	mixture.	A	few	minutes	after	the	sugar	is	added,	slowly	pour
in	the	vanilla.	Slightly	increase	speed	and	whip	until	the	meringue	is	glossy,
and	stiff	peaks	form	when	the	whisk	is	lifted,	3	to	4	minutes.

Spoon	golf	ball-size	spoonfuls	of	meringue	onto	the	parchment	paper,
using	a	second	spoon	to	scrape	it	off	the	spoon.	Flick	your	wrist	to	coax
irregular	peaks	to	form	on	top	of	each	meringue.

Slip	the	baking	sheets	into	the	oven,	and	reduce	the	temperature	to
110°C.

After	25	minutes,	rotate	the	pans	180	degrees	and	switch	their	positions
on	the	racks.	If	the	meringues	appear	to	be	taking	on	colour	or	cracking,
reduce	the	temperature	to	95°C.

Continue	baking	for	another	20	to	25	minutes,	until	the	meringues
easily	lift	off	the	paper,	the	outsides	are	crisp	and	dry	to	the	touch	on	the
outside	and	the	centre	is	still	marshmallowy.	Just	taste	one	to	check!

Gently	lift	the	meringues	from	the	baking	sheet	and	cool	on	a	wire	rack.
They’ll	keep	in	a	tightly	sealed	container	at	room	temperature,	or

individually	wrapped,	for	up	to	a	week	if	your	house	is	not	humid.



Variations
• Form	the	meringues	into	little	Pavlovas.	Spoon	the	meringues	onto	the

parchment	paper	in	8	by	5cm	ovals,	then	use	the	back	of	a	spoon	to
gently	create	a	divot	in	each	meringue.	Bake	for	about	65	minutes	as
directed	above,	cool	completely,	and	then	serve	with	Scented	Cream
(here)	or	ice	cream	topped	with	berry	or	citrus	fruit	Compote	(here).

• For	Persian	Pavlovas,	add	½	teaspoon	ground	cardamom	and	1
tablespoon	cooled	saffron	tea	(see	here)	into	the	egg	whites.	Continue
as	above.	Serve	with	Rose-Scented	Berries	(here),	Cardamom	Cream
(here),	toasted	pistachios,	and	crumbled	rose	petals.

• For	a	Meringue	Fool,	layer	crushed	meringues	into	glasses	with	berry
Compote	(here)	or	lemon	curd,	and	Vanilla	Cream	(here).

• To	make	a	Chocolate-Caramel	Meringue	Fool,	swirl	55g	melted,
cooled	bittersweet	chocolate	into	the	meringue	just	before	baking.
Continue	as	above.	Layer	crushed	meringues	into	glasses	with
chocolate	ice	cream,	Salted	Caramel	Sauce	(here),	and	Caramel
Cream	(here).



Scented	Cream Makes	about	450ml

Both	light	and	rich,	whipped	cream	is	a	most	delicious	contradiction	in
terms.	Cream	has	a	unique	ability	to	entrap	air	and	change	from	its	liquid
form	into	a	billowy	solid	(see	here	for	more).

When	you’re	shopping,	look	for	plain,	unadulterated	double	cream—
many	brands	have	stabilisers	added,	such	as	carrageenan,	or	are	put
through	extreme	Ultra-High	Temperature	(UHT)	pasteurization	that
affects	how	the	cream	will	whip.	For	the	most	heavenly	whipped	cream,	buy
pure	cream	whenever	possible.

Steep	and	spike	it	with	any	of	the	flavours	listed	below	to	customise	it
as	you	like.	Pair	caramel	cream	with	apple	pie,	spoon	bay	leaf	cream	atop
roasted	peaches,	and	combine	Toasted	Coconut	Cream	with	Bittersweet
Chocolate	Pudding	(here).	For	frosting	in	a	hurry,	whip	Scented	Cream	just
past	soft	peaks	to	stiff,	and	spread	it	all	over	a	baked,	cooled	cake.	You’ll
see,	there’s	not	much	that	Scented	Cream	won’t	improve.

225ml	double	cream,	chilled
1½	teaspoons	granulated	sugar
Any	one	of	the	flavour	options	on	the	next	page



Chill	a	large,	deep	metal	bowl	(or	the	bowl	of	your	standing	mixer)	and	the
whisk	(or	whisk	attachment)	in	the	freezer	for	at	least	20	minutes	before
you	begin.	When	the	bowl	is	chilled,	prepare	the	cream	with	your	chosen
flavouring	as	directed	below,	then	add	the	sugar.

I	prefer	to	whip	cream	by	hand	because	it	gives	me	more	control,	so	I’m
less	likely	to	overwhip	it	and	end	up	with	butter.	If	you’d	like	to	use	a	mixer,
run	it	at	a	low	speed.	Whisk	until	the	first	soft	peaks	appear.	If	using	a
machine,	switch	to	a	handheld	whisk	and	continue	to	whisk	until	all	the
liquid	cream	has	been	incorporated	and	the	texture	of	the	cream	is
uniformly	soft	and	billowy.	Taste	and	adjust	sweetness	and	flavouring	as
desired.	Keep	chilled	until	serving.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	2	days.	Use	a	whisk	to	bring
deflated	cream	back	to	soft	peaks	as	needed.
Flavour	Options
Add	into	cream	just	before	whipping:
• For	Spiced	Cream,	add	¼	teaspoon	ground	cardamom,	cinnamon,	or

nutmeg.
• For	Vanilla	Cream,	add	scraped	seeds	from	¼	vanilla	bean	or	1

teaspoon	vanilla	extract.
• For	Lemon	Cream,	add	½	teaspoon	finely	grated	lemon	zest	and	1

tablespoon	Limoncello	liqueur,	if	desired.
• For	Orange	Cream,	add	½	teaspoon	finely	grated	orange	or	mandarin

zest	and	1	tablespoon	Grand	Marnier,	if	desired.
• For	Rose	Cream,	add	1	teaspoon	rosewater.
• For	Orange-Flower	Cream,	add	½	teaspoon	orange	flower	water.
• For	Boozy	Cream,	add	1	tablespoon	Grand	Marnier,	amaretto,

bourbon,	framboise,	Kahlúa,	brandy,	or	rum.
• For	Almond	Cream,	add	½	teaspoon	almond	extract.
• For	Coffee	Cream,	add	1	tablespoon	instant	espresso	powder	and	1

tablespoon	Kahlúa,	if	desired.
Bring	half	of	the	cream	to	a	simmer	(but	no	hotter)	with	any	of	the	below.	Steep
for	the	indicated	amount	of	time.	Strain,	chill,	add	remaining	cream,	and	then
whip	as	directed	on	the	previous	page.
• For	Peach	Leaf	Cream	(peach	leaves	have	a	heavenly	almondlike



flavour!),	steep	12	gently	torn	peach	leaves	for	15	minutes.
• For	Earl	Grey	Cream,	steep	2	tablespoons	Earl	Grey	tea	leaves	for	10

minutes.
• For	Bay	Leaf	Cream,	steep	6	gently	torn	bay	leaves	for	15	minutes.
Steep	2	hours	to	overnight	in	the	chilled	cream,	then	strain	before	whipping	as
directed	on	the	previous	page:
• For	Noyau	(apricot	kernel)	Cream,	steep	12	apricot	kernels,	cracked

and	lightly	toasted.
• For	Toasted	Almond	or	Toasted	Hazelnut	Cream,	steep	35g	coarsely

chopped	nuts.
• For	Toasted	Coconut	Cream,	steep	40g	toasted	shredded

unsweetened	coconut.	The	coconut	will	absorb	some	of	the	cream,	so
squeeze	out	as	much	cream	as	you	can	when	straining.

• To	make	Chocolate	Cream,	scald	125ml	of	double	cream	with	1
tablespoon	sugar	in	a	small	pan	over	medium-low	heat	until	you	start
to	see	steam,	then	pour	into	a	bowl	over	55g	finely	chopped	bittersweet
chocolate.	Stir	to	melt	the	chocolate	and	combine.	Chill	in	the	fridge
until	very	cold,	then	combine	with	125ml	chilled	double	cream	and
whisk	to	soft	peaks.	Serve	with	Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake
(here),	Marshmallowy	Meringues	(here),	Coffee	Granita	(here),	or
vanilla	ice	cream.

• To	make	Caramel	Cream,	cook	50g	sugar	and	3	tablespoons	water	to	a
dark	amber	colour	and	stop	with	125ml	double	cream	(follow	the
method	described	here).	Add	a	pinch	of	salt.	Chill	in	the	fridge	until
very	cold,	then	combine	with	125ml	chilled	double	cream	and	whip	as
directed	above.	Serve	with	Apple	and	Frangipane	Tart	(here),	Classic
Apple	Pie	(here),	Coffee	Granita	(here),	Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight
Cake	(here),	or	ice	cream.

• To	make	Tangy	Whipped	Cream,	combine	125ml	chilled	double	cream
with	3	tablespoons	sugar	and	55ml	sour	cream,	Greek	full-fat	yoghurt,
or	crème	fraîche	(here)	before	whipping	as	directed	above.	Serve	with
Apple	and	Frangipane	Tart	(here),	Fresh	Ginger	and	Molasses	Cake
(here),	or	Pumpkin	Pie	(here).

• To	make	dairy-free	Coconut	Cream,	scoop	out	the	solid	fat	from	two
cans	of	coconut	milk.	Chill	and	whip	as	directed	above.	Save	the
coconut	milk	for	cooking	Jasmine	Rice	(here).	Serve	the	cream	with



Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake	(here),	Bittersweet	Chocolate
Pudding	(here),	Chocolate	Pudding	Pie	(here),	or	ice	cream.



Salted	Caramel	Sauce Makes	about	350ml

It’s	only	fitting	to	end	this	book	right	where	it	began,	with	salt	making	all	of
the	difference.	And	in	caramel	sauce,	it	does.	By	reducing	its	bitterness	and
creating	a	welcome	contrast	to	its	sweetness,	a	little	salt	will	turn	a	caramel
sauce	from	something	tasty	into	something	inexplicably,	mouthwateringly
delicious.	The	only	way	to	know	how	much	salt	to	add	is	to	add	it
incrementally,	allow	it	to	dissolve,	and	to	taste,	again	and	again.	If	you	get	to
a	point	where	you	can’t	tell	if	the	sauce	needs	more	salt	or	not,	then	simply
remove	a	spoonful	of	the	caramel	from	the	entire	batch,	sprinkle	a	little	salt
on	it,	and	taste	that.	If	it’s	too	salty,	then	you’ll	know	you’ve	reached	the
limit.	If	it	tastes	even	better,	then	go	for	it	and	add	a	little	more	to	the	whole
batch.	You	don’t	ever	have	to	risk	ruining	the	entire	batch	if	you’re	unsure.

85g	unsalted	butter
145g	sugar
125ml	double	cream
½	teaspoon	vanilla	extract
Salt

Melt	the	butter	in	a	deep,	heavy-duty	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Stir	in
the	sugar	and	increase	the	heat	to	high.	Don’t	worry	if	the	mixture	separates
and	looks	broken.	Keep	the	faith—it’ll	come	back	together.	Stir	until	the
mixture	comes	back	to	a	boil,	then	stop	stirring.	As	the	caramel	starts	to
take	on	colour,	carefully	swirl	the	pan	to	encourage	even	browning.	Cook
until	the	sugar	is	a	deep	golden	brown	(i.e.,	the	“smoke	alarm”	stage
illustrated	here)	and	it	just	barely	starts	to	smoke,	about	10	to	12	minutes.

Remove	from	the	heat	and	immediately	whisk	in	the	cream.	Take	care,
because	the	very	hot	mixture	will	bubble	up	furiously	and	may	splatter.	If
any	lumps	of	caramel	remain,	whisk	the	sauce	gently	over	low	heat	until
they	dissolve.

Cool	the	caramel	to	lukewarm,	then	season	it	with	the	vanilla	and	a	big
pinch	of	salt.	Stir,	taste,	and	adjust	the	salt	as	needed.	The	caramel	will
thicken	as	it	cools,	and	I	like	to	serve	it	closer	to	room	temperature	rather
than	hot	off	the	stove,	as	it	sticks	to	ice	cream	and	whatever	else	you	want



to	serve	it	on	better	that	way.	But	I	can’t	lie—it’s	pretty	darned	tasty	straight
out	of	the	fridge,	too.

Cover	and	refrigerate	leftovers	for	up	to	2	weeks.	Reheat	gently	in	the
microwave	or	by	stirring	in	a	saucepan	over	very	low	heat.

Serve	alongside:	Classic	Apple	Pie,	Classic	Pumpkin	Pie,	Apple	and
Frangipane	Tart,	Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	Fresh	Ginger	and
Molasses	Cake,	in	a	Chocolate-Caramel	Meringue	Fool,	or	on	top	of	ice
cream.



COOKING	LESSONS
Now	it’s	time	to	put	the	lessons	of	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	and	Heat	into	daily
practice.	If	you’re	not	entirely	sure	where	to	start,	choose	a	recipe	that
applies	a	specific	lesson	from	Part	One	that	intrigued	you.
Salt	Lessons
Seasoning	from	Within

Simmered	Beans	(here)
Any	Pasta	recipe	(here	to	here)
Sage-	and	Honey-Smoked	Chicken	(here)
Buttermilk-Marinated	Roast	Chicken	(here)
Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast	(here)

Layering	Salt
Greek	Salad	(here)
Caesar	Dressing	(here)
Pasta	alla	Puttanesca	(here)
Pasta	all’Amatriciana	(here)
Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken	(here)

Fat	Lessons
Emulsions

Tahini	Dressing	(here)
Pasta	Cacio	e	Pepe	(here)
Pasta	Alfredo	(here)
Chicken	with	Vinegar	(here)
Mayonnaise	and	all	of	its	wonderful	variations	(here	to	here)
Almond	and	Cardamom	Tea	Cake	(here)

Layering	Fat
Blue	Cheese	Dressing	(here)
Beer-Battered	Fish	with	Tartar	Sauce	(here	and	here)
Bittersweet	Chocolate	Pudding	with	Scented	Cream	(here	and	here)



Acid	Lessons
Layering	Acid

Bright	Cabbage	Slaw	(here)
Balsamic	Vinaigrette	(here)
Any-Other-Citrus	Vinaigrette	(here)
Caesar	Dressing	(here)
Blue	Cheese	Dressing	(here)
Pasta	alle	Vongole	(here)
Chicken	with	Vinegar	(here)
Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta	with	Wine-Poached	Fruit	(here	and	here)

Heat	Lessons
Layering	Heat

Grilled	Artichokes	(here)
Persian-ish	Rice	(here)
Chicken	with	Lentil	Rice	(here)
Roasted	Butternut	Squash	and	Brussels	Sprouts	in	Agrodolce	(here)

Browning
On	the	grill:	Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken,	Thin	or	Thick	Rib	Eye

Steak	(here	or	here)
On	the	stove:	Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken,	Chicken	with	Lentil	Rice,

Pork	Braised	with	Chillies	(here,	here,	or	here)
In	the	oven:	Roasted	Butternut	Squash	and	Brussels	Sprouts	in

Agrodolce,	Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken	(here	and	here)
Preserving	Tenderness

Scrambled	Eggs	(here)
Slow-Roasted	Salmon	(here)
Tuna	Confit	(here)
Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken	(here)

Turning	Tough	into	Tender



Long-Cooked	Cima	di	Rapa	(here)
Simmered	Beans	(here)
Chicken	Confit	(here)
Pork	Braised	with	Chillies	(here)

A	Few	Other	Lessons
Precise	Timing

Boiled	Eggs	(here)
Scrambled	Eggs	(here)
Tuna	Confit	(here)
Skirt	and	Rib	Eye	Steaks	(here)
Marshmallowy	Meringues	(here)
Salted	Caramel	Sauce	(here)

Imprecise	Timing
Caramelised	Onions	(here)
Chicken	Stock	(here)
Simmered	Beans	(here)
Pasta	al	Ragù	(here)
Pork	Braised	with	Chillies	(here)

Knife	Skills
Caramelised	Onions—slicing	(here)
Tuscan	Bean	and	Kale	Soup—slicing	and	dicing	(here)
Sicilian	Chicken	Salad—dicing	(here)
Kuku	Sabzi—chopping	greens	and	herbs	(here)
Spatchcocked	Chicken—basic	butchery	(here)
Conveyor	Belt	Chicken—basic	butchery	(here)
Herb	Salsa—finely	chopping	herbs	and	fine	dicing	(here)

Improvising	with	Leftovers
Avocado	Salad	Matrix	(here)



Blanched	Greens	with	Goma-Ae	Dressing	(here	and	here)
Pasta	with	Broccoli	and	Bread	Crumbs	Variations	(here)
Kuku	Sabzi	(here)
Any	Tart	You	Can	Dream	Up!	(here)



SUGGESTED	MENUS
A	Light	Persian	Lunch:

Crumbled	Feta,	Sliced	Cucumbers,	and	Warm	Pitta	Bread
Shaved	Fennel	and	Radishes	(here)
Kuku	Sabzi	(here)	with	Persian	Beetroot	Yoghurt	(here)

Lunch	on	a	Hot	Summer	Day:
Summer	Tomato	and	Herb	Salad	(here)
Tuna	Confit	(here)	with	Simmered	White	Beans	(here)

Classic	Sandwich-and-Salad	Situation:
Romaine	Lettuce	with	Creamy	Herb	Dressing	(here)
Sandwiches	with	Spicy	Brined	Turkey	Breast	(here)	and	Aïoli	(here)

Conjuring	Hanoi:
Vietnamese	Cucumber	Salad	(here)
Pho	Gà	(here)

Pack-It-Ahead	Picnic:
Kale	Salad	with	Parmesan	Vinaigrette	(here)
Sicilian	Chicken	Salad	Sandwiches	(here)
Almond	and	Cardamom	Tea	Cake	(here)

Even	Better	than	Teriyaki:
Asian	Slaw	(here)
Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken	(here)
Steamed	Jasmine	Rice	(here)

Hump	Day	Pick-Me-Up:
Little	Gem	Lettuce	with	Honey-Mustard	Vinaigrette	(here)
Chicken	Pot	Pie	(here)
Garlicky	Green	Beans	(here)

Warming	Winter	Dinner	Party:
Winter	Panzanella	(here)



Brined	Roasted	Pork	Loin	(here)
Roasted	Parsnips	and	Carrots	(use	roasting	method	here)
Meyer	Lemon	Salsa	(here)
Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta	(here)
Wine-Poached	Quince	(here)

Not-Too-Indian:
Indian-Spiced	Salmon	(here)
Saffron	Rice	(here)
Indian	Carrot	Raita	(here)
Indian	Garlicky	Green	Beans	(here)

Summer	Supper:
Rocket	with	Lemon	Vinaigrette	(here)
Conveyor	Belt	Chicken	(here)—try	cooking	it	on	the	grill!
Cherry	Tomato	Confit	(here)
Grilled	Corn	on	the	Cob	(use	grilling	method	here	and	here—parboiling

is	not	necessary)
Strawberry	Shortcakes	(here)

Feeling	French:
Garden	Lettuces	with	Red	Wine	Vinaigrette	(here)
Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken	(here)
Sautéed	Asparagus	(use	sautéing	method	here)
Classic	French	Herb	Salsa	(here)
Rhubarb	and	Frangipane	Tart	with	Vanilla	Cream	(here	and	here)

Flavourful	Moroccan	Feast:
Shaved	Carrot	Salad	with	Ginger	and	Lime	(here)
Chickpeas	Simmered	with	Moroccan	Spices	(here	and	consult	The

World	of	Flavour	here)
Moroccan	Kofta	Kebabs	(here)
Harissa,	Charmoula	and	Herbed	Yoghurt	(here,	here,	and	here)



Kinda,	Sorta,	Izakaya:
Blanched	Spinach	(here)	with	Goma-Ae	Dressing	(here)
Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken	(here)
Japanese-ish	Herb	Salsa	(here)

Winner,	Winner,	Chicken	Dinner:
Bright	Cabbage	Slaw	(here)
Spicy	Fried	Chicken	(here)
Light	and	Flaky	Buttermilk	Biscuits	(here)
Simmered	Black-Eyed	Peas	(here)
Long-Cooked	Collard	Greens	with	Bacon	(use	long-cooking	method

here)
Bittersweet	Chocolate	Pudding	(here)

A	Perfectly	Balanced	Thanksgiving:
Spatchcocked	Thanksgiving	Turkey	(here)
Garlicky	Green	Beans	(here)
Winter	Chicories	with	Balsamic	Vinaigrette	(here)
Roasted	Butternut	Squash	and	Brussels	Sprouts	in	Agrodolce	(here)
Fried	Sage	Salsa	Verde	(here)
Apple	and	Frangipane	Tart	(here)	with	Salted	Caramel	Sauce	(here)
Pumpkin	Pie	(here)	with	Tangy	Whipped	Cream	(here)

Make-Your-Own-Taco	Party:
Avocado	and	Citrus	Salad	with	Macerated	Onions	and	Coriander	(here)
Pork	Braised	with	Chillies	(here)
and	Warm	Tortillas	Mexican-ish	Herb	Salsa	(here)	and	crema
Simmered	Beans	(here)

And	Some	Suggestions	for	Dessert	.	.	.
• Apple	and	Frangipane	Tart	(here)	with	Whipped	Crème	Fraîche	(here)
• Classic	Pumpkin	Pie	(here)	with	Tangy	Whipped	Cream	(here)
• Apple	Pie	(here)	with	Caramel	Cream	(here)



• Almond	Milk	Granita	(here)	with	Toasted	Almond	Cream	(here)
• Coffee	Granita	(here)	with	Chocolate	Cream	(here)
• Blood	Orange	Granita	(here)	with	Earl	Grey	Cream	(here)
• Roasted	Apricots	(here)	with	Noyau	Cream	(here)
• Poached	Pears	(here)	with	Salted	Caramel	Sauce	(here)
• Peach	Compote	(here)	with	Peach	Leaf	Cream	(here)
• Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake	(here)	with	Coffee	Cream	(here)
• Fresh	Ginger	and	Molasses	Cake	(here)	with	Tangy	Whipped	Cream

(here)
• Almond	and	Cardamom	Tea	Cake	(here)	with	Nectarine	Compote

(here)
• Mexican	Chocolate	Pudding	(here)	with	Spiced	Cream	(here)
• Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta	(here)	with	Peach	and	Vanilla	Bean	Compote

(here)
• Cardamom	Panna	Cotta	(here)	with	Rose-Scented	Berries	(here)
• Citrus	Panna	Cotta	(here)	with	Kumquat	Compote	(here)



TIPS	FOR	FURTHER	READING
Once	you	become	familiar	with	a	writer	or	chef,	and	know	that	his	or	her
recipes	work,	add	her	to	your	database	of	trusted	sources.	These	are	the
chefs	and	writers	I	look	to	when	searching	for	new	recipes	online	or	in
books.
For	dishes	from	around	the	world:	Cecilia	Chiang	and	Fuschia	Dunlop
(China),	Julia	Child	and	Richard	Olney	(France),	Madhur	Jaffrey	and
Niloufer	Ichaporia	King	(Indian	Subcontinent),	Najmieh	Batmanglij	(Iran),
Ada	Boni	and	Marcella	Hazan	(Italy),	Nancy	Singleton	Hachisu	and	Shizuo
Tsuji	(Japan),	Yotam	Ottolenghi,	Claudia	Roden,	and	Paula	Wolfert
(Mediterranean),	Diana	Kennedy	and	Maricel	Presilla	(Mexico),	Andy
Ricker	and	David	Thompson	(Thailand),	Andrea	Nguyen	and	Charles	Phan
(Vietnam).
For	general	cooking:	James	Beard,	April	Bloomfield,	Marion	Cunningham,
Suzanne	Goin,	Edna	Lewis,	Deborah	Madison,	Cal	Peternell,	David	Tanis,
Alice	Waters,	The	Canal	House,	and	The	Joy	of	Cooking.
For	inspiring	writing	about	food	and	cooking:	Tamar	Adler,	Elizabeth
David,	MFK	Fisher,	Patience	Gray,	Jane	Grigson,	and	Nigel	Slater.
For	baking:	Josey	Baker,	Flo	Braker,	Dorie	Greenspan,	David	Lebovitz,	Alice
Medrich,	Elisabeth	Prueitt,	Claire	Ptak,	Chad	Robertson,	and	Lindsey	Shere.
For	more	on	the	science	behind	cooking:	Shirley	Corriher,	Harold	McGee,
J.	Kenji	Lopez-Alt,	Hervé	This,	and	the	folks	at	Cook’s	Illustrated.



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This	book	is	the	culmination	of	fifteen	years	of	cooking	and	thinking	about
cooking,	and	six	years	of	research	and	writing.	Along	the	way	many	people
have	made	countless	contributions,	both	large	and	small.	I’d	like	to	express
deep	gratitude	to:

Alice	Waters,	for	creating	an	immeasurably	inspiring	and	educational
community	and	welcoming	me	into	it	as	a	youngster.	For	instilling	in	me	the
aesthetic	and	sensual	values	that	guide	me	in	everything	I	do.	For	showing
me	just	how	much	one	determined	woman	with	a	vision	can	accomplish.

Michael	Pollan	and	Judith	Belzer,	for	friendship,	guidance,	and
innumerable	forms	of	support	over	the	years,	including	the	earliest
encouragement	to	develop	my	harebrained	ideas	about	cooking	into	a
formal	philosophy,	and	then	a	book.

Christopher	Lee,	for	being	the	ultimate	encyclopedic	reference,	for
teaching	me	to	respect	my	culinary	ancestors,	for	showing	me	how	to	take
my	cooking	to	the	edge,	and	for	teaching	me	how	to	taste.

Lori	Podraza	and	Mark	Gordon,	for	patiently	allowing	me	to	test	every
single	theory	on	you.

Thomas	W.	Dorman,	for	teaching	me	the	difference	between	Quality
and	quality.

All	of	my	teachers:	Stephen	Booth,	Sylvan	Brackett,	Mary	Canales,
Dario	Cecchini,	Siew-Chin	Chinn,	Rayneil	de	Guzman,	Amy	Dencler,
Samantha	Greenwood,	Charlie	Hallowell,	Robert	Hass,	Kelsie	Kerr,	Niloufer
Ichaporia	King,	Charlene	Nicholson,	Cal	Peternell,	Dominica	Rice,	Cristina
Roschi,	Lindsey	Shere,	Alan	Tangren,	David	Tanis,	and	Benedetta	Vitali.

Sam	Moghannam,	Rosie	Branson	Gill,	and	Michelle	McKenzie	at	18
Reasons,	and	Alexis	and	Eric	Koefoed	at	Soul	Food	Farm,	for	the	earliest
opportunities	to	teach	and	refine	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat.	And	Sasha	Lopez,	my
first—and	best—student.

My	deeply	supportive	community	of	writers,	including	Chris	Colin,	Jack
Hitt,	Doug	McGray,	Caroline	Paul,	Kevin	West,	and	everyone	at	the	Notto,
past	and	present:	Roxy	Bahar,	Julie	Caine,	Novella	Carpenter,	Bridget
Huber,	Casey	Miner,	Sarah	C.	Rich,	Mary	Roach,	Alec	Scott,	Gordy	Slack,
and	Malia	Wollan.

Sarah	Adelman,	Laurel	Braitman,	and	Jenny	Wapner	for	formative	early



input	and	unwavering	friendship.
Twilight	Greenaway,	for	the	quinoa,	and	for	being	my	sister.	Justin

Limoges,	and	Marlow	Colt	Greenaway-Limoges,	for	being	my	tummy
triplets.

Aaron	Hyman,	for	invariably	following	every	thread	of	curiosity	along
with	me,	and	for	never	letting	me	compromise.

Kristen	Rasmussen	for	being	my	science	and	nutrition	heroine.	Harold
McGee,	for	support	with	food	science,	and	Guy	Crosby,	Michelle	Harris,
and	Laura	Katz	for	help	with	thorough	fact-checking.

Annette	Flores,	Michelle	Fuerst,	Amy	Hatwig,	Carrie	Lewis,	Amalia
Mariño,	Lori	Oyamada,	Laurie	Ellen	Pellicano,	Tom	Purtill,	Jill	Santopietro,
Gillian	Shaw,	and	Jessica	Washburn	for	recipe	writing	and	testing	support
and	advice.

The	hundreds	of	home	cooks	who	patiently,	faithfully,	and	diligently
tested	recipes!

Thomas	and	Tiffany	Campbell,	Greta	Caruso,	Barbara	Denton,	Lex
Denton,	Philip	Dwelle,	and	Alex	Holey	for	your	appetites,	friendship,	and	for
showing	me	how	home	cooks	think.

Tamar	Adler	and	Julia	Turshen,	for	walking	down	the	path	of	words	and
food	alongside	me.

David	Riland,	for	steadfastness	and	compassion.
Sarah	Ryhanen	and	Eric	Famisan,	for	my	writing	room	at	the	farm.
Peter,	Kristin,	Bodhi,	and	Bea	Becker,	for	weaving	me	seamlessly	into

your	fray	every	time	I	come	to	town.
Verlyn	Klikenborg,	for	Several	Short	Sentences	about	Writing.
The	MacDowell	Colony,	The	Headlands	Center	for	the	Arts,	and	Mesa

Refuge	for	space,	time,	and	invaluable	creative	support.
Alvaro	Villanueva,	for	bringing	endless	patience,	good	humour,	and

creativity	to	the	challenge	of	designing	a	book	that	breaks	all	the	rules.
Emily	Graff,	whose	keen	eye	for	detail,	organizational	tendencies,	and

tireless	support	have	improved	this	book	immeasurably.	Ann	Cherry,
Maureen	Cole,	Kayley	Hoffman,	Sarah	Reidy,	Marysue	Rucci,	Stacey	Sakal,
and	Dana	Trocker,	whose	work	behind	the	curtain	at	Simon	&	Schuster	has
shaped	this	book	and	will	give	it	a	life	of	its	own	out	in	the	world.



Jenny	Lord,	for	saying	just	the	right	things	at	just	the	right	time	from	half
a	world	away.

Mike	Szczerban,	for	wisdom	and	enthusiasm	that	help	set	this	book	on
the	right	path,	but	more	important,	for	a	magical	friendship	built	on	a
mutual	love	of	books.

Wendy	MacNaughton,	for	a	brilliant	sense	of	humour	and	adventure,	a
willingness	to	try	anything,	pep	talks	and	come-to-Jesus	moments,	and	of
course,	hard	work.	I	don’t	know	how	I	got	so	lucky	as	to	have	my	favourite
artist	illustrate	my	book	and	become	my	dear	friend	along	the	way.	You’re
unequivocally	the	best	collaborator	I	could’ve	wished	for.

Kari	Stuart,	my	dear	friend	and	indefatigable	champion	in	all	things,
without	whom	this	book	would	have	never	seen	the	light	of	day.	Amanda
Urban,	for	giving	me	Kari.	Patrick	Morley,	for	being	simply	the	best.

And	finally,	to	my	family,	who	taught	me	how	to	eat:	Shahla,	Pasha,	and
Bahador	Nosrat;	my	aunts	and	uncles	Leyla,	Shahab,	Shahram,	Shahriar,
and	Ziba	Khazai;	and	my	grandmothers,	Parvin	Khazai	and	Parivash	Nosrat.
Nooshe	joonetan.

Thank	you	to	my	wonderful	and	ever-encouraging	parents,	Robin	and
Candy	MacNaughton.	(Mom,	you’re	the	original	great	chef	in	my	life.)
Thank	you	to	all	the	friends	and	family	who	enjoyed	the	spoils	of	one	of	the
cooking/drawings	fests,	who	bolstered	us	along	the	way,	who	gave	us	your
thoughts,	wisdom,	support,	and	love.	Your	cheers	were	fuel.

A	standing	ovation	for	Trish	Richman,	my	studio	manager	and	personal
air	traffic	controller.	You	are	a	crucial	part	of	this	project.	Both	the	artwork
and	I	would	be	a	total	mess	without	you.

Alvaro	Villanueva!	Your	brilliant	design,	creative	ideas,	clear	thinking,
and	patience	are	all	astounding.	You	make	landing	hundreds	of	pieces	of
artwork	look	effortless.	Thank	you.

Thank	you	Kari	Stuart	for	taking	such	good	care	of	both	Samin	and	me.
You	are	a	champion.

Charlotte	Sheedy,	my	agent,	my	role	model.	A	hundred	cases	of	the
best	bourbon	isn’t	enough	to	thank	you	for	everything	you	do,	which	is
always	way	beyond	the	call	of	duty	in	both	your	work	and	in	the	world.

Thank	you	Caroline	Paul,	my	everything.	You	were	there	for	every



dinner,	every	clean	up,	every	debrief,	every	discussion.	There	is	nothing
without	you.	Thank	you	for	opening	up	our	home	and	our	life	to	this
experience.	I’m	so	happy	I	can	cook	for	you	now.	And	Samin.	When	you
first	approached	me	to	work	with	you	I	could	barely	scramble	an	egg.	Only
you—with	your	humour,	patience,	kindness,	and	genuine	enthusiasm—
could	capture	my	attention	like	you	did	and	show	me	how	darn	fun	and
fascinating	cooking	can	be.	You’ve	changed	my	life.	Thank	you.	It’s	an	honor
and	a	complete	joy	to	work	with	you,	to	make	art	with	you,	to	be	your	friend.
This	BLL’s	for	you.



BIBLIOGRAPHY
Batali,	Mario.	Crispy	Black	Bass	with	Endive	Marmellata	and	Saffron

Vinaigrette,	in	The	Babbo	Cookbook.	New	York:	Clarkson	Potter,	2002.
Beard,	James.	James	Beard’s	Simple	Foods.	New	York:	Macmillan,	1993.
———.	Theory	and	Practise	of	Good	Cooking.
Braker,	Flo.	The	Simple	Art	of	Perfect	Baking.	San	Francisco:	Chronicle	Books,

2003.
Breslin,	Paul	A.	S.	“An	Evolutionary	Perspective	on	Food	and	Human	Taste.”

Current	Biology,	Elsevier,	May	6,	2013.
Corriher,	Shirley.	BakeWise:	The	Hows	and	Whys	of	Successful	Baking	with

Over	200	Magnificent	Recipes.	New	York:	Scribner,	2008.
Crosby,	Guy.	The	Science	of	Good	Cooking:	Master	50	Simple	Concepts	to

Enjoy	a	Lifetime	of	Success	in	the	Kitchen.	Brookline,	MA:	America’s	Test
Kitchen,	2012.

David,	Elizabeth.	Spices,	Salt	and	Aromatics	in	the	English	Kitchen.
Harmondsworth:	Penguin,	1970.

Frankel,	E.	N.,	R.	J.	Mailer,	C.	F.	Shoemaker,	S.	C.	Wang,	and	J.	D.	Flynn.
“Tests	Indicate	That	Imported	‘extra-Virgin’	Olive	Oil	Often	Fails
International	and	USDA	Standards.”	UC	Davis	Olive	Center.	UC	Regents,
June	2010.

Frankel,	E.	N.,	R.	J.	Mailer,	S.	C.	Wang,	C.	F.	Shoemaker,	J.	X.	Guinard,	J.	D.
Flynn,	and	N.	D.	Sturzenberger.	“Evaluation	of	Extra-Virgin	Olive	Oil
Sold	in	California.”	UC	Davis	Olive	Center.	UC	Regents,	April	2011.

Heaney,	Seamus.	Death	of	a	Naturalist.	London:	Faber	and	Faber,	1969.
Holland,	Mina.	The	Edible	Atlas:	Around	the	World	in	Thirty-Nine	Cuisines.

London:	Canongate,	2014.
Hyde,	Robert	J.,	and	Steven	A.	Witherly.	“Dynamic	Contrast:	A	Sensory

Contribution	to	Palatability.”	Appetite	21.1	(1993):	1-16.
King,	Niloufer	Ichaporia.	My	Bombay	Kitchen:	Traditional	and	Modern	Parsi

Home	Cooking.	Berkeley:	University	of	California,	2007.
Kurlansky,	Mark.	Salt:	A	World	History.	New	York:	Walker,	2002.
Lewis,	Edna.	The	Taste	of	Country	Cooking.	New	York:	A.	A.	Knopf,	2006.



McGee,	Harold.	“Harold	McGee	on	When	to	Put	Oil	in	a	Pan.”	Diners
Journal	Harold	McGee	on	When	to	Put	Oil	in	a	Pan	Comments.	New	York
Times,	August	6,	2008.

———.	Keys	to	Good	Cooking:	A	Guide	to	Making	the	Best	of	Foods	and
Recipes.	New	York:	Penguin	Press,	2010.

———.	On	Food	and	Cooking:	The	Science	and	Lore	of	Cooking.	New	York:
Scribner,	1984;	2nd	ed.	2004.

Mcguire,	S.	“Institute	of	Medicine.	2010.	Strategies	to	Reduce	Sodium
Intake	in	the	United	States.”	Washington,	DC:	The	National	Academies
Press.	Advances	in	Nutrition:	An	International	Review	Journal	1.1	(2010):
49-50.

McLaghan,	Jennifer.	Fat:	An	Appreciation	of	a	Misunderstood	Ingredient,	with
Recipes.	Berkeley:	Ten	Speed	Press,	2008.

McPhee,	John.	Oranges.	New	York:	Farrar,	Straus	and	Giroux,	1967.
Montmayeur,	Jean-Pierre,	and	Johannes	Le	Coutre.	Fat	Detection:	Taste,

Texture,	and	Post	Ingestive	Effects.	Boca	Raton:	CRC/Taylor	&	Francis,
2010.

Page,	Karen,	and	Andrew	Dornenburg.	The	Flavour	Bible:	The	Essential	Guide
to	Culinary	Creativity,	Based	on	the	Wisdom	of	America’s	Most	Imaginative
Chefs.	New	York:	Little,	Brown,	2008.

Pollan,	Michael.	Cooked:	A	Natural	History	of	Transformation.	New	York:
Penguin,	2014.

Powers	of	Ten—A	Film	Dealing	with	the	Relative	Size	of	Things	in	the	Universe
and	the	Effect	of	Adding	Another	Zero.	By	Charles	Eames,	Ray	Eames,
Elmer	Bernstein,	and	Philip	Morrison.	Pyramid	Films,	1978.

Rodgers,	Judy.	The	Zuni	Cafe	Cookbook.	New	York:	W.	W.	Norton,	2002.
Rozin,	Elisabeth.	Ethnic	Cuisine:	The	Flavour-Principle	Cookbook.	Lexington,

MA:	S.	Greene,	1985.
Ruhlman,	Michael.	The	Elements	of	Cooking:	Translating	the	Chef’s	Craft	for

Every	Kitchen.	New	York:	Scribner,	2007.
Segnit,	Niki.	The	Flavour	Thesaurus:	A	Compendium	of	Pairings,	Recipes,	and

Ideas	for	the	Creative	Cook.	New	York:	Bloomsbury,	2010.
“Smoke:	Why	We	Love	It,	for	Cooking	and	Eating.”	Washington	Post,	May	5,

2015.



Stevens,	Wallace.	Harmonium.	New	York:	A.	A.	Knopf,	1947.
Strand,	Mark.	Selected	Poems.	New	York:	Knopf,	1990.
Stuckey,	Barb.	Taste	What	You’re	Missing:	The	Passionate	Eater’s	Guide	to

Why	Good	Food	Tastes	Good.	New	York:	Free,	2012.
Talavera,	Karel,	Keiko	Yasumatsu,	Thomas	Voets,	Guy	Droogmans,

Noriatsu	Shigemura,	Yuzo	Ninomiya,	Robert	F.	Margolskee,	and	Bernd
Nilius.	“Heat	Activation	of	TRPM5	Underlies	Thermal	Sensitivity	of
Sweet	Taste.”	Nature,	2005.

This,	Hervé.	Kitchen	Mysteries:	Revealing	the	Science	of	Cooking=Les	Secrets
De	La	Casserole.	New	York:	Columbia	UP,	2007.

———.	Molecular	Gastronomy:	Exploring	the	Science	of	Flavour.	New	York:
Columbia	UP,	2006.

———.	The	Science	of	the	Oven.	New	York:	Columbia	UP,	2009.
Waters,	Alice,	Alan	Tangren,	and	Fritz	Streiff.	Chez	Panisse	Fruit.	New	York:

HarperCollins,	2002.
Waters,	Alice,	Patricia	Curtan,	Kelsie	Kerr,	and	Fritz	Streiff.	The	Art	of	Simple

Food:	Notes,	Lessons,	and	Recipes	from	a	Delicious	Revolution.	New	York:
Clarkson	Potter,	2007.

Witherly,	Steven	A.	“Why	Humans	Like	Junk	Food.”	Bloomington:	iUniverse
Inc.,	2007.

Wrangham,	Richard	W.	Catching	Fire:	How	Cooking	Made	Us	Human.	New
York:	Basic,	2009.



INDEX
Aaron’s	Tart	Dough,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Acid,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
balancing,	ref1,	ref2
colour	and,	ref1
defined,	ref1
doughs	and	batters	and,	ref1
flavour	and,	ref1
garnishing,	ref1
improvising	with,	ref1,	ref2
layering,	ref1,	ref2
producing,	ref1
sources	of,	ref1
sugar	and,	ref1
World	of	Acid,	ref1

Adas	Polo	o	Morgh	(Chicken	with	Lentil	Rice),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Adu	Lasan,	ref1
Aïoli	(Garlic	Mayonnaise),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Air,	cooking	with,	ref1
Alkalinity,	ref1
All-Butter	Pie	Dough,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Almonds:
Almond	and	Cardamom	Tea	Cake,	ref1,	ref2
Almond	Cream,	ref1
Apricot	and	Almond	Compote,	ref1
Toasted	Almond	or	Hazelnut	Cream,	ref1

Alterna-Slaw,	ref1
Anchoring,	ref1



Animal	fats,	ref1,	ref2
Any-Other-Citrus	Vinaigrette,	ref1
Apples,	ref1
Apple	and	Frangipane	Tart,	ref1
Classic	Apple	Pie,	ref1,	ref2

Apricots,	ref1
Apricot	and	Almond	Compote,	ref1
Apricot	Kernel	(Noyau)	Cream,	ref1

Arborio	rice,	ref1,	ref2
Argentinian	Chimichurri,	ref1
Aroma,	ref1
Aromatic	flavour	bases	of	the	World,	ref1
Artichokes:
Artichoke	Confit,	ref1
grilling,	ref1
heart	of,	ref1

Asian	Slaw,	ref1
Asparagus:
Asparagus	and	Feta	with	Mint	Salad,	ref1
Creamy	Asparagus	and	Mint	Pasta,	ref1

Ata	Lilo,	ref1
Autumn	Panzanella,	ref1,	ref2
Avocado:
Avocado	and	Citrus	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Avocado	Salad	with	Heirloom	Tomato	and	Cucumber,	ref1

Bacon,	ref1
Bacon	fat,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Bain-marie	(water	bath),	ref1,	ref2



Baking,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3	(see	also	Doughs	and	batters)
Baking	powder	and	bicarbonate	of	soda,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Balance,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Balsamic	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2
Barding,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Basic	Mayonnaise,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Basic	Pepper	Paste,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Basic	Salsa	Verde,	ref1
Basil	Pesto,	ref1
Basmati	rice,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Batali,	Mario,	ref1
Bay	Leaf	Cream,	ref1
Beans,	ref1,	ref2
Bean	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Broad	Bean	and	Dill	Rice,	ref1
Garlicky	Green	Beans,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Pasta	with	Beans	and	Broccoli,	ref1
recipes,	ref1
Simmered	Beans,	ref1,	ref2
soaking	stages	of	dried,	ref1
Tender	Beans,	ref1
Tuscan	Bean	and	Kale	Soup,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tuscan	Bread,	Bean,	and	Kale	Soup	(Ribollita),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tuscan	Pasta	and	Bean	Soup	(Pasta	e	Fagioli),	ref1,	ref2

Beard,	James,	ref1,	ref2
Beef:
basic	braising	times,	ref1
beef	fat,	ref1



Beef	Stock,	ref1
best	braising	cuts,	ref1
Pasta	al	Ragù,	ref1
Steak,	ref1

Beer-Battered	Fish,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Beetroots:
Avocado	Salad	with	Heirloom	Tomato	and	Cucumber,	ref1
Persian	Beetroot	Yoghurt	(Mast-o-Laboo),	ref1

Bitterness,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Bittersweet	Chocolate	Pudding,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Blanching,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Blond	onions,	ref1,	ref2
Blue	Cheese	Dressing,	ref1,	ref2
Blumenthal,	Heston,	ref1
Boiled	meat,	ref1
Boiling	eggs,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Boiling	water,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
Boneless	Pork	Loin,	ref1
Boozy	Cream,	ref1
Borani	Esfenaj	(Persian	Spinach	Yoghurt),	ref1
Braising,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
from	around	world,	ref1
basic	times	for,	ref1
best	cuts	for,	ref1

Bread	Crumb	Salsa,	ref1
Bread	Tahdig,	ref1
Breaded	Fish	or	Prawns,	ref1
Bright	Cabbage	Slaw,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6



Brining,	ref1,	ref2
Broad	Bean	and	Dill	Rice,	ref1
Broccoli:
Pasta	with	Beans	and	Broccoli,	ref1
Pasta	with	Broccoli	and	Bread	Crumbs,	ref1
Pasta	with	Sausage	and	Broccoli,	ref1

Brothy	soups,	ref1
Brown	butter,	ref1
Brown	Butter	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Brown	rice,	ref1
Browned	onions,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Browning,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9,	ref10,	ref11,	ref12,

ref13,	ref14,	ref15,	ref16
Brussels	sprouts:
Butternut	Squash	and	Brussels	Sprouts	in	Agrodolce,	ref1

Butter,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8	(see	also	Doughs	and	batters)
Butter	cakes,	ref1
Butter	sauce,	ref1
Buttermilk:
Buttermilk	Biscuits,	ref1
Buttermilk-Marinated	Roast	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2
Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3

Butternut	Squash	and	Brussels	Sprouts	in	Agrodolce,	ref1
Cabbage:
Bright	Cabbage	Slaw,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6

Caesar	Dressing,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Caesar	Salad,	ref1,	ref2
Cakes,	ref1
Almond	and	Cardamom	Tea	Cake,	ref1,	ref2



butter	cakes,	ref1
Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	ref1,	ref2
Fresh	Ginger	and	Molasses	Cake,	ref1,	ref2
Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3

Calcium	sulphate,	ref1
Caprese	Salad,	ref1
Caramel:
caramel	candy,	ref1
Caramel	Cream,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Salted	Caramel	Sauce,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4

Caramelisation,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Caramelised	Onion	Tart,	ref1,	ref2
Caramelised	onions,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Cardamom	Cream,	ref1,	ref2
Cardamom	Panna	Cotta,	ref1
Carrots:
Indian	Carrot	Raita,	ref1
Shaved	Carrot	Salad	with	Ginger	and	Lime,	ref1,	ref2

Carryover,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Casein,	ref1
Catalan	Pepper	Sauce	(Romesco),	ref1
Cecchini,	Dario,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Cellulose,	ref1,	ref2
Cervantes,	ref1
Chard,	ref1,	ref2
Persian	Herb	and	Greens	Frittata	(Kuku	Sabzi),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,
ref6

Charmoula,	ref1,	ref2
Cheese	(see	specific	recipes)



Cheesy	Torn	Croutons,	ref1
Chemical	reaction,	ref1
Chez	Panisse,	Berkeley,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9,	ref10,

ref11,	ref12,	ref13,	ref14,	ref15,	ref16,	ref17
Chicken,	ref1
basic	braising	times,	ref1
best	braising	cuts,	ref1
breaking	down	whole,	ref1
Buttermilk-Marinated	Roast	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2
Chicken	and	Garlic	Soup,	ref1
Chicken	Confit,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
chicken	fat,	ref1,	ref2
Chicken	Pot	Pie,	ref1,	ref2
Chicken	Stock,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9,	ref10,	ref11
Chicken	with	Lentil	Rice	(Adas	Polo	o	Morgh),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Chicken	with	Vinegar,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Classic	Fried	Chicken,	ref1
Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2
cooking	methods,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7
Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Curried	Chicken	Salad,	ref1
Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Indian-Spiced	Fried	Chicken,	ref1
Persian	Roast	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Personal	Pot	Pies,	ref1
Poultry	Ragù,	ref1
recipes,	ref1
Sage-	and	Honey-Smoked	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4



seasoning,	ref1
Sicilian	Chicken	Salad,	ref1
Spicy	Fried	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Spring	Garlic	Soup,	ref1
Vietnamese	Chicken	Soup	(Pho	Gà),	ref1,	ref2

Chickpeas,	ref1
Child,	Julia,	ref1
Chipotle	Mayonnaise,	ref1
Chocolate,	ref1
Bittersweet	Chocolate	Pudding,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Chocolate-Caramel	Meringue	Fool,	ref1
Chocolate-Cardamom	Pudding,	ref1
Chocolate	Cream,	ref1
Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Chocolate	Pudding	Pie,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Mexican	Chocolate	Pudding,	ref1

Chunky	soups,	ref1,	ref2
Chutney,	Indian	Coconut-Coriander,	ref1,	ref2
Cima	di	Rapa,	Spicy,	with	Ricotta	Salata,	ref1
Citrus	Panna	Cotta,	ref1
Citrus	Salmon,	ref1
Citrus	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2
Clams:
Pasta	alle	Vongole,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
White	and	Red	Clam	Sauce,	ref1

Clarified	butter,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Classic	Apple	Pie,	ref1,	ref2



Classic	Egg	Drop	Soup,	ref1
Classic	French	Herb	Salsa,	ref1
Classic	Fried	Chicken,	ref1
Classic	Italian	Salsa	Verde,	ref1
Classic	Pumpkin	Pie,	ref1
Classic	Sandwich	Mayo,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Classic	Southern	Slaw,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Classic	Torn	Croutons,	ref1
Coagulation,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Coconut:
Coconut	Cream,	ref1,	ref2
coconut	oil,	ref1
Indian	Coconut-Coriander	Chutney,	ref1,	ref2

Coddling,	ref1,	ref2
Coffee,	ref1
Coffee	Cream,	ref1
Coffee	Granita,	ref1,	ref2
Collagen,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Collard	greens,	ref1
Colour,	acid	and,	ref1
Compote,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Conduction,	ref1,	ref2
Confit,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Artichoke	Confit,	ref1
Cherry	Tomato	Confit,	ref1
Chicken	Confit,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Duck	Confit,	ref1
Pork	Confit,	ref1



Tomato	Confit,	ref1
Tuna	Confit,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
Turkey	Confit,	ref1

Convection	oven,	ref1,	ref2
Conveyor	Belt	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2
Cooking	acids,	ref1
Cooking	methods:
bain-marie	(water	bath),	ref1,	ref2
baking,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
blanching,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
boiling,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9
braising	(see	Braising)
coddling,	ref1,	ref2
confit	(see	Confit)
deep-frying,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
frying,	ref1,	ref2
grilling,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
oven	grilling,	ref1,	ref2
pan-frying,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
poaching	(see	Poaching)
reducing,	ref1,	ref2
roasting,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
sautéing,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
searing,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
shallow-frying,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
simmering,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
smoking,	ref1
steaming,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3



stewing,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
sweating,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
toasting,	ref1,	ref2

Corn:
Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5

Cream	biscuits,	ref1
Cream	of	tartar,	ref1
Creaming,	ref1
Creamy	Asparagus	and	Mint	Pasta,	ref1
Creamy	Herb	Dressings,	ref1
Creamy	salad	dressings,	ref1,	ref2
Creamy	texture,	ref1,	ref2
Crème	fraîche,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7
Crisp	texture,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Crispiest	Spatchcocked	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Croutons,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Cucumbers:
Avocado	Salad	with	Heirloom	Tomato	and	Cucumber,	ref1
Tomato,	Basil,	and	Cucumber	Salad,	ref1
Vietnamese	Cucumber	Salad,	ref1

Cumin,	ref1
Curried	Chicken	Salad,	ref1
David,	Elizabeth,	ref1
Davis,	Nekisia,	ref1
Deep-frying,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Dehydrating,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Denaturation,	ref1,	ref2
Desserts	(see	Sweets)



Dextrose,	ref1
Diamond	Crystal	Kosher	salt,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Diffusion,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Direct	heat,	ref1
Doughs	and	batters,	ref1
Aaron’s	Tart	Dough,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
acid	and,	ref1
All-Butter	Pie	Dough,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Apple	and	Frangipane	Tart,	ref1
Bittersweet	Chocolate	Pudding,	ref1
Buttermilk	Biscuits,	ref1
Chocolate	Pudding	Pie,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Classic	Apple	Pie,	ref1,	ref2
Classic	Pumpkin	Pie,	ref1
fat	and,	ref1,	ref2
Fritto	Misto,	ref1,	ref2
Fruit	Cobbler,	ref1
Gluten-Free	Batter,	ref1
recipes,	ref1
salt	and,	ref1
Shortcakes,	ref1

Duck,	ref1
cooking	methods,	ref1
Duck	Confit,	ref1
duck	fat,	ref1

Earl	Grey	Cream,	ref1
Earthiness,	ref1
Eggs,	ref1



acid	and,	ref1
Classic	Egg	Drop	Soup,	ref1
cooking	methods,	ref1,	ref2
Eight-Minute	Eggs,	ref1
recipes,	ref1
Roman	Egg	Drop	Soup	(Stracciatella),	ref1,	ref2
salt	and,	ref1
scrambled,	ref1

Emulsions,	ref1,	ref2
breaking	and	fixing,	ref1

Equipment,	kitchen,	ref1
Essentials	of	Classic	Italian	Cooking	(Hazan),	ref1
Everyday	olive	oils,	ref1
Fat,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
balancing,	ref1
butter,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8
cooking	with,	ref1
defined,	ref1
doughs	and	batters	and,	ref1,	ref2
emulsions,	ref1,	ref2
flavour	and,	ref1
heat	and,	ref1,	ref2
improvising	with,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
layering,	ref1,	ref2
limiting	consumption	of,	ref1
olive	oil,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
pan	surfaces,	ref1
roles	of,	ref1



salt	and,	ref1
smoke	points,	ref1
sources	of,	ref1,	ref2
texture	and	(see	Texture)
World	of	Fat,	ref1,	ref2

Fattoush,	ref1,	ref2
Feel,	measuring	heat	and,	ref1
Fennel:
Shaved	Fennel	and	Radishes	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3

Fermentation,	ref1
Feta:
Asparagus	and	Feta	with	Mint	Salad,	ref1
Meyer	Lemon	and	Feta	Relish,	ref1

Finger-Lickin’	Pan-Fried	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Finishing	olive	oils,	ref1
Fish	and	seafood,	ref1
Beer-Battered	Fish,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Breaded	Fish	or	Prawns,	ref1
Citrus	Salmon,	ref1
cooking	methods,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Indian-Spiced	Slow	Roasted	Salmon,	ref1,	ref2
Pasta	alle	Vongole,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Pasta	with	Clams	and	Sausage,	ref1
Pasta	with	Mussels,	ref1
recipes,	ref1
salt	and,	ref1
Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7
Soy-Glazed	Salmon,	ref1



Tuna	Confit,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Flaky	texture,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Flavour:
acid	and,	ref1
aromatic	flavour	bases	of	the	World,	ref1
defined,	ref1
fat	and,	ref1
heat	and,	ref1
salt	and,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
World	of	Flavour,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5

Flavoured	olive	oils,	ref1
Fleming,	Claudia,	ref1
Fleur	de	sel,	ref1,	ref2
Folding,	ref1
Freezer	burn,	ref1
Fresh	Ginger	and	Molasses	Cake,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Fried	Sage	Salsa	Verde,	ref1,	ref2
Frittata:
Persian	Herb	and	Greens	Frittata	(Kuku	Sabzi),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,
ref6

Fritto	Misto,	ref1,	ref2
Fruits,	ref1,	ref2
Fruit	Cobbler,	ref1
Fruit	Compote,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Granita,	ref1
poaching	in	wine,	ref1
roasting,	ref1

Frying,	ref1,	ref2
Frying	eggs,	ref1



Frying	pans,	ref1
Garlic:
Aïoli	(Garlic	Mayonnaise),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Chicken	and	Garlic	Soup,	ref1
Garlicky	Green	Beans,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Spring	Garlic	Soup,	ref1
turning	into	paste,	ref1

Gelatin,	ref1,	ref2
Gentle	heat,	ref1,	ref2
Ginger:
Fresh	Ginger	and	Molasses	Cake,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Shaved	Carrot	Salad	with	Ginger	and	Lime,	ref1,	ref2

Glazed	Five-Spice	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Gliadin,	ref1
Glutamates,	ref1
Gluten,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Gluten	development,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Gluten-Free	Batter,	ref1
Glutenin,	ref1
Goma-Ae	(Japanese	sesame	seed	dressing),	ref1,	ref2
Goose	fat,	ref1
Grains,	ref1
cooking,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Grain	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
recipes,	ref1

Granita,	ref1,	ref2
Granola:
Nekisia’s	Olive	Oil	and	Sea	Salt	Granola,	ref1



Grapeseed	oil,	ref1
Greek	Salad,	ref1,	ref2
Green	beans,	ref1
Garlicky	Green	Beans,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3

Green	Goddess	Dressing,	ref1,	ref2
Grigson,	Jane,	ref1
Grilled	cheese	sandwich,	ref1,	ref2
Grilling,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Grits,	ref1,	ref2
Ground	(milled)	grains,	ref1
Harissa	(North	African	Pepper	Sauce),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Hazan,	Marcella,	ref1,	ref2
Hazelnut	oil,	ref1
Heaney,	Seamus,	ref1
Hearing,	measuring	heat	and,	ref1
Heat,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
browning,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9,	ref10,	ref11,	ref12,
ref13,	ref14,	ref15,	ref16

carbohydrates	and,	ref1,	ref2
defined,	ref1
fat	and,	ref1,	ref2
flavour	and,	ref1
gentle	versus	intense,	ref1
improvising	with,	ref1
layering,	ref1,	ref2
measuring,	ref1
ovens,	ref1
power	of	steam,	ref1
proteins	and,	ref1



science	of,	ref1
sensory	cues	and,	ref1
water	and,	ref1

Herb	Mayonnaise,	ref1,	ref2
Herb	Salsa,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9
Herbed	Rice,	ref1
Herbed	Yoghurt,	ref1
High-heat	baking,	ref1,	ref2
Honey-Mustard	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Hyman,	Aaron,	ref1,	ref2
Improvising:	with	acid,	ref1,	ref2
with	fat,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
with	heat,	ref1
with	salt,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4

Indian	Carrot	Raita,	ref1
Indian	Coconut-Coriander	Chutney,	ref1,	ref2
Indian-Spiced	Fried	Chicken,	ref1
Indian-Spiced	Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	ref1,	ref2
Indirect	heat,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Intense	heat,	ref1,	ref2
Iodine,	ref1
Japanese-ish	Herb	Salsa,	ref1
Jasmine	rice,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Kale,	ref1,	ref2
Tuscan	Bean	and	Kale	Soup,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tuscan	Bread,	Bean,	and	Kale	Soup	(Ribollita),	ref1,	ref2

Kitchen	basics,	ref1
Kitchen	tools,	ref1



Knife	cuts,	ref1
Knives,	ref1
Kosher	salt,	ref1,	ref2
Kufte	Kebabs,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Kuku	Sabzi	(Persian	Herb	and	Greens	Frittata),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
Kumquats:
Kumquat	Salsa,	ref1
Kumquat	Vinaigrette,	ref1

Lamb:
basic	braising	times,	ref1
best	braising	cuts,	ref1
Kufte	Kebabs,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
lamb	fat,	ref1

Laminated	doughs,	ref1
Lard,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Larding,	ref1
Last	Course,	The	(Fleming),	ref1
Layering,	ref1
acid,	ref1
fat,	ref1
heat,	ref1
salt,	ref1,	ref2

Leavenings,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Lebanese	Pepper	and	Walnut	Spread	(Muhammara),	ref1,	ref2
Lecithin,	ref1
Lee,	Chris,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Legumes,	ref1,	ref2
Lemon,	ref1



Lemon-Anchovy	Vinaigrette,	ref1
Lemon	Cream,	ref1
Lemon	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2
Meyer	Lemon	and	Feta	Relish,	ref1
Meyer	Lemon	and	Olive	Relish,	ref1
Meyer	Lemon	Salsa,	ref1,	ref2

Lentils:
Chicken	with	Lentil	Rice	(Adas	Polo	o	Morgh),	ref1,	ref2

Lewis,	Edna,	ref1
Light	salad	dressings,	ref1,	ref2
Light	texture,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Lime:
Lime	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Peanut-Lime	Dressing,	ref1
Shaved	Carrot	Salad	with	Ginger	and	Lime,	ref1,	ref2

Long	cooking,	ref1
Lori’s	Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Low-heat	baking,	ref1,	ref2
Macerate,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Magic	Dust,	ref1
Magnesium	chloride,	ref1
Maillard,	Louis	Camille,	ref1
Maillard	reaction,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9,	ref10,	ref11
Maldon	salt,	ref1,	ref2
Marbling,	ref1
Marmalade,	ref1
Marshmallowy	Meringues,	ref1,	ref2
Mast-o-Laboo	(Persian	Beetroot	Yoghurt),	ref1



Mayonnaise,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Aïoli	(Garlic	Mayonnaise),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Basic	Mayonnaise,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Chipotle	Mayonnaise,	ref1
Classic	Sandwich	Mayo,	ref1,	ref2
fixing	broken,	ref1,	ref2
Herb	Mayonnaise,	ref1,	ref2
making,	ref1
Rouille	(Pepper	Mayonnaise),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3

McGee,	Harold,	ref1,	ref2
McPhee,	John,	ref1
Meat,	ref1
cooking	methods,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9,	ref10,	ref11
ground	meat,	ref1
heat	and,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
recipes,	ref1
recipes	(see	Beef:	Pork;	Lamb)
resting	meat,	ref1,	ref2
salt	and,	ref1

Meatiness,	ref1
Meats
simmering,	ref1

Menu	suggestions,	ref1
Meringues:
Marshmallowy	Meringues,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Meringue	Fool,	ref1

Mexi	Slaw,	ref1
Mexican	Chocolate	Pudding,	ref1



Mexican-ish	Herb	Salsa,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Meyer	Lemon	and	Feta	Relish,	ref1
Meyer	Lemon	and	Olive	Relish,	ref1
Meyer	Lemon	Salsa,	ref1,	ref2
Mint:
Asparagus	and	Feta	with	Mint	Salad,	ref1
Mint	Salsa	Verde,	ref1,	ref2
Snap	Peas	with	Chillies	and	Mint,	ref1

Mirepoix,	ref1
Miso-Mustard	Dressing,	ref1
Moroccan	Kofta,	ref1
Morton	iodised	salt,	ref1
Morton	Kosher	salt,	ref1,	ref2
MSG	(monosodium	glutamate),	ref1
Muhammara	(Lebanese	Pepper	and	Walnut	Spread),	ref1,	ref2
Mushrooms,	ref1
Mussels:
Pasta	with	Mussels,	ref1

Natural	sea	salts,	ref1
Nekisia’s	Olive	Oil	and	Sea	Salt	Granola,	ref1
Niman,	Bill,	ref1
Noodles	(see	Pasta)
North	African	Charmoula,	ref1
Noyau	(apricot	kernel)	Cream,	ref1
Nut	oils,	ref1
Nuttiness,	ref1
Oils	(see	Fat)
Olive	oil,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4



Oliver,	Mary,	ref1
Onions,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
cooking,	ref1
macerated,	ref1,	ref2
slicing	and	dicing,	ref1

Oranges:
Orange	Cream,	ref1
Orange-Flower	Cream,	ref1
Orange	Granita,	ref1

Oranges	(McPhee),	ref1
Osmosis,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Oven	grilling,	ref1,	ref2
Oven	spring,	ref1
Ovens,	ref1
Oxidation,	ref1
Palmful	of	salt,	ref1
Pan-frying,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Pan	surfaces,	ref1
Pancetta,	ref1
Panko,	ref1
Pantry	items,	ref1
Panzanella	(see	Salads)
Parchment	paper,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Parmesan,	ref1,	ref2
Parmesan	Vinaigrette,	ref1
Parsley,	chopping,	ref1,	ref2
Pasta,	ref1
cooking	methods,	ref1,	ref2



Creamy	Asparagus	and	Mint	Pasta,	ref1
five	classic,	ref1
Pasta	al	Ragù,	ref1,	ref2
Pasta	Alfredo,	ref1,	ref2
Pasta	alla	Pomarola,	ref1
Pasta	alla	Puttanesca,	ref1
Pasta	all’Amatriciana,	ref1,	ref2
Pasta	alle	Vongole,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Pasta	Cacio	e	Pepe,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Pasta	e	Fagioli	(Tuscan	Pasta	and	Bean	Soup),	ref1,	ref2
Pasta	with	Beans	and	Broccoli,	ref1
Pasta	with	Broccoli	and	Bread	Crumbs,	ref1
Pasta	with	Clams	and	Sausage,	ref1
Pasta	with	Mussels,	ref1
Pasta	with	Sausage	and	Broccoli,	ref1
recipes,	ref1

Pavlovas,	ref1,	ref2
Peaches:
Peach	and	Vanilla	Bean	Compote,	ref1
Peach	Leaf	Cream,	ref1

Peanut-Lime	Dressing,	ref1
Peanut	oil,	ref1
Pectin,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Pépin,	Jacques,	ref1,	ref2
Pepper,	ref1
Pepper	Mayonnaise	(Rouille),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Pepper	Paste,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Pepper	Sauce,	ref1



Persian	Beetroot	Yoghurt	(Mast-o-Laboo),	ref1
Persian	Herb	and	Cucumber	Yoghurt,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Persian	Herb	and	Greens	Frittata	(Kuku	Sabzi),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
Persian-ish	Rice,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Persian	Pavlovas,	ref1
Persian	Roast	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Persian	Shirazi	Salad,	ref1,	ref2
Persian	Spinach	Yoghurt	(Borani	Esfenaj),	ref1
Personal	Pot	Pies,	ref1
Pesto,	ref1,	ref2
Peternell,	Cal,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
pH	scale,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Pho	Gà	(Vietnamese	Chicken	Soup),	ref1,	ref2
Pie	dough,	ref1
Pies	(see	Sweets)
Pinch	of	salt,	ref1
Plant	anatomy,	ref1,	ref2
Poaching,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
eggs,	ref1,	ref2
fruits,	ref1

Podraza,	Lori,	ref1
Polenta,	ref1,	ref2
Pollan,	Michael,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Pork,	ref1
basic	braising	times,	ref1
best	braising	cuts,	ref1
Boneless	Pork	Loin,	ref1
Pasta	al	Ragù,	ref1



Pork	Braised	with	Chillies,	ref1,	ref2
Pork	Confit,	ref1
pork	fat,	ref1,	ref2
Pork	Schnitzel,	ref1

Porridges,	ref1
“Pot	Roast”	(Strand),	ref1
Potatoes,	ref1,	ref2
Poultry	(see	Chicken;	Turkey)
Poultry	Ragù,	ref1,	ref2
Pound	cake,	ref1
Preserves,	ref1
Prosciutto,	ref1
Puddings	(see	Sweets)
Pumpkin	seed	oil,	ref1
Pumpkin	Seed	Salsa,	ref1
Purtill,	Tom,	ref1
Quinoa,	ref1
Radiant	heat,	ref1,	ref2
Radicchio,	Roasted,	and	Roquefort	Salad,	ref1
Radishes:
Shaved	Fennel	and	Radishes	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3

Recaito,	ref1
Recipes,	ref1,	ref2
beans,	grains,	and	pasta,	ref1
chicken,	ref1
doughs	and	batters,	ref1
eggs,	ref1
fish	and	seafood,	ref1



meat,	ref1
salad	dressings,	ref1
salads,	ref1	(see	also	Slaw)
sauces,	ref1
soups,	ref1
stock,	ref1
sweets,	ref1
vegetables,	ref1

Red	Wine	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Reducing,	ref1,	ref2
Rendering,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Resting	meat,	ref1,	ref2
Reverse	osmosis,	ref1
Rib	eye	steak,	ref1
Ribollita	(Tuscan	Bread,	Bean,	and	Kale	Soup),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Rice:
Broad	Bean	and	Dill	Rice,	ref1
Chicken	with	Lentil	Rice	(Adas	Polo	o	Morgh),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
cooking,	ref1
Herbed	Rice,	ref1
Persian-ish	Rice,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Saffron	Rice,	ref1
Steamed	Jasmine	Rice,	ref1

Rice	Wine	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2
Ricotta:
Ricotta	and	Tomato	Salad	Toasts,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Spicy	Cima	di	Rapa	with	Ricotta	Salata,	ref1

Risotto,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3



Roasted	Radicchio	and	Roquefort	Salad,	ref1
Roasted	Squash,	Sage,	and	Hazelnut	Salad,	ref1
Roasting,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Robertson,	Chad,	ref1
Rock	salt,	ref1,	ref2
Rodgers,	Judy,	ref1,	ref2
Rolled	oats,	ref1,	ref2
Roman	Egg	Drop	Soup	(Stracciatella),	ref1,	ref2
Romesco	(Catalan	Pepper	Sauce),	ref1
Rose	Cream,	ref1
Rose-Scented	Berries,	ref1,	ref2
Rouille	(Pepper	Mayonnaise),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Saffron	Rice,	ref1
Saffron	tea,	ref1,	ref2
Sage-	and	Honey-Smoked	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Salad	dressings,	ref1	(see	also	Vinaigrette	dressings)
Blue	Cheese	Dressing,	ref1,	ref2
Caesar	Dressing,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
creamy,	ref1,	ref2
Creamy	Herb	Dressing,	ref1
Goma-Ae	(Japanese	sesame	seed	dressing),	ref1,	ref2
Green	Goddess	Dressing,	ref1,	ref2
light,	ref1,	ref2
Miso-Mustard	Dressing,	ref1
Peanut-Lime	Dressing,	ref1
recipes,	ref1
Tahini	Dressing,	ref1

Salads,	ref1,	ref2	(see	also	Slaw)



Asparagus	and	Feta	with	Mint	Salad,	ref1
Avocado	and	Citrus	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Avocado	with	Heirloom	Tomato	and
Cucumber	Salad,	ref1
Bean	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Caesar	Salad,	ref1,	ref2
Caprese	Salad,	ref1
croutons,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Curried	Chicken	Salad,	ref1
dressings	(see	Salad	dressings)
Fattoush,	ref1,	ref2
Grain	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Greek	Salad,	ref1,	ref2
ideal,	ref1
Persian	Shirazi	Salad,	ref1,	ref2
recipes,	ref1	(see	also	Slaw)
Ricotta	and	Tomato	Salad	Toasts,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Roasted	Radicchio	and	Roquefort	Salad,	ref1
Roasted	Squash,	Sage,	and	Hazelnut	Salad,	ref1
Shaved	Carrot	Salad	with	Ginger	and	Lime,	ref1,	ref2
Shaved	Fennel	and	Radishes	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Shirazi	Salad,	ref1
Sicilian	Chicken	Salad,	ref1
Summer	Tomato	and	Herb	Salad,	ref1
Tomato,	Basil,	and	Cucumber	Salad,	ref1
Vietnamese	Cucumber	Salad,	ref1,	ref2

Saliva,	ref1
Salmon:



Citrus	Salmon,	ref1
Indian-Spiced	Slow	Roasted	Salmon,	ref1,	ref2
Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7
Soy-Glazed	Salmon,	ref1

Salmoriglio	(Sicilian	Oregano	Sauce),	ref1
Salsa	(see	Salsa	Verde;	Sauces)
Salsa	Verde:
Basic,	ref1
Classic	Italian	Salsa	Verde,	ref1
Fried	Sage	Salsa	Verde,	ref1,	ref2
Mint	Salsa	Verde,	ref1

Salt,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
balancing,	ref1
basic	salting	guidelines,	ref1,	ref2
calendar	of	salting,	ref1
cooking	water	and,	ref1
defined,	ref1
doughs	and	batters	and,	ref1
eggs	and,	ref1
fat	and,	ref1
fish	and	seafood	and,	ref1
flavour	and,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
improvising	with,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
iodised,	ref1
Kosher	salt,	ref1,	ref2
layering,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
legumes	and	grains	and,	ref1
limiting	consumption	of,	ref1



measuring,	ref1
meat	and,	ref1
osmosis	and	diffusion	and,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
pepper	and,	ref1
recipe	examples,	ref1
salting	techniques,	ref1
sea	salt,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
sources	of,	ref1
sugar	and,	ref1
in	sweets,	ref1
table	salt,	ref1,	ref2
types	of,	ref1
vegetables	and,	ref1

Salted	Caramel	Sauce,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Saltiness,	ref1,	ref2
Sauces,	ref1
Argentinian	Chimichurri,	ref1
Basic	Salsa	Verde,	ref1
Bread	Crumb	Salsa,	ref1
Catalan	Pepper	Sauce	(Romesco),	ref1
Charmoula,	ref1,	ref2
Classic	French	Herb	Salsa,	ref1
Classic	Italian	Salsa	Verde,	ref1
cooking,	ref1,	ref2
Fried	Sage	Salsa	Verde,	ref1,	ref2
Herb	Salsa,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8,	ref9
Indian	Carrot	Raita,	ref1
Indian	Coconut-Coriander	Chutney,	ref1,	ref2



Japanese-ish	Herb	Salsa,	ref1
Kumquat	Salsa,	ref1
Lebanese	Pepper	and	Walnut	Spread	(Muhammara),	ref1,	ref2
mayonnaise	(see	Mayonnaise),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Mexican-ish	Herb	Salsa,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Meyer	Lemon	and	Feta	Relish,	ref1
Meyer	Lemon	and	Olive	Relish,	ref1
Meyer	Lemon	Salsa,	ref1,	ref2
Mint	Salsa	Verde,	ref1
North	African	Pepper	Sauce	(Harissa),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Pepper	Paste,	ref1,	ref2
Pepper	Sauce,	ref1
Persian	Beetroot	Yoghurt	(Mast-o-Laboo),	ref1
Persian	Herb	and	Cucumber	Yoghurt,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Persian	Spinach	Yoghurt	(Borani	Esfenaj),	ref1
Pesto,	ref1,	ref2
Pumpkin	Seed	Salsa,	ref1
recipes,	ref1
Salted	Caramel	Sauce,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Sicilian	Oregano	Sauce	(Salmoriglio),	ref1
Southeast	Asian	ish	Herb	Salsa,	ref1
Tartar	Sauce,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
White	and	Red	Clam	Sauce,	ref1
Yoghurt	Sauce,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3

Sausage:
Pasta	with	Clams	and	Sausage,	ref1
Pasta	with	Sausage	and	Broccoli,	ref1
Sausage	Ragù,	ref1



Sautéing,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Scented	Cream,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Schmaltz,	ref1
Scrambled	eggs,	ref1,	ref2
Sea	salt,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Seafood	(see	Fish	and	seafood)
Searing,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Seasoning:
in	advance,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
chicken,	ref1
fat	as,	ref1
food	from	within,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
salt	(see	Salt)
to	taste,	ref1

Seawater,	ref1,	ref2
Seed	oils,	ref1
Seeds,	ref1
Sel	gris,	ref1,	ref2
Senses,	five,	ref1
Sesame	oil,	ref1
Shallow-frying,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Shaved	Carrot	Salad	with	Ginger	and	Lime,	ref1,	ref2
Shaved	Fennel	and	Radishes	Salad,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Short	doughs,	ref1
Shortbread,	ref1
Shortbread	cookies,	ref1
Shortcakes,	ref1
Shortening,	ref1,	ref2



Sicilian	Chicken	Salad,	ref1
Siew-Chin,	ref1
Sight,	measuring	heat	and,	ref1
Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Simmering,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Skirt	steak,	ref1
Slaw:
Alterna-Slaw,	ref1
Asian	Slaw,	ref1
Bright	Cabbage	Slaw,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
Classic	Southern	Slaw,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Mexi-Slaw,	ref1

Slow-Roasted	Salmon,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7
Slow	roasting,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Smell,	measuring	heat	and,	ref1
Smoke,	flavour	of,	ref1
Smoke	points,	ref1,	ref2
Smoking,	ref1
Smooth	(puréed)	soups,	ref1,	ref2
Snap	Peas	with	Chillies	and	Mint,	ref1
Sodium	chloride,	ref1
Soffritto,	ref1
Sofregit,	ref1
Soups:
categories	of,	ref1
Chicken	and	Garlic	Soup,	ref1
Classic	Egg	Drop	Soup,	ref1
recipes,	ref1



Roman	Egg	Drop	Soup	(Stracciatella),	ref1
Silky	Sweet	Corn	Soup,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Spring	Garlic	Soup,	ref1
Tuscan	Bean	and	Kale	Soup,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tuscan	Bread,	Bean,	and	Kale	Soup	(Ribollita),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tuscan	Pasta	and	Bean	Soup	(Pasta	e	Fagioli),	ref1,	ref2
Vietnamese	Chicken	Soup	(Pho	Gà),	ref1,	ref2

Sourness,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Southeast	Asian-ish	Herb	Salsa,	ref1
Soy-Glazed	Salmon,	ref1
Spatchcocked	Thanksgiving	Turkey,	ref1
Spatchcocking,	ref1,	ref2
Spiced	Cream,	ref1
Spices,	ref1
Spicy-Brined	Turkey	Breast,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Spicy	Cima	di	Rapa	with	Ricotta	Salata,	ref1
Spicy	Fried	Chicken,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Spinach:
Persian	Spinach	Yoghurt	(Borani	Esfenaj),	ref1

Spit-roasting,	ref1,	ref2
Sponge	cake,	ref1
Spoons,	ref1
Spring	Garlic	Soup,	ref1
Spring	Panzanella,	ref1,	ref2
Sprinkling	Crumbs,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
Squash,	Roasted,	Sage,	and	Hazelnut	Salad,	ref1
Starches,	ref1,	ref2
Steak,	ref1



Steam,	power	of,	ref1
Steamed	Jasmine	Rice,	ref1
Steaming,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Steamy	sauté,	ref1
Steel-cut	oats,	ref1,	ref2
Stewing,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Stews:
from	around	world,	ref1

Stir-frying,	ref1,	ref2
Stock,	ref1
Stracciatella	(Roman	Egg	Drop	Soup),	ref1,	ref2
Strand,	Mark,	ref1,	ref2
Strawberry	Compote,	ref1
Stripey	peel,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Suet,	ref1,	ref2
Sugar,	ref1,	143	(see	also	Sweets)
browning	stages	of,	ref1
heat	and,	ref1
salt	and,	ref1

Summer	Panzanella,	ref1
Summer	Tomato	and	Herb	Salad,	ref1
Sushi	rice,	ref1
Sweating,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Sweetness,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
balancing	acid	with,	ref1

Sweets,	ref1,	402–27	(see	also	Fruits)
Apple	and	Frangipane	Tart,	ref1
Bittersweet	Chocolate	Pudding,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3



butter	cakes,	ref1
Buttermilk	Panna	Cotta,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
cakes	(see	Cakes)
Cardamom	Panna	Cotta,	ref1
Chocolate-Caramel	Meringue	Fool,	ref1
Chocolate-Cardamom	Pudding,	ref1
Chocolate	Midnight	Cake,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
chocolate	(see	Chocolate)
Citrus	Panna	Cotta,	ref1
Classic	Apple	Pie,	ref1,	ref2
Classic	Pumpkin	Pie,	ref1
Granita,	ref1
Marshmallowy	Meringues,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Meringue	Fool,	ref1
Nekisia’s	Olive	Oil	and	Sea	Salt	Granola,	ref1
Pavlovas,	ref1,	ref2
Persian	Pavlovas,	ref1
Salted	Caramel	Sauce,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Scented	Cream,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Shortcakes,	ref1

Table	(granular)	salt,	ref1,	ref2
Tahini	Dressing,	ref1
Tallow,	ref1
Tangy	Whipped	Cream,	ref1,	ref2
Tanis,	David,	ref1
Tart	dough,	ref1
Tartar	Sauce,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Taste,	seasoning	to,	ref1



Taste	buds,	ref1
Taste	of	Country	Cooking,	The	(Lewis),	ref1
Tastes,	five,	ref1,	ref2
Tasting,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Taylor,	June,	ref1
Tellicherry	peppercorns,	ref1
Ten-Minute	Egg,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tender	Beans,	ref1
Tender	texture,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7
Texture,	ref1
acid	and,	ref1
creamy,	ref1,	ref2
crisp,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
fat	and	(see	Fat)
flaky,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
light,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
tender,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7

Thanksgiving,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Toasted	Almond	or	Hazelnut	Cream,	ref1
Toasted	Coconut	Cream,	ref1
Toasting,	ref1,	ref2
Toklas,	Alice	B,	ref1,	ref2
Tomato,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Avocado	Salad	with	Heirloom	Tomato	and	Cucumber,	ref1
Cherry	Tomato	Confit,	ref1
Fattoush,	ref1,	ref2
Pasta	all	Pomarola,	ref1
Ricotta	and	Tomato	Salad	Toasts,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3



Summer	Tomato	and	Herb	Salad,	ref1
Tomato,	Basil,	and	Cucumber	Salad,	ref1
Tomato	and	Ricotta	Salad	Toasts,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tomato	Confit,	ref1
tomato	ketchup,	ref1
Tomato	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4

Torn	Croutons,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tuna	Confit,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
Turkey:
basic	braising	times,	ref1
heat	and,	ref1
Spatchcocked	Thanksgiving	Turkey,	ref1
Spicy-Brined	Turkey	Breast,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Turkey	Confit,	ref1

Turkish	Köfte,	ref1
Turn	process,	ref1
Tuscan	Bean	and	Kale	Soup,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Tuscan	Bread,	Bean,	and	Kale	Soup	(Ribollita),	ref1,	ref2
Tuscan	Pasta	and	Bean	Soup	(Pasta	e	Fagioli),	ref1,	ref2
Umami	(savouriness),	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5	sources	of,	ref6
Vanilla	Scented	Cream,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8
Vegetable	shortening,	ref1
Vegetables:
Artichoke	Confit,	ref1
Butternut	Squash	and	Brussels	Sprouts	in	Agrodolce,	ref1
Cherry	Tomato	Confit,	ref1
cooking	methods,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6,	ref7,	ref8
Garlicky	Green	Beans,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3



Pasta	with	Broccoli	and	Bread	Crumbs,	ref1
recipes,	ref1
salt	and,	ref1
simmering,	ref1
Snap	Peas	with	Chillies	and	Mint,	ref1
Spicy	Cima	di	Rapa	with	Ricotta	Salata,	ref1

Vietnamese	Cucumber	Salad,	ref1,	ref2
Vinaigrette	dressings,	ref1,	ref2
Any-Other-Citrus	Vinaigrette,	ref1
Balsamic	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2
Brown	Butter	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Citrus	Vinaigrette,	ref1
Honey-Mustard	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Kumquat	Vinaigrette,	ref1
Lemon-Anchovy	Vinaigrette,	ref1
Lemon	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2
Lime	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Parmesan	Vinaigrette,	ref1
Red	Wine	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5,	ref6
Tomato	Vinaigrette,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4

Vinegar,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Chicken	with	Vinegar,	ref1

Vitali,	Benedetta,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Volatility,	ref1
Water,	cooking	with,	ref1
Waters,	Alice,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
White	and	Red	Clam	Sauce,	ref1
Wilting,	ref1



Winter	Panzanella,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3
Wolfert,	Paula,	ref1
World	of	Flavour,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4,	ref5
Wrist	wag,	ref1,	ref2
Yoghurt:
Herbed	Yoghurt,	ref1
Persian	Beetroot	Yoghurt	(Mast-o-Laboo),	ref1
Persian	Herb	and	Cucumber	Yoghurt,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3,	ref4
Persian	Spinach	Yoghurt	(Borani	Esfenaj),	ref1
Yoghurt	Sauce,	ref1,	ref2,	ref3

Zuni	Café,	San	Francisco,	ref1



About	Samin
Samin	Nosrat	is	a	writer,	teacher,	and	chef.	Called	“a	go-to	resource	for
matching	the	correct	techniques	with	the	best	ingredients”	by	The	New	York
Times,	and	“the	next	Julia	Child”	by	NPR’s	All	Things	Considered,	she’s	been
cooking	professionally	since	2000,	when	she	first	stumbled	into	the	kitchen
at	Chez	Panisse	restaurant.	Her	writing	has	appeared	in	The	New	York	Times,
Bon	Appétit,	and	The	San	Francisco	Chronicle,	among	other	places.	She	lives,
cooks,	and	gardens	in	Berkeley,	California.	Salt,	Fat,	Acid,	Heat	is	her	first
book.

Photo	by	Grant	Delin
About	Wendy
Wendy	MacNaughton	is	a	New	York	Times	bestselling	illustrator	and	graphic
journalist	whose	books	include	Meanwhile	in	San	Francisco	(Chronicle),
Knives	&	Ink	(Bloomsbury),	The	Gutsy	Girl	(Bloomsbury),	Lost	Cat
(Bloomsbury),	and	The	Essential	Scratch	and	Sniff	Guide	to	Becoming	a	Wine
Expert	(Houghton	Mifflin	Harcourt).	She	is	a	columnist	for	The	California
Sunday	Magazine.	She	lives	in	San	Francisco	with	her	partner,	several	four
legged	animals,	and	a	well	used	kitchen,	thanks	to	Samin.



Photo	by	Leslie	Sophia	Lindell