Copyright	©	2012	by	the	Editors	at	America’s	Test	Kitchen
	
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	or	transmitted	in	any	manner	whatsoever
without	written	permission	from	the	publisher,	except	in	the	case	of	brief	quotations	embodied	in	critical
articles	or	reviews.
	
America’s	Test	Kitchen
17	Station	Street,	Brookline,	MA	02445
	

Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data

	
The	science	of	good	cooking	:	master	50	simple	concepts	to	enjoy	a	lifetime	of	success	in	the	kitchen/	the
editors	at	America’s	Test	Kitchen	and	Guy	Crosby	;	illustrations	by	Michael	Newhouse	and	John	Burgoyne.
						p.	cm.
Includes	index.
Kindle	ISBN:	978-1-936493-45-6
1.		Cooking.	2.		Food.		I.		Crosby,	Guy.	II.	America’s	Test	Kitchen	(Firm)
TX651.S375	2012



641.3--dc23
																														2012012807
	
Hardcover:	$40	US
	
Manufactured	in	the	United	States	of	America
10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1
	
Distributed	by	America’s	Test	Kitchen
17	Station	Street,	Brookline,	MA	02445
	



EDITORIAL	DIRECTOR:	Jack	Bishop
SCIENCE	EDITOR:	Guy	Crosby,	PhD
PROJECT	EDITOR:	Molly	Birnbaum
TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT	EDITOR:	Dan	Souza
DESIGN	DIRECTOR:	Amy	Klee
ART	DIRECTOR:	Greg	Galvan
ASSOCIATE	ART	DIRECTORS:	Erica	Lee,	Matthew	Warnick
DESIGNERS:	Taylor	Argenzio,	Sarah	Horwitch	Dailey
COLOR	ILLUSTRATIONS:	Michael	Newhouse
BLACK-AND-WHITE	ILLUSTRATIONS:	John	Burgoyne
PHOTOGRAPHY:	Daniel	J.	Van	Ackere
PRODUCTION	DIRECTOR:	Guy	Rochford
SENIOR	PRODUCTION	MANAGER:	Jessica	Quirk
SENIOR	PROJECT	MANAGER:	Alice	Carpenter
PROJECT	MANAGER:	Kate	Hux
ASSET	AND	WORKFLOW	MANAGER:	Andrew	Mannone
PRODUCTION	AND	IMAGING	SPECIALIST:	Lauren	Pettapiece
COPY	EDITOR:	Cheryl	Redmond
PROOFREADER:	Barbara	Wood
SCIENCE	PROOFREADER:	Joanne	Curran-Celentano,	PhD
INDEXER:	Elizabeth	Parson



CONTENTS
Preface	By	Christopher	Kimball
Welcome	to	America’s	Test	Kitchen
Navigating	This	E-book
Introduction
The	Science	of	Measuring
The	Science	of	Time	and	Temperature
The	Science	of	Heat	and	Cold
The	Science	of	the	Senses
The	Science	of	Tools	and	Ingredients
Recipe	Table	of	Contents
CONCEPT	1:	Gentle	Heat	Prevents	Overcooking
CONCEPT	2:	High	Heat	Develops	Flavor
CONCEPT	3:	Resting	Meat	Maximizes	Juiciness
CONCEPT	4:	Hot	Food	Keeps	Cooking
CONCEPT	5:	Some	Proteins	Are	Best	Cooked	Twice



CONCEPT	6:	Slow	Heating	Makes	Meat	Tender
CONCEPT	7:	Cook	Tough	Cuts	Beyond	Well-Done
CONCEPT	8:	Tough	Cuts	Like	a	Covered	Pot
CONCEPT	9:	A	Covered	Pot	Doesn’t	Need	Liquid
CONCEPT	10:	Bones	Add	Flavor,	Fat,	and	Juiciness
CONCEPT	11:	Brining	Maximizes	Juiciness	in	Lean
Meats
CONCEPT	12:	Salt	Makes	Meat	Juicy	and	Skin	Crisp
CONCEPT	13:	Salty	Marinades	Work	Best
CONCEPT	14:	Grind	Meat	at	Home	for	Tender
Burgers
CONCEPT	15:	A	Panade	Keeps	Ground	Meat	Tender
CONCEPT	16:	Create	Layers	for	a	Breading	That
Sticks
CONCEPT	17:	Good	Frying	Is	All	About	Oil
Temperature
CONCEPT	18:	Fat	Makes	Eggs	Tender
CONCEPT	19:	Gentle	Heat	Guarantees	Smooth
Custards



CONCEPT	20:	Starch	Keeps	Eggs	from	Curdling
CONCEPT	21:	Whipped	Egg	Whites	Need	Stabilizers
CONCEPT	22:	Starch	Helps	Cheese	Melt	Nicely
CONCEPT	23:	Salting	Vegetables	Removes	Liquid
CONCEPT	24:	Green	Vegetables	Like	It	Hot—Then
Cold
CONCEPT	25:	All	Potatoes	Are	Not	Created	Equal
CONCEPT	26:	Potato	Starches	Can	Be	Controlled
CONCEPT	27:	Precooking	Makes	Vegetables	Firmer
CONCEPT	28:	Don’t	Soak	Beans—Brine	’Em
CONCEPT	29:	Baking	Soda	Makes	Beans	and	Grains
Soft
CONCEPT	30:	Rinsing	(Not	Soaking)	Makes	Rice
Fluffy
CONCEPT	31:	Slicing	Changes	Garlic	and	Onion
Flavor
CONCEPT	32:	Chile	Heat	Resides	in	Pith	and	Seeds
CONCEPT	33:	Bloom	Spices	to	Boost	Their	Flavor



CONCEPT	34:	Not	All	Herbs	Are	for	Cooking
CONCEPT	35:	Glutamates,	Nucleotides	Add	Meaty
Flavor
CONCEPT	36:	Emulsifiers	Make	Smooth	Sauces
CONCEPT	37:	Speed	Evaporation	When	Cooking
Wine
CONCEPT	38:	More	Water	Makes	Chewier	Bread
CONCEPT	39:	Rest	Dough	to	Trim	Kneading	Time
CONCEPT	40:	Time	Builds	Flavor	in	Bread
CONCEPT	41:	Gentle	Folding	Stops	Tough	Quick
Breads
CONCEPT	42:	Two	Leaveners	Are	Often	Better	than
One
CONCEPT	43:	Layers	of	Butter	Make	Flaky	Pastry
CONCEPT	44:	Vodka	Makes	Pie	Dough	Easy
CONCEPT	45:	Less	Protein	Makes	Tender	Cakes,
Cookies
CONCEPT	46:	Creaming	Butter	Helps	Cakes	Rise
CONCEPT	47:	Reverse	Cream	for	Delicate	Cakes



CONCEPT	48:	Sugar	Changes	Texture	(and
Sweetness)
CONCEPT	49:	Sugar	and	Time	Make	Fruit	Juicier
CONCEPT	50:	Cocoa	Powder	Delivers	Big	Flavor
Equipping	Your	Kitchen
Cookware	Materials
What	About	Nonstick	Pans?
Knife	Basics
Emergency	Ingredient	Substitutions
Food	Safety
Conversions	and	Equivalents
Further	Reading
Index



PREFACE
Despite	the	saying	about	the	cat,	curiosity	is	what	sets	humans	apart	from	other
mammals.	A	hundred	years	ago,	most	cooks	were	working	with	a	limited
repertoire	of	recipes	and	ingredients,	and	they	had	plenty	of	first-hand
experience	to	make	those	recipes	work.	Now	we	stand	at	the	beginning	of	a	new
century,	many	of	us	keenly	interested	in	the	culinary	arts,	but	without	the	years
of	practical	experience	that	it	takes	to	become	a	great	cook.
What’s	the	solution	to	this	modern	quandary?	The	answer	reminds	me	a	bit	of

my	favorite	physicist,	Lawrence	Krauss,	who	spends	his	time	pondering	the
mysteries	of	the	universe.	In	order	to	understand	the	cosmos	and	our	place	in	it,
he	says,	one	has	to	ask	how	and	why.	Once	the	questions	have	been	asked,	we
can	conceive	of	experiments	to	prove	or	disprove	our	theorems.
All	of	that	sounds	rather	familiar	to	everyone	who	works	at	America’s	Test

Kitchen.	We	start	every	day	by	asking	questions.	Do	bones	add	flavor	to	meat
during	cooking?	What	causes	ice	cream	to	turn	icy	in	the	freezer?	Then	we
construct	kitchen	experiments	to	answer	those	questions	in	a	manner	that	helps
us,	as	home	cooks,	to	produce	more	foolproof	recipes,	and	better	food.
To	test	our	theory	about	the	benefits	of	adding	small	pieces	of	frozen	butter	to

eggs,	we	put	2-pound	fishing	weights	on	top	of	omelets.	(The	more	tender
omelet	could	not	hold	the	weight.)	To	gauge	the	benefits	of	letting	cooked	meat
rest,	we	sliced	one	roast	as	soon	as	it	came	out	of	the	oven	and	measured	10
tablespoons	of	lost	liquid;	when	we	waited	just	10	minutes	to	slice	a	second
roast,	the	liquid	lost	was	reduced	to	just	4	tablespoons.	And	does	mixing	method
really	matter	when	making	brownies?	We	tested	stirring	gently	(with	some
streaks	of	flour	remaining),	then	stirred	a	second	batch	until	all	streaks	were
incorporated,	and	then	finished	with	a	third	batch	that	was	well	mixed	in	a
standing	mixer.	The	brownies	made	with	the	lightest	touch	were	perfect;	the
others	were	unpleasantly	tough.
All	of	this	is	fun	and	interesting,	but	our	real	goal	is	to	make	you	a	better

home	cook.	Understanding	the	difference	between	amylose	and	amylopectin
(two	types	of	starches)	is	of	little	use	to	cooks	unless	this	information	can	be
used	to	produce	better	mashed	potatoes.	(It	can	and	does.)	And	understanding
how	heat	is	transferred	from	the	outside	of	a	roast	to	the	inside	is	useful	since	it
explains	why	a	low	oven	is	best	when	cooking	large	pieces	of	meat.	(The	outside
won’t	overcook	by	the	time	the	inside	is	done.)



This	reminds	me,	of	course,	of	the	story	of	the	Vermont	storekeeper	who	was
asked	if	he	would	have	a	particularly	popular	item	back	in	stock	before	long.
“Nope,”	the	old-timer	replied.
“Why	not?”	the	customer	wanted	to	know.
“Moves	too	darn	fast!”
That	inexplicable	logic	is	often	like	the	science	of	cooking.	At	first	it	doesn’t

seem	to	make	much	sense	but	then,	after	a	bit	of	thought,	things	come	into	focus.
When	you	understand	the	language	of	science,	cooking	becomes	clearer	and	you
naturally	make	better	choices	in	the	kitchen.	The	next	time	you	make	pie	dough,
you	might	naturally	replace	half	of	the	water	with	vodka.	(It	makes	a	more
pliable	dough	that	bakes	up	flaky.)	Or	you	will	know	to	brine	beans	or	macerate
sliced	fruit.
Please	enjoy	this	book.	You	will	find	the	answers	to	most	of	your	cooking

questions,	especially	when	it	comes	to	“why”—the	most	important	question	of
all.
	

Christopher	Kimball
Founder	and	Publisher
America’s	Test	Kitchen



WELCOME	TO	AMERICA’S	TEST
KITCHEN
This	book	has	been	tested,	written,	and	edited	by	the	folks	at	America’s	Test
Kitchen,	a	very	real	2,500-square-foot	kitchen	located	just	outside	of	Boston.	It
is	the	home	of	Cook’s	Illustrated	magazine	and	Cook’s	Country	magazine	and	is
the	Monday-through-Friday	destination	for	more	than	three	dozen	test	cooks,
editors,	food	scientists,	tasters,	and	cookware	specialists.	Our	mission	is	to	test
recipes	over	and	over	again	until	we	understand	how	and	why	they	work	and
until	we	arrive	at	the	“best”	version.
We	start	the	process	of	testing	a	recipe	with	a	complete	lack	of	conviction,

which	means	that	we	accept	no	claim,	no	theory,	no	technique,	and	no	recipe	at
face	value.	We	simply	assemble	as	many	variations	as	possible,	test	a	half-dozen
of	the	most	promising,	and	taste	the	results	blind.	We	then	construct	our	own
hybrid	recipe	and	continue	to	test	it,	varying	ingredients,	techniques,	and
cooking	times	until	we	reach	a	consensus.	The	result,	we	hope,	is	the	best
version	of	a	particular	recipe,	but	we	realize	that	only	you	can	be	the	final	judge
of	our	success	(or	failure).	As	we	like	to	say	in	the	test	kitchen,	“We	make	the
mistakes,	so	you	don’t	have	to.”
All	of	this	would	not	be	possible	without	a	belief	that	good	cooking,	much

like	good	music,	is	indeed	based	on	a	foundation	of	objective	technique.	Some
people	like	spicy	foods	and	others	don’t,	but	there	is	a	right	way	to	sauté,	there	is
a	best	way	to	cook	a	pot	roast,	and	there	are	measurable	scientific	principles
involved	in	producing	perfectly	beaten,	stable	egg	whites.	This	is	our	ultimate
goal:	to	investigate	the	fundamental	principles	of	cooking	so	that	you	become	a
better	cook.	It	is	as	simple	as	that.
You	can	watch	us	work	(in	our	actual	test	kitchen)	by	tuning	in	to	America’s

Test	Kitchen	(AmericasTestKitchen.com)	or	Cook’s	Country	from	America’s
Test	Kitchen	(CooksCountryTV.com)	on	public	television,	or	by	subscribing	to
Cook’s	Illustrated	magazine	(CooksIllustrated.com)	or	Cook’s	Country	magazine
(CooksCountry.com),	which	are	each	published	every	other	month.	We	welcome
you	into	our	kitchen,	where	you	can	stand	by	our	side	as	we	test	our	way	to	the
best	recipes	in	America.



NAVIGATING	THIS	E-BOOK
This	eBook	includes	a	Table	of	Contents	that	allows	you	to	jump	to	any	chapter.
We	have	also	created	a	Recipe	Table	of	Contents	that	lists	all	the	recipes	in	the

book,	divided	into	easy-to-browse	categories,	in	one	place.	You	can	access	the
Recipe	Table	of	Contents	from	the	Table	of	Contents.	(It	also	appears	at	the	end
of	the	book.)	Each	title	in	the	Recipe	Table	of	Contents	is	a	link	that	will	take
you	directly	to	that	recipe.
Most	eBook	reading	devices	also	offer	a	search	function	that	allows	you	to

type	in	exactly	what	you	are	looking	for.	Please	read	the	documentation	for	your
particular	eBook	reader	for	more	information	on	its	search	function	and	any
other	navigational	features	it	may	offer.



INTRODUCTION
What	separates	success	from	failure	in	the	kitchen?	It’s	the	ability	to	think	on
your	feet,	to	make	adjustments	as	you	cook.	And,	despite	what	you	might	think,
a	lifetime	of	experience	isn’t	a	prerequisite	for	being	a	good	cook	(although	it
does	help).
Knowledge,	however,	is	essential.	The	successful	home	cook	understands	the

fundamental	principles	of	good	cooking	and	is	able	to	apply	them	on	the	fly,
almost	without	thinking.
But	what	are	these	principles	and	how	do	you	learn	them?	At	America’s	Test

Kitchen	we	have	spent	20	years	investigating	how	cooking	works—and	why
recipes	sometimes	don’t.	We’ve	learned	that	without	solid	technique,	good
cooking	is	impossible.
Sure,	there’s	artistry	involved	(the	combination	of	ingredients,	the

presentation	of	the	dish),	but	good	cooking	starts	with	good	science.	You	must
understand	the	basics—like	the	fact	that	gentle	heat	preserves	moisture	in	meat,
or	salty	marinades	produce	more	tender	meat	than	acidic	marinades—before	you
get	to	the	art.
So	how	do	you	learn	these	core	cooking	principles—and	the	simple	science

upon	which	they	are	based?	Lots	of	practice	is	one	way.	The	observant	cook	will
absorb	and	accumulate	lifelong	lessons	in	the	kitchen	and	come	to	rely,	probably
unconsciously,	on	these	principles	at	work.
But	there’s	another	way.	Why	not	make	a	conscious	effort	to	master	these

principles?	Understanding	the	science	that	leads	to	success	or	failure	in	the
kitchen	is	much	simpler	than	you	think.	Trust	us.
The	Science	of	Good	Cooking	covers	the	50	fundamental	concepts	that	we

think	every	good	cook	should	know.	We	explain	the	science	in	simple,	practical
terms,	so	you	really	understand	how	these	principles	work	and	how	you	can
apply	them	as	you	cook.	Think	of	this	book	as	an	owner’s	manual	for	your
kitchen.
We	suggest	you	start	by	reading	the	following	pages	devoted	to	basic	kitchen

science	before	diving	into	the	rest	of	the	book.	Make	sure	to	consult	the
information	about	equipment,	ingredients,	and	food	safety	in	the	Appendix,	too.
One	final	word	of	advice:	Be	inquisitive	in	the	kitchen.	Think	about	what



you’re	doing	and	why.	That	is	the	most	important	lesson	science	can	teach
anyone	who	wants	to	become	a	better	cook.



THE	SCIENCE	OF	MEASURING
A	BRIEF	HISTORY	OF	MEASURING
The	science	of	cooking	has	come	a	long	way	in	the	past	century,	in	part	because
measuring	has	become	much	more	standardized	and	accurate.	Until	about	100
years	ago,	most	recipes	didn’t	call	for	specific	measures.	Even	when	they	did,
this	information	was	only	moderately	helpful	because	home	cooks	did	not	own
standardized	measuring	cups.
In	colonial	America,	a	recipe	that	called	for	2	cups	of	flour	assumed	the	cook

would	have	a	cup	she	used	for	measuring,	but	there	was	no	guarantee	that	the
cup	used	in	Thomas	Jefferson’s	kitchen	held	the	same	amount	of	flour	as	the	cup
used	in	George	Washington’s	kitchen.	It	wasn’t	until	the	late	19th	century	that
companies	started	to	manufacture	the	type	of	standardized	measuring	cups	and
spoons	we	now	take	for	granted.
So	how	did	cooks	get	along	without	standardized	measures?	You	might

imagine	that	cooking	before	the	advent	of	standardized	measures	was	unreliable,
but	it	wasn’t.	That’s	because	the	skill	level	of	the	home	cook	was	quite	high	and
the	range	of	recipes	prepared	was	quite	narrow.	Cooking	was	a	specialized	task,
much	like	needlepoint	or	carpentry.	It	wasn’t	something	you	learned	by	reading	a
book.	You	learned	from	watching	someone	else	(usually	your	mother).	In
addition,	cooking	was	highly	repetitive.	You	mastered	a	small	set	of	recipes	that
relied	on	local	ingredients	and	local	traditions,	and	you	made	those	same	recipes
over	and	over	and	over.
The	publication	of	The	Boston	Cooking-School	Cook	Book,	written	in	1896	by

Fannie	Merritt	Farmer	(yes,	that	Fannie	Farmer),	marked	a	watershed	moment	in
American	cooking.	Recipes	in	this	best-selling	book	called	for	standardized
measurements	and	future	recipe	writers	followed	suit.	In	the	introduction,	Fannie
Farmer	exhorted	her	readers	to	purchase	true	measuring	cups:	“Correct
measurements	are	absolutely	necessary	to	insure	the	best	results.	Good
judgment,	with	experience,	has	taught	some	to	measure	by	sight;	but	the
majority	need	definite	guides.”
Fannie	Farmer	was	a	true	believer	in	the	power	of	science	to	improve	home

cooking.	What	she	didn’t	see	coming	was	the	decline	in	experience	that	would
make	measurement	by	sight	all	but	impossible	for	99	percent	of	home	cooks
today.	In	addition,	the	explosion	of	recipe	choices	has	meant	that	even



experienced	cooks	find	themselves	preparing	new	recipes	all	the	time.	We	source
ingredients	and	recipes	from	around	the	world.	For	this	model	to	work,	accurate
measurement	is	essential.	How	else	would	the	modern	American	cook	be	able	to
make	dishes	as	diverse	as	curries,	stir-fries,	tamales,	and	tiramisù?



MEASURING	IS	NOT	AS	SIMPLE	AS	IT	SOUNDS
It’s	easy	to	understand	that	measuring	matters,	but	many	modern	cooks	don’t
comprehend	that	how	they	measure	is	just	as	important	as	the	act	of	measuring
itself.	What’s	the	point	of	measuring	if	you	don’t	measure	correctly?
Now,	you	might	be	thinking	that	it	can’t	be	that	hard	to	measure,	especially	if

you’re	using	standardized	measuring	cups.	But	we	ran	the	following	experiment
in	the	test	kitchen	to	prove	otherwise.	We	asked	18	cooks,	all	professionally
trained,	to	measure	1	cup	of	flour	using	the	same	standardized	measuring	cup.
We	then	weighed	the	flour	they	measured	to	see	how	much	flour	was	in	their	“1
cup.”	Because	of	variations	in	measuring	techniques,	the	weights	of	flour	they
obtained	varied	by	13	percent.
What	makes	this	especially	surprising	is	the	fact	that	everyone	in	our	test

kitchen	uses	the	same	method	for	measuring	flour.	We	dip	the	measuring	cup
into	a	container	of	flour	and	then	sweep	off	the	excess	with	a	butter	knife	or
icing	spatula.	(This	method	is	known	as	the	dip-and-sweep	method.)	If	you
measure	flour	by	spooning	the	flour	into	a	measuring	cup,	a	technique	that
aerates	the	flour	as	you	go,	you	might	end	up	with	20	to	25	percent	less	flour.
So	why	would	18	cooks	all	using	the	same	method	for	measuring	flour	get

different	results?	We	realized	that	how	each	person	dips	the	cup	into	the	flour
affects	the	amount	of	flour	that	fits	within.	A	forceful	dip	packs	more	flour	into
the	cup	than	a	gentle	one.



PROFESSIONALS	PREFER	WEIGHT	TO
VOLUME
Recipes	written	for	home	cooks	rely	on	volume	(teaspoons,	tablespoons,	cups)
for	measurement.	Recipes	written	for	professionals	generally	list	ingredients	by
weight.	That’s	because	weight	involves	no	chance	for	operator	error.	Assuming
the	scale	has	been	properly	calibrated,	8	ounces	of	flour	is	8	ounces	of	flour	no
matter	how	the	flour	is	handled.
For	this	reason,	we	generally	supply	weights	for	key	ingredients	when	we

write	our	recipes.	We	always	specify	the	weight	of	meat	because	the	cooking
time	for	a	12-ounce	pork	chop	is	different	from	the	cooking	time	for	an	8-ounce
pork	chop.	Likewise,	we	list	weights	for	fruits	and	vegetables	when	they	are
used	in	large	quantity.	Calling	for	2	pounds	of	russet	potatoes	in	a	mashed	potato
recipe	is	much	more	accurate	than	calling	for	four	russet	potatoes,	which	can
weigh	as	little	as	7	ounces	each	(1¾	pounds	total)	or	as	much	as	10	ounces	each
(2½	pounds	total).
Weight	is	especially	important	when	baking,	which	is	why	our	recipes	include

both	volume	and	weight	measures	for	key	baking	ingredients,	as	does	the	chart
below.



CONVERSIONS	FOR	INGREDIENTS	COMMONLY	USED	IN	BAKING
Ingredient:	1	cup	all-purpose	flour
Ounces:	5
Grams:	142
	
Ingredient:	1	cup	cake	flour
Ounces:	4
Grams:	113
	
Ingredient:	1	cup	whole-wheat	flour
Ounces:	5½
Grams:	156
	
Ingredient:	1	cup	granulated	(white)	sugar
Ounces:	7
Grams:	198
	
Ingredient:	1	cup	packed	brown	sugar	(light	or	dark)
Ounces:	7
Grams:	198
	
Ingredient:	1	cup	confectioners	sugar
Ounces:	4
Grams:	113
	
Ingredient:	1	cup	cocoa	powder
Ounces:	3
Grams:	85
	
Ingredient:	8	tablespoons	butter	(1	stick,	or	½	cup)
Ounces:	4
Grams:	113



A	WORD	ABOUT	METRIC	CONVERSIONS
Though	the	recipes	in	this	book	were	developed	using	standard	United	States
measures,	we	know	that	cooks	outside	the	United	States	use	metric	measures.
The	charts	here	offer	equivalents	for	U.S.	and	metric	measures.
Cooks	using	our	recipes	outside	of	the	United	States	should	also	be	aware	that

key	ingredients	are	not	always	the	same.	Flour	milled	in	the	United	Kingdom
and	elsewhere	will	feel	and	taste	different	from	flour	milled	in	the	United	States.
We	recommend	that	all	cooks,	especially	those	using	ingredients	purchased

outside	of	the	United	States,	rely	on	their	instincts	when	making	our	recipes.
Refer	to	the	visual	cues	provided.	If	the	bread	dough	hasn’t	“come	together	in	a
ball,”	as	described,	you	may	need	to	add	more	flour—even	if	the	recipe	doesn’t
tell	you	so.	You	be	the	judge.



DRY	VERSUS	LIQUID	MEASURES
Even	though	weight	is	a	more	accurate	way	to	measure	than	volume,	we	know
that	most	cooks	will	rely	on	measuring	cups	and	spoons,	not	scales,	when
cooking.	That’s	fine,	but	there	are	ways	to	increase	your	accuracy	when	using
volume	measures.
First	and	foremost,	you	should	own	and	use	three	sets	of	measuring	tools—

dry	measuring	cups,	liquid	measuring	cups,	and	measuring	spoons.	Here’s	what
you	need	to	know	about	each	type	of	tool.
DRY	MEASURING	CUPS	are	generally	made	of	metal	or	plastic	and	have

long	handles	and	flat	tops	that	make	it	easy	to	sweep	off	excess	flour	or	sugar.
We	recommend	that	you	buy	a	set	that	includes	2⁄3-	and	¾-cup	measures	as	well
as	the	standard	¼-,	1⁄3-,	½-,	and	1-cup	measures.	Measure	all	dry	ingredients
(flour,	sugar,	chopped	vegetables,	herbs,	etc.)	in	these	cups.	Don’t	measure
liquid	ingredients	in	these	cups;	you	won’t	completely	fill	the	cup	(to	prevent
spills)	or	you	will	fill	the	cup	and	then	spill	some	of	the	liquid	as	you	work.
Either	way,	the	end	result	is	a	recipe	with	too	little	liquid.
LIQUID	MEASURING	CUPS	are	generally	made	of	glass	or	plastic	and	are

clear	with	markings	on	the	side.	All	liquid	measuring	cups	have	handles	and
pour	spouts.	Because	you’re	not	filling	the	cup	to	the	brim,	liquids	won’t	spill	as
you	work.
Still	not	convinced	you	need	both	dry	and	liquid	measuring	cups?	We	ran

another	experiment	to	convince	skeptics	in	the	kitchen—and	you.	In	addition	to
asking	18	cooks	in	our	kitchen	to	measure	1	cup	of	flour	with	a	dry	measuring
cup	(where	we	found	results	varied	by	13	percent),	we	asked	the	same	cooks	to
measure	1	cup	of	flour	in	a	liquid	measuring	cup	and	found	the	variation	in	the
weight	of	the	flour	actually	contained	in	the	liquid	measuring	cup	jumped	to	26
percent.	That’s	because	there’s	no	way	to	level	off	the	flour	in	a	liquid	measuring
cup.
Likewise,	we	asked	these	cooks	to	measure	1	cup	of	water	(which	should

weigh	8.35	ounces)	in	both	dry	and	liquid	measuring	cups.	The	measurements	in
the	liquid	measuring	cups	varied	by	10	percent,	based	on	different	interpretations
of	when	the	water	had	reached	the	1-cup	marking.	(To	fill	a	liquid	measuring	cup
we	recommend	placing	it	on	the	counter,	bending	down	so	that	the	cup’s
markings	are	at	eye	level,	and	then	pouring	liquid	until	the	meniscus	reaches	the
desired	marking.)	The	measurements	of	water	in	the	dry	measuring	cups	varied
much	more—a	whopping	23	percent.



The	moral	of	the	story:	Measuring	by	weight	is	more	accurate	than	measuring
by	volume,	but	if	you	use	the	right	type	of	volume	measure	you	can	reduce	the
error	rate.
In	addition	to	dry	measuring	cups	and	liquid	measuring	cups,	you	need

measuring	spoons.	(For	more	information	about	our	top-rated	measuring	tools,
click	here.)
MEASURING	SPOONS	have	handles	and	flat	tops	like	dry	measuring	cups,

so	you	can	sweep	off	excess	salt,	spices,	and	other	dry	ingredients.	These	spoons
are	also	used	to	measure	small	amounts	of	liquid.	(You	can’t	measure	a
tablespoon	of	soy	sauce	in	a	liquid	measuring	cup.)	Yes,	the	liquid	might	spill,
but	there’s	really	no	other	choice;	work	carefully	and	make	sure	to	fill	measuring
spoons	to	the	rim.	We	like	oval	rather	than	round	spoons	because	they	are	easier
to	dip	into	narrow	spice	jars.	You	should	own	several	sets	of	measuring	spoons
with	a	full	complement	of	sizes—usually	1	tablespoon,	1	teaspoon,	½	teaspoon,
¼	teaspoon,	and	1⁄8	teaspoon.
And	memorize	this	now:	1	tablespoon	equals	3	teaspoons.	Forget	this	fact	and

you	will	invariably	make	mistakes	when	trying	to	scale	recipes	up	or	down.	It
also	helps	to	remember	that	4	tablespoons	equal	¼	cup.



HOW	TO	MEASURE
Here’s	how	to	measure	dry	and	liquid	ingredients.

	
DIP	AND	SWEEP	Dip	the	dry	measuring	cup	into	the	container	of	flour	(or	sugar	or	cocoa)	and	sweep
away	the	excess	with	a	straight-edged	object	like	the	back	of	a	butter	knife	or	a	small	icing	spatula.



	
GET	DOWN	Set	the	liquid	measuring	cup	on	a	level	surface	and	bend	down	to	read	the	marking	at	eye
level.	Add	the	liquid	until	the	bottom	of	the	curved	surface	of	the	liquid,	called	the	meniscus—not	the	edges
of	the	meniscus,	which	can	cling	and	ride	up	the	walls	of	the	measuring	cup—is	level	with	the	desired
measurement	marking.



THE	SCIENCE	OF	TIME	AND
TEMPERATURE
TIME	CAN	BE	UNRELIABLE
Time	is	a	useful	measure	when	cooking,	but	many	cooks	make	the	mistake	of
giving	it	too	much	weight.	All	of	our	recipes	include	times	as	well	as	sensory
cues	to	tell	when	a	step	in	a	recipe	is	complete.	The	times	are	guidelines	meant
to	help	you	plan	meals	(will	the	roast	take	one	hour	or	two	hours?);	they	are	not
precise	measures.	Always	rely	on	your	five	senses	to	determine	if	a	step	or
recipe	is	completed.	Does	the	food	look	like	the	description	given?	If	a	recipe
says	cook	“until	firm,”	then	touch	the	food.	Likewise,	if	a	recipe	says	cook	“until
fragrant,”	then	rely	on	that	cue,	rather	than	time,	to	determine	when	this	step	is
complete.
So	why	is	time	such	an	unreliable	measure?	Variations	in	equipment	and

variations	in	ingredients.	Heat	output	in	grills	and	cooktops	varies	greatly.	In
addition,	the	weight	and	diameter	of	your	cookware	will	affect	cooking	time.
Even	your	oven	isn’t	as	reliable	as	you	think.	How	do	we	know	this?	We	have

more	than	two	dozen	ovens	in	our	test	kitchen	and	we	keep	an	oven	thermometer
in	each	oven	to	tell	us	if	they	are	properly	calibrated.	That	is,	are	they	reaching
and	holding	the	temperature	set	on	the	dial?	With	heavy	use,	we	find	that	our
ovens	generally	slip	out	of	calibration	in	just	a	few	months,	so	we	get	them
serviced.	The	process	will	happen	more	slowly	at	home,	but	the	odds	are	pretty
good	that	your	oven	is	not	at	350	degrees	Fahrenheit	(to	convert	Fahrenheit	to
Celsius,	see	the	table	here),	even	though	that’s	what	the	dial	says.
To	prove	the	point,	we	gave	15	cooks	in	our	test	kitchen	our	top-rated	oven

thermometer	and	asked	them	to	test	their	home	ovens.	After	setting	their	ovens
to	350	degrees	and	allowing	a	30-minute	preheating	period,	participants
recorded	the	actual	temperatures	in	the	ovens.	We	found	that	the	actual
temperatures	ranged	from	300	to	390	degrees.	A	cake	recipe	designed	to	work	in
a	350-degree	oven	will	behave	much	differently	in	a	300-degree	oven	or	a	390-
degree	oven.	Obviously,	the	cooking	time	will	be	affected,	but	how	the	cake
rises	and	colors	will	also	be	impacted.	So	what	should	you	do	with	this
information?
First,	do	not	assume	your	oven	is	accurate,	which	means	that	you	should	begin



checking	foods	well	before	the	time	suggested	in	recipes.	Second,	buy	an	oven
thermometer	(see	here	for	our	recommendation).	A	$6	investment	could
dramatically	improve	the	quality	of	the	food	that	comes	out	of	your	oven.	Third,
if	your	oven	runs	very	hot	or	very	cool	(let’s	say	it’s	off	by	50	degrees),	you
might	want	to	spend	the	money	to	have	it	calibrated	by	a	professional.
It’s	important	to	note	that	some	variation	in	oven	temperature	is	expected.	An

oven	does	not	simply	heat	up	to	the	temperature	set	on	the	dial	and	then	stay
there.	The	heating	elements	are	either	on	at	full	power	or	off—with	no	middle
ground—in	most	ovens.	To	maintain	the	desired	temperature,	the	heating
element	cycles	within	a	manufacturer-determined	tolerance,	heating	up	and
cooling	down	to	temperatures	just	above	and	below	the	desired	temperature.
We’ve	found	that	the	temperature	in	the	dead-center	location	of	an	electric	oven
preheated	to	350	degrees	cycled	from	a	low	of	335	degrees	to	a	high	of	361
degrees.	We	analyzed	a	gas	oven	and	found	the	temperature	ranged	from	343	to
359	degrees.
The	takeaway	is	simple:	Don’t	make	assumptions	about	your	oven	based	on	a

single	reading,	and	don’t	worry	if	any	single	temperature	reading	is	10	degrees
too	high	or	too	low—that’s	normal.	However,	if	your	oven	is	always	hot	or
always	cold,	and	that	deviation	is	25	degrees	or	more,	you	have	a	problem.



TESTING	ACCURACY	OF	HOME	OVENS
Fifteen	test	cooks	set	their	home	ovens	to	350	degrees.	Actual	temperatures	in	these	ovens	ranged	from	300
to	390	degrees.

	



TEMPERATURE	ALWAYS	MATTERS
While	variations	in	equipment	will	affect	cooking	time,	they	are	hard	to	track.
How	can	you	know	if	your	skillet	heats	up	faster	than	the	ones	we	use	in	the	test
kitchen?	Luckily,	the	other	big	variable	in	cooking	time	is	easier	to	track.
The	initial	temperature	of	ingredients	is	a	key	factor	in	many	recipes—and

one	that	many	cooks	don’t	think	about.	Here’s	an	extreme	example	of	how
temperature	can	affect	cooking	time.
If	you	start	with	two	big	steaks	and	grill	one	straight	out	of	the	refrigerator

and	let	the	other	warm	up	on	the	counter,	their	cooking	times	will	differ	greatly.
We	actually	ran	this	experiment	with	two	2-pound	bottom	round	steaks,	each	1½
inches	thick.	One	steak	was	taken	straight	from	the	refrigerator	to	be	cooked;	it
was	40	degrees	when	it	went	onto	the	grill	and	took	22	minutes	to	reach	the
desired	internal	temperature	of	120	degrees.	The	second	steak	was	wrapped	in
plastic	and	warmed	in	a	bucket	of	water	for	one	hour,	until	it	was	70	degrees.
When	this	steak	was	grilled,	it	took	just	13	minutes	to	reach	the	same	desired
internal	temperature	of	120	degrees.	The	point	of	this	exercise:	Cold	food	cooks
more	slowly	than	room-temperature	food.	So	when	a	recipe	calls	for	a	“chilled”
or	“room-temperature”	ingredient,	pay	heed	to	these	instructions.
In	addition	to	affecting	cooking	time,	the	temperature	of	an	ingredient	will

affect	the	quality	of	the	finished	recipe.	If	your	butter	is	not	well	chilled,	pie
dough	will	turn	out	tough	and	leathery	rather	than	tender	and	flaky.	Eggs	are
much	easier	to	separate	when	cold	because	the	white	is	thicker	when	chilled.
Here	are	some	general	assumptions	and	rules	you	should	follow	regarding	the
temperature	of	ingredients.
ROOM	TEMPERATURE	is	generally	considered	to	be	about	70	degrees.
CHILLED	(as	in	refrigerated)	is	generally	considered	to	be	35	to	40	degrees.

If	the	temperature	inside	your	refrigerator	is	higher	than	40	degrees,	food	is
spoiling.	If	the	temperature	is	32	degrees	or	lower,	food	is	freezing.
FROZEN	is	generally	considered	to	be	0	to	10	degrees.	The	temperature

inside	your	freezer	should	be	0	degrees.
FLOURS	AND	GRAINS	are	assumed	to	be	at	room	temperature.	If	you	store

whole-grain	flours	and	cornmeal	in	the	freezer	to	prevent	rancidity	(which	is	a
good	idea	if	you	won’t	use	up	these	flours	and	grains	within	a	few	months),
bring	them	to	room	temperature	before	baking	with	them.	Cold	flour	will	inhibit
rise	and	yield	dense	baked	goods.	To	quickly	bring	flour	and	grains	to	room
temperature,	spread	them	in	a	thin	layer	on	a	baking	sheet	and	let	sit	for	30



minutes.
EGGS	are	assumed	to	be	chilled	unless	otherwise	noted.	To	bring	eggs

quickly	to	room	temperature,	place	them	(still	in	their	shells)	in	a	bowl	of	warm
water	for	five	minutes.
BUTTER	is	chilled	unless	otherwise	noted.	Softened	butter	should	be

between	60	and	68	degrees—click	here	for	more	details.	Do	not	attempt	to
soften	butter	in	the	microwave—you	will	end	up	melting	some	of	it.	Instead,	set
the	butter	on	the	counter,	letting	it	slowly	warm	up.	(This	will	take	about	an
hour.)	To	speed	up	the	process,	unwrap	the	butter	and	cut	it	into	chunks.	Butter
that	has	been	melted	and	cooled	should	be	still	fluid	and	just	warm	to	the	touch,
ideally	85	to	90	degrees.
MEAT,	CHICKEN,	AND	FISH	are	chilled	unless	otherwise	noted.	Note	that

at	temperatures	above	40	degrees,	bacteria	will	start	to	grow	in	all	perishable
foods,	especially	meat,	chicken,	and	fish.	(Click	here	for	more	on	food	safety.)
In	order	to	track	temperature,	we	strongly	recommend	that	you	invest	in	an

instant-read	thermometer	(click	here	for	our	recommendation).	After	good
knives	and	cookware,	a	reliable	thermometer	might	just	be	the	most	useful	tool
in	any	home	kitchen.



CALIBRATING	AN	INSTANT-READ	THERMOMETER
An	instant-read	thermometer	is	useful	only	if	it’s	accurate.	You	should	check	the	thermometer’s	accuracy
when	you	buy	it	and	then	again	periodically.	Here’s	how:

	
MAKE	AN	ICY	SLUSH	Put	a	mixture	of	ice	and	cold	tap	water	in	a	drinking	glass	or	bowl;	allow	this
mixture	to	sit	for	two	minutes	so	the	temperature	will	stabilize.	Put	the	probe	in	the	slush,	being	careful	not
to	touch	the	sides	or	bottom	of	the	glass	or	bowl.	If	the	temperature	is	not	32	degrees,	then	calibrate	the
thermometer	by	pressing	the	“calibrate”	button	to	32	degrees.	If	you	have	a	dial-face	thermometer,	turn	the
dial	to	32	degrees	(the	method	differs	from	model	to	model;	you	may	need	to	use	pliers	to	turn	a	small	knob
on	the	back).



USING	TEMPERATURE	TO	GAUGE	DONENESS
In	addition	to	knowing	the	temperature	of	ingredients	before	cooking,	we	rely	on
temperature	to	determine	when	many	foods	are	done	cooking.	Don’t	cut	into
food	in	order	to	determine	if	it’s	done.	We	prefer	to	use	an	instant-read
thermometer.	It	is	a	much	more	foolproof	way	to	tell	if	the	holiday	turkey	is
cooked	through.



DONENESS	TEMPERATURE	FOR	MEAT,	POULTRY,	AND	FISH
Since	the	temperature	of	meat	will	continue	to	rise	as	it	rests,	an	effect	called	carryover	cooking,	meat
should	be	removed	from	the	oven,	grill,	or	pan	when	it’s	5	to	10	degrees	below	the	desired	serving
temperature.	(For	more	on	this	phenomenon,	click	here.)	Carryover	cooking	doesn’t	apply	to	poultry	and
fish	(they	don’t	retain	heat	as	well	as	the	dense	muscle	structure	in	meat),	so	they	should	be	cooked	to	the
desired	serving	temperatures.	The	following	temperatures	should	be	used	to	determine	when	to	stop	the
cooking	process.
	
BEEF/LAMB
Rare:	115	to	120	degrees	(120	to	125	degrees	after	resting)
Medium-Rare:	120	to	125	degrees	(125	to	130	degrees	after	resting)
Medium:	130	to	135	degrees	(135	to	140	degrees	after	resting)
Medium-Well:	140	to	145	degrees	(145	to	150	degrees	after	resting)
Well-Done:	150	to	155	degrees	(155	to	160	degrees	after	resting)
	
PORK
Medium:	140	to	145	degrees	(145	to	150	degrees	after	resting)
Well-Done:	150	to	155	degrees	(155	to	160	degrees	after	resting)
	
CHICKEN
White	Meat:	160	degrees
Dark	Meat:	175	degrees
	
FISH
Rare:	110	degrees	(for	tuna	only)
Medium-Rare:	125	degrees	(for	tuna	or	salmon)
Medium:	140	(for	white-fleshed	fish)



DONENESS	TEMPERATURES	FOR	VARIOUS	FOODS
We	rely	on	the	measurement	of	temperature	to	tell	when	many	other	foods	are	done	cooking,	not	just	meat
and	poultry.	Here’s	a	partial	list.
	
Oil,	for	frying:	325	to	375	degrees
Sugar,	for	caramel:	350	degrees
Yeast	bread,	rustic	and	lean:	200	to	210	degrees
Yeast	bread,	sweet	and	rich:	190	to	200	degrees
Custard,	for	ice	cream:	180	degrees
Custard,	for	crème	anglaise	or	lemon	curd:	170	to	180	degrees
Custard,	baked	(such	as	crème	brûlée	or	crème	caramel):	170	to	175	degrees
Cheesecake:	150	degrees
Water,	for	bread	baking:	105	to	115	(sometimes)



TIPS	FOR	USING	AN	INSTANT-READ	THERMOMETER
A	thermometer	must	not	only	be	properly	calibrated	but	you	must	know	how	to	use	it.	Here	are	a	few	tips
for	using	a	thermometer:
	

Slide	the	probe	deep	into	the	center	of	the	food,	making	sure	that	the	tip	does	not	exit	the	food.
Avoid	bones,	cavities	(in	a	turkey	or	chicken),	and	pan	surfaces,	all	of	which	will	throw	off	the
reading.
When	taking	the	temperature	of	steaks,	chops,	and	other	relatively	thin	foods,	use	tongs	to	lift	the
food	out	of	the	pan	(or	off	the	grill)	and	slide	the	probe	in	through	the	side	of	the	food.
Take	more	than	one	reading,	especially	in	large	roasts	and	birds.	We	recommend	measuring	the
temperature	on	either	side	of	the	breastbone	and	in	both	thighs	on	birds	because	one	side	of	the	bird
can	cook	faster	than	the	other,	depending	on	how	the	bird	was	positioned	in	the	oven.
Don’t	forget	about	carryover	cooking	(see	concept	4)	when	determining	if	meat	is	properly	cooked.



THE	SCIENCE	OF	HEAT	AND	COLD
HOW	HEAT	WORKS
So	how	exactly	does	cooking	work?	What’s	happening	when	food	is	placed	over
a	hot	fire—or	the	modern	equivalents?	First,	a	brief	history	of	cooking.
The	discovery	of	fire	is	among	the	most	important	events	in	human	evolution.

Fire	not	only	protected	humans	against	predators	but	it	allowed	our	ancestors	to
cook	their	food.	Why	is	this	important?	Before	fire,	our	humanoid	ancestors,	like
many	other	animals,	spent	most	of	the	day	grinding	tough	plant	foods,	through
prolonged	chewing,	until	they	were	small	enough	to	swallow.	(This	is	still	how
nonhuman	primates	spend	their	day.)	In	the	thoroughly	delightful	Catching	Fire:
How	Cooking	Made	Us	Human	(2009),	Harvard	primatologist	Richard
Wrangham	links	man’s	discovery	of	fire	(which	he	believes	was	roughly	1.8
million	years	ago)	with	a	dramatic	increase	in	the	size	of	the	human	brain.
Cooking	made	it	easier	to	digest	high-quality	proteins,	especially	meat,	therefore
the	link	between	the	advent	of	fire	and	human	brain	development.	Cooking	also
made	food	tender,	so	eating	was	no	longer	an	all-day	activity.	This	“extra”	time
could	now	be	used	to	hunt,	to	explore,	and	to	build—simply	put,	to	become
human.
While	it’s	easy	to	understand	how	cooking	makes	us	human,	few	of	us

understand	what’s	actually	happening	to	food	when	it	is	heated.	Heat	is	a	form	of
energy.	The	term	is	used	to	describe	the	speed	of	molecules	in	a	substance	such
as	air	or	water.	The	higher	the	temperature,	the	faster	the	molecules	are	moving
and	the	more	energy,	or	heat,	the	molecules	contain.
In	order	for	this	heat	to	be	transferred	from	one	substance	to	another,	fast-

moving	molecules	bump	into	slower-moving	ones,	causing	them	to	pick	up
speed.	The	gaseous	molecules	in	a	fire,	the	metal	atoms	in	a	hot	skillet,	or	the	air
molecules	in	a	hot	oven	are	bumping	into	the	slow-moving	molecules	in	the	food
(especially	water	molecules)	and	causing	them	to	speed	up.
A	wide	range	of	changes	occurs	once	the	molecules	in	food	speed	up.	The

food	can	change	color,	both	by	gases	driven	from	hot	food	and	through	heat-
induced	chemical	reactions.	Water	trapped	between	molecules	can	be	freed	and
the	food	can	lose	moisture.	Cell	walls	that	give	raw	foods	their	integrity	can
break	down,	making	foods	more	tender.	The	exact	changes	will	depend	on	the
food	itself,	the	heat	level,	the	type	of	heat,	and	the	length	of	exposure	to	heat.



One	last	thing:	Heat	makes	many	foods	taste	much	better,	but	it	can	also	spoil
the	taste	of	food	when	oils	oxidize	and	bitter	substances	are	released.
There	are	several	types	of	heating	that	can	occur	when	food	is	cooked.	The

most	common—conduction,	convection,	and	radiant	heating—are	described	in
detail	in	concept	1.	Most	cooking	methods,	such	as	roasting,	grilling,	or	frying,
are	really	a	combination	of	heating	modes.	For	instance,	a	roast	that	is	placed	in
a	metal	pan	in	the	oven	is	being	cooked	by	conduction	(heat	transferred	from
molecule	to	molecule	within	the	food)	as	well	as	by	convection	(heat	transferred
by	the	hot	air	in	the	oven	to	the	pan	and	then	from	the	pan	to	the	food)	and
radiant	heat	(the	heat	emitted	by	the	heating	element	in	the	oven	and	absorbed	by
the	food).



COOKING	METHODS
Cookbook	authors	use	a	number	of	terms	when	referring	to	the	specific	way	the
food	should	be	heated.	It’s	helpful	to	understand	these	terms	as	you	read	through
this	(or	any)	cookbook.
	
Method:	Sauté
Definition:	To	cook	foods	in	a	thin	film	of	hot	oil	in	a	skillet	set	on	a	hot	burner.
Details:	Sautéing	works	best	for	flat,	relatively	thin	foods,	such	as	steaks,	chops,
and	cutlets,	as	well	as	small	items,	such	as	chopped	vegetables,	shrimp,	or
scallops.
	
Method:	Roast
Definition:	To	cook	foods	in	a	pan	in	a	hot	oven.
Details:	Roasting	works	with	a	wide	range	of	foods,	from	large	cuts	of	meat	and
whole	birds	to	sliced	potatoes.
	
Method:	Fry
Definition:	To	cook	in	a	significant	quantity	of	hot	oil	in	a	skillet	or	pot	set	on	a
hot	burner.
Details:	Food	can	be	partially	submerged	in	oil	(shallow-frying	or	pan-frying)	or
completely	submerged	in	oil	(deep-frying).	Deep-frying	requires	the	use	of	a
large	pot	and	1	to	2	quarts	of	oil.	Shallow-frying	generally	employs	a	skillet	and
a	modest	amount	of	oil	(about	1	cup).	Many	of	the	foods	that	are	best	for
sautéing	can	also	be	fried;	many	fried	foods	are	breaded	or	battered.
	
Method:	Boil
Definition:	To	cook	foods	in	boiling	liquid	in	a	pot	set	on	a	hot	burner.
Details:	At	sea	level,	water	boils	at	212	degrees.	The	boiling	point	drops	2
degrees	for	every	500-foot	increase	in	elevation.	No	matter	the	temperature,
when	a	liquid	boils,	large	bubbles	energetically	break	the	surface	of	the	liquid	at
a	rapid	and	constant	pace.	This	cooking	method	is	best	with	pasta,	grains,	and
vegetables.



	
Method:	Simmer
Definition:	To	cook	foods	in	liquid	that	is	just	below	the	boiling	point	in	a	pot
set	on	a	hot	burner.
Details:	Depending	on	the	desired	intensity,	the	temperature	of	the	liquid	is
generally	between	180	and	205	degrees.	When	a	liquid	simmers,	small	bubbles
gently	break	the	surface	of	the	liquid	at	a	variable	and	infrequent	rate.	Many
grains,	including	rice,	are	best	simmered.	Simmering	is	invaluable	for	stocks,
soups,	and	sauces.
	
Method:	Poach
Definition:	To	cook	foods	in	liquid	that	is	well	below	the	boiling	point	in	a
covered	pot	set	on	the	stovetop.
Details:	Poaching	is	related	to	simmering;	the	temperature	of	the	liquid	is	lower
(no	bubbles	are	breaking	the	surface)	and	the	pot	is	generally	covered	to	create	a
constant,	gentle	cooking	environment.	It's	best	used	for	delicate	fish	and	fruits.
	
Method:	Steam
Definition:	To	cook	foods	that	are	suspended,	generally	in	a	basket,	over
simmering	liquid	in	a	covered	pot	set	on	a	hot	burner.
Details:	Steaming	is	an	especially	gentle	cooking	method.	Unlike	other	moist-
heat	cooking	methods,	steaming	does	not	wash	away	flavor.	Steaming	is	an
excellent	choice	for	vegetables,	fish,	and	delicate	foods	like	dumplings.
	
Method:	Braise
Definition:	To	cook	foods	by	first	sautéing	them	and	then	adding	liquid,
covering	the	pan,	and	simmering.
Details:	Braising	is	ideal	for	tough	cuts	that	require	prolonged	cooking	to
become	tender,	such	as	pot	roast.
	
Method:	Stew
Definition:	This	is	a	subset	of	braising	(food	is	sautéed,	then	simmered).



Details:	Stewing	is	generally	reserved	for	recipes	that	involve	small	chunks	of
food,	not	entire	roasts.
	
Method:	Grill
Definition:	To	cook	foods	on	a	grate	set	over	a	fire.
Details:	Although	the	term	“grilling”	is	often	used	to	describe	the	preparation	of
any	food	cooked	over	a	fire,	we	generally	reserve	it	for	foods	that	cook	quickly,
such	as	steaks,	cutlets,	chops,	vegetables,	and	seafood.
	
Method:	Grill-Roast
Definition:	To	cook	foods	on	a	grate	set	over	a	modest	fire	confined	to	a	portion
of	the	grill	in	a	closed	environment.
Details:	When	the	lid	is	placed	on	the	grill,	the	cooking	method	resembles
roasting,	especially	if	the	food	is	not	positioned	directly	over	the	fire	and	thus
won’t	brown	too	quickly.	Best	for	thick,	large	cuts	that	require	substantial
cooking	over	moderate	heat,	such	as	a	whole	chicken	or	roast.
	
Method:	Barbecue
Definition:	To	cook	foods	on	a	grate	set	over	a	small,	smoky	fire	confined	to	a
portion	of	the	grill	in	a	closed	environment.
Details:	When	barbecuing,	the	setup	is	the	same	as	with	grill-roasting	but	the
fire	is	smaller	and	wood	is	used	to	create	smoky	flavor	in	the	food.	Best	for
tough	cuts	that	require	prolonged	cooking	to	become	tender,	such	as	brisket	or
ribs.



HOW	COLD	WORKS
Just	as	heat	can	change	food,	exposing	food	to	cold	temperatures	can	have	a
range	of	effects.	Many	naturally	occurring	processes	stop	in	the	cold.	For
instance,	storage	below	40	degrees	can	inhibit	the	activity	of	certain	enzymes	in
peaches	that	normally	break	down	pectin	in	its	cell	walls	during	the	ripening
process.	If	these	enzymes	are	deactivated	before	the	fruit	is	ripe,	the	pectin
remains	intact	and	the	peaches	will	have	a	mealy	texture.	(To	understand	the
practical	effects	of	this	process,	click	here.)
Of	course,	cold	temperatures	can	be	beneficial	when	storing	other	foods.

Dairy	products	and	meat	will	spoil	much	faster	at	temperatures	above	40
degrees.	(Note	that	the	typical	home	refrigerator	should	be	about	35	degrees.)
These	foods	naturally	contain	bacteria,	and	at	temperatures	below	40	degrees	the
activity	of	these	bacteria	is	suppressed.	However,	let	these	warm	up	a	bit	and
they	enter	the	danger	zone,	40	to	140	degrees.	Most	bacteria	will	multiply	at
these	temperatures,	and	that	can	cause	spoilage	of	the	food,	or	lead	to	food-borne
illnesses	if	the	food	is	consumed.	Note	that	cooking	often	stops	the	activity	of
bacteria.	(For	more	on	this	subject,	see	“Food	Safety	Basics.”)



THE	DEEP	FREEZE
The	moisture	in	food	begins	to	freeze	at	temperatures	below	32	degrees,	and
whether	that	moisture	is	in	fruit,	ice	cream,	or	meat,	it	will	form	ice	crystals.
These	crystals	rupture	cell	walls	and	internal	cell	organelles	in	fresh	foods,	like
fruits	or	vegetables,	which	release	enzymes	from	their	locked	compartments.
When	thawed,	these	enzymes	cause	produce	to	develop	off-flavors	and	turn
brown	and	soggy.
In	vegetables,	these	enzymes	can	be	deactivated	by	blanching,	or	briefly

boiling	the	foods.	That’s	why	the	frozen	broccoli	you	purchase	at	the
supermarket	is	bright	green	(it	has	been	cooked	by	the	manufacturer).	If	you’ve
tried	to	freeze	fresh	raw	broccoli	and	then	cook	it,	you	know	that	it	tastes
sulfurous	and	has	a	mushy	texture	and	off	color.
Fruit	cannot	withstand	precooking	so	manufacturers	generally	add	sugar	to

reduce	crystal	size	and	thus	limit	the	damage	that	these	crystals	can	cause.
Another	trick	used	by	manufacturers	is	to	add	ascorbic	acid,	which	deactivates
the	enzymes	that	cause	browning.
When	freezing	meat	and	other	protein,	the	biggest	issue	is	moisture	loss.	The

ice	crystals	damage	the	cell	structure	and,	as	a	result,	frozen	meat	loses	more
moisture	when	cooked	than	meat	that	was	never	frozen.	In	addition,	freezing
causes	moisture	loss	due	to	surface	dehydration.	To	quantify	this	moisture	loss,
we	cooked	three	7-ounce	samples	of	85	percent	lean	ground	beef—one	fresh,
one	frozen	and	thawed	once,	and	one	frozen	and	thawed	twice—over	medium-
high	heat	in	a	small	skillet.	We	drained	the	cooked	meat	and	measured	the
amount	of	liquid	released,	then	repeated	the	tests	with	more	batches	of	meat.
On	average,	the	fresh	ground	meat	lost	¾	teaspoon	of	liquid	compared	to	2

teaspoons	for	the	once-frozen	meat	and	1	tablespoon	for	the	twice-frozen	meat.
To	put	this	in	context,	a	burger	made	with	7	ounces	of	fresh	ground	meat	will
have	an	extra	1¼	teaspoons	of	juice	compared	to	the	same	burger	made	with
frozen	meat.	That’s	the	difference	between	a	juicy,	tender	burger	and	a	dry,
mealy	one.
Another	downside	of	freezing	has	to	do	with	how	your	freezer	works.	Ideally,

home	freezers	are	set	to	0	degrees	and	they	maintain	a	constant	temperature.
However,	that’s	not	the	case,	especially	if	your	freezer	is	opened	and	closed
frequently.	The	reality	is	that	foods	are	constantly	warming	up	and	then	cooling
down,	which	just	accelerates	the	damage	from	ice	crystals.	Food	that	is
encrusted	in	a	layer	of	ice	crystals,	what	is	commonly	called	freezer	burn,	has



suffered	the	ravages	of	constant	freezing,	thawing,	and	refreezing.
	

WHY	IS	ICE	SO	HARD?
One	last	note	about	freezing:	So	why	are	ice	cubes	rock	hard	but	ice	cream	is	soft	and	scoopable,	even
though	both	are	stored	in	the	same	freezer?	Sugar	(or	any	substance	that	dissolves	in	water)	affects	the
freezing	point	of	water.	The	more	sugar	added,	the	lower	the	freezing	point.	For	more	on	this	phenomenon,
click	here.



THE	SCIENCE	OF	THE	SENSES
THE	FIVE	TASTES
Cooking	truly	relies	on	the	five	senses:	sight,	smell,	touch,	taste,	and	sound.
Does	the	chicken	look	properly	browned?	Does	the	cake	feel	firm	to	the	touch?
Is	the	consistency	of	the	sauce	smooth	or	lumpy?	Does	the	garlic	smell	fragrant?
Does	the	dish	taste	properly	seasoned?
The	sense	of	taste	is	worth	some	additional	thought	before	we	start	cooking.
In	grade	school	we	learned	that	we	experience	four	primary	taste	sensations:

salty,	sweet,	bitter,	and	sour.	(Bitter	refers	to	the	flavor	sensation	caused	by	foods
like	kale	or	eggplant,	while	sour	refers	to	the	flavor	sensation	caused	by	acidic
foods	such	as	limes	or	vinegar.)
In	recent	years,	scientists	have	agreed	that	there	is	a	fifth	taste	called	umami.

The	“umami”	taste	is	best	described	as	“meaty”	or	“savory”	and	is	produced	by	a
common	amino	acid	known	as	glutamate	(also	known	as	glutamic	acid).
Glutamate	is	present	in	relatively	high	amounts	as	free	glutamate	in	certain	fruits
(like	tomatoes),	vegetables,	and	cheeses	(especially	Parmesan),	and	as	part	of
most	proteins,	including	meat	and	other	dairy	products.	In	mushrooms,	the
glutamate	content	is	high	enough	to	lend	that	familiar	meaty	flavor.	Umami	also
works	to	make	food	more	palatable	in	general.	(Click	here	for	a	chart	of
glutamate	levels	in	a	variety	of	foods.)
The	flavor	enhancer	monosodium	glutamate	(MSG),	which	is	produced	by

growing	a	special	type	of	bacteria	on	sugar	or	molasses	and	corn,	captures	the
power	of	glutamates.	In	our	kitchen	tests,	we	have	found	that	MSG	bumps	up	the
flavor	of	food.	When	we	added	MSG	in	the	form	of	the	supermarket	product
Accent	to	our	beef	and	vegetable	soup,	tasters	raved	about	the	“rich,”	“ultra-
beefy”	results.	(For	more	on	glutamates,	and	MSG,	see	concept	35.)



HOW	TASTE	WORKS
The	cells	in	our	mouth	that	respond	to	taste	are	located	in	clusters	of	cells	called
tastebuds.	Scientists	used	to	believe	that	tastebuds	were	concentrated	in	specific
regions	of	the	tongue.	In	actuality,	buds	for	the	various	tastes	are	evenly
distributed	all	over	the	tongue	as	well	as	the	mouth.	But	different	individuals	do
taste	things	differently.	This	is	due	to	a	genetically	predetermined	effect	that	is
directly	related	to	the	number	of	tastebuds	each	of	us	has.
Scientist	Linda	Bartoshuk,	now	with	the	Center	for	Taste	and	Smell	at	the

University	of	Florida,	found	that	one	person	can	have	up	to	10	times	as	many
tastebuds	as	another.	This	has	obvious	implications	for	taste—things	seem
sweeter,	spicier,	and	more	bitter	to	these	“supertasters”	than	to	regular	or	below-
average	tasters.	Though	more	intense,	the	taste	for	a	supertaster	is	not	10	times
more	intense	because	of	mitigating	factors—aroma,	mouthfeel,	and	certain	other
aspects	of	a	food	that	interfere	with	taste—but	the	difference	can	be	up	to	three
times	as	much.
So	the	next	time	you	share	a	dish	with	a	friend	and	she	finds	it	much	saltier	or

spicier	than	you	do,	don’t	worry.	You	don’t	have	a	lousy	palate.	Your	friend
probably	just	has	more	tastebuds.
While	we	can’t	do	much	about	how	our	palates	are	hard-wired,	every	cook

can	adjust	how	we	perceive	flavors	in	a	given	dish	by	considering	the	balance
among	the	five	main	tastes.	For	instance,	researchers	investigating	methods	for
making	bitter	medications	more	palatable	have	discovered	that	salt	can	mask
bitter	flavors.	According	to	one	research	group,	for	example,	sodium	ions	can
reduce	the	perceived	bitterness	of	acetaminophen,	the	active	ingredient	in
Tylenol,	by	more	than	50	percent.
To	see	if	salt	might	have	the	same	effect	on	bitter-tasting	foods,	we	performed

a	blind	taste	test	of	several,	including	coffee	and	eggplant,	to	which	we	either
added	salt	or	left	as	is.	With	the	addition	of	¼	teaspoon	of	salt	per	pint,	the
perceived	bitterness	of	the	coffee	was	cut	in	half.	Salt	also	reduced	the	perceived
bitterness	of	eggplant.
The	tradition	of	salting	eggplant,	then,	appears	to	serve	two	functions.	The

first,	as	we	have	found	in	kitchen	tests,	is	that	salt	removes	water	and	reduces	the
amount	of	oil	eggplant	will	absorb.	The	second,	as	we	discovered	in	the	above
tests,	is	that	salt	can	mask	bitterness.	Indeed,	when	we	had	tasters	sample
previously	salted	and	unsalted	batches	of	sautéed	eggplant,	most	claimed	to
detect	a	bitter	background	flavor	in	the	unsalted	batch	that	they	didn’t	taste	in	the



salted	batch.
Likewise,	we	have	noticed	that	very	spicy	dishes	can	seem	less	spicy	when

sugar	is	added.	When	developing	a	recipe	for	Thai-style	chicken	with	basil	we
noticed	that	adding	sugar	to	the	recipe	significantly	toned	down	the	heat	of	the
chiles.	It	turns	out	that	this	phenomenon	is	the	result	of	complex	interactions	in
the	brain	that	regulate	our	perception	of	flavor,	pitting	pain	against	pleasure.
Compounds	in	chiles	(mainly	capsaicin)	stimulate	nerves	(called	trigeminals)
surrounding	the	tastebuds	to	signal	discomfort	to	the	brain,	in	a	process	known
as	chemesthesis.	Sugar,	on	the	other	hand,	stimulates	the	tastebuds	to	signal
pleasure.	These	signals	are	so	enjoyable,	scientists	believe	they	overshadow	the
“pain”	caused	by	chiles.	Sugar	also	draws	heat	from	the	mouth	when	it	dissolves
in	saliva,	producing	a	mild	cooling	sensation.
So	what	does	this	mean,	in	practical	terms?	If	you’ve	added	too	much	salt,

sugar,	or	spice	to	a	dish,	the	damage	is	usually	done.	In	mild	cases,	however,	the
overpowering	ingredient	can	sometimes	be	masked	by	the	addition	of	another
from	the	opposite	end	of	the	flavor	spectrum.	(Forget	the	potato	trick	listed	in
many	cookbooks;	adding	potatoes	to	a	salty	soup	does	nothing	to	counter	the	salt
—it	just	adds	more	bulk.)
In	addition	to	fixing	mistakes	based	on	how	the	science	of	taste	works,	we

often	rely	on	the	following	seasoning	strategies	to	make	food	taste	better.
(Remember	to	account	for	the	reduction	of	liquids	when	seasoning	a	dish—a
perfectly	seasoned	stew	will	likely	taste	too	salty	after	several	hours	of
simmering.	Your	best	bet	is	to	season	with	a	light	hand	during	the	cooking
process	and	then	adjust	the	seasoning	just	before	serving.)
SEASON	WITH	AN	ACID	In	addition	to	grabbing	the	saltshaker	to	boost

flavor	in	soups,	stews,	and	sauces,	try	a	drop	of	lemon	juice	or	vinegar.	Like	salt,
acid	competes	with	bitter	flavor	compounds,	reducing	our	perception	of	them	as
they	“brighten”	other	flavors.	Just	a	dash—1⁄8	teaspoon—can	go	a	long	way.
USE	COARSE	SALT	WHEN	SEASONING	MEAT	Use	kosher	salt—

rather	than	table	salt—when	seasoning	meat.	Its	larger	grains	distribute	more
easily	and	cling	well	to	the	meat’s	surface.
PEP	UP—OR	TONE	DOWN—YOUR	PEPPER	When	exactly	you	apply

black	pepper	to	meat—before	or	after	searing—will	affect	the	strength	of	its	bite.
If	you	want	assertive	pepper	flavor,	season	meat	after	searing;	keeping	the
pepper	away	from	heat	will	preserve	its	volatile	compounds.	Alternatively,
seasoning	before	cooking	will	tame	pepper’s	punch.



SEASON	COLD	FOODS	AGGRESSIVELY	Chilling	foods	dulls	their
flavors,	so	it’s	important	to	compensate	by	seasoning	generously—but
judiciously.	To	keep	from	overdoing	it,	season	with	a	normal	amount	of	salt
before	chilling	and	then	taste	and	add	more	salt	as	desired	just	before	serving.
ADD	HERBS	AT	THE	RIGHT	TIME	Add	hearty	herbs	like	thyme,

rosemary,	oregano,	sage,	and	marjoram	to	dishes	early	in	the	cooking	process;
this	way,	you	give	them	time	to	release	maximum	flavor	while	ensuring	that
their	texture	will	be	less	intrusive.	Save	delicate	herbs	like	parsley,	cilantro,
tarragon,	chives,	and	basil	for	the	end,	lest	they	lose	their	fresh	flavor	and	bright
color.	(see	concept	34	for	more	details	on	using	herbs.)
ADD	A	LITTLE	UMAMI	Common	pantry	staples	like	soy	sauce,

Worcestershire	sauce,	and	anchovies	contain	high	levels	of	glutamates	that	can
give	a	savory	umami	boost	to	a	dish.	Try	mixing	a	teaspoon	or	two	of	soy	sauce
into	chili	or	adding	a	couple	of	finely	minced	anchovies	to	a	chicken	braise.	(See
concept	35	for	more	information	on	cooking	with	glutamate-rich	ingredients.)



THE	SENSES	OF	GOOD	COOKING
In	addition	to	balancing	the	five	tastes,	good	cooks	will	focus	on	aroma.	Our
tastebuds	have	a	harder	time	detecting	flavors	in	cold	foods.	That’s	why	chilled
soup	must	be	aggressively	seasoned.	But	cold	soups	also	have	almost	no	aroma,
which	is	another	reason	that	they	require	a	heavier	hand	when	seasoning.	The
aroma	that	wafts	up	to	your	nose	from	a	piping-hot	bowl	of	soup	affects	your
perception	of	the	flavor.	Take	away	that	aroma	and	the	food	does	not	seem	as
flavorful.
After	all,	aroma	is	an	essential	tool	when	it	comes	to	perceiving	flavor,	as	well

as	a	cue	for	hunger	and	an	important	way	to	recognize	when	food	goes	bad.
Without	it,	it’s	surprisingly	difficult	to	tell	the	difference	between	strawberry	and
vanilla	ice	cream	or	pasta	alla	carbonara	and	pasta	alla	vodka	without	looking
first.
While	aroma	and	taste	relate	most	directly	to	the	enjoyment	of	food,	don’t

neglect	the	other	three	senses.	Food	that	looks	attractive	will	probably	taste
better—or	at	least	it	will	seem	to	taste	better.	To	illustrate	this	principle,	Frédéric
Brochet,	a	researcher	at	the	University	of	Bordeaux,	asked	a	panel	of	wine
experts	to	evaluate	one	white	wine	and	one	red	wine.	The	experts	relied	on	the
adjectives	you	would	expect	to	create	two	very	different	flavor	profiles	for	each
wine.	Too	bad	the	samples	were	both	the	same	white	wine,	with	one	sample
dyed	red	by	the	addition	of	a	tasteless	substance.
In	the	test	kitchen,	we’ve	demonstrated	this	principle	over	and	over	in	taste

tests.	Ask	tasters	to	sample	two	chocolate	puddings	made	with	different	brands
of	chocolate	and	they	gush	over	the	deeper,	richer	flavor	of	the	darker	(i.e.,
“more	chocolaty-looking”)	sample.	But	taste	the	same	puddings	blindfolded	and
the	results	are	much	more	mixed.	We	really	do	eat	with	our	eyes.
Texture	might	be	even	more	important	than	appearance.	Soggy	fried	chicken

or	a	dry,	chewy	steak	isn’t	nearly	as	enjoyable	as	crisp	fried	chicken	or	a	juicy,
tender	steak.	Many	of	the	concepts	in	this	book	are	designed	to	create	the
optimal	texture	in	the	food	being	cooked.
Sound	is	probably	the	least	important	of	the	five	senses	to	the	eater,	but	the

cook	does	have	occasion	to	rely	on	sound.	For	example,	you	expect	vegetables
to	sizzle	when	added	to	a	hot	pan,	and	if	you	don’t	hear	this	sound	you	know	the
pan	is	too	cold.

	



WHY	DO	FOODS	TASTE	BETTER	HOT?
The	explanation	is	twofold:	First,	scientists	have	discovered	that	our	ability	to	taste	is	heightened	by
microscopic	proteins	in	our	tastebuds	that	are	extremely	temperature-sensitive.	These	proteins,	known	as
TRPM5	channels,	perform	far	better	at	warm	temperatures	than	at	cooler	ones.	In	fact,	studies	have	shown
that	when	food	cooled	to	59	degrees	and	below	is	consumed,	the	channels	barely	open,	minimizing	flavor
perception.	However,	when	food	is	heated	to	98.5	degrees,	the	channels	open	up	and	TRPM5	sensitivity
increases	more	than	100	times,	making	food	taste	markedly	more	flavorful.

Second,	much	of	our	perception	of	flavor	comes	from	aroma,	which	we	inhale	as	microscopic	molecules
diffuse	from	food.	The	hotter	the	food,	the	more	energetic	these	molecules	are,	and	the	more	likely	they	are
to	travel	from	the	table	to	our	nose.

The	lessons?	Dishes	meant	to	be	served	hot	should	be	reheated,	and	dishes	served	chilled	(like	gazpacho
or	potato	salad)	must	be	aggressively	seasoned	to	make	up	for	the	flavor-dulling	effects	of	cold
temperatures.



THE	SCIENCE	OF	TOOLS	AND
INGREDIENTS
THE	PHYSICS	OF	COOKING
Changes	in	temperature	can	alter	the	flavor,	texture,	and	appearance	of	foods,
but	they	are	not	the	only	ways	to	“cook.”	Physical	force	is	another	way	to
transform	foods.	This	includes	everything	from	the	force	of	a	knife	slicing
through	an	onion	to	the	power	of	a	food	processor	blade	pureeing	ingredients
into	pesto.
We	know	that	knives	can	change	the	appearance	of	foods,	making	them

smaller,	thinner,	even	more	attractive.	But	as	the	knife	blade	cuts	through	food,	it
damages	cell	structure	(much	like	cooking	or	freezing)	and	that	can	affect	color,
texture,	and	flavor	as	well.
For	example,	the	way	you	cut	an	onion	affects	its	flavor.	To	prove	the	point,

we	took	eight	onions	and	cut	each	two	different	ways:	pole	to	pole	(with	the
grain)	and	parallel	to	the	equator	(against	the	grain).	We	then	smelled	and	tasted
pieces	from	each	onion	cut	each	way.	The	onions	sliced	pole	to	pole	were	clearly
less	pungent	in	taste	and	odor	than	those	cut	along	the	equator.
Here’s	why:	The	intense	flavor	and	acrid	odor	of	onions	are	caused	by

substances	called	thiosulfinates,	created	when	enzymes	known	as	alliinases
contained	in	the	onion’s	cells	interact	with	an	amino	acid	called	isoalliin	that	is
also	present	in	the	vegetable.	These	reactions	take	place	only	when	the	onion’s
cells	are	ruptured	and	release	the	strong-smelling	compounds.	Cutting	with	the
grain	ruptures	fewer	cells	than	cutting	against	the	grain,	leading	to	the	release	of
fewer	alliinases	and	the	creation	of	fewer	thiosulfinates.	(See	concept	31	for
more	information	on	using	your	knife	to	change	the	flavor	of	onions	and	garlic.)
Cutting	can	also	affect	cooked	foods.	You	can	see	the	muscle	fibers	on	some

steaks,	especially	flank	steak.	Those	long	striations	that	run	from	end	to	end	are
actually	muscle	fibers.	If	you	slice	a	grilled	flank	across	the	grain	(that	is,	from
side	to	side	rather	than	end	to	end),	you	are	in	effect	making	these	long	muscle
fibers	much	shorter	and	thus	easier	to	chew.



UNDERSTANDING	COMMON	CUTTING	TERMS
Professional	cooks	use	a	variety	of	terms	to	describe	ways	that	foods	can	be	cut.	Here	are	the	terms	we	use
in	this	book.
	
Cut:	Chiffonade
Description:	To	cut	into	very	thin	strips.	Usually	applies	to	fresh	herbs,	especially	basil.
	
Cut:	Chop
Description:
Fine:	To	cut	into	1⁄8-	to	¼-inch	pieces.
Medium:	To	cut	into	¼-to	½-inch	pieces.
Coarse:	To	cut	into	½-to	¾-inch	pieces.
	
Cut:	Cut
Description:
Crosswise:	To	cut	across	the	food,	perpendicular	to	its	length
Lengthwise:	To	cut	with	the	length	of	the	food,	from	end	to	end.
On	the	bias:	To	cut	across	the	food	with	the	knife	held	at	a	45-degree	angle	to	the	food.	Used	for	long,
slender	items	such	as	asparagus	and	carrots.
	
Cut:	Dice
Description:	To	cut	into	uniform	cubes	with	straight,	even	sides.
	
Cut:	Julienne
Description:	To	cut	into	matchstick-size	pieces,	usually	2	inches	long	and	1⁄8	inch	thick.
	
Cut:	Mince
Description:	To	cut	into	1⁄8-inch	or	smaller	pieces.
	
Cut:	Slice
Description:	To	cut	into	flat	pieces.
Thin:	To	cut	into	flat	pieces	1⁄8	inch	thick	or	less.



TOOLS	THAT	TRANSFORM	FOODS
Knives	are	not	the	only	tools	used	to	physically	manipulate	and	change	food.	Your	kitchen	is	filled	with	a
wide	range	of	tools	that	mix,	combine,	whisk,	stir,	grind,	puree,	blend,	knead,	and	whip.	These	tools	can
perform	a	variety	of	tasks.	In	some	cases,	the	cook	supplies	the	energy,	with	his	or	her	arm;	in	other	cases
electricity	powers	the	tool.	A	few	examples:
	

A	balloon	whisk	incorporates	air	into	chilled	heavy	cream,	turning	a	small	amount	of	liquid	into	a
mound	of	billowy	foam.
A	spice	grinder	transforms	whole	spices	into	a	fine	powder,	releasing	flavorful	oils	in	the	process.
A	meat	pounder	turns	a	thick	chicken	breast	into	a	thin	cutlet	that	will	cook	much	more	quickly.

All	of	these	examples	show	how	a	tool	can	change	a	single	ingredient.	But	many	tools	are	meant	to
combine	several	ingredients.	The	simplest	example	is	a	wooden	spoon	used	to	turn	water,	flour,	and	yeast
into	a	dough.	The	point	here	is	foods	can	change	without	being	heated	(or	chilled).	As	you	read	through	this
book,	you	will	learn	how	the	particular	mixing	method	can	affect	the	outcome	in	many	recipes.



A	COOK’S	TOOLS
The	exact	tools	used	to	heat,	chill,	chop,	mix,	or	otherwise	manipulate	food	will
affect	the	final	outcome.	The	Appendix	in	this	book	has	much	more	information
about	equipment,	but	here	are	a	few	important	things	to	keep	in	mind.
Cookware	is	made	from	a	variety	of	metals,	each	with	its	own	pros	and	cons.

The	ability	of	the	metal	to	withstand	and	conduct	heat	will	determine	how	well
you	can	brown	food,	how	easily	food	will	burn,	and	how	evenly	the	heat	is
distributed.	Weight	matters	too.	Buy	a	lightweight	stainless	steel	pan	and	your
stew	meat	will	stick	to	the	pot.	Ease	of	cleaning	varies,	too.
In	general,	we	reserve	nonstick	pans	for	delicate	foods,	such	as	fish	and	eggs,

which	are	prone	to	sticking.	We	find	that	nonstick	pans	don’t	brown	food	as	well
as	conventional	pans.	Also,	there	often	are	no	browned	bits	left	in	the	pan	once
something	like	a	steak	or	chicken	cutlet	has	been	cooked,	and	thus	nothing	for
the	cook	to	use	in	building	a	pan	sauce.	Don’t	use	a	nonstick	pan	unless	the
recipe	specifically	calls	for	one.
Perhaps	just	as	important	as	cookware	material	is	the	pan	shape	and	size.

Crowd	four	chicken	breasts	into	a	10-inch	pan	and	they	will	steam;	space	them
out	in	a	12-inch	pan	and	they	will	brown.	Skillets	should	be	measured	from	lip	to
lip	to	determine	their	size.	Pots	are	generally	measured	by	volume	(2	quarts,	4
quarts,	etc.).	Use	specified	equipment	in	the	specified	size	when	following	any
recipe.
This	admonishment	applies	to	bakeware	as	well	as	cookware.	If	a	recipe	calls

for	9-inch	cake	pans,	don’t	use	8-inch	pans.	We’ve	found	this	simple	change	will
prolong	the	baking	time	(the	batter	is	in	a	deeper	layer	in	the	smaller	pans)	and
this	can	cause	the	bottom	of	the	cake	layers	to	burn	by	the	time	the	middle	is
sufficiently	baked.	Even	something	as	simple	as	the	presence	or	absence	of	rims
on	the	edges	of	a	baking	sheet	can	affect	the	outcome	of	a	recipe.	(See	“Cookie
Sheet	Bake-Off.”)



MORE	INFORMATION	ABOUT	TOOLS
EQUIPPING	YOUR	KITCHEN
COOKWARE	MATERIALS
WHAT	ABOUT	NONSTICK	PANS?
KNIFE	BASICS



A	COOK’S	INGREDIENTS
The	right	equipment	is	key	to	good	cooking,	but	so	are	the	right	ingredients.
Even	seemingly	small	ingredient	changes	can	have	a	big	effect	on	the	final
outcome.	For	instance,	replace	table	salt	with	kosher	salt	and	you	have
effectively	reduced	the	salt	level	by	half.	That’s	because	the	coarse	crystals	of
kosher	salt	“fluff	up”	when	measured	and	you	get	far	less	salt	in	a	teaspoon.
Bigger	changes—such	as	replacing	butter	with	shortening	when	making	pie

dough—have	even	larger	effects.	In	this	case,	because	butter	is	roughly	80
percent	fat	and	16	to	18	percent	water	it	behaves	differently	in	pie	dough	than
vegetable	shortening,	which	contains	no	water	and	is	100	percent	fat.	The
chemistry	of	the	fat	crystals	is	different	too,	so	the	end	product	has	a	different
texture—to	say	nothing	of	a	different	flavor.
So	here’s	our	best	advice	about	substituting	ingredients:	Don’t	do	it!	Once	you

start	changing	the	ingredients	in	a	recipe,	it’s	very	hard	to	predict	the	outcome.
This	is	especially	true	in	baking	recipes,	where	you	can’t	judge	the	effect	of	the
change	until	the	dish	is	finished.	In	savory	recipes,	you	can	often	taste	as	you	go,
and	thus	replacing	parsley	with	another	herb	is	a	safer	bet	than	replacing	the
cream	with	milk	in	a	custard	recipe.
Now,	of	course,	we	know	there	are	times	when	substitutions	are	unavoidable;

if	you	are	already	cooking,	for	instance,	and	realize	you	don’t	have	an	ingredient
on	hand.	Refer	to	the	Emergency	Ingredient	Substitutions	chart	for	a	list	of
common	substitutions	that	we	have	tested	and	can	recommend	in	a	pinch.
In	addition,	the	“101”	pages	throughout	the	book	will	give	you	in-depth

information	on	key	ingredients.	Refer	to	these	pages	for	shopping,	storage,	and
usage	tips.



MORE	INFORMATION	ABOUT	INGREDIENTS
FISH	101
MEAT	101
POULTRY	101
SALT	101
SHOPPING	FOR	BEEF	101
SHOPPING	FOR	PORK	101
EGGS	101
FLOUR	101
BUTTER	101
SWEETENERS	101
CHOCOLATE	101



CONCEPT	1

Gentle	Heat	Prevents	Overcooking
The	discovery	of	fire—and,	as	a	result,	the	invention	of	cooking—was	a	key	step
in	human	evolution.	Heat	kills	germs	that,	if	consumed,	could	cause	illness.	It
makes	food	easier	to	chew	and	thus	more	palatable.	It	even	changes	some
nutritional	profiles,	allowing	our	bodies	to	more	readily	absorb	key	vitamins	and
nutrients.	But	it’s	not	all	good.	Too	much	heat	can	rob	food	of	moisture,	leaving
it	leathery,	rubbery,	and	dry—especially	large	cuts	of	meat	(such	as	prime	rib,
turkey,	or	ham)	or	delicate	foods	(like	eggs	or	shrimp).	Why?	Let’s	start	by
understanding	how	heat	works.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Heat	is	a	form	of	energy.	The	term	is	used	to	describe	the	speed	of	molecules	in
a	substance	such	as	air	or	water.	The	higher	the	temperature,	the	faster	the
molecules	are	moving	and	the	more	energy,	or	heat,	the	molecules	contain.	In
order	for	this	heat	to	be	transferred	from	one	item	to	another,	fast-moving
molecules	bump	into	slower-moving	ones,	which	then	pick	up	speed.	Therefore,
heat	always	flows	from	a	hot	item—or	region	within	a	food—to	a	cold	one.
There	are	several	types	of	heating	that	occur	in	cooking.	Conduction	is	the

transfer	of	heat	from	a	hotter	to	a	colder	region	within	a	food—in	effect,	the
movement	of	molecules	inside	a	single	substance.	For	example,	the	cold	center
of	a	roast	beef	becomes	warmer	as	molecules	in	its	exterior	sections	begin	to
pick	up	speed.	Since	water	molecules	are	much	smaller	than	fat	or	protein
molecules,	they	are	capable	of	moving	quite	fast	and	conduct	much	of	the	heat.
Convection	is	the	transfer	of	heat	from	a	hot	liquid	(like	boiling	water	or

frying	oil),	or	a	hot	gas	(like	the	air	in	an	oven),	to	a	food.	In	each	case,	heat	is
generated	by	an	external	source,	such	as	a	stovetop	burner	or	the	heating	element
in	an	oven.	In	most	cooking	applications,	both	conduction	and	convection	are	at
work.	There	is	one	more	important	type	of	heating,	however:	Radiant	heating	is
the	transfer	of	heat	by	high-energy	waves	emitted	from	a	remote	object.	One	of
the	best	examples	is	the	sun	on	the	surface	of	the	earth.	In	cooking,	radiant
heating	takes	place	most	commonly	in	grilling,	broiling,	and	even	microwaving.
Here,	the	waves	of	energy	interact	directly	with	the	molecules	in	food,	causing
them	to	accelerate	in	speed	and,	therefore,	become	hotter.
Whether	cooked	by	conduction,	convection,	or	radiant	heat,	the	outside	of

food	always	cooks	faster	than	the	inside.	And	if	the	temperature	is	too	high,	the
outer	layers	may	become	overcooked	by	the	time	conduction	moves	the	heat
toward	the	center	of	the	food.	That’s	because	the	external	moisture	will
evaporate	(remember:	heat	puts	small	water	molecules	into	motion),	leaving	the
surface	area	vulnerable	to	becoming	very	dry.	A	greater	difference	in
temperature	between	the	food’s	edge	and	its	center	means	that	this	will	happen
faster.	Conversely,	a	smaller	temperature	difference	within	the	food	will	help	the
exterior	retain	more	moisture	and	produce	more	uniform	cooking.



HOW	HEAT	WORKS



	
CONDUCTION	moves	heat	from	the	surface	of	the	food	to	the	center.



	
CONVECTION	moves	heat	from	the	water	or	air	to	the	food.



	
RADIANT	HEAT	travels	by	high-energy	waves	and	interacts	directly	with	the	exterior	of	the	food,	which
heats	the	inside	by	conduction.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	effects	of	convection	and	conduction,	we	roasted	two	three-
rib	standing	beef	rib	roasts.	One	was	placed	in	a	450-degree	oven,	the	other	in	a
250-degree	oven.	Prior	to	roasting,	we	trimmed	the	majority	of	visible	fat	from
both	roasts	and	weighed	them.	We	set	up	probes	to	record	temperatures	within
the	meat	at	three	places—the	center,	¼	inch	below	the	surface,	and	midway
between	these	points.	Both	roasts	were	cooked	until	the	center	probe	registered
125	degrees	for	medium-rare	(this	took	just	over	two	hours	in	the	450-degree
oven	and	about	three	hours	in	the	250-degree	oven).	Both	roasts	were	allowed	to
rest	for	45	minutes,	reweighed,	sliced,	and	then	sampled	by	tasters.	We	repeated
the	experiment	two	more	times	and	the	results	below	are	the	averages	of	the
three	tests.



THE	RESULTS
Let’s	start	with	the	taste-test	results.	The	roast	cooked	in	the	250-degree	oven
was	noticeably	juicier	than	the	roast	cooked	in	the	450-degree	oven.	Yes,	the
crust	on	the	roast	cooked	in	the	hot	oven	was	browner	and	crisper,	but	the
majority	of	the	meat	was	very	dry	and	chalky—only	the	dead	center	of	this	roast
boasted	the	tender,	juicy	texture	we	wanted.	The	exterior	of	the	roast	cooked	at
250	degrees	lacked	a	substantial	crust,	but	the	meat	was	moist	and	tender	from
the	center	all	the	way	to	the	edge.
Weighing	each	roast	before	and	after	confirmed	our	tasters’	impressions.	The

roast	in	the	250-degree	oven	lost	9.4	percent	of	its	original	weight.	The	roast
cooked	at	450	degrees	shed	24.2	percent	of	its	original	weight,	almost	three
times	more	than	the	slow-roasted	beef.	Put	another	way:	The	slow-roasted	beef
lost	only	9	ounces	of	moisture	during	the	roasting	process	while	the	high-
temperature	roasted	beef	lost	25	ounces.	Since	we	had	trimmed	both	roasts	of
exterior	fat,	these	numbers	represented	moisture	lost	from	the	meat	itself—no
wonder	the	slow-roasted	beef	tasted	so	much	juicier.
So	if	both	roasts	were	cooked	to	the	same	internal	temperature,	why	was	the

high-temperature	roasted	prime	rib	so	much	drier?	The	answer	lies	in	the
relationship	between	convection	and	conduction,	and	their	effect	on	moisture.	In
both	ovens,	hot	air	conveyed	energy	to	the	surface	of	the	roasts,	at	which	point
the	energy	was	absorbed	and	transferred,	through	conduction,	to	the	center.	In
the	450-degree	oven,	the	outer	portions	of	the	roast	absorbed	far	more	energy
than	did	the	outer	layers	of	meat	roasted	in	the	cooler	oven.	More	energy	meant
faster-moving	water	molecules	and	a	greater	amount	of	evaporation.
Moisture	loss	is	proportional	to	meat	temperature.	The	temperature	probe

inserted	¼	inch	below	the	surface	in	the	high-temperature	roasted	beef	registered
189	degrees,	indicating	that	almost	all	of	the	moisture	had	evaporated	out	of	this
part	of	the	roast.	The	midpoint	between	the	exterior	and	center	of	the	roast
registered	160	degrees—still	seriously	well-done,	dry	meat.	In	contrast,	the
temperature	probes	inserted	in	the	same	places	in	the	roast	cooked	in	the	250-
degree	oven	never	climbed	above	146	degrees—indicating	that	the	outer	layers
of	this	sample	were	losing	much	less	moisture.



THE	TAKEAWAY
For	large	roasts,	where	exterior	meat	can	easily	overcook	and	dry	out	before	the
center	reaches	the	target	temperature,	low	heat	is	the	way	to	go.	But	sometimes
moisture	retention	has	a	downside,	such	as	a	pale	exterior.	You	may	need	to
compensate	with	another	cooking	method	(see	concept	5).



THE	EFFECT	OF	HEAT	ON	MOISTURE	LOSS

	

Roasted	at	450°
1.	Temperature	at	¼”	below	surface:	189°
2.	Temperature	at	midpoint:	160°
3.	Temperature	at	center:	125°
Weight	before	roasting:	6.34	lbs
Weight	after	roasting:	4.8	lbs
Moisture	loss:	24.2%

Roasted	at	250°
1.	Temperature	at	¼”	below	surface:	146°
2.	Temperature	at	midpoint:	135°
3.	Temperature	at	center:	125°



Weight	before	roasting:	5.98	lbs
Weight	after	roasting:	5.42	lbs
Moisture	loss:	9.38%



CONDUCTIVE	HEAT	AT	WORK	
SLOW	ROASTING
Big	roasts	(like	prime	rib,	turkey,	and	ham)	are	especially	prone	to	drying	out
when	cooked	in	a	hot	oven.	The	bigger	the	roast,	the	bigger	the	heat	differential
between	the	center	of	the	meat	and	the	exterior.	Also,	turkey	and	ham	are	fairly
lean,	which	just	compounds	the	problem—there’s	very	little	fat	to	help	moisten
the	dry	meat.	And	turkey	has	the	additional	problem	that	the	legs	need	to	reach	a
higher	internal	temperature	than	the	breast	in	order	to	break	down	their
connective	tissue	and	make	them	palatable.	Keeping	the	oven	temperature	low
reduces	the	heat	differential	and	helps	promote	even	cooking	in	these	large	cuts
of	meat.	But,	in	each	case,	other	strategies	are	used	in	conjunction	with	low	oven
temperature	to	ensure	juicy,	flavorful	results.



PRIME	RIB
SERVES	6	TO	8

A	whole	rib	roast	(aka	prime	rib)	consists	of	ribs	6	through	12.	Butchers	tend	to
cut	the	roast	in	two.	We	prefer	the	cut	further	back	on	the	cow,	which	is	closest	to
the	loin	and	less	fatty.	This	cut	is	referred	to	as	the	first	cut,	the	loin	end,	or
sometimes	the	small	end	because	the	meat	and	ribs	get	larger	as	they	move	up
toward	the	shoulder.	When	ordering	a	three-rib	roast,	ask	for	the	first	three	ribs
from	the	loin	end—ribs	10	through	12.

1				 (7-pound)	first-cut	beef	rib	roast,	3	ribs,	set	at	room	temperature	for	3	hours,	trimmed	and	tied	with
kitchen	twine	at	both	ends,	twine	running	parallel	to	bone

1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	200	degrees.	Pat	roast
dry	with	paper	towels.	Heat	oil	in	large	roasting	pan	over	2	burners	set	at
medium-high	heat.	Place	roast	in	pan	and	cook	on	all	sides	until	nicely	browned
and	about	½	cup	fat	has	rendered,	6	to	8	minutes.
2.	Remove	roast	from	pan.	Discard	fat	in	pan.	Set	wire	rack	in	pan,	then	set

roast	on	rack.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper.
3.	Place	roast	in	oven	and	roast	until	meat	registers	125	degrees	(for	medium-

rare),	about	3½	hours	(or	about	30	minutes	per	pound).	Remove	roast	from	oven
and	tent	with	aluminum	foil.	Let	rest	for	20	minutes.
4.	Remove	twine	and	set	roast	on	carving	board,	rib	bones	at	90-degree	angle

to	board.	Slice	along	bones	to	sever	meat	from	bones.	Set	roast	cut	side	down
and	carve	meat	across	grain	into	¾-inch-thick	slices.	Serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Prime	rib	is	one	of	the	largest	cuts	of	meat	the	home	cook	will	prepare.	As	the
test	kitchen	experiment	demonstrated,	the	difference	between	high-temperature
roasting	and	low-temperature	roasting	is	dramatic,	with	the	roast	shedding	three
times	as	much	moisture	when	roasted	at	450	degrees	versus	250	degrees.	(Here,
we	roast	at	an	even	lower	temperature.)	Unless	you	like	tough,	dry	prime	rib,
low-temperature	roasting	is	essential.
BROWN	IT	FIRST	Low-temperature	roasting	will	ensure	a	juicy	roast	but	it

does	little	for	the	exterior.	That’s	why	we	start	our	recipe	by	browning	the	roast
on	the	stovetop.	If	you	have	a	heavy-duty	roasting	pan,	you	can	brown	the	roast
right	in	the	roasting	pan.	This	step	will	also	render	a	fair	amount	of	exterior	fat.
ELEVATE	ROAST	To	ensure	even	heating,	we	move	the	browned	roast	to	a

rack.	This	trick	also	ensures	that	the	roast	is	elevated	above	any	additional	fat
that	is	rendered	during	the	long	cooking	time.
LET	IT	REST	You’ve	worked	hard	to	retain	all	those	juices,	so	don’t	be

impatient	and	slice	into	the	roast	too	soon.	The	meat	needs	time	for	the	muscle
fibers	to	relax.	If	you	cut	into	the	roast	too	soon,	the	muscle	fibers	won’t	be	able
to	hold	on	to	those	juices,	which	will	flood	onto	the	carving	board.	(For	more
information	on	resting	meat,	see	concept	3.)



SLOW-ROASTED	TURKEY	WITH	GRAVY
SERVES	10	TO	12

Instead	of	drumsticks	and	thighs,	you	may	use	two	(1½-to	2-pound)	whole	leg
quarters.	The	recipe	will	also	work	with	turkey	breast	alone;	in	step	2,	reduce
the	butter	to	1½	tablespoons,	the	salt	to	1½	teaspoons,	and	the	pepper	to	1
teaspoon.	If	you	are	roasting	kosher	or	self-basting	turkey	parts,	season	the
turkey	with	only	1½	teaspoons	salt.

TURKEY
3				 onions,	chopped
3				 celery	ribs,	chopped
2				 carrots,	peeled	and	chopped
5				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
5				 garlic	cloves,	peeled	and	halved
1				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 (5-to	7-pound)	whole	bone-in	turkey	breast,	trimmed
4				 pounds	turkey	drumsticks	and	thighs,	trimmed
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted
1				 tablespoon	salt
2				 teaspoons	pepper

GRAVY				
2				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
3				 tablespoons	all-purpose	flour
2				 bay	leaves
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	FOR	THE	TURKEY:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat
oven	to	275	degrees.	Arrange	onions,	celery,	carrots,	thyme,	and	garlic	in	even
layer	on	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Pour	broth	into	baking	sheet.	Place	wire	rack	on
top	of	vegetables.
2.	Pat	turkey	pieces	dry	with	paper	towels.	Brush	turkey	pieces	on	all	sides

with	melted	butter	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Place	breast	skin	side	down



and	drumsticks	and	thighs	skin	side	up	on	rack	on	vegetable-filled	baking	sheet,
leaving	at	least	¼	inch	between	pieces.
3.	Roast	turkey	pieces	for	1	hour.	Using	2	large	wads	of	paper	towels,	turn

turkey	breast	skin	side	up.	Continue	roasting	until	breast	registers	160	degrees
and	thighs	register	175	degrees,	1	to	2	hours	longer.	Remove	baking	sheet	from
oven	and	transfer	rack	with	turkey	to	second	baking	sheet.	Allow	pieces	to	rest
for	at	least	30	minutes	or	up	to	1½	hours.
4.	FOR	THE	GRAVY:	Strain	vegetables	and	liquid	from	baking	sheet

through	fine-mesh	strainer	set	in	4-cup	liquid	measuring	cup,	pressing	on	solids
to	extract	as	much	liquid	as	possible;	discard	solids.	Add	chicken	broth	to
measuring	cup	(you	should	have	about	3	cups	liquid).
5.	Melt	butter	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium-high	heat.	Add	flour	and

cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	flour	is	dark	golden	brown	and	fragrant,	about	5
minutes.	Slowly	whisk	in	broth	mixture	and	bay	leaves	and	gradually	bring	to
boil.	Reduce	to	simmer	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	gravy	is	thick	and
measures	2	cups,	15	to	20	minutes.	Discard	bay	leaves.	Off	heat,	season	gravy
with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Cover	to	keep	warm.
6.	TO	SERVE:	Heat	oven	to	500	degrees.	Place	baking	sheet	with	turkey	in

oven.	Roast	until	skin	is	golden	brown	and	crisp,	about	15	minutes.	Transfer
turkey	to	carving	board	and	let	rest,	uncovered,	for	20	minutes.	Carve	and	serve
with	gravy.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Roasting	a	whole	bird	is	a	race	to	keep	the	white	meat	from	drying	out	while	the
dark	meat	cooks	through.	A	low	oven	temperature	minimizes	the	temperature
differential	between	the	outer	layers	of	the	breast	meat	(just	under	the	skin)	and
the	center	of	the	breast	meat.	However,	this	doesn’t	really	solve	the	problem	that
dark	meat	is	best	cooked	to	an	internal	temperature	of	175	degrees	(in	order	to
break	down	connective	tissue	and	render	excess	fat),	while	lean	white	meat	is
best	cooked	to	an	internal	temperature	of	160	degrees	(the	temperature	at	which
any	pathogens	have	been	killed	and	moisture	loss	has	been	minimized).	Our
solution:	Forget	about	the	whole	bird	and	roast	two	leg	quarters	(separated	into
thighs	and	drumsticks)	along	with	a	whole	turkey	breast.	The	smaller	dark-meat
parts	will	reach	175	degrees	at	the	same	time	the	larger	breast	piece	reaches	160
degrees.
ELEVATE	THE	BIRD	Placing	the	parts	on	a	rack	set	inside	a	baking	sheet

promotes	better	air	and	heat	circulation	and	ensures	even	cooking.	Vegetables
and	herbs	can	be	placed	in	the	baking	sheet	and	used	to	jump-start	the	gravy-
making	process.
FLIP	THE	BREAST	Even	with	the	breast	on	a	rack,	the	meat	can	cook

unevenly.	The	solution	is	simple:	Start	the	breast	skin	side	down	and	then	flip	it
skin	side	up	partway	through	the	roasting	process.
CRISP	THE	SKIN	Forget	about	using	high	heat	at	the	end	of	the	roasting

time	to	crisp	up	the	skin—you	end	up	just	overcooking	the	outer	layers	of	meat.
Once	the	slow-roasted	turkey	comes	up	to	temperature,	we	let	it	rest	for	at	least
30	minutes	(or	up	to	1½	hours)	before	returning	the	pieces	to	a	500-degree	oven
for	15	minutes.	Letting	the	pieces	rest	lowers	their	internal	temperature	to	about
130	degrees,	so	the	meat	won’t	dry	out	when	it’s	put	back	in	the	hot	oven	to
crisp	the	skin.	Also,	this	method	gives	you	time	to	use	the	pan	drippings	to
create	a	rich	gravy.



GLAZED	SPIRAL-SLICED	HAM
SERVES	12	TO	14,	WITH	LEFTOVERS

You	can	bypass	the	90-minute	soaking	time,	but	the	heating	time	will	increase	to
18	to	20	minutes	per	pound	for	a	cold	ham.	If	there	is	a	tear	or	hole	in	the	ham’s
inner	covering,	wrap	it	in	several	layers	of	plastic	wrap	before	soaking	it	in	hot
water.	Instead	of	using	the	plastic	oven	bag,	the	ham	may	be	placed	cut	side
down	in	the	roasting	pan	and	covered	tightly	with	foil,	but	you	will	need	to	add	3
to	4	minutes	per	pound	to	the	heating	time.	If	using	an	oven	bag,	be	sure	to	cut
slits	in	the	bag	so	it	does	not	burst.

1				 (7-to	10-pound)	spiral-sliced	bone-in	half	ham
1				 large	plastic	oven	bag
1				 recipe	glaze	(recipes	follow)

1.	Leaving	ham’s	inner	plastic	or	foil	covering	intact,	place	ham	in	large
container	and	cover	with	hot	tap	water;	set	aside	for	45	minutes.	Drain	and	cover
again	with	hot	tap	water;	set	aside	for	another	45	minutes.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	250	degrees.	Unwrap

ham;	remove	and	discard	plastic	disk	covering	bone.	Place	ham	in	oven	bag.
Gather	top	of	bag	tightly	so	bag	fits	snugly	around	ham,	tie	bag,	and	trim	excess
plastic.	Set	ham	cut	side	down	in	large	roasting	pan	and	cut	4	slits	in	top	of	bag
with	paring	knife.
3.	Bake	ham	until	center	registers	100	degrees,	1	to	1½	hours	(about	10

minutes	per	pound).
4.	Remove	ham	from	oven	and	increase	oven	temperature	to	350	degrees.	Cut

open	oven	bag	and	roll	back	sides	to	expose	ham.	Brush	ham	with	one-third	of
glaze	and	return	to	oven	until	glaze	becomes	sticky,	about	10	minutes	(if	glaze	is
too	thick	to	brush,	return	to	heat	to	loosen).
5.	Remove	ham	from	oven,	transfer	to	carving	board,	and	brush	entire	ham

with	another	third	of	glaze.	Let	ham	rest,	loosely	tented	with	aluminum	foil,	for
15	minutes.	While	ham	rests,	heat	remaining	third	of	glaze	with	4	to	6
tablespoons	of	ham	juices	until	it	forms	thick	but	fluid	sauce.	Carve	and	serve
ham,	passing	sauce	at	table.



MAPLE-ORANGE	GLAZE
MAKES	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	ONE	RECIPE	SPIRAL-SLICED	HAM

¾				 cup	maple	syrup
½				 cup	orange	marmalade
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 tablespoon	Dijon	mustard
1				 teaspoon	pepper
¼				 teaspoon	ground	cinnamon

Combine	all	ingredients	in	small	saucepan.	Cook	over	medium	heat,	stirring
occasionally,	until	mixture	is	thick,	syrupy,	and	reduced	to	1	cup,	5	to	10
minutes;	set	aside.



CHERRY-PORT	GLAZE
MAKES	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	SPIRAL-SLICED	HAM

½				 cup	ruby	port
1				 cup	packed	dark	brown	sugar
½				 cup	cherry	preserves
1				 teaspoon	pepper

Simmer	port	in	small	saucepan	over	medium	heat	until	reduced	to	2	tablespoons,
about	5	minutes.	Add	remaining	ingredients	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until
sugar	dissolves	and	mixture	is	thick,	syrupy,	and	reduced	to	1	cup,	5	to	10
minutes;	set	aside.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
When	you	purchase	a	ham	at	the	supermarket	it’s	fully	cooked	and	technically
ready	to	eat.	What	you’re	doing	at	home	is	“warming”	the	ham,	not	cooking	it.
The	goal	is	to	minimize	the	amount	of	time	the	ham	spends	in	the	oven	(that	is,
unless	you	like	leathery	ham)	and	to	get	the	center	of	this	thick	cut	to	heat	up	as
quickly	as	possible.	Using	a	low	oven	temperature	(250	degrees)	reduces	the
heat	differential	between	the	exterior	and	interior	of	the	meat,	but	slow	roasting
isn’t	enough	to	ensure	a	juicy	ham.	The	tricks	outlined	below	help	to	cut	the
cooking	time	and	moisture	loss	in	half.
CHOOSE	THE	RIGHT	HAM	Bone-in	hams	with	natural	juices	are	the	least

processed	of	all	the	options	at	the	supermarket.	Boneless	hams	may	seem	like	a
good	choice,	but	they	contain	several	muscles	that	have	been	pressed	together	to
look	like	ham	and	all	that	manipulation	compromises	the	muscle	structure,
making	them	less	able	to	hold	on	to	natural	juices.	And	while	“water-added”
ham	might	sound	juicier,	these	hams	taste	awful	and	shed	all	that	extra	water	in
the	oven.	We	do	like	the	convenience	of	a	spiral-cut	ham,	which	makes	serving	a
cinch.
GIVE	THAT	HAM	A	WARM	BATH	For	serving,	you	need	to	warm	the

ham	to	110	to	120	degrees—a	process	that	takes	a	long	time	if	you	start	with	an
ice-cold	roast	(35	to	40	degrees	straight	from	the	refrigerator).	Instead,	we	found
that	soaking	the	wrapped	ham	in	warm	water	for	90	minutes	raises	its	internal
temperature	to	60	degrees	and	cuts	total	roasting	time	by	an	hour.	Less	time	in
the	oven	means	less	moisture	loss.
BAKE	IN	AN	OVEN	BAG	Roasting	the	ham	in	a	plastic	oven	bag	traps	heat

and	further	reduces	cooking	time.	If	you	don’t	have	an	oven	bag	(we	do
recommending	making	a	trip	to	the	supermarket	to	get	one),	you	can	achieve	a
similar	(if	slightly	less	effective)	result	by	wrapping	the	ham	in	foil	before	it
goes	into	the	oven.
LET	IT	REST	Once	the	ham	comes	out	of	the	oven,	let	it	rest	on	the	counter

for	at	least	15	minutes.	Two	things	are	happening.	The	heat	is	continuing	to
move	toward	the	center	of	the	meat	via	conduction	and	the	temperature	in	the
center	is	creeping	up	to	110	or	120	degrees.	Also,	the	resting	period	allows	the
muscle	fibers	to	relax	and	retain	more	juices	when	the	ham	is	carved.	(For	more
on	this	phenomenon,	see	concept	3.)



CONDUCTIVE	HEAT	AT	WORK	
SLOW	“BOILING”
Water	is	a	much	more	efficient	conductor	of	heat	than	air	and	is	capable	of
cooking	food	very	quickly.	But	because	the	action	happens	so	fast,	the	risk	of
overcooking	is	quite	high.	The	goal	in	boiling	an	egg	is	to	get	the	proteins	to
coagulate	(see	concept	18)	and	turn	from	liquid	to	solid.	However,	the	white
starts	to	coagulate	between	140	and	150	degrees,	while	the	yolk	doesn’t	start	this
process	until	the	temperature	reaches	between	150	and	160.	Since	the	heat	takes
longer	to	reach	the	yolk,	the	basic	physics	makes	this	process	pretty	tricky.
Boiling	shrimp	to	make	shrimp	salad	involves	a	similar	process—the	heat	is

shrinking	the	proteins,	making	them	firmer	and	more	palatable,	but	there’s	an
added	challenge:	Ideally,	the	shrimp	is	also	being	flavored	as	it	cooks.
In	both	cases,	the	solution	turns	out	to	be	low-and-slow	cooking.	High	heat

increases	the	risk	of	overcooking	because	the	window	between	perfection	and
overdone	is	so	small,	and	because	the	outer	layers	(the	egg	whites	or	the	outer
parts	of	the	shrimp)	are	cooking	so	much	faster	than	the	inner	layers	(the	yolks
or	the	middle	of	the	shrimp).	Lower	the	temperature	of	the	water	and	you
increase	the	window	of	time	between	perfectly	cooked	and	overcooked,	and	you
also	reduce	the	temperature	differential	between	the	white	and	yolk,	or	between
the	exterior	and	interior	of	the	shrimp.



HARD-COOKED	EGGS
MAKES	6

Because	these	eggs	are	not	boiled,	this	recipe	is	nearly	foolproof.	Just	set	the
timer	and	you	can	be	assured	that	the	yolks	will	be	set	but	not	tinged	with	green.
This	recipe	can	be	adjusted	to	make	fewer	or	more	hard-cooked	eggs;	just	make
sure	to	use	a	pan	large	enough	to	hold	the	eggs	in	a	single	layer.	Very	fresh	eggs
are	the	best	choice	for	this	recipe	if	you	plan	to	make	deviled	eggs.	As	an	egg
ages,	the	cordlike	strands	that	center	the	yolk	weaken.	If	this	happens,	the	yolk
can	end	up	close	to	the	outer	wall	of	the	hard-cooked	egg,	making	it	likely	you
will	tear	the	white	when	removing	the	yolk.	Of	course,	this	is	not	a	concern	in
recipes	like	egg	salad	that	call	for	dicing	the	hard-cooked	eggs.

6				 large	eggs

1.	Place	eggs	in	medium	saucepan	in	single	layer	and	cover	with	1	inch	of
water.	Bring	to	boil	over	high	heat.	Remove	pan	from	heat,	cover,	and	let	sit	for
10	minutes.
2.	Meanwhile,	fill	large	bowl	with	1	quart	cold	water	and	1	tray	of	ice	cubes.

Pour	off	water	from	saucepan	and	gently	shake	pan	back	and	forth	to	crack	egg
shells.	Transfer	eggs	to	ice-water	bath	with	slotted	spoon	and	let	sit	for	5
minutes.	Peel	and	use	as	desired.



CLASSIC	EGG	SALAD
MAKES	2½	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	4	SANDWICHES

6				 hard-cooked	eggs
¼				 cup	mayonnaise
2				 tablespoons	minced	red	onion
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley
½				 celery	rib,	chopped	fine
2				 teaspoons	Dijon	mustard
2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
¼				 teaspoon	salt
					 Pepper

Cut	peeled	eggs	into	medium	dice.	Mix	diced	eggs	with	other	ingredients	in
medium	bowl,	including	pepper	to	taste.	Serve.	(Egg	salad	can	be	refrigerated	in
airtight	container	for	1	day.)



DEVILED	EGGS
MAKES	1	DOZEN	FILLED	HALVES

To	center	the	yolks,	turn	the	carton	of	eggs	on	its	side	in	the	refrigerator	the	day
before	you	plan	to	cook	the	eggs.	For	a	nicer	presentation,	use	a	pastry	bag
fitted	with	a	large	star	tip	to	pipe	the	filling	into	the	egg	whites.

6				 hard-cooked	eggs
2				 tablespoons	mayonnaise
1				 tablespoon	sour	cream
½				 teaspoon	distilled	white	vinegar
½				 teaspoon	spicy	brown	mustard	(such	as	Gulden’s)
½				 teaspoon	sugar
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
				1⁄8 teaspoon	pepper

1.	Slice	peeled	eggs	in	half	lengthwise.	Transfer	yolks	to	fine-mesh	sieve	and
use	rubber	spatula	to	press	them	through	sieve	into	bowl.	Add	remaining
ingredients,	mashing	mixture	against	sides	of	bowl	until	smooth.
2.	Transfer	mixture	to	zipper-lock	plastic	bag.	Force	mixture	into	1	corner	of

bag	and	twist	top	of	bag	to	keep	filling	in	corner.	Using	scissors,	snip	about	½
inch	off	corner	of	bag.
3.	Arrange	whites	on	serving	platter	and	squeeze	bag	to	pipe	filling	into

whites,	mounding	filling	about	½	inch	above	whites.	Serve	immediately.
(Unfilled	whites	and	yolk	mixture	can	be	wrapped	in	plastic	wrap	and
refrigerated	separately	for	2	days	before	assembling.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Hard-boiling	an	egg	seems	simple	enough—you	barely	need	a	recipe.	But
because	there’s	no	way	to	watch	the	proteins	cook	under	the	brittle	shell	of	an
uncracked	egg,	the	process	is	a	crapshoot.	You	can’t	poke	the	egg	with	an
instant-read	thermometer.	The	classic	method—cooking	the	eggs	in	a	pot	of
boiling	water	for	a	precise	period	of	time—doesn’t	account	for	variations	in	heat
output	of	stoves	or	conductivity	of	pans	or	the	different	sizes	of	eggs.	The
difference	between	an	undercooked	egg	(with	a	dark	orange	yolk	that’s	soft	in
spots)	and	an	overcooked	egg	(with	a	smelly	green	ring	around	the	bright	yellow
yolk)	can	be	just	a	few	minutes.
TURN	OFF	THE	HEAT	Our	solution	to	the	boiled	egg	dilemma	is	to	slow

down	the	cooking	process	and	rely	on	the	residual	heat	in	a	covered	pot	of	hot
water	to	do	the	job	safely	and	evenly.	A	pot	of	boiling	water	(at	212	degrees)
contains	a	lot	of	heat	that	will	be	transferred	to	the	eggs.	Thus,	an	egg	that’s
perfect	after	10	minutes	of	boiling	might	be	overcooked	after	11	or	12	minutes.
To	avoid	this	problem,	we	start	the	eggs	in	cold	water,	gently	raising	their
temperature	as	the	water	in	the	pot	comes	to	a	boil.	Once	the	water	boils,	we
remove	the	pot	from	the	heat	and	throw	on	the	cover.	The	eggs	continue	to	cook
as	the	temperature	of	the	water	drops.	By	the	time	the	eggs	are	perfectly	cooked
(this	takes	10	minutes	with	this	method),	the	temperature	of	the	water	has
dropped	considerably	and	the	water	is	transferring	much	less	heat	to	the	eggs,
thus	reducing	the	risk	of	overcooking.
SHOCK	TO	STOP	THE	COOKING	PROCESS	Once	the	eggs	have	been

cooked	off	the	heat	for	10	minutes,	we	find	it	best	to	rapidly	lower	the
temperature	inside	the	egg,	and	thus	prevent	the	sulfur	smell	and	green	ring.
(The	green	ring	is	caused	by	excessive	or	prolonged	heat;	the	iron	in	the	yolk	is
reacting	with	the	sulfur	compounds	in	the	white.)	We	accomplish	this	by
transferring	the	eggs	from	the	pot	of	hot	water	to	a	bowl	of	ice	water.	Shocking
the	eggs	as	soon	as	10	minutes	have	elapsed	ensures	that	the	cooking	process	is
halted.
CRACK	BEFORE	SHOCKING	A	perfectly	cooked	egg	isn’t	good	if	you

can’t	easily	remove	the	shell.	We	find	that	draining	off	the	cooking	water,	then
sliding	the	eggs	around	the	empty	pan	does	a	nice	job	of	cracking	the	shells.
When	the	cracked	eggs	are	transferred	to	the	ice-water	bath,	the	water	gets	under
the	shells	and	helps	loosen	them	further.	(For	more	on	this	process,	click	here.)
In	addition,	all	those	cracks	make	it	easier	for	the	ice-water	bath	to	perform	its
primary	function—that	is,	to	quickly	lower	the	internal	temperature	of	the	egg.



SHRIMP	SALAD
SERVES	4

This	recipe	can	also	be	prepared	with	large	shrimp	(26	to	30	per	pound);	the
cooking	time	will	be	1	to	2	minutes	less.	The	shrimp	can	be	cooked	up	to	24
hours	in	advance,	but	hold	off	on	dressing	the	salad	until	ready	to	serve.	The
recipe	can	be	easily	doubled;	cook	the	shrimp	in	a	7-quart	Dutch	oven	and
increase	the	cooking	time	to	12	to	14	minutes.	Serve	the	salad	on	a	bed	of	greens
or	on	a	buttered	and	grilled	bun.

1				 pound	extra-large	shrimp	(21	to	25	per	pound),	peeled,	deveined,	and	tails	removed
5				 tablespoons	lemon	juice	(2	lemons),	spent	halves	reserved
5				 sprigs	fresh	parsley	plus	1	teaspoon	minced
3				 sprigs	fresh	tarragon	plus	1	teaspoon	minced
1				 teaspoon	whole	black	peppercorns
1				 tablespoon	sugar
					 Salt	and	pepper
¼				 cup	mayonnaise
1				 small	shallot,	minced
1				 small	celery	rib,	minced

1.	Combine	shrimp,	¼	cup	lemon	juice,	reserved	lemon	halves,	parsley	sprigs,
tarragon	sprigs,	whole	peppercorns,	sugar,	and	1	teaspoon	salt	with	2	cups	cold
water	in	medium	saucepan.	Place	saucepan	over	medium	heat	and	cook	shrimp,
stirring	several	times,	until	pink,	firm	to	touch,	and	centers	are	no	longer
translucent,	8	to	10	minutes	(water	should	be	just	bubbling	around	edge	of	pan
and	register	165	degrees).	Remove	pan	from	heat,	cover,	and	let	shrimp	sit	in
broth	for	2	minutes.
2.	Meanwhile,	fill	medium	bowl	with	ice	water.	Drain	shrimp	into	colander;

discard	lemon	halves,	herbs,	and	spices.	Immediately	transfer	shrimp	to	ice
water	to	stop	cooking	and	chill	thoroughly,	about	3	minutes.	Remove	shrimp
from	ice	water	and	pat	dry	with	paper	towels.
3.	Whisk	together	mayonnaise,	shallot,	celery,	remaining	1	tablespoon	lemon

juice,	minced	parsley,	and	minced	tarragon	in	medium	bowl.	Cut	shrimp	in	half
lengthwise	and	then	cut	each	half	into	thirds;	add	shrimp	to	mayonnaise	mixture



and	toss	to	combine.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste	and	serve.	(Shrimp
salad	can	be	refrigerated	overnight.)

SHRIMP	SALAD	WITH	ROASTED	RED	PEPPER	AND	BASIL
Omit	tarragon	sprigs	from	cooking	liquid.	Replace	celery,	minced	parsley,	and
minced	tarragon	with	1⁄3	cup	thinly	sliced	jarred	roasted	red	peppers,	2	teaspoons
rinsed	capers,	and	3	tablespoons	chopped	fresh	basil.

SHRIMP	SALAD	WITH	AVOCADO	AND	ORANGE
Omit	tarragon	sprigs	from	cooking	liquid.	Replace	celery,	minced	parsley,	and
minced	tarragon	with	4	halved	and	thinly	sliced	radishes;	1	large	orange,	peeled
and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces;	½	ripe	avocado,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces;	and	2
teaspoons	minced	fresh	mint.

SPICY	SHRIMP	SALAD	WITH	CORN	AND	CHIPOTLE
Substitute	lime	juice	(3	limes;	and	save	spent	halves)	for	lemon	juice	and	omit
tarragon	sprigs	from	cooking	liquid.	Replace	celery,	minced	parsley,	and	minced
tarragon	with	½	cup	cooked	corn	kernels,	2	tablespoons	minced	canned	chipotle
chile	in	adobo	sauce,	and	1	tablespoon	minced	fresh	cilantro.

SHRIMP	SALAD	WITH	WASABI	AND	PICKLED	GINGER
Omit	tarragon	sprigs	from	cooking	liquid.	Replace	shallot,	minced	parsley,	and
minced	tarragon	with	2	thinly	sliced	scallions,	2	tablespoons	chopped	pickled
ginger,	1	tablespoon	toasted	sesame	seeds,	and	2	teaspoons	wasabi	powder.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Maybe	it’s	a	good	thing	that	most	shrimp	salads	are	drowning	in	a	sea	of	gloppy
mayonnaise.	The	dressing	might	be	bland,	but	at	least	it	helps	camouflage	the
sorry	state	of	the	rubbery,	flavorless	boiled	shrimp.	Fixing	the	dressing	was	easy
(more	potent	ingredients,	less	mayonnaise),	but	getting	the	shrimp	perfectly
cooked	(and	adding	some	flavor	in	the	process)	required	a	bit	more	work.
START	SHRIMP	IN	COLD	WATER	Classic	recipes	call	for	boiling	water,

white	wine,	lemon	juice,	herbs,	and	spices	to	create	a	court-bouillon	to	which	the
shrimp	are	then	added.	But	despite	all	this	work,	the	shrimp	don’t	pick	up	much
flavor.	We	take	the	same	ingredients	(cutting	way	back	on	the	water	and
eliminating	the	wine,	which	overpowers	the	other	flavors)	and	add	the	shrimp	at
the	outset.	The	science	here	is	simple.	When	the	shrimp	are	added	to	boiling
liquid,	their	proteins	shrink	and	become	firm.	You	can	see	this	as	the	shrimp	turn
from	translucent	to	opaque.	In	boiling	water,	this	process	happens	almost
instantly.	Once	the	proteins	have	shrunk,	there’s	less	room	for	flavor	molecules
to	be	absorbed.	When	the	shrimp	are	put	in	the	broth	at	the	beginning,	they	heat
gently	along	with	the	broth	and	have	more	time	to	pick	up	flavor.
WARM,	DON’T	BOIL	The	proteins	in	shrimp	start	to	shrink	and	toughen

when	the	internal	temperature	reaches	120	degrees.	We	find	bringing	the	internal
temperature	of	shrimp	to	140	degrees	makes	them	pleasantly	chewy	but	not
tough.	If	you	cook	shrimp	in	boiling	liquid	(212	degrees),	you	pretty	much
guarantee	that	their	internal	temperature	will	rise	above	140	degrees	and	the
shrimp	will	turn	rubbery.	To	prevent	shrimp	from	overcooking,	we	heat	the
liquid	to	a	simmer	(no	more	than	165	degrees).
TAKE	OFF	HEAT,	THEN	SHOCK	Once	the	cooking	liquid	reaches	165

degrees,	we	remove	the	pan	from	the	heat,	cover	it,	and	let	the	shrimp	finish
cooking	via	conduction.	This	technique	gives	the	shrimp	about	two	minutes
more	of	flavoring	time,	for	a	total	of	10	to	12	minutes—far	more	than	the	two	to
three	minutes	shrimp	spend	cooking	if	directly	added	to	boiling	liquid.	One	last
step—once	the	shrimp	are	done,	we	quickly	transfer	them	to	a	bowl	of	ice	water
to	stop	the	cooking	process.	Once	chilled,	the	shrimp	are	ready	to	be	dressed	and
served.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
FROZEN	SHRIMP

When	buying	shrimp,	go	for	frozen,	unpeeled,	and	untreated.

Even	the	most	basic	market	now	sells	several	kinds	of	shrimp.	We	cooked	more	than	100	pounds	to	find	out
just	what	to	look	for	(and	avoid)	at	the	supermarket.
FRESH	OR	FROZEN?	Because	nearly	all	shrimp	are	frozen	at	sea,	you	have	no	way	of	knowing	when
those	“fresh”	shrimp	in	the	fish	case	were	thawed	(unless	you	are	on	very	personal	terms	with	your
fishmonger).	We	found	that	the	flavor	and	texture	of	thawed	shrimp	deteriorate	after	a	few	days,	so	you’re
better	off	buying	frozen.
PEELED	OR	UNPEELED?	If	you	think	you	can	dodge	some	work	by	buying	frozen	shrimp	that	have
been	peeled,	think	again.	Someone	had	to	thaw	those	shrimp	in	order	to	remove	their	peel,	and	they	can	get
pretty	banged	up	when	they	are	refrozen.
CHECK	THE	INGREDIENTS	Finally,	check	the	ingredient	list.	Frozen	shrimp	are	often	treated	or
enhanced	with	additives	such	as	sodium	metabisulfate,	STPP	(sodium	tripolyphosphate),	or	salt	to	prevent
darkening	(which	occurs	as	the	shrimp	ages)	or	to	counter	“drip	loss,”	the	industry	term	referring	to	the
amount	of	water	in	the	shrimp	that	is	lost	as	it	thaws.	We	have	found	that	treated	shrimp	have	a	strange
translucency	and	an	unpleasant	texture	and	suggest	that	you	avoid	them.	Look	for	bags	of	frozen	shrimp
that	list	“shrimp”	as	the	only	ingredient.



CONCEPT	2

High	Heat	Develops	Flavor
Gentle	heat	cooks	food	while	minimizing	moisture	loss,	but	juiciness	is	not	the
only	consideration	when	choosing	a	technique.	High	heat	not	only	cooks	a	cut	of
meat	but	changes	the	flavor,	too.	(Think	steak	tartare	versus	a	grilled	steak.)
Much	of	this	change	is	related	to	the	complex	chemical	interactions	known	as
the	Maillard	reaction,	named	for	the	French	scientist	Louis-Camille	Maillard,
who	first	described	the	process	in	the	early	1900s.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
One	hundred	years	after	the	Maillard	reaction	was	first	recognized,	the	principle
is	still	not	fully	understood—the	chemistry	is	that	complicated.	Simply	put,	in
many	foods,	heat	causes	the	amino	acids	(the	building	blocks	of	proteins)	to
react	with	certain	types	of	sugars	(“reducing	sugars,”	like	glucose	and	fructose)
to	create	new,	distinct	flavor	compounds.	These	compounds,	called	dicarbonyls,
in	turn	react	with	more	amino	acids	to	form	even	more	compounds,	multiplying
rapidly	on	both	the	surface	of	the	cooking	food	and	in	the	cooking	vessel.
Ultimately,	very	large	molecules	called	melanoidin	pigments,	which	are
responsible	for	the	deep	brown	hue	on	the	crusts	of	roasted	and	grilled	meats,	are
formed.
Depending	on	the	specific	amino	acids	or	sugars	present,	different	flavor

compounds	can	be	created.	For	example,	cysteine,	a	sulfur-containing	amino
acid	abundant	in	red	meat,	reacts	with	reducing	sugars	to	form	thiazoles	and
thiophenes,	more	complex	compounds	that	are	important	components	of
“roasted	meat”	flavor.	(This	is	one	reason	why	a	browned	steak	has	a	different
flavor	from	a	browned	chicken	breast.)
Temperature	also	affects	the	Maillard	reaction.	In	general,	this	reaction	occurs

when	the	surface	temperature	exceeds	300	degrees.	This	seems	high,	but
remember	that	because	of	the	principles	of	conductive	heat,	the	temperature	of	a
piece	of	meat	can	vary	greatly	as	it	cooks.	In	the	time	it	takes	the	center	of	a
chilled	thick	steak	to	go	from	35	to	80	degrees	in	the	pan,	the	surface
temperature	can	jump	to	300	degrees.
Because	the	Maillard	reaction	becomes	rapid	at	this	high	temperature,	certain

cooking	methods	don’t	brown	foods.	Food	cooked	in	boiling	water,	for	example,
never	browns	because	the	surface	temperature	cannot	exceed	212	degrees.
The	presence	of	any	moisture	influences	the	Maillard	reaction.	Even	with	dry-

heat	cooking	methods	like	sautéing	or	grilling,	the	surface	moisture	of	food	will
steam—lowering	the	temperature,	slowing	the	speed	of	the	reaction,	and	thus
reducing	the	amount	of	browning.



THE	MAILLARD	REACTION:	HOW	BROWNING	OCCURS

	
HIGH	HEAT	FOR	BIG	FLAVOR	When	meat	is	heated,	amino	acids	and	reducing	sugars	(glucose	and
fructose)	react	to	form	new	flavor	compounds.	In	turn,	these	new	compounds	form	yet	more	flavor
compounds.	This	process	keeps	repeating	itself	until	very	large	molecules	called	melanoidin	pigments	are
created.	These	large	molecules	produce	the	brown	colors	(and	flavors)	associated	with	roasted	and	grilled
meats.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	effect	of	browning	on	flavor,	we	conducted	the	following
experiment:	We	started	with	six	chicken	cutlets,	which	we	patted	dry	with	paper
towels	and	seasoned	with	equal	amounts	of	salt	and	pepper.	We	heated	1
tablespoon	of	vegetable	oil	in	two	12-inch	conventional	skillets	for	three
minutes.	One	pan	was	set	over	medium-low	heat	and	the	second	pan	over	high
heat.	After	the	pans	were	heated	for	three	minutes	we	recorded	the	temperature
of	the	oil	and	added	three	cutlets	to	each	pan.	In	each	case,	we	cooked	the
chicken,	flipping	each	piece	once,	until	the	temperature	in	the	center	reached
160	degrees,	indicating	that	the	chicken	was	fully	cooked.	We	also	tracked	the
surface	temperature	of	the	chicken	as	it	cooked.
Once	the	chicken	was	cooked,	we	transferred	it	to	a	plate	and	added	1	cup	of

water	to	each	pan.	Using	a	wooden	spoon,	we	scraped	the	browned	bits	in	the
pan	loose	and	boiled	the	water	until	it	had	reduced	to	½	cup.	We	poured	the
liquid	into	measuring	cups	and	evaluated	both	the	chicken	and	“sauce”	for
color	and	flavor.	We	repeated	the	experiment	three	times	and	compared	the
results.



THE	RESULTS
Let’s	start	with	the	visual	observations.	As	you	might	expect,	the	chicken	cooked
over	medium-low	heat	(the	oil	registered	240	degrees	after	preheating	for	three
minutes)	was	very	pale.	Since	there	were	almost	no	pan	drippings	in	the	pan	set
over	medium-low	heat,	the	“sauce”	we	created	had	almost	no	color.	Tasters
described	the	chicken	as	moist	but	bland	and	the	sauce	tasted	like	water.
The	chicken	cooked	over	high	heat	(the	oil	registered	420	degrees	when	the

chicken	was	added)	developed	a	nice	golden	exterior.	During	the	cooking
process,	lots	of	browned	bits	(called	fond)	had	formed	in	the	pan	and	the	“sauce”
we	made	in	this	pan	had	a	brown	color	and	decent	flavor.	(Remember,	we	added
only	water.)
Cooking	time	had	no	relation	to	overall	browning.	The	cutlets	cooked	over

medium-low	heat	required	about	seven	minutes	to	reach	an	internal	temperature
of	160	degrees.	In	contrast,	the	cutlets	cooked	over	high	heat	required	just	five
minutes	to	reach	an	internal	temperature	of	160	degrees.	So	browning	was	better
in	the	sample	that	spent	less—not	more—time	being	heated.
While	both	samples	were	heated	to	the	same	internal	temperature	(160

degrees),	the	surface	temperatures	varied	greatly.	The	surface	temperature	of	the
cutlets	cooked	over	medium-low	heat	took	an	average	of	five	minutes	to	reach
their	maximum	of	300	degrees.	In	contrast,	the	surface	temperature	of	the	cutlets
cooked	over	high	heat	raced	ahead	to	over	300	degrees	in	about	one	minute	and
continued	to	climb	to	well	over	400	degrees	by	the	time	the	chicken	was	cooked
through.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Significant	heat	is	required	to	jump-start	the	chemical	reaction	that	causes	food
to	brown.	Absent	the	heat	necessary	to	raise	the	surface	temperature	above	300
degrees,	more	cooking	time	won’t	really	lead	to	more	browning	unless	the	food
is	cooked	for	a	very	long	time.	In	the	absence	of	other	variables	(such	as	other
flavorful	ingredients	in	the	dish),	well-browned	food	has	a	richer,	more	varied
flavor	profile	than	poorly	browned	food.



MORE	HEAT	=	MORE	BROWNING

	
COOKED	OVER	MEDIUM-LOW

The	surface	temperature	of	the	chicken	never	exceeded	300	degrees	and	thus	little	browning	occurred.	The
sauce	made	from	the	pan	drippings	was	pale	and	bland.



	
COOKED	OVER	HIGH

The	surface	temperature	of	the	chicken	reached	440	degrees	and	thus	a	lot	of	browning	occurred.	The	sauce
made	from	the	pan	drippings	was	rich	and	brown.



THE	MAILLARD	REACTION	AT	WORK	
STIR-FRYING
One	of	the	reasons	stir-fries	are	appealing	is	that	you	can	prepare	a	complete
meal	(with	vegetables	and	protein)	quickly	in	a	single	pan.	This	method	relies	on
browning	to	impart	flavor	to	both	the	protein	and	the	vegetables.	Choosing	the
right	cooking	vessel,	using	sufficient	heat,	and	cooking	food	in	small	batches
ensures	that	the	pan	remains	hot	enough	to	encourage	the	Maillard	reaction.



STIR-FRIED	BEEF	WITH	SNAP	PEAS	AND	RED	PEPPER
SERVES	4

To	make	slicing	the	meat	easier,	freeze	it	for	15	minutes.	Serve	with	Simple	White
Rice.

SAUCE
½				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
¼				 cup	oyster	sauce
2				 tablespoons	dry	sherry
1				 tablespoon	sugar
1				 teaspoon	cornstarch

BEEF	STIR-FRY
2				 tablespoons	soy	sauce
1				 teaspoon	sugar
1				 (12-ounce)	flank	steak,	trimmed,	cut	into	2-inch-wide	strips	with	grain,	and	sliced	thin	across	grain

on	slight	bias
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
12				 ounces	sugar	snap	peas,	strings	removed
1				 red	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	¼-inch	slices
2				 tablespoons	water

1.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	small	bowl	and	set
aside.
2.	FOR	THE	STIR-FRY:	Combine	soy	sauce	and	sugar	in	medium	bowl.

Add	beef,	toss	well,	and	marinate	for	at	least	10	minutes	or	up	to	1	hour,	stirring
once.	Meanwhile,	combine	1	teaspoon	oil,	garlic,	and	ginger	in	small	bowl.
3.	Drain	beef	and	discard	liquid.	Heat	1	teaspoon	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick

skillet	over	high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add	half	of	beef	in	single	layer,	break
up	any	clumps,	and	cook,	without	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Stir	beef	and	continue	to
cook	until	browned,	1	to	2	minutes.	Transfer	beef	to	clean	bowl.	Repeat	with	1
teaspoon	oil	and	remaining	beef.	Rinse	skillet	clean	and	dry	with	paper	towels.



4.	Add	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil	to	skillet	and	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add
snap	peas	and	bell	pepper	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	vegetables	begin	to
brown,	3	to	5	minutes.	Add	water	and	continue	to	cook	until	vegetables	are
crisp-tender,	1	to	2	minutes	longer.	Clear	center	of	skillet,	add	garlic	mixture,
and	cook,	mashing	mixture	into	pan,	until	fragrant,	15	to	20	seconds.	Stir
mixture	into	vegetables.	Return	beef	and	any	accumulated	juices	to	skillet	and
stir	to	combine.	Whisk	sauce	to	recombine,	add	to	skillet,	and	cook,	stirring
constantly,	until	thickened,	about	30	seconds.	Serve.



TERIYAKI	STIR-FRIED	BEEF	WITH	GREEN	BEANS	AND	SHIITAKES
SERVES	4

To	make	slicing	the	meat	easier,	freeze	it	for	15	minutes.	You	can	substitute	1
tablespoon	of	white	wine	or	sake	mixed	with	1	teaspoon	of	sugar	for	the	mirin.
Serve	with	Simple	White	Rice.

SAUCE
½				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 tablespoons	soy	sauce
2				 tablespoons	sugar
1				 tablespoon	mirin
1				 teaspoon	cornstarch
¼				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes

BEEF	STIR-FRY
2				 tablespoons	soy	sauce
1				 teaspoon	sugar
1				 (12-ounce)	flank	steak,	trimmed,	cut	into	2-inch-wide	strips	with	grain,	and	sliced	thin	across	grain

on	slight	bias
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
8				 ounces	shiitake	mushrooms,	stemmed	and	cut	into	1-inch	pieces
12				 ounces	green	beans,	trimmed	and	halved
¼				 cup	water
3				 scallions,	cut	into	1½-inch	pieces,	white	and	light	green	pieces	quartered	lengthwise

1.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	small	bowl	and	set
aside.
2.	FOR	THE	STIR-FRY:	Combine	soy	sauce	and	sugar	in	medium	bowl.

Add	beef,	toss	well,	and	marinate	for	at	least	10	minutes	or	up	to	1	hour,	stirring
once.	Meanwhile,	combine	1	teaspoon	oil,	garlic,	and	ginger	in	small	bowl.
3.	Drain	beef	and	discard	liquid.	Heat	1	teaspoon	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick

skillet	over	high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add	half	of	beef	in	single	layer,	break



up	any	clumps,	and	cook,	without	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Stir	beef	and	continue	to
cook	until	browned,	1	to	2	minutes.	Transfer	beef	to	clean	bowl.	Repeat	with	1
teaspoon	oil	and	remaining	beef.	Rinse	skillet	clean	and	dry	with	paper	towels.
4.	Add	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil	to	skillet	and	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add

mushrooms	and	cook	until	beginning	to	brown,	about	2	minutes.	Add	green
beans	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	spotty	brown,	3	to	4	minutes.	Add
water,	cover,	and	continue	to	cook	until	green	beans	are	crisp-tender,	2	to	3
minutes	longer.	Uncover,	clear	center	of	skillet,	and	add	garlic	mixture.	Cook,
mashing	mixture	into	pan,	until	fragrant,	15	to	20	seconds.	Stir	mixture	into
vegetables.	Return	beef	and	any	accumulated	juices	to	skillet,	add	scallions,	and
stir	to	combine.	Whisk	sauce	to	recombine,	add	to	skillet,	and	cook,	stirring
constantly,	until	thickened,	about	30	seconds.	Serve.



TANGERINE	STIR-FRIED	BEEF	WITH	ONION	AND	SNOW	PEAS
SERVES	4

To	make	slicing	the	meat	easier,	freeze	it	for	15	minutes.	Make	sure	to	zest	one	of
the	tangerines	before	juicing	them.	Two	oranges	can	be	substituted	for	the
tangerines.	If	available,	substitute	1	teaspoon	of	toasted	and	ground	Sichuan
peppercorns	for	the	red	pepper	flakes.	Serve	with	Simple	White	Rice.

SAUCE
¾				 cup	tangerine	juice	(3	to	4	tangerines)
2				 tablespoons	soy	sauce
1				 tablespoon	packed	light	brown	sugar
1				 teaspoon	toasted	sesame	oil
1				 teaspoon	cornstarch

BEEF	STIR-FRY
2				 tablespoons	soy	sauce
1				 teaspoon	packed	light	brown	sugar
1				 (12-ounce)	flank	steak,	trimmed,	cut	into	2-inch-wide	strips	with	grain,	and	sliced	thin	across	grain

on	slight	bias
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
1				 tablespoon	black	bean	sauce
1				 teaspoon	grated	tangerine	zest
¼– teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
½				
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
1				 large	onion,	halved	and	cut	into	½-inch	wedges
10				 ounces	snow	peas,	strings	removed
2				 tablespoons	water

1.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	small	bowl	and	set
aside.
2.	FOR	THE	STIR-FRY:	Combine	soy	sauce	and	sugar	in	medium	bowl.

Add	beef,	toss	well,	and	marinate	for	at	least	10	minutes	or	up	to	1	hour,	stirring



once.	Meanwhile,	combine	garlic,	ginger,	black	bean	sauce,	tangerine	zest,
pepper	flakes,	and	1	teaspoon	vegetable	oil	in	small	bowl.
3.	Drain	beef	and	discard	liquid.	Heat	1	teaspoon	vegetable	oil	in	12-inch

nonstick	skillet	over	high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add	half	of	beef	in	single
layer,	break	up	any	clumps,	and	cook,	without	stirring,	for	1	minute.	Stir	beef
and	continue	to	cook	until	browned,	1	to	2	minutes.	Transfer	beef	to	clean	bowl.
Repeat	with	1	teaspoon	vegetable	oil	and	remaining	beef.	Rinse	skillet	clean	and
dry	with	paper	towels.
4.	Add	remaining	1	tablespoon	vegetable	oil	to	skillet	and	heat	until	just

smoking.	Add	onion	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	beginning	to	brown,	3	to
5	minutes.	Add	snow	peas	and	continue	to	cook	until	spotty	brown,	about	2
minutes	longer.	Add	water	and	cook	until	vegetables	are	crisp-tender,	about	1
minute.	Clear	center	of	skillet,	add	garlic	mixture,	and	cook,	mashing	mixture
into	pan,	until	fragrant,	15	to	20	seconds.	Stir	mixture	into	vegetables.	Return
beef	and	any	accumulated	juices	to	skillet	and	stir	to	combine.	Whisk	sauce	to
recombine,	add	to	skillet,	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	thickened,	about	30
seconds.	Serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Stir-fries	suffer	from	a	number	of	common	problems—including	burned	garlic
and	ginger	and	watery	sauces—but	the	biggest	problem	is	the	meat,	which	is
often	steamed,	bland,	and	tough.	A	10-minute	soy	marinade	adds	flavor	and
helps	the	meat	retain	moisture.	(The	soy	acts	like	a	brine;	see	concept	13	for
more	information	on	this	phenomenon.)	A	little	sugar	is	mixed	with	the	soy	sauce
to	promote	browning	and	the	meat	is	drained	before	cooking	so	the	excess
marinade	doesn’t	cause	the	meat	to	steam.	Cooking	the	meat	in	two	batches
(rather	than	one)	ensures	that	the	pan	remains	plenty	hot	and	that	the	beef
browns	nicely.
START	WITH	THE	RIGHT	CUT	Flank	steak	is	the	classic	choice	because

it’s	relatively	inexpensive	and	flavorful.	We	also	like	sirloin	tip	steaks	and	blade
steaks.	If	using	the	latter,	you	will	need	to	remove	excess	fat	and	gristle	so	start
with	1	pound	to	compensate	for	the	trimmings.
SLICE	THIN,	ACROSS	THE	GRAIN	Cutting	the	meat	across	the	grain

into	thin	strips	ensures	that	it	will	be	tender	and	easy	to	eat.	Don’t	cut	the	meat
with	the	grain.	Cutting	the	meat	across	the	grain	shortens	long,	tough	muscle
fibers	(most	of	which	run	from	end	to	end	on	this	oblong	cut),	dramatically
diminishing	chewiness.	Thin	slices	will	seem	more	tender	than	thick	slices,	so
freeze	the	meat	for	15	minutes	before	slicing	it	and	make	sure	to	use	a	sharp
knife.
USE	A	BIG	PAN	Piling	food	up	in	the	skillet	hampers	browning.	For

maximum	browning	and	flavor	use	a	12-inch	skillet.	We	prefer	a	nonstick	pan,
which	requires	very	little	oil	and	keeps	the	stir-fry	from	becoming	greasy.
COOK	EVERYTHING	IN	BATCHES	The	goal	when	stir-frying	is	to	keep

the	temperature	in	the	pan	very	hot.	On	a	professional	restaurant	stove,	this
might	not	be	much	of	a	challenge,	but	at	home	it	is.	The	meat	is	cooked	in	two
batches	so	that	each	piece	is	in	direct	contact	with	the	pan.	Likewise,	the
vegetables	are	cooked	in	batches,	with	the	slow-cooking	vegetables	(like
mushrooms	and	onions)	going	into	the	pan	before	faster-cooking	vegetables	(like
snow	peas).
ADD	THE	GARLIC	AND	GINGER	LAST	Many	stir-fry	recipes	start	by

cooking	the	garlic	and	ginger.	The	idea,	we	think,	is	to	flavor	everything	that
subsequently	goes	into	the	pan.	Sounds	good,	but	the	result	is	that	the	garlic	and
ginger	often	burn,	imparting	a	scorched	flavor	to	the	dish.	Instead,	we	add	the
garlic	and	ginger	at	the	end	of	the	cooking	time,	pushing	the	vegetables	to	the



side	of	the	pan	and	making	a	clearing	in	the	middle	for	the	garlic,	ginger,	and	a
little	oil.	Once	the	aromatics	are	fragrant	(this	will	take	15	to	20	seconds),	they
are	stirred	back	into	the	vegetables	and	the	stir-fry	is	finished.
DON’T	FORGET	CORNSTARCH	A	good	stir-fry	sauce	starts	with	very

potent	ingredients.	Some	restaurants	thicken	their	stir-fry	sauces	with	so	much
cornstarch	that	the	result	is	a	pasty,	gloppy	stir-fry.	Many	home	cooks	don’t
bother	with	any	cornstarch	and	their	sauces	are	so	watery	they	run	off	the	food.
We	find	that	a	little	cornstarch	(usually	about	1	teaspoon	for	a	typical	stir-fry
sauce)	strikes	just	the	right	balance.	Make	sure	to	add	the	cornstarch	to	the	sauce
before	it	hits	the	pan.	Cornstarch	must	be	dispersed	in	cold	or	room-temperature
liquids.	If	added	to	hot	liquids	or	directly	to	the	pan,	the	granules	will	swell
quickly	and	form	lumps.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SKILLET	VS.	WOK

On	a	Western	stove,	we	prefer	a	skillet	when	stir-frying.

The	skillet’s	flat-bottom	design	allows	more	of	its	surface	area	to	come	in	direct	contact	with	the	flat	burner
of	a	Western	stove.	The	wok,	which	is	traditionally	shaped	with	a	conical	bottom,	was	designed	for	pit-style
stoves	where	flames	come	in	contact	with	both	the	sides	and	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	When	a	wok	is	placed
on	a	Western	stove,	the	heat	from	the	flat	burner	does	not	reach	the	sides.	On	the	same	stove	more	of	the
skillet	is	in	contact	with	the	burner,	allowing	it	to	grow	very	hot.	The	wok,	instead,	heats	inefficiently	and
its	temperature	drops	precipitously	when	food	is	added.	Since	a	hotter	pan	equals	more	browning,	the
choice	of	skillet	or	wok	really	matters.

To	quantify	their	differences,	we	heated	vegetable	oil	in	a	wok	and	a	heavy	12-inch	skillet	over	high	heat
on	gas	burners.	Once	the	oil	was	smoking	(at	around	415	degrees),	we	added	the	same	stir-fry	ingredients	to
each	pan.	The	wok’s	temperature	plummeted	dramatically,	to	220	degrees	at	its	center,	rising	only	another
50	degrees	over	the	course	of	cooking.	The	skillet’s	temperature	dipped	to	345	degrees,	then	recovered
quickly,	continuing	to	rise	to	almost	500	degrees.	This	higher	heat	translated	to	better	browning	and	more
flavor	in	the	stir-fry	prepared	in	the	skillet.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	COLOR	OF	MEAT

Myoglobin	is	a	protein	that	dictates	the	color	of	meat.

Why	does	meat	change	color	when	it	cooks?	Why	is	the	ground	beef	you	bring	home	from	the	market
sometimes	red	on	the	outside	but	dark	purple	or	brown	on	the	inside?

The	color	in	meat	comes	from	a	protein	called	myoglobin,	which	serves	to	store	oxygen	in	muscle
tissue.	When	the	meat	is	freshly	cut,	this	protein	is	deep	purple.	When	the	exterior	of	raw	meat	is	exposed	to
oxygen	(as	it	sits	in	its	packaging,	or	in	the	butcher’s	display	case),	the	protein	will	convert	to
oxymyoglobin,	which	is	a	striking	bright	red.	Inside	the	meat,	where	less	oxygen	can	penetrate,	however,
this	protein	will	slowly	convert	to	brown	metmyoglobin.	Color	changes	of	this	nature	are	purely	cosmetic—
they	have	no	bearing	on	the	meat’s	flavor	or	wholesomeness,	except	perhaps	when	meat	turns	brown	with
age.	After	all,	the	color	of	meat	is	also	influenced	by	the	age	of	the	animal.	The	level	of	myoglobin
increases	with	age,	and	with	use.	This	is	why	the	most-exercised	parts	of	the	animal	(think	chicken	leg
versus	breast)	is	much	darker	in	color.

Cooking,	obviously,	also	changes	the	color	of	meat.	As	myoglobin	is	heated,	the	protein	denatures	and
unfolds,	and	the	portion	of	the	molecule	responsible	for	the	color,	called	heme,	is	converted	again	to
metmyoglobin,	producing	the	gray	color	of	cooked	meat.



THE	MAILLARD	REACTION	AT	WORK	
GRILLING
Grilling	seems	like	the	easiest	way	to	brown	food	and	encourage	the
development	of	flavor	compounds	associated	with	the	Maillard	reaction.	Unlike
the	stovetop,	where	burner	output	and	smoke	are	real	challenges	for	the	home
cook,	most	grills	are	capable	of	maintaining	high	temperatures	(well	in	excess	of
500	degrees)	and	smoke	is	not	a	concern.	In	fact,	with	large,	thick	cuts,
overbrowning	is	the	bigger	risk.	(We’ve	all	incinerated	something	on	the	grill.)
However,	small	cuts	(like	steaks,	chops,	or	fish	fillets)	will	cook	very	quickly	on
the	grill,	sometimes	before	the	exterior	has	had	time	to	brown	sufficiently.	The
goal	when	preparing	these	foods	for	the	grill	is	to	remove	excess	moisture	so	that
food	can	start	to	brown	the	instant	it	is	placed	on	the	grill.



GRILLED	ARGENTINE	STEAKS	WITH	CHIMICHURRI	SAUCE
SERVES	6	TO	8

The	chimichurri	sauce	can	be	made	up	to	three	days	in	advance.	Our	preferred
steak	for	this	recipe	is	strip	steak,	also	known	as	New	York	strip.	A	less	expensive
alternative	is	a	boneless	shell	sirloin	steak	(or	top	sirloin	steak).	When	using	a
charcoal	grill,	we	prefer	wood	chunks	to	wood	chips	whenever	possible;
substitute	four	medium	wood	chunks,	unsoaked,	for	the	wood	chip	packets.	We
like	oak,	but	other	types	of	wood	chunks	can	be	used.

CHIMICHURRI	SAUCE
¼				 cup	hot	water
2				 teaspoons	dried	oregano
1				 teaspoon	salt

1				1⁄3 cups	parsley	leaves
				2⁄3 cup	cilantro	leaves
6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
¼				 cup	red	wine	vinegar
½				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil

STEAKS
1				 tablespoon	cornstarch

1½				 teaspoons	salt
4				 (1-pound)	boneless	strip	steaks,	1½	inches	thick,	trimmed
4				 cups	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained
					 Pepper

1.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Combine	water,	oregano,	and	salt	in	small	bowl	and
let	sit	until	oregano	is	softened,	about	15	minutes.	Pulse	parsley,	cilantro,	garlic,
and	pepper	flakes	in	food	processor	until	coarsely	chopped,	about	10	pulses.	Add
water	mixture	and	vinegar	and	pulse	to	combine.	Transfer	mixture	to	bowl	and
slowly	whisk	in	oil	until	emulsified.	Cover	with	plastic	wrap	and	let	stand	at
room	temperature	for	at	least	1	hour	(if	preparing	sauce	in	advance,	refrigerate
and	bring	to	room	temperature	before	using).



2.	FOR	THE	STEAKS:	Set	wire	rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Combine
cornstarch	and	salt	in	small	bowl.	Pat	steaks	dry	with	paper	towels	and	place	on
prepared	baking	sheet.	Rub	entire	surface	of	steaks	with	cornstarch	mixture	and
place	steaks,	uncovered,	in	freezer	until	very	firm,	about	30	minutes.
3.	Using	2	large	pieces	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	wrap	soaked	chips	in	2

foil	packets	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	tops.
4A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Light	large

chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals	are
partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	grill.	Place	wood	chip	packets	on
coals.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	halfway.	Heat	grill
until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,	about	5	minutes.
4B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packets	on	cooking	grate.	Turn

all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	until	hot,	about	15	minutes.	Leave	all	burners
on	high.
5.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Season	steaks	with	pepper.	Place	steaks	on

grill,	cover,	and	cook	until	beginning	to	brown	on	both	sides,	4	to	6	minutes,
flipping	halfway	through	cooking.
6.	Flip	steaks	and	cook	uncovered	until	well	browned	on	first	side,	2	to	4

minutes.	Flip	steaks	and	continue	to	cook	until	meat	registers	115	to	120	degrees
(for	rare)	or	120	to	125	degrees	(for	medium-rare),	2	to	6	minutes	longer.
7.	Transfer	steaks	to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with	foil,	and	let	rest	for	10

minutes.	Cut	each	steak	crosswise	into	¼-inch	slices.	Transfer	to	serving	platter
and	serve,	passing	chimichurri	sauce	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
In	Argentina,	2-pound	steaks	are	grilled	over	a	hardwood	fire	so	they	pick	up	a
lot	of	smoke	flavor.	Because	these	steaks	are	so	big,	they	spend	plenty	of	time	on
the	grill	and	emerge	with	a	thick,	flavorful	browned	crust.	When	translated	to
smaller	American	steaks,	the	method	falters.	Our	goal	was	to	devise	a	technique
that	would	prolong	the	grill	time	(so	the	steaks	could	pick	up	more	wood	flavor)
and	maximize	browning.	We	discovered	that	rubbing	the	steaks	with	a	mixture	of
salt	and	cornstarch	and	then	putting	them	in	the	freezer	for	30	minutes
accomplished	both	goals.	The	cornstarch-salt	mixture	wicked	away	moisture	and
the	air	inside	a	freezer	is	very	dry,	so	moisture	evaporates	very	quickly.	Steaks
treated	this	way	started	to	brown	as	soon	as	they	hit	the	grill.	In	addition,
chilling	the	steaks	in	the	freezer	prolonged	their	total	cooking	time,	which	gave
the	steaks	more	time	to	pick	up	smoke	flavor.
USE	FREEZER	AS	DEHYDRATOR	The	freezer	is	a	harsh	environment	for

meat.	Even	when	well	wrapped,	steaks	can	lose	moisture	and	become	covered
with	freezer	burn.	But	we	use	this	effect	to	our	advantage.	We	found	that	steaks
placed	in	the	freezer	for	a	short	period	of	time	emerged	firmer	and	drier	thanks
to	the	evaporation	of	surface	moisture.	Rubbing	the	steaks	with	salt	helps	draw
extra	moisture	to	the	surface,	where	it	can	evaporate.	Adding	some	cornstarch	to
the	rub	absorbs	moisture	and	promotes	the	development	of	an	especially	crisp
crust	on	the	grilled	steaks.	The	starches	in	the	cornstarch	also	enhance	the
browning	by	adding	more	“fuel”	for	the	Maillard	reaction.
MAKE	SMOKE	We	use	a	lot	of	wood	to	produce	sufficient	smoke	to	flavor

the	steaks	during	the	quick	cooking	time.	Oak	is	the	traditional	choice	for	this
recipe,	but	any	wood	will	do.	Placing	the	lid	on	the	grill	for	the	first	few	minutes
of	cooking	time	traps	the	smoke	and	helps	jump-start	the	flavoring	process.	A
charcoal	grill	does	a	much	better	job	of	producing	smoke,	although	we	did
develop	a	workaround	for	a	gas	grill	by	placing	the	packets	with	the	wood	chips
directly	on	the	cooking	grate.
BIG	STEAKS	NEED	BIG	SAUCE	Steaks	in	Argentina	are	traditionally

served	with	a	tart	herb-based	sauce	called	chimichurri.	The	sharp,	grassy	flavors
of	the	sauce	are	the	perfect	complement	to	the	fatty,	smoky	beef.	We	make	a
traditional	version	of	this	sauce	with	parsley,	cilantro,	oregano,	garlic,	red	wine
vinegar,	red	pepper	flakes,	and	salt—all	emulsified	with	a	fruity	extra-virgin
olive	oil.



GRILLED	SALMON	FILLETS
SERVES	4

This	recipe	works	best	with	salmon	fillets	but	can	also	be	used	with	any	thick,
firm-fleshed	white	fish,	including	red	snapper,	grouper,	halibut,	and	sea	bass
(cook	white	fish	to	140	degrees,	up	to	2	minutes	longer	per	side).	If	you	are	using
skinless	fillets,	treat	the	skinned	side	of	each	as	if	it	were	the	skin	side.	Serve
with	lemon	wedges,	Almond	Vinaigrette,	or	Olive	Vinaigrette	(recipes	follow).

1				 (1½-to	2-pound)	skin-on	salmon	fillet,	1½	inches	thick
					 Vegetable	oil
					 Salt	and	pepper
					 Lemon	wedges

1.	Use	sharp	knife	to	remove	any	whitish	fat	from	belly	of	salmon	and	cut
fillet	into	4	equal	pieces.	Place	fillets	skin	side	up	on	large	plate	lined	with	clean
kitchen	towel.	Place	second	clean	kitchen	towel	on	top	of	fillets	and	press	down
to	blot	liquid.	Refrigerate	fish,	wrapped	in	towels,	while	preparing	grill,	at	least
20	minutes.
2A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light

large	chimney	starter	two-thirds	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(4	quarts).	When
top	coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Set
cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,
about	5	minutes.
2B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

very	hot,	about	15	minutes.
3.	Clean	cooking	grate,	then	repeatedly	brush	grate	with	well-oiled	paper

towels	until	grate	is	black	and	glossy,	5	to	10	times.	Lightly	brush	both	sides	of
fish	with	oil	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Place	fish	skin	side	down	on	hot
side	of	grill	(if	using	charcoal)	or	turn	all	burners	to	medium	(if	using	gas)	with
fillets	diagonal	to	grate.	Cover	and	cook	without	moving	until	skin	is	well
browned	and	crisp,	3	to	5	minutes.	(Try	lifting	fish	gently	with	spatula	after	3
minutes;	if	it	doesn’t	cleanly	lift	off	grill,	continue	to	cook,	checking	at	30-
second	intervals,	until	it	releases.)
4.	Using	2	spatulas,	flip	fish	and	continue	to	cook,	covered,	until	center	is	still



translucent	when	checked	with	tip	of	paring	knife	and	registers	125	degrees	(for
medium-rare),	2	to	6	minutes	longer.	Serve	immediately	with	lemon	wedges.



ALMOND	VINAIGRETTE
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	GRILLED	SALMON	FILLETS

				1⁄3 cup	whole	almonds,	toasted
1				 small	shallot,	minced
4				 teaspoons	white	wine	vinegar
2				 teaspoons	honey
1				 teaspoon	Dijon	mustard
				1⁄3 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1				 tablespoon	cold	water
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	tarragon
					 Salt	and	pepper

Place	almonds	in	zipper-lock	bag	and,	using	rolling	pin,	pound	until	no	pieces
larger	than	½	inch	remain.	Combine	pounded	almonds,	shallot,	vinegar,	honey,
and	mustard	in	medium	bowl.	Whisking	constantly,	drizzle	in	olive	oil	until
emulsion	forms.	Add	water	and	tarragon	and	whisk	to	combine,	then	season	with
salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Whisk	to	recombine	before	serving.



OLIVE	VINAIGRETTE
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	GRILLED	SALMON	FILLETS

½				 cup	pitted	green	or	kalamata	olives,	chopped	coarse
¼				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
1				 small	shallot,	minced
2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
					 Salt	and	pepper

Combine	all	ingredients	in	bowl	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Whisk
to	recombine	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	grilled	salmon	with	a	tender	interior	and	crisp	skin,	and	we	wanted
each	fillet	to	hold	together	on	the	grill.	We	prefer	thicker	salmon	fillets,	which
can	stand	the	heat	of	the	grill	for	a	little	longer	before	the	first	turn.	For	moist,
tender	results,	we	cook	the	salmon	to	a	perfect	medium-rare—any	longer	and	it
begins	to	dry	out.
COVER	AND	CHILL	To	prevent	the	fish	from	sticking	and	falling	apart,	we

dry	the	fish’s	exterior	by	wrapping	it	in	a	clean	kitchen	towel	and	refrigerating	it
for	20	minutes.	This	removes	more	moisture	than	simply	blotting	the	fish.	With
less	moisture	on	the	surface,	the	browning	starts	a	bit	faster.	(When	wet	food	is
placed	on	a	grill,	much	of	the	fire’s	energy	is	at	first	used	to	evaporate	this
moisture.)
SEASON	THE	GRILL	To	eliminate	the	risk	of	the	fish	sticking	to	the	grill,

you	need	a	barrier	between	the	fish	and	the	cooking	grate.	We’ve	noticed	when
oiling	the	grate	that	the	oil	vaporizes	almost	instantly,	leaving	behind	a	black,
weblike	residue.	It	turns	out	that	as	the	oil	heats	up,	its	fatty-acid	chains	form
polymers	(that	is,	they	stick	together),	creating	that	crisscross	pattern	over	the
surface	of	the	metal.	We’ve	often	observed	the	same	phenomenon	when
seasoning	a	cast-iron	pan	with	successive	coatings	of	oil.	A	single	layer	of	these
polymers	won’t	prevent	sticking,	but	applying	and	heating	oil	repeatedly	will
build	up	a	thick	layer	of	them	in	a	cast-iron	pan	and	make	it	“nonstick.”	This
same	technique	translates	perfectly	to	the	grill.	We	use	tongs	to	rub	oiled	paper
towels	over	the	heated	grate	five	to	10	times.	When	the	grate	is	black	and	glossy
you	know	you’ve	built	up	a	sufficient	layer	of	polymers.	The	proteins	in	the	fish
are	no	longer	in	direct	contact	with	the	grill	grate	and	cannot	bond	with	it.	Note
that	this	effect	is	temporary	and	the	grill	must	be	reseasoned	every	time	you
want	to	cook	fish.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WILD	VS.	FARMED	SALMON

We	prefer	wild	Alaskan	salmon	to	Norwegian	farmed	salmon.

Setting	environmental	and	sustainability	issues	aside,	we	compared	wild	salmon	fillets	with	farmed	salmon
fillets,	noting	variations	in	fattiness,	flavor,	aroma,	and	color.	We	tasted	fresh	wild	Alaskan	king	salmon
($15.99	per	pound),	which	is	available	year-round	either	fresh,	frozen,	or	thawed,	alongside	fresh	farmed
salmon	($11.99	per	pound)	from	Norway	in	a	basic	pan-fried	application	as	well	as	in	a	salmon	cake	recipe.

Both	raw	and	cooked,	the	wild	salmon	had	a	rosy-pink	hue,	while	the	farmed	salmon	was	lighter	pink.
Wild	salmon	attain	their	color	by	absorbing	a	carotenoid	called	astaxanthin	from	a	krill-based	diet,	while
farmed	salmon	eat	fish	feed	supplemented	with	various	sources	of	astaxanthin	to	enhance	their	color.

The	wild	salmon	exuded	more	oil	in	the	pan	than	the	farmed	salmon	but	tasted	leaner	overall,	with	a
buttery	texture	and	a	sweet,	fresh	flavor.	The	farmed	salmon,	which	get	less	exercise	and	consume	more	fat
than	wild	salmon,	tasted	“fishy,”	with	“slimy,	soft”	flesh	and	a	“musty,	fatty”	aftertaste.	When	mashed,
seasoned,	formed	into	cakes,	and	pan-fried,	the	differences	remained.	Tasters	overwhelmingly	preferred	the
wild	salmon,	which	had	a	rich,	full,	but	delicate	flavor.	In	comparison,	the	farmed	salmon	had	a	“canned”
flavor.

The	flavor	and	texture	of	wild	and	farmed	salmon	will	vary	depending	on	a	host	of	factors,	including	the
species	of	salmon,	the	season,	and	the	place	of	origin.	In	this	particular	instance,	however,	we	found	that	the
wild	Alaskan	salmon	was	preferable	to	the	Norwegian	farmed	salmon.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
DEAL	WITH	GRAY	MATTER

The	gray	matter	on	salmon	is	rich	in	omega-3	fatty	acids.

The	gray	portion	of	flesh	just	below	the	skin	of	salmon	is	a	fatty	deposit	rich	in	omega-3	fatty	acids	and	low
in	the	natural	pink	pigments	found	in	the	rest	of	the	fish.	To	get	a	handle	on	how	the	gray	area	affects	flavor,
we	oven-roasted	several	fillets	of	salmon,	then	removed	the	gray	portion	from	half	of	them	and	left	it	intact
on	the	others.	Only	a	few	discerning	tasters	noted	that	the	samples	with	the	gray	substance	had	an	ever-so-
slightly	fishy	flavor;	most	couldn’t	tell	the	difference.	It’s	easy	enough	to	remove	the	gray	stuff	by	peeling
off	the	skin	of	the	cooked	salmon	and	then	scraping	it	away	with	the	back	of	a	knife,	but	the	flavor
difference	is	so	minor	that	we	don’t	think	it’s	worth	the	hassle.

	
A	TOUCH	OF	GRAY

The	gray	matter	on	the	underside	of	salmon	is	rich	in	omega-3	fatty	acids.



THE	MAILLARD	REACTION	AT	WORK	
SKILLET-COOKED	FISH	AND	SEAFOOD
Unlike	other	proteins,	white	fish	and	seafood,	such	as	shrimp	and	scallops,	have
very	little	fat.	As	a	result,	overcooking	can	have	disastrous	results.	The	punishing
heat	used	to	encourage	browning	can	cause	delicate	fish	and	seafood	to	become
tough	and	dry.	(Salmon	has	plenty	of	fat	so	this	is	less	of	a	concern	with	this
fish.)	Because	of	this,	we	find	it	necessary	to	help	the	browning	along—just
turning	the	heat	up	or	prolonging	the	cooking	time	simply	isn’t	an	option.	We
want	the	benefits	that	the	Maillard	reaction	creates	(that	is,	more	flavor)	but	we
don’t	want	to	risk	ruining	the	fish	or	seafood	in	the	process.	We	found	that	sugar
and	butter	could	both	be	used	to	speed	up	the	browning	process.



SKILLET-ROASTED	FISH	FILLETS
SERVES	4

Thick	white	fish	fillets	with	a	meaty	texture,	like	halibut,	cod,	sea	bass,	or	red
snapper,	work	best	in	this	recipe.	If	your	fillets	happen	to	come	with	skin,	remove
it.	Because	most	fish	fillets	differ	in	thickness,	some	pieces	may	finish	cooking
before	others—be	sure	to	immediately	remove	any	fillet	that	reaches	140
degrees.	Serve	the	fish	with	lemon	wedges	or	the	relish	(recipe	follows).

4				 (6-to	8-ounce)	skinless	white	fish	fillets,	1	to	1½	inches	thick
					 Salt	and	pepper
½				 teaspoon	sugar
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
					 Lemon	wedges	or	relish	(recipe	follows)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.	Dry	fish
thoroughly	with	paper	towels	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Sprinkle	very
light	dusting	of	sugar	(about	1⁄8	teaspoon)	evenly	over	1	side	of	each	fillet.
2.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	ovensafe	nonstick	skillet	over	high	heat	until	smoking.

Place	fillets	in	skillet,	sugared	sides	down,	and	press	down	lightly	to	ensure	even
contact	with	pan.	Cook	until	browned,	1	to	1½	minutes.	Using	2	spatulas,	flip
fillets	and	transfer	skillet	to	oven.	Roast	fillets	until	centers	are	just	opaque	and
register	140	degrees,	7	to	10	minutes.	Immediately	transfer	to	serving	plates	and
serve	with	lemon	wedges,	or	relish	spooned	over	each	fillet.



ROASTED	RED	PEPPER,	HAZELNUT,	AND	THYME	RELISH
MAKES	ABOUT	1½	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	SKILLET-ROASTED	FISH	FILLETS

Rubbing	the	warm,	toasted	hazelnuts	in	a	kitchen	towel	is	an	easy	way	to	remove
their	skins.

½				 cup	hazelnuts,	toasted	and	skinned
½				 cup	jarred	roasted	red	peppers,	rinsed,	patted	dry,	and	chopped	coarse
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
½				 teaspoon	grated	lemon	zest	plus	4	teaspoons	juice
¼				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme
¼				 teaspoon	smoked	paprika
					 Salt	and	pepper

Pulse	hazelnuts,	roasted	peppers,	garlic,	and	lemon	zest	in	food	processor	until
finely	chopped,	10	to	12	pulses.	Transfer	to	bowl	and	stir	in	lemon	juice,	oil,
parsley,	thyme,	and	paprika.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
There	are	two	keys	to	cooking	thick	white	fish	fillets.	First,	a	little	sugar	speeds
the	browning,	thus	creating	more	flavor.	Second,	a	dual	cooking	method	(starting
on	the	stovetop	and	then	transferring	the	fish,	still	in	the	skillet,	to	the	oven)
ensures	even	cooking.
START	THICK	Pan-roasting	is	the	best	way	to	cook	fillets	that	are	at	least	1

inch	thick.	Thinner	fillets	can	be	cooked	through	on	the	stovetop.
SUGAR	JUST	ONE	SIDE	We	find	that	searing	one	side	of	the	fish	is

sufficient	to	develop	the	flavorful	compounds	associated	with	browning.	Searing
both	sides	of	the	fish	yields	tough,	dry	fillets.	Sprinkling	just	1⁄8	teaspoon	of	sugar
on	the	side	of	the	fish	that	is	going	to	be	seared	makes	a	noticeable	impact	on
browning	without	making	the	fish	taste	sweet.
LET	THE	OVEN	DO	THE	WORK	After	the	sugared	side	of	the	fish	is

seared	(this	will	take	just	60	to	90	seconds),	flip	the	fillets	over	and	put	the
skillet	in	a	425-degree	oven	to	finish	the	cooking	process.	(The	allover	heat	in
the	oven	does	a	better	job	of	cooking	the	fish	evenly	than	the	single-directional
heat	of	the	stovetop.)	Higher	oven	temperatures	will	dry	the	fish	out;	at	lower
temperatures	the	fish	won’t	brown	as	well.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE
SUGAR	JUMP-STARTS	BROWNING

Add	sugar	for	faster	browning	when	cooking	fish.

Fish	begins	to	contract	and	dry	out	when	its	internal	temperature	reaches	only	120	degrees	and	it	is	fully
cooked	at	140	degrees.	Beyond	this	temperature,	fish	becomes	dry	and	unpalatable.	While	the	exterior	of
the	fish	will	become	hotter	than	140	degrees,	it	won’t	really	approach	the	300	degrees	necessary	for	the
Maillard	reaction	to	occur.	Our	challenge,	then,	was	to	get	the	fish	to	achieve	flavorful	browning	at	a	lower
temperature.	Here’s	how	we	did	it:	When	sugar	(sucrose)	is	added	to	the	wet	surface	of	the	fish	and	is
exposed	to	the	heat	of	the	pan,	it	quickly	breaks	down	into	glucose	and	fructose.	Fructose	begins	to	rapidly
caramelize	at	around	200	degrees—a	temperature	the	exterior	of	the	fish	easily	reaches	within	a	minute	or
so	of	hitting	the	hot	pan.	Thus,	a	little	bit	of	sugar	sprinkled	on	a	fillet	will	lead	to	faster	browning,	helping
a	good	crust	to	form	before	the	interior	dries	out.

	
After	just	one	minute,	the	fillet	dusted	with	sugar	is	far	more	browned	than	the	fillet	without	it.



PAN-SEARED	SCALLOPS
SERVES	4

We	recommend	buying	“dry”	scallops,	those	without	chemical	additives.	Dry
scallops	will	look	ivory	or	pinkish	and	feel	tacky;	wet	scallops	look	bright	white
and	feel	slippery.	If	using	wet	scallops,	soak	them	in	a	solution	of	1	quart	of	cold
water,	¼	cup	of	lemon	juice,	and	2	tablespoons	of	salt	for	30	minutes	before	step
1,	and	do	not	season	with	salt	in	step	2.	To	remove	the	tendons	from	the	scallops,
simply	peel	away	the	small,	rough-textured	crescent-shaped	tendon	and	discard.
Serve	the	scallops	with	lemon	wedges	or	a	sauce	(recipes	follow).	Prepare	the
sauce,	if	serving,	while	the	scallops	dry	(between	steps	1	and	2)	and	keep	it
warm	while	cooking	them.

1½				 pounds	large	sea	scallops,	tendons	removed
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
					 Lemon	wedges	or	sauce	(recipes	follow)

1.	Place	scallops	on	rimmed	baking	sheet	lined	with	clean	kitchen	towel.	Place
second	clean	kitchen	towel	on	top	of	scallops	and	press	gently	on	towel	to	blot
liquid.	Let	scallops	sit	at	room	temperature	for	10	minutes	while	towels	absorb
moisture.
2.	Sprinkle	scallops	on	both	sides	with	salt	and	pepper.	Heat	1	tablespoon	oil

in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add	half	of	scallops
in	single	layer,	flat	side	down,	and	cook,	without	moving,	until	well	browned,
1½	to	2	minutes.
3.	Add	1	tablespoon	butter	to	skillet.	Using	tongs,	flip	scallops;	continue	to

cook,	using	large	spoon	to	baste	scallops	with	melted	butter	(tilt	skillet	so	butter
runs	to	1	side),	until	sides	of	scallops	are	firm	and	centers	are	opaque,	30	to	90
seconds	longer	(remove	smaller	scallops	as	they	finish	cooking).	Transfer
scallops	to	large	plate	and	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil.	Wipe	out	skillet	with
wad	of	paper	towels	and	repeat	cooking	with	remaining	oil,	scallops,	and	butter.
Serve	immediately	with	lemon	wedges	or	sauce.



GINGER	BUTTER	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	¾	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PAN-SEARED	SCALLOPS

The	richness	of	the	cream	and	butter	is	balanced	well	by	the	bolder	ingredients,
like	the	cayenne	and	white	wine	vinegar,	in	this	recipe.

½				 cup	dry	white	wine
2				 tablespoons	white	wine	vinegar
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 small	shallot,	minced
¼				 cup	heavy	cream
12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	12	pieces	and	chilled
½				 teaspoon	salt
					 Pinch	cayenne	pepper

Combine	wine,	vinegar,	ginger,	garlic,	and	shallot	in	small	saucepan	and	bring	to
boil	over	high	heat.	Lower	heat	to	medium-high	and	simmer	until	mixture	is
reduced	by	half,	about	5	minutes.	Add	cream	and	continue	to	simmer	until
mixture	is	reduced	by	half,	2	to	3	minutes	longer.	Strain	mixture	through	fine-
mesh	strainer	into	small	bowl;	wipe	out	saucepan.	Return	mixture	to	saucepan
set	over	medium	heat.	Whisk	in	2	pieces	of	butter	until	melted.	Continue	adding
butter,	2	pieces	at	a	time,	until	all	butter	has	been	incorporated.	Stir	in	salt	and
cayenne;	cover	and	keep	warm.



LEMON	BROWNED	BUTTER
MAKES	ABOUT	¼	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PAN-SEARED	SCALLOPS

Watch	the	butter	carefully,	as	it	can	go	from	brown	to	burnt	quickly.

4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	4	pieces
1				 small	shallot,	minced
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley
½				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme
2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
					 Salt	and	pepper

Heat	butter	in	small	saucepan	over	medium	heat	and	cook,	swirling	pan
constantly,	until	butter	turns	dark	golden	brown	and	has	nutty	aroma,	4	to	5
minutes.	Add	shallot	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Remove	pan
from	heat	and	stir	in	parsley,	thyme,	and	lemon	juice.	Season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste.	Cover	to	keep	warm.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
A	crisp,	browned	crust	is	the	hallmark	of	a	well-cooked	scallop.	In	restaurants,
they	use	powerful	stoves	and	prepare	just	a	few	scallops	at	a	time	(for	one
order).	At	home,	the	burner	output	is	weaker	and	you	want	to	cook	more	scallops
at	once	(at	least	enough	to	serve	two	people	in	each	batch).	We	found	that	butter
is	the	key	to	creating	a	flavorful	browned	crust	as	quickly	as	possible.
BUY	BIG	AND	DRY	It’s	much	easier	to	brown	big	scallops	(you	have	more

time	before	they	dry	out).	We	recommend	buying	scallops	that	weigh	at	least	an
ounce	each.	Also,	wicking	away	excess	moisture	with	towels	is	key.	We	found	it
helpful	to	sandwich	the	scallops	between	two	kitchen	towels	and	leave	them
there	for	10	minutes.	Purchasing	“dry”	scallops	that	haven’t	been	treated	with	a
chemical	solution	also	helps.	If	the	scallops	are	sitting	in	a	milky	white	solution,
they	are	“wet.”	The	chemical	solution	imparts	an	off-flavor	to	the	scallops	and
makes	it	harder	to	get	them	really	dry	for	sautéing.	If	you	can,	purchase	scallops
that	appear	sticky	and	dry—they	taste	better	and	will	be	easier	to	brown.	If	you
can’t	find	dry	scallops	in	local	markets,	we	recommend	soaking	wet	scallops
(see	Practical	Science	sidebar	on	this	page)	to	camouflage	the	off-flavor	the
chemical	solution	imparts.	Make	sure	to	blot	the	scallops	well	after	they	have
been	soaked	and	don’t	season	them	with	salt	before	cooking.	And	if	you	are
unsure	whether	your	scallops	are	wet	or	dry,	conduct	this	quick	test:	Place	one
scallop	on	a	paper	towel–lined,	microwave-safe	plate	and	microwave	on	high
power	for	15	seconds.	If	the	scallop	is	“dry,”	it	will	exude	very	little	water.	If	it
is	“wet,”	there	will	be	a	sizable	ring	of	moisture	on	the	paper	towel.	(The
microwaved	scallop	can	be	cooked	as	is.)
START	WITH	OIL,	ADD	BUTTER	Butter	contains	milk	proteins	and	the

reducing	sugar	lactose	that	can	enhance	the	Maillard	reaction.	We	found	that	if
we	used	butter	alone	to	cook	the	scallops,	it	actually	burned	by	the	time	the
scallops	were	done.	We	had	better	luck	when	we	heated	oil	in	the	pan,	added	the
scallops,	and	then	started	basting	them	with	butter	about	90	seconds	into	the
cooking	time.	Per	our	method,	the	scallops	are	flipped	and	continue	cooking	for
another	30	to	90	seconds—just	enough	time	for	the	butter	to	promote	browning
on	the	scallops	without	burning.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHY	SOME	SCALLOPS	SHOULD	BE	SOAKED

Mask	the	unpleasant	flavor	of	STPP-treated	scallops	with	lemon.

So-called	wet	scallops	have	been	treated	with	sodium	tripolyphosphate	(STPP),	which	lends	a	disagreeable
flavor.	The	scallops	treated	with	STPP	also	contain	much	more	moisture	(that’s	the	purpose	of	soaking	the
scallops	in	STPP	and	water—to	add	weight	and	“value”	for	the	retailer).	As	a	result,	wet	scallops	tend	to
steam	when	cooked	rather	than	brown.	Could	we	get	rid	of	the	STPP	by	soaking	the	scallops	in	water?

We	prepared	three	batches	of	wet	scallops,	soaking	the	first	in	a	quart	of	water	for	30	minutes,	soaking
the	second	for	an	hour,	and	leaving	the	third	untreated.	We	then	cooked	each	batch	according	to	our	recipe
and	sent	them	to	a	lab	to	be	analyzed	for	STPP	content.

The	scallops	soaked	for	30	minutes	had	only	about	10	percent	less	STPP	than	the	untreated	batch,	and
soaking	for	a	full	hour	wasn’t	much	better:	Only	about	11	percent	of	the	STPP	was	removed.	Tasters	were
still	able	to	clearly	identify	an	unpleasant	chemical	flavor	in	both	soaked	samples.

It	turns	out	that	the	phosphates	in	STPP	form	a	chemical	bond	with	the	proteins	in	scallops.	The	bonds
are	so	strong	that	they	prevent	the	STPP	from	being	washed	away,	no	matter	how	long	the	scallops	are
soaked.	So,	rather	than	try	to	remove	the	chemical	taste	from	STPP-treated	scallops,	we	masked	it	by
soaking	them	in	a	solution	of	lemon	juice,	water,	and	salt	for	30	minutes.



	
CHEMICAL	COVER-UP

A	lemon-flavored	brine	camouflages	the	off-taste	of	wet	scallops.



FISH	101
STRUCTURE
The	structure	of	fish	is	very	different	from	that	of	meat	or	poultry:	shorter	muscle	fibers,	delicate	connective
tissue,	and	fat	that	is	rich	in	unsaturated	fatty	acids.	This	combination	makes	fish	more	flaky	and	tender;	it’s
important	not	to	overcook	it.



	



MUSCLE	FIBERS
Why	is	meat	so	dense	and	fish	so	flaky?	It	has	to	do	with	the	differences	in	the	fibers	of	their	flesh.	Muscle
fibers	in	meat	are	long	and	very	thin—they	can	be	as	much	as	10	centimeters	in	length.	Fish,	on	the	other
hand,	is	constructed	of	very	short	bundles,	up	to	10	times	shorter	than	the	long	muscle	fibers	in	meat.	This
is	why	fish	tends	to	flake—it	is	the	flesh	separating	into	its	short	fibers.

SKIN
Fish	skin	is	thick	and	often	rich—filled	with	connective	tissue	and	fat.	It	is	often	covered	with	scales,	a
strong	layer	of	protection,	which	vary	in	size	and	thickness,	and	are	composed	of	the	same	form	of	calcium
carbonate	as	mammals’	teeth.

CONNECTIVE	TISSUE
The	connective	tissue	in	fish	is	also	quite	different	from	that	in	meat.	Compared	with	meat,	fish	muscle
contains	only	a	small	fraction	of	connective	tissue.	Rather	than	running	parallel	with	the	muscle	fibers,	the
small	amount	of	connective	tissue	in	fish	sits	in	very	thin	sheets	perpendicular	to	the	muscle	bundles.	Fish
collagen	is	much	more	fragile	and	much	more	easily	converted	to	gelatin	than	that	in	meat.	The	connective
tissue	in	most	fish	breaks	down	to	gelatin	at	only	120	to	130	degrees.	This,	plus	those	short	muscle	fibers,
explains	why	fish	is	always	tender.

Because	fish	has	almost	no	collagen,	it	never	benefits	from	long	cooking.	In	fact,	many	fish	are	delicious
raw	or	lightly	cooked.	In	any	case,	fish	should	never	be	cooked	beyond	140	degrees.

FAT
Surprisingly,	oily	fish	like	salmon	contain	about	the	same	amount	of	fat	per	pound	as	ice	cream.	Good
news:	This	fat	is	good	for	you.	The	fat	in	salmon—and	all	fish	with	dark	flesh	and	a	high	oil	content,	such
as	mackerel,	tuna,	and	anchovies—contains	omega-3	fatty	acids,	which	our	bodies	need	to	function
properly.	Because	our	bodies	can’t	manufacture	them,	we	have	to	get	them	from	the	food	we	eat.	And	some
of	the	best	sources	of	preformed	omega-3s	are	fish	and	seafood.

BONES
Fish	bones	are	delicate	and	distinctive,	often	consisting	of	a	backbone	and	ribcage,	with	either	bones
leading	out	into	fins,	or	many	small	pin	bones	supporting	the	connective	tissue.	Small	bones	in	the	flesh
distract	from	the	eating	experience	and	are	therefore	best	removed	before	cooking.	However,	cooking	a
whole	fish	on	the	bone	can	boost	flavor	and	moisture.

BUYING
Whether	it’s	a	specialty	seafood	shop	or	a	neighborhood	supermarket,	make	sure	the	source	is	one	with	a
high	volume.	High	volume	means	high	turnover,	which	ensures	freshness.	The	store	should	smell	like	the
sea,	not	fishy	or	sour.

The	fish	should	be	stored	on	ice	or	well	refrigerated.	If	stored	on	ice,	the	fish	shouldn’t	be	sitting	in
water.

The	flesh	of	fish	should	appear	moist	and	shiny,	not	dull,	and	with	even	coloring.	It	should	feel	firm,	not
mushy.	If	possible,	ask	the	fishmonger	to	press	the	flesh	with	a	finger	to	confirm	its	texture.

Try	to	have	the	fishmonger	slice	steaks	or	fillets	to	order;	it’s	best	to	avoid	precut.

FREEZING	FISH
How	do	the	individually	frozen	fish	from	the	freezer	section	compare	to	fresh	fish	sold	at	the	fish	counter?
We	gathered	every	type	and	brand	of	frozen	fish	we	could	find,	defrosted	them,	and	compared	them	to	fresh
fish.	We	found	that	doing	a	“quick	thaw”	by	leaving	the	vacuum-sealed	bags	under	cool	running	tap	water
for	30	minutes	produced	results	identical	to	an	overnight	thaw	in	the	refrigerator.	We	figured	fresh	fish
would	win	by	a	landslide	but	found	that	with	delicate,	thin	types	of	fish,	like	flounder	or	sole,	it	was	almost
impossible	to	tell	the	difference	between	fresh	and	frozen	once	cooked.	(Be	sure	to	thoroughly	dry	the	fish



before	cooking.)	For	firm	types	of	fish,	like	halibut,	snapper,	tilapia,	and	salmon,	frozen	versions	were	great
when	cooked	beyond	medium-rare.	Cooked	any	less,	they	were	dry	and	stringy.	We	don’t	recommend
freezing	cod,	haddock,	sea	bass,	tuna,	or	swordfish.

STORAGE
Fish	stored	at	32	degrees	will	keep	twice	as	long	as	fish	stored	at	the	typical	home	refrigerator	temperature
of	40	degrees.	To	create	the	optimum	storage	conditions,	place	fish	in	a	zipper-lock	bag	on	ice	(or	cover
with	ice	packs)	and	store	it	at	the	back	of	the	refrigerator,	where	it’s	coldest.	And	remember	to	chill	the	fish
immediately	upon	getting	it	home.	If	you	live	in	a	warm	climate,	you	should	consider	keeping	a	cooler	in
your	car	trunk	for	transporting	fish.

JUDGING	DONENESS
An	instant-read	thermometer	is	a	useful	tool	to	check	doneness	in	thick	fillets,	but	with	thin	fillets	you	have
to	resort	to	a	more	primitive	test—nicking	the	fish	with	a	paring	knife	and	then	peeking	into	the	interior	to
judge	color	and	flakiness.	White	fish,	such	as	cod,	should	be	cooked	to	medium	(140	degrees)—the	flesh
should	be	opaque	but	still	moist	and	just	beginning	to	flake;	salmon	is	best	cooked	to	medium-rare	(125
degrees)	with	the	center	still	translucent;	and	tuna	is	best	when	rare	(110	degrees),	with	only	the	outer	layer
opaque	and	the	rest	of	the	fish	translucent.

ENSURING	EVEN	COOKING
Fish	fillets	often	come	in	odd-size	pieces	of	uneven	thickness.	If	your	fillet	has	a	thin,	wide	tailpiece,	tuck	it
under	before	cooking	to	allow	it	to	cook	at	the	same	rate	as	the	thicker	portion.



CONCEPT	3

Resting	Meat	Maximizes	Juiciness
We’ve	all	had	the	impulse	to	slice	and	serve	a	piece	of	meat	the	second	it	exits
the	oven.	After	all,	the	internal	temperature	is	just	right.	It	looks	beautiful.	Why
not?	But	as	we’ve	learned,	heat	causes	a	rapid	exodus	of	water	molecules	from	a
piece	of	cooking	meat	and	this	can	result	in	a	dry,	leathery	texture.	Resting,
however,	is	an	indispensable	technique	when	it	comes	to	maintaining	maximum
juiciness.	Let’s	find	out	why.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Meat	is	mostly	water.	In	fact,	raw	beef	is	about	75	percent	water	(the	exact
amount	varies	from	cut	to	cut).	The	rest	is	protein	and	fat.	Most	of	this	water	is
referred	to	as	“bound	water”	because	the	proteins	in	the	meat	trap	the	water
molecules	inside.	As	a	result,	a	piece	of	raw	beef	will	not	shed	liquid	when	you
cut	it	up.	However,	if	you	slice	into	a	just-cooked	steak,	suddenly	a	flood	of
juices	will	cover	the	cutting	board.	What’s	happening?
The	protein	that	makes	up	muscle	tissue	in	raw	meat	is	similar	to	many

bundles	of	wire,	each	surrounded	by	a	covering	of	connective	tissue.	Each	wire
represents	a	single	muscle	cell	called	a	muscle	fiber.	These	fibers	are	made	of
many	smaller	structures	called	myofibrils,	which	in	turn	are	made	of	protein
molecules	called	actin	and	myosin.	When	red	meat	(as	well	as	poultry)	is	heated,
the	linear	protein	molecules	begin	to	chemically	bond	with	each	other,	causing
them	to	compress	and	contract,	first	in	diameter	and	then	in	length.	A	single
muscle	fiber	can	shrink	to	as	little	as	half	of	its	original	volume	during	the
cooking	process.	When	these	proteins	contract,	they	squeeze	out	part	of	the
liquid	trapped	within	their	structures,	which	then	moves	into	the	spaces	created
between	the	shrinking	myofibrils.
The	process	of	muscle	contraction	explains	why	experienced	chefs	can

determine	the	doneness	of	meat	by	pushing	on	it	and	judging	the	amount	of
resistance.	The	firmer	the	meat,	the	more	shrinkage	has	occurred	and	the	more
cooked	the	meat	will	be.	But	the	contraction	process	is	at	least	partly	reversible.
If	you	allow	cooked	meat	to	rest,	the	proteins	will	relax,	allowing	some	of	the
expelled	moisture	to	move	back	in.
But	back	in	where?	Some	of	the	proteins	are	doing	more	than	shrinking	when

heated—they	are	dissolving.	Resting	allows	the	contracted	proteins	to	relax	and
draw	moisture	back	in	where	it	is	held	by	the	dissolved	proteins.	As	a	result,
rested	meat	will	be	able	to	hold	on	to	more	of	its	natural	juices,	making	the	meat
seem	less	dry	and	more	tender.



CROSS-SECTIONS	OF	A	MUSCLE	FIBER



	
RAW	In	raw	meat,	the	majority	of	water	is	stored	within	individual	muscle	myofibrils.



	
JUST	COOKED	With	intense	heat,	the	water	is	squeezed	out	of	the	myofibrils	into	the	spaces	between.



	
RESTED	While	resting,	some	of	the	expelled	water	is	reabsorbed	by	the	relaxing	myofibrils	and	fills	the



spaces	once	occupied	by	now-dissolved	proteins.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	effects	of	resting,	we	roasted	five	boneless	pork	loins,	each
weighing	about	3.7	pounds,	in	a	400-degree	oven	until	the	internal	temperature
reached	140	degrees.	One	roast	was	cut	crosswise	into	½-inch-thick	slices	as
soon	as	it	came	out	of	the	oven.	The	other	four	roasts	were	tented	with	foil	and
allowed	to	rest	for	10,	20,	30,	and	40	minutes,	respectively,	before	slicing.	We
collected	any	juices	that	accumulated	during	the	resting	period	and	separated
them	from	juices	that	were	lost	during	slicing.	We	repeated	the	experiment	two
more	times	and	averaged	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
The	roasts	that	we	sliced	immediately	after	cooking	shed	an	average	of	10
tablespoons	of	liquid,	both	on	the	cutting	board	and	on	our	serving	platter.	In
contrast,	the	roasts	that	we	allowed	to	rest	for	10	minutes	before	carving	shed	an
average	of	just	4	tablespoons	of	liquid.	That’s	a	60	percent	decrease	in	moisture
loss	by	waiting	10	minutes	to	slice.	The	numbers	continued	to	improve	with
extended	resting	time;	the	roasts	that	rested	for	20,	30,	and	40	minutes	lost	2½
tablespoons,	1	tablespoon,	and	2	teaspoons	of	juice,	respectively.
Tasters	described	the	roasts	that	had	rested	for	at	least	10	minutes	as	juicier

and	more	tender,	while	the	roasts	sliced	without	resting	were	described	as	drier
and	tougher.	Tasters	could	tell	very	little	difference	between	roasts	rested	for	30
and	40	minutes.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Resting	helps	meat	hold	on	to	moisture	but	there	are	a	couple	of	caveats.	While	a
longer	resting	time	means	more	moisture	reabsorption,	the	difference	might	not
be	significant	enough	to	warrant	the	added	time.	For	example,	our	40-minute
rested	roasts	retained	a	mere	teaspoon	more	juices	than	the	30-minute	roasts.
The	most	dramatic	decrease	in	moisture	loss	happens	during	the	first	10	minutes
of	rest.	The	trick	is	to	determine	the	optimal	resting	time.
The	first	consideration	is	the	size	of	meat.	While	a	big	roast	will	still	be	hot

after	a	30-minute	rest,	a	thin	steak	will	be	cold.	Meat	generally	tastes	best	when
it’s	above	100	degrees,	so	that	limits	how	long	to	let	meat	rest.
The	second	factor	to	consider	is	cooking	method.	Two	pieces	of	meat	can	be

cooked	to	the	same	internal	temperature	while	the	surface	temperature	varies
greatly.	The	more	heat	applied	the	bigger	the	difference	between	the	two.	As	a
result,	meat	cooked	over	high	heat	tends	to	benefit	from	a	slightly	longer	resting
period.	The	proteins	at	the	surface	are	very	hot	and	need	more	time	to	cool
down,	grabbing	any	available	moisture	that	was	not	lost	by	evaporation.



SUGGESTED	RESTING	TIMES	FOR	MEAT
Here	are	some	suggested	resting	times	for	various	cuts	of	meat	and	poultry.	Find	the	correct	category	for	the
cut	you’re	preparing	and	then	choose	the	shorter	or	longer	time	based	on	the	cut’s	relative	size.	For
instance,	rest	a	small	2-pound	beef	tenderloin	roast	for	15	minutes	but	allow	the	full	30	minutes	for	a	big
prime	rib.

BEEF
Steaks:	5	to	10	minutes
Roasts:	15	to	30	minutes

LAMB
Chops:	5	to	10	minutes
Roasts:	15	to	30	minutes

PORK
Chops:	5	to	10	minutes
Tenderloin:	10	minutes
Roasts:	15	to	30	minutes

CHICKEN
Parts:	5	to	10	minutes
Whole:	15	to	20	minutes

TURKEY
Parts:	20	minutes
Roasts:	30	to	40	minutes



JUICES	LOST	WHEN	ROASTS	ARE	SLICED	AFTER	COOKING

	
SLICED	IMMEDIATELY



	
RESTED	10	MINUTES



	
RESTED	20	MINUTES

	



RESTED	30	MINUTES

	
RESTED	40	MINUTES



RESTING	AT	WORK	
MEAT
The	principle	is	the	same	across	thousands	of	recipes:	Meat	and	poultry	should
rest	after	cooking	and	before	slicing	or	carving.	This	applies	to	any	steak,	chop,
roast,	or	bird	that	has	been	roasted,	grilled,	broiled,	or	sautéed.	We’ve	chosen
several	simple	recipes	to	illustrate	this	concept	but	resting	is	also	a	key	step	in
the	following	recipes:	Prime	Rib,	Roast	Salted	Turkey,	and	Roast	Beef
Tenderloin.



GRILLED	FLANK	STEAK	WITH	SPICE	RUB
SERVES	4	TO	6

Flank	steak	is	best	when	cooked	medium-rare,	or	medium	at	most.	It	is	very
important	for	the	meat	to	rest	after	it	comes	off	the	grill.

2				 tablespoons	ground	cumin
2				 tablespoons	chili	powder
1				 tablespoon	ground	coriander
1				 tablespoon	kosher	salt	or	1½	teaspoons	table	salt
2				 teaspoons	pepper
½				 teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
1				 (2½-pound)	flank	steak,	trimmed

1A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light
large	chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals
are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Set	cooking	grate	in
place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5	minutes.
1B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.
2.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Combine	spices	and	salt	in	a	small	bowl.	Pat

steak	dry	with	paper	towels	and	rub	all	over	with	spice	mixture.	Place	steak
directly	on	grill	(hot	side	if	using	charcoal)	and	cook	(covered	if	using	gas)	until
well	browned	on	first	side,	4	to	7	minutes.	Flip	steak	and	continue	to	cook	until
meat	registers	120	to	125	degrees	(for	medium-rare)	or	130	to	135	degrees	(for
medium),	3	to	8	minutes.	If	necessary,	slide	steak	to	cooler	part	of	grill	(or	lower
heat	on	gas	grill)	to	prevent	spice	rub	from	burning.
3.	Transfer	steak	to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let	rest

for	10	minutes.	Slice	steak	against	grain	on	bias	into	¼-inch-thick	slices.	Season
with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Flank	steak	is	a	lean,	relatively	inexpensive	cut,	making	it	perfect	for	a	quick
weeknight	dinner.	However,	flank	steak	can	be	tough	if	not	handled	correctly.
What’s	the	key	to	perfect	flank	steak?	Not	overcooking	the	meat,	giving	it	a	good
rest,	and	slicing	it	properly.
RUB	IN	FLAVOR	Marinades	take	time	to	work	and	all	that	liquid	can	slow

down	the	browning	process—which	is	an	issue	for	such	a	thin	steak	that	cooks
quickly.	We	like	the	speed	and	ease	of	a	spice	rub.	It	flavors	the	steak	instantly
and	helps	create	a	really	good	crust	on	the	steak	when	grilled.	We’ve	chosen	a
basic	rub	with	Latin-inspired	flavor	but	the	basic	formula	can	be	varied
endlessly.	For	fajitas	(recipe	follows),	we	lose	the	spice	rub	and	simply	season
the	steak	with	salt,	pepper,	and	some	fresh	lime	juice.
GIVE	IT	A	REST	Once	the	steak	is	done,	transfer	it	to	a	cutting	board,	cover

it	loosely	with	foil	(so	it	doesn’t	cool	down	excessively),	and	wait.	Set	a	timer
and	come	back	10	minutes	later	to	start	the	slicing	process.	If	you	like,	use	the
time	to	grill	some	vegetables	to	accompany	the	steak.
SLICE	IT	RIGHT	It’s	important	to	slice	the	meat	against	the	grain.	On	a

flank	steak,	the	grain	runs	from	one	rounded	end	to	the	other	end,	so	you	should
slice	across	this	steak.	Slicing	the	meat	across	the	grain	shortens	the	long	muscle
fibers	and	diminishes	chewiness	in	this	cut.	Cutting	the	meat	into	thin	slices
(about	¼	inch	thick)	also	helps.	Finally,	angle	the	knife	a	bit	to	make	each	cut	on
the	bias.	Ideally,	you	will	be	holding	the	knife	so	that	the	blade	forms	a	45-
degree	angle	with	the	cutting	board.	This	technique	produces	wider,	more
attractive	slices	and	likewise	diminishes	chewiness.



GRILLED	BEEF	FAJITAS
SERVES	4	TO	6

Flank	steak	is	best	when	cooked	medium-rare,	or	medium	at	most.	It	is	also	very
important	for	the	meat	to	rest	after	it	comes	off	the	grill.	Use	the	time	while	the
steak	rests	to	grill	the	vegetables	and	warm	the	tortillas	for	this	Tex-Mex	classic.
Serve	with	Fresh	Guacamole	(recipe	follows),	your	favorite	salsa,	and/or	sour
cream.

1				 (2-to	2½-pound)	flank	steak,	trimmed
					 Salt	and	pepper
¼				 cup	lime	juice	(2	limes)
1				 large	red	onion,	peeled	and	cut	into	½-inch-thick	rounds	(do	not	separate	rings)
2				 large	red	or	green	bell	peppers,	cored,	seeded,	and	cut	into	wedges

8–12				 (6-inch)	flour	tortillas

1A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light
large	chimney	starter	mounded	with	charcoal	briquettes	(7	quarts).	When	top
coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Set	cooking
grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5
minutes.
1B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.
2.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Pat	steak	dry	with	paper	towels	and	sprinkle

with	lime	juice,	salt,	and	pepper.	Place	steak	on	grill	(hot	side	if	using	charcoal)
and	cook	(covered	if	using	gas)	until	well	browned	on	first	side,	4	to	7	minutes.
Flip	steak	and	continue	to	cook	until	meat	registers	120	to	125	degrees	(for
medium-rare)	or	130	to	135	degrees	(for	medium),	3	to	8	minutes.	Transfer	steak
to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let	rest	for	10	minutes.
3.	While	steak	rests,	place	onion	rounds	and	peppers	(skin	side	down)	on	hot

side	of	grill	(if	using	charcoal)	or	turn	all	burners	to	medium	(if	using	gas).	Cook
until	tender	and	charred	on	both	sides,	8	to	12	minutes,	flipping	every	3	minutes.
Transfer	onions	and	peppers	to	cutting	board	with	beef.
4.	Place	tortillas	in	single	layer	on	hot	side	of	grill	(if	using	charcoal)	or	turn

all	burners	to	low	(if	using	gas).	Cook	until	warm	and	lightly	browned,	about	20



seconds	per	side	(do	not	grill	too	long	or	tortillas	will	become	brittle).	As
tortillas	are	done,	wrap	them	in	kitchen	towel	or	large	sheet	of	foil.
5.	Separate	onion	into	rings	and	slice	bell	peppers	into	¼-inch	strips.	Slice

steak	against	grain	on	bias	into	¼-inch-thick	slices.	Transfer	beef	and	vegetables
to	serving	platter	and	serve	with	warm	tortillas.



FRESH	GUACAMOLE
MAKES	ABOUT	1½	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	GRILLED	BEEF	FAJITAS

The	best	guacamole	recipe	is	a	simple	mixture	of	avocado,	onion,	garlic,	chile,
cilantro,	and	lime	juice.	For	a	pleasing	texture,	we	mash	some	of	the	avocado
while	keeping	the	rest	chunky.

2				 small	avocados
1				 tablespoon	minced	red	onion
1				 small	garlic	clove,	minced
½				 small	jalapeño	chile,	minced
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	cilantro
					 Salt
1				 tablespoon	lime	juice

1.	Halve	1	avocado,	remove	pit,	and	scoop	flesh	into	medium	bowl.	Using
fork,	mash	lightly	with	onion,	garlic,	jalapeño,	cilantro,	and	1⁄8	teaspoon	salt	until
just	combined.
2.	Halve	and	pit	remaining	avocado.	Using	dinner	knife,	carefully	make	½-

inch	crosshatch	incisions	in	flesh,	cutting	down	to	but	not	through	skin.	Using
soup	spoon,	gently	scoop	flesh	from	skin;	transfer	to	bowl	with	mashed	avocado
mixture.	Sprinkle	lime	juice	over	and	mix	lightly	with	fork	until	combined	but
still	chunky.	Adjust	seasoning	with	salt,	if	necessary,	and	serve.	(Guacamole	can
be	covered	with	plastic	wrap,	pressed	directly	onto	surface	of	mixture,	and
refrigerated	for	up	to	1	day.	Return	guacamole	to	room	temperature,	removing
plastic	wrap	just	before	serving.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Though	fajitas	can	be	made	with	skirt	steak,	we	prefer	flank,	which	is	incredibly
tender	when	sliced	thin	and	across	the	grain.	As	in	our	Grilled	Flank	Steak	with
Spice	Rub	recipe,	it’s	imperative	to	let	the	meat	rest	after	removing	it	from	the
grill—whether	you	spice	it	up	or	not.
AVOCADO	EXTRACTION	A	key	step	in	making	fresh	guacamole	is

removing	the	avocado	flesh	and	dicing	it	without	making	a	huge	mess.	To	do
this,	first	we	slice	the	avocado	in	half	lengthwise	and	remove	the	pit.	Then	we
use	a	dish	towel	to	hold	it	steady,	making	½-inch	crosshatch	incisions	in	the
flesh	with	a	dinner	knife,	cutting	down	to	but	not	through	the	skin.	Separate	the
diced	flesh	from	the	skin	using	a	spoon	inserted	between	the	skin	and	flesh,
gently	scooping	out	avocado	cubes.



MAPLE-GLAZED	PORK	ROAST
SERVES	4	TO	6

In	this	recipe,	the	roast	is	coated	with	a	sticky	maple	glaze	as	it	rests.	As	the
meat	and	glaze	cool,	the	glaze	will	solidify	a	bit	and	create	a	burnished	exterior
on	this	simple	roast.	This	dish	is	unapologetically	sweet,	so	serve	it	with	side
dishes	that	take	well	to	sweetness,	such	as	garlicky	sautéed	greens,	braised
cabbage,	or	creamy	polenta.

½				 cup	maple	syrup,	preferably	grade	B
				1⁄8 teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
					 Pinch	ground	cloves
					 Pinch	cayenne	pepper
1				 (2½-pound)	boneless	blade-end	pork	loin	roast,	tied	at	even	intervals	along	length	with	5	pieces

butcher’s	twine
¾				 teaspoon	salt
½				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 teaspoons	vegetable	oil

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Stir
maple	syrup,	cinnamon,	cloves,	and	cayenne	together	in	measuring	cup	or	small
bowl;	set	aside.	Pat	roast	dry	with	paper	towels,	then	sprinkle	evenly	with	salt
and	pepper.
2.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	ovensafe	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	just

beginning	to	smoke.	Place	roast	fat	side	down	in	skillet	and	cook	until	well
browned	on	all	sides,	7	to	10	minutes,	using	tongs	to	turn	roast.	Transfer	roast	to
large	plate.
3.	Reduce	heat	to	medium	and	pour	off	fat	from	skillet.	Add	maple	syrup

mixture	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds	(syrup	will	bubble
immediately).	Off	heat,	return	roast	to	skillet.	Using	tongs,	roll	to	coat	roast	with
glaze	on	all	sides.
4.	Place	skillet	in	oven	and	roast	until	center	of	roast	registers	140	degrees,	35

to	45	minutes,	using	tongs	to	roll	and	spin	roast	to	coat	with	glaze	twice	during
roasting	time.
5.	Using	potholder	(handle	will	be	scorching	hot),	remove	skillet	from	oven.



Transfer	roast	to	carving	board	and	set	skillet	aside	to	cool	slightly	to	thicken
glaze,	about	5	minutes.	Being	careful	of	hot	handle,	pour	glaze	over	roast	and	let
rest	for	15	minutes	longer.	Snip	twine	off	roast,	cut	into	½-inch	slices,	and	serve
immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Pork	loin	has	very	little	fat	and	can	be	tough	and	dry	if	overcooked.	The	long
resting	time	in	this	recipe	ensures	that	the	roast	holds	on	to	as	much	juice	as
possible	while	gently	coming	up	to	its	final	temperature	of	150	degrees.	(For
more	on	the	phenomenon	of	carryover	cooking,	see	concept	4.)
USE	NATURAL	PORK	Due	to	market	demands,	today’s	pork	is	bred	to	be

50	percent	leaner	than	its	counterpart	in	the	1950s	and	less	fat	means	less	flavor
and	moisture.	The	industry	has	addressed	this	issue	by	introducing	a	product
called	“enhanced	pork”—meat	injected	with	a	solution	of	water,	salt,	and	sodium
phosphate.	The	idea	is	to	both	season	the	pork	and	prevent	it	from	drying	out.
(The	sodium	phosphate	increases	the	pH	of	the	meat,	which	improves	its	water-
retention	abilities.)	More	than	half	of	the	fresh	pork	sold	in	supermarkets	is	now
enhanced.
We’ve	conducted	countless	tests	comparing	enhanced	pork	against	natural

pork	and	unilaterally	prefer	the	latter.	Natural	pork	has	a	better	flavor	and	if
cooked	correctly,	moisture	isn’t	an	issue.	Also,	we’ve	found	that	enhanced	pork
often	gives	up	much	of	the	moisture	added	during	the	manufacturing	process
when	the	roast	is	sliced.	In	fact,	in	our	tests	with	pork	loins,	enhanced	roasts
shed	50	percent	more	juices	during	slicing	than	natural	roasts.
Manufacturers	don’t	use	the	terms	“enhanced”	or	“natural”	on	package	labels,

but	if	the	pork	has	been	enhanced	it	will	have	an	ingredient	list.	Natural	pork
contains	just	pork	and	won’t	have	an	ingredient	list.
Note	that	brining	(see	concept	11)	can	be	a	good	option	for	natural	pork	in

recipes	where	the	pork	can	dry	out.	While	natural	pork	sometimes	benefits	from
brining,	enhanced	pork	should	never	be	brined;	it’s	already	pretty	salty.	In	this
recipe,	the	maple	glaze	keeps	the	pork	plenty	moist	and	there’s	no	need	to	brine
the	meat.
TIE	IT	UP	Straight	from	the	supermarket	packaging,	most	pork	loins	will	lie

flat	in	the	pan	and	cook	unevenly.	Tying	the	roast	not	only	yields	more	attractive
slices	but	also	ensures	that	the	roast	will	have	the	same	thickness	from	end	to
end	so	that	it	cooks	evenly.	We	like	cotton	or	linen	kitchen	twine	sold	in	most
supermarkets,	usually	near	the	disposable	baking	pans.
PICK	THE	RIGHT	MAPLE	Don’t	bother	making	this	recipe	with	pancake

syrup;	only	real	maple	syrup	will	do.	The	flavor	of	grade	B	maple	syrup
(sometimes	called	“cooking	maple”)	is	stronger	and	richer	than	grade	A,	but
either	will	work	in	this	recipe.



NONSTICK	OR	NOT?	A	nonstick	pan	will	be	easier	to	clean,	but	this	recipe
can	be	tough	on	delicate	nonstick	surfaces.	If	using	a	traditional	pan,	let	the	pan
cool	completely	and	then	bring	a	cup	or	two	of	water	to	a	boil	in	the	pan.	The
boiling	water	will	loosen	the	glaze	and	make	cleaning	a	snap.	If	using	a	nonstick
pan,	make	sure	to	use	tongs	with	nonstick-friendly	nylon	tips.
HANDLE	WITH	CARE	It’s	very	economical	to	use	the	same	pan	to	sear

and	cook	the	roast.	However,	the	skillet	will	emerge	from	the	oven	with	a
scorching-hot	handle.	Make	sure	to	use	a	very	reliable	oven	mitt	and	consider
leaving	the	mitt	on	the	handle	to	remind	yourself	(and	others	in	the	kitchen)	that
the	handle	won’t	be	safe	to	touch	with	bare	hands	for	quite	a	while.
	



MEAT	101

	

STRUCTURE
What	we	call	meat	is	actually	muscle,	taken	from	various	parts	of	an	animal.	Whether	it	comes	from	a	cow,
pig,	or	lamb,	meat	consists	primarily	of	muscle	fibers,	water,	connective	tissue,	and	fat.



MUSCLE	FIBER
Each	muscle	contains	thousands	and	thousands	of	individual	muscle	fibers	that	are	very	thin	(even	finer
than	human	hair)	and	often	several	inches	long.	Each	fiber	is	a	single	muscle	cell	composed	of	smaller	units
called	myofibrils.	The	primary	proteins	in	muscle	fibers	are	called	actin	and	myosin.	Individual	fibers	are
bundled	together	and	wrapped	in	connective	tissue—these	are	the	thin	strands	visible	as	the	“grain”	in	many
cuts	of	meat.

CONNECTIVE	TISSUE
Bundles	of	muscle	fibers	are	wrapped	in	a	membranous,	translucent	film	of	protein	that	gives	them	structure
and	support.	This	thin,	silvery	film	(which	you	can	easily	see	when	butchering	a	chuck	roast	or	other	cut
with	multiple	muscles)	also	attaches	muscles	to	the	bone.	Connective	tissue	is	composed	primarily	of
collagen,	a	sturdy	protein	that	is	quite	tough	to	chew.	Cuts	from	muscles	that	aren’t	used	for	mobility,	such
as	the	midsection,	have	very	little	collagen;	however,	muscles	in	the	shoulder	and	hip	area	are	filled	with
connective	tissue,	which	must	be	broken	down	through	prolonged	cooking	to	make	these	cuts	palatable.

WATER
Muscle	fibers	are	saturated	with	water	molecules.	Lean	meat	is	generally	tender	because	of	its	high	water
content.	(Most	cuts	contain	about	75	percent	water.)	Most	of	the	water	is	contained	within	the	myofibrils
that	make	up	a	single	muscle	cell.	The	remaining	water	is	found	in	the	spaces	between	individual	muscle
fibers.	This	water	is	especially	prone	to	being	lost	when	meat	is	cooked.

FAT
Fat	is	produced	and	stored	in	a	specialized	form	of	connective	tissue	called	adipose	cells;	the	job	of	these
cells	is	to	store	energy.	There	are	two	types	of	fat	in	most	animals—the	thick	layer	of	fat	that	surrounds	the
muscles	and	the	thin	filaments	that	run	through	the	muscles.	The	thick	layer	of	fat	that	surrounds	a	steak,	for
instance,	is	generally	removed	during	the	butchering	process	so	that	only	¼	to	½	inch	remains.	The	thin
filaments	of	fat	that	run	through	the	meat	are	called	marbling	and	are	a	key	factor	in	determining	the	flavor
and	perceived	juiciness	of	a	particular	cut.

BUYING
For	information	on	labeling	and	the	purchase	of	various	cuts	of	beef	and	pork,	see	“Shopping	for	Beef	101”
and	“Shopping	for	Pork	101.”

SAFETY
There	are	two	areas	of	concern	when	it	comes	to	safely	preparing	meat:	preventing	cross-contamination	that
can	occur	before	cooking	(that	is,	transferring	bacteria	in	meat	to	fruit,	vegetables,	or	other	foods	that	are
not	cooked)	and	proper	cooking	to	kill	any	bacteria	that	may	be	present	in	the	meat.

SAFER	HANDLING	Don’t	rinse	meat	before	cooking.	You	aren’t	killing	any	bacteria	and	you	may	be
spreading	bacteria	around	your	kitchen.	To	season	meat	without	contaminating	the	salt	box	or	pepper	mill,
mix	a	small	amount	of	salt	and	pepper	together	in	a	small	bowl	and	use	this	mixture	to	season	the	meat;
discard	any	leftovers	when	you’re	done.	After	working	with	raw	meat,	wash	all	cutting	boards,	knives,
kitchen	surfaces,	and	your	hands	in	hot,	soapy	water.

SAFER	COOKING	If	safety	were	the	only	concern,	you	would	cook	all	meat	until	well-done,	or	160
degrees.	Unfortunately,	most	cuts	of	meat	are	not	very	palatable	when	cooked	this	way.	The	risk	of	food-
borne	illness	from	steaks,	roasts,	and	chops	is	fairly	low	because	any	bacteria	present	are	located	on	the
surface	where	the	temperature	will	reach	160	degrees	even	if	the	internal	temperature	doesn’t.	Ground	meat
represents	a	much	greater	risk,	especially	if	it	is	ground	at	a	large	beef	processing	facility.	In	that	case,	a
single	package	of	ground	beef	can	contain	meat	from	hundreds,	if	not	thousands,	of	animals,	increasing	the
odds	of	a	problem.	Buying	beef	that	is	ground	to	order	at	the	market	is	a	safer	practice,	as	is	grinding	your
own	(see	concept	14).	Because	of	the	risks	associated	with	ground	beef,	you	may	want	to	cook	it	to	160
degrees.



STORAGE
REFRIGERATOR	Keep	meat	in	the	coldest	part	of	your	refrigerator,	generally	in	the	back,	where	the

temperature	should	be	between	32	and	36	degrees.	Place	meat	packages	on	plates	to	keep	any	condensation
from	dripping	down	onto	other	items	in	your	refrigerator—this	is	especially	important	when	defrosting
meat.

FREEZER	When	meat	is	frozen,	water	vapor	escapes	from	the	food’s	surface,	migrates	through	an	air
space	in	the	package,	and	condenses	on	the	inner	surface	of	the	package.	The	result	is	a	piece	of	meat
covered	with	ice	crystals	that	can	tear	through	the	muscle	tissue,	what’s	commonly	known	as	freezer	burn.
Freezer	burn	indicates	a	loss	of	moisture	in	the	food	and	should	be	avoided.	The	food	is	still	safe	to	eat,	but
the	quality	has	suffered.

To	prevent	freezer	burn,	don’t	freeze	meat	in	the	store	packaging.	Wrap	cuts	individually	in	plastic	(so
they	can	be	thawed	separately)	and	then	place	each	steak	or	chop	in	a	large	zipper-lock	bag,	pressing	out	all
excess	air.	Defrost	frozen	meat	according	to	the	times	below.

APPROXIMATE	REFRIGERATOR	DEFROSTING	TIMES
Thin	steaks,	chops,	chicken	breasts:	8	to	12	hours
Thick	steaks,	chops,	bone-in	chicken	parts,	1	pound	ground	beef:	24	hours
Roasts,	whole	birds:	5	hours	per	pound



CONCEPT	4

Hot	Food	Keeps	Cooking
You	buy	an	expensive	roast	and	monitor	it	carefully	as	it	cooks.	When	the
temperature	in	its	center	reaches	130	degrees—the	standard	published
temperature	for	medium-rare	beef—you	take	the	roast	out	of	the	oven.
Remembering	that	a	roast	needs	to	rest	before	slicing	(see	concept	3),	you
patiently	wait.	Five,	10,	15	minutes.	After	20	minutes	you	begin	to	slice,	only	to
find	that	the	roast	is	a	dull	shade	of	gray	and	no	longer	pink	at	all.	In	fact,	it
appears	to	be	cooked	to	medium,	not	medium-rare.	What	happened?



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Whether	you	enjoy	your	steak	cooked	rare,	medium-rare,	or	well-done,	most	of
us	find	the	differences	so	significant	that	we	send	meat	not	cooked	to	our	liking
back	to	the	kitchen	when	dining	out.	Since	sending	a	steak	back	isn’t	an	option
when	cooking	at	home,	hitting	the	desired	target	spot-on	is	imperative.	Five	or
10	degrees	can	be	the	difference	between	meat	that	is	pink	and	still	juicy	and
meat	that	is	gray	and	dry.
Unfortunately,	judging	when	meat	hits	the	desired	target	is	tricky,	in	part

because	a	big	piece	of	meat	doesn’t	have	a	single	temperature.	As	we’ve	learned,
the	exterior	of	the	meat	gets	much	hotter	than	the	interior.	Most	recipes,
however,	are	written	based	on	the	temperature	in	the	dead	center	of	the	meat,	far
away	from	any	bones	(for	more	on	bones	and	their	effect	on	temperature,	see
concept	10).	This	makes	sense:	The	internal	temperature	tells	us	when	the	entire
roast	is	done.	But	what	many	cooks	don’t	understand	is	that	because	of	how	heat
is	transferred,	food	can	continue	to	cook	even	after	it	has	been	removed	from	the
heat	source.	This	effect	is	called	carryover	cooking	and	is	an	important	factor	in
determining	when	meat	is	ready	to	come	out	of	the	oven	or	off	the	grill.
As	discussed	in	concept	1,	conduction	causes	heat	to	move	from	a	hotter	to	a

cooler	region	within	food.	And	as	long	as	there	is	a	difference	in	the	temperature
between	the	two	regions—even	after	removing	meat	from	the	oven	or	off	the
grill—heat	will	continue	to	move	from	the	surface	to	the	center.	This	transfer
will	slow,	and	eventually	stop,	as	internal	and	external	temperatures	approach
each	other	and	equal	out.	But	this	heat	transfer	can	result	in	a	significant	5-to	10-
degree	increase	in	the	internal	temperature	of	a	large	roast,	bringing	it	from	a
perfect	pink	to	a	disappointing	gray.



MOVEMENT	OF	HEAT



	
IN	THE	OVEN	Heat	is	hitting	the	exterior	of	the	meat	and	moving	by	conduction	toward	the	center.



	
AT	REST	Heat	is	rapidly	exiting	from	the	hot	exterior	but	continuing	to	move	toward	the	center,	cooking
the	meat	even	further.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	effects	of	carryover	cooking,	we	roasted	four	pork	loins,
varying	both	the	internal	temperature	at	which	they	were	removed	from	the	oven
and	the	time	allotted	for	carryover	cooking.	Two	roasts	were	cooked	until	their
internal	temperature	reached	140	degrees;	we	sliced	one	roast	right	away	and
let	the	other	roast	rest	for	15	minutes	before	slicing,	sticking	a	thermometer
probe	in	its	center	so	we	could	track	its	internal	temperature	during	the	resting
period.	The	other	two	roasts	were	cooked	to	an	internal	temperature	of	150
degrees;	we	sliced	one	of	these	roasts	right	away	and	let	the	other	roast	rest	for
15	minutes	before	slicing,	tracking	its	internal	temperature	as	it	rested	as	well.



THE	RESULTS
Let’s	start	with	the	two	roasts	cooked	to	140	degrees.	The	roast	that	was	sliced
right	away	lost	significantly	more	juice	than	the	roast	that	was	rested	for	15
minutes	(see	concept	3).	We	also	noted	that	the	roast	sliced	right	away	was	very
pink—in	fact,	it	seemed	underdone.	In	contrast,	the	roast	that	rested	for	15
minutes	was	perfectly	cooked	with	just	a	faint	tinge	of	pink.	The	temperature	of
this	roast	had	risen	to	150	degrees	during	the	resting	period,	and	those	10
degrees	made	a	big	difference.
The	results	were	similar	for	the	two	roasts	cooked	to	150	degrees.	The	roast

sliced	right	away	seemed	perfectly	cooked	but	we	lost	a	lot	of	juice	to	the
carving	board.	The	rested	roast	shed	less	juice	but	its	internal	temperature	had
risen	to	160	degrees	during	the	resting	period	and	the	meat	was	gray	(no	pink
here).
In	conclusion,	we	think	lean	pork	is	best	served	at	150	degrees.	There	are	two

ways	to	get	there—cook	to	the	desired	temperature	and	slice	immediately,	or
undercook	the	meat	slightly	and	let	carryover	cooking	do	the	rest	of	the	work.
The	advantage	to	the	second	method	is	clear:	The	meat	will	also	reabsorb
moisture	during	this	combination	of	resting	and	carryover	cooking,	resulting	in	a
juicier,	perfectly	cooked	roast.



THE	TAKEAWAY
When	it	comes	to	red	meat,	including	pork,	judging	doneness,	even	with	a
thermometer,	involves	some	guesswork.	That’s	because	you	aren’t	judging
whether	the	food	is	ready	to	eat,	but	whether	it	will	be	ready	to	eat	once	it	has
rested.	So	how	do	you	do	this?	There	are	two	factors	to	keep	in	mind:	the	size	of
the	roast	and	the	heat	level	during	cooking.	A	larger	roast	will	absorb	more	heat
than	a	thin	steak	and	so	there’s	more	heat	in	the	meat	and	a	greater	amount	of
carryover	cooking	that’s	possible.	Likewise,	meat	cooked	in	a	400-degree	oven
absorbs	more	heat	than	meat	cooked	in	a	200-degree	oven,	so	carryover	cooking
is	greater	in	a	roast	cooked	in	a	hot	oven.
To	make	this	a	bit	easier,	we’ve	put	together	the	following	chart.	Use	the

lower	number	in	the	“stop	cooking”	column	when	cooking	large	cuts	or	using	a
lot	of	heat;	use	the	higher	number	in	the	“stop	cooking”	column	for	thin	cuts	or
when	using	moderate	heat.	Note	that	in	the	test	kitchen	we	generally	cook	beef
to	medium-rare	and	pork	to	medium.



CHARTING	TEMPERATURE	OF	MEAT
Just	before	the	pork	roast	left	the	oven,	its	exterior	registered	270	degrees	while	its	interior	had	just	reached
140	degrees.	With	time,	however,	the	internal	temperature	continued	to	rise	as	the	surface	heat	rapidly
depleted.	After	15	minutes,	the	internal	temperature	reached	150	degrees,	surpassing	the	130	degrees	of	the
exterior.

	



ACCOUNTING	FOR	CARRYOVER	COOKING

IF	YOU	WANT:	RARE	BEEF	OR	LAMB
Stop	cooking	when	temperature	reaches:	115°	to	120°
So	final	serving	temperature	is:	125°

IF	YOU	WANT:	MEDIUM-RARE	BEEF	OR	LAMB
Stop	cooking	when	temperature	reaches:	120°	to	125°
So	final	serving	temperature	is:	130°

IF	YOU	WANT:	MEDIUM	BEEF	OR	LAMB
Stop	cooking	when	temperature	reaches:	130°	to	135°
So	final	serving	temperature	is:	140°

IF	YOU	WANT:	WELL-DONE	BEEF	OR	LAMB
Stop	cooking	when	temperature	reaches:	150°	to	155°
So	final	serving	temperature	is:	160°

IF	YOU	WANT:	MEDIUM	PORK
Stop	cooking	when	temperature	reaches:	140°	to	145°
So	final	serving	temperature	is:	150°

IF	YOU	WANT:	WELL-DONE	PORK
Stop	cooking	when	temperature	reaches:	150°	to	155°
So	final	serving	temperature	is:	160°



CARRYOVER	COOKING	AT	WORK	
GRILLED	MEAT
Carryover	cooking	can	be	a	significant	factor	on	the	grill,	especially	when	there
is	a	big	fire	producing	a	lot	of	heat.	In	order	not	to	overshoot	doneness,	grilled
meats	are	generally	pulled	off	the	grill	5	to	10	degrees	before	they	hit	the	ideal
temperature.	Since	grill	fires	are	so	unpredictable,	make	sure	to	check	the	meat
early.	You	can	see	the	principle	of	carryover	cooking	at	work	in	the	following
other	meat	recipes:	Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with	Chimichurri	Sauce,	Maple-
Glazed	Pork	Roast,	Pan-Seared	Thick-Cut	Pork	Chops,	and	Slow-Roasted	Pork
Shoulder	with	Peach	Sauce.



GRILL-ROASTED	BEEF	TENDERLOIN
SERVES	10	TO	12

Once	trimmed,	and	with	the	butt	tenderloin	(the	lobe	at	the	large	end	of	the
roast)	still	attached,	the	roast	should	weigh	4½	to	5	pounds.	If	you	purchase	an
already-trimmed	tenderloin	without	the	butt	tenderloin	attached,	begin	checking
for	doneness	about	five	minutes	early.	When	using	a	charcoal	grill,	we	prefer
wood	chunks	to	wood	chips	whenever	possible;	substitute	two	medium	wood
chunks,	soaked	in	water	for	one	hour,	for	the	wood	chip	packet	(if	using).	Serve
with	Romesco	Sauce	(recipe	follows).

1				 (6-pound)	beef	tenderloin,	trimmed,	tail	end	tucked,	and	tied	with	kitchen	twine	at	2-inch	intervals
1½				 tablespoons	kosher	salt
2				 cups	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained	(optional)
2				 tablespoons	olive	oil
1				 tablespoon	pepper

1.	Pat	tenderloin	dry	with	paper	towels	and	rub	with	salt.	Cover	loosely	with
plastic	wrap	and	let	sit	at	room	temperature	for	1	hour.
2.	Using	large	piece	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	wrap	soaked	wood	chips,	if

using,	in	foil	packet	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	top.
3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Light	large

chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals	are
partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Place	wood	chip
packet,	if	using,	on	coals.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent
halfway.	Heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,	about	5	minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packet,	if	using,	opposite	primary

burner.	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips
are	smoking,	about	15	minutes.	Leave	primary	burner	on	high	and	turn	other
burner(s)	off.	(Adjust	primary	burner	as	needed	during	cooking	to	maintain	grill
temperature	of	around	350	degrees.)
4.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Rub	tenderloin	with	oil	and	season	with

pepper.	Place	roast	on	hot	side	of	grill	and	cook	(covered	if	using	gas)	until	well
browned	on	all	sides,	8	to	10	minutes,	turning	as	needed.	(If	flare-ups	occur,
move	roast	to	cooler	side	of	grill	until	flames	die	down.)



5.	Move	roast	to	cooler	side	of	grill,	cover	(position	lid	vent	over	meat	if	using
charcoal),	and	cook	until	meat	registers	115	to	120	degrees	(for	rare)	or	120	to
125	degrees	(for	medium-rare),	15	to	30	minutes.
6.	Transfer	tenderloin	to	carving	board,	tent	loosely	with	foil,	and	let	rest	for

15	minutes.	Remove	twine,	cut	into	½-inch-thick	slices,	and	serve.



ROMESCO	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	GRILL-ROASTED	BEEF	TENDERLOIN

This	sauce	can	be	refrigerated	in	an	airtight	container	for	up	to	two	days;	bring
to	room	temperature	before	serving	and	stir	to	combine.

1– slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	crusts	removed,	bread	lightly	toasted	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
2				 (½	cup)
3				 tablespoons	slivered	almonds,	toasted

1¾				 cups	jarred	roasted	red	peppers,	drained
1				 small	ripe	tomato,	cored,	seeded,	and	chopped
2				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil

1½				 tablespoons	sherry	vinegar
1				 large	garlic	clove,	minced
¼				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
					 Salt

Process	bread	and	almonds	in	food	processor	until	nuts	are	finely	ground,	10	to
15	seconds.	Add	red	peppers,	tomato,	oil,	vinegar,	garlic,	cayenne,	and	½
teaspoon	salt.	Process,	scraping	down	side	of	bowl	as	necessary,	until	mixture
has	texture	similar	to	mayonnaise,	20	to	30	seconds.	Season	with	salt	to	taste	and
transfer	to	serving	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	recipe	is	very	simple.	Start	with	an	evenly	shaped	tenderloin,	sear	it	on	all
sides	to	create	a	browned	crust,	and	then	cook	the	meat	on	a	cool	part	of	the
grill.	The	cover	turns	the	grill	into	an	ovenlike	environment	that	cooks	the	roast
evenly.
SALT	EARLY	Salting	the	meat	an	hour	before	cooking	improves	its	flavor.

(For	more	on	this	phenomenon,	see	concept	12.)
TIE	IT	UP	The	key	to	cooking	meat	well	generally	starts	at	the	supermarket:

It’s	best	to	choose	steaks	or	chops	that	are	the	same	thickness	so	they	are	all
done	at	the	same	time.	But	the	thickness	of	a	whole	beef	tenderloin	varies
dramatically,	so	shopping	can’t	help	here.	In	fact,	the	thick	end	can	measure
twice	as	large	as	the	thin	end.	To	promote	even	cooking,	tuck	the	thin	tail	end
back	toward	the	center	of	the	roast	and	tie	the	roast	in	2-inch	intervals	to	create	a
neat	cylinder	with	a	uniform	thickness.
CREATE	A	TWO-LEVEL	FIRE	You	can’t	simply	throw	a	5-pound	roast

over	a	roaring	fire	and	cook	it	until	well	browned—that	is,	unless	you	like	a
bloody	interior.	Waiting	for	the	interior	to	come	up	to	the	necessary	temperature
means	that	the	exterior	will	blacken.	The	solution	is	what	we	call	a	two-level
fire,	with	all	the	coals	banked	on	one	side	of	the	grill.	(On	a	gas	grill,	you	can
turn	off	some	burners	once	the	grill	has	been	preheated.)	You	now	have	two
cooking	zones—one	that	is	very	hot	and	designed	for	browning,	and	another,
more	moderately	heated	area,	where	there’s	little	browning	but	enough	heat	to
keep	cooking	the	interior	of	the	meat.
SEAR,	THEN	ROAST	To	develop	flavor	(and	jump-start	the	Maillard

reaction),	the	roast	is	seared	over	the	hot	fire	on	all	four	sides.	Once	a	browned
crust	has	formed,	the	roast	is	moved	to	the	cooler	part	of	the	grill	and	then
roasted	with	the	grill	cover	on.	In	effect,	the	grill	becomes	an	oven.	Searing	then
roasting	also	means	that	the	roast	is	exposed	to	less	heat	during	the	crucial	last
stages	of	cooking,	thus	the	window	between	perfectly	cooked	and	overcooked
will	be	a	bit	longer	since	the	roast	is	heating	more	gradually	at	this	point	in	the
cooking	process.
LET	IT	REST	To	account	for	the	effects	of	carryover	cooking,	we	find	it

necessary	to	remove	the	tenderloin	when	it	is	5	to	10	degrees	below	the	ideal
finished	temperature.	So,	for	a	rare	roast	that	should	be	125	degrees	when	sliced,
we	remove	the	roast	from	the	grill	when	the	internal	temperature	is	just	115	to
120	degrees.	During	the	15-minute	resting	time,	the	roast	finishes	cooking	and



the	muscle	fibers	relax	and	are	able	to	reabsorb	most	of	the	juices	in	the	meat.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHEN	CARRYOVER	COOKING	DOES	NOT	MATTER

Carryover	cooking	occurs	in	large	roasts,	steaks,	and	chops,	but	not	whole	chickens	or	whole
fish.

When	it	comes	to	cooking	red	meat	and	pork,	we	recommend	a	brief	resting	period	after	cooking	because
the	meat’s	hotter	exterior	will	transfer	heat	to	the	cooler	center	and	equalize	the	meat’s	temperature.	This
phenomenon	is	called	carryover	cooking.	The	thicker	the	cut	of	meat	and	the	higher	the	cooking
temperature,	the	more	the	temperature	of	the	meat	will	continue	to	rise—anywhere	from	5	to	10	degrees
over	the	course	of	five	to	15	minutes.	Thus,	steaks	and	roasts	should	be	taken	off	the	heat	well	below	the
desired	degree	of	doneness.

As	for	chicken	and	fish,	each	has	a	hollow	cavity	that	provides	a	route	for	heat	and	steam	to	dissipate
and	thus	won’t	increase	in	temperature.	To	demonstrate	this,	we	removed	an	undercooked	chicken	from	the
oven	when	the	breast	meat	registered	just	155	degrees,	and,	sure	enough,	carryover	heat	didn’t	finish
cooking	the	bird.	In	fact,	the	temperature	immediately	began	to	fall,	hitting	140	degrees	after	15	minutes.	So
always	cook	whole	poultry	and	fish	to	the	desired	degree	of	doneness.



GRILLED	RACK	OF	LAMB
SERVES	4	TO	6

We	prefer	the	milder	taste	and	bigger	size	of	domestic	lamb,	but	you	may
substitute	lamb	from	New	Zealand	or	Australia.	Since	imported	racks	are
generally	smaller,	follow	the	shorter	cooking	times	given	in	the	recipe.	While
most	lamb	is	sold	frenched	(meaning	part	of	each	rib	bone	is	exposed),	chances
are	there	will	still	be	some	extra	fat	between	the	bones.	Remove	the	majority	of
this	fat,	leaving	an	inch	at	the	top	of	the	small	eye	of	meat.	Also,	make	sure	that
the	chine	bone	(along	the	bottom	of	the	rack)	has	been	removed	to	ensure	that	it
will	be	easy	to	cut	between	the	ribs	after	cooking.	Ask	the	butcher	to	do	it;	it’s
very	hard	to	cut	off	at	home.

1				 (13	by	9-inch)	disposable	aluminum	pan	(if	using	charcoal)
4				 teaspoons	olive	oil
4				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	rosemary
2				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	thyme
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 (1½-to	1¾-pound)	racks	of	lamb	(8	ribs	each),	frenched	and	trimmed
					 Salt	and	pepper

1A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely	and	place
pan	in	center	of	grill.	Light	large	chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes
(6	quarts).	When	top	coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	into	2	even	piles
on	either	side	of	pan.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent
completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5	minutes.
1B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.	Leave	primary	burner	on	high	and	turn	other	burner(s)
off.
2.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Combine	1	tablespoon	oil,	rosemary,	thyme,

and	garlic	in	bowl.	Pat	lamb	dry	with	paper	towels,	rub	with	remaining	teaspoon
oil,	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Place	racks	bone	side	up	on	cooler	part	of
grill,	with	meaty	side	of	racks	very	close	to,	but	not	quite	over,	hot	coals	or	lit
burner.	Cover	and	cook	until	meat	is	lightly	browned,	faint	grill	marks	appear,
and	fat	has	begun	to	render,	8	to	10	minutes.



3.	Flip	racks	over,	bone	side	down,	and	move	to	hotter	parts	of	grill.	Cook
until	well	browned,	3	to	4	minutes.	Brush	racks	with	herb	mixture.	Flip	racks
bone	side	up	and	continue	to	cook	until	well	browned,	3	to	4	minutes	longer.
Stand	racks	up	and	lean	them	against	each	other;	continue	to	cook	(over	1	hotter
side	of	grill	if	using	charcoal)	until	bottom	is	well	browned	and	meat	registers
120	to	125	degrees	(for	medium-rare)	or	130	to	135	degrees	(for	medium),	3	to	8
minutes	longer.
4.	Transfer	lamb	to	carving	board,	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let	rest

for	15	minutes.	Cut	between	ribs	to	separate	chops	and	serve.

GRILLED	RACK	OF	LAMB	WITH	SWEET	MUSTARD	GLAZE
Omit	rosemary	and	add	3	tablespoons	Dijon	mustard,	2	tablespoons	honey,	and
½	teaspoon	grated	lemon	zest	to	oil,	thyme,	and	garlic.	Reserve	2	tablespoons
glaze,	then	brush	racks	as	directed	in	step	3	and	brush	with	reserved	glaze	while
meat	rests.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Lamb	and	the	grill	have	great	chemistry.	The	intense	heat	of	the	coals	produces
a	great	crust	and	melts	away	the	meat’s	abundance	of	fat,	distributing	flavor
throughout,	while	imparting	a	smokiness	that’s	the	perfect	complement	to	lamb’s
rich,	gamy	flavor.	Because	of	the	high	heat	of	the	sear,	the	outer	surface	of	the
lamb	cooks	far	faster	than	the	interior	of	the	meat.	Therefore,	wait	a	good	15
minutes	after	the	rack	is	removed	from	the	grill	before	slicing	between	the	rib
bones	and	serving.
TRIM	THE	FAT	The	key	to	lamb’s	unique	flavor	and	tenderness	is	its	high

proportion	of	fat,	most	of	which	covers	one	side	of	the	rack	like	a	cap.	We	know
from	experience	that	leaving	on	the	fat	leads	to	aggressive	flare-ups	over	hot
coals,	virtually	as	soon	as	the	lamb	is	placed	on	the	grill.	We	don’t	want	to
remove	all	the	fat	because	this	would	leave	us	with	a	dry	rack	with	little	flavor,
though.	Therefore,	we	leave	a	thin	layer	of	fat	over	the	loin	and	remove	most	of
the	fat	between	the	bones.	This	means	that	we	still	have	the	superb	lamb	taste,
but	with	less	grease	and	fire.
BUILD	A	TWO-LEVEL	FIRE	In	order	to	avoid	charring	the	meat	and

causing	way	too	many	fat	flare-ups,	we	build	a	modified	two-level	fire	with	no
coals	(or	lit	burners)	in	part	of	the	grill.	In	a	charcoal	grill,	we	do	this	by	piling
the	coals	on	either	side	of	the	grill	and	placing	an	aluminum	pan	directly
between	the	two	mounds.	This	way,	the	outer	edges	of	the	grill	are	the	hottest,
and	we’re	able	to	cook	the	lamb	more	gently	and	evenly	in	the	center.	For	a	gas
grill,	we’ve	found	that	it’s	possible	to	leave	just	one	burner	on	high	and	turn	the
others	off.	When	the	lamb	cooks	over	the	pan	(in	a	charcoal	grill)	or	over	the
turned-off	burners	(in	a	gas	grill),	there’s	no	chance	of	flare-ups.
REVERSE	THE	COOKING	ORDER	Traditionally,	we	sear	lamb	over	high

heat	to	develop	flavor	and	browning	and	then	finish	cooking	it	at	a	gentler	heat
to	promote	tenderness	and	juiciness.	Here,	we	found	that	searing	first	caused	the
ample	fat	to	flare	up	on	the	grill,	however.	What	to	do?	We	reversed	the	order.
Cooking	lamb	on	the	cooler	part	of	the	grill	first	allows	the	fat	to	render.	Once
that	fat	is	sufficiently	rendered,	we	move	the	racks	to	direct	heat	to	brown	the
exterior.	The	result	is	a	rack	of	lamb	that	is	pink	and	juicy,	with	a	well-browned
crust	that	contrasts	nicely	with	the	lush,	ultra-tender	exterior.	(And	no	towering
inferno.)
USE	A	WET	RUB	Our	goal	in	seasoning	the	lamb	was	to	enhance	its

already-wonderful	flavor	without	overwhelming	it.	We	tried	a	number	of	things,
including	a	marinade	and	a	dry	rub,	but	we	found	that	the	best	option	is	a	wet



rub	consisting	of	garlic	and	a	couple	of	robust	herbs	(rosemary	and	thyme)
mixed	with	a	little	oil	(just	enough	to	adhere	the	flavorings	to	the	lamb	without
causing	flare-ups).	Brushed	on	the	racks	as	they	brown	over	the	direct	heat,	the
wet	rub	adds	just	the	right	note	to	the	perfectly	cooked	meat.



CARRYOVER	COOKING	AT	WORK	
EGGS
The	principle	of	carryover	cooking	is	at	work	in	most	meat	recipes,	but	the
concept	has	applications	in	egg	cookery,	too.	Many	egg-based	desserts	that	are
baked,	including	cheesecake	and	crème	brûlée,	rely	on	a	similar	principle.	(For
more	on	these	recipes,	see	concept	19.)	In	these	recipes,	there’s	a	relatively
narrow	window	between	perfectly	cooked	and	overcooked.	In	many	instances,
you	purposely	underbake	the	dessert	slightly	with	the	expectation	that	the	eggs
will	continue	to	cook	(and	solidify)	as	the	dessert	cools.	Pumpkin	pie	is	a	classic
example—most	recipes	instruct	the	cook	to	bake	the	pie	until	the	outer	ring	of
filling	is	set	but	the	center	still	jiggles	a	bit.	If	you	continue	to	bake	the	pie	until
the	center	is	set,	the	outer	ring	will	be	overcooked	and	curdled.	Removing	the	pie
before	the	center	is	set	allows	carryover	cooking	to	finish	the	job	gently.	By	the
time	the	pie	cools,	the	center	will	set	up	nice	and	firm.	In	egg	cookery,	a	frittata
is	an	easy	way	to	see	this	principle	at	work.



ASPARAGUS,	HAM,	AND	GRUYÈRE	FRITTATA
SERVES	6	TO	8

A	12-inch	ovensafe	nonstick	skillet	is	necessary	for	this	recipe.	Because	broilers
vary	so	much	in	intensity,	watch	the	frittata	carefully	as	it	cooks.

12				 large	eggs
3				 tablespoons	half-and-half
½				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 teaspoons	olive	oil
8				 ounces	asparagus,	trimmed	and	cut	on	bias	into	¼-inch	pieces
4				 ounces	¼-inch-thick	deli	ham,	cut	into	½-inch	cubes	(¾	cup)
1				 shallot,	minced
3				 ounces	Gruyère	cheese,	cut	into	¼-inch	cubes	(¾	cup)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	5	inches	from	broiler	element	and	heat	broiler.	Whisk
eggs,	half-and-half,	salt,	and	pepper	together	in	medium	bowl.	Set	aside.
2.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	ovensafe	nonstick	skillet	over	medium	heat	until

shimmering.	Add	asparagus	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	lightly
browned	and	almost	tender,	about	3	minutes.	Add	ham	and	shallot	and	cook	until
shallot	softens,	about	2	minutes.
3.	Stir	Gruyère	into	eggs;	add	egg	mixture	to	skillet	and	cook,	using	spatula	to

stir	and	scrape	bottom	of	skillet,	until	large	curds	form	and	spatula	begins	to
leave	a	wake	but	eggs	are	still	very	wet,	about	2	minutes.	Shake	skillet	to
distribute	eggs	evenly	and	cook	without	stirring	to	let	bottom	set,	about	30
seconds.
4.	Slide	skillet	under	broiler	and	cook	until	surface	is	puffed	and	spotty	brown,

yet	center	remains	slightly	wet	and	runny	when	cut	into	with	paring	knife,	3	to	4
minutes.	Using	potholder	(skillet	handle	will	be	hot),	remove	skillet	from	oven
and	let	stand	for	5	minutes	to	finish	cooking;	using	spatula,	loosen	frittata	from
skillet	and	slide	it	onto	platter	or	cutting	board.	Cut	into	wedges	and	serve.



LEEK,	PROSCIUTTO,	AND	GOAT	CHEESE	FRITTATA
SERVES	6	TO	8

A	12-inch	ovensafe	nonstick	skillet	is	necessary	for	this	recipe.	The	goat	cheese
will	crumble	more	easily	if	it	is	chilled.

12				 large	eggs
3				 tablespoons	half-and-half
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 pound	leeks,	white	and	light	green	parts	only,	halved	lengthwise,	sliced	thin,	and	washed	thoroughly
3				 ounces	very	thinly	sliced	prosciutto,	cut	into	½-inch-wide	strips
¼				 cup	chopped	fresh	basil
4				 ounces	goat	cheese,	crumbled	(1	cup)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	5	inches	from	broiler	element	and	heat	broiler.	Whisk
eggs,	half-and-half,	½	teaspoon	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper	together	in	medium
bowl.	Set	aside.
2.	Melt	butter	in	12-inch	ovensafe	nonstick	skillet	over	medium	heat.	Add

leeks	and	¼	teaspoon	salt;	reduce	heat	to	low	and	cook,	covered,	stirring
occasionally,	until	softened,	8	to	10	minutes.
3.	Stir	prosciutto,	basil,	and	½	cup	goat	cheese	into	eggs;	add	egg	mixture	to

skillet	and	cook,	using	spatula	to	stir	and	scrape	bottom	of	skillet,	until	large
curds	form	and	spatula	begins	to	leave	a	wake	but	eggs	are	still	very	wet,	about	2
minutes.	Shake	skillet	to	distribute	eggs	evenly	and	cook	without	stirring	to	let
bottom	set,	about	30	seconds.
4.	Distribute	remaining	½	cup	goat	cheese	evenly	over	frittata.	Slide	skillet

under	broiler	and	cook	until	surface	is	puffed	and	spotty	brown,	yet	center
remains	slightly	wet	and	runny	when	cut	into	with	paring	knife,	3	to	4	minutes.
Using	potholder	(skillet	handle	will	be	hot),	remove	skillet	from	oven	and	let
stand	for	5	minutes	to	finish	cooking;	using	spatula,	loosen	frittata	from	skillet
and	slide	it	onto	platter	or	cutting	board.	Cut	into	wedges	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
In	most	egg	recipes,	the	volume	of	ingredients	is	limited	so	heat	conduction	is
fairly	even.	However,	if	you	take	12	eggs	and	cook	them	in	a	large	pan	with
several	cups	of	vegetables,	meat,	and	cheese	to	create	a	thick,	hearty	frittata,
heat	conduction	starts	to	be	a	problem.	The	exterior	of	the	frittata	will	set	long
before	the	interior.	You	can	keep	cooking	the	eggs,	but	because	the	bottom	of	the
frittata	is	in	direct	contact	with	the	hot	pan	it	becomes	tough	and	dry,	and	may
even	burn.
STIR	AT	FIRST	Our	first	discovery	was	to	stir	the	frittata	from	the	outset.

(Most	recipes	say	to	leave	the	eggs	alone	so	they	can	set.)	This	helps	promote
even	cooking	and	allows	the	large	volume	of	eggs	to	set	very	quickly.	Once	the
eggs	have	actually	set	but	still	appear	very	wet,	we	stop	stirring	so	a	cohesive
frittata	can	form.
TRY	THE	BROILER	Rather	than	continuing	to	heat	the	frittata	from	the

bottom	up,	we	move	the	skillet	to	the	broiler	once	the	eggs	have	begun	to	set	and
allow	the	heat	to	cook	the	frittata	from	the	top.	After	just	three	or	four	minutes
under	the	broiler,	the	top	browns	and	puffs,	giving	the	appearance	of	a	perfect
frittata.
FINISH	COOKING	ON	RACK	Even	though	the	top	and	bottom	are	nicely

browned,	the	center	of	the	2-inch-thick	frittata	may	still	be	runny.	More	time	on
the	stovetop	or	under	the	broiler	is	not	an	option.	Almost	by	luck,	we	realized
that	carryover	cooking	could	solve	the	problem.	After	its	time	on	both	the
stovetop	and	under	the	broiler,	the	pan	is	incredibly	hot	and	hard	to	handle.
Letting	the	frittata	rest	for	five	minutes	on	a	cooling	rack	allows	carryover
cooking	to	firm	up	the	center	of	the	frittata	without	any	risk	of	scorching	the	top
or	bottom.	In	addition,	the	pan	cools	a	bit,	so	getting	the	frittata	onto	a	serving
platter	is	less	daunting.



CARRYOVER	COOKING	AT	WORK	
FISH
Carryover	cooking	can’t	always	be	used	to	the	cook’s	advantage.	For	example,
seared	tuna	needs	to	stay	in	the	pan	long	enough	to	develop	a	good	crust,	but	by
the	time	that	happens	the	interior	is	already	rare	(that	is,	perfectly	cooked).	You
can’t	pull	the	tuna	out	of	the	pan	any	earlier,	so	our	advice	is	to	slice	the	fish	as
soon	as	it	comes	out	of	the	pan.	Unlike	meat	and	poultry,	which	must	rest	before
slicing,	fish	can	be	sliced	immediately	with	no	ill	effects.	Either	way,	fish	won’t
lose	juices	like	meat	or	poultry.	So	all	you’re	doing	by	slicing	immediately	is
speeding	up	the	cooling	process	and	thus	preventing	carryover	cooking	from
having	much	of	an	effect.



PAN-SEARED	SESAME-CRUSTED	TUNA	STEAKS
SERVES	4

If	you	plan	to	serve	the	fish	with	the	sauce	or	salsa	(recipes	follow),	prepare	it
before	cooking	the	fish.	Most	members	of	the	test	kitchen	staff	prefer	their	tuna
steaks	rare	to	medium-rare;	the	cooking	times	given	in	this	recipe	are	for	tuna
steaks	cooked	to	these	two	degrees	of	doneness.	For	tuna	steaks	cooked	medium,
observe	the	timing	for	medium-rare,	then	tent	the	steaks	loosely	with	foil	for	five
minutes	before	slicing.	If	you	prefer	tuna	steaks	cooked	so	rare	that	they	are	still
cold	in	the	center,	try	to	purchase	steaks	that	are	1½	inches	thick	and	cook	them
according	to	the	timing	below	for	rare	steaks.	Bear	in	mind,	though,	that	the
cooking	times	below	are	estimates;	check	for	doneness	with	an	instant-read
thermometer.

¾				 cup	sesame	seeds
4				 (8-ounce)	tuna	steaks,	preferably	yellowfin,	about	1	inch	thick
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Spread	sesame	seeds	in	shallow	baking	dish	or	pie	plate.	Pat	tuna	steaks	dry
with	paper	towel;	rub	1	tablespoon	oil	over	steaks,	then	sprinkle	them	with	salt
and	pepper.	Press	both	sides	of	each	steak	in	sesame	seeds	to	coat.
2.	Heat	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	high	heat

until	just	beginning	to	smoke.	Add	tuna	steaks	and	cook	for	30	seconds	without
moving	steaks.	Reduce	heat	to	medium-high	and	continue	to	cook	until	seeds	are
golden	brown,	about	1½	minutes.	Using	tongs,	flip	tuna	steaks	carefully	and
cook,	without	moving	them,	until	golden	brown	on	second	side	and	centers
register	110	degrees	(for	rare),	about	1½	minutes,	or	125	degrees	(for	medium-
rare),	about	3	minutes.	Cut	into	¼-inch-thick	slices	and	serve	immediately.



GINGER-SOY	SAUCE	WITH	SCALLIONS
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PAN-SEARED	SESAME-CRUSTED	TUNA

STEAKS

If	available,	serve	pickled	ginger	and	wasabi,	passed	separately,	with	the	tuna
and	this	sauce.

¼				 cup	soy	sauce
¼				 cup	rice	vinegar
¼				 cup	water
1				 scallion,	sliced	thin

2½				 teaspoons	sugar
2				 teaspoons	grated	fresh	ginger

1½				 teaspoons	toasted	sesame	oil
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes

Combine	all	ingredients	in	small	bowl,	stirring	to	dissolve	sugar.



AVOCADO-ORANGE	SALSA
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PAN-SEARED	SESAME-CRUSTED	TUNA

STEAKS

To	keep	the	avocado	from	discoloring,	prepare	this	salsa	just	before	you	cook	the
tuna	steaks.

1				 large	orange
1				 avocado,	halved,	pitted,	and	diced	medium
2				 tablespoons	minced	red	onion
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	cilantro
4				 teaspoons	lime	juice
1				 small	jalapeño	chile,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	minced
					 Salt

1.	Cut	½	inch	off	top	and	bottom	of	orange.	Set	orange	on	cut	side	on	cutting
board.	Working	from	top	to	bottom,	cut	away	peel	and	pith	in	large	strips,
following	contours	of	fruit.	Remove	flesh	in	wedge-shaped	segments	by	cutting
on	both	sides	of	white	membrane;	cut	segments	into	½-inch	pieces.
2.	Combine	all	ingredients,	including	salt	to	taste,	in	small	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Developing	a	crust	is	the	main	challenge	when	searing	tuna.	Restaurant	chefs
solve	this	problem	by	using	extra-thick	pieces	of	tuna.	But	most	supermarkets
don’t	sell	2-inch	tuna	steaks.	If	you	want	rare	tuna	(and	you	should),
supermarket	tuna	steaks	(usually	about	1	inch	thick)	can	stay	in	the	pan	for	only
three	minutes.	That’s	hardly	enough	time	to	create	a	crisp	contrast	to	the	tender
interior.
HOT	OIL,	HOT	PAN	In	order	to	create	a	crust	as	quickly	as	possible,	the

pan	and	the	oil	must	be	very	hot.	Make	sure	to	heat	the	oil	until	it	just	begins	to
smoke.	As	with	any	fish	recipe,	a	nonstick	pan	is	essential.
SESAME	SEEDS	MAKE	CRUNCHY	CRUST	Sesame	seeds	form	a

crunchy	crust	with	a	neutral	flavor	that	doesn’t	overwhelm	the	fish.	(When	we
tested	peppercorns	and	other	whole	spices,	tasters	liked	the	results	but
complained	that	the	tuna	was	now	playing	second	fiddle.)	Rubbing	the	fish	with
oil	helps	the	sesame	seeds	to	adhere.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHEN	CARRYOVER	COOKING	MUST	BE	STOPPED

For	rare	tuna,	slice	the	steak	immediately	after	cooking.

These	two	tuna	steaks	were	cooked	in	the	same	pan	for	the	same	amount	of	time.	The	piece	on	the	left	was
cut	immediately	after	it	was	removed	from	the	pan;	the	center	is	rare.	The	piece	on	the	right	was	placed	on	a
plate	and	covered	loosely	with	foil	for	10	minutes	before	slicing;	the	center	of	this	steak	has	cooked	to
medium	because	of	carryover	cooking.	The	heat	that	the	steak	has	picked	up	from	the	pan	continues	to	cook
the	tuna	while	it	rests.	If	you	want	your	tuna	rare,	slice	the	steak	as	soon	as	it	is	removed	form	the	pan	to
release	the	internal	heat.

	



CONCEPT	5

Some	Proteins	Are	Best	Cooked	Twice
While	home	cooks	tend	to	think	of	recipes	as	either	“stovetop”	or	“oven,”	it’s
different	in	restaurants.	Professional	chefs	often	move	food	back	and	forth	from
one	heat	source	to	the	other—and	not	just	for	show.	The	stovetop	is	ideal	for
quick	browning,	but	with	heat	from	a	single	direction	it’s	difficult	to	cook	food
evenly	and	preserve	moisture.	One	solution	is	to	open	the	oven.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
When	preparing	meat	and	other	proteins,	we	all	struggle	to	balance	flavor
development	with	moisture	retention.	As	a	result,	sometimes	the	use	of	two
cooking	methods	is	absolutely	necessary.	There	are	a	couple	of	solutions	to
explore.
Sear	and	then	roast	is	one.	As	we	learned	in	the	first	concepts	in	this	book,	the

high	heat	of	the	stovetop	develops	color	and	flavor,	while	the	oven	allows	the
meat’s	interior	to	come	up	to	temperature	with	ease.	Coupling	these	techniques
prevents	scorching	and	excess	moisture	loss.
After	all,	an	oven	is	a	relatively	inefficient	heat	conductor.	A	12-inch

conventional	skillet	set	over	medium-high	heat	on	a	gas	burner	will	reach	400
degrees	in	less	than	five	minutes	while	an	identical	pan	heated	indirectly	by	the
air	of	a	400-degree	oven	will	take	30	minutes	to	reach	the	same	temperature.	As
a	result,	cooking	vessels	in	the	oven	are	generally	cooler	than	those	on	the
stovetop,	and	a	cooler	vessel	means	less	heat	transfer	and	therefore	less	moisture
loss.
While	it’s	common	to	sear	and	then	roast,	it’s	also	possible	to	flip	the	order.

Both	techniques	accomplish	the	same	thing,	but	when	cooking	very	thick	steaks
and	chops	it	makes	sense	to	roast	before	the	sear.	Why?
Let’s	start	with	basic	thermodynamics:	When	a	40-degree	steak	is	placed	in	a

400-degree	skillet,	the	temperature	of	the	pan	drops	significantly.	Until	the
temperature	recovers	to	at	least	300	degrees	(necessary	for	rapid	Maillard
reaction),	little	browning	will	occur.	Therefore,	it	can	take	more	than	four
minutes	per	side	to	form	a	good	crust	on	a	cold,	thick	steak—during	which	time
the	meat	beneath	the	surface	is	robbed	of	moisture	as	it	swings	way	above	160
degrees.	It’s	difficult	to	make	the	pan	hotter	than	450	degrees	when	cooking	with
oil	due	to	its	smoke	point,	but	you	can	change	the	temperature	of	the	meat.
Warming	meat	in	an	oven	before	searing	accomplishes	three	things.	The	meat

doesn’t	cool	down	a	hot	pan	the	way	it	would	straight	from	the	refrigerator.	As	a
result,	the	pan	stays	hot	enough	for	browning	to	commence	almost	immediately.
Second,	the	oven-warming	period	evaporates	some	surface	moisture,	so	there’s
less	to	be	converted	to	steam	before	the	browning	process	can	begin.	With	less
time	in	the	pan,	less	heat	is	absorbed,	and	the	meat	just	below	the	surface	is	not
overcooked.	Finally,	the	gentle	heat	of	the	slow	warming	stage	in	the	oven
activates	enzymes	called	cathepsins,	which	produce	more	tender	meat	(see
concept	6	for	more	on	this	topic).



INTENSE	HEAT	FOR	FLAVOR,	GENTLE	HEAT	FOR	MOISTURE

	
STOVETOP	PLUS	OVEN	The	intense	heat	of	the	burner	on	a	stovetop	does	allow	quick	development	of
flavor,	but	also	more	moisture	loss.	The	slower,	less	efficient	heat	of	the	oven	does	not	promote	quick
browning	but	helps	to	keep	the	meat	moist	and	juicy.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	understand	how	cooking	method	affects	moisture	loss,	we	cooked	boneless,
skinless	chicken	breasts	on	the	stovetop	and	compared	moisture	loss	in	these
samples	to	moisture	loss	in	identical	breasts	cooked	to	the	same	internal
temperature,	but	seared	on	the	stovetop	and	finished	in	the	oven.	We	placed	three
8-ounce	breasts	in	a	large	skillet	(nonstick,	so	we	could	see	the	results	on	the
chicken,	not	the	pan),	set	it	over	medium-high	heat	with	2	teaspoons	of	vegetable
oil,	and	seared	the	chicken	until	it	registered	160	degrees,	flipping	the	breasts
halfway	through	cooking.	We	also	seared	three	more	8-ounce	chicken	breasts
using	the	same	method,	but	we	transferred	the	skillet	to	a	400-degree	oven	after
flipping.	We	repeated	the	tests	and	averaged	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
First	off,	we	noticed	significant	visual	differences.	The	chicken	on	the	stovetop
was	much	darker	in	color	(verging	on	burnt)	than	the	chicken	that	spent	half	its
time	in	the	oven.	This	was	due	to	the	temperature	of	the	skillet,	which	we
tracked	for	both	cooking	methods.	While	the	skillet	that	moved	from	the
stovetop	to	the	oven	never	got	above	300	degrees,	the	skillet	on	the	stovetop
continued	to	climb	to	over	450	degrees.	Interestingly,	both	samples	reached	160
degrees	in	roughly	20	minutes.	This	is	because	while	the	bottom	of	the	stovetop
samples	received	intense	heat	from	the	skillet,	the	side	not	in	contact	with	the
pan	received	little	heat.	In	contrast,	the	samples	cooked	partially	in	the	oven
absorbed	moderate	heat	from	all	sides.	So	even	though	the	oven	was	set	to	400
degrees,	the	heat	transfer	on	the	stovetop	was	much	more	focused	and	efficient,
thus	the	greater	degree	of	browning.	Browning,	however,	is	only	half	the	story.
When	tasters	sampled	the	chicken,	they	found	samples	cooked	on	the	stovetop

more	flavorful.	But	tasters	also	noted	that	this	chicken	seemed	drier	and	tougher
than	the	chicken	that	finished	cooking	in	the	oven.
The	before-and-after	weights	told	the	story	here.	Moisture	loss	was	about	25

percent	in	the	breasts	cooked	on	the	stovetop	but	19	percent	in	those	cooked
partially	on	the	stovetop	and	partially	in	the	oven.	These	percentages	translate
into	an	extra	tablespoon	of	juices	in	each	of	the	combination-cooked	breasts.



THE	EFFECT	OF	COOKING	METHOD	ON	MOISTURE	LOSS	IN
CHICKEN	BREASTS

SEARED	ON	STOVETOP
Weight	before	cooking:	7.18	ounces
Weight	after	cooking:	5.36	ounces
Moisture	loss:	25.35%

SEARED	ON	STOVETOP,	ROASTED	IN	OVEN
Weight	before	cooking:	7.17	ounces
Weight	after	cooking:	5.82	ounces
Moisture	loss:	18.8%



THE	TAKEAWAY
Searing	is	a	great	way	to	add	flavor	because	it	delivers	focused	heat	quickly	and
efficiently	and	thus	promotes	a	lot	of	browning	in	a	minimum	of	time.	But	it	also
causes	a	lot	of	moisture	loss.	Roasting	small	cuts	yields	food	with	spotty
browning	and	flavor	development	but	higher	levels	of	moisture	retention.
Combining	the	methods	offers	the	best	of	both	worlds.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

DOES	SEARING	REALLY	SEAL	IN	THE	JUICES?
In	a	word:	no.	Instead,	searing	develops	flavor	through	the	Maillard	reaction.

For	centuries,	professional	cooks	have	been	taught	that	searing	meat	“seals	in	juices.”	This	simply	isn’t	true.
Searing	meat	adds	a	flavorful	crust	but	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	juiciness.

To	debunk	this	myth,	we	weighed	six	1¼-inch-thick	rib-eye	steaks	and	divided	them	into	two	batches.
We	seared	the	first	batch	in	a	skillet	over	high	heat	until	a	brown	crust	formed,	then	transferred	them	to	a
wire	rack	set	in	a	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	cooked	them	in	a	275-degree	oven	until	they	reached	an	internal
temperature	of	125	degrees	(or	medium-rare).	For	the	second	batch,	we	reversed	the	order.	We	first	placed
the	steaks	on	a	wire	rack	set	in	a	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	cooked	them	in	the	oven	until	they	reached
approximately	95	degrees,	then	we	seared	them	until	an	equally	well-browned	crust	developed	and	their
interiors	hit	125	degrees.	We	rested	both	sets	for	five	minutes	and	reweighed	them.

The	steaks	looked	and	tasted	similar.	Both	batches	were	well	browned	and	moderately	juicy.	We
averaged	the	postcooking	weights	for	each	batch,	and	then	compared	them	with	the	average	weight	before
cooking.	Both	sets	of	steaks	lost	nearly	an	identical	amount	of	liquid:	around	14	percent	of	their	weight.

If	searing	truly	sealed	in	juices,	the	steaks	seared	first	(while	raw)	would	have	had	more	moisture
trapped	inside	them	than	the	steaks	seared	after	cooking	in	the	oven.	Since	this	didn’t	happen,	we	can
conclude	that	searing	has	nothing	to	do	with	moisture	loss.	In	fact,	juiciness	is	almost	entirely	determined
by	two	factors:	the	fat	content	and	the	internal	temperature	of	the	meat	when	the	cooking	process	ends.	Fat
makes	meat	seem	moister.	The	internal	temperature	is	so	important	because	it	is	directly	proportional	to	the
degree	to	which	muscle	proteins	shrink	and	release	water.



BROWNING	THEN	ROASTING	AT	WORK	
CHICKEN	PARTS
Browning	and	then	roasting	is	the	ideal	way	to	cook	chicken	parts,	which	are
very	thick	and	must	be	cooked	to	a	fairly	high	internal	temperature	of	160
degrees	to	kill	bacteria.	Chicken	parts	need	at	least	20	minutes	of	cooking	time,
if	not	more.	After	all,	the	bones	slow	down	the	transfer	of	heat	while	the	skin
needs	time	to	crisp	(for	more	on	cooking	meat	that	contains	bones,	see	concept
10).	You	could	roast	chicken	parts	entirely	in	the	oven,	but	the	skin	won’t	become
super-crisp.	You	need	the	stovetop	for	that.	But	if	you	cook	bone-in	parts	solely
on	the	stovetop,	be	prepared	for	a	lot	of	splattering	and	fat.	In	this	recipe,	the
blast	of	heat	at	the	outset	renders	fat	and	crisps	up	the	skin	before	the	operation
—skillet	and	all—is	moved	to	the	oven,	where	you	can	cook	the	chicken	as	long
as	necessary	without	the	risk	of	splattering	or	scorching.



PAN-ROASTED	CHICKEN	BREASTS	WITH	SAGE-VERMOUTH
SAUCE
SERVES	4

We	prefer	to	split	whole	chicken	breasts	ourselves	because	store-bought	split
chicken	breasts	are	often	sloppily	butchered.	However,	if	you	prefer	to	purchase
split	chicken	breasts,	try	to	choose	10-to	12-ounce	pieces	with	skin	intact.	If
using	kosher	chicken,	do	not	brine	in	step	1,	and	season	with	salt	as	well	as
pepper.	For	more	information	on	brining,	see	concept	11.

CHICKEN
½				 cup	salt
2				 (1½-pound)	bone-in	whole	chicken	breasts,	split	through	breastbone	and	trimmed
					 Pepper
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil

SAUCE
1				 large	shallot,	minced
¾				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
½				 cup	dry	vermouth	or	dry	white	wine
4				 fresh	sage	leaves,	torn	in	half
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	3	pieces	and	chilled
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	FOR	THE	CHICKEN:	Dissolve	salt	in	2	quarts	cold	water	in	large
container.	Submerge	chicken	in	brine,	cover,	and	refrigerate	for	30	minutes	to	1
hour.	Remove	chicken	from	brine	and	pat	dry	with	paper	towels.	Season	chicken
with	pepper.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	Heat	oil

in	12-inch	ovensafe	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Carefully
lay	chicken	pieces	skin	side	down	in	skillet	and	cook	until	well	browned,	6	to	8
minutes.	Flip	chicken	and	continue	to	brown	lightly	on	second	side,	about	3
minutes.
3.	Flip	chicken	skin	side	down	and	transfer	skillet	to	oven.	Roast	until	chicken



registers	160	degrees,	15	to	20	minutes.
4.	Using	potholder	(skillet	handle	will	be	very	hot),	remove	skillet	from	oven.

Transfer	chicken	to	serving	platter	and	let	rest	while	making	sauce.
5.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Being	careful	of	hot	skillet	handle,	pour	off	all	but	1

teaspoon	fat	from	pan,	add	shallot,	and	cook	over	medium-high	heat	until
softened,	about	2	minutes.	Stir	in	broth,	vermouth,	and	sage,	scraping	up	any
browned	bits.	Bring	to	simmer	and	cook	until	liquid	is	slightly	thickened	and
measures	about	¾	cup,	about	5	minutes.	Stir	in	any	accumulated	chicken	juices,
return	to	simmer,	and	cook	for	30	seconds.
6.	Off	heat,	remove	sage	leaves	and	whisk	in	butter,	1	piece	at	a	time.	Season

with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	spoon	sauce	over	chicken,	and	serve.

PAN-ROASTED	CHICKEN	BREASTS	WITH	SWEET-TART	RED	WINE
SAUCE

This	sauce	is	a	variation	on	the	Italian	sweet-sour	combination	called
agrodolce.

Add	1	tablespoon	sugar	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper	along	with	chicken	broth.
Replace	vermouth	with	¼	cup	each	red	wine	and	red	wine	vinegar	and	replace
sage	with	1	bay	leaf.

PAN-ROASTED	CHICKEN	BREASTS	WITH	ONION	AND	ALE	SAUCE

Brown	ale	gives	this	sauce	a	nutty,	toasty,	bittersweet	flavor.	Newcastle	Brown
Ale	and	Samuel	Smith	Nut	Brown	Ale	are	good	choices.

Substitute	½	onion,	sliced	very	thin,	for	shallot	and	cook	onion	until	softened,
about	3	minutes.	Add	1	bay	leaf	and	1	teaspoon	brown	sugar	along	with	chicken
broth.	Replace	vermouth	with	brown	ale	and	sage	with	1	sprig	fresh	thyme.	Add
½	teaspoon	cider	vinegar	along	with	salt	and	pepper.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Pan-roasting	is	a	great	way	to	cook	chicken	parts.	In	the	oven,	the	skin	never
seems	to	crisp	up	enough.	That’s	because	chicken	parts	cook	much	faster	than	a
whole	bird.	Our	solution	is	simple:	Brown	chicken	parts	in	a	skillet	until	the	fat
has	rendered	and	the	skin	is	really	crisp,	then	transfer	the	skillet	to	the	oven	so
the	chicken	can	finish	cooking	through.
START	SKIN	SIDE	DOWN	The	skin	benefits	the	most	from	the	searing

portion	of	the	recipe,	so	make	sure	the	chicken	goes	into	the	pan	skin	side	down.
You	want	to	render	as	much	fat	as	possible	from	the	skin	and	jump-start	the
browning	process—and	the	stovetop,	rather	than	the	oven,	is	the	place	to	get	this
done.
PUT	SKIN	SIDE	DOWN	AGAIN	Once	the	skin	is	browned,	we	flip	the

chicken	and	sear	it	lightly	on	the	second	side.	We	then	flip	the	chicken	skin	side
down	and	put	the	skillet	in	the	oven.	Keeping	the	skin	in	direct	contact	with	the
hot	skillet	ensures	that	the	skin	emerges	crackling	crisp	from	the	oven.	Once	the
hot	skillet	is	placed	in	the	oven	the	skillet	will	begin	to	cool	down	to	the	same
temperature	as	the	oven,	slowing	the	cooking	process	and	reducing	the	loss	of
moisture.
DON’T	TOUCH	THAT	PAN	Once	the	chicken	is	done,	it	can	be	set	aside	on

a	platter	and	you	can	prepare	a	pan	sauce	based	on	the	flavorful	browned	bits	in
the	pan.	Just	be	careful—the	skillet	handle	is	very,	very	hot.	Since	most	cooks
are	accustomed	to	holding	the	skillet	handle	when	it	sits	on	the	stovetop,	we
suggest	leaving	a	potholder	on	the	handle	to	remind	yourself	of	the	risk.	Just
make	sure	the	potholder	is	well	away	from	the	burner:	You	don’t	want	to	prevent
one	problem	but	cause	another.
USE	THE	FOND	The	Maillard	reaction	is	the	source	of	deep	flavors	in	meat

(see	concept	2).	Some	of	the	browned	bits	of	meat	end	up	sticking	to	the	pan.
The	French	call	these	browned	bits	fond,	and	they	are	a	source	of	great	flavor	in
quick	pan	sauces.	Once	the	chicken	has	been	removed	from	the	pan,	you	can
sauté	an	aromatic	(shallot,	garlic,	or	onion)	and	then	add	liquid	(broth,	wine,
cider,	or	beer)	and	scrape	the	pan	bottom	with	a	wooden	spoon	to	loosen	those
browned	bits.	The	fond	will	dissolve	into	the	sauce,	adding	complexity	and
depth.	The	liquid	is	reduced	to	concentrate	the	flavors	of	the	sauce,	and	a	little
butter	is	whisked	into	the	reduced	sauce	to	give	it	some	body.



ORANGE-HONEY	GLAZED	CHICKEN	BREASTS
SERVES	4

We	prefer	to	split	whole	chicken	breasts	ourselves	because	store-bought	split
chicken	breasts	are	often	sloppily	butchered.	However,	if	you	prefer	to	purchase
split	chicken	breasts,	try	to	choose	10-to	12-ounce	pieces	with	skin	intact.	When
reducing	the	glaze	in	step	4,	remember	that	the	skillet	handle	will	be	hot;	use	a
potholder.	If	the	glaze	looks	dry	during	baking,	add	up	to	2	tablespoons	of	juice
to	the	pan.	If	your	skillet	is	not	ovensafe,	brown	the	chicken	breasts	and	reduce
the	glaze	as	instructed,	then	transfer	the	chicken	and	glaze	to	a	13	by	9-inch
baking	dish	and	bake	(don’t	wash	the	skillet).	When	the	chicken	is	fully	cooked,
transfer	it	to	a	plate	to	rest	and	scrape	the	glaze	back	into	the	skillet	to	be
reduced.

1½				 cups	plus	2	tablespoons	orange	juice	(4	oranges)
				1⁄3 cup	light	corn	syrup
3				 tablespoons	honey
1				 tablespoon	Dijon	mustard
1				 tablespoon	distilled	white	vinegar
				1⁄8 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
					 Salt	and	pepper
½				 cup	all-purpose	flour
2				 (1½-pound)	whole	bone-in	chicken	breasts,	split	through	breastbone	and	trimmed
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
1				 shallot,	minced

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	375	degrees.	Whisk
1½	cups	orange	juice,	corn	syrup,	honey,	mustard,	vinegar,	pepper	flakes,	1⁄8
teaspoon	salt,	and	1⁄8	teaspoon	pepper	together	in	medium	bowl.	Place	flour	in
shallow	dish.	Pat	chicken	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.
Working	with	1	chicken	breast	at	a	time,	coat	chicken	with	flour,	patting	off
excess.
2.	Heat	oil	in	ovensafe	12-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat	until	shimmering.

Add	chicken	breasts	skin	side	down;	cook	until	well	browned,	8	to	14	minutes,
reducing	heat	if	pan	begins	to	scorch.	Flip	chicken	skin	side	up	and	lightly
brown	other	side,	about	5	minutes.	Transfer	chicken	to	plate.



3.	Pour	off	all	but	1	teaspoon	fat	from	pan.	Add	shallot	and	cook	until
softened,	1	to	2	minutes.	Increase	heat	to	high	and	add	orange	juice	mixture.
Simmer,	stirring	occasionally,	until	syrupy	and	reduced	to	1	cup	(heatproof
spatula	should	leave	slight	trail	when	dragged	through	glaze),	6	to	10	minutes.
Remove	skillet	from	heat	and	tilt	to	one	side	so	glaze	pools	in	corner	of	pan.
Using	tongs,	roll	each	chicken	breast	in	pooled	glaze	to	coat	evenly	and	place
skin	side	down	in	skillet.
4.	Transfer	skillet	to	oven	and	bake	until	chicken	registers	160	degrees,	25	to

30	minutes,	turning	chicken	skin	side	up	halfway	through	cooking.	Transfer
chicken	to	platter	and	let	rest	for	5	minutes.	Return	skillet	to	high	heat	(be
careful—handle	will	be	very	hot)	and	cook	glaze,	stirring	constantly,	until	thick
and	syrupy,	about	1	minute.	Remove	pan	from	heat	and	whisk	in	remaining	2
tablespoons	orange	juice.	Spoon	1	teaspoon	glaze	over	each	breast	and	serve,
passing	remaining	glaze	at	table.

APPLE-MAPLE	GLAZED	CHICKEN	BREASTS
Substitute	apple	cider	for	orange	juice	and	2	tablespoons	maple	syrup	for	honey.

PINEAPPLE–BROWN	SUGAR	GLAZED	CHICKEN	BREASTS
Substitute	pineapple	juice	for	orange	juice	and	2	tablespoons	brown	sugar	for
honey.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	recipe	is	traditionally	prepared	entirely	in	the	oven.	The	skin	never	really
becomes	crisp	and	the	glaze	does	not	adhere	very	well.	Using	the	skillet
accomplishes	two	things—it	renders	fat	quickly	from	the	skin	so	it	becomes
browned	and	crisp,	and	it	allows	the	glaze	to	reduce	and	thicken	both	before	and
after	the	roasting	portion	of	this	recipe.
FLOUR	THE	CHICKEN	In	general,	we	don’t	flour	meat	before	browning	it.

For	instance,	when	browning	meat	for	stew,	we	find	that	flour	interferes	with	the
complex	taste	of	browned	meat	(instead	you	taste	browned	flour).	In	this	recipe,
however,	the	flour	gives	the	chicken	breasts	a	thin,	crisp	crust	that	serves	as	a
good	grip	for	the	glaze.
REALLY	RENDER	THE	FAT	Cooking	the	chicken	breasts	skin	side	down

over	medium	heat	for	8	to	14	minutes	gives	the	fat	plenty	of	time	to	render	and
ensures	that	the	skin	will	be	crisp,	even	when	glazed.
FORGET	SUGARY	GLAZES	Most	glazed	chicken	recipes	rely	on	jam,

honey,	brown	sugar,	or	maple	syrup	as	the	base	for	the	glaze.	The	results	are
predictably	sweet.	We	prefer	using	orange	juice,	which	we	reduce	in	the	skillet
once	the	chicken	has	been	browned	and	set	aside.	A	little	honey,	along	with
some	Dijon	mustard,	vinegar,	and	red	pepper	flakes,	creates	a	complex	glaze
with	pantry	ingredients.	We	also	reserve	some	orange	juice	and	add	it	to	the
finished	glaze	for	a	final	hit	of	fresh	orange	flavor.
USE	CORN	SYRUP	TO	ADD	MOISTURE	While	we	dislike	glazes	that	are

all	sweetener,	we	need	something	to	thicken	our	glaze.	A	little	honey	helps,	but
adding	more	honey	makes	the	glaze	saccharine.	We	experimented	with	other
sweeteners	and	tasters	proclaimed	corn	syrup	the	winner.	It	turns	out	that	corn
syrup	contains	about	half	as	much	sugar	as	other	sweeteners.	Also,	the
sweeteners	in	corn	syrup	are	mostly	glucose	and	larger	sugar	molecules	that	are
much	less	sweet	than	table	sugar.	An	added	benefit—when	we	added	corn	syrup
to	the	glaze	the	chicken	seemed	moister.	The	concentrated	glucose	in	corn	syrup
has	an	affinity	for	water,	which	means	it	helps	to	hold	moisture	in	the	glaze,
making	the	overall	dish	seem	juicier.	That	same	glucose	also	thickens	and	adds	a
gloss	to	the	glaze.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHY	FRESH	OJ	TURNS	SOUR

Don’t	squeeze	OJ	in	advance.

Oranges	contain	a	compound	called	limonoate	A-ring	lactone	(LARL).	When	the	cells	are	ruptured	during
the	juicing	process,	LARL	reacts	with	the	juice	to	form	a	bitter	compound	called	limonin.	The	heat	used
during	the	pasteurization	process	stops	this	reaction	in	store-bought	juice.	However,	in	freshly	squeezed
juice	the	reaction	will	continue	unabated.	When	we	tasted	fresh	orange	juice	against	juice	squeezed	four
hours	earlier,	tasters	found	the	older	juice	much	more	bitter.	So	for	recipes	that	call	for	fresh	orange	juice,
it’s	best	to	squeeze	the	oranges	at	the	last	minute.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TIME	LIMIT	FOR	FROZEN	CHICKEN

Do	not	freeze	chicken	for	more	than	two	months.

We	often	store	chicken	breasts	in	the	freezer.	But	then	we	read	that	storing	chicken	breasts	in	the	freezer	for
longer	than	two	months	negatively	affects	tenderness.	Ever	the	skeptics,	we	wanted	to	see	for	ourselves	if
this	was	true.	So	we	bought	six	whole	chicken	breasts	and	split	each	one	down	the	center.	We	immediately
tested	one	breast	from	each	chicken	using	a	Warner-Bratzler	shear	device	that	measures	tenderness	by
quantifying	the	force	required	to	cut	meat.	We	wrapped	and	froze	the	other	breasts	at	0	degrees	(the
temperature	of	the	average	home	freezer).	We	tested	three	of	the	previously	frozen	breasts	for	tenderness
after	two	months	and	the	remaining	three	after	three	months.	Our	results	confirmed	it:	Two-month-old
chicken	was	nearly	as	tender	as	fresh	chicken,	while	three-month-old	chicken	was	about	15	percent	tougher.
We	recommend	freezing	chicken	wrapped	in	plastic	and	sealed	in	an	airtight	zipper-lock	bag	for	no	longer
than	two	months.



BROWNING	THEN	ROASTING	AT	WORK	
FISH	STEAKS
Most	fish	can	be	cooked	completely	on	the	stovetop.	But	if	you	have	large	halibut
steaks,	weighing	1¼	pounds	and	measuring	1½	inches	thick,	the	exterior	of	the
fish	will	dry	and	burn	long	before	the	interior	comes	up	to	140	degrees,	the
temperature	to	which	white	fish	are	best	cooked.	A	combination	cooking	method
is	ideal.	We	use	a	similar	technique	when	preparing	the	Skillet-Roasted	Fish
Fillets.



PAN-ROASTED	HALIBUT	STEAKS
SERVES	4	TO	6

Prepare	the	vinaigrette	(recipe	follows)	before	cooking	the	fish.	Even	well-dried
fish	can	cause	the	hot	oil	in	the	pan	to	splatter.	You	can	minimize	splattering	by
laying	the	halibut	steaks	in	the	pan	gently	and	putting	the	edge	closest	to	you	in
the	pan	first	so	that	the	far	edge	falls	away	from	you.	Make	sure	to	cut	off	the
cartilage	at	each	end	of	the	steaks	to	ensure	that	they	will	fit	neatly	in	the	pan
and	diminish	the	likelihood	that	the	small	bones	located	there	will	wind	up	on
dinner	plates.

2				 (1¼-pound)	skin-on	full	halibut	steaks,	1¼	inches	thick	and	10	to	12	inches	long
2				 tablespoons	olive	oil
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 recipe	Chunky	Cherry	Tomato–Basil	Vinaigrette	(recipe	follows)

1.	Rinse	halibut	steaks,	dry	well	with	paper	towels,	and	trim	cartilage	from
both	ends.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.
When	oven	reaches	425	degrees,	heat	oil	in	12-inch	ovenproof	skillet	over	high
heat	until	oil	just	begins	to	smoke.
2.	Meanwhile,	sprinkle	both	sides	of	halibut	steaks	with	salt	and	pepper.

Reduce	heat	to	medium-high	and	swirl	oil	in	pan	to	distribute;	carefully	lay
steaks	in	pan	and	sear,	without	moving	them,	until	spotty	brown,	about	4
minutes.	(If	steaks	are	thinner	than	1¼	inches,	check	browning	at	3½	minutes;
thicker	steaks	of	1½	inches	may	require	extra	time,	so	check	at	4½	minutes.)	Off
heat,	flip	steaks	using	2	spatulas.
3.	Transfer	skillet	to	oven	and	roast	until	steaks	register	140	degrees,	flakes

loosen,	and	flesh	is	opaque	when	checked	with	tip	of	paring	knife,	about	9
minutes	(thicker	steaks	may	take	up	to	10	minutes).	Remove	skillet	from	oven.
Remove	skin	from	cooked	steaks	and	separate	each	quadrant	of	meat	from	bones
by	slipping	spatula	or	knife	gently	between	them.	Transfer	fish	to	warm	platter
and	serve	drizzled	with	vinaigrette.



CHUNKY	CHERRY	TOMATO–BASIL	VINAIGRETTE
MAKES	ABOUT	1½	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PAN-ROASTED	HALIBUT	STEAKS

6				 ounces	cherry	or	grape	tomatoes,	quartered
¼				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
6				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
3				 tablespoons	lemon	juice
2				 shallots,	minced
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	basil

Mix	tomatoes	with	salt	and	pepper	in	medium	bowl;	let	stand	until	juicy	and
seasoned,	about	10	minutes.	Whisk	oil,	lemon	juice,	shallots,	and	basil	together
in	small	mixing	bowl,	pour	over	tomatoes,	and	toss	to	combine.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Halibut	steaks	this	big	will	become	very	dry	if	cooked	strictly	on	the	stovetop.
Roasting	the	fish	produces	moister	results	but	there’s	not	enough	time	for
browning.	The	stovetop	part	of	this	recipe	browns	the	fish	and	builds	flavor,
while	the	oven	portion	of	the	recipe	finishes	cooking	the	fish	through	while
preserving	as	much	moisture	as	possible.
BROWN	JUST	ONE	SIDE	Even	with	its	stint	in	the	oven,	we	found	that	the

fish	dried	out	if	we	browned	both	sides.	Instead,	we	browned	just	one	side	of	the
fish,	flipped	the	steaks,	and	then	immediately	transferred	the	skillet	to	the	oven,
letting	the	second	side	brown	more	slowly	in	the	oven,	where	the	rate	of
moisture	loss	was	lessened.	Make	sure	to	use	two—not	one—thin	metal	spatulas
to	flip	the	fish,	and	make	sure	to	use	2	tablespoons	of	oil	to	prevent	the	fish	from
sticking.
MAKE	A	SEPARATE	SAUCE	While	beef	steaks	will	create	significant	fond

in	a	skillet,	the	proteins	in	fish	don’t	create	fond.	Unlike	beef,	fish	contains	very
little	natural	glucose,	which	is	required	to	undergo	the	browning	reaction	with
proteins.	As	a	result,	there’s	no	benefit	to	making	a	pan	sauce.	We	prefer	to	make
something	more	potent,	like	a	chunky	vinaigrette.	If	you	prefer,	serve	the	pan-
roasted	fish	with	your	favorite	compound	butter.



BAKING	THEN	BROWNING	AT	WORK	
STEAKS	AND	CHOPS
For	steaks	and	chops	in	excess	of	1½	inches	we	like	this	method	because	it
raises	the	temperature	of	the	meat	before	it	is	seared.	Given	the	different	final
temperatures	desired,	120	to	140	degrees	for	beef	and	145	to	150	for	pork,	the
steaks	spend	less	time	in	the	oven	than	the	chops	but	the	effect	is	the	same.



PAN-SEARED	THICK-CUT	STRIP	STEAKS
SERVES	4

Rib	eye	or	filet	mignon	of	similar	thickness	can	be	substituted	for	strip	steaks.	If
using	filet	mignon,	buying	a	2-pound	center-cut	tenderloin	roast	and	portioning
it	into	four	8-ounce	steaks	yourself	will	produce	more	consistent	results.	If	using
filet	mignon,	increase	the	oven	time	by	about	five	minutes.	When	cooking	lean
strip	steaks	(without	an	external	fat	cap)	or	filet	mignon,	add	an	extra
tablespoon	of	oil	to	the	pan.

2				 (1-pound)	boneless	strip	steaks,	1½	to	1¾	inches	thick,	trimmed
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
1				 recipe	Red	Wine–Mushroom	Pan	Sauce	(optional)	(recipe	follows)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	275	degrees.	Pat
steaks	dry	with	paper	towels.	Cut	each	steak	in	half	vertically	to	create	four	8-
ounce	steaks.	Season	steaks	with	salt	and	pepper;	using	hands,	gently	shape	into
uniform	thickness.	Place	steaks	on	wire	rack	set	in	rimmed	baking	sheet;	transfer
baking	sheet	to	oven.	Cook	until	meat	registers	90	to	95	degrees	(for	rare	to
medium-rare),	20	to	25	minutes,	or	100	to	105	degrees	(for	medium),	25	to	30
minutes.
2.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	high	heat	until	smoking.	Place	steaks	in

skillet	and	sear	until	well	browned	and	crusty,	1½	to	2	minutes,	lifting	once
halfway	through	cooking	to	redistribute	fat	underneath	each	steak.	(Reduce	heat
if	fond	begins	to	burn.)	Using	tongs,	turn	steaks	over	and	cook	until	well
browned	on	second	side,	2	to	2½	minutes.	Transfer	steaks	to	clean	wire	rack	and
reduce	heat	under	pan	to	medium.	Use	tongs	to	stand	2	steaks	on	their	sides.
Holding	steaks	together,	return	to	skillet	and	sear	on	all	edges	until	browned,
about	1½	minutes.	Repeat	with	remaining	2	steaks.
3.	Return	steaks	to	wire	rack	and	let	rest,	loosely	tented	with	aluminum	foil,

for	about	10	minutes.	If	desired,	cook	sauce	in	now-empty	skillet.	Arrange
steaks	on	individual	plates	and	spoon	sauce,	if	using,	over	steaks;	serve.



RED	WINE–MUSHROOM	PAN	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PAN-SEARED	THICK-CUT	STRIP	STEAKS

Prepare	all	the	ingredients	for	the	pan	sauce	while	the	steaks	are	in	the	oven;	the
sauce	can	be	cooked	while	the	steaks	are	resting.

1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
8				 ounces	white	mushrooms,	trimmed	and	sliced	thin
1				 small	shallot,	minced
1				 cup	dry	red	wine
½				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 tablespoon	balsamic	vinegar
1				 teaspoon	Dijon	mustard
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	4	pieces	and	chilled
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme
					 Salt	and	pepper

Pour	off	fat	from	skillet	in	which	steaks	were	cooked.	Heat	oil	over	medium-
high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add	mushrooms	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,
until	beginning	to	brown	and	liquid	has	evaporated,	about	5	minutes.	Add	shallot
and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	beginning	to	soften,	about	1	minute.	Increase
heat	to	high;	add	wine	and	broth,	scraping	bottom	of	skillet	with	wooden	spoon
to	loosen	any	browned	bits.	Simmer	rapidly	until	liquid	and	mushrooms	are
reduced	to	1	cup,	about	6	minutes.	Add	vinegar,	mustard,	and	any	accumulated
steak	juices;	cook	until	thickened,	about	1	minute.	Off	heat,	whisk	in	butter	and
thyme;	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Spoon	sauce	over	steaks	and	serve
immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
When	you’re	cooking	a	1-inch	steak,	the	most	likely	problem	is	the	crust,	not	the
interior,	which	is	why	starting	with	a	cold	piece	of	meat	is	an	advantage.	(It
gives	you	more	time	for	a	crust	to	form.)	But	with	a	thick	steak,	the	problem	is
just	the	opposite.	It	will	take	a	long,	long	time	for	the	interior	of	a	mammoth	1¾-
inch	steak	to	reach	130	degrees.	Warming	the	steaks	in	the	oven	jump-starts	this
process	while	minimizing	internal	moisture	loss	and	promoting	even	cooking
from	edge	to	center.
COOK	LOW	AND	SLOW	FOR	TENDERNESS	We	noticed	that,	in

addition	to	being	evenly	cooked,	steaks	prepared	this	way	were	especially
tender.	It	turns	out	that	meat	contains	active	enzymes	called	cathepsins,	which
break	down	connective	tissues	over	time,	increasing	tenderness	(a	fact	that	is
demonstrated	to	great	effect	in	dry-aged	meat).	As	the	temperature	of	the	meat
rises,	these	enzymes	work	faster	and	faster	until	they	reach	122	degrees,	where
all	action	stops.	While	our	steaks	are	slowly	heating	up,	the	cathepsins	are
working	overtime,	in	effect	“aging”	and	tenderizing	our	steaks	within	half	an
hour.	When	thick	steaks	are	cooked	by	conventional	methods,	their	final
temperature	is	reached	much	more	rapidly,	denying	the	cathepsins	the	time	they
need	to	properly	do	their	job.	(For	more	about	cathepsins,	see	concept	6.)
SEAR	ON	THE	SIDES	While	most	recipes	instruct	the	cook	to	sear	steaks

on	both	flat	sides,	we	found	it	beneficial	to	sear	the	steaks	on	their	edges	as	well.
We	use	a	pair	of	tongs	to	hold	two	steaks	at	a	time	on	their	edges	in	the	pan.	The
extra	browning	adds	flavor	and	doesn’t	overheat	the	steaks	because	the	steaks
are	being	rotated	in	the	pan	and	don’t	spend	very	long	in	any	one	place.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	BEST	WAY	TO	WARM	STEAKS	BEFORE	COOKING
Warm	steaks	in	a	275-degree	oven	before	searing.	Excess	moisture	will	evaporate,	and	the

steaks	will	brown	in	half	the	time.

As	we	explored	in	“How	the	Science	Works”,	when	a	40-degree	steak	is	placed	in	a	400-degree	skillet,	the
temperature	of	the	pan	drops	significantly.	Until	the	temperature	in	the	pan	recovers	to	at	least	300	degrees,
little	browning	can	take	place.	While	we	can’t	make	the	pan	much	hotter,	we	can	change	the	temperature	of
the	meat.	How?

Some	cooks	place	a	refrigerated	steak	on	the	counter	to	start	raising	its	internal	temperature.	The	theory
is	that	with	warmer	meat,	the	middle	can	come	up	to	temperature	before	a	dry	gray	band	of	overcooked
meat	can	develop	under	the	crust	during	cooking,	a	problem	with	thick-cut	steaks.	But	does	a	one-or	two-
hour	warm-up	at	room	temperature	actually	increase	the	internal	temperature	of	steak	enough	to	make	a
difference?	(Keeping	meat	out	longer	is	not	advisable,	since	it	puts	it	in	the	food	safety	“danger	zone”	as
defined	by	the	U.S.	Department	of	Agriculture.)	The	short	answer	is	no.	A	gray	band	appears	as	often	as
with	a	steak	straight	from	the	fridge.

We	also	tried	warming	the	meat	by	submerging	it	in	120-degree	water,	enclosed	in	a	zipper-lock	bag,
which	brought	the	temperature	of	the	meat	up	to	100	degrees	after	30	minutes.	But	when	this	warm	meat
was	seared	in	a	preheated	pan,	it	still	took	more	than	six	minutes	to	brown	both	sides	because	the	surface	of
the	meat	was	covered	with	moisture	and	the	heat	of	the	pan	simply	turned	it	to	steam.

We	found	that	the	best	way	to	warm	the	steaks	before	searing	is	in	a	275-degree	oven	for	20	to	30
minutes,	or	until	the	internal	temperature	is	about	95	degrees.	This	way,	the	meat	doesn’t	cool	down	a	hot
pan	when	added	for	a	sear.	In	addition,	this	allows	the	tenderizing	enzymes	found	in	meat,	called
cathepsins,	which	are	active	in	temperatures	below	122	degrees,	ample	time	to	work	(see	concept	6).	Also,
the	oven	evaporates	some	surface	moisture,	so	there’s	less	to	be	converted	to	steam	before	the	browning
process	can	begin.	We	found	steaks	baked	in	the	oven	before	being	seared	took	half	as	much	time	to	brown
as	those	taken	directly	from	the	refrigerator.



PAN-SEARED	THICK-CUT	PORK	CHOPS
SERVES	4

Buy	chops	of	similar	thickness	so	that	they	cook	at	the	same	rate.	If	using	table
salt,	sprinkle	each	chop	with	½	teaspoon	salt.	We	prefer	the	flavor	of	natural
chops	over	that	of	enhanced	chops	(which	have	been	injected	with	a	salt	solution
and	various	sodium	phosphate	salts	to	increase	moistness	and	flavor),	but	if
processed	pork	is	all	you	can	find,	skip	the	salting	step	below.

4				 (12-ounce)	bone-in	pork	rib	chops,	1½	inches	thick,	trimmed
					 Kosher	salt	and	pepper

1–2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
1				 recipe	pan	sauce	(recipes	follow)

1.	Pat	chops	dry	with	paper	towels.	Using	sharp	knife,	cut	2	slits,	about	2
inches	apart,	through	outer	layer	of	fat	and	silverskin.	Sprinkle	entire	surface	of
each	chop	with	1	teaspoon	salt.	Place	chops	on	wire	rack	set	in	rimmed	baking
sheet	and	let	stand	at	room	temperature	for	45	minutes.	Meanwhile,	adjust	oven
rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	275	degrees.
2.	Season	chops	with	pepper;	transfer	baking	sheet	to	oven.	Cook	until	chops

(away	from	bone)	register	120	to	125	degrees,	30	to	45	minutes.
3.	Heat	1	tablespoon	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	high	heat	until	smoking.	Place

2	chops	in	skillet	and	sear	until	well	browned	and	crusty,	1½	to	3	minutes,	lifting
once	halfway	through	cooking	to	redistribute	fat	underneath	each	chop.	(Reduce
heat	if	browned	bits	in	pan	bottom	start	to	burn.)	Using	tongs,	turn	chops	over
and	cook	until	well	browned	on	second	side,	2	to	3	minutes.	Transfer	chops	to
plate	and	repeat	with	remaining	2	chops,	adding	1	tablespoon	oil	if	pan	is	dry.
4.	Reduce	heat	to	medium.	Use	tongs	to	stand	2	pork	chops	on	their	sides.

Holding	chops	together	with	tongs,	return	to	skillet	and	sear	sides	of	chops	(with
exception	of	bone	side)	until	browned	and	chops	register	145	degrees,	about	1½
minutes.	Repeat	with	remaining	2	chops.	Let	chops	rest,	tented	loosely	with
aluminum	foil,	for	10	minutes	while	preparing	sauce.



GARLIC	AND	THYME	PAN	SAUCE
MAKES	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PAN-SEARED	THICK-CUT	PORK	CHOPS

1				 large	shallot,	minced
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
¾				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
½				 cup	dry	white	wine
¼				 teaspoon	white	wine	vinegar
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	3	pieces	and	chilled
					 Salt	and	pepper

Pour	off	all	but	1	teaspoon	fat	from	pan	used	to	cook	chops	and	return	pan	to
medium	heat.	Add	shallot	and	garlic	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	softened,
about	1	minute.	Add	broth	and	wine,	scraping	pan	bottom	to	loosen	browned
bits.	Simmer	until	reduced	to	½	cup,	6	to	7	minutes.	Off	heat,	stir	in	vinegar	and
thyme,	then	whisk	in	butter,	1	tablespoon	at	a	time.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper
to	taste	and	serve	with	chops.



CILANTRO	AND	COCONUT	PAN	SAUCE
MAKES	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PAN-SEARED	THICK-CUT	PORK	CHOPS

1				 large	shallot,	minced
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
¾				 cup	coconut	milk
¼				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 teaspoon	sugar
¼				 cup	minced	fresh	cilantro
2				 teaspoons	lime	juice
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
					 Salt	and	pepper

Pour	off	all	but	1	teaspoon	fat	from	pan	used	to	cook	chops	and	return	pan	to
medium	heat.	Add	shallot,	ginger,	and	garlic	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until
softened,	about	1	minute.	Add	coconut	milk,	broth,	and	sugar,	scraping	pan
bottom	to	loosen	browned	bits.	Simmer	until	reduced	to	½	cup,	6	to	7	minutes.
Off	heat,	stir	in	cilantro	and	lime	juice,	then	whisk	in	butter.	Season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste	and	serve	with	chops.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	oven-then-searing	method	is	especially	beneficial	with	pork	chops	today
because	over	the	years	they	have	become	so	lean.	(Today’s	pork	is	at	least	30
percent	leaner	than	pork	sold	in	the	1980s.)	Overcooking	pork,	even	slightly,
yields	tough	results.	And	the	window	for	doneness	is	quite	narrow—lean	pork
chops	are	best	cooked	to	145	to	150	degrees.	Also,	because	pork	must	be	cooked
to	a	higher	internal	temperature	than	beef,	heat	distribution	is	even	more
inequitable,	especially	in	thick	chops.
BUY	BONE-IN	RIB	CHOPS	You	can	generally	find	four	different	cuts	of

pork	chops:	sirloin,	blade,	center-cut,	and	rib	loin.	Sirloin	chops,	cut	from	the	hip
end	of	the	pig,	are	tough,	dry,	and	bland.	For	this	recipe,	we	also	decided	against
blade	chops	(cut	from	near	the	shoulder),	which	contain	a	fair	amount	of
connective	tissue	and	fat.	Although	the	fat	promises	a	juicy,	flavorful	chop,	the
connective	tissue	requires	a	long,	moist	cooking	method	to	become	tender.	After
comparing	center-cut	chops	(cut	from	the	center	of	the	loin)	and	rib	loin	chops
(cut	from	the	rib	section),	we	decided	on	the	latter,	preferring	their	meaty	texture
and	slightly	higher	fat	content.	We	opted	to	leave	the	bone	in	because	it	acts	as
an	insulator	and	helps	the	chops	cook	gently	while	its	fat	helps	to	baste	the	meat
as	it	cooks	(see	concept	10).
KEEP	THEM	FLAT	Pork	often	comes	covered	with	a	thin	membrane	called

silverskin.	This	membrane	contracts	faster	than	the	rest	of	the	meat,	causing
buckling	and	leading	to	uneven	cooking.	Cutting	two	slits	about	two	inches	apart
in	the	silverskin	around	the	edges	of	the	chops	prevents	this	problem.	Make	sure
to	cut	through	the	fat	and	underlying	silverskin.
SALT	FOR	FLAVOR	Salting	the	pork	chops	draws	out	moisture	via	osmosis

that,	45	minutes	later,	is	pulled	back	into	the	meat,	producing	juicy,	well-
seasoned	chops.	Likewise	this	salt	dissolves	some	of	the	meat	proteins,	making
them	more	effective	at	holding	moisture	during	cooking.	(See	concept	12	for
more	on	salting	meat.)
ROAST,	THEN	SEAR	Cooking	the	salted	chops	in	a	gentle	oven	and	then

searing	them	in	a	smoking-hot	pan	has	several	advantages.	First,	chops	cooked
via	this	method	are	supremely	tender	because	we	keep	them	at	a	lower
temperature	for	about	20	minutes	longer	than	conventional	sautéing	or	roasting
methods	do.	This	is	in	part	because	low-temperature	enzymes	called	cathepsins
(concept	6)	are	at	work,	breaking	down	proteins	such	as	collagen	and	helping	to
tenderize	the	meat.	Second,	the	gentle	roasting	dries	the	exterior	of	the	meat,
creating	a	thin,	arid	layer	that	turns	into	a	gratifyingly	crisp	crust	when	seared.



BAKING	THEN	BROWNING	AT	WORK	
BEEF	TENDERLOIN
Beef	tenderloin	is	extremely	tender	but	fairly	bland.	As	a	result,	it’s	important	to
get	a	really	good	crust	on	the	exterior.	The	problem	is	that	it	is	very	lean	(that’s
why	it’s	bland)	and	can	easily	dry	out.	Most	cooks	either	sacrifice	the	browned
crust	(for	a	perfectly	cooked	interior)	or	live	with	a	thick	gray	band	of
overcooked	meat	just	below	a	nice	brown	crust.	Baking	then	browning	lets	you
have	the	best	of	both	worlds—meat	that	is	rosy	pink	from	the	edge	to	the	center
as	well	as	a	nice	brown	crust.



ROAST	BEEF	TENDERLOIN
SERVES	4	TO	6

Ask	your	butcher	to	prepare	a	trimmed	center-cut	Châteaubriand	from	the	whole
tenderloin,	as	this	cut	is	not	usually	available	without	special	ordering.	If	you
are	cooking	for	a	crowd,	this	recipe	can	be	doubled	to	make	two	roasts.	Sear	the
roasts	one	after	the	other,	wiping	out	the	pan	and	adding	new	oil	after	searing
the	first	roast.	Both	pieces	of	meat	can	be	roasted	on	the	same	rack.

1				 (2-pound)	beef	tenderloin	center-cut	Châteaubriand,	trimmed
2				 teaspoons	kosher	salt
1				 teaspoon	coarsely	ground	black	pepper
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
1				 recipe	flavored	butter	(recipes	follow)

1.	Using	12-inch	lengths	of	twine,	tie	roast	crosswise	at	1½-inch	intervals.
Sprinkle	roast	evenly	with	salt,	cover	loosely	with	plastic	wrap,	and	let	stand	at
room	temperature	for	1	hour.	Meanwhile,	adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position
and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.
2.	Pat	roast	dry	with	paper	towels.	Sprinkle	roast	evenly	with	pepper	and

spread	butter	evenly	over	surface.	Transfer	roast	to	wire	rack	set	in	rimmed
baking	sheet.	Roast	until	center	of	roast	registers	125	degrees	(for	medium-rare),
40	to	55	minutes,	or	135	degrees	(for	medium),	55	to	70	minutes,	flipping	roast
halfway	through	cooking.
3.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Place

roast	in	skillet	and	sear	until	well	browned	on	4	sides,	4	to	8	minutes.	Transfer
roast	to	carving	board	and	spread	2	tablespoons	flavored	butter	evenly	over	top
of	roast;	let	rest	for	15	minutes.	Remove	twine	and	cut	meat	crosswise	into	½-
inch-thick	slices.	Serve,	passing	remaining	flavored	butter	separately.



SHALLOT	AND	PARSLEY	BUTTER
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	ROAST	BEEF	TENDERLOIN

4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
½				 shallot,	minced
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley
¼				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper

Combine	all	ingredients	in	medium	bowl.



BLUE	CHEESE	AND	CHIVE	BUTTER
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	ROAST	BEEF	TENDERLOIN

1½				 ounces	(¼	cup)	mild	blue	cheese,	room	temperature
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives

Combine	all	ingredients	in	medium	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Many	recipes	sear,	then	roast,	beef	tenderloin.	But	it	takes	a	long	time	to	sear	a
tenderloin	straight	from	the	refrigerator	because	a	lot	of	surface	moisture	has	to
evaporate	before	any	browning	can	occur.	During	this	time,	too	much	heat	is
transferred	to	the	roast	and	you	end	up	with	a	band	of	overcooked	gray	meat
below	the	surface.	Roasting	the	meat	first	ensures	even	cooking	and	evaporates
surface	moisture	so	that	the	searing	time	is	just	a	few	minutes.
BUY	A	CENTER-CUT	ROAST	A	whole	tenderloin	is	hard	to	handle.	It’s

usually	covered	with	a	lot	of	fat	and	sinew	and	the	meat	varies	widely	in	girth.
For	indoor	cooking,	we	much	prefer	to	buy	a	center-cut	tenderloin,	also	called	a
Châteaubriand,	because	it’s	already	trimmed	and	the	thickness	is	the	same	from
end	to	end.	This	2-pound	roast	fits	in	a	skillet	and	won’t	break	the	bank	either.
USE	SALT	AND	BUTTER	To	add	flavor	to	this	relatively	bland	cut,	we

apply	salt	an	hour	before	cooking.	The	salt	pulls	juices	out	of	the	meat,	then
reverses	the	flow,	drawing	flavor	deep	into	the	meat	(see	concept	12).	For
richness,	we	slather	the	roast	with	softened	butter	before	cooking,	then	cover	it
with	a	compound	butter	as	it	rests.



CONCEPT	6

Slow	Heating	Makes	Meat	Tender
We’ve	all	had	that	magical	restaurant	moment:	savoring	a	plate	of	meat,	almost
obscenely	flavorful,	so	tender	it’s	easily	sliced	with	a	butter	knife.	At	home,	on
the	other	hand,	we	sometimes	need	to	carve	through	bland	roasts	with	a	saw—
even	ones	that	are	not	overcooked.	Are	chefs	buying	better	meat	in	restaurants?
Or	are	they	just	cooking	it	differently?



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
As	it	turns	out,	many	restaurant	chefs	use	the	same	kind	of	meat	available	to	us
at	home.	But	they	use	a	secret	weapon:	time.
Aging	is	a	technique	used	by	many	restaurants	on	primal	cuts	of	beef	to	create

more	tender,	flavorful	meat.	Dry-aging	allows	meat	to	sit	undisturbed	in	a	humid
refrigerator	ranging	between	32	and	40	degrees	for	up	to	30	days—during	which
time	a	significant	portion	of	moisture	is	lost	and	the	muscle	proteins	begin	to
break	down.	(For	more	information	on	dry-aging	meat	in	a	home	refrigerator,
click	here.)
So	why	is	dry-aged	beef	so	much	more	tender?	The	results	are	largely	due	to

enzymes.	With	the	right	temperature,	and	the	correct	amount	of	time,	meat
enzymes	do	their	best	work.
To	rewind:	Enzymes	are	a	type	of	protein.	In	living	animals,	one	of	their

functions	is	the	turnover	and	reprocessing	of	other	proteins	around	them.	In
meat,	these	enzymes	continue	to	have	the	important	role	of	catalyzing	change—
increasing	the	rates	of	chemical	reaction,	affecting	food’s	consistency,	texture,
and	color.	Here,	there	are	two	important	enzymes	at	work:	calpains	and
cathepsins.	Calpains	break	down	the	proteins	that	hold	the	muscle	fibers	in
place.	Cathepsins	break	apart	a	range	of	meat	proteins,	contracting	filaments	and
supporting	molecules,	and	can	even	weaken	the	collagen	in	the	muscles’
connective	tissue	(for	more	on	collagen,	see	concept	7).	These	crafty	little
enzymes	have	the	ability	to	both	impart	a	meatier,	umami	taste	(encouraging	the
formation	of	amino	acids	and	peptides	as	the	muscle	breaks	down)	and	to
tenderize	(breaking	down	tough	proteins	with	time)—that	is,	if	the	environment
is	right.
The	activity	level	of	these	enzymes	is	largely	based	on	temperature.	The	rate

at	which	they	break	down	the	protein	in	a	cut	of	meat	held	between	32	and	40
degrees	is	fairly	slow,	which	is	why	a	full	30	days	of	dry-aging	is	often	needed.
The	rate	becomes	much	faster	as	the	temperature	of	the	meat	rises,	though—
right	until	it	reaches	122	degrees.	That’s	when	everything	comes	to	a	halt.
So	what	can	we	do	to	simulate	this	process	at	home?	We	know	that	dry-aging

creates	tender,	more	flavorful	meat.	But	most	home	cooks	don’t	have	the	time,
space,	or	energy	to	dry-age	their	own	meat.	Instead,	we	recommend	roasting
meat	very	slowly,	purposely	keeping	the	temperature	below	122	degrees	to
encourage	enzymatic	activity	for	as	long	as	possible.	In	contrast	to	the	slow
cooking	methods	used	for	tough	cuts	of	meat	(see	concept	7),	this	technique	is



best	for	cuts	of	meat	with	little	connective	tissue,	ones	ideally	cooked	no	further
than	medium.	When	slow-roasting	cuts	of	meat	at	a	low	temperature,	the
cathepsins	are	given	leave	to	work	overtime,	in	effect	“aging”	the	roast	within	a
few	hours.	It’s	like	dry-aging,	only	much	faster.



ENZYMES	AT	WORK



	
BELOW	122	DEGREES	As	the	temperature	in	meat	slowly	rises,	enzymes	act	like	saws,	breaking	down



muscle	proteins	at	a	faster	and	faster	rate.



	
ABOVE	122	DEGREES	Heating	enzymes	above	122	degrees,	however,	changes	their	shape	and



eliminates	their	ability	to	break	down	muscle	proteins.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	test	the	effects	of	enzymes	active	below	122	degrees,	we	cut	one	two-rib
standing	beef	rib	roast	into	two	equal	steaks.	We	cooked	one	in	a	sous	vide	water
bath	held	at	120	degrees	for	two	whole	days	(48	hours).	We	cooked	the	second	in
the	same	water	bath—but	just	until	its	internal	temperature	hit	120	degrees,
which	took	about	two	hours.	We	compared	the	two	steaks	for	tenderness	by
tasting	them,	and	every	taster	found	the	steak	cooked	for	48	hours	to	be	more
tender.	We	also	devised	a	stress	test:	We	cut	a	¼-inch-thick,	4-inch-long	cross-
grain	slice	from	the	same	part	of	each	steak	and	suspended	each	vertically,
holding	them	up	with	tongs.	To	the	other	end	of	the	steak	strips,	we	attached	2-
pound	weights	and	waited.



RESULTS
When	we	hung	the	slice	of	meat	that	had	cooked	for	48	hours,	it	tore	in	half
quickly	and	easily—as	soon	as	we	let	go	of	the	weight.	The	second	steak,
however,	didn’t	tear	right	away	but	hung	there	intact,	stubbornly	supporting	the
weight	for	15	seconds.



THE	TAKEAWAY
This	experiment	made	it	glaringly	clear	that	internal	temperature	isn’t	the	only
factor	in	determining	tenderness	in	meat.	We	cooked	both	samples	of	meat	to	the
same	temperature;	the	only	difference	was	the	length	of	time	we	held	them	there.
Enzymes	called	cathepsins	do	their	best	tenderizing	work	when	held	just

below	122	degrees.	We	saw	this	to	dramatic	effect	in	the	standing	beef	rib	roast
that	cooked	in	a	water	bath	at	120	degrees	for	48	hours	straight	compared	to	the
same	cut	cooked	for	only	two	hours.	(We	didn’t	cook	the	meat	at	122	degrees
exactly,	as	that’s	the	temperature	at	which	all	enzymatic	activity	halts.)	In	the	48-
hour	sample,	the	enzymes	had	much	more	time	to	work	their	magic,	which	is
why	the	meat	was	so	tender	it	fell	apart	immediately.	The	meat	brought	to
temperature	quickly	did	not	benefit	from	the	extra	hours	of	enzymatic	activity
and	was	much	less	tender	as	a	result.	(This	is	not	to	say	that	the	home	cook
should	spend	two	days	cooking	a	steak.	Even	an	hour	of	enzymatic	activity
makes	a	difference.)
It’s	important	to	note	that	even	though	the	cathepsin	enzymes	weaken	the

collagen	in	connective	tissue,	the	collagen	does	not	begin	to	break	down	into
gelatin	until	the	temperature	reaches	140	degrees—and	even	then,	it	happens	at	a
slow	rate	(see	concept	7).	So	the	longer	cooking	time	at	120	degrees	does	not
produce	a	more	tender	cut	of	meat	because	of	an	extended	period	of	heat-
induced	collagen	breakdown.	Instead,	it	must	be	due	to	the	action	of	the
enzymes	alone.



PUTTING	ENZYMES	TO	THE	TEST	WITH	SOUS	VIDE






	
SHORT	BATH,	STRONG	MEAT	We	took	a	slice	of	the	roast	cooked	to	just	120	degrees	(for	about	two
hours)	and	attached	a	2-pound	weight	with	a	piece	of	twine.	Because	the	enzymes	in	the	meat	had	little	time
to	work,	this	sample	was	tough,	and	it	held	the	weight	for	15	seconds	before	tearing	in	half.






	
LONG	SOAK,	TENDER	CUT	When	we	tied	a	2-pound	weight	to	a	slice	of	the	meat	that	had	cooked	at
120	degrees	for	48	hours	straight,	the	meat	didn’t	hold	for	a	second.	The	enzymes	had	worked	their	magic
with	time,	and	the	beef	was	so	delicate	it	tore	in	half	immediately.



LOW-TEMPERATURE	TENDERIZING	AT	WORK	
BEEF
This	method	is	designed	for	slightly	tough	cuts	of	meat	with	little	connective
tissue.	Low-temperature	tenderizing	is	not	necessary	when	preparing	supremely
tender	cuts	like	the	tenderloin.	However,	slightly	tougher	(and	less	expensive)
roasts	from	the	round	or	sirloin	really	benefit	from	this	technique.	While	enzymes
active	at	this	low	temperature	do	weaken	collagen,	a	key	component	of	the
connective	tissue,	they	are	more	effective	on	muscle	proteins.	There	are	better
ways	to	tenderize	collagen-heavy	meats	(see	concept	7).



SLOW-ROASTED	BEEF
SERVES	6	TO	8

We	don’t	recommend	cooking	this	roast	past	medium.	Open	the	oven	door	as
little	as	possible	and	remove	the	roast	from	the	oven	while	taking	its
temperature.	If	the	roast	has	not	reached	the	desired	temperature	in	the	time
specified	in	step	3,	heat	the	oven	to	225	degrees	for	five	minutes,	shut	it	off,	and
continue	to	cook	the	roast	to	the	desired	temperature.	For	a	smaller	(2½-to	3½-
pound)	roast,	reduce	the	amount	of	kosher	salt	to	3	teaspoons	and	pepper	to	1½
teaspoons.	For	a	4½-to	6-pound	roast,	cut	in	half	crosswise	before	cooking	to
create	two	smaller	roasts.	Slice	the	roast	as	thin	as	possible.

1				 (3½-to	4½-pound)	boneless	eye-round	roast,	trimmed
4				 teaspoons	kosher	salt
2				 teaspoons	plus	1	tablespoon	vegetable	oil
2				 teaspoons	pepper

1.	Sprinkle	all	sides	of	roast	evenly	with	salt.	Wrap	with	plastic	wrap	and
refrigerate	for	18	to	24	hours.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	225	degrees.	Pat	roast

dry	with	paper	towels;	rub	with	2	teaspoons	oil	and	sprinkle	all	sides	evenly	with
pepper.	Heat	remaining	tablespoon	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat
until	starting	to	smoke.	Sear	roast	until	browned	on	all	sides,	about	12	minutes.
Transfer	roast	to	wire	rack	set	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Roast	until	meat	registers
115	degrees	(for	medium-rare),	1¼	to	1¾	hours,	or	125	degrees	(for	medium),
1¾	to	2¼	hours.
3.	Turn	oven	off;	leave	roast	in	oven,	without	opening	door,	until	center	of

roast	registers	130	degrees	(for	medium-rare)	or	140	degrees	(for	medium),	30	to
50	minutes	longer.	Transfer	roast	to	carving	board	and	let	rest	for	15	minutes.
Slice	meat	crosswise	as	thin	as	possible	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	an	inexpensive	slow-roasted	beef	recipe,	we	transform	a	bargain	cut	into	a
tender,	juicy	roast	by	salting	the	meat	a	full	day	before	roasting.	The	salt
penetrates	the	meat	where	it	dissolves	some	of	the	muscle	proteins,	making	it
easier	for	the	enzymes	to	break	them	down.	In	addition,	the	soluble	proteins	hold
moisture,	which	helps	to	prevent	the	meat	from	drying	out.	(For	more	on	salting,
see	concept	12.)	We	then	cook	the	meat	at	a	very	low	temperature,	which	allows
the	meat’s	enzymes	to	act	as	natural	tenderizers,	breaking	down	its	tough	muscle
proteins.
CHOOSE	FROM	A	LOW-COST	LINEUP	Not	all	bargain	cuts	have	the

potential	to	taste	like	a	million	bucks—or	look	like	it	when	carved	and	served	on
a	plate.	We	tried	the	eye-round	roast,	chuck	eye,	top	round,	and	bottom	round
rump.	While	the	chuck	eye	was	too	fatty,	the	top	round	an	odd,	uneven	shape,
and	the	bottom	round	rump	too	tough	to	carve,	we	loved	the	eye-round	roast	for
its	good	flavor,	relative	tenderness,	and	uniform	shape,	which	means	even
cooking	and	good	looks	on	the	plate.
SALT	EARLY	We	tried	salting	the	roast	for	four,	12,	and	24	hours.	Because

the	process	of	diffusion	causes	salt	to	travel	from	areas	of	higher	to	lower
concentration,	the	full	24	hours	gave	it	the	most	time	to	penetrate	deep	into	the
meat	and	season	the	roast	evenly	(though	as	few	as	18	hours	is	effective).	The
salt	dissolves	some	of	the	proteins,	too,	making	it	easier	for	the	enzymes	to	break
them	down.
SEAR,	THEN	ELEVATE	A	roast	cooked	entirely	in	a	cool	oven	will	have	a

soft,	pallid	exterior.	A	quick	sear	in	a	hot	skillet	develops	a	flavorful	crust	on	the
meat	and	is	an	essential	first	step	in	this	recipe.	Rather	than	placing	the	roast
directly	in	a	roasting	pan,	we	elevate	the	roast	on	a	rack	set	inside	a	rimmed
baking	sheet.	The	rack	allows	the	oven	heat	to	circulate	evenly	around	the	meat
and	prevents	the	bottom	crust	from	steaming	in	the	oven	(which	would	happen	if
the	roast	was	set	directly	in	a	pan).
UTILIZE	CARRYOVER	COOKING	It’s	important	to	shut	the	oven	off

before	the	internal	temperature	of	the	roast	reaches	122	degrees;	in	this	recipe
we	stop	at	115	degrees.	This	allows	the	oven	to	cool	while	the	roast	continues	to
cook,	just	more	slowly.	Like	carryover	cooking	(see	concept	3),	this	allows	the
process	of	conduction	to	continue	to	cook	the	meat,	preserving	tenderness	and
juiciness,	even	when	the	external	heat	source	is	no	longer	active.	The	roast	takes
another	30	to	50	minutes	to	slowly	climb	from	115	to	a	final	temperature	of	130
degrees	for	medium-rare,	and	much	of	this	time	the	internal	temperature	is	still



below	122	so	the	cathepsins	are	continuing	to	make	the	roast	more	tender.



INEXPENSIVE	GRILL-ROASTED	BEEF	WITH	GARLIC	AND
ROSEMARY
SERVES	6	TO	8

A	pair	of	kitchen	shears	works	well	for	punching	the	holes	in	the	aluminum	pan.
We	prefer	a	top	sirloin	roast,	but	you	can	substitute	a	top	round	or	bottom	round
roast.	Start	this	recipe	the	day	before	you	plan	to	grill	so	the	salt	rub	has	time	to
flavor	and	tenderize	the	meat.

6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	rosemary
4				 teaspoons	kosher	salt
1				 tablespoon	pepper
1				 (3-to	4-pound)	top	sirloin	roast
1				 (13	by	9-inch)	disposable	aluminum	roasting	pan

1.	Combine	garlic,	rosemary,	salt,	and	pepper	in	bowl.	Sprinkle	all	sides	of
roast	evenly	with	salt	mixture,	wrap	with	plastic	wrap,	and	refrigerate	for	18	to
24	hours.
2A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Light	large

chimney	starter	half	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(3	quarts).	When	top	coals
are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	one-third	of	grill.	Set	cooking
grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	halfway.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5
minutes.
2B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.
3.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	roast	on	grill	(hot	side	if	using	charcoal)

and	cook	(covered	if	using	gas)	until	well	browned	on	all	sides,	10	to	12
minutes,	turning	as	needed.	(If	flare-ups	occur,	move	roast	to	cooler	side	of	grill
until	flames	die	down.)
4.	Meanwhile,	punch	fifteen	¼-inch	holes	in	center	of	disposable	pan	in	area

roughly	same	size	as	roast.	Once	browned,	place	beef	in	pan	over	holes	and
transfer	pan	to	cool	side	of	grill	(if	using	charcoal)	or	turn	primary	burner	to
medium	and	turn	other	burner(s)	off	(if	using	gas).	Cover	and	cook	until	meat
registers	120	to	125	degrees	(for	medium-rare)	or	130	to	135	degrees	(for



medium),	40	minutes	to	1	hour,	rotating	pan	halfway	through	cooking.
5.	Transfer	meat	to	wire	rack	set	in	rimmed	baking	sheet,	tent	loosely	with

aluminum	foil,	and	let	rest	for	20	minutes.	Transfer	meat	to	carving	board,	slice
thin	against	grain,	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	recipe	translates	our	slow-roasting	method	from	the	oven	to	the	grill.	The
trick	is	to	create	enough	heat	on	the	grill	in	order	to	sear	the	roast—but	not	so
much	that	the	roast	cooks	too	quickly,	finishing	before	the	cathepsins	have	had
time	to	do	their	work.
KEEP	THE	HEAT	DOWN	Traditional	recipes	for	grill-roasting	sear	the

meat	over	the	hot	side	of	the	grill,	then	move	it	to	the	cooler	side,	where	it	cooks
at	a	gentler	pace.	To	ensure	an	evenly	cooked,	pink,	tender	interior,	we	adjusted
that	approach	in	two	ways:	First,	we	minimized	the	heat	output	by	using	only
half	a	chimney’s	worth	of	coals—just	enough	to	give	the	meat	a	good	sear.	(To
replicate	this	effect	on	a	gas	grill,	we	turn	the	heat	down	after	searing.)	Second,
we	shielded	the	seared	roast	from	excess	heat	by	placing	it	in	a	disposable
aluminum	pan	when	we	moved	it	to	the	grill’s	cooler	side.	Both	measures	help
keep	the	roast	below	122	degrees	for	as	long	as	possible.
PUNCH	HOLES	It’s	important	to	punch	holes	in	the	disposable	aluminum

roasting	pan.	Without	them,	the	juices	that	exude	from	the	meat	as	it	cooks	on
the	grill	will	pool	around	the	roast	and	turn	its	underside	boiled	and	gray,	ruining
any	crust	achieved	from	searing.	The	addition	of	a	dozen	or	so	small	escape
channels	in	the	bottom	of	the	pan	allows	the	liquid	to	drain	away	and	leaves	the
meat	perfectly	pink	with	a	crisp,	flavorful	crust.
THINK	THIN	When	slicing	this	roast	beef	to	serve,	peel	off	wafer-thin	slices

of	the	rosy	meat	with	your	knife.	(A	slicing	knife	is	ideal	for	this	task.)	Cutting
extra-thin	slices	will	make	the	meat	seem	even	more	tender.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
DRY-AGING	STEAK	AT	HOME

Wrapping	steaks	in	cheesecloth	and	storing	them	in	the	fridge	for	four	days	gives	them	a
meatier	flavor	and	a	tender	texture.

To	try	replicating	the	results	of	commercial	dry-aging	at	home,	we	bought	rib-eye	and	strip	steaks	($10.99
per	pound)	and	stored	them	in	the	back	of	the	refrigerator,	where	the	temperature	is	coldest.	Since	home
refrigerators	are	less	humid	than	the	commercial	units	used	for	dry-aging,	we	wrapped	the	steaks	in
cheesecloth	to	allow	air	to	pass	through	while	also	preventing	excessive	dehydration.	We	checked	them
after	four	days	(the	longest	we	felt	comfortable	storing	raw	beef	in	a	home	fridge).

Their	edges	looked	appropriately	dried	out,	so	we	pan-seared	the	home-aged	steaks	and	tasted	them
alongside	a	batch	of	the	same	commercially	dry-aged	cuts	costing	$19.99	per	pound.	Our	findings?	Sure
enough,	four	days	of	dry-aging	in	a	home	fridge	gave	the	steaks	a	comparably	meatier	flavor	and	tender
texture.	As	long	as	you	remember	to	wrap	the	meat	in	plenty	of	cheesecloth,	place	it	on	a	wire	rack	for	air
circulation,	and	store	it	in	the	coldest	part	of	the	fridge,	you	can	skip	shelling	out	extra	money	for
commercially	aged	beef.



CONCEPT	7

Cook	Tough	Cuts	Beyond	Well-Done
Tough	cuts	of	meat	don’t	have	to	be	unpalatable.	They	can	become	meltingly
tender	…	if	cooked	to	death.	This	seems	contradictory	to	most	meat	cookery,
where	more	time	in	the	oven	yields	drier,	chewier	results.	What’s	going	on?



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
As	we	saw	here,	meat	mainly	consists	of	four	components:	muscle	fiber,
connective	tissue,	fat,	and	lots	of	water.	The	fibers,	which	are	long,	thin,	and
bundled	together	in	elongated	groups,	create	the	“grain”	of	the	meat.	Though
small	in	young	animals,	muscle	fibers	grow	with	both	age	and	exercise.	They	are
generally	tender	because	of	their	high	water	content,	which	is	around	75	percent.
In	cooking,	the	strands	of	muscle	fiber	begin	to	shrink,	first	in	diameter	between
104	and	145	degrees,	and	then	in	length	above	145	degrees,	expelling	moisture
as	they	contract,	like	wringing	out	a	wet	towel.	The	rate	of	moisture	loss
becomes	significant	around	140	degrees,	however,	when	the	connective	tissue
surrounding	the	muscle	fibers	begins	to	tighten	as	well,	squeezing	the	fibers
even	more	firmly.	This	is	why	tender	cuts	are	best	cooked	to	rare	or	medium-rare
before	this	process	really	gets	underway.
The	connective	tissue	surrounding	the	fiber	bundles	is	a	membranous,

translucent	covering	that	consists	of	cells	and	protein	filaments	and	provides
both	structure	and	support	to	muscles.	Collagen	is	the	predominant	protein	in
connective	tissue	and	is	found	in	everything	from	a	cow’s	muscle	tendons	to	its
hooves.	In	contrast	to	the	muscle	fibers,	collagen	is	composed	of	three	protein
chains	tightly	wound	together	in	a	triple-stranded	helix	and,	therefore,	is	almost
unchewable	when	raw.	In	cooking,	this	sturdy	protein	remains	largely	unaffected
when	heated	to	temperatures	lower	than	140	degrees.	It’s	only	when	the	meat
exceeds	this	temperature	that	collagen	begins	to	relax,	unwinding	into	individual
strands.	When	held	at	this	temperature—or,	ideally,	one	a	bit	higher	(preferably
160	to	180	degrees)—for	an	extended	period	of	time,	the	triple	helix	of	collagen
unwinds	to	form	gelatin,	a	single-stranded	protein	able	to	retain	up	to	10	times
its	weight	in	moisture,	tenderize	meat,	and	add	a	thick	richness	to	the	sauces	of
braised	dishes.	The	conversion	of	collagen	to	gelatin	is	both	temperature-and
time-dependent;	the	longer	the	food	is	held	in	the	ideal	temperature	range	the
more	collagen	will	break	down.
Extended	cooking	destroys	lean	cuts	with	little	collagen	(like	pork	tenderloin)

because	as	the	muscle	fibers	contract,	they	steadily	give	up	their	juices	and
become	drier	and	tougher	with	time.	Therefore,	cuts	with	little	collagen	should
be	cooked	with	moisture	preservation	in	mind,	with	a	final	cooking	temperature
no	higher	than	130	degrees	for	beef	or	150	degrees	for	pork.	But	collagen-rich
cuts	are	too	tough	to	eat	when	cooked	to	rare	or	medium-rare.	Extended	cooking
actually	improves	the	texture	of	tough	cuts	with	lots	of	sinuous	collagen	(like
beef	brisket),	because	it	allows	the	abundant	collagen	to	transform	into	gelatin,



retaining	significantly	more	moisture,	and	the	tightened	muscle	fibers	to	relax	a
bit,	drawing	moisture	back	inside	the	meat.



FROM	COLLAGEN	TO	GELATIN

	



MELTING	DOWN	At	temperatures	above	140	degrees,	the	triple	helix	of	collagen	unwinds	to	form	three
strands	of	gelatin.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	slow	rate	at	which	collagen	melts	into	gelatin,	we	cleaved	1
pound	of	oxtail	(an	almost	obscenely	collagen-rich	cut	of	meat)	into	rough	½-
inch	pieces	(chopping	through	the	bone).	Placing	these	pieces	in	one	large
saucepan,	we	filled	the	pan	with	just	enough	water	(dyed	dark	brown	for
visibility)	to	cover	the	meat.	We	brought	the	liquid	to	a	simmer	on	the	stovetop,
covered	the	pot,	and	cooked	it	in	a	325-degree	oven	for	three	hours.	Along	the
way,	every	30	minutes	we	removed	¼	cup	of	the	braising	liquid,	put	it	in	a
separate	cup,	and	transferred	it	to	the	fridge	to	cool	and	set.	After	they	were	all
fully	chilled,	we	examined	the	samples	to	see	how	they	changed.



THE	RESULTS
While	the	30-minute	sample	showed	little	change	from	the	control	(¼	cup	liquid
reserved	prior	to	cooking),	the	one-hour	sample	was	slightly	thickened.	The	two-
hour	sample	turned	to	a	fragile	jelly	that	could	be	inverted	onto	a	plate	but
quickly	lost	its	structure.	The	three-hour	sample	had	turned	from	a	liquid	to	a
firm	jelly	that	held	sharp	edges	when	inverted	onto	a	plate.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	collagen	in	meat	can	produce	enough	gelatin	to	turn	water	into	Jell-O.
That’s	because	gelatin	can	hold	up	to	10	times	its	weight	in	moisture.	But	as	this
experiment	shows,	the	conversion	of	collagen	to	gelatin	is	a	slow	process.	The
temperature	of	the	oxtail	exceeded	140	degrees—the	temperature	at	which
collagen	begins	to	unwind	into	individual	strands	of	gelatin—rather	quickly
since	the	oxtail	and	water	mixture	was	brought	to	a	simmer	on	the	stovetop.
However,	collagen’s	conversion	to	gelatin	is	dependent	not	only	on	temperature
but	also	on	time.	That’s	why	the	one-hour	sample	failed	to	hold	its	shape	when
chilled.	Even	with	such	small	pieces	of	oxtail,	more	collagen	was	still	being
converted	to	gelatin	after	two	hours	of	cooking—as	demonstrated	by	the	firmer
texture	of	the	sample	that	was	taken	out	of	the	pot	after	three	hours	of	cooking
and	then	chilled.
So,	when	cooking	collagen-rich	cuts,	take	your	time.	Well-done	meat	has

already	lost	most	of	its	natural	moisture.	The	goal	now	is	to	maximize	the
conversion	of	collagen	to	gelatin,	and	this	takes	time—a	lot	of	time!



MELTING	OXTAIL	COLLAGEN	INTO	GELATIN

	
AFTER	ONE	HOUR

After	one	hour	of	braising,	little	of	the	oxtail’s	collagen	had	melted	into	gelatin	and	then	seeped	into	the
surrounding	liquid.	When	we	chilled	a	sample	of	the	braising	liquid	to	see	how	much	it	would	set,	we	were
left	with	a	mushy	soup.

	
AFTER	TWO	HOURS

After	two	hours	of	braising,	the	chunks	of	oxtail	began	to	break	down.	A	sample	of	the	braising	liquid,	now
containing	more	gelatin,	became	much	firmer	(though	still	a	bit	mushy)	when	chilled.



	
AFTER	THREE	HOURS

After	three	hours	of	braising,	the	oxtail	was	in	shreds,	and	enough	collagen	had	turned	to	gelatin	to	produce
a	veritable	Jell-O	mold	when	a	sample	of	the	braising	liquid	was	chilled.



COLLAGEN	BREAKDOWN	AT	WORK	
SLOW-ROASTING
Collagen-rich	cuts	contain	a	lot	of	gelatin	and	that	gelatin	can	make	tough	cuts
of	meat	especially	moist	and	tender.	But	you	can’t	rush	this	process.	A	tough
pork	butt	should	be	roasted	for	at	least	five	hours.



SLOW-ROASTED	PORK	SHOULDER	WITH	PEACH	SAUCE
SERVES	8	TO	12

Add	more	water	to	the	roasting	pan	as	necessary	during	the	last	hours	of
cooking	to	prevent	the	fond	from	burning.	Serve	the	pork	with	the	accompanying
peach	sauce	or	with	cherry	sauce	or	a	sweet-tart	chutney	(recipes	follow).

PORK	ROAST
1				 (6-to	8-pound)	bone-in	pork	butt	(also	known	as	Boston	butt)
				1⁄3 cup	kosher	salt
				1⁄3 cup	packed	light	brown	sugar
					 Pepper

PEACH	SAUCE
10				 ounces	frozen	peaches,	cut	into	1-inch	chunks,	or	2	fresh	peaches,	peeled,	pitted,	and	cut	into	½-

inch	wedges
2				 cups	dry	white	wine
½				 cup	granulated	sugar
¼				 cup	plus	1	tablespoon	rice	vinegar
2				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
1				 tablespoon	whole-grain	mustard

1.	FOR	THE	PORK	ROAST:	Using	sharp	knife,	cut	slits	1	inch	apart	in
crosshatch	pattern	in	fat	cap	of	roast,	being	careful	not	to	cut	into	meat.	Combine
salt	and	sugar	in	bowl.	Rub	salt	mixture	over	entire	pork	shoulder	and	into	slits.
Wrap	roast	tightly	in	double	layer	of	plastic	wrap,	place	on	rimmed	baking	sheet,
and	refrigerate	for	12	to	24	hours.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Unwrap

roast	and	brush	any	excess	salt	mixture	from	surface.	Season	roast	with	pepper.
Set	V-rack	in	large	roasting	pan,	spray	with	vegetable	oil	spray,	and	place	roast
on	rack.	Add	1	quart	water	to	roasting	pan.
3.	Cook	roast,	basting	twice	during	cooking,	until	meat	is	extremely	tender

and	roast	near	(but	not	touching)	bone	registers	190	degrees,	5	to	6	hours.
Transfer	roast	to	carving	board	and	let	rest,	tented	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,
for	1	hour.	Transfer	liquid	in	roasting	pan	to	fat	separator	and	let	stand	for	5



minutes.	Pour	off	¼	cup	jus	and	set	aside;	discard	fat	and	reserve	remaining	jus
for	another	use.
4.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Bring	peaches,	wine,	sugar,	¼	cup	vinegar,	¼	cup

defatted	jus,	and	thyme	sprigs	to	simmer	in	small	saucepan;	cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	reduced	to	2	cups,	about	30	minutes.	Stir	in	remaining	1
tablespoon	vinegar	and	mustard.	Remove	thyme	sprigs,	cover,	and	keep	warm.
5.	Using	sharp	paring	knife,	cut	around	inverted	T-shaped	bone	until	it	can	be

pulled	free	from	roast	(use	clean	kitchen	towel	to	grasp	bone).	Using	serrated
knife,	slice	roast.	Serve,	passing	sauce	separately.

SLOW-ROASTED	PORK	SHOULDER	WITH	CHERRY	SAUCE
Substitute	10	ounces	fresh	or	frozen	pitted	cherries	for	peaches,	red	wine	for
white	wine,	and	red	wine	vinegar	for	rice	vinegar	and	add	¼	cup	ruby	port	along
with	defatted	jus.	Increase	granulated	sugar	to	¾	cup,	omit	thyme	sprigs	and
mustard,	and	reduce	mixture	to	1½	cups.



FENNEL-APPLE	CHUTNEY
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	SLOW-ROASTED	PORK	SHOULDER

1				 tablespoon	olive	oil
1				 large	fennel	bulb,	stalks	discarded,	bulb	halved,	cored,	and	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 onion,	chopped	fine
2				 Granny	Smith	apples,	peeled,	cored,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
1				 cup	rice	vinegar
¾				 cup	sugar
2				 teaspoons	grated	lemon	zest
1				 teaspoon	salt
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes

Heat	oil	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	fennel
and	onion	and	cook	until	softened,	about	10	minutes.	Add	apples,	vinegar,	sugar,
lemon	zest,	salt,	and	pepper	flakes.	Bring	to	simmer	and	cook	until	thickened,
about	20	minutes.	Let	cool	to	room	temperature,	about	2	hours	or	overnight.
Serve	with	pork.



GREEN	TOMATO	CHUTNEY
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	SLOW-ROASTED	PORK	SHOULDER

2				 pounds	green	tomatoes,	cored	and	cut	into	1-inch	pieces
¾				 cup	sugar
¾				 cup	distilled	white	vinegar
1				 teaspoon	coriander	seeds
1				 teaspoon	salt
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice

Bring	tomatoes,	sugar,	vinegar,	coriander	seeds,	salt,	and	pepper	flakes	to
simmer	in	medium	saucepan.	Cook	until	thickened,	about	40	minutes.	Let	cool
to	room	temperature,	about	2	hours	or	overnight.	Stir	in	lemon	juice	just	before
serving	with	pork.



RED	BELL	PEPPER	CHUTNEY
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	SLOW-ROASTED	PORK	SHOULDER

1				 tablespoon	olive	oil
1				 red	onion,	chopped	fine
4				 red	bell	peppers,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
1				 cup	white	wine	vinegar
½				 cup	plus	2	tablespoons	sugar
2				 garlic	cloves,	peeled	and	smashed
1				 (1-inch)	piece	ginger,	peeled,	sliced	into	thin	coins,	and	smashed
1				 teaspoon	yellow	mustard	seeds
1				 teaspoon	salt
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes

Heat	oil	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	onion
and	cook	until	softened,	about	7	minutes.	Add	bell	peppers,	vinegar,	sugar,
garlic,	ginger,	mustard	seeds,	salt,	and	pepper	flakes.	Bring	to	simmer	and	cook
until	thickened,	about	40	minutes.	Let	cool	to	room	temperature,	about	2	hours
or	overnight.	Serve	with	pork.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	is	a	slow,	slow	roast.	Not	only	do	we	let	the	roast	sit	with	a	mixture	of	salt
and	sugar	overnight;	we	cook	it	for	almost	six	hours	straight.	But	don’t	let	that
intimidate	you.	This	roast	is	the	definition	of	tender	when	it	finally	emerges	from
the	oven.	And	don’t	worry:	This	cut	has	so	much	fat,	it’s	almost	impossible	to
overcook.
USE	BONE-IN	PORK	BUTT	Instead	of	the	lean,	center-cut	loin,	our	choice

for	roasting	is	pork	butt	(also	known	as	Boston	butt).	This	shoulder	roast	packs
plenty	of	intramuscular	fat	that	melts	and	bastes	the	meat	during	cooking,	and
it’s	available	with	or	without	the	bone.	We	prefer	bone-in	for	two	reasons:	First,
bone	conducts	heat	poorly	and,	in	effect,	acts	as	an	insulator	against	heat.	This
means	that	the	meat	surrounding	it	stays	cooler	and	the	roast	cooks	at	a	slower,
gentler	pace.	Second,	bones	have	a	large	percentage	of	the	meat’s	connective
tissue	attached	to	them,	which	eventually	breaks	down	to	gelatin	and	helps	the
roast	retain	moisture.	(For	more	on	bones,	see	concept	10.)	This	cut	may	take	a
long	time	to	cook,	but	it’s	also	inexpensive,	loaded	with	flavorful	intramuscular
fat,	and	boasts	a	thick	fat	cap	that	renders	to	a	bronze,	baconlike	crust.
LET	SALTY-SWEET	RUB	SIT	For	super-tender	meat	and	a	deeply

browned	crust,	our	roast	pork	shoulder	takes	time—about	24	hours	total—but
the	results	are	worth	the	wait.	We	rub	our	roast	with	a	mixture	of	salt	and	sugar
and	let	it	rest	overnight.	The	salt	enhances	juiciness	and	seasons	the	meat
throughout,	while	the	sugar	caramelizes	to	create	a	crackling-crisp,	salty-sweet
crust.
SET	OVEN	TO	SLOW	Cooking	pork	slowly	(at	325	degrees	for	five	to	six

hours)	pushes	the	meat	well	beyond	its	“done”	mark	into	the	190-degree	range.
In	lean	cuts,	this	well-done	temperature	would	result	in	a	devastatingly	dry	piece
of	meat.	But	because	there	is	so	much	collagen	and	fat	in	this	roast,	the	high
temperature	encourages	intramuscular	fat	to	melt,	collagen	to	break	down	and
tenderize	the	meat,	and	the	fat	cap	to	render	and	crisp.	Most	importantly,	gelatin
formed	from	the	collagen	holds	tightly	on	to	the	moisture,	producing	a	juicy,	not
dry,	roast.
PLACE	IN	A	V-RACK	When	the	pork	is	cooked	directly	in	the	pan,	the	dark

layer	of	drippings	burns	quickly	thanks	to	its	high	sugar	content,	and	therefore
these	usually	flavorful	bits	of	fond	are	not	ideal	to	be	made	into	a	sauce.	This	is
easily	fixed	with	a	V-rack	and	a	quart	of	water	poured	into	the	bottom	of	the	pan.
Once	the	roast	is	perched	higher	up,	its	fat	drips	down	and	mixes	with	the	water
to	create	a	significant	amount	of	jus,	with	no	burning.



COLLAGEN	BREAKDOWN	AT	WORK	
BARBECUING
Barbecuing	is	the	traditional	slow-cooking	method	used	with	ribs,	pulled	pork,
and	brisket	on	the	grill.	Here	we’re	taking	the	concept	of	cooking	slow	and	low
to	a	high	final	temperature—breaking	down	muscle	fiber	and	melting	collagen
as	we	go—and	moving	it	outdoors.	Because	the	goal	is	to	impart	as	much	smoke
flavor	as	possible,	a	long	cooking	time	over	a	relatively	low	fire	is	required.



BARBECUED	PULLED	PORK
SERVES	8

Pulled	pork	can	be	made	with	a	fresh	ham	or	picnic	roast,	although	our
preference	is	for	Boston	butt.	Preparing	pulled	pork	requires	little	effort,	but	lots
of	time.	Plan	on	10	hours	from	start	to	finish:	three	hours	with	the	spice	rub,	one
hour	to	come	to	room	temperature,	three	hours	on	the	grill,	two	hours	in	the
oven,	and	one	hour	to	rest.	Hickory	is	the	classic	choice	when	it	comes	to
supplying	the	smoke	in	this	recipe.	Four	medium	wood	chunks,	soaked	in	water
for	one	hour,	can	be	substituted	for	the	wood	chip	packets	on	a	charcoal	grill.
Serve	the	pulled	pork	on	plain	white	bread	or	warmed	buns	with	the	classic
accompaniments	of	dill	pickle	chips	and	coleslaw.	You	will	need	a	disposable
aluminum	roasting	pan	as	well	as	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil	and	a	brown	paper
grocery	bag.

1				 (6-to	8-pound)	bone-in	pork	roast,	preferably	pork	butt	(also	known	as	Boston	butt),	trimmed
¾				 cup	Dry	Rub	for	Barbecue	(recipe	follows)
4				 cups	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained
1				 (13	by	9-inch)	disposable	aluminum	roasting	pan
2				 cups	barbecue	sauce	(recipes	follow)

1.	Pat	pork	dry	with	paper	towels,	then	massage	dry	rub	into	meat.	Wrap	meat
in	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	3	hours	or	up	to	3	days.
2.	At	least	1	hour	prior	to	cooking,	remove	roast	from	refrigerator,	unwrap,

and	let	sit	at	room	temperature.	Using	2	large	pieces	of	heavy-duty	aluminum
foil,	wrap	soaked	chips	in	2	foil	packets	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	tops.
3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Light	large

chimney	starter	three-quarters	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(4½	quarts).	When
top	coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Place
wood	chip	packets	on	coals.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent
halfway.	Heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,	about	5	minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packets	over	primary	burner.

Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are
smoking,	about	15	minutes.	Turn	primary	burner	to	medium-high	and	turn	off
other	burner(s).	(Adjust	primary	burner	as	needed	to	maintain	grill	temperature



of	300	to	325	degrees.)
4.	Set	roast	in	disposable	pan,	place	on	cool	side	of	grill,	and	cook	for	3	hours.

During	final	20	minutes	of	cooking,	adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position
and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.
5.	Wrap	disposable	pan	with	heavy-duty	foil	and	cook	in	oven	until	meat	is

fork-tender,	about	2	hours.
6.	Carefully	slide	foil-wrapped	pan	with	roast	into	brown	paper	bag.	Crimp

end	shut	and	let	rest	for	1	hour.
7.	Transfer	roast	to	carving	board	and	unwrap.	Separate	roast	into	muscle

sections,	removing	fat,	if	desired,	and	tearing	meat	into	shreds	with	your	fingers.
Place	shredded	meat	in	large	bowl	and	toss	with	1	cup	barbecue	sauce.	Serve,
passing	remaining	sauce	separately.



DRY	RUB	FOR	BARBECUE
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP

You	can	adjust	the	proportions	of	spices	in	this	all-purpose	rub	or	add	or
subtract	a	spice,	as	you	wish.	Extra	rub	can	be	stored	in	an	airtight	container	for
several	weeks.

¼				 cup	paprika
2				 tablespoons	chili	powder
2				 tablespoons	ground	cumin
2				 tablespoons	packed	dark	brown	sugar
2				 tablespoons	salt
1				 tablespoon	dried	oregano
1				 tablespoon	granulated	sugar
1				 tablespoon	black	pepper
1				 tablespoon	white	pepper

1–2				 teaspoons	cayenne	pepper

Combine	all	ingredients	in	small	bowl.



WESTERN	SOUTH	CAROLINA	BARBECUE	SAUCE
MAKES	2	CUPS

The	sauce	can	be	refrigerated	in	an	airtight	container	for	up	to	four	days.

1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
½				 cup	finely	chopped	onion
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
½				 cup	cider	vinegar
½				 cup	Worcestershire	sauce
1				 tablespoon	dry	mustard
1				 tablespoon	packed	dark	brown	sugar
1				 tablespoon	paprika
1				 teaspoon	salt
1				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
1				 cup	ketchup

Heat	oil	in	small	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Add	onion	and	cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	softened,	5	to	7	minutes.	Stir	in	garlic	and	cook	until	fragrant,
about	30	seconds.	Stir	in	vinegar,	Worcestershire,	mustard,	sugar,	paprika,	salt,
and	cayenne,	bring	to	simmer,	and	stir	in	ketchup.	Cook	over	low	heat	until
thickened,	about	15	minutes.



EASTERN	NORTH	CAROLINA	BARBECUE	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS

This	sauce	can	be	refrigerated	in	an	airtight	container	for	up	to	four	days.

1				 cup	distilled	white	vinegar
1				 cup	cider	vinegar
1				 tablespoon	sugar
1				 tablespoon	red	pepper	flakes
1				 tablespoon	hot	sauce
					 Salt	and	pepper

Mix	all	ingredients	together	in	bowl	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.



MID–SOUTH	CAROLINA	MUSTARD	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	2½	CUPS

The	sauce	can	be	refrigerated	in	an	airtight	container	for	up	to	four	days.

1				 cup	cider	vinegar
1				 cup	vegetable	oil
6				 tablespoons	Dijon	mustard
2				 tablespoons	maple	syrup	or	honey
4				 teaspoons	Worcestershire	sauce
1				 teaspoon	hot	sauce
					 Salt	and	pepper

Mix	all	ingredients	together	in	bowl	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Slow-cooked	pulled	pork	is	a	summertime	favorite;	however,	many	barbecue
procedures	demand	the	regular	attention	of	the	cook	for	eight	hours	or	more.	We
wanted	to	find	a	way	to	make	moist,	fork-tender	pulled	pork	without	the
marathon	cooking	time	and	constant	attention	to	the	grill.	A	combination	of
cooking	at	a	relatively	low	heat	on	the	grill	and	then	in	the	oven	creates	a	well-
done,	tender,	and	smoky	pork	roast	that	goes	well	with	many	geographical
variants	of	a	traditional	sauce.
RUB	IN	THE	SPICES	As	with	any	other	aspect	of	barbecuing,	there	is

considerable	controversy	over	not	only	what	is	the	best	combination	of	spices,
but	how	to	combine	them,	and	even	how	to	apply	them.	There	are	some	who	say
the	spices	should	be	ground	together	with	a	mortar	and	pestle,	others	who	resort
to	the	convenience	of	grinding	them	in	an	electric	coffee	grinder	or	spice	mill,
and	finally	those	who	simply	buy	the	individual	spices	off	the	shelf,	mix	them	in
a	bowl,	and	call	it	done.	It’s	your	call,	but	most	longtime	barbecuers	favor	the
last	method;	while	home-ground	spices	have	more	pungent	flavors,	they	are,	to
put	it	simply,	also	a	lot	more	work.	For	an	even	simpler	method,	you	can	follow
the	example	of	those	who	just	layer	one	spice	over	another	directly	on	the	meat.
PUT	IN	THE	OVEN	TO	FINISH	We	cook	the	roast	first	on	the	grill	to

absorb	smoky	flavor	(from	wood	chips—no	smoker	required).	We	use	a
moderate	amount	of	charcoal—more	than	a	typical	low-and-slow	method,	but
less	than	what	we	use	for	other	large	roasts,	which	could	give	it	too	much	char.
We	then	finish	the	pork	in	the	oven	at	a	relatively	low	temperature	for	two	hours.
This	method	produces	almost	the	same	results	as	the	traditional	barbecue,	but	in
considerably	less	time	and	with	much	less	effort.	Placing	the	roast	in	a
disposable	pan	shields	it	from	the	heat	source	on	the	grill,	so	there’s	no	risk	of
scorching	the	meat.	The	pan	also	makes	it	easy	to	get	the	meat	from	the	grill	into
the	oven.
PAPER	BAG	IT	Don’t	forget	the	bag!	Allowing	the	pork	to	rest	for	an	hour

inside	a	paper	grocery	sack	allows	time	for	the	flavorful	juices	to	be	reabsorbed.
In	addition,	it	produces	a	steaming	effect	that	helps	break	down	any	remaining
tough	collagen.	The	result	is	a	much	more	savory	and	succulent	roast.
TOSS	WITH	THE	SAUCE	Almost	all	traditional	pulled	pork	recipes

involve	tossing	the	shredded	meat	in	a	sauce—and	that’s	precisely	where	the
agreement	ends.	Even	in	the	Carolinas,	tastes	don’t	fall	across	state	lines,
ranging	from	a	tangy	combination	of	vinegar	and	peppers,	the	introduction	of
tomatoes	or	ketchup,	or	even	tomatoes	and	brown	sugar.	We	play	with	a	few



options	here.



BARBECUED	BEEF	BRISKET
SERVES	8	TO	10

Two	medium	wood	chunks,	soaked	in	water	for	one	hour,	can	be	substituted	for
the	wood	chip	packet	on	a	charcoal	grill.

1				 (5-to	6-pound)	beef	brisket,	flat	cut,	fat	trimmed	to	1⁄3	to	½	inch
				2⁄3 cup	salt
½				 cup	plus	2	tablespoons	sugar
2				 cups	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained
3				 tablespoons	kosher	salt
2				 tablespoons	pepper
1				 (13	by	9-inch)	disposable	aluminum	roasting	pan	(if	using	charcoal)	or	1	disposable	aluminum	pie

plate	(if	using	gas)

1.	Using	sharp	knife,	cut	slits	in	fat	cap,	spaced	1	inch	apart,	in	crosshatch
pattern,	being	careful	not	to	cut	into	meat.	Dissolve	table	salt	and	½	cup	sugar	in
4	quarts	cold	water	in	large	container.	Submerge	brisket	in	brine,	cover,	and
refrigerate	for	2	hours.
2.	Using	large	piece	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	wrap	soaked	chips	in	foil

packet	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	top.
3.	Combine	remaining	2	tablespoons	sugar,	kosher	salt,	and	pepper	in	bowl.

Remove	brisket	from	brine	and	pat	dry	with	paper	towels.	Transfer	to	rimmed
baking	sheet	and	rub	salt	mixture	over	entire	brisket	and	into	slits.
4A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Arrange	3

quarts	unlit	charcoal	banked	against	1	side	of	grill	and	disposable	pan	filled	with
2	cups	water	on	empty	side	of	grill.	Light	large	chimney	starter	two-thirds	filled
with	charcoal	(4	quarts).	When	top	coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	on
top	of	unlit	charcoal	to	cover	one-third	of	grill	with	coals	steeply	banked	against
side	of	grill.	Place	wood	chip	packet	on	top	of	coals.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,
cover,	and	open	lid	vent	halfway.	Heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	begin	to
smoke,	about	5	minutes.
4B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packet	directly	on	primary

burner.	Place	disposable	aluminum	pie	plate	filled	with	2	cups	water	on	other
burner(s).	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips



begin	to	smoke,	about	15	minutes.	Turn	primary	burner	to	medium	and	turn
other	burner(s)	off.	(Adjust	primary	burner	as	needed	during	cooking	to	maintain
grill	temperature	between	250	and	300	degrees.)
5.	Line	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	foil	and	set	wire	rack	in	baking	sheet.	Clean

and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	brisket	fat	side	down	on	cool	side	of	grill,	as	far
away	from	coals	and	flames	as	possible	with	thickest	side	facing	coals	and
flames.	Loosely	tent	meat	with	foil	or	build	foil	shield	(see	opposite	page).
Cover	(position	lid	vent	over	meat	if	using	charcoal)	and	cook	for	3	hours.
Transfer	brisket	to	prepared	baking	sheet.
6.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Roast

brisket	until	tender	and	meat	registers	195	degrees,	about	2	hours.
7.	Transfer	brisket	to	carving	board,	tent	loosely	with	foil,	and	let	rest	for	30

minutes.	Cut	brisket	against	grain	into	long,	thin	slices	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
In	researching	recipes	for	barbecued	brisket,	we	found	cooks	could	agree	on	one
thing:	slow	cooking	(for	up	to	12	hours)	for	the	purpose	of	tenderizing.	That
seemed	like	a	lot	of	time,	though.	We	wanted	to	figure	out	a	way	to	make	cooking
this	potentially	delicious	cut	of	meat	less	daunting	and	less	time-consuming,	and
we	wanted	to	trade	in	a	professional	smoker	for	a	backyard	grill.	Brining	the
brisket	seasoned	it	throughout	and	allowed	the	meat	to	remain	juicy	even	after
hours	on	the	grill.	It’s	a	necessary	step	because	brisket,	unlike	other	frequently
slow-roasted	cuts,	does	not	contain	a	lot	of	intramuscular	fat.	Most	of	its	fat	is
on	the	outside	of	the	cut;	the	interior	is	relatively	lean,	but	with	lots	of
connective	tissue.	Therefore,	the	extra	moisture	extracted	from	the	brine	is	key
(see	concept	11	for	more	on	the	science	of	brining).
PICK	ONE	CUT	OF	BRISKET	Cut	from	the	cow’s	breast	section,	a	whole

brisket	is	a	boneless,	coarse-grained	cut	composed	of	two	smaller	roasts:	the	flat
(or	first)	cut	and	the	point	(or	second)	cut.	The	knobby	point	cut	overlaps	the
rectangular	flat	cut.	The	point	cut	has	more	marbling	and	fat,	and	the	flat	cut’s
meat	is	lean	and	topped	with	a	thick	fat	cap.	Our	recipe	calls	for	the	widely
available	flat	cut,	which	is	more	prone	to	dryness	because	it	is	so	lean,	with	very
little	marbling	to	keep	the	interior	moist.	Make	sure	that	the	fat	cap	isn’t
overtrimmed	and	is	1⁄3	to	½	inch	thick.	If	using	the	point	cut,	which	has
substantially	more	fat	and,	as	a	result,	more	moisture	when	cooked,	you	should
omit	the	step	of	brining.
CHOOSE	THE	RIGHT	WOOD	When	using	a	charcoal	grill,	we	prefer

wood	chunks	to	wood	chips	whenever	possible;	substitute	two	medium	wood
chunks,	soaked	in	water	for	one	hour,	for	the	wood	chip	packet.	We	prefer
hickory	wood	chunks	to	smoke	our	brisket.	Pecan,	maple,	oak,	or	fruitwoods
such	as	apple,	cherry,	and	peach	also	work	well.	It	is	best	to	avoid	mesquite,
which	turns	bitter	during	the	long	process	of	barbecuing.	Use	wood	chunks	that
are	about	the	size	of	a	tennis	ball.
BURN	IT	DOWN	In	our	tests,	we	had	trouble	figuring	out	how	to	maintain	a

low	temperature	in	the	grill	without	frequently	refueling.	But	then	we	realized
that	fire	can	burn	down	as	well	as	up.	We	layer	unlit	briquettes	on	the	bottom	of
our	grill	and	add	4	quarts	of	hot	coals	on	top.	The	result?	A	fire	that	burns
consistently	in	the	optimal	300-degree	range	for	about	three	hours.	We	then
transfer	the	brisket	to	the	oven	to	finish	cooking.
USE	A	FOIL	SHIELD	If	your	brisket	is	smaller	than	5	pounds	or	the	fat	cap

has	been	removed,	or	if	you	are	using	a	small	charcoal	grill,	it	may	be	necessary



to	build	a	foil	shield	in	order	to	keep	the	brisket	from	becoming	too	dark.	To	do
this,	make	two	½-inch	folds	on	the	long	side	of	an	18	by	20-inch	piece	of	heavy-
duty	aluminum	foil	to	form	a	reinforced	edge.	Place	the	foil	on	the	center	of	the
cooking	grate,	with	the	reinforced	edge	over	the	hot	side	of	the	grill.	Position	the
brisket	fat	side	down	over	the	cool	side	of	the	grill	so	that	it	covers	about	half	of
the	foil.	Pull	the	foil	over	the	brisket	to	loosely	tent	it.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TWO	CUTS	OF	BRISKET

There	are	two	smaller	roasts	in	every	whole	brisket.

Cut	from	the	cow’s	breast	section,	a	whole	brisket	is	a	boneless,	coarse-grained	cut	composed	of	two
smaller	roasts:	the	flat	(or	first)	cut	and	the	point	(or	second)	cut.	The	knobby	point	cut	(A)	overlaps	the
rectangular	flat	cut	(B).	The	point	cut	has	more	marbling	and	fat,	and	the	flat	cut’s	meat	is	lean	and	topped
with	a	thick	fat	cap.	Our	recipe	calls	for	the	widely	available	flat	cut.	Make	sure	that	the	fat	cap	isn’t
overtrimmed	and	is	1⁄3	to	½	inch	thick.

	
WHOLE	BRISKET

	
POINT	CUT



	
FLAT	CUT



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHY	IS	BRISKET	PINK?

The	pink	layer	beneath	the	surface	of	barbecued	meat	is	called	the	smoke	ring.

In	the	competitive	barbecue	world,	championship	brisket	always	contains	a	thick	smoke	ring—the	¼-inch
pink	layer	just	beneath	the	meat’s	surface.	Often	mistaken	for	underdone	meat,	smoke	rings—which	don’t
affect	taste—occur	in	most	barbecued	meats.	Smoke	rings	are	caused	by	reactions	that	occur	when	meat	is
cooked	for	a	long	time	at	a	low	temperature	in	a	closed	chamber	(i.e.,	barbecued).	Despite	the	name,	only
one	compound	in	smoke	plays	a	role	in	the	ring.	The	color	of	meat	comes	from	a	protein	called	myoglobin.
When	raw	meat	is	freshly	cut,	this	protein	is	a	deep	purple.	When	the	iron	atom	in	myoglobin	binds	to
oxygen,	it	is	a	striking	bright	red.	In	cooked	meat,	this	iron	atom	is	oxidized	and	turns	gray.	In	barbecuing,
however,	this	iron	atom	binds	to	the	nitric	oxide	of	the	smoke,	which	dissolves	in	the	moisture	on	the
surface	of	the	meat	to	create	new	compounds	similar	to	the	nitrites	that	keep	deli	meats	pink.	We	found	that
placing	a	pan	of	water	in	the	grill	added	enough	moisture	to	guarantee	a	proper	smoke	ring.



	
IF	THE	IRON	ATOM:	Binds	to	Nitric	Oxide	
THE	MEAT	COLOR	BECOMES:	Pink
	
IF	THE	IRON	ATOM:	Binds	to	Oxygen	
THE	MEAT	COLOR	BECOMES:	Red
	
IF	THE	IRON	ATOM:	Oxidizes
THE	MEAT	COLOR	BECOMES:	Gray



COLLAGEN	BREAKDOWN	AT	WORK	
BRAISING
Braising	is	the	technique	that	involves	slowly	simmering	food	in	a	small	amount
of	liquid	(generally	at	180	to	190	degrees)	in	a	tightly	covered	pot,	or	sealed	in
foil.	The	closed	lid	allows	the	meat	not	only	to	cook	in	the	evenly	heated	liquid,
but	also	to	more	easily	reach	a	collagen-melting	temperature	due	to	the	power	of
steam.	Braising	is	ideal	for	collagen-heavy	meats	like	brisket.	We	will	cover	this
technique	in	more	depth	in	concept	8.



ONION-BRAISED	BEEF	BRISKET
SERVES	6	TO	8

This	recipe	requires	a	few	hours	of	unattended	cooking.	It	also	requires	advance
preparation.	After	cooking,	the	brisket	must	stand	overnight	in	the	braising
liquid	that	later	becomes	the	sauce;	this	helps	to	keep	the	brisket	moist	and
flavorful.	Good	accompaniments	to	braised	brisket	include	mashed	potatoes	and
buttered	egg	noodles.	Matzo	meal	or	potato	starch	can	be	substituted	for	the
flour.

1				 (4-to	5-pound)	beef	brisket,	flat	cut,	fat	trimmed	to	¼	inch
					 Salt	and	pepper
					 Vegetable	oil

2½				 pounds	onions,	halved	and	sliced	½	inch	thick
1				 tablespoon	packed	brown	sugar
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	tomato	paste
1				 tablespoon	paprika
				1⁄8 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
2				 tablespoons	all-purpose	flour
1				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 cup	dry	red	wine
3				 bay	leaves
3				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
2				 teaspoons	cider	vinegar

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.
Line	13	by	9-inch	baking	dish	with	two	24-inch-long	sheets	of	18-inch-wide
heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	positioning	sheets	perpendicular	to	each	other	and
allowing	excess	foil	to	extend	beyond	edges	of	pan.	Pat	brisket	dry	with	paper
towels.	Place	brisket	fat	side	up	on	cutting	board;	using	dinner	fork,	poke	holes
in	meat	through	fat	layer	about	1	inch	apart.	Season	both	sides	of	brisket	with
salt	and	pepper.
2.	Heat	1	teaspoon	oil	in	large	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	oil	just

begins	to	smoke.	Place	brisket,	fat	side	up,	in	skillet	(brisket	may	climb	up	sides
of	pan);	weight	brisket	with	heavy	Dutch	oven	or	cast-iron	skillet	and	cook	until



well	browned,	about	7	minutes.	Remove	Dutch	oven;	using	tongs,	flip	brisket
and	cook	on	second	side	without	weight	until	well	browned,	about	7	minutes
longer.	Transfer	brisket	to	platter.
3.	Pour	off	all	but	1	tablespoon	fat	from	pan	(or,	if	brisket	was	lean,	add

enough	oil	to	fat	in	skillet	to	equal	1	tablespoon);	stir	in	onions,	sugar,	and	¼
teaspoon	salt	and	cook	over	medium-high	heat,	stirring	occasionally,	until	onions
are	softened,	10	to	12	minutes.	Add	garlic	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until
fragrant,	about	1	minute;	add	tomato	paste	and	cook,	stirring	to	combine,	until
paste	darkens,	about	2	minutes.	Add	paprika	and	cayenne	and	cook,	stirring
constantly,	until	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Add	flour	and	cook,	stirring
constantly,	until	well	combined,	about	2	minutes.	Add	broth,	wine,	bay	leaves,
and	thyme,	stirring	to	scrape	up	browned	bits	from	pan;	bring	to	simmer	and
simmer	for	5	minutes	to	fully	thicken.
4.	Pour	sauce	and	onions	into	foil-lined	baking	dish.	Nestle	brisket,	fat	side

up,	in	sauce	and	onions.	Fold	foil	extensions	over	and	seal	(do	not	tightly	crimp
foil	because	foil	must	later	be	opened	to	test	for	doneness).	Place	in	oven	and
cook	until	fork	slips	easily	in	and	out	of	meat,	3½	to	4	hours	(when	testing	for
doneness,	open	foil	with	caution	as	contents	will	be	steaming).	Carefully	open
foil	and	let	brisket	cool	at	room	temperature,	20	to	30	minutes.
5.	Transfer	brisket	to	large	bowl;	set	fine-mesh	strainer	over	bowl	and	strain

sauce	over	brisket.	Discard	bay	leaves	and	thyme	from	onions	and	transfer
onions	to	small	bowl.	Cover	both	bowls	with	plastic	wrap,	cut	vents	in	plastic,
and	refrigerate	overnight.
6.	About	45	minutes	before	serving,	adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle

position;	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	While	oven	heats,	transfer	cold	brisket	to
carving	board.	Scrape	off	and	discard	any	fat	from	surface	of	sauce,	then	heat
sauce	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium	heat	until	warm,	skimming	any	fat	on
surface	with	wide	shallow	spoon	(you	should	have	about	2	cups	sauce	without
onions;	if	necessary,	simmer	sauce	over	medium-high	heat	until	reduced	to	2
cups).	Slice	brisket	against	grain	into	¼-inch-thick	slices	and	place	slices	in	13
by	9-inch	baking	dish.	Stir	reserved	onions	and	vinegar	into	warmed	sauce	and
season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Pour	sauce	over	brisket	slices,	cover	baking
dish	with	foil,	and	bake	until	heated	through,	25	to	30	minutes.	Serve
immediately.

SAME-DAY	ONION-BRAISED	BEEF	BRISKET
After	removing	brisket	from	oven	in	step	4,	reseal	foil	and	let	brisket	sit	at	room



temperature	for	1	hour.	Transfer	brisket	to	carving	board	and	continue	with
straining,	defatting,	and	reheating	sauce	and	slicing	meat;	omit	step	of	returning
brisket	to	oven	once	reheated	sauce	is	poured	over	it.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	brisket	in	this	recipe—a	lean,	collagen-heavy	cut—is	cooked	until	it	is	well-
done,	sealed	with	its	braising	liquid	in	an	oven	for	a	very	long	time.	Unlike	with
slow-roasting,	the	steam	generated	in	its	sealed	foil	package	helps	the	meat
reach	a	higher	temperature	relatively	quickly.	This	melts	the	collagen	and	keeps
the	meat	moist,	despite	its	lack	of	fat.	Leaving	the	brisket	in	its	sauce	overnight,
and	then	slicing	the	following	day,	helps	to	restore	some	of	the	moisture	lost	in
the	cooking	process,	as	well	as	prevent	the	tender	meat	from	shredding	under	the
knife.
BUY	THE	RIGHT	CUT	A	whole	beef	brisket	weighs	up	to	12	pounds.	It	is

usually	sold	in	two	pieces,	the	flat	(or	first)	cut	and	the	point	cut.	The	flat	cut	is
leaner	and	thinner,	with	a	rectangular	shape	and	an	exterior	fat	cap.	It	is	more
commonly	available	at	supermarkets	than	the	point	cut,	which	has	an	oblong,
irregular	shape	and	contains	large	interior	pockets	of	fat.
We	found	the	point	cut	to	be	marginally	more	flavorful	but,	more	important,

much	less	prone	to	drying	out,	thanks	to	all	that	extra	fat.	Unfortunately,	more
than	a	few	tasters	found	the	point	cut	too	fatty	to	enjoy,	and	it	was	next	to
impossible	to	carve	it	into	neat	slices.	All	in	all,	it	seemed	a	better	cut	for
barbecuing	than	braising.
The	flat	cut	is	easier	to	sear	and	to	slice,	provided	it	has	cooled.	Butchers

usually	trim	away	some	or	all	of	the	fat	cap,	but	try	to	find	one	with	at	least	¼
inch	of	fat	in	place,	as	it	will	help	to	keep	the	meat	moist	during	cooking.	If	the
fat	cap	is	very	thick	and	untrimmed	in	places,	cut	it	down	to	a	thickness	of	about
¼	inch.	A	flat-cut	brisket	roast	usually	weighs	between	4	and	5	pounds,	though
butchers	occasionally	cut	them	into	smaller	2-to	3-pound	roasts.	You	can
substitute	two	of	these	smaller	cuts	if	that	is	all	that	is	available,	although	the
cooking	time	may	vary.
USE	HEAVY-DUTY	FOIL	For	this	braise,	we	use	18-inch-wide	heavy-duty

aluminum	foil	to	seal	in	the	brisket	as	it	cooks.	It’s	important	to	create	a	tight
seal	around	the	meat,	so	that	it	can	cook	in	the	even	heat	of	the	simmering	liquid,
but	also	in	the	heat	of	the	steam	collecting	in	the	closed	container.	Be	careful	not
to	crimp	the	foil	too	tightly	when	you	enclose	the	brisket—you	will	need	to	open
it	later	when	checking	for	doneness.
CHICKEN	OR	BEEF?	Though	many	recipes	call	for	the	use	of	beef	broth	in

the	braising	liquid	of	brisket,	we’ve	found	most	canned	beef	broths	to	taste	salty
and	artificial.	In	testing	this	recipe,	we	found	that	testers	preferred	chicken	to



beef	broth	for	its	cleaner	flavor.	To	boost	the	flavor	of	this	sauce,	we	add	red
wine.
REST	OVERNIGHT	We	find	it’s	preferable	to	leave	the	brisket	in	the

refrigerator	overnight.	Not	only	does	it	produce	a	juicier,	tenderer	brisket,	but	it
also	allows	you	to	slice	the	meat	without	it	falling	apart	or	shredding.	This	is
perfect	if	you’re	cooking	brisket	for	a	crowd:	Making	this	dish	a	day	ahead
reduces	the	stress	of	timing	in	the	kitchen	and	the	neatly	sliced	brisket	creates	a
much	more	elegant	spread	on	the	serving	platter.	(Though	in	a	pinch,	it’s
possible	to	make	and	serve	this	brisket	the	same	day.	See	Same-Day	Onion-
Braised	Beef	Brisket.)
FINISH	THE	SAUCE	While	we	were	testing	this	recipe,	a	debate	sprang	up

in	the	test	kitchen	over	the	proper	thickness	of	the	finished	sauce.	“Gravy”
enthusiasts	wanted	a	thick	sauce	that	would	cling	to	the	meat,	while	their
opponents	backed	a	thinner,	more	natural	jus.	But	everyone	agreed	that	too	much
flour,	stirred	into	the	skillet	while	building	the	sauce,	resulted	in	a	sauce	that	was
overly	pasty;	just	2	tablespoons	were	enough	to	give	it	the	proper	body.	To
further	thicken	the	sauce,	we	put	it	back	on	the	stove	to	simmer	while	slicing	the
finished	brisket.	Just	before	serving,	we	add	a	couple	of	teaspoons	of	cider
vinegar	to	brighten	the	flavor.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOW	TO	STORE	BAY	LEAVES
Keep	bay	leaves	in	the	freezer	to	prolong	freshness.

Given	that	most	soups	and	stews	call	for	just	one	or	two	bay	leaves,	the	jar	of	bay	leaves	in	your	kitchen	is
likely	pretty	old.	Does	it	matter?	To	find	out,	we	ran	tests	with	a	freshly	opened	jar	of	bay	leaves,	with	bay
leaves	that	had	been	opened	for	three	months	and	stored	in	their	original	jar	(the	jar	was	of	course	kept
closed),	and	with	bay	leaves	that	had	been	sealed	in	a	zipper-lock	storage	bag	and	stored	in	the	freezer	for
three	months.	Two	bay	leaves	of	each	were	simmered	in	2	cups	of	canned	chicken	broth	and	tasted	for
herbal	potency.	We	were	amazed	by	the	amount	of	flavor	loss	in	the	leaves	that	had	been	left	in	their
original,	opened	container	in	the	pantry.	Enough	flavor	loss,	in	fact,	that	the	package	of	freshly	opened	bay
leaves	tasted	nearly	twice	as	flavorful.	The	good	news	is	that	there	is	a	way	to	retain	much	of	the	bay	flavor.
The	frozen	leaves	put	out	great,	assertive	bay	flavor	and	aroma,	nearly	as	good	as	the	leaves	from	the
freshly	opened	jar.



CONCEPT	8

Tough	Cuts	Like	a	Covered	Pot
When	roasting,	grilling,	or	sautéing	meat,	our	goal	is	usually	to	develop	flavor
through	browning	and	avoid	moisture	loss	by	not	overcooking.	But	as	we
learned	in	concept	7,	collagen-heavy	cuts	can	be	handled	differently:	We	can
cook	them	until	they	are	very,	very	well-done.	Slow-roasting,	barbecuing,	and
braising	are	three	possible	choices,	but	in	many	ways	braising—which	cooks	the
meat	in	a	covered	pot—is	the	most	reliable	and	versatile	choice.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
When	we	braise,	we	generally	begin	by	searing	a	cut	of	meat	to	develop	color
and	flavor	but	then	partially	submerge	it	in	liquid	and	seal	the	pot,	cooking	with
gentle	heat	until	the	meat	is	so	tender	it	can	be	sliced	with	a	butter	knife.
Braising	works	best	with	fatty	cuts	rich	in	collagen,	such	as	short	ribs,	chuck
roasts,	or	chicken	thighs.
This	technique	coaxes	the	same	tenderizing	effects	out	of	tough	cuts	as	slow-

roasting	and	barbecuing	do	(see	concept	7).	But	it	has	some	advantages	over
these	dry-heat	methods	as	well.
First,	it	offers	even,	steady	cooking.	Because	the	cooking	liquid	maintains	a

temperature	no	higher	than	boiling	water,	or	212	degrees,	braising	provides	an
unflappably	low-and-slow	heat	source	as	the	meat	is	cooked	to	well-done.	As
with	slow-roasting	or	barbecuing,	this	cooking	method	melts	collagen	into
gelatin,	producing	juicy,	tender	meat,	but	without	the	worry	that	one	part	of	the
meat	will	cook	too	fast	or	too	slow.
Second,	because	we	cover	our	pot	while	braising,	steam	is	generated	within.

This	provides	a	secondary	heat	source	and,	in	many	cases,	shortens	the	cooking
time	when	compared	to	slow-roasting	or	barbecuing.
Finally,	the	liquid	used	to	braise	tough	cuts	of	meat	picks	up	flavor	and	depth

and	becomes	a	concentrated,	succulent	sauce.
It’s	possible	to	braise	in	a	covered	pot	on	the	stove,	but	we	find	that	the	direct

heat	of	the	burner	is	intense,	specific,	and	entirely	too	efficient.	It	can	cook	the
meat	quickly	and	unevenly	as	well	as	affect	the	consistency	of	the	braising
liquid,	breaking	down	added	starch	(like	flour)	on	the	bottom	of	the	pan,	creating
a	too-thin	sauce.	The	oven,	however,	uses	indirect	and	less	efficient	heat	(see
concept	1).	This	translates	to	gentle,	even	cooking	in	the	closed	environment	of	a
covered	pot	and	allows	for	a	silky	and	luxurious	sauce.
Three	cooking	methods	fall	under	the	broad	banner	of	braising:	pot-roasting,

stewing,	and	braising	itself.	Pot	roasts	are	large	cuts	of	meat	cooked	partly
submerged	in	liquid.	Stews	consist	of	smaller	pieces,	swimming	in	liquid.	The
term	“braise”	is	reserved	for	everything	else.

	
WHY	BRAISE	IN	THE	OVEN?



	
ON	THE	STOVE	Heat	is	unevenly	distributed	and	concentrated	on	the	bottom	of	the	pot.



	
IN	THE	OVEN	Heat	is	evenly	distributed,	with	no	hot	spots.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	effects	of	braising	on	moisture,	we	set	up	a	test	designed	to
simulate	cooking	meat	with	liquid	in	a	covered	pot.	We	placed	five	200-gram
samples	of	beef	chuck,	along	with	measured	amounts	of	broth,	in	individual
vacuum-sealed	bags	to	eliminate	the	possibility	of	evaporation.	We	then
submerged	the	bags	in	water	held	at	190	degrees	(the	low-end	temperature	of	a
typical	braise)	for	1½	hours.	We	then	removed	the	bags	from	the	water,	weighed
the	beef,	and	measured	the	liquid	in	each	bag.



THE	RESULTS
We	found	that	the	weight	of	the	meat	decreased	(losing	an	average	of	25	grams,
or	12.5	percent	of	its	weight)	during	cooking.	When	we	measured	the	liquid	in
each	bag,	we	found	it	had	increased	by	an	average	of	25	grams.



THE	TAKEAWAY
It’s	a	common	misconception	that	braising	adds	moisture	to	meat	as	it	cooks.
However,	this	experiment	demonstrates	that	moisture	is	being	pulled	out	of	the
meat	and	into	the	surrounding	liquid—not	the	other	way	around.	So	why,	then,
does	braised	meat	seem	so	moist?	Gentle	cooking	helps	break	down	the	meat’s
connective	tissue	and	collagen	into	gelatin,	which	lubricates	and	tenderizes	the
muscle	fibers.	The	resulting	soft,	tender	texture	is	perceived	as	moist.



MEASURING	MOISTURE	IN	MEAT	BEFORE	AND	AFTER	BRAISING

	
BEFORE	BRAISING

	
AFTER	BRAISING

We	weighed	our	samples	of	beef	chuck	before	and	after	braising	in	vacuum-sealed	bags	and	found	that	the



meat	lost	25	grams	of	liquid	on	average,	proving	that	braising	does	not	retain	moisture.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	BEST	PLACE	TO	BRAISE

Braising	a	stew	in	the	oven,	rather	than	on	the	stove,	helps	to	make	a	nice,	thick	sauce.

In	many	instances,	the	test	kitchen	favors	braising	stews	in	the	oven	instead	of	on	top	of	the	stove.	A	good
example	is	the	oven-braised	Daube	Provençal.	For	testing	purposes,	we	cooked	one	daube	in	a	350-degree
oven	and	simmered	another	on	the	stove.	Both	stews	produced	moist,	tender	meat	in	2½	hours,	but	the
textures	of	the	braising	liquids	differed	dramatically.	The	stovetop	stew	produced	a	thin	sauce	more	like
soup,	while	the	oven-braised	daube	yielded	a	silky	and	luxurious	sauce.

Why	so	different?	At	moderate	temperatures,	the	flour	in	a	braising	liquid	gradually	absorbs	water,	thus
thickening	the	sauce.	If	the	liquid	gets	too	hot,	however,	the	starch	breaks	down	and	loses	its	thickening
properties,	resulting	in	a	thinner	sauce.	Because	stovetop	cooking	heats	from	the	bottom	only,	the	flour
closest	to	the	heat	source	loses	its	thickening	ability.

Daubes	were	traditionally	cooked	in	a	covered	urn-shaped	pot	(called	a	daubière).	The	pot	was	placed	in
the	fireplace—away	from	direct	flame—on	a	bed	of	hot	embers	with	more	embers	piled	into	the
indentations	in	the	lid.	The	result?	Even	heat	from	above	and	below	that	gently	simmered	the	stew.	So
oven-braising	is	not	only	more	effective	than	stovetop	simmering,	it’s	also	more	authentic.



BRAISING	AT	WORK	
POT	ROASTS
In	pot-roasting,	we	turn	large	cuts	of	tough	(read	cheap),	nearly	unpalatable
meat	into	a	tender,	rich,	flavorful	main	course.	The	meat	is	partially	submerged
in	liquid	in	a	closed	pot	and	cooked	in	the	gentle	heat	of	the	oven.	When
finished,	the	roast	should	be	so	tender	that	it	can	be	“sliced”	with	a	dull	knife.
Our	classic	recipe	begins	by	browning	the	meat	on	the	stovetop	to	develop
flavor;	our	easy	recipe	skips	this	step.



CLASSIC	POT	ROAST
SERVES	6	TO	8

For	pot	roast,	remember	to	add	only	enough	water	to	come	halfway	up	the	sides
of	the	roast,	and	begin	checking	the	roast	for	doneness	after	only	two	hours.
Mashed	or	boiled	potatoes	are	good	accompaniments.

1				 (3½-pound)	boneless	beef	chuck-eye	roast,	trimmed
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
1				 onion,	chopped
1				 small	carrot,	chopped
1				 small	celery	rib,	chopped
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 teaspoons	sugar
1				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 cup	beef	broth
1				 sprig	fresh	thyme

1–1½				 cups	water
¼				 cup	dry	red	wine

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.	Pat	beef
dry	with	paper	towels;	season	with	salt	and	pepper.
2.	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until	shimmering	but	not

smoking.	Brown	beef	thoroughly	on	all	sides,	reducing	heat	if	fat	begins	to
smoke,	8	to	10	minutes.	Transfer	to	large	plate;	set	aside.	Reduce	heat	to
medium;	add	onion,	carrot,	and	celery	to	pot	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,
until	beginning	to	brown,	6	to	8	minutes.	Add	garlic	and	sugar;	cook	until
fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Add	chicken	and	beef	broths	and	thyme,	scraping
bottom	of	pan	with	wooden	spoon	to	loosen	browned	bits.	Return	beef	and	any
accumulated	juices	to	pot;	add	enough	water	to	come	halfway	up	sides	of	beef.
Place	large	piece	of	aluminum	foil	over	pot	and	cover	tightly	with	lid;	bring
liquid	to	simmer	over	medium	heat,	then	transfer	pot	to	oven.	Cook,	turning
roast	every	30	minutes,	until	fully	tender	and	fork	slips	easily	in	and	out	of	meat,
3½	to	4	hours.



3.	Transfer	roast	to	carving	board;	tent	with	foil	to	keep	warm.	Allow	liquid	in
pot	to	settle	about	5	minutes;	skim	fat	off	surface	with	wide	spoon	and	discard
thyme	sprig.	Boil	over	high	heat	until	reduced	to	about	1½	cups,	about	8
minutes.	Add	red	wine	and	reduce	again	to	1½	cups,	about	2	minutes.	Season
with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.
4.	Slice	meat	against	grain	into	½-inch-thick	slices,	or	pull	apart	into	large

pieces;	transfer	meat	to	serving	platter	and	pour	about	½	cup	sauce	over	meat.
Serve,	passing	remaining	sauce	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
In	this	recipe,	we	brown	the	chuck-eye	roast	over	medium-high	heat	to	develop
both	color	and	flavor.	We	cover	the	pot	first	with	foil,	and	then	with	the	lid,	in
order	to	create	as	tight	a	seal	as	possible.	This	prevents	liquid	from	escaping	(in
the	form	of	steam)	through	the	cracks	of	a	loose-fitting	lid	as	we	gently	simmer
the	pot	roast	in	the	oven.	With	the	meat	submerged	halfway,	we	cook	it	until	it	is
very	well-done	to	create	a	tender,	succulent	roast.
CHOOSE	A	CHUCK	EYE	We	recommend	chuck	eye	for	this	pot	roast.	This

boneless	roast	is	cut	from	the	center	of	the	first	five	ribs.	It	is	very	tender	and
juicy,	though	it	does	contain	a	healthy	amount	of	fat.	The	chuck	7-bone	and	top
blade	roasts	also	work	for	this	pot	roast,	though	they	are	thinner	cuts	and	will
likely	require	an	hour	less	cooking	time.	If	you	use	the	top	blade,	be	sure	to	tie	it
with	twine	before	cooking.
COOK	UNTIL	DONE,	AND	THEN	SOME	We	cook	this	pot	roast	until	it’s

very	well-done—to	an	internal	temperature	of	about	210	degrees,	the	point	at
which	the	fat	and	connective	tissue	are	really	melting	well.	Simply	bringing	the
meat	to	this	temperature	does	not	achieve	the	desired	fall-apart-tender	pot	roast.
But	we	found	that	if	you	leave	the	pot	roast	to	cook	at	that	same	internal
temperature	for	a	full	hour	longer,	the	roast	will	be	so	tender	that	a	fork	poked
into	its	center	will	be	met	with	no	resistance,	nearly	disappearing	into	the	flesh.
USE	A	MAGIC	TEMPERATURE	We	began	pot-roasting	in	an	oven	set	to

250	degrees,	and	then	tested	roasts	at	higher	temperatures	to	see	if	it	would	be
possible	to	reduce	the	cooking	time.	Heat	levels	above	350	degrees	boiled	the
meat	to	a	stringy,	dry	texture	because	the	exterior	overcooked	before	the	interior
was	cooked	and	tender.	The	magic	oven	temperature	turned	out	to	be	300
degrees—just	enough	heat	to	keep	the	meat	at	a	low	simmer	while	high	enough
to	shave	a	few	minutes	off	the	cooking	time.
REDUCE,	REDUCE,	REDUCE	Some	recipes	thicken	the	pot	roast	sauce

with	a	mixture	of	butter	and	flour	or	a	slurry	of	cornstarch	mixed	with	a	little
braising	liquid.	Both	techniques	make	the	sauce	more	gravylike	than	we	prefer,
as	well	as	diluting	the	flavor.	We	like	to	remove	the	roast	from	the	pot	and
reduce	the	liquid	until	the	flavors	are	well	concentrated	and	the	texture	is	more
substantial.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
LOW-TEMPERATURE	BROWNING

The	flavorful	browning	of	the	Maillard	reaction	can	take	place	at	low	temperatures,	too.

When	meat	is	seared	at	a	very	high	temperature,	the	Maillard	reaction	rapidly	kicks	in,	rendering	the
exterior	deeply	browned	and	flavorful.	(For	more	on	this,	see	concept	2.)	But	can	browning	take	place	at
lower	temperatures	in	the	moist,	closed	environment	of	a	braise,	where	the	temperature	can	never	rise	above
the	boiling	point	of	water,	212	degrees?

We	cooked	two	pot	roasts:	one	that	we	seared	before	adding	a	small	amount	of	liquid	to	the	pot,	and	the
other	that	we	placed	directly	in	the	pot	with	the	liquid	without	searing.	Surprisingly,	we	found	that	the	dry
part	of	the	two	roasts	that	sat	above	the	liquid	had	a	similar	level	of	browning,	and	the	unseared	roast	tasted
nearly	as	good	as	the	seared	one.

What	was	going	on?	In	the	searing	heat	of	a	500-degree	pan,	the	Maillard	reaction	quickly	produces
countless	new	flavor	compounds	that	improve	taste.	But	as	it	turns	out,	given	enough	time,	browning	can
also	occur	at	temperatures	as	low	as	160	degrees.

Our	Easy	Pot	Roast	cooks	for	a	good	3½	hours.	This	is	ample	time	for	lots	of	new	flavor	compounds	to
be	created	on	the	dry	top	part	of	the	meat.	Though	these	compounds	won’t	be	as	plentiful	or	richly	flavorful
as	when	browning	occurs	at	higher	temperatures,	in	some	cases	we	feel	that	we	can	skip	the	sear.

	



EASY	POT	ROAST
SERVES	6	TO	8

Chilling	the	whole	cooked	pot	roast	overnight	improves	its	flavor	and	makes	it
moister	and	easier	to	slice.

1				 (3½-to	4-pound)	boneless	beef	chuck-eye	roast,	pulled	apart	at	seams	and	trimmed
					 Kosher	salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
2				 onions,	halved	and	sliced	thin
1				 large	carrot,	peeled	and	chopped
1				 celery	rib,	chopped
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced

2–3				 cups	beef	broth
¾				 cup	dry	red	wine
1				 tablespoon	tomato	paste
1				 bay	leaf
1				 sprig	fresh	thyme	plus	¼	teaspoon	minced
1				 tablespoon	balsamic	vinegar

1.	Season	pieces	of	meat	with	1	tablespoon	salt,	place	on	wire	rack	set	in
rimmed	baking	sheet,	and	let	stand	at	room	temperature	for	1	hour.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.

Melt	butter	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat.	Add	onions	and	cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	softened	and	beginning	to	brown,	8	to	10	minutes.	Add	carrot
and	celery;	continue	to	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	about	5	minutes.	Add	garlic
and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Stir	in	1	cup	broth,	½	cup	wine,
tomato	paste,	bay	leaf,	and	thyme	sprig;	bring	to	simmer.
3.	Pat	beef	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season	with	pepper.	Using	3	pieces	of

kitchen	twine,	tie	each	piece	of	meat	into	loaf	shape	for	even	cooking.
4.	Nestle	meat	on	top	of	vegetables.	Cover	pot	tightly	with	large	piece	of

aluminum	foil	and	cover	with	lid;	transfer	pot	to	oven.	Cook	beef	until	fully
tender	and	paring	knife	easily	slips	in	and	out	of	meat,	3½	to	4	hours,	turning
meat	halfway	through	cooking.
5.	Transfer	roasts	to	carving	board	and	tent	loosely	with	foil.	Strain	liquid



through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	4-cup	liquid	measuring	cup.	Discard	bay	leaf	and
thyme	sprig.	Transfer	vegetables	to	blender.	Let	liquid	settle	for	5	minutes,	then
skim	off	fat;	add	beef	broth	to	bring	liquid	amount	to	3	cups.	Add	liquid	to
blender	and	blend	until	smooth,	about	2	minutes.	Transfer	sauce	to	medium
saucepan	and	bring	to	simmer	over	medium	heat.
6.	Meanwhile,	remove	twine	from	roasts	and	slice	against	grain	into	½-inch-

thick	slices.	Transfer	meat	to	serving	platter.	Stir	remaining	¼	cup	wine,	minced
thyme,	and	vinegar	into	gravy	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Spoon
half	of	gravy	over	meat;	pass	remaining	gravy	separately.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Pot	roast	can	be	made	up	to	2	days	ahead.	Follow

recipe	through	step	4,	then	transfer	cooked	roasts	to	large	bowl.	Strain	and	defat
liquid	and	add	beef	broth	to	bring	liquid	amount	to	3	cups;	transfer	liquid	and
vegetables	to	bowl	with	roasts,	let	cool	for	1	hour,	cover	with	plastic	wrap,	cut
vents	in	plastic,	and	refrigerate	overnight	or	up	to	48	hours.	One	hour	before
serving,	adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Slice
roasts	as	directed,	place	in	13	by	9-inch	baking	dish,	cover	tightly	with	foil,	and
bake	until	heated	through,	about	45	minutes.	Blend	liquid	and	vegetables,	bring
gravy	to	simmer,	and	finish	as	directed.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	recipe	veers	away	from	“classic”—instead	of	first	browning	the	meat,	as	we
do	with	most	braises	in	order	to	develop	flavor,	we	coax	out	some	of	the
browning	effects	through	an	extended	cooking	time	in	the	oven.	To	promote	this
low-temperature	browning,	we	use	minimal	amounts	of	liquid	in	the	braise.	(See
“Low-Temperature	Browning.”)	We	also	compensate	for	this	lack	of	a	flavorful
sear	by	using	intense	flavors	in	the	pot—tomato	paste,	beef	broth,	red	wine,
sautéed	mirepoix.	We	finish	the	sauce	with	even	bolder	flavors—vinegar	and
more	wine.
SPLIT	IT	IN	TWO	Before	cooking,	we	divide	the	roast	in	two,	peeling	it

apart	at	the	seams	and	removing	any	excess	fat.	The	pesky	globs	of	interior	fat
that	stubbornly	refuse	to	render	are	a	common	problem	in	pot	roasts.	In	addition,
we	found	that	halving	the	beef	increases	the	total	surface	area	that	can	brown
while	the	meat	cooks	in	the	covered	pot.
SALT	AHEAD	We	salt	the	meat	an	hour	before	beginning	to	cook.	Salting

draws	moisture	out	of	the	meat,	forming	a	shallow	brine	that,	over	time,	migrates
back	into	the	meat	to	season	it	throughout	rather	than	just	on	the	exterior	(see
concept	12).	While	many	brines	take	hours	and	hours,	we	find	that	salting	just
one	hour	before	cooking	makes	a	big	difference—especially	with	the	additional
exposed	surface	area	that	comes	with	splitting	the	roast	in	two.	When	cooking,
this	technique—along	with	the	additions	of	beef	broth	and	the	glutamate-rich
tomato	paste	(see	concept	35)—really	brings	out	the	meaty	flavors.
PUREE	THE	GRAVY	FOR	FLAVOR	By	the	time	the	pot	roast	is	cooked

until	it’s	well-well-done,	the	vegetables	have	broken	down	and	started	to	thicken
the	gravy.	We	coax	out	the	last	of	their	flavor	by	tossing	them	in	the	blender	with
the	cooking	liquid,	which	we	have	already	defatted.	This	is	a	similar	flavor-
enhancing	technique	to	that	in	the	Classic	Pot	Roast	recipe	because	for	each	we
use	no	thickeners—here	we	simply	puree	the	sauce	rather	than	reduce	it.	Just
before	serving,	we	add	balsamic	vinegar	and	wine	for	a	brighter	flavor.



BRAISING	AT	WORK	
SHORT	RIBS	AND	CHICKEN	THIGHS
Braising	bone-in	cuts	like	short	ribs	and	chicken	parts	has	the	potential	to	yield
extreme	flavor	(for	more	on	bones	and	flavor	see	concept	10),	but	also	an	excess
of	fat.	We	try	a	variety	of	methods	to	reduce	the	amount	of	fat	while	maintaining
the	intensity	of	flavor	in	these	meaty	braises,	including	removing	the	bones	and
chicken	skin,	and	defatting	the	sauce	before	serving.



BRAISED	BONELESS	BEEF	SHORT	RIBS
SERVES	6

In	this	recipe,	we	use	boneless	short	ribs—or	we	remove	the	bones	ourselves.
Make	sure	the	ribs	are	at	least	4	inches	long	and	1	inch	thick.	If	boneless	ribs
are	unavailable,	substitute	7	pounds	of	bone-in	beef	short	ribs	at	least	4	inches
long	with	1	inch	of	meat	above	the	bone.	We	recommend	a	bold	red	wine	such	as
Cabernet	Sauvignon.	Serve	with	buttered	egg	noodles,	mashed	potatoes,	or
roasted	potatoes.

3½				 pounds	boneless	short	ribs,	trimmed
					 Kosher	salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
2				 large	onions,	sliced	thin
1				 tablespoon	tomato	paste
6				 garlic	cloves,	peeled
2				 cups	red	wine
1				 cup	beef	broth
4				 large	carrots,	peeled	and	cut	into	2-inch	pieces
4				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
1				 bay	leaf
¼				 cup	cold	water
½				 teaspoon	unflavored	gelatin

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.
Pat	beef	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season	with	2	teaspoons	salt	and	1	teaspoon
pepper.	Heat	1	tablespoon	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until
smoking.	Add	half	of	beef	and	cook,	without	moving,	until	well	browned,	4	to	6
minutes.	Turn	beef	over	and	continue	to	cook	on	second	side	until	well	browned,
4	to	6	minutes	longer,	reducing	heat	if	fat	begins	to	smoke.	Transfer	beef	to
medium	bowl.	Repeat	with	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil	and	remaining	meat.
2.	Reduce	heat	to	medium,	add	onions,	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until

softened	and	beginning	to	brown,	12	to	15	minutes.	(If	onions	begin	to	darken
too	quickly,	add	1	to	2	tablespoons	water	to	pot.)	Add	tomato	paste	and	cook,
stirring	constantly,	until	it	browns	on	sides	and	bottom	of	pan,	about	2	minutes.
Add	garlic	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Increase	heat	to	medium-



high,	add	wine,	and	simmer,	scraping	bottom	of	pan	with	wooden	spoon	to
loosen	browned	bits,	until	reduced	by	half,	8	to	10	minutes.	Add	broth,	carrots,
thyme,	and	bay	leaf.	Add	beef	and	any	accumulated	juices	to	pot;	cover	and
bring	to	simmer.	Transfer	pot	to	oven	and	cook,	using	tongs	to	turn	meat	twice
during	cooking,	until	fork	slips	easily	in	and	out	of	meat,	2	to	2½	hours.
3.	Put	water	in	small	bowl	and	sprinkle	gelatin	on	top;	let	stand	for	at	least	5

minutes.	Using	tongs,	transfer	meat	and	carrots	to	serving	platter	and	tent	with
aluminum	foil.	Strain	cooking	liquid	through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	fat
separator	or	bowl,	pressing	on	solids	to	extract	as	much	liquid	as	possible;
discard	solids.	Let	liquid	settle	for	5	minutes	and	strain	off	fat.	Return	cooking
liquid	to	Dutch	oven	and	cook	over	medium	heat	until	reduced	to	1	cup,	5	to	10
minutes.	Remove	from	heat	and	stir	in	gelatin	mixture;	season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste.	Pour	sauce	over	meat	and	serve.

BRAISED	BEEF	SHORT	RIBS	WITH	GUINNESS	AND	PRUNES
Substitute	1	cup	Guinness	(or	other	full-flavored	porter	or	stout)	for	red	wine
and	omit	8-to	10-minute	reduction	time	in	step	2.	Add	1⁄3	cup	pitted	prunes	to	pot
along	with	broth.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	begin	with	boneless	short	ribs	in	order	to	reduce	the	amount	of	fat	rendered
during	the	braising	process,	which	can	be	monumental	(see	“A	Real	Melting
Pot,”	below).	This	allows	us	to	simply	defat	the	sauce	at	the	end	of	cooking	and
serve,	rather	than	chill	the	ribs	overnight	in	order	to	solidify	the	fat	for	easy
removal	the	following	day.	(The	latter	method	is	commonly	used	in	short	rib
recipes.)	This	does	mean	that	without	the	bones,	there	is	less	connective	tissue
available	to	melt	down	into	gelatin	and	the	sauce	can	be	a	bit	thin.	We	stir	½
teaspoon	of	gelatin	into	the	strained	sauce	to	give	it	the	proper	viscosity	and
suppleness.
SIZE	DOES	MATTER	Butchers	typically	divide	the	ribs	into	sections	about

10	inches	square	and	3	to	5	inches	thick.	Cutting	the	ribs	between	the	bones	and
into	lengths	between	2	and	6	inches	yields	what	butchers	call	“English”	style,	a
cut	typically	found	in	European	braises.	Cutting	the	meat	across	the	bone	yields
the	“flanken”	cut,	more	typically	found	in	Asian	cuisines.	We	focus	on	the
widely	available	English-style	short	ribs	but	find	that	the	smallest	(about	2
inches)	are	too	short;	once	braised,	they	shrink	into	pieces	resembling	stew	meat.
At	the	other	extreme,	the	6-to	8-inchers	are	fairly	unwieldy	to	brown	in	the	pan.
We	split	the	difference	and	settle	on	4-inch-long	ribs.
BROWN	WELL	The	first	step	in	most	braises	is	browning	the	meat.	Searing

adds	color	and	flavor	due	to	the	Maillard	reaction	(see	concept	2).	But	here,
searing	also	rids	the	ribs	of	some	of	their	excess	fat	by	rendering.
FLAVOR	ACTION	To	jump-start	the	flavor	of	our	sauce,	we	reduce	the	wine

right	over	the	browned	aromatics,	which	adds	an	intensity	and	depth.	Still	in
need	of	more	liquid	for	the	braise,	however,	we	find	that	beef	broth	offers	a	nice
flavor	balance	to	the	wine.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
A	REAL	MELTING	POT

Bone-in	short	ribs	render	exponentially	more	fat	than	boneless.

Although	we	expected	that	bone-in	short	ribs	would	exude	more	fat	than	their	boneless	counterparts,	we
were	shocked	by	the	dramatic	difference—1½	cups	versus	¼	cup	(six	times	as	much)!	No	wonder	most
short	rib	recipes	call	for	letting	the	fat	solidify	overnight	in	the	fridge.	(For	more	on	bones,	see	concept	10.)

	
BONE-IN	=	LOTS	OF	FAT

	
BONELESS	=	MANAGEABLE	FAT



CHICKEN	PROVENÇAL
SERVES	4

This	dish	is	often	served	with	rice	or	slices	of	crusty	bread,	but	soft	polenta	is
also	a	good	accompaniment.	Be	sure	to	use	niçoise	olives	here;	other	olives	are
too	potent.

8				 (5-to	7-ounce)	bone-in	chicken	thighs,	trimmed
					 Salt
1				 tablespoon	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1				 small	onion,	chopped	fine
6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 anchovy	fillet,	rinsed	and	minced
				1⁄8 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
1				 cup	dry	white	wine
1				 (14.5-ounce)	can	diced	tomatoes,	drained
1				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth

2½				 tablespoons	tomato	paste
1½				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	thyme
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	oregano
1				 teaspoon	herbes	de	Provence	(optional)
1				 bay	leaf

1½				 teaspoons	grated	lemon	zest
½				 cup	pitted	niçoise	olives
1				 tablespoon	chopped	fresh	parsley

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.
Season	both	sides	of	chicken	with	salt.	Heat	1	teaspoon	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over
medium-high	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	4	chicken	thighs,	skin	side	down,	and
cook	without	moving	until	skin	is	crisp	and	well	browned,	about	5	minutes.
Using	tongs,	turn	chicken	pieces	and	brown	on	second	side,	about	5	minutes
longer;	transfer	to	large	plate.	Add	remaining	4	chicken	thighs	to	pot	and	repeat,
then	transfer	to	plate	and	set	aside.	Discard	all	but	1	tablespoon	fat	from	pot.
2.	Add	onion	to	fat	in	Dutch	oven	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	over

medium	heat	until	browned,	about	4	minutes.	Add	garlic,	anchovy,	and	cayenne;
cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Add	wine	and	scrape	up



browned	bits	from	bottom	of	pot.	Stir	in	tomatoes,	broth,	tomato	paste,	thyme,
oregano,	herbes	de	Provence,	if	using,	and	bay	leaf.	Remove	and	discard	skin
from	chicken	thighs,	then	submerge	chicken	in	liquid	and	add	accumulated
chicken	juices	to	pot.	Increase	heat	to	high,	bring	to	simmer,	cover,	and	transfer
pot	to	oven;	cook	until	chicken	offers	no	resistance	when	poked	with	tip	of
paring	knife	but	still	clings	to	bones,	about	1¼	hours.
3.	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	chicken	to	serving	platter	and	tent	with

aluminum	foil.	Discard	bay	leaf.	Set	Dutch	oven	over	high	heat,	stir	in	1
teaspoon	lemon	zest,	bring	to	boil,	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	slightly
thickened	and	reduced	to	2	cups,	about	5	minutes.	Stir	in	olives	and	cook	until
heated	through,	about	1	minute.	Meanwhile,	mix	remaining	½	teaspoon	zest	with
parsley.	Spoon	sauce	over	chicken,	drizzle	chicken	with	remaining	2	teaspoons
oil,	sprinkle	with	parsley	mixture,	and	serve.

CHICKEN	PROVENÇAL	WITH	SAFFRON,	ORANGE,	AND	BASIL
Add	1⁄8	teaspoon	saffron	threads	with	wine	in	step	2.	Substitute	orange	zest	for
lemon	zest	and	2	tablespoons	chopped	fresh	basil	for	parsley.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Chicken	Provençal	represents	the	best	of	rustic	peasant	food—bone-in	chicken
simmered	slowly	in	a	tomatoey,	garlicky	herb	broth	that	is	flavorful	enough	to
mop	up	with	thick	slices	of	crusty	bread.	To	achieve	our	ideal,	we	start	with
bone-in,	skin-on	chicken	thighs	and	brown	them	in	olive	oil	to	develop	rich
flavor	and	leave	behind	browned	bits	in	the	pan.	Because	dark	meat	has	more
connective	tissue	than	white	meat,	we	are	able	to	braise	the	chicken	thighs	for	a
long	time—until	they	reach	210	degrees—rendering	them	tender	and	juicy	and
not	at	all	dry.
START	WITH	THIGHS	Chicken	thighs	are	a	favorite	for	braising.	Unlike

drumsticks	and	wings,	they	are	easy	to	handle	and	eat.	And	unlike	breasts,	which
are	very	lean,	dark	meat	thighs	contain	collagen	and	fat	because	there	is	more
connective	tissue	surrounding	these	heavily	used	muscles.	The	collagen	and	fat
render	in	the	long	cooking	time	to	create	a	juicy,	tender	braise.
DITCH	THE	SKIN	The	chicken	skin	is	a	necessary	cushion	between	the

meat	and	pan	when	browning,	and	so	we	leave	it	on	to	begin.	After	all,	it’s
important	to	deeply	brown	the	chicken	thighs	in	order	to	render	more	fat	and
therefore	add	more	chicken	flavor	in	the	dish.	We	discard	the	skin	after
browning	the	thighs,	as	it	turns	flabby	and	inedible	during	the	long	braising	time.
AUGMENT	WITH	OLIVE	OIL	We	use	less	rather	than	more	olive	oil

while	browning	the	chicken	thighs	in	the	beginning	of	this	recipe—just	1
teaspoon.	This	allows	more	chicken	fat	to	be	rendered	and	then	kept	as	we
continue	the	braise,	resulting	in	more	chicken	flavor	in	the	final	dish.	But	we	do
drizzle	two	additional	teaspoons	of	extra-virgin	olive	oil	over	the	finished	results
for	its	added	fruity	flavor.	Olive	oil,	after	all,	is	a	staple	of	southern	France,
where	this	dish	originated.
TASTE	FOR	SEASONING	As	for	seasonings,	the	combination	of	the	dried

herbs	referred	to	as	herbes	de	Provence	(lavender,	marjoram,	basil,	fennel	seeds,
rosemary,	sage,	summer	savory,	and	thyme)	originally	seemed	like	a	shoo-in.
But	we	found	that	when	used	alone,	these	dried	herbs	were	too	strong,	giving	the
sauce	a	flavor	that	bordered	on	medicinal.	Instead,	we	prefer	fresh	thyme,
oregano,	parsley,	and	a	bay	leaf,	with	a	teaspoon	of	the	dried	blend	as	an
optional	item.	A	pinch	of	cayenne	balances	the	sweet	tomatoes	and	a	teaspoon	of
minced	anchovies,	which	are	rich	in	glutamates	and	nucleotides	(for	more	on
glutamates	and	nucleotides,	see	concept	35),	makes	the	sauce	taste	richer	and
fuller.	Finally,	lemon	zest	adds	a	light	touch.



CHICKEN	PAPRIKASH
SERVES	4

In	this	rendition	of	the	Hungarian	classic,	the	natural	juices	of	chicken,	bell
peppers,	onion,	and	tomatoes	are	released	during	the	braising	process	and	then
enriched	with	sour	cream	to	create	a	dish	that’s	especially	comforting	in	cold
weather.	Serve	with	buttered	egg	noodles;	rice	or	mashed	potatoes	are	also	good
options.

8				 (5-to	7-ounce)	bone-in	chicken	thighs,	trimmed
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 teaspoon	vegetable	oil
1				 large	onion,	halved	and	sliced	thin
1				 large	red	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded,	halved	widthwise,	and	cut	into	thin	strips
1				 large	green	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded,	halved	widthwise,	and	cut	into	thin	strips

3½				 tablespoons	paprika
1				 tablespoon	all-purpose	flour
¼				 teaspoon	dried	marjoram
½				 cup	dry	white	wine
1				 (14.5-ounce)	can	diced	tomatoes,	drained
				1⁄3 cup	sour	cream
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.
Pat	chicken	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Heat	oil	in
Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	4	chicken	thighs,
skin	side	down,	and	cook	without	moving	them	until	skin	is	crisp	and	well
browned,	about	5	minutes.	Using	tongs,	flip	chicken	and	brown	on	second	side,
about	5	minutes.	Transfer	to	large	plate.	Add	remaining	4	chicken	thighs	to	pot
and	repeat,	then	transfer	to	plate	and	set	aside.	Discard	all	but	1	tablespoon	fat
from	pot.
2.	Add	onion	to	fat	left	in	Dutch	oven	and	sauté	over	medium	heat	until

softened,	5	to	7	minutes.	Add	bell	peppers	and	sauté	until	onions	are	browned
and	peppers	are	softened,	about	3	minutes.	Stir	in	3	tablespoons	paprika,	flour,
and	marjoram	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Add
wine,	scraping	pot	bottom	with	wooden	spoon	to	loosen	brown	bits.	Stir	in



tomatoes	and	1	teaspoon	salt.	Remove	and	discard	skin	from	chicken	thighs,
then	nestle	chicken	under	onion	and	peppers,	and	add	accumulated	juices	to	pot.
Bring	to	simmer,	cover,	and	place	pot	in	oven.	Cook	until	chicken	offers	no
resistance	when	poked	with	tip	of	paring	knife,	but	still	clings	to	bone,	about	1¼
hours.	(Stew	can	be	cooled	to	room	temperature,	covered,	and	refrigerated	for	up
to	3	days.	Bring	to	simmer	over	medium-low	heat	before	proceeding.)
3.	Combine	sour	cream	and	remaining	½	tablespoon	paprika	in	small	bowl.

Remove	chicken	from	pot	and	place	portion	on	each	plate.	Stir	few	tablespoons
of	hot	sauce	into	sour	cream	to	temper,	and	then	stir	mixture	back	into	remaining
peppers	and	sauce.	Ladle	peppers	and	enriched	sauce	over	chicken,	sprinkle	with
parsley,	and	serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Chicken	paprikash	is	an	easy-to-make	braise	with	succulent	chicken,	a	balance
of	heat,	spice,	and	aromatics,	and	a	rich,	flavorful	sauce	with	paprika	at	center
stage.	To	get	to	this	goal,	we	pared	down	the	usual	mile-long	ingredient	list.
Sautéing	a	handful	of	aromatics	and	vegetables	in	the	fond	led	to	a	rich	base	for
our	sauce,	which	we	enhanced	with	paprika	twice:	once	while	sautéing	the
vegetables	to	let	its	flavor	bloom,	then	once	again	when	adding	sour	cream	to
finish	the	dish.
DITCH	THE	SKIN	Just	as	for	Chicken	Provençal,	we	ditch	the	skin	after

browning	to	prevent	the	accumulation	of	excess	fat	and	a	greasy	sauce.	To	do
this,	grasp	the	skin	from	one	end	of	the	browned	and	cooled	chicken	thighs	and
simply	pull	to	separate	it	from	the	meat.
CHOOSING	YOUR	PAPRIKA	The	brilliant	red	powder	we	call	“paprika”

comes	from	the	dried	pods	(fruit)	of	the	plant	species	Capisicum	annuum	L.,	the
family	of	peppers	that	ranges	from	sweet	bells	to	the	very	hottest	chiles.	Several
varieties	of	this	clan	are	used	to	produce	paprika	and	as	a	result	there	are	many
different	kinds	of	paprika.	We	found	that	chicken	paprikash	is	best	flavored	with
Hungarian	sweet	paprika.	Other	sweet	paprikas	can	deliver	good	results,	but
don’t	use	hot	paprika	in	this	dish.
TEMPER,	TEMPER	If	sour	cream	is	added	directly	to	the	pot	it	can	curdle

—especially	when	added	to	a	hot	sauce	made	acidic	with	tomatoes.	The	tomato
acid	neutralizes	some	of	the	electrical	charges	on	the	proteins	in	sour	cream
(mostly	proteins	called	casein),	causing	them	to	be	more	prone	to	clump	together
(coagulate)	and	separate	(curdle).	Tempering	the	sour	cream	(stirring	some	of	the
hot	liquid	from	the	stew	pot	together	with	the	sour	cream	in	a	small	bowl,	then
adding	the	warmed	mixture	to	the	pot)	helps	to	prevent	curdling,	however.	This
is	because	the	addition	of	a	small	amount	of	the	warm	liquid	dilutes	the	proteins
in	the	sour	cream	and	gradually	brings	them	all	up	to	temperature.	Any	extra	fat
in	the	cooking	liquid	also	helps	to	coat	the	proteins	and	prevent	them	from
clumping.



BRAISING	AT	WORK	
STEWS
In	stews,	we	use	small,	boneless	chunks	of	meat	rather	than	the	big	hunks	typical
in	pot	roasts.	We	cook	stews	with	a	generous	amount	of	liquid,	alongside	a	lot	of
big	vegetable	pieces—and,	as	with	most	braises,	we	do	this	in	a	covered	pot.
Again,	we	like	to	use	the	oven	to	simmer	our	stews	evenly	and	gently,
maintaining	the	well-done	temperature	of	the	meat	until	its	collagen	melts,	tough
muscle	fibers	break	down,	and	fat	renders,	leaving	us	with	a	tender,	flavorful
stew.	These	two	recipes	offer	bold	riffs	on	the	classic	beef	stew.	For	a	more
traditional	beef	stew,	see	Best	Beef	Stew.



DAUBE	PROVENÇAL
SERVES	4	TO	6

Serve	this	French	beef	stew	with	buttered	egg	noodles	or	boiled	potatoes.

¾				 ounce	dried	porcini	mushrooms,	rinsed
2				 cups	water
1				 (3½-pound)	boneless	beef	chuck-eye	roast,	pulled	apart	at	seams,	trimmed,	and	cut	into	2-inch

pieces
1				 teaspoon	salt
1				 teaspoon	pepper
4				 tablespoons	olive	oil
5				 ounces	salt	pork,	rind	removed
4				 carrots,	peeled	and	cut	into	1-inch	pieces
2				 onions,	halved	and	sliced	1⁄8	inch	thick
4				 garlic	cloves,	sliced	thin
2				 tablespoons	tomato	paste
				1⁄3 cup	all-purpose	flour
1				 (750-ml)	bottle	red	wine
1				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
4				 (2-inch)	strips	orange	zest,	cut	lengthwise	into	thin	strips
1				 cup	pitted	niçoise	olives
3				 anchovy	fillets,	rinsed	and	minced
5				 sprigs	fresh	thyme,	tied	together	with	kitchen	twine
2				 bay	leaves
1				 (14.5-ounce)	can	whole	tomatoes,	drained	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley

1.	Cover	mushrooms	with	1	cup	water	in	small	bowl,	cover,	and	microwave
until	steaming,	about	1	minute.	Lift	mushrooms	from	liquid	with	fork	and	chop
into	½-inch	pieces	(you	should	have	about	¼	cup).	Strain	liquid	through	paper
towel–lined	fine-mesh	strainer	into	medium	bowl.	Set	mushrooms	and	liquid
aside.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.

Pat	beef	dry	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.	Heat	2	tablespoons	oil	in	Dutch
oven	over	medium-high	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	half	of	beef	and	cook



without	moving	until	well	browned,	about	2	minutes	per	side.	Transfer	meat	to
medium	bowl.	Repeat	with	remaining	2	tablespoons	oil	and	remaining	meat.
3.	Reduce	heat	to	medium	and	add	salt	pork,	carrots,	onions,	garlic,	and

tomato	paste	to	now-empty	pot;	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	light	brown,
about	2	minutes.	Stir	in	flour	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	about	1	minute.
Slowly	add	wine,	scraping	bottom	of	pot	to	loosen	browned	bits.	Add	broth,
remaining	1	cup	water,	and	beef	with	any	accumulated	juices.	Increase	heat	to
medium-high	and	bring	to	simmer.	Stir	in	mushrooms	and	their	liquid,	orange
zest,	½	cup	olives,	anchovies,	thyme,	and	bay	leaves,	arranging	beef	so	it	is
completely	covered	by	liquid;	partially	cover	pot	and	place	in	oven.	Cook	until
fork	inserted	in	beef	meets	little	resistance	(meat	should	not	be	falling	apart),	2½
to	3	hours.
4.	Discard	salt	pork,	thyme,	and	bay	leaves.	Add	tomatoes	and	remaining	½

cup	olives	and	cook	over	medium-high	heat	until	heated	through,	about	1
minute.	Cover	pot	and	let	stew	sit,	about	5	minutes.	Using	large	spoon,	skim
excess	fat	from	surface	of	stew.	Stir	in	parsley	and	serve.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Once	salt	pork,	thyme,	and	bay	leaves	are	removed	in

step	4,	daube	can	be	cooled	and	refrigerated	in	airtight	container	for	up	to	4
days.	Before	reheating,	skim	hardened	fat	from	surface	and	then	continue	with
recipe.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Daube	Provençal,	also	known	as	daube	Niçoise,	has	all	the	elements	of	the	best
French	fare:	tender	beef,	a	luxurious	sauce,	and	complex	flavors.	But	it	usually
ends	up	as	beef	stew	with	a	few	misplaced	ingredients.	We	wanted	to	translate
the	flavors	of	Provence	to	an	American	home	kitchen,	with	ingredients	that
marry	into	a	robust	but	unified	dish.	We	start	with	our	reliable	set	of	techniques
for	turning	tough	but	flavorful	beef	into	a	tender	stew	and	then	add	briny	niçoise
olives,	bright	tomatoes,	floral	orange	peel,	and	the	regional	flavors	of	thyme	and
bay.	A	few	anchovies	add	complexity	without	a	fishy	taste,	and	salt	pork
contributes	rich	body.
SUPER-SIZE	IT	We	began	by	cutting	the	chuck	roast	into	1-inch	cubes,	a

standard	size	for	beef	stew.	But	because	we	cook	this	stew	for	longer	than
normal—a	time	that	allows	the	full	bottle	of	wine	to	mellow	and	the	sauce	to
become	thick	and	flavorful—the	meat	was	drying	out	and	losing	its	distinct
character.	The	1½-inch	pieces	that	we	use	in	our	Hungarian	Beef	Stew	and	Best
Beef	Stew	seemed	too	small	as	well.	But	by	cutting	the	chuck	roast	into	super-
sized	2-inch	chunks,	we	end	up	with	not	only	a	complex	sauce	but	tender	beef,
too.
ACTIVATE	FLOUR	POWER	Instead	of	using	a	traditional	roux,	which	we

found	made	a	thin,	greasy-looking	sauce,	we	sprinkle	flour	into	the	pot	to	cook
with	the	vegetables	and	tomato	paste.	We	also	increase	the	usual	amount	of	flour
—to	1⁄3	cup,	which	is	a	little	more	than	most	recipes	contain.	This	helps	to	create
a	braising	liquid	that	thickens	to	the	consistency	of	a	luxurious	sauce.



HUNGARIAN	BEEF	STEW
SERVES	6

Serve	the	stew	over	boiled	potatoes	or	buttered	egg	noodles.

1				 (3½-to	4-pound)	boneless	beef	chuck-eye	roast,	pulled	apart	at	seams,	trimmed,	and	cut	into	1½-inch
pieces

					 Salt	and	pepper
				1⁄3 cup	paprika
1				 cup	jarred	roasted	red	peppers,	rinsed	and	patted	dry
2				 tablespoons	tomato	paste
1				 tablespoon	distilled	white	vinegar
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
4				 large	onions,	chopped	fine
4				 large	carrots,	peeled	and	cut	into	1-inch	rounds
1				 bay	leaf
1				 cup	beef	broth,	warmed
¼				 cup	sour	cream	(optional)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.
Season	meat	evenly	with	1	teaspoon	salt	and	let	stand	for	15	minutes.	Process
paprika,	roasted	peppers,	tomato	paste,	and	2	teaspoons	vinegar	in	food
processor	until	smooth,	1	to	2	minutes,	scraping	down	sides	as	needed.
2.	Combine	oil,	onions,	and	1	teaspoon	salt	in	Dutch	oven;	cover	and	set	over

medium	heat.	Cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	onions	soften	but	have	not	yet
begun	to	brown,	8	to	10	minutes.	(If	onions	begin	to	brown,	reduce	heat	to
medium-low	and	stir	in	1	tablespoon	water.)
3.	Stir	in	paprika	mixture;	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	onions	stick	to

bottom	of	pot,	about	2	minutes.	Add	beef,	carrots,	and	bay	leaf;	stir	until	beef	is
well	coated.	Using	rubber	spatula,	scrape	down	sides	of	pot.	Cover	pot	and
transfer	to	oven.	Cook	until	meat	is	almost	tender	and	surface	of	liquid	is	½	inch
below	top	of	meat,	2	to	2½	hours,	stirring	every	30	minutes.	Remove	pot	from
oven	and	add	enough	beef	broth	so	that	surface	of	liquid	is	¼	inch	from	top	of
meat	(beef	should	not	be	fully	submerged).	Return	covered	pot	to	oven	and
continue	to	cook	until	fork	slips	easily	in	and	out	of	beef,	about	30	minutes
longer.



4.	Using	large	spoon,	skim	fat	off	surface;	stir	in	remaining	teaspoon	vinegar.
If	using	sour	cream,	stir	few	tablespoons	of	hot	sauce	into	sour	cream	to	temper
it,	and	then	stir	mixture	back	into	pot.	Remove	bay	leaf,	season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste,	and	serve.	(Stew,	minus	optional	sour	cream,	can	be	refrigerated
for	up	to	2	days.	Stir	sour	cream	into	reheated	stew	just	before	serving.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	Americanized	versions	of	Hungarian	goulash	served	in	the	United	States
bear	little	resemblance	to	the	traditional	dish.	Mushrooms,	green	peppers,	and
most	herbs	have	no	place	in	the	pot	and	sour	cream	is	not	authentic	to	the	dish.
We	wanted	the	real	deal—a	simple	dish	of	tender	braised	beef	packed	with
paprika	flavor.	Though	we	don’t	add	liquid	to	the	stew	itself	(for	more	on	covered
pot	cooking	without	liquid,	see	concept	9),	a	bit	of	broth	added	near	the	end
thins	out	the	stewing	liquid	to	just	the	right	consistency.
MAKE	PAPRIKA	CREAM	To	achieve	the	desired	level	of	spicy	intensity,

we	create	our	own	version	of	paprika	cream,	a	condiment	common	in	Hungarian
cooking	but	hard	to	find	in	the	United	States.	Pureeing	the	paprika	with	roasted
red	peppers,	tomato	paste,	and	vinegar	imparts	vibrant	paprika	flavor	without
any	grittiness.	Do	not	substitute	hot,	half-sharp,	or	smoked	Spanish	paprika	for
the	sweet	paprika;	they	will	compromise	the	flavor	of	the	dish.
SKIP	THE	SEAR,	NOT	THE	FLAVOR	Most	stews	begin	by	browning

meat	on	the	stovetop	to	boost	flavor.	They	also	call	for	lots	of	added	liquid.	Like
our	Easy	Pot	Roast	recipe,	this	recipe	skips	the	sear	and	goes	into	a	moderate
325-degree	oven.	Over	time,	the	dry	top	layer	of	meat	will	begin	to	brown,
forming	new	flavor	compounds.	(See	“Low-Temperature	Browning.”)	We	stir
the	meat	every	30	minutes	to	expose	new	surfaces	and	promote	as	much	of	the
slow	browning	to	take	place	as	possible.
	



CONCEPT	9

A	Covered	Pot	Doesn’t	Need	Liquid
In	concept	8,	we	looked	at	covered	pot	cooking	with	liquid.	But	just	because	the
vessel	is	closed,	that	doesn’t	mean	the	options	are,	too.	You	don’t	need	added
liquid	to	effectively	cook	a	cut	of	meat	in	a	closed	pot.	Sometimes	it’s	best	to	do
it	completely	dry.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Cooking	en	cocotte,	or	casserole-roasting,	is	a	common	cooking	method	in
France	that	is	typically	used	for	chicken	and	lamb.	The	approach	is	simple:	Place
a	seasoned	piece	of	meat	in	a	pot,	scatter	in	a	small	handful	of	chopped
vegetables,	cover,	and	bake.	This	technique	has	many	similarities	to	braising:	It
utilizes	a	covered	pot,	low	oven	temperature,	and	extended	cooking	time	to	yield
tender,	flavorful	meat.	But	the	big	difference	is	when	cooking	en	cocotte,	no
liquid	is	added.	Instead,	juices	are	drawn	from	the	meat	into	the	pot.	These	juices
eventually	create	a	moist-heat	environment,	so	that	the	meat	cooks	gently—in
effect,	braising	in	its	own	juices.	The	result	is	unbelievably	tender	and	flavorful
meat	undiluted	by	additional	liquid.
Unlike	braising,	where	tough,	fatty	cuts	are	generally	cooked	until	they	are

tender	and	falling	off	the	bone,	cooking	en	cocotte	begins	with	lean,	naturally
tender	cuts,	such	as	a	whole	chicken	or	pork	loin.	The	meat	is	cooked	until	it	is
just	done,	which	is	why	we	take	the	temperature	of	the	meat	to	ensure	it	is	not
overcooked	or	undercooked.
We	cook	en	cocotte	in	a	low-temperature	oven	to	retain	moisture,	help	break

down	whatever	tough	muscle	fibers	are	present,	as	well	as	to	intensify	the
flavors	of	the	meat.	In	our	kitchen	testing,	we	found	that	temperatures	of	325	to
375	degrees	produced	decent	results,	but	even	lower	temperatures—around	250
degrees—yielded	incredibly	tender	meat,	thanks	to	the	gentle	heat	and	longer
cooking	time.	Sure,	some	of	these	low-temperature	versions	take	up	to	an	hour
and	45	minutes	to	cook,	but	it’s	worth	it	for	the	rich,	concentrated	flavors.	(For
more	on	the	benefits	of	cooking	with	gentle	heat,	see	concept	1.)
While	cooking	en	cocotte	resembles	braising,	it’s	probably	more	helpful	to

think	of	it	as	an	alternative	to	roasting,	where	the	emphasis	is	on	moisture
retention	rather	than	browning.	In	order	to	maximize	moisture	retention,	it’s
important	to	let	meat	cooked	this	way	rest	before	carving	or	slicing	(see	concept
3).	Use	the	remaining	concentrated	liquid	left	in	the	pot	as	the	basis	for	an	easy-
to-prepare	sauce	that	further	enhances	the	flavor	and	juiciness	of	the	meat.



THE	BENEFITS	OF	“DRY”	BRAISING



	
DRY	ENVIRONMENT	In	a	dry,	covered	pot	with	no	added	liquid,	the	juices	that	come	out	of	the	chicken
create	a	moist	heat	environment	and	are	retained	for	a	sauce,	undiluted	by	other	flavors.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	understand	how	effective	cooking	en	cocotte	is	at	preserving	moisture	in
meat,	we	devised	the	following	test:	We	cooked	two	whole	chickens,	one	en
cocotte	in	a	covered	Dutch	oven	and	the	other	in	an	uncovered	baking	dish—
both	in	250-degree	ovens,	the	temperature	at	which	we	cook	our	French	Chicken
in	a	Pot.	To	determine	moisture	loss,	we	weighed	the	birds	before	and	after
cooking	and	collected	the	liquid	that	settled	in	the	cooking	vessels.	Both	birds
were	raised	up	on	wire	racks	to	eliminate	any	potential	reabsorption	of	expelled
juices.	We	ran	this	test	three	times	and	averaged	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
The	chickens	cooked	in	the	open	baking	dish	lost	11	percent	of	their	moisture
compared	to	roughly	7.5	percent	moisture	loss	in	the	en	cocotte	samples.	While
these	numbers	are	telling	in	and	of	themselves,	they	become	all	the	more
impressive	when	we	factor	in	the	amount	of	liquid	recovered	in	the	bottom	of
each	cooking	vessel.	While	there	was	almost	3	ounces	of	liquid	in	the	Dutch
oven	on	average,	there	was	just	1	ounce	in	the	open	baking	dish.	If	you	serve	the
liquid	in	the	cooking	vessel	with	the	chicken,	you	can	mitigate	some	of	the
moisture	loss	that	occurred	during	cooking.	Assuming	that	this	liquid	makes	it
back	onto	the	dinner	plate,	the	difference	between	the	two	cooking	methods
becomes	even	starker.	With	the	recovered	liquid	added	to	the	equation,	the
chickens	cooked	in	the	open	baking	dish	lost	9.5	percent	of	their	initial	moisture
on	average	while	the	chickens	cooked	in	the	covered	Dutch	oven	lost	just	3.5
percent	of	their	initial	moisture.



THE	TAKEAWAY
It	did	not	come	as	a	surprise	that	the	chickens	roasted	in	open	vessels	lost	more
moisture	than	those	roasted	in	a	closed	pot.	This	difference	is	likely	due	to	the
greater	evaporative	moisture	loss	for	the	exposed	birds.	(It’s	important	to	note,
too,	that	if	we	had	cooked	the	uncovered	birds	at	a	higher	temperature,	which	is
how	we	normally	roast	chicken,	they	would	have	lost	even	more	moisture	due	to
evaporation.)	But	what	makes	the	results	of	this	experiment	dramatic	is	when
you	factor	in	the	liquid	remaining	in	the	pan,	because	that	is	one	of	the	reasons—
if	not	the	best	reason—to	cook	en	cocotte:	the	built-in	sauce.	While	the	low	oven
temperature	in	our	en	cocotte	method	is	partially	responsible	for	supremely
moist	poultry	and	meat,	it’s	the	pot’s	tight-fitting	lid	that	allows	us	to	trap	the
meat	juices	and	mitigate	total	moisture	loss	by	using	these	juices	to	produce	a
rich	jus.



WHAT	REMAINS:	JUICES	RETAINED	WHEN	ROASTING	VS.	EN
COCOTTE

	
ROASTED

A	chicken	cooked	in	an	open	baking	dish	loses	a	good	deal	of	moisture;	only	28	grams	of	juices	remain	in
the	dish.

	
EN	COCOTTE

A	chicken	cooked	in	a	covered	pot	loses	some	moisture,	but	74	grams	of	juices	remain	in	the	pot	after
cooking.



EN	COCOTTE	AT	WORK	
CHICKEN
Chicken	in	a	pot,	or	poulet	en	cocotte,	is	a	Parisian	bistro	classic.	The	dish
features	a	whole	chicken	baked	with	a	smattering	of	vegetables	in	a	covered	pot.
We	brown	it,	cover	it—no	liquid	added!—and	cook	it	in	a	low-temperature	oven.
At	first	glance,	this	chicken	is	nothing	to	rave	about.	After	all,	it	has	pale,	soft
skin	unlike	the	crisp	exterior	of	roasted	poultry.	But	the	first	time	we	tried	this
dish,	one	bite	confirmed	it	was	special	indeed—the	meat	was	incredibly	tender
and	juicy,	with	a	rich,	soul-satisfying	flavor.



FRENCH	CHICKEN	IN	A	POT
SERVES	4

You	will	need	at	least	a	6-quart	Dutch	oven	with	a	tight-fitting	lid.	If	you	choose
not	to	serve	the	skin	with	the	chicken,	simply	remove	it	before	carving.	The
amount	of	jus	varies	depending	on	the	size	of	the	chicken;	season	it	with	¼
teaspoon	of	lemon	juice	for	every	¼	cup.

1				 (4½-to	5-pound)	whole	chicken,	giblets	discarded
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 tablespoon	olive	oil
1				 small	onion,	chopped
1				 small	celery	rib,	chopped
6				 garlic	cloves,	peeled
1				 bay	leaf
1				 sprig	fresh	rosemary	(optional)

½–1				 teaspoon	lemon	juice

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	250	degrees.	Pat
chicken	dry	with	paper	towels,	tuck	wings	behind	back,	and	season	with	salt	and
pepper.	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add
chicken	breast	side	down;	scatter	onion,	celery,	garlic,	bay	leaf,	and	rosemary
sprig,	if	using,	around	chicken.	Cook	until	breast	is	lightly	browned,	about	5
minutes.	Using	wooden	spoon	inserted	into	cavity	of	bird,	flip	chicken	breast
side	up	and	cook	until	chicken	and	vegetables	are	well	browned,	6	to	8	minutes.
2.	Off	heat,	place	large	sheet	of	aluminum	foil	over	pot	and	cover	tightly	with

lid.	Transfer	pot	to	oven	and	cook	chicken	until	breast	registers	160	degrees	and
thighs	register	175	degrees,	1	hour	20	minutes	to	1	hour	50	minutes.
3.	Transfer	chicken	to	carving	board,	tent	with	foil,	and	let	rest	for	20	minutes.

Meanwhile,	strain	chicken	juices	from	pot	through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	fat
separator,	pressing	on	solids	to	extract	liquid;	discard	solids.	Let	juices	settle	for
5	minutes,	then	pour	into	saucepan	and	set	over	low	heat.	Carve	chicken,	adding
any	accumulated	juices	to	saucepan.	Season	with	lemon	juice,	salt,	and	pepper	to
taste.	Serve	chicken,	passing	sauce	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	method	for	our	French	chicken	in	a	pot	is	simple:	Place	a	seasoned	chicken
in	a	pot,	brown	it,	scatter	in	some	vegetables,	cover,	and	bake.	When	done	right,
this	dish	forgoes	crispy	skin	for	unbelievably	tender,	succulent	meat	and	rich
flavor.	The	key	is	a	dry	cooking	environment	and	our	main	challenge	is	to
minimize	the	humidity	in	the	pot	so	that	it	doesn’t	dilute	the	flavor	of	the	meat	as
it	cooks.	By	cooking	the	chicken	by	itself	in	a	tightly	sealed	pot—with	few	added
vegetables	in	order	to	prevent	the	extra	liquid	and	steam	that	come	from	large
chunks—we	get	the	concentrated	flavor	we	seek.	Cooking	the	bird	at	a	low	250
degrees	ensures	the	breast	meat	doesn’t	dry	out.	Finally,	we	add	a	small	amount
of	aromatics,	lightly	browned	to	remove	some	of	their	moisture,	for	extra	flavor.
BROWN	FIRST	We	sear	the	chicken	over	medium	heat	in	order	to	cause

browning,	instigate	the	Maillard	reaction,	and,	as	a	result,	build	flavor.	(For	more
on	this,	see	concept	2.)	Though	often	browning	is	used	as	a	technique	to	build
flavor	in	the	crust	of	the	meat	or	chicken	itself,	many	cooks	will	choose	to
discard	the	skin	of	this	chicken	before	serving.	Therefore,	the	real	flavor	comes
in	the	potent	jus	that	will	be	left	in	the	pot	once	the	chicken	is	done.
PROTECT	THE	WINGS	Tucking	the	wings	of	a	chicken	behind	the	back

will	keep	them	out	of	the	way	and	prevent	the	wingtips	from	burning.	To	do	this,
simply	twist	the	wing	behind	the	back	and	close	the	joints	of	the	wing	tightly.
The	tension	of	the	closed,	tucked	wing	will	help	to	keep	it	in	place.
FOIL	IT	It’s	important	to	add	a	sheet	of	aluminum	foil	over	the	pot	before

placing	on	its	lid.	This	will	help	to	create	the	tightest	seal	possible	and	prevent
any	steam	from	escaping	from	the	pot	as	the	chicken	cooks.
COOK	BREAST	SIDE	UP	We	found	it	necessary	to	cook	the	chicken	breast

side	up	in	the	covered	pot.	Because	the	dark	meat	is	resting	on	the	bottom	of	the
pot,	where	heat	transfer	is	best,	it	will	cook	faster	than	the	white	meat	above.	As
a	result,	by	the	time	the	breast	meat	reaches	160	degrees	(a	temperature	beyond
which	the	meat	will	dry	out),	the	dark	meat	has	raced	ahead	to	175	degrees	(the
temperature	at	which	it	is	no	longer	tough).
STRAIN	AND	SERVE	After	transferring	the	chicken	to	a	carving	board	and

tenting	it	with	foil	to	rest,	strain	the	chicken	juices	from	the	pot	through	a	fine-
mesh	strainer.	We	don’t	strain	the	sauce	purely	for	textural	and	aesthetic	reasons:
It	makes	a	more	intensely	flavored	jus,	too.	By	straining	the	sauce	and	pressing
on	the	aromatics,	we	release	the	essence	of	onion,	carrot,	celery,	and	garlic	into
the	sauce.	Now	we	just	need	a	little	lemon	juice	for	brightness,	and	it’s	ready	to



serve.



EN	COCOTTE	AT	WORK	
PORK
Roasting	en	cocotte	can	produce	just	as	wonderful	results	for	pork	as	it	does	for
chicken.	You	will	need	a	cut	that	will	fit	in	a	Dutch	oven—and	something
boneless	will	be	easier	to	work	with.	Also,	since	this	method	won’t	break	down
much	collagen,	a	cut	that	will	be	tender	when	cooked	through	is	essential.	A
pork	loin	is	the	best	cut	for	the	job.	After	browning	the	meat,	we	cook	it	in	a	low-
temperature	oven	with	minimal	aromatics	for	an	incredibly	juicy,	tender	roast.



PORK	ROAST	EN	COCOTTE	WITH	APPLES	AND	SHALLOTS
SERVES	4	TO	6

Leaving	a	¼-inch-thick	layer	of	fat	on	top	of	the	roast	is	ideal;	if	your	roast	has
a	thicker	fat	cap,	trim	it	back	to	be	about	¼	inch	thick.	You	can	find	herbes	de
Provence	in	most	large	grocery	stores;	however,	1	teaspoon	each	of	dried	thyme,
dried	rosemary,	and	dried	marjoram	can	be	substituted.

1				 (2½-to	3-pound)	boneless	pork	loin	roast,	trimmed	and	tied	at	1½-inch	intervals
1				 tablespoon	herbes	de	Provence
					 Salt	and	pepper
3				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
8				 shallots,	peeled	and	quartered
1				 pound	Golden	Delicious	or	Granny	Smith	apples,	peeled,	cored,	and	cut	into	½-inch-thick	wedges
¼				 teaspoon	sugar
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	250	degrees.	Pat	pork
dry	with	paper	towels,	sprinkle	herbes	de	Provence	evenly	over	pork,	and	season
with	salt	and	pepper.
2.	Heat	2	tablespoons	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until	just

smoking.	Brown	pork	well	on	all	sides,	7	to	10	minutes,	reducing	heat	if	pot
begins	to	scorch.	Transfer	pork	to	large	plate.
3.	Add	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil	to	pot	and	heat	over	medium	heat	until

shimmering.	Add	shallots	and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	golden,	about	3	minutes.
Stir	in	apples	and	sugar	and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	golden,	5	to	7	minutes.
4.	Off	heat,	nestle	pork,	along	with	any	accumulated	juices,	into	pot.	Place

large	sheet	of	aluminum	foil	over	pot	and	press	to	seal,	then	cover	tightly	with
lid.	Transfer	pot	to	oven	and	cook	until	roast	registers	140	degrees,	35	to	55
minutes.
5.	Remove	pot	from	oven.	Transfer	pork	to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with

foil,	and	let	rest	for	about	20	minutes.	Stir	butter	into	apple-shallot	mixture,
season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	cover	to	keep	warm.
6.	Remove	twine,	slice	pork	thin,	and	transfer	to	serving	platter.	Spoon	apple-



shallot	mixture	over	pork	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
As	with	chicken,	we	found	that	browning	the	pork	was	an	essential	step	in
developing	deep	flavor.	Unfortunately,	lean	pork	doesn’t	have	as	much	flavor	as
a	good-quality	bird.	Our	solution	is	to	add	shallots	and	apples	to	the	pot.
Rubbing	the	roast	with	herbes	de	Provence	adds	another	layer	of	flavor.
PICK	THE	RIGHT	ROAST	Buying	the	right	pork	loin	will	make	all	the

difference	in	this	recipe	because	the	pork	needs	to	fit	inside	the	pot.	Look	for	a
2½-to	3-pound	pork	loin	roast	that	is	wide	and	short	and	steer	clear	of	those	that
are	long	and	narrow.	A	roast	that	is	7	to	8	inches	long	and	4	to	5	inches	wide	is
perfect.	We	prefer	a	roast	cut	from	the	blade	end;	however,	a	center-cut	roast
(which	is	more	common)	works	just	fine.
MAKE	APPLE	“SAUCE”	Since	fruit	is	a	traditional	pairing	with	pork,	we

add	apples	to	the	mix.	Knowing	that	the	apples	would	compete	with	the	pork	for
space	in	the	pot,	preventing	it	from	browning	evenly,	and	that	the	liquid	they
release	would	dull	the	flavor	of	the	meat,	we	remove	the	browned	pork	to	a	plate
and	cook	the	apples	separately	on	the	stovetop.	This	allows	some	of	their	juices
to	evaporate.	We	then	add	the	pork	back	to	the	pot	to	let	the	dish	finish	in	the
oven—leaving	us	with	a	rustic,	chunky	applesauce	to	accompany	our	pork.
LET	IT	REST	Remove	this	pork	roast	from	the	oven	when	it	reaches	140	to

145	degrees	and	let	it	rest,	tented	with	foil,	for	20	minutes.	This	rest	time	allows
the	pork	to	keep	cooking,	reaching	the	desired	temperature	of	150	degrees	(for
more	on	carryover	cooking,	see	concept	4),	and	for	the	muscle	fibers	to	relax	so
the	meat	will	retain	more	of	its	juices	(for	more	on	resting,	see	concept	3).



EN	COCOTTE	AT	WORK	
FISH
Fish	is	well	suited	to	a	variety	of	preparations,	from	pan-searing,	baking,	and
steaming	to	grilling	and	oven-roasting.	Some	types	of	fish	have	a	high	fat
content	and	some	are	quite	lean,	but	they	all	have	one	trait	in	common:	They
tend	to	cook	fairly	quickly.	Since	the	whole	premise	of	cooking	en	cocotte	is	to
slow	down	cooking	to	concentrate	flavor,	we	were	skeptical	that	this	technique
would	successfully	translate	to	fish.	But	by	not	searing	the	fish,	we	found	that	we
got	just	what	we	wanted:	perfectly	cooked,	moist	salmon	that	flaked	apart	into
large	buttery	chunks.



SALMON	EN	COCOTTE	WITH	LEEKS	AND	WHITE	WINE
SERVES	4

To	ensure	uniform	pieces	of	fish	that	cook	at	the	same	rate,	we	prefer	to	buy	a
whole	center-cut	fillet	and	cut	it	into	evenly	sized	individual	fillets	ourselves.	If
buying	individual	fillets,	make	sure	they	are	the	same	size	and	thickness.	If	the
fillets	are	thicker	or	thinner	than	1¼	inches,	you	may	need	to	adjust	the	cooking
time	slightly.	If	you	can	find	only	skin-on	fillets,	be	sure	to	remove	the	skin	before
cooking	or	the	sauce	will	be	greasy;	have	the	fishmonger	do	this	for	you,	or	see
the	instructions	that	follow	the	recipe.	You	can	substitute	arctic	char	or	cod
fillets	for	the	salmon.

1				 (1¾-to	2-pound)	skinless	salmon	fillet,	about	1½	inches	at	thickest	part
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
2				 leeks,	white	and	light	green	parts	only,	halved	lengthwise,	sliced	thin,	and	washed	thoroughly
2				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
½				 cup	dry	white	wine
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	2	pieces

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	250	degrees.	Trim	any
whitish	fat	from	belly	of	fillet,	then	cut	fish	into	4	equal	pieces.	Pat	salmon	dry
with	paper	towels	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.
2.	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-low	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	leeks,

thyme,	and	pinch	salt,	cover,	and	cook	until	softened,	8	to	10	minutes.	Stir	in
garlic	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Remove	pot	from	heat.
3.	Lay	salmon,	skinned	side	down,	on	top	of	leeks.	Place	large	sheet	of

aluminum	foil	over	pot	and	press	to	seal,	then	cover	tightly	with	lid.	Transfer	pot
to	oven	and	cook	until	salmon	is	opaque	and	flakes	apart	when	gently	prodded
with	paring	knife,	25	to	30	minutes.
4.	Transfer	fish	to	serving	platter	and	tent	loosely	with	foil.	Stir	wine	into

leeks	in	pot	and	simmer	over	medium-high	heat	until	slightly	thickened,	about	2
minutes.	Off	heat,	whisk	in	butter	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.
Spoon	sauce	over	salmon	and	serve.



SALMON	EN	COCOTTE	WITH	CELERY	AND	ORANGE
Add	2	thinly	sliced	celery	ribs	and	1	teaspoon	minced	orange	zest	along	with
garlic	in	step	2.	Substitute	½	cup	orange	juice	for	wine,	and	add	1	orange,	peeled
and	segmented,	when	thickening	sauce	in	step	4.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
In	this	recipe,	we	take	evenly	cut	fillets	of	salmon	and	cook	them	slowly,	en
cocotte	in	the	oven.	By	eliminating	the	sear	and	adding	leeks	with	their	delicate,
onionlike	sweetness,	as	well	as	wine	and	butter,	we	achieve	a	flavorful,	moist
piece	of	fish.
CUT	FISH	YOURSELF	It’s	important	to	have	uniform	pieces	of	fish	so	that

they	will	cook	evenly	en	cocotte.	To	guarantee	this,	we	begin	with	a	whole
center-cut	fillet	that	we	cut	ourselves	into	four	individual	servings.	(That	said,	if
only	individual	fillets	are	available,	just	be	sure	that	they	are	of	even	size	and
thickness.)
REMOVE	THE	SKIN	We	remove	the	skin	so	that	the	actual	flesh	of	the	fish

will	pick	up	the	flavors	of	the	aromatics.	Removing	the	skin	also	makes	our	final
sauce	less	greasy.	Starting	at	one	end	of	the	fillet,	slide	the	knife	between	the
skin	and	flesh,	until	you	can	grab	hold	of	the	skin	with	a	paper	towel.	Holding
the	skin	firmly,	continue	to	cut	the	flesh	from	the	skin	until	it	is	completely
removed.
SKIP	THE	SEAR	Here,	we	find	that	there	is	no	discernible	advantage	to

searing	the	fish	before	cooking	it	en	cocotte.	To	streamline	the	process,	we
simply	place	the	raw	fish	on	top	of	the	softened	leeks	and	let	it	cook	undisturbed.
BUTTER	IT	UP	After	removing	the	salmon	from	the	pot	we	add	a	healthy

dose	of	white	wine	to	the	leeks	and	simmer	the	mixture	until	it	reduces	slightly.
Then	we	whisk	in	some	butter	to	add	richness	before	spooning	this	simple	sauce
over	the	salmon.



POULTRY	101
STRUCTURE
Chicken,	turkey,	and	other	poultry	have	the	same	basic	structure	as	other	meats.	We	eat	muscles	that	consist
of	muscle	fibers,	fat,	and	connective	tissue	(click	here).	As	with	other	animals,	the	location	and	function	of
poultry	muscles	will	affect	the	amount	of	fat	and	connective	tissue.	In	poultry,	the	differences	between
various	“cuts”	are	especially	dramatic—white	meat	and	dark	meat	look	and	taste	quite	different	and	cook
differently,	too.



	
DARK	MEAT
The	thighs	and	legs	consist	primarily	of	dark	muscle	cells,	which	make	up	what	are	known	as	“slow-twitch”
fibers	and	are	necessary	for	long,	continuous	activity.	Dark	muscle	cells	rely	on	oxygen	in	the	blood	to
convert	stored	fat	into	energy.	This	metabolic	process	requires	the	help	of	several	agents,	including	the
protein	myoglobin,	a	red	pigment	that	stores	oxygen	in	muscle	cells.

WHITE	MEAT
The	breast	consists	primarily	of	white	muscle	cells,	which	make	up	what	are	known	as	“fast-twitch”	fibers
and	are	necessary	for	quick	bursts	of	energy.	White	muscle	cells	rely	on	carbohydrates	stored	in	the	muscle
for	energy	and	do	not	need	the	myoglobin	in	the	blood	to	supply	the	necessary	oxygen.	While	this	energy



can	be	generated	quickly,	it	cannot	be	sustained,	and	therefore	white	meat	cells	are	abundant	only	in
muscles	that	see	little	or	no	activity.	Birds	that	rarely	fly	(such	as	chickens	or	turkeys)	have	an	especially
high	proportion	of	white	cells	in	their	breast	muscles;	in	contrast,	ducks	and	birds	that	fly	long	distances
have	relatively	few	white	cells	in	their	breast	muscles—thus	the	darker	color	of	their	breast	meat.

COLLAGEN
All	animal	tissue	contains	some	collagen,	the	sheets	of	connective	tissue	that	hold	muscle	fibers
together.However,	the	collagen	level	in	white	meat	chicken	is	less	than	2	percent;	dark	meat	chicken
contains	as	much	as	8	percent	collagen,	which	makes	the	legs	and	thighs	a	much	better	choice	for	slow-
cooking	methods	like	braising,	which	can	convert	all	that	tough	collagen	into	tender	gelatin	(click	here).

BONES
Bones	insulate	the	meat	and	thus	slow	down	the	rate	of	cooking.	They	also	provide	flavor—see	concept	10.

SKIN
The	skin	is	the	primary	source	of	fat	in	most	birds.	Additional	fat	lies	just	under	the	skin—it	is	visible	as
yellow	clumps,	especially	near	the	neck	and	tail	end	of	the	bird.	The	dark	meat	also	contains	some
intramuscular	fat—generally	more	than	twice	as	much	as	the	white	meat.

BUYING
FRESHNESS	Some	poultry	has	a	sell-by	date	(usually	12	to	14	days	after	processing),	but	this	date	is

more	for	stores	(to	ensure	that	they	aren’t	selling	old	birds)	and	should	not	be	considered	a	use-by	date	for
the	consumer.	Cook	or	freeze	poultry	within	a	day	of	its	purchase.

SIZE	Whole	chickens	can	weigh	as	little	as	1	pound	or	as	much	as	8	pounds;	likewise,	whole	turkeys
can	range	in	size	from	10	to	25	pounds.	Turkeys	are	easy	to	shop	for	since	the	nomenclature	is	the	same	no
matter	the	size.	When	shopping	for	chicken,	the	same	bird	can	be	labeled	differently	depending	on	age	and
size	at	time	of	slaughter.

PROCESSING	Simply	put,	buy	a	natural	bird.	When	it	comes	to	chicken,	we	prefer	air-chilled	versus
water-chilled	birds.	The	latter	method	(which	soaks	the	bird	in	34-degree	water	after	slaughtering)	causes
the	bird	to	absorb	water.	If	you	see	the	phrase	“contains	up	to	4%	retained	water”	on	the	label,	you	know	the
bird	was	water-chilled.	Besides	the	fact	that	you're	paying	for	the	water,	the	water	dilutes	the	chicken	flavor
and	makes	it	hard	to	crisp	up	the	skin	during	cooking.

Turkeys	can	be	injected	with	a	salt-based	solution	to	increase	perceived	juiciness.	If	in	doubt,	look	for
the	words	“basted”	or	“self-basting”	and	check	to	see	if	there’s	an	ingredient	label—if	the	turkey	has	been
injected	you	should	see	a	list	of	ingredients.	While	we	prefer	to	brine	or	salt	natural	turkeys	(see	concepts
11	and	12),	a	self-basting	bird,	such	as	a	frozen	Butterball,	is	the	best	option	if	you’re	going	to	skip	these
steps.



APPROXIMATE	WEIGHT	OF	VARIOUS	CHICKEN
Cornish	hens:	1	to	1½	pounds
Poussins:	1	to	2	pounds
Broiler/fryers:	3	to	5	pounds
Roasters:	5	to	8	pounds

STORAGE
REFRIGERATOR	Keep	chicken	in	the	coldest	part	of	your	refrigerator,	generally	in	the	back,	where

the	temperature	should	be	between	32	and	36	degrees.	Place	chicken	packages	on	plates	to	keep	any
condensation	from	dripping	down	onto	other	items	in	your	refrigerator—this	is	especially	important	when
defrosting	poultry.

FREEZER	Poultry	is	especially	prone	to	freezer	burn.	Wrap	all	food,	including	birds,	tightly	with
plastic	wrap	before	freezing,	making	sure	to	press	the	wrap	directly	against	the	surface	of	the	food	to
minimize	exposure	to	air.	However,	given	the	odd	shape	of	most	birds	(either	whole	or	in	parts),	expect
some	freezer	burn.	Since	freezer	burn	increases	with	storage	time,	use	frozen	poultry	within	a	month	or	two.
Allow	24	hours	to	defrost	a	whole	chicken	and	three	to	four	days	to	defrost	a	turkey	in	the	refrigerator.



CONCEPT	10

Bones	Add	Flavor,	Fat,	and	Juiciness
In	our	grandparents’	era,	meat	was	generally	cooked	on	the	bone.	But	as	a	result
of	today’s	demand	for	convenience,	boneless	cuts	have	gradually	replaced	bone-
in	options	in	many	markets.	It’s	true,	boneless	cuts	cook	faster	and	are	easier	to
carve	and	serve,	but	are	we	losing	something	in	the	process?	Should	we	consider
buying	and	cooking	bone-in	chops,	steaks,	and	roasts	more	often?	Well,	yes.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Bones	have	the	ability	to	make	juicier,	more	flavorful	roasts,	chops,	steaks,	and
ribs.	Anyone	who	has	experienced	the	pleasure	of	ending	a	meal	by	gnawing	on
a	meat-stripped	bone	intuitively	knows	the	value	of	bones.	Here’s	the	science.
The	main	structural	material	of	bone	is	calcium	phosphate,	an	insoluble	rigid

inorganic	compound.	But	bone	also	contains	a	lot	of	connective	tissue.	In	fact,
collagen,	the	primary	protein	in	connective	tissue,	comprises	about	40	percent	of
bone.	So,	given	enough	cooking	time,	bones	can	be	made	to	yield	a	significant
amount	of	moisture-holding	gelatin.	As	we	learned	in	concept	7,	when	collagen
converts	to	gelatin	good	things	happen.	Veal	bones,	being	high	in	connective
tissue,	are	frequently	used	to	make	the	most	luscious	stocks.	Some	stocks	yield
so	much	gelatin	that	they	actually	gel	when	cooled.	(For	more	on	this,	see	this
Test	Kitchen	Experiment.)
Second,	although	calcium	phosphate	is	a	good	heat-conducting	substance

alone,	bone	is	very	porous	and	thus	a	relatively	poor	conductor	of	heat.	This
means	that	the	meat	located	next	to	the	bone	doesn’t	cook	as	quickly	as	the	rest
of	the	roast—a	phenomenon	that	helps	to	prevent	overcooking	and	moisture	loss
and	contributes	to	a	noticeably	juicier	end	product.	This	is	why	whenever	you
cut	into	any	bone-in	cut	of	meat,	you’ll	notice	that	the	rarest	part	is	right	next	to
the	bone.
In	addition,	bones	are	lined	with	fat,	a	crucial	source	of	flavor.	For	example,

take	barbecue,	a	popular	cooking	method	for	many	bone-in	cuts.	A	good	number
of	flavor	compounds	found	in	smoke	vapor	are	fat-soluble,	and	since	there	is
extra	fat	in	the	roast	or	the	ribs—courtesy	of	the	bones—the	meat	is	likely	to
absorb	and	retain	more	flavor	from	the	smoke.	In	addition,	as	the	fat	melts
during	the	cooking	process,	it	bastes	the	meat,	increasing	the	perceived	juiciness.
And	it	doesn’t	end	there.	Bones	actually	add	flavor	directly	to	the	meat.	Here,

the	credit	goes	to	the	marrow,	where	blood	cells	are	made,	which	is	rich	in	fat
and	other	flavorful	substances.	While	bone-in	cuts	cook,	the	marrow’s	flavor
compounds	slowly	migrate	through	the	porous	bone	into	the	surrounding	meat.
All	in	all,	choosing	a	bone-in	cut	has	a	lot	of	advantages.



ANATOMY	OF	A	STEAK



	
T-BONE	A	T-shaped	bone	in	the	center	of	a	steak	extends	the	cooking	time,	provides	connective	tissue	for



juiciness,	and	fat	and	marrow	for	flavor.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
We’ve	long	known	that	the	fat	and	connective	tissue	that	surround	bones	lend
moisture	and	richness	to	bone-in	meats,	while	the	mere	presence	of	bones	slows
cooking	and	limits	evaporation	of	juices.	But	it	seemed	to	us	that	there	must	be
other	reasons	why	bone-in	meat	tastes	better	than	the	boneless	kind.	So	when
two	meat	experts	suggested	that	some	flavor	might	migrate	from	the	rich	marrow
at	the	center	of	bones	through	the	porous	bone	itself	and	right	into	the	meat,	our
curiosity	was	piqued.	We	devised	a	test	to	see	if	this	theory	made	any	sense.
To	fabricate	a	neutral-flavored	pork	substitute,	we	made	a	big	batch	of

mashed	potatoes	and	seasoned	it	with	8	percent	butter	and	1	percent	salt	by
weight,	amounts	that	mimic	the	fat	and	salt	found	in	a	pork	roast.	Mashed
potatoes	also	contain	nearly	the	same	amount	of	moisture	as	raw	meat.	Then	we
formed	the	potatoes	into	two	equal-size	oblong	shapes	on	a	baking	sheet.	Next
we	scraped	three	pork	rib	bones	clean	of	all	fat	and	connective	tissue,	so	that	the
only	flavor	would	be	from	the	marrow,	and	placed	these	bones	on	top	of	one	of
the	“roasts.”	To	create	a	control,	we	left	the	other	mashed-potato	“roast”	alone.
Then	we	cooked	both	of	our	imitation	roasts	in	a	425-degree	oven	for	1½	hours.
After	a	20-minute	rest,	we	compared	the	plain	sample	to	the	one	with	bones.



THE	RESULTS
In	a	blind	taste	test,	a	majority	of	tasters	found	that	the	sample	cooked	with
bones	tasted	noticeably	meaty.



THE	TAKEAWAY
As	bones	are	heated,	they	expel	moisture,	salt,	amino	acids,	and	nucleotides	(the
last	two	being	responsible	for	the	“meatiness”	that	tasters	detected)	from	the
richly	flavored	marrow.	(For	more	information	on	nucleotides,	see	concept	35.)
Since	those	water-soluble	flavor	molecules	must	penetrate	through	a	thick	layer
of	bone	to	reach	the	meat,	the	diffusion	process	is	slow	and	the	amount	of	flavor
contributed	is	not	enormous—but	it	is	detectable.	When	coupled	with	the
considerable	moisture-and	flavor-enhancing	benefits	of	the	fat	and	connective
tissue	around	the	bones,	the	process	certainly	provides	another	good	reason	to
opt	for	bone-in	cuts	of	meat.



BONE-IN	MASHED-POTATO	“ROAST”

	
Crazy	as	it	sounds,	our	imitation	roast	proved	that	some	flavor	from	the	bone	can	migrate	into	the	meat--or
potatoes,	in	this	test.



OUR	FAVORITE	BONE-IN	CUTS:	PORK
Cut:	Center	Rib	Roast
Description:	Often	referred	to	as	the	pork	equivalent	of	prime	rib	or	rack	of	lamb,	this	roast	consists	of	a
single	muscle	with	a	protective	fat	cap.	It	is	from	the	top	rib	section	of	the	animal	and	may	be	cut	with
anywhere	from	five	to	eight	ribs.
Cooking	Method:	It	is	juicy	and	flavorful,	mild	and	fairly	lean.	Best	when	roasted	or	grilled.
	
Cut:	Rib	Chops
Description:	Our	favorite	chops	are	cut	from	the	rib	section	of	the	loin.	Rib	chops	can	be	distinguished	by
the	section	of	rib	bone	running	along	one	side.
Cooking	Method:	With	a	relatively	high	fat	content,	this	cut	is	flavorful	and	unlikely	to	dry	out	during
cooking.	Best	when	pan-seared	or	grilled.
	
Cut:	Blade	Chops
Description:	Cut	from	the	shoulder	end	of	the	loin,	these	chops	can	be	difficult	to	find	at	the	market.	They
can	be	fatty	and	tough,	though	they	have	good	flavor	and	juiciness.
Cooking	Method:	Best	when	braised.
	
Cut:	St.	Louis–Style	Spareribs
Description:	This	narrow,	rectangular	rack	is	cut	close	to	the	belly	of	the	pig.	It	has	been	trimmed	of	skirt
steak	and	excess	cartilage.
Cooking	Method:	Best	when	barbecued.



BONES	AT	WORK	
CHOPS	AND	STEAKS
We	cook	bone-in	chops	and	steaks	in	part	because	of	the	insulating	power	of
their	ribs.	The	bones	slow	down	the	cooking	process,	giving	the	cook	more	time
to	infuse	the	meat	with	such	flavors	as	smoke	from	the	grill.	Not	only	that,	but
the	bones	can	serve	as	a	shield,	protecting	tender	meats	from	high	heat	and
making	it	easier	to	cook	your	chops	and	steaks	to	the	correct	temperature
without	drying	them	out.



GRILL-SMOKED	PORK	CHOPS
SERVES	4

When	using	a	charcoal	grill,	we	prefer	wood	chunks	to	wood	chips	whenever
possible;	substitute	two	medium	wood	chunks,	soaked	in	water	for	one	hour,	for
the	wood	chip	packet.	Grate	the	onion	on	the	large	holes	of	a	box	grater.

SAUCE
½				 cup	ketchup
¼				 cup	molasses
2				 tablespoons	grated	onion
2				 tablespoons	Worcestershire	sauce
2				 tablespoons	Dijon	mustard
2				 tablespoons	cider	vinegar
1				 tablespoon	packed	light	brown	sugar

CHOPS
2				 cups	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained
4				 (12-ounce)	bone-in	pork	rib	chops,	1½	inches	thick,	trimmed
2				 teaspoons	salt
2				 teaspoons	pepper
1				 (13	by	9-inch)	disposable	aluminum	roasting	pan	(if	using	charcoal)

1.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Bring	all	ingredients	to	simmer	in	small	saucepan
over	medium	heat	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	reduced	to	about	1	cup,	5
to	7	minutes.	Transfer	½	cup	sauce	to	small	bowl	and	set	aside	remaining	sauce
for	serving.
2.	FOR	THE	CHOPS:	Using	large	piece	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	wrap

soaked	chips	in	foil	packet	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	top.	Pat	pork	chops	dry
with	paper	towels.	Use	sharp	knife	to	cut	2	slits	about	1	inch	apart	through	outer
layer	of	fat	and	connective	tissue.	Season	each	chop	with	½	teaspoon	salt	and	½
teaspoon	pepper.	Place	chops	side	by	side,	facing	in	same	direction,	on	cutting
board	with	curved	rib	bone	facing	down.	Pass	2	skewers	through	loin	muscle	of
each	chop,	close	to	bone,	about	1	inch	from	each	end,	then	pull	apart	to	create	1-
inch	space	between	each.



3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway	and	place
roasting	pan	in	center	of	grill.	Light	large	chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal
briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	into	2
even	piles	on	either	side	of	roasting	pan.	Place	wood	chip	packet	on	coals.	Set
cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	halfway.	Heat	grill	until	hot	and
wood	chips	are	smoking,	about	5	minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packet	over	primary	burner.	Turn

all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,
about	15	minutes.	Turn	all	burners	to	medium.	(Adjust	burners	as	needed	during
cooking	to	maintain	grill	temperature	between	300	and	325	degrees.)
4.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	skewered	chops	bone	side	down	on	grill

(over	pan	if	using	charcoal).	Cover	and	cook	until	meat	registers	120	degrees,	28
to	32	minutes.
5.	Remove	skewers	from	chops,	tip	chops	onto	flat	side,	and	brush	surface	of

each	with	1	tablespoon	sauce.	Transfer	chops,	sauce	side	down,	to	hotter	parts	of
grill	(if	using	charcoal)	or	turn	all	burners	to	high	(if	using	gas)	and	cook	until
browned	on	first	side,	2	to	6	minutes.	Brush	top	of	each	chop	with	1	tablespoon
sauce,	flip,	and	continue	to	cook	until	browned	on	second	side	and	meat	registers
145	degrees,	2	to	6	minutes	longer.
6.	Transfer	chops	to	serving	platter,	tent	loosely	with	foil,	and	let	rest	for	5	to

10	minutes.	Serve,	passing	reserved	sauce	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	great	grill-smoked	pork	chops	with	rosy-pink,	ultra-moist	meat	we	use	bone-
in	chops	because	bones	add	flavor	to	the	meat	as	it	cooks	and	contain	connective
tissue	and	fat	that	break	down	to	lend	suppleness.	What’s	more,	the	porous
structure	of	a	bone	acts	as	an	insulator,	slowing	down	heat	penetration.	We	use
this	to	our	advantage	by	resting	the	chops	on	their	bones	instead	of	laying	them
flat.	To	keep	them	from	toppling	over,	we	spear	them	together	with	skewers,	then
stand	them	upright	in	the	center	of	the	grill	with	bone,	not	meat,	touching	the
grill.
PICK	BIG	CHOPS	We	use	chops	at	least	1½	inches	thick	for	this	recipe.	The

larger	chops	mean	more	meat	and	more	bone,	which	gives	us	more	time	on	the
grill	to	really	infuse	the	meat	with	smoke	before	it	grows	leathery	and	dry.	It’s
important	that	every	chop	is	of	the	same	thickness	so	that	they	all	cook	evenly	to
the	same	temperature.
GRATE	ON	THE	BOX	We	like	the	flavor	of	onions	in	our	sauce	but	don’t

like	the	crunch	when	they	are	added	in	chunks.	Therefore,	we	grate	rather	than
mince	the	onions.	To	do	this,	we	use	the	large	holes	of	a	box	grater.
SKEWER	AND	STACK	Not	only	does	skewering	and	stacking	the	chops	on

the	grill	insulate	the	meat	and	therefore	slow	down	the	cooking	time	(allowing
us	to	infuse	the	meat	with	more	smoky	flavor),	but	it’s	an	excellent	technique	for
space	management.	Cooking	for	a	crowd?	This	will	help.
COOK	LOW	TO	HIGH	We	begin	cooking	these	chops	at	a	lower	heat.	This

mimics	the	reversed	low-and-slow	cooking	method	we	wrote	about	in	concept	5
and	allows	the	enzymes	present	and	active	in	meat	under	122	degrees	to	create
tender,	juicy	chops	(for	more	on	enzymes,	see	concept	6).	After	the	chops	spend
about	30	minutes	at	this	lower	temperature,	we	apply	a	few	coats	of	sauce	and
then	achieve	a	beautiful	crust	by	searing	them	over	high	heat.



GRILLED	PORTERHOUSE	OR	T-BONE	STEAKS
SERVES	4	TO	6

Be	sure	to	buy	steaks	that	are	at	least	1	inch	thick.

2				 (1¾-pound)	porterhouse	or	T-bone	steaks,	1	to	1½	inches	thick,	trimmed
2				 teaspoons	salt
2				 teaspoons	pepper
1				 recipe	Chive	Butter	(optional)	(recipe	follows)

1.	Season	entire	surface	of	each	steak	with	1	teaspoon	salt	and	let	sit	at	room
temperature	for	1	hour.	Pat	steaks	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season	each	with	1
teaspoon	pepper.
2A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light

large	chimney	starter	three-quarters	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(4½	quarts).
When	top	coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Set
cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,
about	5	minutes.
2B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.	Leave	primary	burner	on	high	and	turn	other	burner(s)	to
low.
3.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	steaks	on	hot	side	of	grill	with	tenderloin

sides	(smaller	side	of	T-bone)	facing	cool	side	of	grill.	Cook	(covered	if	using
gas)	until	dark	crust	forms,	6	to	8	minutes.	(If	steaks	start	to	flame,	move	them	to
cooler	side	of	fire	and/or	extinguish	flames	with	squirt	bottle	of	water.)	Flip
steaks	and	turn	so	that	tenderloin	sides	are	facing	cool	side	of	grill.	Continue	to
cook	(covered	if	using	gas)	until	dark	brown	crust	forms	on	second	side,	6	to	8
minutes	longer.
4.	Brush	with	butter,	if	using,	and	transfer	steaks	to	cool	side	of	grill	with	bone

side	facing	hot	side	of	grill.	Cover	grill	and	continue	to	cook	until	meat	registers
115	to	120	degrees	(for	rare)	or	120	to	125	degrees	(for	medium-rare),	2	to	4
minutes	longer,	flipping	halfway	through	cooking.
5.	Transfer	steaks	to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let

rest	for	10	minutes.	Cut	strip	and	tenderloin	pieces	off	bones,	then	cut	each	piece



crosswise	into	¼-inch	slices.	Serve.



CHIVE	BUTTER
MAKES	ABOUT	6	TABLESPOONS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	GRILLED	PORTERHOUSE	OR	T-

BONE	STEAKS

4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted
2				 tablespoons	minced	shallot
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	chives
					 Salt	and	pepper

Combine	all	ingredients	in	medium	bowl	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to
taste.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	a	grilled	steak	that	sports	a	dark	(but	not	blackened)	crust,	smoky	aroma,
and	deep	grilled	flavor,	we	first	sear	the	meat	directly	over	a	hot	fire,	then	gently
finish	cooking	it	over	indirect	heat.	Since	a	T-bone	is	really	two	steaks—a	tender
New	York	strip	steak	on	one	side	of	the	bone	and	a	buttery,	quicker-cooking
tenderloin	on	the	other,	we	position	the	meat	so	that	the	tenderloin	always	faces
the	cooler	side	of	the	grill,	which	prevents	that	portion	from	becoming
overcooked	and	dry.
PICK	FROM	TWO	TYPES	OF	T-BONE	Both	T-bone	and	porterhouse

steaks	contain	a	strip	steak	and	a	tenderloin	steak	connected	by	a	T-shaped	bone
(click	here).	The	strip	steak	section	is	a	bit	chewy,	with	a	noticeable	grain,	while
the	tenderloin,	a	long,	cylindrical	muscle,	is	the	most	tender	meat	on	the	cow	but
has	a	less	beefy	flavor.	The	porterhouse	is	really	just	a	huge	T-bone	steak	with	a
larger	tenderloin	section	and	is	cut	farther	back	in	the	animal	than	the	T-bone
steak.	Technically,	a	T-bone	must	have	a	tenderloin	portion	at	least	½	inch
across,	and	a	porterhouse’s	tenderloin	usually	measures	at	least	1¼	inches
across.	Both	types	are	well	balanced	for	texture	and	flavor,	and	either	will	work
here.
TIME	TO	SEASON	Though	in	Florence,	Italy,	where	they	are	known	for	the

bistecca	alla	fiorentina,	a	huge	T-bone	grilled	over	an	oak	fire,	they	season	the
steaks	after	they’re	cooked,	we	like	to	salt	the	meat	an	hour	before.	This	enables
the	salt	to	penetrate	the	meat’s	interior,	boosting	the	flavor	from	crust	to	bone.
Be	sure	to	remove	any	accumulated	moisture	on	the	surface	of	the	steaks	with
paper	towels	before	grilling,	though.	If	left	in	place,	this	moisture	can	cause	the
steaks	to	steam	rather	than	develop	a	crust.
USE	TWO	LEVELS	OF	HEAT	On	a	charcoal	grill,	we	create	a	two-level

fire	by	piling	the	lit	coals	on	only	one	side	of	the	grill.	(It’s	important	to	stack
these	coals	in	an	even	layer;	if	they	are	uneven,	large	flare-ups	may	occur,
causing	the	steaks	to	blacken.)	On	a	gas	grill,	we	keep	the	primary	burner	on
high	and	turn	the	others	to	low.	This	allows	us	to	sear	the	meat	on	the	grill’s
hotter	side	and	then	gently	finish	cooking	the	steak’s	interior	using	indirect	heat
on	the	other	side,	avoiding	large	flare-ups.
SHIELD	THE	TENDERLOIN	After	discovering	the	ease	of	cooking	steaks

on	these	two	levels	of	heat,	we	still	encountered	one	problem.	Though	tasters
were	impressed	with	the	crust	and	the	steaks’	grilled	flavor,	they	found	the
coveted	tenderloin	section	to	be	somewhat	tough	and	dry.	The	solution:	Position
the	meat	so	that	the	tenderloin	faces	the	cooler	side	of	the	grill,	with	the	bone



between	the	tenderloin	and	the	fire.	This	allows	the	delicate	tenderloin	to	cook	at
a	slightly	slower	rate	and	stay	tender	and	juicy,	shielded	from	the	higher	heat	by
the	bone.



OUR	FAVORITE	BONE-IN	CUTS:	BEEF
Cut:	T-Bone	Steak
Description:	The	T-shaped	bone	in	this	steak,	which	comes	from	the	short	loin,	separates	the	long,	narrow
strip	of	top	loin	and	a	small	piece	of	tenderloin.	Since	it	contains	both	cuts	of	meat,	the	T-bone	is	really	two
steaks	in	one,	with	different	textures	and	flavors	in	each.
Cooking	Method:	The	size,	shape,	and	bone	make	indoor	cooking	tricky;	grilling	is	the	best	option.
	
Cut:	Porterhouse	Steak
Description:	The	porterhouse	steak	is	cut	farther	back	in	the	animal	than	the	T-bone	and	is	really	just	a
huge	T-bone	steak	with	a	larger	tenderloin	section.
Cooking	Method:	Like	the	T-bone,	the	porterhouse	has	well-balanced	flavor	and	texture,	and	is	also	best
when	grilled.
	
Cut:	Rib	Roast,	First	Cut
Description:	This	cut	consists	of	ribs	9	through	12,	toward	the	back	of	the	rib	section,	closer	to	the	loin	of
the	animal,	and	contains	the	large	rib-eye	muscle.	The	clearest	way	to	indicate	what	you	want	when	you
order	a	rib	roast	is	to	ask	for	the	“first	four	ribs	from	the	loin	end.”
Cooking	Method:	Extremely	tender	and	flavorful,	it’s	best	when	roasted	in	a	low	oven	(click	here)	or	grill-
roasted.
	
Cut:	Beef	Ribs
Description:	These	large	ribs	come	from	the	top	half	of	the	animal	and	are	cut	from	rib	bones	6	through	12
—the	home	to	prime	rib.	These	ribs	are	often	very	large	(about	8	inches	long)	and	can	be	sold	in	smaller
slabs	with	just	three	or	four	bones.
Cooking	Method:	Rib	cuts	have	excellent	beefy	flavor.	We	like	them	best	when	barbecued.
	
Cut:	Short	Ribs
Description:	These	meaty	ribs	can	be	cut	from	various	locations	on	the	cow,	although	they	commonly
come	from	the	underside	of	the	animal.	Often	each	rib	bone	has	been	separated	and	cut	crosswise	so	that	a
large	chunk	of	meat	is	attached	to	one	side	of	the	bone.
Cooking	Method:	Inexpensive	and	rich,	these	ribs	can	be	tough	without	prolonged	cooking.	Best	when
braised,	although	they	can	be	butterflied	and	grilled.



BONES	AT	WORK	
ROASTS
When	cooking	bone-in	roasts,	the	bones	add	flavor	and	moisture	to	the	meat	with
their	added	fat	and	connective	tissue.	The	bone	marrow	adds	an	unmistakable
meaty	flavor,	too.



GRILL-ROASTED	BONE-IN	PORK	RIB	ROAST
SERVES	6	TO	8

When	using	a	charcoal	grill,	we	prefer	wood	chunks	to	wood	chips	whenever
possible;	substitute	one	medium	wood	chunk,	soaked	in	water	for	one	hour,	for
the	wood	chip	packet.

1				 (4-to	5-pound)	bone-in	center-cut	pork	rib	roast,	tip	of	chine	bone	removed,	fat	trimmed	to	¼-inch
thickness

4				 teaspoons	kosher	salt
1				 cup	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained

1½				 teaspoons	pepper

1.	Pat	roast	dry	with	paper	towels.	Using	sharp	knife,	cut	slits	in	surface	fat
layer,	spaced	1	inch	apart,	in	crosshatch	pattern,	being	careful	not	to	cut	into
meat.	Season	roast	with	salt.	Wrap	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	6
hours	or	up	to	24	hours.
2.	Using	large	piece	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	wrap	soaked	chips	in	foil

packet	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	top.
3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Light	large

chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals	are
partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	into	steeply	banked	pile	against	side	of	grill.
Place	wood	chip	packet	on	coals.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid
vent	halfway.	Heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,	about	5	minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packet	over	primary	burner.	Turn

all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,
about	15	minutes.	Turn	primary	burner	to	medium-high	and	turn	off	other
burner(s).	(Adjust	primary	burner	as	needed	during	cooking	to	maintain	grill
temperature	around	325	degrees.)
4.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Unwrap	roast	and	season	with	pepper.	Place

roast	on	grate	with	meat	near,	but	not	over,	coals	and	flames	and	bones	facing
away	from	coals	and	flames.	Cover	(position	lid	vent	over	meat	if	using
charcoal)	and	cook	until	meat	registers	140	degrees,	1¼	to	1½	hours.
5.	Transfer	roast	to	carving	board,	tent	loosely	with	foil,	and	let	rest	for	30

minutes.	Carve	into	thick	slices	by	cutting	between	ribs.	Serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Grilling	a	bulky	cut	of	meat	like	a	pork	rib	roast	may	sound	difficult,	but	it’s	not.
We	found	that	a	tender,	quick-cooking	center-cut	rib	roast	and	a	simple	salt	rub
were	all	that	we	needed	for	a	juicy	grilled	roast	with	a	thick	mahogany	crust.	We
grill	it	over	indirect	heat	(on	the	cooler	side	of	the	grill)	so	it	can	cook	through
slowly,	adding	a	packet	of	soaked	wood	chips	(or	a	single	soaked	wood	chunk)
for	a	subtle	tinge	of	smoke	flavor.	After	little	more	than	an	hour	on	the	grill,	our
roast	is	tender	and	juicy,	with	plenty	of	rich,	deep	flavor.
CHOOSE	YOUR	CUTS	There	are	three	possible	cuts	from	the	loin	section

of	the	animal—the	best	cuts	for	a	roast	such	as	this.	There	is	the	blade-end	roast
(sometimes	called	the	rib	end),	the	center-cut	rib	roast,	and	the	confusingly
named	center-cut	loin	roast.	We	like	the	center-cut	rib	roast	for	its	flavor	and
simplicity:	Because	the	meat	is	a	single	muscle	attached	along	one	side	to	the
bones,	there	is	no	need	to	tie	the	roast	for	tidy	presentation.	If	you	buy	a	blade-
end	roast	(sometimes	called	a	“rib-end	roast”),	tie	it	into	a	uniform	shape	with
kitchen	twine	at	1-inch	intervals;	this	step	is	unnecessary	with	a	center-cut	rib
roast.	For	easier	carving,	ask	the	butcher	to	remove	the	tip	of	the	chine	bone	and
to	cut	the	remainder	of	the	chine	bone	between	each	rib.
COOK	ON	TWO	LEVELS	We	use	a	two-level	fire	here,	cooking	the	roast

on	the	cool	side.	It’s	important	to	position	the	roast	away	(but	not	too	far	away)
from	the	coals	or	flames	with	the	bones	facing	away	from	the	fire.	After	an	hour
a	mahogany	crust	develops—no	high-temperature	sear	needed.
GIVE	A	LONG	REST	We	let	this	roast	rest	for	a	full	30	minutes	after	it

finishes	on	the	grill,	allowing	the	meat	to	reabsorb	some	of	the	juices	lost	in
cooking	as	its	muscle	fibers	relax	(see	concept	3),	as	well	as	employing	the
principle	of	carryover	cooking	(see	concept	4).	In	this	case,	we	remove	the	roast
from	the	heat	when	it	registers	140	degrees;	it	will	reach	145	to	150	degrees	as	it
rests.



BONES	AT	WORK	
RIBS
The	thin	layers	of	meat	and	thick	layers	of	connective	tissue	and	fat	lining	the
bones	make	beef	and	pork	ribs	a	somewhat	tricky	yet	potentially	magnificent
dish.	Cooking	ribs	low	and	slow—in	the	oven,	on	the	grill,	or	with	both—imbues
the	meat	with	the	flavors	of	fat	and	smoke,	creating	a	baconlike	crust	and	tender
flesh	with	just	a	bit	of	chew.



TEXAS-STYLE	BARBECUED	BEEF	RIBS
SERVES	4

It	is	important	to	use	beef	ribs	with	a	decent	amount	of	meat,	not	bony	scraps;
otherwise,	the	rewards	of	making	this	recipe	are	few.	When	using	a	charcoal
grill,	we	prefer	wood	chunks	to	wood	chips	whenever	possible;	substitute	two
medium	wood	chunks,	soaked	in	water	for	one	hour,	for	the	wood	chip	packet.

4				 teaspoons	chili	powder
2				 teaspoons	salt

1½				 teaspoons	pepper
½				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
4				 (1¼-pound)	beef	rib	slabs,	trimmed
2				 cups	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained
1				 recipe	Barbecue	Sauce	for	Texas-Style	Beef	Ribs	(recipe	follows)

1.	Combine	chili	powder,	salt,	pepper,	and	cayenne	in	bowl.	Pat	ribs	dry	with
paper	towels,	rub	evenly	with	spice	mixture,	and	let	sit	at	room	temperature	for	1
hour.
2.	Using	large	piece	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	wrap	soaked	chips	in	foil

packet	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	top.
3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Light	large

chimney	starter	one-third	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(2	quarts).	When	top
coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	into	steeply	banked	pile	against	1	side
of	grill.	Place	wood	chip	packet	on	coals.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and
open	lid	vent	halfway.	Heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,	about	5
minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packet	over	primary	burner.	Turn

all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,
about	15	minutes.	Turn	primary	burner	to	medium	and	turn	other	burner(s)	off.
(Adjust	primary	burner	as	needed	during	cooking	to	maintain	grill	temperature
between	250	and	300	degrees.)
4.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	ribs	meat	side	down	on	cool	side	of	grill

(ribs	may	overlap	slightly).	Cover	(position	lid	vents	over	meat	if	using
charcoal)	and	cook	for	1	hour.



5.	If	using	charcoal,	remove	cooking	grate	and	add	20	new	briquettes;	set
cooking	grate	in	place.	Flip	ribs	meat	side	up	and	rotate	racks.	Cover	(position
lid	vents	over	meat	if	using	charcoal)	and	continue	to	cook	until	meat	begins	to
pull	away	from	bone,	1¼	to	1¾	hours	longer.
6.	Transfer	ribs	to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let	rest

for	5	to	10	minutes.	Cut	ribs	between	bones	and	serve,	passing	sauce	separately.



BARBECUE	SAUCE	FOR	TEXAS-STYLE	BEEF	RIBS
MAKES	ABOUT	1¾	CUPS

This	is	a	simple,	vinegary	dipping	sauce	quite	unlike	the	sweet,	thick	barbecue
sauces	found	in	the	supermarket.	The	sauce	can	be	refrigerated	in	an	airtight
container	for	up	to	four	days.

2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
¼				 cup	finely	chopped	onion
1½				 teaspoons	chili	powder
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
2				 cups	tomato	juice
¾				 cup	distilled	white	vinegar
2				 tablespoons	Worcestershire	sauce
2				 tablespoons	molasses
1				 teaspoon	minced	chipotle	chile	in	adobo	sauce
½				 teaspoon	dry	mustard	mixed	with	1	tablespoon	water
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Melt	butter	in	small	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Add	onion	and	cook,
stirring	occasionally,	until	softened,	2	to	3	minutes.	Stir	in	chili	powder	and
garlic	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Add	tomato	juice,	½	cup
vinegar,	Worcestershire,	molasses,	chipotle,	mustard	mixture,	½	teaspoon	salt,
and	¼	teaspoon	pepper.	Bring	to	simmer	and	cook	over	medium	heat,	stirring
occasionally,	until	slightly	thickened	and	reduced	to	1½	cups,	30	to	40	minutes.
2.	Off	heat,	stir	in	remaining	¼	cup	vinegar	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to

taste.	Let	cool	to	room	temperature	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Good	beef	ribs	are	all	about	intense	meat	flavor—not	just	smoke	and	spice.	We
found	that	the	juiciest	meat	with	the	most	flavor	was	obtained	by	leaving	the	fat
and	membrane	on	the	back	of	the	ribs	in	place.	The	fat	not	only	bastes	the	ribs
as	they	cook	but	also	renders	to	a	crisp,	baconlike	texture.
FIND	THE	BEEF	In	Texas,	excellent	beef	ribs	are	the	secret	handshake

between	experienced	grillers.	With	a	low	price	tag	and	availability	at	nearly
every	butcher’s	counter	(they	are	the	scrap	bones	from	trimming	rib-eye	steaks),
beef	ribs	manage	to	maintain	a	cool,	cultlike	obscurity.	Be	careful	when	you’re
shopping	for	beef	ribs,	however—some	ribs	will	yield	poor	results	when
barbecued.	We	prefer	partial	slabs	(with	three	or	four	bones)	that	are	very	meaty.
RUB	THAT	SPICE	We	found	that	only	a	small	amount	(2	teaspoons	for	each

rack)	of	a	simple	mixture	of	salt,	pepper,	cayenne,	and	chili	powder	worked	best
to	bring	out	the	flavors	of	the	meat.	Though	we	tested	rubbing	on	the	spice	far	in
advance,	as	well	as	aging	the	ribs	in	the	refrigerator	for	up	to	two	days,	the	best
flavor	comes	from	leaving	the	ribs	at	room	temperature	for	just	an	hour.
MAINTAIN	THE	TEMPERATURE	To	turn	our	grill	into	a	backyard

smoker,	we	make	a	slow,	even	fire	with	a	temperature	in	the	range	of	250	to	300
degrees.	A	couple	of	hours	of	slow	cooking	are	enough	to	render	some	of	the	fat
and	make	the	ribs	juicy,	tender,	and	slightly	toothy.	If	the	temperature	is	any
higher,	too	much	fat	will	render	and	the	meat	will	turn	dry	and	stringy.	If	it’s	any
lower,	the	fat	won’t	render	and	the	meat	will	stay	tough,	the	ribs	never	achieving
that	signature	roasted	beefy	flavor.
PAIR	WITH	SAUCE	For	a	real	Texas-style	barbecue	sauce,	we	pull	together

the	usual	ingredients	(vinegar,	onion,	and	molasses)	with	dry	mustard	and
chipotle	chile	for	spiciness.	Worcestershire	sauce	adds	depth	and	tomato	juice
provides	tangy	flavor	and	helps	thin	out	the	sauce.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BEST	FIRE	FOR	BARBECUE

Pile	coals	on	one	side.	Place	lid	vent	on	other	side.	Don’t	peek.

Barbecue	experts	have	plenty	of	theories	as	to	exactly	what	goes	on	inside	a	covered	grill,	but	agreement	is
hard	to	come	by.	We	wanted	to	see	if	we	could	scientifically	determine	the	best	way	to	lay	a	fire.	What
really	is	the	best	way	to	arrange	the	coals	to	secure	evenly,	thoroughly	barbecued	meat?

We	outfitted	a	Weber	kettle	grill	with	five	temperature	probes,	four	around	the	edges	of	the	grill	and	one
in	the	center.	Through	holes	drilled	in	the	lid,	we	attached	probes—or	thermocouples—to	a	computer	data
recorder	that	would	measure	the	temperature	inside	the	grill	every	minute	for	up	to	two	hours.	After	running
more	than	a	dozen	tests	over	six	weeks,	we	arrived	at	some	answers.

Because	barbecue	is	by	definition	slow	cooking	over	low	heat,	the	high	temperatures	produced	by	so-
called	direct	heat	(cooking	directly	over	a	pile	of	coals)	are	unacceptable.	What’s	wanted	is	indirect	heat,
and,	in	a	kettle	grill,	you	can	produce	indirect	heat	in	one	of	two	ways:	by	banking	two	piles	of	coals	on
opposite	sides	of	the	grill	or	by	banking	one	pile	on	one	side.

The	computer	data	showed	that	splitting	the	coals	between	two	sides	produced	worrisome	temperature
spikes—unacceptable	if	the	goal	was	to	maintain	a	near-constant	temperature.	Also,	the	temperatures	within
the	grill	showed	significant	variation.

If	anything,	we	expected	the	variation	in	heat	distribution	with	the	single-banked	coals	to	be	even	worse.
With	the	exception	of	the	probe	placed	directly	over	the	fire,	however,	the	probes	in	this	case	produced
temperature	readings	that	were	within	a	few	degrees	of	each	other.	This	was	surprising	considering	that	one
probe	was	about	twice	the	distance	from	the	fire	as	the	other	three.	This	was	also	good	news,	as	it	meant
that	a	large	part	of	the	cooking	area	was	being	held	at	a	pretty	constant	temperature.	The	single-banked
method	also	showed	almost	no	heat	spikes	and	held	the	temperature	between	the	ideal	(for	barbecue)	250
and	300	degrees	for	the	longest	period	of	time.

The	results	of	these	tests,	then,	seemed	clear:	For	barbecuing,	it’s	best	to	have	a	single	pile	of	coals
rather	than	two	piles,	because	one	source	of	heat	produces	steady,	evenly	distributed	heat,	while	two	sources
produce	greater	temperature	variation.

But	this	wasn’t	the	only	thing	we	learned.	Barbecue	experts	often	recommend	placing	the	lid	vent	away
from	the	fire.	Was	it	really	part	of	the	reason	why	the	pile	of	banked	coals	was	providing	even,	steady	heat?
Sure	enough,	when	we	placed	the	open	vent	directly	over	the	fire,	the	fire	burned	hotter	and	faster.	In	this
position,	a	direct	convection	current	was	formed	inside	the	egg-shaped	Weber	kettle.	When	the	vent	was
placed	away	from	the	fire,	a	more	diffuse	convection	current	ensured	a	more	even	distribution	of	heat.	Also
important:	the	degree	to	which	we	opened	the	lid	vent.	When	it	was	open	completely,	the	fire	burned	much
hotter,	and	less	evenly.	The	vent	is	best	kept	partially	cracked.

Finally,	when	you	open	the	lid	to	check	on	the	progress	of	your	barbecue,	you	lose	all	of	the	even	heat
distribution	that	you	have	worked	so	hard	to	establish.	Resist	the	temptation	to	peek.



	
We	drilled	holes	into	our	kettle	grill	so	we	could	snake	thermocouples	from	a	computer	data	recorder	to	the
fire.



MEMPHIS-STYLE	BARBECUED	SPARERIBS
SERVES	4	TO	6

Don’t	remove	the	membrane	that	runs	along	the	bone	side	of	the	ribs;	it	prevents
some	of	the	fat	from	rendering	and	is	authentic	to	this	style	of	ribs.

2				 (2½-to	3-pound)	racks	St.	Louis–style	spareribs,	trimmed
1				 recipe	Spice	Rub	(recipe	follows)
¾				 cup	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained
½				 cup	apple	juice
3				 tablespoons	cider	vinegar
1				 (13	by	9-inch)	disposable	aluminum	roasting	pan	(if	using	charcoal)	or	disposable	aluminum	pie

plate	(if	using	gas)

1.	Rub	each	side	of	each	rack	of	ribs	with	2	tablespoons	spice	rub.	Let	ribs	sit
at	room	temperature	for	1	hour.
2.	Using	large	piece	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	wrap	soaked	chips	in	foil

packet	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	top.	Combine	apple	juice	and	vinegar	in
small	bowl	and	set	aside.
3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Place

roasting	pan	filled	with	2	cups	water	on	1	side	of	grill	and	arrange	15	unlit
charcoal	briquettes	on	other	side	of	grill.	Light	large	chimney	starter	one-third
filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(2	quarts).	When	top	coals	are	partially	covered
with	ash,	pour	on	top	of	unlit	briquettes	to	cover	half	of	grill.	Place	wood	chip
packet	on	coals.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	halfway.
Heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are	smoking,	about	5	minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packet	directly	on	primary

burner.	Place	disposable	pie	plate	filled	with	2	cups	water	on	other	burner(s).
Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until	hot	and	wood	chips	are
smoking,	about	15	minutes.	Turn	primary	burner	to	medium-high	and	turn	other
burner(s)	off.	(Adjust	primary	burner	as	needed	during	cooking	to	maintain	grill
temperature	between	250	and	275	degrees.)
4.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	ribs	meat	side	down	on	cool	side	of	grill

over	water-filled	pan.	Cover	(position	lid	vents	over	meat	if	using	charcoal)	and
cook	for	1½	hours,	brushing	each	rack	with	2	tablespoons	apple	juice	mixture



and	flipping	and	rotating	racks	halfway	through	cooking.	During	final	20
minutes	of	cooking,	adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to
300	degrees.
5.	Set	wire	rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	add	enough	water	to	cover

bottom	of	pan.	Transfer	ribs	to	prepared	rack	and	brush	top	of	each	slab	with	2
tablespoons	apple	juice	mixture.	Roast	for	1	hour.
6.	Brush	ribs	with	remaining	apple	juice	mixture	and	continue	to	roast	until

meat	is	tender	but	not	falling	off	bones	(internal	temperature	should	be	195	to
200	degrees),	1	to	2	hours.	Transfer	ribs	to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with	foil,
and	let	rest	for	15	minutes.	Slice	ribs	between	bones	and	serve.



SPICE	RUB
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	MEMPHIS-STYLE	BARBECUED	SPARERIBS

For	less	spiciness,	reduce	the	cayenne	to	½	teaspoon.

2				 tablespoons	paprika
2				 tablespoons	packed	light	brown	sugar
1				 tablespoon	salt
2				 teaspoons	chili	powder

1½				 teaspoons	pepper
1½				 teaspoons	garlic	powder
1½				 teaspoons	onion	powder
1½				 teaspoons	cayenne	pepper
½				 teaspoon	dried	thyme

Combine	all	ingredients	in	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
In	Memphis,	ribs	get	flavor	from	a	spice	rub	and	a	thin,	vinegary	liquid—called
a	mop—that	is	basted	on	the	ribs	as	they	cook.	To	keep	the	meat	moist	on	the
grill,	we	stow	a	pan	of	water	underneath	the	cooking	grate	on	the	cooler	side	of
the	grill,	where	it	absorbs	heat	and	works	to	keep	the	temperature	stable.	Last,
we	transfer	the	ribs	to	the	oven	to	cook	through	until	tender.
MOP	IT	UP	For	the	mop,	we	combine	apple	juice	and	cider	vinegar	and

brush	it	on	the	ribs	while	they	cook	on	the	grill.	This	helps	to	cool	down	the
meat	and	prevent	interior	moisture	from	evaporating.
RUB	THE	RIGHT	WAY	Many	experts	claim	that	the	spice	rub	must	be

applied	to	the	ribs	24	hours	in	advance.	But	the	thinness	of	the	meat	on	the	bones
here	means	that	the	rub	doesn’t	have	all	that	far	to	travel.	Applying	the	rub	right
before	cooking	gives	us	all	the	flavor	we	need.	(Note	that	when	making	ribs	in
the	oven,	as	in	the	next	recipe,	we	do	think	it’s	worth	applying	the	spice	rub	well
in	advance.)
MAKE	SMOKE	WITHOUT	FIRE	Before	settling	on	the	dual	cooking

method	of	grill	to	oven,	we	tried	roasting	the	ribs	before	searing	them	on	the
grill.	This	didn’t	work.	We	were	left	with	overly	wet,	soft-textured	ribs	with	little
spice	and	a	superficial	smoke	flavor.	Why?	Research	revealed	the	first	serious
misstep:	exposing	ribs	to	smoke	after	they	cook.	Smoke	contains	both	water-
soluble	and	fat-soluble	flavor	compounds.	As	traditional	dry-rub	ribs	cook,	the
water-soluble	compounds	dissolve	in	the	meat’s	surface	moisture	and	get	left
behind	as	it	evaporates.	Fat-soluble	compounds	dissolve	in	the	rendering	fat,
which	then	spreads	through	the	meat,	lubricating	the	muscle	fibers	and
depositing	smoke	flavor	as	it	goes.	The	problem	is,	if	the	ribs	start	cooking	in	the
oven,	much	of	the	fat	renders	and	drips	out	of	the	meat	before	it	even	gets	to	the
grill.
COOK	TO	TEMP	While	wet	ribs	are	pretty	forgiving,	dry-rub	ribs	are	more

exacting	and	have	a	very	small	window	during	which	they	are	perfectly	cooked.
The	foolproof	solution?	A	thermometer.	Pull	the	ribs	out	of	the	oven	when	the
thickest	section	reaches	195	degrees.	At	this	temperature,	the	meat	will	turn	out
consistently	tender	with	a	good	bit	of	satisfying	chew.



OVEN-BARBECUED	SPARERIBS
SERVES	4

You	will	need	a	baking	stone,	a	sturdy	baking	sheet	with	a	1-inch	rim,	and	a	wire
cooling	rack	that	fits	inside.	It’s	fine	if	the	ribs	overlap	slightly	on	the	rack.	For
this	recipe,	we	find	it	best	to	coat	the	ribs	with	the	spice	rub	at	least	eight	hours
ahead	of	cooking.	Use	caution	when	opening	the	crimped	foil	to	add	the	juice:
Hot	steam	and	smoke	will	billow	out.	Serve	with	barbecue	sauce,	if	desired.

6				 tablespoons	yellow	mustard
2				 tablespoons	ketchup
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
3				 tablespoons	packed	brown	sugar

1½				 tablespoons	kosher	salt
1				 tablespoon	sweet	paprika
1				 tablespoon	chili	powder
2				 teaspoons	pepper
½				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
2				 (2½-to	3-pound)	racks	St.	Louis–style	spareribs,	trimmed,	membrane	removed,	and	each	rack	cut	in

half
¼				 cup	finely	ground	Lapsang	Souchong	tea	leaves	(from	about	10	tea	bags,	or	½	cup	loose	tea	leaves

ground	to	powder	in	spice	grinder)
½				 cup	apple	juice
					 	

1.	Combine	mustard,	ketchup,	and	garlic	in	bowl;	combine	sugar,	salt,
paprika,	chili	powder,	pepper,	and	cayenne	in	separate	bowl.	Spread	mustard
mixture	in	thin,	even	layer	over	both	sides	of	ribs;	coat	both	sides	with	spice
mixture,	then	wrap	ribs	in	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for	8	to	24	hours.
2.	Transfer	ribs	from	refrigerator	to	freezer	for	45	minutes.	Adjust	oven	racks

to	lowest	and	upper-middle	positions	(at	least	5	inches	below	broiler).	Place
baking	stone	on	lower	rack;	heat	oven	to	500	degrees.	Sprinkle	ground	tea
evenly	over	bottom	of	rimmed	baking	sheet;	set	wire	rack	in	baking	sheet.	Place
ribs	meat	side	up	on	rack	and	cover	with	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	crimping
edges	tightly	to	seal.	Place	baking	sheet	on	stone	and	roast	ribs	for	30	minutes,
then	reduce	oven	temperature	to	250	degrees,	leaving	oven	door	open	for	1



minute	to	cool.	While	oven	is	open,	carefully	open	1	corner	of	foil	and	pour
apple	juice	into	bottom	of	baking	sheet;	reseal	foil.	Continue	to	roast	until	meat
is	very	tender	and	begins	to	pull	away	from	bones,	about	1½	hours.	(Begin	to
check	ribs	after	1	hour;	leave	loosely	covered	with	foil	for	remaining	cooking
time.)
3.	Remove	foil	and	carefully	flip	racks	bone	side	up;	place	baking	sheet	on

upper-middle	rack.	Turn	on	broiler;	cook	ribs	until	well	browned	and	crispy	in
spots,	5	to	10	minutes.	Flip	ribs	meat	side	up	and	cook	until	second	side	is	well
browned	and	crispy,	5	to	7	minutes	more.	Let	cool	for	at	least	10	minutes	before
cutting	into	individual	ribs.	Serve	with	barbecue	sauce,	if	desired.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	to	replicate	the	deep,	rich	flavor	and	fork-tender	texture	of	barbecued
ribs	indoors.	To	do	this,	we	rejected	stovetop	smokers	in	favor	of	the	oven,	which
better	contained	the	smoke	and	was	able	to	accommodate	the	ribs	in	one	batch.
BUY	THE	RIGHT	RIBS	There	are	three	types	of	pork	ribs.	Spareribs,	from

near	the	pig’s	fatty	belly,	are	an	acceptable	choice	but	need	a	fair	amount	of
trimming	at	home.	Baby	back	ribs	are	smaller,	leaner	ribs	from	the	adult	pig’s
back,	which	dry	out	too	quickly	in	this	recipe.	For	outdoor	barbecue,	we	favor
St.	Louis–style	spareribs—pork	spareribs	trimmed	of	skirt	meat	and	excess
cartilage—and	here	we	found	no	reason	to	change.
REMOVE	THE	MEMBRANE	For	this	recipe,	we	like	to	remove	the	thin

membrane	lining	the	concave	side	of	the	rib	rack.	This	way,	the	ribs	are	easier	to
manipulate	and	smoke	penetrates	both	sides	of	the	rack	directly.	Insert	the	handle
of	a	spoon	between	the	membrane	and	ribs	to	loosen.	Then	grasp	the	membrane
with	a	paper	towel	and	pull	away	gently.
MAKE	YOUR	OWN	SMOKER	You	can	crowd	ribs	into	an	indoor	smoker,

but	we	prefer	our	roomier	makeshift	version:	Spread	tea	leaves	on	a	rimmed
baking	sheet,	place	a	wire	cooling	rack	on	top,	followed	by	the	ribs	and	heavy-
duty	foil	in	order	to	trap	the	smoke.	A	baking	stone	gets	the	tea	smoking	quickly.
TIME	FOR	TEA	To	replace	the	wood	chips	of	a	stovetop	smoker,	we

sprinkle	ground	Lapsang	Souchong	tea	leaves	underneath	the	ribs,	which	add	a
rich	smokiness	to	the	meat.	After	all,	Chinese	cooks	smoke	a	variety	of
foodstuffs	over	smoldering	black	tea.	The	leaves	won’t	burn	in	the	oven,	but
“roasting”	is	enough	to	unlock	their	flavor.	We	grind	the	leaves	to	a	fine	power
in	order	to	maximize	their	surface	area	and	give	the	ribs	a	deeper	flavor.
ROAST	HOT	AND	COLD	We	begin	by	roasting	at	high	heat	before

lowering	the	temperature	to	250	degrees.	The	high	heat,	however	good	for
smoke,	can	make	the	ribs	inedibly	tough.	Therefore,	we	quick-freeze	them
before	cooking.	Then	they	can	withstand	high	heat	and	quickly	absorb	smoke
without	toughening.	After	the	ribs	are	fork-tender,	we	pass	them	under	the	high
heat	of	the	broiler	to	turn	the	wet	exterior	into	a	chewy,	crispy	crust.



BONES	AT	WORK	
STOCKS	AND	SOUPS
Bones	are	great	for	adding	flavor	to	meat,	but	they	can	do	more.	Traditionally,
stocks	are	made	by	simmering	bones	(as	well	as	meat	and	vegetables)	for	hours
and	hours	on	the	stove,	the	cooking	time	coaxing	their	deep,	rich	flavors	into	the
broth.	We	harness	the	power	of	chicken	bones	in	our	chicken	stocks	and	soups,
using	some	timesaving	techniques	to	avoid	being	stuck	in	the	kitchen	all	day	for
a	simple	chicken	soup.



QUICK	CHICKEN	STOCK
MAKES	ABOUT	8	CUPS

If	you	use	a	cleaver,	you	will	be	able	to	cut	up	the	chicken	parts	quickly.	A	chef’s
knife	or	kitchen	shears	will	also	work.	To	defat	hot	stock,	we	recommend	using	a
ladle	or	fat	separator.	Alternatively,	you	can	refrigerate	the	stock	and	then
simply	remove	the	hardened	fat	with	a	spoon.

1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
4				 pounds	whole	chicken	legs	or	backs	and	wingtips,	cut	into	2-inch	pieces
1				 onion,	chopped
8				 cups	boiling	water
½				 teaspoon	salt
2				 bay	leaves

1.	Heat	oil	in	stockpot	or	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until
shimmering.	Add	half	of	chicken	pieces	and	cook	until	lightly	browned,	about	5
minutes	per	side.	Transfer	cooked	chicken	to	bowl	and	repeat	with	remaining
chicken	pieces;	transfer	to	bowl	with	first	batch.	Add	onion	and	cook,	stirring
frequently,	until	onion	is	translucent,	3	to	5	minutes.
2.	Return	chicken	to	pot.	Reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,	and	cook	until	chicken

releases	its	juices,	about	20	minutes.	Increase	heat	to	high	and	add	boiling	water,
salt,	and	bay	leaves.	Bring	to	boil,	then	reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,	and	simmer
slowly	until	stock	is	rich	and	flavorful,	about	20	minutes,	skimming	foam	off
surface	if	desired.
3.	Strain	stock	through	fine-mesh	strainer;	discard	solids.	Before	using,	defat

stock.	(Stock	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	4	days	or	frozen	for	up	to	6	months.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Restaurant	chefs	adhere	to	time-consuming,	involved	routines	for	making
chicken	stock.	Bones,	meat,	and	mirepoix	(onions,	carrots,	and	celery)	are	first
oven-roasted	or	sautéed	on	the	stovetop.	A	bouquet	garni	(a	bundle	of	several
fresh	herbs)	and	water	are	added,	and	the	stock	simmers,	uncovered,	for	hours,
with	the	cook	periodically	skimming	off	impurities.	Finally,	the	stock	is	strained,
cooled,	and	defatted.	This	method	is	fine	for	cooks	with	the	inclination	to	spend
all	day	tending	a	simmering	pot,	and	it	does	produce	very	fine	results.	But	most
home	cooks	don’t	want	(or	need)	to	follow	such	a	complicated	regimen.	We
simplify	the	process	by	using	small	pieces	and	fewer	vegetables,	and	we	subject
the	chicken	to	some	browning	and	a	solid	sweat	before	bringing	the	stock	to	a
boil	and	letting	it	simmer	for	only	20	minutes.
HACK	THE	CHICKEN	Many	recipes	throw	whole	chicken	parts	into	the

pot.	We	found	that	cutting	the	parts	into	small	chunks	(a	cleaver	is	perfect	for
this	task)	releases	the	chicken	flavor	in	a	shorter	amount	of	time	since	more
surface	area	of	the	meat	is	exposed.	This	also	exposes	more	bone	marrow,	key
for	both	flavor	and	a	thicker	consistency.
BROWN	FIRST	Most	stock	recipes	dump	the	chicken	and	water	into	the	pot

at	the	same	time.	We	found	that	browning	the	chicken	creates	a	ton	of	flavor	that
would	otherwise	take	hours	to	eke	out.
DON’T	SKIP	THE	ONIONS	Though	carrots	and	celery	aren’t	vital	for	a

flavorful	stock,	onions	certainly	are.	We	sauté	one	chopped	onion	before
returning	the	chicken	to	the	pot.
SWEAT	IT	OUT	Cooking	the	browned	onion	and	chicken	pieces	in	a

covered	pot	in	their	own	juices	(a	process	called	sweating)	further	speeds	along
the	release	of	flavor.	A	20-minute	sweat	before	adding	the	water	is	key	to	this
recipe.



CLASSIC	CHICKEN	NOODLE	SOUP
SERVES	6	TO	8

Make	sure	to	reserve	the	chicken	breast	pieces	until	step	2;	they	should	not	be
browned.	Be	sure	to	reserve	2	tablespoons	of	chicken	fat	for	sautéing	the
aromatics	in	step	4;	however,	if	you	prefer	not	to	use	chicken	fat,	vegetable	oil
can	be	substituted.

STOCK
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
1				 (4-pound)	whole	chicken,	breast	removed,	split,	and	reserved;	remaining	chicken	cut	into	2-inch

pieces
1				 onion,	chopped
8				 cups	boiling	water
1				 teaspoon	salt
2				 bay	leaves

SOUP
2				 tablespoons	chicken	fat,	reserved	from	making	stock,	or	vegetable	oil
1				 onion,	chopped
1				 large	carrot,	peeled	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
1				 celery	rib,	sliced	¼	inch	thick
½				 teaspoon	dried	thyme
3				 ounces	egg	noodles
¼				 cup	minced	fresh	parsley
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	FOR	THE	STOCK:	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until
shimmering.	Add	half	of	chicken	pieces	and	cook	until	lightly	browned,	about	5
minutes	per	side.	Transfer	cooked	chicken	to	bowl	and	repeat	with	remaining
chicken	pieces;	transfer	to	bowl	with	first	batch.	Add	onion	and	cook,	stirring
frequently,	until	onion	is	translucent,	3	to	5	minutes.	Return	chicken	pieces	to
pot.	Reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,	and	cook	until	chicken	releases	its	juices,	about
20	minutes.
2.	Increase	heat	to	high;	add	boiling	water,	reserved	chicken	breast	pieces,



salt,	and	bay	leaves.	Reduce	heat	to	medium-low	and	simmer	until	flavors	have
blended,	about	20	minutes.
3.	Remove	breast	pieces	from	pot.	When	cool	enough	to	handle,	remove	skin

from	breasts,	then	remove	meat	from	bones	and	shred	into	bite-size	pieces;
discard	skin	and	bones.	Strain	stock	through	fine-mesh	strainer;	discard	solids.
Allow	liquid	to	settle,	about	5	minutes,	then	skim	off	fat;	reserve	2	tablespoons,
if	desired.
4.	FOR	THE	SOUP:	Heat	reserved	chicken	fat	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-

high	heat.	Add	onion,	carrot,	and	celery	and	cook	until	softened,	about	5
minutes.	Add	thyme	and	reserved	stock	and	simmer	until	vegetables	are	tender,
10	to	15	minutes.
5.	Add	noodles	and	reserved	shredded	chicken	and	cook	until	just	tender,	5	to

8	minutes.	Stir	in	parsley,	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve.	(After
skimming	broth	in	step	3,	shredded	chicken,	strained	stock,	and	fat	can	be
refrigerated	in	separate	containers	for	up	to	2	days.)

CLASSIC	CHICKEN	SOUP	WITH	ORZO	AND	SPRING	VEGETABLES
Substitute	1	leek,	quartered	lengthwise,	sliced	thin	crosswise,	and	washed
thoroughly,	for	onion	and	½	cup	orzo	for	egg	noodles.	Along	with	orzo,	add	4
ounces	trimmed	asparagus,	cut	into	1-inch	lengths,	and	¼	cup	fresh	or	frozen
peas.	Substitute	2	tablespoons	minced	fresh	tarragon	for	parsley.

CLASSIC	CHICKEN	SOUP	WITH	SHELLS,	TOMATOES,	AND
ZUCCHINI
Add	1	diced	zucchini	to	pot	with	onion,	carrot,	and	celery	in	step	4,	increasing
cooking	time	to	7	minutes.	Add	1	tomato,	cored,	seeded,	and	chopped,	to	pot
along	with	stock	in	step	4.	Substitute	1	cup	small	shells	or	macaroni	for	egg
noodles	and	simmer	until	pasta	is	just	tender.	Substitute	¼	cup	minced	fresh
basil	for	parsley	and	serve	with	grated	Parmesan,	if	desired.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
While	the	stock	for	our	Classic	Chicken	Noodle	Soup	is	similar	to	our	Quick
Chicken	Stock	in	that	both	are,	well,	quick,	there	are	some	important	differences.
We	use	a	whole	chicken	so	that	we	will	have	some	white	meat	for	the	soup.	We
remove	the	breast	and	reserve	it	for	use	later	in	the	recipe.	The	rest	of	the	bird	is
cut	into	small	pieces	and	browned	and	sweated	per	our	stock-making	method.
USE	BROTH	FOR	FLAVOR	Once	the	onion	and	hacked-up	chicken	have

been	browned	and	sweated,	it’s	time	to	add	the	water	and	bay	leaves.	At	this
point	in	the	recipe,	we	also	add	the	split	breast	and	let	it	simmer	for	just	20
minutes.	This	ensures	that	the	white	meat	for	the	soup	won’t	overcook.
RESERVE	THAT	CHICKEN	FAT	Reserve	2	tablespoons	of	the	chicken	fat

skimmed	from	the	broth.	We	use	this	fat	to	sauté	the	aromatics	for	the	soup,
which	imparts	an	excellent	chicken	flavor.
COOK	PASTA	RIGHT	IN	BROTH	Egg	noodles	(cooked	right	in	the	broth

so	they	soak	up	the	chicken	flavor),	celery,	carrot,	onion,	thyme,	and	parsley
round	out	our	classic	recipe.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOW	BEST	TO	COOL	SOUP

Let	your	soup	cool	for	an	hour	before	placing	it	in	the	fridge.

For	safety	reasons,	the	U.S.	Food	and	Drug	Administration	(FDA)	recommends	cooling	liquids	to	70
degrees	within	the	first	two	hours	after	cooking	and	40	degrees	within	four	hours	after	that.

The	easiest	method	to	cool	soup	is	to	put	the	hot	pot	straight	in	the	refrigerator.	When	we	tried	this,	the
boiling	soup	cooled	from	212	degrees	to	40	degrees	in	a	total	time	of	four	hours	and	15	minutes.	However,
the	fridge’s	temperature	rose	to	nearly	50	degrees,	which	is	unsafe	for	everything	else	being	stored	in	there.
We	found	that	by	letting	the	soup	cool	to	85	degrees	on	the	counter	(which	took	only	an	hour)	before
transferring	it	to	the	fridge,	we	could	bring	it	down	to	40	degrees	in	a	total	time	of	four	hours	and	30
minutes	(well	within	the	FDA’s	recommended	range),	and	the	fridge	never	got	above	40	degrees.	You	can
speed	up	the	process	even	further	by	dividing	the	soup	into	smaller	containers.

	



CONCEPT	11

Brining	Maximizes	Juiciness	in	Lean
Meats
Why	are	some	turkeys	dry	as	sawdust	while	others	boast	meat	that’s	firm,	juicy,
and	well	seasoned?	The	answer	is	brining.	Soaking	a	turkey	(or	a	chicken	or
even	lean	pork)	in	a	brine—a	solution	of	salt	water—provides	it	with	a	plump
cushion	of	seasoned	moisture	that	will	sustain	it	throughout	cooking,	which
translates	into	moist	meat,	especially	in	the	breast.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Brining	relies	on	two	scientific	principles—diffusion	and	osmosis—that	sound
complicated	but	are	actually	quite	easy	to	understand.	They	depend	on	a	simple
concept:	Nature	likes	things	to	be	kept	in	balance.
If	you	remember	basic	biology,	meat	is	made	mostly	of	muscle	fibers,	which

are	individual	cells.	These	cells	allow	certain	molecules	to	flow	in	and	out	in
order	to	keep	things	in	balance.	Small	molecules	(like	salt)	will	naturally	move
from	an	area	of	greater	concentration	to	an	area	of	lesser	concentration	by	a
process	called	diffusion.	The	salt	molecules	in	a	typical	brine	are	more
concentrated	than	inside	the	muscle	cells	so	the	salt	diffuses	into	the	muscle
cells.
When	water	moves	across	cell	membranes,	however,	the	process	is	called

osmosis.	In	brining,	the	dissolved	salts,	sugars,	amino	acids,	and	proteins	inside
the	muscle	cells	create	a	more	concentrated	environment	(one	with	less	water)
than	that	of	the	brine.	In	order	to	maintain	a	balance,	water	travels	from	a	less
concentrated	to	a	more	concentrated	environment.	Therefore,	water	flows	into
the	muscle	cells,	causing	the	meat	to	pick	up	“water	weight”	as	it	soaks.	(The
concentration	of	salt	in	a	brine	is	important.	If	it	is	too	high,	then	water	will	be
drawn	out	of	the	meat	instead	of	traveling	in.	If	it	is	too	low,	the	movement	of
water	into	the	meat	will	be	very	slow.)
It’s	intuitive	that	this	added	water	would	make	brined	meat	juicer.	But	why

can’t	we	just	soak	our	meat	in	a	bucket	of	plain	water?	How	exactly	is	the	salt
working?
It	all	comes	down	to	the	reshaping	of	protein	molecules	in	the	meat—a	task

taken	on	by	the	salt	in	the	brine.	This	reshaping	helps	the	proteins	to	hold	on	to
the	added	water,	even	after	the	meat	is	cooked.
But	let’s	take	a	step	back:	Salt	is	made	up	of	two	ions,	sodium	and	chloride,

which	are	oppositely	charged.	Proteins,	such	as	those	in	meat,	are	large
molecules	that	contain	a	mosaic	of	charges,	negative	and	positive.	When	proteins
are	placed	in	a	solution	containing	salt,	they	readjust	their	shape	to	accommodate
the	opposing	charges.	This	rearrangement	of	the	protein	molecules	creates	gaps
that	fill	up	with	water.	More	than	that:	The	salt	actually	dissolves	some	of	the
proteins,	forming	a	gel	capable	of	holding	on	to	even	more	water.
This	rearrangement	of	the	protein	molecules	has	an	additional	effect.	It

compromises	the	structural	integrity	of	the	meat,	reducing	overall	toughness.	So,
in	addition	to	being	juicier,	brined	meat	should	be	more	tender,	too.



MOVEMENT	OF	SALT	AND	WATER	IN	A	BRINE



	
DIFFUSION	Salt	will	move	from	an	area	of	greater	concentration	(the	brine)	to	an	area	of	lesser



concentration	(the	meat).



	
OSMOSIS	Water	moves	across	cell	walls	from	areas	with	a	higher	concentration	of	water	(the	brine)	to



areas	of	lower	concentration	(the	meat).



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	tease	out	the	relative	effects	of	osmosis	and	diffusion,	we	conducted	the
following	experiment:	We	soaked	one	2½-pound	center-cut	boneless	pork	loin
(which	we	trimmed	of	fat	and	silverskin)	in	plain	water	and	a	second	2½-pound
trimmed	loin	in	a	brine	made	with	3	quarts	of	cold	water	and	¾	cup	of	table	salt
for	four	hours,	measuring	the	weight	of	the	loins	before	and	after	soaking.	We
then	roasted	these	samples,	along	with	a	third	2½-pound	pork	loin	taken	straight
from	the	package	and	trimmed.	We	repeated	this	test	three	more	times,	cooking	a
total	of	12	pork	loins,	and	then	averaged	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
Before	we	even	turned	on	the	oven,	we	noticed	a	big	difference	between	the	pork
loins	soaked	in	plain	water	and	the	loins	soaked	in	the	brine.	The	water-soaked
pork	absorbed	about	0.5	percent	of	its	weight	in	water	(a	little	over	½	ounce),
whereas	the	brined	pork	absorbed	almost	three	times	that	amount.	It	was	clear
that	the	brine	was	doing	something	and	the	weighin	after	roasting	confirmed	its
effect.	The	loins	taken	straight	from	the	package	and	the	loins	soaked	in	water
showed	little	difference,	each	losing	about	19	percent	of	their	original	weight.
The	brined	pork	shed	only	14.1	percent	of	its	starting	weight,	nearly	25	percent
less	than	the	other	two	samples.
When	our	tasters	sampled	each	pork	loin,	they	found	the	brined	pork	to	be

noticeably	juicier.	It	was	also	well	seasoned.	(Perhaps	even	too	well	seasoned.
We	used	a	higher	ratio	of	salt	to	water	in	our	experiment	than	we	do	in	our	Grill-
Roasted	Pork	Loin	recipe)	In	separate	tests,	we	had	our	food	lab	analyze	sodium
content	in	a	variety	of	brined	foods.	We	found	that	brining	adds	about	1⁄8	teaspoon
of	salt	per	serving	in	pork	or	poultry.	This	is	roughly	the	amount	of	seasonings
found	in	a	kosher	chicken	(which	is	salted	during	processing)	or	enhanced	pork
(which	has	been	injected	with	a	sodium	solution	by	the	manufacturer	to	increase
juiciness).



THE	TAKEAWAY
Brining	pork	and	other	lean	proteins	accomplishes	three	things.	The	salt	in	the
brine	changes	the	structure	of	the	proteins	in	the	meat	so	that	they	are	able	to
both	absorb	and	hold	on	to	more	moisture,	resulting	in	juicier	meat	when
cooked.	This	change	in	the	protein	structure	also	makes	the	meat	more	tender.
Finally,	unlike	salt	sprinkled	on	the	surface	of	meat	just	before	cooking,	the	salt
in	a	brine	penetrates	deeper	into	the	meat	and	produces	meat	that	is	especially
well	seasoned.



WEIGHT	OF	PORK	LOINS	BEFORE	AND	AFTER	ROASTING
Control
Before:	2.35	pounds
After:	1.92	pounds
Difference:	18.4%
	
Soaked	in	plain	water
Before:	2.42	pounds
After:	1.94	pounds
Difference:	19.7%
	
Brined	in	salt	water
Before:	2.49	pounds
After:	2.14	pounds
Difference:	14.1%
Note:	Numbers	represent	average	of	12	samples,	four	of	each	type.



BRINING	FORMULA	FOR	POULTRY	AND	PORK
CHICKEN***
1	(3-to	8-pound)	Whole	Chicken
Cold	Water:	2	quarts
Table	Salt*:	½	cup
Time**:	1	hour
	
2	(3-to	8-pound)	Whole	Chickens
Cold	Water:	3	quarts
Table	Salt*:	¾	cup
Time**:	1	hour
	
4	pounds	Bone-In	Chicken	Pieces
Cold	Water:	2	quarts
Table	Salt*:	½	cup
Time**:	½	to	1	hour
	
Boneless,	Skinless	Chicken	Breasts	(up	to	6	breasts)
Cold	Water:	1½	quarts
Table	Salt*:	3	tablespoons
Time**:	½	to	1	hour
	
TURKEY***
1	(12-to	17-pound)	Whole	Turkey
Cold	Water:	2	gallons
Table	Salt*:	1	cup
Time**:	6	to	12	hours
	
1	(18-to	24-pound)	Whole	Turkey
Cold	water:	3	gallons
Table	Salt*:	1½	cups
Time**:	6	to	12	hours
	
Bone-In	Turkey	Breast
Cold	water:	1	gallon
Table	Salt*:	½	cup
Time**:	3	to	6	hours



	
PORK***
Bone-In	Pork	Chops	(up	to	6)
Cold	water:	1½	quarts
Table	Salt*:	3	tablespoons
Time**:	½	to	1	hour
	
Boneless	Pork	Chops	(up	to	6)
Cold	water:	1½	quarts
Table	Salt*:	3	tablespoons
Time**:	½	to	1	hour
	
1	(2½-to	6-pound)	Boneless	Roast
Cold	water:	2	quarts
Table	Salt*:	¼	cup
Time**:	1	to	1½	hours
	

*	The	large	clusters	of	crystals	in	kosher	salt	dissolve	quickly	in	water,	making	this	salt	a	good	option	for
brining.	Each	brand	has	a	different	crystal	size	(unlike	table	salt,	which	has	a	standard	crystal	size).	To	use
Morton	kosher	salt,	increase	amounts	in	this	chart	by	50	percent.	To	use	Diamond	Crystal	kosher	salt,
double	amounts	in	this	chart.	It	is	possible	to	add	sugar	(in	equal	amounts	to	salt)	to	brines	for	chicken	and
pork	to	promote	browning.

**	Do	not	brine	longer	than	recommended	or	foods	will	become	overly	salty.

***	Don’t	brine	kosher	chickens	or	turkeys,	self-basting	turkeys	(such	as	frozen	Butterballs),	or	enhanced
pork	(injected	with	sodium	solution).



BRINING	AT	WORK	
POULTRY
Lean	turkey	and	chicken	are	prime	candidates	for	brining.	The	dark	meat	in
birds	tastes	best	when	cooked	to	an	internal	temperature	of	175	degrees—the
point	at	which	the	fat	and	connective	tissue	have	melted	and	the	meat	becomes
tender.	However,	lean	white	breast	meat	will	be	incredibly	dry	when	cooked	to
this	temperature.	Brining,	in	effect,	adds	moisture	to	the	breast	meat	so	it	won’t
be	so	dry,	even	if	it’s	overcooked.



ROASTED	BRINED	TURKEY
SERVES	10	TO	12

This	recipe	is	designed	for	a	natural	turkey,	not	treated	with	salt	or	chemicals.	If
using	a	self-basting	turkey	(such	as	a	frozen	Butterball)	or	kosher	turkey,	do	not
brine	in	step	1,	and	season	with	salt	after	brushing	with	melted	butter	in	step	5.
Resist	the	temptation	to	tent	the	roasted	turkey	with	foil	while	it	rests	on	the
carving	board.	Covering	the	bird	will	make	the	skin	soggy.	If	making	gravy,	see
our	Giblet	Pan	Gravy	recipe.

1				 cup	salt
1				 (12-to	14-pound)	turkey,	neck,	giblets,	and	tailpiece	removed	and	reserved	for	gravy
2				 onions,	chopped	coarse
2				 carrots,	peeled	and	chopped	coarse
2				 celery	ribs,	chopped	coarse
6				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted

1–1½				 cups	water
1				 recipe	Giblet	Pan	Gravy

1.	Dissolve	salt	in	2	gallons	cold	water	in	large	container.	Submerge	turkey	in
brine,	cover,	and	refrigerate	or	store	in	very	cool	spot	(40	degrees	or	less)	for	6
to	12	hours.
2.	Set	wire	rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Remove	turkey	from	brine	and	pat

dry,	inside	and	out,	with	paper	towels.	Place	turkey	on	prepared	wire	rack.
Refrigerate,	uncovered,	for	at	least	8	hours	or	overnight.
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.	Line	V-

rack	with	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil	and	poke	holes	in	foil.	Set	V-rack	in
roasting	pan	and	spray	foil	with	vegetable	oil	spray.
4.	Toss	half	of	onions,	half	of	carrots,	half	of	celery,	and	thyme	with	1

tablespoon	melted	butter	in	bowl	and	place	inside	turkey.	Tie	legs	together	with
kitchen	twine	and	tuck	wings	behind	back.	Scatter	remaining	vegetables	in	pan.
5.	Pour	water	over	vegetable	mixture	in	pan.	Brush	turkey	breast	with	1

tablespoon	melted	butter,	then	place	turkey	breast	side	down	on	V-rack.	Brush
with	remaining	1	tablespoon	butter.



6.	Roast	turkey	for	45	minutes.	Remove	pan	from	oven.	Using	2	large	wads	of
paper	towels,	turn	turkey	breast	side	up.	If	liquid	in	pan	has	totally	evaporated,
add	another	½	cup	water.	Return	turkey	to	oven	and	roast	until	breast	registers
160	degrees	and	thighs	register	175	degrees,	50	minutes	to	1	hour.
7.	Remove	turkey	from	oven.	Gently	tip	turkey	so	that	any	accumulated	juices

in	cavity	run	into	pan.	Transfer	turkey	to	carving	board	and	let	rest,	uncovered,
for	30	minutes.	Carve	turkey	and	serve	with	gravy.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
A	roast	turkey	benefits	from	brining	more	than	chicken	or	even	pork	because	it	is
so	lean	and	because	it	so	big.	With	such	a	long	roasting	time,	there’s	no	way	to
keep	the	breast	juicy	without	the	help	of	a	brine.	However,	brining	alone	won’t
keep	a	turkey	moist.
BRINE,	THEN	DRY	Brining	adds	moisture	to	the	meat	but	also	the	skin,

where	it	can	cause	problems.	Make	sure	to	pat	the	bird	dry	with	paper	towels
once	it	comes	out	of	the	brine.	Air-drying	the	brined	bird	in	the	refrigerator	(a
technique	used	to	make	Peking	duck	so	crispy)	is	worth	the	advance	planning.
KEEP	THE	STUFFING	SEPARATE	A	stuffed	bird	is	very	difficult	to	cook

properly.	By	the	time	the	stuffing	reaches	a	safe	temperature	(165	degrees),	the
white	meat	is	way	overcooked.	The	easiest	solution	is	to	bake	the	stuffing	in	a
separate	dish,	but	we	did	devise	a	more	complicated	recipe	that	cooks	some	of
the	stuffing	inside	the	bird	to	soak	up	poultry	flavor	(click	here).
FLIP	THE	BIRD	Starting	the	bird	breast	side	down	shields	the	white	meat

from	oven	heat	and	helps	solve	the	fundamental	problem	with	cooking	any	bird
—dark	meat	should	be	heated	to	a	higher	internal	temperature	than	white	meat.
To	crisp	the	skin	on	the	breast,	turn	the	bird	breast	side	up	for	the	second	half	of
the	roasting.
ROAST	ON	A	RACK	Cooking	the	turkey	in	a	V-rack	allows	heat	to	circulate

around	the	bird	and	promotes	even	cooking.	Line	the	rack	with	foil	so	the	metal
bars	of	the	rack	don’t	tear	the	turkey	skin.	Cutting	slits	in	the	foil	allows	the
turkey	juices	to	drip	into	the	roasting	pan	and	mix	with	vegetables	that	will	be
used	to	enrich	the	gravy.
LET	IT	REST	When	cooked	meat	and	poultry	are	sliced	right	away,	juices

flood	the	carving	board.	The	bigger	the	roast,	the	longer	it	should	rest.	While	a
4-pound	beef	roast	might	be	ready	to	carve	after	15	minutes,	a	big	bird	should
rest	for	at	least	half	an	hour,	if	not	longer.	(For	more	details	on	the	science	of
resting,	see	concept	3.)



CLASSIC	ROAST	CHICKEN
SERVES	2	TO	3

This	recipe	is	designed	for	a	natural	chicken,	not	treated	with	salt	or	chemicals.
If	using	a	kosher	chicken,	do	not	brine;	it	already	contains	a	good	amount	of
sodium.	We	recommend	using	a	V-rack	to	roast	the	chicken.	If	you	don’t	have	a
V-rack,	set	the	bird	on	a	regular	roasting	rack	and	use	balls	of	aluminum	foil	to
keep	the	roasting	chicken	propped	up	on	its	side.

½				 cup	salt
½				 cup	sugar
1				 (3-pound)	whole	chicken,	giblets	discarded
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
1				 tablespoon	olive	oil
					 Pepper

1.	Dissolve	salt	and	sugar	in	2	quarts	cold	water	in	large	container.	Submerge
chicken	in	brine,	cover	container	with	plastic	wrap,	and	refrigerate	for	1	hour.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position,	place	roasting	pan	on	rack,	and

heat	oven	to	400	degrees.	Coat	V-rack	with	vegetable	oil	spray	and	set	aside.
Remove	chicken	from	brine	and	pat	dry	with	paper	towels.
3.	Using	your	fingers,	gently	loosen	center	portion	of	skin	covering	each	side

of	breast	and	place	butter	under	skin,	directly	on	meat	in	center	of	each	side	of
breast.	Gently	press	on	skin	to	distribute	butter	over	meat.	Tuck	wings	behind
back.	Rub	skin	with	oil,	season	with	pepper,	and	place	chicken	wing	side	up	on
prepared	V-rack.	Place	V-rack	in	preheated	roasting	pan	and	roast	for	15
minutes.
4.	Remove	roasting	pan	from	oven	and,	using	2	large	wads	of	paper	towels,

rotate	chicken	so	that	opposite	wing	side	is	facing	up.	Return	roasting	pan	to
oven	and	roast	for	another	15	minutes.
5.	Using	2	large	wads	of	paper	towels,	rotate	chicken	again	so	that	breast	side

is	facing	up	and	continue	to	roast	until	breast	registers	160	degrees	and	thighs
register	175	degrees,	20	to	25	minutes	longer.	Transfer	chicken	to	carving	board
and	let	rest	for	15	minutes.	Carve	chicken	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Adding	sugar	to	the	brine	encourages	browning,	which	can	be	an	issue	with	a
quick-cooking	roast	chicken.	Soaking	poultry	in	a	brine	makes	the	skin	soggy	(no
surprise)	and	will	slow	down	its	browning	and	crisping.	With	roast	turkey,	the
cooking	time	is	so	long	that	the	skin	will	eventually	dry	out	and	crisp.	A	roast
chicken	cooks	much	more	quickly;	the	sugar	compensates	for	the	negative	effects
brining	has	on	poultry	skin.
BLOT	DRY	Make	sure	to	thoroughly	dry	the	bird	after	brining;	excess

moisture	will	cause	the	skin	to	steam	and	become	flabby.
BUTTER	THE	MEAT,	NOT	THE	SKIN	Because	a	chicken	cooks	so	fast,

brushing	the	bird	with	melted	butter	isn’t	a	good	idea.	The	moisture	in	the	butter
can	soften	poultry	skin	and	there	isn’t	enough	time	for	it	to	crisp	up.	Instead,	put
the	butter	where	it	does	the	most	good—directly	on	top	of	the	lean	breast	meat.
Use	your	fingers	to	loosen	the	skin	from	the	breast	meat	and	smear	softened
butter	directly	onto	the	meat	on	either	side	of	the	breastbone.	You	can	flavor	this
butter	with	herbs,	garlic,	or	grated	citrus	zest,	if	desired.
OIL	THE	EXTERIOR	To	help	the	skin	crisp,	we	do	rub	a	little	oil	on	the

exterior	of	the	bird.	While	butter	is	16	to	18	percent	water	and	80	percent	fat,	oil
is	100	percent	fat	and	won’t	soften	poultry	skin.
ELEVATE	AND	FLIP	To	promote	even	cooking,	it’s	essential	to	roast	a

chicken	in	a	V-rack,	which	allows	heat	to	circulate	around	the	bird.	Placing	the
V-rack	in	a	preheated	roasting	pan	jump-starts	the	browning	of	the	skin.	Turning
the	bird	two	times	as	it	cooks	helps	protect	the	white	meat	from	overcooking	and
crisps	the	entire	exterior	of	the	bird.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	BASICS	OF	BRINING

Pay	attention	to	the	type	of	salt	and	the	container	options.

Successful	brining	is	easy	but	depends	on	paying	attention	to	a	few	details.	The	type	of	salt	used	in	the	brine
will	affect	the	quantity	that	you	use.	(Click	here	for	more	information	about	substituting	one	type	of	salt	for
another.)	Likewise,	you’ll	want	to	make	sure	that	you’ve	got	the	right	container	on	hand	for	the	job.	Zipper-
lock	bags	work	well	for	chicken	breasts	and	chops,	but	for	whole	birds	and	roasts	you’ll	need	something
larger.	In	the	test	kitchen	we	use	heavy-duty	Cambro	containers,	and	for	a	really	big	job—like	a	turkey—
you	may	need	a	cooler.	In	that	case,	keep	the	brine	cold	with	ice	packs.	Last,	for	optimal	results,	don’t
forget	to	make	sure	the	salt	is	fully	dissolved	in	the	water	before	adding	the	meat.



BRINING	AT	WORK	
PORK
Lean	pork	cuts	from	the	loin	and	rib	are	good	candidates	for	brining.	By	the	time
these	cuts	reach	the	proper	internal	temperature	(150	degrees),	much	of	their
moisture	has	been	expelled.	With	so	little	fat,	these	cuts	will	be	leathery	and
tough.	Brining	allows	you	to	cook	lean	pork	while	keeping	it	tender	and	juicy.



GRILL-ROASTED	PORK	LOIN
SERVES	4	TO	6

We	find	that	the	blade-end	roast	is	a	bit	more	flavorful	than	the	center-cut	roast,
but	either	works	well	in	this	recipe.	To	make	sure	the	roast	doesn’t	dry	out	during
cooking,	look	for	one	covered	with	a	layer	of	fat	on	one	side	that	is	at	least	1⁄8
inch	thick.	Because	the	diameter	of	pork	loins	varies	significantly	from	one	to
another,	start	checking	the	internal	temperature	of	the	loin	after	30	minutes	of
grilling	time.	When	using	a	charcoal	grill,	we	prefer	wood	chunks	to	wood	chips
whenever	possible;	substitute	two	medium	wood	chunks,	soaked	in	water	for	one
hour,	for	the	wood	chip	packet.	This	recipe	is	intended	for	natural	pork;	if	the
pork	is	enhanced	(injected	with	a	salt	solution),	do	not	brine.

¼				 cup	salt
1				 (2½-to	3-pound)	boneless	blade-end	or	center-cut	pork	loin	roast,	trimmed	and	tied	at	1½-inch

intervals
2				 tablespoons	olive	oil
1				 tablespoon	pepper
2				 cups	wood	chips,	soaked	in	water	for	15	minutes	and	drained

1.	Dissolve	salt	in	2	quarts	water	in	large	container.	Submerge	pork	loin	in
brine,	cover,	and	refrigerate	for	1	to	1½	hours.	Remove	pork	from	brine	and	pat
dry	with	paper	towels.	Rub	pork	loin	with	oil	and	coat	with	pepper.	Let	sit	at
room	temperature	for	1	hour.
2.	Using	large	piece	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	wrap	soaked	chips	in	foil

packet	and	cut	several	vent	holes	in	top.
3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	halfway.	Light	large

chimney	starter	three-quarters	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(4½	quarts).	When
top	coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Place
wood	chip	packet	on	coals.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent
halfway.	Heat	grill	until	hot	and	chips	are	smoking,	about	5	minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Place	wood	chip	packet	over	primary	burner.	Turn

all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until	hot	and	chips	are	smoking,	about
15	minutes.	Leave	primary	burner	on	medium-high	and	turn	off	other	burner(s).
(Adjust	primary	burner	as	needed	to	maintain	grill	temperature	between	300	and



350	degrees.)
4.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	pork	loin	on	hot	side	of	grill,	fat	side	up,

and	cook	(covered	if	using	gas)	until	well	browned	on	all	sides,	10	to	12
minutes,	turning	as	needed.	Move	loin	to	cool	side	of	grill,	positioning	roast
parallel	with	and	as	close	as	possible	to	heat.	Cover	(position	lid	vent	over	roast
if	using	charcoal)	and	cook	for	20	minutes.
5.	Rotate	roast	180	degrees,	cover,	and	continue	to	cook	until	center	of	meat

registers	140	degrees,	10	to	30	minutes	longer,	depending	on	thickness	of	roast.
6.	Transfer	roast	to	carving	board,	tent	loosely	with	foil,	and	let	rest	for	15

minutes.	Remove	twine,	cut	roast	into	½-inch-thick	slices,	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Brining	adds	moisture	to	lean	pork	loin	but	proper	cooking	is	essential,	too.
Here	it’s	important	to	build	a	two-level	fire,	first	searing	the	pork	over	the	hot
flames	and	then	roasting	it,	covered,	on	the	cooler	side	of	the	grill.	Be	sure	to
remove	the	pork	before	it’s	completely	done:	Carryover	cooking	(concept	4)	will
do	its	work.
CHOOSE	YOUR	CUT	Butchers	typically	cut	and	merchandise	a	loin	roast

in	three	sections.	Closest	to	the	shoulder	is	the	blade	end	(blade	refers	to	the
shoulder	blade).	Moving	down	the	back	of	the	pig	you	find	the	center	cut,	which
is	the	most	expensive—comparable	to	a	beef	prime	rib	when	sold	bone-in.	The
third	and	last	section	is	called	the	sirloin.	Here	the	loin	muscle	tapers	off	and
rests	above	the	tenderloin.	When	the	sirloin	section	is	cut	into	roasts	or	chops,
part	of	the	tenderloin	is	included.	The	tenderloin	muscle	can	be	purchased
separately	as	a	boneless	roast,	but	it	should	not	be	confused	with	the	larger	loin
roast,	which	is	what	we	prefer	here.	After	testing	them	all,	the	blade	roast	was
favorably	compared	by	our	tasters	to	the	dark	meat	of	chicken.	The	fatty	pockets
that	separate	the	different	muscles	add	moisture	and	flavor.	The	center-cut	roast
has	a	milder	flavor,	but	it	was	also	well	liked	by	tasters	in	this	recipe.
UNDERCOOK	IT,	THEN	LET	IT	REST	While	a	pork	loin	that	is	properly

cooked	to	an	internal	temperature	of	145	degrees	will	still	be	moist,	a	roast
cooked	to	an	internal	temperature	of	160	degrees	will	be	tough	and	leathery,
even	if	it	has	been	brined.	Our	solution	is	simple:	As	soon	as	the	meat	reaches	an
internal	temperature	of	140	degrees,	remove	it	from	the	grill.	Tent	the	roast	with
foil	as	it	rests	and	don’t	carve	the	meat	for	15	minutes.	During	this	time,	the
internal	temperature	will	gently	climb	to	145	to	150	degrees	and	there’s	no	risk
of	overcooking	the	meat.



GRILLED	PORK	CHOPS
SERVES	4

Rib	loin	chops	are	our	top	choice	for	their	big	flavor	and	juiciness.	The	spice
rub	adds	a	lot	of	flavor	for	very	little	effort,	but	the	chops	can	also	be	seasoned
with	pepper	alone	just	before	grilling.	This	recipe	is	intended	for	natural	pork;	if
the	pork	is	enhanced	(injected	with	a	salt	solution),	do	not	brine,	and	add	2
teaspoons	of	salt	to	the	spice	rub	or	the	pepper.

3				 tablespoons	salt
3				 tablespoons	sugar
4				 (12-ounce)	bone-in	pork	rib	or	center-cut	chops,	1½	inches	thick,	trimmed
1				 recipe	Basic	Spice	Rub	for	Pork	Chops	(recipe	follows)	or	2	teaspoons	pepper

1.	Dissolve	salt	and	sugar	in	1½	quarts	cold	water	in	large	container.
Submerge	chops	in	brine,	cover,	and	refrigerate	for	30	minutes	to	1	hour.
Remove	chops	from	brine	and	pat	dry	with	paper	towels.	Rub	chops	with	spice
rub	(or	season	with	pepper).
2A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light

large	chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals
are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	two-thirds	evenly	over	grill,	then	pour
remaining	coals	over	half	of	grill.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid
vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5	minutes.
2B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.	Leave	primary	burner	on	high	and	turn	off	other
burner(s).
3.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	chops	on	hotter	side	of	grill	and	cook

(covered	if	using	gas)	until	browned	on	both	sides,	4	to	8	minutes.	Move	chops
to	cool	side	of	grill,	cover,	and	continue	to	cook,	turning	once,	until	meat
registers	145	degrees,	7	to	9	minutes	longer.	Transfer	chops	to	serving	platter,
tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let	rest	for	5	to	10	minutes.	Serve.



BASIC	SPICE	RUB	FOR	PORK	CHOPS
MAKES	¼	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	GRILLED	PORK	CHOPS

1				 tablespoon	ground	cumin
1				 tablespoon	chili	powder
1				 tablespoon	curry	powder
2				 teaspoons	packed	brown	sugar
1				 teaspoon	pepper

Combine	all	ingredients	in	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
During	our	testing,	we	discovered	a	few	simple	secrets	to	the	juiciest,	most
flavorful	pork	chops.	Choose	tender	and	flavorful	bone-in	rib	or	center-cut
chops	and	brine	them	to	pump	up	their	flavor	and	lock	in	their	moisture.	Use	a
heavy	hand	with	the	pepper	or	apply	a	quick	spice	rub	before	the	chops	are	put
on	the	grill.	Finally,	cook	the	chops	over	high	heat	until	browned	and	then	move
them	to	a	cooler	part	of	the	grill	to	allow	the	chops	to	cook	through	without
burning	the	exterior.
PUMP	UP	THE	FLAVOR	Although	rib	chops	are	flavorful	on	their	own,	we

wanted	to	see	if	we	could	boost	their	flavor	by	using	a	spice	rub.	We	tried	two
types	of	rub:	wet	and	dry.	The	wet	rubs,	made	with	spices	and	a	liquid,	gave	the
chops	good	flavor	but	also	caused	their	exteriors	to	turn	syrupy.	We	prefer	the
dry	rubs,	which	combine	potent	dried	spices	with	sugar	to	create	big	flavor	and	a
crisp	crust.	With	the	addition	of	the	brine,	these	chops	not	only	have	big	flavor
but	are	well	seasoned	throughout.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BRINING	FROZEN	MEAT

It’s	possible	to	combine	the	thawing	and	brining	of	frozen	meat.

Submerging	small	portions	of	frozen	meat	in	a	bucket	of	cold	water	speeds	up	the	defrosting	process.	For
recipes	where	the	first	step	is	brining,	we	wondered	if	we	could	combine	these	two	steps	into	one.	Testing
with	chicken	parts	and	pork	chops,	we	found	that	this	method	works	well	as	long	as	the	meat	is	fully
defrosted	when	the	brining	time	has	elapsed.	This	won’t	be	a	problem	for	pork	chops	or	chicken	parts,
which	need	an	hour	to	defrost.	Just	brine	these	small	cuts	for	one	hour—the	upper	time	limit	listed	in	the
chart	here.	However,	a	2½-pound	boneless	pork	roast	should	be	thawed	in	plain	water	for	one	hour	and	then
brined	for	the	1½	hours	recommended	here.	Likewise,	a	whole	chicken	should	be	thawed	in	plain	water	for
two	hours	and	then	brined	for	one	hour.



CONCEPT	12

Salt	Makes	Meat	Juicy	and	Skin	Crisp
Brining	is	an	excellent	technique	to	prevent	chalky,	dried-out	meat.	But
sometimes	we	prefer	a	different	way	to	season.	After	all,	the	added	moisture	of	a
brine	makes	it	difficult	to	get	the	bronzed,	crispy	poultry	skin	that	we	love.	In
some	cases,	we	lose	the	water	and	turn	to	straight	salt.	Here’s	why.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Salting	poultry	fulfills	many	of	the	same	roles	as	brining.	The	salt,	which	slowly
penetrates	the	bird’s	flesh,	helps	to	break	down	proteins	and	retain	moisture.	But
salting	is	different	from	brining—in	more	ways	than	the	presence	of	a	bucket	of
water.
Poultry	naturally	contains	some	salt	and	lots	of	water,	which	normally	coexist

in	a	happy	balance.	But	when	salt	is	applied	directly	to	the	meat,	it	starts	by
drawing	the	moisture	out	to	the	surface	of	the	bird	via	osmosis	(for	more	on	this,
see	concept	11).	On	the	surface,	this	moisture	dissolves	the	applied	salt	in	an
effort	to	restore	balance.
But	wouldn’t	drawing	all	that	water	out	of	the	chicken	make	the	situation

worse,	simply	causing	the	meat	to	dry	out?	At	first,	yes.	If	you	cook	a	chicken
very	soon	after	salting,	the	juices	that	traveled	to	the	exterior	would	simply
evaporate	in	the	oven.	With	a	little	time,	however,	the	surface	moisture	forms	a
super-concentrated	brine	with	the	salt	it	has	dissolved.	At	first	this	draws	even
more	moisture	to	the	surface	in	an	effort	to	further	dilute	the	salt.	But	because
salt	diffuses	from	a	higher	concentration	to	a	lower	concentration,	the	dissolved
salt	will	eventually	move	into	the	chicken.
Once	inside	the	bird,	the	salt	accomplishes	two	things.	First,	it	causes	some

muscle	proteins	to	swell,	making	room	for	more	liquid.	Second,	it	dissolves
other	proteins,	which	then	act	like	a	sponge	to	soak	up	and	hold	moisture.	As	the
surface	concentration	of	salt	decreases	and	the	internal	concentration	of
dissolved	salt	and	protein	increases,	the	moisture	on	the	surface	of	the	bird	is
gradually	drawn	back	inside	as	well—another	attempt	to	strike	balance.	This
process	takes	time.	After	all,	we	are	essentially	“brining”	the	birds	using	their
own	juices	instead	of	a	bucket	of	water.	There	is	no	net	gain	or	loss.
Now	here’s	the	key:	After	the	salt	we’ve	applied	causes	the	moisture	to

migrate	back	within	the	bird,	we	are	left	with	a	drier	surface	area.	This	means	we
more	rapidly	obtain	a	high	outer	temperature	and,	as	a	result,	there	is	better
browning	and	a	supremely	crispy	skin.



SALT	AND	WATER

	
A	TRIP	FOR	TWO	When	salt	is	applied	to	the	exterior	of	the	bird,	it	draws	water	from	within	to	the
surface,	creating	a	shallow	brine.	With	time,	however,	first	the	salt	and	then	the	water	begin	to	move	back
into	the	bird.	This	gives	us	a	moist,	tender	bird	after	cooking,	while	the	dry	surface	helps	to	promote	crisp
skin.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	tease	out	the	relative	effects	of	brining	and	salting	on	muscle	fibers	and	skin,
we	ran	the	following	experiment:	We	started	with	three	bone-in,	skin-on	chicken
breasts;	we	brined	one	for	one	hour	in	a	solution	of	¼	cup	of	table	salt	and	1
quart	of	water,	seasoned	another	with	¾	teaspoon	of	kosher	salt	and	left	it
uncovered	in	the	fridge	for	18	hours,	and	took	a	third	straight	from	the	package
and	seasoned	it	with	salt	just	prior	to	cooking.	We	roasted	the	breasts	in	a	450-
degree	oven	until	their	internal	temperature	hit	160	degrees.	We	tasted	the	meat
of	each	breast	and	inspected	the	skin	for	color	and	crispness.	We	repeated	this
experiment	three	times	and	had	similar	results	each	time.



THE	RESULTS
Tasters	found	the	brined	and	salted	samples	to	be	equally	juicy	and	well
seasoned,	while	the	untreated	sample	was	seasoned	only	at	the	very	surface	and
the	meat	was	noticeably	drier.	The	salted	and	untreated	samples	had	equally
browned,	crispy,	shattering	skin,	while	the	skin	on	the	brined	breast	was	paler
and	a	bit	soggy.	To	help	illustrate	the	dramatic	difference	in	texture,	we	removed
the	skin	from	each	breast	and	balanced	it	on	an	overturned	glass	bowl.	Even
without	any	added	weight,	the	brined	skin	immediately	slumped	around	the
curve,	while	the	salted	skin	remained	flat	as	a	board.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Salting	poultry	allows	us	to	reap	the	benefits	of	brining	as	it	breaks	down
proteins	and	helps	to	retain	moisture	within	the	meat—as	well	as	its	added	bonus
of	leaving	the	chicken	with	a	drier	surface	area.	This	means	we	get	well-
seasoned	meat	and	easily	crisped	skin.	While	brining	is	equally	effective	at
helping	the	meat	retain	moisture,	all	that	water	does	negatively	impact	the
crispness	of	the	skin.



CHICKEN	SKIN:	SALTED	VS.	BRINED

	
SALTED	SKIN

The	skin	of	a	salted	bird	is	crisp	and	bronze.



	
BRINED	SKIN

The	skin	of	a	brined	bird	is	softer	and	paler.



NOT	ALL	KOSHER	SALT	IS	THE	SAME
Unlike	table	salt,	kosher	salt	is	fairly	easy	to	spread	and	won’t	clump,	so	it	is	a	must	in	our	salted	turkey
recipes.	But	the	two	leading	brands	of	kosher	salt	are	not	the	same.	Because	of	its	more	open	crystal
structure,	a	teaspoon	of	Diamond	Crystal	actually	contains	less	salt	than	a	teaspoon	of	Morton	kosher	salt.
Use	this	reference	guide	to	convert	measurements.

	
3	teaspoons	Diamond	Crystal	kosher	salt	=	2¼	teaspoons	Morton	kosher	salt	=	1½	teaspoons	table	salt



SALTING	AT	WORK	
BASIC	METHOD
Adding	salt	to	poultry	acts	as	a	shallow	but	concentrated	brine:	Over	time,	the
salt	migrates	into	the	meat,	just	as	it	does	with	our	brining	technique	(see
concept	11).	Once	inside,	the	salt	changes	the	structure	of	the	muscle	fibers	so
that	the	meat	is	able	to	hold	more	moisture,	even	in	a	hot	oven.	Not	only	that,	it
pulls	moisture	away	from	the	surface	of	the	bird,	resulting	in	a	crispier	skin.



ROAST	SALTED	TURKEY
SERVES	10	TO	12

This	recipe	is	designed	for	a	natural	turkey	that	hasn’t	been	treated	with	salt	or
other	ingredients.	If	using	a	self-basting	turkey	(such	as	a	frozen	Butterball)	or
kosher	turkey,	do	not	salt	in	step	1,	and	season	with	salt	after	brushing	with
melted	butter	in	step	5.	This	recipe	was	developed	and	tested	using	Diamond
Crystal	kosher	salt.	If	you	have	Morton	kosher	salt,	which	is	denser	than
Diamond	Crystal,	use	only	2¼	teaspoons	of	salt	in	the	cavity,	2¼	teaspoons	of
salt	for	each	half	of	the	breast,	and	1	teaspoon	of	salt	per	leg.	Table	salt	is	too
fine	and	is	not	recommended	for	this	recipe.	Serve	with	Giblet	Pan	Gravy	(recipe
follows).

1				 (12-to	14-pound)	turkey,	neck,	giblets,	and	tailpiece	removed	and	reserved	for	gravy
4				 tablespoons	kosher	salt
1				 (5-pound)	bag	ice	cubes
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted
3				 onions,	chopped	coarse
2				 carrots,	peeled	and	chopped	coarse
2				 celery	ribs,	chopped	coarse
6				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
1				 cup	water
1				 recipe	Giblet	Pan	Gravy	(recipe	follows)

1.	Use	your	fingers	or	thin	wooden	spoon	handle	to	gently	loosen	skin
covering	breast,	thighs,	drumsticks,	and	back;	avoid	breaking	skin.	Rub	1
tablespoon	salt	evenly	inside	cavity	of	turkey,	1	tablespoon	salt	under	skin	of
each	side	of	breast,	and	1½	teaspoons	salt	under	skin	of	each	leg.	Wrap	turkey
tightly	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	24	hours	or	up	to	48	hours.
2.	Remove	turkey	from	refrigerator.	Rinse	off	any	excess	salt	between	meat

and	skin	and	in	cavity,	then	pat	dry,	inside	and	out,	with	paper	towels.	Add	ice	to
two	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bags	until	each	is	half	full.	Place	bags	in	roasting	pan
and	lay	turkey	breast	side	down	on	top	of	ice.	Add	ice	to	two	1-quart	zipper-lock
bags	until	each	is	one-third	full;	place	1	bag	of	ice	in	large	cavity	of	turkey	and
other	bag	in	neck	cavity.	(Make	sure	that	ice	touches	breast	only,	not	thighs	or
legs.)	Keep	turkey	on	ice	for	1	hour	(pan	should	remain	on	counter).



3.	Meanwhile,	adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	425
degrees.	Line	V-rack	with	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil,	poke	several	holes	in	foil,
and	spray	foil	with	vegetable	oil	spray.
4.	Remove	turkey	from	ice	and	pat	dry	with	paper	towels	(discard	ice).	Tuck

tips	of	drumsticks	into	skin	at	tail	to	secure	and	tuck	wings	behind	back.	Brush
turkey	breast	with	2	tablespoons	melted	butter.
5.	Set	V-rack	in	pan,	then	scatter	vegetables	and	thyme	into	pan	and	pour

water	over	vegetable	mixture.	Place	turkey	breast	side	down	on	V-rack.	Brush
turkey	with	remaining	2	tablespoons	melted	butter.
6.	Roast	turkey	for	45	minutes.	Remove	pan	from	oven	(close	oven	door	to

retain	oven	heat)	and	reduce	oven	temperature	to	325	degrees.	Using	2	large
wads	of	paper	towels,	rotate	turkey	breast	side	up;	continue	to	roast	until	breast
registers	160	degrees	and	thighs	register	175	degrees,	1	to	1½	hours	longer.
Transfer	turkey	to	carving	board	and	let	rest,	uncovered,	for	30	minutes.	Carve
turkey	and	serve	with	gravy.



GIBLET	PAN	GRAVY
MAKES	ABOUT	6	CUPS

Complete	step	1	up	to	a	day	ahead,	if	desired.	Begin	step	3	once	the	bird	has
been	removed	from	the	oven	and	is	resting	on	a	carving	board.

1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
					 Reserved	turkey	giblets,	neck,	and	tailpiece
1				 onion,	chopped
4				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 cups	water
2				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
8				 sprigs	fresh	parsley
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
¼				 cup	all-purpose	flour
1				 cup	dry	white	wine
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	giblets,
neck,	and	tailpiece	and	cook	until	golden	and	fragrant,	about	5	minutes.	Stir	in
onion	and	cook	until	softened,	about	5	minutes.	Reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,	and
cook	until	turkey	parts	and	onion	release	their	juices,	about	15	minutes.	Stir	in
broth,	water,	thyme,	and	parsley,	bring	to	boil,	and	adjust	heat	to	low.	Simmer,
uncovered,	skimming	any	impurities	that	may	rise	to	surface,	until	broth	is	rich
and	flavorful,	about	30	minutes	longer.	Strain	broth	into	large	container	and
reserve	giblets.	When	cool	enough	to	handle,	chop	giblets.	Refrigerate	giblets
and	broth	until	ready	to	use.	(Broth	can	be	stored	in	refrigerator	for	up	to	1	day.)
2.	While	turkey	is	roasting,	return	reserved	turkey	broth	to	simmer	in

saucepan.	Melt	butter	in	separate	large	saucepan	over	medium-low	heat.	Add
flour	and	cook,	whisking	constantly	(mixture	will	froth	and	then	thin	out	again),
until	nutty	brown	and	fragrant,	10	to	15	minutes.	Vigorously	whisk	all	but	1	cup
of	hot	broth	into	flour	mixture.	Bring	to	boil,	then	continue	to	simmer,	stirring
occasionally,	until	gravy	is	lightly	thickened	and	very	flavorful,	about	30
minutes	longer.	Set	aside	until	turkey	is	done.
3.	When	turkey	has	been	transferred	to	carving	board	to	rest,	spoon	out	and



discard	as	much	fat	as	possible	from	pan,	leaving	caramelized	herbs	and
vegetables.	Place	pan	over	2	burners	set	on	medium-high	heat.	Return	gravy	to
simmer.	Add	wine	to	pan	of	caramelized	vegetables,	scraping	up	any	browned
bits.	Bring	to	boil	and	cook	until	reduced	by	half,	about	5	minutes.	Add
remaining	1	cup	turkey	broth,	bring	to	simmer,	and	cook	for	15	minutes;	strain
pan	juices	into	gravy,	pressing	as	much	juice	as	possible	out	of	vegetables.	Stir
reserved	giblets	into	gravy	and	return	to	boil.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to
taste,	and	serve.



SIMPLE	CRANBERRY	SAUCE
MAKES	2¼	CUPS

If	you’ve	got	frozen	cranberries,	do	not	defrost	them	before	use;	just	pick
through	them	and	add	about	two	minutes	to	the	simmering	time.

1				 cup	sugar
¾				 cup	water
¼				 teaspoon	salt
1				 (12-ounce)	bag	cranberries,	picked	through

Bring	sugar,	water,	and	salt	to	boil	in	medium	saucepan,	stirring	occasionally	to
dissolve	sugar.	Stir	in	cranberries;	return	to	boil,	then	reduce	to	simmer	and	cook
until	saucy	and	slightly	thickened,	and	about	two-thirds	of	berries	have	popped
open,	about	5	minutes.	Transfer	to	bowl,	let	cool	to	room	temperature,	and	serve.
(Cranberry	sauce	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	1	week.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Brining	is	our	go-to	technique	when	we	want	moist,	well-seasoned	turkey.	But
with	refrigerator	space	at	a	premium	around	the	holidays,	we	look	to	salting	as	a
space-saving	alternative.	Here,	we	carefully	separate	the	skin	from	the	meat	and
rub	the	meat	thoroughly	with	kosher	salt.	Though	the	results	are	not	quite	as
moist	as	with	a	brined	turkey,	we’ve	discovered	that	salting	and	refrigerating	the
turkey	for	up	to	48	hours	results	in	a	bird	that	is	well	seasoned	throughout,	with
a	wonderful	natural	turkey	texture	and	flavor.
MASSAGE	THE	SALT	Because	the	skin	is	very	high	in	water-impenetrable

fat	we’ve	found	that	it	is	most	effective	to	apply	the	salt	underneath	the	skin	and
in	direct	contact	with	the	meat.	We	like	to	use	our	fingers	or	the	handle	of	a
wooden	spoon	to	separate	the	skin	from	the	meat.
TAKE	YOUR	TIME	Though	salting	is	effective,	it’s	not	always	quick.	If	the

salted	bird	sits	for	only	12	hours,	the	result	is	a	salty	crust	and	bland	inner	meat.
If	the	salt	sits	for	72	or	even	96	hours,	we	find	that	the	birds	turn	out	overly	salty,
with	a	jerkylike	appearance.	But	turkeys	salted	for	24	to	48	hours	are	the	perfect
compromise:	Most	of	the	meat	ends	up	nicely	seasoned	and	is	pretty	moist.
Make	sure	to	rinse	away	excess	salt	before	roasting	to	avoid	salty	pockets,
especially	in	the	deep	valleys	between	the	thighs	and	breast.	Blot	up	the	excess
moisture	to	ensure	crisp,	brown	skin.
ICE	DOWN	THE	BREAST	Ideally,	the	turkey	breast	should	be	cooked	to

160	degrees	and	the	thighs	to	175	degrees,	but	these	two	temperatures	are	hard
to	achieve	simultaneously,	even	when	the	bird	is	roasted	breast	side	down
(giving	it	some	protection	from	the	direct	heat	of	the	oven).	Since	we	find	that
dryness	in	turkey	meat	is	often	concentrated	in	the	lean	breast,	our	solution	is	to
ice	the	breast	before	the	turkey	goes	into	the	oven.	This	way,	the	breast	meat
starts	at	a	lower	temperature	than	the	dark	meat,	and	we	are	able	to	remove	the
turkey	when	the	dark	meat	is	thoroughly	cooked	but	the	breast	isn’t	overdone.
To	do	this,	place	the	bags	of	ice	in	a	roasting	pan	and	lay	the	turkey	breast	side
down	on	top.	Also	place	bags	of	ice	inside	both	the	large	cavity	and	the	neck
area.	It	may	look	strange,	but	it	sure	does	work.
DO	ONE	FLIP	Repeatedly	rotating	a	hot	turkey	is	ultimately	not	worth	it	for

the	minimal	extra	browning	provided.	Still,	one	flip	protects	the	delicate	breast
meat	during	the	first	half	of	the	cooking	time	and	results	in	meat	that	is	moister
—and	that	is	worth	the	bother.



SPICE-RUBBED	PICNIC	CHICKEN
SERVES	8

If	you	plan	to	serve	the	chicken	later	on	the	same	day	that	you	cook	it,
refrigerate	it	after	it	has	cooled,	then	let	it	come	back	to	room	temperature
before	serving.	If	using	large	chicken	breasts	(about	1	pound	each),	cut	each
breast	into	three	pieces.

3				 tablespoons	packed	brown	sugar
2				 tablespoons	chili	powder
2				 tablespoons	paprika
1				 tablespoon	salt
2				 teaspoons	pepper

¼–½				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
5				 pounds	bone-in	chicken	pieces	(split	breasts	cut	in	half,	drumsticks,	and/or	thighs),	trimmed

1.	Set	wire	rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Combine	sugar,	chili	powder,
paprika,	salt,	pepper,	and	cayenne	in	bowl.
2.	Using	sharp	knife,	make	2	or	3	short	slashes	into	skin	of	each	piece	of

chicken,	taking	care	not	to	cut	into	meat.	Coat	chicken	with	spice	mixture,	gently
lifting	skin	to	distribute	spice	mixture	underneath	but	leaving	it	attached	to
chicken.	Transfer	chicken	skin	side	up	to	prepared	wire	rack	(if	desired,	secure
skin	of	each	breast	piece	with	2	or	3	toothpicks	placed	near	edges	of	skin).	Tent
chicken	loosely	with	aluminum	foil	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	6	hours	or	up	to
24	hours.
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.	Roast

chicken	until	smallest	piece	registers	140	degrees,	15	to	20	minutes.	Increase
oven	temperature	to	500	degrees	and	continue	roasting	until	chicken	is	browned
and	crisp	and	breast	pieces	register	160	degrees,	5	to	8	minutes	longer.	(Smaller
pieces	may	cook	faster	than	larger	pieces.	Remove	pieces	from	oven	as	they
reach	correct	temperature.)	Continue	to	roast	thighs	and/or	drumsticks	until	they
register	175	degrees,	about	5	minutes	longer.	Transfer	chicken	to	wire	rack	and
let	cool	completely	before	refrigerating	or	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Cold	barbecued	chicken	is	a	picnic	classic	with	a	host	of	problems,	namely,
sticky	sauce,	flabby	skin,	and	dry	meat.	In	addition	to	solving	those	problems,	we
want	the	flavor	and	appeal	of	great	barbecued	chicken—without	turning	on	the
grill.	To	start,	we	replace	the	sauce	with	a	dry	rub;	by	rubbing	the	spice	mixture
all	over	the	chicken,	even	under	the	skin,	we	achieve	the	robust	barbecue	flavor
we	prefer,	and	the	skin	is	noticeably	less	soggy.	We	also	salt	the	chicken	instead
of	brining	it,	allowing	both	the	salt	and	spices	to	penetrate	the	meat	for	even
deeper	flavor.	We	roast	the	chicken	at	425	degrees	before	cranking	up	the	heat	to
500	to	really	crisp	the	skin.
SLASH	THE	SKIN	Chicken	breasts	and	thighs	possess	some	excess	fat	that

never	quite	renders	properly,	no	matter	how	long	the	chicken	cooks.	Right	out	of
the	oven,	the	fat	is	mildly	annoying;	the	coagulated	mess	you	bite	into	the	next
day,	however,	is	disgusting.	To	solve	this,	first	trim	the	chicken	pieces.	And	then
slit	the	skin	with	a	sharp	knife	(being	careful	not	to	cut	into	the	flesh).	This
provides	escape	hatches	for	the	melting	fat	during	roasting.
SALT	OVER	AND	UNDER	It’s	important	to	apply	the	salty	spice	rub	both

on	and	beneath	the	skin.	This	ensures	that	neither	the	exterior	nor	the	interior
will	be	bland.
CHILL	OUT	We	like	to	place	the	chicken	pieces	directly	on	the	rack	they’ll

be	cooked	on	and	let	the	whole	pan	air-dry	in	the	refrigerator	overnight.	This
allows	the	spice	flavor	to	penetrate	the	meat	alongside	the	salt,	while	also	drying
out	the	skin,	which	will	help	it	to	crisp	in	the	oven.
PIN	DOWN	On	the	breast	pieces,	we	use	toothpicks	to	secure	the	skin,	which

otherwise	shrinks	considerably	in	the	oven,	leaving	the	meat	exposed	and	prone
to	drying	out.	We	think	the	extra	effort	is	justified,	but	you	can	omit	this	step.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CHICKEN	SAFETY

Raw	chicken	can	harbor	bacteria.	Handle	and	cook	with	care.

Although	the	exact	figures	are	a	matter	of	debate,	you	should	assume	that	the	poultry	you	buy	is
contaminated	with	dangerous	bacteria.	Unlike	beef,	chicken	meat	can	actually	harbor	harmful	bacteria	such
as	salmonella	within,	as	well	as	on	the	surface.	At	home,	you	have	two	goals:	to	prevent	the	bacteria	from
contaminating	other	foods	and	to	kill	any	bacteria	present	in	poultry	by	thorough	cooking.
SAFER	HANDLING	Don’t	rinse	poultry	before	cooking.	You	aren’t	killing	any	bacteria	and	you	may	be
spreading	bacteria	around	your	kitchen.	To	season	poultry	without	contaminating	the	salt	box	or	pepper
mill,	mix	a	small	amount	of	salt	and	pepper	together	in	a	small	bowl	and	use	this	mixture	to	season	the	bird;
discard	any	excess	when	you’re	done.	After	working	with	raw	poultry,	wash	all	cutting	boards,	knives,
kitchen	surfaces,	and	your	hands	well	in	hot,	soapy	water.
SAFER	COOKING	Cooking	poultry	to	160	degrees	will	kill	bacteria.	Make	sure	to	take	the	temperature
of	a	whole	bird	in	several	places.	The	thickest	part	of	the	thigh	is	the	last	part	to	come	up	to	temperature.
Note	that	we	recommend	cooking	white	meat	to	160	degrees;	above	165	degrees,	it	becomes	dry.	Dark	meat
has	the	best	texture	when	cooked	to	an	internal	temperature	of	175	degrees.



SALTING	AT	WORK	
ADVANCED	METHOD	(WITH	BAKING	POWDER)
Salt	doesn’t	have	to	work	alone.	A	rub	made	with	salt	and	baking	powder
guarantees	super-crisp	skin	in	poultry.	Why?	Baking	powder	is	composed	of	an
alkali	(a	chemical	compound	that	generates	hydroxide	ions	when	dissolved	in
water)	and	mild	acids.	The	alkali	in	this	case	is	baking	soda,	and	more	than	half
of	the	acids	present	are	formulated	to	be	released	only	when	heated.	Before
cooking,	then,	the	baking	powder	acts	as	a	mild	alkali,	prodding	some	of	the
proteins	and	fat	in	the	chicken	skin	to	break	down,	as	well	as	speeding	up	the
dehydration	of	the	skin.	The	combination	of	a	more	alkaline	environment	and
weakened	protein	and	fat	accelerates	the	Maillard	reaction	during	roasting	for
crisper,	more	flavorful	skin.	An	overnight	rub	works	best	for	a	plain	roast	bird.	A
one-hour	rub	dries	out	the	skin	on	birds	we	brush	with	a	sticky	glaze.



CRISP	ROAST	CHICKEN
SERVES	3	TO	4

The	recipe	requires	salting	the	chicken	for	at	least	12	hours.	The	sheet	of	foil
between	the	roasting	pan	and	V-rack	will	keep	drippings	from	burning	and
smoking.

1				 (3½-to	4-pound)	whole	chicken,	giblets	discarded
1½				 teaspoons	salt
1				 teaspoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	pepper

1.	Place	chicken	breast	side	down	on	counter.	Insert	tip	of	sharp	knife	to	make
four	1-inch	incisions	along	back	of	chicken.	Using	your	fingers,	gently	loosen
skin	covering	breast	and	thighs.	Using	metal	skewer,	poke	15	to	20	holes	in	fat
deposits	on	top	of	breast	and	thighs.	Tuck	wings	behind	back.
2.	Combine	salt,	baking	powder,	and	pepper	in	bowl.	Pat	chicken	dry	with

paper	towels	and	sprinkle	evenly	all	over	with	salt	mixture.	Rub	in	mixture	with
hands,	coating	entire	surface	evenly.	Set	chicken	breast	side	up	in	V-rack	set	in
rimmed	baking	sheet	and	refrigerate,	uncovered,	for	12	to	24	hours.
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	Using

paring	knife,	poke	20	holes	about	1½	inches	apart	in	16	by	12-inch	piece	of
aluminum	foil.	Place	foil	loosely	in	roasting	pan.	Flip	chicken	breast	side	down
and	set	V-rack	in	prepared	pan	on	top	of	foil.	Roast	chicken	for	25	minutes.
4.	Remove	pan	from	oven.	Using	2	large	wads	of	paper	towels,	rotate	chicken

breast	side	up.	Continue	to	roast	until	breast	registers	135	degrees,	15	to	25
minutes.
5.	Increase	oven	temperature	to	500	degrees.	Continue	to	roast	chicken	until

skin	is	golden	brown	and	crisp,	breast	registers	160	degrees,	and	thighs	register
175	degrees,	10	to	20	minutes.	Transfer	chicken	to	carving	board	and	let	rest	for
20	minutes.	Carve	and	serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	modify	our	basic	roast	chicken	recipe	here	to	produce	even	crisper	skin.	By
mixing	baking	powder	with	the	salt	rub,	we	create	an	alkaline	environment	that
helps	to	speed	up	the	Maillard	reaction	and	produce	a	browner	poultry	skin.	The
baking	powder	helps	to	dehydrate	the	chicken	skin	and	also	reacts	with	the
proteins	and	fat	in	chicken	skin	to	produce	a	crunchier	texture.
PICK	THE	RIGHT	CHICKEN	We	almost	always	use	a	high-quality

chicken	from	Bell	&	Evans.	But	we	tested	this	recipe	using	a	regular
supermarket	brand,	and	the	skin	did	not	brown	as	much	and	the	meat	tasted
bland.	When	we	read	the	label—“Contains	up	to	4	percent	retained	water”—we
understood	why.	Unlike	Bell	&	Evans	chickens,	which	are	air-chilled	soon	after
slaughtering	in	order	to	cool	to	a	safe	temperature,	most	supermarket	birds	are
submerged	in	a	34-degree	chlorinated	water	bath.	According	to	the	USDA’s
Agricultural	Research	Service,	chickens	can	absorb	up	to	12	percent	of	this
additional	moisture;	the	amount	drops	to	about	4	percent	by	the	time	they	are
sold.	Air-chilled	chickens,	however,	are	not	exposed	to	water	and	do	not	absorb
additional	moisture,	which	helps	with	their	concentrated	flavor	and	better
browning	of	their	skin.
PUNCH	HOLES	Soggy	chicken	skin	is	often	caused	by	poorly	rendered	fat,

which	accumulates	under	the	skin	with	nowhere	to	go.	The	excess	fat	and	juices
need	an	escape	route.	We	poke	holes	in	the	fat	deposits	of	each	breast	and	thigh.
(Look	for	yellow	pockets	of	fat	under	the	skin,	which	will	look	opaque	rather
than	translucent.)
LOOSEN	THE	SKIN	Sometimes	holes	aren’t	enough:	To	allow	fat	to	flow

freely	from	the	roasting	chicken,	we	separate	the	skin	from	the	meat	over	much
of	the	bird.	To	do	this,	run	your	hand	between	the	meat	and	the	skin	(making
sure	not	to	tear	it).	Also,	cut	a	few	holes	near	the	back	of	the	bird	to	provide
extra-large	channels	for	the	rendering	fat	to	drip	down	and	escape.
USE	A	HOT	OVEN	We	cook	this	bird	in	a	relatively	hot	oven:	450	degrees

for	the	majority,	and	then	500	for	the	last	few	minutes	to	really	crisp	up	the	skin.
Starting	the	chicken	breast	side	down	and	flipping	it	midway	through	cooking
protects	the	meat	and	cooks	it	gently	enough	to	keep	it	tender	and	juicy.
PROTECT	WITH	A	FOIL	SHIELD	Though	the	high	heat	can	cause	these

escaped	juices	to	burn,	creating	clouds	of	smoke,	we	can	fix	this	by	placing	a
sheet	of	aluminum	foil	with	holes	punched	in	it	under	the	chicken	to	shield	the
rendered	fat	from	the	direct	oven	heat.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SKIN	CONDITIONING

Baking	powder	helps	to	make	poultry	skin	crisp	and	brown.

To	demonstrate	the	effects	of	our	advanced	salting	method,	we	removed	two	pieces	of	skin	from	two
chickens.	One	piece	was	left	au	naturel	while	the	other	was	conditioned	with	a	rub	of	baking	powder	and
salt	and	allowed	to	dry	out	overnight	in	the	refrigerator.	We	then	roasted	the	two	pieces	of	skin	and	found
that	the	conditioned	skin	was	both	crisper	and	browner	than	the	untreated	skin.

	
AU	NATUREL
Soft	and	soggy

	
CONDITIONED
Crisp	and	brown



GLAZED	ROAST	CHICKEN
SERVES	4	TO	6

For	best	results,	use	a	16-ounce	can	of	beer.	A	larger	can	will	work,	but	avoid
using	a	12-ounce	can,	as	it	will	not	support	the	weight	of	the	chicken.	A	vertical
poultry	roaster	can	be	used	in	its	place,	but	we	recommend	only	using	a	model
that	can	be	placed	in	a	roasting	pan.	Taste	your	marmalade	before	using	it;	if	it
is	overly	sweet,	reduce	the	amount	of	maple	syrup	in	the	glaze	by	2	tablespoons.

CHICKEN
1				 (6-to	7-pound)	whole	chicken,	giblets	discarded

2½				 teaspoons	salt
1				 teaspoon	baking	powder
1				 teaspoon	pepper
1				 (16-ounce)	can	beer

GLAZE
1				 teaspoon	cornstarch
1				 tablespoon	water,	plus	extra	as	needed
½				 cup	maple	syrup
½				 cup	orange	marmalade
¼					 cup	cider	vinegar
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
2				 tablespoons	Dijon	mustard
1				 teaspoon	pepper

1.	FOR	THE	CHICKEN:	Place	chicken	breast	side	down	on	counter.	Insert
tip	of	sharp	knife	to	make	four	1-inch	incisions	along	back	of	chicken.	Using
your	fingers,	gently	loosen	skin	covering	breast	and	thighs.	Using	metal	skewer,
poke	15	to	20	holes	in	fat	deposits	on	top	of	breast	and	thighs.	Tuck	wings
behind	back.
2.	Combine	salt,	baking	powder,	and	pepper	in	bowl.	Pat	chicken	dry	with

paper	towels	and	sprinkle	evenly	all	over	with	salt	mixture.	Rub	in	mixture	with
hands,	coating	entire	surface	evenly.	Set	chicken,	breast	side	up,	on	wire	rack	set



in	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	refrigerate,	uncovered,	for	30	minutes	to	1	hour.
Meanwhile,	adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.
3.	Open	beer	can	and	pour	out	(or	drink)	about	half	of	liquid.	Spray	can	lightly

with	vegetable	oil	spray	and	place	in	middle	of	roasting	pan.	Slide	chicken	over
can	so	drumsticks	reach	down	to	bottom	of	can,	chicken	stands	upright,	and
breast	is	perpendicular	to	bottom	of	pan.	Roast	chicken	until	skin	starts	to	turn
golden	and	breast	registers	140	degrees,	1¼	to	1½	hours.	Carefully	remove
chicken	and	pan	from	oven	and	increase	oven	temperature	to	500	degrees.
4.	FOR	THE	GLAZE:	While	chicken	cooks,	stir	cornstarch	and	water

together	in	bowl	until	no	lumps	remain.	Bring	syrup,	marmalade,	vinegar,	butter,
mustard,	and	pepper	to	simmer	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium-low	heat	and
cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	reduced	to	¾	cup,	6	to	8	minutes.	Slowly	whisk
in	cornstarch	mixture;	return	to	simmer	and	cook	for	1	minute.	Remove	pan
from	heat.
5.	When	oven	has	come	to	temperature,	place	1½	cups	water	in	bottom	of	pan

and	return	chicken	to	oven.	Roast	until	entire	chicken	skin	is	browned	and	crisp,
breast	registers	160	degrees,	and	thighs	register	175	degrees,	24	to	30	minutes.
Check	chicken	halfway	through	roasting;	if	top	is	becoming	too	dark,	place	7-
inch	square	piece	of	foil	over	neck	and	wingtips	of	chicken	to	prevent	burning
and	continue	to	roast	(if	pan	begins	to	smoke	and	sizzle,	add	additional	½	cup
water	to	pan).
6.	Brush	chicken	with	¼	cup	glaze	and	continue	to	roast	until	browned	and

sticky,	about	5	minutes.	(If	glaze	has	become	stiff,	return	to	low	heat	to	soften.)
Carefully	remove	chicken	from	oven,	transfer	chicken,	still	on	can,	to	carving
board,	and	brush	with	¼	cup	glaze.	Let	rest	for	20	minutes.
7.	While	chicken	rests,	strain	juices	from	pan	through	fine-mesh	strainer	into

fat	separator;	allow	liquid	to	settle	for	5	minutes.	Whisk	½	cup	juices	into
remaining	¼	cup	glaze	in	saucepan	and	set	over	low	heat.	Using	2	large	wads	of
paper	towels,	carefully	lift	chicken	off	can	and	onto	carving	board.	Carve
chicken,	adding	any	accumulated	juices	to	sauce.	Serve,	passing	sauce
separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Glazed	roast	chicken	sounds	simple	but	actually	presents	a	host	of	troubles,	as
the	problems	inherent	in	roasting	chicken	(dry	breast	meat,	flabby	skin,	big
deposits	of	fat	under	the	skin)	are	compounded	by	the	glaze	(won’t	stick	to	the
meat,	burns	in	patches,	introduces	moisture	to	already	flabby	skin).	We	wanted
an	evenly	glazed	chicken	with	crisp	skin	and	moist	meat.	To	dehydrate	the	skin
enough	for	the	glaze	to	stick,	we	separate	it	from	the	meat	and	poke	holes	in	the
fat	deposits	to	allow	rendered	fat	to	escape,	then	rub	the	skin	with	salt	and
baking	powder.	Resting	the	roasted	bird	before	blasting	it	with	heat	results	in
burnished	skin.
ROAST	VERTICAL	While	vertically	roasting	a	chicken	is	a	technique

usually	associated	with	the	grill,	we	use	it	here	to	help	us	glaze	the	entire	bird
evenly.	Though	we	could	use	a	vertical	roaster,	there’s	a	simpler	answer:	a	beer
can.	After	allowing	the	chicken	to	rest	with	its	rub	for	an	hour,	straddle	the
chicken	on	top	of	a	can	of	beer	(after	pouring	out,	or	drinking,	about	half).	Place
it	in	a	roasting	pan,	and	put	it	in	the	oven.	This	will	reduce	any	awkward
flipping,	allow	you	to	glaze	every	nook	and	cranny	with	ease,	and	let	the	fat	drip
freely	from	the	bird.
USE	BEER	CAN	OR	VERTICAL	ROASTER	Because	the	interiors	of	beer

cans	are	coated	with	an	epoxy	that	contains	bisphenol	A	(BPA),	which	some
studies	have	linked	to	cancer	and	other	harmful	health	effects,	we	wondered	if
cooking	a	chicken	on	an	open	can	was	really	a	good	idea.	To	test	this,	we	roasted
two	whole	birds,	one	set	on	an	open	beer	can	containing	6	ounces	of	beer	and	the
other	on	a	stainless	steel	vertical	roaster	with	the	same	amount	of	beer	poured
into	the	reservoir.	After	roasting	the	chickens,	we	collected	their	drippings	and
stripped	each	carcass,	grinding	the	meat	and	skin	to	create	homogeneous
samples.	We	sent	the	samples	to	a	lab	to	be	evaluated.
In	each	chicken,	the	BPA	measured	less	than	20	micrograms	per	kilogram,

leading	us	to	believe	that	the	beer	can	cooking	method	is	safe.	(The	Food	and
Drug	Administration’s	current	standard	for	exposure	is	50	micrograms	per
kilogram	of	body	weight	for	adults,	or	3,400	micrograms	per	day	for	a	150-
pound	person.)	For	those	who	have	any	remaining	concerns,	there	is	always	the
vertical	roaster,	which	works	just	as	well	as	a	low-tech	option.
REDUCE	THE	GLAZE	Most	glazed	chicken	recipes	call	for	a	watery	glaze

that	slowly	reduces	and	thickens	as	the	bird	cooks—a	hindrance	when	you’re
trying	to	crisp	up	the	skin.	Instead,	we	reduce	the	glaze	on	the	stovetop	before
applying	it	to	the	bird.	This	way,	we	can	wait	to	apply	it	until	the	very	end,	when



it	won’t	ruin	the	texture	of	the	skin.	We	thicken	the	glaze	with	cornstarch	to	help
it	adhere	to	the	bird.



OLD-FASHIONED	STUFFED	ROAST	TURKEY
SERVES	10	TO	12

This	recipe	is	designed	for	a	natural	turkey,	not	treated	with	salt	or	chemicals.	If
using	a	self-basting	turkey	(such	as	a	frozen	Butterball)	or	kosher	turkey,	do	not
salt	in	step	1.	This	recipe	was	developed	and	tested	using	Diamond	Crystal
kosher	salt.	If	you	have	Morton	kosher	salt,	which	is	denser	than	Diamond
Crystal,	use	only	2¼	teaspoons	of	salt	in	the	cavity,	1	teaspoon	of	salt	for	each
half	of	the	breast,	and	1	teaspoon	of	salt	per	leg.	Table	salt	is	not	recommended
for	this	recipe	for	salting	the	turkey	because	it	is	too	fine.	Look	for	salt	pork	that
is	roughly	equal	parts	fat	and	lean	meat.	Serve	with	Giblet	Pan	Gravy,	if	desired.
The	bread	for	the	stuffing	can	be	toasted	up	to	one	day	in	advance.	If	you	prefer,
replace	the	Classic	Herb	Stuffing	with	the	Dried	Fruit	and	Nut	Stuffing	(recipe
follows).

1				 (12-to	14-pound)	turkey,	neck,	giblets,	and	tailpiece	removed	and	reserved	for	gravy
3				 tablespoons	plus	2	teaspoons	kosher	salt
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder
1				 (36-inch)	square	cheesecloth,	folded	into	quarters

CLASSIC	HERB	STUFFING
1½				 pounds	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	cut	into	½-inch	cubes	(12	cups)
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 onion,	chopped	fine
2				 celery	ribs,	minced
1				 teaspoon	salt
1				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	thyme
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	marjoram
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	sage

1½				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 large	eggs

12				 ounces	salt	pork,	cut	into	¼-inch-thick	slices	and	rinsed
1				 recipe	Giblet	Pan	Gravy



1.	FOR	THE	TURKEY:	Use	your	fingers	or	thin	wooden	spoon	handle	to
gently	loosen	skin	covering	breast,	thighs,	drumsticks,	and	back;	avoid	breaking
skin.	Rub	1	tablespoon	salt	evenly	inside	cavity	of	turkey,	1½	teaspoons	salt
under	skin	of	each	side	of	breast,	and	1½	teaspoons	salt	under	skin	of	each	leg.
Wrap	turkey	tightly	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	24	hours	or	up
to	48	hours.
2.	FOR	THE	STUFFING:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven

to	250	degrees.	Spread	bread	cubes	in	single	layer	on	rimmed	baking	sheet;	bake
until	edges	have	dried	but	centers	are	slightly	moist	(cubes	should	yield	to
pressure),	about	45	minutes,	stirring	several	times	during	baking.	(Bread	can	be
toasted	up	to	1	day	in	advance.)	Transfer	dried	bread	to	large	bowl.
3.	While	bread	dries,	melt	butter	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.

Add	onion,	celery,	salt,	and	pepper	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until
vegetables	are	softened	and	lightly	browned,	5	to	7	minutes.	Stir	in	thyme,
marjoram,	and	sage	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Add	vegetable
mixture	to	bowl	with	dried	bread;	add	1	cup	broth	and	toss	until	evenly
moistened	(you	should	have	about	12	cups	stuffing).
4.	Remove	turkey	from	refrigerator	and	pat	dry,	inside	and	out,	with	paper

towels.	Using	metal	skewer,	poke	15	to	20	holes	in	fat	deposits	on	top	of	breast
halves	and	thighs,	4	to	5	holes	in	each	deposit.	Tuck	wings	behind	back.
5.	Increase	oven	temperature	to	325	degrees.	Combine	remaining	2	teaspoons

kosher	salt	and	baking	powder	in	bowl.	Sprinkle	surface	of	turkey	with	salt
mixture	and	rub	in	mixture	with	hands,	coating	entire	surface	evenly.	Line	turkey
cavity	with	cheesecloth,	pack	with	4	to	5	cups	stuffing,	and	tie	ends	of
cheesecloth	together.	Cover	remaining	stuffing	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate.
Using	kitchen	twine,	loosely	tie	turkey	legs	together.	Place	turkey	breast	side
down	in	V-rack	set	in	roasting	pan	and	drape	salt	pork	slices	over	back.
6.	Roast	turkey	until	breast	registers	130	degrees,	2	to	2½	hours.	Remove	pan

from	oven	(close	oven	door	to	retain	oven	heat)	and	increase	oven	temperature
to	450	degrees.	Transfer	turkey	in	V-rack	to	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Remove	and
discard	salt	pork.	Using	2	large	wads	of	paper	towels,	rotate	turkey	breast	side
up.	Cut	twine	binding	legs	and	remove	stuffing	bag;	empty	into	reserved	stuffing
in	bowl.	Pour	drippings	from	roasting	pan	into	fat	separator	and	reserve	for
gravy,	if	making.
7.	Once	oven	has	come	to	temperature,	return	turkey	in	V-rack	to	pan	and

roast	until	skin	is	golden	brown	and	crisp,	breast	registers	160	degrees,	and
thighs	register	175	degrees,	about	45	minutes,	rotating	pan	halfway	through



roasting.	Transfer	turkey	to	carving	board	and	let	rest,	uncovered,	for	30
minutes.
8.	While	turkey	rests,	reduce	oven	temperature	to	400	degrees.	Whisk	eggs

and	remaining	½	cup	broth	from	stuffing	recipe	together	in	bowl.	Pour	egg
mixture	over	stuffing	and	toss	to	combine,	breaking	up	any	large	chunks;	spread
stuffing	into	buttered	13	by	9-inch	baking	dish.	Bake	until	stuffing	registers	165
degrees	and	top	is	golden	brown,	about	15	minutes.	Carve	turkey	and	serve	with
stuffing	and	gravy.



DRIED	FRUIT	AND	NUT	STUFFING
MAKES	ABOUT	12	CUPS

Dried	cranberries	can	be	substituted	for	the	raisins.

1½				 pounds	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	cut	into	½-inch	cubes	(12	cups)
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 onion,	chopped	fine
2				 celery	ribs,	minced
1				 teaspoon	salt
1				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	thyme
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	marjoram
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	sage
1				 cup	raisins
1				 cup	dried	apples,	chopped	fine
1				 cup	walnuts,	chopped	coarse

1½				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
3				 large	eggs

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	250	degrees.	Spread
bread	cubes	in	single	layer	on	rimmed	baking	sheet;	bake	until	edges	have	dried
but	centers	are	slightly	moist	(cubes	should	yield	to	pressure),	about	45	minutes,
stirring	several	times	during	baking.	(Bread	can	be	toasted	up	to	1	day	in
advance.)	Transfer	dried	bread	to	large	bowl	and	increase	oven	temperature	to
325	degrees.
2.	While	bread	dries,	melt	butter	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.

Add	onion,	celery,	salt,	and	pepper	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until
vegetables	are	softened	and	lightly	browned,	5	to	7	minutes.	Stir	in	thyme,
marjoram,	and	sage	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Add	vegetable
mixture,	raisins,	dried	apples,	and	walnuts	to	bowl	with	dried	bread;	add	1	cup
broth	and	toss	until	evenly	moistened	(you	should	have	about	12	cups	stuffing).
3.	Use	stuffing	as	directed	in	Old-Fashioned	Stuffed	Roast	Turkey,	adding

eggs	and	remaining	½	cup	broth	in	step	8.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Stuffing	a	turkey	generally	complicates	the	matter	of	properly	cooking	the	bird;
still,	we	couldn’t	help	but	wonder	if	there	was	a	way	to	have	it	all—juicy	meat,
burnished	skin,	richly	flavored	stuffing,	and	drippings	suitable	for	gravy.	For
crisp	skin,	we	opt	to	salt	the	bird	rather	than	brine	it,	and	using	a	minimal
amount	of	salt	ensures	the	gravy	won’t	be	too	salty.	Unlike	in	the	Roast	Salted
Turkey	recipe,	we	also	rub	the	skin	with	a	mixture	of	baking	powder	and	salt	for
crispier	skin.	As	in	the	Crisp	Roast	Chicken	recipe,	we	poke	holes	in	the	skin	to
help	render	the	fat.
SALT	GENTLY	In	the	past,	we’ve	used	as	many	as	5	tablespoons	of	salt	on

the	bird,	but	this	makes	it	impossible	to	create	a	gravy	from	the	drippings
without	rinsing	off	some	salt.	Therefore,	we	lower	the	total	amount	of	salt	used
here	to	3	tablespoons.	This	allows	for	a	gravy	made	from	the	drippings	that
won’t	make	tasters	wince	but	still	allows	for	juicy	and	tender	meat	when	roasted
wisely.
DRAPE	WITH	SALT	PORK	Inspired	by	the	once-popular	technique	of

barding,	or	wrapping	lean	meat	with	fattier	meat,	we	drape	the	turkey	with
pieces	of	salt	pork.	The	salt	pork	enhances	the	turkey	without	making	its
presence	too	clear.	To	fix	the	problem	of	smoking	in	the	oven,	we	remove	the
salt	pork	and	drain	the	drippings	from	the	roasting	pan	before	cranking	up	the
heat	and	returning	the	bird	to	the	oven.
V-RACK	IT	A	V-rack	is	important	for	two	reasons.	First,	the	rack	holds	the

turkey	in	position	during	roasting	and	keeps	it	from	rolling	to	one	side	or	the
other.	Second,	it	elevates	the	meat	above	the	roasting	pan,	allowing	air	to
circulate	and	promoting	even	cooking	and	browning.	If	you	don’t	own	a	V-rack,
cooking	grates	from	a	gas	stove	can	be	used	to	create	a	makeshift	roasting	rack.
Wrap	two	stove	grates	with	aluminum	foil	and	then	use	a	paring	knife	or	skewer
to	poke	holes	in	the	foil	so	that	juices	can	drip	down	into	the	pan	as	the	bird
roasts.	Place	the	grates	in	the	roasting	pan,	leaning	them	against	the	sides	of	the
pan	so	that	the	bottoms	of	the	grates	meet	to	create	a	V	shape.	Roast	the	turkey
as	usual.
COOK	LOW,	THEN	HIGH	Starting	the	turkey	in	a	low	oven	and	then

cranking	up	the	heat	allows	us	to	cook	the	large	turkey	evenly,	yielding	breast
meat	that	is	moist	and	tender.	We	crank	the	temperature	to	450	to	give	it	a	final
blast	of	skin-crisping	heat	and	bring	the	center	up	to	temperature.
STUFF,	THEN	UNSTUFF	To	solve	the	age-old	stuffing	dilemma	(getting



the	stuffing	to	reach	a	safe	165	degrees	while	not	overcooking	the	white	meat),
we	remove	the	stuffing	(moistened	with	broth	and	no	eggs,	which	would	cause
the	stuffing	to	be	too	firm	too	early)	from	the	turkey	when	the	meat	is	nearly
cooked	through.	Because	it	is	saturated	with	turkey	juices,	we	are	able	to	mix
this	stuffing	with	the	remaining	stuffing	(the	portion	that	didn’t	fit	in	the	bird)	so
that	every	bite	of	stuffing	is	infused	with	turkey	flavor.	We	add	eggs	to	this	mix,
and	then	cook	all	of	it	together	in	a	baking	dish	until	it’s	crisped	up	and	at	a	safe
temperature.	The	timing	works	well	because	the	stuffing	can	crisp	up	while	the
turkey	rests.



BUTTERFLIED	TURKEY	WITH	CRANBERRY-MOLASSES	GLAZE
SERVES	10	TO	12

If	using	a	self-basting	turkey	or	kosher	turkey,	do	not	salt	in	step	1.	Table	salt	is
not	recommended	for	this	recipe	because	it	is	too	fine.	If	you	have	a	V-rack	that,
when	inverted,	still	fits	into	your	roasting	pan,	place	the	turkey	on	that	rather
than	on	the	onions.

TURKEY
1				 (12-to	14-pound)	turkey,	neck,	giblets,	and	tailpiece	discarded
					 Kosher	salt	and	pepper
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder
2				 large	onions,	halved

GLAZE
3				 cups	apple	cider
1				 cup	frozen	or	fresh	cranberries
½				 cup	molasses
½				 cup	cider	vinegar
1				 tablespoon	Dijon	mustard
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	2	pieces	and	chilled

1.	FOR	THE	TURKEY:	Using	kitchen	shears,	cut	along	both	sides	of
backbone	to	remove	it.	Flatten	breastbone	and	tuck	wings	underneath.	Use	your
fingers	or	thin	wooden	spoon	handle	to	gently	loosen	skin	covering	breast,
thighs,	drumsticks,	and	back;	avoid	breaking	skin.	Using	metal	skewer,	poke	15
to	20	holes	in	fat	deposits	on	top	of	breast	and	thighs,	4	to	5	holes	in	each
deposit.	Rub	bone	side	of	turkey	evenly	with	2	teaspoons	salt	and	1	teaspoon
pepper.	Flip	turkey	skin	side	up	and	rub	1	tablespoon	salt	evenly	under	skin.
Tuck	wings	under	turkey.	Push	legs	up	to	rest	on	lower	portion	of	breast	and	tie
legs	together	with	kitchen	twine.
2.	Combine	1	tablespoon	salt,	1	teaspoon	pepper,	and	baking	powder	in	bowl.

Pat	skin	side	of	turkey	dry	with	paper	towels.	Sprinkle	surface	of	turkey	with	salt
mixture	and	rub	in	mixture	with	hands,	coating	entire	surface	evenly.	Transfer



turkey	to	roasting	pan,	skin	side	up.	Place	1	onion	half	under	each	breast	and
thigh	to	elevate	turkey	off	bottom	of	roasting	pan.	Allow	turkey	to	stand	at	room
temperature	for	1	hour.
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	275	degrees.

Roast	turkey	until	breast	registers	160	degrees	and	thighs	register	175	degrees,
2½	to	3	hours.	Remove	pan	from	oven	and	allow	turkey	to	rest	in	pan	for	at	least
30	minutes	or	up	to	1½	hours.	Thirty	minutes	before	returning	turkey	to	oven,
increase	oven	temperature	to	450	degrees.
4.	FOR	THE	GLAZE:	While	turkey	rests,	bring	cider,	cranberries,	molasses,

vinegar,	mustard,	and	ginger	to	boil	in	medium	saucepan.	Cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	reduced	to	1½	cups,	about	30	minutes.	Strain	mixture	through
fine-mesh	strainer	into	2-cup	liquid	measuring	cup,	pressing	on	solids	to	extract
as	much	liquid	as	possible.	Discard	solids	(you	should	have	about	1¼	cups
glaze).	Transfer	½	cup	glaze	to	small	saucepan	and	set	aside.
5.	Brush	turkey	with	one-third	of	glaze	in	measuring	cup,	transfer	to	oven,	and

roast	for	7	minutes.	Brush	on	half	of	remaining	glaze	in	measuring	cup	and	roast
additional	7	minutes.	Brush	on	remaining	glaze	in	measuring	cup	and	roast	until
skin	is	evenly	browned	and	crisp,	7	to	10	minutes.	Transfer	turkey	to	carving
board	and	let	rest	for	20	minutes.
6.	While	turkey	rests,	remove	onions	from	pan	and	discard.	Strain	liquid	from

pan	into	fat	separator	(you	should	have	about	2	cups	liquid).	Allow	liquid	to
settle	for	5	minutes,	then	pour	into	saucepan	with	reserved	glaze,	discarding	any
remaining	fat.	Bring	mixture	to	boil	and	cook	until	slightly	syrupy,	about	10
minutes.	Remove	pan	from	heat	and	whisk	in	butter.	Carve	turkey	and	serve,
passing	sauce	separately.

BUTTERFLIED	TURKEY	WITH	APPLE-MAPLE	GLAZE
Substitute	½	cup	dried	apples	for	cranberries	and	½	cup	maple	syrup	for
molasses.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
In	this	recipe,	we	butterfly	the	turkey	so	that	all	the	skin	is	facing	up	in	the	oven,
and	thus	much	easier	to	crisp.	The	setup	also	makes	it	much	easier	to	glaze	the
turkey	because	the	bird	is	now	flat.	We	use	a	combination	of	salt	and	baking
powder	to	create	crackling	skin.	We	don’t	add	the	glaze	until	late	in	the	cooking
process	in	order	to	maintain	that	crisp,	browned	exterior.
BUTTERFLY	THE	BIRD	Using	kitchen	shears,	cut	through	the	bones	on

either	side	of	the	backbone,	staying	as	close	as	possible	to	the	backbone,	which
you	should	remove	and	discard.	Flip	turkey	over	and	press	down	firmly	with	the
heels	of	your	hands	to	flatten	the	breastbone.
CRISP	SKIN	AND	SEASONED	MEAT	We	rub	this	bird	with	a

combination	of	salt	and	baking	powder	to	ensure	moist,	tender	meat	and	crisp
skin.	The	salt	helps	dehydrate	the	skin,	while	the	baking	powder	creates	a	more
alkaline	environment	that	promotes	browning	and	helps	break	down	proteins	to
produce	a	crunchier	texture.	To	promote	crispness,	we	loosen	the	skin	from	the
bird’s	thighs	and	breasts	and	poke	holes	in	the	fat	deposits	with	a	skewer;	the
loosening	helps	air	to	circulate	around	the	skin,	which	dries	it	out,	while	the
poking	creates	escape	channels	for	the	rendered	fat.
FASHION	A	ROASTING	RACK	Our	butterflied	turkey	fits	in	a	large

roasting	pan	but	needs	to	be	elevated	to	brown	properly.	You	can	easily	raise	it
by	placing	four	onion	halves	cut	side	down	in	the	pan.	Place	one	onion	half
under	each	breast	and	thigh	to	elevate	the	turkey	off	the	bottom	of	the	pan.
COOK	LOW	AND	SLOW	We	roast	the	bird	slowly	and	gently	in	a	low	oven

(for	more	on	gentle	heat,	see	concept	1)	before	blasting	it	with	high	heat	at	the
very	end	(for	more	on	high	heat,	see	concept	2).	We’ve	found	that	this	is	the	best
way	to	get	evenly	cooked	meat	and	a	nicely	browned	exterior.
GET	THE	GLAZE	RIGHT	A	glossy,	tangy-sweet	glaze	is	the	perfect

complement	to	a	beautifully	bronzed	turkey,	but	it	often	pools	at	the	bottom	of
the	roasting	pan	and	prevents	the	skin	from	crisping.	The	solution	to	avoiding
soggy	skin	is	a	simple	matter	of	timing:	Adding	the	glaze	at	the	outset	of
cooking	leads	to	predictably	flabby	skin,	but	brushing	it	on	toward	the	very	end
of	cooking	works	great.	Molasses	serves	as	the	sticky	base	of	our	glaze,	but	we
first	thin	it	out	with	apple	cider	and	cider	vinegar	and	then	thicken	it	with	some
cranberries	(which	contain	a	natural	thickener	called	pectin).



SALT	101
STRUCTURE
Salt	may	well	be	the	most	important	ingredient	in	cooking.	It	is	one	of	our	five	basic	tastes,	a	nutrient	our
body	cannot	live	without.	It	adds	an	essential	depth	of	flavor	to	food,	and	we	add	it	to	almost	every	single
dish.	Salt	has	the	ability	to	change	the	molecular	makeup	of	food	and	is	used	to	preserve	and	to	add
moisture	to	meat.	It	occurs	naturally,	is	made	from	evaporated	seawater	or	obtained	from	rock	deposits,	and
its	cubic	crystal	shape	can	vary	in	size	depending	on	how	quickly	and	where	the	evaporation	takes	place.
Salt’s	two	basic	ions—sodium	and	chloride—are	small,	nimble	ions	with	positive	and	negative	charges,
respectively,	that	can	easily	penetrate	food.

	



SALT	CRYSTALS
Alternating	sodium	and	chloride	ions	(right)	are	held	together	by	electrostatic	attraction	so	that	they	form	a
cubic	crystal	structure	(left).

BUYING
Whether	mined	from	underground	salt	deposits	or	obtained	by	evaporating	seawater,	salt	in	its	most	basic
form	is	the	same:	sodium	chloride.	What	distinguishes	one	salt	from	another	is	texture,	size,	and	mineral
content.	These	qualities	can	affect	how	a	salt	tastes	(although	only	when	salt	is	used	as	a	garnish	for	food)
as	well	as	how	it	interacts	with	other	foods.

TABLE	SALT	Table	salt,	also	known	as	common	salt,	consists	of	tiny,	uniformly	cube-shaped	crystals
created	during	rapid	vacuum	evaporation.	It	usually	includes	anti-caking	agents	that	help	it	pour	smoothly.
Fine-grain	table	salt	dissolves	easily,	making	it	our	go-to	for	most	applications,	both	sweet	and	savory.
(Avoid	iodized	salt,	which	can	impart	a	subtle	chemical	flavor.)	The	anti-caking	agents	are	insoluble	in
water	so	common	table	salt	does	not	produce	a	clear	solution.

KOSHER	SALT	Coarse-grain	kosher	salt	is	raked	during	the	evaporation	process	to	yield	flaky
aggregates	of	cubic	crystals	originally	used	for	koshering	meat.	Unlike	table	salt,	kosher	salt	doesn’t	contain
any	additives.	Kosher	salt	is	our	top	choice	for	seasoning	meat.	The	large	grains	distribute	easily	and	cling
well	to	the	meat’s	surfaces.	The	two	major	brands	of	kosher	salt—Morton	and	Diamond	Crystal—work
equally	well;	however,	their	particle	sizes	differ	considerably,	and	this	makes	a	difference	when	measuring
by	volume	(see	chart).

SEA	SALT	Sea	salt	is	the	product	of	seawater	evaporation—a	time-consuming,	expensive	process	that
yields	irregularly	shaped,	mineral-rich	flakes	that	vary	in	color	but	only	slightly	in	flavor.	The	presence	of
impurities	in	sea	salt	can	produce	crystal	shapes	other	than	cubes.	Don’t	bother	cooking	with	pricey	sea	salt;
we’ve	found	that	mixed	into	food,	it	doesn’t	taste	any	different	from	table	salt.	Instead,	we	use	it	as	a
“finishing	salt,”	where	its	delicate	crunch	stands	out.	Texture—not	exotic	provenance—is	the	main
consideration	when	buying	sea	salt.	Look	for	brands	boasting	large,	flaky	crystals,	such	as	Maldon	Sea	Salt.



	

HOW	MUCH	SALT	IS	IN	THAT	TEASPOON?
Given	the	various	crystal	and	particle	sizes	and	shapes,	some	brands	of	salt	pack	a	lot	less	into	every
teaspoon	when	compared	with	regular	table	salt.	The	simple	formula	is:
1	teaspoon	table	salt	=	1	½	teaspoons	Morton	kosher	salt	=2	teaspoons	Diamond	Crystal	kosher	salt.

But	to	find	out	just	how	much	less	salt	we	might	be	using	depending	on	the	brand,	we	sent	nine	salts	to	a
laboratory	to	determine	the	exact	weight	of	1	teaspoon	of	each.	As	we	learned,	a	teaspoon	of	Maldon	sea
salt	contains	only	half	the	amount	of	salt	that’s	in	a	teaspoon	of	Morton	table	salt.	The	numbers	on	the	far
right	in	the	table	below	indicate	how	many	teaspoons	of	each	brand	are	needed	to	equal	1	teaspoon	of	table
salt.
Brand:	Maldon	Sea	Salt
Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	3.55	grams
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	2	teaspoons
	
Brand:	Diamond	Crystal	Kosher	Salt
Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	3.60	grams
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	2	teaspoons
	
Brand:	Espirit	du	Sel	Fleur	de	Sel
Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	5.30
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	11⁄3	teaspoons
	
Brand:	Light	Grey	Celtic	Sea	Salt



Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	5.66
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	1¼	teaspoons
	
Brand:	Morton	Coarse	Kosher	Salt
Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	5.80	grams
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	1¼	teaspoons
	
Brand:	Fleur	de	Sel	de	Camargue
Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	5.90	grams
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	1¼	teaspoons
	
Brand:	Morton	Salt	(noniodized)
Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	7.15	grams
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	1	teaspoon
	
Brand:	Morton	Iodized	Salt
Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	7.15	grams
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	1	teaspoon
	
Brand:	La	Baleine	Sea	Salt
Amount	of	Salt	in	1	Tsp.:	7.25	grams
Amount	to	Equal	1	Tsp.	Table	Salt:	1	teaspoon
	

USING
SAFE	SEASONING	To	avoid	contaminating	our	salt	box	when	seasoning	raw	meat,	poultry,	or	fish,

we	mix	fresh	ground	pepper	and	salt	(a	ratio	of	1	part	pepper	to	4	parts	kosher	salt	is	ideal)	in	a	small	bowl
or	ramekin.	This	way	we	can	keep	reaching	into	the	bowl	without	having	to	constantly	wash	our	hands.
(Just	be	sure	to	discard	the	leftovers.)

AVOID	OVERSALTING	Why	do	some	recipes	include	a	specific	amount	of	salt	and	then	instruct	that
you	“season	to	taste”?	It	helps	to	prevent	oversalting.	Because	slight	variations	in	ingredients	and	cooking
times	affect	the	saltiness	of	a	dish,	it’s	best	to	hold	back	on	fully	seasoning	until	the	very	end.

SALT	HIGH	Ever	notice	that	some	chefs	season	food	by	sprinkling	it	from	a	good	foot	above	the
counter?	Is	this	just	kitchen	theatrics,	or	is	there	a	reason	behind	this	practice?	We	sprinkled	chicken	breasts
with	salt	and	ground	black	pepper	from	different	heights—4	inches,	8	inches,	and	12	inches—and	found	the
higher	the	starting	point,	the	more	evenly	the	seasoning	was	distributed.	And	the	more	evenly	the	seasoning
is	distributed,	the	better	food	tastes.	So	go	ahead	and	add	a	little	Jamie	Oliver	flourish	the	next	time	you
season.



CONCEPT	13

Salty	Marinades	Work	Best
Marinating	is	often	regarded	as	a	cure-all	for	bland,	chewy	meat.	Years	of	testing
have	taught	us	that	while	many	marinades	can	bump	up	flavor,	most	will	never
turn	a	tough	cut	tender.	Well,	not	without	the	right	ingredient.	What’s	the	secret
to	a	marinade	that	can	add	complexity	to	steak,	chicken,	and	pork	and	enhance
juiciness?	You	guessed	it:	salt.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
A	marinade	is	a	seasoned,	traditionally	acidic	liquid	in	which	we	soak	meat
before	(and	sometimes	after)	cooking.	On	one	level,	marinating	is	about	getting
as	much	of	the	soaking	liquid	flavors	as	possible	into	(and	on)	a	piece	of	meat.
But	the	effectiveness	of	a	marinade	really	rests	on	salt,	a	key	ingredient	that
plays	much	the	same	role	here	as	it	does	in	brining	(see	concept	11).	After	all,
soaking	meat	in	a	saltwater	solution	is	a	way	to	create	more	juiciness.	To	pump
up	flavor	as	well	as	moisture,	our	marinades	combine	both	approaches,	with
soaking	liquids	that	contain	not	only	lots	of	flavorings	but	so	much	salt	you
might	even	call	them	“brinerades.”	(We	do.)
As	in	a	brine,	salt	in	a	marinade	affects	meat	in	four	ways.	It	restructures	the

protein	molecules	in	the	meat,	creating	gaps	that	fill	with	water	to	increase
juiciness,	as	well	as	loosening	the	bundles	of	muscle	fibers,	making	them	more
tender	and	easier	to	bite	through	and	chew.	In	addition,	the	salt	dissolves	some	of
the	muscle	proteins,	which	act	like	a	sponge	to	soak	up	and	hold	moisture	within
the	gaps.	Salt	also	seasons	the	meat,	enhancing	its	inherent	flavors.	And,	finally,
while	the	salt	is	doing	its	work,	osmosis	causes	water	to	move	across	cell	walls
from	areas	with	a	lower	concentration	of	dissolved	substances	(the	marinade)	to
areas	of	higher	concentration	(the	meat).
Along	with	salt,	it’s	important	to	use	ample	amounts	of	strong,	potent	flavors

in	marinades.	We	can	look	at	this	on	a	molecular	level:	In	a	marinade,	the	salt
will	bind	to	the	muscle	proteins	in	meat,	increasing	the	electric	charge	of	these
proteins	and	making	them	less	attractive	to	electrically	neutral	flavor	molecules.
So	whatever	flavors	do	enter	the	meat,	we	want	them	to	pack	a	punch.
Furthermore,	most	flavor	molecules	in	herbs	and	spices	are	fat-soluble—yet	the
water	in	meat	repels	fat-soluble	flavors.	This	means	that	there	is	very	little	flavor
contribution	from	herbs	and	spices	in	marinades	except	on	the	surface	of	meat,
and	we	must	use	as	many	water-soluble	flavors	in	our	marinades	as	we	can.	(The
characteristic	flavor	compounds	of	onion	and	garlic,	for	example,	are	water-
soluble,	allowing	them	to	passively	migrate	into	meat	along	with	the	water.)
We	also	gravitate	toward	flavor	potentiators	in	our	marinades,	like	the	water-

soluble	glutamates	found	in	ingredients	like	soy	sauce,	which	enter	meat	in	a
manner	similar	to	salt.	Though	also	characterized	as	salt,	glutamates	are	not	the
same	as	sodium	chloride.	In	the	meat,	glutamates	provide	umami	flavor	(see
concept	35)	but	play	no	role	in	holding	moisture.	Sodium	chloride,	also	present
in	soy	sauce,	is	responsible	for	increased	juiciness.	Oil	is	often	a	component	of
marinades,	too,	because	it	dissolves	some	of	the	fat-soluble	flavors	and	helps



them	to	cling	to	the	surface	of	meat	and	even	penetrate	exposed	fat.
But	just	as	important	as	what	you	include	in	a	marinade	is	what	you	leave	out,

most	notably,	acids.	Commonly	thought	to	tenderize,	acids	in	fact	can	make	meat
mushy.	To	tenderize	meat,	you	have	to	break	down	muscle	fiber	and	collagen,
the	connective	tissues	that	make	meat	tough,	thus	increasing	the	meat’s	ability	to
retain	moisture	and	become	easier	to	chew.	While	acidic	ingredients	like	citrus
juice,	vinegar,	yogurt,	buttermilk,	and	wine	do	weaken	muscle	tissue,	their
impact	is	confined	to	the	meat’s	surface.	And	if	left	too	long,	acids	break	down
protein	too	much,	turning	the	outermost	layer	of	meat	mushy,	not	tender.	(Acid
can	also	make	meat	tough.	For	more,	see	“Why	Does	Acid	Make	Meat	Tough
and	Dry?.”)
So	with	proper	timing	and	ingredients,	marinating	can	infuse	flavor	and

juiciness	into	meat.	But	after	all	this	work,	just	how	much	flavor	will	a	marinade
impart?	We	hit	the	test	kitchen	to	find	out.



MARINADES	UP	CLOSE



	
START	THE	SOAK	When	marinating,	meat	is	immersed	in	a	solution	of	water,	flavor	compounds,	fat,



and,	most	important,	salt.



	
AFTER	THE	MARINADE	With	time,	the	water	and	salt	penetrate	to	the	center	of	the	meat	while	the	fat



and	fat-soluble	flavor	compounds	remain	on	the	surface.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	test	the	reach	of	the	flavor	compounds	in	a	marinade,	we	marinated	boneless,
skinless	chicken	breasts	in	four	different	marinades	(based	on	soy,	yogurt,	red
wine,	and	lemon	and	garlic,	and	all	made	without	added	salt)	for	18	hours.	(We
used	zipper-lock	bags	and	pressed	out	the	air	to	ensure	full	contact	between	the
chicken	and	the	marinade.)	Afterward,	we	wiped	off	the	excess	marinade	and
baked	the	chicken	breasts	in	a	300-degree	oven	until	they	reached	160	degrees,
along	with	unmarinated	breasts	as	a	control.	After	the	breasts	rested	for	five
minutes,	we	trimmed	off	the	outer	3	millimeters	of	flesh	(which	is	how	far	we
could	see	the	colorful	marinades	penetrated)	and	tasted	the	remaining	chicken.



THE	RESULTS
An	overwhelming	majority	of	tasters	could	discern	little	or	no	difference	among
the	various	chicken	breasts.	For	all	we	could	tell,	none	of	them	had	been
marinated.	Most	tasters	did	find	the	soy-marinated	chicken	breasts	to	be	juicer
than	the	other	samples,	however.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Contrary	to	popular	belief,	marinades	do	most	of	their	work	on	the	surface	of
meat	or	just	below.	Even	with	prolonged	contact,	marinades	don’t	travel	very	far.
Oil-soluble	flavors,	like	most	in	our	marinades,	are	incapable	of	deeply
penetrating	water-filled	meat.	Only	the	salt	in	the	soy	sauce	traveled	far	enough
for	our	tasters	to	discern	a	difference.	Acting	as	a	brine	(see	concept	11),	the	soy
marinade	created	a	more	tender	and	juicier	piece	of	meat.



THE	SHORT	JOURNEY	OF	A	MARINADE

	
Though	soaked	in	a	soy-based	mixture	for	18	hours,	the	chicken	did	not	absorb	the	dark-colored	flavor
compounds	any	deeper	than	a	few	millimeters	from	the	surface.	When	we	cut	off	the	exterior,	tasters
confirmed	that	salt	had	an	impact	on	the	interior,	but	they	could	not	detect	any	other	flavors	from	the
marinade.



MARINATING	AT	WORK	
SHRIMP
Shrimp	cook	so	quickly	that	developing	flavor	can	be	tricky.	As	a	result,
marinating	is	especially	important.	Here,	we	use	thick,	almost	pastelike
marinades—a	mixture	of	salt,	oil,	and	aromatics—that	really	cling	to	the
individual	shrimp	and	impart	the	optimal	flavor.	The	very	high	concentration	of
salt	works	its	magic	in	two	ways.	First,	it	quickly	enters	the	flesh	of	the	shrimp,
helping	them	to	retain	valuable	juices	during	cooking.	Second,	it	forces	the
flavors	from	aromatics	such	as	garlic	and	ginger	into	the	oil.	This	is	called	the
“salting	out”	effect,	in	which	the	high	concentration	of	salt	forces	even	water-
soluble	compounds	out	of	the	water	into	the	oil.	The	oil	in	the	mix	distributes
those	flavor	compounds	evenly	over	the	flesh	(not	just	the	parts	in	direct	contact
with	the	garlic)	for	shrimp	that	taste	better	than	ever.



SPANISH-STYLE	GARLIC	SHRIMP
SERVES	6

Serve	the	shrimp	with	crusty	bread	for	dipping.	The	dish	can	be	served	directly
from	the	skillet	(make	sure	to	use	a	trivet)	or,	for	a	sizzling	effect,	transferred	to
an	8-inch	cast-iron	skillet	that’s	been	heated	for	2	minutes	over	medium-high
heat.	We	prefer	the	slightly	sweet	flavor	of	dried	chiles	in	this	recipe,	but	¼
teaspoon	of	sweet	paprika	can	be	substituted.	If	sherry	vinegar	is	unavailable,
use	2	teaspoons	of	dry	sherry	and	1	teaspoon	of	distilled	white	vinegar.

14				 garlic	cloves,	peeled
1				 pound	large	shrimp	(26	to	30	per	pound),	peeled,	deveined,	and	tails	removed
½				 cup	olive	oil
½				 teaspoon	salt
1				 bay	leaf
1				 (2-inch)	piece	mild	dried	chile,	such	as	New	Mexican,	roughly	broken,	seeds	included

1½				 teaspoons	sherry	vinegar
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley

1.	Mince	2	garlic	cloves	and	toss	with	shrimp,	2	tablespoons	olive	oil,	and	salt
in	medium	bowl.	Let	shrimp	marinate	at	room	temperature	for	30	minutes.
2.	Meanwhile,	using	flat	side	of	chef’s	knife,	smash	4	garlic	cloves.	Heat

smashed	garlic	with	remaining	6	tablespoons	olive	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over
medium-low	heat,	stirring	occasionally,	until	garlic	is	light	golden	brown,	4	to	7
minutes.	Remove	pan	from	heat	and	allow	oil	to	cool	to	room	temperature.
Using	slotted	spoon,	remove	smashed	garlic	from	skillet	and	discard.
3.	Thinly	slice	remaining	8	garlic	cloves.	Return	skillet	to	low	heat	and	add

sliced	garlic,	bay	leaf,	and	chile.	Cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	garlic	is	tender
but	not	browned,	4	to	7	minutes.	(If	garlic	has	not	begun	to	sizzle	after	3
minutes,	increase	heat	to	medium-low.)	Increase	heat	to	medium-low;	add
shrimp	with	marinade	to	pan	in	single	layer.	Cook	shrimp,	undisturbed,	until	oil
starts	to	gently	bubble,	about	2	minutes.	Using	tongs,	flip	shrimp	and	continue	to
cook	until	almost	cooked	through,	about	2	minutes	longer.	Increase	heat	to	high
and	add	vinegar	and	parsley.	Cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	shrimp	are	cooked
through	and	oil	is	bubbling	vigorously,	15	to	20	seconds.	Serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	a	garlic	shrimp	recipe	that	would	make	six	good-size	appetizer
portions	of	wonderfully	sweet	and	tender	shrimp,	infused	with	deep	garlic	flavor
and	not	drenched	in	oil.	First,	we	chose	a	large	pan	to	accommodate	the	shrimp
in	one	layer	in	a	reduced	amount	of	oil.	Then,	to	get	the	intense	flavor	we
wanted,	we	added	garlic	in	three	ways—including	in	a	marinade,	which	uses
both	oil	and	salt.
USE	GARLIC	THREE	WAYS	We	add	lots	of	garlic	to	this	recipe	to	make

sure	its	heady	aroma	and	flavor	share	equal	billing	with	the	tender	shrimp.	We
use	minced	cloves	in	a	marinade,	smash	whole	cloves	and	brown	them	in	the
cooking	oil	(removing	them	before	the	shrimp	are	added),	and	then	add	slices	to
the	oil	right	before	the	shrimp.	(For	more	on	garlic,	see	concept	31.)
CHOOSE	THE	RIGHT	CHILE	The	authentic	choice	here	is	the	slightly

sweet	cascabel	chile,	which	is	traditionally	used	in	the	kinds	of	gambas	al	ajillo
you	will	order	at	a	Spanish	tapas	restaurant.	The	best	substitute	is	the	New
Mexican	chile	(aka	California	chile,	chile	Colorado,	or	dried	Anaheim	chile),
which	is	far	more	widely	available	and	has	the	same	bright	freshness	as	the
cascabel.	The	last	resort	is	sweet	paprika.	You	won’t	have	any	trouble	finding	it,
but	its	slightly	stale	flavor	cannot	compare	with	the	complex	taste	of	whole	dried
chiles.	Chiles	also	provide	another	advantage	in	pastes	and	rubs.	The	principal
oil-soluble	pungent	flavor	compounds	in	chiles	are	not	as	volatile	as	those	in
most	herbs	and	spices,	so	they	evaporate	less	quickly	from	the	hot	surface	of
meat	and	seafood.	(For	more	on	chiles,	see	concept	32.)
COOK	LOW	AND	SLOW	The	heat	is	low	and	the	cooking	time	relatively

slow	for	this	dish	so	that	we	can	cook	the	shrimp	in	a	single	layer	and	flip	them
only	once.	If	we	were	to	reduce	the	cooking	time	by	using	a	higher	heat,	it	would
be	almost	impossible	to	move	fast	enough	to	flip	all	the	shrimp	without	some	of
them	becoming	woefully	overcooked.	Low	and	slow	guarantees	tender,	well-
cooked	shrimp.	It	also	helps	to	guarantee	that	more	of	the	volatile	flavor
molecules	stay	on	the	shrimp	rather	than	evaporate	into	the	air.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
MARINADE	SUPERHEROES
Oil	and	salt	are	key	components	in	our	marinade.

We	found	that	omitting	either	the	oil	or	the	salt	from	our	marinade	significantly	reduced	garlic	flavor	in	the
cooked	shrimp.	Why?	Oil	protects	and	stabilizes	allicin,	the	compound	in	garlic	that	is	responsible	for	its
characteristic	flavor.	Allicin	is	produced	when	garlic	is	cut	or	crushed,	and	it	quickly	degrades	into	less
flavorful	compounds	when	exposed	to	air.	Once	in	oil,	however,	the	allicin	dissolves	and	is	protected	from
air.	There’s	one	more	advantage	to	oil—it	coats	the	shrimp	and	delivers	flavor	evenly,	not	just	in	areas
directly	in	contact	with	the	minced	garlic.	But	allicin	is	one	of	those	unique	small	molecules	that	is	soluble
in	both	oil	and	water.	So	allicin	will	migrate	into	the	shrimp	along	with	water	from	the	marinade.	Salt
contributes	to	the	process	by	speeding	things	up,	drawing	water	containing	allicin	out	of	the	garlic	at	a
faster	rate	than	allicin	would	migrate	on	its	own.



STIR-FRIED	SHRIMP	WITH	SNOW	PEAS	AND	RED	BELL	PEPPER	IN
HOT	AND	SOUR	SAUCE

SERVES	4

Serve	this	stir-fry	with	Simple	White	Rice.

SAUCE
3				 tablespoons	sugar
3				 tablespoons	distilled	white	vinegar
1				 tablespoon	Asian	chili-garlic	sauce
1				 tablespoon	dry	sherry	or	Chinese	rice	cooking	wine
1				 tablespoon	ketchup
2				 teaspoons	toasted	sesame	oil
2				 teaspoons	cornstarch
1				 teaspoon	soy	sauce

SHRIMP	STIR-FRY
1				 pound	extra-large	shrimp	(21	to	25	per	pound),	peeled,	deveined,	and	tails	removed
3				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
2				 garlic	cloves	(1	minced,	1	sliced	thin)
½				 teaspoon	salt
1				 large	shallot,	sliced	thin
8				 ounces	snow	peas	or	sugar	snap	peas,	strings	removed
1				 red	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	¾-inch	pieces

1.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	small	bowl	and	set
aside.
2.	FOR	THE	STIR-FRY:	Combine	shrimp	with	1	tablespoon	oil,	ginger,

minced	garlic,	and	salt	in	medium	bowl.	Let	shrimp	marinate	at	room
temperature	for	30	minutes.
3.	Combine	sliced	garlic	with	shallot	in	small	bowl.	Heat	1	tablespoon	oil	in

12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add	snow	peas	and
bell	pepper	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	vegetables	begin	to	brown,	1½	to



2	minutes.	Transfer	vegetables	to	medium	bowl.
4.	Heat	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil	over	high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add

shallot	mixture	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	just	beginning	to	brown,	about
30	seconds.	Add	shrimp,	reduce	heat	to	medium-low,	and	cook,	stirring
frequently,	until	shrimp	are	light	pink	on	both	sides,	1	to	1½	minutes.	Stir	sauce
to	recombine	and	add	to	skillet;	return	to	high	heat	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,
until	sauce	is	thickened	and	shrimp	are	cooked	through,	1	to	2	minutes.	Return
vegetables	to	skillet,	toss	to	combine,	and	serve.



STIR-FRIED	SICHUAN-STYLE	SHRIMP	WITH	ZUCCHINI,	RED	BELL
PEPPER,	AND	PEANUTS

SERVES	4

Note	that	this	recipe	is	spicy	and	not	for	the	timid.	If	you	can	find	a	Chinese	long
pepper,	use	it	in	place	of	the	jalapeño.	Broad	bean	chili	paste	is	also	referred	to
as	chili	bean	sauce	or	horse	bean	chili	paste.	If	you	can’t	find	it,	increase	the
amount	of	Asian	chili-garlic	sauce	by	1	teaspoon.	Sichuan	peppercorns,
available	at	Asian	markets	and	some	supermarkets,	have	purplish-red	husks	and
shiny	black	seeds;	it	is	preferable	to	buy	them	with	the	seeds	removed,	as	it’s	the
husk	that	provides	the	aromatic,	gently	floral	fragrance	(and	the	notable
numbing	effect	on	the	tongue).	Serve	with	Simple	White	Rice	(recipe	follows).

SAUCE
2				 tablespoons	dry	sherry	or	Chinese	rice	cooking	wine
1				 tablespoon	broad	bean	chili	paste
1				 tablespoon	Asian	chili-garlic	sauce
1				 tablespoon	distilled	white	vinegar	or	Chinese	black	vinegar
2				 teaspoons	soy	sauce
2				 teaspoons	chili	oil	or	toasted	sesame	oil
1				 teaspoon	sugar
1				 teaspoon	cornstarch
½				 teaspoon	Sichuan	peppercorns,	toasted	and	ground	(optional)

SHRIMP	STIR-FRY
1				 pound	extra-large	shrimp	(21	to	25	per	pound),	peeled,	deveined,	and	tails	removed
3				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
2				 garlic	cloves	(1	minced,	1	sliced	thin)
½				 teaspoon	salt
½				 cup	dry-roasted	peanuts
1				 jalapeño	chile,	stemmed,	halved,	seeded,	and	sliced	thin	on	bias
1				 small	zucchini,	cut	into	¾-inch	dice
1				 red	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	¾-inch	dice
½				 cup	fresh	cilantro	leaves



1.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	small	bowl	and	set
aside.
2.	FOR	THE	STIR-FRY:	Combine	shrimp	with	1	tablespoon	oil,	minced

garlic,	and	salt	in	medium	bowl.	Let	shrimp	marinate	at	room	temperature	for	30
minutes.
3.	Combine	sliced	garlic,	peanuts,	and	jalapeño	in	small	bowl.	Heat	1

tablespoon	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add
zucchini	and	bell	pepper	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	zucchini	is	tender
and	well	browned,	2	to	4	minutes.	Transfer	vegetables	to	medium	bowl.
4.	Add	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil	to	skillet	and	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add

peanut	mixture	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	just	beginning	to	brown,	about
30	seconds.	Add	shrimp,	reduce	heat	to	medium-low,	and	cook,	stirring
frequently,	until	shrimp	are	light	pink	on	both	sides,	1	to	1½	minutes.	Stir	sauce
to	recombine	and	add	to	skillet.	Return	to	high	heat	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,
until	sauce	is	thickened	and	shrimp	are	cooked	through,	1	to	2	minutes.	Return
vegetables	to	skillet,	add	cilantro,	toss	to	combine,	and	serve.



SIMPLE	WHITE	RICE
SERVES	4

You	will	need	a	saucepan	with	a	tight-fitting	lid	for	this	recipe.	(For	more
information	on	cooking	rice,	see	concept	30.)

1½				 cups	long-grain	white	rice
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter	or	vegetable	oil

2¼				 cups	water
1				 teaspoon	salt

1.	Place	rice	in	colander	or	fine-mesh	strainer	and	rinse	under	cold	running
water	until	water	runs	clear.	Place	strainer	over	bowl	and	set	aside.
2.	Melt	butter	in	large	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Add	rice	and	cook,	stirring

constantly,	until	grains	become	chalky	and	opaque,	1	to	3	minutes.	Add	water
and	salt,	increase	heat	to	high,	and	bring	to	boil,	swirling	pot	to	blend
ingredients.	Reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,	and	simmer	until	all	liquid	is	absorbed,
18	to	20	minutes.	Off	heat,	remove	lid	and	place	kitchen	towel	folded	in	half
over	saucepan;	replace	lid.	Let	stand	for	10	to	15	minutes.	Fluff	rice	with	fork
and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Our	typical	high-heat	stir-fry	technique,	which	works	well	with	chicken,	beef,
and	pork,	doesn’t	fly	with	quick-cooking	shrimp.	(The	different	muscle	structure
of	shrimp	requires	cooking	to	an	internal	temperature	about	20	degrees	lower
than	meat	to	avoid	overcooking.)	Here,	we	modify	our	technique	to	produce
plump,	juicy,	well-seasoned	shrimp	in	a	balanced,	flavorful	sauce.	For	our
sauce,	the	heavily	soy-based	brews	we	turn	to	for	meat	stir-fries	are	a	poor
match	with	the	shrimp.	Sweeter	or	spicier	sauces	flavored	with	garlic	and	chiles
are	better	suited,	and	they	reduce	to	a	consistency	that	tightly	adheres	to	the
shellfish.
PEEL	THE	SHRIMP	Chinese	stir-fries	often	work	around	the	problem	of

tough	shrimp	by	cooking	them	shell-on	to	protect	their	delicate	flesh,	but	neither
crunching	into	shrimp	shells	nor	peeling	them	at	the	table	appeals	to	us.	We	use
other	methods	for	tender	shrimp;	make	sure	that	your	shrimp	are	peeled,
deveined,	and	tails	removed.
USE	A	SKILLET,	NOT	A	WOK	To	keep	the	pan	good	and	hot	throughout

the	process	of	this	recipe,	we	use	a	large,	shallow	nonstick	skillet.	(On	a	Western
range,	a	skillet	heats	more	efficiently	than	a	wok	and	provides	maximum	surface
area	for	evaporation.	See	“Skillet	vs.	Wok.”)
REVERSE	THE	ORDER	Traditionally,	stir-fry	recipes	call	for	browning

meat	over	high	heat—often	in	batches—before	removing	and	then	adding	the
vegetables	and	aromatics.	It’s	only	at	the	end	that	you	return	the	protein	to	the
pan.	Here,	however,	we	start	out	cooking	the	vegetables	over	high	heat.	We
remove	them	and	then	turn	the	heat	down	before	adding	the	shrimp.	This	way
the	shrimp,	which	have	a	very	small	window	of	time	before	they’re	overcooked
on	high	heat,	are	cooked	slowly	and	remain	tender	and	juicy.	Once	the	shrimp
are	cooked	through,	we	return	the	vegetables	to	the	pan.



MARINATING	AT	WORK	
BEEF
Marinades	containing	oil,	salt,	and	aromatics	work	wonders	with	beef,	too.	The
salt	acts	as	a	brine,	adding	tenderness	and	seasoning,	while	the	oil	helps	to
intensify	the	flavors	of	the	fat-soluble	spices	and	herbs.



BEEF	STROGANOFF
SERVES	4

Steak	tips,	also	known	as	flap	meat,	are	sold	as	whole	steak,	cubes,	and	strips.
To	ensure	uniform	pieces	that	cook	evenly,	we	prefer	to	purchase	whole	steak
tips	and	cut	them	ourselves.	You	can	substitute	1½	pounds	of	blade	steak	for	the
steak	tips;	if	using,	cut	each	steak	in	half	lengthwise	and	remove	the	gristle	that
runs	down	the	center	before	cooking.	Since	blade	steak	yields	smaller	strips	of
meat,	reduce	the	cooking	time	in	step	3	by	several	minutes.	If	the	mushrooms	are
larger	than	1	inch,	cut	them	into	six	even	wedges.	Serve	the	stroganoff	over
buttered	egg	noodles.

1¼				 pounds	sirloin	steak	tips,	trimmed	and	cut	lengthwise	(with	grain)	into	4	equal	pieces
2				 teaspoons	soy	sauce
1				 pound	white	mushrooms,	trimmed	and	quartered
1				 tablespoon	dry	mustard
2				 teaspoons	hot	water
1				 teaspoon	sugar
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
1				 onion,	chopped	fine
4				 teaspoons	all-purpose	flour
2				 teaspoons	tomato	paste

1½				 cups	beef	broth
				1⁄3 cup	plus	1	tablespoon	white	wine	or	dry	vermouth
½				 cup	sour	cream
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley	or	dill

1.	Using	fork,	poke	each	piece	of	steak	10	to	12	times.	Place	in	baking	dish;
rub	both	sides	evenly	with	soy	sauce.	Cover	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for
at	least	15	minutes	or	up	to	1	hour.
2.	While	meat	marinates,	place	mushrooms	in	medium	bowl,	cover,	and

microwave	until	mushrooms	have	decreased	in	volume	by	half,	4	to	5	minutes
(there	should	be	as	much	as	¼	cup	liquid	in	bowl).	Drain	mushrooms	and	set
aside;	discard	liquid.	Combine	mustard,	water,	sugar,	and	½	teaspoon	pepper	in
small	bowl	until	smooth	paste	forms;	set	aside.



3.	Pat	steak	pieces	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season	with	pepper.	Heat	oil	in
12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Place	steak	pieces	in
skillet	and	cook	until	browned	on	all	sides	and	meat	registers	125	to	130
degrees,	6	to	9	minutes.	Transfer	meat	to	large	plate	and	set	aside	while	cooking
sauce.
4.	Add	mushrooms,	onion,	and	½	teaspoon	salt	to	skillet	and	cook	until

vegetables	begin	to	brown	and	dark	bits	form	on	bottom	of	pan,	6	to	8	minutes.
Add	flour	and	tomato	paste	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	onions	and
mushrooms	are	coated,	about	1	minute.	Stir	in	beef	broth,	1⁄3	cup	wine,	and
mustard	paste	and	bring	to	simmer,	scraping	bottom	of	pan	to	loosen	browned
bits.	Reduce	heat	to	medium	and	cook	until	sauce	has	reduced	slightly	and	begun
to	thicken,	4	to	6	minutes.
5.	While	sauce	is	reducing,	slice	steak	pieces	against	grain	into	¼-inch-thick

slices.	Stir	meat	and	any	accumulated	juices	into	thickened	sauce	and	cook	until
beef	has	warmed	through,	1	to	2	minutes.	Remove	pan	from	heat	and	let	any
bubbles	subside.	Stir	in	sour	cream	and	remaining	tablespoon	wine;	season	with
salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Sprinkle	with	parsley	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	a	beefy	stroganoff	recipe,	we	substitute	sirloin	steak	tips	for	traditional
tenderloin.	Marinating	the	meat	in	soy	sauce	makes	it	as	tender	as	tenderloin.
Pan-roasting	the	meat	in	larger	pieces	develops	rich	flavor,	and	letting	it	rest
before	cutting	it	into	strips	preserves	its	juiciness.	Adding	just	a	touch	of	sour
cream	to	the	sauce	completes	our	ideal	beef	stroganoff	recipe,	by	providing	body
and	tang	without	overwhelming	the	other	flavors.
USE	A	FLAVORFUL	CUT	Traditionally,	tenderloin—a	buttery,	tender	cut—

is	used	in	beef	stroganoff.	But	tenderloin	also	lacks	a	beefy	flavor.	Instead,	we
like	to	use	sirloin	steak	tips	(also	known	as	“flap	meat”),	which	have	an
intensely	beefy	taste.	While	not	tough,	their	texture	is	a	far	cry	from	tenderloin,
which	is	why	we	use	a	marinade,	too.
POKE	FOR	FASTER	ABSORPTION	Poking	holes	in	the	meat	allows	the

marinade	to	penetrate	more	deeply	and	contributes	to	a	more	tender	texture.
MAKE	A	SIMPLE	MARINADE	We	marinate	the	flap	meat	in	soy	sauce,

which	is	so	salty	it	works	just	like	a	brine,	breaking	down	proteins	in	meat	and
helping	the	meat	to	retain	more	juices,	as	well	as	loosening	the	bundles	of
muscle	fibers,	making	them	easier	to	bite	through	and	chew.	Soy	sauce	also
contains	glutamate,	which	boosts	meaty	flavor	(see	concept	35).
SEAR	BIG	PIECES,	THEN	SLICE	We	pan-sear	large	pieces	of	meat	and

cut	them	into	strips	only	after	they	have	browned	and	left	their	flavorful	fond	in
the	pan.	This	way	there	is	enough	time	to	allow	the	meat	to	develop	rich,	dark
fond	without	overcooking.	Moreover,	we	can	let	it	rest	before	slicing,	further
improving	juiciness.
MICROWAVE	MUSHROOMS	Our	recipe	calls	for	a	pound	of	white

mushrooms.	It	can	take	up	to	20	minutes	for	all	their	moisture	to	evaporate	and
they	finally	brown	in	the	pan.	Microwaving	the	mushrooms	before	putting	them
in	the	pan	reduces	the	process	to	a	mere	6	to	8	minutes.
BUILD	FLAVOR	While	many	contemporary	recipes	call	for	ketchup,	we	like

to	use	just	a	bit	of	tomato	paste	stirred	in	after	the	onions	and	mushrooms	brown,
which	brings	subtle	depth	to	the	sauce.	In	addition,	we	use	a	paste	made	of	dry
mustard	bloomed	in	warm	water	and	seasoned	with	sugar	and	black	pepper	to
give	a	little	kick	and	bring	other	flavors	into	focus.	White	wine	adds	brightness,
allowing	the	beef	and	mushrooms	to	shine	through.
TEMPER	THE	SOUR	CREAM	The	acidity	of	sour	cream	causes	its	casein

proteins	to	become	so	unstable	that	exposure	to	even	a	little	heat	makes	them



clump.	For	this	reason,	we	temper	the	sour	cream	by	adding	it	when	the	sauce	is
off	the	heat.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CUTTING	OUT	CURDLING	IN	CULTURED	DAIRY

With	all	of	its	fat,	crème	fraîche	will	not	curdle	when	heated	in	dishes	like	beef	stroganoff.

Dishes	like	beef	stroganoff,	chicken	paprikash,	and	many	of	the	Moroccan	stews	known	as	tagines	wouldn’t
be	complete	without	a	little	sour	cream	or	yogurt	stirred	in	at	the	end.	However,	these	cultured	dairy
products	are	sensitive	to	heat	and	can	easily	curdle	if	the	stew	is	too	hot	or	reheated.	We	wondered	if
another	dairy	product	would	provide	a	more	suitable	tang.

We	stirred	dollops	of	whole-milk	yogurt,	full-fat	sour	cream,	and	crème	fraîche	(which	boasts	much
more	fat)	into	water	that	we	brought	to	just	a	simmer	(185	degrees).	After	letting	the	samples	sit	for	10
seconds,	we	examined	the	liquid	for	signs	of	curdling.

Both	the	yogurt	and	the	sour	ream	mixtures	quickly	curdled,	while	the	crème	fraîche	mixture	remained
perfectly	creamy.

Curdling	occurs	when	excessive	heat	causes	the	whey	proteins	in	dairy	to	denature	(unfold)	and	bind
with	casein	proteins,	forming	clumps	of	larger	proteins.	The	greater	amount	of	butterfat	in	crème	fraîche	(30
to	40	percent,	versus	18	to	20	percent	and	roughly	4	percent	in	sour	cream	and	yogurt,	respectively)	protects
against	this	process	by	more	thoroughly	coating	the	proteins	and	preventing	them	from	binding	together.
Plus,	with	more	fat,	crème	fraîche	has	far	fewer	proteins	to	bind	together	in	the	first	place.	It’s	now	our	go-
to	dairy	product	for	hot	dishes;	in	fact,	we	found	that	crème	fraîche	is	so	resistant	to	curdling	that	it	can
withstand	reheating.	Feel	free	to	replace	sour	cream	in	any	heated	sauce	with	an	equal	amount	of	crème
fraîche.



STEAK	TACOS
SERVES	4	TO	6

For	a	spicier	dish,	add	the	seeds	from	the	chiles.	In	addition	to	the	toppings
suggested	below,	try	serving	the	tacos	with	Sweet	and	Spicy	Pickled	Onions
(recipe	follows),	thinly	sliced	radishes	or	cucumber,	or	salsa.	Warm	tortillas	over
the	medium	flame	of	a	gas	burner	(until	slightly	charred,	30	seconds	per	side),	in
a	dry	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	(until	softened	and	speckled	with	brown
spots,	20	to	30	seconds	per	side),	or	in	two	foil-wrapped	stacks	in	a	350-degree
oven	(for	five	minutes).

HERB	PASTE
½				 cup	fresh	cilantro	leaves
3				 garlic	cloves,	chopped	coarse
3				 scallions,	chopped	coarse
1				 jalapeño	chile,	stemmed,	seeds	reserved,	and	chopped	coarse
½				 teaspoon	ground	cumin
¼				 cup	vegetable	oil
1				 tablespoon	lime	juice

STEAK
1				 (1½-to	1¾-pound)	flank	steak,	trimmed	and	cut	lengthwise	(with	grain)	into	4	equal	pieces
1				 tablespoon	kosher	salt
½				 teaspoon	sugar
½				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil

TACOS
12				 (6-inch)	corn	tortillas,	warmed
					 Fresh	cilantro	leaves
					 Minced	white	or	red	onion
					 Lime	wedges

1.	FOR	THE	HERB	PASTE:	Pulse	cilantro,	garlic,	scallions,	jalapeño,	and



cumin	in	food	processor	until	finely	chopped,	10	to	12	pulses,	scraping	down
sides	of	bowl	as	necessary.	Add	oil	and	process	until	mixture	is	smooth	and
resembles	pesto,	about	15	seconds,	scraping	down	sides	of	bowl	as	necessary.
Transfer	2	tablespoons	herb	paste	to	medium	bowl;	whisk	in	lime	juice	and	set
aside.
2.	FOR	THE	STEAK:	Using	dinner	fork,	poke	each	piece	of	steak	10	to	12

times	on	each	side.	Place	in	large	baking	dish;	rub	all	sides	of	steak	pieces
evenly	with	salt	and	then	coat	with	remaining	herb	paste.	Cover	with	plastic
wrap	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	30	minutes	or	up	to	1	hour.
3.	Scrape	herb	paste	off	steak	and	sprinkle	all	sides	of	pieces	evenly	with

sugar	and	pepper.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat
until	just	smoking.	Place	steak	in	skillet	and	cook	until	well	browned,	about	3
minutes.	Flip	steak	and	sear	until	second	side	is	well	browned,	2	to	3	minutes.
Using	tongs,	stand	each	piece	on	1	cut	side	and	cook,	turning	as	necessary,	until
all	cut	sides	are	well	browned	and	meat	registers	125	to	130	degrees,	2	to	7
minutes.	Transfer	steak	to	cutting	board	and	let	rest	for	5	minutes.
4.	FOR	THE	TACOS:	Using	sharp	chef’s	knife	or	carving	knife,	slice	steak

pieces	against	grain	into	thin	slices.	Transfer	sliced	steak	to	bowl	with	herb
paste–lime	juice	mixture	and	toss	to	coat.	Season	with	salt	to	taste.	Spoon	small
amount	of	sliced	steak	into	center	of	each	warm	tortilla	and	serve,	passing
toppings	separately.



SWEET	AND	SPICY	PICKLED	ONIONS
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS

To	make	this	dish	spicier,	add	the	reserved	chile	seeds	with	the	vinegar.

1				 red	onion,	sliced	thin	(1½	cups)
1				 cup	red	wine	vinegar
				1⁄3 cup	sugar
2				 jalapeño	chiles,	stemmed,	seeds	reserved,	and	cut	into	thin	rings
¼					 teaspoon	salt

Place	onion	in	medium	heatproof	bowl.	Bring	vinegar,	sugar,	jalapeños,	and	salt
to	simmer	in	small	saucepan	over	medium-high	heat,	stirring	occasionally,	until
sugar	dissolves.	Pour	vinegar	mixture	over	onion,	cover	loosely,	and	let	cool	to
room	temperature,	about	30	minutes.	Once	cool,	drain	and	discard	liquid.
(Pickled	onions	can	be	refrigerated	in	airtight	container	for	up	to	1	week.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Steak	tacos	are	great	on	the	grill,	but	we	wanted	to	bring	them	indoors	for	those
times	when	grilling	outside	isn’t	an	option.	Cutting	the	beef	into	long	pieces	and
pan-searing	all	four	sides	gave	us	the	browned	exterior	and	crisp	edges
characteristic	of	grilled	meat.	A	paste	of	oil,	cilantro,	scallions,	garlic,	and
jalapeño	applied	to	the	meat	and	scraped	off	just	before	cooking	gave	our	steak
taco	recipe	a	flavor	boost	without	sacrificing	browning.
STAKE	OUT	THE	STEAK	Traditional	Mexican	recipes	typically	call	for

skirt	or	flank	steak	for	taco	meat,	both	of	which	come	from	the	belly	of	the	cow.
We	also	tried	blade	steak,	which	comes	from	the	shoulder,	and	steak	tips,	from
the	sirloin	of	the	animal.	Flank	steak,	however,	turned	out	to	be	the	best	choice;
it	has	a	nice	beefy	flavor	and,	when	sliced	thin	against	the	grain,	is	quite	tender.
QUARTER	AND	SEAR	In	order	to	maximize	flavor,	we	cut	the	steak

lengthwise	with	the	grain	into	four	long	strips,	about	2½	inches	wide	and	1	inch
thick.	Because	the	strips	are	relatively	thick,	we	are	able	to	brown	them	on	four
sides	rather	than	just	two,	which	gives	us	even	more	exposed	edges	to	become
crisp	and	super-flavored.
SALT	AND	MARINADE	We	slather	our	steak	with	a	wet	pestolike	paste

made	of	cilantro,	scallions,	garlic,	and	jalapeños.	When	coupled	with	salt,	this
oil-based	marinade	provides	plenty	of	fat-soluble	cumin-chile	flavor	on	the
surface	as	well	as	penetrating	water-soluble	flavors	from	the	garlic,	flavoring	it
throughout.	We	reserve	some	of	the	fresh	marinade	to	toss	with	the	steak	after	it
is	sliced.



GRILLED	BEEF	KEBABS	WITH	LEMON	AND	ROSEMARY
MARINADE
SERVES	4	TO	6

If	you	can’t	find	sirloin	steak	tips,	sometimes	labeled	“flap	meat,”	substitute	2½
pounds	of	blade	steak;	if	using,	cut	each	steak	in	half	to	remove	the	gristle.	You
will	need	four	12-inch	metal	skewers	for	this	recipe.	If	you	have	long,	thin	pieces
of	meat,	roll	or	fold	them	into	approximate	2-inch	cubes	before	skewering.

MARINADE
1				 onion,	chopped
				1⁄3 cup	beef	broth
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
3				 tablespoons	tomato	paste
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	rosemary
6				 garlic	cloves,	chopped
2				 teaspoons	grated	lemon	zest
2				 teaspoons	salt

1½				 teaspoons	sugar
¾				 teaspoon	pepper

BEEF	AND	VEGETABLES
2				 pounds	sirloin	steak	tips,	trimmed	and	cut	into	2-inch	chunks
1				 large	zucchini	or	summer	squash,	halved	lengthwise	and	sliced	1	inch	thick
1				 large	red	or	green	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	1½-inch	pieces
1				 large	red	or	sweet	onion,	peeled,	halved	lengthwise,	each	half	cut	into	4	wedges	and	each	wedge	cut

crosswise	into	thirds

1.	FOR	THE	MARINADE:	Place	all	ingredients	in	blender	and	process	until
smooth,	about	45	seconds.	Transfer	¾	cup	marinade	to	large	bowl	and	set	aside.
2.	FOR	THE	BEEF	AND	VEGETABLES:	Place	remaining	marinade	and

beef	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag	and	toss	to	coat;	press	out	as	much	air	as
possible	and	seal	bag.	Refrigerate	for	at	least	1	hour	or	up	to	2	hours,	flipping
bag	every	30	minutes.
3.	Add	zucchini,	bell	pepper,	and	onion	to	bowl	with	reserved	marinade	and



toss	to	coat.	Cover	and	let	sit	at	room	temperature	for	at	least	30	minutes.
4.	Remove	beef	from	bag	and	pat	dry	with	paper	towels.	Thread	beef	tightly

onto	two	12-inch	metal	skewers,	rolling	or	folding	meat	as	necessary	to	maintain
2-inch	cubes.	Thread	vegetables	onto	two	12-inch	metal	skewers,	in	alternating
pattern	of	zucchini,	pepper,	and	onion.
5A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light

large	chimney	starter	mounded	with	charcoal	briquettes	(7	quarts).	When	top
coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	grill.	Set	cooking	grate	in
place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5	minutes.
5B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.	Leave	primary	burner	on	high	and	turn	other	burner(s)	to
medium-low.
6.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	beef	skewers	on	grill	(directly	over	coals

if	using	charcoal	or	over	hotter	side	of	grill	if	using	gas).	Place	vegetable
skewers	on	grill	(near	edge	of	coals	but	still	over	coals	if	using	charcoal	or	over
cooler	side	of	grill	if	using	gas).	Cook	(covered	if	using	gas),	turning	skewers
every	3	to	4	minutes,	until	beef	skewers	are	well	browned	and	register	120	to
125	degrees	(for	medium-rare)	or	130	to	135	degrees	(for	medium),	12	to	16
minutes.	Transfer	beef	skewers	to	platter	and	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil.
Continue	cooking	vegetable	skewers	until	tender	and	lightly	charred,	about	5
minutes	longer;	serve	with	beef	skewers.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Well-marbled	steak	tips,	with	their	beefy	flavor	and	tender	texture,	proved	to	be
the	best	choice	for	our	grilled	beef	kebabs.	To	the	beef’s	marinade,	we	added	salt
for	moisture,	oil	for	flavor,	and	sugar	for	browning.	For	even	more	depth,	we
used	tomato	paste,	a	host	of	seasonings	and	herbs,	and	beef	broth.	We	chose
three	grill	favorites	for	the	vegetables:	peppers,	onions,	and	zucchini.	Grilling
the	beef	kebabs	and	vegetables	separately	allowed	us	to	cook	the	vegetables	at	a
lower	temperature	while	the	beef	seared	over	the	hotter	area.
POWER	UP	THE	MARINADE	As	we’ve	learned,	most	of	the	flavors	in	a

marinade	do	not	penetrate	to	the	center	of	the	meat,	no	matter	how	long	you	soak
it.	But	research	has	shown	that	salt—ordinary	table	salt	as	well	as	sodium
glutamates,	the	naturally	occurring	flavor	enhancers	found	in	many	foods—are
the	exception,	traveling	far	into	meat	chunks	and	ramping	up	taste	as	they	go.
With	this	in	mind,	we	created	a	turbo-charged	marinade	with	three	key
ingredients:	salt,	tomato	paste,	and	beef	broth.	Tomato	paste	is	full	of
glutamates,	which	enhance	that	meaty	flavor.	And	when	we	used	beef	broth
instead	of	only	water,	tasters	raved	about	the	new	depth	of	flavor.	This	is	because
many	commercial	broths	contain	yeast	extract,	a	powerhouse	of	not	one	but	two
kinds	of	flavor	enhancers:	glutamates	and	nucleotides.	The	latter	works	in
synergy	with	the	naturally	occurring	glutamates	in	meat	to	ramp	up	savory	taste
by	as	much	as	20-fold	(for	more	on	glutamates,	see	concept	35).
PICK	THE	RIGHT	CUT	We	tried	five	different	cuts	of	meat	for	this	recipe,

from	pricey	tenderloin	to	bottom	round.	After	cutting	them	all	into	big,	2-inch
pieces	and	cooking	them	on	the	grill,	we	discovered	that	the	tenderloin	was	a
waste	of	money,	as	tasters	found	it	bland,	and	the	bottom	round	was	too	chewy.
The	more	marbled	cuts—skirt	steak,	blade	steak,	and	steak	tips—all	boasted
respectable	flavor,	but	the	looser-grained	steak	tips	outdid	the	others	in	both
beefiness	and	tender	texture.
PUREE	THE	SAUCE	We	mix	our	marinade	up	in	a	blender	so	that	the

flavors	are	optimally	combined.	No	blender?	Don’t	worry.	A	food	processor	will
work	as	well.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	FINDING	FLAP	MEAT
We	prefer	thick,	whole	steak	tips	with	a	longitudinal	grain.

Beef	labeled	“steak	tips”	can	be	cut	from	various	muscles	of	the	cow	and	turned	into	cubes,	strips,	or	steaks.
Our	favorite	kind	is	cut	into	a	steak	that	boasts	a	coarse,	longitudinal	grain.	Butchers	call	this	form	of	steak
tips	“flap	meat”	or	“sirloin	tips.”	Look	for	pieces	that	range	from	1	to	1½	inches	thick.

	
SKIP	THE	STRIPS

Don’t	buy	meat	that’s	been	cut	into	strips	or	cubes—you	can’t	tell	what	you’re	buying.



	
GO	FOR	WHOLE

Look	for	whole	steak	with	a	coarse,	longitudinal	grain	labeled	“sirloin	tips”	or	“flap	meat.”



MARINATING	AT	WORK	
BEFORE—AND	AFTER—COOKING
As	we’ve	seen,	a	salt-based	marinade	will	make	meat	juicier	but	the	flavors	of
the	marinade	are	mostly	confined	to	the	exterior.	Even	prolonged	marinating
doesn’t	really	help.	Marinating	meat	for	a	short	time	before	cooking,	and	then
using	the	marinade	again	after	cooking,	yields	meat	that	is	juicy	and	well
flavored	in	every	bite.	The	quick	premarinade	does	the	tenderizing	work	of	a
brine,	while	the	postmarinade—often	done	while	the	meat	rests—heightens	the
flavor.



CLASSIC	MARINADE	FOR	STEAKS
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	TO	MARINATE	4	TO	6	INDIVIDUAL	STEAKS	OR	ONE	2-

POUND	STEAK

½				 cup	soy	sauce
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
¼				 cup	Worcestershire	sauce
2				 tablespoons	packed	dark	brown	sugar
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced

1½				 teaspoons	pepper
2				 teaspoons	balsamic	vinegar

1.	Combine	soy	sauce,	oil,	Worcestershire,	sugar,	chives,	garlic,	and	pepper	in
medium	bowl.	Remove	¼	cup	marinade	and	combine	with	vinegar	in	small
bowl;	set	aside.
2.	Place	remaining	marinade	and	steaks	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag;	press	out

as	much	air	as	possible	and	seal	bag.	Refrigerate	for	1	hour,	flipping	bag	after	30
minutes	to	ensure	that	steaks	marinate	evenly.
3.	Remove	steaks	from	marinade,	letting	any	excess	marinade	drip	back	into

bag.	Discard	bag	and	marinade.	Grill	steaks	as	desired.
4.	Transfer	steaks	to	shallow	pan	and	pour	reserved	marinade	over	top.	Tent

loosely	with	aluminum	foil	and	let	rest	for	10	minutes,	turning	meat	halfway
through	resting.	Slice	steaks	or	serve	whole,	passing	reserved	marinade	if
desired.



MOLE	MARINADE	FOR	STEAKS
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	TO	MARINATE	4	TO	6	INDIVIDUAL	STEAKS	OR	ONE	2-

POUND	STEAK

½				 cup	soy	sauce
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
2				 tablespoons	packed	dark	brown	sugar
4				 minced	chipotle	chiles	in	adobo	sauce
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced
4				 teaspoons	cocoa

1½				 teaspoons	dried	oregano
1				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 tablespoons	lime	juice

1.	Combine	soy	sauce,	oil,	sugar,	chipotle,	garlic,	cocoa,	oregano,	and	pepper
in	medium	bowl.	Remove	¼	cup	marinade	and	combine	with	lime	juice	in	small
bowl;	set	aside.
2.	Place	remaining	marinade	and	steaks	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag;	press	out

as	much	air	as	possible	and	seal	bag.	Refrigerate	for	1	hour,	flipping	bag	after	30
minutes	to	ensure	that	steaks	marinate	evenly.
3.	Remove	steaks	from	marinade,	letting	any	excess	marinade	drip	back	into

bag.	Discard	bag	and	marinade.	Grill	steaks	as	desired.
4.	Transfer	steaks	to	shallow	pan	and	pour	reserved	marinade	over	top.	Tent

loosely	with	aluminum	foil	and	let	rest	for	10	minutes,	turning	meat	halfway
through	resting.	Slice	steaks	or	serve	whole,	passing	reserved	marinade	if
desired.



SOUTHEAST	ASIAN	MARINADE	FOR	STEAKS
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	TO	MARINATE	4	TO	6	INDIVIDUAL	STEAKS	OR	ONE	2-

POUND	STEAK

				1⁄3 cup	soy	sauce
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
2				 tablespoons	packed	dark	brown	sugar
2				 tablespoons	fish	sauce
2				 tablespoons	red	curry	paste
2				 tablespoons	grated	fresh	ginger
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 tablespoons	lime	juice

1.	Combine	soy	sauce,	oil,	sugar,	fish	sauce,	curry	paste,	ginger,	and	garlic	in
medium	bowl.	Remove	¼	cup	marinade	and	combine	with	lime	juice	in	small
bowl;	set	aside.
2.	Place	remaining	marinade	and	steaks	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag;	press	out

as	much	air	as	possible	and	seal	bag.	Refrigerate	for	1	hour,	flipping	bag	after	30
minutes	to	ensure	that	steaks	marinate	evenly.
3.	Remove	steaks	from	marinade,	letting	any	excess	marinade	drip	back	into

bag.	Discard	bag	and	marinade.	Grill	steaks	as	desired.
4.	Transfer	steaks	to	shallow	pan	and	pour	reserved	marinade	over	top.	Tent

loosely	with	aluminum	foil	and	let	rest	for	10	minutes,	turning	meat	halfway
through	resting.	Slice	steaks	or	serve	whole,	passing	reserved	marinade	if
desired.



MOJO	MARINADE	FOR	STEAKS
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	TO	MARINATE	4	TO	6	INDIVIDUAL	STEAKS	OR	ONE	2-

POUND	STEAK

½				 cup	soy	sauce
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
2				 tablespoons	packed	dark	brown	sugar
6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	cilantro
1				 teaspoon	grated	orange	zest	plus	2	tablespoons	juice
1				 teaspoon	pepper
½				 teaspoon	ground	cumin
½				 teaspoon	dried	oregano
2				 teaspoons	white	vinegar

1.	Combine	soy	sauce,	oil,	sugar,	garlic,	cilantro,	orange	zest,	pepper,	cumin,
and	oregano	in	medium	bowl.	Remove	¼	cup	of	marinade	and	combine	with
orange	juice	and	vinegar	in	small	bowl;	set	aside.
2.	Place	remaining	marinade	and	steaks	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag;	press	out

as	much	air	as	possible	and	seal	bag.	Refrigerate	for	1	hour,	flipping	bag	after	30
minutes	to	ensure	that	steaks	marinate	evenly.
3.	Remove	steaks	from	marinade,	letting	any	excess	marinade	drip	back	into

bag.	Discard	bag	and	marinade.	Grill	steaks	as	desired.
4.	Transfer	steaks	to	shallow	pan	and	pour	reserved	marinade	over	top.	Tent

loosely	with	aluminum	foil	and	let	rest	for	10	minutes,	turning	meat	halfway
through	resting.	Slice	steaks	or	serve	whole,	passing	reserved	marinade	if
desired.



HONEY-MUSTARD	MARINADE	FOR	STEAKS
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	TO	MARINATE	4	TO	6	INDIVIDUAL	STEAKS	OR	ONE	2-

POUND	STEAK

½				 cup	soy	sauce
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
3				 tablespoons	Dijon	mustard
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	tarragon
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced
4				 teaspoons	honey

1½				 teaspoons	pepper
1				 teaspoon	cider	vinegar

1.	Combine	soy	sauce,	oil,	mustard,	tarragon,	garlic,	honey,	and	pepper	in
medium	bowl.	Remove	¼	cup	marinade	and	combine	with	vinegar	in	small
bowl;	set	aside.
2.	Place	remaining	marinade	and	steaks	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag;	press	out

as	much	air	as	possible	and	seal	bag.	Refrigerate	for	1	hour,	flipping	bag	after	30
minutes	to	ensure	that	steaks	marinate	evenly.
3.	Remove	steaks	from	marinade,	letting	any	excess	marinade	drip	back	into

bag.	Discard	bag	and	marinade.	Grill	steaks	as	desired.
4.	Transfer	steaks	to	shallow	pan	and	pour	reserved	marinade	over	top.	Tent

loosely	with	aluminum	foil	and	let	rest	for	10	minutes,	turning	meat	halfway
through	resting.	Slice	steaks	or	serve	whole,	passing	reserved	marinade	if
desired.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
These	five	marinade	recipes	for	steaks	use	bright,	intense	flavors	combined	with
the	salty	power	of	soy	sauce	to	create	marinades	excellent	for	their	ability	to
impart	flavor	and	improve	texture	in	the	steaks.	The	salt	in	soy	sauce	acts	much
like	a	brine,	helping	the	meat	retain	moisture	during	cooking	and	making	it	more
tender.	But	to	add	more	depth	of	flavor,	we	needed	additional	seasonings.	We
found	them	in	the	international	section	of	the	supermarket,	with	ingredients	as
diverse	as	red	curry	paste,	Dijon	mustard,	and	chipotle	chiles.
SEND	ALL	CUTS	TO	SOAK	While	the	looser-textured	skirt,	flank,	and

sirloin	tip	steaks	absorb	the	marinade	better	than	the	thicker	rib-eye,	strip,	and
blade	steaks,	all	of	these	cuts	benefit	from	the	one-hour	precooking	marinade
and	the	10-minute	postcooking	marinade.	This	is	one	case	where	double	dipping
is	a	good	thing.
ADD	ACID	AT	THE	END	We	add	the	acidic	component	of	these	marinades

to	the	amount	that	we	reserve	for	the	cooked	steak	at	rest.	As	we’ve	learned,	the
acid	can	break	down	the	meat,	causing	it	to	become	tough	and	dry	and	not	at	all
tender.	But	because	it	imparts	great	flavor,	it	is	included	in	the	second	marinade,
when	it	can	no	longer	do	any	harm.
DOUSE	THEN	SLICE	Once	the	beef	is	pulled	off	the	grill,	we	dip	the	entire

steak	into	the	reserved	marinade,	flipping	it	once	to	ensure	an	even	coating.	If
we	slice	the	beef	before	it	goes	for	a	second	run	in	the	marinade,	the	flavors	can
be	too	intense.



GRILLED	LEMON-PARSLEY	CHICKEN	BREASTS
SERVES	4

The	chicken	should	be	marinated	for	no	less	than	30	minutes	and	no	more	than
one	hour.	Serve	with	a	simply	prepared	vegetable	or	use	in	a	sandwich	or	salad.

6				 tablespoons	olive	oil
2				 tablespoons	lemon	juice
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley

1¼				 teaspoons	sugar
1				 teaspoon	Dijon	mustard
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	water
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
4				 (6-to	8-ounce)	boneless,	skinless	chicken	breasts,	trimmed

1.	Whisk	3	tablespoons	oil,	1	tablespoon	lemon	juice,	parsley,	¼	teaspoon
sugar,	mustard,	¼	teaspoon	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper	together	in	bowl	and	set
aside	for	serving.
2.	Whisk	remaining	3	tablespoons	oil,	remaining	1	tablespoon	lemon	juice,

remaining	1	teaspoon	sugar,	1½	teaspoons	salt,	½	teaspoon	pepper,	water,	and
garlic	together	in	bowl.	Place	marinade	and	chicken	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag
and	toss	to	coat;	press	out	as	much	air	as	possible	and	seal	bag.	Refrigerate	for	at
least	30	minutes	or	up	to	1	hour,	flipping	bag	every	15	minutes.
3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light

large	chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals
are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Set	cooking	grate	in
place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5	minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.	Leave	primary	burner	on	high	and	turn	off	other
burner(s).
4.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Remove	chicken	from	bag,	allowing	excess

marinade	to	drip	off.	Place	chicken	on	cooler	side	of	grill,	smooth	side	down,
with	thicker	sides	facing	coals	and	flames.	Cover	and	cook	until	bottom	of
chicken	just	begins	to	develop	light	grill	marks	and	is	no	longer	translucent,	6	to



9	minutes.
5.	Flip	chicken	and	rotate	so	that	thinner	sides	face	coals	and	flames.	Cover

and	continue	to	cook	until	chicken	is	opaque	and	firm	to	touch	and	registers	140
degrees,	6	to	9	minutes	longer.
6.	Move	chicken	to	hot	side	of	grill	and	cook	until	dark	grill	marks	appear	on

both	sides	and	chicken	registers	160	degrees,	2	to	6	minutes	longer.
7.	Transfer	chicken	to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let

rest	for	5	to	10	minutes.	Slice	each	breast	on	bias	into	¼-inch-thick	slices	and
transfer	to	individual	plates.	Drizzle	with	reserved	sauce	and	serve.

GRILLED	CHIPOTLE-LIME	CHICKEN	BREASTS
Substitute	lime	juice	for	lemon	juice	and	use	1	extra	teaspoon	juice	in	reserved
sauce.	Substitute	minced	chipotle	chile	in	adobo	sauce	for	mustard	and	cilantro
for	parsley.

GRILLED	ORANGE-TARRAGON	CHICKEN	BREASTS
Substitute	orange	juice	for	lemon	juice	and	tarragon	for	parsley.	Add	¼	teaspoon
grated	orange	zest	to	reserved	sauce.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Because	they	have	no	skin	and	little	fat,	plain	boneless	chicken	breasts
invariably	turn	out	dry	and	leathery	when	grilled.	A	common	solution—
marinating	them	in	bottled	salad	dressings,	which	are	laden	with	acid,
sweeteners,	stabilizers,	and	gums—often	imparts	off-flavors.	We	wanted	grilled
chicken	breasts	that	would	come	off	the	grill	juicy	and	flavorful,	and	we	wanted
to	look	beyond	bottled	salad	dressing	to	get	there.	We	use	a	homemade	marinade
and	then	drizzle	a	separate,	reserved	vinaigrette	on	top	for	the	optimal
combination	of	texture	and	flavor.
MAKE	A	TWO-LEVEL	FIRE	Cooked	over	a	hot,	single-level	fire	as	many

recipes	suggest,	the	outer	layers	of	chicken	breasts	turn	into	black	shoe	leather
before	the	inside	reaches	the	requisite	160	degrees.	But	we	found	that	by	using	a
two-level	fire	and	cooking	the	chicken,	covered,	over	the	cooler	side	of	the	grill
until	almost	done	(140	degrees)	and	finishing	with	a	quick	sear,	we	are	rewarded
with	perfectly	cooked	breasts.
ACID	TO	FINISH	Originally,	we	used	a	marinade	that	included	olive	oil,

lemon	juice,	garlic,	salt,	pepper,	and	a	bit	of	sugar.	But	with	this	combination,	we
found	that	the	acid	of	the	lemon	juice	caused	the	exterior	of	the	chicken	breasts
to	turn	white.	In	our	finished	dish,	we	reduce	the	amount	of	lemon	juice	in	the
marinade	and	use	a	complementary	vinaigrette	after	cooking	to	amp	up	the
flavors.



CHICKEN	FAJITAS
SERVES	4	TO	6

You	can	use	red,	yellow,	orange,	or	green	bell	peppers	in	this	recipe.	The	chicken
tenderloins	can	be	reserved	for	another	use	or	marinated	and	grilled	along	with
the	breasts.	When	you	head	outside	to	grill,	bring	a	clean	kitchen	towel	in	which
to	wrap	the	tortillas	and	keep	them	warm.	The	chicken	and	vegetables	have
enough	flavor	on	their	own,	but	accompaniments	(guacamole,	salsa,	sour	cream,
shredded	cheese,	and	lime	wedges)	can	be	offered	at	the	table.

6				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
				1⁄3 cup	lime	juice	(3	limes)
1				 jalapeño	chile,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	minced

1½				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	cilantro
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	Worcestershire	sauce

1½				 teaspoons	packed	brown	sugar
					 Salt	and	pepper

1½				 pounds	boneless,	skinless	chicken	breasts,	tenderloins	removed,	trimmed,	pounded	to	½-inch
thickness

1				 large	red	onion,	peeled	and	cut	into	½-inch-thick	rounds	(do	not	separate	rings)
2				 large	bell	peppers,	quartered,	stemmed,	and	seeded
8– (6-inch)	flour	tortillas

12				

1.	Whisk	¼	cup	oil,	lime	juice,	jalapeño,	cilantro,	garlic,	Worcestershire,
sugar,	1	teaspoon	salt,	and	¾	teaspoon	pepper	together	in	bowl.	Reserve	¼	cup
marinade	and	set	aside.	Add	1	teaspoon	salt	to	remaining	marinade.	Place
marinade	and	chicken	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag	and	toss	to	coat;	press	out	as
much	air	as	possible	and	seal	bag.	Refrigerate	for	at	least	15	minutes,	flipping
bag	halfway	through	marinating.	Brush	both	sides	of	onion	rounds	and	peppers
with	remaining	2	tablespoons	oil	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.
2A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light

large	chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals
are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	coals	over	two-thirds	of	grill,	leaving
remaining	one-third	empty.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent



completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5	minutes.
2B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.	Leave	primary	burner	on	high	and	turn	other	burner(s)	to
medium.
3.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Remove	chicken	from	bag,	allowing	excess

marinade	to	drip	off.	Place	chicken	on	hotter	side	of	grill,	smooth	side	down.
Cook	(covered	if	using	gas)	until	well	browned	on	first	side,	4	to	6	minutes.	Flip
and	continue	to	cook	until	chicken	registers	160	degrees,	4	to	6	minutes	longer.
Transfer	chicken	to	cutting	board,	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let	rest
for	5	to	10	minutes.
4.	While	chicken	cooks,	place	onion	rounds	and	peppers	(skin	side	down)	on

cooler	side	of	grill	and	cook	until	tender	and	charred	on	both	sides,	8	to	12
minutes,	flipping	every	3	minutes.	Transfer	onion	and	peppers	to	cutting	board
with	chicken.
5.	Working	in	2	or	3	batches,	place	tortillas	in	single	layer	on	cooler	side	of

grill.	Cook	until	warm	and	lightly	browned,	about	20	seconds	per	side	(do	not
grill	too	long	or	tortillas	will	become	brittle).	As	tortillas	are	done,	wrap	in
kitchen	towel	or	large	sheet	of	foil.
6.	Separate	onion	into	rings	and	place	in	medium	bowl.	Slice	peppers	into	¼-

inch	strips	and	place	in	bowl	with	onion.	Add	2	tablespoons	reserved	marinade
and	toss	to	combine.	Slice	each	breast	on	bias	into	¼-inch-thick	slices,	place	in
second	bowl,	and	toss	with	remaining	2	tablespoons	reserved	marinade.
7.	Transfer	chicken	and	vegetables	to	serving	platter	and	serve	with	warmed

tortillas.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	quickly	realized	that	the	separate	components	of	the	best	chicken	fajita	recipe
would	require	special	handling.	Unlike	many	of	our	marinades,	in	which	we
avoid	acid	in	order	to	prevent	mushy	meat,	here	we	use	a	high-acid	mixture—but
only	briefly.	A	15-minute	soak	in	this	lime-saturated	marinade	gives	a	bright
tang.
KEEP	TIME	IN	CHECK	Though	marinating	often	takes	some	time,	here	it’s

important	not	to	let	the	minutes	get	away	from	you.	If	the	chicken	breasts	soak	in
the	high-acid	marinade	for	more	than	15	minutes,	they	will	begin	to	“cook”	in
the	acid,	like	a	“chicken	ceviche”	of	sorts.
ADD	A	SMOKY	DEPTH	While	we	began	experimenting	with	a	marinade

that	included	lime	juice,	vegetable	oil,	garlic,	salt,	and	pepper,	we	felt	that	it
lacked	smokiness	and	depth.	What	to	add?	We	finally	stumbled	upon	an	unlikely
candidate:	Worcestershire	sauce,	which	is	made	with	molasses,	anchovies,
tamarind,	onion,	garlic,	and	other	seasonings.	Worcestershire	sauce	has	some	of
the	characteristics	of	umami,	the	fifth	taste	sensation	often	equated	with	“meaty”
or	simply	“delicious.”	A	mere	tablespoon	of	Worcestershire	was	plenty	to	add
another	layer	of	saltiness	and	smoke	without	revealing	its	true	identity.	(Later,	a
bit	of	brown	sugar	helped	to	round	out	the	salty	flavors	in	the	marinade,	and
minced	jalapeño	and	cilantro	added	freshness.)
MAKE	A	TWO-LEVEL	FIRE	The	chicken	needs	blazing-hot	coals	to	cook

correctly	while	the	vegetables,	which	are	prone	to	burning,	require	more
moderate	heat	in	order	for	them	to	brown	nicely	as	well	as	cook	though	without
char.	To	allow	the	chicken	and	vegetables	to	cook	side	by	side,	we	create	a	two-
level	fire	by	first	placing	coals	over	two-thirds	of	the	grill.	(On	a	gas	grill,	we
heat	the	entire	grill	on	high,	and	then	turn	down	the	other	burner(s)	to	medium
before	cooking	commences.)
WRAP	IT	UP	As	for	the	flour	tortillas,	8-to	10-inch	rounds	yield	too	much

excess	tortilla;	small	(but	not	dainty)	6-inch	tortillas	are	the	perfect	size.	Heating
each	side	of	the	tortillas	for	20	brief	seconds	on	the	cooler	side	of	the	grill	allows
them	to	puff	up	and	lose	their	raw,	gummy	texture.	Quickly	wrapping	the
warmed	tortillas	in	a	clean	kitchen	towel	or	foil	prevents	them	from	becoming
dry	and	brittle.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

WHY	DOES	ACID	MAKE	MEAT	TOUGH	AND	DRY?



Acid	and	tough	meat?	It	all	comes	down	to	the	isoelectric	point.

A	common	misconception	is	that	acidic	marinades	are	the	key	for	making	meat	tender.	But	acidic	marinades
can	easily	take	it	too	far,	making	meat	mushy	(click	here)	or	tough	and	dry.	Why?

A	protein	molecule	normally	contains	many	positive	and	negative	charges.	These	electrical	charges
determine	how	proteins	interact	with	each	other.	Often,	there	are	more	positive	or	more	negative	charges,
which	cause	the	protein	molecules	to	repel	each	other,	keeping	them	far	apart.	But	sometimes	these
electrical	charges	completely	balance	each	other	out.	This	moment	of	balance	is	called	the	isoelectric	point.
And	while	being	in	balance	sounds	like	a	good	thing,	when	proteins	hit	the	isoelectric	point,	they	pack
closer	together,	squeezing	out	any	excess	liquid.	And	this	squeezing,	as	we	know,	can	make	the	meat	tough
and	dry.

But	what	causes	proteins	to	reach	the	isoelectric	point?	You	guessed	it:	acid.	Most	chicken	proteins,	for
example,	are	slightly	acidic,	with	a	pH	between	6.0	and	6.5.	The	isoelectric	point	of	all	muscle	proteins,
however,	occurs	at	a	pH	of	5.2.

The	marinades	that	we	offer	here	contain	very	little	acid	or	use	an	acidic	marinade	for	a	very	short
period	of	time.	With	these	proportions,	there	is	not	enough	acid	present	(or	enough	time)	to	lower	the	pH	of
chicken	much	below	6.0.	But	if	there	are	a	lot	of	acidic	ingredients	in	a	marinade,	and	it	is	left	on	a	piece	of
chicken	for	a	long	time,	the	risk	is	high	that	the	pH	of	the	chicken	will	drop	to	the	isoelectric	point,	causing
the	proteins	to	pack	together	and	the	meat	to	become	tough	and	dry.



MARINATING	AT	WORK	
BUTTERMILK	BRINING
When	buttermilk	is	mixed	with	salt	and	used	as	a	marinade	for	fried	chicken,	the
results	are	impressive.	Buttermilk	contains	lactic	acid,	which	activates	the
cathepsin	enzymes	naturally	present	in	meat,	as	it	penetrates	mostly	the	outer
layers	of	the	chicken.	These	enzymes	break	down	proteins	into	smaller
molecules,	tenderizing	the	meat.	(As	we’ve	learned,	strong	acids	such	as	wine
and	vinegar	can	break	down	so	many	proteins	that	the	meat	turns	mushy.	But	the
lactic	acid	in	buttermilk	is	too	weak	to	have	this	effect.)	Just	as	in	a	traditional
brine,	the	salt	helps	change	the	protein	structure	of	meat	so	that	it	can	retain
more	moisture	as	it	cooks,	producing	noticeably	juicier	results.	See	concept	17
for	more	information	about	the	science	of	frying.



EXTRA-CRUNCHY	FRIED	CHICKEN
SERVES	4

Keeping	the	oil	at	the	correct	temperature	is	essential	to	producing	crunchy	fried
chicken	that	is	neither	too	brown	nor	too	greasy.	Use	a	candy/deep-fry
thermometer	to	check	the	temperature	of	the	oil	before	you	add	the	chicken.	If
you	cannot	find	a	chicken	that	weighs	3½	pounds	or	less,	or	if	you	don’t	have	a
pan	that	is	11	inches	in	diameter,	you	will	have	to	fry	the	chicken	in	two	batches.
Follow	the	recipe,	frying	the	chicken	four	pieces	at	a	time	and	keeping	the	first
batch	warm	in	a	200-degree	oven	while	the	second	batch	is	cooking.	If	you	want
to	produce	a	slightly	healthier	version	of	this	recipe,	you	can	remove	the	skin
from	the	chicken	before	soaking	it	in	the	buttermilk.	The	chicken	will	be	slightly
less	crunchy.	If	you	have	leftovers,	they	crisp	up	and	reheat	nicely—put	them	in
a	375-degree	oven	for	10	to	15	minutes.	For	this	recipe,	cut	a	whole	chicken	into
eight	pieces—two	drumsticks,	two	thighs,	and	two	breast	halves	cut	in	half
crosswise.

1				 cup	plus	6	tablespoons	buttermilk
1				 tablespoon	salt
1				 whole	chicken	(about	3½	pounds),	cut	into	8	pieces,	giblets	discarded,	wings	and	back	reserved	for

stock
3				 cups	all-purpose	flour
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder
¾				 teaspoon	dried	thyme
½				 teaspoon	pepper
¼				 teaspoon	garlic	powder
4– cups	peanut	oil,	vegetable	oil,	or	vegetable	shortening
5				

1.	Whisk	together	1	cup	buttermilk	and	salt	in	large	bowl	until	salt	is
dissolved.	Add	chicken	pieces	to	bowl	and	stir	to	coat;	cover	bowl	and
refrigerate	for	at	least	1	hour	or	up	to	overnight.
2.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	thyme,	pepper,	and	garlic	powder	together	in

large	bowl.	Add	remaining	6	tablespoons	buttermilk;	with	your	fingers	rub	flour
and	buttermilk	together	until	buttermilk	is	evenly	incorporated	into	flour	and
mixture	resembles	coarse	wet	sand.



3.	Working	in	batches	of	2,	drop	chicken	pieces	into	flour	mixture	and	turn	to
thoroughly	coat,	gently	pressing	flour	mixture	onto	chicken.	Shake	excess	flour
from	each	piece	of	chicken	and	transfer	to	wire	rack	set	over	rimmed	baking
sheet.
4.	Heat	oil	(it	should	measure	¾	inch	deep)	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high

heat	until	it	reaches	375	degrees.	Place	chicken	pieces	skin	side	down	in	oil,
cover,	and	fry	until	deep	golden	brown,	8	to	10	minutes.	Remove	lid	after	4
minutes	and	lift	chicken	pieces	to	check	for	even	browning;	rearrange	if	some
pieces	are	browning	faster	than	others.	(At	this	point,	oil	should	be	about	300
degrees.	Adjust	burner,	if	necessary,	to	regulate	temperature	of	oil.)	Turn	chicken
pieces	over	and	continue	to	fry,	uncovered,	until	chicken	pieces	are	deep	golden
brown	on	second	side,	6	to	8	minutes	longer.	(At	this	point,	to	keep	chicken	from
browning	too	quickly,	adjust	burner	to	maintain	oil	temperature	of	about	315
degrees.)	Using	tongs,	transfer	chicken	to	paper	towel–lined	plate;	let	stand	for	5
minutes	to	drain.	Serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
There’s	no	arguing	the	point:	Making	even	the	simplest	fried	chicken	is	a	kitchen
production.	So	when	you	do	go	to	the	trouble,	the	recipe	had	better	deliver.	With
a	quick	buttermilk	brine	to	season	the	meat,	keep	it	moist,	and	tenderize	it,	and
with	a	simple	coating	of	buttermilk-moistened	flour	that	fries	up	to	a	deeply
bronzed,	crisp,	and	crunchy	crust,	this	recipe	will	please	the	cook	and	diners
alike.
CUT	THE	CHICKEN	INTO	SMALL	PIECES	It’s	important	that	each

piece	of	chicken	be	the	same	size.	This	way,	no	one	leg	or	breast	will	cook	faster
—or	slower	than	the	others.	You	have	two	options:	Buy	one	cut-up	whole
chicken	(about	3	pounds),	or	cut	one	whole	chicken	into	six	pieces	yourself	(two
drumsticks,	two	thighs,	and	two	breast	halves).	Save	the	wings	for	stock	(click
here),	and	cut	each	breast	piece	in	half	to	yield	eight	pieces.
USE	A	BUTTERMILK	BRINERADE	Most	fried	chicken	recipes	dip	the

chicken	in	buttermilk,	though	mainly	for	flavor	reasons—the	acidity	of	the
buttermilk	adds	a	gentle	tang	that	balances	the	richness	of	the	fried	coating.	But
we’ve	built	on	that	idea	and	turned	the	buttermilk	soak	into	a	buttermilk	brine.	A
heavily	salted	marinade	keeps	the	chicken	moist	and	well	seasoned	with	a	flavor
far	deeper	than	the	typical	water	brine	can	deliver.	The	lactic	acid	present	in	the
buttermilk	helps	to	tenderize	the	outer	layers	of	the	meat,	while	the	salt
penetrates	to	the	center	for	a	juicy,	well-seasoned	bird.	An	hour’s	soak	seasons
the	meat	to	the	bone.
We	experimented	with	the	brinerade	by	cooking	four	batches	of	chicken	side

by	side.	Three	of	them	soaked	for	an	hour,	one	in	a	solution	of	buttermilk	and
salt,	one	in	only	buttermilk,	and	one	in	a	plain	saltwater	solution.	The	fourth	was
not	soaked	at	all.	All	of	the	chicken	was	dredged	in	flour	before	frying.	The
unsoaked	chicken	was	dry	and	tough.	The	saltwater-soaked	chicken	was	moist
but	a	bit	rubbery.	The	chicken	soaked	in	plain	buttermilk,	while	tender,	was	not
terribly	moist.	Only	the	chicken	soaked	in	salted	buttermilk	came	out	both	tender
and	moist.
ADD	BAKING	POWDER,	BUTTERMILK	After	trying	everything	from

Melba	toast	to	pancake	batter	for	the	crunchy	coating,	we	found	a	completely
unexpected	method	for	rolling	the	chicken	in	a	starchy	coating.	We	started	with	a
classic	flour	coating—and	added	a	few	enhancements.	First,	a	little	baking
powder.	(As	the	chicken	fries,	the	baking	powder	releases	carbon	dioxide,
leavening	the	crust	and	increasing	its	surface	area,	keeping	it	light	and	crisp.)
And	then,	buttermilk.	We	noticed	that	the	flour	stuck	better	to	the	chicken	as	we



battered	the	last	piece.	That’s	because	some	buttermilk	had	dripped	off	the
chicken	and	mixed	with	the	flour	to	form	large	clumps,	which	when	fried	made
the	coating	especially	crunchy.
FRY	(RELATIVELY)	SHALLOW	Although	it’s	not	uncommon	for	fried

chicken	to	be	deep-fried,	here	we	use	a	relatively	shallow-frying	technique
(though	not	as	shallow	as	for	our	Easier	Fried	Chicken).	But	because	the	chicken
cooks	in	a	fair	amount	of	fat,	we	call	on	a	Dutch	oven—a	large	one,	so	as	to	fit
all	the	chicken	without	layering—as	the	cooking	vessel	rather	than	a	skillet.
With	the	chicken	parts	only	partially	submerged	in	oil,	the	cooking	time	is	longer
than	if	they	were	fully	submerged,	but	this	suits	slow-cooking	bone-in	chicken
pieces	just	fine.
COVER	IT	UP	Covering	the	pot	during	the	first	half	of	cooking	helps	ensure

that	the	interior	meat	will	be	done	at	the	same	time	as	the	exterior	crust.	It	also
contains	the	spatter-prone	oil	and	helps	keep	the	oil	hot	so	the	coating	is	less
greasy.	As	an	added	bonus,	using	the	lid	makes	the	meat	moister	because	the
chicken	cooks	through	faster	and,	therefore,	doesn’t	have	time	to	dry	out.
MIND	THE	TEMPERATURE	When	you	prepare	the	oil	for	frying,	make

sure	you	heat	it	to	just	about	375	degrees.	When	the	chicken	is	added,	the
temperature	of	the	oil	will	drop.	If	it	drops	too	far,	and	for	too	long,	it	becomes
difficult	to	obtain	that	crunchy,	bronzed	crust.	So	it’s	important	to	monitor	the
temperature	while	the	chicken	is	frying,	keeping	it	between	300	and	315	degrees.
(To	learn	more	about	the	dynamics	of	frying,	see	concept	17.)



EASIER	FRIED	CHICKEN
SERVES	4

A	whole	4-pound	chicken,	cut	into	eight	pieces,	can	be	used	instead	of	the
chicken	parts.	Skinless	chicken	pieces	are	also	an	acceptable	substitute,	but	the
meat	will	come	out	slightly	drier.	If	using	large	chicken	breasts	(about	1	pound
each),	cut	each	breast	into	three	pieces.	If	using	smaller	breasts	(10	to	12	ounces
each),	cut	each	breast	into	two	pieces.	A	Dutch	oven	with	an	11-inch	diameter
can	be	used	in	place	of	the	straight-sided	sauté	pan.

1¼				 cups	buttermilk
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 teaspoon	garlic	powder
1				 teaspoon	paprika
¼				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
					 Dash	hot	sauce

3½				 pounds	bone-in	chicken	pieces	(split	breasts	cut	in	half,	drumsticks,	and/or	thighs),	trimmed
2				 cups	all-purpose	flour
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder

1¾				 cups	vegetable	oil

1.	Whisk	1	cup	buttermilk,	1	tablespoon	salt,	1	teaspoon	pepper,	¼	teaspoon
garlic	powder,	¼	teaspoon	paprika,	pinch	cayenne,	and	hot	sauce	together	in
large	bowl.	Add	chicken	and	turn	to	coat.	Cover	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	1
hour	or	up	to	overnight.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.	Set	wire

rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	1	teaspoon	salt,	2
teaspoons	pepper,	remaining	¾	teaspoon	garlic	powder,	remaining	¾	teaspoon
paprika,	and	remaining	cayenne	together	in	large	bowl.	Add	remaining	¼	cup
buttermilk	to	flour	mixture	and	mix	with	fingers	until	combined	and	small
clumps	form.	Working	with	1	chicken	piece	at	a	time,	dredge	in	flour	mixture,
pressing	mixture	onto	pieces	to	form	thick,	even	coating.	Place	dredged	chicken
on	large	plate,	skin	side	up.
3.	Heat	oil	in	11-inch	straight-sided	sauté	pan	over	medium-high	heat	until	it

registers	375	degrees.	Carefully	place	chicken	in	pan,	skin	side	down,	and	fry



until	golden	brown,	3	to	5	minutes.	(Adjust	heat	as	necessary	to	maintain	oil	at
375	degrees.)	Carefully	flip	and	continue	to	fry	until	golden	brown	on	second
side,	2	to	4	minutes	longer.	Transfer	chicken	to	prepared	wire	rack	and	bake	until
breast	pieces	register	160	degrees	and	thighs	and	drumsticks	register	175
degrees,	15	to	20	minutes.	(Smaller	pieces	may	cook	faster	than	larger	pieces.
Remove	pieces	from	oven	as	they	reach	correct	temperature.)	Let	chicken	rest
for	5	minutes	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS

Is	it	possible	to	achieve	fried	chicken	with	a	crisp	crust	without	resorting	to	a
quart	of	oil?	To	find	an	easier	way	to	fry	chicken,	we	started	with	our	standard
procedure	of	soaking	the	chicken	in	a	salt	and	buttermilk	brine	and	then
dredging	it	in	seasoned	flour	(along	with	a	little	baking	powder,	which	keeps	the
crust	light	and	crisp	due	to	the	carbon	dioxide	released	by	the	powder	during
frying).	A	dual-method	cooking	technique	leaves	us	with	perfect	fried	chicken,
without	all	the	messy	work.

FRY	FIRST	While	our	standard	fried	chicken	recipe	calls	for	about	5	cups	of
oil,	we	wanted	to	significantly	reduce	the	volume	of	oil	for	an	easier,	less	messy
frying	experience.	We	began	with	1¾	cups	of	oil,	but	found	that	the	temperature
of	the	oil	dropped	significantly	after	the	chicken	was	added	and	only	climbed
back	up	to	the	necessary	heat	level	when	we	cranked	the	stove	up	to	high.	Now
we	had	a	new	problem:	burnt	patches	on	the	parts	of	the	chicken	in	direct	contact
with	the	bottom	of	the	pan.	To	fix	this,	each	chicken	piece	could	not	spend	more
than	3	or	4	minutes	without	being	flipped—not	enough	time	to	cook	them
through.	The	solution?	Combine	a	fast,	early	fry	with	a	second	technique:
baking.
BAKE	LATER	We	found	that	the	radiant,	circulating	heat	of	the	oven	was

just	the	ticket	to	replace	the	even	heating	of	a	deep,	hot	oil	bath,	allowing	the
quickly	shallow-fried	chicken	to	brown	and	cook	through	properly.	We	start	by
frying	the	chicken	on	the	stovetop	until	it	forms	a	light	brown	crust,	and	then
finish	it	in	a	hot	oven	(perched	on	a	wire	rack	set	in	a	sheet	pan	to	prevent	burnt
spots	and	promote	air	circulation	all	around	the	meat)	to	both	cook	it	through
and	deepen	its	color.	Though	we	were	worried	that	there	wouldn’t	be	enough	fat
left	on	the	surface	of	the	chicken	after	its	initial	fry	to	fully	permeate	the	crust	as
it	dehydrated,	as	in	traditionally	fried	chicken,	we	found	that	15	minutes	in	the
oven	was	all	it	took	to	give	our	shallow-fried	chicken	a	golden-brown	crust	that
was	crisp	and	craggy.



CONCEPT	14

Grind	Meat	at	Home	for	Tender	Burgers
We	don’t	like	to	eat	all	of	our	beef	in	big	slabs	or	cuts.	Sometimes	only	a	burger
will	do.	So	far	we’ve	learned	about	the	molecular	level	of	whole	cuts	of	beef.
But	what	happens	when	we	grind	them	up?



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Ground	meat	is	a	staple	ingredient	in	many	American	homes.	We	use	it	for
burgers,	pasta	sauce,	meatballs,	and	meatloaves.	We	often	buy	it	straight	from
the	supermarket.	But	it’s	also	possible	to	grind	it	at	home.	And	for	the	ultimate
burgers,	we	find	that’s	the	best	option.	Why?	Let’s	start	with	the	mechanics	of
ground	beef.
As	we’ve	learned,	whole	standard	cuts	of	beef	are	composed	of	the	many	long

muscle	fibers	that	make	up	muscle	tissue,	bundled	within	protective	sheaths	of
connective	tissue	like	electrical	wires	encased	in	plastic.	Individual	muscle	fibers
can	be	a	few	to	tens	of	centimeters	long,	making	them	difficult	to	bite	through
when	held	together	with	connective	tissue.	But	grinding	meat	dramatically
reduces	the	length	of	muscle	fibers	and	cuts	connective	tissue	into	pieces	that	are
easier	to	chew.	Grinding	also	releases	soluble	sticky	proteins,	which	hold
together	the	now-tiny	pieces	of	meat.
The	size	of	these	ground	pieces	of	meat	is	important.	When	it	comes	to

burgers,	we	don’t	want	to	grind	the	meat	too	fine,	as	this	will	produce	rubbery,
dense	results,	or	too	coarse,	which	will	leave	gristly	bits	in	burgers	that	fall	apart
as	they	cook.	And	when	we	use	fresh	ground	meat	as	opposed	to	store-bought
packages,	the	size	of	the	grind,	as	well	as	how	tightly	we	pack	our	meat	together,
is	something	we	can	control.	This	gives	us	the	ability	to	create	different	textures
in	our	finished	dish	(see	Test	Kitchen	Experiment).
Using	fresh	ground	meat	also	allows	us	to	control	the	type	of	meat	we	use.

This	is	important	because	different	cuts	of	meat	differ	in	flavor	and	levels	of
connective	tissue	and	fat,	variables	that	greatly	influence	a	final	dish.
It’s	possible	to	buy	meat	from	grocers	who	grind	in-house,	but	many	markets

purchase	bulk	packages	of	ground	beef	from	beef-processing	plants.	Sometimes
this	is	then	reground	and	supplemented	with	meat	scraps	before	being	packed
into	smaller	parcels.	Understanding	this	is	important	from	both	a	consumer
choice	standpoint	and	a	health	standpoint.	In	the	United	States,	most	preground
beef	comes	from	any	of	about	a	dozen	processing	plants,	which	means	that
preground	beef	can	contain	meat	from	hundreds	of	different	cattle.	Because	the
act	of	grinding	meat	mixes	what	was	once	on	the	outside	(including	any	bacterial
contamination)	with	the	inside	(which	is	sterile),	when	the	meat	from	many
animals	is	combined,	one	cut	with	harmful	bacteria	can	contaminate	large
amounts	of	ground	meat	rather	than	tainting	only	a	small	batch.	(Preground	beef
has	been	recalled	on	several	occasions	for	this	very	reason.)	Alternatively,



consuming	freshly	ground	meat	is	safer	because	the	meat	is	coming	from	a
single	animal.
Grinding	beef	at	home	isn’t	hard	to	do.	All	it	takes	is	a	food	processor	(and

access	to	a	freezer).	For	the	small	amount	of	extra	time	it	takes,	grinding	your
own	meat	allows	you	to	control	what	kind	of	meat	you	use	and	how	finely
ground	you	want	it	for	the	most	desirable	texture	and	taste.



THE	EFFECTS	OF	GRINDING



	
CUT	DOWN	TO	SIZE	Grinding	meat	reduces	the	size	of	muscle	fibers	and	connective	tissue,	making



meat	easier	to	chew,	and	releases	sticky	proteins,	which	help	to	bind	the	meat	together.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	test	whether	freshly	ground	beef	would	make	for	more	tender	burgers,	we	ran
the	following	experiment:	We	made	three	sets	of	burger	patties,	one	with	store-
bought	90	percent	lean	ground	chuck	and	two	with	flap	meat	that	we	ground
ourselves	in	the	food	processor	(we	ground	one	batch	to	mimic	the	texture	of	the
store-bought	meat;	the	other	we	ground	moderately	coarse	in	the	manner	we
prefer—see	“Getting	the	Perfect	Grind”).	After	cooking	all	three	sets	of	burgers
to	medium-rare,	we	let	them	rest	for	five	minutes	and	then	dropped	a	large	Dutch
oven	on	each	patty	from	6	inches	above	the	counter.	We	repeated	the	test	three
times.



THE	RESULTS
Messy.	The	burgers	reacted	very	differently	to	the	weight	of	the	Dutch	oven.	The
one	made	from	the	dense	store-bought	ground	meat	remained	intact	(though
somewhat	flattened)	and	did	not	ooze	any	liquid	at	all.	The	burger	made	from	the
beef	we	ground	to	mimic	the	store-bought	texture	spread	a	bit	but	did	not	release
any	of	its	juices.	The	looser,	more	coarsely	home-ground	burger,	however,
flattened	like	a	pancake,	spewing	its	moist	interior	all	over	the	board.



THE	TAKEAWAY
One	important	variable	in	ground	beef	is	the	texture	of	the	grind.	Because	we
could	control	the	texture	of	the	meat	we	ground	ourselves,	we	were	able	to
construct	a	looser,	more	tender	burger	with	our	coarse-ground	meat.	Because	we
could	not	control	the	size	of	the	grind	in	the	burger	patty	made	from	store-
bought	meat,	it	was	much	denser,	tougher,	and	ultimately	much	more	resilient
when	smashed.	(In	this	case,	resilience	is	not	a	good	thing!)	A	second	variable	in
ground	beef	is	the	choice	of	cut.	Because	we	could	choose	to	grind	flap	meat,	a
cut	with	more	fat	and	flavor	than	chuck,	both	of	our	home-ground	burgers	tasted
richer	and	more	flavorful	(no	matter	how	they	smashed)	than	the	store-bought.



SMASHING	BURGERS:	HOME-GROUND	AND	STORE-BOUGHT
To	test	the	difference	between	burgers	made	with	home-ground	and	store-bought	meat,	we	dropped	a	Dutch
oven	on	top	of	each	patty	from	6	inches	above.

	
HOME-GROUND

The	burger	made	from	meat	we	ground	to	perfection	at	home	was	much	more	tender,	and	therefore
splattered	and	smushed	much	more	under	the	weight	of	the	falling	Dutch	oven.



	
STORE-BOUGHT

The	burger	made	from	store-bought	ground	meat	cooked	up	dense	and	tough	and	remained	relatively	solid
when	smashed	with	a	heavy	Dutch	oven.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
GETTING	THE	PERFECT	GRIND

Under-and	overprocessed	meat	will	produce	burgers	with	unpleasant	textures.

Underprocessed	meat	will	lead	to	gristly	bits	in	the	finished	burgers	and	patties	that	don’t	hold	together.
Overprocessed	meat	becomes	rubbery	and	dense	as	it	cooks.	Perfectly	ground	meat	contains	pieces	that	are
fine	enough	to	ensure	tenderness	but	coarse	enough	that	the	patty	will	stay	loose.

	
UNDERPROCESSED

	
OVERPROCESSED



	
GROUND	TO	PERFECTION



GRINDING	YOUR	OWN	MEAT	AT	WORK	
BURGERS
For	the	ultimate	burger,	one	modeled	after	a	classic	drive-in	or	a	juicy	pub-style
option,	we	prefer	to	grind	our	own	meat.	This	gives	us	control	over	the	type	of
meat	and	the	size	of	our	grind.	If	store-bought	ground	meat	is	your	only	option,
however,	see	our	Well-Done	Burgers	recipe.



BEST	OLD-FASHIONED	BURGERS
MAKES	4	BURGERS

Sirloin	steak	tips	are	also	sold	as	flap	meat.	Flank	steak	can	be	used	in	its	place.
This	recipe	yields	juicy	medium	to	medium-well	burgers.	It’s	important	to	use
very	soft	buns.	If	doubling	the	recipe,	process	the	meat	in	three	batches	in	step	2.
Because	the	cooked	burgers	do	not	hold	well,	fry	four	burgers	and	serve	them
immediately	before	frying	more,	or	cook	them	in	two	pans.	Extra	patties	can	be
frozen	for	up	to	two	weeks.	Stack	the	patties,	separated	by	parchment,	and	wrap
them	in	three	layers	of	plastic	wrap.	Thaw	burgers	in	a	single	layer	on	a	baking
sheet	at	room	temperature	for	30	minutes	before	cooking.

10				 ounces	sirloin	steak	tips,	trimmed	and	cut	into	1-inch	chunks
6				 ounces	boneless	beef	short	ribs,	trimmed	and	cut	into	1-inch	chunks
					 Kosher	salt	and	pepper
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
4				 soft	hamburger	buns
½				 teaspoon	vegetable	oil
4				 slices	American	cheese
					 Thinly	sliced	onion
1				 recipe	Classic	Burger	Sauce	(recipe	follows)

1.	Place	beef	chunks	on	baking	sheet	in	single	layer,	leaving	½	inch	of	space
around	each	chunk.	Freeze	meat	until	very	firm	and	starting	to	harden	around
edges	but	still	pliable,	15	to	25	minutes.
2.	Pulse	half	of	meat	in	food	processor	until	coarsely	ground,	10	to	15	pulses,

stopping	and	redistributing	meat	around	bowl	as	necessary	to	ensure	beef	is
evenly	ground.	Transfer	meat	to	baking	sheet,	overturning	processor	bowl	and
without	directly	touching	meat.	Repeat	grinding	with	remaining	meat.	Spread
meat	over	baking	sheet	and	inspect	carefully,	discarding	any	long	strands	of
gristle	or	large	chunks	of	hard	meat	or	fat.
3.	Gently	separate	ground	meat	into	4	equal	mounds.	Without	picking	meat

up,	with	your	fingers	gently	shape	each	mound	into	loose	patty	½	inch	thick	and
4	inches	in	diameter,	leaving	edges	and	surface	ragged.	Season	top	of	each	patty



with	salt	and	pepper.	Using	spatula,	flip	patties	and	season	other	side.
Refrigerate	while	toasting	buns.
4.	Melt	½	tablespoon	butter	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat.	Add	bun

tops,	cut	side	down,	and	toast	until	light	golden	brown,	about	2	minutes.	Repeat
with	remaining	½	tablespoon	butter	and	bun	bottoms.	Set	buns	aside	and	wipe
out	skillet	with	paper	towels.
5.	Return	skillet	to	high	heat;	add	oil	and	heat	until	just	smoking.	Using

spatula,	transfer	burgers	to	skillet	and	cook	without	moving	for	3	minutes.	Using
spatula,	flip	burgers	over	and	cook	for	1	minute.	Top	each	patty	with	slice	of
cheese	and	continue	to	cook	until	cheese	is	melted,	about	1	minute	longer.
6.	Transfer	patties	to	bun	bottoms	and	top	with	onion.	Spread	about	1

tablespoon	of	burger	sauce	on	each	bun	top.	Cover	burgers	and	serve
immediately.



CLASSIC	BURGER	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	¼	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	BEST	OLD-FASHIONED	BURGERS

2				 tablespoons	mayonnaise
1				 tablespoon	ketchup
½				 teaspoon	sweet	pickle	relish
½				 teaspoon	sugar
½				 teaspoon	distilled	white	vinegar
¼				 teaspoon	pepper

Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Classic	drive-in	burgers	used	to	mean	freshly	ground	high-quality	beef,	but
today	fast-food	burgers	are	nothing	more	than	tasteless,	mass-produced	patties.
We	wanted	to	bring	back	the	original—an	ultra-crisp,	ultra-browned,	ultra-beefy
burger	perfect	with	melted	cheese	and	a	tangy	sauce.	We	learned	that	freshly
ground	beef,	loosely	packed,	was	essential.	Topped	with	a	sweet	and	tangy
sauce,	cheese,	and	a	few	thin	slices	of	onion,	this	burger	recaptures	the	flavor
and	texture	that	started	a	nationwide	craze.
COMBINE	TWO	KINDS	OF	MEAT	We	use	a	combination	of	sirloin	steak

tips	and	boneless	beef	short	ribs	for	this	burger.	Though	this	makes	our
technique	a	bit	more	complicated,	we	find	it’s	worth	it.	We	choose	sirloin	steak
tips	for	their	beefy	flavor,	and	the	short	ribs	add	an	element	of	fat	and	provide
some	much-needed	juiciness.
FREEZE	FIRST	Most	home	cooks	don’t	own	a	meat	grinder,	but	don’t

worry:	A	food	processor	will	work.	When	meat	gets	too	warm,	however,	it	can
end	up	being	smeared	in	the	processor	instead	of	evenly	chopped.	That’s	why	it’s
important	to	cut	the	meat	into	chunks	and	chill	them	in	the	freezer	before
processing.	This	way	they	will	be	chopped,	not	pulverized,	and	cook	up	just	as
perfectly	tender	(with	as	crisp	a	crust)	as	those	ground	in	an	official	meat
grinder.	Be	careful	not	to	grind	the	meat	too	small,	or	leave	it	too	large.	(See
“Getting	the	Perfect	Grind”).
KEEP	HANDS	OFF	We	struggled	with	rubbery	meat	when	developing	this

recipe	and	discovered	that	collagen	was	the	culprit.	As	the	collagen	proteins	are
heated	past	140	degrees,	they	begin	to	squeeze	the	meat,	causing	it	to	become
dense	and	rubbery.	(At	140	degrees,	the	collagen	will	also	begin	to	unravel,
turning	the	meat	from	tough	to	tender,	but	this	process	takes	hours—far	longer
than	the	mere	minutes	burgers	spend	on	the	griddle.)	The	more	these	proteins
come	in	contact	with	each	other,	the	more	shrinkage	and	tightening	will	take
place.	The	key	to	a	tender	burger	is	to	keep	it	as	loosely	packed	as	possible.	In
fact,	we	hardly	touch	the	meat	at	all.	After	letting	it	fall	directly	onto	a	baking
sheet	after	grinding,	we	separate	the	ground	meat	and	gently	press	it	into	four
patties	without	lifting	it	up.	Keep	your	hands	off	the	burgers!
KEEP	NOOKS	AND	CRANNIES	Because	our	burgers	are	so	loosely

packed	with	home-ground	meat,	there	are	many	nooks	and	crannies	on	their
surfaces	as	they	cook.	This	allows	juices	to	bubble	up	through	their	porous
surface	and	drip	back	down,	basting	the	burgers	as	they	cook.	The	finished	result
is	juicy	with	a	substantial,	crisp	crust.



TOP	IT	OFF	This	style	of	burger	is	often	served	with	a	tangy	and	sweet
Thousand	Island–style	dressing.	We	replicate	this	by	adding	relish,	sugar,	and
white	vinegar	to	a	mayo	and	ketchup	base:	a	great	foil	for	the	juicy,	salty	burger.
We	like	American	cheese,	a	classic	choice	that	will	fill	the	cracks	and	crevices	in
the	patty	with	gooey	cheese	and	won’t	compete	against	the	other	flavors.
Garnishing	simply	with	onions—in	lieu	of	“the	works”—keeps	the	flavor	of	the
beef	at	center	stage.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHEN	TO	SALT	FRESH-GROUND

Do	not	salt	your	meat	before	grinding	it	up.

We	thought	that	we	could	improve	the	flavor	of	our	burgers	by	salting	the	meat	before	grinding	it,	but	we
found	the	burgers	ended	up	very	dense.	What	was	going	on?	We	know	that	when	exposed	to	a	strong
concentration	of	salt,	meat	proteins	will	dissolve.	This	breakdown	is	desirable	in	steak	or	chops—the	action
of	dissolving	the	protein	allows	the	meat	to	hold	on	to	more	moisture,	making	it	juicier	when	cooked.	In	our
burgers,	however,	the	dissolved	meat	proteins	act	as	a	sort	of	glue,	binding	the	ground	bits	together	very
tightly	to	create	a	rubbery,	almost	sausagelike	texture.	So	while	you	may	be	tempted	to	add	salt	to	the	meat
before	grinding,	we	recommend	waiting	until	you’ve	formed	the	patties.	(Note	the	exception	in	our	Well-
Done	Burger	recipe,	which	includes	a	tenderizing	panade.)	Salting	just	the	exterior	will	maintain	the	tender,
open	structure	you’re	after.

	
GLUED	TOGETHER

The	meat	for	this	patty	was	salted	before	it	was	ground,	leading	to	a	dense,	rubbery	texture.

	
LOOSENED	UP

Salt	just	on	its	exterior	helped	this	patty	maintain	the	loose	structure	we	wanted.



JUICY	PUB-STYLE	BURGERS
SERVES	4

Sirloin	steak	tips	are	also	sold	as	flap	meat.	When	stirring	the	butter	and	pepper
into	the	ground	meat	and	shaping	the	patties,	take	care	not	to	overwork	the	meat
or	the	burgers	will	become	dense.	For	the	best	flavor,	season	the	burgers
aggressively	just	before	cooking.	The	burgers	can	be	topped	as	desired	or	with
one	of	the	test	kitchen’s	favorite	combinations	(recipes	follow).

2				 pounds	sirloin	steak	tips,	trimmed	and	cut	into	½-inch	chunks
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	andcooled	slightly
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 teaspoon	vegetable	oil
4				 large	hamburger	buns,	toasted	and	buttered

1.	Place	beef	chunks	on	baking	sheet	in	single	layer.	Freeze	meat	until	very
firm	and	starting	to	harden	around	edges	but	still	pliable,	15	to	25	minutes.
2.	Place	one-quarter	of	meat	in	food	processor	and	pulse	until	finely	ground

into	1⁄16-inch	pieces,	about	35	pulses,	stopping	and	redistributing	meat	around
bowl	as	necessary	to	ensure	beef	is	evenly	ground.	Transfer	meat	to	baking
sheet,	overturning	processor	bowl	and	without	directly	touching	meat.	Repeat
grinding	with	remaining	3	batches	of	meat.	Spread	meat	over	baking	sheet	and
inspect	carefully,	discarding	any	long	strands	of	gristle	or	large	chunks	of	hard
meat	or	fat.
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.	Drizzle

melted	butter	over	ground	meat	and	add	1	teaspoon	pepper.	Gently	toss	with	fork
to	combine.	Divide	meat	into	4	lightly	packed	balls.	Gently	flatten	into	patties	¾
inch	thick	and	about	4½	inches	in	diameter.	Refrigerate	patties	until	ready	to
cook.	(Patties	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	1	day.)
4.	Season	1	side	of	patties	with	salt	and	pepper.	Using	spatula,	flip	patties	and

season	other	side.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	high	heat	until	just	smoking.
Using	spatula,	transfer	burgers	to	skillet	and	cook	without	moving	for	2	minutes.
Using	spatula,	flip	burgers	over	and	cook	for	2	minutes	longer.	Transfer	patties
to	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	bake	until	burgers	register	125	degrees	(for	medium-
rare)	or	130	degrees	(for	medium),	3	to	6	minutes.



5.	Transfer	burgers	to	plate	and	let	rest	for	5	minutes.	Transfer	to	buns,	add
desired	toppings,	and	serve.



PUB-STYLE	BURGER	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	JUICY	PUB-STYLE	BURGERS

¾				 cup	mayonnaise
2				 tablespoons	soy	sauce
1				 tablespoon	packed	dark	brown	sugar
1				 tablespoon	Worcestershire	sauce
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	chives
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
¾				 teaspoon	pepper

Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	bowl.

JUICY	PUB-STYLE	BURGERS	WITH	CRISPY	SHALLOTS	AND	BLUE
CHEESE
Heat	½	cup	vegetable	oil	and	3	thinly	sliced	shallots	in	medium	saucepan	over
high	heat;	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	shallots	are	golden,	about	8	minutes.
Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	shallots	to	paper	towel–lined	plate,	season	with
salt,	and	let	drain	until	crisp,	about	5	minutes.	(Cooled	shallots	can	be	stored	at
room	temperature	for	up	to	3	days.)	Top	each	burger	with	1	ounce	crumbled	blue
cheese	before	transferring	to	oven.	Top	with	crispy	shallots	just	before	serving.

JUICY	PUB-STYLE	BURGERS	WITH	SAUTÉED	ONION	AND
SMOKED	CHEDDAR
Heat	2	tablespoons	vegetable	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until
just	smoking.	Add	1	thinly	sliced	onion	and	¼	teaspoon	salt;	cook,	stirring
frequently,	until	softened	and	lightly	browned,	5	to	7	minutes.	Top	each	burger
with	1	ounce	grated	smoked	cheddar	cheese	before	transferring	to	oven.	Top
with	onions	just	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Few	things	are	as	satisfying	as	a	thick,	juicy	pub-style	burger.	But	avoiding	the
usual	gray	band	of	overcooked	meat	is	a	challenge.	We	wanted	a	patty	that	was
well	seared,	juicy,	and	evenly	rosy	from	center	to	edge.	We	found	grinding	our
own	meat	in	the	food	processor	to	be	a	must.	Sirloin	steak	tips	are	the	right	cut
for	the	job.	They	offer	a	supremely	beefy	flavor	without	gristly	sinew.
CUT	INTO	SMALLER	PIECES	Though	for	our	Best	Old-Fashioned

Burgers	we	cut	the	meat	into	1-inch	chunks,	we	found	that	in	these	heftier,	pub-
size	burgers,	the	patties	broke	apart	when	flipped	in	the	pan.	The	solution?
Cutting	the	meat	into	small	½-inch	chunks	before	grinding	and	lightly	packing
the	meat	to	form	patties	gives	the	burgers	just	enough	structure	to	hold	their
shape	in	the	skillet.
ADD	STRAIGHT	FAT	Instead	of	adding	another	cut	of	meat	with	more	fat

(as	we	do	in	our	Best	Old-Fashioned	Burgers),	here	we	add	straight	fat.	A	little
melted	butter,	which	solidifies	as	it	hits	the	cold	meat,	creates	pinhead-size
particles	of	fat	strewn	throughout	the	patties.	The	butter	acts	as	lubrication	and
adds	a	little	more	moisture,	improving	the	burgers’	flavor	and	juiciness.	Also,
and	even	better,	the	dairy	proteins	and	sugar	(lactose)	in	the	butter	boost	the
browning	on	the	burgers’	exteriors.
USE	TWO	COOKING	METHODS	Using	a	standard	cooking	method	for

these	burgers—preheating	a	skillet	over	high	heat	and	then	cooking	the	patties	to
medium-rare	for	about	four	minutes	on	each	side—doesn’t	work.	The	meat	is
marred	by	a	thick	band	of	gray	meat	that	no	extra	fat	can	help.	Instead	we	use	a
two-method	cooking	technique,	first	searing	the	burgers	over	the	high	heat	of	a
skillet	to	produce	a	great	crust	and	then	sticking	them	in	the	gentle,	ambient	heat
of	the	oven	to	finish.	(For	more	on	two-method	cooking,	see	concept	5.)
TRANSFER	TO	COLD	PAN	While	the	two-method	cooking	technique	is

important,	it	makes	only	a	small	change	in	the	finished	product	without	an
important	element:	the	cold	baking	sheet.	When	we	simply	transferred	the
burgers	in	the	hot	skillet	to	the	oven	to	finish,	the	bottom	of	the	burgers	cooked
too	quickly.	But	if	placed	on	a	cold	sheet	pan	in	a	300-degree	oven,	the	burgers
emerge	after	three	to	six	minutes	with	perfect	interiors—juicy	and	rosy
throughout.



SHOPPING	FOR	BEEF	101
PRIMAL	CUTS
Eight	different	cuts	of	beef	are	sold	at	the	wholesale	level.	From	this	first	series	of	cuts,	known	in	the	trade
as	primal	cuts,	a	butcher	(usually	at	a	meat-packing	plant	in	the	Midwest	but	sometimes	on-site	at	your
market)	will	make	the	retail	cuts	that	you	bring	home	from	the	market.

	
CHUCK/SHOULDER
The	chuck	(or	shoulder)	runs	from	the	neck	down	to	the	fifth	rib.	There	are	four	major	muscles	in	this
region,	and	meat	from	the	chuck	tends	to	be	flavorful	and	fairly	fatty,	which	is	why	ground	chuck	makes	the
best	hamburgers.	Chuck	also	contains	a	fair	amount	of	connective	tissue,	so	when	the	meat	is	not	ground	it
generally	requires	a	long	cooking	time	to	become	tender.

RIB
The	rib	section	extends	along	the	back	of	the	animal	from	the	sixth	to	the	twelfth	rib.	The	prime	rib	comes
from	this	area,	as	do	rib-eye	steaks.	Rib	cuts	have	excellent	beefy	flavor	and	are	quite	tender.

SHORT	LOIN



The	short	loin	(also	called	the	loin)	extends	from	the	last	rib	back	through	the	midsection	of	the	animal	to
the	hip	area.	It	contains	two	major	muscles—the	tenderloin	and	the	shell.	The	tenderloin	is	extremely	tender
(it	is	positioned	right	under	the	spine)	and	has	a	quite	mild	flavor.	This	muscle	may	be	sold	whole	as	a	roast
or	sliced	crosswise	into	steaks,	called	filet	mignon.	The	shell	is	a	much	larger	muscle	and	has	a	more	robust
beef	flavor	as	well	as	more	fat.	Strip	steaks	(also	called	shell	steaks)	come	from	this	muscle	and	are	a	test
kitchen	favorite.	Two	steaks	from	the	short	loin	area	contain	portions	of	both	the	tenderloin	and	shell
muscles.	These	steaks	are	called	the	T-bone	and	porterhouse,	and	both	are	excellent.

BRISKET/SHANK,	PLATE,	AND	FLANK
Moderately	thick	boneless	cuts	are	removed	from	the	three	primal	cuts	that	run	along	the	underside	of	the
animal.	The	brisket	is	rather	tough	and	contains	a	lot	of	connective	tissue.	The	plate	is	rarely	sold	at	the
retail	level	(it	is	used	to	make	pastrami).	The	flank	is	a	leaner	cut	that	makes	an	excellent	steak	when
grilled.

ROUND
Roasts	and	steaks	cut	from	the	round	are	usually	sold	boneless	and	are	quite	lean	and	can	be	tough.	Again,
we	generally	prefer	cuts	from	other	parts	of	the	cow,	although	top	round	can	be	roasted	with	some	success.

SIRLOIN
The	sirloin	contains	relatively	inexpensive	cuts	that	are	sold	as	both	steaks	and	roasts.	We	find	that	sirloin
cuts	are	fairly	lean	and	tough.	In	general,	we	prefer	other	parts	of	the	animal,	although	top	sirloin	makes	a
decent	roast.

GRADING
The	U.S.	Department	of	Agriculture	assigns	different	quality	grades	to	beef,	but	most	of	the	meat	available
to	consumers	is	confined	to	just	three:	Prime,	Choice,	and	Select.	Grading	is	strictly	voluntary	on	the	part	of
the	meat	packer.	If	meat	is	graded,	the	meat	should	bear	a	USDA	stamp	indicating	the	grade,	though	it	may
not	be	visible	to	the	consumer.	To	grade	meat,	inspectors	evaluate	color,	grain,	surface	texture,	and	fat
content	and	its	distribution.

Our	blind	tasting	of	all	three	grades	of	strip	steaks	produced	predictable	results:	Prime	ranked	first	for	its
tender,	buttery	texture	and	rich,	beefy	flavor.	Next	came	Choice,	with	good	meaty	flavor	and	a	little	more
chew.	The	tough	and	stringy	Select	steak	followed,	with	flavor	that	was	barely	acceptable.	Our	advice:
When	you’re	willing	to	splurge,	go	for	Prime	steak	(which	in	our	sampling	cost	$6	more	per	pound	than	the
Choice	meat),	but	a	Choice	steak	that	exhibits	a	moderate	amount	of	marbling	is	a	fine,	affordable	option.
Just	steer	clear	of	Select-grade	steak.



	
PRIME

Prime	meat	is	heavily	marbled	with	intramuscular	fat.	About	2	percent	of	graded	beef	is	considered
Prime.



	
CHOICE

The	majority	of	graded	beef	is	Choice.	It	is	generally	moderately	marbled	with	intramuscular	fat.



	
SELECT

Select	beef	has	little	marbling,	which	can	make	Select	meats	drier,	tougher,	and	less	flavorful	than	the
two	higher	grades.

GRAIN-FED	VS.	GRASS-FED
Most	U.S.	beef	is	raised	on	grain	but	grass-fed	beef	is	becoming	an	increasingly	popular	option.	Grain-fed
beef	is	generally	considered	to	be	richer	and	fattier,	while	grass-fed	beef	is	leaner,	chewy,	and	more	gamy—
or	at	least	that’s	the	conventional	wisdom.

In	our	taste	tests,	we	pitted	grain-fed	and	grass-fed	rib-eye	steaks	and	strip	steaks	against	each	other.	We
found	differences	among	the	various	strip	steaks	to	be	quite	small.	The	grain-fed	rib	eyes	had	a	milder
flavor	compared	to	the	nutty,	complex	flavor	of	the	grass-fed	beef,	but	our	tasters’	preferences	were	evenly
split.	The	texture	of	all	samples	was	similar.

	



CONCEPT	15

A	Panade	Keeps	Ground	Meat	Tender
Let’s	put	the	big,	juicy,	home-ground	burgers	aside.	After	all,	it’s	relatively	easy
to	keep	a	rare	burger	tender	and	moist	(see	concept	14).	It’s	when	ground	beef	is
cooked	through	that	the	meat,	no	matter	how	lovingly	handled,	turns	gray	and
you’re	left	with	a	dinner	of	dense,	dry	hockey	pucks.	But	sometimes	you	need	to
fully	cook	beef:	like	the	occasionally	well-done	burger	(for	kids,	especially),	not
to	mention	in	dishes	like	meatloaf	or	meatballs.	So	how	do	you	cook	ground
beef	until	well-done?	It’s	amazing	what	a	simple	bread-and-milk	paste	can	do	to
help.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
A	panade	is	a	mixture	of	starch	and	liquid.	It	can	be	simple	(white	bread	and
regular	milk),	or	it	can	be	complex	(panko	or	saltines;	buttermilk	or	yogurt	or
even	added	gelatin).	But	it	always	has	the	same	set	of	goals:	to	keep	ground	meat
moist	and	tender,	and	to	help	meatballs	and	meatloaf	hold	their	shape.	How	does
it	work?
As	we	learned	in	concept	14,	meat	is	made	of	long	fibers	of	protein	that	run

parallel	to	each	other,	producing	bundled	strands	encased	in	sheaths	of
connective	tissue.	The	length	of	individual	muscle	fibers	can	range	from	several
to	tens	of	centimeters.	The	collection	of	long	fibers	encased	in	tough	connective
tissue	shrinks	during	cooking	and	therefore	can	be	difficult	to	bite	through.	But
when	meat	is	ground	and	mixed,	these	proteins	are	cut	into	much	smaller	pieces.
In	the	process,	they	exude	a	sticky	mass	of	soluble	proteins	that	glue	the	whole
lot	of	it	together	in	a	tangled	web.	Upon	cooking,	this	web	of	proteins	can	shrink
as	much	as	25	percent,	squeezing	out	excess	moisture	and,	as	a	result,	making
burgers	and	meatballs	that	are	dry	and	tough.
But	all	is	not	lost.	That’s	where	the	panade	comes	in.	This	mixture,	most

commonly	of	bread	and	milk,	works	in	two	ways.	First,	its	liquid	adds	moisture
to	the	ground	meat.	Second,	the	molecules	of	starch	in	the	bread	actually	get	in
the	way	of	the	meat	proteins,	preventing	them	from	interconnecting	too	strongly.
In	addition,	starches	from	the	bread	absorb	liquid	from	the	milk	to	form	a	gel

that	coats	and	lubricates	the	protein	molecules	in	the	meat,	much	in	the	same
way	as	fat,	keeping	them	moist	and	preventing	them	from	linking	together	and
shrinking	into	a	tough	matrix.
Starch	from	bread	works	in	the	same	way	as	cornstarch	when	it	is	used	to

thicken	a	sauce	or	gravy.	Starch	granules	absorb	water	and	swell	with	heat,
making	the	liquid	thick	and	viscous.	It	takes	little	cornstarch	to	thicken	a	sauce,
and	so	it	also	takes	relatively	little	panade	to	keep	ground	meat	from	becoming
tough	and	dry.	Although	plain	water	will	work,	milk	adds	more	depth	of	flavor
by	contributing	protein	and	lactose,	a	sugar,	which	combine	to	produce	extra
browning	and	flavor	via	the	Maillard	reaction.



POWER	OF	PANADE



	
ADDED	STARCH	GEL	The	molecules	of	starch	combine	with	the	milk	in	the	panade	to	create	a	gel	that



lubricates	the	ground	meat	proteins,	preventing	them	from	interconnecting	too	strongly,	which	would	leave
us	with	a	tough	and	dry	finished	dish.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	test	the	effects	of	a	panade	in	ground	meat,	we	mixed	up	two	batches	of
burger	meat.	One	batch	contained	12	ounces	of	90	percent	lean	ground	beef,
half	a	slice	of	white	bread,	1	tablespoon	of	milk,	and	½	teaspoon	of	salt	while	the
other	had	only	the	meat	and	salt.	We	made	four	3-ounce	(85-gram)	patties	from
each	batch	and	sealed	each	burger	individually	in	an	airtight	bag.	We	then
placed	all	of	the	burgers	in	a	temperature-controlled	hot	water	bath	set	to	160
degrees	(the	temperature	of	a	well-done	burger)	and	let	them	cook	for	30
minutes	(ample	time	for	the	burgers	to	reach	160	degrees	throughout).	After
letting	them	cool	for	five	minutes,	we	opened	the	bags	and	recorded	the	amount
of	liquid	that	had	pooled	around	the	burgers.



THE	RESULTS
The	burgers	with	the	bread	and	milk	panade	lost	4.5	grams	of	liquid	on	average,
or	just	over	5	percent	of	their	weight.	The	patties	made	without	panade	shed
twice	that	amount:	9	grams	of	liquid,	or	almost	11	percent	of	their	weight.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	goal	when	cooking	ground	meat	is	to	minimize	moisture	loss,	even	when	the
meat	is	cooked	to	well-done.	Without	a	panade,	the	meat	proteins	create	a	dense
web	that	contracts	when	the	meat	is	cooked.	As	a	result,	ground	meat	without	a
panade	will	expel	a	lot	of	moisture.	The	addition	of	a	panade	cuts	this	moisture
loss	in	half.	The	mixture	of	starch	and	milk	forms	a	gel-like	substance	that	coats
the	meat	proteins	and	prevents	them	from	interconnecting	too	strongly.	In
addition,	the	milk	adds	more	moisture	to	the	equation	so	the	end	results	are
juicier	and	more	tender.



MOISTURE	LOSS	IN	WELL-DONE	BURGERS

	
We	cooked	burgers	made	with	and	without	a	panade	and	poured	the	liquid	shed	by	each	batch	intograduated
cylinders.	The	panade-less	burgers	lost	twice	as	much	liquid	as	burgers	made	with	a	panade,	and	less	liquid
in	the	vial	means	more	juice	in	the	burgers.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SHOPPING	FOR	GROUND	BEEF

Our	favorite	preground	beef	is	chuck,	with	ground	sirloin	coming	in	a	close	second.

Today,	many	supermarkets	classify	ground	beef	by	fat	levels	alone,	and	this	means	that	the	meat	can	come
from	anywhere	on	the	animal.	This	is	different	from	the	old-fashioned	approach	to	grinding,	when	butchers
ground	specific	primal	cuts	and	labeled	them	as	such.	The	U.S.	Department	of	Agriculture	defines	ground
beef	as	ground	fresh	and/or	frozen	beef	from	primal	cuts	and	trimmings	containing	no	more	than	30	percent
fat.	Therefore,	ground	beef	can	be	made	from	a	variety	of	cuts,	and	fat	levels	vary	from	70	to	95	percent
lean.	But	this	doesn’t	help	us	understand	the	difference	among	ground	chuck,	sirloin,	and	round.

Ground	chuck	frequently	ranks	tops	in	our	taste	tests.	Cut	from	the	shoulder,	ground	chuck	ranges	from
15	to	20	percent	fat	and	has	been	described	by	our	tasters	as	having	a	“rich”	flavor	and	a	“tender”	and
“moist”	texture.	Ground	sirloin	comes	in	a	close	second.	Cut	from	the	midsection	of	the	animal	near	the	hip,
ground	sirloin	usually	ranges	in	fat	content	from	7	to	10	percent.	Our	tasters	have	described	it	as	“tender
and	tasty.”	Ground	round	has	a	fat	content	ranging	from	10	to	20	percent	and	comes	from	the	rear	upper	leg
and	rump	of	the	cow.	Our	tasters	have	described	it	as	“gristly”	and	“lacking	beef	flavor,”	rejecting	it	in	most
recipes	as	lean	and	tough.	While	chuck	is	great	for	burgers,	and	sirloin	ideal	for	bolognese,	we	sometimes
recommend	a	combination	(see	Glazed	All-Beef	Meatloaf).	Other	times,	our	instructions	are	to	purchase	a
certain	percentage	lean—in	this	case,	whatever	is	available	at	your	market.



PANADES	AT	WORK	
BURGERS
Given	the	real	food-safety	issues	surrounding	ground	beef	from	the	supermarket,
we	recognize	that	many	backyard	cooks	(and	test	cooks)	grill	their	burgers	to
medium-well	and	beyond—especially	when	kids	are	around	(the	minimum
temperature	to	kill	all	bacteria	is	160	degrees).	Instead	of	accepting	the	usual
tough,	desiccated	hockey	pucks	with	diminished	beefy	flavor,	we	use	a	simple
panade	(just	a	mixture	of	white	bread	and	milk)	to	retain	moisture	and	juiciness
so	our	well-done	burgers	are	truly	done	well.



WELL-DONE	BURGERS
SERVES	4

Adding	bread	and	milk	to	the	beef	creates	burgers	that	are	juicy	and	tender	even
when	well-done.	For	cheeseburgers,	follow	the	optional	instructions	below.

1				 slice	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	crust	removed,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
2				 tablespoons	whole	milk
2				 teaspoons	steak	sauce
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
¾				 teaspoon	salt
¾				 teaspoon	pepper
1½				 pounds	80	percent	lean	ground	chuck
6				 ounces	sliced	cheese	(optional)
4				 hamburger	rolls,	toasted

1.	Mash	bread	and	milk	in	large	bowl	with	fork	until	homogeneous.	Stir	in
steak	sauce,	garlic,	salt,	and	pepper.	Using	hands,	gently	break	up	meat	over
bread	mixture	and	toss	lightly	to	distribute.	Divide	meat	into	4	portions	and
lightly	toss	1	portion	from	hand	to	hand	to	form	ball,	then	lightly	flatten	ball
with	fingertips	into	¾-inch-thick	patty.	Press	center	of	patty	down	with	fingertips
until	it	is	about	½	inch	thick,	creating	slight	depression.	Repeat	with	remaining
portions.
2A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light

large	chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals
are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Set	cooking	grate	in
place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5	minutes.
2B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.
3.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	burgers	on	grill	(on	hot	side	if	using

charcoal)	and	cook,	without	pressing	on	them,	until	well	browned	on	first	side,	2
to	4	minutes.	Flip	burgers	and	cook	for	3	to	4	minutes	for	medium-well	or	4	to	5
minutes	for	well-done,	adding	cheese,	if	using,	about	2	minutes	before	reaching
desired	doneness	and	covering	grill	to	melt	cheese.
4.	Transfer	burgers	to	serving	platter,	tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	and	let



rest	for	5	to	10	minutes	before	serving	on	rolls.

WELL-DONE	BACON-CHEESEBURGERS

Most	bacon	burgers	simply	top	the	burgers	with	bacon.	We	also	add	bacon	fat	to
the	ground	beef,	which	adds	juiciness	and	unmistakable	bacon	flavor	throughout
the	burger.

Cook	8	slices	bacon	in	skillet	over	medium	heat	until	crisp,	7	to	9	minutes.
Transfer	bacon	to	paper	towel–lined	plate	and	set	aside.	Reserve	2	tablespoons
fat	and	refrigerate	until	just	warm.	Add	reserved	bacon	fat	to	beef	mixture.
Include	optional	cheese	and	top	each	burger	with	2	slices	bacon	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
While	developing	a	recipe	for	well-done	hamburgers	that	would	still	be	tender
and	moist,	we	opted	to	pack	the	patties	with	a	very	basic	panade,	a	paste	made
from	bread	and	milk	that’s	often	used	to	keep	meatloaf	and	meatballs	moist.
PICK	YOUR	GROUND	CHUCK	We	work	with	supermarket	ground	beef

here—nothing	fancy.	What	type	is	best?	Supermarkets	sell	beef	according	to	the
ratio	of	lean	meat	to	fat,	the	three	most	common	categories	being	80	percent	lean
(usually	from	the	chuck,	or	front	shoulder),	85	percent	(usually	from	the	round,
or	hind	legs),	and	90	percent	(usually	from	the	sirloin).	Our	testers	prefer	the
fattier	80	percent	lean:	The	well-done	chuck	burgers	are	noticeably	moister	than
the	inedible	versions	we	tried	with	the	leaner	sirloin.
SEASON	AGGRESSIVELY	To	punch	up	the	flavor	in	our	well-done

hamburger	recipe,	we	add	minced	garlic	and	tangy	steak	sauce.	This	contributes
to	a	deep,	meaty	flavor.
DON’T	OVERWORK	It’s	important	not	to	overwork	these	burger	patties—

too	much	handling	can	result	in	a	rubbery	burger.	Aggressively	grinding	meat	as
they	do	in	the	supermarket,	often	multiple	times,	releases	too	many	soluble
proteins	that	act	as	a	glue	to	stick	the	proteins	together	to	form	a	dense,	rubbery
mass.
USE	HIGH	HEAT	While	cooking	our	burgers	over	a	medium	fire	would

ensure	a	juicier,	more	tender	burger,	it	would	be	a	burger	without	that	flavorful
sear.	We	cook	these	burgers	over	high	heat	to	create	great	flavor.	The	panade
helps	to	stem	the	moisture	loss	along	the	way.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

TO	DENT	OR	NOT	TO	DENT?
Dimple	your	burgers	cooked	on	the	grill	or	under	the	broiler.

To	prevent	hamburgers	from	puffing	up	during	cooking,	we	sometimes	recommend	making	a	slight
depression	in	the	center	of	the	patty	before	placing	it	on	the	heat.	Meat	inflates	upon	cooking	when	its
connective	tissue,	or	collagen,	shrinks	at	temperatures	higher	than	140	degrees.	The	result	is	a	round	burger
that	does	a	poor	job	of	holding	on	to	toppings.	If	burgers	are	cooked	on	a	grill	or	under	a	broiler,	a	dimple	is
in	order	because	the	meat	is	exposed	to	direct	heat	not	only	from	below	or	above,	but	also	on	its	sides.	As	a
result,	the	edges	of	the	patty	shrink,	cinching	the	hamburger	like	a	belt,	compressing	its	interior	up	and	out.
There’s	no	need	to	dimple	burgers	that	are	cooked	in	a	hot	pan,	since	the	sides	of	the	burger	are	exposed	to
far	less	heat.



	
DIMPLED	FOR	GRILL	AND	BROILER

	
NOT	DIMPLED	FOR	SKILLET

	



PANADES	AT	WORK	
MEATLOAF,	MEAT	SAUCE,	MEATBALLS
When	making	loaves,	sauces,	and	balls	with	ground	meat,	our	panades	are	often
tweaked	from	the	traditional	white	bread	and	milk	combination.	This	can	range
from	using	saltines	or	panko	as	the	bread,	and	yogurt	or	buttermilk	instead	of
milk.	In	a	clever	twist,	we’ve	found	that	adding	baking	powder	as	part	of	the
panade	can	leaven	meat	just	as	it	does	bread,	creating	delicate	and	juicy
Swedish	meatballs.



GLAZED	ALL-BEEF	MEATLOAF
SERVES	6	TO	8

We	suggest	you	use	1	pound	of	ground	chuck	and	1	pound	of	ground	sirloin	for
the	ground	beef,	though	you	may	substitute	any	85	percent	lean	ground	beef.
Handle	the	meat	gently;	it	should	be	thoroughly	combined	but	not	pastelike.	To
avoid	using	the	broiler,	glaze	the	loaf	in	a	500-degree	oven;	increase	the	cooking
time	for	each	interval	by	two	to	three	minutes.

MEATLOAF
3				 ounces	Monterey	Jack	cheese,	shredded	(¾	cup)
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
1				 onion,	chopped	fine
1				 celery	rib,	chopped	fine
2				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	thyme
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
1				 teaspoon	paprika
¼				 cup	tomato	juice
½				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 large	eggs
½				 teaspoon	unflavored	gelatin
				2⁄3 cup	crushed	saltines	(about	16)
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
1				 tablespoon	soy	sauce
1				 teaspoon	Dijon	mustard
¾				 teaspoon	salt
½				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 pounds	85	percent	lean	ground	beef

GLAZE
½				 cup	ketchup
¼				 cup	cider	vinegar
3				 tablespoons	packed	light	brown	sugar
1				 teaspoon	hot	sauce
½				 teaspoon	ground	coriander



1.	FOR	THE	MEATLOAF:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat
oven	to	375	degrees.	Spread	cheese	on	plate	and	place	in	freezer	until	ready	to
use.	Fold	piece	of	heavy-duty	aluminum	foil	to	form	10	by	6-inch	rectangle.
Center	foil	on	wire	rack	and	place	rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Poke	holes	in
foil	with	skewer	about	½	inch	apart.	Spray	foil	with	vegetable	oil	spray	and	set
aside.
2.	Melt	butter	in	10-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat;	add	onion	and	celery

and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	beginning	to	brown,	6	to	8	minutes.	Add
thyme,	garlic,	and	paprika	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fragrant,	about	1
minute.	Reduce	heat	to	low	and	add	tomato	juice.	Cook,	scraping	bottom	of
skillet	with	wooden	spoon	to	loosen	any	browned	bits,	until	thickened,	about	1
minute.	Transfer	mixture	to	bowl	and	set	aside	to	cool.
3.	Whisk	broth	and	eggs	in	large	bowl	until	combined.	Sprinkle	gelatin	over

liquid	and	let	stand	for	5	minutes.	Stir	in	saltines,	parsley,	soy	sauce,	mustard,
salt,	pepper,	and	onion	mixture.	Crumble	frozen	cheese	into	coarse	powder	and
sprinkle	over	mixture.	Add	ground	beef;	mix	gently	with	hands	until	thoroughly
combined,	about	1	minute.	Transfer	meat	to	foil	rectangle	and	shape	into	10	by
6-inch	oval	about	2	inches	high.	Smooth	top	and	edges	of	meatloaf	with
moistened	spatula.	Bake	until	meatloaf	registers	135	to	140	degrees,	55	to	65
minutes.	Remove	meatloaf	from	oven	and	turn	on	broiler.
4.	FOR	THE	GLAZE:	While	meatloaf	cooks,	combine	glaze	ingredients	in

small	saucepan;	bring	to	simmer	over	medium	heat	and	cook,	stirring,	until	thick
and	syrupy,	about	5	minutes.	Spread	half	of	glaze	evenly	over	cooked	meatloaf
with	rubber	spatula;	place	under	broiler	and	cook	until	glaze	bubbles	and	begins
to	brown	at	edges,	about	5	minutes.	Remove	meatloaf	from	oven	and	spread
evenly	with	remaining	glaze;	place	back	under	broiler	and	cook	until	glaze	is
again	bubbling	and	beginning	to	brown,	about	5	minutes	more.	Cool	meatloaf
for	about	20	minutes	before	slicing.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	a	tender,	moist,	and	light	meatloaf,	a	combination	of	ground	beef,	pork,	and
veal	(known	as	meatloaf	mix)	is	usually	the	way	to	go.	But	sometimes	we	can’t
find	meatloaf	mix	or	don’t	have	it	on	hand.	For	an	all-beef	loaf	that’s	just	as
good	as	one	made	with	meatloaf	mix,	we	recommend	using	equal	parts	ground
chuck	and	sirloin,	which	provide	just	the	right	balance	of	juicy,	tender	meat	and
assertive	beefy	flavor.	(Simply	using	85	percent	lean	ground	beef	works,	too.)	A
panade	along	with	frozen,	grated	cheese	adds	moisture	as	well	as	fat.
ADD	A	PANADE	We	use	saltines	as	the	bread	for	our	panade,	delivering	a

well-seasoned,	tender	loaf	with	good	moisture.	Instead	of	milk,	which	does	little
to	tone	down	beef’s	naturally	liver-y	flavor,	we	use	chicken	broth,	which	adds
savory	notes	to	the	loaf.	Powdered	gelatin	rounds	out	the	panade,	replacing	what
was	lost	in	the	ground	veal	of	a	meatloaf	mix,	and	giving	our	version	a	luxurious
smoothness.
USE	FROZEN	CHEESE	We	add	cheese	to	this	meatloaf	for	its	flavor,

moisture,	and	binding	quality.	We	don’t	want	little	pockets	of	cheese	that	ooze
unappealing	liquid	when	the	loaf	is	cut,	though.	Therefore,	the	method	to	break
down	the	cheese	for	this	recipe	is	critical.	Dicing	and	shredding	leaves	those
undesirable	hot	pockets	of	cheese.	Grated	cheese	proves	superior,	and	freezing
the	grated	cheese	keeps	it	crumbly.
BIND	WITH	EGGS	While	the	additions	of	frozen,	grated	cheese	and	a

panade	made	of	saltines,	chicken	broth,	and	gelatin	are	important	steps	toward
binding	the	meatloaf	together,	more	is	required.	We	also	add	2	large	eggs	to	the
mix.	The	eggs,	which	solidify	as	they	cook,	hold	in	moisture	and	add	body	to	the
meatloaf.
BAKE	FREE-FORM	Allowing	meatloaf	baked	in	a	loaf	pan	to	stew	in	its

own	juices	makes	for	a	greasy	mess.	We	ditch	the	loaf	pan	and	bake	the	meatloaf
“free-form”	on	a	raised	rectangle	we	make	from	aluminum	foil	set	atop	a	wire
cooling	rack.	Setting	the	meatloaf	on	this	raised	surface	not	only	allows	the	fat	to
drain	away,	preventing	the	meatloaf	from	tasting	greasy,	it	also	encourages
allover	browning,	which	adds	a	layer	of	flavor.	(Because	the	bigger	surface	area
and	browning	invite	moisture	loss,	we	add	a	panade.)
GLAZE	LATE	The	almost-finished	meatloaf	needs	its	crowning	glory—a

glaze.	But	applied	at	the	beginning	of	cooking,	the	glaze	mixes	unappealingly
with	the	liquids	seeping	out	of	the	loaf.	Finishing	with	the	glaze	produces	better
results,	especially	when	placing	the	loaf	briefly	under	the	broiler.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOW	GELATIN	MIMICS	VEAL

The	collagen	in	veal	converts	to	gelatin	with	ease.	Adding	powdered	gelatin	mimics	the	effects.

Many	traditional	meatloaf	recipes	call	for	three	different	meats	(beef,	pork,	and	veal),	and	each	one	has	a
core	function.	Beef	contributes	assertive	beefiness,	while	pork	adds	dimension	with	flavor	and	extra
fattiness.	With	veal,	it’s	mostly	about	the	gelatin—a	viscous	substance	with	natural	water-retaining	qualities
that	help	keep	a	meatloaf	moist	and	unctuous.	Gelatin	is	formed	when	collagen,	the	protein	in	a	cow’s
connective	tissue,	breaks	down	during	cooking.	Collagen	is	naturally	present	in	cows	of	all	ages,	but	the
collagen	in	calves	(the	source	of	veal)	is	more	loosely	structured—and	therefore	converts	to	gelatin	more
easily	and	quickly—than	the	collagen	in	an	adult	cow.	In	our	all-beef	meatloaf,	we	successfully	replicated
the	gelatinous	qualities	of	veal	by	adding	powdered	gelatin.

So	how	does	it	work?	Gelatin	is	a	pure	protein	that	suspends	water	in	a	meshlike,	semisolid	matrix
similar	to	a	cotton	ball	that	has	absorbed	and	trapped	water.	In	fact,	gelatin	can	hold	as	much	as	10	times	its
own	weight	in	water.	By	slowing	down	the	movement	of	liquids,	gelatin	has	a	stabilizing	effect,	making	it
harder	for	water	and	other	liquids	to	be	forced	out,	essentially	fencing	them	in.	In	meatloaf,	then,	gelatin
helps	by	(1)	decreasing	the	amount	of	liquid	leaking	from	the	meat	as	the	other	proteins	coagulate	and	(2)
improving	the	textural	feel	by	making	the	liquids	more	viscous	even	when	very	hot—sort	of	a	transitional
state	between	liquid	and	solid.	That	viscosity	translates	to	a	luxuriant	texture	in	the	mouth—much	like
reduced	stock,	or	demi-glace—and	the	perception	of	greater	richness,	as	if	we	had	added	more	fat.



SIMPLE	ITALIAN-STYLE	MEAT	SAUCE
SERVES	8	TO	10

High-quality	canned	tomatoes	will	make	a	big	difference	in	this	sauce.	We
recommend	Hunt’s	and	Muir	Glen	diced	tomatoes,	and	Tuttorosso	and	Muir
Glen	crushed	tomatoes.	If	using	dried	oregano,	add	the	entire	amount	with	the
canned	tomato	liquid	in	step	2.

4				 ounces	white	mushrooms,	trimmed	and	halved	if	small	or	quartered	if	large
1				 slice	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
2				 tablespoons	whole	milk
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 pound	85	percent	lean	ground	beef
1				 tablespoon	olive	oil
1				 large	onion,	chopped	fine
6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	tomato	paste
¼				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
1				 (14.5-ounce)	can	diced	tomatoes,	drained	with	¼	cup	juice	reserved
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	oregano	or	1	teaspoon	dried
1				 (28-ounce)	can	crushed	tomatoes
¼				 cup	grated	Parmesan	cheese,	plus	extra	forserving
2				 pounds	spaghetti	or	linguine

1.	Pulse	mushrooms	in	food	processor	until	finely	chopped,	about	8	pulses,
scraping	down	sides	as	needed;	transfer	to	bowl.	Add	bread,	milk,	½	teaspoon
salt,	and	½	teaspoon	pepper	to	now-empty	food	processor	and	pulse	until	paste
forms,	about	8	pulses.	Add	ground	beef	and	pulse	until	mixture	is	well
combined,	about	6	pulses.
2.	Heat	oil	in	large	saucepan	over	medium-high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add

onion	and	mushrooms	and	cook	until	vegetables	are	softened	and	well	browned,
6	to	12	minutes.	Stir	in	garlic,	tomato	paste,	and	pepper	flakes	and	cook	until
fragrant	and	tomato	paste	starts	to	brown,	about	1	minute.	Stir	in	reserved
tomato	juice	and	2	teaspoons	oregano,	scraping	up	any	browned	bits.	Stir	in
meat	mixture	and	cook,	breaking	up	any	large	pieces	with	wooden	spoon,	until
no	longer	pink,	about	3	minutes,	making	sure	that	meat	does	not	brown.



3.	Stir	in	diced	tomatoes	and	crushed	tomatoes,	bring	to	gentle	simmer,	and
cook	until	sauce	has	thickened	and	flavors	meld,	about	30	minutes.	Stir	in
Parmesan	and	remaining	1	teaspoon	oregano	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to
taste.	(Sauce	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days	or	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.)
4.	Meanwhile,	bring	8	quarts	water	to	boil	in	12-quart	pot.	Add	pasta	and	2

tablespoons	salt	and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	al	dente.	Reserve	½	cup	cooking
water,	then	drain	pasta	and	return	it	to	pot.	Add	1	cup	sauce	and	reserved
cooking	water	to	pasta	and	toss	to	combine.	Serve,	topping	individual	portions
with	more	sauce	and	passing	Parmesan	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Simmering	a	meat	sauce	all	day	does	two	things:	It	concentrates	flavors	as	the
liquid	reduces	slowly	over	the	three-to	four-hour	cooking	time;	and	it	breaks
down	the	meat,	giving	it	a	soft,	lush	texture.	For	a	quick	meat	sauce	that	tastes
as	if	it	had	simmered	all	day,	we	use	a	few	tricks:	Instead	of	browning	the	meat,
we	brown	mushrooms	to	give	the	sauce	flavor	without	drying	it	out.	We	blend	a
panade	into	the	meat	before	cooking,	to	keep	it	tender.	Finally,	for	good	tomato
flavor,	we	add	tomato	paste	to	the	browned	vegetables	in	our	meat	sauce	recipe
and	deglaze	the	pan	with	a	little	tomato	juice	before	adding	canned	tomatoes.
TEACH	AN	OLD	PANADE	NEW	TRICKS	We	use	a	basic	panade	in	this

sauce	(white	bread,	whole	milk).	Even	though	it’s	for	a	sauce	and	not	a	compact
construction	like	a	burger,	meatball,	or	meatloaf,	the	goal	is	the	same:	producing
tender,	juicy	meat.	Here,	we	mix	the	beef	and	panade	in	a	food	processor	in
order	to	help	ensure	that	the	starch	is	well	dispersed	so	that	all	the	meat	reaps	its
benefits.	The	food	processor	also	breaks	the	meat	into	tiny	pieces	that	cook	up
supple	and	tender.	When	we	skipped	this	step,	the	meat	was	chunkier—more	like
chili	than	a	good	sauce.
USE	FLAVOR	ENHANCERS	We	ramp	up	flavor	in	this	quick	sauce	in	a

few	ways.	First:	mushrooms.	Basic	white	ones	(browned	in	the	pan	with	an
onion)	are	enough	to	impart	a	real	beefy	taste.	We	also	add	tomato	paste	and
Parmesan	cheese,	which	are	rich	in	glutamates	(see	concept	35)	and	add	an
umami,	or	savory,	taste,	along	with	liberal	amounts	of	red	pepper	flakes	and
fresh	oregano.
GRIND	THE	MUSHROOMS,	TOO	We	process	the	mushrooms	in	a	food

processor	until	finely	chopped	before	browning	them	in	a	pan.	After	all,	we	want
the	beefy	flavor	that	the	mushrooms	add	to	the	sauce	but	are	not	interested	in
their	squishy	texture.	This	way,	the	mushrooms	blend	right	in	with	the	ground
beef.
DEGLAZE	WITH	JUICE	We	save	some	tomato	juice	from	the	drained

diced	tomatoes	to	deglaze	the	pan	after	browning	the	mushrooms.	This	(plus	a
bit	of	tomato	paste)	gives	the	sauce’s	tomato	flavor	a	boost.



CLASSIC	SPAGHETTI	AND	MEATBALLS	FOR	A	CROWD
SERVES	12

If	you	don’t	have	buttermilk,	you	can	substitute	1	cup	of	plain	yogurt	thinned
with	½	cup	of	milk.	Grate	the	onion	on	the	large	holes	of	a	box	grater.	You	can
cook	the	pasta	in	two	separate	pots	if	you	do	not	have	a	pot	large	enough	to	cook
all	of	the	pasta	together.	The	ingredients	in	this	recipe	can	be	reduced	by	two-
thirds	to	serve	four.

MEATBALLS
2¼				 cups	panko	bread	crumbs
1½				 cups	buttermilk
1½				 teaspoons	unflavored	gelatin
3				 tablespoons	water
2				 pounds	85	percent	lean	ground	beef
1				 pound	ground	pork
6				 ounces	thinly	sliced	prosciutto,	chopped	fine
3				 large	eggs
3				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	(1½	cups)
6				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced

1½				 teaspoons	salt
½				 teaspoon	pepper

SAUCE
3				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1				 large	onion,	grated
6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 teaspoon	dried	oregano
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
3				 (28-ounce)	cans	crushed	tomatoes
6				 cups	tomato	juice
6				 tablespoons	dry	white	wine
					 Salt	and	pepper
½				 cup	minced	fresh	basil
3				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley



					 Sugar

3				 pounds	spaghetti
2				 tablespoons	salt
					 Grated	Parmesan	cheese

1.	FOR	THE	MEATBALLS:	Adjust	oven	racks	to	lower-middle	and	upper-
middle	positions	and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	Line	2	rimmed	baking	sheets
with	aluminum	foil,	set	wire	racks	in	baking	sheets,	and	spray	racks	with
vegetable	oil	spray.
2.	Combine	bread	crumbs	and	buttermilk	in	large	bowl	and	let	sit,	mashing

occasionally	with	fork,	until	smooth	paste	forms,	about	10	minutes.	Meanwhile,
sprinkle	gelatin	over	water	in	small	bowl	and	allow	to	soften	for	5	minutes.
3.	Mix	ground	beef,	ground	pork,	prosciutto,	eggs,	Parmesan,	parsley,	garlic,

salt,	pepper,	and	gelatin	mixture	into	bread-crumb	mixture	using	hands.	Pinch
off	and	roll	mixture	into	2-inch	meatballs	(about	40	meatballs	total)	and	arrange
on	prepared	racks.	Bake	until	well	browned,	about	30	minutes,	switching	and
rotating	baking	sheets	halfway	through	baking.
4.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	While	meatballs	bake,	heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over

medium	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	onion	and	cook	until	softened	and	lightly
browned,	5	to	7	minutes.	Stir	in	garlic,	oregano,	and	pepper	flakes	and	cook	until
fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Stir	in	crushed	tomatoes,	tomato	juice,	wine,	1½
teaspoons	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper,	bring	to	simmer,	and	cook	until	thickened
slightly,	about	15	minutes.
5.	Remove	meatballs	from	oven	and	reduce	oven	temperature	to	300	degrees.

Gently	nestle	meatballs	into	sauce.	Cover,	transfer	to	oven,	and	cook	until
meatballs	are	firm	and	sauce	has	thickened,	about	1	hour.	(Sauce	and	meatballs
can	be	cooled	and	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days.	To	reheat,	drizzle	½	cup	water
over	sauce,	without	stirring,	and	reheat	on	lower-middle	rack	of	325-degree	oven
for	1	hour.)
6.	Meanwhile,	bring	10	quarts	water	to	boil	in	12-quart	pot.	Add	pasta	and	salt

and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	al	dente.	Reserve	½	cup	cooking	water,	then	drain
pasta	and	return	it	to	pot.
7.	Gently	stir	basil	and	parsley	into	sauce	and	season	with	sugar,	salt,	and

pepper	to	taste.	Add	2	cups	sauce	(without	meatballs)	to	pasta	and	toss	to



combine.	Add	reserved	cooking	water	as	needed	to	adjust	consistency.	Serve,
topping	individual	portions	with	more	tomato	sauce	and	several	meatballs	and
passing	Parmesan	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Making	spaghetti	and	meatballs	to	serve	a	crowd	can	try	the	patience	of	even	the
toughest	Italian	grandmother.	We	sought	an	easier	way	and	found	that	roasting
our	meatballs	on	a	wire	rack,	rather	than	frying	them	in	batches,	makes	our
recipe	faster	and	cleaner.	Adding	some	powdered	gelatin	to	a	mix	of	ground
chuck	and	ground	pork	serves	to	plump	the	meatballs	and	lends	them	a	soft
richness.
USE	A	MEAT	COMBO	Though	we	tried	making	these	meatballs	with	beef

alone—using	85	percent	lean	ground	beef	(anything	less	fatty	would	almost
certainly	produce	a	dry,	bland	meatball)—we	found	that	replacing	some	of	the
beef	with	ground	pork	(we	like	a	2:1	ratio	best)	makes	for	a	markedly	richer,
meatier	taste.
PICK	PANKO	For	this	panade	we	use	panko,	super-crunchy	Japanese	bread

crumbs	that	hold	on	to	meat	juices	and	keep	the	meatballs	from	getting	tough,
along	with	buttermilk,	which	adds	more	flavor	to	meatballs	than	regular	milk.
One	cup	of	plain	yogurt	thinned	with	half	a	cup	of	milk	can	be	substituted	for	the
buttermilk.
GRATE	THE	ONION	TO	REDUCE	CRUNCH	We	grate	the	onion	for	this

sauce	on	the	large	holes	of	a	box	grater.	This	allows	us	to	have	the	onion	taste
without	the	big	crunch.	We	don’t	even	have	to	sauté	it	first.
BUILD	FLAVOR	We	chop	up	some	prosciutto,	which	is	packed	with

glutamates	(see	concept	35)	that	enhance	savory	flavor,	and	mix	it	in	with	the
meat	for	an	extra-meaty	flavor.	Parmesan,	too,	adds	lots	of	glutamates.
ADD	GELATIN	We	pondered	adding	veal	to	these	meatballs	because	veal

has	lots	of	gelatin	and	could	add	suppleness	to	the	dish.	While	the	veal	did	add
suppleness,	another	problem	arose,	though:	Ultra-lean	veal	is	usually	ground
very	fine,	and	these	meatballs	lacked	the	pleasantly	coarse	texture	of	the	beef-
and-pork	batch.	Instead,	we	add	1½	teaspoons	of	powdered	gelatin	moistened	in
a	little	water	to	the	meatballs.	Works	like	a	charm.
FLAVOR	THE	SAUCE	Because	we	roast	our	meatballs	in	the	oven,	there

are	no	pan	drippings	to	add	flavor	to	the	sauce.	This	is	why	we	drop	the	roasted
meatballs	into	the	simple	marinara	sauce	and	braise	them	together	in	the	oven
for	an	hour.	With	time,	the	rich	flavor	of	the	browned	meat	infiltrates	the	sauce.
One	problem	we	found	with	this	technique,	however,	was	that	as	the	meatballs
absorb	the	liquid	around	them,	the	sauce	can	overreduce	in	the	oven.	To	combat
this,	we	swap	almost	half	of	the	crushed	tomatoes	in	our	marinara	recipe	for	an



equal	portion	of	tomato	juice,	leaving	us	with	a	full-bodied,	but	not	sludgy,
sauce.



SWEDISH	MEATBALLS
SERVES	4	TO	6

The	traditional	accompaniments	for	Swedish	meatballs	are	lingonberry
preserves	and	Swedish	Pickled	Cucumbers	(recipe	follows).	If	you	can’t	find
lingonberry	preserves,	cranberry	preserves	may	be	used.	For	a	slightly	less
sweet	dish,	omit	the	brown	sugar	in	the	meatballs	and	reduce	the	brown	sugar	in
the	sauce	to	2	teaspoons.	A	12-inch	slope-sided	skillet	can	be	used	in	place	of
the	sauté	pan—use	1½	cups	of	oil	for	frying	instead	of	1¼	cups.	Serve	the
meatballs	with	mashed	potatoes,	boiled	red	potatoes,	or	egg	noodles.

MEATBALLS
1				 large	egg
¼				 cup	heavy	cream
1				 slice	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	crusts	removed,	torn	into	1-inch	pieces
8				 ounces	ground	pork
¼				 cup	grated	onion
1½				 teaspoons	salt
1				 teaspoon	packed	brown	sugar
1				 teaspoon	baking	powder
				1⁄8 teaspoon	ground	nutmeg
				1⁄8 teaspoon	ground	allspice
				1⁄8 teaspoon	pepper
8				 ounces	85	percent	lean	ground	beef

1¼				 cups	vegetable	oil

SAUCE
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
1				 tablespoon	all-purpose	flour

1½				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 tablespoon	packed	brown	sugar
½				 cup	heavy	cream
2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
					 Salt	and	pepper



1.	FOR	MEATBALLS:	Whisk	egg	and	cream	together	in	bowl.	Stir	in	bread
and	set	aside.	Meanwhile,	using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	beat	pork,	onion,
salt,	sugar,	baking	powder,	nutmeg,	allspice,	and	pepper	on	high	speed	until
smooth	and	pale,	about	2	minutes,	scraping	down	bowl	as	necessary.	Using	fork,
mash	bread	mixture	until	no	large	dry	bread	chunks	remain;	add	mixture	to
mixer	bowl	and	beat	on	high	speed	until	smooth	and	homogeneous,	about	1
minute,	scraping	bowl	as	necessary.	Add	beef	and	mix	on	medium-low	speed
until	just	incorporated,	about	30	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	as	necessary.
Using	moistened	hands,	form	generous	tablespoon	of	meat	mixture	into	1-inch
round	meatball;	repeat	with	remaining	mixture	to	form	25	to	30	meatballs.
2.	Heat	oil	in	10-inch	straight-sided	sauté	pan	over	medium-high	heat	until

edge	of	meatball	dipped	in	oil	sizzles	(oil	should	register	350	degrees	on	instant-
read	thermometer),	3	to	5	minutes.	Add	meatballs	in	single	layer	and	fry,
flipping	once	halfway	through	cooking,	until	lightly	browned	all	over	and
cooked	through,	7	to	10	minutes.	(Adjust	heat	as	needed	to	keep	oil	sizzling	but
not	smoking.)	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	browned	meatballs	to	paper	towel–
lined	plate.
3.	FOR	SAUCE:	Pour	off	and	discard	oil	in	pan,	leaving	any	browned	bits

behind.	Return	pan	to	medium-high	heat	and	melt	butter.	Add	flour	and	cook,
whisking	constantly,	until	flour	is	light	brown,	about	30	seconds.	Slowly	whisk
in	broth,	scraping	bottom	of	pan	with	wooden	spoon	to	loosen	any	browned	bits.
Add	sugar	and	bring	to	simmer.	Reduce	heat	to	medium	and	cook	until	sauce	is
reduced	to	about	1	cup,	about	5	minutes.	Stir	in	cream	and	return	to	simmer.
4.	Add	meatballs	to	sauce	and	simmer,	turning	occasionally,	until	heated

through,	about	5	minutes.	Stir	in	lemon	juice,	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to
taste,	and	serve.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Meatballs	can	be	fried	and	then	frozen	for	up	to	2

weeks.	To	continue	with	recipe,	thaw	meatballs	in	refrigerator	overnight	and
proceed	from	step	3,	using	clean	pan.



SWEDISH	PICKLED	CUCUMBERS
MAKES	3	CUPS,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	SWEDISH	MEATBALLS

Kirby	cucumbers	are	also	called	pickling	cucumbers.	If	these	small	cucumbers
are	unavailable,	substitute	1	large	American	cucumber.	Serve	the	pickles	chilled
or	at	room	temperature.

3				 small	Kirby	cucumbers	(1	pound),	sliced	into	1⁄8-	to	¼-inch-thick	rounds
1½				 cups	distilled	white	vinegar
1½				 cups	sugar
1				 teaspoon	salt
12				 whole	allspice	berries

Place	cucumber	slices	in	medium	heatproof	bowl.	Bring	vinegar,	sugar,	salt,	and
allspice	to	simmer	in	small	saucepan	over	high	heat,	stirring	occasionally	to
dissolve	sugar.	Pour	vinegar	mixture	over	cucumbers	and	stir	to	separate	slices.
Cover	bowl	with	plastic	wrap	and	let	sit	for	15	minutes.	Uncover	and	cool	to
room	temperature,	about	15	minutes.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Pickles	can	be	refrigerated	in	their	liquid	in	airtight

container	for	up	to	2	weeks.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Most	of	us	know	Swedish	meatballs	as	lumps	of	flavorless	ground	beef	or	pork
covered	in	heavy	gravy	that	congeals	as	it	sits.	But	when	done	right	these	main-
course	meatballs	are	melt-in-your-mouth	tender,	substantial	yet	delicate.	To
achieve	the	right	texture,	we	combine	beef,	pork,	a	panade	(a	mixture	of	bread,
egg,	and	cream),	and	a	surprise	ingredient,	baking	powder,	which	keeps	the
meatballs	delicate	and	juicy.
STRIVE	FOR	SPRINGY	While	Italian	meatballs	are	ideally	moist	and

almost	fall-apart	tender,	that’s	not	at	all	what	we	want	in	Swedish	meatballs.	We
want	them	to	be	springy.	Therefore,	we	still	use	both	pork	and	beef,	but	we	use
cream	(rather	than	milk)	and	egg	along	with	bread	for	a	small	amount	of	panade.
The	extra	fat	from	the	cream	and	egg	coats	the	starch	granules,	reducing	the
extent	of	hydration	and	swelling	so	the	structure	is	springy	rather	than	loose.	The
egg	protein	also	adds	both	structure	and	springiness.
LIGHTEN	WITH	BAKING	POWDER	We	don’t	end	our	textural	quest

there,	though.	With	the	mixture	of	pork	and	beef,	as	well	as	our	creamy	panade,
our	meatballs	still	turned	out	a	bit	dry	and	dense.	We	wanted	to	lighten	them	up.
Thinking	of	other	ingredients	used	elsewhere	to	do	just	that,	we	turned	to	baking
powder.	Can	it	leaven	a	meatball	the	way	it	leavens	bread?	Indeed.	We	use	a
single	teaspoon	of	baking	powder	to	help	produce	meatballs	with	the	ideal
moistness,	substance,	and	lightness.
GRATE	ONIONS	Just	as	we	do	in	our	recipe	for	Classic	Spaghetti	and

Meatballs	for	a	Crowd,	we	grate	the	onion	on	a	box	grater	here.	This	way	we
have	the	taste	of	onion	without	its	crunch.
MIX	THE	PORK,	NOT	THE	BEEF	We	add	a	bit	of	sausagelike	springiness

by	whipping	the	pork	in	a	stand	mixer	along	with	the	salt,	baking	powder,	and
seasonings	until	an	emulsified	paste	forms	before	adding	the	panade	and	the
ground	beef.	We	whip	the	pork	and	not	the	beef	because	the	pork	has	a	higher	fat
content	and	less	robust	muscle	structure.	Whipping	it	finely	distributes	the	fat
into	the	lean	meat,	thus	guaranteeing	a	juicy	finished	product.
USE	FOND	FOR	FLAVOR	For	the	gravy,	we	wanted	a	light	cream	sauce

instead	of	a	heavy	brown	one.	To	get	this,	we	add	a	bit	of	cream	to	our	stock	to
lighten	it	up	and	a	splash	of	lemon	juice	for	bright	flavor.	We	make	it	in	the	same
pan	that	we	use	for	the	meatballs,	scraping	up	the	browned	bits,	or	fond,	for
extra	flavor.
PICKLE	QUICKLY	Swedish	pickled	cucumbers	are	a	traditional



accompaniment	to	these	meatballs.	Here,	we	heat	the	vinegar	with	the	sugar,	salt,
and	allspice	before	pouring	it	over	the	cucumbers.	The	warm	vinegar	(a	mild
acid)	with	dissolved	salt	and	sugar	not	only	adds	seasoning	but	quickly	draws
moisture	out	of	the	cucumbers,	creating	a	texture	that	is	more	like	a	pickle	than	a
crisp	cucumber.



SHOPPING	FOR	PORK	101
PRIMAL	CUTS
Five	different	cuts	of	pork	are	sold	at	the	wholesale	level.	From	this	first	series	of	cuts,	known	in	the	trade
as	primal	cuts,	a	butcher	(usually	at	a	meat-packing	plant	in	the	Midwest	but	sometimes	on-site	at	your
market)	will	make	the	retail	cuts	that	you	bring	home	from	the	market.

	
BLADE	SHOULDER
Cuts	from	the	upper	portion	of	the	shoulder	are	well	marbled	with	fat	and	contain	a	lot	of	connective	tissue,
making	them	ideal	candidates	for	slow-cooking	methods	like	braising,	stewing,	or	barbecuing.

LOIN
The	area	between	the	shoulder	and	back	legs	is	the	leanest,	most	tender	part	of	the	animal.	Rib	and	loin
chops	are	cut	from	this	area,	as	are	pork	loin	roasts	and	tenderloin	roasts.	These	cuts	will	be	dry	if
overcooked.

ARM	SHOULDER
Cuts	from	the	arm,	or	picnic	shoulder,	are	a	bit	more	economical	than	those	from	the	blade	area	but	are



otherwise	quite	similar.

SIDE
The	underside	is	the	fattiest	part	of	the	animal	and	is	the	source	of	bacon	and	spareribs.

LEG
The	rear	legs	are	often	referred	to	as	“ham.”	This	primal	cut	is	sold	as	large	roasts	and	is	available	fresh	or
cured.

THE	OTHER	WHITE	MEAT
The	pork	sold	today	bears	little	resemblance	to	the	pork	our	grandparents	consumed.	New	breeding
techniques	and	feeding	systems	have	slimmed	down	the	modern	pig,	which	contains	a	third	less	fat	than	it
did	30	years	ago.	As	you	might	imagine,	leaner	pork	is	not	as	flavorful	and	is	prone	to	drying	out	as	it
cooks.	Old-fashioned	heritage	breeds,	however,	are	making	a	comeback.	These	breeds	are	touted	as	being
fattier,	juicier,	and	far	more	flavorful.	In	addition	to	fat	content,	heritage	breeds	often	have	a	higher	pH	and
darker	color	than	modern	pork.

When	we	tasted	100	percent	Berkshire	pork,	a	heritage	breed,	against	standard	supermarket	pork	we
found	the	differences	to	be	astounding.	The	Berkshire	meat	had	a	rich	crimson	color	and	a	smoky,	intense
pork	flavor.	It	was	also	very	tender	and	juicy.	The	pale	supermarket	pork	was	bland	and	chewy	in
comparison.	Other	heritage	breeds	(including	Duroc)	failed	to	impress	our	tasters,	but	if	you	can	find
Berkshire	pork	we	recommend	buying	it.

ENHANCED	OR	NOT?
Because	modern	pork	is	so	lean	and	therefore	somewhat	bland	and	prone	to	dryness	if	overcooked,	many
producers	now	inject	their	fresh	pork	products	with	a	sodium	solution.	So-called	“enhanced”	pork	is	now
the	only	option	at	many	supermarkets,	especially	when	buying	lean	cuts	like	the	tenderloin.	(To	be	sure,
read	the	label;	if	the	pork	has	been	enhanced	it	will	have	an	ingredient	label.)

Enhanced	pork	is	injected	with	a	solution	of	water,	salt,	sodium	phosphates,	sodium	lactate,	potassium
lactate,	sodium	diacetate,	and	varying	flavor	agents,	generally	adding	7	to	15	percent	extra	weight.	While
enhanced	pork	does	cook	up	juicier	(it	has	been	pumped	full	of	water!),	we	find	the	texture	almost	spongy
and	the	flavor	is	often	unpleasantly	salty.	We	prefer	the	genuine	pork	flavor	of	natural	pork	and	prefer	to
brine	lean	cuts	(see	concept	11)	to	keep	them	juicy.	Note	that	enhanced	pork	loses	six	times	more	moisture
when	frozen	and	thawed	compared	to	natural	pork—yet	another	reason	to	avoid	enhanced	pork.

NITRITES	VS.	NITRATES
Cured	pork	products,	such	as	bacon,	often	contain	nitrites	and/or	nitrates.	While	nitrites	and	nitrates	are
virtually	identical,	only	nitrites	have	been	shown	to	form	carcinogenic	compounds	called	nitrosamines
when	heated	in	the	presence	of	proteins,	like	those	in	pork.

So	should	you	buy	“nitrate-free”	or	“nitrite-free”	bacon?	These	products	are	generally	brined	with	salt,	a
bacterial	lactic	acid	starter	culture,	and	celery	juice	(which	is	sometimes	listed	as	“natural	flavor”).	The
problem	is	that	celery	juice	contains	a	high	level	of	nitrate,	which	is	converted	to	the	problematic	nitrite	by
the	bacteria	in	the	starter	culture.	While	technically	these	products	can	be	labeled	“no	nitrates	or	nitrites
added,”	the	compounds	are	naturally	formed	during	production.

When	we	analyzed	various	brands	of	bacon,	we	found	that	regular	bacon	actually	contained	lower	levels
of	nitrites	and	nitrates	than	some	brands	labeled	“no	nitrites	or	nitrates	added.”	All	the	bacon	we	tested	fell
well	within	federal	standards	for	these	compounds,	but	if	you	want	to	avoid	nitrites	and	nitrates	you	need	to
avoid	bacon	and	other	processed	pork	products	altogether.



CONCEPT	16

Create	Layers	for	a	Breading	That
Sticks
Chicken	breasts	and	pork	chops:	They’re	simple,	good	for	you,	and	sometimes,
just	so	boring.	One	way	to	mix	it	up	is	to	add	a	flavorful	coating.	After	all,
there’s	little	better	than	a	breaded	cutlet	or	chop—if	done	right.	Here,	we	explore
how	to	get	a	coating	to	stick	to	meat	when	baked	in	the	oven	(à	la	Shake	’N
Bake)	or	when	pan-fried	in	a	little	oil.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
A	crisp	crust.	A	crunchy	coating.	Officially,	it’s	called	bound	breading.	But
however	we	refer	to	that	crackling,	starchy	layer	that	comes	on	top	of	many
chicken	breasts	and	pork	chops,	it	generally	consists	of	three	things:	flour	(or
some	flourlike	substance);	an	egg	wash	(or	something	like	it);	and	bread	crumbs
(sometimes	toasted),	ground	cereal,	or	crushed	crackers.
The	problem,	however,	lies	in	creating	a	bound	breading	that	is	both	texturally

pleasing	and	will	not	fall	off	the	meat.	Too	often	coatings	are	mushy,	unevenly
browned,	and	flaking	off	of	the	cutlet	or	chop.	Why	is	it	so	hard	to	get	breading
to	stick	to	protein?
To	understand	why	some	breadings	adhere	and	others	do	not,	we	must

examine	what	is	happening	on	the	surface	of	the	meat.	One	of	the	principal
reasons	breadings	fail	to	adhere	is	excess	moisture.	As	the	breaded	meat	is
cooked,	surface	moisture	rapidly	turns	to	steam,	forcing	the	coating	to	separate
from	the	meat	as	the	steam	tries	to	escape.	(This	is	why	it	is	essential	to
thoroughly	dry	your	meat	before	applying	a	coating.)	Conversely,	the	presence
of	sticky	proteins,	which	we	first	learned	about	in	concept	14	in	relation	to
ground	meat,	can	help	keep	coatings	in	place.	Most	of	the	recipes	that	follow
incorporate	a	simple	step,	such	as	pounding	or	cutting	the	meat,	to	encourage	the
release	of	these	soluble,	sticky	proteins.
Getting	the	meat	dry	but	sticky	helps,	but	using	a	three-layer	coating	is

paramount	to	creating	a	good	bound	breading.	First	comes	flour	(or	cornstarch).
The	initial	coating	of	starch	will	absorb	any	remaining	moisture	on	the	surface	of
the	meat,	creating	a	tacky	base	coat	when	combined	with	the	sticky	meat
proteins	that	acts	as	a	glue	for	the	breading.	Next	comes	an	egg	wash	(or	similar
liquid	coating).	The	proteins	in	the	eggs	are	also	sticky,	especially	when	lightly
mixed	at	room	temperature,	when	they	begin	the	process	of	unraveling	and,	as	a
result,	are	better	able	to	bind	with	the	layer	of	flour	beneath.	And	finally,	the
third	layer	consists	of	bread	crumbs	(or	something	similar)	to	provide	the
textural	majority	of	the	crust.	A	short	rest	after	applying	the	bread	crumbs	helps
to	ensure	a	strong	bond	with	the	egg	proteins,	which	will	then	have	time	to
penetrate	into	the	honeycomb	structure	of	the	bread.
The	proportions	of	the	layers	are	important:	Too	much	flour	can	act	as	a

barrier	between	the	meat	proteins	and	the	egg	wash	layer.	Likewise,	the	egg
wash	should	not	be	too	heavy	and	thick,	or	it	will	separate	from	the	meat	due	to
the	combination	of	its	own	weight	and	the	steam	escaping	during	cooking.	(To



combat	this,	oil	is	often	added	to	the	egg	wash	to	act	as	a	“thinner.”)



LAYERS	OF	BREADING



	
BREADING	THAT	STICKS	To	make	a	breaded	coating	that	sticks	to	meat	when	it	is	cooked,	layering	is



important.	The	flour,	egg	wash,	and	bread	crumbs	adhere	to	one	another	as	they	are	applied,	especially	with
help	from	the	presence	of	sticky	meat	proteins,	which	act	like	a	natural	glue.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
The	standard	breading	procedure	calls	for	dipping	food	in	flour,	beaten	egg,	and
then	bread	crumbs.	Is	it	really	necessary	to	do	all	three?	To	find	out,	we	made
three	batches	of	breaded	boneless	pork	chops,	coating	one	with	just	panko	bread
crumbs,	a	second	with	egg	and	panko,	and	a	third	with	the	full	breading	trifecta.
We	baked	all	of	the	chops	in	a	400-degree	oven	until	they	registered	140	degrees,
let	them	rest	for	five	minutes,	and	examined	their	coatings.	We	repeated	the	test
three	times.

	



THE	RESULTS
Even	before	we	popped	the	pork	into	the	oven,	we	noticed	some	differences
among	the	three	batches.	We	noted	that	it	was	incredibly	difficult	to	get	a
sufficient	amount	of	panko	to	stick	to	the	naked	chops—it	just	kept	falling	back
into	the	bowl.	The	egg	and	panko	sample	fared	better	but	was	still	sparsely
coated	compared	to	the	pork	with	flour,	egg,	and	panko.	Post-baking,	these
differences	were	even	more	dramatic.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	standard	procedure	for	breading—flour,	egg,	and	bread	crumbs—still	holds
…	literally.	The	sticky	proteins	present	on	the	surface	of	the	pork	adhere	to	the
flour,	creating	a	tacky	base	that	acts	like	glue.	Next	the	egg	proteins	are	likewise
sticky	and	able	to	bind	to	the	bread	crumbs,	which	give	the	coating	a	nice	texture
and	heft.	Without	the	flour,	the	egg	and	bread-crumb	layers	simply	slide	off.
Without	the	egg,	the	crumbs	have	nothing	to	which	to	stick.	A	proper	breading
requires	all	three	ingredients.



GETTING	BREADING	TO	STICK

	
JUST	PANKO

We	coated	(or	tried	to	coat)	our	first	pork	chop	with	panko	bread	crumbs	alone.	The	coating	was	patchy
because	the	crumbs	did	not	stick	well	to	the	meat.



	
EGG	AND	PANKO

A	coating	of	egg	and	then	panko	was	more	successful,	but	it	was	still	impossible	to	get	a	good,	full	breaded
coating	to	stick.



	
FLOUR,	EGG,	AND	PANKO

The	addition	of	flour	made	all	the	difference.	The	pork	chop	coated	in	flour,	egg,	and	then	panko	had	a	full,
unblemished	coating	that	held	up	well	before	and	after	cooking.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
MAKE-AHEAD	BREAD	CRUMBS

It’s	possible	to	make	bread	crumbs	ahead	of	time	and	store	them	in	the	freezer	for	up	to	a
month.

Homemade	bread	crumbs	add	crunch	to	everything	from	chicken	cutlets	to	casseroles,	but	we	wondered	if
we	could	save	time	and	money	by	grinding	homemade	crumbs	in	advance	(when	we	happen	to	have	stale
bread	on	hand)	and	freezing	them	for	later	use.	We	ground	crumbs	two	ways—fine	and	coarse—and	toasted
some	batches	before	putting	them	in	the	freezer	and	left	others	as	is.	All	crumbs	were	stored	in	plastic
zipper-lock	bags	to	prevent	them	from	picking	up	moisture	or	unwanted	flavors	in	the	freezer.	All	of	the
crumbs	were	fine	at	the	one-month	mark	but	after	two	months	in	the	freezer	they	had	lost	most	of	their
flavor.

With	crumbs	in	the	freezer,	you	will	need	to	convert	recipes	that	call	for	bread	slices	processed	into
crumbs.	Use	the	chart	below	to	figure	out	how	much	of	your	freezer	stash	you	should	use.
	
1	LARGE	SLICE	(1.5	OZ.)	SANDWICH	BREAD
	
FROZEN	CRUMBS
Finely	processed:	2⁄3	cup
Coarsely	processed:	1	cup
	
FROZEN	TOASTED	CRUMBS
Finely	processed:	1⁄3	cup	plus	1	tablespoon
Coarsely	processed:	2⁄3	cup



BOUND	BREADING	AT	WORK	
CHICKEN	AND	PORK
A	combination	of	techniques—including	pounding,	flouring,	using	an	egg	wash
and	fresh	bread	crumbs,	and	a	turn	in	either	the	frying	pan	or	the	oven—helps	us
to	achieve	a	range	of	flavorful	and	crisp	breaded	crusts.



CRISP	BREADED	CHICKEN	CUTLETS
SERVES	4

If	you’d	rather	not	prepare	fresh	bread	crumbs,	use	panko,	the	extra-crisp
Japanese	bread	crumbs.	The	chicken	is	cooked	in	two	batches	because	the	crust
is	noticeably	crisper	if	the	pan	is	not	overcrowded.

4				 (6-to	8-ounce)	boneless,	skinless	chicken	breasts,	tenderloins	removed,	trimmed
					 Salt	and	pepper
3				 slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
¾				 cup	all-purpose	flour
2				 large	eggs
1				 tablespoon	plus	¾	cup	vegetable	oil
					 Lemon	wedges

1.	Cover	chicken	breasts	with	plastic	wrap	and	pound	to	even	½-inch
thickness	with	meat	pounder.	Pat	chicken	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season
chicken	with	salt	and	pepper.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	200	degrees.	Set	wire

rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Pulse	bread	in	food	processor	to	coarse	crumbs,
about	10	pulses;	transfer	to	shallow	dish	or	pie	plate.	Place	flour	in	second	dish.
Lightly	beat	eggs	and	1	tablespoon	oil	together	in	third	dish.
3.	Working	with	1	cutlet	at	a	time,	dredge	in	flour,	shaking	off	excess,	then

coat	with	egg	mixture,	allowing	excess	to	drip	off.	Coat	all	sides	of	cutlet	with
bread	crumbs,	pressing	gently	so	that	crumbs	adhere;	transfer	to	prepared	wire
rack	and	let	sit	for	5	minutes.
4.	Heat	6	tablespoons	oil	in	10-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat

until	shimmering.	Place	2	cutlets	in	skillet	and	cook	until	deep	golden	brown	and
crisp	on	first	side,	about	3	minutes.	Flip	cutlets,	reduce	heat	to	medium,	and
continue	to	cook	until	deep	golden	brown	and	crisp	on	second	side	and	meat
feels	firm	when	pressed	gently,	about	3	minutes	longer.	Drain	cutlets	briefly	on
paper	towel–lined	plate,	then	transfer	to	clean	wire	rack	set	in	baking	sheet	and
keep	warm	in	oven.	Pour	off	all	oil	left	in	skillet	and	wipe	out	with	paper	towels.
Repeat	with	remaining	6	tablespoons	oil	and	remaining	2	cutlets.	Serve	with
lemon	wedges.



DEVILED	CRISP	BREADED	CHICKEN	CUTLETS
Rub	each	breast	with	generous	pinch	cayenne	before	dredging	in	flour.	Lightly
beat	3	tablespoons	Dijon	mustard,	1	tablespoon	Worcestershire	sauce,	and	2
teaspoons	minced	fresh	thyme	into	eggs	along	with	oil.

CRISP	BREADED	CHICKEN	CUTLETS	WITH	PARMESAN	(CHICKEN
MILANESE)

Though	Parmesan	is	the	traditional	cheese	to	use	in	this	dish,	feel	free	to
substitute	Pecorino	Romano	cheese	if	you	prefer	a	stronger,	tangier	flavor.	The
cheese	is	quite	susceptible	to	burning,	so	be	sure	to	keep	a	very	close	eye	on	the
cutlets	as	they	cook.

Substitute	¼	cup	finely	grated	Parmesan	cheese	for	an	equal	amount	of	bread
crumbs.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Most	chicken	cutlets	offer	a	thin,	uneven,	pale	crust;	we	wanted	a	thick,	crisp,
flavorful	coating	that	wouldn’t	fall	off.	To	do	this,	we	pounded	the	chicken	to
release	sticky	proteins,	used	flour	to	absorb	moisture,	eggs	to	help	it	adhere,	and
fresh	bread	crumbs	for	a	subtly	sweet	flavor	and	light,	crisp	texture.
POUND	FOR	EVEN	THICKNESS	When	cooked	as	is,	the	thin	tip	of	the

chicken	cutlet	and	the	more	plump	opposite	end	will	cook	at	different	rates.	It’s
an	easy	fix,	though:	All	you	have	to	do	is	pound	the	breast	to	a	uniform	½	inch
to	ensure	the	cutlets	will	cook	evenly.	(Use	a	meat	pounder	or	the	bottom	of	a
small	pan.)	But	don’t	pound	it	any	thinner	than	½	inch;	if	you	do,	the	chicken
can	overcook	before	the	breading	is	sufficiently	browned.	Pounding	also
encourages	the	release	of	sticky	meat	proteins.
BLOT	DRY	Even	if	every	other	step	in	the	process	of	breading	your	cutlets	is

in	place,	a	moist	piece	of	chicken	can	ruin	it	all.	We	find	that	if	there	is	even	a
tiny	bit	of	moisture	on	the	breast,	the	breading	will	peel	off	the	finished	cutlets	in
sheets	because	the	moisture	(now	steam)	will	try	to	escape,	forcing	aside
whatever	is	in	its	path.
EGG	WASH	WITH	OIL	While	it’s	possible	to	use	an	egg	wash	with	just

egg,	beaten	eggs	alone	are	thick	and	viscous	and	tend	to	form	too	heavy	a	layer
on	the	meat,	making	the	breading	too	thick.	Thinning	the	egg	with	oil,	water,	or
both	is	a	common	practice	that	allows	excess	egg	to	slide	off	the	meat	more
easily,	leaving	a	thinner,	more	delicate,	and	tenderer	coat.	Though	all	three
techniques	work,	thinning	the	egg	with	just	oil	helps	the	breading	to	brown	a	bit
more	deeply	without	adding	more	moisture,	which	makes	it	our	pick.
MAKE	YOUR	OWN	CRUMBS	We	tested	fresh	bread	crumbs,	dry	bread

crumbs,	and	Japanese	panko	crumbs	in	this	recipe.	The	dry	bread	crumbs	had	an
unmistakably	stale	flavor,	while	the	panko	crumbs	rated	well	for	their	shattering
crispness	and	wheaty	flavor.	But	the	fresh	bread	crumbs,	with	their	mild,	subtly
sweet	flavor	and	light,	crisp	texture,	swept	the	test.	We	recommend	using
premium	sliced	sandwich	bread	to	make	the	crumbs;	it’s	the	sweetest.	Simply
tear	the	slices	into	rough	pieces	and	pulse	them	in	the	food	processor	until	the
desired	size.
LET	’EM	REST	Yes,	we	all	want	to	get	the	chicken	into	the	pan,	and	then

our	mouths,	as	soon	as	we	can.	But	it’s	important	to	wait—just	a	few	minutes.
Letting	the	chicken	rest	for	five	minutes	after	breading	will	help	everything	to
solidify.	It	takes	a	little	time	for	the	egg	proteins	to	unravel	and	intermingle	with



the	sticky	meat	proteins	and	porous	bread	crumbs	to	ensure	a	strong	bond	among
all	three.
USE	ENOUGH	OIL	For	even,	thorough	browning,	it’s	important	for	the	oil

to	reach	one-third	to	one-half	of	the	way	up	the	sides	of	the	food	being	cooked.
Because	it’s	also	important	for	the	breading	to	brown	gently	and	evenly,	the	oil
should	not	be	as	hot	as	it	is	for	a	sauté,	in	which	there	is	no	breading	and	instant
browning	is	critical.	In	the	test	kitchen	we	put	pure	olive	oil	up	against	vegetable
oil,	and	top	billing	went	to	the	vegetable	oil	for	its	light,	unobtrusive	presence.
BATCH	COOK	FOR	BROWNING	Even	though	four	cutlets	will	fit

comfortably	in	a	12-inch	skillet	on	the	stove,	the	breading	tends	to	get	greasy
and	will	brown	unevenly	due	to	the	accumulation	of	too	much	steam.	Therefore,
we	recommend	using	a	10-inch	skillet	and	cooking	only	two	at	a	time.	This	will
result	in	cutlets	with	a	crisp,	well-browned	crust	every	time.	It’s	worth	the
minimal	extra	time	and	effort.



CHICKEN	KIEV
SERVES	4

To	make	butterflying	the	chicken	easier,	freeze	it	for	15	minutes.

HERB	BUTTER
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
1				 tablespoon	lemon	juice
1				 tablespoon	minced	shallot
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley
½				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	tarragon
				3⁄8 teaspoon	salt
				1⁄8 teaspoon	pepper

CHICKEN
4				 slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
					 Salt	and	pepper
4				 (8-ounce)	boneless,	skinless	chicken	breasts,	tenderloins	removed,	trimmed
1				 cup	all-purpose	flour
3				 large	eggs
1				 teaspoon	Dijon	mustard

1.	FOR	THE	HERB	BUTTER:	Mix	all	ingredients	in	medium	bowl	with
rubber	spatula	until	thoroughly	combined.	Form	into	3-inch	square	on	sheet	of
plastic	wrap;	wrap	tightly	and	refrigerate	until	firm,	about	1	hour.
2.	FOR	THE	CHICKEN:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and

heat	oven	to	300	degrees.	Pulse	bread	in	food	processor	to	coarse	crumbs,	about
10	pulses;	transfer	to	large	bowl.	Add	oil,	1⁄8	teaspoon	salt,	and	1⁄8	teaspoon	pepper
and	toss	until	crumbs	are	evenly	coated.	Spread	crumbs	on	rimmed	baking	sheet
and	bake	until	golden	brown	and	dry,	about	25	minutes,	stirring	twice	during
baking.	Let	cool	to	room	temperature.
3.	Slice	each	chicken	breast	horizontally,	stopping	½	inch	from	edges	so

halves	remain	attached.	Open	chicken	like	a	book.	Pound	between	2	sheets	of



plastic	wrap	to	even	¼-inch	thickness	with	meat	pounder.	Pound	outer	perimeter
to	1⁄8	inch.	Unwrap	herb	butter	and	cut	it	into	4	rectangular	pieces.	Pat	chicken
dry	with	paper	towels,	place	on	counter,	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.
Position	breasts	cut	side	up	and	place	1	piece	of	butter	in	center	of	bottom	half	of
each	breast.	Roll	bottom	edge	of	chicken	over	butter,	then	fold	in	sides	and
continue	rolling	to	form	a	neat,	tight	bundle,	pressing	on	seam	to	seal.	Repeat
with	remaining	butter	and	chicken.	Refrigerate	chicken,	uncovered,	to	allow
edges	to	seal,	about	1	hour.
4.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Set	wire

rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Combine	flour,	¼	teaspoon	salt,	and	1⁄8	teaspoon
pepper	in	shallow	dish.	Lightly	beat	eggs	and	mustard	together	in	second
shallow	dish.	Place	bread	crumbs	in	third	shallow	dish.	Working	with	1	chicken
bundle	at	a	time,	dredge	in	flour,	shaking	off	excess,	then	coat	with	egg	mixture,
allowing	excess	to	drip	off.	Coat	all	sides	of	chicken	bundle	with	bread	crumbs,
pressing	gently	so	that	crumbs	adhere.	Place	on	prepared	wire	rack.
5.	Bake	chicken	until	center	of	bundles	registers	160	degrees,	40	to	45

minutes.	Let	rest	for	5	minutes	before	serving.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Unbaked,	breaded	chicken	Kiev	can	be	refrigerated

overnight	and	baked	the	next	day	or	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.	To	cook	frozen
chicken	Kiev,	increase	the	baking	time	to	50	to	55	minutes	(do	not	thaw
chicken).



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Chicken	Kiev	has	developed	a	reputation	as	bad	banquet	fare.	We	wanted	to
bring	this	dish	back	to	its	roots	as	an	elegant	dish	of	crisply	breaded	chicken
packed	with	a	flavorful	herb	butter.	A	new	rolling	technique	and	some	time	in	the
fridge	helped	us	avoid	a	few	typical	roadblocks.	Toasting	the	bread	crumbs	prior
to	coating	the	chicken	allows	us	to	skip	the	step	of	pan-frying	so	we	can	cook	the
chicken	entirely	in	the	oven.
POUND,	FILL,	AND	ROLL	While	many	recipes	call	for	making	a	slit	in	the

chicken	and	then	sliding	the	butter	in,	we	find	that	it’s	almost	impossible	to
prevent	the	butter	from	leaking	out	while	cooking	in	the	hot	oil.	Our	solution?
First,	we	butterfly	the	breasts	lengthwise	and	then	pound	them	to	a	uniform	¼
inch.	Flattened,	these	cutlets	resemble	teardrops;	placing	the	butter	just	above
the	tapered	end,	we	proceed	as	if	wrapping	up	a	burrito.	To	make	sure	the	fat
edges	do	not	come	undone,	we	pound	them	to	1⁄8	inch.
FILL	WITH	BUTTER	Traditional	recipes	stuff	the	Kievs	with	butter	spiked

with	nothing	more	than	parsley	and	chives.	We	prefer	the	more	aromatic	minced
shallots	over	chives	and	a	small	amount	of	minced	tarragon	for	a	hint	of
sweetness.	A	squeeze	of	lemon	juice	tames	the	rich	butter	with	a	bit	of	acidity.
CHILL	THE	CUTLETS	FOR	A	GOOD	SEAL	Breading	the	filled	cutlets

can	be	treacherous.	Right	after	they	have	been	filled,	the	chicken	bundles	want
to	unravel,	and	handling	them	too	much	can	do	just	that.	But	if	you	leave	the
unbreaded	chicken	bundles	(uncovered)	in	the	fridge	for	an	hour,	the	edges	will
begin	to	stick	together,	nearly	gluing	shut	and	providing	a	much	sturdier	base	for
breading.	This	is	further	proof	that	sticky	meat	proteins	really	work.
EGG	WASH	WITH	MUSTARD	We	add	another	layer	of	flavor	to	the	Kiev

in	a	surprising	place:	the	egg	wash.	A	teaspoon	of	Dijon	mustard	adds	an
excellent	flavor	boost.
TOAST	THE	BREAD	CRUMBS	Toasting	the	bread	crumbs	before	using

them	to	coat	the	chicken	transforms	this	recipe.	This	simple	step	eliminates
messy	frying	and	makes	this	dish	truly	company-friendly.	Make	sure	to	bake	the
chicken	bundles	on	a	wire	rack	set	inside	a	rimmed	baking	sheet	so	that	the	heat
hits	them	evenly	all	around.



CRUNCHY	BAKED	PORK	CHOPS
SERVES	4

If	the	pork	is	enhanced	(injected	with	a	salt	solution),	do	not	brine	in	step	1,	and
season	with	salt	in	step	4.

					 Salt	and	pepper
4				 (6-to	8-ounce)	boneless	pork	chops,	¾	to	1	inch	thick,	trimmed
4				 slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	1-inch	pieces
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
1				 small	shallot,	minced
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 tablespoons	grated	Parmesan	cheese
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
½				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme
¼				 cup	plus	6	tablespoons	all-purpose	flour
3				 large	egg	whites
3				 tablespoons	Dijon	mustard
					 Lemon	wedges

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Dissolve
3	tablespoons	salt	in	1½	quarts	cold	water	in	large	container.	Submerge	chops	in
brine,	cover,	and	refrigerate	for	30	minutes	to	1	hour.	Remove	chops	from	brine
and	thoroughly	pat	dry	with	paper	towels.
2.	Meanwhile,	pulse	bread	in	food	processor	until	coarsely	ground,	about	8

pulses	(you	should	have	about	3½	cups	crumbs).	Transfer	crumbs	to	rimmed
baking	sheet	and	add	oil,	shallot,	garlic,	¼	teaspoon	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper.
Toss	until	crumbs	are	evenly	coated	with	oil.	Bake	until	deep	golden	brown	and
dry,	about	15	minutes,	stirring	twice	during	baking.	(Do	not	turn	off	oven.)	Let
cool	to	room	temperature.	Add	crumbs	to	Parmesan,	parsley,	and	thyme.	(Bread-
crumb	mixture	can	be	prepared	up	to	3	days	in	advance.)
3.	Place	¼	cup	flour	in	shallow	dish.	In	second	shallow	dish,	whisk	egg	whites

and	mustard	until	combined;	add	remaining	6	tablespoons	flour	and	whisk	until
almost	smooth,	with	pea-size	lumps	remaining.
4.	Increase	oven	temperature	to	425	degrees.	Spray	wire	rack	with	vegetable



oil	spray	and	set	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Season	chops	with	pepper.	Dredge	1
pork	chop	in	flour;	shake	off	excess.	Using	tongs,	coat	with	egg	mixture;	let
excess	drip	off.	Coat	all	sides	of	chop	with	bread-crumb	mixture,	pressing	gently
so	that	thick	layer	of	crumbs	adheres	to	chop.	Transfer	breaded	chop	to	prepared
wire	rack	and	repeat	with	remaining	3	chops.
5.	Bake	until	chops	register	145	degrees,	17	to	25	minutes.	Let	rest	on	rack	for

5	minutes	before	serving	with	lemon	wedges.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Breaded	chops	can	be	frozen	for	up	to	1	week.	Do	not

thaw	before	baking;	simply	increase	cooking	time	in	step	5	to	35	to	40	minutes.

CRUNCHY	BAKED	PORK	CHOPS	WITH	PROSCIUTTO	AND	ASIAGO
CHEESE
Omit	salt	added	to	bread-crumb	mixture	in	step	2.	Before	breading,	place	1⁄8-inch-
thick	slice	Asiago	cheese	(about	½	ounce)	on	top	of	each	chop.	Wrap	each	chop
with	thin	slice	prosciutto,	pressing	on	prosciutto	so	that	cheese	and	meat	adhere
to	one	another.	Proceed	with	recipe	from	step	4,	being	careful	when	handling
chops	so	that	cheese	and	meat	do	not	come	apart	during	breading.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
When	done	right,	baked	breaded	pork	chops	are	the	ultimate	comfort	food—
tender	cutlets	surrounded	by	a	crunchy	coating	that	crackles	apart	with	each
bite.	But	use	a	packaged	supermarket	breading	and	you	get	a	thin,	sandy	crust.
Make	your	own	breading	and	you	have	different	problems:	a	soggy,	patchy	crust
that	won’t	stick	to	the	meat.	We	combat	this	with	a	batterlike	egg	wash,	a
flavorful	mix	of	ingredients	for	the	crust,	and	time	in	the	oven	rather	than	on	top
of	the	stove.
USE	FRESH	BREAD	CRUMBS	Forget	dusty,	stale-tasting	packaged

crumbs.	Fresh	crumbs,	made	from	good-quality	sandwich	bread,	are	a	must.
Pretoasting	the	crumbs	ensures	that	they	will	be	plenty	crunchy	by	the	time	the
pork	is	done.	Don’t	skip	the	toasting	step.	If	you	do,	you	must	choose	between	a
less-than-crunchy	coating	and	overcooked	pork.
MAKE	BATTERLIKE	COATING	Most	recipes	dust	the	chops	with	flour,

dip	them	in	beaten	eggs,	and	then	coat	with	crumbs.	The	result	is	a	soft	crust	that
has	a	greater	propensity	to	peel	away	when	baked.	(Pan-frying	does	a	better	job
of	fusing	crumbs	to	meat.)	Our	solution	is	to	replace	the	beaten	whole	eggs	with
a	batterlike	mixture	of	egg	whites,	flour,	and	mustard.	The	fat	in	the	yolks	can
make	the	crumbs	soft,	so	we	get	rid	of	them.	Adding	flour	and	mustard	to	the
egg	whites	turns	the	typically	liquid-y	wash	into	a	Spackle-like	paste	that	really
sticks	to	the	chops	and	holds	on	to	the	crumbs.
BAKE	ON	A	RACK	Oven-baked	items	need	a	hot	oven	in	order	to	crisp	the

coating.	But	no	matter	how	hot	the	oven,	the	side	of	the	food	resting	against	the
baking	sheet	will	never	crisp	up.	Elevating	the	chops	on	a	baking	sheet	allows
any	moisture	shed	by	the	chops	to	drip	harmlessly	away	and	permits	heat	to
circulate	around	the	chops,	ensuring	that	the	coated	chops	brown	on	all	sides.
BRINE	THE	CHOPS	You	might	be	tempted	to	skip	the	brining	step	when

preparing	these	chops.	Don’t.	Center-cut	chops	are	quite	lean,	and	left	untreated
they	will	be	very	dry	and	chewy,	even	when	cooked	to	medium	(an	internal
temperature	of	145).	The	salt	in	the	brine	changes	the	structure	of	the	muscle
proteins	and	allows	them	to	hold	on	to	more	moisture	when	exposed	to	heat.
(For	more	on	brining,	see	concept	11.)



CRISPY	PAN-FRIED	PORK	CHOPS
SERVES	4

We	prefer	natural	to	enhanced	pork	(pork	that	has	been	injected	with	a	salt
solution	to	increase	moistness	and	flavor)	for	this	recipe.	Don’t	let	the	chops
drain	on	the	paper	towels	for	longer	than	30	seconds,	or	the	heat	will	steam	the
crust	and	make	it	soggy.	You	can	substitute	¾	cup	of	store-bought	cornflake
crumbs	for	the	whole	cornflakes.	If	using	crumbs,	omit	the	processing	step	and
mix	the	crumbs	with	the	cornstarch,	salt,	and	pepper.

				2⁄3 cup	cornstarch
1				 cup	buttermilk
2				 tablespoons	Dijon	mustard
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
3				 cups	cornflakes
					 Salt	and	pepper
8				 (3-to	4-ounce)	boneless	pork	chops,	½	to	¾	inch	thick,	trimmed
				2⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
					 Lemon	wedges

1.	Place	1⁄3	cup	cornstarch	in	shallow	dish.	In	second	shallow	dish,	whisk
buttermilk,	mustard,	and	garlic	until	combined.	Process	cornflakes,	½	teaspoon
salt,	½	teaspoon	pepper,	and	remaining	1⁄3	cup	cornstarch	in	food	processor	until
cornflakes	are	finely	ground,	about	10	seconds.	Transfer	cornflake	mixture	to
third	shallow	dish.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	200	degrees.	Set	wire

rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Cut	1⁄16-inch-deep	slits	on	both	sides	of	chops,
spaced	½	inch	apart,	in	crosshatch	pattern.	Season	chops	with	salt	and	pepper.
Dredge	1	chop	in	cornstarch;	shake	off	excess.	Using	tongs,	coat	with	buttermilk
mixture;	let	excess	drip	off.	Coat	with	cornflake	mixture;	gently	pat	off	excess.
Transfer	coated	chop	to	prepared	wire	rack	and	repeat	with	remaining	7	chops.
Let	coated	chops	stand	for	10	minutes.
3.	Heat	1⁄3	cup	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until

shimmering.	Place	4	chops	in	skillet	and	cook	until	golden	brown	and	crisp,	2	to
5	minutes.	Carefully	flip	chops	and	continue	to	cook	until	second	side	is	golden



brown,	crisp,	and	chops	register	145	degrees,	2	to	5	minutes	longer.	Transfer
chops	to	paper	towel–lined	plate	and	let	drain	for	30	seconds	on	each	side.
Transfer	to	clean	wire	rack	set	in	rimmed	baking	sheet,	then	transfer	to	oven	to
keep	warm.	Discard	oil	in	skillet	and	wipe	clean	with	paper	towels.	Repeat
process	with	remaining	oil	and	pork	chops.	Serve	with	lemon	wedges.

CRISPY	PAN-FRIED	PORK	CHOPS	WITH	LATIN	SPICE	RUB
Combine	1½	teaspoons	ground	cumin,	1½	teaspoons	chili	powder,	¾	teaspoon
ground	coriander,	1⁄8	teaspoon	ground	cinnamon,	and	1⁄8	teaspoon	red	pepper
flakes	in	bowl.	Omit	pepper	and	coat	chops	with	spice	rub	after	seasoning	with
salt	in	step	2.

CRISPY	PAN-FRIED	PORK	CHOPS	WITH	THREE-PEPPER	RUB
Combine	1½	teaspoons	pepper,	1½	teaspoons	white	pepper,	¾	teaspoon
coriander,	¾	teaspoon	ground	cumin,	¼	teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes,	and	¼
teaspoon	ground	cinnamon	in	bowl.	Omit	pepper	and	coat	chops	with	spice	rub
after	seasoning	with	salt	in	step	2.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
A	breaded	coating	can	be	just	the	thing	to	give	lean,	bland	pork	chops	a	flavor
boost—but	not	when	it	turns	gummy	and	flakes	off	the	meat.	Using	boneless
chops	is	fast	and	easy.	Forgoing	the	traditional	flour,	egg	wash,	and	bread
crumbs,	we	use	cornstarch,	buttermilk,	and	cornflakes	for	a	light	crust	with	a
craggy,	crunchy	texture.
LOSE	THE	BONE	To	keep	this	dish	fast	and	easy,	we	forgo	bone-in	pork

chops	for	boneless	loin	chops.	Shallow-frying	these	thin	chops	takes	just	a	few
minutes	per	side.
GO	FOR	LIGHT	AND	CRISPY	Unlike	in	the	Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops

recipe,	here	we	don’t	want	a	thick,	batterlike	crust.	Instead,	we’re	shooting	for	an
ultra-light	and	crispy	coating.	To	do	this,	we	use	cornstarch,	which	releases
sticky	starch	as	it	absorbs	water	and	forms	an	ultra-crisp	sheath	when	exposed	to
heat	and	fat.
DIP	IN	BUTTERMILK	We	substitute	buttermilk	for	an	egg	wash	because

cornstarch	absorbs	liquid	less	readily	than	flour	and	raw	egg	is	already	less
available	to	be	soaked	up	because	it	is	so	bound	up	in	its	protein.	Buttermilk,
instead,	brings	a	nice	subtle	tang.	Adding	a	dollop	of	mustard	and	a	little	minced
garlic	perks	up	its	flavor	even	more.
ADD	STARCH	TO	CORNFLAKES	Traditionally,	bound	breading

necessitates	the	use	of	bread	crumbs.	But	with	buttermilk	as	our	wash,	bread
crumbs	absorb	too	much	liquid	and	no	longer	remain	crunchy.	After
experimenting	with	Ritz	crackers,	Melba	toasts,	and	Cream	of	Wheat,	we	settled
on	finely	ground	cornflakes.	The	crisp	flakes,	which	are	engineered	to	retain
their	crunch	in	liquid,	are	a	popular	way	to	add	craggy	texture	to	oven-fried
chicken	so	it’s	not	a	surprise	that	they	work	here,	too.	We	also	add	cornstarch	to
the	cornflakes	before	dredging	the	chops.	Once	swollen,	the	starch	granules
work	their	magic,	turning	the	flakes	even	crispier	in	the	hot	fat.
SCORE	FOR	STICKY	PROTEINS	Making	shallow	cuts	in	the	chops’

surface	releases	sticky	meat	proteins	that	dampen	the	cornstarch	and	help	the
coating	adhere.
REST	TO	SOLIDIFY	BREADING	As	in	our	Crisp	Breaded	Chicken

Cutlets	recipe,	it’s	important	to	let	the	pork	rest	after	breading	and	before
cooking.	Here,	we	let	the	chops	sit	for	10	minutes	before	hitting	the	oil.	This
way,	the	breading	has	a	chance	to	solidify	and	will	remain	intact	during	the
cooking	process.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHERE	BREADED	COATINGS	GO	WRONG

The	use	of	cornstarch	and	buttermilk	helps	keep	the	breading	on	a	juicy	pork	chop.

The	components	of	a	traditional	breading—flour,	beaten	egg,	and	bread	crumbs—present	special	challenges
when	applied	to	juicy	pork	chops.	Here’s	how	we	ensured	a	crust	that	stays	put	and	packs	plenty	of	crunch
in	our	Crispy	Pan-Fried	Pork	Chops.

	
Problem:	Gummy	patches	under	the	coating
Solution:	We	swap	flour—the	usual	breading	base	coat—for	cornstarch.
Problem:	Breading	pulls	away
Solution:	Instead	of	the	typical	egg	wash,	which	puffs	up	when	cooked	and	contributes	to	a	heavier	coating
that	can	pull	away	from	the	meat,	we	use	buttermilk	as	the	second	layer.	It	makes	for	a	lighter	shell	that
clings	nicely	to	the	chops.



PORK	SCHNITZEL
SERVES	4

The	2	cups	of	oil	called	for	in	this	recipe	may	seem	like	a	lot,	but	this	amount	is
necessary	to	achieve	a	wrinkled	texture	on	the	finished	cutlets.	To	ensure	ample
cooking	space,	a	large	Dutch	oven	is	essential.	If	you	don’t	have	an	instant-read
thermometer	to	gauge	the	oil’s	temperature,	place	a	fresh	(not	dry)	bread	cube	in
the	oil	and	start	heating;	when	the	bread	is	deep	golden	brown,	the	oil	is	ready.
The	hard-cooked	egg,	capers,	parsley,	and	lemon	are	the	traditional	garnish,
although	the	egg	can	be	omitted.

PORK
7				 slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	crusts	removed,	cut	into	¾-inch	cubes
½				 cup	all-purpose	flour
2				 large	eggs
1				 tablespoon	plus	2	cups	vegetable	oil
1				 (1¼-pound)	pork	tenderloin,	trimmed	and	cut	on	angle	into	4	equal	pieces
					 Salt	and	pepper

GARNISHES
					 Lemon	wedges
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
2				 tablespoons	capers,	rinsed
1				 Hard-Cooked	Egg,	yolk	and	white	separated	and	passed	separately	through	fine-mesh	strainer

(optional)

1.	Place	bread	cubes	on	large	plate.	Microwave	on	high	power	for	4	minutes,
stirring	well	halfway	through	cooking.	Microwave	on	medium	power	until	bread
is	dry	and	few	pieces	start	to	lightly	brown,	3	to	5	minutes	longer,	stirring	every
minute.	Process	dry	bread	in	food	processor	to	very	fine	crumbs,	about	45
seconds.	Transfer	bread	crumbs	to	shallow	dish	(you	should	have	about	1¼	cups
crumbs).	Spread	flour	in	second	shallow	dish.	Beat	eggs	with	1	tablespoon	oil	in
third	shallow	dish.
2.	Working	with	1	piece	at	a	time,	place	pork,	with	1	cut	side	down,	between	2

sheets	of	parchment	paper	or	plastic	wrap	and	pound	to	even	thickness	between



1⁄8	and	¼	inch.	Pat	cutlets	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.
Working	with	1	cutlet	at	a	time,	dredge	cutlets	thoroughly	in	flour,	shaking	off
excess,	then	coat	with	egg	mixture,	allowing	excess	to	drip	back	into	dish	to
ensure	very	thin	coating,	and	coat	evenly	with	bread	crumbs,	pressing	on	crumbs
to	adhere.	Place	breaded	cutlets	in	single	layer	on	wire	rack	set	on	baking	sheet;
let	coating	dry	for	5	minutes.
3.	Heat	remaining	2	cups	oil	in	large	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until

it	registers	375	degrees.	Lay	2	cutlets,	without	overlapping,	in	pan	and	cook,
shaking	pan	continuously	and	gently,	until	cutlets	are	wrinkled	and	light	golden
brown	on	both	sides,	1	to	2	minutes	per	side.	Transfer	cutlets	to	paper	towel–
lined	plate	and	flip	cutlets	several	times	to	blot	excess	oil.	Repeat	with	remaining
cutlets.	Serve	with	garnishes.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Pork	schnitzel	is	often	a	soggy,	greasy	affair.	But	when	done	right,	it	features	an
irresistible	combination	of	light	bread-crumb	coating	and	tender,	juicy	meat.
Unlike	in	other	recipes	in	this	concept,	here	we	want	our	breaded	coating	to	be
puffy.	For	remarkably	tender	texture	and	mild	flavor,	we	use	pounded	medallions
of	pork	tenderloin,	homemade	bread	crumbs,	and	some	arm	strength.
CHOICE	CUTS	Most	schnitzel	recipes	call	for	boneless	pork	chops,

pounded	thin.	However,	pork	chops	have	very	compact	muscle	fibers,	which
means	that	pounding	them	into	thin	cutlets	is	laborious.	It	also	means	that	once
cooked,	the	pork	has	a	dry,	mealy	texture.	We	use	pork	tenderloin	instead.
Pounded	thin	and	fried,	cutlets	made	from	the	tenderloin	are	remarkably	tender
with	a	mild	flavor	similar	to	veal.
MICROWAVE	BREAD	CRUMBS	Using	raw	homemade	bread	crumbs	can

result	in	a	pork	cutlet	that	is	overcooked	before	the	crumbs	are	crisp,	with	a	too
coarsely	textured	crust.	We	found	that	microwaving	the	bread	cubes	first	on	high
power,	then	medium,	and	giving	them	a	whirl	in	the	food	processor	produces
superfine,	dry	bread	crumbs	that	fry	up	extra-crisp.
USE	ARM	POWER	Wiener	schnitzel’s	signature	attribute	is	a	wrinkled,

puffy	exterior.	When	the	pan	is	shaken,	gently	but	continuously,	the	ample	hot
oil	will	heat	the	eggs	in	the	coating	very	quickly,	solidifying	the	proteins,
creating	a	barrier	that	captures	steam	and	begins	to	puff.	The	shaking	sends	the
hot	oil	over	the	top	of	the	cutlets,	speeding	up	the	setting	process	and	enhancing
the	puff.



CONCEPT	17

Good	Frying	Is	All	About	Oil
Temperature
You	can	get	French	fries	pretty	much	anywhere:	at	fast-food	chains,	served	with
ketchup	squeezed	from	a	plastic	pouch;	at	baseball	stadiums,	doused	with	chili
and	cheese;	at	high-end	bistros,	sprinkled	with	truffle	oil	and	sea	salt.	They’re
one	of	America’s	favorite	foods.	So	why	do	we	never	make	them	at	home?
Many	of	us	avoid	frying	because	of	the	grease.	But	we	shouldn’t	be	so	skittish.
When	done	right,	frying	isn’t	difficult.	It	all	comes	down	to	the	temperature	of
the	oil.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
When	we	fry	food,	it	is	generally	in	oil	held	between	325	and	375	degrees.	This
way	when	we	place	potatoes,	chicken,	or	shrimp	in	the	pot,	their	surface
moisture	immediately	turns	to	steam.	(We’ve	all	seen	the	bubbles	produced	as
soon	as	we	place	food	into	hot	fat.	The	oil	isn’t	boiling	…	that’s	moisture
escaping.)
Though	it	seems	counterintuitive,	frying	is	a	dry-heat	cooking	method.	As	the

steam	flees	the	frying	food,	leaving	tiny	craters	in	its	wake,	a	small	amount	of	oil
moves	in	to	take	its	place.	And	as	the	food	cooks,	its	outermost	coating	of	starch
(because	we	generally	fry	starchy	food,	or	nonstarchy	food	battered	in	starch)
dries	out,	becoming	porous	and	crispy,	with	lots	of	oil	clinging	to	the	newly
formed	crust.
The	high	temperature	is	important	here:	If	the	oil	isn’t	hot	enough,	the

moisture	will	not	turn	to	steam,	the	outer	edge	will	not	dry	out,	and	the
trademark	brown	and	crispy	crust	will	not	form.	After	all,	flavor-producing
browning	reactions,	such	as	caramelization	(concept	27)	and	the	Maillard
reaction	(concept	2),	do	not	take	place	rapidly	until	temperatures	of	at	least	300
degrees.	And	if	the	crisp	crust	containing	sufficient	amounts	of	hot	oil	does	not
materialize,	there	is	nothing	keeping	the	moisture	in	the	food	being	fried	from
migrating	to	the	outer	edges,	and	the	result	is	a	limp	and	soggy	end	product.
(This	is	why	we	often	fry	in	batches.	Dumping	large	amounts	of	food	into	hot	oil
significantly	lowers	the	temperature	of	the	oil	and	guarantees	soggy	fries.)
A	crisp	crust	is	not	only	more	flavorful,	but	it	will	help	prevent	fried	food

from	tasting	greasy.	Believe	it	or	not,	the	oil	temperature	while	frying	is	only
part	of	the	reason	food	can	taste	greasy.	In	fact,	the	hotter	the	oil,	the	greater	the
moisture	loss	and	the	amount	of	oil	absorbed	(see	“Giving	Fat	the	Cold
Shoulder”).	But	oil	absorption	during	frying	is	really	a	secondary	cause	of
greasiness	in	fried	food.	It	turns	out	that	most	fried	foods	absorb	oil	after	they
are	cooked,	when	oil	on	the	surface	is	able	to	penetrate	the	crust.	A	nice	crisp
crust	doesn’t	prevent	a	potato	from	absorbing	oil,	but	it	does	prevent	it	from
growing	limp	and	seeming	greasy.
Keep	in	mind	that	it’s	possible	for	oil	to	get	too	hot.	When	oil	temperature

climbs	above	400	degrees,	the	exterior	of	the	food	can	burn	before	the	interior	is
cooked	through.	Even	if	the	interior	does	cook	through,	excessive	heat	can	cause
excessive	moisture	loss	and	the	food	becomes	tough.	Perhaps	the	biggest	impact
of	excess	heat	is	on	the	quality	of	the	oil.	Before	we	take	a	look	at	this



phenomenon,	let’s	turn	to	the	basic	science	of	fats	and	oils.
Although	the	terms	are	often	used	interchangeably,	by	definition,	a	fat	is	solid

at	room	temperature	while	an	oil	is	liquid.	Fresh	frying	oil	is	composed	of	more
than	98	percent	triglycerides,	which	are	made	of	three	fatty	acids	chemically
bonded	to	a	molecule	of	glycerol.	Triglycerides	that	are	high	in	saturated	fatty
acids,	such	as	those	in	meat,	are	solid	at	room	temperature,	while	those	that	are
high	in	unsaturated	fatty	acids,	such	as	from	plants,	are	liquids.	When	fats	and
oils	are	heated,	and	then	put	in	contact	with	food,	two	things	can	happen:	The
triglycerides	can	react	with	water	from	the	food	to	form	additional	free	fatty
acids	and	glycerol,	and	the	unsaturated	fatty	acids	can	be	oxidized	by	the	air.
Both	of	these	reactions	limit	the	useful	lifetime	of	frying	oil	by	causing	it	to
smoke	at	a	lower	and	lower	temperature.	This	smoke	point,	or	temperature	at
which	the	oil	begins	to	emit	unwelcome	smoke,	changes	from	oil	to	oil,
depending	on	how	quickly	it	breaks	down	to	free	fatty	acids	(see	“Smoke	Points
of	Fats	and	Oils”).	The	amount	of	these	free	fatty	acids	in	the	oil	is	an	indication
of	the	suitability	of	the	oil	for	high-temperature	frying—or,	where	its	smoke
point	falls.	Every	oil	will	eventually	start	to	smoke	during	normal	use.	And	the
more	you	use	an	oil,	the	lower	the	smoke	point	becomes.
So	now	we	know	about	the	importance	of	oil	temperature.	But	where	to	begin

in	the	kitchen?	French	fries	are	always	a	good	bet.
	

WHAT	HAPPENS	WHEN	A	POTATO	HITS	HOT	OIL?



	
RAW	Before	hitting	the	oil,	the	potato	holds	moisture	evenly	spaced	within.



	
FRYING	While	frying	in	hot	oil,	the	moisture	turns	to	steam	and	exits,	leaving	holes	in	its	wake.



	
AFTER	The	craters	on	the	surface	fill	with	oil,	helping	to	create	a	crisp	brown	crust.	The	amount	of	oil



absorbed	is	directly	proportional	to	the	amount	of	water	lost.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	the	ideal	temperature	of	the	oil	in	which	to	cook	French	fries,	we
ran	the	following	experiment:	We	cut	russet	potatoes	into	¼-inch-thick	fries	and
fried	batches	of	them	in	oil	at	275	degrees,	325	degrees,	and	400	degrees.



THE	RESULTS
There	were	some	significant	differences.	First	off,	cooking	times	varied	widely.
While	the	400-degree	fries	were	torched	after	just	a	few	minutes	in	the	hot	oil,
the	ones	fried	at	275	degrees	remained	blond	after	a	full	10	minutes	in	the	pot.
The	fries	cooked	at	325	degrees	landed	in	the	middle,	developing	a	golden
brown	crust	in	about	six	minutes.	Exterior	appearance	aside,	the	real	story	lay	on
the	inside	of	the	fries.	After	letting	the	fries	cool	for	a	minute,	we	sliced	them	in
half	in	the	name	of	autopsy.	Once	again,	the	fries	cooked	at	325	degrees	were
perfect,	featuring	a	core	of	fluffy,	just-cooked	potato	surrounded	by	a	substantial,
crispy	crust.	The	275-degree	sample	was	moist	throughout	(and	that	included	the
super-soggy	crust),	while	the	fries	from	the	400-degree	pot	had	a	small	ring	of
overcooked	potato	surrounding	a	completely	raw	center.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	temperature	of	the	oil	makes	a	big	difference.	Our	French	fries	cooked	at
400	degrees	browned	far	too	quickly,	verging	on	burnt	before	the	inside	of	the
potato	could	cook	at	all.	Our	French	fries	cooked	at	275	degrees,	on	the	other
hand,	cooked	through	completely,	but	a	crust	was	never	able	to	form,	and	they
grew	limp	and	floppy.	The	magic	temperature	is	325	degrees:	The	heat	is	high
enough	to	turn	the	water	in	the	potato	immediately	to	steam,	to	dry	out	the	outer
edge,	and	to	form	a	brown,	crispy	crust,	all	the	while	cooking	the	potato	for	a
moist	and	creamy	center,	too.	Be	sure	to	monitor	the	temperature	of	your	oil!



OIL	TEMPERATURE	AND	THE	COLOR	OF	FRENCH	FRIES

	
TOO	LIGHT

The	crust	is	pale	when	cooked	in	275-degree	oil.

	
PERFECT

The	magic	number	for	a	crisp	crust	is	325	degrees.

	
TOO	BROWN

Fries	cook	too	fast	(almost	burnt)	at	400	degrees.



FRYING	AT	WORK	
FRENCH	FRIES
When	we	fry	potatoes,	we’re	looking	for	crispy,	brown	crusts	and	tender,	moist
interiors.	We	achieve	this	by	using	hot	(but	not	too	hot)	oil	and	techniques
developed	to	control	potato	starch.	Taking	our	knowledge	of	the	science	of	frying
to	the	next	level,	we	even	explore	a	counterintuitive	method	and	begin	some	of
our	French	fries	in	cold	oil.	More	information	on	the	theories	behind	another
popular	fried	food—chicken—can	be	found	in	concept	13.



CLASSIC	FRENCH	FRIES
SERVES	4

Flavoring	the	oil	with	a	few	tablespoons	of	bacon	fat	gives	the	fries	a	mild,
meaty	flavor,	but	omitting	it	will	not	affect	the	final	texture	of	the	fries.	The	oil
will	bubble	up	when	you	add	the	fries,	so	be	sure	you	leave	at	least	3	inches	of
room	between	the	oil	and	the	top	of	your	pot.	We	prefer	peanut	oil	for	frying,	but
vegetable	oil	can	be	substituted.	You	will	need	at	least	a	7-quart	Dutch	oven	for
this	recipe.

2½				 pounds	russet	potatoes,	peeled	and	cut	lengthwise	into	¼-inch-thick	fries
2				 tablespoons	cornstarch
3				 quarts	peanut	oil
¼				 cup	bacon	fat,	strained	(optional)
					 Kosher	salt

1.	Rinse	cut	potatoes	in	large	bowl	under	cold	running	water	until	water	turns
clear.	Cover	with	cold	water	and	refrigerate	for	30	minutes	or	up	to	12	hours.
2.	Pour	off	water,	spread	potatoes	onto	kitchen	towels,	and	thoroughly	dry.

Transfer	potatoes	to	large	bowl	and	toss	with	cornstarch	until	evenly	coated.
Transfer	potatoes	to	wire	rack	set	in	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	let	rest	until	fine
white	coating	forms,	about	20	minutes.
3.	Meanwhile,	heat	peanut	oil	and	bacon	fat,	if	using,	in	Dutch	oven	over

medium	heat	to	325	degrees.	Set	wire	rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet,	line	rack
with	triple	layer	of	paper	towels,	and	set	aside.
4.	Add	half	of	potatoes,	handful	at	a	time,	to	hot	oil	and	increase	heat	to	high.

Fry,	stirring	with	wire	skimmer	or	slotted	spoon,	until	potatoes	start	to	turn	from
white	to	blond,	4	to	5	minutes.	(Oil	temperature	will	drop	about	75	degrees
during	this	frying.)	Using	skimmer	or	slotted	spoon,	transfer	fries	to	prepared
wire	rack.	Return	oil	to	325	degrees	and	repeat	with	remaining	potatoes.	Let
fries	cool	for	at	least	10	minutes.
5.	Increase	heat	under	Dutch	oven	to	high	and	heat	oil	to	350	degrees.	Set

second	wire	rack	in	second	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	line	with	triple	layer	of
paper	towels.	Add	half	of	fries,	handful	at	a	time,	to	hot	oil	and	fry	until	golden
brown	and	puffed,	2	to	3	minutes;	transfer	to	prepared	wire	rack.	Return	oil	to



350	degrees	and	repeat	with	remaining	fries.	Season	fries	with	salt	to	taste,	and
serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Homemade	French	fries—with	their	crisp	exteriors,	airy	interiors,	and	earthy,
sweet	flavor—are	a	revelation.	When	you	start	with	fresh	potatoes	and	cook
them	in	batches	in	hot	peanut	oil,	the	results	are	hard	to	beat.	We	find	that
coating	the	potatoes	with	a	little	cornstarch	creates	a	shatteringly	crisp	crust.
START	WITH	RUSSETS	Obviously,	a	good	French	fry	requires	the	right

potato.	Should	it	be	starchy	or	waxy?	(For	more	on	potatoes,	see	concept	25.)
We	tested	two	of	the	most	popular	waxy	(low-starch/high-moisture)	potatoes,
and	neither	was	even	close	to	ideal,	both	being	too	watery.	During	the	frying,
water	evaporated	inside	the	potato,	leaving	hollows	that	would	fill	with	oil,	so
the	finished	fries	were	greasy.	Next	we	tested	the	starchy	potato	most	readily
available	nationwide,	the	russet.	This	potato	turned	out	to	be	ideal.	Its	high-
starch/low-moisture	levels	allow	the	starch	granules	on	the	outer	layers	of	the
potato	to	swell	and	explode,	releasing	a	starch	molecule	called	amylose	that	later
turns	into	an	excellent	crust.	It	fries	up	with	all	the	qualities	that	we	were	looking
for.
RINSE	WELL	Because	these	are	such	starchy	potatoes,	it	is	important	to

rinse	off	the	surface	after	you	cut	the	potato	into	fries.	(For	more	on	controlling
starches	in	potatoes,	see	concept	26.)	To	do	this,	simply	put	the	cut	fries	in	a
bowl,	place	the	bowl	in	the	sink,	and	run	cold	water	into	it,	swirling	with	your
fingers	until	the	water	runs	clear.	This	might	seem	like	an	unimportant	step,	but
it	makes	a	real	difference.	When	potatoes	are	fried	by	the	classical	method,	any
excess	sugars	left	on	the	surface	of	the	potatoes	will	brown	too	quickly	during
the	first	frying	stage	before	the	potatoes	can	be	fried	to	a	crispy	crust	in	the
second	stage.	Rinsing	removes	the	sugars.
HOT	POTATO,	COLD	POTATO	Refrigerating	the	potatoes	in	a	bowl	of	ice

water	for	at	least	30	minutes	means	that	when	the	potatoes	first	enter	the	hot	oil,
they	are	nearly	frozen.	This	allows	a	slow,	thorough	cooking	of	the	inner	potato
pulp	and	a	finished	batch	of	fries	with	crispier	crusts	and	great	coloration.
PEEL	AND	CUT	Our	preference	is	to	peel	potatoes	for	French	fries.	The	skin

keeps	the	potato	from	forming	those	little	airy	blisters	that	we	love.	Peeling	the
potato	also	allows	home	cooks	to	see—and	remove,	if	they	want—any
imperfections.	The	best	way	to	uniformly	cut	fries	is	to	start	by	trimming	a	thin
slice	from	each	side	of	the	potato.	Once	the	potato	is	“squared,”	you	can	slice	it
into	¼-inch	planks	and	then	cut	each	plank	into	¼-inch	fries.
USE	CORNSTARCH	As	soon	as	we	discovered	that	many	fast-food	French



fries	are	covered	in	a	thin	layer	of	starch-based	coating	before	they	are	fried,	we
decided	to	try	it	ourselves.	The	result?	After	testing	cornstarch,	potato	starch,
and	arrowroot,	we	saw	an	immediate	improvement	in	the	crispiness	of	our	fries.
It	turns	out	that	the	added	starch	is	absorbing	some	of	the	surface	moisture	on
the	potatoes	to	form	a	gel-like	coating.	This	coating	releases	the	starch	molecule
amylose	that	turns	into	a	shatteringly	crisp	crust	when	heated	in	oil.	Our
preference	is	cornstarch.	Just	2	tablespoons	provides	a	flavorless	coating	that
guarantees	crisp	fries.
PICK	YOUR	FAT	What	is	the	right	fat	for	making	perfect	French	fries?	To

find	out,	we	experimented	with	lard,	vegetable	shortening,	canola	oil,	corn	oil,
and	peanut	oil.	Lard	and	shortening	make	great	fries,	but	we	figured	that	many
cooks	won’t	want	to	use	these	saturated	fat–laden	products.	We	moved	on	to
canola	oil,	the	ballyhooed	oil	of	the	’90s,	now	used	in	a	blend	by	McDonald’s,
which	produces	9	million	pounds	of	finished	fries	a	day.	But	we	were	unhappy
with	the	results:	bland,	almost	watery	fries.	Corn	oil	was	the	most	forgiving	oil
in	the	test	kitchen.	But	we	found	that	a	potato	fried	in	peanut	oil	is	light,	and	the
flavor	is	rich	but	not	dense.	The	earthy	flavor	of	the	potato	is	there	but	is	not
overbearing.	There	was	still	something	missing,	though:	the	high	flavor	note,
which	is	supplied	by	the	animal	fat	in	lard.	We	tried	a	dollop	of	strained	bacon
grease	in	peanut	oil,	about	1	generous	tablespoon	per	quart	of	oil.	The	meaty
flavor	came	through,	but	without	its	nasty	baggage.	At	last,	an	equivalent	to	lard.
FRY	TWICE	First,	we	par-fry	the	potatoes	at	a	relatively	low	temperature	to

release	their	rich	and	earthy	flavor.	The	potatoes	are	then	quick-fried	at	a	higher
temperature	until	nicely	browned.	The	garden-variety	cookbook	recipe	calls	for
par-frying	at	350	degrees	and	final	frying	at	375	to	400	degrees.	But	we	found
these	temperatures	to	be	far	too	aggressive.	We	prefer	an	initial	frying	at	325
degrees,	with	the	final	frying	at	350	degrees.	Lower	temperatures	allow	for
easier	monitoring;	with	higher	temperatures,	the	fries	can	get	away	from	the
cook.
REST	BETWEEN	BATCHES	After	10	minutes’	rest	between	the	first	and

second	fry,	the	starches	on	the	exterior	of	the	blanched	fries	form	a	thin	film.
This	helps	the	potatoes	to	become	crisp	once	they	are	fried	again.
USE	A	SKIMMER	If	you	peek	into	a	restaurant	kitchen,	you’ll	see	chefs

working	over	steaming	stockpots	or	vats	of	bubbling	oil	using	shallow,	woven
wire	baskets	on	long	handles	to	retrieve	blanched	vegetables,	French	fries,	and
thin-skinned	wontons.	Suffice	it	to	say	that	most	chefs	wouldn’t	part	with	their
“spiders,”	as	they	are	called,	which	effortlessly	scoop	out	multiple	handfuls	of



food	with	one	swoop	and	leave	all	the	hot	cooking	oil,	water,	or	broth	behind.
We	highly	recommend	using	one	here.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

WHEN	IS	FRYER	OIL	AT	ITS	BEST?
Save	a	cup	of	used	oil	to	mix	with	fresh	oil	when	frying.	The	fried	food	will	be	crisper	and	more

evenly	golden.

In	deep-frying,	the	first	batch	is	never	the	best.	Food	writer	Russ	Parsons	explains	in	How	to	Read	a	French
Fry	that	fry	oil	has	five	stages:	breakin	(too	fresh	to	fry	well),	fresh,	optimum,	degrading	(on	the	way	to
spoiling),	and	runaway	(dark,	smelly,	and	prone	to	smoking).	Food	fried	in	optimum	oil	is	golden	and	crisp.
Breakin	and	fresh	oil	yield	paler,	less	crisp	food.	Degrading	and	runaway	oil	produce	dark,	greasy	food	with
rancid	odors.

Why?	Oil	that	is	too	fresh	can’t	penetrate	the	barrier	of	moisture	that	surrounds	food	as	it	fries.	Over
time,	as	the	oil	continues	to	be	exposed	to	heat,	it	breaks	down,	producing	slippery,	soaplike	compounds
that	can	penetrate	the	water	barrier.	This	increased	contact	between	oil	and	food	promotes	browning	and
crispness.	(During	repeated	use,	the	level	of	free	fatty	acid	increases	from	about	0.03	to	0.05	percent	in
fresh	oil	to	8	to	10	percent	in	runaway	oil.)

With	this	in	mind,	we	wondered	if	we	could	create	optimum	oil	by	mixing	used	and	new.	We	fried
shrimp,	fish,	and	French	fries	in	fresh	oil	and	in	a	mixture	of	fresh	oil	and	oil	that	had	been	used	once	to
make	French	fries	(and	then	strained	through	a	coffee	filter	to	remove	any	solids).	We	found	that	food	fried
in	the	mix	of	new	and	used	oil	was	crisper	and	more	uniformly	golden	than	food	fried	in	fresh	oil.

So	save	a	cup	or	two	of	used	oil	to	mix	with	fresh	the	next	time	you	fry	(we	found	that	a	ratio	of	1	cup	of
used	oil	to	5	cups	of	fresh	oil	worked	best).	Once	the	oil	has	cooled,	filter	it	through	a	strainer	lined	with	a
few	layers	of	cheesecloth	or	paper	coffee	filters	and	place	it	in	the	refrigerator	(or	freezer;	see	“Storing	Used
Frying	Oil”)	in	an	airtight	container.	Stored	in	this	fashion,	the	oil	should	be	good	for	two	or	three	uses.	But
it’s	important	to	remember	that	frying	oil	can	transfer	flavors	from	food	to	food.	As	a	rule,	discard	oil	in
which	fish	was	fried;	multiple	batches	of	chicken	or	potatoes	may	be	cooked	in	the	same	oil,	but	oil	used	for
doughnuts	should	only	be	used	for	doughnuts.	The	oil	should	also	be	kept	clean	when	frying;	skim	away
any	detritus	and	keep	salt	and/or	water	out	of	the	oil.	And,	last,	pay	keen	attention	to	oil	temperature:	If	the
oil	reached	the	smoke	point	during	frying	it	will	impart	an	off-flavor	to	foods,	so	don’t	try	to	reuse	it.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SMOKE	POINTS	OF	FATS	AND	OILS

Smoke	points	vary	in	different	fats	and	oils.

Coconut	Oil
Smoke	Point	(Degrees	Fahrenheit)*:	385
	
Extra-Virgin	Olive	Oil**
Smoke	Point	(Degrees	Fahrenheit)*:	410
	
Peanut	Oil
Smoke	Point	(Degrees	Fahrenheit)*:	446
	
Corn	Oil
Smoke	Point	(Degrees	Fahrenheit)*:	455
	
Canola	Oil
Smoke	Point	(Degrees	Fahrenheit)*:	457
	
Lard
Smoke	Point	(Degrees	Fahrenheit)*:	464
	
Data	from	the	Institute	of	Shortening	and	Edible	Oils

	

*	The	smoke	point	of	all	fats	and	oils	varies	from	sample	to	sample	depending	on	how	it	has	been	refined
and	processed.

	

**	Data	from	the	California	Olive	Oil	Council.	The	smoke	point	of	filtered	olive	oils	can	be	higher,	though
all	vary	widely	by	source.



EASIER	FRENCH	FRIES
SERVES	3	TO	4

Flavoring	the	oil	with	a	few	tablespoons	of	bacon	fat	gives	the	fries	a	mild,
meaty	flavor,	but	omitting	it	will	not	affect	the	final	texture	of	the	fries.	We	prefer
peanut	oil	for	frying,	but	vegetable	oil	can	be	substituted.	This	recipe	will	not
work	with	sweet	potatoes	or	russets.	Serve	with	ketchup	or	a	dipping	sauce
(recipes	follow),	if	desired.	You	will	need	at	least	a	6-quart	Dutch	oven	for	this
recipe.

2½				 pounds	Yukon	Gold	potatoes,	dried,	sides	squared	off,	and	cut	lengthwise	into	¼-inch-thick	fries
6				 cups	peanut	oil
¼				 cup	bacon	fat,	strained	(optional)
					 Kosher	salt

1.	Set	wire	rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet,	line	rack	with	triple	layer	of	paper
towels,	and	set	aside.	Combine	potatoes,	oil,	and	bacon	fat,	if	using,	in	Dutch
oven.	Cook	over	high	heat	until	oil	has	reached	rolling	boil,	about	5	minutes.
Continue	to	cook,	without	stirring,	until	potatoes	are	limp	but	exteriors	are
beginning	to	firm,	about	15	minutes.
2.	Using	tongs,	stir	potatoes,	gently	scraping	up	any	that	stick,	and	continue	to

cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	golden	and	crisp,	5	to	10	minutes	longer.	Using
skimmer	or	slotted	spoon,	transfer	fries	to	prepared	wire	rack.	Season	with	salt
to	taste,	and	serve	immediately.



BELGIAN-STYLE	DIPPING	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	EASIER	FRENCH	FRIES

In	Belgium,	mayonnaise-based	dipping	sauces	for	fries	are	standard.	Hot	sauce
gives	this	dipping	sauce	a	bit	of	a	kick.

5				 tablespoons	mayonnaise
3				 tablespoons	ketchup
1				 garlic	clove,	minced

½–¾				 teaspoon	hot	sauce
¼				 teaspoon	salt
					 	

Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	small	bowl.



CHIVE	AND	BLACK	PEPPER	DIPPING	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	EASIER	FRENCH	FRIES

5				 tablespoons	mayonnaise
3				 tablespoons	sour	cream
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives

1½				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
¼				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper

Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	small	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
When	we	wanted	a	French	fry	recipe	with	half	the	oil	and	no	double-frying,	we
tried	submerging	the	potatoes	in	cold	oil	before	frying	them	over	high	heat	until
browned.	With	lower-starch	potatoes	like	Yukon	Golds,	the	result	was	a	crisp
exterior	and	a	creamy	interior.
START	COLD	To	find	a	cooking	method	that	would	mimic	the	results	of

double-fried	French	fries,	we	were	inspired	by	food	writer	Jeffrey	Steingarten,
who	was	in	turn	inspired	by	a	method	attributed	to	Michelin-starred	French	über-
chef	Joël	Robuchon.	In	this	recipe,	Robuchon	skips	rinsing	and	soaking,	and
instead	submerges	potatoes	in	room-temperature,	or	“cold,”	oil	and	fries	them
over	high	heat	until	browned.	Surprisingly,	it	works.	How?	This	method	gives
the	potato	interior	an	opportunity	to	soften	and	cook	through	before	the	exterior
needs	to	start	crisping.	In	effect,	the	potatoes	are	parcooking	as	the	oil	gradually
heats	up,	mimicking	the	first	phase	of	double-frying.	Once	the	oil	is	hot,	the
exterior	of	the	potatoes	will	crisp	and	brown,	mimicking	the	second	phase	of
double-frying.
USE	YUKON	GOLDS	When	we	made	these	fries	with	russet	potatoes,

which	we	prefer	in	our	Classic	French	Fries,	we	found	our	finished	results	to	be
slightly	tough.	We	thought	this	might	be	because	of	the	russets’	starchiness.
Starchiness	is	an	asset	for	the	typical	double-fry	method—the	starch	granules
from	the	outermost	layers	of	the	potato	swell,	burst,	and	release	amylose	that
solidifies	into	a	crisp	crust.	However,	with	a	longer	cooking	time,	too	many
starch	granules	were	bursting,	leading	to	an	overly	thick	crust	that	was	more
leathery	than	crisp.	If	starchy	potatoes	were	the	problem,	why	not	start	with	a
less	starchy	spud?	We	sliced	up	a	couple	of	pounds	of	Yukon	Golds,	which	also
have	more	water	than	russets,	and	proceeded	with	our	working	recipe.	And	these
worked	well,	really	well.	These	Easier	French	Fries	made	with	Yukon	Golds
have	a	crisp	exterior—well	within	the	ballpark	of	double-fried	fries—with	none
of	the	toughness	of	russets,	and	a	creamy	interior.	Clearly,	the	moister,	less
starchy	composition	of	the	Yukon	Golds	can	better	withstand	the	long	cooking
time	of	this	approach.	Plus,	Yukon	Golds	have	such	a	thin	skin	that	they	can	be
used	unpeeled,	making	the	recipe	even	easier.
DON’T	RINSE	For	this	recipe	it’s	not	necessary	to	rinse	the	potatoes.	But

why?	For	one,	we	use	a	lower-starch	potato	so	there	will	be	less	sugars	(which
come	from	the	breakdown	of	starch)	on	the	surface	to	brown,	and	the	lower
frying	temperatures	also	slow	down	browning	more	than	they	do	crisping,
making	sure	our	fries	don’t	overbrown	before	they	are	fully	cooked.



DON’T	STIR/STIR	In	the	conventional	deep-fry	approach,	sticking	can	be
addressed	by	stirring	the	potatoes	throughout	cooking,	but	with	our	method	the
Yukons	(which	soften	significantly	during	the	early	part	of	cooking)	are	so
fragile	that	any	disturbance	causes	them	to	break	apart.	We	found	that	not
touching	the	spuds	for	20	minutes	after	putting	them	in	the	pot	will	allow	enough
of	a	crust	to	form	so	that	we	can	then	stir	them	with	no	ill	effect.	We	also
determined	that	thinner	¼-inch	fries	are	less	likely	to	stick	(and	we	like	their
greater	ratio	of	crispy	crust	to	creamy	interior).



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
STORING	USED	FRYING	OIL

Keep	used	frying	oil	in	the	freezer.	The	cold	temperature	slows	oxidation	and	helps	prevent
rancidity.

What	is	the	best	way	to	store	used	frying	oil	so	that	it	doesn’t	taste	fishy	and	stale	when	reused?	A	cool,
dark	cupboard	is	fine	for	the	short	term,	since	exposure	to	air	and	light	hastens	oil’s	rate	of	oxidative
rancidification	and	the	creation	of	off-flavors	and	odors.	But	for	long-term	storage	(beyond	one	month),	the
cooler	the	storage	temperature	the	better.	We	fried	chicken	in	vegetable	oil	and	then	divided	the	oil	(strained
first)	among	three	containers	and	stored	them	in	various	locations:	in	a	cool,	dark	cupboard;	in	the
refrigerator;	and	in	the	freezer.	Two	months	later,	we	sautéed	chunks	of	white	bread	in	each	sample	and
took	a	taste.	Sure	enough,	the	oil	from	the	cupboard	had	turned	fishy	and	unpleasant	and	the	refrigerated
sample	only	somewhat	less	so,	while	the	oil	kept	in	the	freezer	tasted	remarkably	clean.	Why?	Though	an
absence	of	light	is	important,	very	cold	temperatures	are	the	most	effective	at	slowing	oxidation	and	the
production	of	peroxides,	which	are	the	source	of	rancid	oil’s	unpleasant	taste	and	smell.	That’s	why	storing
oil	in	the	super-cold,	dark	freezer	is	your	best	bet	for	keeping	it	fresh.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
GIVING	FAT	THE	COLD	SHOULDER

Surprisingly,	starting	out	in	cold	oil	does	not	make	a	greasier	fry.

Our	easier	approach	to	cooking	French	fries	does	not	preheat	the	oil	and	calls	for	one	prolonged	frying
instead	of	the	quicker	double-dip	in	hot	oil	used	in	the	classic	method.	But	does	the	lengthy	exposure	to	oil
lead	to	a	greasier	fry?

We	prepared	two	batches	of	fries	using	Yukon	Gold	potatoes,	our	preferred	spud	for	the	cold-start
method.	We	cooked	one	batch	the	conventional	way,	heating	3	quarts	of	peanut	oil	to	325	degrees	and
frying	2½	pounds	of	potatoes	until	just	beginning	to	color,	removing	them,	increasing	the	oil	temperature	to
350	degrees,	then	returning	the	potatoes	to	the	pot	to	fry	until	golden	brown.	Total	exposure	to	oil:	less	than
10	minutes.	The	second	batch	we	cooked	according	to	our	working	method,	submerging	2½	pounds	of
spuds	in	6	cups	of	cold	oil	and	cooking	over	high	heat	for	about	25	minutes,	with	the	oil	temperature	never
rising	above	280	degrees.	We	then	sent	samples	from	each	batch	to	an	independent	lab	to	analyze	the	fat
content.

Our	cold-start	spuds	contained	about	one-third	less	fat	than	spuds	deep-fried	twice	the	conventional
way:	13	versus	20	percent.

Fries	absorb	oil	two	ways.	As	the	potatoes	cook,	they	lose	moisture	near	their	surface,	which	is	replaced
by	oil.	Then,	as	they	cool	after	being	removed	from	the	hot	grease,	oil	from	their	exterior	gets	pulled	in.
Because	our	cold-start	method	cooks	the	fries	more	gently,	less	moisture	is	lost	(but	enough	so	the	fries	stay
crisp)	and	less	oil	is	absorbed	during	frying.	Plus,	this	approach	exposes	the	spuds	to	just	one	cool-down,
versus	the	two	cooling-off	periods	of	the	classic	method,	so	less	oil	gets	absorbed	after	cooking	as	well.

	
COLD	OIL	METHOD

13%	fat



	
DOUBLE-FRY	METHOD

20%	fat



FRYING	AT	WORK	
TEMPURA
Shrimp	tempura	should	be	light	and	crisp.	But	with	a	tricky	batter	and	quick
cooking	time,	a	perfect	first	(or	second,	or	third)	batch	can	be	elusive.	We	use
hot	oil	(even	hotter	than	the	oil	we	use	for	our	Classic	French	Fries)	and	a
surprising	technique	for	our	batter	to	produce	great	tempura	on	the	first	(and
every)	try.



SHRIMP	TEMPURA
SERVES	4

Do	not	omit	the	vodka;	it	is	critical	for	a	crisp	coating.	You	will	need	at	least	a
7-quart	Dutch	oven.	Be	sure	to	begin	mixing	the	batter	when	the	oil	reaches	385
degrees	(the	final	temperature	should	be	400	degrees).	It	is	important	to
maintain	a	high	oil	temperature	throughout	cooking.	Jumbo	(16	to	20)	or	extra-
large	(21	to	25)	shrimp	may	be	substituted.	Fry	smaller	shrimp	in	three	batches,
reducing	the	cooking	time	to	1½	to	2	minutes	per	batch.	When	cooking	shrimp
for	tempura,	the	underside	tends	to	shrink	more	than	the	top,	causing	the	shrimp
to	curl	tightly	and	the	batter	to	clump.	To	prevent	this,	we	make	two	shallow	cuts
on	the	shrimp’s	underside.

3				 quarts	vegetable	oil
1½				 pounds	colossal	shrimp	(8	to	12	per	pound),peeled	and	deveined,	tails	left	on
1½				 cups	all-purpose	flour
½				 cup	cornstarch
1				 cup	vodka
1				 large	egg
1				 cup	seltzer	water
					 Kosher	salt
1				 recipe	dipping	sauce	(recipes	follow)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	200	degrees.
Set	wire	rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-low
heat	to	385	degrees.
2.	While	oil	heats,	make	2	shallow	cuts	about	¼	inch	deep	and	1	inch	apart	on

underside	of	each	shrimp.	Whisk	flour	and	cornstarch	together	in	large	bowl.
Whisk	vodka	and	egg	together	in	second	large	bowl.	Whisk	seltzer	water	into
egg	mixture.
3.	When	oil	reaches	385	degrees,	pour	liquid	mixture	into	bowl	with	flour

mixture	and	whisk	gently	until	just	combined	(it	is	OK	if	small	lumps	remain).
Submerge	half	of	shrimp	in	batter.	Using	tongs,	remove	shrimp	from	batter	1	at	a
time,	allowing	excess	batter	to	drip	off,	and	carefully	place	in	oil	(temperature
should	now	be	at	400	degrees).	Fry,	stirring	with	chopstick	or	wooden	skewer	to



prevent	sticking,	until	light	brown,	2	to	3	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer
shrimp	to	paper	towel–lined	plate	and	sprinkle	with	salt.	Once	paper	towels
absorb	excess	oil,	place	shrimp	on	prepared	wire	rack	and	place	in	oven.
4.	Return	oil	to	400	degrees,	about	4	minutes,	and	repeat	with	remaining

shrimp.	Serve	immediately	with	dipping	sauce.



GINGER-SOY	DIPPING	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	¾	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	SHRIMP	TEMPURA

¼				 cup	soy	sauce
3				 tablespoons	mirin
1				 teaspoon	sugar
1				 teaspoon	toasted	sesame	oil
1				 scallion,	sliced	thin
2				 teaspoons	grated	fresh	ginger
1				 garlic	clove,	minced

Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	medium	bowl.



CHILE	AÏOLI	DIPPING	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	¾	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR1	RECIPE	SHRIMP	TEMPURA

Sriracha,	an	Asian	chili	sauce	made	with	garlic	and	chiles,	adds	both	heat	and
flavor	to	this	sauce.

½				 cup	mayonnaise
2				 tablespoons	Sriracha	sauce
2				 tablespoons	lime	juice
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
¼				 teaspoon	soy	sauce

Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	medium	bowl.



TEPPANYAKI	MUSTARD	DIPPING	SAUCE
MAKES	ABOUT	¾	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	SHRIMP	TEMPURA

This	dipping	sauce	gets	its	zesty	bite	from	mustard,	ginger,	and	horseradish.

3				 tablespoons	mayonnaise
2				 tablespoons	Dijon	mustard
2				 teaspoons	lime	juice
2				 teaspoons	prepared	horseradish
2				 teaspoons	soy	sauce
1				 teaspoon	grated	fresh	ginger

Whisk	all	ingredients	together	in	medium	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Many	fried	foods,	including	shrimp	tempura,	are	coated	with	a	starchy	batter
(usually	made	with	flour)	and	then	fried.	When	done	right,	the	shrimp	is
perfectly	cooked	and	tender,	while	the	batter	fries	to	a	crisp,	light	shell.	But
undermix	tempura	batter	by	a	hair	and	it	will	be	too	thin	and	won’t	provide
enough	of	a	barrier	for	the	shrimp	against	the	hot	oil.	Overmix	and	you	wind	up
with	a	coating	so	thick	it	would	be	more	at	home	on	a	corn	dog.	We	wanted	a
foolproof	recipe	that	landed	us	between	the	extremes.	Using	hot	oil	and	a
surprising	batter	recipe,	which	includes	vodka,	did	the	trick.	These	shrimp
emerge	from	the	oil	light	and	crisp,	batch	after	batch.
STRAIGHTEN	THOSE	SHRIMP	When	cooking	shrimp	for	tempura,	the

underside	tends	to	shrink	more	than	the	top,	causing	the	shrimp	to	curl	tightly
and	the	batter	to	clump	up	and	cook	unevenly	inside	the	curl.	Here’s	a	way	to
alleviate	the	problem:	After	peeling	and	deveining	a	shrimp,	hold	it	on	its	back
on	the	cutting	board.	Using	the	tip	of	a	paring	knife,	make	two	¼-inch-deep
incisions	on	the	underside	about	1	inch	apart.
COMBINE	FLOUR	AND	CORNSTARCH	In	our	first	attempts	at	this

batter	we	used	only	flour,	which	forms	gluten	when	mixed	with	water,	giving
structure	to	the	coating.	But	there	is	a	thin	line	between	just	enough	and	too
much	gluten	here,	and	after	the	first	batch	of	frying	the	flour	batter	can	become
thick	and	doughy.	A	batter	made	solely	with	cornstarch,	which	does	not	form
gluten,	is	tough	as	Styrofoam.	Mixing	the	two	starches	together,	though,	greatly
improves	the	structure	of	the	batter.
USE	SELTZER	AND	VODKA	When	we	use	ice	water	in	a	tempura	batter,	it

slows	down	the	development	of	gluten—until	it	warms	up.	Searching	for	an
alternative,	we	swapped	the	water	for	effervescent	seltzer	water,	hoping	that	its
multitude	of	bubbles	would	make	our	batter	even	more	delicate	and	lacy.	It
produced	the	desired	effect,	and	then	some.	As	it	turns	out,	seltzer,	with	a	pH	of
4,	is	slightly	more	acidic	than	regular	tap	water,	enough	to	slow	down	gluten
development	(a	pH	of	5	to	6	is	optimal	for	gluten	formation).	Even	with	this,
though,	the	batter	was	easy	to	overmix	and	thickened	too	much	as	it	sat.	The
solution?	Vodka.	While	water	contributes	to	gluten,	alcohol	doesn’t.	(For	more
on	the	phenomenon,	see	concept	44.)	A	mixture	of	half	vodka	and	half	seltzer
slows	the	gluten	development	and	helps	to	create	the	perfect	crust.
MAKE	BATTER	AT	LAST	MINUTE	Because	gluten	develops	even

without	stirring,	a	batter	left	sitting	will	thicken	with	every	second	that	passes.
Make	the	batter	at	the	very	last	minute,	reducing	the	time	it	sits	and	ensuring	the



lightest,	laciest	tempura	possible.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BOOZE	FOR	A	BETTER	BATTER
The	addition	of	vodka	keeps	gluten	formation	in	check.

The	batter	for	shrimp	tempura	is	devilishly	hard	to	get	right,	easily	turning	thick	and	heavy	if	you	overmix
even	slightly	or	let	it	sit	too	long.	Even	when	a	first	batch	came	out	light	and	crisp,	subsequent	batches	were
progressively	thicker	and	greasier.	In	the	past,	we’ve	guaranteed	success	with	another	finicky	foodstuff—
pie	crust	(see	concept	44)—by	replacing	some	of	the	water	with	vodka.	Would	the	same	swap	in	tempura
batter	lead	to	a	coating	immune	to	overmixing	and	resting?

We	fried	two	batches	of	shrimp	in	two	different	batters.	The	first	batter	contained	one	egg,	1½	cups	of
flour,	½	cup	of	cornstarch,	and	2	cups	of	seltzer	water.	In	the	second,	we	replaced	1	cup	of	the	seltzer	water
with	1	cup	of	vodka.

The	vodka-batter	shrimp	was	identical	from	the	first	batch	to	the	second,	turning	out	light	and	crisp	each
time.	The	shrimp	dipped	in	the	batter	without	vodka	came	out	heavier	and	greasier	in	the	second	batch.
When	water	and	flour	are	mixed,	the	proteins	in	the	flour	form	gluten,	which	provides	structure—but	it
takes	just	a	few	too	many	stirs	(or	minutes	of	sitting)	to	develop	too	much	gluten.	Because	vodka	is	about
60	percent	water	and	40	percent	alcohol	(which	does	not	combine	with	protein	to	form	gluten),	it	makes	the
batter	fluid	and	keeps	gluten	formation	in	check	no	matter	how	much	you	stir	or	allow	it	to	sit.



	
JUST	RIGHT

A	surprise	ingredient	and	the	right	technique	keep	our	coating	crisp	and	airy.






	
TOO	PUFFY

Whisking	whipped	egg	white	into	the	batter	creates	a	balloonlike	coating.

	



TOO	THICK
Overmixed	batter	fries	into	a	thick,	breadlike	coating.



	
TOO	THIN



Undermixed	batter	remains	thin,	contributing	to	overcooked	shrimp.



CONCEPT	18

Fat	Makes	Eggs	Tender
Scrambled	eggs	should	be	a	dreamy	mound	of	big,	soft,	wobbling	curds.	They
should	be	cooked	enough	to	hold	their	shape	when	cut	but	soft	enough	to	eat
with	a	spoon.	An	omelet	must	be	firm	enough	to	roll	or	fold,	but	the	eggs	should
still	be	tender	and	soft.	The	reality	is	that	all	too	often	both	dishes	turn	out	dry,
tough,	or	rubbery.	Overcooking	is	one	culprit,	but	the	eggs	need	some	help—in
the	form	of	fat—to	ensure	that	they	remain	soft	and	tender,	even	when	fully	set.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
We	call	them	scrambled	eggs,	no	doubt	because	of	the	mixing	that	occurs	before
the	eggs	are	cooked,	but	this	recipe	relies	on	a	process	called	coagulation	and
could	rightly	be	called	“coagulated	eggs.”	Cooking	causes	the	egg	proteins	to
denature	(unfold)	and	form	a	latticed	gel.	As	a	result,	eggs	transition	from	a
liquid	to	a	semisolid	you	can	pick	up	with	a	fork.	Coagulation	also	explains	how
eggs	thicken	custards,	puddings,	and	sauces.
To	understand	what’s	really	happening,	you	have	to	start	with	the	notion	that

eggs	actually	contain	distinct	elements—the	whites	and	the	yolks—that	behave
quite	differently.	The	whites,	which	represent	about	two-thirds	of	the	total
volume	in	an	egg,	are	88	percent	water,	11	percent	protein,	and	1	percent
minerals	and	carbohydrates.	The	yolks	are	50	percent	water,	34	percent	lipids
(fats	and	related	elements),	and	16	percent	protein.
When	eggs	are	heated,	the	water	they	contain	turns	to	steam.	At	the	same

time,	the	protein	strands	are	unfolding,	sticking	to	each	other,	and	eventually
forming	a	latticed	network.	Ideally,	these	proteins	form	a	loose	network	that’s
capable	of	holding	on	to	the	water	in	the	eggs,	which	will	make	the	cooked	eggs
tender	and	fluffy.	However,	with	continued	cooking,	these	cross-linked	proteins
form	very	tight	bonds	that	squeeze	out	too	much	liquid,	and	the	end	result	is
tough,	dry	eggs.
Most	scrambled	egg	recipes	call	for	some	sort	of	dairy,	usually	milk.	The	fat

in	the	milk	coats	the	proteins	and	slows	down	the	coagulation	process.	The	water
in	the	dairy	provides	additional	moisture,	which	helps	keep	scrambled	eggs
tender.	This	added	liquid	also	produces	more	steam,	which	translates	into
fluffier,	lighter	scrambled	eggs.
The	science	of	omelets	is	similar	but	the	technique	used	to	prevent

overcoagulation	is	different.	While	scrambled	eggs	should	be	fluffy,	an	omelet	is
more	compact	(so	it	can	be	rolled	or	folded).	Thus,	there’s	no	need	for	additional
liquid	or	steam.	In	fact,	adding	dairy	to	eggs	causes	problems	when	making	an
omelet—the	extra	liquid	prolongs	the	cooking	time	and	toughens	the	omelet.	We
turned	to	small	cubes	of	butter,	which	contains	lots	of	fat	and	very	little	liquid.
The	fat	in	the	butter	coats	the	egg	proteins	and	produces	an	omelet	that	is	set	but
still	tender.	Frozen	butter	works	even	better	because	it	doesn’t	melt	as	quickly
and	disperses	more	evenly	throughout	the	egg.



HOW	PROTEINS	CHANGE	WHEN	EGGS	COOK



	
RAW	In	raw	eggs,	globular	protein	strands	are	tangled	and	interspersed	with	water	molecules.



	
COOKED	WITHOUT	FAT	Cooking	causes	the	protein	strands	to	align	and	bond	together.	Continued



cooking	can	cause	the	strong	bonds	to	squeeze	out	the	water	molecules.



	
COOKED	WITH	FAT	Fat	slows	down	this	process,	keeping	eggs	fluffy	and	moist.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	effect	of	fat	on	eggs,	we	cooked	up	a	batch	of	our	Perfect
French	Omelet	recipe,	which	uses	two	whole	eggs,	one	yolk,	and	a	half
tablespoon	of	cubed	frozen	butter	to	make	each	omelet.	We	prepared	two	omelets
using	this	recipe,	so	that	we	would	have	one	omelet	for	tasting	and	one	omelet
for	testing.
We	also	prepared	the	recipe	without	the	frozen	butter,	again	making	one

omelet	for	tasting	and	one	for	testing.	All	omelets	were	prepared	as	follows:	We
preheated	an	8-inch	skillet	over	low	heat	for	10	minutes,	added	the	eggs,
increased	the	heat	to	medium-high,	and	stirred	with	chopsticks	until	small	curds
formed.	Off	the	heat,	we	smoothed	the	eggs	into	an	even	layer,	covered	the
skillet,	and	allowed	residual	heat	to	finish	the	cooking.	For	both	the	omelets	with
and	without	butter,	we	rolled	the	omelets	up	like	cigars,	tasted	one,	and	placed	a
2-pound	lead	fishing	sinker	on	the	middle	of	the	other.	We	repeated	this	test	three
times.



THE	RESULTS
While	our	tasters’	reactions	said	a	lot	(everyone	found	the	omelets	with	butter	to
be	more	tender	than	the	ones	without	butter),	the	lead	sinkers	told	the	story	best.
The	heavy	2-pound	weights	easily	crushed	the	omelets	that	contained	butter.	On
the	other	hand,	the	samples	without	butter	showed	only	a	slight	depression.	Why
the	dramatic	difference?
Since	the	eggs	in	the	butter-less	omelets	contained	little	fat	to	interfere	with

coagulation,	the	latticed	protein	network	was	able	to	form	tighter	bonds.	These
tighter	bonds	resulted	in	a	tougher,	more	resilient	omelet—great	for	supporting	a
lot	of	weight,	but	not	for	eating.
As	the	frozen	butter	cubes	melted	in	the	omelets	made	with	butter,	the	fat

prevented	the	protein	strands	in	the	eggs	from	forming	tight	bonds.	The	result
was	an	omelet	that	held	its	shape	but	was	still	very	tender.



THE	TAKEAWAY
An	omelet	needs	enough	structure	to	allow	for	rolling	or	folding,	but	too	much
will	result	in	rubbery	eggs.	Added	fat,	in	the	form	of	frozen	butter,	coats	protein
strands,	producing	a	looser	network	and	more	tender	omelet.



TESTING	TENDERNESS	OF	EGGS

	
OMELET	COOKED	WITHOUT	BUTTER

Without	fat	from	butter,	the	omelet	cooks	up	tough	and	sturdy	enough	to	support	a	2-pound	weight.

	
OMELET	COOKED	WITH	BUTTER

The	fat	in	the	butter	makes	the	omelet	noticeably	more	tender	and	too	delicate	to	support	a	2-pound	weight.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SALT	EGGS	BEFORE	COOKING

Don’t	wait	to	salt	your	scrambled	eggs.	Salting	before	cooking	gives	us	tender,	moist	curds.

Some	sources	suggest	waiting	to	salt	scrambled	eggs	until	just	before	serving.	The	danger,	they	suggest,	is
that	salt	beaten	into	the	raw	eggs	can	make	them	watery.	To	find	out	if	there’s	merit	to	this	idea,	we	salted
beaten	eggs	one	minute	before	cooking	and	another	batch	right	after	scrambling.

Our	tasters	disliked	the	eggs	salted	after	scrambling,	finding	them	rubbery	and	firm.	By	comparison,	the
eggs	salted	prior	to	cooking	were	tender	and	moist.	(With	these	results	in	hand,	we	wondered	if	salting	the
beaten	eggs	an	hour	before	cooking	would	make	them	even	more	tender.	It	didn’t;	they	were	nearly
identical	to	eggs	salted	just	before	cooking.)

The	science	here	is	pretty	simple.	Salt	affects	the	electrical	charge	on	the	protein	molecules	in	the	eggs,
reducing	the	tendency	of	the	proteins	to	bond	with	each	other.	A	weaker	protein	network	means	eggs	are
less	likely	to	overcoagulate	and	will	cook	up	tender,	not	tough.



COAGULATION	AT	WORK	
SCRAMBLED	EGGS
Cooking	turns	liquid	eggs	into	a	semisolid.	The	goal	is	to	get	the	eggs	set	but	to
keep	them	moist	and	tender.	Dairy	is	an	essential	addition	to	ensure	that	the	eggs
coagulate	but	still	remain	tender—we	often	choose	half-and-half.	The	fat	in	the
half-and-half	coats	the	egg	proteins	and	keeps	them	from	overcoagulating	and
squeezing	out	too	much	liquid.	The	water	in	the	half-and-half	adds	moisture	to
the	eggs	and	produces	extra	steam,	which	results	in	scrambled	eggs	that	are
especially	light	and	fluffy.



PERFECT	SCRAMBLED	EGGS
SERVES	4

It’s	important	to	follow	visual	cues,	as	pan	thickness	will	affect	cooking	times.	If
using	an	electric	stove,	heat	one	burner	on	low	heat	and	a	second	on	medium-
high	heat;	move	the	skillet	between	burners	when	it’s	time	to	adjust	the	heat.	If
you	don’t	have	half-and-half,	substitute	8	teaspoons	of	whole	milk	and	4
teaspoons	of	heavy	cream.	To	dress	up	the	dish,	add	2	tablespoons	of	minced
fresh	parsley,	chives,	basil,	or	cilantro	or	1	tablespoon	of	minced	fresh	dill	or
tarragon	to	the	eggs	after	reducing	the	heat	to	low.

8				 large	eggs	plus	2	large	yolks
¼				 cup	half-and-half
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter,	chilled

1.	Beat	eggs,	yolks,	half-and-half,	¼	teaspoon	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper
with	fork	until	eggs	are	thoroughly	combined	and	color	is	pure	yellow;	do	not
overbeat.
2.	Melt	butter	in	10-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	(butter

should	not	brown),	swirling	to	coat	pan.	Add	egg	mixture	and,	using	heatproof
rubber	spatula,	constantly	and	firmly	scrape	along	bottom	and	sides	of	skillet
until	eggs	begin	to	clump	and	spatula	leaves	trail	on	bottom	of	pan,	1½	to	2½
minutes.	Reduce	heat	to	low	and	gently	but	constantly	fold	eggs	until	clumped
and	just	slightly	wet,	30	to	60	seconds.	Immediately	transfer	eggs	to	warmed
plates	and	season	with	salt	to	taste.	Serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Adding	salt	and	half-and-half	to	the	raw	eggs	before	beating	them	lightly	are	key
steps	toward	creating	great	scrambled	eggs.	With	these	additions,	as	well	as	a
dual-heat	cooking	method,	we’ve	discovered	the	route	to	perfect—glossy,	fluffy,
wobbly—scrambled	eggs.
BEAT	LIGHTLY	For	uniform	texture,	it’s	important	to	beat	the	eggs	before

cooking	them.	That	said,	you	can	overdo.	Some	recipes	suggest	whipping	the
eggs	with	an	egg	beater	or	electric	mixer.	We	found	that	overbeating	causes
premature	coagulation	of	the	egg	proteins.	When	overbeaten	eggs	are	then
cooked,	they	turn	out	tough.	For	a	smooth	yellow	color	and	no	streaks	of	white,
we	whip	eggs	with	a	fork	and	stop	once	large	bubbles	form.
WHAT	KIND	OF	DAIRY?	We	tested	milk,	half-and-half,	and	heavy	cream

while	making	these	scrambled	eggs.	Milk	produced	slightly	fluffier,	cleaner-
tasting	curds,	but	they	were	particularly	prone	to	weeping.	Heavy	cream,	on	the
other	hand,	rendered	the	eggs	very	stable	but	dense,	and	some	tasters	found	their
flavor	just	too	rich.	Everyone	agreed	that	¼	cup	of	half-and-half	fared	best.	The
benefit	of	the	dairy	is	threefold:	First,	the	water	it	contains	(80	percent	in	half-
and-half)	interrupts	the	protein	network	and	dilutes	the	molecules,	thereby
raising	the	temperature	at	which	the	eggs	coagulate	and	providing	a	greater
safety	net	against	overcooking	(and	disproving	the	classic	French	theory	that
adding	the	dairy	at	the	end	of	cooking	is	best).	Second,	as	the	water	in	the	dairy
vaporizes,	it	provides	lift	(just	as	in	a	loaf	of	baking	bread),	which	causes	the
eggs	to	puff	up.	And	third,	the	fat	in	the	dairy	also	raises	the	coagulation
temperature	by	coating	and	insulating	part	of	each	protein	molecule	so	that	they
cannot	stick	together	as	tightly.
ADD	YOLK	To	boost	the	egg	flavor	and	minimize	the	dairy	tones	of	our

scrambled	eggs,	we	add	more	yolks	to	the	mix.	There’s	no	need	to	overdo	it,
though:	Two	extra	yolks	per	eight	eggs	balance	the	flavor	nicely.	Even	better,	the
high	proportion	of	fat	and	emulsifiers	in	the	yolks	further	raises	the	coagulation
temperature,	helping	to	stave	off	overcooking.
CHOOSE	THE	RIGHT	PAN	Pan	size	is	important	when	scrambling	eggs.	If

the	skillet	is	too	large,	the	eggs	spread	out	in	too	thin	a	layer	and	overcook.	A
smaller	pan	forces	you	to	mound	the	eggs	on	top	of	each	other,	which	traps
steam	and	ensures	tender,	fluffy	eggs.
FORGET	LOW	AND	SLOW	Since	overcoagulation	is	a	danger,	many

cooks	use	low	or	moderate	heat	for	scrambling	eggs.	That’s	a	big	mistake.



Getting	the	pan	hot	is	crucial	for	generating	the	steam	that	creates	moist,	puffy
curds.	But	cooking	on	high	heat	alone	can	easily	cause	overcooking.	As	a	result,
we	use	a	dual-heat	method.	First,	cook	the	eggs	over	medium-high	heat,	scraping
the	eggs	with	a	spatula	to	form	large	curds	and	prevent	any	spots	from
overcooking.	As	soon	as	the	spatula	just	leaves	a	trail	in	the	pan	with	minimal
raw	egg	filling	in	the	gap	(about	two	minutes	in),	drop	the	heat	to	low	and	switch
to	a	gentle	folding	motion	to	keep	from	breaking	up	the	larger	curds.	When	the
eggs	look	cooked	through	but	still	glossy	(about	45	seconds	later),	slide	them
onto	a	plate	to	stop	the	cooking	process.	The	result?	Fluffy	and	tender;	a	fail-safe
method	for	perfect	scrambled	eggs.



FORMULA	FOR	PERFECT	SCRAMBLED	EGGS
Half-and-half	adds	liquid	that	turns	to	steam	when	eggs	are	cooked,	thus	helping	them	cook	into	soft,	fluffy
mounds.	You	need	1	tablespoon	of	half-and-half	for	each	serving	of	eggs.	In	addition	to	varying	the	half-
and-half	to	match	the	number	of	eggs,	you	will	need	to	vary	the	seasonings,	pan	size,	and	cooking	time.
Here’s	how	to	do	that.
Servings:	1
Eggs:	2	large,	plus	1	yolk
Half-and-half:	1	tablespoon
Seasonings:	pinch	salt,	pinch	pepper
Butter:	¼	tablespoon
Pan	size:	8	inches
Cooking	time:	30-60	seconds	over	medium-high,	30-60	seconds	over	low
	
Servings:	2
Eggs:	4	large,	plus	1	yolk
Half-and-half:	2	tablespoons
Seasonings:	1⁄8	teaspoon	salt,	1⁄8	teaspoon	pepper
Butter:	½	tablespoon
Pan	size:	8	inches
Cooking	time:	45-75	seconds	over	medium-high,	30-60	seconds	over	low
	
Servings:	3
Eggs:	6	large,	plus	1	yolk
Half-and-half:	3	tablespoons
Seasonings:	¼	teaspoon	salt,	1⁄8	teaspoon	pepper
Butter:	¾	tablespoon
Pan	size:	10	inches
Cooking	time:	1-2	minutes	over	medium-high,	30-60	seconds	over	low



HEARTY	SCRAMBLED	EGGS	WITH	BACON,ONION,	AND	PEPPER
JACK	CHEESE

SERVES	4	TO	6

Note	that	you’ll	need	to	reserve	2	teaspoons	of	bacon	fat	to	sauté	the	onion.
After	removing	the	cooked	bacon	from	the	skillet,	be	sure	to	drain	it	well	on
paper	towels;	otherwise,	the	eggs	will	be	greasy.

12				 large	eggs
6				 tablespoons	half-and-half
¾				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
4				 slices	bacon,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
1				 onion,	chopped
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter

1½				 ounces	pepper	Jack	or	Monterey	Jack	cheese,	shredded	(1⁄3	cup)
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	parsley	(optional)

1.	Beat	eggs,	half-and-half,	salt,	and	pepper	with	fork	in	medium	bowl	until
thoroughly	combined.
2.	Cook	bacon	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium	heat,	stirring

occasionally,	until	crisp,	5	to	7	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	bacon	to
paper	towel–lined	plate;	discard	all	but	2	teaspoons	bacon	fat.	Add	onion	to
skillet	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	lightly	browned,	2	to	4	minutes;
transfer	onion	to	second	plate.
3.	Wipe	out	skillet	with	paper	towels.	Add	butter	to	now-empty	skillet	and

melt	over	medium	heat,	swirling	to	coat	pan.	Pour	in	egg	mixture.	With
heatproof	rubber	spatula,	stir	eggs	constantly,	slowly	pushing	them	from	side	to
side,	scraping	along	bottom	and	sides	of	skillet,	and	lifting	and	folding	eggs	as
they	form	curds	(do	not	overscramble	or	curds	formed	will	be	too	small).	Cook
until	large	curds	form	but	eggs	are	still	very	moist,	2	to	3	minutes.	Off	heat,
gently	fold	in	onion,	pepper	Jack,	and	half	of	bacon	until	evenly	distributed;	if
eggs	are	still	underdone,	return	skillet	to	medium	heat	for	no	longer	than	30
seconds.	Divide	eggs	among	individual	plates,	sprinkle	with	remaining	bacon
and	parsley,	if	using,	and	serve.



HEARTY	SCRAMBLED	EGGS	WITH	SAUSAGE,	SWEET	PEPPER,
AND	CHEDDAR	CHEESE

SERVES	4	TO	6

We	prefer	sweet	Italian	sausage	here,	especially	for	breakfast,	but	you	can
substitute	spicy	sausage	if	desired.

12				 large	eggs
6				 tablespoons	half-and-half
¾				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
1				 teaspoon	vegetable	oil
8				 ounces	sweet	Italian	sausage,	casings	removed,	sausage	crumbled	into	½-inch	pieces
1				 red	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	½-inch	cubes
3				 scallions,	white	and	green	parts	separated,	both	sliced	thin	on	bias
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter

1½				 ounces	sharp	cheddar	cheese,	shredded	(1⁄3	cup)

1.	Beat	eggs,	half-and-half,	salt,	and	pepper	with	fork	in	medium	bowl	until
thoroughly	combined.
2.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium	heat	until	shimmering.

Add	sausage	and	cook	until	beginning	to	brown	but	still	pink	in	center,	about	2
minutes.	Add	bell	pepper	and	scallion	whites;	continue	to	cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	sausage	is	cooked	through	and	pepper	is	beginning	to	brown,
about	3	minutes.	Spread	mixture	in	single	layer	on	medium	plate;	set	aside.
3.	Wipe	out	skillet	with	paper	towels.	Add	butter	to	now-empty	skillet	and

melt	over	medium	heat,	swirling	to	coat	pan.	Pour	in	egg	mixture.	With
heatproof	rubber	spatula,	stir	eggs	constantly,	slowly	pushing	them	from	side	to
side,	scraping	along	bottom	and	sides	of	skillet,	and	lifting	and	folding	eggs	as
they	form	curds	(do	not	overscramble	or	curds	formed	will	be	too	small).	Cook
until	large	curds	form	but	eggs	are	still	very	moist,	2	to	3	minutes.	Off	heat,
gently	fold	in	sausage	mixture	and	cheddar	until	evenly	distributed;	if	eggs	are
still	underdone,	return	skillet	to	medium	heat	for	no	longer	than	30	seconds.
Divide	eggs	among	individual	plates,	sprinkle	with	scallion	greens,	and	serve
immediately.



HEARTY	SCRAMBLED	EGGS	WITH	ARUGULA,	SUN-DRIED
TOMATOES,	AND	GOAT	CHEESE

SERVES	4	TO	6

Rinsing	and	patting	the	sun-dried	tomatoes	dry	prevents	them	from	making	the
eggs	greasy.

12				 large	eggs
6				 tablespoons	half-and-half
¾				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 teaspoons	olive	oil
½				 onion,	chopped	fine
				1⁄8 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
5				 ounces	baby	arugula	(5	cups),	cut	into	½-inch-wide	strips
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
¼				 cup	oil-packed	sun-dried	tomatoes,	rinsed,	patted	dry,	and	chopped	fine
3				 ounces	goat	cheese,	crumbled	(¾	cup)

1.	Beat	eggs,	half-and-half,	salt,	and	pepper	with	fork	in	medium	bowl	until
thoroughly	combined.
2.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium	heat	until	shimmering.

Add	onion	and	pepper	flakes	and	cook	until	onion	has	softened,	about	2	minutes.
Add	arugula	and	cook,	stirring	gently,	until	arugula	begins	to	wilt,	30	to	60
seconds.	Spread	mixture	in	single	layer	on	medium	plate;	set	aside.
3.	Wipe	out	skillet	with	paper	towels.	Add	butter	to	now-empty	skillet	and

melt	over	medium	heat,	swirling	to	coat	pan.	Pour	in	egg	mixture.	With
heatproof	rubber	spatula,	stir	eggs	constantly,	slowly	pushing	them	from	side	to
side,	scraping	along	bottom	and	sides	of	skillet,	and	lifting	and	folding	eggs	as
they	form	curds	(do	not	overscramble	or	curds	formed	will	be	too	small).	Cook
until	large	curds	form	but	eggs	are	still	very	moist,	2	to	3	minutes.	Off	heat,
gently	fold	in	arugula	mixture	and	sun-dried	tomatoes	until	evenly	distributed;	if
eggs	are	still	underdone,	return	skillet	to	medium	heat	for	no	longer	than	30
seconds.	Divide	eggs	among	individual	plates,	sprinkle	with	goat	cheese,	and
serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
When	vegetables	are	added	to	scrambled	eggs,	they	can	become	oversaturated
and	weep.	Adding	lots	of	cooked	sausage	or	bacon	as	well	as	cheese	just
complicates	matters	further.	Here’s	how	to	keep	hearty	scrambled	eggs	tender
and	moist—but	not	soggy.
PRECOOK	ADD-INS	We	found	that	precooking	vegetables	drives	off

excess	moisture	that	can	ruin	scrambled	eggs.	If	you’re	adding	bacon	or	sausage
to	eggs,	they	need	to	be	cooked	to	render	excess	fat,	which	can	then	be	used	to
cook	the	vegetables	and	boost	their	flavor.	Also,	folding	these	cooked
ingredients	(as	well	as	cheese)	into	the	nearly	finished	eggs	reduces	the	risk	of
weeping.
HALF-AND-HALF	IS	ESSENTIAL	Removing	some	liquid	from	the

scrambled	eggs	also	compensates	for	any	liquid	left	in	the	add-on	ingredients.	To
accomplish	this,	we	use	a	smaller	amount	of	half-and-half—with	its	higher
percentage	of	fat	and	lower	water	content—than	the	milk	used	in	most
scrambled	egg	recipes.
LOWER	THE	HEAT	Finally,	reducing	the	heat	to	medium	provides	a

greater	margin	of	error	and	reduces	the	risk	of	overcoagulation.	As	a	result	of
these	changes,	hearty	scrambled	eggs—loaded	with	vegetables,	meat,	and	cheese
—will	be	a	bit	less	fluffy	than	plain	scrambled	eggs	(less	heat	generates	less
steam),	but	at	least	they	won’t	weep.



COAGULATION	AT	WORK	
FRENCH	OMELETS
Unlike	scrambled	eggs,	which	should	be	cooked	until	they	are	just	set,	an	omelet
requires	cooking	the	eggs	a	bit	further.	After	all,	the	omelet	needs	be	rolled	(for
the	traditional	French	version)	or	folded	(for	a	diner-style	version).	This	extra
cooking	pretty	much	guarantees	tough,	rubbery	eggs.	We	found	that	cubes	of
butter	coat	the	egg	proteins	with	plenty	of	fat	and	do	so	without	adding	much
water.	Freezing	the	butter	cubes	ensures	that	they	melt	slowly	enough	to	disperse
evenly	through	the	eggs,	just	at	the	point	when	the	eggs	are	beginning	to
coagulate.



PERFECT	FRENCH	OMELETS
MAKES	2

Because	making	omelets	is	such	a	quick	process,	make	sure	to	have	all	your
ingredients	and	equipment	at	the	ready.	If	you	don’t	have	skewers	or	chopsticks
to	stir	the	eggs	in	step	3,	try	the	handle	of	wooden	spoon.	Warm	the	plates	in	a
200-degree	oven.

2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	2	pieces
½				 teaspoon	vegetable	oil
6				 large	eggs,	chilled
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	shredded	Gruyère	cheese
4				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	chives

1.	Cut	1	tablespoon	butter	in	half.	Cut	remaining	1	tablespoon	butter	into
small	pieces,	transfer	to	small	bowl,	and	place	in	freezer	while	preparing	eggs
and	skillet,	at	least	10	minutes.	Meanwhile,	heat	oil	in	8-inch	nonstick	skillet
over	low	heat	for	10	minutes.
2.	Crack	2	eggs	into	medium	bowl	and	separate	third	egg;	reserve	egg	white

for	another	use	and	add	yolk	to	bowl.	Add	1⁄8	teaspoon	salt	and	pinch	pepper.
Break	egg	yolks	with	fork,	then	beat	eggs	at	moderate	pace,	about	80	strokes,
until	yolks	and	whites	are	well	combined.	Stir	in	half	of	frozen	butter	cubes.
3.	When	skillet	is	fully	heated,	use	paper	towels	to	wipe	out	oil,	leaving	thin

film	on	bottom	and	sides	of	skillet.	Add	½	tablespoon	of	reserved	butter	to
skillet	and	heat	until	melted.	Swirl	butter	to	coat	skillet,	add	egg	mixture,	and
increase	heat	to	medium-high.	Use	2	chopsticks	or	wooden	skewers	to	scramble
eggs,	using	quick	circular	motion	to	move	around	skillet,	scraping	cooked	egg
from	side	of	skillet	as	you	go,	until	eggs	are	almost	cooked	but	still	slightly
runny,	45	to	90	seconds.	Turn	off	heat	(remove	pan	from	heat	if	using	electric
burner)	and	smooth	eggs	into	even	layer	using	heatproof	rubber	spatula.	Sprinkle
omelet	with	1	tablespoon	Gruyère	and	2	teaspoons	chives.	Cover	skillet	with
tight-fitting	lid	and	let	sit	for	1	minute	for	runnier	omelet	or	2	minutes	for	firmer
omelet.
4.	Heat	skillet	over	low	heat	for	20	seconds,	uncover,	and,	using	rubber



spatula,	loosen	edges	of	omelet	from	skillet.	Place	folded	square	of	paper	towel
on	warmed	plate	and	slide	omelet	out	of	skillet	onto	paper	towel	so	that	omelet
lies	flat	on	plate	and	hangs	about	1	inch	off	paper	towel.	Roll	omelet	into	neat
cylinder	and	set	aside.	Return	skillet	to	low	heat	and	heat	2	minutes	before
repeating	instructions	for	second	omelet	starting	with	step	2.	Serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	added	fat	from	the	frozen	butter	helps	produce	a	tender	omelet,	but	there	are
a	few	other	key	steps	in	this	recipe.
LOSE	A	WHITE	Our	recipe	starts	with	six	large	eggs	(enough	for	two

omelets)	but	we	discard	two	egg	whites	along	the	way.	We	found	that	the	amount
of	butter	needed	to	keep	the	proteins	in	three	eggs	from	toughening	resulted	in	a
very	rich	omelet.	Removing	a	single	white	from	the	equation	allows	us	to	use
less	butter	and	keeps	our	cheesy	omelet	from	becoming	too	rich.
BREAK	UP	EGGS,	DON’T	BEAT	’EM	Many	sources	suggest	beating	eggs

with	a	whisk	or	even	an	electric	mixer.	We	found	that	such	tough	treatment
unravels	egg	proteins	and	causes	them	to	cross-link	when	cooked.	The	end	result
is	tough	eggs.	You	want	the	yolks	and	whites	to	be	fully	combined	before	you
start	cooking,	so	some	beating	of	the	eggs	is	a	must.	We	found	that	a	fork	does
the	job	nicely	and	reduces	the	risk	of	overbeating.	Once	the	eggs	look	well
combined,	stop	beating.	This	will	take	about	80	strokes.
STIR	GENTLY	AS	EGGS	SET	Stirring	the	eggs	as	they	set	breaks	the

coagulating	eggs	into	small	curds	that	produce	a	more	refined	omelet	with	a
silkier	texture.	We	found	the	usual	tool	for	cooking	eggs	in	a	nonstick	skillet—a
rubber	spatula—wasn’t	up	to	the	job.	The	smaller	tines	of	a	fork	break	the	curds
into	much	smaller	bits.	Unfortunately,	a	fork	will	scratch	the	nonstick	surface.
We	get	excellent	results	with	nonstick-friendly	wooden	chopsticks	or	bamboo
skewers.	The	handle	of	a	wooden	spoon	can	be	used	if	you	don’t	have	either
chopsticks	or	skewers.
PUT	A	LID	ON	IT	Preheating	the	skillet	over	10	minutes	(see	“Preheat	Your

Omelet	Pan	Slowly”)	ensured	that	the	heat	was	evenly	distributed	across	the	pan
surface	and	reduced	the	risk	of	an	overcooked,	tough	omelet.	But	we	still	had
trouble	getting	the	eggs	furthest	from	the	heat	source	to	cook	fully.	By	the	time
they	did,	often	the	bottom	of	the	omelet	had	become	tough.	The	solution	is	quite
simple:	Once	the	eggs	are	set	but	still	runny,	slide	the	pan	off	the	heat,	smooth
the	eggs	into	an	even	layer	with	a	spatula,	add	the	cheese	and	chives,	then	cover
the	pan.	After	a	minute	or	two	(depending	on	whether	you	like	a	runnier	or
firmer	omelet),	the	residual	heat	trapped	by	the	lid	will	have	gently	cooked
through	the	top	layer	of	eggs,	and	since	the	pan	is	off	the	heat	there’s	no	danger
that	the	bottom	of	the	omelet	will	become	tough.
SLIDE	AND	ROLL	The	traditional	way	to	remove	an	omelet	from	the	pan	is

to	give	the	skillet	a	quick	jerk	in	order	to	fold	the	omelet	over.	You	then	slide	it



out	of	the	pan,	tilting	the	skillet	so	that	the	remaining	flap	of	eggs	rolls	over
neatly.	Sounds	good,	but	this	method	has	a	high	failure	rate.	For	an	easier
approach,	we	tried	slipping	the	omelet	onto	a	plate,	then	using	our	fingers	to	roll
it.	The	eggs	are	still	pretty	hot,	so	we	prefer	to	line	the	plate	with	a	paper	towel,
which	can	be	used	to	roll	the	omelet	into	a	neat	cylinder	without	burning	your
fingertips.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
EGG	SAFETY

The	risk	of	salmonella	can	be	removed	by	cooking	eggs	to	160	degrees	or	buying	pasteurized
eggs.

The	Egg	Safety	Center	estimates	that	one	in	every	10,000	to	20,000	eggs	is	contaminated	by	salmonella
bacteria.	Salmonella,	if	present,	can	be	on	the	outside	of	the	egg	shell	or	inside	the	egg	if	the	hen	that	laid	it
was	infected.	There	are	two	ways	to	reduce	the	risk.
SAFER	COOKING	Salmonella	is	destroyed	at	160	degrees.	Eggs	that	have	just	barely	set,	or	are	still
runny,	have	not	reached	this	temperature.	Eggs	that	are	fully	set	and	dry,	as	they	are	when	hard-cooked	or
used	in	a	frittata,	have	reached	this	temperature.
SAFER	SHOPPING	Pasteurized	eggs	are	whole	eggs	that	have	been	put	through	a	heating	process	that
kills	bacteria	but	does	not	cook	the	eggs	themselves.	Once	cracked	open,	pasteurized	eggs	do	have	a	slightly
different	appearance	and	consistency,	but	for	the	most	part	we	found	that	they	performed	on	par	with
standard	eggs	in	applications	in	which	pasteurized	eggs	might	be	beneficial	(such	as	mayonnaise);	we	had
less	success	using	them	in	cakes	and	cookies.	Note	that	the	majority	of	eggs	pasteurized	in	the	United	States
are	liquid	eggs	already	removed	from	the	shell.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
PREHEAT	YOUR	OMELET	PAN	SLOWLY

Preheat	your	omelet	pan	over	low	heat	for	even	cooking.

While	developing	our	omelet	recipe,	we	found	that	the	way	we	preheated	the	pan	before	adding	the	eggs
was	critical	to	achieving	a	creamy	omelet	with	a	uniformly	golden	exterior.	Instead	of	preheating	over
medium-high	heat	for	two	or	three	minutes	(the	most	common	approach),	we	preheated	the	pan	over	low
heat	for	a	full	10	minutes.

On	a	gas	stove,	a	high	flame	licks	up	the	sides	of	the	pan,	creating	hot	spots	at	the	outer	edges	of	the	pan
bottom.	These	hot	spots,	in	turn,	can	lead	to	brown	splotches	on	your	omelet.	Preheating	the	low-and-slow
way	ensures	that	the	heat	is	more	evenly	distributed.

Preheating	over	low	heat	has	another	advantage:	It	gives	you	a	wider	window	for	adding	your	eggs.
Over	high	heat,	it	takes	just	30	seconds	for	the	pan	to	go	from	an	acceptable	250	degrees	to	an	egg-
toughening	300	degrees.	(Note:	Preheating	an	omelet	pan	is	one	case	in	which	electric	stoves	show	an	edge
over	gas.	Because	of	their	wide,	flat	heating	elements,	electric	stoves	do	not	produce	hot	spots	in	the	pan,
even	over	a	high	setting.	However,	we	still	recommend	preheating	over	low	heat	to	allow	plenty	of	time	for
adding	your	eggs.)

	
MEDIUM-HIGH	=	SPOTTY



	
LOW	=	UNIFORM

To	demonstrate	the	importance	of	preheating	over	the	correct	(low)	temperature,	we	spread	a	layer	of	grated
Parmesan	cheese	over	the	bottom	of	two	pans,	then	heated	one	over	medium-high	heat	and	the	other	one
over	low	heat.	Cheese	heated	over	medium-high	heat	browned	on	the	edges,	while	the	cheese	heated	over
low	heat	melted	to	an	even,	uniform	color.



EGGS	101



	
VITELLINE
This	membrane	contains	and	protects	the	yolk.	It	weakens	as	the	egg	ages,	causing	the	yolk	to	break	more
easily.	This	is	why	fresh	eggs	are	easier	to	separate	than	older	eggs.

YOLK
Most	of	the	egg’s	vitamins	and	minerals,	as	well	as	all	of	the	fat	and	half	of	the	protein,	are	found	in	the
yolk.	It	also	contains	lecithin,	a	powerful	emulsifier	(lecithin	is	the	emulsifying	agent	that	makes	it	possible
to	make	mayonnaise	and	hollandaise	sauce).	The	yolk	is	firmer	when	cold	and	thus	less	likely	to	break;	for
this	reason,	separate	eggs	when	chilled.

AIR	CELL
The	void	at	the	wide	end	of	the	egg	results	from	contraction	as	the	interior	cools	after	the	egg	is	laid.	This
space	increases	in	size	as	the	egg	ages	and	moisture	inside	the	egg	evaporates	through	the	shell.

CHALAZAE
These	whitish	cords	extend	from	each	pole	end	and	center	the	yolk.	As	an	egg	ages,	the	chalazae	weaken
and	the	yolk	can	become	off	center.	We	often	strain	sauces	and	custards	(such	as	Crème	Brûlée)	so	the
chalazae	don’t	mar	their	texture	and	appearance.

SHELL
The	shell	and	inner	membrane	keep	the	contents	in	place	and	keep	out	bacteria.	The	shell	is	permeable	and
over	time	the	contents	of	an	egg	can	evaporate.	Never	use	an	egg	with	a	cracked	or	split	shell.

WHITE
The	white,	also	called	the	albumin,	is	made	of	protein	and	water	and	is	divided	into	thick	and	thin	layers,
with	the	thickest	layer	closest	to	the	yolk.	A	slight	cloudiness	indicates	extreme	freshness.	As	eggs	age,	the
white	becomes	thinner	and	clearer.

BUYING
FRESHNESS	Egg	cartons	are	marked	with	both	a	sell-by	date	and	a	pack	date.	The	pack	date	is	the	day

the	eggs	were	graded	and	packed,	which	is	generally	within	a	week	of	being	laid	but,	legally,	may	be	as
much	as	30	days	later.	The	pack	date	is	printed	on	egg	cartons	as	a	three-number	code	just	below	the	sell-by
date	and	it	runs	consecutively	from	001,	for	January	1,	to	365,	for	December	31.	The	sell-by	date	is	the
legal	limit	until	which	eggs	may	be	sold	and	is	within	30	days	of	the	pack	date.	In	short,	a	carton	may	be	up
to	two	months	old	by	the	sell-by	date.	Even	so,	according	to	the	USDA,	eggs	are	still	fit	for	consumption
for	an	additional	three	to	five	weeks	past	the	sell-by	date	if	refrigerated.	We	tasted	two-and	three-month-old
eggs	and	found	them	palatable.	At	four	months,	the	white	was	loose	and	the	yolk	tasted	of	the	refrigerator,
though	it	was	still	edible.	Our	advice?	Use	your	discretion.	If	the	eggs	smell	odd	or	display	discoloration,
pitch	them.	Older	eggs	also	lack	the	structure-lending	properties	of	fresh	eggs,	so	beware	when	baking.

	
COLOR	The	shell’s	hue	depends	on	the	breed	of	the	chicken.	The	run-of-the-mill	Leghorn	chicken

produces	the	typical	white	egg.	Brown-feathered	birds,	such	as	Rhode	Island	Reds,	produce	café	au	lait–
colored	eggs.	Our	tests	proved	that	shell	color	has	no	effect	on	flavor	or	nutritional	value.

FARM-FRESH	AND	ORGANIC	In	our	taste	tests,	farm-fresh	eggs	were	standouts.	The	large	yolks
were	bright	orange	and	sat	high	above	the	comparatively	small	whites.	Their	flavor	was	rich	and	complex.
The	organic	eggs	followed	in	second	place,	while	eggs	from	hens	raised	on	a	vegetarian	diet	came	in	third
and	standard	supermarket	eggs	last.	Differences	were	easily	detected	in	egg-based	dishes	but	not	in	cakes	or
cookies.

EGG	SIZES	Eggs	vary	in	size,	which	will	make	a	difference	in	recipes.	We	use	large	eggs	in	our



recipes.	If	you	do	the	math,	you	can	substitute	one	size	for	another.	For	instance,	four	jumbo	eggs	are
equivalent	to	five	large	eggs	(both	weigh	10	ounces).

	

APPROXIMATE	WEIGHTS	OF	VARIOUS	EGG	SIZES
Medium:	1.75	ounces
Large:	2.00	ounces
Extra-Large:	2.25	ounces
Jumbo:	2.50	ounces

STORING
REFRIGERATOR	If	your	refrigerator	has	an	egg	tray	on	the	door,	don’t	use	it.	Eggs	should	be	stored

on	the	shelf,	where	the	temperature	is	below	40	degrees.	The	average	door	temperature	in	our	test	kitchen
refrigerators	is	closer	to	45	degrees.

Eggs	are	also	best	stored	in	their	protective	cardboard	carton;	when	removed	they	may	absorb	flavors
from	other	foods.	The	egg	carton	also	helps	maintain	humidity,	which	is	ideally	70	to	80	percent,	and	thus
slows	down	evaporation	of	the	eggs’	contents.

FREEZER	Extra	whites	can	be	frozen,	but	in	our	tests	we	found	their	rising	properties	compromised:
Angel	food	cake	didn’t	rise	quite	as	well	and	meringues	baked	up	deflated	and	a	bit	gummy.	Frozen	whites
are	best	used	in	recipes	that	call	for	small	amounts	(like	an	egg	wash)	or	recipes	that	don’t	depend	on
whipping	the	egg	whites	(such	as	an	omelet).	Yolks,	however,	can’t	be	frozen	as	is;	the	water	forms	ice
crystals	that	disrupt	the	protein	network.	Adding	sugar	syrup	(2	parts	sugar	to	1	part	water)	allows	yolks	to
be	frozen.	Stir	a	scant	¼	teaspoon	of	syrup	per	yolk	into	yolks	before	freezing.	Defrost	and	use	in	custards.



CONCEPT	19

Gentle	Heat	Guarantees	Smooth
Custards
When	it	comes	to	baked	desserts,	eggs	are	key.	They	add	richness	to	baked
custards	(like	crème	brûlée),	custard	pies	(including	pumpkin),	and	cheesecakes,
as	well	as	help	them	all	to	thicken	and	set.	Heat	unlocks	the	power	of	eggs	but
can	also	take	it	too	far.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
As	with	scrambled	eggs	and	omelets,	we	use	whole	eggs	when	baking	custardy
desserts.	In	concept	18,	we	learned	about	coagulation.	As	the	temperature	in
eggs	rises,	the	proteins	in	both	the	white	and	the	yolk	become	active.	They	begin
to	move	about,	running	into	each	other,	breaking	the	delicate	bonds	that	hold
them	as	coiled-up	balls.	Once	unfurled,	they	are	able	to	bond	with	the	other
proteins	likewise	whirling	around	them,	creating	a	weblike	structure	that
becomes	increasingly	opaque	and	solid	with	time.
The	temperatures	at	which	the	egg	white	and	the	yolk	coagulate	are	different

—whites	begin	to	thicken	at	140	to	150	degrees	and	yolks	at	150	to	160	degrees.
This	difference	makes	egg	cookery	a	two-tiered	task	and	is	why	when	we	cook
an	egg	“over	easy,”	the	white	is	solid	while	the	yolk	is	still	a	gooey	orange
liquid.	When	baking	custardy	desserts,	we	use	whole	eggs	mixed	with	many
other	ingredients	(which	often	affect	how	rapidly	the	egg	proteins	uncoil	and
bond	together)	but	that	doesn’t	make	the	technique	any	less	delicate.
Cooking	egg	custards	requires	very	careful	control	of	temperatures.	When

exposed	to	too	much	heat,	the	egg	proteins	will	coagulate	too	much.	They	will
form	stronger	bonds	with	the	surrounding	proteins,	making	clumps	and	lumps
and	separating	from	the	liquid	surrounding	them.	This	is	called	curdling.
Curdling	is	the	enemy	of	egg-based	desserts	that	are	supposed	to	entice	us	with
their	smooth	and	creamy	texture.
To	combat	this	risk,	we	cook	custardlike	desserts	low	and	slow.	In	a	hot	oven,

pumpkin	pie	will	leap	from	not	yet	set	to	overcooked	in	a	heartbeat.	And,
because	of	the	principles	of	conduction	(see	concept	1),	the	edges	will	cook
much	faster	than	the	center.	We	generally	bake	custards	in	a	low	oven	in	order	to
mitigate	the	heat	differential	between	the	exterior	of	a	pie	or	cheesecake	and	the
interior.	A	low	oven	temperature	also	slows	down	the	rate	of	cooking,	thereby
increasing	the	window	of	time	when	a	dessert	is	perfectly	cooked.
In	addition	to	a	low-temperature	oven,	we	sometimes	bake	delicate	egg-based

desserts	in	a	water	bath,	also	known	as	a	bain-marie.	The	ramekin	or	springform
pan	is	placed	in	a	roasting	pan	filled	with	water.	Because	the	water	never	reaches
a	temperature	higher	than	that	of	boiling	water,	or	212	degrees,	the	water	further
slows	down	cooking	in	these	desserts.
Finally,	for	custards	that	are	prepared	on	the	stovetop,	we	temper	eggs,	or	heat

them	very	gently	by	mixing	them	with	a	small	amount	of	hot	liquid,	in	order	to
slow	the	rate	of	cooking.



THE	EFFECTS	OF	HEAT	ON	EGGS



	
GENTLE	HEAT	Careful	cooking	keeps	the	network	of	egg	proteins	loose	and	smooth.



	
HIGH	HEAT	Fast	cooking	can	cause	egg	proteins	to	clump	together,	pull	apart,	and	separate	from	the



liquid	surrounding	them.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	effects	of	a	water	bath	on	egg-based	baked	desserts,	we
prepared	two	identical	cheesecakes	and	baked	one	directly	on	the	rack	and	the
other	in	a	water	bath,	both	in	a	325-degree	oven.	Both	cheesecakes	were
removed	from	the	oven	when	their	centers	reached	147	degrees.



THE	RESULTS
The	cake	that	had	been	baked	in	a	water	bath	was	even-colored	and	smooth;	the
other	cake	was	browned	and	cracked.	A	quick	comparison	of	the	temperature	at
the	edges	of	the	cakes	confirmed	what	we	suspected:	Upon	removal	from	the
oven,	the	cake	that	had	had	the	benefit	of	a	water	bath	was	184	degrees	at	the
edge,	whereas	the	cake	baked	without	the	water	bath	had	climbed	to	213
degrees.



THE	TAKEAWAY
A	water	bath	is	commonly	called	for	in	the	baking	of	cheesecakes	and	custards
to	guarantee	evenly	cooked,	smooth	results.	Why?	Our	experiment	showed	that
the	cheesecake	baked	in	a	water	bath	was	30	degrees	cooler	at	the	edges	than	the
cake	baked	without	a	water	bath.	Although	in	both	cases	the	oven	had	been	set	to
325	degrees,	a	water	bath	cannot	exceed	212	degrees,	as	this	is	the	temperature
at	which	water	converts	to	steam.	Plus,	the	water	takes	time	to	heat	up,	so	most
water	baths	never	exceed	190	degrees	in	a	325-degree	oven.	This	even,	gentle
heat	moderates	the	temperature	around	the	perimeter	of	the	pan,	preventing
overheating	(and	overcooking)	at	the	edges.	The	cheesecake	baked	in	the	water
bath	also	had	an	even,	uncracked	surface.	By	moderating	the	temperature	of	the
cheesecake,	the	water	bath	prevented	the	cheesecake	top	from	inflating	like	a
soufflé.	In	addition,	the	water	bath	added	considerable	moisture	to	the	oven
(more	than	4	cups	of	water	evaporated	from	the	bath	during	cooking).	The	added
moisture	helped	to	keep	the	top	of	the	cake	supple,	which	discouraged	cracking.
This	is	in	opposition	to	the	cake	baked	directly	on	the	rack,	in	which	the	egg
proteins	coagulated	so	rapidly	under	the	unmitigated	heat	that	they	clumped
together,	creating	a	lumpy	texture	and	pulling	apart	the	surface	of	the	cake.



A	WATER	BATH	PREVENTS	UNEVEN	COOKING

	
BAKED	WITHOUT	A	WATER	BATH

The	direct	heat	of	the	oven	caused	the	edges	to	heat	far	faster	than	the	center.	As	a	result,	the	edges	of	the
cheesecake	are	overcooked.	Also,	the	direct	heat	causes	the	egg	proteins	to	clump	together	and	pull	apart.



	
BAKED	IN	A	WATER	BATH

The	gentle,	even	heat	of	a	water	bath	allowed	the	egg	proteins	to	cook	slowly	and	evenly,	resulting	in	a
cheesecake	with	a	smooth,	supple	texture,	even	at	the	edges.



WATER	BATH	AT	WORK	
CHEESECAKE	AND	CUSTARD
We	use	water	baths	in	order	to	cook	delicate	custards	and	custardy	cakes	slowly
and	evenly	throughout.	After	all,	the	water	in	a	water	bath	never	reaches	more
than	212	degrees.	We	nestle	the	ramekins	or	cake	pan	in	the	bath	(so	that	the
water	comes	at	least	halfway	up	its	sides)	in	order	to	moderate	the	temperature
around	the	perimeter	and	prevent	overcooking	around	the	edge.



SPICED	PUMPKIN	CHEESECAKE
SERVES	12	TO	16

This	cheesecake	is	good	on	its	own,	but	either	Brown	Sugar	Whipped	Cream	or
Brown	Sugar	and	Bourbon	Whipped	Cream	(recipes	follow)	is	a	great	addition.
When	cutting	the	cake,	have	a	pitcher	of	hot	tap	water	nearby;	dipping	the	blade
of	the	knife	into	the	water	and	wiping	it	clean	with	a	kitchen	towel	after	each	cut
helps	make	neat	slices.

CRUST
9				 whole	graham	crackers,	broken	into	rough	pieces
3				 tablespoons	sugar
½				 teaspoon	ground	ginger
½				 teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
¼				 teaspoon	ground	cloves
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted

FILLING
1				1⁄3 cups	(91⁄3	ounces)	sugar
1				 teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
½				 teaspoon	ground	ginger
¼				 teaspoon	ground	nutmeg
¼				 teaspoon	ground	cloves
¼				 teaspoon	ground	allspice
½				 teaspoon	salt
1				 (15-ounce)	can	unsweetened	pumpkin	puree

1½				 pounds	cream	cheese,	cut	into	1-inch	chunks	and	softened
1				 tablespoon	vanilla	extract
1				 tablespoon	lemon	juice
5				 large	eggs,	room	temperature
1				 cup	heavy	cream
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter,	melted

1.	FOR	THE	CRUST:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat



oven	to	325	degrees.	Pulse	crackers,	sugar,	ginger,	cinnamon,	and	cloves	in	food
processor	until	crackers	are	finely	ground,	about	15	pulses.	Transfer	crumbs	to
medium	bowl,	drizzle	with	melted	butter,	and	mix	with	rubber	spatula	until
evenly	moistened.	Empty	crumbs	into	9-inch	springform	pan	and,	using	bottom
of	ramekin	or	dry	measuring	cup,	press	crumbs	firmly	and	evenly	into	pan
bottom,	keeping	sides	as	clean	as	possible.	Bake	crust	until	fragrant	and	browned
around	edges,	about	15	minutes.	Let	crust	cool	completely	on	wire	rack,	about
30	minutes.	When	cool,	wrap	outside	of	pan	with	two	18-inch	square	pieces	of
heavy-duty	aluminum	foil	and	set	springform	pan	in	roasting	pan.	Bring	kettle	of
water	to	boil.
2.	FOR	THE	FILLING:	Whisk	sugar,	cinnamon,	ginger,	nutmeg,	cloves,

allspice,	and	salt	together	in	small	bowl;	set	aside.	Line	baking	sheet	with	triple
layer	of	paper	towels.	Spread	pumpkin	on	paper	towels	in	roughly	even	layer
and	pat	puree	with	several	layers	of	paper	towels	to	wick	away	moisture.
3.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	beat	cream	cheese	on	medium	speed

until	broken	up	and	slightly	softened,	about	1	minute.	Scrape	down	bowl,	then
beat	in	sugar	mixture	in	3	additions	on	medium-low	speed	until	combined,	about
1	minute,	scraping	down	bowl	after	each	addition.	Add	pumpkin,	vanilla,	and
lemon	juice	and	beat	on	medium	speed	until	combined,	about	45	seconds;	scrape
down	bowl.	Reduce	speed	to	medium-low,	add	eggs,	1	at	a	time,	and	beat	until
incorporated,	about	1	minute.	Reduce	speed	to	low,	add	cream,	and	beat	until
combined,	about	45	seconds.	Give	filling	final	stir	by	hand.
4.	Being	careful	not	to	disturb	baked	crust,	brush	inside	of	pan	with	melted

butter.	Pour	filling	into	prepared	pan	and	smooth	top	with	rubber	spatula.	Set
roasting	pan	on	oven	rack	and	pour	enough	boiling	water	into	roasting	pan	to
come	about	halfway	up	sides	of	springform	pan.	Bake	cake	until	center	is
slightly	wobbly	when	pan	is	shaken	and	cake	registers	150	degrees,	about	1½
hours.	Set	roasting	pan	on	wire	rack,	then	run	paring	knife	around	cake.	Let	cake
cool	in	roasting	pan	until	water	is	just	warm,	about	45	minutes.	Remove
springform	pan	from	water	bath,	discard	foil,	and	set	on	wire	rack;	continue	to
let	cool	until	barely	warm,	about	3	hours.	Wrap	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate
until	chilled,	at	least	4	hours.
5.	To	unmold	cheesecake,	wrap	hot	kitchen	towel	around	pan	and	let	stand	for

1	minute.	Remove	sides	of	pan.	Slide	thin	metal	spatula	between	crust	and	pan
bottom	to	loosen,	then	slide	cake	onto	serving	platter.	Let	cheesecake	sit	at	room
temperature	for	about	30	minutes	before	serving.	(Cake	can	be	made	up	to	3
days	in	advance;	however,	crust	will	begin	to	lose	its	crispness	after	only	1	day.)



PUMPKIN-BOURBON	CHEESECAKE	WITH	GRAHAM-PECAN
CRUST
Reduce	graham	crackers	to	5	whole	crackers,	process	½	cup	chopped	pecans
with	crackers,	and	reduce	butter	to	4	tablespoons.	In	filling,	omit	lemon	juice,
reduce	vanilla	extract	to	1	teaspoon,	and	add	¼	cup	bourbon	along	with	heavy
cream.



BROWN	SUGAR	WHIPPED	CREAM
MAKES	ABOUT	2½	CUPS

Refrigerating	the	mixture	in	step	1	gives	the	brown	sugar	time	to	dissolve.	This
whipped	cream	pairs	well	with	Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake	or	with	any	dessert
that	has	lots	of	nuts,	warm	spices,	or	molasses,	like	gingerbread,	pecan	pie,	or
pumpkin	pie.

1				 cup	heavy	cream,	chilled
½				 cup	sour	cream
½				 cup	packed	(3½	ounces)	light	brown	sugar
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt

1.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	heavy	cream,	sour	cream,	sugar,
and	salt	until	combined.	Cover	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	until	ready	to
serve,	at	least	4	hours	or	up	to	1	day,	stirring	once	or	twice	during	chilling	to
ensure	that	sugar	dissolves.
2.	Before	serving,	using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	mixture	on

medium-low	speed	until	foamy,	about	1	minute.	Increase	speed	to	high	and	whip
until	soft	peaks	form,	1	to	3	minutes.

BROWN	SUGAR	AND	BOURBON	WHIPPED	CREAM

Add	2	teaspoons	bourbon	to	cream	mixture	before	whipping.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Adding	pumpkin,	with	all	of	its	extra	liquid,	to	a	cheesecake	makes	everything
more	challenging.	An	unusual	method	to	remove	moisture	from	pumpkin	(which
includes	paper	towels)	and	the	use	of	a	water	bath	ensure	that	our	Spiced
Pumpkin	Cheesecake	has	a	velvety	texture.
PREBAKE	THE	CRUST	We	use	crumbled	graham	crackers	for	the	crust,	as

we	do	in	our	New	York–Style	Cheesecake	recipe.	Here	we	add	butter	and	sugar
and	a	bit	of	ground	cinnamon	and	ginger	to	them	in	order	to	complement	the
spices	in	the	filling.	Also,	as	with	our	New	York	cheesecake,	we	prebake	the
crust.	This	way	a	sturdy,	crisp,	buttery	crust	forms.	(Without	prebaking,	the	crust
becomes	a	pasty,	soggy	layer	beneath	the	filling.)
DRY	YOUR	CANNED	PUMPKIN	Anyone	who	has	prepared	fresh

pumpkin	for	pumpkin	pie	can	attest	to	the	fact	that	cutting,	seeding,	peeling,	and
cooking	it	can	take	hours	and	is	not	time	and	effort	well	spent.	We	prefer
opening	a	can,	which	takes	only	a	few	seconds.	But	pumpkin	in	any	form	is
filled	with	liquid.	We	could	remove	some	of	the	moisture	by	cooking,	as	we	do
in	our	Pumpkin	Pie.	But	that	involves	frequent	stirring,	a	cooking	period,	and
waiting	for	it	to	cool.	An	easier	way?	Paper	towels.	Spread	the	pumpkin	on	a
baking	sheet	lined	with	paper	towels	and	then	press	additional	paper	towels	on
the	surface	to	wick	away	more	moisture.	In	seconds,	the	pumpkin	will	shed
enough	liquid	to	yield	a	cheesecake	with	a	lovely	texture,	and	the	paper	towels
will	peel	away	almost	effortlessly.	Removing	this	moisture	allows	us	to	add
heavy	cream	to	the	mix,	which	gives	us	a	cheesecake	that	is	smooth	and	lush.
PICK	YOUR	EGGS	While	cheesecake	recipes	can	take	various	amounts	of

eggs	in	different	configurations	(whole	eggs,	egg	whites,	or	egg	yolks	for	a	range
of	textures),	we	prefer	simply	using	five	whole	eggs	here.	This	produces	a	satiny,
creamy,	unctuous	cheesecake.
FLAVOR	IT	UP	Our	Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake	is	flavored	with	lemon

juice,	salt,	and	vanilla	extract	to	start.	But	we	also	add	sweet,	warm	cinnamon
and	sharp,	spicy	ground	ginger	alongside	small	amounts	of	cloves,	nutmeg,	and
allspice.	In	unison,	these	spices	provide	a	deep,	resounding	flavor	but	not	an
overspiced	burn.
GIVE	IT	A	BATH	In	a	springform	pan,	a	cheesecake	can	be	baked	either

directly	on	the	oven	rack	like	a	regular	cake	or	in	a	water	bath	like	a	delicate
custard.	Because	we	bake	this	cheesecake	at	325	degrees,	a	water	bath	is	needed



for	even	cooking	on	the	edges	and	the	center	(for	more	on	this,	see	Test	Kitchen
Experiment).	For	the	water	bath,	the	pan	must	be	wrapped	in	a	double	layer	of
foil	to	prevent	leakage	(or	placed	within	another	pan,	see	“Leak-Proofing
Springform	Pans”).	The	water,	which	moderates	the	cooking	temperature	and
protects	the	edges	of	the	cake,	should	come	halfway	up	the	sides	of	the
springform	pan.	The	extra	humidity	in	the	air	due	to	the	steaming	water	helps	to
reduce	the	level	of	evaporation	from	the	cake,	for	a	better,	moister	cheesecake
after	it	exits	the	oven.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
LEAK-PROOFING	SPRINGFORM	PANS

Another	option	to	prevent	water	from	seeping	into	your	springform	pan	is	to	place	it	within	a
larger	cake	pan	in	your	water	bath.

	
We’d	love	to	find	a	springform	pan	that	doesn’t	let	moisture	seep	in	when	you	place	it	in	a	water	bath,	but
so	far	a	less-than-watertight	seal	seems	unavoidable	on	pans	with	removable	bottoms.	Our	solution	has
always	been	to	wrap	the	pan	with	a	double	layer	of	aluminum	foil.	But	steam	from	the	water	bath	can
condense	inside	the	foil,	so	that	the	pan	still	sits	in	liquid.	There	is	a	better	way	to	address	the	problem:
placing	the	springform	pan	inside	a	slightly	larger	metal	pan	or	pot—a	10	by	3-inch	cake	pan	or	deep-dish
pizza	pan	is	ideal—before	lowering	it	into	the	bath.	The	slight	gap	between	the	pans	isn’t	wide	enough	to
prevent	the	water	from	insulating	the	springform	pan,	and	there	is	zero	danger	of	exposing	the	cheesecake
to	water,	since	any	moisture	that	condenses	on	the	sides	of	the	pan	rapidly	evaporates.	If	you	bake
cheesecakes	regularly,	this	method	is	worth	the	minimal	expense.



CRÈME	BRÛLÉE
SERVES	8

Separate	the	eggs	and	whisk	the	yolks	after	the	cream	has	finished	steeping;	if
left	to	sit,	the	surface	of	the	yolks	will	dry	and	form	a	film.	A	vanilla	bean	gives
the	custard	the	deepest	flavor,	but	2	teaspoons	of	vanilla	extract,	whisked	into
the	yolks	in	step	4,	can	be	used	instead.	While	we	prefer	turbinado	or	Demerara
sugar	for	the	caramelized	sugar	crust,	regular	granulated	sugar	will	work,	too,
but	use	only	1	scant	teaspoon	on	each	ramekin	or	1	teaspoon	on	each	shallow
fluted	dish.

1				 vanilla	bean
4				 cups	heavy	cream
				2⁄3 cup	(42⁄3	ounces)	granulated	sugar
					 Pinch	salt

12				 large	egg	yolks
8–12				 teaspoons	turbinado	or	Demerara	sugar

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.
2.	Cut	vanilla	bean	in	half	lengthwise.	Using	tip	of	paring	knife,	scrape	out

seeds.	Combine	vanilla	bean	and	seeds,	2	cups	cream,	granulated	sugar,	and	salt
in	medium	saucepan.	Bring	mixture	to	boil	over	medium	heat,	stirring
occasionally	to	dissolve	sugar.	Off	heat,	let	steep	for	15	minutes.
3.	Meanwhile,	place	kitchen	towel	in	bottom	of	large	baking	dish	or	roasting

pan;	set	eight	4-or	5-ounce	ramekins	(or	shallow	fluted	dishes)	on	towel	(they
should	not	touch	each	other).	Bring	kettle	of	water	to	boil.
4.	After	cream	has	steeped,	stir	in	remaining	2	cups	cream.	Whisk	egg	yolks

in	large	bowl	until	uniform.	Whisk	about	1	cup	cream	mixture	into	yolks	until
combined;	repeat	with	1	cup	more	cream	mixture.	Add	remaining	cream	mixture
and	whisk	until	evenly	colored	and	thoroughly	combined.	Strain	mixture	through
fine-mesh	strainer	into	large	liquid	measuring	cup	or	bowl;	discard	solids	in
strainer.	Divide	mixture	evenly	among	ramekins.
5.	Set	baking	dish	on	oven	rack.	Taking	care	not	to	splash	water	into	ramekins,

pour	enough	boiling	water	into	dish	to	reach	two-thirds	up	sides	of	ramekins.
Bake	until	centers	of	custards	are	just	barely	set	and	register	170	to	175	degrees,



30	to	35	minutes	(25	to	30	minutes	for	shallow	fluted	dishes),	checking
temperature	about	5	minutes	before	recommended	minimum	time.
6.	Transfer	ramekins	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	to	room	temperature,	about	2

hours.	Set	ramekins	on	baking	sheet,	cover	tightly	with	plastic	wrap,	and
refrigerate	until	cold,	at	least	4	hours.
7.	Uncover	ramekins;	if	condensation	has	collected	on	custards,	blot	moisture

with	paper	towel.	Sprinkle	each	with	about	1	teaspoon	turbinado	sugar	(1½
teaspoons	for	shallow	fluted	dishes);	tilt	and	tap	each	ramekin	to	distribute	sugar
evenly,	dumping	out	excess	sugar.	Ignite	torch	and	caramelize	sugar.	Refrigerate
ramekins,	uncovered,	to	rechill,	30	to	45	minutes;	serve.

ESPRESSO	CRÈME	BRÛLÉE

Crush	the	espresso	beans	lightly	with	the	bottom	of	a	skillet.

Substitute	¼	cup	lightly	crushed	espresso	beans	for	vanilla	bean.	Whisk	1
teaspoon	vanilla	extract	into	yolks	in	step	4	before	adding	cream.

MAKE-AHEAD	CRÈME	BRÛLÉE
Reduce	egg	yolks	to	10.	After	baked	custards	cool	to	room	temperature,	wrap
each	ramekin	tightly	in	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for	up	to	4	days.	Proceed
with	step	7.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Crème	brûlée	is	all	about	the	contrast	between	the	crisp	sugar	crust	and	the
silky	custard	underneath.	But	too	often	the	crust	is	either	stingy	or	rock-hard,
and	the	custard	is	heavy	and	tasteless.	We	found	that	the	secret	to	a	soft,	supple
custard	is	using	egg	yolks	rather	than	whole	eggs,	and	a	water	bath	for	gentle,
even	cooking.	For	the	crust,	we	use	crunchy	turbinado	sugar	and	a	propane	or
butane	torch	(which	work	better	than	the	broiler)	for	caramelizing	the	sugar.
Because	the	blast	of	heat	inevitably	warms	the	custard	beneath	the	crust,	we
chill	our	crèmes	brûlées	once	more	before	serving.
START	WITH	HEAVY	CREAM	There	is	no	point	cutting	corners	here.	We

tried	this	crème	brûlée	with	half-and-half	(with	a	fat	content	of	around	10
percent),	whipping	cream	(30	percent	fat),	and	heavy	cream	(36	percent	fat).	The
half-and-half	was	far	too	lean,	and	the	custard	was	watery	and	lightweight.	The
whipping	cream	custard	was	an	improvement,	but	still	a	bit	loose.	Heavy	cream
makes	a	custard	that	is	thick	but	not	overbearing,	luxurious	but	not	death-
defying.	In	short:	everything	we	want.
USE	YOLKS	ONLY	Firm	custards,	like	crème	caramel,	are	made	with	whole

eggs,	which	help	the	custard	to	achieve	a	clean-cutting	quality.	Crème	brûlée	is
richer	and	softer—with	a	puddinglike,	spoon-clinging	texture—in	part	because
of	the	exclusive	use	of	yolks.	Using	4	cups	of	heavy	cream,	we	played	with	the
number	of	yolks	here.	The	custard	refuses	to	set	with	as	few	as	six;	eight	is
better,	though	still	slurpy.	With	12,	however,	the	custard	has	a	lovely	lilting
texture,	a	glossy,	luminescent	look,	and	the	richest	flavor.
PICK	VANILLA	BEANS	We	prefer	the	use	of	a	vanilla	bean,	rather	than

vanilla	extract,	in	this	custard.	The	downside	to	starting	with	cold	ingredients	(as
we	do	to	prevent	any	curdling	eggs)	is	that	it	becomes	almost	impossible	to
extract	the	flavor	of	a	vanilla	bean.	We	solve	this	problem	with	a	hybrid
technique:	We	scald	half	the	cream,	along	with	the	sugar	(to	dissolve)	and
vanilla	bean,	and	let	it	sit	for	15	minutes	to	extract	the	flavor	of	the	vanilla.
Later,	we	add	the	cold	cream	to	lower	the	temperature	before	mixing	in	the	eggs.
You	end	up	with	the	tiny	black	flecks	of	vanilla	bean	seeds	in	the	final	dish,	but
don’t	worry,	it’s	only	added	flavor.	(It’s	possible	to	use	vanilla	extract,	but	a	bean
is	far	better.)
COOL	THE	CREAM	Even	though	we	warm	some	of	the	cream	to	better

extract	the	flavor	of	the	vanilla,	it’s	important	to	lower	the	temperature	before
adding	the	eggs.	Cold-started	custard	and	scalded-cream	custard	display	startling
differences.	As	we’ve	learned,	eggs	respond	favorably	to	cooking	at	a	slow,



gentle	pace.	If	heated	quickly,	they	set	only	just	shortly	before	they	enter	the
overcooked	zone,	leaving	a	very	narrow	window	between	just	right	and
overdone.	If	heated	gently,	however,	they	begin	to	thicken	the	custard	at	a	lower
temperature	and	continue	to	do	so	gradually.	Therefore,	cooling	the	cream	before
adding	the	eggs	gives	us	more	time	to	develop	a	perfectly	textured	crème	brûlée
before	we	enter	the	danger	zone	of	overcooked	eggs.	Because	the	cream	is	not
straight-from-the-fridge	cold,	the	baking	time	is	nicely	reduced.
BATHE	THE	RAMEKINS	We	use	a	large	baking	dish	for	our	water	bath	(or

bain-marie,	which	prevents	the	custard	from	overcooking	while	the	center
saunters	to	the	finish	line),	one	that	can	hold	all	of	the	ramekins	comfortably.
(The	ramekins	must	not	touch	and	should	be	at	least	½	inch	away	from	the	sides
of	the	dish.)	Line	the	bottom	of	the	pan	with	a	kitchen	towel	to	protect	the	floors
of	the	ramekins	from	the	heat	of	the	dish.
PICK	THE	BEST	SUGAR	For	the	crackly	caramel	crust,	we	prefer

Demerara	and	turbinado	sugars,	which	are	both	coarse	light	brown	sugars.	They
are	better	than	brown	sugar,	which	is	moist	and	lumpy,	and	granulated	sugar,
because	it	can	be	difficult	to	distribute	evenly	over	the	custards.	Don’t	use	a
broiler	to	caramelize;	it’s	an	almost	guaranteed	fail	with	its	uneven	heat.	A	torch
accomplishes	the	task	efficiently.	(And	be	sure	to	refrigerate	the	finished	crèmes
brûlées—the	brûlée	can	warm	up	the	custard,	ruining	an	otherwise	perfect	dish.)



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CHOOSING	VANILLA	BEANS

Vanilla	beans	are	a	key	component	of	crème	brûlée.	We	tested	five	brands.

We	tested	five	brands	of	vanilla	beans	sourced	from	Madagascar	(the	world’s	largest	producer)—three	mail-
order	beans	and	two	from	the	supermarket—wondering	if	the	tides	had	turned	since	we	rated	them	more
than	a	decade	ago.	At	that	time,	we	couldn’t	recommend	any	supermarket	samples,	finding	them	dried	out
and	hardened,	with	few	seeds	and	even	less	flavor.

To	assess	the	differences,	we	sliced	open	a	pod	from	each	brand	and	scraped	out	the	seeds.	We	then	used
the	seeds	in	an	uncooked	cream	cheese	frosting	and	simmered	both	seeds	and	pods	in	dairy	for	use	in	a
simple	crème	anglaise	and	in	the	base	of	our	Vanilla	Ice	Cream.

This	time	around,	in	a	surprising	reversal,	we	found	the	supermarket	beans	not	only	improved,	but	also
slightly	better	than	the	mail-order	ones.	While	some	variation	can	be	expected	from	any	agricultural
product,	most	of	the	differences	among	beans	likely	came	from	how	much	of	the	flavor	compound	vanillin
was	developed	during	the	curing	process.	For	Madagascar	beans,	this	involves	dipping	the	pods	in	hot	water
to	halt	all	growth,	drying	them	in	the	sun,	and	placing	them	(wrapped	in	cloth	and	straw	mats)	in	wooden
boxes	to	sweat	overnight.	This	cycle	is	repeated	until	a	manufacturer	decides	that	the	beans	are	ready	to	be
moved	to	holding	rooms,	where	they	rest	until	they’re	shriveled,	brown,	and	fragrant—an	indication	that
they’re	ready	for	sorting.

Bottom	line:	Although	all	of	the	brands	were	acceptable,	we	recommend	splurging	on	our	winner,
McCormick	Madagascar	Vanilla	Beans	(at	$15.99	for	two,	they’re	more	costly	than	the	mail-order	brands),
when	you	want	moist,	seed-filled	pods	with	complex	flavor	that	tasters	called	exceptionally	“robust”	and
“vivid.”



LOW	OVEN	HEATING	AT	WORK	
CHEESECAKE	AND	CUSTARD	PIE
Though	we	often	use	water	baths	to	help	our	custards	bake	gently,	sometimes
just	the	oven	is	fine.	For	silky	cakes	and	pies	without	rough	edges	and	jiggly
centers,	we	set	our	ovens	low—very	low.	This	helps	the	eggs	to	cook	slowly	and
evenly.	It	also	expands	the	window	of	opportunity	before	our	desserts	are
cracked,	rough,	and	woefully	overcooked.



NEW	YORK–STYLE	CHEESECAKE
SERVES	12	TO	16

For	the	crust,	chocolate	wafers	can	be	substituted	for	graham	crackers;	you	will
need	about	14	wafers.	The	flavor	and	texture	of	the	cheesecake	are	best	if	the
cake	is	allowed	to	sit	at	room	temperature	for	30	minutes	before	serving.	When
cutting	the	cake,	have	a	pitcher	of	hot	tap	water	nearby;	dipping	the	blade	of	the
knife	into	the	water	and	wiping	it	clean	with	a	kitchen	towel	after	each	cut	helps
make	neat	slices.	Serve	with	Fresh	Strawberry	Topping	(recipe	follows)	if
desired.

CRUST
8				 whole	graham	crackers,	broken	into	rough	pieces
1				 tablespoon	sugar
5				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted

FILLING
2½				 pounds	cream	cheese,	cut	into	1-inch	chunks	and	softened
1½				 cups	(10½	ounces)	sugar
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
				1⁄3 cup	sour	cream
2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
6				 large	eggs	plus	2	large	yolks
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter,	melted

1.	FOR	THE	CRUST:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat
oven	to	325	degrees.	Process	graham	cracker	pieces	in	food	processor	to	fine
crumbs,	about	30	seconds.	Combine	graham	cracker	crumbs	and	sugar	in
medium	bowl,	add	melted	butter,	and	toss	with	fork	until	evenly	moistened.
Empty	crumbs	into	9-inch	springform	pan	and,	using	bottom	of	ramekin	or	dry
measuring	cup,	press	crumbs	firmly	and	evenly	into	pan	bottom,	keeping	sides
as	clean	as	possible.	Bake	crust	until	fragrant	and	beginning	to	brown	around
edges,	about	13	minutes.	Let	crust	cool	in	pan	on	wire	rack	while	making	filling.
2.	FOR	THE	FILLING:	Increase	oven	temperature	to	500	degrees.	Using



stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	beat	cream	cheese	on	medium-low	speed	until
broken	up	and	slightly	softened,	about	1	minute.	Scrape	down	bowl.	Add	¾	cup
sugar	and	salt	and	beat	on	medium-low	speed	until	combined,	about	1	minute.
Scrape	down	bowl,	then	beat	in	remaining	¾	cup	sugar	until	combined,	about	1
minute.	Scrape	down	bowl,	add	sour	cream,	lemon	juice,	and	vanilla,	and	beat
on	low	speed	until	combined,	about	1	minute.	Scrape	down	bowl,	add	egg	yolks,
and	beat	on	medium-low	speed	until	thoroughly	combined,	about	1	minute.
Scrape	down	bowl,	add	whole	eggs,	2	at	a	time,	beating	until	thoroughly
combined,	about	1	minute,	and	scraping	bowl	between	additions.
3.	Being	careful	not	to	disturb	baked	crust,	brush	inside	of	pan	with	melted

butter	and	set	pan	on	rimmed	baking	sheet	to	catch	any	spills	in	case	pan	leaks.
Pour	filling	into	cooled	crust	and	bake	for	10	minutes;	without	opening	oven
door,	reduce	temperature	to	200	degrees	and	continue	to	bake	until	cheesecake
registers	about	150	degrees,	about	1½	hours.	Let	cake	cool	on	wire	rack	for	5
minutes,	then	run	paring	knife	around	cake	to	loosen	from	pan.	Let	cake
continue	to	cool	until	barely	warm,	2½	to	3	hours.	Wrap	tightly	in	plastic	wrap
and	refrigerate	until	cold,	at	least	3	hours.	(Cake	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	4
days.)
4.	To	unmold	cheesecake,	wrap	hot	kitchen	towel	around	pan	and	let	stand	for

1	minute.	Remove	sides	of	pan.	Slide	thin	metal	spatula	between	crust	and	pan
bottom	to	loosen,	then	slide	cake	onto	serving	platter.	Let	cheesecake	sit	at	room
temperature	for	about	30	minutes	before	serving.	(Cheesecake	can	be	made	up	to
3	days	in	advance;	however,	crust	will	begin	to	lose	its	crispness	after	only	1
day.)



FRESH	STRAWBERRY	TOPPING
MAKES	ABOUT	6	CUPS

This	accompaniment	to	cheesecake	is	best	served	the	same	day	it	is	made.

2				 pounds	strawberries,	hulled	and	sliced	lengthwise	¼	to	1⁄8	inch	thick	(3	cups)
½				 cup	(3½	ounces)	sugar
					 Pinch	salt
1				 cup	strawberry	jam
2				 tablespoons	lemon	juice

1.	Toss	berries,	sugar,	and	salt	in	medium	bowl	and	let	sit	until	berries	have
released	juice	and	sugar	has	dissolved,	about	30	minutes,	tossing	occasionally	to
combine.
2.	Process	jam	in	food	processor	until	smooth,	about	8	seconds,	then	transfer

to	small	saucepan.	Bring	jam	to	simmer	over	medium-high	heat	and	simmer,
stirring	frequently,	until	dark	and	no	longer	frothy,	about	3	minutes.	Stir	in
lemon	juice,	then	pour	warm	liquid	over	strawberries	and	stir	to	combine.	Let
cool,	then	cover	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	until	cold,	at	least	2	hours	or
up	to	12	hours.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
A	rejection	of	the	Ben	and	Jerry	school	of	everything-but-the-kitchen-sink
concoctions,	the	ideal	New	York	cheesecake	is	timeless	in	its	adherence	to
simplicity.	It	is	a	tall,	toasty-skinned,	dense	affair,	a	classic	cheesecake	with
bronzed	top	and	lush	interior.	After	giving	it	a	quick	blast	in	a	hot	oven,	we	bake
it	low	and	slow	for	even	cooking	and	a	lovely	graded	texture.
MAKE	A	HOMEMADE	CRUST	Though	some	New	York–style

cheesecakes	have	pastry	crusts,	we	find	they	become	soggy	beneath	the	filling.
Our	preference?	Graham	crackers.	Store-bought	graham	cracker	crumbs	don’t
taste	nearly	as	good	as	crumbs	you	grind	in	the	food	processor	from	real	graham
crackers.	We	enrich	ours	with	butter	and	sugar	and	press	them	into	place	in	a
springform	pan	with	the	bottom	of	a	ramekin.	Prebaking	keeps	this	crust	from
becoming	soggy.
USE	ROOM-TEMPERATURE	CHEESE	A	New	York	cheesecake	should

be	one	of	great	stature.	When	we	made	one	with	2	pounds	(four	bars)	of	cream
cheese,	it	was	not	tall	enough.	Therefore,	we	fill	the	springform	pan	to	the	very
top	with	an	added	half-pound.	It’s	important	that	the	cream	cheese	is	at	least
moderately	soft	so	that	it	can	fully	incorporate	into	the	batter	and	you	aren’t	left
with	a	piece	of	cake	containing	small	nodules	of	unmixed	cream	cheese	amid	an
otherwise	smooth	bite.	Simply	cutting	the	cheese	into	chunks	and	letting	them
stand	while	preparing	the	crust	and	assembling	the	other	ingredients—30	to	45
minutes—makes	mixing	easier.
CHOOSE	THE	RIGHT	DAIRY	Cream	cheese	alone	as	the	filling	of	a

cheesecake	makes	for	a	pasty	cake—much	like	a	bar	of	cream	cheese	straight
from	its	wrapper.	Additional	dairy	loosens	up	the	texture	of	the	cream	cheese,
giving	the	cake	a	smoother,	more	luxurious	texture.	Although	some	recipes	call
for	large	amounts	of	sour	cream,	we	use	only	1⁄3	cup	so	that	the	cake	has	a	nice
tang	but	won’t	end	up	tasting	sour	and	acidic.
MIX	WHOLE	EGGS	AND	YOLKS	In	this	cheesecake,	eggs	do	a	lot	of

work.	They	help	to	bind,	making	the	cake	cohesive	and	giving	it	structure.
Whole	eggs	alone	are	often	called	for	in	softer,	airier	cheesecakes.	But	recipes
for	New	York	cheesecakes	tend	to	include	additional	yolks,	which	add	fat	and
emulsifiers,	and	less	water	than	whole	eggs,	to	help	produce	a	velvety,	lush
texture.	We	use	six	eggs	plus	two	yolks,	a	combination	that	produces	a	dense	but
not	heavy,	firm	but	not	rigid,	perfectly	rich	cake.
FLAVOR,	PLEASE	We	keep	the	flavor	of	this	cake	simple.	Lemon	juice	is	a



great	addition,	perking	things	up	without	adding	a	distinctively	lemon	flavor	(no
zest!).	Just	a	bit	of	salt	(cream	cheese	already	contains	sodium	chloride)	and	a
couple	of	teaspoons	of	vanilla	extract	round	out	the	flavors	well.
GO	HIGH	TO	LOW	There	are	many	ways	to	bake	a	cheesecake—in	a

moderate	oven,	in	a	low	oven,	in	a	water	bath,	or	in	the	New	York	fashion,	in
which	the	cake	bakes	at	500	degrees	for	about	10	minutes	and	then	at	200
degrees	for	about	an	hour	and	a	half.	This	super-simple,	no-water-bath	(no
leaking	pans,	layers	of	foil	prophylactics,	or	boiling	water),	dual-temperature
baking	method	produces	a	lovely	graded	texture—soft	and	creamy	at	the	center
and	firm	and	dry	at	the	periphery.	It	also	yields	the	attractive	nut-brown	surface
that	we’re	after.
PREVENT	CRACKS	Some	cooks	use	the	crack	to	gauge	when	a	cheesecake

is	done.	But	we	say	if	there’s	a	crack	it’s	already	overdone.	The	best	way	to
prevent	a	cheesecake	from	cracking	is	to	use	an	instant-read	thermometer	to	test
its	doneness.	Take	the	cake	out	of	the	oven	when	it	reaches	150	degrees	to	avoid
overbaking.	Higher	temperatures	cause	the	cheesecake	to	rise	so	much	that	the
delicate	network	of	egg	proteins	tears	apart	as	the	center	shrinks	and	falls	during
cool-down.
SEPARATE	AND	COOL	During	baking	is	not	the	only	time	a	cheesecake

can	crack.	There	is	a	second	opportunity	outside	the	oven.	A	perfectly	good-
looking	cake	can	crack	as	it	sits	on	the	cooling	rack.	The	cake	shrinks	during
cooling	and	will	cling	to	the	sides	of	the	springform	pan.	If	the	cake	clings
tenaciously	enough,	the	delicate	egg	structure	splits	at	its	weakest	point,	the
center.	To	avoid	this	type	of	late	cracking,	cool	the	cheesecake	for	only	a	few
minutes,	then	free	it	from	the	sides	of	the	pan	with	a	paring	knife	before
allowing	it	to	cool	fully.



PUMPKIN	PIE
SERVES	8

Use	the	Foolproof	Baked	Pie	Shell.	If	candied	yams	are	unavailable,	regular
canned	yams	can	be	substituted.	When	the	pie	is	properly	baked,	the	center	2
inches	of	the	pie	should	look	firm	but	jiggle	slightly.	The	pie	finishes	cooking
with	residual	heat;	to	ensure	that	the	filling	sets,	let	it	cool	at	room	temperature
and	not	in	the	refrigerator.	Do	not	cool	this	fully	baked	crust;	the	crust	and
filling	must	both	be	warm	when	the	filling	is	added.

1				 cup	heavy	cream
1				 cup	whole	milk
3				 large	eggs	plus	2	large	yolks
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
1				 (15-ounce)	can	unsweetened	pumpkin	puree
1				 cup	candied	yams,	drained
¾				 cup	(5¼	ounces)	sugar
¼				 cup	maple	syrup
2				 teaspoons	grated	fresh	ginger
1				 teaspoon	salt
½				 teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
¼				 teaspoon	ground	nutmeg
1				 recipe	Foolproof	Baked	Pie	Shell,	partially	baked	and	still	warm

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position,	place	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	rack,
and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.	Whisk	cream,	milk,	eggs	and	yolks,	and	vanilla
together	in	bowl.	Bring	pumpkin,	yams,	sugar,	maple	syrup,	ginger,	salt,
cinnamon,	and	nutmeg	to	simmer	in	large	saucepan	and	cook,	stirring	constantly
and	mashing	yams	against	sides	of	pot,	until	thick	and	shiny,	15	to	20	minutes.
2.	Remove	saucepan	from	heat	and	whisk	in	cream	mixture	until	fully

incorporated.	Strain	mixture	through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	bowl,	using	back	of
ladle	or	spatula	to	press	solids	through	strainer.	Whisk	mixture,	then	pour	into
warm	prebaked	pie	crust.
3.	Place	pie	on	heated	baking	sheet	and	bake	for	10	minutes.	Reduce	oven

temperature	to	300	degrees	and	continue	to	bake	until	edges	of	pie	are	set	and



center	registers	175	degrees,	20	to	35	minutes	longer.	Let	pie	cool	on	wire	rack
to	room	temperature,	about	4	hours.	Serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Too	many	pumpkin	pie	recipes	result	in	a	grainy	custard	in	a	soggy	crust.	For
our	pumpkin	pie	recipe,	we	avoid	this	outcome	by	drying	out	the	pumpkin	puree
(with	yams	added	for	complex	flavor)	on	the	stovetop	before	whisking	in	dairy
and	eggs.	The	hot	filling	lets	the	creamy	custard	firm	up	quickly	in	the	oven,
preventing	it	from	both	curdling	and	soaking	into	the	crust.
PREBAKE	PIE	SHELL	Prebaking	the	pie	crust	is	an	essential	step	here.	If

we	skipped	it,	and	instead	poured	the	pie	filling	straight	into	the	raw	dough,	we
would	end	up	with	a	soggy,	sad	crust	when	the	pie	finally	exited	the	oven.	This
is	because	the	filling	is	very	wet,	and	the	crust	needs	that	extra	alone	time	in	the
oven	to	crisp	up	before	coming	in	contact	with	all	the	extra	moisture.	(For	more
on	pie	crust,	see	concept	44.)
PUT	HOT	FILLING	IN	WARM	CRUST	If	you’re	tempted	to	bake	the	pie

crust	way	ahead	of	time,	don’t.	It’s	imperative	that	the	pie	crust	is	warm	when
you	add	the	hot	filling.	If	it	is	not,	the	pie	will	become	soggy.	Using	a	hot	filling
in	a	warm	crust	allows	the	custard	to	firm	up	quickly	in	the	oven,	preventing	it
from	soaking	into	the	crust	and	turning	it	soggy.	This	is	even	true	if	you	let	the
filling	cool	to	room	temperature.	Keep	that	crust	warm!
COOK	THE	PUMPKIN	To	maximize	flavor,	we	concentrate	the	pumpkin’s

liquid	rather	than	remove	it,	and	we’ve	found	it	best	to	do	this	on	the	stove.	This
is	an	added	bonus	for	the	spices	that	we	add	to	the	filling	as	well.	Cooking	the
fresh	ginger	and	spices	along	with	the	pumpkin	puree	intensifies	their	taste—the
direct	heat	blooms	their	flavors	(see	concept	33).	In	addition,	cooking	minimizes
the	mealy	texture	in	this	pie	where	pumpkin	is	the	star.
SUPPLEMENT	WITH	YAMS	When	we	used	solely	pumpkin	puree,	we

craved	more	flavor	complexity.	Therefore,	we	experimented	with	roasted	sweet
potatoes,	which	added	a	surprisingly	deep	flavor	without	a	wholly	recognizable
taste.	In	an	effort	to	streamline	this	technique,	we	tried	adding	canned	sweet
potatoes—commonly	labeled	as	yams—instead.	They	were	a	hit.	The	yams	add
a	complex	flavor	that	complements	the	pumpkin.
ADD	EXTRA	YOLKS	Our	goal	with	this	pie	was	to	eliminate	the	grainy

texture	that	plagues	most	custard	in	favor	of	a	creamy,	sliceable,	not-too-dense
pie.	We	start	with	a	balance	of	whole	milk	and	cream,	and	firm	up	the	mixture
with	eggs.	We	don’t	simply	add	whole	eggs,	though—that	just	makes	the	pie	too
eggy.	Because	the	whites	are	filled	with	much	more	water	than	the	yolks,	we
exchange	some	whole	eggs	for	the	yolks	alone.	Don’t	forget	to	pass	the	mixed



filling	through	a	fine-mesh	strainer	to	remove	any	stringy	bits.	This	will	ensure
the	ultimate	smooth	texture.
TURN	OVEN	HIGH	TO	LOW	Most	pumpkin	pie	recipes	call	for	a	high

oven	temperature	to	expedite	cooking	time.	But	as	we’ve	learned,	baking	any
custard	at	high	heat	has	its	dangers.	Once	the	temperature	of	custard	rises	above
185	degrees	it	curdles,	turning	the	filling	coarse	and	grainy.	This	is	why	we
cannot	bake	the	pie	at	425	degrees,	as	most	recipes	suggest.	Lowering	the
temperature	to	350	only	provided	us	with	a	curdled	and	overcooked	pie	at	the
edges	that	was	still	underdone	in	the	center.	But	baking	at	a	low	300	degrees
would	mean	leaving	the	pie	in	the	oven	for	two	hours.	What	to	do?	As	with	our
New	York–Style	Cheesecake	we	combine	the	two	techniques,	blasting	the	pie	for
10	minutes	on	high	heat	and	then	baking	it	at	300	degrees	for	the	rest	of	the
baking	time.	This	lessens	the	cooking	time	exponentially	and	leaves	us	with	a
creamy	pie	fully	and	evenly	cooked	from	edge	to	center.



TEMPERING	AT	WORK	
CHEESECAKE	AND	ICE	CREAM
Another	technique	we	use	to	cook	eggs	gently	and	slowly	for	our	stovetop
custards	is	tempering.	Tempering	is	the	act	of	gradually	increasing	the
temperature	of	a	sensitive	ingredient—in	this	case,	eggs—to	prevent	it	from
curdling	once	added	to	a	hot	liquid.	This	is	done	by	adding	a	small	portion	of	the
hot	component	(the	base	for	lemon	curd,	for	example)	to	the	cooler	ingredient
(eggs)	and	stirring	it	in	before	adding	the	now-warmed	ingredient	to	the	rest	of
the	hot	component.



LEMON	CHEESECAKE
SERVES	12	TO	16

When	cutting	the	cake,	have	a	pitcher	of	hot	tap	water	nearby;	dipping	the	blade
of	the	knife	into	the	water	and	wiping	it	clean	with	a	kitchen	towel	after	each	cut
helps	make	neat	slices.

CRUST
5				 ounces	Nabisco	Barnum’s	Animals	Crackers	or	Social	Tea	Biscuits
3				 tablespoons	sugar
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted

FILLING
1¼				 cups	(8¾	ounces)	sugar
1				 tablespoon	grated	lemon	zest	plus	¼	cup	juice	(2	lemons)

1½				 pounds	cream	cheese,	cut	into	1-inch	chunks	and	softened
4				 large	eggs,	room	temperature
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
¼				 teaspoon	salt
½				 cup	heavy	cream
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter,	melted

	

LEMON	CURD
				1⁄3 cup	lemon	juice	(2	lemons)
2				 large	eggs	plus	1	large	yolk
½				 cup	(3½	ounces)	sugar
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	and	chilled
1				 tablespoon	heavy	cream
¼				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
					 Pinch	salt



1.	FOR	THE	CRUST:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat
oven	to	325	degrees.	Process	cookies	in	food	processor	to	fine	crumbs,	about	30
seconds	(you	should	have	about	1	cup).	Add	sugar	and	pulse	2	or	3	times	to
incorporate.	Add	melted	butter	in	slow,	steady	stream	while	pulsing;	pulse	until
mixture	is	evenly	moistened	and	resembles	wet	sand,	about	10	pulses.	Empty
crumbs	into	9-inch	springform	pan	and,	using	bottom	of	ramekin	or	dry
measuring	cup,	press	crumbs	firmly	and	evenly	into	pan	bottom,	keeping	sides
as	clean	as	possible.	Bake	crust	until	fragrant	and	golden	brown,	15	to	18
minutes.	Let	cool	on	wire	rack	to	room	temperature,	about	30	minutes.	When
cool,	wrap	outside	of	pan	with	two	18-inch	square	pieces	of	heavy-duty
aluminum	foil	and	set	springform	pan	in	roasting	pan.	Bring	kettle	of	water	to
boil.
2.	FOR	THE	FILLING:	While	crust	is	cooling,	process	¼	cup	sugar	and

lemon	zest	in	food	processor	until	sugar	is	yellow	and	zest	is	broken	down,
about	15	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	as	needed.	Transfer	lemon-sugar	mixture
to	small	bowl	and	stir	in	remaining	1	cup	sugar.
3.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	beat	cream	cheese	on	low	speed	until

broken	up	and	slightly	softened,	about	5	seconds.	With	mixer	running,	add
lemon-sugar	mixture	in	slow,	steady	stream;	increase	speed	to	medium	and
continue	to	beat	until	mixture	is	creamy	and	smooth,	about	3	minutes,	scraping
down	bowl	as	needed.	Reduce	speed	to	medium-low	and	beat	in	eggs,	2	at	a
time,	until	incorporated,	about	30	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	well	after	each
addition.	Add	lemon	juice,	vanilla,	and	salt	and	mix	until	just	incorporated,
about	5	seconds.	Add	cream	and	mix	until	just	incorporated,	about	5	seconds
longer.	Give	filling	final	stir	by	hand.
4.	Being	careful	not	to	disturb	baked	crust,	brush	inside	of	pan	with	melted

butter.	Pour	filling	into	prepared	pan	and	smooth	top	with	rubber	spatula.	Set
roasting	pan	on	oven	rack	and	pour	enough	boiling	water	into	roasting	pan	to
come	halfway	up	sides	of	pan.	Bake	cake	until	center	jiggles	slightly,	sides	just
start	to	puff,	surface	is	no	longer	shiny,	and	cake	registers	150	degrees,	55
minutes	to	1	hour.	Turn	off	oven	and	prop	open	oven	door	with	potholder	or
wooden	spoon	handle;	allow	cake	to	cool	in	water	bath	in	oven	for	1	hour.
Transfer	pan	to	wire	rack.	Remove	foil,	then	run	paring	knife	around	cake	and	let
cake	cool	completely	on	wire	rack,	about	2	hours.
5.	FOR	THE	LEMON	CURD:	While	cheesecake	bakes,	heat	lemon	juice	in

small	saucepan	over	medium	heat	until	hot	but	not	boiling.	Whisk	eggs	and	yolk
together	in	medium	bowl,	then	gradually	whisk	in	sugar.	Whisking	constantly,



slowly	pour	hot	lemon	juice	into	eggs,	then	return	mixture	to	saucepan	and	cook
over	medium	heat,	stirring	constantly	with	wooden	spoon,	until	mixture	is	thick
enough	to	cling	to	spoon	and	registers	170	degrees,	about	3	minutes.
Immediately	remove	pan	from	heat	and	stir	in	cold	butter	until	incorporated.	Stir
in	cream,	vanilla,	and	salt,	then	pour	curd	through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	small
bowl.	Place	plastic	wrap	directly	on	surface	of	curd	and	refrigerate	until	needed.
6.	When	cheesecake	is	cool,	scrape	lemon	curd	onto	cheesecake	still	in

springform	pan.	Using	offset	spatula,	spread	curd	evenly	over	top	of	cheesecake.
Cover	tightly	with	plastic	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	4	hours	or	up	to	1	day.	To
unmold	cheesecake,	wrap	hot	kitchen	towel	around	pan	and	let	stand	for	1
minute.	Remove	sides	of	pan.	Slide	thin	metal	spatula	between	crust	and	pan
bottom	to	loosen,	then	slide	cake	onto	serving	platter	and	serve.	(Cake	can	be
made	up	to	3	days	in	advance;	however,	the	crust	will	begin	to	lose	its	crispness
after	only	1	day.)

GOAT	CHEESE	AND	LEMON	CHEESECAKE	WITH	HAZELNUT
CRUST

The	goat	cheese	gives	this	cheesecake	a	distinctive	tang	and	a	slightly	savory
edge.	Use	a	mild-flavored	goat	cheese.

For	crust,	process	generous	1⁄3	cup	hazelnuts,	toasted,	skinned,	and	cooled,	in
food	processor	with	sugar	until	finely	ground	and	mixture	resembles	coarse
cornmeal,	about	30	seconds.	Add	cookies	and	process	until	mixture	is	finely	and
evenly	ground,	about	30	seconds.	Reduce	melted	butter	to	3	tablespoons.	For
filling,	reduce	cream	cheese	to	1	pound	and	beat	8	ounces	room-temperature
goat	cheese	with	cream	cheese	in	step	3.	Omit	salt.

TRIPLE-CITRUS	CHEESECAKE
For	filling,	reduce	lemon	zest	to	1	teaspoon	and	lemon	juice	to	1	tablespoon.
Process	1	teaspoon	grated	lime	zest	and	1	teaspoon	grated	orange	zest	with
lemon	zest	in	step	2.	Add	1	tablespoon	lime	juice	and	2	tablespoons	orange	juice
to	mixer	with	lemon	juice	in	step	3.	For	curd,	reduce	lemon	juice	to	2
tablespoons	and	heat	2	tablespoons	lime	juice,	4	teaspoons	orange	juice,	and	2
teaspoons	grated	orange	zest	with	lemon	juice	in	step	5.	Omit	vanilla.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	love	cheesecake	it	in	its	unadulterated	form,	but	sometimes	the	fresh	flavor	of
citrus	can	take	it	to	a	refreshing	new	level.	We	aimed	to	develop	a	creamy
cheesecake	with	a	bracing	but	not	overpowering	lemon	flavor.	The	use	of	animal
rather	than	graham	crackers,	lemon	zest,	heavy	cream,	lemon	curd,	and—of
course—a	water	bath	helps	us	to	achieve	the	ultimate	lemon	cheesecake.	In
addition:	This	cheesecake	has	a	crowning	layer	of	lemon	curd,	which	in	turn
demonstrates	the	power	of	tempering	at	work.
USE	ANIMAL	CRACKERS	Most	cheesecakes	have	sweet	and	spicy

graham	cracker	crusts	that	remain	crunchy	under	the	weight	of	the	cheesy	filling.
But	here	the	strong	molasses	taste	of	the	graham	crackers	overwhelms	the	lemon
flavor.	We	experimented	with	several	kinds	of	more	neutral-flavored	crumb
crusts	and	found	that	we	liked	the	one	made	with	animal	crackers	the	best.
PROCESS	ZEST	FOR	FLAVOR	Zest	offers	a	nice	balance	of	lemon	flavor,

but	it	comes	with	a	hitch:	The	fibrous	texture	of	the	zest	can	mar	the	creamy
smoothness	of	the	filling.	To	solve	this,	we	process	the	zest	and	¼	cup	of	sugar
together	before	adding	them	to	the	cream	cheese.	This	produces	a	wonderfully
potent	lemon	flavor	by	breaking	down	the	zest	and	releasing	its	oils.	Don’t
process	all	the	sugar,	though;	that	would	wreak	havoc	with	its	crystalline
structure	(necessary	for	aerating	the	cream	cheese)	as	well	as	meld	it	with	the
oils	from	the	lemon	zest,	creating	a	strangely	dense	cake.
BAKE	IN	A	BATH	Like	our	Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake,	this	cheesecake	is

baked	in	a	water	bath	in	a	325-degree	oven.	But	here	we	turn	the	oven	off	and
leave	the	cake	in	the	oven	for	an	additional	hour	with	the	door	ajar.	This
technique	of	cooking	at	a	very	slow	crawl	so	as	not	to	overcook	the	eggs	gives
us	a	foolproof	creamy	consistency	in	our	cheesecake	from	edge	to	center.	We
cook	our	cheesecake	until	it	reaches	150	degrees	in	the	center;	this	accounts	for
the	fact	that	the	edges,	which	generally	cook	faster,	have	already	reached	170
degrees.
CHILL	THE	CAKE	If	the	cheesecake	is	not	thoroughly	chilled,	it	will	not

hold	its	shape	when	sliced.	After	four	hours	in	the	refrigerator	(and	preferably
longer),	the	cheesecake	has	set	up.	The	fat	in	cream	cheese	has	a	relatively	low
softening	temperature,	and	the	high	proportion	of	cream	cheese	to	eggs	makes	it
difficult	for	the	egg	proteins	alone	to	provide	enough	structure	when	the
cheesecake	is	warm.	The	solution	is	to	ensure	the	cream	cheese	is	cold	enough	to
be	firm.	Likewise,	the	curd	will	firm	up	only	when	the	cheesecake	is	thoroughly
chilled.	Only	then	can	the	cake	be	sliced	neatly.



USE	ACID	To	make	a	creamy	curd	with	a	silken	texture,	acid	is	key.	Here,
we	get	it	from	the	lemon	juice.	The	acid	changes	the	electrical	charge	of	the	egg
proteins,	causing	them	to	denature	and	eventually	form	a	gel	(see	“How	Does
Acid	Affect	the	Texture	of	Eggs?").
TIME	TO	TEMPER	Like	other	stovetop	custards,	lemon	curd	combines

eggs	with	hot	liquid.	To	heat	the	eggs	gently,	we	temper	them,	or	slowly	whisk
in	the	hot	liquid	before	putting	the	eggs	on	the	stove.	On	the	stove,	we	stir	the
mixture	constantly	(this	motion	reduces	the	amount	that	the	egg	proteins	will
bond	so	that	our	end	product	is	a	sauce	rather	than	a	solid	mass)	until	it	reaches
170	degrees.	Be	careful	not	to	overcook	the	curd.	While	we	want	to	get	the
maximum	thickening	power	from	the	heat,	we	don’t	want	so	much	that	the	eggs
will	curdle.
COLD	BUTTER	COOLS	DOWN	CURD	Once	the	curd	reaches	170

degrees,	immediately	remove	the	pan	from	the	heat	and	stir	in	cold	cubed	butter,
which	cools	the	curd	and	prevent	curdling	and	overcooking.	The	butter	also
helps	to	create	a	smoother	emulsion.	(For	more	on	emulsions,	see	concept	36.)



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOW	DOES	ACID	AFFECT	THE	TEXTURE	OF	EGGS?

Acids	neutralize	some	of	the	negative	electrical	charges	of	egg	proteins,	causing	them	to	form	a
gel.

When	testing	our	Lemon	Cheesecake	recipe,	we	wondered	how	a	high	proportion	of	eggs	in	the	presence	of
a	relatively	small	amount	of	liquid	could	produce	the	creamy	silken	texture	of	lemon	curd,	while	the	same
proportion	of	eggs	and	cream,	for	example,	would	simply	scramble.	What	was	the	difference?

We	suspected	it	had	something	to	do	with	the	strength	of	the	acid.	So	we	did	a	little	experiment	to	test
this	hypothesis.	We	placed	an	egg	in	each	of	three	separate	pans	over	medium	heat	and	added	2	tablespoons
of	rice	wine	vinegar	to	one	pan,	2	tablespoons	of	lemon	juice	to	the	second	pan,	and	the	same	amount	of
water	to	the	third	pan.	The	egg	stirred	with	weaker	vinegar	cooked	quickly	and	remained	pale	yellow	and
very	creamy.	The	egg	stirred	with	stronger	lemon	juice	turned	a	more	lemony	yellow,	took	longer	to	cook,
and,	though	it	also	remained	creamy,	formed	a	more	solid	gel	than	the	egg	cooked	with	vinegar.	The	egg
stirred	with	plain	water	took	almost	twice	as	long	to	cook	as	the	first	egg	and	contained	distinctly
coagulated	bits	of	bright	yellow	egg—just	like	scrambled	eggs.

Egg	proteins	are	tangled	chains	of	amino	acids.	Each	chain	carries	an	abundance	of	negative	electrical
charges,	which	cause	the	chains	to	repel	each	other.	Applying	heat	causes	each	protein	chain	to	unravel,
exposing	more	balanced	electrical	charges,	at	which	point	the	chains	are	inclined	to	bond	together	and	form
clumps	of	protein.	In	the	process	of	clumping,	the	amino	acid	molecules	squeeze	out	any	liquid	that	comes
between	them.	This	is	known,	as	we’ve	learned,	as	curdling.

Introducing	an	acid	to	the	egg	proteins	neutralizes	some	of	their	negative	electrical	charges.
Consequently,	when	the	proteins	are	heated	and	unwind	they	do	so	at	a	lower	temperature.	However,	the
altered	electrical	charges	on	the	proteins	cause	them	to	form	a	weak,	soft	gel.	This	creates	a	layer	of	liquid
trapped	between	the	weakly	bonded	ribbons	of	protein,	like	a	sandwich,	producing	the	effect	that	we
pleasantly	experience	with	our	lemon	curd.	(“Curd”	is	a	misnomer	in	this	case.)	The	vinegar	created	a
similar	but	different	effect	because	different	acids	have	different	degrees	of	ability	to	alter	the	charge	on	the
proteins	depending	on	the	strength	of	the	acid.	Thus,	the	stronger	acid	in	lemon	juice,	while	encouraging	an
egg	to	cook	and	form	a	solid,	keeps	the	solid	moist	and	creamy.



VANILLA	ICE	CREAM
MAKES	ABOUT	1	QUART

Two	teaspoons	of	vanilla	extract	can	be	substituted	for	the	vanilla	bean;	stir	the
extract	into	the	cold	custard	in	step	3.	An	instant-read	thermometer	is	critical	for
the	best	results.	Using	a	prechilled	metal	baking	pan	and	working	quickly	in	step
4	will	help	prevent	melting	and	refreezing	of	the	ice	cream	and	will	speed	the
hardening	process.	If	using	a	canister-style	ice	cream	machine,	be	sure	to	freeze
the	empty	canister	for	at	least	24	hours	and	preferably	48	hours	before	churning.
For	self-refrigerating	ice	cream	machines,	prechill	the	canister	by	running	the
machine	for	five	to	10	minutes	before	pouring	in	the	custard.

1				 vanilla	bean
1¾				 cups	heavy	cream
1¼				 cups	whole	milk
½				 cup	plus	2	tablespoons	sugar
				1⁄3 cup	light	corn	syrup
¼				 teaspoon	salt
6				 large	egg	yolks

1.	Place	8-or	9-inch	square	metal	baking	pan	in	freezer.	Cut	vanilla	bean	in
half	lengthwise.	Using	tip	of	paring	knife,	scrape	out	vanilla	seeds.	Combine
vanilla	bean,	seeds,	cream,	milk,	¼	cup	plus	2	tablespoons	sugar,	corn	syrup,	and
salt	in	medium	saucepan.	Heat	over	medium-high	heat,	stirring	occasionally,
until	mixture	is	steaming	steadily	and	registers	175	degrees,	5	to	10	minutes.
Remove	saucepan	from	heat.
2.	While	cream	mixture	heats,	whisk	yolks	and	remaining	¼	cup	sugar

together	in	bowl	until	smooth,	about	30	seconds.	Slowly	whisk	1	cup	heated
cream	mixture	into	egg	yolk	mixture.	Return	mixture	to	saucepan	and	cook	over
medium-low	heat,	stirring	constantly,	until	mixture	thickens	and	registers	180
degrees,	7	to	14	minutes.	Immediately	pour	custard	into	large	bowl	and	let	cool
until	no	longer	steaming,	10	to	20	minutes.	Transfer	1	cup	custard	to	small	bowl.
Cover	both	bowls	with	plastic	wrap.	Place	large	bowl	in	refrigerator	and	small
bowl	in	freezer	and	cool	completely,	at	least	4	hours	or	up	to	24	hours.	(Small
bowl	of	custard	will	freeze	solid.)
3.	Remove	custards	from	refrigerator	and	freezer.	Scrape	frozen	custard	from



small	bowl	into	large	bowl	of	custard.	Stir	occasionally	until	frozen	custard	has
fully	dissolved.	Strain	custard	through	fine-mesh	strainer	and	transfer	to	ice
cream	machine.	Churn	until	mixture	resembles	thick	soft-serve	ice	cream	and
registers	about	21	degrees,	15	to	25	minutes.	Transfer	ice	cream	to	frozen	baking
pan	and	press	plastic	wrap	onto	surface.	Return	to	freezer	until	firm	around
edges,	about	1	hour.
4.	Transfer	ice	cream	to	airtight	container,	pressing	firmly	to	remove	any	air

pockets,	and	freeze	until	firm,	at	least	2	hours.	Serve.	(Ice	cream	can	be	stored
for	up	to	5	days.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
While	you	might	not	think	of	heat	and	eggs	when	making	ice	cream,	eggs	give
homemade	ice	cream	its	silky	texture.	But	heat	the	eggs	and	cream	incorrectly
and	you	get	ice	cream	with	odd	lumps	and	awful	eggy	flavor.	The	quicker	it
freezes,	the	smoother	the	ice	cream,	so	we	speed	up	the	freezing	time	of	our
homemade	Vanilla	Ice	Cream	recipe	by	starting	with	a	colder	base.
Supplementing	the	sugar	with	corn	syrup	gives	us	ice	cream	that	freezes	faster,
remains	hard	at	home-freezer	temperatures,	and	is	free	of	large	ice	crystals.
TEMPER	THE	EGGS	Because	we	are	making	this	custard	on	the	stovetop,

as	we	do	for	Lemon	Curd,	the	techniques	of	a	water	bath	or	a	low-temperature
oven	are	not	available	to	help	us	cook	the	eggs	gently.	Instead,	we	temper	them
by	adding	1	cup	of	the	hot	cream	mixture	to	the	yolks,	slowly	whisking	away.
This	not	only	warms	the	eggs	up	gently,	it	also	dilutes	the	proteins	so	they	are
less	likely	to	bond	so	tightly	that	they	curdle	when	cooking	on	the	stovetop.
COOK	TO	180	DEGREES	Though	on	their	own,	egg	yolks	begin	to	solidify

around	150	degrees,	the	other	ingredients	that	we	add	to	this	custard	change	the
temperature	of	coagulation.	For	example,	milk	dilutes	the	proteins	as	well	as
introduces	some	fat,	both	of	which	raise	the	temperature	at	which	eggs	coagulate
because	in	their	presence	the	proteins	don’t	bump	into	each	other	as	readily.
Sugar	slows	down	protein	unfolding	as	well.	So	together,	the	extra	ingredients	in
our	custard	base	raise	the	coagulation	temperature	of	egg	yolks	to	around	180
degrees.	This	is	why	it’s	so	important	to	cook	the	custard	until	it	reaches	that
point.	Below	that	temperature,	the	egg	proteins	will	not	have	uncoiled	enough	to
form	sufficient	bonds	to	create	the	solid	gel	structure	we	need.	(Make	sure	to
strain	the	custard	before	freezing	to	remove	any	little	bits	that	may	have	curdled
along	the	way.)
SUPER-CHILL	THE	CUSTARD	Smooth	ice	cream	isn’t	technically	less	icy

than	“icy”	ice	cream.	Instead,	its	ice	crystals	are	so	small	that	our	tongues	can’t
detect	them.	One	way	to	encourage	the	creation	of	small	ice	crystals	is	to	freeze
the	ice	cream	base	as	quickly	as	possible.	Fast	freezing,	along	with	agitation,
causes	the	formation	of	thousands	of	tiny	seed	crystals,	which	in	turn	promote
the	formation	of	more	tiny	crystals.	Speed	is	such	an	important	factor	in	ice
cream	making	that	commercial	producers	as	well	as	restaurant	kitchens	spend
tens	of	thousands	of	dollars	on	super-efficient	“continuous	batch”	churners.	The
best	of	these	can	turn	a	40-degree	custard	base	(the	coldest	temperature	it	can
typically	achieve	in	a	refrigerated	environment)	into	soft-serve	ice	cream	in	24
seconds.	Our	canister-style	machine,	on	the	other	hand,	takes	roughly	35



minutes.	No	wonder	our	ice	creams	had	always	been	so	icy!
To	combat	this,	we	start	with	a	colder	base.	After	letting	the	hot	custard	cool

for	a	few	minutes,	we	pop	1	cup	of	it	into	the	freezer	and	let	the	rest	of	the
custard	chill	in	the	fridge	overnight.	The	next	day	we	mix	the	two	together	and
churn	the	blend	(now	a	cool	30	degrees)	in	our	machine	for	a	much	smoother
result.
COMBAT	ICINESS	WITH	CORN	SYRUP	One	key	to	our	ice	cream’s

smoothness	was	to	replace	some	of	the	sugar	with	corn	syrup.	(This	was	after
trying	other	ice-crystal-reducing	ingredients—condensed	and	evaporated	milk,
cornstarch,	gelatin,	pectin,	and	nonfat	dry	milk—to	no	avail.)	This	sweetener	has
a	twofold	effect:	First,	it	is	made	up	of	glucose	molecules	and	large	tangled
chains	of	starch	that	interrupt	the	flow	of	water	molecules	in	a	custard	base.
Since	the	water	molecules	can’t	move	freely,	they	are	less	likely	to	combine	and
form	large	crystals	as	the	ice	cream	freezes.	Second,	corn	syrup	creates	a	higher
freezing	point	in	ice	cream	than	granulated	sugar	does.	Since	the	water	in	ice
cream	made	with	corn	syrup	freezes	at	a	higher	temperature	it	is	less	likely	to
thaw	and	refreeze.	This	makes	the	ice	cream	less	susceptible	to	the	temperature
shifts	inevitable	in	a	home	freezer.	These	shifts	cause	constant	thawing	and
refreezing,	which	creates	large	crystals	even	in	the	smoothest	ice	cream.	Our	ice
cream	stays	smooth	for	nearly	a	week—far	longer	than	most	homemade	ice
creams	do.
HARDEN	FAST	But	we	don’t	stop	there.	For	creamier	results,	we	also

needed	to	figure	out	a	way	to	get	our	already-churned	ice	cream	to	freeze	faster
than	it	had	in	the	past.	With	no	way	to	make	our	freezer	colder,	we	took	a
different	route.	Instead	of	scraping	our	churned	ice	cream	into	a	tall	container
before	placing	it	in	the	freezer,	we	spread	it	into	a	thin	layer	in	a	chilled	square
metal	baking	pan	(metal	conducts	heat	faster	than	glass	or	plastic).	In	an	hour’s
time,	the	ice	cream	firms	up	significantly	and	can	easily	be	scooped	and
transferred	to	an	airtight	container.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
ROLE	OF	SUGAR	IN	FREEZING

The	addition	of	sugar	to	a	frozen	dessert	makes	it	harder	for	water	molecules	to	form	ice
crystals	for	smoother,	creamier	results.

When	we	freeze	water	it	turns	into	a	hard,	impenetrable	block	of	ice.	Why,	when	we	freeze	our	ice	cream
base,	does	it	remain	soft	and	smooth	enough	to	scoop?	It	all	comes	down	to	the	sugar.

A	microscopic	view	of	a	frozen	dessert—like	ice	cream,	sherbet,	sorbet,	or	granita—would	reveal	small
grains	of	ice	lubricated	with	sugar,	fat,	and	bubbles	of	air.	The	simple	churning	of	an	ice	cream	machine	can
add	lots	of	air,	sometimes	as	much	as	doubling	the	volume.	The	other	piece	of	the	chemical	puzzle—the
transformation	of	the	ice	cream	from	liquid	to	solid—is	more	complicated.	Sugar,	it	turns	out,	is	the
mediating	factor	between	the	two.	Water	freezes	at	32	degrees,	but	the	addition	of	sugar	makes	it	harder	for
water	molecules	to	form	ice	crystals	and	thus	lowers	the	freezing	temperature	of	the	mixture.	The	higher	the
sugar	concentration	(that	is,	the	more	sugar	there	is	in	proportion	to	water),	the	greater	this	effect	will	be.	As
the	temperature	of	the	ice	cream	mixture	drops	below	32	degrees,	some	water	starts	to	freeze	into	solid	ice
crystals,	but	the	remaining	water	and	sugar,	which	are	in	syrup	form,	remain	unfrozen.	As	more	water
freezes,	the	sugar	concentration	in	the	remaining	syrup	increases,	making	it	less	and	less	likely	to	freeze.

Unfrozen	sugar,	corn	syrup,	or	sugar	syrup	allows	frozen	desserts	to	be	scooped	straight	from	the
freezer.	(Without	the	sugar,	they	would	be	as	hard	as	ice.)	Sugar	also	reduces	the	size	of	the	ice	crystals,
physically	interfering	with	their	growth.	Smaller	ice	crystals	translate	into	a	less	grainy	texture.	Sugar,	then,
not	only	makes	ice	cream	sweet	but	also	makes	it	smooth	and	scoopable,	as	you	can	see	in	the	photos	below
of	sherbet	made	with	various	amounts	of	sugar.	For	more	on	freezing	and	the	role	of	sugar,	click	here.



	
NO	SUGAR	ADDED
Sherbet	is	hard	and	icy.



	
1	CUP	SUGAR	ADDED
Sherbet	is	somewhat	softer.



	
2	CUPS	SUGAR	ADDED

Sherbet	is	smooth	and	creamy.

	



CONCEPT	20

Starch	Keeps	Eggs	from	Curdling
So	now	we	know	that	we	can	use	low-temperature	ovens,	water	baths,	and
tempering	to	prevent	curdled	eggs	in	baked	desserts.	But	there	are	other	cooking
methods	and	recipes	where	we	need	to	combat	curdled	eggs.	For	a	wide	range	of
dishes	(from	quiche	to	soup	to	pastry	cream)	our	magic	ingredient	is	…	starch.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
As	we’ve	learned,	the	proteins	in	raw	egg	whites	and	yolks	are	long	chains	of
amino	acids	coiled	up	in	balls.	When	cooked,	they	unfurl	and	then	bond	together
to	form	a	solid	network,	or	gel,	with	all	the	water	in	which	they	were	once
floating	now	trapped	inside.
Increasing	temperature	is	one	way	to	make	the	egg	proteins	uncoil	and	bond,

also	known	as	coagulation.	The	rate	at	which	the	proteins	coagulate	is	directly
related	to	the	amount	of	heat	introduced.	If	egg	proteins	are	blasted	with	too
much	heat,	then	the	rate	of	uncoiling	and	bonding	increases	to	the	point	that	the
newly	formed	network	is	so	extensive	and	strong	that	water	is	actually	squeezed
right	out	of	its	tight	molecular	web.	This	is	called	curdling.
There	are	various	ingredients	that	can	affect	the	rate	of	coagulation.	Dairy

dilutes	the	egg	proteins,	preventing	them	from	bumping	into	each	other	and
bonding	so	easily,	thus	raising	the	temperature	at	which	they	coagulate.	Sugar
also	raises	the	coagulation	temperature,	but	it	does	so	by	slowing	down	the
unfolding	of	the	proteins.	(This	is	why	custards	must	be	cooked	to	180	degrees,
rather	than	about	150	degrees,	the	temperature	at	which	eggs	on	their	own
coagulate.	The	added	ingredients	push	the	temperature	a	full	30	degrees	higher.
For	more	on	the	effect	of	sugar	in	eggs,	see	concept	21.)
Stirring	also	affects	the	strength	of	the	protein	network.	Constant	stirring	on

the	stovetop	is	required	for	puddings	and	pastry	cream	to	prevent	overcooking
and	burning,	but	it	also	reduces	the	extent	to	which	the	proteins	bond	into	a	solid
mass.	This	means	that	stirred	custards	form	thinner	custard	sauces,	while	oven-
cooked	custards	form	solid	gels	(for	example,	Creamy	Chocolate	Pudding,
versus	Deep-Dish	Quiche	Lorraine).
But	what	we’ll	concentrate	on	here	is	starch.	Cornstarch	and,	in	some	cases,

flour	are	ingredients	that	affect	how	readily	egg	proteins	will	coagulate,	and
therefore	the	temperature	of	coagulation.	When	added	to	eggs	and	cooked,	starch
granules	release	spindly	threads	of	amylose	that	interfere	with	the	cross-linking
of	proteins,	increasing	the	temperature	at	which	the	eggs	coagulate.	This	plays
an	important	role	in	the	stabilization	of	egg	proteins	when	they’re	heated,
helping	to	prevent	the	clumping	and	curdling	of	eggs	in	creamy	custards	for
quiche,	and	to	keep	the	wisps	of	raw	egg	added	to	a	hot	soup	feathery	and	fine.
This	also	allows	us	to	cook	our	pastry	creams	and	puddings	for	much	longer,	and
to	a	higher	temperature,	than	we	could	without	added	starch,	while	still	avoiding
curdling	the	eggs.	As	a	result,	pudding	becomes	thick	enough	to	mound	on	a



spoon	and	pastry	cream	is	thick	enough	to	slice	through	in	a	tart.



WHEN	STARCH	IS	ADDED	TO	EGGS



	
EGGS	AND	STARCH	When	egg	proteins	are	mixed	with	large	starch	granules,	the	starch	releases	strands



of	amylose,	which	coat	the	proteins,	helping	to	prevent	tight	links	from	forming	as	the	eggs	are	cooked.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	show	the	importance	of	adding	starch	to	eggs	for	stability,	we	ran	a	simple
experiment	based	on	the	classic	French	pastry	cream.	This	recipe	calls	for
heating	2	cups	of	half-and-half	with	6	tablespoons	of	sugar	and	tempering	this
mixture	into	five	egg	yolks	beaten	with	3	tablespoons	of	cornstarch	and	2
tablespoons	of	sugar.	Once	tempered,	the	mixture	is	brought	to	a	full	boil	and
cooked	until	thickened.	We	made	one	batch	following	the	recipe,	and	then	made
the	recipe	again,	this	time	omitting	the	cornstarch.	We	repeated	both	of	these
attempts	twice	and	compared	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
The	pastry	cream	made	with	cornstarch	thickened	into	a	creamy,	smooth,
puddinglike	consistency	with	nary	a	trace	of	curdled	egg.	The	starchless	pastry
cream	broke	into	two	phases,	becoming	a	thin,	watery	base	with	bits	of	curdled
egg	throughout.	Comparing	a	spoonful	of	each	was	telling,	but	the	difference
was	particularly	drastic	when	we	used	a	pastry	brush	to	paint	a	thin	layer	of	each
onto	a	black	board.	The	pastry	cream	made	with	starch	gave	us	a	smooth,	full
stroke,	while	the	pastry	cream	without	starch	brushed	chunky	and	thin.



THE	TAKEAWAY
When	the	eggs	in	pastry	cream	are	heated,	the	granules	of	starch	from	the	added
cornstarch	release	threads	of	amylose,	which	then	coat	the	egg	proteins	and
prevent	them	from	linking	too	tightly,	too	quickly—something	that	can	result	in
curdled	eggs	and,	in	this	case,	a	broken	pastry	cream.
The	lesson?	Starch	is	an	important	element	in	a	diverse	range	of	recipes,	from

pastry	cream	to	chocolate	pudding,	quiche	to	hot	and	sour	soup.	In	all	of	these
recipes	the	eggs	are	exposed	to	high	heat	and/or	prolonged	heat	and	they	will
curdle	if	you	forget	the	starch.



ADD	STARCH	FOR	CREAMY,	NOT	CURDLED,	PASTRY	CREAM

	
STARCH

Our	pastry	cream	made	with	starch	was	creamy	and	smooth.

	
NO	STARCH

Our	pastry	cream	without	starch	was	thin	and	broken.



PAINTING	WITH	PASTRY	CREAM

	
STARCH	When	painted	across	a	black	board,	our	starchy	pastry	cream	made	a	full,	clear	stroke.



	
NO	STARCH	When	we	painted	with	our	starchless	cream,	however,	the	stroke	appeared	broken	and
splotchy.



STARCHES	AT	WORK	
QUICHE
The	rich,	eggy	custard	of	quiche	is	laden	with	additional	fillings—from	bacon	to
onions	to	cheese.	As	we’ve	learned,	custards	are	delicate,	and	these	add-ons
have	the	potential	to	wreak	havoc.	Cornstarch,	with	its	ability	to	interfere	with
the	clumping	and	curdling	of	egg	proteins,	is	a	lifesaver.



DEEP-DISH	QUICHE	LORRAINE
SERVES	8	TO	10

To	prevent	the	crust	from	sagging	during	blind-baking,	make	sure	it	overhangs
the	pan’s	edge	and	use	plenty	of	pie	weights	(3	to	4	cups).	Be	sure	to	use	a	cake
pan	with	at	least	2-inch-tall	straight	sides.	To	reheat	the	whole	quiche,	place	it
on	a	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	the	middle	rack	of	a	325-degree	oven	for	20
minutes;	slices	can	be	reheated	in	a	375-degree	oven	for	10	minutes.	This	recipe
uses	a	total	of	nine	eggs;	one	egg	is	separated	and	the	white	is	used	for	the	crust,
while	the	yolk	is	used	in	the	filling.

CRUST
1¾				 cups	(8¾	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
½				 teaspoon	salt
12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	and	chilled
3				 tablespoons	sour	cream

4–6				 tablespoons	ice	water
1				 large	egg	white,	lightly	beaten

CUSTARD	FILLING
8				 slices	thick-cut	bacon,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
2				 onions,	chopped	fine

1½				 tablespoons	cornstarch
1½				 cups	whole	milk
8				 large	eggs	plus	1	large	yolk

1½				 cups	heavy	cream
½				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
				1⁄8 teaspoon	ground	nutmeg
				1⁄8 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
6				 ounces	Gruyère	cheese,	shredded	(1½	cups)

1.	FOR	THE	CRUST:	Process	flour	and	salt	in	food	processor	until
combined,	about	3	seconds.	Add	butter	and	pulse	until	butter	is	size	of	large



peas,	about	10	pulses.
2.	Combine	sour	cream	and	¼	cup	ice	water	in	small	bowl.	Add	half	of	sour

cream	mixture	to	flour	mixture;	pulse	3	times.	Repeat	with	remaining	sour	cream
mixture.	Pinch	dough	with	fingers;	if	dough	is	floury,	dry,	and	does	not	hold
together,	add	1	to	2	tablespoons	more	ice	water	and	pulse	until	dough	forms
large	clumps	and	no	dry	flour	remains,	3	to	5	pulses.
3.	Turn	dough	out	onto	counter	and	flatten	into	6-inch	disk;	wrap	disk	in

plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	until	firm	but	not	hard,	1	to	2	hours,	before	rolling.
(Dough	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	1	day;	let	stand	at	room	temperature	for	15
minutes	before	rolling.)
4.	Cut	two	16-inch	lengths	of	aluminum	foil.	Arrange	foil	pieces,

perpendicular	to	each	other,	in	9-inch	round	cake	pan,	pushing	them	into	corners
and	up	sides	of	pan;	press	overhang	against	outside	of	pan.	Spray	foil	lightly
with	vegetable	oil	spray.
5.	Roll	out	dough	on	generously	floured	counter	to	15-inch	circle	about	¼

inch	thick.	Roll	dough	loosely	around	rolling	pin	and	unroll	into	prepared	cake
pan.	Working	around	circumference,	ease	dough	into	pan	by	gently	lifting	edge
of	dough	with	1	hand	while	pressing	into	pan	bottom	with	other.	Trim	any	dough
that	extends	more	than	1	inch	over	edge	of	pan.	Patch	any	cracks	or	holes	with
dough	scraps	as	needed.	Refrigerate	any	remaining	dough	scraps.	Refrigerate
dough-lined	pan	until	dough	is	firm,	about	30	minutes,	then	freeze	for	20
minutes.
6.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	375	degrees.

Line	dough	with	foil	or	parchment	paper	and	fill	completely	with	pie	weights,
gently	pressing	weights	into	corners	of	shell.	Bake	on	rimmed	baking	sheet	until
exposed	edges	of	dough	are	beginning	to	brown	but	bottom	is	still	light	in	color,
30	to	40	minutes.	Carefully	remove	foil	and	pie	weights.	If	any	new	holes	or
cracks	have	formed	in	dough,	patch	with	reserved	scraps.	Return	shell	to	oven
and	bake	until	bottom	is	golden	brown,	15	to	20	minutes	longer.	Remove	shell
from	oven	and	brush	interior	with	egg	white.	Set	aside	while	preparing	filling.
Reduce	oven	temperature	to	350	degrees.
7.	FOR	THE	CUSTARD	FILLING:	Cook	bacon	in	12-inch	skillet	over

medium	heat	until	crisp,	5	to	7	minutes.	Transfer	to	paper	towel–lined	plate	and
discard	all	but	2	tablespoons	bacon	fat	from	skillet.	Return	to	medium	heat,	add
onions,	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	softened	and	lightly	browned,	about
12	minutes.	Set	aside	to	cool	slightly.



8.	Whisk	cornstarch	and	3	tablespoons	milk	together	in	large	bowl	to	dissolve
cornstarch.	Whisk	in	remaining	milk,	eggs,	egg	yolk,	cream,	salt,	pepper,
nutmeg,	and	cayenne	until	smooth.
9.	Scatter	onions,	bacon,	and	cheese	evenly	over	crust.	Gently	pour	custard

mixture	over	filling.	Using	fork,	push	filling	ingredients	down	into	custard	and
drag	gently	through	custard	to	dislodge	air	bubbles.	Gently	tap	pan	on	counter	to
dislodge	any	remaining	air	bubbles.
10.	Bake	until	top	of	quiche	is	lightly	browned,	toothpick	inserted	in	center

comes	out	clean,	and	center	registers	170	degrees,	1¼	to	1½	hours.	Transfer	to
wire	rack	and	let	stand	until	cool	to	touch,	about	2	hours.
11.	When	ready	to	serve,	use	sharp	paring	knife	to	remove	any	crust	that

extends	beyond	edge	of	pan.	Lift	foil	overhang	from	sides	of	pan	and	remove
quiche	from	pan;	gently	slide	thin-bladed	spatula	between	quiche	and	foil	to
loosen,	then	slide	quiche	onto	serving	plate.	Cut	into	wedges.	Serve	warm	or	at
room	temperature.

DEEP-DISH	QUICHE	WITH	LEEKS	AND	BLUE	CHEESE
Omit	bacon	and	onions.	Melt	1	tablespoon	unsalted	butter	in	12-inch	skillet	over
medium	heat.	Add	4	large	leeks,	white	and	light	green	parts	only,	halved
lengthwise,	sliced	¼	inch	thick,	and	washed	thoroughly;	cook	until	softened,	10
to	12	minutes.	Increase	heat	to	medium-high;	continue	to	cook,	stirring
constantly,	until	leeks	are	beginning	to	brown,	about	5	minutes.	Transfer	leeks	to
plate	lined	with	triple	layer	of	paper	towels;	press	with	double	layer	of	paper
towels	to	remove	excess	moisture.	Increase	salt	in	filling	to	1	teaspoon.
Substitute	1½	cups	crumbled	blue	cheese	for	Gruyère;	scatter	blue	cheese	and
sautéed	leeks	evenly	over	crust	before	adding	custard.	Reduce	baking	time	to	1
to	1¼	hours.

DEEP-DISH	QUICHE	WITH	SAUSAGE,	BROCCOLI	RABE,	AND
MOZZARELLA

Be	sure	to	use	supermarket-style	low-moisture	mozzarella	in	this	variation;	fresh
mozzarella	will	make	for	a	too-wet	filling.

Omit	bacon	and	onions.	Cook	8	ounces	hot	or	sweet	Italian	sausage,	casings
removed,	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat,	breaking	sausage	into	½-inch



pieces,	until	no	longer	pink,	5	to	7	minutes.	Transfer	to	paper	towel–lined	plate
and	discard	all	but	2	tablespoons	fat	from	skillet.	Return	skillet	to	medium	heat,
add	8	ounces	broccoli	rabe,	trimmed	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces,	and	cook	until
slightly	softened,	about	6	minutes.	Transfer	rabe	to	plate	lined	with	triple	layer
of	paper	towels;	press	with	double	layer	of	paper	towels	to	remove	excess
moisture.	Increase	salt	in	filling	to	1	teaspoon.	Substitute	1½	cups	shredded
whole-milk	mozzarella	cheese	for	Gruyère;	scatter	mozzarella,	cooked	sausage,
and	broccoli	rabe	evenly	over	crust	before	adding	custard.	Reduce	baking	time
to	1	to	1¼	hours.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
There’s	nothing	wrong	with	classic	quiche,	but	sometimes	we	crave	a	thick-
crusted	quiche	brimming	with	a	luxuriously	creamy	custard	and	a	healthy	dose
of	perfectly	suspended	fillings.	To	make	this	work,	we	change	our	bakeware,	use
a	generous	amount	of	crust,	and	mitigate	the	curdling	effects	of	onions	in	the
filling	with	cornstarch.
CHANGE	THE	BAKEWARE	For	us,	a	real	quiche	is	a	tall	quiche.	But	to

get	a	good	and	tall	quiche,	we	need	to	use	a	lot	of	custard.	And	a	lot	of	custard
does	not	fit	in	a	traditional	tart	pan.	We	could	use	a	springform	pan,	but	the
custard	has	a	tendency	to	leak	through	the	thin	gap	between	the	springform’s
base	and	ring,	not	to	mention	that	fitting	the	pastry	dough	up	the	exceptionally
tall	sides	without	tearing	takes	some	practice.	This	is	why	we	use	a	9	by	2-inch
round	cake	pan.	It’s	tall	enough	to	contain	all	the	custard	we	want	and	won’t
leak.
PREVENT	LEAKS	For	extra	insurance	against	leaks	and	tearing,	we	employ

three	tricks	for	baking	a	quiche	in	a	cake	pan.	First,	we	line	the	pan	with	a	foil
“sling”	to	help	extract	the	pastry	from	this	mold.	Second,	we	roll	out	a	15-inch
round	of	pastry	and	drape	a	generous	amount	of	dough	up	and	over	the	sides	of
the	pan.	This	helps	to	anchor	the	crust	in	place,	preventing	it	from	sagging	or
shrinking	when	prebaked.	And,	third,	we	glaze	the	baked	crust	with	an	egg-
white	wash	before	adding	the	filling,	which	helps	seal	any	would-be	cracks.	Rich
with	butter,	supremely	flaky,	and	strong	enough	to	resist	turning	soggy,	this	crust
is	the	perfect	bowl	for	the	satiny	custard.
MAKE	THE	CUSTARD	We	wanted	a	quivering,	barely	set	pudding	for	our

quiche	custard.	But	like	all	gels,	custard	is	a	delicate	matter,	and	its	success
depends	on	just	the	right	ratio	of	eggs	to	liquid	(including	any	excess	moisture
exuded	by	watery	ingredients	like	onions),	plus	gentle,	even	heat.	Too	few	eggs
and	the	custard	is	loose	and	runny,	while	too	many	lend	it	a	scrambled-egg	flavor
and	rubbery	chew.	We	settle	on	eight	whole	eggs	plus	the	extra	yolk	left	over
from	sealing	the	crust	and	3	cups	of	dairy.
USE	CORNSTARCH	The	tricky	part	comes	with	adding	the	fillings:	bacon,

onions,	and	cheese.	When	onions	enter	the	equation,	the	acids	they	release	alter
the	electrical	charges	on	the	egg	proteins,	causing	them	to	clump	together	so
tightly	that	they	squeeze	out	the	moisture	held	between	them.	Starch	granules	in
cornstarch	interfere	with	this	clumping	by	acting	as	a	barrier	between	the
proteins,	which	prevents	them	from	squeezing	out	liquid	and	results	in	a	smooth
and	creamy	custard.	Thanks	to	the	cornstarch,	this	quiche	can	hold	a	full	2	cups



of	onions	with	no	ill	effects.



STARCHES	AT	WORK	
SOUP
Cornstarch	is	a	traditional	thickener	in	hot	and	sour	soup,	but	it	can	do	more
than	thicken.	Cornstarch	is	the	reason	we	can	get	our	egg,	dropped	carefully	into
the	finished	soup,	to	form	perfect	wisps.



HOT	AND	SOUR	SOUP
SERVES	6	TO	8

To	make	slicing	the	pork	chop	easier,	freeze	it	for	15	minutes.	We	prefer	the
distinctive	flavor	of	Chinese	black	vinegar;	look	for	it	in	Asian	supermarkets.	If
you	can’t	find	it,	a	combination	of	red	wine	vinegar	and	balsamic	vinegar
approximates	its	flavor.	This	soup	is	very	spicy.	For	a	less	spicy	soup,	omit	the
chili	oil	altogether	or	add	only	1	teaspoon.

7				 ounces	extra-firm	tofu,	drained
¼				 cup	soy	sauce
1				 teaspoon	toasted	sesame	oil

3½				 tablespoons	cornstarch
1				 (6-ounce)	boneless	pork	chop,	½	inch	thick,	trimmed	and	cut	into	1	by	1⁄8-inch	matchsticks
3				 tablespoons	plus	1	teaspoon	cold	water
1				 large	egg
6				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 (5-ounce)	can	bamboo	shoots,	sliced	lengthwise	into	1⁄8-inch-thick	strips
4				 ounces	shiitake	mushrooms,	stemmed	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
5				 tablespoons	Chinese	black	vinegar	or	1	tablespoon	red	wine	vinegar	plus	1	tablespoon	balsamic

vinegar
2				 teaspoons	chili	oil
1				 teaspoon	ground	white	pepper
3				 scallions,	sliced	thin

1.	Place	tofu	in	paper	towel–lined	pie	plate,	top	with	heavy	plate,	and	weight
with	2	heavy	cans.	Let	tofu	drain	until	it	has	released	about	½	cup	liquid,	about
15	minutes.
2.	Whisk	1	tablespoon	soy	sauce,	sesame	oil,	and	1	teaspoon	cornstarch

together	in	medium	bowl.	Add	pork	to	bowl,	toss	to	coat,	and	let	marinate	for	at
least	10	minutes	or	up	to	30	minutes.
3.	Combine	3	tablespoons	cornstarch	with	3	tablespoons	water	in	small	bowl.

Mix	remaining	½	teaspoon	cornstarch	with	remaining	1	teaspoon	water	in
second	small	bowl.	Add	egg	and	beat	with	fork	until	combined.



4.	Bring	broth	to	boil	in	large	saucepan	over	medium-high	heat.	Reduce	heat
to	medium-low,	add	bamboo	shoots	and	mushrooms,	and	simmer	until
mushrooms	are	just	tender,	about	5	minutes.	While	broth	simmers,	cut	tofu	into
½-inch	cubes.	Add	tofu	and	pork,	with	its	marinade,	to	pan,	stirring	to	separate
any	pieces	of	pork	that	stick	together.	Continue	to	simmer	until	pork	is	no	longer
pink,	about	2	minutes.
5.	Stir	cornstarch	mixture	to	recombine,	then	add	to	soup	and	increase	heat	to

medium-high.	Cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	soup	thickens	and	turns
translucent,	about	1	minute.	Stir	in	vinegar,	chili	oil,	pepper,	and	remaining	3
tablespoons	soy	sauce	and	turn	off	heat.
6.	Without	stirring	soup,	use	soup	spoon	to	slowly	drizzle	very	thin	streams	of

egg	mixture	into	pot	in	circular	motion.	Let	soup	sit	for	1	minute,	then	return
saucepan	to	medium-high	heat.	Bring	soup	to	gentle	boil,	then	immediately
remove	from	heat.	Gently	stir	soup	once	to	evenly	distribute	egg.	Ladle	soup
into	bowls,	top	with	scallions,	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Authentic	versions	of	this	soup	call	for	ingredients	like	mustard	pickle,	pig’s-foot
tendon,	and	dried	sea	cucumber.	To	get	an	authentically	spicy,	rich,	and	complex
version	that	uses	only	ingredients	from	our	local	supermarket,	we	create	a	“hot”
side	for	our	soup	using	two	heat	sources—a	full	teaspoon	of	distinctive,
penetrating	white	pepper	and	a	little	chili	oil.	To	create	the	“sour”	side,	we
prefer	Chinese	black	vinegar	but	find	a	combination	of	balsamic	and	red	wine
vinegar	to	be	an	acceptable	substitute.	Cornstarch	pulls	triple	duty	here,	going
into	our	slurry	to	thicken	the	soup,	into	the	marinade	to	keep	the	meat	tender
when	it	is	cooked,	and	getting	beaten	with	the	egg	to	keep	the	egg	light,	wispy,
and	cohesive.
TOSS	PORK	WITH	CORNSTARCH	In	addition	to	its	role	as	thickener,

cornstarch	is	believed	by	many	Chinese	cooks	to	play	the	part	of	protein
tenderizer.	We	tested	this	theory	by	preparing	two	batches	of	soup,	adding
cornstarch	to	a	simple	soy	sauce	marinade	for	one	julienned	pork	chop	and
omitting	it	in	the	marinade	for	another.	The	cornstarch-marinated	pork	was
noticeably	more	tender.	The	cornstarch	clings	to	and	coats	the	meat	during
cooking,	creating	a	protective	sheath	that	slows	the	loss	of	moisture,	thus
preventing	our	moist,	tender	pork	from	becoming	dry,	chalky	pork	jerky.
BUILD	HOT	AND	SOUR	FLAVOR	The	heat	in	hot	and	sour	soup

traditionally	comes	not	from	fresh	chiles	but	from	ground	white	peppercorns.
Unlike	chiles,	pepper	delivers	direct	spiciness	but	doesn’t	leave	a	lingering	burn
in	its	wake.	We	layer	this	with	chili	oil—a	bit	unconventional	for	this	recipe,	but
a	great	support	of	the	white-hot	heat	of	the	pepper,	laying	the	groundwork	for	the
opposing	flavor	of	vinegar.	The	traditional	vinegar,	or	sour	component,	in	this
soup	is	Chinese	black	vinegar,	which	is	made	from	toasted	rice.	Looking	for	a
more	easily	obtainable	substitute,	we	settled	on	a	combination	of	fruity	balsamic
and	robust	red	wine	vinegar.
PICK	YOUR	VEGGIES	Almost	all	authentic	hot	and	sour	soups	start	with

reconstituted	dried	wood	ear	mushrooms	and	lily	buds.	Wood	ear	mushrooms,
also	known	as	tree	ear	or	cloud	ear,	offer	snappy	texture	but	little	else.	We	tried
swapping	in	commonly	available	dried	porcini	and	shiitake	mushrooms,	but	their
woodsy	notes	had	a	negative	influence	on	the	flavor	equilibrium.	Fresh,	mild
shiitake	mushrooms	are	a	better	choice.	Lily	buds,	or	golden	needles,	are	the
dried	buds	of	the	tiger	lily	flower.	Tangy,	mildly	crunchy	canned	bamboo	shoots
closely	approximate	the	musky,	sour	flavor	of	lily	buds	and	add	textural	variety
(a	crisp	foil	for	the	fluffy	wisps	of	egg).



PRESS	THE	TOFU	As	for	the	tofu,	we	had	one	basic	question:	Must	it	be
pressed?	The	answer	was	a	simple	yes.	Spongelike	tofu	is	full	of	water,	and
weighting	it	beneath	a	heavy	plate	yields	firmer,	cleaner-tasting	cubes.
STABILIZE	THE	EGG	After	the	pork	is	cooked	and	the	soup	thickened,

beaten	egg	is	drizzled	in	to	create	another	complementary	texture:	fine,	feathery
shreds.	But	if	the	egg	doesn’t	set	immediately,	it	can	blend	into	the	soup	and
muddy	the	appearance	of	the	broth.	To	make	this	step	foolproof,	we	use	vinegar
in	the	soup,	and	cornstarch	with	the	egg.	The	vinegar,	which	neutralizes	some	of
the	electrical	charges	on	the	egg	proteins	so	they	will	combine	and	bond
together,	instantly	coagulates	the	egg,	helping	it	to	form	visible	feathery	threads
rather	than	disperse	so	quickly	that	the	individual	proteins	are	almost	invisible	in
the	hot	soup.	The	added	cornstarch	is	the	miracle	worker:	The	cornstarch
molecules	stabilize	the	liquid	proteins,	preventing	them	from	contracting
excessively	in	the	hot	liquid.
To	add	the	egg,	make	sure	to	turn	off	the	heat	so	the	surface	of	the	soup	is

calm,	and	then	use	a	spoon	to	drizzle	egg	onto	the	surface	in	a	thin	stream.	Let	it
sit	for	1	minute.	Then	turn	the	heat	back	on	and	stir	gently	to	finish	cooking,
breaking	it	into	light,	soft	ribbons.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TOASTED	SESAME	OIL

Toasted	sesame	oil	is	used	as	a	flavoring	agent,	rather	than	a	cooking	oil.

Also	referred	to	as	dark	or	Asian	sesame	oil,	toasted	sesame	oil	is	produced	from	deeply	roasted	sesame
seeds,	which	give	it	a	dark	brown	color	and	rich,	perfumed	flavor.	It	should	not	be	confused	with	cold-
pressed	sesame	oil,	which	is	produced	from	raw	seeds	and	has	a	very	light	color	and	little	aroma	or	flavor.
Whereas	cold-pressed	sesame	oil	may	be	used	interchangeably	with	other	vegetable	oils—indeed,	even	to
cook	foods—toasted	sesame	oil,	which	has	a	low	smoke	point	(it	burns	easily),	is	used	not	to	cook	foods	but
as	a	flavoring	agent	to	give	them	a	distinctive	character.	Because	toasted	sesame	oil	is	particularly	prone	to
damage	from	heat	and	light,	it	should	be	purchased	only	in	tinted	glass	bottles	and	stored	in	the	refrigerator.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	FLAVOR	OF	SCALLIONS

White	and	green	areas	of	scallions	differ	in	texture	and	flavor.

Color	aside,	is	there	a	difference	between	the	green	and	white	parts	of	the	scallion?
To	find	out,	we	began	by	tasting	raw	scallions.	Tasters	described	distinctly	different	flavor	profiles	for

the	white	and	green	parts.	The	white	section	has	a	delicate,	sweet	taste	similar	to	shallots,	while	the	green
portion	has	grassy	notes	and	a	peppery	bite.	When	we	used	the	raw	scallions	in	salsa,	tasters	were	still	able
to	identify	the	same	distinguishing	characteristics;	which	scallion	parts	worked	better	depended	on
individual	taste.	Finally,	we	cooked	scallions	in	a	pork	stir-fry.	Tasters	didn’t	notice	major	flavor
differences,	but	the	textures	varied:	The	whites	softened	nicely	while	the	greens	wilted,	taking	on	a	limp
texture	that	some	tasters	didn’t	like.

So	if	texture	is	an	issue,	cook	only	the	white	part	and	reserve	the	green	portion	to	use	as	a	garnish.	When
it	comes	to	using	the	scallions	raw,	choose	the	white	part	for	mild	flavor	and	add	the	green	for	a	strong,
peppery	taste.

And	how	do	scallions	get	their	flavor?	As	with	onions	(see	concept	31),	when	scallions	are	chopped,
enzymes	within	their	cells	are	able	to	come	in	contact	with	sulfur-bearing	amino	acids	to	produce	their
familiar	oniony	flavor.	But	don’t	chop	them	in	advance.	That	spry	scallion	bite	that	adds	mild	green	onion
sweetness	to	soups,	salads,	and	the	like	is	supplanted	by	a	dull,	soapy	flavor	when	the	scallions	are
prechopped	and	left	to	await	sprinkling	or	simmering.



STARCHES	AT	WORK	
PUDDING	AND	PASTRY	CREAM
In	stovetop	custards	and	creams,	we	often	temper	our	eggs,	or	slowly	whisk	a
small	amount	of	hot	liquid	into	the	cold	eggs	before	putting	the	mixture	on	the
stove,	to	more	gradually	bring	them	up	to	temperature.	We	also	add	a	thickener.
Cornstarch,	as	we’ve	seen,	is	effective.	But	sometimes,	as	in	our	Pastry	Cream,
flour	works,	too.	Flour,	which	is	about	75	percent	wheat	starch,	is	similar	to
cornstarch,	though	less	concentrated.	We	simply	need	to	use	a	little	bit	more.



CREAMY	CHOCOLATE	PUDDING
SERVES	6

We	prefer	this	recipe	made	with	60	percent	bittersweet	chocolate	(our	favorite
brands	are	Ghirardelli	Bittersweet	Chocolate	Baking	Bar	and	Callebaut	Intense
Dark	Chocolate).	Using	a	chocolate	with	a	higher	cacao	percentage	will	result
in	a	thicker	pudding.	Low-fat	milk	(1	percent	or	2	percent)	may	be	substituted	for
the	whole	milk	with	a	small	sacrifice	in	richness.	Do	not	use	skim	milk	as	a
substitute.

2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
½				 teaspoon	instant	espresso	powder
½				 cup	(3½	ounces)	sugar
3				 tablespoons	Dutch-processed	cocoa
2				 tablespoons	cornstarch
¼				 teaspoon	salt
3				 large	egg	yolks
½				 cup	heavy	cream
2½				 cups	whole	milk
4				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	chopped	fine
5				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	8	pieces

1.	Stir	together	vanilla	and	espresso	in	bowl;	set	aside.	Whisk	sugar,	cocoa,
cornstarch,	and	salt	together	in	large	saucepan.	Whisk	in	egg	yolks	and	cream
until	fully	incorporated,	making	sure	to	scrape	corners	of	saucepan.	Whisk	in
milk	until	incorporated.
2.	Place	saucepan	over	medium	heat;	cook,	whisking	constantly,	until	mixture

is	thickened	and	bubbling	over	entire	surface,	5	to	8	minutes.	Cook	for	30
seconds	longer,	remove	from	heat,	add	chocolate	and	butter,	and	whisk	until
melted	and	fully	incorporated.	Whisk	in	vanilla	mixture.
3.	Strain	pudding	through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	bowl.	Place	lightly	greased

parchment	paper	against	surface	of	pudding	and	place	in	refrigerator	to	cool,	at
least	4	hours.	Serve.	(Pudding	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Homemade	chocolate	pudding	often	suffers	from	either	lackluster	chocolate
flavor,	caused	by	a	dearth	of	chocolate,	or	a	grainy	texture,	caused	by	too	much
cocoa	butter.	We	were	after	chocolate	pudding	that	tasted	deeply	of	chocolate
and	was	thickened	to	a	perfectly	silky,	creamy	texture.	We	found	that	using	a
moderate	amount	of	bittersweet	chocolate	in	combination	with	unsweetened
cocoa	and	espresso	powder	helped	us	achieve	maximum	chocolate	flavor,	while
cornstarch	proved	the	right	thickener.	Salt	and	vanilla	enhance	the	chocolate
flavor	even	more.
USE	THE	RIGHT	DAIRY	Though	most	pudding	recipes	call	for	only	milk,

we	find	that	swapping	out	a	half	a	cup	of	milk	for	heavy	cream	adds	a	lush
creaminess	that	we	love.
ADD	EGGS	FOR	RICHNESS	A	pudding	made	with	cornstarch	only	is	a

hollow	affair,	not	as	texturally	dense	and	creamy	as	we	prefer.	Adding	eggs
lends	richness	and	body.	Here,	we	use	three	egg	yolks	and	no	whites.
MAKE	IT	SILKY	As	we	developed	our	pudding	recipe,	we	found	that	there

was	a	limit	to	how	much	bittersweet	chocolate	we	could	add	before	the	texture
turned	gritty—but	that	we	could	continue	to	add	chocolate	in	the	form	of	cocoa
powder	without	affecting	smoothness.	Why	should	this	be	the	case?	The	culprit
in	causing	grittiness,	it	turns	out,	is	cocoa	butter—and	solid	chocolate	has	far
more	of	it	than	cocoa	powder.	Chocolate	is	manufactured	so	that	its	fat	remains
solid	at	room	temperature	but	literally	melts	in	the	mouth.	When	melted
chocolate	is	allowed	to	resolidify,	however,	the	crystalline	structure	of	its	cocoa
butter	is	reorganized.	It	becomes	more	stable	and	melts	much	more	slowly	at
close	to	body	temperature.	If	present	in	high	enough	amounts,	this	more	stable
form	of	cocoa	butter	can	create	the	grainy	texture	we	detected	in	the	pudding.
Cocoa	powder	adds	more	chocolate	flavor	without	increasing	the	overall	amount
of	cocoa	butter	in	the	pudding.
THICKEN	WITH	CHOCOLATE	Using	chocolate	with	a	higher	cacao

percentage	will	result	in	a	thicker	pudding.	This	is	because	chocolate	with	a
higher	cacao	percentage	has	more	cocoa	butter	and	cocoa	solids,	both	of	which
act	as	thickeners,	just	as	more	fat	in	heavy	cream	makes	it	much	thicker	than
milk.	The	cocoa	solids	suspended	in	the	fat	also	add	to	the	thickening	effect,	just
as	a	slurry	of	flour	in	water	is	thicker	than	plain	water.	For	all	these	reasons,
make	sure	to	use	bittersweet	chocolate	in	this	recipe.
FLAVOR	WITH	ESPRESSO	POWDER	A	little	bit	of	coffee	flavor	in	our



chocolate	pudding	serves	to	reinforce,	but	not	compete	with,	the	flavor	of	the
chocolate,	enhancing	its	roasted	undertones.



PASTRY	CREAM
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS

This	Pastry	Cream	can	be	used	with	the	Boston	Cream	Cupcakes	recipe.

2				 cups	half-and-half
6				 large	egg	yolks,	room	temperature
½				 cup	(3½	ounces)	sugar
					 Pinch	salt
¼				 cup	(1¼	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	4	pieces	and	chilled

1½				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract

1.	Heat	half-and-half	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium	heat	until	just
simmering.	Meanwhile,	whisk	egg	yolks,	sugar,	and	salt	together	in	medium
bowl	until	smooth.	Add	flour	to	yolk	mixture	and	whisk	until	incorporated.
Remove	half-and-half	from	heat	and,	whisking	constantly,	slowly	add	½	cup	to
yolk	mixture	to	temper.	Whisking	constantly,	return	tempered	yolk	mixture	to
half-and-half	in	saucepan.
2.	Return	saucepan	to	medium	heat	and	cook,	whisking	constantly,	until

mixture	thickens	slightly,	about	1	minute.	Reduce	heat	to	medium-low	and
continue	to	simmer,	whisking	constantly,	for	8	minutes.
3.	Increase	heat	to	medium	and	cook,	whisking	vigorously,	until	bubbles	burst

on	surface,	1	to	2	minutes.	Remove	saucepan	from	heat;	whisk	in	butter	and
vanilla	until	butter	is	melted	and	incorporated.	Strain	pastry	cream	through	fine-
mesh	strainer	set	over	medium	bowl.	Press	lightly	greased	parchment	paper
directly	on	surface	and	refrigerate	until	set,	at	least	2	hours	or	up	to	24	hours.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	prefer	to	use	half-and-half	as	the	dairy	in	our	pastry	cream.	It	gives	us	a
nice,	full	taste	without	feeling	either	too	light	or	too	rich.	Combined	with	flour	as
a	thickening	agent	and	the	body-adding	power	of	butter,	half-and-half	gives	us	a
lush	and	foolproof	custard	sauce.
TEMPER	THE	EGGS	Add	a	portion	of	the	heated	dairy	to	the	cold	eggs	to

gently	raise	their	temperature	before	cooking	on	the	stove—a	method	that
reduces	the	risk	of	curdling.	(For	more	on	tempering,	see	concept	19.)
HEAT	FULLY	Pastry	cream	is	an	anomaly	among	custards.	Although

overheating	a	typical	custard	can	lead	to	curdling,	it’s	vital	to	bring	pastry	cream
almost	to	a	boil.	Doing	so	sets	the	eggs	and	activates	(gelatinizes)	the	starch,
thereby	ensuring	the	proper	consistency.
As	a	typical	custard	heats,	the	egg	proteins	unravel	and	intertwine,	eventually

forming	cross-links	that	can	result	in	coagulation,	or	even	curdling.	Why	is
pastry	cream	different?	Because	it	contains	starch,	which	affects	texture	in	two
ways.	First,	the	starch	interferes	with	the	cross-linking	of	egg	proteins,	thus
delaying	coagulation.	But	the	main	reason	that	pastry	cream	must	be	heated	even
more	is	an	enzyme	in	the	egg	yolks	called	amylase.	If	left	unchecked,	amylase
can	break	down	the	starch	and	make	the	pastry	cream	runny.	Whether	spread
into	a	tart	shell,	sandwiched	between	cake	layers,	or	piped	into	éclairs,	pastry
cream	must	be	both	creamy	and	stiff.	The	starch	in	pastry	cream	allows	the
mixture	to	be	brought	almost	to	a	boil,	which	destroys	the	amylase	in	the	egg
yolks,	at	the	same	time	keeping	the	eggs	from	scrambling.	When	it’s	hot	enough,
three	or	four	bubbles	will	burst	on	the	surface,	its	temperature	will	read	200
degrees	on	an	instant-read	thermometer,	and	it	will	appear	thick	and	glossy.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
FLOUR	OR	CORNSTARCH?	A	THICKENER	FACE-OFF

Flour	is	a	less	potent	thickener	than	cornstarch,	but	when	it	comes	to	our	Pastry	Cream,	a
much	more	reliable	one.

When	developing	this	pastry	cream	recipe,	too	often	we	found	that	the	custard,	which	is	made	by	heating
half-and-half	with	egg	yolks	and	cornstarch,	failed	to	thicken	properly.	Would	flour	be	more	reliable?

We	made	multiple	batches	of	pastry	cream	thickened	with	3	tablespoons	of	cornstarch	according	to	our
recipe,	and	another	set	thickened	with	4	tablespoons	of	flour	(a	less	potent	thickener	than	cornstarch),	which
we	cooked	longer	to	remove	the	floury	taste.

The	flour-thickened	batches	of	pastry	cream	set	up	and	held	perfectly	every	time,	while	those	containing
cornstarch	occasionally	did	not	set	at	all	or	even	thinned	out	once	they	had	thickened.

When	starch	is	heated	in	water,	its	granules	absorb	water,	swell,	and	eventually	burst,	releasing	a	starch
molecule	called	amylose	that	diffuses	throughout	the	solution,	trapping	additional	water	and	forming	a
gelatinous	network.	Because	cornstarch	is	a	pure	starch,	it	contains	far	more	amylose	than	flour	(which	is
only	about	75	percent	starch),	giving	it	maximum	thickening	power.	But	its	purity	makes	cornstarch	finicky.
If	a	custard	such	as	pastry	cream	isn’t	heated	enough,	an	enzyme	in	the	yolks	called	amylase	can	weaken
the	starch	gels	so	the	custard	never	fully	sets	up.	If	the	custard	is	heated	too	much,	the	starch	granules	can
burst.	And	even	if	it	does	thicken	properly,	overwhisking	the	mixture	can	break	the	bonds	of	the	starch	gels
and	thin	it	out.	Flour,	on	the	other	hand,	contains	proteins	and	lipids	that	dilute	its	capacity	to	form	starch
gels,	so	that	more	of	it	is	needed	for	thickening.	But	these	other	components	also	act	as	binders,	keeping
water	trapped	and	ensuring	that	liquid	not	only	thickens,	but	stays	that	way.

	



CONCEPT	21

Whipped	Egg	Whites	Need	Stabilizers
One	of	the	greatest	feats	of	culinary	magic	is	taking	a	few	egg	whites	and
whipping	them	into	a	billowy	mound	of	cloudlike	foam	that	fills	the	entire	bowl.
A	range	of	recipes—from	soufflés	to	angel	food	cake	to	lemon	meringue	pie—
rely	on	whipped	egg	whites.	How	does	beating	transform	a	few	tablespoons	of
liquid	into	several	cups	of	foam?	Let’s	find	out.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Egg	whites	are	different	from	egg	yolks,	and	while	we	mix	the	two	together	for
scrambled	eggs,	omelets,	and	many	baked	desserts,	we	just	as	often	split	them	up
and	use	each	separately.	Sometimes	we	need	just	the	yolks,	such	as	for	ice
cream,	which	is	dense	and	rich,	but	here	we	explore	using	the	whites	alone.
The	most	common	way	to	use	egg	whites	is	to	beat	them,	changing	their

structure	from	a	liquid	to	a	voluminous	foam.	As	an	egg	white	is	beaten,	its
proteins	unfold	and	bond	to	create	a	meshlike	network	that	coats	and	reinforces
the	surface	of	the	air	bubbles	produced	in	a	sea	of	water	(remember,	egg	whites
are	composed	of	about	90	percent	water).	These	unfurled	proteins	actually
increase	the	viscosity	of	the	water	immediately	surrounding	the	air	bubbles,
enhancing	their	stability.	As	the	whites	are	beaten	further,	more	air	bubbles	form
and	more	proteins	bond	to	coat	and	reinforce	them.	Eventually	the	whole	mix
will	puff	up	and	take	on	the	firm	texture	of	shaving	cream.	The	trick	here	is	to
neither	underbeat	the	whites	(the	mixture	will	not	be	stable)	nor	overbeat	them
(the	foam	will	become	too	rigid	and	will	rupture,	squeezing	out	the	liquid
contained	in	the	whites).
Though	this	seems	simple,	things	can	easily	go	astray.	If	any	fats,	oils,	or

emulsifiers	(for	example,	a	bit	of	the	yolk)	get	in	the	mix	they	can	compromise
the	success	of	an	egg-white	foam,	because	these	substances	will	coat	the
proteins,	preventing	them	from	unfolding	and	bonding.	Fats	and	oils	also	take	up
valuable	space	on	the	surface	of	the	air	bubbles	created	when	whipping	egg
whites,	which	disrupts	and	weakens	the	network	of	protective	proteins,	causing
the	foam	to	collapse	very	quickly	and	resulting	in	a	soggy,	deflated	mass.
As	a	rule,	whipped	egg-white	foams	are	temporary	things.	Whether	the	foam

is	raw	or	cooked,	the	water	surrounding	the	air	bubbles	will	eventually	succumb
to	the	force	of	gravity	and	begin	to	drain	away,	causing	the	foam	to	separate	and
release	its	liquid.	Our	goal	is	to	delay	this	as	long	as	possible.
We’ve	seen	the	role	of	starch	when	it	comes	to	stabilizing	fully	cooked	eggs

and	preventing	a	curdled	mess	(concept	20).	But	when	we	isolate	and	whip	egg
whites,	a	different	kind	of	stabilization	is	called	for.	Two	ingredients	help.
The	first	is	sugar,	which	slows	the	drainage	of	moisture	from	the	film

surrounding	the	air	bubbles	in	egg	foams,	helping	the	whites	to	remain	stable	as
well	as	achieve	maximum	volume.	Here,	the	timing	is	key.
In	the	early	stage	of	whipping,	the	proteins	have	not	completely	unfurled	and

linked	together,	so	the	air	bubbles	that	ultimately	give	the	foam	its	volume	can’t



hold	a	firm	shape.	Sugar,	however,	interferes	with	the	ability	of	proteins	to	cross-
link.	If	it’s	added	too	early,	fewer	proteins	will	bond	and	trap	air,	resulting	in	a
foam	that	is	less	voluminous.	If,	on	the	other	hand,	you	beat	the	egg	whites	until
they	are	very	thick	and	dense,	the	sugar	added	at	this	stage	will	have	less	water
to	dissolve	in,	giving	the	finished	meringue	a	gritty	texture	and	a	tendency	to
form	drops	of	sugar	syrup	during	baking.	The	key	is	to	add	sugar	only	when	the
whites	have	been	whipped	enough	to	gain	some	volume	but	still	have	enough
free	water	left	in	them	to	dissolve	the	sugar	completely.	The	right	moment?	Just
before	the	soft	peak	stage,	when	the	foam	is	frothy	and	bubbly	but	not	quite	firm
enough	to	hold	a	peak.
The	second	stabilizing	ingredient	is	cream	of	tartar,	an	acid	that	alters	the

electric	charge	on	the	proteins	of	the	egg	whites,	in	turn	reducing	the	interactions
between	protein	molecules.	Because	this	delays	the	formation	of	the	foam,
whipping	takes	longer	but	also	results	in	a	much	more	stable	foam.



INSIDE	WHIPPED	EGG	WHITES



	
WHEN	WHIPPED	Air	bubbles	whipped	into	the	egg	whites	are	coated	with	the	unfurled	egg	proteins	to



make	a	foam.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	the	effects	of	adding	cream	of	tartar	to	egg	whites	when
whipping	them	to	stiff	peaks,	we	devised	the	following	test:	We	beat	eight	batches
of	four	egg	whites	in	a	stand	mixer	(starting	on	low	speed	to	unravel	the	egg
proteins	and	finishing	on	high	to	incorporate	significant	air)	until	they	achieved
stiff	peaks.	In	half	the	batches	we	included	¼	teaspoon	of	cream	of	tartar	before
whipping,	while	the	others	were	left	plain.	We	transferred	the	fluffy	eggs	to
funnels	set	over	beakers	and	collected	exuded	water	for	60	minutes,	long	enough
to	see	significant	results.



THE	RESULTS
The	whites	whipped	without	any	stabilizers	lost	23	mL	of	liquid	on	average.	The
whites	stabilized	with	cream	of	tartar	lost	less	than	half	that	amount,	about	10
mL	on	average.



THE	TAKEAWAY
While	our	egg	foams	made	with	and	without	a	stabilizer	did	not	look	different—
both	were	light	and	fluffy	foams	holding	stiff	peaks—they	released	a	drastically
different	amount	of	liquid	with	time.	Why	is	this	important?	Beating	air	into	egg
whites	transforms	them	from	a	liquid	to	a	foam.	But	whipped	egg	whites	can
revert,	at	least	partially,	to	their	liquid	state	over	time.	This	is	what	is	happening
when	the	meringue	topping	on	a	pie	“weeps”—the	egg	foam	is	breaking	down
and	becoming	soft	and	wet.
The	addition	of	cream	of	tartar	changed	the	electric	charges	of	the	egg-white

proteins,	delaying	their	ability	to	link	together	and	therefore	creating	a	stronger
network	around	the	air	bubbles	of	the	foam.	This	stronger	network	is	better	able
to	withstand	gravity	and	hold	moisture	within.	Keeping	whipped	egg	whites
stable	is	important	in	a	variety	of	recipes.	If	your	egg	whites	are	not	stabilized
(with	cream	of	tartar	or	sugar),	they	can	lose	a	large	amount	of	liquid	while
baking,	causing	gritty,	weepy	meringues	or	baked	goods	that	deflate	disastrously
in	the	oven.



CREAM	OF	TARTAR	STABILIZES	WHITES

	
UNSTABILIZED



Whipped	with	no	stabilizer,	these	egg	whites	oozed	liquid.

	
STABILIZED

Cream	of	tartar	helped	these	egg	whites	to	hold	on	to	much	more	liquid.



STABILIZING	EGG	WHITES	AT	WORK	
SUGAR
The	addition	of	sugar	stabilizes	whipped	egg	whites	in	two	ways.	First,	it	slows
the	unfolding	of	egg	proteins,	delaying	the	formation	of	foam	and	protecting
against	overwhipping.	Second,	sugar	dissolves	in	the	liquid	surrounding	the	air
bubbles	in	an	egg	foam,	forming	a	thick	and	viscous	syrup	that	is	slow	to	drain.
(If	the	liquid	drains	too	quickly,	the	air	bubbles,	and	therefore	the	foam,	will
collapse.)	Here,	we	look	at	the	stabilizing	effect	of	sugar	when	used	alone	in	our
Meringue	Cookies	and	when	combined	with	other	ingredients	in	our	Bittersweet
Chocolate	Mousse	Cake.



MERINGUE	COOKIES
MAKES	ABOUT	48	SMALL	COOKIES

Meringues	may	be	a	little	soft	immediately	after	being	removed	from	the	oven
but	will	stiffen	as	they	cool.	To	minimize	stickiness	on	humid	or	rainy	days,	allow
the	meringues	to	cool	in	a	turned-off	oven	for	an	additional	hour	(for	a	total	of
two	hours)	without	opening	the	door,	then	transfer	them	immediately	to	airtight
containers	and	seal.

¾				 cup	(5¼	ounces)	sugar
2				 teaspoons	cornstarch
4				 large	egg	whites
¾				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt

1.	Adjust	oven	racks	to	upper-middle	and	lower-middle	positions	and	heat
oven	to	225	degrees.	Line	2	baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.	Combine	sugar
and	cornstarch	in	small	bowl.
2.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	beat	egg	whites,	vanilla,	and	salt

together	on	high	speed	until	very	soft	peaks	start	to	form	(peaks	should	slowly
lose	their	shape	when	whisk	is	removed),	30	to	45	seconds.	Reduce	speed	to
medium	and	slowly	add	sugar	mixture	in	steady	stream	down	side	of	mixer	bowl
(process	should	take	about	30	seconds).	Stop	mixer	and	scrape	down	bowl.
Increase	speed	to	high	and	beat	until	glossy	and	stiff	peaks	have	formed,	30	to
45	seconds.
3.	Working	quickly,	place	meringue	in	pastry	bag	fitted	with	½-inch	plain	tip

or	large	zipper-lock	bag	with	½	inch	of	corner	cut	off.	Pipe	meringues	into	1¼-
inch-wide	mounds	about	1	inch	high	on	baking	sheets,	6	rows	of	4	meringues	on
each	sheet.	Bake	for	1	hour,	switching	and	rotating	baking	sheets	halfway
through	baking.	Turn	off	oven	and	let	meringues	cool	in	oven	for	at	least	1	hour.
Remove	meringues	from	oven,	immediately	transfer	from	baking	sheet	to	wire
rack,	and	let	cool	to	room	temperature.	(Meringues	can	be	stored	in	airtight
container	for	up	to	2	weeks.)



CHOCOLATE	MERINGUE	COOKIES
Gently	fold	2	ounces	finely	chopped	bittersweet	chocolate	into	meringue	mixture
at	end	of	step	2.

TOASTED	ALMOND	MERINGUE	COOKIES
Substitute	½	teaspoon	almond	extract	for	vanilla	extract.	In	step	3,	sprinkle
meringues	with	1⁄3	cup	coarsely	chopped	toasted	almonds	and	1	teaspoon	coarse
sea	salt	(optional)	before	baking.

ORANGE	MERINGUE	COOKIES
Stir	1	teaspoon	grated	orange	zest	into	sugar	mixture	in	step	1.

ESPRESSO	MERINGUE	COOKIES
Stir	2	teaspoons	instant	espresso	powder	into	sugar	mixture	in	step	1.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
A	classic	meringue	cookie	may	have	only	two	basic	ingredients—egg	whites	and
sugar—but	it	requires	precise	timing.	Otherwise,	you’ll	end	up	with	a	meringue
that’s	as	dense	as	Styrofoam	or	weepy,	gritty,	and	cloyingly	sweet.	A	great
meringue	cookie	should	emerge	from	the	oven	glossy	and	white,	with	a
shatteringly	crisp	texture	that	dissolves	instantly	in	your	mouth.	The	key	to
glossy,	evenly	textured	meringue	is	adding	the	sugar	at	just	the	right	time—when
the	whites	have	been	whipped	enough	to	gain	some	volume	and	strength	but	still
have	enough	free	water	left	in	them	for	the	sugar	to	dissolve	completely.
Surprisingly,	we	find	that	cream	of	tartar	is	not	necessary	here.	The	sugar	and
cornstarch	are	stabilizers	enough.
PICK	FRANCE	There	are	three	types	of	meringue:	Italian,	in	which	a	hot

sugar	syrup	is	poured	into	the	egg	whites	as	they	are	beaten;	Swiss,	which	heats
the	whites	with	the	sugar;	and	French,	in	which	egg	whites	are	whipped	with
sugar	alone.	For	this	recipe,	French	is	best.	We	find	that	it’s	the	simplest	of	the
meringues,	and	we	prefer	the	results	in	comparison,	for	example,	to	the	dense
and	candylike	cookies	made	by	the	Italian	method.
ADD	SUGAR	Pay	attention	to	your	egg	whites	as	you	beat	them.	You	don’t

want	to	add	the	sugar	too	early,	when	it	will	interfere	with	the	cross-linking
proteins,	or	too	late,	when	there	isn’t	enough	water	in	which	the	sugar	can
dissolve,	resulting	in	a	gritty,	weeping	meringue.	Add	the	sugar	just	before	the
soft	peak	stage,	when	the	whites	have	gained	some	volume	but	still	have	enough
water	for	the	sugar	to	dissolve.	Adding	the	sugar	in	a	slow	stream	down	the	side
of	the	bowl	of	a	running	stand	mixer	helps	distribute	the	sugar	more	evenly,
which	creates	a	smoother	meringue.
USE	CORNSTARCH	When	tasting	traditional	recipes,	we	found	the

majority	of	them	to	be	too	sweet.	But	when	we	cut	back	on	the	amount	of	sugar,
it	produced	disastrous	results.	The	meringues	with	less	sugar	started	collapsing
and	shrinking	in	the	oven.	Why?	Turns	out	sugar	stabilizes	in	both	the	mixing
bowl	and	the	oven.	Without	sufficient	sugar,	the	meringues	lose	moisture	too
rapidly	as	they	bake,	causing	them	to	collapse.	We	solve	this	problem	with	a	bit
of	cornstarch	(see	“Twin	Stabilizers—Sugar	and	Cornstarch”).
PIPE	THE	COOKIES	To	guarantee	uniform	shape	and	proper	even	cooking,

it’s	essential	to	pipe	the	cookies	rather	than	use	a	spoon.	A	pastry	bag	produces
perfectly	shaped	meringues;	a	zipper-lock	bag	with	a	corner	cut	off	works	nearly
as	well.



TURN	OFF	YOUR	OVEN	Traditionally,	meringues	are	baked	at	a	low
temperature	and	then	left	in	the	turned-off	oven,	sometimes	for	as	long	as
overnight.	The	idea	is	to	completely	dry	out	the	cookies	while	allowing	them	to
remain	snow	white.	We	tried	baking	ours	at	175	degrees,	but	our	ovens	had
trouble	maintaining	this	temperature.	An	hour	in	a	225-degree	oven	followed	by
another	hour	in	the	turned-off	oven	produces	perfectly	cooked	meringues	every
time.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TWIN	STABILIZERS—SUGAR	AND	CORNSTARCH

Sugar	and	cornstarch	stabilize,	without	being	too	sweet.

We	wanted	meringue	cookies	that	were	less	sweet	than	the	traditional	kind,	but	when	we	cut	back	on	sugar,
our	cookies	collapsed	in	the	oven.	What	was	going	on?	In	their	raw	state,	the	tiny	bubbles	that	form	a
meringue	get	their	structure	from	two	things:	the	cross-linking	of	egg-white	proteins	and	the	water	that
occupies	virtually	all	the	space	between	the	bubbles.	As	a	meringue	bakes,	its	moisture	slowly	evaporates,
weakening	its	structure.	At	the	same	time,	the	egg-white	protein	ovalbumin	is	becoming	stronger	by
bonding	with	other	proteins,	providing	additional	structure	for	the	foam.	Because	sugar	has	a	tendency	to
hold	on	to	water	molecules,	if	there	is	not	enough	sugar	in	the	meringue,	the	water	evaporates	too	quickly,
causing	the	cookies	to	collapse	before	the	ovalbumin	has	time	to	strengthen.	We	found	that	cornstarch,
which	shares	the	water-clinging	property	of	sugar,	could	perform	the	same	role	in	our	recipe,	allowing	us	to
cut	back	on	sweetness	without	compromising	structure.

	
SUGAR	WITHDRAWAL

Removing	too	much	sugar	causes	meringues	to	collapse	in	the	oven.



	
FORTIFIED	FOAM

Replacing	a	little	sugar	with	cornstarch	helps	meringues	keep	their	shape	while	baking.



BITTERSWEET	CHOCOLATE	MOUSSE	CAKE
MAKES	ONE	9-INCH	CAKE,	SERVING	12	TO	16

If	the	sugar	is	lumpy	you	should	crumble	it	with	grease-free	fingers.	Any	residual
fat	from	butter	or	chocolate	might	hinder	the	whipping	of	the	whites.	If	you	like,
dust	the	cake	with	confectioners’	sugar	just	before	serving	or	top	slices	with	a
dollop	of	lightly	sweetened	whipped	cream.

12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	12	pieces
12				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	chopped
1				 ounce	unsweetened	chocolate,	chopped
8				 large	eggs,	separated
1				 tablespoon	vanilla	extract
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
				2⁄3 cup	packed	(42⁄3	ounces)	light	brown	sugar

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.
Grease	9-inch	springform	pan,	line	with	parchment	paper,	grease	parchment,	and
flour	pan.	Wrap	bottom	and	sides	of	pan	with	large	sheet	of	aluminum	foil.
2.	Melt	butter	and	chocolates	in	large	heatproof	bowl	set	over	saucepan	filled

with	2	quarts	barely	simmering	water,	stirring	occasionally,	until	smooth.
Remove	from	heat	and	let	mixture	cool	slightly,	then	whisk	in	egg	yolks	and
vanilla.	Set	chocolate	mixture	aside,	reserving	hot	water,	covered,	in	saucepan.
3.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	egg	whites	and	salt	on	medium

speed	until	frothy,	about	30	seconds.	Add	1⁄3	cup	sugar,	increase	speed	to	high,
and	whip	until	combined,	about	30	seconds.	Add	remaining	1⁄3	cup	sugar	and
continue	to	whip	until	soft	peaks	form	when	whisk	is	lifted,	about	2	minutes
longer.	Using	whisk,	stir	about	one-third	of	beaten	egg	whites	into	chocolate
mixture	to	lighten	it,	then	fold	in	remaining	egg	whites	in	2	additions	using
whisk.	Gently	scrape	batter	into	prepared	springform	pan,	set	pan	in	large
roasting	pan,	then	pour	hot	water	from	saucepan	into	roasting	pan	to	depth	of	1
inch.	Carefully	slide	roasting	pan	into	oven	and	bake	until	cake	has	risen,	is	firm
around	edges,	center	has	just	set,	and	center	registers	about	170	degrees,	45	to	55
minutes.
4.	Remove	springform	pan	from	water	bath,	discard	foil,	and	let	cool	on	wire



rack	for	10	minutes.	Run	thin-bladed	paring	knife	between	sides	of	pan	and	cake
to	loosen;	let	cake	cool	in	pan	on	wire	rack	until	barely	warm,	about	3	hours,
then	wrap	pan	in	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	until	thoroughly	chilled,	at	least	8
hours.	(Cake	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days.)
5.	To	unmold	cake,	remove	sides	of	pan.	Slide	thin	metal	spatula	between

cake	and	pan	bottom	to	loosen,	then	invert	cake	onto	large	plate,	peel	off
parchment,	and	reinvert	onto	serving	platter.	To	serve,	use	sharp,	thin-bladed
knife,	dipping	knife	in	pitcher	of	hot	water	and	wiping	blade	before	each	cut.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	recipe	combines	the	techniques	of	using	sugar	to	stabilize	the	egg	whites
and	a	water	bath	to	cook	the	cake	gently	and	evenly	(see	concept	19).	It’s
important	to	whip	the	egg	whites	well	before	folding	them	into	the	chocolate
mixture.	The	Bittersweet	Chocolate	Mousse	Cake	is	nothing	without	stable,
voluminous	egg	whites.
PREPARE	THE	PAN	To	keep	the	cake	from	sticking,	be	sure	to	butter,	flour,

and	then	line	the	bottom	of	the	springform	pan	with	parchment	paper.	We	also
wrap	the	outside	of	the	pan	with	foil	to	prevent	leakage	when	in	the	water	bath.
(See	“Leak-Proofing	Springform	Pans”	for	an	alternative	to	wrapping	the	pan	in
foil.)
USE	LOTS	OF	YOLKS	Butter	and	egg	yolks	are	the	ingredients	that	give

this	cake	its	melt-in-your-mouth	texture.	Twelve	tablespoons	is	the	perfect
amount	of	butter.	Any	more	makes	the	cake	unpalatably	greasy;	less	makes	it
dry.	As	for	the	egg	yolks,	we	made	cakes	using	as	few	as	four	and	as	many	as
10.	The	10-yolk	version	remained	a	little	too	damp	in	the	middle,	even	when
thoroughly	baked.	Eight	is	the	magic	number.
PICK	BROWN	SUGAR	When	we	tried	using	light	brown	sugar	rather	than

granulated,	we	knew	we	were	on	to	something	good.	The	flavor	was	fabulous,
with	just	the	right	amount	of	sweetness	and	a	tiny	hint	of	smokiness	from	the
molasses.	Brown	sugar	offers	an	additional	bonus,	too:	The	molasses	in	brown
sugar	is	slightly	acidic,	eliminating	the	need	for	cream	of	tartar	(another	acid)	to
stabilize	the	egg	whites.	When	beaten	together,	the	whites	and	brown	sugar	turn
into	a	glossy,	perfect	meringue.
FOLD	IN	THE	FOAM	After	beating	the	egg	whites,	we	fold	them	into	the

batter	for	our	cake.	But	if	the	meringue	is	not	the	proper	consistency,	this	can	be
problematic.	Delicate	egg	whites	beaten	with	nothing	added	to	them	will
collapse	under	the	weight	of	the	chocolate,	giving	the	cake	a	dense,	bricklike
structure.	Beating	the	egg	whites	further,	until	they	are	almost	rigid,	will	just
make	the	cake	unappealingly	dry.	Beating	them	less	will	only	make	the	cake
more	dense.	But	adding	the	sugar	to	the	egg	whites	as	they	are	being	beaten	will
create	a	thicker,	more	stable	egg	foam.	This	method	will	produce	a	creamy
meringue	that	holds	up	well	when	folded	into	the	chocolate	mixture,	creating	a
baked	mousse	cake	that	is	moist,	rich,	and	creamy.	Because	the	egg	whites	are
only	beaten	to	soft	peaks—and	no	further—we	add	the	sugar	a	bit	earlier	in	the
process,	as	compared	to	recipes	where	egg	whites	are	beaten	to	stiff	peaks.	We
use	a	similar	technique	in	our	Angel	Food	Cake	recipe.



BAKE	IN	A	WATER	BATH	Baking	the	mousse	cake	on	its	own	in	an	oven
set	to	the	standard	temperature	for	cakes	(350	degrees)	turns	it	into	a	giant
mushroom	that	collapses	after	cooking.	A	more	gentle	heat	level	(300	degrees)
causes	the	outside	of	the	cake	to	be	overdone	while	the	center	remains	raw.	The
solution?	A	water	bath.	A	mousse	cake	baked	in	a	water	bath	in	a	325-degree
oven	rises	evenly	and	has	a	velvety,	creamy	texture	throughout.	The	extra	step	is
worth	the	effort.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	EASIEST	WAY	TO	SEPARATE	AN	EGG

It	is	easier	to	separate	cold	eggs	than	room-temperature	eggs.

Many	baking	recipes	call	for	bringing	eggs	to	room	temperature	before	they	are	separated.	But	this	can	be	a
tricky	business,	as	the	warm	yolk	can	easily	fall	into	the	white	(a	recipe	for	failure	if	you	are	looking	for
fluffy,	whipped	whites).	Separating	each	egg	over	a	smaller	bowl	before	adding	the	yolk	or	white	to	another
bowl	is	always	a	safe	measure,	but	we	have	found	that	we	have	much	better	luck	when	we	separate	the	eggs
while	they	are	still	chilly	from	the	fridge.	Yolks	are	more	taut	and	less	apt	to	break	into	the	whites	when
cold.	If	a	recipe	calls	for	the	eggs	to	be	brought	to	room	temperature,	simply	separate	the	eggs	while	cold,
cover	both	bowls	with	plastic	wrap	(make	sure	the	wrap	touches	the	surface	of	the	eggs	to	keep	them	from
drying	out),	and	let	sit	on	the	counter	until	they’ve	lost	their	chill.



STABILIZING	EGG	WHITES	AT	WORK	
CREAM	OF	TARTAR
Cream	of	tartar,	also	known	as	potassium	bitartrate,	or	potassium	acid	tartrate,
is	a	powdered	byproduct	of	the	winemaking	process	and,	along	with	baking
soda,	is	one	of	the	two	main	ingredients	in	baking	powder.	Cream	of	tartar’s
acidic	nature	lowers	the	pH	of	egg	whites,	altering	the	electric	charge	on	the
proteins	and	encouraging	them	to	unfold,	thus	creating	more	volume,	greater
stability,	and	a	glossier	appearance.	We	use	it	here	to	help	stabilize	egg	whites	in
pies,	cakes,	and	soufflés.



LEMON	MERINGUE	PIE
SERVES	8

For	the	best	flavor,	use	freshly	squeezed	lemon	juice;	don’t	use	bottled	lemon
juice.	Be	sure	that	the	filling	is	cool	when	spreading	the	meringue	onto	the	pie.
This	pie	should	be	served	the	same	day	that	it	is	prepared.

FILLING
1½				 cups	water
1				 cup	(7	ounces)	sugar
¼				 cup	cornstarch
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
6				 large	egg	yolks
1				 tablespoon	grated	lemon	zest	plus	½	cup	juice	(3	lemons)
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	2	pieces

1				 recipe	Foolproof	Single-Crust	Pie	Dough	for	Custard	Pies,	fully	baked	and	cooled

MERINGUE
¾				 cup	(5¼	ounces)	sugar
				1⁄3 cup	water
3				 large	egg	whites
¼				 teaspoon	cream	of	tartar
					 Pinch	salt
¼				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

1.	FOR	THE	FILLING:	Bring	water,	sugar,	cornstarch,	and	salt	to	simmer	in
large	saucepan	over	medium	heat,	whisking	constantly.	When	mixture	starts	to
turn	translucent,	whisk	in	egg	yolks,	2	at	a	time.	Whisk	in	lemon	zest	and	juice
and	butter.	Return	mixture	to	brief	simmer,	then	remove	from	heat.
2.	Pour	filling	into	baked	and	cooled	pie	crust.	Lay	sheet	of	plastic	wrap

directly	on	surface	of	filling	and	refrigerate	pie	until	filling	is	cold,	about	2
hours.



3.	FOR	THE	MERINGUE:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat
oven	to	400	degrees.	Bring	sugar	and	water	to	vigorous	boil	in	small	saucepan
over	medium-high	heat.	Once	syrup	comes	to	rolling	boil,	cook	for	4	minutes
(mixture	will	become	slightly	thickened	and	syrupy).	Remove	from	heat	and	set
aside	while	beating	whites.
4.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	whites,	cream	of	tartar,	and	salt

on	medium-low	speed	until	foamy,	about	1	minute.	Increase	speed	to	medium-
high	and	whip	until	soft	peaks	form,	about	2	minutes.	With	mixer	running,
slowly	pour	hot	syrup	into	whites	(avoid	pouring	syrup	onto	whisk	or	it	will
splash).	Add	vanilla	and	beat	until	meringue	has	cooled	and	becomes	very	thick
and	shiny,	3	to	6	minutes.
5.	Using	rubber	spatula,	mound	meringue	over	filling,	making	sure	meringue

touches	edges	of	crust.	Use	spatula	to	create	peaks	all	over	meringue.	Bake	until
peaks	turn	golden	brown,	about	6	minutes.	Transfer	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	to
room	temperature.	Serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	our	Lemon	Meringue	Pie	recipe	to	produce	a	tall	and	fluffy	topping,
so	we	make	the	meringue	with	a	hot	sugar	syrup	and	add	a	bit	of	cream	of	tartar
to	the	egg	whites	before	beating	them.	This	technique	ensures	that	the	meringue
is	cooked	through	and	stable	enough	to	be	piled	high	on	top	of	the	filling.
ADD	GRAHAM	CRACKERS	TO	CRUST	To	promote	browning	and	really

crisp	the	crust,	we	roll	our	Foolproof	Single-Crust	Pie	Dough	for	Custard	Pies	in
graham	cracker	crumbs.	Not	only	does	this	help	the	texture	of	our	crust,	but	it
adds	a	wonderful	graham	flavor	to	complement	the	lemon	pie	without	masking
the	character	of	the	dough	itself.	It’s	important	to	note	that	the	crust	is	fully
baked	and	cooled	before	it	is	filled	and	chilled.
MAKE	THE	RIGHT	FILLING	The	filling	for	our	Lemon	Meringue	Pie	is	a

close	relative	of	Lemon	Curd,	but	because	you	need	so	much	more	of	it	to	fill	a
pie	shell	it’s	diluted	with	water	(all	lemon	juice	would	be	too	intense)	and
stabilized	with	cornstarch	(so	you	can	slice	cleanly	through	the	thick	filling).
PICK	ITALIAN	Rather	than	simply	beating	egg	whites	with	raw	sugar	(the

French	method),	here	we	pour	hot	sugar	syrup	into	the	whites	as	they	are	beaten
(the	Italian	method).	The	hot	syrup	cooks	the	whites	and	helps	transform	them
into	a	soft,	smooth	meringue	that	is	stable	enough	to	resist	weeping	during	its
short	time	in	the	oven.	With	a	French	meringue,	the	bottom	portion	often	doesn’t
cook	through	and	weeping	is	a	greater	risk.
BAKE,	DON’T	BROIL	While	some	recipes	throw	the	pie	under	the	broiler,	a

hot	oven	greatly	reduces	the	risk	of	burning	the	meringue.



ANGEL	FOOD	CAKE
SERVES	10	TO	12

Do	not	use	all-purpose	flour.	Our	tasters	unflatteringly	compared	a	cake	made
with	it	to	Wonder	Bread.	If	your	angel	food	cake	pan	does	not	have	a	removable
bottom,	line	the	bottom	of	the	pan	with	parchment	paper.	In	either	case,	do	not
grease	the	pan	(or	the	paper).

1				 cup	plus	2	tablespoons	(4½	ounces)	cake	flour
¼				 teaspoon	salt
1¾				 cups	(12¼	ounces)	sugar
12				 large	egg	whites
1½				 teaspoons	cream	of	tartar
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.
Whisk	flour	and	salt	together	in	bowl.	Process	sugar	in	food	processor	until	fine
and	powdery,	about	1	minute.	Reserve	half	of	sugar	in	small	bowl.	Add	flour
mixture	to	food	processor	with	remaining	sugar	and	process	until	aerated,	about
1	minute.
2.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	egg	whites	and	cream	of	tartar	on

medium-low	speed	until	foamy,	about	1	minute.	Increase	speed	to	medium-high,
slowly	add	reserved	sugar,	and	whip	until	soft	peaks	form,	about	6	minutes.	Add
vanilla	and	mix	until	incorporated.
3.	Sift	flour	mixture	over	egg	whites	in	3	additions,	folding	gently	with	rubber

spatula	after	each	addition	until	incorporated.	Scrape	mixture	into	ungreased	12-
cup	tube	pan.
4.	Bake	until	toothpick	inserted	in	center	comes	out	clean	and	cracks	in	cake

appear	dry,	40	to	45	minutes.	Let	cake	cool	completely	in	pan,	upside	down,
about	3	hours.	Run	knife	around	edge	of	cake	to	loosen,	then	gently	tap	pan
upside	down	on	counter	to	release	cake.	Turn	cake	right	side	up	onto	platter	and
serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Unlike	other	cakes,	angel	food	cake	uses	no	oil	or	butter—you	don’t	even	grease
the	cake	pan.	It	doesn’t	call	for	baking	soda	or	baking	powder,	either,	relying
solely	on	beaten	egg	whites	for	its	dramatic	height.	To	make	angel	food	cake,
you	whip	egg	whites	with	sugar	and	cream	of	tartar—stabilizing	ingredients,	as
we	know—until	soft	peaks	form,	fold	in	flour	and	flavorings,	and	bake.
GRIND	SUGAR	EXTRA-FINE	Granulated	or	confectioners’	sugar	will

make	acceptable	but	somewhat	heavy	cakes.	For	an	extraordinary	angel	food
cake,	process	granulated	sugar	in	the	food	processor	until	powdery.	It	will
dissolve	much	faster,	so	it	won’t	deflate	the	egg	whites.
KEEP	YOLKS	AT	BAY	We	stirred	½	teaspoon	of	egg	yolk	into	a	dozen

whites,	just	to	see	what	would	happen.	The	eggs	turned	white	and	frothy	with
whipping,	but	even	after	25	minutes,	they	failed	to	form	peaks.	Lesson	learned:
Separate	eggs	with	care.
FLUFF	WITH	FLOUR	Some	recipes	call	for	sifting	the	flour	and/or	sugar	as

many	as	eight	times.	What	a	pain!	We	tried	skipping	sifting	altogether,	but	the
resulting	cake	was	squat.	Ultimately,	we	figured	out	that	by	processing	the	flour
(with	half	the	sugar)	in	the	food	processor	to	aerate	it,	we	could	get	away	with
sifting	just	once.
FOLD	GENTLY	Use	a	rubber	spatula	to	gently	turn	or	“fold”	the	flour	and

egg	whites	over	one	another	until	they	are	thoroughly	combined.	Add	the	flour
in	three	batches	so	you	don’t	deflate	the	whites.
COOL	UPSIDE	DOWN	Invert	the	cooked	cake	until	it	is	completely	cool,

about	3	hours.	If	you	don’t	have	a	pan	with	feet,	invert	it	over	the	neck	of	a
bottle.	Angel	food	cakes	cooled	right	side	up	can	be	crushed	by	their	own
weight.



GRAND	MARNIER	SOUFFLÉ	WITH	GRATED	CHOCOLATE
SERVES	6	TO	8

Make	the	soufflé	base	and	immediately	begin	beating	the	whites	before	the	base
cools	too	much.	Once	the	whites	have	reached	the	proper	consistency,	they	must
be	used	at	once.	Do	not	open	the	oven	door	during	the	first	15	minutes	of	baking
time;	as	the	soufflé	nears	the	end	of	its	baking,	you	may	check	its	progress	by
opening	the	oven	door	slightly.	(Be	careful;	if	your	oven	runs	hot,	the	top	of	the
soufflé	may	burn.)	Confectioners’	sugar	is	a	nice	finishing	touch,	but	be	ready	to
serve	the	soufflé	immediately.

3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
¾				 cup	(5¼	ounces)	sugar
2				 teaspoons	sifted	cocoa
5				 tablespoons	(1½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
¼				 teaspoon	salt
1				 cup	whole	milk
5				 large	eggs,	separated
3				 tablespoons	Grand	Marnier
1				 tablespoon	grated	orange	zest
				1⁄8 teaspoon	cream	of	tartar
½				 ounce	bittersweet	chocolate,	finely	grated

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.
Grease	1½-quart	soufflé	dish	with	1	tablespoon	butter.	Combine	¼	cup	sugar	and
cocoa	in	small	bowl	and	pour	into	prepared	dish,	shaking	to	coat	bottom	and
sides	of	dish	evenly.	Tap	out	excess	and	set	dish	aside.
2.	Whisk	flour,	¼	cup	sugar,	and	salt	together	in	small	saucepan.	Gradually

whisk	in	milk,	whisking	until	smooth	and	no	lumps	remain.	Bring	mixture	to
boil	over	high	heat,	whisking	constantly,	until	thickened	and	mixture	pulls	away
from	sides	of	pan,	about	3	minutes.	Scrape	mixture	into	medium	bowl;	whisk	in
remaining	2	tablespoons	butter	until	combined.	Whisk	in	egg	yolks	until
incorporated;	stir	in	Grand	Marnier	and	orange	zest.
3.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	egg	whites,	cream	of	tartar,	and	1

teaspoon	sugar	on	medium-low	speed	until	foamy,	about	1	minute.	Increase



speed	to	medium-high	and	whip	whites	to	soft,	billowy	mounds,	about	1	minute.
Gradually	add	half	of	remaining	sugar	and	whip	until	glossy,	soft	peaks	form,
about	30	seconds;	with	mixer	still	running,	add	remaining	sugar	and	whip	until
just	combined,	about	10	seconds.
4.	Using	rubber	spatula,	immediately	stir	one-quarter	of	whipped	whites	into

soufflé	base	to	lighten	until	almost	no	white	streaks	remain.	Scrape	remaining
whites	into	base	and	fold	in	whites,	along	with	grated	chocolate,	with	whisk	until
mixture	is	just	combined.	Gently	pour	mixture	into	prepared	dish	and	run	your
index	finger,	about	½	inch	from	side	of	dish,	through	mixture,	tracing
circumference	to	help	soufflé	rise	properly.	Bake	until	surface	of	soufflé	is	deep
brown,	center	jiggles	slightly	when	shaken,	and	soufflé	has	risen	2	to	2½	inches
above	rim,	20	to	25	minutes.	Serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	our	Grand	Marnier	Soufflé	to	be	airy	and	light,	yet	still	taste	creamy.
Knowing	the	finicky	reputation	of	soufflés,	we	wanted	it	to	be	reliable,	too.
Because	of	the	soufflé’s	airy	texture,	we	knew	that	we	needed	to	increase	its
stability.	We	found	that	building	the	soufflé	base	on	a	bouillie	(a	paste	made	from
flour	and	milk),	enhanced	with	butter	and	egg	yolks,	gives	us	the	richness	we
wanted	without	harming	the	soufflé’s	texture.	And	no	surprise	here:	Whipping
the	egg	whites	with	both	cream	of	tartar	and	granulated	sugar	serves	to	enhance
the	soufflé’s	stability.
MAKE	A	BASE	The	base	for	this	soufflé,	into	which	the	beaten	egg	whites

are	eventually	folded,	provides	flavor	and	additional	moisture	to	help	it	all	rise.
We	prepared	a	blind	taste	test	with	three	different	base	options:	béchamel,	a
classic	French	sauce	made	with	butter,	flour,	and	milk;	pastry	cream;	and
bouillie,	a	paste	made	from	flour	and	milk.	The	bouillie	soufflé	had	the
creamiest,	richest	texture.
WHIP	IT	RIGHT	The	technique	used	to	beat	egg	whites	is	crucial	to	a

successful	soufflé.	The	objective	is	to	create	a	strong,	stable	foam	that	rises	well
and	is	not	prone	to	collapse	during	either	folding	or	baking.	As	we’ve	learned,
adding	sugar	to	the	egg	whites	as	they	are	whipped	enhances	their	stability.	This
makes	them	more	resilient	to	a	heavy	hand	during	the	folding	and	less	apt	to	fall
quickly	after	being	pulled	from	the	oven.	Most	of	the	sugar	must	be	added	after
the	eggs	have	become	foamy	and	should	be	added	gradually.	If	it’s	added	all	at
once,	the	soufflé	will	be	uneven,	with	a	shorter	rise,	and	a	bit	of	an	overly	sweet
taste.	Don’t	forget	the	cream	of	tartar;	it	makes	for	a	more	stable	soufflé	with	a
bigger	rise.
FOLD	IT	OVER	When	combining	the	voluminous	whipped	egg	whites	with

the	dense	batter,	vigorous	stirring	will	get	you	nowhere,	quick.	The	technique	we
use	is	called	folding.	The	goal	is	to	incorporate	the	light	egg	whites	with	the
heavy	batter	without	deflating	the	foam.
GIVE	A	QUICK	SWIPE	Our	Grand	Marnier	Soufflé	relies	on	little	beyond

eggs,	milk,	and	a	little	flour	for	structure	and	benefits	from	the	following
technique:	After	pouring	the	batter	into	the	dish,	trace	a	circle	in	the	batter	with
your	finger,	½	inch	from	the	edge	of	the	dish.	This	breaks	the	surface	tension	and
helps	the	ultra-light	soufflé	achieve	a	high,	even	rise.
DO	NOT	OVERCOOK	Most	important:	Never	overcook	a	soufflé.	It	should

be	very	creamy	in	the	middle	and	firm	around	the	outside,	almost	like	a	pudding



cake.	Don’t	wait	until	the	center	is	completely	solid;	it	will	be	too	late.	The
center	should	not	be	liquid-y,	but	it	should	still	be	quite	loose	and	very	moist.
Once	you	can	smell	a	soufflé	baking	in	the	oven,	it’s	about	ready	to	come	out.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

DO	COPPER	BOWLS	MAKE	A	DIFFERENCE?
Copper	bowls	help	make	whipped	egg	whites	stable,	and	more.

While	testing	our	soufflé	recipe,	we	decided	to	find	out	whether	copper	bowls	are	better	for	whisking	egg
whites	and	discovered	that	they	do	have	a	contribution	to	make:	The	final	baked	soufflé	has	a	greater
volume,	its	flavor	is	less	eggy,	and	it	has	a	crust	that	has	a	beautiful	light	golden	color.

Why?	When	egg	whites	are	whipped	in	a	copper	bowl,	the	copper	ions	combine	with	conalbumin,	an
egg-white	protein,	and	as	a	result	slow	the	coagulation	process.	This	means	that	the	foam	takes	longer	to
whip	and	therefore	is	more	stable.	Because	the	egg	foam	is	more	stable,	it	can	better	tolerate	expansion	in
the	oven.	More	specifically,	the	copper	of	the	bowl	binds	with	sulfur	atoms	contained	within	some	of	the
egg	proteins.	And	since	the	eggy	flavor	comes	from	the	breakdown	of	these	proteins	(and	the	resulting
release	of	sulfur-containing	compounds),	a	soufflé	made	in	a	copper	bowl	is	more	stable	and	tastes	less
eggy.	These	copper	and	sulfur	bonds	also	reflect	light	in	a	way	that	allows	us	to	see	a	golden	yellow	color	in
the	crust.	That	said,	very	good	results	can	also	be	achieved	in	stainless	steel	bowls,	so	copper	is	nice,	but
not	necessary.



CONCEPT	22

Starch	Helps	Cheese	Melt	Nicely
We	eat	a	lot	of	cheese.	Sometimes	we	serve	it	cold,	on	top	of	crackers	or	alone
on	a	plate.	But	we	often	use	it	in	cooking—sandwiched	between	slices	of	bread
and	grilled,	or	baked	into	pasta.	And	when	heated,	cheese	melts.	This	important
characteristic	defines	dishes	from	macaroni	and	cheese	to	lasagna.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Before	we	explore	the	science	of	melting	cheese,	let’s	start	with	how	cheese	is
made.	All	cheeses	start	with	milk.	This	can	be	any	kind	of	milk,	typically	cow,
sheep,	or	goat’s	milk.	Each	type	of	milk	has	different	flavor	characteristics	and	a
different	amount	of	protein,	which	translates	into	a	very	different	texture	in
cheese.	Goat’s	milk,	for	example,	has	much	less	of	the	protein	casein,	the	solid
component	that	gives	cheese	its	structure,	which	is	why	goat	cheese	is	usually
soft	and	creamy	compared	to	cow’s	milk	cheeses	like	cheddar.
Most	cheese	also	contains	an	enzyme	called	rennet	that	traditionally	comes

from	the	stomach	of	a	very	young	calf.	Rennet	is	important	because	unlike	other
enzymes	(like	those	present	in	meat,	for	example;	see	concept	6),	it	breaks	down
only	one	of	the	proteins	in	milk—casein.	Not	only	that,	rennet	does	not	break
casein	proteins	down	into	many	different	pieces,	but	only	at	one	specific	point,
which	allows	these	now-clipped	proteins	to	bond	together	into	a	gel,	also	known
as	the	curd.
The	final	ingredient	is	microbes,	or	bacteria,	which	further	break	down

proteins	slowly	over	time.	This	process	creates	the	distinctive	flavor	compounds
that	make	cheddar	cheese	sharp	or	give	Limburger	its	strong	odor.
When	making	cheese,	these	three	ingredients	are	combined.	First,	bacteria	are

added	to	milk,	converting	the	milk’s	sugar	to	lactic	acid.	This	acidification	then
causes	the	milk	proteins	to	form	a	weak	gel.	Then,	the	rennet	enzymes	work	to
curdle	the	casein	proteins,	separating	the	resulting	gelled	curds	(which	will
become	the	cheese)	from	the	watery	whey.	With	time,	enzymes	from	the	bacteria
(both	present	in	the	milk,	and	added)	ripen	and	intensify	the	flavors	of	the
cheese.
Some	cheese	is	ready	immediately	after	it	is	made	(ricotta	and	mozzarella).

Other	types	(cheddar	and	Parmesan)	are	aged	so	the	bacteria	have	time	to
develop	more	complex	flavors.
When	heated,	cheese	doesn’t	melt	in	the	true	sense,	not	like	an	ice	cube.

Instead,	the	casein	proteins,	which	have	bonded	together	in	the	presence	of
rennet,	begin	to	break	apart.	These	protein	molecules	separate	and	flow,	like
molten	plastic,	which	gives	the	appearance	of	melting.
Relatively	young	cheeses,	such	as	fontina	and	mozzarella,	have	a	high

moisture	content	and	a	weaker	protein	structure,	allowing	the	protein	molecules
to	separate	and	flow	at	lower	temperatures.	This	higher	moisture	content	means
these	cheeses	have	less	of	a	tendency	to	“break”	and	are	less	likely	to	become



greasy	when	they	melt.	(Cheeses	“break”	when	the	hot	flowing	protein	network
loses	moisture	and	forms	even	stronger	bonds	between	protein	molecules,
recombining	into	big	clumps	that	squeeze	out	fat	like	a	sponge.)	On	the	other
hand,	aged	cheeses,	such	as	Gruyère	and	cheddar,	have	less	moisture	and	a
stronger	protein	network.	This	means	they	melt	at	higher	temperatures,	needing
more	heat	to	break	apart	the	tightly	bonded	proteins,	which	must	happen	before
they	can	flow.	Once	melted,	the	moredeveloped	protein	structures	in	these
cheeses	begin	to	regroup,	making	small	clumps	that	separate	from	the	remaining
mass	of	cheese,	leaving	behind	a	gritty	texture	and	the	occasional	pool	of	fat.
(The	fat	content	of	cheese	varies	widely—from	13	percent	in	ricotta	to	33
percent	in	cheddar.)
When	cheeses	break	and	form	unseemly	clumps,	they	can	ruin	the	texture	of

our	creamy	pasta	sauces	made	with	melted	cheese.	We	solve	this	by	adding
starch.	The	starch	(generally	flour	or	cornstarch)	holds	apart	the	tiny	clusters	of
protein	molecules	as	the	cheese	melts.	This	prevents	the	proteins	from
recombining	and	forming	even	larger	clusters	that	eventually	would	become	big
clumps	of	cheese.



WHEN	CHEESE	MEETS	HEAT



	
COLD	CHEESE	The	casein	proteins	are	clustered	together	amid	water	and	droplets	of	fat.



	
MELTED	CHEESE,	WITH	STARCH	The	casein	clusters	separate	and	flow	but	are	prevented	from



forming	clumps	by	strands	of	amylose	from	the	starch.



	
BROKEN	CHEESE	If	cheese	is	melted	without	starch,	the	casein	proteins	can	regroup	into	large	clusters



with	a	gritty	texture.	These	clusters	also	cause	fat	droplets	to	pool	together.

	



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	prove	the	value	in	adding	starch	to	cheeses	that	don’t	naturally	melt	well,	we
made	batches	of	a	classic	roux-thickened	cheese	sauce	(like	that	used	for
macaroni	and	cheese)	with	and	without	flour.	For	the	floured	version	we	made	a
roux	with	2	tablespoons	of	butter	and	3	tablespoons	of	all-purpose	flour,	whisked
in	2½	cups	of	milk,	and	then,	off	the	heat,	slowly	added	8	ounces	of	shredded
cheddar	cheese.	For	the	comparison	batch	we	simply	brought	the	butter	and
milk	to	a	simmer	and	added	the	cheese	off	the	heat.	We	repeated	the	test	three
times.



THE	RESULTS
Ignoring	the	obvious	difference	in	thickness	between	the	two	sauces,	it	was	clear
what	role	the	flour	was	playing.	The	flourless	sauce	quickly	broke	into	clumpy
curds	of	cheese	that	clung	to	the	whisk,	while	the	traditional	sauce	emulsified	to
a	smooth,	creamy	consistency.



THE	TAKEAWAY
To	avoid	the	clumpy,	lumpy	mess	of	a	broken	cheese	sauce,	a	sauce	that	would
ruin	a	good	macaroni	and	cheese,	starch	is	a	necessary	addition.	When	combined
with	melting	cheese,	starch	granules	release	elongated	threads	of	amylose,	which
then	wrap	around	the	casein	proteins,	preventing	them	from	squeezing	out	fat
and	recombining	into	unpleasant	curds.	The	lesson?	Don’t	forget	to	add	flour!
It’s	important	to	note	that	we	add	starch	to	melting	cheeses	in	a	number	of

different	ways.	This	may	mean	starting	with	a	roux	(flour	and	butter)	when
making	a	cheese	sauce	for	a	dish	like	Classic	Macaroni	And	Cheese.	Other
techniques	include	tossing	shredded	cheese	with	cornstarch	for	dishes	like
fondue.	We	also	like	to	combine	easily	melted	cheeses	(relatively	young	cheeses
like	fontina,	Monterey	Jack,	and	mozzarella)	with	cheeses	that	don’t	melt	so	well
(aged	varieties	like	Gruyère	and	cheddar).	In	dishes	like	Four-Cheese	Lasagna,
this	strategy	gives	us	the	benefit	of	better	texture	from	the	young	cheese,	and	the
deeper	flavor	of	the	aged	cheese.



MEASURING	CHEESE
We	prefer	to	weigh	cheese	when	cooking.	You	can	use	cup	measures,	but	note	that	different	graters	will
produce	more	or	less	volume	from	the	same	piece	of	cheese.	To	obtain	the	most	accurate	measure,	cheese
should	be	lightly	packed	into	a	measuring	cup.
	
PARMESAN	AND	OTHER	HARD	CHEESES
Fine	holes	of	box	grater:	1	ounce	=	½	cup
Rasp-style	grater:	1	ounce	=¾	cup
	
CHEDDAR,	MOZZARELLA,	AND	OTHER	SEMISOFT	CHEESES
Large	holes	of	box	grater:	1	ounce	=	¼	cup
	
BLUE	CHEESE,	FETA,	AND	GOAT	CHEESE
Crumbled	by	hand:	1	ounce	=	¼	cup



USING	STARCH	TO	MAKE	CREAMY	CHEESE	SAUCE

	
WITHOUT	STARCH	A	cheese	sauce	made	without	starch	is	gritty	and	clumps	on	the	tines	of	a	whisk.



	
WITH	STARCH	A	cheese	sauce	made	with	starch,	on	the	other	hand,	is	smooth	and	creamy—no	broken
clumps	here.



STARCHES	AT	WORK	
CHEESE	SAUCES
Adding	starch	to	cheese	as	it	melts	helps	to	prevent	clumping—an	enemy	of	rich
and	creamy	cheese	sauces.	Making	a	béchamel,	or	béchamel-like	sauce,	which
contains	a	healthy	amount	of	butter,	milk,	and	flour,	is	a	great	way	to	stabilize
the	cheese	as	well	as	add	flavor	and	substance	to	the	dish.	But	it	can	be	even
simpler:	Just	a	bit	of	starchy	pasta	water	can	do	wonders.



CLASSIC	MACARONI	AND	CHEESE
SERVES	6	TO	8

It’s	crucial	to	cook	the	pasta	until	tender—just	past	the	al	dente	stage.	Whole,
low-fat,	and	skim	milk	all	work	well	in	this	recipe.	The	recipe	may	be	halved	and
baked	in	an	8-inch	square	broiler-safe	baking	pan.	If	desired,	offer	hot	sauce	at
the	table.

6				 slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
5				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	plus	3	tablespoons	cut	into	6	pieces	and	chilled
1				 pound	elbow	macaroni
					 Salt
6				 tablespoons	all-purpose	flour

1½				 teaspoons	dry	mustard
¼				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper	(optional)
5				 cups	milk
8				 ounces	Monterey	Jack	cheese,	shredded	(2	cups)
8				 ounces	sharp	cheddar	cheese,	shredded	(2	cups)

1.	Pulse	bread	and	3	tablespoons	chilled	butter	in	food	processor	to	coarse
crumbs,	about	10	pulses;	set	aside.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	broiler.	Bring	4	quarts

water	to	boil	in	large	pot.	Add	pasta	and	1	tablespoon	salt	and	cook,	stirring
often,	until	tender;	drain	pasta.
3.	Melt	remaining	5	tablespoons	butter	in	now-empty	pot	over	medium-high

heat.	Add	flour,	mustard,	1	teaspoon	salt,	and	cayenne,	if	using,	and	cook,
whisking	constantly,	until	mixture	becomes	fragrant	and	deepens	in	color,	about
1	minute.	Gradually	whisk	in	milk;	bring	mixture	to	boil,	whisking	constantly.
Reduce	heat	to	medium	and	simmer,	whisking	occasionally,	until	thickened,
about	5	minutes.	Off	heat,	slowly	whisk	in	cheeses	until	completely	melted.	Add
pasta	to	sauce	and	cook	over	medium-low	heat,	stirring	constantly,	until	mixture
is	steaming	and	heated	through,	about	6	minutes.
4.	Transfer	mixture	to	13	by	9-inch	broiler-safe	baking	dish	and	sprinkle	with

bread-crumb	mixture.	Broil	until	topping	is	deep	golden	brown,	3	to	5	minutes.



Let	casserole	cool	for	5	minutes	before	serving.

CLASSIC	MACARONI	AND	CHEESE	WITH	HAM	AND	PEAS
Add	8	ounces	deli	ham,	sliced	¼	inch	thick	and	cut	into	1-inch	pieces,	and	1	cup
frozen	peas	to	cheese	sauce	along	with	pasta.

CLASSIC	MACARONI	AND	CHEESE	WITH	KIELBASA	AND
MUSTARD
Add	1	finely	chopped	onion	to	melted	butter	in	step	3	and	cook	until	softened
and	lightly	browned,	5	to	7	minutes.	Add	flour	to	onion	and	continue	with
recipe,	reducing	salt	in	sauce	to	½	teaspoon.	Add	8	ounces	kielbasa,	quartered
lengthwise	and	sliced	½	inch	thick,	and	4	teaspoons	whole-grain	Dijon	mustard
to	cheese	sauce	along	with	pasta.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	a	classic,	old-fashioned	macaroni	and	cheese,	we	took	no	shortcuts.	This
family	favorite	should	boast	tender	pasta	in	a	smooth,	creamy	sauce	with	great
cheese	flavor.	Two	types	of	cheese	are	better	than	one:	Monterey	Jack	melts
nicely,	while	sharp	cheddar	supplies	the	flavor.	We	bind	the	macaroni	and	cheese
with	a	béchamel	sauce,	or	a	mixture	of	flour,	butter,	and	milk.	As	we’ve	learned,
the	flour	stabilizes	the	cheese.
BIND	IT	UP	Most	macaroni	and	cheese	recipes	use	either	eggs	or	starch	to

stabilize	the	sauce.	The	eggs	are	great,	and	we’ve	used	them	on	occasion
ourselves,	but	you	need	to	add	evaporated	milk	to	prevent	the	eggs	from	curdling
and	the	end	result	is	very,	very	rich.	For	everyday	mac	and	cheese,	we	think	the
flour	route	(through	the	use	of	a	béchamel)	is	better.
CREATE	A	ROUX	Béchamel	is	a	white	sauce	made	by	cooking	flour	and

butter	to	create	a	light	roux.	We	use	5	tablespoons	of	butter	and	6	tablespoons	of
flour	(pretty	close	to	a	1:1	ratio),	along	with	a	bit	of	powdered	mustard	and
cayenne	(optional).	Milk	(any	kind)	is	gradually	whisked	in,	and	the	béchamel	is
cooked	until	it	thickens.	Let	the	binding	begin!
USE	CHEESE	AND	PASTA	EQUALLY	For	this	recipe,	we	found	that	two

types	of	cheese	were	better	than	one.	We	tried	Parmesan,	Gruyère,	and	some
aged	cheddars	but	were	not	pleased	with	their	grainy	texture	and	potent	flavor.
On	the	other	hand,	the	incredibly	mild,	soft	cheeses	like	mascarpone	and	ricotta
contributed	no	flavor	at	all.	We	prefer	sharp	cheddar	for	flavor	and	Monterey
Jack	for	creaminess.	And	how	much	to	use?	We	find	that	1	pound	of	cheese	to	1
pound	of	pasta	is	the	perfect	ratio—just	the	right	texture	and	flavor,	and	easy	to
remember,	too.
MAKE	PASTA	ON	THE	STOVETOP	It’s	difficult	to	get	the	timing	right

for	macaroni	and	cheese	baked	in	the	oven.	Either	the	pasta	is	overcooked	or	it
needs	more	time;	and	the	sauce	ends	up	breaking	from	being	overbaked.	It’s
easier	to	cook	the	pasta	on	the	stovetop	and	thus	easier	not	to	ruin	the	cheese
sauce,	too.
COOK	UNTIL	JUST	PAST	AL	DENTE	The	trick	is	to	cook	the	pasta	just

past	al	dente	before	adding	it	to	the	sauce.	If	cooked	less,	the	pasta	releases
starch	into	the	sauce	and	makes	it	gritty.	If	cooked	until	very	tender,	the	noodles
won’t	absorb	the	sauce.	Boiled	until	just	past	al	dente,	however,	the	noodles
retain	structure	to	stand	up	to	the	heat	of	the	sauce	for	a	few	minutes	without
turning	mushy,	and	the	cheese	can	fill	every	nook	and	cranny.



GET	THE	“BAKED”	LOOK	Toasted	bread	crumbs,	even	when	applied	to
mac	and	cheese	made	on	the	stovetop,	give	the	dish	a	baked	look	that	we	love.
Place	fresh	buttered	bread	crumbs	atop	your	batch	of	macaroni	and	cheese	and
place	it	under	the	broiler.	The	broiler	will	concentrate	the	heat	right	on	the	bread
crumbs,	turning	them	a	deep,	golden	brown.	This	only	takes	a	few	minutes—just
enough	for	the	crumbs	to	sink	into	the	cheese	sauce	and	seem	baked	right	in.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
MELTING	CHEESE

Moisture,	fat,	and	age	affect	the	way	different	cheeses	melt.

Government	regulations	allow	Jack	cheese	to	have	5	percent	more	total	moisture	than	cheddar	cheese,	while
cheddar	has	more	fat.	Age	also	has	a	profound	effect	on	how	a	cheese	behaves	when	melted.	Monterey	Jack
is	never	aged	for	more	than	a	few	months,	but	cheddar	can	be	aged	for	years.

What	does	this	difference	in	age	mean	for	cheese	sauce?	Cheddar,	particularly	older	cheddar,	is	gritty
because	casein,	the	primary	protein	in	cheese,	becomes	more	strongly	bonded	together	as	the	cheese	ages.
Monterey	Jack	is	creamy	because	the	casein	structure	is	more	loosely	bonded	and	therefore	better	able	to
retain	fat	and	moisture.	The	combination	of	young	Jack	cheese	and	moderately	aged	cheddar	gives	you
good	texture	and	flavor	in	a	dish	like	Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese.

	
HOW	CHEESE	MELTS	When	cheddar	is	melted,	right,	the	fat	separates	from	the	cheese.	Monterey	Jack,
left,	has	a	higher	moisture	content	and	looks	creamier	when	melted,	with	less	separation.



FOUR-CHEESE	LASAGNA
SERVES	10

Note	that	some	pasta	brands	contain	only	12	no-boil	noodles	per	package;	this
recipe	requires	15	noodles.	Whole	milk	is	best	in	the	sauce,	but	skim	and	low-fat
milk	also	work.	Supermarket-brand	cheeses	work	fine	in	this	recipe.	The
Gorgonzola	may	be	omitted,	but	the	flavor	of	the	lasagna	won’t	be	as	complex.
It’s	important	to	not	overbake	the	lasagna.	Once	the	sauce	starts	bubbling
around	the	edges,	uncover	the	lasagna	and	turn	the	oven	to	broil.	If	your
lasagna	dish	is	not	broiler-safe,	brown	the	lasagna	at	500	degrees	for	about	10
minutes.

6				 ounces	Gruyère	cheese,	shredded	(1½	cups)
2				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	fine	(1	cup)
12				 ounces	(1½	cups)	part-skim	ricotta	cheese
1				 large	egg
2				 tablespoons	plus	2	teaspoons	minced	fresh	parsley
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 shallot,	minced
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
				1⁄3 cup	all-purpose	flour
2½				 cups	whole	milk
1½				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
½				 teaspoon	salt
1				 bay	leaf
					 Pinch	cayenne	pepper

15				 no-boil	lasagna	noodles
8				 ounces	fontina	cheese,	shredded	(2	cups)
3				 ounces	Gorgonzola	cheese,	finely	crumbled	(¾	cup)

1.	Place	Gruyère	and	½	cup	Parmesan	in	large	heatproof	bowl.	Combine
ricotta,	egg,	2	tablespoons	parsley,	and	pepper	in	medium	bowl.	Set	both	bowls
aside.
2.	Melt	butter	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Add	shallot	and	garlic

and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	shallot	is	softened,	about	2	minutes.	Add	flour	and



cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	thoroughly	combined,	about	1½	minutes;	mixture
should	not	brown.	Gradually	whisk	in	milk	and	broth;	increase	heat	to	medium-
high	and	bring	to	boil,	whisking	often.	Stir	in	salt,	bay	leaf,	and	cayenne,	reduce
heat	to	medium-low,	and	simmer	until	sauce	thickens	and	measures	4	cups,
about	10	minutes,	stirring	occasionally	and	making	sure	to	scrape	bottom	and
corners	of	pan.
3.	Discard	bay	leaf.	Gradually	whisk	¼	cup	sauce	into	ricotta	mixture.	Pour

remaining	sauce	over	Gruyère	mixture	and	stir	until	smooth.
4.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.

Pour	2	inches	of	boiling	water	into	13	by	9-inch	broiler-safe	baking	dish.	Slip
noodles	into	water,	1	at	a	time,	and	soak	until	pliable,	about	5	minutes,
separating	noodles	with	tip	of	sharp	knife	to	prevent	sticking.	Remove	noodles
from	water	and	place	in	single	layer	on	clean	kitchen	towels;	discard	water.	Dry
dish	and	spray	lightly	with	vegetable	oil	spray.
5.	Spread	½	cup	sauce	evenly	over	bottom	of	dish.	Arrange	3	noodles	in

single	layer	on	top	of	sauce.	Spread	½	cup	ricotta	mixture	evenly	over	noodles
and	sprinkle	with	½	cup	fontina	and	3	tablespoons	Gorgonzola.	Spoon	½	cup
sauce	over	top.	Repeat	layering	of	noodles,	ricotta	mixture,	fontina,	Gorgonzola,
and	sauce	3	more	times.	For	final	layer,	arrange	remaining	3	noodles	on	top	and
cover	completely	with	remaining	sauce.	Sprinkle	with	remaining	½	cup
Parmesan.
6.	Cover	dish	tightly	with	aluminum	foil	that	has	been	sprayed	with	oil	spray

and	bake	until	edges	are	just	bubbling,	25	to	30	minutes,	rotating	dish	halfway
through	baking.	Remove	foil	and	turn	oven	to	broil.	Broil	lasagna	until	surface	is
spotty	brown,	3	to	5	minutes.	Cool	lasagna	for	15	minutes,	then	sprinkle	with
remaining	2	teaspoons	parsley	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Cheese	lasagna	offers	an	elegant	alternative	to	meat-laden,	red-sauce	lasagna.
But	some	cheese	lasagna	is	just	heavy	and	bland,	due	to	the	use	of	plain-tasting
cheeses.	And	even	those	with	good	cheese	flavor	can	have	soupy,	dry,	or	greasy
textures.	We	wanted	a	robust	cheese	lasagna	with	great	structure,	creamy
texture,	and	maximum	flavor.	For	the	best	cheese	flavor,	we	settled	on	a
combination	of	fontina,	Parmesan,	Gorgonzola,	and	Gruyère	cheeses—plus	a
surprise	fifth	addition.	We	found	that	making	the	white	sauce	(a	béchamel)	with
a	high	ratio	of	flour	to	butter	created	a	thick	binder	that	provided	enough	heft	to
keep	the	lasagna	layers	together.
MAKE	VELOUTÉ	HYBRID	Though	our	béchamel,	with	its	high	flour-to-

butter	ratio,	did	a	great	job	binding,	using	all	milk	in	the	sauce	left	us	with	a
bland	flavor	that	dulled	the	overall	cheesiness	of	the	dish.	The	solution	lies	in	the
classic	French	sauce	called	velouté,	which	is	the	same	sauce	as	béchamel	except
the	milk	is	replaced	by	chicken	broth,	or	basically	a	roux-thickened	broth.	We
replace	1½	cups	of	the	milk	with	chicken	broth	to	balance	the	richness	of	the
sauce	and	bring	forward	the	cheese	flavor.	For	more	complexity,	we	add	shallot
and	a	garlic	clove.	A	bay	leaf	and	a	pinch	of	cayenne	add	backbone	without
overshadowing	the	other	components.
MIX	AGED	CHEESES	INTO	SAUCE	To	counter	the	recurring	problem	of

all	the	cheese	causing	the	lasagna	to	bake	up	with	pools	of	unseemly	grease	on
the	surface	and	a	slightly	curdled	texture,	we	take	a	cue	from	the	Swiss.	Classic
fondue	recipes	include	a	starch	when	melting	cheese	in	order	to	keep	it	from
becoming	oily	and	gritty.	This	is	why	we	incorporate	the	Gruyère	into	the
béchamel	sauce,	which	contains	a	significant	amount	of	flour.	The	starch	helps
to	trap	oil	and	keep	it	from	pooling	on	top	of	the	lasagna.	Gruyère,	an	aged
cheese	with	less	moisture	and	a	stronger	protein	network,	produces	the	most	oil
when	cooked,	which	is	why	it	is	the	best	choice	to	mix	into	the	sauce.
USE	A	FIFTH	CHEESE	The	real	secret	of	a	great	four-cheese	lasagna	is	a

fifth	cheese.	Who	knew?	While	ricotta	doesn’t	add	much	flavor,	it	gives	the
lasagna	body	without	making	the	dish	heavy	and	starchy.
SOAK	THOSE	NOODLES	For	this	recipe,	we	presoak	no-boil	lasagna

noodles	for	five	minutes	before	layering	them	with	the	other	ingredients,	which
shortens	the	lasagna’s	baking	time.	We	have	tried—and	failed—in	the	past	to
substitute	regular	boiled	lasagna	noodles	for	no-boil	noodles.	Recipes	using	no-
boil	noodles	need	more	liquid,	and	substituting	regular	boiled	noodles	leads	to
soupy	lasagna.	However,	since	the	no-boil	noodles	for	this	lasagna	are	first



soaked	in	hot	water	and	the	sauce	isn’t	so	watery,	we	wondered	if	this	finding
would	still	hold	true.
We	used	regular	boiled	noodles	in	this	recipe,	and	the	lasagna	looked	fine—no

excessive	soupiness.	Unfortunately,	the	lasagna	tasted	too	starchy	and	heavy.
The	regular	lasagna	noodles	were	so	thick	and	bulky	that	they	overpowered	the
delicate	balance	of	pasta	to	sauce,	adding	excessive	starchiness	to	the	dish.
When	we	compared	the	actual	weight	of	each	type	of	pasta,	we	found	that	an

uncooked	regular	lasagna	noodle	weighed	almost	twice	as	much	as	a	no-boil
noodle.	So	for	creamy,	delicate	lasagnas	(where	fresh	noodles	are	traditionally
used),	thinner,	no-boil	noodles	are	not	only	faster	than	regular	dried	lasagna
noodles—they	are	also	better.
BAKE	LOW	AND	HIGH	Another	technique	to	minimize	the	time	in	the

oven	for	our	delicate	lasagna	is	to	employ	a	low-heat/high-heat	method.	We	bake
the	lasagna,	covered,	at	350	degrees	until	it	just	starts	to	bubble	around	the
edges.	We	then	remove	the	cover	and	quickly	broil	the	lasagna	to	brown	the	top.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
A	GOOD	WAY	TO	STORE	CHEESE

Store	cheese	wrapped	in	two	layers:	waxed	or	parchment	paper,	and	aluminum	foil.

	
Storing	cheese	presents	a	conundrum:	As	it	sits,	it	releases	moisture.	If	this	moisture	evaporates	too	quickly,
the	cheese	dries	out.	But	if	the	moisture	is	trapped	on	the	cheese’s	surface,	it	encourages	mold.	Specialty
cheese	paper	avoids	this	problem	with	a	two-ply	construction	that	lets	cheese	breathe	without	drying	out,
but	it	usually	requires	mail-ordering.	To	find	a	more	accessible	method,	we	single-and	double-wrapped
cheddar,	Brie,	and	fresh	goat	cheese	in	various	ways,	refrigerated	the	cheeses	for	six	weeks,	and	monitored
them	for	mold	and	dryness.	Cheeses	single-wrapped	in	plastic—whether	cling	wrap	or	zipper-lock	bags—
were	the	first	to	show	mold.	However,	cheeses	shrouded	in	waxed	or	parchment	paper	alone	lost	moisture
and	dried	out.	The	best	method:	waxed	or	parchment	paper	loosely	wrapped	with	aluminum	foil.	Both
papers	wick	moisture	away,	while	the	foil	cover	traps	just	enough	water	to	keep	the	cheese	from	drying	out.
Wrapped	this	way,	even	super-perishable	goat	cheese	kept	for	about	a	week,	and	the	Brie	and	cheddar	were
almost	like	new	more	than	a	month	later.	Cheese	paper	extended	the	life	of	these	cheeses	by	only	a	few	days
more.



SPAGHETTI	WITH	PECORINO	ROMANO	AND	BLACK	PEPPER
(CACIO	E	PEPE)

SERVES	4	TO	6

For	a	slightly	less	rich	dish,	substitute	half-and-half	for	the	heavy	cream.	Do	not
adjust	the	amount	of	water	for	cooking	the	pasta;	the	amount	used	is	critical	to
the	success	of	the	recipe.	Make	sure	to	stir	the	pasta	frequently	while	cooking	so
that	it	doesn’t	stick	to	the	pot.	Draining	the	pasta	water	into	the	serving	bowl
warms	the	bowl	and	helps	keeps	the	dish	hot	until	it	is	served.

6				 ounces	Pecorino	Romano	cheese,	4	ounces	grated	fine	(2	cups)	and	2	ounces	grated	coarse	(1	cup)
1				 pound	spaghetti
					 Salt
2				 tablespoons	heavy	cream
2				 teaspoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil

1½				 teaspoons	pepper

1.	Place	finely	grated	Pecorino	in	medium	bowl.	Set	colander	in	large	bowl.
2.	Bring	2	quarts	water	to	boil	in	large	pot.	Add	pasta	and	1½	teaspoons	salt

and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	al	dente.	Drain	pasta	into	prepared	colander,
reserving	cooking	water.	Pour	1½	cups	cooking	water	into	liquid	measuring	cup
and	discard	remainder.	Return	drained	pasta	to	now-empty	bowl.
3.	Slowly	whisk	1	cup	reserved	cooking	water	into	finely	grated	Pecorino

until	smooth,	then	whisk	in	heavy	cream,	oil,	and	pepper.	Gradually	pour	cheese
mixture	over	pasta	and	toss	to	combine.	Let	pasta	rest	for	1	to	2	minutes,	tossing
frequently	and	adding	remaining	cooking	water	as	needed	to	adjust	consistency.
Serve,	passing	coarsely	grated	Pecorino	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
With	just	three	main	ingredients	(cheese,	pepper,	and	pasta),	this	Roman	dish
makes	a	delicious	and	quick	pantry	supper.	But	in	versions	we	tried,	the	creamy
sauce	quickly	turned	into	clumps	of	solidified	cheese.	For	a	smooth,	intensely
cheesy	sauce	that	wouldn’t	separate	once	tossed	with	the	pasta,	we	whisked
some	of	the	pasta	cooking	water	with	the	grated	cheese.	Swapping	out	butter	for
cream	further	ensured	a	smooth	sauce.	Even	after	sitting	on	the	table	for	a	full
five	minutes,	there	wasn’t	a	clump	in	sight.
START	WITH	GOOD	CHEESE	High-quality	ingredients	are	essential	in

this	dish,	most	importantly,	imported	Pecorino	Romano.	Imported	Pecorino
Romano	is	a	hard,	aged	sheep’s	milk	cheese	with	a	distinctively	pungent,	salty
flavor	that	bears	almost	no	resemblance	to	domestic	cheeses	simply	labeled
“Romano.”	(These	wan	standins	are	made	with	cow’s	milk	and	lack	the	punch	of
the	real	deal.)
PAY	ATTENTION	TO	STARCH	Even	finely	grated,	cheese	can	still	clump.

Starch	helps.	In	a	hard	lump	of	Pecorino,	the	fat,	protein,	and	water	(the	three
main	components	of	cheese)	are	locked	into	position	by	the	solid	structure	of	the
cheese.	But	when	the	cheese	is	heated,	the	proteins	can	fuse	together.	The	starch
from	the	semolina-infused	pasta	water,	however,	coats	the	cheese	and	prevents
the	proteins	from	sticking.	(Make	sure	to	use	the	correct	amount	of	water	for
your	pasta:	2	quarts	of	water	for	a	pound	of	pasta,	rather	than	the	usual	4	quarts.
This	volume	will	get	the	optimal	concentration	of	starch	in	the	liquid.)
CREAM	HELPS,	TOO	Starch	on	its	own	can’t	completely	prevent	the

cheese	from	clumping.	But	there	is	another	factor	that	affects	how	proteins	and
fat	interact:	emulsifiers.	Milk,	cream,	and	fresh	cheeses	have	special	molecules
called	lipoproteins	that	can	associate	with	both	fat	and	protein,	acting	as	a	sort	of
liaison	between	the	two	and	keeping	them	from	separating.	But	as	cheese	ages,
the	lipoproteins	break	down,	losing	their	emulsifying	power.	No	wonder
Pecorino	Romano,	aged	for	at	least	eight	months,	forms	clumps.	How	to	get	an
infusion	of	lipoproteins?	Add	milk	or	cream.	When	we	replace	the	traditional
butter	with	the	same	amount	of	cream,	the	cheese	forms	a	light,	perfectly	smooth
sauce	that	coats	the	spaghetti.



CONCEPT	23

Salting	Vegetables	Removes	Liquid
Vegetables,	especially	summer	vegetables	like	tomatoes	and	zucchini,	are	made
up	of	mostly	water.	When	cooking,	the	biggest	challenge	is	dealing	with	all	this
liquid.	(After	all,	no	one	wants	a	soggy	slaw.)	We	often	employ	salt	to	remove
liquid	from	vegetables	before	using	them	in	recipes.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Edible	plants	include	both	fruits	and	vegetables.	Technically	fruits	are	the
reproductive	parts	of	the	plant	(those	containing	seeds),	whilevegetables	are
everything	else	(roots,	stems,	and	leaves).	The	culinary	definition	of	vegetables,
however,	expands	to	include	some	seeded	specimens	like	tomatoes	and
cucumbers.
Plants,	like	animals,	are	made	up	of	countless	numbers	of	cells.	Plant	cells

contain	a	wide	array	of	proteins,	enzymes,	sugars,	and	color	pigments.	Each	one
is	surrounded	by	a	tough	cell	wall	made	mostly	of	cellulose,	which	gets	thicker
with	age.	(That’s	one	reason	why	raw	veggies	are	so	crunchy.)	Pectin,	a	water-
soluble	polysaccharide,	is	also	present	in	the	cell	walls	and	in	between	cells,
acting	like	a	glue	to	hold	them	together.	And,	like	most	everything	we	eat,
vegetables	are	filled	with	water.
Unlike	cooking	meat,	where	we	want	to	preserve	as	much	moisture	as

possible,	with	vegetables	we	want	the	water	out.	However	counterintuitive	it
may	seem,	we	reach	the	opposite	goal	for	meat	and	vegetables	with	the	same
ingredient	…	salt.
When	salt	is	applied	to	vegetables,	it	creates	a	higher	ion	concentration	at	the

surface	than	exists	deep	within	the	cells.	To	equalize	the	concentration	levels,	the
water	within	the	cells	is	drawn	out	through	the	permeable	cell	walls.	This	is
called	osmosis,	an	important	process	in	brining	(concept	11)	and	marinating
(concept	13).	When	salting	meat,	the	trick	is	to	wait	until	the	meat	reabsorbs	that
liquid	along	with	some	water.	When	salting	vegetables,	we	often	wick	that
moisture	(and	most	of	the	salt)	away.
This	removal	of	water	is	important	when	making	slaws	and	salads;	the	excess

liquid	can	dilute	a	dressing,	causing	the	vegetables	to	swim	in	a	flavorless	pool
of	juice.	But	the	exodus	of	water	plays	another	role	in	the	preparation	of
vegetables—it	can	radically	change	their	texture.	When	salt	draws	water	out	of
vegetable	cells,	the	cells	lose	pressure	(called	turgor	pressure)	and	begin	to
collapse,	like	a	balloon	letting	out	air.	This	means	that	the	texture	of	these
vegetables	becomes	softer	and	less	crisp.
But	that’s	not	the	only	way	salt	affects	the	texture	of	vegetables.	Much	of	the

strength	of	pectin,	the	glue	that	holds	the	cells	together,	comes	from	the	presence
of	calcium	and	magnesium	ions	within	the	molecules.	These	ions	are	part	of	the
pectin	structure,	but	they	also	act	as	links,	holding	the	pectin	molecules	together.
When	raw	vegetables	are	salted,	or	salt	is	added	to	the	cooking	water,	the	sodium



ions	in	the	salt	replace	the	calcium	and	magnesium	ions	in	the	pectin.	This
causes	the	pectin—and	therefore	the	cell	walls	of	vegetables—to	weaken	and	is
another	reason	why	your	broccoli	florets	or	head	of	cabbage	will	soften	with	salt.



THE	EFFECT	OF	SALT	ON	VEGETABLE	CELLS



	
WHILE	SALTING	Salt	draws	water	out	of	vegetable	cells	via	osmosis.



	
AFTER	SALTING	When	water	exits	a	vegetable,	its	cells	lose	pressure	and	begin	to	collapse.	Pectin,	the



glue	that	holds	cells	together,	likewise	begins	to	weaken.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	show	the	drastic	effect	that	salt	can	have	on	raw	vegetables,	we	tossed	three
1-pound	batches	of	whole	napa	cabbage	leaves	with	2½	tablespoons	of	kosher
salt	each.	We	then	placed	the	cabbage	leaves	in	colanders	set	over	bowls	and	let
them	sit.	After	one	hour,	we	collected	and	then	measured	the	exuded	liquid.	As	a
control	we	left	a	fourth	batch	of	cabbage	unsalted.	We	repeated	the	experiment
three	times.



THE	RESULTS
Over	the	course	of	an	hour,	the	batches	of	salted	cabbage	lost,	on	average,	more
than	2	tablespoons	of	water	each.	Not	surprisingly,	the	control	batch	lost	no
moisture	during	this	time.
Even	more	impressive	than	the	numbers	was	the	visual	difference	between	the

salted	and	unsalted	cabbage.	While	the	control	stayed	firm	and	crisp,	the	salted
samples	became	soft	and	flexible,	easily	drooping	when	held	with	a	pair	of
tongs.



THE	TAKEAWAY
When	we	salt	vegetables	like	cabbage,	the	effect	is	clear:	We	lose	a	lot	of
moisture,	the	salt	drawing	water	from	the	vegetable	cells	via	osmosis.	Unlike
salting	meat,	where	the	goal	is	to	keep	the	moisture	within,	here,	moisture	loss	is
exactly	what	we	want.
We	salt	cabbage	(and	other	vegetables)	and	then	drain	away	that	extra

moisture	before	adding	the	dressing	for	our	salads	and	slaws.	This	way,	when	we
do	add	the	creamy	dressing	of	a	buttermilk	coleslaw,	for	example,	the	excess
liquid	does	not	seep	out	into	the	salad	and	dilute	the	flavor.	Though	the	limp
cabbage	may	not	look	appealing,	it	will	create	a	far	better	final	product.	In	fact,
the	salted,	wilted	cabbage	leaves	will	draw	back	some	of	the	added	dressing	in
order	to	restore	turgor	pressure,	thereby	enhancing	the	flavor.



WITH	SALT,	CABBAGE	WILTS
When	we	applied	salt	to	napa	cabbage,	the	leaves	became	soft	and	limp,	wilting	whenheld	by	a	pair	of
tongs.	The	unsalted	cabbage	leaves	(like	the	one	on	the	left)	held	straight	as	a	board.

	



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SALTING	CAN	ALSO	MAKE	VEGETABLES	TASTE	BETTER
Salt	unlocks	flavor	in	vegetables,	but	only	in	recipes	where	the	salt	and	liquid	released	are	not

discarded.

To	determine	if	the	length	of	time	we	salted	our	vegetables	affected	flavor,	we	made	two	batches	of	Creamy
Gazpacho	Andaluz.	For	the	first,	we	salted	the	tomatoes,	cucumber,	onion,	and	green	bell	pepper	and	let
them	sit	for	one	hour	before	pureeing	these	ingredients	with	their	accumulated	juices	in	a	blender.	For	the
second	batch,	we	skipped	the	salting	step	but	stirred	in	the	equivalent	amount	of	salt	after	we	pureed	the
vegetables.	The	results?	The	vegetables	that	were	salted	for	one	hour	before	pureeing	produced	gazpacho
with	fuller,	more	complex	flavor.

To	experience	a	food’s	flavors,	our	tastebuds	must	be	exposed	to	its	flavor	molecules.	But	many	of	the
flavor	molecules	in	fruits	and	vegetables	are	not	only	trapped	within	their	cell	walls,	they	are	tightly	bound
to	proteins	that	also	make	them	inaccessible	to	our	tastebuds.	Blending	or	even	vigorous	chewing	releases
some	of	the	flavor	molecules.	But	for	maximum	flavor	extraction,	salting	the	vegetables	and	letting	them	sit
for	an	hour	works	best.	(This	works	only	in	recipes	that	use	the	liquid	released	by	the	application	of	salt.)
With	time,	the	salt	draws	flavor	compounds	out	of	the	cell	walls	while	simultaneously	forcing	the	proteins
to	separate	from	these	molecules,	producing	a	more	intensely	flavored	soup.	Simply	seasoning	the	soup
before	serving	will	not	have	the	same	effect.



SALTING	AT	WORK	
CABBAGE	AND	CUCUMBER	SALADS
Vegetable	salads	can	be	easy	to	prepare,	but	hard	to	make	well.	If	the	veggies
release	liquid	after	the	dressing	has	been	applied,	this	can	result	in	a	diluted
sauce,	one	that	is	too	thin	and	bland	and	not	appetizing	at	all.	To	prevent	this,
we	salt	our	vegetables	before	the	dressing	is	applied,	encouraging	them	to
release	their	liquid	ahead	of	time,	which	we	then	discard	before	adding	the
dressing.	The	salt	also	makes	the	vegetables	softer	and	more	appealing	to	eat.



CREAMY	BUTTERMILK	COLESLAW
SERVES	4

If	you	are	planning	to	serve	the	coleslaw	immediately,	rinse	the	salted	cabbage
in	a	large	bowl	of	ice	water,	drain	it	in	a	colander,	pick	out	any	ice	cubes,	then
pat	the	cabbage	dry	before	dressing.

½				 head	red	or	green	cabbage,	cored	and	shredded	(6	cups)
					 Salt
1				 carrot,	peeled	and	shredded
½				 cup	buttermilk
2				 tablespoons	mayonnaise
2				 tablespoons	sour	cream
1				 small	shallot,	minced
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
½				 teaspoon	cider	vinegar
½				 teaspoon	sugar
¼				 teaspoon	Dijon	mustard
				1⁄8 teaspoon	pepper

1.	Toss	shredded	cabbage	and	1	teaspoon	salt	in	colander	or	large-mesh
strainer	set	over	medium	bowl.	Let	stand	until	cabbage	wilts,	at	least	1	hour	or
up	to	4	hours.	Rinse	cabbage	under	cold	running	water.	Press,	but	do	not
squeeze,	to	drain;	pat	dry	with	paper	towels.	Place	wilted	cabbage	and	carrot	in
large	bowl.
2.	Stir	buttermilk,	mayonnaise,	sour	cream,	shallot,	parsley,	vinegar,	sugar,

mustard,	¼	teaspoon	salt,	and	pepper	together	in	small	bowl.	Pour	dressing	over
cabbage	and	toss	to	combine;	refrigerate	until	chilled,	about	30	minutes.
(Coleslaw	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	3	days.)

BUTTERMILK	COLESLAW	WITH	SCALLIONS	AND	CILANTRO
Omit	mustard,	substitute	1	tablespoon	minced	fresh	cilantro	for	parsley	and	1
teaspoon	lime	juice	for	cider	vinegar,	and	add	2	thinly	sliced	scallions	to
dressing.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	a	recipe	for	buttermilk	coleslaw	that	would	produce	a	salad	with
crisp,	evenly	cut	pieces	of	cabbage	lightly	coated	with	a	flavorful	buttermilk
dressing	that	would	cling	to	the	cabbage	instead	of	collecting	in	the	bottom	of
the	bowl.	We	found	that	salting	and	draining	the	cabbage	removed	excess	water.
For	a	dressing	that	was	both	hefty	and	tangy,	we	combined	buttermilk,
mayonnaise,	and	sour	cream.
SHRED	THE	CABBAGE	The	tough,	squeaky	leaves	and	compact	core	of	a

cabbage	head	require	both	a	sharp	knife	and	a	good	game	plan.	It	is	best	to
quarter	and	core	the	cabbage,	then	disassemble	each	quarter	into	stacks
containing	several	layers	of	cabbage.	These	stacks	can	then	be	either	laid	flat	on
a	cutting	board	and	sliced	with	a	chef’s	knife	or	rolled	and	pushed	into	the	feeder
tube	of	a	food	processor	fitted	with	the	shredding	disk.
SALT	THE	CABBAGE,	TOO	To	combat	a	weepy	dressing,	we	salt	the

cabbage.	As	the	salt	and	cabbage	sit,	moisture	is	drawn	out	of	the	cabbage	cells.
To	eliminate	excess	salt	and	water,	the	now-wilted	cabbage	needs	a	quick	rinse
and	towel	dry.	(Left	unrinsed	and	undried,	the	salty	moisture	trapped	within	the
thatch	of	shredded	cabbage	ruins	both	the	flavor	and	the	texture	of	the	coleslaw.)
A	mere	teaspoon	of	salt	is	enough	to	draw	the	moisture	out	of	the	cabbage.
BULK	UP	BUTTERMILK	We	like	to	bulk	up	the	buttermilk	in	our	dressing

so	that	it	will	cling	to	the	cabbage	without	losing	its	distinctively	Southern
twang.	Mayonnaise	gives	the	dressing	good	heft	and	adhesiveness	while	sour
cream	reinforces	the	characteristic	zip	of	the	buttermilk.	Together,	they	give	us	a
dressing	that	adheres	well	to	the	cabbage	without	tasting	overly	potent	or	losing
its	bite.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHEN	GOOD	BUTTERMILK	GOES	BAD

Opened	buttermilk	can	last	up	to	three	weeks,	but	the	taste	is	best	when	used	fresh.

Since	buttermilk	always	smells	sour,	how	do	we	know	when	it	has	gone	bad?	When	we	asked	this	question
of	the	folks	at	the	dairy	farm	that	produces	the	buttermilk	we	use	in	the	test	kitchen,	they	told	us	to	consume
their	product	within	five	to	seven	days	after	opening.	However,	guidelines	from	agricultural	programs	at
various	universities	extend	that	period	to	two	weeks.	Then	there’s	our	experience,	which	has	shown	that
refrigerated	buttermilk	won’t	turn	truly	bad	(signified	by	the	growth	of	blue-green	mold)	until	at	least	three
weeks	after	opening.	That	it	can	last	this	long	is	not	surprising,	since	buttermilk	is	high	in	lactic	acid,	which
is	hostile	to	the	growth	of	harmful	bacteria	and	mold.	That	said,	we	wondered	if	the	flavor	of	buttermilk
changes	the	longer	it’s	stored.	To	find	out,	we	held	a	series	of	tastings,	comparing	pancakes	made	with
freshly	opened	buttermilk	with	those	made	with	buttermilk	that	had	been	refrigerated	for	one	week,	two
weeks,	and	three	weeks.	We	found	that	as	time	went	on,	the	pancakes	tasted	increasingly	bland.

Here’s	why:	The	bacteria	in	buttermilk	produce	lactic	acid	and	diacetyl,	a	flavor	compound	that	gives
buttermilk	its	characteristic	buttery	aroma	and	taste	(diacetyl	is	also	the	dominant	flavor	compound	in
butter).	As	time	passes,	the	buttermilk	continues	to	ferment	and	becomes	more	acidic.	The	abundance	of
acid	kills	off	virtually	all	of	the	bacteria	that	produce	the	buttery-tasting	diacetyl.	So	three-week-old
buttermilk	will	retain	its	tartness	(from	lactic	acid)	but	lose	much	of	its	signature	buttery	taste,	giving	it	less
dimension.	The	good	news	is	that	there	is	a	way	to	prolong	the	shelf	life	and	preserve	the	flavor	of
buttermilk:	Freeze	it.



CREAMY	DILL	CUCUMBER	SALAD
SERVES	4

Fresh	dill	is	essential	to	the	flavor	of	this	salad;	do	not	substitute	dried.

3				 cucumbers	(2	pounds),	peeled,	halved	lengthwise,	seeded,	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
1				 small	red	onion,	sliced	very	thin
1				 tablespoon	salt
1				 cup	sour	cream
3				 tablespoons	cider	vinegar
1				 teaspoon	sugar
¼				 cup	minced	fresh	dill

1.	Toss	cucumbers	and	onion	with	salt	in	colander	set	over	large	bowl.	Weight
cucumbers	with	gallon-size	zipper-lock	bag	filled	with	water;	let	drain	for	1	to	3
hours.	Rinse	and	pat	dry.
2.	Whisk	remaining	ingredients	together	in	medium	bowl.	Add	cucumbers	and

onion;	toss	to	coat.	Serve	chilled.



YOGURT-MINT	CUCUMBER	SALAD
SERVES	4

3				 cucumbers	(2	pounds),	peeled,	halved	lengthwise,	seeded,	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
1				 small	red	onion,	sliced	very	thin
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 cup	plain	low-fat	yogurt
2				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
¼				 cup	minced	fresh	mint
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
½				 teaspoon	ground	cumin

1.	Toss	cucumbers	and	onion	with	1	tablespoon	salt	in	colander	set	over	large
bowl.	Weight	cucumbers	with	gallon-size	zipper-lock	bag	filled	with	water;	let
drain	for	1	to	3	hours.	Rinse	and	pat	dry.
2.	Whisk	together	yogurt,	oil,	mint,	garlic,	cumin,	and	salt	and	pepper	to	taste

in	medium	bowl.	Add	cucumbers	and	onion;	toss	to	coat.	Serve	chilled.



SESAME-LEMON	CUCUMBER	SALAD
SERVES	4

	

3				 cucumbers	(2	pounds),	peeled,	halved	lengthwise,	seeded,	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
1				 tablespoon	salt
¼				 cup	rice	vinegar
1				 tablespoon	lemon	juice
2				 tablespoons	toasted	sesame	oil
2				 teaspoons	sugar
				1⁄8 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes,	plus	more	to	taste
1				 tablespoon	sesame	seeds,	toasted

1.	Toss	cucumbers	with	salt	in	colander	set	over	large	bowl.	Weight
cucumbers	with	gallon-size	zipper-lock	bag	filled	with	water;	let	drain	for	1	to	3
hours.	Rinse	and	pat	dry.
2.	Whisk	remaining	ingredients	together	in	medium	bowl.	Add	cucumbers;

toss	to	coat.	Serve	chilled	or	at	room	temperature.



SWEET-AND-TART	CUCUMBER	SALAD
SERVES	4

Based	on	a	common	Thai	relish	served	with	sautés,	this	salad	is	also	great	with
grilled	salmon	or	grilled	chicken	breasts.

3				 cucumbers	(2	pounds),	peeled,	halved	lengthwise,	seeded,	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
½				 red	onion,	sliced	very	thin
1				 tablespoon	salt
½				 cup	rice	vinegar
2½				 tablespoons	sugar
2				 small	jalapeño	chiles,	seeded	and	minced	(or	more,	to	taste)

1.	Toss	cucumbers	and	onion	with	salt	in	colander	set	over	large	bowl.	Weight
cucumbers	with	gallon-size	zipper-lock	bag	filled	with	water;	drain	for	1	to	3
hours.	Rinse	and	pat	dry.
2.	Bring	2⁄3	cup	water	and	vinegar	to	boil	in	small	nonreactive	saucepan	over

medium	heat.	Stir	in	sugar	to	dissolve;	reduce	heat	and	simmer	for	15	minutes.
Let	cool	to	room	temperature.
3.	Meanwhile,	mix	cucumbers,	onion,	and	jalapeños	together	in	medium	bowl.

Pour	dressing	over	cucumber	mixture;	toss	to	coat.	Serve	chilled.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Cucumbers	can	make	a	cool,	crisp	salad,	but	often	they	turn	soggy	from	their
own	moisture.	For	a	good	cucumber	salad	that	doesn’t	swim	in	liquid,	we	found
that	weighting	salted	cucumbers	forced	more	water	from	them	than	salting
alone.	After	many	tests,	we	determined	that	one	to	three	hours	worked	best:	Even
after	12	hours,	the	cucumbers	gave	up	no	more	water	than	they	had	after	three
hours.	(Three	hours	is	best,	but	one	will	work	in	a	pinch.)	For	a	bit	of	zip,	we
like	pairing	cucumbers	with	onion—and	found	that	salting	and	draining	the
onion	along	with	the	cucumbers	removes	its	sharp	sting.	Whether	we	dress	them
with	a	lively	vinaigrette	or	rich,	creamy	dressing,	our	cucumbers	retain
maximum	crunch.
SEED,	SALT,	AND	WEIGHT	To	prepare	the	cucumbers	for	these	salads,

first	peel	them,	halve	them	lengthwise,	and	scoop	out	the	seeds	(which	are	more
watery	than	the	flesh	and	can	add	an	unappealing	texture).	After	slicing	them
into	¼-inch	half	rounds,	place	them	in	a	colander	set	over	a	large	bowl.	Adding	1
tablespoon	of	salt	helps	to	remove	the	water	from	the	vegetables.	Weighing	them
down	with	a	gallon-size	zipper-lock	bag	filled	with	water	and	letting	them	drain
for	one	to	three	hours	removes	the	most	liquid,	preventing	a	soggy	finished
salad.
SALT	LESS	Though	some	people	extol	the	virtues	of	salting	cucumbers	with

much	more	salt	than	you	would	use	to	season	the	salad,	rinsing	off	the	excess
before	serving,	we	don’t	agree.	We’ve	found	that	even	after	rinsing	the	heavily
salted	cucumbers	and	blotting	with	paper	towels,	the	salad	is	overly	salty.
Instead,	we	prefer	to	salt	the	cucumbers	with	just	1	tablespoon	of	salt	and	let
them	sit,	weighted	down,	for	a	few	hours.	We	still	rinse	the	cucumbers,	but	this
smaller	amount	of	salt	is	easily	removed,	leaving	us	with	perfectly	seasoned
cucumbers.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BUYING	CUCUMBERS

A	genetic	difference	keeps	American	cucumbers	crisper	in	the	presence	of	a	softening	enzyme
than	the	seedless	English.

Supermarkets	carry	two	kinds	of	slicing	cucumbers:	seedless	English	and	standard	American.	To	assess
which	we	prefer,	we	tasted	them	grated	in	a	yogurt	sauce,	salted	in	a	salad,	and	plain.	We	found	that	the
American	cucumbers	had	the	crisper	texture	and	the	more	concentrated	cucumber	flavor,	while	the	English
variety	were	much	milder	and	more	watery.

It	turns	out	that	cucumbers	contain	a	“softening”	enzyme	that	breaks	down	cell	walls	when	the	vegetable
is	cut	open.	Due	to	genetic	differences	between	the	English	and	American	varieties,	as	well	as	differences	in
how	they	are	grown	(English	cucumbers	are	almost	exclusively	raised	in	greenhouses,	while	most	American
kinds	grow	outdoors),	English	cucumbers	have	weaker	cell	walls	that	are	more	easily	broken	down	by	the
enzyme.	Weak	cells	lead	to	less-than-crisp	texture	and	flavor	that	leaks	out.	And	salting	cucumbers	(which
we	regularly	do	for	salads)	makes	the	problem	worse.

What	about	the	seedless	advantage?	We’d	rather	suffer	the	minor	inconvenience	of	seeding	our	own
cukes	than	have	to	wade	through	watery	salads.

	
WEAK	AND	SOGGY

English	cucumbers	have	aweak	cellular	structure	that	turns	them	mushy	when	cut	and	salted.



	
STRONG	AND	CRISP

Regular	American	cukes	retain	their	crunch	with	the	same	treatment.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
VINEGAR	SEDIMENT

Don’t	worry:	Vinegar	with	a	cloudy,	slimy	sediment	at	the	bottom	is	still	usable.

Nearly	all	commercially	made	vinegar	will	last	indefinitely	in	an	unopened	bottle.	Once	the	vinegar	is
exposed	to	air,	however,	harmless	“vinegar	bacteria”	may	start	to	grow.	These	bacteria	cause	the	formation
of	a	cloudy	sediment	that	is	nothing	more	than	harmless	cellulose,	a	complex	carbohydrate	that	does	not
affect	the	quality	or	flavor	of	the	vinegar.	We	confirmed	this	with	a	side-by-side	comparison	of	freshly
opened	bottles	of	vinegar	and	those	with	sediment	(strained	before	tasting).

The	Vinegar	Institute	carried	out	storage	studies	of	vinegar	and	determined	that	the	shelf	life	of	opened
vinegar	stored	in	a	dark	cabinet	at	room	temperature	is	“almost	indefinite.”	To	deal	with	the	unsightly
sediment,	simply	strain	the	vinegar	through	a	coffee	filter	set	inside	a	fine-mesh	strainer	before	using	it.



SALTING	AT	WORK	
TOMATOES
Everyone	knows	tomatoes	are	juicy.	What	are	the	best	strategies	for	dealing	with
all	this	liquid?	Salt	can	help	to	remove	excess	moisture	and	prevent	the
waterlogging	of	such	baked	dishes	as	tarts	and	stuffed	tomatoes,	and	it	can	play
an	instrumental	role	in	helping	to	coax	the	flavor	out	of	the	cells.



TOMATO	AND	MOZZARELLA	TART
SERVES	6	TO	8

Thawing	the	frozen	puff	pastry	in	the	refrigerator	overnight	will	help	prevent
cracking	while	unfolding	it.	Be	sure	to	use	low-moisture	supermarket	mozzarella
sold	in	block	form,	not	fresh	water-packed	mozzarella.

2				 (9½	by	9-inch)	sheets	puff	pastry,	thawed
1				 large	egg,	beaten
2				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	(1	cup)
1				 pound	plum	tomatoes,	cored	and	cut	crosswise	into	¼-inch-thick	slices
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
8				 ounces	whole-milk	mozzarella	cheese,	shredded	(2	cups)
2				 tablespoons	chopped	fresh	basil

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.
Line	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	parchment	paper.	Dust	counter	with	flour	and
unfold	both	pieces	of	puff	pastry	onto	counter.	Brush	1	short	edge	of	1	sheet	of
pastry	with	egg	and	overlap	with	second	sheet	by	1	inch,	forming	18	by	9-inch
rectangle.	Press	to	seal	edges,	then	use	rolling	pin	to	smooth	seam.	Cut	two	1-
inch-wide	strips	from	long	side	of	dough	and	two	more	from	short	side.	Transfer
large	piece	of	dough	to	prepared	baking	sheet	and	brush	with	egg.	Attach	long
dough	strips	to	long	edges	of	dough	and	short	strips	to	short	edges,	then	brush
dough	strips	with	egg.	Sprinkle	Parmesan	evenly	over	shell.	Using	fork,
uniformly	poke	holes	in	shell	all	over.	Bake	for	13	to	15	minutes,	then	reduce
oven	temperature	to	350	degrees.	Continue	to	bake	until	golden	brown	and	crisp,
13	to	15	minutes	longer.	Transfer	to	wire	rack;	increase	oven	temperature	to	425
degrees.
2.	While	shell	bakes,	place	tomato	slices	in	single	layer	on	double	layer	of

paper	towels	and	sprinkle	evenly	with	½	teaspoon	salt;	let	stand	for	30	minutes.
Place	another	double	layer	of	paper	towels	on	top	of	tomatoes	and	press	firmly
to	dry	tomatoes.	Combine	garlic,	olive	oil,	and	pinch	each	salt	and	pepper	in
small	bowl;	set	aside.



3.	Sprinkle	mozzarella	evenly	over	baked	shell.	Shingle	tomato	slices
widthwise	on	top	of	cheese	(about	4	slices	per	row);	brush	tomatoes	with	garlic
oil.	Bake	until	shell	is	deep	golden	brown	and	cheese	is	melted,	15	to	17
minutes.	Let	cool	on	wire	rack	for	5	minutes.	Sprinkle	with	basil,	slide	onto
cutting	board	or	serving	platter,	cut	into	pieces,	and	serve.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Tart	shell	can	be	prebaked	through	step	1,	cooled	to

room	temperature,	wrapped	in	plastic	wrap,	and	kept	at	room	temperature	for	up
to	2	days	before	being	topped	and	baked	with	mozzarella	and	tomatoes.

SUN-DRIED	TOMATO	AND	MOZZARELLA	TART

Replacing	the	plum	tomatoes	with	sun-dried	tomatoes	turns	this	into	an
appetizer	you	can	make	any	time	of	year.

Substitute	½	cup	oil-packed	sun-dried	tomatoes,	drained,	rinsed,	and	chopped
fine,	for	plum	tomatoes.

TOMATO	AND	MOZZARELLA	TART	WITH	PROSCIUTTO
Place	2	ounces	thinly	sliced	prosciutto	in	single	layer	on	top	of	mozzarella
before	arranging	tomato	slices.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Falling	somewhere	in	between	pizza	and	quiche,	a	tomato	and	mozzarella	tart
shares	the	flavors	of	both	but	features	problems	unique	unto	itself.	For	starters,
the	moisture	in	the	tomatoes	almost	guarantees	a	soggy	pastry	crust.	Also,
tomato	tarts	are	often	short	on	flavor.	We	set	out	to	develop	a	recipe	that	could
easily	be	made	at	home	with	a	solid	bottom	crust	and	great	vine-ripened	flavor.
The	best	results	came	from	using	a	two-step	baking	method,	“waterproofing”	the
crust	with	egg	wash,	layering	cheese	to	prevent	sogginess,	and,	of	course,
salting	the	sliced	tomatoes	to	remove	excess	juices.
SALT	AND	DRAIN	A	combination	of	salting	and	draining	on	paper	towels

(with	some	pressing	at	the	end)	extracts	much	of	the	moisture	from	sliced
tomatoes	destined	for	a	tart.	We	begin	with	plum	tomatoes	here,	rather	than
beefsteak	tomatoes,	because	they	have	less	liquid.
FORM	THE	PUFF	PASTRY	CRUST	We	transform	store-bought	puff

pastry	sheets	into	a	rectangular	crust	with	a	thin	border	to	contain	the	topping
(tomatoes	easily	slip	off	a	flat	sheet	of	anything).	To	do	this,	we	brush	egg	along
one	edge	of	one	sheet	of	puff	pastry	and	overlap	it	with	the	second	sheet	of
dough	by	1	inch,	pressing	to	seal	them	together.	With	a	rolling	pin,	we	smooth
out	the	seam.	The	dough	should	measure	about	18	by	9	inches.	(You	can	use	a
pizza	cutter	to	trim	the	edges	straight.)	Next,	we	cut	two	1-inch	strips	from	the
long	side	of	the	dough,	and	then	two	1-inch	strips	from	the	short	side.	After
brushing	the	dough	with	an	egg	wash,	we	gently	press	the	thin	strips	onto	the
outer	edges	of	the	dough—one	per	side,	creating	a	well-fitting	border.	Brushing
the	strips	with	more	egg	wash	secures	them	in	place.
PREBAKE	THE	CRUST	We	prebake	the	crust	at	two	different	heat	levels:	a

high	temperature	for	initial	lift	and	browning,	then	a	lower	temperature	to	dry
out	the	shell	for	maximum	sturdiness.	Starting	out	at	425	degrees	(and	held	there
until	puffed	and	light	golden,	about	15	minutes)	and	finishing	at	350	degrees
(and	held	there	until	well	browned,	15	minutes	longer),	the	crust	emerges	flaky
yet	rigid	enough	for	us	to	hold	it	aloft	while	grasping	just	one	end.
WATERPROOF	THE	DOUGH	The	first	lines	of	defense	against	a	soggy

tart	are	a	thick	coat	of	egg	and	a	layer	of	Parmesan	cheese	applied	to	the	entire
tart	before	prebaking	begins.	The	egg	wash	creates	a	deflective	but	not
impermeable	layer	on	the	delicate	crust.	But	the	Parmesan	melts	into	a	solid	(and
delicious,	nutty-tasting)	fatty	layer	that	liquid	rolls	right	off,	like	rain	off	a	duck’s
back.	With	these	layers	intact,	we	can	add	mozzarella	and	tomatoes	and	still	end
up	with	a	firm,	crisp	tart,	even	hours	after	baking.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	TALE	OF	THE	SOGGY	TART

Three	steps	are	necessary	to	prevent	a	soggy	tart:	salt,	an	egg	wash,	and	some	Parmesan.

If	you	neglect	to	salt	the	tomatoes	and	brush	the	dough	with	egg	wash,	the	baked	tart	will	be	soggy	and
limp.	If	you	take	both	of	these	precautions	(and	add	a	layer	of	grated	Parmesan),	individual	slices	will	be
firm	and	dry	and	have	enough	structural	integrity	to	hold	their	shape.

	
SOGGY

Without	salted,	drained	tomatoes,	Parmesan,	or	an	egg	wash,	this	is	one	soggy	tart.



	
FIRM

After	implementing	our	three	precautions,	this	tart	can	be	held	firmly	in	one	hand.



STUFFED	TOMATOES	WITH	PARMESAN,	GARLIC,	AND	BASIL
SERVES	6

Make	sure	not	to	use	tomatoes	that	are	too	ripe,	as	they	will	not	hold	their	shape.

6				 firm,	ripe	large	tomatoes	(8	ounces	each),	1⁄8	inch	sliced	off	stem	end,	cored,	and	seeded
1				 teaspoon	kosher	salt
1				 slice	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
3				 tablespoons	plus	1	teaspoon	olive	oil

1½				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	(¾	cup)
				1⁄3 cup	shredded	fresh	basil
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
					 Pepper

1.	Line	baking	sheet	with	double	layer	of	paper	towels.	Sprinkle	inside	of	each
tomato	with	salt	and	place	upside	down	on	baking	sheet.	Let	sit	to	remove
excess	moisture,	about	30	minutes.
2.	Meanwhile,	adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	375

degrees.	Line	bottom	of	13	by	9-inch	baking	dish	with	aluminum	foil;	set	aside.
Pulse	bread	in	food	processor	to	coarse	crumbs,	about	10	pulses.	Toss	with	1
tablespoon	olive	oil,	Parmesan,	basil,	and	garlic	in	small	bowl;	season	with
pepper	to	taste.
3.	Pat	inside	of	each	tomato	dry	with	paper	towels.	Arrange	tomatoes	in	single

layer	in	prepared	baking	dish.	Brush	top	cut	edges	of	tomatoes	with	1	teaspoon
oil.	Mound	stuffing	into	tomatoes	(about	¼	cup	per	tomato)	and	drizzle	with
remaining	2	tablespoons	oil.	Bake	until	tops	are	golden	brown	and	crisp,	about
20	minutes.	Serve	immediately.

STUFFED	TOMATOES	WITH	GOAT	CHEESE,	OLIVES,	AND
OREGANO
Substitute	3	ounces	crumbled	goat	cheese	(¾	cup)	for	Parmesan,	omit	basil,	and
add	3	tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley,	1½	teaspoons	minced	fresh	oregano,	and
3	tablespoons	chopped	black	olives	to	bread-crumb	mixture	in	step	2.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Most	stuffed	tomatoes	are	mealy	and	bland,	with	a	stuffing	of	waterlogged,
tasteless	bread.	We	were	after	ripe,	sun-drenched	summer	tomatoes	filled	with
garden-fresh	herbs,	garlicky	bread	crumbs,	and	sharp	cheese.	To	combat
sogginess,	we	salt	and	drain	the	tomatoes	prior	to	stuffing.	We	use	homemade
bread	crumbs	as	a	base	for	a	stuffing	that	also	includes	olive	oil,	cheese,	garlic,
and	fresh	basil.	We	generously	fill	the	tomatoes	and	bake	for	just	20	minutes	for
tender	tomatoes	topped	with	a	crisp,	golden	crust.
SALT	THOSE	TOMATOES	Rather	than	letting	the	tomato	juices	make	the

filling	runny	when	baked,	we	remove	these	juices	before	stuffing	by	salting	the
interior.	After	salting,	the	water	passes	through	the	cells’	semipermeable
membranes,	moving	from	the	inside	of	the	cells	to	the	outside,	in	effect	draining
the	tomato	of	its	excess	juices.
DRY	THEM,	TOO	After	salting	the	tomatoes,	we	place	them	upside	down

on	a	pile	of	paper	towels.	Not	only	does	the	salt	help	to	remove	the	liquid,	but
the	paper	towels,	too,	draw	even	more	moisture	from	the	tomatoes.	Placing	the
tomatoes	upside	down	helps	to	speed	up	this	process.
MAKE	HOMEMADE	CRUMBS	Homemade	bread	crumbs	are	better	for

both	flavor	and	texture	in	this	dish.	Store-bought	crumbs	can	be	gritty	and	dry,
and	don’t	absorb	the	remaining	tomato	moisture	very	well.	The	homemade
crumbs,	on	the	other	hand,	absorb	the	juices	yet	still	provide	an	interesting	chew
and	crunch.
USE	POTENT	SEASONINGS	There	isn’t	a	lot	of	space	in	a	tomato,	so	a

little	filling	has	to	have	big	flavor.	Choose	other	ingredients	(besides	the	bread)
carefully.	In	addition	to	the	crumbs,	we	like	a	potent	cheese,	garlic,	fresh	herbs,
and	even	olives.
USE	A	MODERATE	OVEN	If	a	tomato	spends	too	much	time	in	the	oven,	it

will	shrivel.	But	if	the	temperature	is	too	high,	the	stuffing	will	burn	while	the
tomato	remains	raw-tasting	inside.	We	compromise:	375	degrees	for	20	minutes
leaves	us	with	a	tender	tomato	and	a	lovely	golden	crust	on	top.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
REMOVE	GREEN	SPROUTS	FROM	GARLIC

Green	sprouts	in	garlic	can	taste	bitter	and	harsh.

Many	a	culinary	student	has	been	told	to	remove	any	green	shoots	from	cloves	of	garlic	because	they	are
thought	to	have	a	bitter	taste	that	persists	even	when	the	garlic	is	cooked.	To	test	the	validity	of	this	advice,
we	used	raw	garlic	in	aïoli	and	cooked	garlic	in	pasta	with	olive	oil	and	tried	each	recipe	with	the	shoots
removed	before	mincing	the	garlic	as	well	as	with	the	shoots	left	in.	In	the	aïoli,	tasters	could	clearly
identify	a	more	bitter,	unpleasant	taste	in	the	batch	made	with	the	shoots	left	in;	the	batch	without	the	shoots
still	had	the	bite	that	you	expect	from	garlic,	but	it	was	less	harsh.	The	pasta	made	with	the	shoots	had	a
harsh,	somewhat	metallic	aftertaste	that,	once	established,	tainted	every	bite	that	followed.

Why?	The	sprouts	contain	stronger,	more	bitter-tasting	compounds	than	those	found	in	the	clove,	and
they	tend	to	persist	even	after	cooking.	We	recommend	removing	the	sprouts	when	cooking	with	garlic.



CREAMY	GAZPACHO	ANDALUZ
SERVES	4	TO	6

For	ideal	flavor,	allow	the	gazpacho	to	sit	in	the	refrigerator	overnight	before
serving.	Red	wine	vinegar	can	be	substituted	for	the	sherry	vinegar.	Although	we
prefer	to	use	kosher	salt	in	this	soup,	half	the	amount	of	table	salt	can	be	used.
Serve	the	soup	with	additional	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	sherry	vinegar,	ground
black	pepper,	and	diced	vegetables	for	diners	to	season	and	garnish	their	own
bowls	as	desired.

3				 pounds	tomatoes,	cored
1				 small	cucumber,	peeled,	halved	lengthwise,	and	seeded
1				 green	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	halved,	and	seeded
1				 small	red	onion,	peeled	and	halved
2				 garlic	cloves,	peeled	and	quartered
1				 small	serrano	chile,	stemmed	and	halved	lengthwise
					 Kosher	salt	and	pepper
1				 slice	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	crust	removed,	torn	into	1-inch	pieces
½				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	plus	extra	for	serving
2				 tablespoons	sherry	vinegar,	plus	extra	for	serving
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley,	chives,	or	basil

1.	Coarsely	chop	2	pounds	tomatoes,	half	of	cucumber,	half	of	bell	pepper,
and	half	of	onion	and	place	in	large	bowl.	Add	garlic,	serrano,	and	1½	teaspoons
salt	and	toss	to	combine.
2.	Cut	remaining	tomatoes,	cucumber,	and	bell	pepper	into	¼-inch	dice	and

place	in	medium	bowl.	Mince	remaining	onion	and	add	to	diced	vegetables.	Toss
with	½	teaspoon	salt	and	transfer	to	fine-mesh	strainer	set	over	medium	bowl.
Let	drain	for	1	hour.	Transfer	drained	diced	vegetables	to	medium	bowl	and	set
aside,	reserving	exuded	liquid	(there	should	be	about	¼	cup;	discard	extra
liquid).
3.	Add	bread	pieces	to	exuded	liquid	and	soak	for	1	minute.	Add	soaked	bread

and	any	remaining	liquid	to	coarsely	chopped	vegetables	and	toss	thoroughly	to
combine.
4.	Transfer	half	of	vegetable-bread	mixture	to	blender	and	process	for	30



seconds.	With	blender	running,	slowly	drizzle	in	¼	cup	oil	and	continue	to	blend
until	completely	smooth,	about	2	minutes.	Strain	soup	through	fine-mesh	strainer
into	large	bowl,	using	back	of	ladle	or	rubber	spatula	to	press	soup	through
strainer.	Repeat	with	remaining	vegetable-bread	mixture	and	¼	cup	oil.
5.	Stir	vinegar,	parsley,	and	half	of	diced	vegetables	into	soup	and	season	with

salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Cover	and	refrigerate	overnight	or	for	at	least	2	hours	to
chill	completely	and	develop	flavors.	Serve,	passing	remaining	diced	vegetables,
oil,	vinegar,	and	pepper	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	gazpacho	popular	in	Andalusia,	the	southern	region	of	Spain,	is	creamy	and
complex,	with	the	bright	flavor	of	naturally	ripened	vegetables.	The	key	to	fresh
tomato	flavor	is	salting	the	tomatoes	and	letting	them	sit	to	release	more	flavor.
This	is	also	true	for	the	other	vegetables—cucumber,	bell	pepper,	and	onion	(see
“Salting	Can	Also	Make	Vegetables	Taste	Better”).	For	added	flavor,	we	soak
the	bread,	which	we	use	to	thicken	the	soup,	in	the	exuded	vegetable	juices.	A
final	dash	of	olive	oil	and	sherry	vinegar	further	brightens	the	flavor	of	our
soup.	A	diced-vegetable	garnish	lends	a	fresh	finish.
SOAK	THAT	BREAD	True	old-world	gazpacho	is	more	concept	than

precise	recipe.	Centuries	ago,	Spanish	field-workers	cobbled	together	leftover
odds	and	ends—yesterday’s	bread,	almonds,	garlic,	olive	oil,	water—and
mashed	it	all	together	into	a	humble	potage.	(Even	the	etymology	of	gazpacho	is
fuzzy,	though	most	authorities	suggest	it	derives	from	words	for	“fragments,”
“remainder,”	and	“soaked	bread.”)	Needless	to	say,	the	bread	is	an	important
ingredient.	It	adds	body—and	authenticity.	We	soak	our	bread	not	in	water,	the
liquid	traditionally	used	to	soften	the	bread,	but	in	the	exuded	liquid	from	the
salted	vegetables	to	add	even	more	flavor	to	the	soup.
DRIZZLE	OIL	SLOWLY	The	trick	to	a	smooth	soup	with	a	fully	blended

texture	is	all	in	how	you	add	the	olive	oil.	Go	slow.	It’s	important	to	drizzle	the
oil	slowly	in	order	for	it	to	emulsify	(see	concept	36).
TIME	TO	DEVELOP	FLAVORS	Chilling	the	soup	not	only	gets	it	to	the

right	(and	refreshing)	temperature,	but	the	time	it	takes	to	chill	the	soup	helps	to
develop	flavor.	The	soup	should	be	chilled	for	at	least	two	hours,	but	overnight	is
best.



SALTING	AT	WORK	
EGGPLANT
Eggplants	are	filled	with	both	air	pockets	and	water.	Diced	and	cooked	as	is,
they	will	absorb	large	amounts	of	the	cooking	medium—usually	oil—resulting	in
a	greasy	mess.	It’s	important	to	remove	the	liquid	before	cooking,	allowing	the
eggplant	to	brown	under	high	heat	and	collapse	the	air	bubbles	so	that	excessive
amounts	of	oil	are	not	absorbed.	We	do	this	with	salt.	Salting	and	then	draining
the	eggplant	is	traditional,	but	we	take	it	one	step	further	and	use	the
microwave.	Salting	draws	out	the	moisture	and	microwaving	causes	the	liquid	to
evaporate	rapidly,	resulting	in	a	dehydrated	vegetable	ready	for	deep
caramelization	in	a	pan.



CAPONATA
MAKES	3	CUPS

Serve	caponata	spooned	over	slices	of	toasted	baguette	or	alongside	grilled
meat	or	fish.	Adjust	the	vinegar	as	necessary,	depending	on	the	acidity	of	your
tomatoes	and	what	you	are	serving	with	the	caponata.	To	allow	the	steam
released	by	the	eggplant	to	escape,	remove	the	plate	from	the	microwave
immediately.	Although	the	test	kitchen	prefers	the	complex	flavor	of	V8	vegetable
juice,	tomato	juice	can	be	substituted.	Caponata	is	best	made	a	day	in	advance
to	allow	the	flavors	to	meld.

1½				 pounds	eggplant,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
¾				 teaspoon	kosher	salt
¾				 cup	V8	juice
¼				 cup	red	wine	vinegar,	plus	extra	for	seasoning
¼				 cup	minced	fresh	parsley
2				 tablespoons	packed	light	brown	sugar
3				 anchovy	fillets,	rinsed	and	minced
8				 ounces	tomatoes,	cored,	seeded,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
¼				 cup	raisins
2				 tablespoons	minced	black	olives
5				 teaspoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	plus	extra	1	teaspoon	if	needed
1				 celery	rib,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 small	red	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded	and	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 small	onion,	chopped	fine
¼				 cup	pine	nuts,	toasted

1.	Toss	eggplant	and	salt	together	in	bowl.	Line	surface	of	large	plate	with
double	layer	of	coffee	filters	and	lightly	spray	with	vegetable	oil	spray.	Spread
eggplant	in	even	layer	over	coffee	filters.	Microwave	until	eggplant	is	dry	and
shriveled	to	one-third	its	size	but	is	not	brown,	8	to	15	minutes.	(If	microwave
has	no	turntable,	rotate	plate	after	5	minutes.)	Remove	eggplant	from	microwave
and	immediately	transfer	to	paper	towel–lined	plate.
2.	Meanwhile,	whisk	V8	juice,	vinegar,	parsley,	sugar,	and	anchovies	together

in	medium	bowl.	Stir	in	tomatoes,	raisins,	and	olives.



3.	Heat	1	tablespoon	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat
until	shimmering.	Add	eggplant	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	edges	are
browned,	4	to	8	minutes,	adding	up	to	1	teaspoon	oil	if	pan	appears	dry.	Transfer
to	bowl	and	set	aside.
4.	Add	remaining	2	teaspoons	oil	to	now-empty	skillet	and	heat	until

shimmering.	Add	celery	and	bell	pepper	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until
softened	and	edges	are	spotty	brown,	2	to	4	minutes.	Add	onion	and	continue	to
cook	until	vegetables	are	browned,	about	4	minutes	longer.
5.	Reduce	heat	to	medium-low	and	stir	in	eggplant	and	V8	juice	mixture.

Bring	to	simmer	and	cook	until	vegetable	juices	are	thickened	and	coat
vegetables,	4	to	7	minutes.	Transfer	to	serving	bowl	and	let	cool	to	room
temperature.	Taste	and	season	with	up	to	1	teaspoon	additional	vinegar,	if
necessary.	Sprinkle	with	pine	nuts	before	serving.	(Caponata	can	be	refrigerated
for	up	to	1	week.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	classic	Sicilian	dish,	featuring	a	mix	of	sautéed	vegetables	(primarily
tomatoes	and	eggplant)	and	accented	with	anchovies,	capers,	and	pine	nuts,	can
turn	out	greasy	thanks	to	the	spongy	nature	of	eggplants,	which	causes	them	to
soak	up	oil.	For	a	balanced	and	boldly	flavored	caponata	with	eggplant	that
doesn’t	turn	to	oil-soaked	mush,	we	like	to	salt	and	then	microwave	rather	than
just	salt	and	drain	the	eggplant.	Though	an	unexpected	move,	it	turns	out	to	be
critical	for	drying	out	the	eggplant	sufficiently.
SALT	AND	MICROWAVE	Eggplant	is	essentially	a	sponge,	consisting	of	a

maze	of	tiny	air	pockets	ready	to	absorb	anything,	especially	the	medium	it’s
cooked	in.	It’s	also	packed	with	water.	Both	of	these	properties	make	it
troublesome	to	cook.	When	it	is	sautéed,	for	example,	the	air	pockets	will	suck
up	any	oil	in	the	pan,	forcing	the	cook	to	keep	adding	oil	to	prevent	sticking	or
burning.	Meanwhile,	the	moisture	inside	turns	to	steam.	This	one-two	punch
transforms	the	eggplant	into	oil-soaked	mush	before	it	has	a	chance	to
caramelize.	The	classic	technique	of	salting	and	draining	the	eggplant	isn’t
enough	for	this	dish.	Instead,	we	dehydrate	the	eggplant	faster	and	more
effectively	by	cutting	it	into	small	cubes,	salting	it,	and	sticking	it	in	the
microwave.	After	all,	the	microwave	works	by	causing	the	water	molecules	in
food	to	oscillate	rapidly	and	generate	steam.	Food	left	in	the	microwave	will
transition	from	merely	heating	up	to	actually	dehydrating.	Coffee	filters	(rather
than	paper	towels,	which	can	contain	dyes	that	are	not	microwave-safe)	absorb
the	released	liquid	and	prevent	the	newly	dried	eggplant	from	turning	into	mush.
SAUTÉ	SEPARATELY	We	sauté	our	eggplant	separately	so	that	it	won’t	be

affected	by	the	moisture	shed	by	the	other	vegetables	as	they	cook.	As	for	the
other	vegetables,	we	sauté	the	celery,	bell	pepper,	and	onion	in	order	to	develop
their	flavors.	We	don’t	add	the	fresh	tomatoes	until	close	to	the	end	of	cooking
because	a	long	cooking	time	would	rob	them	of	their	fresh	taste.	Adding	them
right	before	taking	the	pan	off	the	heat	would	give	the	caponata	a	texture	like
salsa,	however.	We	strike	the	perfect	balance	by	gently	simmering	the	tomatoes
with	the	browned	eggplant	and	other	ingredients	for	a	handful	of	minutes	at	the
very	end	of	cooking.	About	five	minutes	over	medium-low	heat	incorporates	the
tomatoes’	sweet	juiciness	while	preserving	their	bright	freshness.
GOTTA	HAVE	V8	Alongside	the	fresh	tomatoes,	we	also	add	some	V8	juice

to	this	dish	in	order	to	achieve	the	deep	tomato	flavor	that	makes	a	great
caponata	so	memorable.	A	small	amount	is	just	enough	to	provide	another	layer
of	tomato	flavor,	while	still	allowing	the	fresh	tomatoes	to	shine.



BUILD	FLAVOR	Traditional	caponata	has	a	sweet	and	sour	finish	that	helps
distinguish	it	from	the	stewed	eggplant	specialty	from	France,	ratatouille.	Brown
sugar	adds	a	sweet	note,	while	we	prefer	red	wine	vinegar	for	the	sour.	It
provides	just	the	right	degree	of	bracing	tartness.	Customary	inclusions	of	raisins
and	olives	are	also	a	must.	After	trying	a	dozen	different	olive	varieties,	we	find
that	almost	any	olive	will	work.	A	few	anchovy	fillets	deepen	the	overall	flavor
of	the	dish,	and	a	scattering	of	toasted	pine	nuts	provides	an	aromatic	crunch.
Together,	these	ingredients	give	us	well-balanced,	authentic	caponata	that	tastes
great	as	an	appetizer,	a	relish,	or	just	straight	from	the	bowl.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
A	CURE	FOR	WHAT	AILS	EGGPLANT

Eggplant	can	be	mushy	and	greasy	without	our	surprising	solution:	salt	and	a	microwave.

To	rid	the	eggplant	of	excess	moisture	and	collapse	the	air	pockets	that	make	it	soak	up	oil	like	a	sponge,
we	came	up	with	a	novel	solution:	salting	it	and	then	heating	it	in	the	microwave.	The	salt	pulls	out	liquid
from	inside	the	eggplant	at	the	same	time	the	microwave	causes	it	to	steam.	In	addition,	the	microwave
helps	to	collapse	the	weakened	cell	walls	in	the	eggplant,	making	it	less	spongy.	To	keep	the	eggplant	from
poaching	in	the	liquid	it	releases,	we	set	it	on	a	layer	of	coffee	filters.	By	absorbing	all	of	that	liquid,	the
filters	also	help	to	maintain	a	super-high	salt	concentration	on	the	exterior	of	the	eggplant,	which	causes
even	more	unwanted	moisture	to	be	drawn	out.

	
RAW	DEAL

Without	pretreatment,	the	raw	eggplant	looks	good	but	cooks	up	oily	and	mushy.



	
MICROWAVE	MAGIC

Salted,	microwaved	eggplant	isn’t	as	pretty,	but	the	shrunken	cubes	soak	up	far	less	oil.



PASTA	ALLA	NORMA
SERVES	4

Ricotta	salata	is	traditional,	but	French	feta,	Pecorino	Romano,	and	Cotija	(a
firm,	crumbly	Mexican	cheese)	are	acceptable	substitutes.	We	prefer	kosher	salt
because	it	clings	best	to	the	eggplant.	If	using	table	salt,	reduce	salt	amounts	by
half.	Use	the	smaller	amount	of	red	pepper	flakes	for	a	milder	sauce.

1½				 pounds	eggplant,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
					 Kosher	salt
¼				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 anchovy	fillets,	rinsed	and	minced

¼–½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
1				 (28-ounce)	can	crushed	tomatoes
6				 tablespoons	chopped	fresh	basil
1				 pound	ziti,	rigatoni,	or	penne
3				 ounces	ricotta	salata,	shredded	(1½	cups)

1.	Toss	eggplant	with	1	teaspoon	salt	in	large	bowl.	Line	surface	of	large	plate
with	double	layer	of	coffee	filters	and	lightly	spray	with	vegetable	oil	spray.
Spread	eggplant	in	even	layer	over	coffee	filters;	wipe	out	and	reserve	bowl.
Microwave	eggplant,	uncovered,	until	dry	to	touch	and	slightly	shriveled,	about
10	minutes,	tossing	halfway	through	cooking.	Let	cool	slightly.
2.	Transfer	eggplant	to	now-empty	bowl,	drizzle	with	1	tablespoon	oil,	and

toss	gently	to	coat;	discard	coffee	filters	and	reserve	plate.	Heat	1	tablespoon	oil
in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	shimmering.	Add
eggplant	and	cook,	stirring	every	1½	to	2	minutes	(more	frequent	stirring	may
cause	eggplant	pieces	to	break	apart),	until	well	browned	and	fully	tender,	about
10	minutes.	Transfer	eggplant	to	now-empty	plate	and	set	aside.	Let	skillet	cool
slightly,	about	3	minutes.
3.	Heat	1	tablespoon	oil,	garlic,	anchovies,	and	pepper	flakes	in	now-empty

skillet	over	medium	heat.	Cook,	stirring	often,	until	garlic	turns	golden	but	not
brown,	about	3	minutes.	Stir	in	tomatoes,	bring	to	simmer,	and	cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	slightly	thickened,	8	to	10	minutes.	Add	eggplant	and



continue	to	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	eggplant	is	heated	through	and
flavors	meld,	3	to	5	minutes	longer.	Stir	in	basil	and	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil
and	season	with	salt	to	taste.
4.	Meanwhile,	bring	4	quarts	water	to	boil	in	large	pot.	Add	pasta	and	2

tablespoons	salt	and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	al	dente.	Reserve	½	cup	cooking
water,	then	drain	pasta	and	return	it	to	pot.	Add	sauce	to	pasta	and	toss	to
combine.	Add	reserved	cooking	water	as	needed	to	adjust	consistency.	Serve
immediately,	passing	ricotta	salata	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
To	create	a	bold,	complex	Pasta	alla	Norma	without	a	lot	of	work,	we	came	up
with	a	few	strategies.	As	we	do	for	our	Caponata,	we	salt	and	then	microwave
the	eggplant	to	rid	it	of	as	much	liquid	as	possible,	enabling	us	to	deeply
caramelize	the	vegetable	in	only	a	little	bit	of	oil.	When	developing	this	recipe,
we	tried	many	different	types	of	eggplant:	portly	globe	eggplant;	smaller,	more
svelte	Italian	eggplant;	and	slender,	lavender-colored	Chinese	eggplant.	All
worked,	but	in	the	end	we	prefer	globe	eggplant,	which	has	a	tender	yet	resilient
texture	and	far	fewer	seeds	than	other	varieties,	including	Italian	eggplant.	Cut
into	cubes,	it	retains	its	shape	even	after	sautéing.
BUILD	A	QUICK	SAUCE	For	the	sauce,	we	prefer	using	canned	crushed

tomatoes	for	their	thick	texture	and	added	cohesion.	We	season	the	sauce	with
garlic,	which	is	cooked	using	residual	heat	to	prevent	burning.	A	little	bit	of	red
pepper	flakes	adds	a	suggestion	of	heat,	a	generous	dose	of	chopped	basil	brings
fresh	flavor,	and	a	tablespoon	of	extra-virgin	olive	oil	stirred	in	at	the	end	with
the	basil	gives	the	sauce	rich,	round,	fruity	notes.	Two	anchovy	fillets,	minced,
give	the	sauce	a	deep,	savory	flavor	without	any	trace	of	fishiness.	We	don’t	add
the	eggplant	until	the	very	end	to	prevent	it	from	becoming	mushy.
CHOOSE	THE	RIGHT	CHEESE	Ricotta	salata	is	a	firm,	tangy	Italian

sheep’s	milk	cheese	that	bears	little	resemblance	to	the	moist	ricotta	sold	in	tubs.
It	is	an	essential	component	of	traditional	pasta	alla	Norma.	If	you	can’t	find	it	in
the	market,	consider	substituting	French	feta	(which	is	milder	but	tangy,	a	close
cousin	to	ricotta	salata	in	flavor	and	texture),	Pecorino	Romano	(which	is	hard
and	dry,	with	a	slightly	more	assertive	aroma	and	flavor	than	ricotta	salata),	or
Cotija	(a	Mexican	cow’s	milk	cheese	that	is	firm	yet	crumbly	and	less	complex
than	ricotta	salata).



SALTING	AT	WORK	
ZUCCHINI	AND	SUMMER	SQUASH
Like	cabbage,	tomatoes,	and	eggplant,	zucchini	and	summer	squash	benefit	from
salting	before	being	cooked.	(After	all,	zucchini	is	almost	95	percent	water.)
Here,	the	salt	draws	water	out	of	slices	of	squash	to	prevent	a	gratin	swimming
in	water,	and	from	shredded	zucchini	(minus	the	seeds)	to	avoid	a	watery	sauté.



SUMMER	VEGETABLE	GRATIN
SERVES	6	TO	8

Buy	zucchini	and	summer	squash	of	roughly	the	same	diameter.	While	we	like
the	visual	contrast	zucchini	and	summer	squash	bring	to	the	dish,	you	can	also
use	just	one	or	the	other.	A	similarly	sized	broiler-safe	gratin	dish	can	be
substituted	for	the	13	by	9-inch	baking	dish.	Serve	the	gratin	alongside	grilled
fish	or	meat	and	accompanied	by	bread	to	soak	up	any	flavorful	juices.

6				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1				 pound	zucchini,	sliced	¼	inch	thick
1				 pound	yellow	summer	squash,	sliced	¼	inch	thick
2				 teaspoons	salt

1½				 pounds	tomatoes,	cored	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
2				 onions,	halved	and	sliced	thin
¾				 teaspoon	pepper
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	thyme
1				 slice	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
2				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	(1	cup)
2				 shallots,	minced
¼				 cup	chopped	fresh	basil

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.
Brush	13	by	9-inch	baking	dish	with	1	tablespoon	oil	and	set	aside.	Line	2
baking	sheets	with	triple	layer	of	paper	towels	and	set	aside.
2.	Toss	zucchini	and	summer	squash	slices	with	1	teaspoon	salt	in	large	bowl;

transfer	to	colander.	Let	drain	until	zucchini	and	squash	release	at	least	3
tablespoons	liquid,	about	45	minutes.	Arrange	slices	on	1	prepared	baking	sheet
and	cover	with	another	triple	layer	of	paper	towels.	Firmly	press	each	slice	to
remove	as	much	liquid	as	possible.
3.	Place	tomato	slices	in	single	layer	on	second	prepared	baking	sheet,

sprinkle	evenly	with	½	teaspoon	salt,	and	let	stand	for	30	minutes.	Cover	with
double	layer	of	paper	towels	and	press	firmly	to	dry	tomatoes.
4.	Meanwhile,	heat	1	tablespoon	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium



heat	until	shimmering.	Add	onions,	remaining	½	teaspoon	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon
pepper.	Cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	onions	are	softened	and	dark	golden
brown,	20	to	25	minutes.	Set	onions	aside.
5.	Combine	garlic,	3	tablespoons	oil,	remaining	½	teaspoon	pepper,	and	thyme

in	small	bowl.	In	large	bowl,	toss	zucchini	and	summer	squash	in	half	of	oil
mixture,	then	arrange	in	prepared	baking	dish.	Arrange	caramelized	onions	in
even	layer	over	squash.	Slightly	overlap	tomato	slices	in	single	layer	on	top	of
onions.	Spoon	remaining	garlic-oil	mixture	evenly	over	tomatoes.	Bake	until
vegetables	are	tender	and	tomatoes	are	starting	to	brown	on	edges,	40	to	45
minutes.
6.	Meanwhile,	process	bread	in	food	processor	until	finely	ground,	about	10

seconds.	(You	should	have	about	1	cup	crumbs.)	Combine	bread	crumbs,
remaining	1	tablespoon	oil,	Parmesan,	and	shallots	in	medium	bowl.	Remove
baking	dish	from	oven	and	increase	heat	to	450	degrees.	Sprinkle	bread-crumb
mixture	evenly	on	top	of	tomatoes.	Bake	gratin	until	bubbling	and	cheese	is
lightly	browned,	5	to	10	minutes.	Sprinkle	with	basil	and	let	sit	for	10	minutes
before	serving.

SUMMER	VEGETABLE	GRATIN	WITH	ROASTED	PEPPERS	AND
SMOKED	MOZZARELLA

You	can	use	store-bought	roasted	red	peppers	or	make	your	own.	If	using	store-
bought,	rinse	and	pat	the	peppers	dry	before	using.

Substitute	1	cup	shredded	smoked	mozzarella	for	Parmesan	and	3	roasted	red
peppers,	cut	into	1-inch	pieces,	for	summer	squash	(do	not	salt	roasted	peppers).



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Layering	summer’s	best	vegetables	into	a	gratin	can	lead	to	a	memorable	side
dish—or	a	soggy	mess.	We	wanted	a	simple	Provençal-style	vegetable	gratin,
where	a	golden	brown,	cheesy	topping	provides	a	rich	contrast	to	the	fresh,
bright	flavor	of	the	vegetables.	The	typical	combination	of	tomatoes,	zucchini,
and	summer	squash	made	the	cut	(eggplant	was	too	mushy	and	bell	peppers	took
on	a	steamed	flavor).	To	eliminate	excess	moisture,	we	bake	the	casserole
uncovered	after	salting	the	vegetables.	We	move	the	tomatoes	to	the	top	gratin
layer,	which	allows	them	to	roast	and	caramelize.	We	build	flavor	by	tossing	the
zucchini	and	tomatoes	with	homemade	garlic-thyme	oil.
SALT	AND	SLICE	The	zucchini,	summer	squash,	and	tomatoes	all	get	the

salt	treatment	here.	The	squash	is	sliced	and	placed	in	a	colander,	then	patted	dry
and	pressed	to	remove	excess	liquid.	The	tomatoes	are	placed	directly	on	paper
towels	and	salted;	they	are	too	delicate	to	be	tossed	in	the	colander	like	the
squash.
CARAMELIZE	THE	ONION	To	add	complexity,	we	insert	a	layer	of

caramelized	onions	between	the	zucchini/squash	and	tomato	layers.
BAKE	HOT	AND	UNCOVERED	For	this	gratin,	we	use	a	big	dish	and	a

fairly	shallow	layer	of	vegetables	to	prevent	liquid	from	pooling	and	collecting
among	the	veggies	as	they	bake.	By	cooking	the	gratin	at	a	relatively	high
temperature	without	a	foil	covering,	we	are	likewise	helping	excess	liquid	to
evaporate.
FINISH	WITH	CHEESY	CRUMBS	Homemade	crumbs	are	key	here,

giving	much	better	flavor	and	texture	to	the	dish.	We	add	cheese	and	shallots	to
punch	up	the	flavors.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
KEEP	THE	SEEDS

The	seeds	and	jelly	contain	most	of	the	tomato’s	glutamate.	For	our	gratin,	we	think	twice
before	discarding	them.

At	first	we	thought	that	removing	the	seeds	and	jelly	from	the	tomatoes	would	help	to	cure	the	problem	of
too	much	liquid	in	this	gratin.	This	is	a	common	practice	intended	to	improve	the	texture	of	a	finished	dish.
But	we	found	it	affects	the	flavor,	too.

To	test	this,	we	prepared	two	gratins,	one	made	with	intact	tomatoes	and	another	where	the	tomato	seeds
and	jelly	had	been	removed.	We	found	that	the	gratin	with	the	intact	tomatoes	had	a	decidedly	richer,	deeper
flavor	than	its	stripped-down	counterpart.

According	to	a	study	published	in	the	Journal	of	Agricultural	and	Food	Chemistry,	that’s	because	the
seeds	and	jelly	actually	contain	three	times	the	amount	of	flavor-enhancing	glutamic	acid	as	the	flesh.	(Also
called	glutamate,	this	is	the	compound	that	supplies	the	savory	quality	known	as	umami	in	many	foods;	see
concept	35.)	Sometimes	removing	seeds	is	necessary	(as	in	our	Stuffed	Tomatoes	recipe),	but	it’s	generally
a	last	resort.	The	next	time	a	recipe	calls	for	removing	the	seeds	from	tomatoes,	you	may	want	to	ignore	the
instructions.	You’ll	be	saving	time.



SAUTÉED	SHREDDED	ZUCCHINI	WITH	GARLIC	AND	LEMON
SERVES	4

The	bread-crumb	topping	adds	a	nice	textural	contrast	to	this	recipe,	but	you
may	omit	it	if	you	prefer.

TOPPING
2				 slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter

ZUCCHINI
5				 zucchini,	halved	lengthwise,	seeded,	and	shredded
					 Salt	and	pepper
4				 teaspoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	plus	extra	for	drizzling
1				 small	garlic	clove,	minced

1–2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice

1.	FOR	THE	TOPPING:	Pulse	bread	in	food	processor	to	coarse	crumbs,
about	10	pulses.	Melt	butter	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.
Add	bread	crumbs	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	golden	brown,	about	3
minutes.	Transfer	to	small	bowl;	set	aside.
2.	FOR	THE	ZUCCHINI:	Toss	zucchini	with	1½	teaspoons	salt	in	large

bowl.	Transfer	to	colander	and	let	drain	for	5	to	10	minutes.	Place	zucchini	in
center	of	kitchen	towel	and	wring	out	excess	moisture,	in	batches	if	necessary.
3.	Place	zucchini	in	medium	bowl	and	separate	any	large	clumps.	Combine	2

teaspoons	oil	with	garlic	in	small	bowl.	Add	to	zucchini	and	toss	to	combine.
4.	Heat	remaining	2	teaspoons	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	high	heat

until	just	smoking.	Add	zucchini	in	even	layer	and	cook,	without	stirring,	until
bottom	layer	browns,	about	2	minutes.	Stir	well,	breaking	up	any	clumps	with
tongs,	then	cook	until	bottom	layer	browns,	about	2	minutes	more.	Off	heat,
season	with	lemon	juice	and	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Sprinkle	with	topping,
drizzle	with	olive	oil,	and	serve	immediately.



SAUTÉED	SHREDDED	ZUCCHINI	WITH	TOMATOES	AND	BASIL
Omit	bread-crumb	topping.	Combine	3	diced	plum	tomatoes,	2	tablespoons
chopped	fresh	basil,	2	teaspoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	1	teaspoon	balsamic
vinegar,	1	minced	garlic	clove,	and	¼	teaspoon	salt	in	small	bowl	and	set	aside.
Omit	garlic	in	step	3	and	replace	lemon	juice	with	tomato	mixture	in	step	4.
Transfer	to	serving	platter,	sprinkle	with	¼	cup	grated	Parmesan,	and	serve
immediately,	drizzling	with	additional	olive	oil	if	desired.

SAUTÉED	SHREDDED	ZUCCHINI	WITH	SPICED	CARROTS	AND
ALMONDS
Omit	bread-crumb	topping.	Follow	steps	2	and	3	as	directed,	omitting	garlic,
then	heat	1	tablespoon	extra-virgin	olive	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over
medium	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	2	grated	carrots	and	cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	tender,	about	5	minutes.	Add	½	teaspoon	ground	coriander
and	¼	teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fragrant,
about	30	seconds.	Add	grated	zucchini	and	½	cup	golden	raisins	to	skillet,
spread	into	even	layer,	and	cook	as	directed.	Add	½	cup	sliced	toasted	almonds
and	toss	to	combine	before	seasoning	with	lemon	juice,	salt,	and	pepper.

SAUTÉED	SHREDDED	ZUCCHINI	WITH	PEAS	AND	HERBS
Omit	bread-crumb	topping	and	lemon	juice.	Follow	steps	2	and	3	as	directed,
omitting	garlic,	then	heat	2	teaspoons	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over
medium	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	finely	chopped	whites	from	1	bunch
scallions	and	cook,	stirring,	until	softened	and	beginning	to	brown,	about	3
minutes.	Increase	heat	to	high,	add	zucchini,	and	cook	as	directed.	Once
browned,	add	1	cup	thawed	frozen	peas	and	½	cup	heavy	cream	and	cook,
stirring,	until	cream	is	mostly	reduced,	about	2	minutes.	Off	heat,	stir	in	2
tablespoons	minced	fresh	dill	or	mint	and	thinly	sliced	scallion	greens	and
season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Serve	with	lemon	wedges.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Because	zucchini	is	so	watery,	it	often	cooks	up	soggy	and	bland.	We	wanted	to
find	a	way	to	make	sautéed	zucchini	with	concentrated	flavor	and	appealing
texture.	The	secret	is	to	remove	water	using	more	than	one	method:	salting	and
draining	as	well	as	shredding	and	squeezing.
SHRED,	SALT,	AND	WRING	DRY	The	first	step	is	to	seed	the	zucchini.

The	seeds	and	core	should	be	discarded	to	avoid	a	soupy,	steamy	mess	when
sautéed.	Next,	we	shred	the	zucchini	on	the	large	holes	of	a	box	grater.	Then	we
toss	the	shreds	with	salt	and	drain	them	in	a	colander.	After	draining,	we	wring
them	out	to	dry	in	a	kitchen	towel.	The	shredding	cuts	way	down	on	the	time	the
zucchini	needs	to	drain—five	minutes	as	opposed	to	the	30	minutes	needed	for
whole	slices.
OIL	BEFORE	COOKING	To	avoid	a	slightly	clumpy,	tangled	texture	to	the

zucchini,	which	can	make	it	tricky	to	distribute	flavorful	ingredients	evenly,	the
key	is	to	toss	the	raw	shreds	of	zucchini	with	olive	oil	before	adding	them	to	the
pan.
BROWN	AND	BREAK	To	cook	zucchini,	we	crank	up	the	heat	and

minimize	the	stirring.	This	way	the	zucchini	browns	nicely,	and	we	can	break	up
the	clumps,	somewhat	like	making	hash	browns.



CONCEPT	24

Green	Vegetables	Like	It	Hot—Then
Cold
Many	older	recipes	boil	green	vegetables	too	long	and	the	result	is	a	pile	of
mushy,	army-green	broccoli	or	peas.	Barely	cooking	these	vegetables,	however,
results	in	the	opposite	problem.	They	look	great	but	taste	raw	and	woody.	How
do	you	cook	these	vegetables	so	they	are	tender	and	still	brilliantly	colored?	It’s
all	about	a	high-heat	blanch	followed	by	an	ice-cold	shock.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
When	vegetables	are	cooked,	they	can	change	drastically—especially	in	terms	of
texture.	Heat	immediately	weakens	the	cells	that	hold	water,	causing	liquid	to
leak	out	and	the	vegetable	to	become	limp.	Pectin,	the	soluble	glue	that
reinforces	the	cell	walls	and	holds	the	cells	together,	breaks	down	and	dissolves,
leaving	a	suddenly	softer	piece	of	produce	behind.	Not	all	vegetables	are	meant
to	be	eaten	raw,	so	this	change	is	often	a	welcome	one.
Besides	texture,	heat	also	affects	the	color	of	vegetables.	Green	vegetables	get

their	bright	color	from	chlorophyll,	a	complex	molecule	that	contains	a
magnesium	ion	at	its	center.	When	chlorophyll	is	heated,	however,	it	loses	this
magnesium	ion.	This	loss	results	in	a	dull,	olive-green	hue—familiar	to	all	of	us
who	have	eaten	drab	stalks	of	overcooked	broccoli.
The	process	of	color	change	is	accelerated	in	the	presence	of	acids,	which

occur	naturally	in	plants.	Acids	release	hydrogen	ions,	which	actually	come	in
and	replace	chlorophyll’s	magnesium	ions,	a	change	that	produces	a	dull-colored
molecule	called	pheophytin.	This	is	why	the	pH	of	the	water	(the	levels	of	which
change	drastically	between	“hard”	and	“soft”	water)	used	to	boil	your	green
veggies	can	affect	their	color—not	to	mention	the	use	of	acid-based	dressings.
So	what’s	the	home	cook	to	do?	Well,	move	fast.	We	recommend	cooking

vegetables	as	quickly	as	possible	in	order	to	soften	their	texture	but	not
compromise	their	appearance.	Blanching	(that	is,	cooking	quickly	in	a	pot	of
boiling,	salted	water)	is	the	preferred	method	for	cooking	broccoli,	green	beans,
snow	peas,	and	other	green	vegetables.	It’s	important	not	to	skimp	on	the	amount
of	water	in	the	pot—a	lot	of	water	means	that	the	added	vegetables	won’t	lower
the	temperature	too	much,	allowing	them	to	cook	rapidly.	In	addition	to	adding
flavor,	salt	weakens	pectin,	helping	to	speed	the	softening	of	the	vegetables
before	the	chlorophyll	has	time	to	change.
Interestingly,	a	dip	in	boiling	water	actually	brightens	the	color	of	green

vegetables	before	causing	it	to	dull:	In	raw	vegetables,	the	pockets	of	air	in	the
plant	refract,	and	therefore	dim,	the	color	of	chlorophyll.	But	as	soon	as	the	peas
or	beans	hit	the	water,	some	of	the	air	contained	between	their	cells	expands	and
bubbles	off,	bringing	the	cell	walls	closer	together	and	causing	the	plant	tissue	to
become	more	transparent,	producing	a	brighter	green	color.
After	blanching,	we	then	“shock”	these	vegetables	in	a	bowl	of	ice	water.	This

abruptly	halts	the	cooking	process,	preventing	any	further	transformation	of	the
chlorophyll	and	leaving	us	with	crisp-tender	vegetables	with	brilliant	color.



TWO	STEPS	FOR	TENDER,	BRIGHT	VEGETABLES



	
BLANCH	A	quick	blanch	in	boiling	water	cooks	the	vegetables	until	just	tender,	brightening	their	colors	at



the	same	time.



	
SHOCK	Tossing	the	vegetables	in	ice	water	stops	the	cooking,	preventing	them	from	becoming	mushy	and



drab.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	the	importance	of	not	only	blanching	green	vegetables,	but	also
shocking	them	in	ice	water,	we	set	up	a	simple	test:	We	took	two	1-pound	batches
of	broccoli	spears	and	blanched	each	for	four	minutes	in	a	pot	of	boiling,	salted
water.	After	removing	the	broccoli	from	the	pot,	we	then	shocked	one	batch	in	ice
water	and	let	the	other	batch	simply	sit	in	an	empty	bowl.	After	three	minutes,	we
drained	the	batch	in	the	ice	water	and	then	examined	them	both	for	changes	in
color,	texture,	and	taste.



THE	RESULTS
Not	surprisingly,	the	difference	was	big.	The	broccoli	that	had	been	shocked	in
ice	water	was	firmer	in	texture	and	had	a	brighter	green	color.	The	broccoli	that
had	been	left	to	sit	in	the	bowl	grew	mushy	and	olive	drab.	Because	they	were
boiled	in	salted	water	(our	preferred	method	for	blanching),	both	samples	were
relatively	well	seasoned.



THE	TAKEAWAY
When	cooking	green	vegetables	so	that	they	remain	bright	and	tender,	not	brown
and	mushy,	the	ability	to	abruptly	stop	the	cooking	process	through	the	use	of	an
ice	bath	is	necessary.
Why?	Blanching	vegetables	in	boiling,	salted	water	for	four	minutes	first

begins	to	break	down	the	cell	structure	of	the	broccoli,	beans,	or	peas.	The	pectin
within	starts	to	break	down	and	dissolve,	and	therefore	the	texture	of	that	veggie
moves	from	tough	toward	tender.	Likewise,	the	heat	evaporates	some	of	the
excess	air	within	the	vegetable	cells,	enhancing	its	color	from	a	muted	green	to
an	emerald	green.	This	is	all	good.
But	as	we	learned	in	concept	4,	cooking	doesn’t	always	stop	when	the	food

leaves	the	pot	(or	oven,	or	pan).	According	to	the	principles	of	carryover
cooking,	unless	cooked	vegetables	receive	an	ice-water	bath	immediately	after
exiting	the	pot	of	boiling	water,	they	will	continue	to	cook.	When	our	blanched
broccoli	was	placed	in	a	bowl	(without	an	ice	bath),	the	individual	stalks	were
hot	and	as	they	sat	piled	together	they	shared	their	heat,	continuing	to	cook.	The
result	is	that	the	cell	structures	continue	to	degrade,	turning	the	vegetables
mushier	by	the	minute.	It	also	gives	more	time	for	the	chlorophyll,	responsible
for	color,	to	lose	its	magnesium	ion	and	fade	into	a	drab	olive	green.	In	an	ice
bath,	however,	the	heat	that	is	already	inside	the	vegetables	will	reverse	direction
and	flow	into	the	cold	water,	preventing	further	cooking.	The	cold	water
surrounding	the	vegetables	also	stops	the	heat	from	transferring	from	one	piece
to	another.



THE	EFFECTS	OF	HEAT	ON	TEXTURE

	
RAW	STALK

A	raw	piece	of	broccoli	is	tough	in	texture	and	light	green	in	color.

	
BLANCHED	AND	SHOCKED

Once	blanched,	the	broccoli	is	tender	and	bright	green.	The	shock	keeps	it	that	way.



	
BLANCHED	ALONE

Broccoli	that	is	blanched	and	then	left	to	sit	becomes	soft	and	mushy,	with	an	olive-drab	hue.

	
HOW	LONG	SHOULD	YOU	COOK	THAT	VEGETABLE?

Vegetable:	Asparagus
Preparation:	Tough	ends	snapped	off	and	discarded
Boiling	Time:	2	to	4	minutes
Steaming	Time:	3	to	5	minutes
	
Vegetable:	Broccoli
Preparation:	Florets	cut	into	1-to	1½-inch	pieces,	stalks	peeled	and	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
Boiling	Time:	2	to	4	minutes
Steaming	Time:	4	to	6	minutes
	
Vegetable:	Brussels	Sprouts
Preparation:	Stem	ends	trimmed,	discolored	leaves	removed,	and	halved	through	stems
Boiling	Time:	6	to	8	minutes
Steaming	Time:	7	to	9	minutes
	
Vegetable:	Green	Beans
Preparation:	Ends	trimmed
Boiling	Time:	3	to	5	minutes



Steaming	Time:	6	to	8	minutes
	
Vegetable:	Snap	Peas
Preparation:	Strings	removed
Boiling	Time:	2	to	4	minutes
Steaming	Time:	4	to	6	minutes
	
Vegetable:	Snow	Peas
Preparation:	Strings	removed
Boiling	Time:	2	to	3	minutes
Steaming	Time:	4	to	6	minutes



BLANCHING	AT	WORK	
PEAS	AND	BEANS
We	often	blanch	and	shock	small	green	vegetables	like	peas	and	beans.	The
quick	turn	in	boiling,	salted	water	cooks	them	just	enough	to	lose	their	raw	edge
but	keeps	them	crisp	and	bright	green.	It’s	a	technique	that	can	be	used	for	a
quick	sauté,	a	casserole,	or	even	to	help	plan	ahead.



BLANCHED	SUGAR	SNAP	PEAS
SERVES	6

See	the	following	recipes	for	seasoning	ideas.

1				 pound	sugar	snap	peas,	strings	removed
1				 teaspoon	salt

1.	Fill	large	bowl	with	ice	water	and	set	aside.	Bring	6	cups	water	to	boil	in
large	saucepan.	Add	peas	and	salt	and	cook	until	peas	are	crisp-tender,	1½	to	2
minutes.
2.	Drain	peas,	transfer	to	bowl	with	ice	water,	drain	again,	and	pat	dry.	(Peas

can	be	set	aside	for	up	to	1	hour.)



SUGAR	SNAP	PEAS	WITH	LEMON,	GARLIC,	AND	BASIL
SERVES	6

Keep	a	close	eye	on	the	garlic,	as	it	can	go	from	soft	to	brown	quickly	during
cooking.

2				 tablespoons	olive	oil
1½				 teaspoons	grated	lemon	zest	plus	1	tablespoon	juice
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
1				 recipe	Blanched	Sugar	Snap	Peas
2				 tablespoons	chopped	fresh	basil
					 Salt	and	pepper

Heat	oil	over	medium	heat	in	10-inch	skillet	until	shimmering.	Add	zest	and
garlic	and	cook	until	garlic	is	soft	but	not	browned,	about	2	minutes.	Add	peas,
lemon	juice,	and	basil	and	toss	to	combine.	Cook	until	just	heated	through,	1	to
1½	minutes.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve	immediately.



SUGAR	SNAP	PEAS	WITH	HAM	AND	MINT
SERVES	6

Do	not	use	sliced	deli	ham	for	this	recipe.

1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
3				 ounces	country	ham	or	smoked	ham,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 recipe	Blanched	Sugar	Snap	Peas
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	mint
					 Salt	and	pepper

Melt	butter	over	medium	heat	in	10-inch	skillet.	Add	ham	and	cook	for	1	minute.
Add	peas	and	mint	and	toss	to	combine.	Cook	until	just	heated	through,	1	to	1½
minutes.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	to	determine	a	cooking	method	that	would	highlight	the	crisp	texture
and	sweet	flavor	of	sugar	snap	peas.	Blanching	them	in	salted	water	produces
peas	with	excellent	flavor	and	texture.	Shocking	them	in	ice	water	prevents
shriveling	and	puckering	and	sets	their	color,	too.
BLANCH	AND	SHOCK	A	sweet,	crisp	cross	between	the	snow	pea	and	the

green	garden	pea,	the	sugar	snap	is	completely	edible,	pod	and	all.	Because	raw
sugar	snaps	taste	chalky	and	flat,	the	peas	should	be	eaten	cooked,	but	just
barely.	They	taste	best	when	they	are	still	quite	crisp,	which	takes	some	heat,
some	liquid,	and	a	little	time.	Blanching	yields	peas	with	excellent	taste	and
texture.	Adding	salt	to	the	water	helps	to	season	the	peas	and	speed	up	the
softening	before	the	bright	color	fades.	Shocking	in	ice	water	stops	the	cooking,
helps	to	set	the	bright	color,	and	prevents	further	softening	from	residual	heat.
DRY	AND	FINISH	Once	the	peas	have	been	shocked	in	ice	water,	they	can

be	dried	with	paper	towels	and	then	sautéed	briefly	with	flavorful	ingredients.
Don’t	cook	them	too	long—just	about	a	minute	to	warm	them	up.	Also,	add	the
lemon	juice	at	the	very	end	so	the	acid	doesn’t	have	time	to	dull	the	color.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TO	COVER,	OR	NOT	TO	COVER

Contrary	to	popular	belief,	an	uncovered	pot	is	not	necessary	when	blanching	green	vegetables.

Blanching	involves	briefly	dunking	fruits	or	vegetables	in	boiling	water	to	set	color,	flavor,	and	texture.
Some	sources	say	that	to	successfully	blanch	green	vegetables,	the	lid	must	be	kept	off	of	the	pot	to	allow
the	acids	they	contain	to	evaporate,	rather	than	trapping	them	in	the	cooking	water	and	turning	the
vegetables	brown.

To	examine	the	validity	of	this	claim,	we	blanched	batches	of	broccoli,	green	beans,	and	broccoli	rabe	in
both	covered	and	uncovered	pots.	After	blanching,	the	pH	(acid)	level	of	the	water	in	both	pots	was
identical	for	each	vegetable.	Moreover,	all	of	the	vegetables	were	bright	green,	and	the	covered	and
uncovered	batches	tasted	exactly	the	same.	The	simple	truth	is	that	the	acids	in	vegetables	are	not	volatile,
so	they	can’t	escape	with	the	steam.	The	bottom	line:	When	it	comes	to	blanching,	it	makes	not	a	whit	of
difference	whether	you	cover	the	pot	or	not.



SAUTÉED	PEAS	WITH	SHALLOT	AND	MINT
SERVES	4

Do	not	thaw	the	peas	before	cooking.	Regular	frozen	peas	can	be	used	in	place
of	baby	peas;	increase	the	cooking	time	in	step	2	by	one	to	two	minutes.	Add	the
lemon	juice	right	before	serving;	otherwise,	the	peas	will	turn	brown.

2				 teaspoons	olive	oil
1				 small	shallot,	minced
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
3				 cups	frozen	baby	peas
¼				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
¼				 teaspoon	sugar
¼				 cup	minced	fresh	mint
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	shimmering.	Add
shallot	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	softened,	about	2	minutes.	Add	garlic
and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.
2.	Stir	in	peas,	broth,	and	sugar.	Cover	and	cook	until	peas	are	bright	green

and	just	heated	through,	3	to	5	minutes.	Add	mint	and	butter	and	toss	to
combine.	Off	heat,	stir	in	lemon	juice.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and
serve	immediately.

SAUTÉED	PEAS	WITH	LEEKS	AND	TARRAGON
Substitute	1	small	leek,	white	and	light	green	parts	only,	halved	lengthwise,	cut
into	¼-inch	pieces,	and	washed	thoroughly,	for	shallot	and	increase	cooking	time
in	step	1	to	3	to	5	minutes	(leek	should	be	softened).	Substitute	heavy	cream	for
broth,	2	tablespoons	minced	fresh	tarragon	for	mint,	and	white	wine	vinegar	for
lemon	juice.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Frozen	peas	have	already	been	blanched	during	processing,	so	the	keys	to
making	a	good	and	easy-to-prepare	side	dish	from	them	are	to	avoid
overcooking	as	they	are	heated	and	to	pair	the	peas	with	ingredients	that	don’t
require	much	preparation.	We	found	that	five	minutes	of	simmering	was	all	that
was	needed	to	produce	bright,	tender	green	peas.
CHOOSE	PETITE	PEAS	We’ve	always	been	big	fans	of	frozen	peas.

Individually	frozen	right	after	being	shucked	from	the	pod,	they	are	often
sweeter	and	fresher-tasting	than	the	shuck-’em-yourself	“fresh”	peas	that	may
have	spent	days	in	storage.	(Sugars	in	just-picked	peas	convert	to	starches	over
time.)	Frozen	peas	have	already	been	blanched.	This	stops	the	process	of	starch
conversion,	sets	the	color	of	the	peas,	and	cooks	them	so	that	they	are	tender
enough	to	eat.	We’ve	seen	two	varieties	in	the	freezer	aisle:	regular	frozen	peas
and	bags	labeled	“petite	peas”	(or	sometimes	“petit	pois”	or	“baby	sweet	peas”).
To	see	if	there	is	a	difference,	we	tasted	each	type	with	butter.	Tasters
unanimously	favored	the	smaller	peas	for	their	sweeter	flavor	and	creamier
texture.	Regular	peas	were	by	no	means	unacceptable	but	had	tougher	skins	and
mealier	interiors.	Since	both	varieties	are	available	for	the	same	price,	we’re
going	with	the	petite	peas	from	now	on.
USE	A	SKILLET	You	do	need	to	reheat	frozen	peas—and	flavor	them	in	the

process.	A	skillet,	rather	than	the	usual	saucepan,	lets	you	spread	out	the	peas	so
they	heat	quickly	and	don’t	lose	their	color	or	texture.
ADD	SUGAR	AND	BUTTER	A	smidge	of	sugar	helps	bring	out	the

sweetness	of	these	peas.	Finishing	them	with	a	bit	of	butter	adds	body	and
richness	without	drowning	them	in	fat.



ULTIMATE	GREEN	BEAN	CASSEROLE
SERVES	10	TO	12

This	recipe	can	be	halved	and	baked	in	a	2-quart	(or	8-inch	square)	baking	dish.
If	making	a	half	batch,	decrease	the	cooking	time	of	the	sauce	in	step	3	to	about
six	minutes	(reducing	it	to	1¾	cups)	and	the	baking	time	in	step	4	to	10	minutes.

TOPPING
4					 slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
¼				 teaspoon	salt
				1⁄8 teaspoon	pepper
3				 cups	canned	fried	onions	(about	6	ounces)

BEANS	AND	SAUCE
2				 pounds	green	beans,	trimmed	and	halved	crosswise
					 Salt	and	pepper
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 pound	white	mushrooms,	trimmed	and	broken	into	½-inch	pieces
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
3				 tablespoons	all-purpose	flour

1½				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1½				 cups	heavy	cream

1.	FOR	THE	TOPPING:	Pulse	bread,	butter,	salt,	and	pepper	in	food
processor	until	mixture	resembles	coarse	crumbs,	about	10	pulses.	Transfer	to
large	bowl	and	toss	with	onions;	set	aside.
2.	FOR	THE	BEANS	AND	SAUCE:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position

and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.	Fill	large	bowl	with	ice	water.	Line	baking	sheet
with	paper	towels.	Bring	4	quarts	water	to	boil	in	Dutch	oven.	Add	beans	and	2
tablespoons	salt.	Cook	beans	until	bright	green	and	crisp-tender,	about	6
minutes.	Drain	beans	in	colander,	then	plunge	immediately	into	ice	water	to	stop
cooking.	Spread	beans	on	prepared	baking	sheet	to	drain.
3.	Melt	butter	in	now-empty	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat.	Add



mushrooms,	garlic,	¾	teaspoon	salt,	and	1⁄8	teaspoon	pepper	and	cook	until
mushrooms	release	moisture	and	liquid	evaporates,	about	6	minutes.	Add	flour
and	cook	for	1	minute,	stirring	constantly.	Stir	in	broth	and	bring	to	simmer,
stirring	constantly.	Add	cream,	reduce	heat	to	medium,	and	simmer	until	sauce	is
thickened	and	reduced	to	3½	cups,	about	12	minutes.	Season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste.
4.	Add	green	beans	to	sauce	and	stir	until	evenly	coated.	Arrange	in	even	layer

in	3-quart	(or	13	by	9-inch)	baking	dish.	Sprinkle	with	topping	and	bake	until
top	is	golden	brown	and	sauce	is	bubbling	around	edges,	about	15	minutes.
Serve	immediately.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Store	bread-crumb	topping	in	refrigerator	for	up	to	2

days	and	combine	with	onions	just	before	cooking.	Combine	beans	and	cooled
sauce	in	baking	dish,	cover	with	plastic	wrap,	and	refrigerate	for	up	to	24	hours.
To	serve,	remove	plastic	wrap	and	heat	casserole	in	425-degree	oven	for	10
minutes,	then	add	topping	and	bake	as	directed.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Green	bean	casserole	is	a	classic,	but	we	wanted	a	fresher	spin	that	skipped	the
frozen	green	beans,	condensed	soup,	and	canned	onions.	Using	fresh	green
beans	was	an	obvious	place	to	start,	and	blanching	them	is	the	first	step	toward
preserving	their	color	and	texture.	In	place	of	canned	soup,	we	made	a
mushroom	variation	of	the	classic	French	velouté	sauce	(traditionally	made	by
thickening	white	stock	with	a	roux).
USE	FRESH	BEANS	Using	canned	beans	for	a	dish	that	requires	baking	is	a

nonstarter.	Frozen	beans	are	better,	but	for	the	best	results	you	must	blanch	and
shock	fresh	beans.	Blanching	prevents	overcooking	and	also	seasons	them
nicely.
FORGET	CANNED	SOUP	Rather	than	the	traditional	condensed	canned

soup,	we	build	a	real	sauce—but	with	as	little	work	as	possible.	Using	the	same
pot	in	which	we	blanched	our	beans,	we	sauté	a	pound	of	white	button
mushrooms	(broken,	not	sliced,	for	a	chunkier	texture)	and	then	make	a	thick
roux.	(We	found	fancier	mushrooms,	like	dried	porcini,	were	not	worth	the
added	effort.)	We	finish	the	sauce	with	chicken	broth	and	cream,	which	is	rich
but	not	over	the	top,	giving	this	sauce	the	perfect	balance	of	savory	and	creamy.
COMPROMISE	ON	THE	TOPPING	Of	all	the	places	to	use	a	convenience

product,	it’s	the	topping	(not	the	beans	or	the	filling).	Though	we	tried	to
recreate	the	taste	and	texture	of	the	canned	fried	onions,	we	couldn’t	do	it	in	a
way	that	was	worth	the	time	and	effort.	Instead,	we	toss	the	canned	fried	onions
with	fresh	bread	crumbs	and	butter.	This	is	an	easy	way	to	make	them	seem
homemade.
BAKE	FAST	To	keep	the	beans	from	turning	mushy	in	the	oven,	spread	them

out	in	a	big	dish	and	bake	quickly	in	a	hot	oven—just	long	enough	to	heat
everything	up	and	brown	the	crumbs	on	top.



MAKE-AHEAD	BLANCHED	GREEN	BEANS
SERVES	4

Make	sure	to	undercook	the	beans	slightly;	they	will	continue	to	soften	when
reheated	in	the	recipes	that	follow.

1				 pound	green	beans,	trimmed
1				 teaspoon	salt

Bring	2½	quarts	water	to	boil	in	large	saucepan	over	high	heat.	Add	green	beans
and	salt,	return	to	boil,	and	cook	until	beans	are	bright	green	and	crisp-tender,	3
to	4	minutes.	Meanwhile,	fill	large	bowl	with	ice	water.	Drain	beans,	then
transfer	immediately	to	ice-water	bath.	When	beans	no	longer	feel	warm	to
touch,	drain	beans	again,	then	dry	thoroughly	with	paper	towels.	Transfer	beans
to	large	zipper-lock	bag	and	refrigerate	until	ready	to	use,	up	to	3	days.



GREEN	BEANS	WITH	SAUTÉED	SHALLOTS	AND	VERMOUTH
SERVES	4

The	amount	of	shallots	in	this	recipe	may	seem	like	a	lot,	but	they	cook	down.

4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
5					 ounces	shallots,	sliced	thin
1				 recipe	Make-Ahead	Blanched	Green	Beans
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	dry	vermouth

1.	Melt	2	tablespoons	butter	in	8-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat.	Add	shallots
and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	golden	brown,	fragrant,	and	just	crisp	around
edges,	about	10	minutes.	Set	aside.
2.	Heat	beans	and	¼	cup	water	in	12-inch	skillet	over	high	heat	and	cook,

tossing	frequently	with	tongs,	until	beans	are	warmed	through,	1	to	2	minutes.
Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste	and	transfer	to	serving	platter.
3.	Return	shallots	to	high	heat,	stir	in	vermouth,	and	bring	to	simmer.	Whisk

in	remaining	2	tablespoons	butter,	1	tablespoon	at	a	time;	season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste.	Top	beans	with	shallots	and	sauce	and	serve	immediately.



GREEN	BEANS	WITH	BUTTERED	BREAD	CRUMBS	AND	ALMONDS
SERVES	4

An	equal	amount	of	chopped	walnuts	or	pecans	can	be	substituted	for	the
almonds.

1				 slice	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	crust	removed	and	bread	torn	into	1½-inch	pieces
2				 tablespoons	sliced	almonds,	crumbled	by	hand	into	¼-inch	pieces
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	parsley
1				 recipe	Make-Ahead	Blanched	Green	Beans
					 Salt	and	pepper
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter

1.	Process	bread	in	food	processor	to	fine	crumbs,	20	to	30	seconds	(you
should	have	about	¼	cup	bread	crumbs).	Transfer	bread	crumbs	to	12-inch
nonstick	skillet,	add	almonds,	and	toast	over	medium-high	heat,	stirring
constantly,	until	golden	brown,	about	5	minutes.	Off	heat,	add	garlic	and	parsley
and	toss	with	hot	crumbs.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	transfer	to	small
bowl,	and	set	aside.	(Do	not	wash	skillet.)
2.	Heat	beans	and	¼	cup	water	in	now-empty	skillet	over	high	heat	and	cook,

tossing	frequently	with	tongs,	until	beans	are	warmed	through,	about	1	to	2
minutes.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste	and	transfer	to	platter.
3.	Melt	butter	in	now-empty	skillet	over	medium-high	heat,	add	bread-crumb

mixture,	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	fragrant,	about	1	to	2	minutes.	Top
beans	with	buttered	crumb	mixture	and	serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Green	beans	are	a	classic	side	when	entertaining	but	we	wanted	a	recipe	that
would	alleviate	some	of	the	typical	last-minute	cooking	frenzy.	For	green	beans
that	could	be	cooked	ahead	of	time	and	given	a	quick	finishing	touch	before
serving,	we	found	blanching	to	be	the	best	method,	as	it	guaranteed	evenly
cooked,	well-seasoned	beans	with	a	crisp	texture.	Once	the	beans	were	blanched
and	cooled,	we	refrigerated	them	for	up	to	three	days.	On	the	day	of	serving,	we
simply	tossed	them	in	a	hot	skillet	with	a	little	water	to	warm	them	through
quickly.	To	dress	up	the	green	beans,	we	came	up	with	a	few	simple	butter
sauces.
BLANCH	FIRST	When	we	developed	this	recipe,	we	tried	blanching,

steaming,	and	braising	our	green	beans	and	concluded	that	blanching	(immersing
them	briefly	in	boiling	water)	was	the	way	to	go	for	two	reasons.	First,	blanched
beans	cook	more	evenly	than	steamed	ones,	and	second,	they	are	easier	to	salt	as
they	cook,	which	means	they	become	more	deeply	seasoned.
SHOCK	SECOND	If	the	finished,	dressed	beans	are	to	arrive	at	the	table

with	a	properly	crisp-tender	texture,	it	is	especially	important	not	to	overcook
them.	Shocking	the	beans	in	ice	water	halts	their	cooking	abruptly	and
completely.	After	that	the	beans	can	be	refrigerated.
REHEAT	WITH	THE	SAUCE	As	we	developed	the	butter	sauces,	we

reheated	plenty	of	chilled	beans	and	learned	a	thing	or	two	in	the	process.	Most
important	is	to	add	a	little	bit	of	water	to	the	pan	with	the	beans.	This	small
amount	comes	to	a	boil	quickly	and	evaporates	almost	completely,	helping	to
heat	the	beans	through	in	just	a	minute	or	two.
	



CONCEPT	25

All	Potatoes	Are	Not	Created	Equal
You	might	think	one	potato	is	pretty	much	the	same	as	the	next.	But	bake	a
russet	potato	and	a	red	potato	and	the	two	will	emerge	from	the	oven	completely
different—one	light	and	fluffy,	the	other	creamy	and	dense.	All	potatoes	are	not
created	equal.	Let’s	find	out	why.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
The	average	supermarket	might	contain	four	or	five	different	varieties	of
potatoes,	while	a	farmers’	market	will	have	dozens	more.	(There	are	more	than
200	different	species	of	potato	in	the	world!)	Each	of	these	nubby	tubers	is
different	from	the	next,	but	all	varieties	do	share	some	general	traits.
Potatoes	consist	mainly	of	two	things:	starch	and	moisture	(along	with	small

amounts	of	sugar,	fiber,	minerals,	and	protein).	The	density	of	each	particular
potato	correlates	to	the	amount	of	starch,	and	the	starch	content	in	potatoes	can
range	from	16	percent	to	22	percent.	Less	starch,	and	you	get	a	firm,	waxy
potato,	like	the	Red	Bliss	or	French	Fingerling.	More	starch	can	give	varieties
such	as	russet	a	crumbly,	mealy	texture.	In	the	middle	is	Yukon	Gold.	The
amount	of	starch	in	a	potato	affects	many	things,	including	its	fluffiness	and
ability	to	hold	its	shape.
Starch	occurs	within	the	cells	of	potatoes	as	microscopic	granules.	When

potatoes	are	cooked	the	granules	absorb	water	from	within	the	potato	and	swell
like	balloons,	causing	the	cells	that	contain	them	to	expand,	separate,	and
eventually	burst.	With	continued	cooking,	many	of	the	swollen	granules	will	also
burst	and,	as	a	result,	release	some	of	the	entrapped	starch.	So,	more	starch
translates	to	more	burst	potato	cells.	This,	in	turn,	translates	to	a	potato	that	falls
apart	when	cooked.	And	that	is	exactly	what	happens	when	you	boil	russet
potatoes.
But	this	can	actually	be	a	good	a	thing,	especially	when	making	mashed

potatoes.	In	addition	to	being	easier	to	mash,	cooked	russets,	with	all	their	burst
cells,	will	soak	up	more	liquid	than	sturdy	Red	Bliss.	That’s	because	russets
contain	about	25	percent	more	starch	than	Red	Bliss,	and	that	starch	has	the
capacity	to	soak	up	more	liquid	even	after	cooking.
It’s	important	to	note	that	there	are	two	kinds	of	starch	molecules—amylose

and	amylopectin—and	they	behave	quite	differently.	Amylose	molecules,	which
are	shaped	like	long	chains,	easily	escape	from	the	swollen	starch	granules	when
cooked.	As	a	result,	granules	with	more	amylose	can	suck	up	more	liquid—just
what	you	want	when	adding	dairy	to	make	mashed	potatoes.	This	explains	why
russet	potatoes,	which	have	a	high	amount	of	starch	(and	a	higher	percentage	of
amylose),	are	the	best	choice	for	mashing.
In	contrast,	amylopectin	molecules	have	a	much	larger,	highly	branched	shape

that	holds	together	when	cooked	and	helps	the	potato	remain	intact.	Varieties
with	a	higher	percentage	of	amylopectin	and	much	less	of	amylose,	such	as	Red



Bliss,	are	the	best	choice	for	boiling.	That’s	because	these	potatoes	are	less	likely
to	absorb	liquid	and	are	also	able	to	retain	their	shape	when	cooked.	For	the
same	reasons,	Red	Bliss	are	a	poor	choice	when	making	mashed	potatoes;	they
are	physically	harder	to	mash	than	russets	and	can’t	absorb	liquid	as	well.



POTATO	STARCHES



	
RUSSET	CELLS	Russet	potatoes	contain	more	starch	granules.	This	higher	starch	content	causes	the	cells



to	separate	and	cell	walls	to	burst	during	cooking,	forming	fluffier	potatoes	that	absorb	more	liquid.



	
RED	BLISS	CELLS	Red	Bliss	potatoes	contain	fewer	starch	granules.	The	lower	starch	content	allows	the



cells	to	remain	together	and	intact	rather	than	bursting,	so	they	absorb	less	liquid.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	illustrate	the	significant	differences	in	density	and	starch	makeup	among
common	potato	varieties,	we	cooked	½-inch	cubes	of	three	types	of	potato—Red
Bliss,	Yukon	Gold,	and	russet—in	water	dyed	dark	blue	with	food	coloring.	After
letting	the	cooked	potatoes	cool,	we	cut	them	open	and	examined	how	far	the
blue	coloring	had	traveled.



THE	RESULTS
The	russets	absorbed	the	dye	to	their	very	core,	while	Red	Bliss	exhibited	only	a
thin	blue	line	around	the	very	exterior.	The	Yukon	Golds	sat	right	in	the	middle,
with	more	penetration	than	the	Red	Bliss,	but	less	than	the	russets.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Here,	the	most	important	factor	at	work	is	the	ratio	of	starch	to	moisture.
Because	russets	have	a	higher	percentage	of	starch	than	the	other	varieties,	they
are	denser	(see	“Sink	or	Swim”).	Therefore,	when	we	cook	them,	their	starch
granules	have	a	greater	propensity	to	absorb	liquid,	swell,	and	cause	the	potato
cells	to	separate	from	each	other	and	even	burst.	This	means	that	they	are	better
able	to	absorb	liquid	(including	blue	dye)	and	is	why	we	generally	use	russets	for
mashed	potatoes.	Red	Bliss	potatoes,	on	the	other	hand,	have	less	starch,	and
because	there	is	more	room,	there	is	therefore	less	pressure	for	the	individual
potato	cells	to	separate	and	burst	during	cooking.	This	means	that	there	is	less
ability	for	them	to	absorb	liquid	(like	blue	dye)	and	is	why	we	prefer	them	for
dishes	in	which	potatoes	keep	their	shape,	like	French	Potato	Salad.	As	you	can
probably	guess,	Yukon	Golds	fall	right	in	the	middle.
The	second	factor	is	the	ratio	of	the	two	starches	amylose	and	amylopectin.

Russets	not	only	have	more	starch,	but	they	also	have	a	higher	percentage	of
amylose,	the	long	chains	of	starch	that	separate	from	the	swollen	granules	when
exposed	to	heat.	This	results	in	a	fluffier-textured	potato	when	cooked	and	is
another	reason	why	the	blue	dye	penetrated	to	the	center	of	our	russet	potatoes.
Red	Bliss	have	less	total	starch,	as	well	as	a	high	ratio	of	amylopectin,	which
helps	hold	the	potato	tightly	together	when	exposed	to	heat.	Again,	Yukon	Golds
fall	right	in	the	middle,	with	a	balance	of	the	two	starches,	and	as	a	result,	a
middling	amount	of	blue-dyed	liquid	was	able	to	enter	the	sample.
Our	conclusion?	Because	each	type	of	potato	has	a	different	ratio	of	starch	to

moisture	and	a	different	ratio	of	amylose	to	amylopectin,	and	each	behaves	in
different	ways	when	exposed	to	water	and	heat,	it’s	important	to	pay	attention	to
what	kind	of	potato	you	choose	for	different	recipes.



POTATOES	COOKED	IN	BLUE	WATER
How	much	liquid,	dyed	blue,	do	potatoes	actually	absorb?

	
RED	BLISS

Low-starch	potatoes	absorbed	little	water.



	
YUKON	GOLDS

Moderately	starchy	spuds	began	to	absorb	a	small	amount	of	water.



	
RUSSETS

Starchy	potatoes	absorbed	the	most	water.



POTATOES	AT	WORK	
SALADS
The	simplest	way	to	see	how	potato	varieties	differ	is	to	boil	them	for	salad.
Here	we	offer	two	options—a	classic	American-style	potato	salad	with	crumbly,
cohesive	chunks	of	peeled	potatoes	bound	with	mayonnaise	as	well	as	a	French-
style	recipe	with	slices	of	skin-on	potatoes	dressed	with	a	garlicky,	herby
vinaigrette.



ALL-AMERICAN	POTATO	SALAD
SERVES	4	TO	6

Note	that	this	recipe	calls	for	celery	seeds,	not	celery	salt;	if	only	celery	salt	is
available,	use	the	same	amount	but	omit	the	addition	of	salt	in	the	dressing.
When	testing	the	potatoes	for	doneness,	simply	taste	a	piece;	do	not	overcook	the
potatoes	or	they	will	become	mealy	and	will	break	apart.	The	potatoes	must	be
just	warm,	or	even	fully	cooled,	when	you	add	the	dressing.	If	the	potato	salad
seems	a	little	dry,	add	up	to	2	tablespoons	more	mayonnaise.

2				 pounds	russet	potatoes,	peeled	and	cut	into	¾-inch	cubes
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 tablespoons	distilled	white	vinegar
1				 celery	rib,	chopped	fine
½				 cup	mayonnaise
3				 tablespoons	sweet	pickle	relish
2				 tablespoons	minced	red	onion
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
¾				 teaspoon	dry	mustard
¾				 teaspoon	celery	seeds
2				 Hard-Cooked	Eggs,	peeled	and	cut	into	¼-inch	cubes	(optional)

1.	Place	potatoes	in	large	saucepan	and	add	water	to	cover	by	1	inch.	Bring	to
boil	over	medium-high	heat;	add	1	tablespoon	salt,	reduce	heat	to	medium,	and
simmer,	stirring	once	or	twice,	until	potatoes	are	tender,	about	8	minutes.
2.	Drain	potatoes	and	transfer	to	large	bowl.	Add	vinegar	and,	using	rubber

spatula,	toss	gently	to	combine.	Let	stand	until	potatoes	are	just	warm,	about	20
minutes.
3.	Meanwhile,	in	small	bowl,	stir	together	celery,	mayonnaise,	relish,	onion,

parsley,	mustard,	celery	seeds,	½	teaspoon	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper.	Using
rubber	spatula,	gently	fold	dressing	and	eggs,	if	using,	into	potatoes.	Cover	with
plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	until	chilled,	about	1	hour;	serve.	(Potato	salad	can
be	refrigerated	for	up	to	1	day.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Classic	potato	salad	is	too	often	blanketed	in	a	mayonnaise-rich	dressing	that
results	in	bland	flavor.	We	were	looking	for	flavorful,	tender	potatoes	punctuated
by	crunchy	bits	of	onion	and	celery.	We	found	that	russets	soaked	up	the	most
flavor,	especially	with	a	bit	of	vinegar	added	to	them	while	hot.	A	conservative
hand	with	the	mayonnaise	in	the	dressing	and	some	unexpected	seasonings	give
this	salad	a	boost.
USE	RUSSETS	The	truth	is	you	can	use	most	potato	varieties	to	make	potato

salad.	The	decision	depends	on	what	traits	are	most	important	to	you.	If	you
want	chunks	of	potatoes	that	will	hold	their	shape,	then	red	potatoes	are	best.	If
you	want	potatoes	that	will	soak	up	the	flavors	of	the	dressing	(and	don’t	mind	a
slightly	crumbly	texture),	then	russets	are	best.	We	find	many	potato	salads	to	be
quite	bland.	Adding	more	dressing	doesn’t	solve	the	problem—the	dressing	just
pools	at	the	bottom	of	the	bowl.	We	think	russets,	which	absorb	moisture	much
better	than	red	potatoes,	are	the	best	choice	for	a	classic	American	potato	salad.
We	find	their	starchy	texture	a	welcome	plus—the	salad	is	more	cohesive	than
one	made	with	red	potatoes.
SEASON	WHEN	HOT	We’ve	found	that	the	best	time	to	add	seasoning	is

when	the	potatoes	are	still	warm.	This	maximizes	flavor	and	is	why	we	add	the
vinegar	as	soon	as	the	potatoes	are	drained.	(Don’t	add	the	mayo	then,	though.
You	don’t	want	the	dressing	to	turn	oily	and	thin.)
DRESS	WELL	When	developing	this	recipe,	we	knew	that	we	wanted	a

classic	mayonnaise-based	dressing,	but	we	decided	to	investigate	some
variations	as	well.	We	substituted	buttermilk,	sour	cream,	and	yogurt	for	half	of
the	mayo	in	different	tests	but	found	that	unadulterated	mayonnaise	was
preferred	by	tasters.	Along	with	the	mayonnaise,	we	add	celery	for	crunch,	and
red	onion	for	color	and	flavor.	Pickle	relish	requires	no	preparation	and	gives	the
potato	salad	a	subtle	sweetness.	Celery	seeds,	which	have	fallen	out	of	general
favor	as	a	seasoning,	provide	an	underlying	complexity	and	depth,	and	dry
mustard	gives	the	salad	an	added	pungency.
MINIMIZE	MIXING	Make	the	dressing	in	a	separate	bowl	from	the

potatoes.	Adding	the	dressing	ingredients	one	by	one	to	the	cooked	potatoes
leads	to	excess	mixing,	which	turns	the	salad	to	mush.	It’s	important	to	add	the
dressing	after	it’s	already	been	mixed.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
START	IN	COLD	WATER

Should	you	cook	potatoes	starting	in	cold	water?	In	a	word:	yes.	It	makes	for	a	speedier
cooking	time	and	better	potato	texture.

Many	cookbook	authors	suggest	starting	potatoes	in	cold,	rather	than	boiling,	water.	The	theory:	Because
potatoes	take	a	while	to	cook,	their	exteriors	tend	to	become	mushy	by	the	time	their	interiors	cook	through.
Starting	the	potatoes	in	cold	water	allows	their	temperature	to	gradually	increase,	preventing	excess
softening	of	the	exterior.	We	put	the	theory	to	the	test	by	preparing	plain	whole	unpeeled	boiled	potatoes,
mashed	potatoes	(made	with	whole	unpeeled	potatoes),	and	potato	salad	(made	with	potatoes	that	were
peeled	and	cut	into	¾-inch	cubes)	both	ways—started	in	boiling	water	and	kept	at	a	simmer,	and	started	in
cold	water	that	was	brought	to	a	boil	and	lowered	to	a	simmer—to	see	if	one	method	was	indeed	better	than
the	other.

Once	the	cubed	potato	pieces	were	cooled	and	tossed	with	mayonnaise	and	seasonings	for	the	potato
salad	and	the	whole	potatoes	were	peeled,	pressed	through	a	ricer,	and	combined	with	half-and-half	and
melted	butter	for	the	mashed	potatoes,	no	differences	between	the	two	samples	could	be	detected.	In	the
case	of	the	plain	boiled	whole	potatoes,	we	did	notice	that	the	samples	started	in	boiling	water	were	softer
on	the	exterior	than	on	the	interior.	These	boiled	potatoes	weren’t	terrible,	but	they	weren’t	as	good	as	the
ones	started	in	cold	water.

In	addition	to	slightly	better	texture	in	one	test,	the	potatoes	started	in	cold	water	were	ready	a	few
minutes	earlier.	Yes,	the	potatoes	added	to	boiling	water	spent	less	time	in	the	pot,	but	we	had	to	wait	for	the
water	to	boil	before	we	could	cook	the	potatoes.	The	bottom	line	is	that	starting	the	potatoes	in	cold	water
yields	slightly	better	results	in	some	applications	and	is	always	faster.



FRENCH	POTATO	SALAD	WITH	DIJON	MUSTARD	AND	FINES
HERBES
SERVES	6

If	fresh	chervil	isn’t	available,	substitute	an	additional	½	tablespoon	of	minced
parsley	and	an	additional	½	teaspoon	of	tarragon.	For	best	flavor,	serve	the
salad	warm.

2				 pounds	small	red	potatoes,	cut	into	¼-inch-thick	slices
2				 tablespoons	salt
1				 garlic	clove,	peeled	and	threaded	on	skewer
¼				 cup	olive	oil
1½				 tablespoons	champagne	vinegar	or	white	wine	vinegar
2				 teaspoons	Dijon	mustard
½				 teaspoon	pepper
1				 small	shallot,	minced
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	chervil
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	chives
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	tarragon

1.	Place	potatoes	and	salt	in	large	saucepan	and	add	water	to	cover	by	1	inch;
bring	to	boil	over	high	heat,	then	reduce	heat	to	medium.	Lower	skewered	garlic
into	simmering	water	and	partially	blanch,	about	45	seconds.	Immediately	run
garlic	under	cold	running	water	to	stop	cooking;	remove	garlic	from	skewer	and
set	aside.	Continue	to	simmer	potatoes,	uncovered,	until	tender	but	still	firm,
about	5	minutes.	Drain	potatoes,	reserving	¼	cup	cooking	water.	Arrange	hot
potatoes	close	together	in	single	layer	on	rimmed	baking	sheet.
2.	Mince	garlic.	Whisk	garlic,	reserved	potato	cooking	water,	oil,	vinegar,

mustard,	and	pepper	in	small	bowl	until	combined.	Drizzle	dressing	evenly	over
warm	potatoes;	let	stand	for	10	minutes.
3.	Toss	shallot	and	herbs	in	small	bowl.	Transfer	potatoes	to	large	serving

bowl;	add	shallot-herb	mixture	and	mix	gently	with	rubber	spatula	to	combine.
Serve	immediately.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Follow	recipe	through	step	2,	cover	with	plastic	wrap,



and	refrigerate.	Before	serving,	bring	salad	to	room	temperature,	then	add	shallot
and	herbs.

FRENCH	POTATO	SALAD	WITH	ARUGULA,	ROQUEFORT,	AND
WALNUTS
Omit	herbs	and	toss	dressed	potatoes	with	½	cup	chopped	toasted	walnuts,	1	cup
crumbled	Roquefort	cheese,	and	3	ounces	baby	arugula,	torn	into	bite-size	pieces
along	with	shallot	in	step	3.

FRENCH	POTATO	SALAD	WITH	FENNEL,	TOMATO,	AND	OLIVES

When	chopping	the	fennel	fronds	for	this	variation,	use	only	the	delicate	wispy
leaves,	not	the	tough,	fibrous	stems	to	which	they	are	attached.

Trim	stalks	and	fronds	from	1	small	fennel	bulb;	coarsely	chop	and	reserve	¼
cup	fronds.	Halve	bulb	lengthwise;	using	paring	knife,	core	1	half	of	bulb,
reserving	second	half	for	another	use.	Cut	half	crosswise	into	very	thin	slices.
Omit	chervil,	chives,	and	tarragon	and	increase	parsley	to	3	tablespoons.	Toss
dressed	potatoes	with	fennel,	1	peeled,	seeded,	and	diced	tomato,	and	¼	cup
quartered	oil-cured	pitted	black	olives	along	with	shallot	and	parsley	in	step	3.

FRENCH	POTATO	SALAD	WITH	RADISHES,	CORNICHONS,	AND
CAPERS
Omit	herbs	and	substitute	2	tablespoons	minced	red	onion	for	shallot.	Toss
dressed	potatoes	with	2	thinly	sliced	red	radishes,	¼	cup	rinsed	capers,	and	¼
cup	thinly	sliced	cornichons	along	with	red	onion	in	step	3.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
French	potato	salad	should	be	pleasing	not	only	to	the	eye	but	also	to	the	palate.
The	potatoes	(small	red	potatoes	are	traditional)	should	be	tender	but	not	mushy,
and	the	flavor	of	the	vinaigrette	should	penetrate	the	relatively	bland	potatoes.
To	eliminate	torn	skins	and	broken	slices,	a	common	pitfall	in	boiling	skin-on	red
potatoes,	we	sliced	the	potatoes	before	boiling	them.	Then,	to	evenly	infuse	the
potatoes	with	the	garlicky	mustard	vinaigrette,	we	spread	the	warm	potatoes	out
on	a	sheet	pan	and	poured	the	vinaigrette	over	the	top.	Gently	folding	in	fresh
herbs	just	before	serving	helped	keep	the	colors	and	flavors	of	the	herbs	bright
and	vibrant.	It	helped	to	keep	the	potatoes	intact,	too.
SLICE	AND	BOIL	Slicing	the	potatoes	before	cooking	them	prevents	the

ugliness	of	torn	skin	and	broken	potato	flesh	in	the	finished	salad.	(Not	to
mention	saving	our	hands	from	burning	on	the	hot	potatoes	as	we	try	to	slice.)
The	already	sliced	potatoes	emerge	from	the	water	after	a	quick	cooking	time
unbroken	and	with	their	skins	intact.	They	have	a	clean	(not	starchy)	taste,	are
evenly	cooked,	and	hold	together	perfectly.	We	still	boil	potatoes	whole	and	in
their	skins	for	mashed	potatoes	because	the	starch	retained	produces	a	thick,
creamy	sauce.	But	here	we	prefer	¼-inch	slices.
RAMP	UP	THE	VINEGAR	We	pump	up	the	flavor	of	this	salad	by	using	3

parts	oil	to	1	part	vinegar,	rather	than	the	tamer	4	parts	oil	in	many	classic
vinaigrette	recipes.	Bland	potatoes	can	handle	the	extra	acid.	We	love	the	sharp
flavor	notes	added	by	champagne	vinegar	but	find	that	white	wine	vinegar	works
well,	too.
SAVE	SOME	COOKING	WATER	Dressing	potatoes	with	vinaigrette	can

yield	a	dry	salad.	Some	recipes	add	chicken	stock	or	wine.	We	take	a	cue	from
Julia	Child	and	use	some	of	the	potato	water.	It’s	nicely	seasoned	and	readily
available.
BLANCH	THE	GARLIC	Raw	garlic	is	too	strong	and	pungent	a	flavor	for

this	more	delicate	potato	salad.	Blanching	the	garlic	clove	before	adding	it	to	the
dressing	tones	it	down.
SPREAD	AND	DRESS	After	the	potatoes	have	been	thoroughly	drained,

spread	them	out	on	a	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	drizzle	them	evenly	with	the
vinaigrette.	Spreading	out	the	potatoes	this	way	allows	them	to	cool	off	a	bit,
preventing	residual	cooking	and	potential	mushiness.	It	also	allows	us	to	get	the
warm	potatoes	to	soak	up	the	vinaigrette	without	damaging	the	slices	by	tossing
them.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
KEEPING	POTATO	SALAD	SAFE

Mayonnaise	won’t	spoil	your	potato	salad.	The	potatoes	will.

Mayonnaise	has	gotten	a	bad	reputation,	being	blamed	for	spoiled	potato	salads	and	upset	stomachs	after
many	summer	picnics	and	barbecues.	You	may	think	that	switching	from	a	mayonnaise-based	dressing	to	a
vinaigrette	will	protect	your	potato	salad	(and	your	family)	from	food	poisoning.	Think	again.

The	main	ingredients	in	mayonnaise	are	raw	eggs,	vegetable	oil,	and	an	acid	(usually	vinegar	or	lemon
juice).	The	eggs	used	in	commercially	made	mayonnaise	have	been	pasteurized	to	kill	salmonella	and	other
bacteria.	Its	high	acidity	is	another	safeguard:	Because	bacteria	do	not	fare	well	in	acidic	environments,	the
lemon	juice	or	vinegar	inhibits	bacterial	growth.	Mayonnaise,	even	when	homemade,	is	rarely	the	problem
unless	it	contains	very	little	acid.	It’s	the	potatoes	that	are	more	likely	to	go	bad.

The	bacteria	usually	responsible	for	spoiled	potato	salad	are	Bacillus	cereus	and	Staphylococcus	aureus
(commonly	known	as	staph).	Both	are	found	in	soil	and	dust,	and	they	thrive	on	starchy,	low-acid	foods	like
rice,	pasta,	and	potatoes.	If	they	find	their	way	into	your	potato	salad	via	an	unwashed	cutting	board	or
contaminated	hands,	they	can	wreak	havoc	on	your	digestive	system.

Most	food-borne	bacteria	grow	well	at	temperatures	between	40	and	140	degrees	Fahrenheit.	This	is
known	as	the	temperature	danger	zone,	and	if	contaminated	food	remains	in	this	zone	for	too	long,	the
bacteria	can	produce	enough	toxins	to	make	you	sick.	The	U.S.	Food	and	Drug	Administration	recommends
refrigerating	food	within	two	hours	of	its	preparation,	or	one	hour	if	the	room	temperature	is	above	90
degrees.	Heat	from	the	sun	is	often	what	causes	the	trouble	at	summer	picnics.

Although	the	high	acid	content	of	the	vinaigrette	for	our	French	Potato	Salad	might	slow	bacterial
growth,	it’s	best	to	play	it	safe	and	follow	the	FDA’s	guideline.	Don’t	leave	the	salad	out	for	more	than	two
hours;	promptly	refrigerate	any	leftovers.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

WHY	ARE	MY	POTATOES	GREEN?
Cut	off	the	green	patches	from	your	potatoes.	They	are	an	indication	of	a	toxic	alkaloid	and	can

cause	illness.

The	green	patches	found	on	some	potatoes	are	caused	by	prolonged	exposure	to	light	or	improper	storage.
This	discoloration	is	produced	by	chlorophyll	and	is	usually	an	indication	of	increased	levels	of	a	naturally
occurring	toxic	alkaloid	called	solanine.	Ingesting	solanine	can	lead	to	gastrointestinal	distress,	so	if	you
discover	green	patches	when	peeling	your	potatoes,	make	sure	to	cut	off	up	to	an	inch	below	the	affected
areas.	Also,	make	sure	to	store	potatoes	in	a	well-ventilated,	dark,	dry,	cool	place.	If	left	on	the	counter,
potatoes	will	begin	to	turn	green	in	as	little	as	one	week.



POTATOES	AT	WORK	
MASHED
While	different	potato	varieties	yield	different	textures	in	salad,	the	same	thing
holds	true	when	it	comes	to	boiling	and	mashing.	Use	one	kind	of	potato	to
create	the	ultimate	creamy,	smooth	puree	and	another	for	rustic,	chunky
“smashed”	potatoes.



CLASSIC	MASHED	POTATOES
SERVES	4

Russet	potatoes	make	fluffier	mashed	potatoes,	but	Yukon	Golds	have	an
appealing	buttery	flavor	and	can	be	used.

2				 pounds	russet	potatoes
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted
1				 cup	half-and-half,	warmed
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Place	potatoes	in	large	saucepan	and	add	cold	water	to	cover	by	1	inch.
Bring	to	boil	over	high	heat,	reduce	heat	to	medium-low,	and	simmer	until
potatoes	are	just	tender	(paring	knife	can	be	slipped	in	and	out	of	potatoes	with
little	resistance),	20	to	30	minutes.	Drain.
2.	Set	ricer	or	food	mill	over	now-empty	saucepan.	Using	potholder	(to	hold

potatoes)	and	paring	knife,	peel	skins	from	potatoes.	Working	in	batches,	cut
peeled	potatoes	into	large	chunks	and	press	or	mill	into	saucepan.
3.	Stir	in	butter	until	incorporated.	Gently	whisk	in	half-and-half,	add	1½

teaspoons	salt,	and	season	with	pepper	to	taste.	Serve.

GARLIC	MASHED	POTATOES

Avoid	using	unusually	large	garlic	cloves,	which	will	not	soften	adequately
during	toasting.	For	chunky	mashed	potatoes,	use	a	potato	masher,	decrease	the
half-and-half	to	¾	cup,	and	mash	the	garlic	to	a	paste	with	a	fork	before	you	add
it	to	the	potatoes.

Toast	22	unpeeled	garlic	cloves	(about	3	ounces,	or	2⁄3	cup),	covered,	in	8-inch
skillet	over	low	heat,	shaking	pan	frequently,	until	cloves	are	dark	spotty	brown
and	slightly	softened,	about	22	minutes.	Off	heat,	let	sit,	covered,	until	fully
softened,	15	to	20	minutes.	Peel	cloves	and,	with	paring	knife,	cut	off	woody
root	end;	set	aside.	Press	or	mill	garlic	along	with	potatoes	in	step	2.



MASHED	POTATOES	WITH	SMOKED	CHEDDAR	AND	GRAINY
MUSTARD
After	stirring	butter	into	potatoes	in	step	3,	season	with	1¼	teaspoons	salt	and	½
teaspoon	pepper.	Add	¾	cup	grated	smoked	cheddar	cheese	and	2	tablespoons
whole-grain	mustard	with	half-and-half	and	stir	until	just	combined.	Serve
immediately.

MASHED	POTATOES	WITH	SMOKED	PAPRIKA	AND	TOASTED
GARLIC
While	potatoes	are	simmering,	toast	1	teaspoon	smoked	paprika	in	8-inch	skillet
over	medium	heat,	stirring	frequently,	until	fragrant,	about	2	minutes.	Transfer	to
small	bowl;	set	aside.	Melt	8	tablespoons	butter	in	small	saucepan	over	medium-
low	heat.	Add	3	minced	garlic	cloves,	reduce	heat	to	low,	and	cook,	stirring
frequently,	until	garlic	begins	to	brown,	12	to	14	minutes.	Remove	saucepan
from	heat	immediately	and	set	aside	for	5	minutes	(garlic	will	continue	to
brown).	Pour	butter-garlic	mixture	through	fine-mesh	strainer;	reserve	butter	and
set	toasted	garlic	aside.	Rice	or	mill	potatoes	as	directed,	then	stir	butter	into
potatoes	until	just	incorporated.	Season	potatoes	with	toasted	paprika,	1½
teaspoons	salt,	and	½	teaspoon	pepper.	Add	warm	half-and-half	and	stir	until	just
combined.	Serve	immediately,	sprinkling	with	reserved	toasted	garlic.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Many	people	would	never	consider	consulting	a	recipe	when	making	mashed
potatoes,	instead	adding	chunks	of	butter	and	spurts	of	cream	until	their
conscience	tells	them	to	stop.	Little	wonder	then	that	mashed	potatoes	made	this
way	are	consistent	only	in	their	mediocrity.	We	wanted	mashed	potatoes	that
were	perfectly	smooth	and	creamy,	with	great	potato	flavor	and	plenty	of	buttery
richness	every	time.	We	use	russet	potatoes,	boil	them	whole	for	optimal	texture
and	flavor,	and	tweak	the	temperature	and	order	of	the	addition	of	butter	and
dairy	for	a	smooth,	velvety	mash.
START	WITH	RUSSETS	Russets	have	an	earthy	potato	flavor	coupled	with

a	mild	sweetness.	They	are	starchy	and	fluffy	and	do	the	best	job	of	absorbing
butter	and	cream.
BOIL,	THEN	PEEL	The	usual	method	of	peeling,	cutting	into	chunks,	and

boiling	potatoes	isn’t	nearly	as	good	as	boiling	the	potatoes	in	their	skins.
Peeling	and	cutting	before	simmering	increases	the	surface	area	through	which
the	potatoes	lose	soluble	substances	such	as	starch,	proteins,	and	flavor
compounds	to	the	cooking	water.	The	greater	surface	area	also	enables	lots	of
water	molecules	to	bind	with	the	potatoes’	starch	molecules.	Combine	these	two
effects	and	you’ve	got	bland,	watery	mashed	potatoes.	When	boiled	whole	and
unpeeled,	the	potatoes	absorb	less	water	so	they	can	absorb	more	cream	and
butter.	Their	potato	flavor	is	much	stronger,	too—not	washed	out.
PROTECT	YOUR	HANDS	Yes,	it’s	a	pain	to	peel	hot	potatoes,	but	it’s

worth	it.	You	can	handle	the	job	by	first	holding	the	hot	potato	with	a	potholder,
and	peel	the	potato	skins	using	a	paring	knife.	Or	you	can	cut	each	boiled	potato
in	half	and	use	a	spoon	to	scoop	the	flesh	away	from	the	skins.
RICE	OR	MILL	There	is	more	than	one	way	to	mash	potatoes.	We	prefer	a

ricer	or	a	food	mill,	both	of	which	yield	a	much	smoother	mash	than	a	potato
masher.	After	the	cooked	potatoes	have	been	drained	and	peeled,	process	them
back	into	the	still-warm	saucepan	so	they	don’t	cool	off.
USE	HOT	BUTTER	Adding	butter	and	dairy	to	the	mix	is	more	complicated

than	you	might	think.	Two	things	are	important:	the	order	in	which	they	are
added	to	the	potatoes,	and	the	temperature	of	the	butter.	The	water	in	the	half-
and-half,	when	stirred	into	the	potatoes	before	the	butter,	works	with	the	starch
in	the	potatoes	to	make	the	dish	gluey	and	heavy.	When	the	butter	is	added
before	the	half-and-half,	however,	the	fat	coats	the	starch	granules	and	released
starch	molecules,	inhibiting	their	interaction	with	the	water	in	the	half-and-half



added	later	and	thereby	yielding	silkier,	creamier	potatoes.	The	benefit	of	using
melted	butter	is	that,	as	a	liquid,	it	coats	the	starch	molecules	quickly	and	easily.
This	buttery	coating	not	only	affects	the	interaction	of	the	starch	molecules	with
the	half-and-half,	it	also	affects	the	starch	molecules’	interaction	with	each	other.
All	in	all,	it	makes	for	smoother,	more	velvety	mashed	potatoes.	(Don’t	forget	to
warm	the	half-and-half,	too,	so	the	potatoes	don’t	get	cold.)



SMASHED	POTATOES
SERVES	4	TO	6

White	potatoes	can	be	used	instead	of	red,	but	the	dish	won’t	be	as	colorful.	We
prefer	to	use	small	potatoes,	2	inches	in	diameter,	in	this	recipe.	Try	to	get
potatoes	of	equal	size;	if	that’s	not	possible,	test	the	larger	potatoes	for
doneness.	If	only	larger	potatoes	are	available,	increase	the	cooking	time	by
about	10	minutes.

2				 pounds	small	red	potatoes
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 bay	leaf
4				 ounces	cream	cheese,	softened
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted
3				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives	(optional)

1.	Place	potatoes	in	large	saucepan	and	add	cold	water	to	cover	by	1	inch.	Add
1	teaspoon	salt	and	bay	leaf.	Bring	to	boil	over	high	heat,	then	reduce	heat	to
medium-low	and	simmer	gently	until	paring	knife	can	be	inserted	into	potatoes
with	no	resistance,	35	to	45	minutes.	Reserve	½	cup	cooking	water,	then	drain
potatoes.	Return	potatoes	to	pot,	discard	bay	leaf,	and	let	potatoes	sit	in	pot,
uncovered,	until	surfaces	are	dry,	about	5	minutes.
2.	While	potatoes	dry,	whisk	cream	cheese	and	butter	in	medium	bowl	until

smooth	and	fully	incorporated.	Add	¼	cup	reserved	cooking	water,	chives,	if
using,	½	teaspoon	salt,	and	½	teaspoon	pepper.	Using	rubber	spatula	or	back	of
wooden	spoon,	smash	potatoes	just	enough	to	break	skins.	Fold	in	cream	cheese
mixture	until	most	of	liquid	has	been	absorbed	and	chunks	of	potatoes	remain.
Add	more	cooking	water	as	needed,	1	tablespoon	at	a	time,	until	potatoes	are
slightly	looser	than	desired	(potatoes	will	thicken	slightly	with	sitting).	Season
with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste;	serve	immediately.

GARLIC-ROSEMARY	SMASHED	POTATOES
Add	2	peeled	garlic	cloves	to	potatoes	in	saucepan	along	with	salt	and	bay	leaf
in	step	1.	Melt	4	tablespoons	butter	in	8-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat.	Add	1
minced	garlic	clove	and	½	teaspoon	minced	fresh	rosemary	and	cook	until	just



fragrant,	about	30	seconds;	substitute	butter-garlic	mixture	for	melted	butter,
adding	cooked	garlic	cloves	to	cream	cheese	along	with	butter-garlic	mixture.
Omit	chives.

SMASHED	POTATOES	WITH	BACON	AND	PARSLEY
Cook	6	slices	bacon,	cut	lengthwise	in	half	then	crosswise	into	¼-inch	pieces,	in
10-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat	until	crisp,	5	to	7	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,
transfer	bacon	to	paper	towel–lined	plate;	reserve	1	tablespoon	fat.	Substitute
bacon	fat	for	1	tablespoon	melted	unsalted	butter,	2	tablespoons	minced	fresh
parsley	for	chives,	and	reduce	salt	added	to	cream	cheese	mixture	to	¼	teaspoon.
Sprinkle	potatoes	with	cooked	bacon	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Bold	flavors	and	a	rustic,	chunky	texture	make	smashed	potatoes	a	satisfying
side	dish	that	pairs	well	with	a	range	of	entrées.	We	were	after	a	good	contrast
of	textures,	with	chunks	of	potato	bound	by	a	rich,	creamy	puree.	Low-starch,
high-moisture	red	potatoes	are	the	best	choice	for	smashing	since	their	compact
structure	holds	up	well	under	pressure,	maintaining	its	integrity,	and	their	red
skins	provide	nice	contrasting	color.	For	the	best	chunky	texture,	we	smashed	the
potatoes,	which	we	had	cooked	whole	in	salted	water	with	a	bay	leaf,	with	a
rubber	spatula	or	the	back	of	a	wooden	spoon.	Giving	the	potatoes	a	few
minutes	to	dry	ensured	the	skins	weren’t	too	slippery,	making	the	job	even	easier.
A	combination	of	cream	cheese,	melted	butter,	and	a	little	reserved	potato
cooking	water	gave	our	potatoes	a	unified	creamy	consistency.
CHOOSE	RED	The	classic	mashed	potatoes	are	perfectly	silky.	But	a	newer

style—simply	“smashed”	with	the	skin	on—is	an	appealing	option,	especially
for	simpler	weeknight	meals.	When	the	goal	is	a	rustic,	chunky	smash,	red
potatoes	are	best.	They	have	the	thinnest	skin	(other	varieties	have	pretty	tough
skin)	and	their	structure	is	compact	enough	to	hold	up	when	smashed—in	this
case	(as	in	French	potato	salad),	you	want	a	potato	with	some	integrity.
COOK	’EM	WHOLE	As	we	do	for	our	Classic	Mashed	Potatoes,	we	cook

these	potatoes	whole.	Cut	into	chunks,	they	absorb	too	much	water	and	the	result
is	a	soggy	texture	and	washed-out	potato	flavor.	Additions	to	the	cooking	water
like	salt	and	a	bay	leaf	(and,	for	a	variation,	garlic)	penetrate	the	thin	skins	easily
to	flavor	the	potatoes.
SMASH	WISELY	Potato	mashers	and	forks	are	too	tough	on	potatoes.	A

wooden	spoon	breaks	them	up	without	reducing	them	to	a	smooth	puree.
USE	CREAM	CHEESE	We	liked	the	idea	of	tangy	sour	cream	as	the	dairy

element	but	we	weren’t	wild	about	the	texture	of	the	finished	dish—the	potatoes
needed	more	body.	In	the	end,	we	had	the	best	results	with	cream	cheese.	It	adds
plenty	of	tang	and	makes	the	potatoes	creamy.	A	little	butter	is	necessary,	and
mixing	the	butter	and	cream	together	before	adding	them	to	the	potatoes	reduces
the	chance	of	overworking	the	potatoes	and	making	them	gluey.
RESERVE	COOKING	WATER	As	we	often	do	with	pasta,	we	reserve	a	bit

of	the	salty	cooking	water	to	adjust	the	consistency	of	the	smash.	It	keeps	the
finished	dish	from	being	too	dry	(you	need	some	liquid,	but	more	dairy,	like
cream	or	half-and-half,	will	dull	the	tang	of	the	cream	cheese).	The	water
reinforces	the	salty	flavor	but	doesn’t	dull	the	tang.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SINK	OR	SWIM

The	different	ratios	of	starch	in	Red	Bliss,	Yukon	Gold,	and	russet	potatoes	can	be	seen	when
the	potatoes	are	placed	in	salted	water.

To	determine	the	difference	in	density	of	potato	varieties,	we	mixed	up	an	11	percent	salt	solution	and	split
it	among	three	containers.	We	then	added	a	Red	Bliss,	Yukon	Gold,	and	russet	potato,	respectively.	The	Red
Bliss	floated	to	the	top	of	the	container,	the	russet	sank	like	a	rock,	and	the	Yukon	Gold	stayed	suspended
right	in	the	middle	of	the	container.	What	does	this	tell	us?	Density	correlates	to	starch	content	in	potatoes
so	russets	are	the	highest	in	starch,	and	Red	Bliss	are	the	least	starchy.	Yukon	Golds	have	a	starch	content
between	these	two.

	
RED	BLISS



	
RUSSET



	
UKON	GOLD

	



CONCEPT	26

Potato	Starches	Can	Be	Controlled
Potatoes	contain	a	great	deal	of	starch.	Sometimes	these	starches	work	against
us,	causing	gluey	mashed	potatoes.	Other	times	the	surplus	starch	is	exactly	what
we	need	for	crisp,	browned	home	fries.	We	don’t	leave	our	results	up	to	chance,
however.	Taking	control	of	the	starches	in	potatoes	is	easy:	Use	simple	steps	to
either	remove	or	activate	starch,	depending	on	the	dish.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
We	learned	in	concept	25	that	anywhere	between	16	and	22	percent	of	a	raw
potato’s	weight	is	made	up	of	starch.	We	also	learned	that	there	are	two	types	of
starch	molecules:	amylose	and	amylopectin,	which	act	in	different	ways.
Because	each	variety	of	potato	has	different	amounts	of	starch	and	moisture,	this
means	that	some	potatoes	are	best	for	mashing	(the	fluffy	varieties	such	as
russet)	and	others	for	boiling	and	retaining	their	shape	(the	less	dense,	waxy	Red
Bliss).	In	addition	to	choosing	the	best	potato	for	the	job,	there	are	things	that	we
can	do	to	help	control	the	starches	in	potatoes,	enhancing	or	eliminating	them
with	different	techniques	as	we	cook.
When	we	cook	potatoes,	the	starch	granules	within	the	potato	cells	are	greatly

affected.	These	granules	begin	to	absorb	water	when	the	temperature	of	the
potato	hits	140	degrees.	They	swell	intensely	by	160	degrees.	The	danger	here	is
that	the	starch	granules	can	rupture	if	they	get	too	hot	and	absorb	too	much
water.	And	when	they	burst,	they	spill	out	a	sticky	gel	made	of	amylose.	If	the
potato	cells	holding	these	burst	starch	granules	also	explode,	this	released
amylose	will	no	doubt	turn	potatoes	into	a	gluey	mess.	This	becomes	a
significant	problem	when	the	temperature	reaches	180	degrees.	At	this	point,
pectin,	which	acts	as	a	glue	surrounding	the	cells	and	within	the	cell	walls,
begins	to	break	down,	becomes	water-soluble,	and	dissolves,	causing	the	cells	to
separate	and	the	cell	walls	to	break	open,	releasing	the	gel.	Overcooked	potatoes,
because	a	large	percentage	of	their	starch	granules	have	exploded,	produce	a
great	deal	of	sticky	gel,	making	them	extremely	gluey,	even	if	they	are	easy	to
mash.	(These	starch	granules	can	also	explode	if	the	potatoes	are	overworked
after	cooking.)
To	prevent	a	gluey	dish,	we	often	remove	starch	by	rinsing	it	off	of	the	cut

potatoes	either	before,	during,	or	after	cooking.	Rinsing	helps	remove	some	of
the	free	starch	that	has	escaped	from	the	potato’s	starch	granules.	With	less
starch,	the	potatoes	are	less	inclined	to	become	gluey	and	thick	when	cooked,
and	we’re	left	with	mashed	potatoes,	for	example,	with	a	lighter,	silkier	texture.
Sometimes,	however,	we	want	to	use	this	excess	starch	to	our	advantage.	We

can	do	this	by	activating	the	starch	granules—in	a	controlled	setting.	This	can	be
as	simple	as	stirring	or	using	the	food	processor.	We	use	techniques	like	this	to
manipulate	texture	for	dishes	that	are	meant	to	have	a	more	sticky,	tacky	texture
(like	some	kinds	of	mashed	potatoes),	or	to	promote	browning	by	activating
extra	starch	on	the	surface	of	a	slice	of	potato	going	in	to	roast	(the	starch	will
convert	to	sugar	and	form	a	nicely	browned	crust).



POTATO	STARCH	GRANULES



	
UNCOOKED	Before	cooking,	the	potato	starch	amylose	is	held	within	the	starch	granules.



	
COOKED	When	cooked	(or,	more	often,	overcooked),	these	starch	granules	swell	with	water	and	then



burst,	releasing	the	amylose,	which	forms	a	gluey	gel.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	demonstrate	that	how	you	handle	a	potato	once	it	is	cooked	can	be	just	as
important	as	which	potato	variety	you	choose,	we	mashed	batches	of	potatoes	in
two	different	ways.	First,	we	made	a	batch	of	mashed	potatoes	by	gently	folding
warm	milk	and	butter	into	a	bowl	of	russets	that	we	had	processed	with	a	ricer.
For	the	other	batch,	we	used	the	fast	action	of	a	food	processor	blade	to	puree
the	ingredients	into	the	potatoes	for	30	seconds.	We	repeated	the	test	three	times.



THE	RESULTS
While	the	folded	batch	of	mashed	potatoes	was	fluffy,	the	sample	out	of	the	food
processor	was	sticky,	a	sign	of	burst	starch	granules.	Tasters	unanimously
preferred	the	folded	potatoes,	which	were	described	as	“light.”	Tasters	found	the
potatoes	made	in	the	food	processor	to	be	“too	thick”	and	“gluey.”



THE	TAKEAWAY
Because	potatoes	have	so	much	starch,	which	can	drastically	alter	the	texture	of
the	finished	dish,	it’s	important	to	handle	them	with	care.
As	our	experiment	shows,	the	texture	of	potatoes	run	through	a	food	processor

is	sticky	and	gummy—and,	unless	we’re	making	Aligot,	this	is	everything	we
don’t	want	in	a	classic	mashed	potato	dish.	Why	is	the	texture	so	different?
Because	a	food	processor,	with	its	sharp	blade,	is	a	full-contact	tool,	using	one	is
an	especially	rough	method	of	creaming	a	vegetable.	It	slices	through	many—if
not	all—of	the	already-expanded	starch	granules	and	cells	in	the	potatoes,
causing	them	to	burst	and	release	the	sticky	amylose	strands.	This	creates	a	gel
that	turns	the	potato	dish	into	a	substance	closer	to	glue	than	mashed	potatoes.
The	potatoes	we	barely	touched,	however,	kept	their	starch	granules	and	cells

intact.	Without	the	rough	handling,	the	starch	granules	were	not	punctured	or
split,	and	a	good	deal	of	the	amylose	remained	within	the	intact	cells,	allowing
us	to	finish	with	a	light	and	fluffy	mashed	potato.
In	conclusion:	The	method	of	handling	your	potatoes	will	affect	the	texture	of

your	final	dish.	Pay	careful	attention	to	how	much—or	how	little—you	process
your	spuds.	It	could	mean	the	difference	between	a	puddle	of	glue	and	a	dish	so
fluffy	it	resembles	a	cloud.



STICKY	VERSUS	FLUFFY	MASHED	POTATOES

	
BEATEN	IN	A	FOOD	PROCESSOR	The	mashed	potatoes	made	in	a	food	processor	were	so	violently
handled	that	the	majority	of	their	starch	granules	burst,	causing	them	to	be	so	sticky	they	clung	to	a	spatula
like	glue.

	
GENTLY	MADE	BY	HAND	The	mashed	potatoes	run	through	a	ricer	and	then	folded	by	hand	were
processed	very	lightly,	making	sure	the	majority	of	their	starch	granules	remained	intact	and	resulting	in
fluffy	potatoes.



RINSING	AWAY	STARCHES	AT	WORK	
MASHED	POTATOES	AND	ROESTI
To	control	the	levels	of	sticky	starch	glue	released	from	potatoes	in	such	recipes
as	Mashed	Potatoes	and	Root	Vegetables	(next)	and	Potato	Roesti,	we	rinse	it
away.	This	helps	prevent	the	finished	dishes	from	becoming	heavy	and	dense.



MASHED	POTATOES	AND	ROOT	VEGETABLES
SERVES	4

Russet	potatoes	will	yield	a	slightly	fluffier,	less	creamy	mash,	but	they	can	be
used	in	place	of	the	Yukon	Gold	potatoes	if	desired.	Rinsing	the	potatoes	in	water
reduces	starch	and	helps	prevent	the	mashed	potatoes	from	becoming	gluey.	It	is
important	to	cut	the	potatoes	and	root	vegetables	into	evenly	sized	pieces	so	they
cook	at	the	same	rate.	This	recipe	can	be	doubled	and	cooked	in	a	large	Dutch
oven.	If	doubling,	increase	the	cooking	time	in	step	2	to	40	minutes.

4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
8				 ounces	carrots,	parsnips,	turnips,	or	celery	root,	peeled,	carrots	or	parsnips	cut	into	¼-inch-thick

half-moons,	turnips	or	celery	root	cut	into	½-inch	dice	(about	1½	cups)
1½				 pounds	Yukon	Gold	potatoes,	peeled,	quartered	lengthwise,	and	cut	crosswise	into	¼-inch-thick

slices,	rinsed	and	well	drained
				1⁄3 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
					 Salt	and	pepper
¾				 cup	half-and-half,	warmed
3				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives

1.	Melt	butter	in	large	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Add	root	vegetables	and
cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	butter	is	browned	and	vegetables	are	dark
brown	and	caramelized,	10	to	12	minutes.	(If	after	4	minutes	vegetables	have	not
started	to	brown,	increase	heat	to	medium-high.)
2.	Add	potatoes,	broth,	and	¾	teaspoon	salt	and	stir	to	combine.	Cook,

covered,	over	low	heat	(broth	should	simmer	gently;	do	not	boil),	stirring
occasionally,	until	potatoes	fall	apart	easily	when	poked	with	fork	and	all	liquid
has	been	absorbed,	25	to	30	minutes.	(If	liquid	does	not	gently	simmer	after	a
few	minutes,	increase	heat	to	medium-low.)	Remove	pan	from	heat,	remove	lid,
and	allow	steam	to	escape	for	2	minutes.
3.	Gently	mash	potatoes	and	root	vegetables	in	saucepan	with	potato	masher

(do	not	mash	vigorously).	Gently	fold	in	warm	half-and-half	and	chives.	Season
with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste;	serve	immediately.



MASHED	POTATOES	AND	ROOT	VEGETABLES	WITH	BACON	AND
THYME
Cook	4	slices	bacon,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces,	in	large	saucepan	over	medium	heat
until	crisp,	5	to	7	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	bacon	to	paper	towel–
lined	plate;	set	aside.	Pour	off	all	but	2	tablespoons	fat	from	pan.	Add	2
tablespoons	butter	to	pan	and	continue	with	step	1,	cooking	root	vegetables	in
bacon	fat	mixture	instead	of	butter.	Substitute	1	teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme	for
chives	and	fold	reserved	bacon	into	potatoes	along	with	thyme.

MASHED	POTATOES	AND	ROOT	VEGETABLES	WITH	PAPRIKA
AND	PARSLEY

This	variation	is	particularly	nice	with	carrots.

Toast	1½	teaspoons	smoked	or	sweet	paprika	in	8-inch	skillet	over	medium
heat	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Substitute	parsley	for	chives	and	fold
toasted	paprika	into	potatoes	along	with	parsley.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Root	vegetables	like	carrots,	parsnips,	turnips,	and	celery	root	can	add	an
earthy,	intriguing	flavor	to	mashed	potatoes,	but	despite	being	neighbors	in	the
root	cellar,	root	vegetables	contain	more	water	(80	percent	to	92	percent)	than
russet	potatoes	(about	79	percent),	the	test	kitchen’s	first	choice	for	mashing.
Root	vegetables	also	have	less	starch	(between	0.2	percent	and	6.2	percent	wet
weight)	than	potatoes	(about	16	to	22	percent).	Finally,	many	root	vegetables	are
either	noticeably	sweet	or	slightly	bitter—traits	that	can	overwhelm	mild
potatoes.	So	knowing	that	treating	root	vegetables	and	potatoes	the	same	way
can	create	a	bad	dish,	adding	up	to	a	watery,	lean,	or	saccharine	mash,	we
played	with	the	ratio,	caramelized	the	root	vegetables,	and	braised	them	all	in
chicken	broth.	But	to	avoid	a	gluey	texture	we	hit	the	sink.
USE	THE	RIGHT	RATIO	You	need	to	use	far	fewer	root	vegetables	than

you	think	for	this	recipe.	The	usual	1:1	ratio	of	root	vegetables	to	potatoes	in
other	recipes	proves	to	be	too	thin	because	of	the	extra	moisture	in	the	root
vegetables.	We	found	that	a	1:3	ratio	is	much	better.
BROWN,	BABY,	BROWN	Because	we	use	fewer	root	vegetables,	however,

it’s	imperative	to	enhance	their	flavor.	Browning	them	in	butter	(not	oil)	does	the
job.
MAKE	IT	A	ONE-POT	WONDER	With	the	vegetables	being	browned	in

one	pot,	why	dirty	a	second	pot	just	to	boil	the	potatoes?	We	add	the	raw
potatoes	to	the	pot	with	the	browned	root	vegetables	and	braise	them.	We	prefer
chicken	stock	to	water	as	the	liquid	for	extra	flavor.	Once	they	are	tender,	we
mash	the	root	veggies	and	potatoes	right	in	the	butter.
RINSE	AWAY	STARCH	When	boiling	peeled	chunks	of	russets,	you	wash

away	the	excess	starch	as	part	of	the	cooking	process.	Braising,	however,	means
the	finished	dish	will	contain	all	that	starch.	Switching	to	Yukon	Golds	helps,	but
to	further	cut	down	on	starch	you	need	to	rinse	the	sliced	potatoes	before	adding
them	to	the	pot.	(Rinsing	will	even	make	russets	an	acceptable—if	slightly	less
fluffy—choice.)
USE	HALF-AND-HALF	After	cooking	the	root	vegetables,	the	butter	is

already	in	the	pot,	so	we	just	need	to	add	the	dairy.	As	usual,	we	prefer	half-and-
half.



POTATO	ROESTI
SERVES	4

The	test	kitchen	prefers	a	roesti	prepared	with	potatoes	that	have	been	cut	with
the	large	shredding	disk	of	a	food	processor.	It	is	possible	to	use	a	box	grater	to
cut	the	potatoes,	but	they	should	be	cut	lengthwise,	so	you	are	left	with	long
shreds.	It	is	imperative	to	squeeze	the	potatoes	as	dry	as	possible.	A	well-
seasoned	cast-iron	skillet	can	be	used	in	place	of	the	nonstick	skillet.	With	the
addition	of	fried	eggs,	bacon,	or	cheese,	roesti	can	be	turned	into	a	light	meal
for	two.

1½				 pounds	Yukon	Gold	potatoes,	peeled	and	shredded
1				 teaspoon	cornstarch
					 Salt	and	pepper
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter

1.	Place	potatoes	in	large	bowl	and	fill	with	cold	water.	Using	hands,	swirl	to
remove	excess	starch,	then	drain.
2.	Wipe	bowl	dry.	Place	half	of	potatoes	in	center	of	kitchen	towel.	Gather

ends	together	and	twist	as	tightly	as	possible	to	expel	maximum	moisture.
Transfer	potatoes	to	bowl	and	repeat	process	with	remaining	potatoes.
3.	Sprinkle	cornstarch,	½	teaspoon	salt,	and	pepper	to	taste	over	potatoes.

Using	hands	or	fork,	toss	ingredients	together	until	well	blended.
4.	Melt	2	tablespoons	butter	in	10-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium	heat.

Add	potato	mixture	and	spread	into	even	layer.	Cover	and	cook	for	6	minutes.
Remove	cover	and,	using	spatula,	gently	press	potatoes	down	to	form	round
cake.	Cook,	occasionally	pressing	on	potatoes	to	shape	into	uniform	round	cake,
until	bottom	is	deep	golden	brown,	4	to	6	minutes	longer.
5.	Shake	skillet	to	loosen	roesti	and	slide	onto	large	plate.	Add	remaining	2

tablespoons	butter	to	skillet	and	swirl	to	coat	pan.	Invert	roesti	onto	second	plate
and	slide	it,	browned	side	up,	back	into	skillet.	Cook,	occasionally	pressing
down	on	cake,	until	bottom	is	well	browned,	7	to	9	minutes.	Remove	pan	from
heat	and	allow	cake	to	cool	in	pan	for	5	minutes.	Transfer	roesti	to	cutting	board,
cut	into	4	pieces,	and	serve	immediately.



POTATO	ROESTI	WITH	FRIED	EGGS	AND	PARMESAN
SERVES	2	AS	A	MAIN	COURSE

Slide	2	fried	eggs	onto	finished	roesti,	sprinkle	with	½	cup	grated	Parmesan
cheese,	and	season	with	salt	to	taste.



POTATO	ROESTI	WITH	BACON,	ONION,	AND	SHERRY	VINEGAR
SERVES	2	AS	A	MAIN	COURSE

Cook	3	chopped	slices	bacon	in	10-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until
crisp,	5	to	7	minutes.	Transfer	bacon	to	paper	towel–lined	plate	and	pour	off	all
but	1	tablespoon	fat	from	skillet.	Add	1	thinly	sliced	large	onion	to	skillet,
season	with	salt	and	pepper,	and	cook	until	onion	is	softened,	about	5	to	7
minutes,	topping	finished	roesti	with	bacon	and	onion	and	sprinkling	with	sherry
vinegar	to	taste	before	serving.



CHEESY	POTATO	ROESTI
SERVES	2	AS	A	MAIN	COURSE

While	not	traditional,	sharp	cheddar,	Manchego,	Italian	fontina,	and	Havarti
cheeses	are	each	a	good	match	for	this	potato	dish.

Sprinkle	½	cup	shredded	Gruyère	or	Swiss	cheese	over	roesti	in	step	5	about	3
minutes	before	fully	cooked	on	second	side.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Roesti—a	broad,	golden	brown	cake	of	simply	seasoned	grated	potatoes	fried	in
butter—is	hugely	popular	in	Switzerland.	We	set	out	to	master	a	stateside	recipe
with	a	crunchy,	crisp	exterior	encasing	a	tender,	creamy	interior;	one	with	good
potato	flavor,	rich	with	butter.	The	goal	here	is	to	control	the	starch	and	the
moisture,	which	tend	to	make	roesti	heavy	and	gluey.	Some	roesti	are	made	with
cooked	potatoes,	which	makes	these	issues	easier	to	control.	However,	we
wanted	a	weeknight	recipe	that	could	be	made	with	no	advance	planning	so	raw
potatoes	were	a	must.	Rinsing	and	wringing	out	the	potatoes	helps.
SHRED,	RINSE,	AND	SQUEEZE	Excess	starch	and	moisture	in	the

potatoes	will	cause	roesti	to	cook	up	gummy	in	the	middle.	The	best	way	to
remove	both	the	excess	starch	and	moisture	is	to	shred	the	raw	potatoes	(we	like
the	flavor	of	Yukon	Golds	best),	rinse	them,	and	then	squeeze	them	dry	in	a
kitchen	towel.	Even	without	rinsing,	you	can	extract	¼	cup	of	liquid	from	1½
pounds	of	potatoes.
ADD	A	LITTLE	CORNSTARCH	While	rinsing	away	starch	helps	reduce

gumminess,	if	you	remove	too	much	starch	the	potato	cake	isn’t	cohesive	and	it
will	fall	apart	when	sliced.	Our	solution	is	simple:	Rinse	the	potatoes	and	then
add	a	little	cornstarch	along	with	the	salt	and	pepper.	(This	is	much	easier	than
trying	to	extract	some	of	the	potato	starch	from	the	rinsing	liquid,	as
recommended	in	other	recipes.)	The	added	cornstarch	also	helps	to	crisp	and
brown	the	exterior	of	the	potatoes.
COVER	AT	THE	OUTSET	Since	you’re	using	raw	potatoes,	you	need	to

make	sure	they	are	fully	cooked	by	the	time	the	exterior	of	the	roesti	is	browned.
Using	the	cover	for	the	first	few	minutes	traps	steam	and	actually	yields	a	lighter
potato	cake	than	leaving	the	cover	off	the	whole	time.	(Loosely	packing	the
potatoes	into	the	pan	is	important—you	need	to	give	the	steam	a	way	to	exit	the
roesti.)
DO	THE	FLIP	While	certain	expert	chefs	may	think	nothing	of	flipping	over

a	piping-hot	skillet	to	turn	a	potato	roesti	out	onto	a	plate,	it	can	be	a	scary
endeavor	for	mere	mortals.	A	slipped	grip	or	faltering	wrist	can	send	dinner
crashing	to	the	floor.	Fortunately,	there	is	a	safer	and	less	intimidating	way	to
turn	something	over	in	a	large	skillet.	Working	with	two	plates,	slide	whatever
you	wish	to	flip	onto	one	plate	and	top	it	with	the	other.	Then,	holding	the	two
plates	together,	flip	them	over	and	slide	the	inverted	food	back	into	the	pan	to
finish	cooking.



ACTIVATING	STARCHES	AT	WORK	
ALIGOT,	ROASTED	POTATOES,	HOME	FRIES
We	don’t	always	want	to	rid	our	dishes	of	starches.	Sometimes	we	want	to
activate	them—for	cheesy	mashed	potatoes	with	an	elastic	texture,	or	roasted
potato	slices	with	great	exterior	browning.	Some	recipes	call	for	manipulation	to
develop	the	starches	in	potatoes.	By	stirring,	or	simply	roughing	up	the	surface
of	our	potatoes,	we	make	the	starch	work	to	our	advantage.



FRENCH-STYLE	MASHED	POTATOES	WITH	CHEESE	AND	GARLIC
(ALIGOT)
SERVES	6

The	finished	potatoes	should	have	a	smooth	and	slightly	elastic	texture.	White
cheddar	can	be	substituted	for	the	Gruyère.

2				 pounds	Yukon	Gold	potatoes,	peeled,	cut	into	½-inch-thick	slices,	rinsed	well,	and	drained
					 Salt	and	pepper
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced

1–1½				 cups	whole	milk
4				 ounces	mozzarella	cheese,	shredded	(1	cup)
4				 ounces	Gruyère	cheese,	shredded	(1	cup)

1.	Place	potatoes	in	large	saucepan,	add	cold	water	to	cover	by	1	inch,	and	add
1	tablespoon	salt.	Partially	cover	saucepan	and	bring	potatoes	to	boil	over	high
heat.	Reduce	heat	to	medium-low	and	simmer	until	potatoes	are	tender	and	just
break	apart	when	poked	with	fork,	12	to	17	minutes.	Drain	potatoes	and	dry
saucepan.
2.	Transfer	potatoes	to	food	processor.	Add	butter,	garlic,	and	1½	teaspoons

salt	and	pulse	until	butter	is	melted	and	incorporated	into	potatoes,	about	10
pulses.	Add	1	cup	milk	and	continue	to	process	until	potatoes	are	smooth	and
creamy,	about	20	seconds,	scraping	down	sides	halfway	through	processing.
3.	Transfer	potato	mixture	to	saucepan	and	set	over	medium	heat.	Stir	in

cheeses,	1	cup	at	a	time,	until	incorporated.	Continue	to	cook	potatoes,	stirring
vigorously,	until	cheese	is	fully	melted	and	mixture	is	smooth	and	elastic,	3	to	5
minutes.	If	mixture	is	difficult	to	stir	and	seems	thick,	stir	in	2	tablespoons	milk
at	a	time	(up	to	½	cup)	until	potatoes	are	loose	and	creamy.	Season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste.	Serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Aligot	is	French	cookery’s	intensely	rich,	cheesy	take	on	mashed	potatoes.	These
potatoes	get	their	elastic,	satiny	texture	through	prolonged,	vigorous	stirring—
which	can	easily	go	awry	and	lead	to	a	gluey,	sticky	mess.	We	monitor	our
stirring	with	caution	to	release	just	the	right	amount	of	starch	for	increasing	the
elasticity	of	the	cheese.
START	WITH	YUKON	GOLDS	Russets	have	an	earthy	flavor	we	like	in

mashed	potatoes,	but	with	all	the	stirring	this	recipe	requires	they	can	be	way	too
gluey.	The	Yukon	Golds	have	good	flavor,	but	a	little	less	starch,	so	they	are	not
as	sticky	or	tacky	in	the	finished	dish.	After	making	aligot	with	different
potatoes,	we	found	medium-starch	Yukon	Golds	to	be	the	clear	winner.
CHUNK	AND	BOIL	In	the	test	kitchen,	we’ve	found	that	how	you	cook	the

potatoes	for	a	regular	mash	is	critical	to	their	final	texture.	To	avoid	glueyness,
we’ve	gone	so	far	as	to	steam	as	well	as	rinse	the	spuds	midway	through	cooking
to	rid	them	of	excess	amylose,	the	starch	in	potatoes	that	turns	them	tacky.	But
because	the	potatoes	are	stirred	so	vigorously	later	(rough	handling	also	bursts
the	granules	that	contain	amylose,	and	the	potato	cells,	releasing	the	starch	into
the	mix),	such	treatment	doesn’t	matter.	It’s	fine	to	peel	and	boil	the	potatoes	in
chunks.
GET	OUT	THE	FOOD	PROCESSOR	We	use	a	food	processor	to	“mash”

our	potatoes	here.	It	most	closely	approximates	the	super-smooth	puree	produced
by	a	tamis,	a	drum-size	sieve,	which	is	the	traditional	French	tool	used	for	this
dish.
GO	EASY	ON	BUTTER	AND	DAIRY	This	recipe	needs	less	butter	and

lower-fat	dairy	(milk	is	fine)	than	regular	mashed	potatoes	because	of	all	the	fat
that	will	be	supplied	by	the	cheese.	We	add	the	butter	(and	garlic)	to	the	mix	in
the	food	processor.	Once	the	potato	starches	are	coated	with	fat,	we	add	the	milk.
The	coating	of	butter	helps	to	make	the	starch	more	compatible	with	the	fatty
cheeses	so	the	starch	molecules	are	better	able	to	combine	with	the	proteins.	If
milk	is	added	first,	the	starch	becomes	so	wet	it	resists	interaction	with	the	fatty
cheese.
ADD	TWO	TYPES	OF	CHEESE	The	authentic	cheese	in	aligot	is	tome

fraîche,	a	spongy	and	elastic	cow’s	milk	cheese	not	easily	found	in	the	United
States.	To	replace	this	with	something	more	readily	available,	we	end	up	with
two	cheeses.	Mozzarella	gives	the	dish	stretch,	and	Gruyère	gives	it	a	nutty
flavor.



But	is	it	the	cheese	alone	that	gives	this	dish	its	stretch?	No.	As	it	turns	out,
there	is	something	different	about	the	starch	in	potatoes	that	makes	it	possible	to
form	the	super	stretch	of	aligot.	Unlike	the	starch	from	other	plants,	the
molecules	in	potato	starch	contain	a	small	number	of	negative	electrical	charges.
When	combined	with	cheese	proteins,	parts	of	which	contain	positive	electrical
charges,	an	electrical	bond	between	the	two	is	created.	Therefore,	when	curly
amylose	molecules	bond	with	cheese	proteins,	the	combination	becomes	very
springy	and	stretchy.
STIR,	STIR,	STIR	Stirring	is	the	key	to	aligot,	but	it’s	tricky.	Too	much	and

the	aligot	turns	so	rubbery	that	it	is	reminiscent	of	chewing	gum.	Too	little	and
the	cheese	doesn’t	truly	marry	with	the	potatoes	for	that	essential	elasticity.
Three	to	five	minutes	is	the	magic	number.	During	this	time	the	amylose,
released	from	the	starch	molecules,	is	binding	with	the	proteins	from	the	melted
cheese,	enhancing	its	stretch	without	causing	glueyness.



CRISP	ROASTED	POTATOES
SERVES	4	TO	6

The	steps	of	parcooking	the	potatoes	before	roasting	and	tossing	the	potatoes
with	salt	and	oil	until	they	are	coated	with	starch	are	the	keys	to	developing	a
crisp	exterior	and	creamy	interior.	The	potatoes	should	be	just	undercooked
when	they	are	removed	from	the	boiling	water.

2½				 pounds	Yukon	Gold	potatoes,	cut	into	½-inch-thick	slices
					 Salt	and	pepper
5				 tablespoons	olive	oil

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position,	place	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	rack,
and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	Place	potatoes	and	1	tablespoon	salt	in	Dutch
oven,	add	cold	water	to	cover	by	1	inch.	Bring	to	boil	over	high	heat,	then
reduce	heat	and	gently	simmer	until	exteriors	of	potatoes	have	softened	but
centers	offer	resistance	when	poked	with	paring	knife,	about	5	minutes.	Drain
potatoes	well	and	transfer	to	large	bowl.
2.	Drizzle	potatoes	with	2	tablespoons	oil	and	sprinkle	with	½	teaspoon	salt;

using	rubber	spatula,	toss	to	combine.	Repeat	with	2	tablespoons	oil	and	½
teaspoon	salt	and	continue	to	toss	until	exteriors	of	potato	slices	are	coated	with
starchy	paste,	1	to	2	minutes.
3.	Working	quickly,	remove	baking	sheet	from	oven	and	drizzle	remaining	1

tablespoon	oil	over	surface.	Carefully	transfer	potatoes	to	baking	sheet	and
spread	into	even	layer	(place	end	pieces	skin	side	up).	Bake	until	bottoms	of
potatoes	are	golden	brown	and	crisp,	15	to	25	minutes,	rotating	baking	sheet
after	10	minutes.
4.	Remove	baking	sheet	from	oven	and,	using	metal	spatula	and	tongs,	loosen

potatoes	from	pan	and	carefully	flip	each	slice.	Continue	to	roast	until	second
side	is	golden	and	crisp,	10	to	20	minutes	longer,	rotating	baking	sheet	as	needed
to	ensure	potatoes	brown	evenly.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve
immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	roasted	potatoes	with	the	crispiest	exterior	and	creamiest	interior,	we	had	to
find	the	right	spud,	the	right	shape,	and	the	right	cooking	method.	Parcooking	is
key,	as	gently	simmering	the	potatoes	draws	starch	and	sugar	to	the	surface	and
washes	away	the	excess	quickly.	In	the	oven,	the	starch	and	sugar	will	harden
into	a	crisp	shell,	especially	after	we	rough	up	the	surface	of	the	potatoes,	which
helps	to	speed	up	evaporation	during	roasting,	making	the	crusts	even	crisper.
YUKON	GOLDS	ARE	BEST	Most	recipes	rely	on	long	cooking	times	for

crisp	roasted	potatoes,	yielding	tough,	leathery	exteriors	and	dried-out,	mealy
interiors.	With	the	goal	of	creating	a	really	crisp	roast	potato	with	a	creamy
interior,	we	tested	different	types	of	potatoes.	For	velvety	interiors,	the	ideal
potato	has	high	moisture	and	low	starch.	But	the	ideal	potato	for	a	crisp	exterior
has	low	moisture	and	high	starch.	Russets	and	red	potatoes	give	either	the
exterior	or	the	interior	too	much	weight.	Yukon	Golds	are	the	perfect
compromise	choice—enough	moisture	so	the	interior	is	creamy,	enough	starch
for	a	crispy	exterior.
CUT	INTO	DISKS	We	cut	our	potatoes	into	disks	rather	than	chunks	because

the	disks	have	much	more	surface	area	for	maximum	browning.	They	also	flip
easily,	and	we	can	be	sure	that	each	side	will	sit	flush	against	the	pan.
PARCOOK	THE	POTATOES	For	a	potato	to	brown	and	crisp,	two	things

need	to	happen,	both	of	which	depend	on	moisture.	First,	starch	granules	in	the
potatoes	must	absorb	water	and	swell,	releasing	some	of	their	amylose.	Second,
some	of	the	amylose	must	break	down	into	glucose,	a	type	of	sugar.	Once	the
moisture	evaporates	on	the	surface	of	the	potato,	the	amylose	hardens	into	a
plasticlike	shell,	yielding	crispness,	and	the	glucose	darkens,	yielding	an
appealing	brown	color.	In	the	dry	heat	of	the	oven,	this	is	a	lengthy	process
because	the	starch	granules	swell	slowly,	releasing	little	amylose.	In	contrast,
parboiled	potatoes	are	swimming	in	the	requisite	moist	heat,	releasing	lots	of
amylose	on	the	surface	of	the	potato.	By	the	time	parcooked	spuds	get
transferred	to	the	oven,	they	are	ready	to	begin	browning	and	crisping	almost
immediately.
HANDLE	ROUGHLY	Potatoes	that	are	parcooked	brown	faster	in	the	oven.

But	potatoes	that	are	parcooked	and	“roughed	up”	by	being	tossed	vigorously
with	salt	and	oil	brown	even	faster.	It’s	all	a	matter	of	surface	area.	Browning	or
crisping	can’t	begin	until	the	surface	moisture	evaporates	and	the	temperature
rises.	The	parcooked,	roughed-up	slices—riddled	with	tiny	dips	and	mounds,	the
salt	causing	added	friction—have	more	exposed	surface	area	than	the	smooth



raw	slices	and	thus	more	escape	routes	for	moisture.
USE	HOT	OVEN,	HOT	BAKING	SHEET	Preheat	the	baking	sheet	used

for	the	potatoes	along	with	the	oven.	This	allows	for	a	shorter	roasting	time.	A
shorter	time	in	the	oven	allows	more	retention	of	moisture	in	the	potato	innards,
resulting	in	a	creamier	texture.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
JUST	SCRATCH	THE	SURFACE

Roughing	up	slices	of	potatoes	allows	for	more	moisture	evaporation,	and	better	crusts.

While	developing	our	recipe	for	Crisp	Roasted	Potatoes,	we	discovered	that	parcooked	potato	slices
browned	faster	in	the	oven	than	raw	slices.	When	we	subsequently	“roughed	up”	the	parcooked	slices	by
tossing	them	vigorously	with	salt	and	oil,	they	browned	faster	still.	The	explanation?	It’s	all	a	matter	of
surface	area.	Browning	or	crisping	can’t	begin	until	the	surface	moisture	evaporates.	The	parcooked,
roughed-up	slices—riddled	with	tiny	dips	and	mounds—have	more	exposed	surface	area	than	the	smooth
raw	slices	and	thus	more	escape	routes	for	moisture.	If	you	have	trouble	getting	your	head	around	two
potato	slices	of	identical	width	having	vastly	different	surface	areas,	think	of	it	this	way:	Five	square	miles
of	Colorado’s	mountain	region	will	have	far	more	exposed	surface	area	than	5	square	miles	of	the	Kansas
plains.	(Just	try	walking	them	both.)

	
ROUGHED-UP	SURFACE	=	FAST	EVAPORATION



	
SMOOTH	SURFACE	=	SLOW	EVAPORATION



HOME	FRIES
SERVES	6	TO	8

Don’t	skip	the	baking	soda	in	this	recipe.	It’s	critical	for	home	fries	with	just	the
right	crisp	texture.

3½				 pounds	russet	potatoes,	peeled	and	cut	into	¾-inch	dice
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	12	pieces
					 Kosher	salt	and	pepper
					 Pinch	cayenne	pepper
3				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
2				 medium	onions,	cut	into	½-inch	dice
3				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position,	place	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	rack,
and	heat	oven	to	500	degrees.
2.	Bring	10	cups	water	to	boil	in	Dutch	oven	over	high	heat.	Add	potatoes	and

baking	soda.	Return	to	boil	and	cook	for	1	minute.	Drain	potatoes.	Return
potatoes	to	Dutch	oven	and	place	over	low	heat.	Cook,	shaking	pot	occasionally,
until	any	surface	moisture	has	evaporated,	about	2	minutes.	Remove	from	heat.
Add	butter,	1½	teaspoons	salt,	and	cayenne;	mix	with	rubber	spatula	until
potatoes	are	coated	with	thick	starchy	paste,	about	30	seconds.
3.	Remove	preheated	baking	sheet	from	oven	and	drizzle	with	2	tablespoons

oil.	Transfer	potatoes	to	baking	sheet	and	spread	into	even	layer.	Roast	for	15
minutes.	While	potatoes	roast,	combine	onions,	remaining	tablespoon	oil,	and	½
teaspoon	salt	in	bowl.
4.	Remove	baking	sheet	from	oven.	Using	thin,	sharp	metal	spatula,	scrape

and	turn	potatoes.	Clear	about	8	by	5-inch	space	in	center	of	baking	sheet	and
add	onion	mixture.	Roast	for	15	minutes.
5.	Scrape	and	turn	again,	mixing	onions	into	potatoes.	Continue	to	roast	until

potatoes	are	well	browned	and	onions	are	softened	and	beginning	to	brown,	5	to
10	minutes	longer.	Stir	in	chives	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Serve
immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Despite	the	cozy	image	conjured	by	the	name,	few	people	actually	make	home
fries	at	home.	That’s	probably	because	producing	the	perfect	dish—a	mound	of
golden-brown	potato	chunks	with	crisp	exteriors	and	moist,	fluffy	insides	dotted
with	savory	onions	and	herbs—calls	for	more	time,	elbow	grease,	and	stovetop
space	than	most	cooks	care	to	devote	to	the	project.	We	simplify	our	home	fries
with	a	super-fast	precook	in	boiling	water	(with	baking	soda!),	and	some	time	in
a	hot	oven.
CHOOSE	RUSSETS	When	developing	this	recipe,	we	tested	the	three	main

kinds	of	potatoes:	waxy,	low-starch	red-skinned	spuds;	all-purpose,	medium-
starch	Yukon	Golds;	and	floury,	high-starch	russets	(see	concept	25).	Tasters
almost	universally	rejected	the	texture	of	the	red-skinned	potatoes	as	too	waxy
for	home	fries.	Though	some	praised	the	creaminess	of	the	Yukon	Golds,	the
majority	preferred	the	earthy	flavor	of	russets.	After	all,	the	higher	starch	content
of	russets	does	make	for	a	crustier	exterior—especially	when	manipulated.
PARBOIL	WITH	BAKING	SODA	A	very	quick	jaunt	in	boiling	water—

with	baking	soda—is	the	secret	to	the	success	of	these	home	fries.	Because	the
russets	are	so	starchy,	if	they	are	cooked	all	the	way	through	before	going	against
high	heat,	they	will	absorb	all	the	oil	before	beginning	to	brown.	The	short
blanch	(just	1	minute)	is	an	effective	way	to	break	down	just	the	very	exterior	of
the	potato.	This	is	possible	because	of	the	baking	soda,	which	speeds	up	the
softening	process	(see	“Baking	Soda	for	Brown	Crusts”)	and	therefore
exaggerates	the	differences	in	doneness	between	the	exterior	and	the	interior	of
the	potatoes.	The	thin	outer	layer	of	blown-out,	starchy	potato	will	brown
thoroughly	in	the	oven,	while	the	raw	middle	will	stay	moist.
SALT	THE	EXTERIOR	Tossing	the	drained	parcooked	potato	chunks	with

butter	and	salt	before	placing	them	on	the	baking	sheet	helps	with	the	browned
exterior.	The	coarse	salt	roughs	up	the	surface	of	the	potatoes	so	that	moisture
evaporates	faster,	leading	to	better	browning.
ROAST	IN	THE	OVEN	These	home	fries	might	as	well	be	called	home-

roasted	potatoes,	because	we	do	just	that.	Unable	to	ignore	the	fact	that	the	oven
is	best	for	large	batches,	we	choose	high-temperature	roasting	over	making	many
batches	in	a	skillet.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BAKING	SODA	FOR	BROWN	CRUSTS

Creating	an	alkaline	environment	in	which	to	boil	potatoes	helps	to	later	brown	the	crust.

While	developing	a	potato	salad	recipe,	we	discovered	that	adding	vinegar	to	the	cooking	water	creates	an
acidic	environment	that	slows	the	breakdown	of	the	pectin	that	holds	potato	cells	together,	resulting	in	a
firm,	intact	texture.	So	when	our	home	fries	required	a	thin	outer	layer	of	mush	that	would	brown
thoroughly	in	the	oven,	we	took	the	opposite	approach:	We	created	an	alkaline	environment	by	adding	a
little	bit	of	baking	soda	to	the	water.	After	just	one	minute	in	the	pot,	the	exteriors	of	the	potatoes	became	so
soft	that	they	were	mushy—but	the	interiors	remained	raw.	This	led	to	potatoes	that	more	readily	crisped	on
the	outside	when	roasted	but	didn’t	dry	out	on	the	inside.

How	could	just	½	teaspoon	of	baking	soda	added	to	10	cups	of	water	be	so	powerful?	It’s	because
alkaline	baking	soda	triggers	a	chain	reaction	that	literally	unzips	the	backbone	of	the	pectin	molecules	and
causes	them	to	fall	apart.	This	requires	only	enough	alkali	to	raise	the	pH	of	the	water	high	enough	to	start
the	reaction,	after	which	it	becomes	self-sustaining.

	
BOILED	WITH	BAKING	SODA	(PH	8.1)



	
BOILED	WITH	VINEGAR	(PH	3)

	



CONCEPT	27

Precooking	Makes	Vegetables	Firmer
Almost	any	vegetable	can	be	roasted	(in	a	pan	or	in	the	oven)—even	green
vegetables.	High	heat	is	a	must	to	develop	flavor,	but	sometimes	it’s	not
sufficient	to	produce	a	well-cooked	finished	dish.	As	we	learned	in	concept	5,
many	meats	benefit	from	the	use	of	two	cooking	methods.	Sometimes	vegetables
are	just	the	same.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Cooks	have	known	for	centuries	that	browning	makes	food	taste	better.	But	for
some	reason,	vegetables	have	rarely	received	this	treatment.	Their	small	size
makes	them	challenging	to	work	with	(you	can’t	really	roast	them	on	a	spit),	but
modern	ovens	have	made	roasting	almost	any	vegetable	a	cinch.	The	problem	is
that	vegetables	are	very	high	in	water,	and	when	browned	in	a	hot	oven,	there	is
a	significant	loss	of	moisture	by	evaporation.	This	concentrates	flavor	but	can
leave	you	with	a	batch	of	wrinkled,	dry	carrots.
To	combat	this,	we	turn	to	the	same	technique	we	learned	in	concept	5:	the	use

of	two	cooking	methods.	To	get	our	vegetables	tender	while	not	expelling	liquid,
we	first	steam	them,	often	by	covering	the	pan	with	foil	or	a	lid.	It’s	only	after
this	initial	cooking	that	we	then	turn	up	the	heat.
This	precooking	stage	is	especially	important	in	vegetables	like	potatoes,

sweet	potatoes,	carrots,	Brussels	sprouts,	asparagus,	and	cauliflower—
vegetables	that	can	actually	become	firm	and	stay	firm	during	cooking	if	they
are	subjected	to	a	short	time	in	the	oven	at	lower	heat.	This	persistent	firmness
helps	to	prevent	excess	moisture	loss,	keeping	the	vegetables	tender	and	moist
even	when	subjected	to	high	heat.	Why?	It	all	comes	down	to	enzymes.	Not
unlike	the	enzymes	we	learned	about	in	concept	6,	which	actively	work	to	break
down	the	tough	connective	tissue	in	proteins	when	held	at	a	temperature	under
122	degrees,	these	vegetables	contain	an	enzyme	that	becomes	most	active
between	120	and	160	degrees.	This	enzyme,	called	pectin	methylesterase,	causes
the	pectin	in	the	cell	walls	to	more	readily	link	with	calcium	ions,	which	are
already	present	in	the	vegetable’s	structure.	This	link	causes	the	pectin	to
become	stronger,	making	the	vegetable	much	less	prone	to	breaking	down.	This
is	important	because	when	we	uncover	the	veggies	to	begin	browning,	more
moisture	evaporates.	Precooking	can	keep	vegetables	firm	and	tender	even	as
they	become	well	caramelized.
Before	we	start	cooking,	let’s	address	an	important	distinction.	Many	meat

and	vegetable	recipes	include	a	step	where	the	ingredients	are	either	caramelized
or	browned.	Lots	of	people—even	professional	chefs—use	“caramelize”	and
“brown”	interchangeably,	but	if	you	look	at	the	science	behind	these	flavor-
boosting	techniques,	they’re	related	but	actually	quite	different	(though	both,	of
course,	lead	to	a	literal	browning	of	the	food).
Caramelization	describes	the	chemical	reactions	that	take	place	when	sugar	is

heated	to	the	point	that	its	molecules	begin	to	break	apart	and	generate	hundreds



of	new	flavor,	color,	and	aroma	compounds.	Consider	crème	brûlée—after	being
exposed	to	high	heat,	the	sugar	atop	the	custard	turns	golden	brown,	with	rich,
complex	flavors.	Many	vegetables	are	high	in	natural	sugars—especially	onions,
carrots,	and	squash.	In	high	heat,	once	most	of	their	surface	moisture	has
evaporated,	a	similar	process	to	the	one	for	crème	brûlée	takes	place,	and	their
natural	sugars	begin	to	caramelize.
As	for	browning,	the	process	involves	the	interaction	of	not	just	sugar

molecules	and	heat	but	also	proteins	and	their	breakdown	products,	amino	acids
—and	is	called	the	Maillard	reaction	(see	concept	2).	Browning	creates	a
tremendous	number	of	flavors	and	colors,	but	they’re	not	the	same	as	those
created	by	caramelization	because	protein	is	involved.	Meats	and	bread	benefit
from	browning,	but	since	vegetables	contain	little	or	no	protein	they	technically
caramelize.



A	GENTLE	START	AFFECTS	THE	PECTIN	IN	VEGETABLES



	
GENTLE	START,	HOT	FINISH	When	first	cooked	at	a	low	temperature,	vegetable	cells	maintain	a



strong	pectin	network	due	to	the	work	of	the	enzyme	pectin	methylesterase,	which	causes	the	pectin	to	link
with	calcium	ions.



	
HIGH	HEAT	ALONE	When	cooked	in	an	open	vessel	on	high	heat,	this	enzyme	is	not	active,	and	the



pectin	network	within	vegetable	cells	is	more	prone	to	breaking	down.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	the	effects	of	precooking	vegetables,	we	devised	a	simple	test.	We
cooked	three	500-gram	batches	of	carrots	cut	into	¾-inch	dice.	One	batch	was
cooked	uncovered	in	a	425-degree	oven	for	one	hour.	The	second	batch	was
covered	for	15	minutes	and	then	uncovered	for	45	minutes	in	a	425-degree	oven.
The	third	batch	was	cooked	in	a	sealed	bag	in	a	water	bath	at	150	degrees	for	30
minutes,	and	then	roasted	uncovered	in	a	425-degree	oven	for	45	minutes.	We
weighed	the	carrots	before	and	after	cooking.	We	repeated	the	experiment	two
more	times	and	averaged	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
The	carrots	roasted	uncovered	came	out	of	the	oven	looking	wrinkled	and	small.
They	lost	an	average	of	305	grams,	or	62	percent	of	their	weight.	The	carrots
covered	and	then	uncovered	in	the	oven	were	also	wrinkled,	but	less	so,	and	lost
an	average	of	293	grams,	or	60	percent	of	their	weight.	The	carrots	first	cooked
in	the	water	bath	came	from	the	oven	looking	relatively	firm.	They	lost	260
grams	on	average,	or	53	percent	of	their	weight.



THE	TAKEAWAY
It	was	no	surprise	that	the	carrots	roasted	uncovered	in	a	hot	oven	lost	the	most
water	weight.	They	were	brought	to	temperature	quickly	and	began	caramelizing
(and	losing	water	via	evaporation)	almost	immediately.
On	the	opposite	end,	the	carrots	precooked	in	the	low-temperature	water	bath

lost	the	least	amount	of	water	weight	when	later	roasted	uncovered	in	the	oven.
For	the	sample	that	technically	cooked	the	longest	of	all	three,	this	was	no	small
feat	and	had	everything	to	do	with	enzymes.	Because	these	carrots	were	held	at	a
temperature	optimal	for	the	activation	of	the	enzyme	pectin	methylesterase,	they
had	the	most	time	to	reap	the	benefits,	becoming	persistently	firm	and	therefore
able	to	retain	more	moisture.
But	the	real	story	comes	with	the	middle	results.	We	don’t	expect	home	cooks

to	use	the	extra	pots	and	take	the	extra	time	to	precook	vegetables	in	a	water
bath.	Instead,	we	recommend	cooking	vegetables,	including	carrots,	first	covered
with	foil	and	then	uncovered	in	the	oven.	This	gentle	start	is	less	effective	than
actual	precooking,	but	it	does	keep	the	vegetables	at	a	lower	temperature	for	a
longer	period	of	time.	This	allows	the	enzyme	pectin	methylesterase	to	help	keep
the	vegetables’	flesh	firmer	and	less	prone	to	water	loss.	When	we	roast	carrots
this	way	(especially	when	they’re	cut	into	larger	chunks,	like	our	Roasted
Carrots),	the	finished	results	are	tender,	flavorful	roasted	veggies	without	the	dry,
leathery	texture.



WEIGHING	CARROTS:	GENTLE	START	VS.	HIGH	HEAT

	
RAW	CARROTS	We	took	two	batches	of	cubed	carrots	that	weighed	exactly	the	same	and	then	cooked
them	in	two	different	ways.



	
GENTLE	START	VS.	HIGH	HEAT	Our	carrots	started	under	foil	(left)	retained	more	water	(and	weight)
than	those	cooked	straight	under	high	heat	(right).



PECTIN	STABILIZATION	AT	WORK	OVEN-
ROASTED	VEGETABLES
Instead	of	placing	vegetables	straight	into	a	hot	oven	without	any	protection,	we
cover	our	pans	of	chopped,	thick	cauliflower,	sweet	potatoes,	Brussels	sprouts,
and	carrots	with	aluminum	foil.	This	way,	the	vegetables	steam	in	the	oven	at	a
lower	temperature	for	a	short	amount	of	time,	retaining	moisture	and	acquiring
some	persistent	firmness	before	we	remove	the	foil	and	let	them	brown.



ROASTED	CAULIFLOWER
SERVES	4	TO	6

This	dish	stands	well	on	its	own,	drizzled	with	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	but	it	can
also	be	prepared	with	a	sauce	(recipes	follow).

1				 head	cauliflower	(2	pounds)
¼				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	475	degrees.	Trim
outer	leaves	off	cauliflower	and	cut	stem	flush	with	bottom.	Cut	head	into	8
equal	wedges	through	center	core.	Place	wedges	cut	side	down	on	aluminum
foil–	or	parchment	paper–lined	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Drizzle	with	2	tablespoons
oil	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Gently	rub	seasonings	and	oil	into
cauliflower.	Gently	flip	cauliflower	and	repeat	on	second	cut	side	with	remaining
2	tablespoons	oil,	salt,	and	pepper.
2.	Cover	baking	sheet	tightly	with	foil	and	cook	for	10	minutes.	Remove	foil

and	continue	to	roast	until	bottoms	of	cauliflower	pieces	are	golden,	8	to	12
minutes.	Remove	baking	sheet	from	oven	and,	using	spatula,	carefully	flip
wedges.	Return	baking	sheet	to	oven	and	continue	to	roast	until	cauliflower	is
golden	all	over,	8	to	12	minutes	longer.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and
serve	immediately.



SHERRY	VINEGAR–HONEY	SAUCE	WITH	ALMONDS
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	ROASTED	CAULIFLOWER

Both	regular	and	golden	raisins	work	well	here.

1				 tablespoon	extra-virgin	olive	oil
¼				 cup	raisins
2				 large	garlic	cloves,	minced
¼				 cup	water
3				 tablespoons	sherry	vinegar
2				 tablespoons	honey
¼				 cup	sliced	almonds,	toasted
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	chives

Heat	oil	in	8-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	raisins
and	garlic	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	garlic	is	fragrant,	about	1	minute.
Reduce	heat	to	medium	and	add	water,	vinegar,	and	honey.	Simmer	until	lightly
syrupy,	4	to	6	minutes.	Stir	in	almonds,	parsley,	and	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.
Drizzle	sauce	over	roasted	cauliflower	and	garnish	with	chives	before	serving.



SOY-GINGER	SAUCE	WITH	SCALLION
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	ROASTED	CAULIFLOWER

If	using	this	sauce,	use	vegetable	oil	to	roast	the	cauliflower	instead	of	olive	oil.

2				 teaspoons	vegetable	oil
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
¼				 cup	water
2				 tablespoons	soy	sauce
2				 tablespoons	mirin
1				 tablespoon	rice	vinegar
1				 teaspoon	toasted	sesame	oil
1				 scallion,	sliced	thin

Heat	oil	in	8-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	ginger
and	garlic	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Reduce	heat	to	medium-low
and	add	water,	soy	sauce,	mirin,	and	vinegar.	Simmer	until	slightly	syrupy,	4	to	6
minutes.	Drizzle	sauce	and	sesame	oil	over	roasted	cauliflower	and	garnish	with
scallion	before	serving.



CURRY-YOGURT	SAUCE	WITH	CILANTRO
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	ROASTED	CAULIFLOWER

If	using	this	sauce,	use	vegetable	oil	to	roast	the	cauliflower	instead	of	olive	oil.

1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
1				 shallot,	minced
2				 teaspoons	curry	powder
¼				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
				1⁄3 cup	water
¼				 cup	plain	whole-milk	yogurt
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	cilantro
1				 teaspoon	lime	juice
					 Salt	and	pepper

Heat	oil	in	small	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	shallot
and	cook	until	softened,	about	2	minutes.	Stir	in	curry	powder	and	pepper	flakes;
cook	until	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Remove	from	heat	and	whisk	in	water,
yogurt,	cilantro,	lime	juice,	and	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Drizzle	sauce	over
roasted	cauliflower	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	to	add	flavor	to	cauliflower	without	drowning	it	in	a	heavy	blanket	of
cheese	sauce,	so	we	developed	a	roasted	cauliflower	recipe	that	gave	us
cauliflower	with	a	golden,	nutty	exterior	and	sweet	interior.	We	discovered	that
steaming	(in	a	covered	sheet	pan)	followed	by	roasting	produces	nicely
caramelized	cauliflower	with	a	creamy	texture.	Though	the	cauliflower	is
excellent	on	its	own,	we	also	developed	some	simple	sauces	to	dress	it	up.
CUT	BIG	WEDGES	Roasting	makes	cauliflower	creamy	and	brings	out	the

sweet,	nutty	notes.	If	the	cauliflower	is	cut	too	small,	however,	the	florets	will
disintegrate	into	small	pieces	and	burn.	Cutting	the	cauliflower	through	the	core
(so	that	each	fat	wedge	has	some	of	the	core)	keeps	the	florets	attached	to	each
other.	It	also	ensures	that	each	piece	will	lie	flat—and	that	translates	to
maximum	color	and	flavor	through	caramelization.
OIL	WELL	Cauliflower	wedges	have	lots	of	nooks	and	crannies.	If	you

skimp	on	the	oil,	the	cauliflower	can	dry	out	and	become	leathery.	Also,	the	oil
promotes	good	browning.
OVEN-STEAM,	THEN	ROAST	Straight-up	roasting	causes	cauliflower	to

shed	its	moisture	rapidly	within	the	first	few	minutes	of	cooking.	Covering	the
baking	sheet	with	foil,	however,	traps	this	moisture	and	adds	just	enough	steam
to	cook	the	cauliflower	gently,	keeping	the	florets	firm	and	moist	enough	to
withstand	the	next	20	minutes	of	roasting	and	preventing	them	from	becoming
dry	and	leathery.
FLIP	WITH	CARE	Turn	cauliflower	just	once	(to	minimize	chances	of

breakage)	and	use	a	spatula	to	get	under	each	wedge	and	flip	it	over.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TAKING	THE	SIDE	OF	ALUMINUM	FOIL

The	shiny	and	dull	sides	of	aluminum	foil	work	the	same.

Aluminum	foil	is	made	by	passing	two	layers	of	foil	through	a	rolling	mill	at	the	same	time.	The	side	in
contact	with	the	rolling	mill	comes	out	shiny,	while	the	other	side	is	dull.	To	see	if	one	side	heats	faster	than
the	other,	we	ran	a	series	of	kitchen	tests.	In	one	test,	mashed	potatoes	covered	with	foil	heated	up	a	bit
faster	when	the	shiny	side	was	facing	the	food	rather	than	the	heat	source,	but	the	differences	were	so	slight
that	we	concluded	that	foil	works	the	same,	whether	the	shiny	or	dull	side	is	touching	the	food.



ROASTED	SWEET	POTATOES
SERVES	4	TO	6

Note	that	this	recipe	calls	for	starting	the	potatoes	in	a	cold	oven.	Choose
potatoes	that	are	as	even	in	width	as	possible;	trimming	the	small	ends	prevents
them	from	burning.	If	you	prefer	not	to	peel	the	potatoes,	just	scrub	them	well
before	cutting.

3				 pounds	sweet	potatoes,	ends	trimmed,	peeled,	rinsed,	and	cut	into	¾-inch-thick	rounds
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Toss	potatoes	in	large	bowl	with	oil,	1	teaspoon	salt,	and	pepper	to	taste
until	evenly	coated.	Line	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	aluminum	foil	and	coat	with
vegetable	oil	spray.	Arrange	potatoes	in	single	layer	on	baking	sheet	and	cover
tightly	with	foil.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	place	potatoes	in	cold
oven.	Turn	oven	to	425	degrees	and	cook	potatoes	for	30	minutes.
2.	Remove	baking	sheet	from	oven	and	carefully	remove	top	piece	of	foil.

Return	potatoes	to	oven	and	roast,	uncovered,	until	bottom	edges	of	potatoes	are
golden	brown,	15	to	25	minutes.
3.	Remove	baking	sheet	from	oven	and,	using	thin	metal	spatula,	flip	potato

slices	over.	Continue	to	roast	until	bottom	edges	of	potatoes	are	golden	brown,
18	to	22	minutes	longer.	Remove	from	oven,	let	cool	for	5	to	10	minutes,	and
serve.

ROASTED	SWEET	POTATOES	WITH	MAPLE-THYME	GLAZE
Whisk	¼	cup	maple	syrup,	2	tablespoons	melted	unsalted	butter,	and	2	teaspoons
minced	fresh	thyme	together	in	small	bowl.	Follow	recipe	as	directed	through
step	2.	After	removing	baking	sheet	from	oven	in	step	3,	brush	potatoes	with	half
of	maple	syrup	glaze,	flip	slices	over	with	thin	metal	spatula,	and	brush	with
remaining	glaze.	Return	potatoes	to	oven	and	proceed	as	directed.

ROASTED	SWEET	POTATOES	WITH	SPICED	BROWN	SUGAR
GLAZE



Heat	¼	cup	packed	light	brown	sugar,	2	tablespoons	apple	juice,	2	tablespoons
unsalted	butter,	¼	teaspoon	ground	cinnamon,	¼	teaspoon	ground	ginger,	and	1⁄8
teaspoon	ground	nutmeg	in	small	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Cook,	stirring
constantly,	until	butter	has	melted	and	sugar	is	dissolved,	2	to	4	minutes.	Follow
recipe	as	directed	through	step	2.	After	removing	baking	sheet	from	oven	in	step
3,	brush	potatoes	with	half	of	spice	glaze,	flip	slices	over	with	thin	metal	spatula,
and	brush	with	remaining	glaze.	Return	potatoes	to	oven	and	proceed	as
directed.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Too	often,	roasted	sweet	potatoes	turn	out	starchy	and	wan.	We	wanted	a	method
that	gave	us	potatoes	with	a	nicely	caramelized	exterior,	a	smooth,	creamy
interior,	and	an	earthy	sweetness.	A	two-step	cooking	method	is	key:	We	begin
the	sliced	sweet	potato	rounds	in	a	cold	oven,	covered	in	foil.	Only	after	they
cook	for	30	minutes	do	we	remove	the	foil	and	let	them	brown	and	crisp.
USE	THICK	ROUNDS	The	thin	tips	of	wedges	can	burn.	Big	rounds	are	the

same	thickness	throughout,	though.	And	with	rounds,	there	are	just	two	sides	to
brown,	rather	than	three.
COLD	START,	FINISH	SWEET	In	developing	this	recipe,	we	noticed	that

the	lower	the	oven	temperature,	the	less	the	potatoes	browned,	but	the	sweeter
they	became.	Why?	The	starch	in	sweet	potatoes	is	converted	into	sugars
between	135	and	170	degrees.	Once	the	internal	temperature	of	the	potato
exceeds	170	degrees,	no	further	conversion	occurs.	Thus,	the	lower	the	oven
temperature,	the	longer	the	potatoes	will	stay	within	this	range	and	the	sweeter
the	finished	results	will	be.	Therefore,	we	cover	our	potatoes	with	foil	and	start
them	in	a	cold	oven	to	maximize	their	time	in	the	“sweet	zone.”
REMOVE	THE	FOIL	After	30	minutes,	remove	the	foil	to	get	the	browning

really	going.	Roast	the	potatoes	uncovered,	turning	once.	Don’t	worry,	they
won’t	stick:	Greased	foil	on	the	bottom	of	the	pan	makes	it	easy	to	flip	’em.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
STORING	SWEET	POTATOES

Storing	sweet	potatoes	in	the	refrigerator	can	cause	them	to	develop	a	tough	interior,	even
when	cooked	for	long	periods	of	time.

We	normally	store	sweet	potatoes	away	from	light	at	a	cool	room	temperature,	but	we	wondered	if	storing
them	in	the	refrigerator	would	have	any	detrimental	effects.	We	bought	a	case	of	sweet	potatoes	and	divided
it	into	two	batches.	We	stored	each	batch	for	four	weeks,	one	at	room	temperature	(in	a	cabinet,	between	55
and	65	degrees)	and	one	in	the	refrigerator	(between	34	and	38	degrees).	After	four	weeks,	we	removed	the
sweet	potatoes	from	the	refrigerator	and	allowed	them	to	come	to	room	temperature	before	cutting	both
batches	of	potatoes	into	pieces	and	roasting	them	in	a	400-degree	oven	for	45	minutes.	We	tasted	them	to
see	if	we	could	spot	any	differences.

Both	batches	of	potatoes	looked	the	same	coming	out	of	storage,	but	cooking	them	told	a	different	story.
While	the	room-temperature	potatoes	were	creamy	and	soft	all	the	way	through,	the	refrigerated	potatoes
remained	hard	at	the	center.	To	see	if	another	cooking	method	would	produce	different	results,	we	repeated
the	test,	this	time	boiling	sliced	potatoes	for	40	minutes.	The	outcome	was	the	same:	The	refrigerated
potatoes	had	tough	centers.

It	turns	out	that	the	development	of	a	hard	core	in	sweet	potatoes	is	the	result	of	chilling	and	then
warming.	During	the	chilling	stage,	the	sweet	potatoes’	cell	walls	become	more	permeable,	allowing	the
calcium	ions	located	between	the	cells	to	enter	into	the	cell	walls.	Warming	the	sweet	potatoes	to	room
temperature	activates	the	enzyme	called	pectin	methylesterase	(the	same	enzyme	that	kicks	into	high	gear
during	precooking).	This	enzyme	alters	pectin	in	a	way	that	allows	it	to	react	with	calcium	ions,
strengthening	the	pectin	molecules	in	the	cells’	walls	so	that	they	can’t	be	broken	down—even	by	prolonged
cooking.	In	effect,	the	same	thing	happens	when	sweet	potatoes	are	refrigerated	as	when	many	vegetables
are	precooked,	but	at	a	slower	pace.



ROASTED	CARROTS
SERVES	4	TO	6

While	cutting	the	carrots	into	uniformly	sized	pieces	is	key	for	even	cooking,	it’s
the	large	size	of	the	pieces	that	makes	this	recipe	work,	so	make	sure	not	to	cut
them	too	small.

1½				 pounds	carrots,	peeled
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.	Cut	the
carrots	in	half	crosswise,	then	into	halves	or	quarters	lengthwise	if	necessary	to
create	uniformly	sized	pieces.	In	large	bowl,	combine	carrots	with	butter,	½
teaspoon	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper	and	toss	to	coat.	Transfer	carrots	to
aluminum	foil–	or	parchment	paper–lined	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	spread	in
single	layer.
2.	Cover	baking	sheet	tightly	with	foil	and	cook	for	15	minutes.	Remove	foil

and	continue	to	cook,	stirring	twice,	until	carrots	are	well	browned	and	tender,
30	to	35	minutes.	Transfer	to	serving	platter,	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,
and	serve.

ROASTED	CARROTS	AND	FENNEL	WITH	TOASTED	ALMONDS	AND
LEMON
Reduce	amount	of	carrots	to	1	pound.	Add	1	small	fennel	bulb,	stalks	discarded,
halved,	cored,	and	sliced	½	inch	thick,	to	bowl	with	carrots	and	roast	as	directed.
Toss	vegetables	with	¼	cup	toasted	sliced	almonds,	2	teaspoons	minced	fresh
parsley,	and	1	teaspoon	lemon	juice	before	serving.

ROASTED	CARROTS	AND	PARSNIPS	WITH	ROSEMARY
Reduce	amount	of	carrots	to	1	pound.	Add	8	ounces	peeled	parsnips,	halved
crosswise	and	cut	lengthwise	if	necessary	to	create	even	pieces,	and	1	teaspoon
chopped	fresh	rosemary	to	bowl	with	carrots	and	roast	as	directed.	Toss
vegetables	with	2	teaspoons	minced	fresh	parsley	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Roasting	carrots	draws	out	their	natural	sugars	and	intensifies	their	flavor—if
you	can	prevent	them	from	coming	out	dry,	shriveled,	and	jerkylike.	We	avoid
dirtying	a	second	pan	by	precooking	the	carrots	(which	we	butter	and	season)
right	on	the	baking	sheet,	covered	with	foil.
BATONS	BROWN	BEST	Cutting	carrots	to	a	uniform	size	is	the	key	to

evenly	cooked	results.	If	you	have	large	carrots	(over	1	inch	in	diameter),	you
can	do	this	by	halving	them	crosswise,	then	quartering	each	section	lengthwise
to	create	a	total	of	eight	pieces.	With	medium	carrots	(½	inch	to	1	inch	in
diameter),	halve	them	crosswise,	then	halve	the	wider	section	lengthwise	to
create	a	total	of	three	pieces.	If	you	have	small	carrots	(less	than	½	inch	in
diameter),	simply	halve	them	crosswise	and	leave	the	sections	whole.
COVER	TO	TRAP	MOISTURE	Roasted	carrots	can	dry	out	and	become

tough.	They	contain	more	pectin	than	any	other	vegetable.	We’ve	found	that
keeping	their	internal	temperature	between	120	and	160	degrees	for	as	long	as
possible	converts	the	pectin	to	a	heat-stable	form	that	reinforces	cell	walls	and
keeps	moisture	in	(see	Test	Kitchen	Experiment).	To	prevent	the	carrots’	internal
temperature	from	climbing	too	quickly,	we	start	them	in	the	oven	under	foil.



ROASTED	BRUSSELS	SPROUTS
SERVES	6	TO	8

If	you	are	buying	loose	Brussels	sprouts,	select	those	that	are	about	1½	inches
long.	Quarter	Brussels	sprouts	longer	than	2½	inches;	don’t	cut	sprouts	shorter
than	1	inch.

2¼				 pounds	Brussels	sprouts,	trimmed	and	halved
3				 tablespoons	olive	oil
1				 tablespoon	water
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	500	degrees.
Toss	Brussels	sprouts,	oil,	water,	¾	teaspoon	salt,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper	in	large
bowl	until	sprouts	are	coated.	Transfer	sprouts	to	rimmed	baking	sheet	and
arrange	so	cut	sides	are	facing	down.
2.	Cover	sheet	tightly	with	aluminum	foil	and	cook	for	10	minutes.	Remove

foil	and	continue	to	cook	until	Brussels	sprouts	are	well	browned	and	tender,	10
to	12	minutes	longer.	Transfer	to	serving	platter,	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to
taste,	and	serve.

ROASTED	BRUSSELS	SPROUTS	WITH	GARLIC,	RED	PEPPER
FLAKES,	AND	PARMESAN
While	Brussels	sprouts	roast,	heat	3	tablespoons	olive	oil	in	8-inch	skillet	over
medium	heat	until	shimmering.	Add	2	minced	garlic	cloves	and	½	teaspoon	red
pepper	flakes;	cook	until	garlic	is	golden	and	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Remove
from	heat.	After	transferring	Brussels	sprouts	to	platter,	toss	with	garlic	oil	and
season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Sprinkle	with	¼	cup	grated	Parmesan
cheese	before	serving.

ROASTED	BRUSSELS	SPROUTS	WITH	BACON	AND	PECANS
While	Brussels	sprouts	roast,	cook	4	slices	bacon	in	10-inch	skillet	over	medium
heat	until	crisp,	7	to	10	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	bacon	to	paper
towel–lined	plate	and	reserve	1	tablespoon	bacon	fat.	Finely	chop	bacon.	After



transferring	sprouts	to	platter,	toss	with	2	tablespoons	olive	oil,	reserved	bacon
fat,	chopped	bacon,	and	½	cup	finely	chopped	toasted	pecans.	Season	with	salt
and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve.

ROASTED	BRUSSELS	SPROUTS	WITH	WALNUTS	AND	LEMON
Transfer	roasted	Brussels	sprouts	to	platter	and	toss	with	1⁄3	cup	finely	chopped
toasted	walnuts,	3	tablespoons	melted	unsalted	butter,	and	1	tablespoon	lemon
juice.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Brussels	sprouts	don’t	have	to	taste	overly	bitter	or	sulfurous.	Like	other
members	of	the	crucifer	family	(which	also	includes	broccoli,	cabbage,	and
mustard	greens),	Brussels	sprouts	are	rich	in	flavor	precursors	that	react	with
the	vegetable’s	enzymes	to	produce	pungent	new	compounds	when	the	sprouts
are	cut,	cooked,	and	even	eaten.	But	when	the	sprouts	are	handled	just	right,	this
pungency	takes	on	a	nutty	sweetness.	We	steam	and	then	roast	these	sprouts	on
one	pan	in	the	oven.	They	emerge	with	tender,	sweet	insides	and	caramelized
exteriors.
ARRANGE	CUT	SIDE	DOWN	We	make	sure	to	arrange	the	halved

Brussels	sprouts	cut	side	down	on	the	baking	sheet.	This	flat	surface	is	optimal
for	browning	and,	as	a	result,	extra	flavor.
WATER	AND	FOIL	THE	SPROUTS	We	toss	these	sprouts	with	a

tablespoon	of	water	along	with	olive	oil	and	seasonings	before	putting	them	in
the	oven.	Covered	in	foil,	each	halved	sprout	acts	like	its	own	little	steam
chamber,	holding	on	to	a	tiny	bit	of	water	to	finish	cooking	its	interior	even	as	its
outside	begins	to	brown.



PECTIN	STABILIZATION	AT	WORK	
PAN-ROASTED	VEGETABLES
As	we	do	for	oven-roasted	vegetables,	we	often	precook	vegetables	before	letting
them	brown	on	top	of	the	stove.	This	method	is	especially	appealing	when	pan-
roasting	quick-cooking	vegetables	such	as	asparagus.	(Note	that	the	oven	is
really	the	best	choice	for	denser,	larger	vegetables	like	cauliflower	and	sweet
potatoes.)	Here	we	take	one	very	simple	step—briefly	putting	a	lid	on	our	pan	of
asparagus—to	keep	the	spears	firm	and	moist	before	letting	them	begin	to
brown.



PAN-ROASTED	ASPARAGUS
SERVES	4	TO	6

This	recipe	works	best	with	asparagus	that	is	at	least	½	inch	thick	near	the	base.
If	using	thinner	spears,	reduce	the	covered	cooking	time	to	three	minutes	and	the
uncovered	cooking	time	to	five	minutes.	Do	not	use	pencil-thin	asparagus;	it
cannot	withstand	the	heat	and	overcooks	too	easily.

1				 tablespoon	olive	oil
1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
2				 pounds	thick	asparagus,	trimmed
					 Salt	and	pepper
½				 lemon	(optional)

1.	Heat	oil	and	butter	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.	When	butter
has	melted,	add	half	of	asparagus	to	skillet	with	tips	pointed	in	one	direction;
add	remaining	spears	with	tips	pointed	in	opposite	direction.	Using	tongs,
distribute	spears	evenly	(spears	will	not	quite	fit	into	single	layer);	cover	and
cook	until	asparagus	is	bright	green	and	still	crisp,	about	5	minutes.
2.	Uncover	and	increase	heat	to	high;	season	asparagus	with	salt	and	pepper	to

taste.	Cook	until	spears	are	tender	and	well	browned	along	one	side,	5	to	7
minutes,	using	tongs	to	occasionally	move	spears	from	center	of	pan	to	edge	of
pan	to	ensure	all	are	browned.	Transfer	asparagus	to	serving	dish,	adjust
seasonings	with	salt	and	pepper,	and,	if	desired,	squeeze	lemon	half	over	spears.
Serve	immediately.

PAN-ROASTED	ASPARAGUS	WITH	TOASTED	GARLIC	AND
PARMESAN
Heat	2	tablespoons	olive	oil	in	12-inch	skillet,	add	3	thinly	sliced	garlic	cloves,
and	cook	over	medium	heat,	stirring	occasionally,	until	garlic	is	crisp	and	golden
but	not	dark	brown,	about	5	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	garlic	to
paper	towel–lined	plate.	Follow	recipe,	adding	butter	to	oil	already	in	skillet.
After	transferring	asparagus	to	serving	dish,	sprinkle	with	2	tablespoons	grated
Parmesan	and	toasted	garlic.	Season	with	lemon	juice,	salt,	and	pepper	to	taste,
and	serve	immediately.



PAN-ROASTED	ASPARAGUS	WITH	RED	ONION	AND	BACON
Cook	4	slices	bacon,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces,	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat
until	crisp,	5	to	7	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	bacon	to	paper	towel–
lined	plate;	set	aside.	Pour	off	all	but	1	tablespoon	fat	from	pan.	Return	skillet	to
medium-high	heat	and	add	1	large	red	onion,	halved	and	sliced	thin.	Cook,
stirring	occasionally,	until	edges	darken	and	onion	begins	to	soften,	about	3
minutes.	Add	2	tablespoons	balsamic	vinegar	and	1	tablespoon	maple	syrup	to
skillet	and	cook	until	liquids	reduce	and	cling	to	onions,	about	2	minutes.
Transfer	onions	to	bowl,	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	cover	to	keep
warm.	Top	cooked	asparagus	with	onion	mixture	and	bacon	before	serving.

PAN-ROASTED	ASPARAGUS	WITH	RED	PEPPERS	AND	GOAT
CHEESE
Heat	1	tablespoon	olive	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until
shimmering.	Add	2	red	bell	peppers,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	¼-inch-wide
strips,	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	skins	begin	to	blister,	4	to	5	minutes.
Transfer	peppers	to	bowl,	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	cover	to	keep
warm.	Top	cooked	asparagus	with	peppers,	1	cup	crumbled	goat	cheese,	¼	cup
toasted	pine	nuts,	and	2	tablespoons	minced	fresh	mint	before	serving.

PAN-ROASTED	ASPARAGUS	WITH	WARM	ORANGE-ALMOND
VINAIGRETTE
Heat	2	tablespoons	olive	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat	until
shimmering.	Add	¼	cup	slivered	almonds	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until
golden,	about	5	minutes.	Add	½	cup	orange	juice	and	1	teaspoon	minced	fresh
thyme,	increase	heat	to	medium-high,	and	simmer	until	thickened,	about	4
minutes.	Off	heat,	stir	in	2	tablespoons	minced	shallot,	2	tablespoons	sherry
vinegar,	and	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Transfer	vinaigrette	to	small	bowl.	Wipe
out	skillet	and	follow	recipe,	cooking	asparagus	in	same	pan.	After	transferring
asparagus	to	serving	dish,	pour	vinaigrette	over	and	toss	to	combine.	Season
with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Pan-roasting	is	a	simple	stovetop	cooking	method	that	delivers	crisp,	evenly
browned	asparagus	without	the	fuss	of	having	to	rotate	each	spear	individually.
To	help	the	asparagus	release	moisture,	which	encourages	caramelization	and
better	flavor,	we	parcook	it,	covered,	with	butter	and	oil	before	browning	it.	The
water	evaporating	from	the	butter	helps	to	steam	the	asparagus,	producing
bright	green,	crisp-tender	spears	that	remain	firm	and	juicy	even	when	browned.
STEAM	THEN	BROWN	We	found	that	steaming	before	sautéing	produces

better	results	than	just	sautéing.	That’s	because	the	raw	asparagus	is	dry	and
waxy	and	the	sugars	necessary	for	the	browning	reaction	are	locked	up	inside	the
plant’s	tough	cell	walls.	Cooking	is	required	to	release	these	sugars.	Adding
liquid	and	covering	the	pan	for	the	first	few	minutes	of	cooking	is	a	step	in	the
right	direction,	but	for	better	browning	we	simply	use	butter	(which	is	16	to	18
percent	water,	as	opposed	to	olive	oil,	which	is	100	percent	fat)	as	the	cooking
medium.	That	small	amount	of	water	starts	steaming	the	asparagus,	which	then
begins	to	release	its	own	moisture	to	help	the	process.	A	crowded	pan	also	helps
maximize	the	effect	of	the	steam	that	is	generated.
ARRANGE	CAREFULLY	We	fit	all	of	the	asparagus	spears	into	the	pan

with	careful	arrangement.	A	better	fit	and	better	browning	are	possible	with	half
of	the	spears	pointed	in	one	direction	and	the	other	half	pointed	in	the	opposite
direction.	We	found	that	tasters	preferred	the	spears	to	be	browned	only	on	one
side,	and	bright	green	on	the	other.	Therefore,	only	the	occasional	toss	is	enough
to	ensure	that	all	the	spears	become	partially	browned.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
STORING	ASPARAGUS

The	best	way	to	store	asparagus	is	trimmed,	standing	upright	in	a	glass,	with	a	bit	of	water,	in
the	refrigerator.

To	determine	how	to	best	maintain	asparagus’s	bright	color	and	crisp	texture,	we	tested	refrigerating	spears
in	the	plastic	bag	we’d	bought	them	in,	enclosed	in	a	paper	bag,	wrapped	in	a	damp	paper	towel,	and	with
the	stalk	ends	trimmed	and	standing	up	in	a	small	amount	of	water.	After	three	days	the	results	were	clear.
Those	left	in	the	plastic	bag	had	become	slimy,	while	the	paper	bag	and	towel	bunches	had	shriveled	tips
and	limp	stalks.	However,	the	bunch	stored	in	water	looked	as	good	as	fresh	and	retained	its	firm	texture.	To
store	asparagus	this	way,	trim	the	bottom	½	inch	of	the	stalks	and	stand	the	spears	upright	in	a	glass.	Add
enough	water	to	cover	the	bottom	of	the	stalks	by	1	inch	and	place	the	glass	in	the	refrigerator.	Asparagus
stored	this	way	should	remain	relatively	fresh	for	about	four	days;	you	may	need	to	add	a	little	more	water
every	few	days.	Retrim	the	very	bottom	of	the	stalks	before	using.



CONCEPT	28

Don’t	Soak	Beans—Brine	’Em
Dried	beans	defy	most	of	the	rules	of	cooking.	For	something	so	small,	they	sure
do	require	a	lot	of	cooking.	And	while	the	active	work	is	minimal,	it	can	be
frustrating	when	a	considerable	investment	of	time	yields	subpar	results.	You
want	beans	to	be	creamy,	with	soft	skins.	But	often	the	skins	are	still	tough
despite	hours	of	cooking.	Or	worse,	the	beans	have	exploded	and	formed	a
starchy	mass.	What	to	do?



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Dried	beans	may	not	play	a	central	role	in	the	American	diet,	but	they	are	among
the	most	important	foodstuffs	on	the	planet	because	they	are	high	in	protein	and
fiber,	inexpensive,	and	shelf-stable	for	years.	Legumes	(a	group	that	includes
dried	peas	and	lentils	as	well	as	beans)	are	basically	embryonic	plants
surrounded	by	hard	seed	coats.	The	seed	coat	is	mostly	carbohydrates	and
contains	a	significant	amount	of	fiber.	The	seed	itself	is	rich	in	protein	and
starch.
Eating	dried	beans	requires	planning	and	patience	since	they	are	best	soaked

overnight	and	then	gently	simmered	for	several	hours.	Gentle	simmering	allows
the	beans	to	absorb	water	gradually	and	keeps	them	from	exploding.	Rushing
this	process	causes	the	starches	to	swell	unevenly	and	the	skins	to	burst.	The
starches	can	make	beans	sticky	and	gummy.	Our	solution	to	this	problem	is
simple—we	use	the	oven	to	cook	most	bean	recipes.	The	heat	is	more	evenly
distributed	than	it	is	on	the	stovetop	(see	concept	1),	so	there’s	no	risk	of	the
beans	on	the	bottom	of	the	pot	cooking	too	quickly.	Also,	it’s	much	easier	to
maintain	a	gentle	simmer	in	the	oven;	many	stovetops	run	too	hot,	even	on	low.
We	also	have	found	that	soaking	the	beans	overnight	starts	the	hydration

process.	As	a	result,	soaked	beans	cook	up	faster	than	unsoaked	beans	(as	much
as	45	minutes	faster),	and,	more	important,	they	seem	to	absorb	water	more
evenly	so	the	end	result	is	a	creamier	texture.	A	quick	soak	(covering	the	beans
with	boiling	water	for	an	hour)	is	better	than	nothing.
But	even	with	soaking	and	gentle	cooking,	we	find	that	beans	still	have

trouble.	Yes,	their	interiors	are	creamy	but	their	skins	are	not.	Soaking	the	beans
in	salted	water	(in	effect,	brining	them)	is	the	key	to	beans	that	cook	up	with
tender	skins.	Why?	As	the	beans	soak,	the	sodium	ions	replace	some	of	the
calcium	and	magnesium	ions	in	the	skins.	Because	calcium	and	magnesium	ions
form	links	between	pectin	molecules,	they	are	responsible	for	creating	strong
cells	that	are	tightly	bound	together.	When	they	are	replaced	by	sodium	ions,	the
pectin	weakens,	leading	to	a	softer	texture.	During	soaking,	the	sodium	ions	will
filter	only	partway	into	the	beans,	so	their	greatest	effect	is	on	the	cells	in	the
outermost	part	of	the	beans.
When	brined	beans	are	cooked	(preferably	with	a	little	salt),	the	result	is

tender	skins.	And,	as	we	will	see	in	the	Test	Kitchen	Experiment,	getting	the
skins	to	soften	reduces	the	number	of	beans	that	explode	during	the	cooking
process,	which	is	the	key	to	beans	that	cook	up	creamy	rather	than	starchy.



BRINING	BEANS



	
BEFORE	BRINING	Before	beans	are	brined,	the	strong	pectin	molecules	in	the	beans’	skin	are	tightly



bound	by	calcium	and	magnesium	ions.



	
WHILE	BRINING	When	beans	are	brined,	sodium	replaces	the	calcium	and	magnesium	ions,	causing	the



gluelike	pectin	network	to	more	readily	break	down,	softening	the	skin	and	preventing	exploding	legumes.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	the	value	of	soaking—and	cooking—beans	in	water	seasoned	with
salt,	we	started	with	four	1-cup	samples	of	dried	black	beans.	We	soaked	two
samples	of	beans	for	24	hours	in	2	quarts	of	cold	water	mixed	with	1½
tablespoons	of	table	salt.	After	draining	and	rinsing	these	beans,	we	cooked	one
sample	in	5	cups	of	water	mixed	with	½	teaspoon	of	table	salt,	and	the	other	in	5
cups	of	plain	water.	(To	cook	all	samples,	we	first	brought	the	beans	and	water	to
a	simmer	in	a	medium	saucepan	on	the	stovetop,	and	then	baked	them,	with	the
cover	on,	in	a	325-degree	oven	for	one	hour.)	We	soaked	the	other	two	samples
for	24	hours	in	2	quarts	of	cold	water	without	any	salt.	We	then	cooked	one
sample	in	salted	water	and	the	other	in	unsalted	water.	After	all	of	the	beans
were	cooked,	we	compared	the	results.	We	repeated	the	test	three	times.



THE	RESULTS
The	beans	that	were	brined	for	24	hours	and	cooked	in	salted	water	remained
completely	intact	and	were	the	clear	winners	in	a	side-by-side	comparison	with
the	other	three	samples.	The	beans	that	were	brined	and	cooked	in	unsalted	water
were	largely	intact,	with	a	small	percentage	having	skins	that	began	to	burst.	In
contrast,	the	two	samples	that	were	soaked	in	plain	water,	rather	than	brined,
yielded	far	inferior	results.	Many	of	the	beans	that	were	soaked	in	plain	water,
and	then	cooked	in	salted	water,	burst	in	the	process.	And	every	single	one	of	the
beans	that	were	soaked	in	plain	water	and	then	cooked	in	unsalted	water	burst
while	cooking.	Yes,	not	a	single	bean	in	this	last	sample	remained	intact.



THE	TAKEAWAY
While	soaking	beans	in	water	can	help	to	tenderize,	allowing	us	to	greatly	reduce
the	cooking	time,	the	skins	of	the	beans	can	remain	tough	even	after	the	legumes
themselves	are	fully	cooked.	Beans	with	tough	skins	have	a	tendency	to	burst	in
the	process	of	cooking,	spilling	their	starchy	innards	into	the	pot	and	finishing
with	a	sticky,	unappealing	texture.	The	answer?	Salt.
Our	test	revealed	that	adding	salt	to	the	cooking	water	only	helped	to	soften

the	skins	a	bit.	Brining	the	beans	for	24	hours	did	a	much	better	job	of	giving	us
cooked	beans	with	tender	skins,	ones	that	were	more	pliable	and	did	not	burst
while	cooking.	And	for	maximum	tenderness	and	the	fewest	burst	beans,	it’s	best
to	brine	beans	and	then	cook	them	with	a	little	salt.	During	the	brine	and	simmer,
the	sodium	ions	replace	some	of	the	calcium	and	magnesium	ions	(which	are
responsible	for	bonding	with	the	pectin	to	keep	the	cells	in	bean	skins	strongly
bound),	causing	the	skins	to	soften	considerably.	For	most	recipes	(including	the
ones	found	here)	we	recommend	brining	the	beans	ahead	of	time,	and	then
cooking	them	with	salt,	or	a	salty	ingredient	such	as	pancetta,	chicken	broth,	or
Parmesan.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HARD	WATER	=	HARD	BEANS

Avoid	cooking	your	beans	in	hard	water.	But	if	you	have	no	choice,	be	sure	to	add	salt.

How	does	the	mineral	content	of	water	affect	bean	texture?	To	find	out,	we	compared	a	batch	of	dried	white
beans	soaked	and	cooked	in	mineral-free	distilled	water	with	a	batch	prepared	with	tap	water	containing
dissolved	minerals.	The	beans	cooked	in	this	hard	tap	water	came	out	with	tougher	skins.	This	is	because
two	of	the	minerals	in	tap	water,	magnesium	and	calcium,	are	enemies	of	beans.	If	given	the	chance,	each
will	bind	together	pectin	molecules	in	the	cell	walls	of	the	bean	skins,	lending	reinforcement	that	creates
harder,	tougher	skins.	But	you	don’t	need	distilled	water	to	prevent	this;	salt	will	do	(see	“How	the	Science
Works”).



THE	EFFECT	OF	SALT	ON	SKIN

	
BRINED,	COOKED	WITH	SALT
Elastic	skins	remained	intact.

	
BRINED,	COOKED	WITH	NO	SALT

Only	a	few	skins	broke.



	
SOAKED,	COOKED	WITH	SALT
Many	beans	began	to	explode.

	
SOAKED,	COOKED	WITH	NO	SALT

With	no	salt	all	beans	blew.



BRINING	AT	WORK	
BEANS	AND	LENTILS
Recipes	for	bean	dishes	come	from	all	over	the	world.	We	find	that	there	is	a
common	denominator,	however:	No	matter	the	finished	product,	dried	beans	can
be	difficult	to	cook.	To	guarantee	a	finished	dish	with	good	texture	and	not	too
long	a	cooking	time,	we	often	soak	our	beans	in	salted	water—a	brine—
overnight.	This	softens	their	skins,	paving	the	way	for	a	perfectly	cooked	batch
of	beans,	whether	the	finished	product	is	a	stew,	a	soup,	a	salad,	or	a	bowl	of
rice	and	beans.



HEARTY	TUSCAN	BEAN	STEW
SERVES	8

We	prefer	the	creamier	texture	of	beans	soaked	overnight	for	this	recipe.	If	you
are	pressed	for	time	you	can	quick-soak	your	beans.	In	step	1,	combine	the	salt,
water,	and	beans	in	a	Dutch	oven	and	bring	to	a	boil	over	high	heat.	Remove	the
pot	from	the	heat,	cover,	and	let	stand	for	one	hour.	Drain	and	rinse	the	beans
and	proceed	with	step	2.	If	pancetta	is	unavailable,	substitute	four	slices	of
bacon.

					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 pound	dried	cannellini	beans	(2½	cups),	picked	over	and	rinsed
1				 tablespoon	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	plus	extra	for	drizzling
6				 ounces	pancetta,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 large	onion,	chopped
2				 carrots,	peeled	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
2				 celery	ribs,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
8				 garlic	cloves,	peeled	and	crushed
4				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
3				 cups	water
2				 bay	leaves
1				 pound	kale	or	collard	greens,	stemmed	and	chopped	into	1-inch	pieces
1				 (14.5-ounce)	can	diced	tomatoes,	drained
1				 sprig	fresh	rosemary
8				 (1¼-inch-thick)	slices	rustic	white	bread,	broiled	until	golden	brown	on	both	sides	and	rubbed	with

garlic	clove	(optional)

1.	Dissolve	3	tablespoons	salt	in	4	quarts	cold	water	in	large	bowl	or
container.	Add	beans	and	soak	at	room	temperature	for	at	least	8	hours	or	up	to
24	hours.	Drain	and	rinse	well.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	250	degrees.

Heat	oil	and	pancetta	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat.	Cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	pancetta	is	lightly	browned	and	fat	has	rendered,	6	to	10
minutes.	Add	onion,	carrots,	and	celery	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until
vegetables	are	softened	and	lightly	browned,	10	to	16	minutes.	Stir	in	garlic	and
cook	until	fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Stir	in	broth,	water,	bay	leaves,	and	soaked



beans.	Increase	heat	to	high	and	bring	to	simmer.	Cover	pot,	transfer	to	oven,
and	cook	until	beans	are	almost	tender	(very	center	of	beans	will	still	be	firm),
45	minutes	to	1	hour.
3.	Remove	pot	from	oven	and	stir	in	kale	and	tomatoes.	Return	pot	to	oven

and	continue	to	cook	until	beans	and	greens	are	fully	tender,	30	to	40	minutes
longer.
4.	Remove	pot	from	oven	and	submerge	rosemary	in	stew.	Cover	and	let	stand

for	15	minutes.	Discard	bay	leaves	and	rosemary	and	season	stew	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste.	If	desired,	use	back	of	spoon	to	press	some	beans	against	side	of
pot	to	thicken	stew.	Serve	over	toasted	bread,	if	desired,	and	drizzle	with
additional	olive	oil.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	to	convert	rustic	Tuscan	bean	soup	into	a	hearty	stew.	Determined	to
avoid	tough,	exploded	beans	in	our	stew,	we	soak	the	beans	overnight	in	salted
water	to	soften	the	skins.	To	complete	our	stew,	we	like	other	traditional	Tuscan
flavors,	including	pancetta,	kale,	lots	of	garlic,	and	a	sprig	of	rosemary.
USE	BROTH	AND	WATER	While	you	could	make	this	soup	with	all	water

(as	Tuscans	often	do),	we	find	a	mix	of	chicken	broth	and	water	adds	more
richness	to	the	finished	stew.
GO	SLOW	AND	STEADY	The	traditional	version	of	this	recipe	is	made	by

cooking	the	beans	in	a	wine	flask	set	in	the	dying	embers	of	a	fire	overnight.	Our
low	oven	(250	degrees)	replicates	this	gentle	cooking	method.	Once	everything
is	in	the	pot	and	brought	to	a	simmer,	we	cover	the	pot	and	shove	it	into	the	oven
for	1¼	to	1¾	hours.	(Cooking	time	will	vary	depending	on	the	exact	variety	and
age	of	the	beans.)
ADD	GREENS	AND	TOMATOES	LATER	If	added	at	the	outset,	the	kale

will	become	limp	and	gray.	We	add	it	late	in	the	cooking	process	to	preserve	its
color.	We	also	wait	to	add	the	tomatoes	because	their	acidity,	which	causes	the
pectin	in	beans	to	be	less	soluble,	actually	strengthens	the	cell	walls,	preventing
the	beans	from	softening.
STEEP	AND	DISCARD	ROSEMARY	We	love	the	flavor	of	rosemary	but	it

can	quickly	become	medicinal.	Rather	than	mincing	the	rosemary	and	adding	it
with	the	aromatic	vegetables,	we	simply	steep	a	sprig	in	the	finished	stew	for	15
minutes—this	infuses	the	broth	with	a	delicate,	not	overpowering,	herbal	aroma.
(For	more	on	herbs,	see	concept	34.)



HEARTY	MINESTRONE
SERVES	6	TO	8

If	you	are	pressed	for	time	you	can	quick-soak	your	beans.	In	step	1,	combine	the
salt,	water,	and	beans	in	a	Dutch	oven	and	bring	to	a	boil	over	high	heat.
Remove	the	pot	from	the	heat,	cover,	and	let	stand	for	one	hour.	Drain	and	rinse
the	beans	and	proceed	with	the	recipe.	Cannellini	beans	are	our	first	choice	for
this	soup,	but	navy	or	great	Northern	beans	will	also	work.	We	prefer	pancetta,
but	bacon	can	be	used.	To	make	this	soup	vegetarian,	substitute	vegetable	broth
for	chicken	broth	and	2	teaspoons	of	olive	oil	for	the	pancetta.	Parmesan	rind	is
added	for	flavor	but	can	be	replaced	with	a	2-inch	chunk	of	the	cheese.	In	order
for	the	starch	from	the	beans	to	thicken	the	soup,	it	is	important	to	maintain	a
vigorous	simmer	in	step	3.

					 Salt	and	pepper
8				 ounces	dried	cannellini	beans	(1¼	cups),	picked	over	and	rinsed
3				 ounces	pancetta,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 tablespoon	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	plus	extra	for	serving
2				 celery	ribs,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
1				 carrot,	peeled	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
2				 small	onions,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
1				 zucchini,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	(1	cup)
½				 small	head	green	cabbage,	halved,	cored,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	(2	cups)
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced

				1⁄8–¼ teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
8				 cups	water
2				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 Parmesan	cheese	rind	plus	grated	Parmesan	for	serving
1				 bay	leaf

1½				 cups	V8	juice
½				 cup	chopped	fresh	basil
					 	

1.	Dissolve	1½	tablespoons	salt	in	2	quarts	cold	water	in	large	bowl	or
container.	Add	beans	and	soak	at	room	temperature	for	at	least	8	hours	or	up	to
24	hours.	Drain	beans	and	rinse	well.



2.	Heat	pancetta	and	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat.	Cook,	stirring
occasionally,	until	pancetta	is	lightly	browned	and	fat	has	rendered,	3	to	5
minutes.	Add	celery,	carrot,	onions,	and	zucchini	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,
until	vegetables	are	softened	and	lightly	browned,	5	to	9	minutes.	Stir	in
cabbage,	garlic,	½	teaspoon	salt,	and	pepper	flakes	to	taste	and	continue	to	cook
until	cabbage	starts	to	wilt,	1	to	2	minutes	longer.	Transfer	vegetables	to	rimmed
baking	sheet	and	set	aside.
3.	Add	soaked	beans,	water,	broth,	Parmesan	rind,	and	bay	leaf	to	Dutch	oven

and	bring	to	boil	over	high	heat.	Reduce	heat	and	simmer	vigorously,	stirring
occasionally,	until	beans	are	fully	tender	and	liquid	begins	to	thicken,	45	minutes
to	1	hour.
4.	Add	reserved	vegetables	and	V8	juice	to	pot	and	cook	until	vegetables	are

soft,	about	15	minutes.	Discard	bay	leaf	and	Parmesan	rind,	stir	in	basil,	and
season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Serve	with	additional	oil	and	grated
Parmesan.	(Soup	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days.	Reheat	it	gently	and	add
basil	just	before	serving.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	a	minestrone	with	fresh,	bright	flavors	that	didn’t	have	to	rely	on
market-fresh	vegetables	like	the	best	Italian	versions.	First,	we	begin	with	a
manageable	list	of	supermarket	vegetables	for	our	base.	Slowly	layering	flavors,
salt-soaking	dried	beans,	and	adding	a	surprising	ingredient—vegetable	juice—
gives	us	a	complex	soup	with	a	good,	hearty	texture.
BUILD	THE	FLAVOR	BASE	Our	first	step	in	building	a	soup	with	great

flavor	is	to	brown	the	vegetables	to	help	them	develop	sweetness.	First	we	sauté
the	zucchini	and	aromatics,	and	then	add	the	cabbage	and	garlic	and	cook	them
just	until	the	cabbage	wilts	and	the	garlic	releases	its	aroma	before	adding	the
water	and	chicken	broth.
RELEASE	THE	STARCH	To	give	the	soup	some	body	we	simmer	the

beans	so	that	they	release	some	of	their	starches	and	thicken	the	soup.	Though
their	coats	may	look	smooth	and	unbroken	as	they	simmer,	starches	are
continually	being	released	into	the	water	through	a	section	of	their	seed	coat
called	the	hilum.	These	starches	absorb	the	hot	liquid	and	eventually	burst,
releasing	the	molecule	amylose,	which	acts	as	a	thickener.
REMOVE	THE	VEGGIES	But	simmering	the	beans	vigorously	turns	the

vegetables	to	mush.	To	keep	the	vegetables	vibrant	in	this	dish,	we	remove	them
from	the	pot	after	sautéing,	and	then	add	them	back	to	the	pot	after	the	beans
have	simmered.
GIVE	ME	A	V8	For	the	tomato	element	of	this	soup,	we	tried	supermarket

tomatoes,	which	did	nothing	for	the	flavor.	We	also	tried	canned	products.	These
provided	brighter	flavor,	but	tasters	dismissed	the	diced	tomatoes	as	too	thick
and	chunky	and	the	crushed	ones	as	only	marginally	better.	Our	solution?
Tomato	juice	ensured	consistent	tomato	flavor	in	every	spoonful.	But	then	we
tried	V8,	which	instantly	boosts	the	vegetable	factor	and	creates	depth	through
an	arsenal	of	vegetal	flavors.



CUBAN	BLACK	BEANS	AND	RICE
SERVES	6	TO	8

It	is	important	to	use	lean—not	fatty—salt	pork.	If	you	can’t	find	it,	substitute	six
slices	of	bacon.	If	using	bacon,	decrease	the	cooking	time	in	step	4	to	eight
minutes.	You	will	need	a	Dutch	oven	with	a	tight-fitting	lid	for	this	recipe.

					 Salt
1				 cup	dried	black	beans,	picked	over	and	rinsed
2				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 cups	water
2				 large	green	bell	peppers,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	halved
1				 large	onion,	halved	at	equator	and	peeled,	root	end	left	intact
1				 head	garlic,	5	cloves	minced,	rest	of	head	halved	at	equator	with	skin	left	intact
2				 bay	leaves

1½				 cups	long-grain	white	rice
2				 tablespoons	olive	oil
6				 ounces	lean	salt	pork,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
4				 teaspoons	ground	cumin
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	oregano
2				 tablespoons	red	wine	vinegar
2				 scallions,	sliced	thin
					 Lime	wedges

1.	Dissolve	1½	tablespoons	salt	in	2	quarts	cold	water	in	large	bowl	or
container.	Add	beans	and	soak	at	room	temperature	for	at	least	8	hours	or	up	to
24	hours.	Drain	and	rinse	well.
2.	In	Dutch	oven,	stir	together	drained	beans,	broth,	water,	1	bell	pepper	half,

1	onion	half	(with	root	end),	halved	garlic	head,	bay	leaves,	and	1	teaspoon	salt.
Bring	to	simmer	over	medium-high	heat,	cover,	and	reduce	heat	to	low.	Cook
until	beans	are	just	soft,	30	to	35	minutes.	Using	tongs,	remove	and	discard
pepper,	onion,	garlic,	and	bay	leaves.	Drain	beans	in	colander	set	over	large
bowl,	reserving	2½	cups	bean	cooking	liquid.	(If	you	don’t	have	enough	bean
cooking	liquid,	add	water	to	equal	2½	cups.)	Do	not	wash	out	Dutch	oven.
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Place



rice	in	large	fine-mesh	strainer	and	rinse	under	cold	running	water	until	water
runs	clear,	about	1½	minutes.	Shake	strainer	vigorously	to	remove	all	excess
water;	set	rice	aside.	Cut	remaining	bell	peppers	and	onion	into	2-inch	pieces
and	pulse	in	food	processor	until	broken	into	rough	¼-inch	pieces,	about	8
pulses,	scraping	down	bowl	as	necessary;	set	vegetables	aside.
4.	In	now-empty	Dutch	oven,	heat	1	tablespoon	oil	and	salt	pork	over

medium-low	heat	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	lightly	browned	and	fat	has
rendered,	15	to	20	minutes.	Add	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil,	chopped	peppers
and	onion,	cumin,	and	oregano.	Increase	heat	to	medium	and	continue	to	cook,
stirring	frequently,	until	vegetables	are	softened	and	beginning	to	brown,	10	to
15	minutes	longer.	Add	minced	garlic	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until
fragrant,	about	1	minute.	Add	rice	and	stir	to	coat,	about	30	seconds.
5.	Stir	in	beans,	reserved	bean	cooking	liquid,	vinegar,	and	½	teaspoon	salt.

Increase	heat	to	medium-high	and	bring	to	simmer.	Cover	and	transfer	to	oven.
Cook	until	liquid	is	absorbed	and	rice	is	tender,	about	30	minutes.	Fluff	with	fork
and	let	rest,	uncovered,	for	5	minutes.	Serve,	passing	scallions	and	lime	wedges
separately.

VEGETARIAN	CUBAN-STYLE	BLACK	BEANS	AND	RICE
Substitute	water	for	chicken	broth	and	omit	salt	pork.	Add	1	tablespoon	tomato
paste	with	vegetables	in	step	4	and	increase	amount	of	salt	in	step	5	to	1½
teaspoons.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Beans	and	rice	is	a	familiar	combination	the	world	over,	but	Cuban	black	beans
and	rice	is	unique	in	that	the	rice	is	cooked	in	the	inky	concentrated	liquid	left
over	from	cooking	the	beans,	which	lends	the	grains	extra	flavor.	For	our	own
superlative	version,	we	brine	our	beans	and	reserve	a	portion	of	the	sofrito	(the
traditional	combination	of	garlic,	bell	pepper,	and	onion)	to	simmer	with	our
beans	and	infuse	them	with	flavor.
FLAVOR	THE	BEANS	AS	THEY	COOK	The	traditional	recipe	has	three

parts—cook	the	beans,	cook	the	sofrito,	and	then	combine	the	sofrito	and	beans
with	the	rice	to	finish	cooking.	Our	version	begins	with	brining	the	beans	and
then	cooking	them	partway.	A	sofrito	adds	depth	but	we	found	we	needed	more.
Our	twofold	solution:	Adding	some	vegetables	to	the	pot	of	beans	as	they	cook
and	using	a	mixture	of	chicken	broth	and	water	gives	flavor	to	the	beans	as	well
as	to	the	cooking	liquid	(which	is	later	used	to	cook	the	rice).
MAKE	THE	SOFRITO	The	sofrito	is	commonly	pureed	before	adding	it	to

the	beans	and	rice	mixture,	but	this	muddies	the	texture	and	eliminates	the
possibility	of	browning	the	vegetables	for	flavor.	Instead,	we	chop	the	onion	and
peppers	small	(or	pulse	them	in	a	food	processor).	Then	we	sauté	them	with
some	cumin	and	oregano	in	the	rendered	fat	from	salt	pork	until	they’re	golden
brown	and	packed	with	flavor.	This	sofrito	is	the	backbone	of	our	black	beans
and	rice.
PREVENT	SCORCHED	RICE	Many	recipes	suffer	from	rice	that	is

scorched	on	the	bottom	of	the	pan	and	undercooked	on	top.	What	to	do?	First,
we	remove	excess	starch	from	the	rice	by	rinsing	it	in	water	(for	more	on	this,
see	concept	30).	This	helps	prevent	the	individual	rice	grains	from	clumping	and
becoming	sticky.	We	then	move	the	entire	operation	into	the	oven.	The	even	heat
from	the	oven	helps	to	cook	the	rice	perfectly	from	top	to	bottom.
BRIGHTEN	FLAVORS	When	we	put	the	pot	in	the	oven	(with	the	rice,

beans,	and	liquid)	we	add	a	splash	of	red	wine	vinegar	for	brightness.	We	finish
the	dish	with	scallions	and	lime,	which	are	important	additions,	because	they
really	bring	the	flavors	to	life.



LENTIL	SALAD	WITH	OLIVES,	MINT,	AND	FETA
SERVES	4	TO	6

French	green	lentils,	or	lentilles	du	Puy,	are	our	first	choice	for	this	recipe,	but	it
works	with	any	type	of	lentil	except	red	or	yellow.	Brining	helps	keep	the	lentils
intact,	but	if	you	don’t	have	time,	they’ll	still	taste	good	without	it.	The	salad	can
be	served	warm	or	at	room	temperature.

1				 cup	lentils,	picked	over	and	rinsed
					 Salt	and	pepper
6				 cups	water
2				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
5				 garlic	cloves,	lightly	crushed	and	peeled
1				 bay	leaf
5				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
3				 tablespoons	white	wine	vinegar
½				 cup	coarsely	chopped	pitted	kalamata	olives
½				 cup	minced	fresh	mint
1				 large	shallot,	minced
1				 ounce	feta	cheese,	crumbled	(¼	cup)

1.	Place	lentils	and	1	teaspoon	salt	in	bowl.	Cover	with	4	cups	warm	water
(about	110	degrees)	and	soak	for	1	hour.	Drain	well.	(Drained	lentils	can	be
refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days	before	cooking.)
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Place

drained	lentils,	2	cups	water,	broth,	garlic,	bay	leaf,	and	½	teaspoon	salt	in
medium	saucepan.	Cover	and	bake	until	lentils	are	tender	but	remain	intact,	40
minutes	to	1	hour.	Meanwhile,	whisk	oil	and	vinegar	together	in	large	bowl.
3.	Drain	lentils	well;	remove	and	discard	garlic	and	bay	leaf.	Add	drained

lentils,	olives,	mint,	and	shallot	to	dressing	and	toss	to	combine.	Season	with	salt
and	pepper	to	taste.	Transfer	to	serving	dish,	sprinkle	with	feta,	and	serve.

LENTIL	SALAD	WITH	HAZELNUTS	AND	GOAT	CHEESE
Substitute	red	wine	vinegar	for	white	wine	vinegar	and	add	2	teaspoons	Dijon
mustard	to	dressing	in	step	2.	Omit	olives	and	substitute	¼	cup	minced	fresh



parsley	for	mint.	Substitute2	ounces	crumbled	goat	cheese	for	feta	and	sprinkle
with	1⁄3	cup	coarsely	chopped	toasted	hazelnuts	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	most	important	step	in	making	a	lentil	salad	is	perfecting	the	cooking	of	the
lentils	so	they	maintain	their	shape	and	firm-tender	bite.	Two	things	help.	The
first	is	to	brine	the	lentils	in	warm	salt	water.	With	brining,	the	lentils’	skins
soften,	which	leads	to	fewer	blowouts.	The	second	step	is	to	cook	the	lentils	in
the	oven,	which	heats	them	gently	and	uniformly.	Once	we	had	perfectly	cooked
lentils,	all	we	had	left	to	do	was	to	pair	the	earthy	legumes	with	a	tart	vinaigrette
and	boldly	flavored	mix-ins.
BRINE	FASTER	We	brine	our	lentils	to	soften	their	outer	shells	and	make

them	less	likely	to	burst.	Given	the	smaller	size	of	lentils	(as	opposed	to	beans),
you	don’t	need	to	brine	them	overnight.	(In	fact,	most	recipes	don’t	even	soak
lentils.	But	soaking	does	help	them	to	cook	faster	and	yields	creamier	results.)
We	cut	down	on	the	time	even	more	by	brining	our	lentils	in	warm	water
(because	heat	speeds	up	all	chemical	reactions).
USE	THE	OVEN	While	cooking	our	lentils	in	the	oven,	rather	than	on	the

stove,	increases	the	cooking	time	from	30	minutes	to	one	hour,	the	results	are
worth	the	wait.	With	the	gentle,	even	heat	of	the	oven,	the	result	is	creamy	lentils
with	intact	skins.
MAKE	A	TART	VINAIGRETTE	For	the	finished	salad,	we	toss	our	lentils

with	a	tart	vinaigrette—using	less	than	a	2:1	ratio	of	oil	to	vinegar	versus	our
usual	dressing	ratio	of	three	or	even	four	to	one.	We	dress	the	lentils	when	warm
and	add	in	some	vibrantly	flavored	mix-ins:	feta,	olives,	and	mint;	or	hazelnuts
and	goat	cheese.	These	additions	brighten	and	balance	the	rich,	earthy	flavor	of
the	lentils.
	



CONCEPT	29

Baking	Soda	Makes	Beans	and	Grains
Soft
One	of	the	reasons	why	many	people	shy	away	from	dried	beans	is	that	they	just
take	so	long	to	cook.	We’ve	seen	how	soaking	and	salting	can	reduce	cooking
time	and	yield	better	results.	But	that’s	not	the	only	path	toward	faster,	better
beans.	Creating	an	alkaline	cooking	environment	with	the	introduction	of	baking
soda	can	cut	time	in	the	kitchen	as	well.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Baking	soda,	or	sodium	bicarbonate,	is	most	often	used	as	a	leavening	agent	for
baked	goods	(see	concept	42).	But	its	role	in	the	kitchen	doesn’t	end	there.	When
added	to	a	pot	of	cooking	beans,	baking	soda	can	do	wonders—resulting	in	more
tender	legumes	in	significantly	less	time.
How?	Baking	soda	is	an	alkali	(also	known	as	a	“base”).	And	when	added	to	a

pot	of	boiling	water	and	beans,	it	creates	an	alkaline	environment.	This
environment	causes	a	chemical	reaction	that	actually	forces	the	beans’	pectin	to
break	down	into	smaller	water-soluble	fragments.	The	breakdown	of	pectin
causes	the	cell	walls	within	the	beans	to	weaken,	allowing	water	to	be	absorbed
at	a	faster	rate.	And	this	means	that	beans	become	tender	and	cook	more	quickly.
But	it’s	important	to	use	baking	soda	sparingly,	as	too	much	can	lend	a	bitter,
soapy	flavor	to	the	beans.
In	addition,	baking	soda	can	be	used	to	set	the	color	of	black	beans,

preventing	them	from	turning	a	grayish-purple	color	when	cooked.	The	coating
of	black	beans	contains	anthocyanins	(colored	pigments)	that	change	color	with
alterations	in	pH:	A	more	alkaline	broth	makes	them	darker;	a	more	acidic	broth
makes	them	lighter.	We’ve	found	that	a	very	small	amount	of	baking	soda	(a
mere	1⁄8	teaspoon)	added	at	the	outset	sets	the	color	of	the	beans	without
producing	any	unpleasant	aftertaste.
If	you	find	yourself	with	a	pot	of	beans	that	will	not	soften	after	the

recommended	cooking	time—even	with	baking	soda—your	water	may	be	the
culprit.	Mineral	deposits	in	pots	and	green	rings	in	porcelain	sinks	or	tubs	are
signs	of	“hard	water,”	or	water	rich	with	calcium,	magnesium,	and	other	ions,
which	can	prevent	beans	from	softening.	As	we	learned	in	concept	28,	calcium
and	magnesium	ions	are	capable	of	bonding	pectin	molecules	together,	creating
stronger	cell	walls.	As	a	result,	beans	absorb	water	much	more	slowly.
Finally,	the	same	science	can	be	used	to	shorten	the	cooking	time	for	grains

like	polenta,	or	cornmeal.	The	goal	when	cooking	dried	beans	and	dried	corn	is
essentially	the	same.	In	a	bean,	water	has	to	penetrate	the	hard	outer	skin
(through	a	very	specific	region	called	the	hilum)	in	order	to	gelatinize	the	starch
within.	In	cornmeal,	the	water	has	to	penetrate	the	cell	walls	within	the
endosperm,	the	starchy	part	of	the	kernel.	Corn	cells,	like	bean	cells,	contain	a
lot	of	pectin.	So	when	the	alkaline	sodium	bicarbonate	is	present,	the	pectin
breaks	down,	weakening	the	corn’s	structure	and	allowing	water	to	enter	and
gelatinize	the	starch	in	less	than	half	the	time.



WHEN	BAKING	SODA	IS	ADDED	TO	BEANS



	
WITH	SODA	Baking	soda	creates	an	alkaline	environment	when	cooking	beans	(and	grains),	which	causes



the	pectin	strands	to	break	down,	weakening	the	cell	walls.	Weaker	cell	walls	mean	beans	(and	grains)	cook
quickly.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	tease	out	the	effects	of	pH	when	cooking	legumes,	we	filled	three	pots,	each
with	5	cups	of	water.	To	one	we	added	1	percent	baking	soda	by	weight	to	turn	it
alkaline	(about	8	on	the	pH	scale)	and	to	another	we	added	enough	citric	acid	to
increase	its	acidity	to	3.	We	left	the	third	pot	untreated	so	that	it	registered	a
neutral	pH	of	7.	We	stirred	a	cup	of	black	beans	into	each	pot,	brought	them	all
to	a	simmer,	covered	the	pots,	and	put	them	in	the	same	350-degree	oven	to	cook.
We	removed	all	three	pots	from	the	oven	when	the	beans	in	the	alkaline	water
had	turned	tender,	or	about	45	minutes.	We	repeated	the	test	three	times.



THE	RESULTS
When	the	beans	in	the	alkaline	environment	turned	tender,	the	others	were	far
behind.	The	beans	in	the	plain	water	had	only	slightly	softened	after	45	minutes.
We	returned	this	pot	to	the	oven	and	they	required	another	15	minutes	of
cooking	time,	an	hour	in	total.	Those	in	the	acidic	water	were	still	rock-hard
after	45	minutes.	They	required	a	total	cooking	time	of	one	hour	and	45	minutes
to	soften	fully.
At	the	45-minute	mark,	we	removed	some	beans	from	each	pot	and	placed

them	on	the	counter.	We	then	applied	a	5-pound	weight	on	top.	The	beans
cooked	with	baking	soda	were	incredibly	tender	and	squished	down	beautifully.
The	beans	cooked	in	a	neutral	environment	squished	slightly	but	were	still	hard.
The	beans	cooked	with	acid	were	rock-hard;	the	weight	barely	made	a
difference.



THE	TAKEAWAY
What	was	happening?	It	turns	out	that	an	alkaline	environment	starts	a	chemical
reaction	that	causes	the	cell	structure	of	legumes	to	break	down.	When	we	add
baking	soda	to	a	pot	of	cooking	beans,	it	results	in	tender	beans	in	less	time.
On	the	flip	side,	adding	acid	causes	the	cell	structure	of	legumes	to	remain

firm.	If	there	is	too	much	acid	in	the	pot,	the	beans	may	never	soften	enough	to
be	ready	to	eat.	This	means	that	you	should	be	careful	when	cooking	beans	with
acidic	ingredients,	especially	tomatoes,	citrus	juices,	and	vinegar.	We	find	it	is
best	to	add	citrus	juices	and	vinegars	at	the	end	of	the	cooking	process—when
the	beans	are	already	softened.	(This	also	preserves	the	flavor	of	these	acidic
ingredients.)	Tomatoes	generally	need	some	cooking	time,	so	we	often	add
tomatoes	(including	all	canned	tomato	products)	partway	through	the	cooking
process,	after	the	beans	have	softened	considerably.
The	lesson?	Along	with	brining	and	soaking	(see	concept	28),	baking	soda	can

work	wonders	on	beans,	saving	you	up	to	an	hour	of	cooking	time.	Just	be	sure
not	to	add	more	than	a	pinch—too	much	and	the	beans	can	end	up	tasting	soapy
and	unpleasant.



EFFECTS	OF	5-POUND	WEIGHT	ON	COOKED	BEANS

	
COOKED	WITH	ACID

After	45	minutes	of	cooking	in	water	spiked	with	citric	acid,	these	beans	remained	hard.



	
COOKED	IN	PLAIN	WATER

At	the	45-minute	mark,	these	beans	cooked	in	plain	water	had	begun	to	soften	but	needed	more	time	to	fully
cook.



	
COOKED	WITH	BAKING	SODA
After	45	minutes	of	cooking	in	water

spiked	with	a	little	baking	soda,	these	beans	were	soft	and	tender.



ALKALINE	COOKING	AT	WORK	
BEANS	AND	POLENTA
Just	a	pinch	of	baking	soda	can	cut	the	cooking	time	of	beans	and	grains	by	as
much	as	half.	We	add	this	alkaline	ingredient	to	a	diverse	set	of	recipes—from
baked	beans	to	hummus,	black	bean	soup	to	creamy	polenta—to	vastly	reduce
the	hours	spent	in	the	kitchen.	As	long	as	you	don’t	use	too	much	baking	soda,	no
one	will	guess	the	secret	to	these	faster-cooking	recipes.



BOSTON	BAKED	BEANS
SERVES	4	TO	6

Liquids	evaporate	faster	in	the	oven	in	heavy	cast-iron	Dutch	ovens	than	in
lighter	pots.	If	you’re	using	a	heavy	pot,	increase	the	water	in	step	2	to	4½	cups.

1				 pound	dried	navy	beans	(about	2½	cups),	picked	over	and	rinsed
1				 tablespoon	baking	soda
6				 ounces	salt	pork,	rind	removed,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 onion,	chopped	fine
3				 cups	water
5				 tablespoons	packed	dark	brown	sugar
5				 tablespoons	molasses
2				 tablespoons	Worcestershire	sauce
4				 teaspoons	Dijon	mustard
2				 teaspoons	cider	vinegar
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Bring	3
quarts	water,	beans,	and	baking	soda	to	boil	in	Dutch	oven	over	high	heat.
Reduce	heat	to	medium-high	and	simmer	briskly	for	20	minutes.	Drain	beans	in
colander.	Rinse	beans	and	pot.
2.	Cook	salt	pork	in	now-empty	pot	over	medium	heat,	stirring	occasionally,

until	browned,	about	10	minutes.	Add	onion	and	cook	until	softened,	about	5
minutes.	Stir	in	water,	beans,	sugar,	¼	cup	molasses,	Worcestershire,	1
tablespoon	mustard,	vinegar,	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper	and	bring	to	boil.	Cover,
transfer	to	oven,	and	cook	until	beans	are	nearly	tender,	about	1½	hours.
3.	Remove	lid	and	continue	to	bake	until	beans	are	completely	tender,	about

30	minutes	longer.	Stir	in	remaining	1	tablespoon	molasses	and	remaining	1
teaspoon	mustard.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Serve.	(Beans	can	be
refrigerated	for	up	to	4	days.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	love	authentic	Boston	baked	beans	but	don’t	always	have	the	five	to	six	hours
they	require.	To	get	the	same	creamy	texture	fast,	we	first	simmer	dried	beans
with	a	little	baking	soda.	The	soda	jump-starts	their	softening,	allowing	us	to
shave	the	baking	time	down	to	two	hours.	We	boost	the	flavor	with	well-browned
salt	pork,	rich	dark	brown	sugar,	and	beefy	Worcestershire;	a	little	Dijon
mustard	and	cider	vinegar	add	the	requisite	tang.
COOK	SLOW	AND	LOW,	BUT	FAST	Authentic	Boston	baked	beans	are

not	about	fancy	seasonings;	they	are	about	developing	intense	flavor	by	means
of	the	judicious	employment	of	canonical	ingredients	(beans,	pork,	molasses,
mustard,	and	sometimes	onion)	and	a	slow,	five-hour	cooking	time.	We	found
that	briskly	simmering	the	beans	in	water,	draining	them,	and	then	using	them	to
make	baked	beans	is	faster	than	the	traditional	method	that	simply	cooks	dried
beans	with	all	the	other	ingredients	at	a	very	gentle	simmer.	Just	boiling	them	for
45	minutes	saves	several	hours	of	baking	time.	But	adding	a	little	baking	soda	to
the	water	cuts	the	boiling	time	for	the	beans	down	to	20	minutes.	The	alkaline
soda	breaks	down	the	pectin	in	the	cell	walls	of	the	skin,	allowing	our	beans	to
become	tender	in	record	time.	We	use	a	lot	of	soda	here	(more	than	in	other	bean
recipes),	but	most	of	it	is	washed	down	the	drain	with	the	simmering	liquid.
After	the	partially	cooked	beans	are	rinsed	to	remove	any	remaining	traces	of
soda,	they’re	ready	to	be	baked	with	the	other	ingredients.
ADD	POTENT	SEASONINGS	The	combination	of	dark	brown	sugar,

molasses,	Worcestershire,	Dijon	(which	is	better	than	the	usual	brown	mustard),
cider	vinegar,	and	pepper	gives	our	beans	their	characteristic	rich	flavor.	Because
the	beans	have	been	precooked	and	thus	are	already	partially	softened,	it’s	OK	to
add	acidic	ingredients	at	the	outset	of	the	baking	time.
UNCOVER	AND	FINISH	We	remove	the	lid	from	the	pot	for	the	final	30

minutes	of	cooking.	This	helps	to	thicken	up	the	consistency	of	our	“sauce.”	We
finish	the	beans	with	an	additional	tablespoon	of	molasses	and	a	teaspoon	of
mustard	to	reinforce	these	flavors.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOW	TO	ELIMINATE	GAS	FROM	BEANS
Precooked,	quick-soaked	beans	produce	the	least	amount	of	gas.

For	some,	the	greatest	obstacle	to	preparing	beans	is	not	the	lack	of	a	good	recipe	but	an	aversion	to	the
discomfort	associated	with	digestion.	The	creation	of	unwanted	intestinal	gas	begins	with	the	arrival	of
small	chains	of	carbohydrates	(called	oligosaccharides)	into	the	large	intestine.	People	cannot	digest	these
molecules	efficiently,	but	bacteria	residing	at	the	end	of	the	gut	do,	and	they	produce	gas	as	a	byproduct.
Some	sources	say	that	presoaking	or	precooking	beans	alleviates	gas	production	by	removing	these
carbohydrates.	We	decided	to	put	these	theories	to	the	test	by	measuring	the	amount	of	one	of	the	most
prevalent	small	carbohydrates	in	black	beans,	stachyose.

Our	results	gave	the	theories	some	credence.	Beans	soaked	overnight	in	water	and	then	cooked	and
drained	showed	a	28	percent	reduction	in	stachyose.	The	quick-soak	method,	pouring	boiling	water	over
dried	beans	and	soaking	them	for	an	hour,	was	more	effective,	removing	42.5	percent	of	the	stachyose	once
these	beans	were	cooked.	Though	these	results	were	encouraging,	we	thought	we	could	do	better.	We	tried
several	recommended	ingredients	that	are	purported	to	“neutralize”	the	offending	compounds	as	beans
cook:	epazote,	kombu	(giant	kelp),	bay	leaves,	and	baking	soda.	None	of	these	seemed	to	do	much	in	the
pot,	though	it	is	possible	that	they	act	only	during	digestion.

Our	conclusion:	Though	the	quick-soak	method	can	produce	more	broken	beans	in	the	finished	dish,	if
beans	cause	you	significant	discomfort,	this	approach	was	the	most	effective	at	reducing	the	amount	of	the
offending	compounds.



ULTIMATE	HUMMUS
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS

It’s	possible	to	use	canned	beans	instead	of	dried	beans	for	this	recipe.	Replace
the	dried	chickpeas	with	one	15-ounce	can	of	chickpeas,	rinsed.	(If	using	canned
chickpeas,	we	recommend	Pastene.)	Exchange	the	cooking	liquid	for	tap	water.

½				 cup	dried	chickpeas,	picked	over	and	rinsed
				1⁄8 teaspoon	baking	soda
3				 tablespoons	lemon	juice
6				 tablespoons	tahini
2				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil,	plus	extra	for	drizzling
1				 small	garlic	clove,	minced
½				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	ground	cumin
					 Pinch	cayenne	pepper
1				 tablespoon	minced	fresh	cilantro	or	parsley

1.	Place	beans	in	large	bowl,	cover	with	1	quart	water,	and	soak	overnight.
Drain.	Bring	1	quart	water,	beans,	and	baking	soda	to	boil	in	large	saucepan	over
high	heat.	Reduce	heat	to	low	and	simmer	gently,	stirring	occasionally,	until
beans	are	tender,	about	1	hour.	Drain,	reserving	¼	cup	bean	cooking	water,	and
cool.
2.	Combine	cooking	water	and	lemon	juice	in	small	bowl	or	measuring	cup.

Whisk	together	tahini	and	2	tablespoons	oil	in	second	small	bowl.	Set	aside	2
tablespoons	chickpeas	for	garnish.
3.	Process	remaining	chickpeas,	garlic,	salt,	cumin,	and	cayenne	in	food

processor	until	almost	fully	ground,	about	15	seconds.	Scrape	down	bowl	with
rubber	spatula.	With	processor	running,	add	lemon	juice	mixture	in	steady
stream.	Scrape	down	bowl	and	continue	to	process	for	1	minute.	With	processor
running,	add	tahini	mixture	in	steady	stream;	continue	to	process	until	hummus
is	smooth	and	creamy,	about	15	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	as	needed.
4.	Transfer	hummus	to	serving	bowl,	sprinkle	reserved	chickpeas	and	cilantro

over	surface,	cover	with	plastic	wrap,	and	let	stand	until	flavors	meld,	at	least	30
minutes.	Drizzle	with	extra	olive	oil	and	serve.	(Hummus	can	be	refrigerated	for



up	to	5	days;	refrigerate	garnishes	separately.	When	ready	to	serve,	stir	in
approximately	1	tablespoon	warm	water	if	texture	is	too	thick.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	hummus	with	a	light,	silky-smooth	texture	and	balanced	flavor
profile.	In	theory,	the	best	way	to	guarantee	a	creamy	texture	is	to	remove	the
chickpeas’	tough	skins,	but	we	couldn’t	find	an	approach	that	wasn’t	tedious	or
futile.	The	food	processor,	while	it	couldn’t	remove	all	the	graininess	when	we
pureed	the	chickpeas	alone,	did	produce	the	desired	texture	when	we	used	it	to
make	an	emulsion	(much	like	a	mayonnaise).	Earthy	cumin,	a	pinch	of	cayenne,
lemon	juice,	and	garlic	keep	the	flavors	in	balance.
SOAK	AND	SODA	You	want	chickpeas	to	break	down	completely	and	you

want	this	to	happen	quickly.	Soaking	the	beans	and	then	gently	simmering	them
is	the	best	cooking	method.	Adding	a	little	baking	soda	ensures	that	they	break
down	when	pureed—no	tough	skins	here.
MAXIMIZE	SMOOTHNESS	Grind	the	cooked	chickpeas	with	garlic,	salt,

and	spices,	and	then	add	lemon	juice	and	water.	This	two-step	process,	along
with	adding	the	water	mixture	slowly,	produces	a	smoother	puree	than	just
dumping	everything	into	the	food	processor	at	once.
EMULSIFY	To	keep	the	oil	and	water	together,	we	found	it	best	to	mix	the

olive	oil	and	tahini	together	and	then	drizzle	them	into	the	chickpea	puree.	We
add	the	oil	slowly	so	that	it	doesn’t	break,	using	the	same	principles	as	for
making	a	vinaigrette	(see	concept	36).
ADD	MORE	TAHINI	Tahini	is	a	thick	paste	made	from	ground	sesame

seeds.	We	use	a	hefty	6	tablespoons,	three	times	the	amount	usually	found	in
other	recipes.	It	turns	out	that	different	brands	vary	significantly	in	fat	content	as
well	as	flavor,	with	some	carrying	bitter	off-tastes.	Tasters	appreciated	the	nutty
flavor	and	silken	texture	that	a	good	tahini	lent	to	the	dip.	We	prefer	Joyva
Sesame	Tahini	and	Krinos	Tahini.



BLACK	BEAN	SOUP
SERVES	6

Dried	beans	tend	to	cook	unevenly,	so	be	sure	to	taste	several	beans	to	determine
their	doneness	in	step	1.	For	efficiency,	you	can	prepare	the	soup	ingredients
while	the	beans	simmer	and	the	garnishes	while	the	soup	simmers.	Though	you
do	not	need	to	offer	all	of	the	garnishes	listed	below,	do	choose	at	least	a	couple;
garnishes	are	essential	for	this	soup,	as	they	add	not	only	flavor	but	texture	and
color	as	well.

BEANS
5				 cups	water,	plus	extra	as	needed
1				 pound	dried	black	beans	(2½	cups),	picked	over	and	rinsed
4				 ounces	ham	steak,	trimmed
2				 bay	leaves
				1⁄8 teaspoon	baking	soda
1				 teaspoon	salt
					 	

SOUP
3				 tablespoons	olive	oil
2				 large	onions,	chopped	fine
1				 large	carrot,	peeled	and	chopped	fine
3				 celery	ribs,	chopped	fine
½				 teaspoon	salt

5–6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
1½				 tablespoons	ground	cumin
6				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 tablespoons	cornstarch
2				 tablespoons	water
2				 tablespoons	lime	juice

GARNISHES
					 Lime	wedges



					 Minced	fresh	cilantro
					 Red	onion,	diced	fine
					 Avocado,	halved,	pitted,	and	diced
					 Sour	cream

1.	FOR	THE	BEANS:	Place	4	quarts	cold	water	in	large	bowl	or	container.
Add	beans	and	soak	at	room	temperature	for	at	least	8	hours	or	up	to	24	hours.
Drain	and	rinse	well.
2.	Place	5	cups	water,	soaked	beans,	ham,	bay	leaves,	and	baking	soda	in	large

saucepan	with	tight-fitting	lid.	Bring	to	boil	over	medium-high	heat.	Using	large
spoon,	skim	foam	from	surface	as	needed.	Stir	in	salt,	reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,
and	simmer	briskly	until	beans	are	tender,	1	to	1½	hours	(if	after	1½	hours	beans
are	not	tender,	add	1	cup	more	water	and	continue	to	simmer	until	tender);	do	not
drain	beans.	Discard	bay	leaves.	Remove	ham	steak,	cut	into	¼-inch	cubes,	and
set	aside.
3.	FOR	THE	SOUP:	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until

shimmering.	Add	onions,	carrot,	celery,	and	salt	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,
until	vegetables	are	soft	and	lightly	browned,	12	to	15	minutes.	Reduce	heat	to
medium-low,	add	garlic,	pepper	flakes,	and	cumin,	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,
until	fragrant,	about	3	minutes.	Stir	in	beans,	bean	cooking	liquid,	and	chicken
broth.	Increase	heat	to	medium-high	and	bring	to	boil,	then	reduce	heat	to	low
and	simmer,	uncovered,	stirring	occasionally,	to	blend	flavors,	about	30	minutes.
4.	Ladle	1½	cups	beans	and	2	cups	liquid	into	food	processor	or	blender,

process	until	smooth,	and	return	to	pot.	Stir	cornstarch	and	water	in	small	bowl
until	combined,	then	gradually	stir	half	of	cornstarch	mixture	into	soup.	Bring	to
boil	over	medium-high	heat,	stirring	occasionally,	to	fully	thicken.	If	soup	is	still
thinner	than	desired	once	boiling,	stir	remaining	cornstarch	mixture	to
recombine	and	gradually	stir	mixture	into	soup;	return	to	boil	to	fully	thicken.
Off	heat,	stir	in	lime	juice	and	reserved	ham;	ladle	soup	into	bowls	and	serve
immediately,	passing	garnishes	separately.	(Soup	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	4
days.	If	necessary,	thin	it	with	additional	chicken	broth	when	reheating.)

BLACK	BEAN	SOUP	WITH	CHIPOTLE	CHILES

The	addition	of	chipotle	chile	in	adobo—smoked	jalapeños	packed	in	a	seasoned
tomato-vinegar	sauce—makes	this	a	spicier,	smokier	variation	on	Black	Bean



Soup.

Omit	pepper	flakes	and	add	1	tablespoon	minced	canned	chipotle	chile	in
adobo	sauce	plus	2	teaspoons	adobo	sauce	along	with	chicken	broth	in	step	2.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
GETTING	THE	BEST	FROM	CANNED	BEANS

Simmer	canned	beans	in	soups	for	the	best	results.

Dried	beans	are	always	our	first	choice	in	soups	because	they	soak	up	the	flavor	of	the	broth	so	readily.	But
if	you’re	going	to	use	canned	beans	in	soups,	don’t	shortchange	their	cooking	time.	Even	though	canned
beans	are	fully	cooked,	we	found	that	beans	simmered	for	30	minutes	in	Tuscan	white	bean	soup	as	well	as
black	bean	soup	tasted	much	better	than	beans	simmered	for	just	five	minutes	in	these	dishes.

In	a	recipe	that	calls	for	one	pound	of	dried	beans,	substitute	58	ounces	of	canned	beans.	Make	sure	to
drain	and	rinse	the	beans	well	and	be	prepared	to	radically	reduce	the	amount	of	liquid.	A	long	simmer
gives	canned	beans	time	to	pick	up	flavors	from	the	broth,	but	they	aren’t	going	to	absorb	nearly	as	much
liquid	as	dried	beans.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

ARE	YOUR	DRIED	BEANS	FRESH?
It’s	hard	to	tell	if	your	dried	beans	are	fresh	or	old.	But	there	is	one	way	to	find	out:	Stale	dried

beans	wrinkle	during	soaking.

We	noticed	that	some	raw	dried	beans	wrinkle	during	soaking.	Others	cook	up	gritty	or	mealy	instead	of
creamy.	We	learned	that	this	is	a	sign	of	age.	Because	bean	bags	contain	no	“sell	by”	date,	it’s	hard	to	tell	if
the	beans	on	the	supermarket	shelves	are	fresh.	But	there	is	one	telltale	sign	of	age:	wrinkling	during
soaking.	This	is	because	beans	should	absorb	moisture	through	their	hilum,	the	part	of	the	bean	that	attaches
to	the	pod.	But	beans	are	not	handled	with	much	care.	Beans	that	have	been	knocked	around	a	bit	can
develop	holes	in	their	seed	coats.	Even	carefully	handled	beans	develop	these	holes	(called	“checks”)	over
time	because	of	fluctuations	in	temperature,	moisture,	and	fungi	growth.	These	holes	subsequently	admit
water,	wrinkling	the	bean.	Unfortunately,	apart	from	soaking,	there	is	no	way	to	tell	if	the	beans	you	buy	are
fresh.	Our	advice?	If	you	find	some	fresh	beans,	buy	more	from	the	same	source.

	
STALE	BEAN



	
FRESH	BEAN



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	a	black	bean	soup	recipe	full	of	sweet,	spicy,	smoky	flavors,	we	went	with
dried	beans,	which	release	flavor	into	the	broth	as	they	cook,	unlike	canned
beans.	Adding	baking	soda	to	the	pot	as	the	beans	cooked	saved	time.	We	found
that	we	didn’t	need	from-scratch	stock;	we	maximized	flavor	by	using	a	mixture
of	store-bought	chicken	broth	and	the	bean	cooking	water	flavored	with	ham	and
bay	leaves.
MAKE	IT	SMOOTH	AND	BLACK	When	making	black	bean	soup,	you

want	the	beans	to	break	down	so	that	a	portion	of	the	soup	can	be	pureed.	So
getting	the	beans	fully	cooked	is	important.	And	when	you	puree	the	beans,	you
don’t	want	them	to	lose	their	black	color;	the	resulting	soup	would	be	an
unattractive	purple-gray.	The	alkaline	baking	soda	solves	both	problems.
Soaking	the	beans	reduces	the	cooking	time.	Because	the	beans	are	cooked	until
they	break	down,	there’s	no	benefit	to	brining	them.
PICK	HAM	STEAK	Cooking	the	beans	with	a	ham	hock	(and	bay	leaves)	is

traditional,	but	we	wanted	more	meat	for	the	soup.	We	tested	salt	pork,	slab
bacon,	and	ham	steak	and	liked	the	latter	best.	It	adds	smoky	pork	flavor	to	the
beans	and	broth,	and	the	meat	can	be	reserved,	diced,	and	stirred	into	the	soup
just	before	serving.
USE	A	SOFRITO	A	flavorful	black	bean	soup	needs	a	base	of	sautéed

aromatic	vegetables.	We	like	garlic,	cumin,	and	red	pepper	flakes	along	with	the
usual	onion,	celery,	and	carrot.
PUREE	SOME	OF	THE	BEANS	To	get	a	soup	with	some	body,	we	puree

only	part	of	the	soup—this	way	it’s	smooth	and	chunky	at	the	same	time.	Beans
absorb	water	differently	and	different	stoves	cook	at	different	rates;	to	get	the
texture	just	right	we	found	it	best	to	adjust	the	soup	at	the	end	with	a	cornstarch
slurry.	Make	sure	to	disperse	the	cornstarch	in	cold	water.	Hot	water	will
immediately	wet	the	surface	of	the	starch	granules,	causing	them	to	stick
together	before	they	can	disperse,	and	the	clusters	of	granules	that	stick	together
will	remain	dry	in	the	center.
FINISH	WITH	LIME	AND	GARNISH	Without	an	array	of	colorful

garnishes,	even	the	best	black	bean	soup	might	be	dull.	Sour	cream	and	diced
avocado	offset	the	soup’s	heat,	while	red	onion	and	minced	cilantro	contribute
freshness	and	color.	Finally,	wedges	of	lime	accentuate	the	bright	flavor	of	the
juice	that’s	already	in	the	soup.



CREAMY	PARMESAN	POLENTA
SERVES	4

Coarse-ground	degerminated	cornmeal	such	as	yellow	grits	(with	grains	the	size
of	couscous)	works	best	in	this	recipe.	Avoid	instant	and	quick-cooking	products,
as	well	as	whole-grain,	stone-ground,	and	regular	cornmeal.	Do	not	omit	the
baking	soda—it	reduces	the	cooking	time	and	makes	for	a	creamier	polenta.	If
the	polenta	bubbles	or	sputters	even	slightly	after	the	first	10	minutes,	the	heat	is
too	high	and	you	may	need	a	flame	tamer.	For	a	main	course,	serve	the	polenta
with	a	topping	(recipes	follow)	or	with	a	wedge	of	rich	cheese	(like	Gorgonzola)
or	a	meat	sauce.

7½				 cups	water
					 Salt	and	pepper
					 Pinch	baking	soda

1½				 cups	coarse-ground	cornmeal
4				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	(2	cups),	plus	extra	for	serving
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter

1.	Bring	water	to	boil	in	large	saucepan	over	medium-high	heat.	Stir	in	1½
teaspoons	salt	and	baking	soda.	Slowly	pour	cornmeal	into	water	in	steady
stream,	while	stirring	back	and	forth	with	wooden	spoon	or	rubber	spatula.	Bring
mixture	to	boil,	stirring	constantly,	about	1	minute.	Reduce	heat	to	lowest
possible	setting	and	cover.
2.	After	5	minutes,	whisk	polenta	to	smooth	out	any	lumps	that	may	have

formed,	about	15	seconds.	(Make	sure	to	scrape	down	sides	and	bottom	of	pan.)
Cover	and	continue	to	cook,	without	stirring,	until	grains	of	polenta	are	tender
but	slightly	al	dente,	about	25	minutes	longer.	(Polenta	should	be	loose	and
barely	hold	its	shape	but	will	continue	to	thicken	as	it	cools.)
3.	Remove	from	heat,	stir	in	Parmesan	and	butter,	and	season	with	pepper	to

taste.	Let	stand,	covered,	for	5	minutes.	Serve,	passing	extra	Parmesan
separately.



WILD	MUSHROOM	AND	ROSEMARY	TOPPING
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	CREAMY	PARMESAN	POLENTA

If	you	use	shiitake	mushrooms,	they	should	be	stemmed.

2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
2				 tablespoons	olive	oil
1				 small	onion,	chopped	fine
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	rosemary
1				 pound	wild	mushrooms	(such	as	cremini,	shiitake,	or	oyster),	trimmed	and	sliced
				1⁄3 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Heat	butter	and	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until
shimmering.	Add	onion	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	onion	softens	and
begins	to	brown,	5	to	7	minutes.	Stir	in	garlic	and	rosemary	and	cook	until
fragrant,	about	30	seconds	longer.
2.	Add	mushrooms	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	juices	release,	about

6	minutes.	Add	broth	and	salt	and	pepper	to	taste;	simmer	briskly	until	sauce
thickens,	about	8	minutes.	Spoon	mushroom	mixture	over	individual	portions	of
polenta	and	serve.



SAUTÉED	CHERRY	TOMATO	AND	FRESH	MOZZARELLA	TOPPING
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	CREAMY	PARMESAN	POLENTA

Don’t	stir	the	cheese	into	the	sautéed	tomatoes	or	it	will	melt	prematurely	and
turn	rubbery.

3				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
2				 garlic	cloves,	peeled	and	sliced	thin
					 Pinch	red	pepper	flakes
					 Pinch	sugar

1½				 pounds	cherry	tomatoes,	halved
					 Salt	and	pepper
6				 ounces	fresh	mozzarella	cheese,	cut	into	½-inch	cubes	(1	cup)
2				 tablespoons	shredded	fresh	basil

Heat	oil,	garlic,	pepper	flakes,	and	sugar	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over
medium-high	heat	until	fragrant	and	sizzling,	about	1	minute.	Stir	in	tomatoes
and	cook	until	they	just	begin	to	soften,	about	1	minute.	Season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste	and	remove	from	heat.	Spoon	tomato	mixture	over	individual
portions	of	polenta,	top	with	mozzarella,	sprinkle	with	basil,	and	serve.



BROCCOLI	RABE,	SUN-DRIED	TOMATO,	AND	PINE	NUT	TOPPING
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	CREAMY	PARMESAN	POLENTA

					 	
½				 cup	oil-packed	sun-dried	tomatoes,	chopped	coarse
3				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
½				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
					 Salt
1				 pound	broccoli	rabe,	trimmed	and	cut	into	1½-inch	pieces
¼				 cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
3				 tablespoons	pine	nuts,	toasted

Heat	sun-dried	tomatoes,	oil,	garlic,	pepper	flakes,	and	½	teaspoon	salt	in	12-
inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat,	stirring	frequently,	until	garlic	is
fragrant	and	slightly	toasted,	about	1½	minutes.	Add	broccoli	rabe	and	broth,
cover,	and	cook	until	rabe	turns	bright	green,	about	2	minutes.	Uncover	and
cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	most	of	broth	has	evaporated	and	rabe	is	just
tender,	2	to	3	minutes.	Season	with	salt	to	taste.	Spoon	broccoli	rabe	mixture
over	individual	portions	of	polenta,	sprinkle	with	pine	nuts,	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
If	you	don’t	stir	polenta	almost	constantly,	it	forms	intractable	lumps.	Is	there	a
way	to	get	creamy,	smooth	polenta	with	rich	corn	flavor,	but	without	the	fussy
process?	Taking	a	cue	from	dried	bean	recipes,	which	use	baking	soda	to	help
break	down	the	tough	bean	skins	and	accelerate	cooking,	we	added	a	pinch	to
our	polenta.	The	baking	soda	helped	soften	the	cornmeal’s	cell	walls	within	the
endosperm,	which	cut	the	cooking	time	in	half	and	eliminated	the	need	for
stirring.
ADD	A	PINCH	OF	SODA	Because	corn,	like	beans,	contains	pectin,	baking

soda	can	work	its	magic	in	much	the	same	way.	Just	a	pinch	of	baking	soda
greatly	reduces	the	cooking	time	by	helping	to	break	down	the	pectin	and
allowing	water	to	enter	and	gelatinize	the	starch	with	ease.	Be	sure	not	to	add	too
much	baking	soda—it	can	turn	the	polenta	gluey	and	lend	it	a	strange,	toasted,
chemical	flavor.	Just	a	pinch	is	all	that	is	needed	to	start	the	breakdown	of
pectin.	Once	the	reaction	starts	it	is	self-perpetuating,	like	a	string	of	dominos.
USE	THE	LID	Since	we’re	not	fans	of	being	chained	to	the	kitchen	stove,

stirring	a	pot	of	polenta	constantly	for	up	to	an	hour,	our	goal	was	to	cut	down	on
the	amount	of	stirring	in	our	polenta	recipe.	We	stumbled	upon	the	answer	when
in	the	midst	of	cooking	one	day	we	were	called	away	from	the	kitchen.	We	threw
a	lid	on	the	polenta	and	turned	the	flame	down	to	low.	When	we	returned	a	half-
hour	later,	we	didn’t	find	a	clumpy,	burnt-on-the-bottom	mess	as	we	feared.
Instead	we	discovered	a	perfectly	creamy	polenta.	The	low-heat,	covered	method
had	cooked	the	polenta	so	gently	and	evenly	that	the	result	was	lump-free,	even
without	vigorous	stirring.	We	found	that	one	stir	right	after	the	cornmeal	goes	in
and	another	five	minutes	later	are	all	we	need.
FINISH	WITH	CHEESE	AND	BUTTER	A	full	2	cups	of	Parmesan	plus	a

pair	of	butter	pats	stirred	in	at	the	last	minute	give	this	humble	mush	enough
nutty	tang	and	richness	to	make	it	a	satisfying	dish,	with	or	without	a	topping—
and	with	the	barest	amount	of	effort.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	BEST	CORNMEAL	FOR	POLENTA
We	prefer	coarse-ground,	degerminated	cornmeal	for	polenta.

In	the	supermarket,	cornmeal	can	be	labeled	anything	from	yellow	grits	to	corn	semolina.	Forget	the	names.
When	shopping	for	the	right	product	to	make	polenta	there	are	three	things	to	consider:	“instant”	or	“quick-
cooking”	versus	the	traditional	style,	degerminated	or	full-grain	meal,	and	grind	size.	Instant	and	quick-
cooking	cornmeals	are	parcooked	and	comparatively	bland—leave	them	on	the	shelf.	Though	we	love	the
full-corn	flavor	of	whole-grain	cornmeal,	it	remains	slightly	gritty	no	matter	how	long	you	cook	it.	We
prefer	degerminated	cornmeal,	in	which	the	hard	hull	and	germ	are	removed	from	each	kernel	(check	the
back	label	or	ingredient	list	to	see	if	your	cornmeal	is	degerminated;	if	it’s	not	explicitly	labeled	as	such,
you	can	assume	it’s	whole	grain).

As	for	grind,	we	found	coarser	grains	brought	the	most	desirable	and	pillowy	texture	to	our	Creamy
Parmesan	Polenta.	However,	grind	coarseness	can	vary	dramatically	from	brand	to	brand	since	there	are	no
standards	to	ensure	consistency.	One	manufacturer’s	"coarse"	may	be	another's	"fine."	Here’s	how	to
identify	the	optimal	coarsely	ground	texture.

	
TOO	FINE

The	superfine	grains	of	quick-cooking	cornmeal	speed	the	cooking	process	but	lack	corn	flavor.



	
STILL	TOO	FINE

Regular	cornmeal	(such	as	Quaker’s)	has	a	similarly	sandlike	texture	that	also	cooks	up	gluey.

	
JUST	RIGHT

A	coarser	cut,	about	the	size	of	couscous,	retains	a	soft	but	hearty	texture	after	cooking.

	



CONCEPT	30

Rinsing	(Not	Soaking)	Makes	Rice	Fluffy
Cooking	rice	is	easy,	but	cooking	rice	well	isn’t.	Many	competent	cooks	claim
they	can’t	cook	rice	at	all.	It	scorches.	It’s	mushy.	The	rice	is	sticky	when	they
want	it	fluffy.	Convenience	products,	like	converted	or	instant	rice,	are	supposed
to	take	some	of	the	guesswork	out	of	the	process,	but	their	texture	and	flavor
make	them	poor	options.	Once	you	understand	how	rice	works,	though,	you	will
realize	that	cooking	it	well	is	not	hard.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Rice	is	a	seed	from	the	plant	known	as	Oryza	sativa.	When	harvested,	rice	is
covered	by	a	protective	husk.	After	the	husk	is	removed,	we’re	left	with	brown
rice,	which	is	composed	of	three	parts:	the	bran	(which	encloses	a	layer	of	cells
called	the	aleurone	layer,	which	is	rich	in	oil	and	enzymes),	the	germ,	and	the
endosperm.	For	several	thousand	years,	whole-grain	rice	has	been	parboiled	and
then	milled	in	order	to	remove	the	bran	and	germ,	leaving	only	the	starchy
endosperm.	Parboiled,	polished	rice	(known	simply	as	white	rice)	is	the	most
common	form	called	for	in	recipes.
Like	potatoes	or	pasta,	the	main	challenge	when	cooking	rice	is	figuring	out

how	to	control	the	starches.	However,	while	potatoes	or	pasta	are	often	cooked
in	lots	of	water	to	wash	away	excess	starch,	rice	requires	a	more	precise	cooking
method.	If	you	boil	and	drain	rice,	you	end	up	washing	away	its	delicate	flavor
and	the	grains	turn	soggy	and	bloated.	Rice	is	best	cooked	with	a	measured
amount	of	liquid	in	a	covered	pot.	The	cover	ensures	that	the	liquid	doesn’t
evaporate	but	instead	eventually	gets	absorbed	by	the	rice.	(If	too	much	water
evaporates,	the	rice	will	burn	before	it	becomes	tender.)
Starch	granules,	which	are	the	primary	component	of	rice,	tend	not	to	absorb

water	when	held	at	room	temperature.	As	you	heat	rice	in	water,	however,	the
energy	from	the	rapidly	moving	water	molecules	begins	to	loosen	the	bonds
between	the	starch	molecules,	allowing	the	water	to	seep	in.	This	in	turn	causes
the	starch	granules	to	swell	and	release	some	gummy	starch	molecules	that	then
act	like	a	glue	to	hold	the	grains	together.	The	rice	softens	and	becomes	sticky,	or
“starchy.”
Like	potatoes	(see	concept	26),	rice	contains	two	kinds	of	starch	molecules:

amylose	and	amylopectin.	The	amount	of	amylose	and	the	protein	content	of	the
starch	granules	determine	the	textural	properties	of	the	rice—from	separate	and
fluffy	to	sticky	and	gummy—when	it	is	cooked.	Though	there	are	exceptions,
rice	with	higher	amylose	and	protein	content	(like	long-grain	rice)	cooks	into
grains	that	are	separate,	light,	and	fluffy.	Rice	with	a	lower	amylose	and	protein
content	(like	Arborio)	cooks	into	grains	that	are	moist	and	tender,	with	a	greater
tendency	to	cling	together.
As	a	result	of	the	differences	in	the	amylose	and	protein	content,	the	starch

granules	in	long-grain	rice	swell	and	gelatinize	at	a	much	higher	temperature
(158	degrees)	than	the	granules	in	medium-grain	rice	(144	degrees).	Starch
granules	that	gelatinize	at	a	lower	temperature	release	more	amylose,	even



though	they	have	a	lower	amylose	content.	The	higher	amount	of	released
amylose	causes	the	grains	to	cling	together.
Long-grain	rice	contains	about	22	percent	amylose	and	8.5	percent	protein,

and	the	grains	are	four	to	five	times	longer	than	they	are	wide.	Long-grain	rice
needs	the	most	water	for	cooking	and,	when	cooked,	remains	as	separate	grains
that	harden	as	they	cool	(because	of	the	higher	amylose	content).	We	prefer
long-grain	rice	for	dishes	like	pilaf.
Medium-grain	rice	contains	about	18	percent	amylose	and	6.5	percent	protein,

and	the	grains	are	two	to	three	times	longer	than	they	are	wide.	This	rice	needs	a
bit	less	water	to	cook	than	long-grain	rice	and	cooks	up	tender	and	somewhat
clingy.	Medium-grain	rices	like	Arborio	are	perfect	for	dishes	like	risotto,	as
they	can	be	creamy	but	not	sticky.
Short-grain	contains	about	15	percent	amylose	and	6	percent	protein	and	the

grains	are	almost	round.	This	rice	needs	the	least	amount	of	water	and	can	be
quite	sticky	and	tender	when	cooked.	Short-grain	rice	is	ideal	for	dishes	like
sushi,	in	which	the	grains	need	to	stick	together.



THE	STRUCTURE	OF	A	GRAIN	OF	RICE






	
RICE	GRAIN	Each	grain	of	brown	rice	contains	the	outer	bran	and	aleurone	cell	layer,	which	are	removed
when	milling	for	white	rice.	All	types	of	rice	contain	the	endosperm.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	the	value	of	soaking	rice	in	water	before	cooking,	which	is	a
technique	purported	to	help	rice	cook	faster	and	better,	we	devised	a	simple	test:
Some	recipes	call	for	soaking	brown	rice	for	three	hours,	so	that’s	just	what	we
did.	We	soaked	one	batch	of	Brown	Rice,	then	cooked	it	according	to	our	recipe,
but	with	a	slightly	reduced	amount	of	water.	We	made	another	batch	of	rice	that
had	not	been	soaked	(but	was	rinsed	before	cooking)	using	the	same	recipe	with
the	correct	amount	of	liquid.	We	repeated	the	test	using	long-grain	white	rice
and	basmati	rice.



THE	RESULTS
Every	single	variety	of	rice	that	had	been	soaked	was	overcooked	and	bloated,
with	grains	that	tended	to	blow	out.



THE	TAKEAWAY
To	be	frank,	soaking	was	a	waste	of	time.	Even	with	brown	rice,	which,	with	its
bran,	germ,	and	aleurone	layers	intact,	can	take	two	to	three	times	longer	to	cook
than	white	rice,	the	results	were	overly	tender	and	unpleasant.	Soaking	caused
the	rice	to	absorb	too	much	water,	which	in	turn	caused	the	starch	granules	to
swell	as	soon	as	the	heat	was	applied.
Does	that	mean	that	there’s	no	place	for	water	in	the	world	of	rice

preparation?	Not	necessarily.	We	find	that	the	extra	step	of	rinsing	long-grain
white	or	basmati	rice	in	several	changes	of	water	is	indispensable	for	a	pilaf	with
distinct,	separate	grains.	Rinsing	washes	away	starches	on	the	surface	of	these
grains	that	helps	them	cook	up	lighter	and	fluffier.	What	about	rinsing	brown
rice?	Our	tests	showed	no	benefit	(or	harm).	Because	the	bran	is	still	intact,
brown	rice	doesn’t	have	starch	on	its	exterior.	So	rinsing	doesn’t	accomplish
anything—except	for	wasting	time	and	water.



SOAKING	RICE	CAN	CAUSE	BLOWOUTS	WHEN	COOKED

	
SOAKED

This	bloated	rice	overcooked.



	
UNSOAKED	AND	RINSED
This	rice	cooked	perfectly.



COVERED	STOVETOP	COOKING	AT	WORK	
RICE	PILAF
When	making	rice	pilaf,	we	add	just	enough	water	so	that	when	it	is	fully
absorbed	the	rice	is	tender	and	perfectly	cooked.	A	covered	pot	is	essential	here.
Without	a	tight	lid,	the	water	will	evaporate	from	the	pot	before	being	absorbed
by	the	rice,	and	the	rice	will	burn	before	it	is	fully	cooked.



SIMPLE	RICE	PILAF
SERVES	6

You	will	need	a	saucepan	with	a	tight-fitting	lid	for	this	recipe.	You	can
substitute	basmati	rice	for	the	long-grain	white	rice.

2				 cups	long-grain	white	rice
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter	or	vegetable	oil
1				 small	onion,	chopped	fine
3				 cups	water
1				 teaspoon	salt
					 Pepper

1.	Place	rice	in	colander	or	fine-mesh	strainer	and	rinse	under	cold	running
water	until	water	runs	clear.	Place	strainer	over	bowl	and	set	aside.
2.	Melt	butter	in	large	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Add	onion	and	cook	until

softened	but	not	browned,	about	4	minutes.	Add	rice	and	cook,	stirring
constantly,	until	grains	become	chalky	and	opaque,	1	to	3	minutes.	Add	water,
salt,	and	pepper	to	taste,	increase	heat	to	high,	and	bring	to	boil,	swirling	pot	to
blend	ingredients.	Reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,	and	simmer	until	all	liquid	is
absorbed,	18	to	20	minutes.	Off	heat,	remove	lid	and	place	kitchen	towel	folded
in	half	over	saucepan;	replace	lid.	Let	stand	for	10	to	15	minutes.	Fluff	rice	with
fork	and	serve.

RICE	PILAF	WITH	CURRANTS	AND	PINE	NUTS
Add	2	minced	garlic	cloves,	½	teaspoon	ground	turmeric,	and	¼	teaspoon
ground	cinnamon	to	softened	onion	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.
When	rice	is	off	heat,	before	covering	saucepan	with	towel,	sprinkle	¼	cup
currants	over	top	of	rice	(do	not	mix	in).	When	fluffing	rice	with	fork,	toss	in	¼
cup	toasted	pine	nuts.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Rice	pilaf	should	be	fragrant	and	fluffy,	perfectly	steamed,	and	tender.	While
recipes	for	rice	pilaf	abound,	none	seem	to	agree	on	the	best	method	for
guaranteeing	these	results;	many	espouse	rinsing	the	rice	and	soaking	it
overnight,	but	we	wondered	if	this	was	really	necessary	for	a	simple	rice	dish.
For	the	best	pilaf,	we	start	with	long-grain	white	rice	(though	basmati	rice	is
even	better	if	you	have	it	on	hand).	We	find	that	an	overnight	soak	isn’t
necessary	(see	Test	Kitchen	Experiment),	but	rinsing	the	rice	before	cooking
gives	us	beautifully	separated	grains.	Sautéing	the	rice	in	butter	for	just	a	minute
gives	our	pilaf	great	flavor.
THE	RIGHT	RICE	Pilaf	should	be	light	and	fluffy	so	you	want	to	use	long-

grain	rice.	Long-grain	white	rice	is	neutral	in	flavor,	providing	a	backdrop	for
other	foods.	Nonetheless,	higher-quality	white	rice	offers	a	pleasingly	chewy	al
dente	texture	and	a	slightly	buttery	natural	flavor	of	its	own.	The	buttery	notes
are	caused	by	a	naturally	occurring	flavor	compound,	2-acetyl-1-pyrroline,	and
higher	levels	lend	an	almost	popcornlike	taste.	Basmati	rice,	which	can	be	used
instead	of	long-grain	white	rice,	is	prized	for	its	nutty	flavor	and	sweet	aroma.
Indian	basmati,	unlike	American-grown	basmati,	is	aged	for	a	minimum	of	a
year,	though	often	much	longer,	before	being	packaged.	Aging	dehydrates	the
rice,	which	translates	into	grains	that,	once	cooked,	expand	greatly,	and	more	so
than	any	other	long-grain	rice.	American-grown	basmati	is	not	aged	and	hence
doesn’t	expand	as	much	as	Indian-grown	rice.	When	shopping,	make	sure	that
the	label	indicates	that	the	basmati	rice	has	been	aged.	The	only	“bad”	choice	of
rice	for	this	recipe	is	converted	rice,	which	is	steam-treated	before	packaging.
This	gelatinizes	the	starch	in	the	center	of	the	grain	and	removes	some	of	the
starch	from	the	rice	exterior,	making	the	rice	less	likely	to	become	starchy	or
sticky	when	cooked.	The	result	is	“bouncy”	rice,	with	an	assertive	flavor	our
tasters	don’t	like.
USE	LESS	WATER	The	conventional	ratio	of	2	parts	water	to	1	part	rice

makes	rice	too	sticky	and	soft.	We	find	the	right	ratio	to	be	3	parts	water	to	2
parts	rice,	which	also	takes	into	account	the	effects	of	rinsing	the	rice	before
cooking.
SAUTÉ	THE	RICE	Sautéing	the	rice	in	butter	develops	the	nutty	notes	in	the

rice	and	helps	the	individual	grains	to	maintain	their	integrity.	Also	this	step
gives	us	the	chance	to	sauté	an	onion	(or	another	flavorful	ingredient)	first.
BRING	TO	A	BOIL,	REDUCE	HEAT	Once	the	rice	looks	translucent

around	the	edges,	add	the	water	and	salt,	bring	to	a	boil,	reduce	the	heat	to	the



lowest	setting,	and	cover	the	pot.	The	rice	should	be	tender	(and	with	all	the
water	absorbed)	after	18	to	20	minutes.
STEAM	OFF	THE	HEAT	After	boiling,	the	rice	will	be	a	bit	heavy.	To

lighten	it	up,	we	slide	a	towel	under	the	lid	and	let	the	pot	sit	off	the	heat	for	10
to	15	minutes.	The	towel	absorbs	some	of	the	moisture	in	the	pot	and	helps
produce	rice	that	is	nice	and	fluffy.	Just	fluff	with	a	fork	(to	separate	the	grains)
and	serve.



COVERED	OVEN	COOKING	AT	WORK	
BROWN	RICE	AND	MEXICAN	RICE
For	slow-cooking	rice	dishes,	even	a	tight	cover	might	not	solve	all	the
problems.	You	need	to	even	out	the	cooking	of	the	rice	so	the	bottom	won’t
scorch.	Moving	the	operation	to	the	oven	does	this.



BROWN	RICE
SERVES	4	TO	6

To	minimize	any	loss	of	water	through	evaporation,	cover	the	saucepan	and	use
the	water	as	soon	as	it	reaches	a	boil.	An	8-inch	ceramic	baking	dish	with	a	lid
may	be	used	instead	of	the	baking	dish	and	aluminum	foil.	To	double	the	recipe,
use	a	13	by	9-inch	baking	dish;	the	baking	time	does	not	need	to	be	increased.

1½				 cups	long-grain,	medium-grain,	or	short-grain	brown	rice
2				1⁄3 cups	water
2				 teaspoons	unsalted	butter	or	vegetable	oil
½				 teaspoon	salt

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	375	degrees.	Spread
rice	in	8-inch	square	baking	dish.
2.	Bring	water	and	butter	to	boil,	covered,	in	medium	saucepan.	Once	boiling,

immediately	stir	in	salt	and	pour	water	over	rice	in	baking	dish.	Cover	baking
dish	tightly	with	2	layers	of	aluminum	foil.	Transfer	baking	dish	to	oven	and
bake	rice	until	tender,	about	1	hour.
3.	Remove	baking	dish	from	oven	and	uncover.	Fluff	rice	with	fork,	then

cover	dish	with	kitchen	towel	and	let	rice	stand	for	5	minutes.	Uncover	and	let
rice	stand	for	5	minutes	longer.	Serve	immediately.

CURRIED	BAKED	BROWN	RICE	WITH	TOMATOES	AND	PEAS
Increase	butter	to	2	tablespoons	and	melt	in	10-inch	nonstick	skillet	over
medium	heat.	Add	1	minced	small	onion	and	cook	until	translucent,	about	3
minutes.	Add	1	minced	garlic	clove,	1	tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger,	1½
teaspoons	curry	powder,	and	¼	teaspoon	salt	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	1
minute.	Add	one	14.5-ounce	can	drained	diced	tomatoes	and	cook	until	heated
through,	about	2	minutes.	Set	aside.	Substitute	vegetable	broth	for	water	and
reduce	amount	of	salt	to	1⁄8	teaspoon.	After	pouring	broth	over	rice,	stir	tomato
mixture	into	rice	and	spread	rice	and	tomato	mixture	into	even	layer.	Bake	as
directed,	increasing	baking	time	to	70	minutes.	Before	covering	baking	dish	with
kitchen	towel,	stir	in	½	cup	thawed	frozen	peas.



BAKED	BROWN	RICE	WITH	PARMESAN,	LEMON,	AND	HERBS
Increase	butter	to	2	tablespoons	and	melt	in	10-inch	nonstick	skillet	over
medium	heat.	Add	1	minced	small	onion	and	cook	until	translucent,	about	3
minutes;	set	aside.	Substitute	low-sodium	chicken	broth	for	water	and	reduce	salt
to	1⁄8	teaspoon.	Stir	onion	mixture	into	rice	after	adding	broth.	Cover	and	bake
rice	as	directed.	After	removing	foil,	stir	in	½	cup	grated	Parmesan,	¼	cup
minced	fresh	parsley,	¼	cup	chopped	fresh	basil,	1	teaspoon	grated	lemon	zest,
½	teaspoon	lemon	juice,	and	1⁄8	teaspoon	pepper.	Cover	dish	with	kitchen	towel
and	proceed	as	directed.

BAKED	BROWN	RICE	WITH	SAUTÉED	MUSHROOMS	AND	LEEKS
Substitute	low-sodium	chicken	broth	for	water	and	reduce	amount	of	salt	to	1⁄8
teaspoon;	bake	as	directed.	When	rice	has	about	10	minutes	baking	time
remaining,	melt	1	tablespoon	unsalted	butter	with	1	tablespoon	olive	oil	in	12-
inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.	Add	1	leek,	white	part	only,	sliced
into	¼-inch-thick	rings,	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	wilted,	about	2
minutes.	Add	6	ounces	cremini	mushrooms,	trimmed	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick,
and	¼	teaspoon	salt	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	moisture	has
evaporated	and	mushrooms	are	browned,	about	8	minutes.	Stir	in	1½	teaspoons
minced	fresh	thyme	and	1⁄8	teaspoon	pepper.	After	removing	kitchen	towel,	stir	in
mushroom-leek	mixture	and	1½	teaspoons	sherry	vinegar;	serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Brown	rice	should	have	a	nutty,	gutsy	flavor	and	more	textural	personality—
slightly	sticky	and	just	a	bit	more	chewy—than	white	rice.	To	achieve	this	ideal,
we	stayed	close	to	the	water-to-rice	ratio	established	in	our	Simple	Rice	Pilaf,
settling	on	21⁄3	cups	water	to	1½	cups	rice.	But	unlike	our	white	rice	method,	here
we	cooked	the	rice	in	the	oven	to	approximate	the	controlled,	indirect	heat	of	a
rice	cooker.	A	couple	of	teaspoons	of	butter	or	oil	added	to	the	cooking	water
added	mild	flavor	while	allowing	the	earthy,	nutty	flavor	of	the	rice	to	take
center	stage.
MOVE	IT	TO	THE	OVEN	Brown	rice	doesn’t	require	more	water	(just	an

extra	tablespoon	compared	to	white	rice)	but	it	does	need	a	lot	more	time	to
soften.	Brown	rice	is	a	whole-grain	rice	with	the	hull	intact	(white	rice	has	had
this	hull	removed).	This	hull	is	the	reason	it	takes	just	about	twice	as	long	to
cook	brown	rice	as	white	rice.	Moving	the	cooking	to	the	oven	allows	the	rice	to
be	cooked	more	gently	and	evenly,	reducing	the	risk	of	the	bottom	layer	of	rice
burning,	which	frequently	happens	if	brown	rice	is	cooked	on	the	stovetop.
USE	LESS	WATER	Most	recipes	for	brown	rice	cooked	on	the	stovetop

prevent	scorching	by	upping	the	amount	of	water	(usually	to	a	2:1	ratio).	But	this
can	result	in	very	soggy,	overcooked	rice.	We	find	that	using	less	water	(and	then
trapping	the	moisture	in	a	covered	baking	dish)	yields	a	much	better	product.
Boiling	water	before	adding	it	to	the	rice	(instead	of	using	cold	tap	water)	keeps
the	oven	time	to	one	hour.	A	tight	seal	on	the	baking	dish	is	paramount—this	is
why	we	use	the	two	layers	of	foil.
ADD	A	LITTLE	FAT	AND	SALT	Make	sure	to	season	the	rice	before	it

goes	into	the	oven.	A	little	bit	of	added	fat	gives	mild	flavor	while	keeping	the
rice	fluffy.
FLUFF	AND	LET	REST	After	the	rice	comes	out	of	the	oven,	fluff	the	rice

in	order	to	separate	the	grains,	and	then	cover	the	dish	with	a	clean	towel	to
absorb	some	moisture.



MEXICAN	RICE
SERVES	6	TO	8

Because	the	spiciness	of	jalapeños	varies	from	chile	to	chile,	we	try	to	control
the	heat	by	removing	the	ribs	and	seeds	(the	source	of	most	of	the	heat)	from
those	chiles	that	are	cooked	in	the	rice.	It	is	important	to	use	an	ovensafe	pot
about	12	inches	in	diameter	so	that	the	rice	cooks	evenly	and	in	the	time
indicated.	The	pot’s	depth	is	less	important	than	its	diameter;	we’ve	successfully
used	both	a	straight-sided	sauté	pan	and	a	Dutch	oven.	Whichever	type	of	pot
you	use,	it	should	have	a	tight-fitting,	ovensafe	lid.	Vegetable	broth	can	be
substituted	for	the	chicken	broth.

2				 tomatoes,	cored	and	quartered
1				 white	onion,	peeled	and	quartered
3				 jalapeño	chiles,	2	stemmed,	seeded,	and	minced,	1	stemmed	and	minced
2				 cups	long-grain	white	rice
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 tablespoon	tomato	paste

1½				 teaspoons	salt
½				 cup	minced	fresh	cilantro
					 Lime	wedges

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Process
tomatoes	and	onion	in	food	processor	until	smooth,	about	15	seconds,	scraping
down	bowl	if	necessary.	Transfer	mixture	to	liquid	measuring	cup;	you	should
have	2	cups	(if	necessary,	spoon	off	excess	so	that	volume	equals	2	cups).
2.	Place	rice	in	large	fine-mesh	strainer	and	rinse	under	cold	running	water

until	water	runs	clear,	about	1½	minutes.	Shake	rice	vigorously	in	strainer	to
remove	excess	water.
3.	Heat	oil	in	ovensafe	12-inch	straight-sided	sauté	pan	or	Dutch	oven	over

medium-high	heat	for	1	to	2	minutes.	Drop	3	or	4	grains	rice	in	oil;	if	grains
sizzle,	oil	is	ready.	Add	rice	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	rice	is	light
golden	and	translucent,	6	to	8	minutes.	Reduce	heat	to	medium,	add	garlic	and



seeded	minced	jalapeños,	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fragrant,	about	1½
minutes.	Stir	in	pureed	tomatoes	and	onion,	chicken	broth,	tomato	paste,	and
salt,	increase	heat	to	medium-high,	and	bring	to	boil.	Cover	pan	and	transfer	to
oven;	bake	until	liquid	is	absorbed	and	rice	is	tender,	30	to	35	minutes,	stirring
well	halfway	through	cooking.
4.	Stir	in	cilantro	and	reserved	minced	jalapeño	with	seeds	to	taste.	Serve

immediately,	passing	lime	wedges	separately.



MEXICAN	RICE	WITH	CHARRED	TOMATOES,	CHILES,	AND
ONION

SERVES	6	TO	8

For	this	variation,	the	vegetables	are	charred	in	a	cast-iron	skillet,	which	gives
the	finished	dish	a	deeper	color	and	a	slightly	toasty,	smoky	flavor.	A	cast-iron
skillet	works	best	for	toasting	the	vegetables;	a	traditional	or	even	a	nonstick
skillet	will	be	left	with	burnt	spots	that	are	difficult	to	remove,	even	with	vigorous
scrubbing.	Vegetable	broth	can	be	substituted	for	the	chicken	broth.	Include	the
ribs	and	seeds	when	mincing	the	third	jalapeño.

	

2				 tomatoes,	cored
1				 white	onion,	peeled	and	quartered
6				 garlic	cloves,	unpeeled
3				 jalapeño	chiles,	2	stemmed,	halved,	and	seeded,	1	stemmed	and	minced
2				 cups	long-grain	white	rice
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
2				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 tablespoon	tomato	paste

1½				 teaspoons	salt
½				 cup	minced	fresh	cilantro
					 Lime	wedges

1.	Heat	12-inch	cast-iron	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	for	about	2	minutes.
Add	tomatoes,	onion,	garlic,	and	halved	jalapeños	and	toast,	using	tongs	to	turn
them	frequently,	until	vegetables	are	softened	and	almost	completely	blackened,
about	10	minutes	for	tomatoes	and	15	to	20	minutes	for	other	vegetables.	When
cool	enough	to	handle,	trim	root	ends	from	onion	and	halve	each	piece.	Remove
skins	from	garlic	and	mince.	Mince	jalapeños.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Process

toasted	tomatoes	and	onion	in	food	processor	until	smooth,	about	15	seconds,
scraping	down	bowl	if	necessary.	Transfer	mixture	to	liquid	measuring	cup;	you
should	have	2	cups	(if	necessary,	spoon	off	any	excess	so	that	volume	equals	2



cups).
3.	Place	rice	in	large	fine-mesh	strainer	and	rinse	under	cold	running	water

until	water	runs	clear,	about	1½	minutes.	Shake	rice	vigorously	in	strainer	to
remove	excess	water.
4.	Heat	oil	in	ovensafe	12-inch	straight-sided	sauté	pan	or	Dutch	oven	over

medium-high	heat,	1	to	2	minutes.	Drop	3	or	4	grains	rice	in	oil;	if	grains	sizzle,
oil	is	ready.	Add	rice	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	rice	is	light	golden	and
translucent,	6	to	8	minutes.	Reduce	heat	to	medium,	add	toasted	minced	garlic
and	toasted	minced	jalapeños,	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fragrant,	about
1½	minutes.	Stir	in	pureed	tomatoes	and	onion,	chicken	broth,	tomato	paste,	and
salt,	increase	heat	to	medium-high,	and	bring	to	boil.	Cover	pan	and	transfer	to
oven;	bake	until	liquid	is	absorbed	and	rice	is	tender,	30	to	35	minutes,	stirring
well	halfway	through	cooking.
5.	Stir	in	cilantro	and	reserved	minced	jalapeño	with	seeds	to	taste.	Serve

immediately,	passing	lime	wedges	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Rice	cooked	the	Mexican	way	is	a	flavorful	pilaf-style	dish,	but	we’ve	had	our
share	of	soupy	or	greasy	versions.	With	a	whole	host	of	ingredients	in	the	pot	it
can	be	hard	to	get	the	rice	to	cook	through	evenly	on	the	stovetop.	Not	to
mention	that	excess	stirring	causes	the	rice	to	be	extra	starchy.	We	move	the	pot
to	the	oven	to	solve	both	of	these	problems.
RINSE	AND	FRY	Rinsing	the	rice	washes	away	excess	starch	that	can	make

this	dish	gummy.	Frying	the	rice	in	1⁄3	cup	of	oil	imparts	a	rich,	toasted	flavor.
Note	that	some	recipes	deep-fry	the	rice,	but	we	found	that	this	was	unnecessary.
Likewise,	simply	sautéing	the	rice	in	a	tablespoon	of	oil	didn’t	impart	the
necessary	richness.
USE	TWO	TYPES	OF	TOMATOES	Most	recipes	use	fresh	tomatoes	and

we	found	out	why—the	versions	with	canned	tomatoes	tasted	overcooked	and
too	tomatoey.	We	did	like	the	richer	color	of	the	versions	made	with	canned
tomatoes;	we	got	this	by	adding	a	tablespoon	of	tomato	paste.	To	further
guarantee	the	right	flavor,	color,	and	texture,	we	stir	the	rice	midway	through
cooking	to	reincorporate	the	tomato	mixture.
ADD	FLAVOR,	TEXTURE	We	found	pureeing	the	tomatoes	into	a	pulp	was

best—and	that	we	could	puree	the	onion	with	the	tomatoes	as	well.	We	prefer	to
mince	garlic	and	chiles	and	sauté	them	in	the	pot	with	the	rice,	before	adding	the
tomatoes	and	onion,	to	develop	their	flavor.	We	also	cook	in	chicken	broth	for
richer	flavor.
FINISH	FRESH	While	many	traditional	recipes	consider	fresh	cilantro	and

minced	jalapeño	optional,	in	our	book	they	are	mandatory.	The	raw	herbs	and
pungent	chiles	complement	the	richer	tones	of	the	cooked	tomatoes,	garlic,	and
onion.	A	squirt	of	fresh	lime	illuminates	the	flavor	even	further.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SEEDING	HOT	CHILES

A	melon	baller	can	be	effective	when	seeding	jalapeños.

Using	a	knife	to	remove	the	seeds	and	ribs	from	a	hot	chile	pepper	takes	a	very	steady	hand.	Fortunately
there	is	a	safer	and	equally	effective	alternative.

First,	cut	the	chile	in	half	with	a	knife.	Then,	starting	opposite	the	stem	end,	run	the	edge	of	a	small
melon	baller	scoop	down	the	inside	of	the	chile,	scraping	up	seeds	and	ribs.	Finally,	cut	off	the	core	with	the
scoop.	(For	more	on	chiles,	see	concept	32.)



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
USING	HERBS	STEMS

Cilantro	stems	have	great	flavor	but	avoid	parsley	stems.

Can	you	use	cilantro	and	parsley	stems	when	cooking?	We	asked	tasters	to	eat	the	herbs	by	the	sprig,	from
the	tender	leaf	to	the	fat	tip	of	the	stem.	While	the	parsley	leaves	were	fresh	and	herbal,	we	were	surprised
by	how	intense	the	flavor	became	as	we	traveled	down	the	stems.	By	the	time	we	reached	the	stem	ends,
tasters	were	complaining	(loudly)	about	bitterness.	Cilantro,	however,	was	another	story.	Sure,	the	leaves
were	tasty,	but	the	great	flavor	found	in	the	stems	caught	us	all	off	guard.	Sweet,	fresh,	and	potent,	the
flavor	intensified	as	we	traveled	down	the	stem	but	never	became	bitter.	The	moral?	If	a	recipe	calls	for
cilantro	and	a	slightly	crunchy	texture	isn’t	an	issue,	use	the	stems	as	well	as	the	leaves.	But	when	it	comes
to	parsley—unless	you’ll	be	using	the	herb	in	a	soup	or	stew	where	its	strong	flavor	won’t	be	out	of	place—
be	picky	and	use	just	the	leaves.



COVERED	STOVETOP	COOKING	AT	WORK	
RISOTTO
Traditional	risotto	recipes	call	for	constant	stirring	while	the	rice	cooks.	Stirring
releases	the	starches	in	the	rice,	helping	to	create	that	iconic	creamy	sauce.
We’ve	revamped	the	traditional	recipe	to	drastically	reduce	the	stirring	time,	but
still	achieve	the	firm	yet	tender	texture	by	not	rinsing	the	rice,	and	flooding	it
with	water.



NO-FUSS	RISOTTO	WITH	PARMESAN	AND	HERBS
SERVES	6

This	more	hands-off	method	requires	precise	timing,	so	we	strongly	recommend
using	a	timer.

5				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1½				 cups	water
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 large	onion,	chopped	fine
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
2				 cups	Arborio	rice
1				 cup	dry	white	wine
2				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	(1	cup)
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives
1				 teaspoon	lemon	juice

1.	Bring	broth	and	water	to	boil	in	large	saucepan	over	high	heat.	Reduce	heat
to	medium-low	to	maintain	gentle	simmer.
2.	Melt	2	tablespoons	butter	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat.	Add	onion	and

¾	teaspoon	salt	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	onion	is	softened,	5	to	7
minutes.	Add	garlic	and	stir	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Add	rice	and	cook,
stirring	frequently,	until	grains	are	translucent	around	edges,	about	3	minutes.
3.	Add	wine	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fully	absorbed,	2	to	3	minutes.

Stir	5	cups	hot	broth	mixture	into	rice;	reduce	heat	to	medium-low,	cover,	and
simmer	until	almost	all	liquid	has	been	absorbed	and	rice	is	just	al	dente,	16	to
19	minutes,	stirring	twice	during	cooking.
4.	Add	¾	cup	hot	broth	mixture	and	stir	gently	and	constantly	until	risotto

becomes	creamy,	about	3	minutes.	Stir	in	Parmesan.	Remove	pot	from	heat,
cover,	and	let	stand	for	5	minutes.	Stir	in	remaining	2	tablespoons	butter,	parsley,
chives,	and	lemon	juice.	To	loosen	texture	of	risotto,	add	remaining	broth
mixture	to	taste.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve	immediately.



NO-FUSS	RISOTTO	WITH	CHICKEN	AND	HERBS
SERVES	6

This	more	hands-off	method	requires	precise	timing,	so	we	strongly	recommend
using	a	timer.

5				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 cups	water
1				 tablespoon	olive	oil
2				 (12-ounce)	bone-in	split	chicken	breasts,	trimmed	and	cut	in	half	crosswise
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 large	onion,	chopped	fine
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
2				 cups	Arborio	rice
1				 cup	dry	white	wine
2				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	(1	cup)
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives
1				 teaspoon	lemon	juice

1.	Bring	broth	and	water	to	boil	in	large	saucepan	over	high	heat.	Reduce	heat
to	medium-low	to	maintain	gentle	simmer.
2.	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat	until	just	starting	to	smoke.	Add

chicken,	skin	side	down,	and	cook	without	moving	until	golden	brown,	4	to	6
minutes.	Flip	chicken	and	cook	second	side	until	lightly	browned,	about	2
minutes.	Transfer	chicken	to	saucepan	of	simmering	broth	and	cook	until
chicken	registers	160	degrees,	10	to	15	minutes.	Transfer	to	large	plate.
3.	Melt	2	tablespoons	butter	in	now-empty	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat.

Add	onion	and	¾	teaspoon	salt	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	onion	is
softened,	5	to	7	minutes.	Add	garlic	and	stir	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.
Add	rice	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	grains	are	translucent	around	edges,
about	3	minutes.
4.	Add	wine	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fully	absorbed,	2	to	3	minutes.

Stir	5	cups	hot	broth	mixture	into	rice;	reduce	heat	to	medium-low,	cover,	and



simmer	until	almost	all	liquid	has	been	absorbed	and	rice	is	just	al	dente,	16	to
19	minutes,	stirring	twice	during	cooking.
5.	Add	¾	cup	hot	broth	mixture	to	risotto	and	stir	gently	and	constantly	until

risotto	becomes	creamy,	about	3	minutes.	Stir	in	Parmesan.	Remove	pot	from
heat,	cover,	and	let	stand	for	5	minutes.
6.	Meanwhile,	remove	and	discard	skin	and	bones	from	chicken	and	shred

meat	into	bite-size	pieces.	Gently	stir	shredded	chicken,	remaining	2	tablespoons
butter,	parsley,	chives,	and	lemon	juice	into	risotto.	To	loosen	texture	of	risotto,
add	remaining	broth	mixture	to	taste.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and
serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Classic	risotto	can	demand	half	an	hour	of	stovetop	tedium	for	the	best	creamy
results.	Our	goal	was	five	minutes	of	stirring,	tops.	Typical	recipes	dictate
adding	the	broth	in	small	increments	after	the	wine	has	been	absorbed	(and
stirring	constantly	after	each	addition),	but	we	add	most	of	the	broth	at	once	and
cover	the	pan,	allowing	the	rice	to	simmer	until	almost	all	the	broth	is	absorbed
(stirring	just	twice).
DON’T	STIR	We	have	rethought	this	recipe	to	reduce	stirring	to	a	bare

minimum.	Flooding	the	rice	with	most	of	the	liquid	at	the	outset	and	then	using
the	lid	to	help	the	rice	cook	evenly	is	our	unique	trick	here.	(But	be	sure	to
measure	the	liquid	with	care;	success	is	dependent	on	the	correct	ratios	and
volumes.)	We	don’t	rinse	the	Arborio	rice;	we	want	that	extra	starch	to	help
make	our	risotto	creamy.	(Traditionally,	it’s	the	stirring	that	causes	the	rice	to
release	its	starch	and	create	the	creamy	“sauce.”)	Stirring	also	prevents	sticking
or	scorching,	but	by	flooding	the	rice	and	then	bringing	that	liquid	to	a	boil,
we’re	letting	the	natural	jostling	of	the	rice	take	the	place	of	stirring—our	rice
doesn’t	burn,	and	we	get	a	great	creamy	sauce.
USE	A	DUTCH	OVEN	We	swap	out	the	saucepan	for	a	Dutch	oven,	which

has	a	thick,	heavy	bottom,	deep	sides,	and	tight-fitting	lid—perfect	for	trapping
and	distributing	heat	as	evenly	as	possible.	Also,	its	wider	surface	area	means
there’s	less	differential	in	cooking	rates	between	top	and	bottom;	the	rice	is
spread	out	in	a	thinner	layer	in	the	pot.
COOK	WITH	RESIDUAL	HEAT	We	stir	the	rice	twice	in	the	first	16	to	19

minutes	of	cooking	to	help	release	some	starch	and	build	our	sauce.	After	a
second	addition	of	broth,	we	stir	the	pot	constantly	until	the	risotto	is	creamy,
which	takes	just	three	minutes.	We	then	remove	the	pot	from	the	heat,	throw	on
the	cover,	and	wait	for	five	minutes.	Without	sitting	over	a	direct	flame,	the
heavy	Dutch	oven	maintains	enough	residual	heat	to	finish	off	the	rice	to	a
perfect	al	dente—thickened,	velvety,	and	just	barely	chewy.	Adding	the
Parmesan	cheese	before	the	off-heat	“cooking”	helps	to	build	this	creamy	sauce.
FINISH	WITH	FLAVOR	Just	before	serving,	we	stir	in	extra	butter	to	make

the	sauce	velvety	and	add	herbs	and	a	squeeze	of	lemon.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
DON’T	RINSE	RICE	WHEN	YOU	WANT	A	CREAMY	CONSISTENCY

Are	you	making	risotto	or	rice	pudding?	Don’t	rinse	your	rice.	Rinsing	is	for	dishes	where
individual	grains	are	desired.

Do	you	always	need	to	rinse	rice?	In	the	test	kitchen,	we	recommend	rinsing	long-grain	white	rice	when	we
want	separate,	distinct	grains.	That’s	because	rinsing	flushes	away	excess	starch	that	would	otherwise
absorb	water	and	swell,	causing	grains	to	stick	together.	To	see	if	this	was	also	true	for	other	types	of	white
rice,	we	gathered	up	three	of	the	most	common	kinds	called	for	in	our	recipes	and	cooked	them,	rinsed	and
unrinsed,	in	a	few	typical	applications:	We	cooked	medium-grain	Arborio	rice	in	risotto,	medium-grain	rice
in	rice	pudding,	and	steamed	long-grain	basmati	plain.	After	side-by-side	tastings,	we	confirmed	that	for
steamed	basmati	rice,	where	individual	grains	are	desired,	rinsing	improves	the	result.	But	for	creamy
dishes	like	risotto	and	rice	pudding,	rinsing	compromises	the	texture	of	the	finished	dish.	The	bottom	line:
If	you	want	a	sticky,	creamy	texture,	don’t	rinse	your	rice.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

WHAT	RICE	IS	BEST	FOR	RISOTTO?
There	are	many	different	types	of	rice,	but	for	risotto,	Arborio	is	best.

The	stubby,	milky	grains	of	Arborio	rice,	once	grown	exclusively	in	Italy,	are	valued	for	their	high	starch
content	and	the	subsequent	creaminess	they	bring	to	risotto.

Arborio,	the	classic	choice	for	risotto,	is	different	from	other	types	of	white	rice	for	a	couple	of	reasons.
First,	it	contains	roughly	19	to	21	percent	amylose	(as	opposed	to	22	percent	of	amylose	in	long-grain	white
rice).	But	more	importantly,	the	desirable	“bite”	in	risotto	is	due	to	a	defect	in	Arborio	rice	called	chalk.
During	maturation,	the	starch	structures	at	the	grain’s	core	deform,	making	for	a	firm,	toothy	center	when
cooked.

Italian	rice	comes	in	four	grades:	superfino,	fino,	semifino,	and	commune.	The	top	two	grades	include
Arborio	(the	most	widely	available),	Carnaroli,	and	Vialone	Nano.	(There	are	even	more	varieties,	like
Baldo	and	the	newly	developed	quick-cooking	Poseidone,	but	they	can	be	difficult	to	find	outside	of	Italy.)

In	a	side-by-side	tasting	of	Arborio,	Carnaroli,	and	Vialone	Nano,	tasters	were	split	evenly	between	the
Arborio	and	Carnaroli;	those	liking	firmer	rice	grains	chose	Arborio,	and	those	liking	softer,	creamier	rice
chose	Carnaroli.	Vialone	was	deemed	too	soft	and	had	a	pasty	texture;	the	grains	lacked	a	firm	center.	On	a
whim,	we	also	tried	an	Arborio	integrale,	or	whole-grain	(brown)	Arborio.	While	it	did	take	nearly	twice	as
long	to	cook	and	was	not	quite	as	creamy	as	fully	processed	white	Arborio,	some	tasters	appreciated	its
nutty	taste	and	chewy	texture.

To	find	the	best	Arborio	rice	brand,	we	cooked	up	batches	of	Parmesan	risotto	with	two	domestically
grown	brands	of	Arborio	rice	and	four	Italian	imports;	all	brands	are	widely	available	in	supermarkets.	To
our	surprise,	the	winning	rice	hailed	not	from	the	Boot,	but	from	the	Lone	Star	State:	RiceSelect	Arborio
Rice.
	



CONCEPT	31

Slicing	Changes	Garlic	and	Onion
Flavor
Garlic	and	onions	are	key	components	of	countless	savory	recipes.	Most	cooks
understand	that	cooking	tames	the	harsh	notes	in	garlic	and	onions	and	brings
out	their	sweetness.	What	most	cooks	don’t	understand	is	that	the	method	by
which	garlic	and	onions	are	prepared	on	the	cutting	board	is	important,	too.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Garlic	and	onions	belong	to	the	same	botanical	family	(called	alliums)	that	also
includes	shallots	and	leeks.	Unlike	many	other	foods	with	potent	flavors	(think
aged	cheese	or	fresh	basil),	garlic	and	onions	have	almost	no	aroma.	Sure,	the
papery	skin	keeps	some	of	the	strong	compounds	in	garlic	and	onions	from
reaching	our	noses,	but	it	turns	out	that	these	compounds	are	not	really	activated
until	the	cell	structure	is	disturbed.	That	is,	until	you	slice	into	garlic	or	onions
they	don’t	really	smell.
When	the	cells	of	a	garlic	clove	are	ruptured,	an	odorless	sulfur-containing

amino	acid	is	released	and	immediately	comes	into	contact	with	an	enzyme
called	alliinase.	The	reaction	of	the	two	eventually	produces	a	new	compound
commonly	called	allicin,	which	is	responsible	for	garlic’s	familiar	scent	and
characteristic	fiery	flavor.	The	more	a	garlic	clove	is	broken	down,	the	more
enzymes	are	released,	and	the	more	allicin—and	therefore	more	flavor—is
produced.	But	be	careful:	As	soon	as	you	cut	the	garlic,	the	allicin	will	start	to
build	and	build	until	its	flavor	becomes	overwhelmingly	strong.	So	if	a	recipe
calls	for	chopped	raw	garlic	we	suggest	you	avoid	advance	preparation	of	your
cloves.	(Fortunately,	when	garlic	is	cooked	the	very	pungent	allicin	is	converted
to	a	variety	of	more	mellow-tasting	compounds.)
Onions	glean	their	intense	flavor	and	acrid	odor	from	sulfur-containing

substances	similar	to	allicin,	called	thiosulfinates,	which	are	created	when	the
same	enzyme	alliinase	interacts	with	an	odorless	sulfur-containing	amino	acid,
similar	to	the	one	in	garlic,	released	when	the	onion’s	cells	are	ruptured.	(Unlike
garlic,	onions	also	contain	an	enzyme	called	LF	synthase,	which	is	responsible
for	forming	the	tear-causing	compound	propanethial	S-oxide.)	Like	garlic,	these
pungent	sulfur	compounds	are	converted	to	milder-tasting	sulfonate	and	sulfide
compounds	by	cooking.
We’ve	found	that	there	is	a	way	to	control	the	levels	of	strong-smelling

compounds	that	are	released	from	garlic	and	onions—at	least	to	an	extent.	It’s	all
about	how	you	cut	them	up.	For	garlic,	you	can	control	the	bite	by	cutting	it	into
thin	slices	rather	than	finely	mincing	it.	(That	said,	in	many	recipes	we	want
more	garlic	flavor	to	be	distributed	evenly	throughout	a	dish,	so	we	do	mince	it,
even	though	mincing	produces	more	garlic	flavor	than	slicing.)	For	onions,
we’ve	found	that	slicing	them	through	the	root	end	(rather	than	crosswise)	gives
us	pieces	with	clearly	less	pungency	in	taste	and	odor.



WHAT	HAPPENS	WHEN	YOU	SLICE	ONION	OR	GARLIC



	
BEFORE	SLICING	Enzymes	and	amino	acids	are	stored	in	separate	sections	of	the	onion	and	garlic	cells.



	
AFTER	SLICING	When	cell	walls	are	ruptured	(often	by	a	knife),	the	enzymes	and	amino	acids	react	with



each	other	to	create	new	compounds	responsible	for	the	characteristic	onion	or	garlic	flavor.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
Knowing	that	the	way	that	onions	are	cut	determines	the	amount	of
thiosulfinates	(the	compounds	that	give	onions	their	flavor	and	aroma)	released,
we	devised	an	experiment	to	illustrate	the	relationship	between	ruptured	onion
cells	and	thiosulfinate	production.	To	do	this,	we	relied	on	the	antioxidant
properties	of	thiosulfinates	to	prevent	enzymatic	browning,	an	oxidation	reaction
that	takes	place	in	peeled	potatoes	left	out	too	long.
First,	we	pureed	and	strained	a	pound	of	potatoes	to	produce	what	was

essentially	potato	juice.	To	half	of	the	juice	we	added	an	onion	that	had	been
“minced”	in	the	food	processor—a	violent	method	that	bursts	lots	of	cells.	And
to	the	other	half	we	added	an	onion	that	we’d	minced	by	hand	with	a	sharp	knife
(producing	far	fewer	ruptured	cells).	We	left	both	samples	to	sit	overnight	in	the
refrigerator	(alongside	a	bowl	of	potato	juice	without	any	onion)	and	then
examined	their	color.



THE	RESULTS
The	plain	potato	juice	had	turned	the	color	of	strong	black	tea	because	of
oxidation.	The	potato	juice	spiked	with	hand-minced	onion	was	slightly	lighter
in	color,	like	a	weaker	cup	of	tea,	and	had	a	strong	onion	smell.	Clearly,	hand-
chopping	the	onion	had	released	thiosulfinates	(we	could	smell	them),	but	not
enough	to	keep	the	potato	juice	from	oxidizing.	The	potato	juice	spiked	with	the
onion	“minced”	in	a	food	processor	was	pale	yellow	and	had	a	much	stronger
onion	aroma	than	the	sample	spiked	with	the	hand-minced	onion.	Not	only	did
the	battered	and	bruised	onion	pieces	create	a	stronger	onion	aroma,	but	we
could	see	that	this	rough	handling	of	the	onion	had	created	more	thiosulfinates,
which	had	protected	the	potato	juice	from	oxidizing	even	after	an	overnight	stay
in	the	refrigerator.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	lesson?	Take	care	with	the	manner	in	which	you	chop	your	onions.	The
more	you	chop	the	onions,	the	more	flavorful	thiosulfinates	you	will	release.
Precisely	sliced	onions	with	a	minimum	of	bruising	will	have	a	far	less	pungent
flavor	than	onions	you	manhandle	in	the	food	processor.	For	this	reason,	it’s
important	to	use	a	sharp	knife	(it	will	cut	more	cleanly	through	an	onion	and
cause	less	bruising).	If	your	cutting	board	is	covered	with	juices	by	the	time
you’ve	finished	mincing	an	onion,	your	knife	is	not	sharp	enough	and	you’re
likely	creating	an	excess	of	onion	flavor.
Not	only	is	proper	technique	essential	when	preparing	onions	(as	well	as

garlic),	but	it	is	important	to	understand	that	more	chopping	equals	more	cellular
damage,	which	equals	more	flavor.	For	instance,	slicing	onions	produces	a
milder	onion	flavor	than	mincing	them.	There	are	recipes	where	a	single	onion
needs	to	provide	a	lot	of	flavor	and	should	be	evenly	dispersed	throughout	the
dish.	In	these	cases,	we	will	generally	mince	the	onion.	In	recipes	with	several
onions,	such	as	onion	soup,	we	often	slice	the	onions	to	keep	their	flavor	from
overwhelming	the	dish.	The	same	exact	principle	applies	to	garlic.



HARNESSING	THE	POWER	OF	ONIONS
When	potato	juice	sits	overnight,	it	oxidizes	and	turns	black.	The	potent	flavor	compounds	in	onions
(thiosulfinates)	prevent	oxidation.	We	mixed	onions	processed	in	two	ways	with	this	juice	and	compared	the
results.

	
Precisely	chopping	onions	by	hand	released	fewer	potent	flavor	compounds,	which	in	turn	created	less
protection	against	oxidation	in	what	became	the	dark	brown	potato	juice.



	
Manhandling	onions	in	a	food	processor	released	a	great	amount	of	potent	flavor	compounds,	which	created
more	protection	against	oxidation	in	the	potato	juice	and	kept	it	from	turning	brown.



MANIPULATING	GARLIC	FLAVOR	AT	WORK	
SOUP,	SALAD,	AND	PASTA
We	use	garlic	in	many	ways,	manipulating	its	pungent	flavor	depending	on	what
will	work	best	in	the	finished	dish.	These	flavor-enhancing	(or	-minimizing)
techniques	range	from	mincing	to	poaching	and	sautéing.	Other	recipes	that	rely
on	garlic	include	Spanish-Style	Garlic	Shrimp	and	Garlic	Mayonnaise.



GARLIC-POTATO	SOUP
SERVES	6

A	garnish	is	essential	to	add	texture	to	this	soup.	We	like	Garlic	Chips,	but	crisp
bacon	bits,	fried	leeks,	or	croutons	are	good	options,	too.	A	potato	masher	can
be	used	instead	of	an	immersion	blender	to	mash	some	of	the	potatoes	right	in
the	pot,	though	the	consistency	will	not	be	as	creamy.	If	leeks	are	not	available,
substitute	an	equal	amount	of	yellow	onion.	The	test	kitchen	prefers	the	soup
made	with	chicken	broth,	but	vegetable	broth	can	be	substituted.

3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 leek,	white	and	light	green	parts	only,	halved	lengthwise,	chopped	small,	and	washed	thoroughly
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced,	plus	2	whole	heads	garlic,	outer	papery	skins	removed	and	top	third	of	heads

cut	off	and	discarded
6– cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
7				
2				 bay	leaves
					 Salt	and	pepper

1½				 pounds	russet	potatoes,	peeled	and	cut	into	½-inch	cubes
1				 pound	red	potatoes	(unpeeled),	cut	into	½-inch	cubes
½				 cup	heavy	cream
1½				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	thyme
¼				 cup	minced	fresh	chives
1				 recipe	Garlic	Chips	(recipe	follows)

1.	Melt	butter	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat.	Add	leeks	and	cook	until	soft
(do	not	brown),	5	to	8	minutes.	Stir	in	minced	garlic	and	cook	until	fragrant,
about	1	minute.	Add	garlic	heads,	6	cups	broth,	bay	leaves,	and	¾	teaspoon	salt.
Partially	cover	pot	and	bring	to	simmer	over	medium-high	heat.	Reduce	heat	and
simmer	until	garlic	is	very	tender	when	pierced	with	tip	of	knife,	30	to	40
minutes.	Add	russet	potatoes	and	red	potatoes	and	continue	to	simmer,	partially
covered,	until	potatoes	are	tender,	15	to	20	minutes.
2.	Discard	bay	leaves.	Remove	garlic	heads	from	pot	and,	using	tongs	or	paper

towels,	squeeze	at	root	end	until	cloves	slip	out	of	their	skins	into	bowl.	Using
fork,	mash	garlic	to	smooth	paste.
3.	Stir	cream,	thyme,	and	half	of	mashed	garlic	into	soup.	Heat	soup	until	hot,



about	2	minutes.	Taste	soup	and	add	remaining	garlic	paste	if	desired.
4.	Using	immersion	blender,	process	soup	until	creamy,	with	some	potato

chunks	remaining.	Alternatively,	transfer	1½	cups	potatoes	and	1	cup	broth	to
blender	or	food	processor	and	process	until	smooth.	(Process	more	potatoes	for
thicker	consistency.)	Return	puree	to	pot	and	stir	to	combine,	adjusting
consistency	with	up	to	1	cup	more	broth	if	necessary.	Season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste,	sprinkle	with	chives	and	Garlic	Chips,	and	serve.



GARLIC	CHIPS
MAKES	ABOUT	¼	CUP

3				 tablespoons	olive	oil
6				 garlic	cloves,	sliced	thin	lengthwise
					 Salt

Heat	oil	and	garlic	in	10-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.	Cook,	turning
frequently,	until	light	golden	brown,	about	3	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,
transfer	garlic	to	paper	towel–lined	plate.	Season	with	salt	to	taste.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	soup	is	a	classic:	Simple	and	economical,	both	chunky	and	smooth,	it	is
modeled	after	the	French	potage	Parmentier.	We	use	a	combination	of	two
different	kinds	of	potatoes	and	garlic	cooked	in	three	ways	to	maximize	flavor.
PICK	TWO	POTATOES	Choosing	the	right	potato	was	the	first	step	in

developing	our	Garlic-Potato	Soup.	We	like	peeled	russets	for	the	way	they
break	down	and	thicken	the	broth,	but	we	find	that	adding	red	potatoes	to	the
mix	ramps	up	the	potato	flavor.	(For	more	on	the	differences	in	potato	varieties,
see	concept	25.)
USE	GARLIC	THREE	WAYS	The	key	to	getting	the	garlic	right	proved	to

be	not	quantity	but	cooking	technique.	Finding	that	sautéed	garlic	was	too	harsh
and	poached	was	too	mild,	we	settled	on	incorporating	garlic	in	two	ways:	We
sauté	three	cloves	in	the	pot	before	adding	the	broth	(the	base	of	our	soup),	and
we	poach	two	whole	heads	of	garlic	in	the	broth,	then	squeeze	out	the	softened
pods,	mash	them,	and	add	them	back	to	the	soup.	Finally,	we	top	the	soup	with
Garlic	Chips,	which	have	a	toasty,	pleasantly	bitter	flavor	to	push	our	soup	over
the	top.
ADD	LEEKS,	CREAM,	AND	THYME	Leeks	are	a	natural	partner	for

potatoes,	especially	when	paired	with	cream	(which	our	tasters	favored	over
half-and-half	and	milk)	and	fresh	thyme	(added	at	the	end	of	cooking	for
maximum	flavor).
MAKE	IT	SMOOTH	AND	CHUNKY	In	the	lexicon	of	French	cookery,

there	are	three	classifications	for	soup:	consommé	describes	a	clear,	brothy	soup;
soupe	refers	to	a	thick,	chunky,	stewlike	mixture;	and	potage	is	a	hybrid	of
consommé	and	soupe,	being	at	once	partly	chunky	and	partly	smooth.	For	this
country-style	soup,	we	adopt	the	texture	of	a	potage.	We	puree	a	portion	of	the
soup	to	a	creamy,	smooth	consistency	and	leave	the	remaining	chunks
untouched.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
MANIPULATING	GARLIC’S	FLAVOR
The	method	of	preparation	and	cooking	affects	garlic’s	flavor.

As	we’ve	learned,	the	method	of	cutting	garlic	can	affect	its	taste.	Cooking	also	affects	flavor	intensity.
Garlic	is	sharpest	when	raw.	When	it’s	heated	to	about	150	degrees,	its	enzymes	are	destroyed	and	no	new
flavor	is	produced,	but	the	flavor	molecules	that	have	been	produced	are	transformed	by	the	heat	to	more
mellow-tasting	sulfur	compounds.	This	is	why	toasted	or	roasted	garlic	has	a	mellow,	slightly	sweet	flavor.
But	be	careful;	garlic	browned	(or	overbrowned)	at	very	high	temperatures	(300	to	350	degrees)	results	in	a
bitter	flavor.	(Garlic	Chips	are	the	exception,	since	they	are	mellowed	first,	then	crisped,	which	creates	a
sweet	flavor	with	only	hints	of	bitterness.)
	
Roasted	Whole	Head:	Very	mild,	sweet,	caramel-like	flavor
Toasted	Whole	Clove:	Mellow	and	nutty	flavor
Slivered	and	Sautéed:	Mellow	flavor
Minced	and	Sautéed:	Full	and	rounded	flavor
Pressed	and	Sautéed:	Very	robust,	harsh	flavor
Raw	Paste:	Sharp	and	fiery	flavor



CAESAR	SALAD
SERVES	4	TO	6

If	you	can’t	find	ciabatta,	a	similar	crusty,	rustic	loaf	of	bread	can	be	substituted.
A	quarter-cup	of	Egg	Beaters	may	be	substituted	for	the	egg	yolks.	Since
anchovy	fillets	vary	in	size,	more	than	six	fillets	may	be	necessary	to	yield	1
tablespoon	of	minced	anchovies.	The	easiest	way	to	turn	garlic	cloves	into	a
paste	is	to	grate	them	on	a	rasp-style	grater.

CROUTONS
2				 garlic	cloves,	peeled
5				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil

½–¾				 loaf	ciabatta,	cut	into	¾-inch	cubes	(5	cups)
¼				 cup	water
¼				 teaspoon	salt
2				 tablespoons	finely	grated	Parmesan	cheese

SALAD
2–3				 tablespoons	lemon	juice
2				 large	egg	yolks
6				 anchovy	fillets,	rinsed,	patted	dry,	minced,	and	mashed	to	paste	with	fork	(1	tablespoon)
½				 teaspoon	Worcestershire	sauce
5				 tablespoons	canola	oil
5				 teaspoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil

1½				 ounces	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	fine	(¾	cup)
					 Pepper

2–3				 romaine	lettuce	hearts	(12	to	18	ounces),	cut	into	¾-inch	pieces,	rinsed,	and	dried

1.	Grate	garlic	on	rasp-style	grater	or	press	through	garlic	press.	Measure	out
½	teaspoon	garlic	paste	for	croutons	and	¾	teaspoon	garlic	paste	for	dressing
(discard	remaining	garlic).	Combine	1	tablespoon	oil	and	½	teaspoon	garlic
paste	in	small	bowl;	set	aside.	Whisk	2	tablespoons	lemon	juice	and	¾	teaspoon
garlic	paste	together	in	large	bowl.	Let	stand	for	10	minutes.
2.	FOR	THE	CROUTONS:	Place	bread	cubes	in	large	bowl.	Sprinkle	with

water	and	salt.	Toss,	squeezing	gently	so	bread	absorbs	water.	Place	remaining	¼



cup	oil	and	soaked	bread	cubes	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet.	Cook	over	medium-
high	heat,	stirring	frequently,	until	browned	and	crisp,	7	to	10	minutes.
3.	Remove	skillet	from	heat	and	push	croutons	to	sides	of	skillet	to	clear

center;	add	garlic-oil	mixture	to	clearing	and	cook	with	residual	heat	of	pan,	10
seconds.	Sprinkle	with	Parmesan;	toss	until	garlic	and	Parmesan	are	evenly
distributed.	Transfer	croutons	to	bowl;	set	aside.
4.	FOR	THE	SALAD:	Whisk	egg	yolks,	anchovies,	and	Worcestershire	into

garlic–lemon	juice	mixture.	While	whisking	constantly,	drizzle	canola	oil	and
olive	oil	into	bowl	in	slow,	steady	stream	until	fully	emulsified.	Add	½	cup
Parmesan	and	pepper	to	taste;	whisk	until	incorporated.
5.	Add	romaine	to	dressing	and	toss	to	coat.	Add	croutons	and	mix	gently

until	evenly	distributed.	Taste	and	season	with	up	to	1	tablespoon	remaining
lemon	juice.	Serve	immediately,	passing	remaining	¼	cup	Parmesan	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	our	Caesar	Salad,	we	wanted	crisp-tender	romaine	lettuce	tossed	with	a
creamy,	garlicky	dressing	boasting	a	pleasing	salty	undertone,	with	crunchy,
savory	croutons	strewn	throughout.	To	start,	we	cut	the	extra-virgin	olive	oil	in
the	dressing	with	canola	oil,	which	made	for	a	less	harsh	flavor,	and	we	used	egg
yolks	instead	of	a	whole	egg	to	add	richness.	A	garlic	paste	steeped	in	lemon
juice,	a	double	layer	of	Parmesan,	and	a	novel	method	to	make	croutons	round
out	our	classic	salad.
MAKE	A	PASTE	Well	aware	that	the	dressing’s	flavor	depends	on	how	the

garlic	is	prepared,	we	worked	our	way	through	a	series	of	tests—everything
from	finely	chopping	the	cloves	with	salt	to	rubbing	whole	cloves	around	the
interior	of	the	serving	bowl.	Ultimately,	we	prefer	the	flavor	of	the	garlic
transformed	into	a	pulp	on	a	rasp-style	grater.	The	fine	paste	virtually	disappears
into	the	dressing,	suffusing	it	with	a	robust	(though	far	from	aggressive)	flavor,
especially	when	we	steep	it	in	lemon	juice	for	a	few	minutes	before	introducing
the	rest	of	the	dressing	ingredients.	(See	“Tempering	Garlic’s	Bite.”)
ADD	WATER	FOR	NOVEL	CROUTONS	To	get	our	croutons	perfect

(brown	and	crunchy,	yet	still	tender	and	not	parched	within),	we	sprinkle	the
bite-size	bread	cubes	with	a	little	water	and	salt	and	cook	them	in	an	oiled
nonstick	skillet.	The	result?	Croutons	that	are	perfectly	tender	at	the	center,	and
browned	and	crunchy	as	could	be	around	the	edges.	Water	gelatinizes	the	starch
in	the	bread,	simultaneously	breaking	some	of	it	down	to	glucose.	As	it	cooks,
the	gelatinized	starch	turns	crispy	on	the	exterior	but	remains	tender	within.	And
the	glucose?	Like	all	sugars,	it	hastens	browning—a	good	thing	when	it	comes	to
croutons.
MINCE	THOSE	ANCHOVIES	When	making	anchovy	paste,	start	with

whole	fish.	The	deep	flavor	of	good-quality	oil-packed	fillets	is	a	must	in	this
recipe.	The	fishier,	flatter	taste	of	commercial	anchovy	paste	won’t	do.	And	be
sure	to	mash	them	up	well.	Even	small	bits	of	anchovy	can	be	distracting	in
Caesar	salad.	Finely	slice	the	fillets	and	mash	with	a	fork	to	create	a	paste	that
contributes	savory—not	fishy—flavor.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TEMPERING	GARLIC’S	BITE

Soak	minced	garlic	in	lemon	juice	for	a	nice,	mellow	flavor.

In	our	Caesar	dressing,	every	little	detail	counts—especially	the	strong	flavor	of	raw	garlic.	In	the	past,
we’ve	found	that	cloves	minced	well	in	advance	end	up	tasting	harsh	in	the	final	dish.	Would	letting	the
grated	garlic	in	our	recipe	sit	for	just	10	minutes	while	we	prepared	the	rest	of	the	salad	ingredients	have	the
same	effect?	And	could	steeping	it	in	lemon	juice	for	the	same	amount	of	time—a	practice	recommended
by	an	old	French	wives’	tale—actually	mellow	it	out?

We	made	three	batches	of	Caesar	dressing:	In	the	first,	we	grated	the	garlic	and	immediately	combined	it
with	the	other	dressing	ingredients.	In	the	second,	we	soaked	the	grated	garlic	in	lemon	juice	for	10	minutes
before	proceeding.	In	the	third,	we	let	the	grated	garlic	rest	for	10	minutes	on	its	own	before	combining	it
with	the	other	components.

Tasters	found	the	garlic	grated	in	advance	without	steeping	tasted	the	harshest	of	the	three.	The	other
two	preparations—grated	garlic	soaked	in	lemon	juice	and	grated	garlic	immediately	mixed	into	the
dressing—tasted	milder,	with	the	lemon	juice–soaked	sample	making	for	a	particularly	well-balanced
dressing.

Raw	garlic’s	harsh	flavor	comes	from	a	compound	called	allicin,	which	forms	as	soon	as	the	clove’s
cells	are	ruptured	and	continues	to	build	as	it	sits.	The	citric	acid	in	lemon	juice	hastens	the	conversion	of
harsh-tasting	allicin	to	more	mellow	compounds	called	thiosulfinates,	disulfides,	and	trisulfides—the	same
milder-tasting	compounds	that	form	when	garlic	is	heated.	And	since	soaking	the	garlic	is	easy	to	do	while
preparing	the	other	ingredients,	it’s	a	step	we	think	is	worthwhile.



PASTA	WITH	GARLIC	AND	OIL
SERVES	4

It	pays	to	use	high-quality	extra-virgin	olive	oil	in	this	dish.

SALAD
1				 pound	spaghetti
					 Salt
6				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
12				 garlic	cloves,	minced
3				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
2				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
¾				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
1				 ounce	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	(½	cup)

1.	Bring	4	quarts	water	to	boil	in	large	pot.	Add	pasta	and	1	tablespoon	salt
and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	al	dente.	Reserve	1⁄3	cup	cooking	water,	then	drain
pasta.
2.	Meanwhile,	heat	3	tablespoons	oil,	two-thirds	of	garlic,	and	½	teaspoon	salt

in	10-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	low	heat.	Cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	garlic
foams	and	is	sticky	and	straw-colored,	about	10	minutes.	Off	heat,	add
remaining	garlic,	parsley,	lemon	juice,	pepper	flakes,	and	2	tablespoons	reserved
cooking	water.
3.	Transfer	drained	pasta	to	warm	serving	bowl.	Add	garlic	mixture,

remaining	3	tablespoons	oil,	and	remaining	reserved	cooking	water	to	pasta	and
toss	to	combine.	Season	with	salt	to	taste	and	serve	immediately,	passing
Parmesan	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Nothing	sounds	easier	than	pasta	with	olive	oil	and	garlic,	but	too	often	this
Italian	pantry	classic,	aglio	e	olio,	turns	out	oily	or	rife	with	burnt	garlic.	For
deep,	mellow	garlic	flavor,	we	cooked	most	of	the	garlic	over	low	heat;	a	modest
amount	of	raw	garlic	added	at	the	end	brought	in	some	potent	fresh	garlic	flavor.
Extra-virgin	olive	oil	and	reserved	pasta	cooking	water	helped	to	keep	our	pasta
saucy.	A	splash	of	lemon	juice	and	a	sprinkling	of	red	pepper	flakes	added	some
brightness	and	heat	to	this	simple,	yet	complex-flavored	dish.
WORK	FOR	MELLOW	GARLIC	FLAVOR	This	recipe	relies	on	a	lot	of

garlic.	The	secret	is	to	sauté	it	very	slowly	over	low	heat	for	10	minutes.	The
garlic	should	not	brown	but	become	golden.	To	do	this,	we	start	the	garlic	in	cold
oil,	as	it’s	much	easier	to	cook	it	slowly	and	therefore	prevent	the	heavy
browning	that	causes	the	garlic	to	taste	acrid	and	one-dimensional.
FINISH	WITH	FRESH	GARLIC	The	remaining	garlic	is	added	along	with

the	red	pepper	flakes	to	bloom	its	flavor	but	preserve	punch.	Adding	some	pasta
cooking	water	at	the	same	time	stops	the	cooking	process	so	that	the	garlic
doesn’t	begin	to	sauté.
USE	BOLD	SEASONINGS	Red	pepper	flakes	are	a	must	in	this	dish,	as	are

fresh	parsley,	lemon	juice,	and	coarse	salt.	Parmesan	is	optional,	but	a	great	(if
nontraditional)	addition.	Reserve	some	of	the	olive	oil	to	toss	into	the	finished
dish.	This	will	preserve	the	fruity	flavor	of	the	extra-virgin	olive	oil.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CLOUDY	WITH	A	CHANCE	OF	MUSHINESS

Cloudy	pasta	water	generally	means	the	pasta	will	be	mushy.

Cloudy	pasta	water	isn’t	necessarily	an	indication	that	you’ve	overcooked	the	noodles.	It	can	be	a	visual	cue
that	the	pasta	has	a	weak	structure	and	breaks	down	too	much	as	it	cooks,	resulting	in	a	mushy	texture.
Even	though	we	kept	a	close	eye	on	both	pots,	our	favorite	spaghetti,	from	De	Cecco,	cooked	up	firm	and
springy	and	left	the	water	relatively	clear,	while	the	low-ranking	Montebello	noodles,	boiled	for	the	same
amount	of	time,	swam	in	cloudy,	starchy	water	and	were	soft.

	
CLEARER	WATER	=FIRM	PASTA



	
CLOUDIER	WATER	=	WEAK	PASTA



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHAT	MAKES	GOOD	PASTA?

Great	pasta	texture	all	comes	down	to	the	maintenance	of	the	extruder	and	the	die,	as	well	as
the	drying	process.

When	it	comes	to	taste,	you	can’t	really	tell	the	difference	between	different	brands	of	pasta.	We	tasted	eight
top	brands	tossed	with	just	olive	oil	and	tasters	struggled	to	find	differences.	Flavor	differences	were	even
harder	to	tease	out	when	we	ran	the	same	tasting	but	tossed	each	brand	with	tomato	sauce.

Texture,	however,	was	another	matter.	None	of	the	samples	were	unacceptable,	but	regardless	of	how
vigilantly	we	tracked	their	doneness,	some	noodles	cooked	up	sticky	and	gummy,	while	the	best	spaghettis
were	springy	and	firm.	Because	these	pastas	were	made	with	100	percent	semolina,	it	couldn’t	be	the	fault
of	the	ingredients.	Could	the	way	the	dough	was	processed	also	affect	the	texture?

To	form	pasta	into	shapes,	most	dough	is	passed	through	the	holes	of	a	die.	All	dies	were	originally
made	with	bronze	blocks,	which	give	the	noodles’	surface	a	rough-hewn	appearance	that	some
manufacturers	still	prefer;	they	claim	that	sauce	clings	better	to	the	coarse,	craggy	exterior.	Meanwhile,
other	pasta	producers,	including	both	American	brands	in	our	lineup,	have	switched	to	Teflon-coated	dies,
mostly	for	cosmetic	reasons.	Because	it’s	nonstick,	Teflon	reduces	the	surface	tension	of	the	dough
extrusion	and,	as	a	result,	produces	smoother,	shinier	noodles.	We	found	that	sauce	clung	equally	well	to
noodles	made	by	both	types	of	dies—but	could	bronze	dies	be	responsible	for	producing	the	firmer	texture
we	noticed	in	some	of	the	spaghettis?	As	it	turned	out,	no.	While	our	favorite	pasta	was	produced	by	bronze
dies,	so	were	our	two	least	favorite	brands,	assailed	for	having	“mushy,”	“soft”	texture	“with	no	spring	in
the	bite.”

The	more	important	distinction	is	not	the	material	of	the	die,	but	how	well	the	extruder	and	the	die	have
been	maintained.	The	heat,	friction,	and	pressure	applied	to	the	dough	wear	down	and	loosen	the	extruder
parts	over	time.	When	this	happens,	the	machine	is	no	longer	able	to	press	the	dough	with	enough	force	to
make	perfectly	compact	strands	of	spaghetti,	and	the	texture	of	the	noodles	suffers.	Based	on	our	results,	we
could	only	assume	that	some	extruders	were	in	better	shape	than	others.

The	other	major	processing	step	is	drying	the	noodles.	Drying	times	and	temperatures	range	widely
among	brands:	Some	companies	dry	their	pasta	low	(95	to	100	degrees)	and	slow	(over	the	course	of	many
hours,	or	even	days)	in	drying	rooms,	claiming	that	it	preserves	flavor.	Others,	including	Barilla	and
Ronzoni,	place	the	noodles	in	special	ultra-high-temperature	(UHT)	ovens	and	crank	the	heat	to	190
degrees	or	higher,	which	gets	the	job	done	faster.	The	high	heat	cross-links	some	of	the	gluten	strands	and
can	strengthen	the	pasta.	But	UHT	drying	tends	to	cook	out	some	of	the	pasta’s	flavor,	an	effect	we	noticed
in	the	slightly	duller	taste	of	these	two	UHT-dried	brands.

Ultimately,	we	liked	six	of	the	eight	samples	enough	to	recommend	them.	But	one	pasta,	De	Cecco,
stood	out	for	particularly	good	texture—the	result,	we	could	only	assume,	of	balancing	all	the	variables
most	successfully.



MANIPULATING	ONION	FLAVOR	AT	WORK	
DIPS	AND	SOUPS
When	onions	caramelize,	a	complex	series	of	chemical	reactions	takes	places.
Heat	causes	water	molecules	to	separate	from	the	onions’	sugar	molecules.	As
they	cook,	the	dehydrated	sugar	molecules	react	with	each	other	to	form	new
molecules	that	produce	new	colors,	flavor,	and	aromas.	(This	is	the	same	series
of	reactions	that	occurs	when	granulated	sugar	is	heated	to	make	caramel.)	We
use	this	reaction	to	our	advantage	in	flavorful	dips	and	soups.



BACON,	SCALLION,	AND	CARAMELIZED	ONION	DIP
MAKES	ABOUT	1½	CUPS

This	recipe	uses	half	a	recipe	of	Caramelized	Onions.	Leftovers	can	be	used	in	a
number	of	dishes,	including	omelets	and	pizza.

3				 slices	bacon,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
¾				 cup	sour	cream
½				 cup	Caramelized	Onions
2				 scallions,	minced
½				 teaspoon	cider	vinegar
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Cook	bacon	in	8-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat	until	crisp,	5	to	7	minutes.
Transfer	to	paper	towel–lined	plate	and	set	aside.
2.	Combine	sour	cream,	caramelized	onions,	scallions,	vinegar,	and	bacon	in

medium	bowl.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve.	(Dip	can	be
refrigerated	for	up	to	3	days.)



CARAMELIZED	ONIONS
MAKES	1	CUP

If	the	onions	are	sizzling	or	scorching	in	step	2,	reduce	the	heat.	If	the	onions	are
not	browning	after	15	to	20	minutes,	raise	the	heat.

1				 tablespoon	unsalted	butter
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil
1				 teaspoon	packed	light	brown	sugar
½				 teaspoon	salt
2				 pounds	onions,	halved	and	sliced	through	root	end	into	¼-inch-thick	pieces
1				 tablespoon	water
					 Pepper

1.	Heat	butter	and	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	high	heat	and	stir	in
sugar	and	salt.	Add	onions	and	stir	to	coat.	Cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until
onions	begin	to	soften	and	release	some	moisture,	about	5	minutes.
2.	Reduce	heat	to	medium	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	onions	are

deeply	browned	and	slightly	sticky,	about	40	minutes	longer.
3.	Off	heat,	stir	in	water.	Season	with	pepper	to	taste.	(Onions	can	be

refrigerated	for	up	to	1	week.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Onion	dip	is	an	old	favorite,	but	we	wanted	a	recipe	that	went	beyond	stirring
powdered	onion	soup	mix	into	sour	cream	and	mayonnaise.	For	a	more	modern,
grown-up	take,	we	start	with	caramelized	onions,	which	lend	our	dip	a	sweet,
more	complex	flavor.	We	discovered	several	keys	to	making	caramelized	onions
that	weren’t	burnt,	gummy,	bland,	or	greasy.	We	incorporate	complementary
flavors	to	give	the	dip	more	heft.	Bacon	adds	a	smokiness	that	perfectly	balances
the	sweet	onions,	while	fresh	minced	scallions	reinforce	the	onion	flavor	and	add
a	touch	of	color.
PICK	THE	RIGHT	ONION	What	is	the	best	onion	to	caramelize?	We	tasted

all	types	in	caramelized	form	before	we	decided	on	our	favorite.	In	the	end,	we
prefer	yellow	onions,	which	strike	a	good	balance	between	savory	and	sweet,
with	a	mild	onion	flavor	and	beautiful	color.	Other	options	in	the	produce	aisle
are	white	onions,	Spanish	onions,	red	onions,	and	Vidalia	onions.	White	onions
were	controversial	in	the	test	kitchen—some	described	them	as	sugary	and
mellow	while	others	found	them	too	sweet	and	one-dimensional.	Spanish	onions
have	a	deep	and	complex	flavor	but	can	seem	a	bit	harsh.	Red	onions	turn	very
dark	when	caramelized	and	can	be	pleasantly	sweet	despite	their	sticky	and
jammy	consistency.	Finally,	Vidalia	onions	are	the	sweetest	sample	but	have	a
chalky	and	gummy	texture	when	caramelized.
CHOOSE	THE	RIGHT	PAN	We	tried	caramelizing	our	onions	on	top	of	the

stove,	uncovered,	in	a	regular	skillet,	a	nonstick	skillet,	and	a	Dutch	oven.	The
high	sides	of	the	Dutch	oven	encourage	condensation,	causing	the	reduction	and
caramelization	process	to	take	about	15	minutes	longer	with	no	discernible
difference	in	flavor	or	texture.	The	low-sided	skillets	caramelize	the	onions	more
quickly.	When	it	comes	to	choosing	between	regular	and	nonstick,	we	prefer	the
slippery	nonstick	surface.	This	pan	is	easier	to	clean,	and	the	flavorful	juices	do
not	cling	to	the	pan	but	are	instead	forced	to	mingle	with	the	onions.
START	HIGH	Starting	our	onions	over	high	heat	for	five	minutes	jump-starts

caramelization	by	causing	them	to	quickly	release	their	moisture.	We	then	lower
the	heat	to	medium	and	continue	to	cook	the	onions	to	a	perfect	caramel	brown.
We	add	salt	and	sugar	to	the	onions	at	the	outset	to	help	draw	moisture	out.	A
combination	of	vegetable	oil	and	butter	is	preferred	as	it	results	in	clean,	well-
defined	onion	flavor	lightly	tempered	with	the	rich	taste	of	butter.
FINISH	WITH	WATER	One	tablespoon	of	water	added	at	the	end	of

cooking	gathers	up	the	drops	of	caramelized	onion	juice	from	around	the	edges
of	the	pan	without	diminishing	the	flavor	or	texture	of	the	onions.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHEN	TO	SALT	SAUTÉED	ONIONS

Salt	onions	as	soon	as	they	go	into	the	sauté	pan.	The	salt	draws	out	moisture,	helping	them	to
cook	up	tender	and	well	seasoned.

When	is	the	best	time	to	salt	onions?	We	have	experienced	a	dilemma	in	the	test	kitchen	about	this	very
question—each	cook	has	a	different	opinion	on	the	appropriate	salting	time	when	sautéing	onions.	Putting
aside	any	preconceived	notions,	we	set	out	to	get	to	the	bottom	of	this	simple	but	vexing	issue.

We	started	by	sautéing	1	cup	of	diced	onions	in	oil	in	a	medium	skillet	over	medium	heat.	After	six
minutes	of	frequent	stirring,	the	onions	were	beautifully	golden.	After	removing	the	onions	from	the	skillet,
we	added	½	teaspoon	salt.	Tasters	loved	the	caramelized	flavor	but	commented	on	the	crunchiness	of	the
onions.	They	also	pointed	out	that	the	onions	weren’t	seasoned	throughout—only	on	the	surface.

Next,	we	kept	the	stove	on	the	same	setting	and	sautéed	a	second	cup	of	diced	onions,	this	time	adding
½	teaspoon	of	salt	at	the	outset.	After	six	minutes,	the	onions	were	not	as	brown	as	the	first	batch	had	been
so	we	cooked	them	a	few	more	minutes	until	they	were	golden	brown.	When	we	tasted	these	onions,	they
were	meltingly	tender	and	well	seasoned.	The	salt	had	drawn	out	their	liquid,	causing	them	to	soften	as	they
cooked.	But	the	liquid	also	caused	the	onions	to	brown	more	slowly,	tacking	a	few	extra	minutes	onto	the
cooking	time.	So	the	controversy	is	over:	Salt	onions	when	they	go	into	the	sauté	pan,	leaving	them	over	the
heat	for	as	long	as	necessary	for	decent	browning.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

WHY	SLOW-COOK	ONIONS?
Slow-cooking	onions	helps	to	develop	a	complex,	sweet	flavor.

Invariably,	the	first	step	in	any	soup	or	sauce	recipe	is	“Heat	oil	over	low	heat	and	cook	onions	until	soft	but
not	browned.”	But	why	not	accelerate	the	process	by	turning	up	the	heat?	And	is	“precooking”	in	oil	even
necessary?

We	made	three	batches	of	tomato	sauce	and	tasted	them	side	by	side.	In	the	first,	we	slow-cooked	the
onions	for	10	minutes	in	oil	over	low	heat	before	adding	the	tomatoes;	in	the	second,	we	cooked	the	onions
in	oil	over	high	heat	for	8	minutes;	in	the	last	batch,	we	dumped	the	onions	and	tomatoes	into	the	oil	all	at
once.

The	wisdom	of	the	ages	proved	correct:	The	sauce	with	gently	cooked	onions	was	strongly	preferred	by
the	majority	of	tasters,	who	praised	its	“rich,”	“round,	sweet	flavor.”	The	sauce	with	onions	cooked	over
high	heat	was	deemed	“sharp”	and	“flat,”	while	the	sauce	made	with	raw	onions	was	even	more	“thin-
tasting.”

Onions	contain	different	types	of	sulfur	molecules.	Chopping	and	low	heat	release	the	enzyme	alliinase,
which	zeroes	in	on	some	of	these	molecules,	breaking	them	in	half	and	producing	pungent	compounds	that,
over	time,	transform	into	sweeter-tasting	disulfides	and	trisulfides.	The	longer	the	exposure	to	low	heat,	the
more	such	molecules	are	produced—and	the	greater	complexity	the	onions	can	add	to	a	sauce.	High	heat,
on	the	other	hand,	deactivates	the	enzymes,	so	that	fewer	of	these	flavor	molecules	are	produced.

Slowly	cooking	the	raw	onions	in	oil	or	butter	is	also	important	to	better	flavor.	Cooking	onions	in	water
(or	watery	substances	like	tomatoes)	triggers	the	release	of	smelly	and	unpleasant-tasting	sulfur	compounds
(boiled	onions,	anyone?).	But	when	fat	coats	the	onions	during	cooking,	it	protects	against	the	reaction	with
water,	so	that	fewer	of	these	objectionable	molecules	can	form.	The	bottom	line:	Take	the	time	to	slow-cook
onions	in	fat.	The	added	complexity	is	worth	it.



BEST	FRENCH	ONION	SOUP
SERVES	6

Use	a	Dutch	oven	with	at	least	a	7-quart	capacity	for	this	recipe.	Sweet	onions,
such	as	Vidalia	or	Walla	Walla,	will	make	this	recipe	overly	sweet.	Use	broiler-
safe	crocks	and	keep	the	rim	of	the	bowls	4	to	5	inches	from	the	heating	element
to	obtain	a	proper	gratinée	of	melted,	bubbly	cheese.	If	using	ordinary	soup
bowls,	sprinkle	the	toasted	bread	slices	with	Gruyère	and	return	them	to	the
broiler	until	the	cheese	melts,	then	float	them	on	top	of	the	soup.

SOUP
4				 pounds	onions,	halved	and	sliced	through	root	end	into	¼-inch-thick	pieces
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	3	pieces
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 cups	water,	plus	extra	for	deglazing
½				 cup	dry	sherry
4				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 cups	beef	broth
6				 sprigs	fresh	thyme,	tied	with	kitchen	twine
1				 bay	leaf

CHEESE	CROUTONS
1				 small	baguette,	cut	into	½-inch	slices
8				 ounces	shredded	Gruyère	cheese	(2	cups)

1.	FOR	THE	SOUP:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat
oven	to	400	degrees.	Generously	spray	inside	of	Dutch	oven	with	vegetable	oil
spray.	Add	onions,	butter,	and	1	teaspoon	salt.	Cook,	covered,	for	1	hour	(onions
will	be	moist	and	slightly	reduced	in	volume).	Remove	pot	from	oven	and	stir
onions,	scraping	bottom	and	sides	of	pot.	Return	pot	to	oven	with	lid	slightly	ajar
and	continue	to	cook	until	onions	are	very	soft	and	golden	brown,	1½	to	1¾
hours	longer,	stirring	onions	and	scraping	bottom	and	sides	of	pot	after	1	hour.
2.	Carefully	remove	pot	from	oven	(leave	oven	on)	and	place	over	medium-

high	heat.	Cook	onions,	stirring	frequently	and	scraping	bottom	and	sides	of	pot,
until	liquid	evaporates	and	onions	brown,	15	to	20	minutes	(reduce	heat	to



medium	if	onions	brown	too	quickly).	Continue	to	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until
bottom	of	pot	is	coated	with	dark	crust,	6	to	8	minutes,	adjusting	heat	as
necessary.	(Scrape	any	browned	bits	that	collect	on	spoon	back	into	onions.)	Stir
in	¼	cup	water,	scraping	pot	bottom	to	loosen	crust,	and	cook	until	water
evaporates	and	pot	bottom	has	formed	another	dark	crust,	6	to	8	minutes.	Repeat
process	of	deglazing	2	or	3	more	times,	until	onions	are	very	dark	brown.	Stir	in
sherry	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	sherry	evaporates,	about	5	minutes.
3.	Stir	in	2	cups	water,	chicken	broth,	beef	broth,	thyme,	bay	leaf,	and	½

teaspoon	salt,	scraping	up	any	final	bits	of	browned	crust	on	bottom	and	sides	of
pot.	Increase	heat	to	high	and	bring	to	simmer.	Reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,	and
simmer	for	30	minutes.	Remove	and	discard	herbs	and	season	with	salt	and
pepper	to	taste.
4.	FOR	THE	CHEESE	CROUTONS:	While	soup	simmers,	arrange

baguette	slices	in	single	layer	on	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	bake	until	bread	is
dry,	crisp,	and	golden	at	edges,	about	10	minutes.	Set	aside.
5.	TO	SERVE:	Adjust	oven	rack	7	to	8	inches	from	broiler	element	and	heat

broiler.	Set	6	broiler-safe	crocks	on	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	fill	each	with	about
1¾	cups	soup.	Top	each	bowl	with	1	or	2	baguette	slices	(do	not	overlap	slices)
and	sprinkle	evenly	with	Gruyère.	Broil	until	cheese	is	melted	and	bubbly
around	edges,	3	to	5	minutes.	Let	cool	for	5	minutes	before	serving.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Onions	can	be	prepared	through	step	1,	cooled	in	pot,

and	refrigerated	for	up	to	3	days	before	proceeding	with	recipe.	Soup	can	be
prepared	through	step	3	and	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days.

QUICKER	FRENCH	ONION	SOUP

This	variation	uses	a	microwave	for	the	initial	cooking	of	the	onions,	which
dramatically	reduces	the	cooking	time.	The	soup’s	flavor,	however,	will	not	be
quite	as	deep	as	with	the	stovetop	method.	If	you	don’t	have	a	microwave-safe
bowl	large	enough	to	accommodate	all	of	the	onions,	microwave	in	a	smaller
bowl	in	2	batches.

Combine	onions	and	1	teaspoon	salt	in	large	bowl	and	cover	with	large	plate
(plate	should	completely	cover	bowl	and	not	rest	on	onions).	Microwave	for	20
to	25	minutes	until	onions	are	soft	and	wilted,	stirring	halfway	through	cooking.
(Use	oven	mitts	to	remove	bowl	from	microwave	and	remove	plate	away	from



you	to	avoid	steam.)	Drain	onions	(about	½	cup	liquid	should	drain	off)	and
proceed	with	step	2,	melting	butter	in	Dutch	oven	before	adding	wilted	onions.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	found	that	the	secret	to	a	rich	onion	soup	is	caramelizing	the	onions	a	full	2½
hours	in	the	oven	and	then	deglazing	the	pot	several	times	with	a	combination	of
water,	chicken	broth,	and	beef	broth.	For	the	classic	crouton	topping,	we	toast
the	bread	before	floating	it	in	the	soup	to	ward	off	sogginess,	and	we	sprinkle	the
toasts	with	just	a	modest	amount	of	nutty	Gruyère	to	keep	its	flavor	from
overwhelming	the	soup.
HOW	TO	SLICE	ONIONS	Onions	are	best	when	sliced	pole	to	pole,	with

the	grain.	This	way,	the	onions	have	more	presence	and	retain	some	shape.	As	in
our	Caramelized	Onions	recipe,	we	prefer	using	yellow	onions	here.	Red	onions
bleed	out	to	produce	a	dingy-looking	soup.	White	onions	are	too	mild,	and
Vidalia	onions	make	the	broth	candy-sweet.	Yellow	onions,	on	the	other	hand,
offer	just	the	sweet	and	savory	notes	we’re	after.
CARAMELIZE	IN	THE	OVEN	Our	soup	recipe	is	inspired	by	a	friend

visiting	from	France	name	Henri	Pinon.	He	patiently	cooked	3	pounds	of	onions
in	butter	over	very	low	heat	until	they	were	golden	brown	(which	took	about	90
minutes).	He	then	deglazed	the	pot	with	water	and	recaramelized	the	onions
again	over	a	dozen	times.	The	finished	soup	was	phenomenal	but	took	hours	and
hours	at	the	stove.	We	shortened	this	method	by	using	the	oven.	Four	pounds	of
onions	squeezed	into	a	Dutch	oven	and	cooked	slowly	and	evenly,	covered,	in
the	oven	effectively	build	flavor	all	the	while.	After	a	beginning	hour-long	stint
in	the	oven,	we	move	the	lid	to	be	ajar	and	finish	them	for	another	1½	to	1¾
hours.
DEGLAZE	ON	THE	STOVETOP	Most	French	onion	soup	recipes	call	for

deglazing—loosening	the	flavorful	dark	brown	crust,	or	fond,	that	forms	on	the
bottom	of	the	pot—only	once,	if	at	all.	The	secret	to	our	recipe	is	to	deglaze	the
pot	at	least	three	times.	We	do	this	on	the	stovetop.	(Be	careful:	The	pot	will	be
very	hot.)	The	stovetop	deglazing	process	will	take	45	to	60	minutes.
USE	TWO	BROTHS	While	Henri	used	only	water	for	his	broth,	we	prefer

using	both	chicken	broth	and	beef	broth	along	with	the	water.	The	broths	add
complexity,	helping	us	to	build	as	many	layers	of	flavor	as	possible.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
ODORS	BE	GONE

Remove	strong	odors	from	cutting	boards	with	baking	soda.

We	wondered	what	was	the	best	way	to	remove	strong	odors,	such	as	onion	and	garlic,	from	cutting	boards.
The	dishwasher	is	the	best	way	to	clean	plastic	cutting	boards,	but	often	you	can’t	wait	two	hours	to

reuse	a	malodorous	board.	To	find	the	best	way	to	remove	odors	without	a	dishwasher,	we	cut	a	large	onion
and	made	garlic	paste	out	of	raw	minced	garlic	on	each	of	four	cutting	boards.	When	they	were	nice	and
smelly,	we	used	a	different	odor-removal	method	on	each	board	before	immediately	washing	it	with	hot,
soapy	water:	spraying	with	a	mixture	of	1	tablespoon	of	bleach	and	1	gallon	of	water;	scrubbing	with	a
paste	of	1	tablespoon	of	baking	soda	and	1	teaspoon	of	water;	spraying	with	distilled	white	vinegar;	and
doing	nothing	more	than	washing	with	hot,	soapy	water.

After	the	boards	were	wiped	dry,	we	sliced	apples	on	each	one.	Tasters	were	required	not	only	to	taste
the	apples	for	off-flavors	but	to	sniff	the	boards	as	well.	The	results?	Only	the	baking	soda	paste–treated
cutting	board	was	odor-free;	the	other	boards	suffered	from	varying	degrees	of	sulfurous	odors	and	allium
flavors.	Tasters	were	nearly	unanimous	in	finding	the	apples	cut	on	the	baking	soda	board	“fine,”	with	“no
off-flavors.”	So	the	next	time	you	stink	up	your	cutting	board,	scrub	it	with	a	baking	soda	paste	and	follow
up	by	washing	it	with	hot,	soapy	water.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CUTTING	ONIONS	FOR	NO	MORE	TEARS

We	tested	20	common	methods	used	to	reduce	tears	while	cutting	onions.	Protective	eye	gear
turned	out	to	be	the	best.

We	compiled	more	than	20	ideas	from	reader	correspondence,	books,	and	conversations	with	colleagues	all
aimed	at	reducing	our	tears	while	cutting	onions.	Why	not	put	them	to	the	test?	Our	tests,	which	are	detailed
in	this	chart	along	with	their	results,	range	from	common	sense	to	comical.	Overall,	the	two	general
methods	that	we	found	worked	best	were	to	protect	our	eyes	or	to	introduce	a	flame	near	the	cut	onions.	The
flame,	which	can	be	produced	by	either	a	lit	candle	or	a	gas	burner,	changes	the	activity	of	sulfuric
propanethial	S-oxide	(click	here)	by	completely	oxidizing	it	and	probably	deteriorating	it	as	well.	Two
people,	intense	criers	both,	tried	each	method	several	times	and	rated	its	effectiveness	on	a	scale	of	1	to	10,
10	being	the	most	effective	and	1	being	the	least.
	
Method:	Wear	contact	lenses
Results:	Almost	no	tears	onion	after	onion,	but	useless	if	you	don’t	wear	contacts
Effectiveness:	10
	
Method:	Wear	ski	or	swimming	goggles
Results:	Very	effective,	although	it	makes	you	look	like	a	kitchen	burglar
Effectiveness:	9
	
Method:	Burn	a	candle	near	the	cutting	board
Results:	Easy	to	do,	and	it	worked	pretty	well
Effectiveness:	6.5
	
Method:	Place	cutting	board	near	a	lit	gas	burner
Results:	Worked	as	well	as	a	candle,	but	not	terribly	practical
Effectiveness:	6.5
	
Method:	Refrigerate	whole	onion	for	8	hours
Results:	Chilled	onions;	some	tears
Effectiveness:	5
	
Method:	Refrigerate	quartered	onion	for	8	hours
Results:	Even	colder	onions;	some	tears
Effectiveness:	5
	
Method:	Freeze	onions	for	30	minutes
Results:	Coldest	onions;	some	tears



Effectiveness:	5
	
Method:	Hold	a	slice	of	bread	in	your	mouth
Results:	Looked	silly;	didn’t	work	consistently
Effectiveness:	5
	
Method:	Balance	a	slice	of	onion	on	your	head
Results:	Talk	about	looking	silly,	but	since	it	forces	you	to	tilt	your	head	up,	your	eyes	are	averted	from	the
fumes	and	the	tears	do	slow	down	a	little
Effectiveness:	5
	
Method:	Hold	a	lit-and-put-out	match	in	your	teeth
Results:	Looked	silly,	but	it	worked	better	than	the	unlit	match
Effectiveness:	4
	
Method:	Slice	onions	under	a	running	faucet
Results:	Onion	slices	washed	off	the	board;	so	frustrating	the	tears	didn’t	matter
Effectiveness:	3
	
Method:	Trim	off	ends	and	microwave	for	1	minute
Results:	Onions	began	to	cook;	minor	tear	reduction
Effectiveness:	3
	
Method:	Hold	a	toothpick	in	your	teeth
Results:	Looked	silly;	we	cried	a	lot
Effectiveness:	2
	
Method:	Work	underneath	an	exhaust	fan
Results:	Not	at	all	effective	under	a	home	exhaust
Effectiveness:	2
	
Method:	Tie	a	scarf	around	nose	and	mouth
Results:	Looked	silly;	minor	tear	reduction
Effectiveness:	1
	
Method:	Soak	onions	in	ice	water	for	30	minutes
Results:	Wet	onions;	lots	of	tears
Effectiveness:	1



	
Method:	Blanch	onions	for	1	minute
Results:	Slimy	onions;	lots	of	tears
Effectiveness:	1
	
Method:	Wipe	cutting	board	with	vinegar
Results:	Vinegary	onions;	lots	of	tears
Effectiveness:	1
	
Method:	Slice	onions	next	to	a	running	faucet
Results:	Didn’t	work;	lots	of	tears
Effectiveness:	1
	
Method:	Slice	onions	in	plastic	bag	opened	at	ends
Results:	Awkward	and	dangerous	because	bag	obstructs	view;	didn’t	stop	the	tears
Effectiveness:	1
	
Method:	Hold	an	unlit	match	in	your	teeth
Results:	Looked	silly;	we	cried	a	lot
Effectiveness:	1
	
Method:	Leave	root	end	of	onion	intact
Results:	Didn’t	work
Effectiveness:	1
	



CONCEPT	32

Chile	Heat	Resides	in	Pith	and	Seeds
When	it	comes	to	cooking	with	fresh	chiles,	it	sometimes	feels	like	you’re
playing	roulette.	Who	hasn’t	mistakenly	cooked	a	dish	that’s	way	too	hot?	Chiles
add	depth	and	complexity	to	countless	dishes,	but	how	can	you	use	them	more
reliably?



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
We	admit	that	chiles	are	confusing.	Part	of	the	problem	is	the	sheer	number	of
varieties.	The	fact	that	the	same	chile	often	has	a	different	name	when	it’s	dried
doesn’t	help	either.
Chiles	are	sold	in	two	basic	forms—fresh	and	dried.	Fresh	chiles	can	range	in

color	from	green	to	red,	yellow,	or	orange.	As	with	bell	peppers,	green	chiles	are
picked	before	they	are	ripe	while	red,	orange,	and	yellow	chiles	are	picked	when
they	are	fully	matured.	Dried	chiles	are	red,	brown,	or	black.	Generally	picked
when	they,	too,	are	fully	ripe,	the	dried	versions	tend	to	have	more	concentrated
and	complex	flavors	than	fresh	chiles.
All	chiles	get	their	heat	from	a	group	of	chemical	compounds	call

capsaicinoids,	the	best	known	being	capsaicin.	Most	of	the	capsaicin	is
concentrated	in	the	inner	whitish	pith,	with	progressively	smaller	amounts	in	the
seeds	and	the	flesh	(see	Test	Kitchen	Experiment	that	follows).	When	eating
chiles,	we	have	the	ability	to	detect	a	very	small	amount	of	capsaicin—an
amount	that	can	cause	a	painful	burning	on	the	tongue	and	a	short-lived
inflammation	of	the	mouth.	We	detect	this	spiciness	in	a	manner	similar	to	the
way	we	detect	taste.	It	involves	receptors	in	the	mouth	and	is	known	as
“chemesthesis,”	or	the	perception	of	pain,	touch,	and	heat.	For	aficionados	of
spicy	foods,	of	course,	this	pain	is	often	perceived	as	pleasure.
Varieties	of	chiles	have	a	wide	range	of	heat.	Some	chile	varieties	are	10	or

even	100	times	hotter	than	others.	Even	the	same	variety	can	produce	specimens
with	a	wide	range	of	heat	levels.	Chiles	grown	in	sunny,	arid	weather	undergo	a
lot	of	stress,	and	stressed	chiles	produce	more	capsaicin	than	chiles	grown	in
temperate	climates.	In	fact,	we	measured	the	amount	of	capsaicin	and
dihydrocapsaicin,	the	two	compounds	responsible	for	the	majority	of	the	heat,	in
five	similar-looking	jalapeños	and	found	that	some	jalapeños	were	10	times
hotter	than	other	samples.	We	can	measure	this	heat	(also	called	pungency),
rating	it	in	something	called	Scoville	units,	which	were	traditionally	determined
by	extracting	the	compound	that	produces	chile	heat	with	alcohol	and	adding	it
in	tiny	drops	to	a	sugar	solution	until	the	heat	is	just	detectable	by	sensory
panelists.	Today,	more	sophisticated	analytical	instruments	are	used.
So	how	do	you	figure	out	which	chiles	are	hot	and	which	are	fairly	mild?

Forget	anything	you’ve	heard	about	appearance	being	an	indicator	of	chile	heat.
Small	chiles,	for	example,	have	no	more	heat	than	larger	ones.	And	“corking”
(the	white	striations	visible	on	the	skin	of	some	chiles)	also	has	no	correlation	to



heat.	It	helps	to	understand	the	general	traits	of	various	chile	varieties.	For
instance,	serranos	are	generally	hotter	than	jalapeños.	But	even	armed	with	this
knowledge,	be	aware	that	heat	levels	will	still	vary	considerably.



INSIDE	A	CHILE



	
FLESH	TO	CORE	A	chile’s	heat	comes	from	capsaicin,	a	chemical	compound	produced	mainly	in	the



inner	white	pith,	or	rib,	rather	than	in	the	seeds	or	flesh.	The	seeds	absorb	capsaicin	from	the	rib.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	where	most	of	the	capsaicinoids—the	chemical	compounds	that
give	their	“heat”	(or	pungency)	to	chiles	and	the	best	known	of	which	is
capsaicin—reside,	we	devised	a	simple	experiment.	Donning	rubber	gloves,	we
separated	the	outer	green-colored	flesh,	the	inner	whitish	pith	(also	known	as	the
membranes	or	ribs),	and	the	seeds	from	40	jalapeños.	We	then	sent	the	lot	to	our
food	lab.



THE	RESULTS
As	it	turned	out,	there	were	just	5	milligrams	of	capsaicin	per	kilogram	of	green
jalapeño	flesh	(not	enough	to	really	make	much	impact	on	the	human	tongue),
73	mg	per	kg	in	the	seeds,	and	an	impressive	512	mg	per	kg	in	the	pith.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	pith	is	the	hot	spot.	The	reason	the	seeds	registered	more	heat	than	the	flesh
is	simply	that	they	are	embedded	in	the	pith;	they	are	essentially	guilty—or	hot
—by	association.	If	you	want	to	carefully	mete	out	the	fire	in	salsa	or	chili,	do	it
by	means	of	the	pith.	The	seeds	will	just	be	along	for	the	ride.
Our	method	for	controlling	chile	heat	is	to	remove	the	seeds	and	ribs	from	all

fresh	chiles.	We	then	mince,	chop,	or	puree	the	colored,	fleshy	portion	of	the
chiles	and	use	them	as	directed	in	recipes.	Just	before	serving,	we	add	a	portion
of	the	seeds	and	ribs	if	we	think	the	dish	needs	more	punch.	When	working	with
dried	chiles,	we	break	off	the	stem	to	open	up	the	chiles	and	then	brush	out	the
seeds.	Dried	chiles	are	generally	quite	intense	and	we	don’t	usually	reserve	their
seeds	for	later	use.



WHERE	THE	HEAT	OF	JALAPEÑOS	RESIDES

	
Flesh:	5	mg	capsaicin	per	kg
Seeds:	73	mg	capsaicin	per	kg
Pith:	512	mg	capsaicin	per	kg



COMMON	FRESH	CHILES
For	many	cooks,	fresh	chiles	are	a	bit	of	a	mystery.	And	it’s	no	wonder:	The	same	chile	can	go	by	different
names	in	different	parts	of	the	country	and	can	range	from	green	to	red,	depending	on	when	it	was
harvested.	To	ensure	that	you’re	buying	the	chile	called	for	in	a	recipe,	it’s	a	good	idea	to	look	at	a	photo
before	shopping.	Whatever	the	variety,	you	should	choose	chiles	with	tight,	unblemished	skin	and	flesh
that’s	firm	to	the	touch.
	
POBLANO
Appearance:	Large,	triangular;	green	to	red-brown
Flavor:	Crisp,	vegetal
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Anaheim,	bell	pepper
	
ANAHEIM
Appearance:	Large,	long,	skinny;	yellow-green	to	red
Flavor:	Mildly	tangy,	vegetal
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Poblano
	
JALAPEÑO
Appearance:	Small,	smooth,	shiny;	green	or	red
Flavor:	Bright,	grassy
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Serrano
	
SERRANO
Appearance:	Small;	dark	green
Flavor:	Bright,	citrusy
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Jalapeño
	
BIRD’S	EYE
Appearance:	Narrow	and	petite;	bright	red
Flavor:	Rich,	fruity
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Serrano
	
HABANERO



Appearance:	Bulbous;	bright	orange	to	red
Flavor:	Deeply	floral,	fruity
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Double	dose	of	Thai	Bird’s	Eye



COMMON	DRIED	CHILES
Just	as	dried	fruit	has	a	more	concentrated	taste	than	its	fresh	counterpart,	chiles	gain	a	more	intense
character	when	dried.	Because	they’re	allowed	to	ripen	on	the	plant,	many	chiles	taste	sweeter	dried	than
fresh.	For	dried	chiles	with	the	best	flavor,	buy	ones	that	are	pliable	and	smell	slightly	fruity.
	
ANCHO
Appearance:	Wrinkly;	dark	red
Flavor:	Rich,	with	raisiny	sweetness
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Mulato
	
MULATO
Appearance:	Wrinkly;	deep	brown
Flavor:	Very	smoky,	with	hints	of	licorice	and	dried	cherry
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Ancho
	
CHIPOTLE
Appearance:	Wrinkly;	brownish	red
Flavor:	Smoky,	chocolaty,	with	tobacco-like	sweetness
Heat:	
Substitutions:	None
	
CASCABEL
Appearance:	Small,	round;	reddish	brown
Flavor:	Nutty,	woodsy
Heat:	
Substitutions:	New	Mexican
	
NEW	MEXICAN
Appearance:	Smooth;	brick	red
Flavor:	Slightly	acidic,	earthy
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Cascabel
	
ARBOL
Appearance:	Smooth;	bright	red
Flavor:	Bright	with	smoky	undertones



Heat:	
Substitutions:	Pequin
	
PEQUIN
Appearance:	Small,	round;	deep	red
Flavor:	Bright,	citrusy
Heat:	
Substitutions:	Arbol



CONTROLLING	CAPSAICIN	AT	WORK	
CHILIS	AND	STIR-FRIES
To	control	the	heat	of	fresh	and	dried	chiles	in	chilis	and	stir-fries,	we	remove
the	seeds,	as	well	as	the	whitish	pith	(also	called	the	ribs),	when	working	with
fresh	chiles.	The	pith	and	seeds	contain	the	majority	of	the	capsaicin,	the
compound	responsible	for	that	spicy	kick.	We	do	the	same	thing	in	our	Mexican
Rice.



WHITE	CHICKEN	CHILI
SERVES	6	TO	8

Adjust	the	heat	in	this	dish	by	adding	the	minced	ribs	and	seeds	from	the
jalapeño	as	directed	in	step	6.	If	Anaheim	chiles	cannot	be	found,	add	an
additional	poblano	and	jalapeño	to	the	chili.	Serve	this	chili	with	sour	cream,
tortilla	chips,	and	lime	wedges.

3				 pounds	bone-in	split	chicken	breasts	or	thighs,	trimmed
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil,	plus	extra	as	needed
3				 jalapeño	chiles
3				 poblano	chiles,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	large	pieces
3				 Anaheim	chiles,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	large	pieces
2				 onions,	cut	into	large	pieces
6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	ground	cumin

1½				 teaspoons	ground	coriander
2				 (15-ounce)	cans	cannellini	beans,	rinsed
3				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
3				 tablespoons	lime	juice	(2	limes)
¼				 cup	minced	fresh	cilantro
4				 scallions,	sliced	thin

1.	Season	chicken	with	1	teaspoon	salt	and	¼	teaspoon	pepper.	Heat	oil	in
Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add	chicken,	skin	side
down,	and	cook	without	moving	until	skin	is	golden	brown,	about	4	minutes.
Using	tongs,	flip	chicken	and	lightly	brown	on	other	side,	about	2	minutes.
Transfer	chicken	to	plate;	remove	and	discard	skin.
2.	While	chicken	is	browning,	remove	and	discard	ribs	and	seeds	from	2

jalapeños,	then	mince	jalapeños	and	set	aside.	Pulse	half	of	poblanos,	Anaheims,
and	onions	in	food	processor	until	consistency	of	chunky	salsa,	10	to	12	pulses,
scraping	down	bowl	halfway	through.	Transfer	mixture	to	medium	bowl.	Repeat
with	remaining	poblanos,	Anaheims,	and	onions;	combine	with	first	batch	(do
not	wash	food	processor).



3.	Pour	off	all	but	1	tablespoon	fat	from	Dutch	oven	(adding	additional
vegetable	oil	if	necessary)	and	reduce	heat	to	medium.	Add	minced	jalapeños,
chile	mixture,	garlic,	cumin,	coriander,	and	¼	teaspoon	salt.	Cover	and	cook,
stirring	occasionally,	until	vegetables	have	softened,	about	10	minutes.	Remove
pot	from	heat.
4.	Transfer	1	cup	cooked	vegetable	mixture	to	now-empty	food	processor.

Add	1	cup	beans	and	1	cup	broth	and	process	until	smooth,	about	20	seconds.
Add	vegetable-bean	mixture,	remaining	2	cups	broth,	and	chicken	breasts	to
Dutch	oven	and	bring	to	boil	over	medium-high	heat.	Reduce	heat	to	medium-
low	and	simmer,	covered,	stirring	occasionally,	until	chicken	registers	160
degrees	(175	degrees	if	using	thighs),	15	to	20	minutes	(40	minutes	if	using
thighs).
5.	Transfer	chicken	to	large	plate.	Add	remaining	beans	to	pot	and	continue	to

simmer,	uncovered,	until	beans	are	heated	through	and	chili	has	thickened
slightly,	about	10	minutes.
6.	Mince	remaining	jalapeño,	reserving	and	mincing	ribs	and	seeds,	and	set

aside.	When	cool	enough	to	handle,	shred	chicken	into	bite-size	pieces,
discarding	bones.	Stir	shredded	chicken,	lime	juice,	cilantro,	scallions,	and
remaining	minced	jalapeño	(with	seeds	if	desired)	into	chili	and	return	to
simmer.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
White	chicken	chili	is	a	fresher,	lighter	cousin	of	the	thick	red	chili	most
Americans	know	and	love.	Its	appeal	is	not	surprising.	First,	because	the	recipe
uses	chicken	rather	than	beef,	many	folks	appreciate	it	for	being	healthier.	Next,
because	there	are	no	tomatoes	to	mask	the	other	flavors,	the	chiles,	herbs,	and
spices	take	center	stage.	Unlike	red	chili,	which	uses	any	combination	of	dried
chiles,	chili	powders,	and	cayenne	pepper,	white	chicken	chili	gets	its	backbone
from	fresh	green	chiles.	We	use	bone-in,	skin-on	chicken	pieces,	three	kinds	of
chiles,	and	pureed	vegetables	to	make	our	version	filled	with	flavor	and	great
texture.
BROWN	BONE-IN	CHICKEN	When	it	came	time	to	choose	our	chicken,

we	experimented	with	ground	chicken,	chicken	thighs,	and	chicken	breasts.
Ground	chicken	was	moist	but	spongy,	thighs	were	flavorful	but	tended	to
compete	with	the	flavors	of	the	fresh	chiles,	and	boneless,	skinless	breasts
contributed	very	little	flavor	to	the	chili	at	all.	We	had	the	best	luck	with	bone-in,
skin-on	breasts	(though	thighs	came	in	a	close	second).	We	brown	them	in	the
pot	to	help	develop	fond	and	render	their	fat,	which	we	like	to	save	to	cook	with
the	aromatics	later.	Discard	the	skin	after	browning;	if	left	on,	it	will	be	soggy
and	floppy	after	stewing.
USE	THREE	CHILES	We	use	a	combination	of	poblano,	Anaheim,	and

jalapeño	chiles	in	order	to	achieve	vibrant	chile	flavor.	Jalapeños	are	small,
smooth-skinned,	forest-green	chiles	that	provide	heat	and	a	bitter,	green	bell
pepper–like	flavor.	Anaheims	are	long,	medium-green,	mildly	spicy	chiles	with
an	acidic,	lemony	bitterness.	Poblanos	are	large,	heart-shaped,	blackish-green
chiles	that	are	mild	to	medium-hot	and	pack	a	rich,	vegetal,	slightly	sweet	flavor.
PUREE	THE	VEGETABLES	When	it	comes	to	the	vegetables,	we	start	by

pulsing	the	seeded	chiles	in	a	food	processor	in	order	to	chop	them	up.	We	cook
them	along	with	the	onions,	garlic,	and	spices	in	a	covered	pot	to	help	soften
them.	Once	they’re	cooked,	we	puree	the	chiles	and	onions	(along	with	some
canned	beans	and	broth)	to	thicken	the	chili	and	to	evenly	distribute	the	chile
flavor.
POACH	THE	CHICKEN	After	we	return	the	pureed	chile-onion	mixture	to

the	pot	and	add	a	bit	more	broth,	we	poach	the	browned	chicken	in	the	liquid	and
later,	once	slightly	cooled,	we	shred	it.	The	remaining	white	beans	are	heated
through	during	this	time.
FINISH	WITH	SEASONINGS	This	chili	is	finished	with	one	more	minced



jalapeño,	with	its	ribs	and	seeds	minced	separately	and	added	to	taste,	giving	us
control	over	the	level	of	spiciness.	We	also	top	the	chili	with	lime	juice,	cilantro,
and	scallions	for	a	bright,	colorful	finish.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
KEEPING	THE	FRESHNESS	IN	FRESH	CHILES

The	best	way	to	keep	chiles	fresh	for	weeks	is	in	a	brine.

	
Fresh	chiles	like	jalapeños	and	serranos	have	a	relatively	brief	shelf	life	in	the	refrigerator.	We	tried	four
different	refrigerator	storage	methods	to	see	if	any	would	help	these	chiles	keep	their	crisp	texture	and	fresh
flavor	longer.	We	sealed	whole	chiles	in	a	plastic	bag;	left	them	loose	in	the	crisper	drawer;	sliced	them	in
half	(to	allow	liquid	to	penetrate)	and	stored	them	in	plain	white	vinegar;	and	sliced	them	in	half	and
submerged	them	in	a	brine	solution	(1	tablespoon	of	salt	per	cup	of	water).	In	both	the	bag	and	the	crisper,
the	chiles	began	to	soften	and	turn	brown	in	a	week.	Storing	in	vinegar	was	also	not	ideal;	after	about	a
week,	the	chiles	began	tasting	more	pickled	than	fresh.	The	brine-covered	chiles,	however,	retained	their
crispness,	color,	and	bright	heat	for	several	weeks	and,	after	a	quick	rinse	to	remove	excess	brine,	were
indistinguishable	from	fresh	chiles	when	we	sampled	them	raw	and	in	salsa.	After	a	month	they	began	to
soften,	but	they	remained	perfectly	usable	in	cooked	applications	for	several	more	weeks.



ULTIMATE	BEEF	CHILI
SERVES	6	TO	8

A	4-pound	chuck-eye	roast,	well	trimmed	of	fat,	can	be	substituted	for	the	steak.
Because	much	of	the	chili	flavor	is	held	in	the	fat	of	this	dish,	refrain	from
skimming	fat	from	the	surface.	Dried	New	Mexican,	mulato,	or	guajillo	chiles
make	a	good	substitute	for	the	anchos;	each	dried	arbol	may	be	replaced	with	1⁄8
teaspoon	cayenne.	If	you	prefer	not	to	work	with	any	whole	dried	chiles,	the
anchos	and	arbols	can	be	replaced	with	½	cup	of	commercial	chili	powder	and
¼	to	½	teaspoon	of	cayenne	pepper,	though	the	texture	of	the	chili	will	be
slightly	compromised.	Good	choices	for	condiments	include	diced	avocado,
finely	chopped	red	onion,	chopped	cilantro,	lime	wedges,	sour	cream,	and
shredded	Monterey	Jack	or	cheddar	cheese.

8				 ounces	(1¼	cups)	dried	pinto	beans,	picked	over	and	rinsed
					 Salt
6				 dried	ancho	chiles,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	torn	into	1-inch	pieces

2–4				 dried	arbol	chiles,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	split	into	2	pieces
3				 tablespoons	cornmeal
2				 teaspoons	dried	oregano
2				 teaspoons	ground	cumin
2				 teaspoons	cocoa

2½				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
2				 onions,	cut	into	¾-inch	pieces
3				 small	jalapeño	chiles,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
3				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 (14.5-ounce)	can	diced	tomatoes
2				 teaspoons	molasses

3½				 pounds	blade	steak,	¾	inch	thick,	trimmed	and	cut	into	¾-inch	pieces
1				 (12-ounce)	bottle	mild	lager,	such	as	Budweiser

1.	Combine	4	quarts	water,	beans,	and	3	tablespoons	salt	in	Dutch	oven	and
bring	to	boil	over	high	heat.	Remove	pot	from	heat,	cover,	and	let	stand	for	1
hour.	Drain	and	rinse	well.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.



Place	anchos	in	12-inch	skillet	set	over	medium-high	heat;	toast,	stirring
frequently,	until	flesh	is	fragrant,	4	to	6	minutes,	reducing	heat	if	chiles	begin	to
smoke.	Transfer	to	food	processor	and	let	cool.	Do	not	wash	out	skillet.
3.	Add	arbols,	cornmeal,	oregano,	cumin,	cocoa,	and	½	teaspoon	salt	to	food

processor	with	toasted	anchos;	process	until	finely	ground,	about	2	minutes.
With	processor	running,	slowly	add	½	cup	broth	until	smooth	paste	forms,	about
45	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	as	necessary.	Transfer	paste	to	small	bowl.
Place	onions	in	now-empty	processor	and	pulse	until	roughly	chopped,	about	4
pulses.	Add	jalapeños	and	pulse	until	consistency	of	chunky	salsa,	about	4
pulses,	scraping	down	bowl	as	necessary.
4.	Heat	1	tablespoon	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat.	Add	onion

mixture	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	moisture	has	evaporated	and
vegetables	are	softened,	7	to	9	minutes.	Add	garlic	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about
1	minute.	Add	chile	paste,	tomatoes,	and	molasses;	stir	until	chile	paste	is
thoroughly	combined.	Add	remaining	2	cups	broth	and	drained	beans;	bring	to
boil,	then	reduce	heat	to	simmer.
5.	Meanwhile,	heat	1	tablespoon	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat

until	shimmering.	Pat	beef	dry	with	paper	towels	and	sprinkle	with	1	teaspoon
salt.	Add	half	of	beef	and	cook	until	browned	on	all	sides,	about	10	minutes.
Transfer	meat	to	Dutch	oven.	Add	half	of	beer	to	skillet,	scraping	up	browned
bits	from	bottom	of	pan,	and	bring	to	simmer.	Transfer	beer	to	Dutch	oven.
Repeat	with	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil,	remaining	steak,	and	remaining	beer.
Stir	to	combine	and	return	mixture	to	simmer.
6.	Cover	pot	and	transfer	to	oven.	Cook	until	meat	and	beans	are	fully	tender,

1½	to	2	hours.	Let	chili	stand,	uncovered,	for	10	minutes.	Stir	well,	season	with
salt	to	taste,	and	serve.	(Chili	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	3	days.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Our	goal	in	creating	an	“ultimate”	beef	chili	was	to	determine	which	of	the
“secret	ingredients”	recommended	by	chili	experts	around	the	world	were	spot-
on—and	which	were	expendable.	We	discarded	ground	beef	for	blade	steaks,
used	a	combination	of	dried	and	fresh	chiles,	and	brined	our	beans	for	legumes
that	stayed	creamy	for	the	duration	of	cooking.
CHOOSE	YOUR	MEAT	After	deciding	to	use	diced—not	ground—beef,	we

began	by	testing	six	different	cuts	of	beef	for	our	chili:	flap	meat,	brisket,	chuck-
eye	roast,	skirt	steak,	blade	steak,	and	short	ribs.	Though	the	short	ribs	were
extremely	tender,	some	tasters	felt	that	they	tasted	too	much	like	pot	roast.	The
brisket	was	wonderfully	beefy	but	lean	and	a	bit	tough.	The	clear	winner	was
blade	steak,	favored	for	its	tenderness	and	rich	flavor.	Chuck-eye	roast	is	a	good
second	option.
BRINE	THE	BEANS	It’s	important	to	brine	your	beans	in	order	to	get	them

to	cook	quickly,	with	a	lasting	tender	and	creamy	texture	(see	concept	28).	We
use	a	quick	brine	here	because	beans	are	not	the	central	focus	and,	after	all,	the
rest	of	the	recipe	takes	a	fair	amount	of	work.	The	timing	works	out	perfectly,
though:	By	the	time	the	beans	are	done	brining	(one	hour),	the	rest	of	the	work	is
done.
SEED,	TOAST,	AND	PUREE	For	complex	chile	flavor,	we	trade	in	the

commercial	chili	powder	in	favor	of	ground	dried	ancho	and	arbol	chiles;	for	a
grassy	heat,	we	add	fresh	jalapeños.	We	toast	the	anchos	to	develop	their	flavor
and	seed	all	our	chiles	to	control	the	heat.	We	include	oregano,	cumin,	cocoa,
salt,	and	cornmeal	(which	thickens	the	chili).
ADD	FLAVOR	AND	TEXTURE	Beer	and	chicken	broth	outperformed	red

wine,	coffee,	and	beef	broth	as	the	liquid	component.	To	balance	the	sweetness
of	our	pot,	light	molasses	beat	out	other	offbeat	ingredients	(including	prunes
and	Coca-Cola).	For	the	right	level	of	thickness,	flour	and	peanut	butter	didn’t
perform	as	promised;	instead,	a	small	amount	of	ordinary	cornmeal	sealed	the
deal,	providing	just	the	right	consistency	in	our	ultimate	beef	chili.



STIR-FRIED	THAI	BEEF	WITH	CHILES	AND	SHALLOTS
SERVES	4

If	you	cannot	find	blade	steaks,	use	flank	steak.	Because	flank	steak	requires	less
trimming,	you	will	need	only	about	1¾	pounds.	To	prepare	the	flank	steak,	first
cut	the	steak	with	the	grain	into	1½-inch-wide	strips,	then	cut	the	strips	against
the	grain	into	¼-inch-thick	slices.	To	make	slicing	the	steak	easier,	freeze	it	for
15	minutes.	White	pepper	lends	this	stir-fry	a	unique	flavor;	black	pepper	is	not
a	good	substitute.	Serve	with	steamed	jasmine	rice.

BEEF	STIR-FRY
1				 tablespoon	fish	sauce
1				 teaspoon	packed	light	brown	sugar
¾				 teaspoon	ground	coriander
				1⁄8 teaspoon	ground	white	pepper
2				 pounds	blade	steak,	trimmed	and	cut	crosswise	into	¼-inch-thick	strips

SAUCE	AND	GARNISH
2				 tablespoons	fish	sauce
2				 tablespoons	rice	vinegar
2				 tablespoons	water
1				 tablespoon	packed	light	brown	sugar
1				 tablespoon	Asian	chili-garlic	sauce
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
3				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
3				 serrano	or	jalapeño	chiles,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	sliced	thin
3				 shallots,	peeled,	quartered,	and	layers	separated
½				 cup	fresh	mint	leaves,	large	leaves	torn	into	bite-size	pieces
½				 cup	fresh	cilantro	leaves
				1⁄3 cup	dry-roasted	peanuts,	chopped
					 Lime	wedges

1.	FOR	THE	STIR-FRY:	Combine	fish	sauce,	sugar,	coriander,	and	white
pepper	in	large	bowl.	Add	beef	and	toss	well	to	combine;	marinate	for	15
minutes.



2.	FOR	THE	SAUCE	AND	GARNISH:	Stir	together	fish	sauce,	vinegar,
water,	sugar,	and	chili-garlic	sauce	in	small	bowl	until	sugar	dissolves	and	set
aside.	In	second	small	bowl,	mix	garlic	and	1	teaspoon	oil	together	and	set	aside.
3.	To	prepare	stir-fry,	heat	2	teaspoons	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	high

heat	until	just	smoking.	Add	one-third	of	beef	to	skillet	in	even	layer.	Cook,
without	stirring,	until	well	browned,	about	2	minutes,	then	stir	and	continue
cooking	until	beef	is	browned	around	edges	and	no	longer	pink	in	center,	about
30	seconds.	Transfer	beef	to	medium	bowl.	Repeat	with	4	teaspoons	oil	and
remaining	meat,	in	2	batches.
4.	Reduce	heat	to	medium,	add	remaining	2	teaspoons	oil	to	skillet,	and	swirl

to	coat.	Add	serranos	and	shallots	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	beginning
to	soften,	3	to	4	minutes.	Clear	center	of	skillet,	add	garlic-oil	mixture,	and	cook,
mashing	garlic	into	pan,	until	fragrant,	15	to	20	seconds.	Stir	garlic	into	chile
mixture.	Add	fish	sauce	mixture	to	skillet,	increase	heat	to	high,	and	cook	until
slightly	reduced	and	thickened,	about	30	seconds.
5.	Return	beef	and	any	accumulated	juices	to	skillet	and	toss	well	to	combine

and	coat	with	sauce.	Stir	in	half	of	mint	and	cilantro.	Serve	immediately,
sprinkling	each	serving	with	peanuts	and	remaining	herbs,	and	passing	lime
wedges	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Traditional	Thai-style	beef	relies	on	obscure	ingredients	like	galangal,	palm
sugar,	and	dried	prawns	and	requires	hours	of	prep	plus	deep-frying.	We	wanted
to	use	easily	available	ingredients	and	spend	minimal	time	cooking.	We	settled
on	inexpensive	blade	steak,	which	offers	beefy	flavor	and	tenderness	when	fully
cooked.	With	a	marinade	made	of	fish	sauce,	white	pepper,	coriander,	and	a	little
light	brown	sugar,	the	beef	needed	to	marinate	for	only	15	minutes	to	develop
full	flavor.	To	add	heat,	we	introduced	an	easily	controlled	heat	source—Asian
chili-garlic	sauce—that	also	contributed	toasty,	garlicky	flavors.
USE	A	SALTY	MARINADE	We	replace	our	usual	stir-fry	marinade	base—

soy	sauce—with	the	equally	salty	fermented	fish	sauce	that	is	traditional	in	Thai
chile	beef.	(For	more	on	the	effect	of	salt	in	marinades,	see	concept	32.)	The	fish
sauce	simulates	the	briny	flavors	of	the	dried	shrimp	and	shrimp	paste	listed	in
many	original	recipes.	To	this,	we	add	a	little	light	brown	sugar,	coriander,	and
white	pepper,	which	is	deeply	spicy	and	penetrating,	with	a	somewhat	gamy
flavor.
STIR-FRY	WELL	As	with	all	of	our	stir-fries,	we	cook	our	ingredients	in	a

predictable	order.	First,	we	cook	the	beef	in	batches	to	maximize	browning	(see
concept	2),	then	add	the	vegetables	(in	this	case	the	chiles	and	shallots),	and
finish	with	the	garlic	(to	keep	it	from	scorching).	For	a	Thai	dish	like	this	one,
we	want	our	sauce	to	contain	salty,	sweet,	spicy,	and	sour	notes.	To	that	end	we
use	salty	fish	sauce	and	sweet	brown	sugar.	Rice	vinegar	gives	us	a	sour	note	and
the	spice	comes	from	the	chiles.	Thai	stir-fries	are	often	finished	with	fresh	herbs
(we	use	cilantro	and	mint	here)	and	something	crunchy	(we	use	peanuts).
CONTROL	THE	HEAT	We	remove	the	seeds	and	ribs	from	the	chiles	in

order	to	control	the	level	of	heat,	and	then	cut	the	chiles	into	strips.	We	add
another	layer	of	heat	to	the	mix	with	the	Asian	chile-garlic	sauce,	which
provides	a	complex	mix	of	spicy,	toasty,	and	garlicky	flavors.	The	use	of	two
types	of	heat	gives	us	the	opportunity	to	control	the	spice	level	even	more.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
DON’T	FREEZE	FRESH	CHILES

If	you	have	chiles	that	are	on	the	verge	of	spoiling,	use	them	up	or	store	them	in	a	brine.	But
don’t	bother	freezing.

In	the	test	kitchen,	we	know	that	fresh	chile	peppers	will	last	about	a	week	when	properly	stored	in	a	humid
crisper	drawer.	We	also	know	that	we	can	store	them	in	a	brine	(see	“Keeping	the	Freshness	in	Fresh
Chiles”).	The	next	question:	Could	freezing	them	prolong	their	life	even	further?	To	find	out,	we	froze
whole	jalapeños	and	poblano	chiles.	Two	weeks	later,	we	compared	batches	of	frozen	and	fresh	chiles—the
jalapeños	in	salsa,	and	the	poblanos	straight	up.	Texturewise,	the	thawed	frozen	peppers	were	markedly
inferior;	their	once-crisp	flesh	turned	mushy	and	waterlogged.	The	flavor	of	the	poblanos	had	weakened,
and	the	jalapeños’	“fresh,	grassy”	flavor	and	“building	heat”	were	all	but	gone.	Therefore,	use	up	those
chiles	before	they	go	bad	or	stick	them	in	a	brine.	Freezing	is	not	the	way	to	go.
	



CONCEPT	33

Bloom	Spices	to	Boost	Their	Flavor
Spices	are	a	mystery	to	many	American	home	cooks.	We	use	them	in	baking
recipes	like	gingerbread	but	not	so	much	in	savory	cooking,	with	the	exception
of	barbecuing	(where	spice	rubs	are	essential)	and	some	regional	cuisines	(such
as	Tex-Mex	or	Cajun).	Part	of	the	problem	is	how	we	buy	spices	(those	old	jars
of	ground	spices	in	your	pantry	probably	aren’t	very	good)	and	part	of	the
problem	is	not	understanding	how	spices	actually	work.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Spices	are	generally	berries,	plant	seeds,	roots,	or	bark.	When	dried,	their	flavor
intensifies,	and	they	can	be	sold	in	“whole”	form	or	in	powders	(called	ground
spices).	Cloves,	for	example,	are	dried	flower	buds.	They	can	be	bought	whole—
the	pungent	little	buds	are	often	used	to	flavor	roasts	or	mulled	drinks.	They	can
also	be	bought	ground	and	added	to	spice	cakes	or	cookies.
What	unites	all	spices	is	their	common	use	as	flavoring	agents.	They	have

been	used	in	cooking	for	tens	of	thousands	of	years.	But	they	were	not	viewed	as
simple	ingredients	alone:	Spices	have	long	been	hot	commodities,	highly	sought
after	and	valued	for	their	use	in	religious	rituals	and	medicine,	as	well	as
cooking.	The	desire	for	more	spices	(both	larger	quantities	and	a	greater	variety)
spurred	a	trade	system	that	began	in	the	Middle	East	around	2000	BC	and
expanded	throughout	the	world.
But	why	do	spices	have	so	much	flavor?	The	flavor	of	spices	comes	mainly

from	their	aroma,	which	we	detect	from	the	volatile	molecules	they	release	into
the	air.	Spices	have	a	high	proportion	of	these	flavor	molecules,	which	is	why
they	are	incredibly	potent—in	fact,	spices	in	their	naked	form	are	almost
impossible	to	ingest	alone.
Most	spices	glean	their	flavors	from	a	host	of	different	flavor	compounds,	the

mixture	giving	them	character	and	complexity.	Take	black	peppercorns.	Their
unique	taste	and	aroma	come	from	volatile	oils	called	terpenes,	which	contribute
notes	of	turpentine,	clove,	and	citrus;	and	pyrazines,	which	provide	earthy,
roasty,	green	vegetable	aromas.	Peppercorns	also	contain	the	heat-bearing
compound	piperine,	which	provides	that	familiar	sharp	bite	and	has	the	added
effect	of	perking	up	our	tastebuds.
Spices	generally	fall	into	three	categories:	those	with	water-soluble	flavor

compounds,	those	with	fat-soluble	flavor	compounds,	and	those	that	form	new
flavor	molecules	when	exposed	to	dry	heat	alone.	This	means	that	flavors	able	to
dissolve	into	water	are	better	able	to	penetrate	meat	via	brinerades	(see	concept
13),	while	those	able	to	dissolve	into	fat	can	do	much	more	in	oil-based
marinades	(like	the	one	used	for	Spanish-Style	Garlic	Shrimp).	Other	spices
benefit	simply	from	toasting	in	a	dry	skillet.	(Click	here	for	more	on	individual
spices.)	But	what	really	makes	a	difference	in	the	flavor	(and	intensity	of	flavor)
of	spices	is	the	way	we	use	heat.
We	can	directly	apply	heat	to	spices,	as	when	we	toast	spices	or	when	the

spice	rub	applied	to	the	outside	of	a	cut	of	meat	hits	the	grill.	Toasting	a	spice



whole	brings	its	aromatic	oils	to	the	surface,	contributing	to	a	stronger,	more
complex	aroma.	Toasting	certain	spices	like	cumin	and	coriander	also	brings
about	Maillard	reactions	(see	concept	2)	between	sugars	and	amino	acids,
producing	potent	flavor	molecules	such	as	pyrazines.	We	find	it’s	best	to	toast
spices	before	grinding	them,	as	grinding	releases	moisture	and	aromatic	oils	into
the	air,	subsequently	leaving	the	spice	with	less	to	give	when	toasted.
We	can	also	cook	spices	in	fat,	a	process	called	blooming.	This	works	for

spices	that	are	fat-soluble	and	intensifies	the	flavors	of	both	ground	and	whole
spices.	(We	usually	discard	the	pungent	whole	spices	before	the	dish	is	served.)
When	we	bloom	spices,	the	fat-soluble	flavor	molecules	are	released	from	a
solid	state	into	solution	form,	where	they	mix	and	interact,	thereby	producing	an
even	more	complex	flavor.	Like	most	substances,	these	flavor	molecules
dissolve	faster	and	to	a	greater	extent	in	a	hot	solvent	(such	as	fat	or	oil)	than	a
cold	one.	But	be	careful:	If	the	oil	or	butter	is	too	hot,	the	spices	can	scorch.



WHEN	SPICES	ARE	BLOOMED



	
IN	HOT	OIL	When	fat-soluble	spices	are	heated	in	oil,	many	of	their	flavor	compounds	are	released	into



the	surrounding	solution,	heightening	the	flavors	of	both	the	spices	and	the	oil.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
In	order	to	determine	whether	blooming	spices	and	some	herbs	in	oil	(as
opposed	to	just	water)	truly	produces	more	flavorful	results,	we	designed	the
following	experiment:	We	steeped	50	grams	of	crushed	red	pepper	flakes
separately	in	100	grams	of	canola	oil	and	100	grams	of	water,	both	held	at	a
constant	200	degrees,	for	20	minutes.	We	then	strained	out	the	pepper	flakes	and
tasted	the	water	and	oil	on	white	rice.	We	also	sent	samples	of	the	water	and	oil
to	an	independent	lab	to	test	for	capsaicin	content	(the	compound	responsible
for	the	heat	in	pepper	flakes)	using	a	technique	called	high-performance	liquid
chromatography	(HPLC).	Finally,	we	repeated	the	test	with	thyme	leaves	and
measured	the	concentration	of	their	main	flavor	compound,	thymol,	to
demonstrate	the	effect	of	oil	blooming	on	woody	herbs.	We	repeated	this	test
three	times.



THE	RESULTS
First	up,	the	taste	results.	For	both	the	pepper	flakes	and	thyme,	the	oil	infusion
was	far	more	flavorful	than	the	water	sample	when	tasted	on	plain	white	rice.
There	was	no	contest,	and	the	lab	provided	the	numbers	to	prove	it.	The	pepper
flake–infused	water	registered	an	average	of	1113	Scoville	Heat	Units	(SHU),
while	the	pepper-infused	oil	doubled	that	number	at	2233	SHU.	The	results	for
thyme	were	even	more	dramatic:	The	water	contained	19.4	parts	per	million
(ppm)	of	thymol,	a	tenth	as	much	as	the	thyme-infused	oil	with	an	average	of
197	ppm	of	thymol.



THE	TAKEAWAY
While	we	used	some	heavy	science	to	quantify	our	experiment,	the	takeaway	is	a
no-brainer.	For	more	flavor,	many	spices	(and	some	herbs)	should	be	bloomed	in
oil.	This	requires	no	extra	work.	Simply	add	the	spices	(or	herbs)	to	the	fat	in	the
pan	before	the	liquid	goes	into	the	pot.	For	instance,	when	making	chili,	let	the
spices	cook	with	the	onions	and	garlic	before	adding	the	liquid,	rather	than
adding	the	spices	along	with	the	liquid	as	many	recipes	do.
And	what	are	some	other	ways	we	accentuate	the	flavor	of	spices?	Grinding,

for	one.	Buying	whole	spices	and	then	grinding	them	ourselves	keeps	them
fresher	longer	and	intensifies	their	aroma	and	taste.	If	you	buy	already	ground
spices,	be	sure	to	replace	them	every	year	(whole	spices	retain	their	flavor	for	up
to	two	years).	In	addition	to	blooming,	we	also	toast	spices	in	a	dry	pan.	The
heat	brings	the	spice’s	aromatic	oils	to	the	surface.



MEASURING	FLAVOR	COMPOUNDS	WHEN	SPICES	ARE	BLOOMED
IN	WATER	VS.	OIL

	
*Capsaicin	was	tested	for	using	HPLC	and	reported	in	Scoville	Heat	Units	(SHU).

**Thymol	was	tested	for	using	HPLC	and	reported	in	parts	per	million	(ppm).



SPICE	BLOOMING	AT	WORK	
CHILIS,	CURRIES,	DRY	RUBS,	AND	MORE
Blooming	spices	before	incorporating	them	into	a	dish	is	an	easy	step	that	helps
to	draw	out	maximum	aroma,	boosts	flavor,	and	brings	our	finished	dishes	up	to
the	next	level.	Here,	we	bloom	spices	in	chili,	curry,	blackened	fish,	and	pepper-
crusted	steaks.



SIMPLE	BEEF	CHILI	WITH	KIDNEY	BEANS
SERVES	8	TO	10

Good	choices	for	condiments	include	diced	fresh	tomatoes,	diced	avocado,
sliced	scallions,	finely	chopped	red	onion,	minced	fresh	cilantro,	sour	cream,
and/or	shredded	Monterey	Jack	or	cheddar	cheese.	If	you	are	a	fan	of	spicy	food,
consider	using	a	little	more	of	the	red	pepper	flakes	or	cayenne—or	both.	The
flavor	of	the	chili	improves	with	age;	if	possible,	make	it	the	day	before	you	plan
to	serve	it.

2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
2				 onions,	chopped	fine
1				 red	bell	pepper,	stemmed,	seeded,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
6				 garlic	cloves,	minced
¼				 cup	chili	powder
1				 tablespoon	ground	cumin
2				 teaspoons	ground	coriander
1				 teaspoon	red	pepper	flakes
1				 teaspoon	dried	oregano
½				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
2				 pounds	85	percent	lean	ground	beef
2				 (15-ounce)	cans	red	kidney	beans,	rinsed
1				 (28-ounce)	can	diced	tomatoes,	drained	with	juice	reserved
1				 (28-ounce)	can	tomato	puree
					 Salt
					 Lime	wedges

1.	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat	until	shimmering	but	not
smoking.	Add	onions,	bell	pepper,	garlic,	chili	powder,	cumin,	coriander,	pepper
flakes,	oregano,	and	cayenne	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	vegetables	are
softened	and	beginning	to	brown,	about	10	minutes.	Increase	heat	to	medium-
high	and	add	half	of	beef.	Cook,	breaking	up	pieces	with	spoon,	until	no	longer
pink	and	just	beginning	to	brown,	3	to	4	minutes.	Add	remaining	beef	and	cook,
breaking	up	pieces	with	spoon,	until	no	longer	pink,	3	to	4	minutes.
2.	Add	beans,	tomatoes,	tomato	puree,	and	½	teaspoon	salt;	bring	to	boil,	then

reduce	heat	to	low	and	simmer,	covered,	stirring	occasionally,	for	1	hour.



Remove	cover	and	continue	to	simmer	for	1	hour	longer,	stirring	occasionally	(if
chili	begins	to	stick	to	bottom	of	pot,	stir	in	½	cup	water	and	continue	to
simmer),	until	beef	is	tender	and	chili	is	dark,	rich,	and	slightly	thickened.
Season	with	salt	to	taste.	Serve	with	lime	wedges	and	condiments,	if	desired.
(Chili	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days.)

BEEF	CHILI	WITH	BACON	AND	BLACK	BEANS
Cook	8	slices	bacon,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces,	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium	heat,
stirring	frequently,	until	browned,	about	8	minutes.	Pour	off	all	but	2	tablespoons
fat,	leaving	bacon	in	pot.	Substitute	bacon	fat	in	Dutch	oven	for	vegetable	oil
and	canned	black	beans	for	canned	kidney	beans.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
With	the	goal	of	developing	a	no-fuss	chili	that	would	taste	far	better	than	the
sum	of	its	parts,	we	discovered	that	adding	the	chili	powder	to	the	pan	with	the
aromatics	boosted	its	potency.	We	enhanced	the	flavor	with	additional	spices	and
chose	beef	without	too	much	(or	too	little)	fat.	Cooking	the	chili	with	the	lid	on
for	half	the	simmering	time	resulted	in	a	rich,	thick	consistency.
ADD	SPICES	EARLY	Unlike	our	Ultimate	Beef	Chili	recipe,	this	chili	is	the

definition	of	simple.	And	to	get	great	flavor	from	easily	accessible	ingredients,
we	have	to	take	steps	to	get	the	most	mileage	from	jarred	spices.	Many	chili
recipes	call	for	the	spices	to	be	added	after	the	beef	has	been	browned,	but	we
knew	that	sometimes	ground	spices	taste	better	when	they	get	direct	contact	with
the	cooking	oil.	We	tested	this	by	cooking	three	pots	of	chili—one	with	the
ground	spices	added	before	the	beef,	one	with	the	spices	added	after	the	beef,
and	a	third	in	which	we	toasted	the	spices	in	a	separate	dry	skillet	and	added
them	to	the	pot	after	the	beef.	The	batch	made	with	spices	added	after	the	beef
tasted	weak.	The	batch	made	with	the	spices	toasted	in	a	separate	pan	was	better,
but	in	this	case	toasting	the	spices	subdued	the	flavor	because	some	of	the
volatile	flavor	molecules	vaporized.	The	clear	favorite	was	the	batch	made	with
spices	added	directly	to	the	pot	before	the	meat.	In	fact,	the	best	results	come
with	the	spices	added	at	the	outset	of	cooking	to	develop	their	fat-soluble	flavors
fully	through	the	power	of	blooming.
HELP	THE	CHILI	POWDER	Commercial	chili	powder	is	typically	80

percent	ground	dried	red	chiles	with	the	rest	a	mix	of	garlic	powder,	onion
powder,	oregano,	ground	cumin,	and	salt.	To	boost	flavor,	we	increase	the
amount	of	chili	powder	from	the	typical	recipe,	add	more	cumin	and	oregano,
and	toss	in	some	cayenne.	The	trio	of	aromatics—onions,	red	bell	pepper,	garlic
—helps,	too.
LEAN,	BUT	NOT	TOO	LEAN	We	tried	using	beef	with	different	levels	of

fat	for	this	chili.	Pools	of	orange	oil	floated	to	the	top	of	the	chili	made	with
ground	chuck	(80	percent	lean	beef).	At	the	other	end	of	the	spectrum,	the	chili
made	with	90	percent	lean	beef	was	a	tad	bland—not	bad,	but	not	as	full-
flavored	as	the	chili	made	with	85	percent	lean	beef,	our	final	choice.	Be	sure
not	to	overbrown	the	beef	when	you	add	it	to	the	pot—it	will	get	tough	if	you
brown	it	too	much.	Just	cook	until	it	loses	its	raw	pink	color.
TWO	TOMATOES	We	tried	batches	of	chili	made	with	water	(too	watery),

chicken	broth	(too	chicken-y	and	dull),	beef	broth	(too	metallic),	wine	(too
acidic),	and	no	liquid	at	all	except	for	that	in	the	tomatoes	(beefy-tasting	and	by



far	the	best).	When	we	tried	beer,	we	were	surprised	to	find	that	it	subdues	that
great	beefy	flavor.	Tomato	puree	gives	the	chili	body,	and	diced	tomatoes	give	it
heft.
DON’T	WAIT	ON	BEANS	Most	chili	recipes	add	beans	toward	the	end	of

cooking,	the	idea	being	to	let	them	heat	through	without	causing	them	to	fall
apart.	But	this	method	often	makes	for	beans	that	are	bland	orbs	floating	in	a	sea
of	highly	flavorful	chili.	We	prefer	adding	the	beans	along	with	the	tomatoes.
The	more	time	the	beans	spend	in	the	pot,	the	better	they	taste.



INDIAN	CURRY	WITH	POTATOES,	CAULIFLOWER,	PEAS,	AND
CHICKPEAS
SERVES	4	TO	6

This	curry	is	moderately	spicy	when	made	with	one	chile.	For	more	heat,	use	the
larger	amount	of	chiles.	For	a	mild	curry,	do	not	add	the	chile’s	ribs	and	seeds.
(For	more	on	chiles,	see	concept	32.)	The	onions	can	be	pulsed	in	a	food
processor.	You	can	substitute	2	teaspoons	of	ground	coriander,	½	teaspoon	of
pepper,	¼	teaspoon	of	ground	cardamom,	and	¼	teaspoon	of	ground	cinnamon
for	the	garam	masala.	In	addition	to	the	suggested	condiments,	serve	with
Simple	Rice	Pilaf	and	plain	whole-milk	yogurt.

2				 tablespoons	sweet	or	mild	curry	powder
1½				 teaspoons	garam	masala
1				 (14.5-ounce)	can	diced	tomatoes
¼				 cup	vegetable	oil
2				 onions,	chopped	fine
12				 ounces	red	potatoes,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	grated	fresh	ginger

1–1½				 serrano	chiles,	stemmed,	seeds	reserved,	minced
1				 tablespoon	tomato	paste
½				 head	cauliflower	(1	pound),	cored	and	cut	into	1-inch	florets
1				 (15-ounce)	can	chickpeas,	rinsed

1¼				 cups	water
					 Salt

1½				 cups	frozen	peas
¼				 cup	heavy	cream	or	coconut	milk

CONDIMENTS
					 Onion	Relish	(recipe	follows)
					 Cilantro-Mint	Chutney	(recipe	follows)

1.	Toast	curry	powder	and	garam	masala	in	small	skillet	over	medium-high
heat,	stirring	constantly,	until	spices	darken	slightly	and	become	fragrant,	about



1	minute.	Transfer	to	small	bowl	and	set	aside.	Pulse	tomatoes	in	food	processor
until	coarsely	chopped,	3	to	4	pulses.
2.	Heat	3	tablespoons	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until

shimmering.	Add	onions	and	potatoes	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until
onions	are	caramelized	and	potatoes	are	golden	brown	on	edges,	about	10
minutes.	(Reduce	heat	to	medium	if	onions	darken	too	quickly.)
3.	Reduce	heat	to	medium.	Clear	center	of	pot	and	add	remaining	1	tablespoon

oil,	garlic,	ginger,	serrano,	and	tomato	paste	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until
fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Add	reserved	toasted	spices	and	cook,	stirring
constantly,	about	1	minute.	Add	cauliflower	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until
spices	coat	florets,	about	2	minutes	longer.
4.	Add	tomatoes,	chickpeas,	water,	and	1	teaspoon	salt.	Increase	heat	to

medium-high	and	bring	mixture	to	boil,	scraping	bottom	of	pot	with	wooden
spoon	to	loosen	browned	bits.	Cover	and	reduce	heat	to	medium.	Simmer
briskly,	stirring	occasionally,	until	vegetables	are	tender,	10	to	15	minutes.
5.	Stir	in	peas	and	cream	and	continue	to	cook	until	heated	through,	about	2

minutes.	Season	with	salt	to	taste,	and	serve	immediately,	passing	condiments
separately.



ONION	RELISH
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP

If	using	a	regular	yellow	onion,	increase	the	sugar	to	1	teaspoon.

1				 Vidalia	onion,	diced	fine
1				 tablespoon	lime	juice
½				 teaspoon	sugar
½				 teaspoon	paprika
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
					 Pinch	cayenne	pepper

Combine	all	ingredients	in	medium	bowl.	(Relish	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	1
day.)



CILANTRO-MINT	CHUTNEY
MAKES	ABOUT	1	CUP

2				 cups	fresh	cilantro	leaves
1				 cup	fresh	mint	leaves
				1⁄3 cup	plain	whole-milk	yogurt
¼				 cup	finely	chopped	onion
1				 tablespoon	lime	juice

1½				 teaspoons	sugar
½				 teaspoon	ground	cumin
¼				 teaspoon	salt

Process	all	ingredients	in	food	processor	until	smooth,	about	20	seconds,
scraping	down	sides	of	bowl	halfway	through.	(Chutney	can	be	refrigerated	for
up	to	1	day.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Vegetable	curries	can	be	complicated	affairs,	with	lengthy	ingredient	lists	and
fussy	techniques	meant	to	compensate	for	the	lack	of	meat.	We	wanted	a	curry
we	could	make	on	a	weeknight	in	less	than	an	hour—without	sacrificing	flavor
or	overloading	the	dish	with	spices.	Toasting	store-bought	curry	powder	in	a
skillet	turned	it	into	a	flavor	powerhouse,	and	a	few	pinches	of	garam	masala
added	even	more	spice	flavor.
TOAST	AND	BLOOM	We	toast	curry	powder	and	garam	masala—which

includes	such	warm	spices	as	black	pepper,	cinnamon,	coriander,	and	cardamom
—in	a	dry	skillet	to	explode	their	flavors	for	this	curry.	Why	is	toasting	so
beneficial?	When	added	to	a	simmering	sauce,	the	spices	can	be	heated	to	only
212	degrees.	In	a	dry	skillet,	temperatures	can	exceed	500	degrees,	heightening
flavors	exponentially.	(But	be	aware	that	you	can	overdo	the	toasting	and	burn
the	spices.)	Curry	powder	and	garam	masala	likewise	benefit	from	an	initial	dry
toasting	because	the	heat	induces	the	formation	of	Maillard	reaction	products,
which	greatly	boost	flavor.	(These	reactions	do	not	occur	as	readily	when	the
spices	are	bloomed	in	oil.)	Add	the	toasted	spices	to	the	pot	with	the	onions	and
aromatics	so	that	the	spices	can	bloom	even	further	in	the	added	oil.
SUPERCHARGE	THE	BASE	As	the	onions	caramelize	with	the	other

ingredients,	fond	(flavorful	dark	bits)	develops	in	the	bottom	of	the	pan,
mimicking	the	phenomenon	that	occurs	when	browning	meat.	We	add	garlic,
ginger,	and	a	minced	fresh	chile	for	heat.	Tomato	paste,	though	inauthentic,	adds
sweetness,	helps	browning,	and	even	gives	us	a	meaty	flavor	(see	concept	35).
BROWN	THE	POTATOES	Potatoes	can	be	bland.	We	like	them	oven-

roasted	but	that	takes	time;	we	found	we	could	brown	them	along	with	the
onions.	We	wondered	if	we	could	intensify	the	flavor	of	the	other	vegetables	as
well.	An	Indian	cooking	method	called	bhuna	involves	sautéing	the	spices	and
main	ingredients	together	to	enhance	and	meld	flavors.	This	technique	works
well	with	the	cauliflower	used	in	this	recipe,	helping	to	develop	a	richer,	more
complex	flavor.	This	method	also	works	with	other	sturdy	vegetables,	including
green	beans	and	eggplant.
ADD	LIQUID	A	combination	of	water	and	pureed	canned	tomatoes,	along

with	a	splash	of	cream	or	coconut	milk,	allows	the	delicate	vegetables	and
fragrant	spices	to	shine.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
PURCHASING	SPICES

Buy	spices	whole	and	grind	them	at	home.

How	should	we	purchase	spices?	In	most	cases,	purchasing	whole	spices	and	grinding	them	is	preferable	to
buying	ground	spices.	Whole	spices	have	a	longer	shelf	life	(about	twice	that	of	ground	spices),	and	most
fresh-ground	spices	also	have	superior	aroma	and	taste.	Black	pepper	is	one	spice	we	never	buy	preground.
As	soon	as	peppercorns	are	cracked,	they	begin	losing	the	volatile	compounds	that	give	them	their	bold
aroma	and	subtle	flavor;	soon	enough,	all	that’s	left	is	the	more	stable,	nonvolatile	piperine,	which	gives
that	sensation	of	“hotness”	but	little	else.	Whether	whole	or	ground,	spices	should	be	bought	in	the	smallest
quantities	available.	It	also	pays	to	check	the	expiration	date.



GRILLED	BLACKENED	RED	SNAPPER
SERVES	4

Striped	bass,	halibut,	or	grouper	can	be	substituted	for	the	snapper;	if	the	fillets
are	thicker	or	thinner	than	¾	inch,	they	will	have	slightly	different	cooking	times.
Serve	the	fish	with	lemon	wedges	or	Rémoulade	(recipe	follows).

2				 tablespoons	paprika
2				 teaspoons	onion	powder
2				 teaspoons	garlic	powder
¾				 teaspoon	ground	coriander
¾				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
¼				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
¼				 teaspoon	white	pepper
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
4				 (6-to	8-ounce)	red	snapper	fillets,	¾	inch	thick

1.	Combine	paprika,	onion	powder,	garlic
powder,	coriander,	salt,	pepper,	cayenne,
and	white	pepper	in	bowl.	Melt	butter	in
10-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat.	Stir	in
spice	mixture	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,
until	fragrant	and	spices	turn	dark	rust
color,	2	to	3	minutes.	Transfer	mixture	to
pie	plate	and	let	cool	to	room	temperature.
Use	fork	to	break	up	any	large	clumps.
2A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light



large	chimney	starter	three-quarters	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(4½	quarts).
When	top	coals	are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	evenly	over	half	of	grill.	Set
cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid	vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,
about	5	minutes.
2B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.
3.	Clean	cooking	grate,	then	repeatedly	brush	grate	with	well-oiled	paper

towels	until	black	and	glossy,	5	to	10	times.
4.	Meanwhile,	pat	fillets	dry	with	paper	towels.	Using	sharp	knife,	make

shallow	diagonal	slashes	every	inch	along	skin	side	of	fish,	being	careful	not	to
cut	into	flesh.	Place	fillets	skin	side	up	on	large	plate.	Using	your	fingers,	rub
spice	mixture	in	thin,	even	layer	on	top	and	sides	of	fish.	Flip	fillets	over	and
repeat	on	other	side	(you	should	use	all	of	spice	mixture).	Refrigerate	until
needed.
5.	Place	fish	skin	side	down	on	grill	(hot	side	if	using	charcoal)	with	fillets

diagonal	to	grate.	Cook	until	skin	is	very	dark	brown	and	crisp,	3	to	5	minutes.
Carefully	flip	fish	and	continue	to	cook	until	dark	brown	and	beginning	to	flake
and	center	is	opaque	but	still	moist,	about	5	minutes	longer.	Serve.



RÉMOULADE
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	GRILLED	BLACKENED	RED	SNAPPER

The	rémoulade	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	three	days.

½				 cup	mayonnaise
1½				 teaspoons	sweet	pickle	relish
1				 teaspoon	hot	sauce
1				 teaspoon	lemon	juice
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	parsley
½				 teaspoon	capers,	rinsed
½				 teaspoon	Dijon	mustard
1				 small	garlic	clove,	minced
					 Salt	and	pepper

Pulse	all	ingredients	in	food	processor	until	well	combined	but	not	smooth,
about	10	pulses.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Transfer	to	serving	bowl.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Blackened	fish	is	usually	prepared	in	a	cast-iron	skillet,	but	it	can	lead	to	a
relentlessly	smoky	kitchen.	We	thought	we’d	solve	this	issue	by	throwing	our	fish
on	the	grill,	but	this	introduced	a	host	of	new	challenges,	including	curled	fillets
that	stuck	to	the	grill	and	spices	that	tasted	raw	and	harsh.	Scoring	the	skin	of
our	fish,	cleaning	our	grill	thoroughly,	and	creating	a	rich	spice	rub	gives	us	a
well-cooked	red	snapper	dish	with	a	great	crust	and	the	proper	depth	and
richness	of	flavor.
MAKE	BLACKENING	RUB	After	sampling	six	store-bought	Cajun	spice

rubs,	we	found	that	mixing	our	own	delivers	superior	results.	We	add	coriander,
which	can	take	the	heat	and	gives	the	spice	rub	a	bright	floral	note.	We	also	use
garlic	and	onion	powders,	and	sweet	paprika,	cayenne	pepper,	black	pepper,
white	pepper,	and	salt.
BLOOM	IN	BUTTER	Yes,	the	spices	will	get	plenty	of	heat	on	the	grill.	But

sautéing	them	in	butter	releases	additional	flavors;	they	turn	several	shades
darker	(bright	red	to	dark,	rusty	brown)	and	you	can	smell	the	difference.	After
they	cool,	we	break	apart	the	clumps	and	apply	a	thin	layer	to	the	fish.	By	the
time	the	fish	is	cooked,	the	spices	are	blackened.
FLATTEN	FILLETS	Skin-on	fillets	will	buckle	when	grilled	because	the

skin	shrinks	back,	pulling	the	flesh	along	with	it.	The	fillets	remain	flat	if	the
skin	is	scored	first,	which	prevents	it	from	contracting	more	quickly	than	the
flesh.	Use	a	sharp	knife	to	make	shallow	slits	in	the	skin	before	applying	the	rub,
and	make	sure	not	to	cut	too	deep,	into	the	flesh.
CATCH	AND	RELEASE	Blackening	fish	indoors	makes	no	sense	at	home;

you	don’t	have	enough	ventilation.	We	bring	our	recipe	out	to	the	grill.	But	to
prevent	the	fish	from	sticking	to	the	grill,	we	have	to	take	some	preventive
measures.	First,	we	chill	the	fish.	At	room	temperature,	the	fillets	will	become
floppy	and	will	stick	more	readily	to	the	grill.	Second,	we	heat	the	grill,	scrape
the	grate	clean	with	a	brush,	and	wipe	it	with	oil-dipped	paper	towels	at	least
five	times,	until	the	grates	are	black	and	glossy.	To	cook,	place	the	fish	diagonal
to	the	grill	grate	with	skin	side	facing	down.	And	to	flip?	Slide	one	spatula
underneath	the	fillet	to	lift,	while	using	another	to	help	support	the	fish	as	it’s
flipped.



PEPPER-CRUSTED	FILETS	MIGNONS
SERVES	4

To	crush	the	peppercorns,	spread	half	of	them	on	a	cutting	board,	place	a	skillet
on	top,	and,	pressing	down	firmly	with	both	hands,	use	a	rocking	motion	to	crush
the	peppercorns	beneath	the	“heel”	of	the	skillet.	Repeat	with	the	remaining
peppercorns.	While	heating	the	peppercorns	in	oil	tempers	much	of	their
pungent	heat,	this	recipe	is	still	pretty	spicy.	If	you	prefer	a	very	mild	pepper
flavor,	drain	the	cooled	peppercorns	in	a	fine-mesh	strainer	in	step	1,	toss	them
with	5	tablespoons	of	fresh	oil,	add	the	salt,	and	proceed.	Serve	with	Blue
Cheese	and	Chive	Butter	(recipe	follows).

5				 tablespoons	black	peppercorns,	crushed
5				 tablespoons	plus	2	teaspoons	olive	oil
1				 tablespoon	kosher	salt
4				 (7-to	8-ounce)	center-cut	filets	mignons,	1½	to	2	inches	thick

1.	Heat	peppercorns	and	5	tablespoons	oil	in	small	saucepan	over	low	heat
until	faint	bubbles	appear.	Continue	to	cook	at	bare	simmer,	swirling	pan
occasionally,	until	pepper	is	fragrant,	7	to	10	minutes.	Remove	from	heat	and	set
aside	to	cool.	When	mixture	is	room	temperature,	add	salt	and	stir	to	combine.
Rub	steaks	with	oil	and	pepper	mixture,	thoroughly	coating	top	and	bottom	of
each	steak	with	peppercorns.	Cover	steaks	with	plastic	wrap	and	press	gently	to
make	sure	peppercorns	adhere;	let	stand	at	room	temperature	for	1	hour.
2.	Meanwhile,	adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position,	place	baking	sheet	on	oven

rack,	and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	When	oven	reaches	450	degrees,	heat
remaining	2	teaspoons	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until	just
smoking.	Place	steaks	in	skillet	and	cook,	without	moving,	until	dark	brown
crust	has	formed,	3	to	4	minutes.	Using	tongs,	turn	steaks	and	cook	until	well
browned	on	second	side,	about	3	minutes.	Transfer	steaks	to	hot	baking	sheet	in
oven.	Roast	until	meat	registers	115	to	120	degrees	(for	rare),	120	to	125	degrees
(for	medium-rare),	or	130	to	135	degrees	(for	medium),	3	to	7	minutes.	Transfer
steaks	to	wire	rack	and	let	rest,	tented	loosely	with	aluminum	foil,	for	5	minutes
before	serving.



BLUE	CHEESE	AND	CHIVE	BUTTER
MAKES	ABOUT	½	CUP,	ENOUGH	FOR	1	RECIPE	PEPPER-CRUSTED	FILETS	MIGNONS

1½				 ounces	(¼	cup)	mild	blue	cheese,	room	temperature
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives

Combine	all	ingredients	in	medium	bowl.	While	steaks	are	resting,	spoon	1	to	2
tablespoons	butter	onto	each	one.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Black	peppercorns	can	give	mild-tasting	filet	mignon	a	welcome	flavor	boost.
But	they	can	also	create	a	punishing	blast	of	heat.	For	pepper-crusted	filets
mignons	with	a	crust	that	wouldn’t	overwhelm	the	meat,	we	mellowed	the
peppercorns’	heat	by	gently	simmering	them	in	olive	oil.
REVERSE	ENGINEER	In	this	recipe	we’re	using	the	same	principles	of

blooming	to	convert	the	natural	irritant	in	peppercorns	(piperine)	into	more
complex,	less	harsh	flavor	molecules.	This	means	that	we’re	increasing	overall
flavor	and	complexity,	while	reducing	the	level	of	heat.	How?	As	peppercorns
age,	the	piperine	is	converted	into	closely	related	molecules	(called	isomers)	that
have	different	flavor	characteristics	and	that	are	less	irritating	to	the	nose	and
throat.	Left	sitting	at	room	temperature	in	your	cupboard,	the	peppercorns	may
take	months	to	undergo	this	reaction,	but	the	hot	oil	serves	as	a	catalyst,	driving
the	conversion	at	hundreds	of	times	its	natural	speed,	as	well	as	vaporizing	some
of	the	piperine,	quickly	tempering	the	pepper’s	pungency.	As	a	bonus,	piperine
and	its	isomers	are	oil-soluble,	so	that	during	the	simmer	some	of	the	remaining
pepper	heat	and	flavor	leach	out	of	the	peppercorns	into	the	surrounding	oil.	This
oil	can	then	be	discarded	to	further	reduce	the	heat	of	the	dish.
COAT	AND	PRESS	We	use	a	two-step	process	to	create	a	well-browned	and

attractive	pepper	crust:	First,	we	rub	the	raw	steaks	with	a	paste	of	the	cooked
cracked	peppercorns,	oil,	and	salt;	then	we	press	the	paste	into	each	steak	using	a
sheet	of	plastic	wrap	to	ensure	it	stays	put.	The	paste	not	only	adds	flavor	to	the
meat	but	also	draws	out	the	meat’s	own	beefy	flavor.	Adding	salt	to	the	rub
makes	it	easy	to	season	the	steaks	at	the	same	time	the	crust	is	applied.	The	one-
hour	rest	gives	the	salt	time	to	do	its	work	(see	concept	12).
SEAR,	THEN	ROAST	Here	we	sear	the	steaks	in	order	to	get	them	to	brown

and	become	flavorful	(see	concept	2)	and	then	let	them	finish	cooking	in	the
oven	on	a	preheated	baking	sheet	(see	concept	5).	This	is	partly	to	ensure	even
cooking	of	the	steaks,	but	also	to	limit	the	time	the	pepper	crust	is	being	seared
—you	don’t	want	it	to	burn.
REST	AND	SAUCE	Be	sure	to	let	the	steaks	rest	before	serving	(concept	3).

If	you	like,	spoon	the	compound	Blue	Cheese	and	Chive	Butter	over	the	steaks
as	they	rest.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
DON’T	TOAST	YOUR	PEPPERCORNS

Black	pepper	loses	its	characteristic	bite	when	toasted.

We	often	recommend	toasting	whole	spices	before	grinding	them	to	intensify	their	taste,	but	what	about
black	pepper?	We	took	two	batches	of	Kalustyan’s	(our	favorite	brand	of	peppercorns);	toasted	one	in	a	dry
skillet	and	left	the	other	alone;	and	tasted	each	plain,	ground	over	scrambled	eggs,	and	crushed	and	pan-
seared	in	steak	au	poivre.	The	untoasted	pepper	won	every	test.	While	tasters	noted	that	the	flavor	of	the
toasted	pepper	was	smokier,	it	lacked	the	pungency	of	the	untoasted	pepper.	This	is	because	pepper’s
piquancy	comes	from	a	volatile	molecule	called	piperine.	When	pepper	is	heated,	piperine	is	converted	to
less	pungent	molecules	(called	isomers).	Without	piperine,	pepper	has	no	bite,	and	without	bite,	pepper	has
no	purpose.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
COMMON	SPICES	AND	HOW	TO	USE	THEM

It	can	be	difficult	to	keep	all	the	spices	in	your	cupboard	straight.	Knowing	their	solubility	and
the	best	way	to	buy	them	can	help.

Spice:	Cardamom
Best	to	buy:	Whole
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Whole	cardamom	consists	of	a	green	seed	pod	that	holds	about	20	small	black	seeds.	Since	the
flavor	resides	in	the	seeds,	it	is	necessary	to	crush	whole	pods	before	using	them.
	
Spice:	Cayenne	Pepper
Best	to	buy:	Ground
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Originally	made	from	cayenne	peppers,	this	spice	is	now	made	from	a	variety	of	ground	dried
chiles.	Cayenne	pepper	is	rich	with	volatile	oils,	making	it	susceptible	to	flavor	loss	within	a	few	months.
	
Spice:	Chili	Powder
Best	to	buy:	Ground
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Because	chili	powder	is	a	blend	of	spices	(generally	80	percent	ground	dried	chiles	with	garlic
powder,	oregano,	and	cumin),	it	should	be	bloomed	in	hot	oil	to	bring	out	its	complex	flavors.
	
Spice:	Cinnamon
Best	to	buy:	Ground
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Cinnamon	is	one	of	the	few	spices	we	prefer	to	buy	ground.	Save	whole	cinnamon	sticks	for
infusing	flavor	into	hot	liquids.
	
Spice:	Cloves
Best	to	buy:	Ground
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Cloves	are	potent	and	should	be	used	sparingly.	Because	whole	cloves	are	difficult	to	grind,	we
buy	them	ground.	Reserve	whole	cloves	for	infusing	flavor	into	hot	liquids	(that	include	fat	or	alcohol,	in
which	cloves	are	soluble)	or	for	inserting	into	ham.
	
Spice:	Coriander
Best	to	buy:	Whole
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Coriander	is	the	seed	of	the	plant	that	produces	the	herb	cilantro.	Coriander	is	sold	whole	and



ground,	but	whole	seeds	provide	a	more	vibrant,	complex	flavor.	Toasting	whole	coriander	seeds	helps	to
release	their	aroma.
	
Spice:	Cumin
Best	to	buy:	Whole
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Cumin	is	the	highly	aromatic	spice	that	comes	from	a	plant	in	the	parsley	family.	If	time
allows,	we	like	to	toast	whole	cumin	seeds	and	then	grind	them;	this	gives	the	spice	a	more	complex
peppery	flavor	than	when	purchased	ground.
	
Spice:	Curry	Powder
Best	to	buy:	Ground
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Curry	powder	is	a	blend	of	spices.	Most	formulas	include	cardamom,	chiles,	cumin,	fennel,
fenugreek,	nutmeg,	and	turmeric,	which	gives	curry	its	characteristic	yellow	color.	For	general	cooking,	we
prefer	a	mild	curry	powder;	hot	curry	powder,	which	contains	more	chiles,	can	be	overpowering.	Curry
should	be	sautéed	in	hot	oil	to	bloom	its	flavor.
	
Spice:	Nutmeg
Best	to	buy:	Whole
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Nutmeg	is	the	dried	seedlike	kernel	of	an	evergreen	tree.	It	loses	its	aroma	when	ground,	so	it’s
best	to	buy	whole	nutmegs	and	grate	them	when	needed.	Just	keep	in	mind	that	a	little	goes	a	long	way.
	
Spice:	Paprika
Best	to	buy:	Ground
Soluble	in:	Oil
How	to	use:	Paprika	is	a	fine	powder	made	by	grinding	dried	red	peppers.	We	prefer	the	complexity	of
sweet	paprika,	especially	brands	from	Hungary	and	Spain,	which	have	a	slightly	fuller	flavor	than	domestic
varieties.
	
Spice:	Saffron
Best	to	buy:	Whole
Soluble	in:	Water	and	Oil
How	to	use:	Saffron,	the	world’s	most	expensive	spice,	is	the	hand-harvested	stigma	of	a	type	of	crocus.	To
release	flavor,	crush	saffron	threads	with	your	fingers	before	adding	them	to	a	dish.	Use	sparingly;	too	much
will	impart	a	metallic	taste.



CONCEPT	34

Not	All	Herbs	Are	for	Cooking
Herbs	often	mean	the	difference	between	a	good	dish	and	a	great	one.	Sure,
sometimes	they	serve	little	purpose,	like	when	they’re	used	as	a	garnish	on	a
restaurant	plate.	But	they	shouldn’t	be	an	afterthought.	Herbs	play	a	critical	role
in	the	kitchen	in	many	dishes,	and	knowing	how	to	handle	them	is	key.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Herbs	are	plants	or	parts	of	plants	used	in	cooking	to	add	flavor	rather	than
substance.	Basil,	rosemary,	parsley,	and	oregano	might	all	grow	in	the	same
patch	in	your	garden	but	in	the	kitchen	these	herbs	require	different	treatment.
We	think	it	helps	to	divide	the	world	of	herbs	into	two	camps.
Some	herbs	have	a	hearty,	almost	woody	texture.	The	leaves	are	sturdy	and

the	stems	can	be	tough.	This	group	includes	rosemary,	oregano,	sage,	thyme,	and
marjoram.	In	addition,	these	herbs	are	quite	potent.	A	little	bit	goes	a	long	way.
For	these	reasons,	these	herbs	are	best	cooked.	They	often	go	into	the	pot	along
with	the	aromatics.	Cooking	gives	these	herbs	time	to	soften	and	permeate	a	dish
with	their	flavors.	These	herbs	are	potent	enough	that	dried	forms	are	acceptable
in	long-simmering	dishes	like	soups,	stews,	and	chili.
Other	herbs	have	a	delicate	leafy	texture.	The	stems	are	tender,	even	edible.

This	group	includes	basil,	parsley,	cilantro,	dill,	mint,	chives,	and	tarragon.
These	herbs	are	subject	to	wilting	and	discoloration.	Also,	it	often	requires	a
significant	amount	of	these	herbs	to	have	an	impact	on	a	dish.	You	can	easily
finish	a	pound	of	pasta	with	several	tablespoons	of	minced	parsley,	but	do	the
same	thing	with	oregano	and	the	effect	is	overwhelming.	For	these	reasons,	these
herbs	are	best	used	to	finish	dishes	or	used	raw	in	sauces.	While	heartier	herbs
are	still	good	to	use	when	dried,	delicate	herbs	like	parsley	lose	much	of	their
oomph.
Why	the	difference	in	flavor	and	flavor	duration	in	these	herbs?	The	principal

flavor	compounds	in	herbs	and	spices	can	be	divided	into	a	few	categories:
hydrocarbons,	aldehydes,	ketones,	and	phenols.	The	flavor	of	most	herbs	and
spices	is	due	to	a	combination	of	these	classes	of	molecules,	although	a	few	of
them	owe	their	flavor	to	just	one	or	two	dominant	compounds.	The	heartiness	of
an	herb	or	spice	is	dependent	on	the	volatility	or	stability	of	its	flavor
compounds.	The	delicate	herbs	lose	flavor	compounds	during	cooking	or	drying.
The	flavor	of	dill,	for	example,	is	lost	because	a	number	of	its	aroma
compounds,	such	as	the	hydrocarbon	phellandrene,	are	not	stable	under	the
conditions	of	cooking	and	drying.	In	contrast,	the	dominant	flavor	compounds	in
oregano	are	relatively	nonvolatile,	chemically	stable	phenols,	such	as	carvacrol
and	thymol,	while	rosemary	contains	the	stable	ketones	cineole	and	camphor.
Thus,	the	hearty	herbs	contain	“hardy”	flavor	compounds,	while	the	delicate
herbs	contain	“delicate”	compounds.
The	flavors	of	fresh	herbs	are	transmitted	in	a	few	ways.	Chopping	is	one.	The



knife	ruptures	the	herb’s	cells,	releasing	flavor	molecules.	Bruising,	or	muddling,
is	another.	Heating	is	the	third	way.	We	cook	heartier	herbs	so	they	release	their
flavors	over	a	long	period	of	time.	Delicate	herbs	are	best	added	at	the	end.



COOKING	WITH	HEARTY	AND	DELICATE	HERBS



	
HEARTY	HERBS	Heartier	herbs	like	rosemary	and	oregano	have	more	stable	flavor	compounds	that



remain	in	the	dish	when	cooked.



	
DELICATE	HERBS	Delicate	herbs	like	basil,	parsley,	and	cilantro	contain	volatile	flavor	compounds	that



quickly	disperse	when	cooked.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
Dried	herbs	are	more	convenient	to	use	than	fresh	because	they	require	no	more
prep	than	a	twist	of	the	lid.	Some	cooks	swear	by	the	convenience	of	dried	herbs.
Others	refuse	to	use	dried	herbs—ever.	We	decided	to	look	into	the	matter	more
thoroughly	and	purchased	fresh	and	dried	versions	of	basil,	chives,	dill,	oregano,
parsley,	rosemary,	sage	(in	coarsely	crumbled,	rubbed,	and	ground	forms),
tarragon,	and	thyme.	Then	we	cooked	our	way	through	24	recipes	(including
marinades,	sauces,	and	braises),	making	each	with	fresh	and	dried	herbs	and
comparing	differences	in	flavor.



THE	RESULTS
In	all	but	one	application,	fresh	herbs	were	preferred	over	dry.	A	common
criticism	of	dried	herbs	was	that	they	tasted	“dusty”	and	“stale,”	while	fresh
herbs	tasted	“clean”	and	“bright.”	Many	of	the	subtleties	and	nuances	of	fresh
herbs	seemed	to	be	lost	with	drying.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	good	news	is	that	there	were	a	few	instances	in	which	some	dried	herbs
were	passable,	mainly	in	recipes	involving	fairly	long	cooking	times	(20	minutes
plus)	and	a	good	amount	of	moisture.	Chili	stood	out	as	the	one	dish	that	was
better	when	made	with	a	dried	herb	(oregano)	than	with	fresh.	Dried	rosemary,
sage,	and	thyme	also	fared	reasonably	well	in	some	applications.	In	other	tests,
we	found	that	dried	bay	leaf	and	marjoram	will	work	just	fine	in	similar
preparations.	The	flavor	compounds	in	these	herbs	are	relatively	stable	at	high
temperatures,	helping	them	maintain	their	flavor	even	through	the	drying
process.	Those	herbs	that	we	unofficially	classify	as	delicate	(basil,	chives,	dill,
parsley,	and	tarragon)	seemed	to	have	lost	most	of	their	flavor	when	dried;	we
preferred	fresh	forms	of	these	herbs	in	every	test.
There	is	sometimes	the	misconception	that	dried	herbs	are	less	potent	than

fresh.	But	depending	on	the	variety,	fresh	herb	leaves	are	80	to	90	percent	water.
With	drying,	water	is	lost	and,	consequently,	so	are	weight	and	volume.	The
volatile	essential	oils	that	give	an	herb	its	characteristic	flavor	and	aroma	are	left
closer	to	the	surface.	Because	of	this	water	loss,	ounce	for	ounce,	dried	herbs	are
more	potent	than	fresh.	Our	testing—in	which	we	used	only	newly	purchased
jars	of	herbs—indicated	that	using	1	part	dried	herb	to	3	parts	fresh	came	closest
to	producing	flavors	of	equal	strength.	However,	if	the	herb	is	ground,	like	sage,
1	part	dried	ground	to	4	parts	fresh	was	the	more	suitable	ratio.
If	using	dried	herbs,	keep	in	mind	that	the	flavorful	oils	should	be	released

before	the	herbs	are	added	to	the	food.	Place	the	dried	herbs	in	a	mesh	strainer
and	push	down	on	them	with	your	fingertips	as	you	shake	the	strainer	back	and
forth	over	a	bowl.	And	don’t	forget:	In	all	recipes	that	use	herbs	raw	(like	pesto)
or	to	finish	a	dish,	you	must	use	fresh	herbs—no	substitutions	will	work.



SIZING	UP	HERBS
Types	of	herbs:	Rosemary,	Thyme
Whole	leaves	per	½	ounce:	½	cup
Finely	minced	leaves	per	½	ounce:	2–2½	tablespoons
	
Types	of	herbs:	Basil,	Cilantro,	Dill,	Mint,	Parsley,	Tarragon
Whole	leaves	per	½	ounce:	¾	cup
Finely	minced	leaves	per	½	ounce:	3	tablespoons
	
Type	of	herb:	Chives
Whole	leaves	per	½	ounce:	No	whole	leaves
Finely	minced	leaves	per	½	ounce:	4	tablespoons
	
Types	of	herbs:	Marjoram,	Oregano,	Sage
Whole	leaves	per	½	ounce:	¾	cup
Finely	minced	leaves	per	½	ounce:	5	tablespoons



MILDER	HERBS	AT	WORK	
SAUCES
We	use	milder	herbs	to	add	fresh,	bright	flavor	to	dishes	throughout	this	book.
For	more	recipes,	see	Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with	Chimichurri	Sauce,	Hearty
Minestrone,	and	French	Potato	Salad	with	Dijon	Mustard	and	Fines	Herbes.



CLASSIC	BASIL	PESTO
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	1	POUND	OF	PASTA

Basil	usually	darkens	in	homemade	pesto,	but	you	can	boost	the	green	color	a
little	by	adding	the	optional	parsley.	Pecorino	Romano	cheese	gives	the	pesto	a
sharper	flavor	than	Parmesan.	When	adding	pesto	to	cooked	pasta	it	is
important	to	include	3	or	4	tablespoons	of	the	pasta	cooking	water	for	proper
consistency	and	even	distribution.

3				 garlic	cloves,	unpeeled
¼				 cup	pine	nuts
2				 cups	fresh	basil	leaves
2				 tablespoons	fresh	parsley	leaves	(optional)
7				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
					 Salt	and	pepper
¼				 cup	finely	grated	Parmesan	cheese	or	Pecorino	Romano	cheese

1.	Toast	garlic	in	8-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat,	shaking	pan	occasionally,
until	softened	and	spotty	brown,	about	8	minutes;	when	cool	enough	to	handle,
remove	and	discard	skins.	While	garlic	cools,	toast	nuts	in	now-empty	skillet
over	medium	heat,	stirring	often,	until	golden	and	fragrant,	4	to	5	minutes.
2.	Place	basil	and	parsley,	if	using,	in	1-gallon	zipper-lock	bag.	Pound	bag

with	flat	side	of	meat	pounder	or	rolling	pin	until	all	leaves	are	bruised.
3.	Process	garlic,	nuts,	herbs,	oil,	and	½	teaspoon	salt	in	food	processor	until

smooth,	about	1	minute,	scraping	down	bowl	as	needed.	Transfer	mixture	to
small	bowl,	stir	in	Parmesan,	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	(Pesto	can
be	refrigerated	for	up	to	3	days	in	bowl	with	plastic	wrap	or	thin	layer	of	oil
covering	surface.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Our	goal	in	developing	our	pesto	was	to	heighten	the	basil	and	subdue	the	garlic
flavors	so	that	each	major	element	balanced	the	other.	We	started	with	plenty	of
fresh	basil	and	pounded	to	bruise	it	and	release	flavorful	oils.	To	tame	the	raw
garlic	edge,	we	toasted	it,	toasting	the	nuts	as	well	to	give	them	more	intense
flavor.	And	we	used	a	food	processor	to	combine	the	ingredients	in	our	pesto
quickly	and	easily.
TOAST	THE	GARLIC	The	biggest	problem	with	most	pesto	recipes	is	an

abundance	of	garlic	flavor.	It’s	harsh	and	bitter.	But	if	you	don’t	use	enough
garlic,	the	sauce	lacks	oomph.	Toasting	is	a	guaranteed	way	to	control	the	garlic
flavor;	you	bring	out	its	sweetness	and	dial	back	the	harshness	(see	concept	31).
To	do	this,	leave	the	peel	on	the	garlic	and	cook	in	a	dry	skillet	until	spotty
brown.	Once	the	garlic	cools,	remove	the	skin	to	reveal	cloves	that	have	been
lightly	cooked.
TOAST	THE	NUTS,	TOO	Toasting	nuts	brings	out	their	aromatic	oils,

contributing	to	a	stronger,	more	complex	flavor	and	aroma.	If	you	decide	to	toast
more	than	the	requisite	¼	cup	for	this	recipe—more	than	1	cup—oven-toast	the
nuts	on	a	roomy,	rimmed	baking	sheet.	The	oven	offers	not	only	more	space	than
a	skillet	but	also	more	even	heat	than	the	stove,	with	less	need	for	stirring.
BRUISE	THE	HERBS	Bruising	the	herbs	is	an	important	step	for	this	pesto

because	it	releases	the	basil’s	full	range	of	herbal	and	anise	flavor	notes	in	a	way
that	the	chopping	action	of	the	food	processor	alone	cannot	accomplish.	Bruising
the	basil	leaves	in	a	zipper-lock	bag	with	a	meat	pounder	helps	to	make	for	a
mellow,	full-tasting	pesto.
ADD	PARSLEY	TO	KEEP	THE	PESTO	GREEN	A	little	parsley	doesn’t

really	affect	flavor,	but	it	can	help	keep	basil	fresh-looking.
USE	EXTRA-VIRGIN	OLIVE	OIL	In	raw	sauces	like	pesto,	or	Salsa	Verde

(recipe	follows),	you	can	really	taste	the	oil	used.	Therefore,	this	isn’t	the	place
to	skimp.	Use	the	good	stuff	for	the	best	flavor.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
STORING	BASIL

The	best	way	to	store	basil	is	wrapped	in	a	damp	paper	towel,	in	an	unsealed	zipper-lock	bag,
in	the	refrigerator.

When	making	pesto,	storing	leftover	basil	won’t	be	an	issue—the	large	bunches	available	at	the
supermarket	will	be	easily	used	up.	But	what	about	those	occasions	when	only	two	or	three	leaves	are
needed	to	season	a	dish?	We	wondered	how	long	we	could	keep	leftover	basil	and	what	would	be	the	best
way	to	store	it.

Since	leaving	basil	out	on	the	counter	wasn’t	an	option	(it	wilted	within	hours)	we	were	stuck	with
refrigerator	storage,	which	is	about	15	degrees	colder	than	the	recommended	temperature	for	basil.	We
tested	storing	basil	in	unsealed	zipper-lock	bags	(to	prevent	buildup	of	moisture,	which	can	cause	basil	to
turn	black),	both	plain	and	wrapped	in	damp	paper	towels	(our	preferred	method	for	most	leafy	greens).
After	three	days	in	the	refrigerator,	both	samples	were	still	green	and	perky.	But	after	one	week,	only	the
towel-wrapped	basil	still	looked	and	tasted	fresh.	Don’t	be	tempted	to	rinse	basil	until	just	before	you	need
to	use	it;	when	we	performed	the	same	tests	after	rinsing,	the	shelf	life	was	decreased	by	half.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BRIGHTER,	GREENER	PESTO

To	prevent	darkening	basil	and	a	drab-looking	pesto,	blanch.

To	find	out	if	pesto	can	be	prevented	from	darkening	by	blanching	the	basil	before	adding	it	to	the	food
processor,	we	made	two	batches	of	pesto:	one	with	fresh	basil	and	one	with	blanched	leaves.	The	pesto
made	with	fresh	basil	started	to	darken	as	soon	as	we	scooped	it	out	of	the	food	processor,	but	the	blanched
batch	stayed	bright	green	even	after	sitting	for	a	few	hours	on	the	counter.	When	we	sampled	the	sauces,
tasters	found	them	virtually	identical	in	flavor.	After	an	entire	week	in	the	refrigerator,	the	blanched-basil
pesto	was	still	a	brilliant	green,	as	was	a	sample	that	we	froze	for	three	weeks	and	then	thawed.

Here’s	why	blanching	works:	Cutting,	processing,	or	bruising	releases	enzymes	within	the	basil	leaf	that
promote	rapid	oxidation,	darkening	its	bright	green	color.	Blanching	(dunking	the	leaves	in	boiling	water
for	20	to	30	seconds,	then	plunging	them	into	ice	water)	inactivates	those	enzymes,	so	the	color	holds	fast.

If	you’re	making	a	limited	quantity	of	pesto	to	use	right	away,	blanching	is	hardly	worth	the	trouble.	But
if	you’re	transforming	a	bumper	crop	into	a	year’s	worth	of	pesto,	the	process	will	ensure	vivid	color	that
lasts.

	
BLANCHED	=	BRIGHT



	
UNBLANCHED	=	DULL



SALSA	VERDE
MAKES	1½	CUPS

Salsa	verde	is	excellent	with	grilled	or	roasted	meats,	fish,	or	poultry;	poached
fish;	boiled	or	steamed	potatoes;	or	sliced	tomatoes.	It	is	also	good	on
sandwiches.	This	recipe	can	be	easily	cut	in	half.

2–3				 slices	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	lightly	toasted	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	(1½	cups)
1				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil
¼				 cup	lemon	juice	(2	lemons)
4				 cups	parsley	leaves	(2	bunches)
¼				 cup	capers,	rinsed
4				 anchovy	fillets,	rinsed
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
¼				 teaspoon	salt

Process	bread,	oil,	and	lemon	juice	in	food	processor	until	smooth,	about	10
seconds.	Add	parsley,	capers,	anchovies,	garlic,	and	salt	and	pulse	until	finely
chopped	(mixture	should	not	be	smooth),	about	5	pulses.	Transfer	to	serving
bowl.	(Salsa	verde	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days.)

LEMON-BASIL	SALSA	VERDE
Replace	2	cups	parsley	with	2	cups	fresh	basil	leaves,	increase	garlic	to	2

cloves,	and	add	1	teaspoon	grated	lemon	zest.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Despite	its	innate	simplicity,	salsa	verde	can	easily	go	wrong.	In	fact,	many	of
the	recipes	we	tested	were	overly	potent	and	harsh,	leaving	tasters	with	puckered
lips	and	raging	garlic	breath.	The	texture	was	problematic,	too;	all	of	those	first
salsas	separated	into	pools	of	oil	and	clumps	of	parsley.	Processing	chunks	of
toasted	bread	with	oil	and	lemon	juice—not	vinegar—in	a	food	processor
created	a	smooth	base.	We	then	added	the	remaining	ingredients:	anchovies	for
a	touch	of	complexity,	capers	for	brininess,	a	little	garlic	for	bite,	and	parsley	to
make	the	sauce	“verde.”	For	a	variation,	we	replaced	half	of	the	parsley	with
fragrant	basil.
PICK	FLAT-LEAF	PARSLEY	Some	parsley	is	curly,	some	is	flat.	What’s

the	difference?	Though	curly	and	flat-leaf	parsley	have	the	same	Latin	name
—Petroselinum	crispum—they	are	far	from	identical.	Curly	parsley	is	the	old-
fashioned	corsage	propped	up	next	to	your	steak,	a	flouncy	garnish.	Beyond	that
—being	practically	flavorless—it’s	not	much	use.	Even	so,	restaurants	often
favor	curly	parsley	for	chopping	because	its	upright	carriage	and	drier	nature
make	the	going	easier.	Flat-leaf,	on	the	other	hand,	with	its	big	green	flavor,
deserves	the	same	culinary	status	of	any	fresh	herb.	Salsa	verde	depends	on	it.
So	shop	wisely:	Go	for	the	big	taste,	forget	the	frills.
TOAST	YOUR	BREAD	Bread	buffers	some	of	the	strong	flavors	of	this

salsa	and	helps	to	make	the	sauce	less	puckery.	Also,	processing	bread	with	the
oil	and	lemon	juice	gives	the	sauce	a	smoother	texture	and	keeps	the	oil	from
separating	into	pools.	Airy,	moist	breads	produce	gummy	sauces,	however.	The
ideal	choice	is	firm,	dry	bread	with	a	tight	crumb.	But	don’t	go	out	and	buy
bread	just	for	salsa	verde.	Fifteen	seconds	in	the	toaster	will	dry	out	even	the
squishiest	of	breads.
ADD	SOUR	AND	SALTY	Among	olives,	capers,	cornichons,	and

combinations	thereof,	capers	alone	were	the	top	choice	for	their	salty,	pungent
bite.	As	for	the	acidic	component,	fresh	lemon	juice	narrowly	won	out	over	an
array	of	vinegars.	The	lemon	juice	nicely	accents	the	fresh,	clean	flavor	of	the
parsley.	Lemon	juice	is	also	less	harsh	than	most	vinegars.	The	anchovy	fillets
are	mandatory,	adding	a	welcome	complexity	(but	not	fishiness)	to	the	sauce.



HEARTIER	HERBS	AT	WORK	
SAUCES	AND	INFUSED	OILS
Heartier	herbs	stand	up	to	long	cooking	and	can	be	effectively	infused	into	oils.
We	use	herbs	like	oregano	and	rosemary	in	other	recipes	throughout	this	book,
like	Hearty	Tuscan	Bean	Stew,	Cuban	Black	Beans	and	Rice,	and	Inexpensive
Grill-Roasted	Beef	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary.



MARINARA	SAUCE
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	1	POUND	OF	PASTA

Chianti	or	Merlot	work	well	for	the	dry	red	wine.	We	like	a	smoother	marinara,
but	if	you	prefer	a	chunkier	sauce,	give	it	just	three	or	four	pulses	in	the	food
processor	in	step	4.

2				 (28-ounce)	cans	whole	tomatoes
3				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1				 onion,	chopped	fine
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	oregano	or	½	teaspoon	dried
				1⁄3 cup	dry	red	wine
3				 tablespoons	chopped	fresh	basil
					 Salt	and	pepper
					 Sugar

1.	Pour	tomatoes	and	juice	into	strainer	set	over	large	bowl.	Open	tomatoes
with	hands	and	remove	and	discard	seeds	and	fibrous	cores;	let	tomatoes	drain
excess	liquid,	about	5	minutes.	Remove	¾	cup	tomatoes	from	strainer	and	set
aside.	Reserve	2½	cups	tomato	juice	and	discard	remainder.
2.	Heat	2	tablespoons	oil	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium	heat	until

shimmering.	Add	onion	and	cook	until	softened	and	lightly	browned,	5	to	7
minutes.	Stir	in	garlic	and	oregano	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.
3.	Stir	in	strained	tomatoes	and	increase	heat	to	medium-high.	Cook,	stirring

often,	until	liquid	has	evaporated,	tomatoes	begin	to	stick	to	bottom	of	pan,	and
brown	fond	forms	around	pan	edges,	10	to	12	minutes.	Stir	in	wine	and	cook
until	thick	and	syrupy,	about	1	minute.	Stir	in	reserved	tomato	juice,	scraping	up
any	browned	bits.	Bring	to	simmer	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	sauce	is
thick,	8	to	10	minutes.
4.	Transfer	sauce	and	reserved	tomatoes	to	food	processor	and	pulse	until

slightly	chunky,	about	8	pulses.	Return	sauce	to	now-empty	skillet,	stir	in	basil
and	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil,	and	season	with	salt,	pepper,	and	sugar	to	taste.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	a	multidimensional	marinara	sauce	that	would	take	less	than	an	hour	to
prepare,	we	chose	canned	whole	tomatoes.	We	added	flavor	by	browning	the
tomatoes	and	included	a	minced	onion	and	red	wine.	We	cooked	hearty	dried
oregano	to	draw	out	its	flavor	but	saved	delicate	fresh	basil	for	the	finish.
COOK	OREGANO	WITH	AROMATICS	We	add	the	oregano	with	the

garlic	to	bloom	its	flavor,	similar	to	the	way	we	handle	spices.	(See	concept	33.)
Oregano	is	a	hearty	herb,	able	to	survive	the	longer	cooking	time	of	this	sauce.
This	recipe	works	with	either	fresh	or	dried	oregano.	(For	more	on	dried	herbs,
see	Test	Kitchen	Experiment.)
DRAIN	AND	BROWN	THE	TOMATOES	Crushed,	pureed,	and	diced

tomatoes	offer	the	ultimate	ease	in	sauce	making:	Open	can,	dump	contents	into
pan.	But	all	three	options	have	downsides.	Pureed	tomatoes	go	into	the	can
already	cooked,	which	imparts	a	stale,	flat	flavor	to	the	final	sauce.	Crushed
tomatoes	are	generally	packed	in	tomato	puree;	same	problem.	With	canned
diced	tomatoes,	the	problem	is	texture,	not	flavor.	In	the	past,	we’ve	learned	that
manufacturers	treat	diced	tomatoes	with	calcium	chloride	to	keep	them	from
turning	to	mush	and	losing	their	shape.	That’s	fine	for	many	dishes,	but	for
recipes	in	which	a	smooth	consistency	is	desired,	calcium	chloride	does	its	job
too	well,	making	the	tomatoes	harder	to	break	down—and	the	resulting	sauces
oddly	granular.	The	only	choice	left,	then,	is	canned	whole	tomatoes.	(While
whole	tomatoes	are	also	treated	with	calcium	chloride,	the	chemical	has	direct
contact	with	a	much	smaller	percentage	of	the	tomato.)	The	big	drawback	of
using	whole	tomatoes	in	this	sauce	is	that	they	have	to	be	cut	up.	Chopping	them
on	the	cutting	board	makes	a	mess.	Our	solution	is	to	dump	the	tomatoes	into	a
strainer	over	a	bowl	and	then	hand	crush	them,	removing	the	hard	core	and	any
stray	bits	of	skin.	We	sauté	the	tomato	meats	until	they	glaze	the	bottom	of	the
pan.	Only	then	do	we	add	the	tomato	liquid,	a	step	that,	by	essentially	deglazing
the	pan,	adds	crucial	flavor	to	the	sauce.
ADD	WINE	AND	REDUCE	We	like	a	nice	dry	wine	for	this	sauce.	Wines

with	a	heavy	oak	flavor	rated	lower	than	those	with	little	to	no	oak	presence.
(Chianti	and	Merlot	scored	particularly	high	marks	with	tasters.)	The	wine	adds
flavor,	but	we	cook	it	down	to	get	rid	of	the	majority	of	alcohol.	(For	more	on
cooking	with	wine,	see	concept	37.)
FRESH	BASIL	COMES	LAST	The	basil	is	added	at	the	end	to	preserve	its

color	and	flavor.	It	adds	a	floral	aroma	that	complements	the	sauce’s	careful
balance	of	sweet	and	acidic	flavors.



GRILLED	POTATOES	WITH	GARLIC	AND	ROSEMARY
SERVES	4

This	recipe	works	best	with	small	potatoes	that	are	about	1½	inches	in	diameter.
If	using	medium	potatoes,	2	to	3	inches	in	diameter,	cut	them	into	quarters.	If	the
potatoes	are	larger	than	3	inches	in	diameter,	cut	each	potato	into	eighths.	Since
the	potatoes	are	first	cooked	in	the	microwave,	use	wooden	skewers.

¼				 cup	olive	oil
9				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	rosemary
					 Salt	and	pepper
2				 pounds	small	red	potatoes,	halved	and	skewered
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	chives

1.	Heat	oil,	garlic,	rosemary,	and	½	teaspoon	salt	in	8-inch	skillet	over
medium	heat	until	sizzling,	about	3	minutes.	Reduce	heat	to	medium-low	and
continue	to	cook	until	garlic	is	light	blond,	about	3	minutes.	Pour	mixture
through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	small	bowl;	press	on	solids.	Measure	1
tablespoon	solids	and	1	tablespoon	oil	into	large	bowl	and	set	aside.	Discard
remaining	solids	but	reserve	remaining	oil.
2.	Place	skewered	potatoes	in	single	layer	on	large	plate	and	poke	each	potato

several	times	with	skewer.	Brush	with	1	tablespoon	strained	oil	and	season	with
salt.	Microwave	until	potatoes	offer	slight	resistance	when	pierced	with	paring
knife,	about	8	minutes,	turning	halfway	through	cooking.	Transfer	potatoes	to
baking	sheet	coated	with	1	tablespoon	strained	oil.	Brush	with	remaining	1
tablespoon	strained	oil	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper.
3A.	FOR	A	CHARCOAL	GRILL:	Open	bottom	vent	completely.	Light

large	chimney	starter	filled	with	charcoal	briquettes	(6	quarts).	When	top	coals
are	partially	covered	with	ash,	pour	two-thirds	evenly	over	grill,	then	pour
remaining	coals	over	half	of	grill.	Set	cooking	grate	in	place,	cover,	and	open	lid
vent	completely.	Heat	grill	until	hot,	about	5	minutes.
3B.	FOR	A	GAS	GRILL:	Turn	all	burners	to	high,	cover,	and	heat	grill	until

hot,	about	15	minutes.	Turn	all	burners	to	medium-high.
4.	Clean	and	oil	cooking	grate.	Place	potatoes	on	grill	(hotter	side	if	using



charcoal)	and	cook	(covered	if	using	gas)	until	grill	marks	appear,	3	to	5
minutes,	flipping	halfway	through	cooking.	Move	potatoes	to	cooler	side	of	grill
(if	using	charcoal)	or	turn	all	burners	to	medium-low	(if	using	gas).	Cover	and
continue	to	cook	until	paring	knife	slips	in	and	out	of	potatoes	easily,	5	to	8
minutes	longer.
5.	Remove	potatoes	from	skewers	and	transfer	to	bowl	with	reserved	garlic-oil

mixture.	Add	chives,	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	toss	until
thoroughly	coated.	Serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Grilled	potatoes	are	a	summer	classic,	but	we	wanted	to	put	a	new	spin	on	this
dish	by	adding	rosemary	and	garlic.	Unfortunately,	we	found	it	was	difficult	to
add	garlic	and	rosemary	flavors	to	plain	grilled	potatoes.	Our	solution	came	in
infusing	the	flavors	of	garlic	and	rosemary	into	olive	oil,	and	using	the	oil	to
flavor	the	potatoes.	We	finally	had	it—tender	grilled	potatoes	infused	with	the
smoky	flavor	of	the	grill	and	enlivened	with	the	bold	flavors	of	garlic	and
rosemary.
MAKE	AN	INFUSED	OIL	We	wanted	the	potent	flavors	of	garlic	and

rosemary	on	our	grilled	potatoes,	but	we	didn’t	want	the	garlic	or	herb	to	burn
when	exposed	to	the	high	heat	of	the	grill.	We	solve	this	problem	by	cooking	the
garlic	and	rosemary	in	olive	oil,	to	release	their	full	flavor	before	straining	and
discarding	them.	This	way,	when	we	brush	the	potatoes	with	this	oil	a	few	times
throughout	the	cooking	process,	the	potatoes	drink	that	flavor	right	in.	This	is	a
much	more	effective	way	to	flavor	the	potatoes	than	simply	tossing	them	with
chopped	rosemary	at	the	end	of	cooking,	as	many	recipes	do.	It’s	important	to
note	that	garlic	in	olive	oil	should	not	be	kept	for	more	than	a	few	days,	even	if
it’s	made	with	roasted	garlic.	This	is	because	garlic	can	harbor	the	fatally	toxic
botulism	bacteria.	As	the	University	of	California	at	Davis	cautions,	even
roasting	garlic	does	not	kill	the	bacteria’s	spores.
MICROWAVE,	THEN	GRILL	We	cook	our	potatoes	in	two	stages.	First:

Pierce,	salt,	and	precook	in	the	microwave.	Precooking—rather	than	parboiling
—helps	to	keep	their	texture	firmer	and	skins	saltier.	Second:	Grill.	Skewering
potatoes	makes	them	easier	to	handle	throughout	the	process.	This	two-step
process	means	that	there	are	multiple	chances	to	flavor	the	potatoes—before
they	go	into	the	microwave,	before	they	go	onto	the	grill,	and	after	they	finish
cooking.
FLAVOR	AND	SERVE	For	one	last	hit	of	flavor,	we	toss	these	potatoes	with

chives	just	before	serving.	This	adds	some	color	and	a	bit	of	allium	flavor,	too.
Chives	are	best	used	just	before	serving	because	their	flavor	and	color	are	so
delicate.



CONCEPT	35

Glutamates,	Nucleotides	Add	Meaty
Flavor
Even	when	the	ingredients	are	properly	cooked,	some	stews,	soups,	and	sauces
fail	to	deliver.	All	the	components	seem	to	be	in	place,	but	the	flavor	is	a	bit	dull.
The	sauce,	broth,	or	gravy	isn’t	as	savory,	as	meaty,	as	robust,	or	as	complex	as	it
could	be.	What’s	missing?	Flavor	enhancers.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
In	grade	school,	we	learned	that	we	experience	four	primary	taste	sensations:
salty,	sweet,	bitter,	and	sour.	But	what	gives	food	a	savory,	meaty	flavor?
Japanese	physical	chemistry	professor	Kikunae	Ikeda	answered	this	question	in
1909	when	he	extracted	a	white	compound	from	giant	sea	kelp	used	to	give
Japanese	broths	a	savory	and	meaty	flavor,	even	in	the	absence	of	meat.
Ikeda	identified	the	substance	as	glutamate	and	named	the	taste	effect	it

produced	umami,	which	translates	as	“delicious”	or	“savory.”	Like	foods	that
contain	the	other	four	basic	tastes—salty,	sweet,	bitter,	and	sour—foods
containing	umami	have	been	found	to	stimulate	different	receptor	proteins	in	the
mouth.	The	receptor	for	glutamate	was	discovered	by	molecular	biologists	only
as	recently	as	2000,	confirming	that	umami	is	one	of	the	five	basic	tastes.	When
American	cooks	describe	a	soup,	stew,	or	sauce	as	“full,”	“meaty,”	or	“robust,”
they	are	likely	describing	umami	without	realizing	it.	A	wide	variety	of	foods,
everything	from	Parmesan	cheese	to	tomato	paste,	contain	glutamates	(see
chart).
Glutamates	are	a	type	of	amino	acid,	the	same	molecules	that	build	proteins.

We’ve	learned	that	amino	acids	play	a	role	in	the	browning	of	meat	(see	concept
2).	But	amino	acids	play	a	larger	role	than	that	when	it	comes	to	flavor	in	foods
that	contain	glutamates,	like	mushrooms	and	tomatoes,	and	even	more	so	in
foods	where	the	proteins	have	begun	to	break	down,	like	aged	cheese	and	soy
sauce.
So	how	do	these	naturally	occurring	glutamates	compare	to	monosodium

glutamate	(MSG),	which	is	used	as	a	flavor	enhancer	in	countless	prepared
products	from	packaged	broth	to	frozen	dinners?	MSG	is	simply	the	sodium	salt
form	of	naturally	occurring	glutamate,	produced	by	growing	bacteria	on	cane
molasses	and	ammonia.	Only	the	salt	forms	of	the	amino	acid	glutamic	acid,
called	glutamates,	produce	the	sensation	of	umami.	MSG	is	believed	to	enhance
the	response	of	our	tastebuds,	especially	to	meats	and	proteins.
MSG	has	gotten	somewhat	of	a	bad	rap	in	the	press,	in	part	because	of

“Chinese	restaurant	syndrome.”	The	term	was	coined	in	the	late	1960s,	when
people	complained	of	headaches	and	digestive	upset	after	eating	Chinese	food
and	suspected	MSG	was	the	cause.	However,	numerous	studies	failed	to	find	a
link	between	MSG	and	these	symptoms.	Some	experts	suggest	that	bacteria
growing	on	room-temperature	cooked	rice	was	the	culprit.	Given	the	prevalence
of	MSG	in	the	American	food	supply	today,	there	is	no	evidence	that	this



additive	causes	medical	problems.
As	pure	substances,	glutamates,	including	MSG,	produce	a	relatively	weak

umami	taste.	But	when	tasted	in	combination	with	naturally	occurring
substances	called	nucleotides—especially	inosinate	and	guanylate,	which	are
found	in	meat,	seafood,	and	dried	mushrooms—the	sensation	of	umami	is
greatly	magnified.	When	glutamates	and	nucleotides	are	present	at	equal	levels
in	food	the	strength	of	umami	taste	is	as	much	as	20	to	30	times	greater	than	for
glutamates	alone.
Interestingly,	when	nucleotides	and	glutamates	are	combined	in	cooking,	there

is	no	chemical	reaction	between	the	two.	Instead,	the	nucleotides	affect	the	taste
receptors	on	the	human	tongue,	altering	the	shape	of	the	glutamate	receptors	and
allowing	them	to	send	stronger	signals	to	the	brain.	If	tasting	the	umami	of
glutamates	were	like	lifting	a	heavy	box,	the	addition	of	nucleotides	give	us
handles,	making	the	box	exponentially	easier	to	pick	up	off	the	ground.



GLUTAMATES	AND	NUCLEOTIDES	ON	THE	TONGUE



	
GLUTAMATES	ALONE	We	taste	meaty,	savory	glutamates	when	they	interact	with	a	particular	kind	of



taste	receptor	on	the	tongue.



	
WITH	NUCLEOTIDES	Nucleotides	change	the	shape	of	the	glutamate	taste	receptor,	however,	allowing



the	receptor	to	send	stronger	signals	to	the	brain.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	the	flavor	value	of	adding	glutamates,	nucleotides,	or	glutamates
and	nucleotides	together	to	foods	as	we	cook,	we	designed	a	blind	taste	test.
First,	we	got	our	hands	on	pure	forms	of	both	sodium	glutamate	(MSG	powder)
and	nucleotides	(inosinate	powder).	Using	four	equal	samples	of	warm	tap
water,	we	left	one	untouched,	added	0.3	percent	by	weight	MSG	powder	to	one,
0.3	percent	by	weight	inosinate	powder	to	another,	and	both	MSG	and	inosinate
(each	0.15	percent	by	weight)	to	the	last.



THE	RESULTS
We	had	21	people	taste	the	four	identical-looking	samples.	Our	tasters	rated	each
sample	on	a	scale	from	zero	to	10,	zero	being	the	least	savory,	meatlike,	or
umami,	and	10	being	the	most.	While	tasters	found	the	plain	water	not	savory
(zero),	the	inosinate-only	sample	moderately	savory	(an	average	of	five),	and	the
MSG-only	sample	to	be	likewise	moderately	savory	(an	average	of	five),	the
inosinate-MSG	sample	was	considered	very	savory	(10).



THE	TAKEAWAY
For	years	now	we’ve	added	glutamate-rich	ingredients	like	soy	sauce	and
Parmesan	cheese	to	everything	from	sauces	to	stews	to	boost	a	rich	meatiness.
The	amino	acid	glutamate	in	these	ingredients	stimulates	our	tongue’s	taste
receptors,	increasing	the	perception	of	umami,	or	savoriness.	But	it	turns	out	that
glutamate	also	plays	well	with	others	and	can	have	a	synergistic	effect	when
paired	with	certain	nucleotides.	One	such	nucleotide,	called	inosinate,	has	the
ability	to	amplify	the	perception	of	umami	and	is	readily	found	in	chicken,	pork,
anchovies,	and	many	kinds	of	seafood.	A	classic	example	of	umami	synergy	is
Caesar	salad,	which	combines	the	glutamates	found	in	Parmesan	cheese	with	the
inosinate	in	anchovies.
We	don’t	recommend	buying	powdered	forms	of	MSG	and	inosinate	to	add	to

your	soup,	stew,	or	salad,	of	course.	But	combining	ingredients	rich	in
glutamates	(like	tomatoes,	aged	cheese,	and	cured	meat)	with	ingredients	rich	in
nucleotides	(including	beef,	sardines,	and	mushrooms)	can	heighten	the	savory,
umami	taste	in	countless	dishes	without	turning	your	kitchen	into	a	science	lab.

	



GLUTAMATES	AND	NUCLEOTIDES	IN	COMMON	FOODS
This	chart	shows	milligrams	of	glutamates	and	nucleotides	per	100	grams	(3½	ounces).	The	information
comes	from	the	Umami	Information	Center	and	was	published	in	Food	Technology	(2009).
	
GLUTAMATES
Kombu	(kelp):	2240
Marmite:	1900
Parmigiano-Reggiano:	1680
Vegemite:	1400
Nori	(seaweed):	1378
Soy	Sauce:	1100
Fish	Sauce:	950
Oyster	Sauce:	900
Tomato	Paste*:	556
Cured	Ham:	340
Tomatoes:	246
Garlic*:	112
Onions*:	102
Green	Tea	Extract:	32
Red	Wine*:	12.2
	
NUCLEOTIDES
Dried	Bonito	Flakes:	700
Anchovies:	300	(+4300	mg	glutamates)
Chicken:	288
Pork:	262
Sardines:	193	(+300	mg	glutamates)
Tuna:	188
Dried	Shiitake	Mushrooms:	150
Beef:	94	(+100	mg	glutamates)
Shrimp:	92	(+45	mg	glutamates)
Dried	Morel	Mushrooms:	40
Nori:	13
Dried	Oyster	Mushrooms:	10
Dried	Porcini	Mushrooms:	10
Snow	Crab:	9
Sea	Urchin:	2
	



*	Food	Chemistry	(1988)	by	Geoffrey	R.	Skurray	and	Nicholas	Pucar



GLUTAMATES	AND	NUCLEOTIDES	AT	WORK	
STEWS,	SOUPS,	SAUCES
There	are	many	stews,	soups,	and	sauces	that	rely	on	ingredients	rich	in
glutamates	and/or	nucleotides	to	build	flavor.	The	three	recipes	that	follow	were
specifically	engineered	with	this	principle	in	mind.	But	Daube	Provençal	and
Chicken	Provençal,	among	others,	also	depend	on	potent	flavor	enhancers.



BEST	BEEF	STEW
SERVES	6	TO	8

Use	a	good-quality	medium-bodied	wine,	such	as	a	Côtes	du	Rhône	or	Pinot
Noir,	for	this	stew.	Try	to	find	beef	that	is	well	marbled	with	white	veins	of	fat.
Meat	that	is	too	lean	will	come	out	slightly	dry.	Look	for	salt	pork	that	is	roughly
75	percent	lean.

2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
4				 anchovy	fillets,	rinsed	and	minced
1				 tablespoon	tomato	paste
1				 (4-pound)	boneless	beef	chuck-eye	roast,	pulled	apart	at	seams,	trimmed,	and	cut	into	1½-inch

pieces
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
1				 large	onion,	halved	and	sliced	1⁄8	inch	thick
4				 carrots,	peeled	and	cut	into	1-inch	pieces
¼				 cup	all-purpose	flour
2				 cups	red	wine
2				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
4				 ounces	salt	pork,	rinsed
2				 bay	leaves
4				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
1				 pound	Yukon	Gold	potatoes,	cut	into	1-inch	pieces

1½				 cups	frozen	pearl	onions,	thawed
2				 teaspoons	unflavored	gelatin
½				 cup	water
1				 cup	frozen	peas,	thawed
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.
Combine	garlic	and	anchovies	in	small	bowl;	press	with	back	of	fork	to	form
paste.	Stir	in	tomato	paste	and	set	aside.
2.	Pat	meat	dry	with	paper	towels.	(Do	not	season.)	Heat	1	tablespoon

vegetable	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	high	heat	until	just	starting	to	smoke.	Add	half
of	beef	and	cook	until	well	browned	on	all	sides,	about	8	minutes.	Transfer	beef
to	large	plate.	Repeat	with	remaining	beef	and	remaining	1	tablespoon	vegetable



oil,	leaving	second	batch	of	meat	in	pot	after	browning.
3.	Reduce	heat	to	medium	and	return	first	batch	of	beef	to	pot.	Add	onion	and

carrots	to	Dutch	oven	and	stir	to	combine	with	beef.	Cook,	scraping	bottom	of
pot	to	loosen	any	browned	bits,	until	onion	is	softened,	1	to	2	minutes.	Add
garlic	mixture	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.
Add	flour	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	no	dry	flour	remains,	about	30
seconds.
4.	Slowly	add	wine,	scraping	bottom	of	pot	to	loosen	any	browned	bits.

Increase	heat	to	high	and	allow	wine	to	simmer	until	thickened	and	slightly
reduced,	about	2	minutes.	Stir	in	broth,	salt	pork,	bay	leaves,	and	thyme.	Bring
to	simmer,	cover,	transfer	to	oven,	and	cook	for	1½	hours.
5.	Remove	pot	from	oven;	remove	and	discard	bay	leaves	and	salt	pork.	Stir	in

potatoes,	cover,	return	to	oven,	and	cook	until	potatoes	are	almost	tender,	about
45	minutes.
6.	Using	large	spoon,	skim	any	excess	fat	from	surface	of	stew.	Stir	in	pearl

onions;	cook	over	medium	heat	until	potatoes	and	onions	are	cooked	through
and	meat	offers	little	resistance	when	poked	with	fork	(meat	should	not	be
falling	apart),	about	15	minutes.	Meanwhile,	sprinkle	gelatin	over	water	in	small
bowl	and	let	sit	until	gelatin	softens,	about	5	minutes.
7.	Increase	heat	to	high,	stir	in	softened	gelatin	mixture	and	peas;	simmer	until

gelatin	is	fully	dissolved	and	stew	is	thickened,	about	3	minutes.	Season	with
salt	and	pepper	to	taste;	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	recipe	uses	evenly	cut	chunks	of	chuck-eye	roast—one	of	the	cheapest,
beefiest	cuts	in	the	supermarket—which	we	brown	and	gently	simmer	in	a	rich
broth.	We	flavor	this	broth	with	glutamate-rich	ingredients	like	salt	pork	and
tomato	paste,	and	thicken	it	with	gelatin.	Beef	and	anchovies	are	also	a	good
source	of	nucleotides	that	work	synergistically	with	glutamates.
CUT	YOUR	OWN	MEAT	Using	packaged	“stew	meat”	from	the

supermarket	is	a	nonstarter	here;	the	jumble	of	scraggly	bits	and	large	chunks
from	all	over	the	cow	(some	of	which	are	too	lean	to	be	stewed)	is	impossible	to
cook	evenly.	We	prefer	chuck-eye	roast,	which	can	turn	meltingly	tender	when
properly	cooked.	To	ensure	consistent	texture	and	flavor,	trim	and	cut	the	meat
yourself.	First,	pull	apart	the	roast	at	its	major	seams	(marked	by	lines	of	fat	and
silverskin).	Then,	with	a	sharp	chef’s	knife	or	boning	knife,	trim	off	the	thick
layers	of	fat	and	silverskin.	Slice	the	meat	into	even,	stew-ready	chunks.
BUILD	FLAVOR	We	build	flavor	a	number	of	ways	in	this	stew—from

browning	to	using	glutamate-and	nucleotide-rich	ingredients	in	the	sauce.	We
also	sauté	the	aromatics.	Caramelizing	the	onion	and	carrots	(rather	than	just
adding	them	raw	to	the	broth,	as	many	other	recipes	suggest)	helps	to	start	the
stew	off	with	as	much	flavor	as	possible.	We	like	to	leave	the	meat	in	the	pot
while	the	vegetables	sauté,	as	the	residual	heat	helps	the	vegetables	to	cook
faster	and	more	evenly.
FISH	FOR	MEATIER	FLAVOR	To	boost	meaty	flavor	in	food,	we	often

add	ingredients	high	in	glutamate.	This	common	amino	acid	is	the	building
block	for	MSG	and	occurs	naturally	in	foods	from	mushrooms	to	cheese,
tomatoes,	and	fish.	Thus	it	wasn’t	exactly	a	surprise	that	the	addition	of	two	such
glutamate-rich	ingredients—tomato	paste	and	salt	pork—to	our	beef	stew
intensified	its	savory	taste.	But	when	we	added	a	third	ingredient,	anchovies,	the
beefy	flavor	seemed	to	increase	exponentially.	This	is	because	anchovies	also
contain	compounds	called	nucleotides,	which	scientists	have	found	to	have	a
synergistic	effect	on	glutamate,	heightening	its	meaty	taste	20-to	30-fold.
STAGGER	THE	VEGETABLES	We	stagger	the	addition	of	vegetables	to

the	stew	in	order	to	prevent	overcooking.	Medium-starch	Yukon	Gold	potatoes,
which	aren’t	as	starchy	as	russets	and	therefore	won’t	break	down	too	easily	and
turn	the	stew	grainy,	are	added	1½	hours	into	the	stewing	time.	Pearl	onions	are
added	45	minutes	later,	and	a	handful	of	frozen	peas	are	added	at	the	very	end.



QUICK	BEEF	AND	VEGETABLE	SOUP
SERVES	6

Choose	whole	sirloin	steak	tips	over	ones	that	have	been	cut	into	small	pieces,
often	labeled	for	stir-fries.	If	sirloin	steak	tips	are	unavailable,	substitute	blade
or	flank	steak,	removing	any	hard	gristle	or	excess	fat.	White	mushrooms	can	be
used	in	place	of	the	cremini.	Feel	free	to	add	1	cup	of	frozen	peas,	frozen	corn,
or	frozen	cut	green	beans	during	the	last	five	minutes	of	cooking.	For	a	heartier
soup,	add	10	ounces	of	red	potatoes,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	(2	cups),	during	the
last	15	minutes	of	cooking.

1				 pound	sirloin	steak	tips,	trimmed	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
2				 tablespoons	soy	sauce
1				 teaspoon	vegetable	oil
1				 pound	cremini	mushrooms,	trimmed	and	quartered
1				 large	onion,	chopped
2				 tablespoons	tomato	paste
1				 garlic	clove,	minced
½				 cup	red	wine
4				 cups	beef	broth

1¾				 cups	low-sodium	chicken	broth
4				 carrots,	peeled	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
2				 celery	ribs,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
1				 bay	leaf
1				 tablespoon	unflavored	gelatin
½				 cup	cold	water
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Combine	beef	and	soy	sauce	in	medium	bowl.	Let	sit	for	15	minutes.
2.	Heat	oil	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat	until	just	smoking.	Add

mushrooms	and	onion	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	onion	is	browned,	8	to
12	minutes.	Transfer	vegetables	to	bowl.
3.	Add	beef	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	liquid	evaporates	and	meat

starts	to	brown,	6	to	10	minutes.	Add	tomato	paste	and	garlic	to	pot	and	cook,



stirring	constantly,	until	aromatic,	about	30	seconds.	Stir	in	wine,	scraping
bottom	of	pot	with	wooden	spoon	to	loosen	browned	bits,	and	cook	until	liquid
reduces	and	becomes	syrupy,	1	to	2	minutes.
4.	Add	beef	broth,	chicken	broth,	carrots,	celery,	bay	leaf,	and	browned

mushrooms	and	onion	to	pot	and	bring	to	boil.	Reduce	heat	to	low,	cover,	and
simmer	until	vegetables	and	meat	are	tender,	25	to	30	minutes.	Remove	from
heat	and	remove	and	discard	bay	leaf.
5.	Meanwhile,	sprinkle	gelatin	over	cold	water	in	small	bowl	and	let	sit	until

gelatin	softens,	about	5	minutes.	Add	gelatin	mixture	to	pot	with	soup	and	stir
until	completely	dissolved.	Stir	in	parsley,	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,
and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	a	beef	and	vegetable	soup	that	we	could	make	in	just	an	hour,	we	turned	to
quick-cooking,	richly	flavored	sirloin	steaks	tips	and	doctored	store-bought
broth	with	a	few	of	the	test	kitchen’s	favorite	ingredients	for	accentuating
meatiness:	mushrooms,	tomato	paste,	soy	sauce,	and	red	wine.	To	give	our	quick
version	the	rich	texture	of	a	long-simmered	soup,	we	added	a	tablespoon	of
gelatin	softened	in	cold	water,	which	provided	the	body	typically	lent	by	gelatin
released	from	the	beef	bones	in	a	traditional	recipe.
PICK	THE	RIGHT	BEEF	We	love	the	fall-apart	tenderness	of	the	shin	meat

in	the	traditional	recipe	for	this	soup.	But	it	takes	hours	to	break	down	those
tougher	muscle	fibers	into	anything	remotely	tender.	We	wanted	to	find	a	cut	of
meat	that	had	the	same	textural	characteristics	of	the	shin	meat	but	would	cook
in	a	quarter	of	the	time.	We	cooked	through	various	cuts	and	discovered	that
those	with	a	loose,	open	grain—including	hanger	steak,	flank	steak,	sirloin	steak
tips	(or	flap	meat),	and	blade	steak—had	a	shredded	texture	that	fooled	our
tasters	into	thinking	we	had	cooked	the	meat	for	hours.	Of	these	four	cuts,	sirloin
steak	tips	offer	the	best	balance	of	meat	flavor	and	tenderness.	Just	be	careful
how	you	cut	the	steaks:	If	the	meat	is	cut	too	large,	the	soup	will	seem	more	like
a	stew.	If	you	use	too	many	small	pieces,	it	will	resemble	a	watery	chili.	For	six
generous	bowls	of	soup,	you	will	need	1	pound	of	sirloin	tip	steaks	cut	into	½-
inch	pieces.
USE	A	SALTY	MARINADE	Soy	sauce	is	especially	high	in	glutamates.

Because	of	this,	we	feared	that	it	might	overpower	the	soup.	But	to	our	surprise,
it	enhanced	the	beef	flavor.	This	is	also	why	soy	sauce	is	a	favorite	in	test
kitchen	marinades	(see	concept	13).	Like	a	brine,	the	salt	in	soy	sauce	diffuses
into	the	meat,	allowing	the	individual	muscle	fibers	to	retain	moisture	while
cooking.	When	we	marinate	the	beef	cubes	with	soy	sauce	for	just	15	minutes,
the	flavor	of	the	meat	improves,	and	the	texture	becomes	softer	and	juicier.
CREATE	A	POWERFUL	BASE	While	sirloin	steak	tips	cook	up	with	the

right	texture	and	good	flavor,	they	don’t	flavor	the	broth.	This	is	why	we	use	a
flavorful	combination	of	broths—both	chicken	and	beef.	We	also	brown	the
glutamate-rich	onions	and	mushrooms	to	kick-start	flavor	development.
ADD	MORE	GLUTAMATES	Once	the	veggies	are	browned,	we	remove

them	from	the	pot	and	then	brown	the	beef.	Tomato	paste,	garlic,	and	red	wine
add	more	meaty	notes,	especially	when	we	brown	the	tomato	paste	and	garlic
with	the	beef	and	deglaze	the	pot	with	red	wine.	We	now	add	the	broth	along
with	carrots,	celery,	bay	leaf,	and	the	browned	mushrooms	and	onions.



ADD	POWDERED	GELATIN	The	classic	slow-simmering	approach	allows
the	gelatin	in	the	beef	bones	to	give	the	stock	(and	the	eventual	soup)	great	body.
Since	our	recipe	uses	a	boneless	cut,	we	produce	a	similar	effect	by	stirring	some
gelatin	(which	we	soften	in	cold	water)	into	the	finished	soup.



PASTA	WITH	CREAMY	TOMATO	SAUCE
SERVES	4

High-quality	canned	tomatoes	will	make	a	big	difference	in	this	sauce.

3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
1				 small	onion,	chopped	fine
1				 ounce	thinly	sliced	prosciutto,	minced
1				 bay	leaf
					 Salt	and	pepper
					 Pinch	red	pepper	flakes
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
¼				 cup	oil-packed	sun-dried	tomatoes,	rinsed,	patted	dry,	and	chopped	coarse
2				 tablespoons	tomato	paste
6				 tablespoons	dry	white	wine
2				 cups	plus	2	tablespoons	crushed	tomatoes	(from	one	28-ounce	can)
1				 pound	penne,	fusilli,	or	other	short,	tubular	pasta
½				 cup	heavy	cream
¼				 cup	chopped	fresh	basil
					 Grated	Parmesan	cheese

1.	Melt	butter	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium	heat.	Add	onion,	prosciutto,
bay	leaf,	¼	teaspoon	salt,	and	pepper	flakes	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until
onion	is	softened	and	lightly	browned,	5	to	7	minutes.	Stir	in	garlic,	increase
heat	to	medium-high,	and	cook	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Add	sun-dried
tomatoes	and	tomato	paste	and	cook,	stirring	constantly,	until	slightly	darkened,
1	to	2	minutes.	Add	¼	cup	wine	and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	liquid	has
evaporated,	1	to	2	minutes.
2.	Stir	in	2	cups	crushed	tomatoes	and	bring	to	simmer.	Reduce	heat	to	low,

partially	cover,	and	simmer	gently,	stirring	occasionally,	until	sauce	is	thickened,
25	to	30	minutes.	Discard	bay	leaf.
3.	Meanwhile,	bring	4	quarts	water	to	boil	in	large	pot.	Add	pasta	and	1

tablespoon	salt	and	cook,	stirring	often,	until	al	dente.	Reserve	½	cup	cooking
water,	then	drain	pasta	and	return	it	to	pot.
4.	Stir	cream,	remaining	2	tablespoons	wine,	and	remaining	2	tablespoons



crushed	tomatoes	into	sauce	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Add	sauce
and	basil	to	pasta	and	toss	to	combine.	Add	reserved	cooking	water	as	needed	to
adjust	consistency.	Serve	immediately,	passing	Parmesan	separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Cream	gives	a	basic	tomato	sauce	richness	and	body	but	it	also	tends	to	deaden
the	flavor	of	the	tomatoes.	Our	challenge	was	to	ramp	up	the	savory,	meaty	notes
in	the	tomato	sauce	so	that	it	could	stand	up	to	the	richness	and	sweetness
imparted	by	the	cream.
CONCENTRATE	TOMATO	FLAVOR	Adding	potent	sources	of	tomato

flavor	(both	tomato	paste	and	sun-dried	tomatoes)	is	a	step	in	the	right	direction.
Tomatoes	are	rich	in	glutamates	and	these	concentrated	forms	of	tomatoes	are
particularly	good	flavor	enhancers.	Adding	an	onion	to	the	sauce	helps,	as	does
some	minced	prosciutto.	(Yes,	some	actual	meat	does	help	develop	meaty
flavors.)	After	sautéing	the	onions	until	golden,	we	add	the	tomato	paste	and
sun-dried	tomatoes	and	cook	them	to	maximize	their	impact.
ADD	WHITE	WINE	FOR	ACIDITY	Cream	can	make	sauces	heavy.

Adding	a	splash	of	white	wine	to	the	sautéed	aromatics	and	then	letting	it	reduce
provides	a	welcome	brightness	to	the	sauce.	It	also	helps	balance	the	sweetness
of	the	tomatoes	(and	the	cream).
CRUSH	THOSE	TOMATOES	With	the	flavor	base	set,	it’s	time	for	the

tomatoes.	The	cream	melds	best	with	a	smooth	sauce;	rather	than	starting	with
whole	or	diced	tomatoes	and	then	pureeing	the	finished	sauce,	we	found	that
crushed	tomatoes	gave	the	sauce	the	perfect	consistency	and	there	was	no	need
to	get	out	the	food	processor.	Brands	of	crushed	tomatoes	vary	greatly	so	choose
carefully;	look	for	a	brand	that	lists	fresh	tomatoes,	not	tomato	puree,	as	the	first
ingredient.	(Some	puree	is	fine—it	adds	body,	but	it	shouldn’t	be	the	dominant
source	of	tomato	flavor	because	it	does	have	a	cooked,	not	terribly	fresh	flavor.)
SAVE	THE	CREAM	Cooking	the	cream	can	bring	out	its	sweet	notes	and

throw	off	the	balance	of	the	sauce.	Simply	stir	½	cup	of	cream	into	the	finished
sauce.	Also,	we	found	that	reserving	2	tablespoons	each	of	the	tomatoes	and
wine	adds	another	layer	of	tomato	flavor	and	some	needed	acidity	that	helps
balance	the	richness	of	the	cream.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CHOOSING	THE	RIGHT	CANNED	TOMATOES

Tomatoes,	packed	with	glutamates,	add	great	flavor	to	many	dishes.	We	often	use	canned
tomatoes,	which	come	in	several	forms.

Unlike	most	kinds	of	canned	produce,	which	pale	in	comparison	to	their	fresh	counterparts,	a	great	can	of
tomatoes	offers	flavor	almost	as	intense	as	ripe,	in-season	fruit.	For	this	reason	it’s	one	of	the	most
important	staples	in	our	pantry.	We	rely	on	canned	tomatoes	for	everything	from	pasta	sauce	to	chili	to
soups	and	stews.	We	even	use	them	to	make	a	quick	salsa	when	good	fresh	tomatoes	are	in	short	supply.
WHOLE	TOMATOES	When	big,	bright	chunks	of	tomatoes	are	what	we’re	after,	we	reach	for	canned
whole	tomatoes	and	cut	them	ourselves.	Good	canned	whole	tomatoes	balance	sweetness	and	acidity.	Some
brands	treat	the	tomatoes	with	calcium	chloride,	which	is	added	by	manufacturers	to	maintain	a	firmness
that	we	prefer.	Our	favorite	brands	are	Muir	Glen	Organic	Whole	Peeled	Tomatoes	and	Hunt’s	Whole	Plum
Tomatoes.
DICED	TOMATOES	Great	diced	canned	tomatoes	start	with	the	tomatoes	themselves.	Some	companies
experiment	constantly	to	grow	not	only	the	best-tasting	varieties	but	also	the	firmest	fruit,	with	thick
“walls”	that	will	stand	up	to	mechanical	dicing.	Others	choose	to	use	thin-walled	tomatoes	and	cook	them
longer	for	a	softer	consistency,	which	our	tasters	did	not	care	for.	After	peeling,	the	tomatoes	are	machine-
diced	and	canned.	The	juice	is	handled	separately,	heated	and	treated	with	calcium	chloride	(a	firming
agent),	salt,	and	citric	acid	(to	boost	bright	flavor	and	lower	the	pH).	The	juice	is	then	added	to	the	cans,
which	are	sealed,	heat-sterilized,	and	rapidly	cooled	to	prevent	the	tomatoes	from	overcooking.	The	timing
and	temperatures	of	these	steps	can	mean	the	difference	between	preserving	fresh	flavor	and	boiling	it	to
death.	Our	preferred	brand	is	Hunt’s	Diced	Tomatoes.
CRUSHED	TOMATOES	The	value	of	using	crushed	tomatoes	depends	greatly	upon	the	brand.	Texture	is
important.	We	prefer	cans	of	crushed	tomatoes	containing	actual	tomato	pieces	and	a	fair	amount	of	liquid.
Fresh	tomato	taste	is	another	essential.	How	the	tomatoes	are	processed	(either	at	a	low	temperature	for	a
longer	time,	or	a	high	temperature	for	a	shorter	time)	makes	a	difference.	So	does	the	topping:	Crushed
canned	tomatoes	are	topped	with	either	tomato	puree	or	juice.	Puree	is	cooked,	and	so	the	more	puree,	the
less	fresh	tomato	flavor.	We	prefer	Tuttorosso	Crushed	Tomatoes	in	Thick	Puree	with	Basil.	Muir	Glen
Organic	Crushed	Tomatoes	with	Basil	came	in	a	close	second	in	our	tasting.
TOMATO	PUREE	In	the	family	of	canned	tomato	products,	tomato	puree	is	often	overlooked	in	favor	of
whole	peeled	or	diced	tomatoes.	The	reason	is	clear:	While	whole	and	diced	tomatoes	offer	a	passable
substitute	for	fresh	tomatoes	(they	are	simply	skinned	and	processed),	tomato	puree	is	cooked	and	strained,
removing	all	seeds	and	all	illusions	of	freshness.	That’s	not	to	say	that	tomato	puree	doesn’t	have	a	place;
it’s	just	more	suited	to	long-cooked	dishes	where	the	thick,	even	texture	of	puree	is	important	and	fresh
tomato	flavor	is	not.
TOMATO	PASTE	Tomato	paste	is	the	backbone	of	many	of	our	recipes,	providing	deep,	rich	tomato
flavor.	Even	in	some	non-tomato-based	recipes,	like	beef	stew,	the	paste	acts	as	our	secret	ingredient.
Because	it’s	naturally	full	of	glutamates,	which	stimulate	tastebuds	just	like	salt	and	sugar,	it	brings	out
subtle	depths	and	savory	notes.	Our	preferred	brand	is	Goya	Tomato	Paste.



CONCEPT	36

Emulsifiers	Make	Smooth	Sauces
Vinaigrette	seems	simple	because	it	requires	only	two	ingredients:	oil	and
vinegar.	But	salad	greens	dressed	with	a	broken	vinaigrette	can	be	harsh	and
bristling	in	one	bite,	dull	and	oily	in	the	next.	The	best	vinaigrettes	are	ones	that
stay	together—at	least	long	enough	for	you	to	dress	and	eat	the	salad.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Vinaigrette	relies	on	the	principle	of	emulsification.	An	emulsion	is	a
combination	of	two	liquids	that	don’t	ordinarily	mix,	such	as	oil	and	vinegar.
The	only	way	to	mix	them	is	to	whisk	so	strenuously	that	one	of	the	two
ingredients	breaks	down	into	tiny	droplets—eventually	so	tiny	that	they	remain
separated	by	the	other	liquid.	The	two	fluids	are	now	effectively	one.
The	liquid	in	the	droplet	form	is	called	the	dispersed	phase	(vinegar	in	a

simple	water-in-oil	vinaigrette)	because	the	droplets	are	dispersed	throughout	the
emulsion.	The	liquid	that	surrounds	the	droplets	is	the	continuous	phase	(oil	in	a
simple	water-in-oil	vinaigrette).	Depending	on	how	it’s	formed,	it’s	possible	to
make	emulsions	in	which	the	oil	is	either	the	dispersed	phase	or	the	continuous
phase.	Because	the	continuous	phase	forms	the	surface	of	the	emulsion,	that’s
what	the	mouth	and	tongue	feel	and	taste	first.	This	explains	why	mayonnaise,
which	is	as	much	as	80	percent	oil,	doesn’t	taste	greasy,	because	lemon	juice	is
in	the	continuous	phase.
Unfortunately,	as	soon	as	you	stop	mixing	oil	and	vinegar,	many	of	these	tiny

dispersed	droplets	will	start	to	find	each	other	and	coalesce.	When	enough
vinegar	droplets	find	each	other,	the	emulsion	breaks	and	the	vinegar	and	oil
separate.	If	you	drizzle	a	broken	vinaigrette	over	salad	greens,	the	salad	will
taste	too	oily	or	sour	depending	on	the	leaf.
Many	emulsions	contain	an	agent	called	an	emulsifier,	which	helps	the

vinegar	and	oil	combine	into	a	unified	sauce	and	stay	that	way.	Egg	yolk,	which
contains	lecithin,	a	phospholipid,	is	one	example.	Here’s	how	it	works:	The
lecithin	molecule	has	two	ends.	One	end	is	attracted	to	water	(hydrophilic),
while	the	other	end	is	repelled	by	water	(hydrophobic)	but	is	compatible	with	oil.
When	egg	yolks	are	added	along	with	the	vinegar	in	a	simple	vinaigrette,
however,	the	emulsion	changes:	It	is	now	an	oil-in-water	emulsion,	or	more
stable	with	the	oil	droplets	suspended	in	vinegar,	rather	than	the	other	way
around.	This	is	because	the	hydrophilic	ends	of	lecithin	dissolve	in	the	vinegar
while	the	exposed	hydrophobic	ends	form	a	shield	around	droplets	of	oil.	This	is
why	mayonnaise	can	form	an	emulsion	of	oil	droplets	suspended	in	vinegar	or
lemon	juice.	Another	commonly	used	emulsifier	is	mustard.	The	emulsifying
component	in	mustard	is	a	complex	polysaccharide	that	is	less	effective	than	the
lecithin	found	in	egg	yolks.
Emulsifiers	are	important	in	recipes	far	more	diverse	than	the	vinaigrettes	and

mayonnaise	recipes	found	in	this	concept.	Many	classic	French	sauces,	including



béarnaise	and	hollandaise,	rely	on	emulsifiers.	Pan	sauces	likewise	rely	on	this
concept;	swirling	cold	butter	rather	than	softened	butter	into	a	finished	sauce
ensures	a	smoother,	more	emulsified	result.	Another	common	ingredient	in
emulsified	sauces	is	cornstarch,	which	acts	by	thickening	and	making	it	more
difficult	for	the	dispersed	droplets	to	move	about	and	coalesce.	Even	cakes	need
emulsifiers.	Pound	cake,	for	example,	relies	on	the	proper	emulsification	of
eggs.



BREAKING	OIL	AND	VINEGAR



	
EMULSIFIED	When	oil	and	vinegar	are	emulsified,	tiny	droplets	of	oil	are	surrounded	by	an	added



emulsifier	and	dispersed	in	vinegar.



	
BREAKING	With	time,	however,	the	droplets	of	oil	begin	to	find	each	other	and	coalesce.



	
BROKEN	Eventually	the	oil	and	vinegar	separate	into	distinct	liquids,	resulting	in	a	broken	vinaigrette.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	tease	out	the	relative	effectiveness	of	three	common	emulsifiers	(mustard,	egg
yolk,	and	mayonnaise),	we	created	three	vinaigrettes,	using	three	stand	mixers
fitted	with	the	whisk	attachment	to	ensure	that	ingredients	received	the	same
amount	of	whisking.	We	added	¼	cup	of	vinegar	to	the	bowl	of	each	mixer,	then
added	1	tablespoon	of	Dijon	mustard	to	one,	an	egg	yolk	to	the	second,	and	1
tablespoon	of	mayonnaise	to	the	third.	With	the	mixers	running	on	medium-high
speed,	we	drizzled	¾	cup	of	oil	into	each	over	the	course	of	30	seconds.	We
tracked	all	blended	samples	at	15-minute	intervals.	As	a	control,	we	made	a
fourth	vinaigrette	in	a	stand	mixer	with	no	emulsifier,	just	vinegar	and	oil.



THE	RESULTS
The	vinaigrette	made	with	the	egg	yolk	was	clearly	the	most	stable.	It	was	still
emulsified	more	than	three	hours	after	being	mixed.	The	vinaigrette	made	with
mayonnaise	showed	signs	of	separation	after	1½	hours,	while	the	one	with
mustard	started	to	break	apart	after	only	30	minutes.	The	control	began
separating	immediately	and	was	almost	completely	separated	after	the	first	15-
minute	interval.
And	the	taste?	The	egg	yolk	gave	the	dressing	an	eggy	flavor	that	tasters

didn’t	like.	(And	adding	raw	egg	to	salad	dressing	isn’t	for	everyone.)	The
mayonnaise	didn’t	add	much	flavor,	but	it	did	impart	a	slight	creaminess	tasters
liked.	The	mustard	dressing	tasted	best.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Sauces	that	require	the	seamless	blending	of	liquid	ingredients	that	normally
don’t	blend	should	be	made	with	an	emulsifier,	such	as	egg	yolks,	mayonnaise,
or	mustard.	In	addition	to	stability,	a	good	emulsifier	will	bring	something	else	to
a	vinaigrette—or,	at	the	very	least,	will	cause	no	harm.	Egg	yolks	are	a	very
potent	emulsifier	but	their	flavor	isn’t	always	appropriate.	Mayonnaise	is	a
(slightly	weaker)	emulsifier	because	it	contains	egg	yolks;	it	can	be	used	to
stabilize	a	dressing	without	adding	eggy	flavor.	Mustard	is	a	decent	emulsifier
but	its	primary	advantage	is	flavor.



KEEPING	TRACK	OF	EMULSIFIERS	IN	VINAIGRETTES






	



EMULSIFIERS	AT	WORK	
VINAIGRETTES
The	egg	yolks	in	mayonnaise	are	a	very	potent	emulsifier.	The	mustard	isn’t	quite
as	strong	but	adds	great	flavor.	A	little	of	each	emulsifier	yields	a	smooth,
flavorful	dressing,	provided	the	dressing	is	properly	prepared.	We	found	that	the
way	the	oil	and	vinegar	are	combined	can	also	affect	the	stability	of	the
emulsion.



FOOLPROOF	VINAIGRETTE
MAKES	ABOUT	¼	CUP,	ENOUGH	TO	DRESS	8	TO	10	CUPS	OF	LIGHTLY	PACKED	GREENS

Red	or	white	wine	vinegar	or	champagne	vinegar	will	work	in	this	recipe.	It	is
important	to	use	high-quality	ingredients.	This	vinaigrette	works	with	nearly	any
greens	(as	do	the	walnut	and	herb	variations).	For	a	hint	of	garlic	flavor,	rub	the
inside	of	the	salad	bowl	with	a	clove	of	garlic	before	adding	the	lettuce.

1				 tablespoon	wine	vinegar
1½				 teaspoons	minced	shallot
½				 teaspoon	regular	or	light	mayonnaise
½				 teaspoon	Dijon	mustard
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
					 Pepper
3				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil

1.	Combine	vinegar,	shallot,	mayonnaise,	mustard,	salt,	and	pepper	to	taste	in
small	nonreactive	bowl.	Whisk	until	mixture	is	milky	in	appearance	and	no
lumps	of	mayonnaise	remain.
2.	Place	oil	in	small	measuring	cup	so	that	it	is	easy	to	pour.	Whisking

constantly,	very	slowly	drizzle	oil	into	vinegar	mixture.	If	pools	of	oil	are
gathering	on	surface	as	you	whisk,	stop	addition	of	oil	and	whisk	mixture	well	to
combine,	then	resume	whisking	in	oil	in	slow	stream.	Vinaigrette	should	be
glossy	and	lightly	thickened,	with	no	pools	of	oil	on	its	surface.	(Vinaigrette	can
be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	weeks.)

HERB	VINAIGRETTE
Add	1	tablespoon	minced	fresh	parsley	or	chives	and	½	teaspoon	minced	fresh
thyme,	tarragon,	marjoram,	or	oregano	to	vinaigrette	just	before	use.

WALNUT	VINAIGRETTE
Substitute	1½	tablespoons	roasted	walnut	oil	and	1½	tablespoons	regular	olive
oil	for	extra-virgin	olive	oil.



LEMON	VINAIGRETTE

This	is	best	for	dressing	mild	greens.

Substitute	lemon	juice	for	vinegar,	omit	shallot,	and	add	¼	teaspoon	finely
grated	lemon	zest	and	pinch	sugar	along	with	salt	and	pepper.

BALSAMIC-MUSTARD	VINAIGRETTE

This	is	best	for	dressing	assertive	greens.

Substitute	balsamic	vinegar	for	wine	vinegar,	increase	mustard	to	2	teaspoons,
and	add	½	teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme	along	with	salt	and	pepper.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Modern	recipes	often	call	for	4	parts	oil	to	1	part	vinegar.	We	found	this	formula
yields	a	bland,	greasy	dressing.	It	turns	out	that	slack	attention	to	mixing
(modern	recipes	tend	to	favor	the	dump-and-stir	or	dump-and-shake	method)
has	bumped	up	the	oil-to-vinegar	ratio	to	mitigate	the	effects	of	an	improperly
emulsified	dressing.	The	3:1	ratio	found	in	classic	French	cookbooks	is	correct.
Yes,	you	need	to	work	a	bit	more	slowly	when	adding	the	oil,	but	the	result	is	a
bright,	vibrant	dressing.	Both	the	mustard	and	mayonnaise	help	to	keep	the
dressing	emulsified	for	hours.
WHISK	RATHER	THAN	SHAKE	In	kitchen	tests,	we	found	that

vinaigrette	recipes	that	call	for	shaking	ingredients	together	in	a	jar	or	dumping
the	vinegar	and	oil	into	a	bowl	and	whisking	them	together	separated	very
quickly	and	tasted	harsh—because	the	vinegar	and	oil	weren’t	fully	emulsified.
In	contrast,	the	classic	technique	(slowly	whisking	the	oil	into	the	dressing)
yields	a	dressing	that	tastes	smoother	and	stays	emulsified	longer.	Oil	and
vinegar	don’t	typically	mix	since	vinegar	is	95	percent	water.	Using	mayonnaise
as	the	emulsifier	added	to	the	vinegar,	followed	by	the	addition	of	the	oil	with
vigorous	whisking,	breaks	the	oil	into	very	tiny	droplets	that	more	easily
disperse	in	the	vinegar	and	are	more	likely	to	form	a	stable	emulsion.	Also,	the
smaller	the	droplets	the	more	stable	the	emulsion.
ADD	SEASONINGS	TO	VINEGAR	Salt	won’t	dissolve	in	oil,	so	for	even

seasoning	add	the	salt	(and	other	seasonings	and	the	emulsifiers)	to	the	vinegar.
SCALE	DRESSING;	DON’T	OVERDRESS	If	you	follow	the	3:1	ratio	of

oil	to	vinegar,	you	can	make	as	much	or	as	little	dressing	as	you	need.	One-
quarter	cup	of	dressing	is	the	right	amount	to	dress	8	to	10	cups	of	lightly	packed
greens,	enough	salad	for	four	people.	The	vinaigrette	should	lightly	coat	the
salad	greens	and	there	shouldn’t	be	so	much	dressing	that	some	collects	at	the
bottom	of	the	bowl.



EMULSIFIERS	AT	WORK	
MAYONNAISE
The	emulsifying	power	of	egg	yolks	turns	liquid	oil	into	a	thick,	creamy	sauce.
This	is	true	in	vinaigrette	and	is	even	more	apparent	in	mayonnaise,	which
contains	2.3	parts	oil	dispersed	into	1	part	egg	yolk–lemon	juice.



AÏOLI	(GARLIC	MAYONNAISE)
MAKES	ABOUT	¾	CUP

Use	this	sauce	as	a	condiment	for	meats,	fish,	and	vegetables	or	sandwiches.	If
necessary,	remove	the	green	germ	in	the	garlic	before	pressing	or	grating	it;	the
germ	will	give	the	aïoli	a	bitter	flavor.	If	you	do	not	have	regular	olive	oil,	use	a
blend	of	equal	parts	extra-virgin	olive	oil	and	vegetable	oil.	Ground	white
pepper	is	preferred	because	it’s	not	as	visible	as	black	pepper,	but	either	can	be
used.	To	make	“regular”	mayonnaise,	simply	omit	the	garlic.

1				 garlic	clove,	peeled
2				 large	egg	yolks
4				 teaspoons	lemon	juice
				1⁄8 teaspoon	sugar
				 Salt
					 Ground	pepper,	preferably	white

¾					 cup	olive	oil

1.	Press	garlic	through	garlic	press	or	grate	very	fine	on	rasp-style	grater.
Measure	out	1	teaspoon	garlic;	discard	remaining	garlic.
2.	Process	garlic,	egg	yolks,	lemon	juice,	sugar,	¼	teaspoon	salt,	and	pepper	to

taste	in	food	processor	until	combined,	about	10	seconds.	With	processor
running,	gradually	add	oil	in	slow,	steady	stream	(process	should	take	about	30
seconds);	scrape	down	bowl	with	rubber	spatula	and	process	for	5	seconds
longer.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste,	and	serve.	(Aïoli	can	be	refrigerated
in	airtight	container	for	3	days.)

ROSEMARY-THYME	AÏOLI

Serve	this	aïoli	with	roasted	and	grilled	meats	or	grilled	vegetables.

Add	1	teaspoon	minced	fresh	rosemary	and	1	teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme	to
food	processor	along	with	garlic.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Aïoli	is	a	quick	emulsion	sauce	that	by	tradition	is	the	centerpiece	of	a	simple
supper	of	cooked	vegetables	and	potatoes	and	steamed	fish.	When	it’s	made
badly,	the	overwhelming	impression	is	one	of	garlic:	bitter,	sharp,	and	long-
lasting.	We	found	that	fine,	evenly	minced	garlic	maintained	the	smooth	texture
of	the	sauce	and	prevented	oversize	garlic	bombs	that	exploded	in	the	mouth.
GET	THE	GARLIC	RIGHT	Garlic	gives	aïoli	its	personality	but	it	can	be	a

bully.	We	scale	back	the	amount	of	garlic	used	in	a	traditional	recipe	and	use	a
garlic	press	or	rasp	grater	to	break	it	down	into	a	very	fine	mince.	(Don’t	use
more	than	1	teaspoon.)
PICK	THE	RIGHT	OIL	We	found	that	the	peppery,	fruity	flavor	of	extra-

virgin	olive	oil	was	too	overpowering	for	mayonnaise.	Tasters	preferred	regular
olive	oil,	which	has	been	stripped	of	much	of	its	flavor	during	processing.	If	you
do	not	have	regular	olive	oil,	use	a	blend	of	equal	parts	extra-virgin	olive	oil	and
vegetable	oil.
WHISK	EGGS	AND	LEMON	JUICE	To	keep	the	mayonnaise	from

breaking,	we	found	it	necessary	to	whisk	the	egg	yolks	and	lemon	juice
thoroughly.	The	yolks	contain	liquid	and	fat	that	must	first	be	emulsified	before
the	oil	is	added.
PROCESS	WELL	When	we	tried	blending	the	sauce,	the	emulsion	became

way	too	thick.	Whisking	by	hand	worked	beautifully,	but	after	four	minutes,	our
arms	grew	tired.	The	food	processor,	which	pulls	the	sauce	together	in	just	30
seconds,	is	our	top	choice.	You	can	certainly	make	mayonnaise	by	hand—French
cooks	have	for	centuries.	But	since	you’re	dispersing	a	lot	of	oil	in	a	little	bit	of
egg	yolks	and	lemon	juice,	you	have	to	whisk	the	oil	into	exceedingly	tiny
droplets	in	order	to	make	a	stable	emulsion.	If	using	a	whisk,	plan	on	adding	the
oil	in	a	very,	very	slow	stream—the	process	will	take	at	least	four	minutes	of
constant	whisking.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
EMULSIFYING	EGG	BEATERS

If	you	don’t	want	to	consume	raw	eggs,	pick	Egg	Beaters.

Egg	Beaters	is	one	of	the	only	pasteurized	egg	options	available	to	most	consumers,	but	we	doubted	its
ability	to	serve	as	a	substitute	for	real	eggs	in	something	like	mayonnaise.	Real	egg	yolks	contain	the
emulsifying	agent	lecithin,	which	helps	thicken	mayonnaise,	whereas	Egg	Beaters	is	made	from	egg	whites
and	therefore	contains	no	lecithin.	We	gave	it	a	whirl	in	our	Garlic	Mayonnaise,	replacing	the	two	egg	yolks
with	¼	cup	of	Egg	Beaters.	The	result?	An	incredibly	thick	emulsion,	albeit	slightly	less	rich-tasting	than
the	real	thing.

Encouraged,	we	went	on	to	make	Egg	Beaters–based	hollandaise	sauce	and	Caesar	dressing,	both	with
great	success.	We	prepared	a	classic	crème	brûlée,	swapping	in	the	Egg	Beaters	for	the	prescribed	12	large
yolks.	The	custard	was	remarkably	creamy	but	unacceptably	dull.

How	does	this	product	work?	The	secret	is	the	use	of	vegetable	gums.	Unlike	lecithin,	which	forms	a
barrier	around	water	droplets,	making	it	difficult	for	them	to	separate,	gums	simply	add	viscosity,	helping
mixtures	coalesce.	So	if	you’re	concerned	about	consuming	raw	egg	yolks,	Egg	Beaters	can	work.	Just
don’t	swap	it	for	large	quantities	of	yolks,	as	in	custards.

	



CONCEPT	37

Speed	Evaporation	When	Cooking	Wine
Wine	is	a	key	ingredient	in	countless	recipes.	It	adds	depth,	complexity,	and
acidity	to	everything	from	stews	to	sauces.	There’s	a	popular	misconception	that
the	alcohol	cooks	off	when	heated.	The	truth	is	more	complicated.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Archeological	evidence	indicates	that	wine	was	first	produced	from	grapes	8000
years	ago.	Today,	we	drink	red,	white,	and	rosé	wine,	as	well	as	fortified	wines
like	sherry	and	vermouth.	The	alcohol	content	in	the	average	nonfortified	wine
ranges	from	10	to	14	percent.
To	make	wine,	first	grapes	are	crushed	to	free	their	juices,	which	include

water,	sugars,	and	some	acids.	Sometimes	winemakers	add	additional	yeast	for
fermentation,	but	a	strain	of	yeast	that	grows	naturally	on	the	skin	of	grapes
ferments	the	sugars	in	grapes,	turning	them	to	ethyl	alcohol.	Fermentation	also
helps	to	create	new	aromatic	molecules	within	the	mixture,	giving	wine	some	of
its	familiar	flavors.	Once	these	sugars	are	converted	to	alcohol,	the	new	wine	is
set	to	age,	allowing	the	slow	procession	of	chemical	reactions	to	impart	even
more,	and	more	complex,	flavor.	Fortified	wines	like	sherry	and	vermouth	are
simply	wines	fortified	with	extra	alcohol	(their	alcohol	content	generally	ranges
from	18	to	20	percent).
Distilled	spirits,	such	as	whiskey	and	brandy,	are	made	in	a	fashion	similar	to

wine—at	least	to	begin.	But	yeast	cannot	survive	in	an	environment	too
saturated	with	alcohol,	and	it	dies	when	the	alcohol	percentage	reaches	20
percent.	Therefore,	spirits,	which	have	alcohol	contents	ranging	from	40	to	70
percent,	undergo	a	process	called	distillation	in	which	a	moderately	alcoholic
liquid	is	heated	and	the	alcohol	and	aroma	vapors	are	collected	and	then
condensed.
While	alcohol	is	a	key	component	in	wine	and	spirits,	it’s	not	always	a	desired

component	in	a	finished	recipe.	For	instance,	you	wouldn’t	want	to	serve	steak
Diane	with	uncooked	brandy—the	alcohol	content	would	be	overwhelming.
Cooking	certainly	reduces	the	alcohol	content	in	wine	and	spirits,	but	it	rarely
eliminates	it.	In	most	recipes,	wine	is	used	in	conjunction	with	broth	or	another
water-based	ingredient.	When	alcohol	and	water	mix,	they	form	a	solution	called
an	azeotrope—a	mixture	of	two	different	liquids	that	behaves	as	if	it	were	a
single	compound.	Even	though	alcohol	evaporates	at	a	lower	temperature	than
water,	the	vapors	coming	off	of	an	alcohol-water	azeotrope	will	contain	both
alcohol	and	water—they	become	inextricably	mixed.
Initially	an	equal	mixture	of	alcohol	and	water	will	begin	to	boil	at	about	173

degrees	(which	is	even	a	little	lower	than	the	boiling	point	of	pure	alcohol)	and
the	vapor	will	consist	of	about	95	percent	alcohol.	Gradually	the	temperature	of
the	boiling	liquid	increases	and	the	vapor	becomes	richer	in	water.	Eventually,	as



the	temperature	of	the	liquid	begins	to	approach	the	boiling	point	of	pure	water
(212	degrees),	more	and	more	water	evaporates,	along	with	a	smaller	and
smaller	amount	of	alcohol.	But	unless	you	keep	cooking	until	all	the	azeotropic
mixture	evaporates,	the	alcohol	content	of	the	liquid	will	remain	at	about	5
percent	of	the	initial	alcohol	content	no	matter	how	long	you	simmer	the
mixture.
As	a	cook,	you	can	employ	various	strategies	to	maximize	evaporation	in

dishes	with	alcohol.	One	way	is	to	reduce	the	alcohol	before	adding	any	other
water-based	ingredients	to	the	mix.	High	heat,	a	wide	pot,	and	cooking
uncovered	will	remove	more	alcohol	than	low	heat,	a	narrow	saucepan,	and
cooking	with	a	cover.	Another	way	to	quickly	reduce	the	amount	of	alcohol	in	a
liquid	is	to	ignite	the	vapors	that	lie	above	the	pan,	a	technique	known	as
flambéing.	(This	technique	works	better	with	high-alcohol	spirits	than	with
wine.)	But	the	degree	to	which	a	flambé	will	remove	alcohol	depends	partly	on
the	heat	added	to	the	liquid	underneath.	We	found	that	brandy	ignited	over	high
heat	retains	29	percent	of	its	original	alcohol	concentration,	while	brandy	flamed
in	a	cold	pan	holds	57	percent,	nearly	twice	as	much	alcohol.	In	the	case	of	a
flambé,	the	addition	of	heat	(not	just	the	flame	from	a	match)	can	make	a
significant	difference	in	the	strength	of	the	finished	sauce.	In	practical	terms,	this
mean	that	steak	Diane,	which	is	cooked	on	the	stovetop,	will	lose	more	alcohol
than	cherries	jubilee,	in	which	flaming	liquid	is	poured	over	ice	cream.



COOKING	WITH	WINE



	
WINE	AND	WATER	When	simmering	a	mixture	of	water	and	wine,	alcohol	molecules	are	a	major



component	of	the	vapor	in	the	beginning.



	
WATER	AND	WINE	After	simmering	for	a	while,	water	molecules	compose	the	majority	of	vapor.	It	is



impossible	to	get	rid	of	all	the	alcohol	unless	all	of	the	liquid	evaporates.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
In	order	to	settle	the	debate	about	how	much	alcohol	remains	in	a	wine-based
reduction	sauce	we	had	to	get	technical.	We	wanted	to	know	if	it	made	a
difference	whether	we	reduced	the	wine	alone	before	adding	broth,	or	if	we
could	get	similar	results	by	skipping	this	step	and	combining	the	wine	and	broth
from	the	outset.	We	made	two	different	sauces:	For	one	we	reduced	2	cups	of	red
wine	with	14.5	percent	alcohol	by	volume	(abv)	to	1	cup,	added	1	cup	of	store-
bought	chicken	broth,	and	reduced	this	mixture	to	1	cup;	for	the	second	we
combined	2	cups	of	14.5	percent	abv	red	wine	with	1	cup	of	store-bought	chicken
broth	and	reduced	the	mixture	to	1	cup.	Both	sauces	took	roughly	15	minutes	to
reach	their	final	volume.	We	repeated	the	test	three	times,	tasted	each,	and	sent
portions	to	an	independent	lab	for	analysis	of	the	remaining	ethanol.



THE	RESULTS
Even	though	we	started	with	identical	amounts	of	both	ingredients,	and	the
reductions	took	roughly	the	same	amount	of	time,	both	our	tasters	and	the	lab
found	quite	a	difference	between	the	samples.	Tasters	overwhelmingly	found	the
sample	where	we	first	reduced	the	wine	to	be	less	“boozy”-tasting	than	the
batches	where	we	combined	both	liquids	right	off	the	bat.	And	the	lab	was	able
to	quantify	what	we	tasted.	The	former	samples	averaged	a	very	low	.175
percent	abv,	while	the	latter	samples	averaged	a	moderate	1.55	percent	abv—
over	eight	times	as	much!



THE	TAKEAWAY
While	neither	sauce	contained	a	large	quantity	of	alcohol	after	cooking,	the
disparity	between	the	samples—and	our	ability	to	taste	the	difference—makes	it
significant.	If	your	goal	is	to	make	a	sauce	with	strong	wine	flavor	but	without
the	bite	of	alcohol,	it	pays	to	reduce	the	wine	alone	before	adding	other	liquids.
It’s	important	to	note	that	these	results	are	specific	to	this	experiment,	where

we	used	wide	skillets	and	medium-high	heat	to	rapidly	reduce	the	sauces—a
method	that	is	highly	efficient	at	evaporation.	A	1992	study	published	in	the
Journal	of	the	American	Dietetic	Association	found	that	the	amounts	of	alcohol
retained	in	the	entirety	of	various	cooked	recipes	ranged	considerably—from	4
to	60	percent—depending	on	the	dish.	For	example,	the	alcohol	retained	in	Pot
Roast	Milano,	which	simmered	at	185	degrees	for	2½	hours,	amounted	to	4	to	6
percent	abv,	while	that	retained	in	Orange	Chicken	Burgundy,	simmered	at	185
degrees	for	10	minutes,	ranged	from	10	to	60	percent.	Cooking	temperature	and
time,	as	well	as	additional	ingredients	that	can	absorb	liquid,	will	greatly	impact
final	alcohol	content.



TWO	WAYS	TO	MAKE	A	REDUCTION	SAUCE

	



EVAPORATION	AT	WORK	
STEWING
Wine	adds	great	flavor	and	depth	to	a	whole	range	of	dishes.	When	stewing	our
pot	roast,	we	deal	with	the	wine	before	it	goes	into	the	pot,	reducing	the	amount
of	alcohol	to	prevent	a	boozy	sauce.	When	poaching,	we	use	a	small	amount	of
wine	to	help	cook	perfect	fillets	of	salmon	and	then	to	create	a	flavorful	sauce.



FRENCH-STYLE	POT	ROAST
SERVES	6	TO	8

A	medium-bodied,	fruity	red	wine,	such	as	a	Côtes	du	Rhône	or	Pinot	Noir,	is
best	for	this	recipe.	The	gelatin	lends	richness	and	body	to	the	finished	sauce;
don’t	omit	it.	Serve	this	dish	with	boiled	potatoes,	buttered	noodles,	or	steamed
rice.

1				 (4-to	5-pound)	boneless	beef	chuck-eye	roast,	pulled	apart	at	seams	and	trimmed
					 Kosher	salt	and	pepper
1				 (750-ml)	bottle	red	wine
10				 sprigs	fresh	parsley	plus	2	tablespoons	minced
2				 sprigs	fresh	thyme
2				 bay	leaves
3				 slices	thick-cut	bacon,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 onion,	chopped	fine
3				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 tablespoon	all-purpose	flour
2				 cups	beef	broth
4				 carrots,	peeled	and	cut	on	bias	into	1½-inch	pieces
2				 cups	frozen	pearl	onions,	thawed
¾				 cup	water
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
2				 teaspoons	sugar
10				 ounces	white	mushrooms,	trimmed,	halved	if	small	and	quartered	if	large
1				 tablespoon	unflavored	gelatin

1.	Season	pieces	of	meat	with	2	teaspoons	salt,	place	on	wire	rack	set	in
rimmed	baking	sheet,	and	let	rest	at	room	temperature	for	1	hour.
2.	Meanwhile,	bring	wine	to	simmer	in	large	saucepan	over	medium-high

heat.	Cook	until	reduced	to	2	cups,	about	15	minutes.	Using	kitchen	twine,	tie
parsley	sprigs,	thyme	sprigs,	and	bay	leaves	into	bundle.
3.	Pat	beef	dry	with	paper	towels	and	season	generously	with	pepper.	Tie	3

pieces	of	kitchen	twine	around	each	piece	of	meat	to	keep	it	from	falling	apart.
4.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	300	degrees.



Cook	bacon	in	Dutch	oven	over	medium-high	heat,	stirring	occasionally,	until
crisp,	6	to	8	minutes.	Using	slotted	spoon,	transfer	bacon	to	paper	towel–lined
plate	and	reserve.	Pour	off	all	but	2	tablespoons	fat;	return	Dutch	oven	to
medium-high	heat	and	heat	until	fat	begins	to	smoke.	Add	beef	to	pot	and	brown
on	all	sides,	8	to	10	minutes	total.	Transfer	beef	to	large	plate	and	set	aside.
5.	Reduce	heat	to	medium;	add	onion	and	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until

beginning	to	soften,	2	to	4	minutes.	Add	garlic,	flour,	and	reserved	bacon;	cook,
stirring	constantly,	until	fragrant,	about	30	seconds.	Add	reduced	wine,	broth,
and	herb	bundle,	scraping	bottom	of	pot	to	loosen	browned	bits.	Return	roast	and
any	accumulated	juices	to	pot;	increase	heat	to	high	and	bring	liquid	to	simmer,
then	place	large	sheet	of	aluminum	foil	over	pot	and	cover	tightly	with	lid.	Set
pot	in	oven	and	cook,	using	tongs	to	turn	beef	every	hour,	until	fork	slips	easily
in	and	out	of	meat,	2½	to	3	hours,	adding	carrots	to	pot	after	2	hours.
6.	While	meat	cooks,	bring	pearl	onions,	½	cup	water,	butter,	and	sugar	to	boil

in	large	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.	Reduce	heat	to	medium,	cover,	and	cook
until	onions	are	tender,	5	to	8	minutes.	Uncover,	increase	heat	to	medium-high,
and	cook	until	all	liquid	evaporates,	3	to	4	minutes.	Add	mushrooms	and	¼
teaspoon	salt;	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	vegetables	are	browned	and
glazed,	8	to	12	minutes.	Remove	from	heat	and	set	aside.	Sprinkle	gelatin	over
remaining	¼	cup	water	in	small	bowl	and	let	sit	until	gelatin	softens.
7.	Transfer	beef	to	carving	board;	tent	with	foil	to	keep	warm.	Let	braising

liquid	settle,	about	5	minutes;	using	large	spoon,	skim	fat	from	surface.	Remove
herb	bundle	and	stir	in	onion-mushroom	mixture.	Bring	liquid	to	simmer	over
medium-high	heat	and	cook	until	mixture	is	slightly	thickened	and	reduced	to
3¼	cups,	20	to	30	minutes.	Season	sauce	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.	Add
softened	gelatin	and	stir	until	completely	dissolved.
8.	Remove	twine	from	roasts	and	discard.	Slice	meat	against	grain	into	½-

inch-thick	slices.	Divide	meat	among	warmed	bowls	or	transfer	to	platter;
arrange	vegetables	around	meat,	pour	sauce	over	top,	and	sprinkle	with	minced
parsley.	Serve	immediately.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Follow	recipe	through	step	7,	skipping	step	of

softening	and	adding	gelatin.	Place	meat	back	in	pot,	let	cool	to	room
temperature,	cover,	and	refrigerate	for	up	to	2	days.	To	serve,	slice	beef	and
arrange	in	13	by	9-inch	baking	dish.	Soften	gelatin	as	directed	in	step	6.	Bring
sauce	to	simmer	and	stir	in	softened	gelatin	until	completely	dissolved.	Pour
warm	sauce	over	meat,	cover	with	foil,	and	bake	in	350-degree	oven	until	heated
through,	about	30	minutes.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
How	do	you	use	an	entire	bottle	of	wine	in	a	stew	recipe	that	calls	for	covered
cooking	and	not	end	up	with	a	sauce	that’s	too	boozy?	You	deal	with	the	wine
before	it	goes	into	the	pot.
USE	A	NEW	METHOD	Boeuf	à	la	mode—“beef	in	the	latest	fashion”—is	a

classic	French	recipe	that	dates	to	a	time	when	a	multiday	recipe	was	the	rule
rather	than	the	exception.	Although	boeuf	à	la	mode	bears	some	similarity	to
American	pot	roast,	this	elegant	French	dish	relies	heavily	on	wine	for	flavor,
adds	collagen-rich	veal	and	pork	parts	for	body,	and	has	a	separately	prepared
mushroom-onion	garnish.	Today’s	grain-fed	beef	gets	little	exercise	and	has
much	more	marbling	than	the	leaner,	grass-fed	beef	eaten	in	France	when	this
recipe	was	created.	Therefore,	we	are	able	to	simplify	this	dish	and	skip	the
traditional	larding	and	marinating	of	the	beef,	and	yet	still	produce	a	tender	pot
roast	in	a	suave,	rich	wine	sauce	with	great	body.
SALT	THE	BEEF	We	take	the	usual	pot	roast	cut	(chuck-eye	roast)	and	split

it	in	half	to	expose	(and	remove)	excess	fat	so	we	can	guarantee	an	especially
refined	final	product.	We	then	salt	the	meat	for	an	hour	to	ramp	up	the	meaty
quotient.	This	works	by	drawing	moisture	out	of	the	meat	and	forming	a	shallow
brine.	Over	time,	the	salt	migrates	back	into	the	meat,	seasoning	it	throughout
rather	than	just	on	the	exterior.	(See	concept	12	for	more	details	on	salting.)
REDUCE	THE	WINE	In	all	of	the	classic	recipes,	the	meat	is	marinated	in	a

mixture	of	red	wine	and	large-cut	mirepoix	(carrots,	onions,	and	celery)	for	a
significant	period	of	time,	up	to	three	days	in	some	cases.	Testing	various	lengths
of	time,	we	found	that	the	effect	was	superficial	unless	we	were	willing	to	invest
at	least	two	full	days.	Even	then,	the	wine	flavor	penetrated	only	the	outer	part	of
the	meat,	and	the	vegetables	didn’t	really	add	much.	Frankly,	the	meat	picked	up
so	much	wine	flavor	during	the	hours-long	braising	time	that	marinating	didn’t
seem	worth	the	effort.	In	fact,	we	felt	that	the	meat	picked	up	too	much	wine
flavor	as	it	cooked,	tasting	sour	and	harsh.	We	fixed	this	problem	by	cooking	the
wine	before	braising	the	beef.	When	we	combined	the	reduced	wine	with	the
beef	broth	and	used	this	mixture	as	the	braising	liquid,	we	knew	we’d	got	it
right.	The	wine	tastes	complex	and	fruity,	not	sour	and	astringent.	Reducing	the
wine	before	using	it	in	this	recipe	also	cuts	the	alcohol	content	in	the	final	dish.
PUT	IT	IN	THE	OVEN	We	cook	this	pot	roast,	covered,	in	the	oven	and	use

foil	to	maintain	a	good	seal.	The	steam	that	collects	in	the	pot	helps	to	cook	the
meat	slowly	and	evenly.	(See	concept	8	for	more	on	this	phenomenon.)



MAKE	IT	THICK	AND	GLOSSY	Compared	with	regular	pot	roast	braising
liquid,	which	is	flavorful	but	relatively	thin	and	brothy,	the	sauce	that
accompanies	boeuf	à	la	mode	is	richer	and	more	akin	to	a	sauce	that	might	be
found	on	a	steak	at	a	fine	restaurant.	Adding	some	flour	to	the	sautéed	onion	and
garlic	helps	with	the	overall	consistency,	but	the	sauce	still	needs	body.	Instead
of	adding	pork	rind,	split	calves’	feet,	or	veal	bones,	we	go	straight	to	the	source:
powdered	gelatin.	Adding	powdered	gelatin	after	the	sauce	has	finished	reducing
gives	us	the	results	we	want:	a	rich	and	velvety	sauce,	on	par	with	the	best
classic	recipes	out	there.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
DEALCOHOLIZED	WINES

If	substituting	dealcoholized	wine,	we	prefer	the	brand	Fre.

To	see	how	dealcoholized	wine	performs	in	the	kitchen,	we	sampled	both	red	and	white	versions	of	two
national	brands,	Ariel	and	Fre.	Neither	brand	had	the	complexity	of	real	wine,	but	the	Fre	red	and	white
beverages	were	a	step	up	from	mere	grape	juice.	To	find	out	what	factors	might	contribute	to	the	differences
between	the	brands,	we	looked	into	how	each	producer	removes	alcohol	from	wine.	Ariel	uses	a	cold
filtration	process,	repeatedly	passing	the	wine	along	meshlike	membranes	to	remove	the	alcohol.	The
resulting	alcohol-free	syrup	is	then	diluted	with	water.	Fre	wines,	on	the	other	hand,	are	produced	with	a
technique	known	as	the	“spinning-cone”	method,	in	which	the	wine	cascades	down	spinning	cone-shaped
cylinders	in	a	thin	stream.	Nitrogen	gas	is	sprayed	over	this	thin	layer	of	wine	to	prevent	any	of	the	flavor
compounds	from	becoming	volatile	and	escaping.	When	the	wine	is	subsequently	heated	to	remove	the
alcohol,	the	nitrogen	shield	protects	the	flavors	of	the	wine.	In	the	end,	the	alcohol	is	reduced	from	10	to	12
percent	to	.3	to	.5	percent.	Since	some	liquid	evaporates	in	the	process,	a	small	amount	of	unfermented
grape	juice	is	added	to	the	wine.	Though	sweet,	wines	that	are	dealcoholized	with	the	spinning-cone	method
retain	distinct	wine	aromas	and	flavors.

To	see	how	dealcoholized	Fre	would	stand	up	to	the	real	deal	in	cooking,	we	sautéed	chicken	cutlets	and
made	our	Daube	Provençal.	While	all	tasters	could	easily	detect	the	sweet	and	less	acidic	notes	of	the
dealcoholized	wine	in	both	dishes,	most	thought	it	was	still	quite	acceptable.	When	we	added	some	lemon
juice	or	wine	vinegar	to	cut	the	sweetness,	both	dishes	got	near	universal	compliments.	If	you	want	to	avoid
wine	with	alcohol,	the	only	national	brand	we	found	that	uses	the	spinning-cone	method	is	Fre,	which	is
made	by	Sutter	Home.

If	you	don’t	have	dealcoholized	wine	on	hand	and	really	want	to	avoid	cooking	with	alcohol,	we	found
that	broth	can	work	in	sauces	or	stews	that	don’t	rely	heavily	on	wine	for	flavor.	(This	includes	simple	pan
sauces	with	wine	but	excludes	dishes	like	French-Style	Pot	Roast	or	Daube	Provençal	that	call	for	an	entire
bottle	of	wine.)	Replace	the	wine	with	an	equal	amount	of	broth	and	add	a	little	red	wine	vinegar,	white
wine	vinegar,	or	lemon	juice	just	before	serving	to	mimic	the	acidity	of	the	wine.	For	every	½	cup	of	broth
added,	use	½	teaspoon	of	vinegar	or	lemon	juice.



EVAPORATION	AT	WORK	
POACHING



POACHED	SALMON	WITH	HERB	AND	CAPER	VINAIGRETTE
SERVES	4

To	ensure	uniform	pieces	of	fish	that	cook	at	the	same	rate,	buy	a	whole	center-
cut	fillet	and	cut	it	into	four	pieces.	If	a	skinless	whole	fillet	is	unavailable,
remove	the	skin	yourself	or	follow	the	recipe	as	directed	with	a	skin-on	fillet,
adding	three	to	four	minutes	to	the	cooking	time	in	step	2.	This	recipe	will	yield
salmon	fillets	cooked	to	medium-rare.

2				 lemons
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	parsley,	stems	reserved
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	tarragon,	stems	reserved
1				 large	shallot,	minced
½				 cup	dry	white	wine
½				 cup	water
1				 (1¾-to	2-pound)	skinless	salmon	fillet,	about	1½	inches	thick
2				 tablespoons	capers,	rinsed	and	chopped
2				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1				 tablespoon	honey
					 Salt	and	pepper

1.	Line	plate	with	paper	towels.	Cut	top	and	bottom	off	1	lemon,	then	cut	into
eight	to	ten	¼-inch-thick	slices.	Cut	remaining	lemon	into	8	wedges	and	set
aside.	Arrange	lemon	slices	in	single	layer	across	bottom	of	12-inch	skillet.
Scatter	herb	stems	and	2	tablespoons	minced	shallot	evenly	over	lemon	slices.
Add	wine	and	water	to	skillet.
2.	Use	sharp	knife	to	remove	any	whitish	fat	from	belly	of	salmon	and	cut

fillet	into	4	equal	pieces.	Place	salmon	fillets	in	skillet,	skinned	side	down,	on
top	of	lemon	slices.	Set	pan	over	high	heat	and	bring	liquid	to	simmer.	Reduce
heat	to	low,	cover,	and	cook	until	sides	are	opaque	but	center	of	thickest	part	of
fillet	is	still	translucent	when	cut	into	with	paring	knife,	or	until	fillet	registers
125	degrees	(for	medium-rare),	11	to	16	minutes.	Remove	pan	from	heat	and,
using	spatula,	carefully	transfer	salmon	and	lemon	slices	to	prepared	plate	and
tent	loosely	with	aluminum	foil.
3.	Return	pan	to	high	heat	and	simmer	cooking	liquid	until	slightly	thickened



and	reduced	to	2	tablespoons,	4	to	5	minutes.	Meanwhile,	combine	minced
parsley	and	tarragon,	remaining	minced	shallot,	capers,	oil,	and	honey	in
medium	bowl.	Strain	reduced	cooking	liquid	through	fine-mesh	strainer	into
bowl	with	herb	mixture,	pressing	on	solids	to	extract	as	much	liquid	as	possible.
Whisk	to	combine	and	season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste.
4.	Season	salmon	with	salt	and	pepper.	Using	spatula,	carefully	lift	and	tilt

salmon	fillets	to	remove	lemon	slices.	Place	salmon	on	serving	platter	or
individual	plates	and	spoon	vinaigrette	over	top.	Serve,	passing	lemon	wedges
separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	classic	poaching	method	calls	for	submerging	salmon	completely	in	liquid	in
a	deep	pan.	This	method	makes	sense	in	a	restaurant	where	the	poaching	liquid
is	used	over	and	over	again.	But	at	home	it	seems	wasteful.	Plus,	all	that	liquid
causes	flavor	to	leach	out	of	the	fish.	We	reinvent	poached	fish	in	this	recipe	to
preserve	flavor	and	moisture;	we	also	make	a	sauce	in	the	process.
USE	LESS	LIQUID	Rather	than	poaching	fish	in	a	big	pot	of	wine	and

water,	which	has	to	be	flavored	with	a	ton	of	herbs	and	aromatic	vegetables,	we
cut	way	back	on	the	liquid.	This	keeps	more	flavor	in	the	fish.	And	with	so	little
liquid	in	the	pot	we	need	just	a	couple	of	shallots	and	a	few	herbs	to	flavor	the
water	and	wine.
BOOST	THE	WINE	Because	we’re	using	less	liquid,	the	salmon	isn’t	totally

submerged	as	it	cooks.	Therefore	it	relies	on	steam	to	deliver	heat	and	flavor.
With	our	original	ratio	of	wine	to	liquid,	and	at	such	a	low	temperature,	not
enough	steam	was	being	created	to	efficiently	cook	the	parts	of	the	fish	sticking
out	above	the	liquid.	But	then	we	remembered	that	adding	alcohol	to	water
lowers	the	boiling	temperature.	The	higher	the	concentration	of	alcohol,	the
more	vapor	will	be	produced	as	the	liquid	is	heated.	More	vapor,	in	turn,	means
better	heat	transfer,	which	leads	to	faster	cooking,	even	at	temperatures	below	a
simmer.	We	also	know	that	alcohol	can	increase	the	rate	at	which	proteins
denature.	Therefore,	by	using	more	alcohol	in	the	cooking	liquid,	we	can	cook
the	fish	faster	and	at	a	lower	temperature.	The	results?	A	piece	of	salmon	that	is
perfectly	cooked.
TURN	LIQUID	INTO	SAUCE	We	were	happy	to	discover	that	the	super-

concentrated	poaching	liquid	was	the	foundation	for	a	beurre	blanc,	and
therefore	we	didn’t	have	to	make	a	separate	sauce.	This	classic	French	sauce	is
made	by	reducing	wine	flavored	with	vinegar,	shallots,	and	herbs	and	then
finishing	it	with	butter.	But	since	a	few	tablespoons	of	butter	per	serving	push
this	dish	out	of	the	“everyday”	category,	we	offer	a	vinaigrette-style	variation	in
which	we	use	olive	oil	instead	of	butter.
REMOVE	THE	SKIN	This	recipe	calls	for	skinless	fillets	so	that	the	flavors

of	the	poaching	liquid	can	be	easily	absorbed	by	the	flesh.	If	you’re	able	to
purchase	only	skin-on	fillets,	they	will	work	in	this	recipe	but	you	won’t	want	to
serve	the	soggy	skin.	To	remove	it,	transfer	the	cooked	fillets	to	paper	towels	and
let	cool	slightly.	Gently	slide	a	thin	spatula	between	the	flesh	and	skin	and	use
the	fingers	of	your	free	hand	to	help	separate	the	skin.	In	the	process,	you	can
also	remove	the	unattractive	gray	portion	of	the	flesh	that	is	found	next	to	the



skin,	but	you	may	not	want	to.	While	this	tissue	occasionally	has	a	slightly	fishy
flavor,	it	is	rich	in	omega-3	fatty	acids	and	well	worth	eating.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BENEFITS	OF	BELLY	FAT

Belly	fat	helps	keep	salmon	moist.

A	center-cut	salmon	fillet	typically	tapers	down	on	one	side	to	the	fattier	belly	of	the	fish.	The	belly’s
fattiness	helps	keep	this	section	of	the	fish	moist,	despite	its	thinner	profile.	The	belly	area	is	sometimes
covered	with	a	chewy	white	membrane,	which	should	be	trimmed	away	before	cooking.	We	also	like	to
neaten	up	any	ragged	edges	that	can	dry	out	and	fray	during	cooking.

	



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
QUICK	FIX	FOR	CORKED	WINES

The	acrid	taste	of	corked	wine	can	be	lessened	with	plastic	wrap—but	not	enough	to	make	the
wine	drinkable.

The	chemical	culprit	responsible	for	a	“corked,”	or	tainted,	bottle	of	wine—which	will	have	an
unmistakable	musty	smell	and	acrid	taste—is	TCA	(2,4,6-trichloroanisole).	TCA	is	produced	when	fungi
naturally	present	in	the	cork	encounter	chlorophenols—ironically	a	product	of	the	chlorine	bleaching
process	used	to	sterilize	cork.	While	TCA	is	harmless	to	health,	it	renders	wine	undrinkable.

It	never	occurred	to	us	that	there	might	be	a	way	to	salvage	the	wine,	but	with	a	little	digging,	we
actually	found	a	quirky	recommendation:	Submerge	a	ball	of	plastic	wrap	in	the	wine	and	let	it	sit	for	a
while.	As	odd	as	it	sounds,	the	theory	behind	the	suggestion	makes	sense:	The	polyethylene	material
attracts	the	TCA,	effectively	removing	it	from	the	wine.

With	nothing	to	lose,	we	tracked	down	four	corked	bottles,	poured	half	of	each	into	a	jar	with	a	loose
wad	of	plastic	wrap,	sealed	the	lids,	and	soaked	them	for	10	minutes,	shaking	each	sample	occasionally.
When	we	sipped	the	treated	wines,	we	found	that	the	nasty	“dirty-socks”	odor	and	bitterness	from	the	TCA
were	indeed	greatly	reduced.	But	we	also	noticed	that	the	plastic	had	absorbed	many	of	the	desirable
aromatic	compounds,	leaving	the	wines	tasting	flat	and	muted—and	still	unfit	for	drinking	or	cooking.	Your
best	bet:	Return	the	tainted	wine	for	a	refund.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
COOKING	WITH	WINE

When	it	comes	to	cooking,	not	all	wines	are	the	same.

After	years	of	cooking	with	wine	in	the	test	kitchen,	here’s	what	we’ve	learned.
	

The	salt	used	to	preserve	supermarket	“cooking	wines”	can	ruin	a	recipe
and	make	it	inedible.	Don’t	ever	use	anything	labeled	“cooking	wine.”
Use	wine	you	want	to	drink	but	don’t	cook	with	fine	wines.	We	generally
found	$10	wines	performed	just	as	well	as	$30	bottles.
Flavors	that	work	in	the	glass	can	become	overpowering	when	the	wine	is
reduced.	This	is	especially	true	about	heavily	oaked	wines,	such	as
Chardonnay	or	Cabernet	Sauvignon.
Some	varietals	work	better	than	others.	Of	course,	not	all	Chardonnays	are
the	same,	but	we	do	find	certain	traits	that	we	like	(or	don’t	like)	in	most
wines	made	from	the	same	grape.
Among	whites,	we	recommend	crisp,	clean	Sauvignon	Blanc.
Among	reds,	we	recommend	red	blends	made	from	multiple	varietals.
Boxed	wines,	which	store	the	liquid	in	an	airtight	sack,	are	a	good	option.
You	can	sometimes	replace	regular	wine	with	either	dealcoholized	wine	or
broth.	See	“Dealcoholized	Wines.”



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
QUICK-CHILLING	WINE

To	quick-chill	wine,	wrap	it	in	a	damp	towel	and	place	in	freezer.

To	chill	a	bottle	of	wine,	you	can	just	pop	it	into	the	freezer,	but	it	will	take	a	while	to	cool	down.	In	our
tests,	it	took	about	an	hour	to	bring	a	bottle	of	room-temperature	wine	to	50	degrees,	the	ideal	drinking
temperature.	We’ve	also	recommended	submerging	the	bottle	in	a	salt–ice	water	solution,	which	will	chill	it
in	about	half	that	time.	(When	salt	is	added	to	a	mixture	of	ice	and	water,	its	temperature	decreases	to	well
below	32	degrees.)

Now	we’ve	discovered	an	equally	effective	(and	less	messy)	technique	for	quick	chilling:	Simply	wrap
the	bottle	in	a	wet	kitchen	towel	before	placing	it	in	the	freezer.	Since	cooling	occurs	when	heat	is
transferred	away	from	an	item,	the	water	in	the	towel—a	much	more	efficient	conductor	of	heat	than	air—
will	quickly	freeze,	dropping	the	temperature	of	the	wine	to	50	degrees	in	only	30	minutes.	(Note:	Once	the
wine	is	fully	chilled,	the	towel	will	be	frozen	solid.	To	release	it	from	the	bottle,	just	place	it	briefly	under
lukewarm	running	water.)



EVAPORATION	AT	WORK	
FLAMBÉING
Flambés	do	not	have	to	be	scary.	The	classic	Crêpes	Suzette	uses	the	high-heat
flambé	technique	to	reduce	the	boozy	nature	of	the	sauce,	and	to	provide	deeper,
better	flavor.



CRÊPES	SUZETTE
SERVES	6

To	allow	for	practice,	the	recipe	yields	about	16	crêpes;	only	12	are	needed	for
the	dish.	We	prefer	crêpes	made	with	whole	milk,	but	skim	milk	or	1	percent	or	2
percent	low-fat	milk	can	also	be	used.	Before	flambéing,	be	sure	to	roll	up	long
shirtsleeves,	tie	back	long	hair,	and	turn	off	the	exhaust	fan	and	any	lit	burners.

CRÊPES
1½				 cups	whole	milk
1½				 cups	(7½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
3				 large	eggs
½				 cup	water
5				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted,	plus	extra	for	pan
3				 tablespoons	sugar
2				 tablespoons	cognac
½				 teaspoon	salt

ORANGE	SAUCE
¼				 cup	cognac
1				 tablespoon	finely	grated	orange	zest	plus	1¼	cups	juice	(3	oranges)
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	6	pieces
¼				 cup	sugar
2				 tablespoons	orange	liqueur,	such	as	triple	sec

1.	FOR	THE	CRÊPES:	Process	all	ingredients	in	blender	until	smooth,
about	10	seconds.	Transfer	to	bowl.
2.	Brush	bottom	and	sides	of	10-inch	nonstick	skillet	lightly	with	melted

butter	and	heat	skillet	over	medium	heat.	Pour	in	scant	¼	cup	batter	in	slow,
steady	stream,	twirling	skillet	slowly	until	bottom	is	evenly	covered.	Cook	crêpe
until	it	starts	to	lose	its	opaqueness	and	turns	spotty	light	golden	brown	on
bottom,	30	seconds	to	1	minute,	loosening	edge	with	rubber	spatula.	Gently	slide
spatula	underneath	edge	of	crêpe,	grasp	edge	with	fingertips,	and	flip	crêpe.
Cook	until	dry	on	second	side,	about	20	seconds.



3.	Transfer	cooked	crêpe	to	wire	rack,	inverting	so	spotted	side	is	facing	up.
Return	pan	to	heat,	brush	pan	lightly	with	butter,	and	heat	for	10	seconds	before
repeating	with	remaining	batter.	As	crêpes	are	done,	stack	on	wire	rack.	(Cooked
crêpes	can	be	refrigerated,	wrapped	in	plastic	wrap,	for	up	to	3	days;	bring	them
to	room	temperature	before	proceeding	with	recipe.)
4.	FOR	THE	ORANGE	SAUCE:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position

and	heat	broiler.	Heat	3	tablespoons	cognac	in	12-inch	broiler-safe	skillet	over
medium	heat	just	until	warmed	through,	about	5	seconds.	Off	heat,	wave	lit
match	over	pan	until	cognac	ignites,	then	shake	pan	to	distribute	flames.
5.	When	flames	subside,	add	1	cup	orange	juice,	butter,	and	3	tablespoons

sugar	and	simmer	over	high	heat,	stirring	occasionally,	until	many	large	bubbles
appear	and	mixture	reduces	to	thick	syrup,	6	to	8	minutes	(you	should	have	just
over	½	cup	sauce).	Transfer	sauce	to	small	bowl;	do	not	wash	skillet.	Stir
remaining	¼	cup	orange	juice,	orange	zest,	orange	liqueur,	and	remaining	1
tablespoon	cognac	into	sauce;	cover	to	keep	warm.
6.	To	assemble,	fold	each	crêpe	in	half,	then	fold	into	quarters.	Arrange	9

folded	crêpes	around	edge	of	now-empty	skillet,	with	rounded	edges	facing
inward,	overlapping	as	necessary	to	fit.	Arrange	remaining	3	crêpes	in	center	of
pan.	Sprinkle	crêpes	evenly	with	remaining	1	tablespoon	sugar.	Broil	until	sugar
caramelizes	and	crêpes	turn	spotty	brown,	about	5	minutes.	(Watch	crêpes
constantly	to	prevent	scorching;	turn	pan	as	necessary.)	Carefully	remove	pan
from	oven	and	pour	half	of	sauce	over	crêpes,	leaving	some	areas	uncovered.
Transfer	crêpes	to	individual	plates	and	serve	immediately,	passing	extra	sauce
separately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	classic	recipe	for	crêpes	flambéed	with	an	orange-cognac	sauce	is	certainly
dramatic	but	the	reality	is	often	disappointing.	The	sauce	can	fail	to	ignite,
which	makes	the	dish	too	boozy.	And	even	if	the	sauce	does	flambé,	the	crêpes
are	too	soggy.	Finally,	we	wanted	to	make	this	dish	for	a	small	crowd	rather	than
an	individual,	as	is	the	custom	when	this	dish	is	made	tableside	in	a	restaurant.
BLEND	AND	GO	Classic	crêpe	recipes	generally	call	for	resting	the	batter

(made	with	eggs,	milk,	melted	butter,	flour,	and	sugar)	for	several	hours	so	that
the	gluten	can	relax.	(For	more	on	gluten,	see	concept	39.)	We	found	that
skipping	this	step	yielded	sturdier	crêpes	more	capable	of	standing	up	to	the
sauce,	plus	we	saved	two	hours	of	waiting	time.	To	maximize	gluten
development	we	simply	throw	all	the	batter	ingredients	into	a	blender.	A	splash
of	cognac	and	a	dash	of	salt	give	our	crêpes	additional	flavor.
DON’T	BUY	A	CRÊPE	PAN	There’s	no	need	to	invest	in	a	special	crêpe

pan;	a	buttered	nonstick	pan	works	just	fine	for	this	recipe.	Use	a	pastry	brush	to
ensure	an	even,	light	coating	of	fat.	Use	a	dry	measuring	cup	with	a	¼-cup
capacity	to	portion	the	batter.	When	you’re	ready	to	go,	tilt	the	buttered	and
heated	nonstick	skillet	slightly	to	the	right	and	begin	pouring	in	a	scant	¼	cup	of
batter.	Continue	tilting	the	pan	slowly,	in	a	counterclockwise	motion,	until	a	thin,
even	crêpe	is	formed.	Loosen	the	edge	with	a	heatproof	rubber	spatula	and,	with
fingertips	on	the	top	side,	grab	the	edge	and	flip.	The	first	few	may	not	come	out
perfectly	(or	even	be	usable	at	all).	Here,	practice	really	does	make	perfect.
FLAMBÉ	FIRST	For	a	foolproof	flambé	that	doesn’t	create	a	frightening

fireball	or,	conversely,	doesn’t	burn	at	all,	we	ignite	the	alcohol	(cognac)	alone	in
the	skillet	before	building	the	sauce.	We	then	enrich	a	reduction	of	butter,	sugar,
and	orange	juice	with	additional	orange	juice,	orange	zest,	and	triple	sec.
BROIL	THE	CRÊPES	Before	saucing,	we	sprinkle	our	crêpes	with	sugar

and	broil	them,	forming	a	crunchy,	sugary	barrier	that	provides	partial	protection
from	the	sauce,	so	our	crêpes	don’t	turn	soggy.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	BEST	WAYS	TO	FLAMBÉ

Here	are	some	tips	to	help	you	flambé	without	any	fear.

Flambéing	is	more	than	just	tableside	theatrics:	As	dramatic	as	it	looks,	igniting	alcohol	actually	helps
develop	a	deeper,	more	complex	flavor	in	sauces,	thanks	to	flavor-boosting	chemical	reactions	that	occur
only	at	the	high	temperature	reached	in	flambéing.	But	accomplishing	this	feat	at	home	can	be	daunting.
Here	are	some	tips	for	successful—and	safe—flambéing	at	home.
BE	PREPARED	Turn	off	the	exhaust	fan,	tie	back	long	hair,	and	have	a	lid	ready	to	smother	dangerous
flare-ups.
USE	PROPER	EQUIPMENT	A	pan	with	flared	sides	(such	as	a	skillet)	rather	than	straight	sides	will
allow	more	oxygen	to	mingle	with	the	alcohol	vapors,	increasing	the	chance	that	you’ll	spark	the	desired
flame.	If	possible,	use	long	wooden	chimney	matches,	and	light	the	alcohol	with	your	arm	extended	to	full
length.
IGNITE	WARM	ALCOHOL	If	the	alcohol	becomes	too	hot,	the	vapors	can	rise	to	dangerous	heights,
causing	large	flare-ups	once	lit.	Inversely,	if	the	alcohol	is	too	cold,	there	won’t	be	enough	vapors	to	light	at
all.	We	found	that	heating	alcohol	to	100	degrees	Fahrenheit	(best	achieved	by	adding	alcohol	to	a	pan	off
the	heat,	then	letting	it	heat	from	five	to	10	seconds)	produced	the	most	moderate,	yet	long-burning	flames.
LIGHT	THE	ALCOHOL	OFF	THE	HEAT	If	using	a	gas	burner,	be	sure	to	turn	off	the	flame	to
eliminate	accidental	ignitions	near	the	side	of	the	pan.	Removing	the	pan	from	the	heat	also	gives	you	more
control	over	the	alcohol’s	temperature.
IF	A	DANGEROUS	FLARE-UP	SHOULD	OCCUR	Simply	slide	the	lid	over	the	top	of	the	skillet
(coming	in	from	the	side	of,	rather	than	over,	the	flames)	to	put	out	the	fire	quickly.	Let	the	alcohol	cool
down	and	start	again.
IF	THE	ALCOHOL	WON’T	LIGHT	If	the	pan	is	full	of	other	ingredients,	the	potency	of	the	alcohol	can
be	diminished	as	it	becomes	incorporated.	For	a	more	foolproof	flame,	ignite	the	alcohol	in	a	separate	small
skillet	or	saucepan;	once	the	flame	has	burned	off,	add	the	reduced	alcohol	to	the	remaining	ingredients.

	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	

IS	FLAMBÉ	JUST	FOR	SHOW?
Flambéing	improves	the	flavor	of	a	sauce	by	removing	much	of	the	alcohol	and	reconfiguring

the	molecules	as	a	result	of	the	high	heat.

A	flambé	looks	impressive	and	is	easy	enough	to	execute,	but	we	wondered	if	it	really	improves	the	flavor
of	a	sauce	and,	if	so,	why.	Blind	taste	tests	quickly	revealed	that	flambéing	a	sauce	did	indeed	improve	its
flavor:	A	flamed	sauce	was	richer	and	sweeter	than	a	sauce	that	had	not	been	ignited.	To	get	a	handle	on
why	it	was	better,	we	looked	into	the	scientific	principles	involved.

A	flambé	is	the	ignition	of	the	alcohol	vapor	that	lies	above	the	pan,	a	reaction	that	generates	significant
amounts	of	heat.	To	measure	this	heat,	we	used	an	infrared	thermometer	and	discovered	that	the	temperature
at	the	surface	of	the	cognac—the	base	of	this	particular	sauce—quickly	climbed	past	500	degrees.	Curious
to	know	whether	the	high	heat	served	to	remove	all	of	the	alcohol	from	the	pan,	we	sent	samples	of	the
flambéed	cognac	as	well	as	the	completed	sauce	to	a	food	lab	for	alcohol	analysis.	Tests	revealed	that	the
flambé	removed	79	percent	of	the	alcohol	from	the	cognac.	(The	simmering	of	the	sauce	that	followed	the
flambé	removed	almost	all	of	the	remaining	alcohol.)	So	the	flambé	was	removing	most	of	the	alcohol,	but
what	effect	was	the	high	heat	having	on	flavor?



Many	of	the	great,	flavor-boosting	chemical	reactions	of	cooking	require	high	heat.	Reactions	involving
sugar,	such	as	caramelization	and	browning,	occur	at	temperatures	higher	than	300	degrees.	Because	the
surface	had	reached	above	500	degrees,	we	noticed	some	of	this	type	of	flavor	development.	A	simmered
cognac,	in	contrast,	maintains	a	steady	temperature	of	about	180	degrees	at	its	surface	and	therefore
develops	none	of	that	extra	flavor.	Another	benefit	of	the	flambé	is	that	at	very	high	heat,	molecules	can
absorb	enough	energy	to	isomerize,	or	change	shape.	The	consequences	of	this	reconfiguration	might
include	improved	solubility	and	changed	flavor	perception.	The	mystery	was	solved.	A	flambéed	sauce
burns	off	most	of	its	alcohol	and	gains	flavor	from	several	high-heat	cooking	reactions.	The	result	is	a	sauce
with	a	hint	of	alcohol	and	great	depth.



CONCEPT	38

More	Water	Makes	Chewier	Bread
Bread.	It’s	ironic	that	something	so	simple	seems	so	complicated	to	modern
cooks.	In	many	cases,	the	ingredient	list	for	bread	recipes	consists	of	just	flour,
water,	salt,	and	yeast.	And	the	method	and	required	equipment	should	not	be
daunting.	After	all,	they	were	baking	bread	in	ancient	Egypt.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Let’s	start	with	the	ingredients.
Yeast	is	a	living	organism.	Its	function	in	bread	dough	is	to	consume	sugars

and	starches	present	in	the	flour	and	then	convert	them	into	carbon	dioxide	and
alcohol,	which	gives	the	finished	loaf	its	lift	and	flavor.	This	process	is	known	as
fermentation.
The	two	most	common	forms	of	yeast	in	the	grocery	store	are	active	dry	and

instant.	They	are	similar	in	appearance	and	origins	but	are	processed	differently:
Active	dry	yeast	is	dried	at	higher	temperatures,	which	kills	more	of	the	exterior
yeast	cells	(this	is	why	it	requires	an	initial	activation	in	warm	water),	whereas
instant,	or	rapid-rise,	yeast	is	dried	at	more	gentle	temperatures	(so	it	can	be
added	directly	to	the	dry	ingredients).	As	a	result,	substituting	equal	amounts	of
one	for	the	other	will	not	provide	the	same	results.	(See	“Substituting	Active	Dry
Yeast	for	Instant.”)
Yeast	is	important,	but	bread	would	be	nothing	without	the	combination	of

flour	and	water.	Though	it	may	look	like	nothing	more	than	white	powder,	flour
is	a	complex	substance	made	mostly	of	starch	and	lesser	amounts	of	proteins
(see	“Flour	101”).	With	the	proper	treatment,	it	provides	the	structure	and	texture
of	breads	of	all	kinds.
The	role	of	flour	in	bread	begins	when	it	is	combined	with	water	and	yeast—

the	first	step	of	bread	making.	The	wheat	proteins	in	flour	are	unmoving	and
lifeless	when	dry	but	begin	to	change	shape	when	they	come	in	contact	with
water,	a	process	called	hydration.	During	hydration,	the	individual	protein
molecules,	which	consist	of	the	loosely	coiled	glutenin	and	the	more	tightly
wound	gliadin	(see	concept	39),	begin	to	link	up	with	one	another	to	form	long,
elastic	chains	called	gluten.	These	strands	of	gluten	combine	to	form	a
membranelike	network.	The	network	engulfs	swollen	starch	granules	and	gas
bubbles,	stretching	as	the	dough	rises	and	then	bakes,	giving	the	finished	loaf	its
structure	and	chew.
The	amount	of	water	added	to	your	flour	and	yeast	is	important:	The	more

water	in	a	dough,	the	stronger	and	more	extensible	the	gluten	strands.	If	the
gluten	strands	are	strong	and	extensible,	they	can	support	the	starch	granules	and
gas	bubbles	that	hydrate	and	swell	as	the	dough	rises	and	bakes,	giving	you	an
airier	bread	with	good	chew.	During	baking,	the	water	within	the	dough	turns	to
steam,	creating	hollow	pockets	as	moisture	rushes	to	escape.	Extra	water	also
creates	a	looser	dough,	which	allows	the	steam	bubbles	to	expand	more	easily.	In



a	drier	dough,	gas	bubbles	have	a	harder	time	forming	and	are	more	likely	to
collapse.	Getting	those	gas	bubbles	to	hold	their	shape	until	the	dough	has	risen
and	set	in	the	oven	is	the	key	to	creating	an	open,	airy	crumb.



WHEN	WATER	AND	FLOUR	COMBINE



	
WITHOUT	WATER	When	flour	is	dry,	the	starch’s	protein	strands	are	lifeless	and	unmoving.



	
WATER	ADDED	When	flour	and	water	are	combined,	the	protein	strands	change	shape	and	link	together



to	form	gluten.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
We	wanted	to	see	and	taste	the	differences	in	bread	made	with	varying	quantities
of	water	so	we	designed	a	simple	experiment.	We	started	with	our	recipe	for	a
rustic	Italian	bread,	which	has	a	hydration	level	of	about	68	percent	(for	more
on	percent	hydration,	see	“Calculating	Baker’s	Percentage”),	and	tried	both
increasing	and	decreasing	the	amount	of	water	in	the	recipe.	For	simplicity’s
sake,	and	to	eliminate	unwanted	variables,	we	skipped	using	a	biga	(see	concept
40)	and	made	the	doughs	using	a	straight	mixing	method.	Along	with	the
original	recipe,	we	tested	the	following	hydration	levels:	50	percent,	60	percent,
75	percent,	and	80	percent.



THE	RESULTS
While	even	the	60	and	75	percent	hydrated	doughs	showed	significant
differences,	the	extremes	were	most	illustrative.	The	50	percent	hydrated	loaf
featured	a	tight,	fine	crumb	with	small	air	pockets—and	showed	little	spread	and
expansion.	On	the	other	hand,	the	dough	with	80	percent	water	had	a	loose,	open
crumb	with	large,	irregular	holes,	and	the	bread	baked	up	very	flat	and	wide.	In
the	middle	of	these	outer	limits,	the	original	recipe	featured	moderate-size	holes
and	good	volume	and	height.	Because	the	levels	of	flour,	yeast,	and	salt	were	the
same	for	all	of	our	breads,	ignoring	the	texture,	tasters	found	the	flavor	of	each
loaf	to	be	identical.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	ratio	of	water	to	flour	is	important	when	making	bread	dough.	When	flour
hits	water,	the	individual	wheat	proteins	begin	to	change	shape,	connecting	to
form	strands	of	gluten.	Gluten	is	responsible	for	creating	the	network	within	a
dough	that	gives	bread	its	structure.	Too	little	water,	and	a	strong	gluten	network
cannot	form.	Without	a	strong	gluten	network,	the	gas	bubbles	created	within	the
dough	cannot	hold	and	rise,	making	the	finished	product	a	dense	loaf	with	too
tight	a	crumb,	as	we	saw	in	our	bread	with	50	percent	hydration.	Too	much
water,	on	the	other	hand,	can	dilute	and	weaken	the	gluten,	likewise	hindering	a
bread’s	ability	to	rise,	as	in	the	loaf	with	80	percent	hydration.
We	vary	the	hydration	of	our	doughs	depending	on	our	desired	end	product,

however.	Our	Pizza	Bianca,	which	does	not	need	a	high	rise,	is	a	bread	that	we
want	to	be	extraordinarily	chewy.	Therefore,	we	hydrate	it	at	90	percent.	Olive-
Rosemary	Bread,	on	the	other	hand,	is	best	with	a	moderate	chew,	medium-sized
holes,	and	a	nice	rise.	We	hydrate	this	loaf	at	63	percent.	No	matter	what	kind	of
crumb	and	rise	you	desire,	it	always	pays	to	measure	your	ingredients	well.	Too
much	water	or	flour	can	drastically	alter	the	texture	of	your	bread.



HOW	WATER	AFFECTS	BREAD	TEXTURE

	
50	PERCENT	HYDRATION

This	loaf	had	the	smallest	ratio	of	water	to	flour,	resulting	in	a	weak	gluten	network.	As	a	result,	the	loaf
was	small	and	dense	with	a	tight	crumb.



	
68	PERCENT	HYDRATION

With	a	typical	hydration	level	of	68	percent,	this	loaf	rose	and	expanded	well,	possessing	modest-size	holes.

	
80	PERCENT	HYDRATION

This	loaf	had	the	greatest	ratio	of	water	to	flour,	causing	the	gluten	network	to	be	weak	and	diluted.
Therefore,	the	loaf	is	flat	and	wide	with	large	air	pockets.



BAKER’S	PERCENTAGE	AT	WORK	
BREAD
The	ratio	of	water	to	flour	plays	a	large	role	in	the	finished	texture	and	chew	of
any	loaf	of	bread	or	pizza.	More	water	helps	the	gluten	network	within	the	dough
to	become	stretchy	and	elastic,	allowing	it	to	hold	more	gas	bubbles	as	the	bread
bakes.	We	use	an	extremely	high	percentage	of	water	in	our	Pizza	Bianca	and	a
lower	but	still	high	percentage	of	water	in	our	Almost	No-Knead	Bread	to	create
the	chewy,	bubbly	textures	that	we	desire.	Our	Pizza	Bianca	is	so	hydrated,	in
fact,	that	it	is	impossible	to	roll	out.	Instead,	we	simply	pour	it	into	a	pan	and
press	to	fit.



PIZZA	BIANCA
SERVES	6	TO	8

If	you	don’t	have	a	stand	mixer,	you	can	mix	the	dough	by	hand.	To	do	this,	stir
the	wet	and	dry	ingredients	together	with	a	stiff	rubber	spatula	until	the	dough
comes	together	and	looks	shaggy.	Transfer	the	dough	to	a	clean	counter	and
knead	by	hand	to	form	a	smooth,	round	ball,	15	to	25	minutes,	adding	additional
flour,	if	necessary,	to	prevent	the	dough	from	sticking	to	the	counter.	Proceed
with	the	recipe	as	directed.	If	you	don’t	have	a	baking	stone,	bake	the	pizza	on	an
overturned	and	preheated	rimmed	baking	sheet	set	on	the	lowest	oven	rack.	This
recipe	was	developed	using	an	18	by	13-inch	baking	sheet.	Smaller	baking
sheets	can	be	used,	but	because	the	pizza	will	be	thicker,	baking	times	will	be
longer.	Place	a	damp	kitchen	towel	under	the	mixer	and	watch	it	at	all	times
during	kneading	to	prevent	it	from	wobbling	off	the	counter.	Handle	the	dough
with	lightly	oiled	hands	to	prevent	sticking.	Resist	flouring	your	fingers	or	the
dough	might	stick	further.	Serve	the	pizza	by	itself	as	a	snack,	or	with	soup	or
salad	as	a	light	entrée.

3				 cups	(15	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				2⁄3 cups	water,	room	temperature
1¼				 teaspoons	table	salt
1½				 teaspoons	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast
1¼				 teaspoons	sugar
5				 tablespoons	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1				 teaspoon	kosher	salt
2				 tablespoons	fresh	rosemary	leaves

1.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	dough	hook,	mix	flour,	water,	and	table	salt
together	on	low	speed	until	no	areas	of	dry	flour	remain,	3	to	4	minutes,	scraping
down	bowl	as	needed.	Turn	off	mixer	and	let	dough	rest	for	20	minutes.
2.	Sprinkle	yeast	and	sugar	over	dough.	Knead	on	low	speed	until	fully

combined,	1	to	2	minutes.	Increase	mixer	speed	to	high	and	knead	until	dough	is
glossy	and	smooth	and	pulls	away	from	sides	of	bowl,	6	to	10	minutes.	(Dough
will	pull	away	from	sides	only	while	mixer	is	on.	When	mixer	is	off,	dough	will
fall	back	to	sides.)



3.	Using	fingers,	coat	large	bowl	with	1	tablespoon	oil,	rubbing	excess	oil
from	fingers	onto	blade	of	rubber	spatula.	Using	oiled	spatula,	transfer	dough	to
prepared	bowl	and	pour	1	tablespoon	oil	over	top.	Flip	dough	over	once	so	that	it
is	well	coated	with	oil;	cover	bowl	tightly	with	plastic	wrap	and	let	dough	rise	at
room	temperature	until	nearly	tripled	in	volume	and	large	bubbles	have	formed,
2	to	2½	hours.	(Dough	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	24	hours.	Bring	dough	to
room	temperature,	2	to	2½	hours,	before	proceeding	with	step	4.)
4.	One	hour	before	baking,	adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position,	place	baking

stone	on	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	Coat	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	2
tablespoons	oil.	Using	rubber	spatula,	turn	dough	out	onto	prepared	baking	sheet
along	with	any	oil	in	bowl.	Using	fingertips,	press	dough	out	toward	edges	of
baking	sheet,	taking	care	not	to	tear	it.	(Dough	will	not	fit	snugly	into	corners.	If
dough	resists	stretching,	let	it	relax	for	5	to	10	minutes	before	trying	to	stretch	it
again.)	Let	dough	rest	until	slightly	bubbly,	5	to	10	minutes.	Using	dinner	fork,
poke	surface	of	dough	30	to	40	times	and	sprinkle	with	kosher	salt.
5.	Bake	until	golden	brown,	20	to	30	minutes,	sprinkling	rosemary	over	top

and	rotating	baking	sheet	halfway	through	baking.	Using	metal	spatula,	transfer
pizza	to	cutting	board.	Brush	dough	lightly	with	remaining	1	tablespoon	oil.
Slice	and	serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
With	no	cheese	or	sauce—just	a	gloss	of	olive	oil	and	flakes	of	salt—Pizza
Bianca	looks	more	like	focaccia	than	pizza.	But	its	crisp	exterior	and	chewy,
bubbly	middle	make	us	forget	all	about	nomenclature.	In	some	ways,	this	is	the
simplest	bread	imaginable	because	it	does	not	involve	shaping	it	into	a	loaf…
just	stretching	the	dough	into	a	pan.	Therefore,	the	dough	can	be	very,	very	wet.
ADD	WATER	To	achieve	its	chewy,	bubbly	texture,	our	recipe	for	Pizza

Bianca	calls	for	9	parts	water	to	10	parts	flour—an	almost	30	percent	higher
level	of	hydration	than	in	most	other	pizza	dough.	Water	aids	the	development	of
gluten,	the	network	of	cross-linked	proteins	that	gives	bread	its	internal	structure
and	chew.	Up	to	a	point,	the	more	water	in	the	dough,	the	stronger	and	more
elastic	the	gluten	strands	and	the	chewier	the	bread.	These	strands,	in	turn,	help
to	support	the	gas	bubbles	formed	as	the	dough	bakes,	preventing	them	from
bursting	and	creating	an	open,	airy	crust.
MIX,	REST,	AND	KNEAD	We	let	the	dough	rest	for	20	minutes	before

kneading.	This	rest	time,	called	autolyse,	allows	gluten	to	develop	and	therefore
cuts	down	drastically	on	the	kneading	time.	(See	concept	39	for	more	on
autolyse.)	Instead	of	a	half-hour	of	kneading	in	the	mixer,	now	we	need	less	than
10	minutes.
PRESS	THE	DOUGH	Because	this	recipe	is	traditionally	baked	in	a	pan,	it

is	easy	to	avoid	handling	the	wet	dough;	simply	pour	it	onto	a	well-oiled	baking
sheet.	Shaping	is	easy:	Press	the	dough	from	its	middle	toward	the	edges	of	the
pan.	It’s	important,	however,	to	stop	pressing	the	dough	if	it	is	resisting.	Give	it	a
little	rest:	Resting	allows	the	large	gluten	molecules	to	relax	(like	straightening
curly	hair)	and	stretch	more	easily.
USE	A	BAKING	STONE	Most	pizza	kitchens	are	equipped	with	stone-or

tile-lined	ovens	that	supply	the	steady,	dry,	intense	heat	necessary	to	make	pizzas
with	crisp,	crackerlike	crusts.	Baking	stones	(also	called	pizza	stones)	were
created	to	simulate	these	conditions	in	the	home	oven.
Home	ovens,	whether	electric	or	gas,	are	furnished	with	thermostats	that

switch	on	and	off	to	maintain	the	oven’s	internal	temperature.	This,	along	with
the	opening	and	closing	of	the	oven	door,	causes	the	temperature	to	fluctuate,
which	can	be	damaging	to	baked	goods	that	require	extremely	high	heat.	Our
Pizza	Bianca	requires	such	an	environment,	so	we	turn	to	the	baking	stone.
Preheating	the	oven	with	a	baking	stone	for	an	hour	evens	out	the	heat	in	the
oven,	and	the	stone’s	ability	to	absorb,	retain,	and	radiate	heat	insulates	the	pizza



from	temperature	swings	that	may	occur	during	baking.
Baking	stones	intended	for	home	use	are	usually	made	from	clay	or	terra

cotta.	When	purchasing,	be	sure	to	look	for	the	thickest	possible	stone.
Thickness	is	indicative	of	a	stone’s	ability	to	retain	heat.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CALCULATING	BAKER’S	PERCENTAGE

Quantify	the	ratio	of	water	to	flour	with	baker’s	percentage.

So	how	do	you	figure	out	how	much	water	is	actually	in	a	particular	bread	recipe?	Professional	bakers	rely
on	a	method	called	“baker’s	percentage.”	It	presents	the	quantity	of	each	ingredient	as	a	percentage	by
weight	of	the	amount	of	flour,	which	is	always	set	at	100	percent.	One	advantage	of	the	system:	It	allows
for	easy	conversion	from	pounds	and	ounces	to	kilograms	and	grams	(or	vice	versa).	And	once	weights	are
calculated,	scaling	recipes	up	or	down	is	a	simple	matter	of	multiplication	or	division.

Perhaps	the	most	important	part	of	a	baker’s	percentage	formula	is	the	weight	of	the	water	(or	other
liquid)	relative	to	the	weight	of	the	flour,	since	hydration	level	helps	the	baker	predict	the	texture	of	the
crumb.	(Generally	speaking,	the	more	water	in	the	dough,	the	more	open	the	crumb.)	Sandwich-bread
dough	with	a	typical	60	percent	hydration	(the	weight	of	the	liquid	is	60	percent	of	the	weight	of	the	flour),
for	example,	yields	a	loaf	with	a	denser,	closed	crumb,	whereas	the	80	percent	hydration	level	of	a	rustic
Italian	loaf	such	as	ciabatta	(the	weight	of	the	liquid	is	80	percent	of	the	weight	of	the	flour)	is	responsible
for	its	airy	crumb	and	large,	irregular	holes.

To	calculate	the	hydration	level	of	a	conventional	recipe,	first	weigh	the	flour	and	water	or	other	liquid.
Divide	the	weight	of	the	water	by	the	weight	of	the	flour	and	then	multiply	the	result	by	100.	For	example,	a
recipe	containing	1¼	cups	of	water	(10	ounces)	and	3	cups	of	all-purpose	flour	(15	ounces)	will	have	a	67
percent	(10/15	x	100	=	67)	hydration	level,	indicating	a	moderately	airy	crumb.
	
Bread	Type:	Pizza	Bianca
Baker’s	Percentage:	90%
	
Bread	Type:	Whole-Wheat	Sandwich	Bread
Baker’s	Percentage:	85%
	
Bread	Type:	Rosemary	Focaccia
Baker’s	Percentage:	84%
	
Bread	Type:	Rustic	Dinner	Rolls
Baker’s	Percentage:	72%
	
Bread	Type:	Almost	No-Knead	Bread
Baker’s	Percentage:	70%
	
Bread	Type:	Olive-Rosemary	Bread
Baker’s	Percentage:	63%
	
Bread	Type:	New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	Pizza
Baker’s	Percentage:	63%



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SUBSTITUTING	ACTIVE	DRY	YEAST	FOR	INSTANT

To	substitute	active	dry	yeast	for	instant,	use	25	percent	more	of	it.	To	substitute	instant	for
active	dry,	use	25	percent	less.

When	substituting	active	dry	yeast	for	instant	(also	called	rapid-rise)	yeast,	it’s	important	to	compensate	for
the	“dead	weight”	of	the	inactive	yeast	cells.	To	compensate	for	the	greater	quantity	of	inactive	yeast	cells
in	the	active	dry	yeast,	simply	use	25	percent	more	of	it	(for	example,	if	the	recipe	calls	for	1	teaspoon	of
instant	yeast,	use	1¼	teaspoons	of	active	dry).	The	inverse	holds	true	as	well—use	about	25	percent	less
instant	yeast	in	a	recipe	that	calls	for	active	dry.	Also,	don’t	forget	to	dissolve	active	dry	yeast	in	a	portion
of	the	water	from	the	recipe,	heated	to	110	degrees	(be	careful,	as	fermentation	slows	above	120	degrees,
and	all	the	yeast	cells	will	die	at	140	degrees).	Then	let	it	stand	for	five	minutes	before	adding	it	to	the
remaining	wet	ingredients.	Skip	this	step	if	using	instant	yeast	in	recipes	that	call	for	active	dry.



ALMOST	NO-KNEAD	BREAD
MAKES	1	LARGE	ROUND	LOAF

You	will	need	at	least	a	6-quart	Dutch	oven	for	this	recipe.	An	enameled	cast-
iron	Dutch	oven	with	a	tight-fitting	lid	yields	the	best	results,	but	the	recipe	also
works	in	a	regular	cast-iron	Dutch	oven	or	heavy	stockpot.	Check	the	knob	on
your	Dutch	oven	lid,	as	not	all	are	ovensafe	to	500	degrees;	look	for	inexpensive
replacement	knobs	from	the	manufacturer	of	your	Dutch	oven	(or	try	using	a
metal	drawer	handle	from	a	hardware	store).	This	dough	rises	best	in	a	warm
kitchen	that	is	at	least	68	degrees.

3				 cups	(15	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1½				 teaspoons	salt
¼				 teaspoon	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast
¾				 cup	plus	2	tablespoons	water,	room	temperature
6				 tablespoons	mild-flavored	lager,	room	temperature
1				 tablespoon	white	vinegar

1.	Whisk	flour,	salt,	and	yeast	together	in	large	bowl.	Add	water,	beer,	and
vinegar.	Using	rubber	spatula,	fold	mixture,	scraping	up	dry	flour	from	bottom
of	bowl,	until	shaggy	ball	forms.	Cover	bowl	with	plastic	wrap	and	let	sit	at
room	temperature	for	at	least	8	hours	or	up	to	18	hours.
2.	Lay	18	by	12-inch	sheet	of	parchment	paper	inside	10-inch	skillet	and	spray

with	vegetable	oil	spray.	Transfer	dough	to	lightly	floured	counter	and	knead	by
hand	10	to	15	times.	Shape	dough	into	ball	by	pulling	edges	into	middle.
Transfer	loaf,	seam	side	down,	to	prepared	skillet	and	spray	surface	of	dough
with	oil	spray.	Cover	loosely	with	plastic	wrap	and	let	rise	at	room	temperature
until	doubled	in	size,	about	2	hours.	(Dough	should	barely	spring	back	when
poked	with	knuckle.)
3.	Thirty	minutes	before	baking,	adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position,	place

Dutch	oven	(with	lid)	on	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	500	degrees.	Lightly	flour	top	of
dough	and,	using	sharp	serrated	knife	or	single-edge	razor	blade,	make	one	6-
inch-long,	½-inch-deep	slash	along	top	of	dough.	Carefully	remove	pot	from
oven	and	remove	lid.	Pick	up	loaf	by	lifting	parchment	overhang	and	lower	into
pot	(let	any	excess	parchment	hang	over	pot	edge).	Cover	pot	and	place	in	oven.
Reduce	oven	temperature	to	425	degrees	and	bake,	covered,	for	30	minutes.



Remove	lid	and	continue	to	bake	until	crust	is	deep	golden	brown	and	loaf
registers	210	degrees,	20	to	30	minutes	longer.	Carefully	remove	loaf	from	pot;
transfer	to	wire	rack,	discard	parchment,	and	let	cool	to	room	temperature,	about
2	hours,	before	slicing	and	serving.	(Bread	is	best	eaten	on	day	it	is	baked	but
will	keep	wrapped	in	double	layer	of	plastic	wrap	and	stored	at	room
temperature	for	up	to	2	days.	To	recrisp	crust,	place	unwrapped	bread	in	450-
degree	oven	for	6	to	8	minutes.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
In	2006,	New	York	Times	writer	Mark	Bittman	published	a	recipe	developed	by
Jim	Lahey	of	the	Sullivan	Street	Bakery	in	Manhattan	that	promised	to	shake	up
the	world	of	home	baking:	It	allowed	the	average	cook	to	bake	bread	that	looked
like	it	had	been	produced	in	a	professional	bakery	and	involved	no	kneading	at
all.	However,	as	we	baked	loaf	after	loaf,	we	found	two	big	problems:	The	dough
deflated	when	carried	to	the	pot,	causing	misshapen	loaves,	and	it	lacked	flavor.
To	give	the	dough	more	strength,	we	lower	the	hydration	and	add	the	bare
minimum	of	kneading	time	to	compensate.
DON’T	KNEAD—MUCH	The	original	no-knead	bread	has	a	hydration	level

of	85	percent	(see	“Calculating	Baker’s	Percentage”),	while	most	rustic	breads
max	out	at	around	80	percent	hydration,	and	standard	sandwich	breads	hover
between	60	percent	and	75	percent	hydration.	This	high	level	of	water,	along
with	the	long	rest,	helps	to	form	the	gluten	strands	and,	in	effect,	takes	the	place
of	kneading	(see	concept	39).	Here,	we	cut	back	on	the	water	in	order	to	make
the	dough	easier	to	handle.	But	with	a	lower	level	of	hydration	the	gluten	strands
are	not	rearranged	to	the	same	degree	as	they	are	in	the	original	recipe	and	need
some	help.	This	is	why	we	knead	our	“no-knead”	dough.	Fifteen	seconds	is	all	it
takes.
ADD	VINEGAR	AND	BEER	Two	ingredients	proved	key	to	help	boost	the

loaf’s	flavor:	vinegar	and	beer.	Bottled	vinegars	are	generally	5	percent	solutions
of	acetic	acid—the	same	acid	produced	by	bacteria	during	dough	fermentation.
The	addition	of	1	tablespoon	of	distilled	white	vinegar	adds	tang.	Bread’s	unique
flavor	comes	during	fermentation,	when	yeast	produces	alcohol,	carbon	dioxide,
and	sulfur	compounds.	These	three	elements	are	present	together	in	another
location—a	bottle	of	beer.	We	choose	lager	over	other	types	of	beer	because
most	nonlager	beers	undergo	a	process	called	“top	fermentation,”	whereby	yeast
floats	on	top	of	the	wort	(grain	mashed	in	hot	water),	which	is	exposed	to
oxygen	and	kept	warm.	Oxygen	and	warmth	persuade	yeast	to	produce	spicy,
astringent	flavor	compounds	called	phenols	and	fruity,	floral	compounds	called
esters	that	are	desirable	in	beer	but	not	in	bread.	Lagers,	on	the	other	hand,
undergo	“bottom	fermentation,”	where	the	yeast	is	kept	submerged	in	the	low-
oxygen	environment	at	the	bottom	of	the	wort	at	colder	temperatures,	which
causes	the	yeast	to	produce	fewer	phenols	and	esters,	but	more	sulfur
compounds,	so	that	the	breadier	yeast	and	sulfur	flavors	come	forward.
BAKE	IN	TWO	HOT	OVENS	We	bake	this	bread	in	a	preheated	Dutch

oven.	Be	careful	of	the	knobs.	The	manufacturers	of	our	favorite	Dutch	ovens



(the	7¼-Quart	Round	French	Oven	by	Le	Creuset)	and	our	Best	Buy	Dutch	oven
(the	6.5-Quart	Cast	Iron	Dutch	Oven	by	Tramontina)	recommend	against	heating
the	pots	to	this	temperature	due	to	the	phenolic	(black)	knobs	used	on	the	lids.
But	there	is	a	simple	solution.	The	knobs	on	both	lids	are	secured	with	a	single
screw	that	is	easily	removed.	Once	the	knob	is	removed,	you	can	replace	it	with
an	inexpensive	all-metal	drawer	handle	purchased	from	a	hardware	store.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BREAD	LIKES	A	HUMID	OVEN

Steam	is	key	when	baking	bread	with	a	nice,	crisp	crust.	A	Dutch	oven	holds	steam	well,	or	you
can	add	steam	to	the	oven	yourself.

A	major	breakthrough	in	the	no-knead	bread	recipe	first	published	in	the	New	York	Times	was	to	bake	the
bread	in	a	preheated	Dutch	oven,	which	creates	the	dramatic	open-crumbed	structure	and	the	shatteringly
crisp	crust	that	was	previously	attainable	only	in	a	professional	bakery.	How	does	this	work?

First,	as	the	loaf	heats	it	gives	off	steam	to	create	a	very	humid	environment	inside	the	Dutch	oven.
Since	moist	air	transfers	heat	much	more	efficiently	than	dry	air,	the	loaf	heats	much	more	rapidly.	This	in
turn	causes	the	air	bubbles	inside	to	expand	much	faster,	leading	to	a	more	open	crumb	structure.	As	a	test,
we	baked	two	loaves	of	bread,	one	in	a	Dutch	oven	and	the	other	on	a	preheated	baking	stone.	After	one
minute	in	the	oven,	the	surface	temperature	of	the	Dutch	oven–baked	loaf	had	risen	past	200	degrees,	while
the	other	loaf	had	reached	only	135	degrees.

Steam	contributes	to	a	great	loaf	in	several	other	ways.	As	steam	condenses	onto	the	surface	of	the
baking	bread,	it	keeps	the	crust	soft,	allowing	the	bread	to	continue	to	expand	until	the	crust	dries.	(A	dry
crust	is	much	harder	to	expand.)	It	also	causes	the	starches	to	form	a	thin	sheath	that	eventually	dries	out,
giving	the	finished	loaf	a	shiny	crust	that	stays	crisp.	Finally,	once	the	crust	dries	and	gets	very	hot,	sugar
molecules	caramelize	and	react	with	proteins	to	form	the	wonderful	flavor	and	dark	brown	color	of	crusty
bread.

Many	recipes	suggest	adding	water	or	ice	cubes	to	the	oven;	the	problem	is	home	ovens	cannot	retain
moisture	in	the	way	a	professional	steam-injected	oven	can.	With	its	thick	walls,	small	internal	volume,	and
heavy	lid,	a	Dutch	oven	is	the	ideal	environment	to	create	and	trap	steam.

For	regular	bread	baking,	with	loaves	baking	on	a	rimmed	baking	sheet,	our	usual	approach	to	creating
steam	in	a	home	oven	is	to	pour	boiling	water	into	a	preheated	loaf	pan	placed	on	the	oven’s	bottom	rack,
but	the	water	doesn’t	continue	to	boil	for	very	long.	Inspired	by	the	superheated	stones	used	to	generate
steam	in	Swedish	saunas,	we’ve	come	up	with	a	more	effective	approach:	using	lava	rocks.	These
irregularly	shaped	rocks	(available	at	many	hardware	stores	for	use	in	gas	grills)	have	a	lot	of	surface	area
for	absorbing	and	retaining	heat,	maximizing	the	amount	of	steam	produced	when	boiling	water	is
introduced.	To	do	this,	place	a	wide	pan	filled	with	lava	rocks	on	the	bottom	oven	rack,	and	pour	about	¼
cup	of	boiling	water	into	the	rocks	once	they	are	preheated.	Keep	the	oven	door	closed	for	one	minute	to
create	steam.	When	you	place	the	bread	in	the	oven,	pour	another	¼	cup	of	water	over	the	rocks,	and	bake
as	usual.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BAKE	UNTIL	IT	IS	DONE

Internal	temperature	can	be	less	useful	than	appearance.

We	commonly	advise	checking	the	internal	temperature	of	a	loaf	of	bread	before	making	the	decision	to
pull	it	from	the	oven.	A	properly	baked	loaf	should	register	a	temperature	between	195	and	210	degrees	on
an	instant-read	thermometer,	depending	upon	the	type	of	bread.	But	is	internal	temperature	by	itself
sufficient	proof	that	bread	is	fully	baked?

We	placed	temperature	probes	in	the	center	of	two	loaves	of	rustic	Italian	bread	and	monitored	them	as
they	baked.	Halfway	into	the	baking	time,	the	internal	temperature	of	the	loaves	had	already	passed	200
degrees,	and	they	reached	the	optimal	210	degrees	a	full	15	minutes	before	the	end	of	the	recommended
baking	time.	We	pulled	one	loaf	from	the	oven	as	soon	as	it	neared	210	degrees	and	left	the	other	in	the
oven	for	the	recommended	baking	time.	(The	temperature	of	the	longer-baked	loaf	never	rose	above	210,
because	the	moisture	it	contains,	even	when	fully	baked,	prevents	it	from	going	past	the	boiling	point	of
water,	or	212	degrees.)	The	differences	between	the	two	loaves	were	dramatic:	The	loaf	removed	early	had
a	pale,	soft	crust	and	a	gummy	interior,	while	the	loaf	that	baked	for	the	full	hour	had	a	nicely	browned,
crisp	crust	and	a	perfectly	baked	crumb.

The	takeaway?	Internal	temperature	is	less	useful	than	appearance	as	a	sign	of	a	well-baked	loaf.

	
210	BUT	HALF-BAKED



	
210	AND	FULLY	BAKED



CONCEPT	39

Rest	Dough	to	Trim	Kneading	Time
Part	therapy,	part	exercise,	kneading	is	the	most	enjoyable	part	of	the	bread-
making	process.	But	many	bakers	make	the	mistake	of	overdoing	it,	especially
when	they	rely	on	mixers.	Yes,	kneading	is	an	important	step,	necessary	in	order
to	develop	structure	in	the	bread.	But	too	much	kneading	robs	the	dough	of
flavor	and	alters	its	texture.	The	solution	is	as	simple	as	taking	a	break	during	the
mixing	process.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
The	ultimate	goal	of	making	bread	dough	is	to	create	gluten,	a	strong	network	of
cross-linked	proteins	that	traps	gas	bubbles	and	stretches	as	the	dough	bakes,
creating	the	bubbly,	chewy	crumb	structure	that	is	the	signature	of	any	good	loaf.
How	does	it	work?
To	really	understand	gluten	we	need	to	begin	with	the	proteins	in	flour:

glutenin	and	gliadin.	Glutenin	is	a	very	large,	loosely	coiled	protein	while
gliadin	is	a	much	smaller	and	tightly	coiled	sphere.	Glutenin	provides	most	of
the	strength	and	elasticity	of	the	dough,	allowing	it	to	bounce	back	after	it	has
been	stretched.	Gliadin	provides	its	stretch.
When	water	and	flour	first	mix,	the	glutenin	and	gliadin	form	in	a	random,

disorganized	matrix	of	gluten	that	is	initially	very	weak.	In	order	to	strengthen
this	network,	these	proteins	need	to	be	aligned	next	to	each	other	so	that	they	can
better	link	together.	Imagine	the	proteins	as	coiled-up	balls	of	yarn	you	are	trying
to	tie	together	into	one	longer	piece,	which	you’ll	then	sew	together	into	a	wider
sheet.	In	their	coiled	state,	it’s	not	possible	to	tie	them	together;	first	you	have	to
untangle	and	straighten	them	out.	This	straightening	out	and	aligning	is	usually
accomplished	by	kneading.	As	the	matrix	of	proteins	are	kneaded,	disorganized
weaker	bonds	are	pulled	apart	and	reattached	into	straight,	strong,	orderly	sheets
of	gluten.	And	it’s	important	for	this	gluten	network	to	be	very	strong,	especially
in	rustic	breads	with	a	fair	amount	of	water.	If	not,	the	loaves	spread	sideways	in
the	oven	rather	than	rising	up.
Kneading	develops	gluten	but	at	some	point	more	kneading	is

counterproductive.	Too	much	kneading	causes	the	dough	to	become	warm	and
turn	from	a	wheaty	tan	color	to	a	grayish	white,	producing	loaves	with	a	sickly
pallor	and	expired	flavors.	Overmixing	and	overheating	are	difficult	to	do	by
hand,	but	easy	when	using	an	electric	mixer.	The	action	of	the	dough	hook
creates	heat	through	friction	and	also	kneads	excessive	air	into	the	dough,
bleaching	it	of	flavor	and	color	in	a	process	known	as	oxidation.	(When	properly
kneaded,	dough	should	have	a	smooth,	almost	shiny	appearance.	If	you	pull	the
dough,	it	should	feel	very	stretchy	and	quickly	spring	back	into	place.)	We	don’t
want	to	give	up	the	easy,	quick	option	of	our	stand	mixer.	But	how	do	we
prevent	overmixing	the	dough?
Autolyse.	Developed	by	French	bread-making	authority	Raymond	Calvel	in

the	1970s,	autolyse	(pronounced	AUTO-lees,	also	called	autolysis	in	the	U.S.)	is
a	technique	in	which	flour	and	water	are	first	mixed	together	and	then	allowed	to



rest	before	being	kneaded.	(We	often	add	yeast	along	with	the	flour	and	water.
Though	it’s	not	traditionally	part	of	autolyse,	we	find	that	the	early	addition	does
not	make	a	significant	change.)	Autolyse	makes	a	significant	difference	in	both
the	flavor	and	structure	of	many	breads.	Why?
Autolyse	occurs	after	the	random	matrix	of	proteins	has	come	together,	but

before	the	sheets	of	gluten	have	formed	and	aligned.	While	the	mixture	rests,
naturally	occurring	enzymes	(known	as	proteases)	break	down	the	disorganized
bonds	of	gluten,	acting	like	scissors,	cutting	the	coiled-up	proteins	into	smaller
segments	that	are	easier	to	straighten	and	align	during	kneading.	This	is	why
dough	that	has	undergone	autolyse	requires	much	less	kneading	than	freshly
made	dough.	When	this	rested	dough	is	then	kneaded,	the	gluten	is	positioned	to
form	a	stronger,	more	organized	network	more	quickly.	And	the	less	time	the
dough	is	kneaded	in	the	stand	mixer,	the	better.
While	kneading	by	hand	can	be	a	gratifying	process,	most	of	our	recipes	call

for	a	stand	mixer	simply	because	it’s	easier.	(And	in	cases	where	the	dough	is
extremely	wet	and	loose—as	in	Pizza	Bianca—working	it	by	hand	is	virtually
impossible.)	Machine-kneading	is	rougher;	it	links	gluten	strands	together	only
to	tear	them	apart.	Hand-kneading	is	gentler,	producing	gluten	that,	once	formed,
stays	together,	which	can	ultimately	lead	to	chewier	texture.	But	gluten	develops
no	matter	how	you	mix	the	dough.	And	we’ve	found	the	differences	aren’t
dramatic	enough	to	lock	away	our	stand	mixer	and	revert	to	hand-kneading.	Yes,
hand-kneading	can	deliver	ever	so	slightly	better	results,	but	it’s	more	work	and
there’s	the	risk	of	adding	too	much	flour	as	you	work	the	dough	on	the	counter.



HOW	GLUTEN	FORMS	DURING	AUTOLYSE



	
FLOUR	The	two	proteins	in	flour	are	gliadin	and	glutenin.	When	flour	and	water	are	combined,	these



proteins	come	together	in	a	random	matrix.



	
AUTOLYSE	While	the	dough	rests	before	kneading,	the	flour	proteins	begin	to	break	down.



	
KNEADING	After	autolyse,	the	broken	flour	proteins	are	easy	to	align	into	an	organized	network	by



kneading.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
Just	how	much	kneading	time	does	an	autolyse	period	really	save?	To	find	out,
we	made	two	batches	of	a	simple	rustic	Italian	bread.	For	one	loaf	we	mixed
flour,	water,	yeast,	and	salt	together	in	a	stand	mixer	with	a	dough	hook	and
kneaded	it	on	low	speed	until	the	dough	completely	cleared	the	bowl	and	clung
to	the	hook.	For	the	second,	we	mixed	only	the	flour,	water,	and	yeast	until	just
combined,	and	then	let	the	mixture	sit	for	20	minutes	before	adding	the	salt	and
kneading.	We	repeated	the	test	two	more	times,	measuring	the	time	it	took	for	the
dough	to	cling	to	the	hook,	not	the	bowl,	and	averaged	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
The	results	painted	a	clear	picture.	The	doughs	that	were	given	the	20-minute
respite	took	an	average	of	about	five	minutes	less	kneading	(about	10	minutes
versus	more	than	15)	to	clear	the	bowl.	This	significant	decrease	in	kneading
time	translated	into	bread	with	better	crumb	color,	aroma,	and	wheat	flavor.



THE	TAKEAWAY
During	autolyse,	naturally	occurring	enzymes	begin	to	break	down	the	bonds	of
gluten,	turning	the	long	and	coiled	glutenin	and	gliadin	proteins	into	smaller
pieces.	These	smaller	pieces	of	protein	are	much	easier	to	organize	and	align
during	kneading	than	they	would	be	if	the	autolyse	were	skipped.	The	result?	For
the	mixture	of	water,	flour,	and	yeast	that	we	let	rest,	a	full	five	minutes	was
shaved	from	our	kneading	time,	preventing	overmixing	and	unnecessary
oxidation,	which	dulls	the	natural	flavor	and	color	of	wheat.	(Be	sure	not	to	add
salt	during	autolyse.	See	“Hold	The	Salt—Temporarily.”)
The	lesson?	Let	your	dough	rest.	Autolyse	does	not	reduce	the	overall	time	it

takes	to	make	a	loaf	of	bread,	but	it	gives	you	a	better-tasting,	better-looking	loaf
of	bread.	And	it	will	reduce	wear	and	tear	on	your	stand	mixer.



AUTOLYSE	AT	WORK

	
WITHOUT	A	REST	The	dough	without	a	rest	was	far	from	ready	after	10	minutes	of	kneading.

	
AFTER	20-MINUTE	REST	The	dough	that	was	allowed	to	rest	for	20	minutes	pulled	away	from	the	side
of	the	bowl,	finished	with	kneading,	after	10	minutes.



AUTOLYSE	AT	WORK	
LOAVES	AND	ROLLS
A	brief	rest	after	mixing	together	the	ingredients	for	our	doughs	shortens	the
kneading	time	on	recipes	ranging	from	Olive-Rosemary	Bread	to	Rustic	Dinner
Rolls.	We	also	use	this	technique	with	Pizza	Bianca,	Rosemary	Focaccia,	and
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	Pizza.



OLIVE-ROSEMARY	BREAD
MAKES	2	LARGE	LOAVES

If	you	don’t	have	a	stand	mixer,	you	can	mix	the	dough	by	hand.	To	do	this,	stir
the	wet	and	dry	ingredients	together	with	a	stiff	rubber	spatula	until	the	dough
comes	together	and	looks	shaggy.	Transfer	the	dough	to	a	clean	counter	and
knead	by	hand	to	form	a	smooth,	round	ball,	15	to	25	minutes,	adding	additional
flour,	if	necessary,	to	prevent	the	dough	from	sticking	to	the	counter.	Proceed
with	the	recipe	as	directed.	If	you	don’t	have	a	baking	stone,	bake	the	bread	on
an	overturned	and	preheated	rimmed	baking	sheet	set	on	the	lowest	oven	rack.
Almost	any	variety	of	brined	or	oil-cured	olives	works	in	this	recipe,	although	we
prefer	a	mix	of	both	green	and	black	olives.

1¾				 cups	water,	room	temperature
2				 tablespoons	honey
2				 teaspoons	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast

3½				 cups	(19¼	ounces)	bread	flour,	plus	extra	as	needed
½				 cup	(2¾	ounces)	whole-wheat	flour
2				 teaspoons	salt
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	rosemary

1½				 cups	olives,	pitted,	rinsed,	and	chopped	coarse

1.	Whisk	water,	honey,	and	yeast	together	in	bowl	of	stand	mixer	fitted	with
dough	hook.	Add	bread	flour	and	whole-wheat	flour	to	bowl	and	mix	on	low
speed	until	cohesive	dough	is	formed,	about	3	minutes;	cover	bowl	tightly	with
plastic	wrap	and	let	sit	at	room	temperature	for	20	minutes.
2.	Make	well	in	center	of	dough	and	add	salt	and	rosemary.	Knead	dough	on

low	speed	for	5	minutes,	scraping	down	bowl	and	dough	hook	as	needed.
Increase	speed	to	medium	and	continue	to	knead	until	dough	is	smooth	and
slightly	tacky,	about	1	minute.	If	dough	is	very	sticky,	add	1	to	2	tablespoons
bread	flour	and	continue	mixing	for	1	minute.	Transfer	dough	to	lightly	floured
counter	and	press	into	12	by	6-inch	rectangle,	with	long	side	facing	you.	Press
olives	evenly	into	dough,	then	roll	dough	toward	you	into	firm	cylinder,	keeping
roll	taut	by	tucking	it	under	itself	as	you	go.	Turn	loaf	seam	side	up	and	roll
cylinder	into	coil.	Transfer	dough,	spiral	side	up,	to	large,	lightly	greased	bowl,
cover	tightly	with	plastic	wrap,	and	let	rise	at	room	temperature	until	it	increases



in	size	by	50	percent,	about	1	hour.
3.	Spray	rubber	spatula	or	bowl	scraper	with	vegetable	oil	spray.	Fold	partially

risen	dough	over	itself	by	gently	lifting	and	folding	edge	of	dough	toward
middle.	Turn	bowl	90	degrees;	fold	again.	Turn	bowl	again;	fold	once	more.
Cover	with	plastic	and	let	rise	for	30	minutes.	Repeat	folding,	replace	plastic,
and	let	rise	until	doubled	in	size,	about	30	minutes.
4.	Transfer	dough	to	lightly	floured	counter,	being	careful	not	to	deflate.

Divide	dough	in	half,	loosely	shape	each	piece	into	ball,	and	let	rest	for	15
minutes.	Flip	each	ball	over	and,	starting	from	top,	roll	dough	toward	you	into
firm	oval	shape.	Using	palms,	roll	each	oval	(seam	side	down)	from	center
outward	until	12-inch	loaf	is	formed.	Poke	any	olives	that	fall	off	into	bottom
seam,	then	pinch	seam	closed.	Transfer	each	loaf,	seam	side	down,	to	12	by	6-
inch	piece	of	parchment	and	cover	with	plastic.	Let	rise	until	doubled	in	size,	1
to	1½	hours.	(Dough	should	barely	spring	back	when	poked	with	knuckle.)
5.	One	hour	before	baking,	adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position,	place

baking	stone	on	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	Slide	parchment	with	loaves
onto	pizza	peel.	Using	sharp	serrated	knife	or	single-edge	razor	blade,	make	one
3½-inch-deep	slash	on	diagonal	along	top	of	each	fully	risen	loaf,	starting	and
stopping	about	1	inch	from	ends.	Spray	loaves	with	water	and	slide	parchment
with	loaves	onto	baking	stone.	Bake	for	15	minutes,	spraying	loaves	with	water
twice	more	during	first	5	minutes	of	baking	time.	Reduce	oven	temperature	to
375	degrees	and	continue	to	bake	until	crust	is	deep	golden	brown	and	loaves
register	210	degrees,	25	to	30	minutes.	Transfer	loaves	to	wire	rack,	discard
parchment,	and	let	cool	to	room	temperature,	about	2	hours,	before	slicing	and
serving.	(Bread	can	be	wrapped	in	double	layer	of	plastic	wrap	and	stored	at
room	temperature	for	up	to	3	days.	Wrapped	with	additional	layer	of	aluminum
foil,	bread	can	be	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.	To	recrisp	crust,	thaw	bread	at	room
temperature,	if	frozen,	and	place	unwrapped	bread	in	450-degree	oven	for	5	to
10	minutes.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS:
Olive-rosemary	bread	is	a	basic	Italian	rustic	loaf	flavored	with	olives	and	the
subtle	perfume	of	rosemary.	It	should	have	a	coarse	crumb,	chewy	interior,	and
thick,	burnished	crust.	But	this	hearty	loaf	is	about	as	elusive	as	it	is	perfect.	At
home,	it’s	too	easy	to	bake	loaves	that	are	more	like	sandwich	bread	than	rustic
breads,	with	a	soft	crumb	and	thin	crust.	And	the	olives	are	either	forced	into	the
dough	early	on	and	mixed	to	the	point	of	disintegration	or	added	at	the	very	end
as	a	sparse	afterthought.	To	perfect	our	home	version,	we	first	turn	to	the	bread
recipe,	and	then	work	on	the	olive	distribution	plan.
ADD	A	LITTLE	HONEY	We	add	a	bit	of	honey	to	our	bread	dough	to	add

sweetness	and	help	bring	out	the	savory	flavor	of	the	olives.	Replacing	some
bread	flour	with	whole-wheat	flour	gives	a	nuttier	flavor,	too.	Because	we	add
these	flavors,	this	means	that	the	dough	doesn’t	need	to	ferment	overnight	like
many	other	simple	rustic	breads.
PRESS	THE	OLIVES	Pitting	the	olives	against	the	stand	mixer	isn’t	a	fair

match.	The	olives	and	dough	are	like	oil	and	water—resisting	each	other	and
leaving	the	olives	to	smear	against	the	outside	of	the	dough	and	the	bottom	of
the	bowl.	We	found	success	in	rolling	the	olives	into	the	dough	before	the	first
rise,	pressing	them	into	the	rolled-out	dough	as	if	making	cinnamon	rolls.	This
gives	us	a	nicely	textured	loaf	with	evenly	dispersed	olives.	As	for	what	kind	of
olives	to	use,	any	variety	will	do.	Olive	preference	is	highly	subjective.	We	tend
to	prefer	a	mix.
USE	MORE	ROSEMARY	Rosemary	is	often	perceived	as	being	brutish;	if

used	excessively,	it	can	easily	overpower	a	dish	with	its	piney	harshness.	But	we
soon	realized	that	this	herb	behaves	differently	when	baked	into	bread—its
flavor	is	as	fleeting	as	the	little	specks	are	invisible.	We	use	a	whopping	2
tablespoons	in	order	to	get	a	demure	background	flavor	to	complement	the
bright,	fruity	olives.
LET	IT	REST	The	autolyse	(allowing	the	mixture	of	flours,	water,	and	yeast

to	rest	so	that	the	flour	has	more	time	to	absorb	the	water)	is	instrumental	for
more	efficient	kneading	in	this	recipe.	It	takes	20	minutes,	but	this	is	20	minutes
we	don’t	mind	adding.	Turning	the	dough	during	the	first	rise	also	drastically
improves	its	elasticity	and	strength,	which	results	in	larger	holes	in	the	bread	and
a	heartier	chew	(see	“Turn	the	Dough,	Don’t	Punch	It”).
SLASH	AND	SPRAY	Slashing	the	risen	loaf	with	a	sharp	paring	knife	or

razor	allows	the	crust	to	expand,	preventing	the	bread	from	splitting	in	the	oven.



Misting	the	loaf	right	before	it	goes	into	the	oven	delays	the	formation	of	a	crust,
allowing	the	bread	to	fully	expand	without	tearing	or	splitting.	The	steam	also
promotes	the	formation	of	a	crispy,	glossy	crust.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOLD	THE	SALT—TEMPORARILY

Salt	hinders	autolyse.	Wait	to	add	it	to	bread	dough.

Salt	is	an	important	component	of	dough	because	it	strengthens	gluten	to	help	form	chewy	bread.	But	does
it	hinder	autolyse?	We	wondered	if	adjusting	when	we	added	salt	to	bread	dough	could	help	speed	things
along.

We	prepared	two	simple	doughs.	In	the	first,	we	combined	the	flour,	water,	yeast,	and	salt	with	a	bread
starter	called	a	biga	(see	concept	40	for	more	on	starters)	all	at	once	before	resting;	in	the	second,	we
withheld	the	salt	for	15	minutes.

We	found	that	briefly	omitting	the	salt	hastened	gluten	development	by	an	hour.	After	just	15	minutes,
the	unsalted	dough	was	already	pliant	and	smooth,	while	the	salted	dough	was	still	gluey	and	stiff.	Why?
Salt	inhibits	both	the	ability	of	flour	to	absorb	water	and	the	activity	of	the	enzymes	that	break	down
proteins	to	begin	the	process	of	forming	gluten.	If	allowed	to	rest	without	salt,	the	flour	is	able	to	get	a	jump
on	gluten	development	by	absorbing	as	much	water	as	it	can	and	letting	its	enzymes	work	sooner	to	develop
gluten	networks.

	
15-MINUTE	REST,	WITH	SALT



Dough	is	sticky	and	stiff.

	
15-MINUTE	REST,	WITHOUT	SALT

Dough	is	supple	and	smooth.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TURN	THE	DOUGH,	DON’T	PUNCH	IT
Turning	the	dough	creates	a	coarser	crumb	with	better	chew.

Most	bread	recipes	call	for	punching	down	the	dough	between	the	first	and	second	rises.	Despite	its	name,
punching	down	is	best	accomplished	by	pressing	down	gently	on	the	dough.	This	process	exposes	the	yeast
to	new	food	sources,	which	keeps	it	going	strong	longer.	Punching	also	“degasses”	the	bread,	resulting	in	a
loaf	with	a	fairly	fine	crumb—perfect	for	sandwich	bread,	but	not	a	rustic	loaf.	To	create	a	coarser	crumb
with	better	chew,	we	discovered	that	turning	the	dough	(gently	folding	it	over	onto	itself	between	the	first
and	second	rises)	reactivates	the	yeast	without	pressing	out	as	much	air.	(For	more	information,	see	“Turn
The	Dough	Gently.”)

	
PUNCHED

Bread	bakes	up	with	a	tight,	more	regular	crumb	better	suited	to	sandwich	bread.



	
TURNED

Bread	bakes	up	with	a	coarse,	open	crumb	and	chewy	texture	better	suited	to	rustic	bread.



RUSTIC	DINNER	ROLLS
MAKES	16	ROLLS

If	you	don’t	have	a	stand	mixer,	you	can	mix	the	dough	by	hand.	To	do	this,	stir
the	wet	and	dry	ingredients	together	with	a	stiff	rubber	spatula	until	the	dough
comes	together	and	looks	shaggy.	Transfer	the	dough	to	a	clean	counter	and
knead	by	hand	to	form	a	smooth,	round	ball,	15	to	25	minutes,	adding	additional
flour,	if	necessary,	to	prevent	the	dough	from	sticking	to	the	counter.	Proceed
with	the	recipe	as	directed.	Because	this	dough	is	sticky,	keep	your	hands	well
floured	when	handling	it.

1½				 cups	plus	1	tablespoon	water,	room	temperature
2				 teaspoons	honey

1½				 teaspoons	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast
3				 cups	plus	1	tablespoon	(16½	ounces)	bread	flour,	plus	extra	as	needed
3				 tablespoons	whole-wheat	flour

1½				 teaspoons	salt

1.	Whisk	water,	honey,	and	yeast	together	in	bowl	of	stand	mixer	until	well
combined,	making	sure	no	honey	sticks	to	bottom	of	bowl.	Transfer	bowl	to
stand	mixer	fitted	with	dough	hook.	Add	bread	flour	and	whole-wheat	flour	and
mix	on	low	speed	until	cohesive	dough	is	formed,	about	3	minutes;	cover	bowl
tightly	with	plastic	wrap	and	let	sit	at	room	temperature	for	30	minutes.
2.	Sprinkle	salt	evenly	over	dough	and	knead	on	low	speed	for	5	minutes,

scraping	down	bowl	and	dough	hook	as	needed.	Increase	speed	to	medium	and
continue	to	knead	until	dough	is	smooth	and	slightly	tacky,	about	1	minute.	If
dough	is	very	sticky,	add	1	to	2	tablespoons	flour	and	continue	mixing	for	1
minute.	Transfer	dough	to	large,	lightly	greased	bowl;	cover	tightly	with	plastic
and	let	rise	at	room	temperature	until	doubled	in	size,	about	1	hour.
3.	Spray	rubber	spatula	or	bowl	scraper	with	vegetable	oil	spray.	Fold	partially

risen	dough	over	itself	by	gently	lifting	and	folding	edge	of	dough	toward
middle.	Turn	bowl	90	degrees;	fold	again.	Rotate	bowl	again	and	fold	once
more.	Cover	with	plastic	and	let	rise	for	30	minutes.	Repeat	folding,	replace
plastic,	and	let	dough	rise	until	doubled	in	size,	about	30	minutes	longer.
4.	Grease	two	9-inch	round	cake	pans.	Transfer	dough	to	floured	counter	and



sprinkle	top	with	more	flour.	Using	bench	scraper,	cut	dough	in	half	and	gently
stretch	each	half	into	16-inch	log.	Cut	each	log	into	8	equal	pieces	and	dust	top
of	each	piece	with	more	flour.	With	floured	hands,	gently	pick	up	each	piece	and
roll	in	palms	to	coat	with	flour,	shaking	off	excess.	Arrange	rolls	in	prepared
pans,	placing	1	in	center	and	7	spaced	evenly	around	edges,	with	long	side	of
each	roll	running	from	center	of	pan	to	edge	and	making	sure	cut	side	faces	up.
Loosely	cover	pans	with	lightly	greased	plastic	and	let	rolls	rise	until	doubled	in
size,	about	30	minutes.	(Dough	should	barely	spring	back	when	poked	with
knuckle.)
5.	Thirty	minutes	before	baking,	adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat

oven	to	500	degrees.	Spray	rolls	lightly	with	water,	bake	until	tops	of	rolls	are
brown,	about	10	minutes,	then	remove	them	from	oven.	Reduce	oven
temperature	to	400	degrees;	using	kitchen	towels	or	oven	mitts,	invert	rolls	from
both	cake	pans	onto	rimmed	baking	sheet.	When	rolls	are	cool	enough	to	handle,
turn	them	right	side	up,	pull	apart,	and	space	evenly	on	baking	sheet.	Continue	to
bake	until	rolls	develop	deep	golden	brown	crust	and	sound	hollow	when	tapped
on	bottom,	10	to	15	minutes,	rotating	sheet	halfway	through	baking.	Transfer
rolls	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	to	room	temperature,	about	1	hour,	before	serving.
(Rolls	can	be	placed	in	zipper-lock	bag	and	stored	at	room	temperature	for	up	to
3	days.	Wrapped	with	aluminum	foil	before	placing	in	bag,	rolls	can	be	frozen
for	up	to	1	month.	To	recrisp	crust,	thaw	rolls	at	room	temperature,	if	frozen,	and
place	unwrapped	rolls	in	450-degree	oven	for	6	to	8	minutes.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	remarkably	crisp	crust	of	European-style	dinner	rolls	keeps	them	in	the
domain	of	professionals,	who	use	steam-injected	ovens	to	expose	the	developing
crust	to	moisture.	We	wanted	a	reliable	recipe	for	rustic	dinner	rolls	with	a	crisp
crust	and	chewy	crumb	as	good	as	any	from	an	artisanal	bakery.	But	when	we
tasted	our	first	batch,	we	found	a	dense,	bland	crumb	beneath	a	leathery	crust.
The	flavor	was	easy	to	improve—we	add	whole-wheat	flour	for	earthiness	and
honey	for	sweetness.	A	little	extra	yeast	improves	the	crumb	slightly,	but	making
the	dough	wetter	and	letting	it	sit	for	30	minutes	(a	process	called	autolyse)	are
the	best	fixes.
USE	A	WET	DOUGH	Our	first	tests	left	us	with	unimpressive	dinner	rolls.

As	a	result,we	began	playing	with	hydration	(see	concept	38)	to	fix	the	dense
crumb.	After	all,	during	baking,	the	water	within	the	dough	turns	to	steam,
which	then	rushes	to	escape,	making	hollow	pockets	within.	The	more	water,	the
airier	the	crumb.	Determining	that	our	original	recipe	gave	us	a	dough	with	60
percent	hydration,	we	assembled	several	batches	of	dough	with	varying	amounts
of	water.	Sure	enough,	increasing	hydration	opened	the	crumb	considerably.
Working	our	way	up,	we	found	about	72	percent	hydration	to	be	optimal;	more
than	that	and	the	dough	started	to	get	too	wet	to	shape	into	rolls.
ADD	HONEY	AND	WHEAT	As	in	our	Olive-Rosemary	Bread,	we	swap

some	bread	flour	for	whole	wheat	and	add	a	bit	of	honey.	This	gives	us	rolls	with
subtle	earthiness	and	just	enough	sweetness	to	leave	the	rolls’	savory	profile
intact.
HANDLE	GENTLY	Using	more	water	improves	the	finished	rolls	but	also

makes	the	dough	extremely	sticky,	oozy,	and	hard	to	shape.	In	fact,	the	very
process	of	forming	rolls	sometimes	causes	the	delicate	dough	to	deflate,	making
its	texture	too	dense.	To	solve	this	problem,	we	forgo	shaping	altogether	and
instead	use	a	bench	scraper	to	divide	the	dough	into	rough	(but	equal)	pieces.
With	less	handling,	these	rolls	retain	far	more	of	the	open	texture	we	take	such
pains	to	achieve.	But	to	keep	the	soft	dough	from	spreading	and	baking	into	a
squat	shape	we	begin	by	crowding	them	in	a	cake	pan,	coated	lightly	with	flour.
To	keep	the	spots	that	rest	against	each	other	from	staying	soft,	we	remove	the
rolls	from	the	oven	halfway	through	baking,	pull	them	apart,	and	return	them	to
the	oven	spaced	out	on	a	baking	sheet.	With	this	two-stage	baking	method,	they
finish	uniformly	golden	and	crisp.
START	HIGH	For	a	shatteringly	crisp	crust,	we	start	the	rolls	at	a	higher

temperature,	then	reduce	the	heat	to	finish	them.	This	initial	blast	of	heat	makes



all	the	difference	between	a	so-so	crust	and	one	with	real	crackling	crispness.	It
has	another	advantage,	too—boosting	the	oven	spring	(the	rise	that	yeasted
dough	experiences	when	it	first	hits	the	heat	of	the	oven),	so	the	crumb	is	even
airier	than	before.	Misting	the	rolls	with	water	before	baking	(mimicking	steam-
injected	ovens)	makes	the	crust	even	crisper.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
A	HOT	OVEN	MEANS	MORE	RISE
Baking	rolls	in	a	hot	oven	means	they	will	rise	higher.

Cranking	up	the	heat	when	the	rolls	go	into	the	oven	maximizes	what	professional	bakers	call	“oven
spring,”	the	rapid	rise	in	volume	that	all	yeasted	dough	experiences	when	it	first	hits	a	hot	oven.	The	higher
this	initial	lift,	the	higher	the	finished	bread.

	
HIGHER	HEAT	=	HIGHER	RISE

	
LOWER	HEAT	=LESS	LIFT



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
FREEZE	AND	BAKE	DOUGH

Freeze	bread	dough	between	the	first	and	second	rises	for	the	best	results.

For	most	of	us,	fresh-baked	bread	is	a	treat	rather	than	an	everyday	event,
since	mixing	the	dough	and	allowing	it	to	rise	(or	“proof”)	typically	takes	at	least
four	hours	(around	three	hours	for	the	first	rise	and	one	hour	for	the	second).	But
what	about	freezing	the	dough	ahead	of	time?	We	froze	dough	for	a	rustic	white
loaf	at	three	separate	junctures:	immediately	after	mixing,	after	the	first	rise	(just
before	the	dough	was	divided	and	shaped	into	loaves),	and	after	forming	the
loaves	and	letting	them	rise	the	final	time.	Several	weeks	later,	we	thawed	the
dough	in	the	refrigerator	overnight	and	then	baked	it.

	
TOO	SOON

Freezing	the	dough	just	after	mixing	killed	too	many	of	the	yeast	cells	before	they	had	a	chance	to	ferment
—a	process	that	creates	more	complex	flavor	compounds	and	releases	the	carbon	dioxide	that	makes	dough
rise.	In	addition,	freezing	before	the	first	rise	reduced	gluten	development,	so	the	loaf	didn’t	have	enough
structure	to	fully	expand.	The	result:	a	small,	squat	loaf	with	bland	flavor.



	
TOO	LATE

Dough	frozen	late	in	the	game—after	the	second	rise—was	overproofed:	As	the	already	fully	risen	dough
slowly	thawed,	the	random	remaining	viable	yeast	cells	continued	to	produce	gas	in	some	parts	of	the
dough	but	not	in	others,	weakening	this	structure.	The	result:	a	misshapen	loaf	that	collapsed	during	baking.

	
JUST	RIGHT

Freezing	the	dough	between	the	first	and	second	rises	was	the	best	strategy.	The	first	rise	ensured	that
enough	yeast	had	fermented	for	the	dough	to	develop	complex	flavors	and	some	rise.	The	remaining	viable
yeast	cells	then	finished	the	job	as	the	dough	thawed	and	then	rose	for	the	second	time.



CONCEPT	40

Time	Builds	Flavor	in	Bread
Why	do	breads	from	artisan	bakers	taste	so	good?	Sure,	these	bakers	probably
have	access	to	great	flour	and	very	good	water.	And,	yes,	their	skill	level	and
professional	equipment	no	doubt	contribute	to	the	tangy,	complex	flavor	of	their
breads.	But	expert	bakers	know	that	really	good	flavor	comes	simply	from
waiting.	Stretching	the	bread-making	process	over	two	days	isn’t	any	more	work
but	it	can	yield	fantastic	bread	with	much	better	flavor.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
In	bread	baking,	we	follow	a	basic	set	of	steps.	After	mixing	and	kneading
comes	fermentation,	also	known	as	the	first	rise.
Fermentation	is	arguably	the	oldest	of	cooking	techniques.	Even	the	early

hunters	and	gatherers	must	have	noticed	that	meat	and	berries	tasted	and	smelled
quite	different	a	few	days	after	collection.	Louis	Pasteur	made	the	seminal
discovery	that	the	changes	in	food	over	time	often	result	from	the	metabolic
activity	of	microbes.	Pasteur	was	observing	the	action	of	yeast,	which	converts
sugars	to	ethyl	alcohol	and	releases	carbon	dioxide	gas	as	a	byproduct.	And	as
we	know,	an	important	component	of	bread	is	yeast.
During	fermentation,	the	gluten,	which	was	worked	hard	during	kneading,

will	relax	and	become	more	stretchable	and	supple.	Meanwhile,	the	live	yeast
cells	will	begin	to	go	to	work,	reacting	with	the	sugars	produced	from	the
breakdown	of	starch,	releasing	carbon	dioxide	and	ethyl	alcohol.	This	releasing
of	the	carbon	dioxide	into	the	relaxed,	elastic	dough	is	like	slowly	blowing	air
into	a	balloon.	The	bread	is	ready	for	its	next	step—shaping—when	it	has
doubled	in	size.	(The	yeast	doesn’t	stop	its	work	after	the	first	rise,	however.	It
continues	to	produce	carbon	dioxide	during	the	second	rise,	and	during	baking
the	heat	causes	a	last	rise,	called	oven	spring,	which	lasts	until	all	of	the	yeast	is
killed.)
Fermentation	not	only	allows	the	yeast	to	give	the	dough	its	lofty	rise	but	also

produces	a	multitude	of	aromatic	molecules	that	contribute	to	the	flavor	of	the
bread.	If	the	fermentation	happens	too	quickly	in	a	warm	room,	however,	the
yeast	can	produce	an	excess	of	unpleasant	sour-smelling	volatile	acids.	To
combat	this,	and	to	produce	bread	with	deep	flavor,	we	like	to	use	two	different
techniques:	preferments	and	cool	fermentation.
Preferments—often	known	as	sponges	or	starters—are	made	before	the	bread

dough	itself	is	even	put	together.	In	a	sponge,	for	example,	yeast,	water,	and
flour	are	mixed	together	and	left	to	ferment	for	a	few	hours.	The	sponge	is	then
combined	with	more	water	and	flour	and	any	other	ingredients	in	the	recipe	for
the	final	dough.	This	dough	is	then	kneaded	and	left	to	sit	for	its	first	rise.
In	contrast	to	a	sponge,	a	starter	consists	of	a	portion	of	dough	saved	from	the

last	time	bread	was	made.	The	classic	example	is	sourdough	starter,	which	many
cooks	save	in	a	crock	in	their	refrigerator.	To	begin	the	bread-making	process
with	a	starter,	the	baker	adds	water	and	flour	to	the	starter	and	then	lets	the
mixture	sit	and	ferment.	Whereas	the	sponge	is	added	in	its	entirety	to	the



ingredients	for	the	final	dough,	a	small	portion	of	the	starter	is	put	back	in	the
crock	and	saved	for	the	next	round	of	baking.	Preferments	are	great	for	recipes
with	minimal	ingredients	because	they	boost	the	flavor	in	bread	dramatically.
With	a	lengthy	rest,	long	carbohydrate	chains,	starches,	and	other
polysaccharides	that	have	little	taste	break	down	into	a	multitude	of	sugars,
acids,	and	alcohol	with	lots	of	flavor.
Cool	fermentation,	on	the	other	hand,	is	all	about	temperature	and	is	why	we

often	recommend	letting	bread	dough	rise	overnight	in	the	refrigerator.	This
takes	longer	then	letting	bread	rise	on	a	warm	counter.	But	there	are	many
positive	effects.	First,	it	reduces	the	size	of	the	gas	bubbles	that	are	created	as	the
dough	rises.	(The	larger	the	bubbles	in	the	dough	prior	to	baking	the	more	open
and	puffy	the	final	dough	will	be.)	But	aside	from	producing	finer,	tighter	gas
bubbles,	cold	fermentation	has	the	added	benefit	of	creating	more	flavorful
dough.	Why?	Because	at	lower	temperatures	yeast	produces	less	carbon	dioxide
and	more	of	the	initial	side	products	of	fermentation:	flavorful	sugars,	alcohol,
and	acids.



FERMENTATION	IN	BREAD	DOUGH

	



FERMENTATION	With	time,	the	yeast	produces	flavor	compounds	in	bread	dough,	as	well	as	carbon
dioxide,	which	helps	it	to	rise.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	the	rate	at	which	yeast	converts	sugars	to	ethyl	alcohol	and
releases	carbon	dioxide	during	fermentation,	we	made	the	basic	yeasted	dough
for	our	Yeasted	Waffles	using	milk,	butter,	flour,	sugar,	salt,	two	eggs,	and	1½
teaspoons	of	instant	yeast.	We	split	the	batter	into	two	batches	and	then
fashioned	a	simple	respirometer,	using	a	test	tube	and	balloon,	for	each	of	them.
We	left	one	out	at	room	temperature	and	placed	one	in	the	refrigerator.



THE	RESULTS
Within	a	short	period	of	time	(three	hours),	the	room-temperature	batter	had
produced	enough	carbon	dioxide	to	inflate	the	(semipermeable)	balloon,
indicating	healthy	yeast	activity.	But	after	18	hours,	the	batter	was	spent	and	no
longer	produced	carbon	dioxide,	causing	the	balloon	to	deflate.	The	refrigerated
batter	produced	carbon	dioxide	at	a	very	slow	but	steady	rate.	Even	after	18
hours,	the	batter	was	still	producing	enough	carbon	dioxide	to	partially	fill	the
balloon.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Yeast	plays	two	roles:	providing	leavening	and	flavor.	When	yeast	is	left	out	at
room	temperature,	it	grows	quickly,	leavening	the	batter—or	dough—rapidly.	In
this	case,	however,	the	yeast	is	spent,	and	therefore	no	longer	providing	and
making	flavor,	after	18	hours.
Cool	fermentation	takes	place	in	the	refrigerator.	And	refrigerating	the	dough

allows	the	yeast	to	leaven	at	a	slow	and	steady	pace,	producing	flavor	along	the
way.	You	get	to	the	same	place	(a	fully	risen	dough)	but	because	the	journey	has
taken	so	much	longer,	more	flavorful	compounds	are	created	in	the	process.	Not
only	does	this	cool	fermentation	provide	more	flavor	in	our	finished	product,	but
it	gives	the	cook	more	time	and	flexibility	to	move	the	dough	or	batter	along	to
its	next	step	when	you	want.



COOL	FERMENTATION	TAKES	MORE	TIME,	ADDS	MORE	FLAVOR

	

	



PREFERMENTS	AT	WORK	
BREADS
Both	of	these	recipes	rely	on	a	sponge	made	the	day	before	the	bread	is	baked	to
build	flavor.



ROSEMARY	FOCACCIA
MAKES	TWO	9-INCH	ROUND	LOAVES

If	you	don’t	have	a	baking	stone,	bake	the	bread	on	an	overturned	and	preheated
rimmed	baking	sheet	set	on	the	lowest	oven	rack.

SPONGE
½				 cup	(2½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
				1⁄3 cup	water,	heated	to	110	degrees
¼				 teaspoon	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast

DOUGH
2½				 cups	(12½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1¼				 cups	water,	heated	to	110	degrees
1				 teaspoon	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast
					 Kosher	salt
¼				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil
2				 tablespoons	minced	fresh	rosemary

1.	FOR	THE	SPONGE:	Combine	flour,	water,	and	yeast	in	large	bowl	and
stir	with	wooden	spoon	until	uniform	mass	forms	and	no	dry	flour	remains,
about	1	minute.	Cover	bowl	tightly	with	plastic	wrap	and	let	stand	at	room
temperature	for	at	least	8	hours	or	up	to	24	hours.	Use	immediately	or	store	in
refrigerator	for	up	to	3	days	(allow	to	stand	at	room	temperature	for	30	minutes
before	proceeding	with	recipe).
2.	FOR	THE	DOUGH:	Stir	flour,	water,	and	yeast	into	sponge	with	wooden

spoon	until	uniform	mass	forms	and	no	dry	flour	remains,	about	1	minute.	Cover
with	plastic	and	let	rise	at	room	temperature	for	15	minutes.
3.	Sprinkle	2	teaspoons	salt	over	dough;	stir	into	dough	until	thoroughly

incorporated,	about	1	minute.	Cover	with	plastic	and	let	rise	at	room	temperature
for	30	minutes.	Spray	rubber	spatula	or	bowl	scraper	with	vegetable	oil	spray.
Fold	partially	risen	dough	over	itself	by	gently	lifting	and	folding	edge	of	dough
toward	middle.	Turn	bowl	90	degrees;	fold	again.	Turn	bowl	and	fold	dough	6
more	times	(for	total	of	8	folds).	Cover	with	plastic	and	let	rise	for	30	minutes.



Repeat	folding,	turning,	and	rising	2	more	times,	for	total	of	three	30-minute
rises.
4.	One	hour	before	baking,	adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position,	place

baking	stone	on	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	500	degrees.	Gently	transfer	dough	to
lightly	floured	counter.	Lightly	dust	top	of	dough	with	flour	and	divide	it	in	half.
Shape	each	piece	of	dough	into	5-inch	round	by	gently	tucking	under	edges.
Coat	two	9-inch	round	cake	pans	with	2	tablespoons	oil	each.	Sprinkle	each	pan
with	½	teaspoon	salt.	Place	round	of	dough	in	1	pan,	top	side	down;	slide	dough
around	pan	to	coat	bottom	and	sides	with	oil,	then	flip	dough	over.	Repeat	with
second	piece	of	dough.	Cover	pans	with	plastic	and	let	rest	for	5	minutes.
5.	Using	fingertips,	press	dough	out	toward	edges	of	pan,	taking	care	not	to

tear	it.	(If	dough	resists	stretching,	let	it	relax	for	5	to	10	minutes	before	trying	to
stretch	it	again.)	Using	dinner	fork,	poke	entire	surface	of	dough	25	to	30	times,
popping	any	large	bubbles.	Sprinkle	rosemary	evenly	over	top	of	dough.	Let
dough	rest	in	pans	until	slightly	bubbly,	5	to	10	minutes.
6.	Place	pans	on	baking	stone	and	lower	oven	temperature	to	450	degrees.

Bake	until	tops	are	golden	brown,	25	to	28	minutes,	rotating	pans	halfway
through	baking.	Transfer	pans	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	5	minutes.	Remove
loaves	from	pans	and	return	to	rack.	Brush	tops	with	any	oil	remaining	in	pans.
Cool	for	30	minutes	before	serving.	(Leftover	bread	can	be	wrapped	in	double
layer	of	plastic	wrap	and	stored	at	room	temperature	for	2	days.	Wrapped	with
additional	layer	of	aluminum	foil,	bread	can	be	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Focaccia	can	easily	disappoint	when	it	turns	out	heavy	and	thick.	We	wanted	a
light,	airy	loaf,	crisp-crusted	and	topped	with	just	a	smattering	of	herbs.	To	start,
a	sponge	(a	mixture	of	flour,	water,	and	yeast	that	rests	for	at	least	eight	hours)
gives	us	the	flavor	benefits	of	a	long	fermentation	with	minimal	effort.	But	loaves
with	a	sponge	alone	are	not	tender	and	airy	enough.	Because	vigorous	kneading
develops	too	much	gluten,	we	use	a	gentler	approach—and	a	lot	of	oil	in	the
pan.
BEGIN	WITH	THE	BIGA	A	brush	of	fruity	olive	oil	and	heady	seasonings

give	focaccia	an	addictive	savory	edge,	but	that	doesn’t	mean	a	thing	if	the
dough	itself	lacks	flavor.	The	biggest	key	here	is	fermentation—the	process	by
which	long	chains	of	carbohydrates	with	little	taste	convert	to	sugars,	alcohol,
acids,	and	carbon	dioxide.	And	like	many	other	organic	processes,	it’s	most
effective	over	a	long	period	of	time.	To	get	the	benefits	of	long	fermentation
with	minimal	effort,	we	use	a	“preferment”	(also	known	as	a	sponge,	or	biga	in
Italian):	a	mixture	of	flour,	water,	and	a	small	amount	of	yeast	that	rests
overnight	before	being	incorporated	into	a	dough	either	in	place	of	or	along	with
more	yeast.	Time	is	the	main	factor	here.	That	little	bit	of	yeast	in	the	biga	grows
as	the	hours	go	by,	and	the	flavor	that	slowly	develops	is	stronger	and	more
complex	than	you	would	get	by	simply	adding	yeast	to	flour	and	water	and
kneading.	With	a	biga,	our	focaccia	dough	holds	plenty	of	flavor—with	or
without	toppings	added.
USE	A	LOT	OF	WATER	As	we’ve	learned,	a	dough	with	a	higher	level	of

hydration	is	more	capable	of	expanding	without	tearing,	promoting	the
formation	of	larger	bubbles	(see	concept	38).	A	high	proportion	of	water	to	flour
and	a	long	resting	process	let	the	natural	enzymes	in	the	wheat	replicate	the
effect	of	kneading.	We	use	a	higher	level	of	hydration	here	in	our	focaccia—84
percent—to	help	open	up	the	crumb	structure.
REST	AND	FOLD	As	for	our	Almost	No-Knead	Bread,	we	don’t	knead	our

focaccia,	per	se.	But	we	do	fold	it.	(See	“Turn	the	Dough	Gently.”)	To	prevent
squat	loaves	of	bread,	we	turn	the	dough	while	it	rises.	A	standard	no-knead
dough	develops	structure	gradually	because	the	individual	gluten	clusters	are
relatively	slow	to	combine	into	larger	units.	But	gently	turning	the	dough	over
itself	at	regular	intervals	accomplishes	three	things:	It	brings	the	wheat	proteins
into	closer	proximity	with	one	another,	keeping	the	process	going	at	maximum
clip;	it	aerates	the	dough,	replenishing	the	oxygen	that	the	yeasts	consume
during	fermentation;	and	it	elongates	and	redistributes	the	bubbles.	After	turning



our	dough	three	times	in	the	process,	we	end	up	with	a	well-risen	focaccia	with	a
tender,	moist	crumb.
KEEP	THE	OIL	IN	THE	PAN	Olive	oil	is	a	key	ingredient	in	focaccia,	but

we	find	that	if	added	straight	to	the	dough,	it	can	turn	the	bread	dense	and
cakelike.	(Just	as	with	shortbread,	fat	“shortens”	the	dough	by	blocking	gluten’s
ability	to	form	continuous	networks.)	Instead,	we	bake	the	bread	in	round	cake
pans,	where	a	few	tablespoons	of	oil	coating	the	exterior	can	be	contained.	After
swirling	the	bottom	in	the	oil	and	some	coarse	salt,	we	flip	the	dough,	gently
stretch	it	into	the	pan’s	edges,	and	let	it	rest	for	just	a	few	extra	minutes	before
sliding	it	onto	the	hot	pizza	stone.	This	focaccia	has	a	crackly,	crisp	bottom,	a
deeply	browned	top,	and	an	interior	that	is	open	and	airy.
POKE	AND	SPRINKLE	With	a	dinner	fork,	poke	the	dough	surface	25	to

30	times.	This	will	pop	large	bubbles	of	air	and	allow	any	extra	gas	to	escape.
Then	sprinkle	the	dough	with	a	healthy	dose	of	minced	fresh	rosemary.

	



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
TURN	THE	DOUGH	GENTLY

Delicately	folding	the	dough	helps	the	bread	to	rise	and	improves	flavor.

We	rely	on	turning	to	build	flavor	and	structure	in	bread	dough	as	it	rises.	Turning	involves	delicately
folding	the	dough	over	several	times	as	it	rises.	A	plastic	bowl	scraper	is	perfect	for	this	job,	but	a	rubber
spatula	will	work,	too.	Just	coat	the	scraper	or	spatula	lightly	with	vegetable	oil	to	keep	it	from	sticking	to
the	dough.	Slide	the	scraper	under	the	edge	of	the	dough	and	lift	and	fold	the	dough	toward	the	center	of	the
bowl.	Turn	the	bowl	90	degrees	and	repeat	the	process.	Turn	the	bowl	90	degrees	one	more	time	and	fold.
When	you’re	done,	the	dough	should	be	shaped	roughly	like	a	square.	In	general,	you	will	want	to	recover
the	bowl	with	plastic	wrap,	let	it	rise,	and	repeat	the	turning	process	30	minutes	later.	(The	exact	timing	will
vary	from	recipe	to	recipe.)

Turning	gently	stretches	the	dough	and	builds	strength	as	any	wayward	sheets	of	gluten—the	protein
that	gives	baked	goods	structure—are	brought	into	alignment.	In	addition,	turning	the	dough	rids	the	dough
of	excess	carbon	dioxide,	which	otherwise	inhibits	yeast	activity,	to	ensure	maximum	flavor	and	rise.	We
strongly	recommend	that	you	take	a	minute	to	turn	the	dough	as	it	rises.



WHOLE-WHEAT	SANDWICH	BREAD
MAKES	TWO	8-INCH	LOAVES

If	you	don’t	have	a	stand	mixer,	you	can	mix	the	dough	by	hand.	To	do	this,	stir
the	wet	and	dry	ingredients	together	along	with	the	soaker	and	sponge	with	a
stiff	rubber	spatula	until	the	dough	comes	together	and	looks	shaggy.	Transfer
the	dough	to	a	clean	counter	and	knead	by	hand	to	form	a	smooth,	round	ball,
15	to	25	minutes,	adding	additional	flour,	if	necessary,	to	prevent	the	dough	from
sticking	to	the	counter.	Proceed	with	the	recipe	as	directed.	If	you	don’t	have	a
baking	stone,	bake	the	bread	on	an	overturned	and	preheated	rimmed	baking
sheet	set	on	the	lowest	oven	rack.

SPONGE
2				 cups	(11	ounces)	bread	flour
1				 cup	water,	heated	to	110	degrees
½				 teaspoon	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast

SOAKER
3				 cups	(16½	ounces)	whole-wheat	flour
½				 cup	wheat	germ
2				 cups	whole	milk

DOUGH
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened
¼				 cup	honey
2				 tablespoons	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
4				 teaspoons	salt

1.	FOR	THE	SPONGE:	Combine	flour,	water,	and	yeast	in	large	bowl	and
stir	with	wooden	spoon	until	uniform	mass	forms	and	no	dry	flour	remains,
about	1	minute.	Cover	bowl	tightly	with	plastic	wrap	and	let	sit	at	room
temperature	for	at	least	8	hours	or	up	to	24	hours.
2.	FOR	THE	SOAKER:	Combine	flour,	wheat	germ,	and	milk	in	separate



large	bowl	and	stir	with	wooden	spoon	until	shaggy	mass	forms,	about	1	minute.
Transfer	dough	to	lightly	floured	counter	and	knead	by	hand	until	smooth,	2	to	3
minutes.	Return	soaker	to	bowl,	cover	tightly	with	plastic,	and	refrigerate	for	at
least	8	hours	or	up	to	24	hours.
3.	FOR	THE	DOUGH:	Tear	soaker	apart	into	1-inch	pieces	and	place	in

bowl	of	stand	mixer	fitted	with	dough	hook.	Add	sponge,	butter,	honey,	yeast,
oil,	and	salt	and	mix	on	low	speed	until	cohesive	mass	starts	to	form,	about	2
minutes.	Increase	speed	to	medium	and	knead	until	dough	is	smooth	and	elastic,
8	to	10	minutes.	Transfer	dough	to	lightly	floured	counter	and	knead	by	hand	to
form	smooth,	round	ball,	about	1	minute.	Place	dough	in	large,	lightly	greased
bowl.	Cover	tightly	with	plastic	and	let	rise	at	room	temperature	for	45	minutes.
4.	Gently	press	down	on	center	of	dough	to	deflate.	Spray	rubber	spatula	or

bowl	scraper	with	vegetable	oil	spray;	fold	partially	risen	dough	over	itself	by
gently	lifting	and	folding	edge	of	dough	toward	middle.	Turn	bowl	90	degrees;
fold	again.	Turn	bowl	and	fold	dough	6	more	times	(total	of	8	folds).	Cover
tightly	with	plastic	and	allow	to	rise	at	room	temperature	until	doubled	in	size,
about	45	minutes.
5.	Grease	two	8½	by	4½-inch	loaf	pans.	Transfer	dough	to	well-floured

counter	and	divide	in	half.	Press	1	piece	of	dough	into	17	by	8-inch	rectangle,
with	short	side	facing	you.	Roll	dough	toward	you	into	firm	cylinder,	keeping
roll	taut	by	tucking	it	under	itself	as	you	go.	Turn	loaf	seam	side	up	and	pinch	it
closed.	Place	loaf	seam	side	down	in	prepared	pan,	pressing	gently	into	corners.
Repeat	with	second	piece	of	dough.	Cover	loaves	loosely	with	greased	plastic
and	let	rise	at	room	temperature	until	nearly	doubled	in	size,	1	to	1½	hours	(top
of	loaves	should	rise	about	1	inch	over	lip	of	pan).
6.	One	hour	before	baking,	adjust	oven	racks	to	middle	and	lowest	positions,

place	baking	stone	on	middle	rack,	place	empty	loaf	pan	or	other	heatproof	pan
on	bottom	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.	Bring	2	cups	water	to	boil	on
stovetop.	Using	sharp	serrated	knife	or	single-edge	razor	blade,	make	one	¼-
inch-deep	slash	lengthwise	down	center	of	each	loaf.	Working	quickly,	pour
boiling	water	into	empty	loaf	pan	in	oven	and	set	loaves	in	pans	on	baking	stone.
Reduce	oven	temperature	to	350	degrees.	Bake	until	crust	is	dark	brown	and
loaves	register	200	degrees,	40	to	50	minutes,	rotating	loaves	front	to	back	and
side	to	side	halfway	through	baking.	Transfer	pans	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	5
minutes.	Remove	loaves	from	pans,	return	to	rack,	and	let	cool	to	room
temperature,	about	2	hours,	before	slicing	and	serving.	(Bread	can	be	wrapped	in
double	layer	of	plastic	wrap	and	stored	at	room	temperature	for	up	to	3	days.



Wrapped	with	additional	layer	of	aluminum	foil,	bread	can	be	frozen	for	up	to	1
month.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
To	bump	up	the	whole-wheat	flavor,	we	soak	the	whole-wheat	flour	in	milk
overnight	to	soften	the	flour	and	reduce	its	bitter	notes.	Adding	some	wheat	germ
further	ramps	up	the	wheat	flavor.	We	use	a	biga	(a	combination	of	bread	flour,
water,	and	yeast	left	overnight	in	the	refrigerator)	to	develop	a	full	range	of
unique	flavors.	Three	final	tweaks	give	our	bread	even	more	character:	using
honey	instead	of	white	sugar,	cutting	back	on	the	fat,	and	swapping	some	of	the
butter	for	vegetable	oil.
UP	THE	AMOUNT	OF	WHOLE	WHEAT	Most	recipes	for	whole-wheat

sandwich	bread	lead	to	one	of	two	pitfalls.	They	either	pay	lip	service	to	being
“whole	wheat,”	yielding	loaves	containing	so	little	of	the	whole-grain	stuff	that
they	resemble	the	fluffy,	squishy	bread	you	find	at	the	supermarket,	or	they	call
for	so	much	whole	wheat	that	the	loaves	bake	up	coarse	and	dense,	crumbling	as
soon	as	you	slice	into	them.	(The	challenge	when	making	whole-wheat	bread	is
that	the	very	thing	that	gives	it	character	and	distinguishes	it	from	white	bread—
the	presence	of	bran—is	also	an	impediment	to	gluten	development.)	We	wanted
a	sandwich	bread	with	a	full-blown	nutty	(but	not	bitter)	taste	and	a	hearty	yet
soft	crumb	that	sliced	neatly.
We	first	do	this	by	substituting	bread	flour	for	all-purpose	flour.	Thanks	to	the

boost	in	gluten	development	from	its	extra	protein,	we	are	able	to	increase	the
amount	of	whole-wheat	flour	from	40	to	50	percent.	But	to	up	the	percentage
even	more,	we	have	to	soak.	A	prolonged	soaking	of	the	whole-wheat	flour
accomplishes	three	things:	First	and	foremost,	it	softens	the	grain’s	bran,	thereby
preventing	the	sharp	edges	from	puncturing	and	deflating	the	dough.	Second,	the
hydrating	effect	also	prevents	the	grains	from	robbing	moisture	from	the	dough,
which	would	toughen	the	crumb.	Third,	steeping	the	grains	activates	the	wheat’s
enzymes,	converting	some	starches	into	sugars	and,	in	turn,	reducing	bitterness
and	coaxing	out	a	sweet	flavor.	Using	a	soaker,	we	can	get	our	whole	wheat	up
to	60	percent,	producing	a	considerably	wheatier	final	product.	(See	“Soaking
Wheat	for	Better	Bread.”)	(In	order	to	keep	the	dough	cool	during	the	kneading
process,	we	refrigerate	the	soaker	overnight.	This	way,	the	friction	of	kneading
won’t	cause	the	dough’s	temperature	to	rise	and	lead	to	an	overrisen	product
whose	flavor	and	texture	both	suffer.)
ADD	WHEAT	GERM	To	bring	our	already	wheaty	wheat	bread	up	to	the

next	level,	we	add	extra	wheat	germ,	which	is	removed	along	with	the	bran
during	the	milling	process	for	refined	flour	and	is	a	significant	source	of	not	only
the	whole	grain’s	nutrition	but	also	its	sweet	flavor.	To	add	even	more	to	the



flavor	of	our	bread,	we	add	some	honey	for	a	complex	sweetness	and	cut	back
on	the	fat,	swapping	some	of	the	butter	for	oil,	for	a	hearty	yet	soft-textured	loaf.
USE	A	BIGA	The	difference	between	a	good-tasting	loaf	and	one	that	offers

the	most	robust,	well-developed	flavor	can	boil	down	to	the	use	of	a	biga.	When
left	to	sit	overnight,	this	mixture	of	flour,	water,	and	yeast	develops	a	full	range
of	unique	flavors	that	give	bread	even	more	character.	Because	we	are	already
soaking	the	whole-wheat	flour	overnight,	we	make	our	biga	at	the	same	time	and
let	it	ferment	overnight.
IMPLEMENT	THE	USUAL	TRICKS	This	recipe	relies	on	many	of	the

usual	tricks:	We	turn	the	dough	midway	through	the	first	rise	in	order	to	remove
large	gas	bubbles	and	promote	even	fermentation.	We	slash	the	top	of	the	dough
before	baking	to	make	it	easier	for	the	dough	to	rise	suddenly	in	the	oven.	And
before	putting	the	bread	in	the	oven,	we	pour	boiling	water	into	an	empty	loaf
pan	that	we	positioned	on	the	bottom	rack.	This	supplies	steam—a	common
bread	baker’s	technique	that	prevents	the	crust	from	drying	out	before	the	loaves
have	fully	expanded.

	



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SOAKING	WHEAT	FOR	BETTER	BREAD

Soaking	the	whole-wheat	flour	in	milk	improves	both	the	texture	and	flavor	of	our	Whole-
Wheat	Sandwich	Bread.

When	developing	our	recipe	for	whole-wheat	bread,	our	goal	was	to	cram	as	much	whole	wheat	into	the
dough	as	possible	to	create	a	seriously	wheaty	sandwich	loaf.	Fifty	percent	whole	wheat	wasn’t	enough	to
get	us	to	this	goal—but	any	more	and	the	bread	got	too	heavy	and	developed	off-flavors.	Would	giving	the
whole-wheat	flour	a	long	soak	before	creating	the	final	dough	allow	us	to	bump	up	its	amount?

We	baked	two	loaves,	each	with	a	3:2	ratio	of	whole	wheat	to	refined	bread	flour.	We	soaked	the	whole-
wheat	flour	in	the	first	batch	overnight	in	the	milk	from	our	recipe	before	combining	it	with	the	other
ingredients.	In	the	second	batch,	we	didn’t	give	the	whole-wheat	flour	any	special	treatment	and	proceeded
with	the	recipe	as	usual.

The	texture	and	flavor	of	the	bread	made	with	the	soaked	flour	were	markedly	better	than	those	of	the
loaf	in	which	we	didn’t	soak	the	whole	wheat.

Soaking	has	a	twofold	effect	on	the	final	loaf.	First,	it	dulls	the	flour’s	hard,	fibrous	bran,	blunting	its
ability	to	disrupt	gluten	development	and	produce	a	denser	crumb.	Soaking	also	activates	enzymes	in	the
flour	that	convert	some	of	the	starches	into	sugars,	thereby	sweetening	the	bran’s	natural	bitterness.	The
technique	allowed	us	to	pack	our	bread	with	roughly	50	percent	more	whole	wheat	than	most	recipes	call
for	and	still	create	a	loaf	with	earthy-sweet	flavor	and	a	soft	yet	hearty	crumb.

	
SOAKED	FLOUR

Lighter	texture,	no	bitterness



	
UNSOAKED	FLOUR

Dense	texture,	bitter	flavor



COOL	FERMENTATION	AT	WORK	
PIZZA,	ROLLS,	AND	WAFFLES
These	three	recipes	don’t	use	a	sponge	but	they	call	for	letting	the	dough	rise	in
the	refrigerator	so	yeast	can	develop	flavor	in	the	dough	slowly.	This	simple	idea
is	applied	to	recipes	that	are	very	different	from	each	other.



NEW	YORK–STYLE	THIN-CRUST	PIZZA
MAKES	TWO	13-INCH	PIZZAS,	SERVING	4	TO	6

If	you	don’t	have	a	baking	stone,	bake	the	pizzas	on	an	overturned	and	preheated
rimmed	baking	sheet.	You	can	shape	the	second	dough	round	while	the	first	pizza
bakes,	but	don’t	add	the	toppings	until	just	before	baking.	You	will	need	a	pizza
peel	for	this	recipe.	It	is	important	to	use	ice	water	in	the	dough	to	prevent	the
dough	from	overheating	while	in	the	food	processor.	Semolina	flour	is	ideal	for
dusting	the	peel;	use	it	in	place	of	bread	flour	if	you	have	it.	The	sauce	will	yield
more	than	needed	in	the	recipe;	extra	sauce	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	one
week	or	frozen	for	up	to	one	month.

DOUGH
3				 cups	(16½	ounces)	bread	flour
2				 teaspoons	sugar
½				 teaspoon	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast
1				1⁄3 cups	ice	water
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil

1½				 teaspoons	salt

SAUCE
1				 (28-ounce)	can	whole	tomatoes,	drained
1				 tablespoon	extra-virgin	olive	oil
1				 teaspoon	red	wine	vinegar
2				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 teaspoon	salt
1				 teaspoon	dried	oregano
¼				 teaspoon	pepper

CHEESE
1				 ounce	Parmesan	cheese,	grated	fine	(½	cup)
8				 ounces	whole-milk	mozzarella,	shredded	(2	cups)

1.	FOR	THE	DOUGH:	Pulse	flour,	sugar,	and	yeast	in	food	processor	(fitted



with	dough	blade	if	possible)	until	combined,	about	5	pulses.	With	food
processor	running,	slowly	add	water;	process	until	dough	is	just	combined	and
no	dry	flour	remains,	about	10	seconds.	Let	dough	sit	for	10	minutes.
2.	Add	oil	and	salt	to	dough	and	process	until	dough	forms	satiny,	sticky	ball

that	clears	sides	of	bowl,	30	to	60	seconds.	Transfer	dough	to	lightly	oiled
counter	and	knead	briefly	by	hand	until	smooth,	about	1	minute.	Shape	dough
into	tight	ball	and	place	in	large,	lightly	oiled	bowl;	cover	bowl	tightly	with
plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	24	hours	or	up	to	3	days.
3.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Process	all	ingredients	in	clean	bowl	of	food

processor	until	smooth,	about	30	seconds.	Transfer	to	bowl	and	refrigerate	until
ready	to	use.
4.	TO	TOP	AND	BAKE	THE	PIZZA:	One	hour	before	baking,	adjust	oven

rack	to	upper-middle	position	(rack	should	be	4	to	5	inches	from	broiler),	set
baking	stone	on	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	500	degrees.	Transfer	dough	to	clean
counter	and	divide	in	half.	With	cupped	palms,	form	each	half	into	smooth,	tight
ball.	Place	balls	of	dough	on	lightly	greased	baking	sheet,	spacing	them	at	least	3
inches	apart;	cover	loosely	with	greased	plastic	and	let	sit	for	1	hour.
5.	Coat	1	ball	of	dough	generously	with	flour	and	place	on	well-floured

counter	(keep	other	ball	covered).	Use	fingertips	to	gently	flatten	dough	into	8-
inch	disk,	leaving	1	inch	of	outer	edge	slightly	thicker	than	center.	Using	hands,
gently	stretch	disk	into	12-inch	round,	working	along	edges	and	giving	disk
quarter	turns.	Transfer	dough	to	well-floured	pizza	peel	and	stretch	into	13-inch
round.	Using	back	of	spoon	or	ladle,	spread	½	cup	tomato	sauce	in	thin	layer
over	surface	of	dough,	leaving	¼-inch	border	around	edge.	Sprinkle	¼	cup
Parmesan	evenly	over	sauce,	followed	by	1	cup	mozzarella.	Slide	pizza	carefully
onto	baking	stone	and	bake	until	crust	is	well	browned	and	cheese	is	bubbly	and
beginning	to	brown,	10	to	12	minutes,	rotating	pizza	halfway	through	baking.
Transfer	pizza	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	5	minutes	before	slicing	and	serving.
Repeat	step	5	to	shape,	top,	and	bake	second	pizza.



NEW	YORK–STYLE	THIN-CRUST	WHITE	PIZZA
MAKES	TWO	13-INCH	PIZZAS,	SERVING	4	TO	6

If	you	don’t	have	a	baking	stone,	bake	the	pizzas	on	an	overturned	and	preheated
rimmed	baking	sheet.	You	can	shape	the	second	dough	round	while	the	first	pizza
bakes,	but	don’t	add	the	toppings	until	just	before	baking.	You	will	need	a	pizza
peel	for	this	recipe.	It	is	important	to	use	ice	water	in	the	dough	to	prevent	the
dough	from	overheating	while	in	the	food	processor.	Semolina	flour	is	ideal	for
dusting	the	peel;	use	it	in	place	of	bread	flour	if	you	have	it.

DOUGH
3				 cups	(16½	ounces)	bread	flour
2				 teaspoons	sugar
½				 teaspoon	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast
1				1⁄3 cups	ice	water
1				 tablespoon	vegetable	oil

1½				 teaspoons	salt

WHITE	SAUCE
1				 cup	whole-milk	ricotta	cheese
¼				 cup	extra-virgin	olive	oil
¼				 cup	heavy	cream
1				 large	egg	yolk
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced
2				 teaspoons	minced	fresh	oregano
1				 teaspoon	minced	fresh	thyme
½				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 teaspoon	pepper
				1⁄8 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
2				 scallions,	sliced	thin,	dark	green	tops	reserved	for	garnish

CHEESE
1				 ounce	Pecorino	cheese,	grated	fine	(½	cup)
8				 ounces	whole-milk	mozzarella	cheese,	shredded	(2	cups)
½				 cup	whole-milk	ricotta	cheese



1.	FOR	THE	DOUGH:	Pulse	flour,	sugar,	and	yeast	in	food	processor	(fitted
with	dough	blade	if	possible)	until	combined,	about	5	pulses.	With	food
processor	running,	slowly	add	water;	process	until	dough	is	just	combined	and
no	dry	flour	remains,	about	10	seconds.	Let	dough	sit	for	10	minutes.
2.	Add	oil	and	salt	to	dough	and	process	until	dough	forms	satiny,	sticky	ball

that	clears	sides	of	bowl,	30	to	60	seconds.	Transfer	dough	to	lightly	oiled
counter	and	knead	briefly	by	hand	until	smooth,	about	1	minute.	Shape	dough
into	tight	ball	and	place	in	large,	lightly	oiled	bowl;	cover	bowl	tightly	with
plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	24	hours	or	up	to	3	days.
3.	FOR	THE	SAUCE:	Whisk	all	ingredients	except	scallion	greens	together

in	bowl;	refrigerate	until	ready	to	use.
4.	TO	TOP	AND	BAKE	THE	PIZZA:	One	hour	before	baking,	adjust	oven

rack	to	upper-middle	position	(rack	should	be	4	to	5	inches	from	broiler),	set
baking	stone	on	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	500	degrees.	Transfer	dough	to	clean
counter	and	divide	in	half.	With	cupped	palms,	form	each	half	into	smooth,	tight
ball.	Place	balls	of	dough	on	lightly	greased	baking	sheet,	spacing	them	at	least	3
inches	apart;	cover	loosely	with	greased	plastic	and	let	sit	for	1	hour.
5.	Coat	1	ball	of	dough	generously	with	flour	and	place	on	well-floured

counter	(keep	other	ball	covered).	Use	fingertips	to	gently	flatten	dough	into	8-
inch	disk,	leaving	1	inch	of	outer	edge	slightly	thicker	than	center.	Using	hands,
gently	stretch	disk	into	12-inch	round,	working	along	edges	and	giving	disk
quarter	turns.	Transfer	dough	to	well-floured	pizza	peel	and	stretch	into	13-inch
round.	Using	back	of	spoon	or	ladle,	spread	half	of	white	sauce	in	thin	layer	over
surface	of	dough,	leaving	¼-inch	border	around	edge.	Sprinkle	¼	cup	Pecorino
evenly	over	sauce,	followed	by	1	cup	mozzarella.	Dollop	¼	cup	ricotta	in
teaspoon	amounts	evenly	over	pizza.	Slide	pizza	carefully	onto	baking	stone	and
bake	until	crust	is	well	browned	and	cheese	is	bubbly	and	beginning	to	brown,
10	to	12	minutes,	rotating	pizza	halfway	through	baking.	Transfer	pizza	to	wire
rack	and	let	cool	for	5	minutes	before	slicing	and	serving.	Repeat	step	5	to
shape,	top,	and	bake	second	pizza.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
With	home	ovens	that	reach	only	500	degrees	and	dough	that’s	impossible	to
stretch	thin,	even	the	savviest	cooks	can	struggle	to	produce	New	York–style
parlor-quality	pizza.	We	were	in	pursuit	of	a	New	York–style	pizza	with	a	perfect
crust—thin,	crisp,	and	spottily	charred	on	the	exterior;	tender	yet	chewy	within.
High-protein	bread	flour	gives	us	a	chewy,	nicely	tanned	pizza	crust	and	the
right	ratio	of	flour,	water,	and	yeast	gives	us	dough	that	stretches	and	retains
moisture	as	it	bakes.	We	knead	the	dough	quickly	in	a	food	processor	then	let	it
rest	in	the	refrigerator	for	at	least	24	hours	to	develop	its	flavors.	After	we	shape
and	top	the	pizza,	it	goes	onto	a	blazing-hot	baking	stone	to	cook.	Placing	the
stone	near	the	top	of	the	oven	allows	the	top	of	the	pizza	to	brown	as	well	as	the
bottom.	In	minutes	we	get	a	pizza	with	everything	in	sync:	a	thoroughly	crisp,
browned	crust	with	a	slightly	chewy	texture.
USE	HIGH-PROTEIN	FLOUR	We	opt	for	high-protein	bread	flour	(about

13	percent	by	weight)	in	our	pizza	dough.	It’s	a	typical	choice	when	a	chewy,
nicely	tanned	crust	is	the	goal,	since	the	proteins	both	encourage	gluten
development	and	brown	easily.	We	add	enough	water	to	hydrate	the	dough	at
about	63	percent	(see	concept	38)—enough	so	it	stretches	easily	without	ripping
or	sticking	to	our	fingers	and	retains	moisture	as	it	bakes.	The	dough	is	a	little
sticky,	but	we	add	some	extra	flour	to	the	exterior	as	we	shape	and	stretch	the
dough.	We	use	a	food	processor	to	mix	the	dough.	A	more	conventional	stand-
mixer	method	might	take	15	to	20	minutes	to	produce	a	shiny,	elastic	dough,	but
the	food	processor	turns	out	comparably	kneaded	dough	in	less	than	two
minutes.	(Though	for	many	bread	recipes,	we	would	caution	against	the	rough
treatment	of	a	food	processor,	which	can	tear	apart	the	strands	of	gluten	that	give
bread	structure	and	the	ability	to	rise,	here	the	amount	of	flour	used	is	relatively
small.	Also,	because	this	is	a	pizza,	we	do	not	need	to	develop	the	structure	of	a
dough	destined	to	be	a	flatbread.)
CHILL	THE	DOUGH	Cool	fermentation	of	the	dough	not	only	helps	keep

the	bubbles	in	the	dough	smaller	and	tighter,	it	creates	more	flavor	via	the
production	of	sugar,	alcohol,	and	acids	(see	“Keeping	Inflation	Down”).
ADD	SUGAR	AND	OIL	Adding	oil	and	sugar	to	the	dough	helps	to

encourage	more	crunch	and	color	in	the	crust.	(We	often	sprinkle	a	spoonful	of
sugar	over	poultry	skin	to	help	it	darken	and	crisp	up	in	the	oven,	and	there’s	no
reason	the	same	trick	can’t	be	used	here.)	The	sugar	undergoes	both
caramelization	and	the	Maillard	reaction	to	produce	aromas	and	brown
pigments.



STRETCH	BY	HAND	Forget	using	a	rolling	pin.	You	can	flatten	and	stretch
the	dough	by	hand.	On	a	well-floured	surface	and	using	your	fingertips,	gently
flatten	half	of	the	dough	into	an	8-inch	disk,	leaving	the	outer	edge	slightly
thicker	than	the	center	to	create	a	fatter	“handle.”	With	your	hands,	stretch	the
dough	into	a	12-inch	round,	working	along	the	edges	and	giving	the	dough
quarter	turns.	Transfer	to	a	well-floured	peel	and	stretch	to	a	13-inch	round.
SHRINK	YOUR	HEADROOM	Home	ovens	don’t	get	hot	enough	to

produce	a	deeply	browned	crust	before	the	interior	crumb	dries	out	and
toughens.	The	best	solution	has	always	been	the	hottest	setting	on	the	oven	dial
and	a	baking	stone,	which	soaks	up	the	radiation	heat	like	a	sponge.	Following
that	logic,	most	recipes	call	for	the	stone	to	be	placed	as	low	in	the	oven	as
possible,	where	it	gets	maximum	exposure	to	the	main	heating	element.	But	that
doesn’t	really	make	sense,	and	we	even	have	an	industry	clue	to	prove	it:
commercial	pizza	ovens.	These	wide,	shallow	chambers	quickly	reflect	heat
from	the	floor	back	onto	the	top	of	the	pie	as	it	cooks,	preventing	the	crust	from
drying	out	before	the	toppings	have	browned.	We	can’t	alter	the	shape	of	our
oven,	but	we	can	move	the	stone	up	closer	to	the	top	to	narrow	the	gap	between
the	stone	and	ceiling.	The	best	position	for	the	stone	is	really	as	close	to	the	top
of	the	oven	as	possible—about	4	inches	or	so	from	the	ceiling,	which	leaves	just
enough	headroom	to	comfortably	house	the	pie.
MAKE	AN	EASY	SAUCE	We	use	a	no-cook	sauce	here—canned	tomatoes,

garlic,	olive	oil,	and	spices	pureed	in	a	food	processor.	Red	wine	vinegar
enhances	the	tomatoes’	bright	acidity.	We	supplement	the	creamy,	stretchy
mozzarella	with	a	fistful	of	sharp,	salty,	finely	grated	Parmesan.
TOP	WELL	We	like	our	thin-crust	pizza	simply	dressed	with	tomato	sauce

and	shredded	mozzarella	and	Parmesan,	but	additional	toppings	are	always	an
option—provided	they’re	prepared	correctly	and	added	judiciously.	(An
overloaded	pie	will	become	soggy.)	If	you’re	using	hearty	vegetables,	aim	for	a
maximum	of	6	ounces	per	pie,	precooked	to	remove	excess	moisture.	Leafy
green	vegetables	and	herbs	like	spinach	and	basil	are	best	placed	beneath	the
cheese	to	protect	them	or	added	raw	to	the	fully	cooked	pie.	Meats	(no	more	than
4	ounces	per	pie)	should	be	precooked	and	drained	to	remove	excess	fat.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
KEEPING	INFLATION	DOWN

Cool	fermentation	results	in	a	thinner	crust	and	more	flavor.

The	biggest	factor	contributing	to	a	crust	that	turns	out	thick	versus	thin	is	the	size	of	the	gas	bubbles	in	the
dough	before	it	goes	into	the	oven.	The	more	the	bubbles	expand	with	carbon	dioxide	as	the	dough	ferments
(or	“proofs”),	the	thicker	the	final	crust.	Could	a	longer	rise	in	the	refrigerator	fix	the	problem?

We	made	two	batches	of	bread	dough.	We	left	one	to	rise	at	room	temperature	for	four	hours	and	placed
the	other	in	the	refrigerator	for	24	hours.	We	baked	both	according	to	our	recipe.

The	dough	left	to	rise	at	room	temperature	produced	a	crust	that	puffed	up	like	focaccia,	while	the	dough
that	rose	in	the	fridge	baked	up	with	smaller	bubbles	and	boasted	far	more	flavor.

Fermentation	is	a	two-phase	process:	First,	the	carbohydrates	in	the	dough	are	converted	by	the	yeast	to
sugars,	alcohol,	and	acids.	Next,	these	convert	to	carbon	dioxide,	expanding	the	bubbles	created	in	the
dough	when	it	was	first	mixed.	At	room	temperature,	the	process	moves	rapidly	to	the	production	of	carbon
dioxide.	But	in	the	fridge,	the	process	is	slowed	way	down.	With	enough	time,	the	complex-tasting	sugars,
alcohol,	and	acids	form,	but	very	little	carbon	dioxide	gets	converted,	so	the	bubbles	in	the	dough	stay	small
and	the	crust	bakes	up	both	thinner	and	more	flavorful.

	
PUFFY	AND	BLAND



	
THIN	AND	FLAVORFUL



CRESCENT	ROLLS
MAKES	16	ROLLS

We	developed	this	recipe	using	lower-protein	flour	such	as	Gold	Medal	or
Pillsbury.	If	using	a	higher-protein	flour	such	as	King	Arthur,	reduce	the	flour
amount	to	3½	cups	(17½	ounces).	If	you	don’t	have	a	stand	mixer,	you	can	mix
the	dough	by	hand.	To	do	this,	stir	the	wet	and	dry	ingredients	together	with	a
stiff	rubber	spatula	until	the	dough	comes	together	and	looks	shaggy.	Transfer
the	dough	to	a	clean	counter	and	knead	by	hand	to	form	a	smooth,	round	ball,
15	to	25	minutes,	adding	additional	flour,	if	necessary,	to	prevent	the	dough	from
sticking	to	the	counter.	Proceed	with	the	recipe	as	directed.

16				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	16	pieces
¾				 cup	skim	milk
¼				 cup	(1¾	ounces)	sugar
3				 large	eggs
4				 cups	(20	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 teaspoon	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast

1½				 teaspoons	salt
1				 large	egg	white,	beaten	with	1	teaspoon	water

1.	Microwave	butter,	milk,	and	sugar	in	4-cup	liquid	measuring	cup	until
butter	is	mostly	melted	and	mixture	is	warm	(110	degrees),	about	1½	minutes.
Whisk	to	melt	butter	and	blend	in	sugar.	Beat	eggs	lightly	in	medium	bowl;	add
about	one-third	of	warm	milk	mixture,	whisking	to	combine.	When	bottom	of
bowl	feels	warm,	add	remaining	milk	mixture,	whisking	to	combine.
2.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	mix	flour	and	yeast	together	on	low

speed	until	combined,	about	15	seconds.	Add	egg	mixture	in	steady	stream	and
mix	until	loose,	shiny	dough	forms	(you	may	also	see	satiny	webs	as	dough
moves	in	bowl),	about	1	minute.	Increase	speed	to	medium	and	beat	for	1
minute;	add	salt	slowly	and	continue	beating	until	stronger	webs	form,	about	3
minutes	longer.	(Dough	will	remain	loose	rather	than	forming	neat,	cohesive
mass.)	Transfer	dough	to	large,	lightly	greased	bowl;	cover	tightly	with	plastic
wrap	and	let	rise	at	room	temperature	until	dough	doubles	in	size	and	surface
feels	tacky,	about	3	hours.
3.	Line	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	plastic.	Sprinkle	dough	with	flour	(no	more



than	2	tablespoons)	to	prevent	sticking	and	press	down	gently	to	deflate.
Transfer	dough	to	floured	counter	and	press	into	rough	rectangle	shape.	Transfer
rectangle	to	prepared	baking	sheet,	cover	with	plastic,	and	refrigerate	for	8	to	12
hours.
4.	Transfer	dough	rectangle	to	lightly	floured	counter	and	line	baking	sheet

with	parchment	paper.	Roll	dough	into	uniform	20	by	13-inch	rectangle.	Cut
dough	in	half	lengthwise,	then	cut	each	rectangle	into	8	triangles,	trimming
edges	as	needed	to	make	uniform	triangles.	Before	rolling	crescents,	elongate
each	triangle	of	dough,	stretching	it	an	additional	2	to	3	inches	in	length.	Starting
at	wide	end,	gently	roll	up	dough,	ending	with	pointed	tip	on	bottom,	and	push
ends	toward	each	other	to	form	crescent	shape.	Arrange	crescents	in	4	rows	on
prepared	baking	sheet,	wrap	baking	sheet	with	plastic,	and	refrigerate	for	at	least
2	hours	or	up	to	3	days.
5.	Remove	baking	sheet	with	chilled	rolls	from	refrigerator,	unwrap,	and	slide

baking	sheet	into	large	clean	garbage	bag;	seal	to	close.	Let	crescents	rise	until
they	feel	slightly	tacky	and	soft	and	have	lost	their	chill,	45	minutes	to	1	hour.
6.	Thirty	minutes	before	baking,	adjust	oven	racks	to	lower-middle	and	lowest

positions,	place	second	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	lower	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	425
degrees.	Bring	1	cup	water	to	boil	on	stovetop.	Lightly	brush	risen	crescent	rolls
with	egg-white	mixture.	Working	quickly,	place	baking	sheet	with	rolls	on	upper
rack,	then	pour	boiling	water	onto	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	lower	rack	and
quickly	close	oven	door.	Bake	for	10	minutes,	then	reduce	oven	temperature	to
350	degrees	and	continue	baking	until	tops	and	bottoms	of	rolls	are	deep	golden
brown,	12	to	16	minutes	longer.	Transfer	rolls	to	wire	rack,	let	cool	for	5
minutes,	and	serve	warm.	(Rolls	can	be	placed	in	zipper-lock	bag	and	stored	at
room	temperature	for	up	to	3	days.	Wrapped	with	aluminum	foil	before	placing
in	bag,	rolls	can	be	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.)
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Rolls	can	be	partially	baked	and	frozen	until	ready	to

serve.	Begin	baking	rolls	as	instructed,	but	let	them	bake	at	350	degrees	for	only
4	minutes,	or	until	tops	and	bottoms	brown	slightly.	Remove	them	from	oven
and	let	cool	to	room	temperature.	Place	partially	baked	rolls	in	single	layer
inside	zipper-lock	bag	and	freeze.	When	ready	to	serve,	defrost	rolls	at	room
temperature	and	place	in	preheated	350-degree	oven	for	12	to	16	minutes.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Crescent	rolls	from	the	supermarket	are	artificial-tasting	and	stale	quickly,	but
making	them	at	home	is	time-consuming.	We	were	determined	to	come	up	with	a
recipe	for	rich,	tender,	flaky	crescent	rolls	that	could	fit	into	an	already-hectic
holiday	cooking	schedule.	We	found	that	skim	milk	adds	flavor	without	density,
and	melted	butter	and	extra	eggs	enrich	the	dough.	An	overnight	chill	makes	the
finished	rolls	crisp	and	flaky,	and	the	resilient	dough	can	be	shaped	and
refrigerated	for	three	days	(or	parbaked	and	frozen	for	one	month),	then	baked
right	before	serving,	for	rich,	buttery	rolls	without	any	fuss.
ADD	BUTTER	The	dough	for	our	crescent	rolls	differs	from	rustic	bread	and

pizza	doughs—it	has	a	lot	of	fat.	This	family	of	bread	dough	(which	includes
American	sandwich	bread,	brioche,	and	challah)	calls	for	eggs,	milk,	and	butter
on	top	of	flour,	water,	and	yeast.	With	all	of	that	fat,	however,	the	dough	can	be
incredibly	sticky	and	hard	to	handle.	This	is	why	chilling	it	is	essential.	(Chilling
also	gives	the	gluten	time	to	relax	so	that	you	can	stretch	the	dough	easily	into
crescents.)
CHILL	WELL	Not	only	is	a	chilled	dough	easier	to	handle,	but	the	texture	of

the	final	rolls	made	from	chilled	dough	is	better,	too.	These	rolls	are	flaky	and
flavorful	with	a	blistery,	snappy	crust.	The	process	of	retarding	(or	chilling	for	a
long	time)	allows	acetic	acid	to	build	up	in	the	dough,	which	is	responsible	for	a
richer	flavor	as	well	as	a	blistered	crust.
STRETCH,	CUT,	AND	ROLL	To	turn	a	lump	of	dough	into	16	crescent

rolls,	first	roll	the	dough	into	a	20	by	13-inch	rectangle.	Use	a	pizza	wheel	to
trim	the	edges.	Cut	the	dough	in	half	lengthwise,	and	then	cut	each	length	into
eight	triangles.	Elongate	each	triangle	of	dough	before	rolling	the	crescent,
stretching	it	an	additional	2	to	3	inches	in	length.	And	then,	starting	at	the	wide
end,	gently	roll	up	the	dough,	ending	with	the	pointed	tip	on	the	bottom.
START	IN	HOT	OVEN	We	start	our	crescent	rolls	in	a	425-degree	oven	for

an	initial	bake,	and	then	lower	the	oven	temperature	to	350	degrees	just	when	the
rolls	are	starting	to	color.	Why?	This	improves	the	rolls’	oven	spring,	or	the
dramatic	increase	in	size	caused	by	that	initial	blast	of	heat	from	the	oven.	The
high	heat	makes	the	rolls	larger	and	loftier.	Lowering	the	oven	temperature
allows	the	rolls	to	bake	through	without	burning.



YEASTED	WAFFLES
MAKES	SEVEN	7-INCH	ROUND	OR	FOUR	9-INCH	SQUARE	WAFFLES

While	the	waffles	can	be	eaten	as	soon	as	they	are	removed	from	the	waffle	iron,
they	will	have	a	crispier	exterior	if	rested	in	a	warm	oven	for	10	minutes.	(This
method	also	makes	it	possible	to	serve	everyone	at	the	same	time.)	This	batter
must	be	made	12	to	24	hours	in	advance.	We	prefer	the	texture	of	the	waffles
made	in	a	classic	waffle	iron,	but	a	Belgian	waffle	iron	will	work,	though	it	will
make	fewer	waffles.

1¾				 cups	milk
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	8	pieces
2				 cups	(10	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 tablespoon	sugar

1½				 teaspoons	instant	or	rapid-rise	yeast
1				 teaspoon	salt
2				 large	eggs
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

1.	Heat	milk	and	butter	in	small	saucepan	over	medium-low	heat	until	butter	is
melted,	3	to	5	minutes.	Let	mixture	cool	until	warm	to	touch.
2.	Meanwhile,	whisk	flour,	sugar,	yeast,	and	salt	together	in	large	bowl.

Gradually	whisk	warm	milk	mixture	into	flour	mixture;	continue	to	whisk	until
batter	is	smooth.	Whisk	eggs	and	vanilla	in	small	bowl	until	combined,	then	add
egg	mixture	to	batter	and	whisk	until	incorporated.	Scrape	down	bowl	with
rubber	spatula,	cover	bowl	with	plastic	wrap,	and	refrigerate	for	at	least	12	hours
or	up	to	24	hours.
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	200	degrees.	Set	wire

rack	in	rimmed	baking	sheet;	place	in	oven.	Heat	waffle	iron	according	to
manufacturer’s	instructions.	Remove	batter	from	refrigerator	when	waffle	iron	is
hot	(batter	will	be	foamy	and	doubled	in	size).	Whisk	batter	to	recombine	(batter
will	deflate).	Bake	waffles	according	to	manufacturer’s	instructions	(use	about	½
cup	for	7-inch	round	iron	and	about	1	cup	for	9-inch	square	iron).	Transfer
waffles	to	wire	rack	in	preheated	oven;	repeat	with	remaining	batter.	Serve.



BLUEBERRY	YEASTED	WAFFLES

We	found	that	frozen	wild	blueberries—which	are	smaller—work	best	here.
Larger	blueberries	release	too	much	juice,	which	burns	and	becomes	bitter	when
it	comes	in	contact	with	the	waffle	iron.

After	removing	waffle	batter	from	refrigerator	in	step	3,	gently	fold	1½	cups
frozen	blueberries	into	batter	using	rubber	spatula.	Bake	waffles	as	directed.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Raised	waffles	are	barely	on	the	current	culinary	radar,	and	that’s	a	shame.	They
sound	old-fashioned	and	do	require	an	ounce	of	advance	planning,	but	they	are
crisp,	tasty,	and	easy	to	prepare.	We	wanted	to	revive	this	breakfast	treat	with
yeasted	waffles	that	were	creamy	and	airy,	tangy	and	salty,	refined	and	complex.
We	settled	on	all-purpose	flour,	found	the	right	amount	of	yeast	to	provide	a
pleasant	tang,	and	added	a	full	stick	of	melted	butter	for	rich	flavor.
Refrigerating	the	batter	overnight	keeps	the	growth	of	the	yeast	under	control
and	produces	waffles	with	superior	flavor.	Even	better,	now	all	we	have	to	do	in
the	morning	is	heat	up	the	iron.
LET	RISE	OVERNIGHT	The	concept	for	yeast	waffles	is	simple	enough.

Most	of	the	ingredients	(flour,	salt,	sugar,	yeast,	milk,	melted	butter,	and	vanilla)
are	combined	the	night	before	and	left	to	rise	on	the	counter.	The	next	day,	eggs
and	baking	soda	are	added	and	the	batter	is	baked	off.	But	older	recipes	call	for
the	batter	to	be	left	out	at	room	temperature,	which	causes	the	batter	to	rise	and
then	fall,	and	turn	sour	rather	than	tangy.	We	find	that	slowing	down	the
fermentation	in	the	fridge	ensures	that	flavors	don’t	overdevelop.	Also,	this	way
we	don’t	need	to	wait	to	add	the	eggs	in	the	morning.
DON’T	ADD	BUTTERMILK	We	think	buttermilk	is	the	key	to	great

pancakes	and	waffles	made	à	la	minute.	(See	Best	Buttermilk	Pancakes	recipe.)
Unfortunately,	most	cooks	don’t	have	buttermilk	in	the	fridge	and	many	markets
don’t	even	carry	it.	The	good	news	about	this	recipe:	It	works	best	with	regular
milk.	The	yeast	provides	plenty	of	tang.	Buttermilk	would	be	overkill.
NO	BAKING	SODA	Many	older	recipes	call	for	baking	soda	to	be	added

with	the	eggs	just	before	baking.	In	our	recipe,	this	isn’t	necessary.	The	baking
soda	is	needed	for	lift	in	those	recipes	because	the	batter	is	left	out	overnight,
which	results	in	dead	yeast	in	the	morning.	In	our	waffles,	the	yeast	has	plenty	of
leavening	power	the	next	morning	because	the	batter	has	been	refrigerated;	as	a
result,	the	baking	soda	is	redundant.
USE	A	HOT	IRON	Not	all	waffle	irons	are	the	same—you	want	to	use	a	hot

iron.	The	best	irons	produce	waffles	that	are	evenly	cooked	and	consistently
browned	from	the	beginning	to	the	end	of	a	batch—and	in	the	promised	shade	of
light	to	dark.	Look	for	models	with	thick	heating	coils	extending	under	most	of
the	cooking	surface,	which	helps	to	ensure	uniformly	golden	waffles	that	cook
efficiently.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
REFRIGERATING	MAPLE	SYRUP

Once	opened,	store	maple	syrup	in	the	refrigerator—or	the	freezer.

Because	of	its	high	moisture	level	and	lack	of	preservatives,	maple	syrup	is	a	perishable	food	product	that	is
susceptible	to	the	growth	of	yeasts,	molds,	and	bacteria.	Refrigeration	not	only	helps	maple	syrup	retain	its
flavor	but	prevents	microorganisms	from	growing	as	well.	Unopened,	maple	syrup	will	last	several	years
stored	in	a	cool,	dark	place.	Once	opened,	it	will	keep	six	months	to	a	year	in	the	refrigerator.

But	as	maple	syrup	can	be	pricey,	it	can	make	sense	to	buy	it	in	large	quantities	when	on	sale.	For	long-
term	storage	(more	than	a	year),	we	wondered	if	storing	syrup	in	the	freezer	would	work	as	well	as
refrigeration.	We	froze	half	the	contents	of	one	bottle	of	syrup,	refrigerated	the	rest,	and	then	conducted	a
comparative	tasting.	The	syrup	stored	in	the	freezer	never	froze	solid	and,	once	warmed,	was	identical	in
taste	to	the	refrigerated	syrup.	(The	syrup	never	froze	because	of	the	high	concentration	of	solids	in	the
liquid—in	this	case,	the	sugar.)	At	most,	the	syrup	will	become	thick,	viscous,	or	crystallized	during
freezing,	but	a	quick	zap	in	the	microwave	will	restore	it	so	well	that	you	would	never	know	it	had	been
“frozen.”



CONCEPT	41

Gentle	Folding	Stops	Tough	Quick
Breads
As	we	learned	in	concept	39,	yeast	breads	depend	on	a	well-developed	gluten
structure	to	rise	properly.	Gluten	also	gives	bread	its	resilient,	chewy	texture.	In
contrast,	quick	breads	(such	as	banana	bread),	as	well	as	muffins	and	pancakes,
can	be	ruined	by	excess	development	of	gluten.	That’s	because	tenderness—not
chewiness—is	the	goal.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Let’s	start	with	a	definition	of	quick	breads.	Unlike	yeast	breads,	which	rely	on
slow	fermentation	to	create	rise,	quick	breads	use	chemical	leaveners,	namely,
baking	powder	or	baking	soda.	(For	more	on	the	science	of	chemical	leaveners,
see	concept	42.)	When	these	leaveners	are	added	to	a	quick-bread	batter	they
create	the	gases	that	cause	muffins,	pancakes,	and	the	like	to	rise.	Because	the
production	of	gases	begins	as	soon	as	these	dry	leaveners	are	hydrated,	quick
breads	should	be	baked	immediately	and	don’t	require	long	fermentation,	like
yeast	breads.
Quick	breads	rely	on	the	same	basic	mixing	method—sometimes

(appropriately)	called	the	“quick	bread”	method.	First,	the	dry	ingredients	(flour,
baking	powder	and/or	baking	soda,	and	salt)	are	whisked	together	in	one	bowl.
Next,	the	wet	ingredients	(milk	or	buttermilk,	melted	butter	or	oil,	sugar,	and
eggs)	are	whisked	together	in	another	bowl	or	a	large	measuring	cup.	Finally,	the
wet	ingredients	are	added	to	the	bowl	with	the	dry	ingredients.	But	the	important
part?	How,	exactly,	and	with	what	force,	these	mixtures	are	combined.	It’s	not	as
simple	as	a	few	good	strokes	with	a	wooden	spoon.	Folding—not	stirring—is
essential.
After	all,	a	rustic	yeast	bread	should	be	chewy—think	about	how	you	can	sink

your	teeth	into	good	bread	and	pull.	In	contrast,	a	quick	bread	that	required	a	lot
of	chewing	would	be	considered	a	failure.	Quick	breads	should	be	tender,	more
like	cake	than	bread.	The	eggs,	fats,	and	sugars	in	most	quick	breads	have	a
tenderizing	effect.	That’s	because	melted	fats	and	oils,	the	emulsifiers	in	egg
yolks,	and	dissolved	sugars	all	interfere	with	the	formation	of	gluten	by	either
preventing	or	slowing	protein	unfolding	and	bonding.	But	even	with	eggs,	fats,
and	sugar	in	the	batter,	if	you	overmix	a	quick	bread	you	will	end	up	with	tough
results.
Stirring	would	seem	to	be	a	gentle	way	of	mixing	the	ingredients,	but	in	a	wet

batter	it’s	enough	to	begin	unfolding	the	proteins	and	activate	the	formation	of
gluten.	It	really	doesn’t	require	much	gluten	formation	to	make	a	tender	quick
bread	tough.	For	this	reason,	quick	breads	should	never	be	prepared	with	an
electric	mixer.	Gentle	mixing	with	a	rubber	spatula	(a	technique	called	folding)
is	key.	In	fact,	it’s	important	to	leave	some	streaks	of	flour	in	the	batter.	If	the
batter	is	completely	homogeneous,	it’s	likely	the	batter	has	been	overmixed.



TOUGH	QUICK	BREADS	HAVE	TOO	MUCH	GLUTEN



	
OVERSTIRRED	When	water	and	flour	combine	in	a	quick	bread	batter,	gluten	begins	to	form.	Too	much



stirring	and	the	gluten	network	will	overdevelop	and	cause	a	tough	quick	bread.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
Most	recipes	for	quick	breads	and	brownies	(which	are	made	by	the	quick	bread
method)	caution	against	overmixing	the	batter,	which	purportedly	leads	to
tougher	baked	goods.	To	avoid	overmixing,	wet	and	dry	ingredients	are	gently
folded	together	with	a	spatula	until	only	a	few	streaks	of	dry	flour	remain.	To
find	out	how	important	this	precaution	is	we	designed	the	following	test.

We	made	three	batches	of	brownies,	varying	only	the	mixing	technique.	For
one	batch	we	folded	the	wet	and	dry	ingredients	until	they	were	just	combined,
with	a	few	streaks	of	flour	remaining.	For	the	second,	we	folded	past	this	stage
until	no	dry	flour	remained	and	the	batter	had	an	even,	smooth	appearance.
Finally,	we	mixed	the	third	sample	on	low	speed	in	a	stand	mixer	with	a	whisk
attachment	for	a	full	five	minutes.



THE	RESULTS
The	differences—even	between	the	two	folded	samples—were	dramatic.	While
the	properly	mixed	batter	baked	into	compact,	tender	brownies,	the	overfolded
sample	was	relatively	cakey	and	tough.	The	batter	prepared	in	the	stand	mixer
baked	up	almost	twice	as	tall	as	the	properly	folded	batter	and	offered	serious
resilience.	Tasters	described	these	brownies	as	downright	tough	and	said	they
lacked	the	fudgy	texture	of	the	properly	folded	brownies.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Whether	taking	a	bite	or	lining	up	samples	of	our	three	brownies	in	a	row,	we
could	tell:	Overmixing	gives	us	tough,	not	tender,	brownies.	Why?
Mixing	batter	or	dough	leads	to	gluten	formation.	Too	much	mixing	leads	to	a

strong	gluten	network.	And	a	strong	gluten	network,	as	we’ve	learned,	is	what
provides	structure	in	a	bread,	helping	to	trap	gas	and	ultimately	to	create	chew.
The	brownies	prepared	in	the	stand	mixer	were	twice	as	tall	because	extra	air
had	been	incorporated	into	the	batter	and	the	strong	gluten	network	was	able	to
trap	the	air.	In	a	brownie,	this	is	exactly	what	we	don’t	want.	Overmixing	means
tough,	cakey	squares	instead	of	tender,	fudgy	ones.
The	easiest	way	to	know	when	to	stop	mixing,	we’ve	found,	is	to	be	sure	to

leave	streaks	of	flour	in	your	brownie	(or	cookie,	or	quick	bread)	batter.	If	it’s
not	completely	mixed,	it’s	not	overmixed,	and	that’s	exactly	what	we	do	want.
We	also	recommend	using	a	folding—rather	than	stirring—motion	to	mix	the
dry	and	wet	ingredients	with	the	fewest	strokes.	Scrape	a	rubber	spatula	along
the	bottom	and	sides	of	the	bowl,	turning	the	mixture	over	as	you	go.



HOW	MIXING	AFFECTS	BROWNIE	TEXTURE

	
PERFECTLY	MIXED

The	brownies	that	were	folded	just	right,	with	streaks	of	flour	remaining	in	the	batter,	baked	up	fudgy	and
tender,	just	as	we	like.

	
FOLDED	TOO	MUCH

The	brownies	that	we	mixed	too	much	by	hand	were	taller,	tougher,	and	noticeably	more	cakelike.



	
MIXED	TO	DEATH

The	brownies	whipped	in	a	stand	mixer	were	twice	as	tall,	tough,	and	significantly	less	chocolaty.



GLUTEN	MINIMIZATION	AT	WORK	
QUICK	BREADS	AND	MUFFINS
Banana	bread,	cornbread,	and	muffins	should	all	have	a	tender,	almost	cakey
texture.	Gluten	minimization	is	key	to	achieving	the	proper	texture	in	these	baked
goods	as	well	as	in	pancakes	(see	concept	42).	Just	how	do	you	minimize	gluten?
It’s	mostly	what	you	don’t	do.



ULTIMATE	BANANA	BREAD
SERVES	10

Be	sure	to	use	very	ripe,	heavily	speckled	(or	even	black)	bananas	in	this	recipe.
This	recipe	can	be	made	using	five	thawed	frozen	bananas;	since	they	release	a
lot	of	liquid	naturally,	they	can	bypass	the	microwaving	in	step	2	and	go	directly
into	the	fine-mesh	strainer.	Do	not	use	a	thawed	frozen	banana	in	step	4;	it	will
be	too	soft	to	slice.	Instead,	simply	sprinkle	the	top	of	the	loaf	with	sugar.	We
developed	this	recipe	using	a	loaf	pan	that	measures	8½	by	4½	inches;	if	you	use
a	9	by	5-inch	loaf	pan,	start	checking	for	doneness	five	minutes	earlier	than
advised	in	the	recipe.	The	texture	is	best	when	the	loaf	is	eaten	fresh,	but	it	can
be	stored	(let	cool	completely	first),	covered	tightly	with	plastic	wrap,	for	up	to
three	days.

1¾				 cups	(8¾	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 teaspoon	baking	soda
½				 teaspoon	salt
6				 large	very	ripe	bananas	(2¼	pounds),	peeled
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	cooled
2				 large	eggs
¾				 cup	packed	(5¼	ounces)	light	brown	sugar
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
½				 cup	walnuts,	toasted	and	chopped	coarse	(optional)
2				 teaspoons	granulated	sugar

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Spray
8½	by	4½-inch	loaf	pan	with	vegetable	oil	spray.	Whisk	flour,	baking	soda,	and
salt	together	in	large	bowl.
2.	Place	5	bananas	in	separate	bowl,	cover,	and	microwave	until	bananas	are

soft	and	have	released	liquid,	about	5	minutes.	Transfer	bananas	to	fine-mesh
strainer	over	medium	bowl	and	allow	to	drain,	stirring	occasionally,	for	15
minutes	(you	should	have	½	to	¾	cup	liquid).
3.	Transfer	liquid	to	medium	saucepan	and	cook	over	medium-high	heat	until

reduced	to	¼	cup,	about	5	minutes.	Remove	pan	from	heat,	stir	reduced	liquid
into	bananas,	and	mash	with	potato	masher	until	mostly	smooth.	Whisk	in	butter,



eggs,	brown	sugar,	and	vanilla.
4.	Pour	banana	mixture	into	dry	ingredients	and	stir	until	just	combined,	with

some	streaks	of	flour	remaining.	Gently	fold	in	walnuts,	if	using.	Scrape	batter
into	prepared	pan.	Slice	remaining	banana	diagonally	into	¼-inch-thick	slices.
Shingle	banana	slices	on	top	of	loaf	in	2	rows,	leaving	1½-inch-wide	space	down
center	to	ensure	even	rise.	Sprinkle	granulated	sugar	evenly	over	loaf.
5.	Bake	until	toothpick	inserted	in	center	of	loaf	comes	out	clean,	55	to	75

minutes.	Let	loaf	cool	in	pan	for	10	minutes,	then	turn	out	onto	wire	rack	and	let
cool	for	1	hour	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Our	ideal	banana	bread	is	simple	enough—a	moist,	tender	loaf	that	really	tastes
like	bananas.	We	discovered	that	doubling	the	dose	of	bananas	in	our	favorite
test	recipe	was	both	a	blessing	and	a	curse.	The	abundance	of	fruit	made	for
intense	banana	flavor,	but	the	weight	and	moisture	sank	the	loaf	and	gave	it	a
cakelike	structure.	Looking	to	add	banana	flavor	without	moisture,	we
experimented	with	many	possible	but	unsuccessful	solutions	until	we
rediscovered	the	value	of	the	microwave.
SQUEEZE	IN	MORE	BANANAS	We	wanted	maximum	banana	flavor	in

our	banana	bread,	but	not	a	dense	loaf.	To	lighten	our	banana	bread,	we	knew	we
needed	to	rid	our	bananas	of	some	of	their	moisture.	Roasting	the	bananas	helps
drive	off	moisture	but	it	takes	too	long	and	you	don’t	get	rid	of	enough	moisture.
We	tried	simmering	mashed	bananas,	as	well	as	dicing	and	sautéing	them.	But
what	worked	best?	We	turned	to	a	technique	we	use	with	eggplant	that	uses	the
power	of	the	microwave	to	remove	excess	moisture.	We	then	reduce	the	liquid
and	use	that	concentrated	banana	juice	in	place	of	some	of	the	dairy	in	the	batter
for	super	banana	flavor.
GET	THOSE	BANANAS	RIPE	It’s	important	to	use	very	ripe	bananas	(see

“Do	the	Ripe	Thing”).	Strategies	for	speeding	ripening	in	bananas	abound,	but	as
we	worked	our	way	through	over	eight	cases	of	fruit	while	developing	this
banana	bread,	we	found	most	of	them	ineffective.	One	theory,	for	example,	holds
that	freezing	or	roasting	underripe	bananas	in	their	skins	will	quickly	render
them	sweet	and	soft	enough	for	baking.	While	these	methods	do	turn	the	bananas
black—giving	them	the	appearance	of	their	super-sweet,	overripe	brethren—they
actually	do	little	to	encourage	the	necessary	conversion	of	starch	to	sugar.
The	best	way	to	ripen	bananas	is	to	enclose	them	in	a	paper	bag	for	a	few

days.	The	bag	will	trap	the	ethylene	gas	produced	by	fruit	that	hastens	ripening,
while	still	allowing	some	moisture	to	escape.	Since	fully	ripe	fruit	emits	the	most
ethylene,	placing	a	ripe	banana	or	other	ripe	fruit	in	the	bag	will	speed	the
process	along	by	a	day	or	two.
TWEAK	THE	FLAVOR	We	exchange	the	typical	sugar	for	light	brown

sugar,	finding	that	the	latter’s	molasses	notes	better	complement	the	bananas.	A
teaspoon	of	vanilla	rounds	out	the	bananas’	faintly	boozy,	rumlike	flavor.	Don’t
forget	the	salt.
REPLACE	OIL	WITH	BUTTER	We	replace	the	traditional	oil	in	our

banana	bread	recipe	with	butter.	Butter	gives	our	bread	a	nutty,	rich	flavor	that



we	prefer.
SEPARATE,	THEN	FOLD	To	make	the	batter,	we	combine	the	wet

ingredients	(including	the	brown	sugar),	and	then	add	them	to	the	bowl	with	the
dry	ingredients	and	fold	gently.	Gently	is	the	key	word	here.	Make	sure	that	you
fold	the	batter	gently	enough	that	flour	streaks	remain.	(And	be	sure	to	mash	the
bananas	well	before	they	even	hit	the	dry	ingredients.)
TOP	WITH	MORE	BANANAS	We	slice	a	sixth	banana	and	shingle	it	on

top	of	the	batter.	A	final	sprinkle	of	granulated	sugar	helps	the	buttery	slices	to
caramelize	and	gives	the	loaf	an	enticingly	crisp,	crunchy	top.	To	ensure	an	even
rise,	place	the	banana	slices	along	the	long	sides	of	the	loaf	pan	and	leave	a	1½-
inch-wide	space	down	the	center.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
DO	THE	RIPE	THING

Ripe	bananas	are	heavily	speckled,	with	more	fructose.

Don’t	even	think	of	making	banana	bread	with	anything	less	than	very	ripe,	heavily	speckled	fruit—unless
you’re	fine	with	a	bland	loaf.	As	bananas	ripen,	their	starch	converts	to	sugars	at	an	exponential	rate.	In	lab
tests,	we	found	heavily	speckled	bananas	had	nearly	three	times	the	amount	of	fructose	(the	sweetest	of	the
sugars	in	fruit)	of	less	spotty	bananas.	(The	exact	percentage	will	vary	from	fruit	to	fruit.)	But	the	impact	of
ripeness	only	goes	so	far:	We	found	little	difference	in	sweetness	between	loaves	baked	with	completely
black	bananas	and	those	made	with	heavily	speckled	ones.

	
1.8%	FRUCTOSE	=	TOO	SOON

A	lightly	speckled	banana	has	only	a	little	fructose,	the	sweetest	sugar	in	fruit.



	
5.3%	FRUCTOSE	=JUST	RIGHT

A	heavily	speckled	banana	has	a	lot	more	fructose.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
MAKING	BANANAS	LAST

Refrigerated	bananas	turn	black	but	last	much	longer.

Most	people	store	bananas	on	the	countertop,	and	we	wondered	if	chilling	fruit	could	slow	ripening.	To	find
out,	we	left	12	pounds	of	bananas	at	room	temperature	for	three	days	until	they	were	perfectly	ripe
(signified	by	a	firm	but	yielding	texture).	We	then	moved	half	of	the	bananas	into	the	refrigerator,	leaving
the	remainder	at	room	temperature.

For	the	next	few	days,	the	bananas	were	nearly	indistinguishable.	After	four	days,	however,	the	room-
temperature	fruit	became	markedly	soft	and	mushy,	while	the	refrigerated	fruit	remained	firm,	despite
blackened	skins.	We	continued	to	taste	the	refrigerated	bananas	after	the	room-temperature	samples	had
been	discarded	and	were	delighted	to	discover	that	they	lasted	an	additional	five	days	(so,	almost	two	weeks
after	purchase)	before	the	flesh	became	overripe.

The	explanation	is	simple:	As	a	banana	ripens,	it	emits	a	gas	called	ethylene	that	accelerates	the	ripening
process.	Cool	temperatures	slow	down	the	production	of	ethylene,	thereby	decelerating	ripening.	However,
refrigeration	also	causes	the	cell	walls	of	the	peel	to	break	down,	releasing	enzymes	that	cause	the
formation	of	black-brown	pigments.	For	this	reason,	keep	bananas	on	the	counter	until	they	become
speckled;	if	you’re	not	ready	to	use	the	ripe	bananas,	refrigerate	them	to	prolong	their	shelf	life.



ALL-PURPOSE	CORNBREAD
SERVES	6

Before	preparing	the	baking	dish	or	any	of	the	other	ingredients,	measure	out	the
frozen	corn	kernels	and	let	them	stand	at	room	temperature	until	needed.	When
corn	is	in	season,	cooked	fresh	kernels	can	be	substituted	for	the	frozen	corn.
This	recipe	was	developed	with	Quaker	yellow	cornmeal;	a	stone-ground	whole-
grain	cornmeal	will	work	but	will	yield	a	drier	and	less	tender	cornbread.	We
prefer	a	Pyrex	glass	baking	dish	because	it	produces	a	nice	golden	brown	crust,
but	a	metal	baking	pan	(nonstick	or	traditional)	will	also	work.

1½				 cups	(7½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 cup	(5	ounces)	cornmeal
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder
¼				 teaspoon	baking	soda
¾				 teaspoon	salt
¼				 cup	packed	(1¾	ounces)	light	brown	sugar
¾				 cup	frozen	corn,	thawed
1				 cup	buttermilk
2				 large	eggs
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	cooled

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.	Spray	8-
inch	square	baking	dish	with	vegetable	oil	spray.	Whisk	flour,	cornmeal,	baking
powder,	baking	soda,	and	salt	in	medium	bowl	until	combined;	set	aside.
2.	In	food	processor	or	blender,	process	brown	sugar,	corn	kernels,	and

buttermilk	until	combined,	about	5	seconds.	Add	eggs	and	process	until	well
combined	(corn	lumps	will	remain),	about	5	seconds	longer.
3.	Using	rubber	spatula,	make	well	in	center	of	dry	ingredients;	pour	wet

ingredients	into	well.	Begin	folding	dry	ingredients	into	wet,	giving	mixture	only
a	few	turns	to	barely	combine.	Add	melted	butter	and	continue	folding	until	dry
ingredients	are	just	moistened.	Pour	batter	into	prepared	baking	dish	and	smooth
surface	with	rubber	spatula.
4.	Bake	until	cornbread	is	deep	golden	brown	and	toothpick	inserted	in	center

comes	out	clean,	25	to	35	minutes.	Let	cool	on	wire	rack	for	10	minutes,	then



invert	onto	wire	rack	and	turn	right	side	up.	Let	cool	until	warm,	about	10
minutes	longer,	before	serving.	(Leftover	cornbread	can	be	wrapped	in
aluminum	foil	and	reheated	in	a	350-degree	oven	for	10	to	15	minutes.)

SPICY	JALAPEÑO-CHEDDAR	CORNBREAD
Reduce	salt	to	½	teaspoon.	Add	3⁄8	teaspoon	cayenne	pepper,	1	seeded	and	finely
chopped	jalapeño	chile,	and	½	cup	shredded	cheddar	cheese	to	flour	mixture	and
toss	well	to	combine.	Reduce	brown	sugar	to	2	tablespoons	and	sprinkle	2
ounces	shredded	cheddar	cheese	over	batter	in	dish	just	before	baking.

BLUEBERRY	BREAKFAST	CORNBREAD
Reduce	salt	to	½	teaspoon.	Reduce	buttermilk	to	¾	cup	and	add	¼	cup	maple
syrup	to	food	processor	along	with	buttermilk	in	step	2.	Add	1	cup	fresh	or
frozen	blueberries	with	melted	butter	in	step	3.	Sprinkle	2	tablespoons
granulated	sugar	over	batter	in	baking	dish	just	before	baking.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Cornbread	can	be	sweet	and	cakey	(the	Northern	version)	or	savory	and	light
(the	Southern	version).	We	wanted	a	combination	of	the	two.	And	most
important,	we	wanted	our	cornbread	to	be	bursting	with	corn	flavor.	The	secret
was	pretty	simple:	Use	corn,	not	just	cornmeal.
PUMP	UP	CORN	FLAVOR	For	this	cornbread,	we	use	degerminated	yellow

cornmeal—it	may	not	have	the	best	corn	flavor,	but	it	is	widely	available	in
supermarkets	across	the	country.	The	best	texture	comes	from	using	a	ratio	of	3
parts	flour	to	2	parts	cornmeal—something	else	that	limits	the	corn	flavor	in	our
bread.	The	solution?	We	use	frozen	corn,	ground	up	in	the	food	processor	to
release	its	full	flavor.	With	pureed	corn	in	the	mix,	we	need	to	cut	back	on	the
dairy	(we	prefer	the	flavor	of	buttermilk	to	whole	milk).	A	little	brown	sugar
adds	pleasing	molasses	notes.
DRIZZLE	BUTTER	We	add	the	butter	to	our	batter	last.	This	creates	subtle

streaks	of	unmixed	butter	in	the	batter,	but,	as	the	bread	bakes,	the	butter	rises	to
the	surface	and	creates	a	more	deeply	browned	top	crust	and	a	stronger	butter
flavor.	(And	we	add	a	lot	of	butter—a	whole	stick.)
USE	A	HOT	OVEN	Pouring	the	batter	into	a	hot	skillet	is	a	great	way	to	get

a	dark	brown,	crunchy	crust.	But	not	everyone	has	a	seasoned	cast-iron	skillet.
We	found	that	using	a	hot	oven	allows	us	to	scrape	the	batter	into	a	square
baking	pan	and	still	get	a	decent	crust.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
FREEZING	FLOUR

We	recommend	storing	whole-grain	flours	in	the	freezer.

Refined	flours,	including	all-purpose,	bread,	and	cake	flour,	can	be	stored	in	airtight	containers	in	your
pantry	for	up	to	one	year.	Whole-grain	flours	such	as	rye	and	wheat	contain	more	fat	than	refined	flours	and
can	turn	rancid	quickly	at	room	temperature.	For	this	reason,	we	recommend	storing	these	flours	in	the
freezer.	In	various	tests,	we	found	that	using	flour	straight	from	the	freezer	inhibited	rise	and	yielded	denser
baked	goods.	Therefore,	it’s	important	to	bring	chilled	flour	to	room	temperature	before	baking.	To	quickly
accomplish	this,	spread	the	flour	in	a	thin	layer	on	a	baking	sheet	and	let	it	sit	for	about	30	minutes.



BETTER	BRAN	MUFFINS
MAKES	12	MUFFINS

Dried	cranberries	or	dried	cherries	may	be	substituted	for	the	raisins.

1				 cup	raisins
1				 teaspoon	water

2¼				 cups	(5	ounces)	All-Bran	Original	cereal
1¼				 cups	(6¼	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
½				 cup	(2¾	ounces)	whole-wheat	flour
2				 teaspoons	baking	soda
½				 teaspoon	salt
1				 large	egg	plus	1	large	yolk
				2⁄3 cup	packed	(42⁄3	ounces)	light	brown	sugar
3				 tablespoons	molasses
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	cooled

1¾				 cups	plain	whole-milk	yogurt

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.	Spray
12-cup	muffin	tin	with	vegetable	oil	spray.	Combine	raisins	and	water	in	small
bowl,	cover,	and	microwave	for	30	seconds.	Let	stand,	covered,	until	raisins	are
softened	and	plump,	about	5	minutes.	Transfer	raisins	to	paper	towel–lined	plate
to	cool.
2.	Process	1	cup	plus	2	tablespoons	cereal	in	food	processor	until	finely

ground,	about	1	minute.	Whisk	all-purpose	flour,	whole-wheat	flour,	baking
soda,	and	salt	in	large	bowl	until	combined	and	set	aside.	Whisk	egg	and	yolk
together	in	medium	bowl	until	well	combined	and	light-colored,	about	20
seconds.	Add	sugar,	molasses,	and	vanilla	to	bowl	with	eggs	and	whisk	until
mixture	is	thick,	about	30	seconds.	Add	melted	butter	and	whisk	to	combine.
Add	yogurt	and	whisk	to	combine.	Stir	in	processed	cereal	and	remaining	1	cup
plus	2	tablespoons	unprocessed	cereal.	Let	mixture	sit	until	cereal	is	evenly
moistened	(there	will	still	be	some	small	lumps),	about	5	minutes.
3.	Add	wet	ingredients	to	dry	ingredients	and	mix	gently	with	rubber	spatula

until	batter	is	just	combined	and	evenly	moistened	(do	not	overmix).	Gently	fold
raisins	into	batter.	Using	ice	cream	scoop	or	large	spoon,	divide	batter	evenly



among	prepared	muffin	cups,	dropping	batter	to	form	mounds	(do	not	level	or
flatten	batter).
4.	Bake	until	muffins	are	dark	golden	and	toothpick	inserted	in	center	of

muffin	comes	out	with	few	crumbs	attached,	16	to	20	minutes,	rotating	muffin
tin	halfway	through	baking.	Let	muffins	cool	in	tin	for	5	minutes,	then	transfer	to
wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	10	minutes	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Classic	bran	muffins	rely	on	unprocessed	wheat	bran,	but	our	supermarket
survey	showed	that	few	stores	carry	this	specialized	ingredient.	We	wanted	to
make	a	moist,	hearty	muffin	redolent	of	bran’s	rich,	earthy	flavor	without
tracking	down	unprocessed	bran.	We	accomplish	this	by	using	a	mixture	of
pulverized	and	whole	twig	bran	cereal,	adding	yogurt,	brown	sugar,	and
molasses,	and	plumping	raisins	in	the	microwave.
PICK	THE	RIGHT	CEREAL	Bran	is	the	outer	layer	of	the	wheat	grain	that

is	removed	during	milling.	Bran	cereal	can	come	in	various	forms,	including
flakes,	buds,	and	twigs.	Here’s	how	they	stack	up	in	muffins:	Bran	flakes	are
often	made	with	whole	wheat	in	addition	to	bran	and	give	muffins	very	little
flavor.	Small	bran	buds	make	dense	muffins	with	almost	no	bran	flavor.	Cereal
made	of	bran	twigs	like	All-Bran,	however,	give	muffins	the	most	robust	flavor.
CRUSH	THE	BRAN	The	twigs	provide	a	deep	bran	flavor,	but	getting	them

to	bend	to	our	will	is	another	matter.	Twigs	don’t	easily	dissolve	in	the	batter,
and	presoaking	them	only	makes	the	muffins	as	dense	as	hockey	pucks.	But	we
find	that	grinding	half	of	the	cereal	into	a	fine	powder	and	leaving	the	other	half
in	twig	form	creates	muffins	with	an	even,	but	not	heavy,	texture.	We	like
mixing	all-purpose	flour	and	whole-wheat	flour	to	reinforce	the	flavor	of	the
bran.
USE	YOGURT	We	found	that	more	than	6	tablespoons	of	butter	makes	these

muffins	greasy,	but	we	wondered	if	the	dairy	might	provide	additional	richness
and	tenderness.	Swapping	the	milk	in	most	recipes	for	sour	cream	was	overkill.
Buttermilk	was	an	improvement	over	plain	milk,	but	whole-milk	yogurt	was	the
tasters’	first	choice.	And	replacing	the	baking	powder	with	baking	soda	gives	us
a	coarser	crumb	that	tasters	likewise	enjoyed.
COMBINE	BROWN	SUGAR	AND	MOLASSES	We	use	both	light	brown

sugar	(the	classic	recipe	uses	granulated	sugar)	and	molasses	to	provide	malty,
caramel	sweetness	to	match	with	the	bran	and	whole-wheat	flour.
PLUMP	THE	RAISINS	After	complaints	that	the	raisins	didn’t	soften

enough	during	baking,	we	began	plumping	them	in	the	microwave	with	a	little
water.	Works	like	a	charm.
FILL	THOSE	CUPS	For	big,	hearty	muffins,	fill	the	muffin	cups	to	the	rim.

And	for	nicely	domed	tops,	mound	the	batter	in	the	cups	and	don’t	level	it	off.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
MUFFIN	MYTH

You	don’t	need	to	fill	empty	muffin	cups	with	water.

We’ve	heard	the	tip:	If	you’re	making	a	half	batch	of	muffins	or	cupcakes	and	thus	don’t	fill	all	the	cups	in
the	pan	with	batter,	you	should	fill	the	empty	cups	with	water.	Is	this	really	necessary?

Proponents	of	this	practice	contend	that	filling	empty	cups	with	water	serves	two	functions:	preventing
the	pan	from	warping	and	acting	as	a	“heat	sink”	to	ensure	that	muffins	next	to	empty	cups	heat	evenly
(avoiding	stunted	growth	or	spotty	browning).

We	tested	this	theory	by	baking	one	12-cup	muffin	pan	completely	filled	with	batter,	one	pan	in	which
six	cups	were	filled	with	batter	and	six	with	water,	and	one	pan	in	which	six	cups	were	filled	with	batter	and
the	other	six	left	empty.	All	muffins	had	the	same	height,	texture,	and	color.	None	of	the	tins	warped.

On	reflection,	the	results	made	sense:	In	a	full	12-cup	muffin	tin,	all	but	the	two	center	muffins	are
directly	exposed	to	the	oven’s	heat	on	at	least	one	side	to	no	ill	effect.	If	your	muffin	pan	warps,	that’s	a
sign	that	you	need	to	find	a	better-quality	pan.



BLUEBERRY	MUFFINS
MAKES	12	MUFFINS

If	buttermilk	is	unavailable,	substitute	¾	cup	of	plain	whole-milk	or	low-fat
yogurt	thinned	with	¼	cup	of	milk.

LEMON-SUGAR	TOPPING
				1⁄3 cup	(21⁄3	ounces)	sugar
1½				 teaspoons	grated	lemon	zest

MUFFINS
10				 ounces	(2	cups)	blueberries
1				1⁄8 cups	(7¾	ounces)	plus	1	teaspoon	sugar
2½				 cups	(12½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
2½				 teaspoons	baking	powder
1				 teaspoon	salt
2				 large	eggs
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	cooled
¼				 cup	vegetable	oil
1				 cup	buttermilk

1½				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract

1.	FOR	THE	TOPPING:	Stir	together	sugar	and	lemon	zest	in	small	bowl
until	combined	and	set	aside.
2.	FOR	THE	MUFFINS:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position	and	heat

oven	to	425	degrees.	Spray	12-cup	muffin	tin	with	vegetable	oil	spray.	Bring	1
cup	blueberries	and	1	teaspoon	sugar	to	simmer	in	small	saucepan	over	medium
heat.	Cook,	mashing	berries	with	spoon	several	times	and	stirring	frequently,
until	berries	have	broken	down	and	mixture	is	thickened	and	reduced	to	¼	cup,
about	6	minutes.	Transfer	to	small	bowl	and	let	cool	to	room	temperature,	10	to
15	minutes.
3.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	and	salt	together	in	large	bowl.	Whisk

remaining	11⁄8	cups	sugar	and	eggs	together	in	medium	bowl	until	thick	and
homogeneous,	about	45	seconds.	Slowly	whisk	in	butter	and	oil	until	combined.



Whisk	in	buttermilk	and	vanilla	until	combined.	Using	rubber	spatula,	fold	egg
mixture	and	remaining	1	cup	blueberries	into	flour	mixture	until	just	moistened.
(Batter	will	be	very	lumpy	with	few	spots	of	dry	flour;	do	not	overmix.)
4.	Using	ice	cream	scoop	or	large	spoon,	divide	batter	evenly	among	prepared

muffin	cups	(batter	should	completely	fill	cups	and	mound	slightly).	Spoon	1
teaspoon	cooked	berry	mixture	into	center	of	each	mound	of	batter.	Using
chopstick	or	skewer,	gently	swirl	berry	filling	into	batter	using	figure-8	motion.
Sprinkle	lemon	sugar	evenly	over	muffins.
5.	Bake	until	muffins	are	golden	brown	and	toothpick	inserted	in	center	of

muffin	comes	out	with	few	crumbs	attached,	17	to	19	minutes,	rotating	muffin
tin	halfway	through	baking.	Let	muffins	cool	in	tin	for	5	minutes,	then	transfer	to
wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	5	minutes	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Blueberry	muffins	should	be	packed	with	blueberry	flavor	and	boast	a	moist
crumb.	But	too	often,	the	blueberry	flavor	is	fleeting,	thanks	to	the	fact	that	the
berries	in	the	produce	aisle	have	suffered	from	long-distance	shipping.	We
wanted	blueberry	muffins	that	put	the	berry	flavor	at	the	forefront	and	would
taste	great	with	blueberries	of	any	origin,	even	the	watery	supermarket	kind.	To
achieve	this	goal,	we	make	our	own	low-sugar	blueberry	jam	and	fold	our	batter
rather	than	using	the	creaming	method.	The	result?	Blueberry	muffin	success.
USE	MORE	BERRIES—DIFFERENTLY	Adding	more	blueberries	to	a

muffin	batter	can	make	the	muffins	soggy	and	heavy.	We	cook	some	of	the
berries	down	into	a	jam,	evaporating	excess	moisture	and	concentrating	the
flavor.	(Commercial	jam	is	too	sweet.)	Adding	this	jam	to	our	muffin	batter
gives	us	muffins	with	great	texture	and	pure	blueberry	flavor.	We	add	some	fresh
blueberries,	too.
MAKE	QUICK	BREAD	Instead	of	creaming	the	butter	and	sugar	as	if	we

were	making	a	cake,	we	fold	the	batter,	as	we	do	for	quick	breads.	This	yields	a
slightly	coarser	crumb,	which	we	prefer	for	these	muffins.	It’s	important	to	fold
the	wet	and	dry	ingredients	gently;	the	batter	will	be	slightly	lumpy	and	have
spots	of	flour.
USE	BUTTER	AND	OIL	To	achieve	the	unctuously	moist	muffins	we

sought,	we	examined	the	fat	in	the	recipe.	While	the	butter	contributes	tons	of
flavor,	we	knew	that	oil	has	a	propensity	for	making	baked	goods	moist	and
tender.	Unlike	butter,	oil	contains	no	water	and	is	able	to	completely	coat	flour
proteins	and	restrict	them	from	absorbing	liquid	to	develop	gluten.	We	swapped
some	butter	for	oil	for	a	moist,	tender	texture.
SWIRL	IN	THAT	JAM	Add	the	jam	to	the	batter	after	it	has	been	mixed	and

placed	in	muffin	tins.	Place	1	teaspoon	of	cooled	berry	jam	in	the	center	of	each
batter-filled	cup,	putting	it	below	the	surface.	Then,	using	a	chopstick	or	a
skewer,	swirl	the	jam—very	gently,	using	a	“figure-eight”	motion—to	spread
berry	flavor	throughout.
ADD	LEMON	SUGAR	To	get	a	good	crust	on	our	muffins,	we	bake	them	on

the	upper-middle	rack	of	a	425-degree	oven.	We	sprinkle	lemon-scented	sugar
on	top	of	the	batter	just	before	baking.	The	oven	melts	the	sugar	slightly,	which
then	hardens	as	it	bakes	to	create	an	irresistibly	crunchy	shell.



FLOUR	101
STRUCTURE
Flour,	made	from	wheat,	comes	in	many	forms.	Whether	white	or	whole	wheat,	all-purpose	or	cake,	it	plays
an	important	role	in	baked	goods,	as	a	thickener	in	stews	and	sauces,	and	as	a	base	for	breaded	coatings	on
meat.






	
BRAN
The	bran	is	the	hard	outer	layer	of	the	wheat	kernel	and	is	often	removed	for	the	production	of	refined	white
flour.	It	is	filled	with	fiber	and	a	small	amount	(about	9	percent	by	weight)	of	fatty	acids;	it	includes	the
protein-rich	aleurone	layer	as	well.

ENDOSPERM
The	endosperm	is	the	large	collection	of	cells	in	the	center	of	the	wheat	kernel	that	store	nourishment	for
the	germ.	About	80	percent	of	the	endosperm	is	made	up	of	starch.	The	endosperm	composes	about	75
percent	of	a	kernel	of	wheat	and	is	often	the	only	part	of	the	kernel	that	is	consumed	after	milling
wheatberries.	Refined	white	flour	is	made	only	from	the	endosperm.

GERM	(OR	EMBRYO)
The	germ	is	the	reproductive	part	of	a	wheat	kernel	and	is	rich	in	enzymes,	fat,	and,	as	a	result,	flavor.
Along	with	the	bran,	it	is	a	key	component	of	whole	grains.

SIFTING
Sifting	flour	is	a	chore,	but	sometimes	it	is	important.	When	making	a	delicate	cake	like	a	sponge	cake	or
genoise	that	requires	flour	to	be	folded	into	beaten	eggs	and	sugar,	sifted	flour	can	be	added	quickly	and
distributed	evenly	(because	sifting	aerates	the	flour),	thereby	reducing	the	risk	of	deflating	the	batter.

Sifting	reduces	the	overall	amount	of	flour	(in	weight)	that	goes	into	the	recipe.	Because	of	the	aeration,
1	cup	of	sifted	cake	flour	weighs	in	at	about	3	ounces,	whereas	1	cup	of	cake	flour	measured	straight	from
the	bin	using	the	dip-and-sweep	method	weighs	around	4	ounces.	As	a	result,	if	you	don’t	follow	recipe
directions	regarding	sifting,	you	will	end	up	with	way	too	much	(or	too	little)	flour.

To	guarantee	you’re	using	the	proper	amount	of	flour,	for	recipes	that	read	“1	cup	sifted	flour,”	sift	the
flour	directly	into	a	measuring	cup	set	on	top	of	parchment	paper	and	then	level	off	the	excess.	For	recipes
reading	“1	cup	flour,	sifted,”	measure	the	flour	first	using	the	dip-and-sweep	method	(click	here)	and	then
sift	it.	Of	course,	a	scale	makes	all	of	this	much	simpler	and	more	accurate,	which	is	why	our	baking	recipes
give	both	weight	and	volume.	(For	more	on	measuring,	click	here,	and	on	storing,	click	here.)

BUYING
If	you	bake,	you	should	really	keep	three	flours	(all-purpose,	cake,	and	bread)	on	hand.	Why?	The	protein
content	varies	significantly	among	the	three.	Therefore,	these	flours	will	absorb	water	differently—the	same
amount	of	water	might	make	a	soupy	batter	with	a	cup	of	cake	flour	but	a	nice,	firm	dough	with	bread	flour.
Protein	content	also	affects	gluten	development.	More	protein	leads	to	more	gluten,	which,	in	turn,	can
translate	to	coarseness,	chewiness,	toughness,	or	crispness.	Depending	on	the	recipe,	these	traits	might	be
desirable	or	not.	But	the	choices	of	flour	aren’t	limited	to	three.

ALL-PURPOSE	FLOUR	All-purpose	is	by	far	the	most	versatile	flour	available.	Its	protein	content
(10	to	11.7	percent,	depending	on	the	brand:	King	Arthur	is	close	to	11.7	percent,	Pillsbury	and	Gold	Medal
around	10.5	percent)	provides	enough	structure	to	make	good	sandwich	bread,	yet	it’s	light	enough	to	use
for	cakes	of	a	medium-to-coarse	crumb.	We	prefer	unbleached	flour	(see	“Why	Bleach	Flour?”).	Bleached
flours	in	our	tests	did	not	perform	as	well	as	the	unbleached	flours	and	were	sometimes	criticized	for	tasting
flat	or	carrying	off-flavors.

CAKE	FLOUR	Cake	flour	has	a	low	protein	content—about	6	to	8	percent—and	thus	yields	cakes	and
pastries	with	less	gluten,	which	translates	to	a	finer,	more	delicate	crumb.	We	use	cake	flour	for	light	cakes,
such	as	pound	cake,	angel	food	cake,	and	yellow	layer	cake.	One	note:	Most	cake	flour	is	bleached,	which
affects	the	starches	in	flour	so	that	it	can	absorb	greater	amounts	of	liquid	and	fat.	Most	cakes	have	so	much
sugar	and	fat	it’s	very	hard	to	detect	any	off-notes	in	the	flour	caused	by	the	bleaching	process.	It	is	possible
to	approximate	1	cup	of	cake	flour	by	using	2	tablespoons	of	cornstarch	plus	7⁄8	cup	of	all-purpose	flour.



BREAD	FLOUR	This	flour	has	a	protein	content	of	about	12	percent	to	14	percent,	meaning	it
develops	a	lot	of	gluten	to	provide	strong,	chewy	structure	for	rustic	breads,	especially	those	made	with
little	or	no	fat.	For	sandwich	breads	we	prefer	using	all-purpose	flour,	which	creates	a	softer	crumb.

	
WHOLE-WHEAT	FLOUR	Whole-wheat	flour	is	made	from	all	three	parts	of	the	wheat	kernel—the

endosperm	as	well	as	the	fiber-rich	bran,	or	outer	shell,	and	the	tiny,	vitamin-packed	germ.	The	presence	of
the	germ	and	bran	in	whole-wheat	flour	makes	it	not	only	more	nutritious	and	more	flavorful,	but	more
dense	and	less	able	to	rise.	We	generally	don’t	like	breads	or	baked	goods	made	with	100	percent	whole-
wheat	flour;	they	are	more	dense	and	can	be	sour-tasting.	Instead,	we	rely	on	a	combination	of	all-purpose
flour	and	whole-wheat	flour	in	most	recipes.

PASTRY	FLOUR	Pastry	flour	is	a	soft	wheat	flour	with	a	protein	content	between	that	of	all-purpose
flour	and	cake	flour.	It	is	often	used	in	pie	crusts,	tart	pastry,	scones,	and	other	similarly	buttery	baked
goods	(such	as	biscuits	and	shortbread).	While	it	performs	well	in	these	applications,	we	don’t	think	it’s
worth	stocking	pastry	flour	unless	you	are	a	professional	baker.

SELF-RISING	FLOUR	Self-rising	flour	contains	a	leavener	and	is	made	from	a	soft	flour	that	brings	it
closer	to	cake	flour	than	all-purpose.	We’ve	found	the	convenience	of	self-rising	flour	to	be	pretty	minor
and	recommend	using	cake	flour	in	recipes	that	call	for	self-rising	flour	and	adding	the	baking	powder	and
salt	yourself.	The	formula	is	1½	teaspoons	of	baking	powder	and	½	teaspoon	of	salt	for	every	cup	of	flour.



CONCEPT	42

Two	Leaveners	Are	Often	Better	than
One
The	advent	of	chemical	leaveners,	such	as	baking	soda	and	baking	powder,	in
the	19th	century	made	it	easier	for	cooks	to	bake	at	home.	No	need	to	rely	on
fickle	yeast	in	order	to	make	a	cake.	Chemical	leaveners	are	quick	and	reliable.
But	they	are	also	confusing.	Some	recipes	rely	on	baking	powder,	some	on
baking	soda,	and	many	on	both.	Why	do	you	need	two	leaveners	in	something	as
simple	as	a	cookie	that	doesn’t	even	rise	all	that	much?



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Quick	breads,	muffins,	and	biscuits	as	well	as	cookies	and	cakes	get	their	rise
from	chemical	leaveners—baking	soda	and	baking	powder—rather	than	yeast.
Chemical	leaveners	react	with	acids	to	produce	carbon	dioxide,	the	gas	that
causes	these	baked	goods	to	rise.
To	do	its	work,	baking	soda,	which	is	alkaline,	relies	on	acid	in	the	recipe,

provided	by	ingredients	such	as	buttermilk,	sour	cream,	yogurt,	or	molasses.
When	baking	soda	and	an	acid	interact,	they	immediately	begin	to	produce
carbon	dioxide,	forming	bubbles	within	the	batter	or	dough.	It’s	important	to	use
the	right	amount	of	baking	soda	in	recipes.	If	you	use	too	little	you	won’t	have
enough	bubbles	and	the	dough	won’t	rise.	If	you	use	too	much,	though,	you	end
up	with	too	much	carbon	dioxide,	which	causes	the	bubbles	to	get	too	big.	These
large	bubbles	then	join	up	with	one	another	and	eventually	rise	to	the	top	of	the
dough	and	burst,	resulting	in	a	flat	finished	product.	Also,	use	more	baking	soda
than	can	be	neutralized	by	the	acidic	ingredient	and	you’ll	end	up	with	a
metallic-tasting,	coarse-crumbed	quick	bread	or	cake.
Baking	powder,	on	the	other	hand,	is	nothing	more	than	baking	soda	(about

one-quarter	to	one-third	of	the	total	makeup)	mixed	with	a	dry	acid,	such	as
cream	of	tartar,	and	double-dried	cornstarch.	The	cornstarch	absorbs	moisture
and	keeps	the	baking	soda	and	dry	acid	apart	during	storage,	preventing
premature	production	of	the	gas.	When	baking	powder	becomes	wet,	the	dry
acid	comes	into	contact	with	the	baking	soda,	producing	carbon	dioxide.	Cooks
use	baking	powder	rather	than	baking	soda	when	there	is	no	natural	acidity	in	the
batter.
There	are	two	kinds	of	baking	powder.	A	single-acting	baking	powder	has

only	one	acid	combined	with	the	baking	soda—a	quick-acting	acid	that	begins	to
work	when	liquid	is	added	to	the	batter.	A	double-acting	baking	powder
(virtually	all	supermarket	brands)	has	two	or	more	acids	added	to	the	baking
soda.	One	of	the	acids	(often	sodium	aluminum	sulfate,	also	known	as	alum)
begins	to	work	only	after	the	dish	is	put	in	the	oven,	when	its	temperature	has
climbed	above	120	degrees.	We	recommend	using	double-acting	baking	powder
in	all	recipes—baked	goods	rise	higher	since	most	of	the	rise	with	baking
powder	occurs	at	oven	temperatures.	Also,	we	have	found	that	single-acting
baking	powder	doesn’t	provide	sufficient	leavening	for	doughs	with	little	liquid,
such	as	scones	or	muffins.
In	many	of	our	recipes,	we	use	both	baking	soda	and	baking	powder	because



the	combination	gives	better	control	over	how	fast	gas	is	released	as	well	as	the
alkalinity	of	the	dough.	Sometimes	the	recipe	contains	so	much	acid	that	baking
soda	is	added	to	ensure	the	baking	powder	is	not	neutralized	and	deactivated	by
all	the	acid.	Since	baking	soda	relies	on	the	acid	from	the	other	ingredients	in	the
recipe,	it	generally	produces	more	alkaline	doughs	than	baking	powder.	More
alkaline	doughs	brown	faster	and	have	weaker	gluten,	producing	a	more	tender,
porous	crumb.
Why	does	browning	occur	best	in	an	alkaline	environment?	An	amino	acid

molecule	(like	those	found	in	the	proteins	in	flour)	has	two	ends—one	is	the
amino	end	and	one	is	the	acid	end.	As	you	might	guess,	the	acid	end	is	acidic,
but	(as	you	might	not	guess)	the	amino	end	is	alkaline.	It’s	the	alkaline	end	that
has	to	react	with	the	sugar	molecules	for	the	Maillard	reaction	(see	concept	2)	to
occur.	In	an	acidic	solution,	the	alkaline	ends	are	deactivated.	In	an	alkaline
environment	created	by	the	addition	of	baking	soda,	the	amino	ends	thrive	and
they	can	react	with	the	sugar	to	create	browning.



BAKING	SODA	VS.	BAKING	POWDER



	
BAKING	SODA	When	baking	soda	and	an	acidic	ingredient	interact,	they	immediately	begin	to	produce
carbon	dioxide,	creating	bubbles	that	help	batters	and	doughs	to	rise.



	
BAKING	POWDER	Most	baking	powder	produces	bubbles	of	carbon	dioxide	a	second	time—when	it	is
heated	in	the	oven.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
Given	that	double-acting	baking	powder	contains	both	baking	soda	and	a	dry
acid—and	provides	leavening	twice	during	the	cooking	process	(after	mixing
and	during	baking)—why	would	we	ever	need	to	include	baking	soda	in	the	mix?
To	answer	this	question,	we	ran	the	following	experiment:	We	baked	three
batches	of	our	Easy	Buttermilk	Drop	Biscuits—one	leavened	with	2	teaspoons	of
baking	powder	and	½	teaspoon	of	baking	soda;	the	second	leavened	with	2
teaspoons	of	baking	powder	alone;	the	third	leavened	with	3	teaspoons	of	baking
powder,	to	roughly	equal	the	leavening	power	of	the	first	sample.	We	compared
the	appearance,	flavor,	and	texture	of	the	biscuits	side	by	side.



THE	RESULTS
Interestingly,	the	biscuits	made	without	baking	soda	rose	just	as	high	as	those
baked	with	both	leaveners.	However,	the	similarities	ended	there.	The	two
batches	made	without	baking	soda	were	anemic	in	color,	with	smooth	tops,	while
the	dual-leavened	biscuits	were	well	browned	and	covered	in	crispy	crags.	And
the	differences	weren’t	merely	skin-deep—the	biscuits	with	two	leaveners	tasted
far	richer	and	nuttier.	The	biscuits	made	with	3	teaspoons	of	baking	powder
didn’t	rise	any	higher	than	the	batch	made	with	2	teaspoons	of	baking	powder
but	they	did	have	a	chemical	aftertaste—a	sure	sign	that	there	was	too	much
leavener.



THE	TAKEAWAY
So	will	baking	powder	alone	provide	sufficient	leavening	to	a	baked	good?	In
most	cases,	the	answer	is	yes.	But	will	that	baked	good	look	and	taste	its	best?
That’s	another	matter	entirely.	In	our	buttermilk	biscuits,	the	baking	soda	(an
alkali)	is	crucial	for	two	reasons.	First,	it	immediately	reacts	with	the	buttermilk
(an	acid)	to	produce	tiny	carbon	dioxide	bubbles	that	lighten	the	batter.	Second,
it	neutralizes	the	batter’s	acidity	to	create	a	more	alkaline	environment	that
promotes	the	Maillard	reaction	and	the	creation	of	hundreds	of	new	flavor
compounds,	which	make	the	dual-leavened	biscuits	taste	far	more	complex	and
interesting.



THE	POWER	OF	BAKING	SODA	AND	POWDER

	
BAKING	POWDER	ALONE

The	drop	biscuits	made	with	only	one	leavener	emerged	from	the	oven	smooth	and	light-colored,	with	a
decidedly	bland	flavor.

	
BAKING	SODA	AND	POWDER

The	drop	biscuits	made	with	both	leaveners	finished	craggy	and	browned,	and	had	better	flavor.



DOUBLE	LEAVENING	AT	WORK	
PANCAKES
Pancakes	are	easy	but	they	can	be	heavy	if	you	don’t	get	them	just	right.	Minimal
mixing	is	important	(see	concept	41),	but	the	real	key	is	the	use	of	leaveners.
What	makes	this	tricky	is	the	use	of	acidic	buttermilk,	which	reacts	with	the
leaveners	to	produce	bubbles	in	the	batter.	Buttermilk	can	give	pancakes	great
flavor	and	light,	fluffy	texture.	But	if	the	formula	isn’t	just	right,	pancakes	can	be
a	disaster.



BEST	BUTTERMILK	PANCAKES
MAKES	SIXTEEN	4-INCH	PANCAKES,	SERVING	4	TO	6

The	pancakes	can	be	cooked	on	an	electric	griddle.	Set	the	griddle	temperature
to	350	degrees	and	cook	as	directed.	The	test	kitchen	prefers	a	lower-protein	all-
purpose	flour	like	Gold	Medal	or	Pillsbury	for	this	recipe.	If	you	use	an	all-
purpose	flour	with	a	higher	protein	content,	like	King	Arthur,	you	will	need	to
add	an	extra	tablespoon	or	two	of	buttermilk.	Serve	with	warm	maple	syrup.

2				 cups	(10	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
2				 tablespoons	sugar
1				 teaspoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
½				 teaspoon	salt
2				 cups	buttermilk
¼				 cup	sour	cream
2				 large	eggs
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	cooled

1–2				 teaspoons	vegetable	oil

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	200	degrees.	Spray
wire	rack	set	in	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	vegetable	oil	spray;	place	in	oven.
Whisk	flour,	sugar,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,	and	salt	together	in	medium
bowl.	In	second	medium	bowl,	whisk	together	buttermilk,	sour	cream,	eggs,	and
melted	butter.	Make	well	in	center	of	dry	ingredients	and	pour	in	wet
ingredients;	gently	stir	until	just	combined	(batter	should	remain	lumpy,	with
few	streaks	of	flour).	Do	not	overmix.	Let	batter	sit	for	10	minutes	before
cooking.
2.	Heat	1	teaspoon	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium	heat	until

shimmering.	Using	paper	towels,	carefully	wipe	out	oil,	leaving	thin	film	of	oil
on	bottom	and	sides	of	pan.	Using	¼-cup	measure,	portion	batter	into	pan	in	4
places.	Cook	until	edges	are	set,	first	side	is	golden	brown,	and	bubbles	on
surface	are	just	beginning	to	break,	2	to	3	minutes.	Using	thin,	wide	spatula,	flip
pancakes	and	continue	to	cook	until	second	side	is	golden	brown,	1	to	2	minutes
longer.	Serve	pancakes	immediately,	or	transfer	to	wire	rack	in	preheated	oven.
Repeat	with	remaining	batter,	using	remaining	oil	as	necessary.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Too	often,	buttermilk	pancakes	lack	true	tang,	and	they	rarely	have	the	light	and
fluffy	texture	we	desire.	We	wanted	buttermilk	pancakes	with	a	slightly	crisp,
golden	crust	surrounding	a	fluffy,	tender	center	with	just	enough	structure	to
withstand	a	good	dousing	of	maple	syrup.	We	achieve	this	with	a	sour	cream
substitution,	the	use	of	two	leaveners,	and	some	techniques	to	keep	the	pancakes
nice	and	tender.
START	WITH	BUTTERMILK	When	our	forebears	set	out	to	make

pancakes	enriched	with	the	sweet	tang	of	buttermilk,	they	had	a	built-in
advantage:	real	buttermilk.	Instead	of	using	the	thinly	flavored	liquid	processed
from	skim	milk	and	cultured	bacteria	that	passes	for	buttermilk	today,	earlier
Americans	turned	to	the	fat-flecked	byproduct	of	churning	cream	into	butter.	The
switch	from	churned	buttermilk	to	cultured	buttermilk	accounts	for	the	lack	of
true	tang	in	most	modern-day	buttermilk	pancakes.	We	have	to	use	other
methods	to	obtain	tang.
SUPPLEMENT	WITH	SOUR	CREAM	We	wanted	more	tang	in	our

pancakes,	but	using	more	buttermilk	didn’t	work.	More	buttermilk	means	a
greater	concentration	of	acid	in	the	mix,	which	in	turn	causes	the	baking	soda	to
bubble	too	rapidly.	The	result:	pancakes	that	overinflate	when	they	first	cook,
then	collapse	like	popped	balloons,	becoming	dense	and	wet	by	the	time	they	hit
the	plate.	A	little	sour	cream,	on	the	other	hand,	adds	a	ton	of	flavor	but	doesn’t
radically	affect	the	consistency	of	the	batter.	With	the	extra	fat	from	the	sour
cream,	we	found	it	best	to	trim	butter	back	to	just	3	tablespoons.
USE	TWO	LEAVENERS	Both	baking	soda	and	powder	are	essential	in	our

pancakes.	Baking	soda	responds	to	the	acid	in	the	buttermilk,	producing	carbon
dioxide	gas	that	aerates	the	pancakes,	while	baking	powder	reacts	to	the	heat	of
the	pan	to	release	more	carbon	dioxide.	Baking	soda	likewise	helps	us	to	get	a
nice	brown	color	on	the	pancakes,	boosting	flavor	through	the	Maillard	reaction.
KEEP	IT	TENDER	Three	techniques	help	us	to	get	our	pancakes	as	tender	as

possible.	First,	we	use	a	lower-protein	all-purpose	flour	like	Gold	Medal	or
Pillsbury	(see	“Flour	101”).	Second,	we	fold	the	batter	very	minimally	(see
concept	41).	And	finally,	we	let	the	batter	rest	for	10	minutes	before	cooking.
Why?	Even	with	minimal	mixing,	some	gluten	develops	in	the	pancake	batter.
During	a	10-minute	rest,	the	gluten	relaxes	and	the	end	result	is	tender	pancakes.
Don’t	worry	that	the	leavening	will	dissipate.	Remember	that	baking	powder	is
double	acting	and	will	provide	plenty	of	lift	when	the	batter	hits	the	hot	pan.



	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
IS	THE	PAN	READY?

If	a	pancake	is	golden	brown	after	one	minute,	the	pan	is	ready.

The	only	way	to	know	when	the	pan	is	ready	for	pancakes	is	to	make	a	test	pancake	about	the	size	of	a	half-
dollar,	or	about	1	tablespoon	of	batter.	If	after	one	minute	the	pancake	is	blond	in	color,	the	pan	is	not	hot
enough.	If	after	one	minute	the	pancake	is	golden	brown,	the	pan	is	heated	correctly.	Speeding	up	the
process	by	heating	the	pan	at	a	higher	temperature	will	result	in	a	dark,	unevenly	cooked	pancake.

	
NOT	YET



	
TOO	HOT



MULTIGRAIN	PANCAKES
MAKES	SIXTEEN	4-INCH	PANCAKES,	SERVING	4	TO	6

The	pancakes	can	be	cooked	on	an	electric	griddle.	Set	the	griddle	temperature
to	350	degrees	and	cook	as	directed.	Familia	brand	no-sugar-added	muesli	is
the	best	choice	for	this	recipe.	If	you	can’t	find	Familia,	look	for	Alpen	or	any
no-sugar-added	muesli.	(If	you	can’t	find	muesli	without	sugar,	muesli	with	sugar
added	will	work;	reduce	the	brown	sugar	in	the	recipe	to	1	tablespoon.)	Mix	the
batter	first	and	then	heat	the	pan.	Letting	the	batter	sit	while	the	pan	heats	will
give	the	dry	ingredients	time	to	absorb	the	wet	ingredients;	otherwise,	the	batter
will	be	runny.	Serve	with	maple	syrup	or	Apple,	Cranberry,	and	Pecan	Topping
(recipe	follows).

2				 cups	whole	milk
4				 teaspoons	lemon	juice

1¼				 cups	(6	ounces)	plus	3	tablespoons	no-sugar-added	muesli
¾				 cup	(3¾	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
½				 cup	(2¾	ounces)	whole-wheat	flour
2				 tablespoons	packed	brown	sugar

2¼				 teaspoons	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
½				 teaspoon	salt
2				 large	eggs
3				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	cooled
¾				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

1–2				 teaspoons	vegetable	oil

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	200	degrees.	Spray
wire	rack	set	in	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	vegetable	oil	spray;	place	in	oven.
Whisk	milk	and	lemon	juice	together	in	large	measuring	cup;	set	aside	while
preparing	other	ingredients.
2.	Process	1¼	cups	muesli	in	food	processor	until	finely	ground,	2	to	2½

minutes;	transfer	to	large	bowl.	Add	remaining	3	tablespoons	unground	muesli,
all-purpose	flour,	whole-wheat	flour,	sugar,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,	and
salt;	whisk	to	combine.
3.	Add	eggs,	melted	butter,	and	vanilla	to	milk	mixture	and	whisk	until



combined.	Make	well	in	center	of	dry	ingredients;	pour	in	milk	mixture	and
whisk	very	gently	until	just	combined	(batter	should	remain	lumpy	with	few
streaks	of	flour).	Do	not	overmix.	Allow	batter	to	sit	while	pan	heats.
4.	Heat	1	teaspoon	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium	heat	until

shimmering.	Using	paper	towels,	carefully	wipe	pan,	leaving	thin	film	of	oil	on
bottom	and	sides	of	pan.	Using	¼-cup	measure,	portion	batter	into	pan	in	4
places.	Cook	until	small	bubbles	begin	to	appear	evenly	over	surface,	2	to	3
minutes.	Using	thin,	wide	spatula,	flip	pancakes	and	cook	until	second	side	is
golden	brown,	1½	to	2	minutes	longer.	Serve	pancakes	immediately	or	transfer
to	wire	rack	in	preheated	oven.	Repeat	with	remaining	batter,	using	remaining	oil
as	necessary.



APPLE,	CRANBERRY,	AND	PECAN	TOPPING
SERVES	4	TO	6

We	prefer	semifirm	apples,	such	as	Fuji,	Gala,	or	Braeburn,	for	this	topping.
Avoid	very	tart	apples,	such	as	Granny	Smith,	and	soft	varieties	like	McIntosh.

3½				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	chilled
1¼				 pounds	apples,	peeled,	cored,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
					 Pinch	salt
1				 cup	apple	cider
½				 cup	dried	cranberries
½				 cup	maple	syrup
1				 teaspoon	lemon	juice
½				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
¾				 cup	pecans,	toasted	and	chopped	coarse

Melt	1½	tablespoons	butter	in	12-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.	Add
apples	and	salt;	cook,	stirring	occasionally,	until	softened	and	browned,	7	to	9
minutes.	Stir	in	cider	and	cranberries;	cook	until	liquid	has	almost	evaporated,	6
to	8	minutes.	Stir	in	maple	syrup	and	cook	until	thickened,	4	to	5	minutes.	Add
remaining	2	tablespoons	butter,	lemon	juice,	and	vanilla;	whisk	until	sauce	is
smooth.	Serve	with	toasted	nuts.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Bland,	dense,	and	gummy,	most	multigrain	pancakes	are	more	about	appeasing
your	diet	than	pleasing	your	palate.	We	wanted	flavorful,	fluffy,	and	healthful
flapjacks.	After	testing	lots	of	grains,	we	found	that	muesli	had	all	the
ingredients	and	flavor	we	wanted	in	one	convenient	package—raw	whole	oats,
wheat	germ,	rye,	barley,	toasted	nuts,	and	dried	fruit.	But	pancakes	made	with
whole	muesli	are	too	chewy	and	gummy.	We	solve	this	problem	by	converting
muesli	into	a	flour	and	combining	it	with	some	other	flour	options,	as	well	as
using	two	leaveners.
MOCK	BUTTERMILK	When	testing	our	multigrain	pancakes,	we	found

that	using	buttermilk	made	them	taste	too	sour,	impinging	on	the	flavor	of	our
grains.	But	if	we	did	away	with	the	buttermilk	entirely,	we	would	have	to	rethink
our	leaveners.	(After	all,	baking	soda	needs	acid	to	react.)	But	what	if	we	simply
used	a	less	acidic-tasting	blend	of	milk	and	lemon	juice?	That	turned	out	to	be
the	answer.	The	milk	and	lemon	juice	mixture	makes	for	a	surprisingly	cleaner,
richer-tasting	pancake	with	an	even	lighter	texture.
MAKE	INSTANT	MULTIGRAIN	FLOUR	Some	multigrain	pancake

recipes	load	up	on	unprocessed	grains—great	for	flavor	but	bad	for	texture.	To
avoid	gummy,	chewy	pancakes,	we	make	our	own	multigrain	“flour”	by
processing	store-bought	muesli	cereal	in	a	food	processor.	To	give	our	pancakes
a	subtle	hint	of	that	hearty	whole-grain	texture,	we	add	a	few	tablespoons	of
unprocessed	muesli	to	the	batter,	too.
USE	TWO	LEAVENERS	Many	chemically	leavened	pancake	recipes

include	both	baking	powder	and	soda—especially	when	they’re	bulked	up	with
heavy	grains.	The	combination	makes	for	fail-safe	leavening	and	thorough
browning.	(After	all,	baking	soda	is	a	browning	agent.)
LET	THE	BATTER	REST	To	get	light,	fluffy	pancakes,	it’s	important	to	let

the	batter	rest	while	the	pan	heats	(a	full	five	minutes).	The	flour	needs	this	time
to	absorb	all	the	liquid,	thus	ensuring	that	the	batter	sets	up	properly.	Skip	this
step	and	the	pancakes	will	run	together	in	the	pan	and	cook	up	flat,	not	to
mention	misshapen.	Properly	rested	batter	will	maintain	its	shape	when	poured
into	the	pan	and	will	produce	tall	and	fluffy	pancakes.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOT	STACK

Keep	cooked	pancakes	warm	on	a	cooling	rack	in	the	oven.

A	tall	stack	of	hot	pancakes	first	thing	in	the	morning	just	can’t	be	beat.	But	a	12-inch	skillet	can	turn	out
only	three	or	four	at	a	time.	If	you	want	to	cook	all	of	the	batter	and	then	sit	down	with	everyone	else,	you’d
better	do	something	to	keep	those	pancakes	warm.

What’s	the	best	way?	We	tried	several	methods,	from	stacking	up	the	pancakes	on	a	heated	plate	to
covering	them	with	foil	to	placing	the	plate	of	stacked	pancakes	in	a	warm	oven.	All	of	these	methods	did
the	job	as	far	as	keeping	the	pancakes	warm.	Even	by	the	last	batch	of	pancakes,	the	temperature	reading
would	hit	somewhere	between	145	and	150	degrees.	But	these	pancakes	were	compressed	from	being
stacked,	and	they	steamed	from	the	heat	and	became	very	rubbery.

We	found	that	the	best	method	was	to	spread	the	pancakes	on	a	large	cooling	rack	placed	on	a	sheet	pan
(be	sure	to	spray	the	cooling	rack	well	with	vegetable	oil	spray	to	save	yourself	from	sticking	pancakes).
Place	the	pan	and	the	rack	in	a	200-degree	oven	and	place	your	pancakes	on	the	rack	in	a	single	layer,
uncovered,	for	up	to	20	minutes	(otherwise	they	will	start	to	dry	out).	The	warm	oven	keeps	the	pancakes
hot	enough	to	melt	a	pat	of	butter,	and	leaving	the	pancakes	uncovered	keeps	them	from	becoming	soggy.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BLEMISH-FREE	PANCAKES

Splotchy	pancakes	are	all	about	the	way	oil	heats	in	the	pan.

Why	does	the	first	batch	of	pancakes	turn	out	with	brown	spots?
We’ve	all	experienced	the	annoying	phenomenon	of	having	the	first	batch	of	pancakes	turn	out

splotched	with	brown	spots,	while	subsequent	batches	come	out	evenly	golden.	Here’s	why:	When	fresh	oil
hits	a	hot	pan,	the	surface	tension	of	the	oil	causes	it	to	bead	together	into	little	droplets,	leaving	some	of	the
pan	bottom	without	a	coating.	Since	bare	metal	conducts	heat	better	than	oil,	when	you	ladle	your	batter
into	the	pan,	the	spots	directly	in	contact	with	uncoated	metal	will	cook	faster	than	those	touching	oil.	By
the	time	you	get	to	your	second	batch	of	pancakes,	the	oil	has	undergone	chemical	changes	that	make	the
molecules	less	prone	to	clustering.	What’s	more,	the	first	batch	of	pancakes	has	absorbed	much	of	the	oil,
leaving	only	a	thin	film	that’s	more	likely	to	be	evenly	distributed	across	the	pan.

For	spot-free	pancakes	from	the	get-go,	start	by	applying	oil	to	an	unheated	pan	or	griddle.	Allow	the	oil
to	heat	up	over	medium	heat	for	at	least	one	minute,	then	use	a	paper	towel	to	wipe	away	all	but	a	thin,
barely	visible	layer	to	prevent	sticking.	The	pancakes	should	cook	up	golden	brown	from	the	first	batch	to
the	last.

	
SEEING	SPOTS

Tiny	droplets	of	oil	that	cluster	together	rather	than	spread	out	cause	light	patches	on	the	first	batch	of
pancakes.



DOUBLE	LEAVENING	AT	WORK	
BISCUITS
While	most	biscuits	require	working	cold	fat	into	the	flour	(see	concept	43),	you
can	make	biscuits	by	the	quick-bread	method:	Simply	combine	melted	butter	with
buttermilk	and	then	add	this	liquid	mixture	to	the	dry	mixture.



EASY	BUTTERMILK	DROP	BISCUITS
MAKES	12	BISCUITS

A	¼-cup	portion	scoop	can	be	used	to	portion	the	batter.	To	refresh	day-old
biscuits,	heat	them	in	a	300-degree	oven	for	10	minutes.

2				 cups	(10	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
1				 teaspoon	sugar
¾				 teaspoon	salt
1				 cup	buttermilk,	chilled
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	cooled	slightly,	plus	2	tablespoons	melted

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	475	degrees.	Line
rimmed	baking	sheet	with	parchment	paper.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	baking
soda,	sugar,	and	salt	together	in	large	bowl.	Combine	buttermilk	and	8
tablespoons	melted	butter	in	medium	bowl,	stirring	until	butter	forms	small
clumps.
2.	Add	buttermilk	mixture	to	flour	mixture	and	stir	with	rubber	spatula	until

just	incorporated	and	batter	pulls	away	from	sides	of	bowl.	Using	greased	¼-cup
dry	measure	and	working	quickly,	scoop	level	amount	of	batter	and	drop	onto
prepared	baking	sheet	(biscuits	should	measure	about	2¼	inches	in	diameter	and
1¼	inches	high).	Repeat	with	remaining	batter,	spacing	biscuits	about	1½	inches
apart.	Bake	until	tops	are	golden	brown	and	crisp,	12	to	14	minutes.
3.	Brush	biscuit	tops	with	remaining	2	tablespoons	melted	butter.	Transfer	to

wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	5	minutes	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	a	drop	biscuit	recipe	that	would	offer	a	no-nonsense	alternative	to
traditional	rolled	biscuits,	with	the	same	tenderness	and	buttery	flavor.	Too	many
drop	biscuits	are	dense,	gummy,	and	doughy	or	lean	and	dry;	we	wanted	a
biscuit	that	could	be	easily	broken	apart	and	eaten	piece	by	buttery	piece.
Proper	leavening	and,	surprisingly,	lumpy	butter	turned	out	to	be	the	secret.
USE	REGULAR	ALL-PURPOSE	You	don’t	want	a	super-soft	flour	here.

Since	the	dough	is	not	kneaded	or	rolled,	you	actually	want	a	little	gluten	for	the
structure	of	your	biscuits,	and	all-purpose	flour	has	more	protein	than	softer
flours	(see	“Flour	101”).
PICK	BUTTERMILK	Buttermilk	provides	much-needed	flavor	in	such	a

basic	biscuit	recipe.	But	it	does	more.	Adding	buttermilk	allows	us	to	likewise
add	baking	soda	(along	with	baking	powder).	The	baking	soda	reacts	with	the
acid	in	the	buttermilk	and	gives	the	biscuits	a	crisper,	browner	exterior	and
fluffier	middle.
CLUMP	THE	BUTTER	Usually,	properly	combining	melted	butter	with

buttermilk	(or	any	liquid)	requires	that	both	ingredients	be	at	just	the	right
temperature;	if	they	aren’t,	the	melted	butter	clumps	in	the	cold	buttermilk.	Since
this	is	supposed	to	be	an	easy	recipe,	we	simply	use	lumpy	buttermilk.	This	may
look	like	a	mistake,	but	it	actually	mimics	the	chunks	of	fat	in	a	classic	biscuit
recipe	(see	concept	43).	The	result	is	a	surprisingly	better	biscuit,	slightly	higher
and	with	better	texture.	It	turns	out	that	the	water	in	the	lumps	of	butter	turn	to
steam	in	the	oven,	helping	create	additional	height.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
RESTING	CLABBERED	MILK

Allowing	milk	and	lemon	juice	to	rest	is	not	necessary.

Directions	for	making	a	buttermilk	substitute	by	adding	lemon	juice	to	milk	always	call	for	letting	the
mixture	sit	for	a	while.	Can	you	skip	this	rest	if	you’re	short	on	time,	or	is	it	important?

“Clabbered”	milk	is	widely	recommended	as	a	substitute	for	buttermilk	in	baked	goods.	The	usual
approach	is	to	stir	lemon	juice	into	milk	(1	tablespoon	per	cup)	and	let	the	mixture	sit	for	10	minutes	to
“clabber”	(or	thicken)	before	proceeding	with	the	recipe.	But	after	following	this	method	and	closely
observing	what	transpired,	we	discovered	that	clabbering	milk	doesn’t	give	it	the	smooth,	thick	consistency
of	buttermilk.	Small	curds	formed	almost	instantly,	but	after	a	10-minute	rest,	most	of	the	milk	had	not
thickened	at	all.	And	more	waiting	still	didn’t	give	clabbered	milk	the	consistency	of	buttermilk.

It	turns	out	that	when	lemon	juice	is	added	to	milk,	the	citric	acid	changes	the	electrical	charge	on	the
dairy’s	casein	proteins,	causing	them	to	coagulate	tightly	into	clumps.	On	the	other	hand,	the	Lactobacillus
bacteria	added	to	milk	to	produce	commercial	buttermilk	remove	some	of	the	sugar	molecules	bonded	to
the	proteins,	allowing	them	to	form	a	smooth	gel	that	gradually	becomes	thicker	over	time.

So,	does	waiting	after	treating	milk	with	lemon	juice	impact	its	baking	properties?	To	find	out,	we	made
multiple	batches	of	biscuits	and	buttermilk	pancakes:	one	set	with	clabbered	milk	that	had	rested	for	10
minutes	and	one	set	in	which	we	mixed	the	milk	into	the	batter	immediately	after	adding	the	lemon	juice.
All	of	the	biscuits	and	pancakes	were	virtually	identical	in	appearance,	flavor,	and	texture.

Our	conclusion:	Adding	lemon	juice	to	milk	simply	acidifies	it,	allowing	the	leavening	in	the	batter	to
do	its	job—the	same	role	played	by	buttermilk.	Since	this	change	happens	immediately,	you	can	safely	skip
the	resting	time.



DOUBLE	LEAVENING	AT	WORK	
COOKIES
Cookies	seem	so	simple.	Even	kids	can	make	them,	right?	Wrong.	As	it	turns	out,
cookie	recipes	are	complex	chemical	formulas	with	little	room	for	error.	And	the
simpler	the	cookie,	the	bigger	the	challenge.	Texture	is	the	most	challenging	part
of	any	cookie	recipe	and	is	especially	important	in	simple	cookies,	such	as	sugar
cookies,	where	there	aren’t	big	flavors	that	might	otherwise	hide	textural
imperfections.	Understanding	how	to	use	baking	powder	and	baking	soda	is	the
key	to	getting	texture	right	in	many	cookies.



CHEWY	SUGAR	COOKIES
MAKES	ABOUT	24	COOKIES

The	final	dough	will	be	slightly	softer	than	most	cookie	dough.	For	best	results,
handle	the	dough	as	briefly	and	gently	as	possible	when	shaping	the	cookies.
Overworking	the	dough	will	result	in	flatter	cookies.

2¼				 cups	(11¼	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 teaspoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
½				 teaspoon	salt
1½				 cups	(10½	ounces)	plus	1⁄3	cup	(21⁄3	ounces)	sugar
2				 ounces	cream	cheese,	cut	into	8	pieces
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	still	warm
				1⁄3 cup	vegetable	oil
1				 large	egg
1				 tablespoon	whole	milk
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Line	2
baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,
and	salt	together	in	medium	bowl.	Set	aside.
2.	Place	1½	cups	sugar	and	cream	cheese	in	large	bowl.	Place	remaining	1⁄3	cup

sugar	in	shallow	dish	and	set	aside.	Pour	warm	butter	over	sugar	and	cream
cheese	and	whisk	to	combine	(some	small	lumps	of	cream	cheese	will	remain
but	will	smooth	out	later).	Whisk	in	oil	until	incorporated.	Add	egg,	milk,	and
vanilla;	continue	to	whisk	until	smooth.	Add	flour	mixture	and	mix	with	rubber
spatula	until	soft,	homogeneous	dough	forms.
3.	Working	with	2	tablespoons	of	dough	at	a	time,	roll	into	balls.	Working	in

batches,	roll	half	of	dough	balls	in	sugar	to	coat	and	set	on	prepared	baking
sheet;	repeat	with	remaining	dough	balls.	Using	bottom	of	greased	measuring
cup,	flatten	dough	balls	until	2	inches	in	diameter.	Sprinkle	tops	of	cookies
evenly	with	sugar	remaining	in	shallow	dish,	using	2	teaspoons	for	each	baking
sheet.	(Discard	remaining	sugar.)
4.	Bake	1	sheet	at	a	time	until	edges	of	cookies	are	set	and	beginning	to



brown,	11	to	13	minutes,	rotating	baking	sheet	halfway	through	baking.	Let
cookies	cool	on	baking	sheet	for	5	minutes;	transfer	cookies	to	wire	rack	and	let
cool	to	room	temperature.

CHEWY	CHAI-SPICE	SUGAR	COOKIES
Add	¼	teaspoon	ground	cinnamon,	¼	teaspoon	ground	ginger,	¼	teaspoon
ground	cardamom,	¼	teaspoon	ground	cloves,	and	pinch	pepper	to	sugar	and
cream	cheese	mixture	and	reduce	vanilla	to	1	teaspoon.

CHEWY	COCONUT-LIME	SUGAR	COOKIES
Whisk	½	cup	sweetened	shredded	coconut,	chopped	fine,	into	flour	mixture	in
step	1.	Add	1	teaspoon	finely	grated	lime	zest	to	sugar	and	cream	cheese	mixture
and	substitute	1	tablespoon	lime	juice	for	vanilla.

CHEWY	HAZELNUT–BROWNED	BUTTER	SUGAR	COOKIES
Add	¼	cup	finely	chopped	toasted	hazelnuts	to	sugar	and	cream	cheese	mixture.
Instead	of	melting	butter,	heat	it	in	10-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until
melted,	about	2	minutes.	Continue	to	cook,	swirling	pan	constantly,	until	butter
is	dark	golden	brown	and	has	nutty	aroma,	1	to	3	minutes.	Immediately	pour
butter	over	sugar	and	cream	cheese	mixture	and	proceed	with	recipe	as	directed,
increasing	milk	to	2	tablespoons	and	omitting	vanilla.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Traditional	recipes	for	sugar	cookies	require	obsessive	attention	to	detail.	The
butter	must	be	at	precisely	the	right	temperature	and	it	must	be	creamed	to	the
proper	degree	of	airiness.	Slight	variations	in	measures	can	result	in	cookies	that
spread	or	become	brittle	and	hard	upon	cooling.	We	didn’t	want	a	cookie	that
depended	on	such	a	finicky	process;	we	wanted	an	approachable	recipe	for	great
sugar	cookies	that	anyone	could	make	anytime.	We	melted	the	butter	so	our
sugar	cookie	dough	could	easily	be	mixed	together	with	a	spoon—no	more	fussy
creaming.	Replacing	a	portion	of	the	melted	butter	with	vegetable	oil	ensured	a
chewy	cookie	without	affecting	flavor.	And	incorporating	an	unusual	addition,
cream	cheese,	into	the	cookie	dough	kept	our	cookies	tender,	while	the	slight
tang	of	the	cream	cheese	made	for	a	rich,	not-too-sweet	flavor.
MANAGE	THE	FATS	The	key	to	chewy	texture	is	all	in	the	fat.	For	optimal

chew,	a	recipe	must	contain	saturated	and	unsaturated	fat	in	approximately	a	1:3
ratio.	When	combined,	the	two	types	of	fat	molecules	form	a	sturdier	crystalline
structure	that	requires	more	force	to	bite	through	than	the	structure	formed	from
a	high	proportion	of	saturated	fats.	This	is	why	we	couldn’t	develop	a	recipe	that
called	for	butter	alone	(as	many	of	them	do).	Butter	is	predominantly—but	not
entirely—saturated	fat,	and	an	all-butter	cookie	actually	contains	approximately
2	parts	saturated	fat	to	1	part	unsaturated	fat.	For	optimal	chew,	we	needed	to
reverse	this	ratio	and	then	some.	This	is	why	we	add	oil	to	our	recipe,	just
enough	to	fix	the	fat	ratio	without	affecting	flavor.
MELT	THE	BUTTER	Because	we	are	using	less	butter,	we	melt	it	rather

than	cream	it.	This	does	three	things.	First,	it	eliminates	one	of	the	trickier
aspects	of	baking	sugar	cookies:	ensuring	that	the	solid	butter	is	just	the	right
temperature.	Second,	melted	butter	aids	in	our	quest	for	chewiness.	When
liquefied,	the	small	amount	of	water	in	butter	mixes	with	the	flour	to	form
gluten,	which	makes	for	chewier	cookies.	Finally,	with	creaming	out	of	the
equation,	we	no	longer	need	to	pull	out	our	stand	mixer.	We	can	make	these
cookies	completely	by	hand.
USE	CREAM	CHEESE	Cream	cheese	enriches	the	dough’s	flavor	without

adding	moisture	like	other	tangy	dairy	products.	Cream	cheese	contains	less	than
one-third	the	amount	of	overall	fat	of	vegetable	oil,	but	most	of	it	is	saturated.	A
modest	2	ounces	of	cream	cheese	did	not	markedly	impact	the	chewy	texture	of
the	cookies.
ADD	BAKING	SODA	Cream	cheese	doesn’t	just	add	flavor.	It	adds	acidity.

And	this	allows	us	to	add	baking	soda.	As	long	as	there’s	an	acidic	ingredient



present,	baking	soda	has	all	sorts	of	special	powers,	including	the	ability	to	solve
the	cookies’	other	two	pesky	problems:	a	slightly	humped	shape	and	not	enough
crackle.	Just	½	teaspoon	produces	cookies	that	look	as	good	as	they	taste.	(See
“Dynamic	Duo:	Baking	Powder	+	Baking	Soda”).



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	pH	OF	COMMON	FOODS

The	pH	of	common	foods	influences	the	work	of	leaveners.

The	natural	levels	of	acidity	in	many	ingredients	can	make	a	significant	difference	in	the	finished	dish—
especially	when	using	chemical	leaveners.	Here	is	a	chart	of	the	pH	values	of	nine	common	cooking
ingredients,	from	the	least	to	the	most	acidic.	This	data	comes	from	the	U.S.	Food	and	Drug	Administration.
	
Egg	White
pH:	7.6–8.0
	
Water
pH:	6.9–7.3
	
Chicken
pH:	6.5–6.7
	
Flour
pH:	6.0–6.3
	

Ground	Beef
pH:	5.1–6.2
	
Sugar
pH:	5.0–6.0
	
Buttermilk
pH:	4.5
	
Canned	Tomatoes
pH:	3.5–4.7
	
Lemon	Juice
pH:	2.2–2.4



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
DYNAMIC	DUO:	BAKING	POWDER	+	BAKING	SODA

Using	both	baking	powder	and	baking	soda	is	necessary	to	produce	cookies	that	spread	evenly
and	have	a	nice,	crackly	top.

Many	cookie	recipes,	including	our	Chewy	Sugar	Cookies,	contain	both	baking	soda	and	baking	powder.
Since	each	is	a	leavening	agent,	why	do	you	need	both?	The	answer	is	that	the	two	work	in	tandem	to	create
cookies	that	rise—and	spread—to	the	right	degree.	Plus	in	our	recipe,	baking	soda	has	one	more	purely
aesthetic	effect:	It	creates	cookies	with	an	appealingly	crackly	top.

Baking	powder	is	responsible	for	lift,	since	it	is	engineered	to	produce	most	of	its	gas	after	the	cookies
go	into	the	oven,	where	the	dough	sets	before	these	bubbles	can	burst.

But	too	much	lift	can	mean	cookies	that	turn	out	humped.	Here’s	where	baking	soda	comes	in:	As	long
as	there’s	an	acidic	ingredient	in	the	dough	for	it	to	react	with,	a	small	amount	of	baking	soda	can	even
things	out.	Baking	soda	raises	the	pH	of	dough	(baking	powder	does	too,	but	not	as	high),	weakening
gluten.	Weaker	gluten	means	less	structure	and	cookies	that	spread.	Goodbye,	humped	shapes.	As	for
crackly	tops,	baking	soda	reacts	immediately	in	the	wet	dough	to	produce	large	bubbles	of	carbon	dioxide
that	can’t	all	be	contained	by	the	weakened	dough.	Before	the	cookies	can	set	in	the	oven,	the	bubbles	rise
to	the	top	and	burst,	leaving	fissures	in	their	wake.

The	bottom	line:	For	a	baker	who	likes	her	cookies	just	so,	the	use	of	both	baking	powder	and	baking
soda	can	be	a	potent	combo.

	
HUMPED

Without	baking	soda,	our	cookies	turn	out	tall	and	lumpy.

	
FLAT

With	the	addition	of	baking	soda,	our	cookies	spread	evenlyand	have	a	crackly	top.



THIN	AND	CRISPY	OATMEAL	COOKIES
MAKES	ABOUT	24	COOKIES

Do	not	use	instant	or	quick	oats	in	this	recipe.

1				 cup	(5	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
¾				 teaspoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
½				 teaspoon	salt
14				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened	but	still	cool	(60	degrees)
1				 cup	(7	ounces)	granulated	sugar
¼				 cup	packed	(1¾	ounces)	light	brown	sugar
1				 large	egg
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

2½				 cups	(7½	ounces)	old-fashioned	rolled	oats

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Line	3
baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,
and	salt	together	in	medium	bowl;	set	aside.
2.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	beat	butter,	granulated	sugar,	and

brown	sugar	at	medium-low	speed	until	just	combined,	about	20	seconds.
Increase	speed	to	medium	and	continue	to	beat	until	light	and	fluffy,	about	1
minute	longer,	scraping	down	bowl	as	needed.	Add	egg	and	vanilla	and	beat	on
medium-low	until	fully	incorporated,	about	30	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	as
needed.	Reduce	speed	to	low,	add	flour	mixture,	and	mix	until	just	incorporated
and	smooth,	about	10	seconds.	With	mixer	still	running	on	low,	gradually	add
oats	and	mix	until	well	incorporated,	about	20	seconds.	Give	dough	final	stir	to
ensure	that	no	flour	pockets	remain	and	ingredients	are	evenly	distributed.
3.	Working	with	2	tablespoons	of	dough	at	a	time,	roll	into	balls	and	place	2½

inches	apart	on	prepared	baking	sheets.	Using	fingertips,	gently	press	each
dough	ball	to	¾-inch	thickness.
4.	Bake	1	sheet	at	a	time	until	cookies	are	deep	golden	brown,	edges	are	crisp,

and	centers	yield	to	slight	pressure	when	pressed,	13	to	16	minutes,	rotating
baking	sheet	halfway	through	baking.	Transfer	baking	sheet	to	wire	rack	and	let
cookies	cool	completely.



THIN	AND	CRISPY	COCONUT-OATMEAL	COOKIES
Decrease	oats	to	2	cups	and	add	1½	cups	sweetened	shredded	coconut	to	batter
with	oats.

THIN	AND	CRISPY	ORANGE-ALMOND	OATMEAL	COOKIES
Beat	2	teaspoons	grated	orange	zest	with	butter	and	sugars.	Decrease	oats	to	2
cups	and	add	1	cup	coarsely	chopped	toasted	almonds	to	batter	with	oats.

SALTY	THIN	AND	CRISPY	OATMEAL	COOKIES

We	prefer	the	texture	and	flavor	of	a	coarse-grained	sea	salt,	such	as	Maldon	or
fleur	de	sel,	but	kosher	salt	can	be	used.	If	using	kosher	salt,	reduce	the	amount
sprinkled	over	the	cookies	to	¼	teaspoon.

Reduce	amount	of	salt	in	dough	to	¼	teaspoon.	Lightly	sprinkle	½	teaspoon
coarse	sea	salt	evenly	over	flattened	dough	balls	before	baking.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Thin	and	crispy	oatmeal	cookies	can	be	irresistible—crunchy	and	delicate,	these
cookies	really	let	the	flavor	of	the	oats	take	center	stage.	But	the	usual
ingredients	that	give	thick,	chewy	oatmeal	cookies	great	texture—generous
amounts	of	sugar	and	butter,	a	high	ratio	of	oats	to	flour,	a	modest	amount	of
leavener,	eggs,	raisins,	and	nuts—won’t	all	fit	in	a	thin,	crispy	cookie.	We	wanted
to	adjust	the	standard	ingredients	to	create	a	crisp,	delicate	cookie	in	which	the
simple	flavor	of	buttery	oats	really	stands	out.	Scaling	back	the	sugar	and	fine-
tuning	our	leavening	did	the	trick.
GO	WITH	OLD-FASHIONED	Whole	hulled	oats	are	called	groats.	After

being	heated	to	inhibit	rancidity,	they	are	further	processed,	according	to	the
particular	style.	Steel-cut	oats	are	groats	sliced	into	three	or	four	pieces	by	steel
blades.	Old-fashioned	or	rolled	oats	are	groats	steamed	and	rolled	flat	or	flaked.
Quick	oats	are	steel-cut	oats	steamed	and	rolled	to	one	third	(or	less)	the
thickness	of	regular	rolled	oats.	And	instant	oats	are	very	finely	cut	groats	that
are	rapidly	cooked	and	rolled	flat.
When	baking,	we	prefer	to	use	old-fashioned	oats	for	the	best	texture	and

flavor.	Quick	oats	can	be	used	in	many	recipes,	in	a	pinch;	their	flavor	is	weaker
and	the	texture	of	the	baked	good	might	be	slightly	less	chewy.	We	don’t
recommend	baking	with	instant	oats—they	are	very	bland	and	their	powdery
texture	can	negatively	impact	many	baked	goods.	And	never	bake	with	steel-cut
oats.	The	results	in	anything	from	scones	to	cookies	can	be	like	aquarium	gravel.
Steel-cut	oats	do	make	a	great	breakfast,	however.
CREAM	THE	BUTTER	Creaming	the	butter,	rather	than	melting	it,	tends	to

make	a	crisper	cookie.	When	solid	butter	is	mixed	with	sugar,	air	is	incorporated
into	the	mixture	and	held	there	by	the	crystals	of	solid	fat.	This	is	especially	true
when	they’re	mixed	on	medium	speed	until	light	and	fluffy.	This	extra	air	allows
the	cookies	to	dry	faster	in	the	oven,	producing	crispier	cookies	(see	concept	46).
Limiting	the	sugar	also	helps	with	crispness	(the	greater	the	amount	of	sugar,	the
chewier	the	cookie).	Using	all	granulated	sugar	makes	the	cookies	hard	and
crunchy,	with	a	one-dimensional,	overly	sweet	flavor.	Using	light	brown	sugar	in
place	of	some	of	the	granulated	aids	in	the	flavor—with	subtle	caramel	notes—
without	compromising	texture.
SPREAD	EVEN	If	the	cookies	don’t	spread	evenly,	the	edges	end	up	thinner

and	crisper	than	the	center,	which	is	thicker	and	chewier.	We	wanted	to	create	a
dough	that	would	spread	evenly,	but	a	liquid-y	dough	baked	up	too	thin,	like	lace
cookies.	We	found	that	using	two	leaveners,	and	plenty	of	each,	helped.	During



baking,	large	carbon	dioxide	bubbles	created	by	the	baking	soda	and	baking
powder	(upped	from	our	traditional	recipe)	caused	the	cookies	to	puff	up,
collapse,	and	spread	out,	producing	the	thin,	flat	cookies	we	were	looking	for.
PRESS,	THEN	BAKE	Pressing	the	dough	balls	flat	encourages	an	even

spread.	Baking	the	cookies	all	the	way	through	until	they	are	fully	set	and	evenly
browned	from	center	to	edge	makes	them	crisp	throughout	but	not	tough.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
COOL	BAKING	SHEETS	BETWEEN	BATCHES

Don’t	put	raw	cookie	dough	onto	a	hot	baking	sheet.

While	it’s	tempting	to	save	time	by	portioning	cookie	dough	onto	a	baking	sheet	that	has	just	been	removed
from	the	oven,	we	don’t	recommend	it.	The	dough	begins	to	melt	and	spread	before	it	even	reaches	the
oven,	which	can	adversely	affect	the	texture	of	the	cookies.	We	baked	two	batches	of	chocolate	chip
cookies	and	sugar	cookies,	the	first	using	a	cool	baking	sheet	and	the	second	using	a	hot	baking	sheet	that
had	just	been	removed	from	the	oven.	Both	baking	sheets	were	lined	with	parchment	paper.	While
differences	between	the	two	batches	of	chocolate	chip	cookies	weren’t	too	noticeable,	the	same	couldn’t	be
said	of	the	thinner,	more	delicate	sugar	cookies.	The	sugar	cookies	baked	on	the	hot	baking	sheet	spread
more,	had	darker	bottoms,	and	were	noticeably	thinner	and	crisper	around	the	edges.

Here’s	our	recommendation:	After	removing	baked	cookies	from	the	oven	and	allowing	the	baking	sheet
to	cool	for	a	few	minutes	until	warm	but	no	longer	hot,	simply	run	the	baking	sheet	under	cold	tap	water	to
cool	it	down	quickly,	then	wipe	it	dry.	To	make	the	operation	even	more	efficient,	line	the	cookie	sheet	with
parchment	paper.	As	the	first	batch	bakes,	load	a	second	piece	of	parchment	with	dough.	When	the	cookies
come	out	of	the	oven,	remove	them,	parchment	and	all,	onto	a	cooling	rack.	Once	the	baking	sheet	is
properly	cooled,	the	next	batch	will	be	ready	to	go.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
AVOIDING	UNEVEN	BAKING
Bake	one	sheet	at	a	time,	and	be	sure	to	rotate.

Baking	two	trays	of	cookies	at	a	time	may	be	convenient,	but	it	leads	to	uneven	cooking.	The	cookies	on	the
top	tray	are	often	browner	around	the	edges	than	those	on	the	bottom.	If	you	have	two	sheets	in	the	oven,
switching	their	position	halfway	through	cooking	helps.	But	for	cookies	with	an	especially	finicky	texture,
we	find	it	best	to	bake	the	cookies	one	sheet	at	a	time	to	ensure	the	best	results.	And	just	because	there’s	just
one	baking	sheet	in	the	oven,	don’t	assume	you	can	walk	away.	Even	the	best	ovens	have	hot	and	cold	spots
and	you	must	rotate	the	baking	sheet	at	the	halfway	mark	to	ensure	even	baking.	Simply	grab	the	front	of
the	baking	sheet	and	rotate	the	pan	until	the	cookies	that	were	in	the	front	are	now	in	the	back	of	the	oven.

	
NO	ROTATING	=	UNEVEN	BAKING



CONCEPT	43

Layers	of	Butter	Make	Flaky	Pastry
Butter	makes	countless	baked	goods	taste	great.	But	butter	is	also	a	key	factor	in
creating	a	flaky	texture	in	biscuits	as	well	as	the	pastry	used	in	tarts	and	pies.
Knowing	how	to	handle	the	butter	means	the	difference	between	biscuits	and
pastry	that	are	flaky	and	light	and	biscuits	and	pastry	that	are	dense	and	heavy.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
So	how	exactly	does	butter	make	biscuits	and	pastry	flaky?	Butter	isn’t	just	fat—
it’s	fat	and	water.	When	butter	is	heated,	the	water	turns	to	steam.	This	steam
lifts	the	dough	and	helps	create	a	flaky	texture	in	biscuits,	tart	shells,	and	pie
crusts.	But	for	the	steam	to	have	a	significant	effect,	the	butter	must	be	evenly
dispersed	in	layers	throughout	the	dough.	This	way,	when	the	butter	layers	melt,
the	steam	helps	separate	the	super-thin	layers	of	dough	into	striated	flakes.
The	challenge,	then,	is	getting	the	butter	evenly	dispersed	throughout	the

dough	while	still	leaving	it	in	distinct	layers.	If	the	butter	becomes	fully
incorporated	(as	it	does	when	making	a	cake,	for	instance)	the	flakes	won’t	form.
Starting	with	cold	butter	is	essential	but	handling	the	dough	is	just	as	important.
Let’s	start	with	temperature.	Butter	begins	to	soften	when	it	reaches	60

degrees	Fahrenheit,	begins	to	melt	at	85	degrees,	and	liquefies	completely	by	94
degrees.	When	melted,	butter	easily	works	its	way	into	the	other	ingredients,
removing	the	possibility	of	forming	layers	and	promoting	the	formation	of	flakes
in	the	oven.	To	keep	butter	below	the	melting	point	while	preparing	biscuit	and
pastry	doughs,	we	use	a	few	different	methods.
The	first	technique	we	will	cover	in	this	concept	is	called	lamination.	Puff

pastry,	croissants,	and	the	flaky	pastry	for	many	tart	doughs	all	rely	on	a
mathematical	phenomenon	to	achieve	their	many-layered	structure.	These	so-
called	laminated	pastries,	which	are	made	up	of	alternating	layers	of	dough	and
fat,	are	created	by	repeatedly	rolling	and	folding	the	dough	over	itself,	typically
in	thirds	(like	a	business	letter).	Each	set	of	folds	is	called	a	turn,	and	with	each
turn	the	number	of	layers	increases	exponentially	rather	than	linearly.	Thus,	the
first	turn	gives	three	layers,	the	next	seven,	then	19,	then	55,	and	so	on.	Just	six
turns	creates	an	astonishing	1,459	layers.	This	process	flattens	the	butter	into
thin	sheets	sandwiched	between	thin	layers	of	flour.	In	the	oven,	the	butter	melts
and	steam	fills	the	thin	spaces	left	behind,	creating	hundreds	of	flaky,	buttery
layers.
Next,	let’s	discuss	fraisage.	This	French	mixing	method	also	creates	a	dough

with	thin	layers	of	butter	that	remain	distinct.	Fraisage	refers	to	the	process	of
smearing	the	dough	with	the	heel	of	your	hand,	thereby	spreading	the	butter
pieces	into	long,	thin	streaks	between	skeletal	layers	of	flour	and	water.	This
works	especially	well	in	tart	dough,	giving	us	a	sturdy	dough	(because	the
melted	butter	leaves	behind	no	gaping	holes)	that	won’t	leak	fruit	juices.	The
dough,	however,	is	still	flaky.



LAYERING	WITH	LAMINATION



	
TURN	THE	DOUGH	When	using	a	technique	called	lamination,	pastry	dough	is	rolled	and	folded	over



itself	in	thirds.



	
KEEP	ON	TURNING	As	you	continue	to	turn	the	dough,	the	layers	of	butter	and	dough	multiply



exponentially.	The	result	is	an	incredibly	flaky	pastry.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
Numerous	baked	goods	(think	croissants,	pie	dough,	and	biscuits)	incorporate
super-thin	layers	of	solid	butter	to	develop	a	flaky	texture.	To	illustrate	the
importance	of	getting	the	butter	layers	just	right,	we	designed	a	unique
experiment.	We	started	with	a	traditional	rolled	and	cut	biscuit	dough	and
treated	the	butter	three	different	ways.	For	the	first	sample	we	used	the	most
common	method	of	incorporating	butter:	We	cut	cold	butter	into	the	flour	(using
a	food	processor)	until	it	resembled	pebbly	pieces.	We	also	made	a	batch	with
melted	butter	and	another	where	we	cut	thin	slices	of	cold	butter	and	pressed
them	between	well-floured	fingers	until	they	resembled	nickels.	We	formed
identical	doughs	with	each	batch	from	which	we	then	rolled	and	cut	biscuits.



THE	RESULTS
A	post-baking	lineup	told	the	whole	story.	The	melted-butter	biscuits	sat	squat,
dense,	and	uniform	next	to	the	moderately	flaky	traditional	biscuits,	both	of
which	paled	in	comparison	to	the	height	and	flakiness	of	the	biscuits	made	with
the	thin	pieces	of	butter.



THE	TAKEAWAY
The	key	to	making	flaky	biscuits	is	to	get	layers	of	solid	fat	spread	between	the
layers	of	dough.	This	way,	the	thin	layers	of	fat	(butter)	will	melt	when	they	hit
the	hot	oven.	And	because	butter	is	part	fat	and	part	water,	the	water	turns	to
steam,	filling	the	now-empty	spaces	between	the	dough,	and	giving	rise	to	flaky
layers.
Melted	butter,	on	the	other	hand,	is	incapable	of	forming	discrete	layers	of

solid	fat	between	layers	of	dough;	this	is	why	our	biscuits	made	with	melted
butter	turned	out	dense	and	flat.	Similarly,	the	standard	pebbles	of	butter	can’t
begin	to	form	layers	of	fat	between	layers	of	dough	until	they	soften	enough	to
spread	out.	Even	when	they	do	start	to	spread	in	the	oven,	the	softening	pebbles
can’t	spread	far	enough,	forming	only	small	regions	of	fat	that	will	not	give	rise
to	much	flakiness	at	all.
The	lesson?	If	flaky	biscuits	or	pastries	are	what	you	desire,	be	sure	to	use

techniques	like	lamination	or	fraisage	to	get	thin,	long	layers	of	solid	fat	in	the
dough.



HOW	YOU	HANDLE	YOUR	BUTTER	MAKES	BISCUITS	FLAKY	(OR
NOT)

We	baked	biscuits	using	butter	that	we	handled	in	three	different	ways:	melted,	cut	into	flour	using	a	food
processor,	and	pressed	between	floured	fingers	until	they	resembled	nickels.	The	long,	thin,	nickel-size
layers	of	butter	made	that	batch	of	biscuits	the	flakiest	of	them	all.

	
MELTED	BUTTER

The	biscuits	made	with	melted	butter	had	no	layers	of	fat	and	baked	up	flat	and	dense.

	
PEBBLY	BUTTER

Small	pebbles	of	butter	helped	a	bit	to	form	the	layers	of	fat	that	make	biscuits	flaky.



	
THIN	PIECES	OF	BUTTER

The	nickel-size	rounds	of	butter	gave	our	biscuits	perfect	flaky	layers.



LAMINATION	AT	WORK	
BISCUITS	AND	SCONES
Rolling	and	folding	the	dough	creates	a	multilayered	structure	that	generates
tremendous	rise.	Lamination	is	used	in	everything	from	puff	pastry	and
croissants	to	simple	items	like	biscuits	and	scones.



FLAKY	BUTTERMILK	BISCUITS
MAKES	12	BISCUITS

The	dough	is	a	bit	sticky	when	it	comes	together	and	during	the	first	set	of	turns.
Note	that	you	will	use	up	to	1	cup	of	flour	for	dusting	the	work	surface,	dough,
and	rolling	pin	to	prevent	sticking.	Be	careful	not	to	incorporate	large	pockets	of
flour	into	the	dough	when	folding	it	over.	When	cutting	the	biscuits,	press	down
with	firm,	even	pressure;	do	not	twist	the	cutter.

2½				 cups	(12½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 tablespoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
1				 teaspoon	salt
2				 tablespoons	vegetable	shortening,	cut	into	½-inch	chunks
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	chilled,	lightly	floured,	and	cut	into	1⁄8-inch	slices	plus	2	tablespoons

melted	and	cooled
1¼				 cups	buttermilk,	chilled

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.
Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,	and	salt	together	in	large	bowl.
2.	Add	shortening	to	flour	mixture;	break	up	chunks	with	fingertips	until	only

small,	pea-size	pieces	remain.	Working	with	few	butter	slices	at	a	time,	drop
butter	slices	into	flour	mixture	and	toss	to	coat.	Pick	up	each	slice	of	butter	and
press	between	well-floured	fingertips	into	flat,	nickel-size	pieces.	Repeat	until	all
butter	is	incorporated,	then	toss	to	combine.	Freeze	mixture	(in	bowl)	until
chilled,	about	15	minutes,	or	refrigerate	for	about	30	minutes.
3.	Spray	24-inch-square	area	of	counter	with	vegetable	oil	spray;	spread	spray

evenly	across	surface	with	clean	kitchen	towel	or	paper	towel.	Sprinkle	1⁄3	cup
flour	across	sprayed	area,	then	gently	spread	flour	across	work	surface	with	palm
to	form	thin,	even	coating.	Add	1	cup	plus	2	tablespoons	buttermilk	to	flour
mixture.	Stir	briskly	with	fork	until	ball	forms	and	no	dry	bits	of	flour	are
visible,	adding	remaining	2	tablespoons	buttermilk	as	needed	(dough	will	be
sticky	and	shaggy	but	should	clear	sides	of	bowl).	With	rubber	spatula,	transfer
dough	onto	center	of	prepared	counter,	dust	surface	lightly	with	flour,	and,	with
floured	hands,	bring	dough	together	into	cohesive	ball.



4.	Pat	dough	into	approximate	10-inch	square,	then	roll	into	18	by	14-inch
rectangle	about	¼	inch	thick,	dusting	dough	and	rolling	pin	with	flour	as	needed.
Use	bench	scraper	or	thin	metal	spatula	to	fold	dough	into	thirds,	brushing	any
excess	flour	from	surface	of	dough.	Lift	short	end	of	dough	and	fold	in	thirds
again	to	form	approximate	6	by	4-inch	rectangle.	Rotate	dough	90	degrees,
dusting	counter	underneath	with	flour,	then	roll	and	fold	dough	again,	dusting
with	flour	as	needed.
5.	Roll	dough	into	10-inch	square	about	½	inch	thick.	Flip	dough	over	and	cut

nine	3-inch	rounds	with	floured	3-inch	biscuit	cutter,	dipping	cutter	back	into
flour	after	each	cut.	Carefully	invert	and	transfer	rounds	to	ungreased	baking
sheet,	spacing	them	1	inch	apart.	Gather	dough	scraps	into	ball	and	roll	and	fold
once	or	twice	until	scraps	form	smooth	dough.	Roll	dough	into	½-inch-thick
round	and	cut	3	more	3-inch	rounds	and	transfer	to	baking	sheet.	Discard	excess
dough.
6.	Brush	biscuit	tops	with	melted	butter.	Bake,	without	opening	oven	door,

until	tops	are	golden	brown	and	crisp,	15	to	17	minutes.	Let	cool	on	baking	sheet
for	5	to	10	minutes	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Truly	flaky	biscuits	have	become	scarce,	while	their	down-market	imitators
(think	supermarket	“tube”	biscuits)	are	alarmingly	common.	We	wanted	to
achieve	a	really	flaky—not	fluffy—biscuit,	with	a	golden,	crisp	crust	surrounding
striated	layers	of	tender,	buttery	dough.	While	ingredients	(lard	versus	butter,
buttermilk	versus	milk,	and	so	on)	influence	texture	and	flavor,	we	discovered
that	the	secret	to	the	fluffy/flaky	distinction	is	how	the	ingredients	are	handled:
Flaky	butter	equals	flaky	biscuits.
MAKE	LARGE	FLAKES	When	we	make	pie	crusts,	we	usually	cut	the

butter	into	cubes,	and	then	put	them	in	the	food	processor	along	with	the	other
dry	ingredients,	turning	the	butter	into	small	pebbles.	The	pebble	shape	is	ideal
for	the	small,	irregular	flakes	in	a	pie	crust	but	not	for	the	pronounced	layers	we
need	in	a	biscuit.	Instead,	we	get	“flaky”	butter	by	abandoning	the	food
processor,	slicing	the	butter	into	very	thin	squares,	and—instead	of	cutting	the
squares	into	the	flour	with	a	pastry	blender—we	press	each	piece	onto	the	flour
with	our	fingers,	breaking	them	into	flat,	flaky	pieces	about	the	size	of	a	nickel.
This	is	exactly	what	we	want	for	a	biscuit;	as	we	roll	out	the	dough	we	can	see
the	butter	develop	into	long,	thin	sheets.
ADD	SHORTENING	Swapping	out	some	butter	for	some	shortening	has	a

tenderizing	effect.	Why?	For	one,	butter	contains	16	to	18	percent	water	while
shortening	is	all	fat.	The	use	of	shortening,	then,	reduces	the	level	of	hydration
in	the	biscuits.	(Shortening	likewise	contains	a	higher	amount	of	unsaturated	oil
than	butter,	which	has	a	higher	level	of	saturated	fats.	The	higher	level	of	liquid
oil	in	the	room-temperature	shortening	more	effectively	coats	the	protein	in	the
flour,	also	reducing	the	level	of	hydration.)	Less	hydration	means	less	gluten
formation	(see	concept	38).	A	weaker	gluten	network	helps	to	produce	a	more
tender	biscuit.
USE	TWO	LEAVENERS	We	use	both	baking	soda	and	baking	powder	to

leaven	our	biscuits.	The	baking	soda	reacts	with	the	acidic	buttermilk	in	the
dough,	producing	carbon	dioxide	and	helping	the	biscuits	to	rise	immediately.
More	importantly,	if	the	baking	soda	was	not	added	to	neutralize	the	acid	in	the
buttermilk,	then	the	acid	would	reduce	the	leavening	capability	of	the	baking
powder.	The	baking	powder	adds	its	leavening	power	as	soon	as	the	biscuits	hit
the	heat	of	the	oven.	(See	concept	42	for	more	on	leaveners.)	Also,	the	baking
soda	reacts	with	the	acidic	buttermilk	to	take	the	edge	off	of	its	flavor,	which	can
become	almost	too	tangy.
CHILL	WELL	Don’t	let	the	flakes	of	butter	melt.	If	they	soften	and	mix	with



the	flour	during	the	series	of	folds,	the	result	will	be	biscuits	that	are	short	and
crumbly	instead	of	crisp	and	flaky.	We	don’t	have	the	luxury	of	resting	our
dough	in	the	refrigerator	to	firm	up	the	butter	because	the	baking	soda	in	the
dough	begins	reacting	the	moment	the	liquid	and	dry	ingredients	come	together.
Chilling	the	mixing	bowl	and	all	of	the	ingredients	(instead	of	just	the	butter)
before	mixing	buys	us	the	time	needed	to	complete	all	of	the	necessary	turns
with	the	cold	butter	intact.
CREATE	A	NONSTICK	COUNTER	Biscuit	dough	is	a	Catch-22.	It	needs

to	be	wet—a	dry	dough	makes	a	dry	biscuit—but	it	also	needs	to	be	rollable.	We
don’t	want	to	scatter	too	much	flour	on	the	surface	of	the	counter,	because	then
the	wet	dough	will	absorb	the	extra	flour	and	no	longer	be	wet.	The	solution?	We
give	the	countertop	a	quick	blast	from	a	can	of	vegetable	oil	spray.	It	helps	the
flour	adhere	more	evenly	to	the	counter,	letting	our	dough	release	easily,	and
without	much	flour	sticking	to	it.
PRESS,	DON’T	TWIST	To	cut	the	biscuits,	flour	your	biscuit	cutter,	dipping

it	back	into	the	flour	after	each	cut.	We	invert	the	biscuits	onto	the	baking	sheet
with	the	flat	underside	on	top	so	that	they	will	rise	more	evenly.	Do	not	twist	the
biscuit	cutter	as	you	cut	the	dough.	Twisting	can	seal	the	edges	of	the	biscuit	and
prevent	it	from	rising.	Press	gently.



BLUEBERRY	SCONES
MAKES	8	SCONES

It	is	important	to	work	the	dough	as	little	as	possible—work	quickly	and	knead
and	fold	the	dough	only	the	number	of	times	called	for	or	the	scones	will	turn	out
tough,	rather	than	tender.	The	butter	should	be	frozen	solid	before	grating.	In	hot
or	humid	environments,	chill	the	flour	mixture	and	mixing	bowls	before	use.
While	this	recipe	calls	for	two	whole	sticks	of	butter,	only	10	tablespoons	are
actually	used	(see	step	1).	If	fresh	berries	are	unavailable,	an	equal	amount	of
frozen	berries,	not	thawed,	can	be	substituted.	An	equal	amount	of	raspberries,
blackberries,	or	strawberries	can	be	used	in	place	of	the	blueberries.	Cut	larger
berries	into	¼-to	½-inch	pieces	before	incorporating.	Serve	with	Homemade
Clotted	Cream	(recipe	follows),	if	desired.

16				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter	(2	sticks),	frozen
7½				 ounces	(1½	cups)	blueberries
½				 cup	whole	milk
½				 cup	sour	cream
2				 cups	(10	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
½				 cup	(3½	ounces)	plus	1	tablespoon	sugar
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder
¼				 teaspoon	baking	soda
½				 teaspoon	salt
1				 teaspoon	grated	lemon	zest

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.	Line
baking	sheet	with	parchment	paper.	Remove	half	of	wrapper	from	each	stick	of
frozen	butter.	Grate	unwrapped	ends	(half	of	each	stick)	on	large	holes	of	box
grater	(you	should	grate	total	of	8	tablespoons).	Place	grated	butter	in	freezer
until	needed.	Melt	2	tablespoons	remaining	ungrated	butter	and	set	aside.	Save
remaining	6	tablespoons	butter	for	another	use.	Place	blueberries	in	freezer	until
needed.
2.	Whisk	milk	and	sour	cream	together	in	medium	bowl;	refrigerate	until

needed.	Whisk	flour,	½	cup	sugar,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,	salt,	and	lemon
zest	together	in	medium	bowl.	Add	frozen	grated	butter	to	flour	mixture	and	toss
with	fingers	until	butter	is	thoroughly	coated.



3.	Add	milk	mixture	to	flour	mixture	and	fold	with	rubber	spatula	until	just
combined.	Using	spatula,	transfer	dough	to	liberally	floured	counter.	Dust
surface	of	dough	with	flour	and	with	floured	hands,	knead	dough	6	to	8	times,
until	it	just	holds	together	in	ragged	ball,	adding	flour	as	needed	to	prevent
sticking.
4.	Roll	dough	into	approximate	12-inch	square.	Fold	dough	into	thirds	like	a

business	letter,	using	bench	scraper	or	metal	spatula	to	release	dough	if	it	sticks
to	counter.	Lift	short	ends	of	dough	and	fold	into	thirds	again	to	form
approximate	4-inch	square.	Transfer	dough	to	plate	lightly	dusted	with	flour	and
chill	in	freezer	for	5	minutes.
5.	Transfer	dough	to	floured	counter	and	roll	into	approximate	12-inch	square

again.	Sprinkle	blueberries	evenly	over	surface	of	dough,	then	press	down	so
they	are	slightly	embedded	in	dough.	Using	bench	scraper	or	thin	metal	spatula,
loosen	dough	from	counter.	Roll	dough	into	cylinder,	pressing	to	form	tight	log.
Arrange	log	seam	side	down	and	press	into	12	by	4-inch	rectangle.	Using	sharp,
floured	knife,	cut	rectangle	crosswise	into	4	equal	rectangles.	Cut	each	rectangle
diagonally	to	form	2	triangles	and	transfer	to	prepared	baking	sheet.
6.	Brush	tops	with	melted	butter	and	sprinkle	with	remaining	1	tablespoon

sugar.	Bake	until	tops	and	bottoms	are	golden	brown,	18	to	25	minutes.	Transfer
to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	at	least	10	minutes	before	serving.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	After	placing	scones	on	baking	sheet	in	step	5,	either

refrigerate	them	overnight	or	freeze	for	up	to	1	month.	When	ready	to	bake,	for
refrigerated	scones,	heat	oven	to	425	degrees	and	follow	directions	in	step	6.	For
frozen	scones,	do	not	thaw,	heat	oven	to	375	degrees,	and	follow	directions	in
step	6,	extending	cooking	time	to	25	to	30	minutes.



HOMEMADE	CLOTTED	CREAM
MAKES	2	CUPS

Ultra-pasteurized	heavy	cream	can	be	substituted	but	the	resulting	cream	will
not	be	as	flavorful	and	tangy.	This	recipe	can	be	halved	or	doubled	as	needed.

1½				 cups	pasteurized	(not	ultra-pasteurized)	heavy	cream
½				 cup	buttermilk

Combine	cream	and	buttermilk	in	jar	or	measuring	cup.	Stir,	cover,	and	let	stand
at	room	temperature	until	mixture	has	thickened	to	consistency	of	softly
whipped	cream,	12	to	24	hours.	Refrigerate;	cream	will	continue	to	thicken	as	it
chills.	(Clotted	cream	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	10	days.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
For	our	ultimate	blueberry	scone	recipe,	we	wanted	to	bring	together	the
sweetness	of	a	coffeehouse	confection,	the	moist	freshness	of	a	muffin,	the
richness	of	clotted	cream	and	jam,	and	the	super-flaky	crumb	of	a	good	biscuit.
Increasing	the	amount	of	butter	and	adding	enough	sugar	gave	the	scones
sweetness	without	making	them	cloying.	Cutting	frozen	butter	into	the	flour	and
giving	the	dough	a	few	folds	helped	the	scones	rise.	Rolling	out	the	dough,
pressing	the	berries	into	it,	and	then	rolling	it	up	again	before	flattening	to	cut
out	the	scones	also	contributed	to	making	this	our	ideal	scone	recipe.
FOLD	THE	DOUGH	We	take	a	hint	from	puff	pastry,	where	the	power	of

steam	is	used	to	separate	super-thin	layers	of	dough	into	striated	flakes.	In	a
standard	puff	pastry	recipe,	a	piece	of	dough	will	be	turned,	rolled,	and	folded
about	five	times.	With	each	fold,	the	number	of	layers	of	butter	and	dough
increases	exponentially.	Upon	baking,	steam	forces	the	layers	apart	and	then
escapes,	causing	the	dough	to	puff	up	and	crisp.	We	aren’t	after	the	hundreds	of
layers	produced	by	the	standard	five-turn	puff	pastry	recipe	here,	but	adding	a
few	quick	folds	to	our	recipe	allows	the	scones	to	gently	rise	and	puff.
GRATE	THE	BUTTER	A	good	light	pastry	depends	on	distinct	pieces	of

butter	distributed	throughout	the	dough	that	melt	during	baking	and	leave	behind
pockets	of	air.	For	this	to	happen,	the	butter	needs	to	be	as	cold	and	solid	as
possible	until	baking.	The	problem	with	trying	to	cut	butter	into	the	flour	with
your	fingers	or	a	food	processor	is	that	the	butter	gets	too	warm	during	the
distribution	process.	We	find	that	freezing	sticks	of	butter	and	grating	them	on
the	large	holes	of	a	box	grater	works	best.	We	start	with	two	sticks	of	butter,	but
then,	using	the	wrapper	to	hold	the	frozen	butter,	grate	only	4	tablespoons	from
each.
GET	THE	FLAVOR	RIGHT	Too	often,	berries	weigh	down	scones	and

impart	little	flavor.	Starting	with	traditional	scone	recipes,	we	increase	the
amounts	of	sugar	and	butter	to	add	sweetness	and	richness;	a	combination	of
whole	milk	and	sour	cream	lends	more	richness	as	well	as	tang.
ADD	BLUEBERRIES	Adding	the	blueberries	to	the	dry	ingredients	means

they	get	mashed	when	we	mix	the	dough,	but	when	we	add	them	to	the	already-
mixed	dough,	they	ruin	our	pockets	of	butter.	The	solution	is	pressing	the	berries
into	the	dough,	rolling	the	dough	into	a	log,	then	pressing	the	log	into	a	rectangle
and	cutting	the	scones.	You	can	use	fresh	or	frozen	berries.
CREATE	A	CRISP	TOP	Brush	the	tops	of	the	scones	with	melted	butter,	and



sprinkle	them	with	sugar,	before	baking	to	help	form	a	crisp	top.



FRAISAGE	AT	WORK	
TARTS
You	can	“turn”	the	dough	to	create	thin	layers	of	butter	and	flour	or	you	can	use
a	French	mixing	technique	called	fraisage	to	create	a	similar	effect.	In	this	case,
you	roll	the	dough	but	don’t	fold	or	turn	it.	This	works	well	with	doughs	that
must	be	rolled	thin	to	create	a	tart	or	galette—these	thin	doughs	would	be	tricky
to	fold.



FREE-FORM	FRUIT	TART
SERVES	6

Taste	the	fruit	before	adding	sugar	to	it;	use	the	lesser	amount	if	the	fruit	is	very
sweet,	more	if	it	is	tart.	However	much	sugar	you	use,	do	not	add	it	to	the	fruit
until	you	are	ready	to	fill	and	form	the	tart.	Serve	with	vanilla	ice	cream	or
whipped	cream.

DOUGH
1½				 cups	(7½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
½				 teaspoon	salt
10				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	and	chilled
4–6				 tablespoons	ice	water

FILLING
1				 pound	peaches,	nectarines,	apricots,	or	plums,	halved,	pitted,	and	cut	into	½-inch	wedges
5				 ounces	(1	cup)	blueberries,	raspberries,	or	blackberries

4–6				 tablespoons	sugar

1.	FOR	THE	DOUGH:	Process	flour	and	salt	in	food	processor	until
combined,	about	5	seconds.	Scatter	butter	over	top	and	pulse	until	mixture
resembles	coarse	bread	crumbs	and	butter	pieces	are	about	size	of	small	peas,
about	10	pulses.	Continue	to	pulse,	adding	water	1	tablespoon	at	a	time,	until
dough	begins	to	form	small	curds	that	hold	together	when	pinched	with	fingers
(dough	will	be	crumbly),	about	10	pulses.
2.	Turn	dough	crumbs	onto	lightly	floured	counter	and	gather	into	rectangular-

shaped	pile.	Starting	at	farthest	end,	use	heel	of	hand	to	smear	small	amount	of
dough	against	counter.	Continue	to	smear	dough	until	all	crumbs	have	been
worked.	Gather	smeared	crumbs	together	in	another	rectangular-shaped	pile	and
repeat	process.	Press	dough	into	6-inch	disk,	wrap	it	tightly	in	plastic	wrap,	and
refrigerate	for	1	hour.	Before	rolling	dough	out,	let	it	sit	on	counter	to	soften
slightly,	about	10	minutes.	(Dough	can	be	wrapped	tightly	in	plastic	and
refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days	or	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.	If	frozen,	let	dough
thaw	completely	on	counter	before	rolling	it	out.)



3.	Roll	dough	into	12-inch	circle	between	2	large	sheets	of	floured	parchment
paper.	(If	dough	sticks	to	parchment,	gently	loosen	and	lift	sticky	area	with
bench	scraper	and	dust	parchment	with	additional	flour.)	Slide	dough,	still
between	parchment	sheets,	onto	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	refrigerate	until	firm,
15	to	30	minutes.	(If	refrigerated	longer	and	dough	is	hard	and	brittle,	let	stand	at
room	temperature	until	pliant.)
4.	FOR	THE	FILLING:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven

to	375	degrees.	Gently	toss	fruit	and	3	to	5	tablespoons	sugar	together	in	bowl.
Remove	top	sheet	of	parchment	paper	from	dough.	Mound	fruit	in	center	of
dough,	leaving	2½-inch	border	around	edge	of	fruit.	Being	careful	to	leave	½-
inch	border	of	dough	around	edge	of	fruit,	fold	outermost	2	inches	of	dough	over
fruit,	pleating	it	every	2	to	3	inches	as	needed;	gently	pinch	pleated	dough	to
secure,	but	do	not	press	dough	into	fruit.	Working	quickly,	brush	top	and	sides	of
dough	with	water	and	sprinkle	evenly	with	remaining	1	tablespoon	sugar.
5.	Bake	until	crust	is	deep	golden	brown	and	fruit	is	bubbling,	about	1	hour,

rotating	baking	sheet	halfway	through	baking.	Transfer	tart	with	baking	sheet	to
wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	10	minutes,	then	use	parchment	to	gently	transfer	tart
to	wire	rack.	Use	metal	spatula	to	loosen	tart	from	parchment	and	remove
parchment.	Let	tart	cool	on	rack	until	juices	have	thickened,	about	25	minutes;
serve	slightly	warm	or	at	room	temperature.



FREE-FORM	SUMMER	FRUIT	TARTLETS
MAKES	4	TARTLETS

Divide	dough	into	4	equal	portions	before	rolling	out	in	step	3.	Roll	each	portion
into	7-inch	circle	on	parchment	paper;	stack	rounds	and	refrigerate	until	firm.
Continue	with	recipe	from	step	4,	mounding	one-quarter	of	fruit	in	center	of
dough	round,	leaving	1½-inch	border	around	edge.	Being	careful	to	leave	¼-inch
border	of	dough	around	edge	of	fruit,	fold	outermost	1	to	1¼	inches	of	dough
over	fruit.	Transfer	parchment	with	tart	to	rimmed	baking	sheet.	Repeat	with
remaining	fruit	and	dough.	Brush	dough	with	water	and	sprinkle	each	tartlet	with
portion	of	remaining	1	tablespoon	sugar.	Bake	until	crust	is	deep	golden	brown
and	fruit	is	bubbling,	40	to	45	minutes,	rotating	baking	sheet	halfway	through
baking.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	a	simple	take	on	summer	fruit	pie,	one	without	the	rolling	and	fitting
usually	required	for	a	traditional	pie	or	tart.	A	free-form	tart—a	single	layer	of
buttery	pie	dough	folded	up	around	fresh	fruit—seemed	the	obvious	solution.	But
without	the	support	of	a	pie	plate,	tender	crusts	are	prone	to	leaking	juice,	and
this	can	result	in	a	soggy	bottom.	For	our	crust,	we	used	a	high	proportion	of
butter	to	flour,	which	provided	the	most	buttery	flavor	and	tender	texture	without
compromising	the	structure.	We	then	turned	to	the	French	fraisage	method	to
make	the	pastry	sturdy	yet	flaky.
CREATE	STRONG	BUT	FLAKY	DOUGH	Using	too	much	butter	in	our

crust	results	in	a	weak,	leaky	crust.	Too	little	and	we	get	a	crust	that	is
crackerlike	and	edging	toward	tough.	We	settle	on	10	tablespoons	for	1½	cups	of
flour.	But	just	as	important	as	the	amount	of	butter	is	the	mixing	method.	We
tried	mixing	the	dough	in	a	food	processor,	with	a	stand	mixer,	and	by	hand.	We
found	that	the	latter	two	methods	mashed	the	butter	into	the	flour	and	produced	a
less	flaky	crust.	Quick	pulses	with	the	food	processor,	however,	“cut”	the	butter
into	the	flour	so	that	it	remains	in	distinct	pieces.	We	mix	the	butter	to	be	about
the	size	of	coarse	bread	crumbs—just	big	enough	to	create	the	steamed	spaces
needed	for	flakiness.
SMEAR	THE	DOUGH	Fraisage	is	a	French	method	of	making	pastry	and

involves	smearing	the	dough	with	the	heel	of	the	hand.	This	spreads	the	butter
pieces	into	long	streaks	between	thin	layers	of	flour	and	water.
DON’T	ADD	SUGAR	OR	LEMON	We	tried	adding	sugar	and	lemon	juice

to	the	crust	dough,	but	lemon	juice	made	the	crust	too	tender,	as	acid	weakens
the	gluten	structure	in	dough.	Sugar	improved	the	flavor	of	the	crust	but	was
detrimental	to	the	texture,	even	a	small	amount	making	it	brittle.	We	sprinkle
sugar	on	top	of	the	dough	before	baking	instead.
KEEP	THE	FILLING	SIMPLE	There	is	no	butter	needed	in	our	simple	fruit

filling.	We	use	just	ripe	fruit	sprinkled	with	3	to	5	tablespoons	of	sugar
(depending	on	the	type	of	fruit	and	its	natural	sweetness).	Though	we	prefer	a
tart	made	with	a	mix	of	stone	fruits	and	berries	(our	favorite	combinations	are
plums	and	raspberries,	peaches	and	blueberries,	and	apricots	and	blackberries),
you	can	use	only	one	type	of	fruit	if	you	prefer.	Peeling	the	stone	fruit	(even	the
peaches)	is	not	necessary.	(For	more	on	sugar	and	fruit,	see	concept	49.)
ROLL	AND	FOLD	We	roll	out	the	dough	to	about	the	height	of	three	stacked

quarters	(or	3⁄16	inch).	This	is	thick	enough	to	contain	a	lot	of	fruit	but	thin	enough



to	bake	evenly	and	thoroughly.	After	mounding	the	fruit	in	the	center,	leaving	a
2½-inch	border,	we	lift	the	dough	up	and	back	over	the	fruit	(leaving	the	center
of	the	tart	exposed)	and	loosely	pleat	the	dough	to	allow	for	shrinkage.
USE	HOT	OVEN,	COOL	ON	A	RACK	When	testing	this	recipe,	we	baked

it	on	the	center	rack	of	the	oven	at	350,	375,	400,	and	425	degrees.	Baking	at	the
lowest	temperature	took	too	long;	it	also	dried	out	the	fruit	and	failed	to	brown
the	crust.	At	too	high	a	temperature,	the	crust	darkened	on	the	folds	but	remained
pale	and	underdone	in	the	creases,	and	the	fruit	became	charred.	Setting	the	oven
to	375	degrees	generates	the	ideal	time	and	temperature	for	an	evenly	baked,
flaky	tart.	The	last	small	but	significant	step	toward	a	crisp	crust	is	to	cool	the
tart	directly	on	a	wire	rack;	this	keeps	the	crust	from	steaming	itself	as	it	cools.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHY	FRAISAGE	MATTERS

Long	flaky	layers	of	butter	make	tart	crusts	that	won’t	leak.

We	found	that	fraisage—the	technique	of	smearing	dough	on	the	counter—was	necessary	in	this	recipe.
What	happens	if	you	omit	this	key	step?	Something	like	the	crust	on	the	bottom,	which	has	short	flaky
layers	and	is	prone	to	leaking:	The	dough	had	lumps	of	butter	that,	when	melted	in	the	oven,	left	behind
holes	that	weakened	the	walls	of	the	crust.	The	crust	on	the	top	has	long	flaky	layers	and	is	far	less	prone	to
leaking.	The	fraisage	creates	long	streaks	of	butter	(rather	than	lumps)	that	make	for	a	stable	yet	tender
crust.

	
WITH	FRAISAGE

	
WITHOUT	FRAISAGE



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
STORING	BUTTER

Store	butter	in	the	freezer	for	longer	than	2½	weeks.

Placed	in	the	back	of	the	fridge	where	it’s	coldest	(not	in	the	small	door	compartment),	butter	will	keep	for
2½	weeks.	In	tests	we’ve	found	that	stored	any	longer	it	can	turn	rancid	as	its	unsaturated	fatty	acids
oxidize.	For	longer	storage	(up	to	four	months),	keep	butter	in	the	freezer.	Also,	since	butter	quickly	picks
up	odors	and	flavors,	we	like	to	slip	the	sticks	into	a	zipper-lock	bag.



APPLE	GALETTE
SERVES	10	TO	12

The	most	common	brands	of	instant	flour	are	Wondra	and	Shake	&	Blend;	they
are	sold	in	canisters	in	the	baking	aisle.	The	galette	can	be	made	without	instant
flour,	using	2	cups	of	all-purpose	flour	and	2	tablespoons	of	cornstarch;
however,	you	might	have	to	increase	the	amount	of	ice	water.	Serve	with	vanilla
ice	cream	or	whipped	cream.

DOUGH
1½				 cups	(7½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
½				 cup	(2½	ounces)	instant	flour
½				 teaspoon	salt
½				 teaspoon	sugar
12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces	and	chilled
7–9				 tablespoons	ice	water

TOPPING
1½				 pounds	Granny	Smith	apples,	peeled,	cored,	halved,	and	sliced	1⁄8	inch	thick
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
¼				 cup	(1¾	ounces)	sugar
3				 tablespoons	apple	jelly

1.	FOR	THE	DOUGH:	Process	all-purpose	flour,	instant	flour,	salt,	and
sugar	together	in	food	processor	until	combined,	about	5	seconds.	Scatter	butter
over	top	and	pulse	until	mixture	resembles	coarse	cornmeal,	about	15	pulses.
Continue	to	pulse,	adding	water	1	tablespoon	at	a	time	until	dough	begins	to
form	small	curds	that	hold	together	when	pinched	with	fingers	(dough	will	be
crumbly),	about	10	pulses.
2.	Turn	dough	crumbs	onto	lightly	floured	counter	and	gather	into	rectangular-

shaped	pile.	Starting	at	farthest	end,	use	heel	of	hand	to	smear	small	amount	of
dough	against	counter.	Continue	to	smear	dough	until	all	crumbs	have	been
worked.	Gather	smeared	crumbs	together	in	another	rectangular-shaped	pile	and
repeat	process.	Press	dough	into	4-inch	square,	wrap	it	tightly	in	plastic	wrap,
and	refrigerate	for	1	hour.	Before	rolling	dough	out,	let	it	sit	on	counter	to	soften



slightly,	about	10	minutes.	(Dough	can	be	wrapped	tightly	in	plastic	and
refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days	or	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.	If	frozen,	let	dough
thaw	completely	on	counter	before	rolling	it	out.)
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.	Cut

piece	of	parchment	paper	to	measure	exactly	16	by	12	inches.	Roll	dough	out
over	parchment,	dusting	with	flour	as	needed,	until	it	just	overhangs	parchment.
Trim	edges	of	dough	even	with	parchment.	Roll	outer	1	inch	of	dough	up	to
create	½-inch-thick	border.	Slide	parchment	with	dough	onto	baking	sheet.
4.	FOR	THE	TOPPING:	Starting	in	1	corner	of	tart,	shingle	apple	slices	into

crust	in	tidy	diagonal	rows,	overlapping	them	by	one-third.	Dot	with	butter	and
sprinkle	evenly	with	sugar.	Bake	tart	until	bottom	is	deep	golden	brown	and
apples	have	caramelized,	45	minutes	to	1	hour,	rotating	baking	sheet	halfway
through	baking.
5.	Melt	jelly	in	small	saucepan	over	medium-high	heat,	stirring	occasionally

to	smooth	out	any	lumps.	Brush	glaze	over	apples	and	let	tart	cool	slightly	on
sheet	for	10	minutes.	Slide	tart	onto	large	platter	or	cutting	board	and	slice	tart	in
half	lengthwise,	then	crosswise	into	square	pieces.	Serve	warm	or	at	room
temperature.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	French	tart	known	as	an	apple	galette	should	have	a	flaky	crust	and	a
substantial	layer	of	nicely	shingled	sweet	caramelized	apples.	But	it’s
challenging	to	make	a	crust	strong	enough	to	hold	the	apples	and	still	be	eaten
out	of	hand—most	recipes	create	a	crust	that	is	tough,	crackerlike,	and	bland.
Our	ideal	galette	has	the	buttery	flakiness	of	a	croissant	but	is	strong	enough	to
support	a	generous	layer	of	caramelized	apples.	Choosing	the	right	flour,	and
using	fraisage,	gives	us	exactly	what	we	want.
INSTANT	FLOUR	Even	when	we	used	fraisage	to	make	our	dough	tender

and	flaky,	we	found	that	when	using	all-purpose	flour,	it	just	wasn’t	tender
enough.	Switching	up	the	flours—and	therefore	the	protein	content	of	the	flour
—helped.	All-purpose	flour	has	a	protein	content	ranging	from	10	to	12	percent.
When	mixed	with	water,	the	proteins	(gliadin	and	glutenin)	in	flour	create	a
stronger,	more	elastic	protein	called	gluten	(see	concept	38).	The	higher	the
gluten	content,	the	stronger	and	tougher	the	dough.	Pastry	flour,	with	a	9	percent
protein	content,	made	a	big	difference.	But	pastry	flour	is	not	widely	available.
Cake	flour,	with	an	8	percent	protein	content,	turned	our	crust	crumbly,	however.
(It	turns	out	that	cake	flour	goes	through	a	bleaching	process	with	chlorine	gas
that	affects	how	its	proteins	and	starch	combine	with	water.	As	a	result,	weaker
gluten	is	formed—perfect	for	a	delicate	cake	but	not	for	a	pastry	that	must	be
tender	and	sturdy.)	The	answer?	Instant	flour.	Instant	flour	is	made	by	slightly
moistening	all-purpose	flour	with	water.	After	being	spray-dried,	the	tiny	flour
granules	look	like	small	clusters	of	grapes.	Since	these	aggregated	flour	granules
are	larger	than	those	of	finer-ground	all-purpose	flour,	they	absorb	less	water,
making	it	harder	for	the	proteins	to	form	gluten.	Replacing	½	cup	of	all-purpose
with	instant	flour	gives	us	dough	that	is	tender	but	sturdy	enough	to	cut	neat
slices	of	galette	that	can	be	eaten	out	of	hand.
ROLL,	TRIM,	AND	TUCK	To	make	the	rectangular	pastry,	first	roll	out	the

dough	over	a	floured	piece	of	parchment	paper	cut	to	16	by	12	inches.	Dust	with
more	flour	as	needed.	Trim	the	dough	to	fit	and	then	roll	up	1	inch	of	each	edge,
pinching	firmly	with	your	fingers	to	create	a	solid	border.
SHINGLE	AND	GLAZE	Although	any	apples	will	work	in	this	recipe,	we

prefer	Granny	Smith.	To	arrange	the	apples,	start	in	one	corner	and	shingle	to
form	even	rows,	overlapping	by	about	one-third.	The	apples	are	sugared	and
dotted	with	butter.	(Apples	can	be	drier	than	summer	fruits	like	the	ones	in	our
Free-Form	Fruit	Tart,	and	they	benefit	from	some	fat	as	well	as	some	sugar.)
Although	not	all	galette	recipes	call	for	it,	many	brush	hot-out-of-the-oven	tarts



with	apple	jelly.	This	glaze	provides	an	attractive	sheen	and	helps	to	reinforce
the	apple	flavor.
USE	PARCHMENT	AND	FAIRLY	HOT	OVEN	This	big	galette	requires	a

more	precise	shape	than	a	free-form	tart.	Using	the	parchment	as	a	guide	(as	well
as	to	move	the	tart	around	the	kitchen)	is	helpful.	We	bake	the	tart	at	400
degrees,	a	temperature	that	strikes	the	right	balance	between	intensely
caramelized	and	simply	burnt.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CLARIFYING	BUTTER

While	we	generally	use	butter	as	an	ingredient,	it	can	also	be	used	as	a	cooking	medium.	Here
are	two	ways	to	do	so.

While	recipes	in	this	concept	rely	on	the	temperature	of	butter	and	how	the	dough	is	handled	to	create	the
right	results,	there	is	another	option—heat.	Many	variations	on	Indian	cuisine	as	well	as	recipes	like
baklava	rely	on	butter	that	has	been	clarified	so	it	won’t	brown.
CLARIFIED	Clarified	butter	is	butter	with	the	milk	solids	and	water	removed.	To	clarify	butter,	it	is	heated
to	break	the	emulsion,	which	causes	its	different	components	to	separate	according	to	density	and	chemical
makeup.	The	milk	solids	turn	into	a	foam	at	the	top,	which	can	be	scooped	away	with	a	spoon.	At	the
bottom	lies	a	thin	layer	that	includes	proteins,	phospholipids,	and	the	aqueous	layer,	which	is	predominantly
water	along	with	some	dissolved	milk	sugar	(lactose)	and	minerals.	This	milky	casein	layer	can	be
discarded	after	the	butterfat	solidifies	as	it	cools.	Clarified	butter	has	a	higher	smoke	point	than	whole	butter
and	will	keep	longer	in	the	refrigerator	(for	three	to	four	weeks)	or	the	freezer	(for	four	to	six	months)
without	picking	up	other	flavors	and	odors.
GHEE	Ghee,	a	butter	product	used	throughout	Indian	cooking,	takes	the	clarification	process	a	step	further
by	allowing	butter	to	simmer	until	all	the	moisture	is	evaporated	and	the	milk	solids	begin	to	brown,	giving
the	butterfat	a	slightly	nutty	flavor	and	aroma.	The	product	can	be	found	in	unrefrigerated	jars	at	Indian	and
Middle	Eastern	markets,	as	well	as	at	natural	foods	stores.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CLEANING	APPLES	AND	PEARS

Washing	produce	in	a	vinegar	solution	removes	most	bacteria.

In	kitchen	tests,	we	discovered	that	spraying	produce	with	vinegar	is	the	best	way	to	remove	surface	wax
and	pesticides,	but	could	this	method	destroy	bacteria	as	well?

To	find	out,	we	cleaned	apples	and	pears	four	different	ways:	rinsing	under	cold	running	tap	water,
scrubbing	with	a	brush,	washing	with	a	vinegar	solution,	and	scrubbing	with	antibacterial	soap.	(We	also
left	one	batch	unwashed	as	a	control.)	We	took	surface	samples	from	the	produce	and	grew	the	bacteria	in
petri	dishes.	After	four	days,	we	compared	the	petri	dishes	and	found	that	rinsing	under	cold	water	had
removed	only	25	percent	of	bacteria	and	scrubbing	with	a	brush	removed	85	percent.	The	vinegar	removed
98	percent	of	surface	bacteria,	which	made	it	nearly	as	effective	as	the	antibacterial	soap.	The	July	2002
issue	of	the	journal	Microbiology	explains	that	the	acetic	acid	in	vinegar	acts	to	lower	the	internal	pH	of
bacterial	cells,	which	in	turn	inhibits	several	key	biochemical	mechanisms,	effectively	destroying	the
bacteria.

We	recommend	washing	produce	in	a	solution	of	3	parts	tap	water	to	1	part	distilled	vinegar	applied	with
a	spray	bottle.	This	method	should	work	for	any	firm,	smooth-skinned	fruits	or	vegetables.	Just	be	sure	to
rinse	them	under	cool	running	tap	water	afterward	to	remove	any	unwanted	vinegary	flavors.

	
UNWASHED

This	petri	dish	shows	the	amount	of	bacteria	present	on	the	surface	of	an	unwashed	apple.



	
WASHED	IN	VINEGAR

This	petri	dish	shows	that	washing	apples	in	a	mild	vinegar	solution	cuts	the	bacteria	level	by	98	percent.



BUTTER	101
STRUCTURE

	
FAT	(OR	MILK	FAT)
Globules	of	fat	from	cream	or	milk	(some	of	them	crystallized)	stick	together	when	churned,	creating	a
larger	mass,	which	is	kneaded	to	make	the	bulk	of	butter.	By	law,	fat	must	make	up	a	minimum	of	80
percent	of	the	total	content	of	butter.	As	a	result	of	butter’s	high	level	of	saturated	fat,	it	is	a	solid	at	room
temperature,	begins	to	melt	at	about	85	degrees,	and	is	completely	liquefied	by	94	degrees.	In	its	solid	state,
much	of	the	fat	occurs	as	tiny	crystals	surrounding	the	droplets	of	water	along	with	a	small	amount	of
protein.

WATER
Butter	is	16	to	18	percent	water.	Butter	is	one	of	the	few	ingredients	in	the	kitchen	composed	of	a	water-in-
oil	emulsion,	which	is	an	emulsion	of	tiny	droplets	of	water	suspended	in	a	continuous	phase	of	fat,	similar



to	a	classic	vinaigrette	(see	concept	36).	A	small	amount	of	protein	coats	the	water	droplets	and	keeps	them
from	coalescing	unless	the	butter	is	completely	melted.

MILK	SOLIDS
“Milk	solids”	is	the	term	used	to	describe	everything	in	butter	that	isn’t	water	or	fat.	Milk	solids	are	rich	in
protein,	carbohydrates,	vitamins,	and	minerals,	which	are	all	removed	when	clarifying	butter,	except	for	the
fat-soluble	vitamins.	The	milk	solids	represent	about	1	percent	of	the	compounds	found	in	butter.

BUYING
You	have	four	basic	decisions	at	the	market—salted	or	unsalted,	cultured	or	uncultured,	regular	or	premium,
and	whipped	or	stick.

SALTED	OR	UNSALTED?	In	the	test	kitchen,	we	use	unsalted	butter	almost	exclusively	and	add	our
own	salt	to	recipes.	Why?	First,	the	amount	of	salt	in	salted	butter	varies	from	brand	to	brand—on	average
1⁄3	teaspoon	a	stick—which	makes	offering	a	universal	conversion	impossible.	Second,	salted	butter	almost
always	contains	more	water,	which	can	influence	gluten	development—particularly	important	in	baking.
(Biscuits	made	with	salted	butter	were	noticeably	mushy.)	Third,	salt	overshadows	butter’s	naturally	sweet,
delicate	flavors;	in	butter-specific	recipes	like	beurre	blanc	and	buttercream	frosting,	we	found	that	extra
salt	to	be	overwhelming.

CULTURED	OR	UNCULTURED?	The	real	distinction	between	premium	and	regular	butters	(see
description	at	right)	is	culturing—the	process	of	fermenting	the	cream	before	churning	it	that	builds	tangy,
complex	flavors.	Cultured	butters	are	produced	by	adding	certain	strains	of	bacteria	that	produce	unique
flavors.	That	said,	these	nuances	are	subtle	in	most	cooked	applications,	so	we	save	the	expensive	cultured
stuff	for	spreading	on	toast.

WHIPPED	OR	STICK?	Whipped	butter,	made	by	beating	air	into	butter,	makes	a	creamy	spread	but
isn’t	always	a	good	alternative	to	stick	butter	for	cooking.	While	testers	couldn’t	tell	the	difference	in	baked
goods,	they	found	the	aerated	butter	“foamy”	and	“plasticlike”	in	uncooked	applications	such	as	frosting.	If
you	want	to	use	whipped	butter,	base	your	substitution	on	weight,	not	volume.	(Adding	air	increases	the
volume,	not	the	weight.)	A	standard	tub	of	whipped	butter	weighs	8	ounces,	equal	to	two	sticks	of	butter.

REGULAR	OR	PREMIUM?	While	you	hear	a	lot	about	the	higher	fat	content	in	premium	butters,	our
tasters	had	trouble	telling	the	difference,	even	when	tasted	plain.	Regular	unsalted	butter	contains	81	to	82
percent	fat;	premium	brands	have	83	to	86	percent	fat.	Because	higher-fat	butter	remains	solid	over	a	wider
temperature	range,	we	like	it	when	making	croissant	dough	and	other	recipes	where	rapid	softening	of	the
butter	would	cause	problems.

GAUGING	BUTTER	TEMPERATURE
CHILLED
Temperature:	About	35	degrees
Method:	Cut	into	small	pieces	and	freeze	until	very	firm,	10	to	15	minutes.
How	To	Test:	It	should	not	yield	when	pressed	with	a	finger	and	should	be	cold	to	the	touch.
Why	it	Matters:	Cold	butter	is	cut	into	flour	for	flaky	pie	dough.
SOFTENED
Temperature:	60	to	68	degrees
Method:	Let	refrigerated	butter	sit	at	room	temperature	for	30	to	60	minutes.
How	to	Test:	At	60	degrees,	it	should	yield	to	slight	pressure	and	crack	when	pressed.	At	68	degrees,	it
should	bend	easily	without	breaking	and	give	slightly	when	pressed.



Why	it	Matters:	Sugar	can	be	creamed	with	softened	but	still	cool	butter	(60	degrees)	or	completely
softened	butter	(68	degrees)	to	make	different	types	of	cakes	(see	concepts	46	and	47).

MELTED	AND	COOLED
Temperature:	85	to	94	degrees
Method:	Melt	in	small	saucepan	or	microwave-safe	bowl	and	let	cool	for	about	5	minutes.
How	to	Test:	It	should	be	fluid	and	slightly	warm	to	the	touch.
Why	it	Matters:	Water	in	liquefied	butter	mixes	with	flour	to	create	chewy	cookies.



CONCEPT	44

Vodka	Makes	Pie	Dough	Easy
Whoever	coined	the	phrase	“easy	as	pie”	clearly	had	never	made	a	pie.	Yes,	the
recipe	for	a	pie	crust	sounds	simple	to	prepare.	Mix	flour	with	salt	and	sugar,	cut
in	fat,	add	just	enough	cold	water	so	that	the	dough	sticks	together,	then	roll	out
and	bake.	You	want	a	dough	that	bakes	up	tender	and	flaky	and	is	relatively	easy
to	work	with.	But	the	reality	is	that	pie	dough	often	bakes	up	tough	and	leathery
and	it’s	often	a	pain	to	work	with—cracking	and	tearing	are	common	problems.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
The	trouble	with	pie	dough	is	that	it	never	seems	to	behave	the	same	way	twice.
This	means	that	you	need	to	troubleshoot	every	time	you	make	a	pie.	And
troubleshooting	requires	experience,	so	that	you	can	recognize	what’s	going	on
with	that	particular	dough	and	then	make	the	proper	adjustments.	Most	modern
cooks	make	pies	only	a	few	times	a	year	and	can’t	be	expected	to	troubleshoot	at
all.
Perfect	pie	dough	has	just	the	right	balance	of	tenderness	and	structure.	The

former	comes	from	fat,	the	latter	from	long	protein	chains	called	gluten	that	form
when	flour	mixes	with	water.	Too	little	gluten	and	the	dough	won’t	stick	together
—but	too	much	and	the	crust	turns	tough.	We’ve	developed	an	approach	that
keeps	gluten	in	check	but	also	allows	for	an	unusually	supple	dough	that’s	easy
to	handle	and	reduces	the	chances	of	overworking.	Our	revolutionary	pie	dough
recipe	removes	the	guesswork	by	relying	on	a	secret	ingredient:	It	all	comes
down	to	alcohol.
You	see,	gluten	forms	readily	in	water.	Water	hydrates	the	proteins	in	flour.

This	means	that	the	water	molecules	attach	themselves	to	the	proteins	through
the	formation	of	hydrogen	bonds.	Hydrogen	bonds	are	weak,	electrostatic	bonds
that	hold	water	molecules	onto	the	surface	of	the	protein	molecules,	giving	the
coiled	protein	molecules	flexibility	to	unravel	and	bond	with	each	other	in	order
to	form	strands	of	gluten.	(For	more	on	this,	see	concept	38.)	But	gluten	won’t
form	in	alcohol.	The	ethyl	alcohol	in	vodka	and	other	liquors	does	not	attach
itself	in	the	same	way	as	water.	Because	of	this,	it	does	not	hydrate	the	proteins,
and	therefore	does	not	aid	in	gluten	formation.	By	replacing	some	of	the	water	in
our	recipe	with	vodka	(which	contains	40	percent	ethanol	and	just	60	percent
water),	we’re	able	to	add	more	liquid	to	the	dough	so	it	stays	soft	and	malleable,
but	without	increasing	the	danger	of	the	crust	turning	tough.
But	what	if	you	don’t	have	vodka	in	your	pantry—can	another	80-proof	liquor

be	used	in	its	place?	We	baked	pie	crusts	made	with	rum,	whiskey,	and	gin	and
compared	them	side	by	side	with	our	vodka	crust.	Surprisingly,	the	vast	majority
of	our	tasters	could	not	distinguish	among	the	different	flavors	of	booze.	In	fact,
they	could	not	taste	the	alcohol	at	all.	All	of	the	crusts	had	a	clean	taste	and	flaky
texture.	So	if	vodka	is	not	your	tipple	of	choice,	go	ahead	and	substitute	any	80-
proof	liquor.



ADDING	ALCOHOL	TO	PIE	DOUGH



	
WATER	ALONE	In	pie	dough	made	with	water	alone,	the	water	interacts	with	the	flour	to	form	a	good



deal	of	gluten,	which	can	cause	the	dough	to	be	tough.



	
VODKA	AND	WATER	Gluten	does	not	form	in	alcohol.	Therefore	pie	dough	made	with	a	mixture	of



vodka	and	water	has	less	gluten	and	is	much	more	tender.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
While	science	might	provide	support	for	using	vodka	in	pie	dough,	we	weren’t
going	to	be	convinced	of	its	value	until	we	could	see	it	with	our	own	eyes.	To
determine	whether	or	not	the	use	of	vodka	makes	a	difference	in	the	texture	of	a
flaky	pie	crust,	we	baked	batches	of	our	Foolproof	Double-Crust	Pie	Dough—
one	with	a	1:1	ratio	of	vodka	to	water	(¼	cup	of	each),	and	another	with	just
water	(½	cup	of	water	total).	To	make	cross-section	comparisons	easier,	we
ditched	the	pie	plates	and	instead	rolled	out	the	dough	into	large	sheets	and	cut
them	into	5-inch	by	2-inch	rectangles,	which	we	baked	on	a	parchment-lined
baking	sheet.	Once	the	strips	of	baked	pie	crust	were	cool,	we	balanced	them	on
two	small	metal	cups,	like	a	tightrope,	and	placed	a	250-gram	cup	of	pennies	on
top	of	each	crust	to	assess	its	“toughness.”



THE	RESULTS
The	pie	crust	made	with	vodka	immediately	snapped	in	two,	dropping	the	cup	of
pennies,	which	then	spilled	out	onto	the	counter.	The	pie	crust	made	with	only
water	remained	intact,	however,	and	kept	its	pennies	balanced	for	about	a
minute.	Tasters	said	that	the	vodka	pie	crust	was	much	more	tender	and	flaky.
The	all-water	crust	was	noticeably	tougher.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Because	gluten	will	not	form	in	the	presence	of	alcohol,	the	pie	crust	made	with
equal	parts	vodka	and	water	had	a	much	less	developed	gluten	network	than	the
pie	crust	made	with	water	alone.	And	less	gluten	makes	for	a	tender	and	flaky
crust.	In	addition,	using	a	mixture	of	vodka	and	water	allows	us	to	add	more
liquid	to	the	dough	to	get	it	to	be	as	malleable	and	easy	to	work	with	as	possible
without	causing	excessive	toughness.
The	lesson?	Vodka	isn’t	just	for	drinking.	As	a	secret	ingredient	in	pie	crust,	it

can	both	make	the	pie	crust	more	tender,	and	the	life	of	the	cook	trying	to	roll
out	the	dough	easier.



THE	POWER	OF	VODKA:	EASY-TO-ROLL,	TENDER	PIE	CRUST
We	made	two	batches	of	our	pie	crust,	one	with	the	correct	ratio	of	vodka	to	water,	the	other	with	water
alone,	and	then	tested	the	results	with	a	cup	of	pennies.	The	flaky	vodka	dough	didn’t	stand	a	chance.

	
VODKA	AND	WATER

This	tender	pie	crust	cracked	immediately.



	
WATER	ALONE

This	tougher	crust	held	the	pennies	for	a	full	minute.



GLUTEN	MINIMIZATION	AT	WORK	
PIE	DOUGH
Replacing	part	of	the	ice	water	with	vodka	is	the	key	to	creating	a	well-hydrated
dough	that	is	easy	to	work	with.	And	because	the	vodka	doesn’t	activate	gluten,
our	dough	bakes	up	flaky.	In	contrast,	most	well-hydrated	doughs	made	with	just
ice	water	bake	up	tough	and	leathery	because	the	extra	water	activates	too	much
gluten.	In	addition	to	the	recipes	in	this	concept,	pie	dough	is	a	key	ingredient	in
Pumpkin	Pie	and	Lemon	Meringue	Pie.



FOOLPROOF	DOUBLE-CRUST	PIE	DOUGH
MAKES	ENOUGH	FOR	ONE	9-INCH	PIE

Vodka	is	essential	to	the	tender	texture	of	this	crust	and	imparts	no	flavor—do
not	substitute	water.	This	dough	is	moister	than	most	standard	pie	doughs	and
will	require	lots	of	flour	to	roll	out	(up	to	¼	cup).	A	food	processor	is	essential
for	making	this	dough—it	cannot	be	made	by	hand.

2½				 cups	(12½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
2				 tablespoons	sugar
1				 teaspoon	salt
12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces	and	chilled
8				 tablespoons	vegetable	shortening,	cut	into	4	pieces	and	chilled
¼				 cup	vodka,	chilled
¼				 cup	ice	water
					 	

1.	Process	1½	cups	flour,	sugar,	and	salt	together	in	food	processor	until
combined,	about	5	seconds.	Scatter	butter	and	shortening	over	top	and	continue
to	process	until	incorporated	and	mixture	begins	to	form	uneven	clumps	with	no
remaining	floury	bits,	about	15	seconds.
2.	Scrape	down	bowl	and	redistribute	dough	evenly	around	processor	blade.

Sprinkle	remaining	1	cup	flour	over	dough	and	pulse	until	mixture	has	broken	up
into	pieces	and	is	evenly	distributed	around	bowl,	4	to	6	pulses.
3.	Transfer	mixture	to	large	bowl.	Sprinkle	vodka	and	ice	water	over	mixture.

Stir	and	press	dough	together,	using	stiff	rubber	spatula,	until	dough	sticks
together.
4.	Divide	dough	into	2	even	pieces.	Turn	each	piece	of	dough	onto	sheet	of

plastic	wrap	and	flatten	each	into	4-inch	disk.	Wrap	each	piece	tightly	in	plastic
and	refrigerate	for	1	hour.	Before	rolling	dough	out,	let	it	sit	on	counter	to	soften
slightly,	about	10	minutes.	(Dough	can	be	wrapped	tightly	in	plastic	and
refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days	or	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.	If	frozen,	let	dough
thaw	completely	on	counter	before	rolling	it	out.)



FOOLPROOF	BAKED	PIE	SHELL
MAKES	ONE	9-INCH	PIE	SHELL

Vodka	is	essential	to	the	tender	texture	of	this	crust	and	imparts	no	flavor—do
not	substitute	water.	This	dough	is	moister	than	most	standard	pie	doughs	and
will	require	lots	of	flour	to	roll	out	(up	to	¼	cup).

1¼				 cups	(6¼	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 tablespoon	sugar
½				 teaspoon	salt
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces	and	chilled
4				 tablespoons	vegetable	shortening,	cut	into	2	pieces	and	chilled
2				 tablespoons	vodka,	chilled
2				 tablespoons	ice	water

1.	Process	¾	cup	flour,	sugar,	and	salt	together	in	food	processor	until
combined,	about	5	seconds.	Scatter	butter	and	shortening	over	top	and	continue
to	process	until	incorporated	and	mixture	begins	to	form	uneven	clumps	with	no
remaining	floury	bits,	about	10	seconds.
2.	Scrape	down	bowl	and	redistribute	dough	evenly	around	processor	blade.

Sprinkle	remaining	½	cup	flour	over	dough	and	pulse	until	mixture	has	broken
up	into	pieces	and	is	evenly	distributed	around	bowl,	4	to	6	pulses.
3.	Transfer	mixture	to	medium	bowl.	Sprinkle	vodka	and	ice	water	over

mixture.	Stir	and	press	dough	together,	using	stiff	rubber	spatula,	until	dough
sticks	together.
4.	Turn	dough	onto	sheet	of	plastic	wrap	and	flatten	into	4-inch	disk.	Wrap

tightly	in	plastic	and	refrigerate	for	1	hour.	Before	rolling	dough	out,	let	it	sit	on
counter	to	soften	slightly,	about	10	minutes.	(Dough	can	be	wrapped	tightly	in
plastic	and	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days	or	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.	If	frozen,	let
dough	thaw	completely	on	counter	before	rolling	it	out.)
5.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.	Roll

dough	into	12-inch	circle	on	floured	counter.	Loosely	roll	dough	around	rolling
pin	and	gently	unroll	it	onto	9-inch	pie	plate,	letting	excess	dough	hang	over
edge.	Ease	dough	into	plate	by	gently	lifting	edge	of	dough	with	1	hand	while
pressing	into	plate	bottom	with	other	hand.	Leave	any	dough	that	overhangs



plate	in	place.	Wrap	dough-lined	pie	plate	loosely	in	plastic	and	refrigerate	until
dough	is	firm,	about	30	minutes.
6.	Trim	overhang	to	½	inch	beyond	lip	of	pie	plate.	Tuck	overhang	under

itself;	folded	edge	should	be	flush	with	edge	of	pie	plate.	Crimp	dough	evenly
around	edge	of	pie	using	your	fingers.	Wrap	dough-lined	pie	plate	loosely	in
plastic	and	refrigerate	until	dough	is	fully	chilled	and	firm,	about	15	minutes,
before	using.
7.	Line	chilled	pie	shell	with	double	layer	of	aluminum	foil,	covering	edges	to

prevent	burning,	and	fill	with	pie	weights.
8A.	FOR	A	PARTIALLY	BAKED	CRUST:	Bake	until	pie	dough	looks	dry

and	is	pale	in	color,	about	15	minutes.	Remove	weights	and	foil	and	continue	to
bake	crust	until	light	golden	brown,	4	to	7	minutes	longer.	Transfer	pie	plate	to
wire	rack.	(Crust	must	still	be	warm	when	filling	is	added.)
8B.	FOR	A	FULLY	BAKED	CRUST:	Bake	until	pie	dough	looks	dry	and	is

pale	in	color,	about	15	minutes.	Remove	weights	and	foil	and	continue	to	bake
crust	until	deep	golden	brown,	8	to	12	minutes	longer.	Transfer	pie	plate	to	wire
rack	and	let	crust	cool	completely,	about	1	hour.

FOOLPROOF	SINGLE-CRUST	PIE	DOUGH	FOR	CUSTARD	PIES

We	like	rolling	our	single-crust	dough	in	fresh	graham	cracker	crumbs	because
they	add	flavor	and	crisp	textural	appeal	to	our	custard	pies.

Crush	3	whole	graham	crackers	to	fine	crumbs.	(You	should	have	about	½	cup
crumbs.)	Dust	counter	with	graham	cracker	crumbs	instead	of	flour.	Continue
sprinkling	dough	with	crumbs,	both	underneath	and	on	top,	as	it	is	being	rolled
out.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Pie	dough	can	go	wrong	so	easily:	dry	dough	that	is	too	crumbly	to	roll	out,	a
flaky	but	leathery	crust,	or	a	tender	crust	without	flakes.	We	wanted	a	recipe	for
pie	dough	that	would	roll	out	easily	every	time	and	produce	a	tender,	flaky	crust.
We	found	the	answer	in	the	liquor	cabinet:	vodka.	While	gluten	(the	protein	that
makes	crust	tough)	forms	readily	in	water,	it	doesn’t	form	in	ethanol,	and	vodka
is	60	percent	water	and	40	percent	ethanol.	Adding	¼	cup	of	vodka	produced	a
moist,	easy-to-roll	dough	that	stayed	tender.	(The	alcohol	vaporizes	in	the	oven,
so	you	won’t	taste	it	in	the	baked	crust.)
USE	TWO	FATS	Butter	contributes	rich	taste—but	also	water,	which

encourages	gluten	development.	For	a	crust	that’s	both	flavorful	and	tender,	we
use	a	3:2	ratio	of	butter	to	shortening,	a	pure	fat	with	no	water.
USE	MORE	OF	THEM	We	incorporate	roughly	a	third	more	total	fat	in	our

dough	than	the	typical	recipe,	which	coats	the	flour	more	thoroughly	so	less	of	it
can	mix	with	water	to	form	gluten.	Also,	the	extra	fat	makes	the	dough	more
tender.	(It	makes	it	taste	better,	too.)
CREATE	LAYERS	Traditional	recipes	process	all	the	flour	and	fat	at	once,

but	we	add	the	flour	in	two	batches.	We	first	process	the	fat	with	part	of	the	flour
for	a	good	15	seconds	to	thoroughly	coat	it,	then	give	the	mixture	just	a	few
quick	pulses	once	the	remaining	flour	is	added,	so	less	of	it	gets	coated.	Besides
providing	protection	against	toughness,	this	approach	aids	in	flakiness	by
creating	two	distinct	layers	of	dough—one	with	gluten	and	one	without.
SHAPE	THE	DOUGH	INTO	A	ROUND	Many	bakers	struggle	to	roll

dough	into	an	even	circle.	The	first	mistake	they	make	is	not	shaping	the	dough
into	a	round	disk	before	refrigerating	it.	Take	a	minute	to	shape	the	dough	into	a
4-inch	disk	and	you	will	find	it	much	easier	to	roll	it	out	into	a	12-inch	circle.
CHILL	DOUGH,	FLOUR	COUNTER	To	prevent	the	dough	from	sticking

to	the	counter	(and	to	keep	the	butter	from	melting),	it’s	best	to	chill	the	dough
for	an	hour	before	attempting	to	roll	it	out.	If	the	dough	has	been	refrigerated	for
longer	(it	can	keep	in	the	fridge	for	two	days	or	be	frozen	for	four	weeks	and
then	defrosted	in	the	fridge)	it	will	be	too	cold.	Let	it	warm	up	on	the	counter	for
10	minutes	before	rolling	it	out.
ROLL	AND	TURN	Two	key	pointers	to	keep	in	mind	when	rolling	dough:

First,	always	work	with	well-chilled	pastry;	otherwise,	the	dough	will	stick	to	the
counter	and	tear.	Second,	never	roll	out	dough	by	rolling	back	and	forth	over	the
same	section;	each	time	you	press	on	the	same	spot,	more	gluten	develops	that



can	toughen	the	dough.	Also,	rolling	back	and	forth	makes	it	impossible	to	roll
the	dough	into	an	even	circle.	Instead,	roll	the	pin	over	the	dough	once,	then
rotate	the	dough	90	degrees	and	roll	again.	By	rolling	and	rotating	the	dough	you
ensure	that	the	dough	forms	a	neat	circle	and	that	no	part	of	the	dough	is	getting
overworked	and	tough.	We	like	to	use	long,	tapered	French	rolling	pins;	they	are
gentler	on	delicate	dough	than	standard	rolling	pins.
MOVE	THE	DOUGH	To	move	the	dough	into	the	pie	plate,	place	the	rolling

pin	about	2	inches	from	the	top	of	the	dough	round.	Flip	the	top	edge	of	the
dough	over	the	rolling	pin	and	turn	once	to	loosely	roll	around	the	pin.	Gently
unroll	the	dough	over	the	plate.	Then,	lift	the	dough	around	the	edges	and	gently
press	it	into	the	corners	of	the	plate,	letting	excess	dough	hang	over	the	edge.	For
a	double-crust	pie,	roll	out	the	second	piece	of	dough	and	chill	both	it	and	the
bottom	crust	while	you	make	the	filling.	When	you’re	ready,	fill	the	bottom
crust,	add	the	top	crust,	then	trim	and	flute.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOT-WATER	CRUST

Hot-water	crust	is	easy	to	work	with,	but	it	doesn’t	taste	good.

For	centuries,	pastry	dough	was	used	mainly	as	a	cooking	receptacle.	It	wasn’t	flaky,	nor	was	it	all	that
good.	In	fact,	food	historians	debate	whether	it	was	even	consumed.	Hot-water	crusts	are	one	of	the	oldest
forms	of	pastry;	they	were	molded	around	a	filling	and	baked	free	form,	rather	than	in	a	pie	dish.	With	a
hot-water	crust,	boiling	water	is	whisked	into	fat	(usually	lard)	until	it	forms	an	emulsion.	This	lard	mixture
is	then	added	to	flour.	The	result	is	an	extremely	pliable	dough	that’s	easy	to	work	with	since	it	doesn’t
crack	or	tear.

When	we	compared	a	hot-water	crust	in	several	recipes	(quiche,	deep-dish	apple	pie,	and	blueberry
turnovers)	with	our	Foolproof	Pie	Dough,	we	understood	why	it	might	not	have	been	eaten	in	the	past.	It
baked	up	so	tender,	some	tasters	called	it	“mealy”—the	result	of	both	its	higher-than-usual	fat	content	and
the	fact	that	“precooking”	the	flour	with	a	hot-water	emulsion	causes	some	of	its	starches	to	immediately
swell	with	water,	making	less	of	the	liquid	available	to	form	structure-building	gluten.	While	hot-water
crust	is	simple	to	prepare	and	easy	to	work	with,	stick	with	our	Foolproof	Pie	Dough	if	you	want	pastry
worth	eating.

	
HOT-WATER	CRUST

Boiling	water	and	fat	added	to	the	flour	create	a	nicely	pliable	dough	but	a	mealy	crust.

	



CLASSIC	CRUST
Our	favorite	pie	dough	(made	with	the	usual	cold	water)	is	both	pliable	and	flaky.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HOW	TO	PREVENT	A	SOGGY	CRUST

We	recommend	baking	pies	in	a	glass	pie	plate	on	a	preheated	baking	sheet.

Nobody	likes	a	fruit	pie	with	its	bottom	crust	saturated	in	fruit	juices.	We	wondered	if	getting	the	bottom
crust	of	the	pie	to	heat	more	rapidly	might	help	prevent	fruit	juices	from	soaking	through,	so	we	baked	two
identical	cherry	pies.	We	placed	one	of	them	directly	on	the	oven	rack	and	the	second	one	on	a	baking	sheet
that	had	been	preheated	for	15	minutes	at	400	degrees.

The	bottom	crust	of	the	pie	baked	directly	on	the	oven	rack	was	soaked	with	cherry	juices,	while	the	pie
cooked	on	a	preheated	baking	sheet	had	a	solid,	intact	bottom	crust.

In	its	raw	state,	pie	dough	is	made	up	of	cold,	solid	fat	distributed	among	layers	of	moist	flour.	These
layers	are	easily	permeated	by	juices	from	the	cherry	filling,	which	stay	in	the	dough	for	the	duration	of
baking,	producing	a	soggy	crust.	The	key	to	protecting	the	dough	is	to	partially	liquefy	the	solid	fat	as
quickly	as	possible	so	that	it	can	better	fill	the	spaces	among	the	particles	of	flour,	creating	a	watertight
barrier	and	preventing	the	juices	from	soaking	in.	By	placing	the	pie	plate	on	a	preheated	baking	sheet,	we
are	giving	the	bottom	crust	a	jump	start	in	this	liquefying	process.

We	prefer	to	use	glass	pie	plates	for	several	reasons.	Glass	conducts	heat	poorly	but	retains	and
distributes	heat	very	well,	so	you	get	more	even	browning	than	you	do	in	ceramic	or	metal,	and	glass	won’t
react	with	acidic	fillings.	(Metal	can	do	this	and	this	becomes	a	problem	if	you	have	leftovers.)	Last,	glass
allows	you	to	lift	up	the	pie	plate	(with	oven	mitts,	of	course)	to	check	the	progress	of	the	bottom	crust.	If	it
looks	underbaked,	you	can	simply	put	the	pie	back	in	the	oven.



BLUEBERRY	PIE
SERVES	8

This	recipe	was	developed	using	fresh	blueberries,	but	unthawed	frozen
blueberries	will	work	as	well.	In	step	3,	cook	half	the	frozen	berries	over
medium-high	heat,	without	mashing,	until	reduced	to	1¼	cups,	12	to	15	minutes.
Use	the	large	holes	of	a	box	grater	to	shred	the	apple.	Grind	the	tapioca	to	a
powder	in	a	spice	grinder	or	mini	food	processor.

1				 recipe	Foolproof	Double-Crust	Pie	Dough
30				 ounces	(6	cups)	blueberries
1				 Granny	Smith	apple,	peeled,	cored,	and	shredded
¾				 cup	(5¼	ounces)	sugar
2				 tablespoons	instant	tapioca,	ground
2				 teaspoons	grated	lemon	zest	plus	2	teaspoons	juice
					 Pinch	salt
2				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	¼-inch	pieces
1				 large	egg	white,	lightly	beaten

1.	Roll	1	disk	of	dough	into	12-inch	circle	on	lightly	floured	counter.	Loosely
roll	dough	around	rolling	pin	and	gently	unroll	it	onto	9-inch	pie	plate,	letting
excess	dough	hang	over	edge.	Ease	dough	into	plate	by	gently	lifting	edge	of
dough	with	1	hand	while	pressing	into	plate	bottom	with	other	hand.	Leave	any
dough	that	overhangs	plate	in	place.	Wrap	dough-lined	pie	plate	loosely	in
plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	until	dough	is	firm,	about	30	minutes.
2.	Roll	other	disk	of	dough	into	12-inch	circle	on	lightly	floured	counter.

Using	1¼-inch	round	cookie	cutter,	cut	round	from	center	of	dough.	Cut	6	more
rounds	from	dough,	1½	inches	from	edge	of	center	hole	and	equally	spaced
around	center	hole.	Transfer	dough	to	parchment	paper–lined	baking	sheet;
cover	with	plastic	and	refrigerate	for	30	minutes.
3.	Place	3	cups	berries	in	medium	saucepan	and	set	over	medium	heat.	Using

potato	masher,	mash	berries	several	times	to	release	juices.	Continue	to	cook,
stirring	often	and	mashing	occasionally,	until	about	half	of	berries	have	broken
down	and	mixture	is	thickened	and	reduced	to	1½	cups,	about	8	minutes;	let	cool
slightly.



4.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position,	place	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	rack,
and	heat	oven	to	400	degrees.
5.	Place	shredded	apple	in	clean	kitchen	towel	and	wring	dry.	Transfer	apple

to	large	bowl	and	stir	in	cooked	berries,	remaining	3	cups	uncooked	berries,
sugar,	tapioca,	lemon	zest	and	juice,	and	salt	until	combined.	Spread	mixture	in
dough-lined	pie	plate	and	scatter	butter	over	top.
6.	Loosely	roll	remaining	dough	round	around	rolling	pin	and	gently	unroll	it

onto	filling.	Trim	overhang	to	½	inch	beyond	lip	of	pie	plate.	Pinch	edges	of	top
and	bottom	crusts	firmly	together.	Tuck	overhang	under	itself;	folded	edge
should	be	flush	with	edge	of	pie	plate.	Crimp	dough	evenly	around	edge	of	pie
using	your	fingers.	Brush	surface	with	beaten	egg	white.
7.	Place	pie	on	heated	baking	sheet	and	bake	until	crust	is	light	golden	brown,

about	25	minutes.	Reduce	oven	temperature	to	350	degrees,	rotate	baking	sheet,
and	continue	to	bake	until	juices	are	bubbling	and	crust	is	deep	golden	brown,	30
to	40	minutes	longer.	Let	pie	cool	on	wire	rack	to	room	temperature,	about	4
hours.	Serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
If	the	filling	in	blueberry	pie	doesn’t	jell,	a	wedge	can	collapse	into	a	soupy
puddle	topped	by	a	sodden	crust.	But	use	too	much	thickener	and	the	filling	can
be	so	dense	that	it’s	unpleasantly	gluey	to	eat.	We	wanted	a	pie	that	had	a	firm,
glistening	filling	full	of	fresh,	bright	flavor	and	still-plump	berries.	The	use	of
tapioca	and	a	natural	pectin,	as	well	as	a	hot	oven,	gets	us	exactly	what	we
want.
USE	THE	RIGHT	THICKENER	We	prefer	using	tapioca	to	cornstarch	to

thicken	the	filling	of	a	pie	made	with	juicy	fruit,	but	in	order	to	get	the	pie	to	set
enough	to	slice	neatly,	we	have	to	use	a	lot	of	it,	and	then	we	end	up	with	a
filling	that	is	gluey	and	dull.	(Flour	and	cornstarch	yield	a	pasty,	starchy	filling
no	matter	how	much,	or	how	little,	we	use.)	We	reduce	the	amount	of	tapioca
and	pulverize	it	in	a	spice	grinder	before	adding	it	to	the	filling	so	that	it	doesn’t
leave	any	telltale	“pearls”	in	the	finished	pie.
COOK	HALF	THE	BERRIES	Cooking	just	half	of	the	berries	is	enough	to

adequately	reduce	their	liquid	and	prevent	an	overly	juicy	pie.	After	cooking,	we
fold	the	remaining	berries	in	with	the	cooked,	creating	a	satisfying	combination
of	intensely	flavored	cooked	fruit	and	bright-tasting	fresh	fruit.	(This	allows	us
to	cut	down	on	the	tapioca,	as	well.)
USE	NATURAL	PECTIN	As	we	watched	the	blueberries	for	our	pie	bubble

away	in	the	pot,	we	thought	about	blueberry	jam.	The	secret	to	the	great	texture
of	well-made	jam	is	pectin,	a	carbohydrate	found	in	fruit.	Blueberries	are	low	in
natural	pectin,	so	commercial	pectin	in	the	form	of	a	liquid	or	powder	is	usually
added	when	making	blueberry	jam.	The	only	downside	to	commercial	pectin	is
that	it	needs	the	presence	of	a	certain	proportion	of	sugar	and	acid	in	order	to
work.	Increasing	the	sugar	makes	the	filling	sickeningly	sweet.	A	test	with	“no
sugar	needed”	pectin	set	up	properly,	but	this	additive	contains	lots	of	natural
acid,	which	compensates	for	the	lack	of	extra	sugar—and	its	sourness	did	not
appeal.	Our	solution?	Apples.	Apples	contain	a	lot	of	natural	pectin.	We	fold	one
peeled	and	grated	Granny	Smith	apple	into	the	berries	along	with	a	bit	of
tapioca.	The	apple	provides	enough	thickening	power	to	set	the	pie	beautifully,
plus	it	enhances	the	flavor	of	the	berries	without	anyone	guessing	the	secret
ingredient.	(See	“The	Apple	of	My	Pie.”)
ADD	SUGAR,	NOT	SPICE	To	our	filling	we	add	sugar,	of	course,	and

lemon	juice	and	zest.	But	nothing	else.	We	want	the	filling	to	taste	like	berries,
not	cinnamon.



MAKE	HOLES,	NOT	A	LATTICE	To	vent	the	steam	from	the	berries,	we
found	a	faster,	easier	alternative	to	a	lattice	top	in	a	cookie	cutter,	which	we	use
to	cut	out	circles	in	the	top	crust.
START	HOT	We	begin	baking	our	pie	in	a	400-degree	oven	on	a	preheated

baking	sheet	(see	“How	to	Prevent	a	Soggy	Crust”)	to	help	jump-start	the
browning	process.	After	25	minutes,	we	lower	the	heat	to	350	degrees	and	keep
baking	for	another	30	to	40	minutes.
LET	IT	COOL	If	you	want	neat	slices	of	pie,	it	must	cool.	The	filling	will

continue	to	set	as	the	pie	cools	down	to	room	temperature—a	process	that	will
take	four	hours.	If	you	like	to	serve	warm	pie,	let	it	cool	fully	(so	filling	sets),
then	briefly	warm	the	pie	in	the	oven	before	slicing.	But	don’t	overdo	it!	Leave
the	pie	in	a	350-degree	oven	for	10	minutes—just	long	enough	to	warm	the	pie
without	causing	the	filling	to	loosen.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	APPLE	OF	MY	PIE

Adding	a	grated	apple	(and	all	of	its	pectin)	keeps	pie	filling	thick.

When	making	our	blueberry	pie	filling,	we	found	that	if	we	used	more	than	2	tablespoons	of	tapioca,	the
texture	of	the	filling	took	on	a	gummy	consistency	we	didn’t	like.	But	2	tablespoons	or	less	resulted	in	a
filling	that	was	too	loose.	Could	we	solve	this	problem	with	pectin,	a	gentle	thickener	that	occurs	naturally
in	fruit?

As	a	control,	we	thickened	one	pie	with	2	tablespoons	of	tapioca.	We	then	compared	it	with	a	second	pie
thickened	with	2	tablespoons	of	tapioca	and	a	grated	apple,	which	is	high	in	pectin	and	has	a	mild	flavor.
(We	hoped	that	grating	the	apple	would	make	it	less	noticeable	in	the	baked	pie.)

As	expected,	the	pie	thickened	with	tapioca	alone	was	loose	and	soupy.	But	the	pie	thickened	with
tapioca	plus	an	apple	had	a	naturally	jelled	texture	that	was	just	right.	The	apple	bits	seemed	to	melt	into	the
berry	filling	during	baking,	boosting	fruity	flavor	but	leaving	no	textural	sign	of	their	presence.

Pectin	is	a	natural	substance,	found	in	fruits	and	vegetables,	that	creates	structure	in	a	plant	by	helping	to
bind	its	cell	walls	together.	This	same	substance	is	used	to	thicken	jams	and	jellies	into	a	set,	but	soft,	mass.
Pectin	content	varies	from	fruit	to	fruit	and	also	within	a	plant	(more	pectin	is	found	in	the	skin	of	a	fruit
than	in	its	flesh,	for	example).	Apples	are	a	great	source	of	pectin	because	they	contain	high	levels	of	high-
methoxyl	pectin,	the	best	natural	pectin	for	making	gels.	By	mashing	some	of	the	blueberries	and	grating
the	apple,	we	helped	to	release	the	pectin	from	the	fruits’	cell	walls	so	that	it	could	thicken	the	pie	filling.

	
ON	THE	LOOSE

Pie	filling	thickened	without	enough	tapioca	won’t	firm	up.	But	too	much	tapioca	leads	to	gumminess.



	
ALL	FIRMED	UP

A	little	tapioca	plus	a	grated	apple	created	a	juicy	but	sliceable	filling.



DEEP-DISH	APPLE	PIE
SERVES	8

You	can	substitute	Empire	or	Cortland	apples	for	the	Granny	Smith	apples	and
Jonagold,	Fuji,	or	Braeburn	for	the	Golden	Delicious	apples.

1				 recipe	Foolproof	Double-Crust	Pie	Dough
2½				 pounds	Granny	Smith	apples,	peeled,	cored,	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
2½				 pounds	Golden	Delicious	apples,	peeled,	cored,	and	sliced	¼	inch	thick
½				 cup	(3½	ounces)	plus	1	tablespoon	granulated	sugar
¼				 cup	packed	(1¾	ounces)	light	brown	sugar
½				 teaspoon	grated	lemon	zest	plus	1	tablespoon	juice
¼				 teaspoon	salt
				1⁄8 teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
1				 large	egg	white,	lightly	beaten

1.	Roll	1	disk	of	dough	into	12-inch	circle	on	lightly	floured	counter.	Loosely
roll	dough	around	rolling	pin	and	gently	unroll	it	onto	9-inch	pie	plate,	letting
excess	dough	hang	over	edge.	Ease	dough	into	plate	by	gently	lifting	edge	of
dough	with	1	hand	while	pressing	into	plate	bottom	with	other	hand.	Leave	any
dough	that	overhangs	plate	in	place.	Wrap	dough-lined	pie	plate	loosely	in
plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	until	dough	is	firm,	about	30	minutes.	Roll	other
disk	of	dough	into	12-inch	circle	on	lightly	floured	counter,	then	transfer	to
parchment	paper–lined	baking	sheet;	cover	with	plastic	and	refrigerate	for	30
minutes.
2.	Toss	apples,	½	cup	granulated	sugar,	brown	sugar,	lemon	zest,	salt,	and

cinnamon	together	in	Dutch	oven.	Cover	and	cook	over	medium	heat,	stirring
often,	until	apples	are	tender	when	poked	with	fork	but	still	hold	their	shape,	15
to	20	minutes.	Transfer	apples	and	their	juices	to	rimmed	baking	sheet	and	let
cool	to	room	temperature,	about	30	minutes.
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position,	place	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	rack,

and	heat	oven	to	425	degrees.	Drain	cooled	apples	thoroughly	in	colander,
reserving	¼	cup	of	juice.	Stir	lemon	juice	into	reserved	juice.
4.	Spread	apples	in	dough-lined	pie	plate,	mounding	them	slightly	in	middle,

and	drizzle	with	lemon	juice	mixture.	Loosely	roll	remaining	dough	round



around	rolling	pin	and	gently	unroll	it	onto	filling.	Trim	overhang	to	½	inch
beyond	lip	of	pie	plate.	Pinch	edges	of	top	and	bottom	crusts	firmly	together.
Tuck	overhang	under	itself;	folded	edge	should	be	flush	with	edge	of	pie	plate.
Crimp	dough	evenly	around	edge	of	pie	using	your	fingers.	Cut	four	2-inch	slits
in	top	of	dough.	Brush	surface	with	beaten	egg	white	and	sprinkle	evenly	with
remaining	1	tablespoon	granulated	sugar.
5.	Place	pie	on	heated	baking	sheet	and	bake	until	crust	is	light	golden	brown,

about	25	minutes.	Reduce	oven	temperature	to	375	degrees,	rotate	baking	sheet,
and	continue	to	bake	until	juices	are	bubbling	and	crust	is	deep	golden	brown,	25
to	30	minutes	longer.	Let	pie	cool	on	wire	rack	until	filling	has	set,	about	2
hours;	serve	slightly	warm	or	at	room	temperature.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	problem	with	deep-dish	apple	pie	is	that	the	apples	are	often	unevenly
cooked	and	the	exuded	juices	leave	the	apples	swimming	in	liquid,	producing	a
bottom	crust	that	is	pale	and	soggy.	Then	there	is	the	gaping	hole	left	between
the	shrunken	apples	and	the	top	crust,	making	it	impossible	to	slice	and	serve	a
neat	piece	of	pie.	We	wanted	our	piece	of	deep-dish	pie	to	be	a	towering	wedge
of	tender,	juicy	apples,	fully	framed	by	a	buttery,	flaky	crust.	Precooking	the
apples	solved	the	shrinking	problem,	helped	the	apples	hold	their	shape,	and
prevented	a	flood	of	juices	from	collecting	in	the	bottom	of	the	pie	plate,	thereby
producing	a	nicely	browned	bottom	crust.
PRECOOK	THE	APPLES	For	a	deep-dish	pie	you	need	a	lot	of	apples.	But

all	those	apples	make	the	crust	soggy	and	the	filling	soupy.	Not	to	mention	that
when	all	those	apples	cook	down	you’re	left	with	a	top	crust	that	sits	far	above
the	filling.	Precooking	the	apples	solves	all	of	these	problems—and	precooked
apples	require	no	thickener,	which	can	dull	their	flavor.	(See	“The	Incredible
Shrinking	Apple,”	that	follows.)
COOK	GENTLY	Though	it’s	tempting	to	cook	the	apples	over	high	heat	in

order	to	quickly	drive	off	their	liquid,	it’s	not	the	right	choice.	Precooked	at	high
heat,	the	apples	in	the	pie	end	up	mealy	and	soft.	Cooking	apples	slowly	over
gentle	heat	gets	rid	of	excess	moisture	and	actually	strengthens	the	internal
structure	of	the	apples,	making	them	better	able	to	hold	their	shape	when	baked
in	the	pie.	(For	more	on	the	science	of	precooking	vegetables,	see	concept	27.)
USE	TWO	APPLES,	SUGAR,	AND	SPICE	We	like	tart	apples,	like

Granny	Smith	and	Empire,	because	of	their	brash	flavor,	but	used	alone	their
flavor	can	seem	one-dimensional.	To	achieve	a	fuller,	more	balanced	flavor,	we
find	it	necessary	to	add	a	sweeter	variety,	such	as	Golden	Delicious	or	Braeburn.
Another	important	factor	in	choosing	the	right	apple	is	the	texture.	Even	over	the
gentle	heat	of	the	stovetop,	softer	varieties	such	as	McIntosh	break	down	readily
and	turn	to	mush.	With	the	right	combination	of	apples,	heavy	flavorings	are
gratuitous.	We	add	some	light	brown	sugar	along	with	the	granulated	sugar	to
heighten	the	flavor,	as	well	as	a	pinch	of	salt	and	a	squeeze	of	lemon	juice
(added	after	stovetop	cooking	to	retain	its	flavor).	We’re	content	with	just	a	hint
of	cinnamon.
MAKE	VENTS	IN	THE	TOP	CRUST	Apples	are	a	lot	less	juicy	than

berries	and	you’ve	precooked	all	the	filling	(not	just	half),	so	four	vents	in	the
top	crust	are	plenty	to	allow	steam	to	escape.	Brushing	the	crust	with	egg	white
and	sprinkling	with	sugar	give	the	crust	a	pretty	(and	tasty)	sheen.



START	IN	A	HOT	OVEN	We	begin	baking	our	pie	in	a	hot	oven	(425
degrees),	on	a	preheated	baking	sheet	set	on	the	lowest	rack,	in	order	to	help
brown	up	the	bottom	crust	and	keep	it	from	becoming	soggy.	We	then	turn	the
temperature	down	to	375	degrees	to	finish	it	off.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	INCREDIBLE	SHRINKING	APPLE

Precooking	apples	helps	them	to	keep	their	shape	in	pie.

When	raw	apples	are	used	in	a	deep-dish	pie,	they	shrink	to	almost	nothing,	leaving	a	huge	gap	between	the
top	crust	and	filling.	Precooking	the	apples	eliminates	the	shrinking	problem	and	actually	helps	the	apples
hold	their	shape	once	baked	in	the	pie.

This	seems	counterintuitive,	but	here’s	what	happens:	When	the	apples	are	gently	heated,	their	pectin	is
converted	to	a	heat-stable	form	that	prevents	the	apples	from	becoming	mushy	when	cooked	further	in	the
oven.	(This	process	is	similar	to	the	phenomenon	described	in	concept	27,	where	precooking	helps	roasted
vegetables	retain	their	shape	and	texture.)	The	key	is	to	keep	the	temperature	of	the	apples	below	140
degrees	during	this	precooking	stage.	Rather	than	cooking	the	apples	in	a	skillet	(where	they	are	likely	to
become	too	hot),	it’s	best	to	gently	heat	the	apples	and	seasonings	in	a	large	covered	Dutch	oven.

	
PROBLEM

Raw	apples	shrink	away	from	crust.



	
SOLUTION

Precook	the	apples.



GLUTEN	MINIMIZATION	AT	WORK	
EMPANADAS
Empanadas	can	be	a	lot	of	work.	Many	recipes	braise	meat	for	hours	for	the
filling.	Then	you	have	to	make	the	dough,	which	can	be	tricky.	Then	comes	filling
and	shaping	all	those	little	empanadas,	followed	by	several	rounds	of	frying.	We
wanted	a	simpler	approach,	so	we	started	with	ground	beef	and	decided	to	bake
rather	than	fry.	We	decided	to	make	larger	empanadas	suitable	for	dinner	so
there	would	be	less	folding	and	shaping	involved.	But	what	about	the	dough?
Could	we	use	what	we	learned	about	pie	dough	to	make	this	dough	easier,	too?



BEEF	EMPANADAS
MAKES	12	EMPANADAS,	SERVING	4	TO	6

The	alcohol	in	the	dough	is	essential	to	the	texture	of	the	crust	and	imparts	no
flavor—do	not	substitute.	Masa	harina	can	be	found	in	the	international	foods
aisle	with	other	Latin	American	foods	or	in	the	baking	aisle	with	the	flour.	If	you
cannot	find	masa	harina,	replace	it	with	additional	all-purpose	flour	(for	a	total
of	4	cups).

FILLING
1				 slice	hearty	white	sandwich	bread,	torn	into	quarters
2				 tablespoons	plus	½	cup	low-sodium	chicken	broth
1				 pound	85	percent	lean	ground	beef
					 Salt	and	pepper
1				 tablespoon	olive	oil
2				 onions,	chopped	fine
4				 garlic	cloves,	minced
1				 teaspoon	ground	cumin
¼				 teaspoon	cayenne	pepper
				1⁄8 teaspoon	ground	cloves
½				 cup	minced	fresh	cilantro
2				 Hard-Cooked	Eggs,	chopped	coarse
				1⁄3 cup	raisins,	chopped	coarse
¼				 cup	pitted	green	olives,	chopped	coarse
4				 teaspoons	cider	vinegar

DOUGH
3				 cups	(15	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 cup	(5	ounces)	masa	harina
1				 tablespoon	sugar
2				 teaspoons	salt
12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	and	chilled
½				 cup	cold	vodka	or	tequila
½				 cup	cold	water
5				 tablespoons	olive	oil



1.	FOR	THE	FILLING:	Process	bread	and	2	tablespoons	broth	in	food
processor	until	paste	forms,	about	5	seconds,	scraping	down	sides	of	bowl	as
necessary.	Add	beef,	¾	teaspoon	salt,	and	½	teaspoon	pepper	and	pulse	until
mixture	is	well	combined,	6	to	8	pulses.
2.	Heat	oil	in	12-inch	nonstick	skillet	over	medium-high	heat	until

shimmering.	Add	onions	and	cook,	stirring	frequently,	until	beginning	to	brown,
about	5	minutes.	Stir	in	garlic,	cumin,	cayenne,	and	cloves;	cook	until	fragrant,
about	1	minute.	Add	beef	mixture	and	cook,	breaking	meat	into	1-inch	pieces
with	wooden	spoon,	until	browned,	about	7	minutes.	Add	remaining	½	cup	broth
and	simmer	until	mixture	is	moist	but	not	wet,	3	to	5	minutes.	Transfer	mixture
to	bowl	and	cool	for	10	minutes.	Stir	in	cilantro,	eggs,	raisins,	olives,	and
vinegar.	Season	with	salt	and	pepper	to	taste	and	refrigerate	until	cool,	about	1
hour.	(Filling	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days.)
3.	FOR	THE	DOUGH:	Pulse	1	cup	flour,	masa	harina,	sugar,	and	salt	in	food

processor	until	combined,	about	2	pulses.	Add	butter	and	process	until
homogeneous	and	dough	resembles	wet	sand,	about	10	seconds.	Add	remaining
2	cups	flour	and	pulse	until	mixture	is	evenly	distributed	around	bowl,	4	to	6
quick	pulses.	Empty	mixture	into	large	bowl.
4.	Sprinkle	vodka	and	water	over	mixture.	Using	hands,	mix	dough	until	it

forms	tacky	mass	that	sticks	together.	Divide	dough	in	half,	then	divide	each	half
into	6	equal	pieces.	Transfer	dough	pieces	to	plate,	cover	with	plastic	wrap,	and
refrigerate	until	firm,	about	45	minutes	or	up	to	2	days.
5.	TO	ASSEMBLE:	Adjust	oven	racks	to	upper-middle	and	lower-middle

positions,	place	1	rimmed	baking	sheet	on	each	rack,	and	heat	oven	to	425
degrees.	While	baking	sheets	are	preheating,	remove	dough	from	refrigerator.
Roll	out	each	dough	piece	on	lightly	floured	counter	into	6-inch	circle	about	1⁄8
inch	thick,	covering	each	dough	round	with	plastic	wrap	while	rolling	remaining
dough.	Place	about	1⁄3	cup	filling	in	center	of	each	dough	round.	Brush	edges	of
dough	with	water	and	fold	dough	over	filling.	Trim	any	ragged	edges.	Press
edges	to	seal.	Crimp	edges	of	empanadas	using	fork.	(Empanadas	can	be	made
through	step	5,	covered	tightly	with	plastic	wrap,	and	refrigerated	for	up	to	2
days.)
6.	TO	BAKE:	Drizzle	2	tablespoons	oil	over	surface	of	each	hot	baking	sheet,

then	return	to	oven	for	2	minutes.	Brush	empanadas	with	remaining	1	tablespoon
oil.	Carefully	place	6	empanadas	on	each	baking	sheet	and	cook	until	well
browned	and	crisp,	25	to	30	minutes,	switching	and	rotating	baking	sheets
halfway	through	baking.	Let	empanadas	cool	on	wire	rack	for	10	minutes	and



serve.

BEEF	EMPANADAS	WITH	CORN	AND	BLACK	BEAN	FILLING
Omit	raisins	and	cook	½	cup	frozen	corn	kernels	and	½	cup	rinsed	canned	black
beans	along	with	onions	in	step	2.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
As	all-in-one	meals	go,	empanadas—the	South	American	equivalent	of	Britain’s
pasties,	or	meat	turnovers—are	hard	to	beat:	a	moist,	savory	filling	encased	in	a
tender	yet	sturdy	crust.	But	most	recipes	for	empanadas	are	enormously	time-
consuming	and	fussy.	We	wanted	a	streamlined	recipe	that	would	be	hearty
enough	to	stand	as	a	centerpiece	on	our	dinner	table.	To	do	this,	we	enhance	our
ground	chuck	with	aromatics,	spices,	and	a	mixture	of	chicken	broth	and	bread,
and	make	a	few	Latin-inspired	changes	to	our	Foolproof	Pie	Dough.
MAKE	THE	FILLING	MOIST	Using	ground	beef	is	certainly	faster	than

braising	and	shredding	a	tough	cut,	but	ground	beef	can	be	dry.	Using	a	panade
(made	with	bread	and	chicken	broth),	which	helps	the	meat	to	retain	moisture,	is
the	key.	(For	more	on	panades,	see	concept	15.)
BUILD	FLAVOR	QUICKLY	Sautéing	the	onions	and	then	blooming	the

garlic	and	spices	(see	concept	33)	before	adding	the	beef	creates	a	flavor	base	in
just	minutes.	Punch	up	the	flavors	by	adding	olives,	raisins,	vinegar,	and	hard-
boiled	eggs—salty,	sweet,	tart,	and	rich—along	with	cilantro	for	a	fresh	herbal
hit.
USE	MASA	For	these	empanadas,	straight-up	pie	dough	wasn’t	right.	Using

our	Foolproof	Pie	Dough	as	is	makes	the	empanadas	seem	too	much	like	British
pasties.	Therefore,	we	replace	some	of	the	flour	with	masa	harina,	the
dehydrated	cornmeal	used	to	make	Mexican	tortillas	and	tamales.	Though
unusual,	the	cornmeal	provides	a	welcome	nutty	richness	and	rough-hewn
texture.	Even	better,	less	flour	means	less	protein	in	the	dough;	less	protein
means	we	don’t	need	shortening	(to	tenderize	the	dough)	and	can	switch	to	all
butter	for	better	flavor.	We	keep	the	vodka	(although	tequila	is	just	as	good).
ROLL,	FILL,	AND	CRIMP	To	assemble	the	empanadas,	first	divide	the

dough	in	half,	then	divide	each	half	into	six	equal	pieces.	Roll	each	piece	into	a
6-inch	round,	about	1⁄8	inch	thick.	Place	1⁄3	cup	of	filling	on	each	round,	and	brush
the	edges	with	water.	Fold	the	dough	over	the	filling,	and	then	crimp	the	edges
using	a	fork.
OVEN	“FRY”	Most	pastry	shells	(and	empanada	crusts)	receive	an	egg	wash

before	baking	for	a	lustrous	finish,	but	we	are	not	the	type	for	cosmetics	if	they
don’t	improve	the	flavor	and	texture.	For	a	crisp	crust,	we	brush	the	shells	with	a
little	oil	for	the	tops	to	boast	shine	and	crunch.	To	take	care	of	the	underside	of
the	empanadas,	we	preheat	the	baking	sheet	and	drizzle	the	surface	with	oil.	The
result	is	a	crust	so	shatteringly	crisp	that	it	almost	passes	for	fried,	giving	way	to



a	flavorful	filling.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	BEST	WAY	TO	PEEL	HARD-COOKED	EGGS

Shock	eggs	in	ice	water	to	cool	them	and	make	peeling	easier.

To	find	out	the	best	way	to	peel	hard-cooked	eggs,	we	hard-cooked	120	eggs	and	tested	every	egg-peeling
myth	and	old	wives’	tale	we	could	find.	Ultimately,	while	we	found	that	basics	like	peeling	under	running
water	and	starting	from	the	fat	end	(where	the	air	pocket	makes	it	easier	to	remove	the	first	bit	of	shell)
helped,	only	one	trick	guaranteed	a	nearly	perfect	peeled	egg—shocking	the	egg	in	ice	water	as	soon	as	it	is
done	cooking.

Here’s	why:	As	an	egg	cooks,	the	layer	of	protein	in	the	white	known	as	albumin	that’s	closest	to	the
outer	shell	will	slowly	bond	with	it.	A	hard-cooked	egg	left	at	room	temperature	or	even	under	cold	running
water	will	cool	relatively	slowly,	giving	the	hot	albumin	plenty	of	time	to	form	a	strong	bond	with	the
membrane	and	shell.	Shocking	the	egg	in	ice	water	quickly	halts	this	bonding	process.	In	addition,	the
sudden	cooling	causes	the	cooked	egg	white	to	shrink	and	pull	away	from	the	shell,	making	it	much	easier
to	remove	the	shell	without	damaging	the	white.	(For	more	on	hard-cooked	eggs,	see	concept	1.)



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
HUMIDITY	AND	FLOUR
Short-term	humidity	should	not	affect	flour.

Many	baking	experts	claim	that	baking	on	very	dry	or	very	humid	days	can	affect	flour.	We	were	a	little
skeptical	but	thought	we’d	run	some	tests	while	developing	our	recipe	for	Foolproof	Pie	Dough.	We
constructed	a	sealed	humidity-controlled	chamber	in	which	we	could	simulate	various	types	of	weather.	We
made	pie	crusts	at	relative	humidities	of	at	least	85	percent	(more	humid	than	New	Orleans	in	the	wet
season)	and	below	25	percent	(drier	than	Phoenix	in	midsummer	and	the	average	air-conditioned	office),
leaving	the	lid	to	the	flour	container	open	for	eight	hours	beforehand.	We	found	that	over	the	course	of	the
test,	the	flour’s	weight	varied	by	less	than	0.5	percent	between	the	two	samples,	and	after	being	baked,	the
crusts	were	indistinguishable.

If	an	occasional	humid	day	doesn’t	make	a	difference,	what	about	long-term	exposure	to	excess
humidity?	According	to	King	Arthur	Flour	Company,	flour	held	in	its	paper	packing	bag	(even	unopened)
can	gain	up	to	5	percent	of	its	weight	in	water	after	several	months	in	a	very	humid	environment.	At	this
level,	humidity	might	affect	baked	goods.	But	this	problem	is	easily	avoided	by	transferring	flour	to	an
airtight	container	(preferably	one	wide	enough	to	accommodate	a	1-cup	measure)	as	soon	as	you	get	home.



CONCEPT	45

Less	Protein	Makes	Tender	Cakes,
Cookies
As	we	learned	in	concept	41,	too	much	gluten	development	can	make	quick
breads	tough.	The	solution	is	to	mix	the	batter	as	little	as	possible	to	minimize
gluten	development.	But	this	doesn’t	work	for	drier	mixtures,	such	as	cookie
dough.	And	in	other	recipes	it	may	not	minimize	gluten	development
sufficiently.	Here,	the	solution	starts	with	the	choice	of	flour.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
While	a	muffin	or	quick	bread	can	have	some	chew,	a	yellow	cake	should	be
really	tender.	Likewise,	while	chewiness	is	fine	in	many	cookies,	it	is	out	of
place	in	shortbread,	which	should	have	a	melt-in-the-mouth	texture.	In	order	to
create	super-tender	cakes	and	cookies,	you	need	to	start	with	less	protein.	Less
protein	means	a	reduction	in	the	production	of	gluten,	which	is	what	gives	cakes,
cookies,	and	breads	their	structure,	and	which	in	large	amounts	can	produce	a
tough	end	product.	Many	cake	recipes	depend	on	specially	milled	cake	flour,
which	contains	about	one-third	less	protein	than	all-purpose	flour.	Other	recipes
rely	on	simple	techniques	to	effectively	lower	the	protein	content	of	all-purpose
flour.
All-purpose	flour	has	a	relatively	high	protein	content	of	10	to	12	percent,

depending	on	the	brand.	(The	protein	content	of	King	Arthur	all-purpose	flour	is
about	11.7	percent	while	Pillsbury	and	Gold	Medal	both	contain	about	10.5
percent.)	Bread	flours,	which	are	designed	to	produce	a	lot	of	gluten,	necessary
to	create	chewy	rustic	breads,	have	even	more	protein,	generally	12	to	14
percent.	Cake	flour	has	just	6	to	8	percent	protein.	(See	“Flour	101.”)
Cake	flour	is	made	from	soft	winter	wheat,	using	the	inner	core	of	the

endosperm,	which	is	easier	to	mill	into	a	very	finely	granulated	flour.	It	feels
finer	than	all-purpose	flour	and	this	means	it	can	absorb	fat	and	liquid	more
easily	than	all-purpose	flour,	which	is	made	from	a	mix	of	hard	spring	wheat	and
soft	winter	wheat.	Soft	winter	wheat	is	higher	in	starch	and	lower	in	protein	and
therefore	has	less	of	an	ability	to	form	gluten.
In	addition	to	containing	less	protein,	cake	flour	is	traditionally	bleached	with

dry	bleaches,	such	as	benzoyl	peroxide	and	chlorine	gas,	so	that	the	starches	in
the	flour	can	absorb	greater	amounts	of	liquid	and	fat	and	form	thicker	batters.
Thicker	batters	hold	more	air	bubbles	during	baking,	producing	cakes	with	a
higher	volume	and	finer	crumb.	Chlorine	also	weakens	gluten,	helping	to
produce	a	softer,	more	tender	crumb.	While	bleaching	results	in	a	finer	crumb,
some	people	can	taste	an	off-flavor	when	bleached	flour	is	used,	owing	to	the
residual	chemicals.
A	few	years	ago	King	Arthur	introduced	unbleached	cake	flour.	This	well-

known	Vermont	miller	developed	a	proprietary	technique	to	mimic	the	moisture-
grabbing	abilities	of	bleached	cake	flour	without	the	use	of	any	chemicals.	In	our
kitchen	tests,	we	found	that	their	naturally	oxidized,	unbleached	cake	flour
performed	just	as	well	as	classic	bleached	cake	flour,	with	no	chemical	aftertaste.



If	you	have	a	choice,	we	recommend	buying	unbleached	cake	flour.	That	said,
most	recipes	that	call	for	cake	flour	rely	on	so	much	butter	and	sugar	that	it	is
very	hard	to	detect	any	off-flavor	from	the	bleaching—you	have	to	be	looking
for	it.



BREAD	FLOUR	VS.	CAKE	FLOUR



	
BREAD	FLOUR	Bread	flour	has	a	good	deal	of	protein	and	less	starch.	It	is	designed	to	form	more	gluten,



which	is	necessary	when	baking	chewy	breads.



	
CAKE	FLOUR	Cake	flour	is	higher	in	starch,	and	lower	in	protein.	When	used	in	baking,	it	has	less	of	an



ability	to	form	gluten	than	the	protein-heavy	bread	flour.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
We	wanted	to	illustrate	the	importance	of	using	lower-protein	flour	for	tender
baked	goods	so	we	did	the	unthinkable:	We	made	three	batches	of	our	Fluffy
Yellow	Layer	Cake,	substituting	an	equal	weight	of	bread	flour	for	the	cake	flour.
We	also	baked	off	three	more	according	to	the	recipe	and	had	tasters	taste	them
side	by	side.	Finally,	we	performed	a	simple	stress	test	by	cutting	2	by	8-inch
planks	from	each	cake,	suspending	them	between	two	4-ounce	ramekins,	and
noting	the	point	at	which	they	cracked	under	their	own	weight.



THE	RESULTS
Tasters	admitted	that	this	was	one	of	the	easiest	taste	tests	they’d	been	asked	to
perform.	Everyone	quickly	fingered	the	sample	made	with	bread	flour,	noting	its
unpleasant,	tough,	resilient	texture.	In	contrast,	the	sample	made	with	cake	flour
was	tender	and	easily	melted	in	the	mouth.	The	stress	test	confirmed	our	tasters’
perceptions—the	bread	flour	cake	easily	supported	its	own	weight	for	30
minutes	(and	likely	would	have	lasted	longer	if	we’d	bothered	to	wait),	while	the
sample	with	cake	flour	buckled	and	crumbled	in	less	than	five	minutes.



THE	TAKEAWAY
This	goes	to	show	that	paying	attention	to	the	protein	content	of	flour	is	an
important	step	toward	minimizing	gluten	development	and	creating	super-tender
baked	goods.
After	all,	bread	flour	has	between	12	and	14	percent	protein,	while	cake	flour

logs	in	at	only	6	to	8	percent	protein.	Substituting	bread	for	cake	flour
significantly	ups	the	amount	of	protein,	and	therefore	the	strength	of	the	gluten
network	in	the	finished	cake.	No	wonder	the	Fluffy	Yellow	Layer	Cake	made
with	bread	flour	was	far	from	tender.



THE	EFFECT	OF	PROTEIN	LEVELS	ON	CAKE

	
BREAD	FLOUR

The	cake	made	with	high-protein	bread	flour	was	tough	and	resilient.	It	supported	its	own	weight	for	30
minutes.

	
CAKE	FLOUR

The	cake	made	with	low-protein	cake	flour	was	incredibly	tender.	It	crumbled	under	its	own	weight	within
five	minutes.



	
PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
WHY	BLEACH	FLOUR?

Bleaching	quickly	removes	the	yellow	color	from	flour,	makes	its	proteins	less	likely	to	form
gluten,	and	helps	its	starch	absorb	more	liquid.

We	generally	prefer	unbleached	flour	in	our	baked	goods.	But	what	is	bleaching	and	why	is	it	done?	When
flour	is	first	milled,	it	has	a	yellowish	cast	that	some	consumers	find	unappealing.	Within	a	few	months	of
milling,	however,	the	yellow	pigments,	or	carotenoids,	in	all-purpose	flour	naturally	whiten.	Because	it	is
expensive	to	naturally	“age”	flour,	some	producers	expedite	the	process	chemically.	In	flours	labeled
“bleached,”	benzoyl	peroxide	or	chlorine	gas	has	likely	been	used	to	fade	the	yellow	color.	Bleaching	can
leave	a	faint	off-taste	that	you	can	pick	up	in	really	simple	baked	goods,	such	as	biscuits.	Bleaching	also
alters	the	protein	and	starch	structure	of	the	flour,	making	the	proteins	less	likely	to	form	tough	gluten,	and
the	starch	more	able	to	absorb	more	liquid.	These	traits	are	desirable	in	tender	baked	goods	such	as	cakes	or
biscuits.



PROTEIN	REDUCTION	AT	WORK	
CAKES
When	making	cakes	that	should	be	tender	and	delicate,	using	cake	flour	is	an
easy	way	to	reduce	the	protein	content	in	the	batter	and	thus	minimize	gluten
production.



FLUFFY	YELLOW	LAYER	CAKE	WITH	CHOCOLATE	FROSTING
SERVES	10	TO	12

Bring	all	the	ingredients	to	room	temperature	before	beginning	this	recipe.	Be
sure	to	use	cake	pans	with	at	least	2-inch-tall	sides.	This	frosting	may	be	made
with	milk,	semisweet,	or	bittersweet	chocolate;	we	prefer	a	frosting	made	with
milk	chocolate	for	this	recipe.	Cool	the	chocolate	to	between	85	and	100	degrees
before	adding	it	to	the	butter	mixture.

CAKE
2½				 cups	(10	ounces)	cake	flour
1¼				 teaspoons	baking	powder
¼				 teaspoon	baking	soda
¾				 teaspoon	salt
1¾				 cups	(12¼	ounces)	granulated	sugar
1				 cup	buttermilk,	room	temperature
10				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	cooled
3				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
3				 large	eggs,	separated,	plus	3	large	yolks,	room	temperature
					 Pinch	cream	of	tartar

FROSTING
20				 tablespoons	(2½	sticks)	unsalted	butter,	softened	(68	degrees)
1				 cup	(4	ounces)	confectioners’	sugar
¾				 cup	(2¼	ounces)	Dutch-processed	cocoa
					 Pinch	salt
¾				 cup	light	corn	syrup
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
8				 ounces	milk,	bittersweet,	or	semisweet	chocolate,	melted	and	cooled

1.	FOR	THE	CAKE:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to
350	degrees.	Grease	two	9-inch	round	cake	pans,	line	with	parchment	paper,
grease	parchment,	and	flour	pans.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,	salt,
and	1½	cups	sugar	together	in	large	bowl.	In	medium	bowl,	whisk	together



buttermilk,	melted	butter,	oil,	vanilla,	and	egg	yolks.
2.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	egg	whites	and	cream	of	tartar	on

medium-low	speed	until	foamy,	about	1	minute.	Increase	speed	to	medium-high
and	whip	whites	to	soft	billowy	mounds,	about	1	minute.	Gradually	add
remaining	¼	cup	sugar	and	whip	until	glossy,	stiff	peaks	form,	2	to	3	minutes.
Transfer	to	bowl	and	set	aside.
3.	Add	flour	mixture	to	now-empty	mixer	bowl.	With	mixer	on	low	speed,

gradually	pour	in	butter	mixture	and	mix	until	almost	incorporated	(a	few	streaks
of	dry	flour	will	remain),	about	15	seconds.	Scrape	down	bowl,	then	beat	on
medium-low	speed	until	smooth	and	fully	incorporated,	10	to	15	seconds.
4.	Using	rubber	spatula,	stir	one-third	of	whites	into	batter,	then	add	remaining

two-thirds	of	whites	and	gently	fold	into	batter	until	no	white	streaks	remain.
Divide	batter	evenly	between	prepared	pans,	smooth	tops	with	rubber	spatula,
and	gently	tap	pans	on	counter	to	release	air	bubbles.
5.	Bake	cakes	until	toothpick	inserted	in	center	comes	out	clean,	20	to	22

minutes.	Let	cakes	cool	in	pans	on	wire	rack	for	10	minutes.	Remove	cakes	from
pans,	discard	parchment,	and	let	cool	completely,	about	2	hours,	before	frosting.
(Cooled	cakes	can	be	wrapped	tightly	in	plastic	wrap	and	kept	at	room
temperature	for	up	to	1	day.	Wrapped	tightly	in	plastic,	then	aluminum	foil,
cakes	can	be	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.	Defrost	cakes	at	room	temperature	before
unwrapping	and	frosting.)
6.	FOR	THE	FROSTING:	Process	butter,	sugar,	cocoa,	and	salt	in	food

processor	until	smooth,	about	30	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	as	needed.	Add
corn	syrup	and	vanilla	and	process	until	just	combined,	5	to	10	seconds.	Scrape
down	bowl,	then	add	chocolate	and	process	until	smooth	and	creamy,	10	to	15
seconds.	(Frosting	can	be	kept	at	room	temperature	for	up	to	3	hours	before
frosting	cake	or	refrigerated	for	up	to	3	days.	If	refrigerated,	let	stand	at	room
temperature	for	1	hour	before	using.)
7.	TO	ASSEMBLE	THE	CAKE:	Line	edges	of	cake	platter	with	4	strips	of

parchment	paper	to	keep	platter	clean.	Place	1	cake	layer	on	prepared	platter.
Place	about	1½	cups	frosting	in	center	of	cake	layer	and,	using	large	spatula,
spread	in	even	layer	right	to	edge	of	cake.	Place	second	cake	layer	on	top,
making	sure	layers	are	aligned,	then	frost	top	in	same	manner	as	first	layer,	this
time	spreading	frosting	until	slightly	over	edge.	Gather	more	frosting	on	tip	of
spatula	and	gently	spread	icing	onto	side	of	cake.	Smooth	frosting	by	gently
running	edge	of	spatula	around	cake	and	leveling	ridge	that	forms	around	top
edge,	or	create	billows	by	pressing	back	of	spoon	into	frosting	and	twirling



spoon	as	you	lift	away.	Carefully	pull	out	pieces	of	parchment	from	beneath	cake
before	serving.	(Assembled	cake	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	1	day.	Bring	to
room	temperature	before	serving.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Box	mixes	are	famous	for	engineering	cakes	with	ultra-light	texture.	We	set	out
to	make	an	even	fluffier	cake—one	without	chemicals	and	additives.	Chiffon
cakes	are	especially	weightless,	springy,	and	moist.	But	unlike	butter	cakes,	they
are	too	light	to	stand	up	to	a	serious	slathering	of	frosting.	We	decided	to	blend
the	two	types	of	cake.	To	do	this,	we	use	whipped	egg	whites,	buttermilk,	and	a
combination	of	fats	for	the	cake.	For	the	frosting,	we	use	a	hefty	amount	of
cocoa	powder	to	keep	it	tasting	like	chocolate,	and	a	bit	of	corn	syrup	to	keep	it
glossy	and	smooth.
KNOW	HOW	BOXED	MIXES	WORK	Boxed	mixes	have	defined	the	way

many	of	us	look	at	yellow	layer	cakes.	These	mixes	rely	on	a	number	of
chemicals	to	create	volume	and	tenderness.	Emulsifiers	like	mono-and
diglycerides	improve	the	effectiveness	of	the	leaveners	so	you	can	get	a	taller,
fluffier	cake.	Hydrogenated	fat	guarantees	tenderness	because	it’s	100	percent	fat
while	butter	is	only	80	percent	fat	(it	also	contains	water,	which	promotes	gluten
development).	And	cake	mixes	rely	on	food	colorings,	too.	Don’t	expect	real
eggs	to	do	this.	(See	“Putting	the	Yellow	in	Yolks,”	that	follows.)	Our	goal	was
to	create	more	height	and	tenderness	with	natural	ingredients.
MAKE	AN	EGG	FOAM	While	reverse	creaming	(see	concept	47)	can	create

a	tender	cake,	it	will	not	create	a	tall,	fluffy	cake.	For	that,	we	realized	we
needed	to	adapt	a	technique	used	in	cakes	such	as	angel	food	and	chiffon,	which
rely	on	egg	foams	for	their	height.	We	use	the	standard	butter-cake	ingredients
but	combine	them	by	the	method	used	to	make	chiffon	cake—combine	the	dry
ingredients,	combine	the	wet	ingredients,	mix	the	dry	and	wet	together,	then	fold
in	whipped	eggs	whites.	(This	is	basically	the	quick-bread	method,	with	the
added	step	of	whipping	the	egg	whites	and	folding	them	into	the	batter	at	the
end.)	This	method	gives	us	a	light,	delicate	cake	with	just	enough	heft	to	stand
up	to	a	slathering	of	frosting.
USE	TWO	FATS	A	cake	made	with	all	butter	was	fluffy,	but	it	didn’t	have

the	moisture	we	wanted.	We	know	that	oil,	even	more	than	butter,	can	be	a	key
factor	in	the	moisture	level	of	a	cake.	(Butter	contains	between	16	and	18
percent	water,	which	can	evaporate	in	the	oven	and	leave	a	cake	dry.)	But	after
testing	a	combination	of	both	types	of	fat,	we	found	that	10	tablespoons	of	butter
plus	3	tablespoons	of	oil	keeps	our	butter	flavor	intact	and	improves	the
moistness	of	the	cake.
BAKE	WITH	BUTTERMILK	We	began	testing	this	cake	with	milk	but

found	that	switching	milk	for	buttermilk	produced	a	crumb	that	was	slightly



porous	and	so	fine	it	was	almost	downy.	The	buttermilk’s	tang	also	brings	a	new
flavor	dimension	to	our	cake.	(But	by	adding	acidic	buttermilk,	we	need	to
replace	some	of	the	baking	powder	with	baking	soda	to	ensure	an	even	rise.	See
concept	42.)
ADD	SUGAR	With	the	addition	of	vegetable	oil,	our	cake	was	moist,	but

could	it	be	more	soft	and	tender?	Sugar	is	well	known	for	increasing	tenderness
in	cakes	by	attracting	and	bonding	with	water,	thus	preventing	the	water	from
hydrating	the	proteins	in	the	flour.	With	less	liquid	available	to	them,	fewer
proteins	are	able	to	link	together,	resulting	in	weaker	gluten.	Adding	an
additional	½	cup	of	sugar	did	the	trick.
DON’T	FORGET	COCOA	POWDER	We	wanted	a	simple	frosting	with

butter,	confectioners’	sugar	(used	because	it	dissolves	better	than	granulated	and
keeps	frosting	smooth),	and	melted	chocolate.	We	added	cocoa	powder	for	more
oomph.	The	cocoa	powder	remains	undetectable,	except	for	its	rich	flavor.	This
is	because	the	cocoa	butter	crystals	in	cocoa	powder	blend	with	the	fat	in	butter
to	coat	and	lubricate	particles	of	cocoa	powder,	helping	to	mask	any	grittiness.
(See	concept	50.)
CORN	SYRUP	IS	KEY	Even	confectioners’	sugar	gives	frosting	a	slightly

gritty	texture—though	it	dissolves	more	easily	than	granulated	sugar,	there	just
isn’t	much	liquid	in	a	butter	frosting.	We	replace	some	of	the	confectioners’
sugar	with	corn	syrup	to	help	dissolve	the	sugar.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
PUTTING	THE	YELLOW	IN	YOLKS
Bright	yellow	yolks	have	everything	to	do	with	a	hen’s	diet.

As	we	developed	the	recipe	for	our	Fluffy	Yellow	Layer	Cake,	we	were	surprised	by	the	lack	of	any	real
yellow	color	in	the	cake.	A	closer	look	at	the	standard	supermarket	eggs	we	were	using	provided	a	clue:	The
yolks	were	all	relatively	pale.	When	we	compared	them	with	yolks	from	free-range	eggs	bought	fresh	at	the
farmers’	market,	the	contrast	was	striking.	The	yolks	were	much	darker.	What	accounts	for	the	difference	in
color?	It	all	boils	down	to	the	hens’	diet.	Bright	golden	yellow	yolks	show	that	the	hens	are	well	supplied
with	carotenoids.	These	substances	are	found	in	a	wide	range	of	plants	that	a	true	free-range	hen	could	find
merely	by	pecking	around	the	farmyard.

Cakes	made	with	light	and	dark	yolks	actually	tasted	the	same,	the	difference	was	merely	aesthetic.

	
FARM-FRESH



	
MASS-PRODUCED



CHIFFON	CAKE
SERVES	12

If	your	tube	pan	has	a	removable	bottom,	you	do	not	need	to	line	it	with
parchment.	Serve	this	cake	as	is	or	dust	with	confectioners’	sugar.

1½				 cups	(10½	ounces)	sugar
1				1⁄3 cups	(51⁄3	ounces)	cake	flour
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	salt
7				 large	eggs	(2	whole,	5	separated),	room	temperature
¾				 cup	water
½				 cup	vegetable	oil
1				 tablespoon	vanilla	extract
½				 teaspoon	almond	extract
½				 teaspoon	cream	of	tartar

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.
Line	bottom	of	16-cup	tube	pan	with	parchment	paper	but	do	not	grease.	Whisk
sugar,	flour,	baking	powder,	and	salt	together	in	large	bowl.	Whisk	in	eggs	and
yolks,	water,	oil,	vanilla,	and	almond	extract	until	batter	is	just	smooth.
2.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	egg	whites	and	cream	of	tartar	on

medium-low	speed	until	foamy,	about	1	minute.	Increase	speed	to	medium-high
and	whip	until	stiff	peaks	form,	3	to	4	minutes.	Using	large	rubber	spatula,	fold
whites	into	batter,	smearing	any	stubborn	pockets	of	egg	white	against	side	of
bowl.
3.	Pour	batter	into	prepared	pan,	smooth	top	with	rubber	spatula,	and	gently

tap	pan	on	counter	to	release	air	bubbles.
4.	Bake	cake	until	skewer	inserted	in	center	comes	out	clean,	55	minutes	to	1

hour	5	minutes.	If	cake	has	prongs	around	rim	for	elevating	cake,	invert	pan	on
them.	If	not,	invert	pan	over	neck	of	bottle	or	funnel	so	that	air	can	circulate	all
around	it.	Let	cake	cool	completely,	about	2	hours.
5.	Run	knife	around	edge	of	cake	to	loosen,	then	gently	tap	pan	upside	down

on	counter	to	release	cake.	Peel	off	parchment,	turn	cake	right	side	up	onto
serving	platter,	and	serve.	(Cake	can	be	stored	at	room	temperature	for	up	to	2



days	or	refrigerated	for	up	to	4	days.)

MOCHA-NUT	CHIFFON	CAKE
Substitute	¾	cup	brewed	espresso	or	strong	coffee	for	water	and	omit	almond

extract.	Add	½	cup	finely	chopped	toasted	walnuts	and	1	ounce	unsweetened
grated	chocolate	to	batter	before	folding	in	whites.

LEMON	OR	LEMON-COCONUT	CHIFFON	CAKE
Substitute	½	teaspoon	baking	soda	for	baking	powder,	decrease	water	to	2⁄3	cup

and	vanilla	to	1	teaspoon,	and	omit	almond	extract.	Add	3	tablespoons	grated
lemon	zest	plus	2	tablespoons	juice	(3	lemons)	along	with	vanilla	in	step	1.	(For
Lemon-Coconut	Chiffon	Cake,	also	add	¾	cup	sweetened	shredded	coconut,
coarsely	chopped,	to	batter	before	folding	in	whites.)

ORANGE	OR	CRANBERRY-ORANGE	CHIFFON	CAKE
Substitute	2	tablespoons	grated	orange	zest	plus	¾	cup	orange	juice	(2

oranges)	for	water.	Decrease	vanilla	to	1	teaspoon	and	omit	almond	extract.	(For
Cranberry-Orange	Chiffon	Cake,	also	add	1	cup	minced	cranberries	and	½	cup
finely	chopped	toasted	walnuts	to	batter	before	folding	in	whites.)

CHOCOLATE	MARBLE	CHIFFON	CAKE
Combine	¼	cup	cocoa	and	2	tablespoons	packed	dark	brown	sugar	in	small
bowl,	then	stir	in	3	tablespoons	boiling	water	and	mix	until	smooth.	Follow
recipe	as	directed,	dividing	batter	equally	into	2	separate	bowls	at	end	of	step	2.
Mix	scant	½	cup	batter	from	1	bowl	into	cocoa	mixture,	then	partially	fold
mixture	back	into	same	bowl	(so	that	you	have	1	bowl	of	white	batter	and	one	of
chocolate	batter).	Sift	3	tablespoons	flour	over	chocolate	batter	and	continue	to
fold	until	just	mixed.	Pour	half	the	white	and	then	half	the	chocolate	batter	into
the	pan;	repeat.	Do	not	tap	pan	on	counter	before	baking.	Bake	as	directed.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Like	the	Hollywood	stars	of	the	1920s	who	were	the	first	to	taste	Harry	Baker’s
secret-recipe	cakes	at	the	Brown	Derby,	we	were	delighted	by	the	uniquely	light
yet	full	richness	and	deep	flavor	of	this	American	invention,	which	came	to	be
known	as	the	chiffon	cake.	With	the	airy	height	of	angel	food	cake	(from	using
whipped	egg	whites)	and	the	richness	of	pound	cake	(from	incorporating	egg
yolks	and	oil),	this	cake	seemed	like	a	win-win.	And	by	tweaking	the	original
General	Mills	recipe,	decreasing	the	flour,	increasing	the	egg	yolks,	and
whipping	only	some	of	the	egg	whites,	we	succeeded	in	making	it	one.
KNOW	THE	HISTORY	The	chiffon	cake	is	a	cross	between	angel	food	and

pound	cake.	It	is	huge,	high,	and	light	as	a	feather,	but	also	tender	and	moist,
qualities	that	huge,	high	cakes	typically	lack.	Chiffon	cake	was	invented	by
Henry	Baker,	a	Los	Angeles	insurance	salesman	turned	caterer	who	had	been
wholesaling	fudge	from	the	kitchen	of	the	apartment	that	he	shared	with	his
aging	mother,	in	1927.	When	the	cake	became	a	featured	attraction	at	the	Brown
Derby,	then	the	restaurant	of	the	stars,	Baker	converted	a	spare	room	into	his
top-secret	bakery,	with	12	tin	hotplate	ovens,	and	personally	baked	42	cakes	a
day.	The	cakes	sold	for	a	remarkable	two	dollars	each	to	prestigious	hostesses
and	the	MGM	and	RKO	studio	commissaries.
Baker	kept	his	recipe	a	secret	for	20	years.	Finally,	having	been	evicted	from

his	apartment,	and	fearing	memory	loss,	Baker	sold	the	recipe	to	General	Mills.
There	ensued	considerable	testing,	but	with	only	a	couple	of	minor	changes	to
the	technique	and	a	new	name—“chiffon	cake”—the	cake	appeared	before	the
American	public	in	a	1948	pamphlet	called	“Betty	Crocker	Chiffon,”	containing
14	recipes	and	variations	in	addition	to	umpteen	icings,	fillings,	serving	ideas,
and	helpful	hints.	It	was	an	instant	hit	and	became	one	of	the	most	popular	cakes
of	the	time.
TINKER	WITH	A	CLASSIC	We	tried	the	original	1920s	recipe	and	found	it

too	dry	and	cottony.	Using	cake	flour,	with	its	lower	amount	of	protein	and
therefore	less	gluten,	is	key,	but	this	recipe	also	simply	needs	less	flour.	We
reduce	the	amount	of	flour	used	and	add	an	extra	egg	yolk	to	help	make	up	for
the	reduction	in	the	structure	of	the	cake.	We	also	whip	only	some	of	the	egg
whites,	adding	the	rest	as	is,	to	keep	the	structure	without	causing	the	cake	to
spill	over	the	top	of	the	pan.
BEAT	THOSE	WHITES	In	the	original	recipe	the	directions	for	beating	the

egg	whites	read,	“Whip	until	whites	form	very	stiff	peaks.	They	should	be	much
stiffer	than	for	angel	food	or	meringue.	DO	NOT	UNDERBEAT.”	These



instructions,	with	their	anxiety-inducing	capitalized	words,	are	well	taken.	If	the
whites	are	not	very	stiff,	the	cake	will	not	rise	properly	and	the	bottom	will	be
heavy,	dense,	wet,	and	custardlike.	Better	to	overbeat	than	underbeat.	In	fact,	if
you	overwhip	the	egg	whites	and	they	end	up	dry	and	“blocky,”	you	can	simply
smudge	and	smear	any	stubborn	clumps	with	the	flat	side	of	the	spatula	to	break
them	up	without	worrying	about	deflating	the	beaten	whites,	as	you	would	when
making	an	angel	food	cake.	The	cream	of	tartar	(see	concept	21)	helps	create	an
especially	stable	egg	foam.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
FLOUR	SWAP

Gold	Medal	and	King	Arthur	flours	have	different	protein	levels.

For	the	sake	of	standardization,	we	develop	all	of	our	baking	recipes	requiring	all-purpose	flour	with	Gold
Medal,	the	best-selling	brand	in	the	United	States.	The	number-two	flour	brand,	Pillsbury,	has	the	same
protein	content	as	Gold	Medal	(about	10.5	percent),	and	we’ve	found	that	it	performs	on	par	with	Gold
Medal.	However,	we	know	many	of	our	readers	keep	King	Arthur	in	the	pantry.	King	Arthur	all-purpose
flour	contains	11.7	percent	protein—2	percent	more	than	Gold	Medal.	Protein	affects	gluten	development:
The	more	protein	there	is,	the	more	gluten	will	be	created	during	mixing	and	kneading.	Despite	the	small
difference,	can	the	two	brands	be	used	interchangeably?

It	depends	on	what	you’re	baking.	In	tests	of	recipes	with	relatively	little	gluten	development,	such	as
cookies,	muffins,	and	biscuits,	both	flours	produced	virtually	identical	batches.	But	in	bread	recipes
specifically	engineered	by	the	test	kitchen	to	use	all-purpose	flour	(not	bread	flour)	to	create	a	tender
crumb,	such	as	sandwich	bread	and	challah,	the	switch	mattered.	The	extra	protein	in	King	Arthur	produced
more	gluten	when	the	dough	was	kneaded,	leading	to	loaves	that	were	gummy	and	rubbery	in	comparison
to	loaves	made	from	Gold	Medal.	After	a	few	tests,	we	found	an	easy	fix	to	bread	recipes	made	with	all-
purpose	flour:	Replacing	1	tablespoon	of	flour	per	cup	with	1	tablespoon	of	cornstarch	made	King	Arthur
behave	just	like	Gold	Medal.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BAKING	WITH	COLD	EGGS

In	basic	cakes,	cold	eggs	are	fine.	Finicky	cakes	need	’em	warm.

Cake	recipes	often	call	for	room-temperature	eggs,	which	incorporate	into	the	batter	more	readily	than	cold
eggs.

We	wondered,	though,	if	the	difference	between	room-temperature	and	cold	eggs	was	so	great	that	it
could	actually	ruin	a	basic	cake	recipe.	To	find	out,	we	conducted	a	blind	tasting	of	two	yellow	cakes:	one
made	with	room-temperature	eggs,	the	other	with	eggs	pulled	straight	from	the	refrigerator.	The	cake
prepared	with	cold	eggs	produced	a	slightly	thicker	batter	and	took	five	minutes	longer	to	bake.	The	cake
made	with	room-temperature	eggs	had	a	slightly	finer,	more	even	crumb,	but	the	cold-egg	cake	was	entirely
acceptable.	Overall,	tasters	strained	to	detect	differences	between	the	two	cakes,	so	it’s	fine	to	use	cold	eggs
in	most	basic	cake	recipes.

However,	cold	eggs	can	cause	problems	in	finicky	cakes,	such	as	angel	food,	chiffon,	and	pound	cake,
which	rely	on	air	incorporated	into	the	beaten	eggs	as	a	primary	means	of	leavening.	In	these	cases,	we
found	that	cold	eggs	didn’t	whip	nearly	as	well	as	room-temperature	eggs	and	the	cakes	didn’t	rise	properly.
As	a	result,	these	cakes	were	too	dense	when	made	with	cold	eggs.

To	quickly	warm	whole	eggs,	place	them	in	a	bowl	and	cover	them	with	hot—but	not	boiling—tap	water
for	five	minutes.	Since	it	is	easier	to	separate	eggs	when	they	are	cold,	eggs	can	be	separated	first	and
allowed	to	warm	up	while	the	remaining	ingredients	are	assembled.	If	necessary,	the	whites	or	yolks	can	be
placed	in	a	bowl	nestled	within	another	bowl	filled	with	warm	water	to	speed	up	the	process.



PROTEIN	REDUCTION	AT	WORK	
COOKIES	AND	BARS
Using	cake	flour	is	one	way	to	reduce	the	protein	level	in	cookies	and	bars.	But
there	are	other	options,	especially	for	cookies	where	a	crumbly,	sandy	texture	is
key.



CLASSIC	BROWNIES
MAKES	24	BROWNIES

Be	sure	to	test	for	doneness	before	removing	the	brownies	from	the	oven.	If
underbaked	(the	toothpick	has	batter,	not	just	crumbs,	clinging	to	it),	the
brownies	will	have	a	dense	and	gummy	texture;	if	overbaked	(the	toothpick
comes	out	completely	clean),	the	brownies	will	be	dry	and	cakey.	To	melt	the
chocolate	in	a	microwave,	heat	it	at	50	percent	power	for	two	minutes.	Stir	the
chocolate,	add	the	butter,	and	continue	heating	until	melted,	stirring	once	every
additional	minute.

1¼				 cups	(5	ounces)	cake	flour
¾				 teaspoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	salt
6				 ounces	unsweetened	chocolate,	chopped	fine
12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	6	pieces
2¼				 cups	(15¾	ounces)	sugar
4				 large	eggs
1				 tablespoon	vanilla	extract
1				 cup	pecans	or	walnuts,	toasted	and	chopped	coarse	(optional)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Make
foil	sling	by	folding	2	long	sheets	of	aluminum	foil	so	that	they	are	as	wide	as	13
by	9-inch	baking	pan	(one	13-inch	sheet	and	one	9-inch	sheet).	Lay	sheets	of	foil
in	pan	perpendicular	to	one	another,	with	extra	foil	hanging	over	edges	of	pan.
Push	foil	into	corners	and	up	sides	of	pan,	smoothing	foil	flush	to	pan.	Grease
foil	and	set	aside.
2.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	and	salt	in	medium	bowl	until	combined;	set

aside.
3.	Melt	chocolate	and	butter	in	medium	heatproof	bowl	set	over	saucepan	of

barely	simmering	water,	stirring	occasionally,	until	smooth.	Off	heat,	gradually
whisk	in	sugar.	Add	eggs,	1	at	a	time,	whisking	after	each	addition,	until
thoroughly	combined.	Whisk	in	vanilla.	Add	flour	mixture	in	3	additions,
folding	with	rubber	spatula	until	batter	is	completely	smooth	and	homogeneous.
4.	Transfer	batter	to	prepared	pan;	spread	batter	into	corners	of	pan	and



smooth	surface.	Sprinkle	toasted	nuts,	if	using,	evenly	over	batter.	Bake	until
toothpick	inserted	in	center	of	brownies	comes	out	with	few	moist	crumbs
attached,	30	to	35	minutes,	rotating	pan	halfway	through	baking.	Let	brownies
cool	in	pan	on	wire	rack	to	room	temperature,	about	2	hours.	Remove	brownies
from	pan	using	foil.	Cut	brownies	into	2-inch	squares	and	serve.	(Brownies	can
be	stored	at	room	temperature	for	up	to	3	days.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Chewy	and	chocolaty,	brownies	should	be	a	simple	and	utterly	satisfying	affair.
But	too	often,	brownies	are	heavy,	dense,	and	remarkably	low	on	chocolate
flavor.	We	wanted	old-fashioned	brownies	that	had	serious	chocolate	flavor.	To
get	that	tender	texture	and	delicate	chew,	we	shelved	the	all-purpose	flour	in
favor	of	cake	flour;	a	bit	of	baking	powder	further	lightened	the	crumb.	Getting
the	number	of	eggs	just	right	prevented	our	brownies	from	being	cakey	or	dry.
Plenty	of	unsweetened	chocolate	provided	maximum	chocolate	flavor.
USE	UNSWEETENED	CHOCOLATE	Ounce	for	ounce,	unsweetened

chocolate	has	more	chocolate	flavor	than	bittersweet	or	semisweet	chocolate
(which	are	one-third	to	one-half	sugar).	Using	a	hefty	amount	of	unsweetened
chocolate	gives	us	brownies	that	aren’t	too	sweet	but	have	profound	chocolate
notes.	A	big	dose	of	vanilla	(a	full	tablespoon)	helps	reinforce	the	chocolate
flavor.	(See	“Chocolate	101.”)
ADD	CAKE	FLOUR	Chocolate	contains	starch,	and	if	you’re	using	a	lot	of

chocolate	(which	we	do	here)	it	can	negatively	impact	the	texture	of	brownies.
Switching	from	the	usual	all-purpose	flour	to	cake	flour	(which	has	a	lower
protein	content)	makes	the	brownies	fine-textured	(not	gritty)	and	tender.	A	little
baking	powder	also	lightens	the	texture	a	bit	so	they	are	not	overly	dense	and
fudgy.
TOAST	THE	NUTS	If	we	mix	nuts	into	the	batter	before	baking	the

brownies,	they	steam	and	become	soft.	Sprinkling	the	nuts	on	top	just	before
baking	keeps	them	dry	and	crunchy;	toasting	them	first	makes	them	even
crunchier	while	also	enhancing	their	flavor.
DON’T	OVERBAKE	Chocolate	flavor	really	suffers	when	baked	goods	are

overbaked.	Using	a	325-degree	oven	ensures	even	baking	(the	edges	don’t	dry
out,	which	can	be	a	problem	when	making	a	large	tray	of	brownies,	as	we	are
here).	Also,	don’t	overbake	brownies—you	want	a	toothpick	to	come	out	of	the
brownies	with	a	few	moist	crumbs	still	attached.
MAKE	A	FOIL	SLING	To	make	it	easier	to	remove	brownies	from	the

baked	pan,	we	line	it	with	two	pieces	of	aluminum	foil,	which	are	greased.	Once
the	brownies	have	cooled,	use	the	foil	to	lift	the	entire	slab	onto	a	cutting	board;
remove	the	foil	and	cut	the	brownies	into	neat	squares.



BEST	SHORTBREAD
MAKES	16	WEDGES

Use	the	collar	of	a	springform	pan	to	form	the	shortbread	into	an	even	round.
Mold	the	shortbread	with	the	collar	in	the	closed	position,	then	open	the	collar,
but	leave	it	in	place.	This	allows	the	shortbread	to	expand	slightly	but	keeps	it
from	spreading	too	far.	The	extracted	round	of	dough	in	step	2	is	baked
alongside	the	rest	of	the	shortbread.	The	shortbread	will	keep	for	up	to	one	week.

½				 cup	(1½	ounces)	old-fashioned	rolled	oats
1½				 cups	(7½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
¼				 cup	cornstarch
				2⁄3 cup	(22⁄3	ounces)	confectioners’	sugar
½				 teaspoon	salt
14				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	chilled	and	cut	into	1⁄8-inch-thick	slices

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	450	degrees.	Pulse
oats	in	spice	grinder	or	blender	until	reduced	to	fine	powder,	about	10	pulses
(you	should	have	¼	to	1⁄3	cup	oat	flour).	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,
mix	oat	flour,	all-purpose	flour,	cornstarch,	sugar,	and	salt	on	low	speed	until
combined,	about	5	seconds.	Add	butter	to	dry	ingredients	and	continue	to	mix
until	dough	just	forms	and	pulls	away	from	sides	of	bowl,	5	to	10	minutes.
2.	Place	upside-down	(grooved	edge	should	be	at	top)	collar	of	9-or	9½-inch

springform	pan	on	parchment	paper–lined	baking	sheet	(do	not	use	springform
pan	bottom).	Press	dough	into	collar	in	even	½-inch-thick	layer,	smoothing	top
of	dough	with	back	of	spoon.	Place	2-inch	biscuit	cutter	in	center	of	dough	and
cut	out	center.	Place	extracted	round	alongside	springform	collar	on	baking	sheet
and	replace	cutter	in	center	of	dough.	Open	springform	collar,	but	leave	it	in
place.
3.	Bake	shortbread	for	5	minutes,	then	reduce	oven	temperature	to	250

degrees.	Continue	to	bake	until	edges	turn	pale	golden,	10	to	15	minutes	longer.
Remove	baking	sheet	from	oven;	turn	oven	off.	Remove	springform	pan	collar;
use	chef’s	knife	to	score	surface	of	shortbread	into	16	even	wedges,	cutting
halfway	through	shortbread.	Using	wooden	skewer,	poke	8	to	10	holes	in	each
wedge.	Return	shortbread	to	oven	and	prop	door	open	with	handle	of	wooden



spoon,	leaving	1-inch	gap	at	top.	Allow	shortbread	to	dry	in	turned-off	oven	until
pale	golden	in	center	(shortbread	should	be	firm	but	giving	to	touch),	about	1
hour.
4.	Transfer	baking	sheet	to	wire	rack;	let	shortbread	cool	to	room	temperature.

Cut	shortbread	at	scored	marks	to	separate	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Often	shortbread	turns	out	bland	and	chalky.	We	wanted	superlative	shortbread
with	an	alluring	tawny	brown	crumb	and	pure,	buttery	richness.	In	initial	tests,
we	tinkered	with	various	mixing	methods	and	found	that	reverse	creaming	(see
concept	47)—mixing	the	flour	and	sugar	before	adding	the	butter,	creating	less
aeration—yielded	the	most	reliable	results.	To	smooth	out	an	objectionable
granular	texture,	we	swapped	the	white	sugar	for	confectioners’	sugar.	To	curb
gluten	development,	we	replaced	some	of	our	flour	with	powdered	old-fashioned
oats.	Crisp	and	buttery,	our	shortbread	is	anything	but	bland.
MIX	WELL	At	its	simplest,	shortbread	contains	just	four	ingredients—flour,

sugar,	salt,	and	butter.	But	unlike	crisp	butter	cookies,	shortbread	should	have	an
ultra-fine,	sandy	texture.	It	needs	to	hold	together	while	still	being	tender	and
delicate.	In	traditional	recipes,	the	cold	butter	is	cut	into	the	dry	ingredients	as	if
making	pie	dough.	However,	we	found	that	beating	the	cold	butter	into	the	dry
ingredients	(a	method	called	reverse	creaming)	works	best.
USE	CONFECTIONERS’	SUGAR	Granulated	sugar	won’t	fully	dissolve	in

this	cookie	dough—there’s	not	enough	liquid,	not	even	an	egg.	Fine-textured
confectioners’	sugar	gives	shortbread	a	much	more	delicate	crumb.
PICK	OATS	AND	CORNSTARCH	The	small	amount	of	water	in	the	butter

activates	the	gluten	in	the	flour,	which	can	make	shortbread	tough.	Some	recipes
use	gluten-free	rice	flour	but	we	found	that	flavor	is	sacrificed.	Oats	contain	very
few	of	the	proteins	necessary	for	gluten	development,	plus	they	have	a	nice
flavor.	We	grind	the	oats	to	a	fine	meal	in	a	spice	grinder	or	blender	and	then	use
them	(along	with	some	cornstarch)	to	replace	some	of	the	flour.
GET	THE	RIGHT	SHAPE	When	baking	our	shortbread,	we	had	a	problem

with	spreading.	As	buttery	shortbread	bakes,	it	expands,	losing	its	shape	as	the
edges	flatten	out.	We	tried	baking	the	dough	in	a	traditional	shortbread	mold
with	½-inch-high	sides,	but	it	still	widened	into	an	amorphous	mass.	Needing	a
substantial	barrier	to	keep	its	edges	corralled,	we	use	a	springform	pan	collar.
First,	set	the	closed	collar	on	a	parchment-lined	baking	sheet,	then	pat	the	dough
into	it,	cut	a	hole	in	the	center	of	the	dough	with	a	2-inch	biscuit	cutter,	and	then
open	the	collar	to	give	the	cookie	about	half	an	inch	to	spread	out.
BAKE	HIGH,	THEN	LOW,	THEN	OFF	We	bake	our	shortbread	in	an	oven

that	is	off	for	far	longer	than	it	is	on.	After	all,	early	shortbread	was	made	by
leaving	the	dough	in	a	still-warm	oven	heated	only	by	dying	embers.	After
removing	the	springform	collar,	we	return	our	shortbread	to	a	turned-off	oven	for



an	hour	to	let	it	dry	out	and	finish.



CONCEPT	46

Creaming	Butter	Helps	Cakes	Rise
Classic	cake	recipes	begin	by	creaming	softened	butter	with	sugar.	Later,	the
eggs	and	flavorings	are	gradually	incorporated,	and	then	the	dry	ingredients	are
added,	alternating	with	the	milk.	The	goal	of	this	careful	process	is	to	ensure	that
the	ingredients	are	well	combined	and	aerated.	Creaming	is	the	first	and	perhaps
most	important	step	if	you	want	the	cake	to	rise	high	and	have	a	uniform	texture.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Creaming	butter	and	sugar	accomplishes	two	things.	First,	it	makes	the	butter
malleable,	allowing	other	ingredients	to	be	easily	blended	when	the	time	comes
to	add	them.	Second,	the	tiny	sugar	crystals	act	like	extra	beaters,	helping	to
incorporate	air	into	the	butter	as	it	is	creamed.	Filled	with	the	gas	produced	by
the	baking	powder	and	baking	soda,	these	tiny	pockets	of	air	expand	when
baked.	This	is	what	gives	a	cake	its	lift.
Butter	is	the	preferred	fat	for	cake	baking	because	it	is	able	to	form	“beta-

prime”	crystals	of	fat,	which	are	tiny	and	needlelike	and	necessary	for	trapping
and	holding	the	air	bubbles	whipped	inside.	But	beyond	that—butter	tastes	good.
It	is	the	choice	fat	because	of	its	flavor.	Modern	vegetable	shortening,	which	is
likewise	highly	effective	at	trapping	and	holding	air	bubbles,	does	not	impart
that	rich	taste.	Oil,	another	fat	commonly	found	in	the	kitchen,	is	not	often	used
in	cakes	that	need	to	be	leavened,	as	oils	cannot	hold	bubbles	when	whipped	like
a	solid	fat.	And,	finally,	lard	forms	much	larger	and	coarser	beta-crystals	than
butter	or	shortening	do.	These	crystals	are	not	effective	at	holding	air,	rendering
lard	unhelpful	when	trying	to	bake	fine-textured	cakes.
Though	the	act	of	creaming	butter	and	sugar	is	easy	in	itself,	it’s	important	to

pay	careful	attention	to	the	temperature	of	the	butter.	After	all,	you	can’t	cream
cold	butter.	It’s	too	firm	to	admit	any	air,	and	it	doesn’t	form	the	right	crystal
structure.	You	also	can’t	cream	warm	butter.	Once	the	butter	starts	to	melt,	which
happens	around	85	degrees,	it	likewise	won’t	hold	any	of	those	air	bubbles
because	all	the	crystals	have	melted.	So	what	temperature	is	ideal?
Butter	that	is	between	60	and	65	degrees	is	ready	for	creaming.	This	means

that	it	is	somewhat	softened	but	still	cool.	It	will	yield	to	slight	pressure	applied
by	your	finger	and	will	crack	when	pressed.	Since	beating	warms	up	the	butter,
we	factor	this	into	the	equation.	By	the	time	creaming	is	finished,	the	butter	will
have	risen	to	about	68	degrees	to	help	create	a	cake	batter	that	is	light	and	fluffy.
Proper	creaming	is	essential	in	recipes	without	chemical	leaveners	(like	pound

cake)	or	in	cakes	that	demand	a	tall	rise,	like	a	Bundt	cake.



WHEN	BUTTER	AND	SUGAR	ARE	COMBINED



	
CREAMED	When	butter	and	sugar	are	whipped	together,	tiny	air	bubbles	are	created	and	held	in	place	by



small	fat	crystals.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	the	importance	of	butter	temperature	when	creaming	butter	and
sugar	for	pound	cakes,	which	don’t	use	chemical	leaveners	to	help	incorporate
air	bubbles	and	provide	lift,	we	devised	a	simple	experiment.	We	made	eight
batches	of	our	Classic	Pound	Cake:	four	using	stand	mixers	and	four	using
hand-held	mixers.	For	half	of	these	recipes,	we	used	room-temperature	butter
(70	degrees)	and	for	the	other	half	we	used	cool	yet	still	pliable	butter	(60
degrees),	and	then	compared	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
Whether	prepared	with	a	stand	mixer	or	hand-held	mixer,	the	pound	cakes	made
with	room-temperature	butter	produced	soft,	slick	batter	that	looked	shiny	and
wet.	The	cakes	looked	flat	and	dense.	The	cakes	made	with	cool	butter	(and
either	a	stand	or	hand-held	mixer)	produced	a	batter	that	was	light,	fluffy,	and
off-white	in	color.	The	finished	cakes	were	nicely	domed.	Because	the
ingredients	were	the	same,	tasters	found	that	all	of	the	cakes	had	similar	flavor.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Temperature	matters.	When	butter	is	too	soft	during	creaming,	the	batter	will	be
unable	to	hold	any	of	the	air	bubbles	produced	when	whipped.	This	means	that
the	finished	product	will	be	flat	and	dense.
Butter	that	is	cool	(but	not	cold)	is	ideal.	When	creamed,	the	butter	retains	its

crystal	structure	as	the	sugar	becomes	incorporated,	supporting	the	addition	of
air	bubbles	created	by	the	combination	of	movement	and	the	small,	hard	sugar
crystals.	This	means	that	the	finished	cake	will	have	nice	lift	and	domed	shape.
This	holds	true	whether	you’re	using	a	stand	mixer	or	a	hand-held	mixer.
To	make	sure	that	your	butter	is	the	correct	temperature,	remove	it	from	the

fridge	and	leave	it	on	the	counter	for	30	minutes	to	one	hour.	If	you’re	in	hurry,
cut	the	butter	into	chunks,	place	the	chunks	in	the	mixing	bowl	you	plan	to	use,
and	wrap	a	warm	towel	around	the	bowl.	The	butter	should	be	softened	in	15	to
30	minutes.



SUCCESSFUL	CREAMING	IS	ALL	ABOUT	THE	BUTTER
TEMPERATURE

	



CREAMING	AT	WORK	
CAKES
The	key	to	successful	creaming	is	to	start	with	softened	but	still	cold	butter	that
is	about	60	degrees.	Beating	the	butter	with	some	sugar	helps	aerate	it	and	will
ensure	cakes	rise	nicely.



CLASSIC	POUND	CAKE
SERVES	8

The	butter	and	eggs	should	be	the	first	ingredients	prepared	so	they	have	a
chance	to	stand	at	room	temperature	and	lose	their	chill	while	the	oven	heats,
the	loaf	pan	is	greased	and	floured,	and	the	other	ingredients	are	measured.	The
test	kitchen’s	preferred	loaf	pan	measures	8½	by	4½	inches;	if	you	use	a	9	by	5-
inch	loaf	pan,	start	checking	for	doneness	five	minutes	earlier	than	advised	in
the	recipe.

16				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	16	pieces	and	chilled
3				 large	eggs	plus	3	large	yolks
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
½				 teaspoon	salt
1¼				 cups	(8¾	ounces)	sugar
1¾				 cups	(7	ounces)	cake	flour

1.	Place	butter	in	bowl	of	stand	mixer;	let	stand	at	room	temperature	for	20	to
30	minutes	to	soften	slightly	(butter	should	reach	no	more	than	60	degrees).
Using	dinner	fork,	beat	eggs,	yolks,	and	vanilla	in	4-cup	liquid	measuring	cup
until	combined.	Let	egg	mixture	stand	at	room	temperature	until	ready	to	use.
2.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.	Grease

and	flour	8½	by	4½-inch	loaf	pan.
3.	Fit	stand	mixer	with	paddle	and	beat	butter	and	salt	at	medium-high	speed

until	shiny,	smooth,	and	creamy,	2	to	3	minutes,	scraping	down	bowl	once.
Reduce	speed	to	medium	and	gradually	pour	in	sugar	(this	should	take	about	1
minute).	Once	all	sugar	is	added,	increase	speed	to	medium-high	and	beat	until
mixture	is	light	and	fluffy,	5	to	8	minutes,	scraping	down	bowl	once.	Reduce
speed	to	medium	and	gradually	add	egg	mixture	in	slow,	steady	stream	(this
should	take	1	to	1½	minutes).	Scrape	down	bowl,	then	beat	mixture	at	medium-
high	speed	until	light	and	fluffy,	3	to	4	minutes	(batter	may	look	slightly
curdled).	Remove	bowl	from	mixer	and	scrape	down	bowl.
4.	Sift	flour	over	butter-egg	mixture	in	3	additions,	folding	gently	with	rubber

spatula	until	combined	after	each	addition.	Scrape	along	bottom	of	bowl	to
ensure	batter	is	homogeneous.



5.	Pour	batter	into	prepared	pan	and	smooth	top	with	rubber	spatula.	Bake
cake	until	golden	brown	and	toothpick	inserted	in	center	comes	out	clean,	1	hour
10	minutes	to	1	hour	20	minutes.	Let	cake	cool	in	pan	on	wire	rack	for	15
minutes,	then	invert	cake	onto	wire	rack	and	turn	cake	right	side	up.	Let	cake
cool	completely	on	rack,	about	2	hours,	before	serving.	(Cake	can	be	stored	at
room	temperature	for	up	to	3	days.)

ALMOND	POUND	CAKE
Reduce	vanilla	to	1	teaspoon	and	add	1½	teaspoons	almond	extract	to	eggs

along	with	vanilla.	Sprinkle	2	tablespoons	sliced	almonds	over	surface	of	batter
just	before	baking.

POUND	CAKE	WITH	ORANGE	ESSENCE
Reduce	vanilla	to	1	teaspoon	and	add	1	tablespoon	grated	then	minced	orange

zest	to	mixer	bowl	just	after	adding	eggs	in	step	3.

CLASSIC	POUND	CAKE	IN	A	TUBE	PAN
Double	all	ingredients	and	substitute	greased	and	floured	16-cup	tube	pan	for

loaf	pan.	Bake	cake	at	350	degrees	for	15	minutes,	then	reduce	oven	temperature
to	325	degrees	and	continue	to	bake	until	cake	is	golden	brown	and	skewer
inserted	in	center	of	cake	comes	out	clean,	40	to	45	minutes.	Let	cake	cool	in
pan	on	wire	rack	for	30	minutes,	then	invert	cake	onto	wire	rack	and	turn	cake
right	side	up.	Let	cake	cool	completely	on	rack,	about	3	hours,	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
A	perfect	recipe	for	pound	cake	is	hard	to	find.	Good-looking	pound	cakes	tend
to	resemble	yellow	layer	cakes:	fluffy,	bouncy,	and	open-textured.	Those	that
taste	good	often	bake	up	as	flat	and	firm	as	bricks.	We	wanted	to	retool	this
classic	recipe	to	make	it	great-tasting	and	ultra-plush,	every	time.	The	first	key
was	starting	with	chilly	60-degree	butter,	and	making	sure	the	eggs	were	at	the
same	temperature.
CREAM	PROPERLY	Pound	cake	looks	so	humble	that	many	bakers	assume

it’s	simple	to	prepare.	The	recipe	dates	back	to	the	18th	century	and	originally
called	for	a	pound	each	of	flour,	sugar,	butter,	and	eggs.	Good	pound	cake	should
have	a	fine,	even	crumb	and	suedelike	texture.	Too	bad	many	recipes	produce
leaden	doorstops.	To	get	a	good	rise,	you	have	to	cream	the	butter	properly.
That’s	because	traditional	recipes	contain	no	leavener—all	the	rise	is	provided
by	air	incorporated	into	the	butter	and	the	eggs.	Modern	recipes	often	cheat	and
add	baking	powder.	Sure,	the	pound	cake	rises,	but	now	the	texture	is	too	light—
more	like	yellow	layer	cake	than	pound	cake.
START	WITH	EXTRA-COLD	BUTTER	Many	recipes	that	call	for

creaming	butter	start	with	softened	butter	(65	to	67	degrees).	Because	the	butter
in	this	recipe	needs	to	be	beaten	quite	a	long	time	(to	work	in	as	much	air	as
possible)	you	need	to	start	with	the	butter	at	a	lower	temperature—60	degrees	is
best.	For	best	results,	check	the	temperature	of	the	butter	with	an	instant-read
thermometer.
USE	CHILLY	EGGS	Even	when	the	butter	is	properly	creamed,	this	doesn’t

mean	success	is	guaranteed.	The	temperature	of	the	eggs	plays	a	role	as	well.
Too-warm	eggs	can	deflate	the	batter.	And	if	the	eggs	are	too	cold	or	added	too
quickly,	they	are	difficult	to	incorporate	and	the	air	is	knocked	out	of	the	butter
by	the	time	you	have	a	smooth	batter.	After	trial	and	error,	we’ve	found	that	60
degrees	is	also	the	perfect	temperature	for	the	eggs	in	this	recipe.	(See	“Baking
with	Cold	Eggs.”)
ADD	EGGS	SLOWLY	Most	cake	recipes	say	to	add	eggs	one	at	a	time,

mixing	well	and	scraping	the	bowl	after	each	addition.	Frankly,	the	pound	cake
never	worked	well	using	this	method.	The	delicate	batter	just	couldn’t	absorb	a
whole	egg	at	once	yet	retain	its	aeration.	Some	pound	cake	recipes	require	a
more	extreme	method—the	eggs	are	beaten	together	in	a	measuring	cup	then
slowly	dribbled	into	the	creamed	butter	and	sugar,	a	process	that	takes	up	to	five
minutes.	We	discovered	that	if	the	beaten	eggs	are	added	very	gradually,	they
can	be	incorporated	in	60	to	90	seconds,	as	long	as	the	mixture	is	beaten	a	few



additional	minutes	once	the	last	egg	is	added.	This	technique	results	in	batter	that
is	more	stable	and	produces	much	better	pound	cake	that	rises	higher	and	has	a
lighter	texture.	(See	“Add	Eggs	Slowly	to	Cake	Batters.”)
SIFT	THE	CAKE	FLOUR	Lower-protein	cake	flour	helps	create	a	pound

cake	that	is	tender.	Sifting	the	flour	over	the	batter	makes	it	easier	to	incorporate
the	flour.	(For	more	on	flour,	see	concept	45.)



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
LOAF	PAN	SIZES	REALLY	MATTER
For	a	well-domed	cake,	use	the	correct	size	of	loaf	pan.

Small	differences	in	loaf	pan	sizes	really	matter	when	making	pound	cake	as	well	as	quick	breads.	Use	a
pan	that’s	too	small	and	the	batter	will	rise	out	of	the	pan.	Use	a	pan	that’s	too	big	and	the	cake	will	bake	up
with	a	flat	top	and	the	crumb	will	be	dry.

The	fact	that	there’s	no	standard	size	for	a	loaf	pan	makes	all	of	this	more	important	(and	trickier)	than	it
seems.	“Standard”	loaf	pans	can	measure	as	small	as	8	by	4	inches	or	as	large	as	10	by	5	inches.	The	two
most	common	sizes	are	8½	by	4½	and	9	by	5.	Even	this	small	difference	in	size	can	affect	the	rise	and
appearance	of	your	baked	goods.

When	our	Classic	Pound	Cake	is	baked	in	the	pan	size	we	call	for,	8½	by	4½	inches,	the	cake	emerges
nicely	domed	with	the	classic	pound	cake	fissure	through	the	top.	But	bake	that	same	batter	in	a	slightly
larger	9	by	5-inch	pan	and	it	emerges	a	good	inch	shorter	and	with	a	flat	top.	Because	the	batter	has	more
room	to	spread	out	in	the	larger	pan,	it	also	bakes	up	a	bit	dry.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
THE	RIGHT	TIME	TO	SIFT

The	timing	of	when	you	sift	flour	(either	before	or	after	measuring)	can	make	a	noticeable
difference	in	the	finished	cake.

Does	it	really	matter	whether	you	sift	your	flour	before	you	measure	it	or	after?	In	a	word:	yes.	When	a
recipe	calls	for	“1	cup	sifted	flour,”	the	flour	should	be	sifted	before	measuring,	whereas	“1	cup	flour,
sifted”	should	be	sifted	after	measuring.	Here’s	why:	A	cup	of	flour	sifted	before	measuring	will	weigh	20
to	25	percent	less	than	a	cup	of	flour	sifted	after	measuring—a	difference	that	can	make	a	huge	impact	on
the	texture	of	finished	baked	goods.	The	best	way	to	make	sure	you’ve	got	the	right	amount	of	flour?	Weigh
it.
	
Type	of	flour:	All-Purpose
Weight	of	1	cup	unsifted:	5	ounces
Weight	of	1	cup	sifted:	4	ounces
	
Type	of	flour:	Cake
Weight	of	1	cup	unsifted:	4	ounces
Weight	of	1	cup	sifted:	3.25	ounces
	
Type	of	flour:	Bread
Weight	of	1	cup	unsifted:	5.5	ounces
Weight	of	1	cup	sifted:	4.5	ounces
	

	
JUST	RIGHT



	
TOO	LITTLE	FLOUR

The	cake	on	top	was	made	by	measuring	flour	by	weight	before	sifting,	as	the	recipe	directed.	The	one	on
the	bottom	was	made	by	measuring	flour	by	volume	after	sifting,	causing	us	to	use	20	percent	less	flour	by
weight	and	resulting	in	an	overly	wet,	dense	texture.



LEMON	BUNDT	CAKE
SERVES	12

It	is	important	to	pour	the	glaze	over	the	cake	after	it	has	cooled	for	just	10
minutes	and	is	still	warm.	Serve	this	cake	as	is	or	dress	it	up	with	lightly
sweetened	berries.	The	cake	has	a	light,	fluffy	texture	when	eaten	the	day	it	is
baked,	but	if	well	wrapped	and	held	at	room	temperature	overnight	its	texture
becomes	more	dense—like	that	of	pound	cake—the	following	day.

CAKE
3				 tablespoons	grated	lemon	zest	plus	3	tablespoons	juice	(3	lemons)
3				 cups	(15	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 teaspoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
1				 teaspoon	salt
¾				 cup	buttermilk
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
3				 large	eggs	plus	1	large	yolk,	room	temperature
18				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter	(2¼	sticks),	softened	but	still	cool	(60	degrees)
2				 cups	(14	ounces)	granulated	sugar

GLAZE
2–3				 tablespoons	lemon	juice
1				 tablespoon	buttermilk
2				 cups	(8	ounces)	confectioners’	sugar

1.	FOR	THE	CAKE:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position;	heat	oven
to	350	degrees.	Spray	12-cup	nonstick	Bundt	pan	with	baking	spray	with	flour.
Mince	lemon	zest	to	fine	paste	(you	should	have	about	2	tablespoons).	Combine
zest	and	lemon	juice	in	small	bowl;	set	aside	to	soften,	10	to	15	minutes.
2.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,	and	salt	in	large	bowl.	Combine

lemon	juice	mixture,	buttermilk,	and	vanilla	in	medium	bowl.	In	small	bowl,
gently	whisk	eggs	and	yolk	to	combine.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,
beat	butter	and	sugar	on	medium-high	speed	until	pale	and	fluffy,	about	3



minutes.	Reduce	speed	to	medium	and	add	half	of	eggs,	mixing	until
incorporated,	about	15	seconds.	Repeat	with	remaining	eggs	and	scrape	down
bowl.	Reduce	speed	to	low	and	add	flour	mixture	in	3	additions,	alternating	with
2	additions	of	buttermilk	mixture,	scraping	down	bowl	as	needed.	Give	batter
final	stir	by	hand.
3.	Scrape	batter	into	prepared	pan	and	smooth	top	with	rubber	spatula.	Bake

cake	until	top	is	golden	brown	and	skewer	inserted	in	center	comes	out	with	no
crumbs	attached,	45	to	50	minutes.	Let	cake	cool	in	pan	on	wire	rack	set	over
baking	sheet	for	10	minutes,	then	invert	cake	onto	rack.
4.	FOR	THE	GLAZE:	While	cake	is	baking,	whisk	2	tablespoons	lemon

juice,	buttermilk,	and	sugar	together	until	smooth,	adding	remaining	lemon	juice
gradually	as	needed	until	glaze	is	thick	but	still	pourable	(mixture	should	leave
faint	trail	across	bottom	of	mixing	bowl	when	drizzled	from	whisk).	Pour	half	of
glaze	over	warm	cake	and	let	cool	for	1	hour;	pour	remaining	glaze	evenly	over
top	of	cake	and	continue	to	cool	to	room	temperature,	at	least	2	hours,	before
serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Lemons	are	tart,	brash,	and	aromatic.	Why,	then,	is	it	so	hard	to	capture	their
assertive	flavor	in	a	straightforward	Bundt	cake?	The	flavor	of	lemon	juice	is
drastically	muted	when	exposed	to	the	heat	of	an	oven,	and	its	acidity	can	wreak
havoc	on	the	delicate	nature	of	baked	goods.	We	wanted	to	develop	a	Bundt	cake
with	potent	lemon	flavor	without	ruining	its	texture.	To	do	this,	we	cream	the
butter	well,	add	zest,	and	use	a	double	glaze.
START	WITH	1-2-3-4	Many	baking	recipes	are	based	on	simple	formulas,

mnemonic	tools	used	to	pass	down	recipes	through	the	generations.	Bundt	cakes
commonly	fall	into	the	1-2-3-4	cake	category:	1	cup	of	butter,	2	of	cups	sugar,	3
cups	of	flour,	4	eggs	(plus	1	cup	of	milk,	a	liquid	component	that	sets	both	layer
and	Bundt	cakes	apart	from	pound	cake).	We	follow	this	formula—almost.	We
increase	the	butter	by	2	tablespoons	and	replace	the	milk	with	buttermilk	for	a
lighter,	more	tender	crumb	and	a	nice,	mild	tang.
CREAM	THE	BUTTER	We	tried	to	create	a	recipe	that	eliminated	the	step

of	creaming	the	butter,	but	that	didn’t	work	and	gave	us	rubbery,	dense	cakes.
Creaming	is	indeed	necessary	to	achieve	a	light	and	even	crumb.	The	whipping
action	aerates	the	batter,	contributing	lightness	to	the	final	cake.	After	all,	the
Bundt	cake	must	be	tall,	almost	statuesque,	and	chemical	leaveners	need	all	the
help	they	can	get	from	properly	creamed	butter.
USE	LEMON	JUICE	SPARINGLY	Desperate	to	get	some	good	lemon

flavor	into	our	cake,	we	were	quickly	reminded	that	playing	with	acid	(as	in
lemon	juice)	is	no	casual	affair.	(Lemon	juice	has	a	pH	of	about	2.2	to	2.4,	even
lower	than	vinegar.)	Acids	interfere	with	the	formation	of	gluten,	the	protein
that’s	so	vital	to	a	cake’s	structure.	The	more	acidic	the	batter,	the	less	structure
in	the	cake,	making	the	cake	literally	fall-apart	tender.	But	fragile	is	not	what
we’re	going	for	here.	Instead,	we	harness	the	acid’s	gluten-weakening	tendency
to	produce	a	slightly	more	delicate	crumb.	A	modest	3	tablespoons	does	the
trick.
ADD	ZEST	FOR	BIG	LEMON	FLAVOR	To	really	get	the	lemon	flavor

into	our	cake,	we	use	zest	(just	the	yellow	part	of	the	peel;	the	white	pith	beneath
is	very	bitter	and	unpleasant).	Three	lemons’	worth	of	zest	gives	us	a	floral,
perfumed	lemon	flavor	that	does	not	go	so	far	as	to	remind	us	of	furniture	polish.
We	mince	the	grated	zest	and	then	steep	it	in	the	lemon	juice	so	that	its	long
stranded	texture	is	not	distracting	in	the	baked	cake.
PREPARE	THE	PAN	Baking	spray	works	well	in	our	Bundt	cake	pan.	The



uniformly	blended	flour-oil	mixture	makes	it	easy	to	achieve	an	even	coating,
and	the	more	solid	texture	of	baking	sprays	keeps	grease	from	pooling	in
crevices,	which	can	dull	the	ridges	of	a	Bundt	cake.	If	you	don’t	have	baking
spray,	a	mixture	of	1	tablespoon	of	flour	and	1	tablespoon	of	melted	butter	can
replace	it.	This	does	a	better	job	of	evenly	coating	the	pan	than	the	usual	method
of	coating	the	pan	with	softened	butter,	then	dusting	with	flour.	You	need
perfectly	even	coverage	in	order	to	ensure	that	the	cake	releases	from	the	Bundt
pan	and	no	bits	get	stuck	in	the	pan’s	crevices.
FINISH	WITH	A	DOUBLE	GLAZE	For	the	glaze,	we	first	tried	mixing

just	lemon	juice	and	confectioners’	sugar	but	found	that	it	was	too	sour	and
overwhelmed	the	delicate	flavor	of	the	cake.	Adding	zest	made	it	too	floral,
butter	only	muted	the	flavor,	but	buttermilk	did	the	trick.	Supplementing	some	of
the	sour	juice	with	the	more	mild	yet	tangy	buttermilk	smooths	out	the	flavor
without	dulling	the	brightness.	We	apply	the	first	round	of	glaze	while	the	cake
is	still	warm	so	it	will	melt	into	the	cake	and	then	dry	into	a	thin,	mottled	shellac.
We	reserve	half	of	the	glaze	for	use	once	the	cake	has	cooled.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
ALTERNATE	INGREDIENTS	WHEN	MAKING	CAKE

The	standard	method	of	alternating	dry	and	wet	ingredients	when	making	cakes	is	standard
for	a	good	reason.

The	mixing	method	for	classic	butter	cakes	is	to	first	cream	the	butter	and	sugar,	then	beat	in	the	eggs,	and
finally	add	the	flour	and	liquid	components	alternately,	beginning	and	ending	with	the	flour.	We	wondered
if	this	alternation	of	dry	and	wet	really	makes	a	difference	in	the	cake’s	texture	or	if	good	results	could	be
had	without	it	(and	without	the	extra	work).

To	find	out,	we	made	German	chocolate	cakes	and	yellow	cakes	using	four	mixing	methods:	(1)
following	the	standard	dry/wet	alternation	technique,	(2)	mixing	in	the	wet	ingredients	followed	by	the	dry,
(3)	mixing	in	the	dry	ingredients	followed	by	the	wet,	and	(4)	mixing	in	dry	and	wet	simultaneously.

The	worst	cakes	were	made	with	the	last	two	methods.	These	cakes	were	plagued	by	dark	spots,	large
holes,	and	uneven	crumbs	(coarse	in	some	patches,	fine	in	others)—all	signs	that	the	ingredients	had	not
been	properly	incorporated	into	the	batter.	Mixing	wet	ingredients	followed	by	dry	(method	2)	yielded
better	cakes	with	fewer	and	smaller	holes	and	more	tender	and	even	textures.	The	standard	dry/wet
alternation	technique	(method	1),	however,	made	superior	cakes.	They	had	far	fewer	and	smaller	holes	and
evenly	fine,	soft,	tender	textures.	There	are	good	reasons	why	this	cake-mixing	method	is	widely	practiced.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
ADD	EGGS	SLOWLY	TO	CAKE	BATTERS
The	speed	at	which	you	add	eggs	to	batters	makes	a	difference.

Looking	into	our	archives,	we	noticed	that	almost	all	of	our	cake	and	cookie	recipes	that	call	for	more	than
one	egg	either	add	them	one	at	a	time	or	premix	the	eggs	and	then	add	them	in	a	steady	stream.	We
wondered	why	this	extra	effort	is	involved	and	whether	it	is	necessary.	First,	we	made	a	batch	of	chocolate
chip	cookies.	When	the	two	eggs	in	the	recipe	were	added	one	at	a	time,	it	took	about	30	seconds	to
incorporate	each	into	the	creamed	butter	and	sugar,	compared	with	slightly	over	two	minutes	when	both
were	added	at	once.	While	the	difference	in	time	might	not	seem	significant,	the	difference	in	the	finished
cookies	was.	Eggs	added	one	at	a	time	led	to	cookies	that	were	thick	and	chewy;	eggs	added	all	at	once
produced	cookies	that	spread,	became	unevenly	shaped,	and	were	not	as	chewy.	We	encountered	similar
differences	with	a	Bundt	cake	and	a	pound	cake.	In	both	recipes,	when	the	eggs	were	added	together,	it	took
longer	to	incorporate	them	and	the	cakes	turned	out	denser	and	slightly	rubbery.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
LEMON	ANATOMY	101

Use	the	juice	and	zest;	leave	the	pith	behind.

What	is	the	best	source	of	lemon	flavor?	It	all	depends	on	the	context.	Lemon	juice	is	acidic	and	tart,	but
that	brightness	is	lost	when	exposed	to	heat;	it’s	best	used	uncooked.	(In	baked	items,	juice	provides
tenderness	only.)	Better	for	baking	is	the	thin,	yellow	layer	of	zest,	which	contains	floral	lemony	oils.	But
avoid	the	bitter	white	pith,	just	beneath	the	zest.

	



CONCEPT	47

Reverse	Cream	for	Delicate	Cakes
While	creaming	butter	and	sugar	(concept	46)	is	the	first	step	in	most	cake
recipes,	it’s	not	the	only	option.	In	recent	years,	another	technique	has	become
popular:	reverse	creaming.	This	method	is	our	choice	when	making	a	classic
yellow	layer	cake	and	many	kinds	of	holiday	cookies	because	it	minimizes	rise
and	yields	cakes	and	cookies	with	flat	tops,	which	are	perfect	for	glazing	or
decorating.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
While	creaming,	which	aerates	the	butter	and	sugar	and	helps	to	give	cakes	great
rise,	is	essential	in	pound	cakes	(no	leaveners	added)	and	in	statuesque	Bundt
cakes,	we	find	this	method	is	not	ideal	for	a	layer	cake.	This	is	because	layer
cake	recipes	always	contain	at	least	one	chemical	leavener,	and	so	getting	proper
rise	is	rarely	an	issue	at	all.	But	most	of	the	time	you	don’t	even	want	cake	layers
to	rise	all	that	much.	After	all,	layer	cakes	contain,	well,	layers,	often	multiple
layers,	which	are	sandwiched	by	thick	coats	of	frosting.	In	the	test	kitchen,	we
find	that	using	the	creaming	method	can	produce	layers	that	are	too	tall	with	a
crumb	that	is	too	coarse	and	open	to	support	the	layers	of	the	finished	cake.
Beating	all	that	air	into	the	butter	can	be	superfluous,	even	detrimental.
So	what	to	do?	We	prefer	to	“reverse”	the	process,	using	what	is	also	called

the	“two-stage	method.”	This	method	was	developed	by	General	Mills	and
Pillsbury	in	the	1940s	and	later	popularized	by	Rose	Levy	Beranbaum	in	her
seminal	book	The	Cake	Bible,	published	in	1988.	The	advent	of	chlorinated	cake
flour	and	modern	shortening	made	this	method	possible.
Soft,	low-protein	flour	cannot	absorb	as	much	liquid	as	high-protein	flours.

But	low-protein	flour	that	has	been	bleached	with	chlorine	can	hold	more	liquid
(see	concept	45).	And	bleached	cake	flour	is	essential	for	the	success	of	this
method	because	it	can	hold	more	water,	which	is	necessary	when	the	weight	of
the	sugar	exceeds	the	weight	of	the	flour.	This	method	of	mixing,	also	known	as
the	high-ratio	method	because	of	the	high	ratio	of	liquid	to	flour,	produces	a
more	velvety,	tender	crumb	compared	with	other	methods	of	mixing.
In	the	two-stage	method,	the	flour,	sugar,	baking	powder,	and	salt	are

combined	in	the	mixing	bowl	and	then	softened	butter	is	beaten	into	the	dry
ingredients,	one	piece	at	a	time,	before	the	milk	and	eggs	are	added	in	two
batches	(hence	the	“two-stage”	part	of	the	name).	In	the	test	kitchen,	however,
we	don’t	always	find	it	necessary	to	add	the	eggs	in	two	batches,	which	is	why
we	prefer	the	name	“reverse	creaming,”	highlighting	the	fact	that	the	flour	is
added	at	the	outset,	not	the	end	of	the	process.	The	key	element	of	this	technique
is	that	the	fat	in	the	softened	butter	(which	should	be	around	68	degrees)	coats
the	flour	and	therefore	minimizes	the	development	of	gluten	that	begins	when
the	liquid	is	added	(for	more	on	gluten,	see	concept	38).	But	just	as	important,
the	softened	butter	contains	fewer	fat	crystals	so	less	air	is	retained	within	the
batter,	which	translates	to	less	rise.
And	the	results?	Because	this	technique	does	not	highly	aerate	the	butter,	the



cake	layers	started	with	reverse	creaming	end	up	not	quite	as	tall	(perfect	for
layers	of	frosting).	Because	the	development	of	gluten	is	minimized	from	the
outset,	the	cakes	end	up	with	a	crumb	that	is	more	delicate	and	fine,	almost
velvety	smooth	and	tender,	reducing	the	risk	of	baking	a	tough	cake.	After	all,	in
creaming,	flour	and	milk	are	added	alternately	in	small	batches	at	the	end.	The
tendency	there	is	to	overbeat	the	batter	in	order	to	get	it	fully	incorporated,
resulting	in	an	excess	of	gluten	development.	The	final	addition	of	liquid	in
reverse	creaming	happens	quickly	and	requires	less	beating.
We	don’t	restrict	this	method	to	layer	cakes	alone.	Here	we	explore	the	use	of

this	alternating	technique	in	crumb	cakes,	which	need	to	support	a	layer	of
buttery	crumbs;	cupcakes,	which	can	stand	up	to	a	thick	filling	of	pastry	cream;
and	sugar	cookies	that	are	glazed.



CREAMING	VS.	REVERSE	CREAMING



	
CREAMING	When	cake	batters	begin	with	the	traditional	creaming	method,	there	are	significant	air



bubbles	incorporated	within,	and	a	relatively	strong	gluten	network.



	
REVERSE	CREAMING	When	batters	begin	with	reverse	creaming,	however,	there	are	very	few	air



bubbles	and	significantly	less	gluten	is	formed.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	determine	whether	the	mixing	method	matters	when	making	a	layer	cake	we
compared	a	simple	yellow	layer	cake	mixed	two	ways.	For	one	batch	we	used	the
straightforward	creaming	method;	the	other	we	reverse	creamed.	We	repeated
the	experiment	twice	and	examined	and	tasted	the	results.



THE	RESULTS
Holding	all	ingredients,	baking	time,	and	temperature	constant,	we	were	able	to
see	that	creaming	and	reverse	creaming	produce	very	different	products.	The
cakes	mixed	by	creaming	the	butter	and	sugar	together	first	were	springy	with	an
open,	coarse	crumb,	while	the	reverse-creamed	cakes	baked	up	extremely	tender
with	a	fine	crumb	and	soft,	cottony	interior.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Creaming	is	a	common	method	used	in	baking,	but	it’s	not	always	the	one	we
want.	Because	reverse	creaming	first	mixes	the	butter	with	the	flour,	the	fat	coats
the	wheat	proteins,	preventing	them	from	becoming	hydrated,	and	therefore
minimizing	the	development	of	gluten.	As	we	learned	in	concept	38,	gluten
forms	a	network	in	baked	goods,	giving	structure	and	holding	air	bubbles	within,
which	contributes	to	a	hefty	rise.	Without	the	development	of	gluten,	our
reverse-creamed	cake	did	not	have	as	much	air	trapped	within	as	it	baked,
resulting	in	a	cake	with	a	fine	rather	than	open	crumb.	The	lack	of	gluten
likewise	gives	the	reverse-creamed	cake	a	much	more	tender	feel	in	the	mouth.
Our	tasters	noticed	this	immediately.	This	is	why	reverse	creaming	is	our	go-to
method	when	tenderness	is	priority	number	one.
The	minimization	of	gluten	development	is	helpful	in	more	ways	than	one.

Layer	cakes	are	only	the	beginning.	We	also	choose	reverse	creaming	to	make
tender	but	sturdy	cupcakes	(see	Boston	Cream	Cupcakes).	The	denser	crumb
allows	the	cupcakes	to	hold	together	even	when	filled	with	pastry	cream.	They
can	be	eaten	by	hand,	without	crumbling.	Reverse	creaming	also	helps	us	to
make	butter	cookies	flat	enough	to	glaze	with	ease	(see	Glazed	Butter	Cookies).
After	all,	the	lack	of	leaveners	along	with	the	lack	of	air	bubbles	means	that
cookies	made	by	reverse	creaming	don’t	really	rise	as	they	bake	and	the	finished
cookies	have	flat,	even	tops.



MIXING	METHOD	MAKES	A	DIFFERENCE

	
CREAMING

More	rise	and	open	crumb

	
REVERSE	CREAMING
Less	rise	and	finer	crumb



REVERSE	CREAMING	AT	WORK	
CAKES
Our	Fluffy	Yellow	Layer	Cake	yields	an	extra-tall,	extra-tender	cake,	but	there	is
another	style—what	you	might	call	an	old-fashioned	layer	cake.	Tenderness	is
just	as	important,	but	the	cake	is	more	delicate	and	richer,	and	the	crumb	is
particularly	fine.



RICH,	TENDER	YELLOW	CAKE	WITH	BUTTERCREAM	FROSTING
SERVES	10	TO	12

Adding	the	butter	pieces	to	the	mixing	bowl	one	at	a	time	prevents	the	dry
ingredients	from	flying	up	and	out	of	the	bowl.

½				 cup	whole	milk,	room	temperature
4				 large	eggs,	room	temperature
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract

1¾				 cups	(7	ounces)	cake	flour
1½				 cups	(10½	ounces)	sugar
2				 teaspoons	baking	powder
¾				 teaspoon	salt
16				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	16	pieces	and	softened	(68	degrees)
1				 recipe	frosting	(recipes	follow)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Grease
two	9-inch	round	cake	pans,	line	with	parchment	paper,	grease	parchment,	and
flour	pans.	Whisk	milk,	eggs,	and	vanilla	together	in	small	bowl.
2.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	mix	flour,	sugar,	baking	powder,	and

salt	on	low	speed	until	combined.	Add	butter,	1	piece	at	a	time,	and	mix	until
only	pea-size	pieces	remain,	about	1	minute.
3.	Add	all	but	½	cup	milk	mixture,	increase	speed	to	medium-high,	and	beat

until	light	and	fluffy,	about	1	minute.	Reduce	speed	to	medium-low,	add
remaining	½	cup	milk	mixture,	and	beat	until	incorporated,	about	30	seconds
(batter	may	look	slightly	curdled).	Give	batter	final	stir	by	hand.
4.	Divide	batter	evenly	between	prepared	pans	and	smooth	tops	with	rubber

spatula.	Bake	cake	until	toothpick	inserted	in	centers	comes	out	with	few	crumbs
attached,	20	to	25	minutes.	Let	cakes	cool	in	pans	on	wire	rack	for	10	minutes.
Remove	cakes	from	pans,	discard	parchment,	and	let	cool	completely,	about	2
hours,	before	frosting.	(Cooled	cakes	can	be	wrapped	tightly	in	plastic	wrap	and
kept	at	room	temperature	for	up	to	1	day.	Wrapped	tightly	in	plastic,	then
aluminum	foil,	cakes	can	be	frozen	for	up	to	1	month.	Defrost	cakes	at	room
temperature	before	unwrapping	and	frosting.)
5.	TO	ASSEMBLE	THE	CAKE:	Line	edges	of	cake	platter	with	4	strips	of



parchment	paper	to	keep	platter	clean.	Place	1	cake	layer	on	prepared	platter.
Place	about	1½	cups	frosting	in	center	of	cake	layer	and,	using	large	spatula,
spread	in	even	layer	right	to	edge	of	cake.	Place	second	cake	layer	on	top,
making	sure	layers	are	aligned,	then	frost	top	in	same	manner	as	first	layer,	this
time	spreading	frosting	until	slightly	over	edge.	Gather	more	frosting	on	tip	of
spatula	and	gently	spread	icing	onto	side	of	cake.	Smooth	frosting	by	gently
running	edge	of	spatula	around	cake	and	leveling	ridge	that	forms	around	top
edge,	or	create	billows	by	pressing	back	of	spoon	into	frosting	and	twirling
spoon	as	you	lift	away.	Carefully	pull	out	pieces	of	parchment	from	beneath	cake
before	serving.	(Assembled	cake	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	1	day.	Bring	to
room	temperature	before	serving.)



VANILLA	BUTTERCREAM	FROSTING
MAKES	ABOUT	4	CUPS

The	whole	eggs,	whipped	until	airy,	give	this	buttercream	a	light,	satiny-smooth
texture	that	melts	on	the	tongue.

4				 large	eggs,	room	temperature
1				 cup	(7	ounces)	sugar
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
					 Pinch	salt
1				 pound	unsalted	butter	(4	sticks),	each	stick	cut	into	quarters	and	softened	(68	degrees)

1.	Combine	eggs,	sugar,	vanilla,	and	salt	in	bowl	of	stand	mixer	and	set	bowl
over	saucepan	containing	1	inch	of	barely	simmering	water.	Whisking	gently	but
constantly,	heat	mixture	until	thin	and	foamy	and	registers	160	degrees.
2.	Fit	stand	mixer	with	whisk	and	whip	egg	mixture	on	medium-high	speed

until	light,	airy,	and	cooled	to	room	temperature,	about	5	minutes.	Reduce	speed
to	medium	and	add	butter,	1	piece	at	a	time.	(After	adding	half	of	butter,
buttercream	may	look	curdled;	it	will	smooth	with	additional	butter.)	Once	all
butter	is	added,	increase	speed	to	high	and	whip	until	light,	fluffy,	and
thoroughly	combined,	about	1	minute.	(Frosting	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	5
days.	Let	frosting	sit	at	room	temperature	until	softened,	about	2	hours,	then,
using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	on	medium	speed	until	smooth,	2	to	5
minutes.)

RICH	COFFEE	BUTTERCREAM	FROSTING
Omit	vanilla.	Substitute	3	tablespoons	instant	espresso	powder	in	3

tablespoons	warm	water	and	beat	dissolved	coffee	into	buttercream	after	butter
has	been	added.



RICH	CHOCOLATE	CREAM	FROSTING
MAKES	ABOUT	3	CUPS

1½				 cups	heavy	cream
16				 ounces	semisweet	chocolate,	chopped	fine
				1⁄3 cup	corn	syrup
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

Place	chocolate	in	heatproof	bowl.	Bring	heavy	cream	to	boil	in	small
saucepan	over	medium-high	heat,	then	pour	over	chocolate.	Add	corn	syrup	and
let	sit,	covered,	for	5	minutes.	Whisk	mixture	gently	until	smooth,	then	stir	in
vanilla.	Refrigerate	for	1	to	1½	hours,	stirring	every	15	minutes,	until	mixture
reaches	spreadable	consistency.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	a	yellow	cake	that	was	moist	and	tender,	with	a	rich,	buttery,	eggy
flavor	and	a	fine,	even	crumb.	Those	cakes	made	using	the	classic	creaming
method—beating	the	butter	and	sugar	together,	then	adding	the	flour	and	milk-
egg	mixture	alternately	to	the	bowl—gave	us	disappointing	results.	Instead	of
melting	in	your	mouth,	these	cakes	were	crumbly,	sugary,	and	a	little	hard.	And
they	didn’t	taste	of	butter	and	eggs,	as	all	plain	cakes	ought	to,	but	instead
seemed	merely	sweet.	We	found	that	reverse	creaming—combining	all	the	dry
ingredients	in	the	mixing	bowl,	then	adding	the	butter,	followed	by	the	milk	and
eggs,	in	stages—gave	us	the	tender	texture	and	fine	crumb	we	were	after.
START	WITH	CAKE	FLOUR	For	a	delicate	cake,	you	must	start	with	cake

flour	(see	concept	45).	Because	cake	flour	contains	less	protein	than	all-purpose
flour,	it	produces	cake	layers	with	less	gluten,	which	are	quite	tender.
CHANGE	1-2-3-4	Most	yellow	cake	recipes	start	with	a	basic	formula	of	1

cup	of	butter,	2	cups	of	sugar,	3	cups	of	flour,	and	4	eggs—called	a	1-2-3-4	cake.
After	testing,	we	found	that	the	butter	and	egg	amounts	were	fine,	but	we	ended
up	using	less	sugar	and	flour,	and	we	reduced	the	milk,	too.	The	end	result	is	a
richer	cake	with	a	buttery	flavor.	More	fat	also	makes	the	cake	especially	tender.
LINE	PANS	WITH	PARCHMENT	To	ensure	easy	removal	of	the	cake

layer,	we	grease	the	pans,	line	them	with	rounds	of	parchment,	then	grease	and
flour	the	parchment.	The	paper	makes	it	easy	to	flip	the	cake	layers	out	of	the
pan	just	10	minutes	after	they	come	out	of	the	oven—no	need	to	worry	about	the
hot	layers	falling	apart.	The	paper	peels	right	off	and	you	can	continue	to	cool
the	layers	to	room	temperature	before	frosting	them.
MAKE	A	CLASSIC	BUTTERCREAM	Sure,	you	could	mix	butter	and

confectioners’	sugar	and	use	that	as	a	base	for	the	frosting,	but	this	kind	of	quick
frosting	has	a	slightly	gritty	texture	and	very	sweet	flavor.	We	prefer	to	make	a
classic	buttercream	with	whole	eggs.	The	eggs,	sugar,	and	vanilla	are	heated	to
160	degrees	(to	make	the	eggs	safe	and	unlock	their	thickening	properties)	and
then	whipped	until	airy	before	the	softened	butter	is	beaten	into	the	mixture.	The
resulting	buttercream	has	a	satiny	texture.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
OUT	OF	CIRCULATION

For	even	baking,	place	cakes	in	the	oven	side	by	side.

What’s	the	best	way	to	get	a	two-layer	cake	to	bake	evenly?	We	baked	our	Rich,	Tender	Yellow	Cake	layers
in	three	positions:	side	by	side	on	one	rack;	on	two	racks	with	one	pan	directly	above	the	other;	and	on	two
racks	with	one	pan	on	the	top	left	of	the	oven	and	the	other	on	the	lower	right.	Only	the	cakes	on	the	same
rack	baked	evenly.

The	reason	is	convection	(see	concept	1)—the	hot	air	currents	moving	around	the	oven.	In	bottom-
heating	ovens,	when	cakes	are	stacked,	the	bottom	one	acts	as	a	barrier,	creating	hot	air	currents	that	flow
up	and	over	the	top	cake.	The	result	is	an	overcooked	top	cake	and	an	undercooked	bottom	cake.	Results	are
also	uneven	in	rear-heating	ovens	or	those	with	top	and	bottom	elements.	But	when	cakes	are	baked	side	by
side,	hot	air	circulates	evenly	no	matter	how	your	oven	heats.

	
STACKED	=	UNEVEN

Cakes	stacked	above	each	other	disrupt	heat	flow	in	the	oven.

	
SIDE	BY	SIDE	=	EVEN



Cakes	kept	side	by	side	bake	up	evenly	and	brown	nicely.



NEW	YORK–STYLE	CRUMB	CAKE
SERVES	8	TO	10

Don’t	be	tempted	to	substitute	all-purpose	flour	for	the	cake	flour,	as	doing	so
will	make	a	dry,	tough	cake.	If	you	can’t	find	buttermilk,	you	can	substitute	an
equal	amount	of	plain	low-fat	yogurt.	When	topping	the	cake,	take	care	to	not
push	the	crumbs	into	the	batter.	This	recipe	can	be	easily	doubled	and	baked	in	a
13	by	9-inch	baking	pan.	If	doubling,	increase	the	baking	time	to	about	45
minutes.

CRUMB	TOPPING
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted	and	still	warm
				1⁄3 cup	(21⁄3	ounces)	granulated	sugar
				1⁄3 cup	packed	(21⁄3	ounces)	dark	brown	sugar
¾				 teaspoon	ground	cinnamon
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
1¾				 cups	(7	ounces)	cake	flour

CAKE
1¼				 cups	(5	ounces)	cake	flour
½				 cup	(3½	ounces)	granulated	sugar
¼				 teaspoon	baking	soda
¼				 teaspoon	salt
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	6	pieces	and	softened	(68	degrees)
				1⁄3 cup	buttermilk
1				 large	egg	plus	1	large	yolk
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
					 Confectioners’	sugar

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	upper-middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	325	degrees.
Cut	16-inch	length	of	parchment	paper	or	aluminum	foil	and	fold	lengthwise	to
7-inch	width.	Spray	8-inch	square	baking	dish	with	vegetable	oil	spray	and	fit
parchment	into	dish,	pushing	it	into	corners	and	up	sides,	allowing	excess	to
hang	over	edges	of	dish.



2.	FOR	THE	TOPPING:	Whisk	butter,	granulated	sugar,	brown	sugar,
cinnamon,	and	salt	together	in	medium	bowl	to	combine.	Add	flour	and	stir	with
rubber	spatula	or	wooden	spoon	until	mixture	resembles	thick,	cohesive	dough;
set	aside	to	cool	to	room	temperature,	10	to	15	minutes.
3.	FOR	THE	CAKE:	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	mix	flour,	sugar,

baking	soda,	and	salt	on	low	speed	to	combine.	With	mixer	running,	add	butter	1
piece	at	a	time.	Continue	beating	until	mixture	resembles	moist	crumbs,	with	no
visible	butter	chunks	remaining,	1	to	2	minutes.	Add	buttermilk,	egg	and	yolk,
and	vanilla	and	beat	on	medium-high	speed	until	light	and	fluffy,	about	1	minute,
scraping	down	bowl	as	needed.
4.	Transfer	batter	to	prepared	pan.	Using	rubber	spatula,	spread	batter	into

even	layer.	Break	apart	crumb	topping	into	large	pea-size	pieces	and	spread	in
even	layer	over	batter,	beginning	with	edges	and	then	working	toward	center.
Bake	until	crumbs	are	golden	and	toothpick	inserted	in	center	of	cake	comes	out
clean,	35	to	40	minutes.	Let	cool	on	wire	rack	for	at	least	30	minutes.	Remove
cake	from	pan	by	lifting	parchment	overhang.	Dust	with	confectioners’	sugar
just	before	serving.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	original	crumb	cake	was	brought	to	New	York	by	German	immigrants;
sadly,	the	bakery-fresh	versions	have	all	but	disappeared.	Most	modern	recipes
use	butter	cake	rather	than	the	traditional	yeast	dough,	which	made	our	job	that
much	easier.	The	essence	of	this	cake	is	the	balance	between	the	tender,	buttery
cake	and	the	thick,	lightly	spiced	crumb	topping.	Starting	with	our	favorite
yellow	cake	recipe,	we	realized	we	needed	to	reduce	the	amount	of	butter	or	the
richness	would	be	overwhelming.	We	wanted	our	crumb	topping	to	be	soft	and
cookielike,	not	a	crunchy	streusel,	so	we	mixed	granulated	and	brown	sugars
and	melted	the	butter	for	a	doughlike	consistency,	flavoring	the	mixture	only
with	cinnamon.	Broken	into	little	pieces	and	sprinkled	over	the	cake	batter,	our
topping	held	together	during	baking	and	made	a	thick	layer	of	moist	crumbs
with	golden	edges	that	didn’t	sink	into	the	cake.
CUT	BUTTER	AND	ADD	BUTTERMILK	Our	Rich,	Tender	Yellow	Cake

is	a	good	base	for	this	crumb	cake.	But	with	all	those	buttery	crumbs,	we	found
we	wanted	a	slightly	less	rich	cake	as	the	base.	As	a	result,	we	cut	back	on	the
butter	and	added	more	milk	to	keep	the	cake	from	becoming	dry,	but	we	then
found	that	the	batter	became	too	thin	to	support	the	heavy	crumbs.	We
compensated	by	substituting	buttermilk	for	milk.	We	also	left	out	an	egg	white
so	the	cake	wouldn’t	be	rubbery.
USE	CAKE	FLOUR	Even	though	the	cake	layer	has	to	support	a	heavy	layer

of	crumbs,	don’t	think	about	switching	to	all-purpose	flour.	Yes,	the	cake	layer
will	be	sturdy	but	it	will	also	be	dry.
MAKE	CRUMBS,	NOT	STREUSEL	For	really	big	crumbs	you	have	to

make	a	dough	and	then	break	that	dough	apart	by	hand.	Melted	butter,	two	kinds
of	sugar,	and	flour	are	essential.	You	need	more	butter	than	you	do	when	making
streusel—the	overall	effect	is	more	like	cookie	dough,	with	more	substance	than
streusel	and	less	sweetness.
SHAPE	AND	DISTRIBUTE	THE	CRUMBS	Using	both	hands,	break	apart

the	crumb	dough,	rolling	the	broken	dough	between	your	thumb	and	forefinger
to	form	crumbs	about	the	size	of	large	peas.	Continue	until	all	the	dough	has
been	broken	down	into	crumbs.	Sprinkle	the	crumbs	evenly	over	the	cake	batter,
breaking	apart	any	larger	chunks.	Spread	the	crumbs	from	the	outside	of	the	cake
toward	the	center	so	as	to	not	make	the	center	too	heavy.
BAKE	IN	LOW	OVEN	Reducing	the	oven	temperature	to	a	gentle	325

degrees,	lengthening	the	baking	time,	and	placing	the	cake	in	the	upper	part	of



the	oven	all	help	to	crisp	the	crumb	topping.



BOSTON	CREAM	CUPCAKES
MAKES	12	CUPCAKES

Bake	the	cupcakes	directly	in	a	greased	and	floured	muffin	tin	rather	than	using
paper	cupcake	liners	so	the	chocolate	glaze	can	run	down	the	sides	of	the	cooled
cakes.

CUPCAKES
1¾				 cups	(8¾	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 cup	(7	ounces)	sugar

1½				 teaspoons	baking	powder
¾				 teaspoon	salt
12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	12	pieces	and	softened	(68	degrees)
3				 large	eggs
¾				 cup	whole	milk
1½				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract

CHOCOLATE	GLAZE
¾				 cup	heavy	cream
¼				 cup	light	corn	syrup
8				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	chopped
½				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

1				 recipe	Pastry	Cream,	cooled

1.	FOR	THE	CUPCAKES:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat
oven	to	350	degrees.	Spray	muffin	tin	with	vegetable	oil	spray,	flour	generously,
and	tap	pan	to	remove	excess	flour.
2.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	mix	flour,	sugar,	baking	powder,	and

salt	on	low	speed	to	combine.	With	mixer	running,	add	butter,	1	piece	at	a	time,
and	beat	until	mixture	resembles	coarse	sand.	Add	eggs,	1	at	a	time,	and	mix
until	combined.	Add	milk	and	vanilla,	increase	speed	to	medium,	and	beat	until
light	and	fluffy	and	no	lumps	remain,	about	3	minutes.



3.	Fill	muffin	cups	three-quarters	full	(do	not	overfill).	Bake	until	toothpick
inserted	in	center	of	cupcake	comes	out	clean,	18	to	20	minutes.	Let	cupcakes
cool	in	pan	for	5	minutes,	then	transfer	them	to	rack	to	cool	completely.
4.	FOR	THE	GLAZE:	Heat	cream,	corn	syrup,	chocolate,	and	vanilla	in

small	saucepan	over	medium	heat,	stirring	constantly,	until	smooth.	Set	glaze
aside	to	cool	and	thicken	for	30	minutes.
5.	Prepare	and	fill	cupcakes	by	inserting	tip	of	small	knife	at	45-degree	angle

about	1⁄8	inch	from	edge	of	cupcake	top	and	cut	all	the	way	around,	removing
cone	of	cake.	Cut	away	all	but	top	¼	inch	of	cone,	leaving	only	small	disk	of
cake.	Fill	cupcake	with	2	tablespoons	pastry	cream	and	top	with	disk	of	cake.	Set
filled	cupcakes	on	wire	rack	set	over	parchment	paper.	Spoon	2	tablespoons
glaze	over	each	cupcake,	allowing	it	to	drip	down	sides.	Refrigerate	until	just
set,	about	10	minutes.	(Cupcakes	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	2	days;	bring	to
room	temperature	before	serving.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
We	wanted	a	recipe	for	Boston	cream	cupcakes	that	produced	cupcakes	with	big
chocolate	flavor	and	a	smooth,	creamy	center,	rather	than	the	artificial,	bland
flavors	characteristic	of	most	Boston	cream	cupcake	recipes.	For	our	recipe,	we
use	the	reverse	creaming	method	to	achieve	tender,	close-crumbed	cupcakes,
then	fill	them	with	cream	through	a	cone-shaped	hole	in	the	top	of	the	cupcakes.
Our	chocolate	glaze,	which	clings	tightly	to	the	tops	of	the	cupcakes	thanks	to
light	corn	syrup,	covers	any	evidence	of	the	holes.
REVERSE	CREAM	We	started	this	recipe	with	a	basic	yellow	cake,	which

was	a	bit	too	coarsely	textured.	Instead	of	the	traditional	creaming	method	we
use	the	reverse	creaming	method,	which	calls	for	cutting	the	butter	into	the	dry
ingredients,	as	is	done	with	biscuit	dough.	These	cupcakes	are	soft,	moist,	and
tender.	The	reason?	The	traditional	creaming	method,	which	relies	on	aerating
the	butter	with	the	sugar,	creates	large	air	pockets	that	result	in	a	coarser	crumb.
In	the	reverse	creaming	method,	the	butter	coats	the	flour	before	the	batter	is
aerated,	keeping	the	cake	tender	and	fine	crumbed.
PICK	ALL-PURPOSE	FLOUR	While	cake	flour	is	essential	when	making

delicate,	tender	cake	layers,	a	cupcake	should	be	a	bit	sturdier—you	want	to	eat
a	cupcake	out	of	hand	without	having	it	fall	apart.	All-purpose	flour	adds	a	bit
more	structure	to	the	cake	portion	of	this	recipe.
MAKE	A	CONE	The	real	challenge	is	how	to	get	the	pastry	cream	inside	the

cupcake.	We	tried	filling	a	pastry	bag	with	pastry	cream	and	piping	it	in	through
a	hole	in	the	bottom,	but	tasters	wanted	more	filling.	We	tried	cutting	the	top	of
the	cupcake	off,	scooping	out	a	bit,	and	then	replacing	the	top,	but	the	scar	was
obvious.	We	prefer	removing	a	cone-shaped	section	of	the	cake	from	the	top.
Once	the	glaze	is	applied,	the	incision	becomes	invisible.



REVERSE	CREAMING	AT	WORK	
COOKIES
The	reverse	creaming	method—in	which	the	butter	is	beaten	into	the	flour	and
sugar	rather	than	creamed	with	the	sugar—makes	for	flatter	cookies	that	are
easier	to	decorate.	Also,	less	air	in	the	batter	means	fewer	bubbles	in	the	baked
cookies,	so	they	are	sturdier	and	crisper—again,	making	them	perfect	for
glazing.



GLAZED	BUTTER	COOKIES
MAKES	ABOUT	38	COOKIES

If	you	cannot	find	superfine	sugar,	process	granulated	sugar	in	a	food	processor
for	30	seconds.	If	desired,	the	cookies	can	be	finished	with	sprinkles	or	other
decorations	immediately	after	glazing.

COOKIES
2½				 cups	(12½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
¾				 cup	(52⁄3	ounces)	superfine	sugar
¼				 teaspoon	salt
16				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	16	pieces	and	softened	(68	degrees)
2				 tablespoons	cream	cheese,	room	temperature
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract

GLAZE
1				 tablespoon	cream	cheese,	room	temperature
3				 tablespoons	milk

1½				 cups	(6	ounces)	confectioners’	sugar

1.	FOR	THE	COOKIES:	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	mix	flour,
sugar,	and	salt	at	low	speed	until	combined,	about	5	seconds.	With	mixer
running	on	low,	add	butter	1	piece	at	a	time;	continue	to	mix	until	mixture	looks
crumbly	and	slightly	wet,	1	to	2	minutes	longer.	Beat	in	cream	cheese	and
vanilla	until	dough	just	begins	to	form	large	clumps,	about	30	seconds.
2.	Knead	dough	by	hand	in	bowl,	2	to	3	turns,	until	it	forms	large,	cohesive

mass.	Transfer	dough	to	counter	and	divide	it	into	2	even	pieces.	Press	each
piece	into	4-inch	disk,	wrap	disks	in	plastic	wrap,	and	refrigerate	until	dough	is
firm	but	malleable,	about	30	minutes.	(Dough	can	be	refrigerated	for	up	to	3
days	or	frozen	for	up	to	2	weeks;	defrost	in	refrigerator	before	using.)
3.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	375	degrees.	Line	2

baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.	Working	with	1	piece	of	dough	at	a	time,
roll	1⁄8	inch	thick	between	2	large	sheets	of	parchment	paper;	slide	rolled	dough,
still	on	parchment,	onto	baking	sheet	and	refrigerate	until	firm,	about	10



minutes.
4.	Working	with	1	sheet	of	dough	at	a	time,	peel	parchment	from	1	side	of

dough	and	cut	into	desired	shapes	using	cookie	cutters;	place	cookies	1½	inches
apart	on	prepared	sheets.	Bake	1	sheet	at	a	time	until	cookies	are	light	golden
brown,	about	10	minutes,	rotating	baking	sheet	halfway	through	baking.	(Dough
scraps	can	be	patted	together,	chilled,	and	rerolled	once.)	Let	cookies	cool	on
baking	sheet	for	3	minutes;	transfer	cookies	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	to	room
temperature.
5.	FOR	THE	GLAZE:	Whisk	cream	cheese	and	2	tablespoons	milk	together

in	medium	bowl	until	combined	and	no	lumps	remain.	Add	confectioners’	sugar
and	whisk	until	smooth,	adding	remaining	1	tablespoon	milk	as	needed	until
glaze	is	thin	enough	to	spread	easily.	Using	back	of	spoon,	drizzle	or	spread
scant	teaspoon	of	glaze	onto	each	cooled	cookie.	Allow	glazed	cookies	to	dry	for
at	least	30	minutes.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Baking	holiday	cookies	should	be	a	fun	endeavor,	but	so	often	it’s	an	exercise	in
frustration.	The	dough	clings	to	the	rolling	pin,	it	rips	and	tears	as	it’s	rolled	out,
and	moving	the	dough	in	and	out	of	the	fridge	to	make	it	easier	to	work	with
turns	a	simple	one-hour	process	into	a	half-day	project.	We	wanted	a	simple
recipe	that	would	yield	a	forgiving,	workable	dough,	producing	cookies	that
would	be	sturdy	enough	to	decorate	yet	tender	enough	to	be	worth	eating.	Our
first	realization	was	that	we	had	to	use	enough	butter	to	stay	true	to	the	nature	of
a	butter	cookie	but	not	so	much	that	the	dough	became	greasy.	All-purpose	flour
had	enough	gluten	to	provide	structure,	while	superfine	sugar	provided	a	fine,
even	crumb	and	a	compact,	crisp	cookie.	A	surprise	ingredient—cream	cheese—
gave	the	cookies	flavor	and	richness	without	altering	their	texture.
USE	SUPERFINE	SUGAR	Regular	granulated	sugar	makes	cookies	with	a

flaky	texture	and	some	large	holes.	In	contrast,	superfine	sugar	yields	crisp,
compact	cookies	with	a	fine,	even	crumb	that	is	preferable	for	a	cookie	that	will
be	glazed.	There’s	no	leavener	in	these	cookies	(you	want	them	flat)	and	no	eggs
(which	would	make	them	moist	and	chewy).
ADD	CREAM	CHEESE	We	use	just	enough	butter	for	rich	flavor	and

tenderness.	More	butter	just	makes	the	dough	sticky	and	hard	to	handle.
However,	we	found	that	we	could	supplement	the	butter	with	cream	cheese.
Because	it’s	softer	than	butter	when	chilled	it	makes	the	dough	easier	to	roll	out.
And	it	adds	a	nice	tang.
PICK	ALL-PURPOSE	FLOUR	While	holiday	glazed	cookies	should	be

delicate,	cake	flour	makes	overly	fragile	cookies.	All-purpose	flour	develops
enough	gluten	for	cookies	to	be	glazed	and	decorated	without	too	much	worry
that	they	will	crumble.
ROLL,	THEN	CHILL	To	prevent	the	dough	from	sticking	to	the	counter—

and	to	the	rolling	pin—roll	it	between	two	large	pieces	of	parchment.	Cold,	stiff
dough	will	cut	more	cleanly	than	soft	dough,	so	make	sure	to	chill	the	dough
after	rolling.	Slide	the	bottom	piece	of	parchment	onto	a	baking	sheet	to	keep	the
dough	flat	and	then	refrigerate	it	until	firm,	about	10	minutes.
MINIMIZE	SCRAPS	Cut	shapes	close	together,	starting	from	the	outside

and	working	your	way	to	the	middle.	When	making	large	and	small	cookies,
alternate	cutters	as	you	stamp	to	use	as	much	dough	as	possible.	While	you	can
reroll	this	dough	once,	you	want	to	reduce	scraps;	if	you	overwork	the	dough	too
much	gluten	will	develop	and	the	cookies	will	bake	up	tough.	Make	sure	to	chill



the	dough	scraps	again	before	rolling	them	out	a	second	time.
PEEL	AWAY	SCRAPS	FIRST	Use	a	small	spatula	to	strip	away	the	dough

scraps	from	around	the	cookies.	With	excess	dough	out	of	the	way,	it’s	easier	to
lift	the	cookies	and	transfer	them	to	a	baking	sheet	without	marring	the	shape	of
the	cookies,	or	stretching	the	dough.
BAKE	ONE	SHEET	AT	A	TIME	Baking	one	sheet	of	cookies	at	a	time

ensures	even	baking.	(For	more	on	this,	see	“Avoiding	Uneven	Baking.”)



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
STAND	VS.	HAND-HELD	MIXER

We	prefer	to	use	stand	mixers.	But	hand-held	mixers	work,	too.

Curious	about	the	performance	differences	between	our	favorite	hand-held	and	stand	mixers,	we	conducted
side-by-side	tests	to	establish	general	guidelines	for	their	use.	We	whipped	cream,	beat	egg	whites	for
meringue,	and	made	cookies,	cakes,	and	buttercream	frosting.

Although	it	took	the	hand-held	mixer	40	to	60	seconds	longer	than	the	stand	mixer	to	whip	cream	and
beat	egg	whites,	it	did	just	as	good	a	job	(both	were	fitted	with	the	whisk	attachment).	When	making
oatmeal	cookie	dough,	the	stand	mixer	(with	the	paddle	attachment)	produced	more	volume	in	the	batter,
but	the	baked	cookies	were	identical	in	number,	texture,	and	flavor.	Neither	mixer	had	trouble	mixing
oatmeal	and	nuts	into	the	stiff	dough	on	low	speed.

Our	favorite	yellow	layer	cake	recipe	baked	up	the	same	when	made	with	both	mixers,	although	the
stand	mixer	created	a	slightly	more	voluminous	batter.	The	same	was	true	with	genoise,	a	cake	leavened	by
whole-egg	foam,	although	the	hand-held	mixer	took	nearly	twice	as	long	to	beat	the	eggs	to	the	proper
volume.	For	those	partial	to	buttercream	frostings,	we	found	that	we	preferred	the	hand-held	mixer	to	the
stand	mixer	because	it	was	easier	to	keep	the	hot	sugar	syrup	from	clinging	to	the	beaters.

Our	conclusion?	The	stand	mixer	offers	greater	flexibility	and	versatility.	(Its	dough	hook	is	ideal	for
kneading	bread,	something	a	hand-held	mixer	can’t	do.)	Also,	the	solid,	freestanding	base	leaves	the	cook
free	to	accomplish	other	tasks.	We	found,	however,	that	with	some	adjustments	for	time	and	technique,	the
hand-held	mixer	generally	yields	baked	goods	that	are	identical	to	those	prepared	in	a	stand	mixer.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
EXTRA-OLD	EXTRACT

Vanilla	extract	will	last	indefinitely	if	stored	in	a	sealed	container.

Some	people	bake	enough	cookies	and	cakes	to	blow	through	a	whole	bottle	of	vanilla	extract	in	just	a
month,	while	less	enthusiastic	bakers	may	keep	the	same	bottle	for	years.	Does	vanilla	extract	ever	go	bad
or	lose	potency?

We	located	three-year-old	and	10-year-old	bottles	of	vanilla	extract	and	compared	them	with	a	fresh
bottle	of	the	same	brand	in	three	of	our	recipes:	yellow	cupcakes,	vanilla	frosting,	and	chocolate	chip
cookies.	Although	the	older	bottles	took	a	bit	of	effort	to	open,	once	the	extract	was	incorporated	into
recipes,	tasters	could	detect	no	difference	between	the	old	and	the	new.

Vanilla	extract	has	a	minimum	alcohol	content	of	35	percent,	which,	according	to	Matt	Nielsen	of
vanilla	manufacturer	Nielsen-Massey,	makes	it	the	most	shelf-stable	form	of	vanilla	(beans	and	paste	can
lose	flavor	quickly).	It	will	last	indefinitely	if	stored	in	a	sealed	container	away	from	heat	and	light.

	
WELL	PRESERVED

This	bottle	may	look	old	on	the	outside,	but	the	extract	inside	will	stay	fresh	indefinitely.



CONCEPT	48

Sugar	Changes	Texture	(and	Sweetness)
Even	novice	cooks	understand	that	if	they	add	more	sugar	to	a	dessert	it	will
become	sweeter.	But	what	many	fail	to	realize	is	that	sugar	can	have	a	huge
effect	on	texture,	too,	changing	the	structure	of	foods	ranging	from	cookies	to
frozen	desserts.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Sweeteners	come	in	many	forms,	most	of	them	familiar	to	the	home	cook.	There
is	crystalline	white	table	sugar,	deep	bronze	brown	sugar,	thick,	oozy	molasses,
and	the	lighter,	golden	honey.	What	is	less	familiar	is	how	sweeteners	really
work.
Let’s	begin	with	structure.	Sugar	can	be	a	single	molecule	made	up	of	carbon,

hydrogen,	and	oxygen—like	glucose	and	fructose.	Other	sugars,	like	sucrose,	are
made	of	two	or	more	molecules	(in	this	case,	one	glucose	and	one	fructose)	tied
together	with	chemical	bonds.	Table	sugar,	for	example,	consists	of	virtually
pure	sucrose.	(For	more	information	on	sugars,	see	“Sweeteners	101.”)
Sucrose	is	abundant	in	many	plants,	especially	fruits.	But	unlike	in	fruits,

some	plants,	like	potatoes,	convert	the	sucrose	they	form	by	photosynthesis	into
starch.	This	process	is	reversible,	which	explains	why	some	vegetables	can
become	sweeter	when	stored	in	the	refrigerator.	Table	sugar	is	produced	from
either	sugar	cane	or	sugar	beets.	It	is	highly	water	soluble	and	when	dissolved,
the	sucrose	molecules	organized	within	each	crystal	disperse	into	the	water.
Sugar	doesn’t	melt,	not	in	the	traditional	sense	like	an	ice	cube,	but	instead
decomposes	when	it	is	brought	to	temperatures	between	320	and	367	degrees.
So	how	does	sugar	affect	texture	in	cookies,	and	even	frozen	desserts?	It	has

everything	to	do	with	moisture.	Sucrose	is	hygroscopic,	which	means	it	has	an
affinity	for	water	molecules.
What	happens	is	this:	Because	of	the	nature	of	the	hydrogen	and	oxygen

atoms	in	both	water	and	sugar,	they	are	electrostatically	attracted	to	each	other.
When	water	and	sugar	are	combined,	they	link	together	and	form	hydrogen
bonds.	It	takes	a	fair	amount	of	heat	energy	to	break	these	bonds	and,	as	a	result,
table	sugar	will	hold	on	to	moisture	in	food.	Because	of	this	tendency,	sugar	can
slow	the	evaporation	of	moisture	from	cookies	and	cakes	as	they	bake,	which
makes	a	tremendous	difference	when	it	comes	to	producing	moist,	tender	baked
goods.
In	addition,	when	sucrose	is	heated	along	with	some	acid,	it	breaks	back	down

into	two	simple	sugars,	glucose	and	fructose.	When	this	happens,	the	result	is
called	an	invert	sugar.	Because	fructose	does	not	easily	crystallize	in	the
presence	of	glucose,	invert	sugars	are	always	viscous	liquids.	A	benefit	of	invert
sugar	comes	into	play	when	making,	for	example,	chewy	cookies	(see	Test
Kitchen	Experiment,	opposite).	Invert	sugar	is	especially	hygroscopic,	pulling
water	from	wherever	it	can	be	found,	the	best	source	being	the	air.	Because



brown	sugar	has	more	invert	sugar	than	granulated	sugar,	it	is	our	sugar	of
choice	when	baking	chewy	cookies—especially	because	invert	sugar	keeps	on
drawing	in	moisture	even	after	cookies	have	been	baked,	thus	helping	them	to
stay	chewy	as	they	cool.
Finally,	sugar	likewise	affects	the	texture	of	frozen	desserts.	How?	When

making	frozen	desserts,	sugar	is	usually	heated	with	a	liquid	(cream,	water,	fruit
juice)	so	that	it	dissolves.	When	dissolved,	sugar	lowers	the	freezing	point	of
water.	This	means	that	a	sugar-water	mixture	freezes	at	a	lower	temperature	than
water	alone.	And	because	this	mixture	freezes	at	a	lower	temperature,	it	is	able
to	become	far	colder	than	32	degrees	before	beginning	to	form	ice	crystals	while
being	made	into	ice	cream.	This	means	that	when	the	ice	crystals	do	form	they
form	very	rapidly—and	stay	very	small.	And	tiny	ice	crystals	translate	into	ice
creams,	sherbets,	and	sorbets	that	we	perceive	as	smooth	and	creamy,	not	icy	or
grainy.



SUGAR	HOLDS	ON	TO	WATER



	
HOLDING	ON	Sugar	has	an	affinity	for	water	molecules,	holding	on	to	moisture	in	baked	goods	while



they	are	in	the	oven,	and	even	as	they	cool.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	show	the	powerful	effect	that	sugar	can	have	on	the	texture	of	a	baked	good,
we	ran	the	following	experiment:	We	made	two	batches	of	our	Chocolate-Chunk
Oatmeal	Cookies,	one	with	brown	sugar	and	the	other	with	granulated	white
sugar.	To	isolate	this	variable,	we	kept	the	rest	of	the	ingredients	and	the	baking
procedure	identical.	We	repeated	the	experiment	three	times.



THE	RESULTS
After	the	cookies	had	cooled	to	room	temperature,	we	tasted	them	for	chewiness
and	then	attempted	to	bend	a	sample	of	each	batch	around	a	large	wooden	rolling
pin	(no	easy	task	for	firm,	crunchy	cookies).	The	results	were	clear	as	day:	The
brown	sugar	cookies	had	serious	chew	and	the	flexibility	to	conform	to	the
curvature	of	the	rolling	pin.	On	the	other	hand,	the	cookies	made	with	white
sugar	were	crunchy	rather	than	chewy	and	quickly	snapped	when	bent.



THE	TAKEAWAY
So	you	want	to	make	some	chewy	cookies?	Using	brown	sugar	is	a	good	start.
Our	findings	confirm	the	science	that	sweeteners	(like	brown	sugar)	that	contain
invert	sugar	help	to	retard	the	crystallization	of	sucrose,	therefore	holding	on	to
more	moisture	than	white	sugar	and	better	maintaining	a	chewy	texture	as	the
cookie	cools.
But	there	are	a	few	other	important	steps	to	take	for	chewy	cookies.	First,

don’t	be	afraid	of	butter.	Many	of	the	cookie	recipes	that	follow	rely	on	melted
butter.	(Remember	that	butter	is	roughly	16	to	18	percent	water,	and	by	melting
the	butter	you	are	encouraging	the	formation	of	gluten	when	the	flour	is	added	to
the	batter.)	Second,	use	a	generous	amount	of	dough	for	each	cookie.	It’s	very
hard	to	keep	small	cookies	chewy.	Use	at	least	2	tablespoons	of	dough	(and	even
more	in	some	cases)	for	each	cookie.	Third,	don’t	overbake.	Even	with	brown
sugar	and	melted	butter	in	the	mix,	if	you	overbake	any	of	these	cookies	they
will	lose	their	chewy	texture.	Fourth,	be	sure	to	take	the	cookies	out	of	the	oven
when	they	are	set	around	the	edges	but	look	a	bit	underdone	in	the	center.	They
will	continue	to	firm	up	as	they	cool	on	the	baking	sheet.	Finally,	chewy	cookies
will	become	less	chewy	over	time.	Storing	them	in	an	airtight	container	helps.



THE	EFFECT	OF	SUGAR	ON	TEXTURE

	
BROWN	SUGAR	VS.	WHITE	SUGAR

The	cookie	made	with	brown	sugar	(left)	baked	up	chewy	and	easily	bent	around	a	rolling	pin.	The	cookie
made	with	white	sugar	(right)	emerged	from	the	oven	crisp	and	dry,	and	snapped	immediately	when	bent.



INVERT	SUGARS	AT	WORK	
CHEWY	COOKIES
The	cookie	recipes	that	follow	rely	on	brown	sugar,	careful	baking,	and	melted
butter	(in	two	cases)	to	create	and	maintain	a	good	chewy	texture.	Brown	sugar
contains	invert	sugars,	which	retard	the	crystallization	of	sucrose	and	therefore
help	the	cookies	retain	moisture	as	they	both	bake	and	cool.	Remember	to	use	a
generous	scoop	of	dough	for	each	cookie	and	not	to	overbake.



BROWN	SUGAR	COOKIES
MAKES	ABOUT	24	COOKIES

Avoid	using	a	nonstick	skillet	to	brown	the	butter;	the	dark	color	of	the	nonstick
coating	makes	it	difficult	to	gauge	when	the	butter	is	sufficiently	browned.	Use
fresh,	moist	brown	sugar,	as	hardened	brown	sugar	will	make	the	cookies	too
dry.	Achieving	the	proper	texture—crisp	at	the	edges	and	chewy	in	the	middle—
is	critical	to	this	recipe.	Because	the	cookies	are	so	dark,	it’s	hard	to	judge
doneness	by	color.	Instead,	gently	press	halfway	between	the	edge	and	center	of
the	cookie.	When	it’s	done,	it	will	form	an	indentation	with	slight	resistance.
Check	early	and	err	on	the	side	of	underdone.

14				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
2				 cups	packed	(14	ounces)	dark	brown	sugar
¼				 cup	(1¾	ounces)	granulated	sugar
2				 cups	plus	2	tablespoons	(102⁄3	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
¼				 teaspoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	salt
1				 large	egg	plus	1	large	yolk
1				 tablespoon	vanilla	extract

1.	Melt	10	tablespoons	butter	in	10-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.	Cook,
swirling	pan	constantly,	until	butter	is	dark	golden	brown	and	has	nutty	aroma,	1
to	3	minutes.	Transfer	browned	butter	to	large	heatproof	bowl.	Add	remaining	4
tablespoons	butter	and	stir	until	completely	melted;	set	aside	for	15	minutes.
2.	Meanwhile,	adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350

degrees.	Line	2	baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.	In	shallow	baking	dish,	mix
¼	cup	brown	sugar	and	granulated	sugar	until	well	combined;	set	aside.	Whisk
flour,	baking	soda,	and	baking	powder	together	in	medium	bowl;	set	aside.
3.	Add	remaining	1¾	cups	brown	sugar	and	salt	to	bowl	with	cooled	butter;

mix	until	no	sugar	lumps	remain,	about	30	seconds.	Scrape	down	bowl;	add	egg,
yolk,	and	vanilla	and	mix	until	fully	incorporated,	about	30	seconds.	Scrape
down	bowl.	Add	flour	mixture	and	mix	until	just	combined,	about	1	minute.
Give	dough	final	stir	to	ensure	that	no	flour	pockets	remain.



4.	Working	with	2	tablespoons	of	dough	at	a	time,	roll	into	balls.	Roll	half	of
dough	balls	into	sugar	mixture	to	coat.	Place	dough	balls	2	inches	apart	on
prepared	baking	sheet;	repeat	with	remaining	dough	balls.
5.	Bake	1	sheet	at	a	time	until	cookies	are	browned	and	still	puffy	and	edges

have	begun	to	set	but	centers	are	still	soft	(cookies	will	look	raw	between	cracks
and	seem	underdone),	12	to	14	minutes,	rotating	baking	sheet	halfway	through
baking.	Let	cookies	cool	on	baking	sheet	for	5	minutes;	transfer	to	wire	rack	and
let	cool	to	room	temperature.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Simple	sugar	cookies,	while	classic,	can	seem	too	simple—even	dull—at	times.
We	wanted	to	turn	up	the	volume	on	the	sugar	cookie	by	switching	out	the
granulated	sugar	in	favor	of	brown	sugar.	We	had	a	clear	vision	of	this	cookie.	It
would	be	oversized,	with	a	crackling	crisp	exterior	and	a	chewy	interior.	And	its
flavor	would	scream	“brown	sugar.”	We	wanted	butter	for	optimal	flavor,	but	the
traditional	creaming	method	(see	concept	46)	gave	us	cakey	and	tender	cookies
while	cutting	the	butter	into	the	flour	produced	crumbly	cookies.	The	solution?
Melting	the	butter.
BROWN	THE	BUTTER	Melting	the	butter	is	a	good	start	if	you	want	a

chewy	cookie,	but	if	you	brown	that	butter	you	develop	a	range	of	butterscotch
and	toffee	flavors,	too.	Adding	a	full	tablespoon	of	vanilla	helps	boost	the	nutty
flavors	in	our	cookies	without	using	more	brown	sugar	(which	would	make	them
overly	sweet).	Make	sure	to	use	the	full	½	teaspoon	of	salt—you	need	it	to
balance	the	sweetness	of	these	cookies.
LOSE	A	WHITE	Egg	whites	tend	to	make	cookies	cakey—they	cause	the

cookies	to	puff	and	dry	out.	We	use	a	whole	egg	plus	a	yolk	for	richness,	leaving
out	the	second	white.
USE	TWO	LEAVENERS	The	choice	of	leavener	is	probably	the	most

confusing	part	of	any	cookie	recipe	(see	concept	42).	Sugar	cookies	typically
contain	baking	powder—a	mixture	of	baking	soda	and	a	weak	acid	(calcium	acid
phosphate)	that	is	activated	by	moisture	and	heat.	The	soda	and	acid	create	gas
bubbles,	which	expand	cookies	and	other	baked	goods.	However,	many	baked
goods	with	brown	sugar	call	for	baking	soda	instead.	This	is	because	while
granulated	sugar	is	neutral,	dark	brown	sugar	can	be	slightly	acidic.	But	when
we	used	baking	soda	by	itself,	the	cookies	had	an	open,	coarse	crumb	and	craggy
top.	Tasters	loved	the	craggy	top,	not	the	coarse	crumb.	When	we	used	baking
powder	by	itself,	the	cookies	had	a	finer,	tighter	crumb	but	the	craggy	top
disappeared.	After	a	dozen	rounds	of	testing,	we	settled	on	using	a	combination
of	both	leaveners	to	moderate	the	coarseness	of	the	crumb	without
compromising	the	craggy	tops.
ROLL	IN	BROWN	SUGAR	Dark	brown	sugar	is	the	obvious	choice	for	the

dough	itself—more	butterscotch,	brown	sugar	flavor,	and	more	chewiness
because	it	has	more	moisture	and	a	little	more	invert	sugar	than	light	brown
sugar.	Rolling	balls	of	dough	in	more	brown	sugar	boosts	their	flavor	further.
Adding	some	granulated	sugar	keeps	the	brown	sugar	from	clumping.



BAKE	ONE	SHEET	AT	A	TIME	We	had	hoped	to	be	able	to	bake	two
sheets	of	cookies	at	a	time,	but	even	with	rotating	and	changing	tray	positions	at
different	times	during	baking,	we	could	not	get	two-tray	baking	to	work.	Some
of	the	cookies	had	the	right	texture,	but	others	were	inexplicably	dry.	Baking	one
tray	at	a	time	allows	for	even	heat	distribution	and	ensures	that	every	cookie	has
the	same	texture.	It’s	important	not	to	overbake	these	cookies.	To	check	cookies
for	doneness,	gently	press	halfway	between	the	edge	and	center	of	the	cookie.
When	the	cookie	is	done,	your	finger	will	form	an	indentation	with	slight
resistance.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
KEEPING	COOKIES	SOFT

The	best	way	to	store	chewy	cookies	is	in	a	zipper-lock	bag.

When	it	comes	to	storing	chewy	cookies,	too	much	exposure	to	air	dries	them	out	and	causes	staling.	To
find	the	best	method	for	storing	chewy	cookies,	we	baked	three	types—chocolate	chip,	molasses	spice,	and
peanut	butter—and	stored	them	in	the	following	ways:	in	a	zipper-lock	bag	with	the	air	pressed	out;	in	a
zipper-lock	bag	with	an	apple	slice;	and	in	a	zipper-lock	bag	with	a	slice	of	white	sandwich	bread	thrown	in.
(The	last	two	help	keep	brown	sugar	moist;	we	wondered	if	they	would	do	the	same	for	cookies.)

After	five	days,	all	three	cookie	samples	exhibited	negative	traits.	The	ones	simply	placed	in	the	bag	had
become	dry	on	the	edges	but	were	still	acceptable.	Those	stored	with	the	apple	slice	were	moist	but	had
begun	to	pick	up	the	odor	and	flavor	of	the	apple.	The	cookies	stored	with	a	slice	of	bread	became	damp	in
the	areas	where	the	bread	touched	the	cookies.	Nestled	together	in	the	same	bag,	the	hygroscopic	sugar	in
the	cookies	attracted	some	of	the	water	from	the	bread.	In	fact,	while	the	cookies	became	wetter,	the	bread
dried	out	and	became	brittle.

Because	the	bread	was	providing	too	much	moisture,	we	wondered	if	using	less	bread	would	produce
chewy,	rather	than	soggy,	cookies.	No	such	luck.	Half-and	quarter-slices	of	bread	produced	similarly
lackluster	cookies.	Though	no	longer	wet,	the	cookies	didn’t	seem	any	fresher	than	those	stored	by
themselves.	So	the	best	way	to	store	cookies	is	also	the	simplest:	in	a	zipper-lock	bag	with	the	air	pressed
out.	And	to	return	just-baked	chewiness	to	cookies	that	have	been	stored	for	several	days,	place	them	on	a
microwave-safe	plate	and	microwave	at	full	power	for	30	seconds.



CHOCOLATE-CHUNK	OATMEAL	COOKIES	WITH	PECANS	AND
DRIED	CHERRIES

MAKES	ABOUT	16	LARGE	COOKIES

We	like	these	cookies	made	with	pecans	and	dried	sour	cherries,	but	walnuts	or
skinned	hazelnuts	can	be	substituted	for	the	pecans	and	dried	cranberries	for	the
cherries.	Quick	oats	used	in	place	of	the	old-fashioned	oats	will	yield	a	cookie
with	slightly	less	chewiness.

1¼				 cups	(6¼	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
¾				 teaspoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
½				 teaspoon	salt
1¼				 cups	(3¾	ounces)	old-fashioned	rolled	oats
1				 cup	pecans,	toasted	and	chopped
1				 cup	(4	ounces)	dried	sour	cherries,	chopped	coarse
4				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	chopped	into	chunks	about	size	of	chocolate	chips
12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	softened	(68	degrees)
1½				 cups	packed	(10½	ounces)	dark	brown	sugar
1				 large	egg
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

1.	Adjust	oven	racks	to	upper-middle	and	lower-middle	positions	and	heat
oven	to	350	degrees.	Line	2	baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.
2.	Whisk	flour,	baking	powder,	baking	soda,	and	salt	together	in	medium

bowl.	In	second	medium	bowl,	stir	oats,	pecans,	cherries,	and	chocolate	together.
3.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	paddle,	beat	butter	and	sugar	at	medium

speed	until	no	sugar	lumps	remain,	about	1	minute,	scraping	down	bowl	as
needed.	Add	egg	and	vanilla	and	beat	on	medium-low	until	fully	incorporated,
about	30	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	as	needed.	Reduce	speed	to	low,	add
flour	mixture,	and	mix	until	just	combined,	about	30	seconds.	Gradually	add	oat
mixture;	mix	until	just	incorporated.	Give	dough	final	stir	to	ensure	that	no	flour
pockets	remain	and	ingredients	are	evenly	distributed.
4.	Working	with	¼	cup	of	dough	at	a	time,	roll	into	balls	and	place	2½	inches

apart	on	prepared	baking	sheets.	Press	dough	to	1-inch	thickness	using	bottom	of



greased	measuring	cup.	Bake	until	cookies	are	medium	brown	and	edges	have
begun	to	set	but	centers	are	still	soft	(cookies	will	seem	underdone	and	will
appear	raw,	wet,	and	shiny	in	cracks),	20	to	22	minutes,	switching	and	rotating
baking	sheets	halfway	through	baking.
5.	Let	cookies	cool	on	baking	sheets	for	5	minutes;	transfer	cookies	to	wire

rack	and	let	cool	to	room	temperature.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
It’s	easy	to	get	carried	away	and	overload	cookie	dough	with	a	crazy	jumble	of
ingredients,	resulting	in	a	poorly	textured	cookie	monster.	Our	ultimate	oatmeal
cookie	would	have	just	the	right	amount	of	added	ingredients	and	an	ideal
texture—crisp	around	the	edges	and	chewy	in	the	middle.	To	get	the	results	we
wanted,	we	used	brown	sugar	for	moisture	and	a	combination	of	leaveners.	Also,
keep	a	careful	eye	on	the	timing	to	make	sure	the	cookies	don’t	overbake.
MAKING	LOADED	OATMEAL	COOKIES	Sure,	we	like	plain	oatmeal

cookies	but	here	we	wanted	something	special,	loaded	with	flavorful	ingredients.
Many	recipes	add	too	many	goodies	to	the	batter.	We	found	that	a	careful
balance	of	bittersweet	chocolate	chunks	(semisweet	is	too	sweet),	pecans
(toasting	is	essential	to	bring	out	their	flavor),	and	dried	sour	cherries	(you	need
something	tart)	is	the	way	to	make	a	truly	great	oatmeal	cookie.	No	spices.	No
coconut.	No	raisins	or	dried	tropical	fruits.
START	WITH	THE	RIGHT	OATS	When	baking	we	find	that	old-fashioned

oats	are	far	superior	to	the	other	choices.	Steel-cut	oats	are	great	for	breakfast
but	make	dry,	pebbly	cookies.	Instant	oats	will	create	dense,	mealy	cookies
lacking	in	good	oat	flavor.	Quick	oats	are	OK,	but	they	taste	somewhat	bland,
and	the	cookies	won’t	be	quite	as	chewy.
USE	ALL	BROWN	SUGAR	We	use	brown	sugar	to	help	add	moisture	(it	is

more	moist	than	white	sugar).	After	testing	a	half-dozen	combinations,	we	found
that	using	all	dark	brown	sugar	is	best.	All	light	brown	sugar	is	the	second	best
option.	In	addition	to	being	more	moist,	the	cookies	made	with	brown	sugar	are
chewier	than	cookies	made	with	granulated,	and	the	brown	sugar	also	gives	the
cookies	a	rich,	dark	color	and	deep	caramel	flavor.
PICK	TWO	LEAVENERS	We	began	making	these	cookies	with	baking

soda,	which	made	the	cookies	crisp	from	the	inside	out—a	problem,	since	we
want	a	chewy	interior	and	a	crisp	exterior.	When	we	switched	to	baking	powder,
the	cookies	puffed	in	the	oven	and	then	collapsed,	losing	their	shape	and
yielding	not	a	hint	of	crispy	exterior.	Because	we	want	a	combination	of	crisp
edges	and	chewy	centers,	we	use	a	combination	of	baking	powder	and	soda.	This
pairing	produces	cookie	that	are	light	and	crisp	on	the	outside	but	chewy,	dense,
and	soft	in	the	center.	(For	more	on	leaveners,	see	concept	42.)



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
COOKIE	SHEET	BAKE-OFF

The	type	of	baking	sheet	that	you	use	(rimmed	or	rimless)	can	affect	the	baking	time	of	your
cookies.

Recently,	we	came	across	a	piece	of	cookie-baking	advice	in	the	1964	edition	of	Joy	of	Cooking:	Use	a	flat,
unrimmed	baking	sheet	to	promote	even	cooking.	To	see	if	this	still	applied	to	a	modern	oven,	we	made	two
identical	batches	of	cookies:	We	baked	one	on	our	favorite	cookie	sheet	(its	shorter	sides	boast	a	slightly
raised	lip	to	facilitate	handling,	but	it	has	no	true	rim),	and	the	other	on	our	favorite	rimmed	baking	sheet,
which	features	a	1-inch	rim	on	all	sides.	We	baked	both	batches	successively	on	the	same	rack	in	the	oven.

How	evenly	the	cookies	baked	wasn’t	an	issue;	both	batches	came	out	perfectly	pale	golden.	However,
the	cookies	baked	on	the	rimless	pan	browned	more	quickly	and	finished	baking	several	minutes	before
those	on	the	rimmed	pan.	The	discrepancy	makes	sense:	Heat	rises	from	the	element	at	the	bottom	of	the
oven	and	circulates	in	currents	to	warm	the	entire	chamber.	A	rimmed	baking	sheet’s	raised	edges	block	the
hot	air	currents,	diverting	them	from	the	cookies	to	the	top	of	the	oven.	A	rimless	baking	sheet	allows	the
hot	air	to	immediately	sweep	over	the	cookies,	which	means	quicker	baking.

Bottom	line:	No	need	to	rush	out	and	buy	a	rimless	sheet	the	next	time	you	bake	cookies.	Just	be	aware
of	the	type	of	baking	sheet	you’re	using	and	the	timing.	We	like	to	check	on	cookies	a	minute	or	two	before
the	timer	goes	off,	just	to	play	it	safe.

	
RIMLESS	EDGES	=	QUICKER	BAKING

With	no	raised	edges	to	block	hot	air	currents,	a	rimless	cookie	sheet	baked	cookies	about	three	minutes
faster	than	a	rimmed	pan.



	
RIMMED	EDGES	=	SLOWER	BAKING

After	the	same	amount	of	time,	cookies	baked	on	a	rimmed	baking	sheet,	whose	edges	divert	hot	air	to	the
top	of	the	oven,	were	still	underdone.



ULTIMATE	CHOCOLATE	CHIP	COOKIES
MAKES	ABOUT	16	LARGE	COOKIES

Avoid	using	a	nonstick	skillet	to	brown	the	butter;	the	dark	color	of	the	nonstick
coating	makes	it	difficult	to	gauge	when	the	butter	is	sufficiently	browned.	Use
fresh,	moist	brown	sugar,	as	hardened	brown	sugar	will	make	the	cookies	too
dry.

1¾				 cups	(8¾	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
14				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter
¾				 cup	packed	(5¼	ounces)	dark	brown	sugar
½				 cup	(3½	ounces)	granulated	sugar
1				 teaspoon	salt
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
1				 large	egg	plus	1	large	yolk

1¼				 cups	(7½	ounces)	semisweet	chocolate	chips	or	chunks
¾				 cup	pecans	or	walnuts,	toasted	and	chopped	(optional)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	375	degrees.	Line	2
baking	sheets	with	parchment	paper.	Whisk	flour	and	baking	soda	together	in
medium	bowl;	set	aside.
2.	Melt	10	tablespoons	butter	in	10-inch	skillet	over	medium-high	heat.

Continue	cooking,	swirling	pan	constantly,	until	butter	is	dark	golden	brown	and
has	nutty	aroma,	1	to	3	minutes.	Transfer	browned	butter	to	large	heatproof
bowl.	Add	remaining	4	tablespoons	butter	and	stir	until	completely	melted.
3.	Add	brown	sugar,	granulated	sugar,	salt,	and	vanilla	to	melted	butter;	whisk

until	fully	incorporated.	Add	egg	and	yolk;	whisk	until	mixture	is	smooth	with
no	sugar	lumps	remaining,	about	30	seconds.	Let	mixture	stand	for	3	minutes,
then	whisk	for	30	seconds.	Repeat	process	of	resting	and	whisking	2	more	times
until	mixture	is	thick,	smooth,	and	shiny.	Using	rubber	spatula,	stir	in	flour
mixture	until	just	combined,	about	1	minute.	Stir	in	chocolate	chips	and	nuts,	if
using.	Give	dough	final	stir	to	ensure	that	no	flour	pockets	remain	and
ingredients	are	evenly	distributed.
4.	Working	with	3	tablespoons	of	dough	at	a	time,	roll	into	balls	and	place	2



inches	apart	on	prepared	baking	sheets.
5.	Bake	1	sheet	at	a	time	until	cookies	are	golden	brown	and	still	puffy	and

edges	have	begun	to	set	but	centers	are	still	soft,	10	to	14	minutes,	rotating
baking	sheet	halfway	through	baking.	Transfer	baking	sheet	to	wire	rack;	let
cookies	cool	to	room	temperature.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Since	Nestlé	first	began	printing	the	recipe	for	Toll	House	cookies	on	the	back	of
chocolate	chip	bags	in	1939,	generations	of	bakers	have	packed	chocolate	chip
cookies	into	lunches	and	taken	them	to	potlucks.	But	after	a	few	samples,	we
wondered	if	this	was	really	the	best	that	a	chocolate	chip	cookie	could	be.	We
wanted	to	refine	this	recipe	to	create	a	moist	and	chewy	chocolate	chip	cookie
with	crisp	edges	and	deep	notes	of	toffee	and	butterscotch	to	balance	its
sweetness—in	short,	a	more	sophisticated	cookie	than	the	standard	bake-sale
offering.	Melting	a	generous	amount	of	butter	before	combining	it	with	other
ingredients	gives	us	the	chewy	texture	we	wanted.	We	also	use	a	bit	more	brown
sugar	than	white	sugar	to	enhance	chewiness.	The	resulting	cookies	are	crisp
and	chewy	and	gooey	with	chocolate	and	boast	a	complex	medley	of	sweet,
buttery,	caramel,	and	toffee	flavors.
CHANGE	SUGAR	Traditionally,	Toll	House	cookies	have	a	1:1	ratio	of

brown	sugar	to	white	sugar.	White	sugar	granules	lend	crispness,	while	brown
sugar,	which	is	more	hygroscopic	(meaning	it	attracts	and	retains	water,	mainly
from	the	air)	than	white	sugar,	enhances	chewiness.	All	that	moisture	sounds	like
a	good	thing—but	it’s	too	good,	in	fact.	Cookies	made	with	all	brown	sugar	are
beyond	chewy	here.	They	are	so	moist	they’re	nearly	floppy.	We	got	the	best
results	when	we	changed	the	ratio	of	brown	sugar	to	white	sugar	to	3:2.	This
recipe	works	with	light	brown	sugar,	but	the	cookies	will	be	less	full-flavored.
BROWN	THE	BUTTER,	LOSE	ONE	WHITE	As	with	our	Brown	Sugar

Cookies,	we	brown	the	butter	here	for	flavor.	(Melting	the	butter	increases
chewiness	as	well.)	Losing	an	egg	white	(which	makes	cookies	more	cakey)	also
improves	chewiness.
WHISK	AND	WAIT	After	stirring	together	the	butter,	sugar,	and	eggs	…

wait.	After	10	minutes,	the	sugar	will	have	dissolved	and	the	mixture	will	turn
thick	and	shiny,	like	frosting.	The	finished	cookies	will	emerge	from	the	oven
with	a	slight	glossy	sheen	and	an	alluring	surface	of	cracks	and	crags,	with	a
deep,	toffeelike	flavor.	This	is	because	by	allowing	the	sugar	to	rest	in	the
liquids,	more	of	it	dissolves	in	the	small	amount	of	moisture	before	baking.	The
dissolved	sugar	caramelizes	more	easily	and	helps	to	create	a	cookie	with	crisp
edges	and	a	chewy	center	(see	“For	Perfect	Cookies,	Look	to	Sugar”).
BAKE	IN	A	MODERATE	OVEN	With	caramelization	in	mind,	we	bake	our

cookies	in	a	375-degree	oven—the	same	as	for	Toll	House	cookies.	Baking	two
trays	a	time	may	be	convenient,	but	it	leads	to	uneven	cooking.	The	cookies	on
the	top	tray	are	often	browner	around	the	edges	than	those	on	the	bottom,	even



when	rotated	halfway	through	baking.	These	cookies	will	finish	crisp	and	chewy,
gooey	with	chocolate,	with	a	complex	medley	of	sweet,	buttery,	caramel,	and
toffee	flavors.	In	other	words?	Perfect.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BROWNED	BUTTER

Browning	your	butter	adds	a	nutty,	toasted	flavor.

Browned	butter,	or	beurre	noisette,	as	it	is	called	in	French,	gives	our	Ultimate	Chocolate	Chip	Cookies	a
deep,	rich	flavor.	Beurre	noisette	translates	literally	as	“hazelnut	butter”;	as	the	butter	browns,	it	takes	on
the	flavor	and	aroma	of	toasted	nuts.	Browned	butter	is	used	in	both	baked	goods	and	savory	preparations;
brightened	with	lemon	juice,	it	makes	a	classic,	simple	“sauce”	for	fish	meunière	as	well	as	for	vegetables
such	as	asparagus	and	green	beans.

When	making	browned	butter,	use	a	saucepan	or	skillet	with	a	light-colored	interior;	the	dark	color	of
nonstick	or	anodized	aluminum	cookware	makes	it	difficult	to	judge	the	color	of	the	butter	as	it	browns.
Use	medium	to	medium-high	heat,	and	stir	or	swirl	the	butter	occasionally	so	that	the	milk	solids	brown
evenly;	depending	on	the	heat	setting	and	the	amount	of	butter,	the	process	may	take	as	few	as	three
minutes	if	browning	just	a	couple	of	tablespoons	or	as	long	as	10	minutes	if	browning	a	full	cup.	Finally,	if
not	using	the	browned	butter	immediately,	transfer	it	to	a	bowl;	if	left	in	the	saucepan	or	skillet,	residual
heat	can	cause	it	to	continue	cooking	…	and	then	it	becomes	beurre	noir.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
FOR	PERFECT	COOKIES,	LOOK	TO	SUGAR

Dissolved	sugar	makes	cookies	with	better	flavor	and	texture.

Crunchy	edges,	chewy	centers,	and	big	butterscotch	flavors—that	chocolate	chip	cookie	framework
sounded	pretty	sweet	to	us.	As	it	turns	out,	perfect	cookies	have	a	lot	to	do	with	sugar	and	how	it’s	treated.
Sugar	that	is	dissolved	in	liquid	before	baking	caramelizes	more	readily	than	sugar	that	simply	“melts”
when	exposed	to	the	same	amount	of	heat.	What	would	happen	if	we	rested	our	cookie	batter	after	we
added	the	sugar	to	allow	more	of	it	to	dissolve	before	going	into	the	oven?

We	prepared	two	batches	of	our	Ultimate	Chocolate	Chip	Cookies.	Dough	from	the	first	batch	went
straight	from	the	mixing	bowl	onto	the	baking	sheet;	the	other	batch	rested	for	10	minutes	(with	occasional
whisking)	after	we	combined	the	sugar	with	the	recipe’s	liquids.

Cookies	baked	from	the	rested	batter	boasted	not	only	richer,	deeper	flavor	but	also	crisper	edges.
Dissolving	the	sugar	in	the	liquid	provided	by	the	melted	butter,	vanilla,	and	egg	affects	both	flavor	and

texture.	Dissolved	sugar	breaks	down	more	quickly	from	crystalline	sucrose	into	glucose	and	fructose,
which	caramelize	at	a	lower	temperature	to	form	many	new	flavor	compounds.	As	the	dissolved,
caramelized	sugar	cools,	it	takes	on	a	brittle	structure.	In	our	cookies	this	brittle	texture	is	more	evident	at
the	edges.	Why?	As	the	oven	burns	off	moisture	from	the	cookie	perimeter,	the	remaining	moisture	is
retained	in	the	center	by	the	sugar,	keeping	it	chewy.



SUGAR	SYRUPS	AT	WORK	
CREAMY	FROZEN	DESSERTS
When	sugar	is	used	in	cookies,	it	is	a	liquid	(dissolved)	ingredient	in	a	mixture
that	is	mostly	dry	ingredients.	Sugar	behaves	differently	when	heated	in	a	purely
liquid	medium,	as	is	the	case	when	making	frozen	desserts.	While	sugar	plays	an
important	role	in	ice	cream	(see	Vanilla	Ice	Cream),	its	effect	on	texture	is	less
clear-cut	in	a	recipe	with	so	much	fat.	However,	in	sherbets	and	ices,	which
contain	little	or	no	fat,	sugar	is	the	key	ingredient	that	determines	the	size	of	the
frozen	crystals	and	the	overall	texture	of	the	dessert.



FRESH	ORANGE	SHERBET
MAKES	ABOUT	1	QUART

If	using	a	canister-style	ice-cream	machine,	be	sure	to	freeze	the	empty	canister
at	least	24	hours	and	preferably	48	hours	before	churning.	For	self-refrigerating
ice	cream	machines,	prechill	the	canister	by	running	the	machine	for	five	to	10
minutes	before	pouring	in	the	sherbet.	For	the	freshest,	purest	orange	flavor,	use
freshly	squeezed	unpasteurized	orange	juice	(either	store-bought	or	juiced	at
home).	Pasteurized	fresh-squeezed	juice	makes	an	acceptable	though	noticeably
less	fresh-tasting	sherbet.	Do	not	use	juice	made	from	concentrate,	which	has	a
cooked	and	less	bright	flavor.

1				 cup	(7	ounces)	sugar
1				 tablespoon	grated	orange	zest	plus	2	cups	juice	(4	oranges)
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
3				 tablespoons	lemon	juice
2				 teaspoons	triple	sec	or	vodka
				2⁄3 cup	heavy	cream

1.	Pulse	sugar,	orange	zest,	and	salt	in	food	processor	until	damp,	10	to	15
pulses.	With	processor	running,	add	orange	juice	and	lemon	juice	in	slow,	steady
stream;	continue	to	process	until	sugar	is	fully	dissolved,	about	1	minute.	Strain
mixture	through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	medium	bowl;	stir	in	triple	sec,	then
cover	and	place	in	freezer	until	chilled	and	mixture	registers	about	40	degrees,
30	minutes	to	1	hour.	Do	not	let	mixture	freeze.
2.	When	mixture	is	chilled,	using	whisk,	whip	cream	in	medium	bowl	until

soft	peaks	form.	Whisking	constantly,	add	juice	mixture	in	steady	stream,
pouring	against	edge	of	bowl.	Transfer	to	ice	cream	machine	and	churn	until
mixture	resembles	thick	soft-serve	ice	cream,	25	to	30	minutes.
3.	Transfer	sherbet	to	airtight	container,	press	firmly	to	remove	any	air

pockets,	and	freeze	until	firm,	at	least	3	hours.	(Sherbet	can	be	frozen	for	up	to	1
week.)

FRESH	LIME	SHERBET
Substitute	lime	zest	for	orange	zest,	increase	sugar	to	1	cup	plus	2



tablespoons,	and	omit	lemon	juice.	Substitute	2⁄3	cup	lime	juice	(6	limes)
combined	with	1½	cups	water	for	orange	juice.

FRESH	LEMON	SHERBET
Omit	orange	juice.	Substitute	lemon	zest	for	orange	zest,	increase	sugar	to	1

cup	plus	2	tablespoons,	and	increase	lemon	juice	to	2⁄3	cup	(4	lemons).	Combine
lemon	juice	with	1½	cups	water	before	adding	to	food	processor.

FRESH	RASPBERRY	SHERBET

In-season	fresh	raspberries	have	the	best	flavor,	but	when	they	are	not	in	season,
frozen	raspberries	are	a	better	option.	Substitute	a	12-ounce	bag	of	frozen
raspberries	for	fresh.

Omit	orange	zest	and	juice.	Cook	15	ounces	(3	cups)	raspberries	with	sugar,
salt,	and	¾	cup	water	in	medium	saucepan	over	medium	heat,	stirring
occasionally,	until	mixture	just	begins	to	simmer,	about	7	minutes.	Strain
through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	medium	bowl,	pressing	on	solids	to	extract	as
much	liquid	as	possible.	Add	lemon	juice	and	triple	sec;	cover	and	place	in
freezer	until	chilled	and	mixture	registers	about	40	degrees,	30	minutes	to	1
hour.	Proceed	as	directed.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
The	perfect	sherbet	recipe	is	a	cross	between	sorbet	and	ice	cream,	containing
fruit,	sugar,	and	dairy	but	no	egg	yolks.	Like	its	foreign	cousin,	sorbet,	sherbet
should	taste	vibrant	and	fresh.	In	the	case	of	sherbet,	however,	its	assertive
flavor	is	tempered	by	the	creamy	addition	of	dairy.	Ideally,	it	is	as	smooth	as	ice
cream	but	devoid	of	ice	cream’s	richness	and	weight.	We	began	with	classic
orange	sherbet.	For	bright	flavor,	we	started	by	combining	fruit	zest	and	sugar
in	a	food	processor	before	adding	2	cups	of	orange	juice.	A	small	amount	of
alcohol	ensured	the	sherbet	had	a	smooth,	silky	texture,	and	whipped	heavy
cream	lightened	the	texture	of	our	frozen	dessert.	To	guarantee	sherbet	with	an
even	consistency,	we	prepared	it	in	an	ice	cream	machine	and	then	came	up	with
variations	with	lime,	lemon,	and	raspberries.
START	WITH	FRESH	FRUIT	Commercial	rainbow	sherbet	holds	a	certain

appeal,	until	you	actually	taste	it.	If	you	want	sherbet	that	tastes	like	fruit,	you
need	to	make	it	yourself,	and	you	have	to	start	with	real	fruit.	For	orange,	lime,
and	lemon	flavors,	you	need	the	zest	(which	has	a	good	deal	of	flavorful	oils)	as
well	juice.	For	raspberry	sherbet,	you	need	whole	fruit	(frozen	berries	are	fine).
ADD	SUGAR	AND	CREAM	Sherbet	requires	sugar	and	a	little	cream.

There	are	no	eggs.	(This	is	what	makes	sherbet	more	refreshing	than	ice	cream.)
And	the	amount	of	dairy	is	quite	small—less	than	1	cup	of	dairy	for	a	quart	of
sherbet.	(A	quart	of	ice	cream	has	3	cups	of	dairy.)	We	found	it	best	to	dissolve
the	sugar	right	in	the	fruit	juice	to	make	a	concentrated	base	(no	water	needed).
As	for	the	dairy,	we	like	2⁄3	cup	of	cream—there’s	less	water	in	cream	so	it	makes
the	sherbet	less	icy	than	versions	we	tested	with	half-and-half	or	milk.
GRIND	ZEST	AND	SUGAR	To	maximize	fruit	flavor,	we	found	it	best	to

grind	the	zest	with	the	sugar	in	a	food	processor,	then	add	juice,	and	strain.
Oranges	and	raspberries	need	a	boost	from	lemon	juice	(limes	and	lemons	are
fine	on	their	own).	We	add	a	pinch	of	salt	to	balance	sweet	and	tart	flavors.
USE	BOOZE	You	can	only	add	so	much	sugar	before	the	sherbet	becomes

too	sweet.	Unfortunately,	that	amount	of	sugar	doesn’t	yield	the	ideal	texture	(for
more	on	the	role	of	sugar	in	frozen	desserts,	see	“Role	of	Sugar	in	Freezing”).
We	tried	a	variety	of	tricks	used	in	other	recipes	to	keep	the	sherbet	soft—beaten
egg	whites,	gelatin,	and	corn	syrup—but	we	ended	up	preferring	a	little	booze.
Like	sugar,	alcohol	lowers	the	freezing	point	of	the	sherbet	mixture.	In	small
amounts,	you	can’t	taste	the	alcohol	(we	use	just	2	teaspoons	of	triple	sec	or
vodka)	but	it	does	have	a	significant	effect	on	texture	without	affecting
sweetness.



WHIP	THE	CREAM	We	tried	one	last	refinement—whipping	the	cream—to
make	the	finished	product	lighter	and	smoother.	We	found	it	best	to	chill	the
strained	liquid	base	(you	want	to	start	with	a	cold	mixture	whenever	making	any
frozen	dessert;	see	Vanilla	Ice	Cream),	and	then	fold	the	whipped	cream	into	the
chilled	base	right	before	it	goes	into	the	ice	cream	machine.
CHURN	IN	A	MACHINE	An	ice	cream	machine	is	essential	when	making

sherbet.	As	with	our	Vanilla	Ice	Cream,	you	need	a	machine	to	beat	in	air	and	to
make	the	texture	lighter	and	smoother.



CONCEPT	49

Sugar	and	Time	Make	Fruit	Juicier
Fruit	is	naturally	sweet,	so	why	do	so	many	recipes—everything	from	fruit
salads	to	fruit	crisps—call	for	so	much	sugar?	While	we	agree	that	many	recipes
go	overboard	and	make	the	fruit	taste	too	sweet,	you	can’t	eliminate	the	sugar
altogether.	When	fruit	is	tossed	with	sugar,	it	not	only	changes	the	flavor	of	the
fruit	but	it	changes	its	texture,	too.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Fruits,	by	definition,	are	the	reproductive	part	of	plants,	the	ones	containing	all
the	seeds.	Therefore,	they	are	engineered	by	nature	to	appeal,	enticing	animals	to
eat	them	and	scatter	their	seeds.	When	ripe,	fruits	are	often	brightly	colored,
filled	with	sugar,	and	smell	aggressively	good.
The	ripening	process	of	fruit	is	triggered	by	the	release	of	ethylene,	a	simple

gas	produced	by	the	plant	when	it	is	ready	to	ripen.	But	not	all	fruits	ripen	the
same	way:	There	are	two	different	methods.	One	type	of	fruit,	called	climacteric
fruit,	produces	a	sudden	burst	of	ethylene	right	when	it	is	ready	to	ripen.	During
this	process,	fruits	like	bananas,	peaches,	and	pears	convert	starch	to	sugar	and
begin	to	digest	their	cell	walls,	thereby	becoming	sweeter	and	softer	as	they
ripen.	Most	importantly,	climacteric	fruits	continue	to	ripen	in	this	way	even
after	they	are	separated	from	the	plant.	For	this	reason	most	climacteric	fruits	are
harvested	before	they	are	ripe,	at	the	firm	mature	stage,	when	they	are	better	able
to	withstand	the	rigors	of	shipping	and	storage.	This	fruit	will	continue	to	ripen
and	become	sweeter	after	it’s	brought	home	from	the	market.	The	other	type	of
fruit,	called	nonclimacteric,	produces	ethylene	only	very	slowly	and	does	not
continue	to	ripen	after	being	separated	from	the	plant.	Nonclimacteric	fruits	like
blueberries,	cherries,	and	oranges	do	not	convert	starch	to	sugar	but	must	receive
it	from	the	parent	plant.	As	a	result,	nonclimacteric	fruits	will	not	get	any
sweeter	after	harvesting	and	should	be	purchased	as	ripe	as	possible	to	ensure
the	best	quality.	(For	more	on	different	types	of	fruit,	see	Practical	Science.)
The	cell	structure	of	fruit	is	no	different	from	the	cell	structure	of	vegetables

(see	concept	23).	But	unlike	vegetables,	to	which	we	often	recommend	adding
salt	to	release	the	juices,	to	fruit	we	add	sugar.	Though	sugar	has	one-tenth	of	the
power	of	salt	when	it	comes	to	coaxing	the	fruit	to	release	its	liquid,	it	is
effective	nonetheless.	When	added	to	fruit	(which	is	often	chopped,	with	the	skin
removed,	to	maximize	surface	area)	sugar	produces	osmotic	pressure,	pulling	the
moisture	out	of	the	fruit’s	cells.
Why?	Sugar	is	hygroscopic,	meaning	it	has	an	affinity	for	water	molecules,	so

it	draws	out	water	by	osmotic	action,	then	holds	on	to	the	water.	Sugar	has	such
a	lust	for	water	it	will	even	draw	moisture	out	of	the	air.
When	sugar	is	added	to	fruit	to	draw	out	the	juices,	this	is	called	maceration.

Maceration	changes	the	texture	of	fruit,	making	it	softer	and	less	waterlogged.
Cells	filled	with	water	are	firm,	while	those	containing	less	water	become	flaccid
and	soft,	just	like	a	plant	wilts	when	it	becomes	dry.	The	flavor-rich	liquid	that’s



created	can	be	used	to	moisten	dishes	like	fruit	salad	or	berry	shortcakes,	or	it
can	be	discarded	to	help	keep	crumbles	and	pies	from	becoming	a	soggy	mess.



THE	EFFECT	OF	SUGAR	ON	FRUIT	CELLS



	
DRAWING	WATER	OUT	When	sugar	is	added	to	fruit,	the	sugar	draws	water	out	of	the	fruit’s	cells	via



osmosis.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
To	see	how	quickly	maceration	really	works,	we	ran	the	following	experiment:
We	sliced	4	ounces	of	fresh	strawberries	into	¼-inch	pieces,	tossed	them	with	1
tablespoon	of	granulated	sugar,	and	piled	them	into	the	middle	of	a	small
cocktail	napkin.	We	then	tracked	how	far	the	exuded	juices	traveled	on	the
napkin	at	five-minute	intervals	over	15	minutes.	We	repeated	the	test	three	times,
averaged	the	results,	and	compared	them	to	a	control	set	of	strawberry	slices
that	weren’t	tossed	with	sugar.



THE	RESULTS
The	moment	the	strawberries	came	in	contact	with	the	sugar	they	started	to
glisten	with	moisture	and	by	the	five-minute	mark	they’d	saturated	almost	an
inch	of	the	napkin.	After	another	five	minutes,	the	juices	traveled	an	additional
½	inch,	and	by	the	15-minute	mark	they’d	hit	the	edge	of	the	napkin,	registering
over	2	inches.	By	stark	comparison,	the	strawberries	that	were	sliced	but	not
macerated	left	only	a	faint	damp	footprint	behind	when	we	removed	them	after
15	minutes.	The	berries	tossed	with	sugar	were	also	noticeably	softer	at	the	end
of	the	15-minute	test	period	than	the	berries	that	had	not	been	tossed	with	sugar.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Tossing	fruit	with	a	little	sugar	may	seem	like	an	insignificant	step	in	a	recipe,
but	our	experiment	shows	that	the	difference	it	makes	is	sizable.	The	sugar
dissolves	and	draws	out	juices	from	the	fruit.	This	process	happens	quickly—30
minutes,	or	less,	depending	on	the	recipe.	The	sugar	both	softens	the	fruit	and
creates	flavorful	juices	that	can	either	be	used	or	discarded,	depending	on	the
recipe.



THE	EFFECT	OF	SUGAR	ON	FRUIT

	
After	15	minutes,	the	sliced	but	unsugared	strawberries	did	not	lose	any	liquid.

	
After	15	minutes,	the	strawberries	macerated	in	sugar	saturated	the	napkin	with	juice.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SELECTED	CLIMACTERIC	AND	NONCLIMACTERIC	FRUITS

Different	fruits	ripen	in	different	ways,	but	most	can	be	separated	into	two	categories:
climacteric	and	non.

	
CLIMACTERIC	FRUITS

Apples,	apricots,	avocados,	bananas,	cantaloupes,	peaches,	pears,	plums,	tomatoes,	papayas,	and	mangoes
continue	to	ripen	after	harvest.

	



NONCLIMACTERIC	FRUITS
Bell	peppers,	blueberries,	cherries,	grapefruits,	lemons,	oranges,	grapes,	melons,	pineapples,	raspberries,

and	strawberries	should	be	purchased	only	when	fully	ripe.



MACERATION	AT	WORK	
FRUIT	SALADS
We	use	sugar	to	draw	out	moisture	from	fruit	in	fruit	salads	to	create	a	flavorful
dressing.	Macerating	also	gives	the	fruit	a	more	appealing	texture.



HONEYDEW,	MANGO,	AND	RASPBERRIES	WITH	LIME	AND
GINGER

SERVES	4	TO	6

The	optional	cayenne	adds	a	bit	of	heat	to	this	fruit	salad.

4				 teaspoons	sugar
2				 teaspoons	grated	lime	zest	plus	1	to	2	tablespoons	juice
					 Pinch	cayenne	(optional)
3				 cups	honeydew	melon,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
1				 mango,	peeled,	pitted,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	(1½	cups)

1–2				 teaspoons	grated	fresh	ginger
5				 ounces	(1	cup)	raspberries

Combine	sugar,	lime	zest,	and	cayenne,	if	using,	in	large	bowl.	Using	rubber
spatula,	press	mixture	into	side	of	bowl	until	sugar	becomes	damp,	about	30
seconds.	Gently	toss	honeydew,	mango,	and	ginger	to	taste	with	sugar	mixture
until	combined.	Let	sit	at	room	temperature,	stirring	occasionally,	until	fruit
releases	its	juices,	15	to	30	minutes.	Gently	stir	in	raspberries.	Stir	in	lime	juice
to	taste,	and	serve.



PEACHES,	BLACKBERRIES,	AND	STRAWBERRIES	WITH	BASIL
AND	PEPPER
SERVES	4	TO	6

Nectarines	can	be	substituted	for	the	peaches.
	

4				 teaspoons	sugar
2				 tablespoons	chopped	fresh	basil
½				 teaspoon	pepper
18				 ounces	peaches,	halved,	pitted,	and	cut	into	½-inch	pieces
10				 ounces	(2	cups)	blackberries
10				 ounces	strawberries	(2	cups),	hulled	and	quartered	lengthwise
1–2				 tablespoons	lime	juice

Combine	sugar,	basil,	and	pepper	in	large	bowl.	Using	rubber	spatula,	press
mixture	into	side	of	bowl	until	sugar	becomes	damp,	about	30	seconds.	Gently
toss	fruit	with	sugar	mixture	until	combined.	Let	sit	at	room	temperature,	stirring
occasionally,	until	fruit	releases	its	juices,	15	to	30	minutes.	Stir	in	lime	juice	to
taste,	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Most	fruit	salads	betray	neither	rhyme	nor	reason	regarding	the	fruit	selection
or	assembly,	and	the	customary	heavy	sprinkling	of	sugar	seems	designed	to
mask	defects	in	the	fruit.	We	set	out	to	rewrite	the	rules	of	fruit	salad	to	bring	out
the	best	fruit	flavor.	We	cut	the	fruit	into	small,	uniform	pieces,	so	the	different
flavors	and	textures	would	come	through	in	each	mouthful.	To	keep	each	fruit
distinct,	we	also	limited	the	number	to	three	per	salad.	We	found	it	hard	to	judge
the	proper	amount	of	sugar	when	it	was	added	directly	to	the	salad,	so	we
macerated	each	fruit	in	just	the	amount	needed	to	release	the	fruits’	natural
juices;	we	also	balanced	the	sweetness	with	fresh	lime	juice.	But	first,	we
mashed	the	sugar	with	herbs	and	zests	(in	bartending	circles,	this	process	is
called	“muddling”)	to	ensure	even	flavor	distribution.
SKIP	THE	SYRUP,	KEEP	THE	SUGAR	Many	classic	fruit	salads	dissolve

the	sugar	in	water	to	make	a	simple	syrup	that	is	then	tossed	with	the	fruit.
Besides	the	bother	(you	have	to	turn	on	the	stove),	the	water	doesn’t	improve	the
flavor	of	the	fruit.	We	prefer	to	simply	toss	the	cut	fruit	with	sugar	and	wait	for
15	to	30	minutes.	The	sugar	draws	juices	out	of	the	fruit	and	makes	a	natural
syrup	that’s	much	more	flavorful.	The	juices	moisten	the	salad	and	make	the
fruit	taste	better.
MUDDLE	FLAVORINGS	WITH	SUGAR	Fresh	herbs,	citrus	zest,	and

spices	are	nice	counterpoints	to	the	fruit	in	a	summer	salad.	Making	the	classic
syrup	does	have	the	advantage	of	getting	these	flavors	into	the	fruit;	simply
tossing	these	flavorings	right	into	the	fruit	salad	doesn’t	work	as	well.	To	ensure
even	distribution	and/or	to	make	their	texture	disappear	into	the	salad,	we	found
it	best	to	work	these	seasonings	into	the	raw	sugar.	We	use	the	bartending
technique	of	muddling,	in	which	a	small	wooden	dowel	with	a	flattened	end	is
used	to	mash	sugar	with	herbs	or	citrus	to	extract	bigger,	fresher	flavors	in
alcoholic	drinks	(think	mojitos).	Using	a	flexible	rubber	spatula,	we	can	apply
this	technique	to	our	salad.
FINISH	WITH	LIME	JUICE	Just	before	serving	we	recommend	tossing	the

fruit	salad	with	a	little	lime	juice	(1	to	2	tablespoons,	depending	on	the
sweetness	of	the	fruit).	The	acidity	balances	the	sugar	and	makes	the	salad	taste
fresher	and	brighter.



MACERATION	AT	WORK	
FRUIT	DESSERTS
Many	crisps,	cobblers,	crumbles,	and	shortcakes	begin	by	tossing	the	fruit	with
sugar	and	other	flavorings.	The	idea	is	to	get	the	fruit	to	release	its	juices	and
help	create	a	saucier	texture.	Macerating	is	also	a	way	to	get	the	fruit	to	release
its	juices	before	baking,	so	you	don’t	end	up	with	a	soggy	mess.



PEACH	CRUMBLE
SERVES	6

Add	the	lemon	juice	to	taste	in	step	2	according	to	the	sweetness	of	your
peaches.	If	ripe	peaches	are	unavailable,	you	can	substitute	3	pounds	of	frozen
peaches,	thawed	overnight	in	the	refrigerator.	If	your	peaches	are	firm,	you
should	be	able	to	peel	them	with	a	vegetable	peeler.	If	they	are	too	soft	and	ripe
to	withstand	the	pressure	of	a	peeler,	you’ll	need	to	blanch	them	in	a	pot	of
simmering	water	for	15	seconds	and	then	shock	them	in	a	bowl	of	ice	water
before	peeling.	Serve	with	vanilla	ice	cream.

FILLING
3½				 pounds	peaches,	peeled,	halved,	pitted,	and	cut	into	¾-inch	wedges
				1⁄3 cup	(21⁄3	ounces)	granulated	sugar
1¼				 teaspoons	cornstarch
3–5				 teaspoons	lemon	juice

					 Pinch	salt
					 Pinch	ground	cinnamon
					 Pinch	ground	nutmeg

CRUMBLE	TOPPING
1				 cup	(5	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
5				 tablespoons	(2¼	ounces)	granulated	sugar
¼				 cup	packed	(1¾	ounces)	brown	sugar
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
6				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	6	pieces	and	softened	(68	degrees)
½				 cup	sliced	almonds

1.	Adjust	oven	racks	to	lowest	and	middle	positions	and	heat	oven	to	350
degrees.	Line	rimmed	baking	sheet	with	parchment	paper.	Line	second	rimmed
baking	sheet	with	aluminum	foil.
2.	FOR	THE	FILLING:	Gently	toss	peaches	and	sugar	together	in	large

bowl	and	let	sit	for	30	minutes,	gently	stirring	several	times.	Drain	peaches	in
colander	set	over	large	bowl	and	reserve	¼	cup	juices	(discard	remaining	juices).



Whisk	reserved	juices,	cornstarch,	lemon	juice	to	taste,	salt,	cinnamon,	and
nutmeg	together	in	small	bowl.	Combine	peaches	and	juice	mixture	in	bowl	and
transfer	to	8-inch	square	baking	dish.
3.	FOR	THE	CRUMBLE	TOPPING:	While	peaches	are	macerating,

combine	flour,	¼	cup	granulated	sugar,	brown	sugar,	and	salt	in	food	processor
and	drizzle	vanilla	over	top.	Pulse	to	combine,	about	5	pulses.	Scatter	butter
pieces	and	¼	cup	almonds	over	top	and	process	until	mixture	clumps	together
into	large,	crumbly	balls,	about	30	seconds,	scraping	down	bowl	halfway
through	processing.	Sprinkle	remaining	¼	cup	almonds	over	mixture	and	pulse	2
times	to	combine.	Transfer	mixture	to	parchment-lined	baking	sheet	and	spread
into	even	layer	(mixture	should	break	up	into	roughly	½-inch	chunks	with	some
smaller,	loose	bits).	Bake	on	middle	rack	until	chunks	are	lightly	browned	and
firm,	18	to	22	minutes,	rotating	baking	sheet	halfway	through	baking.	(Cooled
topping	can	be	stored	in	airtight	container	for	up	to	2	days.)
4.	TO	ASSEMBLE	AND	BAKE:	Grasp	edges	of	parchment	paper,	slide

topping	off	paper	over	peaches,	and	spread	into	even	layer	with	spatula,	packing
down	lightly	and	breaking	up	any	very	large	pieces.	Sprinkle	remaining	1
tablespoon	sugar	evenly	over	top	and	place	dish	on	foil-lined	baking	sheet;	place
on	lower	rack.	Increase	oven	temperature	to	375	degrees	and	bake	until	well
browned	and	filling	is	bubbling	around	edges,	25	to	35	minutes,	rotating	baking
sheet	halfway	through	baking.	Transfer	baking	dish	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	for
at	least	15	minutes;	serve	warm.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
A	soggy	topping	and	watery,	flavorless	filling	are	the	norm	for	the	simple,
humble	peach	crumble.	The	problem	is	the	peaches—you	never	know	just	how
juicy	or	how	flavorful	they	will	be	until	you	cut	them	open.	We	wanted	a	peach
crumble	that	consisted	of	fresh-tasting,	lightly	sweetened	peaches	topped	with	a
buttery,	crisp,	and	nutty-tasting	crumble—no	matter	how	sweet	the	peaches	were
(or	weren’t).	Solving	the	peach	problem	involved	letting	peeled,	sliced	peaches
macerate	in	sugar.	The	sweetness	of	the	filling	was	adjusted	by	adding	more	or
less	lemon	juice	as	needed.	Baking	the	topping	separately	solved	the	final
challenge	of	getting	a	crisp,	well-browned	crust.
MACERATE	AND	MEASURE	Many	peaches	shed	a	ton	of	liquid	when

baked,	causing	a	soggy	crumble	that’s	not	nearly	crisp	enough	on	top.	Our
solution	is	to	macerate	the	sliced	peaches	for	30	minutes.	We	then	drain	the
juices	and	discard	all	but	¼	cup.	We	add	a	little	thickener	(cornstarch)	to	the
reserved	juices,	along	with	the	flavorings	(lemon	juice,	salt,	cinnamon,	and
nutmeg),	and	toss	this	with	the	macerated	fruit.	This	way	we	know	just	how
much	juice	will	be	in	the	baking	dish.
MAKE	A	CRISP	CRUMBLE	For	our	crumble	we	use	softened	butter	rather

than	melted	butter.	Melted	butter	makes	a	topping	that	is	too	sandy.	We	prefer	to
make	the	topping	in	a	food	processor.	This	way,	we	end	up	with	a	cohesive
dough,	which	can	be	easily	broken	apart	into	large	chunks	that	bake	up	nice	and
crisp	in	the	oven.
BAKE	THE	TOPPING	FIRST	No	topping	baked	on	top	of	steaming	fruit

will	ever	become	really	crisp.	Our	solution	is	to	bake	the	topping	on	a	separate
baking	sheet	until	lightly	browned.	We	then	add	the	baked	topping	to	the	fruit
and	put	the	crumble	in	the	oven.	A	sprinkling	of	sugar	over	the	crumble	topping
adds	a	sweet	crunch	on	top.	This	method	ensures	that	as	soon	as	the	fruit	is
cooked,	the	topping	will	be	browned	and	crisp.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
KEEP	YOUR	PEACHES	OUT	OF	THE	COLD

Unless	your	peaches	are	ripe,	don’t	refrigerate	them.

Keeping	peaches	in	the	fridge	might	seem	like	a	good	way	to	prolong	their	shelf	life,	but	unless	the	fruit	is
ripe,	the	cold	temperatures	can	turn	their	flesh	mealy.	Storing	the	fruit	at	or	below	40	degrees	deactivates	an
enzyme	that	breaks	down	pectin	during	ripening.	If	this	happens	before	the	flesh	is	ripe,	the	pectin	will
remain	intact	and	the	flesh	texture	will	be	mealy.	The	lesson:	Store	peaches	on	the	counter.



STRAWBERRY	SHORTCAKES
SERVES	6

Preparing	the	fruit	first	gives	it	time	to	release	its	juices.

FRUIT
2½				 pounds	strawberries	(8	cups),	hulled
6				 tablespoons	(22⁄3	ounces)	sugar

BISCUITS
2				 cups	(10	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
5				 tablespoons	(2¼	ounces)	sugar
1				 tablespoon	baking	powder
½				 teaspoon	salt
8				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces	and	chilled
½				 cup	plus	1	tablespoon	half-and-half	or	milk
1				 large	egg,	lightly	beaten,	plus	1	large	white,	lightly	beaten

1				 recipe	Whipped	Cream	(recipe	follows)

1.	FOR	THE	FRUIT:	Crush	3	cups	strawberries	in	large	bowl	with	potato
masher.	Slice	remaining	5	cups	berries.	Stir	sliced	berries	and	sugar	into	crushed
berries.	Set	aside	until	sugar	has	dissolved	and	berries	are	juicy,	at	least	30
minutes	or	up	to	2	hours.
2.	FOR	THE	BISCUITS:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lower-middle	position	and

heat	oven	to	425	degrees.	Line	baking	sheet	with	parchment	paper.	Pulse	flour,	3
tablespoons	sugar,	baking	powder,	and	salt	in	food	processor	until	combined.
Scatter	butter	pieces	over	top	and	pulse	until	mixture	resembles	coarse	meal,
about	15	pulses.	Transfer	mixture	to	large	bowl.
3.	Whisk	half-and-half	and	whole	egg	together	in	bowl,	then	stir	into	flour

mixture	until	large	clumps	form.	Turn	out	onto	lightly	floured	counter	and	knead
lightly	until	dough	comes	together	(do	not	overwork	dough).
4.	Pat	dough	into	9	by	6-inch	rectangle,	about	¾	inch	thick.	Using	floured	2¾-



inch	biscuit	cutter,	cut	out	6	dough	rounds.	Arrange	biscuits	on	prepared	sheet,
spaced	about	1½	inches	apart.	Brush	tops	with	egg	white	and	sprinkle	evenly
with	remaining	2	tablespoons	sugar.	(Unbaked	biscuits	can	be	refrigerated,
covered	with	plastic	wrap,	for	up	to	2	hours.)
5.	Bake	until	biscuits	are	golden	brown,	12	to	14	minutes,	rotating	baking

sheet	halfway	through	baking.	Transfer	baking	sheet	to	wire	rack	and	let	biscuits
cool,	about	10	minutes.	(Cooled	biscuits	can	be	stored	at	room	temperature	for
up	to	1	day.	Before	assembling,	reheat	in	350-degree	oven	for	3	to	5	minutes.)
6.	To	assemble,	split	each	biscuit	in	half	and	place	bottoms	on	individual

plates.	Spoon	portion	of	berries	over	each	bottom,	dollop	with	whipped	cream,
and	cap	with	biscuit	tops.	Serve	immediately.



WHIPPED	CREAM
MAKES	ABOUT	2	CUPS

For	lightly	sweetened	whipped	cream,	reduce	the	sugar	to	1½	teaspoons.

1				 cup	heavy	cream,	chilled
1				 tablespoon	sugar
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	cream,	sugar,	and	vanilla	on
medium-low	speed	until	foamy,	about	1	minute.	Increase	speed	to	high	and	whip
until	soft	peaks	form,	1	to	3	minutes.	(Whipped	cream	can	be	refrigerated	in
fine-mesh	strainer	set	over	small	bowl	and	covered	with	plastic	wrap	for	up	to	8
hours.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
While	some	folks	like	to	spoon	strawberries	over	pound	cake,	sponge	cake,	or
even	angel	food	cake,	our	idea	of	strawberry	shortcake	definitely	involves	a
biscuit.	We	wanted	a	juicy	strawberry	filling	and	mounds	of	freshly	whipped
cream	sandwiched	in	the	middle	of	a	lightly	sweetened,	tender	biscuit.	Therefore,
we	enhance	the	biscuit	dough	with	egg	and	sugar,	and	mash	a	portion	of	the
berries	while	slicing	the	rest	for	a	chunky,	juicy	mixture	that	won’t	slide	off	the
biscuits.
MASH	SOME	BERRIES	Most	strawberry	shortcakes	are	made	with	sliced

or	quartered	berries,	which	simply	slide	off	the	biscuit	when	you	go	to	eat	it.	We
mash	some	of	the	berries	and	then	stir	in	the	sliced	berries	and	sugar.	The	sugar
dissolves	after	about	30	minutes	and	you	have	plenty	of	thickened,	juicy	berry
puree	that	will	anchor	the	sliced	berries	in	place.
ENRICH	THOSE	BISCUITS	Yes,	you	can	use	regular	biscuits	to	make	a

shortcake,	but	we	think	a	true	shortcake	should	be	sweet	(we	add	more	sugar	to
the	biscuits)	and	richer	(we	add	an	egg	and	use	half-and-half	rather	than	milk).
Brushing	the	biscuits	with	a	beaten	egg	white	and	then	sprinkling	them	with
sugar	gives	them	a	crunchy,	appealingly	browned	top.
USE	COLD	CREAM	The	secret	to	billowy	whipped	cream	is	to	start	with

cold	cream.	If	the	cream	has	been	well	chilled	in	the	refrigerator,	it	should	whip
just	fine.	If	your	kitchen	is	warm,	chill	the	mixer	bowl	and	whisk,	too.	To
sweeten	the	cream,	we	prefer	granulated	sugar,	added	at	the	outset.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SECRETS	TO	FOOLPROOF	WHIPPED	CREAM

It’s	best	to	add	sugar	early,	and	keep	your	cream	cold.

When	is	the	best	time	to	add	sugar	when	making	whipped	cream?	The	old	wives’	tale	says	that	you	need	to
add	it	at	the	end;	otherwise,	the	cream	won’t	whip	properly.	We	made	two	batches	of	whipped	cream	to	find
out.	We	added	the	sugar	at	two	different	points:	at	the	beginning	of	whipping	and	at	the	end.	Although	both
batches	whipped	to	the	same	volume,	there	was	a	difference	in	texture.	When	the	sugar	was	added	later	in
the	process,	the	whipped	cream	had	a	slightly	grainy	texture.	When	added	to	the	cream	at	the	beginning	of
whipping,	however,	the	granules	had	dissolved	by	the	time	the	cream	was	fully	whipped.

While	sugar	timing	doesn’t	affect	the	cream’s	ability	to	whip	up	properly,	the	temperature	of	the	cream
does.	Whipping	the	cream	introduces	air	bubbles,	whose	walls	are	stabilized	by	tiny	globules	of	fat.	These
fat	globules	hold	the	air	bubbles	in	place	as	the	whipping	continues,	forming	what	eventually	becomes	light,
airy	whipped	cream.	Because	heat	softens	the	butterfat	in	the	cream,	the	liquid	fat	globules	will	collapse
completely	rather	than	hold	together	the	air	bubbles,	preventing	the	cream	from	whipping	up	properly.	To
keep	this	from	happening,	it	is	crucial	to	use	cream	straight	from	the	refrigerator.	Chilling	the	bowl	and
beaters	helps,	too.



BERRY	FOOL
SERVES	6

Blueberries	or	blackberries	can	be	substituted	for	the	raspberries	in	this	recipe.
You	may	also	substitute	frozen	fruit	for	fresh,	but	it	will	slightly	compromise	the
texture.	If	using	frozen	fruit,	reduce	the	amount	of	sugar	in	the	puree	by	1
tablespoon.	The	thickened	fruit	puree	can	be	made	up	to	four	hours	in	advance;
just	make	sure	to	whisk	it	well	in	step	4	to	break	up	any	clumps	before	combining
it	with	the	whipped	cream.	For	the	best	results,	chill	your	mixer	bowl	and	whisk
before	whipping	the	cream.	We	like	the	granular	texture	and	nutty	flavor	of
Carr’s	Whole	Wheat	Crackers,	but	graham	crackers	or	gingersnaps	will	also
work.	You	will	need	six	tall	parfait	or	sundae	glasses	for	this	recipe.

2				 pounds	strawberries	(6	cups),	hulled
12				 ounces	(21⁄3	cups)	raspberries
¾				 cup	(5¼	ounces)	sugar
2				 teaspoons	unflavored	gelatin
1				 cup	heavy	cream,	chilled
¼				 cup	sour	cream,	chilled
½				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract
4				 Carr’s	Whole	Wheat	Crackers,	crushed	fine	(¼	cup)
6				 sprigs	fresh	mint	(optional)

1.	Process	half	of	strawberries,	half	of	raspberries,	and	½	cup	sugar	in	food
processor	until	mixture	is	completely	smooth,	about	1	minute.	Strain	berry	puree
through	fine-mesh	strainer	into	large	liquid	measuring	cup	(you	should	have
about	2½	cups	puree;	reserve	excess	for	another	use).	Transfer	½	cup	puree	to
small	bowl	and	sprinkle	gelatin	over	top;	let	stand	for	at	least	5	minutes	to	soften
and	stir.	Heat	remaining	2	cups	puree	in	small	saucepan	over	medium	heat	until
it	begins	to	bubble,	4	to	6	minutes.	Off	heat,	stir	in	gelatin	mixture	until
dissolved.	Transfer	to	medium	bowl,	cover	with	plastic	wrap,	and	refrigerate
until	well	chilled,	about	2	hours.
2.	Meanwhile,	chop	remaining	strawberries	into	rough	¼-inch	pieces.	Toss

strawberries,	remaining	raspberries,	and	2	tablespoons	sugar	together	in	medium
bowl.	Set	aside	for	1	hour.
3.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	cream,	sour	cream,	vanilla,	and



remaining	2	tablespoons	sugar	on	low	speed	until	bubbles	form,	about	30
seconds.	Increase	speed	to	medium	and	whip	until	whisk	leaves	trail,	about	30
seconds.	Increase	speed	to	high;	whip	until	mixture	has	nearly	doubled	in
volume	and	holds	stiff	peaks,	about	30	seconds.	Transfer	1⁄3	cup	whipped	cream
mixture	to	small	bowl;	set	aside.
4.	Remove	berry	puree	from	refrigerator	and	whisk	until	smooth.	With	mixer

on	medium	speed,	slowly	add	two-thirds	of	puree	to	whipped	cream	mixture;
mix	until	incorporated,	about	15	seconds.	Using	spatula,	gently	fold	in	remaining
puree,	leaving	streaks	of	puree.
5.	Transfer	uncooked	berries	to	fine-mesh	strainer;	shake	gently	to	remove	any

excess	juices.	Divide	two-thirds	of	berries	evenly	among	six	tall	parfait	or
sundae	glasses.	Divide	creamy	berry	mixture	evenly	among	glasses,	followed	by
remaining	uncooked	berries.	Top	each	glass	with	reserved	plain	whipped	cream
mixture.	Sprinkle	with	crushed	crackers	and	garnish	with	mint	sprigs,	if	using.
Serve	immediately.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	traditional	British	fruit	dessert	is	typically	made	by	folding	pureed	stewed
fruit	(usually	gooseberries)	into	pastry	cream.	Modern	fool	recipes	skip	the
pastry	cream	and	use	whipped	cream.	Simpler	for	sure,	but	with	whipped	cream
the	fool	ends	up	too	loose	and	watery.	We	wanted	a	dessert	with	intense
fruitiness	and	rich	body—and	we	wanted	to	use	strawberries	and	raspberries
rather	than	gooseberries.	To	do	this,	we	thickened	the	fruit	properly	with	gelatin
and	strengthened	our	whipped	cream	with	sour	cream.	For	even	more	fruit
flavor,	we	layered	the	fruit	puree	and	cream	base	with	fresh	berries	that	had
been	macerated	in	sugar.
PUREE	SOME	BERRIES	We	tried	various	methods	for	thickening	the	fruit

(since	we	didn’t	want	to	lose	the	ease	of	whipped	cream)	and	ended	up	using
gelatin	to	make	a	thick,	sweet	puree.	The	rest	of	the	berries	are	chopped	and
macerated	so	they	soften	and	become	more	flavorful.	We	strain	off	the	excess
juices	to	keep	the	fool	from	becoming	soggy.
SWELL,	THEN	HEAT	THE	GELATIN	For	the	gelatin	in	the	fruit	puree,

we	use	a	judicious	hand.	First	we	add	2	teaspoons	of	gelatin	to	some	uncooked
berry	puree	to	let	it	soften,	and	then	we	combine	the	softened	mixture	with	some
heated	puree	to	help	melt	and	distribute	the	gelatin.	(Most	recipes	call	for	the
gelatin	to	be	hydrated	because	adding	powdered	gelatin	directly	to	hot	liquid	can
cause	the	exterior	of	the	gelatin	granules	to	hydrate	too	quickly,	making	them
clump	together	and	preventing	the	center	of	the	granules	from	absorbing	water.)
After	sitting	for	a	couple	of	hours	in	the	refrigerator,	the	puree	thickens	to	the
consistency	of	loose	pie	filling—perfect.
BULK	UP	WHIPPED	CREAM	With	the	gelatin	added	to	our	fruit,	it	could

hold	its	own	against	the	whipped	cream,	but	we	wondered	if	there	was	an	easy
way	to	make	the	whipped	cream	itself	sturdier	and	richer.	After	trying	yogurt,
mascarpone,	crème	fraîche,	and	sour	cream,	our	tasters	thought	sour	cream	did
the	best	job—it	provided	just	the	right	degree	of	richness	along	with	a	mild	tang.
BUILD	THE	LAYERS	We	fold	some	of	the	gelatin-thickened	puree	into	the

some	of	the	whipped	cream	and	then	layer	that	with	fresh	berries	and	plain
whipped	cream.	We	like	a	final	garnish	of	some	crushed	Carr’s	Whole	Wheat
Crackers	for	a	little	crunch	but	this	is	optional.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
GELATIN	VS.	PECTIN

Gelatin	is	our	first	choice	to	thicken	the	berry	puree	in	our	fool.

Gelatin	might	be	a	newcomer	to	recipes	for	fruit	fool,	but	it	has	long	been	used	to	impart	a	silken	texture	to
desserts	ranging	from	Bavarian	crème	to	mousse.	A	pure	protein	derived	from	animal	bones	and	connective
tissues,	gelatin	changes	a	liquid	into	a	semisolid	state	by	trapping	water	and	slowing	its	movement.	In
contrast	to	other	thickening	agents,	gelatin	begins	to	melt	at	body	temperature,	contributing	to	a	unique
sensation	in	the	mouth.	These	properties	work	beautifully	in	our	Berry	Fool,	transforming	a	thin	berry	puree
into	a	viscous	mixture	that	lends	silkiness	to	the	enriched	whipped	cream.

Pectin	is	a	carbohydrate	that	occurs	naturally	in	fruits	and	vegetables	and	holds	cell	walls	together	like
cement.	When	exposed	to	heat,	sugar,	and	acid,	pectin	molecules	loosen	their	grip	on	the	cell	walls	and
bond	directly	with	each	other,	creating	a	matrix	that	traps	water	in	much	the	same	way	gelatin	molecules	do.
However,	unlike	gelatin,	pectin	requires	high	temperatures	for	its	thickening	action	to	be	reversed.	It	also
proved	an	unsuitable	thickener	for	the	fruit	in	our	fool,	requiring	so	much	sugar	to	work	that	it	turned	the
berries	into	jam.



SWEETENERS	101
STRUCTURE
Most	home	kitchens	are	stocked	with	a	multitude	of	sweeteners	derived	from	various	plant	sources.	(Honey
is	an	exception	since	it	is	“processed”	by	bees,	not	humans.)	Most	natural	sweeteners	are	obtained	by	either
extracting	or	squeezing	them	from	these	plant	sources	and	then	purifying	the	natural	sugars.	Before
examining	the	differences	among	these	sweeteners,	let’s	first	understand	their	basic	chemical	composition.
Natural	sweeteners	are	based	on	different	types	of	sugar	molecules	called	mono-and	disaccharides,
composed	of	only	carbon,	hydrogen,	and	oxygen.	Sweet-tasting	sugar	molecules	contain	atoms	of	hydrogen
linked	to	oxygen	(called	hydroxy	groups)	attached	to	a	carbon	framework	in	specific	three-dimensional
shapes	that	bind	with	the	sweet	taste	receptors	in	the	mouth.	Most	sweeteners	rely	on	the	following
molecules,	alone	or	in	combination.

	
GLUCOSE
Glucose	(also	known	as	dextrose)	is	one	of	two	simple	sugar	molecules.	(The	other	is	fructose.)	It	is
referred	to	as	a	monosaccharide.	Glucose	is	found	in	a	variety	of	living	cells,	especially	fruits	and	honey.	It
is	also	found	in	corn	syrup	made	from	cornstarch.	Glucose	is	only	75	percent	as	sweet	as	sucrose.

FRUCTOSE



Fructose	is	one	of	two	simple	sugar	molecules.	Like	glucose,	fructose	is	referred	to	as	a	monosaccharide.
Like	glucose,	fructose	is	found	in	many	fruits	as	well	as	honey.	Fructose	is	almost	1.5	times	sweeter	than
sucrose.

SUCROSE
This	complex	sugar	contains	one	molecule	of	glucose	bonded	to	one	molecule	of	fructose,	in	what	is	called
a	disaccharide.	Like	glucose	and	fructose,	sucrose	is	produced	by	green	plants	during	photosynthesis.	All
sugar	derived	from	cane	or	beets,	including	granulated	sugar,	consists	mainly	or	entirely	of	sucrose,	as	does
maple	syrup.

BUYING
GRANULATED	SUGAR	Common	granulated	sugar	starts	with	either	sugar	cane	or	sugar	beets.	In

kitchen	tests,	we	couldn’t	tell	the	difference,	since	the	end	product,	sucrose,	is	chemically	the	same,	no
matter	the	source.

SUPERFINE	SUGAR	This	finely	processed	sugar	has	extra-small	crystals	that	dissolve	quickly,
making	it	a	must	for	drinks.	Superfine	sugar	promotes	a	melt-in-the-mouth	texture	in	delicate	cookies	such
as	shortbread.

CONFECTIONERS’	SUGAR	To	prevent	clumping,	this	pulverized	sugar	contains	a	small	amount	of
cornstarch,	making	it	ideal	for	dusting	over	cakes	or	dissolving	in	a	quick	glaze.

BROWN	SUGAR	Modern	brown	sugar	is	basically	granulated	sugar	with	molasses	added—6.5	percent
for	dark	brown	sugar	or	3.5	percent	for	light	brown	sugar.	Except	for	certain	recipes,	we	find	that	light	and
dark	brown	sugars	are	interchangeable,	with	some	slight	differences	in	flavor	and	texture.	Note	that	natural
brown	sugars,	such	as	Demerara	and	turbinado,	are	derived	from	sugar	cane	(like	granulated	sugar),	but
they	are	slightly	less	processed	and	thus	retain	a	gentle	molasses	flavor	and	larger	crystal	size.

MOLASSES	Molasses	is	a	byproduct	of	the	process	by	which	sugar	cane	is	refined.	Depending	on
when	in	the	process	the	molasses	is	extracted,	it	can	be	fairly	mild	or	quite	strong.	Blackstrap	molasses	is
derived	late	in	the	refining	process	and	has	a	harsh	flavor	we	don’t	like	in	recipes.

HONEY	Honey	has	a	distinct	flavor	based	on	the	type	of	plant	from	which	the	bees	extracted	their
nectar.	Honey	contains	water	as	well	as	fructose	and	glucose.

CORN	SYRUP	This	modern	sweetener	is	derived	from	cornstarch	and	contains	glucose	along	with	long
chains	of	glucose	molecules	that	make	it	very	thick	(viscous)	and	keep	it	from	crystallizing	like	honey	or
maple	syrup.	Corn	syrup	is	less	sweet	than	most	other	sweeteners.

STORING
GRANULATED	SUGAR	(as	well	as	superfine	and	confectioners’	sugar)	will	keep	indefinitely	in	a

cool,	dry	pantry.
BROWN	SUGAR	must	be	kept	in	an	airtight	container.	Over	time,	brown	sugar	will	dry	out.	To	revive

hardened	brown	sugar,	place	it	in	a	bowl	with	a	slice	of	bread,	cover	the	bowl	with	plastic	wrap,	and
microwave	it	on	high	power	for	10	to	20	seconds.	This	should	soften	the	sugar	enough	to	measure	it.	(It	will
harden	once	it	cools.)	Make	sure	to	pack	brown	sugar	into	the	cup	when	measuring	it.

HONEY	keeps	indefinitely	but	it	will	crystallize.	To	return	honey	to	a	fluid	state,	place	the	open
container	of	honey	in	a	saucepan	filled	with	1	inch	of	water	and	stir	over	low	heat	until	liquefied.

USING
It	is	possible	to	make	sweetener	substitutions.
To	Replace:	1	cup	superfine	sugar
Substitute:	Grind	1	cup	plus	2	teaspoons	granulated	sugar	in	food	processor	for	30	seconds.



To	Replace:	1	cup	confectioners’	sugar
Substitute:	Pulverize	1	cup	granulated	sugar	and	1	teaspoon	cornstarch	in	spice	grinder	or	blender	for	at
least	1	minute.	(Do	not	use	food	processor.)	Strain	through	fine-mesh	strainer	before	using.
To	Replace:	1	cup	light	brown	sugar
Substitute:	Pulse	1	cup	granulated	sugar	with	1	teaspoon	molasses	in	food	processor	until	uniformly
blended.
To	Replace:	1	cup	dark	brown	sugar
Substitute:	Pulse	1	cup	granulated	sugar	with	2	teaspoons	molasses	in	food	processor.



CONCEPT	50

Cocoa	Powder	Delivers	Big	Flavor
All	too	often,	chocolate	cakes,	brownies,	puddings,	and	mousses	look	dark	and
decadent,	but	take	a	bite	and	the	flavor	is	actually	pretty	wimpy.	This	might	be
because	an	insufficient	amount	of	chocolate	was	used.	But	just	as	often	the
culprit	is	the	type	of	chocolate,	not	the	amount.



HOW	THE	SCIENCE	WORKS
Older	dessert	recipes	generally	call	for	unsweetened	chocolate,	which	contains
cocoa	butter	(the	fat	that	makes	chocolate	so	smooth)	and	cocoa	solids	(the
compounds	that	create	chocolate	flavor).	Many	newer	recipes	call	for	bittersweet
chocolate,	which	is	basically	unsweetened	chocolate	with	sugar	added.	These
eating	chocolates	are	more	highly	processed	than	unsweetened	bars	and	can
provide	a	luscious	texture	to	frostings,	but	they	don’t	have	nearly	as	much
chocolate	oomph	as	unsweetened	chocolate.	That’s	why	brownies,	for	instance,
are	almost	always	made	with	unsweetened	chocolate.
While	we	rely	on	both	unsweetened	and	bittersweet	chocolates	in	our	dessert

recipes,	over	the	years	we	have	found	that	cocoa	powder	is	often	a	key
component	in	creating	chocolate	recipes	that	deliver	big	flavor.	We	use	cocoa	in
everything	from	chocolate	mousse	to	chocolate	cupcakes.	Not	only	do	other
recipes	rarely	call	for	cocoa	powder,	but	those	that	do	rarely	use	it	correctly.
Why	do	we	like	cocoa	powder?	Cocoa	powder	is	made	by	removing	most	of

the	fat	(cocoa	butter)	from	cocoa	liquor	(produced	from	fermented	cocoa	beans),
which	in	effect	concentrates	the	amount	of	cocoa	solids.	Ounce	for	ounce,	cocoa
powder	has	more	cocoa	solids—and	thus	more	chocolate	flavor—than	any	other
type	of	chocolate.	But	you	need	to	handle	the	cocoa	powder	correctly	to	get	the
maximum	flavor	benefit	from	this	potent	ingredient.
Cocoa	powder	contains	solid	particles	of	insoluble	carbohydrate,	fat	(about	10

to	12	percent),	and	a	smaller	amount	of	protein,	with	tiny	flavor	molecules
trapped	inside.	Some	of	these	flavor	molecules	come	from	the	cocoa	beans,
while	others	are	produced	during	the	fermentation	and	subsequent	roasting	of	the
beans.	If	you	simply	add	cocoa	powder	to	the	dry	ingredients	(as	is	often	the
case	in	cake	recipes	that	call	for	cocoa	powder),	you	don’t	get	much	flavor.	The
secret	to	using	cocoa	powder	is	to	bloom	the	flavors	by	pouring	hot	water	over
the	cocoa.	Stirring	the	cocoa	in	hot	water	causes	these	flavor	molecules,	which
would	otherwise	remain	imprisoned,	to	burst	forth,	amplifying	overall	flavor.
The	intensity	of	this	flavor	also	depends	on	how	the	cocoa	was	produced.

Regular	cocoa	powder	produced	from	fermented,	roasted	beans	has	an	intense
flavor	and	light	color,	and	is	naturally	acidic	with	a	pH	around	5.7.	Dutch-
processed,	or	alkalized,	cocoa	powder	is	produced	from	fermented	beans	that
have	been	treated	with	an	alkali	before	or	after	roasting	to	raise	the	pH	of	the
cocoa	powder	to	6.8	to	7.2.	Dutch-processed	cocoa	powder	has	a	milder,	less
bitter	flavor,	but	a	darker	color.	(For	more	on	different	types	of	cocoa	powder,



see	“Natural	Cocoa	and	Dutch-Processed	Cocoa.”)



COCOA	SOLIDS	IN	CHOCOLATE



	
COCOA	POWDER	Cocoa	powder	has	a	high	ratio	of	cocoa	solids,	which	are	responsible	for	giving	big



chocolate	flavor.



	
UNSWEETENED	Unsweetened	chocolate	has	a	good	deal	of	cocoa	solids,	but	also	contains	more	fat



crystals	than	cocoa	powder,	and	therefore	contains	less	chocolate	flavor.



	
BITTERSWEET	Bittersweet	chocolate	contains	less	cocoa	solids,	and	many	more	fat	crystals,	as	well	as



sugar,	giving	it	the	least	chocolate	flavor	of	the	three.



TEST	KITCHEN	EXPERIMENT
We	wanted	to	clear	up	any	confusion	about	the	amount	of	real	chocolate	flavor
in	three	common	forms	of	chocolate,	so	we	designed	a	simple	experiment.	We
made	three	batches	of	hot	chocolate.	For	each	8	ounces	of	hot	water,	we	used	1
ounce	of	chocolate—cocoa	powder,	bittersweet	bar	chocolate,	and	unsweetened
bar	chocolate,	respectively—and	asked	20	tasters	to	sample	them	in	a	blind	taste
test.	Tasters	were	asked	to	ignore	differences	in	sugar	and	fat	and	focus	solely	on
the	intensity	of	chocolate	flavor	in	each	sample.



THE	RESULTS
The	cocoa	powder	won	hands-down,	followed	by	the	unsweetened	bar
chocolate,	and	finally	the	bittersweet	bar	chocolate.	All	20	tasters	ranked	the	hot
chocolate	made	with	cocoa	powder	as	the	one	with	the	strongest	chocolate
flavor.



THE	TAKEAWAY
Our	results	correlate	directly	to	the	percentage	of	cocoa	solids	in	each	type	of
chocolate	(that	is,	the	more	cocoa	solids,	the	more	chocolate	flavor	we	noticed),
so	we	did	some	math	to	figure	out	how	much	unsweetened	and	bittersweet
chocolate	we’d	need	to	use	in	order	to	have	the	same	intensity	of	chocolate
flavor	as	we	got	from	the	cocoa	powder.	Cocoa	powder	is	80	percent	cocoa
solids,	so	1	ounce	provides	0.8	ounce	of	flavorful	solids.	Our	preferred	brand	of
unsweetened	chocolate	is	about	49	percent	cocoa	solids	(the	remainder	of	the	bar
is	made	up	of	fat	and	emulsifiers)	so	we	would	need	about	1.63	ounces	of	it	to
equal	0.8	ounce	of	solids.	Cocoa	solids	make	up	only	21	percent	of	our	winning
bittersweet	bar	chocolate,	meaning	it	would	take	a	whopping	3.8	ounces	of	it	to
equal	the	chocolate	flavor	in	1	ounce	of	cocoa	powder!
To	illustrate	our	math,	we	made	three	more	batches	of	hot	chocolate,	this	time

with	the	adjusted	amounts	of	unsweetened	bar	chocolate	and	bittersweet	bar
chocolate.	Ignoring	the	varying	levels	of	sugar	and	fat,	tasters	found	that	the
level	of	chocolate	flavor	was	indeed	equal	across	all	three	samples.
While	the	fat	and	sugar	found	in	bittersweet	chocolate	make	it	a	pleasure	to

eat	straight	and	can	play	an	important	role	in	imparting	a	creamy	texture	to
frostings,	puddings,	and	mousses,	we	now	know	that	to	get	the	most	chocolate
flavor	into	baked	goods,	we	have	to	reach	for	the	cocoa	powder.



STACKING	UP	CHOCOLATE	FLAVOR
In	order	to	get	the	same	amount	of	cocoa	solids	(0.8	ounces),	the	source	of	chocolate	flavor,	we	had	to	use
drastically	different	amounts	of	cocoa	powder,	unsweetened	bar	chocolate,	and	bittersweet	bar	chocolate.

	



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
UNDERSTANDING	CACAO	PERCENTAGES

When	it	comes	to	cooking	with	chocolate,	swapping	cacao	percentages	can	make	a	big
difference.

In	a	recipe	specifying	a	bittersweet	or	semisweet	chocolate,	can	you	substitute	a	chocolate	with	a	higher
cacao	percentage	(cacao	percentage	is	the	combined	percentages	of	cocoa	butter	and	nonfat	cocoa	solids)
than	the	60	percent	generally	used	for	cooking,	making	no	other	adjustments?	Not	if	you	expect	identical
results.	First	we	tasted	brownies	and	pots	de	crème	made	with	our	two	top-ranked	dark	chocolates,
Callebaut	and	Ghirardelli,	which	have	60	percent	cacao,	alongside	ones	made	with	the	same	brands’	70
percent	cacao	offerings.

While	all	four	versions	were	acceptable,	tasters	strongly	preferred	the	60	percent	cacao	chocolates	in
these	recipes,	complaining	of	dryness	and	lack	of	sweetness	(and	in	the	case	of	the	pots	de	crème,	a	thicker,
stiffer	consistency)	in	the	versions	made	with	the	70	percent	cacao	chocolates.	Although	some	tasters	noted
the	“deeper”	chocolate	flavor	of	the	desserts	made	with	70	percent	cacao	chocolates,	the	problems	far
outweighed	any	benefit.

When	chocolate	manufacturers	increase	cacao	content,	they	correspondingly	decrease	the	amount	of
sugar	and	usually	add	less	cocoa	butter.	With	less	sugar	and	fat,	it’s	no	wonder	the	results	were	different.	If
you’re	baking	with	70	percent	cacao	chocolate	and	you	suspect	the	recipe	was	developed	with	60	percent
cacao	chocolate,	you	can	try	to	add	a	bit	more	sugar,	but	be	prepared	for	some	trial	and	error	before
obtaining	perfection.



BLOOMING	AT	WORK	
BROWNIES,	CAKES,	AND	MOUSSE
Blooming	cocoa	in	hot	water—or	hot	coffee—is	the	key	to	bringing	out	the	deep
chocolate	flavor	of	this	concentrated	source	of	cocoa	solids.	Cocoa	powder	is	an
important	ingredient,	both	for	its	flavor	and	for	the	fact	that	it	contains	little	fat,
which	can	negatively	affect	the	texture	of	chewy	brownies	or	sturdy	cupcakes.
For	another	recipe	that	maximizes	the	flavor	of	chocolate,	see	Creamy
Chocolate	Pudding.



CHEWY	BROWNIES
MAKES	24	BROWNIES

For	an	accurate	measurement	of	boiling	water,	bring	a	full	kettle	of	water	to	a
boil,	then	measure	out	the	desired	amount.	For	the	chewiest	texture,	it	is
important	to	let	the	brownies	cool	thoroughly	before	cutting.	If	your	baking	dish
is	glass,	let	the	brownies	cool	for	10	minutes,	then	remove	them	promptly	from
the	pan	(otherwise,	the	superior	heat	retention	of	glass	can	lead	to	overbaking).
Use	high-quality	chocolate	in	this	recipe.

				1⁄3 cup	(1	ounce)	Dutch-processed	cocoa
1½				 teaspoons	instant	espresso	powder	(optional)
½				 cup	plus	2	tablespoons	boiling	water
2				 ounces	unsweetened	chocolate,	chopped	fine
½				 cup	plus	2	tablespoons	vegetable	oil
4				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	melted
2				 large	eggs	plus	2	large	yolks
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract

2½				 cups	(17½	ounces)	sugar
1¾				 cups	(8¾	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
¾				 teaspoon	salt
6				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	cut	into	½-inch	pieces

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	lowest	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Make	foil
sling	by	folding	2	long	sheets	of	aluminum	foil	so	that	they	are	as	wide	as	13	by
9-inch	baking	pan	(one	13-inch	sheet	and	one	9-inch	sheet).	Lay	sheets	of	foil	in
pan	perpendicular	to	one	another,	with	extra	foil	hanging	over	edges	of	pan.
Push	foil	into	corners	and	up	sides	of	pan,	smoothing	foil	flush	to	pan.	Grease
foil	and	set	aside.
2.	Whisk	cocoa,	espresso	powder,	if	using,	and	boiling	water	together	in	large

bowl	until	smooth.	Add	unsweetened	chocolate	and	whisk	until	chocolate	is
melted.	Whisk	in	oil	and	melted	butter.	(Mixture	may	look	curdled.)	Add	eggs,
yolks,	and	vanilla	and	continue	to	whisk	until	smooth	and	homogeneous.	Whisk
in	sugar	until	fully	incorporated.	Whisk	together	flour	and	salt	in	small	bowl	and
then	mix	into	batter	with	rubber	spatula	until	combined.	Fold	in	bittersweet
chocolate	pieces.



3.	Transfer	batter	to	prepared	pan;	spread	batter	into	corners	of	pan	and
smooth	surface.	Bake	until	toothpick	inserted	in	center	of	brownies	comes	out
with	few	moist	crumbs	attached,	30	to	35	minutes,	rotating	pan	halfway	through
baking.	Transfer	pan	to	wire	rack	and	let	cool	for	1½	hours.
4.	Remove	brownies	from	pan	using	foil.	Return	brownies	to	wire	rack	and	let

cool	completely,	about	1	hour.	Cut	brownies	into	2-inch	squares	and	serve.
(Brownies	can	be	stored	in	airtight	container	at	room	temperature	for	up	to	3
days.)



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Brownies	are	a	tricky	business;	homemade	recipes	have	better	flavor,	while
boxed	mixes	claim	best	texture.	Our	goal	was	clear:	a	homemade	brownie	with
chewiness	(and	a	shiny,	crisp,	crackly	top)	to	rival	the	boxed-mix	standard,	but
flush	with	a	rich,	deep,	all-natural	chocolate	flavor.	What	it	all	comes	down	to	is
the	ratio	of	saturated	to	unsaturated	fats.
GO	FOR	CHEW	Most	homemade	brownies	are	either	super-rich	and	fudgy

or	more	cakelike	and	less	rich.	The	difference	between	the	two	styles	is	simply
the	ratio	of	chocolate	to	flour.	Chewy	brownies,	like	the	kind	you	get	from	a
boxed	mix,	are	very	hard	to	make	from	scratch.	We	tried	all	kinds	of	tricks—
everything	from	using	condensed	milk	and	biscuit	mix	instead	of	flour	to
cooking	the	sugar	and	butter	into	a	caramel—but	nothing	worked.	We	even
replaced	the	granulated	sugar	with	brown	sugar,	but	that	only	caused	us	to	lose
the	shiny,	crackly	top	that	we	expect	from	good	brownies.	(See	“Baking
Brownies	with	a	Shiny	Top,”	for	more	on	this	phenomenon.)
LOOK	TO	THE	BOX	It	turns	out	that	the	whole	key	to	the	texture	of	a	box

brownie	resides	in	the	specific	types	and	amounts	of	fat	it	includes.	To	get
boxed-mix	brownie	chew	in	homemade,	we	discovered	the	perfect	proportion	of
liquid	to	solid	fat,	without	the	aid	of	high-tech	fats	used	by	brownie	mix	makers.
It	all	came	down	to	the	magic	1:3	ratio	of	saturated	to	unsaturated	fat	(as
opposed	to	the	2:1	ratio	found	in	homemade	brownies	made	with	butter).	We
balance	the	saturated	fat	of	butter	with	unsaturated	vegetable	oil.	To	simplify	the
calculations	in	our	version	we	chose	to	eliminate	melted	chocolate	and	use	cocoa
powder,	which	contains	very	little	fat	by	comparison.
ADD	EXTRA	YOLKS	To	reduce	greasiness,	we	first	tried	reducing	the

overall	fat	content	but	found	that	left	the	brownies	dry.	We	remembered	that
emulsifiers	can	help	prevent	fats	from	separating	(see	concept	36)	and	leaking
out	during	baking.	We	tried	using	mayonnaise,	which	worked	surprisingly	well,
producing	brownies	with	a	rich,	luxurious	texture.	But	when	we	dove	deeper,	we
identified	the	active	emulsifier	in	the	mayonnaise	as	lecithin,	a	phospholipid	that
occurs	naturally	in	egg	yolks.	Rather	than	using	mayonnaise,	the	simple	addition
of	two	extra	yolks	in	exchange	for	a	little	oil	made	greasiness	a	thing	of	the	past.
BLOOM	THE	COCOA	At	this	point,	our	recipe	relied	on	just	cocoa.	We

realized	we	could	replace	some	of	the	butter	in	our	recipe	with	unsweetened
chocolate	without	changing	the	ratio	of	fats.	We	poured	boiling	water	over	the
cocoa	to	bloom	its	flavor	and	added	a	little	instant	espresso	for	intensity.	We	then
whisked	in	the	chocolate	until	melted.



END	WITH	CHUNKS	OF	CHOCOLATE	Only	chocolate	that	is	melted
and	incorporated	into	the	batter	actually	affects	the	ratio	of	fats	in	the	mix.
Therefore,	for	even	more	chocolate	flavor,	we	incorporate	chocolate	chunks	into
the	mixed	batter.	Because	they	don’t	melt	until	the	batter	starts	baking,	they	have
no	effect	on	texture.	The	final	results	are	as	close	to	a	boxed-mix	texture	as	any
home	cook	could	produce	without	the	benefits	of	industrial	processing:	chewy,
fudgy	bars	with	gooey	pockets	of	melted	chocolate	that	evoke	images	of	bake
sales	past,	but	with	complex	flavor	and	just	enough	adult	flourish	to	lift	them	out
of	the	realm	of	child’s	fare.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
BAKING	BROWNIES	WITH	A	SHINY	TOP

Granulated	sugar	is	key	for	brownies	with	good	shine.

A	glossy,	crackly	top	is	one	of	the	hallmarks	of	a	great	brownie,	but	achieving	it	can	be	elusive.	Can	the
type	of	sweetener	you	use	help?

We	baked	three	batches	of	brownies,	one	sweetened	with	granulated	sugar,	another	with	brown	sugar,
and	a	third	with	brown	sugar	and	corn	syrup.	Only	the	brownies	made	with	granulated	sugar	took	on	an
attractive	crackly	sheen.

Why?	It’s	all	due	to	what	might	be	deemed	“special	effects.”	Whether	on	its	own	or	in	combination	with
corn	syrup,	brown	sugar	forms	crystals	on	the	surface	of	the	cooling	brownie.	Crystals	reflect	light	in	a
diffuse	way,	creating	a	matte	effect.	The	pure	sucrose	in	granulated	sugar,	on	the	other	hand,	forms	a
smooth,	glasslike,	noncrystalline	surface	as	it	cools	that	reflects	light	in	a	focused	way,	for	a	shiny	effect.	As
for	the	crackly	crust,	its	formation	depends	on	sugar	molecules	rising	to	the	surface	of	the	batter	and	drying
out	during	baking.	Since	both	brown	sugar	and	corn	syrup	contain	more	moisture	than	granulated	sugar,	the
surface	of	brownies	made	with	either	of	these	sweeteners	never	dries	out	enough	for	a	crisp	crust	to	form.

	
BROWN	SUGAR	=	DULL,	MATTE	FINISH



	
WHITE	SUGAR	=	SHINY,	CRACKLY	FINISH



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
CHEWY	BROWNIES	ARE	ABOUT	THE	FAT

The	secret	to	a	boxed-mix	brownie’s	chewy	texture	boils	down	to	one	thing:	fat—specifically,
the	ratio	of	saturated	to	unsaturated	fat.

Fat	can	be	divided	into	two	broad	types:	saturated	and	unsaturated.	Both	types	consist	of	carbon	atoms
strung	together	in	long	chains.	In	predominantly	saturated	fats	such	as	shortening	(aka	partially
hydrogenated	vegetable	oil),	beef	tallow,	and	lard,	each	of	these	carbon	atoms	has	the	maximum	number	of
hydrogen	atoms	attached	to	it.	The	hydrogen	acts	as	a	buttress	to	keep	the	carbon	chains	rigid	so	that	they
pack	together	like	a	box	of	pencils,	forming	a	fat	that	is	solid	even	at	room	temperature.	Unsaturated	fats,
such	as	vegetable	oils,	have	fewer	hydrogen	atoms	providing	support,	resulting	in	carbon	chains	that	don’t
stick	together	tightly	and	a	fat	that	is	liquid	at	room	temperature.	The	right	combination	of	rigid	and	flexible
chains—the	shortening	system—is	what	gives	box	brownies	their	unique	texture.

Boxed	brownie	mixes	already	come	with	the	saturated-fat	component,	which	is	broken	down	into	tiny,
powdery	crystals.	When	a	cook	then	adds	unsaturated	vegetable	oil	to	this	mix,	the	liquid	fat	and	powdered
solid	fat	combine	in	a	ratio	designed	to	deliver	maximum	chew.

By	using	both	butter	(a	predominantly	saturated	fat)	and	unsaturated	vegetable	oil,	we	were	able	to
approximate	the	same	1:3	ratio	found	in	commercially	engineered	specimens	to	mimic	their	satisfying
chew.

	



BOX	FORMULA
Besides	containing	the	optimal	ratio	of	different	fat	types,	box	brownies	make	use	of	highly	processed
powdered	shortening	to	achieve	their	chewy	texture.

	
CLASSIC	FORMULA

The	classic	version	of	brownies	is	made	with	all	butter	(and	no	vegetable	oil)	for	a	high	proportion	of	solid,
saturated	fat	that	leads	to	a	tender	texture,	versus	a	chewy	one.

	
OUR	FORMULA

Our	brownies	contain	a	low-tech	combo	of	butter	and	vegetable	oil	that	creates	a	chewy	texture	similar	to
box	brownies,	but	a	far	richer	taste	than	shortening	ever	could.

SATURATED	FAT



Box	Formula:	28%
Classic	Formula:	64%
Our	Formula:	29%
	
UNSATURATED	FAT
Box	Formula:	72%
Classic	Formula:	36%
Our	Formula:	71%



EASY	CHOCOLATE	CAKE
SERVES	8

Any	high-quality	dark,	bittersweet,	or	semisweet	chocolate	will	work	in	this
recipe.	Instead	of	confectioners’	sugar,	the	cake	can	be	served	with	Whipped
Cream.

1½				 cups	(7½	ounces)	all-purpose	flour
1				 cup	(7	ounces)	sugar
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
¼				 teaspoon	salt
½				 cup	(1½	ounces)	Dutch-processed	cocoa
2				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	chopped	fine
1				 cup	brewed	coffee,	hot
				2⁄3 cup	mayonnaise
1				 large	egg,	room	temperature
2				 teaspoons	vanilla	extract
					 Confectioners’	sugar	(optional)

1.	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat	oven	to	350	degrees.	Grease
8-inch	square	baking	pan,	line	with	parchment	paper,	grease	parchment,	and
flour	pan.
2.	Whisk	flour,	sugar,	baking	soda,	and	salt	together	in	large	bowl.	In	separate

bowl,	combine	cocoa	and	chocolate.	Pour	hot	coffee	over	cocoa	mixture	and	let
sit,	covered,	for	5	minutes.	Gently	whisk	mixture	until	smooth,	let	cool	slightly,
then	whisk	in	mayonnaise,	egg,	and	vanilla.	Stir	mayonnaise	mixture	into	flour
mixture	until	combined.
3.	Scrape	batter	into	prepared	pan	and	smooth	top	with	rubber	spatula.	Bake

cake	until	toothpick	inserted	in	center	comes	out	with	few	crumbs	attached,	30	to
35	minutes.
4.	Let	cake	cool	in	pan	on	wire	rack,	1	to	2	hours.	Dust	with	confectioners’

sugar,	if	using,	cut	into	squares,	and	serve	straight	from	pan;	alternatively,	turn
cake	out	onto	serving	platter,	dust	with	confectioners’	sugar,	if	using,	and	serve.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
This	easy	wartime	cake	made	with	just	a	few	ingredients	(flour,	sugar,	cocoa
powder,	baking	soda,	vanilla,	and	mayonnaise,	a	standin	for	butter	and	eggs)
had	a	lot	of	good	things	going	for	it,	but	chocolate	flavor	wasn’t	one	of	them.
Our	first	order	of	business	was	deepening	the	chocolate	flavor.	We	achieved	this
by	blooming	the	cocoa	powder	and	adding	a	bit	of	melted	chocolate,	too.	A
surprising	ingredient	helped	to	hold	everything	together	and	keep	the	cake
moist.
REMEMBER	WAR	RATIONS	When	ingredients	like	butter	and	fresh	eggs

were	scarce	during	World	War	II,	cooks	came	up	with	cakes	that	worked	without
them—often	using	mayonnaise.	These	recipes	lived	on	long	after	rationing
ended	because	they	are	so	easy	(just	dump	and	stir)	and	the	results	are	so	moist.
That’s	because	mayonnaise	contains	lecithin,	an	emulsifier	that	helps	keep	the
oil	in	the	mayonnaise	suspended	in	micro-droplets.	These	small	droplets	aid	the
oil’s	ability	to	coat	the	flour’s	protein	particles,	leading	to	a	supremely	tender
cake.	In	fact,	when	we	tried	replacing	the	mayonnaise	with	butter	and	an	egg,	or
oil	and	an	egg,	the	cake	was	less	moist	and	the	crumb	was	not	as	velvety.	We	did
like	the	extra	egg	paired	with	the	mayonnaise,	which	gave	the	cake	a	richer
flavor	and	springier	texture.
ADD	SOME	BITTERSWEET	CHOCOLATE	While	we	loved	the	texture

of	the	original	cake,	we	did	want	more	chocolate	flavor.	We	found	that	we
couldn’t	increase	the	amount	of	cocoa	powder;	when	we	did,	the	cake	became
dry	and	chalky.	But	we	could	add	a	few	ounces	of	bittersweet	chocolate.
BLOOM	FLAVORS	WITH	HOT	COFFEE	Cocoa	powder	contains	solid

particles	of	fat	and	protein	with	tiny	flavor	molecules	trapped	inside.	Dissolving
the	cocoa	in	hot	water	causes	these	flavor	molecules,	which	would	otherwise
remain	imprisoned,	to	burst	forth,	amplifying	overall	flavor.	We	found	that	using
a	cup	of	coffee	was	even	more	effective.	The	roasted	notes	of	the	coffee
reinforce	the	nutty,	roasted	notes	in	the	chocolate.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
NATURAL	COCOA	AND	DUTCH-PROCESSED	COCOA

The	difference	between	natural	cocoa	and	Dutch-processed	cocoa	all	comes	down	to	the	pH.
Our	preference?	Dutched.

To	understand	a	cocoa	label,	it’s	necessary	to	know	how	cocoa	is	made.	Cocoa	beans	grow	on	a	tropical
evergreen	(Theobroma	cacao).	Once	picked,	the	white	beans	are	fermented,	turning	them	dark	and
developing	a	characteristic	aroma.	The	dried	beans	are	then	cracked	open	and	the	nibs	separated	from	the
shells	and	roasted	to	bring	out	flavors.	The	nibs	contain	about	55	percent	cocoa	butter,	and	when	they	are
ground	up	and	heated	they	form	a	thick	liquid	called	chocolate	liquor,	the	basis	of	most	chocolate	products.

To	make	cocoa	powder,	much	of	the	cocoa	butter	must	be	removed	from	the	chocolate	liquor,	leaving	a
dry	powder.	The	final	fat	content	is	indicated	by	the	numbers	on	the	cocoa	label.	For	example,	a	10/12
cocoa	contains	10	percent	to	12	percent	cocoa	butter,	whereas	a	22/24	cocoa	contains	22	percent	to	24
percent	cocoa	butter	and	is	therefore	higher	in	fat.	(Premium	brands	tend	to	have	higher	cocoa	butter
percentages,	while	mass-market	Hershey’s	and	Nestlé	cocoas	belong	to	the	10/12	category.)

Without	any	further	processing,	the	cocoa	is	still	naturally	acidic	and,	after	being	finely	ground,	sifted,
and	packaged,	is	marketed	as	“natural	cocoa”	powder.	During	the	early	19th	century,	a	Dutch	inventor
named	Conrad	van	Houten	developed	a	process	called	Dutching	that	has	been	used	for	over	a	century	by
most	European	companies	to	make	Dutch-processed	or	alkalized	cocoa.	To	Dutch	cocoa,	an	alkaline
solution,	usually	potassium	carbonate,	is	added	to	the	chocolate	liquor	as	it	is	refined.	The	alkali	raises	the
pH	of	cocoa,	from	around	5.7	to	7.2.	Raising	the	pH	has	the	effect	of	darkening	the	color	of	the	cocoa,
mellowing	its	sometimes	harsh	flavor,	and	improving	its	solubility	in	liquids.

Most	European	cocoas	are	Dutch-processed,	whereas	most	American	ones	are	natural.	In	most	cases,	the
two	types	of	cocoa	are	interchangeable,	though	in	recipes	for	baked	goods	such	as	cakes	that	rely	on	baking
soda	or	baking	powder	for	some	or	all	of	their	leavening,	it	is	best	to	use	the	type	of	cocoa	that	the	recipe
specifies	since	the	cocoa’s	acidity	may	affect	the	leavener’s	effectiveness.	In	general,	we	prefer	the	rounder,
less	harsh	flavor	of	Dutch-processed	cocoa	powder	and	use	it	in	most	of	our	recipes.



ULTIMATE	CHOCOLATE	CUPCAKES	WITH	GANACHE	FILLING
MAKES	12	CUPCAKES

Use	a	high-quality	bittersweet	or	semisweet	chocolate	for	this	recipe.	Though	we
highly	recommend	the	ganache	filling,	you	can	omit	it	for	a	more	traditional
cupcake.

FILLING
2				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	chopped	fine
¼				 cup	heavy	cream
1				 tablespoon	confectioners’	sugar

CUPCAKES
3				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	chopped	fine
				1⁄3 cup	(1	ounce)	Dutch-processed	cocoa
¾				 cup	brewed	coffee,	hot
¾				 cup	(41⁄8	ounces)	bread	flour
¾				 cup	(5¼	ounces)	sugar
½				 teaspoon	salt
½				 teaspoon	baking	soda
6				 tablespoons	vegetable	oil
2				 large	eggs
2				 teaspoons	distilled	white	vinegar
1				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

1				 recipe	Creamy	Chocolate	Frosting	(recipe
					 follows)

1.	FOR	THE	FILLING:	Microwave	chocolate,	cream,	and	sugar	in	medium
bowl	until	mixture	is	warm	to	touch,	about	30	seconds.	Whisk	until	smooth,	then
transfer	bowl	to	refrigerator	and	let	sit	until	just	chilled,	no	longer	than	30
minutes.
2.	FOR	THE	CUPCAKES:	Adjust	oven	rack	to	middle	position	and	heat

oven	to	350	degrees.	Line	12-cup	muffin	tin	with	paper	or	foil	liners.	Place



chocolate	and	cocoa	in	medium	heatproof	bowl.	Pour	hot	coffee	over	mixture
and	let	sit,	covered,	for	5	minutes.	Whisk	mixture	gently	until	smooth,	then
transfer	to	refrigerator	to	cool	completely,	about	20	minutes.
3.	Whisk	flour,	sugar,	salt,	and	baking	soda	together	in	medium	bowl.	Whisk

oil,	eggs,	vinegar,	and	vanilla	into	cooled	chocolate	mixture	until	smooth.	Add
flour	mixture	and	whisk	until	smooth.
4.	Using	ice	cream	scoop	or	large	spoon,	divide	batter	evenly	among	prepared

muffin	cups.	Place	1	slightly	rounded	teaspoon	ganache	filling	on	top	of	each
portion	of	batter.	Bake	cupcakes	until	set	and	just	firm	to	touch,	17	to	19
minutes.	Let	cupcakes	cool	in	muffin	tin	on	wire	rack	until	cool	enough	to
handle,	about	10	minutes.	Lift	each	cupcake	from	tin,	set	on	wire	rack,	and	let
cool	completely	before	frosting,	about	1	hour.	(Unfrosted	cupcakes	can	be	stored
at	room	temperature	for	up	to	1	day.)
5.	TO	FROST:	Spread	2	to	3	tablespoons	frosting	over	each	cooled	cupcake

and	serve.



CREAMY	CHOCOLATE	FROSTING
MAKES	ABOUT	2¼	CUPS

The	melted	chocolate	should	be	cooled	to	between	85	and	100	degrees	before
being	added	to	the	frosting.	If	the	frosting	seems	too	soft	after	adding	the
chocolate,	chill	it	briefly	in	the	refrigerator	and	then	rewhip	it	until	creamy.

				1⁄3 cup	(21⁄3	ounces)	sugar
2				 large	egg	whites
					 Pinch	salt

12				 tablespoons	unsalted	butter,	cut	into	12	pieces	and	softened	(68	degrees)
6				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	melted	and	cooled
½				 teaspoon	vanilla	extract

1.	Combine	sugar,	egg	whites,	and	salt	in	bowl	of	stand	mixer	and	set	bowl
over	saucepan	filled	with	1	inch	of	barely	simmering	water.	Whisking	gently	but
constantly,	heat	mixture	until	slightly	thickened,	foamy,	and	registers	150
degrees,	2	to	3	minutes.
2.	Fit	stand	mixer	with	whisk	and	beat	mixture	on	medium	speed	until

consistency	of	shaving	cream	and	slightly	cooled,	1	to	2	minutes.	Add	butter,	1
piece	at	a	time,	until	smooth	and	creamy.	(Frosting	may	look	curdled	after	half
of	butter	has	been	added;	it	will	smooth	with	additional	butter.)	Once	all	butter	is
added,	add	cooled	melted	chocolate	and	vanilla;	mix	until	combined.	Increase
speed	to	medium-high	and	beat	until	light,	fluffy,	and	thoroughly	combined,
about	30	seconds,	scraping	down	beater	and	sides	of	bowl	with	rubber	spatula	as
necessary.
TO	MAKE	AHEAD:	Frosting	can	be	made	up	to	1	day	in	advance	and

refrigerated	in	airtight	container.	When	ready	to	frost,	warm	frosting	briefly	in
microwave	until	just	slightly	softened,	5	to	10	seconds.	Once	warmed,	stir	until
creamy.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
A	chocolate	cupcake	Catch-22	befalls	bakery	and	homemade	confections	alike:
If	the	cupcakes	have	decent	chocolate	flavor,	their	structure	is	too	crumbly	for
out-of-hand	consumption.	Conversely,	if	the	cakes	balance	moisture	and
tenderness	without	crumbling,	the	cake	and	frosting	are	barely	palatable,	with
the	chocolate	flavor	hardly	registering	at	all.	We	wanted	moist,	tender	(but	not
crumbly)	cupcakes	capped	with	just	enough	creamy,	not-too-sweet	frosting.	We
got	them	by	using	bread	flour	and	reducing	the	amount	of	chocolate	to
strengthen	the	batter,	but	upping	the	chocolate	flavor	through	blooming	and
replacing	butter	with	oil.	A	ganache	center	and	Swiss	meringue	frosting	seal	the
chocolate	lover’s	deal.
DON’T	MAKE	CRUMBLY	CUPCAKES	Most	cupcakes	sacrifice	flavor

for	appearance.	We	decided	to	start	with	our	favorite	chocolate	layer	cake	recipe,
made	with	cocoa	powder,	bittersweet	chocolate,	buttermilk,	and	brewed	coffee.
Divided	into	muffin	tins,	the	batter	baked	up	into	delicious	cupcakes	that	literally
fell	apart	in	our	hands.	For	a	dessert	eaten	out	of	hand,	and	not	with	a	fork,	we
needed	more	structure,	and	therefore	more	gluten.
MAXIMIZE	CHOCOLATE	FLAVOR	We	reduced	the	amount	of	cocoa

powder	in	our	recipe	tests	because	cocoa	powder	contains	no	gluten-forming
proteins	and	works	to	dilute	the	flour.	We	then	used	less	chocolate,	in	an	attempt
to	cut	back	on	the	fat,	which	was	making	the	cupcakes	so	tender.	We	got	rid	of
the	dairy	in	our	cake	recipe	and	used	more	brewed	coffee,	which	helped	amp	up
the	chocolate	(and	reduce	the	negative	impact	dairy	has	on	chocolate	flavor).	We
bloomed	the	cocoa	by	pouring	the	hot	coffee	over	the	cocoa	powder	and
chopped	chocolate.	After	all	of	this,	we	succeeded	in	making	a	very	chocolaty
but	dry	cupcake.
CHANGE	TO	OIL	Replacing	butter	with	oil	adds	moisture.	Oil,	after	all,	is

100	percent	fat,	while	butter	contains	around	16	to	18	percent	water,	which	can
evaporate	in	the	oven,	leaving	the	cupcakes	dry.	Oil	likewise	improved	the
chocolate	flavor	a	bit	more,	because	the	milk	solids	in	butter	can	mute	chocolate
flavors.
PICK	BREAD	FLOUR	We	began	our	testing	with	all-purpose	flour	but

wondered	if	bread	flour,	with	more	gluten,	might	allow	us	to	use	more	cocoa	and
chocolate.	It	did,	giving	us	a	less	crumble-prone	but	not	tough	cupcake	with	big
chocolate	flavor.
MAKE	A	GANACHE	CENTER	Adding	a	teaspoon	of	cooled	ganache	onto



the	cupcakes	before	baking	was	the	ticket	for	even	bigger	chocolate	flavor.	The
ganache	sinks	in	the	batter	during	baking,	providing	a	rich,	trufflelike	center	to
the	cupcakes,	otherwise	known	as	chocolate	nirvana.
RECONSIDER	THE	FROSTING	We	decided	to	abandon	the	super-sweet,

grainy	classic	frosting	made	by	whipping	together	softened	butter	and
confectioners’	sugar.	Instead,	we	choose	cooked	buttercream—the	Swiss
meringue	variety,	where	egg	whites	and	granulated	sugar	are	heated	over	a
double	boiler,	then	whipped	with	knobs	of	softened	butter.	The	result	is	utterly
silky	and	decadent,	without	the	weight	and	greasiness	of	other	rich	frostings.



DARK	CHOCOLATE	MOUSSE
SERVES	6	TO	8

When	developing	this	recipe,	we	used	Callebaut	Intense	Dark	Chocolate	and
Ghirardelli	Bittersweet	Chocolate	Baking	Bar,	which	each	contain	about	60
percent	cacao.	If	you	want	to	use	a	chocolate	with	a	higher	percentage	of	cacao,
see	our	variation,	Premium	Dark	Chocolate	Mousse.	If	you	choose	to	make	the
mousse	a	day	in	advance,	let	it	sit	at	room	temperature	for	10	minutes	before
serving.	Serve	with	Whipped	Cream	and	chocolate	shavings,	if	desired.

8				 ounces	bittersweet	chocolate,	chopped	fine
5				 tablespoons	water
2				 tablespoons	Dutch-processed	cocoa
1				 tablespoon	brandy
1				 teaspoon	instant	espresso	powder
2				 large	eggs,	separated
1				 tablespoon	sugar
				1⁄8 teaspoon	salt
1				 cup	plus	2	tablespoons	heavy	cream,	chilled

1.	Melt	chocolate,	water,	cocoa,	brandy,	and	espresso	in	medium	heatproof
bowl	set	over	saucepan	filled	with	1	inch	of	barely	simmering	water,	stirring
frequently	until	smooth.	Remove	from	heat.
2.	Whisk	egg	yolks,	1½	teaspoons	sugar,	and	salt	together	in	medium	bowl

until	mixture	lightens	in	color	and	thickens	slightly,	about	30	seconds.	Pour
melted	chocolate	into	egg-yolk	mixture	and	whisk	until	combined.	Let	cool	until
just	warmer	than	room	temperature,	3	to	5	minutes.
3.	Using	stand	mixer	fitted	with	whisk,	whip	egg	whites	at	medium-low	speed

until	foamy,	about	1	minute.	Add	remaining	1½	teaspoons	sugar,	increase	speed
to	medium-high,	and	whip	until	soft	peaks	form,	about	1	minute.	Using	whisk,
stir	about	one-quarter	of	whipped	egg	whites	into	chocolate	mixture	to	lighten	it;
gently	fold	in	remaining	egg	whites	with	rubber	spatula	until	few	white	streaks
remain.
4.	In	now-empty	bowl,	whip	cream	on	medium	speed	until	it	begins	to

thicken,	about	30	seconds.	Increase	speed	to	high	and	whip	until	soft	peaks	form,



about	15	seconds	more.	Using	rubber	spatula,	fold	whipped	cream	into	mousse
until	no	white	streaks	remain.	Spoon	mousse	into	6	to	8	individual	serving
dishes.	Cover	with	plastic	wrap	and	refrigerate	until	set	and	firm,	at	least	2	hours
or	up	to	24	hours.	Serve.

PREMIUM	DARK	CHOCOLATE	MOUSSE

This	recipe	is	designed	to	work	with	a	boutique	chocolate	that	contains	a	higher
percentage	of	cacao	than	our	master	recipe.

Replace	bittersweet	chocolate	(containing	about	60	percent	cacao)	with	equal
amount	of	bittersweet	chocolate	containing	62	to	70	percent	cacao.	Increase
water	to	7	tablespoons,	increase	eggs	to	3,	and	increase	sugar	to	3	tablespoons,
adding	extra	2	tablespoons	to	chocolate	mixture	in	step	1.

CHOCOLATE-RASPBERRY	MOUSSE

Chambord	is	our	preferred	brand	of	raspberry-flavored	liqueur	for	this	recipe.
Serve	the	mousse	with	fresh	raspberries,	if	desired.

Reduce	water	to	4	tablespoons,	omit	brandy,	and	add	2	tablespoons	raspberry-
flavored	liqueur	to	melted	chocolate	mixture	in	step	1.



WHY	THIS	RECIPE	WORKS
Rich,	creamy,	and	dense,	chocolate	mousse	can	be	delicious	but	too	filling	after
a	few	mouthfuls.	On	the	other	hand,	light	and	airy	mousse	usually	lacks	deep
chocolate	flavor.	We	wanted	chocolate	mousse	that	had	both	a	light,	meltingly
smooth	texture	and	a	substantial	chocolate	flavor.	To	achieve	this,	we	eliminated
the	butter,	reduced	the	number	of	eggs,	added	whipped	cream,	and	played	with
the	ratio	of	chocolate	and	water.	The	result?	A	light,	ethereal	mousse	chock-full
of	chocolate.
LOSE	THE	BUTTER	Mousse	contains	far	less	dairy	than	pudding	and	more

chocolate.	And	it	almost	always	contains	whipped	egg	whites	or	whipped	cream.
The	challenge	with	mousse	is	daunting:	You	want	intense	chocolate	flavor	but
you	also	want	a	light,	airy	texture.	Of	course,	mousse	must	be	perfectly	smooth,
and	it	must	set	but	without	a	trace	of	the	bouncy	texture	that	can	pass	in	pudding.
To	start,	we	addressed	the	mousse’s	dense,	heavy	texture.	Most	recipes	for
chocolate	mousse	contain	butter.	Could	we	do	without	it?	We	eliminated	the
butter	and	found	that	our	mousse	tasted	less	heavy.	It	also	lost	the	waxy	texture
that	butter	can	impart	when	it	resolidifies	in	the	fridge.
LIMIT	THE	EGGS	Some	recipes	call	for	as	many	four	eggs	but	we	found

that	too	many	egg	whites	made	the	texture	similar	to	marshmallows.	We
lightened	the	mousse’s	texture	by	reducing	the	number	of	egg	whites.	To	make
up	for	the	lost	volume	of	the	eggs,	we	whipped	the	cream	to	soft	peaks	before
adding	it	to	the	chocolate.	The	volume	makes	the	mousse	light	but	not	foamy.
ADD	MORE	CHOCOLATE	We	maximized	the	chocolate	flavor	with	a

combination	of	bittersweet	chocolate	and	cocoa	powder.	And	to	further	deepen
the	chocolate	flavor,	we	found	that	a	small	amount	of	instant	espresso	powder,
salt,	and	brandy	did	the	trick.
WATER	TO	THE	RESCUE	With	all	of	this	added	chocolate,	our	mixture

was	beginning	to	seize,	giving	us	a	gritty,	grainy	texture	totally	unfit	for	a
mousse.	We	fixed	the	texture	problem	with	an	unlikely	ingredient—water.
Liquid	can	cause	chocolate	to	seize,	yes.	But	more	important	is	the	liquid-to-
solid	ratio.	With	small	amounts	of	liquid,	the	solids	absorb	just	enough	moisture
to	form	a	gritty	paste.	But	with	more	liquid	(at	least	1	tablespoon	for	every	2
ounces	of	chocolate),	the	dry	cocoa	solids	become	fluid.	Increasing	the	water
makes	the	finished	product	looser	and	glossier.



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
SMOOTHLY	MELTED	CHOCOLATE

Adding	more	liquid	can	reverse	seizing	chocolate.

Seizing	describes	the	nearly	instantaneous	transformation	of	chocolate	from	a	fluid	state	to	a	stiff,	grainy
one.	When	chocolate	is	melted,	its	ingredients—mainly	cocoa	solids,	sugar,	and	cocoa	butter—disperse
evenly,	creating	a	fluid	mass.	But	if	even	a	tiny	amount	of	moisture	is	introduced,	the	liquid	and	the	sugar
will	form	a	syrup	which	cements	the	cocoa	particles	together,	creating	grainy	clumps.	How	much	liquid	it
actually	takes	to	trigger	this	reaction	depends	mostly	on	the	amount	of	chocolate	and	its	sugar	content.
(Even	in	the	absence	of	sugar,	however,	such	as	in	unsweetened	chocolate,	the	cocoa	particles	will	cling
together	if	liquid	is	introduced.)	Surprisingly,	the	addition	of	more	liquid	can	actually	reverse	the	seizing
and	bring	the	chocolate	back	to	a	fluid	state.

Reversing	the	reaction	means	adding	just	enough	water	(or	other	liquid	such	as	milk)	to	dissolve	most	of
the	sugar	and	disperse	the	cocoa	particles	in	the	seized	chocolate	clumps.	The	water	will	still	dilute	the
chocolate	slightly,	so	it	can	no	longer	reliably	be	used	for	baking.	Use	it	instead	for	making	chocolate	sauce
or	hot	chocolate	or	drizzling	on	cookies.

To	prevent	seizing,	follow	these	guidelines:	In	recipes	that	contain	no	liquid,	take	great	care	not	to	let
any	moisture	into	the	chocolate.	In	recipes	that	do	contain	liquids	such	as	melted	butter,	liqueur,	or	water,
always	melt	the	chocolate	along	with	these	ingredients	to	keep	the	cocoa	and	sugar	particles	sufficiently
wet.

If	your	chocolate	does	seize,	add	boiling	water	to	it,	1	teaspoon	at	a	time,	and	stir	vigorously	after	each
addition	until	the	chocolate	is	smooth.

	
SEIZED	UP



	
SATINY	SMOOTH



PRACTICAL	SCIENCE	
GETTING	THE	TEXTURE	RIGHT

There	are	as	many	different	mousse	textures	as	there	are	mousse	recipes.	Here’s	how	some	of
them	look.

	
DENSE

Butter,	unwhipped	cream,	and	too	much	chocolate	are	often	the	culprits	in	heavy,	ganachelike	mousse.

	
FLUFFY

Too	many	whipped	egg	whites	produce	an	unappealing	“marshmallow	effect.”



	
PERFECT

Going	easy	on	the	egg	whites,	omitting	the	butter,	and	adding	a	small	amount	of	water	yields	just	the	right
texture.



CHOCOLATE	101
STRUCTURE

	
COCOA	BEANS
The	cacao	tree	grows	in	tropical	regions	around	the	world	and	produces	large	fruits	that	look	like	fibrous
pods.	Each	fruit	contains	about	40	white	cocoa	beans,	which	are	dried,	fermented,	and	then	shipped	to	a
processing	plant	where	they	are	stripped	of	their	hulls	to	form	cocoa	nibs	(left).

CHOCOLATE	LIQUOR
At	the	processing	plant	the	nibs	are	roasted	to	dark	brown	seeds	and	ground	into	a	liquid	cocoa	mass	called
chocolate	liquor.	Chocolate	liquor	is	pure,	unsweetened	chocolate	and	is	the	base	ingredient	for	all
chocolate	products.

COCOA	BUTTER
About	55	percent	of	chocolate	liquor	is	cocoa	butter,	a	natural,	highly	unsaturated	fat	responsible	for
chocolate’s	unique	texture.	Cocoa	butter	has	a	very	narrow	melting	range	and	stays	firm	up	to	92	degrees.
Since	the	temperature	inside	the	human	mouth	is	just	a	few	degrees	higher	than	the	melting	point	of	cocoa
butter,	chocolate	melts	very	slowly.	In	fact,	it	seems	to	melt	into—rather	than	just	in—your	mouth.

COCOA	SOLIDS
Particles	of	ground	cocoa	solids	are	suspended	in	the	cocoa	butter	and	make	up	the	other	45	percent	of
chocolate	liquor.	Cocoa	solids	carry	hundreds	of	flavor	compounds	we	recognize	as	chocolate.	Most	of	the
characteristic	chocolate	flavor	compounds	are	produced	during	the	fermentation	and	roasting	steps.



BUYING
UNSWEETENED	CHOCOLATE	Also	called	baking	chocolate,	this	is	simply	pure	chocolate	liquor

that	has	been	cooled	and	formed	into	bars.	Among	bar	chocolates,	unsweetened	has	the	most	intense
chocolate	flavor.

BITTERSWEET/SEMISWEET	CHOCOLATE	When	sugar	is	added	to	chocolate	liquor	the	product
is	now	technically	called	“dark	chocolate,”	assuming	that	it	still	contains	at	least	35	percent	chocolate	liquor
(most	chocolates	contain	far	more).	The	terms	“bittersweet”	and	“semisweet”	are	not	regulated,	although
most	manufacturers	use	the	former	to	indicate	a	product	with	less	sugar.	When	you	see	labels	that	read	“70
percent	cacao,”	this	means	the	product	contains	70	percent	chocolate	liquor	by	weight	and	the	rest	is	mostly
sugar,	plus	a	little	emulsifier	and/or	vanilla.

MILK	CHOCOLATE	Milk	chocolate	is	similar	to	bittersweet	or	semisweet	chocolate	but	with	the
addition	of	milk	solids,	which	give	this	product	its	unique	caramel	and	butterscotch	flavors	and	soft	texture.
Most	milk	chocolate	contain	less	chocolate	liquor	and	more	sugar	than	bittersweet	or	semisweet	chocolates.

WHITE	CHOCOLATE	White	chocolate	is	technically	not	chocolate	since	it	contains	no	cocoa	solids.
Authentic	white	chocolate	contains	at	least	20	percent	cocoa	butter	(along	with	milk	solids	and	sugar),
which	gives	this	product	its	meltingly	smooth	texture.	Note	that	many	brands	rely	on	palm	oil	in	place	of
some	or	all	of	the	cocoa	butter	and	can’t	be	labeled	“chocolate.”	If	the	product	is	called	“white	chips”	or
“white	confection,”	it	is	made	with	little	or	no	cocoa	butter.	That	said,	since	both	styles	derive	their	flavor
from	milk	and	sugar,	not	the	fat,	we	find	this	distinction	makes	little	difference	in	recipes.

COCOA	POWDER	Cocoa	powder	is	made	by	removing	most	of	the	cocoa	butter	from	chocolate
liquor.	The	resulting	powder	is	roughly	80	percent	cocoa	solids	and	therefore	has	an	intense	chocolate
flavor.	To	counter	the	harsh,	acidic	flavor	of	this	concentrated	form	of	chocolate,	the	powder	is	sometimes
treated	with	an	alkaline	solution,	or	“Dutched.”	We	find	that	Dutch-processed	cocoa	has	a	milder,	more
complex	flavor	than	natural	cocoa,	which	can	be	harsh	and	astringent.	That	said,	you	can	use	the	two
interchangeably	in	most	recipes.

STORING
Never	store	chocolate	in	the	refrigerator	or	freezer,	as	cocoa	butter	can	easily	pick	up	off-flavors	from	other
foods.	Wrap	chocolate	well	in	plastic	wrap	and	store	it	in	a	cool,	dark	pantry.	Milk	and	white	chocolates
should	keep	for	six	months;	dark	and	unsweetened	chocolates	will	keep	for	a	year.	If	chocolate	is	exposed
to	rapid	changes	in	humidity	or	temperature,	sugar	or	fat	may	dissolve	and	migrate,	causing	a	white	film	to
develop	on	the	surface	of	the	chocolate.	This	cosmetic	condition,	known	as	bloom,	does	not	harm	the	flavor
of	the	chocolate.

USING
MELTING	CHOCOLATE	Since	chocolate	can	scorch	if	overheated,	you	want	to	employ	gentle	heat.

The	traditional	method	calls	for	a	double	boiler.	Place	the	chopped	chocolate	in	a	heatproof	bowl	set	over	a
pot	of	barely	simmering	water.	Make	sure	the	water	isn’t	touching	the	bowl,	or	the	chocolate	can	overheat.
The	steam	will	gently	heat	the	bowl	and	melt	the	chocolate.	If	the	recipe	also	calls	for	melted	butter,	you
can	add	the	butter	to	the	bowl	with	the	chocolate	at	the	outset.

You	can	speed	up	the	process	with	a	microwave,	but	you	should	use	a	reduced	power	setting	to	reduce
the	risk	of	scorching.	Place	the	chopped	chocolate	in	a	microwave-safe	bowl	and	microwave	for	45	seconds
at	50	percent	power.	Stir	the	chocolate	to	help	it	liquefy	and	continue	to	microwave	in	15-second	intervals
as	needed.	If	melting	butter,	don’t	add	it	until	the	chocolate	is	almost	melted.	(If	added	earlier,	the	butter
will	splatter.)

CHOCOLATE	SUBSTITUTIONS	In	a	pinch,	you	can	replace	some	chocolate	products	with	another	one.
To	Replace:	1	ounce	unsweetened	chocolate



Substitute:	3	tablespoons	cocoa	powder	+	1	tablespoon	butter	or	oil
To	Replace:	1	ounce	bittersweet	or	semisweet	chocolate
Substitute:	2⁄3	ounce	unsweetened	chocolate	+	2	teaspoons	granulated	sugar



EQUIPPING	YOUR	KITCHEN
What	equipment	do	you	really	need	to	set	up	a	decent	home	kitchen?	The	answer
depends	on	what	you	want	to	accomplish.	Your	grandmother	probably	had	a
minimum	of	kitchen	gear,	yet	she	was	a	great	cook.	In	contrast,	you	probably
have	friends	who	own	a	top-of-the-line	kitchen	and	every	gadget	imaginable,	yet
they	can’t	turn	out	a	creditable	meal.	A	well-equipped	kitchen	won’t	make	you	a
good	cook,	but	the	right	tools	can	help.
The	list	that	follows	highlights	the	gear	we	find	most	useful	in	our	test	kitchen

and	the	brands	that	have	earned	our	top	ratings.	We	have	not	listed	specialty
items	that	can	be	essential	for	certain	recipes	(like	a	springform	pan,	without
which	a	cheesecake	can’t	be	made),	nor	have	we	listed	“nice-to-have”	items	like
a	cleaver	for	cutting	up	chicken	parts	for	stock.	Start	with	the	items	on	the
following	pages	and	then	add	more	gear	depending	on	the	recipes	you	want	to
make.
Since	cookware	and	knives	are	so	important,	we	have	included	special

sections	on	Cookware	Materials,	the	safety	of	Nonstick	Pans,	and	Knife	Basics.



KNIVES	AND	MORE
Chef’s	Knife

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

High-carbon	stainless	steel	knife
Thin,	curved	8-inch	blade
Lightweight
Comfortable	grip	and	nonslip	handle

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Victorinox	Fibrox	8-Inch	Chef’s	Knife	(formerly	Victorinox	Forschner)



$29.99
Paring	Knife

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

3-to	3½-inch	blade
Thin,	slightly	curved	blade	with	pointed	tip
Comfortable	grip

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Wüsthof	Classic	with	PEtec	3½-Inch	Paring	Knife	(model	#4066)



$39.95
BEST	BUY:	Victorinox	Fibrox	3¼-inch	Paring	Knife



$8.95
Serrated	Knife

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

10-to	12-inch	blade
Long,	somewhat	flexible,	slightly	curved	blade
Pointed	serrations	that	are	uniformly	spaced	and	moderately	sized

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Wüsthof	Classic	10-Inch	Bread	Knife



$109.95
BEST	BUY:	Victorinox	Fibrox	10¼-Inch	Bread	Knife



$24.95
Slicing	Knife

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Tapered	12-inch	blade	for	slicing	large	cuts	of	meat
Oval	scallops	(called	a	granton	edge)	carved	into	blade
Fairly	rigid	blade	with	rounded	tip

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Victorinox	Fibrox	12-Inch	Granton	Edge	Slicing	Knife



$39.95
Cutting	Board

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Roomy	work	surface	at	least	15	by	20	inches
Teak	board	for	minimal	maintenance
Durable	edge-grain	construction	(wood	grain	runs	parallel	to	surface	of	board)

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Proteak	Edge	Grain	Teak	Cutting	Board



$84.99
BEST	BUY:	OXO	Good	Grips	Carving	and	Cutting	Board



$24.99
Knife	Sharpener

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Diamond	sharpening	material	for	electric	sharpeners
Easy	to	use	and	comfortable
Clear	instructions

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
ELECTRIC:	Chef’sChoice	Model	130	Professional	Sharpening	Station	$149.95
MANUAL:	AccuSharp	Knife	and	Tool	Sharpener



$10.95
POTS	AND	PANS
Traditional	Skillets

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Stainless	steel	interior,	fully	clad	for	even	heat	distribution
12-inch	diameter	and	flared	sides
Comfortable,	ovensafe	handle
Cooking	surface	of	at	least	9	inches
Good	to	have	smaller	(8-or	10-inch)	skillets	too

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
All-Clad	Stainless	12-Inch	Frypan	$154.99



Nonstick	Skillets

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Dark,	nonstick	surface
12-or	12½-inch	diameter,	thick	bottom
Comfortable,	ovensafe	handle
Cooking	surface	of	at	least	9	inches
Good	to	have	smaller	(8-or	10-inch)	skillets	too

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
T-Fal	Professional	Total	NonStick	12½-Inch	Fry	Pan



$34.99
Dutch	Oven

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Enameled	cast	iron	or	stainless	steel
Capacity	of	at	least	6	quarts
Diameter	of	at	least	9	inches
Tight-fitting	lid
Wide,	sturdy	handles

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Le	Creuset	7¼-Quart	Round	French	Oven
$279
All-Clad	Stainless	8-Quart	Stockpot



$294.95
BEST	BUY:	Tramontina	6.5-Quart	Cast	Iron	Dutch	Oven
$49



Saucepans

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Large	saucepan	with	3-to	4-quart	capacity	and	small	nonstick	saucepan	with	2-to	2½-quart	capacity
Tight-fitting	lids
Pans	with	rounded	corners	that	a	whisk	can	reach	into
Long,	comfortable	handles	that	are	angled	for	even	weight	distribution

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
LARGE:	All-Clad	Stainless	4-Quart	Saucepan



$179.95
BEST	BUY:	Cuisinart	MultiClad	Unlimited	4-Quart	Saucepan



$69.99
SMALL:	Calphalon	Contemporary	Nonstick	2½-Quart	Shallow	Saucepan



$39.95
Rimmed	Baking	Sheets

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Light-colored	surface	(heats	and	browns	evenly)
Thick,	sturdy	pan
Dimensions	of	18	by	13	inches
Good	to	have	at	least	two

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Wear-Ever	13-Gauge	Half	Size	Heavy	Duty	Sheet	Pan	by	Vollrath	(formerly	Lincoln	Foodservice)
$13



Roasting	Pan

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

At	least	15	by	11	inches
Stainless	steel	interior	with	aluminum	core	for	even	heat	distribution
Upright	handles	for	easy	gripping
Light	interior	for	better	food	monitoring
Fixed	V-rack	with	tall	handles

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Calphalon	Contemporary	Stainless	Roasting	Pan	with	V-Rack



$129.99
HANDY	TOOLS
Tongs

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Scalloped	edges
Slightly	concave	pincers
12	inches	in	length	(to	keep	your	hand	far	from	heat)
Open	and	close	easily

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
OXO	Good	Grips	12-Inch	Locking	Tongs



$12.95
Wooden	Spoon

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Slim	yet	broad	bowl
Stain-resistant	bamboo
Comfortable	handle

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
SCI	Bamboo	Wood	Cooking	Spoon



$2.40
Slotted	Spoon

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Deep	bowl
Long	handle
Enough	holes	for	quick	draining

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
OXO	Good	Grips	Nylon	Slotted	Spoon



$6.99
All-Around	Spatulas

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Head	about	3	inches	wide	and	5½	inches	long
11	inches	in	length	(tip	to	handle)
Long,	vertical	slots
Useful	to	have	a	metal	spatula	to	use	with	traditional	cookware	and	a	plastic	spatula	for	nonstick
cookware

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
METAL:	Wüsthof	Gourmet	Fish	Spatula



$34.95
PLASTIC:	Matfer	Bourgeat	Pelton	Spatula



$11.95
Rubber	Spatula

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Wide,	stiff	blade	with	thin	edge	that’s	flexible	enough	to	conform	to	curve	of	a	mixing	bowl
Heatproof

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Rubbermaid	Professional	13½-Inch	High	Heat	Scraper



$18.99
All-Purpose	Whisk

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

At	least	10	wires
Wires	of	moderate	thickness
Comfortable	handle
Balanced,	lightweight	feel

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
OXO	Good	Grips	11-Inch	Whisk



$9.99
Garlic	Press

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Large	capacity	that	holds	multiple	garlic	cloves
Curved	plastic	handles
Long	handle	and	short	distance	between	pivot	point	and	plunger

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Kuhn	Rikon	Easy-Squeeze	Garlic	Press
$20
BEST	BUY:	Trudeau	Garlic	Press



$11.99
Pepper	Mill

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

At	least	½-cup	capacity
Wide,	unobstructed	filler	doors
Easy-to-adjust	grind	settings

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Unicorn	Magnum	Plus	Pepper	Mill
$45



Can	Opener

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Intuitive	and	easy	to	attach
Smooth	turning	motions
Magnet	for	no-touch	lid	disposal
Comfortable	handle

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
OXO	Good	Grips	Magnetic	Locking	Can	Opener



$21.99
Vegetable	Peeler

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Sharp,	carbon	steel	blade
1-inch	space	between	blade	and	peeler	to	prevent	jamming
Lightweight	and	comfortable

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Kuhn	Rikon	Original	4-Inch	Swiss	Peeler



$3.50
Grater

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Paddle-style	grater
Sharp,	extra-large	holes	and	generous	grating	plane
Rubber-lined	feet	for	stability
Comfortable	handle

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Rösle	Coarse	Grater
$35



Rasp	Grater

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Sharp	teeth	(require	little	effort	or	pressure	when	grating)
Maneuverable	over	round	or	irregular	shapes
Comfortable	handle

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Microplane	Classic	40020	Zester/Grater



$14.95
Rolling	Pin

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Moderate	weight	(1	to	1½	pounds)
19-inch	straight	barrel
Slightly	textured	wooden	surface	to	grip	dough	for	easy	rolling

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
J.	K.	Adams	Plain	Maple	Rolling	Dowel



$13.95
Oven	Mitt

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Form-fitting	and	not	overly	bulky	for	easy	maneuvering
Machine	washable
Flexible,	heat-resistant	material

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Kool-Tek	15-Inch	Oven	Mitt	by	KatchAll



$44.95
BEST	BUY:	OrkaPlus	Silicone	Oven	Mitt	with	Cotton	Lining



$14.95
Ladle

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Stainless	steel
Handle	9	to	10	inches	in	length
Hooked	handle	end	for	hanging	on	pot
Pouring	rim	to	prevent	dripping

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Rösle	Ladle	with	Pouring	Rim



$29.95
Colander

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

4-to	7-quart	capacity
Metal	ring	attached	to	bottom	for	stability
Many	holes	for	quick	draining
Small	holes	so	pasta	doesn’t	slip	through

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
RSVP	International	Endurance	Precision	Pierced	5-Quart	Colander



$32.95
Fine-Mesh	Strainer

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

At	least	6	inches	in	diameter	(measured	from	inside	edge	to	inside	edge)
Sturdy	construction

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
CIA	Masters	Collection	6¾-Inch	Fine	Mesh	Strainer



$27.50
Potato	Masher

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Solid	mashing	disk	with	small	holes
Comfortable	grip

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
WMF	Profi	Plus	Stainless	Steel	Potato	Masher
$19



Salad	Spinner

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Solid	bottom	for	washing	greens	in	bowl
Ergonomic	and	easy-to-operate	hand	pump

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
OXO	Good	Grips	Salad	Spinner



$29.99
MEASURING	EQUIPMENT
Dry	Measuring	Cups

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Stainless	steel	cups	(hefty	and	durable)
Measurement	markings	that	are	visible	even	when	cup	is	full
Evenly	weighted	and	stable
Long	handles	that	are	level	with	rim	of	cup

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Amco	Basic	Ingredient	4-Piece	Measuring	Cup	Set



$11.50
Liquid	Measuring	Cups

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Crisp,	unambiguous	markings	that	include¼-and	1⁄3-cup	measurements
Heatproof,	sturdy	cup	with	handle
Good	to	have	in	a	variety	of	sizes(1,	2,	and	4	cups)

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Pyrex	2-Cup	Measuring	Cup



$5.99
Measuring	Spoons

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Long,	comfortable	handles
Rim	of	bowl	flush	with	handle	for	easy	“sweeping”	off	of	excess	ingredients
Slim	design

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Cuisipro	Stainless	Steel	Measuring	Spoon	Set



$9.95
Digital	Scale

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Easy-to-read	display	not	blocked	by	weighing	platform
At	least	7-pound	capacity
Accessible	buttons
Gram-to-ounce	conversion	feature
Roomy	platform

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
OXO	Food	Scale



$49.99
BEST	BUY:	Soehnle	65055	Digital	Scale



$34.95
Instant-Read	Thermometer

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Digital	model	with	automatic	shut-off
Quick-response	readings	in	10	seconds	or	less
Wide	temperature	range	(-40	to	450	degrees)
Long	stem	that	can	reach	interior	of	large	cuts	of	meat
Water-resistant

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
ThermoWorks	Splash-Proof	Super-Fast	Thermapen
$89
BEST	BUYS:	ThermoWorks	Super-Fast	Pocket	Thermometer
$19
CDN	ProAccurate	Quick-Read	Thermometer



$19.99
Oven	Thermometer

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Clearly	marked	numbers	for	easy	readability
Hook	for	hanging	or	stable	base
Large	temperature	range	(up	to	600	degrees)

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Cooper-Atkins	Oven	Thermometer	(model	#24HP)
$6



Kitchen	Timer

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Lengthy	time	range	(1	second	to	at	least	10	hours)
Ability	to	count	up	after	alarm	goes	off
Easy	to	use	and	read

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Polder	3-in-1	Clock,	Timer,	and	Stopwatch
(model	#898–95)
$12



ESSENTIAL	BAKEWARE
Glass	Baking	Dish

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Dimensions	of	13	by	9	inches
Large	enough	to	hold	casseroles	and	large	crisps	and	cobblers
Handles

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Pyrex	Bakeware	9	x	13-Inch	Baking	Dish



$12.99
Metal	Baking	Pan

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Dimensions	of	13	by	9	inches
Straight	sides
Nonstick	coating	for	even	browning	and	easy	release	of	cakes	and	bar	cookies
Handles

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Baker’s	Secret	9	x	13-Inch	Nonstick	Cake	Pan



$7.49
Square	Baking	Pans

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Straight	sides
Light	gold	or	dark	nonstick	surface	for	even	browning	and	easy	release	of	cakes
Good	to	have	both	9-inch	and	8-inch	square	pans

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Williams-Sonoma	Nonstick	Goldtouch	Square	Cake	Pan
$26,	8-inch;	$27,	9-inch
BEST	BUY:	Chicago	Metallic	Gourmetware	8-Inch	Nonstick	Square	Cake	Pan



$6.99
Round	Cake	Pans

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Straight	sides
Nonstick	coating	for	even	browning	and	easy	release	of	cakes
Recommend	a	set	of	9-inch	and	8-inch	pans

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Chicago	Metallic	Professional	Lifetime	9-Inch	Nonstick	Round	Cake	Pan



$12.99
Pie	Plates

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Glass	for	even	browning	and	easier	monitoring
½-inch	rim	(makes	it	easy	to	shape	decorative	crusts)
Shallow	angled	sides	prevent	crusts	from	slumping
Good	to	have	two

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Pyrex	Bakeware	9-Inch	Pie	Plate



$2.99
Loaf	Pans

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Light	gold	or	dark	nonstick	surface	for	even	browning	and	easy	release
Good	to	have	both	8½	by	4½-inch	and	9	by	5-inch	pans

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Williams-Sonoma	8½	x	4½-Inch	Nonstick	Goldtouch	Loaf	Pan
$21
BEST	BUY:	Baker’s	Secret	9	x	5-Inch	Nonstick	Loaf	Pan
$5



Muffin	Tin

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Nonstick	surface	for	even	browning	and	easy	release
Wide,	extended	rims	and	raised	lip	for	easy	handling
Cup	capacity	of	½	cup

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Wilton	Avanti	Everglide	Metal-Safe	Nonstick	12-Cup	Muffin	Pan



$13.99
Cooling	Rack

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Grid-style	rack	with	tightly	woven,	heavy-gauge	bars
Should	fit	inside	standard	18	by	13-inch	rimmed	baking	sheet
Dishwasher-safe

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
CIA	Bakeware	12	x	17-Inch	Cooling	Rack



$15.95
BEST	BUY:	Libertyware	Half-Size	Sheet	Pan	Grate



$5.25
SMALL	APPLIANCES
Food	Processor

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

14-cup	capacity
Sharp	and	sturdy	blades
Wide	feed	tube
Should	come	with	basic	blades	and	disks:	steel	blade,	dough	blade,	shredding/slicing	disk

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Cuisinart	Custom	14-Cup	Food	Processor
$199



Hand-Held	Mixer

	



WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Lightweight	model
Slim	wire	beaters	without	central	post
Digital	display
Separate	ejector	buttons	(not	part	of	speed	dial)
Variety	of	speeds

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Cuisinart	Power	Advantage	7-Speed	Hand	Mixer



$49.95
NOTE:	If	you	do	a	lot	of	baking	or	want	to	make	bread,	you	should	invest	in	a	stand	mixer	instead	of	a
hand-held	mixer.	We	recommend	the	Cuisinart	5.5	Quart	Stand	Mixer	($299).



Blender

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Large	blades	that	reach	close	to	the	edge	and	bottom	of	the	jar
Powerful	motor	(at	least	700	watts)
Automatic	shut-off	to	keep	motor	from	overheating
Clear	jar	to	monitor	progress

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Vitamix	5200
$449
BEST	BUY:	Breville	BBL605XL	Hemisphere	Control	Blender



$200



KITCHEN	SUPPLIES
Parchment	Paper

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Sturdy	paper	for	heavy	doughs
Easy	release	of	baked	goods
At	least	14	inches	wide

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Reynolds	Parchment	Paper



$3.69
Plastic	Wrap

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Clings	tightly	and	resticks	well
Packaging	with	sharp	teeth	that	aren’t	exposed	(to	avoid	snags	on	clothing	and	skin)
Adhesive	pad	to	hold	cut	end	of	wrap

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Glad	Cling	Wrap	Clear	Plastic



$2.59
GRILLING	EQUIPMENT
Gas	Grill

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Large	grilling	area	(at	least	350	square	inches)
Built-in	thermometer
Two	burners	for	varying	heat	levels	(three	are	even	better)
Attached	table
Fat	drainage	system

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Weber	Spirit	E-210
$399
NOTE:	Unless	you	live	in	an	apartment	with	no	access	to	outdoor	space,	you	should	own	either	a	gas	or	a
charcoal	grill.	If	you	choose	charcoal,	you	will	want	a	chimney	starter.



Charcoal	Grill

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Large	grilling	area
Deep	grill	cover	to	fit	large	food	items	(such	as	a	turkey)
Hinged	grill	grate	to	tend	fire
Ash	catcher	for	easier	cleanup

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Weber	One-Touch	Gold	22½-Inch	Charcoal	Grill
$149



Chimney	Starter

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

6-quart	capacity
Holes	in	canister	so	air	can	circulate	around	coals
Sturdy	construction
Heat-resistant	handle
Dual	handle	for	easy	control

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Weber	Rapidfire	Chimney	Starter



$14.99
Grill	Tongs

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

16	inches	in	length
Scalloped,	not	sharp	and	serrated,	edges
Open	and	close	easily
Lightweight
Moderate	amount	of	springy	tension

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
OXO	Good	Grips	16-Inch	Locking	Tongs



$14.99
Grill	Brush

	

WHAT	TO	LOOK	FOR
	

Long	handle	(about	14	inches)
Large	woven-mesh	detachable	stainless	steel	scrubbing	pad

TEST	KITCHEN	FAVORITES
Tool	Wizard	BBQ	Brush



$9.99

COOKWARE	MATERIALS
Cookware	is	made	from	a	variety	of	metals,	each	with	its	own	pros	and	cons.
The	ability	of	the	metal	to	withstand	and	conduct	heat	will	determine	how	well
you	can	brown	food,	how	easily	food	will	burn,	and	how	evenly	the	heat	is
distributed.	Weight	matters	too.	Buy	a	lightweight	stainless	steel	pan	and	your
stew	meat	will	stick	to	the	pot.	Ease	of	cleaning	can	enhance	(or	detract	from)	a
pan’s	desirability.	Here’s	what	you	need	to	know:
COPPER	conducts	heat	extremely	well,	but	it	is	expensive,	heavy,	and	tarnishes
easily.	Copper	is	also	is	reactive,	leaching	into	many	foods	to	produce	off-colors
and	flavors.	For	this	reason,	copper	cookware	is	usually	lined	with	tin	or
stainless	steel.

	
THE	BOTTOM	LINE:	Copper	looks	great	but	it’s	not	worth	the	expense.



ALUMINUM	is	second	to	copper	in	conductivity	among	the	metals	used	for
cookware.	It	is	also	light	and	inexpensive	and	retains	heat	well,	provided	it	is	of
sufficient	thickness,	although	the	soft	metal	dents	and	scratches	easily	and	it	can
react	with	acidic	ingredients.	Anodized	aluminum	cookware	has	a	harder	and
less	reactive	outer	surface.	But	its	dark	color	can	make	it	tricky	to	monitor	the
development	of	fond.

	
THE	BOTTOM	LINE:	Unless	anodized,	aluminum	is	best	used	in	combination	with	other	metals.



CAST	IRON	heats	up	slowly	but	retains	heat	well.	Cast-iron	cookware	is	also
inexpensive	and	lasts	a	lifetime,	but	it	is	heavy,	reactive,	and	must	be	seasoned
before	use	(unless	you	buy	preseasoned	cast-iron	cookware,	which	we
recommend).	Cast	iron	is	often	coated	with	brightly	colored	enamel,	which	is	not
only	attractive	but	makes	the	pot	nonreactive.	Because	heavy	cast-iron	pots
retain	heat	so	well,	they	are	perfect	for	recipes	like	frying	and	stewing	that
require	precise	temperature	control.

	
THE	BOTTOM	LINE:	Cast	iron	is	great	for	skillets,	and	we	like	enameled	cast	iron	for	Dutch	ovens.



STAINLESS	STEEL	is	a	poor	heat	conductor.	Inexpensive	cookware	made
entirely	of	thin-gauge	stainless	steel	is	prone	to	hot	spots	and	warping.	Stainless
steel	is,	however,	nonreactive,	durable,	and	attractive,	making	it	an	excellent
choice	for	coating,	or	“cladding,”	cookware	made	from	aluminum	or	copper.

	
THE	BOTTOM	LINE:	Buy	cookware	made	with	stainless	steel	that	is	combined	with	other	metals.



CLAD	cookware	is	what	we	recommend	most	of	the	time.	The	“cladding”	label
means	that	it	is	made	from	layers	of	metal	that	have	been	bonded	under	intense
pressure	and	heat.	For	most	clad	cookware,	these	layers	form	a	sandwich	with
the	“filling”	made	of	aluminum	and	the	outer	layers	made	of	stainless	steel.

	
THE	BOTTOM	LINE:	Clad	cookware	heats	evenly	and	quickly,	and	is	easy	to	care	for.



REACTIVITY	IN	COOKWARE
When	acidic	ingredients	are	cooked	in	“reactive”	pans	(those	made	of	aluminum	or	unseasoned	cast	iron),
trace	amounts	of	molecules	from	the	metal	can	leach	into	the	food.	These	minute	amounts	are	not	harmful
to	consume,	but	they	may	impart	unwanted	metallic	flavors.

To	determine	how	noticeable	such	flavors	are,	we	simmered	tomato	sauce	in	an	aluminum	Dutch	oven
and	in	seasoned	and	unseasoned	cast-iron	Dutch	ovens.	We	also	cooked	tomato	sauce	in	a	stainless	steel
Dutch	oven.	Tasters	noticed	a	strong	taste	of	iron	in	the	sauce	from	the	unseasoned	cast-iron	pot	and	a	more
subtle	metallic	taste	in	the	sauce	from	the	aluminum	pot.	The	sauces	cooked	in	seasoned	cast	iron	(which
has	layers	of	oil	compounds	protecting	the	surface)	and	stainless	steel	tasted	just	fine.

We	sent	samples	of	each	sauce	to	an	independent	lab	to	test	for	the	presence	of	iron	and	aluminum.	The
sauce	from	the	unseasoned	cast	iron	contained	nearly10	times	as	much	iron(108	mg/kg)	as	the	sauce	from
the	seasoned	cast-iron	pot,	which	contained	only	a	few	more	milligrams	of	iron	than	the	sauce	from	the
stainless	steel	pot.	The	sauce	from	the	aluminum	pot	contained	14.3	mg/kg	of	aluminum,	compared	to	less
than	1	mg/kg	in	the	sauce	from	the	stainless	steel	pot.

The	verdict?	Avoid	reactive	cookware	when	cooking	acidic	foods.	It	can	compromise	flavor.

	

WHAT	ABOUT	NONSTICK	PANS?
You	may	be	wondering	about	nonstick	coatings,	which	can	be	applied	to
cookware	made	from	any	of	these	materials.	In	general,	we	reserve	nonstick
pans	for	delicate	foods,	such	as	fish	and	eggs,	which	are	prone	to	sticking.	We
find	that	nonstick	pans	don’t	brown	food	as	well	as	conventional	pans.	Also,
there	often	are	no	browned	bits	left	in	the	pan	once	something	like	a	steak	or
chicken	cutlet	has	been	cooked,	and	thus	nothing	for	the	cook	to	use	in	building
a	pan	sauce.	(For	more	on	this,	see	“Don't	Use	Nonstick	Pans	for	Sauces.”)
There’s	been	a	fair	amount	of	news	and	concern	about	the	safety	of	nonstick

cookware,	which	now	accounts	for	more	than	half	of	all	cookware	sales	in	the
United	States.	What	are	the	issues?
First,	the	production	of	nonstick	surfaces	can	pollute	the	local	ground	water.

This	issue	directly	impacts	anyone	living	near	a	manufacturing	facility	where
nonstick	surfaces	are	made.
Second,	the	ingestion	of	nonstick	surfaces	(once	the	coating	starts	to	peel	and

flake)	probably	isn’t	good	for	you.	Maybe	the	coating	just	passes	through	your
system,	maybe	not.	In	any	case,	the	coating	is	no	longer	working	if	it	has	started
to	flake	off;	you	need	to	throw	out	the	pan	and	buy	another	one.
Third,	nonstick	pans	can	emit	fumes	if	the	surface	reaches	temperatures	in



excess	of	600	degrees.	Manufacturers	admit	that	these	fumes	can	kill	small	birds
and	advise	against	keeping	pet	birds	in	the	kitchen.	These	fumes	can	cause	a
flulike	illness	in	humans.
So	how	much	of	a	concern	is	this?	We	conducted	several	kitchen	tests	in

which	we	exposed	both	cheap	and	good-quality	nonstick	pans	to	high	heat	on	the
stovetop	and	under	the	broiler.	We	wanted	to	see	how	hot	the	cookware	would
get	when	used	in	recipes	that	call	for	high	heat,	like	cooking	a	stir-fry.	Using	an
infrared	thermometer	gun,	we	tracked	temperatures	and	found	only	one	way	to
get	the	temperature	in	the	pan	to	600	degrees:	Heat	an	empty	pan	over	a	hot
burner	and	forget	about	it.
Our	recommendation:	Never	heat	any	pan,	nonstick	or	otherwise,	without	first

putting	some	oil	in	the	pan.	The	oil	will	smoke	at	400	degrees—well	before	the
surface	of	a	nonstick	pan	will	emit	dangerous	fumes.	You	will	notice	the
smoking	oil	and	can	pull	the	pan	off	the	heat.	This	is	a	good	idea	when	using
conventional	pans,	too.
We	continue	to	use	nonstick	cookware	in	the	test	kitchen,	but	for	anyone	who

is	looking	for	an	alternative,	we’ve	found	cast	iron	to	be	the	most	effective.	Over
time,	cast-iron	pans	develop	nonstick	properties	as	the	oils	and	fats	used	in
cooking	polymerize	(the	molecules	change	shape	and	link	up)	and	essentially
fuse	with	the	surface	of	the	pan.	How	much	time?	Clearly,	the	older	and	more
seasoned	the	pan,	the	more	“nonstick”	it	will	become—as	anyone	who	has	been
lucky	enough	to	inherit	their	grandparents’	cast-iron	skillet	will	tell	you.	For	the
rest	of	us,	it’s	never	too	late	to	start.



DON’T	USE	NONSTICK	PANS	FOR	SAUCES
We	strongly	suggest	that	you	sear	all	chicken	and	meat	in	pans	with	a	conventional	metal	surface.	Nonstick
pans	are	easy	to	clean	but	don’t	allow	much	fond	to	develop.	(Fond	is	the	bits	of	browned	food	that	get
stuck	to	the	bottom	of	the	pan	and	help	develop	flavor	in	sauces.)	We	ran	the	following	test	to	prove	this
point.

We	seared	chicken	breasts	in	a	clad	skillet	lined	with	stainless	steel	and	in	a	nonstick	skillet.	We	then
deglazed	each	pan	with	2	cups	of	water,	which	we	then	reduced	to	1	cup	before	tasting.	The	liquid	from	the
nonstick	pan	was	nearly	flavorless,	while	the	water	from	the	conventional	pan	had	a	distinct	chicken	flavor.
One	look	at	the	color	of	the	“sauces”	made	in	each	pan	tells	the	story.	If	you	want	a	flavorful	sauce,	don’t
use	a	nonstick	pan.

	
NONSTICK	PAN

This	sauce	was	nearly	indistinguishable	from	plain	water.



	
STAINLESS	STEEL	PAN

This	sauce	acquired	a	golden-brown	color	and	distinct	chicken	flavor.



KNIFE	BASICS
Specific	knives	are	designed	to	perform	a	variety	of	tasks,	which	is	why	you
need	several	knives.	For	instance,	the	serrations	on	a	bread	knife	“grab”	on	to
craggy	surfaces	(such	as	those	on	crusty	bread)	much	better	than	the	smooth
edge	of	a	chef’s	knife.	Likewise,	a	small	paring	knife	is	a	much	better	choice
than	a	large	chef’s	knife	when	trying	to	hull	strawberries	or	devein	shrimp.	For	a
complete	list	of	the	knives	we	recommend	that	you	own,	see	“Equipping	Your
Kitchen.”
Whichever	knife	you’re	using,	it	should	be	sharp.	Let’s	say	that	again.	Your

knives	must	be	sharp!	There	are	three	main	reasons	to	keep	your	knives	sharp.
	

Sharp	knives	are	actually	less	dangerous	than	dull	knives,	which	are	much
more	likely	to	slip	and	end	up	cutting	your	hand.
Sharp	knives	cut	through	food	more	quickly	than	dull	knives.	Would	you
rather	take	two	minutes	or	five	minutes	to	chop	an	onion?	It	may	not	seem
like	a	big	difference,	but	in	a	recipe	with	a	lot	of	vegetable	or	protein	prep
those	extra	minutes	can	really	add	up.
Sharp	knives	produce	food	that	is	more	evenly	cut	than	dull	knives.	A	dull
blade	will	yield	roughly	minced	garlic	with	large	hunks,	which	can	burn
and	impart	a	harsh	flavor	to	your	food.	With	a	sharp	knife,	you	can	mince
the	garlic	finer	and	more	evenly,	thus	producing	better-tasting	food.

Right	from	the	manufacturer,	the	blade	should	be	very	sharp.	Most	knife
blades	are	actually	shaped	like	a	wedge.	The	spine	(the	top	of	the	blade)	is	thick
and	helps	the	cook	push	the	blade	through	food.	The	cutting	edge	is	angled	to	a
point.	The	blades	on	most	European-style	knives	are	angled	at	about	20	degrees.
So	what	turns	a	knife	edge	dull	and	what’s	the	best	way	to	remedy	the

problem?	After	just	a	few	minutes	of	use,	the	edge	can	roll	over,	making	the
blade	feel	slightly	dull.	The	wedge	becomes	less	effective	and	the	cook	needs	to
supply	more	energy	to	push	the	blade	through	food.	Running	the	knife	blade	up
and	down	the	steel	that	came	with	your	knife	set	can	remove	the	folded	edge	and
return	the	knife	to	its	original	sharpness.
However,	most	knives	used	by	home	cooks	are	much	duller	than	this.	The

cook	hasn’t	stopped	every	few	minutes	to	retool	the	blade	with	a	steel.	As	a
result,	the	factory-sharp	angles	on	the	edge	have	become	rounded	and	very	dull.



At	this	point,	it	will	take	much	more	effort	to	use	the	knife	and	the	edge	will
bruise	food	as	it	cuts.	(The	blade	is	also	more	likely	to	slip.)	The	knife	needs	an
entirely	new	edge.	A	steel	can’t	do	this;	you	need	to	regrind	the	blade	and
remove	some	metal.	An	electric	knife	sharpener	is	your	best	bet	for	doing	this	at
home.



LIFECYCLE	OF	A	KNIFE

	
A	sharp	edge	(left)	will	make	quick	work	of	slicing	and	chopping.	However,	even	a	few	minutes	of	work
can	make	the	edge	roll	over	(center),	making	the	blade	feel	slightly	dull.	A	quick	steeling	or	sharpening	will
remove	the	folded	edge	and	return	the	knife	to	its	original	sharpness.	After	significant	use,	the	sharp	angles
on	the	edge	will	become	rounded	and	dull	(right).	At	this	point,	the	knife	needs	a	new	edge,	which	only	an
electric	sharpener	(or	whetstone)	can	provide.



EMERGENCY	INGREDIENT
SUBSTITUTIONS
Everybody	does	it	(even	though	they	shouldn’t).	Here	are	some	tips	for	doing	it
well.	No	one	wants	to	run	out	to	the	market	for	just	one	ingredient.	Perhaps
something	you’ve	got	on	hand	will	do	the	trick.	We	tested	scores	of	widely
published	ingredient	substitutions	to	figure	out	which	ones	work	under	what
circumstances	and	which	ones	simply	don’t	work.	Below	is	a	list	of	ingredients
commonly	called	for	in	recipes	and	the	items	you	are	likely	to	have	on	hand	that
will	work	as	substitutions.
	
To	replace:	Whole	Milk
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:
5⁄8	cup	skim	milk	+	3⁄8	cup	half-and-half
2⁄3	cup	1%	milk	+	1⁄3	cup	half-and-half
¾	cup	2%	milk	+	¼	cup	half-and-half
7⁄8	cup	skim	milk	+	1⁄8	cup	heavy	cream
	
To	replace:	Half-and-Half
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:
¾	cup	whole	milk	+	¼	cup	heavy	cream
2⁄3	cup	skim	or	low-fat	milk	+	1⁄3	cup	heavy	cream
	
To	replace:	Heavy	Cream
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:	1	cup	evaporated	milk
Not	suitable	for	whipping	or	baking,	but	fine	for	soups	and	sauces.
	
To	replace:	Eggs
Amount	and	Substitute:
1	LARGE	=	1	JUMBO	=	1	EXTRA-LARGE	=	1	MEDIUM
2	LARGE	=	1½	JUMBO	=	2	EXTRA-LARGE	=	2	MEDIUM
3	LARGE	=	2½	JUMBO	=	2½	EXTRA-LARGE	=	3½	MEDIUM



4	LARGE	=	3	JUMBO	=	3½	EXTRA-LARGE	=	4½	MEDIUM
5	LARGE	=	4	JUMBO	=	4	EXTRA-LARGE	=	6	MEDIUM
6	LARGE	=	5	JUMBO	=	5	EXTRA-LARGE	=	7	MEDIUM
	
To	replace:	Buttermilk
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:
1	cup	milk	+	1	tablespoon	lemon	juice	or	distilled	white	vinegar
Not	suitable	for	raw	applications,	such	as	a	buttermilk	dressing.
	
To	replace:	Sour	Cream
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:	1	cup	plain	whole-milk	yogurt
Nonfat	and	low-fat	yogurts	are	too	lean	to	replace	sour	cream.
	
To	replace:	Plain	Yogurt
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:	1	cup	sour	cream
	
To	replace:	Cake	Flour
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:	7⁄8	cup	all-purpose	flour	+	2	tablespoons	cornstarch
	
To	replace:	Bread	Flour
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:	1	cup	all-purpose	flour
Bread	and	pizza	crusts	may	bake	up	with	slightly	less	chew.
	
To	replace:	Baking	Powder
Amount:	1	teaspoon
Substitute:	¼	teaspoon	baking	soda	+	½	teaspoon	cream	of	tartar	(use	right	away)
	
To	replace:	Light	Brown	Sugar
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:	1	cup	granulated	sugar	+	1	tablespoon	molasses
Pulse	the	molasses	in	a	food	processor	along	with	the	sugar	or	simply	add	it	along	with	the	other	wet
ingredients.
	



To	replace:	Dark	Brown	Sugar
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:	1	cup	granulated	sugar	+	2	tablespoons	molasses
Pulse	the	molasses	in	a	food	processor	along	with	the	sugar	or	simply	add	it	along	with	the	other	wet
ingredients.
	
To	replace:	Confectioners’	Sugar
Amount:	1	cup
Substitute:	1	cup	granulated	sugar	+	1	teaspoon	cornstarch,	ground	in	a	blender	(not	a	food	processor)
Works	well	for	dusting	over	cakes,	less	so	in	frostings	and	glazes.
	
To	replace:	Table	Salt
Amount:	1	tablespoon
Substitute:
1½	tablespoons	Morton	Kosher	Salt	or	fleur	de	sel 
OR 2	tablespoons	Diamond	Crystal	Kosher	Salt	or	Maldon	Sea	Salt 
Not	recommended	for	use	in	baking	recipes.
	
To	replace:	Fresh	Herbs
Amount:	1	tablespoon
Substitute:	1	teaspoon	dried	herbs
	
To	replace:	Wine
Amount:	½	cup
Substitute:
½	cup	broth	+	1	teaspoon	wine	vinegar	(added	just	before	serving) 
OR ½	cup	broth	+	1	teaspoon	lemon	juice	(added	just	before	serving)
Vermouth	makes	an	acceptable	substitute	for	white	wine.
	
To	replace:	Unsweetened	Chocolate
Amount:	1	ounce
Substitute:
3	tablespoons	cocoa	powder	+	1	tablespoon	vegetable	oil
1½	ounces	bittersweet	or	semisweet	chocolate	(remove	1	tablespoon	sugar	from	the	recipe)
	
To	replace:	Bittersweet	or	Semisweet	Chocolate
Amount:	1	ounce
Substitute:	2⁄3	ounce	unsweetened	chocolate	+	2	teaspoons	sugar



Works	well	with	fudgy	brownies.	Do	not	use	in	a	custard	or	cake.



FOOD	SAFETY
THE	BASICS
Food	safety	sounds	scary	and	in	some	respects	it	is.	If	you	don’t	follow	basic
sanitation	practices,	you	can	make	yourself	and	your	family	sick.	That	said,
taking	a	few	basic	steps	will	dramatically	reduce	the	risk	of	food-borne	illnesses.
SEPARATE	RAW	AND	COOKED	One	of	the	most	important	rules	of	food

safety	is	to	keep	raw	and	cooked	foods	separate.	Never	place	cooked	food	on	a
plate	or	cutting	board	that	has	come	into	contact	with	raw	food,	or	vice	versa,
and	wash	any	utensil	(including	a	thermometer)	that	comes	in	contact	with	raw
food	before	reusing	it.	These	additional	steps	will	help	you	avoid	cross-
contamination.
PUT	UP	A	BARRIER	Items	that	come	in	contact	with	both	raw	and	cooked

food,	like	scales	and	platters,	should	be	covered	with	aluminum	foil	or	plastic
wrap	to	create	a	protective	barrier.	Once	the	item	has	been	used,	the	foil—and
any	bacteria—can	be	discarded.	Similarly,	wrapping	your	cutting	board	with
plastic	wrap	before	pounding	meat	and	poultry	will	limit	the	spread	of	bacteria.
DON’T	RINSE	RAW	MEAT	AND	POULTRY	Avoid	rinsing	raw	meat	and

poultry,	as	doing	so	is	likely	to	spread	contaminants	around	your	sink.
SAFER	SEASONINGS	Though	bacteria	can’t	live	for	more	than	a	few

minutes	in	direct	contact	with	salt	(which	quickly	dehydrates	bacteria,	leading	to
death),	they	can	live	on	the	edges	of	a	box	or	shaker.	To	avoid	contamination,	we
grind	pepper	into	a	small	bowl	and	then	mix	it	with	salt	(using	a	ratio	of	1	part
pepper	to	4	parts	kosher	salt	or	2	parts	table	salt).	This	way,	we	can	reach	into
the	bowl	for	seasoning	without	having	to	wash	our	hands	every	time	we	touch
the	meat.	Afterward,	the	bowl	goes	right	into	the	dishwasher.
DON’T	RECYCLE	USED	MARINADES	Used	marinade	is	contaminated

with	raw	meat	juices	and	is	therefore	unsafe	to	consume.	If	you	want	a	sauce	to
serve	with	cooked	meat,	make	a	little	extra	marinade	and	set	it	aside	before
adding	the	rest	to	the	raw	meat.



AVOIDING	THE	DANGER	ZONE
Most	bacteria	thrive	between	40	and	140	degrees.	Within	this	“danger	zone,”
bacteria	double	about	every	20	minutes,	quickly	reaching	harmful	levels.	As	a
general	rule,	food	shouldn’t	stay	in	this	zone	for	more	than	two	hours	(one	hour
if	the	room	temperature	is	over	90	degrees).	Here	are	some	specific	steps	you
should	take	to	avoid	letting	food	spend	too	much	time	in	the	danger	zone.
DEFROST	IN	FRIDGE	Defrosting	should	always	be	done	in	the

refrigerator,	not	on	the	counter,	where	the	temperatures	are	higher	and	bacteria
can	multiply	readily.	Always	place	food	on	a	plate	or	in	a	bowl	while	defrosting
to	prevent	any	liquid	it	releases	from	coming	in	contact	with	other	foods.	Most
food	will	take	24	hours	to	thaw	fully.	(Larger	items,	like	whole	turkeys,	can	take
far	longer.	Count	on	about	five	hours	per	pound.)
COUNTERINTUITIVE	COOLING	Though	it	may	go	against	your

instincts,	don’t	put	hot	foods	in	the	fridge	immediately	after	cooking.	This	will
cause	the	temperature	of	the	refrigerator	to	rise,	potentially	making	it	hospitable
to	the	spread	of	bacteria.	The	FDA	recommends	cooling	foods	to	70	degrees
within	the	first	two	hours	after	cooking	and	40	degrees	within	four	hours	after
that.	We	stay	within	these	recommendations	by	cooling	food	on	the	countertop
for	about	an	hour,	until	it	reaches	80	to	90	degrees	(food	should	be	just	warm	to
the	touch)	before	transferring	it	to	the	fridge.	(Click	here	for	details.)
REHEAT	RAPIDLY	When	food	is	reheated,	it	should	be	brought	through	the

danger	zone	as	rapidly	as	possible—don’t	let	it	come	slowly	to	a	simmer.	Bring
leftover	sauces,	soups,	and	gravies	to	a	boil	and	make	sure	casseroles	reach	at
least	165	degrees,	using	an	instant-read	thermometer	to	determine	whether
they’re	at	the	proper	temperature.



KEEP	IT	COOL
Thermometers	are	proven	assets	in	limiting	the	spread	of	food-borne	illness.	A
refrigerator	thermometer	will	tell	you	if	your	fridge	and	freezer	are	working
properly.	Check	the	temperature	of	your	refrigerator	regularly	to	ensure	that	it	is
between	35	and	40	degrees;	your	freezer	should	be	below	0	degrees.
Here	are	the	recommended	storage	temperatures	for	specific	foods.	Keep	in

mind	that	the	back	of	a	refrigerator	is	the	coldest.	Make	sure	that	raw	meat	is
stored	well	wrapped	and	never	on	shelves	that	are	above	other	food.
	
Food:	Fish	and	Shellfish
Temperature:	30	to	34	degrees
	
Food:	Meat	and	Poultry
Temperature:	32	to	36	degrees
	
Food:	Dairy	Products
Temperature:	36	to	40	degrees
	
Food:	Eggs
Temperature:	38	to	40	degrees
	
Food:	Produce
Temperature:	40	to	45	degrees



GET	IT	HOT
The	doneness	temperatures	used	throughout	this	book	represent	the	test	kitchen’s
best	assessment	of	palatability	weighed	against	safety.	In	most	cases,	those
concerns	align.	Rare	chicken	isn’t	very	tasty,	or	very	safe.	There	are	a	few
notable	exceptions,	especially	as	regards	ground	meat.	If	safety	is	your	primary
concern,	you	don’t	want	to	eat	rare	burgers.
The	USDA	has	issued	a	complex	set	of	rules	regarding	the	cooking	of	meat

and	poultry.Here	are	the	basics:
	

Cook	whole	cuts	of	meat,	including	pork,	to	an	internal	temperature	of	at
least	145	degrees	and	let	rest	for	at	least	three	minutes.
Cook	all	ground	meats	to	an	internal	temperature	of	at	least	160	degrees.
Cook	all	poultry,	including	ground	poultry,	to	an	internal	temperature	of	at
least	165	degrees.

If	you	want	more	information	on	food	safety,	visit
www.fsis.usda.gov/factsheets.



CONVERSIONS	AND	EQUIVALENTS
The	recipes	in	this	book	were	developed	using	standard	U.S.	measures.	The
charts	below	offer	equivalents	for	U.S.	and	metric	measures.	All	conversions	are
approximate	and	have	been	rounded	up	or	down	to	the	nearest	whole	number.
For	example:
1	teaspoon	=	4.929	milliliters,	rounded	up	to	5	milliliters
1	ounce	=	28.349	grams,	rounded	down	to	28	grams



VOLUME	CONVERSIONS
	
U.S.	TO	METRIC
1	teaspoon	=	5	milliliters
2	teaspoons	=	10	milliliters
1	tablespoon	=	15	milliliters
2	tablespoons	=	30	milliliters
¼	cup	=	59	milliliters
1⁄3	cup	=	79	milliliters
½	cup	=	118	milliliters
¾	cup	=	177	milliliters
1	cup	=	237	milliliters
1	¼	cup	=	296	milliliters
1	½	cup	=	355	milliliters
2	cups	=	473	milliliters
2	½	cups	=	591	milliliters
3	cups	=	710	milliliters
4	cups	(I	quart)	=	0.946	liter
1.06	quart	=	1	liter
4	quarts	(1	gallon)	=	3.8	liters



OVEN	TEMPERATURES
	
Farenheit,	Celsius,	and	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
225	Fahrenheit	=	105	Celsius	=	¼	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
250	Fahrenheit	=	120	Celsius	=	½	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
275	Fahrenheit	=	135	Celsius	=	1	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
300	Fahrenheit	=	150	Celsius	=	2	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
325	Fahrenheit	=	165	Celsius	=	3	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
350	Fahrenheit	=	180	Celsius	=	4	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
375	Fahrenheit	=	190	Celsius	=	5	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
400	Fahrenheit	=	200	Celsius	=	6	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
425	Fahrenheit	=	220	Celsius	=	7	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
450	Fahrenheit	=	230	Celsius	=	8	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)
475	Fahrenheit	=	245	Celsius	=	9	Gas	Mark	(Imperial)



WEIGHT	CONVERSIONS
	
Ounces	to	Grams
½	ounce	=	14	grams
¾	ounce	=	21	grams
1	ounce	=	28	grams
1	½	ounces	=	43	grams
2	ounces	=	57	grams
2	½	ounces	=	71	grams
3	ounces	=	85	grams
3	½	ounces	=	99	grams
4	ounces	=	113	grams
4	½	ounces	=	128	grams
5	ounces	=	142	grams
6	ounces	=	170	grams
7	ounces	=	198	grams
8	ounces	=	227	grams
9	ounces	=	255	grams
10	ounces	=	283	grams
12	ounces	=	340	grams
16	ounces	(1	pound)	=	454	grams



METRIC	TEMPERATURES
If	you	use	an	oven	set	to	metric	or	Imperial	measures,	you	will	want	to	refer	to
the	chart	on	the	left	when	using	our	recipes.	For	other	temperatures	not
represented	in	the	chart,	use	this	simple	formula:
Subtract	32	degrees	from	the	Fahrenheit	reading,	then	divide	the	result	by	1.8

to	find	the	Celsius	reading.
For	example,	if	a	recipe	says	“roast	until	chicken	thighs	register	175	degrees,”

you	would	convert	this	Fahrenheit	temperature	as	follows:

175˚F	–	32	=	143˚
143˚	÷	1.8	=	79.44˚C,	rounded	down	to	79˚C



FURTHER	READING
Amendola,	Joseph,	and	Nicole	Rees.	Understanding	Baking.	Hoboken,	NJ:	John
Wiley	&	Sons,	2003.
Barham,	Peter.	The	Science	of	Cooking.	Berlin:	Springer-Verlag,	2001.
Belitz,	H.-D.,	Werner	Grosch,	and	Peter	Schieberle.	Food	Chemistry.	4th	ed.
Berlin:	Springer-Verlag,	2009.
Block,	Eric.	Garlic	and	Other	Alliums:	The	Lore	and	the	Science.	Cambridge:
The	Royal	Society	of	Chemistry,	2010.
Brown,	Amy	C.	Understanding	Food:	Principles	and	Preparation.	3rd	ed.
Belmont,	CA:	Thomson	Wadsworth,	2008.
Coultate,	Tom.	Food:	The	Chemistry	of	Its	Components.	5th	ed.	Cambridge:	The
Royal	Society	of	Chemistry,	2009.
Fellows,	P.	J.	Food	Processing	Technology:	Principles	and	Practice.	3rd	ed.
Boca	Raton,	FL:	CRC	Press,	2009.
Figoni,	Paula.	How	Baking	Works.	3rd	ed.	Hoboken,	NJ:	John	Wiley	&	Sons,
2011.
Igoe,	Robert	S.	Dictionary	of	Food	Ingredients.	4th	ed.	Gaithersburg,	MD:
Aspen	Publishers,	2001.
Kamozawa,	Aki,	and	H.	Alexander	Talbot.	Ideas	in	Food:	Great	Recipes	and
Why	They	Work.	New	York:	Clarkson	Potter,	2010.
McClements,	David	Julian.	Food	Emulsions:	Principles,	Practices,	and
Techniques.	2nd	ed.	Boca	Raton,	FL:	CRC	Press,	2004.
McGee,	Harold.	On	Food	and	Cooking:	The	Science	and	Lore	of	the	Kitchen.
New	York:	Scribner,	2004.
McWilliams,	Margaret.	Foods:	Experimental	Perspectives.	6th	ed.	Upper	Saddle
River,	NJ:	Prentice	Hall,	2008.
Murano,	Peter.	Understanding	Food	Science	and	Technology.	Belmont,	CA:
Thomson	Wadsworth,	2003.
Myhrvold,	Nathan,	Chris	Young,	and	Maxime	Bilet.	Modernist	Cuisine:	The	Art
and	Science	of	Cooking.	Bellevue,	WA:	The	Cooking	Lab,	2011.
Nielsen,	Suzanne,	ed.	Food	Analysis.	New	York:	Springer,	2010.



Owusu-Apenten,	Richard.	Introduction	to	Food	Chemistry.	Boca	Raton,	FL:
CRC	Press,	2005.
Potter,	Jeff.	Cooking	for	Geeks:	Real	Science,	Great	Hacks,	and	Good	Food.
Sebastapol,	CA:	O’Reilly	Media,	2010.
Reineccius,	Gary.	Flavor	Chemistry	and	Technology.	2nd	ed.	Boca	Raton,	FL:
Taylor	and	Francis,	2006.
Stauffer,	Clyde.	Fats	and	Oils.	St.	Paul:	Eagan	Press,	1996.
This,	Hervé.	Molecular	Gastronomy:	Exploring	the	Science	of	Flavor.	New
York:	Columbia	University	Press,	2008.
———.	The	Science	of	the	Oven.	New	York:	Columbia	University	Press,	2009.
Varnam,	Alan,	and	Jane	Sutherland.	Meat	and	Meat	Products:	Technology,
Chemistry	and	Microbiology.	London:	Chapman	&	Hall,	1995.
Warriss,	Paul.	Meat	Science:	An	Introductory	Text.	Oxford:	CABI	Publishing,
2000.
Wolke,	Robert.	What	Einstein	Told	His	Cook:	Kitchen	Science	Explained.	New
York:	W.	W.	Norton	&	Co.,	2002	.
———.	What	Einstein	Told	His	Cook	2:	The	Sequel:	Further	Adventures	in
Kitchen	Science.	New	York:	W.	W.	Norton	&	Co.,	2005.



RESOURCES—SELECTED	
SCIENTIFIC	JOURNAL	ARTICLES
While	popular	books	on	cooking	science	and	food	science	textbooks	provide
very	helpful	explanations,	the	ultimate	source	of	scientific	information	comes
from	scholarly	review	articles	and	original	research	papers	published	in
academic	journals.	While	working	on	this	book,	I	consulted	more	than	350
scientific	papers.	These	landmark	papers	were	especially	helpful.
—Guy	Crosby



MEAT,	POULTRY,	AND	SEAFOOD	PREPARATION
Bertram,	H.,	S.	Holdsworth,	A.	Whittaker,	and	H.	Andersen.	“Salt	Diffusion	and
Distribution	in	Meat	Studied	by	23Na	Nuclear	Magnetic	Resonance	Imaging	and
Relaxometry.”	Journal	of	Agricultural	and	Food	Chemistry	53	(2005):	7814–
7818.
Casey,	J.,	A.	Crosland,	and	R.	Patterson.	“Collagen	Content	of	Meat	Carcasses
of	Known	History.”	Meat	Science	12	(1985):	189–203.
Cross,	H.,	M.	Stanfield,	and	E.	Koch.	“Beef	Palatability	as	Affected	by	Cooking
Rate	and	Final	Temperature.”	Journal	of	Animal	Science	43	(1976):	114–121.
Johnson,	I.	“Structure	and	Function	of	Fish	Muscle.”	Symposia	of	the	Zoological
Society	of	London	48	(1981):	71–113.
Jiang,	S.-T.	“Contribution	of	Muscle	Proteinases	to	Meat	Tenderization.”
Proceedings	of	the	National	Science	Council,	ROC	22	(1998):	97–107.
McCrae,	S.,	and	P.	Paul.	“Rate	of	Heating	as	It	Affects	the	Solubilization	of	Beef
Muscle	Collagen.”	Journal	of	Food	Science	39	(1974):	18–21.
Offer,	G.,	and	J.	Trinick.	“On	the	Mechanism	of	Water	Holding	in	Meat:	The
Swelling	and	Shrinking	of	Myofibrils.”	Meat	Science	8	(1983):	245–281.
Oreskovich,	D.	C.,	P.	J.	Bechtel,	F.	K.	McKeith,	J.	Novakofski,	and	E.	J.	Basgall.
“Marinade	pH	Affects	Textural	Properties	of	Beef.”	Journal	of	Food	Science	57
(1992):	305–311.
Yusop,	S.	M.,	M.	G.	O’Sullivan,	J.	F.	Kerry,	and	J.	P.	Kerry.	“Effect	of
Marinating	Time	and	Low	pH	on	Marinade	Performance	and	Sensory
Acceptability	of	Poultry	Meat.”	Meat	Science	85	(2010):	657–663.



COOKING	WITH	CHEESE	AND	EGGS
Bogenreif,	D.,	and	N.	Olson.	“Hydrolysis	of	ß-Casein	Increases	Cheddar	Cheese
Meltability.”	Milchwissenschaft	50	(1995):	678–682.
Clark,	A.,	G.	Kavanagh,	and	S.	Ross-Murphy.	“Globular	Protein	Gelation—
Theory	and	Experiment	(Cooking	Eggs).”	Food	Hydrocolloids	15	(2001):	383–
400.
Lomakina,	K.,	and	K.	Míková.	“A	Study	of	the	Factors	Affecting	the	Foaming
Properties	of	Egg	White—a	Review.”	Czech	Journal	of	Food	Sciences	24
(2006):	110–118.



FRUITS,	VEGETABLES,	CEREAL	GRAINS,	AND	LEGUMES
Brummell,	D.,	et	al.	“Cell	Wall	Metabolism	during	the	Development	of	Chilling
Injury	in	Cold-Stored	Peach	Fruit:	Association	of	Mealiness	with	Arrested
Disassembly	of	Cell	Wall	Pectins.”	Journal	of	Experimental	Botany	55	(2004):
2041–2052.
Kikuchi,	K.,	M.	Koizumi,	N.	Ishida,	and	H.	Kano.	“Water	Uptake	by	Dry	Beans
Observed	by	Micro-Magnetic	Resonance	Imaging.”	Annals	of	Botany	98	(2006):
545–553.
McComber,	D.,	H.	Horner,	M.	Chamberlain,	and	D.	Cox.	“Potato	Cultivar
Differences	Associated	with	Mealiness.”	Journal	of	Agricultural	and	Food
Chemistry	42	(1994):	2433–2439.
McPherson,	A.,	and	J.	Jane.	“Comparison	of	Waxy	Potato	with	Other	Root	and
Tuber	Starches.”	Carbohydrate	Polymers	40	(1999):	57–70.
Micheli,	F.	“Pectin	Methylesterases:	Cell	Wall	Enzymes	with	Important	Roles	in
Plant	Physiology.”	Trends	in	Plant	Science	6	(2001):	414–419.
Stolle-Smits,	T.,	J.	Beekhuizen,	C.	van	Dijk,	A.	G.	J.	Voragen,	and	K.	Recourt.
“Cell	Wall	Dissolution	During	Industrial	Processing	of	Green	Beans	(Phaseolus
vulgaris	L.).”	Journal	of	Agricultural	and	Food	Chemistry	43	(1995):	2480–
2486.
Waldron,	K.,	M.	Parker,	and	A.	Smith.	“Plant	Cell	Walls	and	Food	Quality.”
Comprehensive	Reviews	in	Food	Science	and	Food	Safety	2	(2003):	101–119.



BAKING	AND	CONFECTIONARY	SCIENCE
Amend,	T.,	and	H.-D.	Belitz.	“The	Formation	of	Dough	and	Gluten—A	Study	by
Scanning	Electron	Microscopy.”	Z.	Lebensm	Unters	Forsch	190	(1990):	401–
409.
———.	“Gluten	Formation	Studied	by	the	Transmission	Electron	Microscope.”
Z.	Lebensm	Unters	Forsch	190	(1990):	184–193.
Campos,	R.,	M.	Ollivon,	and	A.	Maragoni.	“Molecular	Composition	Dynamics
and	Structure	of	Cocoa	Butter.”	Crystal	Growth	&	Design	10	(2010):	205–217.
Wieser,	H.	“Chemistry	of	Gluten	Proteins.”	Food	Microbiology	24	(2007):	115–
119.



COOKING	METHODS
Aguilera,	J.,	and	H.	Gloria.	“Determination	of	Oil	in	Fried	Potato	Products	by
Differential	Scanning	Calorimetry.”	Journal	of	Agricultural	and	Food	Chemistry
45	(1997):	781–785.
Augustin,	J.,	E.	Augustin,	R.	L.	Cutrufelli,	S.	R.	Hagen,	and	C.	Teitzel.	“Alcohol
Retention	in	Food	Preparation.”	Journal	of	the	American	Dietetic	Association	92
(1992):	486–488.
Saguy,	I.,	and	E.	Pinthus.	“Oil	Uptake	During	Deep-Fat	Frying:	Factors	and
Mechanism.”	Food	Technology	49	(1995):	142–150.



CREATING	FLAVOR
Ashoor,	S.,	and	J.	Zent.	“Maillard	Browning	of	Common	Amino	Acids	and
Sugars.”	Journal	of	Food	Science	49	(1984):	1206–1207.
Kurihara,	K.	“Glutamate:	From	Discovery	as	a	Food	Flavor	to	Role	as	a	Basic
Taste	(Umami).”	American	Journal	of	Clinical	Nutrition	90	(2009):	719S–722S.
Skurray,	G.,	and	N.	Pucar.	“L-Glutamic	Acid	Content	of	Fresh	and	Processed
Food.”	Food	Chemistry	27	(1988):	177–180.
Randall,	W.	“Onion	Flavor	Chemistry	and	Factors	Influencing	Flavor	Intensity.”
In	Spices:	Flavor	Chemistry	and	Antioxidant	Properties,	S.	Risch	and	C.-T.	Ho,
eds.	Washington,	D.C.:	American	Chemical	Society,	1997.



RECIPE	TABLE	OF	CONTENTS
Concept	1:	Gentle	Heat	Prevents	Overcooking
Prime	Rib
Slow-Roasted	Turkey	with	Gravy
Glazed	Spiral-Sliced	Ham
Maple-Orange	Glaze
Cherry-Port	Glaze
Hard-Cooked	Eggs
Classic	Egg	Salad
Deviled	Eggs
Shrimp	Salad

Shrimp	Salad	with	Roasted	Red	Pepper	and	Basil
Shrimp	Salad	with	Avocado	and	Orange
Spicy	Shrimp	Salad	with	Corn	and	Chipotle
Shrimp	Salad	with	Wasabi	and	Pickled	Ginger

Concept	2:	High	Heat	Develops	Flavor
Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Snap	Peas	and	Red	Pepper
Teriyaki	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Green	Beans	and	Shiitakes
Tangerine	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Onion	and	Snow	Peas
Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with	Chimichurri	Sauce
Grilled	Salmon	Fillets
Almond	Vinaigrette
Olive	Vinaigrette
Skillet-Roasted	Fish	Fillets
Roasted	Red	Pepper,	Hazelnut,	and	Thyme	Relish
Pan-Seared	Scallops
Ginger	Butter	Sauce
Lemon	Browned	Butter

Concept	3:	Resting	Meat	Maximizes	Juiciness
Grilled	Flank	Steak	with	Spice	Rub



Grilled	Beef	Fajitas
Fresh	Guacamole
Maple-Glazed	Pork	Roast

Concept	4:	Hot	Food	Keeps	Cooking
Grill-Roasted	Beef	Tenderloin
Romesco	Sauce
Grilled	Rack	of	Lamb

Grilled	Rack	of	Lamb	with	Sweet	Mustard	Glaze
Asparagus,	Ham,	and	Gruyère	Frittata
Leek,	Prosciutto,	and	Goat	Cheese	Frittata
Pan-Seared	Sesame-Crusted	Tuna	Steaks
Ginger-Soy	Sauce	with	Scallions
Avocado-Orange	Salsa

Concept	5:	Some	Proteins	Are	Best	Cooked	Twice
Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with	Sage-Vermouth	Sauce

Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with	Sweet-Rart	Red	Wine	Sauce
Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with	Onion	and	Ale	Sauce

Orange-Honey	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts
Apple-Maple	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts
Pineapple–Brown	Sugar	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts

Pan-Roasted	Halibut	Steaks
Chunky	Cherry	Tomato–Basil	Vinaigrette
Pan-Seared	Thick-Cut	Strip	Steaks
Red	Wine–Mushroom	Pan	Sauce
Pan-Seared	Thick-Cut	Pork	Chops
Garlic	and	Thyme	Pan	Sauce
Cilantro	and	Coconut	Pan	Sauce
Roast	Beef	Tenderloin
Shallot	and	Parsley	Butter
Blue	Cheese	and	Chive	Butter

Concept	6:	Slow	Heating	Makes	Meat	Tender



Slow-Roasted	Beef
Inexpensive	Grill-Roasted	Beef	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary

Concept	7:	Cook	Tough	Cuts	Beyond	Well-Done
Slow-Roasted	Pork	Shoulder	with	Peach	Sauce

Slow-Roasted	Pork	Shoulder	with	Cherry	Sauce
Fennel-Apple	Chutney
Green	Tomato	Chutney
Red	Bell	Pepper	Chutney
Barbecued	Pulled	Pork
Dry	Rub	for	Barbecue
Western	South	Carolina	Barbecue	Sauce
Eastern	North	Carolina	Barbecue	Sauce
Mid–South	Carolina	Mustard	Sauce
Barbecued	Beef	Brisket
Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket

Same-Day	Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket

Concept	8:	Tough	Cuts	Like	a	Covered	Pot
Classic	Pot	Roast
Easy	Pot	Roast
Braised	Boneless	Beef	Short	Ribs

Braised	Beef	Short	Ribs	with	Guinness	and	Prunes
Chicken	Provençal

Chicken	Provençal	with	Saffron,	Orange,	and	Basil
Chicken	Paprikash
Daube	Provençal
Hungarian	Beef	Stew

Concept	9:	A	Covered	Pot	Doesn’t	Need	Liquid
French	Chicken	in	a	Pot
Pork	Roast	En	Cocotte	with	Apples	and	Shallots
Salmon	En	Cocotte	with	Leeks	and	White	Wine

Salmon	En	Cocotte	with	Celery	and	Orange



Concept	10:	Bones	Add	Flavor,	Fat,	and	Juiciness
Grill-Smoked	Pork	Chops
Grilled	Porterhouse	or	T-Bone	Steaks
Chive	Butter
Grill-Roasted	Bone-in	Pork	Rib	Roast
Texas-Style	Barbecued	Beef	Ribs
Barbecue	Sauce	for	Texas-Style	Beef	Ribs
Memphis-Style	Barbecued	Spareribs
Spice	Rub
Oven-Barbecued	Spareribs
Quick	Chicken	Stock
Classic	Chicken	Noodle	Soup

Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Orzo	and	Spring	Vegetables
Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Shells,	Tomatoes,	and	Zucchini

Concept	11:	Brining	Maximizes	Juiciness	in	Lean	Meats
Roasted	Brined	Turkey
Classic	Roast	Chicken
Grill-Roasted	Pork	Loin
Grilled	Pork	Chops
Basic	Spice	Rub	for	Pork	Chops

Concept	12:	Salt	Makes	Meat	Juicy	and	Skin	Crisp
Roast	Salted	Turkey
Giblet	Pan	Gravy
Simple	Cranberry	Sauce
Spice-Rubbed	Picnic	Chicken
Crisp	Roast	Chicken
Glazed	Roast	Chicken
Old-Fashioned	Stuffed	Roast	Turkey
Dried	Fruit	and	Nut	Stuffing
Butterflied	Turkey	with	Cranberry-Molasses	Glaze

Butterflied	Turkey	with	Apple-Maple	Glaze



Concept	13:	Salty	Marinades	Work	Best
Spanish-Style	Garlic	Shrimp
Stir-Fried	Shrimp	with	Snow	Peas	and	Red	Bell	Pepper	in	Hot	and	Sour	Sauce
Stir-Fried	Sichuan-Style	Shrimp	with	Zucchini,	Red	Bell	Pepper,	and	Peanuts
Simple	White	Rice
Beef	Stroganoff
Steak	Tacos
Sweet	and	Spicy	Pickled	Onions
Grilled	Beef	Kebabs	with	Lemon	and	Rosemary	Marinade
Classic	Marinade	for	Steaks
Mole	Marinade	for	Steaks
Southeast	Asian	Marinade	for	Steaks
Mojo	Marinade	for	Steaks
Honey-Mustard	Marinade	for	Steaks
Grilled	Lemon-Parsley	Chicken	Breasts

Grilled	Chipotle-Lime	Chicken	Breasts
Grilled	Orange-Rarragon	Chicken	Breasts

Chicken	Fajitas
Extra-Crunchy	Fried	Chicken
Easier	Fried	Chicken

Concept	14:	Grind	Meat	At	Home	for	Tender	Burgers
Best	Old-Fashioned	Burgers
Classic	Burger	Sauce
Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers
Pub-Style	Burger	Sauce

Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers	with	Crispy	Shallots	and	Blue	Cheese
Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers	with	Sautéed	Onion	and	Smoked	Cheddar

Concept	15:	A	Panade	Keeps	Ground	Meat	Tender
Well-Done	Burgers

Well-Done	Bacon-Cheeseburgers
Glazed	All-Beef	Meatloaf
Simple	Italian-Style	Meat	Sauce



Classic	Spaghetti	and	Meatballs	for	a	Crowd
Swedish	Meatballs
Swedish	Pickled	Cucumbers

Concept	16:	Create	Layers	for	a	Breading	That	Sticks
Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets

Deviled	Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets
Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets	with	Parmesan	(chicken	Milanese)

Chicken	Kiev
Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops

Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops	with	Prosciutto	and	Asiago	Cheese
Crispy	Pan-Fried	Pork	Chops

Crispy	Pan-Fried	Pork	Chops	with	Latin	Spice	Rub
Crispy	Pan-Fried	Pork	Chops	with	Three-Pepper	Rub

Pork	Schnitzel

Concept	17:	Good	Frying	Is	All	About	Oil	Temperature
Classic	French	Fries
Easier	French	Fries
Belgian-Style	Dipping	Sauce
Chive	and	Black	Pepper	Dipping	Sauce
Shrimp	Tempura
Ginger-Soy	Dipping	Sauce
Chile	Aïoli	Dipping	Sauce
Teppanyaki	Mustard	Dipping	Sauce

Concept	18:	Fat	Makes	Eggs	Tender
Perfect	Scrambled	Eggs
Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with	Bacon,Onion,	and	Pepper	Jack	Cheese
Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with	Sausage,	Sweet	Pepper,	and	Cheddar	Cheese
Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with	Arugula,	Sun-Dried	Tomatoes,	and	Goat	Cheese
Perfect	French	Omelets

Concept	19:	Gentle	Heat	Guarantees	Smooth	Custards
Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake



Pumpkin-Bourbon	Cheesecake	with	Graham-Pecan	Crust
Brown	Sugar	Whipped	Cream

Brown	Sugar	and	Bourbon	Whipped	Cream
Crème	Brûlée

Espresso	Crème	Brûlée
Make-Ahead	Crème	Brûlée

New	York–Style	Cheesecake
Fresh	Strawberry	Topping
Pumpkin	Pie
Lemon	Cheesecake

Goat	Cheese	and	Lemon	Cheesecake	with	Hazelnut	Crust
Triple-Citrus	Cheesecake

Vanilla	Ice	Cream

Concept	20:	Starch	Keeps	Eggs	From	Curdling
Deep-Dish	Quiche	Lorraine

Deep-Dish	Quiche	with	Leeks	and	Blue	Cheese
Deep-Dish	Quiche	with	Sausage,	Broccoli	Rabe,	and	Mozzarella

Hot	and	Sour	Soup
Creamy	Chocolate	Pudding
Pastry	Cream

Concept	21:	Whipped	Egg	Whites	Need	Stabilizers
Meringue	Cookies

Chocolate	Meringue	Cookies
Toasted	Almond	Meringue	Cookies
Orange	Meringue	Cookies
Espresso	Meringue	Cookies

Bittersweet	Chocolate	Mousse	Cake
Lemon	Meringue	Pie
Angel	Food	Cake
Grand	Marnier	Soufflé	with	Grated	Chocolate

Concept	22:	Starch	Helps	Cheese	Melt	Nicely



Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese
Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese	with	Ham	and	Peas
Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese	with	Kielbasa	and	Mustard

Four-Cheese	Lasagna
Spaghetti	with	Pecorino	Romano	and	Black	Pepper	(Cacio	e	Pepe)

Concept	23:	Salting	Vegetables	Removes	Liquid
Creamy	Buttermilk	Coleslaw

Buttermilk	Coleslaw	with	Scallions	and	Cilantro
Creamy	Dill	Cucumber	Salad
Yogurt-Mint	Cucumber	Salad
Sesame-Lemon	Cucumber	Salad
Sweet-and-Tart	Cucumber	Salad
Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart

Sun-Dried	Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart
Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart	with	Prosciutto

Stuffed	Tomatoes	with	Parmesan,	Garlic,	and	Basil
Stuffed	Tomatoes	with	Goat	Cheese,	Olives,	and	Oregano

Creamy	Gazpacho	Andaluz
Caponata
Pasta	Alla	Norma
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin

Summer	Vegetable	Gratin	with	Roasted	Peppers	and	Smoked	Mozzarella
Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with	Garlic	and	Lemon

Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with	Tomatoes	and	Basil
Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with	Spiced	Carrots	and	Almonds
Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with	Peas	and	Herbs

Concept	24:	Green	Vegetables	Like	It	Hot—Then	Cold
Blanched	Sugar	Snap	Peas
Sugar	Snap	Peas	with	Lemon,	Garlic,	and	Basil
Sugar	Snap	Peas	with	Ham	and	Mint
Sautéed	Peas	with	Shallot	and	Mint

Sautéed	Peas	with	Leeks	and	Tarragon



Ultimate	Green	Bean	Casserole
Make-Ahead	Blanched	Green	Beans
Green	Beans	with	Sautéed	Shallots	and	Vermouth
Green	Beans	with	Buttered	Bread	Crumbs	and	Almonds

Concept	25:	All	Potatoes	Are	Not	Created	Equal
All-American	Potato	Salad
French	Potato	Salad	with	Dijon	Mustard	and	Fines	Herbes

French	Potato	Salad	with	Arugula,	Roquefort,	and	Walnuts
French	Potato	Salad	with	Fennel,	Tomato,	and	Olives
French	Potato	Salad	with	Radishes,	Cornichons,	and	Capers

Classic	Mashed	Potatoes
Garlic	Mashed	Potatoes
Mashed	Potatoes	with	Smoked	Cheddar	and	Grainy	Mustard
Mashed	Potatoes	with	Smoked	Paprika	and	Toasted	Garlic

Smashed	Potatoes
Garlic-Rosemary	Smashed	Potatoes
Smashed	Potatoes	with	Bacon	and	Parsley

Concept	26:	Potato	Starches	Can	Be	Controlled
Mashed	Potatoes	and	Root	Vegetables

Mashed	Potatoes	and	Root	Vegetables	with	Bacon	and	Thyme
Mashed	Potatoes	and	Root	Vegetables	with	Paprika	and	Parsley

Potato	Roesti
Potato	Roesti	with	Fried	Eggs	and	Parmesan
Potato	Roesti	with	Bacon,	Onion,	and	Sherry	Vinegar
Cheesy	Potato	Roesti
French-Style	Mashed	Potatoes	with	cheese	and	Garlic	(aligot)
Crisp	Roasted	Potatoes
Home	Fries

Concept	27:	Precooking	Makes	Vegetables	Firmer
Roasted	Cauliflower
Sherry	Vinegar–Honey	Sauce	with	Almonds



Soy-Ginger	Sauce	with	Scallion
Curry-Yogurt	Sauce	with	Cilantro
Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes

Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes	with	Maple-Rhyme	Glaze
Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes	with	Spiced	Brown	Sugar	Glaze

Roasted	Carrots
Roasted	Carrots	and	Fennel	with	Toasted	Almonds	and	Lemon
Roasted	Carrots	and	Parsnips	with	Rosemary

Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts
Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with	Garlic,	Red	Pepper	Flakes,	and	Parmesan
Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with	Bacon	and	Pecans
Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with	Walnuts	and	Lemon

Pan-Roasted	Asparagus
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with	Toasted	Garlic	and	Parmesan
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with	Red	Onion	and	Bacon
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with	Red	Peppers	and	Goat	Cheese
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with	Warm	Orange-Almond	Vinaigrette

Concept	28:	Don’t	Soak	Beans—Brine	’Em
Hearty	Tuscan	Bean	Stew
Hearty	Minestrone
Cuban	Black	Beans	and	Rice

Vegetarian	Cuban-Style	Black	Beans	and	Rice
Lentil	Salad	with	Olives,	Mint,	and	Feta

Lentil	Salad	with	Hazelnuts	and	Goat	Cheese

Concept	29:	Baking	Soda	Makes	Beans	and	Grains	Soft
Boston	Baked	Beans
Ultimate	Hummus
Black	Bean	Soup

Black	Bean	Soup	with	Chipotle	Chiles
Creamy	Parmesan	Polenta
Wild	Mushroom	and	Rosemary	Topping
Sautéed	Cherry	Tomato	and	Fresh	Mozzarella	Topping



Broccoli	Rabe,	Sun-Dried	Tomato,	and	Pine	Nut	Topping

Concept	30:	Rinsing	(Not	Soaking)	Makes	Rice	Fluffy
Simple	Rice	Pilaf

Rice	Pilaf	with	Currants	and	Pine	Nuts
Brown	Rice

Curried	Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Tomatoes	and	Peas
Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Parmesan,	Lemon,	and	Herbs
Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Sautéed	Mushrooms	and	Leeks

Mexican	Rice
Mexican	Rice	with	Charred	Tomatoes,	Chiles,	and	Onion
No-Fuss	Risotto	with	Parmesan	and	Herbs
No-Fuss	Risotto	with	Chicken	and	Herbs

Concept	31:	Slicing	Changes	Garlic	and	Onion	Flavor
Garlic-Potato	Soup
Garlic	Chips
Caesar	Salad
Pasta	with	Garlic	and	Oil
Bacon,	Scallion,	and	Caramelized	Onion	Dip
Caramelized	Onions
Best	French	Onion	Soup

Quicker	French	Onion	Soup

Concept	32:	Chile	Heat	Resides	in	Pith	and	Seeds
White	Chicken	Chili
Ultimate	Beef	Chili
Stir-Fried	Thai	Beef	with	Chiles	and	Shallots

Concept	33:	Bloom	Spices	to	Boost	Their	Flavor
Simple	Beef	Chili	with	Kidney	Beans

Beef	Chili	with	Bacon	and	Black	Beans
Indian	Curry	with	Potatoes,	Cauliflower,	Peas,	and	Chickpeas
Onion	Relish
Cilantro-Mint	Chutney



Grilled	Blackened	Red	Snapper
Rémoulade
Pepper-Crusted	Filets	Mignons
Blue	Cheese	and	Chive	Butter

Concept	34:	Not	All	Herbs	Are	for	Cooking
Classic	Basil	Pesto
Salsa	Verde

Lemon-Basil	Salsa	Verde
Marinara	Sauce
Grilled	Potatoes	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary

Concept	35:	Glutamates,	Nucleotides	Add	Meaty	Flavor
Best	Beef	Stew
Quick	Beef	and	Vegetable	Soup
Pasta	with	Creamy	Tomato	Sauce

Concept	36:	Emulsifiers	Make	Smooth	Sauces
Foolproof	Vinaigrette

Herb	Vinaigrette
Walnut	Vinaigrette
Lemon	Vinaigrette
Balsamic-Mustard	Vinaigrette

Aïoli	(Garlic	Mayonnaise)
Rosemary-Rhyme	Aïoli

Concept	37:	Speed	Evaporation	When	Cooking	Wine
French-Style	Pot	Roast
Poached	Salmon	with	Herb	and	Caper	Vinaigrette
Crêpes	Suzette

Concept	38:	More	Water	Makes	Chewier	Bread
Pizza	Bianca
Almost	No-Knead	Bread



Concept	39:	Rest	Dough	to	Trim	Kneading	Time
Olive-Rosemary	Bread
Rustic	Dinner	Rolls

Concept	40:	Time	Builds	Flavor	in	Bread
Rosemary	Focaccia
Whole-Wheat	Sandwich	Bread
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	Pizza
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	White	Pizza
Crescent	Rolls
Yeasted	Waffles

Blueberry	Yeasted	Waffles

Concept	41:	Gentle	Folding	Stops	Tough	Quick	Breads
Ultimate	Banana	Bread
All-Purpose	Cornbread

Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread
Blueberry	Breakfast	Cornbread

Better	Bran	Muffins
Blueberry	Muffins

Concept	42:	Two	Leaveners	Are	Often	Better	Than	One
Best	Buttermilk	Pancakes
Multigrain	Pancakes
Apple,	Cranberry,	and	Pecan	Topping
Easy	Buttermilk	Drop	Biscuits
Chewy	Sugar	Cookies

Chewy	Chai-Spice	Sugar	Cookies
Chewy	Coconut-Lime	Sugar	Cookies
Chewy	Hazelnut–Browned	Butter	Sugar	Cookies

Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies
Thin	and	Crispy	Coconut-Oatmeal	Cookies
Thin	and	Crispy	Orange-Almond	Oatmeal	Cookies
Salty	Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies



Concept	43:	Layers	of	Butter	Make	Flaky	Pastry
Flaky	Buttermilk	Biscuits
Blueberry	Scones
Homemade	Clotted	Cream
Free-Form	Fruit	Tart
Free-Form	Summer	Fruit	Tartlets
Apple	Galette

Concept	44:	Vodka	Makes	Pie	Dough	Easy
Foolproof	Double-Crust	Pie	Dough
Foolproof	Baked	Pie	Shell

Foolproof	Single-Crust	Pie	Dough	for	Custard	Pies
Blueberry	Pie
Deep-Dish	Apple	Pie
Beef	Empanadas

Beef	Empanadas	with	Corn	and	Black	Bean	Filling

Concept	45:	Less	Protein	Makes	Tender	Cakes,	Cookies
Fluffy	Yellow	Layer	Cake	with	Chocolate	Frosting
Chiffon	Cake

Mocha-Nut	Chiffon	Cake
Lemon	or	Lemon-Coconut	Chiffon	Cake
Orange	or	Cranberry-Orange	Chiffon	Cake
Chocolate	Marble	Chiffon	Cake

Classic	Brownies
Best	Shortbread

Concept	46:	Creaming	Butter	Helps	Cakes	Rise
Classic	Pound	Cake

Almond	Pound	Cake
Pound	Cake	with	Orange	Essence
Classic	Pound	Cake	in	a	Tube	Pan

Lemon	Bundt	Cake

Concept	47:	Reverse	Cream	for	Delicate	Cakes



Rich,	Tender	Yellow	Cake	with	Buttercream	Frosting
Vanilla	Buttercream	Frosting

Rich	Coffee	Buttercream	Frosting
Rich	Chocolate	Cream	Frosting
New	York–Style	Crumb	Cake
Boston	Cream	Cupcakes
Glazed	Butter	Cookies

Concept	48:	Sugar	Changes	Texture	(and	Sweetness)
Brown	Sugar	Cookies
Chocolate-Chunk	Oatmeal	Cookies	with	Pecans	and	Dried	Cherries
Ultimate	Chocolate	Chip	Cookies
Fresh	Orange	Sherbet

Fresh	Lime	Sherbet
Fresh	Lemon	Sherbet
Fresh	Raspberry	Sherbet

Concept	49:	Sugar	and	Time	Make	Fruit	Juicier
Honeydew,	Mango,	and	Raspberries	with	Lime	and	Ginger
Peaches,	Blackberries,	and	Strawberries	with	Basil	and	Pepper
Peach	Crumble
Strawberry	Shortcakes
Whipped	Cream
Berry	Fool

Concept	50:	Cocoa	Powder	Delivers	Big	Flavor
Chewy	Brownies
Easy	Chocolate	Cake
Ultimate	Chocolate	Cupcakes	with	Ganache	Filling
Creamy	Chocolate	Frosting
Dark	Chocolate	Mousse

Premium	Dark	Chocolate	Mousse
Chocolate-Raspberry	Mousse



INDEX
A	|	B	|	C	|	D	|	E	|	F	|	G	|	H	|	I	|	J	|	K	|	L	|	M	|	N	|	O	|	P	|	Q	|	R	|	S	|	T	|	U	|	V	|

W	|	X	|	Y	|	Z

A
Acidic	ingredients

effect	on	egg	texture
pH	of	common	foods
seasoning	with

Aïoli,	Rosemary-Thyme
Aïoli	(Garlic	Mayonnaise)
Alcohol.	See	Beer;	Evaporating	alcohol;	Vodka;	Wine
Ale	and	Onion	Sauce,	Pan-Roasted	Chicken
Breasts	with,
Aligot	(French-Style	Mashed	Potatoes	with	Cheese
and	Garlic),
Alkaline	cooking	(concept)

Black	Bean	Soup
Black	Bean	Soup	with	Chipotle	Chiles
Boston	Baked	Beans
Creamy	Parmesan	Polenta
how	the	science	works
test	kitchen	experiment
Ultimate	Hummus

All-American	Potato	Salad
All-Purpose	Cornbread
Almond(s)

and	Buttered	Bread	Crumbs,	Green	Beans	with
-Orange	Oatmeal	Cookies,	Thin	and	Crispy



-Orange	Vinaigrette,	Warm,	Pan-Roasted
Asparagus	with,
Pound	Cake
Romesco	Sauce
Sherry	Vinegar–Honey	Sauce	with
and	Spiced	Carrots,	Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with
Toasted,	and	Lemon,	Roasted	Carrots	and	Fennel	with
Toasted,	Meringue	Cookies
Vinaigrette

Almost	No-Knead	Bread
Aluminum	foil,	two	sides	of
Angel	Food	Cake
Appearance	of	food
Appetizers

Bacon,	Scallion,	and	Caramelized	Onion	Dip
Caramelized	Onions
Deviled	Eggs
Fresh	Guacamole
Sun-Dried	Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart
Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart
Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart	with	Prosciutto
Ultimate	Hummus

Apple(s)
Blueberry	Pie
Cranberry,	and	Pecan	Topping
Dried	Fruit	and	Nut	Stuffing
-Fennel	Chutney
Galette
grated,	thickening	pie	fillings	with



-Maple	Glaze,	Butterflied	Turkey	with
-Maple	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts
Pie,	Deep-Dish
precooking,	for	pies
and	Shallots,	Pork	Roast	en	Cocotte	with
washing

Appliances,	small,	ratings	of
Aroma	of	food
Arugula

Roquefort,	and	Walnuts,	French	Potato	Salad	with
Sun-Dried	Tomatoes,	and	Goat	Cheese,	Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with

Asiago	Cheese	and	Prosciutto,	Crunchy	Baked
Pork	Chops	with,
Asparagus

Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Orzo	and	Spring	Vegetables
cooking	times
Ham,	and	Gruyère	Frittata
Pan-Roasted
Pan-Roasted,	with	Red	Onion	and	Bacon
Pan-Roasted,	with	Red	Peppers	and	Goat	Cheese
Pan-Roasted,	with	Toasted	Garlic	and	Parmesan
Pan-Roasted,	with	Warm	Orange-Almond	Vinaigrette
storing

Autolyse
Avocado(s)

Fresh	Guacamole
and	Orange,	Shrimp	Salad	with
-Orange	Salsa
removing	flesh	from



B
Bacon

and	Black	Beans,	Beef	Chili	with
-Cheeseburgers,	Well-Done
Deep-Dish	Quiche	Lorraine
Onion,	and	Pepper	Jack	Cheese,	Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with
Onion,	and	Sherry	Vinegar,	Potato	Roesti	with
and	Parsley,	Smashed	Potatoes	with
and	Pecans,	Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with
and	Red	Onion,	Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with
Scallion,	and	Caramelized	Onion	Dip

Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Parmesan,	Lemon,	and	Herbs
Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Sautéed	Mushrooms	and	Leeks
Baker’s	percentage	(concept)

Almost	No-Knead	Bread
calculating
how	the	science	works
Pizza	Bianca
test	kitchen	experiment

Bakeware
essential,	ratings	of
shapes	and	sizes

Baking,	then	browning	(concept)
beef	tenderloin
how	the	science	works
Pan-Seared	Thick-Cut	Pork	Chops
Pan-Seared	Thick-Cut	Strip	Steaks
Roast	Beef	Tenderloin



steaks	and	chops
Baking	dishes,	glass,	ratings	of
Baking	pans,	ratings	of
Baking	powder

double-acting,	about
effect	on	poultry	skin
emergency	substitute	for
single-acting,	about
see	also	Chemical	leaveners

Baking	sheets
rimmed,	ratings	of
rimmed	vs.	rimless

Baking	soda
boiling	potatoes	with
see	also	Alkaline	cooking;	Chemical	leaveners

Balsamic-Mustard	Vinaigrette
Banana(s)

Bread,	Ultimate
ripe,	appearance	of
storing

Barbecue,	defined
Barbecuing

Barbecued	Beef	Brisket
Barbecued	Pulled	Pork
best	fire	for
collagen	breakdown	at	work
Memphis-Style	Barbecued	Spareribs
Texas-Style	Barbecued	Beef	Ribs

Bars.	See	Brownies



Basic	Spice	Rub	for	Pork	Chops
Basil

–Cherry	Tomato	Vinaigrette,	Chunky
Lemon,	and	Garlic,	Sugar	Snap	Peas	with
-Lemon	Salsa	Verde
Parmesan,	and	Garlic,	Stuffed	Tomatoes	with
Pesto,	Classic
pesto,	preventing	darkening	of
and	Roasted	Red	Pepper,	Shrimp	Salad	with
storing

Bay	leaves,	storing
Bean(s)

alkaline	cooking	at	work
alkaline	cooking	water	for
Black

Beef	Chili	with
and	Corn	Filling,	Beef	Empanadas	with
and	Rice,	Cuban
and	Rice,	Vegetarian	Cuban-Style
Soup
Soup	with	Chipotle	Chiles

Boston	Baked
brining.	See	Brining	(beans)
canned,	cooking	with
cooking	water	for
demonstrating	effects	of	pH	on
dried,	testing	freshness	of
eliminating	gas	from
Hearty	Minestrone



Indian	Curry	with	Potatoes,	Cauliflower,	Peas,	and	Chickpeas
Kidney,	Simple	Beef	Chili	with
Stew,	Hearty	Tuscan
Ultimate	Beef	Chili
Ultimate	Hummus
White	Chicken	Chili
see	also	Green	Bean(s)

Beef
All-	,	Meatloaf,	Glazed
Best	Old-Fashioned	Burgers
bone-in	cuts
Brisket

Barbecued
Onion-Braised
Onion-Braised,	Same-Day
two	cuts	of
why	it	is	pink

Chili
with	Bacon	and	Black	Beans
Simple,	with	Kidney	Beans
Ultimate

Classic	Spaghetti	and	Meatballs	for	a	Crowd
Daube	Provençal
demonstrating	grinding	at	home	with
doneness	temperatures
Empanadas
Empanadas	with	Corn	and	Black	Bean	Filling
Fajitas,	Grilled
flap	meat,	buying



French-Style	Pot	Roast
grain-fed	vs.	grass-fed
ground,	demonstrating	panades	with
ground,	shopping	for
Inexpensive	Grill-Roasted,	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary
Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers

with	Crispy	Shallots	and	Blue	Cheese
with	Sautéed	Onion	and	Smoked	Cheddar

Kebabs,	Grilled,	with	Lemon	and	Rosemary	Marinade
low-temperature	tenderizing	at	work
marinating	at	work
optimal	cooking	temperatures
optimal	resting	times
oxtails,	demonstrating	collagen	breakdown	with
Pepper-Crusted	Filets	Mignons
Pot	Roast

braising	at	work
Classic
Easy

primal	cuts
Rib	Roast

demonstrating	convection	and	conduction	with
demonstrating	enzyme	activity	with
Prime	Rib

Ribs,	Texas-Style	Barbecued
shopping	for
Short	Ribs

Boneless,	Braised
Braised,	with	Guinness	and	Prunes



braising	at	work
fat	rendered	from

Simple	Italian-Style	Meat	Sauce
sirloin	tips,	buying
Slow-Roasted
Steaks

baking	then	browning	at	work
Classic	Marinade	for
demonstrating	bones	at	work
dry-aging	at	home
flank,	cutting	across	the	grain
Flank,	Grilled,	with	Spice	Rub
Grilled	Argentine,	with	Chimichurri	Sauce
Honey-Mustard	Marinade	for
Mojo	Marinade	for
Mole	Marinade	for
Porterhouse	or	T-Bone,	Grilled
Southeast	Asian	Marinade	for
Strip,	Thick-Cut	Pan-Seared
warming	before	cooking

Steak	Tacos
Stew,	Best
Stew,	Hungarian
Stir-Fried

with	Snap	Peas	and	Red	Pepper
Tangerine,	with	Onion	and	Snow	Peas
Teriyaki,	with	Green	Beans	and	Shiitakes
Thai,	with	Chiles	and	Shallots

Stroganoff



Swedish	Meatballs
Tenderloin

baking	then	browning	at	work
Grill-Roasted
Roast

USDA	grades
and	Vegetable	Soup,	Quick
Well-Done	Bacon-Cheeseburgers
Well-Done	Burgers

Beer
Braised	Beef	Short	Ribs	with	Guinness	and	Prunes
Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with	Onion	and
Ale	Sauce,

Belgian-Style	Dipping	Sauce
Berry(ies)

Apple,	Cranberry,	and	Pecan	Topping
Blueberry	Breakfast	Cornbread
Blueberry	Muffins
Blueberry	Scones
Blueberry	Yeasted	Waffles
Butterflied	Turkey	with	Cranberry-Molasses	Glaze
Chocolate-Raspberry	Mousse
Cranberry-Orange	Chiffon	Cake
demonstrating	maceration	with
Fool
Fresh	Raspberry	Sherbet
Fresh	Strawberry	Topping
Honeydew,	Mango,	and	Raspberries	with	Lime	and	Ginger
Peaches,	Blackberries,	and	Strawberries	with	Basil	and	Pepper



Simple	Cranberry	Sauce
Strawberry	Shortcakes

Best	Beef	Stew
Best	Buttermilk	Pancakes
Best	French	Onion	Soup
Best	Old-Fashioned	Burgers
Best	Shortbread
Better	Bran	Muffins
Biscuits

Buttermilk,	Flaky
Buttermilk	Drop,	Easy
demonstrating	chemical	leaveners	with
demonstrating	pastry-making	with

Bittersweet	Chocolate	Mousse	Cake
Bitter-tasting	foods
Black	Bean(s)

Beef	Chili	with
and	Corn	Filling,	Beef	Empanadas	with
and	Rice,	Cuban
and	Rice,	Vegetarian	Cuban-Style
Soup
Soup	with	Chipotle	Chiles

Blackberries,	Peaches,	and	Strawberries	with	Basil	and	Pepper
Blanching	vegetables	(concept)

Blanched	Sugar	Snap	Peas
covering	pot	when
Green	Beans	with	Buttered	Bread	Crumbs
and	Almonds,
Green	Beans	with	Sautéed	Shallots	and	Vermouth



how	the	science	works
Make-Ahead	Blanched	Green	Beans
peas	and	beans
Sautéed	Peas	with	Leeks	and	Tarragon
Sautéed	Peas	with	Shallot	and	Mint
Sugar	Snap	Peas	with	Ham	and	Mint
Sugar	Snap	Peas	with	Lemon,	Garlic,	and	Basil
test	kitchen	experiment
Ultimate	Green	Bean	Casserole

Blenders,	ratings	of
Blooming	spices	(concept)

Beef	Chili	with	Bacon	and	Black	Beans
Grilled	Blackened	Red	Snapper
how	the	science	works
Indian	Curry	with	Potatoes,	Cauliflower,	Peas,	and	Chickpeas
Pepper-Crusted	Filets	Mignons
Simple	Beef	Chili	with	Kidney	Beans
test	kitchen	experiment

Blueberry
Breakfast	Cornbread
Muffins
Scones
Yeasted	Waffles

Blue	Cheese	and	Chive	Butter,	Link	2
Boil,	defined
Boiling,	with	gentle	heat.	See	Slow	“boiling”
Bones	at	work	(concept)

chops	and	steaks
Classic	Chicken	Noodle	Soup



Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Orzo	and	Spring	Vegetables
Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Shells,	Tomatoes,
and	Zucchini,
Garlic-Rosemary	Roast	Pork	Loin	with	Roasted	Potatoes
Grilled	Porterhouse	or	T-Bone	Steaks
Grill-Roasted	Bone-In	Pork	Rib	Roast
Grill-Smoked	Pork	Chops
how	the	science	works
Memphis-Style	Barbecued	Spareribs
Oven-Barbecued	Spareribs
Quick	Chicken	Stock
ribs
roasts
stocks	and	soups
test	kitchen	experiment
Texas-Style	Barbecued	Beef	Ribs

Boston	Baked	Beans
Boston	Cream	Cupcakes
The	Boston	Cooking-School	Cook	Book	(Farmer)
Bourbon

and	Brown	Sugar	Whipped	Cream
-Pumpkin	Cheesecake	with	Graham-Pecan	Crust

Braise,	defined,	Link	2
Braising	beyond	well-done	(concept)

collagen	breakdown	at	work
how	the	science	works
Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket
Same-Day	Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket
test	kitchen	experiment



Braising	in	covered	pot	(concept)
Braised	Beef	Short	Ribs	with	Guinness	and	Prunes
Braised	Boneless	Beef	Short	Ribs
Chicken	Paprikash
Chicken	Provençal
Chicken	Provençal	with	Saffron,	Orange,	and	Basil
Classic	Pot	Roast
Daube	Provençal
Easy	Pot	Roast
how	the	science	works
Hungarian	Beef	Stew
pot	roasts
short	ribs	and	chicken	thighs
stews
test	kitchen	experiment

Bran	Muffins,	Better
Bread

Almost	No-Knead
-and-milk	paste.	See	Panades
baking	in	humid	oven
baking	rolls	in	hot	oven
Crescent	Rolls
crumbs,	making	ahead
doneness	temperatures
dough,	freezing
dough,	turning	as	it	rises
dough,	turning	versus	punching
internal	temperature	for
kneading.	See	Kneading	bread



Olive-Rosemary
quick.	See	Quick	breads
Rosemary	Focaccia
Rustic	Dinner	Rolls
texture,	effect	of	water	on.	See	Baker’s	percentage
whole-wheat,	soaking	flour	for
Whole-Wheat	Sandwich
see	also	Pizza;	Stuffing

Bread	flour
about,	Link	2
substitute	for

Breading	(concept)
chicken	and	pork
Chicken	Kiev
cornstarch	and	buttermilk	for
Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets
Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets	with	Parmesan
(Chicken	Milanese),
Crispy	Pan-Fried	Pork	Chops
Crispy	Pan-Fried	Pork	Chops	with	Latin	Spice	Rub
Crispy	Pan-Fried	Pork	Chops	with	Three-Pepper	Rub
Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops
Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops	with	Prosciutto	and
Asiago	Cheese,
Deviled	Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets
how	the	science	works
Pork	Schnitzel
test	kitchen	experiment

Brinerades.	See	Salty	marinades



Brining	(beans)	(concept)
Cuban	Black	Beans	and	Rice
Hearty	Minestrone
Hearty	Tuscan	Bean	Stew
how	the	science	works
Lentil	Salad	with	Hazelnuts	and	Goat	Cheese
Lentil	Salad	with	Olives,	Mint,	and	Feta
test	kitchen	experiment
Vegetarian	Cuban-Style	Black	Beans	and	Rice

Brining	(lean	meats)	(concept)
Classic	Roast	Chicken
containers	for
frozen	meat,	method	for
Grilled	Pork	Chops
Grill-Roasted	Pork	Loin
how	the	science	works
pork
poultry
Roasted	Brined	Turkey
salt	for
test	kitchen	experiment

Broccoli
cooking	times
demonstrating	blanching	and	shocking	with

Broccoli	Rabe
Sausage,	and	Mozzarella,	Deep-Dish	Quiche	with
Sun-Dried	Tomato,	and	Pine	Nut	Topping

Brownies
Chewy



chewy,	fat	content	in
Classic
demonstrating	gentle	folding	with
with	shiny	top,	white	sugar	for

Browning,	then	roasting	(concept)
Apple-Maple	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts
chicken	parts
fish	steaks
how	the	science	works
Orange-Honey	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts
Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with	Onion	and
Ale	Sauce,
Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with	Sage-Vermouth	Sauce
Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with	Sweet-Tart	Red	Wine	Sauce
Pan-Roasted	Halibut	Steaks
Pineapple–Brown	Sugar	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts
test	kitchen	experiment

Browning	foods
description	of
see	also	Browning,	then	roasting;	Maillard	reaction

Brown	Rice
Brown	Sugar

about
and	Bourbon	Whipped	Cream
Cookies
Glaze,	Spiced,	Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes	with
storing
substitute	for
volume	and	weight	measures



Whipped	Cream
Brussels	Sprouts

cooking	times
Roasted
Roasted,	with	Bacon	and	Pecans
Roasted,	with	Garlic,	Red	Pepper	Flakes,	and	Parmesan
Roasted,	with	Walnuts	and	Lemon

Burgers
Best	Old-Fashioned
demonstrating	panades	with
grinding	your	own	meat
Juicy	Pub-Style

with	Crispy	Shallot	and	Blue	Cheese
with	Sautéed	Onion	and	Smoked	Cheddar

panades	at	work
shaping,	before	cooking
Well-Done
Well-Done	Bacon-Cheeseburgers

Burger	Sauces
Classic
Pub-Style

Butter
Blue	Cheese	and	Chive,	Link	2
Browned,	Lemon
browning,	for	rich	flavor
Butter,	Link	2
buying	choices
Chive
clarified,	preparing



creaming.	See	Creaming	butter
for	flaky	pastry.	See	Pastry-making
gauging	temperature	of
ghee,	about
reverse	creaming.	See	Reverse	creaming
Sauce,	Ginger
Shallot	and	Parsley
storing
structure	of
temperature,	for	recipes
volume	and	weight	measures

Butterflied	Turkey	with	Apple-Maple	Glaze
Butterflied	Turkey	with	Cranberry-Molasses	Glaze
Buttermilk

-based	marinades
Biscuits,	Flaky
for	breadings
Coleslaw,	Creamy
Coleslaw	with	Scallions	and	Cilantro
Drop	Biscuits,	Easy
emergency	substitute	for
Pancakes,	Best
shelf	life
substitute	(clabbered	milk),	resting

C
Cabbage

Buttermilk	Coleslaw	with	Scallions	and	Cilantro
Creamy	Buttermilk	Coleslaw



demonstrating	salting	with
salting	at	work

Caesar	Salad
Cake	flour

about,	Link	2
substitute	for

Cake	pans,	ratings	of
Cakes

adding	eggs	to	batter
Angel	Food
baking	layers	evenly
Bittersweet	Chocolate	Mousse
Boston	Cream	Cupcakes
Chiffon

Chocolate	Marble
Lemon	or	Lemon-Coconut
Mocha-Nut
Orange	or	Cranberry-Orange

Chocolate,	Easy
creaming	at	work
Crumb,	New	York–Style
demonstrating	low-protein	flour	with
Fluffy	Yellow	Layer,	with	Chocolate	Frosting
layer,	demonstrating	reverse	creaming	with
Lemon	Bundt
loaf	pan	sizes	for
mixing	method	for
Pound

Almond



Classic
Classic,	in	a	Tube	Pan
with	Orange	Essence

protein	reduction	at	work
reverse	creaming	at	work
Rich,	Tender,	Yellow,	with	Buttercream	Frosting
sifting	flour	for
Ultimate	Chocolate	Cupcakes	with	Ganache	Filling
see	also	Cheesecakes

The	Cake	Bible	(Beranbaum)
Calpains
Can	openers,	ratings	of
Caper(s)

and	Herb	Vinaigrette,	Poached	Salmon	with
Pork	Schnitzel
Radishes,	and	Cornichons,	French	Potato	Salad	with
Salsa	Verde

Caponata
Capsaicin	(concept),	Link	2

how	the	science	works
Stir-Fried	Thai	Beef	with	Chiles	and	Shallots
test	kitchen	experiment
Ultimate	Beef	Chili
White	Chicken	Chili

Caramelization,	description	of
Caramelized	Onions
Cardamom,	about
Carrots

demonstrating	precooking	with



Roasted
Roasted,	and	Fennel	with	Toasted	Almonds	and	Lemon
Roasted,	and	Parsnips	with	Rosemary
Spiced,	and	Almonds,	Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with

Carryover	cooking	(concept)
Asparagus,	Ham,	and	Gruyère	Frittata
eggs
fish
grilled	meat
Grilled	Rack	of	Lamb
Grilled	Rack	of	Lamb	with	Sweet	Mustard	Glaze
Grill-Roasted	Beef	Tenderloin
how	the	science	works
Leek,	Prosciutto,	and	Goat	Cheese	Frittata
Pan-Seared	Sesame-Crusted	Tuna	Steaks
test	kitchen	experiment
when	it	does	not	matter
when	it	must	be	stopped

Casein	proteins
Casserole-roasting.	See	Cooking	en	cocotte
Catching	Fire:	How	Cooking	Made	Us	Human	
(Wrangham),
Cathepsins,	Link	2,	Link	3
Cauliflower

Potatoes,	Peas,	and	Chickpeas,	Indian	Curry	with
Roasted

Cayenne	pepper,	about
Celery	and	Orange,	Salmon	en	Cocotte	with
Chai-Spice	Sugar	Cookies,	Chewy



Charcoal	grills,	ratings	of
Cheese

Asiago,	and	Prosciutto,	Crunchy	Baked	Pork
Chops	with,
Asparagus,	Ham,	and	Gruyère	Frittata
Best	French	Onion	Soup
Blue

and	Chive	Butter,	Link	2
and	Crispy	Shallots,	Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers	with
and	Leeks,	Deep-Dish	Quiche	with

Cheddar,	Sausage,	and	Sweet	Pepper,	Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with
Cheesy	Potato	Roesti
Classic	Macaroni	and

with	Ham	and	Peas
with	Kielbasa	and	Mustard

Deep-Dish	Quiche	Lorraine
Four-	,	Lasagna
French	Potato	Salad	with	Arugula,	Roquefort,
and	Walnuts,
and	Garlic,	French-Style	Mashed	Potatoes	with	(Aligot)
Goat

Arugula,	and	Sun-Dried	Tomatoes,	Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with
and	Hazelnuts,	Lentil	Salad	with
Leek,	and	Prosciutto	Frittata
and	Lemon	Cheesecake	with	Hazelnut	Crust
Olives,	and	Oregano,	Stuffed	Tomatoes	with
and	Red	Peppers,	Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with

Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers	with	Sautéed	Onion	and	Smoked	Cheddar
Lentil	Salad	with	Olives,	Mint,	and	Feta



Mashed	Potatoes	with	Smoked	Cheddar	and	Grainy	Mustard
melting,	how	the	science	works
melting,	test	kitchen	experiment
melting,	variables	in
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	White	Pizza
Pasta	alla	Norma
Pepper	Jack,	Bacon,	and	Onion,	Hearty	Scrambled
Eggs	with,
Spaghetti	with	Pecorino	Romano	and	Black	Pepper	(Cacio	e	Pepe)
Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread
storing
Well-Done	Bacon-Cheeseburgers
see	also	Cream	cheese;	Mozzarella;	Parmesan

Cheesecakes
doneness	temperature
Goat	Cheese	and	Lemon,	with	Hazelnut	Crust
Lemon
low	oven	heating	at	work
New	York–Style
Pumpkin,	Spiced
Pumpkin-Bourbon,	with	Graham-Pecan	Crust
tempering	at	work
Triple-Citrus
water	baths	at	work

Chef’s	knives,	ratings	of
Chemical	leaveners	(concept)

Best	Buttermilk	Pancakes
biscuits
Chewy	Chai-Spice	Sugar	Cookies



Chewy	Coconut-Lime	Sugar	Cookies
Chewy	Hazelnut–Browned	Butter	Sugar	Cookies
Chewy	Sugar	Cookies
cookies
Easy	Buttermilk	Drop	Biscuits
how	the	science	works
Multigrain	Pancakes
pancakes
Salty	Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies
test	kitchen	experiment
Thin	and	Crispy	Coconut-Oatmeal	Cookies
Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies
Thin	and	Crispy	Orange-Almond	Oatmeal	Cookies

Cherry(ies)
Dried,	and	Pecans,	Chocolate-Chunk	Oatmeal	Cookies	with
-Port	Glaze
Sauce,	Slow-Roasted	Pork	Shoulder	with

Chewy	Brownies
Chewy	Chai-Spice	Sugar	Cookies
Chewy	Coconut-Lime	Sugar	Cookies
Chewy	Hazelnut–Browned	Butter	Sugar	Cookies
Chewy	Sugar	Cookies
Chicken

bound	breading	at	work
Breasts

Apple-Maple	Glazed
demonstrating	effects	of	two	cooking	methods
demonstrating	marinades	with
demonstrating	salting	with



Grilled	Chipotle-Lime
Grilled	Lemon-Parsley
Grilled	Orange-Tarragon
Orange-Honey	Glazed
Pan-Roasted,	with	Onion	and	Ale	Sauce
Pan-Roasted,	with	Sage-Vermouth	Sauce
Pan-Roasted,	with	Sweet-Tart	Red	Wine	Sauce
Pineapple–Brown	Sugar	Glazed

brining	formula
browning	then	roasting	at	work
buying
Chili,	White
Cutlets

browning	well,	for	maximum	flavor
Crisp	Breaded
Crisp	Breaded,	with	Parmesan	(Chicken	Milanese)
Deviled	Crisp	Breaded

doneness	temperatures,	Link	2,	Link	3
en	cocotte	at	work
Fajitas
freezing,	time	limit	for
Fried,	Easier
Fried,	Extra-Crunchy
and	Herbs,	No-Fuss	Risotto	with
Kiev
Noodle	Soup,	Classic
optimal	resting	times
Paprikash
Picnic,	Spice-Rubbed



in	a	Pot,	French
Provençal
Provençal	with	Saffron,	Orange,	and	Basil
Roast,	Classic
Roast,	Crisp
Roast,	Glazed
safe	handling	of,	Link	2
Soup,	Classic,	with	Orzo	and	Spring	Vegetables
Soup,	Classic,	with	Shells,	Tomatoes,	and	Zucchini
Stock,	Quick
structure	of
temperature	of,	for	recipes
thighs,	braising	at	work
whole,	carryover	cooking	and
whole,	demonstrating	cooking	en	cocotte	with

Chiffonade,	description	of
Chile(s)

Aïoli	Dipping	Sauce
Charred	Tomatoes,	and	Onion,	Mexican	Rice	with
Chipotle,	Black	Bean	Soup	with
dried,	common	types	of
effect	on	tastebuds
fresh,	common	types	of
fresh,	freezing,	note	about
fresh,	storing	in	brine
Grilled	Chipotle-Lime	Chicken	Breasts
hot,	removing	seeds	from
Mexican	Rice
Mole	Marinade	for	Steaks



and	Shallots,	Stir-Fried	Thai	Beef	with
Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread
Spicy	Shrimp	Salad	with	Corn	and	Chipotle
Sweet	and	Spicy	Pickled	Onions
Sweet-and-Tart	Cucumber	Salad
Ultimate	Beef	Chili
White	Chicken	Chili
see	also	Capsaicin

Chili
Beef,	Simple,	with	Kidney	Beans
Beef,	Ultimate
Beef,	with	Bacon	and	Black	Beans
controlling	capsaicin	at	work
White	Chicken

Chili	powder,	about
Chimichurri	Sauce,	Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with
Chimney	starters,	ratings	of
Chive

and	Black	Pepper	Dipping	Sauce
and	Blue	Cheese	Butter,	Link	2
Butter

Chocolate
bittersweet,	about
Bittersweet,	Mousse	Cake
bittersweet,	substitute	for
Boston	Cream	Cupcakes
buying
Cake,	Easy
Chewy	Brownies



Chip	Cookies,	Ultimate
chocolate,	Link	2
-Chunk	Oatmeal	Cookies	with	Pecans	and	Dried	Cherries
Classic	Brownies
Cream	Frosting,	Rich
Cupcakes,	Ultimate,	with	Ganache	Filling
Frosting,	Creamy
Frosting,	Fluffy	Yellow	Layer	Cake	with
Grated,	Grand	Marnier	Soufflé	with
hot,	demonstrating	chocolate	flavor	with
Marble	Chiffon	Cake
melting,	Link	2
Meringue	Cookies
milk,	about
Mocha-Nut	Chiffon	Cake
Mousse

Dark
Premium	Dark
Raspberry-

Pudding,	Creamy
seized,	preventing
semisweet,	about
semisweet,	substitute	for
storing
structure	of
substitutions
understanding	cacao	percentages
unsweetened,	about
unsweetened,	substitutes	for



using
white,	about
see	also	Cocoa	powder

Chop,	description	of
Chunky	Cherry	Tomato–Basil	Vinaigrette
Chutney

Cilantro-Mint
Fennel-Apple
Green	Tomato
Red	Bell	Pepper

Cilantro
and	Coconut	Pan	Sauce
Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with	Chimichurri	Sauce
-Mint	Chutney
stems,	cooking	with

Cinnamon,	about
Clabbered	milk,	resting
Classic	Basil	Pesto
Classic	Brownies
Classic	Burger	Sauce
Classic	Chicken	Noodle	Soup
Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Orzo	and	Spring	Vegetables
Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Shells,	Tomatoes,	and	Zucchini
Classic	Egg	Salad
Classic	French	Fries
Classic	Herb	Stuffing
Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese

with	Ham	and	Peas
with	Kielbasa	and	Mustard



Classic	Marinade	for	Steaks
Classic	Mashed	Potatoes
Classic	Pot	Roast
Classic	Pound	Cake
Classic	Pound	Cake	in	a	Tube	Pan
Classic	Roast	Chicken
Classic	Spaghetti	and	Meatballs	for	a	Crowd
Clotted	Cream,	Homemade
Cloves,	about
Coagulation	(concept)

Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with	Arugula,	Sun-Dried	Tomatoes,	and	Goat
Cheese
Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with	Bacon,	Onion,	and	Pepper	Jack	Cheese
Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with	Sausage,	Sweet	Pepper,	and	Cheddar	Cheese
how	the	science	works
Perfect	French	Omelets
Perfect	Scrambled	Eggs
scrambled	eggs
test	kitchen	experiment

Cocoa	powder	(concept)
blooming	the	flavors
brownies,	cakes,	and	mousse
Chewy	Brownies
Chocolate-Raspberry	Mousse
Dark	Chocolate	Mousse
Dutch-processed,	about,	Link	2,	Link	3
Easy	Chocolate	Cake
how	the	science	works
natural,	about,	Link	2,	Link	3



Premium	Dark	Chocolate	Mousse
test	kitchen	experiment
Ultimate	Chocolate	Cupcakes	with	Ganache	Filling
volume	and	weight	measures

Coconut
and	Cilantro	Pan	Sauce
-Lemon	or	Lemon	Chiffon	Cake
-Lime	Sugar	Cookies,	Chewy
-Oatmeal	Cookies,	Thin	and	Crispy

Cod
freezing,	note	about
optimal	cooking	temperature

Coffee
Buttercream	Frosting,	Rich
Espresso	Crème	Brûlée
Espresso	Meringue	Cookies
Mocha-Nut	Chiffon	Cake

Cognac
Crêpes	Suzette

Colanders,	ratings	of
Cold	foods,	seasoning
Cold	temperature,	effect	on	food
Coleslaw

Buttermilk,	Creamy
Buttermilk,	with	Scallions	and	Cilantro

Collagen
conversion	to	gelatin,	Link	2,	Link	3
see	also	Collagen	breakdown

Collagen	breakdown	(concept)



Barbecued	Beef	Brisket
Barbecued	Pulled	Pork
barbecuing
braising
how	the	science	works
Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket
Same-Day	Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket
Slow-Roasted	Pork	Shoulder	with	Cherry	Sauce
Slow-Roasted	Pork	Shoulder	with	Peach	Sauce
test	kitchen	experiment

Collagen	breakdown	(concept)
Braised	Beef	Short	Ribs	with	Guinness
and	Prunes,
Braised	Boneless	Beef	Short	Ribs
Chicken	Paprikash
Chicken	Provençal
Chicken	Provençal	with	Saffron,	Orange,	and	Basil
Classic	Pot	Roast
Daube	Provençal
Easy	Pot	Roast
how	the	science	works
Hungarian	Beef	Stew
test	kitchen	experiment

Conduction	(concept)
Classic	Egg	Salad
Deviled	Eggs
Glazed	Spiral-Sliced	Ham
Hard-Cooked	Eggs
how	the	science	works



Prime	Rib
Shrimp	Salad
Shrimp	Salad	with	Avocado	and	Orange
Shrimp	Salad	with	Roasted	Red	Pepper	and	Basil
Shrimp	Salad	with	Wasabi	and	Pickled	Ginger
slow	“boiling”	at	work
Slow-Roasted	Turkey	with	Gravy
slow-roasting	at	work
Spicy	Shrimp	Salad	with	Corn	and	Chipotle
test	kitchen	experiment

Confectioners’	sugar
about
substitute	for

Convection	heat,	Link	2,	Link	3
Cookies

baking	sheets	for
Best	Shortbread
Brown	Sugar
Butter,	Glazed
chewy,	storing
Chocolate	Chip,	Ultimate
Chocolate-Chunk	Oatmeal,	with	Pecans	and	Dried	Cherries
cooling	baking	sheets	between	batches
demonstrating	invert	sugars	with
dissolved	sugar	for
double	leaveners	for
invert	sugars	at	work
Meringue

Chocolate



Espresso
Orange
stabilizing,	with	sugar	and	cornstarch
Toasted	Almond

Oatmeal,	Thin	and	Crispy
-Coconut
Orange-Almond
Salty

Sugar,	Chewy
Chai-Spice
Coconut-Lime
Hazelnut–Browned	Butter

uneven	baking,	avoiding
Cooking	en	cocotte	(concept)

chicken
fish
French	Chicken	in	a	Pot
how	the	science	works
pork
Pork	Roast	en	Cocotte	with	Apples	and	Shallots
Salmon	en	Cocotte	with	Celery	and	Orange
Salmon	en	Cocotte	with	Leeks	and	White	Wine
test	kitchen	experiment

Cooking	method	terms
Cooking	times,	variables	in
Cookware

aluminum
clad
copper



materials	for,	Link	2
nonstick	pans,	about
pots	and	pans,	ratings	of
reactivity	in
shapes	and	sizes

Cooling	racks,	ratings	of
Coriander,	about
Corn

All-Purpose	Cornbread
and	Black	Bean	Filling,	Beef	Empanadas	with
Blueberry	Breakfast	Cornbread
and	Chipotle,	Spicy	Shrimp	Salad	with
Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread

Cornichons,	Radishes,	and	Capers,	French	Potato	Salad	with
Cornmeal

All-Purpose	Cornbread
best,	for	polenta
Blueberry	Breakfast	Cornbread
Creamy	Parmesan	Polenta
Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread

Cornstarch
for	breadings
thickening	pastry	cream	with

Corn	syrup,	about
Cranberry

Apple,	and	Pecan	Topping
-Molasses	Glaze,	Butterflied	Turkey	with
-Orange	or	Orange	Chiffon	Cake
Sauce,	Simple



Cream
Clotted,	Homemade
heavy,	substitute	for
Whipped
whipped,	foolproof

Cream	cheese
Goat	Cheese	and	Lemon	Cheesecake	with	Hazelnut	Crust
Lemon	Cheesecake
New	York–Style	Cheesecake
Pumpkin-Bourbon	Cheesecake	with	Graham-Pecan	Crust
Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake
Triple-Citrus	Cheesecake

Creaming,	reverse.	See	Reverse	creaming
Creaming	butter	(concept)

Almond	Pound	Cake
cakes
Classic	Pound	Cake
Classic	Pound	Cake	in	a	Tube	Pan
how	the	science	works
Lemon	Bundt	Cake
Pound	Cake	with	Orange	Essence
test	kitchen	experiment

Cream	of	tartar
role	in	whipping	egg	whites
stabilizing	egg	whites	with

Creamy	Buttermilk	Coleslaw
Creamy	Chocolate	Frosting
Creamy	Chocolate	Pudding
Creamy	Dill	Cucumber	Salad



Creamy	Gazpacho	Andaluz
Creamy	Parmesan	Polenta
Crème	Brûlée

Espresso
Make-Ahead

Crème	fraîche,	for	heated	sauces
Crêpes	Suzette
Crescent	Rolls
Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets
Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets	with	Parmesan	(Chicken	Milanese)
Crisp	Roast	Chicken
Crisp	Roasted	Potatoes
Crispy	Pan-Fried	Pork	Chops

with	Latin	Spice	Rub
with	Three-Pepper	Rub

Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops
Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops	with	Prosciutto	and	Asiago	Cheese
Cuban	Black	Beans	and	Rice
Cuban-Style	Black	Beans	and	Rice,	Vegetarian
Cucumber(s)

American	vs.	English
Pickled,	Swedish
Salad

Creamy	Dill
Sesame-Lemon
Sweet-and-Tart
Yogurt-Mint

salting	at	work
Cumin,	about



Cupcakes
Boston	Cream
Ultimate	Chocolate,	with	Ganache	Filling

Currants	and	Pine	Nuts,	Rice	Pilaf	with
Curry(ied)

Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Tomatoes	and	Peas
Indian,	with	Potatoes,	Cauliflower,	Peas,	and	Chickpeas
Southeast	Asian	Marinade	for	Steaks
-Yogurt	Sauce	with	Cilantro

Curry	powder,	aboutCustard	Pies,	Foolproof	Single-Crust	Pie	Dough	for,	Link	2
Custards

Crème	Brûlée
doneness	temperatures
Espresso	Crème	Brûlée
Make-Ahead	Crème	Brûlée

Custardy	desserts	(concept)
Crème	Brûlée
Espresso	Crème	Brûlée
Goat	Cheese	and	Lemon	Cheesecake	with
Hazelnut	Crust,
how	the	science	works
Lemon	Cheesecake
low	oven	heating	at	work
Make-Ahead	Crème	Brûlée
New	York–Style	Cheesecake
Pumpkin-Bourbon	Cheesecake	with	Graham-Pecan	Crust
Pumpkin	Pie
Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake
tempering	at	work



test	kitchen	experiment
Triple-Citrus	Cheesecake
Vanilla	Ice	Cream
water	baths	at	work

Cut,	description	of
Cutting	boards

ratings	of
removing	odors	from

Cutting	foods
common	cutting	terms
effect	on	flavor
garlic	and	onions	(concept),	Link	2
physics	of

D
Dairy	products

cultured,	preventing	curdling	of
emergency	substitutions
recommended	storage	temperatures
see	also	specific	products

Dark	Chocolate	Mousse
Daube	Provençal
Deep-Dish	Apple	Pie
Deep-Dish	Quiche

with	Leeks	and	Blue	Cheese
Lorraine
with	Sausage,	Broccoli	Rabe,	and	Mozzarella

Desserts
Apple	Galette



Berry	Fool
Blueberry	Pie
Chocolate-Raspberry	Mousse
Creamy	Chocolate	Pudding
Crème	Brûlée
Crêpes	Suzette
Dark	Chocolate	Mousse
Deep-Dish	Apple	Pie
Espresso	Crème	Brûlée
Free-Form	Fruit	Tart
Free-Form	Summer	Fruit	Tartlets
Fresh	Lemon	Sherbet
Fresh	Lime	Sherbet
Fresh	Orange	Sherbet
Fresh	Raspberry	Sherbet
Grand	Marnier	Soufflé	with	Grated	Chocolate
Honeydew,	Mango,	and	Raspberries	with	Lime	and	Ginger
Lemon	Meringue	Pie
Make-Ahead	Crème	Brûlée
Pastry	Cream
Peach	Crumble
Peaches,	Blackberries,	and	Strawberries	with	Basil	and	Pepper
Premium	Dark	Chocolate	Mousse
Pumpkin	Pie
Strawberry	Shortcakes
Vanilla	Ice	Cream
see	also	Brownies;	Cakes;	Cheesecakes;	Cookies;	Cupcakes

Deviled	Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets
Deviled	Eggs



Dice,	description	of
Diffusion
Digital	scales,	ratings	of
Dill	Cucumber	Salad,	Creamy
Dips	and	spreads

Bacon,	Scallion,	and	Caramelized	Onion	Dip
Belgian-Style	Dipping	Sauce
Chile	Aïoli	Dipping	Sauce
Chive	and	Black	Pepper	Dipping	Sauce
Fresh	Guacamole
Ginger-Soy	Dipping	Sauce
Teppanyaki	Mustard	Dipping	Sauce

Dressings,	salad.	See	Vinaigrettes
Dried	Fruit	and	Nut	Stuffing
Dry	Rub	for	Barbecue
Dutch	ovens,	ratings	of

E
Easier	French	Fries
Easier	Fried	Chicken
Eastern	North	Carolina	Barbecue	Sauce
Easy	Buttermilk	Drop	Biscuits
Easy	Chocolate	Cake
Easy	Pot	Roast
Egg	Beaters,	emulsifying
Eggplant

Caponata
flavor	of
Pasta	alla	Norma



removing	excess	liquid	from
salting	at	work

Egg(s)
adding	to	cake	batters
anatomy	of
Asparagus,	Ham,	and	Gruyère	Frittata
buying
carryover	cooking	at	work
cold,	baking	cakes	with
Deep-Dish	Quiche

with	Leeks	and	Blue	Cheese
Lorraine
with	Sausage,	Broccoli	Rabe,	and	Mozzarella

demonstrating	effect	of	fat	on
Deviled
Eggs,	Link	2
freezing
Fried,	and	Parmesan,	Potato	Roesti	with
Hard-Cooked
hard-cooked,	peeling
Leek,	Prosciutto,	and	Goat	Cheese	Frittata
pasteurized,	about
Perfect	French	Omelets
preventing	curdling	of

with	low	oven	heat
with	starch
with	tempering
with	water	baths

recommended	storage	temperatures



safe	handling	of
Salad,	Classic
Scrambled

coagulation	at	work
formula	for
Hearty,	with	Arugula,	Sun-Dried	Tomatoes,	and	Goat	Cheese
Hearty,	with	Bacon,	Onion,	and	Pepper	Jack	Cheese
Hearty,	with	Sausage,	Sweet	Pepper,	and	Cheddar	Cheese
Perfect
salting	before	cooking
science	of

separating,	easiest	method	for
sizes,	substitutions	for
sizes	and	weights
storing
temperature,	for	recipes
texture	of,	effect	of	acid	on
warming	quickly
yolks,	bright	yellow
see	also	Custardy	desserts;	Whipped	egg	whites

Emergency	ingredient	substitutions
Empanadas

Beef
Beef,	with	Corn	and	Black	Bean	Filling

Emulsifiers	(concept)
Aïoli	(Garlic	Mayonnaise)
Balsamic-Mustard	Vinaigrette
Foolproof	Vinaigrette
Herb	Vinaigrette



how	the	science	works
Lemon	Vinaigrette
mayonnaise
Rosemary-Thyme	Aïoli
test	kitchen	experiment
vinaigrettes
Walnut	Vinaigrette

Enzymes
Equipment,	ratings	of

essential	bakeware
grilling	equipment
handy	tools
kitchen	supplies
knives	and	more
measuring	equipment
pots	and	pans
small	appliances

Espresso	Crème	Brûlée
Espresso	Meringue	Cookies
Evaporating	alcohol	(concept)

Crêpes	Suzette
flambéing
French-Style	Pot	Roast
how	the	science	works
Poached	Salmon	with	Herb	and	Caper	Vinaigrette
poaching
stewing
test	kitchen	experiment

Extra-Crunchy	Fried	Chicken



F
Fajitas

Chicken
Grilled	Beef

Fats
effect	on	eggs.	See	Coagulation
smoke	points

Fennel
-Apple	Chutney
and	Carrots,	Roasted,	with	Toasted	Almonds	and	Lemon
Tomato,	and	Olives,	French	Potato	Salad	with

Fermentation	(concept)
about
Blueberry	Yeasted	Waffles
cool	fermentation,	about
cool	fermentation,	demonstrating
Crescent	Rolls
how	the	science	works
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	Pizza
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	White	Pizza
preferments,	about
preferments,	demonstrating
Rosemary	Focaccia
test	kitchen	experiment
Whole-Wheat	Sandwich	Bread
Yeasted	Waffles

Feta,	Olives,	and	Mint,	Lentil	Salad	with
Fish



browning	then	roasting	at	work
buying
carryover	cooking	at	work
doneness	temperatures
en	cocotte	at	work
ensuring	even	cooking
Fillets,	Skillet-Roasted
Fish,	Link	2
freezing
gray	matter	on	salmon,	about
Grilled	Blackened	Red	Snapper
Grilled	Salmon	Fillets
judging	doneness
Maillard	reaction	at	work
Pan-Roasted	Halibut	Steaks
Pan-Seared	Sesame-Crusted	Tuna	Steaks
Poached	Salmon	with	Herb	and	Caper	Vinaigrette
recommended	storage	temperatures
salmon	belly	fat,	about
Salmon	en	Cocotte	with	Celery	and	Orange
Salmon	en	Cocotte	with	Leeks	and	White	Wine
slicing	tuna	immediately	after	cooking
storing
structure	of
temperature,	for	recipes
whole,	carryover	cooking	and
wild	vs.	farmed	salmon

Fish	browning	faster,	with	sugar
Flaky	Buttermilk	Biscuits



Flambéing
best	ways	of
effect	on	sauce	flavors
evaporation	at	work

Flavor
adjusting	and	balancing
appearance	and
aroma	and
food	temperature	and
how	foods	are	cut	and
seasoning	strategies
taste	sensations
texture	and
see	also	Glutamates	and	nucleotides

Flour
all-purpose,	about
bleached,	about
bread,	about,	Link	2
bread,	substitute	for
buying
cake,	about,	Link	2
cake,	substitute	for
effect	of	short-term	humidity	on
Flour,	Link	2
Gold	Medal	vs.	King	Arthur
pastry,	about
self-rising,	about
sifting,	Link	2
structure	of



temperature,	for	recipes
for	tender	cakes	and	cookies.	See	Protein	reduction
thickening	pastry	cream	with
weight	vs.	volume	measures,	Link	2
whole-grain,	freezing
whole-wheat,	about

Fluffy	Yellow	Layer	Cake	with	Chocolate	Frosting
Focaccia,	Rosemary
Fond,	description	of
Food	processors,	ratings	of
Food	safety

avoiding	bacterial	danger	zone
basic	information
chicken,	Link	2
cooling	foods	and
defrosting	and
eggs
meat
potato	salad
poultry
recommended	storage	temperatures
reheating	foods	and
turkey
USDA	rules	for	doneness	temperatures
warm	temperatures	and

Fool,	Berry
Foolproof	Baked	Pie	Shell
Foolproof	Double-Crust	Pie	Dough
Foolproof	Single-Crust	Pie	Dough	for	Custard	Pies



Foolproof	Vinaigrette
Four-Cheese	Lasagna
Fraisage

about
demonstrating

Free-Form	Fruit	Tart
Free-Form	Summer	Fruit	Tartlets
Freezing	foods
French	Chicken	in	a	Pot
French	Fries

Classic
demonstrating	frying	with
Easier
frying	at	work

French	Potato	Salad
with	Arugula,	Roquefort,	and	Walnuts
with	Dijon	Mustard	and	Fines	Herbes
with	Fennel,	Tomato,	and	Olives
with	Radishes,	Cornichons,	and	Capers

French-Style	Mashed	Potatoes	with	Cheese	and	Garlic	(Aligot)
French-Style	Pot	Roast
Fresh	Guacamole
Fresh	Lemon	Sherbet
Fresh	Lime	Sherbet
Fresh	Orange	Sherbet
Fresh	Raspberry	Sherbet
Fresh	Strawberry	Topping
Frittatas

Asparagus,	Ham,	and	Gruyère



Leek,	Prosciutto,	and	Goat	Cheese
Frostings

Chocolate,	Creamy
Chocolate,	Fluffy	Yellow	Layer	Cake	with
Chocolate	Cream,	Rich
Coffee	Buttercream,	Rich
Vanilla	Buttercream

Fruit
climacteric	vs.	nonclimacteric
recommended	storage	temperatures
ripening	process
Summer,	Tartlets,	Free-Form
Tart,	Free-Form
tossing	with	sugar.	See	Maceration
see	also	specific	fruits

Fry,	defined
Frying	(concept)

Classic	French	Fries
cold-start	method
Easier	French	Fries
how	the	science	works
Shrimp	Tempura
test	kitchen	experiment

Frying	oil
about
best	way	to	fry	with
doneness	temperature
smoke	points,	Link	2
used,	storing



G
Galette,	Apple
Garlic

allicin	compounds	in
Caesar	Salad
Chips
Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with	Chimichurri	Sauce
manipulating	flavor	of
Mashed	Potatoes
Mayonnaise	(Aïoli)
and	Oil,	Pasta	with
-Potato	Soup
removing	green	sprouts	from
and	Rosemary,	Grilled	Potatoes	with
and	Rosemary,	Inexpensive	Grill-Roasted
Beef	with,
-Rosemary	Smashed	Potatoes
Shrimp,	Spanish-Style
slicing,	how	the	science	works
tempering	flavor	of
and	Thyme	Pan	Sauce

Garlic	presses,	ratings	of
Gas	grills,	ratings	of
Gazpacho	Andaluz,	Creamy
Gelatin

collagen	conversion	to,	Link	2,	Link	3
compared	with	pectin
powdered,	adding	to	meatloaf

Ghee,	about



Giblet	Pan	Gravy
Ginger

Butter	Sauce
Pickled,	and	Wasabi,	Shrimp	Salad	with
Southeast	Asian	Marinade	for	Steaks
-Soy	Dipping	Sauce
-Soy	Sauce	with	Scallions,	Link	2

Glass	baking	dishes,	ratings	of
Glazed	All-Beef	Meatloaf
Glazed	Butter	Cookies
Glazed	Roast	Chicken
Glazed	Spiral-Sliced	Ham
Glazes

Cherry-Port
Maple-Orange

Glutamate,	about
Glutamates	and	nucleotides	(concept)

Best	Beef	Stew
in	common	foods
how	the	science	works
Pasta	with	Creamy	Tomato	Sauce
Quick	Beef	and	Vegetable	Soup
test	kitchen	experiment

Gluten
in	bread	dough
low-protein	flour	and
in	pie	dough
in	quick-bread	batter
reverse	creaming	and



see	also	Gluten	minimization
Gluten	minimization	(pie	dough)	(concept)

Beef	Empanadas
Beef	Empanadas	with	Corn	and	Black	Bean	Filling
Blueberry	Pie
Deep-Dish	Apple	Pie
empanadas
Foolproof	Baked	Pie	Shell
Foolproof	Double-Crust	Pie	Dough
Foolproof	Single-Crust	Pie	Dough	for
Custard	Pies,
how	the	science	works
pie	dough
test	kitchen	experiment

Gluten	minimization	(quick	breads)	(concept)
All-Purpose	Cornbread
Better	Bran	Muffins
Blueberry	Breakfast	Cornbread
Blueberry	Muffins
how	the	science	works
Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread
test	kitchen	experiment
Ultimate	Banana	Bread

Goat	Cheese	and	Lemon	Cheesecake	with	Hazelnut	Crust
Grains

alkaline	cooking	water	for
All-Purpose	Cornbread
best	cornmeal	for	polenta
Better	Bran	Muffins



Blueberry	Breakfast	Cornbread
Chocolate-Chunk	Oatmeal	Cookies	with	Pecans	and	Dried	Cherries
Creamy	Parmesan	Polenta
Multigrain	Pancakes
Salty	Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies
Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread
Thin	and	Crispy	Coconut-Oatmeal	Cookies
Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies
Thin	and	Crispy	Orange-Almond	Oatmeal	Cookies
see	also	Rice

Grand	Marnier	Soufflé	with	Grated	Chocolate
Graters,	ratings	of
Gravy

Giblet	Pan
Slow-Roasted	Turkey	with

Green	Bean(s)
Blanched,	Make-Ahead
blanching	at	work
with	Buttered	Bread	Crumbs	and	Almonds
Casserole,	Ultimate
cooking	times
with	Sautéed	Shallots	and	Vermouth
and	Shiitakes,	Teriyaki	Stir-Fried	Beef	with

Greens
Caesar	Salad
French	Potato	Salad	with	Arugula,	Roquefort,
and	Walnuts,
Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with	Arugula,	Sun-Dried	Tomatoes,	and	Goat
Cheese



Hearty	Tuscan	Bean	Stew
see	also	Cabbage

Green	Tomato	Chutney
Grill,	defined
Grill	brushes,	ratings	of
Grilled	dishes

carryover	cooking	at	work
Chicken	Fajitas
Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with	Chimichurri	Sauce
Grilled	Beef	Fajitas
Grilled	Beef	Kebabs	with	Lemon	and	Rosemary
Marinade,
Grilled	Blackened	Red	Snapper
Grilled	Chipotle-Lime	Chicken	Breasts
Grilled	Flank	Steak	with	Spice	Rub
Grilled	Lemon-Parsley	Chicken	Breasts
Grilled	Orange-Tarragon	Chicken	Breasts
Grilled	Pork	Chops
Grilled	Porterhouse	or	T-Bone	Steaks
Grilled	Potatoes	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary
Grilled	Rack	of	Lamb
Grilled	Rack	of	Lamb	with	Sweet	Mustard	Glaze
Grilled	Salmon	Fillets
Grill-Roasted	Beef	Tenderloin
Grill-Roasted	Bone-In	Pork	Rib	Roast
Grill-Roasted	Pork	Loin
Grill-Smoked	Pork	Chops
Inexpensive	Grill-Roasted	Beef	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary
Maillard	reaction	at	work



Well-Done	Burgers
see	also	Barbecuing

Grill-roast,	defined
Grills,	ratings	of
Grill	tongs,	ratings	of
Grinding	meat	(concept)

Best	Old-Fashioned	Burgers
burgers
getting	the	perfect	grind
how	the	science	works
Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers
Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers	with	Crispy	Shallots	and	Blue	Cheese
Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers	with	Sautéed	Onion	and	Smoked	Cheddar
test	kitchen	experiment
when	to	salt

Guacamole,	Fresh
Guinness	and	Prunes,	Braised	Beef	Short	Ribs	with

H
Haddock,	freezing,	note	about
Half-and-half,	substitutes	for
Halibut	Steaks,	Pan-Roasted
Ham

Asparagus,	and	Gruyère	Frittata
Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops	with	Prosciutto	and	Asiago	Cheese
Leek,	Prosciutto,	and	Goat	Cheese	Frittata
and	Mint,	Sugar	Snap	Peas	with
and	Peas,	Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese	with
Spiral-Sliced,	Glazed



Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart	with	Prosciutto
Hand-held	mixers,	ratings	of
Handling	herbs	(concept)

Classic	Basil	Pesto
Grilled	Potatoes	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary
heartier	herbs,	in	sauces	and	oils
how	the	science	works
Lemon-Basil	Salsa	Verde
Marinara	Sauce
mild	herbs,	in	sauces
Salsa	Verde
test	kitchen	experiment

Hard-Cooked	Eggs
Hazelnut(s)

–Browned	Butter	Sugar	Cookies,	Chewy
Crust,	Goat	Cheese	and	Lemon	Cheesecake	with
and	Goat	Cheese,	Lentil	Salad	with
Roasted	Red	Pepper,	and	Thyme	Relish

Hearty	Minestrone
Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs

with	Arugula,	Sun-Dried	Tomatoes,	and	Goat	Cheese
with	Bacon,	Onion,	and	Pepper	Jack	Cheese
with	Sausage,	Sweet	Pepper,	and	Cheddar	Cheese

Hearty	Tuscan	Bean	Stew
Heat

convection,	Link	2,	Link	3
gentle,	for	custardy	desserts
gentle,	to	prevent	overcooking
high,	developing	flavor	with



how	the	science	works,	Link	2
radiant,	Link	2
see	also	Conduction;	Convection	heat;	Radiant	heat

Herb(s)
and	Caper	Vinaigrette,	Poached	Salmon	with
comparing	dried	with	fresh
fresh,	substituting	dried	for
Vinaigrette
weight	and	volume	chart
when	to	add	to	recipes
see	also	Handling	herbs;	specific	herbs

Home	Fries
Homemade	Clotted	Cream
Honey

about
-Mustard	Marinade	for	Steaks
storing

Honeydew,	Mango,	and	Raspberries	with	Lime	and	Ginger
Hot	and	Sour	Soup
Hummus,	Ultimate
Hungarian	Beef	Stew

I
Ice	Cream,	Vanilla
Indian	Curry	with	Potatoes,	Cauliflower,	Peas,	and	Chickpeas
Inexpensive	Grill-Roasted	Beef	with	Garlic	and
Rosemary,
Ingredients

Butter,	Link	2



Chocolate,	Link	2
Eggs,	Link	2
emergency	substitutions
Fish,	Link	2
Flour,	Link	2
Meat,	Link	2
“”	pages,	note	about,	Link	2
Poultry,	Link	2
Salt,	Link	2
Shopping	for	Beef,	Link	2
Shopping	for	Pork,	Link	2
substituting,	note	about
Sweeteners,	Link	2

Invert	sugars	(concept)
Brown	Sugar	Cookies
chewy	cookies
Chocolate-Chunk	Oatmeal	Cookies	with	Pecans	and	Dried	Cherries
creamy	frozen	desserts
Fresh	Lemon	Sherbet
Fresh	Lime	Sherbet
Fresh	Orange	Sherbet
Fresh	Raspberry	Sherbet
how	the	science	works
sugar	syrups	at	work
test	kitchen	experiment
Ultimate	Chocolate	Chip	Cookies

J
Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers



with	Crispy	Shallots	and	Blue	Cheese
with	Sautéed	Onion	and	Smoked	Cheddar

Julienne,	description	of

K
Kitchen	supplies,	ratings	of
Kitchen	timers,	ratings	of
Kneading	bread	(concept)

autolyse	at	work
how	the	science	works
Olive-Rosemary	Bread
Rustic	Dinner	Rolls
test	kitchen	experiment

Knife	basics
Knife	sharpeners,	ratings	of
Knives,	ratings	of

L
Ladles,	ratings	of
Lamb

doneness	temperatures
optimal	cooking	temperatures
optimal	resting	times
Rack	of,	Grilled
Rack	of,	Grilled,	with	Sweet	Mustard	Glaze

Lamination
about
demonstrating

Lasagna,	Four-Cheese
Leaveners.	See	Chemical	leaveners



Leek(s)
and	Blue	Cheese,	Deep-Dish	Quiche	with
Prosciutto,	and	Goat	Cheese	Frittata
and	White	Wine,	Salmon	en	Cocotte	with

Legumes
Lentil	Salad	with	Hazelnuts	and	Goat	Cheese
Lentil	Salad	with	Olives,	Mint,	and	Feta
protein	and	fiber	in
see	also	Bean(s)

Lemon
anatomy,	Link	2
-Basil	Salsa	Verde
Browned	Butter
Bundt	Cake
Cheesecake
and	Goat	Cheese	Cheesecake	with	Hazelnut	Crust
Meringue	Pie
or	Lemon-Coconut	Chiffon	Cake
-Parsley	Chicken	Breasts,	Grilled
and	Rosemary	Marinade,	Grilled	Beef	Kebabs	with
Sherbet,	Fresh
Triple-Citrus	Cheesecake
Vinaigrette

Lentil
Salad	with	Hazelnuts	and	Goat	Cheese
Salad	with	Olives,	Mint,	and	Feta

Lime
-Chipotle	Chicken	Breasts,	Grilled
-Coconut	Sugar	Cookies,	Chewy



Sherbet,	Fresh
Triple-Citrus	Cheesecake

Loaf	pans,	ratings	of
Low	oven	heating	at	work	(concept)

how	the	science	works
New	York–Style	Cheesecake
Pumpkin	Pie

M
Maceration	(concept)

Berry	Fool
fruit	desserts
fruit	salads
Honeydew,	Mango,	and	Raspberries	with	Lime	and
Ginger,
how	the	science	works
Peach	Crumble
Peaches,	Blackberries,	and	Strawberries	with	Basil	and	Pepper
Strawberry	Shortcakes
test	kitchen	experiment

Maillard	reaction	(concept)
description	of
developing	flavor	with
Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with	Chimichurri	Sauce
Grilled	Salmon	Fillets
grilling	at	work
how	the	science	works
at	low	temperatures
Pan-Seared	Scallops



skillet-cooked	seafood
Skillet-Roasted	Fish	Fillets
Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Snap	Peas	and	Red	Pepper
stir-frying	at	work
Tangerine	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Onion	and	Snow	Peas
Teriyaki	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Green	Beans	and	Shiitakes
test	kitchen	experiment

Make-Ahead	Blanched	Green	Beans
Make-Ahead	Crème	Brûlée
Mango,	Honeydew,	and	Raspberries	with	Lime
and	Ginger,
Maple	(syrup)

-Apple	Glaze,	Butterflied	Turkey	with
-Apple	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts
-Glazed	Pork	Roast
-Orange	Glaze
refrigerating
-Thyme	Glaze,	Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes	with

Marinades
Classic,	for	Steaks
Honey-Mustard,	for	Steaks
Mojo,	for	Steaks
Mole,	for	Steaks
Southeast	Asian,	for	Steaks
see	also	Salty	marinades

Marinara	Sauce
Marrow,	in	bones
Mayonnaise

Garlic	(Aïoli)



Rosemary-Thyme	Aïoli
Measuring

conversion	chart	for	baking	ingredients
conversions	and	equivalents
dip-and-sweep	method
dry	measuring	cups
dry	measuring	cups,	ratings	of
equipment,	ratings	of
history	of
liquid	measuring	cups
liquid	measuring	cups,	ratings	of
measuring	spoons
measuring	spoons,	ratings	of
methods	for
metric	measures,	Link	2
variables	in
by	weight	vs.	volume

Meat
aging
barbecued,	pink	color	in
buying
carryover	cooking.	See	Carryover	cooking
color	of,	science	of
enzymes	in
frozen,	brining
frozen,	moisture	loss	from
frozen,	thawing
grinding.	See	Grinding	meat
ground,	panades	for.	See	Panades



Meat,	Link	2
muscle	fibers	in,	Link	2,	Link	3
optimal	cooking	temperatures
proteins	and	fat	in,	Link	2,	Link	3
recommended	storage	temperatures
resting.	See	Resting	meat
safe	handling	of
seasoning,	with	kosher	salt
slow-roasting	at	low	temperature
storing
structure	of
temperature,	for	recipes
water	content,	Link	2
see	also	Beef;	Lamb;	Pork

Meatballs
Spaghetti	and,	Classic,	for	a	Crowd
Swedish

Meatloaf
All-Beef,	Glazed
panades	at	work

Memphis-Style	Barbecued	Spareribs
Meringue	Cookies

Chocolate
Espresso
Orange
stabilizing,	with	sugar	and	cornstarch
Toasted	Almond

Metal	baking	pans,	ratings	of
Mexican	Rice



Mexican	Rice	with	Charred	Tomatoes,	Chiles,	and	Onion
Mid–South	Carolina	Mustard	Sauce
Milk,	whole,	substitutes	for
Mince,	description	of
Minestrone,	Hearty
Mint

-Cilantro	Chutney
and	Ham,	Sugar	Snap	Peas	with
Olives,	and	Feta,	Lentil	Salad	with
and	Shallot,	Sautéed	Peas	with
-Yogurt	Cucumber	Salad

Mixers
hand-held,	ratings	of
stand	vs.	hand-held

Mocha-Nut	Chiffon	Cake
Mojo	Marinade	for	Steaks
Molasses

about
-Cranberry	Glaze,	Butterflied	Turkey	with

Mole	Marinade	for	Steaks
Monosodium	glutamate	(MSG),	Link	2
Mousse

Chocolate-Raspberry
Dark	Chocolate
Premium	Dark	Chocolate
texture	variations

Mozzarella	Cheese
French-Style	Mashed	Potatoes	with	Cheese	and	Garlic	(Aligot)
Fresh,	and	Sautéed	Cherry	Tomato	Topping



New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	Pizza
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	White	Pizza
Sausage,	and	Broccoli	Rabe,	Deep-Dish	Quiche	with
Smoked,	and	Roasted	Peppers,	Summer	Vegetable	Gratin	with
and	Sun-Dried	Tomato	Tart
and	Tomato	Tart
and	Tomato	Tart	with	Prosciutto

Muffins,	Better	Bran
Muffins,	Blueberry
Muffin	tins

empty,	filling	with	water
ratings	of

Multigrain	Pancakes
Mushroom(s)

Beef	Stroganoff
–Red	Wine	Pan	Sauce
Sautéed,	and	Leeks,	Baked	Brown	Rice	with
Teriyaki	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Green	Beans	and	Shiitakes
Ultimate	Green	Bean	Casserole
Wild,	and	Rosemary	Topping

Mustard
-Balsamic	Vinaigrette
Deviled	Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets
Dipping	Sauce,	Teppanyaki
Glaze,	Sweet,	Grilled	Rack	of	Lamb	with
-Honey	Marinade	for	Steaks
Sauce,	Mid–South	Carolina

Myoglobin,	Link	2



N
New	York–Style	Cheesecake
New	York–Style	Crumb	Cake
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	Pizza
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	White	Pizza
Nitrites	and	nitrates
No-Fuss	Risotto	with	Chicken	and	Herbs
No-Fuss	Risotto	with	Parmesan	and	Herbs
Noodle	Soup,	Chicken,	Classic
Nucleotides.	See	Glutamates	and	nucleotides
Nutmeg,	about
Nuts

Pine,	and	Currants,	Rice	Pilaf	with
Stir-Fried	Sichuan-Style	Shrimp	with	Zucchini,	Red	Bell	Pepper,	and
Peanuts
see	also	Almond(s);	Hazelnut(s);	Pecan(s);	Walnuts

O
Oatmeal	Cookies

Chocolate-Chunk,	with	Pecans	and	Dried	Cherries
-Coconut,	Thin	and	Crispy
Orange-Almond,	Thin	and	Crispy
Thin	and	Crispy
Thin	and	Crispy,	Salty

Oil(s)
effect	on	marinated	foods
emulsifiers	for
see	also	Frying	oil

Old-Fashioned	Stuffed	Roast	Turkey



Olive(s)
Chicken	Provençal
Chicken	Provençal	with	Saffron,	Orange,	and	Basil
Daube	Provençal
Goat	Cheese,	and	Oregano,	Stuffed	Tomatoes	with
Mint,	and	Feta,	Lentil	Salad	with
-Rosemary	Bread
Vinaigrette

Omega-3	fatty	acids
in	oily	fish
in	salmon

Omelets
demonstrating	effect	of	fat	on
French,	Perfect
preheating	pans	for

Onion(s)
and	Ale	Sauce,	Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with
-Braised	Beef	Brisket
-Braised	Beef	Brisket,	Same-Day
Caramelized
Caramelized,	Bacon,	and	Scallion	Dip
Deep-Dish	Quiche	Lorraine
demonstrating	effect	of	cutting
Home	Fries
manipulating	flavor	of,	Link	2
Pickled,	Sweet	and	Spicy
reducing	tears	while	cutting
Relish
Sautéed,	and	Smoked	Cheddar,	Juicy	Pub-Style



Burgers	with,
sautéed,	when	to	salt
slicing,	how	the	science	works
slow-cooking,	for	complex	flavors
Soup,	Best	French
Soup,	Quicker	French
sulfur	compounds	in
Ultimate	Green	Bean	Casserole

Orange(s)
-Almond	Oatmeal	Cookies,	Thin	and	Crispy
-Almond	Vinaigrette,	Warm,	Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with
and	Avocado,	Shrimp	Salad	with
-Avocado	Salsa
and	Celery,	Salmon	en	Cocotte	with
Crêpes	Suzette
Essence,	Pound	Cake	with
freshly	squeezed,	note	about
-Honey	Glazed	Chicken	Breasts
-Maple	Glaze
Meringue	Cookies
Mojo	Marinade	for	Steaks
or	Cranberry-Orange	Chiffon	Cake
Sherbet,	Fresh
-Tarragon	Chicken	Breasts,	Grilled
Triple-Citrus	Cheesecake

Oregano
Marinara	Sauce

Osmosis,	Link	2
Oven-Barbecued	Spareribs



Oven	mitts,	ratings	of
Oven	temperature,	Link	2
Oxtails,	demonstrating	collagen	breakdown	with

P
Panades	(concept)

burgers
Classic	Spaghetti	and	Meatballs	for	a	Crowd
Glazed	All-Beef	Meatloaf
how	the	science	works
meatloaf,	meat	sauce,	and	meatballs
Simple	Italian-Style	Meat	Sauce
Swedish	Meatballs
test	kitchen	experiment
Well-Done	Bacon-Cheeseburgers
Well-Done	Burgers

Pancakes
Buttermilk,	Best
cooked,	keeping	warm
Multigrain
proper	pan	heat	for
splotchy,	avoiding

Pan-Roasted	Asparagus
with	Red	Onion	and	Bacon
with	Red	Peppers	and	Goat	Cheese
with	Toasted	Garlic	and	Parmesan
with	Warm	Orange-Almond	Vinaigrette

Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts
with	Onion	and	Ale	Sauce



with	Sage-Vermouth	Sauce
with	Sweet-Tart	Red	Wine	Sauce

Pan-Roasted	Halibut	Steaks
Pan-Seared	Scallops
Pan-Seared	Sesame-Crusted	Tuna	Steaks
Pan-Seared	Thick-Cut	Pork	Chops
Pan-Seared	Thick-Cut	Strip	Steaks
Paprika

about
Chicken	Paprikash
Hungarian	Beef	Stew
Smoked,	and	Toasted	Garlic,	Mashed	Potatoes	with

Parchment	paper,	ratings	of
Paring	knives,	ratings	of
Parmesan	Cheese

Caesar	Salad
Crisp	Breaded	Chicken	Cutlets	with	(Chicken	Milanese)
Four-Cheese	Lasagna
and	Fried	Eggs,	Potato	Roesti	with
Garlic,	and	Basil,	Stuffed	Tomatoes	with
Garlic,	and	Red	Pepper	Flakes,	Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with
and	Herbs,	No-Fuss	Risotto	with
Lemon,	and	Herbs,	Baked	Brown	Rice	with
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	Pizza
Polenta,	Creamy
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin
and	Toasted	Garlic,	Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with

Parsley
Grilled	Argentine	Steaks	with	Chimichurri	Sauce



Lemon-Basil	Salsa	Verde
Salsa	Verde
and	Shallot	Butter
stems,	bitter	taste	of

Parsnips	and	Carrots,	Roasted,	with	Rosemary
Pasta

alla	Norma
Classic	Chicken	Noodle	Soup
Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Orzo	and	Spring	Vegetables
Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Shells,	Tomatoes,	and	Zucchini
Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese

with	Ham	and	Peas
with	Kielbasa	and	Mustard

Classic	Spaghetti	and	Meatballs	for	a	Crowd
cloudy	and	starchy	cooking	water
with	Creamy	Tomato	Sauce
Four-Cheese	Lasagna
with	Garlic	and	Oil
sampling	brands	of
Simple	Italian-Style	Meat	Sauce
Spaghetti	with	Pecorino	Romano	and	Black	Pepper
(Cacio	e	Pepe),

Pasta	sauces
Classic	Basil	Pesto
Marinara	Sauce
Simple	Italian-Style	Meat	Sauce

Pastry	Cream
demonstrating	role	of	starch	in
thickening	agents	for



Pastry	flour,	about
Pastry-making	(concept)

Apple	Galette
Blueberry	Scones
Flaky	Buttermilk	Biscuits
fraisage,	about
fraisage,	demonstrating
Free-Form	Fruit	Tart
Free-Form	Summer	Fruit	Tartlets
how	the	science	works
lamination,	about
lamination,	demonstrating
test	kitchen	experiment

Peach(es)
Blackberries,	and	Strawberries	with	Basil	and	Pepper
Crumble
Sauce,	Slow-Roasted	Pork	Shoulder	with
storing

Peanuts,	Zucchini,	and	Red	Bell	Pepper,	Stir-Fried	Sichuan-Style	Shrimp	with
Pears,	washing
Pea(s)

blanching	at	work
Classic	Chicken	Soup	with	Orzo	and	Spring	Vegetables
and	Ham,	Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese	with
and	Herbs,	Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with
Potatoes,	Cauliflower,	and	Chickpeas,	Indian	Curry	with
Sautéed,	with	Leeks	and	Tarragon
Sautéed,	with	Shallot	and	Mint
Snow



cooking	times
and	Onion,	Tangerine	Stir-Fried	Beef	with
and	Red	Bell	Pepper,	Stir-Fried	Shrimp	with,	in	Hot	and	Sour	Sauce

Sugar	Snap
Blanched
cooking	times
with	Ham	and	Mint
with	Lemon,	Garlic,	and	Basil
and	Red	Pepper,	Stir-Fried	Beef	with

and	Tomatoes,	Curried	Baked	Brown	Rice	with
Pecan(s)

Apple,	and	Cranberry	Topping
and	Bacon,	Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with
and	Dried	Cherries,	Chocolate-Chunk	Oatmeal	Cookies	with
-Graham	Crust,	Pumpkin-Bourbon	Cheesecake	with

Pecorino	Romano	and	Black	Pepper,	Spaghetti	with	
(Cacio	e	Pepe),	
Pectin

compared	with	gelatin
in	vegetables,	Link	2,	Link	3

Peppercorns
freshly	ground,	seasoning	with
Pepper-Crusted	Filets	Mignons
toasting,	note	about

Pepper	flakes,	demonstrating	blooming	with
Pepper	Jack	Cheese,	Bacon,	and	Onion,	Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with
Pepper	mills,	ratings	of
Pepper(s)

Chicken	Fajitas



Chicken	Paprikash
Grilled	Beef	Fajitas
Grilled	Beef	Kebabs	with	Lemon	and	Rosemary	Marinade
Hungarian	Beef	Stew
Red	Bell

Chutney
and	Goat	Cheese,	Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with
and	Snap	Peas,	Stir-Fried	Beef	with
and	Snow	Peas,	Stir-Fried	Shrimp	with,	in	Hot	and	Sour	Sauce
Zucchini,	and	Peanuts,	Stir-Fried	Sichuan-Style	Shrimp	with

Roasted	Red
and	Basil,	Shrimp	Salad	with
Hazelnut,	and	Thyme	Relish
and	Smoked	Mozzarella,	Summer	Vegetable	Gratin	with

Romesco	Sauce
Sweet,	Sausage,	and	Cheddar	Cheese,	Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with
see	also	Chile(s)

Perfect	French	Omelets
Perfect	Scrambled	Eggs
Pesto

Basil,	Classic
basil,	preventing	darkening	of

Pickled	Cucumbers,	Swedish
Pickled	Onions,	Sweet	and	Spicy
Pie	Dough

demonstrating	effect	of	vodka	on
Foolproof	Baked	Pie	Shell
Foolproof	Double-Crust
Foolproof	Single-Crust,	for	Custard	Pies



hot-water	method,	about
Pie	plates,	ratings	of
Pies

Apple,	Deep-Dish
Blueberry
Lemon	Meringue
preventing	soggy	crusts
Pumpkin

Pilaf,	Rice,	Simple
Pilaf,	Rice,	with	Currants	and	Pine	Nuts
Pineapple–Brown	Sugar	Glazed	Chicken	BreastsPine	Nuts	and	Currants,	Rice
Pilaf	with,	Link	2
Pizza

Bianca
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	White

Plastic	wrap,	ratings	of
Poach,	defined
Poached	Salmon	with	Herb	and	Caper	Vinaigrette
Polenta

best	cornmeal	for
Creamy	Parmesan

Pork
Barbecued	Pulled
bone-in	cuts
bound	breading	at	work
brining	at	work
brining	formula
Chops



baking	then	browning	at	work
Basic	Spice	Rub	for
Crispy	Pan-Fried
Crispy	Pan-Fried,	with	Latin	Spice	Rub
Crispy	Pan-Fried,	with	Three-Pepper	Rub
Crunchy	Baked
Crunchy	Baked,	with	Prosciutto	and	Asiago	Cheese
demonstrating	bones	at	work
demonstrating	breading	with
Grilled
Grill-Smoked
Pan-Seared	Thick-Cut

Classic	Spaghetti	and	Meatballs	for	a	Crowd
cured,	nitrites	and	nitrates	in
demonstrating	flavor	of	bone-in	meat	with
doneness	temperatures
en	cocotte	at	work
enhanced,	about
heritage	breeds
Hot	and	Sour	Soup
Loin

demonstrating	brining	with
demonstrating	carryover	cooking	with
demonstrating	resting	times	with
Grill-Roasted

optimal	cooking	temperatures
optimal	resting	times
primal	cuts
Rib	Roast,	Bone-In,	Grill-Roasted



ribs,	demonstrating	bones	at	work
Roast,	Maple-Glazed
Roast	en	Cocotte	with	Apples	and	Shallots
roasts,	demonstrating	bones	at	work
Schnitzel
shopping	for
Shoulder,	Slow-Roasted,	with	Cherry	Sauce
Shoulder,	Slow-Roasted,	with	Peach	Sauce
Spareribs,	Memphis-Style	Barbecued
Spareribs,	Oven-Barbecued
Swedish	Meatballs
see	also	Bacon;	Ham;	Sausage(s)

Port-Cherry	Glaze
Potato(es)

boiling,	with	baking	soda
Cauliflower,	Peas,	and	Chickpeas,	Indian	Curry	with
demonstrating	flavor	of	bone-in	meat	with
demonstrating	frying	with
French	Fries,	Classic
French	Fries,	Easier
-Garlic	Soup
Grilled,	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary
Home	Fries
home	fries,	activating	starches	at	work
Mashed

Classic
French-Style,	with	Cheese	and	Garlic	(Aligot)
Garlic
rinsing	away	starches	at	work



and	Root	Vegetables
and	Root	Vegetables	with	Bacon	and	Thyme
and	Root	Vegetables	with	Paprika	and	Parsley
with	Smoked	Cheddar	and	Grainy	Mustard
with	Smoked	Paprika	and	Toasted	Garlic
test	kitchen	experiments,	Link	2

parcooked,	browning
removing	green	patches	from
roasted,	activating	starches	at	work
Roasted,	Crisp
Roesti

with	Bacon,	Onion,	and	Sherry	Vinegar
Cheesy
with	Fried	Eggs	and	Parmesan
rinsing	away	starches	at	work

Salad
All-American
French,	with	Arugula,	Roquefort,	and	Walnuts
French,	with	Dijon	Mustard	and	Fines	Herbes
French,	with	Fennel,	Tomato,	and	Olives
French,	with	Radishes,	Cornichons,	and	Capers
safe	handling	of

Smashed
with	Bacon	and	Parsley
Garlic-Rosemary

starting	cooking	in	cold	water
see	also	Potato	starches;	Sweet	Potatoes

Potato	mashers,	ratings	of
Potato	starches	(manipulating)	(concept)



activating
Cheesy	Potato	Roesti
Crisp	Roasted	Potatoes
French-Style	Mashed	Potatoes	with	Cheese	and	Garlic	(Aligot)
Home	Fries
how	the	science	works
Mashed	Potatoes	and	Root	Vegetables
Mashed	Potatoes	and	Root	Vegetables	with	Bacon	and	Thyme
Mashed	Potatoes	and	Root	Vegetables	with	Paprika	and	Parsley
Potato	Roesti
Potato	Roesti	with	Bacon,	Onion,	and	Sherry	Vinegar
Potato	Roesti	with	Fried	Eggs	and	Parmesan
rinsing	away
test	kitchen	experiment

Potato	starches	(variations	in)	(concept)
All-American	Potato	Salad
Classic	Mashed	Potatoes
French	Potato	Salad	with	Arugula,	Roquefort,	and	Walnuts
French	Potato	Salad	with	Dijon	Mustard	and	Fines	Herbes
French	Potato	Salad	with	Fennel,	Tomato,	and	Olives
French	Potato	Salad	with	Radishes,	Cornichons,	and	Capers
Garlic	Mashed	Potatoes
Garlic-Rosemary	Smashed	Potatoes
how	the	science	works
mashed	potatoes
Mashed	Potatoes	with	Smoked	Cheddar	and	Grainy	Mustard
Mashed	Potatoes	with	Smoked	Paprika	and	Toasted	Garlic
in	Red	Bliss,	Russet,	and	Yukon	Gold	potatoes
salads



Smashed	Potatoes
Smashed	Potatoes	with	Bacon	and	Parsley
test	kitchen	experiment

Pot	roasts,	defined
Pots	and	pans.	See	Cookware
Poultry

brining	at	work
buying
optimal	cooking	temperatures
optimal	resting	times
Poultry,	Link	2
recommended	storage	temperatures
safe	handling
structure	of
see	also	Chicken;	Turkey

Practical	science
adding	eggs	to	cake	batters
adding	grated	apple	to	pie	fillings
adding	salt	to	bread	dough
adding	sugar	to	frozen	desserts
adding	vodka	to	tempura	batter
American	vs.	English	cucumbers
avoiding	splotchy	pancakes
avoiding	uneven	cookie	baking
baking	bread	in	humid	oven
baking	brownies	with	shiny	top
baking	cakes	with	cold	eggs
baking	even	cake	layers
baking	rolls	in	hot	oven



baking	sheets	for	cookies
belly	fat	on	salmon
best	cornmeal	for	polenta
best	fire	for	barbecue
best	place	to	braise
best	rice	for	risotto
best	ways	to	flambé
blanching	green	vegetables
boiling	potatoes	with	baking	soda
brighter,	greener	pesto
bright	yellow	egg	yolks
brining	frozen	meat
browning	butter	for	rich	flavor
browning	parcooked	potatoes
buttermilk	shelf	life
buying	flap	meat
calculating	baker’s	percentage
choosing	canned	tomatoes
choosing	vanilla	beans
clarifying	butter
cleaning	apples	and	pears
climacteric	vs.	nonclimacteric	fruits
cloudy	pasta	water
cold-start	frying	method
color	of	meat
common	spices	and	how	to	use	them
cooking	water	for	beans
cooking	with	canned	beans
cooking	with	herb	stems



cooking	with	wine
cool	fermentation	for	thinner	crust
cooling	baking	sheets	between	cookie	batches
cooling	soups
cornstarch	and	buttermilk	for	breadings
cutting	onions	for	no	more	tears
dealcoholized	wines
developing	flavor	by	searing	foods
don’t	freeze	fresh	chiles
don’t	toast	peppercorns
double	leaveners	for	cookies
dry-aging	steaks	at	home
effect	of	acid	on	egg	texture
effect	of	baking	powder	on	poultry	skin
eliminating	gas	from	beans
emulsifying	Egg	Beaters
fat	content	in	chewy	brownies
fat	rendered	from	short	ribs
filling	empty	muffin	cups
flambéing	improves	flavor	of	sauce
flavor	in	tomato	seeds	and	jelly
flavor	of	scallions
flour	and	short-term	humidity
foolproof	whipped	cream
freezing	bread	dough
freezing	flour
frozen	shrimp
frying	oil	at	its	best
gelatin	vs.	pectin



Gold	Medal	vs.	King	Arthur	flours
gray	matter	on	salmon
green	patches	on	potatoes
hot-water	pie	crusts
how	gelatin	mimics	veal
internal	temperature	for	baked	bread
jump-starting	browning	with	sugar
keeping	pancakes	warm
keeping	potato	salad	safe
leak-proofing	springform	pans
lemon	anatomy,	Link	2
loaf	pan	sizes	for	cakes
low-temperature	browning
make-ahead	bread	crumbs
making	cookies	with	dissolved	sugar
manipulating	garlic	flavor
melting	cheese
mixing	method	for	butter	cakes
mousse	textures
natural	vs.	Dutch-processed	cocoa
oil	and	salt	in	marinades
pasta	taste	tests
peeling	hard-cooked	eggs
perfectly	ground	meat
pH	of	common	foods
precooking	apples	for	pies
preheating	omelet	pans
preventing	curdled	dairy	products
preventing	puffy	burgers



preventing	seized	chocolate
preventing	soggy	pie	crusts
preventing	soggy	tart	shells
proper	pan	heat	for	pancakes
purchasing	spices
quick-chilling	wine
quick	fix	for	corked	wines
refrigerating	maple	syrup
removing	excess	liquid	from	eggplant
removing	green	sprouts	from	garlic
removing	odors	from	cutting	boards
resting	clabbered	milk
safely	handling	chicken
safely	handling	eggs
salt	and	containers	for	brining
salting	eggs	before	scrambling
salting	fresh-ground	meat
salting	vegetables	for	maximum	flavor
seeding	hot	chiles
separating	eggs
shopping	for	ground	beef
sifting	flour	for	cakes
skillet	vs.	wok
slow-cooking	onions
smoke	points	of	fats	and	oils
soaking	wheat	for	better	bread
stabilizing	meringues	with	sugar	and	cornstarch
stand	vs.	hand-held	mixer
storing	asparagus



storing	bananas
storing	basil
storing	bay	leaves
storing	butter
storing	cheese
storing	chewy	cookies
storing	fresh	chiles	in	brine
storing	peaches
storing	sweet	potatoes
storing	used	frying	oil
substituting	active	dry	yeast	for	instant
tempering	garlic’s	bite
testing	dried	beans	for	freshness
thickening	agents	for	pastry	cream
time	limit	for	frozen	chicken
toasted	sesame	oil
turn,	rather	than	punch	bread	dough
turning	bread	dough	as	it	rises
two	cuts	of	brisket
two	sides	of	aluminum	foil
understanding	cacao	percentages
vanilla	extract	shelf	life
variations	in	potato	variety	densities
very	ripe	bananas
vinegar	sediment
warming	steaks	before	cooking
when	carryover	cooking	does	not	matter
when	carryover	cooking	must	be	stopped
when	not	to	rinse	rice



when	to	salt	sautéed	onions
whipping	egg	whites	in	copper	bowls
why	brisket	is	pink
why	flour	is	bleached
why	fraisage	matters
why	fresh	orange	juice	turns	sour
why	to	soak	wet	scallops
wild	vs.	farmed	salmon

Precooking	vegetables	(concept)
how	the	science	works
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with	Red	Onion	and	Bacon
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with	Red	Peppers	and	Goat	Cheese
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with	Toasted	Garlic	and	Parmesan
Pan-Roasted	Asparagus	with	Warm	Orange-Almond	Vinaigrette
pectin	stabilization:	oven-roasted	vegetables
pectin	stabilization:	pan-roasted	vegetables
Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts
Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with	Bacon	and	Pecans
Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with	Garlic,	Red	Pepper	Flakes,	and	Parmesan
Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with	Walnuts	and	Lemon
Roasted	Carrots
Roasted	Carrots	and	Fennel	with	Toasted	Almonds	and	Lemon
Roasted	Carrots	and	Parsnips	with	Rosemary
Roasted	Cauliflower
Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes
Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes	with	Maple-Thyme	Glaze
Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes	with	Spiced	Brown	Sugar	Glaze
test	kitchen	experiment



Premium	Dark	Chocolate	Mousse
Prime	Rib
Prosciutto

and	Asiago	Cheese,	Crunchy	Baked	Pork	Chops	with
Leek,	and	Goat	Cheese	Frittata
Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart	with

Protein	reduction	(concept)
Best	Shortbread
cakes
Chiffon	Cake
Chocolate	Marble	Chiffon	Cake
Classic	Brownies
cookies	and	bars
Fluffy	Yellow	Layer	Cake	with	Chocolate	Frosting
how	the	science	works
Lemon	or	Lemon-Coconut	Chiffon	Cake
Mocha-Nut	Chiffon	Cake
Orange	or	Cranberry-Orange	Chiffon	Cake
test	kitchen	experiment

Prunes	and	Guinness,	Braised	Beef	Short	Ribs	with
Pub-Style	Burger	Sauce
Pudding,	Creamy	Chocolate
Pumpkin

-Bourbon	Cheesecake	with	Graham-Pecan	Crust
Cheesecake,	Spiced
Pie

Q
Quiche,	Deep-Dish



with	Leeks	and	Blue	Cheese
Lorraine
with	Sausage,	Broccoli	Rabe,	and	Mozzarella

Quick	Beef	and	Vegetable	Soup
Quick	breads

All-Purpose	Cornbread
Better	Bran	Muffins
Blueberry	Breakfast	Cornbread
Blueberry	Muffins
Blueberry	Scones
definition	of
demonstrating	chemical	leaveners	with	biscuits
demonstrating	pastry-making	with	biscuits
Easy	Buttermilk	Drop	Biscuits
Flaky	Buttermilk	Biscuits
“quick	bread”	mixing	method
Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread
Ultimate	Banana	Bread

Quick	Chicken	Stock
Quicker	French	Onion	Soup

R
Radiant	heat,	Link	2
Radishes,	Cornichons,	and	Capers,	French	Potato	Salad	with
Raisins

Beef	Empanadas
Better	Bran	Muffins
Dried	Fruit	and	Nut	Stuffing
Sherry	Vinegar–Honey	Sauce	with	Almonds



Raspberry(s)
Berry	Fool
-Chocolate	Mousse
Honeydew,	and	Mango	with	Lime	and	Ginger
Sherbet,	Fresh

Rasp	graters,	ratings	of
Red	bell	peppers.	See	under	Pepper(s)
Red	Snapper,	Grilled	Blackened
Red	Wine–Mushroom	Pan	Sauce
Refrigerator	temperature
Relish

Onion
Roasted	Red	Pepper,	Hazelnut,	and	Thyme

Rémoulade
Rennet
Resting	meat	(concept)

Grilled	Beef	Fajitas
Grilled	Flank	Steak	with	Spice	Rub
how	the	science	works
Maple-Glazed	Pork	Roast
optimal	resting	times
test	kitchen	experiment

Reverse	creaming	(concept)
Boston	Cream	Cupcakes
cakes
cookies
Glazed	Butter	Cookies
how	the	science	works
New	York–Style	Crumb	Cake



Rich,	Tender	Yellow	Cake	with	Buttercream	Frosting
test	kitchen	experiment

Rice
best,	for	risotto
and	Black	Beans,	Cuban
and	Black	Beans,	Vegetarian	Cuban-Style
Brown

Baked,	with	Parmesan,	Lemon,	and	Herbs
Baked,	with	Sautéed	Mushrooms	and	Leeks
Curried	Baked,	with	Tomatoes	and	Peas

grains,	structure	of
long-grain,	about
medium-grain,	about
Mexican
Mexican,	with	Charred	Tomatoes,	Chiles,	and	Onion
No-Fuss	Risotto	with	Chicken	and	Herbs
No-Fuss	Risotto	with	Parmesan	and	Herbs
Pilaf,	Simple
Pilaf	with	Currants	and	Pine	Nuts
short-grain,	about
starch	molecules	in
White,	Simple

Rich,	Tender	Yellow	Cake	with	Buttercream	Frosting
Rich	Chocolate	Buttercream	Frosting
Rich	Coffee	Buttercream	Frosting
Rimmed	baking	sheets,	ratings	of
Rinsing	rice	(concept)

Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Parmesan,	Lemon,	and	Herbs
Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Sautéed	Mushrooms	and	Leeks



Brown	Rice
covered	oven	cooking
covered	stovetop	cooking
Curried	Baked	Brown	Rice	with	Tomatoes	and	Peas
demonstrating	value	of	soaking
how	the	science	works
Mexican	Rice
Mexican	Rice	with	Charred	Tomatoes,	Chiles,	and	Onion
No-Fuss	Risotto	with	Chicken	and	Herbs
No-Fuss	Risotto	with	Parmesan	and	Herbs
Rice	Pilaf	with	Currants	and	Pine	Nuts
risotto
Simple	Rice	Pilaf
test	kitchen	experiment
when	not	to	rinse

Risotto
best	rice	for
No-Fuss,	with	Chicken	and	Herbs
No-Fuss,	with	Parmesan	and	Herbs

Roast,	defined
Roast	Beef	Tenderloin
Roasted	Brined	Turkey
Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts

with	Bacon	and	Pecans
with	Garlic,	Red	Pepper	Flakes,	and	Parmesan
with	Walnuts	and	Lemon

Roasted	Carrots
and	Fennel	with	Toasted	Almonds	and	Lemon
and	Parsnips	with	Rosemary



Roasted	Cauliflower
Roasted	Red	Pepper,	Hazelnut,	and	Thyme	Relish
Roasted	Sweet	Potatoes

with	Maple-Thyme	Glaze
with	Spiced	Brown	Sugar	Glaze

Roasting	pans,	ratings	of
Roast	Salted	Turkey
Rolling	pins,	ratings	of
Rolls

baking	in	hot	oven
Crescent
Rustic	Dinner

Romesco	Sauce
Rosemary

Focaccia
and	Garlic,	Grilled	Potatoes	with
and	Garlic,	Inexpensive	Grill-Roasted	Beef	with
Grilled	Rack	of	Lamb
and	Lemon	Marinade,	Grilled	Beef	Kebabs	with
-Olive	Bread
Pizza	Bianca
-Thyme	Aïoli

Rubs,	spice.	See	under	Spice(s)
Rustic	Dinner	Rolls

S
Saffron,	about
Sage-Vermouth	Sauce,	Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with
Salad	dressings.	See	Vinaigrettes



Salads
cabbage,	salting	at	work
Caesar
Cucumber

Creamy	Dill
Sesame-Lemon
Sweet-and-Tart
Yogurt-Mint

Egg,	Classic
Honeydew,	Mango,	and	Raspberries	with	Lime	and	Ginger
Lentil,	with	Hazelnuts	and	Goat	Cheese
Lentil,	with	Olives,	Mint,	and	Feta
Peaches,	Blackberries,	and	Strawberries	with	Basil	and	Pepper
Potato

All-American
French,	with	Arugula,	Roquefort,	and	Walnuts
French,	with	Dijon	Mustard	and	Fines	Herbes
French,	with	Fennel,	Tomato,	and	Olives
French,	with	Radishes,	Cornichons,	and	Capers

Shrimp
with	Avocado	and	Orange
with	Roasted	Red	Pepper	and	Basil
Spicy,	with	Corn	and	Chipotle
with	Wasabi	and	Pickled	Ginger

Salad	spinners,	ratings	of
Salmon

belly	fat	on
en	Cocotte	with	Celery	and	Orange
en	Cocotte	with	Leeks	and	White	Wine



Fillets,	Grilled
gray	matter	on
optimal	cooking	temperature
Poached,	with	Herb	and	Caper	Vinaigrette
wild	vs.	farmed

Salsa
Avocado-Orange
Verde
Verde,	Lemon-Basil

Salt
adding	to	bread	dough
buying
effect	on	marinated	foods
grams	per	teaspoon
kosher,	about
kosher,	brands	of
kosher,	seasoning	meat	with
Salt,	Link	2
sea,	about
seasoning	with
structure	of
table,	about
table,	substitutes	for
see	also	Brining;	Salting	poultry;	Salting	vegetables;	Salty	marinades

Salting	poultry	(concept)
advanced	method	(with	baking	powder)
basic	method
Butterflied	Turkey	with	Apple-Maple	Glaze
Butterflied	Turkey	with	Cranberry-Molasses	Glaze



Crisp	Roast	Chicken
Glazed	Roast	Chicken
how	the	science	works
Old-Fashioned	Stuffed	Roast	Turkey
Roast	Salted	Turkey
Spice-Rubbed	Picnic	Chicken
test	kitchen	experiment

Salting	vegetables	(concept)
Buttermilk	Coleslaw	with	Scallions	and	Cilantro
cabbage	and	cucumber	salads
Caponata
Creamy	Buttermilk	Coleslaw
Creamy	Dill	Cucumber	Salad
Creamy	Gazpacho	Andaluz
eggplant
how	the	science	works
Pasta	alla	Norma
Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with	Garlic	and	Lemon
Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with	Peas	and	Herbs
Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with	Spiced	Carrots	and	Almonds
Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with	Tomatoes	and	Basil
Sesame-Lemon	Cucumber	Salad
Stuffed	Tomatoes	with	Goat	Cheese,	Olives,	and	Oregano
Stuffed	Tomatoes	with	Parmesan,	Garlic,	and	Basil
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin	with	Roasted	Peppers	and	Smoked	Mozzarella
Sun-Dried	Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart
Sweet-and-Tart	Cucumber	Salad
test	kitchen	experiment



Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart
Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart	with	Prosciutto
tomatoes
Yogurt-Mint	Cucumber	Salad
zucchini	and	summer	squash

Salty	marinades	(concept)
beef
Beef	Stroganoff
before–and	after–cooking
buttermilk	brining
Chicken	Fajitas
Classic	Marinade	for	Steaks
Easier	Fried	Chicken
Extra-Crunchy	Fried	Chicken
Grilled	Beef	Kebabs	with	Lemon	and	Rosemary	Marinade
Grilled	Chipotle-Lime	Chicken	Breasts
Grilled	Lemon-Parsley	Chicken	Breasts
Grilled	Orange-Tarragon	Chicken	Breasts
Honey-Mustard	Marinade	for	Steaks
how	the	science	works
Mojo	Marinade	for	Steaks
Mole	Marinade	for	Steaks
shrimp
Southeast	Asian	Marinade	for	Steaks
Spanish-Style	Garlic	Shrimp
Steak	Tacos
Stir-Fried	Shrimp	with	Snow	Peas	and	Red	Bell	Pepper	in	Hot	and	Sour
Sauce
Stir-Fried	Sichuan-Style	Shrimp	with	Zucchini,	Red	Bell	Pepper,	and



Peanuts
test	kitchen	experiment

Salty	Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies
Same-Day	Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket
Saucepans,	ratings	of
Sauces

Barbecue
Eastern	North	Carolina
for	Texas-Style	Beef	Ribs
Western	South	Carolina

Burger,	Classic
Burger,	Pub-Style
cheese-based,	demonstrating	role	of	starch	in
cheese-based,	starches	at	work
Classic	Basil	Pesto
Cranberry,	Simple
Curry-Yogurt,	with	Cilantro
Dipping

Belgian-Style
Chile	Aïoli
Chive	and	Black	Pepper
Ginger-Soy
Teppanyaki	Mustard

Ginger	Butter
Ginger-Soy,	with	Scallions
herbs	at	work
Lemon-Basil	Salsa	Verde
Lemon	Browned	Butter
Marinara



Meat,	Simple	Italian-Style
meat-based,	panades	at	work
Mustard,	Mid–South	Carolina
Pan

best	pans	for
Cilantro	and	Coconut
Garlic	and	Thyme
Red	Wine–Mushroom

Rémoulade
Romesco
Salsa	Verde
Sherry	Vinegar–Honey,	with	Almonds
Soy-Ginger,	with	Scallions
Tomato,	Creamy,	Pasta	with
wine-based,	demonstrating	alcohol	evaporation	with
see	also	Toppings

Sausage(s)
Broccoli	Rabe,	and	Mozzarella,	Deep-Dish	Quiche	with
Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese	with	Kielbasa	and	Mustard
Sweet	Pepper,	and	Cheddar	Cheese,	Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with

Sauté,	defined
Sautéed	Cherry	Tomato	and	Fresh	Mozzarella	Topping
Sautéed	Peas	with	Leeks	and	Tarragon
Sautéed	Peas	with	Shallot	and	Mint
Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini

with	Garlic	and	Lemon
with	Peas	and	Herbs
with	Spiced	Carrots	and	Almonds
with	Tomatoes	and	Basil



Scallions
and	Cilantro,	Buttermilk	Coleslaw	with
flavor	and	texture	of
Ginger-Soy	Sauce	with
Soy-Ginger	Sauce	with

Scallops
Pan-Seared
wet,	soaking	in	brine

Scones,	Buttermilk
Sea	bass,	freezing,	note	about
Seafood.	See	Fish
Seasoning	strategies
Self-rising	flour,	about
Serrated	knives,	ratings	of
Sesame	oil,	toasted,	about
Sesame	seeds

Pan-Seared	Sesame-Crusted	Tuna	Steaks
Sesame-Lemon	Cucumber	Salad

Shallot(s)
and	Apples,	Pork	Roast	en	Cocotte	with
Crispy,	and	Blue	Cheese,	Juicy	Pub-Style	Burgers	with
and	Parsley	Butter

Sherbet
Fresh	Lemon
Fresh	Lime
Fresh	Orange
Fresh	Raspberry

Sherry	Vinegar–Honey	Sauce	with	Almonds
Shortbread,	Best



Shortcakes,	Strawberry
Shrimp

frozen,	buying
Garlic,	Spanish-Style
marinating	at	work
Salad

with	Avocado	and	Orange
with	Roasted	Red	Pepper	and	Basil
Spicy,	with	Corn	and	Chipotle
with	Wasabi	and	Pickled	Ginger

Stir-Fried,	with	Snow	Peas	and	Red	Bell	Pepper	in	Hot	and	Sour	Sauce
Stir-Fried	Sichuan-Style,	with	Zucchini,	Red	Bell	Pepper,	and	Peanuts
Tempura

Simmer,	defined
Simple	Beef	Chili	with	Kidney	Beans
Simple	Cranberry	Sauce
Simple	Italian-Style	Meat	Sauce
Simple	Rice	Pilaf
Simple	White	Rice
Skillet	cooking,	demonstrating	Maillard	reaction	with
Skillet-Roasted	Fish	Fillets
Skillets

compared	with	woks
nonstick,	ratings	of
traditional,	ratings	of

Slice,	description	of
Slicing	garlic	and	onions	(concept)

Bacon,	Scallion,	and	Caramelized	Onion	Dip
Best	French	Onion	Soup



Caesar	Salad
Caramelized	Onions
dips	and	soups
Garlic	Chips
Garlic-Potato	Soup
how	the	science	works
Pasta	with	Garlic	and	Oil
Quicker	French	Onion	Soup
soups,	salads,	and	pasta
test	kitchen	experiment

Slicing	knives,	ratings	of
Slow	“boiling”	(concept)

Classic	Egg	Salad
conductive	heat	at	work
Deviled	Eggs
Hard-Cooked	Eggs
Shrimp	Salad
Shrimp	Salad	with	Avocado	and	Orange
Shrimp	Salad	with	Roasted	Red	Pepper	and	Basil
Shrimp	Salad	with	Wasabi	and	Pickled	Ginger
Spicy	Shrimp	Salad	with	Corn	and	Chipotle

Slow	roasting	for	tough	cuts	(concept)
Barbecued	Beef	Brisket
Barbecued	Pulled	Pork
barbecuing
braising
collagen	breakdown
how	the	science	works
Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket



Same-Day	Onion-Braised	Beef	Brisket
Slow-Roasted	Pork	Shoulder	with	Cherry	Sauce
Slow-Roasted	Pork	Shoulder	with	Peach	Sauce
test	kitchen	experiment

Slow	roasting	to	prevent	overcooking	(concept)
conductive	heat	at	work
Glazed	Spiral-Sliced	Ham
how	the	science	works
Prime	Rib
Slow-Roasted	Turkey	with	Gravy
test	kitchen	experiment

Slow	roasting	to	tenderize	meat	(concept)
beef
how	the	science	works
Inexpensive	Grill-Roasted	Beef	with	Garlic	and	Rosemary
Slow-Roasted	Beef
test	kitchen	experiment

Smashed	Potatoes
with	Bacon	and	Parsley
Garlic-Rosemary

Sodium	tripolyphosphate	(STPP)
Soufflé,	Grand	Marnier,	with	Grated	Chocolate
Soups

Beef	and	Vegetable,	Quick
Black	Bean
Black	Bean,	with	Chipotle	Chiles
bones	at	work
Chicken,	Classic,	with	Orzo	and	Spring	Vegetables
Chicken,	Classic,	with	Shells,	Tomatoes,



and	Zucchini,
Chicken	Noodle,	Classic
cooling,	best	method	for
Creamy	Gazpacho	Andaluz
Garlic-Potato
Hearty	Minestrone
Hot	and	Sour
Onion,	Best	French
Onion,	Quicker	French
starches	at	work
see	also	Chili;	Stews;	Stocks

Sour	cream
effect	of	heat	on
substitute	for

Southeast	Asian	Marinade	for	Steaks
Soy-Ginger	Sauce	with	Scallions
Spaghetti	with	Pecorino	Romano	and	Black	Pepper
(Cacio	e	Pepe),
Spanish-Style	Garlic	Shrimp
Spatulas,	ratings	of
Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake
Spice(s)

blooming.	See	Blooming	spices
buying
common,	and	how	to	use	them
Dry	Rub	for	Barbecue
Rub
Rub,	Basic,	for	Pork	Chops
Rub,	Grilled	Flank	Steak	with



-Rubbed	Picnic	Chicken
Spicy	Jalapeño-Cheddar	Cornbread
Spicy	Shrimp	Salad	with	Corn	and	Chipotle
Spirits,	alcohol	content	in
Spoons

slotted,	ratings	of
wooden,	ratings	of

Springform	pans,	leak-proofing
Squash

Pumpkin-Bourbon	Cheesecake	with	Graham-Pecan	Crust
Pumpkin	Pie
Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake
summer,	salting	at	work
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin
see	also	Zucchini

Starch
potato.	See	Potato	starches
in	rice

Starch	(for	melting	cheese)	(concept)
cheese	sauces
Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese
Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese	with	Ham	and	Peas
Classic	Macaroni	and	Cheese	with	Kielbasa	and	Mustard
Four-Cheese	Lasagna
how	the	science	works
Spaghetti	with	Pecorino	Romano	and	Black	Pepper
(Cacio	e	Pepe),
test	kitchen	experiment

Starch	(to	prevent	curdled	eggs)	(concept)



Creamy	Chocolate	Pudding
Deep-Dish	Quiche	Lorraine
Deep-Dish	Quiche	with	Leeks	and	Blue	Cheese
Deep-Dish	Quiche	with	Sausage,	Broccoli	Rabe,
and	Mozzarella,
Hot	and	Sour	Soup
how	the	science	works
Pastry	Cream
pudding	and	pastry	cream
quiche
soups
test	kitchen	experiment

Starters,	for	bread-making
Steak	Tacos
Steam,	defined
Stew,	defined
Stews

Bean,	Hearty	Tuscan
Beef,	Best
Beef,	Hungarian
braising	at	work
braising	in	the	oven
Daube	Provençal
defined
see	also	Chili

Stir-fries
Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Snap	Peas	and	Red	Pepper
Stir-Fried	Shrimp	with	Snow	Peas	and	Red	Bell	Pepper	in	Hot	and	Sour
Sauce



Stir-Fried	Sichuan-Style	Shrimp	with	Zucchini,	Red	Bell	Pepper,	and
Peanuts
Stir-Fried	Thai	Beef	with	Chiles	and	Shallots
Tangerine	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Onion	and	Snow	Peas
Teriyaki	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Green	Beans	and	Shiitakes

Stocks
bones	at	work
Chicken,	Quick

Strainers,	fine-mesh,	ratings	of
Strawberry(ies)

Berry	Fool
demonstrating	maceration	with
Peaches,	and	Blackberries	with	Basil	and	Pepper
Shortcakes
Topping,	Fresh

Stuffed	Tomatoes	with	Goat	Cheese,	Olives,	and	Oregano
Stuffed	Tomatoes	with	Parmesan,	Garlic,	and	Basil
Stuffing

Dried	Fruit	and	Nut
Herb,	Classic

Sugar
adding	to	frozen	desserts
for	browning	fish	faster
for	caramel,	doneness	temperature
confectioners’,	about
confectioners’,	substitute	for
effect	on	tastebuds
effect	on	texture.	See	Invert	sugars
granulated,	about



stabilizing	egg	whites	with
storing
superfine,	about
syrups,	for	frozen	desserts
tossing	fruit	with.	See	Maceration
volume	and	weight	measures
see	also	Brown	Sugar

Summer	Vegetable	Gratin
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin	with	Roasted	Peppers	and	Smoked	Mozzarella
Sun-Dried	Tomato	and	Mozzarella	Tart
“Supertasters,”
Swedish	Meatballs
Swedish	Pickled	Cucumbers
Sweet	and	Spicy	Pickled	Onions
Sweet-and-Tart	Cucumber	Salad
Sweeteners,	Link	2

see	also	Brown	Sugar;	Sugar
Sweet	Potatoes

Roasted
Roasted,	with	Maple-Thyme	Glaze
Roasted,	with	Spiced	Brown	Sugar	Glaze
storing

Swordfish,	freezing,	note	about

T
Tacos,	Steak
Tangerine	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Onion	and	Snow	Peas
Tarragon

and	Leeks,	Sautéed	Peas	with



-Orange	Chicken	Breasts,	Grilled
Tarts

Apple	Galette
Free-Form	Summer	Fruit	Tartlets
Fruit,	Free-Form
preventing	soggy	bottoms
Sun-Dried	Tomato	and	Mozzarella
Tomato	and	Mozzarella
Tomato	and	Mozzarella,	with	Prosciutto

Tastebuds
Taste	sensations
Temperature

“chilled,”	defined
cold,	effect	on	food
frozen,	effect	on	food
“frozen,”	defined
for	gauging	doneness
of	ingredients
metric
oven,	Link	2
“room,”	defined
thermometers	for

Tempering	at	work	(concept)
Goat	Cheese	and	Lemon	Cheesecake	with	Hazelnut	Crust
how	the	science	works
Lemon	Cheesecake
Triple-Citrus	Cheesecake
Vanilla	Ice	Cream

Tempura



batter,	adding	vodka	to
Shrimp

Teppanyaki	Mustard	Dipping	Sauce
Teriyaki	Stir-Fried	Beef	with	Green	Beans	and	Shiitakes
Texas-Style	Barbecued	Beef	Ribs
Texture	of	food
Thermometers,	instant-read

calibrating
ratings	of
tracking	temperature	with,	Link	2
using,	tips	for

Thermometers,	oven,	ratings	of
Thin	and	Crispy	Coconut-Oatmeal	Cookies
Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies
Thin	and	Crispy	Oatmeal	Cookies,	Salty
Thin	and	Crispy	Orange-Almond	Oatmeal	Cookies
Thyme

demonstrating	blooming	with
and	Garlic	Pan	Sauce
-Rosemary	Aïoli

Time,	cooking,	variables	in
Toasted	Almond	Meringue	Cookies
Toasted	sesame	oil,	about
Tofu

Hot	and	Sour	Soup
Tomato(es)

and	Basil,	Sautéed	Shredded	Zucchini	with
canned,	taste	tests	on
Caponata



Charred,	Chiles,	and	Onion,	Mexican	Rice	with
Cherry,	–Basil	Vinaigrette,	Chunky
Cherry,	Sautéed,	and	Fresh	Mozzarella	Topping
Chicken	Provençal
Chicken	Provençal	with	Saffron,	Orange,	and	Basil
Classic	Spaghetti	and	Meatballs	for	a	Crowd
Creamy	Gazpacho	Andaluz
Green,	Chutney
Marinara	Sauce
and	Mozzarella	Tart
and	Mozzarella	Tart	with	Prosciutto
New	York–Style	Thin-Crust	Pizza
Pasta	alla	Norma
and	Peas,	Curried	Baked	Brown	Rice	with
salting	at	work
Sauce,	Creamy,	Pasta	with
seeds	and	jelly,	flavor	in
Shells,	and	Zucchini,	Classic	Chicken	Soup	with
Simple	Italian-Style	Meat	Sauce
Stuffed,	with	Goat	Cheese,	Olives,	and	Oregano
Stuffed,	with	Parmesan,	Garlic,	and	Basil
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin	with	Roasted	Peppers	and	Smoked	Mozzarella
Sun-Dried,	and	Mozzarella	Tart
Sun-Dried,	Arugula,	and	Goat	Cheese,	Hearty	Scrambled	Eggs	with
Sun-Dried,	Broccoli	Rabe,	and	Pine	Nut	Topping

Tongs
grill,	ratings	of
12-inch,	ratings	of



Tools,	kitchen
handy,	ratings	of
transforming	foods	with

Toppings
Apple,	Cranberry,	and	Pecan
Broccoli	Rabe,	Sun-Dried	Tomato,	and	Pine	Nut
Fresh	Strawberry
Sautéed	Cherry	Tomato	and	Fresh	Mozzarella
Wild	Mushroom	and	Rosemary

Tortillas
Chicken	Fajitas
Grilled	Beef	Fajitas
Steak	Tacos

Triple-Citrus	Cheesecake
Tuna

freezing,	note	about
optimal	cooking	temperature
slicing	immediately	after	cooking
Steaks,	Pan-Seared	Sesame-Crusted

Turkey
brining	formula
Butterflied,	with	Apple-Maple	Glaze
Butterflied,	with	Cranberry-Molasses	Glaze
buying
optimal	cooking	temperatures
optimal	resting	times
poultry,	Link	2
Roast,	Old-Fashioned	Stuffed
Roasted	Brined



Roast	Salted
safe	handling
Slow-Roasted,	with	Gravy
structure	of

U
Ultimate	Banana	Bread
Ultimate	Beef	Chili
Ultimate	Chocolate	Chip	Cookies
Ultimate	Chocolate	Cupcakes	with	Ganache	Filling
Ultimate	Green	Bean	Casserole
Ultimate	Hummus
Umami,	Link	2,	Link	3

V
Vanilla

beans,	choosing
Buttercream	Frosting
extract,	shelf	life	for
Ice	Cream

Vegetable	peelers,	ratings	of
Vegetable(s)

and	Beef	Soup,	Quick
blanching.	See	Blanching	vegetables
green,	shocking	in	ice	water
Hearty	Minestrone
oven-roasted,	pectin	stabilization	at	work
pan-roasted,	pectin	stabilization	at	work
precooking.	See	Precooking	vegetables
recommended	storage	temperatures



Root,	and	Mashed	Potatoes
Root,	and	Mashed	Potatoes	with	Bacon	and	Thyme
Root,	and	Mashed	Potatoes	with	Paprika	and	Parsley
salting.	See	Salting	vegetables
see	also	specific	vegetables

Vegetarian	Cuban-Style	Black	Beans	and	Rice
Vermouth-Sage	Sauce,	Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with
Vinaigrettes

Almond
Balsamic-Mustard
Cherry	Tomato–Basil,	Chunky
demonstrating	emulsifiers	with
Foolproof
Herb
Lemon
Olive
Walnut

Vinegar
sediment	in
Sherry,	–Honey	Sauce	with	Almonds
see	also	Vinaigrettes

Vodka
in	pie	dough.	See	Gluten	minimization	(pie	dough)
for	tempura	batter

W
Waffles

demonstrating	fermentation	with
Yeasted



Yeasted,	Blueberry
Walnuts

Arugula,	and	Roquefort,	French	Potato	Salad	with
Dried	Fruit	and	Nut	Stuffing
and	Lemon,	Roasted	Brussels	Sprouts	with
Mocha-Nut	Chiffon	Cake

Walnut	Vinaigrette
Wasabi	and	Pickled	Ginger,	Shrimp	Salad	with
Water

effect	on	bread	texture.	See	Baker’s	percentage
temperature,	for	bread	baking

Water	baths	at	work	(concept)
Crème	Brûlée
Espresso	Crème	Brûlée
how	the	science	works
Make-Ahead	Crème	Brûlée
Pumpkin-Bourbon	Cheesecake	with	Graham-Pecan	Crust
Spiced	Pumpkin	Cheesecake
test	kitchen	experiment

Well-Done	Bacon-Cheeseburgers
Well-Done	Burgers
Western	South	Carolina	Barbecue	Sauce
Whipped	Cream

Brown	Sugar
Brown	Sugar	and	Bourbon
foolproof,	tips	for

Whipped	egg	whites	(concept)
Angel	Food	Cake
Bittersweet	Chocolate	Mousse	Cake



Chocolate	Meringue	Cookies
copper	bowls	for
Espresso	Meringue	Cookies
Grand	Marnier	Soufflé	with	Grated	Chocolate
how	the	science	works
Lemon	Meringue	Pie
Meringue	Cookies
Orange	Meringue	Cookies
stabilizing	with	cream	of	tartar
stabilizing	with	sugar
test	kitchen	experiment
Toasted	Almond	Meringue	Cookies

Whisks,	ratings	of
White	Chicken	Chili
Whole-wheat	flour

about
Whole-Wheat	Sandwich	Bread

Wild	Mushroom	and	Rosemary	Topping
Wine

alcohol	content
Braised	Boneless	Beef	Short	Ribs
Cherry-Port	Glaze
cooking	off.	See	Evaporating	alcohol
cooking	with
corked,	quick	fix	for
Daube	Provençal
dealcoholized,	cooking	with
emergency	substitutes	for
French-Style	Pot	Roast



Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with	Sage-Vermouth	Sauce
Poached	Salmon	with	Herb	and	Caper	Vinaigrette
quick-chilling
Red,	–Mushroom	Pan	Sauce
Red,	Sauce,	Sweet-Tart,	Pan-Roasted	Chicken	Breasts	with
White,	and	Leeks,	Salmon	en	Cocotte	with

Wok	vs.	skillet

Y
Yeast

active	dry,	about
active	dry,	substituting	for	instant
during	fermentation
function	of
instant	(rapid-rise),	about
instant	(rapid-rise),	substituting	for	active	dry

Yeasted	Waffles
Yeasted	Waffles,	Blueberry
Yogurt

-Curry	Sauce	with	Cilantro
effect	of	heat	on
-Mint	Cucumber	Salad
plain,	substitute	for

Z
Zucchini

Grilled	Beef	Kebabs	with	Lemon	and	Rosemary	Marinade
Red	Bell	Pepper,	and	Peanuts,	Stir-Fried	Sichuan-Style	Shrimp	with
salting	at	work
Sautéed	Shredded,	with	Garlic	and	Lemon



Sautéed	Shredded,	with	Peas	and	Herbs
Sautéed	Shredded,	with	Spiced	Carrots	and	Almonds
Sautéed	Shredded,	with	Tomatoes	and	Basil
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin
Summer	Vegetable	Gratin	with	Roasted	Peppers	and	Smoked	Mozzarella
and	Tomatoes,	Classic	Chicken	Soup	with



Table	of	Contents
Preface
Welcome	to	America's	Test	Kitchen
Navigating	This	E-book
Introduction
The	Science	of	Measuring
The	Science	of	Time	and	Temperature
The	Science	of	Heat	and	Cold
The	Science	of	the	Senses
The	Science	of	Tools	and	Ingredients
Recipe	Table	of	Contents
Concept	1:	Gentle	Heat	Prevents	Overcooking
Concept	2:	High	Heat	Develops	Flavor
Concept	3:	Resting	Meat	Maximizes	Juiciness
Concept	4:	Hot	Food	Keeps	Cooking
Concept	5:	Some	Proteins	Are	Best	Cooked	Twice
Concept	6:	Slow	Heating	Makes	Meat	Tender
Concept	7:	Cook	Tough	Cuts	Beyond	Well-Done
Concept	8:	Tough	Cuts	Like	a	Covered	Pot
Concept	9:	A	Covered	Pot	Doesn’t	Need	Liquid
Concept	10:	Bones	Add	Flavor,	Fat,	and	Juiciness
Concept	11:	Brining	Maximizes	Juiciness	in	Lean	Meats
Concept	12:	Salt	Makes	Meat	Juicy	and	Skin	Crisp
Concept	13:	Salty	Marinades	Work	Best
Concept	14:	Grind	Meat	at	Home	for	Tender	Burgers
Concept	15:	A	Panade	Keeps	Ground	Meat	Tender
Concept	16:	Create	Layers	for	a	Breading	That	Sticks
Concept	17:	Good	Frying	Is	All	About	Oil	Temperature
Concept	18:	Fat	Makes	Eggs	Tender
Concept	19:	Gentle	Heat	Guarantees	Smooth	Custards
Concept	20:	Starch	Keeps	Eggs	from	Curdling
Concept	21:	Whipped	Egg	Whites	Need	Stabilizers
Concept	22:	Starch	Helps	Cheese	Melt	Nicely
Concept	23:	Salting	Vegetables	Removes	Liquid
Concept	24:	Green	Vegetables	Like	It	Hot—Then	Cold
Concept	25:	All	Potatoes	Are	Not	Created	Equal



Concept	26:	Potato	Starches	Can	Be	Controlled
Concept	27:	Precooking	Makes	Vegetables	Firmer
Concept	28:	Don’t	Soak	Beans—Brine	’Em
Concept	29:	Baking	Soda	Makes	Beans	and	Grains	Soft
Concept	30:	Rinsing	(Not	Soaking)	Makes	Rice	Fluffy
Concept	31:	Slicing	Changes	Garlic	and	Onion	Flavor
Concept	32:	Chile	Heat	Resides	in	Pith	and	Seeds
Concept	33:	Bloom	Spices	to	Boost	Their	Flavor
Concept	34:	Not	All	Herbs	Are	for	Cooking
Concept	35:	Glutamates,	Nucleotides	Add	Meaty	Flavor
Concept	36:	Emulsifiers	Make	Smooth	Sauces
Concept	37:	Speed	Evaporation	When	Cooking	Wine
Concept	38:	More	Water	Makes	Chewier	Bread
Concept	39:	Rest	Dough	to	Trim	Kneading	Time
Concept	40:	Time	Builds	Flavor	in	Bread
Concept	41:	Gentle	Folding	Stops	Tough	Quick	Breads
Concept	42:	Two	Leaveners	Are	Often	Better	than	One
Concept	43:	Layers	of	Butter	Make	Flaky	Pastry
Concept	44:	Vodka	Makes	Pie	Dough	Easy
Concept	45:	Less	Protein	Makes	Tender	Cakes,	Cookies
Concept	46:	Creaming	Butter	Helps	Cakes	Rise
Concept	47:	Reverse	Cream	for	Delicate	Cakes
Concept	48:	Sugar	Changes	Texture	(and	Sweetness)
Concept	49:	Sugar	and	Time	Make	Fruit	Juicier
Concept	50:	Cocoa	Powder	Delivers	Big	Flavor
Equipping	Your	Kitchen
Emergency	Ingredient	Substitutions
Food	Safety
Conversions	and	Equivalents
Further	Reading
Resources—Selected	Scientific	Journal	Articles
Index